O
^
'4.
3
1 ?
^fjiifuiwAfli>4^ "^yciiiAiua-iu'.
w,OFCALIFO/?^
(> ^.OFCAllF0/?4^ 6>
>&Aavaaii# ^om
in>:.MirCIf
THE LIBRARY
o
•V
OF
THE UNIVERSITY
%a3AINfl3WV
OF CALIFORNIA
'0-
:nf Ai.irnCc
LOS ANGELES
'FrK'IVFRf,
o
T O
,
g ^
/ O-n t u - ^ - o
M
RARYO/r^, ^^ILIBRARYQ<
i 1
o
=a
s^
'%J1WJJ0^'
OFCAIIF0% (^ ^^'rtt UNIV c t ^ KJ^ C ct v ^ ^\05ANLtlfX^^ ILIFO/?^ >- " ^ ^
^
27
v«aii#' ^OAhvaaiH^^^ 'V/sa3AiNll-3UV" aaiH^ ^^A
>/- ^v.\o^ANr,Flf -sxVllBRAR" MIIBRARY/?^^ ,\WEUNIVERS/A
o
^
%a]AiNniwv IIVO JO^ '<
^.0FCAIIF0%^ ,4;OFCALIF0/?^ A\^EUNIVER^//i

OFCALIF0% ^OFCAIIFO/?^ ... ^h%. vvlOSANCElfj> ^,OFCAlIFn;?r.
o
^omm\n\^ '//Sa3AIN(l3WV ^(?Aava;;
.^WEUNIVER% ^^^UIBRARYQ^ ^^UIBRAR>
>-
o
<ril30NVS01^ %a3AiNn-3WV %JI1V3J0^ •^OJIIVJJO'^
AV\EUNIVER% vvlOSANCElfj> ^A^OFCALIFOfi*^ .-;,OFC—A1IxFO^% aweuni\
^(VV/ .is
i "
Infill
<rii3DN^soi^ %a3AiNn3\\v^ ^<?A{ivaan-#
^IIIBRARYO^ ^^ILIBRARY^k. s.^MtU^NIVERi^-//;. v\io^-AN'CFi/;r. .aM11BRA|>Y^
-3VI 1^.
'^<!/03llV3JO'^ '^<!/OjnV3-30>^ '^/5JI3AINa3WV^
^.OFCALIF0%. ^OFCALIFO/?^ .\\\[UNIVER5"/^ ^lOSANCELfXy. OFCAIIFO%
— —
^, 'PI-;:;' ^. •'-'H'
'^/5a3AINfl3WV "^(^AavaaiH^
^WEUNIVERS/^ vj<lOSANGE[fj^ ^v^llIBRARYtk. <^;^tLIBRARYQr AV\EUNIVER5-/A
-A
C? r f
^TiijoNvsoi^"^ '^^mwmv^ ^<i/03llV3JO'^ '^<i/0jiiyj3o 'Jil3DNVS0\^
aMEUNIVER% ^vVOSANGELfx^ ^OFCALIF0% ^OFCAIIFO/?^- ^WEUNIVERi-//%)
JP'
30Nvsoi^ '^Aa3AiNn-3UV^ ^OAHvaaii-^ ^^Aavasiii^^^ 'smm-m^^
^UIBRARYC/^ ^ .^ ^ , lllBRA^R„YQ,r^ ^WEIJNIVERy/A .V;lOSANCEia >^ -s>^tllBRARYG
'^.!/03nV3JO^ ^.!/03llV3JO>^ ^Tii^DNVSOl^'^ '^/5a3AINn3W"^^ '''%3nV330^
, aFfAiiFnp/, ir\FrAiiFf»Pi, -tVAFllNIVFPr/>. .mUNf.Flfr.x A^FfAIIFnP.^

r<
LIF(
m
IVEf
i
vso
IVEfi
v';n
(AR^
liFO
mi

THE JATAKA
OR
STORIES OF THE BUDDHA'S FORMER BIRTHS

SonDon: C. J. CLAY AND SONS,
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,
AVE MARIA LANE.
©lassofa: 263, ARGYLB STREET.
Etqjiig: F. A. BROCKHA.US.
£it'ca gorfe: MACMILLAN AND CO.
Bomfaag: G. BELL AND SONS.

SCENE FRO'^ THE SIUPA OF BHARHUT IILUSIRAIINC JAIAKA
(from Cuiiiiiiigliaui, I'l. xxv, 2).

:
THE JATAKA
OR
STORIES OF THE BUDDHA^S
FORMER BIRTHS.
TRANSLATED FROM THE PALI BY VARIOUS HANDS
UNDER THE EDITORSHIP OF
PROFESSOR COWELL.
E. B.
VOL. M.
TRANSLATED BY
W. H. D. ROUSE, M.A.,
SOMETIME FELLOW OF CHRIST's COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.
CAMBRIDGE
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.
1895
[All Rights reserved.]

:
Cambridge
PRINTED BY J. AND C. F. CLAY,
AT THE UNIVEKSITY PRESS.

B

vi Preface.
It remains to acknowledge my indebtedness to those friends
who have helped me. The members of our "Guild" who arc
resident at Cambridge have been so kind as to revise the proofs;
and to them I owe very many corrections and improvements.
Mr R. Chalmers lent me a MS. translation of a few of the 'Stories
of the Past/ for which I thank him. But my chief thanks are
due to my Master, Professor Cowell ; who, for many years past,
has with unfailing patience and kindliness helped me in my
Oriental studies. I feel that what I know of these things has
been his gift to me almost entirely ; and I hope he may consider
this book not all unworthy of his teaching.
By the kind permission of the Secretary of State for India, an
illustration of one of the stories from the Bharhut Stupa is given
in this volume as in the first. The story is No, 267 : the words
beneath the picture are NZlga Jataka.
W. H. D. ROUSE.
Christ's Colleuk, Cambridgk,
Jul^ 30, 1895.

MANIBVS
GVILLELMI ROBERTSON SMITH
SVMMO DESIDERIO
D. D. D.
b'l

CONTENTS.
PAGE
151. RAJOVADA-JATAKA 1
Two kings, both wise and good, meet in a narrow way, and a
dispute arises who is to give place. Both are of the same age and
power. Their drivers sing each his master's praises. One is good
to the good, and bad to the bad; tlie other repays evil with good.
The first acknowledgeshis superior, and gives place.
152. SIGALA-JATAKA 4
The Bodhisattais a young lion, one of seven brothers; a Jackal
Ijroposes love to his sister. Six of the brothers set out to kill the
jackal, but seeing him as he lies in a crystal grotto, imagine him to
be in the sky, leap up and kill themselves. The Bodhisatta roars,
and thejackal dies offear.
153. SUKARA-JATAKA 7
Aboar challengesa lion to light; and then in fear wallows amid
filth until he smells so foul that the lion will not come near him,
but ownshimself vanquished rather than fight with him.
154. URAGA-JATAKA
A Garula chases a serpent, which taking the form of a jewel,
fixes himself upon an ascetic's garment, and by this means wins
safety.
155. GAGGA-JATAKA 11
How a goblin had power over all people who did not wish each
otherwell at a sneeze, and how he was foiled.
156. ALiNA-CITTA-JATAKA lo
An elephant runs a thorn into its foot; it is tended by some
carpenters, and serves them out of gratitude. His young one takes
his place afterwards, and is bought by the king for a large sum.
How on the king's death, it routs a hostile host, and saves the
kingdom for the king's infant son.

X Contents.
PAGE
157. GUNA-JATAKA 17
Ajackalrescues alion, whoout of gratitude makeshim a friend.
The lioness is jealous of the she-jackal; theu the whole matter is
explained, andmaximsgiven in praiseoffriendship.
158. SUHANU-JATAKA 21
Two savage horses, that maltreat all other of their kind, strike
up a sudden friendshipwitheach other,thusillustratingtheproverb,
'Birdsofafeather.'
159. MORA-JATAKA 23
How a peacock kept itself safe by reciting spells; how its mind
was disturbed byhearing the female's note, and it was caught ; how
the king desired to eat it, but the ^^eacock discoursed such good
divinity that he was stayed; and finally thebird was set free again
toreturn to themountains.
160. VIXILAKA-JATAKA 26
A bird, the offspring of a goose with a crow, isbeingcarriedby
hisfather's two other sonsto see him, but is arrogant and compares
them to horsesthat servehim ; sohe is sent backagain,
161. INDASAMANAGOTTA-JATAKA 28
How a man kept a fat elephant, which turned against him and
trampledhim to death.
162. SANTHAVA-JATAKA 29
How amanhadhis house burnt by reason of the great offerings
which he made to his sacred fire.
163. SUSiMA-JATAKA 31
How a lad whose hereditary right it was to manage a festival,
journeyed 2000leaguesin a day, learnt the ceremonial, andreturned
in timeto conduct the ceremony.
164. GI.J.JHA-JATAKA 34
About a merchant who succoured some vultures, and they in
return stole cloths and other things and brought to him; how one
was caught, and the king learnt the story, and all the goods were
restored.
165. NAKULA-JATAKA 36
Howa mungoose and a snake were friends, and distrusted each
othernevertheless; andhow theywere madeat one.
166. UPASALHA-JATAKA 37
How acertain man was particular in choice of burying-grounds,
and howhewas shown that thereis no .spot free of taintfrom some
deadbody.

Contents. x
i
PAGE
167. SAMIDDHI-JATAKA 3!>
Howauympli tempted the saint to love, andhe resisted, since no
man knows the time ofdeath.
168. SAKUNAGGHI-JATAKA . . . /. . 4(1
Howa quail beat a falcon by fighting on hisown ground.
169. ARAKA-JATAKA 42
How the Buddlia forsook the world, and discoursed on charity.
170. KAKANTAKA-JATAKA 4.'}
(See Mahu-ummagiia.)
171. KALYAXA-DHAMMA-JATAKA 44
. . . ,
How a certain man became a recluse all because of a lucky
greeting.
172. DADDARA-JATAKA 4.')
Howa jackal amongstlionsbetrayedhimselfbyhis tongue.
173. MAKKATA-JATAKA 47
How a monkey disguised himself as an ascetic, and was
found oiit.
DUBHIYA-MAKKATA-JATAKA 4S
174.
How theBodhisatta drew water foramonkey, and all he got for
hispains was agrimace and an insult.
175. ADICCUPATTHANA-JATAKA 50
How a rascally monkey made havoc in the settlement, and the
people tookhim for a holy being.
176. KALAYA-MUTTHI-JATAKA ol
Howamonkeythrewaway a handful ofpeas to findone.
177. TINDUKA-JATAKA ')'-\
How a troop of monkeys entered a village by night, and were
surrounded by the villagers; and the device by which they were
saved.
178. KACCHAPA-JATAKA ').'>
How a tortoise came to grief because he loved his home too
much.
179. SATADHAMMA-JATAKA 'u
Howa proudyoungbrahmin ate theleavings ofa low-caste man,
andthen feltashamed ofhimself.
180. DUDDADA-.JATAKA oO
Where faith is, nogiftis small,

;
xii Contents.
PAGE
181. ASADISA-JATAKA . 60
Ofacleverarcher, and his feats.
182. SAMGAMAVACARA-JATAKA 63
Howa nobleelephant obeyed the word ofcommand.
183. VALODAKA-JATAKA 65
He that is noble keeps a steady brain even thoughhe drain most
potentliquor dry.
184. GIRIDANTA-JATAKA 67
Evilcommunications corrupt good manners.
185. ANABHIRATI-JATAKA 68
On serenity ofmind.
186. DADHI-VAHANA-JATAKA 69
TheMagicRazor-axe, Milk-bowl, andDrum.
CATUMATTA-JATAKA 73
187.
Howajackal was reproved forintruding.
188. SiHAKOTTHUKA-JATAKA 75
Howa mongrelcub amonglions was betrayedby itsvoice.
SIHACAMMA-JATAKA 76
189.
Theassinthelion'sskin.
190. SiLANISAMSA-JATAKA 77
Howa virtuousbarber saved another man by his merit.
191. RUHAKA-JATAKA 79
How a wicked wife fooled her husband, and sent him prancing
down the street in horse-trappings.
192. SIRI-KALAKANNI-JATAKA 80
(See MaJid-uiiimafiga.)
193. ('ULI.A-PADUMA-JATAKA 81
Of a wicked wife, who tried to murder her husband, and finally
with her paramour was brought for trial before her husband, then
becomeking.
MANICORA-JATAKA 85
194.
Of the plot devised bya king to take the wife of another man
andhow Sakkacaused him to change bodies with his victim, and so
tobeexecuted himself.
PABBATUPATTHARA-JATAKA 88
195.
How the Bodhisatta advisedaking to condonean intrigue.
196. VALAHASSA-JATAKA 89
Howsome shipwrecked mariners escaped from acityofgoblins by
aidofa flyinghorse.

2
Co7itents. X
iii
I'Aiii;
197. MITTAMITTA-JATAKA 91
How to tell friend from foe.
198. RADHA-JATAKA 02
How aparrot told talesofhismistress, andhadhis neck wrung.
199. GAHAPATI-JATAKA 94
Howa wife tried to trick herhusband, and was found out.
200. SADHUSiLA-JATAKA 90
How a fatherchose ahusband forliisdaughters.
201. BANDHANAGARA-JATAKA 97
' Thereal fetters are those ofdesire.
202. KELI-SiLA-JATAKA 9S
How Sakka rebukedan irreverentking.
203. KHANDHA-VATTA-JATAKA 100
How to win thegoodwill ofsnakes.
204. VIRAKA-JATAKA 10"
.
How acrow triedto stealmeat, andwasplucked.
205. GANGEYYA-JATAKA 104
Howtwo fish disputed which shouldbethemorebeautiful, and a
tortoiseanswered thathewasmore beautiful than either.
/^Od) KURUNGA-MIGA-JATAKA 10(i
-^'^ Howawoodpeckeranda tortoise rescuedtheir friendtheantelope
from a trap.
207. ASSAKA-JATAKA lOS
How a kingwascured of love for his dead wife bya revelation of
herpresentcondition.
208. SUMSUMARA-JATAKA 110
How a crocodile wanted the heart of a monkey, and how the /
monkeypretendedthat it washangingon a fig-tree.
209. KAKKARA-JATAKA 11
How a fowler tried to stalk a bird by covering himself with
branches.
210. KANDAGALAKA-JATAKA 11:>
How a woodpecker struck a tree too hard forit, and perished.
211. SOMADATTA-JATAKA 1 1">
How a foolish man gave wlu'ii he meant to crave.

. ;
xiv Contents.
PAGE
212. UCCHITTHA-BHATTA-JATAKA 117
Howahusbandfound out his wife's intrigue by the stateof the
rice.
213. BHARU-JATAKA 118
How thekingofBharumade twobandsofhermitsto quarrel
214. PUNNA-NADi-JATAKA 121
Howa kingsentariddling message to hisformerpreceptor.
215. KACCHAPA-JATAKA 128
Howa tortoise wasconveyedthrough the air,bitingwithhisteeth
upon a stick; andhowhe answered to a taunt, and felL
216. MACCHA-JATAKA 125
Howa fish beingcapturedlamented for loss of his wife, and was
setat liberty.
217. SEGGU-JATAKA 126
How apiousgreengrocertestedhis daughter's virtue.
218. KUTA-VANIJA-JATAKA 127
How aman deposited ploughshares with a friend, and the friend
protested that theyhad been eaten byrats; and of the clever device
bywhichtheman'sguilt wasbrought home to him.
219. GARAHITA-JATAKA 120
How a monkeyhadbeen a captive of men, and escaped, and his
censure upon mankind.
220. DHAMMADDHAJA-JATAKA 131
How impossible tasks were set to a good man, who did them all
byaidofSakka.
221. KA8AVA-JATAKA 188
How a man disguisedhimself in holy robes, andkilled elephants
and howhewasput to shame.
222. CULA-NANDIYA-JATAKA 140
Howtwo monkeys sacrificed their lives to save theirmother, and
whatbefel thehunter.
223. PUTA-BHATTA-JATAKA 142
How a harshhusbandwas rebuked.
224. KUMBHiLA-JATAKA 145
225. KHANTI-VANNANA-JATAKA 145
How two sinners were made toamend theirways.

Co)(tents. XV
PAGE
226. KOSIYA-JATAKA 146
How an owl came togrief thiougb sallying forth untimely.
227. GUTHA-PANA-JATAKA 147
How an intoxicated beetle challenged an 'elephant, and was
ignominiously destroyed.
228. KAMANiTA-JATAKA 149
How a king wascured ofgreed.
229. PALAYI-JATAKA 151
Howakingwas frightened away by the mere sight ofa citygate.
230. DUTIYA-PALAYI-JATAKA 158
How a hostile king was frightened away by the sight of the
Bodhisatta, and thehearing ofhis threats.
231. UPAHANA-JATAKA 154
Howapupil tried to outdo histeacher, and was worsted.
232. VINA-THUNA-JATAKA 15G
How a girl thought a humpback was a right royal man, and
how shewasundeceived.
233. VIKANNAKA-JATAKA 157
How some fishcameto feed at the sound of a drum; and how a
malevolent crocodile was speared.
234. ASITABHU-JATAKA 158
Howa man, enamoured ofa sprite, losthis wife by thislust.
235. VACCHA-NAKHA-JATAKA KiO
Howa Brotherwas tempted to return to the world, and the evil
ofa worldly life shown forth.
236. BAKA-JATAKA 161
Howacrane shammed sleep, in order to catch fish; and how he
wasexposed.
237. SAKETA-JATAKA 162
(AsNo. 68.)
238. EKAPADA-JATAKA 163
Of aprecocious boy who asked aphilosophicalquestion and the
;
answerto thesame.
239. HARITA-MATA-JATAKA 164
A water-snake that fell into a fish-trap, and how tlie fish all fell
upon him; with amoral.

XVI Contents.
PAGE
240. MAHA-PINGALA-JATAKA 165
How the portermourned whenhis tyrannical master died, lest he
should prove too much for the King of Death, and should be sent
back to earth again.
241. SABBA-DATHA-JATAKA 168
How a jackal learnt the spell 'Of subduing theworld,' andbyit
collectedagreat army ofwild beasts ; andhowhe was discomfited.
242. SUNAKHA-JATAKA 170
Howa doggnawed throughhis leash,andescaped from servitude.
243. GUTTILA-JATAKA 172
Howagreat musicianplayedbyaid ofSakkato the delight of all
thatheard.
.178
244. VITICCHA-JATAKA
Howacertainmantriedto catch.the.Maste.r wi.thphrases.
245. MULA-PARIYAYA-JATAKA 180
Howthe Masterdiscomfit . edsom . ewou . ld-be . cleve . ryout . hs. .
246. TELOVADA-JATAKA 182
That there isnoharm in eating meat, but only in taking life.
247. PADANJALI-JATAKA 183
How afool wasfound out.
248. KIMSUKOPAMA-JATAKA 184
How fourlads saw a tree, and each describedit differently.
249. .SALAKA-JATAKA 186
How soft words failedto bringdown amonkey from a tree.
250. KAPI-JATAKA 187
How a monkey disguised himself as an ascetic, and was found
out.
251. SAMKAPPA-JATAKA 189
Howan asceticwastempted bylust, andhow he was saved.
252. TILA-MUTTHI-JATAKA 193
Howateacherchastisedapupil,and the pupil meditated revenge,
but wasappeased.
253. MANI-KANTHA-JATAKA 197
How a serpent and an ascetic were friends, and how the ascetic
got rid ofthe .serpent.

Contents. xvii
....
PACK
254. KUXDAKA-KUCCHI-SINDHAVA-JATAKA 19'J
Of a high-bred foal; how he knew his own worth, and what he
could do foramarvel.
255. SUKA-JATAKA / . 203
Of a parrot that used to bring food oversea forhis parents, and
howhe ate too much, and was drowned.
256. JARITDAPANA-JATAKA 205
How some men won a treasure by digging, and by digging too
muchlost itagain.
257. GAMANI-CANDA-JATAKA 207
How aprince's wisdom was tried. Also how a man was haled to
the king's tribunal for injuriesdone unwittingly, and the judgements
of the king thereupon ; and of certain problems propounded to him
bythose he met. [Several stories in one.]
258. MANDHATU-JATAKA 216
Howaking could not win contentment, not though he ruled as
King ofHeaven.
259. TIRITA-VACCHA-JATAKA 218
Howaking'slifewas saved,and thegratitude whichhe showed to
his deliverer.
260. DUTA-JATAKA 221
Howa man got a meal by callinghimself'Belly's Messenger.'
261. PADUMA-JATAKA 222
Howsomeboys tried towheedle a noselessgardener thathemight
givethem a bunch oflotus.
262. MUDU-PAXI-JATAKA 224
Love willfindaway; and the nature ofwomankind.
263. CULLA-PALOBHAXA-JATAKA 227
How theBodhisatta is temptedby a woman, and succumbs.
264. MAHA-PANADA-JATAKA 229
(Incomplete: as No. 489.)
265. KHURAPPA-JATAKA 231
How onebraveman saved acaravan from robbers.
266. VATAGGA-SINDHAVA-JATAKA 233
How ashe-ass fell in love with a line horse, and by coquetry lost
him.

xviii Contents.
I'AGK
267. KAKKATA-JATAKA 235
How au elephant, by aid of his faithful mate, destroyed an
immense crab.
268. ARAMA-DUSA-JATAKA 237
How some monkeys were left to water a garden, and how they
pulled up thetrees to proportion the water to thelength ofthe roots.
269. SUJATA-JATAKA 239
How the shrew was tamed byobservation ofa cuckoo and ajay.
270. ULUKA-JATAKA 242
How theowlwas proposed asking ofthe birds, but because ofhis
sourlooks, not taken.
271. UDAPANA-DUSAKA-JATAKA 243
The vile nature ofjackals.
272. VYAGGHA-JATAKA 244
Howa sprite drove away from its wood a lion and tiger, andhow
mencameand cut the treesdown.
KACCHAPA-JATAKA 246
2'Jl.
Howamonkeyinsulteda tortoise, and how he was punished.
274. LOLA-JATAKA . . . . 248
Howacrowlosthis life throughgreed.
275. KUCIRA-JATAKA 250
(AsNo. 274.)
276. KURU-DHAMMA-JATAKA 251
How there was a drought, and by observance of virtue the rain
wasmadetocome.
277. ROMAKA-JATAKA 260
How a shamascetic tried tu killa bird, and failed.
278. MAHLSA-JATAKA 262
Of awickedmonkey, that waskilled for his vileness; and of the
patience ofthe Bodhisatta.
279. SATAPATTA-JATAKA 264
How a man did not know his friend from his enemy ; and how
theBodhisattawasarobber,
280. PUTA-DUSAKA-JATAKA 266
Of a monkeywhothought to please agardener by destroying the
pottleswhichhe made.

;
Contents. x x
i
TAliK
281. ABBHANTARA-JATAKA :iG7
How a queen longed for a 'middle niango "; uud Low a pel parrot
procured one.
282. SEYYA-JATAKA , . . 273
How a marauding monarcli was comiuered by kindness.
283. VADDHAKI-SUKARA-JATAKA 275
How aboar drilled an army of boars to conijuer a tiger; and how
a sham ascetic was done to death.
284. SIRI-JATAKA 279
How luck came ofeating the llesh ofcertain birds.
285. MANI-SUKARA-JATAKA 283
How some boars tried to sully crystal by rubbing it, and only
madeit shine the more.
286. SALUKA-JATAKA ' 285
. . .
How an ox enviedthe fatted pig.
287. LABHA-GARAHA-JATAKA 287
Oftheevil ofa worldlylife.
288. MACCH-UDDANA-JATAKA li.S.S
How aparcel of money was lost in the river, and restored by the
river-spirit in the belly ofafish.
289. NANA-CCHANDA-JATAKA 290
How a king fell into thehands of thieves, anda brahmin saw it
andwhat werethe boonsheasked.
290. SiLA-ViMAMSA-JATAKA 292
How a man triedhis own reputation forvirtue.
291. BHADRA-GHATA-JATAKA 293
The Wishing-Bowl, with a moral ending.
292. SUPATTA-JATAKA 295
How a queen of the crows desired some meat, anda brave crow
got it for her.
293. KAYA-VICCHINDA-JATAKA 297
Of a sick man who on his recovery becamereligious, to his own
great advantage.
294. JAMBU-KHADAKA-JATAKA 299
The Fox and the Crow, with adifference.

)
XX Contents.
PAGE
295. ANTA-JATAKA 300
Similartothelast, butvice versa.
296. SAMUDDA-JATAKA oOl
Ofacrow that feared the sea mightbedrunk dry.
297. KAMA-VILAPA-JATAKA 302
Howdesireis strongerthan pain.
298. UDUMBARA-JATAKA 303
Oldbirds cannotbe caught with chaff.
299. KOMAYA-PUTTA-JATAKA 305
Upon the reformationofa mischievousmonkey.
300. VAKA-JATAKA 306
How awolfkept a holy day service.
ADDITIONS AND COKRECTIONS.
Page10,note. TheGarulaisoftenrepresentedasaWingedManinart. SeeFergusson,
Tree and Serpent Worship, pi. xxvi. 1, xxviii. 1, &c. Examples are
numerous; e.g. British Museum, 2nd N. Gallery, 'Brahmanism,' side
case, sect. 5 (little bronzes); a large steatite image, iJiid.; Berlin, Mus. f.
Volkerkunde, Indian Section, Case 45, I. c. 44M, praying Garula from
Siam, with wings and bird feet. Often the Garula is a bird of peculiar
shape. One or two of each are figured in Griinwedel, Buddiiistiscite
—
KunstinIndien, pp. 47 50.
,, 53. With thisstorycompare Tibetan Tales, p. 348.
,, 60, note, before 'on the Sauchi Tope' insert 'possibly.' (The archer is not
shooting at the mango tree; and other things arepresentnot referred to
in the story. I took this reference at second hand, beforeIwasable to
see theplatemyself.
80, note, 216, iiote, read: Tibetan.
92, No. 198, iiuerttitle: Radha-jataka.
129,note 1, read: Tunisische.
158, title, read: Asitabhu for -vi-.
207, note, add: Compare Tibetan Tales, p. 29, Adursamukha, andpref. p. xli.
220, line 6infra,for Perfections read Faculties.
235, title,read: Kakkata-/o>' -a-.

BOOK DUKANIPATA.
II.
No. 151\
RAJOVADA-JATAKA.
—
[1] "Rough to the roiigh" etc. This story the Master told whilst ho was
livingin Jetavana, to explain how a kingwas taught a lesson.
This will be set forthin the Tesakuna Birth"-^.
It is said that one day the king of Kosala had just passed sentence in a very
difficultcase involving moral wrong^. After his meal, with hands not yet dry,
he proceeded in his splendid chariot to visit the Master and the king saluted
;
him, his feet beautiful like the oi^en lotus flower, and sat down aside.
Then the Master addressed him in these words. "Why, my lord king, what
brings 3'ou here at this time of day]" "Sir," said he, "I missed my tinie
f b i e n c i a s u h s e e d i I t, w a a n s d s e i a t t t e i n n , g a o n n d a he d r i e ffi I cu a lt m, ca w se i , th in m v y olv h i a n n g ds mor ha a r l dl w y ro d n ry g , ; t n o o w w ait I u h p a o v n e
you." "My lord king," replied the Master, "to judge a cause with justice and
impartiality is the right thing ; that is the way to heaven. Now when you first
havetheadviceofabeingall-wiselikeme,itisnowonderifyoushouldjudge your
case fairly andjustly ; but the wonder is when kings have only had the advice
ofscholars who are not all-wise, and yet have decided fairly and justly, avoiding
the Four Ways of Wickedness, and observing the Ten Royal Virtues, and after
rulingjustlyhave gone to swellthehostsofheaven." Then,at theking'srequest,
he told astorv ofthe olden time.
[2] Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was conceived by his Queen Consort and the ceremonies
;
])roper to her state having been duly done'*, she was afterwards safely
1 Fausb^ll, Ten J., pp. 1 and 57; Rhys David.s, Buddhist Birth Stories, p. xxii.
A similar contest of two minstrels occurs in the Kaleval—a (Crawford's translation,
i. p. 30). Theyoungdrives fiercely into the old, who saj-s 'Thou shouldst give me
all thehighway, for I am tlie older.' 'Wliat matters tliat? ' says the other; 'let the
leastwisegive place.' There theystandandeach sings hislegends by way ofdeciding
the matter.
^ No. 521.
^ Eeading, with Childers (Diet. p. 613), agatigatam.
* Lit. "protection to theembryo ; " doubtlesssomemagical rite.
J. II. 1

;
The Jataka. Booh II.
delivered. On his name-day, the name they gave him was Prince
Brahmadatta,
In course of time, lie grew up, and at sixteen years went to Takkasila'
for liis education ; where he mastered all branclu's of learning, and on his
father's death he became king in his stead, and luled with uprightness and
all rectitude, administering justice with no regard had to his own will or
whim. And as he ruled thus justly, his ministers on their part were also
just ; thus, while all things were justly done, there was none who brought
a false suit into court. Presently all the bustle of suitors ceased within
the jtrecincts of the palace; all day long the ministers might sit on the
bench, and go away v/ithout seeing a single suitor. The courts were
deserted.
Then the Bodhisatta thought to himself, "Because of my just govern-
ment not one suitor comes to try issue in court ; the old hubbub is quiet
the courts of law are deserted. Now I must search whether I have any
fault in me ; which if I find, I will eschew it, and live a good life here-
after." From that time he tried continually to find some one who would
tell him of a fault; but of all who were about him at court he could not
find one such; nothing could he hear but good of himself. "Perhaps,"
thought he, "they are all so much afraid of me that they say no ill of
me but only good," and so he went about to try those who were outside
his walls. But with these it was just the same. Then he made
inquisition of the citizens at large, and out.side the city questioned
those who belonged to the suburbs at the four city gates. Still there
was none who had any fault to find nothing but praises could he hear.
:
Lastly, with intent to try the country side, he entrusted all govern-
ment to his ministers, and mounted in his carriage, and taking only
the driver with him, left the city in disguise. All the country he
traversed, even to the frontier [3] but not a faultfinder could he
;
light upon ; all he could hear was only his own praises. So back
he turned from the marches, and set his face homewai'ds again by the
highroad.
Now it fortuned that at this very time Mallika, the king of Kosala,
had done the very same thing. He too was a just king, and he had been
searching for his faults; but amongst those about him there was none who
had any fault to find and heaiing nothing but praise, he had been
;
making enquiry throughout all the country, and had but then arrived at
that same spot.
These two met, in a place where the carriage-road was deeply sunk
between two banks, and there was no room for one carriage to pass
another.
^ The great Universitytown ofIndia ; it was in thePunjab (TdfiXa).

— —
" ;
No. 151. 3
"Get your carriage out of the way I" said king Mallika'.s driver to the
driver ofthe king ofBenares.
"No, no, driver," said he, "out of the way with yours ! Know tliat in
this carriage sits tlie groat nionaich Brahniadatta, lord of tlu- kingdom of
Benares!
"Not so, driver ! " replied the other, "in this carriage sits the great
king Mallika, lord of the realm of Kosala
!
Itis for you to make way, and
to give place to the carriage ofour king "
!
"Why, here's a king too," thought the driver of the king of Benares.
"What in the world is to be done]" Then a thought struck iiini ; he
would enquire what should be the age of the two kings, so that the
younger should give way to the elder. And he made enquiry of the other
driver how old his king was ; but he learnt that both were of the same
age. Thereupon he asked the extent of this king's power, wealth, and
glory, and all points touching his caste and clan and his family
discovering that both of them had a country three hundred leagues long,
and that they were alike in power, wealth, glory, and the nature of their
family and lineage. Then he betlxuight him that place might be given to
the better man; so he requested that the other driver should describe his
master's virtues. The man replied by the first verse of poetry following,
in which he set forth his monarch's faults as though they were so many
virtues:
"Rough to the rough, king Mallika the mild with mildness sways,
Masters the good by goodness, and the bad with badness pays.
Give place, give place, O driver! such are this monarch's ways!"
[4] "Oh," said the man of the king of Benares, "is th—at all you have
to say about your king's virtues'?" "Yes," said the other. " If these are
his virtues, what must his vices be !" "Vices be it, then," quoth he, "if
you will; but let us hear what your king's virtues may be like
!
" " Listen
then," rejoined the first, and repeated the second verse :
"He conquers wrath by mildness, the bad with goodness sways,
By gifts the miser vanquishes and lies with truth repays.
Give place, give place, O driver! such are this monarch's waysM"
At these words both king Mallika and his driver descended from their
carriage, and loosed the horses, and moved it out of the way, to gi\<' place
to the king of Benares. Then the king of Benares gave good admonition
to king Mallika, saying, "Thus and thus [5] nnist you do;" after which
he returned to Benares, and there gave alms and did good all his life, till
at the last he went to swell the hosts of heaven. And king Mallika took
the lesson to heart; and after traversing the length and brea<ltli of tln'
1 Dhamniapacla, verse 223.
1—2

Tlie Jdtaha. Book II.
land, and lighting upon none who had any fault to find, returned to his
own city; where he gave alms all his life and did good, till at the end he
too went to swell the hosts of heaven.
When the ]\Iaster had ended this discourse, which he began for the purpose
ofgivinga lesson to the kingofKosala,he identifiedtheBirth : "Moggallfuia was
then the driver of king Mallika, Ananda was the king, Sariputta was the driver
ofthe king ofBenares, l)ut I myselfwas the king."
No. 152.
SIGALA-JATAKA.
—
" Who rashly undertakes" etc. This story the Master told while staying in
his gabled chamber, about a barber who lived at Vesali.
Thisman,aswearetold,usedtodo shavingandhairdressingandcross-plaiting
forthe royal household, kings and queens, princes and princesses, indeed he did
all of that kind that had to be done. He was atriie believer, sheltered in the
Three Refuges resolved to keep the Five Precepts; and from time to time he
i,
would listen to the Master's discoursing.
One day he set out to do his work in the palace, taking his son with him.
Theyoung fellow, seeinga Licchavi girl drest up fine and grand, like a nymph,
fell in love fordesire of her.— He said to his father, as they left the palace in
company, "There is a girl if I get her, I shall live; but if I don't, there's
nothing but death for me." He would not touch amorsel offood, but lay down
hugging the bedstead. His father found him and said, "Why, son, don't set
your mind on forbidden fruit. You are a nobody—a barber's son ; this Licchavi
g a ir g l ir i l s a of hi y g o h m b - or o n w l n ad p y l . ace Yo a u n ' d re s n t o ati m o a n t ." ch B fo u r t he t r h . e l I a ' d ll w f o i u nd ld yo n u ot so li m s e te b n od t y o e h l i s m e . ;
Then came mother, brother, and sister, aiuit and uncle, all his kinsfolk, and all
his friends and companions, trying to pacify him but pacify him they could
;
not. So he pined and pined away, and lay there until he died.
Then the fatherperformed his obsequies, and did what is usual to do for the
spirits ofthe dead. [6] By and by, when the first edge ofgrief had worn off, he
thought he would wait upon the Master. Taking a large present of flowers,
scents, and perfumes, he repaired to IVIahavana, and did reverence to the Master,
saluted him, and sat down on one side. "Why have you kept out of sight
all this time, layman?" the Master asked. Then the man told him what had
happened. Said the Master, "Ah, layman, 'tis not the first timehe has perished
by settinghis heart on what he must not have ; this is only what he has done
before." Then atthe layman's request, he told a story ofthe olden time.
1 Buddha, the Law, and the OrderofBrethren,

"
No. 152. 5
Once upon a time, while Bralunadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodliisatta came into the world as a youngLion in the region of Himalaya.
Of the same family there were some younger brothers, and one sister; and
all ofthem li\ed in a Oolden Cave.
Now hard by this cave was a Cave of Crystal on a silver hill, where a
Jackal lived. By and by the Lions lost their parents by the stroke of
death. Then they used to leave the Lioness, their sister, behind in the
cave, while they ranged for food which when they obtained, they would
;
bring it back for her to eat.
Now the Jackal had caught sight of this Lioness, and fell in love with
her; but while the old Lion and Lioness lived, he could win no access.
Now, when the seven brothers went to seek food, out he came from his
Crystal Cave, and made all haste to the Golden Cave ; where, taking his
stand before the youngLioness, he addressed her slily with these seductive
and tempting words
;
"O Lioness, I am a fourfoot creature, and so are you. Therefore do
you be my mate, and I will be your husband We will live together
!
in friendship and amity, and you shall love me always !
Now on hearing this the Lioness thought to herself, "This Jackal here
is mean amongst beasts, vile, and like a man of low caste : but I am
esteemed to be one of royal issue. That he to me should so speak is
unseemly and evil. How can I live after hearing such things said1 I
—
will hold my breath until I shall die." Then, bethinking her awhile,
"Nay," quoth she, "to die so would not be comely. My brothers will
soon be home again ; I will [7] tell them first, and then I will put an
end to myself."
The Jackal, finding that no answer came, felt sure she cared nothing
for him ; so back he went to his Crystal Cave, and lay down in much
misery.
Now one of the young Lions, having killed a buffalo, or an elephant,
or what not, himself ate some of it, and brought back a share for his
sister, which he gave her, inviting her to eat. "No, brother," says she,
"not a bite will I eat; for I must die!" "Why must that be?" he
asked. And she told him what had happened, "Where is this Jackal
now?" he asked. She saw him lying in the Crystal Cave, and thinking
he was up in the sky\ she said, "Why, brother, cannot you see him there
on Silver Mountain, lying up in the sky 1" The young Lion, unaware
that the Jackal lay in a Crystal Cave, and deeming that lu; was truly
in the sky, made a spring, as lions do, to kill him, and struck agaiust the
crystal which burst his heart asunder, and falling to the foot of the
:
mountain, he perished straightway.
' i.e. because of the transparency.

—
The Jdtaka. Book II.
Then came in another, to whom the Lioness told the same tale. This
Lion did even as the first, and fell dead by the mountain toot.
When six of the brother Lions had i)erished in this way, last of all
entered the Bodhisatta. When she had told her stoi-y, he enquii-ed where
was the Jackal now] "There he is," said—she, "up in the sky, above
Silver Mountain
!
" The Bodhisatta thought "Jackals lying in the sky1
nonsense. I know what it is : he is lying in a Crystal Cave." So he
repaired to the mountain's foot, and there he saw his six brothers lying
dead. "I see how it is," thought he; "these were all foolish, and lacked
the fulness of wisdom not knowing that this is the Crystal Cave, they
;
beat their hearts out against it, and were killed. This is what comes
of acting in rashness without due reflection ;" and he repeated the first
stanza:
"Who rashly undertakes an enterprise,
Not counting all the issue may arise.
Like one who biu-ns his mouth in eating food
Falls victim to the plans he did devise."
[8] After repeating these lines, the Lion continued : " My brothers
wanted to kill this Jackal, but knew not how to lay their plans cleverly
;
so theyleaptup too quickly at him, andsocame by theirdeath. This I will
not do but I will make the Jackal burst his own heart as he lies there in
;
the Crystal Cave," So he espied out the path whereby the Jackal used to
go up and down, and turning that way he roared thrice the lions' roar,
that earth and heaven together were all one great roaring ! The Jackal
lying in the Ci'ystal Cave was frightened and astounded, so that his heart
burst ; and he })erished on the spot incontinently.
roar T ." he A M n a d st b e e r co co m n i t n i g nu p e e d r , fec " t T ly hu e s nli d g i h d te t n h e i d s , J h a e ck r a e l pea p t e e r d is t h he on sec h o e n ar d i s n t g an t z h a e — Liini
:
On Daddara the Lion gave a roar,
And made Mount Daddara resound again.
Hard by a Jackal li\ed ; he feared full sore
To hear the sound, and burst his heart in twain.
[9] Thus did our Lion do this Jackal to death. Then he laid his
brothers together in one grave, and told the sister they were dead, and
comforted her ; and he lived the rest ofhis days in the Golden Cave, until
he passed away to the place which his merits had earned for him.

No. 152. 7
When the INfaster— had eiulcd this discoiu-se, lie revealed the Truths, and
[identified the Birth: at tlic conclusion—of tlic Truths, the layman was csti-
'blished in the Fruit of the First Path: "The harher's son of to-day \v;us then
t n h o e w J s a i c x ka E l ld ; er t s he ; a Li n c d ch I a m vi ys g e i l rl f w a a m s t t h h e e e y l o d i e u st ig Li L o i n o . n " ess ; the six younger Lionsarc
No. 153.
SUKARA-JATAKA\
—
"Vouare afotn-foot" etc. This is a story told by the Master while at Jeta-
vana, about acertain Elder well stricken in years.
Once, we are told, there happened to lie a night service, and the Master had
preached standing upon a slab ofthejewelled staircase at the door of his scented
cell. After delivering the discourse of the Blessed, he retired into his scented
chamber; and the Captain of the Faith, saluting his Master, went back to his
own cell again. Mahanioggallana too retired to his cell, and after a moment's
rest returned to ask the Elder Sariputta a (juestion. As he asked and asked
each question, the Captain of the Faith made it all clear, as though he were
making the moon rise in the sky. There were present the four classes of
disciples-, who sat and heard it all. Then a thought came into the mind of
one aged Elder. ".Sui)po.se," he thought, "I can puzide Sariputta l)efore all
this crowd, by asking him some question? They will all think, What a clever
fellow! and I shall gain great credit and repute." So he rose up in the crowd,
and stepping near tothe Elder, stood on one side, and said, "Friend S;Tri[)utta,
I too have a question for you; will you let me speak? CtIvc me a decision in
discrimination or in undiscrimination, in refutation or in acceptation, in dis-
tinction or in counter-distinction^." The Elder looked at him. "This old man,"
thought he, "stands within the sphere of desire still; he is empty, and knows
nothing." He said not a single word to him for very shame laying his fan
;
down,he rosefrom his seat,[10] and returned to his cell. And Elder Moggalluna
likewise returned to his cell. The bystanders jumped up, crying, "Seize this
wicked old fellow, who wouldn't let us hear the sweet words of the sermonI" and
they mobbed him. Oft" he ran, and fell through a hole in the corner of a cess-
pool just outside the monastery ; when he got up he was all over tilth. When
the people saw him, they felt sorry for it, and went away to the Master. He
asked, "Why have you come at this unseasonable hour, laymen!" They told
him what had happened. "Laymen," said he, "this is not the only time this
old man has been puft'ed up, and nc^t knowing his own power, pitted himself
against the strong, only to be covered all over with filth. Long, long ago he
knew not his powers, pitted himself against the strong, and was C(jvered with
tilth as he iscovered now." Then, at their request, he told them a story of the
oldentime.
1 FausbfJl, TenJiltakas, pp. 12, 03, 94 (hecompares Noa. 278and 481); R. Morris
in Contemp. Rev. 1881, vol. 39, p. 737.
2 Monks, nuns, laymen and lay sisters.
' These wordsappeartobe nonsense.

;
8 The Jdtaka. Book II.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was a Lion who dwelt in a mountain cave in the Himalayas.
Hard by were a multitude of Boars, living bya lakeside ; and beside the
same lake lived a company of anchorites in huts made of leaves and the
branches of trees.
One day it so happened that the Lion had brought down a buffalo or
elephant or some such game and,aftereatingwhathe listed,he wentdown
;
to drink at tliis lake. Just as he came out, a sturdy Boar happened to be
feeding by the side of the water. "He'll make a meal for me some other
day," thought the Lion. But fearing that if tlie Boar saw him, he might
never come there again, the Lion as he came up out of the water slunk
away to t—he side. This the Boar saw ; and at once the thought came into
his mind, "This is because he has seen me, and is afraid ! He dare not
come nigh me, and offhe runs for fear This day shall see a fight between
1
me and a lion !" So he raised his head, and made challenge against the
Lion in the first stanza :
—
"Y Tu o r u n, ar L e io a n, fo t u u r r f n o ; ot are so yo a u m a I fr : ai t d h ' u ^ s, W f h ri y end d , o w y e o 'r u e r b u o n th aw a a li y ke, fr y o o m u m s e e ' e ^" ;
[11] The Lion gave ear. "Friend Boar," he said, "to-day there will
be no fight between you and me. But this day week let us fight it out in
this very spot." And with these words, he departed.
The Boar was highly delighted in thinking how he was to fight a lion
and he told all his kith and kin about it. But the tale only terrified them.
"You will be the bane of us all," they said, "and yourself to boot.
You know not what you can do, or you would not be so eager to do battle
with a lion. When the Lion conies, he'll be the death of you and all of
us as well ; do not be so violent!" These words made the Boar fear on
his part. "What am I to do, then?" he asked. Then the other Boars
advised him to roll about in the anchorites' dunghill for the next seven
days, and let the muck dry on his l)ody then onthe seventh day he should
;
moisten himself with dewdrops, and be first at the trysting place; he
must find how the wind should lie, and get to the windward ; and the
Lion, being a cleanly creature, would spare his life when he had a whiff of
him.
So accordingly he did ; and on the day appointed, there he was. No
sooner had the Lion scented him, and smelt the filth, says he, "Friend
Boar, a pretty trick this ! Were you not all besmeared with tilth, I
should have had your life this very day. But as it is, bite you I cannot,
nor so much as touch you with my foot. Therefore I spare your life."
And then he repeated the second stanza
:
"0 dirty Boar, your hide is foul, the stench is horrible to me;
If you would fight I yield me quite, and own you have the victory."

No. 153. 9
Then the Lion turned away, and procured his day's food and anon,
;
after a drink at the hike, lie went back again to his cave on the mountain.
And the Boar told his kindred how he had beaten tli(^ Lion! [12] lint
they were terrified for fear the Lion should come again another day and be
the death of them all. So tliey ran away and betook them to .some other
place.
When the Master had ended this discom-sc, he identitied the Birth
:
"Tii
Boarofthose days is now the ancient Eldci', and I myselfwas the Lion."
No. 154.
URAGA-JATAKA.
—
^'Concealed within a stone" etc. This story the Master told at Jctavana,
about a soldiers' quarrel.
Tradition tells howtwo soldiers, in the service of the king of Kosala, of high
rank, and great persons at com-t,no soonercaught sight ofoneanother than they
used to fall at ill words. Neither king, nor friends, nor kinsfolk could make
them agree.
It happened one day that early in the morning the Master, looking around
to see which of his friends were ripe fjr Release, perceived that these two were
rciidy to enter upon the First Path. Next day he went all alone seekingalms in
Savatthi, and stopt before the door of one of them, who came out and took the
Master's bowl ; then led him within, and oft'ered him a seat. The Master sat,
and then enlarged on the profit of cultivating Lovingkintlness. "When he saw
the man's mind was ready, he declared the Truths. This done, the other wiis
established in the Frait oftheFirstPath. Seeingthis, the Master persuaded him
to take the Bowl ; then risinghe proceeded to the house ofthe other. Out came
the other, and after salutation given, begged the Master to enter, and gave him
a seat. He also took the Ma.ster's bowl, and entered along with him. To him
the Master lauded the Eleven Blessings of Lovingkindness and perceiving that
;
his heart was ready, declared the Truths. And this done, he too becameesta-
blished in the Fruit ofthe First Path.
Thus they were both converted; they confessed their faults one to the other,
and asked forgiveness; peaceful and harmonious, they were at one togcthei".
That very same day they ate together in the presence ofthe Blessed One.
His meal over, tlie Master returned to the monastery. They both returneil
with him, bearing a rich present of flowers, scents and perfumes, of ghee, honey,
and sugar. The Master, having preached of duty [13] before the Brotherhood,
and uttered a Buddha's admonition, retired to hisscented chamber.
Next moniing, the Brethren talked the matter over in the Hall of Truth.
"Friend," one would say to another, "our Master sid)dues the unsulidued.

: :
10 The Jdtaka. Book II.
Why, hero arc these two grand persons, who have been quarrelling all this
time, and could not be reconciled by tlic king himself, or friends and kinsfolk
and the Master has humljled tliem in a single day!" The Master came in.
"What arc you talking aViout," asked he, "as you sit here together?" They
told him. Said he, "Brethren, this is not the first time that I have reconciled
these two; in bygone ages I reconciled the same two persons." And he told a
story ofthe oldeu time.
Once on a time, while Brahmadatta was king of Benares, a great
multitude gathered together in Benares to keep festival. Crowds of men
and ofgods, ofserpents, and garujas\ came together to see the meeting.
It so happened that in one spot a Serpent and a Garula were watching
the goings-on together. The Serpent, not noticing that this was a Garula
beside him, laid a hand on his shouldtr. And when the Garul.a turned
and looked round to see whose hand had been laid upon his shoulder, he
saw the Serpent. The Serpent looked too, and saw that this was a
Garula ; and fi'ightened to death, he flew off over the surface of a river.
The Garula gave chase, to catch him.
Now the Bodhisatta was a recluse, and lived in a leaf-hut on the river
bank. At that time he was trying to keep off the sun's heat by putting
on a wet cloth and doffing his garment of bark ; and he was bathing in
the river, "I will make this recluse," thought the Serpent, "the means of
saving my life." Putting offhis own proper shajje, and assuming the form
of a fine jewel, he fixed himself upon the bark garment. The Garula in
full pursuit saw where he had gone ; but for very reverence he would not
touch the garment ; so he thus addressed the Bodhisatta
—
"Sir, I am hungry. Look at your bark garment: in it there is a
serpent which I desire to eat." And to make the matter clear, he repeated
the first stanza :
[14] "Concealed within a stone this wretched snake
Has taken harboiu'age for safety's sake.
And yet, in reverence of your holiness,
Though I am hungry, yet I will not take."
Standing where he was in the water, the Bodhisatta said the second
stanza in praise of the Garula king
:
"Live long, preserved by Brahma, though i)ursued.
And may you never lack for heavenly food.
Do not, in reverence of my holiness,
Do not devom' him, though in hungry mood."
In these words the Bodhisatta expi-essed his approval, standing there
in the water. Then he came out, and put on his bark garment, and took
1 Amythical bird,whichwe see is able to assumehumanform. Morris {J.P.T.S.,
1893,p. 26) concludes thatthe nujunmo, here translated Garula, was a "wingedman."

No. 154. 11
both creatureswith him tohis heriiiit;i<;t^ ; whore, lie reliearsed tlie ]ilessiii;^s
of Lovingkindness until they were both at one. Tlienceforwaril they lived
together happily in peace and harmony.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Hirtli, saying,
"In those days, the two great personages were the Serpentand the Ciaruja, aii(i
I myselfwas therecluse."
No. 155.
GAGGA-JATAKA'.
—
[15] ^''Gagga,live an humlredyears" etc. This story the Master told when
he was staying in the monastery made by King Pasenadi in front of Jetavana
;
it was about a sneeze which he gave.
One day, we are told, as the Master satdiscoursing with four i)ersons i-nund
him, he sneezed. "Long life to the Blessed One, long life to the BuddhaI" tiic
Brothers all cried aloud, and made a great to-do.
The noise interrupted the discourse. Then the Master said to the Brethren
"Why, Brothers, if one cry 'Long life!' on hearing a sneeze, does a man live or :
dieany the more for that?" They answered, "No, no. Sir." He went on, "Vou
should not cry 'Long life' for a sneeze, Brethren. Whosoever docs so is guilty
ofsin."
It is said that at that time, when the Brethren sneezed, people used to call
out, "Long life to you, Sir!" But the Brethren had their scruples, and made
no answer. Everybody was annoyed, and asked, "Pray, why is it that the
priests about Buddha the Sakya prince make no answer, when they snee/.e, and
somebody or other wishes them long life?"
All this was told to the Blessed One. He said "Brethren, common folk are
superstitious. When you sneeze, and they say, 'Lo : ng life to you, Si—r!' I permit
you to answer, 'Thesame to you'." Then the Brethren asked him "Sir, when
did people begin to answer'Long life' by 'The same toyou'V Said the Master,
"That was long, long ago;" and he told them a tale ofthe olden time.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, tlie
Bodhisatta came into the woild as a brahmin's son of the kingdom of
Kasi ; and his father was a lawyer by calling. When the lad was sixteen
years old or so, his father gave a fine jewel into his charge, and tluiy l>otli
^ The introductory story is repeated in the CuUavagga, v. 33 (iii. l-'jJ of liliys
t

" ! ; ;
12 The Jataka. Book II.
travelled through town after town, village after village, until they came to
Benares. Thei-e the man had a meal cooked in the gatekeeper's house
and as he could find nowhere to put up, he asked where there was lodging
to be had for wayfarers who came too late? The people told him that
there was a buildingoutside the city,but that itwashaunted but however
;
he might lodge there if he liked. Says the lad to his father, "Have no
fear of anygoblin,father I will subdue him, and bringhim to your feet."
!
[16] So he persuaded his father, and they went to the place together.
The father lay down upon a bench, and his son sat beside him, chafing his
feet.
Now the Goblin that haunted the place had received it for twelve
years' service ofVessavana^, on these terms : that if any man who entered
it should sneeze, and when long life was wished him, should answer,
—
"Long life to you !" or "The same to you ! " all except these the Goblin
had a right to eat. The Goblin lived upon the central rafter of the hut".
He determined to make the father of the Bodhisatta sneeze. Accord-
ingly, by his magic power he raised a cloud of fine dust, which entered the
man's nostrils; and as he lay on the bench, he sneezed. The son did
not cry "Long life !" and down came the Goblin from his perch, ready to
devour his victim. But the Bodhisatta saw him descend, and then these
thoughts passed through his mind. "Doubtless it is he who made my
father sneeze. This must be a Goblin that eats all who do not say ' Long
life to you'." And addressing his father, he repeated the first verse as
follow^s
:
—
"Gagga, live an hundred years, aye, and twenty more, I pray
May no goblin eat you up; live an hundred years, I say!"
The Goblin thought, "This one I cannot eat, because he said ' Long
life to you.' But I shall eat his father;" and he— came close to the
father. But the man divined the truth of the matter "This must be a
Goblin," thought he, "who eats all who do not reply, ' Long life to you,
too !' " and so addressing his son, he repeated the second verse :
—
"You too live an hundred years, aye, and twenty more, I pray
Poison be the goblins' food ; live an hundi'ed years, I say!
[17] The Goblin hearing these words, turned away, thinking "Neither
of these is for me to eat." But the Bodhisatta put a question to him :
" Come, Goblin, how is it you eat the people who enter this building'\ "
"I earned the right for twelve years' service of Vessavana."
"What, are you allowed to eat everybody 1 "
1 Amonster witli white skin, three legs, and eight teeth,guardian ofjewels and the
precious metals, anda kind ofIndianPluto.
- SeeEggeling, yatap.-Brabm. vol.2, p. 3, S.B.E., for the construction ofthehut.

No. 155. 13
"All except those who say 'Tlie same to you' \vh(ni another wishes
them long life."
"Goblin," said the lad, "you have done some wickedness in foiiner
lives, which has caused you to be born now fierce, and cruel, and a l>an(^ to
others. If you do the same kind of thing npw, yon will pass from
darkness to dai-kness. Therefore from this time forth abstain from sucli
things as taking life." With these words he humbled the Goblin, scarcfl
him with fear of hell, established him in the Five Precepts, and made him
as obedient as an errand-boy.
Next day, when the people came and saw the Goblin, and learnt how
that the Bodhisatta had subdued him, they went and told the king "My
:
lord, some man has subdued the Goblin, and made him as obedient as an
errand-boy !" So the king sent for him, and raised him to be Commander-
in-Chief while he heaped honours upon the father. Having made the
;
Goblin a tax-gatherer, and establishes! him in the Bodhisatta's precepts,
after giving alms and doing good he departed to swell the hosts ofheaven.
'\Vhen the Master had ended this story, which he told to explain when the
custom first arose of answering 'Long life' by 'The same to you,' he identified
the Birth: "In those days, Ananda was the king, Kassapa the father, and I
myselfwas the lad his son."
No. 156.
ALINACITTA-JATAKA.
—
^'Prince Winheart once uj)on a time" etc. This story tlie Master told at
Jetavana, about a fainthearted Brother. The circumstances will bo set forth
in the Samvara Birth in the eleventh BookV When tlie Master asked this
Brother ifhe really were fainthearted, as was said, ho replied, [18] "Yes, Blcs.sed
One." To which the Master said, "What, Brother ! in former days did you not
gain supremacy over tlu; kingdom of Benares, twelve leagues either way, .uid
give it to a baby boy, like a lump of flesh and nothing more, and all this just
y b o y u i t ) o er l . o s s e e ve h ra e n a c r e t ! an A d n f d ain n t? o " w ' t A ha n t d y h o e u t h ol a d ve a s e t m o l r ) y ra o c f ed old th e i n s d g a r y e s. at salvation, are
» No. 402.

;;
14 The Jdtaka. Booh II.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was kiug of Benares, there was
a viHage of carpenters not far from the city, in which five hundred
carpenters lived. They would go up the river in a vessel, and enter the
forest, where they would shape beams and planks for housebuilding, and
put together the framework of one-storey or two-storey houses, numbering
all the pieces from the mainpost onwards ; these then they brought down
to the river bank, and put them all aboard ; then rowing down stream
a»ain, they would build houses to order as it was required of them
after which, when they received their wage, they went back again for
more materials for the building, and in this way they made their liveli-
hood.
Once it befel that in a place where they were at work in shaping
timbers, a certain Elephant trod upon a splinter of acacia wood, which
pierced his foot, and caused it to swell up and fester, and he was in great
pain. In his agony, lie caught the sound of these carpenters cutting
wood. "There are some carpenters will cui^e me," thought he; and
limping on three feet, he presented himself before them, and lay down
close by. The carpenters, noticing his swollen foot, went up and looked ;
there was the splinter sticking in it. With a sharp tool they made
incision al)0ut the splinter, and tying a string to it, pulled it right out.
Then they lanced the gathering, and washed it with warm water, and
doctored it properly ; and in a very short time the wound was healed.
Grateful for this cure, the Elephant thought : "My life has been saved
by the help of these carpenters ; now I must make myself useful to
them." So ever after that, [19] he used to pull up trees for them, or
when they were chopping he would roll up the logs ; or bring them their
adzes and any tools they might want, holding everything in his trunk like
grim death. And the carpenters, when it was time to feed him, used to
bring him each a portion of food, so that he had five hundred portions
in all.
Now this Elephant had a young one, white all over, a magnificent high-
bred creatui-e. The Elephant reflected that he was now old, and he had
better bring his young one to serve the carpenters, and himself be left free
to go. So without a word to the carpenters he went ofi*into the wood, and
brought his son to them, saying, "This young Elephant is a son of mine.
You saved my life, and I give him to you as a fee for your leechcraft
from henceforward he shall work for you." So he explained to the young
Elephant that it was his duty to do tiie work which he had been used to
do himself, and then went away into the forest, leaving him with the
carpenters. So after that time the young Elephant did all their work,
faithfully and obediently and they fed him, as they had fed the other,
;
with five hundred portions for a meal.
His work once done, the Elephant would go play about in the

.
No. 15G. 15
river, and then return agiiin. The carpenters' children used to pull hin>
by the trunk, and play all sorts of pranks with him in water and (Jut.
Now noble creatures, be they elephants, horses, or men, never dung or
stale in thewater'. So this Elephant did nothingof the kind when ho was
in the water, but waited until he came out upon the V)ank.
One day, rain had fallen up river; and by th(^ flood a half-dry cake
of his dung was carried into the river. This floated down to the
Benares landing place, where it stuck fast in a bush. Just then the king's
elephant keeper's had brought down five hundred elephants to give them a
bath. But the creatures scented this soil of a noble animal, and not one
would enter the water; up went their tails, and oft' they all ran. The
keepers told this to the elephant trainers; who replied, "There must be
something in the water, then." So orders were given to cleanse the
water; [20] and there in the bushes this lump was seen. "That's what
the matter is !" cried the men. So they brought a jar, and filled it with
water ; next powdering the stuff into it, they sprinkled the water over the
elephants, whose bodies then became sweet. At once they went down into
the river and bathed.
When the trainers made their report to the king, they advised him to
secure the Elephant for his own use and profit.
The king accordingly embarked upon a raft, and rowed up stream
mitil he arrived at the place where the carpenters had settled. Tiie young
Elephant, hearing the sound of drums as he was playing in the water,
came out and pi'esented himself before the carpenters, who one and all
came forth to do honour to the king's coming, and said to him, "Sire, if
woodwork is wanted, what need to come here1 Why not send and have
it brought to you 1 "
"No, no, good friends," the king answered, " 'tis not for wood that 1
come, but for this elephant here."
—
"He is yours, Sire ! " But the Elephant refused to budge.
" What do you want me to do, gossip Elephant 1 " asked the king.
"Order thecarpenters tobe paid forwhat theyhave spenton me.Sire."
"Willingly, friend." And the king oi-dered an hundred thousand
pieces of money to be laid by his tail, and trunk, and by each of his four
feet. But this was not enough for the Elephant go lie would not. So
;
to each of the cai-penters was given a pair of cloths, and to each of their
wives robes to dress in, nor did he omit to give enough whereby his
playmates the children should be brought u)> ; then with a last look upon
the carpenters, and the women, and the children, he departed in company
with the king.
* CompareHesiod, Op. 753 : iJ.r]8i ttot iv rrpoxofi -rroTa/xwi'a\ade irpoptdvrwv, f^-qS fir\
KpTjvduv ovpeiv. Hdt. i. 138 (the Persians) ^s Troranbv M oDreivovpiovai ...

;
16 The Jdtaka. Booh II.
To his capital city the king brought him ; and city and stable were
decked out with all magnificence. He led the Elephant round the city in
solemn procession, and thence into his stable, which was fitted up with
splendour and pomp. There he solemnly sprinkled the Elephant, and
api)ointed him for his own riding; like a comi'ade he treated him, and
gave him the half of his kingdom, [21] taking as much care of him as he
did of himself After the coming of this Elephant, the king won
supremacy over all India.
In course of time the Bodhisatta was conceived by the Queen Consort
and when her time was near come to be delivered, the king died. Now if
the Elephant learnt news of the king's death, he was sure to break his
heart ; so he was waited upon as before, and not a woi'd said. But the
next neighbour, the king of Kosala, heard of the king's death. "Surely
the land is at my mercy," thought he ; and marched with a mighty host to
the city, and beleaguered it. Sti'aigh—t the gates wei'e closed, and a
message was sent to the king of Kosala : "Our Queen is near the time of
her delivery and the astrologers have declared that in seven days she
;
shall bear a son. If she bears a son, we will not yield the kingdom, but
on the seventh day we will give yon battle. For so long we pray you
wait " And to this the king agreed.
!
In seven days the Queen bore a son. On his name-day they called
him Prince Winheart, because, said they, he was born to win the hearts of
the people.
On the very same day that he was born, the townsfolk began to do
battle with the king of Kosala. But as they had no leader, little by little
the army gave way, great though it was. The courtiers told this news to
the Queen, adding, "Since our army loses ground in this way, we fear
defeat. But the state Elephant, our king's bosom friend, has never been
told that the king is dead, and a son born to him, and that the king of
Kosala is here to give us battle. Shall we tell him?"
"Yes, do .so," said the Queen. So she dressed up her son, and laid
him in a fine linen cloth after which she with all the court came down
;
from the palace and entered the Elephant's stable. There she laid the
babe at theElephant's feet, [22]saying, "Master,yourcomrade is dead,but
we feared to tell it you lest you might break your heart. This is your
comrade's son ; the king of Kosala has run a leaguer about the city, and
is making war upon your son ; the army is losing ground ; either kill your
son yourself, or else win the kingdom back for him "
!
At once the Elephant stroked the child with his trunk, and lifted him
uponhis own head
;
then making moan and lamentationh—e took him down
and laid him in his mother's arms, and with the words " I will master
the king of Kosala " he went forth hastily.
!
Then the courtiers put his armour and caparison upon him, and

—
No. 156. 17
unlocked the city gate, and escorted Lini tliitlier. The Elephant einerginji;
trumpeted, and frightened all tlie host so that they ran away, and hroke
up the camp ; then seizing the king of Kosala by his topknot, he carried
him to the young prince, at whose feet he let him fall. Some rose to kill
him, but them the Elephant stayed and he let the captive king go with
;
this advice : "Be careful for the future, and be not presumptuous by
retison that our Prince is young."
After that, the power over all India fell into the Bodhisatta's own
hand, and not a foe was able to rise up against him. The Bodhisatta was
consecrated at the age of seven years, as King Winheart just was his
;
reign, and when he came to life's end he went to swell the hosts of
heaven.
When the Master had ended this discourse, having become perfectly en-
lightened, he repeated this couple ofverses :
"Prince Winheart took king Kosala, ill pleased with all he had;
By capturing the greedy king, he made his people glad."
"So any brother, strong in will, who to the Eefuge flies,
Who cherishes all good, and goes the way Nirvana lies.
By slow degrees will bring about destruction of all ties."
[23] AndsotheMaster,bringinghis teachingtoaclimaxintheeternalNirvana,
went on to declare the Truths, and then identitied the Birth after the Truths,
this backsliding Brother was established in
sainthood:-":
She who now is
Mahamaya was then the mother; this backslider was the Elephant who took the
kingdom and handed it over to the child ; Sariputta was the father Elcpliant,
and I myselfwas the young Prince."
No. 157.
GUNA-JATAKA.
—
"The strong will always have their way" etc. This was told l)y the Master
whilst at Jetavana, how Elder Ananda received a present ofa thousand robes.
The Elder had been preaching to the ladies of the kingof Kosala's palace as
described above in the Mahasara l>irth^
As he preached there in the manner described, [24] a thousand rol)es, worth
each athousand pieces of money, were brought to the king. Of these the king
' No. 92, Compare CiilUivagga, xi. 1. 13 ff. (trans, iu S.B.K., iii. p. 382).
2
J. II.

—
18 Tlie Jdtaka. Book II.
gave five hundred to as many of his queens. The ladies put these aside,
and made them a present to our Elder, and then the next day in their old
ones went to the palace where the king took breakfast. The king remarked,
"1 gave you dresses worth a thousand pieces each. Why are you not
wearing them?" "My lord," said they, "we have given them to the Elder."
"Has Elder Ananda got them all?" he asked. They said, yes, he had. "The
Supreme Buddha," said he, "allows only three robes. Ananda is doing a little
trade in cloth, I suppose!" He was angry with the Elder ; and after breakfast,
visited him in his cell, and after greeting, sat down, with these words:
"Pray, Sir, do my ladies learn or listen to your preaching?"
"Yes", Sire; they learn what they ought, and what they ought to hear, they
hear."
"Oh, indeed. Do they only listen, or do they make you presents of upper-
garments or under-garments?"
"To-day, Sire, they have given me five hundred robes worth a thousand
pieces each."
"And you accepted them. Sir?"
"Yes, Sire, I did."
"Why, Sir, didn't the Mastermake some rule aboutthree robes?"
"True, Sire, for every Brother three robes is the rule, speaking of what he
uses for himself. — But no one is forbidden to accept what is offered ; and that is
why I took them to give them to Brothers whose robes are worn out."
"But when these Brothers get them from you,what do they do with theirold
ones?"
"Make them into a cloke."
"And what about the old cloke?"
"That they turn into ashirt."
"And the old shirt—?"
"That serves for a coverlet."
"The old coverlet?"—"Becomes a mat." [25] "The old mat?"—"A towel."
"And what about the old towel?"
"Sire, it is not permitted to waste the gifts of the faithful ; so they chop up
the old towel into bits, and mix the bits with clay, which they use for mortar
in building their houses."
"A gift, Sir, ought not to bedestroyed, not even a towel."
"Well, Sir king, we destroy no gifts, but all areused somehow."
This conversation pleased the king so much, that he sent for the other five
hundred dresses which remained, and ga\e them to the Elder. Then, after
receiving his thanks, he greeted the Elder in solemn state, and went his way.
The Elder gave the first five hundred robes to Brothers whose robes were
worn out. But the number of his fellow priests was just five hundred. One of
these, a young Brother, was very useful to the Elder ; sweeping out his cell,
servinghim with food and drink, giving him toothbrush and water for cleansing
his mouth, looking after the privies, living rooms, and sleeping rooms, and
doing iill that was needed for hand, foot,or back. To him, as his by right forall
his great service, the Elder gave all the five hundred robes which he had
received afterwards. The young Brother in his turn distributed them among
his fellow-students. These all cut them up, dyed them yellow as a kanikara^
flower; then drest therein they waited upon the Master, greeted him, and sat
down on one side. "Sir," they asked, "is it possible fora holy disciple who has
entered on the First Path to be a respecter of persons in his gifts?" "No,
Brothers, it is not possible for holy disciples to be resj^ecters of persons in
their gifts." "Sir, our spiritual Teacher, the Treasurer of the Faith, gave five
hundred robes, each worth a thousand pieces, to a young Brother ; and he
has divided them amongst us." "Brothers, in giving these Ananda was no
respecter of persons. [26] That young fellow was a very useful servant;
so he made the present to his own attendant for service' sake, for goodness'
1 Pterospermuinacerifolium.

No. 157. 19
sake, and by right, thinking that one good turn deserves another, and with
a wish to do what gratitmle demands. In former days, as now, wise men
acted on the principle that one good turn deserves another." And then, at their
request, he told them astory ofthe olden time.
Once upon a time, while Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was a Lion living in a cave on the hills. One day he came out
from his lair and looked towards the mountain foot. Now all round
the foot of that mountain stretched a great piece of water. Upon some
ground that rose out of this was a quantity of soft green grass, growing
on the thick mud, and over this mud ran rabbits and deer and such light
creatures, eating of the grass. On that day, as usual, there was a deer
eating grass i;pon it.
" I'll have that deer !" thought the Lion ; and with a lion's leap he
sprang from the hillside towards it. But the deer, frightened to death,
scampered away belling. The Lion could not stop his onset ; down on the
mud he fell, and sank in, so that he could not get out; and there he
remained seven days, his feet fixed like four posts, with not a morsel
to eat.
Then a Jackal, hunting for food, chanced to see h—im; and set off
running in high terror. But the Lion called out to him "I say. Jackal,
—
don't run here am I, caught fast in the mud. Please save me !" Up
came the Jackal. "I could pull you out," says he, "but I much fear
that once out you might eat me." "Fear nothing, I won't eat you," says
the Lion. "On the contrary, I'll do you great service ; only get me out
somehow."
The Jackal, accepting this promise, worked away the mud around his
four feet, and the holes wherein his four feet were fixed he dug further
towards the water ; [27] then the water r — an in, and made the mud soft.
Then he got underneath the Lion, saying "Now, Sir, one great effort,"
making a loud noise and striking the Lion's belly with his head. The
Lion sti-ained every nei-ve, and scrambled out of the mud he stood on
;
dry land. After a moment's rest, he plunged in the lake, and washed and
scoured the mud from him. Then he killed a buffalo, and with his fangs
tore up its ilesh, of which he proffered some to the Jackal, saying, "Eat,
comrade !" and himself after the Jackal had done did eat too. After thi.s,
the Jackal took a piece in his mouth. "What's that fori" the Lion
asked. "For your humble servant my mate, who awaits me at liome."
"All right," says the Lion, taking a bit for his own mate. "Come,
comrade," says he again, "let us stay awhile on the mountain top, and
then go to the lady's house." So there they went, and the Lion fed the
she-jackal; and after thev were lioth satisfied, said he, " Now I am going
2—2

" ;
20 The Jcitaka. Booh II.
to take care of you." So he conducted tliem to the phice where he dwelt,
and settled them in a cave near to the entrance ofhis own.
Ever after that, he and the Jackal used to go a-hunting together,
leaving their mates behind ; all kinds of creatures they would kill, and eat
to their hearts' content, and tlien bring back some for tht; two others.
And as time went on, the she-Jackal and the Lioness had each two cubs,
and they all lived happily together.
One day, a sudd(>n thought struck the Lioness. "My Lion seems very
fond of the Jackal and his mate and young ones. What if there be some-
tliing wrong between them ! That must be the cause why he is so fond of
them, I suppose. Well, 1 will plague her and frighten her, and get her
away from this place."
So when the Lion and the Jackal w^re away on the hunt, she plagued
and terrified the Jackal's mate, asking her why she stayed there, [28] why
she did not run away ? And her cubs frightened the young Jackals after
the same fashion. The she-Jackal told her mate what had been said.
"It is clear," said she, "that the Lion must have dropt a hint about us.
We have been here a long time
;
and now he will be the death ofus. Let
us go back to the place where we lived before !
On hearing this, the Jackal approached the Lion, with these words.
"Master, we have been here a long time. Those who staytoo long outstay
their welcoine. While we are away, your Lioness scolds and terrifies my
mate, by asking why she stays, and telling her to begone your young
;
ones do the same to mine. Ifany one does not like a neighbour, he should
just bid him go, and send him about his business ; what is the use of all
this plaguing1" So saying, he repeated the first stanza :
"The strong will always have their way; it is their nature so to do;
Your mate roars loud ; and now I say I fear what once I trusted to."
[29] The Lion listened; then turning to his Lioness, "Wife," said he,
"you remember how once I was out hunting for a week, and then brought
back this Jackal and his mate with me?"•"Yes, I remember." "Well,
do you know why I stayed away all that week 1 " "No, Sir." "My wife,
in trying to catch a deer, I made a mistake, and stuck fast in the mud
there I stayed — for I could not get out — a whole week without food. My
life was saved by this Jackal. This my friend saved my life ! A friend
in need is a friend indeed, be he great or small. Never again must you
put a slight upon my conn-ade, or his wife, or his family." And then the
Lion repeated the second stanza
:
"A friend who plays a friendly part, however small and weak he be.
He is my kinsman and my flesh and blood, a friend and comrade he;
Despise him not, my sharp-fanged mate! this Jackal saved my life for me,"

No. 157. 21
The Lioness, when she heard this tale, made her jn-ace wiih tlu;Jackal's
mate, and ever after lived at amity with her and her young ones. And
the young of the two pairs played together in their early days, and wljen
the parents died, [30] they did not break the bond of friendship, but
lived happily together as the old ones had lived before them. Indeed,
the friendship remained unbroken thi-ough seven generations.
When tlic ]\Iaster had ended this discourse, he dcclareil the Tnitlis and
identified the Birth: — (at the end of the Truths some cntei'cd on — the Fii\st
Path, some on the Second, some on the Third,and some the Fourth :) "Ananda
was theJackal in thosedays, and the Lion was 1 myself."
No. 158.
SUHANU-JATAKA.
—
"Birds of a feather" etc. This story the Master told whilst at Jetavana,
abouttwo hot-tempered Brothers.
It happened that there were two Brothers, passionate, cruel, and violent, one
living at Jetavana and one in the country. Once the country Brother came to
Jetavana on some errand or other. The novices and young Brothers knew the
passionate nature of this man, so they led him to the cell of the other, all agog
to see them quarrel. No sooner did they sjiy one another, those two hot-
tempered men, than they ran into each other's arms, stroking and caressing
hands, and feet, and back !
The Brothers talked about it in the Hall of Truth. "Friend, these
passionate Brothers are cross, cruel, angry to every body else, but with each
other they are the best of friends, cordial and symi)athetic!" The Master
came in, asking what they sat there talking about \ They told him. Said he,
"This, Brothers, is not the only time that these men, who are cross, cruel, and
angry to all else, have shown themselves cordial, and friendly, and sympatlietic
to each other. It happened just so in olden days"; and so saying, he told an
old-world tale.
Once upon a time when Lrahmadatta w^as king of lienares, the
Bodhisatta was his do-all, a courtier who advised him on things temporal
and things spiritual. Now this king was of a somewhat covetous nature ;
[31] and he had a brute of a horse, named Mahasoua, or iiig Ciiestnut.

: "
22 The Jdtaka. Book II.
Some horse-dealers from the north country brought down five hundred
horses; and word was sent to the king that these horses had arrived.
Now heretofore the Bodhisatta had always asked the dealers to fix their
own price, and then paid it in full. But now the king, being displeased
with him, summoned another of his court, to whom he said,
"Friend, make the men name their price then let loose Big Chestnut
;
so that he goes amongst them make him bite them, and when they are
;
weak and wounded get the men to reduce their price."
*'Certainly," said the man ; and so he did.
The dealers in great dudgeon told the Bodhisatta whi^t this horse had
done.
"Have you not such another brute in ymir own city1 " asked the
Bodhisatta. Yes, they said, there wa;^ one named Suhanu, Strongjaw,
aiid a fierce and savage brute he was. "Bring him with you the next
time you come," the Bodhisatta said; and this they pi'omised to do.
So the next time they came this brute came with them. The king, on
hearing how the horse-dealers had arrived, opened his window to look at
the horses, and caused Chestnut to be let loose. Then as the dealers saw
Chestnut coming, they let Strongjaw loose. No sooner had the two met,
than they stood still licking each other all over !
The king asked the Bodhisatta how it was. "Friend," said he, "when
these two rogue horses come across othei's, they are fierce, wild, and savage,
—
they bite them, and make them ill. But with each other there they
stand, licking one another all over the body ! What's the reason of this1
"The reason is," said the Bodhisatta, "that they are not dissimilar, but
like in nature and character." And he i*epeated this couple ofverses
:
"Birds of a feather flock together Chestnut and Strongjaw both agree
: —
In scope and aim both are thesame there is no difference I can see."
[32] "Both savage are, and vicious both; both always bite their tether;.
So sin with sin, and vice with vice, must e'en agree together."
Then the Bodhisatta went on to warn the king against excessive
covetise, and the spoiling of other men's goods ; and fixing the value, he
made him pay the proper price. The dealers received the due value, and
went away well satisfied; and the king, abiding by the Bodhisatta's
admonition, at last passed away to fare according to his deeds.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth: "The
bad Brothers were then these two horses, Anandawas the king, and I was the
wise counsellor."

—
: :
No. 159. 23
No. 159.
MOllA-JATAKA.
[33] ''There he rises, king all-seeing" etc. This story the ^faster told at
Jetavana about a backsliding Brother. This Brother \v;us led l)y some others
before the Master, who asked, "Is it true, Brothei-, as I hear, that you have
backslidden?" "Yes, Sir.'' "What have you seen that should make you do
so?" "A woman drest up in magniticent attire." Then said the Master, "What
wonder that womankind should troul)le the wits of a man like you Even wise
men, who for .seven hundred years have done no sin, on hearinga wo ! man's voice
have tran.sgressed in a moment; even the holy become impure; even they who
have attained the highest honour have thus come todi.sgrace—how much more
the unholy!" and he told a story ofthe olden time.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta came into this world as a Peacock. The egg w-hich contained him
had a shell as yellow as a kaiiikara bud and when he broke the shell, he
;
became a Golden Peacock, fair and lovely, with beautiful red lines under
his wings. To preserve his life, he traversed three ranges of hills, and in
the fourth he settled, on a plateau of a golden hill in Dandaka. When
day dawned, as he sat upon the hill, watching the sun rise, he composed
a Brahma spell to preserve himself safe in his own feeding-ground, the
charm beginning "There he rises"
:
"There he rises, king all-seeing.
Making all things Uriglit with his golden light.
Thee I worship, glorious being,
Making all things bright with thy golden light,
Keep me safe, I pray,
Through the coming day."
[34] Worshipping the sun on this wise by the rerse here recited, ho
repeats another in worship of the Buddhas who have passed away, and all
their virtues
"All saints, the righteous, wise in holy lore,
The.se do I honour, and their aid implore
All honour to the wise, to wisdom honour be,
To freedom, and to all that freedom has made free."
Uttering this charm to keep himself from harm, the Peacock went
a-feeding
'.
^ This line ofthe text ismetrical in tliu I'ali.

:
24 The Jataka. Book 11.
[35] So after flying about all day, he came back at even and sat on the
hilltop to see the sun go down ; then as he meditated, he uttered another
spell to preserve himself and keep off evil, the one beginning "Tliere he
sets" :—
"There he sets, the king all-seeing,
He that makes all bright with his golden light.
Thee I worship, glorious being.
Making all things bright with thy golden light.
Through the night, as through the day,
Keep me safe, I pray.
"All saints, the righteous, wise in holy lore.
These do I honour and their aid implore
All honour to the wise, to wisdom honour be.
To freedom, and to all that freedom has made free."
Uttering this charm to keep himself from harm, the Peacock fell
a-sleeping'.
[36] Now thei-e was a savage who lived in a certain village ofwild
huntsmen, near Benares. Wandering about among the Himalaya hills he
noticed the Bodhisatta perched upon the golden hill of Dandaka, and
told it to his son.
It so befel that on a day one of the wives of the king of Benares,
Khema by name, saw in a dream a golden peacock holding a religious
discourse. This she told to the king, saying that she longed to hear
the discourse of the golden peacock. The king asked his courtiers
about it; and the courtiers said, "The Brahmins will be sure to know."
The Brahmins said "Yes, there are golden peacocks." When asked,
:
where 1 they replied, "The hunters will be sure to know." The king
called the hunters together and asked them. Then this hunter answered,
"O lord king, there is a golden hill in Dandaka; and there a golden
—
peacock lives." "Then bring it here kill it not, butjust take it alive."
The hunter set snares in the peacock's feeding-ground. But even
when the peacock stepped upon it, the snare would not close. This the
hunter tried for seven years, but catch him he could not ; and there
he died. And Queen Khema too died without obtaining her wish.
The king was wroth because his Queen had died for the sake of a
peacock. He caused au inscription to be made upon a golden plate to this
effect: "Among the Himalaya mountains is a golden hill iu Dandaka.
There lives a golden peacock ; and whoso eats of its flesh becomes ever
young and immortal." This he enclosed in a casket.
After his death, the next king read this inscription and thought
:
he, "I will become ever young and immortal;" so he sent another
^ This line ofthetext is metricalin thePali.

"
No. 159. 25
hunter. Like the first, this huntei* failed to capture the peacock, and
died in the quest. In the same way the kiiigJoin was ruled hy six
successive kings.
Then a seventh arose, who also sent forth a hunter, 'i'lic hunter
observed that when the Golden Peacock came ipto the snare, it did not
shut to, [37] and also that he recited a charm before setting out in search
of food. Off he went to the marches, and caught a peahen, which he
trained to dance when he clapped his hands, and at snap of finger to utter
her cry. Then, taking her along with him, he set the snare, fi.ving its
uprights in the ground, early in the morning, before the peacock had
recited his charm. Then he made the peahen utter a cry. This unwonted
— —
sound the female's note woke desire in the peacock's breast leaving
:
his charm unsaid, he came towards her; and was caught in the net.
Then the hunter took hold of him and conveyed him to the king of
Benares.
The king was delighted at the peacock's beauty ; and ordered a seat to
be placed for him. Sitting on the proffered seat, the Bodhisatta asked,
"Why did you have me caught, O king] "
"Because they say all that eat of you become immortal and have
eternal youth. So I wish to gain youth eternal and immortality by
eating of you," said the king.
"So be it — granted that all who eat of me become innnortal and have
eternal youth. But that means that I must die "
!
"Ofcourse it does," said the king.
—
"Well and if I die, how can my flesh give immortality to those that
eat of it% "
"Your colour is golden; therefore (so it is said) those who eat your
flesh become young and live so for ever'."
"Sir," replied the bird, "thei-e is a very good reason for my golden
colour. Long ago, I held imperial sway over the whole world, reigning in
this very city; I kept the Five Connnandnients, and made all people of
the world keep the same. For that I was born again after death in the
World of the Thirty-Three Archangels there I lived out my life, but
;
in my next birth I Ijecame apeacock in consequence of some sin; however,
golden I became because I had aforetime kept the Commandments."
"What"? Incredible! You an imperial ruler, who kept the Com-
mandments ! born gold-coloured as the fruit of them ! A proof, prithee !
^ Perhaps because they are supposed to live as long as gold lasts. On the same
principle, piecesofjade areplaced in the coffin of the Chinese, topreserve the soul of
the dead. Groot, in a work on Chinese religions, quotes a Chinese writer of the
4th century, who says: "He who swallows gold will exist as long as gold; he who
swallows jade will exist as long asjade;" and recommends it for tlie living (cp. Groot,
Religioux Systems ofChina, i. pp. 271, 273).

—
:
26 The Jataka. Book II.
[38] "I have one, Sire."
"What 1"
is it
"Well, Sire, when 1 was monarch, I used to pass thiough mid-air
seated in a jewelled car, which now lies buried in the earth beneath the
waters of the i-oyal lake. Dig it up from beneath the lake, and that shall
be my proof."
The king approved the plan; he caused the lake to be drained, and dug
out the chariot, and believed the Bodhisatta. Then the Bodhisatta
addressed him thus
"Sire, except Nirvana, which is everlasting, all things else, being
composite in their nature, are unsubstantial, transient, and subject to
living and death." Discoursing on this theme he established the king in
keeping of the Commandments. Peace .^illedthe king's heart; he be.stowed
his kingdom upon the Bodhisatta, and showed him the highest respect.
The Bodhisatta i-eturned the gift; and after a few days' sojourn, he rose
up in the air, and flew—back to the golden hill of Dandaka, with a
pai'ting word of advice "O king, be careful!" And the king on his
part clave to the Bodhisatta's advice; and after giving alms and doing
good, passed away to fare according to his deeds.
Thi — s discourse ended, the Master declared the Truths, and identified the
Birth: now after the Truths the backsliding Brother became a Saint:
"Auandawas the king ofthose days, and I myselfwas the Golden Peacock."
No. 160.
VINiLAKA-JATAKA.
—
''As yonder ling goes galloping" etc. This story the Master told during a
sojourn in Veluvana, how Devadatta imitated the Buddha.
The two chiefDisciples^went tovisitGayasIsa'^,whereDevadatta imitated the
Buddha, and fell; the Elders then both returned, after delivering a discourse,
takingwith them their own pupils. On arriving at Veluvana, the Masterasked
them what Devadatta had done when he saw them 1 [39] "Sir," they said, "he
' Sariputta and Moggallana. See Cullavagga, vii. 4 (trans, in Vinaya Texts, iii.
256ff.).
2 Amountain nearGaya inBehar. It is nowcalledBrahmayoni (seeKajendralala
Mitra, Buddha Gaya, p. 2.3).

No. 160. 27
imitated the Buddha, and was utterly destroyed." The Ma.ster answered, "It is
not only now, Saripntta, that Devadatta came to dire destruction hy niiniickiii),'
me; it was just the same before." Then at tlic Polder's request, he told an old-
world tale.
Once upon a time, when Videha was reigning at Mithilfi in the realm
of Videha, the Bodhisatta became a son of his Queen Consort. He grew
up in due course, and was educated at Takkasila ; and on his father's
decease he inherited his kingdom.
At that time a certain king of the Golden Geese paired with a Crow
at the feeding-grounds, and to them was l)orn a son. He was like
neither mother nor father. All dingy blue-black he was, and accordingly
they gave him Dingy to his name. The Goose-king often visited liis
offspring; and he had besides two other sons, geese like himself. These
remarked that he often used to go to the regions where mankind do
frequent, and asked him what should be the reason, "My sons," said he,
"I have a mate there, a Crow, and she has given me a .son, whose name is
Dingy. He it is I go to visit." "Where do they livel" they iisked.
"On a palm-top near Mithila in the kingdom of Videha," describing the
spot. "Father," said they, "where men are, there is fear and peril. You
ought not to go there ; let us go and fetch him to you."
So they took a stick, and perched Dingy upon it; then catching the
ends in their beaks, they flew over the city of Mithila.
At that moment King Videha chanced to be sitting in a magniticent
carriage drawn by a team of four milk-white thoroughbreds, as—he made a
triumphal circuit of the city. Dingy saw him, and thought he "What is
the difference between King Videha and me? He is riding in stite
around his capital in a chariot drawn by four white horses and I am
;
carried in a vehicle drawn by a pair of Geese." So as he passed through
the air he repeated the first stanza :
[40] "As yonder king goes galloping with his niilk-whitc four-in-hand,
Dingy has these, his pair of Geese, to bear him over tlie landI"
These words made the Geese angry. Their first thought was " Let us
—
drop him here, and leave him! " But then again they bethought them
"What will our father say !" So for fear of rebuke, they brought the
creature to their father, and recounted all that he had done. The father
grew angry when he heard it: "What!" said he, "are you my sons'
superior, that you make yourself master over them, and treat them like
horses in a carriage1 You don't know your measure. This is no i)lace
for you get you back to your mother!" And with this censure he
;
repeated the second stanza
:
"Dingy, my dear, there's danger here — ; this is no })lace for you;
By village gates your mother waits there you iiui.st hasten too."

28 The Jataka. Book II.
With this censure, he bade his sons convey the bird to the dunghill
outside the city of Mithila and so they did.
;
This lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth : "Devadatta in those days
was Dingy, the two Elders were the two young Geese, Ananda was the father
Goose, and 1 was king Videha myself."
No. 161.
INDASAMANAGOTTA-JATAKA.
[41] ''Friendship with evil,'' e^c—This is a story told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about a headstrong person; and the circumstances will be found in
t o h l e de V n u d l a t y u s r , e a B s i n r o th w, ', y o o f u th w e er N e in t t ra h mp B l oo e k d . to T d h e e ath Ma b s y te a r m s a ai d d e t l o ep th h i a s nt Br b o e t ca h u e s r e —" y I o n u
wereso headstrongandcareless ofwise men's advice." And he told the old story.
Once upon a time, while Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born of a brahmin family. On growing up he left his
worldly home and took to the religious life, and in time became the
leader of a company of five hundred anchorites, who all lived together in
the region of Himalaya.
Amongst these anchorites was a headstrong and unteachable person
named Inda.sanianagotta. He had a pet elephant. The Bodhisatta sent
for him when he found this out, and asked if he I'eally did keep a young
elephant1 Yes, the man said, he had an elephant which had lost its dam.
"Well," the Bodhisatta said, "when elephants grow up they kill even
those who foster them ; so you had better not keep it any longer." "But
I can't live without him, my Teacher ! " was the reply, " Oh, well," said
the Bodhisatta, "you'll live to repent it."
Howbeit he still reared the creature, and by and bye it grew to an
immense size.
It happened once that the anchorites had all gone far afield to gather
roots and fruits in the forest, and they were absent for several days.
At the first breath of the south wind this elephant fell in a frenzy.
1 Gijjhajataka, No. 427.

—
;
No. 161. 29
"Destruction to tins hut!" thought lie, "I'll snuish the water-jar! I'll
overturn the stone bench ! I'll tear up the pallet ! I'll kill the licnnit,
and then off I'll go !" So he sj)e(l into the jungle, ami waited watching
for their return.
The master came 6rst, [42] laden with food fo,r his pet. As soon as he
saw him, he hastened up, thinking all was well'. Out rushed tlie clt'iiliiiiit
from the thicket, and seizing him in his trunk, dashed him to the ground,
then with a blow on the head crushed the life out of him ; and madly
trumpeting, he scampered into the forest.
The other anchorites brought this news to the Bodhisatta. Said he,
" We should have no dealings with the bad;" and then he repeated these
two verses:
"Friendship with evil let the good eschew.
The good, who know what duty bids them do:
"They will work mischief, be it soon or late,
Even as the elephant his master slew."
"But if a kindred spii'it thou shalt see.
In virtue, wisdom, learning like to thee.
Choose such an one to be thy own true friend
Good friends and blessing go in company."
[43] In this way the Bodhisatta showed his band of anchorites that
it is well to be docile and not obstinate. Then he performed Inda.samana-
gotta's obsequies, and cultivating the Excellences, came at last into
Brahma's heaven.
After concluding this discourse, the Master identified the Birth "This
:
unruly fellow was then Indasamanagotta, and I was myself the teacher of the
anchorite band."
No. 162.
SANTHAVA-JATAKA.
"Nothing is worse," p^c—This .story the Master told while dwelling at
Jetavana, about feeding the sacred fire. The circumstances are the .same a.s
those of the Nahguttha Birth related above-. The Brethren, on seeing those
who kept up this fire,' said to the Blessed One, "Sir, here are topknot ascetics
practising all .sorts of false asceticism. What's the good of it/" "There is no
1 Or, "with his usual Rreetins, or signal."
2 No. 144.

— ——
; ; ;
30 The Jataka. Book 11.
good in it," said the Master. "It has happened before that even wise men have
imagined some good in feeding the sacred fire, but after doing this for a long
time, have foutul out that there is no good in it, and have quenched it with
water, and beat it down, beat it down with sticks, never giving it somuch as a
lookafterwards."' Then he told them a story.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born in a brahmin family. When he was aboiit sixteen
years old, his father and mother took his birth-fire' and spoke to him
thus "Son, will you take your birth-fire into the woods, and worship the
:
fire there ; or will you learn the Three Vedas, settle down as a married
man, and live in the world?" Said he, "No worldly life for me: I will
worship my fire in the woodland, and go on the way to heaven." So
taking his birth-fire, he bade farewell to his parents, and entered the
fore.«t, where he lived in a hut made of branches and leaA'^es and did
worship to the fire.
One day he had been invited to someplace whei-e he received a present
of rice and ghee. "This rice," thought he, "I will offer to Great Brahma."
[44] So he took home the rice, and made the fire blaze. Then with the
words, "With this rice I feed the sacred flame," he cast it upon the fire.
—
Scarce had this rice dropt upon it, all full of fat as it was when a fierce
flame leapt up which set his hermitage alight. Then the brahmin hurried
away in terror, and sat down some distance ofi". "There should be no
dealings with the wicked," said he; "and so this fire has burnt the hut
which I madewith so muchtrouble ! " And he repeated the first stanza :
"Nothing is worse than evil company
I fed my fire with plenteous rice and ghee
To b A u n il d d l i o t ! up t , he m h y ut fi w r h e i h c a h s g b a u v r e nt me for su m c e h ." ado
"I've done withyou now, falsefriend!" he added; and he poui'ed water
upon the fire, and beat it out with sticks, and then buried himself in the
mountains. There he came upon a black hind licking the faces of a lion,
a tiger, and a panther. This put it into his mind how there was nothing
better than good friends; and therewith he repeated the second stanza:
"Nothing is better than good company
Kind offices of friendship here I see;
[45] Behold the lion, tiger, and the pard
The black hind licks the faces of all three."
1 Cp. vol. i. no. 01, and 144, init.\ a sacred lire was also kindled at a wedding, to
beused forsacrifice andconstantlykept up (Manu, 3. 67). So too now, theAgni-hotri
in Kumaon begins fire-worship fromthe date of his marriage. The sacred fire of the
marriage altar is carried in a copper vessel to his fire-pit. It is always kept alight,
and from it must bekindledhis funei-al pyre [North IndianNoteaand Queries, iii. 284).

No. 1G2. 31
With these reflections the Boilhisatta plunged into the deptlis of tlic
mountains, and there he embraced the true religious lif(>, cultivating the
Faculties and the Attainments, until at his life's end he passe<l into
Brahma's heaven.
After delivering this discourse, the i\[aster identified the Birth: "In those
days I was the ascetic ofthe story."
No. 163.
SUSiMA-JATAKA.
—
^^Five sco7-e black elephants," etc. This story the Master told at Jetavana,
about arbitrary giving ofalms.
We hear that at Savatthi, a family used sometimes to give alms to the
Buddha and his friends, sometimes they used to give to the heretics, or else the
givers would form themselves into companies, or again the people of one street
would club together, or the whole of the inhabitants would collect voluntary
offerings, and present them.
On this occasion all the inhabitants had made such a collection of all
necessaries; but counsels were divided, some demanding that this be given
to the heretics, some speaking for those who followed the Buddha. p]ach i)arty
stuckto their point, the disciples of the heretics voting for the heretics, and the
disciples of Buddha for Buddha's company. Then it was proposed to divide
upon the question, and accordingly they divided; those who were for the
Buddha were in the majority.
So their plan was followed, and the disciples ofthe heretics could not prevent
thegifts being offered to the Budtlha and his followers.
Thecitizens gave invitation to the Buddha's company for seven days they
;
set rich offsrings before them, and on the seventli gave over all the articles
they had collected. The Master returned thanks, [4G] after wliieli he in-
structed a host of people in the fruition of the Paths. Next ho returned to
Jetavana; and when his followers had done theirduties, lie delivered a Buildha's
discourse standing before his scented chamber, into which he then retii-ed.
At evening time the Brethren talked tlie matter over together in the
Hall of Truth : "P'riend, how the heretics' di.sciples tried to prevent tliis from
coming to the saints! Yet they couldn't do it; all the collection of articles was
laid before the saints' own feet. Ah, how gi'eat is the Budilha's power!"
"What is this you are talking about now together?" a.sked the Master, coming
in. They told him. "Brethren," said he, "this is not the first time tiiat tlie
disciples of the heretics have tried to thwart an offering which sliould iiave U-en
made to me. They did the same before; but always tiiese articles have Ikxmi
finally laid at my feet." So saying, hetold them a tale oflong ago.

32 The Jataka. Book II.
Once upon a time there lived in Benares a king SusTma; and the
Bodhisatta was the sonof his chaplain's lady. When he was sixteen years
old, his fatherdied. The fatherwhile he lived was Masterof the Ceremonies
in tlie king's elephant festivals. He alone had right to all the trappings
and appointments of the elephants which came into the place of festival.
By this means he gained as much as ten millions at each festival.
At the time of our story the season for an elephant festival came
round. And the Brahmins all flocked to the king, with these words:
"O great king the season for an elephant festival has come, and a
!
festival should be made. But this your chaplain's son is very young
;
he knows neither the three Vedas nor the lore of elephants^ Shall we
conduct the ceremony ? " To this the king consented.
Off went the Brahmins delighted. "Aha," said they, "we have
barred this lad from performing the festival. We shall do it oui'selves,
and keep the gains "
!
But the Bodhisatta's mother heard that in four days there was to be
an elephant festival. [47] "For seven generations," thought she, "we
have managed the elephant festivals from father to son. The old custom
will pass from us, and our wealth will all melt away ! " She wept and
wailed. — "Why are you weeping?" asked her son. She told him.
Said he "Well, mother, shall I conduct the festivaH" "What, you,
sonny % You don't know the three Vedas or the elephant lore ; how can
you do it?" "When are they going to have the festival, mother?"
"Four days from now, my son." " Where can I find teachers who know
the three Vedas by heart, and all the elephant lore1" "Just such a
famous teacher, my son, lives in Takkasila, in the realm of Gandhara, two
thousand leagues away." "Mother," says he, "our hereditary right we
shall not lose. One day will take me to Takkasila ; one night will be
enough to teach me the three Vedas and the elephant lore; on the
moiTOw I will joui'ney home ; and on the fourth day I will manage the
elephant festival. Weep no more !" With these words he comforted his
mother.
Early next morning he broke his fast, and set out all alone for
Takkasila, which he reached in a single day. Then seeking out the
teacher, he greeted him and sat on one side.
"Where have you come from 1 " the teacher asked.
"From Benares, Teacher."
"To what end "
1
"To learn from you the three Vedas and the elephant lore."
"Certainly, my son, you shall learn it."
^ An elephant trainer's manual, the hastisutram or hastifjikm, cf. Mallinatha,
Raghuv. vi. 27.

—
: " ;
No. 163. 33
"But, Sir," said our Bodhisatfca, " my case is urgent." Then he
recounted the whole matter, adding, "In a single day T have traversed
a journey of two thousand leagues. Give me your time for this one
night only. Three days from now there is to be an Elephant festival
I will learn the whole after one lesson."
The Teacher consented. Then the lad washed his master's feet, and
laid before him a fee of a thousand pieces of money [48] he sat down
;
on one side, and learnt his lesson by heart ; as day broke, even as the
day broke, he finished the three Vedas and the Elephant Lore. "Is
there any more, Sir?" asked he. "No, my son, you have it all." "Sir,"
he went on, "in this book such a verse comes in too late, such another has
gone astray in the reading. This is the way to teach your pupils for the
future," and then he corrected his teacher's knowledge for him.
After an early meal he took his leave, and in a single day he was
back again in Benares, and greeting his mother. "Have you learnt your
lesson, my boy1 " said she. He answered, yes
;
and she was delighted to
hear it.
Next day, the festival of the elephants was prepared. A hundred
elephants were set in array, with golden trappings, golden flags, all
covered withanetwork offinegold andallthepalacecourtyard wasdecked
;
out. There stood the Brahmins, in all their fine gala dress, thinking to
themselves, "Now we shall do the ceremony, we shall do it!" Presently
came the king, in all his splendour, and with him the ornaments and other
things that were used.
The Bodhisatta, apparelled like a prince, at the head of his suite,
approached the king with these words.
"Is it really true, O great king, that you are going to rob me of my
right] Are you going to give other brahmins the managing of this
ceremony ? Have you said that you mean to give them the various
ornaments and vessels that are used?" and he repeated the first stanza as
follows
"Five score black elephants, with tusks all white
Are thine, in gold caparison bedight.—
' To thee, and thee I give them ' dost thou say.
Remembering my old ancestral right1
[49] King Suslma, thus addressed, then repeated the second stanza:
"Five score black elephants, with tusks all white,
Are mine, in gold, caparison bedight.—
'To thee, and thee 1 give them' so I say.
My lad, remembering thine ancestral right."
Then a thought struck the Bodhisatta ; and he said, "Sire, if you
do remember my ancient right and your ancient custom, why do you
neglect me and make others the masters of your festivalt" "Why, I
J. II. 3

;
34 The Jdtaka. Booh II.
was told that you did not know the three Vedas or the Elephant
Lore, and that is why I have caused the festival to be managed by
others." "Very well, Sire. If there is one amongst all these brahmins
who can recite a portion of the Vedas or the Elephant Lore against
me, let him stand forward ! Not in all India is there one save me who
knows the three Vedas and the Elephant Lore for the ordering of an
Elephant festival ! " [50] Proiid as a lion's roar rang out the answer !
Not a brahmin durst rise and contend with him. So the Bodhisatta kept
his ancestral right, and conducted the ceremony and laden with riches,
;
he returned to his own home.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he declared the Truths, and
identified the Birth:—some entered—on the First Path, some on the Second, some
the Third, and some the Fourth: "Mahamaya was at that time my mother,
king Suddhodana was my father, Ananda was king Susima, Sariputta the
famous Teacher and I myselfwas the young Brahmin."
No. 164.
GIJJHA-JATAKA.
"A vulture sees a corpse" etc. — This story the Master told about a Brother
who had his mother to support. The circumstances will be related under the
Sama Birthi. The Master asked him whether he, a Brother, was really sup-
porting persons who were still living in the world. This the Brother admitted.
"How are they related to you?" the Master went on. "They are my parents,
Sir." "Excellent, excellent," the Master said and bade the Brethren not be
angry with this Brother. "Wise men of old," s ; aid he, "have done service even
to those who were not of kin to them butthis man's task has been to support
hisown parents." So saying, he told th ; em this story ofbygonedays.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life as a young Vulture on the Vulture Hill, and had
his mother and father to nourish.
1 No. 532 in Westergaard's Copenhagen Catalogue (Cat. Or. MSS. Bibl. Haun.)
notyetprinted.

: "
No. 164. 35
Once there came a great wind and rain. The Vultures could not hold
their own against it; half frozen, they flew to Benares, and there near the
wall and near the ditch they sat, shivering with the cold.
A merchant of Benares was issuing from the city on his way to bathe,
when he spied these miserable Vultures. He got them together in a dry
place, made a fire, sent and brought them some cowflesh from the cattle's
l)urniug-place, and put some one to look after them.
When the storm fell, [51] our Vultures were all right and ilew ufl" at
once among the mountains. Without delay they met, and thus took
counsel together. "A Benares merchant has done us a good turn; and
one good tui'n deserves anothei', as the saying is': so after thi.s when any
of us finds a garment or an ornament it must be dropt in that merchant's
courtyard." So thenceforward if they ever noticed people drying their
clothes or fineryinthe sun, watching for an unwary moment, they snatched
them quickly, as hawks swoop on a bit of meat, and dropt them in the
merchant's yard. But he, whenever he observed that they were bringing
him anything, used to cause it to be laid aside.
They told the king how vultures were plundering the city. "Just
catch me one vulture," says the king, "and I will make them bring it all
back." So snares and gins were set everywhere ; our dutiful Vulture
was caught. They seized him with intent to bring him to the king. The
Merchant afoiesaid, on the way to wait upon his majesty, saw these people
walking along with the Vulture. He went in their company, for fear they
might hurt the Vulture.
They gave the Vulture to the king, who examined him.
"Y — ou rob our ci—ty, and carry off clothes and all sorts—of things," he
began. "Yes—, Sire." "— Whom have theybeen given to1 " " A merchant
of Benares." "Why?" "Because he saved our lives, and they say one
good turn deserves another ; that is why we gave them to him."
"Vultures, they say," quoth the king, "can spy a corpse an hundred
leagues away ; and can't you see a trap set ready for you?" And with
these words he repeated the first stanza
"A vulture .sees a corpse that lies one hundred leagues away :
"When thou alightst upon a trap dost thou not see it, pray?
[52] The Vulture listened, then replied by repeating the second stanza :
"When life is coming to an end, and death's hour draws anigh,
Though you may come close up to it, nor trap nor snare you spy."
After this response of the Vulture, the king turned to our Merchant.
"Have all these things really been brought to you, then, by the Vultures?"
1 This seems tobe another form of the "Grateful Beasts" incident whichso often
occurs in folk-tales.
3—2

36 The Jdtaka. Book II,
"Yes, my lord." "Where are the — y?" "My lord,they are all put away ;
each shall receive his own again : only let this Vulture go !" He had
his way the Vulture was set at liberty, and the Merchant returned all
;
the property to its owners.
— Thislesson ended, the Masterdeclaredthe Truths, and identified the Birth :
at the conclusion of the Truths the dutiful Brother was established in the
fruition of the First Path :— "Ananda was the king of those days ; Sariputta
was the Merchant ; and I myselfwas the Vulture that supported his parents."
No. 165.
NAKULA-JATAKA.
—
"Creature, your egg-horn enemy,^' etc. This story the Master told dimng a
sojom-n at Jetavana,'about two oflBcers who had a quarrel. The circumstances
have been given above in the Uraga Birth*. Here, as before, the Mastersaid,
"This is not the first time. Brethren, these two nobles have been reconciled by
me ; in formertimes I reconciled them too." Then hetold an old story.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born in a certain village as one of a brahmin family. When he
came of age, [53] he was educated at Takkasila ; then, renouncing the
world he became a recluse, cultivated the Faculties and the Attainments,
and dwelt in the region of Himalaya, living upon wild roots and fruits
which he picked up in his goings to and fro.
At the end of his cloistered walk lived a Mongoose in an ant-heap
;
and not far off, a Snake lived in a hollow tree. These two. Snake and
Mongoose, were perpetually quarrelling. The Bodhisatta preached to them
the misery of quarrels and the blessing of peace, and reconciled the two
together, saying, "You ought to cease your quarrelling and live together
at one."
When the Serpent was abroad, the Mongoose at the end of the walk
lay with his head out of the hole in his ant-hill, and his mouth open, and
1 Above, No. 154.

" "
No. 165. 37
thus fell asleep, heavily drawing his breath in and out. The Bodliisatta
saw him sleeping there, and asking him, "Why, what are you afraid of?
repeated the fii'st stanza :
"Creature\ your egg-born enemy a foithful friend is made:
Why sleep you there with teeth all bare I of what are you afraid?
"Father," said the Mongoose, "never despise a former enemy, but
always suspect him" and he repeated the second stanza
: :
"Never despise an enemy nor ever trust a friend
A fear that springs from luifeared things uproots : and makes an end."
[54] "Fear not," replied the Bodhisatta. "I have persuaded the Snake
to do you no harm ; distrust him no more." With this advice, he
proceeded to cultivate the Four Excellences, and set his face toward
Brahma's heaven. And the others too passed away to fare hereafter
according to their deeds.
Then this lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth : "The two noblemen
wereat that time Snake and Mongoose, and I was myselfthe ascetic.'''
No. 166.
UPASALHA-JATAKA.
—
^^ Fourteen thovmnd Upasdlhas" etc. This story the Master told whilst at
Jetavana, about a brahmin named Upasalha, who was fastidious in the matterof
cemeteries.
This man, we learn, was rich and wealthy ; but, though he lived over against
the monastery, he showed no kindness to the Buddhas, being given to heresy.
But he had ason, wise and intelligent. When he was growing old, the man said
to his son, "Don't let my body be burnt in a cemetery where any outcast ctin
be burnt, but find some uncontaminated place to burn me in." "Father," said
the young fellow, " I know no cemetery fit to burn your body in. Good my
father, take the lead and yourself point out the place where 1 shall have you
burnt." So the brahmin consenting led his son out of the city to the top of
Vulture Peak, and then said he, "Here, my son, no outcast is ever burnt ; here
I would have you burn me." Then he began to descend the hill in his sou's
company.
On that day, in the evening, the Master was looking aroimd to see which of
his friends was ripe for Release, and perceived that this father and son were
^ Lit. ' viviparous one.'
I

;
38 Tihe Jataka. Book II.
ready to enter upon the First Path. So he took their road, and came to the
h d i o ll w - n foot f , ro l m ike t a he hu t n o t p e . r w J a ) i o t w i n ng t fo h r ey his ca q m u e a , rry an ; d th n e o r t e ic h e e d sa t t he till Ma t s h t e e y r. shou H l e d c g o a m v e e
them greeting, and asked, "Where are you bound, brahminsi" Theyoung man
told him their errand. "Come along, then," said the Master, "show me the
place your father pointed out." So he and they two together climbed up the
mountain. "Which place?" he asked. "Sir," said the lad, "the space between
these threehills is the one he showed me." [55] The Master said, "This is not
the first time, my lad, that your fatherhasbeenniceinthe matterofcemeteries
he was the same before. Nor is it now only that he has pointed you out this
place for his burning ; long ago he pointed out the very same place." And
athis request the Master told them atale oflong ago.
Once upon a time, in this very city of Rajagaha, lived this same
brahmin Upasalhaka^, and he had the very same son. At that period the
Bodhisatta had been born in a brahmin family of Magadha land ; and
whenhis educationwas finished, he embraced areligious life, cultivated the
Faculties and the Attainments, and lived a long time in the region of
Himalaya, plunged in mystic exaltation.
Once he left his hermitage on Vulture Peak to go buy salt and
seasoning. While he vi^as away, this brahmin spoke in just the same way
to his son, as now. The lad begged him to point out a proper place, and
he came and pointed out this very place. As he was descending, with his
son, he observed the Bodhisatta, and approached him, and the Bodhisatta
put the same question as I did just now, and received the son's answer.
"Ah," said he, "we'll see whether this place which your father has shown
you is contaminated or not," and made them go with him up the hill
again. "The space between these three hills," said the lad, "is pure."
"My lad," the Bodhisatta replied, "there is no end to the people who
have been burned in this very spot. Your own father, born a brahmin,
as now, in Bajagaha, and bearing the very same name of Upasalhaka,
has been burnt on this hill in fourteen thousand births. On the whole
earth there's not a spot to be found where a corpse has not been bui-nt,
which has not been a cemetery, which has not been covered with skulls."
This he discerned by the faculty of knowing all previous lives : and then
—
he repeated these two stanzas : [56]
"Fourteen thousand Upasalhas have been burnt upon this spot,
Nor is there the wide world over any place where death is not.
"Where is kindness, truth, and justice, temperance and self-control,
There no death can find an entrance; thither hies each saintly soul."
1 This added suffixmakes nopractical differencein theword : it is often puton to
adjectives and substantiveswithoutaffectingtheir meaning. But sometimes it has a
diminutiveforce.

No. 166. 39
When the Bodhisatta had thus discoursed to father and son, he
cultivated the Four Excellences and went liis way to Brahma's heaven.
Wlien t—his discourse wa-sended,,the Masterdeclared the Truths and identified
the Birth: at the concl—usion oftheTruths father andson wereestablishedinthe
Fruit ofthe First Path: "The father and son were the same then .is they are
now, and the ascetic was I myself."
No. 167.
SAMIDDHI-JATAKA.
—
^^Begging Brother, do you know," etc. This story was told by the Master
whilsthe was staying in Tapoda Park near Rajagaha, about Elder Samiddhi, or
Goodluck.
Once Father Goodluck had been wrestling in the spirit all night long. At
sunrise he bathed ; then he stood with his vmder garment on, holding the other
in his hand, as he dried his body, all yellow as gold. Like a golden statue
ofexquisite workmanship he was, the i^erfection of beauty [57] and that is why
he was called Goodluck. ;
A daughter ofthegods, seeing the Elder'ssm-passing beauty, fell in lovewith
him, and addressed him thus. "You are young, Brother, and fresh, a mere
stripling, with black hair, bless you you have youth, you are lovely and
pleasant to the eyes. Why should a ma!n like you turn religious without a little
enjoyment? Take your pleasm-e first, and then you shall become religiousand
do whatthe hermits do!" He replied, "Nymph, at some time or other I must
d i i n e, th a e nd fr t e h sh e n t e i ss me of of m m y y y d o e u a t t h h I I k wi n l o l w fo n l o l t ow ; t t h h a e t s t ol i i m t e ar i y s l h i i fe d , f a r n o d m m m a e k . e a T n he e re n f d or o e f
pain."
Finding she received no encouragement, the goddess at once vanished. The
Elder went and told his Master about it. Then the Master said, "Not now
alone, Goodluck, are you tempted by a nymph. In olden days, as now,
nymphs tempted ascetics." And then at his request the Master told an old-
world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king in Benares, the
Bodhisatta became a brahmin's son in a village of Kasi. Coming of
years, he attained perfection in all his studies, and embraced the religious
life; and he lived in Himalaya, hard by a natural lake, cultivating the
Faculties and the Attainments.

— —
: : :
40 The Jdtaka. Booh II.
All night loiio; he had wrestled in the spirit ; and at sunrise he bathed
him, and with one bark garment on and the otlier in his hand, he stood,
letting the water dry off his body. At the moment a daughter of the
gods observed his perfect beauty, and fell in love with him. Tempting
him, she repeated this first stanza :
"Begging brother, do you know
What ofjoy the— world can show?
Now's the time th—ere is no other:
Pleasure first, then begging brother!"
[58] The Bodhisatta listened to the nymph's address, and then
replied, declaring his set purpose, by repeating the second stanza:
—
"The time is hid I cannot know
When is the time that I must go
N So ow I i a s m th n e ow tim a e b : eg t g h i er n e g i b s ro n t o he o r t ^ h " er
When the nymph heard the Bodhisatta's words, she vanished at once.
After this discourse the Master identified the Birth: "The nymph is the
same in both stories, and the hermit at that time was I myself."
\
No. 168.
SAKUNAGGHI-JATAKA.
"^ Quail tvas in his feeding-ground" etc. — This story the Master told at
Jetavana, abouthis meaningin the Bird Preaching^.
One day the Master called the Brethren, saying, "When you seek alms.
Brethren, keep each to your own district." And repeating that sutta from the
Mahayagga which suited the occasion, [59] he added, "But wait a moment: j
aforetime others even in the form of animals refused to keep to their own J
^ Thecommentator, in explaining thispassage, adds another couplet
"Life, sic — kness, death, the putting off the flesh, I
Ee-birth these five are hidden in this world."
2 I have not been able to trace this Sakunovuda-sutta. Perhaps it refers to a
speech ofthe Buddhaas abird ; cp. Kukkurovudo i. p. 178 (Pali).

—
" "
No. 168. 41
districts, and by jioachiiig on other people's preserves, they fell into the way of
their enemies, and then by their own intelligence and resource got free from the
hands oftheir enemies." With these words he related an old story.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta wa6 king in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came into the world as a young Quail. He got his food in
hopping about over the clods left after ploughing.
One day he thought he would leave his feeding ground and try
another ; so off he flew to the edge of a forest. As he picked up his food
there, a Falcon spied him, and attacking him fiercely, he caught him fast.
Held prisoner by this Falcon, our Quail made his moan "Ah how
: !
very unlucky I am ! how little sense I have ! I'm poaching on some one
else's preserves ! O that I had kept to my own place, where my fathera
were before me ! then this Falcon would have been no match for me,
I mean if he had come to tight ! "
"Why, Quailie," says the Falcon, "what's your own ground, where
your fathers fed before you ? "
A
" ploughed field all covered with clods !
At this the Falcon, relaxing his strength, let go. "Off with you.
Quail You won't escape me, even there
! I
The Quail—flew back and perched on an immense clod, and there he
stood, calling "Come along now, Falcon "
!
Straining every nerve, poising both wings, down swooped the Falcon
fiercely upon our Quail. "Here he comes with a vengeance !" thought
the Quail; and as soon as he saw him in full career,just turned over and
let him strike full against the clod of earth. The Falcon could not stop
himself, and struck his breast against the earth; this broke his heart,
and he fell dead with his eyes starting out of his head.
[60] When this tale had been told, the Master added, "Thus you see,
Brethren, how even animals fall into their enemies'hands byleavingtheir proper
place; but when they keep to it, they conquer their enemies. Therefore do
you take care not to leave your own place and intrude upon another's. O
Brethren, when people leave their own station Mara' finds a door, Mara gets a
foothold. What is foreign ground, Brethren, and what is the wrong place fora
Brother? I mean the Five Pleasures of Sense. What are these five? The
Lust of the Eye... [and so on].^ This, Brethren, is the wrong place for a
Brother." Then growingperfectly enlightened he repeated the first stanza:
"A Quail was in his feeding ground, when, swooping from on high,
A Falcon came; but so it fell he came to death thereby."
^ Marais Death, andis usedbyBuddha for the Evil One.
2 Thepassageis corrupt. We must read 'cakkhu-ddi-viiiueyd.'

—
42 The Jataka. Booh II.
When he had thus perished, out came the Quail, exclaiming, "I have
seen the back of my enemy !" and perching upon his enemy's breast,
he gave voice to his exultation in the words ofthe second stanza :
"Now I rejoice at my success: a clever plan I found
To rid uie of my eueuiy by keeping my own ground."
Thi — sdiscourse at an end, the Master declared the Truths and identified the
Birth: Atthe conclusion of the Truths many Brethren were established in the
Paths or their Fruition:—"Devadatta was the Falcon of those days, and the
Quail was I myself."
No. 169.
ARAKA-JATAKA.
"The heart that boundless pity feels,^^ etc. —This story the Master told at
Jetavana, about the Scripture on Lovingkindness.
On one occasion the Master thus addressed the Brotherhood "Brethren,
:
charity practised with all devotion of thought, [61] meditated upon, increased,
made a vehicle of progress, made your one object, practised, well begun, may be
expected to produce Eleven Blessingsi, What are these eleven? Happy he
sleeps and happy he awakes ; he sees no bad dreams ; men love him ; spirits
g a u bs a o r r d be h d im in ; m f i ir n e, d; po h i i s s on l , oo a k nd gr s o w w o s rd ca c lm o ; me he no d t ie n s ea u r nd h i i s m ma;ye q d u ; ick w l i y th h o e ut b n e e c e o d me o s f
further wisdom he goes to Brahma's heaven—. Charity, Brethren, practised with
—
renunciation ofone's wishes" and so forth "may be expected to produce these
Eleven Blessings. Praising the Charity which holds these Eleven Blessings,
Brethren, a Brother ought to show kindness to all creatures, whether expressly
commanded or not, he should be a friend to the friendly, aye a friend to the
unfriendly, and a friend to the indifferent : thus to all without distinction,
whether expressly bidden or not, he should show Charity he should show
:
sympathy with joy and sorrow and practise eqvianimity ; he should do his work
by means of the Four Excellences. By so doing he will go to Brahma's heaven
even without Path or Fruit. Wise men of old by cultivating charity for seven
years, have dwelt in Brahma's heaven seven ages, each with its one period to
waxand one to wane-." And he told them astory ofthepast.
1 The ElevenBlessingsarediscussed inthe Questions of Milinda, iv. 4. 16 (trans,
in theS. B.E., i. p. 279).
2 See Childers, Diet. p. 185h. The belief still lives. Two gentlemen who visitea
the Chief of Chinese Lamaism and the High Priest of Buddhism in Pekin, in 1890,
talked with them over the decline of Buddhism in this age. Both admitted it, the
i

—
No. 1G9. 43
Once upon a time, in a former age, the Bodliisatta was born in a
brahmin's family. When he grew up, he forsook his lusts and embraced
the religious life, and attained the Four Excellences. His name was
Araka, and he became a Teacher, and lived in Himalaya region, with a
large body of followers. Admonishing his band of sages, he said, "A
recluse must show Charity, sympathetic must he be both in joy and
sorrow, and full of equanimity for this thought of charity attainetl V)y
;
resolve prepares him for Brahma's heaven." And explaining the blessing
of charity, he repeated these verses:
"The heart that boundless pity feels for all things that have birth,
In heaven above, in realms below, and on this middle earth,
"Filled full of pity infinite, infinite charity.
In such a heart nought narrow or confined can ever be."
[62] Thus did the Bodliisatta discourse to his pupils on the practice
of chai'ity and its blessings. And without a moment's interruj)tion
of his mystic trance, he was born in the heaven of Brahma, and for
seven ages, each with his time to wax and wane, he came no more to
this world.
sage
A
s
ft
o
e
f
r
th
fi
a
n
t
is
t
h
i
i
m
n
e
g
a
t
r
h
e
is
n
d
o
i
w
sco
t
u
h
r
e
se
B
,
ud
t
d
h
h
e
a
M
'
a
s
s
f
t
o
e
l
r
lo
i
w
d
e
e
r
n
s
ti
;
fi
a
e
n
d
d
t
I
he
my
B
s
i
e
r
l
tl
f
i a:m "T
h
h
e
e
th
b
a
a
t
nd
wa
o
s
f
the Teacher Araka."
No. 170.
KAKANTAKA-JATAKA.
[63] This Kakantaka Birth willbe given belowintheMaha-UmmaggaBirth'.
Buddhist attributing it to want of government support, whilo the Lama thought it
was because this is a waning period in religion ; butas the wa.\iug follows the waning
belooked forwardto arevival. {Baptist Mii<siouary Herald, 1890.)
^ No. 538 in Westergaard's Catalogue.

—
"
44 The Jataka. Book II.
No. 171.
kalyana-dhamma-jataka\
—
" king, when people hail us," etc. This story the Master told in Jetavana,
about a deafmother-in-law.
Itis said that there was a squire in Savatthi, one ofthefaith,a true believer,
who had fled to the Three Refuges, endowed with the Five Virtues. One day he
set out to listentotheMasteratJetavana,bearingjalenteousgheeandcondiments
of all sorts, flowers, perfumes, etc. At the same time, his wife's mother started
to visit her daughter, and brought apresent of solid foodand gruel. She was a
littl A e ft h e a r rd d o i f nn h e e r ar — in o g n . e—feels a little drowsy after a meal — she said, by way of
keeping herself awake "Well, and does your husband live happily with you ?
d fi o nd yo a u h a o g l r y ee h t e o r g m e i t t he w r h ?" o is "W so hy g , oo m d ot a h n e d r, vi w r h t a u t ou a s t a h s in h g e t ! o " as T k h ! e y g o o u od— co w u o ld ma ha n rd d l i y d
not quite take—in what herdaughter said, but she caught the word "Hermit
and cries she " dear, why has your husband turned hermit!" and a great
to-do she made. Everybodywho lived in that house heard it,and cried,"News
the squire has turned hermit !" People heard the noise, and a crowd gathered
at the door to find out what it was. "The squire who lives here has turned
hermit!" was all they heard.
Our Squire listened to the Buddha's sermon, then—left the monastery to
return to the city. Midway a man met him, who cried "Why, master, they
do say you've tm-ned hermit, and all your family and servants are crying at
home!" [64] Then these thoughts passed through his mind. "People say I
have turned hermit when I have done nothing of the kind. A lucky speech
m tu u r s n t ed no r t ig b ht e r n o e u g n l d e , ct a e n d d ; w t e h n i t s b d a a c y k a to h t e h r e mi M t ast I er m . ust "Y b o e. u " pa T i h d e y n ou a r nd vis t it he t r o e t h h e e
Buddha," the Mastersaid, "and went away. What brings you back here again?"
The mantold him about it, adding, "A lucky speech. Sir, must not be neglected.
So hei'e I am, and I wish to become ahermit." Then he received the lesser and
the greater orders, and lived a good life; and very soon he attained to sainthood.
The story got known amongst the community. One day theywerediscussing
it all together in the Hall of Truth, on this fashion : "I say, friend. Squire
So-and-so took orders because he said 'a lucky speech must never be neglected,'
and now he has attained to sainthood !" The Master came in and wanted to
know what itwas theywere talking about. They told him. Said he, "Brethren,
wise men in days long past also entered the Brotherhood because they said that
aluckyspeech must never be neglected;" and then hetold them astoryofolden
days.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta came into the world as a rich merchant's son; and when he
grew up and his father died he took his father's place.
Once he had gone to pay his respects to the king and his mother-in-
:
law came on a visit to her daugliter. She was a little hard of hearing,
and all liappened just as it has happened now. The husband was on
^ No. 20in Jataka-Mala : (Jresthi-jutaka.

:
No. 171. 45
bis way back from paying his respects tothe king, when he was met by a
man, who said, "They say you have turned hermit, and there's such a
hullabaloo in your house !" The Bodhisatta, thinking that lucky words
must never be neglected, tuined right round and went back to the king.
The king asked what brought him back again.^ "My lord," said he,
"all my people are bewailing me, as I am told, because I have turned
hermit, when I have done nothing of the kind. But lucky words must
not be neglected, and a hermit I will be. I crave your permission to
become a hermit !" And he explained the circumstances by the following
verses : [65]
"O king, when people hail ils by the name
Of holy, we must make our acts the same:
We must not waver nor fall short of it;
We must take up the yoke for very shame.
"0 king, this name has been bestowed on me:
To-day they cry how holy I must be
Therefore I would a hermit live and die;
I have no taste for joy and revelry."
Thus did the Bodhisatta ask the king's leave to embrace the religious
life. Then he went away to the Himalayas, and becoming an ascetic he
cultivatedthe Faculties and the Attainments and at last came to Brahma's
heaven.
The Master, havingended this discourse, identified the Birth : "Ananda was
king in those days, and I myselfwas the rich Benares merchant."
No. 172.
DADDARA-JATAKA^
—
" Who is it itnth a mightycry, etc.^' This is a story which the Mastertold at
Jetavana about one Kokalika. Atthis time we hear that there were a number
of very learned Brethren in the district of Manosila, who spoke outlike young
lions,loudenoughtobringdowntheheavenlyGanges^,[66]whilerecitingpa.ssages
of scripture before the Community. As theyrecited their texts, Kokalika (not
knowingwhat an empty fool he showed himself) thought he would like to do the
same. So he went about among the Brethren, not however taking the Name
upon him, but saying, "They don't ask me to recite a piece of scriptm-e. If
1 FauRb(f)ll, FiveJdtakas, p. 45 (not translated); below, Nos. 188 and 189.
- The Milky Way. Seethe Introd. Story to No. 1, above.

: ": ;
46 The Jataha. Booh 11.
they were to ask me, I would do it." All the Community got to know of it
and they thought they would try him. "Friend Kokalika," said they, "give
the Community a recital of .some .scriptures to-day." To this he agreed, not
knowing his folly that day he would recite before the Community.
He first parto ; ok of gruel made to his liking, ate some food, and had some
of his favourite soup. At sundown the gong sounded for sermon time ; all the
community gathered together. The 'yellow robe' which he put on was blue as
abluebell ; his outer robe was pure white. Thus clad, he entered the meeting,
greeted the Elders, stepped up to a Preaching Seat under a grand jewelled
pavilion, holding an elegantly carved fan, and sat down, ready to begin his
recitation. But just at that moment beads of sweat began to start out all over
him, and he felt ashamed. The first verse of the first stanza he repeated ; but
what came next he could not think. So rising from the seat in confusion, he
passed out through the meeting, and sought his own cell. Some one else, a real
scholar, recited the Scripture. After that all the Brethren knew how empty he
was.
One day the Brethren fell a talking of it in the Hall of Truth : "Friend, it
was not easy to see formerly how empty Kokalika is ; but now he has given
tongue of his own accord, and shown it." The Master ente—red, and asked what
they were discussing together. They told him. He said "Brethren, this is
not the first time Kokalika has betrayed himself by his voice ; the very same
thing happened before;" and then he told them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born as a young Lion, [67] and was the king of many
lions. With a suite of lions he dwelt in Silver Cave. Near by was a
Jackal, living in another cave.
One day, after a shower of rain, all the Lions were together at the
entrance of their leader's cave, roaring loudly and gambolling about as
lions use. As they were thus roaring and playing, the Jackal too lifted
up his voice. "Here's this Jackal, giving tongue along with us !" said
the Lions ; they felt ashamed, and were silent. When they all fell silent,
the Bodhisatta's cub asked him this question. "Father, all these Lions
that were roaring and playing about have fallen silent for very shame on
hearing yon creature. What creature is it that betrays itself thus by its
voice 1 " and he repeated the first stanza :
"Who is it with a mighty cry makes Daddara resound?
Who is it. Lord of Beasts? and why has he no welcome found?
At his son's words the old Lion repeated the second stanza
"The Jackal, of all beasts most vile, 'tis he that makes that soimd
The Lions loathe his baseness, while they sit in silence round."
"Brethren," the Masteradded, "'tis not the first time Kokalika has betrayed
h a i n ms en e d l , fb h y e h i i d s en v t o i i fi c e e d ; t i h t e w B a i s rt j h us : t " t A h t e s t a h m at e t b i e m fo e re Ko ;" ka a l n i d ka br w i a n s gi t n h g e h J i a s ck d a i l s , co R u a rs h e ul t a o
was the younglion, and I was myselfthe Lion king."

:
No. 173.
No. 173.
MAKKATA-JATAKA.
[68] ^^Father, see! apoor oldfe—llow"e^f.—This story the Master told whilst
staying in Jetavana, about a rogue. The circumstances will be explained in the
Uddala Birth i, Book xiv. Here too the Master said, "Brethren, not this once
only has the fellow turned out a rogue in days of yore, when he wms a monkey,
he played tricks for the sake ofa fire." ; And lie t(jld a talc ofdays longgone by.
Once iipon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born in a brahmin family in a village of Kasi. When he
came of years, he received his education at Takkasila, and settled down in
life.
His lady in time boi*e him a son and when the child could just run
;
to and fro, she died. The husband performed her obsequies, and then,
said he, "What is home to me now 1 I and my son will live the life of
hermits." Leaving his friends and kindred in tears, he took the lad to
the Himalaya, became a religious anchorite, and lived on the fruits and
roots which the forest yielded.
On a day during the rainy season, when there had been a downpour,
he kindled some sticks, and lay down on a pallet, warming himself at the
fii-e. And his son sat beside him chafing his feet.
Now a wild Monkey, miserable with cold, spied the fire in the leaf-hut
of our hermit. "Now," thought he, "suppose I go in : they'll cry out
Monkey Monkey and beat me back I shan't get a chance of warming
—! ! :
myself. I have it ! " he cined. "I'll get an ascetic's dress, and get inside
by a trick " So he put on the bark dress of a dead ascetic, lifted his
!
basket and crooked stick, and took his stand by the hut door, where he
crouched down beside a palm ti'ee. The lad saw him, and cried to his
father (not knowing he was a monkey) *'Here's an old hernut, sure
enough, miserably cold, come to warm himself at the fire." [69] Then lie
addressed his father in the words of the first stanza, begging him to let
the poor fellow in to warm himself
"F H a e t r h e er, we se h e a ! ve a a po h o u r t o t l o d l f i e v l e lo i w n hud le d t le u d s b gi y ve a t p h a e lm m t a r n ee a th s e h r a e re ! ."
;
J No. 487.

—
;
48 The Jdtaka. Book II.
When the Bodhisatta heard this, up he got and went to the door.
But when he saw the creature was only a monkey, he said, "My son,
men have no such face as that ; 'tis a monkey, and he must not be asked
in liere." Then he repeated the second stanza :
"He would b—ut defile our dwel—ling if he came inside the door
Such a face 'tis easy telling no good brahmin,ever bore."
—
The Bodhisatta seized a brand, crying "What do you want there?"
threw it at him, and drove him away. Mr Monkey dropt his bark
garments, sprang up a tree, and buried himselfin the forest.
Then the Bodhisatta cultivated the Four Excellences until he came
unto Brahma's heaven.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth "This
:
trickyBrother was the Monkeyofthose days Rahula^was the hermit's son, and
;
I myselfwas thehermit."
No. 174.
DtJBHIYA-MAKKATA-JATAKA.
—
[VO] "Plenty of tuater" etc. This story the Master told in his sojourn at
Veluvana, about Devadatta. One day it happened that the Brethren were
talking in the Hall of Truth about Devadatta's ingratitude and treachery to his
friends, when the Master broke in, "Not this once only, Brethren, has Devadatta
been ungrateful and treacherous to his own friends. He was just the same
before." Then he told them an old story.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born into a brahmin family in a certain Kasi village, and
when he grew of age, married and settled down. Now in those days there
was a certain deep well by the highway in Kasi-land, which had no way
^ GotamaBuddha's son.

— —
: ;
No. 174. 49
down to it. The people who passed by that way, to win merit, nsod to
draw water by a long rope and a bucket, and till a trough for the animals
thus they gave the animals water to drink. All around lay a mighty
forest, wherein troops of monkeys dwelt.
It happened by a chance that for two or th^-ee days the supply of
water ceased which wayfarers used to draw ; and the creatures could get
A
nothing to drink. Monkey, tormented with thirst, walked up and
down by the well looking for water.
Now the Bodhisatta came that way on some errand, drew water for
himself, drank it, and washed his hands ; then he noticed our Monkey.
Seeing how thii'sty he was, the traveller drew water from the well and
tilled the trough for him. Then he sat down under a tree, to see what
the creature would do.
The Monkey drank, sat down near, and pulled a monkey-gi'i—rnace, to
frighten the Bodhisatta. "Ah, you bad monkey " said he, at this "when
!
you were thirsty and miserable, [71] I gave you plenty of water; and now
you make monkey-faces at me. Well, well, help a rascal and you waste
your pains." And he repeated the fii'st stanza :
"Plenty of water did I give to you
When you were chafing hot and thirsty too
Now full of mischief you sit chattering,
With wicked people best have nought to do."
Then this spite-friend monkey replied, "I suppose you think that's all
I can do. Now I'll drop something on your head before I go." Then,
repeating the second stanza, he went on
"A well-conducted monkey who did ever hear or see?
I leave my droppings on your head ; for such our manners be."
As soon as he heard this the Bodhisatta got up to go. But at the very
instant this Monkey from the branch where he sat dropt it like a festoon
upon his head ; and then made off into the forest shrieking. The
Bodhisatta washed, and went his way.
[72] Whenthe Master had ended this discourse, after saying "It is not only
now that Devadatta is so, but in former days also he would not acknowledge a
kindness which I showed him," he identified the Birth : "Devadatta was the
Monkey then, and the bralunin was I myself."
J. II.

" "
50 The Jdtaha. Book II.
No. 175.
ADICCUPATTHANA-JATAKA.
—
"There is no tribe" etc. This is a story told by the Master in Jetavana,
about a rogue.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born in a brahmin family of Kasi. Coming of years, he
went to Takkasila, and there completed his education. Then he embraced
the religious life, cultivated the Faculties and the Attainments, and
becoming the preceptor of a large band of pupils he spent his life in
Himalaya.
There for a long time he abode ; until once having to buy salt and
seasoning, he came down from the highlands to a border village, where he
stayed in a leaf-hut. When they were absent seeking alms, a mischievous
monkey used to enter the hermitage, and turn everything upside down,
spill the water out ofthejars, smash thejugs, and finish by making a mess
in the cell where the fire was.
The rains over, the anchorites thought of returning, and took leave of
the villagers; "for now," they thought, "the flowers and fruit are ripen-
ing on the mountains." "To-morrow," was the answer, "we will come to
your dwelling with our alms; you shall eat befoi*e you go." So next day
they brought thither plenty offood, solid and liquid. The monkey thought
to himself, "I'll trick these people and cajole them into giving me some
food too." So he put on the air of a holy man seeking alms, [73] and
close by the anchorites he stood, worshipping the sun. When the people
saw him. they thought, "Holy are they who live with the holy," and
repeated the first stanza
:
"There is no tribe of animals but hath its virtuous one:
See how this wretched monkey here stands worshipping the sun !
After this fashion the people praised our monkey's virtues. But the
Bodhisatta, observing it, replied, "You don't know the ways of a mis-
chievous monkey, or you would not praise one who little deserves praise;
adding the second stanza
:
"You praise this creature's character because you know him not;
He has defiled the sacred fire, and broke each waterpot."

No. 175. 51
When the people heard what a rascally monkey it was, seizing sticks
and clods they pelted him, and gave their alms to the Brethren. The
sages returned to Himalaya ; and without once interrupting their mystic
ecstasy they came at last to Brahma's heaven.
was At in th t e ho e s n e d d o a f y t s hi t s h d e is M co o u n r k se e , y t ; he t M h a e st B e u r dd i h d a e ' n s tif f i o e l d lo t w h e e rs Bi w r e th re : " th T e hi c s om hy p p a o n c y rit o e f
sages; and theirleader was I myself."
No. 176.
KALAYA-MUTTHI-JATAKA.
—
[74] "Afoolish monkey^''etc. This story the MastertoldatJetavana, about
akingofKosala.
One rainy season, disaffection broke out on his borders. Thetroopsstationed
there, aftertwo orthree battles in which they failed to conquertheiradversaries,
sent a message to the king. Spite of the season, spite of the rains he took the
field, and encamped before Jetavana Park. Then he began to ponder. '"Tis a
b is ad he s a e v a y so : n I' f l o l r g a o n v e i x si p t ed t i h t e io M n as ; t e e v r e . ry H cr e ev w i i c l e l a b n e d su h r o e ll t o o w a i s s k fu ' l w l h o i f th w e a r te a r wa ; y t ' he ; t r h o e a n d
I'll tell him. It is not only in things of the future life that our Master protects
me, but he protects in the things which we now see. So if my going is not to
prosper, he will say 'It is a bad time to go, Sire' ; but ifI am to prosper, hewill
say nothing." So into the Park he came, and after greetingtheMastersatdown
on one side.
"Whence come you, O King," asked the Master, "at this unsca-sonable
hour?" "Sir," he replied, "I am on my way to quell a border rising; and I
come first to bid you farewell." To this the Mastersaid, "So ithappened before,
that mighty monarchs, before setting out for war, have listened to tlie word of
the wise, and turned back from an unseasonable expedition." Then, at the
king's request, he told an old story.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, he
had a Councillor who was his right-hand man and gave him advice in
things spiritual and temporal. There was a lising on the frontier, and the
4—2

52 The Jdtaka. Booh II.
troops there stationed sent the king a letter. The king started, rainy-
season though it was, and formed a camp in his park. The Bodhisatta
stood before the king. At that moment the people had steamed some peas
for the horses, and poured them out into a trough. One of the monkeys
that lived in the parkjumped down from a tree, filled his mouth and hands
with the peas, then up again, and sitting down in the tree he began to eat.
As he ate, one pea fell from his hand upon the ground. Down dropped
at once all the peas from his hands and mouth, [75] and down from the
tree he came, to hunt for the lost pea. But that pea he could not find
;
so he climbed up his tree again, and sat still, very glum, looking like
some one who had lost a thousand in some lawsuit.
The king observed how the monkey had done, and pointed it out to
the Bodhisatta. "Friend, what do you think of that?" he asked. To
which the Bodhisatta made answer : "King, this is what fools of little
wit are wont to do ; they spend a pound to win a penny ; " and he went
on to repeat the fii'st stanza :
"A foolish monkey, living in the trees,
king, when both his hands were full of peas.
Has thrown them all away to look for one :
There is no wisdom, Sire, in such as these."
Then the Bodhisatta approached the king, and addressing him again,
repeated the second stanza
:
"Such are we, O mighty monarch, such all those that greedy be;
Losing much to gain a little, like the monkey and the pea."
[76j On hearing this address the king turned and went straight back
to Benares. And the outlaws hearing that the king had set forth from
his capital to make mincemeat of his enemies, hurried away from the
borders.
At the time when this story was told, the outlaws ran away in just the same
fashion. The king, after listeningto the Master's utterances, rose and took his
leave, and went backto Savatthi.
The Master, after this discourse was at an end, identified the Birth : "In
thosedays Auanda was the king, and thewise councillor was I myself."

No. 177. 53
No. 177.
TINDUKA-JATAKA.
"All around us see them stand" e^c—This is a story told by the Master
whilstat Jetavana, about perfect knowledge. As iu the Mahabodhi Birth and
the Ummagga Birth-, on heai'ing his own knowledge praised, ho rema ' r , ked,
"Notthis once only is the Buddha wise, but wise he Wiis before and fertile in all
resource;" and told the followmgold story.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king iu Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born as a Monkey, and with a tioop of eighty thousand
monkeys he lived in Himalaya. Not far off was a village, sometimes
inhabited and sometimes empty. And in the midst of this village was a
tinduka^ tree, with sweet fruit, covered with twigs and branches. When
the place was empty, all the monkeys used to go thither and eat the
fruit.
Once, in the fruit time, the village was full of people, a bamboo
palisade set about it, and the gates guarded. And this tree [77] stood
with all its boughs bending beneath the weight ofthe fruit. The monkeys
began to wonder: "There's such and such a village, where we used to get
fruit to eat. I wonder has that tree fruit upon it or no are the people
;
there or no1" At last they sent a scout monkey to spy. He found that
thei'e was fruit on the tree, and the village was crammed with people.
When the monkeys heard that thei'e was fruit on the tree, theydetermined
to get that sweet fruit to eat; and waxing bold, a ci'owd ofthem went and
told their chief. The chief asked was the village full or empty ; full,
they said. "Then you must not go," said he, "because men are very
deceitful." " But, Sire, we'll go at midnight, when everybody is fast
asleep, and then eat !" So this great company obtained leave of their
chief, and came down from the mountains, and waited on a great rock
hard by until the people retired to rest; in the middle watch, when people
were asleep, they climbed the tree and began eating of the fruit.
A man had to get up in the night for some necessarypurpose he went
;
out into the village, and there he saw the monkeys. At once he gave the
alarm ; out the people came, armed with bow and quiver, or holding any
1 No. 528.
• No. 538 (Westergaard).
^ Diospyros Embryopteiis (Childers).

: :
54 Th,e Jdtaha. Book II.
sort of weapon that came to hand, sticks, or lumps of earth, and sur-
rounded the tree; "when dawn comes," thought they, "we have them ! "
The eighty thousand monkeys saw these people, and were scared to
death. Thought they, "No help have we but our Chief only; " so to
him they came, and recited the first stanza :
"All around us see them stand, warriors armed with bow and quiver,
All around us, sword in hand: who is there who can deliver?"
[78] At this the monkey Chief answered : "Fear not ; human beings
have ple—nty to do. It is the middle watch now ; thex'e they stand,
thinking ' We'll kill them !' but we will find some other business to
hinder this business of theirs." And to console the Monkeys he repeated
the second stanza
"Men have many things to do; something will disperse the meeting;
See what still remains for you ; eat, while fruit is left for eating."
The Great Being comforted the monkey troop. If they had not had
this crumb of comfort they would have broken their hearts and perished.
When the Great Being had consoled the monkeys, he cried, "Assemble all
the monkeys together!" But in assembling them, thei-e was one they
could not find, his nephew, a monkey named Senaka. So they told him
that Senaka was not among the troop. "IfSenaka is not here," said he,
"have no fear; he will find a way to help you."
Now at the time when the troop sallied forth, Senaka had been asleep.
Later he awoke, and could not see any body about. So he followed their
tracks, and by and bye he saw all the people hastening up. "Some danger
for our troop," thought he. Just then he spied, in a hut on the outskirts
of the village, an old woman, fast asleep, before a lighted fire. And
making as though he were a village child going out to the fields, Senaka
seized a firebrand, [79] and standing well to windward, set light to the
village. Then did every man leave the monkeys, and hurried up to
quench the fire. So the monkeys scampered away, and each brought one
fruit for Senaka.
When this discourse came to an end, the Master identified the Birth
"Mahanama Sakka was the nephew Senaka of those days ; Buddha's followers
werethemonkey troop; and I myselfwastheir Chief"

"
No. 178. 55
No. 178.
KACCHAPA-JATAKA.
—
"Here loas Iborn," etc. This story the Master told in Jetavana, how a man
gotrid ofmalarial
It is said that malarial fever once broke out in afamily of Savatthi. The
parents said to their son: "Don't stay in this house, son; make a hole in the
wall and escape somewhere, and save your life-. Then come back again — in
this place a great hoard is buried ; dig it up, and restore the family fortunes,
and a happy life to you!" The young fellow did as he was bid; he l)r()ke
through the wall, and made his escape. When his complaint was cured, he
retiu-ned aud dug the treasure u}), with which he set up his household.
One day, laden with oil and ghee, clothes and raiment, and otherofferings, he
repaired to Jetavana, and greeted the Master, and took his seat. The Master
entered into converse with him. "We hear," said he, "that you had cholera in
yourhouse. How did you escape it?" He told the Master all about it. Said he,
"In days of yore, as now, friend layman, when danger arose, there were people
who were too fond of home to leave it, and they perished thereby ; while those
who were not too fond of it, but departed elsewhere, saved themselves alive."
And then at his request the Master told an old-world story.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born in a village as a potter's son. He plied the potter's
trade, and had a wife and family to support.
At that time there lay a great natural lake close by the great river of
Benares. When there was much water, river and lake were one ; but
when the water was low, [80] they were apart. Now fish and toi-toises
know by instinct when the year will be rainy and when there will be a
drought. So at the time of our story the fish and tortoises which lived
in that lake knew there would be a drought ; and when the two were one
^water, they swam out of the lake into the river. But there was one
Tortoise that would not go into the river, because, said he, "here I was
bom, and here I have grown up, and here is my parents' home : leave it I
cannot!
1 ahivutarof/o occurs in the Comm. on Ther'tgdthu (P. T. S. 1893), p. 120, line 20,
but nohintas to its meaningis given. Theword shouldmean, "snake-wind-disease,"
perhaps malarial fever, which e.g. in the Terai is believed tobedue to snake's breath.
Or is it possible that ahi, which maymean the navel, could here be the bowels, and
somesuchdisease ascholerabe meant?
2 It is noteworthythat here the same means is used to outwit the spirit of disease
as isoften taken to outwit theghosts ofthe dead
;
whomight besupposed toguard the
door, but not the parts ofthehouse where there was no outlet.

—
! ; ; ;
56 Tlie Jataha. Book II.
Then in the hot season the water all dried up. He dug a hole and
buried himself, just in the place where the Bodhisatta was used to come
for clay. There the Bodhisatta came to get some clay ; with a big spade
he dug down, till he cracked the tortoise' shell, turning him out on the
ground as though he were a large piece of clay. In his agony the creature
thought, "Here I am, dying, all because I was too fond of my home to
leave it!" and in the words of these verses following he made his
moan
:
" A He n r d e n w o a w s t I he bo c r l n a , y a h n a d s h p e l r a e ye I d l m i e ved fa ; ls m e y in re a fu m g o e st wa g s ri t e h v e ou c s la w y ay
Thee, thee I call, Bhaggava ^; hear what I have to say ;
"Go where thou canst find happiness, where'er the place may be
Forest or village, there the wise both home and birthplace see
Go where there's life; nor stay at home for death to master thee."
[81] So he went on and on, talking to the Bodhisatta, till he died.
The Bodhisatta picked him up, and collecting all the villagers addressed
them thus : "Look at this tortoise. When the other fish and tortoises
went into the great river, he was too fond of home to go with them,
and buried himself in the place where I get my clay. Then as I was
digging for clay, 1 broke his shell with my big spade, and turned him out
on the ground in the belief that he was a large lump of clay. Then he
called to mind what he had done, lamented his fate in two verses of
poetry, and expired. So you see he came to his end because he was too
fond of his home. Take care not to be like this tortoise. Don't say to
yourselves, ' I have sight, I have hearing, I have smell, I have taste, I
have touch, I have a son, I have a daughter, I have numbers of men
and maids for my service, I have precious gold '; do not cleave to these
things with craving and desire. Each being passes through three stages
of existence-." Thus did he exliort the crowd with all a Buddha's skill.
The discourse was bruited abroad all over India, and for full seven
thousand years it was remembered. All the crowd abode by his exhor-
tation and gave alms and did good until at last they went to swell the
;
hosts of heaven.
W^en t — he Master had made an end, he declared the Truths, and identified
the Birth : at the concl — usionoftheTruths the youngmanwas established inthe
Fruit ofthe First Path : saying, "Anandawas thentheTortoise,andthe Potter
was I myself."
^ "Addressingthepotter." Schol.
^ World ofSense, World ofForm, World of formlessExistence.

No. 179. 57
No. 179.
SATADHAMMA-JATAKA.
[82] " What a trifle^" etc.—This story the Master told while sojourning in
Jetavana,about the twenty-one unlawful ways ofearning a livelihood.
At one time there were a great many I'jrethren who used to get a living
bybeing physicians,orrunners,doing errands onfoot,exchangingalms for alms',
and the like, the twenty-one unlawful callings. All this will be set forth in the
Silketa Birth-. When the Master found out that they got their living thus, he
said, "Now there are a great many Brethren who get their living in inilawful
ways. Those who get their living thus will not escape birth as golilins or
d he i l s l emb f o or di t e h d eir sp b i e ri n t e s fi ; t t a h n e d y b w l i e l s l si b n e g c i o t m i e s n b e e c a e s s t s s ar o y f t b o ur h d o e ld n a ; d t i h s e c y ou w r i s l e l w I h je ic V h )or b i e i ar i s n
its o;wn moral clear and plain." So he summoned the Community together, and
said, "Brethren, you must not win your necessaries by the onc-and-twcnty
unlawful methods. Food won unlawfully is like a piece of redhot iron, like
adeadly poison. These unlawful methods are blamed and rebuked by disciples
of all Buddhas and Pacceka-Buddhas. For those who eat food gained by
unlawful means there is no laughter and no joy. Food got in this way, in my
religion, is like the leavings of one of the lowest caste. To partake of it, for a
disciple ofthe Religion ofthe Good, is like partaking of the leavings ofthe vilest
ofmankind." And with these words, he told an old-world story.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born as the son of a man of the lowest caste. When he
grew up, he took the road for some purpose, taking for his provision some
rice grains in a basket.
At that time there was a young fellow in Benares, named Satadhamma.
He was the son of a magnifico, a Northern brahmin. He also took
the road for some purpose, but neither rice grains nor basket had he.
The two met upon the highway. Said the young brahmin to the other,
"What caste are you of?" He replied, "Of the lowest. And what are
you?" [83] "Oh, I am a Northern brahmin." "All right, let us journey
together;" and so together they fared along. Breakfast time came.
The Bodhisatta sat down where there was some nice water, and washed
his hands, and opened his basket. "Will you have some?" said lie.
"Tut, tut," says the other, "I want none, you low fellow." "All right,"
1 Theoffence meant is giving a share of alms on one day, and receiving the like
thenext day, to savethe troubleofseekingalms daily.
'^ No. 237, whichhowever only refersto no. 08.

—
! ;
58 The Jataka. Book II.
says the Bodhisatta. Careful to waste none, he put as much as he wanted
in a leaf apart from the rest, fastened up his basket, and ate. Then he
took a drink of water, washed his hands and feet, and picked up the restof
his rice and food. "Come along, youug Sir," says he, and they started
off again on their journey.
All day they tramped along and at evening they both had a bath in
;
some nice water. When they came out, the Bodhisatta sat down in a
nice place, undid his parcel, and began to eat. This time he did not oflPer
the other a share. The young gentleman was tired with walking all day,
and hungry to the bottom of his soul; there he stood, looking on, and
thinking, "If he offers me any, I'll take it." But the other ate away
without a word. "This low fellow," thought the young man, "eats every
scrap without a word. Well, I'll beg a piece; I can throw away the
outside, which is defiled, and eat the rest." An — d so he did; he ate what
was left. As soon as he had eaten, he thought " How I have disgraced
my birth, my clan, my family Why, I have eaten the leavings of a
!
low born churl !" Keen indeed was his remorse ; he threw up the food,
and blood came with it. "Oh, what a wicked deed I have done," he
wept, "all for the sake of a trifle!" and he went on in the words of the
first stanza : [84]
" A W n h d at I a a t m rif a le h ! ig a h n b d or h n is b l r e a a h v m i i n n gs ! ! a g n i d ven the too stu a f g f ai h n a s s t m hi a s de wil m l e ill!"
Thus did the young gentleman make his lamentation ; adding, "Why
did I do such a wicked thing just for life's sake?" He plunged into the
jungle, and never let any eye see him again, but there he died forlorn.
When this story was ended, the Master repeated, "Just as the young
brahmin. Brethren, after eating the leavings of a low-caste man, found that
neither laughter nor joy was for him, because he had taken improper food
so whosoever has embraced this salvation, and gains a livelihood by unlawful
means, when he eats the food and supports his life in any way that is blamed
and disapproved by the Buddha, will tind that there is no laughter and no joy
forhim." Then,becomingperfectlyenlightened,he repeated the secondstanza:
"He that lives by being wicked, he that cares not if he sins,
Like the brahmin in the story, has no joy of what he wins."
[85] When this di—scourse was concluded, the Master declared the Truths and
identified the Birth: at the conclusio — n of the Truths many Brethi'en entered
upon the Paths and the Fruit thereof: saying, "At thetime of the story 1 was
the low-caste man."

No. 180. 59
No. 180.
DUDDADA-JATAKA.
—
"Tishard to do asgood men do" etc. This story the Master tokl whilst in
Jetavana, aboutalms given in common. Two friends at Savatthi, yoiuig men ot
good position, made a collection, providingall the necessaries to give the Buddha
and hisfollowers. They invited them all, provided bounty for seven days, and
on the seventh presented them with all their requisites. The eldest of these
saluted the ]\Iaster, and said, sitting beside liim, "Sir, amongst the givers some
gave much and some gave little; but let it bear much fruit tor all alike." Then
h B e ud o d f h fe a re a d nd the his gif f t o . llow T e h rs e , M y a o s u t , er m ' y s r l e a p y l f y ri w e a nd s s, : ha " v I e n d g o i n v e in a g g t r h e e a s t e de t e h d i . ngs lu to da t y h s e
of old wise men gave their bounty thus, and thus offered theirgifts." Then at
hisrequest he told a story.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born into a brahmin family of Kasi. When he grew up,
he was thoroughly educated at Takkasila; after which he renounced the
world, and took up the religious life, and with a band of disciples went to
live in Himalaya. There he lived a long time.
Once having need to procure salt and seasoning, he went on pilgrimage
through the countiy-side, and in coui-se of it he arrived at Benares.
There he settled in the king's park and on the following morning he
;
and his company went a-begging to some village outside the gates. The
people gave him alms. Next day he sought alms in the city. The people
were all glad to give him their alms. They clubbed together and made
a collection; and provided plenty for the band of anchorites. After the
presentation their spokesman offered his gift with the same words as
above. The Bodhisatta replied, "Friend, where faith^ is, no gift is small."
And he returned his thanks in these verses following : [86]
'"Tis hard to do as good men do, to give as they can give,
Bad men can hardly imitate the life which good men live.
"And so, when good and evil go to pass away from earth.
The bad are born in hell below, in heaven the good have birth."
This was his thanksgiving. He remained in the place for the four
months of the rains, and then returned to Himalaya ; where he practised
all the modes of holy meditation, and without a single interruption
continued in them until hejoined the hosts of heaven.
When this discourse cameto an end the Master identified the Birth : "At
that time," said he, "the Buddha's company was the body of ascetics, and I
myselfwas their leader."
1 Citta-pasddo.

60 Tlie Jataka. Booh II.
No. 181.
ASADISA-JATAKA*.
—
"Prince Peerless, skilledin archers^ craft" etc. This story the Mastei' told at
Jetavana, about the Great Renunciation. The Master said, "Not now alone,
Brethren, has the Tathagata made the Great Renunciation in other days he
also renounced the white parasol of royalty, and did the same ; ." And he told a
story ofthe past.
[87] Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was conceived as the son of the Queen Consort. She was
safely delivered ; and on his nameday they gave him the name of Asadisa-
Kumara, Prince Peerless. About the time he was able to walk, the
Queen conceived one who was also to be a wise being. She was safely
delivered, and on the nameday they called the babe Brahmadatta-Kumara,
or Prince Heaven-sent.
When Prince Peerless was sixteen, he went to Tnkkasila for his
education. There at the feet ofa world-famed teacher he learnt the Three
Vedas and the Eighteen Accomplishments ; in the science of archery he
was peerless; then he returned to Benares.
When the king was onhis deathbed he commanded thatPrincePeerless
should be king in his stead, and Prince Brahmadatta heir apparent. Then
he died after which the kingship was offered to Peerless, who refused,
;
saying that he cared not for it. So they consecrated Brahmadatta to be
king by sprinkling him. Peerless cared nothing for glory, and wanted
nothing.
While the younger brother ruled, Peerless lived in all royal state.
The slaves came and slandered him to his brother; "Prince Peerless wants
to be king " said they. Brahmadatta believed them, and allowed himself
!
to be deceived ; he sent some men to take Peerless prisoner.
One of Prince Peex-less' attendants told him what was afoot. He
waxed angry with his brothei*, and went away into another country.
When he was arrived there, he sent in woi-d to the king that an archer
was come, and awaited him. "What wages does he ask?" the king
enquired. "A hundred thousand a year." "Good," said the king; "let
him enter,"
1 Hardy, Manual of Buddhism, 114. The latter part of the story is given very
—
brieflyinMahdvastu2.82 -3, CaraksepanaJataka. It isfigured on theBharhutStupa,
see Cunningham, p. 70, and plate xxvii. 13 ; and on the Sanchi Tope, seeFergusson,
Treeand Serpent Worship, pi. xxxvi. p. 181.
/

;
No. 181. 61
Peerless came into the presence, and stood waiting. "Are you the
archer1 " asked the king. "Yes, Sii-e." "Very well, I take yon into my
service." After that Peerless remained in the service of this king.
[88] But the old archers were annoyed at the wage which was given him ;
"Too much," they grumbled.
One day it so happened that the king went out into his i)ark. There,
at foot of a mango tree, where a screen had been })ut up before a certain
stone seatof ceremony, he reclined uponamagnificent couch. He happened
to look up, and there right at the treetop he saw a cluster of mango fruit.
"It is too high to climb for," thought he ; so summoning his archers, he
asked them whether they could cut off yon cluster with an arrow, and
bring it down for him. "Oh," said they, "that is not much for us to do.
But your majesty has seen our skill often enough. The newcomer is so
much better paid than we, that perhaps you might make him bring down
the fruit."
Then the king sent for Peerless, and asked him if he could do it.
"Oh yes, your Majesty, if I may choose my position." "What position
do you want?" "The place where your couch stands." The king had
the couch removed, and gave place.
Peerless had no bow in his hand ; he used to carry it underneath his
body-cloth so he must needs have a screen. The king ordered a screen
;
to be brought and spread for liim, and our archer went in. He doffed the
white cloth which he wore over all, and put on a red cloth next his skin
then he fastened his girdle, and donned a red waistcloth. From a bag he
took out a sword in pieces, which he put together and girt on his left side.
Next he put on a mailcoat of gold, fastened his bow-case over his back,
and took out his great ramshorn bow, made in several pieces, which he
fitted together, fixed the bowstring, red as coral put a turban upon his
;
head twirling the arrow with his nails, he threw open the screen and
;
came out, looking like a serpent prince just emerging from the riven
ground. He went to the place of shooting, arrow set to bow, and then
put this question to the king. "Your Majesty," said he, "am I to bring
this fruit down with an upward shot, [89] or by dropping the arrow
upon if?"
"My son," said the king, "I have often seen a mark brought down by
the upward shot, but never one taken in the fall. You had better make
the shaft fall on it."
"Your Majesty," said the archer, "this arrow will Hy high. Up to
the heaven of the Four Great Kings it will fly, and then return of itself.
You must please be patient till it returns." The king promised. Then
the archer said again, "Your Majesty, this arrow in its upshot will pierce
the stalk exactly in the middle: and when it comes down, it will not
swerve a hair's-breadth either way, but hit the same spot to a nicety, and

62 The Jataka. Book II.
bring down the cluster with it." Then he sped the arrow forth swiftly.
As the arrow went up it pierced the exact centre of the mango stalk. By
the time the archer knew his arrow had reached the place of the Four
Great Kings, he let fly another arrow with greater speed than the first.
This struck the feather of the first arrow, and turned it back ; then itself
went up as far as the heaven of the Thirty-three Archangels. There the
deities caught and kept it.
The sound of the falling arrow as it cleft the air was as the sound of
a thunderbolt. "What is that noise? " asked every man. "That is the
arrow falling," our archer replied. The bystanders were all frightened to
death, for fear the arrow should fall on them ; but Peerless comforted
them. "Fear nothing," said he, "and I will see that it does not fall on
the earth." Down came the arrow, not a hairbreadth out either way, but
neatly cut through the stalk of the mango cluster. The archer caught the
arrow in one hand and the fruit in the other, so that they should not fall
upon the ground. "We never saw such a thing before !" cried the
onlookers, at this marvel. [90] How they praised the great man ! how
they cheered and clapped and snapped their fingers, thousands of kerchiefs
waving in the air In their joy and delight the courtiers gave presents
!
to Peerless amounting to ten millions of money. And the king too
showered gifts and honours upon him like rain.
While the Bodhisatta was receiving such glory and honour at the
hands of this king, seven kings, who knew that there was no Prince
Peerless in Benares, drew a leaguer around the city, and summoned its
king to fi;^ht or yield. The kingwas frightened out ofhis life. "Where is
my brother?" he asked. "He is in the service of a neighbouring king,"
was the reply. "If my dear brother does not come," said he, "I am a
dead man. Go, fall at his feet in my name, appease him, bring him
hither!" His messengers came and did their errand. Peerless took
leave of his master, and returned to Benares. He comforted his brother
and bade him fear nothing ; then scratched ' a message upon an arrow to
this effect: "I, Prince Peerless, am returned. I mean to kill you all with
one arrow which I will shoot at you. Let those who care for life make
their escape." This he shot so that it fell upon the very middle of a
golden dish, from which the seven kings were eating together. When
they read the writing they all fled, half-dead with fright.
Thus did our Prince put to flight seven kings, without shedding even
so much blood as a little fly might drink ; then, looking upon his younger
brother, he renounced his lusts, and forsook the world, cultivated the
Faculties and the Attainments, and at his life's end came to Brahma's
heaven.
' In the Mahavastu it iswrapt round it (2. p. 82. 14,parircthitvd); so in Hardy.

; ;
No. 181. 03
[91] "And this is the way," said the Master, "that Prince Peerless routed
seven kings and won the battle ; after which he took up the religious life."
Then becoming perfectly enlightened he uttered these two verses
:
"Prince Peerless, skilled in archers' craft, a doughty chief was he
Swift as the lightning sped his shaft great warriors' bane to be.
"A H m e o s n a g ve h d is hi f s oe b s ro w t h h a e t r; ha a v n o d c h d e on w e o ! n y t e h t e hu g r r t a ; ce he of no se t lf a -co s n o t u r l ol."
[92] When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth:
"Auanda was then the younger brother, and I was myselfthe elder."
No. 182.
SAMGAMAVACARA-JATAKA.
—
" Elephant, a hero thou," etc. This story the Master told while staying at
Jetavana, about Elder Nanda.
The Master, on his first return to Kapila city, had received into the
Community Prince Nanda, his younger brother, and after returned to Savatthi
and stayed there. Now Father Nanda, rememberinghow as he was leaving his
home, after taking the Bowl, in the Master's company, Janapadakalyi'—viil was
looking out of a window, with her hair
—
half combed, and she said "Why,
Prince Nanda is off with the Master! Come back soon, dear lord!"- re-
membering this, I say, grew downcast and despondent, yellower and yellower,
and the veins stood knotted overhis skin.
When the Master learnt of this, he thought, "What if I could establish
Nanda in sainthood!" To Nanda's cell he went, and sat on the seat which was
oflfered him. "Well, Nanda," he asked, "are you content with our tejxching?"
"Sir," replied Nanda, "I aminlovewithJanapadakalyanT,and I amnotcontent."
"Have you been on pilgrimage in the Himalaya, Nanda?" "No, Sir, not yet."
"Then we will go." "But, Sir, I have no miraculous power; how can I go?"
"I will take you, Nanda." So saying, the Master took him by the hand, and
thus passed through the air.
On the waythey passed over a burnt field. There,uponthe charred stump of
atree, with nose and tail half gone, hair scorched off, and hide a cinder, nothing
but skin, all covered with blood, sat a she-monkey. "Do you see that monkey,
Nanda?" the Master asked. "Yes, Sir." "Take a good look at her," .said he.
Then he pointed out, stretching oversixty leagues, the uplands of Manosila, the
seven great lakes, Anotatta and the rest, the five great rivers, the whole
Himalayahighlands, with the magnificent hills named of Gold, of Silver, and of
Gems, and hundreds of other lovely spots. Next he asked, "Nanda, have you
ever seen the abode of the Thirty-three Archangels?" [93] "No, Sir, never,"
was the reply. "Come along, Nanda," said he, "and I will show you the abode
oftheThirty-three." Therewithhe brought him to theYellowstoneThrone and
i,
made him sit on it. Sakka, king of thegods in two heavens, came with his host
1 The throne ofSakka (Indra).

64 The Jataha. Booh II.
ofgods, gave greeting and satdown on one side. His handmaids to the number
of twenty-five million, and five hundred nymphs with doves' feet, came and
made greeting, then sat down on one side. The Master made Nanda look at
these five hundred nym{)hs again and again, with desire after them. "Nanda,"
said he, " — do you see these dove's-foot nymphs?" "Yes, Sir." "Well, which is
prettiest they orJanapadakalyani?" "Oh, Sir ! as that wretched ape was in
c
N
o
a
m
n
]
d
)
a
a
,
ris
w
o
h
n
at
wit
ar
h
e
J
y
an
o
a
u
pa
g
d
o
a
i
k
n
a
g
ly
t
a
o
ni
d
,
o?
s
"
o is
"H
sh
o
e
w
c
i
o
s
mp
it
ar
p
e
o
d
ssi
w
bl
i
e
t
,
h
S
t
ir
h
,
es
t
e
o
I"
win
"W
t
e
h
l
e
l
s
,
e
nymphs?" "By livingas an ascetic, Sir," said the Master, "one may win these
nymphs." The lad said, "If the Bles.sed One pledges his word that an ascetic
life will win these nymphs, an ascetic life I will lead." "Agreed, Nanda, I
pledge my word." "Well, Sir," said he, "don't let us makea long business ofit.
Let us be off, and I will becomean ascetic."
The IMastcr broughthim to Jetavanaback again. The Elderbegan to follow
the ascetic life.
The Masterrecoimted to Sariputta, the Captain oftheFaith,howhisyounger
brother had made him pledge him.self in the midst of the gods in the heaven of
the Thirty-three about the nymphs. In the same manner, he told the story to
Elder Mahamoggallana, to Elder Mahakassapa, to Elder Anui'uddha, to Elder
Ananda, the Treasui'er of the Faith, eighty great disciples in all ; and then, one
after the other, he told it to the other Brethren. The Captain of the Faith,
Elder Sariputta, asked Elder Nanda, "Is it true, as I hear, friend, that you have
the Buddha's pledged word that you shall win the nymphs of the gods in the
heaven of the Thirty-three, by passingyour life as an ascetic? Then," he went
on, "is not your holy life all bound up with womankind and lust? If you live
chaste just for the sake of women, what is the difference between you and a
labourerwho works for hire?" [94] This saying quenched all the fire in him and
made him ashamed of himself. In the same way all the eighty chief disciples,
and all the rest of the Brethren, made this worthy father ashamed. "I have
been wrong," thought he ; in all shame and remorse, he screwed up his courage,
and set to work to develope his spiritual insight. Soon he attained to sainthood.
He came to the Master, and said, "Sir, I release the Blessed One from his
promise." The Master said, "If you have attained sainthood, Nanda, I am
thereby released from my promise."
When the Brethren heard of this, they began to talk it over in their Hall of
Truth. "How docile yon Elder Nanda is, to be sure ! Why, friend, one word
of advice awakened his sense of shame at once he began to live as an ascetic
and now he is a Saint!" The Master ; came in, and asked w^hat they were
talking about together. They told him. "Brethren," said he, "Nanda was
just as docile in formerdays as he is now;" and then he told them a story.
Once upon a time when Brahmadatta wasreigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born as an elephant-trainer's son. When he grew up, he
was carefully taught all that pertains to the training of elephants. He
was in the service of a kingwho was an enemyto the king of Benares. He
trained this king's elephant ofstate to perfection.
The king determined to capture Benares. Moimting upon his state
elephant, he led a mighty host against Benares, and laid siege to it. Then
he sent a letter to the king of the city "Fight, or yield " The king
: !
chose to tight. Walls and gates, towers and battlements he manned with
a great host, and defied the foe.
The hostile king armed his state elephant, and clad himself in armour,
took a sharp goad in his hand, and drove his beast city-wards; "Now,"

: !
No. 182. G5
said he, "I'll storm this city, and kill my enemy, and get his realms into
my hands !" But at sight of the defendei*s, who cast boiling mud, and
stonesfrom theircatapults,andall kinds of missiles,theelephant was scared
out of his wits and would not come near the place. Thereupon up came
the trainer, crying, "Son, a hero like you is quite at home in the battle-
field ! [95] insuch a place it is disgraceful to turii tail ! " And toencourage
his elephant, he uttered these two verses :
" Elephant, a hero thou, whose home is in the field
There stands the gate before thee now
:
why dost thou turn and yield1
"Make liaste break through the iron bar, and beat the |)illars down
!
Crash through the gatets, made fast for war, and enter in the town!"
The Elephant listened one word of advice was enough to turn him.
;
Winding his trunk about the shafts of the pillars, he tore them up like so
many toadstools he beat against the gateway, broke down the bars, and
:
forcing his way through entered the city and won it for his king.
—
When the Master had finished this discourse, he identified the Birth: "lu
those days Nanda was the Elephant, Ananda was the king, and the trainer was
I myself."
No. 183.
VALODAKA-JATAKA'.
—
'^This sorry draught,^' etc. This story the Master told whilst at Jetavana,
about fivehundred pei'sons who ate broken meat.
At Savatthi, we learn, were five hundred persons who had left the stumbling-
block of a worldly life to their sons and daughters, [96] and lived all together
sitting under the Master's preaching. Of these, some were in the First Path,
some in the Second, some in the Third: not a single one but had embraced
salvation. They that invited the Master invited these also. But they had five
hundred pages waiting upon them, to bring them toothbrushes, mouth-water,
a me n a d l, ga a r n l d an a ds na o p f , f t l h o e w y er u s s ; ed the t s o e r l u a n ds d u o s w e n d t t o o t e h a e t A t c h i e r i a r va b t r I, ok a e n n d me o a n t. the A r f i t v e e r r b th a e n i k r
they would wrestle like very Mallians'-, shouting all the time. But the Hve
hundred lay brethren were quiet, made very little noise, courted .solitude.
1 Theintroductory story is variedin Dhamiiuipada, Comm. p. 271.
- The MalHaiis were a tribe ofprofessional wrestlers.
J. II. 5

— —
:
66 The Jataka. Booh II.
The Master happened to hear the pages shouting. "What is that noise,
Ananda?" he asked. "The pages, who eat the broken meat," was the reply.
The Master said : "Ananda, this is not the only time these pages have fed
on broken meat, and made a great noise after it; they used to do the same
in the olden days ; and then too these lay biethren were just as quiet as they
arenow." So saying, at his request, the ]\Iaster told a story ofthe past.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born as the son of one of his courtiers, and became the
king's adviser in all things both temporal and spiritual. Word came to
the king of a revolt on the frontier. He ordered five hundred chargers
to be got ready, and an ai'my complete in its four parts'. With this he
set out, and quelled the rising, after which he returned to Benares.
When he came home, he gave order, "As the horses are tired, let
them have some juicy food, some grape-juice to drink." The steeds took
this delicious drink, then retired to their stables and stood quietly each in
his stall.
But there was a mass of leavings, with nearlyall the goodness squeezed
out of it. The keepers asked the king what to do with that. "Knead it
up with water," was his command, "strain through a towel, and give it
to the donkeys who carry the horses' provender." This wretched stuffthe
donkeys drank up. It maddened them, and they galloped about the palace
yard braying loudly.
From an open window the king saw the Bodhisatta, and called out to
him. [97] "Look there! how mad these donkeys are from that sorry
drink ! how they bray, how they caper ! But those fine thorobreds that
drank the strong liquor, they make no noise they are perfectly quiet, and
;
jump not at all. What is the meaning of this1" and he repeated the
fir.st stanza :
"This sorry draught, the goodness all strained out 2,
Drives all these asses in a drunken rout
The thorobreds, that drank the potent juice.
Stand silent, nor skip capering about."
And the Bodhisatta explained the matter in the second stanza:
"The low-born churl, though he but taste and try.
Is frolicsome and drunken by and by
He that is gentle keeps a steady : brain
Even if he drain most potent liqiior dry."
When the king had listened to the Bodhisatta's answei', he had the
donkeys driven out of his courtyard. Then, abiding by the Bodhisatta's
^ Elephants, horse, chariots, infantry.
^ DJiammapada, p. 275.

— —
No. 183. 67
advice, he gave alms and did good until he passed away to fai*e according
to his deserts.
When thisdiscourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth as follows:
"At that time these pages were the five hundred ai^ses, these lay brethren were
the five hundred thorobreds, Ananda was the king, and the wise courtier wji»s
I myself."
No. 184.
GIRIDANTA-JATAKA,
[98] "Thanh to the (/room" e^c—This story the Master told while staying in
Veluvana Park, about keeping bad company. The circumstances have been
already recounted underthe MahilamukhaJataka'. Again, as before, the Master
said "In former days this Brother kept bad company just as he does now."
:
Then he told an old story.
Once upon a time, there was a king named Sama, the Black, reigning
in Benares. In those days the Bodhisatta was one of a courtier's family,
and grew up to be the king's temporal and spiritual adviser. Now the
king had a state horse named Pandava, and one Giridanta was his trainer,
a lame man. The horse used to watch him as he tramped on and on in
front, holding the halter ; and knowing him to be his trainer, imitated
him and limped too.
Somebody told the king how the horse was limping. The king sent
surgeons. They examined the horse, but found him perfectly sound and
;
so accordingly made report. Then the king sent the Bodhisatta. "Go,
friend," said he, "and find out all about it." He soon found out that the
horse was lame because he went about with a lame trainer. So he told
the king what it was. "It's a case ofbad company," said he, and went on
to repeat the first stanza :
"Thanks to the groom, poor Pandava is in a parlous .state:
No more displays his former ways, but needs must imitate."
1 No. 2G.
5—2

68 The Jdtaka. Booh II.
"Well, now, my friend," said the king, "what's to be done?" "Get a
good groom," replied the Bodliisatta, "and the horse will be as good as
ever." Then he repeated the second stanza: — [99]
"Find but a fit and proper groom, on whom you can depend.
To bridle him and exercise, the horse will quickly mend;
His sorry plight will be set right; he imitates his friend."
Theking did so. The horse becameasgoodas before. The king showed
great honour to the Bodhisatta, being pleased that he knew even the ways
ofanimals.
—
The Master,whenthis discourse wasended, identifiedtheBirth: "Devadatta
was Giridanta in those days; the Brother who keeps bad company was the
horse; andthe wisecounsellorwas I myself."
No. 185.
ANABHIRATI-JATAKA.
—
"Thick, muddy loater" etc. This story the Master told while staying in
Jetavana, and it was about a young brahmin.
A young brahmin, as they say, belonging to Savatthi, had mastered the
Three Vedas, and used to teach sacred verses to a number of young brahmins
and kshatriyas. In time he settled down as a married man. His thoughts
being now busy with wealth and ornaments, serving men and serving women,
lands and substance, kine and buffaloes, sons and daughters, he became subject
to passion, error, folly. This obscured his wits, so that he forgot how to repeat
his formulse in due order, and every now and then the charms did not come
clear in his mind. This man one day procured a quantity of flowers and sweet
scents, and these he took to the Master in Jetavana Park. After his greeting,
he sat down on one side. [100] The Master talked pleasantly to him. "Well,
young Sir, you are a teacher of the sacred verses. Do you know them all by
heart?" "Well, Sir, I used to know them all right, but since I married my
mind has been darkened, and I don't know them any longer." "Ah, young Sir,"
the Master said, "just the same happened before at first your mind was clear,
and you knew all your verses perfectly, but when; your mind was obscured by
passions and lusts, you could no longer clearly see them." Then at his request
theMastertold the following story.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born in the family of a brahmin magnifico. When he grew up,
he studied under a far-famed teacher of Takkasila, where he learnt all

—
:
No. 185. 09
magic charms. After returning to Benares he taught these charms to a
hirge number of bi-ahmin and kshatriya youths.
Amongst these youths was one young brahmin who hud learnt the
Three Vedas by heart; he became a master ofritual', and could repeat the
whole of the sacred texts without stumbling in a single line. By and bye
he married and settled down. Then household cares clouded his mind,
and no longer could he repeat the sacred verses.
One day his teacher paid him a visit. " Well, young Sir," he enquired,
"do you know all your verses offby heart?" "Since I have been the head
of a household," was the reply, "my mind has been clouded, and I cannot
repeat them." "My son," said his teacher, "when the mind is clouded,
no matter how perfectly the scriptiu-es have been learnt, they will not
stand out clear. But when the mind is serene there is no forgetting
them." And thereupon he repeated the two verses following :
"Thick, muddy water will not show
Fish or shell or sand or gravel that may lie below2;
So with a clouded wit:
Nor your nor other's good is seen in it.
"Clear, quiet waters ever show
All, be it fish or shell, that lies below; [101]
So with unclouded wit
Both your and other's good shows clear in it."
When the Master — had finished this discourse, he declared the Truths, and
identified the Birth: at the conclusion—of the Truths tlie young brahmin
entered upon the Fruit of the First Path: "In those days, this youth was the
young brahmin, and I was his teacher."
No. 186.
DADHI-VAHANA-JATAKA^
—
'^Siveei ivas once the mangoes savour" etc. This story the Master told wliil«t
dwelling in Jetavana, on the subject of keeping bad company. The circum-
stances were the same as above. Again the Master said: "Brethren, bad
1 Orit maymean 'apupil-teacher.'
- There is an irregularity in this stanza, the Pali having an extra fine. I have
reproduced thisbymaking line 2 of an irregularlength.
' Fausb^ll, Five Jatahas, pp. 1 and 20; Khys Davids, Buddhist Birth Stories,
p. xvi. This tale belongs to the same group as Grimm uo. 36, The Wish imi 'Table, the
Gold-Ass, and the Cudgel in the Sack; no. .54, The Knapsack, the Hatand the Horn (to
which see the bibliographical note in Hunt'i* edition).

70 The Jdtaka. Book II.
company is evil and injurious ; why should one talk of the evil effects of bad
company on human beings? In days long gone by, even a vegetable, a mango
ti-ee,whose sweet fruit was a dish fit forthe gods,turned soiu- and bitterthrough
the influence ofa noisome and bitter nimb tree." Then hetold a story.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, four
brahmins, brothers, of the land of Kasi, left the world and became
hermits ; they built themselves four huts in a row in the highlands of
the Himalaya, and there they lived.
The eldest brother died, and was born as Sakka. Knowing who he
had been, he used to visit the others every seven or eight days, and lend
them a helping hand.
One day, he visited the eldest of the anchorites, and after the usual
greeting, took his seat to one side. [102] "Well, Sir, how can I serve
you?" he enquired The hermit, who was suffering from jaundice,
.
replied, "Fire is what I want." Sakka gave him a razor-axe. (A razor-
axe is so called because it serves as razor or as axe according as you tit it
into the handle.) "Why," said the hermit, "who is there to get me
firewood with this?" " If you want a fire, Sir," replie—d Sakka, "all you
have to do is to strike your hand upon the axe, andsay ' Fetchwood and
make a fii-e ! ' The axe will fetch the wood and make you the fire."
After giving him this razor-ax—e he next visited the second brother,
and asked him the same question "How can I serve you, Sir?" Now
there was an elephant track by his hut, and the creatures annoyed him.
So he told Sakka that he was annoyed by elephants, and wanted them to
be driven away. Sakka gave him a drum. "If you beat upon this side.
Sir," he explained, "your enemies will run away; but if you strike the
other, they will become your firm fi'iends, and will encompass you with
an army in fourfold array." Then he handed him the drum.
Lastly he made a visit to the youngest, and asked as befor—e how he
could serve him. He too had jaundice, and what he said was "Please
give me some curds." Sakka gave him a milk-bowl, with these words
:
"Turn this over ifyou want anything, and a great river will pour out of
it, and will flood the whole place, and it will be able even to win a
kingdom for you." With these words he departed.
After this the axe used to make tire for the eldest brother, the second
used to beat upon one side of his drum and drive the elephants away, and
the youngest had his curds to eat.
About this time a wild boar, that lived in a ruined village, lit upon a
gem possessed of magic power. Picking up the gem in his mouth, he rose
in the air by its magic. From afar he could see an isle in mid-ocean, and
there he z-esolved to live. So descending he chose a pleasant spot beneath
a mango tree, [103] and there he made his abode.

No. 186. 71
One day he fell asleep under the tree, with the jewel lying in front of
him. Now a certain man from the Kasi country, who ha<l been turned
out of doors hy his parents as a ne'er-do-well, had made his way to a
seaport, where he embarked on shipboard as a sailors' drudges In mid-sea
the ship was wrecked, and he floated upon a plank to this island. As he
wandered in search of fruit, he espied our bqar fast asleep. Quietly he
crept up, seized the gem, and found himself by magic rising through the
air He alighted on the mango tree, and ])ondered. "The magic of this
!
gem," thought he, "has taught yon boar to be a sky-walker; that's how
he got here, I suppose. Well ! I must kill him and make a meal of him
first; and then I'll be off." So he snapt off a twig, dropping it upon the
boar's head. The boar woke up, and seeing no gem, ran trembling up and
down. The man up in the tree laughed. The boar looked up, and seeing
him ran his head against the tree, and killed himself.
The man came down,litafire, cooked tlie boar and made a meal. Then
he rose up in the sky, and set out on hisjourney.
As he passed over the Himalaya, he saw the hermits' settlement.
So he descended, and spent two or three days in the eldest brother's hut,
entertaining and entertained, and he found out the virtue of the axe. He
made up his mind to get it for himself. So he showed our hermit the
virtue of his gem, and offered to exchange it for the axe. The hermit
longed to be aVjle to pass through mid-air', and struck the bargain. The
man took the axe, and d—eparted ; but before he had gone very far, he
struck upon it, and said " Axe 1 smash that hermit's skull and bring
the gem to me !" Oflf flew the axe, clove the hermit's skull, and brought
the gem back.
Then the man hid the axe away, and paid a visit to the second brother.
[104] With him the visitor stayed a few days, and soon discovered the
power of his drum. Then he exchanged his gem for the drum, as before,
and as before made the axe cleave the owner's skull. After this he went
on to the youngest of the three hermits, found out the power of the milk-
bowl, gave his jewel in exchange for it, and as before sent his axe to
cleave the man's skull. Thus he was now owner of jewel, axe, drum, anil
milk-bowl, all four.
He now rose up and past through the air. Stopping hard by Benares,
he wrote a letter which he sent by a messenger's hands, that the king
must either fight him or yield. On receipt of this message the king
sallied forth to "seize the scoundrel." But he beat on one side of his
drum, and was promptly surrounded by an army in fourfold an-ay. When
he saw that the king had deployed his forces, he then overturned the
milk-bowl, and a great river poured forth; multitudes were drowned
' This wasone ofthe supernatural powers much coveted byBuddhists.

;
72 The Jataka. Book II.
in the river of curds. Next he struck upou his axe. "Fetch me the
king's head !" cried he ; away went the axe, and came back and dropt the
head at his feet. Not a man could raise hand against him.
So encompassed by a mighty host, he entered the city, and caused
himself to be anointed king under the title of king Dadhi-vahana, or
Carried-on-the-Curds, and ruled righteously.
One day, as the king was amusing himself by casting a net into the
river, he caught a mango fruit, fit for the gods, which had floated down
from Lake Kannamunda. When the net was hauled out, the mango was
found, and shown to the king. It was a huge fruit, as big as a basin,
round, and golden in colour. The king asked what the fruit was Mango,
:
said the foresters. He ate it, aiid had the stone planted in his park, and
watered with milk-water.
The tree sprouted up, and in three years it bore fruit. Great was the
worship paid to this tree ; milk-water was poured about it ; perfumed
garlands with five sprays' were hung upon it; wreaths were festooned
about it; a lamp was kept burning, and fed with scented oil; and all
round it was a screen of cloth. The fruit was sweet, and had the colour
of fine gold. King Dadhi-vahana, beforesendingpresentsof thesemangoes
to other kings, [105] used to prick with a thorn that place in the stone
where the sprout would come from, for fear of their growing the like by
planting it. When they ate the fruit, they used to plant the stone ; but
they could not get it to take root. They enquired the reason, and learnt
how the matter was.
One king asked his gardener whether he could spoil the flavour of this
fruit, and turn it bitter on the tree. Yes, the man said he could ; so his
king gave him a thousand pieces and sent him on his errand.
So soon as he had arrived in Benares, the man sent a message to the
king that a gardener was come. The king admitted him to the presence.
After the man had saluted him, the king asked, "You are a gardener?"
"Yes, Sire," said the man, and began to sound his own praises. "Very
well," said the king, "you may go and assist my park-keeper." So after
that these used both to look after the royal grounds.
The new comer managed to make the park look more beautiful by
forcing flowers and fruit out of their season. This pleased the king,
1 Themeaningof(jandhapanca'nguUkamis uncertain. Perhaps agarlandin which
sprouts or twigs were arranged radiating like the fingers of a hand. See Morris in
J.P.T.S., 1884, s.v. See vol. i. p. 71 for a different rendering; but there gandhena
pancamjulikam datva seems rather tomean "making five-finger wreaths with scent."
The spread hand is in many places a symbol used to avert the evil eye. In some
villages of India it is marked on the house walls (North Ind. N. and Q., i. 42); it is
carved on Phoenician tombstones (see those in the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris)
and Ihave seen it in allparts of Syria,on thehousesofJews,Christians,andMoslems.

—
;
No. 186. 73
so that he dismissed the former keeper and gave the park into sole charge
ofthe new one. No sooner had this man got the park into his own hands
than he phinted nimbs and creepers about the choice mango tree. By and
by the nimbs sprouted up. Above and below, root with root, and branch
with branch, these were all entangled with the mango tree. Thus this
tree, Avith its sweet fruit, grew bitter as the bittcr-loaved nimb by the
company of this noxious and sour plant. As soon as the gardener knew
that the fruit had gone bitter, he took to his heels.
King Dadhi-vahana went a-walkingin his pleasaunce, and took a bite of
the mango fruit. The juice in his mouth tasted like a nasty nimb
swallow it he could not, so he coughed and spat it out. Now at that time
the Bodhisatta was his temporal and spiritual counsellor. The king
turned to him. "Wise Sir, this tree is as carefully cai-ed for as ever, and
yet its fruit has gone bitter. What's the meaning of if?" and asking
—
this question, he repeated the first stanza: [106]
"Sweet was once the mango's savour, sweet its scent, its colour gold:
What has caused this bitter flavour/ for we tend it as of old."
The Bodhisatta explained the reason in the second stanza:
"Round about the trunk entwining, branch with branch, and root with root.
See the bitter creeper climbing; that is what has spoilt your fruit;
And so you see bad company will make the better follow suit."
On hearing this the Bodhisatta caused all the nimbs and creepers
to be removed, and their roots pulled up ; the noxious soil wjis all taken
away, and sweet earth put in its place; and the tree was carefully fed
with sweet water, milk-water, scented water. Then by absorbing all this
sweetness its fruit grew sweet again. The king put his former gardener in
charge of the park, and after his life was done passed away to fare accord-
ing to his desei-ts.
—
After this discom-sewas ended, the Master identified the Birth : "In those
days I was the wise counselloi-."
No. 187.
CATUMATTA-JATAKA.
—
"Sit and siiiff," etc. This story the Master told while staying at Jetavana,
about an old Brother. Once, we are told, two ofthe cliicfdisciples were sitting
together, questioning and answering ; when u[) came an old Brother, and

— — —
" "
74 The Jdtaka. Book II.
madeathird. [107] Takingaseat, he said, "I have aquestion too. Sirs, which I
s T h h o e ul E d ld h e k r e s t w o er a e sk di y s o g u us : te a d nd ; t if he y y ou ro h se ave up an a y nd di l f e f f i t cu h l i t m y, . yo T u he ma c y on p g u re t ga i t t i t o o n m w e h . o "
listened to the discourse of the Elders, after the meeting broke up, came to the
Master; he askedwhat brought them there untimelyand theytold himwhat had
happened. He replied, "This is not the tirst time, Brethren, that Sariputta and
]\Ioggallanahave been disgusted with this man, and left him without a word ; it
wasjust the same in olden days." And he proceeded to tell a story ofthe past.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king ofBenares, the Bodhi-
satta became a tree sprite that lived in a forest. Two young Geese flew
down from Mount Cittakuta and perched upon this tree. They flew about
in search of food, returned thither again, and after resting flew back to
their mountain home. As time went on and on, the sprite struck up a
friendship with them. Coming and going, they were great friends, and
used to talk ofreligion to one another before they parted.
It happened one day as the birds sat on the treetop, talking with the
Bodhisatta, that a Jackal, halting at the foot of the tree, addressed the
young Geese in the words ofthe following stanza:
"Sit and sing upon the tree
If in private you would be.
Sit upon the groimd, and sing
Verses to the beasts' own king!
Filled with disgust, the young Geese took wing and flew back to
Cittakuta. When they were gone, the Bodhisatta repeated the second
stanza for the Jackal's benefit:
"Fairwing here to fairwing sings,
God to god sweet converse brings;
Pei'fect beauty', you must then
Back into your hole again!
[108] When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth:
"Inthose times the old man was the Jackal, Sariputta and Moggallana thetwo
young Geese, and I myselfwas the tree-sprite."
1 Lit. 'lovely in four points,' i.e. as theschol. explains 'in form, in birth, in voice,
in quality ': said sarcastically.

— —
;
No. 188. 75
No. 188.
SiHAKOTTHUKA-JATAKA.
—
"Lion'sclaws coullion'spaws" etc. This is a'story ti)lil by the M;uster whilst
at Jctavana, about Kokalika. They say that KokaUka one day hearing a
number of wise Brethren preaching, desired to preach himself; all the rest
is like thecircmnstances given in a previous tale'. This time again the Master
on hearing ofit said, "Not this once only has Kokiilika been shown up for what
he was worth by means ofhis own voice; the very same thing happenal before."
And he told a story.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was a Lion in the Himalaya mountains, and he had a cub by a
she-jackal who mated with him. The cub was just like his sire in toes,
—
claws, mane, colour, figure all these ; but in voice he was like his dam.
One day, after a shower ofrain, all the Lions were gambolling together
and roaring ; the cub thouglit he would like to roar too, and yelped like a
jackal. On hearing which all the Lions fell silent at once ! Another
cub of the same sire, own brother of this one, heard the sound, and said,
"Father, yon lion is like us in colour and everything except in voice.
Who's he1" in asking which question he repeated the first stanza:
"Lion's claws and lion's paws,
Lion's feet to stand upon
But the bellow of this fellow
Soimds not like a lion's son!"
[109] In answer the Bodhisatta said, "It's your brother, the Jackal's
cub ; like me in form, but — in voice like his dam." Then he gave a word
of advice to the other cub " My dear son, as long as you live here keep a
quiet tongue in your head. If you give tongue again, they'll all find out
that you are a Jackal." To drive the advice home he repeated the second
stanza:
"All will see what kind you be
If you yelp as once before;
So don't try it, but keep quiet:
Yours is not a lion's roar."
After this advice the creature never again so much as tried to roar.
When the Master had finished this discourse, he identified the Birth:— "In
thosedays Kokalika was the Jackal, Rahula was the brother cub, and the king
ofbeasts was I myself."
' No. 172 ; compare no. 18'.). Kokalika is often alluded to in this way ; cp. no.s.
117,481. There is a story in the Cullavogya i. 18. 3, turning on a similarpoint ; a hen
has a chick by a crow, and when it would ciy cock-a-doodle-doo it caws, and
vice versa (Viiiaya Texts, S. Ji. K., ii. p. 362).

— — —
: ! ;"
The Jdtaka. Booh II.
Yi)
No. 189.
SiHACAMMA-JATAKA
'.
"Nor lion nor tiger Isee," etc.-This story, like the last, was about Kokalika,
told by the Master in Jetavana. This time he wanted to intone. The Master
on hearing ofit told the following story.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born in a farmer's family, and when he grew up he got a
livelihood by tillage.
At the same time there was a Merchant who used to go about hawking
goods, which a donkey carried for him. Wherever he went, he used to
take his bundle off" the ass, and throw a lionskin over him, [110] and then
turn him loose in the rice and barley fields. When the watchmen saw
this creature, they imagined him to be a lion, and so dui'st not come near
him.
Onedaythishawkerstopped atacertainvillage,andwhilehewasgetting
his own breakfast cooked, he turned the ass loose in a barley field with the
lionskin on. The watchmen thought it was a lion, and durst not come
near, but fled home and gave the alarm. All the villagers armed them-
selves, and hurried to the field, shouting and blowing on conchs and
beating drums. The ass was frightened out of his wits, and gave a
hee-haw ! Then the Bodhisatta, seeing that it was a donkey, repeated the
first stanza:
"Nor lion nor tiger I see.
Not even a le—opard is he
But a donkey the wretched old hack
With a lionskin over his back!"
As soon as the villagers learnt that it was only an ass, they cudgelled
him till they broke his bones, and then went off with the lionskin.
When the Merchant appeared, and found that his ass had come to grief,
he repeated the second stanza :
"The donkey, if he had been wise,
]\Iight long the green barley have eaten
A lionskin was his disguise:
But he gave a hee-haw, and got beaten!
1 Fausbjill, Five Jutakast, pp. 14 and 39; Rhys Davids, Buddhist Birth Stories,
p. V. This isAesop'sAss in the Lion's Skin.

No. 189. 77
As he was in the act of uttering these words, the ass expired. The
Merchant left him, and went his way.
—
After this discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth : "At tliat
time Kokalika was the ass, and the wise farmer was I myself."
No. 190.
SiLANISAMSA-JATAKA.
[Ill] ^^Behold the fruit of sacrifice," eic—This story the Master told whilst
staying in Jetavana, about a believinglayman. This was afaithful, pious soul,
an elect disciple. One evening, on his way to Jetavana, he came to the bank of
theriverAciravatI, when the ferrymen had pidled up their boat on the shore in
order to attend service ; as no l:)oat could be seen at the landing-stage, and our
friend's mind beingfull ofdelightful thoughts of the Buddha, he walked into the
river^ Hisfeetdid not sink belowthe water. He got as farasmid-riverwalking
as thoughhewere ondryland butthere he noticed the waves. Thenhis ecstasy
subsided,and his feet began to ; sink. Again hestmnghimselfup tohighten.sion,
and walked on over the water. So he arrived atJetavana, greeted the Master,
and took a seat on one side. The Master entered into conversation with him
pleasantly. "I hope, good layman," said he, "you had no mishap on your way."
"Oh, Sir," hereplied, "on my way I was so absorbed in thoughts of the Buddha
g th r a o t un I d s ! e " t f " o A o h t , up fr o i n end th l e ay r m i a ve n r ," ; I s j a u i t d I th w e al M k a e st d er o , ve " r y i o t u as ar t e h n o o u t gh th i e t h o a nl d y b o e n e e n w d h r o y
has kept safe by remembering the virtues of the Buddha. In oldeu days pious
laymen havebeen shipwrecked in mid-ocean,and savedthemselvesbyremember-
ing the Buddha's virtues." Then, at the man's request, he told anold-worldtale.
Once upon a time, in the days when Kassapa was Supreme Buddha, a
disciple, who had entered on the Paths, took passage on board ship in com-
pany with a barber of some considerable property. The barber's wife had
given him in charge of our friend, to look after him in better and in worse.
A week later, the ship was wrecked in mid-ocean. These two persons
1 The resemblance to St Peter on the SeaofGalilee is striking.

——
"
78 TIk" Jdtaka. Book II.
clinging to one plank were cast up on an island. There the barber killed
some birds, and cookedthem, offering a shareofhis meal tothelaybrother.
"No, thank you," said he, "I have had enough." He was thinking to
himself, "In this place there is no help for us except the Three Jewels',"
and so he pondered upon the blessings of the Three Jewels. As he
pondered and pondered, a Serpent-king who had been born in that isle
changed his own body to the shape of a great ship. The ship was filled
with the seven kinds of precious things. [112] A Spirit of the Sea was
the helmsman. The three masts were made of sapphire, the anchor^ of
gold, the ropes of silver, and the planks we—re golden.
The Sea-spirit stood on board, crying " Any passengers for India?"
The lay brother said, "Yes, that's where we are bound for." "In with
—
you then on board with you !" He went aboard, and wanted to call
his friend the barber. "You may come," says the helmsman, "but
not he." ""Why not1 " "He is not a man of holy life, that's why," said
the other; "I brought this ship for you, not for him." "Very well:
the gifts I have given, the vii-tues I have practised, the powers I have
developed — I give him the fruit of all ofthem !" "I thank you, master ! "
said the barber. "Now," said the Sea-spirit, "I can take you aboard."
So he conveyed them both oversea, and sailed upstream to Benares.
There, by his power, he created a store of wealth for both of them, and
bespoke them thus.
"Keep company with the wise and good. If this barber had not been
in company with this pious layman, he would have perished in the midst
of the deep." Then he uttered these verses in praise ofgood company :
" A Beh s o e l r d pen t t he in fru s i h t ip o - f sh s a ac p r e ifi c c o e n , ve v y ir s tu t e h , e a g n o d od pi m et a y n: o'er the sea.
"Make friendship only with the good, and keep good company;
Friends with the good, this Barber could his home in safety see."
[113] Thus did the Spirit of the Sea hold forth, poised in mid-air.
Finally he went to his own abode, taking the Serpent-king along with
him.
The Mas — ter, after finishing this discourse, declared the Truths and identified
the Birth: at the conclu—sion of the Truths the pious layman entered on the
Fruit ofthe Second Path : "On that occasion the convertedlaybrotherattained
Nirvana Sariputta was the Serpent-king, and the Sea-spirit was I ni}self
;
' The Three.JewelsareBuddha,theLaw,the Order. Forthe seven precious things
(orjewels), see Childers, p. 402 b.
- lakdro or lahkuro. I do not knowwhat theword means. Prof. Cowell suggests
"anchor," the Mod, Persian forwhich is Jangar.

;
No. 191. 79
No. 191.
RUHAKA-JATAKA.
'^Even a broken hoirstring" e^c.--Thits story the Master told while dwelling in
Jetavana, about temptation arising from a former wife. The circumstances will
be explained in the Eighth Book, in the Indriya-J.ataka'. Then the Master Siiid
to this brother, "That is a woman who does you harm. In former times, too,
she put you to the blush before the king and his whole court, and gave you
good reason to leave your home." And he told an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when king Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares,
the Bodhisatta was born of his chief queen. He came of age, and his
father passed away ; and then he became king and ruled in righteousness.
The Bodhisatta had a chaplain named Rnhaka, and this Ruhaka had
an old brahmin woman to wife.
The king gave the brahmin a horse accoutred witli all its trappings,
and he mounted the horse and went to wait upon the king. As he rode
along on the back of his richly caparisoned steed, the people on this side
and that were loud in its praise : "See that fine horse !" they cried
"what a beauty "
!
When he came home again, he went into his mansion and told his wife.
[114] "Goodwife," said he, "our horse is passing fine! Right and left
the people are all speaking in praise of it."
Now his wife was no better than she should be, and full of deceit so
;
she made reply to him thus.
"Ah, husband, you do not know wherein lies the beauty of this horse.
It is all in his fine trappings. Now if you woiild make yourself fine like
the horse, put his trappings on youi'self and go down into the street,
prancing along horse-fashion". You will see the king, and he will praise
you, and all the people will praise you."
This fool of a brahmin listened to it all, but did not know what she
purposed. So he believed her, and did as she had said. All that saw him
laughed aloud : " There goes a fine professor !" said they all. And the
king cried shame on him. "Why, my Teacher," said he, "has your bile
gone wrong 1 Are you crazy?" At this the brahmin thought that he must
have behaved amiss, and he was ashamed. So he was wroth with his wife,
and made haste home, saying to himself, "The woman has shamed me
1 No. 423.
- Compare Pancatantra iv. 6 (Benfey, ii. p. 307).

— —
" ;
80 The Jdtcika. Book II.
before the king and all his army : I will chastise her and turn her out of
dooi's !
But the crafty woman found out that he had come home in anger ; she
stole a march on him, and departed by a side door, and made her way to
the palace, wliere she stayed four or five days. When the king heard of
it, he sent for his chaplain, and said to him,
"My Teacher, all womankind are full of faults you ought to forgive
;
this lady;" and with intent to make him forgive he uttered the first
stanza:
"Even a broken bowstring can be mended and made whole
:
Forgive your wife, and cherish not this anger in your soul."
[115] Hearing this, Ruhaka uttered the second :
"While there is bark^ and workmen too
'Tis easy to buy bowstrings new.
Another wife I will procure
I've had enough of this one, sure."
So saying, he sent her away, and took him another brahmin woman to
wife.
The Mas — ter, after finishingthis discourse, declared the Truths and identified
the Birth : at the conclusion—ofthe Truths the tempted Brother was established
in the fniit ofthe FirstPath : "On that occasion the formerwife was the same,
Ruhaka was the tempted brother, and I was the king ofBenares."
No. 192.
SIRI-KALAKANNI-JATAKA
-.
—
"Even though women may hefair" etc. This story will be given in the Maha-
ummagga-Jataka^
^ Reading nmdrmu, 'fresh (bark),' from the fibre of which bowstrings were some-
timesmade.
—
2 Cf. Thibetan Tales, xxi. pp. 291 5, "How a Woman ReqiuitesLove."
3 No, 538in Westergaard.

No. 193. 81
No. 193\
CULLA-PADUMA-JATAKA.
"'Ti's I—no other," e^<?.—This story the :\Ia.ster told wliile (Iwelliiif,' at
Jetavana about a backsHding brother. The cireuui.stances will he explained in
the UmmadantI Birth'-. When tliis bi'other was a.sked by the Master whether
he were really a backslider, lie replii'd that he was. "Who," said the Master,
"has caused you to backslide ?" Ho replied that he had seen a, woman dressed
up in finery, and ovei'come by passion he had backslidden. Then the Master
s w a e i r d e , " ev B e r n ot s h o er s , t w up o i m d an as ki t n o d gi a v r e e t a l l i l e u b n l g o r o a d te f f r u o l m a t n h d ei t r re o a w c n he r r i o g u h s t ; kn wi e s e e f m or en th o e f m ol t d o
drink,andmade thempresentsalltheirlife long,and yetdidnotwin theirhearts."
And he told an old-world tale.
[116] Once uponatime, when king Brahmadatta reigned over Benares,
the Bodhisatta was born as his chief queen's son. On liis name-day, they
called him Prince Paduma, the Lotus Prince. After him came six younger
brothers. One after another these seven came of age and manned and
settled down, living as the king's companions.
One day'the king looked out into the palace courts, and as he looked
he saw these men with a great following on their way to wait upon him-
self. He conceived the suspicion that they meant to slay him, and seize
his kingdom. So he sent for them, and after this fashion bespake them.
"My sons, you may not dwell in this town. So go elsewhere, and
when I die you shall return and take the kingdom which belongs to our
family."
They agreed to their father's words ; and went home weeping and
wailing. "It matters not where we go !" they cried ; and taking their
wives with them, they left the city, and journeyed along the road. By
and bye they came to a wood, where they could get no food or drink.
And being unable to bear the pangs of hunger, they determined to save
their lives at the women's cost. They seized the youngest brother's wife,
and slew her ; they cut up her body into thirteen parts, and ate it.
But the Bodhisatta and his wife set aside one portion, and ate the other
between them.
Thus they did six days, and slew and ate six of the women ; and each
day the Bodhisatta set one portion aside, so that he had six portions saved.
^ See Pancatantra iv. 5 (Benfey, ii. p. 305); Thibetan Talcs, no. xxi. "How a
Woman requites Love."
' No. 527.
J. II. 6

—
"
82 The Jataka. Booh II.
On the seventh day the others would have taken the Bodhisatta's wife to
kill her ; but instead he gave them the six portions which he had kept.
"Eat these," said he "to-morrow I will manage." They all did eat
;
the flesh; and when the time came that they fell asleep, the Bodhisatta
and his wife made offtogether.
When they had gone a little space, the woman said, "Husband, I can
go no further." So the Bodhisatta took her upon his shoulders, and at
sunrise he came out of the wood. When the sun was risen, said she
" Husband, I am thirsty "
!
"There is no water, dear wife " said he.
!
But she begged him again and again, until he struck his right knee
with his swoi'd, [117] and said,
"Water there is none but sit you downanddrink the blood here from
;
my knee." And so she did.
By and bye they came to the mighty Ganges. They drank, they
bathed, they ate all manner of fruits, and rested in a pleasant spot. And
there by a bend of the river they made a hermit's hut and took up their
abode in it.
Now it happened that a robber in the regions of Upper Ganges had
been guilty of high treason. His hands and feet, and his nose and ears
had been cut off, and he was laid in a caiioe, and left to drift down the
great river. To this place he floated, groaning aloud with pain. The
Bodhisatta heard his piteous wailing.
"While I live," said he, "no poor creature shall perish for me !" and
to the river bank he went, and saved the man. He brought him to the
hut, and with astringent lotions and ointments he tended his wounds.
But his wife said to herself, "Hei"e is a nice lazy fellow he has fetched
out of the Ganges, to look after !" and she went about spitting for disgust
at the fellow.
Now when the man's wounds were growing together, the Bodhisatta
had him to dwell there in the hut along with his wife, and he brought
fruits of all kinds from the forest to feed both him and the woman. And
as they thus dwelt together, the woman fell in love with the fellow, and
committed sin. Then she desired to kill the Bodhisatta, and said to him,
"Husband, as I sat on your shoulder when I came out from the forest,
I saw yon hill, and I vowed that if ever you and I should be saved, and
come to no harm, I would make offering to the holy spirit of the hill.
Now this spirit haunts me
:
and I desire to pay my offering!
"Very good," said the Bodhisatta, not knowing her guile. He
prepared an offering, and delivering to her the vessel of offering, he
climbed the hill-top. [118] Then his wife said to him,
"Husband, not the hill-spirit, but you are my chief of gods Then in
!
your honour first of all I will offer wild flowers, and walk reverently

"
No. 193. 83
round you, keeping you on the right, and salute you : and after that I
will make my offering to the mountain spirit." So saying, she placed
him facing a precipice, and pretended that she was fain to salute him in
reverent fashion. Thus getting Ijohind him, she smote him on the back,
and hurled him down the precipice. Then she cried in her joy, "I have
seen the back of my enemy!" and she came down from the mountain,
and went into the presence of her paramour.
Now the Bodhisatta tumbled down the cliff; but he stuck fast in a
clump of leaves on the top of a tig tree where there were no thorns. Yet
he could not get down the hill, so there he sat among the branches,
eating the figs. It happened that a huge Iguana used to climb the hill
from the foot of it, and would eat the fruit of this fig tree. That day he
saw the Bodhisatta and took to flight. On the next day, he came and ate
some fruit on one side of it. Again and again he came, till at last he
struck up a friendship with the Bodhisatta.
"How did you get to this place1" he asked and the Bodhisatta told
;
him how.
"Well, don't be afraid," said the Iguana and taking him on his own
;
back, he descended the hill and brought him out of the forest. There he
set him u])on the high road, and showed him what way he should go, and
himself returned to the forest.
The other proceeded to a certain village, and dwelt there till he heard
of his father's death. Upon this he made his way to Benares. There he
inherited the kingdom which belonged to his family, and took the name
of King Lotus the ten rules of righteousness for kings he did not
;
transgress, and he ruled uprightly. He built six Halls of Bounty, one at
each of the four gates, one in the midst of the city, and one l)efore the
palace; and every day he distributed in gifts six hundred thousand pieces
ofmone3\
Now the wicked wife took her paramour upon her shoulders, and came
forth out of the forest; and she went a-begging among the people, and
collected rice and gruel to support him withal. [119] If she was asked
what the man was to her, she would reply, " His mother was sister to my
f t a o th d e e r a , th he I i w s o m ul y d c t ou a s k i e n m ' ; y t o o w h n im hu t s h b ey an g d av u e po m n e. my E s v h e o n ul i d f er h s e , w a e n r d e c d a o r o e m f e o d r
him, and beg food for his living !
" What a devoted wife !" said all the people. And thenceforward
they gave her more food than ever. Some of them also offered advice,
saying, "Do not live in this way. King Lotus is lord of Benares; he
has set all India in a stir by his bounty. It will delight him to see you ;
so delighted will he be, that he will give you rich gifts. Put your husband
1 The Sanskrit version says "his kinsfolk persecuted him," whichgives a reason
forthe statehe was seen in,
6—2

84 The Jdtaka. Book II.
in this basket, and make your way to him." So saying, they persuaded
her, and gave her a basket ofosiers.
The wicked woman placed her paramour in the basket, and taking it
up she repaired to Benares, and lived on what she got at the Halls of
Bounty. Now the Bodhisatta nsed to ride to an alms-hall upon the back
of a splendid elephant richly dight ; and after giving alms to eight or ten
people, he would set out again for home. Then the wicked woman
placed her paramour in the basket, and taking it up, she stood where the
king was used to pass. The king saw hei-. "Who is this?" he asked.
"A devoted wife," was the answer. He seiit for her, and recognised
who she was. He caused the man to be pu—t down from the basket,
and asked her, "What is this man to you'?" "He is the son of my
father's sister, given me by my family, my own husband," she answered.
"Ah, what a devoted wife !" cried they all : for they knew not the ins
and outs of
—
it; and they pi-aised the wicked woman.
"What is the scoundrel your cousin1 did your family give him to
you*?" asked the king; "your husband, is he?"
She did not recognise the king and "Yes, my lord " said she, as bold
; !
as you like.
"And is this the kingof Benares' son1 Are you not thewifeofprince
Lotus, the daughter of such and such a king, your name so and so1
Did not you drink the blood from my knee? Did you not fall in love with
this rascal, and throw me down a precipice? Ah, you thought that
—
I was
dead, and here you are with death written upon your own forehead and
here am I, alive!" [120] Then he turned to his courtiers. "Do you
remember what I told you, when you questioned me? My six younger
brothers slew their six wives and ate them but I kept my wife unhurt,
;
and brought her to Ganges' bank, where I dwelt in a hermit's hut : I
hauled a condemned criminal out of the river, and supported him this
;
woman fell in love with him, and threw me down a precipice, but I saved
my life by showing kindness. This is no other than the wicked woman
who threw me offthe crag : this, and no other, is the condemned wretch ! "
And then he uttered the following verses
:
—
"'Tis I no other, and this que/in is she
The handle—ss knave, no other, there you ; see
Quoth she 'This is the husband of my youth ; .'
Women deserve to die they have no truth.
;
"With a great club beat out the scoundrel's life
Who
lies in wait to steal his neighbour's wife.
Then take the faithful harlot by and bye.
And shear off nose and ears before she die."
[121] But although the Bodhisatta could not swallow his anger, and
ordained this punishment for them, he did not do accordingly; but he

No. 193. 85
smothered his wrath, and had the basket fixed upon her head so fast that
she could not take it off; tlie villain he had placed in the same, and they
were driven out ofhis kingdom.
When the Master — had ended this discourse,' he declared the Truths and
identified the Birth : at the conclusion o—f the Truths the backsliding Brother
entered on the Fruit of the First Path : "In those days certain elders were
thesix brothers,the young lady Ciuca was the wife, Devadatta was the criminal,
Ananda was the Iguana, and King Lotus was I myself."
No. 194.
MANICORA-JATAKA.
—
"xVo ffods are here" etc. This story the ]\Iaster told during a stay in
Veluvana, how Devadatta tried to kill him. Hearing that Devadatta went
about to kill him, he said, "Brethren, this is not the only time that Devadatta
has been trying to kill me ; he tried to do so before, and failed," Then he told
them this story.
Once upon a time Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, when the
Bodhisatta came to life as the son of a householder who lived in a village
not far from the city.
When he came to years, they fetched a young lady of family from
Benares to many him. She was a fair and lovely maiden, beautiful as
a nymph divine, graceful like a twining creeper, ravishing as a sylph.
Her name was Sujata ; she was faithful, virtuous, and dutiful. She
always did duly her devoir to her lord and his parents. This girl was
very dear and precious to the Bodhisatta. [122] So they two dwelt
together injoy, and unity, and oneness ofmind.
On a day Sujata said to her husband, "I have a wish to see my mother
and father,"
" Very good, my wife," replied he ; "make ready food sufficient for
thejourney," He caused food of all sorts to be cooked, and })laced the
provisions in a waggon since he drove the vehicle, he sat in front, and
;
his wife behind. To Benares they went and there they unyoked the
;
waggon, and washed, and ate. Then the Bodhisatta yoked the oxen

——
;
86 The Jataka. Book II.
again, and sat in front; and Sujata, who had changed her dress and
adorned herself, sat behind.
As the waggon entered the city, the king of Benares happened to
be making a solemn circuit round the place mounted upon the back of a
splendid elephant; and he passed by that place. Sujata had come down
out ofthe cart, and was walking behind on foot. The king saw her her
:
beauty so attracted his eye, that he became enamoured of her. He called
one of his suite. "Go," said he, "and find out whether yon woman has a
husband or no." The man did as he was bid, and came back to tell the
king. "She has a husband, I am told," said he ; "do you see that man
sitting in the cart yonder? He is her husband."
The king could not smother his passion, and sin entered into his mind.
"I will find some way of getting rid of this fellow," thought he, "and
then I will take the wife myself." Calling to a man, he said, "Here,
my good fellov/, take this jewelled crest^ and make as though you were
passing down the street. As you go, drop it in the waggon of yonder
man." So saying, he gave him a jewelled crest, and dismissed him. The
man took it, and went ; as he passed the waggon, he dropped it in; then
he returned, and reported to the king that it was done.
"I have lost ajewelled crest !" cried the king the whole place was in
:
an uproar.
"Shut all the gates ! " the king gave order : "cut oifthe outlets ! hunt
the thief!" The king's followers obeyed. The city was all confusion
!
The ot—her man, taking some others with him, went up to the Bodhisatta,
crying "Hullo ! stop your cart ! [123] the king has lost ajewelled crest;
we must search your cart !" And search it he did, till he found thejewel
which he had put there himself. "Thief!" cried he, seizing the Bodhi-
satta
;
they beat him and kicked him
;
then bi—nding his arms behind him
they dragged him before the king, crying out "See the thief who stole
your jewel
!
" "Ofi" with his head
!
" was the king's command. They
scourged him with whips, and tormented him at every street corner, and
cast him out of the city by the south gates.
Now Sujata left the waggon—, and stretching out her arms she ran
after him, wailing as she went "O my husband, it is I who brought
you into this woful plight !" The king's servants threw the Bodhisatta
upon his back, with the intent to cut off his head. When she saw this,
Sujata thought upon her own goodness and virtue, reflecting thus within
herself; "I suppose there can be no spirit here strong enough to stay
the hand of cruel and wicked men, who work mischief to the virtuous"
and weeping and wailing she repeated the first stanza:
"N No o g g N o o d o d s s w , a w w r i h e l o d he o a r v n e e d r : v t a i l h l o e l y e t n h m t e u m s wo e t r n l b d e ma h f o a y l r d w a o s w r w a k a y y ; th : eir will,
For here is no one who could say them nay."

— —
No. 194. 87
As this virtuous woman thus lamented, the tlirone of Sakka', king of
the Gods, grew hot as he sat upon it. [1--1] "Who is it that would make
me fall from my godhead ? " thought Sakka. Then he was ware of wliat
was befalling. "The king of Benares," he thought, "is doing a very cruel
deed. He is makingthe virtuousSujatamiserable; now I mustgo thither!"
So descending from the godworld, by his own power he dismounted
the wick-ed king from the elephant on whose back he was riding, and laid
him upon his back in the place of execution, but the Bodhisatta he caught
up, and decked him with all kinds of ornaments, and made the kijig's
dress come upon him, and set him on the back of the king's elephant.
—
The servants lifted the axe and smote off a head but it was the king's
head ; and when it was off, they knew that it was the head ofthe king.
Sakka took upon himavisible body, andcamebeforetheBodhisatta,and
consecrated him to beking and caused the place of chief queen to be given
;
to Sujata. And as the courtiers, the brahmins and householders, and the
rest, saw Sakka, king of the gods, they i-ejoiced, saying, "The iinrigliteous
king is slain ! nosv have we received from the hands of Sakka a king
who is righteous !" And Sakka stood poised in the air, and declared,
"This your righteous king from this time forth shall rule in righteousness.
If a king be unrighteous, God sends rain out of season, and in season he
sends no rain and fear of famine, fear of pestilence, fear of the sword
:
these three fears come upon men for him." Thus did he instruct them,
and spake this second verse :
"For him no rain falls in the time of rain.
But out of season pours and pom's amain.
A king comes down from heaven upon the earth.
Behold the reason why this man is slain."
[125] Thus did Sakka admonish a great concourse offolk, and then he
went straight to his divine abode. And the Bodhisatta reigned in right-
eousness, and then went to swell the hosts of heaven.
The Master, having ended this discourse, thus identified the Birth:—"At
that time Devadatta was the wicked king Anuruddha was Sakka Sujata was
; ;
Rahula's mother ; but the king by Sakka's gift wa.s I myself."
^ India.

— —
:
Jlie Jataha. Booh II.
No. 195.
PABBATUPATTHARA-JATAKA.
—
"A happy lake" etc. This story the Master told while dwellingatJetavana,
about the king ofKosala.
We are told that a certain courtier intrigued in the royal harem. The king
inquired into the matter, and when he found it all out exactly he determined to
tell the Master. So he came to Jetavana, and saluted the Master ; told him how
a courtier had intrigued, and asked what he was to do. The Master asked him
whether he found the courtier useful to him, and whether he loved his wife.
"Yes," was the reply, "the man is very useful ; he is the mainstay of my
com-t ; and I do love tlae woman." "Sire," replied the Master, "when servants
are useful, and women are dear, there is no harming them. In olden days too
kings listened to the words of the wise, and were indifferent to such things."
And he told an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was bora into a courtiex"'s family. When he came ofage, he
became the king's counsellor in things temporal and spiritual.
Now one of the king's court intrigued in the harem, and the king
learnt all about it. "He is a most useful servant," thought he, "and the
woman is dear to me. I cannot destroy these two. [126] I will put a
question to some wise man ofmy court; and if I must put up with it, put
up with it I will; if not, then I will not."
He sent for the Bodhisatta, and bade him be seated. "Wise sir,"
said he, "I have a question to ask you."
"Ask it, O king ! I will make answer," replied the other. Then the
king asked his question in the words ofthe first couplet:
"A happy lake lay sheltered at the foot of a lovely hill,
But a jackal used it, knowing that a lion watched it still."
"Surely," thought the Bodhisatta, "one of his courtiers must have
intrigued in the harem" ; and he recited the second couplet:
"Out of the mighty river all c—reatures drink at will
If she is dear, have patience the river's a river still."
[127] Thus did the Great Being advise the king.
And the king abode by this advice, and he forgave them both, bidding
them go and sin no more. And from that time they ceased. And the
king gave alms, and did good, till at his life's end he went to fill the hosts
of heaven.

;
No. 195. 89
And the king of Kosala also, after hearing this discourse, forgave both
these people and remained indifferent.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he idcntirtcd the Birth:—"At
that time Auanda was the king, and I myselfwas tlie wise uovincillor."
No. 196.
VALAHASSA-JATAKA.
—
" The)/ who will neglect^' etc. This story the Master told while staying in
Jetavana, about a Brother who had become a backslider.
When the ]\Iaster asked him if it was really true that he was a backslider,
the Brotherreplied that it was true. Beingquestioned for the reason, he replied
that his passion had been aroused by seeing a finely dressed woman. Then
the Master thus addressed him
"Brother, these women temp : t men by their figureandvoice,scents, perfumes,
and touch, and by their wiles and dalliance thus theyget men intotheir power
;
and as soon as they perceive that this is done, they ruin them, character, wealth
and all, by their evil ways. This gives them the name ofshe-goblins. In former
days also a troop of she-goblins tempted a cai'avan of traders, and got power
over them and afterwards, when they got sight of other men, they killed every
;
one of the first, and then devoured them, crunching them in their teeth while
the bloodrandown over both cheeks." And then he told an old story.
Once upon a time, there was in the island of Ceylon a goblin town
called Sirisavatthu, peopled by she-goblins. When a ship is wrecked,
these adorn and deck themselves, and taking rice and gruel, with trains
of slaves, and their children on their hip, they come up to the merchants.
[128] In order to make them imagine that theirs is acity of human beings,
theymake them see here and there men ploughing and tending kine, herds
ofcattle, dogs, and the like. Then approaching the merchants they invite
them to partake of the gruel, rice, and other food which they l)ring.
The merchants, all unaware, eat of what is offered. When they have
eaten and drunken, and are taking their rest, the goblins address them
thus : " Where do you live] where do you come from 1 whither are you
going, and what errand brought you here?" "We were shipwrecked
here," they reply. "Very good, noble sirs," the others make answer ;
" 'tis three years ago since our own husbands went on board ship ; they

"
90 The Jataka. Book II.
must have perished. You are merchants too; we will be your wives."
Thus they lead them astray by their women's wiles, and tricks, and
dalliance, until they get them into the goblin city then, if they have any
;
others already caught, tiiey bind these with magic chains, and cast them
into the house of torment. And if they find no shipwrecked men in the
place where they dwell, they scour the coast as far as the river Kalyani'
on one side and the island of Nagadlpa on the other. This is their way.
Now it happened once that five hundred shipwrecked traders were cast
ashore near the city of these she-goblins. The goblins came up to them
and enticed them, till they brought them to their city; those whom they
had caught before, they bound with magic chains and cast them into the
house of torment. Then the chief goblin took the chief man, and the
others took the rest, till five hundred had the five hundred traders; and
they made the men their husbands. Then in the night time, when her
man was asleep, the chief she-goblin rose up, and made her way to the
house ofdeath, slew some of the men and ate them. The others did the
same. When the eldest goblin returned from eating men's flesh, her
body was cold. The eldest merchant embraced her, and perceived that
she was a goblin. [129] " All the five hundred ofthem must be goblins "
!
he thought to himself "we must make our escape "
: !
So in the early morning, when he went to wash his face, he bespake
the other merchants in these words. "These are goblins, and not human
beings As soon as other shipwrecked men can be found, they will make
! —
them their husbands, and will eat us ; come let us escape !
Two hundred and fifty of them replied, " We cannot leave them : go
ye, if ye will, but we will not flee away."
Then the chief trader with two hundred and fifty, who were ready to
obey him, fled away in fear of the goblins.
Now at that time, the Bodhisatta had come into the world as a flying
horse ^, white all over, and beaked like a crow, with hair like mufija
grass^, possessed of supernatural power, able to fly through the air. From
Himalaya he flew through the air until he came to Ceylon. There he
passed over the ponds and tanks of Ceylon, and ate the paddy that grew
wild there. As he—passed on thus, he thrice uttered human speech filled
with mercy, saying "Who wants to go—home? who wants to go home?"
The traders heard his saying, and cried " We are going home, master "
!
joining their hands, and raising them respectfully to their foreheads.
"Then climb up on my back," said the Bodhisatta. Thereat some of
1 Themodern Kaelani-gaiiga (Journ. ofthe Pali Text Soc, 1888, p. 20).
^ On one side of a pillar in a Buddhist railing at Mathura, is a flying horse with
people clinging to it, perhaps intended for this scene (Anderson, Catalogue of the
IndianMuseum, i. p. 189).
3 Saccharum Mufija.

—
No. 196. 91
them climbed up, some laid hold of his tail, and some remained standing,
with a respectful salute. Then the Bodhisatta took up even those who
stood still saluting him, and conveyed all of them, even two hundred and
fifty, to their own country, and set down each in his own i>lacc; then he
went back to his place of dwelling.
And the she-goblins, when other men came to that place, slew those
two hundred and fifty who were left, and devoured them.
The Master now said, addressing the Brethren : "iirctln-cn, even as these
traders perished by falling into the hands of sho-goblins, but the others by
obeying the behest of the wonderful horse each returned safe home again so,
;
even so, they who neglect the advice of the Buddhas, both Brethren and Sisters,
lay Brethren and lay Sisters, [130] come to great misery in the four iiells,
places where they are punished luider the five fetters, and so forth. But those
who abide by such advice come to the three kinds of fortmiate birth, the six
heavens of sense, the twenty worlds of Brahma, and reaching the state of im-
perishable Nirvana they attain great blessedness." Then, becoming perfectly
enlightened, he recited thefollowing verses:
"They who will neglect the Buddha when he tells them what to do.
As the goblins ate the merchants, likewise they shall perish too.
"They who hearken to the Buddha when he tells them what to do.
As the bird-horse saved the merchants, they shall win salvation too."
When the Maste — r had ended this discom-se, he declared the Truths and
identified the Birth: at the conclusion of the Truths the backsliding Brother
entered on the Fruit ofthe First Path,—and many others entered on the Fruit of
the First, Second, Third or Fourth: "The Buddha's followers were the two
hundred and fifty who followed the advice of the horse, and I was the horse
myself"
No. 197.
MITTAMITTA-JATAKA.
—
"He smiles not," etc. Thisstory the Mastertold whilstdwellingat Savatthi,
about a certain Brother.
This Brother took a piece of cloth, deposited byhis teacher, feehngconfident
that ifhe took it his teacher would not be angry. Then he made ashoe-bag of
it, and took his leave. When this teacher asked why he took it, he replied he
had felt confident, if he did, that his teacher would not be angry. The teacher
flew into a passion, [131] got up and struck him a blow. "What confidence is
there between you and me^' he asked.
This fact became known among the Brotherhood. One day the brotliers
were all together talking about it in the Hall ofTruth. "Friend, young Brother

—
: "
92 The Jdtaka. Booh II.
So-and-so felt so confident of his teacher's friendship, that he took a piece of
cloth, and made it into a shoe-bag. Then the teacher asked him what confidence
there was between them, flew into a passion, jumped up, and gave him ablow."
The ]\Iastercame in, and asked them what they were talking ofas they sat there
together. They told him. Then he said, "This is not the first time. Brothers,
that this man has disappointed the confidence of his fellow. He did the same
before." And then he told an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born as a brahmin's son in the'realm of Kasi. When he
came of age, he renounced the world ; he caused to grow in him the
Supernatural Faculties and the Attainments, and took up his abode in the
region of Himalaya with a band ofdisciples. One of this band ofascetics
disobeyed the voice of the Bodhisatta, and kept a young elephant which
had lost its dam. This creature by and by grew big, then killed its
master and made off into the forest. The ascetics did his obsequies ; and
then, coming about the Bodhisatta, they put this question to him.
"Sir, how may we know whether one is a friend or an enemy%
This the Bodhisatta declared to them in the following stanzas:
"He smiles not when he sees him, no welcome will he show.
He will not turn his eyes that way, and answers him with No.
"These are the marks and tokens by which your foe you see
These if a wise man sees and hears he knows his enemy."
[132] In these words the Bodhisatta declared the marks of friend and
foe. Thereafter he cultivated the Excellences, and entered the heaven
ofBrahma.
—
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth : "The
Brother in question was he who kept the pet elephant, his teacher was the
elephant, the Buddha's followers were then the band of hermits, and I myself
was theirchief."
No. 198'.
—
"/come, my son" etc. This story the Master told whilst living at Jetavana,
abouta brother who was a backslider.
repl A ie V d e , h y e e a s r ,h t e ha w t as t . he b B l e a i s n t g er as a k s e k d ed th h e im rea if so h n e , h r e eal r l e y iil w i e ed r , e " a Be b c a a c u k s sl e id m e y r ; pa a s n s d io h n e s
' There are many variants of this story. Compare Gesta Romanoriim (EarlyEng.
Text See), no. 45, pp. 174 ff.; Bake of the KnUjht dc la Tour Landry (same series),
p. 22. Compare no. 145.

—
:: "
No. 198. 03
werearoused on seeingawoman in her finery." Then theMastersaid, "Brother,
there is no watching women. In days of yore, watchers were jilaced to guard the
doors, and yet they could not keeji thcni safe; even when you have got them,
you cannot keep them." And ho told an old-world talc.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta came into the world as a young parrot. His name was Radha,
and his 3'oungest brother was named Pottliapada. While th(^y were yet
quite young, both ofthem were caught by a fowler and handed over to a
brahmin in Benares. The brahmin cared for them as if they were his
children. [133] But the brahmin's wife was a wicked woman; there was
no watching her.
The husband had to go away on business, and addressed his young
parrots thus. "Little dears, I am going away on business. Keep watch
on your mother in season and out of season ; obsei-ve whether or not any
man visits her." So oft'he went, leaving his wife in charge of the young
parrots.
As soon as he was gone, the woman began to do wrong; night and day
—
the visitors came and went —there was no end to them, Potthapada,
observing this, said to Radha "Our master gave this woman into our
charge, and here she is doing wickedness. I will speak to her."
" Don't," said Radha. But the other would not listen. "Mother,"
said he, "why do you commit sin?"
How she longed to kill him But making as though she would fondle
!
him, she called him to her.
"Little one, you are my son ! I will never do it again ! Here, then,
the dear ! " So he came out ; then she seized him crying,
"What
!
you preach to me
!
you don't know your measiire !" and she
wrung his neck, and threw him into the oven.
The brahmin returned. When he had rested, he asked the Bodhisatta:
—
"Well, my dear, what about your mother does she do wrong, or no?
and as he asked the question, he repeated the first couplet:
"I come, my son, the journey done, and now I am at home again
Cometell me ; isyour mothertrue? does she make love to other menV
Radha answered, "Father dear, the wise speak not of things which do
not conduce to blessing, whether they have hajjpened or not "; and he
explained this by repeating the second couplet [134]
:
"For whathe said he now lies dead, bm-nt up beneaththeashesthere
It is not well the truth to tell, lest Potthapilda's fate I share."

94 The Jataka. Booh II.
— Thus did the Bodhisatta hold forth to the brahmin ; and he went
on "This is no place for me to live in either"; then bidding the
brahmin farewell, he flew away to the woods.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he declared the Truths, and
—
identified the Birth: at the conclus—ion of the Truths the backsliding Brother
reached the Fruit of the First Path: "Anauda was Potthapada, and I myself
was Radha."
No. 199.
GAHAPATI-JATAKA,
—
"/like not this," etc. This story the Master told, also about a backsliding
Brother, duringa sojourn in Jetavana, and in the course of his address he said,
"Womankind can never be kept right ; somehow or other they will sin and
trick their husbands." And then he told the followingstory.
Once upon a time, in the reign of Brahmadatta, king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born in the realm of Kasi as a householder's son and
:
coming ofage he married and settled down. Now his wife was a wicked
woman, and she intrigued with the village headman. The Bodhisatta got
wind ofit, and bethouglit him how he might put her to the test. [135]
At that time all the grain had been carried away during the rainy
season, and there was a famine. But it was the time when the corn had
just sprouted ; and all the villagers came together, and besought help
of their headman, saying, "Two months from now, when we have
harvested the grain, we will pay you in kind"
;
so they got an old ox
from him, and ate it.
One day, the headman watched his chance, and when the Bodhisatta
was gone abroad he visited the house. Just as the two were happy
together, the Bodhisatta came in by the village gate, and set his face
towards home. The woman was looking towai'ds the village gate, and
saw him. "Why, who's this?" she wondered, looking at him as he
stood on the threshold. "It is he !" She knew him, and she told the
headman. He trembled in terror.

—
" " ' ; ";
No. i;)!). 05
"Don't be afraid," said the woman, "I have a plan. You know we
have had meat from you to eat make as thougli you were seeking the
:
price of the meat ; I will climb up into the granary, and stand at the door
of it, crying. ' No rice here !' while you must stand in the middle of the
room, and call out insisting, again and again, 'I have children at home
;
give me the price ofthe meat1 '" '
So saying, she climbed up to the granary, and sat in the door of it.
The other stood in the midst of the house, and cried, "Give me the price
of the meat!" while she replied, sitting at the granary door, "There is no
rice in the granary ; I will give it when the harvest i§ home : leave me
now
!
The goodman entered the house, and saw what they were about.
"This must be that wicked woman's plan," he thought, and he called to
the headman.
"Sir Headman, when we had some of your old ox to eat, we promised
to give you rice for it in two months' time. Not halfa month has passed
then why do you try to make us pay now 1 That's not the reason you are
here you must have come for something else. I don't like your ways.
:
That wicked and sinful woman yonder knows that there is no rice in the
garner, but she has climbed up, and there she sits, crying [136] ' No rice
here!' and you cry 'Give!' I don't like your doings, either of you !
and to make his meaning clear, he uttered these lines:
"I like not this, I like not that ; I like not her, I say.
Who stands beside the granary, and cries 'I cannot pay !
—
" Y No o r u y g o a u v , e n m o e r y o o n u c . e S a ir sk ! i l n i n s y ten co n w, ow an : d m t y wo m m e o a u n t s hs a ' nd gi- s a t c o e re wi a t r h e al small
Now, ere the day, you bid me pay ! I like it not at all." ;
So saying, he seized the headman by the lock of hair on the top of his
head, dragged him out into the courtyard, thre—w him down, and as he
cried, "I'm the Headman !" mocked him thus "Damages, please, for
injury done to the chattels under another man's watch and ward !" while
he thrashed him till the man was faint. Then he took him by the neck
and cast him out ofthe house. The wicked woman he seized by the hair
of her head, p—ulled lier away from the garner, knocked her down, and
threatened her "If you ever do this kind of thing again, I'll make you
remember it !
From that day forward the headman durst not even look at that
house, and the woman did not dare to transgress even in thought.
[137] When this discourse was ended, the I\Iaster declared the Truths, at^the
conclu—sion of which the backsliding Brother reached the Fruit of the First
Path : "The gooduian who piuiishcd that headman was I myself."

— —
: " ;;
96 TJie Jdtaha. Book II.
No. 200.
SADHUSILA-JATAKA.
—
"One is good" etc. This story the Master told while dwelling at Jetavana,
abouta brahmin.
This man, we are told, had four daughters. Four suitors wooed them ; one
was fine and handsome, one was old and well advanced in years, the third a man
of family, and the fourth was good. He thought to himself, "When a man is
settlinghis daughters and disposing of them, whom should he give them to? the
handsome man or the oldish man, or one ofthe other two, the highly born or the
very virtuous man?" Ponder as he would, he could not decide. So he thought
he would tell the matter to the Supreme Buddha, who would be sure to know
and then he would give the girls to the most suitable wooer. So he had a
quantityofperfumes and garlandsprepared,andvisited the monastery. Saluting
the Master, he sat on one side, and told him everythingfrom beginning to end
then he asked, "To which of these four should I give my daughters?" To this
the Master replied, "In olden days, as now, wise men asked this question ; but
nowthat re-birth has confused your memory, you cannot remember the case."
And then at his request the Master told an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta ruled in Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born as a brahmin's son. He came of age, and I'eceived his
education at Takkasila ; then on returning he became a famous teacher.
Now there was a brahmin who had four daughters. These four were
wooed by four persons as told above. The brahmin could not decide to
whom to give them, "I will enquire of the teacher," he thought, "and
then he shall have them to whom they should be given." So he came into
the teacher's presence, and repeated the first couplet:
" A O n n s e we is r g m oo e d, th a i n s d qu o e n s e ti i o s n, no b b r l a e h ; mi o n ne h o a f s th b e ea f u o t u y r , , o w n h e ic h h as be y s e t ar a s. ppears?
;
[138] Hearing this, the teacher replied, "Even though there be beauty
and the like qualities, a man is to be despised if he fail in virtue. There-
fore the former is not the measure of a man ; those that I like are the
virtuous." And in explanation of this matter, he repeated the second
couplet:
" G G o o o o d d i i s s n b o e b a l u e ty b : ir t t o h ; th b e ut ag v e i d rtu s e h — ow vi r r e t s u p e e , ct t , ha f t or is th m is y is del r i i g g h h t t ."
When the brahmin heard this, he gave all his daughters to the
virtuous wooer.

No. 200. 97
The Mas—ter,when this discourse wasended,declaredtheTruths and identified
t th h e e F B i i r r s t t h P : at a h t : t — h " e T c h o i n s ch b i r si a o h n mi o n f w th a e s T t r h u e t b h r s ab t r li u e in br t a h h en m , in an a d tt t a h i e ne f d am t o h u e s F t r e u a i c t he o r f
was I myself."
No. 201.
BANDHANAGARA-JATAKA.
—
[139] "N'ot iron fetters" etc. This story the Master told whilst staying
in Jetavana, about the prison-house.
At the time of this story we hear that a gang of burglars, highwaymen, and
murderers had been caught and haled before the king of Kosala. The king
ordered themtobe made fostwith chains,and ropes,and fetters. Thirtycountry
Brothers, desirous of seeing the Master, had paid him a visit and offered their
salutations. Next day, as they were seeking alms, they passed the prison and
noticed these rascals. In the evening, after their return from the day's rounds,
they approached the Buddha: "Su'," they said, "to-day, as we were seeking
alms, we saw in the prison-house a number of criminals bound fast in chains
and fetters, being in great misery. They could not break these fetters, and run
away. Is there any fetter stronger than these?"
The Master replied, "Brethren, those are fetters, it is true ; but the fetters
which consist of a craving for wealth, corn, sons, wives and children are stronger
than they are an hundred-fold, nay a thousand-fold. Yet even those fetters,
hard to breakas they are, have been broken by wise men of the olden time, who
went to Himalaya and became anchorites." Then he told them an old-world
tale.
Once iipon a time, while Brahmadatta ruled over Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born into a poor man's family. When he grew up, his
father died. He earned wages, and supported his mother. His mother,
much against his will, brought a wife home for him, and soon after died.
Now his wife conceived. Not knowing that she had conceived, he said
to her, " Wife, you must earn your living ; I will renounce the world."
Then said she, "Nay, for I am with child. [140] Wait and see the child
that is born of me, and then go and become a hermit." To this he agreed.
So when she was delivered, he said, "Now, wife, yo»i are safely delivered,
and I must turn hermit." "Wait," said she, "till the time when the
child is weaned." And after that she conceived again.
"If I agree to her request," thought the Bodhisatta, "I shall never
get away at all. I will flee without saying a word to her, and become a
hermit." So he told her nothing, but rose up in the night, and fled
away.
J. II. 7

— — ——
"
98 The Jdtaka. Book II.
The city guards seized him. "I have a mother to support," said he
" let me go!" thus he made them let him go free, and after staying in a
certain place, he passed out by the chief gate and made his way to
the Himalayas, where he lived as a recluse and caused the Supernatural
;
Faculties and the Attainments to spring up within him, as he dwelt
in the i-apture of meditation. As he dwelt there, he exulted, saying
"The bond of wife and child, the bond of passion, so hard to break, is
broken ! " and he uttered these lines :
—
"Not iron fetters so the wise have told
Not ropes, or bars of wood, so fast can hold
As passion, and the love of child or wife,
Of precious gems and earrings of fine gold.
—
"These heavy fetters— who is there can find
Release from such? these are the ties that bind :
These if the wise can burst, then they are fi'ee,
Leaving all love and all desire behind!
[141] And the Bodhisatta, after uttering this aspiration, without
breaking the charm ofhis ecstasy attained to Brahma's world.
—
When the Master had ended this discourse, he declared the Truths: at the
conclusion of the Trutlis, some ent—ered the First Path, some the Second, some
the Third, and some the Fourth: "In the story, Mahamaya was the mother,
King Suddhodana was the father, Rahula's mother was the wife, Rahula himself
theson, and I was the man who left his family and became an anchorite."
No. 202.
KELI-SiLA-JATAKA.
[142] ''Geese,herom,elephants,"e^c—This storytheMaster toldwhile dwelling
atJetavana, aboutLakuntaka the venerable and good.
Now this venerable ' Lakuntaka, we learn, was well known in the faith
of the Buddha, a famous man,' speaking sweet words, a honeyed preacher, of
keen discernment, with his passions perfectly subdued, but in stature the
smallest of allthe eighty Elders, no bigger than a novice, like adwarf keptfor
amusement.
One day, he had been to the gate of Jetavana to salute the Buddha, when
thu'ty brothers from the country arrived at the gate on their way to salute him
too. When they saw the Elder, they imagined him to be some novice; they
pulled tlie corner ofhis robe, they caught his hands, held his head, tweaked his
nose, got him by the ears and shook him, and handled him very rudely ; then

No. 202. 99
afterputtingaside their bowl and robe, they visited the Masterand sahitcd him.
Next they a.sked him, "Sir, we understand that you have an Elder who goes by
the name of Laktu.itaka tlie Good, a honeyed preacher. Where is he?" "Do
you want to see him?" the IMaster asked. "Yes, Sir." "lie is the man you saw
by the gate, and twitched his robe and pulled him about with great ruilene.sH
t b o ef p o r r a e ye y r o , u fu c l a l m o e fh h i er g e h ." aspi " ra W t h i y on , s, S a ir t ," ru a e s d k i e s d ci t p h l e e y — , h " o h w ow is i i s th i e t t i h s a s t o a in m si a g n ni d fi e c v a o n t t e ? d "
"Because of his own sins," answered the blaster;' and at their request he told
theman old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when king Bi-ahmadatta reigned in Benares, the
Bodhisatta became Sakka, king of the gods. Brahmadatta could not
endure to look upon anything old or decrepit, whether elephant, horse, ox,
or what not. He was full of prank.s, and whenever he saw any such, he
would chase them away ; old carts he had broken up ; any old women that
he sawhe sent for, and beat upon the belly, then stood them up again and
gave them a scare ; he made old men roll about and play on the ground
like tumblers. If he saw none, but only heard that there was a greybeard
in such and such a town, [143] he sent for him thence and took his sport
with him.
At this the people for very shame sent their parents outside the
boundaries of the kingdom. No more did men tend or care for their
mother and father. The king's friends were as wanton as he. As men
died, they filled up the four' worlds of unhappiness ; the company of the
gods grew less and less.
Sakka saw that there were no newcomers among the gods and he
;
cast about him what w^as to be done. At last he hit upon a plan. "I wall
humble him !" thought Sakka ; and he took ujDon him the form of an old
man, and placing two jars of buttermilk in a crazy old waggon, he yoked
to it a pair of old oxen, and set out upon a feast day. Brahmadatta,
mounted upon a richly caparisoned elephant, was making a solemn pro-
cession about the city, which was all decorated ; and Sakka, clad in rags,
and driving this cart, came to meet the king. When the king saw the old
cart, he shouted, "Away with that cai't, you!" But his people answered,
"Where is it, my lord? wecannot see any cart! " (for Sakka by his power
let it be seen by no one but the king). And, coming up to the king
repeatedly, at last Sakka, still driving his cart, smashed one of the jars
upon the king's head, and made him turn round ; then he smashed the
other in like manner. And the buttermilk trickled down on either side
of his head. Thus was the king plagued and tormented, and made
miserable by Sakka's doings.
1 The four apdye=B.eU, birth as an animal, birth as a iieta (ghost), birth among
the asaras (Titans or fallen spirits).
7—2

—
;
100 The Jataka. Book II.
When Sakka saw his distress, he made the cart disappear, and took his
proper shape again. Poised in mid-air, thunderbolt in hand, he up-
braided him—"O wicked and unrighteous king Will you never become
!
old yourself? will not age assail you
'?
Yet you sport and mock, and do
despite to those who are old ! It is through you alone, and these doings of
yours, that men die on every hand, and fill up the four worlds of un-
happiness, and that men cannot care for their parents' welfare Ifyou do
!
not cease from this, I will cleave your head with my thunderbolt. Go,
and do so no more."
With this rebuke, he declaied the worth of parents, and made known
the advantage of reverencing old age after which discourse he departed
;
to his own place. From that time forward the king never so much as
thought ofdoing anything like what he had done before.
[144] This story ended, the Master, becoming perfectly enlightened, recited
thesetwo couplets :
"Geese, herons, elephants, and spotted deer
Though all unlike, alike the lion fear.
"Even so, a child is great if he be clever
Fools may be big, but great they can be neveri."
When t—his discourse was ended, the Master declaredtheTruthsand identified
the Birth: at the conclusion of the Truths some of those Bret—hren entered on
the First Path, some on the Second, and someupontheFourth: "The excellent
Lakuutakawas the king in the story, who made people the buttforhis jests and
then became a butt himself, whilst I myselfwas Sakka."
No. 203%
KHANDHA-VATTA-JATAKA.
—
"^Virilpakkhasnakes Ilove," etc. This story the Mastertold whilst living at
Jetavana, abouta certain brother.
As he sat, we are told, at the door of his living room, chopping sticks, a
snake crept out of a rotten log, and bit his toe ; he died on the spot. All the
monastery learnt how he had come byhis sudden death. In the Hall of Truth
1 Theselines occurin Samyutta-Nikaya, pt. n. xxi. 6 (ii. p. 279, ed. P.T.S.).
^ See Cullavagga v. 6 (iii. 75 in Vinaya Texts, S.B.E.), where the verses occur
again. Theversespartlyrecur in the ' Bower MS,' a Sanskrit MS latelyfound inthe

— —
"" ;:
No. 203. 101
they began talking about it; saying how Brother So-and-so was sitting at his
door, chopping wood, when a snake bit him, and he died immediately of the
bite.
[145] The Master came in, and wanted to know what they werediscussing as
they sat there together. They told him. Said he, "Brethren, ifour brotiior had
practised kindness towards the four royal races ofserpents, tliat snake would not
havebittenhim wise anchorites in by-gonedays,beforethe P>ud(iliawasborn,by
:
usingkindness to these four royal races, were released from the fear thatsprang
from these serpents." Then he'told them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, during the reign of Brahmadatta king of Benai'es,
the Bodhisatta came into the world as a young brahmin of Kasi. Wlien
he came of age, he quelled his passions and took upon him the life of an
ascetic; he developed the Supernatural Faculties and the Attainments
he built anhermitage bythe bendoftheGangesnearthe foot ofHimalaya,
and there he dwelt, surrounded by a band of ascetics, lost in the rapture
ofmeditation.
At that time there were many kinds of snakes upon the Ganges bank,
which did mischief to the hermits, and many of them perished by snake-
bite. The ascetics told the matter to the Bodhisatta. He summoned all
the ascetics to meet him, and thus addressed them : "If you showed
goodwill to the four royal races of snakes, no serpents would bite you.
Therefore from this time forward do you show goodwill to the four royal
races." Then he added this verse :
"Virupakkha snakes I love,
Erapatha snakes I love,
Chabbyaputta snakes I love,
Kanhagotamas I love."
After thus naming the four royal families of the snakes, he added
"If you can cultivate goodwill towards these, no snake creature will bite
you or do you harm." Then he repeated the second verse : — [146]
"Creatures all beneath the sun.
Two feet, four feet, more, or none—
How I love you, every one!
Having declared the nature of the love within him, he uttered another
verse by way of prayer :
"Creatures all, two feet or four.
You with none, and you with more,
Do not hurt me, I implore!
ruinsof an ancient city in Kashgaria (seeJ.F.T.S., 1893, p. Gi). The kinds of snakes
mentioned cannot be identified. Snake charms are extremely common in Sanskrit;
there are many in the Atharva Veda.

— —
102 77^6 Jdtaha. Booh II.
Then again, in general terms, he repeated one verse more:
"All ye creatures that have birth,
Breathe, and move iipon the earth,
Happy be ye, one and all,
Never into mischief falP."
[147] Thus did he set forth how one must show love and goodwill to
all creatures without distincti—on; he reminded his hearers of the virtues
ofthe Three Treasures, saying "Infinite is the Buddha, infinite the Law,
and the Order infinite." He said, "Remember the quality of the Three
Treasures;" and thus having shown them the infinity of the Three
Treasures, and wishing to show them that all beings are finite, he added,
"Finite and measurable are creeping things, snakes, scorpions, centipedes,
spiders, lizards, mice." Then again, "As the passions and lusts in these
creatures are the qualities which make them finite and limited, let us be
protected night and day against these finite things by the power of the
Three Treasures, which are infinite wherefore remember the worth of the
:
Three Treasures." Then he recited this stanza:
"Now I am guarded safe, and fenced around;
Now let all creatures leave me to my ground.
All honour to the Blessed One I pay.
And the seven Buddhaa who have passed away."
[148] And bidding them also remember the seven Buddhas^ whilst
they did honoui*, the Bodhisatta composed this guardian charm and
delivered it to his band of sages. Thenceforward the sages bore in mind
the Bodhisatta's admonition, and cherished love and goodwill, and remem-
bered the Buddha's virtues. As they did this, all the snake kind departed
from them. And the Bodhisatta cultivated the Excellencies, and attained
to Brahma's heaven.
—
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth: "The
Buddha's followerswerethenthe followers of the sage and theirTeacher was I
;
myself."
^ Alltheverseshitherto given match, and are to be taken together as the "First
gatha." The otheris in adifferentmetre, and is the "Secondgatha."
2 ForthesevenBuddhas, seeWilson, Select Works, ii. 5.

No. 204. 103
No. 204.
ViRAKA-JATAKA.
—
" have i/ou seen," etc. This story the Master told, while dwelling at
Jetavana, about imitating the Buddha.
When the Elders had gone with their followers to visit Devadatta^, the
Master asked Sfiriputta what Devadatta had done when he saw them. The
reply was that he had imitated the Buddha. The Master rejoined, "Not now
onlyhas Devadatta imitated me and thereby come to ruin he didjust the same
;
before." Then, at the Elder's request, he told an old-world tale.
[149] Once upon a time, while Brahmadattareignedasking in Benares,
the Bodhisatta became a marsh crow, and dwelt by a certain pool. His
name was Viraka, the Strong.
There arose a famine in Kasi. Men could not spare food for the
crows, nor make offering to goblins and snakes. One by one the crows
left the famine-stricken land, and betook them to the woods.
A certain crow named Savitthaka, who lived at Benares, took with
him his lady crow and went to the place where Viraka lived, making his
abode beside the same pool.
One day, this crow was seeking food about the pool. He saw how
Viraka went down into it, and made a meal off some fish ; and after-
wards came up out of the water again, and stood drying his feathei-s.
"Under the wing of that crow," thought he, "plenty of fish are to be got.
I will become his servant." So he drew near.
"What is it, Sir? " asked Viraka.
"I want to be your servant, my lord !" was the reply.
Viraka agreed, and from that time the other served him. And from
that time, Viraka used to eat enough fish to keep him alive, and the rest
he gave to Savitthakaas soon ashehadcaughtthem andwhen Savitthaka
;
had eaten enough to keep him alive, he gave what was over to his wife.
After a while pride came into his heart. "This crow," said he, "is
black, and so am I : in eyes and beak and feet, too, there is no difference
between us. I don't want his fish; I will catch my own !" So he told
Viraka that for the future he intended to go down to the water and catch
fish himself. Then Viraka said, "Good friend, you do not belong to a
^ Sariputta and MogRalljlnavisited the arch-heretic to try if theycould win back
hisfollowerstothe Master. The story of their visit, and how it succeeded, is told in
theVinaya, Cullavagga, vii. 4 foil, (translated in S.B.E., Vinaya Texts, iii. 256). See
also vol. i. no. 11,

— ——
;
104 The Jataka. Book II.
tribe of such crows as are born to go into water and catch fish. Don't
destroy yourself "
!
But in spite of this attempt to dissuade him, Savitthaka did not take
the warning to heart. Down he wont to the pool, down into the water
but he could not make his way through the weeds and come out again
there he was, entangled in the weeds, with only the tip of his beak
appearing above the water. So not being able to breathe he perished
there beneath the water.
[150] His mate noticed that he did not return, and went to Viraka to
ask news of him. "My lord," she asked, "Savitthaka is not to be seen :
where is he 1, " And as she asked him this, she repeated thefirststanza :
"O have you seen Savitthaka, Viraka, have you seen
My sweet-voiced mate whose neck is like the peacock in its sheen?"
"When Viraka heard it, he replied, "Yes, I know where he is gone,"
and recited the second stanza
:
"He was not born to dive beneath the wave.
But what he could not do he needs must try;
So the poor bird has found a watery grave,
Entangled in the weeds, and left to die."
When the lady-crow heard it, weeping, she returned to Benares.
—
Afterthis discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth: "Devadatta
was then incarnate as Savitthaka, and I myselfwas Viraka."
No. 205.
GANGEYYA-JATAKA.
[151] "Fine are thefish," eic—This story the Master told while dwelling at
Jetavana, about two young Brethren.
These two youngfellows, we are told, belonged to a good family of Savatthi,
and had embraced the faith. But they, not realising the impurity of the bodyi,
sang the praises oftheirbeauty, and wentabout bragging ofit.
^ Beadingan-anuyufijitva.

—
!
No. 205. 105
One day they fell into a dispute on this point. "You're handsome, but
so am I," said each of them ; then, spying an aged Elder .sitting not far away,
they agreed that he was likely to know whether they were beautiful or not.
Then they a[>proached him with the que.stion, "Sir, which of us is beautiful?"
The Elder replied, "Friends, I am more beautiful than citlier of y<ni." At this
the young men reviled him, and went oft", gruml)ling that he told them some-
thing they did not ask, but would not tell them what they did.
The Brotlierhood became aware of this event and one day, wlien they were
;
all together in the Hall of Ti'Uth, they began talking aliout it. "Friend, liow
theold Elder shamed those two young fellows whose heads were full oftheirown
beauty!" The Master ctime in, and asked what they were talking of now as
they sat together. They told him. He rejoined, "This is not the only time.
Brethren, that our friends were full ofthe praises oftheirown beauty. In olden
times tliey used to go about boasting of it as they do now." And then he told
them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, during the reign of Brahmadatta, king of Benares,
the Bodhisatta became a tree sprite on the bank of the Ganges. At the
point where Ganges and Jumna meet, two fish met together, one from
the Ganges and one from the Jumna. " I am beautiful " said one, "and
!
so are you !" and then they fell to quarrelling about their beauty. Not
far from the Ganges they saw a Tortoise lying on the bank. "Yon fellow
shall decide whether or no we are beautiful !" said they ; and they went
up to him. "Which of us is beautiful, friend Tortoise," they asked, "the
Ganges fish or the Jumna fish?" The Tortoise answered, "The Ganges
fish is beautiful, and the Jumna fish is beautiful : but I am more beautiful
than you both." And to explain it, he uttered the first verse: — [152]
"Fine are the fish of Jumna stream, the Ganges fish are fine.
But a foiu"-footed creature, with a tapering neck like mine.
Round like a spreading banyan tree, must all of them outshine."
When the fish heard this, they cried, "Ah, you rascally Tortoise !
you won't answer our question, but you answer another one !" and they
repeated the second verse :
"We a.sk him this, he answers that : in — deed a strange reply
By his own tongue his praise is sung: I like it not, not I!"
—
When this discourse was concluded, the ]\[aster identified the Birth: "In
those days theyoung Bi'others were the two fish, the old man was the tortoise,
and I was the tree-sprite whosaw the whole thing from the Ganges bank."

—
;
106 The Jcitaka. Book II.
No. 206\
KURUNGA-MIGA-JATAKA.
^'Come, Tortoise," etc.—This story the Master told at Veluvana, about Deva-
datta. News came to the Master that Devadatta was plotting his death. "Ah,
Brethren," said he, "it wasjust the same long ago; Devadatta tried then to kill
me, as he is trying now." And hetold them thisstory.
[153] Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta became an Antelope, and lived within a forest, in a thicket
near a certain lake. Not far from the same lake, sat a Woodpecker
perched at the top of a tree; and in the lake dwelt a Tortoise. And the
three Ijecame friends, and lived together in amity.
A
hunter, wandering about in the wood, observed the Bodhisatta's
footprint at the going down into the water ; and he set a trap ofleather,
strong, like an iron chain, and went his way. In the first watch ofthe
night the Bodhisatta went down to drink, and got caught in the noose
:
whereat he cried loud and long. Thereupon the Woodpecker flew down
from her tree-top, and the Tortoise came out of the water, and consulted
what was to be done.
—
Said the Woodpecker to the Tortoise, " Friend, you have teeth bite
this snare through ; I will go and see to it that the hunter keeps away
and if we both do our best, our friend will not lose his life." To make
this clear he uttered the first stanza:
"Come, Tortoise, tearthe leathern snare, and bite it through and through,
And ofthe hunter I'll take care, and keep him oft'from you."
The Tortoise began to gnaw the leather thong the Woodpecker made
:
his way to the hunter's dwelling. At dawn of day the hunter went out,
knife in hand. As soon as the bird saw him start, he uttered a cry,
flapped his wings, and struck him in the face as he left the front door.
"Some bird of ill omen has struck me !" thought the hunter ; he turned
back, and lay down for a little while. Then he rose up again, and took
his knife. The bird reasoned within himself, "The first time he went out
by the front door, so now he will leave by the back :" and he sat him
down behind the house. [154] The hunter, too, reasoned in the same
way "When I went out by the front door, I saw a bad omen, now will I
:
1 Figuredon theBharhut Stupa(Cunningham, p. 67, andpi. xxvii. 9).

: ;
No. 206. 107
go out by the back !" and so he did. But the bird cried out again, and
struck him in the face. Finding that he was again struck by a bird of
ill omen, the hunter exclaimed, "This creature will not let me go !" and
turning back he lay down until sunrise, and when the sun was risen, he
took his knife and started.
The Woodpecker made all haste back to his friends. "Here comes the
hunter!" he cried. By this time the Tortoise had gnawed through all the
thongs but one tough thong : his teeth seemed as though they would fall
out, and his mouth was all smeared with blood. The Bodhisatta saw the
young hunter coming on like lightning, knife in hand he burst the thong,
:
and fled into the woods. The Woodpecker perched upon his tree-top.
But the Tortoise was so weak, that he lay where he was. The hunter
threw him into a bag, and tied it to a tree.
The Bodhisatta observed that the Tortoise was taken, and determined
to save his friend's life. So he let the hunter see him, and made as though
he were weak. The hunter saw him, and thinking him to be weak,
seized his knife and set out in pursuit. The Bodhisatta, keeping just out
of his reach, led him into the forest; and when he saw that they had
come far away, gave him the slip and returned swift as the wind by
another way. He lifted the bag with his horns, threw it upon the ground,
ripped it open and let the Tortoise out. And the Woodpecker came down
from the tree.
Then the Bodhisatta thus addressed them both : "My life has been
saved by you, and you have done a friend's part to me. Now the hunter
will come and take you ; so do you, friend Woodpecker, migrate else-
where with your brood, and you, friend Tortoise, dive into the water."
They did so.
The IMaster, becoming perfectly enlightened, uttered the second stanza
[155]
"The Tortoise went into the pond, the Deer into the wood.
And from the tree the Woodpecker carried away his brood."
The hunter returned, and saw none of them. He found his bag torn
picked it up, and went home sorrowful. And the three friends lived all
their life long in unbroken amity, and then passed away to fare according
to their deeds.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth:—
"Devadatta was the huntsman, Siiriputta the Woodpecker, Moggallana the
Tortoise, and I was the Antelope."

;
108 The Jdtaka. Book II.
No. 207.
ASSAKA-JATAKA.
—
" Once with the great king Assaka" etc. This story the Master told whilst
staying in Jetavana, about some one who was distracted by the recollection of a
formerwife. He asked the Brotherwhether he were really lovesick. The man
said, Yes. "Whom are you in love with?" the Master continued. "My late
wife," was the reply. Then the Master said, "Not this once only, Brother, have
you been full of desire for this woman ; in olden days her love brought you to
great misery." And he told a story.
Once upon a time, there was a king Assaka reigning in Potali, which
is a city of the kingdom of Kasi. His queen consort, named Ubbarl, was
very dear to him ; she was charming, and graceful, and beautiful passing
the beauty of women, though not so fair as a goddess. She died : and at
her death the king was plunged in grief, and became sad and miserable.
He had the body laid in a coffin, and embalmed with oil and ointment,
and laid beneath the bed ; and there he lay without food, weeping and
wailing. [156] In vain did his parents and kinsfolk, friends and courtiers,
priests and laymen, bid him not to grieve, since all things pass away
they could not move him. As he lay in sorrow, seven days passed by.
Now the Bodhisatta was at that time an ascetic, who had gained the
Five Supernatural Faculties and the Eight Attainments ; he dwelt at the
foot of Himalaya. He was possessed of perfect supernatural insight, and
as he looked round India with his heavenly vision, he saw this king
lamenting, and straightway resolved to help him. By his miraculous
power he rose in the air, and alighted in the king's park, and sat down
on the ceremonial stone, like a golden image.
A young brahmin of the city of Potali entered the park, and seeing
the Bodhisatta, he greeted him and sat down. The Bodhisatta began to
talk pleasantly with him. "Is the king ajust ruler?" he asked.
"Yes, Sir, the king isjust," replied the youth; "but his queen is just
dead ; he has laid her body in a coffin, a — nd lies down lamenting her ; and
to-day is the seventh day since he began. Why do you not free the king
from this great grief1 Virtuous beings like you ought to overcome the
king's sorrow."
"I do not know the king, young man," said the Bodhisatta; "but
if he were to come and ask me, I would tell him the place where she
has now come into the flesh again, and make her speak herself."
"Then, holy Sir, stay here until I bring the king to you," said the

— —
" "
No. 207. 101)
youth. The Bodhisatta agreed, and he hastened into the king's presence,
and told him about it. "You should visit this being with the divine
insight " he told the king.
!
The king was overjoyed at the thought of seeing UbbarT and he
;
entered his chariot and drove to the place. Greeting the Bodhisatta,
he sat down on one side, and asked, "Is it trute, as I am told, that you
know where my queen has come into being again1
"Yes, I do, my lord king," replied he.
Then the king asked where it was.
The Bodhisatta replied, "O king, she was intoxicated with her beauty,
and so fell into negligence and did not do fair and virtuous acts ; so now
she has become a little dung-worm in this very park." [157j
"I don't believe it!" said the king.
"Then I will show her to you, and make her speak," answered the
Bodhisatta.
"Please make her speak !" s—aid the king.
The Bodhisatta commanded "Let the two that are busy rolling a
lump of cow-dung, come forth before the king '" and by his power he
made them do it, and they came. The Bodhisatta pointed one out to the
king: "There is your queen UbbarT, O king! she has just come out of
this lump, following her husband the dung-worm. Look and see."
"What! my queen UbbarT a dung-worm 1 I don't believe it!" cried
the king.
"I will make her speak, O king!
"Pray make her speak, holy Sir !" said he.
The Bodhisatta by his power gave her speech. " Ubbarl " said he.
!
"What is it, holy Sir?" she asked, in a human voice.
"What was your name in your former character?" the Bodhisatta
asked her.
"My name was UbbarT, Sir," she replied, "the consort of king
Assaka."
"Tell me," the Bodhisatta went on, "which do you love best now
king Assaka, or this dung-worm 1 "
"O Sir, that was my former birth," said she. "Then I lived with
him in this park, enjoying shape and sound, scent, savour and touch ; but
now that my memory is confused by re-birth, what is he 1 Why, now I
would kill kingAssaka, and would smear the feet ofmy husband the dung-
worm with the blood flowing from his throat !" and in the midst of the
king's comjjany, she uttered these verses in a human voice :
"Once with the great king Assaka, who was my husband dear,
Beloving and beloved, I walked about this garden here.
"But now new sorrows and new joys have made the old ones flee,
And dearer far than Assaka my Worm is now to uic."

—
;
no The Jdtaha. Book II.
[158] When king Assaka heard this, he repented on the spot; and at
once he caused the queen's body to be removed and washed his head. He
saluted the Bodhisatta, and went back into the city where he married
;
another queen, and ruled in rigliteousness. And tlie Bodhisatta, having
instructed the king, and set him free from .sorrow, returned again to
the Himalayas.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he declared the Truths and
identified the Birth :—at the conclu—sion of the Truths, the lovesick Brother
l r o e v a e c s h i e c d k t B h r e oth F e r r u , it we o r f e th k e in F g ir A s s t sa P k a a t ; h S : ar " ip Y u o t u t r a w l a a s te t w h i e f y e o w u a n s g b U r b a b h a m r i i n; ; y a ou n , d t t h h e e
anchorite was I myself."
No. 208.
SUMSUMARA-JATAKA^
—
"Rose-apple,jach-fruit" etc. This storythe Master told at Jetavana, about
Devadatta's attempts to murder him 2. When he heard of these attempts, the
Master said, "This is not the first time that Devadatta has tried to murder me
1 Cf. Blarkata-jdtaka, Mahavastuii. 208; Cariyu-Pitaka, iii. 7; Morris, Contemp.
Rev. vol. 39, quoting Griffis, Japanese Fairy World, p. 153. A monkey outwits a
crocodileinNo. 57, above.
The following variant, from Russia (Moscow district) maybe of interest. It was
given me by Mr I. Nestor Schnurmann, who heard it from his nurse (about 1860).
Once uponatime, the King of theFisheswaswanting in wisdom. His advisers told
himthatoncehecouldget theheart of the fox,hewouldbecomewise. Sohe sent a
deputation, consisting of the great magnates of the sea, whales and others. '' Our
king wants your advice on some state affairs." The fox, flattered, consented. A
whale took him on his back. On thewaythe wavesbeat uponhim ; at last he asked
what they really wanted. They said, what their king really wanted was to eat his
heart,bywhich he hoped to become cliever. He said, "Whydidn't you tell me that
before? I would gladly sacrifice my life for such a worthy object. But we foxes
alwaysleaveourhearts at home. Take me backand I'll fetch it. Otherwise I'm sure
yourkingwill be angry." So they took himback. As soon as he gotnearthe shore,
he leapedon land, and cried "Ahyoufools! Have you ever heard of an animal not
carryinghisheart withhim?" andran off. The fishhad to return empty.
- TheseattemptsofDevadatta,andhowtheywerefoiled,aresetforthinCullavagga,
VII. iii. 6 foil., trans, in S.B.E., Vinaya Texts, iii. 243 f.

" "
No. 208.
I 1 I
he did the same before, and yet could not so much asmake me afraid." Then
hetold tliis story.
Once upon a time, while Bralimadatta was king ofBenares, the Bodlii-
satta came to life at the foot of Himalaya as a'Monkey. Ho grew strong
and sturdy, big of frame, well-to-do, and lived by a curve of the river
Ganges in a forest haunt.
Now at that time there was a Crocodile dwelling in the Ganges. The
Crocodile's mate saw the great frame of the monkey, [loOJ and she
conceived a longing for his heart to eat. So she said to her lord : "Sir, I
desire to eat the heart ofthat great king of the monkeys !
"Good wife," said the Crocodile, "I live in the water and he lives on
dry land : how can we catch him 1 "
"By hook or by crook," she replied, "caught he must be. If I don't
get him, I shall die."
"All right," answei'ed the Crocodile, consoling her, "don't trouble
yourself. I have a plan ; I will give you his heart to eat."
So when the Bodhisatta was sitting on the bank of the Ganges, after
taking a drink of water, the Crocodile drew near, and said
:
"Sir Monkey, why do you live on bad fruits in this old familiar
place'? On the other side of the Ganges there is no end to the mango
trees, and labuja trees', with fruit sweet as honey 1 Is it not better to
cross over and have all kinds ofwild fruit to eat1 "
"Lord Crocodile," the Monkey made answer, "deep and wide is the
Ganges
:
how shall I get across1 "
"If you will go, I will mount yoi; on my back, and carry you over."
.
The Monkey trusted him, and agreed. "Come here, then," said the
other, "up on my back with you !" and up the monkey climbed. But
when the Crocodile had swum a little way, he plunged the Monkey under
the water.
"Good friend, you are letting me sink !" cried the Monkey. "What
is that for1 "
Said the Crocodile, "You think I am carrying you out of pure good
nature1 Not a bit of it ! My wife has a longing for your heart, and
I want to give it her to eat!
"Friend," said the Monkey, "it is nice of you to tell me. Why, if
our heart were inside us when we go jumping among the tree-tops, it
would be all knocked to pieces ! "
"Well, where do you keep if?" asked the other.
The Bodhisatta pointed out a fig-tree, with clusters of ri])e fruit,
1 ArtocarpusLacucba (C]ulders).

—
!!; "
112 The Jdtaka. Booh II.
standing not far off. "See," said he, "there are onr heai'ts hanging
on yon fig-tree." [160]
"If you will show me your heart," said the Crocodile, "then I won't
kill you."
"Take me to the tree, then, and I will point it out to you hanging
upon it."
The Crocodile brought him to the place. The Monkey leapt ofi" his
back, and climbing up the fig-tree sat upon it. "O silly Crocodile !
said he, "you thought that there were creatures that kept their hearts in
a tree-top ! You are a fool, and I have outwitted you ! You may keep
your fruit to yourself. Your body is great, but you have no sense." And
then to explain this idea he uttered the following stanzas :
"Rose-apple, jack-fruit, mangoes too across the water there I see
Enough ofthem, I want them not ; my fig isgood enough for me
"Great is your body, verily, but how much smaller is your wit
Now go your ways. Sir Crocodile, for I have had the best of it."
The Crocodile, feeling as sad and miserable as ifhe had lost a thousand
pieces ofmoney, went back sorrowing to the place where he lived.
—
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth: "In
those days Devadattawas the Crocodile, the lady Ciiica was his mate, and I was
the Monkey,"
No. 209\
KAKKARA-JATAKA.
—
"Trees a many have Iseen" etc. This story the Master told while dwelling
at Jetavana, about a Brother who was one of the fellow-students of Elder
Sariputta, Captain ofthe Faith.
This fellow, as we learn, [161] was cleverat takingcare of his person. Food
very hot or very cold he would not eat, for fear it should do him harm. He
never went out for fear of being hurt by cold or heat and he would nothave
;
rice which was either over-boiled or too hard.
The Brotherhood learnt how much care he took of himself In the Hall of
Truth, they all discussed it. "Friend, what a cleverfellow Brother So-and-so is
in knowing what is good forhim !" The Master came in, and asked what they
were talking of as they sat there together. They told him. Then he rejoined,
1 Comparelatterpart oftheSecondCakimtakaJdtaka,Mahavastu ii. 250 ; the first
line ofthe firstverseandthe whole ofthe second arenearlythe same.

— —
"
No. 209. ri3
"Notonly now is ouryoungfriend careful for hispersonalcomfort. He wasjust
the same in olden days." And he told them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, in the reign of Brahmadatta, king of Benares, the^
A
Bodhisatta became a Tree-spirit in a forest glade. certain fowler, witli
a decoy bird, hair noose, and stick, went into the forest in search of birds.
He began to follow one old bird which flew off into the woods, trying to
escape. The bird would not give him a chance of catching it in his snare,
but kept rising and alighting, rising and alighting. So the fowler covered
himself with twigs and branches, and set his noose and stick again and
again. But the bird, wishing to make him ashamed of himself, sent forth
a human voice and repeated the first stanza:
"Trees a many have I seen
Growing in the woodland green
:
But, Tree, they could not do
Any such strange things as you!"
So saying, the bird flew off and went elsewhere. When it had gone,
—
the fowler repeated the second verse: [162]
"This old bird, that knows the snare,
Off has flown into the air;
Forth from out his cage has broken,
And with human voice has spoken!
So said the fowler ; and having hunted through the woods, took what
he could catch and went home asrain.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth:
"Devadatta was the fowler then, the young dandy was the bii'd, and the tree-
sprite that saw the whole thingwas I myself."
No. 210.
KANDAGALAKA-JATAKA.
" friend" e^c—This was told by the Master, during a stay in Veluvana,
about Devadatta's attempts to iujitate him^. When he heard of these attempts
to imitate him, the Master said, "This is not the first time Devadatta has
destroyed himself by imitating me the same thing happened before." Then
;
he told this story.
' See above, note to no. 208.
J. n.

— —
" ; "
114 The Jataka. Book II.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king ofBenares, the Bodhi-
satta entered into life as a Woodpecker. In a wood of acacia trees he
lived, and his name was Khadiravaniya, the Bird of the Acacia Wood.
He had a comrade named Kandagalaka, or Eatbulb, who got his food in a
wood full of good fruit.
Oneday thefriendwentto visit Khadiravaniya. "My friend is come !
thought Khadiravaniya ; and he led him into the acacia wood, and pecked
at the tree-trunks until the insects came out, which he gave to his friend.
As each was given him, the friend pecked it up, and ate it, as if it were a
honey cake. As he ate, pride arose in his heart. [163] "This bird is a
woodpecker," thought he, "and so am I. What need for me to be fed by
him? I will get my own food in this acacia wood!" So he said to
Khadiravaniya,
—
"Friend, don't trouble yourself, I will get my own food in the acacia
wood."
Then said the other, "You belong to a tribe of birds which finds its
food in a forest of pithless silk-cotton trees, and trees that bear abundant
fruit; but the acacia is full of pith,—and hard. Please do not do so ! "
"What!" said Kandagalaka "am I not a woodpecker1" And
he would not listen, but pecked at an acacia trunk. In a moment his
beak snapped off, and his eyes bade fair to fall out of his head, and his
head split. So not being able to hold fast to the tree, he fell to the
ground, repeating the first verse:
" friend, what is this thorny, cool-leaved tree
Which at one blow has broke my beak for me?"
Having heard this, Khadiravaniya recited the second stanza:
"This bird was good for rotten wood
And soft; but once he tried.
By some ill hap, hard trees to tap
And broke his skull, and died."
"0
[164] So said Khadiravaniya; and added, Kandagalaka, the tree
where you broke your head is hard and strong !
But the other perished then and there.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth;
"Devadattawas Kandagalaka, but Khadiravaniyawas I myself."

—
" ""
No. 211. 115
No. 211\
SOMADATTA-JATAKA.
—
^^All the year long never ceasing," etc. This story the Master told while
dwellingatJetavana, about Elder Laludayl, or Udilyl the Simpleton.
This man, we learn, was unable to get out a single sound in the presence of
two or three people. He was so very nervous, that he said one thing when
he meant another. It happened that the Brethren were speaking ofthis as they
sat together in the Hall of Truth. [165] The Master came in, and asked
what they were talking of as they sat there together. They told him. He
answered, "Brethren, this is not the first time that Laludayi has been a very
nervous man. It wasjust the same before." Andhetold an old-world tale.
Once on a time, while Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born into a certain brahmin family in the kingdom of Kasi.
When he came of age, he went to study at Takkasila. On returning he
found his family poor; and he bade his parents farewell and set out to
Benares, saying to himself, "I will set up my fallen family again !
At Benares he became the king's attendant and he grew very dear to
;
the king and became a favourite.
Now his father lived by ploughing the land, but he had only one pair
of oxen ; and one of them died. He came before the Bodhisatta, and said
to him, "Son, one ofmy oxen is dead, and the ploughing does not go on.
Ask the king to give you one ox!
"No, Father," answered he, "I have but just now seen the king;
I ought not to ask him for oxen now : — you ask him."
"My son," said his father, "you do not know how bashful I am.
If there are two or three people present I cannot get a word out. If
I go to ask the king for an ox, I shall end by giving him this one !
"Father," said the Bodhisatta, "what must be, must be. I cannot
ask the king; but I will train you to do it." So he led his father to
a cemetery where there were clumps of sweet grass; and tying up tufts of
it, he scattered them here and tliere, and named them one by one, pointing
them out to his father : "That is the King, that is the Viceroy, this is the
Chief Ca—ptain. Now, Father, when you come before the king, you must
first say ' Long live the king !' and then repeat this verse, to ask for an
ox;" and this is the verse he taught him :
"I had two oxen to my plough, with which my work was done,
But one is dead! mighty prince, plea.se give me another one!"
^ Fau8b<|ill, Five Jdtakas, p. 31; Comm. on Dhammapada verse 152 (p. 317 of
F.'a edition).
8—2

— — — —
; !
116 The Jataka. Book II.
[166] For the space of—a whole year the man learnt this couplet; and
then he said to his son "Dear Somadatta, I have learnt the lines
Now I can say it before any man ! Take me to the king."
So the Bodhisatta, taking a suitable present, led his father into the
king's presence. "Long live the king " cried the brahmin, offering his
!
present.
"Who is this brahmin, Somadatta?" the king asked.
"Great king, it is my father," he answered.
"Why has he come herel" asked the king. Then the brahmin
repeated his couplet, to ask for the ox :
"I had two oxen to my plough, with which my work was done.
But one is dead! mighty prince, please take the other one!"
The king saw that there was some mistake. "Somadatta," said he,
smiling, "you have plenty ofoxen at home, I suppose?"
"Ifso, great king, they are your gift
!
"
At this answer the king was pleased. He gave the man, for a
brahmin's offering, sixteen oxen, with fine caparison, and a village to
live in, and sent him away with great honour. The brahmin ascended
a car drawn by Sindh horses, pure white, and went to his dwelling in
gi'eat pomp.
As the Bodhisatta sat beside his father inthechariot, said he, "Father,
I taught you the whole year long, and yet when the moment came you
gave your ox to the king!" and he uttered the first stanza;
"All the year long never ceasing with vmwearied diligence
Where the sweet grass grows in clusters day by day he practised it:
When he came amid the courtiers all at once he changed the sense
Practice truly nought availeth if a man has little wit."
[167] When he heard this, the brahmin uttered the second stanza :
"He that asks, dear Somadatta, takes his chance between the two
May get more, or may get nothing: when yovi ask, 'tis ever so."
When the Master bythis story had shown how Simpleton Udayi had been
just asbashful before as he was then, he identified the Birth :— "Laludayl was
the fatherofSomadatta, and I was Somadatta myself."

: ": "
No. 212. 117
No. 212.
UCCHITTHA-BHATTA-JATAKA.
"Hot at top," etc. This is a story told by the Master while at Jetavaiia,
about one who hankered after a lost wife. The Brother in question was ivsked
by the Master ifhe reallywas lovesick. Yes, he said, so he was. "For whom?
wasthe next question. "For my late wife." "Brother," the Master said, "this
same woman in former days was wicked, and made you eat the leavings of her
paramour." Then he told this story ofthe past.
Once upon a time, while Brahinadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was boi-n as one of a family of poor acrobats, that lived by
begging. So when he grew up, he was needy and squalid, and by begging
he lived.
Thei'e was at the time, in a certain village of Kasi, a brahmin whose
wife was bad and wicked, and did wrong. [168] And it befel that the
husband went abroad one day upon some matter, and her lover watching
his time went to visit the house. After she had received him, he said, "I
will eat a bit before I go." So she made ready the food, and served up
rice hot with sauce and cui-ry, and gave it him, bidding him eat : she
herselfstood at the door, watching for the brahmin's coming. And while
the lover was eating, the Bodhisatta stood waiting for a morsel.
At that moment the brahmin set his—face for home. And his wife saw
him drawing nigh, and ran in quickly "Up, my man is coming!" and
she made her lover go down into the store-room. The husband came in
;
she gave him a seat, and water for washing the hands ; and upon the cold
rice that was left by the other she turned out some hot rice, and set it
before him. He put his hand into the rice, and felt that it was hot above
and cold below, "This must be some one else's leavings," thought he;
and so he asked the woman about it in the words ofthe first stanza
"Hot at top, and cold at bottom, not alike it seems to be
I would ask you for the reason : come, my lady, answer me!
Again and again he asked, but she, fearing lest her deed should be
discovered, held her peace. Then a thought came into our tumbler's
mind. "The man down in the store-room must be a lover, and this is the
master of the house : the wife says nothing, for fear that her deed be made
manifest. Soho I will declare the whole matter, and show the brahmin
!
that a man is hidden in his larder " [1G9] And he told him the whole
!

—
118 TJie Jdtaka. Booh II.
matter: how that when he had gone out from his house, another had
come in, and had done evil; how he had eaten the first rice, and the wife
had stood by the door to watch the road; and how the other man had
been hidden in the store-room. And in so saying, he repeated the second
stanza:
"I am a tumbler, Sir: I came on begging here intent;
He that you seek is hiding in the store-room, where he went!"
By his top-knot he haled the man out of the store-room, and bade him
take care not to do the like again ; and then he went away. The brahmin
rebuked and beat them both, and gave them such a lesson that they were
not likely to do the same again. Afterwards he passed away to fare
according to his deserts.
When the Master had ended his discourse, he declared the Truths, and
identified the Birth:—at the conclusion of the Truths the lovesick Brother
reached the Fruitof the First Path:—"Your late wife was then the brahmin's
lady; you, the lovesick Brother, were the brahmin himself; and I was the
tumbler."
No. 213.
BHARU-JATAKA.
" The king of Bharu" etc. This story the Master told while staying at
Jetavana, about the king ofKosala.
Now weread that magnificent presents were madetothe Blessed One and his
company,and theywere held in great respect,as itis written : "At that time the
Blessed One was honoured — and revered, respected, reverenced, highly esteemed,
and received rich presents robes, food, lodgement, drugs and medicines, and
provisions; and the Brotherhood was honoured, etc. (asbefore) ; butthe pilgrims
of heterodox schools were not honoured, etc. (as before)'." Well, the sectaries,
findingthat honour and gifts diminished, convened a secretmeeting fordelibera-
tion. "Since the appearance of the Priest Gotama," they said, [170] "honour
and giftscome no more to us, but he has got the best of both. What can be the
reason of his good fortune?" Then one of them spoke as follows. "Priest
Gotama has the best and chiefest place in all India to live in, and that is
thereason of his success." Then the others said, "If this is the reason, we will
make a rival settlement above Jetavana, and then we shall receive presents."
This was the conclusion they came to.
1 This appears to be a regular formula; the Sanskrit equivalent occurs in
Divyuvaduna, p. 91.

^
No. 213. 119
"But,"thought they, "if we make our settlement unknown to the king, the
Brethren will prevent us. If he accepts a present, he will not be disinclined
to break up their settlement. So we had best bribe hira to give us a place
forours."
So by the intervention of his courtiers, they offered an hundred thousand
pieces to the king, with this message ; "Great King, we want to make a rival
settlement in Jetavana. Ifthe Brethren tell you they won't permit it, plc;ise do
not give them any answer." To this the king agreed, because he wanted the
bribe.
Afterthus conciliating the king, the schismatics gotan architectand put the
workin hand. There was agood deal ofnoiseabout it.
"What is all this great noise and tumult, Ananda?" the Master asked.
"The noise," said he, "is some sectaries who are having a new settlementbuilt."
"That is not a fit place," he rejoined, "for them to settle. These sectaries are
fond of noise; there's no living with them." Then he called the Brotherhood
together,and badethem go inform the king, and have the building put a stop to.
The Brethren went and stood by the palace door. The king, as soon as he
heard of their coming, knew they must be come about stopping the new settle-
ment. But he had been bribed, and so he ordered his attendants to say the
king was not at home. The Bretln-en went back and told the ]\Iaster. The
Master guessed that a bribe had been given, and sent his two chief disciples
But the king,as soon as he heard oftheir coming, gave the same order as before
and they too returned and told the Master. The Master said, "Doubtless the ;
king is not able to stay at home to-day ; he must be out."
Next forenoon, he dressed himself, took his bowl and robe, and with five
hundred brethren walked to the door of the palace. The king heard them
come; he descended from the upper story, and took from the Buddha his
alms-bowl. Then he gave rice and gruel to him and his followers, and with a
salutation sat down on one side.
The Master began an exposition for the king's behoof, in these words.
"Great King,otherkings in by-gone days have taken bribes,and then by making
virtuous people quarrel together have been dispossessed of their kingdom, and
been utterly destroyed." And then, at his request, the Master told an old-world
tale.
[171] Once upon a time, king Bharu was reigning over the kingdom
of Bhai'u. At the same time the Bodhisatta was Teacher of a troop of
monks. He was an ascetic who had acquired the Five Supernatuial
Faculties and the Eight Attainments ; and he dwelt a long time in the
region of Himalaya.
He came down from Himalaya to buy salt and seasoning, followed
by five hundred ascetics; and they came by stages to the city of Bharu.
He went a-begging through the city ; and then coming forth from it, he
sat down by the northern gate, at the root of a banyan tree all covered
with twigs and branches. There he made a meal, and there he took up
his abode.
Now when that band of hermits had dwelt there by the space of half a
moon, there came another Teacher with another five hundred, who went
seeking alms about the city, and then came out and sat beneath just such
^ Sariputta and Moggallsnu.

:
120 The Jataka. Book II.
another banyan tree by the south gate, and ate, and dwelt there. And
the two bands abode there so long as they would, aud then returned again
to Himalaya,
When they had gone, the tree by the south gate withered away. Next
time, they who had dwelt under it came first, and perceiving that their
tree was withered, they first went on their rounds throughout the city,
seeking alms, and then passing out by the northern gate, they ate and
abode under the banyan tree that was by that gate. And the other band,
coming afterwards, went their rounds in the city, and then made ready
their meal and would have dwelt by their own tree, "This is not your
tree, 'tis ours !" they cried; and the—y began to quarrel about the tree.
The quarrel waxed great
:
t—hese said "Take not the place where we
dwelt aforetime !" and those "This time are we first come ; do not you
take it!" So crying aloud each that thej' were the owners of it, they all
went to the king's palace.
The king ordained that they who — had first dwelt there should hold
it. [172] Then the others thought "We will not allow ourselves
to say that we have been beaten by these !" They looked about them
with divine vision\ and observing the body of a chariot fit for an emperor
to use, they took it and offered it as a gift to the kiug, begging him
to give them too possession of the tree. He took their gift, and ordained
that both should dwell under the tree; and so they were there all masters
together. Then the other hermits fetched thejewelled wheels ofthe same
chariot, and offered them to the king, praying him, " mighty king, make
us to possess the tree alone !" And the king did so. Then the ascetics
repented, and said: "To think that we, who have overcome the love of
riches and the lust of the flesh, and have renounced the world, should
fall to quarrelling by reason of a tree, and offer bribes for it! This is
no seemly thing." And they went away in all haste till they came to
Himalaya, And all the spirits that dwelt in the realm of Bharu with
one mind were angry with the king, and they brought up the sea, and
for the space of three hundred leagues they made the kingdom of Bharu
as though it were not. And so for the sake of the king of Bharu alone,
all the inhabitants ofthe kingdom perished thus.
When the Teac — herhad ended this tale, in his perfect wisdom, he uttered the
followingstanzas
:
"The king of Bharu, as old stories say.
Made holy hermits quarrel on a day
For the which sin it fell that he fell dead,
And with him all his kingdom perished.
^ OneoftheAbhiundsor Supernatural Faculties ; seeabove.

:
No. 213. 121
"Wherefore the wise do not approve at all
When that desire into the heart doth fall.
He that is free from guile, whose heart is i)urc,
All that he says is ever tnie and sure^"
[173] AVhen the Master had ended this story, he added, "Great King, one
should nut be under the jiower of desire. Two r—eligious persons ouglit not to
quarrel together." Then he identihed the Birth '. "In those days, I wjis the
le<iderofthe sages."
AVhen the king had entertained the Buddha, and he had dcpiu-ted, the king
sent some men and had the rival settlementdestroyed, and the sectaries Ijccamc
homeless.
No. 214.
PUXNA-NADi-JATAKA.
—
"That rollick can drink," etc. This story the Master told while sfcxying at
Jetavana, aboutperfectwisdom.
On one occasion, the Brethren were gathered in the Hall of Truth, talking of
the Buddha's wisdom. "Friend, the SujJreme Buddha's wisdom is great, and
wide, cutting, and quick, sharp, penetrating, and full of resource." The Mixster
came in, and asked what they talked of as they sat there together. They told
him. "Not now only," said he, "is the Buddha wise and resourceful ; he was so
in daysofyore." And then he told them astory.
Once on a time, while Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodlii-
satta came into the world as the son of the court chaplain. When he
grew up, he studied at Takkasila; and at his father's death he received
the office of chaplain, and he was the king's counsellor in things human
and divine.
Afterwards the king opened his ear to breedbates, and in anger bade
the Bodhisatta dwell before his face no more, and sent liim away from
Benares. So he took his wife and family with him, and abode in a
certain village of Kasi. Afterward the king remembered his goodness,
and said to himself
' Incommentingupon this line, the Scholiast says : "And thosewho at that time
spoke the truth, blaming king Bharu for taking a bribe, found standing room upon a
thousandislands which are yet tobe seen to-day about the island ofNAlikera."

— — — —
;
122 The Jdtaka. Booh 11.
"It is not meet that I should send a messenger to fetch my teacher.
I will compose a verse of poetry, [174] and write it upon a leaf; I will
cause crow's flesh to be cooked ; and after I have tied up letter and meat
in a white cloth, I will seal it with the king's seal, and send it to him. If
he is wise, when he has read the letter and seen that it is crow's-meat, he
will come ; if not, then he will not come." And so he wrote on the leaf
this stanza :
"That which can drink when rivers are in flood
That which the corn will cover out of sight;
That which forebodes a traveller on the road
wise one, eat! my riddle read arighti."
This verse did the king write upon—a leaf, and sent it to the Bodhi-
satta. He read the letter, and thinking "The king wishes to see me"
—
he repeated the second verse : [175]
"The king does not forget to send me crow:
—
Geese, herons, peacocks, other birds there are:
If he gives one, he'll give the rest, I know;
If he sent none at all 'twere worser far'^."
Then he caused his vehicle to be made ready, and went, and looked
upon the king. And the king, being pleased, set him again in the place of
the king's chaplain.
—
This discourse ended, the Master identified the Birth: "Ananda was the
kingin those days, and I was his chaplain."
1 Kakapeyya, both in Skr. and in Pali, is proverbial for rivers at the flood. For
Skr. seePanini, 2. 1.33,wheresome comm. say 'deep,' some 'shallow.' The scholiast
here says : "Theycall rivers K. when acrow standing on thebankcan stretchout its
neckanddrink." Buddbaghosha,quotedbyEh.D. innotetoBuddhistSiittas,S.B.E.,
p. 178, says the same. Kukaguyha is corn tall enoughto — hidea crow ; see Pan. 3. 2. 5
andtheKa(;ika'scomment,withthescholiast'snotehere. InthedictionaryofVacaspa-
ti, vol. 2, p. 1846, col. 1, it is said "When the crow cries Khare Khare, a traveller is
coming." The schol. h
—
ere says
:
"If peoplewish toknowwhetheran absentfriendis
comingback, they say Ca — w, crow, if so-and-so is coming ! andif the crowscaw, they
know that he will come." This verse riddles on these three proverbs and beliefs.
[Forpart ofthis note I am indebtedto Prof. Cowell.]
- Iam not sure of the meaning of these obscure lines, but this is the best I can
make of it. The schol. says "When he gets crow's flesh he remembers to—send me
some ; surely he will remember when he gets geese, etc." The phrase "Geese,
herons, peacocks," isa reminiscenceoftheversequotedin No. 202, above.

—
;
No. 215. 123
No. 215'.
KACCHAPA-JATAKA.
—
*'7%e Tortoiseneeds must speak"etc. This is a story told by theMasterwhile
staying in Jetavana, about Kokalika. The circumstances which gave rise to it
w " i T ll hi b s e is se n t ot fo t r h t e h o v n u l i y de t r im t e h , e B M r a e h t f h i r t e a n k , ka t r h i at l^ K i o rt k h' a ' l ^. ika He ha r s e b a e g e a n in ru t i l n ie ed Ma b s y te t r al s k a i i n d g :
it was thesamebefore." And then he told the story as follows.
Once on a time Brahmadatta was king of Benares, and the Bodhisatta,
being born to one of the king's court, grew up, and became the king's
adviser in all things human and divine. But this king wasverytalkative;
and when he talked there was no chance for any other to get in a word.
[176] And the Bodhisatta, wishing to put a stop to his much talking, kept
watching for an opportunity.
Now there dwelt a Tortoise in acertainpondintheregionofHimalaya.
Two young wild Geese, searching for food, struck up an acquaintance with
him and by and byetheygrewclose friends together. One day these two
;
said to him "Friend Tortoise, we have a lovely home in Himalaya, on
:
a plateau of Mount Cittakiita, in a cave of gold Will you come with
!
us?"
"Why," said he, "how can I get there?"
"Oh, we will take you, ifonly you can keep your mouth shut, and say
not a word to any body."
"Yes, I can do that," says he ; "take me along ! "
So they made the Tortoise hold a stick between his teeth and
;
themselves taking hold so of the two ends, they sprang up into the
air. —
The village children saw this, and exclaimed "There are two geese
carrying a tortoise by a stick "
!
(By this time the geese flying swiftly had arrived at the space above
the palace of the king, at Benares.) The Tortoise wanted to cry out
^ Fau8b<()ll,i<'iueJdtakas, p.41 ; Dhammapada, p.418 ; cp.Benfey'sPantschatantra,
i. p. 239 ; Babrius, ed. Lewis, i. 122 ; Phaedrus, ed. Orelli, 55, 128 ; llhys Davids,
BuddhistBirth Stories, viii.; Jacobs, IndianFairy Tales, pp. 100and 245.
^ Takkciyiya-jutuka, No. 481.

— —
:
124 The Jdtaka. Book II.
"Well, and if my friends do carry me, what is that to you, you caitiflFsl"
and he let go the stick from between his teeth, and falling into the open
courtyard he split in two. What an uproar there was " A tortoise has
!
fallen in the courtyard, and broken in two !" they cried. The king, with
the Bodhisatta, and all his court, came up to the place, and seeing the
tortoise asked the Bodhisatta a question. "Wise Sir, what made this
creature fall1 "
"Now's my time " thought he. "For a long while I have been
!
wishing to admonish the king, and I have gone about seeking my
opportunity. No doubt the truth is this : the tortoise and the geese
became friendly; the geese must have meant to carry him to Himalaya,
and so made him hold a stick between his teeth, and then lifted him into
the air; then he must have heard some remark, and wanted to reply ; and
not being able to keep his mouth shut he must have let himself go [177]
;
and so he must have fallen from the sky and thus come by his death." So
thought he; and addressed the king: "0 king, they that have too much
tongue, that set no limit to their speaking, ever come to such misfortune
as this ; " and he uttered the following verses :
"The Tortoise needs must speak aloud,
Although between his teeth
A stick he —bit: yet, spite of it.
He spoke and fell beneath.
"And now, mighty master, mark it well.
See thou speak wisely, see thou speak in season.
To death the Tortoise fell
He talked too much that was the reason."
:
"He is speaking of me ! " the king thought to himself; and asked the
Bodhisatta if it was so.
"Be it you, O great king, or be it another," replied he, "whosoever
talks beyond measure comes by some misery of this kind;" and so he
made the thing manifest. And thenceforward the king abstained from
talking, and became a man offew words.
—
[178] This discourse ended, the Master identified the Birth: "Kokahka was
the tortoisethen, the two famous Elders were the two wild geese, Anauda was
the kins;, and I was his wise adviser."

—
;
No. 216. 125
No. 216.
MACCHA-JATAKA.
"'Tisnot thefire" eic—This story the Mastertold duringa stay in Jetavana,
about one who hankered after a former wife. The Master asked this Brother,
"Is it time, Brother, what I hear, that you are lovesick?" "Yes, Sir." "For
whom?" "For my late wife." Then the Master said to him: "This wife,
Brother, has been the mischief to you. Longago by her means you came near
being spitted and roasted for food, but wise men saved your life." Then he
told a tale ofthe past.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodbi-
satta was his chaplain. Some fishermen drew out a Fish which had got
caught in their net, and cast it upon hot sand, saying, "We will cook it in
the embers, and eat." So they sharpened a spit. And the Fish fell
a-weeping over his mate, and said these two verses:
"'Tis not the fii'e that biu-ns me, nor the spit that hurts me sore;
But the thought my mate may call me a faithless paramour.
"'Tis the flame of love that biu-ns me, and fills my heart with pain
Not death is the due of loving; fishers, free me again!"
[179] At that moment the Bodhisatta approached the river bank and
;
hearing the Fish's lament, he went up to the fishermen and made them set
the Fish at liberty.
Thi — s discourse ended, the Master declared the Truths and identified the
Birth: atthe con—clusion of the Truths the lovesick Brother reached the Fruit
ofthe First Path: "The wife was in those days the fish's mate, the lovesick
Brother wasthe fish, and I myselfwas the chaplain."

— —
126 The Jataha. Booh II.
No. 217.
SEGGU-JATAKA.
—
^'' All the ivorld's on pleamre bent" etc. This story the Master told, while
dwelling at Jetavana, about a greengrocerwho wasa lay-brother.
The circumstances have been already given in the First Book^. Here
again the Master asked him where he had been so long and he replied, "My
;
daughter. Sir, is always smiling. After testing her, I gave her in marriage to a
younggentleman. As this had to be done, 1 had no opportunity ofpayingyou a
visit." To this the Master answered, "Not now only is your daughter virtuous,
but virtuous she was in days of yore ; and as you have tested her now, so
youtested herin those days." And at the man's request he told an old-world
tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was a tree-spirit.
This same pious greengrocer took it into his head to test his daughter.
He led her intothe woods, [180] and seized her by the hand, making as
though he had conceived a passion for her. And as she cried out in woe,
he addi'Bssed her in the words ofthe first stanza:
"All the world's on pleasure bent;
Ah, my baby innocent!
Now I've caught you, pray don't cry;
As the town does, so do I."
When she heard it, she answered, "Dear Father, I am a maid, and I
know not the ways of sin :" and weeping she uttered the second
stanza:
"He that should keep me safe from all distress,
The same betrays me in my loneliness;
My father, who should be my sure defence,
Here in the forest offers violence."
And the greengrocer, after testing his daughter thus, took her home,
and gave her in marriage to a young man. Afterwards he passed away
according to his deeds.
When the Maste — r had ended this discom-se, he declared the Truths and
identified the Birth: at—the end of the Truths the greengrocer entered on the
Fruit ofthe First Path : "In those days, father and daughterwere the same as
now, and the tree-spiritthat saw it all was I myself."
^ No. 102, Parmika-Jutaka, whererecursthe second stanza.

No. 218. 127
No. 218.
KUTA-VANIJA-JATAKA.
—
" Well planned indeedP' etc. [181] This story the Master told while staying
in Jetavana, about adishonest trader.
There were two traders of Savatthi, one pious and the other a cheat. These
twojoined partnership, and loaded live hundred waggons full of wares, journey-
ing from east to west for trade ; and returned to Savatthi with large profits.
The pious trader suggested to his partnerthat they should divide their stock.
The rogue thought to himself, "This fellow has been roughing it for ever so long
with bad food and lodging. Now he's athome again,hell eat all sorts ofdainties
and die of a surfeit. Then I shall have all the stock for myself." What he
said was, "Neither the stars nor the day are favourable ; to-morrow or tlie next
day we'll see about it;" so he kept putting it off. However, the pious trader
pressedhim,andthedivision was made. Then he went with scents andgarlands
to visit the Master ; and after a respectful obeisance, he sat on one side. The
Master asked when he had returned. "Just a fortnight ago. Sir," said he.
"Then why have you delayed to visit the Buddha?" The trader explained.
Then the Master said, "It is not only now thatyourpartner is a rogue ; he was
just the same before;" and at his request told him an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, while Brahmadatta was king ofBenares, the Bodhi-
satta came into this world as the son ofone in the king's court. When he
grew up he was made a Lord Justice.
At that time, two traders, one from a village and one ofthe town, were
friends together. The villager deposited with the townsman five hundred
ploughshares. The other sold these, and kept the price, and in the place
where they were he scattered mouse dung. By and by came the villager,
and asked for his ploughshare\ "The mice have eaten them up^ !" said
the cheat, and pointed out the mouse dung to him.
1 Here,in thelast sentence but one, andin theverses the singularplullam is used.
Itispossible this may be a collective, but more likely that itharks back to a simpler
and olderversion, where only oneis spoken of. Eeaders cannot fail to have marked
the fondness ofthe Jatakaeditor for roundnumbers, especially five hundred.
- Things gnawed by mice or rats were unlucky; cp. vol. i. p. 372 (Pali), Tevijja-
SuttaMahusilaih i (trans, in S. B. E., Buddhist Suttas, p. 196). The man here goes
furtherthanhe need; if the micehadbutnibbled the ploughshares perhaps he might
—
throw them away. We may also have a reference to an old proverb, found both in
Greek andLatin: "wheremiceeatiron" meant "nowhere." Herondas 3. 70 ov5'okov
Xti/>7?s 01 /jlvs ofiolusTov ffldtjpov Tpihyovaiv. Seneca, Apocolocyntosis chap. 7 (to Claudius
inheaven) venistihue ubi mures ferrum rodunt.

—
" " ! "
128 Tlie Jataka. Book II.
"Well, well, so be it," replied the other : "what can be done with
things which the mice have eaten1
Now at the time of batliing he took the other trader's son, and set him
in a friend's house, in an inner chamber, bidding them not suffer him to
go out any whither. [182] And having washed himself he went to his
friend's house.
"Where is my son1 " asked the cheat.
"Dear friend," he replied, "I took him with me and left him on the
river side; and when I was gone down into the water, there came
a hawk, and seized your son in his extended claws, and flew up into
—
the air. I beat the water, shouted, struggled but could not make him
let go."
"Lies
!
" cried the rogue. "No hawk could carry offa boy
!
"
"Let be, dear friend : ifthings happen that should not, how can I help
it1 Your son has been carried offby a hawk, as I say."
The other reviled him. "Ah, you scoundrel! you murderer! Now
I will go to the judge, and have you dragged before him !" And he
departed. The villager said, "As you please," and went to the court of
justice. The rogue addressed the Bodhisatta thus
:
"My lord, this fellow took my son with him to bathe, and when I
asked where he was, he answered, that a hawk had carried him off.
Judge my cause "
!
"Tell the truth," said the Bodhisatta, asking the other.
"Indeed, my lord," he answered, "I took him with me, and a falcon
has carried him off."
"But where in the world are there hawks which carry offboys?"
"My lord," he answered, "I have a question to ask you. If hawks
cannot carry offboys into the air, can mice eat iron ploughshares?
"What do you mean by that1 "
"My lord, I deposited in this man's house five hundred ploughshares.
The man told me that the mice had devoured them, and showed me the
droppings of the mice that had done it. My lord, if mice eat plough-
shares, then hawks carry off boys : but if mice cannot do this, neither will
hawks carry the boy off. This man says the mice ate my plough-
shares. Give sentence whether they are eaten or no. [183] Judge my
cause !
"He must have meant," thought the Bodhisatta, "to fight the
—
trickster with his own weapons. Well devised !" said he, and then he
uttered these two verses:
"Well planned indeed —! The biter bit,
The trickster tricked a pretty hit!
If mice eat ploughshares, hawks can fly
With boys away into the sky

!
No. 218. 129
"A rogue out-rogued with tit for tat
Give hack the plough, and after that
Perhaps the man who k).st the plough
May give your son back to you nowI"*
[184] Thus ho that had lost his sou received him again, and ho
received his ploughshare that had lost it; and afterwards both passed
away to fare according to their deeds.
—
"When this discourse was ended, the Master identified the JJirth: "The
cheat in both cases was the same, and so was the cleverman ; I myself waa the
Loi'd ChiefJustice."
No. 219\
GARAHITA-JATAKA.
—
"The gold is mine" etc. This story the blaster told at Jetavana, about a
brother who was downcastand discontent.
This man could not concentrate his mind on any single object, but his life
was all full of discontent ; and this was told to the Master. When asked by the
w M a as s te t r hr i o f u h g e h r h e i a s ll p y a w ss e i r o e ns d . isc " on O ten B t r e o d t , he h r e !" sai s d ai y d es t ; he as ] k \ e I d ast w e h r, y, "t h h e is rep p l a i s e s d io t n hat ha i s t
lieen despised even by the lower animals; and can you, a priest of such a
doctrine, yield to discontent arising from the passion that even brutesdespise?"
Then he told him an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta reigned over Benares, the
Bodhisatta came into the world as a Monkey, in the region of Himalaya.
A
woodranger caught him, brought him home and gave him to the king.
For a long time he dwelt with the king, serving him foithfully, and he
learnt a great deal about the manners of the world of men. The king was
' Alikerepartee is found in North Ind. N. and Q. iii. 214 (The Judgement of the
Jackal) ; Swynnerton, Iiul. Nights Entertainments, p. 142 (The Traveller and the
Oilman) \ andastory ofan oilman in Stumme's Tuni^cheMiirchen, vol. ii.
- Folk-LoreJournal, iii. 253. ^'
J. II. 9

—
"
130 TJie Jataka. Book II.
pleased at his faithfulness. He sent for the woodranger, and bade him
set the monkey free in the very place where he had been caught ; and so
he did.
All the monkey tribe gathered together upon the face of a huge rock,
to see the Bodhisatta now that he had come back to them ; and they spoke
pleasantly to him.
"Sir, where have you been living this long time? "
"In the king's palace at Benares."
"Then how did you get free1 "
"The king made me his pet monkey, and being pleased with my
tricks, he let me go." —
The monkeys went on "You must know the manner of living in the
—
world of men : [185] tell us about it too we want to hear!
"Don't ask me the manner ofmen's living," quoth the Bodhisatta.
—
"Do tell we want to hear !" they said again.
—
"Mankind," said he, "both princes and Brahmans, cry out^ ^' Mine !
mine !' They know not of the impermanence, by which the things that be
are not. Hear now the way of these blind fools;" and he spake these
verses
:
"'The gold is mine, the precious gold!' so cry they, night and day:
These foolish folk cast never a look upon the holy way.
"There are two masters in the house; one has no beard to wear.
But has long breasts, ears pierced with holes, and goes with plaited hair;
His price is told in countless gold; he plagues all people there."
—
[186] On hearing this, all the monkeys cried out "Stop, stop! we
have heard what it is not meet to hear!" and with both hands they
stopped their ears tight. And they liked not the place, because they said,
"In this place we heard a thing not seemly;" so they went elsewhere.
And this rock went by the name of Garahitapitthi Rock, or the Rock of
Blamincr.
When the Master had ended this discovu-se, he declared the Truths and
identified the Birth:—at the conclusion of the Truths this Brother reached the
Fruit of the First Path:—"The Buddha's present followers were that troop of
monkeys, and theirchiefwas I myself."
J

"
No. 220. 131
No. 220'.
DHAMMADDHAJA-JATAKA.
—
" Vou look OA thmigh," etc. This was told by the jMastor while staying at
the Bamboo Grove, about attempts to murder him. On this occasion, as before,
the Mastersaid, "This is not the tirst time Devadatta has tried to murder me
and has not even frightened me. He did the same before." And he told this
story.
Once upon a time reigned at Benares a king named Yasapani, the
Glorious. His chiefcaptain was named Kalaka, or Blackie, At that time
the Bodhisatta was his chaplain, and had the name of Dhammaddhaja, the
Banner of the Faith. There was also a man Chattapaui, maker of
ornaments to the king. The king was a good king. But his chief captain
swallowed bribes in the judging of causes; he was a backbiter; he took
bribes, and defrauded the rightful ownei-s.
On a day, one who had lost his suit was departing from the court,
weeping and stretching out his arms, [187] Avhen he fell in with the
Bodhisatta as he was going to pay his service to the king. Falling at his
feet, the man cried out, telling how he had been worsted in his cause
:
"Although such as you, my lord, instruct the king in the things of this
world and the next, the Commander-in-Chief takes bribes, and defrauds
rightful owners!
The Bodhisatta pitied him. "Come, my good fellow," says he, "I will
judge your cause for you " and he jiroceeded to the court-house. A great
!
company gathered together. The Bodhisatta reversed the sentence, and
gave judgement for him that had the right. The sp—ectators applauded.
The sound was great. The king heard it, and asked "What sound is
this I hear 1. "
"My lord king," they answered, "it is a cause wrongly judged that
has been judged aright by the wise Dhammaddhaja ; that is why there is
this shout of applause."
The king was pleased and sent for the Bodhisatta. "Thoy tell me,"
he began, "that you havejudged a cau.se?"
"Yes, gi'eat king, I have judged that which Kalaka did not judge
aright."
^ Here we have the "Hero'sTasks" in a new form.
9—2

—
" "
132 Tlie Jataka. Book II.
"Be youjudge from this day," said the king; "it will be ajoy for my
ears, and p—rosperity for the world !' ' He was unwilling, but the king
begged him "In mercy to all creatures, sit you in judgement!" and so
the king won his consent.
From that time Kajaka received no presents and losing his gains he
;
spokecalumny ofthe Bodhisatta before the king, saying, "O mighty King,
the wise Dhammaddhaja covets your kingdom !" But the king would not
believe; and bade him say not so.
"If you donot believe me," said Kalaka, "look out of the window at
the time of his coming. Then you will see that he has got the whole city
into his own hands."
The king saw the crowd of those that were about him in hisjudgement
hall. "There is his retinue," thought he. He gave way. "What are
we to do, Captain? " he asked.
"My lord, he must be put to death." [188]
"How can we put him to death without having found him out in
some great wickedness?
"There is a way," said the other,
"What way?
"Tell him to do what is impossible, and if he cannot, put him to death
for that."
"But what is impossible to him 1 "
"My lord king," replied he, "it takes two years or twice two for a
garden with good—soil to bear fruit, being planted and tended. Send you
for him, and say ' We want a garden to disport ourselves in to-morrow.
Make us a garden !' This he will not be able to do ; and we will slay
him for that fault."
The king addressed himself to the Bodhisatta. "Wise Sir, we have
sported long enough in our old garden ; now we crave to sport in a new.
Make us a garden ! Ifyou cannot make it, you must die."
The Bodhisatta reasoned, "It must be that Kalaka has set the king
—
against me, because he gets no presents. If I can," he said to the king,
"O mighty king, I will see to it." And he went home. After a good
meal he lay upon his bed, thinking. Sakka's palace grew hot'. Sakka
reflecting perceived the Bodhisatta's—difficulty. He made haste to him,
entered his chamber, and asked him " Wise Sir, what think you on?"
poised the while in mid-air.
"Who are you 1" asked the Bodhisatta.
1 This was supposed to happen when a good man was in straits. Some modern
superstitions, turning upon the pity of a god for creatures in pain, maybe seen in
NorthInd. N. and Q. iii. 285. As this: "Hot oil is poured into a dog's ear and the
pain makes him yell. It is believed that his yells are heard by Raja Indra, who in
pity stopstherain."

" " " " "
No. 220. 133
"I am Sakka."
"The king bids me make a garden : that is what I am thinking
upon."
"Wise Sir, do not trouble : I will make you a garden like the groves
of Nandana and Cittalata
!
In what place shall I make it1
"In such and such a place," he told him. Sakka made it, and
returned to the city of the gods.
Next day, the Bodhisatta beheld the garden there in very truth,
and sought the king's pi-esence. "O king, the garden is ready : go to
your sport "
!
The king came to the place, and beheld a garden girt with a fence of
eighteen cubits, vermilion tinted, having gates and ponds, [189] beautiful
with all manner of trees laden heavy with flowers and fruit! "The
sage has done my bidding," said he to Kiilaka "now what are we to
:
dol"
"O mighty King
!
" replied he, "ifhe can make a garden in onenight,
can he not seize upon your kingdom1
"Well, what are we to do?
"We will make him perform another impossible thing."
"What is that1" asked the king.
"We will bid him make a lake possessed of the seven precious
jewels !
The king agreed, and thus addressed the Bodhisatta
:
"Teacher, you have made a park. Make now a lake to match it, with
the seven preciousjewels. Ifyou cannot make it, you shall not live ! "
"Very good, great King," answered the Bodhisatta, "I will make it if
I can."
Then Sakka made a lake of great splendour, having an hundred
landing-places, a thousand inlets, covered over with lotus plants of five
different colours, like the lake in Nandana.
Next day, the Bodhisatta beheld this also, and told the king "See,
:
the lake is made ! " And the king saw it, and asked of Kalaka what was
to be done.
"Bid him, my lord, make a house to suit it," said he.
"Make a house. Teacher," said the king to the Bodhisatta, "all of
ivory, to suit with the park and the lake : ifyou do not make it, you must
die !
Then Sakka made him a house likewise. The Bodhisatta beheld it
next day, and told the king. When the king had seen it, he asked
Kalaka again, what was to do. Kalaka told him to bid the Bodhisatta
make ajewel to suit the house. The king said to him, "Wise Sir, make a
jewel to suit with this ivory house ; I will go about looking at it by the
light ofthe jewel : if you cannot make one, you must die ! " Then Sakka

— —
134 The Jataka. Book II.
made him ajewel too. Next day the Bodhisatta beheld it, and told the
king. [190] When the king had seen it, he again asked Kalaka what was
to be done.
"Mighty king ! " answered he, "I think there is some sprite who does
each thing that the Brahmin Dhammaddhaja wishes. Now bid him make
something which even a divinity cannot make. Not even a deity can
make a man with all four virtues '; therefore bid him make a keeper with
these four." So the king said, "Teacher, you have made a park, a lake,
and a palace, and ajewel to give light. Now make me a keeper with four
virtues, to watch the park ; ifyou cannot, you must die."
"So be it," answered he, "if it is possible, I will see to it." He went
home, had a good meal, and lay down. When he awoke in the morning,
he sat upon his bed, and thought thus. "What the great king Sakka can
make by his power, that he has made. He cannot make a park-keeper
with four virtues'. This being so, it is better to die forlorn in the woods,
than to die at the hand ofother men." So saying no word to any man, he
went down from his dwelling and passed out of the city by the chief gate,
and entered the woods, where he sat him down beneath a tree and
reflected upon the religion of the good. Sakka perceived it; and in the
fashion of a forester he approached the Bodhisatta, saying,
"Brahmin, you are young and tender : why sit you here in this wood,
as though you had never seen pain before%" As he asked it, he repeated
the first stanza :
"You look as though yom- life must happy be
Yet to the wild woods you would homeless go, ;
Like some poor wretch whose life was misery,
And pine beneath this tree in lonely woe."
[191] To this the Bodhisatta made answer in the second stanza:
"I look as though my life must happy be
Yet to the wild woods I would homeless ; go.
Like some poor wretch whose life was misery,
And pine beneath this tree in lonely woe.
Pondering the truth that all the saints do know."
Then Sakka said, "Ifso, then why. Brahmin, are you sitting here?"
"The king," he made answer, "requires a park-keeper with four good
—
qualities ; such an one cannot be found ; so I thought Why perish
by the hand of man] I will ofi" to the woods, and die a lonely death.
So here I came, and here I sit."
Then the other replied, "Brahmin, I am Sakka, king ofthe gods. By
' Caturavga-samanndgatam ; it is an oddcoincidence that the Pythagoreans called
the perfect man Terpdywos, 'four-square ' (see the poem of Simonides, in Plat. Prot.
339 b).

—
" ; "
No. 220. 135
me was your park made, and those other things. A park-keeper possessed
of four virtues cannot be made ; but in your country there is one
Chattapani, who makes ornaments for the head, and he is such a man. If
a park-keeper is wanted, go and make this workman the keeper." With
these words Sakka departed to his city divine, after consoling him and
bidding him fear no more.
[192] The Bodhisatta went homo, and having broken his fast, he
rei)aired to the palace gates, and tlieve i—n that spot he saw Chattapani.
He took him by the hand, and asked him "Is it true, as I hear, Chatta-
pani, that you are endowed with the four virtiies? "
"Who told you so]" asked the other.
"Sakka, king ofthe gods."
*• Why did he tell you1 " He recounted all, and told the reason. The
other said,
"Yes, I am endowed with the four virtues." The BodhLsatta taking
him by the hand led him into the king's presence. "Here, mighty
monarch, is Chattapani, endowed with four virtues. If there is need of a
keeper for the park, make him keeper."
"Is it true, as I hear," the king asked him, "that you have four
virtues1
"Yes, mighty king."
"What are they?" he asked.
"I envy not, and drink no wine
No strong desire, no wrath is mine,"
said he.
"Why, Chattapani," cried the king, "did you say you have no envy1
"Yes, O king, I have no envy."
"What are the things you do not envy 1 "
"Listen, my lord !" said he ; and then he told how he felt no envy in
the following lines' :
1 The following is the commentary on these lines. Tlie story is tliat of No. 120,
wherethefirst stanza ofthosewhich follow, isgiven.
"This is the meaning. In formerdays, I was aking of Benareslike this, and for
awoman'ssake I imprisonedachaplain.
The free are bound, when folly has her say
;
When wisdom speaks, the bond go free away.
Just as in the Birth now spoken of, this Chattapani became king. The <iuccn
intrigued with sixty-four of the slaves. She tempted the Bodhisatta, and when lie
wouldnotconsent she tried to ruin him by speaking calumny of him ; then the king
threwhim intoprison. TheBodhisatta wasbrought before bim bound, and explained
the real state of the case. Then he was set free himself ; and then be got tlic king
to release all those slaves who had been imprisoned, and advised him to forgive both

— —
;
136 The Jataka. Book II.
"A chaplain once in bonds I threw —
Which thing a woman made me do:
Ho built me up in holy lore;
Since when I never envied more."
[193] Then the king said, "Dear Chattapani, why do you abstain from
strong drink]" And the other answered in the following verse' :
the queen and them. All the rest is to be understood exactly as explained above.
Itwasin referenceto thishe said
"A chaplain once in bonds I threw
Which thing a woman made me do
:
He built me up in holy lore
;
Since when I never envied more."
But then I thought, 'I have avoided sixteen thousand women, and I cannot
satisfy this onein the way of passion. Such is the anger of women, hard to satisfy.
It is like being angry, saying, ' Why is it dirty?' when a worn garment is dirty
it is like being angry, saying, ' Why does it become like this? ' when after a meal
some passes into the draught. Imade aresolve that henceforth no envy should arise
in me by way of passion, lest I should fail to become a saint. From that time I
have been free from envy. This is the point of saying, ' Since lohen I never envied
"
more.'' —
1 The scholiast tells the foUomng story to illustrate this verse. "I was once,"
says the speaker, "a king of Benares; I could not live without strong drink and
meat. Now in that city animals might not be slaughtered on the Sabbath (uposatha-
divasesu) so the cook had prepared some meat for ray Sabbath meal the daybefore
;
(the 13th of the lunar fortnight). This, being badly kept, the dogs ate. The cook
durst notcomebefore the king on the Sabbath to serve his rich and varied repast in
theupperchamberwithoutmeat, so heasked the queen's advice. "My lady, to-day I
have no meat; andwithout it I dare not offer a meal to him, what am I to do?"
Said she, "The king is very fond of my son. As he fondles him, he hardly knows
whether he exists or not. [194]Iwill dress myson up, and give himinto the king's
hands, and while he plays with him you shall serve his dinner ; he vWll not notice."
So .she dressed up her darling son, and put him into the king's hands. As he was
playing with the lad, the cook served the dinner. The king, mad with drink, and
seeingno meat upon the dish, asked where the meat was. The answer was that no
meatwas to be had that daybecause there was nokillingon the Sabbath. "Meatis
hard to get for me, is it?" he said; and then he wrung his dear son's neck as he
sat in his arms, and killed him ; threw him down before the cook, and told him to
look sharpandcook it. The cook obeyed, and the kingatehis own son'sflesh. For
dread oftheking not a soul durstweeporwailor saya word. Theking ate, and went
to sleep. Nextmorning, having sleptoffhis intoxication, he asked forhis son. Then
the queen fell weeping at his feet, and said, "Oh, sir, yesterdayyoukilledyour son
and ate his flesh ! " The king wept and wailed for grief, and thought, "This is
because of drinking strongdrink!" Then, seeing the mischief of drinking, I made a
resolution that lest I should never become a saint, I would never touch this deadly
liquor; takingdust, andrubbing it upon my mouth. From that time I have drunk
no strongdrink. This is the point ofthelines, "Once Iwasdrunken."

— —
; ;
No. 220. 137
"Once I was drunken, and I ate
My own sou's flesh upon my plate
Then, touched with sorrow and with pain,
Swore never to touch drink again."
[194] Then the king said, "But what, dear sir, makes you indifferent,
without love?" The man explained it in these \vords' :
"King Kitavasa was my name;
A mighty king was I
My boy the Buddha's basin broke
And so he had to die."
[195] Said the king then, "What was it, good friend, that made you to
be without angerf And the other made the matter clear in these lines:
"As Araka, for seven years
I practised charity;
And then for seven ages dwelt
In Brahma's heaven on high."
When Chattapani had thus explained his fourattributes,the king made
a sign to his attendants. Andin an instant all th—e court, [196] priests and
laymen andall, roseup, and criedoutupon Kalaka "Fie, bribe-swallowing
thief and scoundrel! You couldn't get your bribes, and so you would
murder the wise man by speaking ill of him!" They seized him by hand
and foot, and bundled him out of the palace ; and catching up whatever
^ The scholiast tells this story: "The meaning is, Once ui)on a time I was
a king named Kitavasa, and a son was born to me. The fortune-tellers said that
the boywould perish of lack of water. So he was namedDutthakumara. When he
grew up, he was viceroy. The king kept his son close to him, before or behind and
;
tobreak the prophecyhad tanks madeat the fourcity gates andhereand tliere inside
the city; he made halls in the squares and crossways, and set water jars in them.
One day the young man, dressed finely, went to theparkby himself. On his way he
saw a Pacceka-Buddha in the road, and manypeople spoke to him, praised him, did
obeisancebefore him. [195] ' What! ' thought thei^rince, ' when such as I am passing
by, do people show all this respect to yonder shavepate? ' Angry, he dismounted
from the elephant, andasked theBuddha if he had received his food. 'Yes,'was the
reply. Theprince took it fromhim, cast it on theground, riceand bowl together, and
crushed it to dust under his feet. ' The man is lost, verily! ' said the Buddha, and
lookedintohisface. 'I am Prince Duttha, son of king Kitavasa!' said the prince
'whatharm willyou do me, by looking angrily at me and opening your eyes? ' The
Buddha, havinglosthis food, rose up in the air and went off to a cave at the foot of
Nanda, in Northern Him—alaya. At that verymoment the prince's evil-doing began to
bear fruit, and he cried 'I burn ! I burn!' His body burst into flame, and he fell
down in the road where he was ; all the water that there was near disappeared, the
conduitsdried up,then and there he perished, and pa—ssed into hell. The king heard
it, and was overcome with giief. Then he thought ' This grief is come upon me
because my son was dear to me. If I had had no affection, I had had no pain.
From this time forward I resolve that I will fix my affection on nothing, animateor
inanimate.'"

—
138 The Jataka. Book II.
they could get hold of, this a stone, and this a staff, they broke his head
and did him to death : and dragging him by the feet they cast him upon a
dunghill.
Thenceforward the king ruled in righteousness, until he passed away
according: to his deserts.
—
This discourse ended, the Master identified the Birth: "Devadatta was
the Commander Kalaka, Sariputta was the artisan Chattapaiii, and I was
Dhammaddhaja."
No. 221.
KASAVA-JATAKA.
—
"If ani/ maji" etc. This story the ^Master told while staying at Jetavana,
about Devadatta.
It was occasioned by something that happened at Rajagaha. At one period
the Captain ofthe Faith was living with five hundred brethren at the Bamboo
Grove. And Devadatta, with a body of men wicked like himself, lived at
Gayasisa.
At that time the citizens ofRajagaha used to clubtogetherforthe pm^^ose of
almsgiving. A trader, who had come there on business, brought a magnificent
IJerfumed yellow robe, asking that he might become one of them, and give this
garment as his contribution. The townspeople brought plenty of gifts. All
that was contributed by those who had clubbed together consisted of ready
money. There was this garment left. The crowd which had come together
said, "Here is this beautiful perfumed robe left over. Who shall have it
Elder Sariputta, or Devadatta?" Some were in favourofSariputta; otherssaid,
"Elder Sariputta will stay here a few days, [197] and then go travelling at his
own sweetwill; but Devadatta always lives near our city; he is our refuge in
good fortune or ill. Devadatta shall have it!" They made a division, and
those who voted for Devadatta were in the majority. So to Devadatta theygave
it. He had it cut in strips, and sewn together, and coloured like gold, and so he
wore it upon him.
At the same time, thirty Brethren went from Savatthi to salute the Master.
Aftergi-eetings had been exchanged, they told him all this affair, adding, "And
so, sir, Devadatta wears this mark of the saint, which suits him ill enough."
"Brethren," said the Master, "this is not the first time that Devadattahas pvit
on thegarb ofa saint, a most unsuitable dress. He did the samebetore." And
then he told them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta came into this world as an Elephant in the Himalaya region.

—
No. 221. 13'J
Lord of a hei'd that numbered eighty thousand wild elephants, he dwelt in
the forest land.
A poor man that lived in Benai-es, seeing the workers of ivory in the
ivory bazaar making bangles and all manner of ivory trinkets, he a-sked
them would they buy an elephant's tusks, if he should get them. To
which they answered, Yes.
So he took a weapon, and clothing himself in a yellow robe, he put on
the guise of a Pacceka-Buddha", with a covering band about his head.
Taking his stand in the path of the elephants, he slew one of them with
his weapon, and sold the tusks of it in Benares; and in this manner he
made a living. After this he began always to slay the very last elephant
in the Bodhisatta's troop. Day by day the elephants grew fewer and
fewer. Then they went and asked the Bodhisatta how it was that their
numbers dwindled. He perceived the reason. "Some man," thought
he, "stands in the place where the elephants go, having made himself
like a Pacceka-Buddha in appearance. Now can it be he that slays
the elephants? I will find him out." So one day he sent the others
on before him [198] and he followed after. The man saw the Bodhisatta,
and made a rush at him with his weapon. The Bodhisatta turned and
stood. "I will beat hi — m to the eai-th, and kill him!" thought he: and
stretched out his trunk, when he saw the yellow robes which the man
wore. "I ought to pay respect—to those sacred robes!" said he. So
drawing back his trunk, he cried "0 man! Is not that dress, the flag
of sainthood, unsuitable to you? Why do you wear it?" and he
repeated these lines :
"If any man, yet full of am, should dare
To don the yellow robe, in whom no care
For temperance is found, or love of truth,
He is not worthy such a robe to wear.
He who has spued out sin, who everywhere
Is firm in virtue, and whose chiefest care
Is to control his passions, and be true.
He well deserves the yellow robe to wear."
[199] With these words, the Bodhisatta rebuked the man, and bade
him never come there again, else he should die for it. Thus he drove him
away.
—
Afterthis discoursewas ended,the ^Master identified the Birth : "Devadatta
was the man who killed theelephants, and the head ofthe herd was I."
1 Onewho hasattained theknowledge needful for attainingNirvana, but does not
preach it to men.

140 JTiC Jataka. Book II.
No. 222.
CtJLA-NANDIYA-JATAKA^
—
"/ call to mind" etc. This story the Master told whilst dwelling in the
Bamboo Gi'ove, about Devadatta.
One day the brethren fell a-talking in the Hall of Truth : "Friend, that
man Devadatta is harsh, cruel, and tyrannical, full ofbaneful devices againstthe
Supreme Buddha. He flung a stone'^, he even used the aid of Nalagiri^;
pity and compassion thereis none in him for the Tathagata."
The Master came in, and asked what they were talking about as they sat
there. They told him. Then he said, "This is not the first time. Brethren, that
Devadatta has been harsh, cruel, merciless. He was so before." And he told
them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta became a Monkey named Nandiya, or Jolly; and dwelt in the
Himalayaregion andhisyoungestbrotherborethe nameofJollikin. They
;
two headed a band of eighty thousand monkeys, and they had a blind
mother in their home to care for.
They left their mother in her lair in the bushes, and went amongst the
trees to find sweet wild fruit of all kinds, which they sent back home to
her. The messengers did not deliver it; and, tormented with hunger, she
became nothing but skin and bone. Said the Bodhisatta to her,
"Mother, we send you plenty ofsweetfruits then what makes you so
:
thin?"
"My son, I never get it! " [200]
The Bodhisatta pondered. " While I look aftei- my herd, my mother
will perish I will leave the herd, and look after my mother alone." So
!
calling his brother, "Brother," said he, "do you tend the herd, and I will
care for our mother."
"Nay, brother," replied he, "what care I for ruling a herd] I too
will care for only our mother!" So thetwoof them wereofone mind, and
leaving the herd, they brought their mother down out of Himalaya, and
took up their abode in a banyan tree of the border-land, where they took
care ofher.
' QuestionsofMilbula, iv. 4. 24 (traus. in S.B.E., xxxv. 287).
2 Forthe stone-throwing see Cullavaggavii. 3. 9; Hardy, Manual, p. 320.
^ A fierce elephant, let loose at Devadatta's request to kill the Buddha. See
Cullavagga vii. 3. 11f. {Vinaya Texts, S.B.E., iii. 247f.); Milinda, iv. 4. 44 (wherehe
iscalledDhanaprdaka, assnjoravol. i. 57); Hardy, Manual, p. 320.

——
No. 222. 141
Now a certain Brahmin, who lived at Takkasila, had received his
education from a famous teacher, and afterward he took leave of him,
saying that hewould depart. This teacher had the power ofdivining from
the signs on a man's l)ody ; and thus lie perceived that his pupil was harsh,
cruel, and violent. "My son," said he, "you are harsh, and cruel, and
violent. Such persons do not prosper at all seasons alike; they come to
dire woe and dire destruction. Be not harsh, nor do what you will after-
wards repent." With this counsel, he let him go.
The youth took leave of his teacher, and went his way to Benares.
There he married and settled down ; and not being able to earn a
livelihood by any other of his arts, he determined to live by his bow.
So he set to work as a huntsman ; and left Benares to earn his living.
Dwelling in a border village, he would range the woods girt with bow
and quiver, and lived by sale of the flesh of all manner of beasts which
he slew.
One day, as he was returning homewards after having caught nothing
at all in the forest, he observed a banyan tree standing on the verge ofan
open glade. "Perhaps," thought he, "there may be something here."
And he turned his face towards the banyan tree. Now the two brothers
had just fed their mother with fruits, and were sitting behind her in the
tree, when they saw the man coming. "Even ifhe sees our mother," said
they, "what will he dol" and they hid amongst the branches. Then this
cruel man, as he came upto thetreeandsawthemothermonkey weak with
age, and blind, thought to himself, "Why should I return empty-handed?
I will shoot this she-monkey first!" [201] and lifted up his bow to shoot
her. This the Bodhisatta saw, and said to his brother, "Jollikin, my dear,
this man wants to shoot our mother ! I will save her life. When I am
dead, do you take care of her." So saying, down he came out of the tree,
and called out,
"O man, don't shoot my raothei" ! she is blind, and weak for age. I
will save her life; don't kill her, but kill me instead!" and when the
other had promised, he sat down in a place within bowshot. The hunter
pitilessly shot the Bodhisatta ; when he dropped, the man prepared hisbow
to shoot the mother monkey. Jollikin saw this, and thought to himself,
"Yon hunter wants to shoot my mother. Even if she only lives a day,
she will have received the gift of life; I will give my life for hers."
Accordingly, down he came from the tree, and said,
" O man, don't shoot mymother ! I give my life forhers. Shootme
take both usbrothers, and spare our mother's life! " The hunter consented,
and Jollikin squatt—ed down within bowshot. The hunter shot this one
too, and killed him "It will do for my children at home," thought he
and he shotthe mother too; hung them all three on his carrying pole, and
set his face homewards. At that moment a thunderbolt fell ujH)n the

—
;
142 TJie Jdtaka. Book II.
house of this wicked man, andbiirut up his wife and two children with the
house: nothing was left but the voofand the bamboo uprights.
A man met him at the entering in of the village, and told him of it.
Sorrow for his wife and children overcame him down on the spot he
:
dropped his pole with the game, andhis bow, threw off his gai-ments, and
naked he went homewards, wailing with hands outstretched. Then the
bamboo uprights broke, and fell upon his head, and crushed it. The earth
yawned, flame rose from hell. As he was being swallowed up in the
earth, he thought upon his master's warning: [202] "Then this was the
teaching that the Brahmin Piirasariya gave me!" and lamenting he
uttered these stanzas :
"I call to mind my teacher's words : so this was what he meant !
Be careful you should nothing do of which you might repent.
"Whatever a man does, the same he in himself will find;
The good man, good ; and evil he that evil has designed
And so our deeds are all like seeds, and bring forth fruit in kind."
Lamenting thus, he went down into the earth, and came to life in the
depths of hell.
When the Masterhad endedthis discourse, by which he showed how in other
days, as then, Devadattahad been harsh, cruel, and merciless, he identified the
Birth in these words "In those days Devadatta was the hunter, Sariputtawas
:
the famous teacher, Ananda was Jollikin, the noble Lady Gotami was the
mother, and I was the monkey Jolly."
No. 223.
PUTA-BHATTA-JATAKA.
"Honourfor honour,'' e^c—This story the Master told in Jetavana, about a
landed proprietor.
Tradition has it that once a landowner who was a citizen of Savatthi did
business with a landowner from the country. [203] Taking his wife with him,
he \nsited this man, his debtor; but the debtor averred that he could not pay.
The other, in anger, set out for home without having broken his fast. On the
r fo o o a d d , , b s i o d m d e in p g e h op i l m e s m h e ar t e h it im wi ; t a h n h d is se w e if i e n . g how famished the man was, gave him

"
No. 223. 143
When hegot this, he grudged his wife a share. So addressing lier he sjiid,
"Wife, this is a well-known haunt of thieves, so you had better go in front."
Having thus got r—id of her, he ate all the food, and then showed her the
pot empty, saying "Look here, wife! they gave me an empty pot!" She
guessed that be had eaten it all up himself, and was much annoyed.
As they both passed by the monastery in Jetavana, they thought they would
go into the park and get a drink of water. There sat the blaster, waiting
on purpose to see them, like a hunter on the trail, feeated under the shade (jf his
perfumed cell. He gi-eeted thenl kindly, and said, "Lay Sister, is your husliand
kind and loving?" "I love him, sir," .she replied, "but he does not love me;
let alone other days, this very day he was given a pot of food on the way,
and gave not a bit to me, but ate it all himself" "Lay Sister, so it has
always been—you lovingand kind, and he loveless but when by the help of the
;
wise he learnsyoiu*worth, he will do you all honour." Then, at her request, he
told an old-world tale.
On a time, while Brahmadatta was king in Benares, the Bodhi.satta
was the son of one of the king's court. On coming of age he became the
king's adviser in things temporal and spiritual. It happened that the king
was afraid of his son, lest he might injure him and sent him away.
;
Taking his wife, the son departed from that city, and came to a village of
Kasi, where he dwelt. By and by when the father died, his son liearLng
of it set out to go back to Benares; "that I may receive the kingdom
which Ls my birthright," said he. On his way one gave him a mess of
pottage, saying, "Eat, and give to your wife—also." But he gave her none,
anddid eatitallhimself. [204] Thoughtshe " A cruel man this, indeed!"
and she was full of sorrow.
When he had come to Benares—, and received his kingdom, he made her
the queen consort; but thinking "A little is enough for her," he showed
her no other consideration or honour, not so much as to ask her how
she did.
"This queen," thought the Bodhisatta, "serves the king well, and loves
him Vjut the king spends not a tliought upon her. I will make him show
;
her respect and honour."
So he came to the queen, and made salutation, and stood aside.
"What is it, dear sir] " she asked.
"Lady," he asked, "how can we serve you'? ought you not to give the
old Fathers a piece of cloth or a dish of rice?
"Dear sir, I never receive anything myself; what shall I give to
you] When I received, did I not give? But now the king gives me
nothing at all : let alone giving anything else, as he was — going along
the road he received a bowl of rice, and never gave me a bit he ate it all
himself."
"Well, madam, will you be able to say this in the king's presence1 "
"Yes," she replied.

—
" : :
144 The, Jataka. Book II.
'« Very well then. To-day, when I stand before the king, when I ask
my question do yon give the same answer : this very day will I make your
goodness known." So the Bodhisatta went on before, and stood in the
king's presence. And she too went and stood near the king.
Then said the Bodhisatta, "Madam, you are very cruel. Ought you
not to give the Fathers a piece of cloth or a dish of food] " And she
made answer, "Good sir, I myself receive nothing from the king : what
can I give to you1
"Are you not the queen consort1" quoth he,
"Good sir," said she, " what boots the place of a queen consort, when
no respect is paid? What will the king give me now ? When he received
a dish of i-ice on the road, [205] he gave me none, but ate it all himself."
And the Bodhisatta asked him, "Is it so, O king?" And the king
assented. When the Bodhisatta saw that the king assented, "Then lady,"
quoth he, "why dwell here with the king after he has become unkindly 1
In the world, union withoutlove ispainful. Whileyou dwellhere, loveless
union with the king will bring you sorrow. These folk honour him that
—
honours, and when one honours not as soon as you see it, you should go
elsewhither ; they that dwell in the world are many." And he repeated
the stanzas following :
"Honour for honour, love for love is due
Do good to him who does the same to you
Observance breeds observance ; but 'tis plain
None need help him who will not help again.
"Return neglect for negligence, nor stay
To comfort him whose love is past away.
The world is wide; and when t — he birds desciy
That trees have lost their fruit away they fly."
Hearing this, the king gave his queen all honour ; and from that time
forward they dwelt together in friendship and harmony.
[206] "When the Master had ended this discourse, hedeclaredthe Truths, and
identified the Birth:—at tlie conclusion of the Truths the husband and wife
entered on the Fruit of the First Path :— "The husband and wife are the same
in both cases, and the wise counsellorwas I myself."

— —
No. 224. 145
No. 224.
KUMBHILA-JATAKA.
"0 Ape," etc. — This story the Master told at the Bamboo Grove, alwut
Devadatta.
"O Ape, these virtues four bring victory:
Truth, "Wisdom, Self-control, and Piety.
"Without these blessings is no victory
Truth, Wisdom, Self-control, and Piety."
No. 225.
KHANTI-VANNANA-JATAKA.
—
"There is a man" etc. This story the Master told at Jetavana, about the
king of Kosala. A very uscfvil subordinate intrigued in the harem. Even
though he knew the culprit, the king pocketed the affront, V)ecause tlie fellow-
was useful, and told the ]\Iaster of it. The Master said, "Other kings in days
long gone by have done the same;" and at hisrequest, told the following story.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, a man of
his court fell into an intrigue in the king's harem, and an attendant ofthis
courtier did the same thing in the courtier's house. The man could not
endure to be thus affronted. So he led the other before the king, saying,
"My lord, [207] I have a servant who does all manner of work, and he
has made me a cuckold: what mu.st I do with him1" and with the
question he uttered this first verse following :
"There is a man within my house, a zealo—us servant too;
He has betrayed my trust, O king! Say what am 1 to do?"
10
J. II.

—
!
146 The Jataha. Booh 11.
On hearing this, the king uttered the second verse :
" G I o t o o d o m a en ze , al I ou t s ro s w e , rv a a r n e t r h a a r v e e e ; no a w nd : s h o ere pat h i e en s c t e an i d s s, my ind r e e e d d e."
The courtier saw that these words of the king were aimed at him and
;
for the future dui'st do no wrong in the king's house. And the servant
likewise, having come to know that the matter had been told to the king,
durst for the future do that thins no more.
—
This discourse ended, the Master identified the Birth: "I was the king of
Benares." And the courtier on this occasion found out that the king had told of
him to the Master, and neverdid such a thing again.
No. 226.
KOSIYA-JATAKA.
[208] "There is a time" etc.
—A
story told by the Master at Jetavana, about
the king of Kosala. Thiskingstarted to quell a border rising at a bad season
of the year. Tlie circumstances have been described already^ The Master as
before toldthe kinga story.
Once on a time, the king of Benares having started for the field ofwar
at an unseasonable time, set up a camp in his park. At that time an Owl
entered a thicket of bamboos, and hid in it. There came a flock ofCrows :
" We will catch him," said they, "so soon as he shall come out." And
they compassed it around. Out he came before his time, nor did he wait
until the sun should set; and tried to make his escape. The crows
surrounded him, and pecked him with their beaks till he fell to the
ground. The king asked the Bodhisatta : "Tell me, wise sir, why are
the crows attacking this owH" And the Bodhisatta made answer, "They
that leave their dwelling before the right time, great king, fall into just
such misery as this. Therefore before the time one should not leave one's
1 See no. 176, p. 51 above.

; ;
No. 226. 147
dwelling place." And to make the matter clear, he uttered this pair of
verses
:
"There is a time for every thing: who forth from liome will go
One man or many, out of time, will .surely meet some woo
As dill the Owl, unlucky fowl! pecked dead by many a crow.
"Who masters quite eacli j-ule and rite; who others' weakness knows
Like wise owls, he will happy be, and contpier all his foes."
[209] When the king heard this, he turned back home again.
—
This discourse ended, the Master identified the Birth: "Ananda was then
the king, and the wise courtier was I myself."
No. 227.
GUTHA-PANA-JATAKA.
—
" Well matched," etc. This story the Mastertold while dwellingatJetavana,
about one ofthe Brethren.
Therestood atthat time, about three-quarters^ of a league from Jetiivana, a
market town, where a great deal of rice was distributed l)y ticket, and special
meals were given. Here lived an inquisitive lout, who pestered the young men
and novices who came to share in the distribution — [^^10] "Who are for solid
food? who for drink? who for moist food?" And he made those who could not
answer feel ashamed, and they dreaded Mm so much that to that village they
would notgo.
One day, a brother came to the ticket-hall, with the question, "Any food for
distribution in such-and-such a village, sir?" "Yes, friend," was the answer,
"but there's a lubber here asking questions* ifyou can't answer them, he abu.ses
and reviles you. He is such a pest that nobody will go near the place." "Sir,"
said the other, "give me an order on the place, and I'll humble him, and make
him modest, and so influence him that whenever he sees you after this, he'll feel
inclined to run away."
The brothers agreed, and gave the necessary order. The man walked to our
—
village, and at the gate of it he put on his robe. The loafersi)ied him was at
him like a mad ram, with "Answer me a question, priest!" "Layman, let me
go first about the village for my broth, and then come back with it to the
waitinghall."
When he returned with his meal, the man repeated his question. The
brother answered, "Leave me to finish my broth, to sweep the room, and to
fetch my ticket's worth of rice." So he fetched the rice; then placing his bowl
in this very man's hands, he said, "Come, now I'll answer your question."
' G(lriit(i(ldh<iyoj(iV(iiii(itti'. It may possHily mean 'an oi^'litli.'
10—2

—
: : ;
148 The Jdtaka. Booh II.
Then he led him outside the village, folded his outerrobe, put it on his shoulder,
and taking the bowl from the other, stood waiting for him to begin. The man
said, "Priest,answermeonequestion." "Very well, so I will," said the brother
and with one blow he felled him to the ground, bruised his eyes, beat him,
dropped tilth in his face, and went off, with these parting words to frighten
him, "If ever again you ask a question ofany Brother who comes to this village,
I'll see about it !"
Afterthis, he took to hisheels at the mere sight ofa Brother.
By and bye all this became known among the Brotherhood. One day they
were talking about it in the Hall of Truth: "Friend, I hear that Brother
So-and-so dropped filth in the face of that loafer, and left him!" The Master
came in, and wanted to know what they were all talking about as they sat
there. They told him. Said he, "Brethren, this is not the first time this
brotherattacked the man with dirt, but he did just the same before." Then he
told them an old-world tale.
[211] Once on a time, those citizens of the kingdoms of Aiiga and
Magadha who were travelling from one land to the other, used to stay in a
house on the marches ofthe twokingdoms, andtheretheydrankliquorand
ate the flesh of fishes, and early in the morning they yoked their carts and
wentaway. Atthe time when they came, a certain dung-beetle,led bythe
odour of dung, came to the place where they had drunken, and saw some
liquor shed upon the ground, and for thirst he drank it, and returned to
his lump of dung intoxicated. When he climbed upon it the moist dung
gave way a little. "The world cannot bear my weight!" he bawled out.
At that very instant a maddened Elephant came to the spot, and smelling
the dung went back in disgust. The Beetle saw it. — "Yon creature," he
thought, "is afraid of me, and see how he runs away ! I must fight with
him !" and so he challenged him in the first stanza :
" T We u l r l n m b a ac t k c , he t d ur ! n fo b r ac w k e , a fr r i e en h d er E o l e e s ph b a ot n h t : ! h W er h e y le w t o u u s ld is y s o u u e t f r e y ar and fly1
Let Magadha and Aiiga see how great our bravery!"
The Elephant listened, and heard the voice he turned back towards
;
the Beetle, and said the second stanza, by way of rebuke:—
"Non pede, longinquave manu, non dentibus utar
Stercore, cui stercus cura, perisse decet."
[212] And so, dropping a great piece of dung upon him, and making
water, he killed him then and there ; and scampered into the forest,
trumpeting.
When this discovirse was ended, the Master identified the Birth :— "In those
days, this lout was the dung-beetle, the Brother in question was the elephant,
and I was the tree-sprite who saw it all from that clump oftrees."

—
" " " "
No. 228. 14'.)
No. 228.
KAMANITA-JATAKA.
—
"Three foi'ts," etc. This story the Master told at Jetfivana about a brahmin
namedKauianita. Tlie circumstances will beexplainedin theTwelfth Book,and
the Kama-Jataka'.
[The king of Benares had two sons.] And of these two sons the elder
went to Benares, and became king : the youngest was the vicei'oy. He
that was king was given over to the desire of riches, and the lust of the
flesh, and greedy ofgain.
At the time, the Bodhisatta was Sakka, king of the gods. And as he
looked out upon India, and observed that the king of it was given
over to these lusts, he said to himself, "I Avill chastise that king, and
make him ashamed." So taking the semblance of a young bi'ahmin, he
went to the king and looked at him.
"What wants this young fellow1 " the king asked.
Said he, "Great king, I see three towns, prosperous, fertile, having
elephants, horses, chariots and infantry in plenty, full of ornaments ofgold
and fine gold. These may be taken with a verysmall army. I have come
hither to offer to get them for you !
"When shallwe go, young man 1 " asked the king.
"To-morrow, Sire."
"Then leave me now to-morrow early shall you go,"
;
"Good, my king: hasten to prepare the army ! " And so saying [21.3]
Sakka went back again to his own place.
Next day the king caused the drum to beat, and an army to be made
ready ; and having summoned his courtiers, he thus bespoke them :
"Yesterday a young brahmin came and said that he would conquer for
—
me three cities Uttarapaiicala, Indapatta, and Kekaka. Wherefore now
we will go along with that man and conquer those cities. Summon him in
all haste !
"What place did you assign him, my lord, to dwell in1
"I gave him no place to dwell in," said the king.
"But you gave him wherewith to pay for a lodging1
1 No. 467.

—
—
:
150 The Jdtaka. Book II.
"Nay, not even that,"
"Then how shall we find him ?"
"Seek him in the streets of the city," said the king.
They sought, but found him not. So they came before the king, and
told him, " O king, we cannot see him."
Great sorrowfell upon the king. "What glory hasbeensnatched from
me!" he groaned; his heart became hot, his blood became disordered,
dysentery attacked him, the physicians could not cure him.
After the space of three or four days, Sakka meditated, and was ware
of his illness. Said he, " I will cure him :" and in the semblance of a
brahmin he went and stood at his door. He caused it to be told the king,
"A brahmin physician is come to cure you."
On bearing it, the kinganswered, "All thegreatphysiciansofthecourt
have not been able to cure me. Give hini a fee, and let him go."
Sakka listened, and made reply : "I want not even money for ray
lodging, nor will I take fee for my leechcraft. I will cure him : let the
king see me !"
"Then let him come in," said the king, on receiving this message.
Then Sakka went in, and wishing victory to the king, sat on one side.
"Are you going to cure me?" the king asked.
He replied, "Even so, my lord."
"Cure me, then !" said the king.
"Very good. Sire. Tell me the symptoms of your disease, and how it
—
came about, what you have eaten or drunken, to bring it on, or what you
have heard or seen."
"Dear friend, my disease was brought upon me by something that I
heard."
Then the other asked, "What was it %" [214]
"Dear Sir, there came a young brahmin who offered to win and give
me power over three cities and I gave him neither lodging, nor where-
:
withal to pay for one. He must have grown angry with me, and gone
away to some other king. So when I bethought me how great glory had
been snatched away from me, this disease came upon me ; cure, if you can,
this which has come upon me for my covetousness." And to make the.
matter clear he uttered the first stanza ;
"Three forts, each builded high upon a mount,
I want to take, whose names I hei-e recount^
And there is one thing further that I need-
Cure me, brahmin, me the slave of greed!"
Then Sakka said, "0 king, by simples made with roots you cannot
^ Thenames ofPaficala, Kuru, and Kekaka aregiven.

;
No. 228. 151
be cured, but you must be cured with the siinijle of knowledge:" and ho
uttered the second verse as follows [215]
:
"There are, who ciu-e the bite of a black snake;
The wise can heal tlie wounds that goblins make.
The slave (if greed no doctor can make whole
What cm-c is tliere for the backslidi;ig souH"
So spake the great Being to explain his meaning, and he added this yet
beyond : "O king, what if you were to get those three cities, then while
you reigned over these four cities, could you wear four pairs of robes at
once, eat out of four golden dishes, lie on four state beds? king,
one ought not to be mastered by desire. Desire is the root of all (^vil
;
when desire is increased, he that cherishes her is cast into the eight great
hells, and thesixteenlowesthells, and intoall kindsand mannerof misery."
So the great Being terrified the king with fear of hell and misery, and
discoursed to him. And the king, by hearing his discourse, got rid of his
heartbreak, and in a moment he Ijecame whole of his disease. [216] And
Sakka after giving him instruction, and establishing him in virtue, went
away to the world of gods. And the king thenceforward gave alms and
did good, and he passed away to fare according to his deserts.
—
When this discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth: "The
Brotherwho is a slave to his desires was at that time the king ; and I myself
was Sakka."
No. 229.
PALAYI-JATAKA.
—
"Zo, my elephants" etc. This story the Master told at Jetavana, about a
mendicant, with vagrant tastes.
He traversed the whole of India for the puq^osc of arguing, and found
no one to contradict him. At last he got as far as Savatthi, and asked was tliero
any one there who could argue with — him. The people said, "Tliere is One who
could argue with a thousand such all-wise, chief of men, the mighty Gotama,
lord of the faith, who bears down all opposition, there is no adversary in all
India who can dispute with Him. As the billows break upon tlie shore,
so all arguments break against his feet, and are dashed to spray." Thu.s thoy
described thequalitiesofthe Buddha.

—
152 TJie Jataka. Book 11.
"Where is honow?" asked the mendicant. He wasatJetavana,they replied.
"Now I'll get up a disputationwithhim!" said the mendicant. So attended bya
large crowdhemadehiswaytoJetavana. OnseeingthegatetowersofJetavana*,
which PrinceJetahadbuiltatacostofninetymillionsofmoney,heaskedwhether
that was the palace where the Priest Gotama lived. The gateway of it, they
said. "If this be the gateway, what will the dwelling be like!" he cried.
"There's no end to the perfumed chambers!" the people said. "Who could
arguewith such a i)riest asthis?" he asked; and hurried offatonce.
The crowd shouted for joy, and thronged into the park. "What bringsyou
herebeforeyour time?" asked the Master. They told him what had happened.
Said he, "This i.s not the fii-st time, laymen, that he hurried away at the mere
sight of the gateway of my dwelling. He did the same before." And at their
request, hetold an old-world tale.
[217] Once upon a time, it befel that the Bodhisatta reigned king in
Takkasila, of the realm of Gandhara, and Brahmadatta in Benares.
Brahmadatta resolved to capture Takkasila ; wherefore with a great host
he set forth, and took up a position not far from the city, and set his army
in array "Here be the elephants, here the horses, the chariots here, and
:
here the footmen : thus do ye charge and hurl with your weapons ; as the
clouds pour forth rain, so pour ye forth a rain of arrows !" and he uttered
this i)air ofstanzas :
"Lo, my elephants and horses, like the storm-cloud in the sky!
Lo, my surging sea of chariots shooting arrow-spray on high
Lo, my host of warriors, striking sword in hand, with blow a ! nd thrust,
Closing in upon the city, till their foes shall bite the dust!
— —
"Rush against them fall upon them! shout the war-cry loudly sing!
While the elephants in concert raise a clamorous trumpeting!
As the thunder and the lightning flash and rumble in the sky,
So be now your voice uplifted in the loud long battle-cry!"
[218] So cried the king. And he made his army march, and came
before the gate of the city; and when he saw the towers on the city gate,
he asked whether was that the king's dwelling. "That," said they,
"is the gate tower." "If the gate tower be such as this, of what
sort will the king's palace be1" he asked. And they replied, "Like to
Vejayanta, the palace of Sakka ! " On hearing it, the king said, "With
so glorious a king we shall never be able to fight !" And having seen no
more than the tower set upon the city gate, he turned and fled away, and
came again to Benares.
This discourse ended, the Master identified the Birth:—"Our mendicant
gadabout was then the king of Benares, and I was the king of Takkasila
myself."
1 The Jetavana monastery is represented on the Bharhut Stupa (Cunningham,
pi. Lvii) ; for thegandhaknfi, seepi. xxviii, fig. 3.

—— — —
! :"
No. 230. 153
No. 230.
DUTIYA-PALAYI-JATAKA.
—
"CoiuUless are my banners" etc. [219] This story the Master told whilst
livingat Jetavana, about this same gadabout mendicant.
At that time, the Miister, with a large company round him, sitting on the
beautifully adorned throne of the truth, upon a vermilion dais, was discoursing
like a young lion roaring with a lion's roar. Themendicant,seeingthe l>uiUlha's
form like the form of Brahma, his face like the gloiy of the full moon, and his
forehead like aplate of gold, turned round where he had come, in the midst of
the crowd, and ran off, saying, '*Wlio could overcome a man like this?"
The crowd went in chase, then came back and told the Master. He said,
"Not only now has this mendicant tied at the mere sight of my golden face ; he
did the same before." And he told an old-world talc.
Once on a time, the Bodhisatta was king in Benares, and in Takkasila
reigned a certain king of Gandhara. This king, desiring to capture
Benares, went and compassed the city about with a complete army of four
divisions. And taking his stand at the city gate, he looked upon his
army, and said he, "Who shall be able to conquer so great an army
as this?" and describing his army, he uttered the first stanza:
"Countless are my banners rival none they own
:
Flocks of crows can never stem the rolling sea
Never can the storm-blast beat a mountain down :
So, of all the living none can conquer me!"
[220] Then the Bodhisatta disclosed his own glorious countenance, in
fashion as the full moon; and threatening him, thus spoke "Fool, babble
:
not vainly Now will I destroy your host,as a maddened elephant crushes
!
a thicket ofreeds
!
" and he repeated the second stanza:
"Fool
!
and hast thou never yet a rival found?
Thou art hot with fever, if thou seekst to wound
Solitary savage elephants like me
As they crush a reed-stalk so will I crush thee!
When the king of Gandhara heard him threaten thus, [221] he looked
up, and beholding his wide forehead like a plate of gold, for fear of being
captured himself he turned and ran away, and came again even unto his
own
city.
—
This discourse ended, the Master identified the Birth: "The vagivuit
gadabout was at that time the king of Gandhara, and the king of Benares was I
myself."

154 The Jdtaka. Book II.
No. 231.
UPAHANA-JATAKA,
—
"As vjhen a pair of shoes," etc. This story the Master told iu the Bamboo
Grove, about Devadatta. The Brethren gathered together in the Hall of Trnth,
and began to discuss the matter. "Friend, Devadatta having repudiated his
teachei', and become the foe and adversary of the Tathagata, has come to utter
destruction." The Mastercame in, and asked what they were talking about as
they sat thei'e. They told him. The Master said, "Brethren, this is not the
first time that Devadatta has repudiated his teacher, and become my enemy,
and come to utter destruction. The same thing happened before." Then he
told them au old-world tale.
Once on a time,while Brahmadatta was king ofBenares, theBodhisatta
was born as the son of an elephant trainer. When he grew up, he was
taught all the art of managing the elephant. And there came a young
villager fromKasi,andwastaught ofhim. Now when the future Buddhas
teach any, they do not give a niggardly dole of leai-ning; but according to
their own knowledge so teach they, keeping nothing back. So this yovith
learnt all thebranchesofknowledgefrom the Bodhisatta, withoutomission
;
and when he had learnt, said he to his master [222]
:
" Master, I will go and serve the king."
"Good, my son," said he and he went before the king, and told him
:
how that a pupil ofhis would serve the king. Said the king, "Good, let
him serve me." "Then do you know what fee to give?" says the
Bodhisatta.
" A pupil of yours will not receive so much as you ; if you receive an
hundred, he shall have fifty; if you receivetwo, to him shall one be given."
So the Bodhisatta went home, and told all this to his pupil.
"Master," said the youth, "all your knowledge do I know, piece for
piece. IfI shall have the like payment, I will serve the king ; but if not,
then I will not serve him." And this the Bodhisatta told to the king.
Said the king,
—
"If the young man could do even as you if he is able to show skill
for skill with you, he shall receive the like." And the Bodhisatta told this
to the pupil, and the pupil made answer, "Very good, I will." "To-
mori'ow," said the king, "do you make exhibition of your skill." "Good,
I will; let proclamation be made by beat of drum." And the king
caused it to be proclaimed, "To-morrow the master and the pupil will

—— —
"
No. 231. 155
make show togethei* of their skill in managing the elephant. To-niorrow
let all that wish to see gather together in the courtyard of the palace, and
see it."
"My pupil," thought the teacher to himself, "does not know all my
resources." Sohe chose an elephant, and in one night he taught him to do
all things awry. He taught him to back when bidden go forward, and to
go on when told to back ; to lie down when bidden rise, and to rise when
bidden lie down ; to drop when told to pick up, and to pick up when told
to drop.
Next day mounting his elephant he came to the palace yard. And his
Ijupil also was there, mounted upon a beautiful elephant. There was a
great concourse of people. They both showed all their skill. But the
Bodhisatta made his elephant reverse orders [223] "Go on !" said he,
;
and it backed ; "Back !" and it ran forward ; "Stand up !" and it lay
down ; "Lie ! " and it stood up ; "Pick it up : " and the creature dropped
it; "Drop it! " and he picked it up. And the crowd cried, "Go to, you
rascal ! do not raise your voice against your master ! You do not know
your own measure, and you think you can match yourself against him !
and they assailed him with clods and staves, so that he gave up the ghost
then and there. And the Bodhisatta came down from his ele[)hant, and
approaching the king, addressed him thus
" mighty king for their own good men get them taught; but there
!
was one to whom his learning brought misery with it, like an ili-iuade
shoe;" and he uttered these two stanzas :
"As when a pair of shoes which one has bought
For help and comfort cause but misery.
Chafing the feet till they grow burning hot
And making them to fester by and bye:
"Even so an underbred ignoble man,
Having learnt all that he can learn from you,
By your own teaching proves your very bane':
The lowbred churl is like the ill-made shoe."
[224] Theking was delighted, and heaped honours upon theBodhisatta.
When this discourse was ended, the Master identified this Birth a.s follow.s:
"Devadatta was the pupil, and I myselfwas the teacher."
1 The schol. would take tavi as for ntulnam, "he hurts himself," not "thee," but
this ishardlypossible. The verses do not seem to fit the story veryexactly.

156 The Jataka. Book II.
No. 232.
ViNA-THUNA-JATAKA.
" Your own idea" e^c—This story the Master told while stayingatJetavana,
about a young lady.
She was the only daughter of a rich merchant ofSavatthi. She noticed that
in her fother's ho\ise agreat fuss was made over a finebull, and asked her nurse
what it meant. "Who is this, nurse, that is honoiu-ed so?" The nurse replied
that it was a right royal bull.
Another day she was lookingfrom an upper storey down the street, when lo,
she spied a hunchback. [225] Thought she, "In the cow tribe, the leader has
a hump. I suppose it's the same with men. That must be a right royal man,
and I must go and be his humble follower." So she sent her maid to say that
the merchant's daughterwished to join herself to him, and he was to wait for
her in a certain spot. She collected her treasures together, and disguising
herself, leftthe mansion and went offwith the hunchback.
By and bye all this became known in the town and among the Brotherhood.
In the Hall of Truth, brothers discussed its bearings : "Friend, there is a
merchant's daughter who has eloped with a hunchback!" The Master came in,
and asked what they were all talking about together. They told him. He
replied, "This is not the first time. Brethren, that she has fallen in love with a
hunchback. She did the same before." And he told them an old-world tale.
Once on atime, whileBrahmadatta was kingof Benares, theBodhisatta
was born of a rich man's family in a certain market town. When he
came of age, he lived as a householdei', and was blessed with sons and
daughters, and for his son's wife he chose the daughter of a rich citizen of
Benares, and fixed the day.
Now the girl saw in her home honour and reverence ofi'ered to a bull.
She asked of her nurse, "What is that? "— " A right royal bull," said she.
And afterward the girl saw a hunchback going through the street. "That
must be a right royal man " thought she and taking with her the best
! ;
ofher belongings in a bundle, she went offwith him.
The BodhLsatta also, having a mind to fetch the girl home, set out for
Benares with a great company and he travelled by the same road.
;
The pair went along the road allnight long. All night long the hunch-
back was overcome with thirst; and at the sunrise, he was attacked by
colic, and great pain came upon him. So he went offthe road, dizzy with
pain,and fell down, like a broken lute-stick, huddled together ; the girl too
sat down at his feet. The Bodhisatta observed her sitting at the hunch-
back's feet,and recognised her. Approaching,he talkedwith her,repeating
the first stanza : [226]
"Your own idea this foolish man can't move without a guide,
!
This foolish hunchback ! 'tis not meet you should be by his side."

— —
No. 232. 157
And lieai'ing his voice, the girl answered by the second stanza:
"I thought the crookback king of men, and loved him tor liis wortli,
Who, hke a hito with broken strings, hes huddled on the earth."
And when the Bodhisatta perceived that she had only followiMl him in
disguise, he caused her to bathe, and adorned, her, and took lier into his
carriage and went to his home.
—
When this discourse wa.s ended, the Master identified the Birth: "The girl
is the same in both cases ; and the merchant ofBenares was I myself."
No. 233.
VIKANNAKA-JATAKA.
—
[227] " The barb is in your bach" etc. This story the Master told while
dwelling in Jetavana, about a backsliding brother.
He was brought into the Hall of Truth, and asked if he were really back-
sliding; to which he replied yes. When asked why, he replied "Because of the
quality of desire." The Master said, "Desire is like twy-barbed arrows for
getting lodgement in the heart ; once there, they kill, as the barbed arrows
killed the crocodile." Then he told them an old-world tale.
Onceupon a time, the Bodhisattawas king of Benares, and a good king
he was. One day he entered his pai-k, and came to the side of a lake.
And those who were clever with dance and song began to dance and to
sing. The fish and tortoises, eager to hear the sound of song, flocked
together and went along beside the king. And the king, seeing a mass
of fish as long as a palm trunk, asked his courtiers,
"Now why do these fish follow me? "
Said the courtiers, "They are coming to offer their services to their
lord."
The king was pleased at this saying, that they were come to serve
him, and ordered rice to be given to tluun regularly. At the time of
feeding some of the fish came, and some did not; and rice was wa.sted.
They told the king of it. "Henceforward," said the king, "at the time for

158 Tlie Jdtaka. Booh II.
the giving of rice let a drum be sounded ; and at the sound of the drum,
when the fish flock together, give the food to tliem." From thenceforth
the feeder caused a drum to sound, and wlien they flocked together gave
rice to the fish. As thoy were gathered thus, eating the food, came a
crocodile and ate some of the fish. The feeder told the king. The king
listened. "When the crocodile is eating the fish," said he, "pierce him
with a harpoon, and capture him." [228]
"Good," the man said. And he went aboard a boat, and so soon as
the crocodile was come to eat the fish, he pierced him with a harpoon. It
went into his back. Mad with pain, the crocodile went ofi" with the
harpoon. Perceiving that he was wounded, the feeder spake to him by
—
this stanza :
"The barb is in your back, go where you may.
The beat of drum, calling my fish to feed.
Brought you, pursuing, greedy, on the way
Which brought you also to your direst need."
When the crocodile got to his own place, he died.
To explainthis matter,the Master having become perfectly enlightened spake
thesecond verse as follows
:
"So, when the world tempts any man to sin
Who knows no law but his own will and wish,
He perishes amid his friends and kin.
Even as the Crocodile that ate the fish."
[229] When this — discourse was ended, the Master declared the Truths and
identified the Birth: at the conclusion—of the Truths, the backsliding Brother
reached the Fruit of the First Path: "In those days I was the king of
Benares."
No. 234.
ASITABHtj-JATAKA.
—
"Noio desire has gone" etc. This story the Master told while staying at
Jetavana, aboutayounggirl.
Tradition tells us that a certain man at Savatthi, a servant of the Master's
two chief disciples, had one beautiful and happy daughter. When she grew

—
;
No. 234. 150
up, she married into a family as good as her own. The hu,sl)and, witlioiit
consulting anybody, used to enjoy himself elsewhere at his own sweet will. She
took no notice of his disrespect; but invited the two chief discijjlcs, made them
presents, and listened to their preaching, until she reachetl the Fruit ofthe First
Path. After this she si)ent all iier time in the enjoyment of the Path and the
Fniit; at last, thinking that as her husband did not want her, there w;is no
need for her to remain in the household, she determined to embrace the religious
life. She informed her parents of her plan, carried it out, and became a
saint.
Herstory became known amongst the Brotherhood; and one day they were
discussing it in the Hall of Truth. "Friend, the daughter of such and such
afamily strives to attain the highest good. Finding tliat her husband did not
care for her, she made rich pi'esents to the chief discii)les, listened to their
preaching, and gained the Fruit of the First Path; she took leave of her
parents, became a religious, and then a saint. So, friend, the girl sought the
highest good."
While they were talking, the blaster came in and asked what it was all
about. They told him. He .said, "This is not the first time, Pwcthren, that she
.seeks the highest; she did so in olden days as well." And he told an old-world
tale.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was king in Benares, the Bodlii-
satta was living as an ascetic, in the Himalaya region; and he had
cultivated the Faculties and the Attainments. Then the king of Benares,
observing how niagnifical was the pomp of his son Prince Brahmadatta,
was filled with suspicion, and banished his son from the realm.
[230] The youth with his wife Asitabhu made his way to Himalaya,
and took up his abode in a liut of leaves, with fish to eat, and all
manner of wild fruits. He saw a woodland sprite, and became enamoured
of her. "Her will I make my wife !" said he, and nought recking of
Asitabhu, he followed after her steps. His wife seeing that he followed
after the sprite, was wroth. "The man cares nought for me," she thought
"what have I to do with himT' So .she came to the Bodhisatta, and
did him reverence she learnt what she must needs do to be initiated,
:
and gazing at the mystic object, she developed the Faculties and the
Attainments, bade the Bodhisatta farewell, and returning stood at tlie
door ofher hut of leaves.
Now Brahmadatta followed the sprite, but saw not l»y what way she
went and baulked of his desire he set his face again for the hut.
;
Asitabhu saw him coming, and rose up in the air and poised upon a
;
him—
plane in the air of the colour of a precious stone, she said to
"My young lord ! 'tis through you that I have attained this ecstatic
bliss!" and she uttered the first stanza:
"Now desire has gone.
Thanks to you, and found its ending:
Like a tusk, once sawn,
None can make it one by mending."

160 The Jdtaha. Book II.
So saying, as he looked, she rose up and departed to another place.
—
And when she had gone, he uttered the second stanza, lamenting : [231]
"Greed that knows no stay,
Lust, the senses all confusing.
Steals oiu" good away.
Even as now my wife I'm losing."
And having made his moan in this stanza, he dwelt alone in the
forest, and at his father's death he received the sovereignty.
—
After this discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth: "These
two people werethen the prince and princess, and I wasthe hermit."
No. 235.
VACCHA-NAKHA-JATAKA.
—
"Houses inthe ivorld are sweet" etc. This story the Mastertold at Jetavana,
about Roja the Mallian.
We learn that this man, who was a lay friend of Ananda's, sent the Eldera
message that he should come to him. The Elder took leave of the Master, and
went. He served the Elder with all sorts of food, and sat down on one side,
engaginghim in a pleasant conversation. Then he offered the Elder a share of
his house, tempting him by the five channels ofdesire. "Ananda, Sir, I have at
home great store of live and dead stock. I will divide it and give youhalf ; let
us live in one housetogether!" The Elder declared to him the suffering which
is involved in desire ; then rose from his seat, and returned to the monastery.
When the Master asked whether he had seen Roja, he replied that he had.
" I W ex h p a l t ai d n i e d d h to e h s i ay m t t o he yo s u u ? fi " eri " ng Si i r, nv R o o l j v a ed in i v n it d e e d si m re e s t a o n r d et t u h r e n w t o o r t l h d e ly wo l r if l e d ." ; t T h h e e n
Master said, "Ananda, this is not the first time that Roja the Mallian has
invited anchorites to retimi to the world; hedid the same before;" and then, at
his request, he told astory ofthe olden time.
[232] Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was one of a family of brahmins who lived in a certain market
town. Coming to years, he took up the religious life, and dwelt for a
long time amid the Himalayas.
He went to Benares to purchase salt and seasoning, and abode in the
king's grounds next day he entered Benares.
;

— —
—
:
No. 235. IGl
Now a certain rich man of the place, pleased at his behaviour, took
him home, gave him to eat, and receiving his promise to abide with him,
caused him to dwell in the garden and attended to his wants. And they
conceived a friendship each for the other.
One day, the rich man, by reason of his love and friendship for the
Bodhisatta, thought this within himself "The life of an ascetic is
:
unhappy. I will persuade my friend Yacchanakha to unfrock himself; I
will part my wealth in two, and give half to him, and we both will dwell
together." So one day, when the meal was done, he spake sweetly to his
friend and said
"Good Vacchanakha, unhappy is the hermit's life; 'tis pleasant to
live in a house. Come now, let us both together take our pleasure as we
will." So saying, he uttered the first stanza :
"Houses in the world are sweet,
Full of food, and full of treasure;
There you have your fill of meat
Eating, drinking at your pleasure."
The Bodhisatta on hearing him, thus replied "Good Sir, from
:
ignorance you have become greedy in desire, and call the householder's
life good, and the life of the ascetic bad ; listen now, and I will tell
you how bad is the householder's life ;" and he uttered the second
stanza [233]
:
"He that hath houses peace can never know.
He lies and cheats, he must deal many a blow
On others' shoulders : nought this fault can cure
Then who into a house would willing go?"
With these words the great Buddha told the defects ofa householder's
life, and went into the garden again.
:—
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth "Roja
the Mallian was the Benares merchant, andI was Yacchanakha the mendicant."
No. 236.
BAKA-JATAKA.
''See that twice-born bird," etc.—This story the Master told while staying in
Jetavana, about a hypocrite. When he was brought before the Master, the
Master said, "Brethren, he was a hypocrite of old just as he is now," and told
the following story.
J. n. 11

— — — —
;
162 The Jataha. Booh 11.
[234] Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta became a Fish in a certain pond in the Himalaya region, and a
great shoal went with him. Now a Crane desired to eat the fish. So in
a place near the pond he drooped his head, and spread out his wings, and
looked vacantly, vacantly at the fish, waiting till they were ofi" their
guard'. At the same moment the Bodhisatta with his shoal came to that
place in search offood. And the shoal offish on seeing the crane uttered
the first stanza:
"See that twice-born''^ bird, how white
Like a water-lily seeming;
Wings outspread to left and right
Oh, how pious! dreaming, dreaming!"
Then the Bodhisatta looked, and uttered the second stanza :
"What he is ye do not know.
Or you would not sing his praises.
He is our most treacherous foe
That is why no wing he I'aises."
Thereupon the fish splashed in the water and drove the crane away.
—
When this discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth: "This
hypocrite was the Crane, and I was the chiefofthe shoal offish."
No. 237.
SAKETA-JATAKA.
—
" Why are hearts cold" etc. This story the Master told during a stay near
Saketa, about a brahmin named Saketa. Both the circumstances that suggested
the story and the story itselfhave already been given in the First Book^.
^ "A crane's sleep" isauIndian proverb fortrickery.
2 dijo isused of abirdas born in theegg and from theegg. It is also applied to
Brahmins, and soconveys an additional notion ofpiety,
^ No. 68.

— — —
No. 237. ir,3
[235]... And when the Tathagata had gone to the monastery, the
Brother asked, "How, Sir, did the love begin? " and repented the first
stanza:
"Why are hearts cold to one — Buddha, tell!
And love another so exceeding well?"
The Masterexplained the nature oflove by the second stanza:
"Those love they who in other lives were dear,
As siu'e as grows the lotus in the mere."
—
After this discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth: "These
two peoplewere the brahmin and his wife in the story ; and I waa theirson."
No. 238.
EKAPADA-JATAKA.
[236] "Tell meone word" eic—This story the Mastertold in Jetavana, about
a certain landowner.
We are told that there wasalandowner who lived at Savatthi. Oneday, his
son sitting on his hip asked him what is called the "Doori" question. He
replied, "That question requires a Buddha nobody else can answer it." So he
took his son to Jetavana, and saluted the ; Master. "Sir," .said he, "as my son
.sat on my hip, he asked me the question called the 'Door.' I didn't know the
answer, so here I am to ask you to give it." Said the Master, "This is not the
first time, layman, that the lad has been a seeker after the way to accompli.sh
his ends, and asked wise men this question ; he did so before, and wise men in
olden days gave him the answer; but by reason of the dimness caused by
re-birth, hehas forgotten it." And at his request the Master told a tale of the
olden time.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came into this world as a rich merchant's son. He grew u]>,
and when in course of time the father died, he took his father'.s place as a
merchant.
1 This question referred to the meansofentering on the Paths.
11—2

— —
::
164 The Jfitaka. Book 11.
And his son, a young boy, sitting on his hip, asked him a question.
"Father," said he, "tell me a thing in one word which embraces a wide
range ofmeaning;" and he repeated the first stanza :
"Tell me one word that all things comprehends
By what, in short, can we attain our ends?"
His father replied with the second
:
—
"One thing for all things precious that is skill
Add virtue and add patience, and you will
Do good to friends and to your foes do ill."
[237] Thus did the Bodhisatta answer his son's question. The son
used the way which his father pointed out to accomplish his purposes, and
by and bye he passed away to fare according to his deserts.
When this discourse was ended,the Masterdeclared the Truths and identified
the Birth:—at th—e conclusion of the Truths father and son reached the Fruit of
the First Path: "This man was then the son, and I was the merchant of
Benares myself"
No. 239.
HARITA-MATA-JATAKA.
—
" When Itvas in theircage," etc. This story the Master told while dwelling in
the Bamboo-grove, about Ajatasattu.
Maha-Kosala, the king of Kosala's father, when he married his daughter
to king Bimbisara, had given hera village in Kasi for bath-money. After Ajata-
sattu murdered Bimbisara, his father, the queen very soon died of love for him.
Even after his mother's death, Ajatasattu still enjoyed the revenues of this
village. But the king of Kosala determined that no parricide should have a
village which was his by right of inheritance, and made war upon him. Some-
times the uncle got the best of it, and sometimes the nephew. And when
Ajatasattu was victor, he raised his banner and marched through the country
back to his capital in triumph ; but when he lost, all downcast he returned
withoutletting any oneknow.
Ithappened on —aday that the Bret—hren sat talking about it in ihe Hall of
Truth. "Friend" so one would say "Ajatasattu is delighted when he beats
his uncle, and when he loses he is cast down." The Master, entering the Hall,
asked what they were discussing this time [238] and they told him. He said,
"Brethren, this is not the first time that ; the man has been happy when he
conquered, and miserable when he did not." And he told them an old-world
tale.

— — —
; "
No. 239. 165
Once upon a time, when Brahraadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta became a Green Frog. At the time people set wicker cages in all
pits and holes ofthe rivers, to catch fish withal. Tn one cage were a large
number of fish. And a Water-snake, eating "fish, went into the trap him-
self. A number of the fish thronging together fell to biting him, until
he was covered with blood. Seeing no help f6r it, in fear of his life he
slipped out of the mouth of the cage, and lay down full of pain on the
edge of the water. At the same moment, the Green Frog took a leap and
fell into the mouth of the trap. The Snake, not knowing to whom he
could appeal, asked the Frog that he saw there in the trap ~" Fi-icud
Frog, are you pleased with the behaviour of yonder Fish?'' arid he uttered
the first stanza :
"When I was in their cage, the fish did bite
Me, though a snake. Green Frog, does that seem right?"
Then the Frog answered him, "Yes, friend Snake, it does : why not?
if you eat fish which get into your demesne, [239] the fish eat you when
youget into theirs. In his own place, and district, and feeding ground no
one is weak." So saying, he uttered the second stanza :
"Men rob as long as the — y can compass it
And when they cannot why, the biter's bit!
The Bodhisatta having pronounced his opinion, all the fish observing
the Snake's weakness, cried, "Let us seize our foe !" and came out of the
cage, and did him to death then and there, and then departed.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth:
"Ajatasattu was the Water-snake, and the Green Frog was I."
No. 240.
MAHAPINGALA-JATAKAK
—
''The Yelloic Kitig^' etc. This story the Master told at the -Jetavana Park,
about Devadatta the heretic.
Devadatta for nine months had ti-ied to compass the destruction of the
future Buddha, and had sunk down into the earth by the gateway of Jetavana.
1 Folk-LoieJournal, iii. Viiu

—
166 The Jdtaha. Booh II.
Then they that dwelt at Jetavana and in all the country round about were
delighted, saying, "Devadatta the enemy of Buddha has been swallowed up in
the earth: the adversary is slain, and the ^Master has become perfectly en-
lightened!" [240] And hearing these words sicken many a time and oft, the
people ofall the continent of India, and all the goblins, and livingcreatures, and
gods were delighted likewise. One day, all the brethren were talking together
in the Hall of Truth, and thus would they say: "Brother, since Devadatta
sank into the earth, what a number of people are glad, saying, Devadatta is
swallowed up by the earth!" The Teacher entered, and asked, "What are ye
all talkingabout here, brethren?" They told him. Then said he, "This is not
the first time, O brethren, that multitudes have rejoiced and laughed aloud at
the death of Devadatta. Long ago they rejoiced and laughed as they do now."
And he told them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time reigned at Benares a wicked and unjiist king named
Maha-pingala, the Great Yellow King, who did sinfully after his own will
and pleasure. With taxes and fines, and manymutilations' and robberies,
he crushed the folk as it were sugar-cane in a mill ; he was cruel, fierce,
ferocious. For other people he had not a grain of pity at home he was
;
harsh and implacable towards his wives, his sons and daughters, to his
brahmin courtiers and the householders of the country. He was like a
speck of dust that falls in the eye, like gravel in the broth, like a thorn
sticking in the heel.
Now the Bodhisatta was a son of king Maha-pihgala. After this king
had reigned for a long time, he died. When he died all the citizens of
Benares were overjoyed and laughed a great laugh they burnt his body
;
with a thousand cartloads of logs, and quenched the place of burning with
thousands of jai's of water, and consecrated the Bodhisatta to be king :
they caused a drum of rejoicing to beat about the streets, for joy that they
had got them a righteous king. They raised flags and banners, and decked
out the city; at every door was set a pavilion, and scattering parched
corn and flowers, they sat them down upon the decorated platforms under
fine canopies, and did eat and drink. The Bodhisatta himself sat upon a
fine divan [241] on a great raised dais, in great magnificence, with a white
parasol stretched above him. The courtiers and householders, the citizens
and the doorkeepers stood around their king.
But one doorkeeper, standing not far from the king, was sighing aiid
sobbing. "Good Porter," said the Bodhisatta, observing him, "all the
people are making merry for joy that my father is dead, but you stand
weeping. Come, was my father good and kind to you?" And with the
question he uttered the first stanza:
^ -jamghakahapanadigahanetiaI take tomean 'the takingawayoflegs, money, etc'
Possiblyjam(//id (takingit independently) maymean something like 'boot ' or 'stocks,'
but I can find no authority for this.

——
; : ; :
No. 240. Kw
"The Yellow King was ci*uel to all men
Now he is dead, all freely breatlie again.
Was he, the yellow-eyed, so very dear?
Oi", Porter, why do yoii stand weeping here?"
The man heard, and answered: "I am not weeping for sorrow that
Pirigala is dead. My head would be glad enough. For King Piiigala,
every time he came down from the palace, or went uj) into it, would give
me eight blows over the head with his list, like the blows of a blacksmith's
hammer. So when he goes down to the other world, he will deal eight
blows on the head of Yama, the gatekeeper of hell, as though he were
—
striking me. Then the people there will cry He is too cruel for us ! and
will send him up again. And I fear he will come and deal fisticuffs on
my head again, and that is why I weep." To explain the matter he
uttered the second stanza:— [2-12]
"The Yellow King was anything but dear
It is his coming back again I fear.
"What if he beat the king of Death, and then
The king of Death should send him back again?"
Then said the Bodhisatta: "That king has been burnt with a thousand
cartloads of wood; the place of his burning has been soaked with water
from thousands of pitchers, and the ground has been dug up all round
;
beings that have gone to the other world, except by force of fate', do not
return to the same bodily shape as they had befoi-e; do not be afraid I"
and to comfort him, he repeated the following stanza :
"Thousands of loads of wood have burnt him quite.
Thousands of pitchers quenched what still did burn
The earth — is dug about to left and right
Fear not the king will never more return.
After that, the porter took comfort. And the Bodhisatta ruled in
righteousness; and after giving gifts and doing other good acts, he passed
away to fare according to his deserts.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth
"Devadatta was Pingala ; and his son was I myself."
• Readingafimtra gativascl, 'exceptby the powerofre-birth.'

:
168 The Jdtaka. Book II.
No. 241\
SABBADATHA-JATAKA.
"Even as theJackal,'' etc. This story the Master told while staying in the
Bamboo-grove, about Devadatta.
Devadatta, having won favour in the eyes of Ajatasattu, yet could not make
the repute and supportwhich he received last any time. Ever since they saw
the miracle''' done when Nalagiri was sent against him, the reputation and
receipts ofDevadattaliegan to fall off. [243]
So one day, the Brethren were all talking about it in the Hall of Truth
"Friend, Devadatta managed to get reputation and support, yet could not keep
it up. This happened in olden days in just the same way." And then he told
them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, Brahmadatta was king of Benares, and the Bodhi-
satta was his chaplain; and he had mastered the three Vedas and the
eighteenbranches of knowledge. He knew the spell entitled ' Ofsubduing
the World.' (Now this spell is one which involves religious meditation.)
One day, the Bodhisatta thought that he would recite this spell; so he
sat down in a place apart upon a flat stone, and there went through his
reciting of it. It is said that this spell could be taught to no one without
use of a special rite for which reason he recited it in the place just
;
described. It so happened that a Jackal lying in a hole heard the spell at
We
the time that he was reciting it, and got it by heart. are told that
this jackal in a previous existence had been some brahmin who had learnt
the charm ' Of subduing the World.' —
The Bodhisatta ended his recitation, and rose up, saying "Surely
I have tha—t spell by heart now." Then the Jackal arose out of his hole,
and cried "Ho, brahmin I have learnt the spell better than you
!
know it yourself ! " and off—he ran. The Bodhisatta set off in chas — e, and
followed some way, crying "Yon jackal will do a great mischief catch
him, catch him " But thejackal got clear offinto the forest.
\
The Jackal found a she-jackal, and gave her a little nip upon the body.
"What is it, master?" she asked. "Do you know me," he asked, "or do
you not?" "^I do not know you." He repeated the spell, and thus had
1 Folk-LoreJournal, iv. 60.
- Agreatelephantwaslet loose for thepurpose of destroying the Buddha, but only
did him reverence : Cullavagga, vii. 3. 11 (S. B. E., Vinaya Texts, iii. 247); Hardy,
ManualofBuddhism, p. 320; Milinda-panha iv. 4. 30 (trans, in S.B.E., i. 288).
* Perhaps ajdnami "1 do knowyou."

—
" "
No. 241. ir,9
under his orders several hundreds of jackals, and gathered round him
all the elephants and horses, lions and tigers, swine and deer, and all
other fourfooted creatures [244] and their king lie became, under the
;
title of Sabbudatha, or Alltusk, and a she-jackal he made his consort. On
the back of two elephants stood a lion, and on the lion's back sat
Sabbadatha, the jackal king, along with his cOnsort the she-jackal ; and
great honour was paid to them.
Now the Jackal was tempted by his great honour, and became putfed
up with pride, and he resolved to capture the kingdom of Benares. So
with all the fourfooted creatures in his train, he came to a place near to
Benares. His host covered twelve leagues of ground. From his position
there he sent a message to the king, "Give up your kingdom, or fight foi-
it." The citizens of Benares, smitten with terror, shut close their gates
and stayed within.
Then the Bodhisatta drew near the king, and said to him, "Fear not,
mighty king leave me the task of fighting with the jackal king,
1
Sabbadatha. Except only me, no one is able to fight with him at all."
Thus he gave heart to the king and the citizens. "I will ask him at
once," he went on, "what he will do in order to take th—e city." So he
mounted the tower over one of the gates, and cried out "Sabbadatha,
what will you do to get possession ofthis realm1 "
"I will cause the lions to roar, and with the roaring I will frighten
the multitude : thus will I take it !
"Oh, that's it," thought the Bodhisatta, and down he came from the
tower. He made proclamation by beat of drum that all the dwellers
in the great cityof Benares, over all its twelve leagues, must stop uj) their
ears with flour. The multitude heard the command; they stopped up
their own ears with 6our, so that they could not hear each other speak :
nay, they even did the same to their cats and other animals.
Then the Bodhisatta went up a second time into the tower, and cried
out "Sabbadatha "
!
"What is it, Brahmin ? " quoth he.
"How will you take this realm1 " he asked.
"I will cau.se the lions to roar, and I will frighten the people, and
destroy them ; thus will I take it ! " he said.
"You will not be able to make the lions roar; these noble lions, with
their tawny paws and shaggy manes, will never do the bidding of an old
jackal like you "
I
The jackal, stubborn with pride, [245] answered, " Not only will the
other lions obey me, but I'll even make this one, upon whose back I sit,
roar alone !
"Very well," said the Bodhisatta, "do it ifyou can."
So he tapped with his foot on the lion which he sat upon, to roar.

—
:
170 The Jdtaka. Book II.
And the lion resting his mouth upon the Elephant's temple, roared thrice,
without any manner of doubt. The elephants were terrified and dropped
the Jackal down at their feet they tramjjled upon his head and crushed it
;
to atoms. Then and there Sabbadatha perished. And the elephants,
hearing the roar of the lion, were frightened to death, and wounding one
another, they all perished there. The rest of the creatures, deer and
swine, down to the hares and cats, perished then and there, all except the
lions; and these ran off and took to the woods. There was a heap of
carcases covering the ground for twelve leagues.
The Bodhisatta came down from the tower, and had the gates of the
city thrown open. By beat of drum he caused proclamation to be made
throughout the city : "Let all the people take the flour from out of their
ears, and they that desire meat, meat let them take ! " The people all ate
what meat they could fresh, and the rest they dried and preserved.
It was at this time, according to tradition, that people first began to
dry meat.
TheMasterhavingfinished this discourse,identified the Birth bythe following
verses, full ofdivine wisdom :
"Even as the Jackal, stiff" with pride,
Craved for a mighty host on every side,
And all toothed creatures came
Flocking around, until he won great fame
"Even so the man who is supplied
With a great host of men on every side,
As great renown has he
As had the Jackal in his sovranty."
[246] "In those days Devadatta was the Jackal, Ananda was the king, and 1
wasthe chaplain."
No. 242.
SUNAKHA-JATAKA.
''Foolhh Dog" etc. This story the Master told whilst living in Jetavana,
about adogthat used to be fed in the resting hall by the Ambala tower.
It is said that from a puppy this dog had been kept there and fed by some
water-carriers. In course of time it grew up there to be a big dog. Once a

— — —
: "
No. 242. 171
v u i p l p l e a r ger ga h r a m p e p n e t ne a d nd to a se r e u h pe i e m ; ; t a h n e d n, h f e as b t o e u n g i h ng t l h i i i m m t f o ro a m c t h h a e in w , at l e e r d -c t a h r e ri d e o r g s f a o w r a a y n .
The dog was led away, unresisting, making no sound, and followed and followed
the new master, editing whatever was offered. "He's fond of me, no doul)t,''
t hi h m o s u e g l h f tt fr h e e e, ma th n an ; a o n f d f h le e t h we i n m t, fi' a ce nd fro n m ev t e h r e s c t h o a i i ) n p . ed N un o til soo h n e er ca di m d e t b h a e ck do t g o H t i h i e d
place he started from.
Seeing him, the Brethren guessed what had happened ; and in the evening,
w "F h r e i n en t d h — ey he w r e e r 's e t g h a e th d e o re g d ba in ck th a e ga H i a n ll in of our Tru r t es h t , in t g he h y all be I ga h n ow ta c l l k e i v n e g r a h b e ou n t ui. i s t t .
have been, to get rid of his chain I No sooner free, than back he rani"' The
Master, entering, asked what they were all talking about as they sat together.
They told him. He rejoined, " Brethren, tins is not the first time our dog was
clever at getting rid of his chain ; he was just tlie same before." And he told
them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born in a rich family of the kingdom of Kasi ; and when
he grew up, he set up a house of his own. There was a man in Benares
who had a dog which had been fed on I'ice till it grew fat. [247] And a
certain villager who had come to Benares saw the dog ; and to the owner
he gave a fine garment and a piece of money for the dog, which he led off
bound by a strap. Arrived at the outskirts of a forest, he entered a hut,
tied up the dog, and lay down to sleep. At that moment the Bodhisatta
entered the forest on some errand, and beheld the dog made fast by a
thon * g »>; whereat he uttered the first stanza :
"Foolish Dog why don't you bite
!
Through that strap that holds you tight I
In a trice you would be free.
Scampering oft" merrily!
On hearing this stanza, the Dog uttered the second :
—
"Eesolute determined, I
Wait my opportunity
Careful watch and ward I keep
Till the people are asleep."
So spake he ; and when the company were asleep, he gnawed through
the strap, and returned to his master's house in great glee.
[248] "When this discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth:
"Thedogs are the same, and I was the wise man."

!
172 The Jdfrdri. Book IL
No. 243.
GUTTILA-JATAKA.
—
"/ had apupil once" etc. This story the Master told in the Bamboo-grove,
about Devadatta.
Oil this occasion the Brethren said to Devadatta: "Friend Devadatta, the
Supreme Buddha isyour teacher
;
of him you learnt the Three Pitakas and how
t y o ou p r ro o d w u n ce t t e h a e ch F er o ! u " r k D i e n v d a s d o a f tt E a cs r t e a p s l y ie ; d: yo " u AV r h e y al , ly fr s i h e o n u d l s, d — no G t ot a a ct ma th t e he en A e s m c y eti t c o
m Pi y ta t k e a a s, che a r nd ? p N r o o t du a ce b d it t : he wa F s ou it r n E o c t st b a y si m es y ?" own He po r w e e f r us t e h d at to I a le c a k r n n o t w t l h e e dg T e hr h e i e s
teacher.
The Brethren fell a-talking of this in the Hall of Truth. "Friend! Deva-
datta repudiates his teacher he has become an enemy of the Supreme Buddha
!
and what a miserable fate has befallen him1" In came the Master, and enquired
what they were all talking of together. They told him. "Ah, Brethren," said
he, "this is not the first time that Devadatta has repudiated his teacher, and
shown himself my enemy, and come to a miserable end. It was ju.st the same
before." And then he told the followingstory.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born in a musician's family. His name was Master
Guttila. When he grew up, he mastered all the bi-anches of music, and
under the name of Guttila the Musician he became the chief of his kind in
all India. He married no wife, but maintained his blind parents'.
At that time certain traders of Benai'es made a journey to Ujjeni for
trade. A holiday was proclaimed ; they all clubbed together ; they pro-
cured scents and perfumes and ointments, and all manner of foods and
meats. "Pay the hire," they cried, "and fetch a musician!"
It happened that at the time a certain Musila [249] was the chief
musician in Ujjeni. Him they sent for, and made him their musician.
Musila was a player on the lute ; and he tuned his lute up to the highest
key, to play upon. But they knew the playing of Guttila the Musician,
and his music seemed to them like scratching on a mat. So not one of
them showed pleasu—re. When Musila saw thatthey expressed no pleasure,
he said to himself "Too sharp, I suppose," and tuning his lute down to
the middle tone, he played it so. Still theysat indifferent. Then thought
he, "I suppose they know nothing about it;" and making as though he
1 Guttilais one ofthe fourmenwho "even in theirearthlybodies attained to glory
in thecityofthegods." Milinda, iv. 8. 25 (trans, in ,s;.B.K., ii. 145).

— —
No. 243. 173
too were ignorant, he played with the strings all loose. As before, they
made no sign. Then Musila asked them, "Good merchants, why do you
not like my playing? "
"What! are you playing?" cried they. " We imagined that you must
be tuning up."
"Why, do you know any better musician,'' he asked, "or are you too
ignorant to like my playing 1 "
Said the merchants, " We have heard the music of Guttila the
Musician, at Benares ; and yours sounds like women crooning to soothe
their babies."
"Here, take your money back," said he, "I don't want it. Only
when you go to Benares, please take me with you."
They agi*eed, and took him back to Benares with them ; they pointed
out the dwelling of Guttila, and departed eveiy man to his own
house.
Musila entered the Bodhisatta's dwelling ; he saw his beautiful lute
where it stood, tied up : he took it down, and played \i|)on it. At this the
old parents, who could not see him because they were blind, [2-50] cried
out
"The mice are gnawing at the lute Shoo shoo the rats are biting
! ! !
the lute to pieces "
!
At once Musila put down the lute, and greeted the old folks.
"Where do you come from?" asked they.
He replied, "I come from Ujjeni to learn at the feet ofthe teacher."
"Oh, all right," said they. He asked where the teacher was.
"He is out, father; but he will be back to-day," came the answer.
Musila sat downand waited until he came ; thenafter some friendly words,
he told his errand. Now the Bodhisatta was skilled in divining from the
lineaments of the body. He perceived that this was not a good man so
;
he refused. "Go, my son, this art is not for you." Musila clasped the
feet of the Bodhisatta's parents, to help his suit, and prayed them
"Make him teach me!" Again and again his parents besought the Bodhi-
satta to do so; until he could not stand it any longer, and did as he was
asked. And Musila went along with the Bodhisatta into the king's
palace.
"Who is this, master ? " asked the king, on seeing him.
"A pupil ofmine, great king!" was the reply.
By and bye he got the ear of the king.
Now the Bodhisatta did not stint his knowledge, but taught his pupil
everything which he knew himself. This done, he said, " Your knowledge
is now perfect."
Thought Musila, "I have now mastered my art. This city of Benares
is the chief city in all India. My teacher is old ; here tiierefore must I

" "
174 'file Jdtaka. Book II.
stay," So he said to his teacher, "Sir, 1 would serve the king." "Grood,
my son," replied he, "I will tell the king of it."
He came before the king, and said, " My pupil is wishful to serve yoiir
Highness. Fix what his fee shall be."
The king answered, "His fee shall be the half of yours." And he
came and told it to Musila. Musila said, " If I receive the same as you, I
will serve; but if not, then I will not serve him." [251]
"Why?" "Say : do I not know all that you know]" "Yes, you do."
"Then why does he offer me the half?"
The Bodhisatta informed the king what had passed. The king said,
"If he is as perfect in his art as you, he shall receive the same as you
do." This saying of the king the Bodhisatta told to his pupil. The
pupil c—onsented to the bargain
;
and the king, being informed of this,
replied "Very good. What day will you compete together?" "Be it
the seventh day from this, O king."
The king sent for Musila. "I understand that you are ready to try
issue with your master? "
"Yes, your Majesty," was the reply.
The king would have dissuaded him. "Don't do it," said he, "there
should be never rivalry between — master and pupil."
"Hold, king !" cried he "yes, let there be a meeting between me
and my teacher on the seventh day ; we shall know which of us is master
ofhis art."
So the k—ing agreed ; and he sent the drum beating round the city with
this notice : "Oyez ! on the seventh day Guttila the Teacher, and Musila
the Pupil, will meet at the door of the royal palace, to show their skill.
Let the people assemble from the city, and see their skill !
The Bodhisatta thought within himself, "This Musila is young and
fresh, I am old and my strength is gone. What an old man does will not
prosper. If my pupil is beaten', there is no great credit in that. If he
beats me, death in the woods is better than the shame which will be my
portion." So to the woods he went, bvit he kept returning through fear of
death and going back to the wood through fear of shame. And in this
way six days passed by. The grass died as he walked, and his feet wore
away a path.
At that time, Sakka's throne became hot. Sakka meditated, and
perceived what had happened. "Guttila the Musician is suffering much
sorrow in the foi'est by reason of his pupil. [252] I must help him !" So
he went in haste and stood before the Bodhisatta. "Master," said he,
"why have you taken to the woods?
"Who are you?" asked the other.
^ Beadingantevdsike.

—
; ;
No. 243. 175
"lamSakka."
Then said the Bodhisatta, " I was in fear of being worsted by my
pupil, king of the gods ; and therefoi-e did I flee to the woods." And
he repeated the tiist stanza :
'
"I had a pupil once, who learnt of me
The seven-stringed lute's melodiou's minstrelsy
He now would fain his teacher's skill outdo.
Kosiya- do thou my helper be!"
1
" Fear not," said Sakka, "I am your defence and refuge:" and lit-
repeated the second stanza :—
"Fear not, for I \yill help thee at thy neud
For honour is the teacher's rightful meed.
Fear not thy pupil shall not rival thee,
But thou shal ! t prove the better man indeed."
"As yon play, you shall break one ofthe strings ofyour lute, and play
upon six; and the music shall be as good as before. Musila too shall
break a string, and he shall not be able to make music with his lute ; then
shall he be defeated. And when you see that he is defeated, you shall
break the second string ofyour lute, and the third, even unto the seventh,
and you shall go on playing with nothing but the body; and from the
ends ofthe broken strings the sound shall go forth, and fill all the land of
Benares for a space of twelve leagues." [253] With these words he gave
the Bodhisatta three playing-dice, and went on: "When the sound of the
lute has filled all the city, you must throw one of these dice into the air
;
and three hundred nymphs shall descend and dance before you. While
they dance throw up the second, and three hundred shall dance in front of
your lute ; then the third, and then three hundred more shall come down
and dance within the arena. I too will come with them go on, and fear
;
not!"
In the morning the Bodhisatta returned home. At the palace door ii
pavilion was set up, and a throne was set apart for the king. He came
down from the palace, and took his seat upon the divan in the gay
pavilion. All around him were thousands of slaves, women beauteously
apparelled, courtiers, brahmins, citizens. All the people of the town had
come together. In the courtyard they wei-e fixing the seats circle on
circle, tier above tier. The Bodhisatta, washed and anointed, had eaten
of all manner of finest meats ; and lute in hand he sat waiting in his
appointed place. Sakka was there, invisible, poised in the air, surrounded
' These stanzas, together withthose which follow on page 255, and others, occur
in the Vimdna-vatthu, no. 33 (p. 28 in theP. T. S. ed.), Guttila-vimdtia.
- A title of Indra; the wordmeans an Owl (Skr. Kaiiqika) : it is one of tho many
Indian clan names that are al.so names ofanimals,

176 The Jcitaka. Booh II.
by a great company. However, the Bodhisatta saw him. Musila too was
there, and sat in his own seat. All around was a great concourse of
people.
First the two played each the same piece. When they played, both
the same, the multitude was delighted, and gave abundant applause.
Sakka spoke to the Bodhisatta, from his place in the air : "Break one of
the strings ! " said he. Then the Bodhisatta brake the bee-string ; and the
string, though broken, gave out a sound from its broken end ; it seemed
like mxisic divine. Musila too broke a string ; but after that no sound
came out of it. His teacher broke the second, and so on to the seventh
string he played upon the body alone, and the sound continued, and
: —
filled the town : the multitude in thousands waved and waved their
kerchiefs in the air, in thousands they shouted applause. [254] The
Bodhisatta threw up one of the dice into the air, and three hundred
nymphs descended and began to dance. And when he had thrown the
second and third in the same manner, there were nine hundred nymphs a-
dancing as Sakka had said. The — n the king made a sign to the multitude
;
up rose the multitude, and cried "You made a great mistakeinmatching
yourself against your teacher You know not your measure!' Thus they
!
cried out against Musila ; and with stones and staves, and anything that
came to hand, they beat and bruised him to death, and seizing him by the
feet, they cast him upon a dustheap.
The king in his delight showered gifts upon the Bodhisatta, and so
did they of the city. Sakka likewise spake pleasantly to him, and said,
"Wise Sir, I will send anon my charioteer Matali with a car drawn by a
thousand thoroughbreds ; and you shall mount upon my divine car, drawn
by a thousand steeds, and travel to heaven"; and he departed.
When Sakka was returned, and sat upon his throne, made all of a
precious stone, the daughters of the gods asked him, "Where have you
been, kingl" Sakka told them infullall that had happened, and praised
the virtues and good parts of the Bodhisatta. Then said the daughters of
the gods,
"O king, we long to look upon this teacher; fetch him hither!"
Sakka summoned Matali. "The nymphs of heaven," said he, "desire
to look upon Guttila the Musician. Go, seat him in my divine car, and
bringhimhither," Thecharioteerwentandbroughtthe Bodhisatta. Sakka
gave him a friendly greeting. "The maidens of the gods," said he, "wish
to hear your music, Master."
"We musicians, O great king," said he, "live by practice of our art.
For a recompense I will play."
"Play on, and I will recompense you."
"I care for no other recompense but this. Let these daughters of the
godstell mewhatacts of virtuebroughtthem here
;
then will I play." [255]

—
; ;
No. 243. 177
Then said the daughters of the gods, "Gladly will we tell you after of
the virtues that we have practised but first do you play to us, Master."
;
For the space of a week the Bodhisatta played to them, and his music
surpassed the musicofheaveu. On the seveuth dayheasked the daughters
of the gods oftheir virtiious lives, beginning from the first. One of them,
in the time of the Buddha Kassapa, had giveii an uppca" garment to a
certain Brother ; and having renewed existence as an attendant of Sakka,
had become chief among the daughters of the g—ods, with a retinue of a
thousand nymphs of her the Bodhisatta asked "What did you do in a
:
previous existence, that has bi-ought you here?" The manner of his
question and the gift she had given have been told in the Vimana story :
they spoke as follows :
" brilliant goddess, like the morning star.
Shedding thy light of beauty near and far^.
Whence springs this beauty? whence this hapi)iness?
Whence all the blessings that the heart can bless?
I ask thee, goddess excellent in might,
Whence comes this all-pervading wondrous light?
When thou wert mortal woman, what didst thou
To gain the glory that surrounds thee now?"
"Chief among men and chief of women she
Who gives an uj^per robe in charity.
She that gives pleasant things is sure to win
A home divine and fair to enter in.
Behold this habitation, how divine
A As t f h r o u u it sa o n f d m n — y ym g p o h o s d s d t e a e n d d s r th e i a s dy ho at m ! e ra i y s c m a i ll ne :
Fair nymphs and I the fairest of them all.
And therefore am I excellent in might
Hence comes this all-pervading wondrous light!"
[25G] Another had given flowers for worship to a Brother who craved
an alms. Another had been asked for a scented wreath of five sprays
for the shrine, and gave it. Another had given sweet fruits. Another
had given fine essences. Another had given a scented five-spray to the
shrine of the Buddha Kassaj)a. Another had heard the discourse of
Brethren or Sisters in wayfaring, or such as had taken up their abode in
the house of some family. Another had stood in the water, and given
water to a Brother who had eaten his meal on a boat. Anotlier living
in the world had done her duty by motlier-in-law and father-in-law, never
losing her temper. Another had divided even the share that she received,
and so did eat, and was virtuous. Another, who had been a slave in some
household, without anger and without pride had given away a share of lier
own portion, and had been born again as an attendant upon the king of
^ These two lines occur in the Comm. to theDhaminapada, j). <•>'.). See also note
on the First Stanza, above.
J. II. 12

—
'
178 The Jataka. Book II.
the gods. So also all those who are written in the story of Guttila-
vimana,thirty andsevendaughtersofthegods, wereasked bythe Bodhisatta
what each had done to come there, and they too told what they had done
in the same way by verses.
On hearing all this, the Bodhisatta exclaimed: '"Tis good for me, in
sooth, truly 'tis very good for me, that I came here, and heard by how
very small a merit great glory has been attained. Henceforward, when I
return to the world of men, I will give all manner of gifts, and perform
good deeds." And he uttered this aspiration :
" O h h a a p p p p y y p d i a l w g n rim ! age, ha w p h p e y re m b u y st I s I ee be !
These daughters of the gods, divinely fair, [257]
And hear their sweet discom\se ! Henceforth I swear
Full of sweet peace, and generosity.
Of temperance, and truth my life shall be,
Till I come there where no more sorrows are."
Then after seven days had passed, the king of heaven laid his com-
mands upon Matali the charioteer, and he seated Guttila in the chariot
and sent him to Benares. And when he came to Benares, he told the
people what he had seen with his own eyes in heaven. From that time
the people resolved to do good deeds with all their might.
Wlien this discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth "In those
:
days Devadatta was MCisila, Anm-uddha was Sakka, Ananda was the king, and I
was Guttilathe Musician."
No. 244.
VITICCHA-JATAKA.
—
" What hesees," etc. This story the Master told at Jetavana, about aturntail
vagrant who wandered aboutthe country.
It is said that this man could not find any one to argue with him in all
w I i n t d h ia h ; im t . ill Y h e e s— ca h m e e wa t s o t S o f l i d v—att t h h i e , S a u n p d re a m s e ke B d u w d h d e h t a h ; er he a a n r y ing on w e hi c c o h u , ld he di a s n p d ut a e
multitude with him repaired to Jetavana, and put a question to the Master,
* J'imdna-vutthu, p. 31.

— —
"
No. 244. 171)
whilst he was discoursing in the midst of the four kinds of discipl&s. The
Master answered his question, and tlien put one to him in retni-n. This tlio
man failed to answer, got up, and turned tail. The crowil sitting round
exclaimed, "One word. Sir, vanquished tlie itinerant!" Saiil the Master, " Ves,
Brethren,andjust as I havevanquished himnowwithone word,so I did hcforc."
Then he told a story ofolden days.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a brahmin in the kingdom of Kasi. He grew up,
and mastered his passions; and embracing the religious life, [^.IS] he
dwelt a long time in the Himalayas.
He came down from tlie highlands, and took up his abode near a con-
siderable town, in a hut ofleaves built be.side a bend of the river Ganges.
A certain pilgrim, who found no one that could answerhim throughout
all India, came to that town. "Is there anyone," asked ho, " who can
argue with me?"
Yes, they said, and told him the power of the Bodhisatta. So, followed
by a great multitude, he made his way to the place wliere the Bodhisatta
dwelt, and after greeting him, took a seat.
'•Will you drink," he asked, "of the Ganges water, infused with wild
wood odours?"
The pilgrim tried to catch him in his words. "What is Ganges'?
Ganges may be sand, Ganges may be water, Ganges may be the near
bank, Ganges may be the far bank!
Said the Bodhisatta to the pilgi-im, " Besides the sand, the water, the
hither and the further bank, what other Ganges can you have?" The
pilgrim had no answer for this; he rose up, and went away. When he
had gone the Bodhisatta spake these verses by way of discourse to the
assembled multitude:
"What he sees, he will not have
What he sees not he will crave. ;
He may go a long way yet
What he wants he will not get.
"He contemns what he has got
Once 'tis gained, he wants it no ; t.
He craves everything always
Who craves nothing earns our : praise."
[259] When this discourse was ended, the Masteridentilied the Eirth : "The
vagrant is the same in bothcases, and I myselfwasthen theascetic."
12—2

180 Tlie Jataka. Book II.
No. 245.
MtJLA-PARIYAYA-JATAKA.
—
"Time all consumes" etc. This is astory told by the Master while he stayed
near Ukkattha, in the Subhagavana Park, in connexion with the Chapter on
the Succession ofCauses.
At that time, it is said, five hundred brahmins who had mastered the three
Vedas, having embraced salvation,studied theThreePit—akas. Theselearnt, they
became intoxicated with pride, thinking to themselves "The Supreme Buddha
knowsjust the Three Pitakas, and we know them too. So what is the difterence
between usi" They discontinued their waiting upon the Buddha, and went
about with an equal following oftheirown.
One day the Master, when these men were seated before him, repeated the
Chapter on the Succession of Cavises, and adorned it with the Eight Stages of
Knowl—edge. They did not understand a word. The thought came into their
mind "Here we have been believing that there were none so wise as we, and of
this we understand nothing. There is none so wise as the Buddhas : the
excellence of the Buddhas!" Afterthis they were humbled, as quiet as serpents
with theirfangs extracted.
When the Master had stayed as long as he wished in Ukkattha, he departed
to Vesali ; and at Gotama's shrine he repeated the Chapter on Gotama. There
was a quaking of a thousand worlds ! Hearing this, these Brothers became
saints.
But however, after the Master had finished repeating the Chapter on the
Succession of Causes, during his visit to Ukkattha [260] the Brethren discussed
the whole afi^air in the Hall ofTruth. "How great is the power of the Buddhas,
friend Why, these brahmin mendicants, who used to be so drunk with pride,
!
have been humbled by the lesson on the Succession ofCauses!" The Master
entered and asked what their talk was about. They told him. He said,
"Brethren, this is not the first time that I have humbled these men,who used to
carry theirheads so high with pride ; I did thesamebefore." And then he told
them a tale ofthe olden time.
Onceuponatime, when BrahmadattareignedinBenares, the Bodhisatta
was born a brahmin; who when he grew up, and mastered the Three
Vedas, became a far-famed teacher, and instructed five hundred pupils in
sacred verses. These five hundred, having given their best energy to
their work, and perfected their learning, said within themselves,
"We know as much as our teacher: there is no difference."
Proud and stubborn, they would not come before their teacher's face,
nor do their round of duty.
One day, they saw their master seated beneath a jujube tree; and
desiring to mock him, they tapped upon the tree with their fingers. "A.
worthless tree!" said they.

— —
No. 245. ISl
The Bodhisatta observed that they were mocking him. "My pupils,"
he said, "I will ask you a question."
They were delighted. "Speak on," .said they, "we will answer."
Their teacher asked the question by repeating the first stanza :
"T W i h m o e i a s l ' l t c c o o n n s s u u m m e e s s , t o h v e en al t l i -c m o e ns i u ts m e e l r f ? a — s t w e e l l l l M . "
[261] The youths listened to the problem; Ijut not one amongst tlieni
could answer it. Then said the Bodhisatta,
"Do not imagine that this question is in the Three Veilas. You
imagine that you know all that I know, and so you act like the jujube
tree*. You don't know that I know a great deal which is unknown to
—
you. Leave me now: I give you seven days think over this questionfor
so long."
So they made salutation, and departed each to his own house. There
for a week they pondered,yet they could make neither head nor tail of the
problem. On theseventh day, theycame to their teacher, and greeted him,
sitting down.
"Well, ye ofauspicious speech, have you solved the question?"
"No, we have not," said they.
Again the Bodhisatta spoke in reproof, uttering the second stanza;
"Heads grow on necks, and hair on heads will grow:
How many heads have ears, 1 wish to know?"
"Fools are ye," he went on, rebuking the youths "ye have ears with
:
holes in them, but not wisdom ;" and he solved the pi'oblem. [262] They
listened. "Ah," said they, "great are our Teachers !" and theycraved his
pardon, and quenching their pride they waited iipon the Bodhisatta.
When the Masterhad ended this discourse, he identified the Birth: "At tliat
time these Brothers were the live hundred pupils; and I my.self was their
teacher."
^ Kdlaghaso, the 'consumer of time,' is he who, by destroying the thirst for
existence, solivesasnot to beborn again (SchoUast's explanation).
2 The jujube fruit is often contrasted with the cocoanut, as being onlyexternally
pleasing, see Hitop. i. 95.

— —
182 The Jdtaha. Book II.
No. 246.
TELOVADA-JATAKA.
" The wickedkills," etc.—Thin is a story which the Master told while staying
iu his gabled chamber near Vesali, about Sihasenapati.
It is said that this man, after he had fled to the Refuge, offered hospitality
and then gave food with meat in it. The naked ascetics on hearing this were
angry and displeased; they wanted to do the Buddha a mischief; "The priest
Gotama," sneered they, "with his eyes open, eats meat prepared on purpose for
him."
The Brethren discussed this matter in their Hall of Truth: "Friend,
Nathaputta the Ascetici goes about sneering, because, he says, 'Priest Gotama
eats meat prepared on piu-pose forhim, with his eyes open'." Hearing this, the
Master rejoined:—"This is not the first time. Brethren, that Nathaputta has
been sneering at me for eatingmeat which was got ready for me on purpose ; he
didjust so in formertimes." And he told them an old-world tale.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a brahmin. When he came of age he embraced the
I'eligious life.
He came down from Himalaya to get salt and seasoning, and next day
walked the city, begging alms. A certain wealthy man designed to annoy
the ascetic. So he brought him to his dwelling, and pointed out a seat,
and then served him with fish. After the meal, the man sat on one side,
and said,
"This foodwas pi'epared on purpose for you, bykilling living creatures.
Not upon my head is this wrong, but upon yours!" And he repeated the
first stanza:
"The wicked kills, and cooks, and gives to eat :
He is defiled with sin that takes such meat."
[263] On hearing this, the Bodhisatta recited the second stanza:
"The wicked may for gift slay wife or son.
Yet, if the holy eat, no sin is donc'-^."
1 He is one of the six titthiyas (Heretics), and generallycalledNdtapiitta (which
isprobably therightspellinghere). The 'nakedascetics ' wereprobablythe Jains.
- "...Those who take life are in fault, but not the personswho eattheflesh ; my
priests have permission to eat whatever food it is customary to eat in any place or
country, so that it be done without the indulgence of the appetite, or evil desire."
Hardy, Manual, p. 327.

—
.
No. 246. 183
And the Bodhisatta with these words of instruction rose from his seat
and departed.
This discourse ended, the Master identified the Bii-th: "Nfithaputti tlio
Naked Ascetic was this wealthy man, and I was theascetic."
No. 247.
PADANJALI-JATAKA
—
">Su>-el>/ this lad,'" etc. This story the Master told wliilc dwelling in
Jetavaua, about the Elder Laludayi.
One day, it is said, the two chief disciples were discussing a question. The
Brethren who heard the discussion praised the Elders—. Elder Lfiludayi, who sat
amongstthecompany,curledhis lipwiththetliought "What is theirknowledge
compared with mine?" When the Bretliren noticed this, they left him. The
company broke up.
The Brethren were talking about it in the Hall of Truth. "Friend, did ynn
see how LfJudayi curled his lip in scorn of the two chief disciples?" On
hearing which the Master said, "Brethren, in olden days, as now, Laludayi had
no otheranswer but a curl ofthe lip." Then he told thein an old-world tale.
[264] Once upon a time, when king Brahmadatta was reigning in
Benares, the Bodhisatta was his adviser in things spiritual and temporal.
Now the king had a son, Piidafijali by name, an idle lazy loafer. By and
bye the king died. His obsequies over, the courtiers talked ofconsecrating
his son Padanjali to be king. But the Bodhisatta said,
—
"'Tis a lazy fellow, an idle loafer, shall we take and consecrate him
king1 "
The courtiers held a trial. Tliey sat the youth down before them, and
made a wrong decision. They adjudged something to the %vrong owner,
and asked him, "Young sir, do we decide rightly? "
The lad curled his lip.
"He is a wise lad, I think," thought the Bodhisatta; "he niu.st know
that we have decided wrongly :" and he recited the first verse :
"Surely the lad is wise beyond all men.
lie curls liis lip—he nuist see through us, then!"

—
"
184 The Jdtaka. Book II.
Next day, as before, they arranged a trial, but this time judged it
aright. Again they asked him what he thought ofit.
Again he curled his lip. Then the Bodhisatta perceived that he was a
blind fool, and repeated the second verse :
"Not right from — wrong, nor bad from good he knows :
He curls his lip but no more sense he shows."
The courtiers became aware that the young man Padanjali was a fool,
and they made the Bodhisatta king.
Whenthe ]\Iastcrhad ended this discourse,he identified theBirth
:
"Laludayi
was Padaiijali, and I was the wise com'tier."
No. 248.
KIMSUKOPAMA-JATAKA.
—
[265] '^All have seen" etc. This story the Master told whilst staying at
Jetavana, on the Chapterabout the Judas tree^.
Four Brothers, approaching the Tathagata, asked him to exj^lain the means
by which ecstasy maybe induced. This heexplained. This done,theydispersed
to the several i)laces where they spent their nights and days. One of them,
having learnt the Six Spheres of Touch, became a saint; another did so after
learning the Five Elements ofBeing, the third afterlearning the Four Principal
Elements, the fourth after learning the Eighteen Constituents ofBeing. Each
ofthem recounted to the Masterthe particular excellence which hehad attained.
A thought came into the mind ofone oftlieni and he asked theMaster, "There
;
is only one Nirvana for all these modes ofmeditation; how is itthatall of them
lead to sainthood?" Then the Master asked, "Is not this like the people who
saw the Judas treel" As they requested him to tell them about it, he repeated
atale ofbygone days.
Once on a time Brahmadatta the king of Benai'es had four sons. One
day they sent for the charioteer, and said to him,
"We want to see a Judas tree show us one!
;
^ Khhsuka—Butea Frundosa.

— ——
No. 248. 185
"Very well, I will," the charioteer replied. But he ditl not show it
to them all together. He took the eldest at once- to tlio forest in the
chariot, and showed him tin; trtie at the time when tlie hiids wcrt^ just
sprouting from the stem. To the second he showed it when the leaves
were green, to the third at tlu; time of blossoming, and to the fourth when
it was bearing fruit.
After this it happened tliat the four brothers were sitting together,
and some one asked, "What sort of a tree is the Judas tree?" Then the
first brother answered,
"Like a burnt stump!"
And the secon—d cried, "Like a banyan tree!"
And the third " Like a piece of meat'!"
And the fourth said, "Like the acacia!"
They were vexed at each other's answers, and ran to find their father.
"My lord," they asked, "what sort of a tree is the Judas tree?"
"What did you say to that?" he asked. They told him the manner
oftheir answers. Said the king,
"All four of you have seen the tree. Only when the charioteer
showed you the tree, you did not ask him ' What is the tree like at such
a time?' [266] or 'at such another time?' You made no distinctions,
and that is the reason of your mistake." And he repeated the first
stanza:
"All have seen the Judas tree
What is your perplexity?
No one asked the charioteer
What its form the livelong year!"
Tiie Master, having explained the matter, then addressed the Bretln-cn
"Now as the four brothers, because they did not make a distinrtion and ask, :
fell in doubt about the tree, so you have fallen in doubt about tlie right" : aiul
in his perfect wisdom he uttered the second verse :
"Who know the right with some deficiency
Feel doubt, like those four brothers with the tree."
When this discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth "At that
:
time I was the king ofBenares."
1 Ithaspinkflowers.

— —
"
186 The Jataka. Book II.
No. 249.
SALAKA-JATAKA.
"ZiXc m>i ownson," etc.—Th'm story the Mastertoldwhilst living inJetavana,
abouta distinguished Elder.
It is said that he had ordained a youth, whom he treated unkindly. The
novice at last could stand it no longer, and returned to the world. Then the
Elder tried to coax him. [267] "Look here, lad," said he, "yourrobe shall be
your own, and your bowl too I haveanother bowl and robe which I'll giveyou.
Join us again !" At first he ; refused, but at last after much asking he did so.
From the day he joined the brotherhood the Elder maltreated him as before.
Again the lad found it too much, and left the order. As the Elder begged him
again several times to join—, the lad replied, "You can neither do with me nor
without me let me alone I will notjoin!"
;
The Brethren got talking about this in the Hall of Truth. "Friend," said
they, "a sensitive lad that! He knew the Elder too well to join us." The
IMaster came in and asked what they were talking about. They told him. He
rejoined, "Not only is the lad sensitive now, Brethren, but he was justthe same
of old when once he saw the faults of tliat man, he would not accept him
;
again." And he told a story ofthe olden time.
Once upon a time, in the reign of Brahmadatta king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born into a landowner's family, and gained a living by
selling corn. Another man, a snake-charmer, had trained a monkey, made
him swallow an antidote, and making a snake play with the monkey he
gained his livelihood in this way.
A merrymaking had been proclaimed ; this man wished to make merry
at the feast, and he entrusted the monkey to this merchant, bidding him
not neglect it. Seven days after he came to the merchant, and asked for
his monkey. The monkey heard his master's voice, and came out quickly
from the grain shop. At once the man beat him over the back with a
piece of bamboo ; then he took him off to the woods, tied him up and fell
asleep. So soon as the monkey saw that he was asleep, he loosed his
bonds, scampered off and climbed a mango tree. He ate a mango, and
dropped the stone upon the snake-charmer's head. The man awoke, and
lookedup: there was the monkey. "I'll wheedle him!" he thought, "and
when he comes down from the tree, I'll catch him !" So to wheedle him,
he repeated the first vex'se :
"Like my own son you shall be,
Master in our family
[268] Come down, Nuncle^ : from the tree
Come and hurry home with me?
1 sdlaha, lit. 'brother-in-law,' often used as a term ofabuse.

—
No. 241). 187
The monkey listened, and repeated the second verse :
"You arc laughing in your sleeve !
Have you quite forgot that beating i
Here I am content to live
(So good-bye) ripe mangoes eating."
Up he arose, and was soon lost in the wood ; while the snake-charmer
returned to his house in hi^rh dudgeon.
When this discourse was ended, the Master identified the I'irtli : "Ournovice
was the Monkey. The Elder was the snake-charmer, and I myselfwas the corn-
merchant."
No. 250.
KAPl-JATAKA.
—
"J /loli/ sage" etc. This story was told by the Master whilst living at
Jetavana, about a hypocritical Brother.
The Brotherhood found out his hypocrisy. In the Hall of Truth the}^
weretalking it over : "Friend, Brother So-and-so, after embracing the Buddha's
religion, which leads to salvation, still practises hypocrisy." The IMaster on
coming in [269] asked what they were discussing together. They told hiui.
f S o a r id a h h e y , po " c B r r i e t t e h h r e en w , a i s t b i e s fo n r o e t , t w h h e en on h l e y s t h im a e mm th e i d s s B i r m o p t l h y er fo h r a t s he be s e a n ke a o h f y w po a c r r m i i t n e g;
himselfat the fire." Then hetold them an old-world tale.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta waskinginBenares,the Bodhisatta
was born one of a brahmin family. When he grew up, and his own son
was of an age to run about, his wife died ; he took the child on his hip,
and departed into the Himalayas, where he became an ascetic, and bronglit
up his son to the same life, dwelling in a hut of leaves.
It was the rainy season, and the heaven poured down its Hoods
incessantly a Monkey wandered about, tormented witli the cold, chatter-
:
ing and rattling his teeth. The Bodhisatta fetched a great log, lit a lire,
and lay down upon his pallet. His son sat by him, and chafed his feet.

— —
188 The Jataka. Book II.
Now the Monkey had found a dress belonging to some dead anchorite.
He clad himself in the upper and lower garment, throwing the skin over
one shoulder; he took the pole and waterpot, and in this sage's dress he
came to the leaf-hut for the fire : and there he stood, in his borrowed
plumes.
The lad caught sight ofhim, andcried out to his father, "See, father
there is an ascetic, trembling with cold ! Call hiin hither ; he shall warm
himself." Thus addressing his father, he uttered the first stanza :
"A
holy sage stands shivering at our gate,
A sage, to peace and goodness consecrate.
That al f l at b h i e s r c ! ol b d id a t n h d e m h i o s l e y ry ma m n ay co a m ba e te i . n " ,
The Bodhisatta listened to his son ; he rose up, and looked ; then he
knew it was a monkey, and repeated the second stanza : [270]
"N An o d ho l l o y at s h a s g o e me is M h o e nk : ey it , is gr a ee v d i y le all to spoil
That he can touch, who dwells among the trees
Once let him in, our home he will defile." ;
With these words, the Bodhisatta seized a firebrand, and scared away
the monkey ; aiid he leaped up, and whether he liked the wood or whether
he didn't, he never returned to that place any more. The Bodhisatta
cultivated the Faculties and the Attainments, and to the young ascetic he
explained the process of the mystic trance ; and he too let the Faculties
and the Attainments spring up within him. And both ofthem, without a
break in their ecstasy, became destined to Brahma's world.
Thus did the Masterdiscourseby way ofshewing how this man was not then
only, but a — lways, a hypocrite. This ended,he declared the Truths, and identified
the 13irth : at the conclusion of the Trut—hs some reached the First Path, some
the Second, and yet some the Third : "The hypocritical Brother was the
IMonkey, Kahula was the son, and I was the hermit myself."

BOOK III—TIKA-NIPATA.
No. 251.
SAMKAPPA-JATAKA.
—
[271] "N'o archer," etc. This story the IMaster told at Jctavaiia, about a
backsliding Brother.
A yoviug nobleman, living in Savatthi, gave his heart to the doctrine of the
Treasures^, and embraced the religious life. But one day, ashe went his rounds
in Savatthi, he happened to see a woman dressed in gay a2)parel. Passion
sprang up in his heart ; he became disconsolate. When his teachers, counsellors
and friends saw him thus, they at once asked him the cause. Seeing that lie
longed to return to the world, they .said to one another, "My friend, the Master
can remove the sins ofthose who are tormented by the sin of lust and the like,
and by declaring the Truths, he brings them to enjoy the fruition of sanctity.
Come, let us lead him to the Master." So to the Master they brought him.
Said he, "Why do you bring me this youth against his will. Brothers'(" They
told him the reason. "Is this true," he asked, "that you are a backslider, as
they .say?" He as.sented. The Master asked the reason, and he recounted wliat
had happened. Said he, "O Brother, it has happened before that these women
have caused impurity to spring up even in pure beings whose sins have l>een
stayed by the power of ecstasy. Why should not vain men like you be defiled,
when defilement comes even to the pure? Even men of the highest repute
h w a i v n e d f t a h l a l t en s i h n a t k o es di M s o h u o n no t ur Si ; ne h r o u w al m s u o c s h tir mo a re he t a h p e o u f np o u l r d ifi le e a d ve ! s? Sha [ l 2 l 72 n ] ot Th tl i i s e
sin has troubled the enlightened Budtlha himself, sitting on his throne, and
shall it not trouble such an one as you?" and at their request he told them
an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benare.s, the
Bodhisatta was born into a groat brahmin family, which had wealth
to the amount of eight hundred millions of money. He grew up, and
received his education at Takkasila, and returned to Benares. There he
married a wife; and on his pai-ents' death, he performed their obsequies.
' Buddha, tlie Law, the Order.

" ;
190 The Jdtaka. Book III.
Then, as he inspected his treasure, he reflected—"The treasure is still
here, but they who gathered it are here no more !" He was overcome
with grief, aud the sweat })oured from his body.
He lived a long time at home, and gave much in alms ; he mastered
his passions then he left hisweepingfriends,and wentintothe Himalayas,
;
where he built a hut in a delightful spot, and lived upon the wild fruits
and roots of the forest, which he found in his goings to and fro. Ere long
he cultivated the Faculties and the Attainments, and lived awhile in the
bliss ofjoyous meditation.
Then a thought came to him. He would go amongst mankind, to
buy salt and seasoning ; thus his body would grow strong, and he would
wander about on foot. "All that shall give alms to a virtuous man like
me," thought he, "and greet me with i-espect, shall fill the heavenly
regions." So down he came from Himalaya, and by and bye, as he
tramped onwards, he came to Benares at the time of the sun-setting. He
looked about for a place to bide in, and spied the royal park. "Here,"
said he, " is a place fit for retirement; here will I dwell." So he entered
the park, and sat at the foot of a tree, and spent the night in the joy of
meditation.
Next day in the forenoon, having seen to his bodilyneeds, and adjusted
his matted hair, his skin and robes of bark, he took up his alms-bowl
all his senses were quiet, his pride was calmed, he bore himself nobly,
looking no more than a plough's length befoi'e him ; by the glory of his
appearance, which was perfect in every way, [273] he drew upon him the
eyes of the world. In this fashion he entered the city, and begged from
door to door, till he came to the king's palace.
Now the king was upon his terrace, walking to and fro. He spied the
Bodhisatta through a window. He was pleased with his bearing ; "If,"
thought he, "there is such a thing as perfect quietude, it must be found in
this man." So he sent one of his courtiers, bidding him fetch the ascetic.
The man came up with a greeting, and took his alms-bowl, saying, "The
king sends for you. Sir."
"Noble friend," replied the Bodhisatta, "the king does not know
me!"
"Then, Sir, please remain hei'e until I return." So he told the king
what the beggar had said. Then said the kiHg,
"We have no confidential priest
:
go, fetch him;—" and at the same
time he beckoned out of the window, calling to him "Here, come in.
Sir !
The Bodhisatta gave up his alms-bowl to the courtier, and mounted
upon the terrace. Then the king greeted him, and set him upon the
king's couch, and offered him all the foods and meats prepared for himself.
When he had eaten, he put a fewquestions to him and the answerswhich
;

—
"
No. 251. IDl
were given pleased him ever more and more, so that with a word of
respect, he asked,
"Good Sir, where do you live1 wlience did you come hitlior] "
"I dwell in Himalaya, niiglity king, and from Himalaya have 1 come."
The king asked, "Why
l
"In the rainy season, O king, we must seek a fixed abode."
"Then," the king said, "abide here in my royal park, you shall not
lack for the four things needful ; I shall acquire the merit which leads to
heaven."
The promise was given ; and having broken his fast he went with the
Bodhisatta into the grounds, and caused a hut of leaves to be built there.
A
covered walk he had made, and prepared all the places for his living by
night and by day. All the furidture and requisites for an anchorite's life
he had brought, and bidding him be comfortable he gave him in charge to
the park-keeper.
For twelve years after this, [^74] the Bodhisatta had liis dwelling in
that place.
Once it so happened that a frontier district I'ose in rebellion. The
king desired to go himself to quell it. Calling his queen, he said
"Lady, either you or I must stay behind."
"Why do you say that, my lord1" she asked.
"For the sake ofthe good ascetic."
"T will not neglect him," said she. "Mine be it to attend upon the
holy father; do you go away without anxiety."
So the king departed and then the queen waited attentively upon the
;
Bodhisatta.
Now the king was gone ; at the fixed season the Bodhisatta came.
When it pleased him, he would come to the palace, and take his meal
there. One day, he tarried a long time. The queen had made ready all
his food
;
she bathed and adorned herself, and prepared a low seat; with a
clean robe thrown looselyover her,she reclined, waiting for the Bodhisatta
to come. Now the Bodhisatta noted the time of day ; he took up his
alms-bowl, and passing through the air, came up to the great window.
She heard his bark robes rustle, and as she rose hastily, her yellow dress
slipped. The Bodhisatta let this unusual sight penetrate his senses, and
looked upon her with desire. Then the evil passion that had been calmed
by the power ofhis ecstasy, rose as a cobra rises spreading his hood, from
the basket in which he is kept : he was like a milky tree struck by the
axe. As his passion gained force, his ecstatic calm gave way, his senses
lost their purity ; he was as it were a crow with a broken wing. He
could not sit down as before, and take his meal ; not though she begged
him to be seated, could he take his seat. So the queen placed all the food
together in his alms-bowl [275] but that day he could not do as lie used
;

:
192 llie Jataka. Book III.
to do after his meal, and go out of the window through the air; taking
the food, he went down hy the great staircase, and so into the grove.
When he came there, he could oat nothing. He set do^vn the food at
the foot of his bench, murmuring, "What a woman lovely hands, lovely
!
feet! what a waist, what thighs!" and .so forth. Thus he lay for seven
days. The food all went bad, and was covered with a cloud of black
flies.
Then the king returned, having reduced his frontier to order. The
city was all decorated ; he went round it in solemn procession, keeping it
always on the right, and then proceeded to the palace. Next he entered
the grove, wishing to see the Bodhisatta. He noticed the dirt and rubbish
about the hermitage, and thinking he must be gone, he pushed back the
hut door, and stepped in. There lay the anchorite. "He must be ill,"
thought the king. So he had the putrid food thrown away, and the hut
set in order, and then asked,
"What is the matter, Sir?"
"Sire, I am wounded "
!
Then the king thought, "I suppose my enemies must have done this.
They could not get a chance at me, so they determined to do a mischief to
what I love." So he turned him over, looking for the wound; but no
wound could he see. Then he asked, "Where's the place, Sir?"
"No one has hurt me," replied the Bodhisatta, "only I have wounded
my own heart." And he rose, and sat upon a seat, and repeated the
following verses
"Nf) archer drew an arrow to his ear
To deal this wound ; no feathered shaft is here
Plucked from a peac—ock's wing, and decked out fine
By skilful fletchers : 'tis this heart of mine,
"Once cleansed from passion by my own firm will.
And keen intelligence, which through desire
Hath dealt the wound that bids me fair to kill,
And burns through all the limbs of me like fire.
[276] "I see no wound from which the blood might flow
My own heart's folly 'tis that pierces so." :
Thus did the Bodhisatta explain matters to the king by these three
stanzas. Then he made the king retire from the hut, and induced the
mystic trance ; and so he recovered his interrupted ecstasy. Then he left
the hut, and sitting in the air, exhorted the king. After this he declared
that he would go up to Himalaya. The king would have dissuaded him,
but he said,
"O king, see what humiliation has come upon me while I dwelt here
!
I cannot live here." And although the king entreated him, he uprose in

No. 251. 193
the air, and departed to Himalaya, where he abode his life long, and then
went to Bi-ahma's world.
[277] When the Ma — ster had ended this discourseyhe dechired tlic Trutlis and
identified the Birth : at the conchision of the Trutlis tlic backslidinj,' IJrothcr
became—a Saint,and some entered the First Path,some the Second, and some tlie
Third : "Anauda wastheking, and I was the hermit."
No. 252.
TILA-MUTTHI-JATAKA.
—
"JVow I bethink me," etc.- This story the Master told in Jetavana, about a
passionate man. We learn that there was a Brother who was full ofbitterness.
No matter how little was said to him, he fell in a rage and spoke roughly;
showing wrath, hatred, and mistrust. In the Hall of Truth the Brethren
discussed the matter. "Friend, how angry and bitter is Brother So-and-so!
He goes snapping about forall the world like salt in the fire. Though he ha.s
adopted this peaceful religion, yet he cannot even restrain his anger." The
Master heard this and sent a brother to fetch the man in question. "Are you
really as passionate as they say?" he asked. The man said he was. Then the
Master added, "This is not the first time, Brethren, that this man has been
passionate. He wasjust the same before;" and he told them an old-world tale.
Once on a time, Brahmadatta the king of Benares had a son named
Prince Brahmadatta. Now kings of former times, though there might
be a famous teacher living in their own city, often used to send their sons
to foreign countries afar offto complete their education, that bythis means
they might learn to quell their pride and highmindeduess, and endure
heat or cold, and be made acquainted with the ways of the world. So
—
did this king. Calling his boy to him now the lad was sixteen years
—
old he gave him one-soled sandals, a sunshade of leaves, and a thousand
pieces ofmoney, with these words
:
"My son, get you to Takkasila, and study there,"
[278] The boy obeyed. He bade his parents farewell, and in due
course arrived at Takkasila. There he enquired for the teacher's dwelling,
and reached it at the time when the teacher had finished his lecture, and
J. II. 13

"
194 The Jataka. Booh III.
was walking up and down at the door of the house. When the lad set
eyes upon the teacher, he loosed his shoes, closed his sunshade, and with a
respectful greeting stood still where he was. The teacher saw that he was
weary, and welcomed the new-comer. The lad ate, and rested a little.
Then he returned to the teacher, and stood respectfully by him.
"Where have you come from'?" he asked.
"From Benares."
"Whose son are you?
"I am the son of the king of Benares."
"What brings you here? "
"I come to learn," replied the lad.
"Well, have you brought a teacher's fee? or do you wish to attend on
me in return for teaching you ? "
"I have brought a feewith me:" andwith this he laid at the teacher's
feet his purse ofa thousand pieces.
The resident pupils attend on their teacher by day, and at night they
learn of him but they who bring a fee are treated like the eldest sons in
:
his house, and thus they learn. And this teacher, like the rest, gave
schooling to the prince on every light and lucky day'. Thus the young
prince was taught.
Now one day, he went to bathe along with his teacher. There was an
old woman, who had prepared some white seeds, and strewed them out
before her : there she sat, watching them. The youth looked upon these
white seeds, and desired to eat; he picked up a handful, and ate them.
"Yon fellow must be hungry," thought she; but she said nothing, and
sat silent.
Next day the same thing happened at the same time. Again the
woman said nothing to him. On the third day, he did it again ; then
the old dame cried out, saying,
"The great Teacher is letting his pupils rob me!" and uplifting her
arms she raised a lamentation.
The Teacher turned back. [279] "What is it, mother?" he asked.
"Master, I have been parching some seeds, and your pupil took a
handful and ate them ! This he has done to-day, he did it yesterday, and
he did it the day before! Surely he will eat me out of house and
home!"
"Don't cry, mother: I will see that you are paid."
"Oh, I want no payment, master: only teach your pupil not to do it
again."
"See here, then, mother," said he; and he caused two lads to take the
1 There are four naklihattm called lahu, 'light'; there is another reading
subhanakkhattena, 'every fair day'. Themeaningis bynomeansclear.

— — — —
:
No. 252. 195
young fellow by his two hands, and smote him thrice upon the back
with a bamboo stick, bidding him take care not to do it again.
The prince was very angry with his teacher. With a bloodshot glare,
he eyed hira from his head to foot. The teacher observed how angry he
was, and how he eyed him.
The youth applied himself to his work, and finished his courses. But
the oflPence he hid away in his heart, anddetermined to murder his teacher.
When the time came for him to go away, he said to him,
"O my Teacher, when I receive the kingdom of Benares, I will send
for you. Then come to me, I pray." And so he exacted a i)romise most
affectionately.
He returned to Benares, and visited his parents, and showed proof of
what he had learnt. Said the king, "I have lived to see my son again,
and while I yet live, 1 will see the magnificence of his rule." So he made
his son king in his stead.
When the prince enjoyed the splendour of royalty, he remembered
his gi'udge, and anger rose within him. "I will be the death of that
fellow!" he thought, and sent offa messenger to fetch his teacher.
"I shall never be able to appease him while he is young," thought the
teacher; so he came not. But when the prince's time of rule was half
over, he thought he could appease him then; and he came, and stood at
the king's door, and sent to say that the teacher from Takkasila had
arrived. The king was glad, and caused the brahmin to be led in. Then
his anger rose, and his eyes grew bloodshot. He beckoned to those
about him. "Ha, the place which my teacher struck still hurts me
to-day! He has come here with death written upon his forehead, [280]
to die! To-day his life must end!" and he repeated the first two
verses:
"Now I bethink me, for a few poor seeds, in days of yore.
You seized me by the arm, and beat me Vvnth a stick full sore.
Brahmin, are you in love with death, and do you nothing fear
For seizing me and beating me, that now you venture hereT'
Thus he threatened him with death. As he heard, the teacher uttered
the third verse:
"The gently born^ who uses blows ungentleness to quell
This is right discipline, not wrath : the wise all know it well."
1 The Scholiast explainswhat 'gentlebreeding ' means. Itmaybe usedofconduct,
bothinmen and animals ; as
" 'Tis gentle to respect old age, red Goose
Go where you will : I set your husband loose:"
13—2

:
196 The Jdtaka. Booh III.
"And so, great king, understand this yourself. Know that this is no
just cause for anger. Indeed, if you had not been taught this lesson by
me, you would have gone on taking cakes and sweets, fruit, and the like,
until you became covetous through these acts of theft; then by degrees
you would have been lured on to house-breaking, highway robbery, and
murder about the villages; the end would have been, that you would have
been taken red-handed and haled before the king for a public enemy and a
robber; and you would have come in fear of public punishment, when the
king should say, 'Take this man, and punish him according to his crimes.'
Whence could have come all this prosperity which you now enjoy] Is it
not through me that you have attained to such magnificence?"
Thus did his teacher talk over the king. [282] And the coui'tiers, who
stood round, said when they heard his speech, "Of a truth, my lord, all
your magnificence really belongs to your teacher!"
At once the king recognised the goodness of his teacher, and said to
him,
"All my power I give to you, my teacher! receive the kingdom!"
But the other refused, sayiug, "No, my lord king; I have no wish for
the kingdom."
And the king sent to Takkasila for the teacher's wife and family; he
gave them great power, and made him the royal priest; he treated him
like a father, and obeyed his admonitions; and after bestowing gifts and
doing good deeds he became destined for paradise.
When the Masterhad ended this discourse, he declared the Truths: — atthe
conclusion of the Truths the passionate brother attained the Fruit of—the Third
Path, and many others entered on the First, or Second, or Third: "At that
timethe passionate Brotherwasthe king ; but the Teacherwas I myself."
orofform, 'noble,' 'thoroughbred': as— [281]
"Your mien shows breeding, and your clear calm eye:
You must have left some noble family.
What made you wish to leave your home and wealth
To be an anchorite for your soul's health?"
and addsyetthisother
"Clad in a semblance of fair piety
But all deceitful, boldly forth leapt he,
A babbler of vain sayings, mean and base,
Intemperate, the ruin of his race."
^Thelast four lines occur in Sutta Nipata, verse 89.)

No. 253. 197
No. 253.
MANI-KANTHA-JATAKA\
—
"Richfoodanddrink"etc. This storythe Mastertoldwhilehe wasdwelling
at the shrine of Aggalava, nearAlavl, about the rules for building cells.
Some Brethren who lived in Alavl'^ were begging^ from all quarters the
materials for houses which they were getting made for themselves. They
were for ever dinning and dunning; "Give us a man, give us somebody to
do servant's work," and so forth. Everybody was annoyed at this begging and
solicitation. So much annoyed were they, that at sight of these Brethren they
were startled and scared away.
It happened that the reverend father Mahakassapa entered Alavi, and
traversed the place in quest ofalms. The people, as soon asthey saw the Elder,
ran away as before'*. After mealtime, having retm'ned from his romids, he
summonedthe brethren, and thus addressed them "Once Alavi was a capital
:
place foralms; why is it so poor now?" They told him the reason.
Now the Blessed Onewas at the time dwelling at the Aggalava shrine. To
the Blessed One came the Elder, and told him all about it. The Master
convened the Brethren touching this matter. [283] "T hear," said he, "that
you arebuildinghouses and worrying everybody for help. Is this true?" They
said it was. Then the Master rebuked them, adding these words : "Even in
the serpent world, Brethren, full as it is of the seven precious stones, this
kind of begging is distasteful to the serpents. How much more to men, from
whom it is as hard to get a rupee as it is to skin a flint!" and he toldan old-
world tale.
Onceuponatime,whenBrahmadattareignedin Benares,the Bodhisatta
was born as a rich brahmin's son. When he was old enough to run about,
his mother gave birth to another wise being. Both the brothers, when
they grew up, were so deeply pained at their parents' death, that they
became anchorites, and dwelt in leaf-huts which theymade them at a bend
of the Ganges river. The elder had his lodge by the upper Ganges, and
the younger by the lower rivei*.
One day, a Serpent-King (his name was Manikantha, or Jewel-throat)
left his dwelling-place, and taking the shape of a man, walked along the
river bank until he came to the younger brother's hermitage. He greeted
1 I think this Jatakaisrepresented on the Stupa of Bbarhut. In pi. xLii. 1 we sec
a man sittingbefore a hut, apparentlyconversing with a great five-headed cobra. The
storyisalso toldinthe Vinaya Pitaka, Suttavibhahga, vi. 1. 3.
2 Theintroductory story occurs intheVinaya, SuttavibJicu'iga, Saihghcldisesa, vi. 1.
The sinwas imi^ortunity.
3 Readingsamydcikuya (as in Suttavihhahga).
* Readingimtipajjlsu.

—
" " : ;
198 The Jdtaka. Book III.
tlie owner, and satclown at one side. They conversed pleasantly together
and such friends did they become, that there was no living apart for them.
Often and often came Jewel-throat to visit the younger recluse, and sat
talking and chatting; and when he left, so much did he love the man, he
put offhis shape, and encircled the ascetic with snake'sfolds, and embraced
him, with his great hood upon his head ; there he lay a little, till his
affection was satisfied; then he let go his friend's body, and bidding him
farewell, returned to his own place. For fear of him, the hermit grew
thin; he became squalid, lost his colour, grew yellower and yellower, and
the veins stood out upon his skin.
It happened one day that he paid a visit to his brother. "Why,
brother," said he, " what makes you thin1 how did you lose your colour1
why are you so yellow, and why do your veins stand out like this upon
your skin 1
The other told him all about it.
"Come tell me," said the first, "do you like him to come or not?"
[284]. "No, I don't."
"Well, what ornament does the Serpent-King wear when he visits
you?
"A preciousjewel !"
"Very well. When he comes again, before he has time to sit down,
ask him to give you the jewel. Then he will depart without embracing
you in his snaky folds. Next day stand at your door, and ask him for it
there; and on the third ask him just as he emerges from the river. He
will never visit you again."
The younger promised so to do, and returned to his hut. On the
morrow, when the Serpent had come, as he stood there the hermit cried,
"Give me your beautiful jewel " The Sei-pent hurried away without
!
sitting down. On the day follo—wing, the hermit stood at his door, and
called out as the Serpent came "You would not give me your jewel
yesterday ! now to-day you must!" And the Serpent slipt off without
entering the hut. On the third—day, the man called outjust as the Serpent
was emerging from the water "This is the third day that I have asked
you for it: come, give this jewel to me!" And the Serpent, speaking
from his place in the water, refused, in the words of these two stanzas:
"Rich food and drink in plenty I can have
By means of this fine jewel which you crave
You ask too much; the gem I will not give;
Nor visit you again while I shall live.
"Like lads who wait with tempered sword in hand.
You scare me as m — y jewel you demand.
You ask too much the gem I will not give.
Nor ever visit you while I shall five!"

—
"
No. 253. H)0
[285] With these words, the King of the Serpents plunged beneath
the water, and went toliis own place, never to return.
Then the ascetic, not seeing his beautiful Serpent-King again, became
thinner and thinner still ; he grew more squalid, lost his colour worse than
before, and grew more yellow, and the veins rose thicker on his skin !
The elder brother thought he would go and see how his brother was
getting on. He paid him a visit, and found him yellower than he had
been before.
"Why, how is this ? woi'se than ever ! " said he.
His brother replied, "It is because 1 never see the lovely King of
Serpents !
"This hermit," said the elder, on hearing his answer, "cannot live
without his Serpent-King ; " and he repeated the third verse :
"Importune not a man whose love you prize.
For begging makes you hateful in his eyes.
The brahmin begged the Serpent's gem so sore
He disappeared and never came back more."
Then he counselled his brother not to grieve, and with this conso-
lation, left him and returned to his own hermitage. And after that
[286] the two brothers cultivated the Faculties and the Attainments, and
became destined for the heaven of Brahma.
The Master added, "Thus, Brethren, even in the world of serpents, where
arethe seven precious stones in plenty, begging is disliked by the serpents : how
much more—by men!" And, after teaching them this lesson, he identified
the Birth: "Atthat time, Ananda was the younger brother, but the elder was
I myself."
No. 254.
KUNDAKA-KUCCHI-SINDHAVA-JATAKA.
"Grass and the scum ofgruel," e^c—This story the Master told atJctavana
about the Elder Sariputta.
It once fell out that the Buddha had been spending tlie rainy season in
Savatthi, and afterwards had been on alms-pilgrimage. On his return, the
i to nh t a h b e it B a u nt d s dh d a et a e n r d mi h n i e s d f t o o llo w w e i l n c g. ome Th hi e s y h p o o m s e t - ed co t m h i e ng cl ; er a k nd wh t o hey us m e a d d t e o t s h o e u i n r d gi t f h t e s

;
200 The Jdtaha. Booh III.
call for preaching, to distribute the Brethren amongst all comers, according to
the numberthey wished to provide for.
There was one poor old woman,who had prepared one portion. The Brethren
were assigned, some to this giver, some to that. At sunrise, the poor woman
came to the clerk, and said, "Give a Brother to me!" He answered, "I have
already distributed them all; but Elder Sariputta is still in the monastery,
and you may give your portion to him." At this she was delighted, and waited
by the gate of Jetavana until the Elder came out. She gave him greeting,
took his bowl from his hand, and leadinghim to herhouse, offered him a seat.
Many pious families heard a rumourthat some old woman had got Sariputta
to sit down at her door. Amongst tiiose who heard it was king Pasenadi the
Kosala. He at once sent her food of all sorts, together with a garment and
a ]mrse ofa thousand pieces, with the request, "Let her who is entertainingthe
priest, put on this robe, and spend this money, and thus entertain the Elder."
As the king did, so did Anatha-pin — dika, [287] the younger Anatha-pindika, the
lay sister Visakha (a great lady), all sent the same : other families sent one
hundred, two hundred or so, as their means allowed. Thus in a single day the
old woman got as much as a hvmdred thousand pieces ofmoney.
Our Elder drank the broth which she gave him, and ate her food, and the
rice that she cooked; then he thanked her, and so edified her that she was
converted. Then he returned to the monastery.
In the Hall of Truth, the brethren discussed theElder's goodness. "Friend,
the Captain of the Faith has rescued an old housewife from poverty. He has
been her mainstay. Thefood she offered he did not disdain to eat."
The Master entered, and asked what they were talking of now as they sat
together. They told him. And he said, "This is not the first time. Brethren,
that Sariputta has been the refuge of this old woman ; nor the first time he did
notdisdain to eat the food she offered. He did the same before." And he told
an old-world tale.
It happened once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king ofBenares,
that the Bodhisatta was born into a trader's family in the Northern
province. Five hundred people of that country, horse-dealers, used to
convey horses to Benares, and sell them there.
Now a certain dealer took the road to Benares with five hundred
horses for sale. On this road, not far offBenares, thei-e is a town, where
had formerly lived a rich merchant. A vast dwelling once was his
but his family had gradually gone down in the world, and only one old
Avoman was left, who lived in the family house. The dealer took up his
lodging for a certain hire in that house, and kept his horses hard by.
On that very day, as luck would have it, a thoroughbred mare of his
foaled. He tarried two or three days, and then taking his horses with
him went off to visit the king. Thereat the old woman asked him for the
hire ofthe house.
"All right, mother, I'll pay you," said he, [288]
"When you pay me, my son," she said then, "give me this foal, and
deduct its value from the hire." The dealer did as she asked and went
his way. The woman loved the foal like a son ; and she fed him upon
parched rice drippings, on broken meats, and grass.
Some time after, the Bodhisatta, on his way with five hundred horses,

—
" "
No. 254. 201
took lodging in this house. But the horses scented this highbred foal, that
fed on red rice-powder, and not one ofthem would enter the place. Then
said the Bodhisatta to the dame,
"There seems to be some horse in the place, mother?"
"Oh, my son, the only horse there is a young foal which I keep here as
tenderly as it were my son !" '
"Where is he, mother?"
"Gone out to graze."
" When will he return] "
"Oh, he'll soon come back."
The Bodhisatta kept the horses without, and sat down to wait until the
foal should come in; and soon the foal returned from his walk. When he
set eyes on the fine foal with his belly full of rice powder, the Bodhisatta
noted his marks, and thought he, "This is a priceless thoroughbred ; I
must buy him of the old woman."
Bythis time the foal had entered the house andgone to his own stable.
At once all the horses were able to go in too.
There abode the Bodhisatta for a few days, and attended to his horses.
Then as he made to go, "Mother," said he to the old woman, "let me buy
this foal ofyou."
"What are you saying ! one mustn't sell one's own foster child ! "
"What do you give him to eat, mother1
"Rice boiled, and rice gruel, and parched rice; broken meats and
grass and rice-broth to di'ink."
;
"Well, mother, if I get him, I'll feed him on the daintiest of fare
;
[289] when he stands, he shall have a cloth awning spread over him ; I
will give him a carpet to stand on."
"Will you, my son1 Then take this child of mine, and go, and may
he be happy "
!
And the Bodhisatta paid a separate pricefor the foal's four feet, for liis
tail and for his head ; six purses of a thousand pieces of money he laid
down, one for each ; and he caused the dame to robe herself in a new
dress, and decked her with ornaments, and set her in front of the foal.
And the foal opened his eyes, and looked upon his mother, and shed tears.
She stroked his back, and said, "I have received the recompense for
what I have done for thee go, my son " and then he departed.
: !
Next day the Bodhisatta thought he would make trial of the foal,
whether he knew his own power or no. So after preparing common
food, he caused red rice gruel to be poured out, presented to him in a
bucket. But this he could not swallow ; and refused to touch any such
food. Then the Bodhisatta to test him, uttered the first verse:
"Grass and the scum of gruel you thought good
In former times
:
why don't you eat yoiu- foodI

—
202 The Jdtaka. Book III.
On hearing which, the Foal answered with the two other couplets
following :
"When people do not know one's birth and breed,
Rice-scum is good enough to serve one's need.
"But I am chief of steeds, as you are ware ;
Therefore from you I will not take this fare."
[290] Then answered the Bodhisatta, "I did this to try you; do not
be angry"; and he cooked the fine food and offered it to him. "When he
came to the king's courtyard, he set the five hundred horses on one side,
and on the other an embroidered awning, under which he laid a carpet,
with a canopy of stuffover it; and here he lodged the foal.
The king coming to inspect the horses asked why thishorse was housed
apart.
"O king," was the reply, "if this horse be not kept apart, he will let
loose these others."
"Is he a beautiful horse^ " the king asked.
"Yes, O king."
"Then let me see his paces."
The owner caparisoned him, and mounted on his back. Then he
cleared the covirtyard of men, and rode the horse about in it. The whole
place appeared to be encircled with lines ofhorses, without a break !
Then said the Bodhisatta, "See my horse's speed, king!" andlet him
have his head. Not a man could see him at all ! Then he fastened a red
leafupon the horse's flank
;
and they sawjust the leaf. Andthen he rode
him over the surface of a pond in a certain garden of the city. Over he
went, and not even the tips of his hoofs were wet. Again, he galloped
over lotus leaves, [291] without even pushing one ofthem under water.
"When his master had thus showed offthe steed's magnificent paces, he
dismounted, clapped his hands, and held out one, palm upwards. The
horse got upon it, and stood on the palm of his master's hand, with his
four feet close together. And the Bodhisatta said, " mighty king ! not
even the whole circle of the ocean would be space enough for this horse to
show off all his skill." The king was so pleased that he gave him the
halfof his kingdom thehorse he installed as his horse ofstate, sprinkling
:
him with ceremonial watei*. Dear was he and precious to the king, and
great honour was done him ; and his dwelling place was made like the
chamber where the king dwelt, all beautiful the floor was spi"inkled with
:
all the four manners of perfumes, the walls were hung with wreaths of
flowers and frequent garlands ; up in the roof was an awning of cloth
spangled with golden stars; it was all like a lovely pavilion round about.
A
lamp of scented oil burnt always ; and in the retiring closet was set a
goldenjar. Hisfood was always fit fora king. And after he came there,

No. 254. 203
the lordship over all India came iuto this king's hand. And the king
did good deeds and almsgiving according to tlie Bodhisatta's admonition,
and became destined for paradise.
When the blaster had ended this discourse, he declared the Truths, and
identified the Birth (now at the conclusion of the Trutlis many entered the
First Path, or the Se : cond, or the Third :) "At that time the old woman wa.s the
same, Sariputtawasthe thoroughbred, Ananda was the king,andthehorscdcaler
was I myself."
No. 255.
SUKA-JATAKA.
" What time the bird," etc.—This story the Master told while dwelling at
Jetavana, about a Brother who died ofover-eating.
[292] On his death, the brethren assembled in the Hall of Truth, and dis-
cussed his demerits on this fashion "Friend, Brother So-and-so was ignorant
:
howmuch he could safelyeat. So he ate more than he could digest, and died in
consequence." The Master entered, and asked what they talked ofnow as they
sat together and they told him. "Brethren," he said, "this is not the first
time our frie ; nd died of surfeit; the same has happened before." Then he told
them an old-world tale.
Once on a time, when king Brahmadatta reigned over Benares, the
Bodhisatta became a Parrot, and dwelt in the Himalaya region. He was
king over several thousands of his kind, who lived on the seaward side of
the Himalayas; and one son was his. When his son grew up to be
strong, the father Parrot's eyes became weak. The truth is, that parrots
fly with great swiftness; wherefore when they be old it is the eye that
weakens first. His son kept his parents in the nest, and would bring
them food to feed them.
It happened one day thatour young PaiTOt went to the place where he
found his food, andalighted upon a mountain-top. Thence he looked over
the ocean, and beheld an island, in which was a mango grove full of sweet
golden fruit. So next day, at the time of the fetching offood, he rose in
the airandflewto this grove of mangoes, wherehe sucked the mangojuice,

—
; ;
204 The Jataka. Book III.
and took of the fruit, and bore it home to his mother and father. As the
Bodhisatta ate ofit, he knew the taste.
"My son," said he, "this is a mango of such and such an island,"
naming
it.
"Even so, father ! " replied the young Parrot.
"Parrots that go thither, my son, have not length of life," he said.
"Go not to that island again!"—But the son obeyed him not, and went
yet again.
Then one day it befel that he went as usual, and drank much of the
mango juice. With a mango in his beak [293] he was passing over the
ocean, when he grew worn out with so long carrying, and sleep mastered
him ; sleeping he flew on, and the fruit which he carried fell from out of
his beak. Andbydegrees he left his path, and sinking down skimmed the
surface of the water, till in the end he fell in. And then a fish caught and
devoured him. When he should have returned, he returned not, and the
Bodhisatta knew that he must have fallen into the water. Then his
parents, receiving no sustenance, pined away and died.
The Master,having told this tale, in his perfectwisdom,uttered thefollowing
stanzas:
"What time the bird without excess did eat.
He found the way, and brought his mother meat.
"But once he ate too much, forgot the mean,
He fell; and afterward was no more seen.
" T So o b s e par n e ot is gr s e a e fe dy ; gr m e o e d d es go t et b h e b i e n fo a r ll e . a fall^"
;
' The Scholiast adds the followinglines:
"Be moderate in eating wet or dry,
And this thy hunger's need will satisfy.
Who eats with care, whose belly is not great,
Will be a holy hermit soon or late.
—
[291] Four or five mouthfuls, then a drink is right
Enough for any earnest eremite.
A careful moderate eater has small pain,
Slowly grows old, lives twice as long again."
And these
"When sons bring meat to fathers in the wood,
Like ointment to the eye, 'tis very good.
Thus for bare life, with weariness forspent,
He nourished him upon such nourishment."

No. 255. 205
When the lilaster had ended this discourse, he declared the Truths (at the
concUision of which many persons entered the First Path, or the Second, or
Third, or Fourth), and identified the Birth "At that time, the brother who
:
has over-eaten was the young Parrot, and the king of the Parrots was I
myself."
No. 256.
JARUDAPANA-JATAKA.
—
"Some merchants,'" etc. This story the Master told while living atJetavana,
about some traders whosehomewas at Savatthi.
The tradition is that thesemen had acquired wares in Savatthi, which they
loaded on carts. When the time came for them to set about their business, they
gavean invitation to the Blessed One, and offered him rich alms ; they received
the Refuges, were strengthened in the Precepts, and took their leave of the
Master with these words, "Sir, we are going a longway. When we have jiarted
with our wares, if we are fortunate and return in safety, we will come and wait
upon you again." Then they set oft"on theirjourney.
In a difficultpart of their road they observed a disused well. There was no
water in it that they could see, and they were athirst ; so they resolved to dig
deeper. As they dug, [295] they came upon successive layers of minerals of all
sorts, from iron to lapis lazuli. This find contented them ; they filled their
waggons with these treasures, and got back safe to Savatthi. They stowed
away the treasure which they had brought; and then bethought them, that
having been so lucky they would give food to the brotherhood. So they invited
the Blessed One, and made him presents; and when they had respectfully
greeted him, and sat down on one side, they recounted how they had found
their treasure. Said he, "You, good laymen, are content with your find, and
acceptyour wealth and your livelihood with all moderation. But in otherdays
there were men not content, inmioderate, who refused to do as wise men advised
them, andso lost their life." And he told at their request an old-world tale.
Once on a time, when Bralimadatta was reigning in JJcnares, the
Bodhisatta was born into the family of a business man ; and grew up to
be a gi'cat merchant. At one time he had filled his waggons with goods,
and in company with a large caravan he came to this very same wood and
saw this very same well. No sooner had the traders seen it, than they
yv^anted to drink, and began to dig, and as they dug they came upon a

—
206 Tlie Jataka. Booh ITT.
quantityof metal and gems. But though they got a gi-eat deal oftreasure,
they were discontented. *'There must be another treasure here, better
than this !" they thought, and they dug and dug.
Then said the Bodhisatta to them, "Merchants, greed is the root of
destruction. Ye have won a great deal ofwealth with this beyecontent,
;
and dig no more." But they digged yet the more notwithstanding.
Now this well was haunted by serpents. The Serpent-king, incensed
at the falling of clods and earth, slewthem with the breath of his nostrils^,
all saving the Bodhisatta, [296] and destroyedthem and he came up from
;
the serpent world, and put the oxen to the carts, filled them withjewels,
and seating the Bodhisatta upon a fine waggon, he made certain young
serpents drive the carts, and brought him to Benares. He led him into
his house, set the treasure in order, and went away again to his own
place in the serpent land. And the Bodhisatta spent his treasure, so
that he made much stir throughout all India by his almsgiving, and,
having undertaken the deeds of virtue, and kept the holy day, at the
end of his life he came to paradise.
The Master, after telling this tale, in his perfect wisdom, uttered the
followinglines:
"Some merchants, wanting water, dug the groimd
In an old well, and there a treasure found:—
Tin, iron, copper, lead, silver and gold,
Beryls and pearls and jewels manifold.
"But not content, still more they did desire.
And fiery serpents slew them all with fire.
Dig if thou wilt, but dig not to excess;
For too much digging is a wickedness.
"Digging bestowed a treasure on these men;
But too much digging lost it all again."
When the Master had finished this discourse, he identified the Birth :— "At
thattime, Sariputta was the Serpent-king, and the master of the caravan was I
myself."
1 Nilsihavutena. Perhaps this throws light on the disease ahivdtarogo, p. 55
note.

.
No. 257. 207
No. 257.
GAMANI-CANDA-JATAKA^
—
[297] "/if is not a clever builder,'' etc. This story the Mcoster tokl while
sojourning at Jetavana, about the praise of wisdom. In the Hall of Truth sat
the Brethren, praising the wisdom of the Buddha: "The Blessed One has
wisdom great and wide, wisdom witty and quick, wisdom sharp and penetrating.
He excels this world and the world ofgods in wisdom."
The j\Iaster entered, and asked what they were talking of now as they sat
there. They told him. He answered, "This is not the fii-st time. Brethren,
that the Blessed One has been wise ; he was the same before." And he told an
old-world tale.
Onceupon a time, Brethren, whenJanasandhawas reigning inBenares,
the Bodhisatta came to life as the son of his chief queen. His face was
resplendent, wearing a look of auspicious beauty, like a golden mirror
well polished. On the day of his naming they called him Adasa-mukha,
Prince Miri'or-face.
Within the space of seven years his father caused him to be taught
the Three Vedas, and all the duties of this world ; and then lie died,
when the lad was seven years old. The courtiers performed the kin^f's
obsequies with great pomp, and made the offerings for the dead and on
;
the seventh day they gathered together in the palace court, and talked
together. The prince was very young, they thought, and he could not be
made king.
Before they made him king, they would test him. So they prepared
a court of justice, and set a divan. Then they came into the prince's
presence, and said they, "You must come, my lord, to the law-court."
To this the prince agreed ; and with a great company he repaired thither,
and sat upon the dais.
Now at the time when the king sat down for judgement, the courtiers
had dressed up a monkey, in the garb of a man who is skilled in the lore
which tells what are good sites for a building. They made him go upon
two feet, and brought him into thejudgement hall.
—
^ See Morris, Folk-Lore Journal, iii. 337; Tawney, Phil. Journ. xii. 112 ll'J;
Academy, Aug. 6, 1887, no. 796. Problems to be solved are a common part of the
machineryof fairytales; e.g. Grimm, no. 29, The Devil with the Three GoldenIlairs,
andthe editors' notes.

— — —
" ; ; "
208 The Jataka. Book III.
"My lord," said they, "in the time of the king your father this man
was one who divined by magic as to desirable sites, and well did he know
his art. [298] Down in the earth as deep as seven cubits he can see a
fault. By his help there was a place chosen for the king's house ; let the
king provide for him, and give him a post."
The prince scanned him fi'om head to foot. "This is no man, but
a monkey," he thought "and monkeyscandestroywhatothershavemade,
;
but of themselves can neither make anything nor carry out such a thing."
And so he repeated the first stanza to his court :
"It is not a clever builder, but an ape with a wrinkled face
He can destroy what others make ; that is the way of his race."
" It must be so, my lord ! " said the courtiers, and took him away.
But after a day or two they dressed this same creature in grand clothes,
and brought him again to thejudgement hall. "In the king your father's
time, my lord, this was a judge who dealt justice. Him should you take
to help you in the awarding ofjustice."
The prince looked at him. Thought he, "A man with mind and
reason is notsohairyasall that. Thiswitlessapecannotdispensejustice ;"
and he repeated the second stanza
:
" H Th e er k e' n s ow n s o n w o i u t gh i t n , t a h s is m h y air f y ath c e r r ea t t a ur u e gh ; t h : e th b e ree a d n s im n a o l c h o a n s fi n d o enc s e ense!
[299] "So it must be, my lord !" said the courtiers, and led him away.
Yet once again did they dress up the very same monkey, and bring him
to the hall of judgement. "Sire," said they, "in the time of the king
your father this man did his duty to father and mother, and paid respect
to old age in his family. Him you should keep w—ith you."
Again the prince looked at him, and thought "Monkeys ai-e fickle of
mind ; such a thing they cannot do." And then he repeated the third
stanza :
"One thing Dasaratha^ has taught me no help such a creature would send
To father or mother, to sister or brot : her, or any who call him friend!"
"So must it be, my lord !" answered they, and took him away again.
And they said amongst themselves, "'Tis a wise prince ; he will be able
to rule"; [300] and they made the Bodhisatta king; and throughout the
city by beat of drum they made proclamation, saying, "Theedicts of king
Mirror-face !
From that time the Bodhisatta reigned righteously; and his wisdom
was noised abroad throughout all India. To show forth the matter of
^ Pasarathaisanother name forhis father (SchoL).

—
No. 257. 209
this wisdom of his, these fourteen problems were brought to him to
decide;
"An ox, a lad, a horse, a basket-knight,
A squire, a light-o'-love, and a young dame,
A snake, a deer, a partridge, and a sprite,
A snake, ascetics, a young priest I name."
This happened as we shall now explain. When the Bodhisatta was
inaugurated king, a certain servant of king Janasandha, named Gfimaiii-
canda, thus considered within himself: "This kingdom is glorious if it be
governed byaid of those who are ofan age with the king. Now I am old,
and I cannot wait upon a young prince : so I will get me a living by
farming in the country." So he departed from the city a distance of three
leagues, and abode in a certain village. But he had no oxen for farming.
And so, after rain had fallen, he begged the loan of two oxen from a
friend; all day long he ploughed with them, and then he gave them grass
to eat, and went to the owner's house to give them back again. At the
moment it happened that the owner sat at meat with his wife ; and
the oxen entered the house, quite at home. As they entered, the master
was raising his plate, and the wife putting hers down. Seeing that they
did not invite him to share the meal, Gamani-canda departed without
formally making over the oxen. During the night, thieves broke into
the cow-pen, and stole the oxen away.
Early on the moi-row, the owner of these oxen entered the cow-shed,
but cattle there were none he perceived that they had been stolen away
;
by thieves. "I'll make Gamani pay for it ! " thought he, and to (jamaiii
he went. [301]
"I say, return me my oxen !" cried he.
"Are not they in their stall1 "
"Now did you return them to nrnV
"No, I didn't."
"Here's the king's officer: come along ! "
Now this peop—le have a custom that they i)ick up a bit of stone or a
potsherd, and say "Here's the king's officer ; come along ! " Ifany man
refuses to go, he is punished. So when Gamani heard the word "officer,"
he went along.
So they went together towai-ds the king's court. On the way, they
came to a village where dwelt a friend ofGamani's. Said he to the other,
" I say, I'm very hungry. Wait here till I go in andgetme.something
to eat " and he entered his friend's house.
!
But his friend was not at home. The wife said,
"Sir, there is nothing cooked. Wait but a moment; i will cook at
once and set before you."
She climbed a ladder to the grain store, and in her haste she fell (o the
J. II. 14

—
210 TJie Jdtaka. Booh III.
ground. And as she was seven months gone with child, a miscarriage
followed.
At that moment, in came the husband, and saw what had happened.
" You have struck my wife," cried he, "and brought her labour upon her
—
untimely Here's a king's oflBcer for you come along!" aud he carried
!
him off. After this they went on, the two of them, with Gamani
between.
As they went, there was a horse at a village gate ; and the groom
could not stop it, but it ran along with them. Tlie hoi'sekeeper called out
to Gamani
"Uncle' Caudagamani, hit the horse with something, and head him
back !" Gamani picked up a stone, and threw it at the horse. The stone
struck his foot, and broke it like the stalk of a castor-oil plant. Then the
man cried,
" Oh, you've broken my horse's leg Here's a king's officer for
!
you !" and he laid hold of him.
Grimani was thus thi-ee men's prisoner. As they led him along, he
thought : "These people will denounce me to the king ; [303] I can't pay
for the oxen ; much less the fine for causing an untimely birth ; and then
where shall I get the price of the horse? I were better dead." So, as
they went along, he saw a wood hard by the road, and in it a hill with a
precipice on one side of it. In the shadow of it were two basket-makers,
father and son, weaving a mat. Said Gamani,
"I say, I want to retire for a moment: wait here, while I go aside";
and with these words he climbed the hill, and threw himself down the
precipice. He fell upon the back of the elder basket-maker, and killed
him on the spot. Gamani got up, and stood still.
"Ah, you villain! you've murdei'ed ray father!" cried the younger
basket-maker; "here's the king's officer!" He seized Gamani's hands,
and came out of the thicket.
"What's this?" asked the other.s.
"The villain has murdered my father "
!
So on they went, the four ofthem, with Gamani in the middle.
They came to the gate of another village. The headman was thei*e,
who hailed Gamani : "Uncle ' Cauda, whither away ? "
" To see the king," says Gamani.
" Oh indeed, to see the king. I want to send him a message ; will you
take it1 "
"Yes, that I will."
—
"Well I am usually handsome, rich, honoured, and healthy; but now
I am miserable and have the jaundice too. Ask the king why this is.
^ Itis worth notiug that this termofaffection meansamother's brother.

No. 257. 211
He is a wise man, so they say ; ho will tell you, and you can Vtring mo. his
message again."
To this the other agreed.
—
At another village a light-o'-love called out to him " Whillicr liound,
Uncle' Cauda?"
"To see the king," says he.
"They say the king is a wise man; take him a message from me,"
says the woman. [303] "Aforetime I used to make great gains; now I
don't get the worth of a betel-nut, and nobody courts me. Ask the
king how this may be, and then you can tell me."
At a third village, there was a young woman who told Gamani, " I
can live neither with my hu.sband nor with my own family. Ask tlu; king
how this is, and then tell me."
A
little further on there was a snake living in an ant-hill near the road.
He saw Gamani, and called out,
"Whither away, Cauda "
1
"Tosee the king."
*'The king is wise ; take hini a mes.sage from me. When I go out to
get my food, I leave this ant-hill faint and famishing, and yet 1 till the
entrance hole with my body, and I get outwith difficulty, dragging myself
along. But when I come in again, I feel satisfied, and fat, yet I pass
quickly through the hole without touching the sides. How is this? ask
the king, and bring me his answer."
And further on a deer saw him, and said—" Ican't eat grass anywhere
but underneath this tree. Ask the king the reason." And again a par-
tridge said, " When I sit at the foot of this ant-heap, and utter my note,
I can make it prettily ; but nowhere else. Ask the king why." And
again, [304] a tree spirit saw him, and said,
"Whither away, Cauda "
1
"To the king."
" The king's a wise man, they say. In former times I was highly
honoured ; now I don't receive so much as a handful of twigs. Ask the
king what the reason is."
And further on again he was seen by a serpent-king, who spoke to liim
thus: "The king is said to be a wise man : then ask him this question.
Why
Heretofore the water inthis pool has been clear as crystal. is itthat
now it has become turbid, with scum all over it1 "
Further on, not far from a town, certain ascetics who dwelt in a park
saw him, and said, in the same way, " They say the king is wis(!. Of yore
there were in this park sweet fruits in plenty, now they have grown taste-
less and dry. Ask him what the reason is." Further on again, ho was
accosted by some brahmin students who wore in a hall at the gate of a
town. They said to him,
1 See note, p. 210.
14—2

"" "
212 Tlie Jataka. Book III.
"Where are you going, Canda, eli?
"To the king," says Canda.
"Then take a message for iis. Till now, whatever passage we learnt
was bright and cle
—
ar; now it does not stay with us, it is not understood,
but all is dai'kness, it is like water in a leaky jar. Ask the king what
the reason is."
Gamani-canda came before the king with his fourteen questions.
When theking saw him, he recognised him. "This is my father's servant,
who used to dandle me in his arras. W^here has he been living all this
time?" And "Canda," said he, "where have you been living all this
time ? [305] We have seen nothing of you for a long while ; what Virings
you here?
" Oh, my lord, when my lord the late king went to heaven, I
departed into the country and kept myself by farming. Then this
man summoned me for a suit regarding his cattle, and here he has
brought me."
"If you had not been brought here, you had never come ; but
I'm glad that you were brought anyhow. Now I can see you. Where is
that man ?
"Here, my lord."
"It is you that summoned our friend Canda 1 "
"Yes, my lord."
"Why?"
"He refuses to give back my pair ofoxen "
!
"Is this so, Canda ? "
"Hear my story too, my lord !" said Cauda ; and told him the whole.
When he had heard the tale, the king accosted the owner of the oxen.
"Did you see the oxen," said he, "entering the stall?"
"No, my lord," the man replied.
"Why, man, did you never hear my name ? They call me king
Mirror-face. Speak out honestly."
"I saw them, my lord !" said he.
"Now, Cauda," said the king, "you failed to return the oxen, and
therefore you are his debtor for them. But this man, in saying that he
had not seen them, told a direct lie. Therefore you with your own hands
shall pluck his eyes out, and you shall youi-selfpay him twenty-four pieces
ofmoney as the price of the oxen." Then they led the owner of tlie oxen
out of doors.
" IfI lose my eyes, what do I care for—the money?" thought he. And
he fell at Gamani's feet, and besought him "O master Canda, keep those
twenty-four pieces, and take these too !" and he gave him other pieces,
and ran away.
The second man said, "My lord, this fellow struck my wife, [306] and

"
No. 257. 213
made her miscarry." "Is this true, Canda?" asked the king. Cauda
begged for a hearing, and told the whole story.
" Did you leally strike her, and cause her to miscarry? " asked the
king.
"No, my lord
! —
I did no such—thing."
"Now, can you" to the other "can you Ileal the nnscarriu;;e wliich
he has caused ] "
"No, my lord, I cannot."
"Now, what do you want to do 1 "
"I ought to have a son, my lord."
"Now then, Canda — you take the man's wife to your house and when
;
a son shall be born to you, hand him over to the husband."
Then this man also fell at Canda's feet, crying, " Don't Itreak up my
home, master ! " threw down some money, and made off.
The third man then accused Cauda of laming his horse's foot. Cauda
as before told what had happened. Then the king asked the owner,
"Did you really bid Cauda strike the horse, and turn him back ]"
"No, my lord, I did not." But on being pressed, he admitted that he
had said so.
"This man," said the king, "has told a direct lie, in saying that he
did not tell you to head back the horse. You may tear out his tongue ;
and then pay him a thousand pieces for the horse's price, which I will give
you." But the fellow even gave him another sum of money, and departed.
Then the basket-maker's son said,
"This fellow is a murderer, and he killed my father !
"Is it so, Cauda?" asked the king. "Hear me, my lord," said Cauda,
and told him about it.
"Now, what do you want ? " asked the king.
"My lord, I must have my father." [307]
"Cauda," said the king, " this man must have a father. But you
cannot bring him back from the dead. Then take his mother to your
house, and do you be a father to him."
"Oh, master !" cried the man, "don't break up my dead fatlier's
home " He gave Gamani a sum ofmoney, and hurried away.
!
Thus Gamani won his suit, and in great delight he said to the king,
"My lord, I have several questions for you from several persons ; may
I tell you them 1 "
"Say on," said the king.
So Gamani told them all in reverse order, beginning with the young
brahmins. The king answered them in turn. To the first question, he
answered: "In the place where they lived there used to be a crowing
cock that knew the time. When they heard his crow, they used to rise
up, and repeat their texts, until the sun rose, and thus tln^ did not forget

;;
214 77ic Jdtaka. Book III.
what they learnt. But now there is a cock that crows out of season ; he
crows at dead of night, or in broad day. When he crows in the depth of
niglit, up tliey rise, but they are too sleepy to repeat the text. When he
crows in broad day, they rise up, but they have not the chance to repeat
their texts. Thus it is, that whatever they learn, they soon forget."
To the second question, he answered "Formerly these men used to do
:
all the duties of the ascetic, and they induced the mystic trance. Now
they have neglected the ascetic's duties, and they do what they ought not
to do ; the fruits which grow in the park they give to their attendants
they live in a sinful way, exchanging their alms'. This is why this fruit
does not gi-ow sweet. [308] If they once more with one consent do their
duty as ascetics, again the fruit will grow sweet for them. Those hermits
know not the wisdom of kings; tell them to live the ascetic life."
He heard the third question, and answered, "Those serpent chiefs
quarrel one with another, and that is why the water becomes turbid. If
they make friends as before, the water will be clear again." After hearing
the fourth, "The tree-spirit," said he, "used formerly to protect men
passing through the wood, and therefore she received many offei'ings.
Now she gives them no protection, and so she receives no offerings. Ifshe
protects them as before, she will receive choice offerings again. She knows
not that there are kings in the world. Tell her, then, to guard the men
who go up into that wood." And on hearing the fifth, "Under the
ant-hill where the partridge finds himself able to utter a pleasant cry is a
crock of treasure; dig it up and get it." To the sixth he answered, "On
the tree under which the deer found he could eat grass, is a great honey-
comb. He craves the grass on which this honey has dropped, and so he
can eat no other. You get the honeycomb, send the best of it to me, and
eat the rest yourself." Then on heai'ing the seventh, "Under the snake's
ant-heap lies a large treasure-crock, and there he lives guarding it. So
when he goes out, from greed for this treasure his body sticks fast; but
after he has fed,his desire for the treasure prevents his bodyfrom sticking,
and he goes in quickly and easily. Dig up the treasure, and keep it."
Then he replied to the eighth question, "Between the villages where dwell
the young woman's husband and her parents [309] lives a lover of hers in
a certain house. She remembers him, and her desire is toward him
therefore she cannot stay in her husband's house, but says she will go and
see her parents, and on the way she stays a few days with her lovei\
When she has been at home a few days, again she remembers him, and
saying she will return to her husband,she goes again to her lover. Go, tell
her there are kings in the land ; say, she must dwell with her husband,
1 Some staying at home, while others beg for all, to save trouble. See p. 57,
note 1.

No. 257. 215
and if she will not, let her have a care, the king will cause her to be
seized, and she shall die." He heard the ninth, and to this he said, "The
woman used formerly to take a price from the hand of one, and not to go
with another until she was off with him', and that is how she used to
receive much. Now she has clianged her manner, and without leave of the
first she goes with the last, m that she receives nothing, and none sock
after her. If she keeps to her old custom, it will be as it was before.
Tell her that she should keep to that." On hearing the tenth, he
replied, "That village headman used once to deal justice indifVcrontly, so
that men were pleased and delighted with him and in their delight tliey
;
gave him many a present. This is what made him handsome, rich, and
honoured. Now he loves to take bi-ibes, and his judgement is not fair; so
he is poor and miserable, and jaundiced. If he judges once again with
righteousness, he will be again as he was before. He knows not that
there are kings in the land. Tell him that he must use justice in giving
judgement."
And Gamani-canda told all these messages, as they were told to him.
And the king haATing resolved all these questions by his wisdom, like
Buddha omniscient, [310] gave rich presents to Gamaui-canda ; and the
village where Canda dwelt he gave to him,as a brahmin's gift, and let him
go. Cauda went out of the city,and told the king's answer to the brahmin
youths, and the ascetics, to the serpent and to the tree-spirit; he took the
treasure from the place where the partridge sat, and from the tree beneath
which the deer did eat, he took the honeycomb, and sent honey to the
king ; he broke into the snake's ant-hill, and gathered the treasure out of
it; and to the young woman,and the light-o'-love,and the village headman
he said even as the king had told him. Then he returned to his own
village, and dwelt there so long as he lived, and afterward passed away
to fare according to his deserts. And king Mirror-face also gave alms, and
wrought goodness, and finally after his death went to swell the hosts of
heaven.
When the Masterhad ended this discoiu-se, to show that not now only is the
Blessed One wise, but wise he was before, he declared the Truths, and idcntitied
the Birth: (now at the conclusion of the Truths many persons entered on the
First Path, or the Second, or the Third, or the Fourth :) "At that time Ananda
was Gamani-Canda ; but king Mirror-foce was I myself."
' Literally, "until shehad madehim enjoyhis money's worth," ajirdpetvd.

—
216 The Jataka. Book III.
No. 258\
MANDHATU-JATAKA.
" Wherever sun and moon,^' etc. This story the Master told during a stay
at Jetavana, about a backsHding brother.
We are told that this brother, in traversing Savatthi for his alms, saw a
finely dressed woman and fell in love with her. Then the Brethren led him
to the Hall of Truth, and informed the Master that he was a backslider. The
Masterasked whetherit wei'e true; and was answered, yes, it was. [311]
"Brother," said theMastei', "when will you ever satisfy this lust, even while
you are a householder? Such lust is as deep as the ocean, nothing can satisfy
it. In former days there have been supreme mouarchs, who attended by their
I'etinue of men held sway over the four great continents encircled by two
thousand isles, ruling even in the heaven ofthe four great kings, even when they
wei-e kings of the gods in — the Heaven of the Thirty Three, even in the abode
of the Thiz-ty Six Sakkas, even these ftiiled to satisfy their lust, and died
before they could do so; when will you be able to satisfy it]" And he told
an old-world tale.
Long ago, iu the early ages of the world, there lived a king named
Mahasammata, and he had a son Roja, who had a son Vararoja, who had
a son Kalyana, wlio had a son Varakalyana, and Varakalyana had a son
named Uposatha, and Uposatha had a son Mandhata. Mandhata was en-
dowed with the Seven Precious Things and the FourSupernatural Powers;
and he was a great monarch. When he clenched his left hand, and then
touched it with his right, there fell a rain of seven kinds of jewels,
knee-deep, as though a celestial rain-cloud had arisen in the sky so
;
wondrous a man was he. Eighty-four thousaiid years he was a prince,
the same number he took some share in ruling the kingdom, and even
so many years he ruled as supreme king ; his life lasted for countless ages.
One day, he could not satisfy some desire, so he showed signs of
discontent.
"Why ai'e you cast down, ray lord1" thecourtiers asked him.
*' When the power of my merit is considered, what is this kingdom ?
Which place seems worth desiring "
'i
"Heaven, my lord."
1 See Divydvaddna, p.210; Thibetan Tales, p. 1 20,KingMdndhdtar. This king
isnamed as one of the foiu- persons who haveattainedin their earthlybodies toglory
in thecity ofthe gods; Milinda, iv. 8. 25 (ii. p. 145 in the trans., .S'.B.E.).

"
No. 258. 217
So rolling along the Wheel of Empire, with his suite [312] he went to
the heaven of the four great kings. The four kings, with a grt-at throng
of gods, catne to meet him in state, bearing celestial flowers and perfumes
;
and having escorted him into their heaven, gave him rule over it. Tliero
he reigned in state, and a long time went by. But not there either could
he satisfy his craving
;
and so.h(^ began to look sick with discontent.
"Why, mighty king," said the four monarchs, "are you unsatisfied?"
And the king replied,
"What place is more lovely than this heaven 1 "
They answered, " My lonl, we arc like servants. The Heaven of the
Thirty-three is more lovely than this !
Mandhata set the Wheel of Empire a-rolling, and with his court all
round him turned his face to the Heav(;n of the Thirty-three. And
Sakka, king of the Gods, bearing celestial flowers and pcirfumcs, in the
midst of a great throng of gods, came to meet him in state, and taking
charge of him showed him the way he should go. At the time when the
king was marching amidst the throng of gods, his ehU^st son took the
Wheel of Empire, and descending to the paths of men, came to his own
city. Sakka led Mandhata into the Heaven ofthe Thirty-three, and gave
him the half of his own kingdom. After that the two of them ruled to-
gether. Time went on, until Sakka had lived for sixty times an hundred
thousand years, and thirty millions ofyears, then was born on earth again;
another Sakka grew up,and he too reigned,and lived his life,and was born
on earth. In this way six and thirty Sakkas followed one after another.
Still Mandhata reigned with his crowd of courtiers round him. As time
went on, the force of his passion and desire grew stronger and stronger.
"What is half a realm to me?" said he in his heart; "I will kill Sakka,
and reign alone!" But kill Sakka he could not. This desire aud greed
of his was the root of his misfortune. The power of his life began to
wane; old age seized upon him; [313] but a human body does not
disintegrate in heaven. So from heaven he fell, aud descended in a park.
The gardener made known his coming to the royal family they came and
;
appointed him a resting-place in the park ; there lay the king in lassitude
and weariness. The courtiers asked him,
"My lord, what word shall we take from you 1 "
"Take from me," quoth he, "this message to the jjcople : Mandhata,
king of kings, having ruled supreme over the four quarters of the globe,
with all the two thousand islands round about, for a long time having
reigned over the peoi)le of the four great kings, having been king of
Heaven during the lifetime of six and thirty Sakkas, now lies dead,"
With these words he died, and went to fore according to his deserts.

— —
: :
218 The Jataka. Book III.
This tale ended, the Master became perfectly enlightened and uttered the
following stanzas:
"Wherever sun and moon their courses run
All arc Mandhata's servants, every one
Where'er earth's quarters see the light of day.
There king Mandhata holds imperial sway.
"Not though a rain of coins fall from the sky ^
Could anything be found to satisfy.
Pain is desire, and sorrow is unrest
He that knows this is wise, and he is blest.
"Where longing is, there pleasure takes him wings,
Even though desire be set on heavenly things.
Disciples of the Very Buddha try
To crush out all desire eternally."
[314] When the Master had e — nded this discourse, he declared the Four
Truths, and identified the Birth : at the conclusion of the Truths the back-
sliding Brother and many others attained to the Fruit of the First Path:
"Atthat time, I was the greatking Mandhata."
No. 259.
TIRITA-VACCHA-JATAKA.
"Wheti all alone" etc. This story the Master told whilstliving atJetavana,
about the gift of a thousand garments, how the reverend Ananda received five
hundred garments from the women of the household of the king of Kosala, and
five hundred from the king himself. The circumstances have been described
above, in the Sigala Birth,ofthe Second Book^.
Once on atime, whileBrahmadatta was kingofBenares, the Bodhisatta
was born as the son of a brahmin in Kasi. On his nameday they called
him Master Tirltavaccha. In due time he grew up, and studied at
Takkasila. He married and settled down, but his parents' death so
distressed him [315] that he became an ascetic, and lived in a woodland
dwelling, feeding upon the roots and fruits of the forest.
1 SeeDhamviapada, verses 186 and 187, which are the last two ofthese stanzas.
2 No. 152, page 4, where howeverthere isnoword ofthis incident; itreally occurs
in No. 156, p. 17 ofthis volume.

;
No. 259. 21!)
Whilst he lived there, arose a disturbance on the frontiers of Benares.
The king i-epaired thither, but was worsted in the fight; fearing for his
life, he mounted an elepluint, aiul fled away covertly through the furcst.
In the morning, Tirltavaccha had gone abroad to gather wild fruit, and
meanwhile the king came upon his hut. "A iierniit's hut!" (juoth \w.
;
down he came from his elephant, weary with \Vind and sun, and athirst;
he looked about for a waterpot, but none could he find. At the end of
the covered walk he spied a well, but he could see no rope and bucket for
the drawing of water. His thirst was too great to bear ; he took ofl'the
girth which passed under the {^](»phant's belly, made it fast on the edge,
and let himself down into the well. But it was too short ; so he tied on
to the end of it his lower garment, and let himself down again. Still he
could not reach the water. He could just touch it with his feet : he was
verythirsty ! "IfI can but quench my thirst," thought he, " death itself
will be sweet!" So down he dropped, and drank his fill; but he could
not get up again, so he remained standing there in the well. And the
elephant, so well trained was he, stood still, waiting for the king.
In the evening, the Bodhisatta returned, laden with wild fruits, and
espied the elephant. "I suppose," thought he, "the king is come; but
nothing is to be seen save the armed elephant. What's to do?" And he
appi'oached the elephant, which stood and waited for him. He went to
the edge of the well, and saw the king at the bottom. "Fear nothing, O
king !" he called out ; then he placed a ladder, and heli)ed the king out
he chafed the king's body, and anointed him with oil ; after wliich he
gave him of the fruits to eat [316], and loosed the elephant's armour.
Two or three days the king rested there then he went away, after
;
making the Bodhisatta promise to pay him a visit.
The royal foi'ces were encamped hard by the city; and when tlu; king
was perceived coming, they flocked around him.
After a month and half a month, the Bodhisatta returned to Benares,
and settled in the park. Next day he came to the palace to ask for
food. The king had opened a great window, and stood looking out into
the courtyard and so seeing the Bodhisatta, and recognising him, he
;
descended and gave him greeting ; he led him to a dais, and set him upon
the throne under a white umbrella his own food the king gave him to
;
eat, and ate himself of it. Then he took him to the garden, and caused a
covered walk and a dwelling to be made for him, and furnished him
with all the necessaries of an ascetic ; then giving him in charge of a
gardener, he bade farewell, and departed. After this, the Bodhisatta took
his food in the king's dwelling great was the respect and honour paid to
:
him.
But the courtiers could not endure it. "If a soldier," said they,
"were to i-eceive such honour, how would he behave?" They betook

—
;; ;;
220 Thii Jataka. Book III.
them to the viceroy : "My lord, our king is making too much of an
ascetic! What can he have seen in the man? You speak with the
king about it." The viceroy consented, and they all went together before
the king. And the viceroy greeted the king, and uttered the first stanza :
"There is no wit in him that I can see
He is no kinsman, nor a friend of thee
Why should this hermit with three bits of wood*,
Tirltavaccha, have such splendid food?"
[317] The king listened. Then he said, addressing his son,
"My son, you remember how once I went to the marches, and how I
was conquered in war, and came not back for a few days?"
"I remember," said he.
"Tliis man saved my life," said the king; and he told him all that
hud happened. "Well, my son, now that this my preserver is with me,
I cannot requite him for what he has done, not even were I to give him
my kingdom." And he recited the two stanzas following:
"When all alone, in a grim thirsty wood,
He, and no othei-, tried to do me good
In my distress he lent a helping hand
Half-dead he drew me up and made me stand.
"By his sole doing I returned again
Out of death's jaws back to the world of men.
To recompense such kindness is but fair;
Give a rich offering, nor stint his share."
[318] So spake the king, as though he were causing the moon to rise
up in the sky; and as the virtue of the Bodhisatta was declared, so was
declared his own virtue everywhere and his takings increased, and the
:
honour shown to him. After that neither his viceroy nor his courtiers
nor any one else durst say anything against him to the king. The king
abode in the Bodhisatta's admonition ; and he gave alms and did good,
and at the last went to swell the hosts of heaven. And the Bodhisatta,
having cultivated the Perfections and the Attainments, became destined
to the world of Brahma.
Then the Master added, "Wise men of old gave help too;" and having thus
concluded his discourse, he identified the Birth as follows : "Ananda was the
king, and I was thehermit."
* Tohanghiswaterpot upon.
i

No. 260. 221
No. 260.
DUTA-JATARAX
" king, the Belly's tiiessenger" etc. This story the Master told while stay-
ing at Jetavana, about a Brother who was addicted to covctousiiess. Tlio cir-
cumstances will be given at large under the Kfika- Birth, in I'ook the Ninth.
Here again the Master told the Brother, [319] "Vou were greedy before, Brother,
as you are now; and in olden days foryourgreed you had yourhead cleft with
a sword." Then he told an old-world story.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was king over Benares, the Bodlii-
satta was born as his son. He grew up, and finished his education at
Takkasila. On his father's death, he inherited the kingdom, and lie was
very dainty in his eating ; accordinglyhe earned the name of KingDainty.
There was so much extravagance about his eating, that on one dish
he spent an hundred thousand pieces. When he ate, he ate not within
doors; but as he wished to confer merit^ upon many people by showing
them the costly array of his meals, he caused a pavilion adorned with
jewels to be set up at the door, and at the time of eating, he had this
decorated, and there he sat upon a royal dais made all of gold, under a
white parasol with princesses all around him, and ate the food of an
hundred delicate flavours from a dish which cost an hundred thousand
pieces of money.
Now a certain greedyman saw the king's mannerof eating,and desired
to have a taste. Unable to master his cravi—ng, he girt up his loins tight,
and ran up to the king, calling out loudly "Messenger! messenger! O
—
king" with his hands held up. (At that time and in that nation, if a
man called out "Messenger!" no one would stay him; and so it was that
the multitude divided and gave him way to pass.)
The man ran up swiftly, and catching a piece of rice from tiie king's
dish, he put it in his mouth. The swoi'dsman drew his sword, to cleave
—
the man's head. But the king stayed him. ".Smite not," said lie; then
to the man, "fear nothing, eat on!" He washed his hand.s, and sat down.
• See Morris, Folk-loreJournal, iv. 54.
2 There is no such heading in Book IX. There is a Kaka-Jfitaka in Book VI.
no. 395, where the Introd. Story is notgiven, but said to be "the same as liefore."
3 The Talmud says that one shouklalways run to meet thekings ofIsrael and even
gentile kings.

— —
!! ;
222 The Jataha. Book III.
[320] After the meal, the kiiig caused his owu drinking water and betel
nut to be given to the man, and then said
"Now my man, you had tidings, you said. What are your tidings'?"
"O king, I am a messenger from Lust and the Belly. Says Lust to
me, Go! and sent me here as her messenger-" and with these words he
spake the first two stanzas :—
"O king, the Belly's messenger you see:
O lord of chariots, do not angry be
For Belly's sake men very far will go,
Even to ask a favour of a foe.
"O king, the Belly's messenger you see
O lord of chariots, do not angry be
The Belly holds beneath his puissant sway
All men upon the earth both night and day."
When this the king heard, he said, "That is true; Belly-messengers
are these; urged by lust they go to and fro, and lust makes them go.
How prettily this man has put it!" he was pleased with him, and uttered
the third stanza:
"Brahmin, a thousand red kine I present
To thee; thereto the bull, for complement.
One messenger may to another give;
For Belly's messengers are all that live."
So said the king; and continued, " I have heard something I never
heard before, or thought of, said by this great man." And so pleased was
he, that he showered honours upon him.
[321] When the Masterhad ended thisdiscourse, hedeclared the Tnxths and
—
identified the Birth: at theconclusionofthe Truthsthe greedyBrother r—eached
the Fniit of the Third Path, and many others entered the other Paths: "The
greedy man is the same in both stories, and I was King Dainty."
No. 261.
PADUMA-JATAKA.
"Cut, andcut, andcut again," etc. This story the Master told at Jetavana,
about some Brethren who made offering of garlandsunder Ananda's tree. The
circumstances will be given in the Kaliiiga-bodhi Births. This was called
1 No. 479.

— — —
" ;" ;
No. 261. 223
Ananda's tree, because Ananda planted it. All India hcixrd tell how the Elder
had planted tliis tree by the gate of Jctavana.
Some Brethren who lived in the country thought they would make oH'cring.s
before Ananda's tree. They journeyed to Jetavana, did their devoirs to tlie
Master,and next daywended their wayto Savatthi,to the Lotus Street; but not
agarland could they get. So theytold Ananda,howtheyhad wished to makean
oft'ering to the tree, but that not a garland was to hdhad in all the Lotus Street.
The Elder promised to fetch some; so he wont off to the Lotus Street, and re-
turned with many handfuls of blue lotus, which he gave them. With these they
made their oftering to the tree.
"\\lien the Brethren got wind of this, they began discussing the Elder's
merits in the Hall of Ti'uth : "Friend, some brothers of little mt'i'it from tlie
country could not get asingle nosegay in the Lotus Bazaar but the Elder went
;
and fetched them some." The IMaster entei-ed, and asked what they were talk-
ing of as they sat there; and they told him. Said he, [322] "Brethren, this is
notthefirst time that the clevertonguehasgained agarland forcleverspeaking
it was the same before." And he told them an old-world tale.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta reigned in Benares, the Bodhisatta
was a rich merchant's son. In the town was a tank, in which the lotus
flowered. A man who had lost his nose looked after the tank.
It happened one daythat they proclaimed holiday in Benares and the
;
three sons of this rich man thought that they would i)ut wreaths upon
them, and go a merrymaking. "We'll flatter up the old lacknose fellow,
and then we'll beg some flowers of him." So at the time when he used
to pluck the lotus flowers, to the tank they went, and waited. And one
of them uttered the first stanza :
"Cut, and cut, and cut again.
Hair and whiskers grow amain
And your nose will grow like these.
Give me just one lotus, please!"
But the man was angry, and gave none. Then the second said the
second stanza:
"In the autumn seeds are sown
Which ere long are fully grown
May your nose sprout up like th ; ese.
Give me just one lotus, please !
Again the man was angry, and gave no lotus. Then the third ofthem
repeated the third stanza :
"Babbling fools ! to think that they
Can get a lotus in this way.
Say they yes, or say they no.
Noses cut no more will grow.
See, I ask you honestly
Give a lotus, sir, to me : !

224 The JCitaka. Booh III.
[323] On hearing this the lake keeper said, "The other two lied, but
you have spoken the truth. You deserve to have some lotuses." So he
gave him a great bunch of lotus, and went back to his lake.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth "The
:
boy whogot the lotus was I myself."
No. 262.
MUDU-PANI-JATAKA.
"yl soft hand" etc. This story the Master told at Jetavana, about a back-
sliding Brother. They brought him to the Hall ofTruth, and the Masterasked
him if he were really a backslider? He replied, yes, he was. Then said the
d M e a s s i t r e es r . , " In o B l r d e e t n hr d e a n ys ! , I e t v i e s n i w m i p s o e ssi m b e l n e t c o ou k l e d ep no w t o g m u e a n rd f t r h o e m ir g o oi w n n g d a a ft u e g r ht t e h r e s i ; r
while theystood holding their fathers' hand,without their fathers' knowing, they
went away wrong-doingwith a paramour"; and hetold them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, while king Brahmadatta reigned in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born as the son of his Queen Consort. Growing up, he
was educated at Takkasilfi, and on his father's death he became kingin his
.stead, and reigned righteously.
There dwelt with him a daughter and a nephew, both together in his
house. One day as he sat with his court, he said,
"When I am dead my nephew will be king, [324] and my daughter
will be his chief queen."
Afterwards, when they were grown up, he was sitting again amidst his
court ; and he said to them,
" I will bring home some other man's daughter for my nephew, and
my own daughter will I marry into another king's family. In this way I
shall have many relations." The courtiers agreed. Then the king assigned
to the nephew a house outside the palace, and forbade his coming to the
palace.
\

—
No. 262. 225
But these two were in love with each other. Thought the youth
"How shall I get the king's daughter outside the house? — Ah, I liavc it."
He gave a present to the nurse.
"What am I to do for this, master1 " she asked.
"Well, mother, I want to get a chance of bringing tlu; princess out of
doors."
"I will talk it over with the princess," said she, "and then tell you."
"Very good, mother," he replied.
To the princess she came. "Let me pick the insects out of your head,"
said she.
She sat the princess upon a low stool, and herself sitting on a higher
one, she put the princess's head upon her lap, and iu looking for the
insects, she scratched the princess's head. The princess understood. She
thoug — ht, "She has scratched me with my cousin the prince's Uiiil, not her
own. Mother," asked she, "have you been with the prince?"
"Yes, my daughter."
"And what did he say? "
"He asked how he could find a way ofgetting you out of doors."
"Ifhe is wise, he will know," said the princess ; and she recited the
first stanza, bidding the old woman learn it and repeat it to the prince :
"A soft hand, and a well-trained elephant,
And a black rain-cloud, gives you what you want."
The woman learnt it, and returned to the prince.
"Well, mother, what did the princess say? " he asked.
"Nothing, [325] but only sent you this stanza," replied she; and she
repeated it. The prince took it in, and dismissed her.
The prince understood exactly what was meant. He found a beautiful
and soft-handed page lad, and prepared him. He bribed the keeper of a
state elephant, and having trained the elephant to be impassive, he bided
his time. Then, one fast-day ofthe dark fortnight, just after the middle
watch, rain fell from a thick black cloud. "This is the day the princess
meant," thought he ; he mounted the elephant, and placed the lad ofthe
soft hands on its back, and set out. Oi)posite the palace he fastened the
elephant to the greatwall ofan opencourtyard, and stood before a window
getting drenched.
Now the king watched his daughter, and let her rest nowhere but
upon a little bed, in his presence. She thought to herself, "To-day the
prince will come !" and lay down without going to sleep.
"Father," .said she, "I want to bathe."
"Come along, my daughter," said the king. Holding her hands, lie
led her to the window; he lifted her, and placed her on a lotus ornament
outside it, holding her by one hand. As she bathed herself, .she held outa
J. II. 15

— —
: : ;
226 The Jcitaha. Booh III.
hand to the prince. He loosed offthe bangles from her arm, and fastened
tliem on the arm of his page boy ; then he lifted the lad, and placed him
upon the lotus beside the princess. [326] She took his hand, and placed
it in her father's, who took it, and let go his daughter's hand. Then she
loosed the ornaments from her other arm, and fastened them on the other
hand of the lad, which she placed in her father's, and went away with
the prince. The king thought the lad to be his own daughter; and
when the bathing was over, he put him to sleep in the royal bedchamber,
shut to the door, and set his seal on it; then setting a guard, he retired
to his own chamber, and lay down to rest.
When the daylight came, he opened the door, and there he saw
this lad. "What's this? " cried he. The lad told how she was fled along
with the prince. The king was cast down. "Not even if one goes along
and holds hands," thought the king, "can one guard a woman. Thus
women it is impossible to guard;" and he uttered these other two
stanzas
:
"Though soft of speech, like rivers hard to fill,
Insatiate, nought can satisfy their will
D F o r w o n m , w d o o m w e n n, th w e h y en sin h k e : k a no m w a s n wh sh a o t ul k d in f d lee th a e f y ar are.
Whomso they serve for gold or for desire.
They burn him up like fuel in the fire\"
[327] So saying, the great Being added, "I must support my nephew;"
so with great honour he gave hisdaughter to this veryman, and made him
viceroy. And the nephew at his uncle's death became king himself.
When the Master — had ended this discourse, he declared the Truths and
identified the Birth: at the conclusion of the Truths,—the backsliding Brother
was firmly established in the Fruit of the First Path : "In those days, I was
the king."
^ The followingversesaregiven by thecommentator
"Where women rule, the seeing lose their sight,
The strong grow weak, the mighty have no might.
Where women rule, virtue and wisdom fly
Eeckless the prisoners in durance lie.
Like highway robbers, all they steal away
From their poor victims, careless come what may
Kefiection, virtue, truth, and reasoning
—
Self-sacrifice, and goodness everything.
As fire burns fuel, for each careless wight
They burn fame, glory, learning, wit, and might."
The word for fire is the archaic jdtaveda, used already in no. 35. See note in
vol. i. p. 90.

" "
No. 2G3. 227
No. 263.
CULLA-PALOBHANA-JATAKA.
[328] "Not through the sea" etc. This story the ^Master told at Jetavana,
also about a backsliding Brother. The blaster had him brouglit into the Hall of
Truth, and asked if it were true that he was a backslider. Ves, said lie, it w;us.
"Women," said the Master, "in olden days made even believing souls to sin."
Then he told a story.
Once on a time Bralimadatta, the king of Benares, was childless. He
said to his queen, "Let us offer prayer for a son." They offered i)rayer.
After a long time, the Bodhisatta came down from the world of Brahma,
and was conceived by this queen. So soon as he was born, he was bathed,
and given to a serving woman to nurse. As he took the bi'east, ho cried.
He was given to another ; but while a woman held him, he would not be
quiet. So he was given to a man servant; and as soon as the man took
him, he was quiet. After that men used to carry him about. When they
suckled him, they would milk the breast for him, or they gave him the
breast from behind a screen. Even when he grew older, they could not
show him a woman. The king caused to be made for him a sojjarate
place for sitting or what not, and a separate room for meditation, all by
himself.
When the lad was sixteen years old, the king thought thus within
himself. "Other son have I none, and this one enjoys no pleasures. He
will not even wish for the kingdom. What's the good ofsuch a son?
And there was a certain dancing girl, clever at dance and song and
music, young, able to gain ascendancy over any man she came across.
She approached the king, and asked what he was thinking about the
;
king told her what it was. [329]
"Let be, my lord," said she : "I will allure him, 1 will make him
love me."
"Well, if you can allure my son, who has never had any dealings
whatsoever with women, he shall be king, and you shall be his chief
queen !
"Leave that to me, my lord," said she "and don't be anxious." So
;
she came to the people of the guard, and said, "At dawn of day I will go
to the sleeping place of the prince, and outsidethe room wliorehemeditates
apart I will sing. If he is angry, you must tell me, and I will go away ;
but if he listens, speak my praises." This they agreed to do.
15—2

— —
:
228 The Jataka. Book III.
So in the morning time she took her stand in that place, and sang
with a voice of honey, so that the music was as sweet as the song, and
the song as sweet as the music. The prince lay listening. Next day, he
commanded that she should stand near and sing. The next day, he com-
manded her to stand in the private chamber, and the next, in his own
presence ; and so by and bye desire arose in him ; he went the way of the
woi'ld, and knew the joy of love. " I will not let another have this
woman," he resolved; and taking his sword, he ran amuck through the
street, chasing the people. The king had him captured, and banished him
from the city along with the girl.
Together they journeyed to the jungle, away down the Ganges.
There, with the river on one side and the sea on the other, they made a
hut, and there they lived. She sat indoors, and cooked the roots and
bulbs ; the Bodhisatta brought wild fruits from the forest.
One day,when he was away in search offruits, a hermit from an island
in the sea, who was going his rounds to get food, saw smoke as he passed
through the air, and alighted beside this hut.
" Sit down until it is cooked," said the woman ; then her woman's
charms seduced his soul, and brought it down from his mystic trance,
making a breach in his purity. And he, like a crow with broken wing,
[330] unable to leave her, sat there the whole day till he saw the Bodhi-
satta coming, and then ran off quickly in the direction of the sea. "This
must be an enemy," thought he, and drawing his sword set off in chase.
But the ascetic, making as though he would rise in the air, fell down into
the sea. Then thought the Bodhisatta,
"Yon man is doubtless an ascetic who came hither through the air;
and now that his trance is broken, he has fallen into the sea. I must
go help him." And standing on the shore he uttered these verses:
"Not through the sea, but by your magic power,
You journeyed hither at an earlier hour;
Now by a woman's evil company
You have been made to plunge beneath the sea.
"Full of seductive wiles, deceitful all.
T D h o e w y n— te d m o p w t n th t e he m y os s t ink pu : r a e-h m e a a n rte s d ho t u o ld hi f s lee fal a l. far
From women, when he knows what kind they are.
"Whomso they serve, for gold or for desire.
They burn him up like fuel in the firel"
^ The Scholiastgives the followinglinesinhisnote
Hallucination, sorrow, and disease,
Mirage, distress (and solid bonds are these).
The snare of death, deep-seated in the raind
Who trusts in these is vilest of his kind.

No. 263.
-I'li)
When the ascetic heard these words which the Bodhisatta spake, he
stood up in the midst of the sea, and resuming his interrupted trance,
he rose through the air, and went away to his dwelling place. Thought
the Bodhisatta, "Yon ascetic, with so great a burden, goes through the
air like a fleck of cotton. [331] Why should not I like him cultivate
the trance, and pass through the air1" So he returned to his hut, and
led the woman among mankind again; then he told her to be gone, and
himself went into thejungle, where he built him a hut in a pleasant spot,
and became an ascetic; he prepared for the mystic trance, cultivated the
Faculties and the Attainments, and became destined for the world of
Brahma.
When this discoiu'se was ended, the Master declared the Truths (now at the
:
conclusion of the Truths the backsliding Brother became establisliod in the
Fruit of the First Path :) "At that time," said he, "I was myself the youth that
had never had anything to do with women."
No. 264.
MAHA-PANADA-JATAKA^.
—
"'Tivas king Pandda^^ etc. This story the Master tokl when lie was settled
on the bank ofthe Ganges, about the miraculous powerofElder Bhaddaji.
On one occasion, when the Master had passed the rains at Savatthi, he
thought he would show kindness to a young gentleman named Bhadilaji. So
with all the Bi'ethren who were with him, he made his way to the city of
Bhaddiya, and stayed three months in Jatiya Grove, waiting luitil the young
man should mature and perfect his knowledge. Now young Bhaddaji was a
magnificent person, the only son of a rich merchant in Bhaddiya, with a fortune
ofeight hundred millions. He had three housesfor thethree seasons, in each of
which he stayed four months ; and after spending this period in one of them, he
used to migrate with all his kith and kin to another in the greatest pomp. On
these occasions all the town was a-tlutter to see the young man's magniliccnce;
and between these houses used to be erected scats in circles on circles ami tiers
above tiers.
When the Master had been there three months, he informed the townspeople
that he intended to leave. Begging him to wait until the morrow, the town.sfolk
onthefollowingday collected magnificent gifts forthe Jjuddha and his attendant
Brethren ; and set up a jiavilion in the midst of the town, decorating it and
laying out seats then they announced that the hour had come. The Ma.ster
;
^ Cp. Divydvadiina, p. 57.

230 The Jdtaka. Book III.
with hiscompany went and took their seats there. Everybody gave generously
to them. Afterthe meal was over, the Masterin a voicesweetashoneyreturned
thanks to them.
At this moment, young Bhaddaji was passing from one of his residencesto
a p n e o o t p h l e e r. wer [ e 33 a 2 b ] o B u u t t h t i h m a . t d S a o y n h o e t a a sk s e ou d l h c i a s m p e eo to pl s e ee h h o i w s s it pl w e a n s d . our U ; su o a n l l l y y hi a s ll o t w h n e
city was in a flutter to see him pass from house to house ; circles on circles and
tiers above tiers the seats were built ; bvitjust then there was nobody but his
own Th fo e llo r w e e p r l s y ! wa W s, ha " t M c y oul l d ord b , e t t h h e e r S e u a p so r n em ? e Buddha has been spending three
months near the town, and this day he leaves. He has just finished his meal,
and is holding a discourse. All the town is there listeningto his words."
"Oh, very well, we willgo and hear him too," said the young man. So, in a
blaze ofornaments, with his crowd of followers about him, he went and stood on
theskirtof the crowd ; as he heard the discourse, he threw off" all his sins, and
attained to high fruition and sainthood.
The Master,addressing the merchant ofBhaddiya, said, "Sir, yourson, in all
his splendour, while hearing my discourse has become a saint; this very day
he should eitherembrace the religious life, or enter Nirvana."
"Sir," replied he, "I do not wish my son to enter Nirvana. Admit him
to the i-eligious order; this done, come with him to my house to-morrow."
The Blessed One accepted this invitation; he took the young gentleman
to the monastery, admitted him to the brotherhood, and afterward to the
lesser and greater orders. For a week the youth's parents showed generous
hospitality to him.
Afterremaining these seven days,the Masterwentonalms-pilgrimage,taking
the young man with him, and arrived at a village called Koti. The villagers
of Koti gave generously to the Buddha and his followers. At the end of this
meal, the Master began to express his thanks. While this was being done, the
younggentleman went outside the village, and by a landing-place of the Ganges
he sat down under a tree, and plunged in a trance, thinking that he would rise
as soon as the Master should come. When the Elders of greatest age ap-
proached, he did not rise, but he rose as soon as the Master came. The
unconverted f<jlk were angry because he behaved as though he were a Brother
ofold standing, not rising up even when he saw the eldest Brethren approach.
The villagers constructed rafts. This done, [333] the Master asked where
Bhaddaji was. "There he is. Sir." "Come, Bhaddaji, come aboard my raft."
The Elder rose, and followed him to his raft. When they were in mid-river, the
Masterasked him aquestion.
"Bhaddaji, where is the palace you lived in when Great Panada wasking?"
"Here, under the water," was the reply. The unconverted said one to the other,
"Elder Bhaddaji is showing that he is a saint!" Then the Master bade him
disperse the doubt of his fellow-students.
In a moment, the Elder, with a bow to his Master, moving by his mysterious
power, took the whole pile ofthe palace on his finger, and rose in the airbearing
the palace with him (it covered a space oftwenty-five leagues) ; then he made a
hole in it and showed himself to the pi-esent inhabitants of the palace below,
and tossed the building above the water fii-st one league, then two, then three.
Then those who had been his kinsfolk in this former existence, who had now
become fish or tortoises, water-snakes or frogs, because they loved the palace
so much, and had come to life in the very same place, wriggled out of it when
it rose up, and tumbled over and over into the water again. When the Master
saw this, he said, "Bhaddaji, your relations are in trouble." At his Master's
words the Elder let the palace go, and it sank to the place where it had been
before.
The Master passed to the further side of the Ganges. Then they prepared
1 Foran explanation ofthisphrase, ahhamvydkaroti, seeMahdvagga i.v. 19 with
thetranslators' note (.S.B. E.,Vinaya Texts ii. p. 10).

— —
: : ;
No. 264. 231
him a seatjust on the river bank. On the seat prepared for the Buddha, ho
sat, like the sun frcssh risen pouring forth his i\iy.s. Tlien the Bretliren asked
him when it was that Elder Bhaddaji had lived in that palace. The Mjister
answered, "In the daysofking Great Panada," and wenton to tell them an old-
world tale.
Once upon a time, a certaiii Suruci was king of Mithila, which is a
town in the kingdom of Videha. He had a son, nanunl Suruci likewise,
and he again had a son, the Great Panada. They obtained possession of
that mansion. They obtained it by a deed done in a former existence.
A
father and son made a hut of leaves with canes and branches of the fig-
tree, as a dwelling for a Paccekabuddha.
The rest ofthestory will be told in the Suruci Birth, Book XIV.*
[334] The Master, having finished telling this story, in his perfect wisdom
uttered these stanzas here following:
"'Twas king Panada who this palace had,
A thousand bowshots high, in breadth sixteen,
A
thousand bowshots high, in banners clad
An hundred storeys, all of emerald green.
"Six thousand men of music to and fro
In seven companies did dance withal
As Bhaddaji has said, 'twas even so
I, Sakka, was your slave, at beck and call."
[335] At that moment the unconverted people became resolved of their
doubt.
When the Master had ended this discoui'se, he identified the Birth:
"Bhaddaji was the Great Panada, and I was Sakka."
No. 265.
KHURAPPA-JATAKA.
—
" W/ien many a hoiv" etc. This story the ]\Iaster told in Jetavana, about
a Brother who had lost all energy. The Master asked, was it true that this
Brother had lost his energy. Yes, he replied. "Why," asked he, "have you
slackened your energy, after embracing this doctrine of salvation? In days of
yore, wise men were energetic even in matters which do not lead to salvation;"
and so saying he told an old-world tale.
1 No. 489.

——— ——
: ;
232 The Jdtaka. Book III.
Once on a time, while Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born into the family of a forester. When he grew \i\), he took
the lead of a band of five hundred foresters, and lived in a village at
the entrance to the forest. He used to hire himself out to guide men
through it.
Now one day a man of Benares, a merchant's son, arrived at that
village with a caravan of five hundred waggons. Sending for the Bodhi-
satta, he offered him a thousand pieces to be his guide through the forest.
He agreed, and received the money from the merchant's hand and as
;
he took it, he mentally devoted his life to the merchant's service. Then
he guided him into the forest.
In the midst of the forest, up rose five hundred robbers. Asfor the
rest of the company, no sooner did they see these robbers, than they
grovelled upon their belly the bead forester alone, shouting and leaping
:
and dealing blows, put to flight all the five hundred robbers, and led the
merchant across the wood in safety. Once aci'oss the forest, the merchant
encamped his caravan [336] he gave the chief forester choice meats of
;
every kind, and himselfhaving broken his fast, sat pleasantly by him, and
talked with him thus "Tell me," said he, "how it was that even when
:
five hundred robbers, with arms in their hands, were spread all around,
you felt not even any fear in your heart 1 " And he uttered the first
stanza
"When many a bow the shaft at speed let fly
Hands grasping blades of tempered steel were nigh
When Death had marshalled all his dread array-
Why, 'mid such terror, felt you no dismay?"
On hearing this the forester repeated the two verses following
:
"When many a bow the shaft at speed let fly
Hands grasping blades of tempered steel were nigh
When Death had marshalled all his dread array
I felt a great and mighty joy this day.
"'And this my joy gave me the victory;
I was resolved to die, if need should be
He must contemn his life, who would fulfil
Heroic deeds and be a hero still."
[337] Thus did he send forth his words like a shower ofarrows ; and
having explained how he had done heroically through being fi-ee from the
desire to live, he parted from the young merchant, and returned to his
own village where after giving alms and doing good he passed away
;
to fare according to his deserts.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he declared the Truths, and
identified the Birth:—at the conclusion of the Truths the disheartened Brother
attained to Sainthood : —"At that time I was the chiefoftheforesters."

;;
No. '266. 233
No. 266.
VATAGGA-SINDHAVA-JATAKA.
—
"He for wkone sake" etc. This story the Master told at Jctavaiia, about a
certain land-owner.
At Savatthi, \vc learn, a handsome woman saw this man, who was also
handsome, and fell in love. The passion within her was like a fire burning
her body through and through. She lost hersenses, both of body and of mind
she cared nothing for food; she only lay down hugging the frame of the
bedstead.
Herfriends and handmaidens asked her what troubled her at heart that she
lay hugging the bedstead what was the matter, they wished to know. The
;
first few times she answei'ed nothing ; but as they continued pressing her, she
told them what it was.
"Don't worry," said they, "we'll bring him to you;" and they went and had
a talk with the man. At first he refused, but by their nuicli asking he at last
consented. They got his promise to come at a certain houron a fixed day, and
told the woman.
She prepared her chamber, and dressed herself in her finery, and sat on the
bed waiting until he came. He sat down beside her. Then a thought came into
her mind. [338] "IfI accept his addresses at once, and make myselfcheap, my
pride will be himibled. To let him have his will the very first day he comes
would be out of place. I will be capricious to-day, and afterwards I will give
way." So no sooner had he touched her, and begun to dally, she caught his
hands, and spoke roughly to him, bidding him go away, as she did not want him.
He shrankbackangrily, and went oft'home.
When the women found out what she had done, and that the man had gone
oflf, they reproached her. "Here you are," they said, "in love with somcljody,
and lie down refusing to take nourishment ; we hadgreatdifficultyin persuading
the man, but at last we bring him; and then you'll have nothing to say to
him!" She told them why it was, and they went oft", warning her that she
would get talked about.
The man never even came to look at her again. When she found she had
lost him, she would take no nourishment, and soon died. When the man heard
of her death, he took a quantity of flowers, scents, and perfumes, and went
to Jetavana, where he saluted the IMasterand sat on one side.
The Master asked him, "How is it, lay brother, that we never sec you
here?" He told him the whole story, adding that he had avoided waiting on the
Buddha all this time for shame. Said the Master, "Layman, on this occasion
thewoman sent for you through her passion, and then would have nothing to do
with you and sent you away angry ; and just so in olden days, she fell in
love with wise persons, sent for them, and when they came refused to have
anything to do with them, and thus plagued them and sent them to the right-
about." Then athis request the Mastertold an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was a Sindh horse, and they called him Swift-as-the-Wiud
and he was the king's horse of ceremony. The grooms used to take him
to bathe in the Ganges. There a certain she-ass saw him, and fell in love.

: :
234 The Jataka. Book III.
Tremblingwith passion, [339] she neither ate grass nor drank water but
;
pined away and became thin, until she was nothing but skin and bone.
Then a foal of hers, seeing her pining away, said, "Why do you eat
no grass, mother, and drink no water ; and why do you pine away, and
lie trembling iti this place or that? What is the matter?" She would
not say; but after he had asked again and again, she told him the matter.
Tlien her foal comforted her, saying,
"Mother, do not be troubled I will bi-ing him to you."
;
So when Swift-as-the-Wind went down to bathe, the foal said, ap-
proaching him,
" Sir, my mother is in love with you : she takes no food, and she is
pining away to death. Give her life !"
"Good, my lad, Iwill," said the horse. "When my bath is over, the
grooms let me go awhile to exercise on the river bank. Do you bi'ing
your mother to that place."
So the foal fetched his mother, and turned her loose in the place; then
he hid himselfhard by.
The groom let Swift-as-the-Wind go for a run ; he spied the she-ass,
and came up to her.
Now when the horse came up and began to suiflf at her, thought the
ass to herself, "If I make myselfcheap, and let him have his way as soon
as he has come here, my honour and pride will perish. I must make as
though I did not wish it." So she gave him a kick on the lower jaw,
and scampered away. It broke his jaw, and half killed him. " What
does she matter to me?" thought Swift-as-the-Wind [340] he felt
;
ashamed and made off.
Then the ass repented, and lay down on the spot in grief. And
her son the foal came up, and asked her a question in the following
lines
"He for whose sake you thin and yellow grew.
And would not eat a bite.
That dear beloved one is come to you;
Why do you take to flight?"
Hearing her son's voice, the ass repeated the second verse
"If at the very first, when by her side
He stands, without delay
A woman yields, all humbled is her pride:
Therefore I ran away."
In these words she explained the feminine nature to her son.

No. 266. 235
The Master, in his perfect wisdom, repeated the third stanza:
"If she refuse a suitoi- nohly born
Who by her side would stay,
As Kundah moiu'ned ^^'inds\vift, she must mimrn
For many a long day."
When th—isdiscourse wasended,the blasterdeclared the Truths and identified
the Birth: at the con—clusion of the Truths, this land-owner entered on the
Fruit ofthe First Path : "This woman was the she-ass, and I was Swift-a.s-the-
Wiiid."
No. 266.
KAKKATA-JATAKA
'.
—
"Gold-clawedcreature" etc. [341] This story the Master told while dwelling
at Jetavaua, about a certain woman.
We are told that a certain land-owner of Savatthi, with his wife, was on a
journey into the country for the jiurpose of collecting debts, when he fell among
robbers. Now the wife was very beautiful and charming. The robl)er chiefwas
so taken by her that he purposed killing the husband to get her. But the
woman was good and virtuous, a devoted wife. She fell at the robbei-'s feet,
crying, "My lord, if you kill my husband for love of me, I will take poison,
m or y s h to u p sb m a y nd b u r s e e a l t e h s , sl a y n ! d " kil I l n m t y h s i e s l w f a t y oo sh I e b W e i g t g h ed y h ou im I of w f i . ll not go. Do not kill
They both got back safe to Savatthi. Then it occurred to them ;i,s they
passed the monastery in Jetavaua, that they would visit it and salute the
Master. So to the jjerfumed cell they went, and after salutation sat down
on one side. The Master asked them where they had been. "To collect
our debts," they replied. "Did your journey pass off without mishap?" he
asked next. "We were captured by robbers on the way," said the husband,
"and the chief wanted to murder me; but my wife here begged me ofl", and
I owe my life to her." Then said the Master, "You are not the only one,
layman, whose life she has saved. In days of yore she saved the lives of other
wise men." And then at his request the Master told an old-world talc.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, there was
a great lake in Himalaya, wherein was a great golden Crab. Because he
lived there, the place was known as the Crab Tarn. The Crab was very
large, as big round as a threshing floor; it would catch elephants, and kill
1 Cf. Morris in Contemp. Rev. 1881, vol. 30, p. 742; Cunningham, Stiipa of JUmr-
hut, pi. XXV. 2 (frontispiece to this volume).

— —
: : " "
236 TJie Jataka. Book III.
and eat them and from fear of it [342] the elephants durst not go down
;
and browse there.
Now the Bodhisatta was conceived by the mate of an elephant, the
leader of a herd, living hard by this Crab Tarn. The mother, in order
to be safe till her delivery, sought another place on a mountain, and
there she was delivered of a son ; who in due time grew to years of
wisdom, and was great and mighty, and prospered, and he was like a
purple mountain of collyrium.
He chose another elephant for his mate, and he resolved to catch this
Crab. So with his mate and his mother, he sought out the elephant herd,
and finding his father, proposed to go and catch the Crab.
"You will not be able to do that, my son," said he.
But he begged the father again and again to give him leave, until at
last he said, "Well, you may try."
So the young Elephantcollected all the elephantsbeside the CrabTarn,
and led them close by the lake. "Does the Crab catch them when they
go down, or while they are feeding, or when they come up again]
They replied, "When the beasts come up again."
"Well then," said he, "do you all go down to the lakeand eat what-
ever you see, and come up first; I will follow last behind you." And so
they did. Then the Crab, seeing the Bodhisatta coming up last, caught
his feet tight in his claw, like a smith who seizes a lump of iron in a huge
pair of tongs. The Bodhisatta's mate did not leave him, but stood there
close by him. The Budhisatta pulled at the Crab,but could notmake him
budge. Then the Crab pulled, and drew him towards himself. At this
in deadly fear the Elephant roaredand roared; hearing which all the other
elephants, in deadly tei"i"or, ran ofi" trumpeting, and dropping excrement.
Even his mate could not stand, but began to make off". [343] Then to
tell her how he was held a prisoner, he uttered the first stanza, hoping to
stay her from her flight
"Gold-clawed1 creature with projecting eyes,
Tarn-bred, hairless, clad in bony shell.
He has caught me! hear my woful cries!
Mate don't leave me— for you love me well!
!
Then his mate turned round, and repeated the second stanza to his
comfort
"Leave you? never! never will I go
Noble husband, with your years threescore.
All fom' quarters of the earth can show
None so dear as thou hast been of yore."
1 Sihgl means either 'horned' or 'gold,' and the scholiast gives both infcerpreta
tions. As the word suggested both to the writer, I usea word which expresses both
inEnglish.

No. 267. 237
In this way she encouraged him and saying, "Noble sir, now I will
;
talk to the Crab a while to make him let you go," she addressed the Crab
in the third stanza [344]
:
"Of all the crabs that in tlic sea,
Ganges, or Nerbudda be,
Y He o a u r a m re e— be l s e t t a m n y d h ch u i s ef b , an I d k g n« o ) ! \ " v:
As she spoke thus, the Crab's fancy was smitten with the sound of the
female voice, and forgettingall fear he loosed his claws from the Elephant's
leg, and suspected nothing of what he would do when he was set free.
Then the Elephant lifted his foot, and stepped upon the Crab's back ; and
atonce his eyes started out. The Elephant shouted the joy-cry. Up ran
the otherelephantsall, pulled the Crab along and set him upon the ground,
and trampled him to mincemeat. His two claws broken from his body lay
apart. And this Crab Tarn, being near the Ganges, when there was a
flood in the Ganges, was filled with Ganges water; when the water
subsided it ran from the lake into the Ganges. Then these two claws
were lifted and floated along the Ganges. One of them reached the sea,
the other was found by the ten royal brothers while playing in the water,
and they took it and made of it the little drum called Anaka. The
Titans found that which reached the sea, and made it into the drum
called Alambara. These afterwards being worsted in battle with Sakka,
ran off and left it behind. Then Sakka caused it to be kept for his own
use; and it is of this they say, "There is thunder like the Alambara
cloud "
!
When t—his discourse wasended, the MasterdeclaredtheTruths,andidentified
the Birth: at the conclusion of the Truths both husband and wifeattained the
Fruit of the First Path: — [345] "In those days, this lay sister was the she-
elephant, and I myselfwas hermate."
No. 268'.
ARAMA-DtJSA-JATAKA.
—
"Best ofall," etc. This story the Master told whilstdwelling in the country
near Dakkhinagiri, about agardener's son.
After the rains, the Master left Jetavaiia, and wont on alms-pilgrimage in the
^ This is the same storyas No. 46 (vol. i. of the translation, p. 118): it is briefer,
andtheverses are not the same. See Folk-LoreJournal,iii. 251; Cunningham, Bhav-
hut, XLV. 5 (frontispiece to vol. i.).

! :
238 Th.e Jataka. Book III.
district about Dakkhinagiri. A layman invited the Buddha and his company,
and made them sit down in his grounds till he gave them of rice and cakes.
Then he said, "If any of the holy Fathers care to see over the grounds, they
might go along with the gardener;" and he ordered thegardenerto supply them
with any fruit they might fancy.
V>y and bye they came upon a bare spot. "What is the reason," they asked,
"that this spot is bare and treeless?" "The reason is," answered the gardener,
"that a certain gardener's son, who had to water the saplings, thought he had
better give them water in proportion to the length of the roots so he pulled
them all up to see, and watered them accordingly. The result ; was that the
place became bare."
The Brethren returned, and told this to their Master. Said he, "Not now
onlyhas the lad destroyed a plantation hedidjustthe same before;" and then
;
he told them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when a king named Vissasena was reigning over
Benares, proclamation was made of a holiday. The park keeper thought
he would go and keep holiday so calling the monkeys that lived in the
;
park, he said
:
"This park is a gi'eat blessing to you. I want to take a week's
holiday. Will you water the saplings on the seventh day?" "Oh, yes,"
said they ; he gave them the watering-skins, and went his way.
The monkeys drew water, and began to water the roots.
The eldest monkey cried out : "Wait, now ! It's hard to get water
always. We must husband it. Let us pull up the plants, [346] and
notice the length oftheir roots ; if they have long roots, they need plenty
of water; but short ones need but a little." "True, true," they agreed;
then some of them pulled up the plants ; then others put them in again,
and watered them.
The Bodhisatta at the time was a young gentleman living in Benares.
Something or other took him to this park, and he saw what the monkeys
were doing.
"Who bids you do that1 " asked he,
"Our chief," they replied.
"If that is the wisdom of the chief, what must the rest of you be
like ! " said he ; and to explain the matter, he uttered the first stanza :
"Best of all the troop is this :
What intelligence is his !
If he was chosen as the best.
What sort of creatures are the rest !"
Hearing this remark, the monkeys rejoined with the second stanza
"Brahmin, you know not what you say
Blaming us in such a way
If the root we do not know,
How can we tell the trees that grow?"

:
No. 2G8. 239
To which the Bodhisatta replied by the third, as follows
"Monkeys, T liave no blame for you,
Nor those who range the woodland through.
The monarch is a fool, to say
'Please tend my trees while I'm away.'"
[347] When this discourse was ended, the Master identified the Birth "The
lad who destroyed the park was the monkey chief, and I was the wise man : ."
No. 269.
SUJATA-JATAKA.
—
"Those who are dowered,^' etc. This story the Master told while living in
Jetavana about one Sujata, a daughter-in-law of Anatlia-pindika, daughter of
thegreat merchant Dhanaiijaya, and youngest sister ofVisiikha,.
We are told that she entered the house ofAnatha-pindikafull ofhaughtiness,
thinking how great a family she had come from, and she was obstinate, violent,
passionate,and cruel; refused to do her part towards her new fatherand mother,
or her husband and went about the house with harsh words and hard blows
;
foreveryone.
One day, the Master and five hundred brothers visited Anatha-pindika's
house, and took their seats. The great merchant sat beside the Blessed One,
hearkening to his discourse. At the same time Sujata happened tobe scolding
the servants.
The ]\Iaster ceased speaking, and asked what that noisewas. The merchant
explained that itwas his rude daughter-in-law
;
that she did not behave properly
towards her husband or his parents, she gave no alms, and had no good points
faithless and unbelieving, she went about the house scolding day and night. ;
The Masterbade send forher.
The woman came,and aftersalutingthe Master,she stood on one side. Then
the Masteraddressed her thus
"Sujata, there are seven ki : nds of wife a man may have of which sort are
you?" She replied, "Sir, you speak too shortly for me to u ; nderstand plciise
;
explain." "Well," said the Master, "listen attentively," anil he uttered the
following verses
:
"One is bad-hearted, nor compassionates
The good loves others, but her lord she hates.
;
Destroying all that her lord's wealth obtains*,
This wife the title of Destroyer gains.
* It isnot clearwhethervadhenak'dassa is 'the thing bought by his wealth,' or the
'person'; probablyboth.

— —
240 The Jataha. Booh III.
"Whate'er the husband gets for her by trade,
Or skilled profession, or the farmer's spade,
[348] She tries to filch a little out of it.
For such a wife the title Thief is fit.
"Careless of duty, lazy, passionate.
Greedy, foul-mouthed, and full of wrath and hate.
Tyrannical to all her underlings
All this the title High and Mighty brings.
"Who evermore compassionates the good.
Cares for her husband as a mother would.
Guards all the wealth her husband may obtain
This wife the title Motherly will gain.
"She who respects her husband in the way
Young sisters reverence to elders pay,
Modest, obedient to her husband's will,
The Sisterly is this wife's title still.
"She whom her husband's sight will always please
As friend that friend after long absence sees,
High-bred and virtuous, giving up her life
To him—this one is called the Fi-iendly wife.
"Calm when abused, afraid of violence.
No passion, full of dogged patience,
True-hearted, bending to her husband's will,
Slave is the title given to her still."
[349] "These, Sujata, are the seven wives a man may have. Three of these,
the Destructive wife, the Dishonest wife, and Madam High and Mighty are re-
born in hell; the otherfourin the Fifth Heaven.
"They who are called Destroyer in this life,
The High and Mighty, or the Thievish wife,
Being angry, wicked, disrespectful, go
Out of the body into hell below.
"They who are called the Friendly in this life,
Motherly, Sisterly, or Slavish wife.
By vu'tue and their long self-mastery
Pass into heaven when their bodies die."
Whilst the Master was explaining these seven kinds of wives, Sujataattained
t b o el t o h n e ged F , rui s t he of an t s h w e er F e i d r , st " P I atl a i m; a a nd sla w v h e. en Si t r he !" Ma a s n t d er re a s s p k e e c d tf t u o ll w y hi s c al h ut c i la n s g s s t h h e e
Buddha, gained pardon ofhim.
Thus by one admonition the Master tamed the shrew and after the meal,
;
when hehad declared their dutiesamidstthe Brotherhood,heenteredhisscented
chamber.
Now the Brethren gathered together in the Hall of Truth, and sang the
Master's praises. "Friend, by a single admonition the Master has tamed a
shrew, and raised her to Fruition of the First Path!" The Master entered, and
asked what they were talking ofas they sat together. They told him. Said he,
"Brethren, this is not the first time that I have tamed Sujata by a single
admonition." And he proceeded to tell an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, while Brahmadatta reigned over Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born as the son of his Queen Consort. When he grew up

— — —
;: "
No. 269. 241
he received his education at Takkasila, and after the death of his fatlior,
became king and ruled in righteousness.
His mother was a passionate woman, cruel, harsh, slnvwisli, ill-
tongued. The son wished to admonish his mother ; hut lie felt he must
not do anything so disrespectful ; so he kept on the look-out for a chance
ofdropping a hint.
One day he wont down into the grounds, and his mother went with
him. [350] A blue jay screeched on the road. At this all the courtiers
—
stopped their ears, crying
—
"What a harsh voice, what a shriek ! don't make that noi.se !
While the Bodhisatta was walking through the park with his mother,
and a company of players, a cuckoo, perched amid the thick leaves of a
saF tree, sang with a sweet note. All the bystanders were delighted at
her—voice
;
clasping their hands, and stretching them out, they besought
her "Oh, what a soft voice, what a kind voice, what a gentle voice!
sing away, biixlie, singaway!" and there theystood, stretching their necks,
eagerly listening.
The Bodhisatta, noting these two things, thought that here was a
chance to drop a hint to the queen-mother. "Mother," said he, "when
they heard the jay's cry on the road, every body stopped their ears, and
—
called out Don't make that noise don't makethat noise and stopped up
! !
their ears for harsh sounds are liked by no body." And he repeated the
:
following stanzas :
"Those who are dowered with a lovely hue.
Though ne'er so foir and beautiful to view,
Yet if they have a voice all harsh to hear
Neither in this world nor the next are dear.
"There is a bird that you may often see
Ill-favoured, black, and speckled though it be.
Yet its soft voice is pleasant to the ear
How many creatures hold the cuckoo dear!
"Therefore your voice should gentle be and sweet.
Wise-speaking, not puffed up with self-conceit.
And such a voice —how sweet the sound of it!
Explains the meaning of the Holy Writ-."
When the Bodhisatta had thus admonished his motherwith the.se three
verses, he won her over to his way of thinking; and ever afterwards she
followed a right course of living. And he having by one word made his
mother a self-denying woman afterwards passed away to fare according
to his deeds.
' Shoren Rnhunta.
- Thelast Btauza comes from Dhaiiimfijxidti, v. 30:^, not quoted word forword, Init
adapted to the context.
16
J. IT.

"
242 The Jataka. Book III.
[351] When the Master had ended this discourse, he thus identified the
Birth
:
"Sujatfi was the motherof the king ofBenares, and I wasthe kinghim-
self."
No. 270.
ULUKA-JATAKA.
—
" The owl isKing" etc. This story the Master tokl while living at Jetavana,
about aquarrel between Crows and Owls.
At the period in question, the Grows used to eat Owls during the day, and at
night, the Owls flew about, nipping offthe heads of the Crows as they slept, and
thus killing them. There was a certain brother who lived in a cell on the
outskirts of Jetavana. When the time came for sweeping, there used to be a
c^uantity of crows' heads to throw away, which had dropt from thetree, enough
to fill seven or eightpottles. He told this to the Ijrethren. In the Hall ofTruth
the Brethren began to talk about it. "Friend, Brother So-and-so finds ever so
many crows' heads to throw away every day in the place where he lives!" [352]
The Master came in, and asked what they were talking about as they sat
together. They told him. They went on to ask how long it was since the
Crows and Owls fell a-quarrelling. The Master replied, "Since the time of the
first age ofthe world;" iind then he told them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, the people who lived in the first cycle of the world
gathered together, and took for their king a certain man, handsome,
auspicious,commanding, altogetherperfect. The quadrupeds also gatliered,
and chose for king the Lion; and the fish in the ocean chose them a
fish called Ananda. Then all the birds in the Himalayas assembled
upon a flat rock, crying,
"Among men there is a king, and among the beasts, and the fish have
one too; but amongst us birds king there is none. We should not live in
anarchy; we too should choose a king. Fix on some one fit to be .set in
the king's place!
They searched about for such a bird, and chose the Owl; "Here is the
bird we like," said they. And a bird made i)roclamation three; timesto all
that there would be a vote taken on this matter. After patiently liearing
this announcement twice, on the third time up i-ose a Crow, and cried out,
"Stay now! If that is what he looks like when he is being con-
.secrated king, what will he look like when he is angry1 If lie only looks
at us in anger, we shall be scattered like sesame seeds thrown on a hot

— —
2
: :
No. 270. 243
plate. I don't want to make this fellow kini,'!" and cidurijing upon tinslie
—
nttered the first stanza: [353]
"The owl is king, yon say, o'er all bird-kind
With your permission, may I speak my mind?"
The Birds repeated the second, granting him leave to speak:
"You have our leave. Sir, so it be good and right
For other birda are young, and mse, and bright."
Thus permitted, he repeated the third
:
"I like not (with all deference be it said)
To have the Owl anointed as our He<ad.
W
Lo
h
o
a
k
t
a
w
t
il
h
l
is
he
fix
d
c
o
e!
w
i
h
f
e
t
n
hi
h
s
e
go
lo
o
o
d
ks
hu
an
m
g
o
r
u
i
r
ly?
b
"
e,
Then he flow up into the air, cawing out "I don't like it! I don't like
it!" The Owl rose and pursued him. Thenceforward those two nui-.sod
enmityone towards another. And the birds chose a golden Goose for their
king, and dispei'sed.
[354] When the Ma—ster had ended tliis discourse, lie declared the Trutlisand
identified the Birth: "At that time, tlie wild Goose chosen for kintr was 1
myself."
No. 271.
UDAPANA-DUSAKA-JATAKA.
—
"Thiswell a forest-anchorite,"etc. This storythe Master told whilst dwelling
at Isipatana, al)out a Jackal that fouled a well.
We learn that a Jackal used to foul a well where the Brethren used to draw
water, and then used to make off. One day the novices pelted liim with clods
of earth, and made it uncomfortable for him. After that he never came to look
at the place again.
The Brethren heard of this and began to discuss it in the Hall of Truth.
"Friend, the jackal that used to foul our well has never come near it since tiie
novices chased him away with clods!" The Ma.ster came in, and asked wiiat
they were talking about now as they sat together. They told him. Tlu'U he
replied, "Brethren, this is not the first time that this jackal fouled a well. lie
did thesame before;" and tlien he told an old-world tale.
IG—

— — —
: .
244 The Jataka. Booh III.
Once on a time, in this place near Benares called Isipatana was that
very well. At that time the Bodhisatta was born ofa good family. When
he grew up he embraced the religious life, and with a body of followers
dwelt at Isipatana. A certain Jackal fouled the well as has been described,
and took to In's heels. One day, the ascetics surroiinded him, and having
caught him somehow, they led him before the Bodhisatta. He addressed
the Jackal in the lines of the first stanza:
"This well a forest-anchorite has made
Who long has lived a hermit in the glade.
And after all his trouble and his toil
Why did you try, my friend, the well to spoil?"
[355] On hearing this, the Jackal repeated the second stanza:
"This is the law of all the Jackal race.
To foul when they have drunk in any place
My sires and grandsires always did the same;
So there is no just reason for your blame."
Then the Bodhisatta replied with the third :
"If this is 'law' in jackal polity
I wonder what their 'lawlessness' can be!
I hope that I have seen the last of you.
Your actions, lawful and unlawful too."
Thias the Great Being admonished him, and said, "Do not go there
again." Thenceforward he did not even pause to look at it.
When the Master had ended this discourse he declared the Truths and
identified the Birth:—"The Jackal that fouled the well is the same in both
cases ; and I was the chiefofthe ascetic band."
No. 272.
VYAGGHA-JATAKA.
—
" What time the near-iiess" etc. [356] Thisstory the Mastertold whilst living
at Jetavana, about Kokjilikai. The circumstances of this story will be given
in the Tliirteenth Book, and the Takkariya-jataka^. Here again Kokfilika said,
"I will take Sari])utta and Moggallana with me." So having left Kokalika's
country, he travelled to Jetavana, greeted the Master, and went on to the
1 Kokalikawas a followerofDevadatta. "^ No. 481

;
No. 272. 245
Elders. He said, "Friends, the citizens of Kokalika's country suunuon you.
Let us go thither!" "C«o yourself, friend, wc won't," w;is the answer. After
this refusal he went away by himself.
The Brethren got talking alxmt this in tlic Hall of Truth. "Friend!
Kokalikacan't live either with Sariputta and Moggallana, or witliout them! lie
can't put up with their room or tlieir comi)any!" The Master came in, and
enquired what they were all talking about togetlier. They told him. He .said,
" In olden days,just as now, Kokalika couldn't live with Sariputtii and Moggal-
lana, or without them." And ho told astory.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king oi Benaics, the
Bodhisatta was a tree-spirit living in a wood. Not far from his abode
lived another tree-spirit, in a great monarch of the forest. In the same
forest dwelt a lion and a tiger. For fear of them no one durst till the
earth, or cut down a tree, no one could even pause to look at it. And
the lion and tiger used to kill and eat all numner of ci'eatures; and what
remained after eating, they left on the spot and departed, so that the
forest was full offoul decaying stench.
The other spirit, being foolish and knowing neither reason nor un-
reason, one day bespoke thus the Bodhisatta
:
"Good friend, the forest is full of foul stench all because of this lion
and this tiger. I will drive them away."
Said he, *' Good friend, it isjust these two creatures [357] that protect
our homes. Once they are driven off, our homes will be made desolate.
If men see not the lion and the tiger tracks, they will cut all the forest
down, make it all one open space, and till the land. Please do not do
this thing!" and then he uttered the first two stanzas :
"What time the nearness of a bosom friend
Threatens your peace to end.
If you are wise, guard your supremacy
Like the apple of your eye.
"But when your bosom friend does more increase
The measure of your peace.
Let your friend's life in everything right through
Be dear as yours to you."
When the Bodhisatta had thus explained the matter, the foolish sprite
notwithstanding did not lay it to lujart, but one day assumed an awful
shape, and drove away the lion and tiger. The people, no longer seeing
the footmarks of these, divined that the lion and tiger must have gone to
another wood, and cut down one side ofthis wood. Then the sprite came
up to the Bodhisatta [358] and said to him,
*' Ah, friend, I did not do as you said, but drove the creatures away
and now men have found out that they are gone, and they are cutting
down the wood ! What is to be done ] " The reply was, that they were

;
246 The Jdtaka. Book III.
gone to live in such and such a wood ; the sprite must go and fetch them
back. This tlic sprite did ; and, standing in front of them, repeated the
third stanza, with a respectful salute
:
"Come back, Tigers! to the wood again,
And let it not be levelled with the plain
For, without you, the axe will lay it low;
You, without it, for ever homeless go."
This request they refused, saying, "Go away we will not come."
!
The sprite i-eturned to the forest alone. And the men after a very fev/
days cut down all the wood, made fields, and brought them under
cultivation.
When the IMastcr—had ended this discourse, he declared the Truths and
identified the Birth: "Kokalika was then the foolish Sprite, Sariputta the
Lion, Moggallana the Tiger, and the wise Sprite was I myself."
No. 273.
KACCHAPA-JATAKA.
—
[359] "Quis pateram extendens" etc. This story the ]\Iaster told diu'ing a
stay in Jetavana, how a quarrel was made up between two magnates of the
king's court in Kosala*. The circumstances have been told in the Second Book.
Brahmadatta quondam Benari regnante, Bodisatta sacerdotali genera
regno Kasensi natus, postquam ad puberem aetatem pervenit, in urbe
Takkasila studiis se dedit, et mox, cum lubidines tandem compressisset,
solitarius homo in agro Himavanto prope ripamGangaefrondibusramisquc
arborum mapale contexit ubi habitaret, Facultates Potentiasque magicas
foveret, gaudium perpetuae cogitationis perciperet. Turn quidem hoc
modo nato ita mens erat placida placataque ut ad summam patientiam
unus pervenerit.
' Compare Nos. 154, 165,

:
No. 273. 247
Quem in limine casae sedentom visitabat Siiiiius ((iiidaia iiii[)iulrn
tissimus pessiniusque, inquo aurcni t'ius semen emittero solebat, ne<iuo
tamen eiim conimovere i)oterat, sed sedcbat porro sunima aniiiii (raii-
quillit;ito Bodisatta. Accidit (juoiulam ut ex aqua Ti-studo ogrcssa
soinnuin ore aperto captarct, in solo apricans, Quaiii ciini vidisset Si-
mins ille inq)iidcns, nee mora, pene in os inscrto inci'pil lutnere. Con-
tinuo Testudo experrecta os velut cistellani conclu.sit dciitiliusqu(! com-
prendit id quod inscrtum erat. Siniius cum ncquiret niiiiium dolorcin
mulcere 'quo eam,' incjuit, *ciii i)crsuadcam ut hoc dolore me lilierct?'
Fore ut liberaretur ratus si ad Bodisattam i)ervenisset, Tcstudiiic aiiibabus
manibus sublata ad Bodisattam pergit : (pii ludos fecit Himium vtisilius
his: [300]
"quis patcram cxtcndcnsi nostram mendicat ad aulam^
undo venis? prccibus quae, precor, esca datast?"
Quibus auditis Simius respondit
"quod tetigissc nefas, tetigi: sum simius aniens:
eripc me ereptus mox nemora alta petam."
!
Continue pergit Bodisatta, Simium allocutus
:
"Cassapa testudo genus est : Contlanuus at illc:
Cassapa Condaunum mitte fututa precor-."
[361] His verbis valde delectata Testudo Simium omisit : qui Bodi-
sattae dicta salute, se in fugam dedit, necpic umquam postea euni locum ne
oculis quideni usurpavit. Testudo quo(iue cum salutcm dixisset aljiit, at
Bodisatta, defixo in contemplatione perpetua auimo, tandem in eum locum,
cuius dominus Brahma deus, pervenit.
When thisdiscourse was ended,theMaster declared theTruths and identilied
the Birth: "The two magnates were the Monkey and Tortoise, and 1 was the
hermit."
1 The tortoiselookedlikeabegging bowl.
^ Acurious verso, as bearing onthe laws of marriage. Kussapa means 'belonging
to the Tortoise clan' (for which see e.g. Muir, Sdiiskrit Tcrtx, i. 138). The scholiast's
note is: "The Tortoises are of the Kassapa clan, monkeys of the Komlanria"—Skr.
Kauiifjinija,"between which two clans thereisintermarriage(uvdhavivdliasambaiulho);
now thatitis consummated, let go."

248 TJie Jataka. Book III.
No. 274.
LOLA-JATAKA'.
—
"IFAo is this tuftedcrane" etc. Thi.s story the Master told in Jetavana about
a gr—eedy Brother. He too was brought to the Audience Hall, when the ]\Iaster
said "It is not only now that he is greedy greedy he was before, and his
greed lost him his life; and by his means wise ; men of old were driven out of
house and home." Then he told astory.
Once upon a time, when Brahniadatta was king of Benares, a rich
merchant's cook of that town hung up a nest-basket in the kitchen to win
merit by it. Tlie Bodhisatta at that time was a Pigeon ; and be came
and lived in it.
Now a greedy Crow as he flew over the kitchen was attracted by the
fish which lay about in great variety. He fell a-liungering after it.
"How in the world can I get some?" [362] thought he. Then his eye
fell upon the Bodhisatta. "I have it!" thinks he, "I'll make this creature
my cat's-paw." And this is how he carried out his resolve.
When thePigeon went out toseek hisday'sfood, behindhim,following,
following, came the Crow.
"What do you want with me, Mr Crow?" says the Pigeon. "You
and I don't feed alike."
"Ah, but I like you," says the Crow. "Let me be your humble
servant, and feed with you."
The Pigeon agreed. But when they went feeding together, the Crow
only pretended to eat with him ; ever and anon he would turn back, peck
to bits some lump of cow-du—ng, and get a worm or two. When he had
had his bellyful, up he flies "Hullo, Mr Pigeon ! what a time you take
over your meal ! You never know where to draw the line. Come, let's be
going back before it is too late." And so they did. When they got back
together, the Cook, seeing that their Pigeon had brought a friend, hung up
another basket.
In this way things went on for foui- or five days. Then a great
purchase of fish came to the rich man's kitchen. How the Crow longed
1 The same storyoccurs in vol. i. p. 112 (no. 42). Ithasbeen alsotranslatedand
slightly shortened by the writer, in Jacobs' Indian Fairy Tales, page 222, The two
birds and the nest-baskct seem to be figured on the Bharbut Stupa (Cunningham,
pi. XLV. 7).

—— — —
! " "
No. 274. 241)
foi" some ! There he hiy, from early morn, groaning and making a great
noise. In the morning, says the Pigeon to the Crow
— :
"Come along, old fellow, bn^akfixst !"
" You can go," .says he, "I have such a lit ofindigestion !
"A Crow with indigestion1 Nonsense
!
" says the Pigeon. " Even a
lamp-wick hardly stays any time in your stomach and anything else you
;
digest in a trice, as soon as you eat it. Now you do what I tell you.
[363] Don't behave in this wayjust for seeing a little fish !
"Why, Sir, what are you saying? I tell you I have a Itad pain
inside "
!
"All right, all right," says the Pigeon; "only do take care." And
away he flew.
The Cook got all the dishes ready, and then stood at the kitchen door,
mopping the sweat off him. "Now's my time ! " thinks Mr Crow, and
alights on a dish with some dainty food in it. Click ! Thecook heard the
noise, and looked round. Ah in a twinkling he caught the Crow, and
!
plucked off all his feathers, except one tuft on the to}) of his head ; then
he powdered ginger and cinnamon, and niixt it up with buttermilk, and
rubbed it in well all over the bird's body. "That's for spoiling my
master's dinner, and making me throw it away !" said he, and threw him
into his basket. Oh, how it hurt
By and by, in came the Pigeon from his hunt. The first thing he saw
was our Crow, making a great to-do. Whatfun hedid make of him, to be
sure ! He dropt into poetxy, as follows :
"Who is this tufted crane^ I see
Where she has no right to be?
C W o h m o e w o il u l t d ! o m y y ou fr h ie a n r d m, th I e f C e r ar ow !" is near.
[364] To this the Crow answered with another verse :
"No tufted crane am I — no, no !
Nothing but a greedy Crow.
I would not do as I was told
So I'm plucked, as you behol4."
And the Pigeon rejoined with a third :
"You'll come to grief again, I know
It is your nature to do .so.
If people make a di.sli of meat,
'Tis not for little birds to eat."
1 The epithet "whoso grandfather i.s the cloud {lit. swift one)" is added. I hope
I t t h h e e r c e u a r d i e o r us wil s l upe p r a s r t d i o t n ion its : — om C i r s a s u i c o s n ; ar i e ti c s o u n n c m e a i n v a ed gea at ble t . he s T o h u e nd sch o o f lia t s h t un e d x e p r l . ains He it nc b e y
thunderiscalled their father, and the thundercloud theirgrandfather.

— —
250 The Jataka. Book III.
—
Then the Pigeon flew away, saying "I can't live with this creature."
And the Crow lay there groaning until he died.
Wlicii the Maste — r had ended this discDursc, he declared the 'JVuths am!
identified the Birth: atthecon—clusion oftheTruths the greedyBrother readied
the Fruit of the Third Path: "The greedy Brother in those days was the
greedy Ci'ow ; and I was the Pigeon."
No. 275.
—
[.3G5] "117^0 is thispretty Cntne" etc. This story the Master told at Jctavana
about some greedy Brother. The two stories are just the same as the last.
And these are the verses :
"Who is this pretty Crane, and why
Does he in my Crow's basket lie?
An angry bird, my friend the Crow !
This is his nest, I'd have you know!"
"Do you not know me, friend, indeed?
Together we were used to feed ! j
I would not do as I was told,
So now I'm plucked, as you behold." '
"You'll come to grief again, I know
It is your uature to do so.
When people make a dish of meat
'Tis not for little birds to eat."
—
As before, the Bodhisatta said "I can't live here any more," and flew
away some whither.
When t — his discourse was ended,theIMastei- declared theTruths and identified
the Birth: at the conclus—ion of the Truths, the greedy Brother attained the
Fruit of the Third Path: "The greedy Brother was the Crow, and I was the
Pigeon."

No. 270. 251
No. 276.
KURUDHAMMA-JATAKA.
',
—
"Knowing thy faith" etc. Tliis story the Master told whilst (Iwelliii;^ in
Jetavana, about a Brother tliat killed a wild goose. [36G] Two brothers, great
friends, who came from Savatthi, and had embraced the religious life, after
taking the higher orders used generally to go about together. One day they
came to Aciravati. After a bath, they stood on the sand, basking in the sun-
light and talking pleasantly together. At this moment two wild geese flew over
their heads. One of the young fellows picked up a stone. "I'm going to hit
that goose bird in the eye!" says he. — "You can't," says the other. "That 1
can," says the first, "and not only that I can hit either this eye or that eye,
as I please." "Not you!" says the other. "Look here, then!" says the tinst;
and picking up a three-cornered stone, threw it after the l)ird. The bird turnetl
its head on hearing the pebble whizz through the air. Then the othei', seizing
around pebble, threw it so that it hit the near eye and came out of the other.
Thegoo.se with a loud cry turned over and over and fell at their very feet.
The Brothers who were standing al)out saw what had occurred, an(i ran up,
reproaching him. "What a shame," said they, "that you, who have embraced
such a doctrine as ours, should take the life of a living creature I" They made
him go before the Tathfigata with them. "Is what they say true?" asked the
Master. "Have you really taken the life of a living creatureT' "Yes, Sir,"
replied the Brother. "Brother," said he, "how is it that you have done this
thing, after embracing so great salvation'? Wise men of old, before the Buddha
appeared, though they lived in the world, and the worldly life is imi)ure, felt
h r a e v mo e rs n e o a s b c o ru u p t le m s. ere A tr B i r fl o e t s h ; er bu o t ug y h o t u, to wh h o old ha h v i e ms e e m l b f ra in ce c d on t t h r i o s l g i r n ea d t ee d d o , ct w r o i r n d e , ,
and thought." Then he told a story.
Once upon a time, when Dhanafijaya was king of Indapatta City, in
the Kuru kingdom, the Bodhisatta was born as a son of his Queen Con-
sort. By and bye he grew up, and was educated at Takkasila. His
father made him Viceroy, [367] and afterwards on his father's d(!ath he
became king, and grew in the Kuru righteousness, keeping the ten royal
duties. The Kuru righteousness means the Five Virtues ; these the Bod-
hisatta observed, and kept pure; as did the Bodhisatta, even so did queen-
mother, queen-consort, younger brother, viceroy, family priest, Ijrahmin,
driver, courtier, charioteer, treasurer, master of tlie granaries, noble,
—
porter, courtesan, slave-girl all did the same.
King, mother, consort, viceroy, chaplain too.
Driver and charioteer and treasurer.
And he that g(jverned the king's granaries.
Porter, and courtesan, eleven in all,
Observed the rules of Kuru righteousness.
—
^ Cf. Cariijd-Pitaka, i. 3; Dhammapada, p. 416. In this btory the kiug appearsas
araiu-maker, and on certain occasionsdresses like thegods.

" "
252 The Jataka. Booh III.
Thus all these did observe the Five Virtues,andkeptthemuntarnished.
—
The king built six Almonries, one at each of the four city gates, one in
themidstofthe city, and one at his own door dailyhedistributed 600,000
;
pieces of money in alms, by which he stirred up the whole of India. All
India was overspread by his love and delight in charity.
At this period there was in the city of Dantapura, in the kingdom of
Kalinga, a king named King Kaliiiga. In his realms the rain fell not,
and because of the drought there was a famine in the land. The people
thought that lack of food might produce a pestilence and there was fear
— ;
of drought, and fear of famine these three fears were ever present before
them. The people wandered about destitute hither and thither, leading
their children by the hand. All the peojJe in the kingdom gathered
together, and came to Dantapura and there at the king's door they made
;
outcry.
As the king stood, by the window, he heard the noise, and asked why
the people were making all that noise. [368]
"Oh, Sire," was the reply, " three feai'S have seized upon all your
kingdom : there falls no rain, the crops fail, there is a famine. The
peojjle, starving, diseased, and destitute, are wandering about with their
little ones by the hand. Make I'ain for us, O king !
Said the king, "What used former monarchs to do, if it would not
rainl"
"Former monarchs, O king, if it would not rain, used to give alms, to
keep the holy day, to make vows of virtue, and to lie down seven days
in their chamber on a grass pallet : then the rain would fall."
"Very good," the king said ; and even so did he. Still even so there
came no rain. The king said to his court,
"As you bade me, so I have done ; but there is no rain. What am I
to do1
"O king, in the city of Indapatta, there is a state elephant, named
Anjana-vasabho, the Black Bull. It belongs to Dhanaiijaya, the Kuru
king. This let us fetch then the rain will come."
;
" But how can we do that1 The king and his army are not easy to
overcome."
" O king, there is no need to fight him. The king is fond of giving,
he loves giving : were he but asked, he would even cut ofl' his head in all
its magnificence, or tearout his gracious eyes, or give uj)his verykingdom.
There will be no need even to plead for the elephant. He will give it
without fail."
"But who is able to ask him ?" said the king.
"The Brahmins, great king "
!
The king summoned eight Brahmins from a Brahmin village, and with
all honour and respect sent them to ask for the elephant. They took

— —
" ;
No. 276. 253
raoney for theirjourney, and donned triivelliui( garli, and without restiuj^
past oiae night in a phxce, traveUed quickly until after a few days tliey
took their meal at tlie ahnshall in the city gate. Wlien they had satisfied
their bodily wants, they asked, " When does the king come to the
Almonry
t '
—
The answer was, [3G9] "On three days in the fortnight fourteenth,
fifteenth, and eighth ; but to-morrow is the full moon, so he will come
to-morrow also."
So early the next morning, the brahmins went, and entered by the
eastern gate. The Bodhisatta ahso, washed and anointed, all adorned and
rarely arrayed, mounted upon a fin(! elephant richly caparisoned, came
with a great company to the Ahnshall at the eastern gate. There he
dismounted, and gave food to seven or eight people with his own hand.
"In this manner give," said he, and mounting his elephant departed to
the south gate. At the eastern gate the ])rahmins had had no chance,
owing to the force ofthe royal guard ; so they proceeded to the south, and
watched when the king should come. When the king reached a rising
ground not far from the gate, they i-aised their hands, and hailed the king
victorious. The king guided his animal with the sharp goad to the place
where they wei'e. " Well, Brahmins, what is your wish 1 " asked he.
Then the brahmins declared the virtues of the Bodhisatta in the first
stanza
:
"Knowing thy fixith and virtue. Lord, we come
For this beast's sake our wealth we spent at home'.
[370] To this the Bodhisatta made answer, " Brahmins, if all your
—
wealth has been exhausted in getting this elephant, never mind I give
him to you with all his splendour." Thus comforting them, he repeated
these two verses :
"Whether or no ye serve for livery,
Whatever creature shall come here to me.
As my preceptors taught me long ago.
All that come here shall always welcome be.
"This elephant to you for gift I bring:
'Tis a king's portion, worthy of a king !
Take him, with all his trappings, golden chain,
Driver and all, and go your ways again."
[371] Thus spake the great Bei—ng, mounted upon his elephant's back
;
then, dismounting, he said to them "If thereis a spot on himunadorned,
I will adorn it and then give him to you." Thrice he went about the
creature, turning towards the right, and examined him ; but he found no
spot on him withoutadornment. Then heputthe trunk into thebrahmins'
1 i.e. we spent all we liad on food, trusting that you would give us the elephant
when weasked for it.

" "
254 Tlie Jataha. Booh III.
hands ; he besprinkled liim with scented water from a fine golden vase,
and made him over to them. The brahmins accepted the elephant with
his belongings, and seating themselves upon his back rode to Dantapura,
and handed him over to their king. But although the elephant was come,
no I'ain fell yet. —
Then the king asked again " What can be the reason1
They said, "Dhananjaya, the Kuru King, observes the Kuru righteous-
ness ; therefore in his realms it rains evexy ten or fifteen days. That is
the power of the king's goodness. If in this animal there is any good,
how little it must be!" Then said the king, "Take this elephant,
caparisoned as he is, with all his belongings, and give it back to the king.
Write upon a golden plate the Kuru righteousness which he observes, and
bring it hither." With these words he despatched the brahmins and
courtiers.
These came before the king, and restored his elephant, saying, "My
lord, even when your elephant came, [372] no rain fell in our country.
They say that you observe the Kuru righteousness. Our king is wishful
himself to observe it; and he has sent us, bidding us write itupona golden
plate, and bring it to him. Tell us this righteousness !
"Friends," says the king, "indeed I did once observe this righteous-
ness but now I am in doubt about this very point. This righteousness
;
does not ble.ss my heart now : therefore I cannot give it you."
Why, you may ask, did not virtue bless the king any longer1 Well,
every third year, in the month of Kattika^ the kings used to hold a
festival, called the Kattika Feast. While keeping this feast, the kings
used to deck themselves out in great magnificence, and dress up like gods;
they stood in the presence of a goblin named Oittaraja, the King of Many
Colours, and they would shoot to the four points of the compass arrows
wreathed in flowers, and painted in divers colours. This king then, in
keeping the feast, stood on the bank of a lake, in the presence of Cittaraja,
and shot arrows to the four quarters. They could see whither three of the
arrows went ; but the fourth, which was shot over the water, this they
saw not. Thought the king, "Perchance the arrow which I have shot
has fallen upon some fish ! " As this doubt arose, the sin of life-taking
made a flaw in his virtue; that is whyhis virtue did notlilesshim asbefore.
This the kingtoldthem and added, " Friends, I am in doubtaboutmyself,
;
whether or no I do observe the Kuru righteousness ; but mymother keeps
it well. You can get it from her."
" But, O king," said they, "you had no intent to take life. Without
the intent of the heart there is no taking of life. Give us tlie Kuru
righteousness which you have kept "
!
—
1 Octobei' November.

" :
No. 276. 255
" Writo, then," said he. Ami lie caused them to write upon the
plate of gold: "Slay not the living; take not wliat is not given;
[373] walk not evilly in lust; speak no lies; drink no strong drink.'
Then he added,
"Still, it does not bless me; you had Ijetter learn it Irom my
mother."
The mes.sengers saluted the king, and visited the Queen-mother.
"Lady," said they, "they say you keepthe Kuru righteousness : pa.ss it on
to us !
Said the Queen-mother, "My sons, indeed I did once keepthis i-ighteous-
ness, but now I have my doultts. This righteousness does not make me
happy, so I cannot give it to you." Now we are told that she had two
A
sons, the elder being king and the younger viceroy. certain king sent
to the Bodhisatta perfumesof fine sandal wood worth an hundi-ed thousand
pieces, and a golden neckband worth an hundred thousand. And he,
thinking to do his mother honour, sent the whole to her. Thought she
"I donotperfume myself with sandal-wood, I do notwear necklets.—I will
give them to my sons' wives." Then the thought occurred to her "My
elder son's wife is my lady ; she is the chiefqueen: to her w — ill I give the
gold necklet ; but thewifeof the younger is a poor creature, to her I will
give the sandal perfume." And so to the one she gave the necklet, and
the perfume gave she to theother. Afterward she bethought her, "I keep
the Kuru righteousness ; whether they be poor or whether they be not
poor is no matter. It is not seemly that I should pay court to the elder.
Perchance by not doing this I have made a flaw in my virtue " And she
!
began to doubt ; that is why she spoke as she did.
The messengers said, "When it is in your hands, a thing is given even
as you will. If you have scruples about a thing so small as that, what
other sip would you ever do? Virtue is not broken by a thing of that
kind. [374] Give us the Kuru righteousness!" And from her also they
received it, and wrote it upon the golden plate.
"All the same, my sons," said the Queen-mother, " I am not happy in
this righteousness. But my daughter-in-law observes it well. Ask her
for it."
So they took their leave respectfully, and asked the daughter in the
same way as before. — And, as before, she replied, "I cannot, for I kee]) it
myself no longer!" Now one day as she sat at the lattice, looking down
she saw the king making a solemn procession about the city; and behind
him on the elephant's back sat the viceroy. She fell in love with him,
and thought, "What if I were to strike up a friendship with him, and his
brother were to die, and then he were to l—)ecome king, and take me to
wife!" Then it fla.shed across her mind "I who keep the Kuru
righteousness, who am married to a husband, I have looked with love

!
256 The Jataha. Book III.
upon another man ! Here is a flaw in my virtue !" Remorse seized upon
her. This she told the messengers.
Then tliey said, "Sin is not the mere uprising of a thought. If you
feel remoi'se for so small a thing as this, what transgression could you ev(U"
commit ? Not by such a small matter is viitue broken; give us this
righteousness ! " And she likewise told it to them, and they wrote it
upon a golden plate. But she said, "However, my sons, my virtue is not
perfect. But the viceroy observes these rules well go ye and receive
;
them from him."
Then again they repaired to the viceroy, and as before asked him for
—
the Kuru righteousness. Now the viceroy used to go and pay his devoirs
to the king at evening ; and when they came to the palace courtyard, in
his car, if he wished to eat with the king, and spend the night there, he
would throw his reins and goad upon the yoke; and thatwasasign for the
peopleto depart; andnextmorningearlythey would come again,andstand
awaiting the viceroy's departure. And the charioteer [375] would attend
the car, and come again with it early in the morning, and wait by the
king's door. But if the viceroy would depart at the same time, he left
the reins and goad there in the chariot,and went in to waitupon the king.
Then the people, taking it for a sign that he would presently depart, stood
waiting there at the palace door. One day he did thus, and went in to
wait upon the king. But as he was within, it began to rain; and the
king, remarking this, would not let him go away, so he took his meal, and
slept there. But a great crowdof people stood expecting him to come out,
and there they stayed all night in the wet. Next day the vic—eroy came
out, and seeing the crowd standing there drenched, thought he "I, who
keep the Kuru righteousness, have put all this crowd to discomfort
Surely here is a flaw in my virtue !" and he was seized with remorse. So
he said to the messengers : "Now doubt has come upon me if indeed I do
keep this righteousness ; therefore I cannot give it to you;" and he told
them the matter,
"But," said they, "you never had the wish to plague those people.
What is not intended is not counted to one's score. If you feel remorse
for so small a thing, in what would you ever transgress'?" So they
received from him too the knowledge of this righteousness, and wrote it
on their golden plate. "However," said he, "this righteousness is not
perfected in me. But my chaplain keeps it well; go, ask him for it."
Then again they went on to the chaplain.
Now the chaplain one day had been going to wait upon the king.
On the road he saw a chariot, sent to the king by another king, coloured
like the young sun. "Whose chariot?" he asked. "Sent for the king,"
they said. Then he thought, "I am an old man ; if the king were to give
me that chariot, how nice it would be to ride about in it ! " When he

"
No. 276. 257
came before the king, and stood by after greeting him with the prayer for
prosperity, [376] they showed the chariot to tlie king. "That is a most
beautiful car," said the king; "give it to my teacher." But the chuphiin
did not like taking it; no, not tliough he was begged again — and again.
Why was this? Because the thought came into his mind "I, who
practise the Kuru righteousness, have coveted another's goods. Surely
this is a flaw in my virtue ! " So he told the story to these messengers,
adding, "My sons, I am in doubt about the Kuru righteousness; this
righteousness does not bless me now ; therefore I cannot teach it to you."
But the messengers said, "Not by mere uprising of covetise is virtue
broken. Ifyou feel a scruple in so small a matter, whatreal transgression
would you ever do1" And from him also they received the righteousness,
and wrote it on their golden plate. "Still, this goodness does not bless me
now," said he; "but the royal driver' carefully practises it. Go and ask
him." So they found the royal driver, and asked him.
Now the driver one day was measuring a field. Tying a cord to a
stick, he gave one end to the ownerof the field to hold, and took the other
himself The stick tied to the end of the cord which he held came to a
crab's lurk-hole. Thought he, "If I put the stick in the hole, the crab in
the hole will be hurt : if I put it on the other side, the king's property-
will lose; and if I put it on this—side, the farmer will lose. What's to be
done?" Then he thought again "The crab ought to be in his hole but
;
if he were, he would show himself;" so he put the stick in the hole. The
crab made a click! inside. Then he thought, "The stick must have struck
upon the crab, and it must have killed him ! I observethe Kuru righteous-
ness, and now here's a flaw in it !" [377] So he told them this, and
added, "So now I have my doubts about it, and I cannot give it to you."
Said the messengers, "You had no wish to kill the crab. What is
done without intent is not counted to the score; if you feel a scruple
about so small a matter, what real transgression woidd you ever do1
And they took the righteousness from his lips likewise, and wrote it on
their golden plate. " However," said he, "though this does not bless
me, the charioteer practises it carefully go and ask him."
;
So they took their leave, and sought out the charioteer. Now the
charioteer one day drove the king into his park in the car. There the
king took his pleasureduring the day, and ateveningreturned, and entered
the chariot. But before he could get back to the city, at the time of
sunset a storm cloud arose. The charioteer, fearing the king might get
wet, touched up the team with the goad the steeds sped swiftly home.
:
^ Some differencethere mustbe between rajjuguhakaamacco andsdratthi (the same
words occur in DJq). p. 416). I would suggest that the former isthe moreimportant,
andmay answer to the Greek Trapai^aTris, Skr. savytsthar.
J. II. 17

258 The Jataka. Booh III.
Ever since, going to the park or coming from it, from that spot they went
atspeed. Whywasthis1 Becausetheythought there must be some danger
at this spot, and that was why the charioteer had touched them with the
goad. Andthe charioteer thought, " Iftlie king is wet or dry, 'tis no fault
of mine ; but I have given a touch of the goad out ofseason to these well-
ti'ained steeds, and so they run at speed again and again till they are tired,
all by my doing. And I observe the Kuru righteousness ! Surely there's
a flaw in it now !" This he told the messengers, and said, "For this
cause I am in doubt about it, and I cannot give it to you." "But," said
they, "you did not mean to tire the horses, and what is done without
meaning is not set down to the score. If you feel a scruple about so
small a matter, what real transgression could you ever commit1" And
they learnt the righteousness from him also, [378] andwrote it down upon
their golden plate. But the charioteer sent them in search of a certain
wealthy man, saying, "Even though this righteousness does not bless me,
he keeps it carefully."
So to this rich man they came, and asked him. Now he one day had
gone to his paddy field, and seeing a head of rice bursting the husk, went
about to tie it up with a wisp of rice; and tak—ing a handful of it, he tied
the head to a post. Then it occurred to him "From this field I have
yet to give the king his due, and I have taken a handful of rice from an
untithed field! I, who observe the rules of Kuru righteousness ! Surely
I must have broken them !" And this matter he told to the messengers,
saying, "Now I am in doubt about this righteousness, and so I cannot
give it to you."
"But," said they, "you had no thought of thieving ; without this one
cannot be proclaimed' guilty of theft. If you feel scruples in such a
small matter, when will you ever take what belongs to another man ? "
And from him too they received the righteousness, and wrote it down on
their golden plate. He added, "Still, though I am not happy in this
matter, the Master of the Royal Granaries keeps these rules well. Go,
ask him for them." So they betook them to the Master of the Granaries.
Now this man, as he sat one day at the door of the granary, causing
the rice of the king's tax to be measured, took a grain from the heap
which was not yet measured, and piit it down for a marker. At that
moment rain began to fall. The official counted up the markers, so many,
and then swept them all together and dropt them upon the heap which had
been measured. Then he ran in quickly and sat in the gate-house. "Did
I throw the markers on the measured heap or the unmeasured 1" he
wondered; and the thought came into his mind— [379] "If I threw them
on what was already measured, the king's property has been increased,
^ I.e. iu thesampha (natti is a 'resolution').

—
No. 276. 259
and the owners have lost I keepthe Kuru righteousness and now here's
; ;
a flaw !" So he told this to the messengers, adding that therefore he had
his doubts about it, and could not give it to them. But the messengers
said, "You had no thought of theft, and without this no one can be
declared guilty of dishonesty. If you feel scruples iu a small matter like
this, when would you ever steal any thing belonging to another1" And
from him too they received the righteousness, and wrote it on their golden
plate. "But," added he, "although this virtue is not perfect in me, there
is the gatekeeper, who obsei'ves it well : go and get it from him." 8o they
went offand asked the gatekeeper.
Now it so happened tliat one day, at the time for closing the city gate,
he cried aloud thi-ee times. And a certain poor man, who had gone into
the woodland a-gathering sticks and leaves with his youngest sister,
hearing the sound came running up with her. Says the door keeper
"What! don't you know that the king is in the city? Don't you know
that the gate of this town is shut betimes? Is that why you go out into
the woods, making love1 " Said the other, "No, master, it is not my wife,
but my sister." Then the porter thought, "How unseemly to address a
sister as a wife ! And I keep the rules of the Kurus ; surely I must have
broken them now !" This he told the messengers, adding, "In this way
I have my doubts whether I really keep the Kuru righteousness, and so I
cannot give it to you." But they said, "You said it because you thought
so; [380]thisdoesnot bi*eakyourvirtue. If you feel remorseon so slight a
cause, how could you ever tell a lie with intent?" And so they took down
those virtues from him too, and wrote them on their golden plate.
Then he said, "But though this virtue does not bless me, thei-e is a
courtesan who keeps it well; go and ask her." And so they did. She
refused as the others had done, for the following reason. Sakka, king of
the gods, designed to try her goodness; so putting on theshapeofa youth,
he gave her a thousand pieces, saying, "I will come by and bye." Then
he returned to heaven, and did not visit her for three years. And she, for
honour's sake, for three years took not so much as a piece of bet—el from
another man. By degrees she got poor; and then she thought "The
man who gave me a thousand pieces has not come these three years ; and
now I have grown poor. I cannot keep body and soul together. Now I
must go tell the Chief Justices, and get my wage as before." So to the
court she came, and said, "There was a man three years ago gave me a
thousand pieces, and never came back whether he be dead I know not.
;
I cannot keep body and soul together; what am I to do, my lord?" Said
he, "If he does not come for three years, what can you do? Earn your
wage as before." As soon as she left the court, after this award, there
came a man who offered her a thousand. As she held out her hands to
take it, Sakka showed himself. Said she, "Here is the man who gave me
17—2
i

;
260 The Jdtahi. Bool- Til.
a thousand pieces three years ago I must not take your money;" and
:
she drew back her hand. Then Sakka caused his own proper shape to be
seen, and hovered in the air, shining like the sun fresh risen, and gathered
all the city together. Sakka, in the midst of the crowd, [381] said, "To
test her goodness I gave her a thousand pieces three years ago. Be like
her, and like her keep your honour;" and with this monition, he filled
her dwelling with jewels of seven kinds, and saying, "Henceforth be
vigilant," he comforted her, and went away to heaven. So for this cause
she refused, saying, "Because before I had earned one wage I held out my
hand for another, therefore my virtue is not perfect, and so I cannot give
it to you." To this the messengers replied, "Merely to hold out the hand
is not a breach of virtue : that virtue of yours is the highest perfection ! "
And from her, as from the rest, they received the rules of virtue, and
wrote them on their golden plate. They took it with them to Dantapura,
and told the king how they had fared.
Then their king practised the Kuru precepts, and fulfilled the Five
Virtues. And then in all the realm of Kalinga the rain fell; the three
feai'S were allayed ; the land became prosperous and fertile. The Bodhi-
satta all his life long gave alms and did good, and then with his subjects
went to fill the heavens.
When the Teacher had ended this discourse, he declared the Truths, and
explained the Birth-tale. At the conclusion of the Truths, some entered the
First Path, some the Second, some entered the Third, and some became saints.
And the Birth-tale is thus explained :
"Uppalavanna was the courtesan,
Punna the porter, and the driver was
Kuccana; Kolita, the measurer;
The rich man, Sariputta he who drove
;
The chariot, Anuruddha; and the priest
Was Kassapa the Elder; he that was
The Viceroy, now is Nandapandita
Rahula's mother was the queen-consort.
W Th a e s Q B u o e dh e i n s - a m t o t t a. he — r T w h a u s s M th a e ya Bi ; r a t n h d is th c e lea K r i ." ng
No. 277.
KOMAKA-JATAKA.
—
[382] ^'Here in the hills" etc. This story was told by the Master when at
the Bamboo-grove, about attempted murder. The circumstances explain them-
selves.

:
No. 277. 261
Once on a time, when Brahnnidatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta became a Pigeon, and with a hirge flock of jjigeons he lived amidst
the woodhxnd in a cave of the hills. There was an ascetic, a virtuous
man, who had l)uilt him a hut near a frontier village not far from the
place where the pigeons were, and there in a cave of the hills he lived.
Him the Bodhisatta visited from time to time, and heard from him
things worth hearing.
After living there a long time, the ascetic went away and there came
;
a sham ascetic, and lived there. The Bodhisatta, attended by his flock of
pigeons, visited him and greeted him respectfully they .spent the day in
;
hopping about the hermit's abode, and picking up food before the cave,
and returned home in the evening. There; the sham ascetic lived for
more than fifty years.
One day the villagers gave him some pigeon's fle.sh which they had
cooked. He was taken with the flavour, and asked what it was.
"Pigeon," said they. Thought he, "There come flocks of pigeons to my
hermitage I must kill some ofthem to eat."
;
So he got rice and ghee, milk and cummin and pepper, and put it
by all ready ; in a corner of his robe he hid a staflT, and sat down at the
hut door watching for the pigeons' coming.
The Bodhisatta came, with his flock, and spied out what wicked thing
this sham ascetic would be at. "Yon wicked ascetic sitting there goes
under false pretences Perhaps he has been feeding on some ofour kind
! ;
I'll tind him out ! "
So he alighted to leeward, and scented him. [383] " Yes," .'<aid he,
"the man wants to kill us and eat us; we must not go near him ;" and
away he flew with his flock. On seeing that he kept aloof, the hermit
thought, "I will speak words of honey to him, and make friends, and then
kill and eat him !" and he uttered the two first stanzas :
"Here in the hills, for one and fifty years,
feathered fowl the birds would visit me.
!
Nothing suspecting, knowing nought of fears,
In sweet security
!
"These very children of the eggs now seem
To fly suspicious to another hill.
Have they forgotten all their old esteem ?
Are they the same birds still r'
[384] Then the Bodhisatta stept back and repeated the third
"We are no fools, and we know you;
We are the same, and you are too:
You have designs against our weal,
So, heretic, this fear we feel."
"They have found me out !" thought the false ascetic. He threw his

;
262 The Jdtaka. Book III.
—
staff at the bird, but missed him. "Get away !" said he "I've missed
you!"
"You have missed us," said the Bodhisatta, "but you shall not miss
the four hells ! If you stay hex^e, I'll call the villagers and make them
catch you for a thief. Run off, quick !" Thus he thi'eatened the man,
and flew away. The hermit could live there no longer.
The Teacher having ended this discourse, identified the Birth: "At that
time Devadatta was the ascetic ; the first ascetic, the good one, was Sariputta
and the chiefofthe Pigeons was I myself."
No. 278/
MAHISA-JATAKA.
[385] "Why do you patiently" etc. This story the Master told at Jetavana,
about a certain impertinent monkey. At Savatthi, we are told, was a tame
monkey in a certain family ; and it ran into the elephant's stable, and perching
on the back ofa virtuous elephant, voided excrement, and began to walk up and
down. The elephant, being both virtuous and patient, did nothing. But one
day in thiselephant's place stood a wicked young one. The monkey thought it
was the same, and climbed upon its back. The elephant seized him in his
trunk, and dashing him to the ground, trod him to pieces. This became known
in the meeting of the Brotherhood ; and one day they all began to talk about it.
"Brother, have you heard how the impertinent monkey mistook a bad elephant
for a good one, and climbed on his back, and how he lost his life for it?" In
came the Master, and asked, "Brethren, what are you talking of as you sit
here?" and when they told him, "This is not the first time," said he, "that
t t h h i e s m i a mp n er o t l i d n - e w n o t rld mo ta n l k e. ey behaved so ; he did the same before :" and he told
Once on a time, whenBrahmadattawas kingof Benares, theBodhisatta
was born in the Himalaya region as a Buffalo. He grew up strong and
big, and ranged the hills and mountains, peaks and caves, tortuous woods
a many.
Once, as he went, he saw a pleasant tree, and took his food, standing
under it.
^ Jdtaka Mdlci, no. 33 (Mahisa) ; Cariyd-Pitaka, ii. 5.

No. 278. 263
Then an impertinent monkey came down out of the tree, and
getting on his back, voided excrement ; then he took hold of oiie of the
Buffalo's horns, and swung down from it by his tail, disporting himself.
The Bodhisatta, being full of patience, kindliness, and mercy, took no
notice at all of his misconduct. This the' monkey did again and
again.
But one day, the spirit that belonged to that tree, standing upon the
tree-trunk, asked him, saying, [386] "My lord Buffalo, why do you put up
with the rudeness of this bad Monkey 1 Put a stop to him !" and eidarging
upon this theme he repeated the first two verses as follows :
"Why do you patiently endure each freak
This mischievous and selfish ape may wreak ?
"Crush underfoot, transfix him with your horn !
Stop him or even children will show scorn."
The Bodhisatta, on hearing this, replied, "If, Tree-sprite, I cannot
endure this monkey's ill-treatment without abusing his birth, lineage, and
powers, how can my wish ever come to fulfilment] But the monkey will
do the same to any other, thinking him to be like me. And if he does it
to any fierce Buffalos, they will destroy him indeed. When some other
has killed him, I shall be delivered both from pain and from Ijlood-
guiltiness." And saying this he repeated the third verse :
"If he treats others as he now treats me,
They will destroy him then I shall be free."
;
A few days after, the Bodhisatta went elsewhither, and another
Buffalo, a savage beast, went and stood in his place. The wicked Monkey,
[387] thinking it to be the old one, climbed upon his back and did as
before. The Buffalo shook him off upon the ground, and drove his
horn into the Monkey's heart, and trampled him to mincemeat under
his hoofs.
When the Master had ended this teaching, he declared the Trutlis, and
identified the Birth : "At that time the bad buftalo was he who now is the bad
elephant, the bad monkey was the same, but the virtuous noble Buftalo was I
myself"

"
264 The Jdtaka. Book III.
No. 279.
SATAPATTA-JATAKA.
"Js the youth upon his way^'' etc. This story the — Master told in Jetavana,
about Panduka and Lohita. Of the Six Heretics, two Mettiya and Bhumniaja
—
- lived hard by Rajagaha; two, Assaji and Punabbasu, near Kitagiri, and at
Jetavana near Savatthi the two others, Panduka and Lohita. They questioned
matters laid down in the doctrine whoever were their friends and intimates,
they would encourage, saying,
"You;
are no worse than these, brother, in birth,
lineage, or character ; if you give iip your opinions, they will have much the
better of you," and by saying this kind of thing they prevented their giving
up their oi)inions, and thus strifes and quarrels and contentions arose. The
Brethren told this to the Blessed One. The Blessed One assembled the Brethren
for that cause, to make explanation and causing Panduka and Lohita to be
;
summoned, addressed them : "Ls it true. Brethren, that you really yourselves
question certain matters, and prevent people from giving up their opinions?
"Yes," they replied. "Then," said he, "your behaviour is like that of the Man
and the Crane;" and he told them an old-world tale.
Once on a time, when Brahniadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born to a certain family in a Kasi village. When he
grew lip, instead of earning a livelihood by farming or ti'ade, [388] he
gathered five hundred robbers, and became their chief, and lived by
highway robbery and housebreaking.
Now it so happened that a landowner had given a thousand pieces of
money to some one, and died before receiving it back again. Some time
after, his wife lay on her deathbed, and addi-essing her son, said,
"Son, your father gave a thousand pieces of money to a man, and died
without getting it back ; if I die too, he will not give it to you. Go,
while I yet live, get him to fetch it and give it back."
So the son went, and got the money.
The mother died ; but she loved her son so much, that she suddenly
reappeared' as a jackal on the road by which he was coming. At that
time, the robber chief with his band lay by the road in wait to plunder
travellers. And when her son had got to the entrance of the wood,
the Jackal returned again and again, and sought to stay him ; saying,
"My son, don't enter the wood I there are robbers there, who will slay
thee and take thy money "
!
1 The word implies a creature not born in the natural way, but taking shape
without the need of parents.

"
No. 271). 2G5
But the man understood not what she meant. " 111 luck ! " said he,
"here's a jackal trying to stop my way !" he said ; and he drove her off
with sticks and clods, and into the wood he went. —
And a crane flew towards the robbers, crying out " Here's a man
with a thousand pieces in his hand Kill him, and take them!" Tiie
!
young fellow did not know what it was doing, so he thought, "Good
luck ! here's a lucky bird ! now there is a good omen for me ! " He saluted
respectfully, crying, "Give voice, give voice, my lord !
The Bodliisatta, who knew the meaning of all sounds, observed what
these two did, and thought : "Yon jackal must be the man's mother ; so
she tries to stop him, and tell him that he will be killed and robbed ; but
the crane must be some adversai-y, and that is why it says 'Kill him, and
take the money; ' and the man does not know what is happening, [389]
and drives off his mother, who wishes his welfare, while the crane, who
wishes him ill, he worships, under the belief that it is a well-wisher. The
man is a fool."
(Now the Bodhisattas, even though they aie great beings, sometimes
take the goods of others by being born as wicked men ; this they say
comes from a fault in the horoscope.)
So the young man went on, and by and bye fell in with the robbeiij.
The Bodhisatta caught him, and " Where do you live 1 " said he.
"In Benares."
"Where have you been "
1
"There was a thousand pieces due to nie in a certain village and that
;
is where I have been."
"Did you get it1 "
"Yes, I did."
"Who .sent you 1 "
"Master, my father is dead, and my mother is ill; it was she sent me,
because she thought I should not get it if she were dead."
"And do you know what has happened to your mother nowl"
"No, master."
"She died after you left; and so much did she love you, that she
at once became a jackal, and kept trying to stop you for fear you
should get killed. She it was that you scared away. But the crane was
an enemy, who came and told us to kill you, and take your money. You
are such a fool that you thought your mother was an illwisher, when she
wished you well, and thought the crane was a wellwisher when it wished
ill to you. He did you no good, but your mother was very good to you.
Keep your money, and be off! " And he let him go.

——
; ; ;
266 The Jataka. Booh III.
When the Master had finished this discourse, he repeated the following
stanzas
:
"As the youth upon his way-
Thought the jackal of the wood
Was a foe, his path to stay,
While she tried to do him good
:
That false crane his true friend deeming
Which to ruin him was scheming
:
"Such another, who is here.
Has his friends misunderstood
They can never win his ear ;
Who advise him for his good.
[390] "He believes when others praise
Awful terrors prophesying
As the youth of olden days :
Loved the crane above him flying^"
When the Master had enlarged upon this theme, he identified the Birth:
"At that timethe robber chiefwas I myself"
No. 280.
PUTA-DUSAKA-JATAKA.
—
"A^o doubt theking" etc. This story the Master told in Jetavana, about one
who destroyed pottles. At Savatthi, we learn, a certain courtier invited the
Buddha and his company, and made them sit in his park. [391] As he was
distributing to them, during the meal, he said, "Let those who wish to walk
aboutthe park, do so." The Brothers walked about the park. At that time the
gardener climbed up a tree which had leaves upon it, and said, taking hold of
some of the large leaves, "This will do for flowers, this one for fruit," and
makingthem into pottles he dropt them to the foot of the tree. His little son
destroyed each as soon as it fell. The Brothers told this to the Master.
"Brothers," said the Master, "this is not the fii'st time that this lad has
destroyed pottles : he did it before." And he told them an old-world tale.
The scholiast addsthe foUowiug lines:
The friend who robs another without ceasing
He that protests, protests incessantly
The friend who flatters for the sake of pleasing
The boon companion in debauchery;
These four the wise as enemies should fear,
And keep aloof, if there be danger near.

— — —
; !
No. 280. 267
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born in a certain family of Benares. When he grew up, and
was living in the workl as a householder, it happened that for some reason
he went into a park, where a number of monkeys lived. The gardener
was throwing down his pottles as we have described, and the chief of the
monkeys was destroying them as they fell. The Bodhisatta, addressing
him, said, "As the gardener drops his pottles, the monkey thinks he is
trying to please him by tearing them up',"and repeated the first stanza :
"No doubt the king of beasts is clever
In pottle-making; he would never
Destroy what's made with so much pother.
Unless he meant to make another."
On hearing this the Monkey repeated the second stanza :
"Neither my fiither nor my mother
Nor I myself could make another.
What others make, we tear to pieces
The proper way of monkeys, this is!"
[392] And the Bodhisatta responded with the third :
"If this is proper monkey nature,
What's the impropei' way of such a creature
—
Be off it does not ma — tter whether
You're proper or improper both together!"
and with these words of blame he departed.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he ideutilied the Birtii "At
:
that time the monkey was the boy who has been destroying the pottles ; but
the wise manwas I myself."
No. 281.
ABBHANTARA-JATAKA.
" The7-e groiDS a tree" e^c.—This story the Master told in Jetavana, about the
Elder SariputtagivingmangojuicetotheSister Bimbadevl. When the Supreme
Buddha inaugurated the universal reign of religion, whilst living in a room at
Vesali, the chief wife of the Gotama with five hundred of the Sakiya clan
asked forinitiation, and i-eceived initiation and full orders. Afterwardsthe five
' Shouldwe read, "... Kritukamo ti maufie" ti?

:;:
268 The Jataka. Booh III.
hundred Sisters became saints on hearingthe preaching of Nandaka. Butwhen
the Master was living near Savatthi, the mother of Rahula thouglit to herself,
"Myhusband on embracing the religious lifehas become omniscient; myson too
has become areligious, and lives with him. What am I to do in the midst ofthe
house ? I will enter on this life, and go to Savatthi, and I will live looking upon
the Supreme Buddha and my son continually." So she betook herself to a
nunnery, and entered the order, and went and lived in a cell at Savatthi, in
company ofher teachers and preceptors, beholding the Master and her beloved
son. The novice Rahula came and saw his mother.
One day, the Sister was afflicted with flatulence; [393] and when her son
cameto see her,shecould notget to see him,but some others came and told him
she was ill. Then he went in, and asked his mother, "What ought you to
take?" "Son," said she, "at home this pain used to be cured by mango juice
flavoured with sugar; but now we live by begging, and where can we get it?"
Said the novice, "I'll get it for you," and departed. Now the preceptor of his
reverence Rahula was the Captain of the Faith, his teacher was the great Mog-
gallana, his unclewas theElderAnanda,andhisfatherwas theSupremeBuddha
thus he had great luck. However,hewent to no othersave onlytohispreceptor
and after greeting him, stood before him with a sad look. "Why do you seem
sad, Rahula?" asked the Elder. "Sir," he replied, "my mother is ill with
flatulence." "What must she take?" "Mango juice and sugardoes her good."
"All right, I'll get some; don't trouble about it." So next day he took the lad
to Savatthi, and seating him in a waiting-room, went up to the palace. The
king of Kosala bade the Elder be seated. At that very moment the gardener
brought a basket of sweet mangoes ripe for food. The king removed the skin,
sprinkled sugar, crushed them up himself, and filled the Elder's bowl for him.
The Elder i-eturned to the place ofwaiting andgave them tothe novice, bidding
him give them to his mother ; and so he did. No sooner had the Sister eaten,
than her pain was cured. The king also sent messengers, saying, "The Elder
did not sit here to eat the mango juice. Go and find out whether hegave it to
any one," The messenger went along with the elder, and found out, and then
returned to tell theking. Thought the king : "Ifthe Master should return to a
worldly life, he would be an universal monarch ; the novice Rahula would be his
treasure the Crown Princei, the holy Sisterwould be his treasure the Empress,
and all the universe would belong to them. I must go and attend upon them.
Now they are living close by there is no time to be lost." So from thatday he
continuallygave mango syrup tothe Sister.
It became known among the Brothers how the Elder gave mango syrup to
the holy Sister. [394] And one day they fell a-talking in the Hall of Truth
"Friend, I hear that the Elder Sariputta comforted Sister BimbadevI with
mango syrup." The Master ca—me in and asked, "What are you talking about
now?" When they told him "This is not the first time. Brothers, that
Rahula's mother was comforted with mango syrup by the Elder; the same
happened before;" and he told them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born in a brahmin family living in a village of Kasi.
When he grew up, he was educated at Takkasila, settled down into family
life, and on the death of his parents embraced the religious life. After
that he remained in the region of Himalaya, cultivating the Faculties and
the Attainments. A body of sages gathered round him, and he became
their teacher.
1 Two ofthe seven ratanas, or Treasures ofthe Empire ofan universal monarch.

; ;
No. 281. 2G9
At the end ofa long time time he came down from the hills to get salt
and seasoning, and in the course of his wanderings arrived at Benares,
where he took up his abode in a park. And at the glory of the virtue of
this companyof holy men the palaceofSakka shook. Sakka reflected, and
perceived what it was. Tliought he, "I will 'do an injury to their dwell-
ing ; then their stay will be disturbed ; they will be too much distressed
to have tranquillity of mind. Then I shall be comfortable again." As he
bethought him howto do it, he hit uponaplan. "I will enterthechamber
of the chief queen, j—ust at the middle watch of the night, and hovering
in the air, I will say 'Lady, if you eat a midmost mango', you will con-
ceive a son'-, who shall become a universal monarch.' She will tell the
king, and he will send to the orchard for a mango fruit : I will cause
all the fruit to disappear. They will tell the king that there is none, and
when he asks who eats it, they will say 'The ascetics'." So just in the
middle watch, he appeared in the queen's chamber, and hovering in the
air, revealed his godhead, and conversing with her, repeated the tirst two
stanzas :—[395]
"There grows a tree, with fruit divine thereon
Men clepo it Middlemost: and if one be
With child, and eat of it, she shall aiiou
Bear one to hold the whole wide earth in fee.
"Lady, you are a mighty Queen indeed
The King, your husband, holds you lief and dear.
Bid him procure the mango for your need,
And he the Midmost fruit will bring you here."
These stanzas did Sakka recite to the queen ; and then bidding her be
careful, and make no delay, but tell the matter to the king herself, he
encouraged her, and went back to his own place.
Next day, the queen lay down, as though ill, giving instructions to her
maidens. The king sat upon his throne, under the white umbrella, and
looked on at the dancing. Not seeing his queen, he asked a handmaid
where she was.
"The queen is sick," replied the girl.
So the king went to see her ; and sitting by her side, stroked her back,
and asked, "What is the matter, lady? "
"Nothing," said she, "but that I have a craving for something."
"What is it you want, lady1" he asked again.
"A middle mango, my lord."
"Where is there such a thing as a middle mango ? "
^ Thephraseismeantto beenigmatical. It is explained below.
- The idea of conception by eating of fruit and in other abnormal ways is fully
—
discussedin The IxgendofFerseus, E. S. Hartland. vol. i. chaps. 4 6.

" ;:
270 The Jcitcika. Book III.
"I don't know what a middle mango is; but I know that 1 shall die if
I don't get one."
"All right, we will get you one ; don't trouble about it."
So the king consoled her, and went away. He took his seat upon the
royal divan, and sent for his courtiers. [396] "My queen has a great
craving for a middle mango. What is to be done 1 " said he.
Some one told him, "A middle mango is one which grows between
two others. Send to your park, and find a mango growing between two
others pluck its fruit and let us give it to the queen." So the king sent
;
men to do after this manner.
But Sakka by his power made all the fruit disappear, as though it had
been eaten. The men who came for the mangoes searchedthe whole park
through, and not a mango could they find; so back they went to the king,
and told him that mangoes there were none.
*' Who is it eats the mangoes?" asked the king.
"The ascetics, my lord."
"Give the ascetics a drubbing, and bundle them out of the park !" he
commanded. The people heard and obeyed Sakka's wish was fulfilled.
:
The queen lay on and on, longing for the mango.
The king could not think what to do. He gathered his courtiers and
his brahmins, and asked them, " Do you know what a middle mango is 1 "
Said the brahmins : "My loi-d, a middle mango is the portion of the
gods. It grows in Himalaya, in the Golden Cave. So we have heard by
immemorial tradition."
" Well, who can go and get if?
" A human being cannot go ; we must send a young pari-ot."
At that time there was a fine young parrot in the king's family, as
big as the nave of the wheel in the princes' carriage, strong, clever, and
full of sharp devices. This parrot the king sent for, and thus addressed
him,
"Dear parrot, I have done a great deal for you : you live in a golden
ca(^e; you have sweet grain to eat on a golden dish; you have sugared
water to drink. There'ssomething I want you to do for me."
"Speak on, my lord," said the parrot.
"Sou, my queen has a craving for a middle mango ; this mango grows
in Himalaya, in the Golden Mountain ; it is the gods' portion, [397] no
human being can go thither. You must bring the fruit back from
thence."
"Very good, my king, I will," said the parrot. Then the king gave
him sweetened grain to eat, on a golden plate, and sugar-water to drink
and anointed him beneath the wings with oil an hundred times refined
then he took him in both hands, and standing at a window, let him fly
awav.

—
" " "
No. 281. 271
The parrot, on the king's errand, flew along in the air, beyond the
ways of men, till he came to some parrots which dwelt in the Hrst hill-
region of Himalaya. "Where is the middle mango?" ho asked thi-in
;
"tell me the place."
"We know not," said they, "but the parrots in the second range of
hills will know."
The parrot listened, and flew away to the second range. After that
he wentonto the third,fourth, fifth, andsixth. There too the parrots said,
"We
do not know, but those in the seventh range will know." So he
went on there, and asked where the middle mango tree grew.
" In such and such a place, on the Golden Hill," they.said.
"I have come for the fruit of it," said he, "guide me thither, and
procure the fruit for me."
"That is the portion of the king Vessavana. It is impossible to
get near it. The whole tree from the roots upwards is encircled with
seven iron nets ; it is guarded by thousands of millions of Kumbhanda
goblins ; if they see any one, he's done for. The place is like the fire of
the dissolution and the fire of hell. Do not ask such a thing ! "
"If you will not go with me, then describe the place to me," said he.
So theytold him to go by such and such a way. He listened carefully
to their instructions. He did not show himself by day but at dead of
;
night, when the goblins were asleep, he approached the tree, and began
softly — to climb on one — of its roots, when clink ! went the iron net
[398] thegoblinsawoke sawtheparrot, andseizedhim, crying, "Thief!
Then they discussed what was to be done with him.
Says one, "I'll throw him into my mouth, and swallow him !
Says another, " I'll crush him and knead him in my hands and scatter
him in bits "
!
Says a third, " I'll split him in two, and cook him on the coals and
eat him!
The parrot heard them deliberating. Without any fear he addressed
them, "I say. Goblins, whose men are you ? "
"We
belong to king Vessavana."
"Well, you have one king for your master, and I have another for
mine. The king of Benares sent me here to fetch a fruit of the middle
mango tree. Then and there I gave my life to my king, and here I
am. He who loses his life for parents or master is born at once in heaven.
Therefore I shall pass at once from this animal form to the world of the
gods !" and he repeated the third stanza
:
"Whatever be the place which they attain
Who, by heroic self-forgetfulness.
Strive with all zeal a master's end to gain
To that same place I soon shall win access."

272 The Jataha. Book III.
After this fashion did he discourse, repeating this stanza. The
goblins listened, and were pleased in their heart. "This is a righteous
creature," said they, "we must not kill him— let him go!" So they let
him go, and said, "I say, Parrot, you're free ! Go unharmed out of our
hands !" [399]
"Do not let me return empty-handed," said the parrot : "give me a
fruitoffthe tree
!
"
"Parrot," they said, "it is not our business to give you fruit offthis
tree. All the fruit on this tree is marked. If there is one fruit wrong
we shall lose our lives. If Vessavana is angry and looks but once, a
thousand goblins are broken up and scattered like parched peas hopping
about on a hot plate. So we cannot give yon any. But we will tell you
a place where you can get some."
"I care not who gives it," said the parrot, "but the fruit I must have.
Tell me where I mayget it."
" In one of the tortuous paths of the Golden Mountain lives an
ascetic, by name Jotirasa, who watches the sacred fire in a leaf-thatched
hut, called Kaiicana-patti or Goldleaf, a favourite of Vessavana ; and Ves-
savana sends him constantly four fruits from the tree go to him."
;
The parrot took his leave, and came to the ascetic; he gave him
greeting, and sat down on one side. The ascetic asked him,
"Where have you come from?" "From the king of Benares."
"Why are you come 1 "
"Master, our Queen has a great craving for the fruit of the middle
mango, and that is why I am come. Howbeit the goblins would not give
me any themselves, but sent me to you."
" Sit down, then, and you shall have one," said the ascetic. Then
came the four which Vessavana used to send. The ascetic ate two of
them, gave the parrot one to eat, and when this was eaten he hung the
fou—rth by a string, and made it fast around the parrot's neck, and let him
go "Offwith you, now !" said he. The parrot flew back and gave it to
the Queen. She ate it, and satisfied her craving, but still all the same
she had noson.
[400] When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth in
these words: "At that time Rahula's mother was the Queen, Ananda was the
parrot, Sariputta was the ascetic whogave the mango fruit, but the ascetic who
lived in thepark was I myself."

No. 282. 273
No. 282.
SEYYA-JATAKA.
—
'"yis best thatyoushouldknoio," etc. This talc the I\Iaster told at Jetavana,
about acourtier of the king of Kosala. This man was very useful to tlie king,
we are told, and did everything that had to be done. Because he was very
useful, the king did him great honour. The others werejealous, and concocted
a slander, and calumniated him. The king believed their saying, and without
enquiring into his guilt, bound him in chains, though virtuous and innocent,
and cast him into prison. There he dwelt all alone ; but by reason ofhis virtue,
he had peace of mind, and with mind at peace he understood the conditions of
existence,andattainedthefruition ofthe FirstPath. By and bye the king found
thathewasguiltless,andbrokehischainsandgavehim honour more than before.
The man wished to pay his respects to the Master; and taking flowers and
perfumes, he went to the monastery, and did reverence to the Buddha, and sat
respectfully aside. The Master talked graciously with him. "We have heard
that ill fortune befel you," said he. "Yes, sir, but I made my ill fortune into
good; and as I sat in prison, I produced the fruition ofthe First Path." "Good
friend," said the Master, "you are not the only one who has turned evil into
good; for wise men in the olden time tui-ned evil into good as you did." And
he told an old-world tale.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born as the son of his Queen Consort. He grew up and was
educated at Takkasila ; and on his father's death he became king, and
kept the ten royal rules : he gave alms, practised virtue, [401] and ob-
served the sacred day.
Now one of his courtiers intrigued among the king's wives. Tlie
servants noticed it, and told the king that so and so was carrying on an
intrigue. The king found out the very truth of the matter, and sent for
him. "Never show yourself before me again," said he, and banished liim.
The man went off to the court of a neighbouring king, and then all
happened as described above in the MahasTlava Birth'. Here too this
king thrice tested him, and believing the word of the courtier came with
a great army before Benares with intent to take it. When this was
known to the chief warriors of the king of Benares, five liundrcd in
number, they said to the king,
"Such and such a king has come here, wasting the country, with
—
intent to take Benares here, let us go and capture him ! "
"I want no kingdom that must be kept by doing harm," said tlio king.
"Do nothing at all."
1 No. 51 (vol. i. p. 129 oftins translation).
J. II. 18

: :;
274 The Jataka. Book III.
The marauding king surrounded the city. Again the courtiers ap-
proached the king, and said,
—
"My lord, be advised let us capture him "
!
"Nothing can be done," said the king. "Openthe city gates." Then,
surrounded by his court, he sate down in state upon the great dais.
The marauder entered the town, felling the men at the four gates and
ascended the terrace. There he took prisoner the king with all his court,
threw chains upon them and cast them into prison. The king, ashe sat
in prison, pitied the marauder, and an ecstasy of pity was stirred in him.
By reason of this pity, the other king felt great torment in his body
he burnt all through as though with a twofold flame ; and smitten with
great pain, he asked what the matter was.
They replied, "You have cast a righteous king into prison, that is why
this is come upon you."
He went and craved pardon of the Bodhisatta, and restored his king-
dom, saying, "Your kingdom be your own. [402] Henceforward leave
your enemies for me to deal with." He punished the evil counsellor, and
returned to his own city.
The Bodhisatta sat in state upon his high dais, in festal array, with
his court around him ; and addressing them repeated the fii'st two stanzas
"'Tis best that you should know, the better part
Is evermore the better thing to do.
By treating one with kindliness of heart,
I saved an hundred men from death their due.
"Therefore to all the world I bid you show
The grace of kindliness and friendship dear;
And then alone to heaven you shall not go.
people of the Kasi country, hear!"
Thus the great Being praised virtue in the way of pitying the great
multitude ; and leaving the white umbrella in the great city of Benares,
twelve leagues in extent, retired to Himalaya, and embraced the religious
life.
[403] The Master, in his perfect wisdom, repeated the third stanza
"These are the words that I, king Kaihsa, said,
1 the great ruler of Benares town.
I laid my bow, I laid my quiver down,
And my self-mastery I perfected."
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth: "At
that time Ananda was the marauding king, but the king of Benares was I
myself."

' '
No. 283. 275
No. 283.
VADDHAKI-SUKARA-JATAKA
" The best, the best you ahoays" etc.—This story the Master told in Jetavana
about the Elder Dhanuggahatissa. Mahakosala, the father of king l\isen;uli,
when he married his daughter,theLadyKosala, to kingBinil)isara,gave a village
of Kasi, producing a revenue of a hundred thousand, for Ijath and perfume
money. When Ajatasattu murdered the king his father, the lady Kosala died
of grief. Then thought king Pasonadi, "Ajatasattu has killed his father, my
sister has died from sympathy with her husband's misfortune I will not give
;
the Kasi town to the parricide." So lie refused to give it to Ajatasattu. About
this village there was warbetwixt these two from time to time. Ajatasattu was
fierce and strong, and Pasenadi was a very old man, so he was Ijcaten again and
again, and the people of Mahakosala were generally conquered. Then the king
a " s M ke y d l h o i r s d," cou s r a t i i d er t s h , ey " , W " e th a e re re c v o e n r s e t n a d ntl fa y th b e e r i s ng ai" b e ea s t ki e l n le ; d w i h n at inc is an t t o ati b o e ns d . one W\e "
must hear the word of the Brothers who dwell in the Jetavana monastery."
Then the king despatched couriers, bidding them listen to the ccjuverse of the
Brothers at a suitable time. Now at thetime there were two old Elders living
in a leaf-hut close to the monastery, whose names were Elder Utta and Elder
Dhanuggahatissa. [404] Dhanuggahatissa had slept through the first and second
w fi a re t , ch an o d f t s h it e ti n n i g gh d t o ; wn an s d ai a d, wa " k U i t n t g a, in m t y he fr la i s e t nd wa I" tch " , W h h e a b t ro i k s e it s , o f m r e ie s n t d ic T k i s, s- l s i a t ? a "
"Are you not asleep?" "Now we are awake, what's to do?" "Get up, now,
and sit by me." So he did, and began to talk to him. "That stupid,pot-bellied
w Ko a s r al h a e n k e n v o e w r s ha n s ot a a ja b r it f . ull H o e f b i o s il a e l d wa r y ic s e b w e i i t n h g ou b t ea l t e e t n ti a ng nd it fo s r po c i e l d ; to ho p w ay. t " o pl " a B n ut a
what should he do?" Nowjust then the couriers stood listening to their talk.
The Elder Dhanuggahatissa discussed the nature of war. "War, Sir," said he,
"consists of three kinds
:
the lotus army, the wheel army, and the waggon
army'^. If those who wish to capture Ajatasattu will post garrisons in two hill-
fortsright away in the hills, and pretend that they are weak, and watch till they
gethimamongthehills,andbar his passage,leap out from the two forts andtake
him in front and in the rear, and shout aloud, they will quickly have him like a
l th a i n s de t d he fi c s o h u , r l i i e k r e s a to f l r d og th i e n ir th k e in f g i . st ; Th an e d ki s n o g t c h a e u y s w e i d ll th b e e d a r bl u e m t t o o s b e e cu b r e e at h e i n m. f " or t A h ll e
attack, arranged his army waggon-wise, took Ajatasattu alive; his daughter,
Princess Vajira he gave in marriage to his sister's son, and dismissed her
with the Kasi village for her bath-money.
This event became known among the Brotherhood. One day, they were all
t c a o l n k q i u n e g re a d bo A u j t at it as i a n t t t h u e t H h a r l o l ug o h f t T h r e u i t n h st ; ru " c F t r i i o e n n s d o , f I Dh h a e n a u r gg t a h h a a t ti t s h s e a. k " ing Th o e f M K a o s s t a e l r a
^ See Morris, Folk-lore Journal, iv. 48.
- These are technical terms in Sanskrit also (imdmavyiUw, rahata°, cakra°) ; see
Manu 7. 188, 7. 187, and B. R. diet. s.v. The 'wheel ' explains itself: the 'wagt;on
was a wedge-shaped phalanx
;
the 'lotus,' as noted by Biihler (trans, of Manu in
S. B. E. page 246), is "equallyextended on all sides andperfectly circular, the centre
beingoccupiedby theking."
18—2

" "
276 The Jdtaka. Book III.
c to a l m d e hi in m. ; "W H h e a s t ai d d, o " yo T u hi s s it is he n r o e t t t a h l e ki f n ir g st ab t o i u m t e n t o h w a , t B D r h o a t n h u e g r g s a 1 ha " t a i s s k s e a d w h a e. s c T le h v e e y r
in discussing war" : and he told them an old-world tale.
[40-5] Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares,
the Bodhisatta came to life as a tree-spii'it. At that time there were some
carpenters settled in a village near Benares. One of them, on going into
the forest to get wood, found a young boar fallen in a pit, which he took
home and kept. He grew big, with curved tusks, and was a well-mannei^ed
creature. Because the carpenter kept him, he went by the name of
Carpenter's Boar. When the carpenter was chopping up a tree, the boar
used to turn the tree over with his snout, and with his teeth fetch hatchet
and adze, chisel and mallet, and pull along the measuring line by the end.
The carpenter was afraid somebody might eat him up ; so he took him and
let him go in the forest. The Boar ran into the forest, looking for a safe
and pleasant place to live in; and at last he espied a great cave up in
a mountain side, with plenty of bulbs, and roots, and fruits, a pleasant
living-place. Some hiindreds of other boars saw him and approached
him.
Said he to them, "You are jixst what I am looking for, and here I
have found you. This seems a nice place ; and here I mean to live now
with you."
"A nice place it certainly is," said they, "but dangerous."
"Ah," said he, "as soon as I saw you, I wondered how it was that
those who dwell in so plentiful a place could be so meagre in flesh and
blood. What is it you are afraid of?
"There is a tiger comes in the morning, and every one he sees he
seizes and carries off"."
"Does this always happen, or only now and then1
"Always."
"How many tigers are there1 "
"Only one."
—
"What one alone too many for all of you ! "
"Yes, Sir."
"I'll catch him, if you only do what I tell you. Where does this tiger
"
live1
"On that hill yonder."
So at night he drilled the Boars and prepared them — for war ; explain-
ing to them the science. [406] "War is of three kinds the lotus army,
the wheel army, and the waggon army " and he arranged them after the
:
lotus pattern. He knew the place of vantage ; so, says he, "Here we
must set our battle." The mothers and their suckling brood he placed

:
No. 283. 277
in the middle around these he put the sows that had no younu; ai-onnd
; ;
these,-the little boars; around these, those which were rather young;
around these, all whose tusks were grown ; aroimd these, the boars fit for
battle, strong and powerful, by tens and by twenties ; thus he placed them
in serried ranks. Before his own position he had a round hole dug;
behind it, a pit getting gradually deeper and deeper, shaped like a
winnowing basket^ As he moved about amongst them, followed by si.xty
or seventy Boars, bidding them be ofgood courage, the dawn broke.
The Tiger awoke. "Time now ! " thought he. He trotted up till he
caught sight of them ; then stopped still upon the plateau, glaring at the
crowd ofBoars. "Glare back !" cried the Carpenter's Boar, with a signal
to the rest. They all glared. The Tiger opened his mouth, and drew a
long breath : the Boars all did the same. The Tiger relieved himself: so
did the Boars. Thus whatever the Tiger did, the Boars did after liim.
"Why, what's this !" the Tig
—
er wondered. "They used to take to
their heels as soon as they saw me indeed, theywere too much frightened
even to run. Now so far from running, they actually stand up against
me ! Whatever I do, they mimic. There's a fellow yonder on a com-
manding position : he it is who has organised the rabble. Well, I don't
see how to get the better ofthem." And he turned away and went back
to his lair.
Now there was a sham hermit, who used to get a share of the Tiger's
prey. This time the Tiger returned empty-handed. Noticing this, the
hermit I'epeated the following stanza. [-107]
"The best, the best you always brought before
When you went hunting after the wild boar.
Now empty-handed you consume with grief.
To-day where is the strength you had of yore?"
At this address, the Tiger repeated another stanza
"Once they would hurry-scurry all about
To find their holes, a panic-stricken rout.
But now they grunt in serried ranks compact :
Invincible, they stand and face me out."
"Oh, don't be afraid of them!" urged the hermit. "One roar and
one leap will frighten them out of their wits, and send them pell-mell."
The Tiger yielded to this insistence. Plucking up his courage, he went
back and stood upon the plateau.
Carpenter's Boar stood between the two pits. "See Master! here's
the scoundrel again!" cried the Boars. "Oh, don't be afraid," said he,
"we have him now,"
1 The winnowing baskethaslowwalls on three sides, two of them sloping towards
theopenend. See apicture in Grierson, BiluirPeasant Life, 118.

"
!
"!
278 The Jdtaka. Booh III.
With a roar the Tiger leapt upon Carpenter's Boar. At the very
instant he sprang, [408] the Boar dodged and dropped straight into the
round hole. The Tiger could not stop, but tumbled over and over and fell
all of a heap in the jaws of the other pit, where it got very narrow.
Up jumps the Boar out of his hole, and quick as lightning ran his tusk
into the Tiger's thighs, tore him about the kidneys, buried his fangs
in the creature's sweet flesh, and w — ounded his head. Then he tosses
him out of the pit, ci-ying aloud "Here's your enemy for you !
They who came first had tiger to eat; but they who came after went
about sniffing at the others' mouths, and asking what tiger's flesh tasted
like!
But the Boars were still uneasy. "What's the matter nowl" asked
our Hog, who had noticed their movements.
"Master," said they, "it's all very well to kill one tiger, but the sham
hermit can bring ten tigers more "
!
"Who is he? "
" A wicked ascetic."
"The tiger I have killed ; do you suppose a man can hurt me ? Come
along, and we'll get hold of him." So they all set forth.
Now the man had been wondering why the Tiger was so long in
coming. Could the Boars have caught him ? he thought. At last he
started to meet him on the way ; and as he went, there came the Boars
He snatched up his belongings, and ofl" he ran. The Boars tore after
him. He threw away his encumbrances, and with all speed climbed up a
fig-tree.
"Now, Master, it's all up ! " cried the herd. "The man has climbed a
tree !
"What tree1 " their leader asked.
They replied, "A fig-tree."
''Oh, very well," said the leader. "The sows must bring water, the
young ones dig about the tree, the tuskers tear at the roots, and the rest
surround it and watch." They did their several task—s as he bade them;
he meanwhile charged full at a great thick root, [409] 'twas like an axe-
blow; and with this one blow he felledthe tree to the ground. The Boars
who wei'e waiting for the man, knocked him down, tore him to pieces,
gnawed the bones clean in a moment
Now they perched Carpenter's Boar on the tree-trunk. They filled the
dead man's shell with water, and sprinkled the Boar to consecrate him for
their king ; a young sow they consecrated to be his Consort.
This, the saying goes,is the originof the custom still observed. When
people make a king now-a-days, he is placed on a fine chair of fig-wood,
and sprinkled out ofthree shells.
A sprite that dwelt in that forest beheld this marvel. Appearing

—
No. 283. 279
before the Boars in a cleft of his tree-trunk, he repeated the third
stanza:
"Honour to all the triUes assonililcd be!
A wondrou.s union I myself did see!
How tuskers once a tiger oyercarac
By federal strength and tusked unity!"
After this discourse the Master identified the Rirth "Dlianuggalia the
:
Elder was the Carpenter's Boar, and I was the tree-sprite."
No. 284.
Smi-JATAKA.
—
" Whatever riches they who strive,'^ etc. This story the Master told about a
brahmin who stole good luck. [410] The circumstances of this birth-tale arc
given above in the Khadiranga Births. As before, the heretical spirit that lived
in the gate tower of Anathapindika's house, doing penance, brought four and
fifty crores of gold and filled the store-rooms, and became a friend of the great
man. Heled herbefore the ]\Iaster. The IMasterdiscoursed to her. She heard,
andentered on the streamofconversion. Thenceforward thegreat man'shonour
was great as before. Now there was livingin Savatthiabrahmin,versedinlucky
marks, who thought on this wise. "Anathapindika was poor, and then became
famous. What if I make as though I went to see him, and steal his luck?" So
to thehouse he went,and was welcomed hospitably. After exchanging civilities,
the host asked why he had come. The brahmin was looking about to see where
the man's luck lay. Now Anathapindika had a white cock, white as ascoured
shell, which he kept in a golden cage, and in the comb of this cock lay the great
man's luck. The brahmin looked about and spied where the luck lay. "Noble
sir," said he, "I teach magic charms to five hundred young fellows. "We are
plagued by a cock that crows at the wrong time. Yourcockcrows at the right
time. Forhim I have come; willyou give him to me?" "Yes," said the other:
and at tlae instant the word was uttered, the luck left the cockscomb,and settled
in a jewel put away in the pillow. The brahmin observed that the luck had
gone into this jewel, and asked for ittoo. As soon as the owneragreed to give
it, the luck left the jewel, and settled in a club for self-defence which lay upon
the pillow. The brahmin saw it and asked again. "Take it, and take your
leave," said the owner; and in an instant the luck left the club, and settled on
the head of the owner's chief wife, who was named the Lady Punnalakkhanfi.
The thievish brahmin thought, when he saw this, "This is an inalienable article
which I cannot ask for." Then he told the great man, "Nol)le sir," said ho,
"I came to your house to steal your luck. The luck was in the comb of your
» No. 40, vol. i. page 100.

—
;
280 The Jdtaka. Book III.
cock. But when you gave me the cock, the luck passed into this jewel when
yougave me the jewel it passed intoyour stick; when you gavethe stick ; to me,
it went out of it [411] and passed into the head of the Lady Puiiiialakkhana.
S—urely this^is inalienable, I can never get it. It is impossible to steal your luck
keep it, then!" and rising from his seat, he departed. Anathapindika deter-
mined to tell the Master; so he came to the monastery, and after respectfully
greeting him, sat on one side, and told the Buddha all about it. The Master
listened, and said, "Goodman, now-a-days the luck of one man does not go to
another. But formerly the luck belonging to those of small wit went to the
wise;" and he told him an old-world tale.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta reigned in Benai'es, the Bodhi-
satta was born into a Brahmin family in the realm of Kasi. On
growing uj), he was educated at Takkasila, and lived among his faiiiily
but when his parents died, much distressed he retired to the life of
a recluse in Himalaya, and there he cultivated the Faculties and the
Attainments.
A long time passed, and he came down to inhabited parts for salt
and savouring, and took up his quartei's in the gardens of the king of
Benares. Next day, on his begging rounds, he came to the door of an
elephant-trainer. This man took a fancy to his ways and manners,
fed him, and gave him lodging in his own grounds, waiting upon him
continually.
Now it happened just then that a man whose business it was to gather
firewood failed to get back to town from the woods in time. He lay
down for the night in a temple, jilacing a bundle of sticks under his head
for a pillow. At this temple thei'e were a number of cocks quite free,
which had perched close by on a tree. Towards morning, one of them,
who was roosting high, let fall a dropping on the back of a bird below.
"Who dropt that on me"?" cried this one. "I did," cried the first. "And
why"?" "Didn't think," said the other; and then—did it again. Here-
upon they both began to abuse each other, crying "What power have
youl what power have you?" At last the lower one said, "Anybody
who kills me, and eats my flesh roasted on the coals, [412] gets a thousand
pieces of money in the morning " And the one above answered
!
"Pooh, pooh, don't boast about a little thing like that Anybody who
!
eats my fleshy parts will become king; if he eats my outside, he'll
become commander-in-chief or chief queen, according as he's man or
woman; if he eats the flesh by my bones, he'll get the post of royal
Treasurer, if he be a householder ; or, if a holy man, will become the
king's favourite "
!
The stick-picker heard all this, and pondered. "Now if I become
king, there'll be no need of a thousand pieces of money." Quietly he
climbed the tree, caught the topmost cock and killed him he fastened
:

No. 284. 281
—
him in a fold of his dress, saying to himself " Now I'll be king!" As
soon as the gates were opened, in he walked. He plucked the fowl, and
cleaned it, and gave it to his wife, bidding her make the meat nice for
eating. She got ready the meat with some rice, and set it before him,
bidding her lord eat. '
"Goodwife," said he, "there's great virtue in this meat. By eating
it I shall become king, and you my queen ! " So they took the meat
and rice down to the Ganges bank, intending to bathe before eating it.
Then, putting meat and rice down upon the bank, in they went to
bathe.
Just then a breeze stirred up the water, which washed away the
meat. Down the river it floated, till it came in sight of an elephant-
trainer, a great personage, who was giving his elephants a bath lower
down, "What have we herel" said he, and picked it up. "It's fowl
and rice, my lord," was the reply. He bade wrap it up, and .seal it,
and sent it home to his wife, with a message to open it for him when he
returned.
The stick-picker also ran ofF, with his belly i)uffed out with sand and
water which he had swallowed.
Now a certain ascetic, who had divine vision, the favourite chaplain
of the elephant-trainer, was thinking to himself, "My patron friend
does not leave his post with the elephants. When will he attain
promotion 1 " As he thus pondered, he saw this man by his divine insight,
and perceived what was a-doing. He went on before, and sat in the
patron's house.
When the master retui'ned, [413] he greeted him respectfully and sat
down on one side. Then, sending for the pai'cel, he ordered food and
water to be bi'ought for the ascetic. The ascetic did not accept the food
which was offered him; but said, "I will divide this food." The master
gave him leave. Then separating the meat into portions, he gave to the
elephant-trainer the fleshy parts, the outside to his wife, and took the flesh
about the bones for his own share. After the meal was over, he said,
"On the third day from this you will become king. Take care what you
do!" and away he went.
On the third day a neighbouring king came and beleaguered Benares.
The king told his elephant-trainer to dress in the royal robes, bidding him
go mount his elephant and fight. He himself put on a disguise, and
mingled with the ranks ; swift came an arrow, and pierced him, so that
he perished then and there. The trainer, learningthat the king was dead,
sent for a great quantity of money, and beat the drum, proclaiming, "Let
those who want money, advance, and fight!" The warrior host in a
twinkling slew the hostile king.
After the king's obsequies the courtiers deliberated who was to be

—
^
282 The Jataka. Book III.
made king. Said they, " While our king was yet alive, he put his royal
robes upon the elephant-trainer. This very man has fought and won the
kingdom. To him the kingdom shall be given!" And they consecrated
him king, and his wife they made the chief queen. The Bodhisatta
became his confidant.
After this discourse the Master, in his perfect wisdom, gave utterance
to the two stanzas following :
"Whatever riches they who strive amain
Without the aid of luck can ever gain,
All that, by favour of the goddess Luck,
Both skilled and unskilled equally obtain.
"All the world over many meet our sight.
Not only good, but creatures differeut quite.
Whose lot it is fruition to possess
Of wealth in store which is not theirs by right.'"'
[414] After this the Master added, "Good sir, these beings have no
other resource but their merit won in previous births ; this enables you
to obtain treasures in places where there is no mine." Then he recited
the following scripture
"There is a treasury of all good things
Which both to gods and men their wishes brings.
Fine looks, voice, figure, form, and sovranty
With all its pomp, lies in that treasury.
Lordship and government, imperial bliss,
The crown of heaven, within that treasure is.
All human happiness, the joys of heaven.
Nirvana's self, from out that store is given.
True ties of friendship, wisdom's liberty.
Firm self-control, lies in that treasiu-y.
Salvation, understanding, training tit
To make Pacceka Buddhas come from it.
Thus hath this merit a virtue magical
The wise and stedfast praise it one and; all."
[415] Lastly the Fowl repeated the third stanza, explaining the
treasures in which lay the luck of Anathapindika.
"A fowl, a gem, a club, a wife
All these with lucky marks were rife.
For all these treasures, be it known,
A good and sinless man did own."
Then he identified the Birth : "Elder Ananda was the King, and the family
priest was the Very Buddha."
1 Khiul. Pdtha, p. 14.

:
No. 285. 283
No. 285.
MANISUKARA-JATAKA\
—
" To hellshallgo he" etc. ^This story the Master told at Jetavaiia, ahout tlie
murderofSuudari. At that timewe learnthattlieBodhisattawas honounul and
respected. The circumstances were the same as in the Kandhaka- ; this is an
abstract of them. The brotherhotKl of the Blessed One had received gain and
honoiu-like five rivers pouring in a mighty flood the heretics, finding that gain
;
and honom* cameto them no longer, becoming dim like fireflies at sum-ise, they
collected together, and took counsel "Ever since the priest Gotania appeared,
:
our gain and glory has gone from us. Not a soul ever knows that we e.xist.
Who will help us to bring reproach on Gotama,and prevent him from getting all
this?" Then an idea occurred to them. "Sundarl will make us able to do it."
So when one day Sundarl visited the heretics' grove, they gave her greeting, but
said nothing more. She addressed themagain and again, but receivednoanswer.
"Has anything annoyed the holy fathers?" she asked. "Why, sister," said
they, "do not you see how the priest Gotama annoys us, depriving us of alms
and honour?" "What can I do about it?" she said. "You, sister, arc fair and
lovely. You can bring disgrace upon Gotama, and your words will influence
agreat many, [416] and you can thus restore our gains and good repute." She
agreed, and took her leave. After this she used to take flowers and scents and
perfumes, camphor, condiments and fruits, and at evening time, when a great
crowd had entered the city after hearing the IVIaster's discoui-se, she would set
her face towards Jetavana. If any asked where she was going, she would say,
"To the Priest Gotama I live with him in one perfumed chamber." Then she
;
spent the night in a heretical settlement, and in the morning entered the road
which led from Jetavana into the city. If any asked her where she was going,
she replied, "I have been with the i)riest Gotama in one perfumed chamljer, and
he made love to me." After the lapse of some days they hired some ruffians
to kill Sundarl before Gotama's chamber and throw her body into the dust-heap.
And so they did. Then the heretics made a hue and cry after Sundarl, and
informed the king. He asked where their suspicions pointed. They an.swered
that she had gone the last few days to Jetavana, but what happened afterwards
they did not know. He sent them to search for her. Acting on this jiermis-
sion, they took his own servants, and went to Jetavana,where theyhunted aljout
till they found her in the dust-heap. Calling for a litter, they brouglit the body
into the town, and told the king that the disciples of (rotama had killed Smi-
dari, and thrown her in the dust-heap, in order to cloak the sin of their Master.
The king bade them scour the city. All through the streets they went, crying,
"Come and see what has been done by the priests of the Sakya prince !" and
came back to the palace door. The king had placed the body of Sundarl upon
aplatform, and had it watched in the cemetery. All the populace, e.\cept the
holydisciples, went al)0ut inside the town, outside the town, in the parks and in
the woods, abusing the Brethren, and crying out, "Come and see what the
priests of the Sakya prince have done !" The Brethren told all this to tho
Buddha. Said the Master, "^Vell, go and reprove these people in these
words
* Of. Morris, Folk-loreJournal, iv. 58.
^ This story is given in Uddnam, iv. 8 (p. 13). Khandhakam seems to mean the
Vinaya (Childers.s. v., J. P. T. S. 1888s. v.), but I cannotfind the story there.

—
284 The Jataka. Book III.
"To hell shall go he that delights in lies,
And he who having done a thing, denies
:
[417] Both these, when death has carried them away,
As men of evil deeds elsewhere shall risei."
The king directed some men to find out whether Sundarl had been killed by
anybody else. Now the ruffians had drunk the blood-money, and were
quarrelling together. Said one to another, "You killed Sundarl with one blow,
and then threw her in the dust-heap, and here you are, buying liquor with
t c h a e ug b h l t oo t d h - e mo r n uf e f y ia ! n " s a " n A d ll dr r a ig g h g t e , d al t l h r e ig m ht b , e " f s o a r i e d t t h h e e k k i i n n g g . 's m " e D s i se d ng y e o r u s ; ki a ll nd he t r h ? e " y
asked the king. They said, yes, they did. "Who bade you?" "The heretics,
my lord." The king had the heretics summoned. "Lift up Sundarl," said he,
"and carry her round the city, crying as you go : 'This woman Sundari wanted
n to ot b G r o i t ng am d a i ' s s g , ra n c o e r u hi p s on dis t c h i e ple p s r ' ie ; st th G e o g t u a il m t a is ; o w u e rs h ! a ' d " h T e h r e m y u d r i d d er so e . d ;A th m e ul g t u i i t lt ud i e s
of the unconverted believed, and the heretics were kei)t out of mischief by
receiving the punishment for murder. Thenceforward the Buddha's reputation
grewgreater and greater. And then one day they began to gossip in the Hall of
Truth "Friend, the heretics thought to blacken the Buddha, and they only
b M l a a s c t k e e r n : e c d am t e hem i s n, el a v n es d : as e k ve e r d s w i h nc a e t , o t u h r ey ga w i e n r s e a t n a d lk g i l n o g ry ab h o a u v t e ? in T cr h e e a y sed to ! l " d h T i h m e .
"Brethren," said he, "it is impossible to make the Buddha impure. Trying
to stain the Buddha, is like trying to stain agem of the first water. In bygone
ages people have wished to stain a fine jewel, and no matter how they tried,
they failed to do it." And he told them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisattawas born into a Brahmin family. When he grewup, perceiving
the suffering that arises from desire, he went away, and traversed three
ranges of Himalaya, where he became a hermit, and lived in a hut of
leaves.
Near his hut was a crystal cave, in whicli lived thirty Boars. Near
the cave a Lion used to range. [418] His shadow used to be reflected in
the crystal. The Boars used to see this reflection, and terror made them
lean and thin-blooded. Thought they, "We see the reflection because
this crystal is clear. We will make it dirty and discolour it." So they
got some mud from a pool close by, and rubbed and rubbed the crystal
with it. But the crystal, being constantly polished by the boars' bristles,
got brighter than ever.
They did not know how to manage it; so they determined to ask the
hermit how they might sully the crystal. To him therefore theycame, and
after respectful greeting, they sat down beside him, and gave utterance to
these two verses :
"Seven summers we have been
Thirty in a crystal grot.
Now we are keen to dull the sheen
But dull it we can not.
1 Dhammapada, v. 306 ; Sutta Nipdta, v. 661.

"
No. 285. 285
"Though wo try with all our might
To obwcure its l)rilliiiiicy,
Still more bright shines forth the light,
What can the reason be?
The Bodhisatta listeued. Then he repeated the third stanza
:
"' N T o is g p l r a e s c s i — ou i s ts cr b y r s i t l a l l i , anc s y pot f l o e r ss e , ve b r ri s g m h - t e , . and pure ;
Nothing on earth its brightness can impair.
Boars, you had l)est betake yourselves elsewhere."
And so they did, on liearing this answer. The Bodhisatta lost himself
in rapturous ecstasy, and became destined to Brahma's world.
After this discourse was ended, the Master identified the I'irth : "At that
time, I was the hermit."
No. 286.
SALUKA-JATAKA'.
—
[419] ''•Envy not what Celery eats" etc. This story the Master toUl in
Jetavana, about the temptation springing fi-om a fat girl. The circumstances
will be explained in the Cullanaradakassapa- story. So the Master asked this
brother whether it was true he had fallen in love. Yes, he said. "With
whom?" the Master asked. "With a fat girl." "That woman, brother," said
the Master, "is your bane
;
long ago, as now, you became food for the crowd
through yourdesire to marry her." Then at the request of the brethren he told
an old-world tale.
Once iipon a time, when Brahraadatta reigned in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was an ox named Big Redcoat, and ho had a young brother
called Little Redcoat. Both of them worked for a family in some
village.
^ CompareNo. 30, Vol. i. p. 75, and No. 477 ; parallels arc quoted by Bcnfcy, Pan-
catantra pref. pp. 228, 229. iEsop's fable of the Calf and the Ox will occur to the
reader. See also Rhys Davids' note tohis translation ofNo. 30.
•' No. 477.

":
286 The Jataka. Book III.
There was in this family a grown-up girl, who was asked in marriage
by another family. Now in the first family a pig called Saluka or Celery',
was being fatted, on purpose to serve for a feast on the wedding-day ; it
used to sleep in a sty^
One day. Little Redcoat said to his brother, "Brother, we work for
this family, and we help them to get their living. Yet they only give us
grass and straw, while they feed yon pig with rice porridge, and let
it sleep in a sty; and what can it do for them ? "
"Brother," said Big Redcoat, "don't covet his porridge. They want
to make a feast of him on our young lady's wedding-day, that's why they
are fattening him up. Wait a few days, and you'll see him dragged out
of his sty, killed, chopped into bits, and eaten up by the visitors." So
saying, he composed the first two stanzas : [420]
"Envy not what Celery eats
;
Deadly is the food he gets.
Be content and eat your chaff
It means long life on yoixr belialf
"By and bye the guest will come.
With his gossips all and some.
All chopt up poor Celery
With his big flat snout will lie."
A few days after, the wedding guests came, and Saluka was killed and
made a meal of. Both oxen, seeing what became of him, thought their
own chaffwas the best.
The Master, in his perfect wisdom,repeated the third stanza by way ofexpla-
nation
:
"When they saw the flat-snout lie
All chopt up, poor Celery,
Said the oxen. Best by half
Surely is our humble chaff!
When the Master — had finished this discourse, he declared the Truths, and
i a d t e t n a t i i n f e i d ed th t e he fr B u i it r i t o h n : of at th t e he Fir c s o t nc P l a u t s h io : n — o " f A t t he th T a r t ut t h i s m , e, th t e he Br s o t t o h ut er gi i r n l q w u a e s sti t o h n e
same, the lovesick brother was Saluka, Ananda was Little Eedcoat, and I was
Big Redcoat myself."
1 Lit. ediblelotus root.
'^ Hetthamafica, 'perhapstheplatformoutsidethehouseundertheeaves, afavourite
resort.' Cp. RhysDavids, Buddhist Birth Stories, p. 277.

— — —
No. 287. 287
No. 287.
LABHA-CtARAHA-JATAKA.
—
" He that hath madness" etc. This story the Master told at J(»t;uan:i, alxnit
afellow-priest ofthe Elder Saripiitta. [421] This brother came and greeted tlu^
Elder, and sitting ou one side, ho asked him to tell the way in which one could
getgain, and how he could get dress and the like. The Elder rei)lied, " Friend,
there are four qualities which make a man successful in getting gain. He unist
getrid ofmodesty from his heart, must resign his orders, must seem to he mad
even if he is not; he must speak slander; he must behave like a dancer;
he must use unkind words everywhere." Thus he ex]>lained how a man gets
agreat deal. The brother objected to this method, and went away. The Elder
went to his Master, and told him about it. The Master said, "'I'iiis is not the
first time that this brother spoke in dispraise of gain he did the samebefore;"
and then, at the request ofthe Elder, he told an old-wo ; rld tale.
Once upon a time, when Brabmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born in a Bi'ahmin family. When he grew up to the age of
sixteen years, he had already mastered the three Vedas and tlie eighteen
accomplishments ; and be became a far-faraed teacher, who educated a
body of five hundred young men. One young man, a youth of virtuous
life, approached his teacher one day with the question, " How is it these
people get gain1 "
The teacher answered, "My son, there are four qualities which procure
gain for those people ; " and he repeated the first stanza :
"He that hath madness, he that slanders well,
That hath an actor's tricks, ill tales doth tell.
Such is the man that wins 2)rosperity
Where all are fools : let this your maxim be."
[422] The pupil, on hearing his master's words, expressed his disap-
proval of gain-getting in the two following stanzas:
"Shame upon him that gain or glory wins
By dire destruction and by wicked sins.
"With bowl in hand a homeless life I'll lead
Rather than live in wickedness and greed."
[423] Thus did the youth praise the quality of the religious life and
;
straight became a hermit, and craved alms with righteousness, cultivating
the Attainments, until he became destined to Brahma's world.
"At Wh t e ha n t t t h i e me Ma t s h t e er br h ot a h d er en w d h e o d t d h i i s s ap d p i r s o c v ou e r d se of he gai t n hu w s a i s de t n h ti e fi y e o d u t n h g e m B a i n r , th b : ut
his teacher was I myself."

288 The Jdtaka. Book III.
No. 288.
MACCH-UDDANA-JATAKA
'.
—
" ^yho could believe the story" etc. This story the Master told at Jetavana
about a dishonest merchant. The circumstances havebeen told above.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born in the family ofa landed proprietor.
When he grew up, he became a wealthy man. He had a young
brother. Afterwards their father died. They determined to arrange
some business of their father's. This took them to a village, where they
were paid a thousand pieces of money. On their wayback, as they waited
on a river-bank for the boat, they ate a meal out of a leaf-pottle. The
Bodhisatta threw what he left into the Ganges for the fishes, giving the
merit to the river-spirit. The spirit accepted this with gratification, which
increased her divine power, and on thinking over this increase of her
power, became aware what had happened. The Bodhisatta [424] laid his
upper garment upon the sand, and there he lay down and went to sleep.
Now the young brother was of a rather thievish nature. He wanted
to filch the money from the Bodhisatta and keep it himself; so he
packed a parcel ofgravel to look like the parcel of money, and put them
both away.
When they had got aboard, and were come to mid-river, the younger
stumbled against the side of the boat, and dropt overboard the parcel
of gravel, as he thought, but really the money.
"Brother, the money's overboard ! " he cried. "What's to be done ? "
"What can we do? What's gone is gone. Never mind about it,"
replied the other.
But the river-spirit thought how pleased she had been with the merit
she had received, and how her divine power had been increased, and
resolved to take care of his property. So by her power she made a
big-mouthed fish swallow the parcel, and took care of it herself.
When the thiefgot home, he chuckled over the trick he had served his
brother, and undid the remaining pai-cel. There wasnothing but gravelto
be seen ! His heart dried up ; he fell on his bed, and clutched the
bedstead.
1 Folk-loreJournal, iii. 364.

—— — —
No. 288. 289
Now some fishermen just then cast their nets for a draught. By
power of the river-spirit, this fish fell into the net. The fisher.s took it to
town to sell. People asked what the price was.
"A
thousand pieces and seven annas," said the fishermen.
Everybody made fun of them. "We have' seen a fish offered for a
thousand pieces " they laughed.
!
The fishers brought their fish to the Bodhisatta's dooi-, and asked him
to buy it.
"What's the price1" he asked.
"You may have it for seven annas," they said.
"What did you ask other peoph' for it1 "
"Fx'om other people vv'e asked a thousand rupees and seven annas ; but
you may have it for seven annas," they said.
He paid seven annas for it, and sent it to his wife. She cut it open,
and there was the parcel of money [425] She called the Bodhisatta. He
!
gave a look, and recognising his mark, knew it for his own. Thought he,
"These fishers asked other people the price ofa thousand rupees and seven
annas, but because the thousand i-upees were mine, they let me have it for
seven annas only! If a man does not understand the meaning of this,
nothing will ever make him believe:" and then he repeated the first
stanza:
"Who could believe the story, were he told,
That fishes for a thousand should be sold?
They're seven pence to me : how I could wisli
To buy a whole string of this kind of fish!"
When he had said this, he wondered how it was that he had recovered
his money. At the moment the river-spirit hovered invisibly in the air,
and declared
"I am the Spirit of the Ganges. You gave the remains of your meal
to the fishes, and let me have the merit. Therefore I have taken care
ofyour pi'operty ; " and she repeated a stanza :
"You fed the fish, and gave a gift to me.
This I remember, and your piety."
[426] Then the spirit told about the mean trick which the younger
brother had played. Then she added, "There he lies, with his heart dried
up within him. There is no prosperity for the cheat. But I have; brought
you your own, and I warn you not tolose it. Don't give itto your young
thief of a brother, but keep it all yourself." Then she repeated the third
stanza:
"Tliere's no good fortune for the wicked heart,
And in the sprites' respect he has no part;
Who cheats his brother of paternal wealth
And works out evil deeds by craft and stealth."
19
J. II.

290 The Jataka. Book III.
Thus spoke the spirit, not wishing that the treacherous villain should
receive the money. But the Bodhisatta said, "That is impossible," and all
the same sent the brother five hundred.
—
After this discourse, the Master declared the Truths: at —tlie conclusion
ofwhich th—e merchantenteredupon the fruitionofthefirstpath: andidentified
the Birth "At that time theyounger brotherwas the dishonest merchant, but
:
the elderwas I myself."
No. 289.
NANA-CCHANDA-JATAKA.
"We livein onehouse" etc.—Tinastorythe Mastertold in Jetavana,about the
venerable Ananda's taking a valuable article. The circumstances will be ex-
plained in the Junha Birth, in the Eleventh Book^.
[427] Nowonceuponatime,when BrahmadattawasreigninginBenares,
the Bodhisatta was born as the son of his Queen Consort. He grew up,
and was educated at Takkasila ; and became king on his father's death.
There was a family priest of his father's who had been removed from his
post, and being very poor lived in an old house.
One night it happened that the king was walking about the city in
disguise, to explore it. Some thieves, their work done, had been drinking
in a wine-shop, and were carrying some m—ore liquor home in a jar. They
spied him there in the street, and crying "Halloo, who are you ? " they
knocked him down, and took his upper robe ; then, they picked up their
jar, and offthey went, scaring him the while.
The aforesaid brahmin chanced at the time to be in the street ob-
serving the constellations. He sawhow thekinghad fallen into unfi-iendly
hands, and called to his wife quickly she came, asking what it was. Said
;
he^, "Wife, our king has got into the hands of his enemies!" "Why,
1 No. 456.
^ sa isamistake forso.

No. 289. 291
your reverence," said she, "what, dealings have you with the king? His
brahmins will see to it." This the king heard, and, going on a little,
—
called out to the rascals, " I'm a poor man, masters take my robe and
let me go!" As he said this again and again, they let him go out
of pity. He took note of the jdace they lived in, and turned back
again.
Said the brahmin to his wife, "Wife, our kinghas got away from the
hands of his enemies !" The king heard this as before ; and entered his
palace.
When dawn came, the king summoned his brahmins, and asked tliem
a question.
"Have you been takingobservations1 "
" Yes, my lord."
"Was it lucky or unlucky V •
" Lucky, my lord."
"No eclipse? "
"No, my lord, none."
Said the king, "Go and fetch me the brahmin from such and such a
house," giving them directions.
So they fetched the old chaplain, and the king proceeded to question
him. [428]
"Did you take observations last night, master V
"Yes, my lord, I did."
"Was there any eclipse1 "
"Yes, my lord : last night you fell into the hands of your enemies,
and in a moment you got free again."
The king said, "That is the kind of man a star-gazer ought to be."
He dismissed the other brahmins he told the old one that he was pleased
;
with him, and bade him ask a boon. The man asked leave to consult
with his family, and the king allowed him.
The man summoned wife and son, daughter-in-law and maidservant,
and laid the matter before them. "The king has granted me a boon
;
what shall I ask ? "
Said the wife, " Get me a hundred milch kine."
The son, named Chatta, said, "For me, a chariot drawn by fine lily-
white thoroughbreds."
Then the daughter-in-law, " For me, all manner of trinkets, earrings
set with gems, and so forth ! "
And the maidservant (whose name was Punna), "For me, a pestle and
mortar, and a winnowing basket."
The brahmin himself wanted to have the revenue of a village as his
boon. So when he returned to the king, and the king wanted to know
whether his wife had been asked, the brahmin replied, " Yes, my lord
19—2

— —
"
292 Tlie Jataka. Booh III.
king ; but those who are asked are not all of one mind"; and he repeated
a couple ofstanzas :
"We live in one house, O king,
B
M
u
y
t
w
w
i
e
fe'
d
s
on
w
'
i
t
sh
al—l
a
wa
h
n
u
t
nd
t
r
h
e
e
d
s
k
a
i
m
n
e
e
thing.
A prosperous village is mine ;
The student's of course is a c ; arriage and horses.
Our girl wants an earring fine.
While poor little Puniia, the maid,
Wants pestle and mortar, she said !
"All right," said the king, "they shall all have what they want"; and
—
repeated the remaining lines : [429]
"Give a hundred kine to the wife,
To the goodman a village for life.
And a jewelled earring to the daughter
A carriage and j^air be the student's sha : re.
And the maid gets her pestle and mortar^"
Thus the king gave the brahmin what he wished, and great honour
besides and bidding him thenceforward busy himself about the king's
;
business, he kept the brahmin in attendance upon himself.
When the Masterhad ended thisdiscourse,he identifiedthe Birth
:
"At that
time the Brahmin was Ananda, but the king was I myself"
No. 290.
SiLA-VIMAMSA-JATAKA
2.
—
" Virtue is lovely" etc. This story the Master told at Jetavana, about a
brahmin who put his reputation to the test. The circumstances which gave
rise to it, and the story itself, are both given in the Silavimamsa Birth-tale, in
the First Book. Here, as before
When Brahniadatta was king of Benares, his chaplain resolved to test
his own reputation for virtue, and on two days abstracted a coin from the
1 Ihopetheindulgentreaderwill pardon the rime.
" Compare Nos. 86, 290, .305, 330, 3G2.

—
"
No. 290. 293
Treasurer's counter. On the third day they dragged him to the king, a>id
accused him oftheft. On the way he noticed some snake-charmers making
a snake dance. The king asked him what he had done sucli a thing for.
The brahmin re{)lied, "To try my reputation f9r virtue" and went on
:
"Virtue is lovely—so tlic people deem
Virtue in all the world is held supreme.
Behold ! this deadly snake they do not slay,
'For he is good,' they say.
[430] "Here I proclaim how virtue is all-blest
And lovely in the world whereof possest
He that is virtuous cvei' : more is said
Perfection's path to tread.
"To kinsfolk dear, he shines among his friends;
And when his union with the body ends,
He that to practise virtue has been fain
In heaven is born again."
Having thus in three stanzas declared—the beauty of virtue and
discoursed to them, the Bodhisatta went on "Great king, a great deal
hasbeen given to you by my family, my father's property, my mother's,
and what I have gained myself : there is no end to it. But I took these
coins from the treasury to try my own value. Now I see how worthless
in this world is birth and lineage, blood and family, and how much the
best is virtue. 1 will embrace the i-eligious life; allow me to do so !
After many entreaties, the king at last consented. He left the world, aud
retired to Himalaya, where he took to the religious life, and cultivated the
Faculties and the Attainments until he came to Brahma's world.
"When the Masterhad ended this discourse, he identified the Birth "At that
:
time the Brahman chaplain who tried his reputation for \irtue was 1 myself"
No. 291.
BHADllA-GHATA-JATAKA.
[431] "A ne'er-do-welldidonce," eic—This story the Master told at Jctavana,
about a nephew of Anathapindika. This person had stpiandercd an inheritance
offorty crores ofgold. Then he visited his uncle,who gave him athousand, and
bade him trade with it. The man squandered this, and then came again ; and

—
294 The Jataka. Book III.
oncemore he was given five hundred. Havingsquandered this hke the rest,next
time his uncle gave him two coarsegarments ; and when he had worn these out,
and once more appHed, his uncle had him taken by the neck and tm-ned out
ofdoors. The fellow was helpless, and fell down by a side-wall and died. They
dragged him outside and threw him down there. Anathapindika went and told
the Buddha what had happened to his nephew. Said the Master, "How could
you expect to satisfy the man whom I long ago failed to satisfy, even when I
gave him the Wishing Cup?" andathis request,he proceeded to tellhim an old-
world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born as a rich merchant's son and after his father's
;
death, took his place. In his house was buried a treasure of four hundi'ed
million. He had an only son. The Bodhisatta gave alms and did good
until he died, and then he came to life again as Sakka, king of the gods.
His son proceeded to make a pavilion across the road, and sat down with
many friends round him, to drink. He paid a thousand pieces to runners
and tumblers, singers and dancers, and passed his time in drinking,
gluttony, and debauchery he wandered about, asking onlyfor song, music,
;
and dancing, devoted to his boon-companions, sunk in sloth. So in a short
time he squandered all his treasure of four hundred millions, [432] all his
pi'operty, goods, and furniture, and got so poor and miserable that he had
to go about clad in rags.
Sakka, as he meditated, became aware how poor he was. Overcome
with love for his son, he gave him a Wishing Cup, with these words
:
"Son, take care not to break this cup. So long as you keep it, your
wealth will never come to an end. So take good care of it ! " and then he
returned to heaven.
After that the man did nothing but drink out ofit. One day, he was
drunk, and threw the cup into the air, catching it as it fell. But once he
missed it. Down it fell upon the earth, and smashed ! Then he got poor
again, and went about in rags, begging, bowl in hand, till at last he lay
down by a wall, and died.
When the Master had finished this tale, he went on :
"A ne'er-do-well did once a Bowl acquire,
A Bowl that gave him all his heart's desire.
And of this Bowl so long as he took care,
His fortunes were all fair.
"When, proud and drunken, in a careless hoiu",
He broke the Bowl that gave him all this power,
Naked, poor fool! in rags and tatters, he
Fell in great misery.

:
No. 291. 295
"Not otherwise whoso great fortune owes,
But in tlio enjoying it no nicusuro knows, —
Is scorched anon, even as the knave—poor soul!
That broke his Wishing Bowl."
Repeating these stanzas in liis perfect wisdom, lie identified tlie Birth : "At
that time Anathapindika's nephew was the rascal'who broke the Lucky Cup,
but I myselfwas Sakka."
No. 292.
SUPATTA-JATAKA
'.
—
[433] ^^Here, in Benares citi/," etc. This story the Master told in .Tctavana,
about a meal of rice mixed with new ghee, with red tish to flavour it, which was
given by Elder Sariputta to Bimbadevi. The circumstances are like those given
above in the Abbhantara Birth-tale^. Here too the holySisterhad a pain in the
stomach. The excellent Rahula told the Elder. He seated llahula in his
waiting-room, and went to the king toget the rice, red fish and new ghee. The
lad gave it to the holy sister, his mother. No sooner had she eaten than the
pain subsided. The king sent messengers to make enquiries, and after that
always sent her thatkind of food. One day they began to talk about it in the
Hall of Truth: "Friend, the Captain of the Faith satisfied the Sister with such
and such food." The Mastercame in, and asked what they were talking about
they told him. Said he, "This is not the first time, Brother, that Sariputta has
given Rahula's mother what she wanted ; he did the same before." So saying,
he told an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king in Benares, the Bodhi-
sattawasbornasaCrow. Hegrew up,andbecamechief ofeightytliousand
crows, a Crow king, by name, Supatta, or Fairwing ; and bis chief mate
went by the name of Suphassa or Softie, his chief Captain was called
—
Sumukho Prettybeak. With his eighty tliousand subjects, he dwelt hard
by Benares.
One day he and his mate in search of food passed over the king's
kitchen. The king's cook had been preparing a host of dishes, ofall sorts
of fish, and he had uncovered the dishes for a moment, to cool them.
Queen Ci"OW smelt the odour of the food, and longed for a bit. But that
day she said nothing.
' Folk-lore Journal, 3. 8(30.
•* No. 281, above.

" ;;
296 The Jataka. Book III.
However the next day, when King Crow proposed that they should go
a-feeding, she said, "Go by yourself there's something I want very
:
much
!
"What is it1" asked he.
"I want some of the king's food to eat [434] and as I can't get it, I
;
am going to die."
The Crow sat down to think. Prettybeak approached him and asked
if anything had displeased him. King Crow told him what it was. "Oh,
that'll be all right," said the Captain ; and added, to console them both,
"you stay where you are to-day, and I'll fetch the meat."
So he gathered the Crows together, and told them the matter. "Now
come, and let's get it !" said he ; and offthey all flew together to Benares.
He posted them in companies here and there, near the kitchen to watch
and he, with eight champions, sat on the kitchen roof. While waiting
for the king's food to be served, he gave his directions to these "When
:
the food is taken up, I'll make the man drop the dishes. Once that is
done there's an end of me. So four of you must fill your mouths with
the I'ice, and four with the fish, and feed our royal pair with them ; and if
they ask where I am, say I'm coming."
Well, the cook got his various dishes all ready, hungthemonabalance-
pole, and went off towards the king's rooms. As he passed through the
court, the Crow Captain with a signal to his followers flew and settled
upon the carrier's chest, struck him with extended claws, with his beak,
sharp as a spear-point, pecked the end of the man's nose, and with his
two feet stopped up hisjaws.
The king was walking up and down upon an upper floor, when looking
out of a large window he saw what the crow was doing. He hailed the
—
carrier: " Hullo you, down with the dishes and catch the crow!" so
the man dropt the dishes and caught the crow tight.
"Come here " cried the king.
!
Then the crows ate all they wanted, [435] and picked Tip the rest as
they had been told, and carried it off. Next all the others flocked up,
and ate what remained. The eight champions gave it to their king and
queen to eat. The craving of Softie was appeased.
The servant who was cariying the dinner brought his crow to the
king.
"O Crow!" said he, "you have shown no respect for me! you have
broken my servitor's nose you have smashed my dishes you have
! !
recklessly thrown away your life ! What made you do such things? "
Answered the Crow, " great king Our king lives near Benares,
!
and I am captain of his forces. His wife (whosename is Softie) conceived
a great longing, and wanted a taste of your food. Our king told me what
she craved. At once I devoted my life. Now I have sent her the food

—
:
No. 292. 2U7
my desire is acconi[)lisheci. This is the reason wliy I acted as T did."
And to explain the matter, lie said
"Here in Benares city, O great king,
There dwells a king of Crows that hight Fairwing;
Who was attended by a following
Of eighty thousand Crows.
"Softie, his mate, had one o'ermastering wish
She craved a supper of the king's own fish.
—
Fresh caught, cooked in his kitchen, such a dish
As to kings' tables goes.
"You now behold me as their messenger;
It was my royal master sent me here;
And for that I my monarch do revere
I wounded that man's nose."
[436] When the king heard this, he said, "Wc do great honour to
men, and yet cannot make friends of them. Even though wc make
presents of such things as a whole village, we can find no one willing
to give his life for us. But this creature, crow as he is, sacrifices life for
his king. He is very noble, sweet-speaking, and good." He was so
pleased with the ci'ow's good qualities that he did him the honour of
giving him a white umbrella. But the crow saluted the king with this,
his own gift, and descanted upon the virtues of Fairwing. The king sent
for him, and heard his teaching, and sent them both food of the same soi-t
as he ate himself; and for the rest of the crows he had cooked each day
a large measure of rice. He himself walked according to the monition
of the Bodhisatta, and protecting all creatures, practised virtue. The ad-
monitions ofFairwing the crow were remembered for seven hundred yeai-s.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth: "At
thattime the king was Ananda, the Captain was Sariputta, but Supatta was I
myself."
No. 293.
KAYA-VICCHINDA-JATAKA.
—
''Downsmitten witha direful illness" etc. This story the Master told atJcta-
vana about a certain man. We learn that there lived at Savatthi a man
tormented byjaundice, given up by the doctors as a hopeless case. His wife and

! :
298 The Jcitaka. Book III.
son wondered who could be found to cure him. The man thought, "If I can
only get rid of this disease, I will take to the religious life." Now it happened
that some days after he took something that did him good, and got well. Then
he went to Jetavana, and asked admission into the Order. He received the
lesser and greater ordei's from the Master, and before long attained to sainthood.
One day after this the brethren were talking together in the Hall of Truth
"Friend, So and so hadjaundice, andvowedthat ifhegotwell he would embrace
thereligious life; he did so, and now he has attained sainthood." The Master
came in, and askedwhat they talked about, sitting there together. [437] They
told him. Then he said : "Brothers, this is not the only man who has done so.
Long ago wise men, recovering from sickness, embraced a religious life, and
seciu"ed their own advantage." And he told an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born in a Brahmin family. He grew up, and began to amass
wealth : but he fell sick of the jaundice. Even the physicians could do
nothing for him, and his wife and family were in despair. He resolved
that if he ever got well, he would embrace the religious life; and having
taken something that did him good, he did get well, whereupon he went
away to Himalaya and became a religious. He cultivated the Faculties
and the Attainments, and dwelt in ecstatic happiness. "All this time,"
thought he, "I have been without this great happiness!" and he breathed
out this aspiration
:
"Down smitten with a direful illness, I
In utter torment and affliction lie,
My body quickly withers, like a flower
Laid in the sun upon the dust to dry.
"The noble seems ignoble, and pure the impure seems.
He that is blind, all beautiful a sink of foulness deems.
"Shame on that sickly body, shame, I say.
Loathsome, impure, and full of foul decay
When fools are indolent, they fail to win
New birth in heaven, and wander from the way."
[438] Thus did the Great Being describe in various ways the nature
of impurity and constant disease, and being disgusted with the body and
all its parts, cultivated all his life the four excellent conditions of life,
till he went to Brahma's world.
When the Master — had ended this discourse, he proclaimed the Truths, and
identified the Birt—h many were they who attained the fruition of the First
Path, and so forth "At that time I myselfwas the ascetic."

—
No. 294. 2y'J
No. 294.
JAMBU-KHADAKA-JATAKA'.
—
" Who is it sits" etc. This story the Master told at tlie Bamboo-grove, about
Devadatta and Kokalika. At the time when Devadatta began to lose his
gettings and his repute, Kokalika wont from house to house, saying, "Elder
Devadatta is born of the line of the First Greiit King, of the royal stock of
Okkaka^, by an uninterrupted noble descent, versed in all the scriptvu'cs, full of
ecstatic sanctity, sweet ofspeech, a preacher ofthe law. Give to the Elder, liclp
him!" In these words he praised up Devadatta. On the other hand, Deva-
datta praised up Kokalika, in such words as these: "Kokrdika comes from a
northern brahmin family; he follows the religious life; he is le<vrned in doctrine,
a preacher of the law. Give to Kokalika, help him!" So they went al)out,
praising each other, and getting fed in different houses. One day the brothers
began to talk about it in the Hall of Truth. "Friend, Devadatta and Kokalika
go about praising each other for virtues which they haven't got, and so getting
food." The Master came in, and asked what they were talking aboutas they sat
there. They told him. Said he, "Brethren, this is not the iirst tiine that these
men have got food by praising each other. Long ago they did the same," and
he told them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
A
Bodhisatta became a tree-sprite in a certain rose-apple grove. ['^39]
Crow perched upon a branch ofhis tree, and began to eat the fruit. Then
came a Jackal, and looked up and spied the Crow. Thought he, "If I
flatter this creature, perhaps I shall get some of the fruit to eat " So iu
!
flattery he repeated the first stanza :
"Who is it sits in a rose-apple tree
Sweet singer! whose voice trickles gently to me?
Like a young peacock she coos with soft grace,
And ever sits still in her place."
The Crow, in his praise, responded with the second
:
"He that is noble in breeding and birth
Can praise others' breeding, knows what they are worth.
Like a young tiger thou seemest to be:
Come, eat. Sir, what I give to thee!"
With these words she shook the branch and made some fruit drop.
' Compare No. 295, andjEsop's fable oftheFox and the Crow.
^ Afabulousking, the same asIkshvaku. See refif. in J. P. T. S. 1888, p. 17.

! ;
300 The Jataka. Book III.
Then the spirit of the tree, beholding these two eating, after flattering
each other, repeated the third stanza
:
"Liars foregathei-, I very well know.
Hero, for example, a carrion Crow,
And corpse-eating Jackal, with puerile clatter
Proceed one another to flatter!"
After repeating this stanza, the tree-sprite, assuming a fearful shape,
scared them both away.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he summed up the Birth-tale
"Atthat time the Jackal was Devadatta, the Crow was Kokalika, but the Spirit
ofthe Tree was I myself."
No. 295.
ANTA-JATAKA^
—
"Like to a hull" etc. [440] This is another story told by the Master in the
same place and about the same people. The circumstances are the same as
before.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was kingof Benares, the Bodhi-
satta became the spirit of a castor-oil-tree which stood in the approach to
a certain village. An old ox died in a certain village ; and they dragged
the carcase out and threw it down in the grove ofthese trees by the village
gate. A Jackal came and began to eat its flesh. Then came a Crow,
and perched upon the tree. When she saw the Jackal, she cast about
whether by flatteiy she could not get some ofthis carcase to eat. And so
she repeated the first stanza :
"Like to a bull your body seems to be.
Like to a lion yoiu* activity.
king of beasts ! all glory be to thee
Please don't forget to leave a bit for me."
1 Folk-LoreJournal, 3. 363. CompareNo. 294.

—
""
No. 295. 301
On hearing this the Jackal i*epeated the second :
"They that of gentle birth and breeding l)e
Know how to praise the gentle worthily,
Crow, whose neck is like the peacock's neck.
Come down from oflF the tree and, take a peck!
The Tree-spirit, on seeing this, repeated the third :
"The lowest of all beasts the Jackal is,
The Crow is lowest of all birds y-wis.
The Castor-oil of trees the lowest tree:
And now these lowest things are here all three
I
[441] "When the Master had ended this discourse he identified the Birth
:
"At thattime Devadatta was the Jackal, Kokfdika was the Crow, but the Tree-
spirit was I myself.
No. 296.
SAMUDDA-JATAKA\
—
"Over the salt sea wave," etc. This story the ]\Iaster told at Jetavana, about
Elder Upananda. This man was a great eater and drinker; there was no
satisfying him even with cartloads of provisions. During the rainy season he
would pass his time at two or three different settlements, leaving his shoes in
one, his walking-stick in another, and his water-jar in a third, and one he lived
in himself. When he visited a country monastery, and saw the brothers with
their requisites all ready, he began to talk about the four classes of contented
ascetics'^; laid hold of their garments, and made them ]Mck up rags from the
dust-heap; made them take earthen bowls, and give him any bowls that he
fancied and their metal bowls ; then he filled a cart with them, anil carried
them oft' to Jetavana. One day people began to talk in the Hall of Truth.
"Friend, Upananda of the Sakka clan, a gi-eat eater, a greedy fellow, has l)een
preaching religion to other people, and here he comes with acartful of priests'
property!" The Master came in, and wanted to know what they were talking
of as they sat there. They told him. "Brethren," said he, "lTi)ananda has
gone wi'ong before by talking about this contentment. But a man ought finst
of all to become modest in his desires, before praising the good behaviour of
other people.
"Yourself first stablish in propriety.
Then teach ; the wi.se should not self-seeking be."
1 Folk-LoreJournal, 3. 328.
2 See Childers, p. 56h. The reclusewho is contented with the robes prcsentoil to
him,withthefood, with the bedding, andhewho delights in meditation.

302 The Jcltaka. Book III.
Pointing out this verse from the Dhammapadai, and blaming Upananda, he
went on, "This is not the iirst time, Brethren, that Upananda has been greedy.
Longago, he thought even the water in the ocean oughtto be saved." And he
tohl an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhi-
satta became a Sea-spirit. Now it so happened that a Water-crow was
passing over the sea. He went flying about, and trying to check the
shoals ofiish and flocks of birds, crying,
"Don't drinktoo much of the sea-water
!
be careful ofit !" [442] On
seeing him, the Sea-spirit I'epeated the first stanza :
"Over the salt sea wave who flie.s?
Who checks the shoals of fish, and tries
The monsters of the deep to stay
Lest all the sea be drunk away?"
The Water-crow heard this, and answered with the second stanza :
"A drinker never satisfied
So people call me the world wide.
To drink the sea I fain would try,
And drain the lord of rivers dry."
On hearing which the Sea-spirit repeated the third
:
"The ocean ever ebbs away.
And fills again the selfsame day.
Who ever knew the sea to fail?
To drink it up can none avail!"
With these words the spirit assumed a terrible shape and frightened
the Water-crow away.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth "At
:
that time, Upanandawas the Water-crow, but the Spirit was I myself"
No. 297.
KAMA-VILAPA-JATAKA.
—
" bird, thatfliest" etc. This story the Master told at Jetavana, about a
man who pined for his former wife. The circumstances which called it forth
are^ explained in the Puppharatta Birth-tale^, and the tale of the past in
the Indriya Birth-tale*.
1 Verse 158. ^ Reading kathitam.
3 No. 147 above, vol. i. page312. * No. 423.

:
No. 297. 303
So the man was impaled alive. As he hung there, he looked up and
saw a crow flying through the air ; and, nought recking of the liitter
pain, he hailed the crow, to send a message to his dt-ar wife, repeating
these verses following
:
"0
bird, that flicst in the sky!
T O el w l in m g y ed wi l f ) e i , rd, wi t t h h at th fl i i g e h st s l s i o igh fai ! r :
Long will seem the time to her.
"She knows not sword and sjicar are set
Full wroth and angry she will fret.
That is my torment and my fear,
And not that I am hanging here.
"My lotus-mail I have put by,
And jewels in my pillow lie,
And soft Benares cloth beside.
With wealth let her be satisfied."
[444] With these lamentations, he died.
When the Master had ended this discourse, he declared the Truths, and
identified the Birth (now at the conclusitMi of the Truths, the lovesick brother
attained the fruition ofthe First Path) "The wife then was the wife now but
: ;
the spirit who saw this, was I myself."
No. 298.
UDUMBARA-JATAKA\
—
"Ripe are the Jigs," etc. This story the Master told at Jetavana, about a
certain Brother, who had made a hermitage to live in at a certain village on the
frontier. This delightful dwelling stood upon a flat rock ; a little well-swept
spot, with enough water to make itpleasant, a village close at hand to go yoiu"
rounds in, and friendly people togive food. A Brother on his rounds arriveil at
this place. The Elder who lived in it did the duties of host to the new arrival,
and next day took him along with him for his rounds. The people gave him
food, and invited him to visit tliem again next day. After the new-comer iiad
thus fared a few days,he meditated by what means he ccnild oust the other [445]
and gethold ofthe hermitage. Once when lie had come- towait upon the Eider,
heasked, "Have you ever visited the Buddha, friend/" "Why no, Sir
;
there's
' Folk-LoreJouriuil, 3. 255.
2 Readingugantvd (which is surelyri^'ht).

: : !; " " ;
304 The Jcitaka. Booh III.
no onehere tolookafter my hut, or I should have gone before." "Oh, I'll look
afterit whileyou are gone to visit the Buddha," said the new-comer ; and so the
ownerwent, after laying injunctions upon the villagers to take care of the holy
Brother until his return. The new-comer proceeded to backbite his host, and
hinted to the villagers all sorts of faults in him. The other visited his Master,
and returned but the new-comer refused him harbourage. Hefound a place to
abide in, and ; next day went on his rounds in the village. But the villagers
would not do their duty by him. He was much discouraged, and went back to
Jetavana, where he told the Brethren all about it. They began to discuss the
matter in their Hall of Truth : "Friend, Brother So-and-so has turned Brother
So-and-so out ofhis hermitage, and taken it for himself ! " The Master came in,
and wanted to know what they were discussing as they sat there. They told
him. Said he, "Brethren, this is not the first time that this man turned the
other out ofhis dwelling;" and he told them an old-world tale.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta became a Tree-spirit in the woods. At that time during the
rainy season rain used to pour down seven days on a stretch. A certain
small red-faced Monkey lived in a rock-cave sheltered from the rain. One
day he was sitting at the mouth ofit, in the dry, quite happy. As he sat
there, a big black-faced Monkey, wet through, perishing with cold, spied
him. "How can I get that fellow out, and live in his hole?" he
wondered. Puffing out his belly, and making as though he had eaten
a good meal, he stopped in front of the other, and repeated the first
stanza
"Ripe are the figs, the banyans good,
And ready for the Monkey's food.
Come along with me and eat
Why should you for hunger fret?
[44G] Redface believed all this, and longed to have all this fruit to eat.
So he went off, and hunted here, and hunted there, but no fruit could he
find. Then he came back again ; and there was Blackface sitting inside
his cave ! He determined to outwit him ; so stopping in front he repeated
the second stanza
"Happy he who honour pays
To his elders full of days
Just as happy I feel now
After all that fruit, I vow !
The big monkey listened, and repeated the third :
"When Greek meets Greek, then comes the tug of war
A monkey scents a monkey's tricks afar.
Even a young one were too sharp by half;
But old birds never can be caught with chaff."
The other made off.

No. 298. 305
When the Master ended this discourse, he summed up the birth-tale: "At
that time the owner of the hut was tlie little monkey, the interloper was the
bigblack monkey, but the Tree-spirit was I myself."
No. 299.
KOMAYA-PUTTA-JATAKA\
—
[447] "Aforetime you were used" etc. This story the I\Iaster told in Pub-
barama, about some Brethren who were rude and rough in their manners. These
Brethren, who lived on the floor below that where the Master was, talked of
what they had seen and heard, and werequarrelsome and abusive. The Ma.ster
called Mahamoggallana to him, and bade him go startle them. The Elder rose in
the air, and just touched the foundation of the house with his great toe. It
shook to the furthest edge of ocean The Brothers were frightened to death,
!
and came and stood outside. Their rough behaviour became known among the
Brethren. One day they got to talkingabout it in the Hall ofTruth. "Friend,
there are some Brethren who have retired to this house of salvation, who are
rough and rude they do not see the impermauence, sorrow and imreality of the
;
world, nor do their duty." The Mastercame in, and asked what they were dis-
cussing as they sat there. They told him. "This is not the first time.
Brethren," said he, "that they have been rough and rude. They were thesame
before." And he told them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta reigned king in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born as a brahmin's son in a village. They named him
Komayaputta. By and bye he went out and embraced the religious life in
the region of Himalaya. There were some frivolous ascetics who had
made a hermitage in that region, and there they lived. But they did not
take the means to induce religious ecstasy. They fetched the fruits from
the woods, to eat ; then they spent the time laughing and joking togctiior.
They had a monkey, rude-mannered like themselves, which gave them
endless amusement by his giimaces and antics.
Long they lived in this place, till they had to go amongst men again to
get salt and condiments. After they went away, the Bodhisatta lived in
their dwelling-place. The monkey played his pranks for him as he had
done for the others. The Bodhisatta suapt his fingers at him, and gave
him a lecture, saying, "One who lives with well-trained ascetics [448]
' Folk-Lore Journal, 3. 254.
20
J. 11.

; ;
306 The Jdtaka. Book III.
ought to behave properly, ought to he well-advised in his actions, and
devoted to meditation." After that, the monkey was always virtuoiis and
well-behaved.
After this, the Bodhisatta moved away. The other ascetics returned
with their salt and condiments. But the monkey no longer played his
pranks for them. "What's this, my friend V they asked. "Why don't
you make sport, as you used to do?" One of them repeated the first
stanza
"Aforetime you were used to play
Where in this hut we hermits stay.
O monkey as a monkey do
When you ! are good we love n ; ot you."
On hearing this, the Monkey repeated the second stanza
"All perfect wisdom by the word
Of wise Komaya I have heard.
Think me not now as I was late
Now 'tis my love to meditate."
Hereupon the anchorite repeated the third
:
"If seed upon the rock you sow,
Though rain should fall, it will not grow.
You may hear perfect wisdom still
But meditate you never will."
[449] When the Master had ended this discourse, he declared the Truths,
and identified the Birth "At that time these Brothers were the frivolous
:
anchorites, but Komayaputta was I myself."
No. 300.
VAKA-JATAKA'.
—
[449] "The uvlfivhotakes" etc. Thisstorythe MastertoldatJetavana, about
old friendship. The circumstances were the same in detail as in the Vinaya^;
this is an abstract of them. The reverend Upasena, a two-years' man, visited
1 Mahuvagga, i. 31. 3 foil. (tran.s. in S. B. E., i. p, 175); Folk-Lore Journal,
3. 359 ; Morris, Contemp. Rev. xxix. 739.

—
;
No. 300. 307
the Master along with a first year's man who lived in the same monastery
the Master rebuked him, and ho retired. Havingacquired spiritual insight, and
attained to sainthood, having got contentment and kindred virtues, having
undertaken the Thii'teen Practices of a Recluse, and taught tlicm to his fellows,
while the Blessed Onewas secluded forthreemonths,he withliishretiiren,having
accepted the blame first given for wrong speech apd nonconformity, receivoil in
the second instance approval, in.the words, "Henceforth, let any lirotliers visit
me when they will, provided they follow the Thirteen Practices of a Recluse."
Thus encouraged, he returned and told it to the Brethren. After that, the
brothers followed these practices before comingto visit the Master then, when
;
he hadcomeout fromhis seclusion, theywoulil throwawaytheir old rags and put
on clean garments. As the IMaster with all the body ofthe Brethren went round
to inspect the rooms, [450] he noticed these rags lying about, and asked what
they were. When they told him, he said, "Brethren, the practice nntlertaken
by these brothers is short-lived, like the wolfs holy day service"; and he told
them an old-world tale.
Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta reigned king in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life as Sakka, king of the gods. At that time a Wolf
lived on a rock by the Ganges bank. The winter floods came up and
surrounded the rock. There he lay upon the rock, with no food and no
way of getting it. The water rose and rose, and the wolf pondered : "No
food here, and no way to get it. Here I lie, with nothing to do. I may
as well keep a sabbath feast." Thus resolved to keep a sabbath, as he lay
he solemnly resolved to keep the religious precepts. Sakka in his medita-
tions perceived the wolf's weak resolve. Thought he, "I'll plague that
wolf"; and taking the shape of a wild goat, he stood near, and let the
wolfsee him.
" I'll keep Sabbath another day ! " thought the Wolf, as he spied him ;
up he got, and leapt at the creature. But the goat jumped about so that
the Wolf could not catch him. When our Wolf saw that he could not
catch him, he came to a standstill, and went back, thinking to himself as
he lay down again, " Well, my Sabbath is not broken after all.''
Then Sakka, by his divine power, hovered above in the air; said he,
" What have such as you, all unstable, to do with keeping a Sal^bath?
Youdidn't knowthat Iwas Sakka,and wanted a meal ofgoat's-flesh
!
" and
thus plaguing and rebuking him, he returned to the world ofthe gods.
"The wolf, who takes live creatures for his food,
And makes a meal upon their flesh and blood,
Once undertook a holy vow to pay,
Made up his mind to keep the Sabbath day.
"When Sakka learnt what he resolved to do,
He made himself a goat to outward view.
Then the blood-bibber leaped to seize his prey.
His vow forgot, liis virtue cast away.

308 The Jdtaha. Book III.
[451] "Even so some persons in this world of ours,
That make resolves which are beyond their powers,
Swerve from their purpose, as the wolf did here
As soon as he beheld the goat appear."
When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth as
follows : "At that time I myselfwas Sakka."
END OF THE THIRD BOOK.

INDEX OF NAMES AND PALI WORDS.
*^* This Index contains all names of persons andplaces, real orlegendary (except
s d u o c c h um a e s nt i s n q t u h o e te S d to i r n ie t s he of te t x h t e ; P a a n s d t t a h r e e p m ar a a n l i l f e e l s s tl o y r i i n l v lu e s n t t r e a d t ) io ; ns al g l iv n e a n me i s n t o h f e li n t o e t r e a s r ; y
butit does notinclude thenames ofprevious translators ofany ofthe stories.
Aciravati, river65, 251 193, 194, 195, 197, 200,203, 205,207,
Aesop referredto 76, 285, 299 218, 219, 221, 223, 224, 227, 232,233,
Aggalava, shrineof 197 235, 238, 240,242, 244, 245, 246, 248,
Ajatasattu, aking 161, 165, 168, 275 261, 262, 264, 265, 267, 268,269, 271,
Alavi, a place 197 273, 274, 276, 280, 284, 285,287,288,
Ambalatower 170 290, 292, 294, 296, 297, 298,299,300,
Ananda 4, 1.^, 17, 18, 21, 22, 26, 28, 34, Bhadd 3 a 0 j 2 i , , 3 E 04 l , de 3 r 05 2 , 29 3 , 07 230, 231
36, 45, 52, 56, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 85, Bhaddiya, city229, 230
89, 94, 119, 122, 124, 142, 160, 170, Bhaggava 56
2 1 6 7 8 8, , 2 1 7 9 2 3, , 2 1 7 9 4 9, , 2 2 0 8 3 2 , , 2 2 1 8 5 6 , , 2 2 9 1 0 8 , ,2 2 2 9 0 2 , , 2 2 2 9 3 7 , Bharhut Stupa 60,106, 152,197,235, 237,
248
A A n n a a t n h d a a - , p a md t i is k h a 24 2 2 00, 239, 279, 280, 282, B B h h a u r m u m , aj ki a n , g, a c h i e ty r , et k ic in 2 g 6 d 4 om 119, 121
the 29 y 3 o , un 2 g 9 e 4, r 2 2 9 0 5 0 Bimba, Sister 267, 268, 295
Ang , a , , kingdom of148 Bimbisara, a king 164, 275
Anotatta, lake 63 Bodhisatta 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12, 16,17.
Anuruddha64, 87, 178, 260 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. 28 , 29,
Araka 43, 137 32, .33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 43,
Assaji, a heretic264 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 55,
Atharva Vedareferred to 101 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 62, 64, 66, 67, 68,
74, 75, 76, 79, 81, h2, 83, 84, 85, 86,
88, 90, 92, 93, 94, 96, 97, 98, 99, 101,
102, 103, 105, 106, 110, 111,113,114,
Babrius referred to 123 11.5, 117, 119, 121, 122, 123,124, 125,
Bamboo Grove (Veluvana) 26, 48, 67,85, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131,132, 133,
106, 113, 131,138, 140, 145, 154, 168, 134, 135, 138, 139, 140, 141, 143, 144,
172, 260, 299 146, 149, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157,
Benares 1, 3, 5, 8, 10, 11, 13, 19, 21, 23, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 165, 166, 167,
24, 28, 32, 33, 34, .35, 36, 39, 41, 44, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172,173,174,175,
46, 47, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 57, 59, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, l.s2, 183,186,
60, 62, 64, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 75, 76, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192,197,200,
79, 80, 81, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 92, 201, 202, 203, 205, 206, 207,20H,209,
93, 94,96, 97, 99, 101, 103, 104, 105, 218,219, 220, 221, 223, 224,227,228,
106, 111, 113, 114, 115, 117,121, 123, 229,232, 233, 236, 238, 239,240, 241,
125, 126, 127, 129, 131, 138, 139, 140, 244,245, 246, 247, 248, 250,251,253,
141,143, 145, 146, 149, 152, 153, 154, 260,261, 262, 263, 264, 265,267,268,
156, 157, 158, 159, 160,162, 163, 164, 273,274, 276, 280, 282, 2H4, 2H5,287,
165, 166, 168, 169, 171,172, 178, 179, 288,289, 290, 293, 294, 297, 298,299,
180, 182, 183, 184,186, 187,189, 190, 300, 302, 304, 305, 307

:
310 Index.
Book of the Knight de la Tour Landry Garula xx, 10, 11
referred to 92 Gayasisa26, 138
Bower MS. referred to 100 Gesta Eomanorumreferredto 92
Brahma29, 30, 31, 37, 39, 42, 43, 45, 48, Gotama 118, 151, 152, 172, 180, 182, 267,
51, 62, 92, 98, 153, 188, 193,199,220, 283, 284
229, 247, 285, 287, 293, 298 GotamI 142
Brahmadatta 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 10, 11, 19, 21, Grimm referred to 69, 207
23, 28, 34, 36, 39, 41, 44, 46, 47, 48, Guttila, the musician 172, 178
50, 51, 53, 55, 57, 59, 60, 64, 66, 68,
70, 75, 76, 79, 81, 85, 88, 92, 93, 94, Herodotus quoted 15
96, 97, 99, 101, 103, 105, 106, 111, Herondas quoted 127
113, 114, 115, 117, 121, 123,125, 126, Hesiodquoted 15
127, 129, 138, 140, 143, 145,152, 154, Himalaya 5, 8, 24, 28, 36, 38, 39, 43, 45,
156, 159, 160, 162,163,165, 168, 171, 47, 50, 51, 53, 59, 63, 70, 71, 75, 92,
172, 179, 180, 182, 183, 184, 186,187, 97, 110, 111, 119, 120, 123, 124, 129,
189, 193, 197, 200,203,205,218,221, 137, 138, 140, 159, 160,162, 168,179,
223, 224, 227, 232, 233,235,240, 245, 182, 187, 190, 191, 192, 193, 203,235,
246,248, 261, 262, 264, 267,268, 273, 246, 262,268,270, 271, 274, 280, 284,
276, 280, 284, 285, 287, 288, 290,292, 293, 298, 305
294, 298, 299, 300, 302, 304, 305, 307 Hitopadesareferredto 181
Buddha 11, 31, 37, 51, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58,
59, 64, 77, 91, 92, 97, 101, 103, 121, Indapatta, a city 149, 251, 252
127, 130, 137, 140,151,153, 161, 166, India, snepissime
172, 178, ISO, 182, 149, 199, 207,218, IndianNights'Entertainments quoted129
229, 230, 238, 251, 266,267,268,273, Isipatana, aplace nearBenares 243, 244
280, 282, 283, 284, 303, 304
Buddhaghoshareferredto 122 Jains, the 182
Buddha Kassapa 177 JanapadakalyanI63, 64
Buddhas, Seven 102 Janasandba, a legendaryking 207, 209
Jataka-Malareferred to 44, 262
Cariya-pitakareferredto 110, 251, 262 Jiitakas referred to in the text
^atapatha-brahmana referred to 12 Abbhantara295
Ceylon 89 Cullanaradakassapa 285
Cifica 85, 112 (Daddara, not byname75)
Cittakiita, Mount 74, 123 Gijjha 28
Cittalatji, a grove 133 ludriya 79
Cittaraja, agoblin 254 302
Cullavagga quoted or referred to 11, 17, Junha 290
26, 75, 100, 103, 110, 140, 168 Kaka 221
(Kalaya-mutthi, not by name 146)
Daddara, Mount 6, 46 Kalihga-bodhi 222
Dakkhinagiri, a place 237, 238 Kama 149
Dandaka 23, 24, 26 Khadirahga 279
Dantapura, city 252, 260 Mahabodhi 53
Dasaratha, a name 208 Mahasara 17
Devadatta26, 27, 28, 42, 48, 49, 68, 85, Mahasilava273
87, 103, 104, 106, 107, 110, 112, 113, Maha-ummagga 43, 53, 80
114, 131, 138, 139,140, 142, 145, 154, Mahilamukha 67
155, 165, 166, 167, 168, 170, 172,178, (Nakula, not by name 246)
262, 299, 300, 301 Nahguttha29
Dhammapada(oritsCommentary)referred (Pannika, not by name 126)
to 3, 65, 66, 115, 123, 177, 218, 241, Puppharatta 302
251, 257, 284, 302 Saketa57
Dhanafijaya, amerchant 239 (notbyname) 162
a legendary king 251, 252,
Sa,m,a34
,,
254 Samvara 13
Dhanuggahatissa, Elder275, 279 Sigala218
Divyavadanareferred to 118, 216, 229 Silavlmamsa 292
Suruci 231
Gagga 12 Takkariya 123
Gandhara32, 152, 153 244
Ganges 101, 105, 111, 179, 197, 229, 230, Tesakuna 1
233, 237, 246, 281, 288, 289, 307 Uddala 47
Ganges, theheavenly45 Ummadanti81
GarahitapitthiEock130 Ummagga, see Maha-ummagga

:
Index. 311
Jat U a r k a a g s a re 3 f 6 erredtoin the text {cont.) ; Jat K a o k s a i s ya tr 1 a 4 n ( s ) lated inthisbook (cont.)
(notbyname) 246 Kumbbila 145
,,
Jatakas translated in this book: Kundaka-kuccbi-sindliava 199
Abbhautara 267 Kuru-dhamma251
Kuruiiga-miga 106
Adiccupatthfina 50
Alma-citta 13 Kuta-vatiija 127
Labha-garaha287
Anabhirati 68
Anta 300 Lola 248
Araka42 Maccha 125
Macchudtlana 288
Arama-diisa 237 Maha-panfida 229
Asadisa 60 Maha-pingala 165
Asitabhu 158 Mahisa262
Assaka 108 Makkata 47
Baka 161 MandbVitu 216
Bandhanagara97 Mani-cora85
Bhadra-ghata293 Mani-kantha 197
Bharu 118 Mani-siikara 283
Catumatta 73 Mittamitta91
Culanandiya 140 Mora 23
Culla-paduma 81 Mudu-pani 224
CuUa-palobhana 227 Mula-pariyaya 180
Daddara 45 Nakula 36
Dadhivahana 69 Nanacchanda 290
Dhammadhaja 131 Pabbatupatthara88
Dubhiya-makkata48 Padafijali 183
Duddada59 Paduraa 222
Duta 221 Palayi 151
Dutiya-palayi153 Punua-nadi 121
Ekapada 163 Puta-bhatta 142
Gagga 11 Puta-dusaka 266
Crahapati 94 Radha92
Gamani-canda 207 Rajovada 1
Gaiigeyya 104 Romaka 260
Garahita 129 Rucira 250
Gijjha 34 Ruhaka 79
Giridanta 67 Sabba-datha 168
Guna 17 Sfidhu-siia 96
Gutba-pana 147 Srvketa 162
Guttila 172 Sakunagghi40
Harita-mata 164 Salaka 186
Indasamanagotta 28 Saluka285
Jambu-khildaka 299 Sariigilma-vacara 63
Jarudapana205 Sauiiddbi 3'.)
Kacchapa 55 Saiiikappa 189
123 Samvidda 301
246 Santhava 29
Kakantaka43 Sata-dhamma 57
Kakkara 112 Satapatta264
Kakkata235 Seggu 126
Kalaya-mutthi 51 Seyya 273
Kalyana-dhamma 44 Sigjlla 4
Kamanita 149 Siha-camma 76
Kamavilapa 302 Siha-kotthuka 75
Kandagalaka 113 Silanisarhsa77
Kapi 187 Slla-vimamsa 292
Kasava 138 Siri 279
Kaya-viccbinda 297 Siri-kalakanni 80
Kelisila9S Somadatta 115
Khandha-vatta 100 Sulianu 21
Khanti-vannana 145 Sujata 239
Khurappa 231 Suka 203
Kimsukopama 184 Sukara 7
Komayaputta 305 Sumsumara 110

:
312 Index.
Jatakasreferred to in thisbook {cont.) KhuddakaPatba quoted 280
Sunakha 170 Kitagiri, a place 264
Supatta295 Kitavasa, King 137
Susima 31 Kokalika 45, 46, 75, 76, 77, 123, 124, 244,
Telovada 182 245, 246, 299, 300, 301
Tila-mutthi 193 Kolita, a man 260
Tinduka 53 Komaya 306
Tirlta-vaccha 218 Kondanna clan 247
Ucchittha-bhatta 117 Kosala 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 16, 17, 51, 88, 89,
Udapana-dfisaka243 97, 118, 145, 146, 164, 200, 218, 246,
Udumbara 303 268, 273, 275
Uluka242 Kosala, a princess 275
Upahana 154 Kosiya ('owl'), name ofa clan 175
Upasalha37 Koti, a village 230
Uraga 9 Kuccana, a man 260
Vaccha-nakba 160 Kukkurovadareferred to 40
Vaddhaki-sukara 275 Kuru, a city 150
Vaka306 kingdom251
,,
Valahassa89
Valodaka 65 Lakuntaka, Elder98, 100
Vatagga-sindbava 233 Laludayi, Elder, see Udayi.
Vikannaka 157 Liccbavi4, 7
Vina-tbiina 156 Lohita, aheretic 264
Viuilaka 26
Viraka 103 Magadha 38, 148
Viticcha 178 Mahakassapa64, 197
Vyaggba244 Mahakosala, King 164, 275
Jatiyagrove 229 Mabamaya 17, 34, 98
Jeta, prince 152 Mahauama the Sakya54
Jetavana 7, 11, 13, 17, 21, 23, 28, 29, Mabasona 21
31, 36, 37, 40, 42, 44, 45, 47, 50, Mahavagga referredto230, 306
51, 55, 59, 60, 63, 64, 65, 68, 69, Mahavana 4
73, 75, 76, 77, 79, 88, 89, 92, 94, Mabavastu referredto 60, 62, 110, 112
96, 97, 98, 103, 104, 108, 112, 117, MaUians, the 65, 160
118, 119, 121, 123, 125, 126, 127, Mallika 2, 3
129, 138, 142, 145, 146, 147, 149, Manosila 63
151, 152, 153, 156, 157, 158, 160, Manu quoted 275
161, 163, 165, 170, 178, 183, 184, Mara 41, 167
186, 187, 193, 199, 200, 203, 205, M;\tali, charioteer ofSakka 176, 178
207, 216, 218, 221, 222, 223, 224, Matbura, carving at, identified as a Ja-
227, 231, 233, 235, 237, 242, 244, taka scene90
246, 248, 250, 251, 262, 264, 266, Maya260
267, 273, 275, 283, 285, 287, 288, Mettiya, aheretic 264
290, 292, 293, 295, 297, 298, 301, Milindareferredto 140, 168, 172, 216
302, 303, 306 Mithila, atown 27, 231
Jumna105 Moggallana 4, 7, 26, 64, 74, 107, 119, 183,
244, 245, 246, 268, 305
Kalinga, akingdom 252, 260
Kalyani, riverin Ceylon 90 Nagadlpa,islandoff Ceylon 90
Kamanita, a brahmin 149 Nalagiri, elephant 140, 168
Kamsa, King 274 Naiikera, islandof 121
Kapila 63 Nanda 63, 64, 65
Kasi 11, 39, 47, 48, 50, 59, 70, 71, 92, ,, aplace 137
94, 101, 103, 108, 115, 117, 121, 143, Nandaka'spreaching268
154, 164, 171, 179, 218, 246, 264, Nandana, agrove 133
268, 275, 280 Nandapandita, aman 260
Kassapa 13 Nataputtal82
„ Buddha 77, 177 Natbaputta 182, 183
the Elder260 Nerbudda, the 237
thetortoiseclan 247 New Testamentreferredto 77
Katti ,, ka, amonth 254 Nirvana 17, 26, 78, 91, 139, 184, 230, 282
„ feast254 North Indian Notes and Queries quoted
Kekaka, acity 149, 150 30, 72, 129, 132
Khandbakam 283
Khema24 Okkaka, a mythicalking299

:
Index. 313
Pacceka-buddha ,57, 137, 139, 231, 282 Sakyaclan(Sakiya,Sakka)11,267,283,301
Pali wordsexplained Samiddhi 39
agatigataiii 1 Samyutta Nikaya referred to 100
ahivataroga55, 206 Sanchi Tope 60, Addenda p. xx
ajambaradrum 237 Sariputta 4, 7, 17, 26, 27, 34, 36, 64, 74,
anakadrum 237 78, 103, 107, 110, 112, 119, IHH, 142,
afinaiii vyakaroti 230 183, 1!)'.(, 200, 203, 244, 245, 246,260,
asura (fallen angel) 99 262, 207, 268, 272, 287, 295, 297
caturaiigasamannagataiii 134 Satadhamnia 57
citta-pasada 59 Savatthi 9, 31, 44, 52, 55, 59, 65, 68, 91,
dija, 'twice-born,' of birds and brah- 104, 127, 138, 142, 151, 156, 158, 163,
mins 162 178, 189, 199, 205, 216,223, 229, 233,
gandhakuti 152 235, 251, 262, 264, 206, 268, 297
gandhapaficaiigulikarii 72 Senaka54
gavutaddhayojanaraatte 147 Seneca quoted 127
hetthamafica 286 Sihasenapati 182
-jamghakahapanfidigahanena 166 Simonides referred to 134
jataveda, 'fire' 226 Sineru, Mount 189
kakaguyha 122 Sirlsavatthu, agoblin town 89
kakapeyya 122, 302 Subhagavana Park 180
kalaghasa 181 Suddhodbana34, 98
kiiiisuka tree 184 Suhanu22
lakara, laukara 78 Sujata, alady 239, 240, 242
nakkbatta 194 Sundarl, a woman murdered by the
niisikavata 206 heretics 283, 284
iiatti 258 Suslma 32, 33, 34
peta (ghost) 99 Sutta Nipata referred to 196, 284
rajjugahakaamacca 257 Suttavibhaiiga referred to 197
salaka, aterm of abuse 186
siiratthi 257 Takkasila 2, 27, 32, 36, 47, 50, 59, 60, 68,
tindukatree 53 96, 121, 141, 152, 153, 189, 193, 195,
titthiya 182 196, 218, 221, 224, 241,251,273, 280,
Panada, alegendaryking 230, 231 290
Pancatantrareferredto79,81,83,123,285 Talmudreferred to 221
Panduka, aheretic264 TapodaPark 39
Paninireferred to 122 Tathagata 60, 140, 154, 163, 184, 251
Parasariya, abrahmin teacher 142 Tevijja-Sutta referred to 127
Pasenadi, King 11, 200, 275 TbC'rlgatha referred to 55
Phaedrusreferred to 123 Tibetan Tales referred to 80, 81, 216
Pitakas, the Three 172, 180 Tunisische Miirchen referred to 129
Platoreferred to 134
Potali, cityof108 Udanaquoted283
Pubbarama 305 Udayi, afoolish Elder 115, 116, 183, 184
Punabbasu, aheretic264 Ukkatthii, a place 180
Punna, a man 260 Upananda, Elder301, 302
Puiiiialakkhana, Lady 279, 280 Upasalha 37, 38
Pythagoreanscompared134 Upasena, a Brother 306
Uppalavanna, awoman 260
Questionsof Milindareferred to 140, 168, Utta, Elder 275
172, 216 Uttarapaficala, acity 149, 150
Eaghuvamsa quoted 32 Vacaspati's Dictionary quoted 122
Eahula 46, 48, 75, 98, 188, 268, 295 Vajira, princess 275
Eahula's mother 87, 98, 260, 268, 272, Vedas, the Three 30, 32, 33, 34, 60, 68,
295 69, 168, 180, 181, 287
Eajagaha38, 39, 138, 264 Vejayanta, Sakka'spalace 152
Eoja the Mallian 160, 161 Veluvana, see Bamboo Grove
Vesali, a place4, 180
Saketa, a place 162 Vessavana, 12, 271, 272
,, a name 162 Videha, kingdom of27, 28, 231
Sakka 63, 70, 87, 99, 100, 132, 133, 134, Vimana-vatthureferred to 175, 177, 178
135, 149, 150, 151, 152, 174, 175, 176, Vinaya mentioned 30()
177, 216, 217, 231, 259, 260, 269,294, Visfikha, alady 200, 239
295, 307, 308
Sakunovfvda-sutta40 Yama, gatekeeper ofhell 167
J. II. 21

INDEX OF MATTERS.
Accomplishments, Eighteen 60, 287 Discrepancybetweenversesandstory127,
Air, passing through the, a supernatural 155
power of ascetics 70, 71, 191, 192, Disease tricked by escaping through a
229 holein thewall 55
Alms foralms 57, 214 'Door' question, the 163
Alms-halls 83, 84, 252, 253 Dove's-foot nymphs 63
Alms, how not to give 31 Drum made ofa crab'sclaw 237
Alms-pilgrimage 230, 237
Archer'sgarb 61 Earning a living. Twenty-one unlawful
Army, its fourparts 66 ways 57
,, modes ofdrawing up 275 Ecstasies, Four 172
Ascetics, fourclasses ofcontented 301 Eighteen Accomplishments 60, 287
,,
Thu'teen Practicesof307 Eighteen Constituents ofBeing 184
Ascetic, sham 47, 139, 188, 261, 278 Eight StagesofKnowledge 180
Astrology 16, 127, 291 Elements ofBeing, Five184
Attainments, see Faculties and287 „ Four Principal 184
Elephant Festivals 32, 33, 34
Bath-money, aqueen'sallowance 164,275 manual 32, 33, 34
Being, FiveElementsof 184 ofState 16
,, Eighteen Constituents of 184 ,, with thornin its foot 14
Birth : immediate re-incarnation due to Eleven Blessings, 9, 42
keen desire, and brought aboutwith- Emendations suggested 1, 104, 167, 168,
outparents 264 174, 194, 197, 267, 290, 302, 303
Birth-fire30 Excellences, the four 29, 37, 39, 42, 43,
Blessings, Eleven 9, 42 48, 92, 102
Bodliisattapeculiar fromhis birth 228 Existence, three stages of56
,, tempted and sins 228, 265
Bonds, what are the real 228 FacultiesandAttainments, the31, 36, 38,
Buddha, attempts to injure 85, 106, 110, 39, 45, 50, 62, 92, 98, 108, 120, 159,
131, 140, 165, 166, 168, 172 188, 190, 199, 220, 229, 246,268, 280,
,, imitating of103, 113 293, 298
Fatewritten upon the forehead84, 195
Captain oftheFaith 7, 64, 112, 138, 200, Festivals 32, 254
268, 295 Fire lit at birth30
Carpenters, village of 14; theirtools and ,, sacred 30
mode of work 14 Five ElementsofBeing 184
Chinese funeral custom 25 Five Pleasures ofSense 41
City guards 98 Five Precepts, seePrecepts
Clan, tortoise 247 Five-spray garlands 72, 177
Commander-in-chief13 Five Virtues 44, 251, 252, 260
Constituents ofBeing, Eighteen 184 Flyinghorse 90
Conceptionbyeating fruit alluded to 269 Forehead, fatewritten upon84, 195
,, ceremoniesdone at 1 FourEcstasies 172
Coronation : fig-wood chair and three FourExcellences, see Excellences
shells usedin the ceremony 278 Four Great Kings 61, 62, 217
Cranes conceived at the sound of thunder FourPrincipalElements 184
249 Four SupernaturalPowers 216
'Crane's sleei?,' proverb fortrickery 162 FourVirtues, a man with 134, 145
Fourworlds ofmisery 98, 262
Disciples, fourclassesof7 Friends, which should beavoided 266

. ;
Index. 315
Gifts, rulesabout 18 Northern brahmin 57, 299
Goblins 12, S9, 103, 271 Nymphs63, 175, 177
Grain, measuringof258
GratefulBeasts, newform of35 Ordination 230, 298
Great Kenunciation 60 Owl clan 175
Hallof Truth 9, 21, 31, 44, 46, 48, 64, Palace ofSakka 132, 269
91, 112, 121, 140, 148, 154, 156, 157, Paths, the 9, 17, 21, 26, 31, 34, 36, 38,
159, 164, 166, 168,171, 182, 183, 186, 39, 42, 56, 58, 65, 69, 77, 78, 80,
187, 193, 200, 203, 207,216,223,224, 85, 91, 94, 95, 97, 98, 100, 110,
227, 240, 242, 243, 245,268,275, 295, 118, 125, 126, 130, 144, 158, 159,
298, 299, 301, 304, 305 163, 164, 188, 193, 196, 203, 205,
Headman, village 94 215, 218, 222, 22(;, 229, 230, 232,
Heaven, bywhat deedswon 177f. 250, 260, 268, 2H(), 290, 298, 303
,, oftheFour GreatKings217 Precepts, Five 4, 13, 25, 205
,, Brahma's, saepe Precious Things, the Seven 216
Hells, theFour 98, 262 Problems in folk-tales 207, 209
Hereditaryrights 32 Processions 16
Heretics31, 118, 119, 182, 264, 283
Hero's Tasks, new form of 131 Rain-maker 252
Refuges, Three4, 17, 44, 205
Imitating theBuddha, 103, 113 Release 9
Immortality won by eating a Golden Renunciation, Great 60
Peacock 25 Riddles 122, 130, 225, 269
Inscriptions,upongolden plates 24,255ff Robes for Buddhist priests, rules about
Insight 268 18
RoyalVirtues, ten 1, 273
Jains, the 182 Russian unpublishedvariant 110
Japanesevariant 110
Jewel ofserpent 197ff. Seven Precious Things 216
Judas tree 184, 185 Seven Treasures ofEmpire 268
Judgementsgiven 212f. Similes 155, 166, 191, 220, 229, 236, 284
Sin oftheBodhisatta 228, 265
Kalevalaquoted 1 Snake-charmer 186
King asrain-maker 252 Snakes' breath poisonous55, 206; Breeds
Kings dresslikethe gods252 of snakes 101 ; Charms against 101
'King's officer' 209 Guardiansof treasure214; Jewels in
Knowledge, Eight Stages of 180 theirheads 197ff.
Kururighteousness251 ff. Sneezing, an omen 11ff.
Spells23, 101, 168
Life-token 111, op. 279 Spirit of hill 82; river 288, 289 ; sea 78,
Lotusarmy 275 302; tree 105, 113, 148, 211, 245,
Luck 44, 127, 265, 279, 282, 291 263, 276, 278, 299, 300, 301, 304,
Lucky days 194 305; woodland 159
,,
speech44, 265 State elephant 16
Succession ofCauses, chapter on 180
Magicrazor-axe 70 Sun, adjured 23, 24
,,
milk-bowl 70 Supernaturalpower 229
„ drum70 ,, Powers, theFour216
gem 70
,,
,, powers gained by eating certain Tax-gatherer 13
birds280 Ten Royal Virtues 1, 273
Marriagerule 247 Thirty-three Archangels 25, 62, 63, 64,
Master ofthe Ceremonies32 216, 217
Meat-eating 182 Thirty-six, the 216
Merit, how conferred 221, 288, 289 Three Refuges, see Refuges
'Messenger' 221 Three stages of existence 56
Metrein the text ofthe Jatakas 23, 24 Three Treasures 78, 102, 189
Mice andrats, theirgnawing unlucky 127 Throne ofSakkagrowshot87, 132, 174
Miracles ofsaints 77 Thunder, proverb concerning237
Moderation 204 ,, cranes conceived at the sound
Music,technicalities of 172, 173, 175, 176 of249
Tortoiseclan 247
Naked ascetics 182, 183 Touch, six spheres of184
Name-day 218 Trance, mystic 188, 192

316 Index.
Treasureguardedby snakes211 Village headman 94
Treasurerofthe faith 18, 64 Virtues, Five 251, 252, 260
TreasuresofEmpire, the seven 268 Ten 1, 273
Truths, the 9, 17, 21, 26, 34, 36, 39, 42,
56, 58, 69, 78, 80, 85, 91, 94, 95, Waggon army 275
97, 98, 100, 110, 118, 125, 126, 130, Water, not to be defiled 15
144, 158, 159, 164, 188, 189, 193, Waxing and waningperiod42
196, 203, 205, 215, 218, 222, 226, Wheel army275
229, 232, 243, 244, 247, 250, 260, Wheel ofEmpire217
263, 286, 290, 298, 303, 306 Wickedness, FourWaysof 1
Twenty-one unlawful ways of earning a Winnowingbasket 277
living57 Wishing Cup 294
Wives, seven kindsof239, 240
Umbrella, white 274 Women, Buddhist opinion of 226, 228,
'Uncle ' =mother's brother, term of affec- 234
tion 210 Writingupon aleaf122
Verses and story, discrepancy between
,, on agolden plate 24
127, 155 Yellowstonethrone of Sakka 63
CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY J. AND C. F. CLAY, AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.
V

1 >- .,Mr„ciTv r>F f ALIFORMA LIBRARY
cn..-rLi..r,H'!l^®''^'*y °* California — CElfj
330055 Dn
L
e^
OS
rNel
A
v^
N
e^
G
n
D E r L i
"
E v
^
e S
°
,
'
-
°
P
'
C a
^
A r
'
L k
^
I
'
i
-
n F g O
L
R L
I
N o
B
t I
R
A
A
17
R
9
Y
0 . 0
F
9 B
A
5
C
o l
I
x
L
a
I
Q l S
T
i
Y
s ^f ' lu
^n
idjtt
-^'t \C.
JAN 2 8 RtC'O
'V4f\
&UE 2 WKS FROM DATE RiiCEiVED
Rl
:ru;r;,.
[J pi A 5
eS Bti9
-i
1
Lqs
Ar..-
CElf.;
L—
«i'i
a
I
Z5200(Jte
^<?/0JllV3JO
OFCALIFO/?,
^lOSANCElfj
v.m^.AUf.Flfi

^
CmWRi. ^OF-CAIIFC
58 00968 31
6(r
^<?Aava8nA^
AA
000 904 572
MH
\oimy
i.>\^
AC ruicfv
Of
=
i>
o
"^/^iiMiNn]wv
^ .^^HIBRARY6?J
2
30 — (
sr'
^
^<?AJiviian-^^
^^ ^lOSA,»JC[lfj
^"^
'SO] ^/^a3AiNa 3\\"i
vlOSANCElfj
s^^lIBRARV
1(3^
C
.
s^?
^<!/Odnvoj
(AF-fAIIFn