[* JUN 27 1911 *]
BL
Divisioa (410
.Sit
Section

u

THE
SACRED HOOKS OF THE BUDDHISTS

HORACE HART, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY

SACRED BOOKS OF THE BUDDHISTS
TRANSLATED
BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS
AND EDITED BY ^jjjw of rtijccfc
MAX MULLER \ * y ^ v JU . N _ 2 , 7 — 1 , 911 *)
F. A /
K£«/WL SEtt#-
PUBLISHED UNDER THE PATRONAGE OP
HIS MAJESTY CHULALANKARANA, KING OF SIAM
VOL.
I
Bonbon
HENRY FROWDE
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE
AMEN CORNER, E.G.
1895

l^
OtLtrtl
\_)oo\xs,
THE GATAKAMA/\ LA/\
OR
GARLAND OF BIRTH-STORIES
m
BV
»
ARYA i'URA
JUN27
(* 1911
*J
&>
TRANSLATED FROM THE SANSKRIT
SPEYER
J. S.
Bonbon
HENRY FROWDE
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE
AMEN CORNER, E.G.
1895

EDITORS PREFACE.
After all the necessary preparations for the first and
second series of the SacredBooks oftheEast, consisting
in all offorty-nine volumes, with two volumes ofGeneral
Index, had been completed, I still received several
offers of translations of important texts which I felt
reluctant to leave unpublished. As they were chiefly
translations of Buddhist texts, I mentioned the fact to
several of my Buddhist friends, and I was highly grati-
fied when I was informed that H. M. the King ofSiam,
being desirous that the true teaching of the Buddha
should become more widely known in Europe, had
been graciously pleased to promise that material sup-
port without which the publication of these translations
would have been impossible.
I therefore resolved to do what I could for helping
to spread a more correct knowledge of the religion
of Buddha but after the first three volumes of this
:
new Series of the Sacred Books of the Buddhists is
published, it will mainly depend on the interest which
the public may take in this work, whether it can be con-
tinued or not.
As long as my health allows me to do so I shall
be quite willing to continue what has been a labour
of love to me during many years of my life. It was
not always an easy task. The constant correspondence
with my fellow-workers has taxed my time and my
strength far more than I expected. The difficulty
was not only to select from the very large mass of
Sacred Books those that seemed most important

:
GATAKAMALA.
Vlll
and most likely to be useful for enabling us to gain
a correct view of the great religions of the East, but
to find scholars competent and willing to undertake
the labour of translation. I can perfectly understand
the unwillingness of most scholars to devote their time
to mere translations. With every year the translation
of such works as the Veda or the Avesta, instead of
becoming easier, becomes really more perplexing and
more difficult. Difficulties of which we formerly had
no suspicion have been brought to light by the ever-
increasing number of fresh students, and precautions
have now to be taken against dangers the very
existence of which was never dreamt of in former
years. I do not exaggerate when I say that the
translation of some of the hymns of the Veda, often
clearly corrupt in the original, has become as difficult
as the deciphering of hieroglyphic or cuneiform in-
scriptions, where at all events the text may be
depended on. What critical scholars like is to translate
a verse here and a verse there, possibly a hymn or
a whole chapter with various readings, critical notes
and brilliant conjectures but to translate a whole
;
book without shirking a single line is a task from
which most of them recoil. Nor have the labours of
those who have hitherto ventured on a more complete
translation ofthe Rig-veda, such as Wilson, Grassmann,
Ludwig and Griffith, been received as they ought to
have been, with gratitude for what they have achieved,
and with allowances for what they failed to achieve.
I therefore remarked in the Preface to the first volume
of this collection, p. xlii
'Oriental scholars have been blamed for not having as yet supplied
a want so generally felt, and so frequently expressed, as a complete,
trustworthy, and readable translation of the principal Sacred Books
of the Eastern Religions. The reasons, however, why hitherto they
have shrunk from such an undertaking are clear enough. The
difficulties in many cases of giving complete translations, and not
selections only, are very great. There is still much work to be done
for a critical restoration of the original texts, for an examination of
their grammar and metres, and for determining the exact meaning
of many words and passages. That kind of work is naturally far

editor's preface. IX
more attractive to scholars than a mere translation, particularly when
they cannot but feel that, with the progress of our knowledge, many
a passage which now seems clear and easy, may, on being re-
examined, assume a new import. Thus while scholars who would
be most competent to undertake a translation prefer to devote their
time to more special researches, the work of a complete translation
is deferred to the future, and historians are left under the impression
that Oriental scholarship is still in so unsatisfactorya state as to make
any reliance on translations of the Veda, the Avesta, or the Tao-te
king extremely hazardous.
'It is clear, therefore, that a translation of the principal Sacred
Books of the East can be carried out only at a certain sacrifice.
Scholars must leave for a time their own special researches in order to
render the general results already obtained accessible to the public at
large. Andeven then,usefulresults can beachievedviribusunitisonly/
My expectations, however, have not been deceived.
My appeal was most generously responded to by the
best Oriental scholars in England, France, Germany,
Holland and America. Nor have these scholars, who
were not afraid to come forward with translations which
they knew to be far from final, had to regret their
courage and their public spirit. The most competent
judges have accepted what we had to offer in a grate-
ful and indulgent spirit. There has only been one
painful exception in the case of a scholar who has
himself never ventured on the translation of a sacred
text, and who seems to have imagined that he could
render more useful service by finding fault with the
translation of certain words and passages, or by
suggesting an entirely different and, in his eyes, a far
more excellent method of translation. All scholars
know how easy it is to glean a few straws, and how
laborious to mow a whole field. There are passages
in every one of the Sacred Books, even in such care-
fully edited texts as the Old and New Testaments,
on which interpreters will always differ and we know
;
how, after centuries of constant labour bestowed on
those texts, the most learned and careful scholars
have not been able to agree, or to avoid oversights in
their Revised Version of the Bible. Could we expect
anything different in the first attempts at translating the
Sacred Books of other religions ? Valuable emenda-

X GATAKAMAL\.
tions, offered in a scholarlike spirit, would have been
most gratefully accepted by myself and by my fellow-
workers. But seldom, nay hardly ever, have emenda-
tions been proposed that would essentially alter the
textus receptus or throw new light on really obscure
passages, while the offensive tone adopted by our
critic made it impossible to answer him. As he
is no longer among the living, I shall say no more.
I feel bound, however, for the sake of those who do
not know me, to correct one remark, as invidious as
it was groundless, made by the same departed scholar,
namely that I had received an excessive honorarium
as Editor of the Sacred Books of the East, nay, as he
expressed it, that I had levied tribute of my fellow-
workers. The fact is that during all the years which
I devoted to the superintending ofthe publication of the
fiftyvolumes ofthe Sacred Books ofthe East, I have not
had the smallest addition to my income. I was relieved
by the University ofOxford from the duty of delivering
my public lectures, so that I might devote my time to
this large literary undertaking brought out by our Uni-
versity Press. My labour, even the mere official cor-
respondence with my many contributors, was certainly
not less than that of delivering lectures which I had
been in the habit of delivering for twenty-five years.
My private lectures were continued all the same, and
the publications of my pupils are there to show how
ungrudgingly gave them my time and my assistance
I
in their literary labours. It is difficult to see of what
interest such matters can be to other people, or with
what objecttheyare draggedbeforethe public. I should
have felt ashamed to notice such an accusation, if the
accuser had not been a man whose scholarship deserved
respect. I have never claimed any credit for the sacri-
fices which I have made both in time and in money, for
objects which were near and dear to my heart. It has
been, as I said, a labour of love, and I shall always feel
most grateful to the University of Oxford, and to my
fellow-translators, for having enabled me to realise
this long cherished plan of making the world better

EDITOR S TREFACE. XI
acquainted with the Sacred Books of the principal reli-
gions of mankind, a work which has borne fruit already,
and will, I hope, bear still richer fruit in the future.
If the members of the principal religions of the
world wish to understand one another, to bear with
one another, and possibly to recognise certain great
truths which, without being aware of it, they share in
common with one another, the only solid and sound
foundation for such a religious peace-movement will be
suppliedby a study ofthe Sacred Books ofeach religion.
One such religious Peace-Congress has been held
already in America. Preparations for another are now
being made and it is certainly a sign of the times when
;
we see Cardinal Gibbons, after conferring with Pope
Leo XIII at Rome, assuring those who are organising
this new Congress : ' The Pope will be with you, I know
it. Write, agitate, and do not be timid 1.'
The c^atakamala, ofwhich Prof. Speyer has given us
an E no-fish translation in this volume, is a work well
known to students of Buddhism. The edition of the
Sanskrit text by Prof. Kern is not only an editio
princeps, but the text as restored by him will probably
remain the final text, and Prof. Speyer in translating
has had but seldom to depart from it.
Cataka has generally been translated by Birth-story
or Tale of Anterior Births, and it would be difficult to
find a better rendering. This class of stories is peculiar
to Buddhism for although the idea that every man
;
had passed through many existences before his birth
on earth and will pass through many more after his
death was, like most Buddhist theories, borrowed from
the Brahmans, yet its employment for teaching the
great lessons of morality seems to have been the work
of Buddha and his pupils. In addition to this there
was another theory, likewise Brahmanic in its origin,
but again more fully developed for practical purposes
by the Buddhists, that of Karma, a firm belief that an
r
1 Le Pape sera avec vous, je le sais. Ecrivez, agisscz, ne soyczpas
iimidcs. Revue de Paris, Sept. i, 1895, p. 136.

GATAKAMALA.
Xll
unbroken chain of cause and effect binds all existences
together. The great problems of the justice of the
government of the world, of the earthly sufferings of
the innocent, and the apparent happiness of the wicked,
were to the Indian mind solved once for all by the firm
conviction that what we experience here is the result of
something that has happened before, that there is an
unbroken heredity in the world, and that we not only
benefit by, but also suffer from our ancestors. In
order fully to understand the drift of the 6"atakas we
must, however, bear in mind one more article of the
Buddhist faith, namely that, though ordinary mortals
remember nothing of their former existences beyond
the fact that they did exist, which is involved in the
very fact of their self-consciousness, highly en-
lightened beings have the gift of recalling their former
vicissitudes. It is well known that Pythagoras claimed
the same gift of remembering his former lives, or at all
events is reported to have claimed it. A Buddha is
supposed to know whatever has happened to him in
every existence through which he has passed : and it
seems to have been the constant habit of the historical
Buddha, Buddha .Sakya-muni, to explain to his disciples
things thatwere happening bythings thathad happened
countless ages before. Those lessons seem certainly
to have impressed his hearers, after they once believed
that what they had to suffer here on earth was not the
result of mere chance, but the result of their own
former deeds or of the deeds of their fellow-creatures,
that they were in fact paying off a debt which they
had contracted long ago. It was an equally impressive
lesson that whatever good they might do on earth
would be placed to their account in a future life,
because the whole world was one large system in
which nothing could ever be lost, though many of the
links of the chain of cause and effect might escape
human observation or recollection.
The Buddha, in telling these stories of his former
births or existences, speaks of himself, not exactly as
the same individual, but rather as the enlightened one,

;
EDITORS PREFACE. Xlll
the Buddha as he existed at any and at every time
and from a moral point of view, the enlightened meant
We
the good, the perfect man. must not suppose that
his hearers were expected to believe, in our sense of
the word, all the circumstances of his former existences
as told by Buddha 6akya-muni. Even for an Indian
imagination it would have been hard to accept them as
matters of fact. A (Sataka was not much more than
what a parable is with us, and as little as Christians'
are expected to accept the story of Lazarus resting in
Abraham's bosom as a matter of fact (though, I believe,
the house of Dives is shown at Jerusalem) were the
Buddhists bound to believe that Buddha as an indi-
vidual or as an historical person, had formerly been
a crow or a hare. The views of the Buddhists on the
world and its temporary tenants, whether men, animals,
or trees, are totally different from our own, though we
know how even among ourselves the theories of
heredity have led some philosophers to hold that we,
or our ancestors, existed at one time in an animal, and
why not in a vegetable or mineral state. It is difficult
for us to enter fully into the Buddhist views of the
world would only warn my readers that they must
; I
not imagine that highly educated men among the
Buddhists were so silly as to accept the cTatakas as
ancient history.
It would be more correct, I believe, to look upon
these Birth-stories as homilies used for educational
purposes and for inculcating the moral lessons of
Buddhism. This is clearly implied in the remarks at
the end of certain c7atakas, such as ' This story is also
to be used when discoursing on the Buddha' (p. 148),
or ' This story may be used with the object of showing
the difficulty of finding companions for a religious
life' (p. 172). We know that Christian divines also
made use of popular stories for similar purposes. In
India many of these stories must have existed long
before the rise of Buddhism, as they exist even now, in
the memory of the people. It is known how some of
them reached Greece and Rome and the Western world

XIV GATAKAMALA.
through various well-ascertained channels *, and how
they still supply our nurseries with the earliest lessons
of morality, good sense, and good manners.
It may be said that the lessons of morality inculcated
in these homilies are too exaggerated to be of any
practical usefulness. Still this modus doccndi is very
common in Sacred Books, where we often find an
extreme standard held up in the hope of producing an
impression that may be useful in less extreme cases.
To offer the other cheek to whosoever shall strike our
right cheek, to give up our cloak to him who takes
away our coat, to declare that it is easier for a camel
to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man
to enter into the kingdom of God, are all lessons which
we also take cum grano salts. They ask for much in
the hope that something may be given. That there is
daneer too in this mode of teaching cannot be denied.
We are told that Arya .Sura, in order to follow the
example of Buddha in a former birth, threw himself in
this life before a starving tigress to be devoured. Let
us hope that this too was only a Cataka.
When once a taste for these moralising stories had
arisen, probably owing to Buddha's daily intercourse
with the common people, their number grew most
rapidly. The supply was unlimited, all that was re-
quired was the moral application, the Haccfabula docet.
The Buddhists give their number as 550. The
earliest are probably those which are found in different
partsofthe Buddhist Canon. In theAariya-pi/aka there
is a collection of thirty-five stories of the former lives of
Buddha, in each ofwhich he acquired one of the ten
Paramitas or Great Perfections which fit a human being
A
for Buddhahood2 similar collection is found in the
.
Buddhavawsa3 which contains an account of the life
,
of the coming Buddha, the Bodhisat, in the various
1 Migration of Fables, in Chips from a German Workshop, vol. iv,
p. 412.
2 See Buddhist Birth-stories, translated by Rhys Davids, p. Iv.
3 Some doubt attaches to the canonicity of the Aariya-pi/aka and
the Buddhava77/sa (see Childers, s.v. Nikaya).

:
EDITOR S PREFACE. XV
characters which he filled during the periods of the
twenty-four previous Buddhas.
The 67ataka stories are therefore at least as old as
the compilation of the Buddhist Canon at the Council
of Vesali, about 377 B.C. * It was at that Council that
the great schism took place, and that the ancient
Canon was rearranged or disarranged. A mono- the
books thus tampered with is mentioned the c7ataka-,
which therefore must be considered as having existed,
and formed part of the old Canon before the Council of
Vesali. This is what the Dipavawsa (V, 32) says on
the subject
' The Bhikkhus of the Great Council settled a doctrine contrary
(to the true Faith). Altering the original text they made another text.
Theytransposed Suttaswhich belonged to oneplace (of the collection)
to another place they destroyed the truemeaning ofthe Faith, in the
;
Vinaya and in the five collections (of the Suttas). . . . Rejecting single
passages of the Suttas and of the proposed Vinaya, they composed
other Suttas and another Vinaya which had (only) the appearance
(ofthe genuine ones). Rejecting the following texts, viz. the Parivara,
which is the abstract of the contents (of the Vinaya), the six sections
of the Abhidhamma, the Pa/isambhida, the Niddesa, and some portions
ofthe Gdtaka, they composed new ones.'
Whatever else this may prove with regard to the
way in which the ancient Canon was preserved, it
shows at all events that Gatakas existed before the
Vesali Council as an integral portion of the sacred
Canon, and we learn at the same time that it was
possible even then to compose new chapters of that
canon, and probably also to add new c7ataka stories.
Whether we possess the text of the t7ataka in
exactly that form in which it existed previous to the
Council of Vesali in 377 B.C. is another question.
Strictly speaking we must be satisfied with the time of
Vattagamani in whose reign, 88-76 B.C., writing for
literary purposes seems to have become more general
in India, and the Buddhist Canon was for the first time
reduced to writing.
What we possess is the Pali text of the 6ataka as
1 Dhammapada, p. xxx, S. B.F., vol. x.
b

XVI GATAKAMALA.
it has been preserved in Ceylon. The tradition is that
these 550 C7ataka stories, composed in Pali, were taken
to Ceylon by Mahinda, about 250 B.C., that the
commentary was there translated into Singhalese, and
that the commentary was retranslated into Pali by
Buddhaghosha, in the fifth century a.d. It is in this
commentary alone that the text of the CTatakas has
come down to us. This text has been edited by Dr.
Fausboll. He has distinguished in his edition between
three component elements, the tale, the frame, and the
verbal interpretation. This text, of which the begin-
ning was translated in 1880 by Prof. Rhys Davids, is
now being translated by Mr. R. Chalmers, Mr. W. R. D.
Rouse, Mr. H. T. Francis and Mr. R. A. Neil, and
the first volume of their translation has appeared in
1895 under the able editorship of Professor Cowell.
As Professor Speyer has explained, the 6"ataka-
mala, the Garland of Birth-stories, which he has trans-
lated, is a totally different work. It is a Sanskrit
rendering of only thirty-four Catakas ascribed to Arya
Sura.. While the Pali 6"ataka is written in the plainest
prose style, the work of Arya .Sura has higher preten-
sions, and is in fact a kind ofkavya, a work ofart. Itwas
used by the Northern Buddhists, while the Pali 67ataka
belongs to the Canon of the Southern Buddhists. The
date of Arya .Sura is difficult to fix. Taranatha (p. 90)
states that .Sura was known by many names, such as
Asvaghosha, Matr//£e/a, Pitrz&efa, Durdarsha (sic),.
Dharmika-subhuti, Mati/'itra. He also states that
towards the end of his life Sura, was in correspondence
with king Kanika (Kanishka and that he began to
?),
write the hundred CTatakas illustrating Buddha's ac-
quirement of the ten Paramitas (see p. xiv), but died
when he had finished only thirty-four. It is certainly
curious that our c^atakamala contains thirty-four
Gatakas l If therefore we could rely on Taranatha,
.
1 The same is also the number of Avadanas in the Bodhisattva-
Avada — na, and the stories seem to be the same as those ofour Gataka-
mala. Rajendralal Mitra, Sanskrit Buddhist Literature, p. 49.

editor's preface. xvii
Arya 6ura, being identical with A^vaghosha, the
author of the Buddha/'arita, would have lived in the
first century of our era. He is mentioned as a great
authorityon metres (Taranatha, p. i8i), and he certainly
handles his metres with great skill. But dates are
always the weak point in the history of Indian
Literature. Possibly the study of Tibetan Literature,
and a knowledge of the authorities on which Taranatha
relied, may throw more light hereafter on the date of
..Sura and Aj-vaghosha.
F. Max Muller.
Oxford, October, 1895.
b 2

CONTENTS.
......
Introduction .....
Introductory Stanzas
I. The Story ofthe Tigress
II. The Story ofthe King ofthe -Sibis .
III. The Story ofthe Small Portion of Gruel
IV. The Story ofthe Head of a Guild .
V. The Story ofAvishahya, the Head of a G
VI. The Story of the Hare .
VII. The Story of Agastya
VIII. The Story of Maitnbala
.
IX. The Story ofVi^vantara
.
X. The Story of the Sacrifice
XI. The Story of -Sakra
XII. The Story ofthe Brahman
XIII. The Story ofUnmadayanti
XIV. The Storyof Suparaga
.
XV. The Story of the Fish .
XVI. The Story ofthe Quail's Young
.
XVII. The Story ofthe Jar
XVIII. The Story ofthe Childless One
XIX. The Story of the Lotus-Stalks
XX. The Story ofthe Treasurer
.
XXI. The Story of Au^/abodhi
.
XXII. The Story of the Holy Swans
XXIII. The Story of Mahabodhi
XXIV. The Story of the Great Ape
.

XX GATAKAMALA.
XXV. The Story of the Sarabha 227
XXVI. The Story ofthe Ruru-Deer . 234
XXVII. The Story ofthe Great Monkey 244
XXVIII. The Story of Kshantivadin . 253
XXIX. The Story ofthe Inhabitant of the Brahmaloka 268
XXX. The Story ofthe Elephant 281
.
XXXI. The Story ofSutasoma 291
.
XXXII. The Story ofAyogn'ha 3M
.
XXXIII. The Story ofthe Buffalo 324
XXXIV. The Story ofthe Woodpecker 329
Synoptical Ta . ble .of th.e Cor . resp . onde . nce b . etwe . en t.he Stanzas
of the (ratakamala and the Scripture Verses of the Pal
Gata.ka ......
337
Index 34i
Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the Trans-
lations of the Sacred Books of the Buddhists . 347

INTRODUCTION
The ' Garland of Birth-stories' belongs to the Canon of the
Northern Buddhists. For the discovery of this work we are
indebted to Mr. Brian H. Hodgson, who as early as lttitt
mentioned it among the interesting specimens of Bauddha
scriptures communicated to him by his old Patan monk, and
also procured copies of it. One of these was deposited in the
library of the college of Fort William, now belonging to the
Bengal Asiatic Society, and was described, in 1N82, by
Ra^endralala Mitra. Another was forwarded to the Paris
library. Burnouf, who thoroughly studied other works belong-
ing to the Sutra and Avadana classes, which form part of the
Hodgson MSS.in Paris, seems to havehad a merely superficial
acquaintance with the CVatakamala, if we may judge from the
terms with which he deals with it in his ' Introduction a l'his-
toire du Bouddhisme indien.' p. 54 of the second edition : 'Je
dis les livres, quoiqu'il n'en existe qu'un seul dans la liste
nepalaise et dans la collection de M. Hodgson, qui portc et
qui merite le titre de Djdtaka (naissance) ; e'est le volume
intitule Djdtakamdld 011 la Guirlande des naissances, qui
passe pour 1 un recit des diverses actions meritoires de(^akya
anterieurement a 1 epoque ou il devint Buddha.' In fact, he
has never given a summary, still less a detailed account of its
contents. It was not until 1875 that M. Feer gave such an
VIP
account in the Journal Asiatique, Ser., t. 5, p. 413.
Moreover, Burnoufs statement is not quite correct with
respect to the Nepal list. Not one, but three CTataka works
are named there2 the Gatakavadana(No. 32), the Gatakamala
,
( No. ^), and the Maha^atakamala(No. 34). Oftheseonlyone.
indeed, is extant, viz. No. 33, our ' Garland of Birth-stories.'
No. 34 may be the work, containing 550 or565 Gatakas,spoken
of by the Bauddha monk who imparted so much valuable
I havespaced the words that prove mystatement.
See Hodgson, Essays on the Languages &c. ofNepal and Tibet, 1874, p. 37.

XX11 GATAKAMALA.
information to Hodgson\ or, perhaps, the original of the
Tibetan collection of 101 tales, including also our c7atakamala,
to which two Russian scholars, Serge d'Oldenburg and
Ivanovski, have of late drawn the attention of the public-.
As to No. 32, its title, (7atakavadana, allows the supposition
that it is either a collection of 6atakas and avadanas, or that
it contains 'great religious exploits ' (avadana) performed by
the Bodhisattva, who afterwards became Buddha, the Lord.
Nothing is more common than theuseof both terms in a nearly
synonymous manner. Our CTatakamala bears also the appella-
tion of Bodhisattvavadanamala 3 In translating Cataka by
.
'birth-story,' I comply with the general use and official
interpretation of that term by the Buddhist Church. The
original meaning must have been simply ' tale, story,' as Prof.
Kern hasdemonstrated in his" History of Buddhism in India4.'
Additional evidence of this statement may be drawn from the
fact, that in several of the old and traditional headings of
these stories the former part of the compound denotes
not the Bodhisattva, but some other person of the tale, as
Vyaghri^ataka, 'the Story of the Tigress,' ora thing,as Kum-
bha^ataka, 'the Story of the Jar ; ' Bisa^ataka, ' the Story of
the Lotus-stalks,' which are respectively Nos. I, XVII,
and XIX ofthis collection or an action, as Silavimawsa(ka)-
;
^ataka, the common heading of Nos. 86, 290, 305, and 330 in
Fausboll's Pali £ataka, Na/'/'a^ataka,ibid., No. 32, ora quality,
as Silanisawsa^ataka, ibid., No. 190.
SometimeafterM. Peer's compte-rendu oftheParis MS.was
published two new MSS. of the 6"atakamala came to Europe.
They belong to the valuable set of Sanskrit Buddhist works
which Dr. Wright acquired for the Cambridge University
Library, and are described by Prof. Cecil Bendall in his
excellent Catalogue (1883). Prof. Kern was the first to
appreciate the great literary merits of the eVatakamala, and
soonplanned an edition,availing himselfof thetwo Cambridge
MSS. (Add. 1328 and 1415) and the Paris one5 This editio
.
princeps was published at the end of 1891 as the first volume
ofthe Harvard Oriental Series of Prof. Lanman. It has everv
right to bear the name of l princeps,' not only because Arya
Sura's work has never been edited before, but on account of
1 See Hodgson, Essays, pp. 17 and 37.
2 See the paperofd'Uldenburg, translated byDr.Wenzel in theJourn. Roy. As.
Soc. of1893, p. 304.
3 Also cp. the passage ofthe Avadanakalpalata, quoted infra, p. xxiii.
4 See I, p. 257 ofthe original (Dutch) edition.
5 Dr. d'Oldenburgmentionstwo more copies
;
theyareat St.Petersburg. Seehis
paper in theJourn. Roy. As. Soc, p. 306.

—
INTRODUCTION. XX111
the critical acumen and the untiring care of the editor, whose
exertions have almost purged the text from the clerical errors
and blunders which greatlyencumberthe Nepal manuscripts1 .
Thus, thanks to Prof. Kern, this masterpiece of Sanskrit
Buddhist literature is now accessible to Sanskritists in an
excellent edition. I have undertaken to translate it, as I con-
sider it a most valuable document for the knowledge of
Buddhism.
Properly speaking, cTatakamaki is a class-name. It has
been pointed out above that in the Northern Buddhist Canon
several writings of that name have been made known, and
though, so far as I know, this appellation does not occur
in the book-titles of the Pali Tripi/aka, such texts as the Pali
K
6ataka and the ariyapi/aka may have some right to be thus
designated. That it is a generic appellation is made plain
from Somendra's Introduction to the Avadanakalpalata of his
father Kshemendra. It is said there, verses 7 and <S :
a^aryaGopadattadyair avadanakramo^//ita//
'
u/'£ityo£/vitya vihita gadyapadyavLsr/nkhala//,
ekamarganusari//ya// para;// gambhiryakarka^a//
vistir//avar//ana// santi (S'ina^atakamalika//.'
' There exist many "Garlands of Birth-stories ofthe 6ma " by
Gopadatta and other teachers,who,discarding the usual order
oftheAvadanas, gathered talescarptiw,and told them atlength
in elaborate prose (gadya) interspersed with verse, holding
themselves free as to the proportions of the two styles, which
they made interchange. They all treat of the praise of the
Right Path, but, owing to their profoundness, are hard to
understand.'
This definition of that class exactly suits the work, the
translation of which is here published. This composition
consists, indeed, of verse intermingled with flowery prose built
up according to the rules and methods of Sanskrit rhetoric it
;
claims to be a florilegium, a selection of Gatakas, with the
avowed object of rousing or invigorating the true faith in the
minds of the reader; and the stories are told at length. It
has perhaps been the most perfect writing of its kind. It is
distinguished no less by the superiority of its style than by
the loitiness ofits thoughts. Its verses and artful prose are
written in the purest Sanskrit -, and charm the reader by the
1 Compare the complaint of Prof. Cowcll, p. xii of the Introduction to his
translation ofthe Buddha/tarita (Sacred Books,vol.xlix).
" The peculiarities of our authorarenot many, and bearchiefly on lexicology,
not on grammar or style, which show the mosi intimate acquaintance wiili the
classic language. His subject-matter and his faith, of course, necessitate the use
of a number ofterms, found in Buddhist writings only; yet he avoids several ol

XXIV GATAKAMALA.
elegance of their form and the skill displayed in the handling
of a great variety of metres, some of which are rarely to be
met with elsewhere1 and are sometimes adorned with the
,
additional qualities of difficult and refined rhymes, and the
like. Apparently vSura, to whom the CVatakamala is ascribed,
was a poet richly gifted by Nature, whose talent must have
been developed by thorough and extensive literary studies.
Above all, I admire his moderation. Unlike so many other
Indian masters in the art of literary composition, he does not
allow himself the use of embellishing apparel and the whole
luxuriant misc en schie of Sanskrit alawkara beyond what is
necessary for his subject. His flowery descriptions, his long
and elaborate sermons, his elegant manner of narration, are
always in harmony with the scheme of the whole or the
nature of the contents. Similarly, in the choice of his metres
he was guided bystylistic motives in accordance with the tone
and sentiment required at a given point of the narrative. It
is a pity that most of these excellencies are lost in the
translation.
Thus much for the philologist and the lover of Oriental
literature. To the student of Buddhism it is the peculiar
character of the Catakamala which constitutes its great
importance. Although it is styled 'a garland of stories,' it
is really a collection ofhomilies. Each cVataka is introduced
by a simple prose sentence of ethical and religious purport,
which is to be illustrated by the story. The whole treatment
of the tale bears the character of a religious discourse. Prof.
Cowell, in his preface to the translation of the Pali GTataka,
observes that the 6ataka-legends are 'continually introduced
into the religious discourses .... whether to magnify the
glory ofthe Buddha or to illustrate Buddhist doctrines and
them, which are not good Sanskrit, as vi^ita and most of those signalized by
u Co d w d e h l a l va a - n = d P N a e l i i l i u n t p t . ha ix va of [ t w h h e i ir ch ed it i s t e i l o f n is o = f S t k he t. D u i t v s y a av v a a d ] a , n s a u . mu H k e ha o = it ' en pr e ep m e p n l s o e y , s '
satmibhavati,°karoti, °bhava,a termtoexpress theimbibingofqualitiesinto
one'snature,adhyaj-aya=aj-aya, vitanaandvaitanya= 'dejected'and'dejec-
tion,' vimana^ = durmana// 'sad,' pratipat and pratipatti= ' (good)
conduct' and so on. Likewise he uses such words as vanipaka, pratisa/w-
modana, (ahoratram) atinamayam asa, XXVI, 27 arabhya [=Pali
arabbha] in the meaning of 'concerning'=adhik;-*'tya, ajritya and VIII,
20 pratyaham=pratyaham. On the otherhand, instances of old wordsand
expressions, and of such as were hitherto onlyknown from the Dictionaries, are
found in his work. So e.g. addha. IX, 60 andelsewhere, akumbha XVII, 5,
XXVIII, 31, dawrt'a.finika in XXVIII, 37.
1 Among the less common metres I notice the Mattamayura V, 22-24, XXIX,
4 and 32; the Pramitakshara XVII, 17, XVIII, 20, XXIII, 25; the Bhu^anga-
prayata XXIX, 26 thePrahara«akalitaor KalikaXVII, 20; somemetre akin to
the Sumanika—cp. ; Colebrooke,Misc. Ess. II, 141—XXIII, 34-39, for it does not
suitthe scheme taught byColebrooke, inverses 35-39 each pada consistingoftwo
trocheesandabacchius,whereasverse34ismadeupoftwotrocheesandamolossus.

INTRODUCTION. XXV
precepts by appropriate examples V Our Gatakamala has
a right to be called a choice collection of such sermons,
distinguished by their lofty conception and their artistic
elaboration. It is a document of the first rank for the study
ofancient Buddhist homiletics, and is for this reason entitled
to a place among the Sacred Books ofthe East.
Sura, took his thirty-four holy legends from the old and
traditional store of 6ataka-tales. Almost all of them have
been identified with corresponding ones in other collections,
both of Northern and Southern Buddhism. So far as I could
control those parallels or add to them, I have taken care to
notice them at the beginningorat the end ofeach story. The
author himself in his introductory stanzas declares his strict
conformity with scripture and tradition and, however much
;
he has done for the adornment and embellishment of the outer
form of his tales, we may trust him, when he implies that he
has nowhere changed their outlines or their essential features,
but has narrated them as they were handed down to him by
writing or by oral tradition. Wherever his account differs
from that preserved in other sources, we may infer that he
followed some different version. Sometimes he passes over
details of minor importance. For instance, in the second
story he avoids the hideous particulars of the eye-operation,
dwelt upon in the Pali Cataka. The same good taste will be
appreciated in Story XXVIII, when the cruel act of the
wicked king against the monk Kshantivadin has to be told,
and in Story VIII. Stories XVII, XXII, XXXI are much
simpler than their parallels in the holy Pali book, which are
unwieldy, encumbered as they are by exuberance of details.
I cannot help thinking that .Sura omitted such particulars
purposely. For the rest, he does not pretend to tell stories
new or unknown to his readers. He acknowledges their
popularity he puts the story of the tigress at the beginning,
in order to h ; onourhis teacher,who had celebrated that CVataka.
He often neglects to give proper names to the actors in his
tales. For instance, of Agastya, Ayogr/'ha, ATudtfabodhi, the
heroes ofthe £atakas thus named, it is nowhere said that they
were so called. Gugaka, the Brahman who begged the chil-
dren from Vuvantara, consequently a well-known figure in
thelegend, is only named 'a Brahman.' Inthe samestory(IX)
Madri, the wife of the hero, is introduced as a well-known
person, although her name had not been mentioned before.
That he closely adheres to the traditional stock of legends
1 SeeThe Jataka,translated fromthe Pali byvarious handsundertheeditorship
ofProf. E. B. Cowell, Cambridge, 1895, I, p. vi.

I
XXVI GATAKAMALA.
is also shown by a good number of his verses. Generally
speaking, the metrical part of the Gatakamala. admits of
a fourfold division. There are laudatory verses, praising and
pointing out the virtues of the hero these are commonly
;
found in the first part or preamble of the tale. There are
descriptive verses, containing pictures of fine scenery or of
phenomena. Further, there are religiousdiscourses,sometimes
of considerable length, put in the mouth of the Bodhisattva
;
they have their place mostly at the end *. The rest consists
in verses treating of facts in the story, and it is chiefly
there that we find again the gathas of the corresponding Pali
Gatakas. It is incontestable that in a great many cases Sura.
worked on the same or a very similar stock of gathas as are
containedin the Sacred Canon ofthe Southern Buddhists. For
the sake of reference I have registered those parallel verses in
a Synoptical Table, which is placed at the end of this book
(pp. 337-340). Sometimes the affinity is so striking that
one text will assist the interpretation and critical resti-
tution of the other. Sura's stanza, V, 11, for example, has
not been invented by the author himself; it is a refined
paraphrase in Sanskrit of some Prakrit gatha of exactly
the same purport as that which in Fausboll's (7ataka III,
p. T31, bears the number 158. By comparing pada c in
both, it is plain that in the Pali text no ought to be
read instead of vo2 . It must have been sacred texts in
some popular dialect, not in Sanskrit, that underly the elabo-
rate and high-flown verses of Suva. This is proved, among
other things, by the mistake in XIX, 17, pointed out by Prof.
Kern in the Various Readings he has appended to his edition.
As I have already remarked, each story is introduced by
a leading sentence, expressing some religious maxim, which,
according to Indian usage, is repeated again at the end as
1 It is but seldom that theversescontain a mererepetition or development of
what hasjust been toldintheproseimmediatelypreceding. Ofthiskindare XIII,
16; XIX, 5; XXV, 1; XXX, 5.
2 Here are someother instances. In the Bhisa^ataka,Fausb. IV, 309, 11, read
p v u e t d t a i w. . an . d sa 1. b 2 b 4 ak p a u m ^e i n , tu c , p. cp G . at G a a k t a a m k a a l m a al X S IX X , IX 1 , 3, 16 i ; bid i . bid 1 . . p 2 . 2 31 s 0 a , b 3 ba l s a a tt m h a a t , t n a o - t
alattha, cp. XIX, 18.—In the A'ullahawsat'ataka, F. V, 340, 12 kha«</a;«
the reading of BJsand Sdr is confirmed by .Sura, XXII, 37 unaw. Ibid. 343, 16
I XX r I e I a , d 5 t 0 a , v a a n d df e r v o a m k X z X . I t I e , l 8 a 0 b I ho inf k er at t ' hat as F s . a V, ya 35 i 0 a , n 1 a 6 m la am me a , is co —t m o pa b r e in r g ead .Su f r o a r
dhammaw, vasu for vaso, sabbatth' instead of sabb' atth'. n F; I> 2'3>
13 aprosepassagemaybe corrected from theparallel prose ofGatakamalAa. (p. 98,
8 of the edition); divide the words thus, ku£Mito ,§ato aw^/akosam
padaletva.
On the other hand the Pali textis ofuseto correct a passage ofiSura. XXII,
33 c we should read dharmo hy apa&ita/i samyag &c, cp. Fausb. V,
339- 22.

INTRODUCTION. XXV11
a conclusion to the story, being preceded by evam or tatha,
'in this manner.' But, as a rule ', the epilogues are not limited
to that simple repetition. They often contain more, the
practical usefulnessofthe storythustold beingenhanced bythe
addition of other moral lessons, which may be illustrated by
it, or by pointing out different subjects of religious discourses,
in connection with which our tale may be of use. Most of
these epilogues, in my opinion, are posterior to Sura. Apart
from the argument offered by some remarkable discrepancies
in style and language and the monkish spirit pervading them,'
I think it highly improbable that, after the author had put at
the head and at the end ofeach G"ataka the moral maxim he
desires to inculcate upon the minds of his readers by means
ofthe account ofa certain marvellous deed of the Bodhisattva,
he should himself add different indications for other employ-
ments to serve homiletical purposes. It is more likely that
these accessories are of later origin, and were added when the
discourses of vSura had gained so great a reputation as to be
admitted to the Canonof SacredWritings, and had come to be
employed by the monks as a store of holy and edifying
sermons for the purposes of religious instruction.
On account of these considerations, I have bracketed in my
translation such part of the epilogues as seemed to me later
interpolations. Yet I did not think it advisable to omit them.
They are not without importance in themselves. They allow
us an insight into the interior of the monasteries and to
witness the monks preparing for preaching. Moreover, some
ofthem contain precious information about holy texts of the
Northern Buddhists, which are either lost or have not yet
been discovered. In the epilogue of VIII there is even
a textual quotation likewise in that of XXX, where we find
;
the words spoken by the Lord at the time of his Complete
Extinction. As to XI, see my note on that epilogue. In XII
and XXI similar sayings of holy books are hinted at.
Concerning the person of the author and his time, nothing
certain is known. That he was called Arya .Sura is told in
the manuscripts, and is corroborated by Chinese tradition ; the
Chinese translation of the G"atakamala, made between 960
and 1127 A.D., bears Arya vSura on its title as the author's
name (see Bunyiu Nanjio's Catalogue, No. 1312). Tibetan
tradition, too, knows Sura, as a famous teacher, and as the
author of our collection of stories. Taranatha identifies him
1 With the exception of V and XV. In the conclusion of III and XIII the
leading text is repeated, and then more fully developed ; in that of the ninth
(Jataka it isrepeated in an abridged form.

—
XXV111 GATAKAMALA.
with Ajvaghosha, and adds many more names by which the
same great man should be known. It is, however, impossible
that two works so entirely different in style and spirit as the
Buddha/forita and the £atakamala should be ascribed to one
and the same author.
As to his time, Dr. d'Oldenburg observes that the terminus
ante quern is the end of the 7th century A.D., since it seems
that the Chinese traveller I-tsing speaks of our ' Garland of
Birth-stories.' IfNo. 1349 ofBunyiu Nanjio's Catalogue ofthe
Chinese Tripi/aka,being aSutraon thefruits of Ka — rma briefly
explained by Arya Sura, is written by ourauthor and there
seems to be no reasonable objection to this Sura must have
lived before 434A.D., when the latter work is said to have
been translated into Chinese. This conclusion is supported
by the purity and elegance of the language, which necessarily
point to a period of a high standard of literary taste and
a flourishing state of letters. Prof. Kern was induced by this
reason to place Suraapproximatelyin the century of Kalidasa
and Varahamihira, but equally favourable circumstances may
be supposed to have existed a couple of centuries earlier.
I think, however, he is posterior to the author of the Buddha-
£arita. For other questions concerning the £atakamala,
which it would be too long to dwell upon here, I refer to
Prof. Kerns preface and d'Oldenburg in Journ. Roy. As. Soc.
1893, pp. 306-309.
Taranatha, the historian of Tibetan Buddhism,has preserved
a legend which shows the high esteem in which the Gata-
kamala stands with the followers ofthe Buddha's Law. ' Pon-
dering on the Bodhisattva's gift ofhis own bodytothe tigress,
he [viz. Sura] thought he could do the same, as it was not so
very difficult. Once he, as in the tale, saw a tigress followed
by her young, near starvation at first he could not resolve
;
on the self-sacrifice, but, calling forth a stronger faith in the
Buddha, and writing with his own blood a prayer of seventy
Slokas, he first gave the tigers his blood to drink, and, when
their bodies had taken a little force, offered himself1.' In this
legend I recognise the sediment, so to speak, of the stream of
emotion caused by the stimulating eloquence of that gifted
Mahayanist preacher on the minds of his co-religionists.
Any one who could compose discourses such as these must
have been capable of himself performing the extraordinary
exploits ofa Bodhisattva. In fact, something ofthe religious
enthusiasm of those ancient apostles of the Mahayana who
1 I quote the very words, with which Dr. Wenzel translates d'Oldenburg's
quotation from the Russian. SeeJourn. Roy. As. Soc., 1. 1. p. 307.

INTRODUCTION. XXIX
brought the Saddharma to China and Tibet pervades
the work of .Sura, and it is not difficult to understand that in
the memory of posterity he should have been represented as
a saint who professed the ethics of his religion, non disputaudi
causa, as Cicero says of Cato, ut magna pars, scd ita vivendi.
It was no easy task to translate a work of so refined a com-
position, still less because there is no help to be had from any
commentary. The Sanskrit text has none, and the Chinese
commentary mentioned by Bunyiu Nanjio is not translated.
Repeated and careful study of the original has led me to
change a few passages of the translation I formerly published
in the Bijdragen voor Taal-Land-en Volkenkunde van Ned.
Indie, vols, viii and x of the fifth ' Volgreeks.' Moreover.
I have adapted this, which may almost be styled a second
edition, to the wants and the arrangements of the ' Sacred
Books of the East.'
J. S. Speyer.
Groningen, April 16, 1S95.

GATAKAMAAL_ AA
OR
GARLAND OF BIRTH-STORIES
BY
ARYA
.SURA.
Om ! Adoration to all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas !
Introductory Stanzas.
i \ Grand and glorious, of inexhaustible praise and
charm, comprising excellent virtues and thereby aus-
picious, are the wonderful exploits which the Muni
performed in previous births. Them will I devoutly
worship with the handful of flowers of my poem.
2, 3. 'By those praiseworthy deeds the way is taught
that is leading to Buddhahood they are the landmarks
;
on that way. Further even the hard-hearted may be
softened by them. The holy stories may also obtain
a greater attractiveness.' So I considered, and for the
benefit of men the attempt will be made to find
a favourable audience for my own genius, by treating
of the extraordinary facts of the Highest One in the
world in a manner which is in accordance with the
course of facts as recorded by Scripture and Tradition.
4. Him, whose beautiful practice of virtues, while
acting for the sake of others, no one could imitate,
though bent on self-interest; Him, the blaze of whose
glory is involved in his true name of the All-Knowing
One Him, the Incomparable One together with the
;
Law and the Conorecration I venerate with bowed head.
1 The cipher on the left denotes the number of the stanza. The
prose parts ofthe original are indicated by the absence of the cipher.
13

GATAKAMALA.
The Story of the Tigress.
I.
Even in former births the Lord showed His innate,
disinterested, and immense love towards all creatures,
and identified himself with all beings. For this reason
we ought to have the utmost faith in Buddha, the
Lord. This will be instanced by the following great
performance of the Lord in a previous birth, which has
been celebrated by my guru, a venerator of the Three
Jewels, an authority because of his thorough study of
virtues, and beloved by his own guru by virtue of his
religious practices.
In the time that the Bodhisattva, who afterwards
became our Lord, benefited the world by manifold
outpourings of his compassion gifts, kind words,
:
succour, and similar blameless deeds of a wisdom-culti-
vating mind, quite in accordance with the excessive
engagements to which he had bound himself, he took
his birth in a most eminent and mighty family of
Brahmans, distinguished by the purity of their conduct
owing to their attachment to their (religious) duties.
Being purified by the^"atakarma and the other sacra-
ments in due order, he grew up and in a short time,
owing to the innate quickness of his understanding, the
excellent aid in his studies, his eagerness for learning
and his zeal, he obtained the mastership in the eighteen
branches of science and in all the arts (kalas) which
were not incompatible with the custom of his family.
5. To the Brahmans he was (an authority) like the
Holy Writ; to the Kshatriyas as venerable as a king;
to the masses heappeared like the embodied Thousand-
eyed One1 to those who longed for knowledge he was
;
a helpful father.
In consequence of his prosperous destiny (the
result of merits formerly earned), a large store of
wealth, distinction, and fame fell to his share. But the
Bodhisattva took no delight in such things. His
thoughts had been purified by his constant study of
1 Viz. .Sakra, the Indra or Lord ofthe Devas.

.
THE STORY OF THE TIGRESS.
I.
the Law, and he had become familiar with world-
renunciation.
6. His former behaviour had wholly cleared his
mind, he saw the many kinds of sin which beset
(worldly) pleasures. So he shook off the householder's
state, as if it were an illness, and retired to some
plateau, which he adorned by his presence.
7. There, both by his detachment from the world
and by his wisdom-brightened tranquillity, he con-
founded, as it were, the people in the world, who by
attachment to bad occupations are disinclined for the
calmness of the wise.
8. His calmness full of friendliness spread about, it
seems, and penetrated into the hearts of the ferocious
animals so as to make them cease injuring one another
and live like ascetics.
9. By dint of the pureness of his conduct, his self-
control, his contentment, and his compassion, he was
no less a friend even to the people in the world, who
were unknown to him, than all creatures were friends
to him.
10. As he wanted little, he did not know the art of
hypocrisy, and he had abandoned the desire for gain,
glory, and pleasures. So he caused even the deities to
be propitious and worshipful towards him.
On the other hand, those whose affection he had
1 1
gained (in his former state) by his virtues, hearing of
his ascetic life, left their families and their relations
and went up to him as to the embodied Salvation, in
order to become his disciples.
12. He taught his disciples, as best he could, good
conduct (5ila), chastity, purification of the organs of
sense, constant attentiveness, detachment from the
world, and the concentration of the mind to the medi-
tation on friendliness (maitri) and the rest 1
.
Most of his numerous disciples attained perfection
in consequence of his teaching, by which this holy road
(to salvation) was established and people were put on
1 The four, or five, bhavanas or ' meditative rites' are meant.
B 2

! !
GATAKAMALA.
the excellent path of world-renunciation. Now, the
doors of evils being shut, as it were, but the ways of
happiness widely opened like high roads, it once hap-
pened that the Great-minded One (mahatman) was
rambling along the shrubby caverns of the mountain
well adapted to the practices of meditation (yoga), in
order to enjoy at his ease this existing order of things.
A^ita, his disciple at that time, accompanied him.
13-15. Now, below in a cavern of the mountain, he
beheld a young tigress that could scarcely move from
the place, her strength being exhausted by the labour
of whelping. Her sunken eyes and her emaciated
belly betokened her hunger, and she was regarding her
own offspring as food, who thirsting for the milk of her
udders, had come near her, trusting their mother and
fearless but she brawled at them, as if they were
;
strange to her, with prolonged harsh roarings.
16, 17. On seeing her, the Bodhisattva, though
composed in mind, was shaken with compassion by the
suffering of his fellow-creature, as the lord of the
mountains (Meru) is by an earthquake. It is a wonder,
how the compassionate, be their constancy ever so
evident in the greatest sufferings of their own, are
touched by the grief, however small, of another
And his powerful pity made him utter, agitation
made him repeat to his pupil, the following words
My my
manifesting his excellent nature : ' dear, dear,'
he exclaimed,
18. 'Behold the worthlessness of Sawsara This
!
animal seeks to feed on her very own young ones.
Hunger causes her to transgress love's law.
19. 'Alas Fie upon the ferocity of self-love, that
!
makes a mother wish to make her meal with the bodies
of her own offspring
20. ' Who ought to foster the foe, whose name is
self-love, by whom one may be compelled to actions
like this ?
' Go, then, quickly and look about for some means
of appeasing her hunger, that she may not injure her
young ones and herself. I too shall endeavour to avert

THE STORY OF THE TIGRESS.
I.
her from that rash act.' The disciple promised to do
so, and went off in search of food. Yet the Bodhisattva
had but used a pretext to turn him off. He considered
thus
:
21. 'Why should I search after meat from the body
of another, whilst the whole of my own body is avail-
able ? Not only is the getting of the meat in itself
a matterofchance, but I should also lose the opportunity
of doing my duty.
' Further,
22-24. 'This body being brute, frail, pithless, un-
grateful, always impure, and a source of suffering, he is
not wise who should not rejoice at its being spent for
the benefit of another. There are but two things that
make one disregard the orief of another attachment
:
to one's own pleasure and the absence of the power of
helping. But I cannot have pleasure, whilst another
grieves, and I have the power to help; why should
I be indifferent ? And if, while being able to succour,
I were to show indifference even to an evildoer im-
mersed in grief, my mind, I suppose, would feel the
remorse for an evil deed, burning like shrubs caught
by a great fire.
25. 'Therefore, I will kill my miserable body by-
casting it down into the precipice, and with my corpse
I shall preserve the tigress from killing her young
ones and the young ones from dying by the teeth of
their mother.
' Even more, by so doing
26-29. ' I set an example to those who long for the
good oftheworld ; I encourage the feeble ; I rejoice those
who understand the meaning of charity 1 stimulate
;
the virtuous I cause disappointment to the great
;
hosts of Mara, but gladness to those who love the
Buddha-virtues; I confound the people who are ab-
sorbed in selfishness and subdued by egotism and
lusts I o-ive a token of faith to the adherents of the
;
most excellent of vehicles1 but I fill with astonishment
,
1 This best of vehicles (yanavara) is the Buddhayana, the

' !
GATAKAMALA.
those who sneer at deeds of charity I clear the high-
;
way to Heaven in a manner pleasing to the charitable
among men ; and finally that wish I yearned for,
" When may
I
have the opportunity of b—enefiting
others with the offering of my own limbs ? " I shall
accomplish it now, and so acquire erelong Complete
Wisdom.
30, 31. ' Verily, as surely as this determination does
not proceed from ambition, nor from thirst of glory,
nor is a means of gaining Heaven or royal dignity,
as surely as I do not care even for supreme and ever-
lasting bliss for myself, but for securing the benefit of
others1 : as surely may I gain by it the power of
taking away and imparting for ever at the same time
the world's sorrow and the world's happiness, just as
the sun takes away darkness and imparts light
32. ' Whether I shall be remembered, when virtue is
seen to be practised, or made conspicuous, when the
tale ofmy exploit is told; in everyway may I constantly
benefit the world and promote its happiness !
33. After so making up his mind, delighted at the
thought that he was to destroy even his life for securing
the benefit of others, to — the amazement even of the
calm minds of the deities he gave up his body.
The sound of the Bodhisattva's body falling clown
stirred the curiosity and the anger of the tigress. She
desisted from her disposition of making a slaughter of
her whelps, and cast her eyes all around. As soon as
she perceived the lifeless body of the Bodhisattva, she
rushed hastily upon it and commenced to devour it.
But his disciple, coming back without meat, as he
had got none, not seeing his teacher, looked about for
vehicle by which Buddhahood may be reached, or mahayana, for
both appellations cover nearly the same ground. The other two
are the 6"ravakayana and the Pratyekabuddhayana. See
Dharmasa;«graha II, with the annotation of Kenjiu Kasawara.
1 Pararthasiddhi here and in st.33 is a rather ambiguous term,
as it may also convey this meaning : ' the attainment of the highest
object.' Apparently this ambiguity is intentional. Cp. Story XXX,
verse 17.

I. THE STORY OF THE TIGRESS.
him. Then he beheld that young tigress feeding on
the lifeless body ofthe Bodhisattva. And the admira-
tion of the extraordinary greatness of his performance
driving back his emotions of sorrow and pain, he
probably gave a fair utterance1 to his veneration for his
teacher's attachment to virtues by this monologue
:
34-37. ' Oh, how merciful the Great-minded One was
to people afflicted by distress How indifferent He
was to His own welfare
Ho!w
He has brought to
!
perfection the virtuous conduct of the pious, and
dashed to pieces the splendid glory of their adver-
saries! How He has displayed, clinging to virtues,
His heroic, fearless, and immense love How His
!
body, which was already precious for its virtues, has
now forcibly been turned into a vessel of the highest
veneration And although by His innate kindness
!
He was as patient as Earth, how intolerant He was of
the* suffering of others And how my own roughness
!
of mind is evidenced by the contrast of this splendid
act of heroism of His Verily, the creatures are not
!
to be commiserated now, having got Him as their
Protector, and Manmatha2 forsooth, is now sighing
,
away, being disturbed and in dread of defeat.
' In every way, veneration be to that illustrious
Great Being (mahasattva), of exuberant compassion,
ofboundless goodness, the refuge of all creatures, yea,
that Bodhisattva for the sake of the creatures.' And
he told the matter over to his fellow-disciples.
38. Then his disciples and also the Gandharvas, the
Yakshas, the snakes, and the chiefs of the Devas,
expressing by their countenance their admiration for
his deed, covered the ground that held the treasure of
his bones, with a profusion of wreaths, clothes, jewel
ornaments, and sandal powder.
1 The text has jobhela, not ai-obhata, as might have been
expected.
- Manmatha, Kama, Kandarpa and the other names of the pod
of sensual love and pleasure are common equivalents of Mara.
Cp. BuddhaX-arita XIII, 2.

8 GATAKAMALA.
So, then, even in former births the Lord showed His
innate, disinterested, and immense love towards all
creatures, and identified Himself with all creatures.
For this reason we ought to have the utmost faith in
Buddha, the Lord. [And also this is to be propounded:
' And having obtained this faith in Buddha the Lord,
we ought to strive for feeling the highest gl — adness ; in
this mannerourfaith will have itssanctuary.' Likewise
we must listen with attention to the preaching of the
Law, since it has been brough — t to us by means of
hundreds of difficult hardships1 . And in sermons on
the subject of compassion, thus is to be said : ' in this
manner compassion, moving us to act for the benefit
of others, is productive of an exceedingly excellent
natureV]
The story of the tigress, which does not appear either in the Pali
Gataka or in the Xariyapi/aka, is alluded to in the Bodhisattvava-
danakalpalata ofKshemendra II, 108. There the Bodhisattva, on the
occasion of a similar fact of self-denial and heroism in a later birth,
says: 'Formerly, on seeing a hungry tigress preparing to eat her
whelps, I gave her my body, in order to avert this, without hesitation.'
And in the fifty-first pallava the story is narrated at length,
verses 28-50. It differs in some points from ours. So does also the
redaction of the Southern Buddhists, told by Spence Hardy, Manual,
p. 94 of the 2nd ed.
II. The Story of the King of the 6ibis.
(Comp. the Pali Gataka, No. 499, Fausb. IV, 401-412
;
.ffariyapi/aka I, 8.)
The preaching of the excellent Law must be listened
to with attention. For it is by means of hundreds of
difficult hardships that the Lord obtained this excellent
Law for our sake. This is shown by the following.
In the time, when this our Lord was still a Bodhi-
sattva, in consequence of his possessing a store of
1 Dushkara^atasamudanitatvat,cp.Divyavadana,ed. Cowell,
p. 490.
2 Viz. as far as gathering merit, the consequence of good actions,
improves our nature.

II. THE STORY OF THE KING OF THE SIBIS. O.
meritorious actions collected by a practice from time
immemorial, he once was a king of the .Sibis. By his
deference to the elders whom he was wont to honour
from his very childhood, and by his attachment to
a modest behaviour, he gained the affection of his
subjects owing to his natural quickness of intellect, he
;
enlarged his mind by learning many sciences he was
;
distinguished by energy, discretion, majesty and power,
and favoured by fortune. He ruled his subjects as if
they were his own children.
1. The different sets of virtues, that accompany
each member of the triad (of dharm a, artha, and
kama) all together gladly took their residence, it
seems, with him and yet they did not lose any of their
;
splendour in spite of the disturbance which might
occur from their contrasts.
2. And felicity, that is like a mockery to those who
have attained a high rank by wrong means, like a
grievous calamity to the fo—ol, like an intoxicating
liquor to the feeble-minded to him it was, as is
indicated by its name, real happiness.
3. Noble-hearted, full of compassion, and wealthy,
this best of kings rejoiced at seeing the faces of the
mendicants beaming with satisfaction and joy at the
attainment of the wished-for objects.
Now
this king, in accordance with his propensity
for charity, had caused alms-halls, provided with every
kind of utensils, goods, and grains, to be constructed in
all parts of the town. In this way he poured out the
rain of his gifts, not unlike a cloud of the Krz'ta Yuga.
And he distributed them in such a manner, as well
became the loftiness of his mind, supplying the wants
of each according to his desire, with lovely deference
and kind speed, whereby he enhanced the benefit of
his gifts. He bestowed food and drink on those who
were in need of food and drink likewise he dispensed
;
couches, seats, dwellings, meals, perfumes, wreaths,
silver, gold, &c, to those who wanted them. Then,
the fame of the king's sublime munificence spreading
abroad, people who lived in different regions and parts

—
IO GATAKAMALA.
of the world went to that country, with surprise and
joy in their hearts.
4. The mendicants, when letting the whole world of
men pass before their mind's eye, did not find in others
an opportunity of putting forth their requests to him
;
it was that they went up in crowds with glad faces,
just as wild elephants go up to a great lake.
The king, on the other hand, when beholding them,
whose minds were rejoiced with the hope of gain,
flocking together fr0 m all directions, though the out-
ward appearance of that mendi•cant peopl1e i•n travel i l t ing
dress was anything but handsome,
5. Nevertheless he received them, as if they were
friends come back from abroad, his eyes wide-opened
with joy; he listened to their requests, as if good news
were reported to him, and after giving, his contentment
surpassed that of the recipients.
6. The voices of the beggars spread about the
perfume of the fame of his munificence, and so abated
the pride of the other kings. In a similar way, the
scent of the juice that runs out of the temples of the
scent-elephant in rut, being scattered by the wind,
causes the bees to neglect the like fluid of the other
elephants 1
.
One day the king, making the tour of his alms-halls,
noticed the very small number of supplicants staying
there, in consequence of the wants of the mendicant
people being supplied. When he considered this, he
was uneasy, because his habit of almsgiving could not
well proceed.
The indigent, when coming to him, quenched
7.
their thirst (for the desired boons), not he his (thirst
for giving), when meeting with them. His passion for
charity was so great, that no requester by the extent
of his request could outdo his determination of giving.
Then this thought arose within him : ' Oh, very
blessed are those most excellent among the pious, to
1 In the original this simile is expressed by the rhetorical figure,
called jlesha.

II. THE STORY OF THE KING OF THE SIBIS. 1 I
whom the mendicants uttertheir desireswith confidence
and without restraint, so as to ask even their limbs !
But to me, as if they were terrified by harsh words of
my
refusal, they show only boldness in requesting
wealth.'
8. Now Earth, becoming aware of that exceedingly
lofty thought, how her lord holding on to charity, had
stopped the very attachment to his own flesh, trembled
as a wife would, who loves her husband.
The surface of the earth being shaken, Sumeru, the
lord of mountains, radiant with the shine of its manifold
gems, began to waver. vSakra, the Lord of the Devas
(Devendra), inquiring into the cause of this wavering,
understood that it was the sublime thought of that king
which produced the shivering of Earth's surface and
;
as he was taken up with amazement, he entered into
this reflection
:
9. ' How is this ? Does this king bear his mind so
high and feel so great a rejoicing at giving away in
charity as to conceive the thought of girding his reso-
lution to give with the strong determination of parting
with his own limbs ?
•Well, I will try him.'
Now the king, surrounded by his officials, was sitting
(on his throne, in his hall) in the midst of the assembly.
The usual summons by proclamation had been given,
inviting anybody who was in need of anything stores
;
ofwealth, silver, gold,jewels,werebeingdisclosed by the
care ofthe treasurer; boxes filled to the top with various
kinds of clothes, were being uncovered; various excel-
lent carriages, the yokes of which enclosed the necks
of different well-trained beasts of draught, were being
made to advance and the mendicants were crowding
;
in. Among them Sakra, the Lord of the Devas, having
assumed the shape of an old and blind Brahman, drew
the attention of the king. On him the king fixed his
firm, placid, and mild looks expressive of compassion
and friendliness, and he seemed with them to go to his
encounter and to embrace him. The royal attendants
requested him to say what he was wanting, but he

:
I 2
GATAKAMALA.
drew near the king, and after uttering his hail and
blessing, addressed him with these words
:
10. ' A blind, old man I have come hither from afar
begging thy eye, O highest of kings. For the purpose
of ruling the world's regular course one eye may be
O
sufficient, lotus-eyed monarch.'
Though the Bodhisattva experienced an extreme
delight at his heart's desire beinor realised, a doubt
arose within him as to whether the Brahman had really
said so or, this thought being always present to his
mind, himself had fancied so, and since he longed to
hear the very sweet words of the eye being asked, he
thus spoke to the eye-asker
ii. 'Who has instructed thee, illustrious Brahman,
to come here and to ask from me one eye ? No one, it
is said, will easily part with his eye. Who is he that
thinks the contrary of me ? '
.Sakra, the Lord of the Devas in the disguise of a
Brahman, knowing the intention of the king, answered:
12. 'It is .Sakra. His statue, instructing me to ask
thee for thy eye, has caused me to come here. Now
make real his opinion and my hope by giving me
thy eye.'
Hearing the name of .Sakra, the king thought:
' Surely, through divine power this Brahman shall
regain his eyesight in this way,' and he spoke in
a voice, the clear sound of which manifested his joy :
13. 'Brahman, I will fulfil thy wish, which has
prompted thee to come here. Thou desirest one eye
from me, I shall give thee both.
14. 'After I have adorned thy face with a pair of
bright lotus-like eyes, go thy way, putting the by-
standers first into doubt's swing as to thy identity, but
soon amazing them by the certainty of it.'
The king's counsellors, understanding that he had
decided to part with his eyes, were perplexed and
agitated, and sadness afflicted their minds. They said
to the king
:
15. 16. ' Majesty,Your too great fondness for charity
makes you overlook that this is mismanagement lead-

3
'
II. THE STORY OF THE KING OF THE SIBIS. 1
ing to evil. Be propitious, then, desist from your
purpose do not give up your eyesight For the sake
; !
of one twice-born man you must not disregard all
of us. Do not burn with the fire of sorrow your
subjects, to whom you have hitherto ensured comfort
and prosperity.
17, 18. 'Money, the source of opulence; brilliant
o-ems milch cows carriages and trained beasts of
; ;
draught vigorous elephants of graceful beauty
; ;
dwellings fit for all seasons, resounding with the noise
of the anklets 1 and by their brightness surpassing
,
t G h i e ve aut th u o m s n e - , cl a o n u d ds no : t su y c o h u a r re ey b e o s o i n gh s t, fit O to y b o e u be w s h t o owe a d r . e
the only eye of the world.
' Moreover, great king, you must but consider this :
19. 'How can the eye of one person be put in the
face of another ? If, however, divine power may
effect this, why should your eye be wanted for it ?
' Further, Your Majesty,
20. ' Of what use is eyesight to a poor man ? That
he might witness the abundance of others ? Well
then, give him money do not commit an act of
;
rashness !
Then the kin^ addressed his ministers in soft and
conciliating terms
:
21. ' He who after promising to give, makes up his
mind to withhold his gift, such a one puts on again the
bond of cupidity which he had cast off before.
22. 'He who after promising to give, does not keep
his promise, being driven from his resolution byavarice,
should he not be held for the worst of men ?
23. ' He who, having strengthened the hope of the
mendicants by engaging himself to give, pays them
with the harsh disappointment of a refusal, for him
there is no expiation.
' And with respect to your asserting " is divine
1 Not only the houses, therefore, are meant, but also the (female)
attendance ; in other words, the epithet is indicative of the richness
and magnificence of the habitations.

14 GATAKAMALA.
power of itself not sufficient to restore the eyesight to
that man ?" you should be taught thi^.
24. ' That different means are wanted to carry out
purposes, is well known, indeed. For this reason even
Destiny (Vidhi), though a deity, needs some means
or other.
' Therefore, you must not exert yourselves to ob-
struct my determination to accomplish an extraordinary
deed of charity.'
The ministers answered : ' We have only ventured
to observe to Your Majesty that you ought to give
away goods and grains and jewels, not your eye
;
when saying this, we do not entice Your Majesty to
wickedness.'
The king said
:
25. ' The very thing asked for must be given.
A gift not wished for does not afford pleasure. Of
what use is water to one carried off by the stream ?
For this reason, I shall give to this man the object he
requests.'
After this, the first minister who more than the
others had got into the intimate confidence of the
king, overlooking, owing to his solicitude, the respect
due to the king, spoke thus : ' Pray, do it not.
26. ' You are holding an empire, which is vying
with the riches of .Sakra, to the attainment of which
no one can aspire without a large amount of penance
and meditation, and the possession of which may pave
with numerous sacrifices the way to glory and Heaven;
and you care not for it ! and you are willing to give
away both your eyes With what aim do you wish
!
so ? Where on earth has there been seen such a way
of proceeding
?
27. ' By your sacrifices you have gained a place
among the celestial gods, your fame is shining far and
wide, your feet reflect the splendour ot the head-
—
ornaments of the kings (your vassals) what then is it
that you long for to give up your eyesight ? '
But the king answered that minister in a gentle tone
:
28. ' It is not the realm of the whole earth for which

5
II. THE STORY OF THE KING OF THE SIBIS. 1
I am striving' in this manner, nor is it Heaven, nor
final extinction, nor glory, but with the intention of
becoming a Saviour of the World I now provide that
this man's labour of asking be not fruitless.'
Then the king ordered one eye of his, the lovely
brightness of which appeared like a petal of a blue
lotus, to be extirpated after the precepts of the
physicians gradually and intact, and with the greatest
gladness he had it handed over to the beggar, who
asked it. Now .Sakra, the Lord of the Devas, by the
power of magic produced an illusion of such a kind
that the king and his bystanders saw that eye filling
up the eye-hole of the old Brahman. When the king
beheld the eye-asker in the possession of one unclosed
eye, his heart expanded with the utmost delight, and
he presented him with the other eye too.
29. The eyes being given away, the king's visage
looked like a lotus-pond without lotuses, yet it bore
the expression of satisfaction, not shared however by
the citizens. On the other hand, the Brahman was
seen with sound eyes
30. In the inner apartments of the palace as well as
in the town, everywhere tears of sorrow moistened
the ground. But 6akra was transported with admira-
tion and satisfaction, seeing the king's unshaken in-
tention of attaining Supreme Wisdom (Sambodhi).
And in this state of mind he entered into this
reflection
:
31. 'What a constancy! What a goodness and
a lonoincr for the £ood of the creatures Though
!
I witnessed the fact, I can scarcely believe it.
' It is riot right, then, that this person of marvellous
goodness should endure this great hardship for a long
time. I will try to render him his eyesight by showing
him the way for it.'
Afterwards, when time had healed the wounds caused
by the operation, and lessened and almost lulled
the sorrow of the inhabitants of the palace, the town,
and the country, it happened one day that the king,

6
: : :
GATAKAMALA.
1
desirous of solitary retirement, was sitting- with crossed
legs in his garden on the border of a pond of lotuses.
That spot was beset by fair and fine trees bent down
by the weight of their flowers swarms of bees were
;
humming a gentle, fresh, and odoriferous wind was
;
blowing agreeably. Suddenly 6akra, the Lord of
the Devas, presented himself before the king. Being
asked who he was, he answered
32 a. 'I am .Sakra, the Lord of the Devas, I have
come to you.'
Thereupon the king welcomed him and said that he
waited for his orders. After being thus complimented,
he again addressed the king
32 b. ' Choose some boon, holy prince (ra^arshi)
;
say on what thou desirest.'
Now the king being ever wont to give, and having
never trodden the way of miserable begging, in con-
formity with his astonishment and his lofty mind spoke
to him
:
tt 34. ' Great is my wealth, .Sakra, my army is large
and ) ), strong my blindness, however, makes death
;
welcome to me. It is impossible for me, after sup-
plying the wants of the mendicants, to see their faces
brightened by gladness and joy for this reason, O
;
Indra, I love death now.'
6akra said : ' No more of that resolution ! Only
virtuous persons come in such a state as thine. But
this thou must tell me
35. ' It is the mendicants who have caused thee to
come in this state how is it that thy mind is occupied
;
with them even now ? Say on ! do not hide the truth
from me and thou mayst take the way to immediate
V
cure
The king replied : ' Why dost thou insist upon my
boasting myself? Hear, however, Lord of the Devas.
1 This way is the Act of Truth, as Hardy, Manual of Buddhism2 ,
197, calls it. In the Pali Gataka, Sakka invites the king to it in plain
terms. Other instances of the sa/Makiriva, as it is styled in Pali, will
occur in Stories XIV, XV, XVI.

:!
II. THE STORY OF THE KING OF THE 6IBIS. IJ
36. 'As surely as the supplicatory language of
begging people both now and before is as pleasing to
my ears as the sound of benedictions, so surely may
one eye appear to me !'
No sooner had the king pronounced these words
than by the power of his firm veracity and his excellent
store of meritorious actions one eye appeared to him,
resembling a piece of a lotus-petal, encompassing
a pupil like sapphire. Rejoiced at this miraculous
appearance of his eye, the king again spoke to 6akra
37. ' And as surely as, after giving away both eyes
to him who asked but one, my mind knew no other
feeling but the utmost delight, so surely may I obtain
also the other eye !'
The king had hardly finished, when there appeared
to him another eye, the rival, as it were, of the first
one.
38-40. Upon this the earth was shaken with its
mountains the ocean flowed over its borders the
; ;
drums of the celestials spontaneously uttered deep-
toned and pleasing sounds the sky in all directions
;
looked placid and lovely the sun shone with pure
;
brightness as it does in autumn l ; a great number of
various flowers, tinged by the sandal powder which
was whirling around, fell down from heaven the
;
celestials, including Apsarasas and Ga7*as, came to the
spot, their eyes wide opened with amazement; there
blew an agreeable wind of extreme loveliness glad-
;
ness expanded in the minds of the creatures.
41-43. From all parts were heard voices of
praise, uttered by crowds of beings endowed with
great magic power. Filled with joy and admiration,
they glorified the great exploit of the king in such
exclamations : ' Oh, what loftiness ! what compas-
sion see the purity of his heart, how great it is
!
oh, how little he cares for his own pleasures! Hail
to thee, renowned one, for thy constancy and valour !
1 It was spring when the miracle happened, as is to be inferred
from the flowers being mentioned above.
C

8
' '
GATAKAMALA.
1
The world of creatures has recovered their protector
in thee, of a truth, as the lustre of thy eye-lotuses has
again expanded Surely, the stores of merit are
!
solid treasures After a lonQ" time Righteousness
!
has, indeed, obtained an immense victory !
Then .Sakra applauded him, ' Very well, very well !
and spoke again
:
44, 45. ' Thy true feeling was not hidden from me,
pure-hearted king ; so I have but rendered thee these
eyes of thine. And by means of them thou wilt have
the unencumbered power of seeing in all directions
over one hundred of yo^anas, even beyond mountains.'
Having said these words, .Sakra disappeared on the
spot.
Then the Bodhisattva, followed by his officials
',
whose wide-opened and scarcely winking eyes indi-
cated the astonishment that filled their minds, went up
in procession to his capital. That town exhibited
a festival attire, being adorned with hoisted flags and
manifold banners, the citizens looking on and the
Brahmans praising the monarch with hails and bene-
dictions. When he had seated himself in his audience-
hall, in the midst of a great crowd, made up of the
ministers in the first place, of Brahmans and elders,
townsmen and countrymen, all of whom had come to
express their respectful congratulations he preached
;
the Law r to them, taking for his text the account of
his own experience.
46-48. ' Who in the world, then, should be slow in
satisfying the wants of the mendicants with his wealth,
who has beheld how have obtained these eyes of
I
mine, endowed with divine power, in consequence
of charity-gathered merit ? In the circumference
of one hundred of yo^anas I see everything, though
hidden by many mountains, as distinctly as if it were
1 The sudden appearance of these officials and ministers is some-
what strange here. The Pali C7ataka may account for it. ' At the
same time, it is said there (IV, p. 411) that [the eyes] reappeared,
the whole attendance of the king (sabba ra^-aparisa) was present
by the power of Sakka.'

9
THE STORY OF THE KING OF THE SIBIS.
II. 1
near. What means of attaining bliss is superior
to charity, distinguished by commiseration with others
and modesty? since I, by giving away my human
eyesight, have got already in this world a superhuman
and divine vision.
49. ' Understanding this, ^ibis, make your riches
fruitful by gifts and by spending1 . This is the path
leading to glory and future happiness both in this
world and in the next.
50. 'Wealth is a contemptible thing, because it is
pithless yet it has one virtue, that it can bs given
away by ; him who aims at the welfare of the creatures
;
for if given away, it becomes a treasure (nidhana),
otherwise its ultimate object is only death (nidhana).'
So, then, it is by means of hundreds of difficult
hardships that the Lord obtained this excellent Law
for our sake for this reason its preaching is to be
;
heard with attention. [This story is also to be told on
account of the high-mindedness of the Tathagata, just
as the foregoing2 Likewise when discoursing of
.
compassion, and when demonstrating the result ofmeri-
torious actions appearing already in this world : ' in
this manner the merit, gathered by good actions, shows
already here (in this world) something like the blossom
of its power, the charming flowers ofincreasing glory.']
In the list of the contents ofthe Avadanakalpalata which Somendra
added to that poem of his father Kshemendra, I do not find our
avadana, unless it should happen to be included in No. 91, which deals
with a king ofthe *Sibis. But the edition which is being published in
the Bibl. Indica is not yet so far advanced. For the rest, like the
story of the tigress, it is alluded to in the second pallava, verse 108:
' And in my .S'ibi-birth I gave away both my eyes to a blind man, and
with (the gift of) my body preserved a pigeon from the danger caused
by a falcon.'
1 The purport of this royal precept may be illustrated by the cor-
responding parts of the narrative in the Pali Gataka. The precept
is there given twice, in prose and in verse, see Fausboll's Gataka IV,
p. 411, 22, and p. 412, 7.
2 Viz. the story ofthe tigress.
C 2

20 GATAKAMALA.
III. The Story of the Small Portion of Gruel.
(Comp. the Pali G&taka, No. 415, Fausb. III. 406-414 ; Divyavadana
VII, p. 88, Cowell's ed. ; Kathasarits. XXVII, 79-105.)
Any gift that proceeds from faith of the heart and
is bestowed on a worthy recipient produces a great
result there does not exist at all anything like a trifling
;
gift of that nature, as will be taught by the following.
In the time, when our Lord was still a Bodhisattva,
he was a king of Ko.9ala. Though he displayed his
royal virtues,such as energy, discretion, majesty, power,
and the rest in an exceedingly high degree, the brilliancy
of one virtue, his great felicity, surpassed the others.
1. His virtues, being embellished by his felicity,
shone the more; as the moonbeams do, when autumn
makes their splendour expand.
2. Fortune, who dwelt with him, distributed her
wrath and favour to the other kings in such a manner,
that she abandoned his enemies, however proud, but
like an amorous woman cherished his vassals.
His righteousness, however, prevented his mind
3.
from doing ill ; so he did not oppress at all his adver-
saries. But his dependents displayed their affection
for him in such a degree, that Fortune would not stay
with his foes.
Now one day this king recollected his last previous
existence. In consequence of remembering this he
felt greatly m — oved. He bestowed still greater
gifts in c — harity the motive and essential cause of
happiness on .Srama^as and Brahmans, the wretched
and the beggars he fostered unceasingly his obser-
;
vance of good conduct (.rila) and he kept strictly the
;
poshadha'-restrictions on sabbath-days. Moreover,
as he was desirous of bringing his people into the
way ofsalvationby magnifying the power ofmeritorious
actions, he was in the habit of uttering with a believing
1 Poshadha in Buddhistic Sanskrit = Pali uposatha, which is of
course the same word as Sanskrit upavasatha. A fuller form
uposhadha occurs in the Avadanakalpalata, VI, 76.

: :
III. THE STORY OF THE SMALL PORTION OF GRUEL. 2 1
heart in his audience-hall as well as in the inner apart-
ments of his palace these two stanzas, full of import
4. '
Attending on Buddhas1 by paying them honour,
howsoever little, cannot produce a trifling fruit. This
has been taught before only by words, now it may be
seen. Look at the rich affluence of the fruit, produced
by a small portion of saltless, dry, coarse, reddish-
brown gruel.
5. l This mighty army of mine with its beautiful
chariots and horses and its dark-blue masses of fierce
elephants the sovereignty of the whole earth great
wealth Fo ; rtune's favour my noble wife beho ; ld the
; ; :
beauty of this store offruit, produced by a small portion
of coarse gruel.'
Neither his ministers nor the worthiest among the
Brahmans nor the foremost among the townsmen,
though tormented with curiosity, ventured to question
the king as to what he meant by these two stanzas
which he was in the habit of reciting every moment.
Nowbythe king's incessant repeatingofthem the queen
also grew curious and as she felt less embarrassment
;
in putting forth her request, one day, the opportunity
of entering into conversation upon this subject pre-
1 The text has na Sugatapari/i'arya vidyate svalpikapi, the
parallel passage in the Pali Gataka may serve as its commentary
Na kir' atthi anomadassisu
Pari/iariya Buddhesu appika.
In stanza 18 of this Gataka the purport of these words of the king
k is im£ t i hu t s ; e th x e p r r e e f s o s r e e, d: ks k h s i h w i a w s a r s a r v a a v = esh Pa u li n k a hi/ k za r s i a t v a o m , ' t w a h n o u ha n s a e m x a -
tinguished his passions,' is here synonymouswith buddha. Speaking
properly, then, all wanderingmonks,who are earnestlyperformingtheir
duties as such, may be styled 'buddhas,' cp. for instance, Suttanipata,
Sammaparibba^aniyasutta, verse 12; in other terms, buddha may
sometimes be an equivalent of muni. So it is used in chapter xiv of
the Dhammapada; see the note of Prof. Max Miilleronverses 179 and
180 in Sacred Books, vol. x, p. 50, andtheverses pointedoutbyWeber,
Ind. Streifen, I, p. 147. It is also plain that the Pratyekabuddhas are
considered to belong to the general class of the Buddhas. Though
they are different from the SupremeBuddhas (Samyaksambuddha),
they are nevertheless also sugatas or buddhas. Cp. Spence Hardy,
Manual, pp. 37-39 ; Kern, Het Buddhisme, I, pp. 294-296.

: :
GATAKAMALA.
22
senting itself, she put this question in full audience
to him
6, 7. 'Verily, at all times, my lord, you are reciting, as
if you were giving vent to the gladness which is within
your heart. But my heart is troubled by curiosity
at your speaking so. If my person is allowed to hear
it, say on, then, what you mean by this utterance, sir.
A secret is nowhere proclaimed in this manner ; there-
fore, it must be a matter of public knowledge, and
I may ask you about it.'
Then the king cast a mild look of gladness on his
queen, and with a smile-blooming face he spoke
8, 9. ' When hearing this utterance of mine without
perceiving its cause, it is not only you, that are excited
by curiosity, but also the whole of my officials, my
town, and my zenana are troubled and disturbed by
the desire of knowing the meaning of it. Listen, then,
to what I am going to say.
10. ' lust as one who awakes from sleep, I remember
my existence, when I lived a servant in this very
town. Although I was keeping good conduct, I earned
a sorry livelihood by performing hired labour for people
elevated only because of their wealth.
11. 'So one day I was about to begin my service
for hire, that abode of toil, contempt, and sorrow,
striving to support (my family) and fearing, lest
should lack the means of sustenance myself; when
I
saw four 6Yama«as with subdued senses, accompanied
I
as it were by the bliss of monkhood, going about for
alms.
12. 'After bowing to them with a mind softened
by faith, I reverentially entertained them in my house
with a small dish of gruel. Out of that sprout has
sprung this tree of greatness, that the glitterings of
the crest-jewels of other kings are now reflected in the
dust on my feet.
my
13. 'Thinking of this, I recite these stanzas,
queen, and for this reason I find satisfaction in doing
meritorious actions and receiving Arhats.'
Then the queen's face expanded with gladness and

' ' :-
III. THE STORY OF THE SMALL PORTION OF GRUEL. 23
surprise. She raised her eyes respectfully to the king,
saying: 'Highly probable, indeed, is it that such
very great prosperity is the fruit produced by meri-
torious actions, since you, great king, being yourself
a witness of the result of meritorious actions, are so
anxious for (gathering) merit. For this very reason
you are disinclined to evil actions, disposed to protect
your subjects duly like a father, and intent on earning
plenty of merit.
14. 'Shining with illustrious glory enhanced by
charity, vanquisher of your rival kings waiting with
bent heads for your orders, may you for a long time
with a righteous management rule the earth up to its
wind-wrinkled ocean-border !
The king said : ' Why should this notbe ? myqueen !
15. 'In fact, I will endeavour to keep once more
the path leading to salvation, of which I have noted
the lovely marks. People will love giving, having
heard the fruit of charity how should not I be liberal,
;
having experienced it in myself?'
Now the king, tenderly looking on his queen, beheld
her shining with almost divine splendour, and desiring
to know the reason of that brightness, said again
:
16. 'Like the crescent amidst the stars you shine
in the midst of the women. Say, what deed have you
clone, my dear, having this very sweet result ?
The queen replied : ' O yes, my lord, I too have
some remembrance of my life in my former birth.'
Now, as the king gently entreated her to tell it, she
spoke
:
17. 18. 'Like something experienced in my child-
hood I recollect that being a slave, after giving with
devotion to a Muni with extinguished passions the
remnants of one dish, I fell asleep there, as it were,
and arose from sleep here. By this wholesome action,
my prince, I remember, I have obtained you for my
lord, sharing you with the earth. What you said
"surely, no benefit given to holy persons who ha — ve
extinguished their passions, can be a small one
'
these very words were then spoken by that Muni.'

;
24 GATAKAMALA.
Then the king, perceiving that the assembly was
overcome by feelings of pietyand amazement, and that
the manifestation of the result of merit had roused
in their minds a hieh esteem for meritorious actions,
earnestly pressed on the audience something like
this
:
19. ' How is it possible, then, that anybody should
not devote himself to performing meritorious actions
by practising charity and good conduct, after seeing
this large and splendid result of a good action however
small ? No, that man is not even worth looking at,
who inwrapt in the darkness of avarice, should decline
to make himself renowned for his gifts, though being
wealthy enough to do so.
20. ' If by abandoning in the right manner wealth,
once necessarily to be left and so of no use at all, any
good quality may be acquired who, then, knowing
:
the charm of virtues, would follow in this matter the
path of selfishness? And different virtues, in truth,
gladness, &c, being followed by good renown, are
founded on charity.
21. 'Almseivinsf is a oreat treasure, indeed, a trea-
sure which is always with us and is inaccessible to
thieves and the rest 1 Almsgiving cleanses the mind
.
from the dirt of the sins of selfishness and cupidity
it is an easy vehicle by which to relieve the fatigue of
the travel through Sawsara; it is our best and
constant friend, that seeks to procure manifold pleasure
and comfort for us.
22. 'All is obtained by almsgiving, whatever may
be wished for, whether it be abundance of riches or
brilliant domination, or a residence in the city of the
Devas, or beauty of the body. Who, considering this
matter so, should not practise almsgiving ?
23. 'Almsgiving, it is said, constitutes the worth of
riches; it is also called the essential cause.of domina-
tions, the grand performance of piety. Even rags for
1 That is : to fire, water, seizure from the part of the king.
Cp. Story V, stanza 8.

IV. THE STORY OF THE HEAD OF A GUILD. 25
dress, given away by the simple-minded, are a well-
bestowed gift.'
The audience respectfully approved this persuasive
discourse of the king, and felt inclined to the exercise
of charity and the like.
So any gift that proceeds from faith of the heart,
and is bestowed on a worthy recipient, produces a
great result there does not exist at all anything like
;
a trifling gift of that nature. [For this reason, by
giving — with a faithful heart to the Congregation of the
Holy 1 that most — excellent ground fit for (sowing)
meritorious actions one may obtain the utmost glad-
ness, considering thus : ' such blessings, and even
greater than these, may erelong occur to me too.
J
IV. The Story of the Head of a Guild.
(Comp. the Pali Gataka, No. 40, Fausb. I, 231-234.)
The pious wish to exercise almsgiving even in spite
of imminent peril who, then, should not be charitable
;
when safe ? This will be taught as follows.
In the time, when our Lord was still a Bodhisattva,
he was a head of a guild. In consequence of the
excessive favour of his destiny, and owing to his own
great activity, he had acquired a large estate. His
fairness and integrity in commercial transactions pro-
cured him the highest esteem amongthe people; he was
born of an illustrious family he had acquainted himself
;
with various branches of learning and art, and by them
purified his mind. These qualities and his noble
virtues caused him to be honoured by the king. As
he was always keeping the precept of almsgiving, he
shared his opulence with the people.
The mendicants loving him, praised his name
1.
far and wide, so as to fill all parts of the horizon with
the high reputation of his prowess as an almsgiver.
1 Arvasawirhe.

26 GATAKAMALA.
2. With him, no one indigent was floating on the
swing of doubt as to whether he would give or not.
Trusting in this benefactor of renowned exploits, the
mendicants were bold enough to put forth their wants
freely.
3. And he, for his part, did not keep his wealth
from them, neither for his own pleasures, nor striving
to emulate others, nor overcome by avarice. It was
impossible for him to see the suffering of the mendi-
cants, and for this reason he avoided saying ' no to
'
them.
One day, at meal-time, when the Great Being had
just bathed and anointed himself, and a complete
dinner made up of various dishes of hard and soft
food and the rest, dressed by skilled and excellent
cooks, and so prepared as to please by their colour,
smell, taste, touch, &c, was served up, a mendicant
came near his house. It was a Pratyekabuddha, who
by the fire of his knowledge had burned away all the
fuel of innate evil passions, and now desired to increase
the merit of the Bodhisattva. He placed himself in
the gateway.
There he stood without apprehension, without
4.
agitation, looking firmly and quietly 1 to no greater
distance before him than the length of a yoke 2 in
,
a quiet attitude, holding his lotus-white fingers clasped
on his almsbowl.
Now Mara, the Wicked One, could not bear the
Bodhisattva to enjoy that bliss of almsgiving. In
order to put an obstacle in his way, he created by
magic between the Reverend and the threshold of
the entrance-door a very deep hell measuring several
fathoms in width. It offered a dreadful sight, accom-
panied with terrible sounds tremulous flames were
;
burning awfully within it contained many hundreds
;
of men in great agony.
1 Read pranma instead of pra»ama°, an error of print of
course.
2 Cp. Lalitavistara (Bibl. Ind.), p- 230 infra, BuddhaX-arita X, 13.

IV. THE STORY OF THE HEAD OF A GUILD. 2"]
In the meanwhile the Bodhisattva, seeing the Pra-
tyekabuddha come in search of alms, said to his wife
:
' My dear, go yourself and give an abundant portion
of food to the holy man.' She said she would do so,
and went off with excellent hard and soft food but
;
beholding the hell near the gateway, she suddenly
turned on her heels, terror-stricken and with bewildered
looks. When her husband asked her what was the
matter, she could hardly tell the sudden fright had
;
almost barred her throat. As the Bodhisattva, how-
ever, was uneasy at the thought that this holy man
mierht turn back from his house without receiving his
beeped meal, he did not heed what she told him, but
takine the excellent hard and soft food, came himself,
desiring to fill with it the almsbowl of the Great-
Minded One. When he arrived near the gateway,
he saw that most dreadful hell between. And whilst
he considered what could be the meaning of this, Mara,
the Wicked One, went out of the house-wall, and
showing his divine and marvellous shape, stood in the
air, and, as if he wished to do good to the Bodhisattva,
spoke: 'Householder, this is the great hell, named
Maharaurava.
—
5. ' Here is the — abode an abode, out of which it is
difficult to escape of those who, greedy of the prais-
ing voices of the beggars, desire to give away wealth,
indulging in the vicious passion for charity. In this
hell they must stay for many thousands of autumns.
6. ' Material prosperity (artha) is the principal cause
of the world's regular striving after the triad of objects.
Whoso injures artha, injures righteousness (dharma)
How
too 1 . is it possible, then, that the injurer of
righteousness by destroying material prosperity, should
not stay in hell ?
1 The idea which underlies this assertion is often met with in
Biahmanical literature. If practising dharma is the same thing as
performing the sacrifices to the deities, material prosperity may be
justly styled the foundation-ground or substratum of dharma for the
;
right performance of sacrifices requires the possession of goods.

28 GATAKAMALA.
7. ' Thou hast sinned, being attached to charity and
destroying thy wealth, which is the root of dharma.
For this reason this flame-tongued hell, that looks like
the face of Narakantaka 1 has come to thy encounter
J
in order to devour thee.
8. ' Well then, desist from giving, lest thou imme-
diately fall down and share the fate of those alms-
givers, who shrink away from pain and are weeping
piteously.
9. ' The recipients, on the other hand, who have
ceased, from the bad custom of giving, obtain the
rank of Devas. Therefore, desist from thy effort for
charity, which obstructs the way to Heaven, and rather
V
apply thyself to restraint
The Bodhisattva, however, knew him : ' Surely, this
is an attempt of the Evil One to thwart my alms-
giving.' And understanding so, he made, in truth,
a vigorous reply, yet in accordance with his firm
attachment to virtue, without breaking modesty and
kindness of words. He spoke thus to him
:
10-12. ' It is with respect to my welfare, that thou
hast had the kindness to show me the path of the
pious. Indeed, it is most proper for divine beings to
show by their actions their skill in feeling compassion
for others. Nevertheless, it would have been wise to
use that way of stopping the illness before its appear-
ance, or immediately after its first symptoms. For if
a sickness have already made progress 3 by the fault
of bad treatment, the desire for cure will but tend to
calamity. So this passion of mine for charity has
already spread, I fear, beyond the compass of medical
1 See Vishwupurawa IV, chapter xxix (Wilson, p. 581).
2 The Evil One uses ambiguous expressions purposely. The
worthy recipients of the gifts are indeed on the way that leads to
salvation ; and the 'restraint' sawyama he recommends, may imply
the meaning of the self-restraint of the monks. The Bodhisattva
in his well-turned answer takes care to keep the same ambiguous
word (see stanza 15, sawyamayishyatapi).
3 The reading prayamam, proposed by Prof. Kern in the various
readings ofhis edition, is undoubtedly right. Cp. pp. 78, 2; 96, 23;
111,16; 171,15; 182,3; 238, 1 1 of his edition.

TV. THE STORY OF THE HEAD OF A GUILD. 2Q.
cure, inasmuch as my mind will never shrink from
almsgiving, notwithstanding thy well-wishing counsel.
IT,, 14. 'As for what thou saidst about unrighteous-
ness arising from charity and wealth being the principal
cause of righteousness, my weak human understanding
cannot grasp how wealth without charity can be called
the path of virtue. Why, tell me, please, at what time
is it that wealth produces virtue ? whether when
laid up as a treasure, or when robbed violently by
thieves, or when sunk away to the bottom of the sea,
or when having become fuel for fire ?
15, 16. 'Further, thou saidst, "the giver goes to
hell and the receiver to the celestial abodes." Speak-
ing so, however, thou hast increased my longing for
works of charity, though endeavouring to restrain me.
Yea, may that word of thine be fulfilled, and those
who beg from me rise to heaven ! For it is not as
a means of procuring my own happiness that I give in
charity, but 1 love charity that I may do good to the
world.'
Then Mara, the Wicked One, once more addressed
the Bodhisattva, speaking earnestly as though he were
a wcll-meaninor friend.
i 7. ' Decide thyself, whether I have spoken for thy
good or idle talk, and afterwards go as thou —desirest.
Thou shalt remember me with high regard either
happy or remorseful.'
The Bodhisattva said : ' Sir, thou must excuse me.
18. 'I will fall of my own accord into this fiercely
blazing hell headlong, a prey to the flames, that will
lick at me, rather than at the due time of honouring
the mendicants, who show me their affection byrequest-
ing from me, incur the guilt of neglecting them.'
—
After so speaking, the Bodhisattva relying on the
power of his destiny and knowing that almsgiving
—
cannot at any rate entail evil stepped forth across
the hell without heeding his family and his attendants,
who were eager to withhold him his mind was not
;
overcome by terror, and his desire of giving was still
increased.

GATAKAMALA.
3<3
19. Then, owing to the power of his merit, in the
midst of the hell a lotus sprang up, not rooted in
mud like other lotuses1 With its row of stamen-
.
teeth 2 it seemed to laugh contemptuously at Mara.
And with the aid of the lotus, produced out of the
large amount of his merit, the Bodhisattva having
reached the Pratyekabuddha, filled his bowl with food,
while his heart was expanding with gladness and joy.
20. The monk, in order to show his satisfaction,
rose into the air. There he displayed his splendour,
raining and flaming with as great a majesty as a cloud
from which appear flashes of lightning.
21. Mara, on the other hand, seeing his design
overturned, was in low spirits and lost accordingly his
splendour. He dared no longer look in the face of
the Bodhisattva, and soon he disappeared with his hell.
Why has this been taught ? (For this purpose) : in
this manner the pious wish to exercise almsgiving
even in spite of imminent peril who, then, should not
;
be charitable when safe ? [Further this too is to be
propounded : ' the virtuous cannot be induced even
by fear to take the wrong way.']
V. The Story of Avishahva, the Head of a Guild.
(Comp. the Pali £ataka, No. 340, Fausb. Ill, 128-132.) 3
The virtuous do not allow themselves to be deficient
in the virtue of charity either from respect to the loss
of their fortune, or from the prospect of riches, as will
be taught in the following.
1 In the original there is a pun, paraka^a, 'originating in mud,
born from mud,' being a common word for 'lotus.'
2 Instead ofdanti° I read danta°.
3 In the Pali redaction the story is told of the se///n Visayha, not
Avisayha, in consequence, it seems, of the misinterpretation of the
first pada of the first gatha in this story; that line should be read
adasi danani pure 'visayha. Likewise in the Nidanakatha
(Fausb. I, p. 45, 1. 14) we must read ^andakumarakale 'vishah-
vase///zikale.

THE STORY OF AVISIIAUYA.
In the time, when our Lord was yet a Bodhisattva,
he was the head ofa guild, born of an illustrious family.
He possessed many virtues: liberality, modesty, morals,
sacred learning, spiritual knowledge ', humility, &c.
His affluent riches made him appear another K libera.
He spent them by admitting everybody as his guest
and practising charity like an everlasting sacrifice
(sattra). In short, he was the best of almsgivers and
lived for the good of mankind. On account of his
being invincible by vices, selfishness, and the rest, he
was known under the name of Avishahya (that is, ' the
Invincible One ').
i. The sight of the mendicants had the same effect
on him, as he had on the mendicants. On both sides
it was a principal cause of gladness, since it destroyed
the uncertainty as to the attainment of the object
wished for.
2. When requested to give, he was not capable of
saying 'no.' His great compassion had left no room
in his heart for attachment to wealth.
3. His joy rose to the highest pitch, when mendi-
cants carried away the best things out of his house.
For he knew those so-called goods to be the source
of violent and heavy calamities, and therefore to cause
dissatisfaction in a short time and without any apparent
reason.
4. As a rule, indeed, riches, being joined with
covetousness, may be called caravans on the road
towards wretchedness. With him, on the contrary,
they conduced to the bliss of both himself and others
;
his goods appeared to be what is signified by their
name.
So then, that Great Being 1 bestowed large oifts on
the mendicant people all around, and satisfied them
wholly, giving to each according to his desire and
generously, and adorning his bounty by paying a pious
1 The 'sacred learning' is jruta, knowledge of Vaidik texts. &c,
the 'spiritual knowledge,' gfiana, to be learnt from the Upanishads,
the philosophical Darjanas and the like.

:
32 GATAKAMALA.
respect to the requesters. When J>akra, the Lord of
the Devas, heard of his lofty munificence, he was
transported with amazement and wishing- to try the
;
firmness of his resolution, he caused the every-day
provisions of money, grains, jewels, clothes to dis-
appear day after day ; ' perhaps, so he thought, his
apprehension at least of the loss of his goods may
entice him -to self-interest.' Nevertheless, the Great
Being remained intent on the virtue of charity.
As often as his goods disappeared, like water-
5.
drops hit by the sun-darts, so often did he order
them to be fetched again from his house, as if it were
on fire, and continued his large gifts.
*Sakra, the Lord of the Devas, understanding the
Great Being to be bent as intently as ever on deeds of
charity, although his riches always went on decreasing,
his amazement crew. Now he concealed the whole of
his wealth in one night, except a coil of rope and
a sickle. When the Bodhisattva, as usual, awoke
at daybreak, he nowhere saw his household goods,
neither furniture, nor money, nor grains, nor clothes,
nor even his attendants. His house looked quite
empty, desolate, and sad, as if it were plundered by
Rakshasas ; in short, it offered an afflicting aspect.
Then he began to reflect upon the matter and
;
searching about, he found nothing left but that coil
of rope and that sickle. And he considered thus
' Perhaps somebody, not accustomed to begging, but
wont to get his livelihood by his own energy, has in
this manner shown a favour to my house. In that
case, my goods are well spent. If, however, by the
fault of my destiny, some person whom my high rank
has made envious, has caused them to run away with-
out being of use to any one, it is a great pity.
6. ' The fickleness of Fortune's friendship was
known to me long before but that the indigent have
come to grief by it, on this ; account my heart aches.
7. 'When coming to my empty house, how will
they feel, my mendicants, who for a long time were
accustomed to the enjoyment of my gifts and my

'
V. THE STORY OF AVISHAHYA. 33
hospitality ? Will they not be like thirsty people
coming to a dried-up pond ?
Nevertheless, the Bodhisattva did not yield to the
feeling of affliction and sadness, but kept the constancy
of his mind, and though, being in this condition, he
was not capable of asking others, not even his inti-
mates, as he never had followed the course of eettine
his livelihood by begging. Moreover, since he ex-
perienced himself that it is hard to beg, his com-
passion for the begging people became still greater.
Then that High-minded One, still with the disposition
to earn, from those who lived by begging their food,
kind words of welcome and the like, took that coil of
rope and that sickle, and went out to weed grass day
after day. With the little money he earned by selling
the grass, he attended to the wants of the mendicants.
But .Sakra, the Lord of the Devas, seeing his im-
perturbable calmness and his devotion to almsgiving
even in a state of extreme poverty, was filled not only
with astonishment, but also with admiration. Showing
his wonderful celestial body, he stood in the air and
spoke to the Great Being to dissuade him from
giving: 'Householder,
8-10. ' Neither thieves have robbed thee of thy
wealth, nor water, nor fire, nor princes. It is thy own
largesses, that have brought thee into this condition,
which alarms thy friends. For this reason I tell thee for
thy own good restrain thy passionate love of charity.
:
Though being as poor as thou art now, if thou dost
not give, thou mayst recover thy former beautiful
riches. By constant consuming of however little at
a time, possessions fade bygathering ant-hills become
;
high. For him who sees this, the only way of increas-
ing his property is self-restraint.'
The Bodhisattva,however,displayed hishigh-minded-
ness and his constant practice of charity, when he
answered 6akra in this manner
:
11. 'A gentleman (arya), however distressed, will
scarcely do anything ignoble (anarya), O thou
Thousand-eyed One! Never let such wealth be mine,
D

34 GATAKAMALA.
O .Sakra, to obtain which I should have to live as
a miser.
12, 13. 'Who, thinking himself to belong to an
honest family, would strike with the clear-sky thunder-
bolt of his refusal the wretched men who desire to find
a remedy for their misery by death-like begging? Is
it possible, then, that such a one as I am, should
accept any jewel, or wealth, or even the realm among
the Celestials, and not use it for the purpose ofgladden-
ing the faces of the beggars, grown pale by the pain
of asking ?
14. 'Such receiving as would only tend to increase
the vice of selfishness, not to strengthen the propensity
to give away, must be entirely abandoned by such as
me for it is a calamity in disguise.
;
15. 'Wealth is as fickle as a flash of lightning; it
may come to every one, and it is the cause of many
calamities but almsgiving is a source of happiness.
;
This being so, how may a nobleman cling to selfish-
ness
?
16. 'Therefore, .Sakra, thou hast shown me thy
good nature, I thank thee also for thy commiseration
and well-wishing words yet my heart is too much
;
accustomed to the gladness caused by deeds of charity.
How, then, can it take delight in the wrong way ?
17. 'Do not, however, bend thy mind to anger on
this account, I pray thee ! Indeed, it is impossible to
assault the hostile fortress of my native character with
small forces.'
.Sakra spoke : ' Householder, what thou describest is
the line of conduct for a wealthy man, whose treasury
and granary are full to the top, for whom manifold
and abundant work is well-performed (by his servants),
who has assured his future, and has gained domi-
nation among men, but that conduct does not suit thy
condition. See,
18-20. 'Thou must, before all, through honest
business either carried on by exerting thy own
sagacity, or by following the traditional line of trade
ofthy family, in so far as it be compatible with thy fame,

V. THE STORY OF AVISHAHYA. 35
gather riches surpassing, like the sun, the splendour
of thy rivals then on proper occasions, display thy
;
opulence to the people, and rejoice by it thy relations
and friends. Afterwards, having obtained due honour
even from the part of the king and enjoying Fortune's
favour, like the embrace of a loving sweetheart, if
then there may arise in thee the inclination for charity
or worldly pleasures, nobody will blame thee. But
the sole love of charity without means makes a man
come to calamity and resemble a bird desiring to rise
in the air with wings not yet full-grown.
21. ' Therefore, thou must acquire wealth by practis-
ing restraint and pursuing humble aims, and mean-
while give up the longing for almsgiving. And what
meanness can there be in this after all, if thou dost
not give, possessing nothing ? '
The Bodhisattva replied : ' Pray, thy Highness
must not urge me.
22, 23. 'Even he who cares more for his own
interest than for the benefit of others, ought to give
in charity, not caring for riches. For great opulence
affords him no such gladness, as is caused by the
satisfaction he enjoys by subduing covetousness with
charitable deeds. Add to this, that mere riches do
not lead to Heaven, but charity alone is sufficient to
obtain a holy reputation further, that riches are an
;
impediment to the subduing ofselfishness and the other
vices. Who, then, should not observe charity ?
24. ' He, however, who in order to protect the
creatures surrounded by old age and death, desires to
give away his very self in alms, moved by compassion
;
he whom the sufferings of others forbid to enjoy the
relish of pleasures say, of what use will be to him
;
the very great bliss, possessed by thee ?
' Hear also this, Lord of the Devas.
25. 'The duration of our life is as uncertain as the
prosperity of our wealth. Thus reflecting, we must not
care for riches, when getting a mendicant.
26. 'If one carriage has beaten a track on the
ground, a second goes by that track with some confi-
d 2

' :
36 GATAKAMALA.
dence, and so on. For this reason I will not spurn
this first good road, nor prefer conducting my carriage
on the wrong path.
27. 'And should I once more come to great wealth,
it shall to a certainty enrapture the minds of the
mendicants and for the present, even in this con-
;
dition, I will give alms according to my means. And
may I never be careless in keeping my vow of charity,
.Sakra !
On. these words .5akra, the Lord of the Devas, being
wholly propitiated, exclaimed with praise : ' Excellent,
excellent,' and looking at him with admiration and
kindness, spoke
28, 29. ' (Other) people run after riches by every
trade, be it low and rough and prejudicial to their
reputation, not minding danger, since they are at-
tached to their own pleasures and misguided by their
inconsiderateness. Thou, on the contrary, dost not
mind the loss of thy wealth, nor the deficiency of thy
pleasures, nor my temptation keeping thy mind firmly
;
intent on promoting the welfare of others, thou hast
manifested the greatness of thy excellent nature
!
30. ' Ah ! how thy heart shines with the lustre of
exceeding loftiness, and how it has wiped off entirely
the darkness of selfish feelings, that even after the
loss of thy riches the hope for recovering them cannot
spoil it by bringing about reduction of its charitable-
ness
!
31. 'Yet, since thou sufferest at the suffering of
others, and moved by compassion strivest for the good
of the world, it is no wonder after all, that I have not
been able to deter thee from almsgiving. As little
is the Snow-bright Mountain shaken by the wind.
32. ' But it is in order to enhance thy fame by trial,
that I have hidden that wealth of thine. Not otherwise
than by trial can a gem, though beautiful, reach the
great value of a renowned jewel.
2,^. 'Well then, pour thy gifts down on the mendi-
cants, satisfy them as a great rain-cloud fills the pools.
By my favour thou shalt never experience the loss of

VI. THE STORY OF THE HARE. 37
thy wealth, and thou must forgive me my behaviour
towards thee.'
After praising him so, *Sakra restored his large estate
to him, and obtained his pardon, then he disappeared
on the spot.
In this manner, then, the virtuous do not allow
themselves to be deficient in the virtue of chanty
either through regard to the loss of their fortune, or
through the prospect of riches.
VI. The Story of the Hare.
(Comp. the Pali Gataka, No. 316, Fausb. Ill, 51-56 ; A'ariyapi/aka I,
10; Avadana-rataka in Feer's transl. Ann. du Musee Guimet,
XVIII, 142 \)
The practice of charity according to their power by
the Great-minded, even when in the state of beasts, is
a demonstrated fact who then, being a man, should
;
not be charitable ? This is taught by the following.
In some inhabited region of a forest there was
a spot frequented by ascetics. It was beset with
thickets made up of lovely creepers, grasses, and
trees abounding in flowers and fruits adorned on
its bo ; undary with a river, the stream of ; which was as
blue and as pure as lapis lazuli; its ground, covered
with a carpet of tender grass, was soft to the touch
and handsome to look at. There the Bodhisattva
lived a hare.
1. In consequence of his goodness, his splendid
figure, his superior strength, and his great vigour, not
suspected by the small animals nor fearing others, he
behaved like the king of animals in that part of the
forest.
2. Satisfying his wants with blades of grass, he bore
1 Inthe Avadanakalpalatathe hare that gave up his body is No. 104.
It is much akin to the version of the Avadana^ataka, as I ascertained
from the two Cambridge MSS. ofthe Avadanakalpalata.

38 GATAKAMALA.
the handsome appearance of a Muni. For the ascetic's
skin he wore his own, his bark-garment was the hairs
of his body.
As everything he did in thought, speech, and
3.
action was purified by his friendliness, most of the
animals given to wickedness were like his pupils and
friends 1
.
But more especially he had caught the hearts of an
otter, a jackal, and an ape. They became his com-
panions, attracted by the love and respect which his
eminent virtues inspired in them. Like relations whose
affection is founded on mutual relationship, like friends
whose friendship has grown by the compliance to each
other's wishes, they passed their time rejoicing together.
Opposed to the nature of the brutes, they showed
compassion to living beings, and their cupidity being
extinguished, they forgot to practise theft. By this
behaviour and by their having regard to good re-
nown conformably to (the precepts of) righteousness
(dharma), by their keen understanding and, owing to
this, by their close observance of religious obligations
in the manner approved by the pious, theyroused even
the surprise of the deities. —
4, 5. If out of the two lines of conduct that which
complies with pleasures and checks virtue, and that
which is—in accordance with virtue and obstructs
pleasures a man applies himself to the virtuous side,
he is already illustrious, how much more a being that
has the shape of a beast But among them, he who
!
bore the figure of a hare and was their teacher, was
so pious, he esteemed the practice of compassion for
others so highly, and his excellent native character was
accompanied by such a set of virtues, that their renown
reached even the world of the Devas.
One day at evening-time, the Great-minded One
1 The text is slightly corrupt here. The MSS. have °sukha//, the
printed text cmukha^, but in the various readings the editor
again adopts the reading of the MSS. But now Prof. Kern tells me
he should rather suppose that the original reading was csakha//,
which suits the sense better.

:
VI. THE STORY OF THE HARE. 39
was in the company of his friends, who had come to
him to hear him preach the Law and reverentially sat
down at his feet. The moon, then being; at a great
distance from the sun, showed its orb almost full and
resembling by its bright beauty a silver mirror without
handle. When the Bodhisattva beheld it showing its
disc not fully rounded on one side l and considered that
,
it was the moon of the fourteenth of the bright half,
that had risen, he said to his comrades
6. ' See ! The moon by the beauty of its almost
complete orb is announcing with a laughing face as it
were the holyday of sabbath (poshadha) to the pious.
' Surely, to-morrow is the fifteenth. Ye must
perform accordingly the religious duties which are
prescribed for the sabbath, and not satisfy the want of
sustaining your body before honouring some guest at
the time appearing with excellent food obtained in
a rig;ht manner. Ye must consider thus
:
7, 8. ' Every union has separation at its end, of
high rank the conclusion is dreary downfall ; life is as
frail and fickle as a flash of lightning. It is for this
very reason, that ye must be upon your guard against
carelessness (in the fulfilment of your duties), and also
endeavour to increase your merit by charity, which
has good conduct (sila) for its ornament. Meritorious
actions, indeed, are the strongest support for the
creatures moving round in the troublesome succession
of births.
9, 10. ' That the moon by its lovely brightness
outdoes the lustre of the host of stars, that the sun's
splendour overpowers the (other) luminaries, is due to
the sublimity of the qualities produced by merit. It
is also by the power of their merit that mighty kings
cause presumptuous high officials and princes to bear,
like excellent horses, willingly and with abated pride
the yoke of their command.
1 Instead of ishatpar-yvapavr/ttabimbaw, the reading of the
MSS., I think we should read capakmtabimba;«. In the evening
before full-moon's day the disc of the moon is not completely round,
presenting one side so as to seem a little flattened.

! ! !
4-0 GATAKAMALA.
ii. 'But if they are devoid of merit, misfortune
goes after them, be they ever moving about on the
road of political wisdom (niti) 1 For that unhappi-
.
ness, being rebuffed by the excess of merit, hovers, as
if moved by wrath, round the possessors of demerit.
12. 'Leave then that path of demerit; suffering is
underlying it, and it is connected with dishonour. But
merit being the illustrious source and instrument of
happiness, ye must keep your mind intent on all
opportunities of gathering it.'
The others, after listening to his teaching, said
amen, and saluting him with respect circumambulated
him from left to right, then they went off each to his
dwelling. When his comrades were not far off, the
Great-minded One entered upon this reflection
:
13-15. 'They are able to honour with some food or
other the guest that may happen to arrive, but I am
here in a pitiful condition. It is in no way possible to
present a guest with the very bitter blades of grass
M I y cu p t ow o e ff rl w e i s t s h ne m ss y a t ff e l e i t c h t . s m A e l . as O ! f ho w w ha h t el u p s l e e , ss th I en a , m is
life to me, since a guest that ouoht to be a matter of
joy to me, must in this manner become a matter of
sorrow
' On what occasion, then, may this worthless body,
which is not even able to attend on a guest, be given
up so as to conduce to the profit ofanybody ? ' When
his reflection had come to that point, the Great-minded
One recovered his keenness of thought. Well
'
16. 'The property which will suit the purpose of
honouring any guest is easy to be got ; for it is in my
power ; it is unobjectionable ; it belongs to none but
me indeed, it is the property of my body.
;
' Why, then, should I be in trouble ?
1 The political wisdom, which aims at attaining worldly ends by
worldly means, and makes morals subordinate to self-interest, is
taught in such books as Kamandaki's Nituastra, *Sukra's Nitisara,
in the PawX'atantra and the Hitopadeja. It is considered sinful by
Buddhistic lore. The Gatakamala. often reproves it, see for instance,
IX, 10; XXIII. 51.

1
VI. THE STORY OF THE HARE. 4
17. 'Yes, I have found proper food for my guest;
now, my heart, abandon thy grief and thy sadness
!
With this vile body of mine I will practise hospitality
and satisfy the want of my guest.'
Havino- thus resolved, the Great Beinq- felt an
extreme delight as though he had obtained a very
great gain, and remained there (in his dwelling, waiting
for some guest).
18. Now, when that sublime reflection had presented
itself to the Great Being's mind, the Celestials mani-
fested their propitiousness and their power.
19-21. Earth shook with her mountains, as if from
joy, nor was her garment, the Ocean, quiet1 divine
;
drums resounded in the sky the regions of the horizon
;
were ornamented with a placid sheen all around
;
clouds of a pleasant aspect, which were girded with
lightnings and gave forth prolonged soft rattlings of
thunder, strewed on him a shower of flowers falling
close together, so as to spread the pollen through the
air by their contact. The god of wind, too, showed
him his esteem blowing steadily he bore to him the
;
fragrant flower-dust from various trees, as if out of
gladness he presented him with gauzy veils, bearing
them up and so disarranging the figures interwoven in
them.
As the deities, rejoiced and astonished, were praising
everywhere the marvellous resolution of the Great
Being, .Sakra, the Lord of the Devas, became aware of
it ; and curiosity and surprise overtaking his mind, he
was desirous of knowing the truth about his disposition.
On the next day at noon-tide, when the sun, ascending
in the midst of the sky, darts his sharpest beams when
;
the horizon, clothed in a net of trembling rays of light
and veiled with the outburst of radiant heat, does not
suffer itself to be looked upon when shadows are con-
;
tracting when the interior of the woods resounds with
;
the loud shrieks of the cicadae when birds cease to
;
1 Read babhuvanibhr/ta°. Cp. supra, II, 38, and Bodhisattva-
vadanakalpalata II, 52.

: :
42 GATAKAMALA.
show themselves and the vigour of travelling- people
is exhausted by heat and fatigue : in that time of the
day, then, Sakra, the chief (adhipati) of the Devas
having assumed the figure of a Brahman, cried out not
far from the spot where the four animals were living.
He wept and wailed aloud, like one who has lost his
way, and as one worn out with hunger and thirst,
weariness and sorrow.
22. 'Alone and astray, having lost my caravan,
I am roaming through the deep forest, exhausted by
hunger and lassitude. Help me, ye pious!
23. ' Not knowing the right way nor the wrong,
having lost my faculty of orientation, wandering at
random, alone in this wilderness, I suffer from heat,
from thirst, from fatigue. Who will rejoice me by
friendly words of hospitality ? '
The Great Beings, touched in their heart and
alarmed by the sound of his piteous outcries for help,
quickly went to that spot, and beholding him who
offered the miserable appearance of a traveller gone
astray, approached him and in a respectful manner
spoke to him these words of comfort
24. 25. 'Be no more disturbed, thinking thou art
astray in the wilderness with us thou art altogether as
;
if thou wert with thine own disciples. Therefore,
grant us the favour of accepting to-day our attendance,
gentle sir to-morrow thou mayst go thy way accord-
;
ing to thy wish.'
Then the otter, understanding from his silence that
he accepted the invitation, went off hastily joy and
agitation quickened his pace. He came b ; ack with
seven rohita-fishes, which he offered him, saying:
26. ' These seven fishes I found on the dry ground,
where they were lying motionless, as if asleep through
lassitude either they have been left there by fisher-
;
men who forgot them, or they have jumped upon the
shore through fear. Feed on them, and stay here.'
Then the jackal also brought to him such food
as he happened to have at that time, and after
bowing reverentially, he spoke with deference thus

'
VI. THE STORY OF THE HARE. 43
27. ' Here, traveller, is one lizard and a vessel of sour
milk, left by somebody grant me the benefit of thy
;
enjoying them, and take thy abode in this forest this
night, 6 thou who art an abode of virtues !
*So speaking he handed them over to him with an
extreme gladness of mind.
Then the monkey drew near. He brought mango-
fruits, ripe and consequently distinguished by their
softness, their strong orange colour, as if they were
dyed with red orpiment, their very red stalk-ends,
and their roundness and performing the reverence
;
of the a;^ali, he spoke:
28. ' Ripe mangos, delicious water, shadow refreshing
O
like the pleasure of good society, these things, best
of those who know the brahma, I have for thee.
Enjoy them, and stay this night here.'
Then the hare approached, and as soon as he had
made his reverence, he bade him accept the offer of
his own body. Thus he spoke, looking up to him
with great regard
:
29. 'A hare, who has grown up in the forest, has no
beans nor sesamum seeds nor grains of rice to offer, but
prepare this body of mine with fire, and having fed
upon it stay over this night in this hermitage.
30. ' On the holiday of a mendicant's arrival every
one provides him with whatever of his goods may
be a means of supplying his wants. But my wealth
is limited to my body ; take it, then, this whole of my
possessions.'
.Sakra answered
31. 'How is i : t possible that anybody like me
should kill another living being? And how much
less a beino- like thee, who hast shown friendship
to me ? '
The hare said : ' Verily, this becomes well a Brah-
man, inclined to compassion. Well then, thou must
grant me at least the favour of resting here in this
place in the mean while 1 think I shall find in some
way or ; other the means of showing my favour to thee.
Now 6akra, the Lord of the Devas, understanding

—
44
GATAKAMAALAA
his intention, created by magic a heap of charcoal
burning without smoke this mass had the colour
;
of purified gold, very thin flames shot forth out of
it, and a multitude of sparks were scattered about.
The hare, who was looking around on all sides,
perceived that fire. On seeing it, he said, rejoiced,
to .Sakra : ' I have found that means of showing: thee
my favour. Thou, then, must fulfil the hope with
which I give thee this boon, and enjoy my body. See,
great Brahman,
32. ' It is my duty to give in charity, and my heart
is inclined to do so, and in a person like thee I have
met with a worthy guest such an opportunity for
;
giving cannot be easily obtained. Let then my
charity not be useless, inasmuch as it depends on
thee.'
So saying the Great-minded One persuaded him,
and after showing him by his salutation his esteem,
his respect, and his hospitable mind
33. Then, with the utmost gladness, like one
desirous of wealth on suddenly beholding a treasure,
he threw himself in that blazing fire, as the supreme
ha;?zsa plunges into a pond with laughing lotuses.
When the chief of the Devas saw this deed, he was
affected with the highest admiration. Reassuming his
own shape, he praised the Great Being with words
both agreeable to the mind and the ears and preceded
by a shower of celestial flowers. Then with his
delicate hands of a rich lustre, like that of the petal
of the white lotus, and embellished with their fingers
resplendent like jewel ornaments, he took him up him-
self and showed him to the Celestials. ' Behold, ye
Devas, inhabitants of the celestial residence, behold
and rejoice at this astonishing deed, this heroic
exploit of this Great Being.
34. 'Oh, how he has given away his body without
hesitation to-day, to be charitable to his guest But
!
the fickle-minded1 are not even able to give up, with-
1 Strengthofmind, constancy, earnestness, wisdom and virtue areall

'
VI. THE STORY OF THE HARE. 45
out trembling, faded flowers, the remainder of a
sacrifice.
35. 'What a contrast between the animal species,
which he belongs to, and the loftiness of his self-
sacrifice, the sharpness of his mind! Indeed, he
confoundsall such as are slow in striving for meritorious
actions, deities as well as men.
36. ' Oh, how his mind is impregnated with the
fragrance of a constant practice of virtues! How he
loves good conduct, as he manifested by his sublime
deed !
Then, in order to glorify that extraordinary fact,
and having in view the good of the world, .5akra
adorned with the image of the hare as a distinctive
—
mark both peaks on the top of the belvederes one
on his most excellent palace Vai^aya — nta and the other
c
on Sudharma, the hall of the Devas and likewise the
disc of the moon.
37. 38. At full-moon even now that image ofthe hare
(^a^a) appears in the moon's disc in the sky, as
a reflected image shines in a silver mirror. From
that time onward A'andra (the Moon), named also the
Ornament of the Night and the Cause of the Brilliancy
of the Night-waterlilies, is famous in the world as the
Hare-marked (^asahka).
And the others, the otter, the jackal, and the ape,
disappeared thereafter (from the earth) and arrived
in the world of the Devas, thanks to their possessing
such a holy friend.
So then the practice of charity according to their
power by Great Beings, even when in the state of
beasts, is a demonstrated fact ; who, then, being a man,
should not be charitable ? [Moreover, this too is to be
propounded : ' Even beasts are honoured by the pious
for their attachment to virtues for this reason one
;
must be intent on virtues.]
implied by the Buddhistic term dhira; its opposite, adhira, denotes
therefore those who possess the opposed qualities, the 'fickle-minded.'

:
46 GATAKAMALA.
VII. The Story of Agastya.
(Comp. the Pali Gataka, No. 480, Fausb. IV, 236-242 and A^ariya-
;
pi/aka I, 1.)
A
heroic practice of liberality is an ornament even
to ascetics, how much more to householders as is
;
taught by the following.
In the time, when our Lord, still being a Bodhisattva,
was moving on his road through Sawsara for the
good of the world, he was born of an illustrious family
of Brahmans, which being distinguished by great
purity of conduct might pass for an ornament of the
earth. His birth enhanced the lustre of this family
in the same way as the moon rising in autumn with
full and spotless orb, beautifies the firmament. He
had in due order obtained the different sacraments
ordained by the sacred texts and the tradition
^atakarma and the rest; he had studied the Vedas
with their Arigas and the whole ritual, and the fame
of his learning filled the world of men. By the large
gifts which he received, begging from charitable people
who were lovers of virtues, he amassed considerable
wealth.
1. Like a big cloud showering over the fields, he
gladdened with his wealth his relations, his friends,
his clients, his guests, his teachers, in short the dis-
tressed as well as those who are to be honoured.
2. Owing to his grand munificence, the bright glory
which he had obtained by his learningshone the more.
So the complete beauty of the moon's full disc is still
augmented with loveliness, when autumn makes it
shine brightly.
Yet the Great-minded One soon understood that
the state of a householder is a source of sorrow, and
affords but meagre comfort for by its close con-
;
nection with wrong business, it is thronged with
noxious qualities, it is the abode of carelessness (about
religious duties), it is a troublesome state, being
connected with occupations for gathering wealth and

VIf. THE STORY OF AGASTYA.
guarding- it, it affords a scope for hundreds of arrows
made up of calamities and evil habits obstructive
of tranquillity, and is accompanied with toil, inasmuch
as it implies the necessity of accomplishing numberless
tasks. On the other hand, he became convinced
that renunciation of the world brings about comfort
by its freedom from those evils, that it is a state
favourable to the performance of religious duties, and
that it may be called the proper basis for undertaking
the religious practices required for salvation. So
casting away, as if it were a straw, that great abun-
dance of wealth which he had obtained without trouble,
and which must have possessed charms for him because
of the high regard which he enjoyed among the people,
he gave himself up to the observance of the discipline
and the self-restraint of world-renou — ncing ascetics.
But also, after his leaving the world owing to his
celebrated fame, the remembrance of former inter-
course, the respect for his virtue—s, and the tranquillity
by which he was distinguished the Great Being was
frequented as before by people longing for salvation,
whose affection he had gained by the multitude of
his virtues. Yet, disliking that contact with house-
holders, as prejudicial to the happiness that arises from
entire detachment from the world, and an obstacle
to throwing away the bonds by which he had held
to it, he repaired to the island of Kara, aspiring to
solitude. That island is situated in the Southern
Ocean. Its outskirts are moistened by the play of
the wanton waves, which moved by the wind have
the blue colour of pieces of sapphire white sand
;
covers its ground; various trees, the branches of
which are adorned with twigs, flowers and fruits,
enhance its beauty ; near its shore there is a lake
of pure water. This lovely country he embellished
with the splendour of his hermitage.
3. There he lived, manifesting the lustre of his
heavy penance by the emaciation of his body, as the
crescent appears in the sky, joining great loveliness
to a small size.

48 GATAKAMALA.
4. That this man living in the forest, absorbed in
vows and penances, and whose modest actions and
sensations attested his tranquillity of mind, was a
Muni, even the wild quadrupeds and birds of the
forest did understand, even their small intellect became
aware of it, and they imitated his behaviour.
While staying in the grove of penance, the Great-
minded One, being in the habit of giving, continued
also honouring the guests that happened to arrive,
with such roots and fruits as he had just gathered, with
fresh water and such hearty and kind words of
welcome and blessings as are appropriate to ascetics,
and himself lived on as much of his forest-produced
food as his guests had left, strictly limiting his meals to
the sustenance of his body.
Now, the glory of his excessive penance having
spread about, .Sakra, the Lord of the Devas, touched
by it, desired to prove his constancy. In that part of
the forest where the Great Being dwelt, he caused to
disappear successively all roots and fruits fit for thefood
of ascetics. But the Bodhisattva, absorbed in medita-
tion and beingaccustomed to the feeling ofcontentment,
insensible to the perplexing influence of stupefaction,
and indifferentconcerning his food and his body, did not
direct his thoughts to the cause of that disappearance1
.
And having dressed young leaves on the fire, he
accomplished with these the action of taking his meal,
without any feeling of discontent, nor longing for a
better meal, but calm as ever he went on living in the
same way.
5. The livelihood of those who in earnest practise
continence is nowhere difficult to be obtained. Say,
where are not found grass and leaves and ponds ?
Yet .Sakra, the Lord of the Devas, though his
astonishment increased, in consequence of the Bodhi-
sattva's behaviour in that situation, and his high
opinion ofhis virtues grew stronger, resorted to another
1 For, if he had, he would have discovered it, owing to the
transcendent power he had obtained by his penance.

VII. THE STORY OF AGASTYA. 49
trial. Like the wind at summer-time he stripped oftheir
leaves the whole number of trees, shrubs and grasses,
that were in that grove. Then the Bodhisattva, taking
such fallen leaves as were still fresh, and boiling them
in water, lived on them without feeling any uneasiness
;
rejoiced by the happiness of meditation, he stayed there
as if he had feasted upon ambrosia.
6. Modesty in the learned, disinterestedness in the
wealthy, and contentment in the ascetics each of these
:
splendid virtues is the highest treasure of each of
thein 1
Now that very marvellous constancy of his content-
ment increased the surprise of 6akra, and as if he were
angry on account of it, having assumed the shape of
a Brahman, that he might be a guest, of course, he
appeared before the eyes of the Great Being, when at
the time prescribed by his vow, after performing the
Agnihotra-sacrifice and repeating his prayers, he was
just looking about for some guest. And the Bodhi-
sattva rejoiced went to meet him, and welcoming
him and addressing kind words to him, invited him to
take his meal by announcing to him that it was meal-
time. Understanding by his silence that he accepted,
the Great-minded One,
7. Manifesting by his expanding eyes and his bloom-
ing face the gladness he experienced in practising
charity, and rejoicing his guest with gentle words both
pleasant to the mind and to the ears, entertained him
with the whole of his boiled leaves, which he had had
so much trouble to procure, and himself was satisfied
with joy alone.
And even so he entered his home of meditation 2
,
and passed that day and night in the very ecstacy of
gladness.
Now 6akra reappeared to him in the same
1 Instead of guwajobhavidhi// para// I read "nidhi^ para//,
com}), p. 51, I. 11 ofthe edited text gu//abhyasanidher udarata.
8 In other words, his hut. Both Pali redactions mention here his
pawwasala, 'hut ofleaves.'
E

50 GATAKAMALA.
manner the next day at the time destined for (the
accomplishment of) his vow (of hospitality). So he did
also on the third, fourth, and fifth day. And the other
received him as his guest in the same way, and with
still more joy.
8. No suffering, indeed, not even peril of life, is able
to compel the virtuous to a miserable infringement of
their love for giving, a love fostered by their practice
of commiseration.
Then .5akra, whose mind was overcome by the
utmost amazement, knowing him to be enabled by his
excess of penance to get into the possession of (his
own) brilliant realm of the gods \ if he did but ask
for it, began to feel uneasy, and fear arose within
him. Having assumed the wonderful beauty of his
own celestial shape, he questioned him as to the purpose
for which he performed his penance.
9, 10. 'Say, on what hastthou set thy hopes, that they
could impel thee to leave thy beloved relations, who
shed tears at thy departure, thy household and posses-
sions that had been a source of happiness to thee, and
to resort to this toilsome life of penance ? For it is
not for a trifling motive that the wise despise enjoy-
ments easily obtained, and afflict their relations with
grief, leaving them to go to the penance-forest destruc-
tive of pleasures.
11. 'If thou thinkest it may be told me, please,
satisfy my curiosity. What may be the object of thy
wishes, the penetration into the excellent qualities of
which fascinated to this point a mind like thine ? '
The Bodhisattva replied : ' Hearken, sir, what I am
exerting myself for.
12. ' Repeated births tend to great sorrow; so
do calamitous old age and illnesses, those dismal
1 This fear of the Lord of the Devas rests on the belief in the
transcendent power ofpenance, which enables great ascetics to aspire
even to that dignity. .Sakra, afraid of human tapas and trying to
prevent its earning by every means, is a well-known figure in Indian
mythology.

'
VII. THE STORY OF AGASTVA. 5 I
plagues and the necessity of death is a disturbance
;
to the mind. From those evils I am resolved to save
the creatures.'
Then 6akra, the Lord of the Devas, understanding
that it was not his own celestial splendour that was
claimed by the Bodhisattva, was set at rest, and as
he was very pleased with that well-said sentence, he
honoured it by exclaiming 'Very well!' and requested
him to accept some boon.
13. 'Ascetic, Ka^yapa 1 for this right and well-said
,
sentence I give thee some boon ; choose then what
thou desirest.'
TheBodhisattva, being notatall desirous ofpleasures
and rejoicings connected with existence, and thinking it
painful even to ask for anything, since he had attained
the state of contentment, said to Sakra :
14. 'If thou wishest to give me some boon, that
may please me, I ask the foremost of the Devas this
boon,
15. 'May that fire of covetousness, which after
obtaining a beloved wife, children, power, riches
more abundant than had been longed for, still go — es on
heating the mind of men never to be satisfied may
that fire never enter my heart !
The propensity to contentment declared by this well-
turned saying delighted 6akra in a still higher degree.
He praised the Bodhisattva again, saying : ' Excellent,
excellent ! and once more he urged him to choose
'
some boon.
16. ' Muni, also for this right and well-said sentence
I offer thee gladly as a present in return a second boon.
Then the Bodhisattva, in order to show him the
difficulty of getting rid entirely of the innate evil
passions 2 preached him the Law once more under the
,
guise of asking a boon,
1 In the metrical part of the Pali redaction of this story in the
Gataka, Akiiti (=Agastya) is likewise called Kassapa and addressed
by that name.
2 Viz. the klcras, cp. Dharmasa/wgraha LXVII with Kenjiu
Kasawara's explanatory noie on p. 49 and the literature quoted there.
E 2

: : ' ' !
52 GATAKAMALA.
17. 'If thou givest me some boon, thou Vasava,
abode of excellent qualities, then I ask thee another
boon, and no mean one, Lord of the Devas.
18. 'May that fire of hatred, subdued by which the
creatures come to x loss of wealth, loss of caste and of
good r — eputation, as if they were vanquished by a hostile
attack may that fire be far from me !
On hearing this, 6akra, the chief of the Devas.
highly admiring him, praised him : ' Excellent, ex-
cellent ! and again he said
'
19. ' Justly Fame, like a loving woman, attends upon
those who have renounced the world. Well, accept
some other boon from me for this well-said sentence.'
Then the Bodhisattva, induced by his hostility to
innate evil passions to blame the intercourse with such
creatures as are not free from those passions, under
the guise of accepting the boon 2 said this
, :
20. ' May I never hear a fool, nor get the sight of
such a one, nor speak to such a one, nor endure the
annoyance and the pain of staying with such a one
This is the boon I ask thee for.'
.Sakra spoke
21. 22. 'What dost thou say? Anybody being in
distress is most deserving of the commiseration of the
pious. Now, foolishness being the root of calamities,
How
is held to be the vilest condition. is this that
thou, though compassionate, abhorrest the sight of
a fool, a person especially fit for commiseration ?
The Bodhisattva answered : ' Because there is no
help for him, sir. Do but consider this
:
23. ' If a fool were at any rate curable by treatment,
how would anybody like me be wanting in effort to
brino- about his eood ?
' But such a one, thou must understand, can derive
no profit at all from medical treatment.
1 In order to correct the fault against the metre in the first pada
of this stanza, I think we should read arthad api bhraw-ram
avapnuvanii.
2 Instead of vrati, which is here almost meaningless, Prof. Kern
=
suggests vriti vara.

VII. THE STORY OF AGASTYA. 53
24, 25. 'He follows the wrong course of conduct,
as if it were the right one, and desires to put also
his neighbour in that way, and not having- been
accustomed to a decent and upright behaviour, be-
comes even angry when admonished for his good.
Now, then, to such a person, who burns with the infatua-
tion of self-conceit, thinking himself wise, whose harsh-
anger is provoked by those who speak for his good,
and whose impetuousness has not been sof — tened
because of the deficiency of his moral education say,
what means does there exist to bring profit to him ?
26. ' For this reason, then, O most excellent of the
Devas, because there is no help for him, not even in
the power of the compassionate, I do not want to see
a fool, since he is the most unfit object.'
On hearing this, 6akra praised him, exclaiming 'Very
well very well ! and charmed by his right sayings,
! '
spoke again
:
27. 'The invaluable jewels of well-said sentences
cannot be rewarded by any equivalent. But as a hand-
ful of flowers to worship thee, I gladly offer thee some
boon for these too.'
Then the Bodhisattva, in order to show that the
virtuous are welcome in every circumstance, spoke :
28. ' May I see a wise man, and hear a wise man,
dwell with such a one, 6akra, and converse with such
a one This boon, best of the Devas, do grant me.'
!
^Sakra said : ' Thou seemest, indeed, to be a warm
partisan of the wise. Why, tell me then,
29. ' What have the wise done for thee ? Say, Kas-
yapa, what is the reason that thou showest this rather
foolish greediness for the sight of a wise man ? '
Then the Bodhisattva, in order to show him the
magnanimity of the virtuous, spoke: 'Hearken, sir,
for what reason my mind longs for the sight of a wise
man.
30. 31. ' He walks in the path of virtue himself,
and brings also others into that way, and words said
for his good, even if they be harsh, do not rouse his
impatience. Beingadornedby uprightnessand decency,

:
GATAKAMALA.
54
it is always possible to make him accept what is said
for his good. For this reason my mind, adhering
to virtue, is inclined to the partisan of virtue.'
Then .5akra praised him, exclaiming : ' Well said !
very excellent ! and with still increased satisfaction
'
again summoned him to ask some boon.
32, 33. 'Surely, thou hast already obtained every-
thing, since thou art wholly satisfied, yet thou shouldst
take some boon from me, considering it as a means of
gratifying me. For a favour offered out of reverence,
from abundance ofpower, and with the hope ofaffording
a benefit, becomesa cause of great pain, if notaccepted.'
Then the Bodhisattva, seeing his utmost desire for
doing good, and wishing to please him and to benefit
him, answered so as to declare to him the superiority
of the strong desire of almsgiving.
34. ' May thy food, which is free from destruction
and corruption, thy mind, which is lovely because of
its practice of charity, and mendicants adorned by the
pureness of their good conduct, be mine This most
!
blessed boon I ask.'
.Sakra said : ' Thy Reverence is a mine of jewels
of well-said sentences. Further,
35. ' Not only will everything thou hast requested
be accomplished, but on account of this well-said
sentence I give thee some other boon.'
The Bodhisattva said
36. ' If thou wilt give me a boon which incloses the
highest favour for me, O most excellent ofall Celestials,
do not come to me again in this thy blazing splendour.
For this boon I ask the destroyer of the Daityas.'
Upon this ^akra was somewhat irritated, and highly
astonished he thus spoke to him : ' Do not speak so, sir.
37. 'By every kind of ritual: prayers, vows, sacri-
fices, with penances and toilsome exertions, people
on earth seek to obtain the sight of me. But thou
dost not desire so. For what reason then ? I came up
to thee, wishing to bestow my boons on thee.'
The Bodhisattva said : ' Do not yield to thy anger.
I will pacify Thy Highness, king of the Devas. It is

VIII. THE STORY OF MAITRIBALA. 55
not for want of courtesy, that I ask so, nor is it a deed
of irreverence, nor do I aim at showing lack ofdevotion
towards Thy Majesty. Not at all, but,
38. ' Contemplating thysuperhuman wonderful shape,
which though shining gently, is still blazing with brilli-
ancy, I fear the sight of thee, however mildly shining,
lest it should cause any want of strictness in the ful-
my
filment of penance.'
Then .5akra bowed to him, circumambulated him
from left to right, and disappeared on the spot. And
lo, at daybreak the Bodhisattva perceived plenty of
divine food and drink, brought thither by the power of
6akra, and many hundreds of Pratyekabuddhas called
by the invitation of 6akra, also many angels (deva-
putras) high girded, ready to wait on them.
39. Supplying in this way with food and drink the
wants of those most holy sages, the Muni obtained a
sublimejoy; and he delighted in living after the manner
suitable for ascetics, in performing his boundless vow
of meditation (dhyana), and in tranquillity.
In this manner, then, a heroic practice of liberality
is an ornament even in ascetics, how much more in
householders.
[So considering, a virtuous man must adorn himself
with heroic constancy of giving. This (story) must
also be adduced, when treating of the gladness caused
to a liberal and charitable man when blaming
;
covetousness, hatred, infatuation, and foolishness; when
preaching on the virtue of the intercourse with a pious
friend, or on contentment. Likewise in discourses
on the magnanimity of the Tathagata : ' So our Lord
was an inexhaustible mine ofjewels ofexcellent sayings,
when still in his former existences, how much more
so was he after attaining Complete Wisdom.']
VIII. The Story of Maitribala.
Being afflicted by the sufferings of others, the in-
tensely compassionate do not mind their own pleasure.
This will be taught as follows.

56 GATAKAMALA.
At the time when the Bodhisattva, always having in
view his purpose of saving the creatures, had fixed
upon (the exercise of the paramita of) compassion,
as became his high-mindedness, and was always in-
—
creasing in matchless virtues charity, humility, self-
restraint, tenderness, and the like, suitable for the
benefit of the world, he was, it is said, a king kind-
hearted towards all creatures, named Maitribala1
.
i, 2. This king felt the weal and the woe of his
subjects as his own, and being skilled in the art of
protecting them, he handled both his sword and his
law in accordance with this feeling. Yet his sword
was only an ornament to him, since the (other) kings
waited for his orders, respectfully bowing their head-
crests his law, on the contrary, showed itself most
;
openly in the measures he took for promoting the
welfare of his people.
3. He dealt out punishments and rewards without
infringing righteousness. In consequence of his good-
ness of heart and his political wisdom, he inquired into
his subjects like a father.
So he ruled with righteousness, and while directing
his veracity, his liberality, his tranquillity, his wisdom,
and his other virtues to conduce to the welfare of
others, he increased his store of exceedingly lofty
actions, which are the due requisites for the attainment
of Buddhahood. Now one day, five Yakshas, whom
for some offence or other (Kubera) the Lord of the
Yakshas had exiled from his dominions, came to his
realm. These goblins were O £'oharas [that is, vigour-
t
bereaving spirits], skilled in the art of killing others".
When they saw the kingdom exhibiting the aspect
of the utmost prosperity, and became aware that the
absence of every kind of calamity made the people
1 This name signifies, 'he whose strength is kindness,' cp. stanza
14. The edition has here Maitrabalo, by a misprint, it seems.
2 It is likely, those Yakshas were thought to possess the power
of causing consumptive diseases; consumption is called in Sanskrit
yakshma or ra^ayakshma. In the Divyavadana (295, 6) a
rakshasa o^ohara/z is mentioned.

VIII. THE STORY OF MAITRII1ALA. 57
rejoiced, satisfied, thriving, and in the habit of having
merriment and manifold festivals, the desire of taking
away the vigour from the inhabitants of that region
arose within them.
4. But, though they did their usual work with the
greatest effort, they were still not able to take away
the vigour of the inhabitants of that country.
5. The power of that king was so excessive that his
very intention of shielding proved the highest pro-
tection. For this reason those Yakshas were power-
less to take away the vigour of his subjects.
And as they were not able to debilitate any one,
living in that kingdom, however much they exerted
themselves, they deliberated among themselves and
said : ' How may this be, sirs ?
6. ' They do not possess such superiorities of learn-
ing, penance, or magic as to enable them to obstruct
our power, and yet all of us are reduced to impotency,
so as to bear our appellation (of O^oharas) in vain.'
And they assumed the shape of men of the Brahman
class, and going about, they saw a certain cowherd of
those who live in the forest-region, who was sitting
upon a grass-plot at the foot of a shady tree. He had
shoes on his feet, and on his head he wore a garland,
made of flowers and opening buds of forest-trees. His
stick and his hatchet he had laid on the earth on
his right. He was alone and occupied with twisting
a rope, diverting himself meanwhile with singing and
humming. Him they approached and imitating human
voice ', they said to him : ' Well, friend, thou who art
charged with guarding the cows, how is it that staying
thus alone in this lonely forest where no man is to
be seen, thou are not afraid ? ' And he, looking at
them, spoke: ' Of what should I be afraid?' The
Yakshas said 'Hast thou never before heard that
:
such goblins as Yakshas, Rakshasas, or Pisa/'as are
cruel by nature ?
1 In the original the Yakshas utter some inarticulate sounds
before succeeding in speaking Sanskrit.

:
58 GATAKAMALA.
7, 8. 'If men are in company and endowed with
learning, penance, and svastyayana-charms \ even
then, be they never so brave and contemptuous offear,
they will but narrowly escape those Rakshasas who
feed on the flesh and fat of men. How, then, is it
that thou art not afraid of them, thou who stayest
without any comrade amidst these solitary, remote, and
frightful forests ?'
On hearing this, the cowherd laughed heartily, and
said to them
:
9, 10. ' Well, the people of this country are pro-
tected by a mighty svastyayana, so that even the
Lord of the Devas himself has no power over them,
how much less the flesh-eating goblins. So it happens
that I wander fearless through the wilderness as if
I stayed at home, at night as if it were day, and alone
as if I were in a crowd.'
Upon this the Yakshas became very curious, and
said to him respectfully, as if to encourage him : ' Why,
you must tell us, gentle sir, you must tell us, of what
kind this extraordinary svastyayana of yours is.'
He answered them, laughing once more : ' Hear, then,
of what kind this very wonderful excellent svastya-
yana of ours is.
11. ' It is he whose broad breast is equal to a plate
of the Golden Mountain (Meru), he whose face dis-
plays the lovelybeauty of the spotless moon in autumn,
he whose long and full arms are like golden clubs, he
who has the eyes of a bull and the gait of a bull. In
short, it is our kingr
' Of this kind our excellent svastyayana is. And
after saying these words, looking with resentment and
astonishment in the face of the Yakshas, he continued
' Ah ! this is rather a wonder, is not it ?
12. 'So renowned is the power of our king, and it
has not come to your hearing How has this hap-
!
pened ? Or have you perhaps heard of it, but clis-
1 Viz. spells and charms, effective of bliss and happiness and
obstructive of the contrary.

VIII. THE STORY OF MAITRIBALA. 59
trusting the excessive marvel of that fame, not
minded
it ?
13. 'I suppose, the people of the country, from
whence you have come hither, are either disinclined
to search after virtue or indifferent about it it may
;
also be that, the store of their good fortune 1 being
exhausted, the great renown of our king has shunned
them.
'At all events, for you there is still some remnant
of eood fortune, since you are come here from such
a savage country.
The Yakshas said : ' Gentle sir, tell us, of what
nature is this power of that king, that spirits are by
no means able to hurt the inhabitants of his realm ?'
The cowherd replied : ' Our monarch has obtained
this power through his high-mindedness. See, noble
Brahmans.
14. ' On friendliness does his strength rest, not on
his motley-bannered army, which he keeps only to
comply with custom. He knows no anger, nor
does he speak harsh words. He protects his land in
the proper manner. Righteousness is the rule of his
actions, not political wisdom, that base science. His
wealth serves to honour the virtuous. And endowed
with those marvellous qualities, still he does not take
unto himself either the wealth of the wicked, or pride.
' Such and many, many more virtues are to be found
in our master. For this reason no calamities have the
power to hurt the inhabitants of his realm. But how
little is the information you may get from me ! If you
are curious to learn the excellent qualities of our
king, it would rather be suitable for you to enter the
capital. There you will behold the people in their
every-day life you will see how firm they stand in
;
the (moral) bounds of the aryas, loving each the
peculiar duties proper to him how merry and thriving
;
they are, in consequence of a constant abundance ot
1 Every one's good fortune is the result ofhis merit, and lasts until
that store ofgood actions is exhausted.

6o GATAKAMALA.
food and uninterrupted welfare how splendidly they
;
are dressed, yet not presumptuously how kind they
;
are to worthy strangers who come to them as guests
;
how enraptured they are with the virtues of their
king, the praises of whose glory they never cease
to proclaim with gladness, as if they were utterirfg
When
some auspicious and evil-averting charm. be-
holding all this, you will obtain the standard for
measuring the multitude of virtues possessed by our
lord. And if you once begin to feel something like
reverence for his virtues, you will witness them, for
you will not fail to feel the desire for getting the sight
of him.'
The Yakshas, being already moved with anger
against the king on account of his obstructing the
manifestation of their power, were in no way softened
by this affectionate and well-deserved eulogy of his
virtues.
15. Verily, as a rule the mind of fools 1 becomes
inflamed the more by the praise of the object which
has excited their fervent wrath.
Now considering that king's love of charity and
wishing to do harm to him, they approached him at the
time of his audience, and asked him for a meal. The
kingrejoiced, ordered his officers who stood in charge of
such matters : ' Go and quickly present the Brahmans
with a delicious meal.' The Yakshas, however, were
not ready to accept the meal served to them, though
it might have suited the royal table, but spurning it,
as tigers would green grass, said they did not feed on
such dishes. On hearing which, the king went to them
saying : ' But what sort of repast will agree with your
digestion, that something of the kind may be fetched ?'
The Yakshas answered
:
1 In the original they are not called bala, as above, Story VII,
stanza 22, but by the nearly synonymous term of manda. Slill there
may be a slight difference between both appellations. Bala meant
at the outset 'child, childish, ignorant;' manda, 'slow, feeble, sick,
dull, lazy.' Cp. Suttanipata, verses 666, 728, 820, and 1051.

: 1
VIII. THE STORY OF MAITRIBALA. 6
16. ' Raw human flelsh, freshly cut off and still
warm, and human blood, O lotus-eyed monarch, is the
food and drink of Yakshas, O you who are strict in
keeping" your engagements.'
Alter which, they reassumed their own disfigured
and frightful features, exhibiting their mouths rendered
ferocious by large teeth, their eyes fierce and red,
flaming and squinting, theirflat noses, wide-opened and
misshapen. Their hair and beard had the tawny
colour of flames, and their complexion was as dark as
clouds bio- with rain. Looking at them, the king-
knew them to be goblins 1 not men, and understood
,
that for that reason they did not like the food and
drink served by his orders.
17. And according to his compassionate nature and
his pure-heartedness, the pity of the monarch towards
them increased by this reflection.
Absorbed with commiseration and pitying those
Yakshas, he entered surely upon this thought
18. 19. ' For a merciful man such food and drink
is not only hard to be found, but it were also to be
searched for day after day. Oh, the immense grief
it would cause him ! A cruel man may be either
able to get it for them, or not. If not able, his effort
would have no other effect than that of mere de-
struction if able, what can be more miserable than
;
such a one constantly exercising that evil practice ?
20. ' These Yakshas, on the other hand, who live
on food of that kind, with hearts.wicked and pitiless,
are destroying their own happiness every day. When
will their sufferings ever end ?
' This being so, how is it possible for me to procure
1 Lit. 'to be Pua^as/ apparently a general term. The different
classes ofgoblins, Yakshas, Rakshasas, Pi«Uas, are often confounded
;
in stanza 27 the general appellation is Rakshasas. In Story IX,
verse 66. yaksha and puva/'a are used promiscuously in the sense
of 'ogre.' In the sixth story of the Pali G&taka (translated by Rhys
Davids in his Birth Stories, p. 180) the water-sprite is sometimes
called rakkhaso, sometimes yakkho.

62 GATAKAMALA.
such food for them ? Not even for one single day
could I injure others and destroy life.
21. ' Indeed, I do not remember having ever sad-
dened the faces of those who came to me as sup-
plicants, and bereaved them of splendour by the
disappointment of their hopes, so as to make them
appear like lotuses withered by the winter-wind.
' But, why muse any longer ? I have found what
I will do.
22, 23. 'I will give them lumps of solid and fat
flesh and draughts of blood taken from my own body.
What way, if not this, can be more suitable for me
to supply the wants of those beggars seeking their
relief from my side ? For the flesh of animals who
have died a natural death is cold and bloodless,
and of course does not please them and their hunger
;
is great and attested by their afflicted figures.
' On the one hand, how may I take flesh out of the
body of any other living being ? On the other, how
may I suffer them who have resorted to me, to draw
off in this manner, with countenances languishing and
eyes sunken in consequence of their hunger and thirst,
and still more sick with grief because of the fruitless-
ness of their request on which they had founded their
hopes ? It is, therefore, the right time to act in this
way.
24. ' Like a malignant ulcer, this body is always
sick and an abode of pain. Now I will return it that
grief by availing myself of it for the accomplishment
of an extraordinary performance of surpassing love-
liness.'
Having so resolved, the Great-minded One, whose
eyes and face received increase of splendour by the
outburst of his gladness, spoke thus to the Yakshas,
pointing out his body to them
:
25. ' If this flesh and blood, which I bear only for
the good of the creatures, were now to be disposed of
with the object of entertaining guests, I would deem
this a good fortune for myself and of great con-
sequence.'

VIII. THE STORY OF MAITRIBALA. 6 J
The Yakshas, though knowing the determination of
the kine, could not believe it ; so marvellous did it
appear to them. And they said to him
:
26. ' After the mendicant has unveiled his suffering
by wretched asking, from that very moment it is the
<>iver alone who oui>ht to know what should be done
in the case.
The king, understanding that they assented, was
much rejoiced, and ordered his physicians to be sent
Now
for, to have his veins opened. the royal minis-
ters, understanding his determination to offer his own
flesh and blood, became agitated, irritated, and per-
plexed by and prompted by their affection, spoke
it,
emphatically to this purport : ' We pray Your Majesty
not to give way to your excessive love of charity in
such a degree as to disregard the consequences ofyour
actions, whether they are to be good or evil to your
loyal and devoted subjects. Your Majesty cannot be
ignorant of the nature of the evil spirits.
27. ' Goblins, you know, rejoice in whatsoever may
tend to the mishap of your subjects, most illustrious
lord. They get satisfied by a livelihood necessitating
injury to others. Such is the nature of that class of
beings, benevolent master.
28. ' You, Your Majesty, not minding your own
pleasures, sustain the toilsome burden of royalty ex-
clusively for the happiness of your people. Cease,
therefore, from this determination of offering your
flesh and blood it is a wrong action.
;
29. ' These goblins have no power over your people,
Your Majesty, no doubt, as long as your strength
protects your subjects. So being obstructed in their
cleverness in bringing about mischief, they seek the
calamity of the inhabitants of this country by means
of an adroit scheme.
30. ' In fact, the Celestials are pleased with fat, suet,
and the like, offered to them in the fire at sacrifices,
and these goblins should not like Your Majesty's food,
that is excellent and pure, being carefully prepared !
'Surely, Your Royal Majesty is not obliged to

64 GATAKAMALA.
communicate your designs to such as we. Notwith-
standing this, the attachment to our duty forbids us to
show in this matter our usual obedience. Can it be
called a righteous action of Your Majesty to throw
your whole people into calamity for the sake of those
five ? Moreover, for what reason do you make us
feel to this degree your want of affection ? How else
could it happen that our flesh and blood, which we are
employing in the service of our master, have remained
unnoticed by you, but you form the desire of offering
your own, while our bodies are entire and available ?'
Then the king spoke to those ministers
:
31. 'Being requested in distinct terms, how may
anybody like me say " I have not," when having, or
" I will not give," speaking falsely ?
32. ' Since I pass for your leader in matters of
righteousness, if I myself should walk in the wrong
path, what would be the condition of my subjects, who
are ready to follow the example of my behaviour ?
33. ' Therefore, it is with regard to my very subjects
that I will have the strength of my body taken out of
it. Besides, if I were to be faint-hearted, subdued by
self-love, what power should I have to promote the
welfare of my people ?
' As to the words of love and respect which you have
spoken, words full of affection and cordial sympathy,
when you asked why I showed such want of affection,
wishing to offer my own limbs even now, while
your flesh and blood are intact and available, I will
convince you by argument. Surely, do not think that
by want of trust I mean to close up the path in which
you could show your affection towards me, or that
suspicion has created an impenetrable thicket across
Yet,
it.
34. ' The proper time for friends to conceive the
desire of succouring their friend is this, when his
wealth has either diminished gradually, or has been
destroyed by the disfavour of his destiny; but it would
not befit the poor acting thus towards a wealthy man.
35. 'Now, my limbs are available. They are big,

VIII. THE STORY OF MAITRtBALA.
solid, fleshy. Them I do sustain for die sake of
supplicants. This being so, it would be unfit even for
you to conceive such a desire.
36. 'I am not capable of bearing the pain of
strangers, how then can you suppose I should bear
your suffering ? Therefore, I wish to offer my own
flesh. It is I, whom they ask, not you.
'Well, then, though attachment to my person gave
you the courage to put obstacles in the way of my
righteous behaviour, do not oppose my determination
any longer. Verily, Your Lordships are not in the
habit of dealing in the proper manner with my mendi-
cants. Besides, you should also consider this.
37. ' He who prohibits any one wishing for his own
sake to give in charity food or the like, say, by what
appellation is he to be called, a pious man or an im-
pious one ? How much less can there be any doubt
about this in the case of a gift of this character ?
'Why then insist any longer ? Do but examine the
matter duly, and you will keep your thoughts from
the wrong path, as befits those who occupy a minister-
my
ship in service. In fact, sympathetic words of ap-
proval would now become Your Lordships more than
Why
these anxious looks. do I say so ?
38. 39- ' Beggars, wanting money and goods, objects
of various employment, are to be found every day, are
they not ? but mendicants like these cannot be obtained
even by propitiating deities. Now considering the
frailness of my body and that it is an abode of woe, it
would be meanness of mind, I think, even to hesitate
at the time of the appearance of such uncommon
mendicants but miserable self-love would be here the
;
deepest darkness.
' Pray, do not withhold me, then, My Lords.'
Having so persuaded his council, he sent for the
physicians, and after having five veins in his body
opened by them, he spoke to the Yakshas
:
40. ' Deign to assist me in this pious performance
and to procure for me the highest gladness by accepting
this bounty.'
F

66 GATAKAMALA.
They assented and began to drink, intercepting with
the hollow of their joint hands the king's blood, the
dark colour of which resembled fragrant red sandal.
41. While allowing the nocturnal monsters to drink
the blood from his wounds, the monarch shone as if his
body were of gold, and he had the appearance ofMount
Meru covered with rain-clouds hanging down by their
weight, and tinged with the hue of the twilight.
42. In consequence ofthe high degree ofhisgladness,
of his magnanimous forbearance, and also of his cor-
poreal strength, his body did not fade, nor did his
mind faint, and the flowing blood did not lessen.
The Yakshas, having quenched their intense thirst,
said to the kinoo- that it was enougo-h.
43. Considering that he had now disposed of his
body, that always ungrateful object and abode of many
pains, so as to turn it into a means of honouring mendi-
cants, his satisfaction grew no less when they ceased.
Then the king, the serenity of whose countenance
was enhanced by his expanding joy, took a sharp
sword. It had a spotless bluish blade, not unlike a
petal of the blue lotus, and a beautiful hilt shining with
brilliancy by the lustre of the jewels which adorned it.
With it he cut pieces of flesh out of his body and
presented the Yakshas with them.
44. And the joy he experienced by giving did not
leave room for the sense of pain caused by cutting, and
prevented his mind again and again from being im-
mersed in sorrow.
45. So the pain, pushing on at each stroke of the
sharp sword, but driven far back again by his gladness,
was slow in penetrating his mind, as if it were tired by
the trouble of being; urged to and fro.
46. And he was feeling a sense of gladness alone,
whilst he satisfied the nocturnal goblins with pieces of
his flesh, to such an extent that the cruel hearts of those
very beings unclosed themselves to softness.
47. He who, moved by love of the Law or by com-
passion, abandons his own dear body for the benefit of
others, such a man may be able to regenerate the hearts

VIII. THE STORY OF MAITRIBALA. 67
of men burnt by the fire of hatred, changing it into the
gold of tenderness and faith \
The Yakshas, beholding the monarch, who, though
intent on cutting out his own flesh, was yet as calm as
ever, and exhibited an unshaken serenity ofcountenance
and dauntless intrepidity against the pain caused by
the work of his sword, became affected with the utmost
tenderness and admiration.
48. ' Oh, it is a wonder ! oh, it is a miracle ! Can it
be true, or is it perhaps a phantasm ? ' Such thoughts
arose in their ecstatic minds and the wrath they had
;
fostered against the king was crushed, and they began
to proclaim their faith by veneration and praise of his
deed.
No more, no more, Your Majesty,' they exclaimed
' ;
' cease injuring your own body ! This marvellous per-
formance of yours, by which you win the hearts of all
mendicants, has satisfied us.' So with great agitation,
and respectfully bowing their heads, they bade the
king stop after which, they looked up to him with
;
great regard, uplifting their faces moistened with tears
of faithful contrition, and continued
49. ' Justly people are prompted by devoutness to
proclaim everywhere yourglory. J ustly .Sri, disdaining
the lotus-pond, loves to reside with you. Verily, if
Heaven, though protected by .Sakra's sovereignty, does
not feel something like jealousy, when i—t looks down on
this earth, guarded by your heroism Heaven, for-
sooth, is deceived.
'Why use many words ? Mankind is happy, indeed,
being under the protection of such a person as you
;
but we, we are utterly distressed at having approved
of your suffering. Yet, we hope that applying to such
a being as you are, may prove a means of salvation for
us, be we ever so wicked as we are. Thus hoping, we
put this question to you.
1 'Tender-heartedness' or 'softness of mind' and 'faith in the
Buddha' are expressed by the one word prasada. I have as a rule
translatedit according to the conception prevailing,but there is equiva-
lence here.
F 2

'
68 GATAKAMALA.
50. 'What is that exceedingly marvellous rank for
which you long, acting in this way without regard to
your royal happiness, that beloved state which you
possess at your ease ?
51. 'Is it the sovereignty of the whole earth you
covet by means of this penance, or is it the rank of
Kubera or that of Indra, or entire deliverance and
absorption into the Brahma ?
52. 'Be it what it may, the goal you are striving
after cannot be very far from this strong determination.
If we are allowed to hear it, you would please us by
telling it, sir.'
The king spoke : ' Hear then, for what I am exerting
myself.
53-55. 'An illustrious high rank depends on exist-
ence, it is to be obtained by effort, and may be easily
lost. It cannot give the pleasure of satisfaction, much
less tend to serenity of mind. For this reason, I do
not desire even the brilliancy of the Lord of the Devas,
how much less, that of a king of the earth. Nor would
my heart become content, if I were to succeed in
destroying the suffering of myself alone 1 . I rather
regard those helpless creatures, distressed by toil and
sufferings because of the violent calamities and vices
to which they are liable. For their sakes, may I by
means of this my meritorious action attain All-knowing-
ness, and vanquishing the evil passions, my enemies,
may I save the creatures from the Ocean of Existence,
that rough sea with its billows of old age, sickness
and death !
On hearing this, the Yakshas, the hairs on whose
bodies bristled in consequence of the intense joy of
faith, bowed to the king, and said : ' This performance
of yours is consistent with your extraordinary deter-
mination. Accordingly we venture to express our con-
viction concerning it : the designs of such persons as
you will be accomplished after a short time.
1 This is said in answer to the question whether he aimed at
absorption into Brahma [or 'into the Brahma,' the Sanskrit word
being brahmabhuyaj.

THE STORY OF MAITRIBALA. 69
VIII.
56, 57. 'No doubt, all your exertions tend to the
salvation of all creatures yet deign to take a special
care of us, pray do not fo ; rget us at that time l . And
now forgive us what we have done from ignorance,
causing you to be thus tortured we did not understand
:
even our own interest.
58. ' Further, we beg you to show us your favour by
giving us some injunction which we may follow. Do it
with the same confidence, as you would to your own
officials.'
Upon which the king, knowing them to be converted
and to have lost their hard-heartedness, spoke in this
manner: 'Do not be in trouble without reason. It
is no torment, in fact it is a benefit you have conferred
on me. Moreover,
59. ' The path of righteousness (dharma) being thus
(difficult), how should I ever forget my companions on
that road, when once I shall have attained Supreme
Wisdom (bodhi) ? My first teaching of the Lore of
Liberation shall be to you to you I shall impart
;
of that ambrosia first.
60. 'And if you now intend to do what may be
agreeable to me, you must avoid like poison these
sins doing harm to others, coveting the goods or
:
wives of others, speaking evil, and drinking intoxicating
liquors.'
The Yakshas promised to do so, and having bowed
to him and circumambulated him from left to right,
disappeared on the spot.
But when the Great Being had made up his mind to
give away his own flesh and blood, at that very time
61. 62. Earth trembled in many places and caused
the Golden Mountain to waver, in consequence of which
concussion the drums on that mountain began to sound
and the trees to cast off their flowers. These spread
about in the sky, and moved by the wind appeared
like a cloud at one place, like a flight of birds, they
;
1 Viz. 'at the time of your All-knowingness, when you will have
reached Buddhahood.'

'
JO GATAKAMALA.
resembled a canopy; at another they bore the appear-
ance of a well-arranged garland. They fell down
together on all sides of the place where the king was.
63. The great Ocean, as if he intended to prevent
the monarch, showed his excitement and agitation by
the increased commotion and noise of his waves, and
his figure expressed great vigour as if he were ready
to march l
.
64, 65. Then the Chief of the Devas became
agitated by those phenomena and discovering by
;
reflection the cause of them, and being filled with
apprehension at the sufferings to which the king ex-
posed himself, hastily came to the royal residence, where
he found every one perplexed with sorrow and fear,
except the king. On beholding the calmness of his
countenance, though he was in so miserable a con-
dition, .Sakra was affected with the utmost amazement.
He approached the monarch, and impelled by gladness
and joy, he eulogised his performance in his lovely
voice.
66. ' Oh, thou hast reached the summit of pious
behaviour oh, the loftiness of thy treasure which is
!
the practice of virtue oh, how charmingly clever is thy
!
mind in showing thy favour to others Verily, being
!
given to thee, Earth has obtained a protector!
After so praising him, 6akra, the Lord of the
Devas, applied excellent herbs, fit to heal wounds
immediately, which herbs were partly divine, partly
such as are used by men. So he put a stop to his
pains, and made his body as it was before. In return
for which the king honoured him by kind attendance in
a courteous and reverent manner. Then .Sakra went
back to his own abode.
In this way, then, the intensely compassionate do
not mind their own pleasure, being afflicted by the
1 Viz. to relieve the king. In this simile the Ocean is represented
as an auxiliary prince who raises his army to the succour ofhis ally.

1
IX. THE STORY OF VISVANTARA. 7
sufferings of others [who, then, ought not to set
;
aside the attachment to anything so mean as wealth ?
Thus ought to be said when stimulating the zeal of
charitable people. Likewise, when explaining the virtue
of compassion when glorifying the Tathagata also on
; ;
the subject of listening with attention to the preaching
of the Law. Moreover, the words said by the Lord
:
' Monks, these Five have done much, indeed,' will
be explained by their being connected with this story.
For they were the five Yakshas of that time. To
them the Lord imparted the first of the ambrosia
of the Law, just as he had promised.]
The story of Maitribala is not met with in the Aariyapi/aka nor in
the five volumes of the Pali Cataka, which have appeared up to date
;
it will probablybe found in the part not yet published. Something like
it is told in the ninety-first pallava ofKshemendra'sAvadanakalpalata.
There a king of the £ibis gives up his flesh and blood in order to
obtain a sukta or well-said sentence1 . This tale, however, is not yet
printed, nor may we expect it soon to be so. But in another part
of that poem, already published, I have met with the story of king
Mam/iiWa, which bears in many respects a striking resemblance
to ours. See 3, 56 foil.
IX. The Story of Vlsvantara.
The mean-spirited are not even capable of approving
the behaviour of the Bodhisattva, how much less can
they act after it. This will be taught by the following.
Once the ^Sibis were ruled by a king named Saw^aya,
who performed his royal duties in the right manner.
Having entirely subdued his organs of sense, and
possessing in a high degree the virtues of valour,
discretion, and modesty, he was victorious and mighty.
Thanks to the constant and strict observance he paid
to the elders, he had mastered the essential contents
of the three Vedas (trayi) and of metaphysics. His
good administration of justice was praised by his
1 Somendrain his introductoryjlokas describes theninety-first story
thus: svamawsas/'/kpradanena yah S\b\h suktam agrahit
(s\. 36).

;
72 GATAKAMALA.
affectionate subjects, who loved the exercise of their
different trades and duties, and enjoyed the benefits of
security and peace.
i. By the progress of his virtues he had gained the
affection of Royal Felicity, who, like an honest woman,
was faithful to him, not to be thought of by the other
monarchs just as a den kept by a lion is inaccessible
;
to other animals.
2. All such men as spent their labours in any kind
of penance, science or art, used to come up to him, and
if they proved their merit, they obtained distinguished
honour from him.
Next to him in dignity, but not his inferior by
a famous set of virtues, his son Vi^vantara held the
rank of heir-apparent.
?. Though a youth, he possessed the lovely placidity
ofmind proper to old age though he was full ofardour,
;
his natural disposition was inclined to forbearance
though learned, he was free from the conceit of know-
ledge though mighty and illustrious, he was void of
;
pride.
4. As the extent 2 of his virtue was conspicuous in
all regions and his fame penetrated the three worlds,
there was no room for the feeble and trifling reputa-
tions of others it seemed as if they did not venture to
;
show themselves.
5. He could not endure the proud prevalence of
calamities and other causes of sufferines among- man-
kind. It was against these foes that he waged war
and fought in battle, shooting from his large bow of
compassion numberless arrows which had the form of
gifts of charity.
So he was wont to fill day after day the mendicants
who happened to come to him with the utmost gladness
by his bounties, given without difficulty, surpassing the
objects asked for, and the more lovely, as they were
bestowed with deference and kind words. But on the
1 I suppose the reading of the MSS. dr/sh/aprayamasu to be
right.

IX. THE STORY OF VLSVANTARA. 73
knotdays1 as he was distinguished by his strict obser-
,
vance of the restrictions and the quiet of the sabbath,
afterbathing his head and puttingon a white linen dress,
he mounted hisexcellent,well-trained,swift,and vigorous
elephant, who (by his colour and size) might be com-
pared to a peak of the Snow-mountain, whose face was
adorned with the tracks of the juice flowing in rutting-
time, and on whose body auspicious marks were found.
Sitting, then, on the back of that far-famed scent-
elephant 2 and royal vehicle, he was in the habit of
making the round of his alms-halls, which he had
established in all parts of the town to be like refresh-
ing wells for the mendicants. So going about, he
experienced an excessive gladness.
6. No opulence, in truth, within doors procures to
a charitable man such rejoicing, as it produces when
transferred to the mendicants.
Now his very great practice of charity being pro-
claimed everywhere by the rejoiced mendicants, some
neighbouring kino- who had heard of it, considering
that it would be possible to deceive the young prince
by means of his passion for almsgiving, directed some
Brahmans, his emissaries, to rob him of that excellent
elephant. Accordingly one day, when Vi.rvantara was
inspecting his alms-halls, manifesting his gladness of
mind by the enhanced beauty of his countenance, the
said Brahmans placed themselves in his way, uttering
benedictions with their uplifted and outstretched right
hands. He stopped his excellent elephant, and asked
them respectfully the reason of their coming they
;
had but to express their want, he said. The Brahmans
spoke
:
7, 8. ' Both the excellent qualities of this elephant
of thine, who has so graceful a gait, and thy heroic
love of charity make us like beggars. Present us with
this (white) elephant, who is like a peak of the Kailasa
1 Viz. the sabbath-days.
2 Cp. stanza 6 of Story II.

74 GATAKAMALA.
mountain, and thou wilt fill the world with astonish-
ment.'
The Bodhisattva being thus addressed, was filled
with sincere joy and entered upon this reflection
:
1 Truly, after a long- time I now see mendicants re-
questing a grand boon. But, after all, what may be
the want ofsuch a lord ofelephants to these Brahmans?
No doubt, this must be a miserable trick of some kino-
whose mind is troubled with covetousness, jealousy,
and hatred.
9. ' Yet that prince, who, not minding either his
reputation or the precepts of righteousness, is eager,
as it were, to promote my good1 must not be saddened
,
by disappointment.'
Having thus considered, the Great-minded One
alighted from the back of that excellent elephant and
stood before them with uplifted golden pitcher then
;
he pronounced (the solemn formula) ' Accept.'
10. After which, though knowing that the science of
politics follows the path of Righteousness (dharma)
only as far as it may agree with material interest
(artha), he gave away his foremost elephant. His
attachment to Righteousness did not allow him to be
frightened by the lie of political wisdom.
1 1. Having given away that lord of elephants, who,
adorned with the lovely golden lattice-seat on his back,
resembled a massy cloud of autumn, radiant with
a flash of lightning 2 the royal prince obtained the
— ,
utmost delight but the citizens were stricken with
consternation, for they were adherents of political
wisdom.
In fact, when the ^Sibis heard of the gift of that lord
of elephants, anger and wrath penetrated them, and
the eldest of the Brahmans, the ministers, the warriors,
1 Inasmuch as his covetousness affords to the Bodhisattva an
occasion of performing an extraordinary deed of charity. Compare
a similar argument in Story XXXIII, stanza 15.
2 In the Pali redaction which is the source of Spence Hardy's
narration of our tale, it is said that this white elephant had the power
ofcausingrain.

IX. THE STORY OF VLSVANTARA. 75
and the chiefs of the townsmen, making hubbub went
into the presence of king Sa?/^raya. Owing to their
agitation, resentment, and anger, they neglected the
restraint imposed on them by the respect due to their
monarch, and spoke: 'Why do you overlook in this
manner, Your Majesty, the fortune of your kingdom
being carried off? Your Majesty ought not to overlook
that in this way you are fostering the misfortune ot
your realm.' When the king, alarmed, asked them
what they meant by this, they replied : ' Why, are you
not aware of what has happened, Your Majesty ?
12, 13. 'That splendid animal, whose face, being-
fragrant with the scent of the flowing juice, intoxicates
crowds of humming bees hovering about, and likewise
impregnates the cherishing wind with its perfume, so
as to induce him to wipe off gladly and easily the
smell caught from the fluid of other haughty elephants
;
that war-elephant, whose brilliant vigour subdued the
strength and the power of your enemies, and a — bated
their pride even unto the motionlessness of sleep see,
that embodied victory has been given away by Vis-
vantara and is now being carried off abroad.
14. ' Kine, gold, clothes, eatables, such are the
goods fit to give to Brahmans, but parting with our
foremost elephant, the pledge ofglorious victory, is an
excess of charity, and goes too far.
15. 'How should success and might ever join this
prince who acts up to this point contrary to the
maxims of policy? In this matter forbearance from
your side is out of place, Your Majesty, lest he should
before long afford matter of rejoicing to your enemies.'
On hearing this, the king, who loved his son, was
not very kindly disposed towards them but sub-
;
mitting to necessity, he told them hastily, they were
right after which he tried to appease the iSlbis.
;
' I know,' he said, ' that VLrvantara indulges in his
disproportionate passion for charity so as to neglect
for it the rules of political wisdom, which behaviour is
not suitable for a person appointed to the royal charge.
But as he has resigned his own elephant, as if it were

GATAKAMALA.
76
phlegm, who will bring back that animal ? Neverthe-
less, I shall take such measures that Visvantara will
know a limit in his almsgiving. This may suffice to
appease your anger.'
The .Sibis answered : ' No, Your Majesty, this will
not do. Vbvantara is no person to be brought to
reason in this matter by a simple censure.'
Samgaya spoke : ' But what else can I do ?
16. 'He is averse to sinful actions, only his
attachment to virtuous practices is turning into a kind
of passion. Why, should you then deem imprisonment
or death inflicted on myown son to be the due requital
for that elephant ?
' Therefore, desist from your wrath ! Henceforward
I will prevent Visvantara irom such actions.'
Notwithstanding this, the .Sibis persisted in their
anger and said
17, 18. 'Who : would be pleased, O king, with the
pain of death, or prison, or flogging pronounced upon
your son ? But being devoted to his religious duties,
Vuvantara is not fit to be a bearer of the troublesome
burden of royalty, because of his tenderness of heart
and his compassion. Let the throne be occupied by
such princes, as have obtained renown for their martial
qualities and are skilled in the art of giving its due to
each of the three members of the trivarga; but your
son, who in consequence of his love of Righteousness
(dharma), does not heed Policy (nay a), is a proper
person to dwell in a penance-grove.
19. 'Surely, if princes commit faults of bad policy,
the results of those faults fall on their subjects1 .
They are however bearable for them, after all, as is
taught by experience not so for the kings themselves,
;
the very roots of whose power they undermine.
20. ' Why, then, here say much ? Not capable of
conniving at a state of things which must lead to your
1 This Indian parallel to the Horatian verse quidquid delirant
reges, plectuntur Achivi, runs thus in the original: phalanti
kama/ra vasudhadipanaw durnitidoshas tadupa^riteshu.

;
IX. THE STORY OF VLSVANTARA. JJ
ruin, the .Sibis have taken this resolution. The royal
prince must withdraw to Mount Vahka, the residence
of the Siddhas there he may exert his penance.'
;
Being- so addressed for his good in very harsh terms
by those dignitaries, who moved by affection and love
spoke frankly, foreseeing the calamities to be expected
from bad policy, the king was ashamed of the wrath
of the chiefs of his people, and with downcast eyes,
overwhelmed by the sorrowful thought of a separation
from his son, he heaved a deep, woeful sigh, and said
to the .Sibis : ' If this is your peremptory decision, allow
him, at least, the delay of one day and night. To-
morrow at day-break Vi.rvantara shall accomplish your
desire.' This answer satisfied the .Sibis. Then the
king said to his chamberlain 'Go and tell Vi.svantara
:
what has happened.' The chamberlain said he would
do so, and, his face bathed in tears, went to VLsvantara,
who was at that moment in his own palace. Over-
whelmed by his sorrow, he threw himself at the
feet of the prince, weeping aloud. Then Vi^vantara
anxiously inquired after the health of the royal family
the other said in a voice rather indistinct by affliction:
' O, the royal family is well.' ' But why are you thus
excited, then ? Visvantara replied. Being so asked
'
once more, the chamberlain whose throat was choked
with tears, uttered slowly and in a faltering tone these
words, interrupting and disturbing them by his sobs
:
21. 'Brusquely disregarding the royal command,
though it was declared to them in gentle terms, the
.5ibis, moved by anger, order you to be banished from
the kingdom, my prince.'
VLsvantara said : ' Me .... the -Sibis .... order to
be banished, moved by anger What you say is out
!
of all reason.
22. ' Never did I take delight in leaving the path of
discipline, and 1 detest carelessness about my duties.
What evil action of mine, unknown to me, makes the
.Sibis angry with me ? '
The chamberlain said £ They are offended at your
:
exceeding loftiness of mind.

GATAKAMALA.
78
23, 24. ' Your satisfaction was pure by the disin-
terested feeling you experienced, but that of those
mendicants was troubled by cupidity. When you gave
away that foremost of elephants, O most noble prince,
wrath put the Slb'is out of patience and caused them to
transgress the limits of their duty. They are furious
against you. You must go, indeed, the way of those
who live as ascetics.'
At this moment the Bodhisattva displayed both his
deeply-rooted affection for the mendicants which his
continuous practice of compassion had firmly estab-
lished, and his grand, immense patience. He said
:
' The nature of the Sib'is is fickle, and they cannot
understand mine, it seems.
25. ' The objects of sense being outside of ourselves,
it is superfluous to say that I would give away my
eyes or my head 1 For the benefit of the creatures
.
I support this body, how much more the possession of
clothes and vehicles.
26. ' Me, wanting to honour the requests of the
mendicants, if need be, with my own limbs, the Sib'is
believe to restrain from charity by fear So consider-
!
ing, they do but unfold their foolish fickleness of
mind.
27. ' Let all ^Sibis kill me or banish me, I shall not
desist from charity for that reason. With this mind
I am ready to set out for the penance-grove.'
After this, the Bodhisattva said to his wife, who had
turned pale while hearing the sad news: 'Your High-
ness has heard the resolution of the .Sibis.' Madri2
replied : ' I have.' Vrrvantara said :
28. ' Now make a deposit, fair-eyed one, of all your
1 The Bodhisattva is said to have given away his eyes in one ot
his existences (Story II). The gift of his head is related in some
^-ataka, not found in this selection of Arya Sura. It occurs in
Kshemendra's Avadanakalpalata, pallava the fifth.
2 It is plain that Sura supposes the story ofVuvantarato be known
to his readers. Neither the name of Vi^vantara's wife nor even the
fact of his being married has been told before.

IX. THE STORY OF VLSVANTARA. 79
property, taking what you have got from my part as
well as from your father's side1.'
Madri answered : ' Where shall I lay the deposit,
my prince ? ' Vlsvantara spoke :
29, 30. ' You must always give in charity to people
of good conduct, embellishing your bounty by kind
observance. Goods deposited in this manner are im-
perishable and follow us after death. Be a loving
daughter to your parents-in-law, a careful mother to
our children. Continue in pious conduct, beware of
inadvertence but do not mourn for my absence, will
;
you '
?
Upon this, Madri, avoiding what might impair the
firmness of mind of her husband, suppressed the deep
sorrow that put her heart to anguish, and said with
feigned calmness
:
31, 32. ' It is not right, Your Majesty, that you should
go to the forest alone. I too will go with you where
you must go, my lord. When attending on you, even
death will be a festival to me but living without you
;
I deem worse than death.
' Nor do I think the forest-life to be unpleasant at
all. Do but consider it well.
33. ' Removed from wicked people, haunted by deer,
resounding with the warbling of manifold birds, the
penance-groves with their rivulets and trees, both
intact, with their grass-plots which have the loveliness
of inlaid lapis lazuli floors, are by far more pleasing
than our artificial ofardens.
' Indeed, my prince,
34. ' When beholding these children neatly dressed
and adorned with garlands, playing in the wild shrubs,
you will not think of your royalty.
35. ' The water-carrying brooks, overhung by natural
bowers of perpetually renewed beauty, varying accord-
ing to the succession of the seasons, will delight you
in the forest.
1 On this stridhana, or ' wife's property,' see the paper ofJolly in
the Suzungsber. der bair. Akad. der Wiss., 1876.

8o GATAKAMALA.
36, 37. ' The melodious music of the songs of birds
longing for the pleasure of love, the dances of the
peacocks whom Lasciviousness has taught that art, the
sweet and praised buzzing of the honey-seeking bees
:
they make together a forest-concert that will rejoice
your mind.
38, 39. ' Further, the rocks overspread at night with
the silk garment of moonlight the soft-stroking forest
;
wind impregnated with the scent of flowering trees
;
the murmuring noise of the rivulets, pushing their
waters over moving gravel so as to imitate the sound
—
of a number of rattling female ornaments all this will
gladden your mind in the forest.'
This entreaty of his well-beloved wife filled him with
a great desire to set out for the forest. Therefore he
prepared to bestow great largesses on the mendicant
people.
But in the king's palace the news of the banish-
ment pronounced upon Vi.wantara caused great alarm
and violent lamentations. Likewise the mendicants,
agitated by sorrow and grief, became almost beside
themselves, or behaved as if they were intoxicated or
mad, and uttered many and various' lamentations of
this kind
:
40. 'How is it that Earth does not feel ashamed,
permitting the hatchets to hew down that shady tree,
her foster-child, the giver of such sweet fruits? It is
now plain she has been deprived of consciousness.'
41. ' If no one will prevent those who are about to
destroy that well of cold, pure, and sweet water, then
in truth the guardians of the world-quarters are falsely
named so, or they are absent, or they are nothing but
a mere sound.'
42. ' Oh ! Indeed Injustice is awake and Righteous-
ness either asleep or dead, since prince Visvantara is
banished from his rei^n.'
Who
43. ' possesses such a refined skill in occasioning
distress, as to have the cruelty to aim at starving us,
the guiltless, who obtain a scanty livelihood by
begging '
?

1
IX. THE STORY OF VLSVANTARA. 8
The Boclhisattva then gave away his wealth. He
bestowed on the mendicants the contents of his treasury,
rilled to the very top with precious stones, gold, and
silver, of the value of many hundred thousands his
;
magazines and granaries, containing stores of manifold
goods and grains all his other property, consisting of
;
slaves of both sexes, beasts of draught, carriages,
garments and the like. The whole of this he dis-
tributed according to the merit of the recipients.
This being done, he paid his respectful homage to his
father and mother, taking leave of them, who were
overwhelmed with sadness and grief. Then he mounted
his royal chariot with his wife and children. He left
the capital, while a great body of people uttered
lamentations, the streets being as noisy as on a holiday;
nor did he succeed without difficulty in making the
crowd turn back, who followed him out of affection,
shedding tears of sorrow. Then himself taking- the
reins, he drove in the direction of Mount Varika.
And without the least agitation of mind he passed
along the environs of the capital, crowned with charm-
ing gardens and groves, and approached the forest,
betokened by the gradually increasing rareness ofshady
trees and of human beings, the sight of flocks of
antelopes running at a far distance, and the chirping of
crickets. Now by chance some Brahmans came to
meet him, who begged from him the horses that were
drawing- his chariot.
44. And he, though on a journey of many yq^anas
without attendants, and burdened with his wife, gave
away to these Brahmans his four horses, being rejoiced
at this opportunity of giving, and not caring for the
future.
Now, when the Boclhisattvawas about to put himself
under the yoke, and was fastening thegirth tightly round
his waist, there appeared four young Yakshas, under
the form of red deer. Like well-trained excellent
horses they put their shoulders under the yoke them-
selves. On seeing them, the Bodhisattva said to
Madri, who stared at them with joy and surprise
:
G

82 GATAKAMALA.
45. ' Behold the extraordinary might of the penance-
groves honoured by the residence of ascetics. Their
kindness towards guests has in this degree taken root
in the breast of the foremost of deer.'
Madri replied
:
46. 'This is rather your superhuman power, I sup-
pose. The practice of virtue by the pious, however
deeply rooted, is not the same with respect to every-
body.
47. 'When the beautiful reflection of the stars in the
water is surpassed by the laughing lustre of the night-
waterlilies, the cause thereof is to be found in the
beams which the Moon-Lrod sends down as if out of
curiosity1.'
While they were going on, so speaking to each other
kind words of affection, see, another Brahman came
near, and asked the Bodhisattva for his royal chariot.
48. And the Bodhisattva, as he was indifferent to
his own comfort, but to the beggars a loving kinsman,
fulfilled the wish of that Brahman.
He gladly caused his family to alight from the
chariot,' presented the Brahman with it, and taking
6"alin, his boy, in his arms, he continued his way on
foot. Madri, she too free from sadness, took the girl,
Kr/sh/za^ina, in her arms and marched after him.
49. The trees, stretching out to him their branches
adorned at their ends with charming fruits, invited
him, as it were, to enjoy their hospitality, and paying-
homage to his merit-obtained dignity, bowed to him
like obedient disciples, when they got sight of him.
50. And, where he longed for water, in those very
places lotus-ponds appeared to his eyes, covered on
their surface with the white and reddish-brown pollen
fallen down from the anthers of the lotuses shaken by
the wing-movements of the swans.
51. The clouds overspread him with a beautiful
1 The white waterlilies (kumuda) are said to open at moonrise.
The connection between these flowers and the moon is a common-
place in Indian poetry.

IX. THE STORY OF VLSVANTAUA. 8,}
canopy there blew an agreeable and odoriferous wind;
;
and his path was shortened by Yakshas not enduring
his labour and fatigue.
In this manner the Bodhisattva with his wife and chil-
dren experienced the pleasure and the delight ofa walk,
without feeling the sensation of weariness, just as if he
were in some park, and at last he perceived Mount
Varika. Being showed the way by some foresters, he
went up to the penance-forest which was on that
mountain. This forest was beset with manifold charm-
ing and smooth-barked, excellent trees, with their orna-
ments of twigs, flowers, and fruits birds exulting with
;
lust made it resound with their various notes ; groups
of dancing peacocks enhanced its beauty; many kinds
of deer lived in it. It was encircled as with a girdle by
a river of pure, blue water, and the wind was agreeable
there, carrying red flower-dust. In this grove stood
a desert hut of leaves, lovely to behold, and pleasing in
every season. Vi^vakarman himself had built it by
the orders of 6akra. There the Bodhisattva took up
his residence.
52. Attended by his beloved wife, enjoying the
artless and sweet talk of his children, not thinking of
the cares of royalty, like one who is staying in his
gardens, he practised in that grove strong penance for
half a year.
One day, when the princess had gone to seek roots
and fruits, and the prince watching the children kept
himself within the borders of the hermitage, there
arrived a Brahman, whose feet and ankles were stiff
with the dust of the journey, and whose eyes and
cheeks were sunken by toil he was bearing over his
;
shoulder a wooden club, from which his waterpot hung
clown. His wife had despatched him with the pressing
errand, to go and search after some attendance. When
the Bodhisattva saw a mendicant coming up to him
aftera longtime, his heart rejoiced, and his countenance
began to beam. He went to meet him, and welcomed
him with kind words. After the usual complimentary
conversation he told him to enter the hermitage,
G 2

:
84 GATAKAMALA.
where he entertained him with the honour due to
a guest. Then he asked him the object of his coming.
And the Brahman, who through fondness for his wife
had banished virtue and shame and was but eager
to receive his boon, said in truth something like this
:
53. 'Where a light is and an even road, there it
is easy for men to go. But in this world the darkness
of selfishness prevails to such a degree that no other
men would support my words of request.
54. ' Thy brilliant renown of heroic almsgiving
has penetrated everywhere. For this reason I have
undertaken this labour of beeping: from thee. Give me
both thy children to be my attendants.'
Being so addressed, the Bodhisattva, that Great
Being,
55. As he was in the habit of cheerfully giving to
mendicants and had never learnt to say no, bravely
said that he would oive even both his darlings.
' Bless thee ! But what art thou still waiting for ?
Thus speaking the Brahman urged the Great Being.
Now the children, having heard their father saying
he would give them away, became afflicted, and their
eyes filled with tears. His affection for them agitated
him, and made his heart sink. So the Bodhisattva
spoke
56, 57. ' They are thine, being given by me to thee.
But their mother is not at home. She went out to the
forest in search of roots and fruits she will come
;
back at evening-time. Let their mother see them,
neatly dressed as they are now and bearing wreaths,
and kiss x them (farewTell). Rest this night here
;
to-morrow thou shalt carry them away.'
The Brahman said : ' Thy Reverence ought not
to urge me.
58. ' A metaphorical name of womankind is " beau-
1 The literal translation is ' to smell at.' This old and traditional
manner ofcaressing is prescribed in the ritual-books, see for instance,
Ajvalayanag/v'byasutra I, 15, 9; Paraskara I, 18; Gobhila II, 8, 22
and 25.

IX. THE STORY OF VISVANTARA. 85
tiful charmers l," thou knowest. She might prove
a hindrance to the fulfilment of thy promise. Therefore
I do not like staying- here.'
The Bodhisattva said : ' Do not think of that. My
wife will not obstruct the fulfilment of my promise.
She is in fact the companion of my pious practice 2
.
But do as pleases Thy Reverence. Yet, great
Brahman, thou shouldst consider this
:
59-61. 'How should these children satisfy thy
wants by slavework ? They are very young and weak
and have never been accustomed to such kind of
occupation. But the king of .Sibi, their grandfather,
seeing- them fallen into this state of bondage, will
doubtlessly give thee as much money as thou desirest
to redeem them. Well, for this reason I pray thee,
take them to his realm. When acting thus, thou
wilt get the possession of great wealth and at the
same time of righteousness.'
'No' (said the Brahman), 'I do not venture to
come to this king with an offer which would
excite his anger he would be unapproachable like a
;
snake.
62. ' He would have the children torn from me
by force, perhaps he would also inflict punishment
on me. I shall bring them rather to my Brahmawi
that they may attend on her.'
Upon this the Bodhisattva said nothing but : ' Then
as thou likest,' without finishing the sentence. He
instructed the little ones with persuasive words how
they had to act in accordance with their new condition
of servants after which he took the waterpot, bending
;
1 I have tried to render approximately the ambiguousness of the
original. Women are designated, says the Brahman, by the appel-
lation of varaa/i. Now vaina means 'beautiful,' but pronounced
with a different accent vama, it is a word signifying 'left, contrary,
opposite.'
- Vwvantarausesherethesolemnappellationofsahadharma£ari»i
( r = ata ' » ho z us d ew h i a fe rm')a w m ith is its ut f t ul e l re m d ea i n n in t g h . e fo T u h r e th f o o r rm P u r l a a ^a s p a a h ty o a bh f a o u rm /* o a- f
marriage. Manu III, 30.

:
86 GATAKAMALA.
it over the outstretched hand of the Brahman, greedy
to accept the ratification of the gift.
63. Yielding to his effort, the water poured down
from the pot, and at the same time tears fell with-
out effort from his eyes resembling dark red lotus-
petals.
Overjoyed with his success, agitated by his excite-
ment, and hastening to carry off the children of the
Bodhisattva, the Brahman uttered a short phrase of
benediction, and telling the children with a harsh
voice of command to go out, he prepared to make
them leave the hermitage. They, however, could not
bear the too intense grief of separation, their hearts
shrunk together and they embraced the feet of their
father. Bathed in tears, they exclaimed
:
64. ' Mother is out of doors, while you are about to
give us away. Do not give us away before we have
bidden adieu to mother too.'
Now the Brahman reflected : ' The motherwill return
erelong, or it is likely that his paternal love will make
him repent.' Thus considering, he tied their hands like
a bundle of lotuses with a creeper, and as they were
reluctant and looked back at their father, he began to
drag those young and delicate children along with him,
threatening them. At this moment K/7sh^a<nna the
girl, having never before experienced a sudden cala-
mity, cried out with tears to her father
:
65. 66. ' This cruel Brahman, father, hurts me with
a creeper. No, it is no Brahman, to be sure. Brah-
mans are righteous, they say. It is an ogre under
the guise of a Brahman. Certainly he carries us off
to eat us. Why do you suffer us, father, to be led
away by this ogre ? '
And C7alin the boy lamented on account of his
mother, saying
67. 'I do not suffer so much by the violence of
this Brahman, as by the absence of mother. It is
as if my heart is pierced by grief that I did not
see her.
68. ' Oh ! certainly, mother will weep for us for a

IX. THE STORY OF VISVANTARA. 87
long time in the empty hermitage, like the bird
/'ataka ' whose little ones have been killed.
69. ' How will mother behave, when coming back
with the many roots and fruits she has gathered in
the forest for us, she will find the hermitage empty ?
70. ' Here, father, are our toy horses, elephants, and
chariots. Half of them you must give to mother,
that she may assuage her grief therewith.
71. 'You must also present to her our respectful
salutations and withhold her at any rate from afflicting
herself ; for it will be difficult for us, father, to see you
and her again.
72. ' Come, Kr/sh//a, let us die. Of what use is
life to us? We have been delivered by the prince
to a Brahman who is in want of money.'
After so speaking they parted. But the Bodhi-
sattva, though his mind was shaken by these most
piteous laments of his children, did not move from
the place where he was sitting. While representing
to himself that it is not right to repent having given,
his heart was burnt by the fire of irremediable grief,
and his mind became troubled, as though it were
paralysed by torpor occasioned by poison. The fan-
ning of the cool wind made him soon recover his
senses, and seeing the hermitage noiseless and silent,
as it were, being devoid of his children, he said to
himself in a voice choked with tears :
73. ' How is it possible that this man did not
scruple to strike my very heart before my very eyes in
my children ?2 O, fie on that shameless Brahman !
How may they be capable of making the
74. '
journey, going bare-footed, unable to bear fatigue by
reason of their tender age, and become servants to
that man ?
1 Thisbird, the cuculus melanoleucus, is a favourite wilh Indian
poe 2 ts Li a t n .: d rh ' e O t n oric m i y ans. very It i h s ea s r a t i , d t u o ho fe s e e d o n n am r e aind is rop o s f . fspri _ ng.( 11ns
identification of the heart of the father with his children depends on
an old formula, forming part of the prayers and sacred mantras ofthe
gr/hya-books. Cp. also Kauslntakibrahmawopanishad II, 11.

SS GATAKAMALA.
75. 'Who will afford rest to them, when they are
way-worn and exhausted Whom may they go and
?
ask, if vexed by the suffering of hunger and thirst ?
76. 'If this sorrow strikes even me, the earnest
striver after firmness of mind, what then will be the
condition of those little ones, brought up in ease ?
77. 'Oh! the separation from my children is to my
mind like a burning fire .... Nevertheless, who, hold-
ing on to the righteous conduct of the virtuous, would
give way to repentance ? '
In the meanwhile Madri was disquieted by ill omens
and prognostics, the foretokens of some accident.
Desiring therefore to get back with her roots and
fruits as soon as possible, she was obstructed on the
way by ferocious animals, and was obliged to return
to the hermitage by a long circuitous way. And
when she did not see her children neither on the way,
where they were used to come to meet her, nor in
the playground, her uneasiness greatly increased.
78. Apprehending evil because of these dreadful
sensations of danger, she was agitated and anxious,
and looked round about if she might get sight of
the children then she called them. Receiving no
;
answer, she began to lament, being sore with grief.
79. ' Formerly the hermitage, resounding with the
shouts of my children, appeared to me a much-
frequented region ; now not perceiving them, I feel
myself helpless in the very same place as in a wilder-
ness.
80. ' But perhaps they have fallen asleep and are
slumbering, tired with playing. Or should they have
gone astray in the thicket ? Or should they have
hidden themselves out of childishness, beingdispleased
that I was so long in coming home ?
81. 'But why do not yonder birds warble? Are
they perhaps bewildered, having witnessed mischief
done to the children ? Can it be that my darlings have
been carried away by that very rapid stream, which is
eagerly pushing forth its dashing waves ?
' Oh ! that my suspicions may prove to be groundless

IX. THE STORY OF VISVANTAU A. 89
and false even now, and the prince and the children
be well Oh may the evil-boding" prognostics find
their ful ! filmen ! t on my body But why then is my
! Why
heart big with sadness because of them ? is it
enwrapt in the night of sorrow and as if it would sink
away ? Why is it that my limbs seem to slacken,
that I am no more able to discern the objects around
me, that this grove, deprived of its lustre, seems to
turn round ? '
Having entered the hermitage-ground and put aside
her roots and fruits, she went to her husband. After
performing the usual salutation, she asked him for the
children. Now the Bodhisattva, knowing the tender-
ness of a mother's love and also considering that bad
news is hard to be told, was not able to make any
answer.
82. It is a very difficult matter for a pitiful man,
indeed, to torment with evil tidings the mind of one
who has come to him and deserves to hear pleasant
words.
Then Madri thought : ' Surely, some ill has befallen
the children his silence must be the effect of his
;
being overwhelmed by grief and sadness,' and almost
stricken with stupor she stared about the hermitage,
but saw no children. And aQ-ain she said in a voice
rather indistinct by smothered tears
:
83. ' 1 do not see the children, and you do not speak
anything to me ! Alas ! I am wretched, I am forlorn.
This silence speaks of some great evil.'
No sooner had she said these words, than over-
powered by the sorrow that tortured her heart, she
sank down like a creeper violently cut off. The
Bodhisattva prevented her from falling to the ground,
clasping his arms round her, and brought her to a grass
couch, on which lying and being sprinkled with cold
water she recovered her senses. Then he endeavoured
to comfort her, saying
:
84. ' I have not told the sad news straightway to
you, Madri, for firmness is not to be expected ot
a mind rendered weak by affection.

' :
90 GATAKAMALA.
85. ' See, a Brahman suffering from old age and
poverty has come to me. To him I have given both
children. Be appeased and do not mourn.
86. ' Look at me, Madri, do not look for the chil-
dren, nor indulge in lamentations. Do not strike
anew my heart, still pierced by the dart of sorrow on
account of the children.
87. ' When asked for my life, should I be able to
withhold it ? Take this in account, my love, and
approve the gift I have made of the children.'
Madri, whom the suspicion of the death of her
children had put to anguish, now hearing by these
words that they were alive, began to recover from her
fright and affliction. She wiped away her tears with
the obect of comforting- and strengthening her hus-
band then looking up, she beheld (something) that
;
made her speak with amazement to her husband
' A wonder ! A wonder! To say it in a few words,
88. ' Surely, even the Celestials are wrapt in admira-
tion at your heart being up to this point inaccessible
to selfish feelings.
89. ' This is evident from the sounds of the divine
drums, echoing in all directions. It is in order to cele-
brate your glory, that Heaven has composed the hymn
which it thus pronounces in distinct language from
afar.
90. 'Earth shakes, trembling, I suppose, from exulta-
tion, as is indicated by the heaving of her breasts, the
huge mountains. Golden flowers, falling down from
heaven, make the sky appear as if it were illuminated
by lightnings.
91. ' Leave, then, grief and sadness. That you have
given away in charity must rather tend to brighten up
your mind. Become again the well that affords benefit
to the creatures, and a giver as before !
Now the surface of Earth being shaken, Sumeru,
the lord of mountains, radiant with the lustre of its
manifold gems, began to waver. .5akra, the Lord of
the Devas, inquiring into the cause of the earthquake,
was informed of it by the regents of the world-quarters,

THE STORY OF VISVANTARA. 91
IX.
who, with eyes expanding with amazement, told him
that'it had been caused by Visvantara giving away his
children. Excited with joy and surprise, next day at
day-break he went into the presence of Visvantara,
feigning to be a Brahman come to him as a mendicant.
The Bodhisattva showed him the hospitality due to
a guest, after which he asked him to bring forth his
request. Then 5akra begged him for his wife.
92. ' The practice of almsgiving in virtuous persons,'
he said, ' comes as little to its end as the water in great
lakes dries up. For this reason I ask thee for that
woman there who is looking like a deity. Her, thy
wife, give to me, I pray thee.'
The Bodhisattva did not lose his firmness of mind,
however, and made the promise of giving her.
93. Then taking Madri with his left hand and the
waterpot with his right, he poured down water on the
hand of the Brahman, but fire of grief on the mind of
the Love-god l
.
94. No* anger arose in Madri's breast, nor did she
weep, for she knew her husband's nature. Only
keeping her eyes fixed on him, she stood like an
image, stupefied by the excessive heaviness of that
fresh burden of suffering.
On beholding this, Sakra, the Lord of the Devas,
affected with the utmost admiration, magnified the
Great Being.
95. 'Oh! the wide distance which is between the
How
conduct of the righteous and that ofthe impious
!
will those who have not purified their hearts be even
capable of believing this great performance ?
96. ' To cherish an affectionate wife and much-
beloved children, and yet to give t — hem up, obeying
the self-imposed vow of detachment is it possible to
conceive any loftiness like this ?
97. 'When thy glory will be spread throughout the
1 This means not so much that the Indian Amor was afflicted^on
account of the offence against conjugal love, as the defeat of M&ra,
the Indian Satan. To conquer the senses and sensualityis to vanquish
Mara, who is the same as Kama.

92 GATAKAMALA.
world by the tales of those who are enthusiastic about
thy virtues, the brilliant reputations of others will dis-
appear in thine, beyond doubt, just as the other
luminaries dissolve in the splendour of the sunlight.
98. ' Even now this superhuman fact of thine is
praisingly approved by the Yakshas, the Gandharvas,
the snakes, and by the Devas, Vasava included.'
'
After so speaking, .Sakra reassumed his own brilliant
figure and made himself known to the Bodhisattva.
Which being done, he said
:
99. ' To thee I now give back Madri, thy wife.
Where else should moonshine stay but with
the moon ?
100. Nor shouldst thou be anxious about the
'
separation from thy son and daughter, nor grieve for
the loss of thy royal dignity. Before long thy father
will come to thee, accompanied by both thy children,
and provide his kingdom with a protector, re-establish-
ing thee in thy high rank.'
Having said these words, .5akra disappeared on the
spot.
And that Brahman, in consequence of.Sakra's power,
brought the children of the Bodhisattva to the very
land of .Sibi. And when the Sibls and Sa;;/^aya, their
king, heard of the Bodhisattva's performance of the
greatest compassion, hard to be done by others, their
hearts became soft with tenderness. They redeemed
the children from the hand of the Brahman, and having
obtained the pardon of Visvantara, led him back and
reinstated him in his royal dignity.
[In this way, then, the behaviour of a Bodhisattva
is exceedingly marvellous. For this reason such dis-
tinguished beings as strive for that state, must not be
despised or hindered. This story is also to be adduced,
when discoursing on the Tatha^ata and when treating
of listening with attention to the preaching of the
Law.]
1 Vasava is another name of-Sakra.

;
THE STORY OF THE SACRIFICE. 93
Yu-vantara's birth being the last but one of the Lord, the person of
that charitable king is held very high among Buddhists. His largesses
are also considered to constitute the highest degree of practising the
paramita of charity. In the memorable night which preceded his
attainment of the Buddhahood, the .Sakya prince had but to refer to
his actions in the Vijvantara-existence to demonstrate his having ful-
filled that paramita. In the Pali Gataka that existence forms the
subject-matter of the longest and last tale of the collection, but since
it is the last, it is still unpublished ; its contents, however, have been
communicatedby Spence Hardy in his ' Manual ofBudhism' (pp. 118-
127 of the second edition). From hence Prof. Kern borrowed his
exposition of the tale in his Geschiedenis van het Buddhisme, I,
pp. 303-317, to which he added copious notes with the object of
exploring and expoundingthe mythological substratum whichunderlies
it. It is curious to compare the redaction of the Pali Gataka with that
of .Sura. The latter omitted purposely, it seems, some particulars,
for instance, the name of the old Brahman, that of the mother of
Ymantara, and the etymology of his name ; his narration is different
in some slight details. But the main features are the same, likewise in
the redaction of the A^ariyapi/aka, where Vijvantara's story is No. 9 of
the danaparamita and is told in 58 xlokas. From this version it
appears that the earthquake, caused by the great liberality of the
prince, is something most essential; or rather the earthquakes, for this
miracle occurred seven times, once, when he took the determination
[not mentioned by .Sura] of giving his heart, eyes, flesh or blood, if
requested; secondly, after the gift of the white elephant; thirdly,
whenhe hadmade his greatlargessesprecedinghiswithdrawalto Mount
Vahka; fourthly and fifthly, after giving his children and his wife
the sixth timewaswhenhe met again withhis father andmother in the
forest; the seventh at his entranceinhiscapital. Thesevenfoldearth-
quake is also discussed in the Milinda Patfha, 119 foil. Cp. also the
parallel performance told of the Bodhisattva, who afterwards was
Maftgala Buddha (Fausb. Gat. I, p. 31, translated by Rhys Davids,
Birth-Stories, I, p. 33).
In Kshemendra's Avadanakalpalata the story of Vi.rvantara is
No. 23, not yet published.
X. The Story of the Sacrifice.
Those whose hearts are pure do not act up to the
enticement of the wicked. Knowing this, pure-hearted-
ness is to be striven after. This will be taught by the
following.
Long ago the Bodhisattva, it is said, was a king
who had obtained his kingdom in the order of heredi-
tary succession. He had reached this state as the
effect of his merit, and ruled his realm in peace, not

94 GATAKAMALA.
disturbed by any rival, his sovereignty being universally
acknowledged. His country was free from any kind
of annoyance, vexation or disaster, both his home
relations and those with foreign countries being quiet
in every respect and all his vassals obeyed his com-
;
mands.
i. This monarch having subdued the passions, his
enemies, felt no inclination for such profits as are to
be blamed when enjoyed, but was with his whole heart
intent on promoting the happiness of his subjects.
Holding virtuous practice (dharma) the only purpose
of his actions, he behaved like a Muni.
2. For he knew the nature of mankind, that people
set a hi°h value on imitating the behaviour of the
highest. For this reason, being desirous of bringing
about salvation for his subjects, he was particularly
attached to the due performance of his religious duties.
3. He practised almsgiving, kept strictly the pre-
cepts of moral conduct (ula), cultivated forbearance,
strove for the benefit of the creatures. His mild
countenance being in accordance with his thoughts
devoted to the happiness of his subjects, he appeared
like the embodied Dharma.
Now it once happened that, though protected by his
arm, his realm, both in consequence ofthe faulty actions
of its inhabitants and inadvertence on the part of
the aneels charged with the care of rain, was afflicted
in several districts by drought and the troublesome
effects of such a disaster. Upon this the king, fully
convinced that this plague had been brought about
by the violation of righteousness by himself or his
subjects, and taking much to heart the distress of
his people, whose welfare was the constant object
of his thoughts and cares, took the advice of men of
acknowledged competence, who were reputed for their
knowledge in matters of religion. So keeping coun-
sel with the elders among the Brahmans, headed
by his family priest (purohita) and his ministers, he
asked them for some means of putting an end to that
calamity. Now they, believing a solemn sacrifice as

X. THE STORY OF THE SACRIFICE. 95
is enjoined by the Veda to be a cause of abundant
rain, explained to him that he must perform such a
sacrifice of a frightful character, inasmuch as it requires
the massacre of many hundreds of living beings.
But after being informed of everything concerning
such a slaughter as is prescribed for the sacrifice, his
innate compassionateness forbade him to approve of
their advice in his heart yet out of civility, unwilling
;
to offend them by harsh words of refusal, he slipped
over this point, turning the conversation upon other
topics. They, on the other hand, no sooner caught
the opportunity of conversing with the king on matters
of religion, than they once more admonished him to
accomplish the sacrifice, for they did not understand
his deeply hidden mind.
4. ' You constantly take care not to neglect the
proper time of performing your different royal duties,
established for the sake of obtaining the possession of
land and ruling it. The due order of these actions of
yours is in agreement with the precepts of Righteous-
ness (dharma).
5. ' How then is this that you who (in all other
respects) are so clever in the observance of the triad
(of dharma, artha, and kama), bearing your bow to
defend the good of your people, are so careless and
almost sluggish as to that bridge to the world of the
Devas, the name of which is ' sacrifice ' ?
6. ' Like servants, the kings (your vassals) revere
vour commands, thinking them to be the surest eaee of
Now O
success. the time is come, destroyer of your
foes, to gather by means of sacrifice superior blessings,
which are to procure for you a shining glory.
7. 8. ' Certainly, that holiness which is the requisite
for a dikshita 1 is already yours, by reason of your
1 Before undertaking the performance of a great sacrifice, its per-
former has to be purified by the initiatoryceremony of diksha. From
that time till the final bath or avabh/'/tha at the close ofthe sacrifice
he is called a dikshita, and bound to the observance of manydetailed
prescriptions about his food, dress, residence, and his whole mode of
living

96 GATAKAMALA.
habitual practice of charity and your strictness in
observing the restraint (of good conduct). Never-
theless, it would be fit for you to discharge your debt
to the Devas l by such sacrifices as are the subject-
matter of the Veda. The deities being satisfied by
duly and faultlessly performed sacrifice, honour the
creatures in return by (sending) rain. Thus consider-
ing, take to mind the welfare of your subjects and
your own, and consent to the performance of a regular
sacrifice, which will enhance your glory.'
Thereupon he entered upon this thought : ' Very
badly guarded is my poor person indeed, being given
in trust to such leaders. While faithfully believing and
loving the Law, I should uproot my virtue of tender-
heartedness by reliance upon the words of others.
For, truly,
9. ' Those who are reputed among men to be the
best refuge, are the very persons who intend to do
harm, borrowing their arguments from the Law.
Alas such a man who follows the wrong path shown
!
by them, will soon find himself driven to straits, for he
will be surrounded by evils.
10. 'What connection may there be, forsooth, be-
tween righteousness and injuring animals ? How may
residence in the world of the Devas or propitiation
of the deities have anything to do with the murder of
victims ?
11. 12. 'The animal slaughtered according to the
rites with the prescribed prayers, as if those sacred
formulae were so many darts to wound it, goes to
heaven, they say, and with this object it is killed. In
this way that action is interpreted to be done according
to the Law. Yet it is a lie. For how is it possible
that in the next world one should reap the fruits of
what has been done by others ? And by what reason
1 By sacrifice, is the saying ofthe Hindus, man pays his debtstothe
Devas, by the 6'raddha and by offspring to his ancestors, by study
and penance to the r/shis or old sages, by benevolence and kindness
to men. See,for instance, Mhbh. I, 120, 17 foil.; BuddhaX'aritaIX, 55.

X. THE STORY OF THE SACRIFICE. 97
will the sacrificial animal mount to heaven ? though
he has not abstained from wicked actions, though he
has not devoted himself to the practice of good ones,
simply because he has been killed in sacrifice, and not
on the ground of his own actions ?
13. 'And should the victim killed in sacrifice really
go to heaven, should we not expect the Brahmans to
A
offer themselves to be immolated in sacrifice ?
similar practice, however, is nowhere seen among them.
Who, then, may take to heart the advice proffered by
these counsellors ?
14. 'As to the Celestials, should we believe that
theywho are wont to enjoy the fair ambrosia of incom-
parable scent, flavour, magnificence, and effective power,
served to them by the beautiful Apsarasas, would
abandon it to delight in the slaughter of a pitiable
victim, that they might feast on the omentum and
such other parts of his body as are offered to them in
sacrifice ?
' Therefore, it is the proper time to act so and so.'
Having thus made up his mind, the king feigned to
be eager to undertake the sacrifice and in approval
;
of their words he spoke to them in this manner :
'Verily, well protected am I, well gratified, having
such counsellors as Your Lordships are, thus bent on
securing my happiness ! Therefore I will have a
human sacrifice (purushamedha) of a thousand
victims performed. Let my officials, each in his sphere
of business, be ordered to bring together the requi-
sites necessary for that purpose. Let also an inquiry
be made of the most fitting ground whereon to raise
the tents and other buildings for the sattra1 . Further,
the proper time for the sacrifice must be fixed (by the
astrologers) examining the auspicious lunar days, ka-
ra»as, muhurtas, and constellations.' The purohita
answered 'In order to succeed in your enterprise,
:
Your Majesty ought to take the avabhr/tha (final
1 This is the appellation of great Soma-sacrifices lasting for many
days, sometimes even for years.
H

98 GATAKAMALA.
bath) at the end of one sacrifice after which you
;
may successively undertake the others. For if the
thousand human victims were to be seized at once,
your subjects, to be sure, would blame you and be
stirred up to great agitation on their account.' These
words of the purohita having been approved by the
(other) Brahmans, the king replied : ' Do not apprehend
the wrath of the people, Reverends. I shall take such
measures as to prevent any agitation among my
subjects.'
After this the king convoked an assembly of the
townsmen and the landsmen, and said : ' I intend to
perform a human sacrifice of a thousand victims. But
nobody behaving honestly is fit to be designated for
immolation on my part. With this in mind, I give
you this advice : Whomsoever of you I shall hence-
forward perceive transgressing the boundaries of moral
conduct, despising my royal will, him will I order to
be caught to be a victim at my sacrifice, thinking such
a one the stain of his family and a danger to my
country. With the object of carrying this resolution
into effect, I shall cause you to be observed by fault-
less and sharp-sighted emissaries, who have shaken
off sleepy carelessness and will report to me concerning
your conduct.'
Then the foremost of the assembly, folding their
hands and bringing them to their foreheads, spoke
:
15, 16. 'Your Majesty, all your actions tend to the
happiness of your subjects, what reason can there be
to despise you on that account ? Even (god) Brahma
cannot but sanction your behaviour. Your Majesty,
who is the authority of the virtuous, be our highest
authority. For this reason anything which pleases Your
Majesty must please us, too. Indeed, you are pleased
with nothing else but our enjoyment and our good.'
After the notables both of the town and the country
had accepted his command in this manner, the king
dispersed about his towns and all over his country
officers, notified as such by their outward appearance
to the people, with the charge of laying hold ofthe evil-

—
X. THE STORY OF THE SACRIFICE. 99
doers, and everywhere he ordered proclamations to be
made by beat of drum day after day, of this kind
:
1 7. ' The king, a granter of security as he is,
warrants safety to every one who constantly cultivates
honesty and good conduct, in short, to the virtuous.
Yet, intending to perform a human sacrifice for the
benefit of his subjects, he wants human victims by
thousands to be taken out of those who delight in
misconduct.
18. ' Therefore, whosoever henceforward, licentiously
indulging in misbehaviour, shall disregard the command
of our monarch, which is even observed by the kings,
his vassals, shall be brought to the state of a sacrificial
victim by the very force of his own actions and
;
people shall witness his miserable suffering, when he
shall pine with pain, his body being fastened to the
sacrificial post.'
When the inhabitants of that realm became aware
of their king's careful search after evil-doers with t—he
aim of destining them to be victims at his sacrifice
for they heard the most frightful royal proclamation
day after day and saw the king's servants, who were
appointed to look out for wicked people and to seize
them, appearing every now and then everywhere
they abandoned their attachment to bad conduct, and
grew intent on strictly observing the moral precepts
and self-control. They avoided every occasion of
hatred and enmity, and settling their quarrels and
differences, cherished mutual love and mutual esteem.
Obedience to the words of parents and teachers,
a general spirit of liberality and sharing with others,
hospitality, good manners, modesty, prevailed among
them. In short, theylived as it were in the Krz'taYuga.
19. The fear of death had awakened in them
thoughts of the next world the risk of tarnishing the
;
honour of their families had stirred their care of
guarding their reputation the great purity of their
;
hearts had strengthened their sense of shame. These
factors being at work, people were soon distinguished
by their spotless behaviour.
h 2

ICO GATAKAMALA.
20. Even though every one became more than ever
intent on keeping a righteous conduct, still the king's
servants did not diminish their watchfulness in the
pursuit of the evildoers. This also contributed to
prevent people from falling short of righteousness.
21. The king, learning from his emissaries this state
He
of things in his realm, felt extremely rejoiced.
bestowed rich presents on those messengers as a
reward for the good news they told him, and enjoined
his ministers, speaking something like this :
22-24. ' The protection of my subjects is my highest
desire, you know. Now, they have become worthy to
be recipients of sacrificial gifts \ and it is for the
purpose of my sacrifice that I have provided this
wealth. Well, I intend to accomplish my sacrifice in
the manner which I have considered to be the proper
one. Let every one who wishes for money, that it
may be fuel for his happiness, come and accept it from
my hand to his heart's content. In this way the
distress and poverty, which is vexing our country, may
be soon driven out. Indeed, whenever I consider
my own strong determination to protect my subjects
and the great assistance I derive from you, my ex-
cellent companions in that task, it often seems to me as
though those sufferings of my people, by exciting my
anger, were burning in my mind like a blazing fire.'
The ministers accepted the royal command and
anon went to execute it. They ordered alms-halls to
be established in all villages, towns, and markets,
likewise at all stations on the roads. This being
done, they caused all who begged in order to satisfy
their wants, to be provided day after day with a gift
of those objects, just as had been ordered by the
king.
25. So poverty disappeared, and the people, having
received wealth from the part of the king, dressed and
adorned with manifold and fine garments and orna-
ments, exhibited the splendour of festival days.
1 Viz. by the purity oftheir life and the holiness oftheir conduct.

:
X. THE STORY OF THE SACRIFICE. lOI
26. The glory of the king, magnified by the eulogies
of the rejoiced recipients of his gifts, spread about in
all directions in the same way, as the llowerdust of the
lotuses carried forth by the small waves of a lake,
extends itself over a larger and larger surface.
27 '. And after the whole people, in consequence of
the wise measures taken by their ruler, had become
intent on virtuous behaviour, the plagues and ca-
lamities, overpowered by the growth of all such
qualities as conduce to prosperity, faded away, having
lost their hold.
28. The seasons succeeded each other in due course,
rejoicing everybody by their regularity, and like kings
newly established, complying with the lawful order of
things. Consequently the earth produced the various
kinds of corn in abundance, and there was fulness of
pure and blue water and lotuses in all waterbasins.
29. No epidemics afflicted mankind the medicinal
;
herbs possessed their efficacious virtues more than
ever; the monsoons blew in due time and regularly
the planets moved along in auspicious paths.
30. Nowhere there existed any danger to be feared,
either from abroad, or from within, or such as might be
caused by derangements of the elements. Continuing
in righteousness and self-control, cultivating- good
behaviour and modesty, the people of that country
enjoyed as it were the prerogatives of the K;7ta Yuga.
By the power, then, of the king performing his
sacrifice in this manner in accordance with (the pre-
cepts of) the Law, the sufferings of the indigent were
put to an end together with the plagues and calamities,
and the country abounded in a prosperous and thriving
population offering the pleasing aspect of felicity. Ac-
cordingly people never wearied of repeating bene-
dictions on their king and extending: his renown in all
directions.
1 In ihe printed text the first line of this stanza is deficient, two
syllables at the end being wanting. I think this second inula should
be restored by the insertion of^-ane after nikhile.

102 GATAKAMALA.
One day one of the highest royal officials, whose
heart had been inclined to the (True) Belief, spoke
thus to the king : ' This is a true saying, in truth.
31. ' Monarchs, because they always deal with all
kinds of business, the highest, the lowest, and the
intermediate, by far surpass in their wisdom any wise
men.
' For, Yonr Majesty, you have obtained the happiness
of your subjects both in this world and in the next, as
the effect ofyour sacrifice being performed in righteous-
ness, free from the blameable sin of animal-slaughter.
The hard times are all over and the sufferings of
poverty have ceased, since men have been established
in the precepts of good conduct. Why use many
words ? Your subjects are happy.
32'. 'The black antelope's skin which covers your
limbs has the resemblance of the spot on the bright
moon's surface, nor can the natural loveliness of your
demeanour be hindered by the restraint imposed on
you by your being a dikshita -. Your head, adorned
with such hair-dress as is in compliance with the rites
of the diksha, possesses no less lustre than when
it was embellished with the splendour of the royal
umbrella 3 And, last not least, by your largesses you
.
1 The corruptions of this stanza in the MSS. have been corrected
in the edition. In some points, however, I venture to propose some
alterations.
To gatre/za of the MSS., gatre na of the ed., I should prefer
gatreshu.
For mandodyama^ of the MSS., mandodyama/z of the ed.,
I substitute mandodyama, and in pada 3,1think kejara^'anajobha
is one word.
2 See note on p. 95 supra. The sattra and the diksha continue
as long as the sacrifice is being performed. The king, therefore, is
still wearing the skin of the black antelope, which he put on at the
time of his consecration for the sake of performing the sacrifice,
since he is obliged to observe this and many other restrictions of the
diksha. The minister says that to the pious monarch these obli-
gations are no restraint with respect to his behaviour, which already
before has been in accordance with the strictest precepts ofthe Law.
3 The white umbrella has been put aside for the time of the
diksha.

:
X. THE STORY OF THE SACRIFICE. 103
have surpassed the renown and abated the pride of
the famous performer of a hundred sacrifices '.
33. 'As a rule, O you wise ruler, the sacrifice of
those who long for the attainment of some good, is
a vile act, accompanied as it is by injury done to
living beings. Your sacrifice, on the contrary, this
monument of your glory, is in complete accordance
with your lovely behaviour and your aversion to
vices.
34. ' Oh ! Happy are the subjects who have their
protector in you! It is certain that no father could
be a better guardian to his children.'
Another
said
35. 'If the wealthy practise charity, they are com-
monly impelled to do so by the hopes they put in the
cultivation of that virtue good conduct, too, may be
;
accounted for by the wish to obtain high regard
amonof men or the desire of reaching- heaven after
death. But such a practice of both, as is seen in your
skill in securing the benefit of others, cannot be found
but in those who are accomplished both in learning
and in virtuous exertions.'
In such a way, then, those whose hearts are pure do
not act up to the enticement of the wicked. Knowing
this, pure-heartedness is to be striven after.
[In the spiritual lessons for princes, also, this is to be
said
:
'Who to his subjects wishing good, himself exerts,
Thus brings about salvation, glory, happiness.
No other should be of a king the business.'
And it may be added as follows : ' (The prince) who
strives after material prosperity, ought to act in
accordance with the precepts of religion, thinking
a religious conduct of his subjects to be the source of
prosperity.'
1 Viz. .Sakra, the Lord ofthe Devas. Hereheis called i-ataya^van,
which is well-nigh synonymous with his common epithet of jata-
kratu.

T04 GATAKAMALA.
Further this is here to be said : ' Injuring animals
never tends to bliss, but charity, self-restraint, con-
tinence and the like have this power for this reason
;
he who longs for bliss must devote himself to these
virtues.' And also when discoursing on the Tatha-
gata : ' In this manner the Lord showed his inclination
to care for the interests of the world, when he was
still in his previous existences.']
This story is not met with elsewhere, it seems,at least in this shape.
No. 50 of the Pali Cataka is told with the same intention but in
a different manner. The resolve of the Bodhisattva and his stopping
bloody sacrifices is better accounted for in our text.
XI. The Story of Sakra.
(Comp. Fausb., Cat. I, p. 202, translated by Rhys Davids, Buddhist
Birth Stories, pp. 284-287.)
Neither adversity nor the brilliancy of sovereign
power can relax in the high-minded the virtue of
compassion towards living beings. This will be taught
now.
In the time when the Bodhisattva, havinp- well
practised meritorious actions for a long time, and having
come into possession of the virtues of charity, self-
restraint, continence and compassion, was directing
his extraordinary performances for the benefit of others,
once, it is said, he became 6akra, the Lord of the
Devas.
1. The magnificence of the Chief of the Celestials
shone in a higher degree and displayed a greater
majesty, since that rank had fallen to his share.
Something analogous may be seen, when a palace
adorned by a covering of fresh stucco is made re-
splendent by the moonbeams.
2. The rich lustre of that mighty state, to conquer
which the sons of Diti dared push forward against the
impetuous advance of the world-elephants and expose
their breasts to their pestle-like tusks, that brilliancy
was his. But though he easily enjoyed that happiness

XL THE STORY OF SAKRA. IO5
at his command, nevertheless, that bliss did not stain
his heart with pride.
Ruling heaven and earth in the proper manner, he
acquired splendid glory, which pervaded the whole
universe. Now the Demons could not bear the
*
renown nor the very wonderful bliss which he enjoyed,
and waged war against him. They marched to his
encounter to fight him with an enormous army of
elephants, chariots, horsemen and footmen, being the
more terrible, as they were drawn up in the proud
array of battle and made a noise as awful as that of
the wild Ocean. Through, the glittering blaze of their
various kinds of offensive and defensive weapons they
hardly suffered themselves to be looked at.
3. Me for his part, though attached to the precepts
of righteousness, felt however within his heart the
He
disposition to indulge in the frenzy of fighting.
was prompted to do so by the pride of his enemies, by
the danger of his own men, unpleasantly interrupted
in their peaceful sport, also by the regard of his
majesty and of the traditional line of conduct along
the path of political wisdom.
So he mounted his excellentgolden chariot, to which
a thousand excellent horses were put. This chariot
was decorated in front with a beautiful, high-floating
banner which bore a figure in the attire of an Arhat-
for its emblem. Its outer appearance was exceedingly
brilliant, owing to the lustre reflected by the manifold
precious stones and jewels that adorned it, and to the
brightness which irradiated its flanks and which pro-
ceeded from the different flamingweapons,sharp-pointed
and well-disposed to be ready for use, on both sides of
the chariot. On the inside it was covered with a fine
1 The spirits of darkness, called Daityas (sons ofDiti) or Danavas
(sons ofDanu) or Asuras.
2 It is curious to see this »Sakra of the Buddhists making profession
in this manner of his Buddhistical faith. If this trait is an old one,
•Sakra is here represented as a digambara, as he in fact is. The
•Sahdaratnavali gives Arha as a name of India
;
see Petr. Diet. s.v.
arha
2).

!
T06 GATAKAMALA.
white blanket. Standing on it and surrounded by his
great divine host of different arms, elephants, chariots,
horse and foot, the Great Being met the forces of the
Demons just on the border-line of the Ocean.
4. Then a great battle took place, destructive of the
firmness of the timid as well as of the shields and
mail-coats pierced by the strokes of the weapons
with which they fought each other.
5, 6. Various cries were heard in the tumult of that
struggle. Stay! Not in this manner Here! Look
!
out ! Where are you now ? You will not escape me
Strike You are a dead man So challengine one
! !
another they fought. And this noise mixing with the
clashing and crashing of the arms all over the battle-
field and the sound of the drums, made Heaven shake
and almost burst.
7. The elephants on both sides, rushing on each
other with great fury increased by the smell of the
flowing juice, offered the frightful spectacle of moun-
tains swept along by the wind of a world-destroying
period.
8. Like portentous clouds, the chariots swept over
the field, their floating standards resembling the
lightning, and the rattling noise they made being as
the roaring of the thunder.
9. Sharp arrows were flying over both armies, and
fell down amidst the warriors of both the Devas and
the Demons, hitting banners and royal umbrellas,
bows and spears, shields and cuirasses, and the heads
of men.
10. At the end the army of .5akra took to flight,
frightened by the fiery swords and arrows of the
Demons. The Lord of the Celestials alone held
still the field, barring with his chariot the host of his
enemies.
When Matali, the charioteer of the Lord of the
Devas, perceived that the army of the Demons, high-
spirited and overjoyed, was coming over them with
a tremendous noise of loud warcries and shouts of
victory, whereas the army of the Devas was almost

XI. THE STORY OF SAKRA. 107
intent on flight, he thought it was now the proper time
to retreat, and so he turned the chariot of the Ruler of
the Devas. While they were making the ascent l
,
6akra, the Lord of the Devas, caught sight of some
eagle-nests which were placed on a silk-cotton tree just
in the line of direction ofthe chariot-pole, so that they
must needs be crushed by No sooner had he seen
it.
them, than seized with compassion he said to Matali,
his charioteer
:
11. 'The birds' nests on this silk-cotton tree are
filled with not yet winged young ones. Drive my
chariot in such a manner that these nests will not fall
down crushed by the chariot-pole.'
Matali answered 'In the meanwhile the crowds of
:
the Demons will overtake us, sir.'
6akra said : ' Never mind. Do you but take the
Upon
proper care in avoiding these eagle-nests.'
which Matali answered
:
12. ' Nothing short of turning the chariot can save
the birds, O Lotus-eyed One. But we have at our
heels yon host of foes who after a long time are at last
getting the better of the Devas.'
At this moment 6akra, the Lord of the Devas,
moved by the utmost compassion, showed his ex-
traordinary goodness of heart and firmness of in-
tention.
13. ' Well then,' said he, ' turn the chariot. Better is
it for me to die by the terrible club-strokes of the
chiefs of the Demons than to live blameful and dis-
honoured, if I should have murdered those poor
terror-stricken creatures.'
Matali promised to do so, and turned his car, drawn
by a thousand horses.
14. Now the foes who had witnessed his heroism in
battle, seeing that the chariot turned, were overtaken
with fear, and got into confusion. Their ranks gave
way like dark rain-clouds driven away by the wind.
1 Returning from the battle-field on the border of the Ocean to his
residence in Heaven, 6akra must needs drive upward.

:
108 GATAKAMALA.
IS- In the case of a defeat one single man turning:
his face to the enemy and barring the way of the
enemy's forces, will sometimes abate the pride and
haughtiness of the victors by the unexpectedness of
his heroic valour.
16. The sight of the broken ranks of the hostile
army encouraging the host of the Devas, made them
return. For the Demons, terror-stricken and fleeing,
thought no more of rallying and resisting.
1 7. Then the Devas, whose joy was mingled with
shame, paid homage to their Lord after which,
;
brilliant and beautiful by the radiance of victory, he
quietly returned from the battle-field to his city, where
his zenana impatiently longed for him.
In this way was the victory gained in that battle.
It is for this reason that the saying goes
:
18. The low-minded do wicked actions in conse-
quence of their cruelty. Average men, though piti-
ful, will do so, when come into distress. But the
virtuous, even when in danger of life, are as little
capable of transgressing their proper line of conduct
as the Ocean its boundary.
[In this way the Lord did long ago protect animal
life even at the risk of his own and of the loss of the
Celestial sway. Keeping then in mind that it does
not at all befit a wise man to offend living; beings,
much less to sin against them, a pious man must be
intent on practising compassion towards the creatures.
And the saying that Dharma in truth watches him
who walks in righteousness (dharma) \ is to be pro-
pounded here too. Likewise this (story) may be
adduced when discoursing- on the Tathag-ata, and
when treating of listening with attention to the preach-
ing of the Law.]
1 We have here a remarkable quotation from the Holy Writ of
Northern Buddhism. The wording of this sentence in the original
dharmo ha vai rakshati dharma<£ari«am, is the exact Sanskrit
counterpart of the first pada of a well-known Pali stanza uttered by

:
XII. THE STORY OF THE BRAHMAN. IO9
XII. The Story of the Brahman.
What forbids the virtuous to transgress the boundary
of good behaviour is the very shame of the Self within
their hearts. This will be taught by the following.
Once the Bodhisattva, it is told, came to life in
an illustrious family of Brahmans, well-reputed both
on account of their ancestry and their conduct. They
were highly esteemed and renowned, observing their
traditional customs and setting a high value on good
education and good manners. Having received in due
order the different sacraments garbhadhana, pum-
:
savana, simantonnayana, ^atakarma, and the
rest, he dwelt at his teacher's, who was a Brahman
distinguished by the superiority of his learning, by his
birth, and by his practice of the customary conduct,
with the object of studying the Veda.
1. His quickness in mastering and retaining the
texts he was taught, his devoted obedience for which
—
his family had always been reputed a virtue his
correctness of conduct embellished by tranquillity,
a rare ornament in a youth, made him obtain the love
and affection of his teacher.
2. For virtues practised without interruption are
maeic charms to win the affection even of such as are
burnt by the fire of hatred, how much more of the
sound-hearted.
Now his teacher, in the intervals of rest from sacred
stud)-, with the object of trying the morals of all his
disciples, was used to tell them frequently of his own
sufferings, the effect of his poverty.
3. ' To him no help his family affords,
No joy is his, not e'en on holidays,
And wretched alms-requesting makes him sick.
A pauper's wish, how may it be fulfill'd ?
the Lord (see Fausboll, Gataka I, p. 31; IV, p. 54, and the other
passages quoted there)
Dhammo have rakkhati dhamma£ari/«
Dhammo suX-iz/z/o sukham avahati
Esanisawso dhamme suAbme
Na duggatiwz ga/M//ati dhammaX'ari.

IO GATAKAMALA.
I
4. ' The state of a moneyless man is the home of
disregard, the abode of toil. And a very hard con-
dition it is, devoid of pleasure, abounding in scantiness,
and incessantly afflicting like a calamity.'
Like excellent horses, pricked with spurs, his dis-
ciples, very much moved by their attachment to their
spiritual teacher, did their utmost to deliver to him
ever more and better prepared food from their daily
begging round. But he said to them : ' Good sirs, do
not exert yourselves in this way. No offerings of food
obtained by daily begging will diminish the distress of
poverty to anybody. If you cannot bear my hardship,
you ought rather to apply these your efforts to gaining
wealth. Doing thus, you would act in the proper
Why
manner. do I say so ?
5. ' Hunger is driven away by food, and thirst by
water. The spell-uttering voice together with medicine
expels illnesses. But poverty's pain is destroyed by
wealth, that cause ofbeing honoured by ones kinsmen.'
The pupils answered : ' What can we do for you ?
Unhappy we, that the extent of our power is so small.
Moreover,
6. 7. '11 wealth, like food, were obtained by begging,
we would not allow you to suffer by poverty in this
degree, master. But the case is this. The proper,
though weak, means for Brahmans of gaining wealth
is receiving gifts and people here are not charitable.
:
So we are powerless, and by this impotency we are
smitten with grief.'
The teacher replied : ' But there are still other
expedients for earning money, and they are explained
in the law-books. Yet, my strength being exhausted
by old age, I am not fit to put them into effect.'
The disciples said: 'But our strength is not im-
paired by old age, master. If, then, you think us
capable of acting upon those precepts of the law-
books, inform us of them, that we may requite you
for your labour of teaching us.'
The teacher said: 'No, such means of earning
money are hardly available, indeed, for young men,

XII. THE STORY OF THE BRAHMAN. Ill
whose mind is too loose to carry out a strong reso-
lution. Nevertheless, if Your Honours urge me, well
',
you may learn from me what one of the said ex-
pedients is.
8. 'In the law-precepts for the time of distress 2
theft is an approved livelihood for Brahmans ; and
poverty, I suppose, is the extreme distress in this
world. Consequently, it is no sin for us to enjoy
the wealth of others, and the whole of these goods
belongs, of a truth, to the Brahmans.
9. ' Men such as you, would doubtlessly be able to
seize on wealth even by violence. You should, how-
ever, not practise that mode of taking, minding your
reputation. Therefore, you must show your energy
in lonely places and times.'
By such language he loosened the bridle from his
disciples. Accordingly they exclaimed ' Very well,'
approving his bad words, as if they were good — , and
all of them enowed themselves to do so, all save
the Bodhisattva.
10. Mini his innate goodness forbade to comply
with the teacher's advice, and compelled him on the
contrary to oppose it without delay, though it had been
accepted as a duty by the other pupils.
Ashamed and with downcast looks he heaved a soft
sigh and remained silent. The teacher perceived that
the Bodhisattva did not approve of that fashion of
making money, without, however, crying it down and
;
as he had a higfh regard for the virtue of that Great
Being, he entered upon this reflection : ' For what
reason does he disapprove of theft ? Is it want of
1 Instead ofsadhu// we must read sadhu.
2 Read apaddharme steyam,&c. The apaddharma substitutes
for the precepts ofrightconductandright livelihood some others to be
followed in times of distress, ifthe primary ones cannot be observed.
The permission to Brahmans to make money by theft is of course
not lawful; it is inferred from the well-known pretension of the
Brahmanical caste to be owners of the whole earth. Even Sarvilaka,
the thief in the Mrz'££^aka/ik£, does not venture to defend his deeds
by arguments borrowed from the law-books ; he avows that theft is
blameable, 'I blame it,' says he, 'and yet I do it.'

' :
112 GATAKAMALA.
courage or disaffection towards me ? Or does he really
know it to be a wicked action?' Then in order to
prompt him to open his true disposition of mind, he
spoke in this way to the Bodhisattva : ' Say, noble
Brahman,
ii. 'Those twice-born men, incapable of bearing
my
misfortune, are willing to resort to the course of life
followed by the energetic and the heroes but in you
;
I find nothing but indolence and dullness. Surely, it is
not you who are affected by our distress.
My
12. ' suffering is evident. Its whole extent lies
open to your eyes. I have made it plain by speech.
Notwithstanding this, you are keeping quiet How is
!
it that your mind is undisturbed and untouched by
sorrow ?
Upon this the Bodhisattva, after making his re-
spectful salute to the teacher, said quite alarmed
' Heaven forbid such feelings ! Verily, it is not want
of affection or hard-heartedness which causes me to
keep apart, nor am I unmoved by the sufferings of my
teacher, but I think the mode of acting which my
master has shown us, cannot be put into practice. It
is impossible, indeed, to commit a wicked action without
Why
being seen. ? Because there does not exist any-
thing like loneliness.
13, 14. ' No, loneliness is not to be found anywhere
in the world for the evildoer. Are not the invisible
Beings and the purified Munis, whose eye is endowed
with divine power, lookers-on of men's actions ? Not
seeing them, the fool thinks himself alone and commits
sin l
.
15. ' But I know no lonely place at all. Whereso-
ever I do not see anybody else, is such a place for
that reason empty of my own Self?
16, 17. 'And of a bad action my Self is a wit-
ness far more sharp-sighted than any other person.
Another may perchance perceive me, or he may not,
his mind being occupied with his own business, but
1 Cp. Manu VIII, 85; Mahabharata (ed. Bombay) I, 74, 39.

3
THE STORY OF THE BRAHMAN.
XTT. I 1
my Self, eagerly surrendering my whole mind to
passion, knows with certainty that I am doing evil.
' For this reason, then, 1 keep aloof from the
others.' And understanding that his teacher was
fully appeased, the Bodhisattva continued :
18. ' Nor can I persuade myself into the belief that
you would deceive us in this way for the sake of
obtaining wealth. Who, indeed, knowing the differ-
ence between virtue and vice, would allow himself to
be seduced by the pursuit of wealth to oppression of
virtue ?
' As to my own determination, I will inform you
of it.
19. ' Better is it to take the almsbovvl and vile
garments, beholding the opulence of the mansions of
one's enemies, than to bend one's mind shamelessly to
the murder of Righteousness, be it even with the goal
of attaining the Sovereignty of the Devas !'
At these words his teacher rapt with joy and ad-
miration, rising from his seat, embraced him, and said
to him : ' Very well, very well, my son ! well-said, well-
said, noble Brahman This is becoming to your keen
!
intellect adorned by tranquillity.
20. ' Fools leave the path of duty, stirred by any
motive whatever, but the virtuous do not allow them-
selves to be led astray even in the greatest distress
;
penance, learning, and wisdom being their wealth.
21. 'As the moon rising in autumn adorns the
firmament, so you are the ornament of your entirely
spotless family. For you the sacred texts you have
been taught have their full import that you have
;
well understood them is made plain by your good
behaviour and my labour is crowned with success,
;
it has not been fruitless.'
So, then, it is the very shame of the Selfwithin their
hearts that prevents the virtuous from transgressing
the boundary of good behaviour. [For this reason
the pious man (arya) ought to have a powerful shelter
in shame. (This story) is to be adduced on account
1

114 GATAKAMALA.
of such texts l as this : ' In this way the faithful
votary of our creed (arya^ravaka), being well-guarded
by the trench of his shame, avoids what is noxious
and fosters what is wholesome.' Likewise in texts
dealing with the feeling of shame and the regard of
public opinion.]
The story ofthe Brahman has the appearance of being the clumsy
invention ofsome monk engaged in giving lessons ofmorality and in
want of some story to illustrate the sinfulness oftheft. I can scarcely
believe it forms part ofthe old stock of traditional tales and folklore,
as little as the story of the sacrifice (X). In its parallel in the Pali
Gataka, No. 305, silavimarasana^-ataka (Fausb. Ill, pp. 18, 19),
the old teacher's trial of his disciples is better accounted for.
XIII. The Story of Unmadayanti.
(Cp. Pali Cataka, No. 529; Fausb.V, 210-227.)
Even when sick with heavy sorrow, the virtuous are
disinclined to follow the road of the low-minded, being
prevented from such actions by the firmness of their
constancy2 This will be taught as follows.
.
In the time when the Bodhisattva by the practice
of his surpassing virtues, veracity, liberality, tranquillity
of mind, wisdom &c, was exerting himself for the
benefit of the creatures, he was, it is said, a king of
the ^ibis, behaving like the embodied Righteousness
and Discipline, and being intent on promoting the
welfare of his subjects like a father.
1. Being withheld from sinful actions and put in
the possession of virtues by their king, (who was
solicitous of their true happiness) as a father is of his
son's, his people rejoiced both in this world and in the
next.
2. For his administration of justice followed the
path of righteousness, and made no difference between
kinsmen and the rest of his subjects. It obstructed
1 siitreshu. The same term is used at the conclusion of
Story XXI.
2 Compare the note on p. 44.

XIII. THE STORY OF UNMADAYANTI. I I 5
for his people the road of wickedness, and accordingly
became, so to speak, a flowery ladder to Heaven.
Perceiving the welfare of the creatures to be the
3.
effect of righteousness, this ruler of men knew no
other purpose than this. With all his heart he
delighted in the path of righteousness, and did not
allow others to violate its precepts.
Now in the capital of that king one of the principal
townsmen had a daughter of surpassing beauty, the
acknowledged pearl of womanhood. The ravishing
loveliness of her figure and charms made her appear
like the embodied goddess 6ri or Rati or one of the
Apsarasas. — —
No one except only the passionless having
4.
got the sight of her, was able to withdraw his looks
from her figure, as she fascinated by her beauty the
eyes of all who beheld her.
And for this reason her relations called her Unma-
dayantl she who makes mad
(' ').
Now her father apprised the king of the fact of
his having such a daughter : ' Your Majesty, the very
pearl of womanhood has appeared in your realm. May
Your Majesty therefore deign to decide whether you
will accept her as a wife or renounce her.' Then the
king ordered some Brahmans knowing the auspicious
marks of women, to go and see the maiden, whether
she would be a suitable wife for him or not. The
father of Unmadayanti led them to his house, and
ordered his daughter to attend upon his guests herselt.
She said she would do so, and commenced to attend
upon them at table in the proper manner. But no
sooner did those Brahmans
5. Behold her, than their eyes were compelled to
remain closely fixed on her face. The god of Love
had subdued their firmness. They had no power
over their looks and minds, and they got rid of their
consciousness as if drunkenness had befallen them.
Now, as they were not able to keep their grave
and modest countenance nor their imperturbability,
still less to take their meal, the householder removed
1 2

I I 6 GATAKAMALA.
his daughter out of the reach of their looks and
attended himself on the Brahmans. Afterwards they
took their leave and went off. And they considered
thus : ' The lovely beauty of that maiden is, in truth,
of an exceedingly enchanting nature, it acts like a very
magic spell. For this reason it is not suitable for the
king to see her, much less to make her his queen.
Having grown mad by her splendid beauty, as he
doubtless would, he would abate his zeal for perform-
ing his religious and political duties, and his neglect of
duly observing his royal occupations would prove
of evil consequence to his subjects, inasmuch as it
would obstruct the sources of their profit and welfare.
6. ' The sight of her would be sufficient to put an
obstacle in the way even of Munis striving after perfect
wisdom, how much more may it obstruct the success
of a young prince, who lives in pleasure, and is in the
habit of directing his looks to the objects of sense.
' Therefore it is now suitable to act so and so.'
Having thus made up their mind, they went to the
king's presence at a convenient time and reported this
to him 'We have seen that maiden, great king. She
:
is a beauty and possesses lovely charms, but no more
;
she has inauspicious marks, the foretokens of ruin and
ill luck. For this reason Your Majesty ought not
even to see her, how can there be question about
wedding her
?
A
7. ' reprehensible wife veils both the glory and
the opulence of two families just as a cloudy, moon-
;
concealing night hides the beauty and the arrangement
of all things upon earth and in heaven.'
Thus informed, the monarch imagining her to have
inauspicious marks and not to suit his family, no more
desired to possess her and the householder, her
;
father, knowing the king's disaffection, married his
daughter to one Abhiparaga, officer of that very king.
Now once, on the occasion of the Kaumudi-festival,
it happened that the king desired to contemplate the
splendour of that festivity in his capital. He mounted
his royal chariot and took a drive through the town,

XIII. THE STORY OF UNMADAYANTI. I I 7
which exhibited a pleasant aspect. Its streets and
squares had been sprinkled and cleansed their white
;
ground was strewed with many-coloured flowers gay
;
flags and banners were floating aloft; everywhere
there was dancing and singing, representations of
burlesques, ballets and music; the mingled scents
of flowers, incense, odoriferous powders, perfumes,
garlands, strong liquors, also of the perfumed water
_
and the ointments used in ablutions, filled the air with
fragrance lovely articles were being exposed for sale
; ;
the*principal streets were thronged by a merry crowd
of townsmen and landsmen in their best dress. While
making this tour, the king came near the house of
Abhiplraga. Now Unmadayanti, who w — as angry with
the king because he — had spurned her had she not
inauspicious marks ? feigning curiosity to see him,
placed herself in his way, illuminating by her brilliant
figure the flat roof of her house, as a flash of lightning
does the top of a cloud; he at least, she thought
within her heart, must be able to keep the firmness of
his mind and the power over his senses unshaken by the
sight of an inauspicious person such as I am. Accord-
ingly, while the king, curious to behold the splendour
of his capital, was looking around, his eye suddenly
fell upon her, when she was facing him. On beholding
her, the monarch,
8, 9. Though his eyes were accustomed to the attrac-
tion of the wanton graces of the beauties in his zenana
;
though, owing to his attachment to the path of virtue,
his disposition was a modest one, and he had exercised
himself in subduing his organs of sense though he
;
possessed in a high degree the virtue of constancy;
though he had a strong feeling of shame and his looks
were afraid of the looks of young women belonging
—
to others notwithstanding this, he could not prevent
the Love-god's triumph, and gazed a long gaze at that
woman, powerless to turn his eyes from her face.
10. 'Is she perhaps the embodied Kaumudi or the
Deity ofthathouse ? is she an Apsaras or a Demoness?
For it is no human figure she has.'

'
Il8 GATAKAMALA.
Thus the king considered and could not look enough
at her and the chariot passing away did not comply
;
with his heart's desire. He went back to his palace,
like one absent-minded, thinking of nothing1 but her
:
his firmness of mind had been confounded by Man-
matha. So he asked his charioteer Sunanda secretly
:
II. 4 Do you know, whose is the house that was
surrounded by a white wall, and who is she whose
beauty did shine there like lightning in a white
cloud ?
The charioteer answered : ' Your Majesty has a high
official named Abhiparaga. His is that house, and
she is his wife, a daughter to Kiri/avatsa, of herself
she is called Unmadayanti.' After hearing this, the
thought that she was the wife of another caused ,his
heart to faint, and sorrowful meditation made his eyes
rigid. Often he heaved long and deep sighs, and
thinking of nothing but her, said in a low voice to
himself:
12. 'Alas! She bears her soft and lovely-sounding
name rightly, indeed. This sweet-smiling Unma-
dayanti has made me almost mad.
13. ' I would forget her, yet I see her always in my
mind. For my thoughts are with her, or rather it is
she who is the ruler of my mind.
14. 'And this weakness of mind is mine concerning
the wife of another ! No doubt, I am mad ; shame, it
seems, has left me, just as sleep has.
15. ' While absorbed in representing to myself with
rapture the grace of her features, her smiles, her looks,
O that sudden sound of the metal plate1 reminding me
by its bold tone of the regular order , of my royal
business, rouses my wrath.'
In such a way the king's firmness was shaken by
the power of passionate love. And although he
endeavoured to compose his mind, his languishing ap-
pearance and emaciating body, his frequent absorption
1 Strokes on a metal plate, sounding every half-hour, are to
announce the time to the king.

XIII. TIIF. STORY OF UNMADAYANTI. 119
in thoughts together with his sighs indicated very
clearly his state of being in love.
16. However great his firmness was in disguising-
his heart's disease,it manifested itselfin his countenance,
his eyes rigid from thoughtfulness, and his emaciated
limbs.
Now Abhiparaga, the king's officer, was skilled in
the interpretation of the expression of the face and of
such gestures as betray internal feelings. When he
had observed the behaviour of his master and dis-
covered its cause, he apprehended evil consequences
from it, for he loved the king and knew the excessive
power of the God of Love. So he asked the king
for a secret audience which having- been granted to
;
him, he went up to his master, and having obtained
permission, thus addressed him
:
17, 18. 'While engaged in worshipping the Devas
O
to-day, lotus-eyed ruler of men, see, a Yaksha, pre-
senting himself before my eyes, said to me " How
:
is it that you ignore the king having fallen in love
with Unmadayanti ? " After speaking so, he disap-
peared immediately, and I, solicitous on this account,
approached you. If this is true, why, Your Majesty, do
you show in this manner your disaffection to me by
your silence ?
' Therefore, may Your Majesty do me the favour
of accepting her from my hand.'
The king was confounded, and dared not lift up
his eyes for shame. Nevertheless, even though hewas
in the power of Love, he did not suffer his firmness
to falter, thanks to his being conversant with the Law
by long and good practice, and refused that offer in
plain terms. ' No, that may not be. For what reason ?
Hear.
19. ' I would lose my merit and I know myself not
to be immortal. Further, my wicked deed would be
known also to the public. Moreover, if the fire of
sorrow should burn your heart because of that separa-
tion, it would erelong consume you, as fire consumes
dry grass.

120 GATAKAMALA.
20. ' And such a deed, which would cause that
distress in both this world and the next and would be
committed for this reason by the unwise, the wise
never will do, for this very reason.'
Abhiparaga answered : ' Do not fear, Your Majesty,
that you will transgress the Law herein.
21. 'By assisting in the performance of a gift you
will act in accordance with the Law, whereas by not
receiving her from my hand you would do wrong, since
you obstruct the practice of giving.
' Nor do I see in this matter any occasion of damage
to the reputation of Your Majesty. Why ?
22. 'This is an arrangement between us; nobody
else need know of it ? Do not, therefore, put in your
mind the fear of blame by public opinion.
' Further, to me this will be a favour, not a source of
Why
grief. so ?
23. ' What harm can be procured to a faithful heart
by the satisfaction obtained by serving the interest of
his master ? For this reason you may quietly indulge
in your love; do not apprehend any griefon my side.'
The king replied: 'Stop, stop! no more of that
wicked reasoning.
24. ' Surely, yourvery great attachment to my person
prevents you from understanding that the righteous
action which consists in the assistance to a deed of
giving does not exist in the case of every gift.
25. 'Who by exceeding attachment to my person
does not heed even his own life, is my friend, dearer
to me than my kinsmen. His wife I am bound to
respect as a friend's.
' You do not well, therefore, enticing me to a sinful
action. And what you assert, " nobody else will know
of it," will it be less sinful for this reason ?
26. ' How can happiness be expected for him who
commits a wicked action, though unwitnessed ? As
little as for him who has taken poison unseen. Both
the pure-sighted Celestials and the holy ascetics among
men cannot fail to witness him.
' Moreover, I tell you this :

: '
XIII. THE STORY OF UNmAdAYANt!. 121
27. 'Who may in earnest believe that you do not
love her, or that you will not get into harm, as soon as
you have abandoned her ?
Abhiparaga said
:
28. ' I am your slave, I with my wife and children.
You are my master and my deity. What infringement
of Law, Your Majesty, can there be, then, if you act as
pleases you with respect to this your female slave ?
' As to yourasserting that I love her, what matters it?
29. 'Yea, my liege, she is my beloved wife, and it is
for this very reason that I desire her to be given to
you. He who has given in this world something dear
to him, receives in the next dear objects of exceeding-
loveliness.
' Therefore, Your Majesty may take her.'
The king spoke: 'Oh, do not say so! It is im-
possible for me to do so. Why?
30. ' I should dare throw myself on a sharp sword
or into a fire with blazing flames, but I shall not be
able to offend against Righteousness, which I have
always observed, and to which I owe my royal bliss.'
Abhiparaga said: 'If Your Majesty will not take
her, because she is my wife, then myself will command
her to lead the life ofa harlot, whom no one is forbidden
to woo. Then Your Majesty may take her.'
The king answered : ' Are you mad ?
31. 'If you were to abandon your guiltless wife, you
would not only incur punishment from my part, but
having become an object of reproach, likewise un-
avoidable grief in this world and hereafter.
' Desist then do not enforce a bad action. Rather
;
direct your mind to justice and honesty.'
Abhiparaga said
32. 'And if by persisting, I really were to do an
action which might be in any respect a violation of
Righteousness and the source of censure among men
—
and ofthe loss of my — happiness be these consequences
whatever they may I fain shall front them with my
breast, owinsf to the gladness of mind I shall feel for
having promoted your happiness.

!
122 GATAKAMALA.
33. ' No one I know in the world is more worthy than
you to be worshipped by a sacrificial offering, O most
mighty ruler of the earth. Well then, with the object
of increasing my merit, deign to accept, like an officiat-
ing priest, Unmadayanti as your sacrificial fee1.'
The king said : ' No doubt it is your great affection
for me that prompts you to the effort to promote my
interest without considering what is right and wrong
on your side. But this very consideration induces me
the more to prevent you. Verily, indifference as to
the censure of men cannot at any rate be approved.
Look here
34. ' Who, neglecting Righteousness, does not mind
either the censure of men or the evil consequences in
the next world, will attain but this in this world
:
people will distrust him and surely, after death he
;
will be destitute of bliss.
' And therefore I press this upon your mind.
35. ' Never delight in injuring Righteousness for
the sake of life 2 The sin you would incur would be
.
great and unquestionable, the advantage trifling and
doubtful.
'Moreover, you should consider also this.
36. ' The virtuous do not like for themselves a
pleasure, procured at the expense of others, whom they
have distressed by bringing them into disrepute and
the like. For this reason, standing on the ground of
Righteousness, I shall bear the charge of my private
interests alone without causing pain to others.'
Abhiparaga replied : ' But how could there be any
room for injustice here, after all, either on my side, if
moved by attachment I should take care of the interest
of my master, or on the side of Your Majesty receiving
1 Properly speaking, giving the woman into marriage to the officiat-
ing priest at the end of a jrauta-sacrifice as his fee (dakshiwa) is the
second of the eight classical forms of wedding, the so-called daivo
vivaha/z.
2 The meaning of this seems to be something like this: ' Do not
seek after temporal pleasure here at the risk oflong-lasting suffering
after death.'

XIII. THE STORY OF UNMADAYANT?. I 23
her as a present from my hand ? All ^ibis, townsmen
and landsmen, would ask : what is the injustice of this
deed ? Therefore, be pleased to take her,Your Majesty.'
The king replied 'Verily, you have the intense
:
desire of assisting me. But reflect well upon this
:
Which of us knows the Law best, the whole of the
6"ibis, you, or I ?'
Then Abhiparaga hastily answered
:
37. ' Owing to yourassiduous and respectful watching
of the wise, and your great regard for sacred lore, and
the sagacity of your mind, Your Majesty ranks with
Brzhaspati as the most competent judge in all matters
taught in the sciences concerning the Triad of objects
(trivarga).'
mis T l h e e ad k m i e ng in sa t i h d is : m ' a T t h t i er s . be W in h g y so d , o y I ou say ou s g o ht ? not to
38. ' The evil and the good of the people depend on
the behaviour of their rulers. For this reason, and
taking into account the attachment of my subjects,
I shall continue to love the Path of the Pious above
all, in conformity with my reputation.
39. ' As cows go after the bull in any direction,
whether the right or the wrong one, following his
steps, in the very same manner the subjects imitate
the behaviour of their ruler without any scruple and
undauntedly.
' You must take also this into consideration.
40. • If I should lack the power of ruling my own
self, say, into what condition would I bring this people
who long for protection from my side ?
41. 'Thus considering and regardful of the good of
my subjects, my own righteousness, and my spotless
fame, I do not allow myself to submit to my passion.
I am the leader of my subjects, the bull of my herd.'
Then Abhiparaga, the king's official, appeased by
this constancy of the king, bowed his head and rever-
entially folding his hands, spoke
:
42. ' Oh ! excessively favoured by Destiny are these
subjects, having such a ruler as you are, Illustrious
King. Love of Righteousness utterly disregardful of

I 24 GATAKAMALA.
oleasures is to be searched for even anion? those who
dwell in penance-groves.
O
43. ' In you the appellation of " great," Maharaja,
is a brilliant ornament. For the name of a virtue,
conferred upon persons devoid of virtue, has a rather
harsh sound, as if used in contempt.
44. ' Nor is there any reason for me to be astonished
or agitated by this grand deed of yours, who are a mine
V
of virtues, as the sea is ofjewels
In this manner, then, the virtuous, even when sick
with heavy sorrow, are disinclined to follow the road
of the low-minded, being prevented from such actions
by the firmness of their constancy [and their being
conversant with the Law by long and good practice.
Thus considering, one ought to exert one's self in
practising constancy and the precepts of the Law].
The tale of the maiden making mad all who see her, and the
love-smitten monarch who prefers walking on the right path and even
death to indulging in passion, is found also outside Buddhism. In
the preface of his edition, Prof. Kern points out its being told thrice
in the Kathasaritsagara ; in the fifteenth, the thirty-third, and the
ninety-first tarahga. The last version, being a Vetala-tale, is found
also in the prose-work VetalapawX'aviw^ati (Katha 14). Ofthe non-
Buddhistic redactions all agree in this point, that the king at last dies
from love, and that the faithful officer then kills himself. No doubt,
this must be the original conclusion.
XIV. The Story of Suparaga.
(Cp. the Pali Gataka, No. 463 Fausb. IV, 137-143.)
;
Even speaking the truth on the ground of Righteous-
ness is sufficient to dispel calamity, what can be said
more to assert the good results of observing the Law ?
Considering thus, one must observe the Law. This
will be taught now.
In one of his Bodhisattva-existences, the Great
Being was, it is said, an extremely clever steersman.
1 This epithet of the sea is very common inIndian rhetorical style.

XIV. THE STORY OF SUPARAGA. I 25
For this is the invariable nature of the Bodhisattvas,
that owing to the innate acuteness of their mind, what-
ever branch of science or species of art they desire to
know, they will in it surpass the wisest in the world.
Accordingly the High-minded One possessed every
quality required in such a one. Knowing the course
of the celestial luminaries, he was never at a loss with
respect to the regions of the sky; being perfectly
acquainted with the different prognostics, die permanent,
the occasional, and the miraculous ones, he was skilled
in the establishment of a given time as proper or im-
proper by means of manifold marks, observing the
;
fishes, the colour ofthe water, the species ofthe ground,
birds, rocks, &c, he knew how to ascertain rightly the
part of the sea further he was vigilant, not subject to
;
drowsiness and sleep, capable of enduring the fatigue
of cold, heat, rain, and the like, careful and patient.
So being skilled in the art of taking a ship out and
bringing her home 1 he exercised the profession of one
,
who conducts the merchants by sea to their destination.
And as his navigation was very successful, he was
named Suparaga 2 The seaport where he lived bore
.
the same name of Suparaga, which place is now known
as Suparaga. Even in his old age, the sea-traders,
longing for a prosperous voyage, applied to him,
who was well-known to be an auspicious person, and
entreating him in the most respectful terms, put him
on their ships.
So it once happened that merchants who trafficked
with Goldland, coming from Bharuka/W7za, longing for
a prosperous voyage, touched at the town of Suparaga
and requested that Great Being to embark with them.
He answered them
:
1 The exact meaning of the Sanskrit terms aharawa and apaha-
ra;/a is doubtful, hut must be something like this.
2 In the Pali redaction he is called Supparaka, and the seaport
where he lives and from whence he undertakes his last vovaq;e is
Bharuka/'/Ma. The form Suparaga is Sanskritised wrongly, in order
to fit the author's etymological fancy. See Prof. Kern's note on this
passage in the various readings of his edition.

125 GATAKAMALA.
i. ' What kind of assistance do you think to find
in me ? Old age, having got power over me, makes
my eyesight diminish x in consequence of the many
;
toils I have endured, my attentiveness has grown weak,
and even in my bodily occupations I feel my strength
almost gone.'
We
The merchants said : ' are well acquainted with
the bodily state of Your Honour. But this being
so, and taking into account your inability for labour,
we will not cause hardship to you nor give any
task into your charge, but we want you for some other
reason.
2. ' The dust touched and hallowed by your lotus-
like feet will beauspicious to our ship and procurehera
happy course over yonder sea, even if assailed by great
danger. With this in mind we have applied to you.'
The Great Being, though subject to the infirmity
of old age, went on board their vessel out of com-
passion. " His embarkment was a cause of rejoicing
for all those merchants, for they thought : ' Now we
are assured of a very successful voyage.' And so
they (set off, and) in course of their voyage reached
that Abode of the Snakes who constitute the host
of the Demons, that Patala into which it is difficult
to penetrate, that immense receptacle of water, the
Great Ocean, which is haunted by different kinds of
fishes and resounds with the murmuring of its never-
quiet waves, whereas, when impelled by the power
of the wind, it hurries on its billows after the whims
of that element; on its bottom different sorts of
ground extend, concealing manifold precious stones,
and its surface is embellished by the various flower-
garlands of its foam.
3. A dark-blue hue, like that of a heap of sapphires,
was lying over the surface of the water, as if it were
1 In the Pali redaction Supparaka is wholly blind. This must be
the better tradition on account of his never perceiving himself, but
always hearing from the traders the miraculous objects which will
present themselves in this voyage.

XIV. THE STORY OF SUPARAGA. 127
sky melted by the glowing heat of the sunbeams,
when they lost sight of the coast-line and were
runnino- over the profound ocean which surrounded
them on all sides.
After they were in the open sea, it happened in
the afternoon, at the time when the sun-rays begin
to lose their strength, that a great and very fearful,
portentous event appeared to them.
4. On a sudden the sea took a terrible aspect.
A violent gale arose, causing a fearful noise of the
waters, lashing their surface so that they were covered
with foam scattered by the breaking billows. The
whole sea was brought in commotion up from its very
bottom.
Shaken by the hurricane, the immense masses of
5.
water were stirred up and rolled with formidable
rapidity. The Ocean assumed a dreadful appearance,
like that of Earth quivering with her mountains at the
time of a world-destruction.
6. Like many-headed hissing serpents, clouds of
a bluish-black colour with their flame-tongues of light-
nings obstructed the path of the sun, and without
interruption produced the terrible noise oftheirthunder.
The sun, whose network of rays was hidden by
7.
thick clouds, gradually reached the point where it set.
Then darkness availing itself of the opportunity of
evening-time and growing, as it were, more concrete,
enveloped all around.
8. 9. Smitten on its wave-surface by the rain-darts
of the showers, the sea rose up, as if in rage, and
the poor ship trembled very much, as if afraid, sadden-
ing the hearts of the occupants, who manifested their
different natures according to their inherent qualities.
Some were overcome by affliction and stood speechless
with terror, some behaved courageously and were busily
working" to avert the danger, and some were absorbed
in prayers to their tutelar deities.
Now, the strong wind making the sea run high, the
vessel drove along with the current. The merchants
did not discover land for many days, nor did they

128 GATAKAMALA.
observe favourable signs of the sea. The signs they
saw, being new to them, made their sadness increase,
and thev orew perplexed by fear and dejection. But
Suparaga, the Bodhisattva, comforted them, thus speak-
ino- : ' You must not wonder at the sea tossing about
in a portentous state of commotion ; are we not cross-
ino- the Great Ocean ? There is no reasonable ground
Why
for Your Honours to indulge in affliction. so ?
10, 1 1. 'It is not by dejection that mischief is warded
off; therefore do not remain in low spirits. But it is
by courage that those who are clever to do what is to
be done surmount difficulties without difficulty. Well
then, shake off that sadness and dejection, set rather to
work, availing yourselves of the opportunity ofworking.
The energy of a wise man, kindled by firmness of
mind, is the hand by which success is grasped in any
matter.
' Let each of you then be intent on performing his
special duty.' And the merchants, in this way invigo-
rated by the Great Being, longing for the sight of land
and looking down into the sea, beheld beings who had
the figure of men and looked as if they wore silver
armour they saw them diving up and down the
;
water-surface. When they had well considered their
figures and marks, they informed Suparaga of that
phenomenon, expressing their amazement. ' Verily,
here we meet in the great ocean with a phenomenon
unheard of before. These, in truth, are
Some beings not unlike warriors of the Demons,
12. '
wearing silver armour, with fierce looks and ugly noses
that resemble a quadruped's hoof; it seems as if they
are sporting in the ocean-water, incessantly shooting
and diving up and down its surface.'
Suparaga said : ' These are no men nor demons, but
fishes, to be sure. Do not be afraid of them. Still,
13. 'We are driven far off both seaports. This is
the sea called Khuramalin [ =wearing hoof-garlands].
Therefore, you must try to turn back.'
But they could notveer on account of the vehemence
of the high-running sea and of the strong wind, which

'
XIV. THE STORY OF SUPARAGA. I 20.
continued to blow after them and drive the ship in^the
same direction. And as they advanced farther into
the ocean, they perceived another sea shining with the
lustre of silver and looking bright with the mass of
white foam on its waves. On beholding this astonish-
ing spectacle, they said to Suparaga :
14. 'What great sea is this, which is clothed, as it
were, in fine white linen and veils its waters with its
foam ? It seems to bear on its surface fluid moon-
beams, as it were, and to show all around a laughing
face.'
Suparaga said : ' Alas ! we are penetrating too far.
15. 'That is the sea Dadhimalin [ = wearing ^gar-
lands of coagulated milk], called the " milk-ocean." It
is not wise to go farther on, at least if it is possible to
turn back.'
The merchants said : ' It is impossible, indeed, to
reduce the speed of the ship, much less to change
her course. She is being driven too swiftly by the
current, and the wind blows contrary.'
Now, having crossed also that sea, the merchants
perceived another sea, whose rolling waves were tinged
with the splendour of gold resembling the red-brown
colour of flames, and filled with amazement and
curiosity they spoke about it to Suparaga.
16. 'It looks now as if the high, bright waves had
been tinged with the brilliant hue of the rising sun.
They appear to us like a great, blazing fire. Say, what
sea is this and how is it named for this reason ?
Suparaga answered
:
1 7. ' Agnimalin [ = wearing fire-garlands] is the cele-
brated name of this sea. It would be very prudent,
indeed, if we were to turn back now.'
Thus saying the Great Being, far-seeing as he was,
told them only the name of that sea, but concealed the
cause of the change of colour of the water. After
crossing also that sea, the merchants saw that the
colour of the sea changed again now its hue bore^ a
;
resemblance to a grove of ripe kiua-grass, and its
waters were illuminated with the lustre of topazes
K

'
30 GATAKAMALA.
1
and sapphires and prompted by curiosity they asked
;
Suparaga
:
18. 'Which of the seas now appears to us? Its
waters have the colour of the blades of ripe ku5a-grass.
The breaking of its wind-stirred billows crowns it with
a many-coloured foam-ornament, and makes it look as
if it were overspread with flowers.'
Suparaga said : ' Say, merchants, you should now
make efforts to turn back. Surely it is not advisable
to go farther.
19. 'This is the sea named Kiuamalin [= wearing
kui-a-garlands]. Like an elephant not heeding the
goad, it drags forcibly along with its irresistible waves,
and will take away our enjoyment'
And the merchants, not being able to turn the ship,
however bravely they exerted themselves, crossed also,
that sea. Then perceiving another sea, the water of
which had a greenish colour like that proceeding from
the united brilliancy of emeralds and beryls, they asked
Suparaga
:
20. 'The sea we now behold has yet another appear-
ance. Its waters have the green shine of emeralds and
resemble a splendid meadow they are adorned with
;
foam as lovely as waterlilies. Which sea is this
again ?
Upon this the Great Being, whose heart ached as he
foresaw the calamity which was about to befall the
merchants, heaved a long and deep sigh, and said in
a low tone
:
2 1. 'You have crone too far. It will be hard to return
from hence. This sea, the Nalamalin [ = wearing reed-
garlands1 ], is wellnigh at the end of the world.'
W'hen they heard that answer, the poor merchants
were utterly afflicted. Their minds lost their energy,
their limbs became powerless, and sitting down in
1 In the Pali redaction this sea has the appearance of an immense
reed-bedor bamboo-grove (nalavanaw viyakave/uvanaw viya
ka.), and the commentator argues that those names of grasses convey
also the acceptation ofsome precious stones. Butthe stones there
are ofa red colour.

' : '
XIV. THE STORY OF SUI'ARAGA.
1
3T
dull sadness, they did nothing but sigh. And after
crossing that sea too, in the afternoon, when the Sun
with his slackening circle of rays seemed to be about
to enter the Ocean, a confused and tremendous noise,
piercing both the ears and the hearts of the merchants,
became audible. This noise rising from the sea may
be compared to that of a sea swelling in rage, or- of
many thunderclaps together, or of bamboo-groves
having caught fire and crackling. On hearing it, they
suddenly jumped from their seats, trembling with fear
and highly agitated, and examining the ocean all
around, perceived that immense mass of water falling
down as if over some precipice or chasm. That
alarmingsight filled them with the utmost fear, sadness,
and dejection. They went to Suparaga, saying
22. 'We hear a tremendous noise from afar, almost
piercing our ears and crushing our minds, as if the
Lord of the Rivers were angry, and this whole mass of
ocean-water falls down, it seems, into an awful abyss.
Say, then, what sea is that, and what do you think is
best to be done now ?
Then the Great Being, agitated, said : 'Alas ! alas !
and looking down over the sea, he spoke
:
23. 'You have come to that dreadful place, from
which no one returns, that mouth-like entrance of
Death, the famous Mare-mouth 1.'
On hearing this the poor merchants, understanding
that having reached the Mare-mouth, they must give
up all hope of life, were distressed by the fear of death.
24-26. Some of them wept aloud or lamented and
cried out. Others did nothing at all, being torpid
from anxiety. Some with sorrow-stricken minds wor-
shipped the deities, especially the Lord of the Devas,
others resorted to the Adityas, the Rudras, the Maruts,
the Vasus, and to Sagara himself [the Ocean]. Others
again muttered various prayers, and there were those
who paid in due form homage to Devi. Some again
1 This vao'avamukha is the place where, according to Hindu
mythology, the submarine fire resides.
K
2

'
T}2 GATAKAMALA.
went to Suparaga, and in various modes and ways
lamented piteously.
27-29. ' Practised in the virtue of compassionate-
ness for others, you are in the habit of relieving from
fear those who are in distress. Now the time has
arrived for employing that excessive power of yours.
Resolve, then, O wise man, upon rescuing us, the dis-
tressed, the helpless, who have taken our refuge in you.
The Ocean in his wrath is now about to swallow us
with his Mare-mouth, like a mouthful of food. It does
not become you to neglect this poor crew perishing in
the rolling waves. Thegreat Ocean obeys your orders.
Therefore, put a stop to his rage.'
But the Great Being felt his heart oppressed with
great compassion and spoke thus, comforting the poor
merchants: 'There is still an expedient to rescue
us even now. It occurs to my mind. Why, I will
make use of it. But you must show courage for
a moment' Now, when the merchants heard this, the
hope that there was still some remedy, after all, revived
their courage, and fixing their whole attention upon
him, they became silent. But Suparaga, the Bocthi-
sattva, after throwinghis upper-garmenton one shoulder
and bending his right knee on the ship's deck 1 made
,
his veneration to the Tathagatas, having his whole
heart absorbed by that deed of devotion after which
;
he thus addressed the company : ' Be you, honourable
sea-traders, and you, different gods, who have your
dwelling in the sky, my witnesses.
30. ' Since I have remembrance of my Self, since the
time when I have become conscious of my deeds, I do
not recollect, however much 1 ponder, having injured
in any respect any living being.
31. 'By the power of this Act of Truth and by the
strength of my store of meritorious actions may the
ship turn safely without reaching the Mare-mouth !
1 In the Pali redaction the Bodhisatta orders the merchants to
bathe his body with fragrant water and to clothe him with unwashed,
i.e. new, garments, and to prepare a vessel filled with water, to pour
out while performing his sa/i/takiriya.

XIV. THE STORY OF SUPARAGA. I33
And so great was the power of the veracity of the
Great Being, so great also the splendour of his merit \
that the current and the wind changed to the opposite
direction and made the vessel gfo back. The merchants
beholding the ship go back, exulted with the highest
admiration and joy, and expressing their veneration to
Suparaga by reverential bows, told him that the ship
went back. Then the Great Being- instructed them to
be calm and to hoist the sails quickly. And being
thus ordered, they who had the charge of that work,
having regained by their gladness their ability and
energy, did as he had said.
32. Then, resplendent with the lovely outspread
wings of her white sails, and filled with the sound of
her merry and laughing crew, the ship flew over the
sea, like a flamingo in the pure and cloudless sky.
Now while the ship, favoured by both current and
wind, returned with as much ease as the heavenly cars
move through the air, and was flying, so to speak, at
her will, at that time of the day, when the gathering
darkness extends far and wide, and the sky, no more
adorned by the dimming glow of the twilight, begins to
make the ornaments of its constellations appear on the
firmament, where still a faint remnant of light is left, in
that moment, then, of the commencement of the rule of
Night, Suparaga addressed the merchants in these
terms : ' Well, traders, while crossing the Nalamalin
sea and the others, you must draw up sand and stones
from the bottom of the seas and charge your ship with
as much as she can contain. By this practice she will
keep her sides firm, if assailed by a violent hurricane
;
besides, that sand and gravel being pronounced to be
auspicious, will doubtless tend to your profit and gain.'
And the merchants, being shown the fit places all along
by the deities, who did so out ofaffection and veneration
for Suparaga, drew up from thence what they meant
to be sand and stones, and loaded their ship with that
1 In the Pali version it is the power of the Great Being's veracity
alone that causes the winds to change.

GATAKAMALA.
I ^4
burden. But, in fact, that sand and those stones were
beryls and otherjewels. And in that one night's course
they reached BharukaHV/a1
.
At day-break they beheld with gladness their
33.
ship filled with treasures : silver, gold, sapphires, beryls,
and at the same time they saw that they had arrived
in their country; and exulting with joy they praised
their saviour.
In this manner even speaking the truth on the
ground of Righteousness is sufficient to dispel calamity,
what can be said more to assert the good results of
observing the Law ? Thus considering, one must
observe the Law. [Likewise, when discoursing on the
assistance of a virtuous friend, it is to be said: 'In
this way those who rest on a virtuous friend attain
happiness.']
XV. The Story of the Fish.
(Cp. Pali Gataka, No. 75, Fau-b. I, 331-32 ; A"ariyap:/aka III, 10.)
The designs of those who practise good conduct will
be successful and thrive even in this world, how much
more in the next. For this reason perfect pureness
of conduct ought to be striven after, as will be taught
by the following.
The Bodhisattva, it is said, was once a chief of
fishes, living in a certain small lake, the lovelywater of
which was embellished with various lotuses and water-
lilies, white, red, and blue, adorned with couples of
swans, ducks, and geese, and covered with the blossoms
of the trees growing on its borders. Yet, owing to his
constant practice of (the virtue of) helping others in
many previous births, he was wholly given up to the
business of procuring for others what would be good
and agreeable to them, even in this fish-existence.
1. By the power of a long practice, actions good or
1 According to the Pali story, they had spent a four months' voyage
before they reached the Mare-mouth.

XV. THE STORY OF THE FISH. 135
wicked become inherent in mankind to such an extent
that they will perform them in a new existence without
any effort and, as it were, while sleeping I .
The Great Being, then, had set his heart on those
fishes, as if they were his own dear offspring, and
showed them his favour in various ways by gifts,
:
kind words, attending to their interests, and the like.
2. He restrained them from desiring to injure each
other and made their mutual affection grow. Owing
to this, and his efforts, and his knowledge of every
expedient, he made them forget their habit of feeding
in the (cruel) manner of fishes.
3. Duly protected by him, that shoal of fishes came
to great prosperity, just as a town, when ruled by
a king that acts in the proper manner, enjoys freedom
from every kind of mishap.
One time, because of the deficiency of good fortune
in the creatures and the neglect of the angels who
have the charge of rain, the (rain)god did not rain his
due amount. In consequence of this scantiness of rain,
the lake was not filled up as before with new water
yellow-coloured by the expanding flowers of the
kadamba-trees. Afterwards, when the hot season
arrived, the rays of the sun, burning more ardently and
being, as it were, exhausted with fatigue, drank from
that lake day after day so did Earth heated by those
;
rays; likewise Wind, who being, as it were, accompanied
by flames, would long for refreshment. All three
assuaging their thirst in the lake, so to speak, made
it at last turn into a pool.
4. In the hot season the flaming Sun, the pungent
Wind who seems to send forth flames, and heat-wearied
Earth sick with fever, dry up the waters, as if they
would allay their wrath.
That shoal of fishes, then, had come into a miserable
condition. Not only the crowds of birds haunting the
borders of the lake, but even troops of crows com-
1 The technical name for that imbibing of good qualities is
sa.tmibh.ava.

136 GATAKAMALA.
menced to look upon them as their prey, for they could
do nothingbu tlie and gasp. The Bodhisattva perceived
the affliction and grief of his tribe, and moved with
compassion entered upon this reflection: 'Oh! these
wretched fishes, what a calamity has befallen them
!
5. ' The water is decreasing every day, as if it vied
with the life of mortals, and as yet clouds are not to
be expected to come at all for a long time.
6, 7. ' There is no opportunity of withdrawing ; and
if there were, who should lead us elsewhere ? Besides,
our enemies, invited by our calamity, throng together
against us. No doubt, they do but wait for the
remainder of the water to dry up to devour these
prostrate fishes under my very eyes.
' Now, what may be the proper act to be done
here?' Thus considering, the Great Being saw but
one means for relief, if he should avail himself of his
veracity. Accordingly, while grieved by compassion
in his mind and heaving a long and deep sigh, he
looked upwards to the sky and spoke:
8. ' As truly as I do not recollect, however pondering,
that I ever did harm to any living being, not even in
the highest distress, by the power of this truth may the
King of the Devas fill the water-basins with the water
of his rains.'
When the Great Being had pronounced these words,
there happened a miracle, occasioned by the power ot
his veracity joined to the store of his merit and to the
favour shown to him by Devas, Snakes and Yakshas,
who put into effect their might. In all parts of the sky
there appeared rain-clouds, though out of season yet
in the proper time K They were hanging low, being
loaded with rain the deep and soft sound ofapproach-
;
ing thunder was heard out of them while flashes of
;
lightning adorned their big and dark-blue tops, they
were spreading over the sky, as if they embraced each
other with their heads and arms gradually approaching.
1 Or 'rain-clouds, out of season and black.' The pun is in the
word kalamegha.

XV. THE STORY OF THE FISH. 137
9. Like the shadows of mountains projected in the
mirror of the sky, the black clouds appeared, diminish-
ing like those the circumference of the horizon and
occasioning darkness with their tops.
10. The rumbling noise of the thunderclaps now
resounded around, inducing the peacocks to utter cries
of gladness and to perform various dancing move-
ments, as if they praised the clouds. These accessories
together with the incessant illumination by lightning
gave the effect of great merriness and laughter irra-
diating those cloud-masses.
11. Then the clouds let loose streams of rain,
which fell down like pearls loosened from their shells.
The dust subsided, and a strong smell extended itself,
carried about by means of the wind which accompanied
the thunder-shower.
12. The sun-rays, though their power had reached
its highest degree because of the hot season, were
now hidden, and currents of water ran down from the
mountains, troubling their banks with the rows of foam
which they deposited.
13. And it was as if the slender fiorire of Lightning",
illuminating the firmament again and again with her
gold-yellow light-appearances, performed her dances,
rejoiced at the music of the cloud-instruments.
Now, while the currents of palish water flowing to
the lake from all sides were filling it, the crows and
other birds had flown away at the very outset of the
thunderstorm. The crowds of fishes recovering the
hope of life, were much rejoiced. Yet the Bodhisattva,
though his heart was pervaded with gladness, fearing
lest the rain should cease, thus spoke to Parfanya
again and again
:
14. ' Roar, Parianya, roar a roaring, loud and deep
;
dispel the joy of the crows, pouring out thy waters like
jewels endowed with the flaming brilliancy of lightning,
their companion V
1 The corresponding gatha in the Pali Gataka (Fausb. I, p. 332) is
also found in die A'anyapi/aka (III, 10, 7) with some preiciable

I38 GATAKAMALA.
When 6akra, the Lord of the Devas, heard this, he
became highly astonished and went in person to him.
And eulogizing him, he spoke
:
15. 'Surely, it is thy power, the effect of thy tran-
scendent veracity, O mighty lord of fishes, that makes
these rain-clouds pour out their waters with the lovely
noise of thunder, as if they were waterpots bent down.
16. ' But I should incur the blame ofgreat inattention
if I neglected to approve ofthe exertions ofsuch beings
as thou, intent on performing such deeds for the benefit
of the world.
17. 'Therefore, thou must be henceforth no more
anxious. I am bound to assist the virtuous in carrying
out their designs. Never shall this region, since it is
the abode of thy virtues, be visited another time by
a similar plague.'
After thus praising him in kind terms, he disappeared
on the spot. And that lake obtained a very large
increase of water.
In this manner the designs of those who practise
good conduct will be successful and thrive even in this
world, how much more in the next. For this reason
entire pureness of conduct ought to be striven after.
XVI. The Story of the Quail's Young.
(Cp. the Pali Gataka, No. 35, Fausb.I, 213-14; A'ariyapi/aka III. 9.)
Not even fire is able to surpass speech purified by
truth. Having this in mind, one must addict one's self
to speaking the truth. This will be taught as follows.
Once the Bodhisattva, it is said, lived in some part
various readings. In both redactions the birds have already begun to
kill and devour the fishes, when the Bodhisatta performs his saMa-
kiriya and addresses Pa^unna, commanding him, says the Gataka
prose-writer, 'as aman would do hisattendant slave.' Thisexhortation
is uttered before the appearance ofthe clouds, which I suppose to be
the older version ofour story.

:
XVI. THE STORY OF THE QUAILS YOUNG. 1 39
of the forest as a young quail. He had come out of the
egg some nights before, and could not fly, his tender
wings having still to grow both in height and in width ;
in his very small and weak body the different limbs,
principal and minor, were hardly discernible. So he
dwelt with his numerous brothers in the nest which
his parents had built with great care and made im-
pervious by a strong covering of grass. This nest
was placed on a creeper within a thicket. Yet, still
in this existence, he had not lost his consciousness
of the Law, and would not feed on such living beings
as his father and mother offered to them, but exclu-
sively sustained himself by (the vegetable food) which
was brought by his parents grass-seeds, figs of the
:
banian tree, &c. In consequence of this coarse and
insufficient nourishment, his body did not thrive nor
would his wings develop. The other young quails,
on the contrary, who fed on everything offered to
them, became strong and got full-grown wings. For
this, indeed, is an invariable rule :
He who, not anxious about the precepts of the
i.
Law, eats everything, will thrive at his ease, but such
a one as seeks for his livelihood in accordance with
the precepts, and is careful about the choice of his food,
will endure pain in this world 1
.
Now, while they were living in this manner, a great
forest-conflagration took place not far from them. It
1 Here follows an interpolation, which the editor of the original has
placed within brackets. It is a quotation, which was originally no
doubt a marginal note. Here is its translation
'Thisisalso declared by our Lord in the two gathas : "Easy is the
livelihood &c."
2. 'Easy is the livelihood of the shameless crow, that bold and
impetuous animal, who practises impure actions, but it is a very sinful
life.
3. 'But the modest one who always strives afterpurity has a hard
livelihood,the bashful one who is scrupulous and sustains himself only
by pure modes ofliving.
' This coupleofgathasis found in the Aryasthaviriyanikaya.
The gathas quoted are substantially and partly verbally the same as
two stanzas of the Dhammapada (244 and 245) that are their Pali
counterpart.

40 GATAKAMALA.
1
was characterised by an incessant tremendous noise,
by the appearance of clouds of rising smoke, then by
flying sparks of fire scattered about from the line of
flames. This fire caused much terror to such animals
as haunted the forest, and was a ruin to its groves and
thickets.
4. The fire excited by the whirling of the wind, that
seemed to induce it to perform manifold and different
figures of dance, agitated its wide-outstretched flame-
arms, leaped shaking its dishevelled smoke-hair, and
crackled, taking away the courage and strength of those
(animals and plants).
5. It jumped, as if in wrath, on the grasses, which
trembling under the violent touch of the fierce wind,
seemed to take to flight and covering them with
;
its glittering sparks, burnt them.
6. Yea, it seemed as if the forest itself, with its
crowds of birds flying about terror-stricken and
alarmed, with its terrified quadrupeds roaming on all
sides, with the thick smoke which enveloped it, and
with the sharp noise of the fire's crackling, uttered
strong roars of pain.
So that conflagration, pushed forward as if pressed
on by the violent wind, and following the grasses and
shrubs, reached at last the vicinity of that nest. In
this moment the young quails, uttering confused and
discordant shrieks of fear, each caring for himself,
none for the rest, suddenly flew up all together. Only
the Bodhisattva, because of the great weakness of his
bodyand because he had as yet no wings, made no such
effort. Yet the Great Being knew his power and was
not at all disturbed. When the fire with impetuosity
approached, and was about to seize upon the nest, he
addressed it with these persuasive words :
7. ' My feet are not strong enough to deserve that
name, nor are my wings able to fly, and the disturbance
caused by thee put to flight also my parents. Nothing
worth offering to a guest like thee, is to be found here.
For this reason it becomes thee to turn back from
hence, Agni.'

XVII. THE STORY OF THE JAR. 141
When the Great Being had spoken these words,
hallowed by the power of Truth,
8. That fire, though stirred by the wind, though
raging in dry underwood mixed with very arid grasses,
abated suddenly, as if it had reached a swollen river,
having come near to his utterance of speech.
9. Still up to this clay any forest-conflagration,
reaching that famous place in the Himalaya, however
high its flames may rise by the power of the wind, will
lessen its fire and slacken its rage, in the same way as
a many-headed serpent is charmed by a spell.
For what reason, then, has this (tale) been adduced ?
It will be said.
to. As little as the sea with its rolling billows
will transgress the shore, or he who loves Truth the
discipline ordained by the Lord of Munis, so little even
fire is able to transgress the command of the veracious.
For this reason one must never leave Truth.
In this manner, then, not even fire is able to sur-
pass speech purified by truth. Having this in view,
one must addict one's self to speaking the truth.
[This story is also to be told, when discoursing on the
Tathagata.]
XVII. The Story of the Jar.
(Cp. Pali Crdtaka, No. 512, Fausb. V, pp. 11-20)
Drinking intoxicating liquors is an exceedingly bad
action, attended by many evils. Having this in mind,
the virtuous will keep back their neighbour from that
sin, how much more their own selves. This will be
taught as follows.
One time the Bodhisattva, having by his excessive
compassion purified his mind, always intent on bringing
about the good and the happiness ofothers, manifesting
his holy practice ofgood conduct by his deeds ofcharity,
modesty, self-restraint, and the like, held the dignity of

I42 GATAKAMALA.
.Sakra, the Lord of the Devas. In this existence,
though he enjoyed to his heart's content such para-
mount sensual pleasures as are proper to the Celestials,
yet Compassionateness ruled his mind so as not to
allow him to relax his exertions for the benefit of the
world.
1. As a rule the creatures, drinking from the wine 1
of prosperity, are not watchful, not even with respect
H
to their own interests. e, on the contrary, was not
only free from the drunkenness originating from the
transcendent enjoyments which attend the sovereign
rank among the Devas, but his watchfulness for the
interests of others was as great as ever.
2. Being full of affection towards the creatures, as
if they were his kinsmen, those poor creatures harassed
by many violent calamities, he never forgot to take
care of the interests of others, persisting in his strong
determination and being well aware of his own (extra-
ordinary) nature.
Now, one day the Great Being was casting His eyes
over the world of men. His eye, great as His nature
and mildly looking according to His friendliness, while
bending down to mankind with compassion, perceived
a certain king, whose name was Sarvamitra = every
[
one's friend], who by the sin of his intercourse with
wicked friends was inclined to the habit of drinking
strong liquors, himself with his people, townsmen and
landsmen. Now, having understood that the king saw
no sin in this habit, and knowing; that drinking" consti-
tutes a great sin, the Great Being;, affected with great
compassion, entered upon this reflection : ' It is a pity,
indeed, how great a misery has befallen this people
— !
3. ' Drinking, like a love—ly but wrong path for it is
a sweet thing at the outset leads away from salvation
such people as fail to recognise the evils which it causes.
1 The juice of grapes not being among the national intoxicating
liquorsof India, Sanskrithas noproperword for' wine.' For rhetorical
purposes, however, it will meet no objection to use this term in
a translation. Moreover, nowadays 'wine ' is signified in Sanskrit
by words meaning 'strong liquor.'

; '
XVII. THE STORY OF THE JAR. 143
' What, then, may be the proper way to act here ? . . .
Why, have found
I it.
4. ' People like to imitate the behaviour ofhim who is
the foremost among them this is their constant nature.
;
Accordingly, here the king alone is the person to be
cured, for it is from him that originates the good as
well as the evil of his people.'
Having thus made up his mind, the Great Being
took on himself the majestic figure of a Brahman. His
colour shone like pure gold he wore his hair matted
;
and twisted up, which gave him a rather stern appear-
ance he had his body covered with the bark-garment
; A
and the deer-skin l jar of moderate size, filled with
.
sura, was hanging down from his left side. In this
shape, standing in the air he showed himself to king
Sarvamitra, while he was sitting with his company in
his audience-hall, and their conversation had turned
to be such as attends drinking sura, asava, maireya-,
rum, and honeyed liquor. On seeing him, the assembly,
moved by surprise and veneration, rose from their
seats, and reverentially folded their hands to him.
After which, he began to speak in a loud voice, re-
sembling the deep noise of a cloud big with rain
:
5. ' See, 't is fill'd up to its neck,
Flowers laugh around its neck
Well 't is dress'd, a splendid jar ;
Who will buy from me this jar ?
6. ' I have here a jar adorned with this bracelet-like
wide wreath of flowers, fluttering in the wind. See
how proud it looks, decorated as it is by tender foliage.
Which of you desires to possess it by purchase ?
Upon which, that king, whose curiosity was excited
by astonishment, reverentially fixing his eyes on him
and raising his folded hands, spoke these words :
Like the morning-sun thou appearest to us by
7. '
1 The matted hair, the bark-garment, and the deer-skin are the
attributes of an anchorite or muni. Cp. Dhammapada, verses 393,
394.
* All ofthem names ofdifferent kinds of spirituous liquor.

:
GATAKAMALA.
144
thy lustre, like the moon by thy gracefulness, and by
thy figure like some Muni. Deign to tell us, then,
by what name thou art known in the world. Thy
different illustrious qualities make us uncertain about
thee.'
.5akra said
8. ' Afterwards you will know me, who me I — am, but
now be intent on purchasing this jar from at least
if you are not afraid of the sufferings in the next world
or heavy calamities to be expected still in this.'
The king replied: 'Verily, such an introduction to
a bargain as is made by Thy Reverence, I never saw
before.
9, io. 'The ordinary mode of offering objects for
sale among men is to extol their good qualities and
conceal their faults. Surely, that manner practised by
thee is becoming such men as thou, who abhor false-
hood. For the virtuous will never forsake veracity,
even when in distress!
ii. 'Tell us then, Eminent One, with what this
jar is filled. And what is it, that such a mighty being
as thou may desire from our side by the barter ? '
.Sakra said: ' Hear, mighty sovereign.
12. 'It is not filled with water, either the largess of
the clouds or drawn from a holy stream nor with
;
fragrant honey gathered out of the filaments of flowers
;
nor with excellent butter nor with milk, whose hue
;
equals that of the moonbeams awaking the waterlilies
in a cloudless night. No, this jar is filled up with
mischievous liquor. Now, learn the virtue of this
liquor.
13. ' He who drinks it will lose the control of him-
self, in consequence of mind-perplexing intoxication ;
as his mindfulness will slacken, he will stumble even on
plain ground he will not make a difference between
;
food allowed and forbidden, and will make his meals of
whatever he may get. Of such a nature is the fluid
within this jar. Buy it, it is for sale, that worst ofjars !
14. ' This liquor has the power of taking away your
consciousness, so as to make you lose the control of

. !
XVII. THE STORY OF THE JAR. 45
1
your thoughts and behave like a brute beast, giving
your enemies the trouble of laughing at you. Thanks
to it, you may also dance in the midst of an assembly,
accompanying yourself with the music of your mouth.
Being of such a nature, it is worth purchasing by you,
that liquor within the jar, devoid as it is of any good !
] 5. ' Even the bashful lose shame by drinking it,
and will have done with the trouble and restraint of
dress; unclothed like Nirgranthas 1 they will walk
boldly on the highways crowded with people. Of such
a nature is the liquor contained in this jar and now
offered for sale -.
16. ' Drinking it may cause men even to lie senseless
asleep on the king's roads, having their figures soiled
with food ejected by their vomitings and licked from
their face by bold dogs. Such is the beverage, lovely
to purchase, which has been poured into this jar
17. ' Even a woman enjoying it may be brought by
the power of intoxication into such a state, that she
would be able to fasten her parents to a tree and to
disregard her husband, may he be as wealthy as
Kubera 3 Of this kind is the merchandise which is
.
contained within this jar
!
iS. 'That liquor, by drinking which the Vr/srmayas
and the Andhakas were put out of their senses to this
degree, that without minding 4 their relationship they
crushed down each other with their clubs, that very
beverao-e of maddening effect is enclosed within this
jar!
19. 'Addicted to which whole families of the highest
rank and dignity, the abodes of splendour, perished,
1 The Nirgranthas are a class of monks, especially £ain monks,
who wander about naked.
2 Instead of the reading of the printed text, the fourth pada, I
suppose, should be read thus: sa pa«yatam upagata nihitatra
kumbhe.
3 The strange examples for illustration are occasioned by the
exigencies of a metrical tour de force, very skilfully executed.^
4 It is evident that vismitabandhubhava// is a misprint for
v is m ritabandhubhavah

I46 GATAKAMALA.
that liquor which has caused likewise the ruin of
wealthy families, here in this jar it is exposed for sale.
20. ' Here in this jar is that which makes the tongue
and the feet unrestrained, and puts off every check in
weeping and laughing that by which the eyes look
;
heavy and dull as of one possessed of a demon that
;
which impairing a man's mind, of necessity reduces him
to an object of contempt.
21. 'In thisjar is ready forsale thatwhich, disturbing
the senses of even aged people and making them
timid to continue the road which leads to their good,
induces them to talk much without purpose and rashly.
22. 'It is the fault of this beverage, that the old
gods, having become careless, were bereaved of their
splendour by the King of the Devas, and seeking for
reliefwere drowned in the Ocean. With that drink this
jar is filled. Well, take it !
23. 'Like an Incarnation of Curse she 1 lies within
this jar, she by whose power falsehood is spoken with
confidence, as if it were truth, and forbidden actions
are committed with joy, as if they were prescribed. It
is she who causes men to hold for good what is bad
and for bad what is good.
24. 'Well, purchase then this madness-producing
philtre, this abode of calamities, this embodied Dis-
aster, this mother of sins, this sole and unparalleled
road of sin 2 this dreadful darkness of mind.
25. ' Purc , hase from me, O king, that beverage which
is able to take away a man's senses entirely, so that,
without caring for his happiness or future state, he
may strike his own innocent father or mother or a holy
ascetic.
26. 'Such is this liquor, known among men by the
name of sura, O you lord of men, who by your
splendour equal the celestials (suras). Let him en-
deavour to buy it, who is no partisan of virtues.
1 The word sura is feminine.
2 Kali is here used as an appellative with the general meaning it
has in Pali (see Childers' Diet. s.v.)

XVII. THE STORY OF THE JAR. 147
27. 'People, being addicted to this liquor, grow accus-
tomed to ill-behaviour, and will consequently fall into
the precipices of dreadful hells or come to the state of
Who
beasts or to the attenuated condition of pretas.
then, forsooth, should make up his mind even to look
at this liquor ?
28. 'And, be the result of drinking intoxicating
liquors ever so trifling, still that vice destroys the
good conduct and the good understanding of those
who pass through human existence. Moreover it leads
afterwards to the residence in the tremendous hell
Avi/C-i, burning with flaming fire, or in the world of
spectres 1 or in the bodies of vile beasts.
,
29. 'In short, drinking this destroys every virtue.
It deadens good conduct (sila), forcibly kills good
How
reputation, banishes shame, and defiles the mind.
should you allow yourself to drink intoxicating liquors
O
henceforward, king ? '
By these persuasive words of 6akra and his strong
arguments the kine became aware of the sinfulness of
drinking intoxicating liquors. He cast off the desire of
takine them, and addressing his interlocutor said
:
30. ' As an affectionate father would deign to speak
to his son, or a teacher to his pupil in reward for his
discipline and attachment, or a Muni who knows the
difference between the good and the evil modes of life,
such an import is conveyed in the well-said words
thou hast spoken to me out of benevolence. For this
reason I will endeavour to honour thee, as is due, by
a deed.
' In return for thy well-said sentences Thy Reverence
will at least deign to accept from us this honour.
31. 'I give thee five excellent villages, a hundred
female slaves, five hundred cows, and these ten chariots
with the best horses harnessed to them. As a speaker
of wholesome words thou art a Guru to me.
=
1 ' The world of spectres' pitrz'loke. In Buddhist terminology
the pitara/z are a synonym of preta^, considered to be a class of
spectres and ghosts. 'In appearance they are extremely attenuated,
like a dry leaf.' Spence Hardy, Manual, p. 48.
L 2

I48 GATAKAMALA.
' Or, wert thou to desire anything else to be done
from my side, Thy Reverence would favour me once
more by ordering so.'
.Sakra replied
:
32, 33. 'I do not want villages or other boons.
Know me to be the Lord of the Celestials, O King.
But the speaker of wholesome words is to be honoured
by accepting his words and acting up to them. For
this is the way which leads to glory and bliss, and
after death to the many different forms of happiness.
Therefore, throw off the habit of taking intoxicating
drinks. Holding fast to Righteousness you shall
partake of my heaven.'
After thus speaking, .5akra disappeared on the
spot, and the king, with his townsmen and landsmen,
desisted from the vice of drinking strong liquors.
In this manner, then, the virtuous, considering the
use of intoxicating liquors an exceedingly bad action,
attended by many evils, will keep back their neighbour
from this sin, how much more their own selves. [And
when discoursing: about the Tathao;ata, this is also to
be propounded 'In this manner the Lord was careful
:
of the good of the world already in his previous
existences.']
XVIII. The Story of the Childless One.
The state of a householder is beset with occupations
inimical to religious conduct and tranquillity. For
this reason it does not please those who long only for
the Self1 This will be taught by the following.
.
One time the Bodhisattva was born in a wealthy
family, noted for their virtuous mode of life and
1 Though the Buddhist lore denies the existence of the individual
soul, die Self (atman), Buddhist Sanskrit, as well as Pali, often
employs that name, as it is used in pagan and profane writings, in
such cases as where it may suit to signify that part of the individual
being, to whose profit or damage the good or evil karma will tend.

XVIII. THE STORY OF THE CHILDLESS ONE. 149
good behaviour, so as to be much sought in alliance
and highly esteemed by the people. That family was
like a refreshing well to persons of good birth ; they
shared the stores of their treasuries and magazines
with ^ramawas and Brahmans their houses were open
;
to friends and kinsmen the poor and the mendicants
;
lived by their gifts the artisans found business and
;
protection with them and by their splendid riches
;
they were permitted to bestow their favour and hospi-
tality on the king. Being born in this family, he grew
up in course of time, and studied such branches of
science as are reputed of much value in the world,
while he turned his mind with no less zeal to various
arts, the knowledge of which is optional. Owing to
his accomplished education, his beautiful figure pleasing
the eyes of men, and the knowledge of the world he
displayed without infringing the precepts of the Law,
he won the hearts of his fellow-citizens, who considered
him like their kinsman.
1, 2. For it is not on account of their relationship that
we honour our relations, nor do we consider the rest
of men as strangers because they are not related to
us. No, men are considered relations or strangers,
accordine as their virtues or vices make them meet
with esteem or disregard.
But that Great Bein^ had familiarised himself with
world-renunciation.
He had had experience of the householder's
3.
life, and knew it to be a state not consistent with the
practice of religious duties, since the pain of seeking
after profit is necessarily implied by it. On the other
hand, he understood the happiness of the penance-
Q-roves. So his mind became detached from the
pleasures of the home-life.
So, when his father and mother had died, he
was utterly alarmed in his heart, and forsaking his
splendid house and estate, an amount of many
hundred thousands, duly bestowed it upon his friends
and kinsmen, the poor, the .Srama^as, and the
Brahmans after which he abandoned his home.
;

150 GATAKAMALA.
He passed successively through villages and towns
and boroughs, through kingdoms and capitals of
kingdoms, and took up his abode on a certain
woody plateau in the vicinity of a town. There he
soon became conspicuous by his tranquillity, his
conversation, and his behaviour. The calmness of
his senses, the result of a long practice of meditation,
was natural and sincere. His language delighted both
minds and ears, and while betraying his wisdom, still
was full of modesty ; and his discourses being entirely
free from miserable and troublesome hope for gain,
were distinguished by his solid learning, by his softness
in addressing the audience to whom he paid due
honour, and by the skill he displayed in tracing the
boundary between actions allowed and forbidden by
the Law. His behaviour, adorned with such practices
as are proper to a homeless ascetic, was quite in
accordance with that approved by the virtuous. And
when the people who were curious about his person,
became aware of how he had renounced a high
rank in the world, they loved him the more for it.
4. Virtues obtain a more favourable reception, if
found in persons distinguished by a high birth in
;
the same way as the beams shooting from the moon
have more loveliness, when coming in contact with any
object of excellent qualities.
Now some friend and companion ofhis father, having
heard he had taken up his abode in that place, went up
to him, moved byagreat esteem for his virtues. After
the usual friendly inquiries concerning his health, the
visitor made himself known to the ascetic, and told
him of the paternal relation. Then there ensued
a conversation between them, in the course of which
the said friend spoke these affectionate words : ' Your
Reverence is likely to have acted inconsiderately, after
all, renouncing the world in this age without further
regard to your family and (the maintenance of) your
lineage.
5. ' For what have you left your rich dwelling,
setting your mind on the forest-life ? Those who

XVIII. THE STORY OF THE CHILDLESS ONE. 151
practise a virtuous life may observe this Law in their
homes as well as in the wilderness.
6, 7. ' How, then, is it that you give yourself up
to a life of pain, embracing this state of incarnate
Poverty, as it were ? You are sustaining yourself
by alms' obtained from the charity of strangers, and
you are not a bit more regarded than a vagabond.
Covered with rags and devoid of relations and
friends, you are hiding yourself in this abode in the
midst of the forest. Even the eyes of your enemies
would be filled with tears, if they were to see you
in this condition.
8. 'Therefore, return to your paternal house.
Certainly, the abundance of its estate must be known
also to you. Living there, you might fulfil at the
same time both your religious duties and your desire
of possessing a virtuous son.
' For such is the saying, indeed, you know :
9. ' Even to a hired labourer his home is comforting,
like a well of fresh water, how much more an easily
obtained luxurious residence, resplendent with wealth!'
But the Bodhisattva's mind was purified by that
delicious and comforting ambrosia, the name of which
is detachment. His heart clung to it, for he knewwell
the difference between the life of a householder and
the forest-life and the invitation to enjoy worldly-
;
pleasures had the same effect of discomfort upon him,
as talking of a meal would have upon one who is
satiated. So he spoke:
10. ' What you said was spoken out of affection,
of a truth, and on this account your words did not
grieve me so much. Nevertheless, do not employ
the term " comfort," when speaking of one who lives
in the world.
11. 'The householder's state is a state of great
uneasiness, whether he have money or not. 1 he
rich man is vexed by the toil of guarding his wealth,
and the poor one by the labour of earning it.
12. 'Now, since there is no comfort to be found
in that state either for the rich or for the poor, it is

152 GATAKAMALA.
mere folly to delight in it. It must have such conse-
quences as are the result of wickedness.
' As to your statement that a householder, too, may
be able to observe the precepts of the Law, certainly,
this is true. But it is a very, very difficult thing,
methinks. The life in the world is crowded with
business quite adverse to the precepts of the Law, and
implies a great amount of toil. Do but consider it
well, sir.
13. ' The life of a householder is not suitable for
one who desires nothing, nor for such a one as never
speaks a falsehood, nor for him who never uses
violence, nor for such a one as never injures others.
' And he whose heart is attached to the " comfort
of home-life," cannot but strive to put into effect the
means by which this is secured.
14. 'If you devote yourself to the Law, you must
leave your house, and inversely, how can the Law exist
for him who is attached to his house ? It is tranquillity
from which the road of the Law derives its flavour, but
the success of a householderrequires him to follow the
way of courageous enterprise.
15. 16. ' Now, as the life of a householder is repre-
hensible for this reason, that it is in opposition to
the Law, who, then, having got the true insight of his
Self, will keep to it ? He, indeed, whom the prospect
of pleasure has once induced to neglect the Law, will
feel himself not at all restrained as to the means
of procuring those pleasures. Besides, they will
certainly be followed by the loss of good reputation,
by remorse and misfortune. For this reason the wise
do not embrace that state, which procures pleasures
to the detriment of the Law they rather look on it as
;
a calamity.
' Further I should think, the statement that living in
the world procures happiness is only supported by
belief (not by evidence).
17, 18. 'The pain caused by earning wealth or by
guarding it never ceases for the householder. He is
more than anybody else exposed to murder, captivity,

XVIII. THE STORY OF THE CHILDLESS ONE. 153
and other calamities. Even if a king, he would not be
satisfied with his riches, no more than the sea may be
Why
with showers ofrain. can there be happiness in that
state, or how, or when, if man does not attain by it the
longing for self-perfection, but on the contrary in his
infatuation fancies happiness is to be obtained by attach-
ment to sensual objects ? Such a person may be
compared to one who tries to heal his wounds by
rubbing.
1 As a rule, in truth, I dare say,
19. ' As a rule, material prosperity makes the house-
holderarrogant, nobility ofextraction makes him proud,
strength makes him insolent. His anger is roused by
grief, and adversity puts him to dejection. At what
time may that state offer an opportunity for tran-
quillity ?
' And for this reason it is that I would persuade
Your Honour not to oppose my determination.
20. ' The house is the home of many and heavy
sufferings. It is haunted by the serpents named
arrogance, pride, and infatuation. In it the lovely
happiness of tranquillity comes to ruin. Who then
should choose that abode that tends to dissolution ?
21. 'In the forest, on the other hand, that home
of the nothing-desirers, the mind is calm, enjoying the
happiness of detachment. Can there exist so great
a contentment in 6akra's heaven ?
22. ' Thus considering I delight in the midst of the
forests, although covered with rags and getting my
livelihood through the kindheartedness of straneers.
I do not long for such happiness as is tainted with
unrighteousness. I abhor it like food besmeared with
poison I have got the insight of my Self.'
;
These persuasivewords did notfail to make an impres-
sion on his paternal friend, who showed his high respect
to the Great Being by entertaining him with a meal in
the most distinguished manner.
In this manner, then, those who long only for the
Self abandon the state of a householder, understanding

:
154 GATAKAMALA.
that it is beset with occupations inimical to religious
conduct and to tranquillity. [When treating of the
virtue of detachment, this is to be propounded
' Those who have once got the taste for detachment
will not go back to worldly pleasures.']
The Pali version of this story is not found in the Pali Gataka nor
in the A'ariyapi/aka. The whole tale is nothing but a plea for
the virtue of world-renunciation, the naishkrama, roughly dressed in
the shape ofa story, and may serve as a kind of introduction to the
subsequent tales, where the state of an ascetic is glorified.
XIX. The Story of the Lotus-Stalks.
(Cp. the Pali Cataka. No. 488, Fausb. IV, 305-314 Aariyapi/aka
;
III, 4.)
Those who have learnt to appreciate the happiness
of detachment are hostile to worldly pleasures they
;
will oppose them, like one opposes a deception, an
injury. This will be taught as follows.
One time the Bodhisattva was born in an illustrious
family of Brahmans, far-famed for theirvirtues and their
freedom from reprehensible vices. In this existence
he had six younger brothers endowed with virtues
similar to his, and who out of affection and esteem
for him always imitated him he had also a sister,
;
who was the seventh. Having studied the Vedas
with their auxiliary sciences, likewise the Upavedas 1
,
he obtained great renown on account of his learning,
and high respect from the side of the people. Attend-
ing on his father and mother with the utmost piety,
yea, worshipping them like deities, and instructing his
brothers in different branches of science like a spiritual
teacher or a father, he dwelt in the world, being
1 The Upavedas are the four sciences of medicine (ayurveda),
military sciences (dhanurveda), music (gandharvaveda), and
mechanics (^ilpa^astra), which theory attaches to the Rig-, Ya^ur-,
Sama-, and Atharva-veda respectively.

XIX. THE STORY OF THE LOTUS-STALKS. 155
skilled in the art of dealing with worldly affairs, and
distinguished by his good manners. In course of
time his parents died, which loss deeply moved his
soul. Having performed the funeral ceremonies for
them, after some days spent in mourning, he assembled
his brothers and thus spoke to them
:
I, 2. 'This is the necessary order of things in the
world and a source of grief and excessive pain,
that Death separates us at last from those with whom
we have lived together for a time, however long. For
this reason I desire to walk homeless on that laudable
road to salvation, before Death, our foe, seizes me while
attached to the householder's life.
' Having thus resolved, I have to advise you this,
one and all. Our Brahmanical family is in the lawful
possession of some wealth obtained in an honest way.
With it you are able to sustain yourselves. Well, then,
you must dwell here as householders in a becoming-
manner. Let all of you be intent on loving and re-
specting each other, take care not to slacken your
regard of the moral precepts and the practice of
a righteous behaviour, keep up the assiduous study of
the Veda, be prepared to meet the wishes of your
friends, your guests, and your kinsmen. In short,
above all things observe Righteousness.
3. ' Always continuing in good behaviour, observing
your daily Veda-study, and delighting in almsgiving,
you must keep the householder's state (so) as it ought
to be kept.
4. 'In this way not onlywill your reputation increase,
not only will you extend your virtue and your wealth,
the substance of welfare, but you may expect your
entrance in the other life to be happy. Do not
commit, therefore, any inadvertence while living the
householder's life.'
But his brothers, hearing him speak of the homeless
life, felt their hearts grieved with the apprehension
of separation. Their faces grew wet with tears of
sorrow, and respectfully bowing they spoke to him :
' The wound caused by the sorrow-arrow of our father's

'
56 GATAKAMALA.
]
decease is not yet healed. Pray do not rub it open
afresh with the salt of this new assault of grief.
5. ' Even now the wound is still open which was
inflicted on our minds by the death of our father.
Oh you must retract your resolution, wise brother,
!
you must not strew salt on our wound.
6. ' Or, if indeed you are convinced that attach-
ment to the house is unfit, or that the happiness of the
forest-life is the road to salvation, why is it that you
desire to depart for the forest alone, leaving us in this
house destitute of our protector ?
' For this reason, the state of life which is yours, that
We
will be ours, too. too will renounce the world.'
The Bodhisattva answered
:
People who have not familiarised themselves
7. '
with Detachment cannot but follow after worldly
desires. As a rule they look upon it as the same thing
to give up the world or to fall over a precipice.
' Thus considering, I restrained myself and did not
exhort you to adopt the homeless life, though knowing
the difference between both states. But if my choice
please you too, why, let us abandon our home !
And so all seven brothers, with their sister as the
eighth, gave up their wealthy estate and precious
goods, took leave of their weeping friends, kinsmen
and relations, and resorted to the state of homeless
ascetics. And with them, out of affection also one
comrade, one male, and one female servant set out
for the forest.
In a certain place in the forest there was a large
lake of pure, blue water. It exhibited a resplendent
fiery beauty, when its lotus-beds were expanded, and
offered a gay aspect, when its groups of waterlilies
disclosed their calyxes ' swarms of bees were always
;
humming there. On the shore of that lake they built
as many huts of leaves as they numbered, one for
1 The former happened at daytime, the latter in the nights bright
with moonshine.

XIX. THE STORY OF THE LOTUS-STALKS. I 57
each, placing them at some distance from one another,
hidden in the shadow of the trees in the midst of
a lovely solitude. There they lived, devoted to their
self-imposed vows and observances, and having- their
minds bound to meditation. On each fifth day they
were in the habit of Lroin^ to the Bodhisattva in order
to listen to his preachingof the Law. Then he delivered
some or other edifying discourse to show them the
way of tranquillity and placidity of mind. In those
discourses he exhorted to meditation, asserted the
sinfulness of worldly pleasures, expatiated on the sense
of satisfaction which is the result of detachment,
blamed hypocrisy, loquacity, idleness and other vices,
and made a deep impression on his audience.
Now, their maid-servant, prompted by respect and
affection, did not cease to attend upon them still in
the forest. She was wont to draw eatable lotus-stalks
out of the lake and to put equal shares of them upon
large lotus-leaves in a clean place on the lake-shore;
when she had thus prepared the meal, she would
announce the time by taking two pieces of wood and
clashing them against each other, after which she
withdrew. Then those holy men, after performing
the proper and usual prayers and libations, would
come to the lake-side one after another according1
to their acre, and each havinir taken successivelv his
share of the stalks, return to his hut. There they
would enjoy the meal in the prescribed manner and
pass the rest of the time absorbed in meditation. By
this practice they avoided seeing each other, except at
preaching-time.
Such irreproachable morals, way of living, and be-
haviour, such love of detachment, and such prone-
ness to meditation made them renowned everywhere.
6akra, the Lord of the Devas, having heard of their
reputation, came to their abode for the purpose of
trying them. Now, when he perceived their disposition
to meditation, their purity from bad actions, their
freedom from lusts and the constancy of their serene
calmness, his high opinion of their virtues grew

;
1^8 GATAKAMALA.
stronger, and he became the more anxious to try
them.
8. He who lives in the depth of the forest without
any desire, only intent on calmness of mind, such
a man causes reverence for his virtues to arise in the
hearts of the pious.
.Sakra, then, the Lord of the Devas, watched the
time when the maid-servant, after Gathering- her
provision of eatable lotus-stalks, as white and tender
as the teeth of a young elephant, washed them
and arranged them in equal portions on lotus-leaves
with the green hue of emeralds, taking care to adorn
each share by adding to it some petals and filaments
of the lotuses. After announcing the mealtime to the
holy ascetics, as usual, by the noise of the clashing
pieces ofwood, she withdrew. At this moment 6akra,
with the object of trying the Bodhisattva, made the
very first share disappear (from the lotus-leaf).
9. When mishap arises and happiness disappears,
then there is opportunity for measuring the constancy
of the virtuous, as it cannot fail to start into view.
When the Bodhisattva, comingto the place ofthe first
share of stalks, perceived that the eatable stalks were
missing on his lotus-leaf, while the adornment of petals
and filamentswas disarranged, he thought : ' Somebody-
has taken my share of food.' Then, without feeling
agitation or anger in his heart, he went back to his
hut, where he entered upon his practices of meditation,
as he was wont to do. Nor did he inform the
other holy ascetics of the matter, to avoid grieving
them. And those again, thinking it to be a matter
of course that he had taken his share of the stalks,
took their portions too, as usual, successively and in
due order, and ate them severally, each in his hut
after which they became absorbed in meditation. In
the same manner .Sakra concealed the Bodhisattva's
portion of the lotus-stalks on the second, the third, the
fourth and the fifth day. But the effect was the same.
The Great Being remained as calm in mind as ever,
and was entirely free from trouble.

XIX. THE STORY OF THE LOTUS-STALKS. 159
10. The virtuous consider the agitation of the mind,
not the extinction of life, to be death. It is for this
reason that the wise never become alarmed, not even
when in danger of life.
In the afternoon of that (fifth) day those AYshis
went up to the leaf-hut of the Bodhisattva, as they
were in the habit of doing, in order to listen to his
preaching of the Law. On seeing him, they perceived
the leanness of his body. His cheeks looked hollow,
his eyes were sunken, the splendour of his face had
faded, his sonorous voice had lost its full sound. Yet,
however emaciated, he was lovely to behold like the
crescent for his virtues, wisdom, constancy, tran-
;
quillity had not diminished. Accordingly, after
coming into his presence and paying him the usual
homage, they asked him with anxious excitement the
cause of that emaciation. And the Bodhisattva told
them the matter as he had experienced The
it.
ascetics, who could not suppose any one among
themselves to have done an action so unbecomino-
as this, and who felt quite alarmed at his pain,
expressed their sorrow by exclamations, and kept their
eyes fixed on the ground for shame. But 6akra having
by his power obstructed their free movement on the
ways in which they could obtain knowledge, they were
unable to come to a conclusion as to the cause of the
disappearance. Then the brother of the Bodhisattva,
who was born next to him, showing both his alarmed
mind and his guiltlessness, made this extraordinary
protestation l
:
11.' May he who took thy lotus-stalks, O Brahman,
obtain a house betokening by its rich decoration the
wealth of its owner, a wife to his heart's desire, and
may he be blessed with many children and grand-
children 2 '
!
1 The following set of remarkable protestations are also found in
the same order and in a substantially identical form in the Pali
redaction. They are very old, and not wholly free from corruptions
and misunderstandings.
2 The Pali redaction adds, that the audience on hearing this

'
60 GATAKAMALA.
1
The second brother said
1 2. ' May he who took th : y lotus-stalks, O foremost
Brahman, be tainted with a strong attachment to world-
liness, may he wear wreaths and garlands and sandal-
powder and fine garments and ornaments, touched by
his (playing) children !
The third brother said
:
13. 'May he who took thy lotus-stalks even once,
be a husbandman who, having obtained wealth in
consequence of his husbandry and delighting in the
prattle of his children, enjoys the home-life without
thinking of the time when he must retire from the
world l'
!
The fourth brother spoke
:
14. 'May he who prompted by cupidity took thy
lotus-stalks, rule the whole earth as a monarch, and be
worshipped by kings attending on him in the humble
attitude of slaves, lowering their trembling heads!'
The fifth brother spoke
:
15. 'May he be a king's family-priest in the pos-
session of evil-charming mantras and the like, may he
also be treated with distinction by his king, whosoever
he be who took thy lotus-stalks !'
The sixth brother said
:
16. ' May he who has been eager to possess thy
lotus-stalks rather than thy virtues, be a famous teacher
well-versed in the Veda and largely enjoy the worship
of an ascetic from the people crowding together to
see him !'
The friend spoke
:
17. ' May he who could not subdue his greediness
for thy lotus-stalks obtain from the part of the king
an excellent village endowed with the four plenties
(abounding in population, corn, wood and water)2 and
,
may he die without having subdued his passions!'
protestation shut their ears, saying : ' Do not speak in this manner,
friend thy curse is too tremendous.'
1 Th ! e Sanskrit text has vayo 'py apajyan=Pali vayaw appas-
san. I follow the explication of the Pali commentary.
2 The said four plenties are thus explained in the commentary on

: ' 1
XIX. THE STORY OF THE LOTUS-STALKS. 16
The male-servant said
:
18. 'May he be the head of a village, cheerfully
living with his comrades, exhilarated by the dances
and chants ofwomen, and never meet with harm from
the king's side, he who destroyed his own interest for
the sake of those lotus-stalks !'
The sister said
19. ' May that person 1 who ventured to take the
lotus-stalks of such a being as you, be a woman of
resplendent beauty and figure, may a king make her
his wife and put her at the head of his zenana of
a thousand females !
The maid-servant said
:
20. ' May she much delight in eating sweetmeats
alone stealthily, disregarding the pious, and be greatly
rejoiced when she gets a dainty dish, she who set her
heart on thy lotus-stalks, not on thy righteousness !'
Now three inhabitants of the forest had also come
to that place to hear the preaching of the Law, namely
a Yaksha, an elephant, and a monkey. They had heard
the conversation and were overcome with the utmost
shame and confusion. Among them, the Yaksha
attested his innocence, uttering in their presence this
solemn protestation
:
21. ' May he who failed against thee for the sake of
the lotus-stalks, have his residence in the Great
Monastery, entrusted with the charge of the reparations
in (the town of) Ka/'angala, and make one window
every day 2'
!
the Pali Gataka,which proveshereofessential help,since ^atu^atam
of the Sanskrit text is a wrong Sanskritisation of Pali ^atussadaw,
and does not suit the context.
1 Both the Sanskrit and the Pali redaction have here the masculine
pron. demonstr. The fault must be a very ancient one. In the
imprecation ofthe female servant the grammatical gender is respected
by Suva, not so in the Gataka.
2 This imprecation alludes to the story of a certain devaputra, who
in the time of the Buddha Kajyapa dwelt in the said monastery and
was obliged to do the labour imposed on him, whereby he suffered
much. A brief account of that tale is given in the commentary on
M

: ' '
62 GATAKAMALA.
1
The elephant spoke
:
22. ' May he come into captivity from the lovely
forest into the company of men, fettered with six
hundred solid chains1 and suffer pain from the sharp
,
goads of his driver, he who took thy lotus-stalks,
O most excellent of Munis !
The monkey said
23. ' May he who moved by greediness took thy
lotus-stalks wear a flower-garland and a tin collar
rubbing his neck, and beaten with a stick pass before
the face of a serpent 2 and with a long wreath hanging
,
from his shoulder, live in the houses (of men) !
In reply, the Bodhisattva addressed all of them with
words both persuasive and kind, indicating how deep-
rooted was his dispassionateness.
24. ' May he who falsely said " they have dis-
appeared," though he had them, obtain to his heart's
desire worldly pleasures and die a householder. May
the same be the fate of him who suspects you of
a similar action !'
Those extraordinary protestations of them, indi-
cative of their abhorrence of the enjoyment of worldly
pleasures, roused the astonishment and respect of
.Sakra, the Lord of the Devas. He made himself
visible in his own brilliant shape, and drawing near
to those i^/shis, said as if with resentment : ' You
ought not to speak so. —
25. ' Those enjoyments to obtain which everybody
who longs for happiness strives after to such a degree
as to banish sleep from his eyes and to undertake
—
any form of penance and toil you censure, calling
Why
them " worldly pleasures !" do you judge so ?'
the Pali £ataka, where the speaker of this stanza is called a Devata,
not a Yaksha.
1 I suppose the author of the Sanskrit original did not understand
the meaning of the text he Sanskritised. The corresponding stanza
of the Pali redaction has so ba^o-hatu pasasatehi £/zambhi,
where £/iambh\ is explained in the commentary as signifying the six
parts of the elephant's body fastened by many chains (pasasatehiti
bahuhi pasehi), viz. the four feet, the neck, and the loins.
2 In other words, may he be the monkey ofa serpent-charmer.

'
XIX. THE STORY OF THE LOTUS-STALKS. 163
The Bodhisattva spoke : ' Sensual enjoyments are
accompanied by endless sins, sir. Why, hear then,
I will tell thee concisely, what the Munis have in view
that makes them blame sensual enjoyments.
26. ' On account of them, men incur captivity and
death, grief, fatigue, danger, in short manifold suffer-
ings. For the sake of them, kings are eager to oppress-
righteousness, and consequently fall into hell after
death.
27. 'When the ties of friendship are suddenly
loosened, when men enter the road of political wisdom,
that unclean path offalseness, when they lose theirgood
—reputation and hereafter come to meet with sufferings
is it not sensual enjoyments that are the cause
thereof ?
28. ' Now, since worldly pleasures in this mannertend
to the destruction of all conditions of men, the highest,
the middle and the lowest, both in this world and in
the next, the Munis, O .Sakra, who long only for the
Self, keep aloof from them, as they would from angry
serpents.'
Then 6akra, the Lord of the Devas, approved his
words, saying, 'Well spoken,' and as he was propitiated
by the greatness of mind of those 7?zshis, he confessed
that he himself had committed the theft.
29. 30. 'A high opinion of virtue may be tested by
trial. Thus considering, I hid the lotus-stalks in order
to try you. And now, how fortunate is the world in
that it possesses such Munis as you, whose glory is
tested by fact. And thou, here, take these lotus-stalks,
as a proof of a constant holy behaviour.'
With these words he handed the stalks over to
the Bodhisattva. But the Bodhisattva reproved his
unbecoming and audacious way of proceeding in terms
though modest, yet expressive of noble self-esteem.
31. 'We are no kinsfolk of thine, nor thy comrades,
nor are we thy actors or buffoons. What, then, is the
reason for thy coming here, Lord of the Devas, to play
with 7c7shis in this manner ?
At these words 6akra, the Lord of the Devas,
m
2

'
GATAKAMALA.
ir>4
hastily divested himself of his divine appearance,
brilliant with his ear-rings, his head-ornament, and
his lightning, and respectfully bowing to the Bodhi-
sattva, spoke thus in order to appease him :
32. ' O thou who art free from all selfishness, deign
to forgive me the thoughtless deed I did with the
aforesaid purpose pardon it like a father, like a
;
teacher
!
33. ' It is proper, indeed, to those whose eyes are
not yet opened to wisdom, to offend against others, be
they even their equals. Likewise it is proper to (the
wise) who know the Self, to pardon such offences.
Also for this reason, pray do not feel anger in thy
heart concerning that deed !
Having thus appeased him, 6akra disappeared on
the spot.
In this manner, then, those who have learnt to
appreciate the happiness of detachment are hostile to
worldly pleasures; they will oppose them like one
opposes a deception, an injury \
XX. The Story of the Treasurer.
(Cp. Pali Gataka, No. 171, Fausb. II, 64,65.)
An unfounded opinion of their possession of some
virtue acts upon the virtuous like a stirring spur.
1 In the original some lines follow here, bracketed by the editor.
No doubt, we have here an interpolation, as is also indicated by its
very collocation after the ethical maxim which must be the final part
of our tale. This is its translation :
' And thisgitaka has thus been explained by the Lord :
34-36. " I, the son of Saradvati [viz. .Sariputra], Maudgalyayana,
Kajyapa, Purwa, Aniruddha, and Ananda, we were the brothers of that
time. Utpalavarwa, was the sister and Kub^ottara was the maid-
servant. .ATitra the householder was then the male slave, Satagiri the
Yaksha, Parileya the elephant, Madhudatar the monkey, Kalodayin
the Sakraof that time. Retain well this g-ataka thus explained."
Almost the same verses and names are found in the conclusion of
this story in the Pali Gataka.

XX. THE STORY OF THE TREASURER. 165
Considering thus, one ought to strive after the realisa-
tion of virtues as will be taught in the following.
;
One time the Bodhisattva is said to have been a
king's treasurer, illustrious for his learning, his noble
family and his modest behaviour. He had lofty aspira-
tions and a clever intellect, loved honest practices in
business, and owing to his thorough study of many'
branches of science, attracted notice by his elegance of
speech. Compassionate as he was and in the posses-
sion of a large estate, he made the bliss of his wealth
flow in all directions by his great gifts of charity. So
he was considered the jewel of householders.
1. As he was by his nature fond of righteousness,
and was adorned by(acquired) qualities, sacred learning
and the like, people were wont to look upon him as
worthy of veneration above all others.
One day, when that Great Being had gone out for
some business to the king's palace, his mother-in-law
came to his house to see her daughter. After the
usual welcome and inquiries as to health, there
ensued a conversation, in the course of which, being
alone with her daughter, the wife of the Bodhisattva,
she turned to put questions to her such as these: '
AY7our
husband does not disregard you, my clear, I hope ?
And does he know how to show you attention ? He
does not grieve you by misconduct, I hope ? ' And
she answered with downcast looks bashfully in a soft
tone: 'Virtuous conduct and behaviour such as his
are hardly to be met with even in a mendicant who
has renounced the world.' But her mother, whose
hearing and understanding were impaired by old age,
did not well catch the meaning of these words of her
daughter, as they were spoken with shame in a rather
low voice, and having heard the mention of a mendi-
cant who had renounced the world, drew the inference
that her son-in-law had become a religious mendicant.
She burst into tears, and overpowered by the violence
of her grief, indulged in lamenting and bewailing her
daughter. ' What virtuous behaviour and conduct is
shown by him who leaves the world in this manner,

'
66 GATAKAMALA.
1
abandoning his affectionate family ? And what has
he to do with world-renunciation, after all ?
2. ' What is the reason that such a person as he is,
young, handsome, delicate, accustomed to a life of com-
fort, a favourite with the king, should feel a vocation
for the forest-life ?
3. ' How did it come to pass thatwithout experiencing
any wrong from the side of his family and before the
deformity of old age had come, he left suddenly and
without pain his home abounding in wealth ?
4. 'He, adorned by a decent behaviour, by wisdom
and lo — ve of righteousness, he, full of compassion for
others how is it that he could come to such a reckless
deed without mercy for his own family ?
5. ' As he was in the habit of honouring ^ramawas
and Brahmans, friends and clients, his own family and
(that larger family of) the distressed, and as he con-
sidered a spotless conduct his (highest) wealth, say,
could he not attain in the world that which he seeks
in the forest ?
6. ' Abandoning his chaste and devoted wife, the
companion of his religious duties, how is it that he
does not perceive that by excessive love of the Law
he is here transgressing the path of the Law ?
7. 'Alas! It is a pity! Fie upon the bad manage-
ment of Destiny, that men can leave their beloved
relations without being withheld by Compassion, or
that they can be successful even in the slightest part
of the holiness they pursue !
When the Bodhisattva's wife heard those piteous
and sincere lamentations of her mother on account
of her husband having renounced the world, she
grew alarmed (being impressionable) after the nature
of women. Her disturbed countenance expressed the
dejection of her mind shaken by the sudden assault
of sorrow and pain. She wholly forgot the subject
and the connection of the conversation, and reflected
:
' My husband has forsaken the world, and my mother
on hearing the sad news has come here in order to
comfort me.' Having thus made up her mind, the

!
XX. THE STORY OF THE TREASURER. 167
young, girlish woman began to lament and to weep,
and with a loud cry swooned away. The other
members of the family and the attendants, hearing
the matter, became utterly distressed, and burst into
lamentations. On hearing that noise, neighbours,
friends, kinsmen, and other relations, clients, chiefs
of Brahmanical families, in short, the bulk of the
citizens, as they were much attached to the treasurer,
gathered round his house.
8. As a rule, he had always shared the good and
the ill fortune of the people. In consequence thereof
the people, as if they had learnt this behaviour from
him, showed him the like sympathy in both fortunes.
Now, when the Bodhisattva on his return from
the king's residence approached his dwelling-place,
he heard the lamentations resounding from his house,
and saw the lar^e multitude there assembled. He
ordered his attendant to eo and learn what was the
matter, who having grot that information came back
and reported it to him.
9. 'It has been rumoured, I do not know in what
way, that Your Honour has given up her wealthy
home to become a mendicant. This news has induced
this large body ofpeople to crowd here out of affection.'
Upon hearing these words, the Great Being felt
something like shame. His heart of innate pureness
was alarmed by what appeared to him like a reproof.
And he entered upon this reflection : ' Oh ! how much
am I honoured by this opinion of the people
10. 'If after obtaining this high opinion of my
virtues from the part of the citizens, I should cling
to the home-life henceforward, should I not be a
coward
?
11. 'I should make myself reputed as one attached
to vice, ill-behaving and a despiser of virtues and
;
would consequently lose the esteem I now enjoy from
the virtuous. So living, life would be insupportable
to me.
12. ' For this reason, in return for the honour con-
ferred upon me by public opinion, I will honour them

'
68 GATAKAMALA.
1
again by realising it, and affected with a pious love
of the forest-groves, detach myself from my home
with its vice-producing evil passions.'
Having thus considered, the Great Being forthwith
turned back, and caused himself to be announced to
the king : ' The treasurer wants to see Your Majesty
once more.' After being admitted to the king's
presence, and after the usual salutations, being asked
by the king the reason of his return, he said : ' I desire
to renounce the world, and beg you to grant me your
permission, Your Majesty.'
On hearing this, the king was troubled and alarmed,
and said these affectionate words
:
13. ' What ails you that, while I am living who
love you more than your friends and kinsmen, you
should want to withdraw to the forest, as if I were
unable to relieve you from that pain either by my
wealth or my policy or my great power ?
14. 'Are you in want of money: take it from my
side. Is it some grief that makes you suffer: I will
cure it. Or is it for any other purpose that you desire
to withdraw to the forest, leaving your relations and
me, who entreat you in this manner ?
To these affectionate and honorific words of the
monarch he answered in a tone of friendly persua-
siveness
:
'From whence can there arise grief to those
15.
whom your arm protects, or sadness caused by want
of wealth ? It is, therefore, not sorrow that induces
me to withdraw to the forest, but another reason.
Hear what
it is.
16. ' The report is current, Your Majesty, that I have
A
taken the vows of a religious mendicant. crowd of
people mourn for it, and weep for sorrow. It is for
this reason that I want to live in the solitude of the
forests, since I have been judged a person capable of
conceiving this virtuous purpose.'
The king replied : ' Your Honour ought not to
leave us on account of a mere rumour. The worth
of persons like you does not depend on public opinion,

'
XX. THE STORY OF THE TREASURER. 169
nor do they acquire their illustrious virtues nor lose
them conformably to idle gossip.
1 7. ' Rumour is the result of unrestrained imagina-
tion. Once abroad, it runs about free and unchecked.
Ridiculous is he who in earnest minds such gossip,
more ridiculous is he who acts up to it ! '
not Th sp e ea B k od s h o isat A tva hi s g a h id o : pi ' n N i o o , n n o o f , m Y e o n ur mu M s a t je b s e ty a , c - t d e o d
!
up to. Will Your Majesty deign to consider this.
18. ' When a man becomes famous for holiness,Your
Majesty, that person ought not to remain behind his
reputation, if in fact he is pious, but, to say nothing
more, his very shame must induce him to take upon
himself the burden of that virtue.
19. ' For, ifhe is seen in anyway acting in accordance
with that high opinion of his virtue, the renown of his
glory will shine the more, whereas he will be like
a dried-up well in the opposite case.
20. ' By a false reputation ofvirtue, which will spread
up to the time when subdued by further knowledge it
will disappear, the good renown of men is utterly
destroyed. Once destroyed, it is hardly able to shoot
forth anew.
21. 'Thus considering, I am about to abandon my
family and property, since those goods are the root of
strife and trouble, and worth avoiding like black-
hooded snakes with wrath-raised heads. It does not be-
come you, Your Majesty, to oppose my determination.
22. ' (Do not supply me with money.) You are
accustomed to show your attachment and gratitude
to your loyal servants, as becomes you, I know yet
;
what to a homeless mendicant would be the use of
money, which of necessity involves worldly goods and
passions ?
So speaking the Great Being persuaded the king
to give him his permission. After which he imme-
diately set out for the forest.
But his friends, relations, and clients met him, and
shedding tears and embracing his feet, tried to prevent
him. Some obstructed his way, placing themselves

:
70 GATAKAMALA.
1
before him with respectfully folded hands. Some
again endeavoured to lead him in the direction of
his house (with soft violence), by embraces and similar
persuasive practices. Others again were prompted by
their affection to address him in somewhat harsh terms,
expressing their blame in some way or other. Some
also tried to persuade him that he ought to have
regard to his friends and family, for whom he should
feel compassion. Others, too, directed their efforts to
convince him by argument, combining sacred texts
with deductions of reasoning, to the effect that the
state of a householder must be the holiest one.
There were others again who exerted themselves in
different ways to make him give up his design partly
;
dwelling on the hardships of the life in a penance-
grove, partly urging him to fulfil his obligations and
duties in the world to the end, partly expressing their
doubt as to the existence of anything like reward in
the other world. Now when he looked on his friends
thus opposing his world-renunciation and earnestly
endeavouring tohinder his departure for the forestwith
faces wet with tears, surely, this thought arose in his
mind
23. 'If a person acts inconsiderately, it is the duty
of those who claim to be his friends to care for the
good of their friend, be it even in a rough manner.
Such, indeed, is acknowledged to be the righteous way
of proceeding among the pious. How much the more,
if the good they advise be at the same time something
pleasant.
24. ' But as to them, how is it possible that prefer-
ring the home-life and boldly deterring me from the
forest-life as from the contact of some evil, they should
express the judgment of a sound mind ?
25. 'A dead man orone in dangerofdeath is a person
to be wept for, likewise one fallen from righteousness.
But what may be the meaning of this weeping for me
who am alive but desirous of living in the forest ?
26. ' Suppose the separation from me should be the
cause of their sorrow, why will they not dwell in the

! 1
XX. THE STORY OF THE TREASURER. I 7
forest with me ? If however they prefer their homes
to me, why are they prodigal of their tears ?
27. ' But granted that attachment to their family
prevents them from adopting the state of an ascetic,
how is it that the like consideration did not formerly
present itself to them on so many battle-fields ?
28. ' I have often experienced the heroism of their
sincere friendship in adversity, and now behold that
deep-rooted friendship, as it were, embodied in their
tears. Yet, notwithstanding this, it will seem mere
guile to me, since they do not follow my example.
29. 30. 'As surely as it is great regard for their
friend deserving regard, that makes their eyes full of
tears, their heads reverentially bent, their words inter-
rupted with sobs, while they are exerting themselves
to hinder my departure, so surely ought their love
to have the effect of bringing them to the praiseworthy
resolution to go and wander about with me, lest they
should appear like actors in a theatrical performance,
to the shame of the pious
!
51. 'If anybody be in distress, be he ever so wicked
a person, some two or three friends will keep with
him, at least; but for a man, however excellent by
virtue, it will be oh ! so hard, to get one single com-
rade, when setting out for the forest
32. 'Those who in battles, when danger was
imminent from furious elephants, used to set an
example (of fearlessness) to me, even they do not
follow me now, when I lead them to the forest.
Verily am I, are they, the same as we were before ?
2,3. ' I do not recollect having done them any wrong
that could cause the ruin of their attachment ... So
this behaviour of my friends may, perhaps, issue from
the care for what they consider my happiness.
34. ' Or is it rather my lack of virtues that hinders
them from being my companions in the forest ? For
who may possess the power of loosening hearts that
have been won by virtue ?
35. ' But why indulge in idle reflections about
these persons ? Of a truth, since they are unable to

I72 GATAKAMALA.
perceive the evils, however obvious, inherent in the
home-life, nor the virtues to be found in the penance-
groves, the eye of knowledge is shut to them !
36. ' They are not capable of parting with worldly
pleasures, the cause of suffering both in this world
and in the next, but forsake both the penance-grove
which frees from those sufferings, and me Fie upon
!
their infatuation
!
37, ' O, those very sins by the delusions of which
these friends of mine and the whole of the creatures
are prevented from tranquillity, I will crush down
forcibly whenever I shall have obtained by residence
in the penance-forest the excellent power of doing so!'
Of such a kind were his reflections. And after thus
making up his mind, he put aside the manifold
affectionate entreaties of his friends, made plain to
them his firm resolution in kind and gentle terms,
and set out for the penance-forest.
In this manner, then, an unfounded opinion of their
possession of some virtue acts upon the virtuous in the
same way as a stirring spur. Thus considering, one
ought to strive after the realisation of virtues. [For
this reason a pious man, being esteemed for his
virtues as a monk or as a lay-devotee, must strive
to be in fact adorned with the virtues fit for that
state. Further, this story may be adduced with the
object of showing the difficulty of finding companions
for a religious life.]
XXI. The Story of Kuddabodhi 1
.
(Cp. the Pali Gataka, No. 443, Fausb. IV, 22-27;
.ATari)api/aka II, 4.)
By keeping down his anger a man appeases his
enemies, but doing otherwise he will inflame them.
This will be taught as follows.
1 Though -Sura does not mention the Bodhisattva's name which he
bore in this existence, = yet it appears from the Pali redactions, that
Auatfabodhi, literally ' Little Bodhi,' is intended as his proper
name.

XXI. THE STORY OF ATUDDABODHI. 1/3
One time the Bodhisattva, that Great Being, was
born in this world in a certain noble Brahmanical
family, it is said, who enjoyed great renown for their
practise of virtues in a grand style, owned a large
and well-secured estate, were honoured by the king
and favoured by the gods. In course of time he
grew up, and having duly received the sacraments,
as he exerted himself to excel in the virtue of learning,
within a short time he became renowned in the
assemblies of the learned.
i. The fame of the learned unfolds itself in the
assemblies of the learned, in the same way as jewels
get their reputation with jewellers, as heroes are
known on the battle-field.
Now when the Great-minded One, according to his
constant observance of the Law in previous existences
and to the enlightenment of his mind by wisdom, had
familiarised himself with world-renunciation, his house
no longer pleased him. He understood that worldly
pleasures are the abode of many evils and sins, since
they are attended by a great deal of discomfort in
consequence of strife, quarrel, infatuation, and subject
to (losses of wealth either from the side of) the king,
or (because of) water, or fire, or thieves, or unfriendly
kinsmen so he was convinced that they can never
;
yield satisfaction. Accordingly, shunning them like
poisonous food and longing for the Self, he parted
with his fair hair and beard, resigned the delusive
brilliancy of a householder's dress, and putting on the
vile orange-coloured robes, embraced that glorious
state of the ascetic life disciplined by rules and
restrained by vows. His wife, who loved him much,
likewise cut off her hair, and forsook the care of
apparelling her body and beautifying it with orna-
ments. Then, only adorned by the natural beauty of
her form and virtues, she covered her limbs with the
orange-coloured robes, and followed her husband.
Now, when the Bodhisattva understood her deter-
mination of going with him to the penance-forest,
knowing that the delicate constitution of a woman

GATAKAMALA.
174
is unfit for the ascetic life, he spoke to her: 'My
dear, truly, you have now shown me your sincere
affection. Yet this be sufficient. Do not persist in
your determination of being my companion in the
forest. It would rather be suitable for you to take
up your abode in such a place, where other women
dwell who have forsaken the world; with them you
should live. It is a hard thing to pass the night in
forest-dwellings. Look here.
2. ' Cemeteries, desert houses, mountains, forests
infested by ferocious animals, are the resting-places
of the homeless ascetics; they take their rest in
whatsoever place they are when the sun sets.
3. ' Being intent on meditation, they always like
to walk alone, and are averse even to the sight of
a woman. Therefore, make up your mind to desist
from your purpose. What profit may you have from
that wandering life ? '
But she who had firmly resolved upon accompanying
him, answered him something like this, while her eyes
grew dim with tears
:
4. 5. ' If I should suppose my going with you a
matter of weariness rather than of joy, do you think
I should desire a thing which causes suffering to
myself and displeasure to you ? But it is because
I cannot bear to live without you, that you must
pardon this lack of obedience to your orders.'
And though he repeated his entreaties, she never
would turn back. Then the Bodhisattva gave up his
opposition, and silently suffered her companionship.
As the female /£akravaka goes after her mate, so
she went along with him in his wanderings through
villages and towns and markets.
One day after meal-time he performed the usual
rite of profound meditation (dhyana) in a lonely part
of some forest. It was a splendid landscape, adorned
with many groves of trees affording much shade, and
waited on, as it were, by the sunbeams peeping here
and there through the thick foliage with the softness
of the moonlight the dust of various flowers over-
;

XXI. THE STORY OF KUDDABODUl.
I75
spread the ground; in short, it was a fair spot. In
the afternoon he rose from his profound meditation,
and sewed rags together to make clothes *. And at no
great distance from him, she, the companion of his
homeless life, embellishing by the splendour of her
beauty the trunk of a tree in whose shade she was
seated like a deity, was meditating on such subject
and in such manner as he had enjoined her. It was
the season of spring, when gardens and groves are
at their loveliest. On all sides young and tender
shoots abounded the soft humming; of crowds of
;
bees roaming about was heard, as well as the cries
of joy uttered by the lascivious cuckoos the lakes
;
and ponds, adorned with laughing lotuses and water-
lilies, were an attraction for the eyes there blew soft
;
windsscentedwith the odours and perfumes of manifold
blossoms. To enjoy that magnificence of spring, the
king- of that country made a tour in the groves, and
came to that very spot.
6, 7. It does, indeed, afford gladness to the mind
to behold forest-regions at spring-time, when their
various blossoms and flower-clusters make them bright,
as if that season enveloped them with its pomp, when
the he-cuckoo and the peacock sing, the drunken bees
make their buzzing sound, when soft and fresh grass-
plots cover the earth and lotuses fill up the water-
basins. Then the groves are the play-grounds of
the Love-£od.
On seeing the Bodhisattva, the king respectfully drew
near to him, and after the usual ceremonial oTeetines
and complimentary words, sat down apart. Then, on
perceiving the female ascetic, that very lovely appari-
tion, the beauty of her figure perturbed his heart,
and though understanding that she must certainly
be the companion of his religious duties, owing to the
lasciviousness of his nature, he reflected on some
contrivance to carry her away.
8. But having heard of the transcendent power of
1 Pawsukulani sivyati sma,

I 76 GATAKAMALA.
the ascetics, that the fire of their wrath can shoot
a curse as its flame, he refrained from a rash deed
of contempt against him, even though the Love-god
had destroyed the moral checks (that might have
restrained him).
Then this thought entered his mind : ' Let me
examine the extent of his penance-obtained power.
Then I shall be able to act in a proper manner, not
otherwise. If his mind is ruled by passionate affection
for her, surely, he has no power gained by penance.
But if he were to prove dispassionate or to show little
interest in her, then he may be supposed to possess
that sublime power.' Having thus considered, the
king, desirous of proving that penance-power, spoke
to the Bodhisattva, as if he wished his good. ' Say,
ascetic, this world abounds in rogues and bold
adventurers. Why, it is not fit for Your Reverence
to have with you such a handsome person as this
companion of your religious duties in remote forests,
where you are destitute of protection. If she were
to be injured by somebody, certainly people would
censure me, too. Look here.
9, 10. ' Suppose, while living in these lonely regions,
some man disregarding both you, a penance-exhausted
ascetic, and Righteousness, were to carry her off by
force, what else could you do in that case but wail
on her account ? Indulging in anger, forsooth, agitates
the mind and destroys the glory of a religious life,
since it tends to the detriment of it. It is, therefore,
best to let her live in an inhabited place. Ofwhat use,
after all, is female company to ascetics ? '
The Bodhisattva said: 'Your Majesty has spoken
truth. Yet hear to what I would resort in such
circumstances.
11. 4 Who were to act in such a case against me,
Should pride incite or thoughtless rashness
move him,
In truth, I would, while living, not release him,
A rain-cloud like that never will endure dust.'
Then the king thought: 'He takes a great interest

'
XXI. THE STORY OF JL'UDDABODHI. I77
in her, he does not possess penance-power,' and
despising the Great Being, was no longer afraid of
injuring him. Obeying his passion, he ordered his
attendants who were in charge of his zenana : ' Go
my On
and fetch this female ascetic into zenana.'
hearing this order, she, like a deerassailed by a ferocious
animal, showed her fear, alarm, and dismay by her
(changed) countenance, her eyes filled with tears, and
overpowered by her grief, she lamented in a faltering
voice somewhat in this manner
:
12. 'To mankind, overcome by sufferings, the king
is the best refuge, it is said, like a father. But whose
help can be implored by him, to whom the king himself
acts as an evildoer ?
Alas The guardians of the world-quarters
13. ' !
okapalas) have been dismissed from their office,
(1
or they do not exist at all, or they are dead, since
they make noeffort to protect the oppressed. Dharma
himself is but a mere sound, I suppose.
14. ' But why do I reproach the Celestials, while my
lord himself is thus keeping silence, undisturbed by my
fate ? Are you not bound to protect even a stranger
who is ill-treated by wicked people ?
15. 'By the thunderbolt of his curse he might
change a mountain into dust, if he were to pronounce
the word " perish," and still, he dees not break silence,
whilst his wife is thus injured! And I must live to
see this, wretched woman that 1 am !
16. 'Or am I a bad person, scarcely deserving pity
after coming into this distress ? But ascetics ought to
behave with compassion towards any one in distress.
Is not this their proper line of conduct ?
17. 'I am afraid you bear in mind even now my
refusal to leave you, when you ordered me to turn
back. Alas Is then this catastrophe the happiness
I longed for ! through the fulfilment of my own wish
though contrary to yours ? —
While she thus lamented and what else could she
do, that female a — scetic, but cry and wail and weep in
piteous accents ? the royal attendants, obeying the
N

'
GATAKAMALA.
I 78
orders of the king, placed her on a chariot, and before
the very eyes of the Great Being carried her off to the
zenana. The Bodhisattva, however, had repressed his
powerful anger by the power of his tranquillity, and
was sewing his rags just as before without the slightest
perturbation, as calm and serene as ever. To him the
king spoke
:
18. 'Threatening words of indignation and anger
you uttered in a loud and strength-betraying voice,
out now, on seeing that beauty ravished before your
eyes, you keep quiet and are cast down because you
have no power.
19. 'Why, show your wrath, either by the strength
of your arm or by the splendid power you have accu-
mulated as the result of your penance. He who, not
knowing the compass of his own faculties, takes an
engagement he cannot keep, such a one loses his
splendour, you know.'
The Bodhisattva replied: 'Know that I did keep
my engagement, Your Majesty.
20. 'He who was ready in—that case against me
To act and struggled I did not release him,
But kept him down, made him by force be
quiet,
So you must own that I made true my promise.'
That excessive firmness of mind of the Bodhisattva,
proved by his tranquillity, did not fail to inspire the
And
king with respect for the virtues of the ascetic.
he began to reflect : ' This Brahman must have
hinted at something else, speaking thus, and I, not
understanding his mind, committed a rash action.'
This reflection arising within him, induced him to ask
the Bodhisattva
:
21. 'Who was that otherwho acted against you and
was not released by you, however much he struggled,
Whom
no more than rising dust is by a rain-cloud ?
did you quiet then ?
The Bodhisattva answered : ' Hearken, great prince.
22. 'He, whose forthcoming robs the insight and
without whose appearance a man sees clearly, rose

XXI. THE STORY OF JTUDDABODIII. I 79
within me, but I repressed him ; Anger is the name of
that being, disastrous to his fosterer.
23. 'He, at whose appearance the foes of man-
kind rejoice, rose within me, but I repressed him,
that Anger who would have caused gladness to my
enemies.
24. • Him who, when bursting forth, induces man to
nothing good and blinds the eye of the mind, him I did
subdue, O king Anger is his name.
;
25. 'Yea, I have destroyed that hideous-looking
ferocious monster rising up within me, that anger,
which becomes to him whom it has subdued the cause
of leaving his good and losingeven the profit obtained
before.
26. ' As fire, by the process of attrition, arises from
a piece of wood to the destruction of that very log, in
the same way wrath, breaking out by the false con-
ceptions it produces in the mind of a man, tends to
his ruin.
27. 'He who is notable to appease theheart-burning
fever of anger, when fire-like it bursts forth with
fierceness, such a man is little esteemed ; his reputation
fades away, just as moonshine, that friend of the
waterlilies, fades in the blush of dawn.
28. ' But hewho, not heeding insults from the side of
other people, considers anger as his real enemy, the
reputation of such a man shines with brightness, like
the auspicious lustre which streams down the disc of
the crescent.
' Further, anger is also attended by other noxious
qualities of importance.
29. 'An angry man, though resplendent with orna-
ments, looks ugly the fire of wrath has taken away
;
the splendour of his beauty. And lying on a precious
couch, he does not rest at his ease, his heart being
wounded by the arrow of anger.
30. ' Bewildered by wrath, a man forgets to keep
the side by which to reach the happiness suitable for
himself, and runs off on the wrong road, so that he
forfeits the happiness consisting in a good reputation,
N 2

'
ISO GATAKAMALA.
as the moon is deprived of its lustre in the dark part
of its menstrual course.
31. ' By wrath he throws himself headlong into his
ruin, in spite of the efforts of his friends to restrain
him. As a rule he gets into a stupid rage of hatred,
and the power of his mind being impaired, he is
unable to distinguish between what is good for him
and what is bad.
32. ' Carried away by his anger, he will commit
sinful actions to be repented of with many misfortunes
for centuries. Can enemies, whose wrath has been
provoked by severe injuries, do anything worse ?
33. ' Anger is our adversary within us, this I know.
Who may bear the free course of its insolence ?
34. ' For this reason I did not release that anger,
although it was strugfsrlms' within me. Who, indeed,
may suffer himself to overlook an enemy able to do
such mischief?
These heart-moving words and the marvellous for-
bearance he had proved by them to possess, softened
and converted the mind of that king who spoke
:
35. 'Worthy, indeed, of your tranquillity of mind
are these words you have spoken But, why use
! . . .
many words ? I was deceived because I did not
understand you.'
After thus praising the Bodhisattva, he went near to
him and throwing himself at his feet, confessed his sin.
And he dismissed also that female ascetic, after
obtaining her pardon, and offered himself to the
disposal of the Bodhisattva as his attendant.
In this manner a man by keeping clown his anger
appeases his enemies, but doing otherwise he will
inflame them. Thus considering, one ought to strive
after the suppression of anger. [This story is also to
be told in connection with such sayings as praise the
precept of forbearance, viz. ' in this manner unfriendly
feelings are set at rest by friendliness, and by self-
restraint hatred is not allowed to grow,' and ' in this
manner he who banishes anger acts to the benefit of

XXII. THE STORY OF THE HOLY SWANS. l8l
both.' Likewise when expounding the sinfulness of
ano-er, and treating of the high-mindedness of the
Tathagata.]
XXII. The Story of the Holy Swans.
(Comp. Pali Cataka, No. 533, Fausb.V, 337~354-)
The virtuous, even when in distress, behave in
such a manner as cannot be imitated by the impious ;
how much less are the latter able to follow up the con-
duct of the virtuous, when favoured by fortune ! This
will be taught as follows.
One time, it is told, the Bodhisattva was a king of
swans. He was the chief of a large tribe of swans,
numberingmany hundred thousands, who lived in Lake
Manasa. His name was Dhr/tarash/ra. The com-
mander of his army, who was called Sumukha1 was
,
skilled in the management of affairs, knowing the right
and the wrong policy very well his keen intellect
;
encompassed the objects and events over a large
extent of space and time born of an illustrious
;
family, he embellished the nobility of his extraction by
his talent, his courtesy, his modesty ; he was endowed
with the virtues of constancy, honesty, courage, and
distinguished by the purity of his conduct, mode of life,
and behaviour moreover he was capable of enduring
;
fatigue, vigilant and clever in military marches as well
as in battles, and bore a great affection to his master.
In consequence of their mutual love the grandeur of
their qualities shone the more and as they were in
;
the habit of instructing that flock of swans, as a teacher
and his foremost disciple would instruct all his other
pupils, or a father with his eldest son his other sons,
inculcating upon their mind a peaceable behaviour
towards others, and such other matters as lead to the
benefit of the creatures, they offered a spectacle for the
1 The original text has here this interpolation, 'who was the
presbyter Ananda at that lime,' of course bracketed by the editor.
Cp. the note on p. 164.

82 GATAKAMALA.
1
great admiration of the Devas, Snakes, Yakshas,
Vidyadharas, and holy ascetics who witnessed them.
i. As of a bird in the sky both wings are incessantly
occupied in holding up his body, so these two knew
no other business than that of supporting the body of
Salvation for their flock of swans.
Now that tribe of swans, being thus favoured by
them, attained a state of great plenty, in the same way
as mankind by the extension of righteousness and
material prosperity. Consequently that lake bore the
utmost beauty.
2, 3. Adorned by that tribe of swans, who by their
sound would call to mind the soft and lovely noise of
the anklets of women, that lake was splendid. When
in a mass, the swans resembled a moving grove
of lotuses. When dispersed or divided into separate
groups of unequal size, they made the lake surpass
even the beauty of a sky embellished with scattered
banks of clouds.
Enchanted with that exceeding splendour, which was
the effect of the virtue of that lord of swans intent on
the good of all creatures, and of Sumukha, his com-
mander-in-chief, crowds of Siddhas, 7?/shis, Vidya-
clharas, and deities often and in many places delighted
in conversing on the glory of those two.
4. ' Their magnificent figures resemble pure gold,
their voices utter articulate speech, righteousness is
the rule of their modest behaviour and their policy.
Whosoever they may be, they bear but the shape of
swans.'
The fame of those two, spreading through the
5.
world by the report of those superhuman beings who,
free from jealousy, celebrated their virtues, found a
general belief to such an extent, that it became a topic
of conversation in the councils of kings, where the
account of their glory circulated like a present.
Now in that time one Brahmadatta l was king in
1 Brahmadatta, the king of Benares, is the fabulous prince, during
whose reign a great number of the stories of the Pali C7at;ika-book
take place.

:
XXII. THE STORY OF THE HOLY SWANS. 183
Benares. Having often heard in his council his trust-
worthy officials and the foremost among the Brahmans
highly extol the extraordinary qualities of that lord of
swans and of his commander-in-chief, he became more
and more affected with curiosity to see them. So he
said to his ministers, who were very clever, having
studied many branches of science: 'Well, sirs, set.to
work the cleverness of your minds, and try to devise
some means by which I might obtain at least the sight
of those two excellent swans.' Then those wise minis-
ters let their thoughts range over the road of political
wisdom, and (having discovered by thinking the means
wanted) said to the king
6. ' The prospect of happiness allures the creatures
to withdraw from any place, Your Majesty. For this
reason the rumour of the existence of some extremely
good qualities conducive to their happiness may bring
them hither.
' Therefore, let Your Majesty deign to order a beau-
tiful lake, of the same kind as that where those lovely-
shaped swans are reported to live, but still surpassing
it in brilliancy, to be constructed here in one of your
forests which being done, you must make known by
;
proclamation, to be repeated every day, that you grant
safety to all birds. Perhaps the rumour of the sur-
passing excellence of this lake, conducive to their
happiness, may excite their curiosity and draw them
hither. Do but consider, Your Majesty.
7. ' As a rule happiness once obtained loses its charm,
and ceases to be taken into account; butsuch happiness
as rests upon hearsay seems lovely, and fascinates the
mind, because it is remote from the eyes.'
The king accepted their proposal, and had a great
lake, which by the splendour of its magnificence
rivalled with Lake Manasa, constructed in a short
time in a place not too near the park which skirted
his capital. It was a mostcharmingbasin ofpure water,
and very rich in water-plants, embracing various kinds
of lotuses and waterlilies padma, utpala, kumuda,
:
pu^arika, saugandhika, tamarasa, kahlara.

184 GATAKAMALA.
8. Flowery trees, bright with their quivering twigs,
surrounded its shore, as if they had taken possession
of that place in order to contemplate that lake.
9. Swarms of bees, as if attracted by its laughing
lotuses, which were rocking on its gently trembling
waves, roamed hovering over its surface.
io, 11. Here its beauty was enhanced by its various
waterlilies, sleepless through the gentle touch of the
moonbeams, which made them resemble patches of
moonshine piercing through the foliage. There the
pollen of lotuses and waterlilies, conveyed by the
finger-like waves, would ornament its shore as if with
£old wires.
12. In many other places, where it was covered
with the lovely petals and filaments of lotuses and
waterlilies, it showed a widespread splendour, as if it
bore a gift of homage.
13. Another beauty was due to the limpidity and
calmness of its water, which was so transparent as
to show the sharp contours and the fair hues of its
crowds of fishes, no less conspicuous while swimming
beneath its surface than they would have been, if
moving in the sky.
14. Near such places, where the elephants, dipping
their trunks in it, blew forth cascades of spray
glittering like a string of loosened pearls, it seemed as
if the lake carried waves ground to dust after being
driven upon rocks and scattered in the air.
15. Here and there it was perfumed, so to speak,
with the fragrances emanating- from the ointments used
by bathing Vidyadhara women, from the streams of
juice of elephants in rut and from the dust of its (own)
flowers.
16. Being so brilliant, that lake was like a general
mirror for the stars, the wives of the Moon-god. Gay
birds abounded, and their warbling resounded in it.
Such, then, was the lake he had ordered to be con-
structed, and which he gave to the whole nation of
birds to have the unobstructed use and enjoyment of
it. Accordingly, in order to inspire all birds with

'
XXII. THE STORY OF THE HOLY SWANS. I85
confidence, he ordered a proclamation, by which he
granted them security, to be repeated day after day.
It ran in these terms
:
1 7. ' The king is glad to give this lake, inclusive of
the groups of lotuses and waterlilies covering its
waters, to the birds, and grants safety to them.'
One time, when autumn having drawn away the
dark curtain of clouds, dispensed its beautiful gifts,
enlarging the horizon clear and pure, the lakes were
lovely to behold, with their limpid water and with the
full brilliancy of their clusters of lotuses disclosed. It
was the season when the Moon, with increased power
of rays, as it were, reaches the highest pitch of loveli-
ness and youthfulness, when Earth, adorned with the
harvest-bliss of manifold crops, offers a fair aspect, and
when the younger among the swans begin to show
themselves. Now, a couple of swans, who belonged
to that very tribe of the Bodhisattva, flew up from
Lake Manasa, and passing over different regions
overspread with autumn's mildness, at last came to the
realm of that king. And there they saw that lake and
the wonderful beauty caused by its flowers for its
;
lotuses, when expanded, made it glow as with flames,
and its waterlilies, when unclosed, gave it a laughing
aspect. They heard the echoes ofthe confused sounds
of crowds of birds and the humming of the bees who
were busily roaming over its flowers. They smelt
the scent of the dust of its lotuses and waterlilies
scattered about by the gentle, cool, and soft breezes,
which seemed to have the task of gliding over the
wreaths of its waves. Though accustomed to Lake
Manasa, those two swans were touched by the sur-
passing loveliness and splendour of that other lake
and this thought entered their mind : ' Oh ! our whole ;
tribe must come here !
18. Generally people, obtainingsome pleasure within
the reach of everybody, will in the first place remember
their friends, owing to the suggestion of their love.
That couple remained there, diverting themselves as
they best liked, till the next rainy season. At the

S6 GATAKAMALA.
]
commencement of that period, when masses of clouds
like hosts of the Daityas advance causing darkness,
yet not too thick and interrupted by flashes of light-
ning glittering like brandished weapons when the gay
;
troops of peacocks perform their dances and display
the beauty of their wide-opened feather-tails, while
uttering their loud and continual cries, as if they
exulted at the triumph of the clouds, and also the
smaller birds have become loquacious when brisk
;
winds blow, fragrant with the flower-dust of forest
trees: the sal, the kadamba, the arfuna, and the
ketaka, and produce a welcome coolness, as if they
were the breath of the forest when flocks of young
;
cranes, showing themselves in the sky, contrast with
the dark background of the clouds, so as to resemble
their rows ofteeth, so to speak; when the tribes ofswans
are anxious to leave, and give vent to their longing by
—
soft and gentle cries on that opportunity our couple
of swans returned to their Lake Manasa. And paying
their respects to their lord, they told him, first of the
regions they had visited, then gave him an account
of the surpassing advantages of that lake (whence they
had just returned). 'Your Majesty, south of Mount
Himavat,' they said, 'there lives at Benares a king of
men, named Brahmadatta, who has delivered to the
birds a large lake of marvellous beauty, possessing
delights of indescribable loveliness. All birds may
enjoy it at their free will and wish, and safety is war-
ranted to them by a royal decree which is made known
every day by proclamation. The birds divert them-
selves there as unrestrained and fearless as if they
stayed in their homes. When the rains are over,
Your Majesty ought to go there.' On hearing this, the
whole tribe of swans were affected with a strong desire
to see that lake. The Bodhisattva, then, fixing his
eyes with an inquisitive expression upon the face of
Sumukha, his commander-in-chief, said 'What do you
:
think about this ? ' Sumukha, after bowing his head,
answered : ' I deem it unfit for Your Majesty to go
there. Why ? Those delights of charming loveliness

XXII. THE STORY OF THE HOLY SWANS. 187
are, after all, but a kind of allurement, and here we
are in want of nothing. Generally speaking, the hearts
of men are false, their tender compassion is deceitful,
and under the guise of delusive sweet words and kind
attentions they conceal a cruel and wicked nature.
Will Your Hiehness deign to consider this.
19. 'Quadrupeds and birds are wont to express
their true feelings by the import of their cries. But
men are the only animals skilled in producing sound
meaning the contrary of their intentions.
20. 'Their language, of course, is sweet, well-
intentioned, and wholesome. Merchants also make
expenses in the hope of obtaining gain.
21. ' Therefore, Your Majesty, it is unfit at any time
to put confidence (in them) because of something as
A
trifling (as their words). line of conduct which is
dangerous and wrong, cannot be but unsuccessful, even
if followed in pursuit of some object.
' Should, however, the excursion to that lake be
indispensable, it is not suitable for us to stay there for
a long time, or to make up our minds to resolve to
take up our residence there we have only to go and,
;
after enjoying its magnificent beauties, return shortly.
Such is my advice.'
Now, as the tribe of swans, whose curiosity to see
the Benares lake was ever increasing, did not cease to
request the Bodhisattva again and again to set out
for that place, once on a bright autumn night, adorned
with the pure lustre of the moon, the asterisms, and
the stars, he complied with their wishes. And, accom-
panied by Sumukha and a numerous crowd of swans,
he set out in that direction, resembling the Moon-god
with his attendant band of (white) autumn clouds.
22. As soon as they beheld the charming splendour
of that lake, surprise mingled with gladness over-
whelmed their minds. When they entered it, they
added to it no less brilliancy by their gay shapes and
the lovely groups they formed, taking possession of it.
23. Owing to the manifold varieties of its sites, by
which it surpassed Lake Manasa, the)- were delighted,

88 GATAKAMALA.
1
and in time their attachment to the new place of abode
effaced Manasa from their hearts.
They heard the proclamation of safety, perceived
the freedom of movement of the birds residing there,
and were gladdened by the display of the beauty of
the lake. "Their delight rose to the highest degree
when they wandered over its waters, enjoying the
pleasure of one who makes an excursion in a park.
Now the guardians of that lake reported the arrival
of those swans to the king, saying : ' Your Majesty, two
excellent swans, who bear the very same shape and
are distinguished by the very same qualities as those
famous ones are said to possess, have arrived at Your
Majesty's lake, as if to enhance its beauty. Their
beautiful wings shinelikegold, theirbeaks and feethave
a lustre which even surpasses that of gold, their size
exceeds the average, and they have well-shaped bodies.
A retinue of many hundred thousands of swans have
come with them.' Having been thus informed, the
king selected among his fowlers one who was re-
nowned and recognised for his skill in the art of
bird-catching, and committed to him the honourable
charge of catching them. The fowler promised to do
so, and having carefully watched the places which
those two swans were in the habit of frequenting and
haunting, laid down on different spots strong snares well
concealed. Now, while the swans were wandering
far and wide over the lake, with minds cheerful and
rejoiced and without suspecting any mischief, trusting
the grant of safety, their lord got one foot entangled
in a snare.
24. Trustfulness, indeed, is pernicious. Aroused by
the subtle contrivances of those who inspire confidence,
it first obliterates the suspicion ofdanger, then displays
carelessness and want of policy.
Then the Bodhisattva, lest a similar misfortune
should befall also anybody else of his tribe, announced
by a special cry the dangerousness of the lake. Upon
which, the swans, alarmed at the capture of their lord,
flew up to the sky, uttering confused and dissonant

::
XXII. THE STORY OF THE HOLY SWANS. 189
cries of fear, without regarding each other, like soldiers
whose chief warrior has been killed. Yet Sumukha,
the commander-in-chief, did not withdraw from the
side of the lord of swans.
25. A heart bound by affection does not mind
imminent peril. Worse than death to such a one is
the sorrow which the miserable distress of a friend
inflicts on it.
To him the Bodhisattva said
:
26. ' Go, Sumukha, go ; it is not wise to linger here.
What opportunity couldst thou have of helping me
who am in this state ? '
Sumukha spoke
27. 'No final death can I incur, if I stay here, nor
shall I, if I go, be freed from old age and death.
I always attended on thee in thy prosperity. How,
master, should I be capable of leaving thee in thy
calamity ?
28. ' If I were to leave thee, prince of birds, on
account of such a trifle as the thread of my own life,
where could I find a shield against the rain-shower of
blame
?
29. ' It is not right, my Hege, that I should leave
thee in thy distress. Whatever fate may be thine,
I am pleased with it, O lord of birds.'
The Bodhisattva spoke
:
30. ' What other may be the fate of an insnared
How
bird than the kitchen ? can that prospect
please thee who art in the free possession of thy mind
and thy limbs ?
31. 32. ' Or what profit dost thou see for me or thy-
self or the whole of our kindred in the death of both
of us ? And what profit mayst thou explain to be in
giving up thy life on an occurrence, when that profit
is as little to be seen as level and unlevel in the
dark '
?
Sumukha spoke
23, 34. ' How, most excellent of birds, dost thou not
perceive the profit in following the path of Righteous-
ness ? Honouring the Law of Righteousness in the

190 (7ATAKAMALA.
right manner1 produces the highest profit. For this
reason I, knowing the precepts of Righteousness and
the profit arising therefrom, also moved by attachment
to thee, my liege, do not cling to life.'
The Bodhisattva spoke
:
35, 36. 'Verily, this is the law for the virtuous, that
a friend, minding his duty, shall not abandon his friend
in distress, even at the cost of his life. Now, thou
didst observe the Law of Righteousness, thou didst
show me thy devoted affection. Grant me then,
I pray thee, this last request. Fly away, I give thee
leave.
37. 'Moreover, the affair having taken this turn, it
is thy task, wise-minded one, to fill up the gap caused
to our friends by the loss of me.'
38. While they were thus conversing, vying with
each other in mutual affection, lo, the Nishada2
appeared, rushing upon them like the God of Death.
As soon as they became aware of his approach, the
two excellent birds became silent. Now, the Nishada
seeing that the tribe of swans had flown away, was
persuaded ' certainly, some one of them has been
caught ; and going round the different places, where
'
he had laid down his snares, discovered those two
foremost swans. He was surprised at their beauty,
and thinking both of them to be insnared, shook the
snares placed in their neighbourhood. But when he
perceived that one was caught and the other, loose
and free, was keeping him company, his astonishment
increased, and drawing near to Sumukha, he spoke
to him
:
39, 40. ' This bird, being caught in a strong snare,
loses his freedom of movement. For this reason
he cannot mount to the sky, although I approach.
But thou who art not fastened, who art free and
1 Instead of upa>('ita/z in the Sanskrit text, the Pali redaction has
apa/£ito. which no doubt is the true reading. I have translated
accordingly, comparing also stanza 36 tadarX'itas tvaya dharma^.
2 The fowler belonged to that low class of people.

' : '
XXII. THE STORY OF THE HOLY SWANS. 191
strong and hast thy winged carriage at thy disposal,
why dost thou not hastily fly up to the sky at my
arrival ?
On hearing- this, Sumukha addressed him with
human language in a voice which distinctly articulated
syllables and words, and by its sonorousness manifested
the firmness of mind of the speaker, being employed
to show his (virtuous) nature.
41,42. 'How is it, thou askest me, that I, being
able to go, do not go. Why, the cause thereof is
this. This bird here suffers the misfortune of being
insnared. Thou hast power over him, whose foot is
entangled in this strong snare, but he has power over
me by still stronger fetters, his virtues, by which he
has fastened my heart.'
Upon this the Nishada, affected with high admiration
and almost in ecstasy \ once more asked Sumukha.
43. ' Being afraid of me, the other swans left him
and flew up to the sky. But thou dost not leave him.
Say, what is this bird to thee ? '
Sumukha spoke
44. ' My king he : is, my friend he is, whom I love
no less than life, my benefactor he is, and he is in
distress. On this account I may never desert him,
not even in order to save my own life.'
And observing the feelings of growing tenderness
and admiration which appeared in the Nishada, he
continued
:
45. 'Oh! If this our conversation might lead to
a happy end, my friend If thou wert to obtain
!
the glory of a virtuous action by setting us free now!'
The Nishada spoke
46. ' I do not wish thee harm, and it is not thee
I have caught. Why then, go free and join thy
relations who will be glad at the sight of thee !
Sumukha spoke
:
47. 48. 'If thou dost not wish my sorrow, then thou
must grant my request. If thou art content with one,
1 Literally on whose body the hairs stood up.
:

'
192 GATAKAMALA.
well, leave him and take me. Our bodies have an
equal size and compass, and our age is the same,
I tell thee. So, taking me as a ransom for him, thou
wilt not lose thy profit.
O
49, 50. ' Why, sir, do consider it well. that thou
mayst be greedy to possess me Thou mayst tie me
!
first, and afterwards release the king of birds. Thus
doing, thou wouldst enjoy the same amount of gain,
thou wouldst have granted my request, thou wouldst
also cause gladness to the tribe of swans and obtain
their friendship, too.
51.' Now then, gladden the host of swans by setting
their lord at liberty, that they may see him again
in his resplendent beauty in the clear sky, resembling
the Moon released from the Lord of Daityas (Rahu).'
The Nishada, though accustomed to a cruel trade
and hard-hearted by practice, was much touched by
these words of the bird uttered in a firm yet soft tone
and imposing by their import. For they magnified
the attachment to one's master without minding one's
own and were a strong manifestation of the virtue
life,
ofgratitude. Overpowered byadmiration and respect,
he folded his hands, and lifting them up to Sumukha,
said : ' Well said, well said, noble being.
52, 53. ' If met with among men or deities, such
self-denial would pass for a miracle, as is practised
by thee claiming it thy duty to give up thy life for
the sake of thy master. I will pay thee my homage,
therefore, and set free thy king. Who, indeed, may
be capable of doing evil to him who is dearer to thee
than life ?
With these words the Nishada, without caring for
the mandate of his king, listening to the voice of his
compassion, paid honour to the king of swans, and
released him from the snare. And Sumukha, the
commander-in-chief, greatly rejoiced at the rescue of
his king, fixed a glad and kind look on the Nishada
and spoke
:
54. ' As thou hast rejoiced me now by the release
of the kino- of swans, O thou source of gladness to

XXIT. THE STORY OF THE HOLY SWANS. I93
thy friends, mayst thou in the same way be rejoiced
with thy friends and kinsmen for many thousands
of years
!
55. 'Then, that thy labour may not be fruit-
less, well, take me and also this king of swans, and
carrying us on thy shoulder-pole, free and unbound,
show us to thy king in his zenana.
56. • Beholding the king of swans with his minister,
this ruler, no doubt, will show thee his gladness by
a eift of riches larger than that thou didst dream of,
a source to thee of great rejoicing.
The Nishada acceded to his request, thinking, the
king must see at all events this marvellous couple
of swans, and placing them (in baskets) on his pole
unhurt and unbound, showed those excellent swans to
the king.
57. ' Deign to see,' quoth he, ' the wonderful present
I offer you, my lord. Here is that famous king of
swans, together with his commander-in-chief!'
On beholdingr those two foremost of swans, who
by the glittering splendour of their lovely figures
resembled two solid pieces of gold, the king filled with
amazement and exulting with gladness said to the
Nishada
:
58. ' How didst thou obtain possession of those two
who remain in thy hands, unhurt and unbound, though
able to fly away from thee who art on foot ? Tell
me
it at length.'
Being thus addressed, the Nishada bowing to the
king, answered
59-62. ' I ha : d laid down many snares, O so cruel
causes of pain, in pools and ponds, the places of recrea-
tion of the birds. Then this foremost of swans,
moving unsuspectingly, owing to his trustfulness, got
his foot entangled in a hidden snare. The other,
though free, was keeping him company, and entreated
me to take him in redemption for the life of his king,
littering in a human voice articulate and sweet-sounding
language. His ardent request derived its power from
his readiness to sacrifice his own life.
o

194 GATAKAMALA.
63. 'So great was the effect of his soft words and
his strong deeds in behalf of his master, that I was
converted to tenderness, and dismissed hislord together
with my own cruel temper.
64. ' After which, rejoiced at the release of the king
of birds, he returned many thanks and blessings to
me, and instructed me to go up in this manner to you,
that my labour, so he said, should not have been
a burden by lack of reward.
65. ' And so it is out of gratitude for the deliverance
of his king and in my behalf, that this most righteous
being, whosoever he may be, who under the outward
appearance of a bird roused in one moment tenderness
of mind in the heart of a person like me, has arrived
of his own accord together with his master at your
zenana.'
The king was filled by these words with great joy
and amazement. He assigned to the king of swans
a golden throne with a footstool, a seat well becoming
a king ; for it had brilliant feet glittering with the
lustre of various jewels, was spread with a most costly
and lovely cover, and provided with a sott cushion
on its back. To Sumukha he offered a bamboo seat
fit for a chief minister to sit upon. Then the Bodhi-
sattva, considering that it was now the proper time
to make a complimentary address, spoke to the king
in a voice as soft as the sound of anklets.
66. ' Thy body, adorned with lustre and loveliness,
O
is in good health, I hope, health-deserving prince.
And so, I hope, is also that other body cf thine which
is made up of thy righteousness. Does it frequently
emit, so to speak, its breath of pious discourses and
gifts ?
67. ' Thou hast dedicated thyself, hast thou not ?
to the task of protecting thy subjects, distributing
reward or punishment in due time, so as to make both
thy illustrious glory and the people's affection, together
with their welfare, always increase ?
68. ' Hast thou not the assistance of affectionate
and honest ministers, averse to fraud and skilled in

'
XXII. THE STORY OF THE HOLY SWANS. 195
the management of affairs, with whom to consider the
interest of thy subjects ? Thy mind is not indifferent
to this important matter, I hope ?
69. ' When the kings, thy vassals, after incurring
abatement of their splendour by thy policy and vigour,
entreat thee to show them mercy, thou wilt generously
follow the impulse of pity, I hope, without, however,
indulging" in trustfulness, which is nothing but the
sleep of carelessness ?
70. ' Are thy actions, tending to secure the un-
obstructed pursuit of dharma, artha, and kama, not
applauded by the virtuous, O hero among men, and
widespread in the world, so to say, by the effect of thy
renown ? And thy enemies have but sighs to hurt
them, hope ?
I
In reply to these questions the king, manifesting
by his gladness the placidity of his senses 3 spoke
,
to him
:
71. 'Now my welfare is assured in every respect,
O swan, for I have obtained the long wished-for
happiness of meeting with your holy persons.
72. 73. ' This man, having captured thee in the
snare, did not hurt thee, I hope, in the exuberance
of his joy with his pain-inflicting stick ? So it happens,
in fact, when there arises calamity to birds, that the
mind of those knaves, soiled by exulting joy, impels
them to sinful actions.'
The Bodhisattva spoke
:
74-77. ' I did not suffer, great king, while in that
most distressing condition, nor did this man behave
towards me at all like an enemy. When he perceived
Sumukha staying there, though uncaught, out of love
for me, as if he, too, had been caught, he addressed
him with great kindness, prompted by curiosity and
astonishment. Afterwards, having been propitiated
1 The placidity ofhis senses is indicative of his having subdued his
evil passions, so that he could give a satisfactory account of his royal
occupations. In the Pali redactions of our story, each question is
immediately followed by its answer, which is affirmative, of course,
and the wording ofwhich exactly corresponds to the question.
O 2

'
I96 GATAKAMALA.
by the gentle words of Sumukha, he released me from
the snare, and setting me free, showed respect and
honour to me. It is for this reason that Sumukha,
wishing this man's good, told him to bring us hither.
May then our arrival cause happiness also to him !
The king said
:
78, 79. ' Having eagerly longed for your arrival,
I bid welcome here to both of you. The sight of
you is a feast to my eyes and causes me extreme
gladness. As to that Nishada, I will bestow a rich
gift upon him presently. Having shown kindness
to both of you, he deserves a high reward/
Then the king honoured the Nishada by a munificent
pfift of great wealth. After which, he again addressed
the king of swans
:
80. ' Ye have come here to this residence, which is
yours, indeed. Pray, set aside, then, cramping reserve
with respect to me, and make known in what way
and how I may serve your wants. For my riches are
at your service.
81. 'A friend expressing his wants in frank speech,
causes a greater satisfaction to a wealthy man, than he
could obtain from his riches. For this reason, un-
reservedness among friends is a great benefit.'
Then, being also very curious to converse with
Sumukha, the king casting his admiring looks on him,
addressed him thus
:
82. ' Surely, new acquaintances are not bold enough
to speak frankly to the newly acquired friend, in whose
mind they have not yet got footing. Still, they will
use at least kind language, adorned by courteous
terms.
83. Tt is for this reason that I beg also Thy Honour
to favour me with thy conversation. So thou wouldst
realise my desireofacquiringthyfriendshipand increase
the gladness of my heart.'
On these words, Sumukha, the commander-in-chief
of swans, bowing respectfully to the king, spoke
:
84. ' A conversation with thee who art great Indra's
equal, is a kind of festival. Who, therefore, would not

XXII. THE STORY OF THE HOLY SWANS. I97
feel that this token of thy friendly disposition sur-
passed his wishes ?
85, 86. ' But would it not have been an unbecoming
act ofinsolence for an attendant to join in the conversa-
tion of the two monarchs, of men and of birds, while
they were exchanging lovely words of friendship ?
No, a well-educated person does not act in that way.
How, then, could I, knowing this, follow that way?
On this account, great prince, I was silent, and if I
need thy pardon, I deserve it.'
In reply to these words the king, expressing by
his countenance his gladness and admiration, eulogised
Sumukha.
Sy. 'Justly the world takes delight in hearing the
fame of thy virtues. Justly the king of swans made
thee his friend. Such modesty and accomplished
demeanour is displayed by none but those who have
subdued their inner self.
88. ' Therefore I sincerely trust that these friendly
relations, now commenced between us, will never be
broken off. The meeting of pious persons, indeed,
produces friendship.'
Then the Bodhisattva, understanding that the king
was eagerly desirous of their friendship and inclined
to show them his affection, addressed him in terms
of praise
:
89. ' Following the impulse of thy generous nature,
thou hast acted towards us as one should act to one's
best friend, although our acquaintance has only been
made just now.
90. 'Whose heart, then, would not be won, illus-
trious prince, by such honourable treatment as thou
hast shown us ?
91. 'Whatever profit thou expectest from relations
with me, O lord, orhowever important thou maystdeem
them, it is a matter of fact that thou hast displayed
thy hospitable disposition by practising hospitality,
O
thou lover of virtues
!
92. ' But this is no wonder in a self-subdued prince
such as thou, who bearest thy royal duties for the

I98 GATAKAMALA.
interest of thysubjects, intent on penance and profound
contemplation, like a Muni. Thou, in truth, hadst
but to follow the inclination of thy excellent nature to
become a storehouse of virtues.
93. ' It is virtues that procure to their possessor the
satisfaction of such praise, as I did celebrate of thee.
They afford happiness, but in the strongholds of vice
there dwells no bliss. What conscious being, then,
knowing this to be the constant law as to virtue and
vice, would resort to the wrong way which diverges
from his good ?
94. 'Not by military prowess nor by the strength
of his treasury nor by a successful policy will a prince
reach that high rank, which he may obtain even with-
out exertion and expense, if he but follow the right
path which consists in the cultivation of virtues.
95. ' Virtues are visited even by such bliss, as
attends the Lord of the Devas the virtuous alone
;
attain humility virtues alone are the sources of
;
glory; it is on them that the magnificence of sover-
eignty rests.
96. ' Virtues alone, possessinggreater loveliness than
moonshine, are able to appease enemies, be their mind
never so ferocious by indulgence in jealous anger and
pride, be theirselfishness never so deep-rooted byalong-
continuance of hatred.
97. ' For this reason, O sovereign, whose rule earth
obeys with its proud kings who bow to thy lustre, foster
the love of virtues in thy people, setting them an
example by the undiminished splendourof thy modesty
and the rest of thy virtues.
98. ' The good of his subjects is the first care of
a king, and the way leading to it tends to his bliss
both (in this world and in the next) l . And this end
will be attained, if the king loves righteousness ; for
people like to follow the conduct of their ruler 2 .
1 Or perhaps: tends to the happiness of both (his subjects and
himself).
2 Cp. Story XIII, stanzas 38, 39.

XXII. THE STORY OF THE HOLY SWANS. 199
99. ' Mayst thou, then, rule thy land with righteous-
ness, and may the Lord of the Celestials have thee in
his guard But though thy presence purifies those
!
who rest on thee, yet must I leave thee now. The
sorrow of my fellow-swans draws me to them, so to
speak.'
The king and all those present approved of the
words spoken by the Bodhisattva. Then he dismissed
both excellent swans in the most honourable and kind
terms.
The Bodhisattva mounted upward to the sky,
which, adorned by the serene beauty of autumn, was
as dark-blue as a spotless sword-blade, and followed
by Sumukha, his commander-in-chief, as by his
reflected image, joined his tribe of swans. And those,
by the very sight of him, were filled with the
utmost gladness.
100. And after some time that swan, a passionate
lover as he was of compassion for his neighbour, came
back to the king with his swans, and discoursed to
him on the Law of Righteousness. And the kino- with
respectfully bowed head in return honoured him.
In this way, then, the virtuous, even when in dis-
tress, behave in such manner as cannot be imitated
by the impious how much less are the latter able to
;
follow up the conduct of the virtuous, when favoured
by fortune [This story is also to be adduced, when
!
praising pious language: 'In this manner a pious
language conduces to the good of both V Likewise,
when treating of pious friends : ' In this manner they
who possess a pious friend will be successful even in
dangerous circumstances.' Also to exemplify the fact
of the presbyter Ananda having been a companion (to
the Lord) still in previous births : ' So this presbyter
sharing the vicissitudes of the Bodhisattva, cherished
affection and veneration (for the Lord) for a long, long
time.']
1 Viz. the speaker and the listener.

200 GATAKAMALA.
This much-renowned tale of the two fabulous swans is thrice told in
the collection of Pali Gatakas, edited by Fausboll No. 502 Ha?«sa-
:
g-atakam, No. 533 iTullaha#zsagr;it., and No. 534 Mahab^/sa^at.
Of them No. 502 is almost an abridgement of No. 534. These two
show another redaction of the tale than that which is contained in
No. 533. Our author used some recension closely related to the
redactionofNo. 533 some ofhis stanzas are almost identical with the
;
Pali gathas.
From a note in Tawney's translation of the Kathasaritsagara
(II, p. 506) I learn that Ra^endralala Mitra found the story of the
golden swans in the Bodhisattva Avadana, one of the Hodgson MSS.
It is probable that the work quoted is the Bodhisattvavadanakalpalata,
which is being edited by Sara£ Aandra Das, in the Bibliotheca Indica.
But as the story in question has not yet been published and the list of
contents in the preface of that work is here of no help, I could not
find out in which pallava it is told.
Moreover compare Kathasaritsagara 3, 26-35 an^ Ir4> x7 f°N»
The self-denial of the commander-in-chief has its counterpart in the
behaviour of the sarasa bird in the main story of the third book of
the Hitopadcs-a.
XXIII. The Story of Mahabodhi.
(Cp. the Pali Gataka, No. 528, Fausb. V, 227-246.)
The compassion of the virtuous for those who once
were their benefactors, does not diminish even by
injuries done to them. Such is their gratitude, and to
this extent have theyimbibed the virtue of forbearance.
This will be taught as follows.
In the time when the Lord was a Bodhisattva, he
was a wandering ascetic, it is said, named Mahabodhi 1 .
When still a householder, he had made a regular and
thorough study of such branches of learning as are
esteemed in the world, and being curious of line arts,
had also acquainted himself with them. Afterwards,
having renounced the world, as he was exerting
himself for the benefit of the world, he directed his
mind more earnestly to the study of the law-books,
and obtained the mastership in that science. Thanks
to his possession of a store of merit, the loftiness of his
1 This name means ' (possessing) great wisdom.'

XXIII. THE STORY OF MAIIABODHI. 201
wisdom, his knowledge of the world, and his superior
skill in the art of conversing with men, it happened
that to whatever country he went, his company was
sought for, and his person cherished by the learned
as well as by such princes as patronized the learned,
by Brahmans living in the world as well as by other
ascetics.
i. Virtues acquire splendour by their appearing on
the ground of meritorious actions 1 but it is by the
,
gracefulness of their practice, that they will gain the
affection of men and partake of the most distinguished
worship even from the side of one's enemies, obliged
to do so by regard for their own reputation.
Now that Great-minded One, wandering about with
the object of doing good to men. in villages, towns,
markets, countries, kingdoms, royal residences, reached
the realm of a king who, having heard of the splendour
of his many virtues, was rejoiced at the report of his
arrival. Having been informed of it long before, he
had a dwelling-place built for him in a lovely spot in
his own pleasure-gardens. At his arrival, he made him
enter his kinedom in the most honourable manner,
eoine to meet him and showing him other tokens
of esteem. He attended on him and listened to his
teaching, as a pupil observes his spiritual teacher.
2. To a lover of virtues, the arrival of a virtuous
guest, coming confidingly to his wealth-abounding
home, is a kind of feasta .
And the Bodhisattva for his part favoured him with
daily discourses on religious subjects, delightful to
both the ears and the heart, by which he gradually
prepared him to walk on the road to salvation.
Those who love the Law desire to give religious
3.
instruction even to such people as have not shown
them their attachment, they will do so out of com-
1 Our author never forgets to point out the importance of the
possession of much puwya, cp. Story XIV, p. 133, and Story XV,
p. 136.
2 Cp. Story VI, stanza 30.

202 GATAKAMALA.
How
passion for their neighbour. should they not
teach him who, like a pure vessel, is eager to accept
their instruction and to manifest his love ?
But the ministers of that king, though receiving the
honour due to their learning, and his counsellors,
though also treated with respect, could not bear the
constantly increasing honour paid to the magnificence of
the Bodhisattva's virtues. Jealousy had tainted their
minds.
4. The glory and renown of a man who shows his
ability to fascinate mankind by the superiority of his
virtues, suffices to kindle the fire of envious feeling
in those who are honoured only on account of their
professional skill.
They were unable to vanquish him in open contest
in disputes on topics of the law-books, and at the
same time were sorry to see the king's constant
attachment to the Law of Righteousness. Then, in
order to rouse his disaffection towards the Bodhisattva,
they proceeded almost in this manner. 'Your Majesty,'
so would they say, ' should not put his confidence in
that wandering monk Bodhi. It is evident that he
must be a kind of spy of some rival king, who having
learnt Your Majesty's love of virtues and inclination
towards Righteousness, avails himself of this clever
fellow with his soft, smooth, and deceitful tongue, to
entice you into baleful habits and to be informed of
your actions. For this devotee of Righteousness, as
he pretends to be, instructing Your Majesty exclusively
to practise compassionateness and to foster the miser-
able feeling of shame, induces you to take upon yourself
such vows of a religious life as are incompatible with
your royal and military duties, prejudicial to the pro-
motion of material interests (artha) and pleasures
(kama), and subject to the dangers attending a bad
policy. Indeed, it is out of pure charity that, in the
way of exhorting you, he suggests the line of conduct
you should follow nevertheless, he likes to converse
;
with the messengers of other kin^s, and is far from
beine a stranger to the contents of the manuals of

XXIII. THE STORY OF MAHABODHI. 203
political wisdom which treat of the duties of kings.
Accordingly this matter fills our hearts with appre-
hension.' Such language spoken with the intention of
causing estrangement, being often repeated and by
many who feigned to have in view the good of the
king, could not fail to have its effect. His attachment
ancfveneration for the Bodhisattva shrunk under the
influence of his distrust, and his disposition towards
him became changed.
Whether a succession of loud-roaring tremendous
5.
thunderbolts or of those other thunderbolts, whose
name is calumny, pierce the ears of men, does there
exist anybody who can remain unshaken by them,
trustful and firm in the confidence of his own power ?
Now, as the absence of trust lessened the king's
affection and veneration for the Great Being, the king
was no more, as before, careful to pay him due honour.
But the Bodhisattva, owing to his pure-heartedness,
did not mind it ; ' kings are distracted by many occu-
pations,' so he thought. Still, when he perceived the
coolness and lack of attention from the side of the
courtiers, he understood that he had incurred the king's
displeasure, and taking his triple staff, his waterpot
and the other utensils of a wandering ascetic, made
preparations for his departure. The king, hearing his
resolution, as he was partly moved by a remnant of
his old affection, partly would not neglectan act of
politeness and civility, went up to him, and in order to
show his trouble and pretended desire to retain him,
said
6. : ' For what reason are you determined to go away,
leaving us all of a sudden ? Have you perhaps to
complain of some lack of attention on our part,
which has roused your fears ? If this is the case, you
suspect us without reason, it must have been an
omission.'
The Bodhisattva replied
:
'My departure has a good reason. Not that
7.
so trifling a matter as ill-treatment has irritated
me, but because you have ceased to be a vessel of

204 GATAKAMALA.
righteousness in consequence of your deceitful beha-
viour, for this reason I set out from hence.'
At this moment the kino-'s favourite doer came
running- to the Bodhisattva in a hostile manner and
barked at him with wide-opened mouth. Pointing at
this dog, he said again : ' Why, let this animal bear
witness to the case, Your Majesty.
8, 9. ' Formerly this dog was accustomed to fondle
me then he was imitating your example. But now
;
he betrays your feelings by his barks, for he does not
know how to feign. Surely, he must have heard from
you harsh words on my account, as will happen when
former affection has been destroyed and now, for-
;
sooth, he is acting up to them, that he may please
you for such is the behaviour of servants who eat
;
the bread of their lord.'
This reproof filled the king with shame, and made
him cast down his eyes. The acuteness of mind of
the Bodhisattva touched him and moved his heart.
He thought it was not proper to continue his false
protestations of love, and bowing reverentially to him,
spoke
:
10. ' You were indeed the subject of such conversa-
tion as you said. Audacious people used that language
in my council, and I, absorbed in business, overlooked
the matter. You must forgive me, then, and stay here.
Pray, do not go.'
The Bodhisattva said : ' Surely, it is not on account
of ill-treatment that I want to go, Your Majesty, nor
am I driven out by resentment. But considering, it is
now no proper time to stay here, Your Majesty, for
this reason I go. Do but take this in view.
11. 'If, eitherby attachment or from apathy, I should
not go of my own accord now, as I needs must, after
the honourable hospitality shown to me has lost its
beauty, having become an ordinary one, verily, would
it not hereafter come to the point that I should be
seized by the neck and turned out ?
12. ' Not with a heart sore with hatred am I about
to leave you, but considering this the proper course to

XXIII. THE STORY OF MAHABODHI. 205
follow now. Former benefits are not effaced from the
heart of the pious by the stroke of one affront.
13. ' But an ill-disposed man is not fit to be had for
a patron, no more than a dried-up pond will serve him
who is in want of water. If profit may be gained from
the side of such a one, it requires much care to acquire
and the result will be meagre and not unmixed.
it,
'He, however, who desires ease and dislikes
14.
trouble, must attend only on such a patron who has
composed his mind and by his placidity resembles
a great lake of pure water in autumn. So is the well-
known line of conduct approved of men.
15.' Further, he who is averse to one intent on
showing his attachment likewise he who, attending on
;
somebody who dislikes him, afflicts himself; t—hirdly,
he who is slow in remembering former benefits such
persons bear only the shape of a man and raise doubts
as to their real nature.
16. ' Friendship is destroyed both by lack of inter-
course and profusion of attentions, also by frequent
requests. Therefore, desiring to protect this remnant
of our affection from the dangers of my residing here,
I now take my leave.'
The king said : ' If Your Reverence has a strong
determination to go, thinking your departure to be
indispensable, pray, deign to favour us by coming back
here again, will you ? Friendship ought to be kept
safe also from the fault of lack of intercourse, did you
not say so ? ' The Bodhisattva replied : 'Your Majesty,
sojourning in the world is something subject to many
hindrances, for a great many adversaries in the shape
of various calamities attend it. Thus considering,
I cannot make the positive promise, that I shall come
ao-ain. I can only express my wish to see you another
time, when there may be some indispensable reason
for coming.' Having in this way appeased the king,
who dismissed him in the most honourable manner, he
set off from his realm, and feeling his mind troubled
by intercourse with people living in the world, took
up his abode in some forest-place. Staying there,

206 GATAKAMALA.
he directed his mind to the exercise of meditation and
before long came to the possession of the four ecstatic
trances (dhyana) and the five kinds of transcendent
knowledge (abhi^a).
Now, while he was enjoying the exquisite happiness
of tranquillity, the remembrance of the king, accom-
panied by a feeling of compassion, appeared to his
mind. And, as he was concerned about the present
state of that prince, he directed his thoughts towards
him, and saw 1 that his ministers were each enticing
him to the tenets of the (false) doctrine which he
professed. One among them endeavoured to win
him for the doctrine according to which there should
be no causality, taking for examples such instances,
where it is difficult to demonstrate causality.
17. 'What,' said he, 'is the cause of the shape, the
colour, the arrangement, the softness and so on of the
stalks,' the petals, the filaments and the pericarps of
the lotuses ? Who diversifies the feathers of the birds
in this world ? In just the same manner this whole
universe is the product of the work of essential and
inherent properties, to be sure.'
Another, who held a Supreme Being (lsvara) for the
first cause, expounded him the tenets of his lore.
18. 'It is not probable that this universe should exist
without a cause. There is some being who rules it,
Eternal and One. It is He who in consequence of
the fixation of His mind on His transcendental volition,
creates the world and again dissolves it.'
Another, on the contrary, deceived him by this
doctrine This universe is the result of former actions,
:
which are the cause of fortune, good and ill personal
;
energy has no effect at all to modify it.
19. ' How, indeed, may one being create at the
same time the manifold and boundless variety of the
different substances and properties ? No, this universe
is the product of former actions. For even he who
1 Viz.as the effect ofhis divine eye (divyazw £akshu£), one ofthe
five abhi^/las.

XXIII. THE STORY OF MAI1ABODHI. 207
is skilled in striving for his happiness comes into
mishap.'
Another again enticed him to be solely attached to
the enjoyment of sensual pleasures, by means of such
reasoning as is heard from the adherents ofthe doctrine
of annihilation.
20. ' Pieces of wood, differing in colour, properties,
and shape, cannot be said to exist as the result of
actions, and yet they exist, and once perished they do
not o-row up again. Something similar is to be said of
thisworld. For this reason one mustconsider pleasures
the main object of life.'
Another, pretending to instruct him in his royal
duties, recommended to him such practices asare taught
in the science of the Kshatriyas, and which, following
the winding paths of political wisdom (niti), are soiled
by cruelty and contrary to righteousness (dharma).
21. 'You must avail yourself of men, as of shady
trees, considering them fit objects to resort to. Ac-
cordingly, endeavour to extend your glory by showing
them gratitude, only as long, until your policy ceases to
want their use. They are to be appointed to their task
in the manner of victims destined for the sacrifice.'
So those ministers desired to lead the king astray,
each on the path of his own false doctrines.
The Bodhisattva, then, perceiving that the king,
owing to his intercourse with wicked people and his
readiness to allow himself to be guided by others
whom he trusted, was about to fall into the precipice
of false doctrines, was affected with compassion and
pondered on some means of rescuing him.
22. The pious, in consequence of their constant
practice of virtues, retain in their mind the good done
to them, whereas the evil they experienced drops from
their mind, like water from a lotus-petal.
Having taken his resolution as to the proper thing
to be done in the case, he created in his own hermitage,
bydint ofmagic, a large monkey, whose skin he stripped
off, making the rest of his body disappear. Wearing
that skin, created by himself, he presented himself at

!
208 GATAKAMALA.
the entrance-gate of the king's palace. After being
ushered in by the doorkeepers, he was admitted to the
royal presence. He passed successively the guards
who were posted outside, and the different courts
filled with officers, Brahmans, military men, mes-
sengers, and notable townsmen, and entered the
audience-hall, the doors of which were kept outside
by doorkeepers with swords and staves the king was
;
sitting on his throne surrounded by his assembly of
learned and wise men, magnificently dressed and
orderly arranged. The monarch went to meet him,
and showed him every honour and respect due to
a guest. After the usual exchange of compliments and
kind reception, when the Bodhisattva had taken the
seat offered to him, the king, who was curious about
that monkey-skin, asked him how he got it, saying :
' Who bestowed this monkey-skin on the Reverend,
procuring by that deed a great favour to himself?'
The Bodhisattva answered : ' I got to it by myself,
Your Majesty, I did not receive it from anybody else.
While sitting or sleeping on the hard ground strewed
only with thin straw, the body suffers, and the religious
duties cannot be performed at ease. Now, I saw
a large monkey in the hermitage and thought so within
myself : " Oh ! here is the right instrument I want to
perform -my religion, if I had but the skin of this
monkey ! sitting or sleeping on it, I shall be able to
accomplish the rules of my religion, without caring
even for royal couches spread with the most precious
clothes." In consequence of this reflection, after
subduing the animal I took his skin.' On hearing
that account, the king who was polite and well-
educated replied nothing to the Bodhisattva, but
feeling something like shame, cast down his eyes.
His ministers, however, who before that already bore
a grudge to the Great Being, seized this opportunity
of declaring their opinion, and looking with beaming
faces at the king and pointing at the Bodhisattva,
exclaimed : ' How entirely the Reverend is devoted to
the love of his religion which is his only delight

' !
XXIII. THE STORY OF MAHABODHI. 209
What a constancy is his ! What ability to put into
effect the best means for the realisation of his aims
It is a wonder that being alone and emaciated by
penance, he was able to subdue so large a monkey,
who had just entered his hermitage! At all events,
may his penance be successful ' ! ' In reply to
them, the Bodhisattva, without losing his placidity
of mind, said : ' Your honours, blaming me, should
not disregard the fair tenets of your doctrines. This
is not the way by which to make the glory of learning
shine. Your honours must consider this.
23. 'He who despises his adversaries with such
words as are destructive to his own doctrine, such
a one, so to speak, wishes the dishonour of his enemy
at the cost of his own life.'
After thus reproaching those ministers collectively,
the Great Beinir, wishing" to revile them once more
individually, addressed that minister who denied
causality in these terms
:
24. ' You profess that this universe is the product
of essential and inherent properties. Now, if this be
true, why do you blame me ? What fault is mine,
if this ape died in consequence of his nature ? There-
fore, I have rightly killed him.
25. ' If, however, I committed a sin by killing him,
it is evident that his death is produced by an (external)
cause. This being so, you must either renounce
your doctrine of non-causality or use here such reason-
ing as does not befit you.
26. ' Further, if the arrangement, colour &c. of the
stalks, petals &c. of lotuses were not the effect of
some cause, would they not be found always and
everywhere ? But this is not so, they are produced
from seeds being in water &c. where this condition
;
is found, they appear, not where it is not found.
' This, too, I would propound to Your Worship, to
consider it well.
1 The last words are the usual complimentary blessing said to
ascetics. When asking after their health, it is similarly said : 'is
your penance successful ?
P

!
2IO GATAKAMALA.
27. 'He who denies the agency of cause by means
of reasoning- with arguments, does not such a one desert
his own tenets : ? On the other hand, if he is averse
to the use of argument, say, what will he do with his
sole tenet (not supported by argument) ?
28. ' And he who, not perceiving the cause in some
particular case, proclaims for this very reason, that
there does not exist causality at all, will not such
a one, when he learns the manifest power of
causality in that case, grow angry at it and oppose it
with invectives ?
29. ' And if somewhere the cause is latent, why do
you say with assurance, it does not exist ? Though it
is, it is not perceived for some other cause, as for
instance the white colour of the sun's disc is not seen
at sunset.
' Moreover, sir,
30. ' For the sake of happiness you pursue the
objects you desire, and will not follow such things as
are opposed to it. And it is for the same purpose
that you attend on the king. And notwithstanding
this, you dare deny causality
31. 'And, if nevertheless you should persist in your
doctrine of non-causality, then it follows that the death
of the monkey is not to be ascribed to any cause.
Why do you blame me?'
So with clear arguments the High-minded One
confounded that advocate of the doctrine of non-
causality. Then addressing himself to the believer
in a Supreme Being, he said : ' You, too, never ought
to blame me, noble sir. According to your doctrine,
the Lord is the cause of everything. Look here.
32. 33. 'If the Lord does everything, He alone is
the killer of that ape, is He not ? How can you bear
such unfriendliness in your heart as to throw blame on
me on account of the fault of another ? If, however,
you do not ascribe the murder of that valiant monkey to
1 As far as using argumentbymeansofreasoningimplies adherence
to causality. Moreover, the word hetu the Bodhisattva employs here
means both 'cause' and 'reason.'

'
XXIII. THE STORY OF MAHABODHI. 211
Him because of His compassionateness, how is it that
you loudly proclaim, the Lord is the cause of this
Universe
?
' Moreover, friend, believing, as you do, that every-
thing is done by the Lord ',
34. ' What hope have you of propitiating the Lord
by praise, supplication, and the like ? For the Self-
born Being works those actions of yours himself.
35. ' If, however, you say, the sacrifice is performed
by yourself, still you cannot disavow that He is the
author of it. He who is self-acting out of the fulness
of His power, is the author of a deed, no other.
36. 37. 'Again, if the Lord is the performer of all
sins, however many there are committed, what virtue
of His have you in view that you should foster
devotion to Him ? On the other hand, if it is not He
who commits them, since He abhors wickedness, it
is not right to say that everything is created by the
Lord.
3S, 39. ' Further, the sovereignty of the Lord must
rest either on the lawful order of things (Dharma) or
on something else. If on the former, then the Lord
cannot have existed before the Dharma. If effected
by some external cause, it should rather be called
"bondage;" for if a state of dependency should not
bear that name, what state may not be called
" sovereignty ? "
1 Nevertheless, if in spite of this reasoning, attached
to the doctrine of Devotion2 and without having well
reflected on its probability or improbability,
40. ' You persist in holding the Supreme Being and
Lord for the sole cause of the whole universe, does it,
then, become you to impute to me the murder of that
chief of monkeys, which has been decided by the
Supreme Being ?
1 The Bodhisattva is much helped here bythe double sense implied
by the words sarvam Tjvarakrriam, meaning 'all is created by the
Lord' as well as 'everything is done by the Lord.'
2 The beliefin a Supreme Being,Lord (Lrvara),is in itselfofcourse
also a beliefin the strong effectiveness ofdevotion (bhakti).
P 2

GATAKAMALA.
2 I2
So reasoning with a well-connected series of con-
clusive arguments, the High-minded One struck dumb,
so to speak, the minister who was an adherent of the
Lord (irvara)-supreme cause. And turning to that
minister who was a partisan of the doctrine of former
actions, he addressed him in a very skilful manner,
saying : ' No more does it become you, too, to
censure me. According to your opinion, everything
is the consequence of former actions. For this reason,
I tell you,
41. 'If everything ought to be imputed exclusively
to the power of former actions, then this monkey has
been rightly killed by me. He has been burnt by the
wild fire of his former actions. What fault of mine is
to be found here that you should blame me ?
42. ' On the other hand, suppose I did a bad action
in killing the ape, I must be the cause of his death,
not his former actions. Further, if you state, that
karma (always) produces (fresh) karma, nobody will
reach final emancipation1 in your system.
43. ' Verily, if something like this should be seen :
happiness enjoyed by him who lives in circumstances
productive of suffering, or sufferings visiting such
a one whose circumstances are instruments ofhappiness,
then we should have the right to infer, it is beyond
question, that good and evil fortune depend exclusively
on former actions.
44. ' But, in fact, this rule as to the appearance of
happiness and sufferings is nowhere seen. Con-
sequently, former actions are not the sole and entire
cause of them. Further, it is possible that there
ceases to be new karma. And this lacking, whence
should you get the " old karma " (indispensable for the
maintenance of the Universe) ?
45. ' If, nevertheless, you persist in your doctrine of
the former actions, for what reason do you judge me
to have caused the death of that ape ? '
Final emancipation necessarily implies cessation of actions, for it
is the same thing as total extinction.

XXIII. THE STORY OF MAHABODHI. 213
In this manner the High-minded One, expounding
irrefutable arguments, put him to silence so that it
seemed as if he had made him take the vow of
silence. Next he said smilingly to that minister
who was an adherent of the doctrine of annihilation
' How extremely eager your honour is to blame me, :
if at least you really are a partisan of the doctrine 'of
annihilation.
46. ' If there does not exist anything like a future
existence after death, why should we avoid evil
actions, and what have we to do with the folly of
holding good actions in esteem ? He alone would
be wise who behaves according to impulse, as he
likes best. If this doctrine be true, it is right indeed,
that I killed that ape.
47, 48. ' If, however, it is fear of public opinion
which causes such a one to eschew bad actions by
following the path of virtue, he will, nevertheless, not
escape the criticism of public opinion, because of the
contradiction between his words and his deeds nor
:
will he obtain the happiness presenting itself on the
road of his destiny, owing to the same awe of public
opinion. Is, then, such a one, allowing himself to be
misled by a fruitless and delusive doctrine, not the
meanest of simpletons?
' As to your statement, when you said :
49. '" Pieces of wood, differing in colour, properties
and shape, cannot be said to exist as the result of
actions, and yet they exist, and once perished they do
not grow up again. Something similar is to be said
of this world,'' pray, tell me, what reason have you for
believing so, after all ?
50. ' If, notwithstanding this, you persist in your
attachment to the doctrine of annihilation, what
reason is it that you should censure the murderer of
a monkey or a man ? '
So the Great Being silenced that adherent of
annihilation by means of a refutation of conspicuous
elegance. Then he addressed that minister who was
so skilled in the science of princes. For what reason,'
'

214 GATAKAMALA.
he said, ' do you also censure me, if you really consider
the line of conduct as taught in the love of political
science to be the rio;ht one ?
51. ' According to that doctrine, in truth, deeds
good or evil are to be performed for the sake of
material profit having once risen, a man shall bestow
;
his wealth, indeed, for his benefit on actions of
righteousness (dharma 1
).
' On this account I tell you.
52. 'If for the sake of personal interest honest
proceedings may be neglected even with respect to
affectionate relations 2 what reason have you to
,
censure me about that ape whom I killed for the sake
of his skin, putting into effect the policy taught also
in your books ?
533 . 'On the other hand, if such a deed is to be
blamed for its cruelty, and is certain to have evil
consequences, by what means do you resort to a lore
which does not acknowledge this ?
54. ' Now, if such is the manifestation of what is
called "policy" in your system, say, of what kind may
be the error, called " want of policy " ? Oh ! the
audacious who, despising mankind, propound injustice
by the way of authoritative law-books
!
55.—' Nevertheless, if you maintain that false doc-
trine is it no — t prescribed in the books of your sect in
plain terms ? well, it is not I who should be blamed on
account of the death of that ape, since I followed the
path of that policy which is taught in your books.'
In this manner, then, the High-minded One van-
quished by a strong assault those ministers in spite of
their influence on the bystanders, in spite also of
their habitual boldness. And when he understood he
1 Cp. Story V, stanzas 18-22.
2 The Pali recension expresses this by the drastic utterance : ' the
would-be wise advocates of the khattavi^a say: you may kill your
father or mother or eldest brother, yea your children and wife, if such
be your interest.'
3 I followtheemendation oftheeditor mukhena, not the senseless
reading ofthe MSS. sukhena.

5
XXIII. THE STORY OF MAHABODHI. 21
had won over the assembly with the king, wishing to
expel from their hearts the grief he had caused them by
killing the monkey, he addressed the king, saying : ' In
fact, Your Majesty, I never killed any living creature l .
I did but put into effect my power of creation. This
skin I stripped off a monkey whom I had created,
with the object of using it as the topic of this very
conversation. Do not therefore judge me falsely.'
So speaking, he dissolved the illusion (of the ape-skin)
he had produced by magic. Then, seeing that the
king and his assembly were now in apt state of mind
to be converted, he said
:
56. ' What person, who perceives that all things
produced emanate from causes who feels himself
;
acting by his free will who believes in another world
;
after this who maintains right tenets who cherishes
; — ;
compassionateness may kill any living being ?
' Do but consider this, great prince.
57. ' How should the believer in the true and
rational doctrine commit a deed which, to be sure,
neither the denier of causality, nor the believer in
absolute dependence, nor the materialist, nor the
follower of the lore of political wisdom would perform
for the sake ofa little glory ?
58. ' A man's creed, O best of men, be it the true or
a false one, is the motive which induces him to actions
corresponding with For people show the tenets of
it.
their belief by their words and actions, since their
purposes comply with the line of conduct, prescribed
by their creed.
59. ' And for this reason the excellent lore is to be
cherished, but a bad lore must be abandoned, for it is
a source of calamity. One must take this course in
this way keeping with the virtuous, but keeping afar
:
from wicked people.
—
60. ' Indeed, there are— such monks goblins they
should rather be called who wander about in the
dress of the self-restrained, but have not subdued their
1 Vanaraw is a gloss, I suppose.

2l6 GATAKAMALA.
senses. It is they who ruin simple people by their
false views, not unlike such serpents as cause harm
by the venom of their looks.
61. 'The discordant voices of the adherents of
the doctrine of non-causality and the rest, disclose
their special natures, in the same manner as jackals
are betrayed by their howling. For this reason
a wise man ought not to cherish such persons but
should (rather) care for their good, if he have the
power to do so.
62. ' But no one, however illustrious his glory may
be in the world, should make friends with an unfit
person, not even for interest's sake. Even the
moon suffers loss of loveliness, when soiled by its
conjunction with a gloomy winter-day.
63. ' Therefore, avoiding the company of those who
are avoiders of virtues and frequenting those who
know how to foster virtues, make your glory shine
by rousing in your subjects the love of virtue and
dissolving their attachment to vice.
64. ' Observing the Law of Righteousness, you
might cause your subjects, for the greater part indeed,
to be intent on good behaviour and to keep to the
path which leads to Heaven. Now you have to pro-
tect your people and you are willing to exert yourself
with this object. Well, then, betake yourself to the
Dharma its rules of discipline (vinaya) make its road
;
a lovely one.
65. ' Purify your moral conduct (.rila), earn the
glory of a charitable giver, direct your mind to friend-
liness towards strangers, just as if they were your
relations, and may you rule your land for a long time
with righteousness and an uninterrupted observance
of your duties! In this way you will gain happiness,
glory, and Heaven.
66. ' If he fail to protect the peasants, his tax-payers,
both the husbandmen and the cattle-breeders, who
are like trees abounding in flowers and fruits, a king
gets into difficulties concerning such wealth as con-
sists in fruits of the earth.

'
XXIII. THE STORY OF MAHABODIII. 21 7
67. ' If he fail to protect those who live by buying
and selling different merchandises, traders, and towns-
men, who gratify him by paying the customs, he raises
difficulties for himself with respect to his treasury.
68. ' Likewise a prince who, having no reason to
complain of his army, fails to honour it, and disregards
his military men who have shown their valour on the
battle-field and are renowned for their skill in the
science of arms, surely such a king will be deserted by
victory in battle.
69. ' In the very same way a king who stains his
behaviour by disregard of the religious men, excellent
by morals or learning or supernatural power (yoga)
and illustrious by such virtues as attend on high-
mindedness, will be destitute of the rejoicings of
Heaven.
70. ' As one who plucks an unripe fruit kills the
seed without finding juice, so a king raising unlawful
tributes, ruins his country without obtaining profit
from them.
71. 'On the other hand, as a tree abounding in
excellent properties, grants the enjoyment of its
fruits at the time of their ripeness, in the very same
manner a country, well protected by its ruler, provides
him with the triad of religious and material prosperity
and enjoyment.
72. ' Keep attached to yourself faithful ministers,
clever and wise in promoting your interests, likewise
honest friends, and your family, attaching their hearts
by words agreeable to them, and by gifts offered to
them in a flattering manner.
73. ' For this reason, then, let Righteousness be
always the guide of your actions, having your mind
bent on securing the salvation of your subjects. May
you, while saving your people by administering justice
free from partiality and hatred, secure the worlds for
yourself ' !
1 This term 'worlds' loka/z is a common appellation of the happy
state or states after death.

2l8 GATAKAMALA.
Thus the High-minded One led that king away
from the wrong road of false doctrines and put him
and his attendants on the Excellent Path. Afterwhich
he directly mounted to the sky, worshipped by the
assembly with heads reverentially bowed and hands
folded, and returned to his residence in the forest.
In this manner, then, the compassion of the virtuous
for those who were once their benefactors does not
diminish even by injuries done to them such is their
;
gratitude, and to this extent have they imbibed the
virtue of forbearance. [Considering thus, one must
not forget a former benefit because of such a trifle as
an injury. Also, when discoursing on the Buddha,
it may be said : ' In this manner the Lord, even before
he reached Supreme Wisdom, defeated the doctrines
of other teachers and taught the Truth.' Further,
when censuring erroneous doctrines or inversely when
praising the true faith, this story is to be adduced,
saying: ' In this manner a false doctrine cannot bear
strong arguments, because it has no support, and is
to be avoided.']
XXIV. The Story of the Great Ape.
(Cp. the Pali Gataka, No. 516, Fausb. V, 68-74.)
The virtuous grieve not so much for their own pain
as for the loss of happiness incurred by their injurers.
This will be taught now.
There is a blessed region on one side of the
Himavat. Its soil, pervaded with different metallic
ores, might be called its body perfumed with lovely
and various ointments and its magnificent woods and
;
forests constituted its upper garment, as it were, con-
sisting in a mantle of dark silk. The slopes and
declivities of that landscape were adorned by their
picturesque scenery, which harmonized the inequality
of colours and shapes and combinations, so that they
seemed to have been arranged purposely and with

XXIV. THE STORY OF THE GREAT APE. 2IO,
care. In this recreation-grouncl of the Vidyadharas,
moistened by the waters of many mountain-streams
passing through it, abounding in deep holes, chasms,
and precipices, resounding with the dull and shrill
noise of humming bees and caressed by lovely winds
fanning its various trees with their beautiful flowers,
fruits, and stems, the Bodhisattva was once, it ' is
said, an ape of great size who lived alone. But even
in that state he had not lost his consciousness of the
Dharma, he was grateful, noble-natured, and endowed
with great patience and Compassion, as if retained
;
by attachment, would never leave him.
1. The earth with its forests, its great mountains
and its oceans perished many hundred times at the
end of the yuga, either by water or fire or wind, but
the great compassion ofthe Bodhisattva never perishes.
Subsisting, then, like an ascetic, exclusively on the
simple fare of leaves and fruits of the forest-trees,
and showing pity in various circumstances and ways
to such creatures as he met within the sphere of his
power, the High-minded One lived in the said forest-
region.
Now, one time a certain man wandering about in all
directions in search of a stray cow, lost his way, and
being utterly unable to find out the regions of the sky,
roamed at random, and reached that place. There,
being exhausted by hunger, thirst, heat, and toil, and
suffering from the fire of sorrow which blazed within
his heart, he sat down at the foot of a tree, as if
pressed down by the exceeding weight of his sadness.
Looking around, he saw a number of very tawny
tinduka-fruits1 which being ripe had fallen off. After
,
enjoying them, as the hunger which tortured him
much made them seem very sweet to him, he felt
a very strong desire to find out their origin and
;
1 The tinduka or tinduki is the diosperos embryopteris,
acommon tree,not tall, evergreen with long, glimmering leaves. See
Watt, DictionaryoftheEconomic Products ofIndia,III,pp. 141-145.
' The fruit is eatable, but excessively sour; ' it is a food ofthe poor.

220 GATAKAMALA.
looking, sharply around on all sides, he discovered
the tree from whence they came. This tree had its
roots on the border of the sloping bank of a waterfall,
and hung down its branches, loaded with very ripe
fruits which gave them a tawny hue at their ends.
Craving for those fruits, the man mounted to that
slope, and climbing up the tinduka-tree, reached
a branch with fruit overhanging the precipice. And
his eagerness to get the fruit induced him to go
along it to its very end.
2. Then on a sudden, that branch, hanging down,
unable to bear its too heavy burden, broke off with
a noise and fell down, as if hewn with a hatchet.
And with that branch he fell headlong in a large
precipice surrounded on all sides by steep rock-walls,
like a pit; but as he was protected by the leaves and
plunged into deep water, he came off without breaking
any of his bones. Afcer getting out of the water,
he went about on all sides, looking out for some way
by which he might escape, but saw none. As he
found no outlet and realised that he must starve
there very soon, he despaired of his life, and tortured
by the heart-piercing dart of heavy sorrow burst into
tears, that moistened his sad face. Overwhelmed by
discouragement and painful thoughts, he lamented
somewhat in this manner.
3. ' Down I fell into this precipice in the midst of
this forest remote from human approach. Who, how-
evercarefully seeking, may discover me, except Death ?
4. ' Who will rescue me out of this place, into which
I was precipitated, like awild beast caught in a pit-fall ?
No relations, no friends have I near, only swarms of
mosquitoes drinking my blood.
5. ' Alas, the night within this pit conceals from me
the aspect of the universe. I shall no more see the
manifold loveliness of gardens, groves, arbours, and
streams. No more the sky resplendent with its jewel
ornament of wide-scattered stars. Thick darkness, like
a night in the dark half of the month, surrounds me.'
Thus lamenting, that man passed there some clays,

:
XXIV. THE STORY OF THE GREAT APE. 22 1
feeding on the water and the tinduka-fruits which had
come down together with himself.
Now, that great ape wandering through that part
of the forest with the purpose of taking his food, came
to that place, beckoned as it were by the wind-agitated
branches of that tinduka-tree. Climbing on it and
looking over the waterfall, he perceived that man
lying there and in want of relief, and saw also his
eyes and cheeks sunken, and his limbs emaciated, pale,
and suffering from hunger. The wretched situation
ofthe man roused the compassion of the great monkey,
who setting aside the care for his meal, fixed his eyes
intently on the man and in a human voice uttered
this
:
6. ' Thou art in this precipice inaccessible to men.
Well, tell me then, please, who thou art and by what
cause thou hast come there.'
Then the man, casting up his eyes to the great ape,
bowing his head and folding his hands as a supplicant,
spoke
7, 8. 'I am a man, illustriousbeing. Having lost my
way and roaming in the forest, I came into this distress,
while seeking to get fruits from this tree. Befallen by
this heavy calamity, while away from my friends and
kindred, I beseech thee, protector of troops of mon-
keys, be also my protector.'
These words succeeded in stirringthe boundless pity
of the Great Beine-
A
9. person in distress, without friends or family
to help him, imploring help with anxious looks and
folded hands, would rouse compassion in the heart
even of his enemies to the compassionate he is a
;
great attraction.
Then the Bodhisattva, pitying him, comforted him
with kind words, such as he could hardly expect in
that time.
10. 'Be not afflicted, thinking thou hast lost thy
strength by the fall into this precipice or that thou
hast no relations to help thee. What those would do
for thee, I will do it all. Do not fear.'

222 GATAKAMALA.
And after these comforting words the Great
Being provided the man with tindukas and other fruits.
Then with the object of rescuing him, he went away
to some other place, and exercised himself in climbing
having on his back a stone of a man's weight. Having
learnt the measure of his strength and convinced
himself that he was able to bring up the man out of
the waterfall, he descended to the bottom of it, and
moved by compassion, said these words to the man
:
ii. 'Come, climb upon my back and cling fast to
me, while I shall bring out both thee and the usefulness
of my body.
12. 'For the pious pronounce this to be the use-
fulness of the body, otherwise a worthless thing, that
it may be employed by the wise as an instrument for
benefiting our neighbour.'
The other agreed, and after reverentially bowing to
the ape, mounted on his back.
13. So with that man on his back, stooping under
the pain of the exceeding heaviness of his burden, yet,
owing to the intensity of his goodness, with unshaken
firmness of mind, he succeeded in rescuing him, though
with great difficulty.
14, And having delivered him, he enjoyed the
highest gladness, but was so exhausted, that he walked
with an unstable and tottering step, and chose some
cloud-black slab of stone to lie upon, that he might
take his rest.
Pure-hearted as he was and being his benefactor,
the Boclhisattva did not suspect danger from the part
of that man, and trustingly said to him
:
15, 16. 'This part ofthe forestbeingeasilyaccessible,
is exposed to the free course of ferocious animals.
Therefore, that nobody may kill me and his own future
happiness by a sudden attack, while I am taking my
rest from fatigue, thou must carefully look out in all
directions and keep guard over me and thyself. My
body is utterly tired, and I want to sleep a little while.'
The man promised to do so. Assuming the frank
language of honesty, he said : ' Sleep, sir, as long as

XXIV. THE STORY OF THE GREAT APE. 223
you like, and may your awaking be glad I stay here,
!
keeping guard over you.' But when the Great Being,
in consequence of his fatigue, had fallen asleep, he
conceived wicked thoughts within his mind.
frui 1 t 7 s . o ' f R fe o r o e t d s b t y o c b h e an o c b e ta a i r n e ed m w y it l h iv h e a l r i d ho e o f d fo h r e t re o . r fo H re o st w -
can my emaciated body sustain life by them ? how
much less, recover its strength ?
18. 'And how shall I succeed in traversing this
wilderness hard to pass, if I am infirm ? Yet, in the
body of this ape I should have food amply sufficient
to get out of this troublesome wilderness.
19. ' Although he has done good to me, I may feed
on him, I may, for he has been created such a being.
I may, for here the rules given for times of distress l
are applicable, to be sure. For this reason I have to
get my provisions from his body.
20. ' But I am only able to kill him while he is
sleeping the profound and quiet sleep of trustfulness.
For if he were to be attacked in open fight, even
a lion would not be assured of victory.
' Therefore, there is no time to lose now.' Having
thus made up his mind, that scoundrel, troubled in his
thoughts by sinful lust which had destroyed within
him his gratitude, his consciousness of the moral
precepts, and even his tender innate feeling of com-
passion, not minding his great weakness of body, and
listening only to his extreme desire to perform that
vile action, took a stone, and made it fall straight
down on the head of the great ape.
21. 22. But, being sent by a hand trembling with
weakness and hastily, because of his great cupidity,
that stone, flung with the desire of sending the monkey
to the complete sleep (of death), destroyed his sleep.
It did not strike him with its whole weight, so that
it did not dash his head to pieces ; it only bruised it
with one of its edges, and fell down on the earth with
a thundering noise.
1 The so-called apaddharma, cp. stanza 8 of Story XII.

!
224 GATAKAMAI-A.
23, 24. The Bodhisattva, whose head had been
injured by the stone, jumped up hastily; and looking
around him that he might discover his injurer, saw
nobody else but that very man who stood before him
in the attitude of shame, confounded, timid, perplexed,
and dejected, betraying his confusion by the ashy-
pale colour of his face, which had lost its brightness
;
sudden fright had dried up his throat, drops of sweat
covered his body, and he did not venture to lift up
his eyes.
As soon as the great ape realised that the man
himself was the evildoer, without minding the pain
of his wound any longer,he felt himself utterly moved.
He did not become angry, nor was he subdued by
the sinful feeling Qf wrath. He was rather affected
with compassion for him who, disregarding his own
happiness, had committed that exceedingly vile deed.
Looking at him with eyes wet with tears, he lamented
over the man, saying:
25, 26. ' Friend, how hast thou, a man, been capable
of doing an action like this ? How couldst thou con-
ceive it ? how undertake it ? Thou, who wast bound
to oppose with heroic valour any foe whosoever eager
to hurt me would have assailed me
27. ' If I felt something like pride, thinking I per-
formed a deed hard to be done, thou hast cast away
from me that idea of haughtiness, having done some-
thing still more difficult to do.
28. ' After being brought back from the other world,
from the mouth of Death, as it were, thou, scarcely
saved from one precipice, hast fallen into another,
in truth
!
29. ' Fie upon ignorance, that vile and most cruel
thing! for it is ignorance that throws the miserable
creatures into distress, (deceiving them) with (false)
hope of prosperity.
30. 31. ' Thou hast ruined thyself, kindled the fire
of sorrow in me, obscured the splendour of thy repu-
tation, obstructed thy former love of virtues, and
destroyed thy trustworthiness, having become a mark

XXIV. THE STORY OF THE GREAT ArE.
for (the arrows of) reproach. What great profit, then,
didst thou expect by acting in that manner ?
32. ' The pain of this wound does not grieve me so
much as this thought which makes my mind suffer.
that it is on account of me that thou hast plunged into
evil, but that I have not the power of wiping off
that sin.
33, 34. ' Well then, go with me, keeping by my side,
but mind to be always in my sight, for thou art
much to be distrusted. I will conduct thee out of this
forest, the abode of manifold dangers, again into the
path which leads to the dwellings of men, lest roaming
alone in this forest, emaciated and ignorant of the
way, thou shouldst be assailed by somebody who,
hurting thee, would make fruitless my labour spent in
thy behalf.'
So commiserating that man, the High-minded One
conducted him to the border of the inhabited region,
and having put him on his way, said again:
35. ' Thou hast reached the habitations of men,
friend now thou mayst leave this forest-region with
;
its fearful thickets and wildernesses. 1 bid thee a happy
journey and wish that thou mayst endeavour to avoid
evil actions. For the harvest of their evil results is
an extremely painful time.'
So the great ape pitying the man, instructed him as
if he were his disciple ; after which he went back to
his abode in the forest. But the man who had
attempted that exceedingly vile and sinful deed, tor-
tured by the blazing fire of remorse, was on a sudden
struck with a dreadful attack of leprosy. His figure
became changed, his skin was spotted with vesicles
which, becoming ulcers and bursting, wetted his body
with their matter, and made it putrid in a high degree.
To whatever country he came, he was an object of
horror to men so hideous was his distorted form
neither by his a ; ppearance did he resemble a human ;
being nor by his changed voice, indicative of his pain.
And people, thinking him to be the embodied Devil,
drove him away, threatening him with uplifted clods

—
226 GATAKAMALA.
and clubs and harsh words of menace. One time,
roaming about in some forest, he was seen by a certain
king who was hunti — ng there. On perceiving his most
horrible appearance for he looked like a Preta1 the
,
dirty remains of his garments having at last dropped
off, so that he had hardly enough to cover his shame
that king, affected with curiosity mingled with fear,
asked him thus
:
36, 37. ' Thy body is disfigured by leprosy, thy skin
spotted with ulcers; thou art pale, emaciated, miser-
Who
able thy hair is dirty with dust. art thou ?
;
Art thou a Preta, or a goblin, or the embodied Devil,
or a Putana 2 ? Or if one out of the number of sick-
nesses, which art thou who displayest the assemblage
of many diseases ? '
Upon which the other, bowing to the prince, an-
swered in a faltering tone : ' I am a man, great king,
not a spirit.' And being asked again by the king, how
he had come into that state, he confessed to him his
wicked deed, and added these words
:
38. ' This suffering here is only the blossom of the
tree sown by that treacherous deed against my friend.
O, surely, its fruit will be still more miserable than
this.
Therefore, you ought to consider a treacherous
39. '
deed against a friend as your foe. With kindhearted-
ness you must look upon friends, who are kindhearted
towards you.
40. Those who adopt a hostile behaviour against
their friends, come into such a wretched state already
in this world. From hence you may infer what will
be in the other world the fate of those who, sullied in
their mind by covetousness and other vices, attempted
the life of their friends.
41. ' He, on the other hand, whose mind is pervaded
—
1 See supra, note on p. 147. As to the punishment of this
treacherous man (mitradhruk), cp. a similar punishment ofthe slan-
derer Kokaliya in Suttanipata III, 10.
2 A Putana is a kind of ghost looking terrible. They live in
cemeteries, and like to feed on human flesh.

XXV. THE STORY OF THE SARABHA. 22;
with kindness and affection for his friends, obtains
a good reputation, is trusted by his friends and enjoys
their benefits. He will possess gladness of mind and
the virtue of humility, his enemies will consider him
a man hard to offend, and finally he will gain residence
in Heaven.
42. ' Thus knowing the power and the consequences
of good and evil behaviour with respect to friends,
O king, hold fast to the road followed by the virtuous.
He who goes along on this will attain happiness.'
In this manner, then, the virtuous grieve not so
much for their own pain as for the loss of happiness
incurred by their injurers. [So is to be said, when
discoursing on the great-mindedness of the Tathagata,
and when treating of listening with attention to the
preaching of the Law likewise when dealing with the
;
subjectsofforbearance and faithfulness towards friends;
also when demonstrating the sinfulness of evil deeds.]
XXV. The Story of the .Sarabha.
(Cp. the Pali Gataka, No. 483, Fausb. IV, 267-275.)
Even to him who attempts their life the intensely
compassionate show pity in his distress they will
;
not disregard such a one. This will be taught in
the following.
One time, it is said, the Bodhisattva was a ^arabha1
,
living in a remote part of a certain forest. That region,
lying beyond the path and the noise of men, was
a dwelling-place of manifold tribes of forest-animals.
Its many roots, trees, and shrubs were immersed
in the thick and high grass which covered its soil,
untrodden by travellers and showing nowhere any
trace of vehicles and carriages, the tracks of whose
1 Not the common deer of that name seems to be meant, but the
fabulous animal jarabha, said to be eight-legged, very strong, anil
a match for lions and elephants.
Q2

228 GATAKAMALA.
feet or wheels might have beaten something like a road
or border-line yet, it was intersected with channels
and full of ant- ; hills and holes. That ^arabha had
a solid body, endowed with strength, vigour, and swift-
ness he was distinguished by the beautiful colour of
;
his skin. As he was addicted to practising compassion,
he cherished friendly feelings towards all animals.
Possessing the virtue of contentment, he subsisted
only on grasses, leaves and water, and was pleased
with his residence in the forest. So he adorned that
part of the forest, longing, like a Yogin, for complete
detachment.
i. Bearing the shape of a forest-animal, but pos-
sessing the intellectual faculties of a man, he lived in
that solitary wilderness, showing, like an ascetic, mercy
to all livingbeings, and contenting himself, like aYogin,
with blades of grass.
Now once upon a time it happened that the king
who was the ruler of that country came near that
place. Mounted on his excellent horse, holding his
bent bow and arrow in his hand, and being eager to
try his skill of arms on the game, he was pursuing
the deer with speed, indulging in the excitement
(of the chase). So he was carried away by his horse,
an animal of extraordinary swiftness, and separated by
no small distance from his retinue, a body of elephants,
horse, chariots, and footmen. As soon as he saw the
Great Being from afar, he was resolved on killing him,
and keeping ready his bow strung with a sharp arrow,
spurred his horse to chase the High-minded One.
But the Bodhisattva had no sooner perceived the king
on horseback assailing him, than he took to flight with
the utmost swiftness not because he would have been
;
powerless to stand and fight his aggressor, but because
he had desisted from acts of violence and anger. While
being pursued by the king, meetingwith a large hole on
his way, he quicklyjumped over it, as if it were a small
puddle, and continued his flight. When the excellent
horse, runnin O g after the sarabha in the samei di l rec l tion
as sw ' iftly as ever he could, arrived at that hole,

XXV. THE STORY OF THE SARABHA. 229
he hesitated to risk the leap, and of a sudden stood
still.
2. Then the king, as he was, his bow in his hands,
tumbled down from horseback and fell headlong into
the large hole, as a warrior of the Daityas sinks into
the Ocean.
3. Keeping his eyes fixed on the ^arabha, he had
not noticed that chasm. So he fell by the fault of his
want of circumspection, as he lost his balance by the
sudden stopping of his horse from his great swiftness.
Now, the sound of the trampling of hoofs ceasing,
the Bodhisattvabegan to think: 'has that king, perhaps,
really turned back ?' Then, turning his head and look-
ing behind, he saw the horse without his rider standing
on the brink of that chasm. On perceiving this, his
thoughts turned to this reasoning : ' No doubt, the
kine must have fallen into this chasm. No tree is
here spreading its thick foliage, the sheltering shade of
which might invite to sit down and rest, nor is here
any lake to be found fit for bathing in its water as blue
and as pure as a petal of a blue lotus. Nor, since he
entered this wild forest-region haunted by ferocious
animals, is he likely to have dismounted and left his
excellent horse in some place, that he might either
take his rest or continue hunting alone. No more is
there here any jungle in which he might be hidden.
Surely, that king must have fallen into this hole.'
After he had convinced himself of this, the High-
minded One felt the utmost commiseration for him
who sought his life.
4. 5. ' But lately this monarch possessed the enjoy-
ments of royalty, being worshipped like the Lord
of the Devas by crowds of people revering him with
clasped hands. His army attended him, a mixed host
of chariots, horsemen, footmen, and elephants, adorned
with gay banners, glittering in their armour and
weapons, and marching to the brisk tones of music.
His head was sheltered by the lovely umbrella, and
the chowries fanning him made a beautiful effect with
the shine of their (jewelled) handles.

GATAKAMALA.
6. ' And now at this moment he is lying below in
this large chasm. By the shock of his fall he must
have broken his bones, he has swooned or pines with
sorrow. Alas To what a distress has he come
! !
Common people, whose mind has grown callous
7. '
with suffering, so to speak, are not so much afflicted
by their sorrows, as men of high rank, when calami-
ties visiting them plunge them into grief, something
new to such as are accustomed to great delicacy.
' He will never be able to escape from thence by
himself. If there is still some remnant of life in him,
then it is not right to abandon him to his fate.' So
considering, the High-minded One, impelled by his
compassion, went to the brink of the precipice and
perceived him struggling there. His armour, covered
with dust, had lost its splendour, his diadem and his
garments were utterly disarranged, and the pain
caused by the blows he had got in falling down afflicted
his mind, and brought him to despondency.
8. Having seen the king in that wretched situation,
he forgot that it was his enemy, and affected with
pity felt an equal pain to his tears welled up in his
;
eyes.
And he addressed him with modest and kind
9.
language, manifesting his innate pious disposition and
comforting him by the proper and respectful words he
used in a distinct and lovely-sounding voice.
10. 'Thou hast received no hurt, Your Majesty,
I hope, coming into this hell-resembling chasm ? Thou
hast broken no limb, I hope ? Do thy pains grow less
already ?
11. 'I am no goblin, O most distinguished of men,
I am a forest-animal living within thy realm, reared
upon thy grass and water. So thou mayst put confi-
dence in me.
12. ' Do not despond, then, because of thy fall into
the precipice. I have the power to rescue thee from
thence. If thou thinkest me trustworthy, then quickly
command me and I come.'
This marvellous speech of the animal roused the

XXV. THE STORY OF THE SARABHA. 2$l
admiration of the kin£. Shame arose within his mind
and he began, in truth, to reflect in this manner
:
13. ' How is it possible that he shows pity towards
me, his enemy, of whose prowess he perceived himself
to be the eoal ? And how could I act so unbe-
comingly to this innocent one ?
14. 'Oh! How he confounds me by the sharp re-
proach of his softness! It is I who am the animal,
the brute, he is some being bearing only the shape
of a i'arabha.
' He deserves, therefore, to be honoured by my
acceptance of his friendly offer.' Having thus made
up his mind, he spoke
:
15—17. ' My body being covered by my armour has
not been too heavily injured, and the pain I feel from
being crushed in this chasm is at least bearable. Yet,
that grievance caused by my fall does not torment
me so much as my offence against a being so pure-
hearted and holy as thou. Do not mind it, I pray
thee, that relying on thy outward shape I took thee for
a forest-animal, not being aware of thy real nature.'
Then the .rarabha, inferring from these friendly
words of the king, that he agreed to his proposal,
exercised himself with the object of rescuing him,
bearing on his back a stone of a man's weight.
Having learnt the extent of his strength, determined
upon rescuing the king, he went down into the hole
and drawing near to him, spoke in a respectful tone
:
18. ' Pray, put up for a while with the necessity
of touching this body of mine, that, with the object
of obtaining my own happiness, I may make thy
face resplendent with contentment and joy.
' Your Majesty, deign therefore to mount upon my
back and cling fast to me.' And he, after declaring his
approval, mounted his back, as if it were a horse's.
19. Then, with the king on his back, he climbed
aloft with surpassing vigour and swiftness, and
holding high the forepart of his body, resembled
some (stone-)elephant rising in the air, as is repre-
sented on arches.

232 GATAKAMALA,
20. After carrying the king out of that inaccessible
place and making him rejoin his horse, he was much
rejoiced and told him the way to his capital, and
himself prepared to retire to his forest.
But the king, moved with gratitude for his kind
service, so modestly rendered, embraced the ^arabha
affectionately, saying
:
21. ' This life of mine is at thy disposal, Crarabha.
It is, therefore, unnecessary to add that thou must
consider as thy property all that is within my power.
Give me, then, the pleasure of visiting my capital, and
if thou likest it, take up thy residence there.
22. 'Is it not unbecoming to me that I should set
out for home alone, leaving thee in this dreadful forest
haunted by hunters, where thou art exposed to suffer-
ing because of cold, heat, rain, and other calamities ?
' Well then, let us go together.'
Then the Bodhisattva eulogized him in modest, soft
and respectful terms, answering thus
23. ' In lovers of virtues, like thee,
:O
most excellent
of men, a behaviour like thine is the proper one. For
virtues, constantly practised by pious persons, turn out
to be an essential part of their very nature.
24. ' But since thou thinkest, that I who am accus-
tomed to the forest might be favoured by taking up my
residence at thy home, pray, no more of this. Of one
kind is the pleasure of men, of another that of the
forest-animals conformable to the habits of their kind.
25. 'If, however, thou wantest to do something
O
pleasant to me, then desist from hunting, hero, for
ever The poor beasts of the forest, being brute
!
and dull of intellect, are worth pitying for this very
reason.
26. ' With respect to the pursuit of happiness and
the removal of mischief, the animals, thou shouldst
know, are subject to the same feelings as men.
Keeping this in mind, deem it improper to do to
others what would be a cause of displeasure, if done
to thyself.
27. ' Understanding that evil deeds entail loss of

XXV. THE STORY OF THE SARAI5HA. 233
reputation, censure by the virtuous, and moreover
suffering, thou must extirpate the evil within thee,
considering it thy adversary. It never becomes thee
to overlook it, no more than illness.
28. ' It is by pursuing meritorious actions that
thou obtainedst the royal dignity, a thing highly
esteemed by men and the abode of bliss. That very
store of merit thou must enlarge, thou shouldst not
enfeeble the ranks of the benefactors.
29. ' Gather meritorious actions, the instruments of
glory and happiness, by munificent gifts, (taking care)
to enhance their charm by (distributing them at the
right) time and in a respectful manner by a moral
;
conduct, the right laws of which thou mayst learn
by intercourse with virtuous persons 1 and by succeed-
;
ing in making thy dispositions towards all creatures as
well-wishing as to thyself.'
In this manner the High-minded One favoured the
king, firmly establishing him in the matters relating to
the future life. And the king accepted his words.
After which he entered his dwelling-place in the forest,
followed with respectful looks by the king.
In this manner the intensely compassionate show
pity even to him who attempts their life, when
he is in distress they will not disregard such a one.
;
[This story is to be told also when treating of com-
miseration, when discoursing on the high-mindedness
of the Tathagata and on the subject of listening with
attention to the preaching of the Law. Likewise^ it
is to be propounded when demonstrating that enmities
are appeased by means of friendliness, also when
treating of the virtue of forbearance. ' In this way
it is seen that the High-minded, even when in the
state of beasts, behave mercifully towards those who
attempt their life. How, indeed, should it become
1 In the original two short syllables are wanting in the second plda
ofthis stanza. 'Iimagine it should be readthus, jilenas&dhu^ana)-
sawgatanij^ayena.

GATAKAMALA.
234
a human being or one who has taken the vow of
a homeless life to be wanting in mercy towards the
animals? For this reason a pious man (arya) must
show mercy to living beings.']
XXVI. The Story of the Ruru-Deer.
(Cp. the Pali Gataka, No. 482, Fausb. IV, 255-263; A'ariya-
pi/aka II, 6.)
To the virtuous no suffering;exists but that of others.
It is this they cannot bear, not their own suffering, as
will be taught by the following.
One time the Boclhisattva, it is said, lived in the
forest as a ruru-deer. He had his residence in
a remote part of a large wilderness, far from the
paths of men and overgrown with a rich, manifold
vep-etation. There were a great number of sals,
bakulas, piyalas, hintalas, tamalas, naktamalas, of
vidula and ni/'ula reeds and of shrubs thickets of
;
.sim.s-apas, tini.sas, samis, pala^as, ^akas, of kura-grass,
bamboo and reeds encumbered it ; kadambas, sar^as,
ar^unas, dhavas, khadiras, and ku/a^as abounded in
it ; and the outstretched branches of many trees were
covered as if by a veil with the tendrils of manifold
creeping plants. It was the abode of a great many
forest-animals deer of the ruru, przshata and srzmara
:
varieties, yaks, elephants, gavaya-oxen, buffaloes, ante-
lopes ofthe hariz/aand the nyanku kind, boars, panthers,
hyenas, tigers, wolves, lions, bears, and others. Among
them that ruru-deerwas conspicuous by its hue brilliant
like pure gold and the very soft hair of his body, which
was moreover adorned and resplendent with spots of
different lovely colours, shining like rubies, sapphires,
emeralds, and beryls. With his large blue eyes of
incomparable mildness and brightness, with his horns
and hoofs endowed with a soft splendour, as if they
were made of precious stones, that ruru-deer of
surpassing beauty had the appearance of a moving

'
XXVI. THE STORY OF THE RURU-DEER. 235
treasury of jewels. Then, knowing his body to be
a much desirable object and being aware of the
pitiless nature of man, he liked to frequent such
forest-tracks as were free from human intercourse, and
in consequence of his keen intellect, was careful to
avoid such places as were unsafe by the artifices
of huntsmen, their traps, nets, snares, holes, lime-twigs,
and the seeds and other food theystrew down. More-
over, he warned also the animals who followed after
him to avoid them. He exercised his rule over them
like a teacher, like a father.
1. Where on earth will not people, longing for their
happiness, honour the combination ofparamountbeauty
and paramount intelligence, hallowed by accomplished
good actions ?
Now once upon a time it happened that the High-
minded One, residing in that wild part of the forest,
heard cries for help uttered by some man who was
being carried away by the current of a rapid stream
flowing near and lately swollen by the rains.
2. ' The rapid and swollen stream carries me away,
and there is nobody to help, no vessel to take me.
Come to me, pitiful people come quickly to rescue
;
a wretch.
'My arms, exhausted from fatigue, are not able
3.
to keep my body on the water, and nowhere can I find
a ford. Help me then and soon, there is no time
to lose.'
These piteous cries ofdistressstruck the Bodhisattva,
and as if he were wounded by them in his heart, he
rushed out of the thicket, exclaiming those comforting
words he had been wont to use in hundreds of previous
existences and by which he had banished fear, grief,
sadness, and fatigue. So even now he succeeded in
b in rin pl g a i i n n g h fo u r m th an th v e oi w c o e rd r s ep ' e d a o te n d o l t y f a e n a d r ! l d o o udl n y o . t fe A ar nd !
coming out of the forest he saw from afar that man,
like a precious present brought to him by the stream.
Then, resolved upon rescuing him and without
4.
minding- the risk of his own life, he entered the river

236 GATAKAMALA.
that was running with tremendous rapidity, like a brave
warrior disturbing a hostile army.
5. He placed himself across his way, then told him
to cling fast to him. And the man, who was in the
paroxysm of fear and had almost lost the power
of his limbs, his strength being exhausted, climbed on
his back.
6. Nevertheless, though he was mounted by the
man and forced out of his way by the violence of
the current, the paramount excellence of his nature
enabled him to keep his great vigour intact, and
he reached the riverbank according to the wish of
that man.
7. Having brought the man to the riverside and
dispelled his weariness and pain, obtaining by this
a very great rejoicing himself, he warmed his cold
limbs with the warmth of his own body, then dismissed
him. Go,' he said, showing him the way.
'
This marvellous propensity for affording succour,
such as is unparalleled in affectionate relations and
friends, touched the man to the quick, and the
beautiful shape of the ruru-deer roused his admira-
tion and respect. Bowing his head to him, he addressed
him with kind words like these
:
8-10. ' No friend from childhood nor kinsman is
capable of performing such a deed as thou hast done
for me. This life of mine, therefore, is thine. If it
were to be spent for some matter of thy interest,
however small, I would esteem myself highly favoured.
Why, procure me that favour by ordering me to do
something for thee, in whatever respect Thy Honour
thinks me fit for employment'
In reply to this the Bodhisattva said approvingly
:
11. 'Gratitude is not at all to be wondered at in
a gentleman. For this quality proceeds from his
very nature. But seeing the corruptness of the
world, even gratitude is nowadays reckoned among
the virtues.
' For this reason, I tell thee this. Let thy grateful
disposition not induce thee to relate to anybody, that

XXVI. THE STORY OF THE RURU-DEER. 237
thou wast rescued by such an extraordinary animal.
My beautiful figure makes me too desirable a prey.
Lo, as a rule, the hearts of men, owing to their great
covetousness, possess little mercy or self-restraint.
1 2. ' Therefore, take care A to guard both thy own
good properties and me. treacherous behaviour
towards a friend never tends to bliss.
' Do not either trouble thy mind by anger because
I speak so to thee. I am but a deer, unskilled in the
deceitful politeness of men. Moreover,
13. 'It is the fault of such people as are clever in
fallacy and possess the talent of assuming a show
of feigned honesty that even those whose honesty is
sincere are looked at with suspicion.
' So then, thou wilt please me by doing as I said/
And the man promised to do so, and after bowing
to the Great Being and circumambulating him, set out
for his home.
Now at that time there lived in that country a queen
of some king who saw true dreams. Whatever extra-
ordinary dream she dreamt was realised. One time,
being asleep she had this dream about day-break.
She saw a ruru-deer of resplendent brilliancy, shining
like a heap of jewels of every kind, standing on
a throne and surrounded by the king and his
assembly, preaching the Law in a human voice of
an articulate and distinct sound. Affected with
astonishment she awoke with the beating of drums
which were to arouse her husband from sleep 1 And
.
she took the first opportunity to go and see the king,
who kindly received her not only with the honour she
deserved but also with solicitous affection.
14. Then she, whose bright eyes enlarged with
astonishment and whose lovely cheeks were trembling
from gladness, presented her lord with the account of
that marvellous dream as with a gift of homage.
1 It was the custom to awake the king by the sound of music and
songs. See, for instance, Ramayawa II, sarga 65.

: :
238 GATAKAMALA.
When she had told her wonderful dream to the
king, she added this earnest request
15. ' Therefore, my lord, pray endeavour to obtain
that deer. Adorned with this jewel-deer, your zenana
would be as resplendent as the sky with the Deer-
asterism V
The king, who trusted by experience the visions
of her dreams, readily complied with her desire, partly
that he might do something agreeable to her, partly
because he himself was covetous of obtaining that
jewel-deer. Accordingly he ordered all his huntsmen
to search for that deer, and had this proclamation made
public in his capital day after day
16. 'There exists a deer gold-skinned and spotted
with various colours shining like hundreds of jewels.
It is celebrated in the holy texts, and some have
eot the sight of it. Whosoever will show that deer, to
him the king gives a very rich village and full ten
lovely women.'
Now the man (who had been rescued by the Bodhi-
sattva) heard that proclamation again and again.
1 7. As he was poor, the reflection on the sufferings
of poverty afflicted his heart, but on the other hand
he kept in mind the great benefit he had received
from the ruru-deer. Distracted by cupidity and
gratitude, he was moved in both directions as in
a swing by different considerations like these
:
' What, then, have I to do now ? Shall I have
regard to Virtue or Wealth ? Shall I keep the
promise to my benefactor rather than the duty of
sustaining my family ? Which must I esteem most
highly, the other world or this ? Which must I follow,
the conduct of the pious or rather that of the world ?
Shall I strive after riches or rather after such good
as is cherished by the virtuous ? Whether to mind
the present time or the time hereafter?' At last his
mind disturbed by covetousness came to this con-
clusion. ' If I have once obtained great wealth,' so he
1 Viz. Mr/ga-riras, corresponding with the head ofOrion.

XXVI. THE STORY OF THE RURU-DEER. 239
thought, ' I shall be able by means of these riches to
gain, while enjoying the pleasures of this world, also
happiness in the other world, being intent on honour-
ing my kinsmen and friends, guests and mendicants V
Having so resolved, putting out of his mind the benefit
of the ruru-deer, he went up to the king and said:
1 I, Your Majesty, know that excellent deer and his
dwelling-place. Pray, tell me to whom I shall show
him.' On hearing this, the king much rejoiced answered
him, 'Well, friend, show him to myself/ and putting
on his hunting-dress left his capital, accompanied by
a large body of his army. Conducted by the man,
he went to the aforesaid riverside. Then he encircled
the forest adjoining it with the whole of his forces,
but himself bearing his bow, wearing his finger-guard2
and surrounded by a select number of resolute and
faithful men, entered the thicket, being shown the way
by that man. As they went onward, the man dis-
covering the ruru-deer who quietly and unsuspect-
ingly was staying in his forest, showed him to the
king, exclaiming : ' Here, here is that precious deer,
Your Majesty. May Your Majesty deign to look at
him and be careful.'
18. So saying he raised his arm, eager as he was
to point at the deer, and lo, his hand fell down off
his arm, as if it had been cut off with a sword.
19. Indeed, when directed at such objects hallowed
by their extraordinary performances, one's actions come
immediately to ripeness, provided that they are ot
consequence and there is but little to counterbalance
them 3
.
Then the king, curious to get the sight of the ruru-
deer, let his eyes pass along the way shownby the man.
1 A similar reasoning is made by *Sakra, when he tries the
Bodhisattva in his Avishahya-cxistence, see Story V, stanzas 18-21.
2 The finger-guard (angulitrawa) is a contrivance used byarchers
to protect the thumb and fingers from being injured bythe bow-string.
3 In other words, in such cases the evil karma has so great
a strength that a considerable amount of good works would be
required in order to check the rapidity of the development ofits fruit.

'
24O GATAKAMALA.
20. And in the midst of that wood, dark as clouds
newly formed, he perceived a body shining with the
lustre of a treasury of jewels, and saw that ceer, dear
by his illustrious properties. So does the fire of
lightning- appear out of the womb of the cloud.
21. Charmed by the beauty of his figure, the king,
eagerly desirous of catching him, immediately curved
his bow, made the arrow bite its string and went up
to him that he might hit him.
But the Bodhisattva, on hearing the noise of
people on every side, had thereby concluded that
he must have been surrounded, to be sure. After-
wards perceiving the king coming up ready to shoot
off his arrow at him, he understood there was no
opportunity for running away. Then he uttered
distinct articulate language, addressing the king in
a human voice.
22. 23. 'Stop a moment, mighty prince, do not hit
me, hero among men Pray, first satisfy my curiosity,
and tell me this.
Who!
may have discovered my abode
to thee, far as it is from the paths of men, saying that
I, such a deer, dwell in this thicket ?'
The king, touched by this wonderful address in
a human voice and taking still more interest in him,
showed him that man with the point of his arrow.
' This man,' he said, ' has disclosed thy extremely
marvellous person to us.' But the Bodhisattva
knowing again that man, spoke disapprovingly : ' Fie
upon him
!
24, 25. ' It is a true saying, in truth "better is it to
take a log out of the water than to save an ungrateful
person from it." In this manner he returns that exer-
tion made in his behalf! How is it that he did not
see that he destroyed his own happiness, too, at the
same time ?
Now the king, being curious to know what he might
thus reproach, vividly said to the ruru-deer
:
26, 27. ' On hearing thee censure somebody without
catching the meaning of thy obscure words or knowing
with respect of whom thou spokest them, my mind is

'! ' 1
XXVI. THE STORY OF THE RURU-DEER. 24
somewhat alarmed. Therefore, tell me, wonderful
deer, who is he on whose account thou speakest so ?
Is it a man or a spirit, a bird or perhaps a forest-
animal ?
The Bodhisattva spoke
:
28. ' No desire of blaming prompted me, O king, to
this utterance, but becoming aware of this blame-
deserving action, I spoke sharp words in order to
prevent him from attempting to do such a thing
aofain.
29. ' For who would like to use harsh language to
those who have committed a sin, strewing, so to speak,
salt upon the wound of their fault ? But even to his
beloved son a physician is obliged to apply such
medical treatment as is made necessary by his illness.
30. 'He whom I, moved by pity, rescued, when he
was carried off by the current, is the man who made
this danger arise for me, O best of men. Indeed,
intercourse with wicked people does not tend to bliss.'
Then the king, casting on that man a stern look
expressive of harsh reproach, asked him : ' Oh, in
truth, wast thou rescued before from such a distress by
this deer ?' And the man, who was pale and perspired
with fear, sorrow, and dejection, answered in a low tone
of shame: 'Yes, I was.' Upon which the king re-
vilingly exclaimed : ' Fie upon thee !' and placing the
arrow on the bowstring he continued : ' Do not think
it a trifle
2i. 'He whose heart was not even softened by an
exertion like that employed in thy behalf, is a vile
representative of his fellow-creatures and brings them
into dishonour. Why should this lowest of men live
any longer ?
With these words he grasped his bow in the middle
and bent it in order to kill him. But the Bodhisattva,
overpowered by his great compassion, placed himself
between, saying to the king : ' Stop, Your Majesty,
stop, do not strike one already stricken
!
32. 'At the very moment that he listened to the
culpable enticement of Cupidity, his enemy, at that
R

242 GATAKAMALA.
moment surely, he was ruined both in this world,
because of the loss of his good name, and in the next
too, his righteousness being destroyed.
33. ' Yea, in this way, when their soundness of mind
has faded away in consequence of unbearable suffer-
ings, men fall into calamities, being allured by the
prospect of rich profit, like foolish moths attracted by
the shining of a light.
'Thou must,therefore,rather pityhim and restrain
34.
thy wrath. And if he wanted to obtain something by
so acting, let not his rash deed lack that reward. For
lo, I am standing here with bent head awaiting thy
orders.'
This merciful and sincere desire to reward even
the man who had ill-treated him excited the highest
surprise of the king. His heart became converted, and
looking up with veneration to the ruru-deer, he ex-
claimed : ' Well said, well said, holy being.
35. ' Verily, showing such mercy to him whose cruel
offence against thee is evident, thou art a human being
by thy properties, we do bear but the shape of men.
36. ' Further, since thou deemest this knave worth
commiseration, and since he has been the cause of my
seeing a virtuous person, I give him the wealth he
coveted and to thee the permission to go freely in this
kingdom wherever it pleases thee.'
The ruru-deer said: 'I accept this royal boon,
illustrious king, which is not given in vain. Therefore,
deign to give me thy orders, that our meeting here may
afford thee profit and that I may beofsome use to thee.'
Then the king made the ruru-deer mount his royal
chariot, worshipping him like his teacher, and led him
with great pomp to his capital. And having given
him the reception due to a guest and invited him to
place himself on the royal throne, he with his wives
and the whole retinue of his officers exhorted him to
preach the Law, and raising his eyes to him with
a kind expression of gladness mixed with reverence,
entreated him in this manner
:
37. 'There is a great diversity of opinions among

XXVI. THE STORY OF THE RURU-DEER. 243
men concerning the Law, but thou possessest the
certainty about the Law. Deign, therefore, to preach
it to us.'
Upon which the Bodhisattva raised his voice and
preached the Law to the king and his royal assembly
in words distinctly spoken in a soft tone and elegantly
composed.
38. ' Of the Law with the manifold performances
depending on it and with its subdivisions : abstaining
from injuring others, from theft, &c, this, I believe, is
the brief summary " Mercy to the creatures."
' Look here, illustrious prince.
39. 'If mercy to all creatures should make men hold
them like themselves or their own family, whose heart
would ever cherish the baleful desire for wickedness ?
40. ' But the lack of mercy is to men the cause of
the greatest disturbance, as it corrupts the action of
their minds and words and bodies no less with respect
to their family than to strangers.
41. ' Forthis reason hewho strives for Righteousness
ought to keep to mercy, which will yield rich profit.
Mercy1 indeed, engenders virtues, as a fructifying rain
,
makes the crops grow.
42. ' Mercy, possessing a man's mind, destroys in it
the passion for injuring one's neighbour and his mind
;
being pure, neither his speech nor his body will be
perverted. So the love of one's neighbour's good
always increases and becomes the source of many
other virtues charity, forbearance, and so on, which
:
are followed by gladness of mind and are conducive to
reputation.
43. ' The merciful one does not arouse apprehension
in the mind of others because ofhis tranquillity. Owing
to his mercy, everybody will hold him a person to be
trusted, as if he were their kinsman. No agitation of
passion will seize him whose heart has been made firm
by mercy,nordoes the fire ofanger blazewithinhis mind
which enjoys the coolness of water, thanks to mercy.
1 In the fourth pada ofthis stanza sa is a misprint for sa.
R 2

244 GATAKAMALA.
44. ' Why use many words ? For this reason the
wise firmly believe that in Mercy the whole of
Righteousness is contained. What virtue, indeed,
cherished by the pious does there exist which is
not the consequence of Mercy? Having this in
mind, be intent on ever fortifying thy mercy to all
people, holding them like thy son, like thyself; and
winning by thy pious conduct the hearts of thy people,
mayst thou glorify thy royalty!'
Then the king praised these words of the ruru-deer,
and with his townsmen and landsmen became intent on
actingup to the Law of Righteousness. And he granted
security to all quadrupeds and birds.
In this manner, then, for the virtuous no suffering
exists but that of others. It is this they cannot bear,
not their own suffering. [This story is also to be told
when discoursing on compassion, and may be adduced
when treatine of the hieh-mindedness of the virtuous,
also when censuring the mischievous.]
XXVII. The Story of the Great Monkey.
(Cp. the Pali Gataka, No. 407, Fausb. Ill, 370-375-)
Those who follow the behaviour of the virtuous win
over even the hearts of their enemies. This will be
taught as follows.
In the heart of the Himavat there is a blessed region,
whose soil is covered with many kinds of herbs of dif-
ferent efficacious properties, and abounds in hundreds
of forest-trees with their great variety and manifold
arrangement of boughs, twigs, flowers, and fruits. It
is irrigated by mountain-currents whose water possesses
the limpidity of crystals, and resounds with the music
of manifold crowds of birds. In that forest the Bodhi-
sattva lived, it is said,—a chief of a troop of monkeys.
But even in that state in consequence of his constant
—
practice of charity and compassion jealousy, selfish-
ness, and cruelty, as if they were at war with him

XXVII. THE STORY OF THE GREAT MONKEY. 245
because he attended on their enemies (the virtues),
would not enter his mind. There he had his residence
on a large banian tree, which by its height, standing
out superior against the skylike the top of a mountain,
might pass for the lord of that forest, and by the thick-
ness of its branches beset with dark foliage, resembled
a mass of clouds. Those branches were somewhat
curved, being loaded with excellent fruits of a size
surpassing that of palmyra-nuts, and distinguished by
an exceedingly sweet flavour and a lovely colour and
smell.
1. The virtuous, even when they are in the state of
animals, have still some remainder of good fortune x
which tends to the happiness of their friends, for whose
sake they employ it, in the same manner as the re-
mainder of the wealth of people abroad may serve the
wants of their friends.
Now one branch of that tree hung over a river
which passed by that place 2 Now the Bodhisattva,
.
far-sighted as he was, had instructed his flock of
monkeys in this manner : ' Unless ye prevent this
banian-branch from having fruit, none of you will
ever be able to eat any fruit from the other branches15.'
Now it once happened that the monkeys overlooked
one young and for this reason not very big fruit, hidden
as it was in the cavity of some leaf crooked by ants.
So that fruit grew on, and in time developed its
fine colour, smell, flavour, and softness when it had
;
ripened and its stalk became loose, it dropped into the
river. Being carried down the stream, it stuck at last
1 In other wordsitis said,that though their storeofmerit, producing
good fortune, must have been exhausted accordingto theirbeing born
beasts, yet thereis leftsome remainder,the effectofwhich mayassuage
them in that low state. Cp. Story XXXIII, stanza 2.
2 In the Pali redaction that river is the Ganges and the king
Brahmadatta ofBenares.
a Considering the abruptness of the narration, it seems there is
something wanting in the text. In the Pali redaction it is told that
the Bodhisattva, having warned the monkeys that a fruit ofthat tree
wouldfall in the waterand bring them mischief, causesthemtodestroy
all germs offruit on that branch in blossom-time.

246 GATAKAMALA.
in the net-work of a fence (let down in the river by
the orders) of a certain king, who, with his harem, was
sporting- at that time in the water of that river.
2. Spreading about its delicious smell of great
excellency and delightful to the nose, that fruit made
the different other odours disappear, that exhaled there
from the garlands, the rum, and the perfumes of the
bathing women, however those scents were intensified
by the union of the women interlacing each other.
3. This smell soon enchanted the women they
;
enjoyed it with prolonged inhalations and half-shut
eyes. And being curious to know its origin, they cast
their eyes in all directions.
And while casting their eyes, stirred by curiosity,
all around, the women perceived that banian fig, sur-
passing by its size a ripe palmyra-nut, as it stuck to
the net-work of the fence, and having once discovered
it, they could not keep their eyes from it. Nor was
the king less curious to know the nature of that fruit.
He had it brought to him, and after examination by
reliable physicians tasted it himself.
4. Its marvellous flavour (rasa) raised the king's
amazement, as (in a dramatic composition) the mar-
vellous sentiment (rasa), ravishing (the mind of the
spectators) by a good representation, rouses their
admiration.
5. Had its extraordinary colour and smell stirred
his surprise before, now its flavour filled him with the
highest admiration, and agitated him with lust.
Though accustomed to dainties, the king became so
eager to enjoy that relish that this thought came to
him
:
6. ' If one does not eat those fruits, in truth, what
fruit does one enjoy from his royalty? But he who
gets them is really a king, and this without the toil of
exercising royal power/
Accordingly, having made up his mind to find out
its origin, he reasoned in this way to himself. ' Surely,
the excellent tree, whence came this fruit, cannot be
far from here and it must stand on the riverside. For

XXVII. THE STORY OF THE GREAT MONKEY. 247
it cannot have been in contact with the water for a long
time, since it has kept its colour, smell, and flavour
intact, and is moreover undamaged and shows no trace
of decomposition. For this reason, it is possible to
pursue its origin.' Having so resolved, as he was
possessedby a strong desire forthat delicious flavour, he
ceased that water-sport, and, after taking such measures
as were suitable for the maintenance of order in
his capital (during his absence), set out, accom-
panied by a great body of armed people equipped for
expedition. With them he marched up the river and
enjoyed the different and various sensations proper
tojourneying in a forest-region,clearinghis way through
thickets haunted by ferocious animals, beholding wood-
lands of great natural beauty, and frightening ele-
phants and deer by the noise of his drums. At last
he reached the neighbourhood of that tree, a place
difficult for men to approach.
7. Like a mass of clouds hanging down by the
burden of their water, this lord of trees appeared from
afar to the eyes of the king, dominating the other trees
which seemed to look up to it as to their sovereign, and,
though it stood near a steep mountain, resembling
a mountain itself.
The exceedingly lovely smell, more fragrant than
that of ripe mango fruits, which was spreading from it
and met the army as if it went to receive it, made the
kino; sure that this was the tree he sought for. Coming -
near, he saw many hundreds of apes filling its boughs
and branches and occupied in eating its fruits. The
king became angry with those monkeys who robbed
him of the objects so ardently longed for, and with
harsh words as 'Hit them! hit them! drive them
away, destroy them all, these scoundrels of monkeys !'
he ordered his men to assail them. And those warriors
made themselves ready to shoot off the arrows from
their bows (strung), and uttered cries to frighten away
the monkeys others lifted up clods and sticks and
;
spears to throw at them. They invaded the tree, as
if they were to attack a hostile fortress.

248 GATAKAMALA.
But the Bodhisattva had perceived the approach of
that noisy royal army moving with loud tumult and
uproar, like the billows of a sea roused by the violence
of the wind he had seen the assault made on all sides
;
of his excellent tree with a shower of arrows, spears,
clods, sticks, which resembled a shower of thunder-
bolts and he beheld his monkeys unable to do any-
;
thing but utter discordant cries of fear, while they
looked up to him with faces pale with dejection. His
mind was affected with the utmost compassion. Being
himself free from affliction, sadness, and anxiety, he
comforted his tribe of monkeys, and having resolved
upon their rescue, climbed to the top of the tree,
desirous to jump over to the mountain-peak near it.
And although that place could be reached only by
many successive leaps, the Great Being, by dint of his
surpassing heroism, passed across like a bird and held
the spot.
8. Other monkeys would not be able to traverse
that space even in two successive leaps, but he, the
courageous one, swiftly crossed it with one single
bound, as if it were a small distance.
9. His compassion had fostered his strong deter-
mination, but it was his heroism which brought it to
its perfection. So he made his utmost effort to carry
it out, and by the earnestness of his exertion he found
the way to it in his mind.
Having mounted, then, on some elevated place of
the mountain-slope, he found a cane, tall and strong,
deep-rooted and strong-rooted, the size of which sur-
passed the distance (between the mountain and the
tree). This he fastened to his feet, after which he
jumped back to the tree. But as the distance was
great and he was embarrassed by his feet being tied,
the Great Being hardly succeeded in seizing with his
hands the nearest branch of the tree.
10. Then holding fast that branch and keeping the
cane stretched by his effort, he ordered his tribe,
making them the signal proper to his race, to come
quickly off the tree.

:
XXVII. THE STORY OF THE GREAT MONKEY. 249
And the monkeys, as they were bewildered by fear,
having found that way of retreat, hastened to make
use of wildly rushing over his body without regard
it,
to him, and safely escaped along that cane.
11. While being incessantly trodden by the feet of
those fear-bewildered monkeys,his bodylost the solidity
of its flesh, but his mind did not lose its extraordinary
firmness.
On beholding this, the king and his men were over-
come with the utmost astonishment.
1 2. Such a splendid display of strength and wisdom,
combined with such great self-denial and mercy to
others, must rouse wonder in the minds of those who
hear of it ; how much more did it affect the bystanders
who witnessed it ?
Then the king commanded his men in this manner
' This chief of apes,' he said, ' having his limbs shaken
and bruised by the feet of the multitude of monkeys
who, agitated by fear, ran over his body, and remaining
in that same position for a long time, must be ex-
cessively tired. Surely, he will be unable to retire
from this difficult posture by himself. Therefore,
quickly dress a canopy underneath the place where he
is, which beine done, the cane and the banian branch
must be shot off simultaneously, wit1h one arrow each1.>
And they did so. Then the king ordered the monkey
to be gently lifted off the canopy and placed on a soft
couch. There he lay without consciousness, for in
consequence of the pain of his' wounds and his ex-
haustion he had swooned. After his wounds had
been salved with clarified butter and other ointments
suitable for the reliefoffresh bruises, his faintness grew
less. When he had recovered his senses, he was visited
by the king, who, affected with curiosity, admiration,
and respect, afteraskinghim abouthishealth, continued
thus
:
13. 'Thou madest thy body a bridge for those
monkeys, and feeling no mercy for thy own life,
rescuedst them. What art thou to them or what
are they to thee ?

!
25O GATAKAMALA.
14. 'If thou deemest me a person worth hearing
this matter, pray, tell it me, foremost of monkeys. No
small fetters of friendship, methinks, should fasten
one's mind to enable it to do the like performances.'
In reply to these words the Bodhisattva, in return
for the king's wish to relieve him, made himself known
in a proper manner. He said:
15. 'Those, always prompt to act up to my orders,
charged me with the burden of bein^ their ruler. And
I, for my part, bound to them with the affection of
a father for his children, engaged myself to bear it ; so
I did.
16. 'This, mighty sovereign, is the kind of relation
existing between them and me. It is rooted by time
and has increased the friendlyfeelings existing between
animals of the same species. Our dwelling together
has strengthened it to the mutual affection of kinsmen.'
On hearing this, the kincr affected with great admira-
tion replied
:
1 7. : The ministers and the rest of his officials are
to serve the interest of their lord, not the king to serve
theirs. For what, then, did Your Honour sacrifice
yourself in behalf of your attendants ? '
The Bodhisattva spoke : ' Verily, such is the lore of
Political Wisdom (ra^aniti), Your Majesty, but to
me it seems something difficult to follow.
18. ' It is excessively painful to overlook heavy and
unbearable pain, even if the sufferer be somebody
unacquainted with us. How much more, if those suffer
who, having their minds intent on worshipping us, are
like dear relations to us
19. 'So, on seeing distress and despair overwhelm-
ing the monkeys in consequence of their sudden
danger, a great sorrow overcame me, which did not
leave me room to think of my personal interest.
20. ' Perceiving the bows bent and the Glittering
arrows fly upward on all sides, and hearing the dreadful
noise of the strings, hastily and without further con-
sideration I ju — mped over from the tree to the mountain.
21. -'Then for the distress of my poor comrades,

' 1
XXVII. THE STORY OF THE GREAT MONKEY. 25
overcome with the highest degree of terror, drew me
—
back to them I tied a cane fast to my feet, a well-
rooted reed, suitable for the effort at which I aimed.
22. 'So I jumped once more, leaping from the
mountain-side to the tree, in order to rescue my
comrades, and with my hands I attained its nearest
branch stretched out like a hand to meet me.
23. 'And while I was hanging there with extended
body between that cane and that outstretched branch of
the tree, those comrades of mine happily made their
escape, running without hesitation over my body.'
The king, perceiving the ecstasy of gladness, which
even in that miserable condition pervaded the Great
Being, and much wondering at it, again spoke to him :
24. 'What good has Your Honour obtained, thus
despising your own welfare and taking upon yourself
the disaster which threatened others ?
The Bodhisattva spoke
25. ' Verily, my body is : broken, O king, but my mind
is come to a state of the greatest soundness, since
I removed the distress of those, over whom I exercised
royal power for a long time.
26. 'As heroes who have vanquished their proud
enemies in battle wear on their limbs the beautiful
marks of their prowess like ornaments, so I gladlybear
these pains.
27. ' Now I have requited them that long succession
of prosperity which I got by the chieftaincy over my
tribe, that showed me not only their reverence and other
marks ofworship, but also theiraffectionate attachment.
28. ' For this reason, this bodily pain does not grieve
me, nor the separation from my friends, nor the de-
struction of my pleasure, nor my approaching death
which I have incurred by thus acting. It seems to me
rather the approach of a high festival.
29. 30. ' Self-satisfaction gained by requital of
former benefits, appeasement of the solicitude (caused
thereby), a spotless fame, honour on the part of a king,
fearlessness of death, and the approbation which my
grateful behaviour will meet with from the virtuous :

252 GATAKAMALA.
O
these good qualities, thou wh — o, like a tree1 , art the
residence of excellent virtues ! have I obtained by
falling in with this wretched state. But the vices
opposite to these virtues will be met by such a king as
is without mercy for his dependents.
31. ' For, if a king be devoid of virtues, if he have
destroyed his good renown and vices have taken up
their abode in him, say, what else may he expect than
to cro to the fierce-flaming fires of hell ?
32. ' For this reason I have explained to thee,
powerful prince, the power of virtues and vices. Rule,
therefore, thy realm with righteousness. For Fortune
shows in her affections the fickle nature of a woman.
33. ' His army, not only the military men but also
the animals of war his officials his people, both
; ;
townsmen and landsmen those who have no protector;
;
and both (classes of religious people) ^rama^as and
Brahmans all of them musta king endeavour to endow
;
with such happiness as is conducive to their good, as if
he were their father.
34. 'In this manner increasing in merit, wealth, and
glory, thou mayst enjoy prosperity both in this world
and in the next. With this kind of felicity proper to
the holy kings of old (ra^'arshis) and attainable by
practising commiseration towards thy subjects, mayst
thou be illustrious, O king of men '
!
35. After thus instructing the king who, like a pupil,
listened to him with devout attention and set a high
value on his words, he left his body paralysed in its
functions by the excess of his pains, and mounted to
Heaven.
In this manner, then, those who imitate the behaviour
of the virtuous win over even the hearts of their
enemies. Thus considering, he who is desirous of
earning" the affection of men ought to imitate the
behaviour of the virtuous. [This story is also to be
propounded, when discoursing on the Tathagata. The
'
1 This simile is not improper, the speaker being a monkey.

;
XXVIII. THE STORY OF KSHANTIVADIN. 25;
creatures are not as able to bring about their own
profit, as the Lord was to bring about the profit of
others.' Likewise, when treating of listening with
attention to the preaching of the Law, when discoursing
on compassion, and also when instructing princes, in
which case this is to be said : ' In this manner a king-
must be merciful towards his subjects.' It may be
adduced also, when treating of gratitude. ' In this
manner the virtuous show their gratitude.']
XXVIII. The Story of Kshantivadin1
.
(Cp. the Pali Gataka, No. 313, Fausb. Ill, 39-43-)
Truly, to those who have wholly imbibed the
virtue of forbearance and are great in keeping their
tranquillity there is nothing unbearable. This will be
taught as follows.
One time the Bodhisattva, it is said, was an ascetic
who had forsaken the world. He had become convinced
that the life in a home, since it is beset with bad
occupations, leaves but little room for righteousness
for it is visited by many sins and evils and unfit
for quiet, inasmuch as it implies the prevalence of
material interest (artha) and sensual pleasures (kama);
it is exposed to the inroad of defiling passions : love,
hatred, infatuation, jealousy, anger, lasciviousness,
pride, selfishness, and the rest ; it involves the loss
of the possession of shame and religion, and is the
abode of covetousness and wicked lust. On the other
hand he understood the homeless state, as it avoids
material property and sensual objects, to be an agree-
able one, being wholly free from those evils. Thus
knowing, he became an ascetic, eminent by his con-
duct, his learning, his placidity of mind, his modesty,
and his self-restraint. As he was in the habit of
1 In the original Kshanti^atakam. Kshanti must here be an
abbreviation of the name Kshantivadin ; in the Pali redaction the
corresponding story bears the title of Khantivadi^ataka.

254 GATAKAMALA.
always preaching forbearance and teaching the Law
from that point of view, in strict conformity with the
vow he had taken to do so, people neglecting his
proper name and that of his family, made him a name
of their own invention, calling him Kshantivadin
(forbearance-preacher).
i. Illustrious domination or knowledge or penance,
also an extreme passion for arts, likewise anomaly of
body, language or behaviour are the causes of giving
new names to men.
2. So was the case with him. His true name
vanished for the appellation of Kshantivadin, because
knowing the power of forbearance and desiring to
adorn mankind, like himself, with that virtue he
constantly used to discourse on that topic.
3. The great endurance, which was a part of his
very nature and the firmness of which he showed by
his unaltered calm, when injured by others, as well
as his excellent sermons on that subject, gave him
the renown of a Muni.
The residence of the High-minded One was a place
in the forest, lovely by its utter solitude and exhibiting
the charming beauty of a garden ; it bore flowers and
fruits at all seasons, and encompassed a pond of pure
water embellished by white and blue lotuses. By his
dwelling there he procured for that place the holiness
of a hermitage.
4. For where pious persons adorned with ex-
cellent virtues, have their residence, such a place is
a very auspicious and lovely one, a sacred place of
pilgrimage (tirtha), a hermitage.
There he was venerated by the different deities,
who were living there, and often visited by such
people as were lovers of virtues and desirous of their
salvation. To that multitude of visitors he showed
the high favour of entertaining them with his sermons
on the subject of forbearance, rejoicing both their ears
and hearts.
Now one time in the season of summer it happened
that the king of that country, in consequence of the

XXVIII. THE STORY OF KSHANTIVADIN. 255
hot weather, was seized with a great longing to play in
the water, a very desirable thing at that time. So
he went with his harem to that place in the forest,
as it was distinguished by the different delights
proper to gardens.
While he was rambling in the wood with the
5.
beauties of his zenana spreading about on all sides,
he embellished its Nandana-like splendour, so to
speak, by the rich display of the graceful sport of
himself and his wanton retinue.
6. In the arbours and bowers, under the forest-trees
with their laughing dress of flowers, and in the water
with its expanding lotuses the king delighted in the
unrestrained expansion of the natural dalliance of the
females.
Smilingly he beheld the graceful movements of
7.
fear and its beautiful expression on the faces of some
molested by bees, that were allured by the perfumes
of the implements for bathing and anointing mixed
with the fragrance of garlands and the odour of the
rum.
8. Though they had adorned their ears with the
most beautiful flowers, and their hair wore plenty of
garlands, the women could not have enough of flowers.
In the same way the king could not look enough at
their wanton playing.
He beheld those chaplet-like clusters of females,
9.
now clinoincr to the arbours, now tarrying at the lotus-
groups, sometimes hovering like bees about the flowery
trees.
10. Even the bold lascivious cries of the cuckoos,
the dances of the peacocks, and the humming of the
bees were outdone by the tattle, the dances, and the
songs of those women.
11. The sound of the royal drums, as strong as the
rattling of thunder, induced the peacocks to utter their
peculiar cries and make a wide-spread circle of their
tails, as if they were actors worshipping the monarch
by the virtue of their art.
Then, having enjoyed, with his harem, to his heart's

256 GATAKAMALA.
content the pleasure of walking about in that garden-
like wood, as he was tired with incessant playing and
drunkenness overcame his mind, the king laid himself
down on his very precious royal couch in a beautiful
arbour, and fell asleep.
Now, when the women perceived that their lord
was no longer occupied with them, as they were not
satiated with the manifold loveliness of the forest
which kept them enchanted, they moved from that
place, and rambled about in groups formed accordingto
theirliking, mixing the confused sounds of their rattling
ornaments with the tinkling noise of their chatter.
12. Followed by the badges of sovereign power, the
royal umbrella, the royal tail-fan, the royal seat &c,
which were decorated with golden ornaments and
borne by female slaves, the women walked about, in-
dulging unrestrainedly in their natural wantonness.
13. Disregarding the entreaties of the female ser-
vants, they greedily laid hands upon the lovely
flowers and twigs of the trees within their reach,
prompted by their petulance.
14. Though they had plenty of flowers, both as
ornaments and arranged as wreaths, they left on their
way no shrub lovely by its flowers, nor tree with its
waving twigs without stripping them, out of cupidity.
Now
in the course of their rambling through the
forest, the loveliness ofwhich had captured their minds,
the king's harem approached the hermitage of Kshan-
tivadin. But those who were in charge of the royal
wives, although they knew the penance-power and
high-mindedness of that Muni, did not venture to
prevent them from entering, on account of the king's
attachment to his darlings, lest he might resent their
intervention. So the royal wives, as if they were
attracted by the splendour of that hermitage, the
loveliness of which was enhanced by (the) super-
natural power (of its occupant), entered the hermitage
and saw the eminent Muni sitting there with crossed
legs under a tree, a view auspicious and purifying to
behold. His tranquillity gave a soft expression to his

XXVIII. THE STORY OF KSHANTIVAD1N. 257
countenance the exceeding profundity of his mind
;
inspired awe his face radiated, as it were, from the
;
splendour of his penance and, owing to his diligent
exercise of dhyana, bore the beautiful expression
of calm, as is proper to undisturbed senses, even
though the loftiest subjects of meditation were present
to his thoughts. In short, he was like the embodied
Dharma. The lustre of his penance subdued the
minds of those royal wives, and the very sight of him
was sufficient to make them abandon their dalliance,
frivolity, and haughtiness. Accordingly they went
to him in a humble attitude, and sat down respectfully
in a circle around him. He, for his part, performed to
them the usual salutation, welcoming them and saying
to them kind and courteous things which are agreeable
to guests then availing himself of the opportunity
;
which their questions procured him, he showed them
his hospitality by a religious discourse, preaching in
such terms as were easily understood by women, and
illustrating his exposition of the Law with examples.
15. ' He who, having obtained the blameless human
state, and being born in the full possession of organs
and senses sound and vigorous, without any defect \
neglects —to do good actions every day from lack of
attention such a one is much deceived is he not
;
subject to the necessity of death ?
16. ' A man may be ever so excellent by his birth,
his figure, his age, his superior power, or the wealth
of his estate, never will he enjoy happiness in the
other world, unless he be purified by charity, good
conduct (jyila), and the rest of the virtues.
1 7. ' For surely, he who though devoid of a noble
birth and the rest, abhorring wickedness, resorts to
the virtues of charity, good conduct &c, such a one is
hereafter visited by every kind of bliss, as the sea in
the rainy season by the water of the rivers.
1 Bodily infirmities are the effect offormer actions. They are with
the Buddhists an impediment to proceeding on the way to salvation
for the same reason, as theyentail impurity and incompetence to assist
at sacrificial performances in Brahmanism.
S

2;8 GATAKAMALA.
18. ' To him who excels by his extraction, his figure,
his age, his superior power, or the wealth of his estate,
attachment to virtues is the most proper ornament
already in this world his golden garlands are only
;
indicative of his riches.
19. ' Blossoms are the ornaments of trees, it is
flashes of lightning that adorn the big rain-clouds, the
lakes are adorned by lotuses and waterlilies with their
drunken bees but virtues brought to perfection are
;
the proper ornament of living beings.
20. ' The various differences of men with respect to
their health, duration of life, beauty of figure, wealth,
birth may be classed under the heads of low, middle
and High. This triad is not the effect of natural
properties nor caused by external influences, indeed.
No, it is the result of a man's actions (karma).
21. 'Knowing this to be the fixed law of human
existence, and keeping in mind the fickleness and
frailness of life, a man must avoid wickedness, di-
recting his heart to pious behaviour. For this is the
way leading to good reputation and to happiness.
22. ' But a defiled mind acts like a fire, it burns
away the good of one's self and one's neighbour. He
who is afraid of wickedness, therefore, ought carefully
to keep off such defilement by cultivating what tends
to the contrary.
23. 'Asa fire, however fiercely burning, if it meet
a great river, filled up to its borders with water, be-
comes extinguished, so does the firewhich blazes within
the mind of a man, if he relies on forbearance that will
serve him both in this world and in the next.
24. ' So forbearance is of great benefit. He who
practises this virtue avoids wickedness, for he has
vanquished the causes of it. In consequence thereof
he will not rouse enmity, owing to his cherishing
friendliness. For this reason, he will be a person
beloved and honoured, and accordingly enjoy a happy
life. At the end he comes to Heaven (as easily) as if
he entered his home, thanks to his attachment to
a meritorious behaviour.

XXVIII. THE STORY OF KSHANTIVADIN. 259
' Moreover, ladies, this virtue of forbearance, I say,
25. 'Is celebrated as the superior degree of a pious
nature as the highest development obtainable by merit
;
and good repute as that purification which is attained
;
without touching water as the highest wealth afforded
;
by many affluents of virtuous properties.
26. 'It is praised also as the lovely firmness of
mind of the virtuous which is always indifferent to
injuries done to them by others; as having obtained
by its properties its lovely name of kshama 1 as
;
benefiting mankind as well acquainted with pity.
;
27. ' Forbearance is the ornament of the powerful;
it is the highest pitch of the strength of ascetics ; and
since it has the effect of a shower of rain on the con-
flagration of evils, it may be called the extinguisher
of misfortune both in this world and after death.
28. ' To the virtuous forbearance is a coat of mail,
blunting the arrows which the tongaie of the wicked
shoots off against them. Mostly it changes those
weapons into flowers of praise, which may be inserted
in the garland of their glory.
29. 'It is stated to be the killer of Delusion, that
adversary of the Dharma, and an easy contrivance by
which to reach salvation. Who, then, ought not to do
his utmost to obtain forbearance, that virtue invariably
conducive to happiness ?'
In this manner the High-minded One entertained
those female guests with an edifying sermon.
Meanwhile the king, having satisfied his want of
sleep, awoke his lassitude was gone, but his eyes
;
were still heavy with the dimness of inebriation, which
had not entirely passed away. Desirous of continuing
his amorous sport, he frowningly asked the female
servants who were Qfuardingf his couch, where his wives
were. 'Your Majesty,' they answered, 'Their High-
nesses are now embellishing other parts of the forest,
to admire the splendour of which they walked on.'
Having been thus informed by them, the king, as he
1 Kshama is a synonym ofkshanti.
S 2

26o GATAKAMALA.
eagerly desired to witness the sportive sayings and
doings of the royal wives, how they were laughing and
jesting free and unrestrained, rose from his couch,
and accompanied by his female warriors bearing his
umbrella, his chowrie, his upper garment, and his
sword, and followed by the eunuchs of his zenana,
wearing: their armour and having; reed-staves in their
hands, he marched through the forest after them. It
was easy to follow the way they had taken for they
;
had traced it out with juvenile wantonness by means of
a multitude of various blossoms, flower-clusters, and
twigs, which they had strewed about, moreover by the
red sap of the areca-nut and betel chewed by them.
So then, o-oinQ" after them he went to the hermitage.
But no sooner had the king seen that most excellent
TvYshi Kshantivadin surrounded by the circle of the
royal wives, than he was seized with a fit of wrath.
This frenzy overtook him, partly because he was long
since his enemy and bore him a grudge 1 partly in
,
consequence of his intellect being still troubled by
drunkenness and his mind overcome with jealousy.
And as his power of composing himself was small, he
lost his countenance, disregarding the laws of decency
and politeness, and submitted to sinful wrath. So his
colour altered, drops of sweat appeared on his face,
his limbs trembled, his brows frowned, and his eyes
tinged reddish, squinted, rolled, stared. The loveli-
ness, grace, and beauty of his figure had waned. He
pressed his hands together, and rubbing them, squeez-
ing thereby his finger-rings and shaking his golden
armlets, scolded that excellent Rzshi, uttering many
invectives : ' Ha, he exclaimed,
30. ' Who is that knave who injures our majesty,
casting his eyes on our wives ? Under the disguise
of a Muni this hypocrite acts like a fowler.'
These words alarmed and disturbed the eunuchs,
who said to the king : ' Your Majesty ought not to
1 This can be no wonder, for in the Pali (Jataka, that wicked
king is identified with Devadatta.

1
XXVIII. THE STORY OF KSHANTIVADIN. 26
speak so. This is a Muni who has purified his Self
by a long- life of vows and restraints and penance
;
Kshantivadin is his name.' Nevertheless the king, in
the pervertedness of his mind, did not take to heart
their words, and continued : ' Alas ! Ah !
31. ' So it is then a long time already since this
hypocrite, setting himself up as the foremost of holy
ascetics, has deceived people by his forgery
!
' Well, then, I will lay open the true nature of that
hypocrite, though he keeps it veiled with his ascetic's
dress and well conceals it by practising the art of
delusion and false godliness.' After thus speaking, he
took his sword from the hand of the female guard
(who was bearing it) and rushed on the holy AYshi
with the determination of striking him, as if he were his
rival. The royal wives, who had been informed by their
attendants of the king's approach, on seeing his fine
features changed by anger, became much afflicted, and
with anxious looks expressive of their trouble and
consternation rose from the earth, and took leave of
the holy ift'shi. Then they went to meet the king,
and as they stood near him with their folded hands
lifted up to their face, they had the appearance of an
assemblage of lotuses in autumn, when the brightness
of the flowers begins to peep out of the enclosure of
the buds.
32. Yet their graceful demeanour, their modesty and
comeliness did not appease his mind incensed with the
fire of wrath.
But the queens who commenced already to recover
from their first terror, perceiving that the king in the
fierce manner of one whose behaviour is altered by
anger was marching with a weapon in the direction of
the holyAVshi,on whom he kept fixed his adverse looks,
placed themselves in his way, and surrounding him
entreated him : ' Your Majesty, pray, do not commit
a reckless act, do not, pray. This man is the Reverend
Kshantivadin.' The king, however, owing to his
heart's wickedness, became the more angry, thinking
:
'Surely, he has already gained their affection.' He

l62 GATAKAMALA.
reproved their temerity in requesting by clear signs
(of his discontent), frowning and casting on them
angry looks, fierce as the jealousy which had taken
possession of his mind. After which, turning to his
eunuchs and shaking his head so that his royal diadem
and ear-rings trembled, he said with a glance at his
wives
:
33. ' This man speaks only of forbearance, but he
does not practise it. For example, he was not im-
passible to the covetousness of the contact with
females.
34. ' His tongue does not at all agree with his
actions, still less with his ill-intentioned heart. What
has this man with unrestrained senses to do in the
penance-forest, that he should simulate religious vows
and dress and sit down in the hypocritical posture of
a saint ?'
Now, the king in his fit of wrath having thus re-
buked his queens and shown his hard-heartedness,
they were affected with sorrow and sadness, for they
knew his ferocious nature and his contumacy which
made him inaccessible to persuasion. The eunuchs,
who were likewise alarmed, affected with anxiety, and
afflicted, made signs to them with their hands that
they should withdraw. So they went away, lowering
their faces with shame and lamenting- over that best
of y?/shis.
We
35. ' are the cause of the king's wrath against
that sinless and self-subdued holy ascetic, wide-famed
for his virtues. Who knows what will be the end of
it ? In one way or other will the king perform some
unbecoming deed, when he will make his wrath fall
down on him, however virtuous.
36. Yea, this king would be able to destroy his
own royal behaviour and his glory obtained by it,
hurting the body of that Muni, as well as the body of
his penance, and grieving our guiltless minds at the
same time !'
After — the queens thus lamenting and sighing — on his
account for what could they else do for him ? were

XXVIII. THE STORY OF KSHANTIVADIN. 263
gone, the king in wrath came up to the holy TvYshi,
threatening him with drawn sword, in order to strike
him himself. On seeing that the Great Being, though
thus assailed, kept his calmness unchanged with imper-
turbable constancy, he became the more excited, and
said to him
:
37. ' How skilled he is in playing the holy one, that
he looks even at me as if he were a Muni, persisting in
his guileful arrogance!'
The Bodhisattva, however, owing to his constant
practice of forbearance, was not at all disturbed, and as
he at once understood from that hostile proceeding,
though not without astonishment, that it was the
eagerness of wrath which caused the kino- to act in
such an unbecoming way that he had thrown off all
restraint of politeness and good manners and lost the
faculty of distinguishing between his good and evil, he
pitied that monarch and, with the object of appeasing
him, said, in truth, something like this
:
38. ' Meeting with disrespect is nothing strange in
this world for this reason, since it may also happen
;
to be the effect of destiny and guilt, I do not mind it.
But this grieves me that I cannot perform towards
you, not even with my voice, the usual kind reception,
due to those who come to me.
' Moreover hear this, O sovereign.
39. ' To such as you, who are bound to put evil-
doers on the right way and to act for the interest of
the creatures, it never behoves to do any rash action.
You should rather follow, therefore, the way of re-
flection.
40. ' Something good may be considered evil ;
inversely, something evil may appear in a false light.
The truth about anything to be done cannot be
discerned at once before inquiring by reasoning into
the differences in the several modes of action.
41. ' But such a king as gets a true insight of his
proper line of conduct by reflection and, after that,
carries out his design with righteousness by the way
of his policy, will always effect the thrift of dharma,

264 GATAKAMALA.
artha and kama in his people, nor will he be devoid
of that threefold prosperity himself.
42. ' For this reason, you ought to purify your
mind of rashness, and to be only intent on such
actions as tend to good repute. In fact, transgressions
of a decent behaviour are highly notorious, if they are
committed by persons of a high rank in whom they
were not seen before.
43. 'In a penance-forest protected by your mighty
arm, you would not suffer anybody else, in truth, to
do what is blamed by the pious and destructive to
good behaviour. How is it that you should be decided
to act in this way yourself, O king ?
44. 'If your harem came perchance to my her-
mitage together with their male attendants, what fault
of mine may be found there that you should allow
yourself to be thus altered by wrath ?
45. ' Suppose, however, there is here some fault
of mine, forbearance would become you even then,
my lord. Forbearance, indeed, is the chief ornament
of a powerful one for it betrays his cleverness in
;
keeping (the treasury of) his virtues.
46. ' Kings cannot so much be adorned either by
their dark-blue ear-rings with their reverberation of
dancing shine on the cheeks, or by the several brilliant
jewels of their head-ornament, as they are adorned by
forbearance. Thus considering, pray, do not disregard
that virtue.
47. ' Set aside irascibility which is never fit to be
relied upon, but maintain forbearance (as carefully) as
your dominions \ In truth, the lovely behaviour of
princes showing their esteem to ascetics, is full of bliss.'
Notwithstanding this admonition by that excellent
Muni, the king, troubled by the crookedness of his
mind, persisted in his false suspicion. So he addressed
him again
:
48. ' If you are not a mock-ascetic, but really
1 Literally : as if it were the earth. The comparison constiiutes
a pun in the original, for kshama may conveythe meaning of 'earth'
while it also signifies ' forbearance.'

XXVIII. THE STORY OF KSIIANTIVADIN. 26;
engaged in keeping your vow of restraint, for what
reason then do you, under the pretext of exhorting me
to forbearance, beg safety from my side 1 ?'
The Bodhisattva answered : ' Hear then, great
prince, for what reason I urged you.
49. ' I spoke so that your good renown might not
break down under the blame you would incur because
of me, if it were to be said of you " the king has killed
a guiltless ascetic, a Brahman."
50. ' Death is an invariable necessityforall creatures.
For this reason I am not afraid of it, nor have I any-
thing to fear, when I recollect my own behaviour.
51. • But it was for your sake, that you should not
suffer by injuring Righteousness, the source of happi-
ness, that I praised forbearance to you as the fit
instrument for attaining salvation.
52. ' Since it is a mine of virtues and an armour
against vices, I gladly praise Forbearance, for it is an
excellent boon, 1 offer you.'
But the king disdained these gentle flowers of speech
which the Muni offered him. Scornfully he said to
that foremost of TvVshis : ' Let us now see your attach-
ment to forbearance,' and so speaking, he directed his
sharp sword to the right hand of the Muni, which was
a little extended towards him,with a prohibitive gesture,
having its very fine and long fingers upward, and
severed it from his arm like a lotus from its stalk.
53. Yet the Bodhisattva did not feel so much pain,
even after his hand had been cut off—so steadfast was
he in keeping his vow of forbearance—as sorrow con-
cerning the cutter, whose future misfortune he saw,
which was to fall terrible and irremediable upon that
person hitherto accustomed to pleasures.
And thinking within himself 'Alas! he has trans-
:
gressed the boundary of his good, he has ceased to
be a person worth admonishing2,' and commiserating
him, as he would do a sick man given up by the
1 Instead ofasmad I read asman.
2 Cp. Story VII, stanzas 20-26.

266 GATAKAMALA.
doctors, he kept silent. But the king continued to
speak threatening words to him.
54. ' And in this manner your body shall be cut to
pieces until death. Desist from your hypocritical
penance, and leave that villainous forgery.'
The Bodhisattva made no answer. He understood
him to be deaf to admonition and had learnt his
obstinacy. Then the king successively and in the
same way cut off the other hand of the High-minded
One, both his arms, his ears and nose, and his feet.
55. Yet that foremost of Munis did not feel sorrow
or anger, when the sharp sword fell down on his body.
His knowledge that the machinery of his body must
eventually come to an end, and his habitual practice of
forbearance against everybody made him so strong.
56. In consequence of its habitual friendliness, the
mind of that virtuous one was inaccessible to the
sense of sorrow on account of himself. Even while he
saw his limbs being cut off, his forbearance remained
unshaken, but that he saw the king fallen from
Righteousness, made him sore with grief.
57. Verily, the compassionate who are great in
retaining their tranquillity throughout are not so much
afflicted by pain arising in themselves, as they grieve
on account of the sufferins: of others.
58. But the king, after performing that cruel deed,
was anon caught by a fire-like fever, and when he
went out of the gardens, earth on a sudden opened and
swallowed him.
After swallowing the king, the earth continued to
make a fearful noise, and fiery flames appeared in the
opening. This caused great consternation all around,
and perplexed and alarmed the royal attendants. The
king's ministers, knowing the grandeur of the penance-
power of that Muni and imputing to it the catastrophe
of the king, were affected with anxiety, lest that holy
jRish'i should burn down the whole country on account
of the king. Thus apprehending, they went up to the
holy TvYshi, and bowing to him entreated him with
folded hands to be propitious.

XXVIII. THE STORY OK KSIIAXTiVADIX. 267
59. ' May that king, who impelled by his infatuated
mind has put thee into this state by an exceedingly
rash action, be alone the fuel for the fire of thy curse.
Pray, do not burn his town
!
60. ' Pray, do not destroy for his fault innocent
people, women and children, the old and the sick, the
Brahmans and the poor Rather shouldst thou, being
!
a lover of virtues, preserve both the realm of that
king and thy own righteousness.'
In reply to this, the Bodhisattva comforted them :
' Do not fear,' he said, ' sirs.
61. 62. 'As to that king who just cut off with his
sword my hands and feet, my ears and nose, maiming
an innocent ascetic living in the forest, how should
a person like me aim at his hurt or conceive even
such a thought? May that king live long and no
evil befall him
63. ' A being ! subject to sorrow, death and sickness,
subdued by cupidity and hatred, consumed by his evil
actions is a person to be pitied. Who ought to get
angry with such a one ?
64. ' And should that line of conduct l be ever so
preferable, O that his sin might ripen (its unavoidable
result) in detriment of no other but me ! For to people
accustomed to pleasure meeting with suffering, even ior
a short time, is keen and unbearable.
65. ' But now, as I am unable to protect that king
who annihilated in this manner his own happiness,
for what reason should I give up that state of power-
lessness of myself and indulge in hatred against him ?
66. ' Even without a king's intervention, everybody
born has to deal with sufferings, arising from death, &c.
Therefore in this (series of evils), it is birth alone which
one has to oppose -. For this not being, what suffering
may there arise and from whence ?
67. 'For many kalpas 1 have lost my worthless
1 Viz. indulging in anger and cursing that king. The curse of
a 7?/shi, who has obtained supernatural power by his penance, is
a dreadful weapon.
2 In other words, one has to strive for final extinction.

'
268 GATAKAMALA.
body in manifold ways in numbers of existences.
How
is it that I should give up forbearance on
account of the destruction of that frame ? Would it
not be as if I were to give up a jewel of the first water
for a straw ?
68. ' Dwelling in the forest, bound to my vow of
world-renunciation, a preacher of forbearance and
soon a prey to death, how should 1 feel the desire
of revenge ? Do not fear me any longer, then, peace
be to you, go !
69. After thus instructing and at the same time
admitting them as disciples in the Lore of the pious,
that foremost of Munis, who kept his constancy un-
shaken owing to his relying on forbearance, left his
earthly residence and mounted to Heaven.
So then, indeed, to those who have wholly imbibed
the virtue of forbearance and are great in keeping
their tranquillity there is nothing unbearable. [Thus
is to be said when discoursing1 on the virtue of for-
bearance, taking the Muni for example. On account
of the vices of rashness and wrath, taking the king
for example, this story is also to be told, and when
expounding the miserable consequences of sensual
pleasures, saying : ' In this manner sensual pleasures
lead a man to become addicted to wicked behaviour
which brings him into ruin.' It may also be told with
the object of showing the inconstancy of material
prosperity.]
This story is also extant in the Avadanakalpalata, in pallava 38, as
appears from the Anukramawi, verse 15 (ya/z kshanti^ila// jantya-
bhiik /7/innango 'py avikaravan), but this part of the work has
as yet not been published nor is it found in the Cambridge MSS.
XXIX. The Story of the Inhabitant of the
Brahmaloka.
Since the tenets of unbelief are blameable, those
who are possessed by the vice of clinging to a false
belief are especially worth commiserating by the
virtuous. This will be taught as follows.

XXIX. STORY OF INHABITANT OF BRAHMALOKA. 269
One time the Bodhisattva, our Lord, havinggathered
by a constant practice of clhyana a store of good
karma, obtained, it is said, a birth in the Brahmaloka,
in consequence of the ripening of that merit. Never-
theless, owing to his having always been conversant
with commiseration in his former existences, that high
happiness of the Brahmaloka, which he had obtained
as the effect of the excellence of his dhyana, did not
destroy in him his longing for the task of benefiting
others.
1. By indulging in sensual pleasures, however
material, worldly people become utterly careless.
But a frequent absorption in the delight of meditation,
however ideal, does not hide the desire for benefiting
others from (the mind of) the pious.
Now one time it happened that the High-minded
One was passing his looks over the Region of
Sensuality' below (his Brahma-world), where Com-
passion finds its proper sphere of action, since this
is the reeion visited by hundreds of different forms
ofsufferings and calamiti•es, and contai•ni• ng the elements
for moral illnesses, disasters, injuries against living
beings, and sensual pleasures. And he perceived the
king of Videha, named Aiigadinna, erring in the
wilderness of a wrong belief, partly by the fault of his
intercourse with bad friends, partly also in conse-
quence of his being ardentlyattached to false thoughts.
That king had got this persuasion : ' there is no other
world after this how could there be anything like
;
result ripening out of good or evil actions ? and in
'
conformity with this belief his longing for religious
practices was extinguished, he was averse to per-
forming the pious works of charity, good conduct
1 The Brahmaloka or Brahma-world is in Buddhist cosmology the
world superior to the region of sensuality, the kamadhatu (see
Burnouf, Introduction, &c. p. 604) or kamavahra (see Hardy,
Manual, pp. 3, 261). Cp. Kern, Geschiedenis van het Buddhisme, I,
pp. 290, 291. Cp. Story XXX, stanza 21, where we have this series
of happiness : 1. royalty on earth, 2. heavenly bliss, 3. Brahma's
world, 4. final extinction (Nirva;/a).

270 GATAKAMALA.
(sila), &c, felt a deep-rooted contempt for such as led
a religious life, and owing- to his want of faith, bore
ill-will to the religious law-books. Being- inclined to
laugh at tales concerning the other world, and showing
but little respect and honour to .Srama^as and Brah-
mans, whom he held in little esteem, he was exclusively
given up to sensual pleasures.
2. He who is firm in the belief 'surely, there is a
world hereafter where good and evil karma produce
their fruit of happiness and mishap,' such a one will
avoid evil actions and exert himself to cultivate pious
ones. But by absence of faith a man follows his desires.
Now that king, whose disastrous attachment to
a false lore must have mischievous consequences and
become a source of calamities to his people, roused
the compassion of that High-minded Devarshi. One
time, when that king, always directed by his indulgence
in sensual pleasures, was staying in a beautiful and
lonely arbour, he descended in his flaming brilliancy
from the Brahma-world before his eyes. On beholding
that luminous being who blazed like a mass of fire,
shone like an agglomeration of lightnings, and spread
about a great brilliancy of intense light like a collec-
tion of sun-rays, the king, overwhelmed by that lustre,
was alarmed and rose from his seat to meet him
reverently with folded hands. Respectfully he looked
up to him (who stood in the air) and said
:
3. ' The sky makes thee a resting-place for thy feet,
as if it were the earth, O thou being with lotus-like
feet thou shinest far and wide, bearing the lustre of
the ; sun, so to speak. Who art thou, whose form is
a delight to the eyes ? '
The Bodhisattva replied
4. ' Know me, O king, on : e of those Devarshis who
attained Brahma's world, having by the power of their
mind's strong and assiduous attachment to religion
vanquished love and hatred1 those two proud foes, like
,
two haughty chiefs of a hostile army in battle.'
1 Love, viz. sensual love and covetousness, and hatred (with anger)

' ::
XXIX. STORY OF INHABITANT OF BRAHMALOKA. 2~I
After these words theking offered him the hospitable
reception due to a worthy guest, water to wash his
feet and the arghya-water \ accompanying this act
(of homage) with kind words of welcome and the like.
Then, casting admiring looks at his face, he said
O
1 Verywonderful, Great Tv/shi, is thy figure. Indeed,
thy power is supernatural.
'Without clinging to the walls of a building, thou
5.
O
walkest in the sky as easily as on earth. Tell me,
thou whose brightness has the lustre of a flash of
lightning, how didst thou obtain this supernatural
power ?
The Bodhisattva spoke
: O
6. ' Such superhuman power is the result, king,
of meditation (dhyana), spotless good conduct (sila),
and an excellent restraint of the senses, which I have
so practised in other existences that they became
essential elements of my nature.'
The king said : ' Does there exist in earnest anything
like a world hereafter?' The Brahman2 said: 'Verily,
Your Majesty, there is a world hereafter.' The king
said : ' But, my dear sir, how should I too be able to
believe so ?' The Bodhisattva said: 'This is a tangible
truth, Your Majesty, which maybe proved by reasoning
with the ordinary modes of proof (pramawa) per-
:
ception by the senses and the rest 3 . It is exemplified
by the declarations of reliable persons, and may be
tested by the method of accurate examination. Do
but consider this
:
7. ' The heaven, with its ornament of sun, moon and
stars, and the many-shaped variety of animals, are the
are the two great divisions of vyasanani (vices, evil habits), not only
with Buddhists. See, for instance, Manu VII, 45 foil.
1 The arghya is the name of a worshipful offering of water to
a worthy guest, given with die other ceremonial marks of hospitality
vish/ara, padya, madhuparka.
2 The inhabitants ofBrahma"s world are called Brahmans.
3 The others are inference and analogy ; for it is unlikely that the
Brahman would think of persuading a disbeliever by means of the
fourth mode of proof, revelation.

272 GATAKAMALA.
world hereafter in a concrete and visible form. Let
not thy mind be benumbed by scepticism so as not to
perceive this truth.
8. ' Further there are now and then persons who,
owing to their practice of dhyana and the vividness
of their memory, remember their former existences.
From this it must likewise be inferred, there exists
a world after this. And myself, do I not give thee the
evidence of a witness ?
9. ' Moreover, thou must infer its existence also from
this. The perfection of the intellect presupposes a
previous existence of that intellect. The rudimentary
intellect of the fetus is the uninterrupted continuation
of the intellect in the preceding existence.
10. ' Further, it is the faculty for catching matter of
knowledge that is called intellect (buddhi). There-
fore there must be a sphere of employment for the
intellect at the beginning of existence \ But it is not
possible to find it in this world, because of the
absence of the eyes and the other (organs of sense).
By inference, the place where it is to be found, is the
other world.
11. ' It is known by experience that children diverge
from the nature of their fathers and show discrepancies
of conduct and the like. Now, since this fact cannot
arise without a cause, it follows that we have to do
here with habits acquired in other existences.
12. 13. ' That the new-born child, though his mental
powers are wholly rude and his organs of sense in
a torpid state, makes an effort to take the breast
without being instructed so and almost in a state of
deep sleep, this proves his having in former existences
exercised himself as to the fit ways of taking his food.
For practice, perfecting the mind, sharpens its faculty
for acquiring knowledge for different special perform-
ances.
' Perhaps, since thou art not accustomed to the idea
of the existence of another world, thou mayst still be
1 In other words, in the state of the fetus.

"
XXIX. STORY OF INHABITANT OF BRAHMALOKA. 273
doubtful about the last statement. (Should this be the
case and shouldst thou reason in this way
:)
14. ' " Then the lotuses shutting and opening them-
selves are also a proof, indeed, of their having
already practised those movements in other existences.
Otherwise, this not being admitted, why dost thou
affirm that the suckling's effort of taking the breast is
the effect of exertion made in previous births ?
4 then thou art obliged to put aside that doubt by
the consideration that in one case there is compulsion,
in the other freedom, and exertion is not made there,
but that it is made here.
15. 'In the case of the lotuses, their opening and
shutting depend on time, but the effort to take the
breast not' so. Moreover, there is no exertion in the
lotus, but in the case of the suckling it is evident there
is. It is the power of the sun that is the cause of the
lotuses expanding.
' In this manner, then, Your Majesty, by a close and
careful examination it is possible to have faith in the
world hereafter.'
But the king, as he was deeply attached to the false
lore he professed, also because the extent of his sin
was large, felt uneasy on hearing that account of the
other world, and spoke ; ' Why, great J?zshi,
16. 'If the next world is not that (well-known) bug-
me
bear for children, or if thou judgest it fit for to
believe in it, well, lend me five hundred nishkas 1
here, and I shall give thee back one thousand in
the next existence.'
Now when the king, according to his habitual bold-
ness, had uttered without scruple this unbecoming
language, which was as it were the vomiting of the
poison of his wrong belief, the Bodhisattva answered
him in a very proper way.
17. 'Still in this world those who wish to employ
their money, in order to augment it, do not make any
loan at all to a wicked person or a glutton or a block-
1 A nishka is a gold coin, whose value varied at different times.
T

274 GATAKAMALA.
head or a sluggard. For wealth going to such persons,
tends to their ruin.
18. 'But if they see one bashful, with thoroughly
subdued senses, and skilled in business, to such a one
they offer a loan, even unwitnessed. Such a bestowal
of money produces bliss.
19. 'The very same line of conduct must be fol-
O
lowed, king, with respect to a debt payable in the
world hereafter. But it is not suitable to contract
such a loan with thee who art a person of a wicked
behaviour because of the evil doctrine thou pro-
fessest.
20. ' For, at the time when, being precipitated into
hell by thy own cruel actions originating in the sin of
a wicked lore, thou wilt lie there, sore with pains and
paralysed in thy mental powers, who would then call
upon thee for a debt of one thousand nishkas ?
21. 'There the regions of the sky do not shine in
their full feminine beauty 1 by the beams of sun and
moon, the destroyers of their veil of darkness. Nor
is the firmament there seen with its ornament of
crowds of stars, like a lake embellished by unclosed
waterlilies.
22. ' The place where the unbelievers dwell in the
next world, is encompassed with thick darkness, and an
icy wind prevails there, penetrating to the very bones
and extremely painful. Who, being wise, would enter
that hell in order to obtain money ?
23. ' Some wander for a long time on the bottom of
the hell, which is wrapt in dense obscurity and dull
with pungent smoke they are afflicted there, drawing
;
along theirrags fastened with leather thongs, and crying
with pain as often as they tumble over each other.
24. ' Likewise others are running with wounded
feet again and again in all directions in the Hell
Cvalatkukula [ = Flaming Chaff], longing for deliver-
1 The disa./i belong grammatically,and for this reason also mytho-
logically, to the females. Hence they are spoken of as women
(digahgana/^).

XXIX. STORY OF INHABITANT OF BRAIIMALOKA. 275
ance from thence, but they do not attain the end of
their sin nor of their life.
25. ' Terrible servants of Yama carve like carpenters
the limbs of others, having them fastened in different
manners, and delight in shaping them by_ cutting
with sharp knives, as if they wrought in fresh
timber.
26. ' Others again are entirely stripped off their
skin, groaning with pain, or are even bereaved of
their flesh, living skeletons, but they cannot die, kept
alive by their own evil actions. Likewise others who
are cut to pieces.
27. 'Others draw flaming chariots for a long time.
They wear broad flaming bits in their mouth and
submit to harnesses and goads of a tawny hue, being
The grounds on which they draw are of iron,
fiery.
heated by an unceasing fire.
28. ' Some have their bodies crushed, when they meet
mount Sawghata1 and ground to dust by its incursion;
,
nevertheless, even in that great suffering of the most
karma
intense degree, they cannot die before their evil
is annihilated.
29. ' Some others are being ground to dust with big
and flaming brazen pestles in troughs incandescent by
fire during a succession of full five hundred years, and
yet they do not lose life.
30. ' Others again are hanging with their heads or
even feet to trees made red-hot like corals and of
a rough surface, being beset with flaming thorns of
sharp iron. They are beaten by demons, attendants
of Yama, who chide them with harsh cries.
31. 'Others enjoy the fruit of their conduct, lying
on large heaps of burning coals, flaming and resembling
molten gold. (Helpless) they are exposed to their fate,
they can do nothing but lie and moan.
32. ' Some howl with their tongues hanging out of
their mouths, while their bodies are overcome by heavy
1 Sa/wghata is the name of a kind of infernal Symplegades. Cp.
Journal Asiatique, 8e S., tome XX, p. 184 foil.
T 2

276 GATAKAMALA,
pains caused by hundreds of sharp spears on a ground
illuminated by garlands of flames rising out of it. In
that time they are made to believe that there exists
something like a world beyond this.
33. 'There are others whose heads are encircled
with flaming diadems of brass others are boiled out in
;
pots of brass. Of others the bodies are wounded by
sharp stings of showers of weapons, and devoured by
crowds of ferocious animals, who gnaw them off to the
bones.
34. ' Others again, exhausted by toil, enter the salt
water of the Vaitara/n, but that water is painful to
touch like fire, and their flesh wastes away from their
limbs, when in it, but not their life, kept up by their
evil actions.
35. ' And those who afflicted because of the intense
torment caused by burning, have resorted to (the hell
named) A^u/t'iku^apa [the hell of unclean corpses] as to
a pond of fresh water, meet there with unparalleled
pain. Their bones are brought to decomposition by
hundreds ofworms.
36. ' Elsewhere others undergo the pain of being
burnt for a long" time. Surrounded bv fire, their
bodies flame like iron staves surrounded by flames.
Yet they do not burn to ashes, being kept alive by
their actions.
37. 'There is sawing of others with fiery saws,
cutting of others with sharp razors. Of others the
heads are crushed with hammers quickly swung, so as
to make them yell with anguish. There is roasting
on a smokeless fire of others, fixed on broad iron-spits
which pierce through their bodies. Others again are
compelled to drink liquid brass looking like blazing
fire, which makes them utter raw cries.
2)S. ' Some are assailed by spotted dogs of great
strength who with their sharp-biting teeth tear off the
flesh from their limbs they fall on the ground with
;
lacerated bodies, crying loudly with pain.
39. ' Of such a nature are the tremendous torments
in the different hells. If thou, impelled by thy karma,

'
XXIX. STORY OF INHABITANT OF BRAHMALOKA. 277
shalt once have reached that state \ who then would
think of calling upon thee for that debt at that time,
while thou art sore with sorrow and thy mind is afflicted
with exhaustion and sadness ?
40. 'It may happen that thou art staying in the hell
of brazen jars filled with the corpses of wicked people
and hard to approach because of the fire-flames, which
heat them and make thee move helplessly exposed to
the suffering of being boiled. Who then would think
of calling upon thee for that debt at that time ?
41. 'Or thou mayst lie with tied limbs on flaming
iron pins or on the earth made red-hot by a blazing
fire. While thou wilt be weeping piteously, thy body
burning away, who then would think of calling upon
thee for that debt at that time ?
42. 'Who would require that debt from thee, when
thou wilt have reached that wretched state of humilia-
tion, undereoincr terrible sufferings and not even able
to make any answer ?
43. ' Or suppose thy bones to be pierced by the
icy wind which destroys even the power of groaning,
or thy voice uttering roaring cries of pain, when thou
wilt be torn asunder, who would dare ask thee for
that money in the other world ?
44. ' Or, if rather thou wert to be exposed to the
injuries of Yama's attendants, or to lie in the midst
of fiery flames, or if dogs and crows were to feast
on thy flesh and blood, who would urge thee with a call
for money in the other world ?
45. ' Besides, when thou wert to undergo an un-
interrupted torture by striking or cutting or beating
or cleaving, by burning or carving or grinding or
splitting, in short, by the most different modes of
tearing up (thy body), how shouldst thou be able to
give back that debt to me at that time ?
This extremely fearful account of the hells missed
1 The second pada of this stanza is wanting an iambus in its
middle part. I think it is thus to be supplied : praptobhavishyasi
(yada) svakr/tapranunna/;.

278 GATAKAMALA.
not its effect upon the king. Hearing it, he became
alarmed and left his attachment to the false lore.
And having; obtained faith in the world hereafter, he
bowed to that illustrious .AYshi and spoke
:
46. ' After being apprised of the tortures in the
different hells, my mind almost dissolves from
fear, on the other hand I feel a burning sense of
anxiety, considering how I may take shelter from that
terrible pain.
47. ' For, short-sighted as I was, I walked on the
wrong road, my mind being perverted by a wicked
doctrine. Now then, let Thy Reverence be my guide
here. Thou knowest the right way. Thou art my
authority and my refuge, O Muni.
48. ' As the rising sun dispels darkness, so thou
hast dispelled the darkness of my false opinions. In
the very same manner, O 7?/shi, thou must teach me
the road, going on which I may not attain misery after
death.'
Then the Bodhisattva, perceiving his emotion and
understanding that he had changed his opinion for the
better and had now be — come a vessel fit for accepting
the Law, instructed him forh — e pitied him, likea father
his son or a teacher his pupil in this way.
49. ' The glorious way leading to Heaven, is that
by which the old kings went, who displayed their love
of virtues, behaving like good pupils towards 6Yama//as
and Brahmans, and manifested their compassion for
their subjects by their own behaviour 1
.
50. ' Therefore, subdue injustice which is very
difficult to subdue, and overcome vile covetousness
which is very difficult to overcome So thou mayst
!
mount a luminous being to the city of the Lord of
Heaven, that city with golden gates resplendent with
the most excellent jewels.
51. ' May thy approval of the lore cherished by the
1 The following stanzas are of a very ingenious composition. In
stanzas 50-54 each pada ends in two homonymous syllables put twice
in different functions, and from 55 the simile of the chariot is elabo-
rated with great skill.

XXIX. STORY OF INHABITANT OF BRAHMALOKA. 279
virtuous, and which thou acceptedst in a mind accus-
tomed to a wicked lore, be steadfast. Renounce the
latter, which is a system of injustice proclaimed by
people intent on gratifying the fools.
O
52. ' For thou hast taken the (right) road, king,
now, in that very moment, when desiring to walk on
with the pious behaviour prescribed by the True
it
Lore, thou destroyedst within thy heart the harsh
feeling against virtues.
53. ' Let, therefore, thy wealth be an instrument for
obtaining virtues, and to thy people exercise mercy,
which is an auspicious thing and will increase thine own
happiness. Be also constant in keeping the excellent
restraint of senses and good conduct. In this way
thou mayst incur no calamity in the next world.
O
54. ' Let thy rule, king, derive its entire brilliancy
from the lustre of thy meritorious actions let it be
;
relied upon by those who practise good actions, and
be lovely by its purity. So ruling thou wilt strive for
thy true happiness together with thy material interest,
and exterminate the anguish of the creatures, increasing
thereby thy glory in a lovely manner.
55. ' Thou art here (on earth) standing on thy royal
war-chariot. Letworship of the pious be thy charioteer.
Let thy own body, engendering virtues, be thy chariot.
Let friendliness be its axle, self-restraint and charity
its wheels, and the earnest desire for gathering merit
its axletree.
56. ' Control thy horses, the organs of sense, with
that splendid bridle named attentiveness. Make
prudence thy goad and take thy weapons from the
store of sacred learning. Let shame be the furniture
of thy chariot, humility its lovely pole, forbearance
its yoke. (Standing on that chariot,) thou wilt
drive it skilfully, if thou art firm in courageous self-
command.
'By keeping clown bad words thou wilt make
57.
it go without rattling of the wheels ; if thou usest
lovely language, the sound of them will be grave
and deep. Never breaking thy self-restraint will

28o GATAKAMALA.
preserve thy chariot from looseness of its constituent
parts. Thou wilt keep the right direction, if thou
avoidest going astray on the winding paths of wicked
actions.
58. 'Using this vehicle (yana), brilliant with the
lustre of wisdom, adorned by the flag of good renown
and thehigh-floatingbanneroftranquillity, and followed
by mercy as its attendance, thou wilt move in the
direction of the Highest Atman (paramatma) and
never shalt thou descend to the infernal regions,
O
kino-.'
Having thus dispelled by the brilliant beams of his
words that darkness of false lore that lay upon the
mind of the king, and shown him clearly the road
to happiness, the High-minded One disappeared on
the spot. But the king, having got a thorough
knowledge concerning the matters of the next world,
embraced the True Lore with his whole heart, and
himself as well as his officials, his townsmen, and
landsmen became intent on exercising charity, self-
command, and self-restraint.
In this manner, then, those who are possessed by
the vice of clinging to a false belief are especially
worth commiserating by the virtuous for the tenets
;
of unbelief are blameable. [This story may also
be adduced with this conclusion 'In this manner
:
listening to the preaching of the Excellent Law
(saddharma), fills up with overflowing faith.' Or
with this : ' In this manner hearing the Law preached
by another, rouses faith productive of right belief.'
And when adducing it in a discourse on praise of the
virtuous, likewise on the subject of forbearance, this
is to be said : 'In this manner the virtuous will parry
even a hostile attack by counselling their enemy for
his good, and they will do so without harshness in
consequence of their being accustomed to forbearance.'
Also when treating of saravega', it is to be said : ' In
1 Sazrcvega is the emotional state which prepares the mind to
accept spiritual instruction or to take the vow of a religious life.

1
XXX. THE STORY OF THE ELEPHANT. 28
this manner emotion of the mind makes a man inclined
to care for his salvation.']
Of this Gataka no Pali recension has been edited as yet, nor am
I aware of its occurring in other texts of the Northern Buddhists.
Yet, at least stanza 16, which containsthe pointe ofthe tale, must be
founded on some old traditional verse, one of those sacred sayings,
of which the Cataka-class of the Holy Writ is made up.
XXX. The Story of the Elephant.
If they may cause by it the happiness of others,
even pain is highly esteemed by the righteous, as if it
were gain. This will be taught by the following.
Once the Bodhisattva, itis said, was a huge elephant.
He had his residence in some forest suitable for ele-
phants, which had for its ornament, so to speak, the
young offshoots of its excellent trees, whose tops were
conspicuous by their twigs, flowers, and fruits. Its
bottom was hidden under manifold kinds of shrubs
and trees and grasses. It was beset with mountain-
ridges and plateaus that made the effect, as if they
were detained there by the charming beauty of the
forest and would not long for another place. That
wood was the abode of forest-animals, and contained
a lake of abundant and deep water. It was far remote
from the habitations of men, being surrounded on all
sides by a large desert, where there was no tree, no
shrub, no water. There he lived a solitary elephant.
1. Like an ascetic he stayed there, pleased with
leaves of the trees, lotus-stalks and water, and with
the virtues of contentment and tranquillity.
Nowone time, when the Great Being was wandering
near the border of that forest, it happened that he
heard a noise of people from the side of the wilder-
ness. Then this thought entered his mind: 'What
may this be ? First of all, there is in this direction no
road leading to any country; nor is it likely, a hunting-
partyshould have crossed a wilderness so large as this.
Still less can there be question ofan attempt to catch

282 GATAKAMALA.
my fellow-elephants, on account of the heavy toil with
which it would be attended.
2,3.' Surely, this people are either astray, their
guides having lost their way, or have been banished
in consequence of a king's anger or of their own
misconduct. Such is the nature of the noise I hear,
which is not made up of the strong tones of joy,
cheerfulness, and merriment, but rather low-spirited
sounds, as of people weeping under the overwhelming
power of a great grief.
' At all events, I will know what it really is.' Thus
reflecting, the Great Being impelled by his compassion,
hastened forward in the direction from whence the
noise of that multitude came. When he heard more
distinctly those sad and piteous accents of lamenta-
tion, unpleasant to the ears, the High-minded One,
understanding that they were cries for help uttered
by people in distress, ran with still greater swiftness,
his mind being filled with the yearning of compassion.
After leaving the thicket, owing to the naked desert
destitute of vegetation, he saw already from afar that
body of persons who cried for assistance, keeping their
eyes in the direction of the forest. They numbered
seven hundred men, and were exhausted with hunger,
thirst, and fatigue. And those men, on the other
hand, saw the Great Being coming up to them,
resembling a moving peak of a snow-covered moun-
tain, or a condensed mass of white fog, or an autumn-
cloud driven towards them by a strong wind and
;
as they were overcome with sorrow and utterly
dejected, this sight frightened them much. In their
fear they thought : ' Alas ! now we are certainly lost !'
but they could make no effort to run away hunger,
;
thirst, and fatigue had destroyed their energy.
4. Powerless by hunger, thirst, and fatigue, and
being in low spirits, they made no preparations for
flight, though the peril seemed imminent.
The Boclhisattva perceiving theiranxiety, exclaimed:
' Be not afraid ! Be not afraid ! You have nothing to
fear from my part,' and so comforting them, drew

' '
XXX. THE STORY OF THE ELEPHANT. 283
nigh, uplifting his trunk and showing its tip broad,
soft, and dark-red as copper. Moved by compassion
he asked them : ' Who are you, sirs, and how are you
come to this state ?
5. 'Your pale faces betray the effect of dust and
sun, meagre you are and suffering from sorrow and
Who
dejection of mind. are you and by what cause
have you come here ?
On hearing him utter in a human voice these words
not only indicative of a peaceful disposition, but of
the desire to succour, the men recovered their con-
fidence, and the whole assembly bowed to him. Then
they spoke
:
6. ' An outburst of the king's anger blew us away
to this region from the very eyes of our kinsmen, who
sorrowful must behold that banishment, O lord of
elephants.
7. ' Yet, forsooth, there must be still some remnant
of our good fortune and some favour of Fortune
towards us that we have drawn the attention of Thee,
who art better than friends and kinsmen.
8. ' By the auspicious sight of Thee we know we
have crossed our calamity. Who, in truth, having
seen even in his dreams such a beimj as Thee, would
not be saved from distress ?
Then that eminent elephant spoke : ' Well, how
many are you, sirs ?' The men said
9. 10. 'We numbered one thousa : nd men, O fair-
figured being, when the king left us here, but many
of us, being unacquainted with adversity, have perished
overcome by hunger, thirst, and sorrow. And now,
O lord of elephants, we estimate the number of those
still alive to be seven hundred, who being about to
sink clown in the mouth of Death, look up to Thee as
the embodied Comfort come to us to help.'
By these words the Great Being, as he was in the
habit of compassion, was moved to tears, and com-
miserating them said, to be sure, something like this :
'Alas! alas!
11. ' Oh ! How averse to tenderness, how devoid of

'
2S4 GATAKAMALA.
shame, how little anxious about the next world the
mind of that king is ! Oh ! How his senses, caught
by his royal splendour, something as fickle as lightning,
are blind to his good
!
12. 'Oh! He does not understand that Death is
near, I suppose, nor has he been taught the unhappy
end of wickedness Alas Oh Those poor and
! ! !
helpless kings who, owing to the weakness of
their judgment, are impatient of listening to words
(of counsel).
13. 'And, verily, this cruelty towards living beings
is performed on account of one single body, a perish-
able substratum of illnesses 1 Alas! Fie upon
!
ignorance !
Now, while letting his eyes full of pity and tender-
ness go over that people, this thought appeared to
the chief of elephants : ' Being so tortured by hunger,
thirst and fatigue, and their bodies having become
so weak, how may they overcome that wilderness of
an extent of many yo^anas, where they find neither
water nor shade, unless they have wholesome food ?
Nor does the forest of elephants contain proper food
for them, not even for one day, without much trouble.
Nevertheless, if they were to take their provisions
from the flesh of my limbs and to use my bowels
instead of bags, putting water in them, they would
be able to cross this desert not otherwise.
;
14. ' Let me, therefore, in their behalf employ my
body, the abode of many hundreds of illnesses, that
it may be for this multitude of men overwhelmed by
suffering, like a raft to get across their misery.
15. ' Being born a man is the proper state for reach-
ing happiness, either heavenly bliss or final extinction,
and it is difficult to attain that state. May then this
advantage not be dissolved to them
!
16. ' Further, since they are come within the com-
pass of my dominion, I rightly may call them my
1 I surmise that pada 2 ofthis line is to be read rogibhutasya
na.yina/2.

'
XXX. THE STORY OF THE ELEPHANT. 285
guests. And they are in distress and destitute of
relations hence I have to show the more pity to them.
;
17. 'And this vessel of many infirmities, this sub-
stratum of manifold toil caused by everlasting illness,
this assemblage of evils, whose name is "body," will
now, after a long time, have at last its proper employ-
ment, serving to relieve others.'
Then some of them, who suffered intensely from
the pain of hunger, thirst, fatigue, and heat, after
bowing to him with folded hands and eyes wet with
tears, in the manner of supplicants, asked him for
water by means of signs with their hands. Others
spoke to him piteous words
:
18. 'To us who are destitute of kindred, Thou art
a kinsman, Thou art our recourse and refuge. Deign
to shelter us in such a way as Thou deemest best,
Illustrious One !
Others again who had more energy of mind, asked
him to show them some place where to find water and
the way to get out of that dreadful desert.
19. 20. ' If there is here some pond or river with
cold water, or perhaps some waterfall, if a shady tree
O
may be found here on a grass-plot, tell it us, chief
of elephants. And since thou thinkest it possible to
get out of this desert, show us mercy and point out
the direction to us.
' It is a good many days that we have been staying
in this wilderness. For this reason, pray make us,
O
lord, <jet across it.'
Then the Hio;h-minded One who felt his heart
growing still more wet with pity by their piteous
requests,upliftinghis trunk asbigas the coils ofa mighty
serpent, showed them the mountain, beyond which
they could make their escape from the wilderness,
and spoke: 'Underneath this mountain there is
a large lake adorned with lotuses, white and red, and
containing pure water. Go, therefore, by this way.
With the water of that lake ye may quench your
thirst, and dispel your fatigue and (the vexation of)
heat. Then, continuing your way, not far from that

'
286 GATAKAMALA.
place ye will meet with the corpse of an elephant,
fallen clown the mountain-plateau. The flesh of its
limbs ye must take to serve for provisions on the
journey, and provide yourselves with water, putting
it in its bowels instead of bags ; after which ye have
to go farther in the very same direction. So ye will
overcome this wilderness without much hardship.'
With such comforting language the High-minded
One induced them to set out, but himself, running
quickly by another way, ascended to the top of that
mountain. Standing there, about to give up his own
body for the purpose of rescuing that body of people,
he strengthened his determination1 truly, by repre-
,
senting- to his mind something like this.
21. 'This performance does not tend to the attain-
ment ofa high state for myself, neither the magnificence
of a king of men, the possessor of the royal umbrella,
nor Heaven with the singular flavour of its surpassing
enjoyments, nor the bliss of Brahma's world, nor even
the happiness of release^;
22. ' But ifthere be any merit ofmine in thus striving
to help those men lost in the wilderness, may I become
by it the Saviour of the World, of those creatures
erring in the wilderness of Samsara. !
Having thus resolved, and not minding because of
his gladness, the painful death he would suffer by
being crushed down that deep descent, the High-
minded One gave up his body according to his design
by precipitating himself down that steep mountain.
23. While falling, he shone like an autumn-cloud or
like the moon sinking with reversed disc behind the
1 This 'strong determination' is the prawidhi, also called pra;zi-
dhana. By it he who performs some extraordinarymeritoriousaction
with the object of attaining some definite result in a future existence
proclaims his design before carryingout hisperformance. Its counter-
part in the ritual of Hinduism is the so-called sarakalpa preceding
the ceremony and contributory to its success. For other instances of
it, though the name ofprawidhi is not used there, see Story I, stanzas
30-32; VIII, stanzas 53-55.
2 Viz. 'final extinction' or nirvawa.

XXX. THE STORY OF THE ELEPHANT. 287
mountain of setting, or like the snow-cover of the peak
of that mountain, cast clown by the violent swiftness
of the wind moved by the wings of Garu^/a.
24. With the heavy noise of a whirlwind he precipi-
tated himself, shaking not only the earth and the
mountains, but the mind of Mara possessed by the
infatuation of sovereignty 1 And in his fall, he bent
.
both the forest-creepers and the forest-deities.
25. No doubt, on that occasion the Celestials, residing
about that forest, were affected with the utmost aston-
ishment. From the ecstasy of their gladness the
hairs on their body bristled, and they swung their
arms in the sky, their fine fingers turned upwards.
26. Some overspread him with a thick shower of
flowers sweet-scented and tinged with sandal-powder.
Others covered him with their upper garments, wrought
of (celestial) unwoven stuff and resplendent with
golden decorations others with their ornaments.
;
27. Others again worshipped him with hymns they
had devoutly composed, and with the reverence of
the a^ali, their folded hands resembling opening
lotus-buds. Or they honoured him with bent heads,
lowering their beautiful head-diadems,and with prayers
of veneration.
28. Some fanned him with an agreeable wind, such
as arranges garlands (of foam) on the waves and is
perfumed with the scents borrowed from the dust of
flowers. Others held a canopy of dense clouds in
the sky over his head.
29. Some were prompted by devotion to make
Heaven echo his praise with the sounds of the celestial
drums. And more, others enamelled the trees with
an untimely outburst of new twigs, flowers, and fruits.
30. The skyassumed the lovely splendourofautumn,
the sun's rays seemed to become longer, and the
Ocean trembled and shook its wave-surface as from
impatience to go and visit him out of gladness.
1 In the original ka. put twice in the second pada of this stanza
is hardlyright. In the latter place, I suppose that itshould be changed
to sa.

288 GATAKAMALA.
Meanwhile those men, following the way pointed
out to them, had reached the lake and after refreshing
;
themselves and recovering from heat, thirst, and
fatigue, going on as the High-minded One had
instructed them, they saw at no great distance from
that place the body of an elephant that had died not
long before. And they reflected : ' What a strong
likeness this elephant has to that chief of elephants
!
31. ' Is he perhaps a brother to that mighty being,
or some kinsman of his, or one of his sons ? In fact,
it is the self-same beautiful figure equalling a snow-
peak that we behold in this body, even though it be
crushed.
32. ' It looks like a condensation of the lustre of
many groups of waterlilies, like the concrete form of
moonshine, or rather like His image, reflected in a
mirror.'
But some among them who had a keener judgment
of the matter began to reflect thus : ' As far as we
see, this animal, whose surpassing beauty rivals
the elephants of the world-quarters, is that very
elephant, indeed, who has thrown himself from this
plateau, in order that He might save us from distress
who are without relations and friends.' (And having
understood so, they said
:)
2,2- ' That noise we heard, as of a whirlwind, as of
an earthquake, was caused by His fall, to be sure.
34. 'This body, in truth, is His. It has the same
yellowish-white hue of a lotus-root, and is covered with
similar hairs as white as moonbeams and adorned
with fine spots. These are the same tortoise-like feet
with white nails. And this is the same backbone
gracefully curved in the guise of a bow.
35. 'Also this is the same face long and full, em-
bellished by the furrows of his wind-perfuming juice.
And this is the same head, tall, auspicious, never
touched by a driver's goad, standing on a strong neck.
36. ' This is the same couple of tusks of a honey-
colour they boastingly bear the token (of his glory),
;
being covered with the red dust of the mountain-slope.

! ! ! ;
XXX. THE STORY OF THE ELEPHANT. 289
And this is that trunk with long, finger-like tip, where-
with He showed us this way.
' Oh ! This is, in truth, a wonder of surpassing
strangeness
37. ' Ah ! So great a friendship has He shown to us,
without first inquiring into our family, our conduct
and faith, to us broken by misfortunes and never
heard of by Him before How great must His good-
!
ness be for His friends and relations
' In every way veneration be to Him, that Illustrious
One!
38. ' Assisting the likes of us, distressed people,
overcome with fear and sorrow and desponding, He,
bearing the shape of an elephant, holds up, as it were,
the sinking behaviour of the pious1
.
39. ' Where has He been taught this extraordinary
propitiousness ? At the feet of what teacher may He
have sat in the forest ? The popular saying : ' no
beauty of figure pleases without virtues ' is exemplified
in Him.
40. ' Oh ! How He has manifested by the splendid
loftiness of His nature the auspiciousness to be ex-
pected of (his auspicious figure) Verily, even in His
!
dead body, His self-satisfaction appears in His com-
plexion shining like the Snow-mountain, as though it
laughed with joy
1 Who, therefore, will allow himself to feed oh the
body ofthis exceedinglyvirtuous being, who, surpassing
by his goodness affectionate relations and friends, was
thus inclined to help us, thus ready to sacrifice even
his own life for our benefit ? No, it becomes us
rather to pay him our debt of gratitude by the cre-
mation of his body with the proper rites and worship.'
Thus considering, they were inclined to indulge in
mourning, as if a family-disaster had befallen them
their eyes grew dim with tears and they lamented
1 I have not adopted the ingenious conjecture of Professor Kern,
sishatsatam, as I now think the text ofthe MSS. gives a good sense,
ifbut the complex ofaksharas sidatsatam is divided into two words.
Accordingly I read sidat satam udvahativa vr/ttam.
U

:
29O GATAKAMALA.
in a faltering voice. But some of them who had
a stronger frame of mind, perceiving their attitude
and understanding the difference of the cases, spoke
to them : ' Verily, by doing so this excellent elephant
would be neither worshipped nor gratified. For aught
we know, it is by the accomplishment of his design
that we ought to honour him.
41. ' For it was with the object of rescuing us, that
he, a stranger to us, yea, not even knowing us, aban-
doned in this manner his body dear to him, to his
guests, still dearer to him.
42. ' For this reason it is proper to fulfil his design.
Otherwise, would not the exertion of that being be
made fruitless ?
43. ' He has offered affectionately hiswhole property,
indeed, to entertain his guests. Who, then, would
render his hospitality fruitless by not accepting it ?
We
44. ' are therefore bound to honour him by
accepting it like the word of a teacher, whereby we
will secure also our own welfare.
45. ' After surmounting our adversity, it will be the
fit time to worship him either conjointly or severally,
and to perform for this excellent elephant the whole of
the funeral rites due to a deceased kinsman.'
Accordingly those men, keeping in mind that that
chief of elephants had taken his determination with
the object of rescuing them from the wilderness,
obeyed his words. They took their provisions from
the body of the Great Being, and filled his bowels with
water, using them as water-bags. Then following the
direction he had pointed out to them, they safely
crossed that wilderness.
In this manner the righteous highly esteem even
pain, as if it were gain, if they may cause by it the
happiness of others. [So is to be said when praising
the righteous. Likewise, when discoursing on the
Tathagata or on the subject of listening with attention
to the preaching of the Law. When treating of how
to acquire an auspicious nature, this is to be said

1:
XXXI. THE STORY OF SUTASOMA. 29
' In this manner an auspicious nature obtained by
exercise (of virtues) comes back in new existences.'
This story may also be told, when demonstrating the
virtue consisting in habitual charity. ' So the habit of
abandoning material objects makes it easy to give up
even self-love.' And on the words spoken by the Lord
at the time of His Complete Nirvana, when He was
attended with celestial flowers and celestial music
'^Something like this, in truth, is not the right manner,
Ananda, to gratify the Tathagata,' this story may serve
as the comment, by taking it for example: In this
manner worship consists in fulfilling the design (of the
person honoured), not in offerings ofperfumes, garlands,
and the like.']
In the Avadanakalpalata this tale occurs in pallava 96, 9-15, where
the Lord tells it succinctly. The elephant is called Bhadra (friendly
;
'auspicious') there. Cp.supra,stanzas 39, 40, where his atibhadrata,
respecting bhadrata, is praised. Concerning the Bhadra-elephants
cp. Kielhorn, Indian Antiquary, 1890, p. 60.
XXXI. The Story of Sutasoma.
(Cp. the Pali Gataka, No. 537, Fausb.V, 456-511, and
A"ariyapi/aka III, 12 l .)
Meeting with a virtuous person, in whatever way it
may have been occasioned, promotes salvation. Thus
considering, he who longs for salvation must strive
after intercourse with virtuous persons. This will be
taught as follows.
In the time when our Lord was a Bodhisattva, he
happened to be born, it is said, in the illustrious royal
family of the Kauravas, that dynasty wide-famed for
its glory, w^ho owing to their intentness on possessing
1 Compare Professor Kern's interesting paper on the Old-Javanese
poem Sutasoma in the Verslagen en Mededeelingen der Kon. Akade-
mie van Wetenschappen afd. Letterkunde, 3de Reeks, dl.V. pp. 8-43,
especiallynoteon p. 21. This Javanese poem, composed by Tantular,
a manuscript of which belongs to the Leiden University Library, is
based on some unknown work named Bauddhakavya, not mentioned
in Bunyiu Nanjio's Catalogue.
U 2

292 GATAKAMALA.
virtues, possessed the deep-rooted affection of their
subjects, and the splendour of whose power had put
their proud neighbours to vassalage. His father gave
him the name of Sutasoma, for he looked as lovely
as Soma (the Moon-god), his face being irradiated by
the nimbus of his hundreds of virtues. Like the
moon in the bright half of the month, his loveliness
and grace increased every day. Having in course of
time attained skill in the Vedas with their Angas and
in the Upavedas, and having been also initiated in the
worldly arts and sciences (kalas), including the ad-
ditional ones (uttarakalas), he became an object of
esteem and love to his people and might be called
a kinsman of virtues, so to speak. For he was inclined
to be a decided helper of virtues 1 his regard for them
,
was everincreasing, and he kepthimselfunder restraint
to preserve them carefully.
i, 2. Good conduct (.s'ila), learning, charity, mercy,
self-control, splendour, forbearance, wisdom, patience,
humility, modesty, shame, judgment, loveliness, re-
nown, civility, retentiveness, strength, pureness of
mind, these and such were the excellent properties
which dwelt with him. Embellished by his youth,
as it were, and deriving an additional charm from the
holiness and loftiness of his person, they were like his
constituent parts, as the (sixteen) kalas of the moon 2
.
And for this reason the king, his father, raised him
to the illustrious rank of heir-apparent, judging him
the proper person for ruling his subjects, for he knew
his high aspirations and the holiness of his nature.
3. But as he was fond of learning, he was a great
lover of religious sentences well-turned, and paid the
most distinguished reward to those who attended him
with well-said sentences.
Once it was the season of spring, and the power of
1 So elsewhere the pious are called ' partisans of virtue' (guwapa-
kshapatina/z). See, for instance, Story VII, stanza 31.
2 The exactness of the comparison would appear more, if the
numberofvirtues ofyoung Sutasoma were also sixteen. But I count
nineteen.

;
XXXI. THE STORY OF SUTASOMA. 293
the month of flowers had decorated the suburban
parks. The young offshoots of shrubs and trees over-
spread them with a soft brilliancy the opening flowers
;
gave them a charming and laughing aspect; fresh
grass-plots, like smooth woollen carpets, extended
all around over their grounds their water-basins
;
with unstained and blue water were covered with the
petals of lotuses white and blue the humming noise
;
of numbers of roaming- bees was heard in them
crowds of bold cuckoos and peacocks showed them-
selves and breezes, agreeable by their mildness,
;
fragrancy, and coolness, blew over them. The splen-
dour of those o-ardens roused gladness in the minds
of men. So the High-minded One, walking about
escorted by a small body of guards, went out to one
of those pleasure-grounds in order to divert himself.
4. Its groves resounded with the chants of the he-
cuckoo its various trees w rere bending under the
;
weight of their flowers and the grace of the gardens
;
was enhanced by their charming arbours, artfully ar-
ranged. Rambling through his groves in the company
of his wives, he resembled one enjoying the fruit of
his merit in Nandana.
5. There he delighted in the songs of the females
blending with the soft tones of musical instruments,
in their dances charmingly executed with exciting
coquetry and graceful x gesticulation, in their brilliant
amorous play in consequence of their excitement by
liquors, but no less in the loveliness of the forest.
Now, while he was staying there, a certain Brahman
who professed to be a speaker of well-said sentences,
called on him. After being received with due
respect, he sat down in that place, absorbed in the
contemplation of the prince's beautiful figure. So
the Great Being, though he was enjoying at that time
the sport allowed to his age and fallen to his share as
the effect of the power of his rich store of merit,
1 Professor Kern writesto me, that lulitac in the printed text ought
to be changed into lalita the reading ofthe MSS.
,

294 GATAKAMALA.
was nevertheless filled with great regard for that
Brahman. Before the Brahman could reap the profit
of his coming by reciting some well-turned sentences,
there suddenly arose a confused noise, checking the
sounds of song and music, destroying the merriment
of the company engaged in playful occupation, and
rousing fear and anxiety in the females. On hearing
this uproar, he kindly bade the guardians of his harem
inquire about the matter. Then his doorkeepers
hastily went to him, alarmed and with saddened faces
expressive of their fear and anxiety. They reported to
him : ' Your Majesty, this is the man-eater Kalmasha-
pada, the son of Sudasa, the cruel disposition ofwhose
mind exceeds even that of the Rakshasas. It is he,
who, as if he were an incarnation of the God of
Death, is in the habit of destroying hundreds of men.
Looking terrible and dreadful like a Rakshas, that
embodied Terror of the World, so to speak, of super-
human strength, vigour, and insolence is coming up to
this very place. Our guards are dispersed. Terror
has devoured the courage of the warriors, consternation
has dissolved their ranks, and put also the chariots,
horse, and elephants into disorder. Therefore Your
Majesty must be on your guard for your defence, or
reflect on the proper measures to be taken.' Then
Sutasoma, though knowing it well, asked them : ' Who
is that man whom you call the son of Sudasa ? ' And
they said to him : ' Is it then unknown to Your Majesty
that there was a king of the name, who having gone
out a hunting, carried away by his horse penetrated
into the very heart of the forest? There he cohabited
with a lioness, who having become pregnant, after
some time was delivered of a male human child. Some
foresters took up that boy, and brought him to Sudasa,
who being childless, brought him up as his son, and
when he passed away to the city of the Celestials \ left
him as his successor. So he came to the possession
ofhis legitimate royal dignity, but by the fault of his
1 In oiher words, ' when he died.'

:
XXXI. THE STORY OF SUTASOMA. 295
maternal origin he was fond of raw flesh. Once having
tasted human flesh and liking its relish surpassing
any other flesh, he commenced to kill and eat the
very inhabitants of his capital. Then the townsmen
prepared to put him to death. The son of Sudasa,
being afraid of them, made this promise to the goblins
who are wont to enjoy offerings of human flesh and
blood : <l If I am saved from this peril, I will perform
a sacrifice of one hundred royal princes to the goblins."
So he was saved from that peril of his life. And now
he carried off by force many, many royal princes, and
he is also come here in order to carry away a Your
Majesty, too. You have heard the matter we await
;
your orders, Your Majesty.'
Now the Bodhisattva, who was formerly aware of
the aberration of mind of the son of Sudasa and his
wicked behaviour, felt compassion for him. So he
set his mind on the design of curing him and since
;
he trusted himself to possess the qualities adapted to
the extinction of the monstrous abnormity of his
conduct, the information about Sudasa's son drawing
near, like welcome news, made him feel the sense of
gladness. And, indeed, he spoke in this manner
6. ' This man who, dispossessed from his royalty
because of his fondness for human flesh, acts like a
madman utterly unable to govern himself, having left
his royal duties and destroyed his (former) good repute
and merit, such a person, I suppose, is in a state
deserving commiseration.
7. ' This being so, what opportunity is there for me
to use force now, or what room for alarm and fear from
the side of such a one ? Rather will I utterly destroy
his wickedness without employing effort, violence, and
lorce.
8. ' And now this man who would deserve com-
miseration from my side, if even he went away from
me, comes himself to the place, where 1 am staying.
For this reason it befits me to show him hospitality.
1 Upahartum is ofcourse a misprint for apahartum.

296 GATAKAMALA.
For it is in this way that the virtuous act towards
guests.
' Therefore, it suffices that each of you mind his
ordinary duty.' So he instructed the guard of his
harem. And turning to his female life-guards, who
with eyes great and bewildered with anxiety and with
throats almost choked by agitation, prepared to bar
the way of the monster, he made them desist from
that purpose, addressing them with comforting words,
and went forward in the direction of that alarming
noise. And he saw his royal army dispersed and in
flight, pursued by the son of Sudasa, whose appearance
was dreadful. His soiled garments, loosely kept to-
gether with a girdle, hung around his body his hair
;
dressed with a diadem of bark and coarse with dust,
was dishevelled and hanging down his face wholly
covered with a thick, rugged beard which lay upon
it like darkness ; his eyes rolling with wrath and anger
looked tremendous he brandished his sword and
;
shield. The prince fearless and free from anxiety,
called out to him : ' Hallo, here I am, I, Sutasoma.
Turn to me. Why are you troubling yourself to
assail those poor people?' These words of challenge
stirred the pride of the son of Sudasa, and turning
from thence like a lion, he perceived the Bodhisattva
(waiting for him) alone, unarmed, and placidly looking
according to his nature. On seeing him he exclaimed,
'You are the very man I am seeking,' and at once with-
out delay went hastily and with impetuosity to him, and
placing him on his shoulder ran off. And the Bodhi-
sattva, considering with solicitude that his mind was
still troubled with agitation, and his heart infatuated
by wrath and arrogance kindled by the insolence of
his rejoicing at the royal forces put to flight, thought
it was no proper time now for admonition, and per-
sisted in his attitude of unconcern. On the other
hand, the son of Sudasa having obtained his wish and
thinking to have made a capture of importance,
entered much rejoiced the stronghold where he had
his residence.

:
XXXI. THE STORY OF SUTASOMA. 297
9, 10. That unholy dwelling, when appearing from
afar to the eyes of the travellers, caused them to be
frozen with horror ; for it offered an aspect as dreadful
as the dancing-place of giants and spectres 1 It was
.
encumbered with corpses of slain men, and wet with
blood horribly moistening its ground it seemed to
;
threaten every one (approaching) with the cries' of
jackals roaring there most inauspiciously and the
;
trees standing on its area, exposed to the discolouring
smoke of many funeral piles, bore dark-red leaves, the
ferocious abode of vultures and crows.
Having set down the Bodhisattva in that place, he
took his rest for a while, his eyes intently fixed on
the face of his victim, charmed as he was by his
exceeding beauty. Meanwhile the Bodhisattva re-
membered that poor Brahman who had come to him
in order to get some present for his sentences, whom
he had not yet paid the due honour, and who must
still be waiting for his return to the gardens with
hope in his heart. And this thought entered in his
mind Alas ho
: ' ! !
11. 'That Brahman came to me from afar,bringing to
me the present of his sentences and filled with hope.
What will he do now on hearing of my capture ?
12. 'Afflictedwith aburning sorrow on accountofthe
destruction of his hope, and vexed with fatigue felt the
keener because of his despair, he will either sigh, com-
miserating my fate, or chide his own destiny.'
While the Great Being was reflecting in this manner,
and his mind accustomed to commiserate (the sufferings
of others) was sore with grief on account of that Brah-
man, tears welled up in his eyes. The son of Sudasa,
seeing those tears, began to laugh aloud, and said :
Do
' leave off.
13. ' You are renowned for your wisdom proved by
many different virtues. But having come into my
power, you too shed tears
!
1 Verily, this is a true saying
1 In other words, 'as dreadful as a cemetery.'

29S GATAKAMALA.
14. 'In calamities constancy has no effect, and in
sorrow learning is of no use. No being is to be found,
indeed, who does not shake, when stricken.
' Therefore, tell me the truth.
15. ' Do you bewail your life dear to yourself, or
your wealth, the instrument of pleasures, or your
relations, or perhaps your royal rank ? Or is it the
recollection of your father who loves his son so much,
or that of your own children who now weep for you,
which makes these tears burst from your eyes ? '
The Bodhisattva said
:
16. ' It is not the thought either of my life or my
parents, children, relatives, and wives, or the recol-
lection of the pleasures of royalty, that moves me to
tears; but some Brahman who came to me hopeful,
relying on the well-said sentences he brings with him.
Forsooth, hearing that I have been carried off, he must
grieve with despair. This I remembered, and hence
my eyes are wet with tears.
1 7. ' For this reason you ought to let me go in
order that I may refresh the heart of that Brahman,
now distressed with the grief of disappointment, pour-
ing on it the water of honourable reward, and on the
other hand, that I may take from him the honey of
sentences he offers me.
18. 'After thus paying my debt to that Brahman,
I will come back to you again, that I may be also free
from debt with respect to you, and afford gladness to
your eyes beholding me returning here.
19. ' Do not, however, suspect me, troubling your
mind with the thought this may be some contrivance
of mine to go off. Men like me, O king, follow a way
different from that on which other people are wont to
walk.'
The son of Sudasa spoke
:
20. ' What you say, as if it were something worth
regard, is a thing which utterly exceeds belief. Who,
indeed, being released from the mouth of Death and
having recovered his freedom of movement, would go
to meet it once more ?

'
XXXI. THE STORY OF SUTASOMA. 299
21. 'If, having passed the danger of death hard to
overcome, you are in safety in your brilliant palace,
say, what reason does there exist that should induce
you to come back here to me ?
The Bodhisattva spoke: 'How? Does Your Honour
not understand the motive ofmy returning here, though
it is a strong one, to be sure ? Have I not promised
to come back ? For this reason, do not suspect me any
Am
longer, taking me for an equal of the villain.
I not Sutasoma ?
22. ' It is true that some, out of cupidity and fear of
death, leave veracity, as if it were a straw. But to the
virtuous veracity is their property and life therefore
;
they do not give it up even in distress.
23. ' Neither life nor the pleasures of this world will
preserve from mishap him who has fallen from veracity.
Who, then, would leave veracity for the sake of these
objects ? that virtue which is a rich mine of praise,
glory, and happiness ?
24. ' Nevertheless, in a person who is seen walking
on the road of sin or in whom there does not appear
any effort to lead a holy life, a pious behaviour becomes
a matter of disbelief. Now, what of the kind did
you perceive in my person that you should suspect
even me
?
25. ' If I had really been afraid of you, or if my
mind had been attached to pleasures, or my heartwere
devoid of compassion, do you not think I should have
met an adversary so famous for his ferocity as you, in
full armour and prepared to fight, as becomes one
proud of his valour ?
26. ' But it may be that 1 did even desire that con-
versation with you. Why, after satisfying the labour
of that Brahman, I will come back to you of my own
accord. Persons like me, in truth, do not utter an
untruth.'
Now these words of the Bodhisattva irritated the
son of Sudasa, as if they spoke of something fanciful,
and he entered upon this reflection : ' Verily, he does
greatly boast of his veracity and righteous behaviour.

300 GATAKAMALA.
Well then, I will see them, both his attachment to
truth and his love of righteousness. What matters his
loss to me, after all ? I have already my full number
of one hundred royal princes whom I subdued by
the overwhelming strength of my arm with them
I may perform my sacrifice to the goblins ; according to
my desire.' After thus considering, he said to the
We
Bodhisattva : ' Well then, go. wish to see your
faithfulness in keeping your promise and your right-
eousness.
27. £ Go, and having done for that Brahman what
he longs for, return soon meanwhile I will dress your
;
funeral pile.'
And the Bodhisattva promised him he would do so.
Then he set out for his palace, where he was wel-
comed by his household. Having sent for that
Brahman, he learnt from him a tetrad of gathas.
The Great Being, to whom the hearing of those well-
said sentences procured an intense gladness, praised
the Brahman with kind words and marks of honour,
and valuing each cratha at the rate of one thousand
(pieces of gold), rewarded him with the wealth so much
desired for.
Now his father, intending to avert him from expenses
out of place and extravagant, availed himself of this
opportunity, and admonished his son in friendly terms.
' My dear,' he said, ' when you reward well-said sen-
tences, you should know the limit, should you not ?
You have to maintain a large retinue besides, the
;
splendour of kings depends on the affluence of their
treasury. For this reason I tell you this.
28. ' Rewarding a well-said sentence with one hun-
dred is a very high estimation. It is not fit to exceed
this limit. If a man, however wealthy, be too liberal,
he will never retain the splendour of his riches for
long.
29. ' Wealth is the chief instrument of success and
an effective one for no pleasure is attainable in
;
defiance of Wealth. Fortune, indeed, like a harlot,
disregards a king who lacks an abundant treasury.'

XXXI. THE STORY OF SUTASOMA. 3OI
The Bodhisattva spoke
:
30. ' If it were at all possible to settle a limit to
the value ofwell-said sentences, Your Majesty, I would
not incur your reprehension, to be sure, if I were to
give up even my royal rank to purchase them.
31. 'Verily, such sayings by hearing which a man
gains placidity of mind, his love for salvation' is
strengthened, and the darkness (of ignorance) dis-
appears (from his intellect) by the increase of his
—
wisdom ought they not to be bought even at the
price of one's own flesh ?
32. 33. ' Holy texts are a light which destroys the
darkness of delusion (moha); they are the highest
wealth, a wealth beyond the reach of thieves and the
rest the weapon to hurt that enemy whose name is
' ;
infatuation the best counsellor and adviser as to
;
a man's course of conduct an unalterable friend even
;
in time ofdistress the painless medicine of the disease
;
called sorrow a mighty army strong enough to crush
;
the army of vices the highest treasure of glory and
;
bliss.
34-37. 'Moreover, the splendid possession of holy
texts (6Yuti) is also the principal cause of eloquent
speech. When meeting with virtuous persons, this
possession affords the opportunity of making a present
of great value in the assemblies it conciliates the
;
favour of the learned in disputes and controversies it
;
casts its light like the sun, and destroys the arrogance
and fame of envious adversaries. Its superiority is ex-
hibited bythe expressionofdelight and the high colour
in the eyes and on the faces of even common people,
when they are enraptured with ecstasy and applaud
by clapping of hands. Further it enables its pos-
sessor to demonstrate a matter with plain argument
and in a graceful way, owing to his quotations from
manifold treatises and sacred books. By its softness,
its culture, and its loveliness, eloquence may be com-
pared to a string of unfaded garlands or to the blazing
1 Compare note to Story III, stanza 21.

!
302 GATAKAMALA.
lustre of a tempered lamp 1 , and (finally) it- forcibly
gains glory for its owner. So making use of sacred
texts is a pleasant way to success.
38. 'And thosewho have heard them will betake them-
selves to the road leading to the threefold prosperity,
and free of obstructing vices and conforming their
;
behaviour to the precepts imported by those texts, and
making it excellent, they will easily cross the dangerous
passage through existences.
39. ' For so many excellent properties holy texts
are famous. Now then, havinggot them like a present,
how should I, being able to reward the giver of them,
not honour him in return ? Or, (on the other hand,)
how should I transgress your order ?
40. ' I will go, therefore, to the son of Sudasa. I do
not want either the toil ofroyalty or that other anxiety
I should incur by following the way of wickedness,
if I were to transgress my duty of keeping my engage-
ment to come back.'
These words alarmed his father, who moved by his
affection replied with earnest entreaty : ' Verily, it is
but for your good, my dear, that I spoke so. You
must not take offence at it, will you ? May your
enemies come into the power of the son of Sudasa
In fact, you made him the promise to return to him,
and for this reason you, being wont to keep your faith,
wish to accomplish your promise. Nevertheless, I will
not allow it. No sin is incurred, truly, by following
the way of untruth, if one may thereby save one's own
life and also for the sake of one's parents and other
Why
venerable persons. should you exert yourself to
avoid this precept, which is prescribed by the Veda ?
Besides, those who are skilled in the science of politics
proclaim the attachment to righteousness (dharma) in
such cases as where it evidently causes damage to
material interests (artha) and pleasures (kama), to be
mismanagement and an evil habit in kings. No more,
then, of that determination, wherewith you grieve my
1 I read vinitadipapratibho^'valasya.

XXXI. THE STORY OF SUTASOMA. 303
—
heart and disregard your own interest. But you will
object, my dear, that acting thus is dishonourable and
in contradiction to righteousness, and that it is for this
reason you cannot decide to break your promise, having
never been accustomed to do anything like this. Yet,
why should you break your promise Here have
? I
an army of footmen, chariots, horse, and elephants, pre-
pared for war, and ready to march to your rescue.
They make up an excellent body of warriors attached
to your person, yea, a legion of heroes skilled in arms
and having distinguished themselves in many battles.
In short, these forces are dreadful, like a violent stream
of water. Well, come to him, surrounded by that army,
and bring him either to submission or to death. In
this manner you will have fulfilled your promise and
at the same time saved your life.'
The Bodhisattva replied : ' I am not able to promise
one thing, Your Majesty, and perform another nor can
;
I strike at such people as deserve pity, who being im-
mersed in the mud of wicked habits and moving in the
direction of Hell, and whom I reckon my friends after
their relations haveabandonedthem andthere is nobody
to protect them. Moreover,
41. 'That man-eater performed for me something
generous and difficult to be done (by others), since he
dismissed me out of his power, relying on my faith.
42. ' So it is thanks to him that 1 got those holy
stanzas, father. For this reason he is my benefactor,
and is especially entitled to be an object of my com-
miseration.
' Cease also to be afraid of any misfortune threaten-
ing me, Your Majesty. How should he be capable of
injuring me when I come back to him, as I went ?' So
speaking the High-minded One persuaded his father
to give him leave. Then declining the entreaties of
his friends and his faithful army, who were eager to
prevent his going away, he set out for the dwelling of
the son of Sudasa, alone and free from fear and sad-
ness, for he was keeping his faith, and marched with
the aim of softening his heart, to the happiness of men.

! ' : ! !
304 GATAKAMALA.
As soon as the son of Sudasa saw the Great Being
approaching from afar, he became exceedingly aston-
ished, and his esteem and liking for him increased.
Not even his cruelty, however long practised and deep-
rooted in his defiled mind, could prevent him from
entering, indeed, upon a thought like this : ' Ah
Ah
! !
43. ' This is the wonder of wonders, to be sure, the
marvel of marvels That prince's lofty veracity
!
exceeds all that may be expected of men and deities
44. ' To me, a person as cruel-natured as Death, he
comes back of himself, subduing fear and anxiety
Ah What a constancy Bravo for his veracity !
! ! !
45. 'Justly, indeed, the renown of his truth-speaking
is wide-spread, as he now gave up his life and royal
state to keep his faith !
While he was thus affected with amazement and
admiration, the Bodhisattva drew near, saying
46. ' I have obtained that treasure of well-said sen-
tences, I have rewarded the indigent man who presented
me with it, and gladness has been procured to my mind,
thanks to you. Now I am back here. Eat me, if such
is your desire, or use me as a victim at your sacrifice.'
The son of Sudasa spoke
:
47. ' I am not in a hurry to eat you ; moreover, this
funeral pile is still smoky, and flesh gets its proper
relish only when roasted on a smokeless fire. Let us
hear meanwhile these well-said sentences.'
The Bodhisattva replied : ' Of what use is it to you,
in such a state, to listen to holy sentences ?
48. You adopted this mode of living merciless to
'
your subjects for the sake of your belly. Now these
stanzas praise righteousness. Righteousness does not
go together with injustice.
49. ' Following the wicked manner of life of Rak-
shasas and having left the way of the pious 1 you do
,
1 In other words, ' having transgressed the precepts of morality.'
Instead of sawtyaktarthapathasya, I read sawtyaktaryapa-
thasya.

' '
XXXI. THE STORY OF SUTASOMA. 2°S
not possess faith, still less righteousness. What will
you do with holy texts ?
This contempt roused the impatience of the son of
Sudasa. He answered : ' Do not speak so, sir.
50. ' Where is that king, say, who does not kill with
his bent bow in his park the mates of the hinds of the
forest ? If I in a similar way kill men for my livelihood,
I am the unjust one, so it is said, not those killers of
deer !
The Bodhisattva spoke
:
51. 'Neither do those stand on the ground of
righteousness, whose bent bows are directed against
the frightened and fleeing deer. But by far more
reprehensible than those is a man-eater. Human
beings, indeed, occupy by their birth the highest place
(in the scale of creatures), and are not allowed to serve
as food.'
Now, though the Bodhisattva had spoken very harsh
words to the son of Sudasa, the friendliness of his
nature exercised such a power that it outweighed the
ferocious nature of the man-eater. So he quietly
heard this reproof, only he laughed aloud at it, then
he spoke : ' Say, Sutasoma.
52. 'After being released by me and having
reached your home and lovely residence resplendent
with the lustre of royalty, you came back to me. For
this reason you are not skilled in political wisdom,
I suppose.'
The Bodhisattva said : ' You are wrong. On the
contrary, I am skilled in political wisdom, and there-
fore I do not put it into effect.
53. 'What, in truth, is the worth of skill in an art,
resortine to which brings about the certain fall from
righteousness without bringing about happiness ?
' Moreover, I tell you,
54. ' Those who are wise in directing their actions
along the way of political wisdom, commonly get into
calamities after death. Therefore I put aside the
winding paths of artful politics and keeping my faith,
came back.
x

GATAKAMALA.
*C>6
55. ' Also by this I show it is I who am skilled in
politics, that, leaving untruth, I delight in veracity.
For no action is declared by competent judges in
the science of politics to be well-managed which is not
attended by good reputation, satisfaction, and interest.'
The son of Sudasa spoke
:
56. ' What is that interest you perceive to be attained
by holding on veracity, that giving up your own dear
life, your relations who shed tears at your departure,
and the charming pleasures attendant on royalty, you
returned to me, in order to keep your faith before all?'
The Bodhisattva spoke : ' Many kinds of virtues
rest on veracity. Hear but the succinct account of
them.
57. 'Veracity surpasses splendid garlands by its
lovely grace and every sweet flavour by its sweetness
;
and inasmuch as it produces merit, that excellent good,
without toil, it is superior to every kind of penance
and the troublesome pilgrimages to tirthas.
58. ' Affording to glory the opportunity of spreading
among men, veracity is the way to its penetrating the
three worlds. It is the entrance-door of the abode of
the Celestials, the bridge to cross the swamps of
Sawsara.'
Then the son of Sudasa exclaimed: 'Excellent!
right!' and bowing to him and casting an admiring
look on him, said again
:
The other men come into my power, are
59. '
paralysed by affliction, and fear robs them of their
courage. In you, on the contrary, I see a splendid
imperturbation. I suppose, you are not afraid of
my
death, prince.'
The Bodhisattva spoke
:
60. ' Of what use is cowardous fear, the most unfit
means of prevention, against a thing which cannot be
avoided even with great effort ?
4 Nevertheless, and though knowing the natural
course of things in the world, people are poltroons
against death.
61. ' It is the vexation of their mind in consequence

;
XXXI. THE STORY OF SUTASOMA. 307
of their wickedness it is because they were wanting
;
in exerting themselves to perform good actions ; it is
their apprehension of sufferings in the other world.
That conscience makes them torpid from anxiety that
they must die.
62. ' But I do not remember having done anything
that should torture my conscience, and consequently
I have imbibed pure actions into my very nature.
Who, clinging to Righteousness, should be in fear of
death
?
63. ' Nor do I remember having made gifts to the
indigent, which did not tend to the gladness of both
the mendicants and myself. Who, having in this
manner obtained contentment by his gifts, clinging to
Righteousness, should be in fear of death ?
64. ' Even when reflecting for a long time, I never
recollect having taken any step towards evil, not even
in my thoughts. So the path to Heaven is cleared
Why
for me. should I conceive fear of death ?
65. ' On Brahmans, on my relations and friends, on
my dependents, on the poor, on ascetics who are the
ornaments of their hermitages, I bestowed much wealth,
giving according to the worthiness of the recipients
what each of them was in want of, that was done for
him.
66. ' I built hundreds of magnificent temples,
hospitals, court-yards, hermitages, halls, and tanks,
and by this I obtained satisfaction. Therefore I do
not fear death. Why, dress me for your sacrifice or
eat me.'
On hearing this language, the son of Sudasa was
moved to tears of tenderness, the hairs on his body
bristled, the darkness of his wicked nature vanished,
and looking with reverence up to the Bodhisattva, he
exclaimed : ' Beware ! May the evil be averted !
67. ' Verily, may he who should wish evil to such
O
a being as you, foremost of princes, take the poison
Halahala knowingly, or eat a furious serpent or flaming
iron, or may his head, also his heart, burst asunder
into a hundred pieces
!
x 2

: '
308 GATAKAMALA.
' Therefore you may tell me also those holy sen-
tences. Touched to tenderness as I am by the flower-
shower of your words, my curiosity to hear them grows
stronger. Attend also to this.
68. ' Having beholden the ugliness of my conduct
in the mirror of Righteousness, and being touched by
emotion may I not, perhaps, be a person whose mind
craves for the Law ?
Now the Bodhisattva, considering the eagerness
of his desire to hear the Law, knew him to have
become a fit vessel. He spoke : ' Being then desirous
of hearing the Law, it is right that you listen to its
preaching in the proper attitude suitable for that act.
Look here.
69, 70. ' Sitting on a lower seat, which betokens
illustrious modesty enjoying the honey of the (sacred)
;
words with eyes expanding from gladness, so to speak
;
bending one's mind c — alm and pure to the most intense
reverential attention in this way one must listen de-
voutly to the preaching of the Law, as a sick man to
the words of a doctor.'
Then the son of Sudasa covered a slab of stone
with his upper garment, and having offered this higher
seat to the Bodhisattva, himself sat down on the naked
earth before the visage of the Bodhisattva. After
which, keeping his eyes fixed with attention on his
face, he invited the Great Being: 'Speak now, sir1.'
Then the Bodhisattva opened his mouth and filling as
it were the forest with his voice deep and sonorous,
like the lovely sound of a new-formed rain-cloud,
spoke
71. 'Meeting a virtuous person but once and by
chance will suffice for
Friendship strong and for ever, not wanting
repeated assurance.'
On hearing this gatha, the son of Sudasa exclaimed,
1 This formula (bruhidaniw marsha) and the whole of this
ceremonial shows a striking likeness to the observances prescribed for
the instruction in the Veda of a pupil by his spiritual teacher.

!
XXXI. THE STORY OF SUTASOMA. 309
' Well said ! well said !' and nodding his head and
waving his fineers said to the Bodhisattva : ' Go on,
go on.'
Then the Bodhisattva uttered the second gatha.
72. ' From virtuous persons thou shouldst never
keep remote,
But follow those to worship them thyself
;
devote.
Their fragrance-spreading virtues uncompelled
must
Attain him who stands near them, as does
flower-dust.'
The son of Sudasa spoke
:
73. ' You employed your wealth in the right manner,
indeed rightly you did not mind trouble, that you did
your u ; tmost, O virtuous one, to reward well-said
sentences
' Go on, go on.'
The Bodhisattva spoke
:
74. ' The cars of kings, with jewels shining and with
gold,
With their possessors lose their beauty, grow-
ing old.
But not to pious conduct has old age access.
So strongalove of virtues pious men possess1.'
bro
(
s
T
ia
h
,
e
t
o
o
th
b
e
e
r
s
r
u
e
r
p
e
l
.
ied) O:
h
' T
o
h
w
is
gr
i
e
s
at
as
a
a
sa
s
t
h
i
o
sf
w
a
e
c
r
tio
o
n
f a
y
m
o
-
u
give me Go on, go on.'
!
The Bodhisattva spoke
:
75. ' How distant Earth from Heaven is, the East
How far from Sunset, and both Ocean's shores
From one another. Greater distance keeps
Of virtue sever'd and of wrong the lores.'
Then the son of Sudasa, who in consequence of his
gladness and surprise was filled with affection and
reverence for the Bodhisattva, said to him
:
76. ' Lovely are the gatha s I heard from you. The
elegance of their words is still surpassed by the
1 Cp. Dhammapada, verse 151.

'
^IO GATAKAMALA.
brilliancy of their contents. By reciting them you
have procured me gladness. Let me honour you in
return by offering you four boons.
1 Therefore, choose whatever you desire from my
side.'
Then the Bodhisattva, astonished at this offering,
and esteeming him for it, spoke : ' Who are you that
you should bestow boons
?
77. ' You have no power over yourself, being
dominated by a passion for sinful actions. Say, what
boon, then, will you give to another, you, whose
heart is averse to pious conduct ?
78. 'It might be that I were to declare the boon
I would ask, but that your mind would be disinclined
to give it. Who, being compassionate 1 would like to
,
provoke such a calamity ? Enough, enough have you
done for me.'
On these words the son of Sudasa was somewhat
ashamed, and lowering his face, said to the Bodhisattva:
' I beg Your Honour not to have so mean an opinion
of me.
79. ' I will give you your boons, even if it were to
my
cost life. Therefore, choose freely, prince, be it
what it may be that you desire.'
The Bodhisattva spoke : ' Well then,
80. ' Give me these four precious boons. Take the
vow of veracity; give up injuring living beings; re-
lease all your prisoners, nobody excepted and never
more eat human flesh, O you hero among m ; en !
The son of Sudasa said
:
81. 'I grant you the first three, but choose another
fourth boon. Are you not aware that I am unable
to desist from eating human flesh ?'
The Bodhisattva spoke 'Ah! Indeed! There you
:
are ! Did not I say " who are you that you should
bestow boons ?" Moreover,
1 Inasmuch as by his naming the four boons he would bring about
for the man-eater an opportunity of breaking bis faith, he might
become the involuntary causeofinfernal punishment to his neighbour.
Cp. Story XXIV, stanza 32.

XXXI. THE STORY OF SUTASOMA. 3 I I
82. 'How can you keep the vow of veracity and
refrain from injuring others, O king, if you do not
give up the habit of being an eater of human flesh ?
' Fie upon you !
S3. ' Did not you say before, you were willing to
give these boons even at the risk of your life ? But
now you act quite otherwise.
84. ' And how should you abstain from injury, killing
men in order to get their flesh ? And this being so,
what may be the value of the three boons you did
grant me ?'
The son of Sudasa spoke
:
85. ' How shall I be able to give up that very habit,
because of which I renounced my kingdom, bore hard-
my
ship in the wilderness, and suffered myself to kill
righteousness and destroy my good renown ?'
The Bodhisattva replied : * Forthis very reason you
ought to give it up.
86. ' How should you not leave that state because
of which you have lost your righteousness, your royal
Why
power, your pleasures, and your good renown ?
cling to such an abode of misfortune ?
8 J. ' Besides, it is but the vilest among men who
repent having given. How, then, should this meanness
of mind subdue a person like you ?
' Cease then, cease following after mere wicked-
ness. You ought to stir up yourself now. Is not
Your Honour the son of Sudasa?
88. ' Meat examined by physicians and dressed by
skilful (cooks) is at your disposal. You may take the
flesh of domestic animals, of fishes living in water-
basins, and also venison. With such meat satisfy your
heart, but pray, desist from the reprehensible habit of
eating human flesh.
89. ' How do you like to stay in this solitary forest
and prefer it to your relations and children and your
attendants (once) beloved ? how prefer it to enjoying
the melodious songs at night, the grave sounds of
drums reminding you of water-clouds, and the other
various pleasures of royalty ?

312 GATAKAMALA.
O
90. ' It is not right, monarch, that you allow
yourself to be dominated by your passion. Take
rather that line of conduct which is compatible with
righteousness (dharma) and interest (artha). Having,
all alone, vanquished in battle kings with their whole
armies, do not become a great coward now, when you
have to wage war with your passion.
91. 'And have you not to mind also the next world,
lord of men ? For this reason you must not cherish
what is bad, because it pleases you. But rather pursue
that which is favourable to your renown and the way
to which is a lovely one, and accept what is for your
good, even though you dislike it, taking it as medicine.'
Then the son of Sudasa was moved to tenderness
and tears, which barred his throat with emotion. He
threw himself before the Bodhisattva, and embracing
his feet exclaimed
:
92. 'Justly your fame pervades the world in all
directions, spreading about the flower-dust of your
virtues and the scent of your merit. For example,
who else but you alone, in truth, could have felt com-
passion for such an evildoer as I was, accustomed to
a cruel livelihood, which made me resemble a messenger
of Death ?
93. ' You are my master, my teacher, yea, my deity.
1 honour your words, accepting them with (bowed)
head. Never more will I feed on human flesh,
Sutasoma. Everything you told me I will accomplish
according to your words.
94. ' Well then, those princes whom I brought here
to be victims at my sacrifice, and who vexed by the
sufferings of imprisonment have lost their splendour
and are overwhelmed by grief, let us release them
together, none excepted.'
The Bodhisattva, having promised him his assistance,
set out with him to the very place where those royal
princes were kept in confinement. And no sooner
had they seen Sutasoma, than understanding that
they were set at liberty, they became filled with
extreme gladness.

3
XXXI. THE STORY OF SUTASOMA. 3
1
95. At the sight of Sutasoma the royal princes
became radiant with joy, and the loveliness of laughter
burst out on their faces, in the same way as in the
beginning of autumn the groups of waterlilies burst
open, invigorated by the moon-beams.
And the Bodhisattva, having come to them, spoke to
them comforting and kind words, and after making
them take an oath not to do harm to the son of Sudasa,
released them. Then togetherwith the son of Sudasa
and followed by those royal princes, he set out for his
kingdom, and having there made to the princes and
the son of Sudasa an honourable reception according
to their rank, he re-established them each on his royal
throne.
In this manner meeting with a virtuous person, in
whatever way it may have been occasioned, promotes
salvation. Thus consideringhe who longs forsalvation
must strive after intercourse with virtuous persons.
[This story may also be told when praising the Tatha-
gata : ' So Buddha the Lord always intent on doing
good was a friend even to strangers still in his previous
existences.' Likewise it is to be told, when discoursing
on listening with attention to the preaching of the
excellent Law: ' In this manner hearing the excellent
Law tends to diminish wickedness and to acquire
virtues.' Also it is to be told when extolling sacred
learning: 'In this manner sacred learning has many
advantages/ Likewise when discoursing on veracity
:
• In this manner speaking the truth is approved by the
And
virtuous and procures a large extent of merit.'
also when glorifying veracity, this may be propounded :
4 In this manner the virtuous keep their faith without
regard for their life, pleasures, or domination.' Like-
wise, when praising commiseration.]
Dr. S. d'Oldenburg has pointed out in his paper, quoted in my
Introduction, p. xxii, another redaction of the story of Sutasoma in
chap. 34 of the Bhadrakalpavadana, the contents ofwhich aregiven in
the translation ofthat paper, Journ. Roy. As. Soc, pp. 33I"334- 1°
some parts the account in that text is fuller, but for the most part,

314 GATAKAMALA.
according to Dr. S.d'Oldenburg, it closely followsour Gatakamala, the
verses ofwhich it 'mostly copies word for wordV Nevertheless the
extract shows one difference, I think, in a capital point. In the tale,
as it is told by iSura, Kalmashapada has already got his hundred
princes, when he comes to carry away Sutasoma, but in the said
extract of the Bhadrakalpavadana Sutasoma is the very hundredth
one.
In the Mahabharata the legend of Kalmashapada Saudasa, theman-
eater, is told, I, adhy. 176 and 177. It is very different from the
Buddhistic fashion, yet both versions must be derived from one source.
XXXII. The Story of Ayogk/ha 2
.
(Cp.the PaliGataka,No.510, Fausb.IV,491-499; A'ariyapi/akaIII, 3.)
To those, whose mind has been seized by emotion 3
,
even the brilliancy of royalty does not obstruct the
way to salvation. Thus considering, one must make
one's self familiar with the emotional state (sawvega),
as will be taught in the following.
At that time, when our Lord was still a Bodhisattva,
seeing the world exposed to the assaults of hundreds
of calamities diseases, old age, death, separation from
:
beloved persons, and so on, and understanding that it
was woe-begone, without protector, without help, with-
out guidance, He was impelled by His compassion
to take the determination of saving the creatures
according to His exceedingly good nature, bringing
about again and again the good and the highest
happiness even to people averse to him and unknown
to him. At that time, then, he once took his birth, it
is said, in a certain royal family distinguished for their
modest behaviour and their surpassing lustre, which,
in consequence of their intentness on possessing the
affection of their subjects, was manifested by their
1 In1894Dr. S.d'Oldenburgmorefullydealtwith theBhadrakalpava-
dana in a Russianbook on Buddhistic Legends in Bhadrakalpavadana
and Gatakamala. As to Sutasoma, cp. pp. 83-85 ofthat book.
2 That ayog/'/ha is the name of the prince, not an appellative,
appears from the Pali recensions. He was named so, since he was
brought up in the ' iron house ' (ayogrz'ha).
3 Sawvignamanasam ; compare note on p. 280.

XXXII. THE STORY OF AYOGRIUA. 315
increasing prosperity and riches without hindrance, as
well as by the submissiveness of their proud vassals.
Hisvery birth adorned both that court and that capital,
always sympathising with their princes in weal andwoe,
with the brilliant show of a festival day.
1, 2. (At the court) a large distribution of gifts filled
the hands and satisfied the minds of Brahmans, and
the attendants were proud of their very brilliant
festival garments 1 (Outside the palace) the streets
.
resounded with the tones of many instruments and
with the blending noise of singing, jesting, laughing,
as the gladness of the hearts manifested itself by
various merriment, dancing, and wantonness. Every-
where people meeting told each other with exultation
and embraces the happy news, which gave them the
same contentment as a present, and they magnified the
felicity of their king.
The doors of the prisons were opened, and the
3.
prisoners set at liberty. Flags floating at the tops
of the houses decorated the places, and the ground
was covered with fragrant powders and flowers, and
moistened with spirituous liquors. So adorned, the
town bore the lovely and bright appearance of
a festival.
4. From the splendid dwellings of the wealthy
abundant showers of different goods clothes, gold,
:
jewels &c. poured down, so that it seemed as if
Felicity, doing her best to pervade the world, with
lovely sport imitated Gafiga in madness -.
Now at that time it happened as a rule that every
prince born to the king soon died: Supposing that
rule to be the effect ofgoblin-power 3 he ordered, with
,
1 Apparently the attendants had received that new attire as
a present.
2 The presents strewed about are compared either with the cascade
of the Ganges at Gahgadvara, where the river rushes into the valley,
or with the mythological account of Gahga. hurling down from heaven
to earth at the instance of Bhagiratha.
3 In the Pali redaction the new-born children are in fact carried
away by a goblin, a Yakkhini.

3I 6 GATAKAMALA.
the object of saving the life of that son, the building
which was to serve for lying-in chamber to be wholly
constructed of iron, (though) ornamented with magnifi-
cent figures wrought of jewels, gold, and silver. The
preservative rites destructive ofgoblins were performed
there according to the precepts expounded in the
Science of Spirits and ordained by the Veda and
;
likewise the different customary auspicious ceremonies
which have the effect of securing prosperity. As to
his son, he had the ^atakarma 1 and the other sacra-
ments performed to him in that iron-house, and let
him grow up there. Owing to that most careful
guard, but no less to the excellent goodness of his
nature and to the power of his store of merit, no
goblins overpowered the Great Being. In course of
time, after the sacraments and initiatory rites had been
performed, he was instructed by teachers illustrious for
their knowledge of the sacred texts, their extraction,
and behaviour, who were renowned and honoured as
scholars, and attached to the virtues of tranquillity,
modesty, and discretion. Having learnt from them
many branches of science, and being favoured by the
loveliness of youth, which made his figure grow fuller
day by day 2 further displaying that attachment to
,
modesty which was innate in him, he became an object
of the greatest love both to his relations and the people
at large.
5. People go after a virtuous person, though no
relation nor acquaintance of theirs, with the like joy
as if they honoured a friend. It is the brilliancy of
his virtues which is the cause thereof.
6. In the season of autumn, when the moon freely
shooting his beams all around is the laugh of Heaven,
say what kind of relation does there exist for the people
Him
to ?
1 The king had those sacraments performed by his purohita, the
king's constant and customary representative in sacrificial and
ceremonial matters.
2 It is plain that the image of the crescent moon is present to the
author's mind.

!
XXXII. THE STORY OF AYOGK/HA. 6*
I
So then the Great Being was enjoying the bliss that
had fallen to his share as the effect of the power of his
merit. He was petted with plenty of objects of celestial
brilliancy standing at his disposal, and his father, who
loved him much and bore him high esteem, was no
more anxious about him, trusting he would be safe.
Now once on the occasion of the Kaumudi-festival
recurring in course of time, it happened that the
Bodhisattva was desirous of contemplating the lovely
beauty and the display of brilliancy in his capital.
Having obtained the permission of his father, he
mounted the royal chariot to take a drive. This
chariot was embellished with fair ornaments of gold,
jewels, and silver gay flags and banners of various
;
colours were floating aloft on it ; its horses well-
trained and swift, were adorned with golden trappings
;
it was driven by a charioteer distinguished for his
dexterity, skill, comeliness, honesty, modesty, and
firmness, and followed by a retinue adorned with
a picturesque and brilliant attire and armour. Pre-
ceded by the delightful tones of musical instruments,
the prince with his train passed through the capital
in many directions, and let his eyes roam over the
spectacle of the streets crowded with townsmen and
landsmen in their lovely festival array, who with looks
agitated by curiosity, were wholly intent on seeing
him, and all along his way received him with praise
and worship, folded hands and bent heads, and
pronounced blessings over him. Nevertheless, though
the contemplation of this beautiful spectacle was
a proper occasion for conceiving a great rejoicing
within his mind, he regained by it the remembrance
of his former births. So familiar to his nature was
the feeling- of sa^/vega.
7. ' Alas ' (he thought), ' piteous is the state of the
world and displeasing because of its unsteadiness.
The brilliant splendour of this Kaumudi-day, how
soon will it exist but in the memory
8. ' And yet, such being the condition of all creatures,
how heedless of danger men are, that they hurry after

:
3I 8 GATAKAMALA.
rejoicings with untroubled minds, though every way
around them is obstructed by death
!
9. ' Disease, old age and death, three enemies of
irresistible strength, stand near ready to strike, and
there is no escape from the dreadful world hereafter.
How then may there be opportunity for merriment
to an intelligent beings ?
10. ' The clouds, that poured out streams of water
with tremendous noise, alm0ost 0in an0ger,0imitating, as
it were, the uproar of great seas, the clouds with their
o-olden ogarlands of flashing- lightning's, being- born of
e>
agglomeration come ag;ain to dissolution.
11. ' The rivers, that flowing with increased rapidity
carried away trees together with the river-banks, upon
which they had their roots, afterwards and in course
of time assume again a mean appearance, as if they
were burnt away by sorrow.
1 2. ' The violence of the wind, too, blowing down
peaks of mountains, dispersing masses of clouds,
rolling and stirring up the waves of the ocean, becomes
extinguished.
13. 'With high and blazing flame sparkling about,
the fire destroys the grass, then it abates and ceases.
By turns the different beauties of the groves and
forests appear and disappear, as time goes on.
14. 'What union does there exist which has not its
end in separation ? what felicity which is not liable
to mishap 1 ? Since inconstancy, then, is proper to the
course of worldly things, that mirth of the multitude is
a very thoughtless one/
In this manner the Hieh-minded One reasoned
within himself. Utterly touched with emotion, his
heart became averse to that rejoicing and festival
mirth he paid no longer attention to the groups
;
of people, however picturesque, flocking to embellish
1 This sentence is expressed in a similar way in a jloka, recurring
several times in Divyavadana (ed. Cowell, p. 27 ; 100 ; 486)
sarve kshavanta nikaya/i patananta/2 samuH7;raya//
sawyoga viprayoganta marawanta/w kz ^ivitam.
Cp. also supra, Story VI, stanza 7.

XXXII. THE STORY OF AYOGRIUA. 319
the capital. In this disposition of mind he perceived
that he had already returned to his palace. His
emotion increased still by this, and considering that
there is no other refuge but Righteousness, since it is
unconcerned with sensual pleasures, he made up his
mind to embrace the state of a virtuous life. At the
first opportunity he visited the king, his father, and
with folded hands asked leave to set out for the
penance-forest.
15. 'By taking the vow ofworld-renunciation I wish
to bring about the good of my Self, and I want your
leave which I shall hold for a favour and a guidance
to this (goal).'
16. On hearing this request of his well beloved
son, the king, as if he were an elephant wounded
by an empoisoned arrow or a deep sea shaken by the
wind, was seized with shivering, for his heart was sore
through grief.
17. And desiring to withhold him, he embraced him
affectionately, and in a faltering voice obstructed by
his tears spoke : ' My son, why have you made up
your mind to leave us so suddenly ?
18. 'Who is that man who, being a cause of dis-
pleasure to you, causes his own ruin, rousing in this
manner Death (against himself) ? Say, whose relations
have to wet their faces with tears of sorrow ?
19. 'Or do you perhaps apprehend, or have you
heard of, any improper act of mine ? Then, tell it,
that I may put an end to it. But I myself do not
perceive anything of the kind.'
The Bodhisattva spoke
:
20. ' What improper act may be found in you, being
thus intent to show me your affection ? And who
would be capable of assailing me with grief? '
' But why then do you want to leave us ? ' replied
the king with tears. Then the Great Being answered:
4 Because of the peril of death. Do but consider,
Your Majesty.
21. 'From the very night when a man obtains his
residence in the maternal womb, he moves towards

;
320 GATAKAMALA.
death, O hero among men, marching without interrup-
tion in that direction day after day.
22. ' May a man be ever so skilled in the manage-
ment of his affairs, ever so strong, nobody escapes
Death or Old Age, both of whom infest every place in
this world. For this reason I will resort to the forest
to lead a virtuous life.
23. ' Haughty princes vanquish by bold attack whole
armies in splendid battle-array of footmen, horse,
chariots, and elephants but they are powerless to
;
defeat that enemy named Death, though he is alone.
Therefore I am resolved on taking my refuge in
Righteousness.
24. ' Guarded by their forces made up of brisk
horses and elephants and footmen and chariots,
princes succeed in making their escape from their
enemies but all princes since Manu, together with
;
their armies, succumbed helplessly to the superior
power of that enemy whose name is Death.
25. ' Furious elephants crush in battle with their
pestle-like tusks the gates of towns, the bodies of men,
chariots, and other elephants. Yet the same tusks
that were victorious even over town-walls will not
push back Death, when that foe rushes on them.
26. ' Skilled archers pierce their enemies with
their arrows in battle, though distant and sheltered
by shield and armour strong and artfully wrought
but they never hit that enemy of old, named Death.
27. ' Lions may abate the martial lustre of elephants,
plunging their cutting claws in their frontal globes, and
with their roarings they may pierce the ears and frighten
thehearts oftheir adversaries; butwhen they encounter
Death, their insolence and strength are broken, and
they fall asleep.
28. ' Kings inflict punishment on their enemies
havine sinned against them according to the measure
of their guilt but if that enemy whose name is Death
;
has greatly sinned against them, they do not think of
enforcing their law-sentences upon him.
29. ' Likewise kings may conquer a foe who has

XXXII. THE STORY OF AY0G/J7IIA. 32 I
offended them by means of the (well-known) ex-
pedients conciliation and the rest but Death, that
: ;
ferocious enemy, whose insolence is strengthened
by the long duration of his hatred, is not to be
subdued with such craft.
30. ' Serpents in wrath bite men, and the poison of
their pointed teeth has the burning effect of a fire
blazing awfully, kindled as it is by their anger ; but
against Death, though always clever in doing harm
and therefore deserving of punishment, their effort of
bitingO- is deficient.
31. ' If a man has been bitten by serpents, however
furious, medical men will appease the poison by means
of charms and medicines but Death is a serpent with
;
imperishable teeth and irresistible poison, his power
cannot be put down by charms, medicines and the like.
32. ' Gammas will stir up the abode of crowds of
playing fishes, shaking with the flapping of their wings
the water out of the seas with a thunderlike dreadful
noise, then seize the serpents with their outstretched
fangs yet they are unable to destroy Death in that
;
boisterous manner.
^t,. ' Tigers by their surpassing swiftness overtake*
the deer of the forest running away with fear, and
easily crushing them upon the earth, as if playing,
with the thunderbolt of their unequalled claws, drink
their blood but they have no skill to proceed in the
;
same way with Death.
34. ' It may happen perchance that a deer having
come within the reach of a tiger's mouth with its tre-
mendous teeth, makes his escape even then. But who,
having; reached the mouth of Death with the bi«; teeth
named disease or old age or grief, can become sound
again
?
p,$. ' Demons (grahas), deformed and ferocious-
looking, drink up the vital strength and absorb the
lives of the men they hold with a strong grasp ' ; but
1 In the Pali redaction these demons are specified by the names of
yakkha, pisaM, and peta (= Sans, preta//), different classes of
goblins.
Y

322 GATAKAMALA.
when time has come for them likewise to wage war
with Death, they will lose their insolence and ferocity.
$6. ' Such as are masters in magic arts may subdue
those demons, if they come up to do harm to godly
persons, by the use of penance-power, evil-averting
spells, and medicinal herbs but against that demon,
;
whose name is Death, there is no remedy at all.
37. ' Such as are skilled in the art of bringing about
magical illusions, perplex the eyes of a great assembly1 .
Yet Death, too, must have still some power, that his
eye is not bewildered even by those.
38. ' Both those who by their penance-powerful
charms checked the virulence of poison, and the ex-
cellent physicians who extinguished the diseases of
men, even Dhanvantari and such as he, have dis-
appeared. Therefore my mind is ben£ on practising
righteousness in the forest.
39. ' The Vidyadharas, owing to their might made
up of manifold spells and powers, make themselves
visible and again invisible, go through the air or
descend to the earth. Nevertheless, when they meet
Death, they too have lost their might.
40. ' The lords of the Celestials (the Devas) drive
back the Asuras in spite of their haughtiness, and
themselves in turn in spite of their haughtiness are
driven back by the Asuras. Yet, even both armies
combined, a host that would march with just pride
against any adversary, are not able to vanquish Death.
41. 'Understanding this ferocity of the nature of
Death, our enemy, and his irresistibleness, I am no
longer pleased with the life at home. It is not from
ano-er that I leave nor in consequence of diminished
affection, but I have resolved upon a life of righteous-
ness in the forest.'
The king said : ' But what hope do you set upon the
forest-life, the danger ofdeath being thus irremediable ?
what hope on taking the vow of a holy life ?
42. ' Shall not Death, our enemy, attain you also in
1 Jugglers may effect illusions ofthe kind. The fourth act of the
Ratnavali affords an instance ofthat indra^ala.

'
XXXII. THE STORY OF AYOG/J/HA. 323
the forest ? Did not the i^/shis die who kept their
vows of righteousness in the forest ? In every place
the course of life you wish to adopt is practicable,
indeed. What profit, then, do you see in leaving your
home and resorting to the forest ?
The Bodhisattva spoke
:
43. ' No doubt, Death equally visits those at home
and those in the forest, the righteous as well as the
vicious. Yet the righteous have no reason for remorse,
and righteousness is nowhere easier to be attained than
in the forest, to be sure.
' Will Your Majesty deign to consider this ?
44. ' The house is an abode of carelessness (about
one's moral and religious duties), of infatuation, sensual
love, concupiscence, hatred, of everything contrary to
righteousness. What opportunity of applying one's
self to it may be found at home ?
A
45. ' householder is distracted by many bad occu-
pations the care of earning and guarding his goods
;
agitates his mind, which is also troubled by calamities
arising or approaching. At what time may a house-
holder take the way of tranquillity ?
46. ' In the forest, on the other hand, after leaving
that multitude of bad occupations and being freed from
the troublesome care of worldly goods, a man is at his
ease and may strive for tranquillity exclusively and
with a satisfied mind. So he will come to happiness
and righteousness and glory.
47. ' Not his wealth nor his power preserves a man,
nothing but his righteousness. It is righteousness
that procures him great happiness, not the possession
of a large estate. And to a righteous man death
cannot but procure gladness. For no fear of mishap
exists for him who is devoted to a holy life.
48. 'And as good and evil are distinguished by their
different characteristic marks and separated from each
other by the discrepancy of the actions belonging to
each, in the same way the result, too, of wickedness
is mishap, but that of beautiful righteousness a happy
state.'
Y 2

GATAKAMALA.
24
In this manner the Great-minded One persuaded
his father. He obtained his father's permission and re-
nouncing his brilliant royal bliss, as if it were a straw,
took up his abode in the penance-grove. Having
acquired there dhyanas of immense extent and es-
tablished mankind in them, he mounted to Brahma's
world.
In this manner even the brilliancy of royalty does
not obstruct the way of salvation to those, whose mind
has been seized by emotion. Thus considering, one
must make one's self familiar with the emotional state
(sa/wvega). [This is also to be told, when expounding
the right conception of death : ' So the thought that
one may die soon causes the sense of sa7;zvega.'
Likewise, when expounding that death should always
be present to our mind, and when teaching the
temporariness of everything : ' So all phenomena l are
perishable.' Also, when inculcating the tenet of
taking no delight in the whole Universe : ' So nothing
which has form (samskrzts) - is reliable.' And also
with this conclusion : ' So this world is helpless and
succourless.' Also this may be propounded 'In this
:
manner it is easy to obtain righteousness in the forest,
but not so for a householder.']
XXXIII. The Story of the Buffalo.
(Cp. the Pali Gataka, No. 278, Fausb. II, 385-388.'
A"ariyapi/aka II, 5.)
Forbearance deserves this name only if there exists
some opportunity for showing it, not otherwise. Thus
1 Anitya/z sarvasawskara^, one of the most popular sayings of
the Lord.
2 Properly speaking, the sa/zzskrz'ta is the phenomenon, and the
sa/nskara/^ are the 'fashions' or ' forms' of the perceptible objects
as well as of the perceiving mind. But the latter term is not rarely
likewise indicative of the things or objects (see Childers, Dictionary,
s. v. sawzkharo), and the former is here nearly a synonym of
namarupa.

XXXIII. THE STORY OF THE BUFFALO. 325
considering, the virtuous appreciate even their injurer,
deeming him a profit. This will be shown by the
following.
The Bodhisattva, it is said, one time lived in some
forest-region as a wild buffalo-bull of grim appearance,
owing to his being dirty with mud, and so dark of
complexion that he resembled a moving piece of
a dark-blue cloud. Nevertheless, though in that
animal-state, in which there prevails complete igno-
rance and it is difficult to come to the conception of
righteousness, he in consequence of his keen under-
standing, was exerting himself to practise righteous-
ness.
1. Compassion, as if it had a deep-rooted affection
for him in return for his long service, never left him.
But some power too, either of his karma or his nature,
must be taken into account to explain the fact that he
was so.
2. And it is for this reason, in truth, that the Lord '
declared the mystery of the result of karma to be
inscrutable, since He, though compassion was at the
bottom of his nature, obtained the state of a beast,
yet even in this condition retained his knowledge of
righteousness.
Without karma the series of existences cannot
3.
be it is also an impossibility that good actions should
;
have evil as their result. But it must be the influence
of small portions of (evil) karma that caused him now
and then, notwithstanding his knowledge of righteous-
ness, to be in such (low) states2 .
Now some wicked monkey, knowing his natural
goodness which had manifested itself in course of
time, and understanding from his habitual mercy that
anger and wrath had no power over him, was in the
1 In his Buddha-existence, ofcourse.
2 This apology isnot superfluous,indeed. Though fablesofanimals
have been adapted of old so as to form part of the stock of sacred
lore of the Buddhists, the contradiction between the low existences of
the most virtuous ones and the doctrines about the karma is as great
as possible.

326 GATAKAMALA.
habit of vexing the Great Being very much by dif-
ferent injuries. ' From him I have nothing to fear,'
so he thought.
4. A rascal is never more eager to insult and never
displays greater insolence than towards people meek
and merciful. Against those he performs his worst
tricks, for he sees no danger from their side. But
with respect to those from whence a suspicion of
danger, however slight, strikes him, he will behave,
oh so modestly, like an honest man his petulance is
! ;
quieted there.
Sometimes, then, while the Great Being was calmly
asleep or nodding from drowsiness, that monkey would
of a sudden leap upon his back. Another time, having
climbed on (his head), as if he were a tree, he swung
repeatedly (between his horns). Sometimes again,
when he was hungry, he would stand before his feet,
obstructing his grazing. It happened also now and
then that he rubbed his ears with a log. When he
was lonorinor to bathe, he would sometimes climb on
his head and cover his eyes with his hands. Or having
mounted on his back, he would ride him perforce, and
holding a stick in his hand counterfeit Yama ! And
.
the Bodhisattva, that Great Being, bore all that un-
becoming behaviour of the monkey without irritation
and anger, quite untroubled, for he considered it a
benefit, as it were.
5. It is the very nature of the wicked, indeed, to
walk aside from the way of decent behaviour, whereas
forbearance is something like a benefit to the virtuous,
owing to their habitual practice of going that way.
Now of a truth, some Yaksha who was scandalised
at those insults of the Great Being, or perhaps wished
to try his nature, one time when the wicked monkey
was riding the buffalo-bull, placed himself in his way,
saying Be not so patient. Art thou the slave of
: '
1 The common representation of Yama is sitting on the back of
a buffalo with a staff in his hand. See, for instance, Varahamihira
B/vhatsawhita 58, 57 dandi Yamo mahishaga^.

XXXIII. THE STORY OF THE BUFFALO. 327
that wicked monkey by purchase or by loss at play,
or dost thou suspect any danger from his part, or dost
thou not know thine own strength, that thou sufferest
thyself to be so abused by him as to become his riding
my
animal? Verily, friend,
'The thunderbolt of thy pointed horns swung
6.
with swiftness could pierce a diamond, or like the
thunderbolt, cleave huge trees. And these thy feet
treadingwith furious anger, would sink in the mountain-
rock as in mud.
7. ' And this body of thine is, like a rock, solid and
compact, the splendid strength of its muscles makes its
beauty perfect. So thy power is well-known to the
vigorous by nature, and thou wouldst be hard to
approach even for a lion.
8. ' Therefore, either crush him with thy hoof by an
energetic effort, or destroy his insolence with the sharp
edges of thy horns. Why dost thou suffer this rogue
of a monkey to torment thee and to cause pain to thee,
as if thou wert powerless ?
9. ' Where is it ever seen that an evildoer is
brought to reason by a cure consisting in a virtuous
behaviour towards him, modesty, and kindness ? This
treatment being applied to such a one who is to be
cured by pungent and burning and harsh remedies,
his insolence will wax like a disease arising from the
phlegm1.'
Then the Bodhisattva looking at the Yaksha spoke
to him mild words expressive of his adherence to the
virtue of forbearance.
10. 'Surely, I know him a fickle-minded one and
always fond of iniquity, but for this very reason it is
right, in truth, that I put up with him.
"11. 'What forbearance is that, practised towards
somebody of greater strength, against whom it is im-
possible to retaliate ? And with respect to virtuous
1 Indianmedicinedivides the diseasesintothree classes, according to
their origin from one of the three humours : phlegm (kapha), wind
(vata), and bile (pitta).

'
328 GATAKAMALA.
people standing firm in honesty and decent behaviour,
what is there to be endured at all ?
12. 'Therefore we ought to endure injuries by
a feeble one, though having the power of revenge.
Better to bear insults from such a one than to get
rid of virtues.
13. ' Ill-treatment by a powerless one is the best
opportunity, in truth, for showing virtues. With what
purpose, then, should the lover of virtues make use of
his strength in such cases so as to lose his firmness
of mind ?
14. ' Besides, the opportunity for forbearance, that
virtue always of use, being difficult to obtain inas-
much as it depends on others, what reason could
there be to resort to anger just then, when that
opportunity has been afforded by another
?
15. 'And if I did not use forbearance against him
who disregarding the damage of his own righteous-
ness (dharma), acts as if to cleanse my sins, say who
else should be ungrateful, if not I ?
The Yaksha spoke : ' Then wilt thou never be
delivered from his persecutions.
16. 'Who may be able to chastise the ill-behaviour
of a rascal having no respect for virtues, unless he
sets aside humble forbearance ? '
The Bodhisattva spoke
:
17. 'It is not suitable for him who longs for happi-
ness to pursue comfort or prevention of discomfort
by inflicting grief on another. The result of such
actions will not tend to the production of happiness.
My
18. ' persistence in patient endurance is, in fact,
an admonition to awake his conscience. If he does
not understand it, he will afterwards assail others of
a hasty temper who will stop him in his pursuit of the
wrong way.
19. 'And having been ill-treated by such a one,
he will no more do these things to such as me.
For having received punishment, he will not act in
this (unbecoming) manner again. And so I will get
rid of him.'

:
XXXIV. THE STORY OF THE WOODPECKER. 329
On these words the Yaksha, affected with faithful
contentment, amazement, and respect, exclaimed
' Well said ! well said ! ' and moving his head and
shaking his (extended) fingers, magnified the Great
Being with kind words such as these
:
20. ' How is it possible that beasts should possess
a conduct like this ? How didst thou come to
this degree of regard for virtues ? Having assumed
with some purpose or other this animal-shape, thou
must be somebody practising penance in the penance-
forest '
!
After thus eulogising him, he threw the wicked
monkey off his back, and taught him a preservative
charm after which he disappeared on the spot.
;
In this manner, then, forbearance deserves this
name only, if there exists some opportunity for showing
it, not otherwise : thus considering the virtuous ap-
preciate even their injurer, deeming him a profit.
[So is to be said, when discoursing on forbearance.
And this ma)- also be said 'In this manner is shown
:
the imperturbable tranquillity of the Bodhisattvas,
even when in the state of a beast how, indeed, should
;
it become a human being or one who has taken the
vow of a homeless life to be deficient in it 1? ' This
story is also to be told, when praising the Tathagata
and when discoursing on listening with attention to
the preaching of the Law.]
XXXIV. The Story of the Woodpecker.
(Cp. the Pali Gataka, No. 308, Fausb. Ill, 25-27.)
Even though provoked, a virtuous person is in-
capable of betaking himself to wickedness, having
never learnt to do so. This will be taught as follows.
The Bodhisattva, it is said, lived in some place of
a forest as a woodpecker distinguished by his beautiful
1 Cp. the conclusion of Story XXV.

5 ^O GATAKAMALA.
and lovely feathers of manifold colours. But though
in that state, owing to his habitual compassion, he did
not follow the way of living of his kind, a sinful one
since it involves injuries to living beings.
i. With the young shoots of the trees, with the
sweet and delicious flavours of their flowers, and with
their fruits of different hue, scent, and relish he kept
such diet as was dictated by his contentment.
2. He manifested his care for the interests of others
by preaching to others the precepts of righteousness
on proper opportunities, by helping the distressed
according to his power, and by preventing the base-
minded from immodest actions.
The whole multitude of animals in that part of
the forest, being thus protected by the Great Being,
thrived and were happy for in him they possessed
;
a teacher, as it were, a kinsman, a physician, a king.
3. In the same degree as they, being well protected
by the greatness of his mercy, increased in virtues,
in the very same degree his protection endowed them,
though making up a collection of substances, with
increase of their qualities l
.
Now one time, when the Great Being, according
to his pity for the creatures, was rambling through
parts of the forest, it happened that he saw in some
part of the wood a lion who overcome by an ex-
ceedingly heavy pain was lying on the earth, as
if he were hit with a poisonous arrow, having his
mane disarranged and dirty with dust. And drawing
near to him, moved by compassion, he asked him
:
' What is the matter, king of the quadrupeds ? Thou
art seriously ill, indeed, I see.
4. 'Is this illness caused by exhaustion after in-
dulging too much in boldness against elephants ? or
1 The point of this stanza is lost in translation. The term
sattvakaya admits oftwo acceptations,according to its being applied
to the philosophical and to the ordinary use of the word sattva. So
the same compound may signify 'a body ofanimals' and 'a collection
of substances.' Similarly the term gu/;a means 'virtue' as well as
' quality.'

XXXIV. THE STORY OF THE WOODPECKER. 3^1
in excessive running after deer ? or art thou hit with
an arrow by a hunter ? or has some disease seized
thee ?
5. ' Say then, what ails thee, if at least it may be
told to me. Likewise tell me what may be done for
thee in this case. And if perhaps I possess some
power for the benefit of my friends, thou must enjoy
the profit I may bring about by it and recover thy
health 1.'
The lion spoke : ' Thou, virtuous and best of birds,
this illness is not the effect of exhaustion nor is it
caused by disease nor occasioned by a hunter's arrow.
my
But it is the fragment of a bone that sticks here in
throat and, like the point of an arrow, causes grievous
pain to me. I can neither swallow it down nor throw
it up. Therefore, it is now the time of assistance by
friends. Now, if you know the way to make me
sound, well, do it.' Then the Bodhisattva, owing to
the keenness of his intellect, thought out some means
of extracting the object which was the cause of his
pain. Taking a piece of wood large enough to bar
his mouth, he spoke to the lion : ' Open thy mouth
as wide as ever thou canst.' After he had done so,
the Bodhisattva having placed the log tightly between
the two rows of his teeth, entered the bottom of his
throat. With the top of his beak he seized that
fragment of bone sticking athwart in it by one edge,
and having loosened it, took it by another edge, and
at last drew it out. And while retiring, he dropped
the log which barred the lion's mouth.
6. No wound-healer, however skilled in his art and
clever, would have succeeded even with great effort
in extracting that extraneous substance, yet he pulled
it out, thanks to his keen intellect, though not exer-
cised by professional training2 but proper to him
,
through hundreds of existences.
1 The last pada of this jloka looks corrupt in the original, yet
without encumbrance of the main sense which is evident.
2 Cp. the beginning of Story XIV, p. 125.

2 GATAKAMALA.
7. After taking away together with the bone the
pain and anguish caused by it, he felt no less gladness
at having relieved his suffering fellow-creature, than the
lion at being released from the pain-causing object.
This, indeed, is the essential property of a virtuous
person.
A
8. virtuous person having effected the happiness
of another or stopped his mischief even with difficulty,
will enjoy a greater amount of excessive gladness, than
he would on account even of prosperity happening to
himself and easily obtained.
So the Great Being having relieved his pain, was
rejoiced in his heart. He took leave of the lion, and
having received his thanks went his way.
Now some time after, it happened that the wood-
pecker flying about with his outspread wings of
exquisite beauty, could nowhere get any suitable food,
so that he was caught by hunger which burnt his
limbs. Then he saw that same lion feasting" on the
flesh of a young antelope fresh killed. His mouth and
claws and the lower end of his mane being tinged
with the blood of that animal, he resembled a frag-
ment of a cloud in autumn, immersed in the glow
of twilight.
9. Yet, though he was his benefactor, he did not
venture to address him with words of request, dis-
agreeable to the ear for however skilled in speech,
;
shame imposed upon him a temporary obligation of
silence.
10. Nevertheless, as his wants required satisfaction,
he walked up and down before his eyes in a bashful
attitude. But that scoundrel, though well aware of
him, did not at all invite him to join in the repast.
1 r. Like seed sown on a rock, like an oblation
poured out on ashes that have lost their heat, of that
very nature is, at the time of fruit, a benefit bestowed
on an ungrateful person, and the flower of the vidula-
reed.
Then the Bodhisattva thought : ' Surely, he does
not know me again,' and approaching him with a little

'
XXXIV. THE STORY OF THE WOODPECKER. 333
more confidence, asked him for a share, supporting his
demand with a proper benediction after the manner
of mendicants.
12. ' Much good may it do thee, lord of the quadru-
peds, who procurest thy livelihood by thy prowess
!
I beg thee to honour a mendicant, which is an instru-
ment for thee to gather good repute and merit.'
But the lion disregarding this kind blessing, un-
acquainted as he was with the behaviour of the pious
(arya), owing to his habitual cruelty and selfishness,
fixed a sidelong look on the Boclhisattva, as if he
were willing- to burn him down with the flame of the
anger blazing out of his fiery eyes, and said : ' No more
of this.
13. ' Is it not enough that thou art alive, after enter-
ing the mouth of a creature like me, a devourer of
fresh killed deer who does not know of unmanly
mercy
?
14. ' Is it to insult me that thou darest molest me
thus another time with a demand. Art thou weary
of thy life ? Thou wishest to see the world hereafter,
I suppose.'
This refusal and the harsh words expressing it,
filled the Bodhisattva with shame. He flew directly
upward to the sky, telling him in the language of his
extended wings he was a bird, and went his way.
Now some forest-deity who was indignant at this
injury, or who wanted to know the extent of his
virtuous constancy, mounted also to the sky, and said
to the Great Being : ' Excellent one among birds, for
what reason dost thou suffer this injury inflicted by
that scoundrel on thee, his benefactor, though thou
dost possess the power of revenge ? What is the profit
of overlooking that ungrateful one in this manner ?
15. 'He may be ever so strong, thou art still able
to blind him by a sudden assault on his face. Thou
mayst also rob the flesh of his repast from between
his very teeth. Why then dost thou suffer his
insolence ?
At that moment the Bodhisattva, though having

334 GATAKAMALA.
been ill-treated and insulted, and notwithstanding the
provocation of the forest-deity, manifested the extreme
goodness of his nature, saying : ' Enough, enough of
this manner of proceeding. This way is not followed
by such as me.
16. 'It is out of mercy, not with the desire of gain,
that the virtuous take care of a person in distress, nor
do they mind whether the other understands this or
not. What opportunity for anger is there in such
a case ?
17. ' Ingratitude cannot but tend to the deception of
the ungrateful one himself. Who, indeed, wishing a
service in return, will do good to him a second time ?
18. 'As to the benefactor, he obtains merit and the
result of it in the world hereafter in consequence of
his self-restraint, and an illustrious renown still in this
world.
19. 'Moreover, if the benefit has been performed
in order to practise a righteous action, why should
it be regretted afterwards ? If done with the purpose
of receiving something in return, it is a loan, not a
benefit.
20. ' He who because of the ingratitude of his
neighbour prepares to do him harm, such a one,
in truth, after first earning a spotless reputation by
his virtues, will subsequently act after the manner
of elephants.
21. 'If my neighbour by the infirmity of his mind
does not know how to return the benefit, he will also
never obtain the lovely lustre inherent in virtues but,
;
say, what reason should there exist for a sentient being
to destroy, on account of that, his own lofty renown ?
' But this seems to me most becoming- in this case.
22. ' He in whose heart a service done by a virtuous
person did not rouse a friendly disposition, such a one
is to be left, but gently, without harshness and anger.'
Then the deity, rejoiced at his well-said sentences,
praised him, exclaiming repeatedly : ' Well said ! well
said ! ' and adding many kind words.
23. 'Though exempt from the toil caused by

XXXIV. THE STORY OF THE WOODPECKER. 335
matted hair and a bark garment, thou art a /vYshi,
thou art a holy ascetic knowing the future ! It is not
the dress, truly, that makes the Muni, but he who
is adorned by virtues is the real Muni here.'
After thus distinguishing him and honouring him, he
disappeared on the spot.
In this manner, then, a virtuous person is incapable
of betaking himself to wickedness, even though pro-
voked, having never learnt to do so. [So is to be said
when eulogising the virtuous. And when discoursing
on forbearance, this is to be propounded : 'In this
manner a man practising forbearance will rarely meet
with enmity, rarely with reproach, and will be beloved
and welcome to many people.' When praising ad-
herence to tranquillity, this is to be said: 'In this
manner the wise being great in preserving their tran-
quillity preserve theirown lustre of virtues.' Likewise,
when glorifying the Tathagata and praising the culti-
vation of an excellent nature : ' In this manner a good
nature being always striven after does not pass away,
even when in the state of a beast.']

SYNOPTICAL TABLE
OF THE CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN THE STANZAS OF THE
GATAKAMALA AND THE SCRIPTURE VERSES
OF THE PALI GATAKA.
* Indicates a very close andpartly verbal agreement.

GATAKAMALA.
138
(7atakamala.

SYNOPTICAL TABLE.
Gatakamala.

GATAKAMALA.
34Q
XXIII. Mahabodhig-ataka = Fausb. No. 528.
Catakamala.
Stanza 13, 14
15
16
66-69
70
5,
71
5,

INDEX.
abhhjwa, page 206. Bauddhakavya, 291.
Abhiparaga, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, Benares, 183, 186, 187, 245.
121, 122, 123. Bodhi (proper name), 202.
Act ofTruth, 16, 132, 136, 137, 141. Bodhi, see Buddhahood.
Agastya, thestory of, VII. 46-55. Bodhisattva, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12,
Agni, 140. 18, 20, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,30, 31,
Agnihotra, 49. 32 , 33, 35, 39,46,48, 49, 50, 51,
Agnimalin, 129. 52,53,54,55,56,7i,74, 73, 81,
A^ita, 4. 82, 83, 84,85,86, 87,89,91,92,
Almsgiving, eulogy of, 24. 93, 104, 109, in, ii2, 113, 114,
Andhakas, 145. 124, 125, 128, 132, 134, 136,
Angels, charged with the care of 137, 138, !4°, Mi, 148, 151,
rain, 94, 135. 154, 156, 157, 158, 159, 162,
Anger, sermon on, 178-180. 163, 165, 166, 167, 169, 173,
Aniruddha, 164. 174, 175, 176, 178, 180, 181,
Annihilation, doctrine of, 207, 213. 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190,
Angadinna, 269. 195, 197, 199, 200, 201, 202,
Ahgas, see Vedahgas. 203, 204, 205, 207, 208, 209,
Ape, 38, 45 ; for the rest cp. 2IO, 219, 221, 222, 224, 227,
Monkey, 228, 229, 232, 234, 235, 236,
story of the great, XXIV. 218- 239, 24O, 24I, 243, 244, 245,
227. 248, 250, 251, 253, 263, 265,
Apsaras(as), 17, 97, 115, 117. 266, 267, 269, 270, 271, 273,
arghya, 271. 278, 28l, 282, 29I, 295, 296,
Arhat, 22, 105. 297, 299, 3OO, 301, 303, 304,
artha, a means forattainingdharma. 3°5, 306, 307, 308, 309, 31°,
— 27-29. 311, 312, 313, 314, 3r9, 325,
9, 95, 195, 202, 253, 264, 302, 327, 328, 329, 331, 332, 333.
312. Bodhisattvas, 125, 329.
Asuras, 105, 322. Bodhisattvavadanakalpalata, 8, 19.
Aju/'ilui«;ipa, 276. 20, 37, 41, 7i, 78, 93, 200, 268,
avabh/v'tha, 95, 97. 291.
Avadanakalpalata, sec Bodhisattva- Brahma (n.), 43, 68.
vadanakalpalata. Brahma (m.), 98.
Avadanajataka, 37. Brahmadatta, 182, 186, 245.
Avishahya, 30, 31. Brahmaloka,269, 270, 271, 286, 324.
Story of, V. 30-37. Story of the inhabitant of the,
A\\k\, 147. XXIX. 268-281.
Ayogr/'ha, story of, XXXII. 314- Brahman, majestic figure of a, 143 ?
324. Brahmans abhorfalsehood, 144 ;
the Brahman with the four
A
Adityas, 131. well-said sentences, 293, 294,
Ananda, 164, 181, 199, 291. 297, 298, 299, 300; the Brah-
apaddharma, in, 223. manwhoasked the Bodh.'s eye,
Aryasthaviriyanikaya, 139. ir, 12, 13, 15 ; the Brahman in

;42 GATAKAMALA.
the shape ofwhom Sakra tried Diti, 104.
the hare, 42, 43, 44. Divyavadana, 8, 20, 56, 318.
Brahman,storyofthe,XII. 109-114. d?ksha, 95, 102.
Brahmawi, A, 85. dikshita, 95, 102.
Brihaspati, 123. Dog, a, 204.
Brothers,thesix,oftheBodhisattva,
154, 155, 156, 157, 159, 160. Dhammapada, 21, 139, 143.
Buddha, 1, 8, 67, 218, 313, 325. Dhanvantari, 322.
Buddhas, 21. dharma, 9, 27, 69, 95, J95, 207, 211,
Buddhahood, 1, 56, 69. 214,216,259,263,302,312,328.
Buddha-virtues, 5. Dharma (personified), 94, 177, 257.
Buddhayana, 5. Dh/v'tarasiura, 181.
buddhi, 272. dhyana, 55, 174, 206, 257, 269, 271,
Buffalo, story ofthe, XXXIII. 324- 272, 324.
329.
Elephant, 161, 162 ; awhite, 73, 74,
Bhadra, 291. 75,78.
Bhadrakalpavadana, 313, 314. Story ofthe, XXX. 281-291.
bhakti, doctrine of, 211. Elephantsoftheworld-quarters,288.
Bharuka/WAa, 125, 134.
bhavanas, 3. False doctrines, 206,207, 209-214,
216, 218.
Celestials, celestialgods, see Devas. Fear ofDeath, 306, 307 discourse
Charity praised, 19, 24, 28, 29, 30, on the, 3i9-323- ;
3i, 32, 35, 36 , 45, 54, 60, 72, Fish,storyofthe, XV. 134-138.
73 ; excess of, 75. Five, the (first followers of the
Childless one, story of the, XVIII. Lord), 71.
148-154. Forbearance,praiseof, 258,259, 264,
Comrade, the, of the Bodhisattva, 265, 328.
156, 160. Forest-deity, 333-335-
Curse, the effect of penance-power,
176, 267 ; strong liquor,anem- Gandharvas, 7,92.
bodied Curse, 146. Ganges, 245, 315.
Gawas, 17.
Dadhimalin, 129. garbhadhana, 109.
Daityas, 54, 105, 186, 192, 229. Garu</a(s), 287, 321.
Danavas, 105. gathas, tetrad of, 300, 308, 309.
Delusion (= maya) 259; (= moha) Goblins,57,58,63,295,300,315,316.
301. Goldland, 125.
Demoness, 117. grahas, 321.
Demons, 105, 106, 107, 108, 126, Gruel, story of the small portion of,
128 (= graha) 320, 321. III. 20-25.
;
Destiny, 14, 123, 166. Guild, story oftheheadofa,IV.25-
Detachment praised, 151, 156, 253. 3°-
Devadatta, 260. guru, the,ofAryajura, 2.
Devaputras, 55, 161, andseeAngels.
Devarshi, 270. Galin, 82, 86.
Devas, 7, 14, 44, 63, 90, 92, 96, 97, Gataka, the Pali, 8, 18, 19, 20, 21,
106, 107, 108, 119, 136, 182, 25, 30, 37, 46, 71, 93, I04, 109,
287, 322. 114, 124, 125, 126, 130, 132,
Cit L y or o d f t o h f e, the 2 , 4 s ; ee ha S l a l kr o a f ; th r e a , nk 45 of ; 1 1 5 3 9 3, , 1 1 3 6 4 0 , , 1 1 3 6 7 4 , , 1 1 3 7 8 2 , , 1 18 4 1 1 , , 1 18 5 2 4 , ,
the, 28; world of the, 38, 45, 19°, J95, 200, 214, 218, 227,
96; sovereignty of the, 113; 234, 244, 245, 253, 260, 268,
old, 146. 291, 3M, 324, 329-
Devil, the embodied, 226. Commentaryonthe, 160, 161, 162.
Devi, 131. gatakarma, 2, 46, 109, 316.

• ;
INDEX. 34;
Gvalatkukula, 274. Aandra, 45.
Hawsa, the supreme, 44. F"or the ATariy 1 a 3 p 7 i , /ak 1 a 3 , 8, 8, 15 37 4 , , 46 1 , 72, 71, 23 9 4 3 , , 2 i 9 3 1 4 , ,
rest, cp. Swan. 314, 324.
Hare, story ofthe, VI. 37-45. ATitni, 164.
Halahala, the poison, 307. ATudyabodhi, story of, XXI. 172-
Hells, description of, 274-277. 181.
Himalaya or Himavat, 36, 141, 186,
218, 244, 289. Leprosya punishmentfortreachery,
Hitopadeja, 200. 225, 226.
Hospitality praised, 39-44, 49 Lion, 33Q-333-
Lioness, 294.
Indra, 16, 68, 196. Liquors, sin ofdrinking strong, 142,
148; discourse on the sin of
Ijvara, 206, 211, 212. drinking, 144-147.
Lokapalas, 80, 177.
Jackal,thefriendofthehare, 38,42, Lotus stalks, story of the, XIX.
45- 154-164.
Jar, story ofthe, XVII. 141-154. Love-god, 91, 117, 119, 175, 176.
Jewels (the three), or Triratna, 2.
Madri, 78, 79, 81, 82, 88, 89,90, 91,
Kailasa, 73. 92"
Kaiangala, 161. Madhudatar, 164.
kalis, 2, 292. Magic, the power of, 15, 44, 207,
Kalmashapada, see the son of 215.
Sudasa. Mahabodhi, story of, XXIII. 200-
karma, 269, 275, 276 ; doctrine of, 218.
206, 212, 325; result of, 148, Maharaurava, 27.
258, 270, 325; harvest of, 225, Maitribala, story of, VIII. 55-71.
239; evil, 239. Mangala Buddha, 93.
Kathasaritsagara, 20, 124, 200. Man-eater, the, see Kalmashapada.
Kaumudi, 117. Manmatha, 7, 118.
Kaumudi-festival, 116, 317. Manu, 320.
Kauravas, 291. Mare-mouth, the, 131, 132.
Kaiodayin, 164. Maruts, 131.
kama, 9, 95, 195, 202, 253,264, 302. Maudgalyayana, 164.
kamadhatu, 269. Manasa,Lake,18x,183,185,186,187.
kainava^ara, 269. Mara, 26, 27, 29, 30, 91, 287; hosts
Kara, 47. of, 5.
Kajyapa, 51, 53; (another) 164. Matali, 106, 107.
Kfuyapa, the Buddha, 161. Mercy, discourse on, 243, 244.
King's duties,a, 216, 217, 250, 252, Merit and Meritorious actions, 8,
278-280. 23, 24, 25, 26, 39, 40, 45, 68,
Kiri/avatsa, 118. 233, 245, 279 ; power of, 9, 20,
Kojala, 20. 3°, 39, I33s r36, 200, 201, 316,
Kr/'shwa^ina, 82, 86, 87. 317; result of, 19, 22, 23, 94.
Krz'ta Yuga, 9, 99, 101. Meru, 4, 58, 66, 69.
kshama, 259, 264. Milinda Pasha, 93.
kshanti, 253, 259. Monastery, the Great, 161.
Kshantivadin,253,254,256, 260,261. Monkey, 43, 161, 162,207,208,215,
Story of, XXVIII. 253-268. 244, 245, 247, 248, 249; the
Kshemendra, 8,93. wicked, 325, 326, 327.
Kubera, 31, 56, 68, 145. Story ofthe great, XXVII. 244-
Kubjottara, 164. 253.
Kujamfdin, 130. Monks,false, 215.
Mountain, the golden, see Meru
;
Khuramalin, 128. the snow-bright, see Himalaya.

GATAKAMALA.
544
Muni, epitheton ofthe Buddha, and Rahu, 192.
theBodhisattva, i,55, 262,265, Rakshasas, 32, 57, 58, 61, 294.
278; foremost of Munis, 266, Recollection of former existences,
268 , Lord of Munis, 141. 20, 22, 23, 272, 317.
Muni, a, 23, 48, 94, 112, 116, 144, Rudras, 131.
163, 198, 254, 263, 335. Rum-deer, story of the, XXVI.
234-244.
naishkrama, 47, 154.
Nalamalin, 130, 133. i?/'shi, 162, 163, 182, 260, 261, 262,
Nandana, the park of the Devas, 263, 265, 278, 323, 335.
255, 293.
Narak = antaka, 28. Sabbath-days, 20, 39, 73.
naya niti, 76. Sacraments, 2, 109, 173, 316.
Nirgranthas, 145. Sacrifice, story ofthe, X. 93-104.
Nirvana, 269, 286. Sacrificial fee, 122.
Nishada, 190, 191, 192, 193, 196. sa^akiriya, see Act ofTruth.
niti, see Political wisdom. sambodhi=Supreme Wisdom, 6, 15.
Sawghata, 275.
(Dg-oharas, 56, 57. Sawg-aya, 71, 75, 76,92.
Otter, 38, 42, 45. Sawsara, 4, 24, 46, 286, 306.
sawskara and sawzskr/ta, 324.
paraloka, see World hereafter. Sawvega, 280, 314, 317.
paramatman, 280, Sahgha, 25.
Parg-anya, 137. Sarvamitra, 142, 143.
paramita, 93. sattra, 31, 97, 102.
Parileya, 164. Saviour ofthe World, 15, 286.
Patala, 126. Sagara, the Ocean, as a god, 131.
Pija^as, 57,61„ Satagiri, 164.
Pitaras, 147. satmibhava, 135,232.
Political wisdom, the science of Servant, the male, and the female,
princes, 40, 59, 74, 75, 105, ofthe Bodhisattva, 156, 161.
163, 203, 207, 213, 214, 215, Siddhas, 77, 182.
250, 302, 305, 306. Sister,the,oftheBodhisattva,i56,i6i.
poshadha, 20, 39. simantonnayana, 109.
prama«a, 271. Snakes, 7, 126, 136, 182.
prawidhana, prawidhi, 286. Snow-mountain, see Himalaya.
prasada, 67. Soma, 292.
Pratyekabuddha, 26, 27, 30, 55. Soma-sacrifices, 97.
Preaching ofthe Law, 39, 157, 159, Southern Ocean, 47.
161, 237, 243, 330; listening Stars, the, the wives of the Moon-
with attention to the—of the god, 184.
Law, 8, 71, 108, 227, 253, 280, stridhana, 79.
29°, 3i3, 329- Sudasa, 294 ; the son of, 294, 295,
Pretas, 147, 226. 296, 297, 298, 299, 302, 303,
puwsavana, T09. 304, 305, 3°6 307, 3°8, 309,
puwya, see Merit. 310, jn, 312, , 313.
purohita, 94, 97, 98, 160, 316. Sudharma, 45.
purushamedha, 97. Sumeru, 11, 90.
Purwa, 164. Sumukha, 181, 182, 186, 187, 189,
Putana, 226. 190, 191, 192, 194, 195, 196,
197, 199-
Quail's young, story of the, XVI. Sunanda, 118.
138-141. Suparaga (the man), 125, 128, 129,
Rakshas = Rakshasa, 294. Th 1 e 30 s , to 1 r 3 y 1, of 1 , 32 X , IV 1 . 33. 124-134.
Rati, 115. (the town), 125.
rag-arshi, 16, 252. Supparaka, 125.

INDEX. 345
Sutasoma, 292, 294, 296, 299, 305, Upavedas, 154, 292.
312, 314- Utpalavarwa, 164.
The story of, XXXI. 291-314.
SGparaga, 125. VWavamukha, see Mare-mouth.
svastyayana, 58. Vauj-ayanta, 45.
Swans, the storyoftheholy, XXII. Vaitarawi, 276.
i 81-200. Vanka, Mount, 77, 81, 83, 93.
Vasus, 131.
Sakra, the Lord ofthe Devas, 2,11, Vasava = 6'akra, 52, 92.
12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 32, 33, Vedas, 46, 71, 95, 96, 109, 154, 155,
34, 35, 36,37,41, 42 , 43,44, 45, 160, 292, 302, 308, 316.
48, 49, 50, 51,52,53,54,55,58, Vedahgas, 46, 292.
67, 68, 70, 83, 90, 91, 92, 103, Veracity, praise of, 306 ; power of,
104, 106, 107, 131, 136, 138, 17, 133, 138.
142, 144, 146, 147, 148, 153, Vetalapa^X-aviwjati, 124.
157, 158, 159, J62, 163, 164; Videha, 269.
theriches,(brilliancy,realm) of, Vidhi, 14.
14, 68, 198 ; city of, 278. Vidyadharas, 182, 184, 219.
Story of, XI. 104-108. vinaya, 216.
.Varabha,storyofthe, XXV.227-2 34. Virtues, praise of, 198, 292 ; lover
Sajanka, 45. of virtues, partisan of virtues.
Satakratu, 103. 54, 292, 328 ; property of a
Satayag-van, 103. virtuousperson, 332, 334.
Sakya prince, 93. VLfvakarman, 83.
6'aradvati, 164. Vijvantara, 72, 73, 75, 76, 77, 78 ,
Slriputra, 164. 79, 80,93 ; storyof, IX.71-93.
Sibis, the, 8, 9, 19, 71, 74, 75, 76, V/v'slwayas, 145.
77, 78, 85, 92, 114, 123.
Storyoftheking ofthe, II. 8-19. Wisdom, supreme,see Buddhahood.
Sraddha, 96. Woodpecker, storyofthe, XXXIV.
Sri, 67, 115. 329-335-
Sruti, praise of, 301, 302. World hereafter, proof for its
Sura, 1, 93. existence, 271-277.
T T a a n t t h u a l g a a r t , a, 29 1 1 9 . , 55, 71, 92, 104, 108, World 1 - 5 r 3 e , nu 1 n 5 c 6 i , at 1 i 6 o 6 n - , 17 3 2 , , 4, 2 4 5 7 3 , , 1 2 4 6 9 S,
319.
141, 148, 181, 227, 233, 252, Worldly pleasures censured, 159-
290, 291, 313, 329.
163, 173.
Tathagatas, 132.
Tigress, story ofthe, I. 1-8.
tirtha, 254, 306. Yakshas, 7, 57, 61, 81, 83, 119, 136,
trayi, 71. 161, 164, 182, 327, 328, 329 :
Treasurer,storyofthe,XX.164-172. the five, in story VIII. 56, 57,
Triad of dharma, artha, kama 58,59,60, 61,62,63, 65, 66, 67,
(trivarga), 9, 27, 76, 95, 123, 68, 69, 71.
195, 217, 263, 302. Yakshiwi, 315.
Triad of low, middle, high, 163, 258. Yama, 275, 277, 326.
Trivarga, see Triad ofdharma, &c. yana, the three, 5, 6, cp. 280.
yoga, 4, 217.
Uninadayanti, 115, 117, ti8, 122; Yogin, 228.
story of, XIII. 114- 124. yug.i, 219.

i
TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.
547
CO
O
»H—
<!
-1
co
<
H
w
CO
c*

48 TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS
as

FOR THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE BUDDHISTS. 349
••*••
• •••••••«•&»«
• m

OD' TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.
c
u

HORACE HART, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY

BL1410.S12v.l
TheGatakamala;
PrincetonTheologicalSeminary-SpeerLibrary
1012 00009 6992
1