JATAKAMALA
(GARLAND OF BIRTH-STORIES) ,
TRAMSI.ATKD FltOM THE ORIGIN At- SANSKRIT
BY
J. S. SPEYER.
Wfl?/row//. 1S2, ?W. jFf/7)
VIII.
THE STORY OF MAITRIBALA.
(Maitrt balajTitaka.)
Being afflicted by the sufferings of others, the intensely
compassionate do not mind their own pleasure. This will
be taught as follows.
In the time when the Bodhisattva, always having in
view his purpose of saving the creatures, had fixed upon
(the exercise of the pilramita of) compassiou , as became
his high minded ness, and was always increasing in matchless
virtues: charity, humility, self-restraint, tenderness and the
like, suitable for the beuetit of the world, he was, it is
said, a king kind-hearted towards all creatures, named
Maitribala ».
1—2. This king felt the weal and the woe of his subjects as
his own, and being skilled iu the art of protecting them,
he handled both his sword and his law in accordance with
this feeling. Yet his sword was only an ornament to him,
since the (other) kings waited for his orders, respectfully
bowing their head-crests; his law, on the contrary, showed
• This name signifies: „lie whose strength is kindness," cp. Btiuiza 14. The
edition has here Maitrabalo by a misprint, as it seems.

255
itself most openly in the measures lie took for promoting
the welfare of his people.
•'}. He dealt with punishments and rewards without infringing
righteousness. In consequence of his goodness of heart and
his political wisdom lie watched his subjects like a father.
So he ruled witli righteousness, and while directing his
veracity, his liberality, his tranquillity, his wisdom and
his other virtues to conduce to the welfare of others, he
increased his store of exceedingly sublime deeds which are
the due requisites for the attainment of Buddhahood. Now
one day, five yaks has whom for some offence or other
(Kubera) the Lord of the yaks has had exiled from his
dominions came to his realm. These goblins were Ojoh&ras
[that is: vigour-bereaving spirits], skilled in the art of
killing others '. When they saw the kingdom exhibiting
the aspect of the utmost prosperity, and became aware that
the absence of every kind of calamity made the people
rejoiced, satisfied, thriving and in the habit of having
merriment and manifold festivals, the desire of taking away
the vigour from the inhabitants of that region arose within
them.
4. But, though they did their usual work with the greatest
eilort, they were still not able to take away the vigour
of the inhabitants of that country.
5. The power of the king was so excessive that his very
intention of shielding proved the highest protection. For
this reason those yaks has did not succeed in their exertions
to take away the vigour of his subjects.
And as they were not able to debilitate any one, living
in that kingdom, however much they exerted themselves,
they deliberated between each other and said : "How may
this be, sirs?
6. '/They do not possess such superiorities of learning, penance
or magic us to enable them to obstruct our power, and
yet all of us are reduced to impoteucy so as to bear our
appellation (of Oj o haras) in vain."
' It is likely, thoBe yakshas were thought to possess the power of oauaing
consumptive diseasos; consumption 1B called in Sanskrit yakshma or raja-
yaks h ma.

And they assumed the shape of men ol' the brahman
class, and going about, they saw some cowherd ol' those who
live in the forest-region, who was sitting upon a grass-plot
at the foot of a shady tree. He had shoes on his feet, and
on his head he wore a garland, wreathed of flowers and
opening buds of the forest-trees. His stick aud his hatchet
he had laid on the earth on his right. He was alone aud
occupied with twisting a rope, diverting himself meanwhile
witli singing and humming. Him they approached and
imitating human voice', they said to him: '/ Well, friend ,
thou who art charged with guarding the cows, how is
that thou art not afraid of staying so by thyself in this
forest which is so lonely and where no man is to be seen ?"
And he, looking at them, spoke: //What should I be afraid
of?" The yaks has said: //Hast thou never before heard
that such spirits like yakshas, r&kshasas or pic&cas
are cruel by nature?
7—8. «If men are in company and endowed with learning,
penance and svastyayana-charms, * even then, be they
ever so brave and contemptuous of fear, they will but nar-
rowly escape those rakshasas who feed on the flesh and
fat of men. How, then, is it that thou art not afraid of
them, thou who stayest without any comrade amidst those
.solitary, deep aud frightful forests?"
On hearing this, the cowherd laughed heartily, and said
to them:
9—10. //Well, the people of this country are protected by a
mighty talisman, so that the Lord of the Devas himself
has no power over them, how much less the flesh-eating
goblins. So it happens that 1 wander fearless through the
wilderness, as if I stayed at home, at night as if it were
day, and alone as if I were in a crowd."
Upon this the yakshas became very curious and said
to him respectfully, as if to encourage him: //Why, you
must tell us, gentle sir, you must tell us, of what kind
this extraordinary talisman of yours is." He answered them
' In the original the yakshas utter some inartioulate sounds beforeBuoceeding
in speaking Sanskrit.
' viz. spells and oharms, effeotive of bliss and happiness and obstructive of the
oontrary. .- u •;

JaTAKAM&La. 257
laughing again: wllear, then, of what kind this very
wonderful excellent talisman of ours is.
IJ. wit is he whose broad breast is equal to a plate of the
Golden Mountain, • he whose face displays the lovely beauty
of the spotless moon in autumn, he whose long and muscular
arms are like golden clubs, he who has a bull's eyes and
a bull's gait. In short, it is our king.
wOf this kind our excellent talisman is." And after saying
these words, looking with resentment and astonishment in
the face oi the yakshas, he continued: ?Ah! this is
rather a wonder, is not it?
1£. wSo renowned is the power of our king and it has not
come to your hearing! How has this happened? Or have
you perhaps heard of it, but suspecting the excessive
marvel of that fame, not minded it?
13. wl suppose, the people of the country, from whence
you have come hither, are either disinclined to searching
after virtue or indifferent about it; it may also be that,
the store of their good fortune - being consumed, the great
renown of our king has shunned them.
'/At all events, for you there w some remnant of' good
fortune, that you are come here from such an uncivilized
region."
The yakshas said: "Gentle sir, tell us, of what fashion
is this power of that king, that spirits are by no means
able to hurt the inhabitants of his realm?" The cowherd
replied: «Our monarch has got this power through his
high-mindedness. See, noble brahuians.
14. «On friendliness his strength does rest, not on his
motley-bannered army, which he keeps but to comply witli
the custom. He knows no auger nor does he speak harsh
words. He cares for his land, as is proper. Righteousness
is the rule of his actions, not political wisdom, that base
science. His wealth serves to honour the virtuous. And
endowed with those marvellous qualities, still he does not
take unto himself either the wealth of the wicked or pride.
' viz. the Sumeru or Heru (op. below stanza -11), see the second story
between Btauza 8 And 9.
^ Cp. foot-note 1 on the fifth page of the fourth story.

258
'/Such and mauy, many more virtues are to be found
in oar master. 1'or this reason no calamities may hurt the
inhabitants of his realm. But how little is the information
you may get from me! If you are curious after learning the
excellent qualities of our king, it would rather be suitable
for you to enter the capital. There you will behold the
people in their every-day life, you will see how firmly
they observe the precepts of good conduct, loving each
the peculiar duties proper to him; how much constant
abundance of food and uninterrupted welfare makes them
merry and thriving; how splendidly they are dressed yet
not presumptuously; how kind they are to worthy strangers
who come to them as guests; how enraptured they are
with the virtues of their king, the praises of whose glory
they never cease proclaiming with gladness, as if they were
uttering some auspicious and evil averting charm. When
beholding all this, you will obtain the standard for measuring
the multitude of virtues possessed by our lord. And if you
once begin to feel something like reverence for his virtues,
you will witness them, for you will not fail to teel the
desire of getting the sight of him."
The yakshas, being already moved with anger against
the king on account of his obstructing the manifestation
of their power, were in no way softened by this affectionate
and well-deserved eulogy of his virtues.
15. Verily, as a rule the mind of the fools ' becomes inflamed
the more by the praise of the object which has excited
their fervent wrath.
Now considering that king's love of charity and wishing
to do harm to him, they drew to him at the time of his
audience and asked him a meal. The king rejoiced, ordered
his officers who stood in charge of such matters to entertain
quickly the brahmans witli a delicious meal. The yakshas,
however, were not ready to accept the meal served to
them, though it might have suited the royal table, but
spurning it, as tigers would green grass, said they did
nol feed on such dishes. On hearing which, the king went
> The „fools" are the wioked, the eiuuers, those subdued by imssii'UB. Cp. f. i.
SuUauipita VB. 666; 728; 1061. .,;.,

259
to them saying: «But what sort of' repast will agree with
your digestion, that something of the kind may bu fetched ?"
The y a k s h a s answered:
IH. '/Raw human flesh, freshly cut oil' and still warm, and
liuman blood, o lotus-eyed monarch, is the food and drink
of yakshas, o you who are strict in keeping your engagements.''
After which, they reassumed their own disfigured anil
frightful features, exhibiting their mouth rendered ferocious
by large teeth, their eyes fierce and led, ilaming and
squinting, their Hat nose, wide-opeued and misshapen. Their
hair and beard had the tawny colour of flames and their
complexion was as dark as of clouds big with raiu.
Looking at them, the king knew them to be goblins, '
not men aud understood that they for that reason did not
like the food and drink served by his orders.
17. And according to his compassionate nature and his pure-
hearteduess, the pity of the monarch towards them increased
by this reflection.
Absorbed with commiseration aud pitying those y a k s h a s ,
he entered with an intent mind upon this thought:
IS—ID. //1<W a merciful man such food and drink as is lit
for them is not only hard to be found, but it were also
to be searched for day after day. Ü, the immense grief
it would cause to him! A cruel man uiay be either able
to get it for them or not. If not able, his eiïort would
have no other effect than that of mere destruction; if able,
what can be more miserable than such constant exercise
of evil practice?
20. //These yak alias, on the other hand, who live on
food of that kind with hearts wicked aud pitiless, they
are destroying their own happiness every day. * When will
their sufferings ever end?
• liter, „to be picaoas," apparently, a geueral term. The different clasucH of
goblius, yakBhaB, ïakshasas, pijaoas ftro ofteu coufouuded; iu Btoiiza 27
the geueral appellation ie rakshasas. In jat. IX, vs. 66 yakeha aud piyAca
are syuonymous. Iu the sixth story of the pali Jataka (translated by Rhys
Davids iu hie .BiW/i-jtofK», p. 180) the water-sprite is sometimes called rakkhaso,
som etimee y a k k h «.
* For their siuful behaviour makes them ripe for the hells aud rebirtliB in low
and vile existences.

2*0 J&TAKAIiaii,.
being so, how is it possible for me to procure
such food for them? Not even for one single day could 1
injure others and destroy life.
21. '/And yet 1 do not remember to have ever saddened
the countenances of those who came to me as supplicants
and bereaved them of splendour by disappointing their hopes,
so as to make them appear like lotuses withered by the
winter-wind.
'/But, why musing any longer? 1 have found, what will do.
— 23. "1 will give them lumps of solid and fat tiesh and
draughts of blood taken from my owu body. What other
means than this can be more suitable for me to supply
the wants of those beggars who are seeking their relief
from my side? For the flesh of animals who have died
their natural death is cold and bloodless and does of course
not please them; and their hunger is great and attested
by their afflicted figures.
*()n the one hand, it is impossible for me to take flesh
out of the body of any living being; on the other, how
may I suffer them who have resorted to me to draw oil'
in this manner, with countenances languishing and eyes
sunken, as before, in consequence of their hunger and
thirst, and moreover grieved by the fruitlessness of their
request on which they had founded their hope? It is,
therefore, the right time to act in this way.
2k //Like a malignant ulcer this body is always sick and
causes me pain. Now I will return it that grief by availing
myself of it for the accomplishment of an extraordinary
performance."
Having so resolved, the Great-minded One, whose coun-
tenance received increase oi splendour by the outburst of
his gladness, spoke thus to the yakshas, pointing out his
body to them:
25. *If this flesh and blood which 1 bear only for the good
of the creatures were now to be disposed of with the object
of entertaining guests, 1 would deem this a good fortune
for myself and of great consequence."
The yakshas, though knowing the determination of
the king, could not believe it; so marvellous did it appear
to them. And they said to him;

26. «After the mendicant lias unveiled his suffering by
wretched asking, from that very moment it. is the giver
alone who ought to know what will do in the case."
The king, understanding that they assented, was much
rejoiced and ordered his physicians to be sent for, to have
his veins opened. Now when the royal ministers were aware
of his determination of ottering his own flesh and blood,
they became agitated, irritated and perplexed by it, and
prompted by their affection, they spoke emphatically to this
purport: »We pray Your Majesty not to give way to your
excessive love of charity in this degree as to disregard the
consequences of your actions, whether they are to be good
or evil to your loyal and devoted subjects. Your Majesty
cannot be ignorant of the nature of the evil spirits. You
know that
27. //they rejoice in whatsoever may tend to the mishap of
your subjects, most illustrious lord , and get satisfied by a
livelihood necessitating injury of others. So-natured is that
class of beings, benevolent master.
28. //You, on the other hand, noble prince, sustain the
toilsome burden of royalty not minding your own pleasures,
having exclusively in view the happiness of your people.
Cease, therefore, from the determination of offering your
flesh and blood; it is wrong to do it.
21). «These goblins have no power over your people, Majesty ,
no doubt, they have not — provided that your strength
be present to protect your subjects. Now being obstructed
in their cleverness of bringing about mischief, they seek
the calamity of the inhabitants of this country by means
of an adroit scheme.
30. »In fact, the Celestials are pleased by fat, suet and the
like, ottered to them into the fire at sacrifices, and these
goblins should not like Your Majesty's food , that is ex-
cellent, pure and carefully prepared!
^Surely, Your Royal Majesty are not obliged to com-
municate your designs to such men like us. Notwithstanding
this, our sense of duty forbids us to show in this matter
our usual compliance with your desire. Can it be called a
righteous action of Your Majesty to throw your whole people
into calamity for the sake of these five? Moreover, for

262
what reason do your make us feel in this degree your
disaffection? How else could it happen that our llesh and
!)loo(l which we aie employing iu the service of our master,
have remained unnoticed by you , to form the desire of offering
your own, while our bodies are alive and available?"
Then the king spoke to those ministers:
81. //Being requested in distinct terms, how may any body
like me say '/I have not" , when having, or//I will not give",
speaking falsely?
«"52. «Since 1 pass for an authority in acting according to
the ordinances of righteousness, if myself should walk on
the wrong path, what would be the condition of my subjects
who are ready to follow the example of my behaviour?
83. '/Therefore, in regard of my very subjects I will have
the strength of my body taken out of it. Besides, if 1
were to be faint-hearted, subdued by self-love, what would
be my power to promote the welfare of my people?
//As to the words of love and respect, you have spoken,
words full of affection and cordial sympathy, when you asked
what 1 did show you my disaffection for , wishing to offer my
own limbs even now, while your flesh and blood are intact
and available, I will convince you by argument. Surely,
do not think that by want of trust I mean to close up
the path on which you could show your affection towards
me, nor that suspicion has created an impenetrable thicket
across it. Nevertheless,
tfl<. «the proper time for friends of showing by deeds their love
to their friend is this, when his wealth has either dimi-
nished by degrees or has been destroyed by the disfavour
of his destiny; but it would not belit the poor acting thus
towards a wealthy man.
iJo. //Now, my limbs rtw available. They are big, solid,
lieshy. Them 1 do sustain for the sake of supplicants. This
being so, it would be unbecoming even for you to give
vent to your affection (by offering your own).
•So'. »1 am not capable of forbearing the pain of strangers,
how can you suppose that I should bear yywr suffering?
For these reasons I desire to offer my own flesh. It is 1,
whom they ask, not you,
//Therefore, though stirred by attachment to my person

- 2Ó8
to the boldness of putting obstacles on the way of my
righteous behaviour, do not oppose my determination any
longer. Verily, Your Lordships are not in the habit of
dealing in the proper manner with my mendicants. Besides,
you should also consider but this.
87. "He who prohibits any one that wishes for his own sake
to give in charity food or the like, say , by what appellation
is he to be called, a pious man or an impious one? How
much less can there be any doubt about this in the case
of a gift of this character?
»Why then insist any longer? Do but examine the matter
duly, and you will prevent your thoughts from the wrong
path, as befits those who occupy n ministership in >»//
service. In fact, sympathie words of approval would now
become Your Lordships more than these anxious looks.
Why do T say so?
38—39. "Beggars, wanting money and goods, objects of various
employment, are to be found every day, are not they ? but this
kind of mendicants cannot be obtained even by propitiating
deities. Now considering the frailness of my body and its being
an abode of woe, it would be meanuess of mind, T think,
even to hesitate at the time of the appearance of such
uncommon mendicants, and miserable self-love would be
here the deepest darkness.
//Pray, do not withhold me, then, Mylords."
Having so persuaded his council, he called for the phy-
sicians, and after having five veins on his body opened
by them, he spoke to the yakslias:
40. »Deign to assist me in this pious performance and to
procure for me the highest gladness by accepting this
bounty."
They assented and began to drink, intercepting with the
hollow of their joint hands the king's blood, the dark
colour of which resembled to fragrant red sandal.
41. While allowing the nocturnal monsters to drink the blood
from his wounds, the monarch shone as if his body were
of gold, and he had the appearance of mount Meru, when
covered with rain-clouds hanging down by their weight
and tinged with the hue of the twilight.
42. lu consequence of the high pitch of' his gladness, of his

264
magnanimous forbearance and also of his corporeal strength
his body did not fade nor did his mind faint, and the
Üowing blood did not lessen. • ,. •••:-.
The yaks has, having quenched their intense thirst,
said to the king that it was enough.
48. Considering that he had now disposed of his body, that
always ingrateful object and abode of many pains, so as to
turn it into a means of honouring mendicants, his satis-
faction grew no less, when they ceased.
Then the king, the serenity of whose countenance was
enhanced by his expanding joy, took a sharp sword. It
had a spotless bluish blade, not unlike a petal of' the blue,
lotus, and a beautiful hilt shining with brilliancy by the
lustre of the jewels which adorned it. With it he cut pieces
of flesh out of his body and presented the yakshas with them.
44. And the joy he experienced by giving did not leave
room for the sense of pain caused by cutting, and prevented
again and again his mind to be immersed in sorrow.
45. So the pain, pushing on at each stroke of the sharp
sword but driven far back again by his gladness, was slow
in penetrating his mind, as if it were tired by the trouble
of being urged to and fro.
4(1. And he was feeling a mere sense of gladness, whilst
he satisfied the nocturnal goblins with pieces of his Hesh ,
up to this point that.the cruel hearts of those very beings
unclosed themselves to softness.
47. lie who moved by love of the Law or by compassion
abandons his own dear body for the benefit of others,
9ucli a one may be able to regenerate the hearts of men
burnt by the fire of hatred, changing it into the gold
of tenderness and faith. '
The y a k s h a s, beholding the monarch, though intent
on cutting out his own flesh, yet as calm as ever, and
exhibiting an unshaken serenity of countenance and dauntless
intrepidity against the pain caused by the work of his
sword, became affected with the utmost tenderness and
admiration.
• „Tender-heartedness" or „Boftness of mind" and „faith in the Buddha" are
expressed by the ono wnrd prusada. I have as a rale translated this term aooord-
iug to the conception prevailing, but there is equivalence here.

J&TAKAM&LH.
48. »Oh , it is a wonder! oh, it is a miracle! Can it be
true, or is it perhaps a phantasm?"' Such thoughts arose
in their ecstatic minds; and the wrath they did foster
against the king was crushed, and they began to proclaim
their faith by veneration and praise of his deed.
»No more, no more, Majesty" they exclaimed; «cease
injuring your own body! This marvellous performance of
yours, by which you win the hearts of all mendicants,
has satisfied us." So with great agitation and respectfully
bowing their heads they bade the king stop; after which,
they looked up to him witli great regard, uplifting their
faces moistened with tears of faithful contrition , and continued :
49. «Justly people are prompted by devoutuess to proclaim
everywhere your glory. Justly f>i, disdaining the lotus-
pond, cherishes residing with you. Verily Heaven, though
protected by Qakra's sovereignty, must feel something like
jealousy when looking down on this earth, guarded hy
your heroism; if not, Heaven forsooth is deceived.
»Why use many words? Mankind is happy, indeed, being
under the protection of such a person like you; but we, we
are utterly distressed having approved of //ww suffering.
Yet we hope that it would have been almost beyond our
power to prevent it, inasmuch as applying to such a being
as you are, may prove a means for salvation for us, be
we ever as wicked as we are. In this hopa we put this
question to you.
50. «What is that exceedingly marvellous rank you long
for, that you act in this way disregarding your royal happiness,
that beloved state which you possess at ease?
51. »ls it the sovereignty of the whole earth you covet by
means of this penance, or is it the rank of Kubera or
that of Indra or entire deliverance and absorption into
Brahma ?
52. «Be it whatever it be, the aim you are aspiring at
cannot be very far from this strong determination. If we
are allowed to hear it, you would please us hy telling it, sir."
The king spoke: "Hear then what I am exerting myself for.
58—55. «An illustrious high rank depends on existence, it is to
be obtained by effort and may be easily lost. It cannot
all'ord the pleasure of satisfaction, much less tend to serenity

266 J&TAKAMaL;1.
of mind. For this reason, saying nothing of any other
wordly lustre, T do not desire even the brilliancy of the
Lord of the Devas. Nor would my heart become content,
if T were to succeed in destroying the suffering of myself
alone. • My object arc those helpless creatures, distressed
by toil and sufferings because of the violent calamities and
vices to which they are liable. For their sakes may T by
means of this my meritorious action attain Allknowingness,
and vanquishing the evil passions, my enemies, may T
save the creatures from the Ocean of Existence, that rough
sea with its big billows of old age, sickness and death!"
On hearing this the yaks has had the feeling of horri-
pilation caused by the intense joy of faith , and bowing to
the king they said: «This performance of yours is most
befitting your extraordinary determination. Accordingly we
venture to express our conviction concerning that, to be: of
such persons like you the designs will be accomplished after
a short time.
56—57. "No doubt, your exertion tends wholly to the salvation
of all creatures; yet deign to take a special care of us,
pray do not forget us at that time. And now forgive us
what we have done from ignorance, causing you to be
thus torturted; we did not understand even our own interest.
OS. /'Further we beg you to show* us your favour by giving
us some injunction which we may follow. Give it with the
like confidence as to your own officials."
Upon which the king, knowing them to be converted
and to have lost their heard-heartedness, spoke in this
manner: »Do not be in trouble any longer. It is no tor-
ment , in fact it is a benefit you did confer on me. Moreover,
59. «there M no other way but this for those who follow
the path of righteousness (d har ma). How, then, should
1 ever forget my companions on that road, when once T
shall have attained Supreme Wisdom (bod hi)? My first
teaching of the Lore of Salvation shall be to you; to you
I shall impart of that ambrosia first.
60. «And if you now aim at doing what may be agreeable
' This in said in auBwer to tho question whether lie did aim at absorption into
Orahuia [or „into the brahma", the Ranslrit word bpïiit- brahmabhüya]

J&TAKAMUlil. 267
to me, you must avoid like poison these sins: doing harm
to otliers, coveting the goods or wives of others, speaking
evil and drinking intoxicating liquors."
The yakshas promised to do so, and having bowed to
him and circumambulated him from left to right, disap-
peared on the very spot.
But when this Great Being had made up his mind to
"#+** away his own flesh and blood , at that very time
61—62. Earth trembled in many places and caused the golden
mountain to waver, in consequence of which concussion the
drums on that mountain began to sound and the trees to
cast oft' their flowers. These spread about in the sky and
moved by the wind they appeared like a cloud, like a
flight of birds, somewhere resembled a canopy, somewhere
again bore the appearance of a well-arranged garland; thev
fell down together on all sides of the spot where the king
was staying.
68. The great Ocean , as if he intended to prevent the mon-
arch , showed his excitement and agitation by the increas-
ed commotion and noise of his waves, and his figure
expressed great vigour as if he were ready to march '.
64—65. Also the Chief of the Devas became agitated by these
phenomena, and discovering by reflection the cause of them
and being tilled with apprehension at the sufierings which the
king exposed himself to, hastily came to the royal residence.
There he found every one perplexed with sorrow and fear,
except the king. On beholding the calmness of his coun-
tenance, though he was in so miserable a condition , (,'akra
was affected with the utmost amazement. He approached
the monarch and impelled by gladness and joy, he eulogized
his performance in his lovely voice.
66. «Oh, thou hast reached the summit of pious behaviour!
oh, the loftiness of thy treasure which is practice of virtue!
oh, how clever is thy mind in showing thy favour to others!
Verily, being given to thee Earth has obtained a protector!"
After so praising him, (^akra, the Lord of the Devas,
applied excellent herbs, fit to heal wounds immediately,
*) viz. tn relieve tlio king In tin's simile the Ocean is rep repented a« an auxi-
liary prince who raises his army to the Riiccour of hin ally.
5e Volgr. VIII. 1»

£68
which herbs were partly divine, partly such a? are used
with men. So he put a stop to his pains and made his
body as it was before. In reply to which the king honoured
him by kind attendance in a courteous and reverent manner.
Then (^akra went, bacjc to his own abode.
«In this way, then, the intensely compassionate do not
mind their own pleasure, being afflicted by the sufferings of
others; who, then, ought not to set aside the attachment
to so slight a thing as his wealth is?" So is to be said when
stimulating the zeal of charitable people. Likewise when
explaining the virtue of compassion, when glorifying the
Tathagata, also on the subject of listening with attention
to the preaching of the Law, ' Moreover, the words said
by the Lord : «Monks, these Five have much done , indeed" *
will have their explication by their being connected with this
story. For they were the five yakshas of that time. To
them the Lord did impart the first of the ambrosia of the
Law, just as he had promised.
The story of Maitrtbala in not met with iii the Cariyapitaka nor in
the five volumes of the pali Jataka, which have appeared up to this
date; probably it will be found in the part not yet published. Some-
thing like it but not the same is told in the91tf> pallava of Kshemen-
dra'H A vadAnakal palata. There a king of the C'ibis gives up
his flesh and blood in order to obtain a sukta or well-eaid sentence.»
This tale, however, is not yet printed nor may we expect it
soon to be so. In that part of Kshemendra's poem, which has already
been published, I have also met with a story, told of kinp Mani-
ouda in tho third pallava, cl. 56 aud foil., whioh bears in many
respects a striking resemblance with ours, though it differs in others,
as will appear from its oontents. On the oooasion of a great bloodless
' The import of this last application may be accounted for by the fact of the
conversion of the yakshas and the law preached to them. In the conclusion of
the story (XXXI) of Sutasoma it is more fully stated that listening t. the preaoh-
ing of the Law tends to the removal of vice and the rise of virtue. This applic-
ation is also mentioned in the conclusion of the stories IX, XI, XXIV, XXV,
XXX and XXXIV.
• Bahukarah khalv ote panoaka bhikshava iti. This saored text taken
from some of tho Saored Scriptures of the so-called Northern Buddhism, is one of
tha two, whioh are quoted in the Jatakamala. The other is to be found in the
oouolusion uf story XXX. The five yakshas are of course the Bhadravar^iyns,
Kaupdinya and the rest, see Lalit a vistara oh. J6, Spenoe Hardy Afanuni
p. 190, Kern OeteAiecfenu «an A«£ BuddAism* I, p. 83 and 8G footnote 1.
• Souiendva in his introductory clokas describes the 91,|, story tliuR: svamaiu-
sasrl; piadanena ynh fibih suktam agrahtt (cl. 36).

JiYl'AKAMULa. 26 9
saorifloe performed by the pious king:, the opportunity being given of
asking all sorts of boons, one rakshasa arises out of the sacri-
ficial fire. Desiring food and drink, he gets a delioious meal, but spurns
it, saying: „I do not like suoh food, I am used to feed on raw flesh."
Upon this Manicuda enters into a reflection of the same kind as Maitrt-
bala here; if he prooures the food desired , he cannot but violate his vow <if
ahimsa, if not, he sins against his duty of charity. In this dilemma
he resolves to take the flesh and blood from his own body, and performs
liis resolution. The goblin having drunk lus full and devoured the flesh,
transforms himself, showing his true shape. (Jakra had assumed the
figure of that monster with the purpose of trying the magnanimous
king, and now eulogizes and congratulates the mnnaroh and heals his
wounds with divine raedioiuaJ drugs, after which he mounts to his henven.
IX.
THE STORY OK VICVANTAUA.
(Vicvantarajfttaka).
The mean-spirited are not capable of approving the be-
haviour of the Bodhisattva, how much less can they act
after it. This will be taught by the following.
Once the Qibis were ruled by a king, named Sarpjaya,
who performed his royal duties in the right manner. Having
entirely subdued his organs of sense and possessing in a
high degree the virtues of valour, discretion and modesty
he was victorious and mighty. Thanks to the constant
and strict observance he paid to the elders, he had
mastered the essential contents of the three Vedas (trayt)
and of metaphysics. ' The fairness of his rule was manifested
by the affection of his subjects who loved the performance
of their different trades and duties and were accustomed to
security and comfortable peace.
i The term anvtkshikt encompasses here something else than the simple soienoe
of logic. Its full import is to be learnt from Kamandaki'e Kit is ara, second
Ba>-ga. Four are the branches of learning, it is said there, to be necessary for
a prince, the anvtkshikt, the tiayt, the vartta and the dandaniti. The
last is of course the „political soienoe"; the vartta is a kind of „political eco-
nomy" (see the work (|U"ted II, 14); the trayt may be understood as „vaidik
science," but it includes in its widest sense the Bix vedaugas, the nyaya,
the mlmamsa, the law-books and purapa-class (did. II, 18). The anrikahikt
is described as the metaphysical soience, it is called the science of the at in an
(i'6. II, 8), and its contents are the investigation of the summum bonnin and
summum nialum (»i. II, 11).

270 J&TAKAMUlA.
1. T?y the practice of his virtues lie had «rained the affec-
tion of Royal Felicity who like an honest woman was
faithful to him , not to be thought of by the other monarchs;
just as a den kept by a lion is unattainable for other animals.
2. All such men as spent their labours to any kind of
penance, science or art, used to come up to him, and if
proving their merit, they obtained distinguished honour
from his side.
Next to him in dignity, but not his inferior by a famous
set of virtues, his son Vicvantara held the rank of heir
apparent.
8. Though a youth, he possessed the lovely placidity of
mind proper to old age; though he was full of ardour,
. his natural disposition was inclined to forbearance; though
learned, he was free from the conceit of knowledge; though
mighty and illustrious, he was void of pride.
4. As the extent ' of his virtue was perceived in all regions
and his feme penetrated the three worlds, there was no
__ room for the feeble and trifling reputations of others; it
seemed that they did not venture to show themselves.
5. He could not forbear the proud prevalence of calamities
and other causes of suffering's among mankind. It was against
these foes that he waged war and fought in battle, shooting
from his large bow of compassion numberless arrows which
had the figure of gifts in charity.
So he was wont to rejoice day after day the mendicants
who happened to come to him with bounties, given without
difficulty, surpassing the objects asked for and the more
welcome inasmuch they were bestowed with deference and
kind words. Hut on the knotdays *, when he was distinguished
by his keeping the strict observances and the rest of the
sabbath, after bathing his head and putting on white linen
dress, he mounted his excellent, well-trained, swift and
vigorous elephant, who (by his colour and size) might be
compared to a peak of the Snow-mountain ', whose face
was adorned with the tracks of the juice flowing in rutting-
time, and on whose body were to be found auspicious marks.
' I suppose the reading of the uiee. Jrsli(aprayainiisu to be right.
' viz. the sabbath-daya.
• viü. the Himalaya.

271
Sitting on tin; back of that wide-renowned scent-elephant
and royal vehicle, he was in the habit of making the round
of his alms-halls, which he had established in all parts of
the town to be like refreshing wells for the mendicants.
So going about he experienced an excessive gladness,
b'. No opulence, forsooth, within doors procures to a chari-
table man such rejoicing as it produces when being trans-
ferred ' on the mendicants.
Now this so great practice of charity being proclaimed
everywhere by the rejoiced mendicants, some conterminous
king who had heard of it, considering that it would be
possible to deceive the young prince by means of his excessive
love of almsgiving, directed some brahmans, his emissaries,
to rob him of that excellent elephant. Accordingly one day,
when Vicvantara was inspecting his alms-halls, manifesting
his gladness of mind by the enhanced beauty of his coun-
tenance, the said brahmans placed themselves in his way,
uttering benedictions with their uplifted and outstretched
right hands. He stopped his excellent elephant and asked
them respectfully the reason of their coming; they had but
to express their want, he said. The brahmans spoke:
-8. *Both the excellent qualities of this elephant of thine
who has so graceful a gait, and thy heroic love of charity
make us to beggars. Present us with this white elephant
who is like a peak of the Kailasa mountain, and thou
wilt till the world with astonishment."
The Bodhisattva being thus addressed , was tilled with
sincere joy and entered upon this reflection: «Truly, after
a long time I now see mendicants requesting a loity demand.
But», what may be after all the want of such a distinguished
elephant to these brahmansH No doubt, this must be a
miserable trick of some king, affected by covetousness,
jealousy and hatred.
9. '/Yet that prince who not minding either his reputation
or the precepts of righteousness is eager for possessing what
he thinks to be our good , must not be >addene.d by dis-
appointment ."
Having thus considered, the Great-minded One, alighted
' A misprint disfigures the edited text. Of courso, there is meant samkramye
m & o a.

•272
from the back of that excellent elephant and stood before them
with uplifted golden pitcher; then he pronounced (the solemu
formula) „accept". '
10. After which, though knowing that the science of politics
follows the path of Righteousness (d harm a) only as far as
it may agree with material interest (art ha), he gave away
his foremost elephant. His attachment to the precepts of
Righteousness did not allow him to be frightened by the
lie of political wisdom.
11. Having given away that lord of elephants who adorned
with the lovely golden lattice-seat on his back resembled
a massy cloud of autumn radiant with a Hash of lightning,*
the royal prince obtained the utmost delight — but the
citizens were stricken with consternation; for they were ad-
herents of political wisdom.
In fact, when the Qibis heard of the gift of that lord of
elephants, anger and wrath penetrated them, and the eldest
of the hralimans, the ministers, the warriors and the chiefs
of the townsmen, making hubbub went to the presence of
king Sarnjaya. Agitated, excited and angry they paid little
regard to the observance of the boundaries of the respect
due to the monarch, and spoke: //Why do you overlook in
this manner, sir, the fortune of your kingdom being carried
oil? You ought not to overlook that in this manner mis-
fortune is brought into your realm." When the king
alarmed asked them what they meant by this, they replied:
"Why, do^you ignore what has happened, Majesty?
—13. wThat splendid animal whose face when being fragrant
by the scent of the flowing juice, intoxicates crowds of
humming bees hovering about and likewise impregnates the
cherishing Wind with its perfume so as to induce him to
wipe off gladly and easily the smell caught from the fluid
of other haughty elephants; that war-elephant whose bril-
liant vigour subdued the strength and the power of your
' On this old symbol of trausferring property, which is mentioned also below
(see at. 63 and especially st. 93) see Kern, Ge«:Ai«fenu van Art BurfdAi'sme I, 91
N. 4.
Greek (TTftroKinai and Latin spotuirre may also be compared, tho primitive
signification of either seems to have been „to pour out a liquid."
* In the pali-redaotion which ie the source of S pence Hardy's narration
of our tale, it is said that this white elephant had the power of causing rain.

278
enemies and abated their pride even unto the motionless-
ness of sleep — see, that magnificent being, that embodied
Victory has been given away by Vievantara and is now
being carried off' abroad.
14. //Kine, gold, clothes, eatables, sucli are the goods fit
to give to brahmans, but parting with our foremost elephant,
the pledge of glorious victory, is an excess of charity and
goes too far.
15. "How should success and might ever join this prince who
acts up to this point opposite to the maxims of policy?
In this matter forbearance from your side is out of place,
sir, lest he should before long afford matter of rejoicing
to your enemies."
On hearing this, the king who loved his son was not
very friendly disposed towards them, but submitting to neces-
sity, he said they were right; after which he tried to ap-
pease the Cibis. "T know, he said , that Vicvantara indulges
in his disproportionate passion for charity so as to neglect
for it the rules of political wisdom, which behaviour is
not suitable for a person appointed to the royal charge.
Hut he /!<w resigned his own elephant, as if it were a
phlegm; and now, who will bring back that animal?
Nevertheless, I shall take such measures that Vicvantara
will know a limit in his almsgiving. This may suffice to
appease your anger."
The C^ibis answered: "No, Majesty, this will not do.
Vicvantara is not one to be brought to reason in this matter
by a simple censure."
Samjaya spoke: "But what else can 1 do?
16. «My son is averse from siuful actions, only his attach-
ment to virtuous practices is turning into a kind of passion.
Why, should you then deem ^w imprisonment or death to
be the due requital of that elephant?
"Therefore, desist from your wrath! Henceforward 1
shall prevent Vicvantara from such actions." Notwithstanding
this, the Qibis persisted in their anger and said:
17—18. "Who would be pleased, sir, with the pain of death
or prison or whipping pronounced upon your son? But being
devoted to his religious duties , Vicvsuitara is not fit to be
n bearer of the troublesome burden of royalty because of

274 jaTAKAMatü.
his tenderness of heart and his compassion. The throne is
to be occupied by such princes as have obtained renown
for their martial qualities and are skilled in the art of
giving its due to each of the three members of the
trivarga, ' but your son who in consequence of his love
of Righteousness (d har ma) does Dot heed Policy (nay a)
is a proper person to dwell in a penance-grove.
]!). //Surely, if princes commit faults of bad policy, the results
of those faults come down on their subjects. * They are
however bearable for if/^w, after all, as is taught by ex-
perience ; not so for the kings themselves, the very roots
of whose domination they undermine.
20. '/Why, then, say here much? Not capable of conniving
at a state of things which must lead to your ruin, the
(/ibis have taken this resolution. The royal prince shall
withdraw to mount Vauka, the residence of the siddhas *;
there he may exert his penance."
Reing so addressed for his good in very harsh terms by
those dignitaries who were (in fact) moved by attachment,
affection and love, but foresaw the calamities to be expected
from bad policy, the king was ashamed of the wrath of
the spokesmen of his people, and with down-cast eyes,
overwhelmed by the sorrowful thought of a separation from
his son he heaved a deep, woeful sigh and said to the
Qibis: *lf this is your peremptory decision, allow him,
at least, the delay of one day and night. To-morrow at
day-break Vicvantara shall accomplish your desire." The
Qibis were satisfied with this answer Then the king said
to his chamberlain: '/Go and tell what has happened to
Vicvantara." The chamberlain said he would do so and,
his face bathing in tears, went to Vicvantara who was in
that moment in his own palace. Overwhelmed by his sorrow
he threw himself at the feet of the prince and wept aloud.
Then Vicvantara anxiously inquired after the healtli of the
' Cp. «upra jat. II, at. 1.
* This Indian parallel to the well-known guitfyutd cfeitrani rejea, jifectuntw
runs thus in the original Sanskrit: phalanti kamani vasudhadipanam
durnitidoshas tadapavriteshu.
• The siddhas are a class of invisible, superhuman beiu^-s of great holiness
and endowed with supernatural powers.

'275
royal family; the other said iu a voice rather indistinct
by alHiction : "o, the royal family is well." "But why are
you thus excited, then?" Vicvautara replied. Being so
asked once more, the chamberlain whose throat was choked
with tears, uttered slowly and in a faltering tone these
words, interrupting and disturbirrg them by his sobs :
21. '/Awkwardly disregarding the royal command, though it
was declared to them in gentle terms, the Qibis moved
by auger order you to be banished from the kingdom, my
prince."
Viyvantara said: »Me .... the Qibis.... order to be
banished! What you say, is out of all reason.
22. «Never did I take delight in leaving the path of dis-
cipline and I detest carelessness about my duties. Why then
are the Qibis angry with me who am not conscious of any
evil action?"
The chamberlain said: »They are offended at your ex-
ceeding loftiness of mind.
23. "Your satisfaction was pure by the disinterested feeling
you experienced, but that of those mendicants was troubled
by cupidity. When that foremost of elephants, o most noble
prince, had been given away by you, wrath put the Qibis
out of patience and caused them to transgress the limits of
their duty. They are furious against you. You must go,
indeed, the way of those who are driven into exile to live
as ascetics."
In this moment the Bodhisattva displayed both his deeply
rooted affection for the mendicants which his continuous
practice of compassion had tirinly established , and his grand ,
immense patience. He said: »The nature of the Qibis is
tickle, and they cannot understand mine, it seems.
25. "The objects of sense being outside our Self, it is super-
fluous to say that 1 would give away my eyes or my head. '
For the benefit of the creatures I am bearing this body,'
' This is no rhetorioal phrase. That the Bedhiaattva is said to have given away
his eyes iu one of his existences, has been told in jat. II. The gift of his head
is related in some jataka, uut found iu this selection of Arya Cur». It occurs in
Kshemendra's A vadanakalpal at a, the fifth pallavti "f which contain» the
story of kintr ('audraprabha who cut "tt' his head at the request of a brahma-
rakshftBa disguised as a brahman.
• .Ju the time »f Dipaukara Bu(d)dha, Ootama Bodhisat might have attained

276
how much more the possession of clothes ami vehicles.
2b'. «Me who am wishing to honour the requests of the
mendicants, if ueeds, with my-own limbs, the Qibis believe
to restrain from charity by fear! So considering they do
but unfold their foolish fickleness of mind.
27. "Let all (;ibi kill me or banish me, 1 shall not desist
from charity for that reason. With this mind I am ready
to set out for the penance-grove."
After this, the Bodhisattva said to his wife who had
turned pale while hearing the sad news: «Your Highness
lias heard the resolution of the Qibis." Madri' replied:
'/I have". Vicvantara said:
28. "Now make a deposit, fair-eyed, of all your property,
taking what you have got from my part as well as from
your father's side." *
Madri answered: «Where am 1 to lay the deposit, my
prince?" Viyvantara spoke:
2!)—o<). //You must always give in charity to people of good
conduct, embellishing your bounty by kind observance.
IJoods deposited in this manner are imperishable and follow
us alter death. Bo a loving daughter to your parents-in law,
a careful mother to your children. Hold on a pious conduct,
beware of inadvertence; hut do not mourn for my absence,
will you?"
Upon this Madri, avoiding what might impair the iirmness
of mind of her husband, suppressed the deep sorrow that
put her heart at anguish and said with feigned calmness:
31—:i2. «It is not right, Majesty, that you should go to the
forest alone. I too will go with you where you must go,
my lord. When attending on you, even death will be a
festival to me; but living without you T deem worse than death.
nirwana, but that lie might save countless beings from the woes of repeated birth,
he voluntarily chose to continuo in existence during the period that would elapse
before he could become a Bu(d)dha, the design ho had formed being constantly
kept in view, until the whole of the paramitas were fulfilled." Spence Hardy,
Afanwnl o/ BwMism, 2'! ed. p. 107.
' It is plain that £ura supposos the story of Vicvantara to bo knonw to his
readers. Neither the name of V.'s wife imr oven the fact of his being married
have been meutii ned before.
* On this strtdhana, or „wife's property" see the paper of Jolly in the
Sitzungsbei. der bair. Akad. von Wiss. 1876.

J&TAKAM&lA. 277
«Nor do I think the forest-lifc (o be unpleasant at all.
Uo but consider it well.
33. "Removed from wicked people, haunted by deer, re-
sounding with the warbling of manifold birds, the penance-
groves with their rivulets and trees, both intact, with their
grass-plots which have the loveliness of inlaid lapis lazuli
floors, are by far more pleasing than our artificial gardens.
"1 ndeed , my prince ,
34. "When beholding these children neatly dressed and
adorned with garlands playing in the wild shrubs, you
will not think of your royalty.
35. "The water-carrying brooks, overhung by natural bowers
of always renewed beauty varying according to the succes-
sion of the seasons, will delight you in the forest.
36—37. "The melodious music of the chants of birds, longing
for Love's satisfaction, the dances of the peacocks whom
Lasciviousuess has taught that art, the sweet and praised
buzzing of the honey-seeking bees: they make together a
forest-concert that will rejoice your mind.
38 — 3!). «Further the rocks, overspread at night with the silk-
garment of moon-light; the soft-stroking forest-wind im-
pregnated with the scent of flowering trees; the murmuring
noise of the rivulets, pushing their waters over moving
gravel so as to imitate the sound of a number of rattling
female ornaments — all this will gladden your mind in
the forest."
.This entreaty of his well-beloved wife iilled him with ii
great desire of setting out lor the forest. Then having in
view the mendicant people, lie prepared to bestow great
largesses.
Tn the king's palace the news of the banishment being
pronounced upon Vicvantara caused a great alarm and
violent lamentations. Likewise the mendicants agitated by
sorrow and grief, became almost out of their senses or be-
haved as if they were intoxicated or mad anil uttered many
and various lamentations of this kind:
40. «How is it that Earth does not feel aihamed permitting
the hatchets to hew down that shady tree, her foster-child,
the giver of so sweet fruits? Verily, she must have lost
consciousness."

278
41. '/If no one will prevent those who are about to destroy
that well of cold, pure and sweet water, then forsooth the
guardians of the world-quarters are falsely named so, or
they are absent, or they are nothing but a mere sound."
12. "Oh! Indeed Injustice is awake and Righteousness either
asleep or dead, since prince Vicvantara is banished from
his reign."
'43. «Who possesses a so refined skill of occasioning distress
as to have the cruelty of endeavouring to make us starve,
the guiltless, who earn a scanty livelihood by begging?"
The Bodhisattva, then, gave away his wealth. He be-
stowed on the mendicants the content of his treasury, filled
to the very top with precious stones, gold and silver, of
a value of many hundred thousands; his magazines and
granaries, containing stores of manifold goods and grains;
all his other property consisting of slaves of both sexes,
beasts of draught, carriages, garments and the like. Tlie
whole of tin's he cïistributed according to the merit of the
recipients. This being done, he paid his respectful homage
to his father and mother, taking leave of them, who were
overwhelmed with sadness and grief. Then he mounted with
his wife and children his beautiful chariot. He left the
excellent town, while a great body of people uttered lamen-
tations, the streets being as noisy as on a holiday; nor
did lie succeed without difficulty in making the crowd turn
back who followed him out of affection shedding tears of
sorrow. Then taking himself the reins, he drove in the
direction of mount Vanka. And without the least discompositiou
of mind he passed along the environs of the excellent town
crowned with charming gardens and groves, and approached
the forest betokened by the gradually increasing rareness
of shady trees and of human beings, the sight of Hocks of
antelopes running at a far distance, and the chirping of
crickets. Now by chance some brahmans came to meet him
who begged from him the horses that were drawing his
chariot
41. And lie though on a journey of many leagues without
attendance and charged with his wife, gave away to these
brahmans his four horses, being rejoiced at this opportunity
of giving and not minding the future.

279
Now when the Bodhisattva was about to put himself to
the yoke and was fastening the girth tightly round his
waist, there appeared four young yaks lias, bearing the
figure of red deer. Like well-trained excellent horses they
put their shoulders under the yoke themselves. On seins*
them, the Bodhisattva said to Madrt who stared at them with
joy and surprise:
45. «Behold the extraordinary might of the penance-groves
honoured by the residence of ascetics. 2%e?r kindness to-
wards guests has iu this way taken root in the breast of
the foremost of deer."
Madn replied:
46. '/This is rather ^(wr superhuman power, I suppose. The
practice of virtue by the pious however deeply rooted , is
not the same with respect to everybody.
47. «When the beautiful reflection of the stars in the water
is surpassed by the laughing lustre of the night-waterlilies,
the cause thereof is to be found in the beams which the
Moon-god sends down as if out of curiosity.'" '
While they were going on so speaking to each other
kind words of ailection , see, another brahman came near
and asked the Bodhisattva his excellent chariot.
48. And the Bodhisattva, as he was indifferent about his
own comfort but to the beggars a loving kinsman, fulfilled
the wish of that brahman.
With gladness he caused his family to alight from the
chariot, presented the brahman with it and taking .Talin ,
his boy, in his arms, he continued his way on foot. Madrï
also free from sadness, took the girl, Krshnfijiufl,, in her
arms and marched after him.
49. The trees, stretching out to him their branches adorned
at their ends with charming fruits, invited him, as it were,
to enjoy their hospitality, and paying homage to his merit-
obtained dignity, bowed to him like obedient disciples,
when they got sight of him.
50. And where he longed for water, iu those very places
' The white waterlilies (kumudas) are said to open at moon-rise. Iudian rhetoric
likos to avail itself by similes and other figures of the relation which iH Buppoaed
to exist between the waterlilics mid the moon, not unlike thai, between the
lotuses and the nun.

280 J&TAKAM&lA.
lotus-poïids appeared to his eves, covered on their surface
with the white and reddish-brown pollen fallen down from
the anthers of the lotuses, shaken by the wing-movements
of the swans.
51. The clouds overspread him with a beautiful canopy j there
blew an agreeable and odoriferous wind; and his path was
shortened by yakshas not enduring his labour and fatigue.
In this manner the Bodhisattva experienced the pleasure
and the delight of a walk , without feeling the sen-atiou of
weariness, just as if he amused himself in some park, a:id
at last he perceived mount Vanka, Being showed the way
by some foresters, he went up to the penance-grove which
was on that mountain. This grove was beset with manifold
charming and smooth-barked excellent trees with their or-
naments of twigs, flowers and fruits; birds exulting with
lust made it resound with their various notes; groups of
dancing peacocks enhanced its beauty; many kinds of deer
lived in i(. It was encircled as with a gird by a river of
pure, blue water, and the wind was agreeable there, car-
rying red flower-dust. Tn this grove stood a desert hut of
leaves, lovely to behold and pleasing in every season. Vic-
vakarman ' himself had built it by the orders of Qakra. There
the Bodhisattva took his residence.
52. Attended by his beloved wife, enjoying the artless and
sweet talk of his children, not thinking of the cares of
royalty, like one who is staying in his gardens, he practised
in that grove strong penance for half a year.
One day, when the princess had gone to seek roots and
fruits and the prince watching the children kept himself
within the borders of the hermitage, there arrived a brahman
whose feet and ankles were stiff with the dust of the
journey, and whose eyes and cheeks were sunken by toil;
he was bearing over his shoulder a wooden club from which
his waterpot hang down. His wife had despatched him
with the pressing errand, to go and search after some at-
tendance. When the Bodhisattva saw a mendicant coining up
to him after a long time, his heart rejoiced and his coun-
tenance began to beam. He went to his encounter, LUICI
Vicvfikanniiii ia the architect of the Uovas, thr Indian Hephaistos.

J&TAKA MïÏLil. 281
welcomed liim with kind words. After the usual complimental
conversation he told him to enter the hermitage where he
entertained him with the honour due to a guest. Then he
asked him the object, of his coming. And the brahman
who by fondness for his wife had banished discretion and
shame and was eager for receiving his boon, said in plain
words something like this:
53. "Where a light is and an even road, there is it easy tor
men to go. But in this world the darkness of selfishness prevails
in this degree that no other but thou wouldst lend an ear
to my words of request.
54. "Thy brilliant renown of heroic alsmgiving has penetrated
everywhere. For this reason I have undertaken this labour
of begging of thee. Give me both of thy children that
they may attend on me.'"
Being so addressed, the Bodhisattva, that Great Being,
55. as he was in the habit of cheerfully giving to mendicants
and had never learnt to say no, bravely said that he would
give even both of his darlings.
«Bless thee! But what art thou still waiting for?" thus
speaking the brahman urged the Great Being. Now the
children , having heard their father saying he would give
them away, became afflicted and their eyes filled with tears.
Moved by affection for them and touched in his heart the
Bodhisattva spoke:
56 — 57. "They are thine, being given by me to thee. But their
mother is not at home. She went out to the forest in search
of roots and fruits; she will come back at evening time.
Do thou permit them to see their mother, neally dressed
as they are now and bearing wreaths, and to be kissed
(farewell) by her. ' Rest this night here; to morrow thou
shalt carry them away "
The brahman said: "Thy Keverence ought not to urge me."
58. «The common epithet of womankind is .beautiful char-
mers' * thou knowest. She might prove a hindrance ti) the
' The literal translation is: „to be snuffled at, emelled at." Tins traditional
manner of caressing is mentioned in the ritual-books, soe f.i. A ^valayanaicrhya-
sutra I, 15, 9; Paraskara I, 18.
' I have tried to render approjrimativi'ly the iimbk'UouxnosH of tlio oriphiftl. Women
are designated, says the biohmnn, by the epithet of vamnlf. N«-w v.iina means

282
fulfilling of thy promise. Therefore T do not like staying
here."
The Bodhisattva said: »Do not think of that. My wife
will not obstruct the fulfilling of my prumise. She is in fact
the companion of my pious practice. ' But do as pleases
Thy Reverence. Yet, great brahman, thou shouldst consider
this:
59—01. "How should these children contrive to satisfy thy wants
by slavework ? They are very young and weak and have
never been accustomed to such kind of occupation. But the
king of Qibi, their grandfather, seeing them fallen into
this state of bondage, will doubtlessly give thee as much
money as thou desirest to redeem them. Well, for this
reason T pray thee briug them to his country. When acting
thus, thou wilt obtain great riches and at the same time
observe righteousness."
»No, said the brahman, I do not venture to come to
this king with an offer which would excite his anger; he
would be unapproachable like a snake.
6Ü. /'Ke would have the children torn from me by force,
perhaps he would inflict also punishment on me. I shall
bring them rather to my br&hman? that they may attend
on her."
Upon I his the Bodhisattva said nothing but: //then as
thou likest" without finishing the sentence. He taught the
little ones with persuasive words such things as they wanted
•in accordance with their new condition of' servants; sifter
which he took the waterpot, bending it over the outstretched
haud of the brahman greedy to accept the ratification of
the gift. •
fi3. Yielding to his effort, the water poured down from the
pot, and at the same time tears fell of themselves from
his eyes resembling dark-red lotus-petals.
Overjoyed with his success, ngitated by his excitement
and hastening to carry off the children of the Bodhisattva,
„beautiful," but pronounced with a different"accent vftma it is a word signifying
„left; contrary; opposite."
' Vicjvantara uses hove the solemn appellation of Bali adharni acariu i ( =
„house-wife") with its full moaninj. The formulr salmbhau oaratam <lharm:im
is uttered hi the. fourth or Prftjftpaiya form of marriage. Manu III, 30.

the brahman uttered a short phrase of benediction and telling
the children with a harsh voice of command to so out,
he made preparatives to cause them to leave the hermitage.
They, however, could not bear the too intense grief of
separation, their hearts shrunk together and they embraced
the feet of their father. Bathing in tears, they exclaimed:
64. "Mother is out doors, while you are about to give us away.
Do not give us before we have bidden adieu to mother too."
Now the brahman reflected : »the mother will return erelong
or it is likely that Ae will repent, subdued by paternal
love." Considering thus, he tied their hands like a bundle
of lotuses with a creeper, and as they were reluctant and
looked back at their father, he began to drag those young
and delicate children along with him, threatening them.
Tn this moment KrshnAjina the girl who had never before
experienced what it means to be befallen by a sudden
calamity, cried out with tears:
65—66. «This cruel brahman, father, hurts me with a creeper.
No, it is no brahman, to be sure. Brahinansare righteous,
they say. Tt is an ogre under the guise of a brahman.
Certainly he carries us off to eat us. Why do you sulfer
us, father, to be led away by this ogre?"
And Jllin the boy lamented on account of his mother,
saying:
(!7. "T do not suffer so much by the violence of this brahman,
as by the absence of mother. Tt is as if my heart is pierced
by grief that 1 could not take leave of her.
fiS. «Ü! certainly mother will wee]) for us for a long time in
the empty hermitage, like the bird c&taka ' whose little
ones have been killed.
69. wflow will mother behave, when coming back with the
many roots and fruits she has gathered in the forest for
us she will find the hermitage empty?
70. «Here, father, are our toy-horses, elephants and chariots.
Half of them you must give to mother, that she may assuage
her grief «herewith.
71. //You must also present her our respectful salutations
' This bird, tho ruculu* mefcww&wu», i« a favourite witli Indian rhetorical style.
It is Baid to feed on rniu-diiips.
5« Volgr. VUI. 20

284 J&TAKAUitLft,
anil withhold her at any rate from afflicting herself; for it
will be difficult for us, father, to see you and her again.
72. «Come, Krshna, let us die. Of what use is life to us?
We have been delivered by the prince to a brahman who
is in want of money.'"
After so speaking they parted. But the Bodhisattva,
though his mind was shaken by these most piteous laments
of his children, did not move from the place where he was
sitting. While representing to himself that it is not right
to repent, having given, his heart was burnt by the lire
of irremediable grief, and his mind became troubled as
though paralysed by torpor occasioned by poison. The fanning
of the cool wind made him soon recover his senses, and
seeing the hermitage noiseless and silent without his children,
he said by himself in a voice choked with tears:
7:3. «How is it possible that this man did not fear to strike
in my children my very heart? ' O, fie on that shameless
brahman!
74. "How may they be capable of making the journey, going
bare-footed and unable to bear fatigue by their tender age
»nd being servants to that man ?
75. «Who will afford rest to them, when they are way-worn
and exhausted? Whom may they go and ask, if vexed by
the suffering of hunger and thirst?
76. »lf this sorrow strikes even me, the earnest striver for
firmness of mind, what then will be the condition of those
little ones, brought up in ease ?
77. »Oh! the separation of my children is to my mind like
a burning lire .... Nevertheless, no one who holds on the
righteous conduct of the virtuous, will give way to repen-
tance."
In the mean while Madri was disquieted by ill omens
and prognostics, the foretokens of some accident. Desiring
' liter.: „on my very heart, whose name in offspring." This identification of
the heart of the father with his children dependa on an old formula, partaking
of the prayers and saored mantras of the grfiya-books. See Acvalayanagrhya
(I, 15, 9) and Paraskara (1, 18, 2). „Thou arisest from me, from limb by
limb; out of my heart tlu.u art bom. Thou art my self, called son. Mayst
thou live, then, a hundred autumns." Cp. the Kauuhi takibra h mana-upa-
nishad II, 11.

285
therefore to «et back with her roots and fruits as soon as
possible , she was obstructed the way by ferocious animals and
was obliged to return to the hermitage by a long round-
about way. And when she did not see her children neither
on the way, where they were used to come to her encounter,
nor in the play-ground, her uneasiness greatly increased.
78. Apprehending evil because of these unpleasing sensations
of danger, she was agitated and anxious and looked round-
about, if she might get sight of the children; then she
called them. Receiving no answer, she began to lament,
sore with grief.
79. «Formerly the hermitage, resounding from the shouts
of my children, appeared to me a much frequented region;
now not perceiving them, T feel myself helpless in the
very same place as in a wilderness.
50. «But perhaps they have fallen asleep and slumber, tired
with playing. Or should they have gone astray in the thicket ?
Or should they have hidden themselves out of childishness,
being displeased that 1 was so long in coming home?
51. "But why do not yonder birds warble? Should they l>e
bewildered having witnessed mischief done to the children?
Can it be that they have been carried away by that most
rapid stream , which is eagerly pushing forth its dashing waves?
//Oh! that my suspicions may prove to be groundless
and false even now, and the prince and the children be
well! Oh! may the evil-boding prognostics find their ful-
filment on my body! But why then is my heart big with
sadness? why is it enwrapt in the night of sorrow and as if it
would sink away? Why is it that my limbs seem to slacken,
that I am no more able to discern the objects around me,
that this grove, deprived of its lustre, seems to turn round?"
Having entered the hermitage-ground and put aside her
roots and fruits, she went to her husband. After performing
the usual salutation she asked him for the children. Now
the Bodhisattva, knowing the tenderness of a mother's love
and also considering that bad news is hard to be told. was
not capable of making any answer.
S3. It is a very difficult matter for a pitiful man,,indeed,
to torment with evil tidings the mind of one who has come
to him and deserves to hear pleasant words.

286
Then Madrï thought: //surely, some ill has befallen the
children; his silence is the effect of his being overwhelmed
by grief and sadness", and struck with stupor she stared
about the hermitage, but saw no children. And again she
said, in a voice rather indistinct by smothered tears:
S3. »l do not see the children, and you do not speak any-
thing to me! Alas! I am wretched, 1 am forlorn. This
silence speaks of some great evil."
No sooner had she said these words than overpowered
by the sorrow that tortured her heart, she sank down like
a creeper violently cut off. The Bodhisattva prevented
her from falling on the ground, clasping his arms round
her and brought her to a grass-couch, on which lying and
being sprinkled with cold water she recovered her senses.
Then he endeavoured to comfort her, saying:
84. "1 have not told the sad news straightway to you,
Madri, for firmness is not to be expected of a mind rendered
weak by affection.
85. »See, a brahman suffering from old age and poverty
has come to me. To him 1 have given both of the children.
Be appeased and do not mourn.
86. »Look at me, Madrï, do not look for the children, nor
indulge in lamentations. Do not strike anew my heart, still
pierced by the dart of sorrow on account of the children.
87. //When being asked my life, should I be able not to
give it? Take this in account, my love, and approve the
gift I have made of the children."
Madrï whom the suspicion of the death of her children
had put to anguish, now hearing by these words that they
were alive, began to recover from her fright and affliction.
She wiped off her tears with the object of comforting and
strengthening her husband; then looking up, she beheld
:•'•• what made her speak with amazement to her husband:
• *A wonder! A wouder! To say it in a few words,
88. ^Surely, even the Celestials are wrapt in admiration at
your heart beiug up to this point unattainable, for selfish
feelings.
89—90. //This is evident from the sounds of the divine drums,
echoing in all directions. In order to celebrate your very
glory, Heaven has composed the hymu which it thus pro-

287
nounces in distinct language from afar. Earth shakes, trem-
bling, I suppose, from exaltation, as is indicated by the
heaving of her breasts, the mountains. Golden flowers, falling
down from heaven, make the sky appear as if it were
illuminated by lightnings.
91. «Leave, then, grief and sadness. That you have given
away in charity must rather tend to brighten up your mind.
Become again the well that aftbrds benefit to the creatures,
and a giver as you were before!"
Now the surface of Earth being shaken, Sumeru, the
lord of mountains, radiant with the lustre of its manifold
gems, began to waver. Qakra, the Lord of the Devas,
inquiring into the cause of the earthquake, was informed
of it by the regents of the world-quarters who with eyes ex-
panding witli amazement told him that it had been caused
by Viyvautara giving away his children. Excited with joy
and surprise, next day at day-break he went to the presence
of Vicvantara, feigning to be a brahman, come to him in
want of something. The Bodhisattva showed him the hospi-
tality due to a guest, after which he requested him to
bring forth his want. Then Qakra begged him his wife.
92. »The practice of almsgiving in virtuous persons, he said,
comes as little to its end as the water in great lakes will
dry up. For this reason I ask thee that woman there who
is looking like a deity. Her, thy wife, give to me, I
pray thee."
Being so requested, the Bodhisattva did not lose his
firmness of mind , however, and made the promise of giving her.
93. Then taking Madrt with his left and the waterpot with
his right he poured down water on the hand of the brahman ,
but tire of grief on the mind of the Love-god. '
94. No anger arose in Madrï's breast, nor did she weep,
for she knew his innate disposition. Only keeping her eyes
fixed on him, she stood like an image, stupefied by the
excessive heaviness of that fresh burden of suffering.
On beholdiug this, Qakra, the Lord of the Devas,
' This means not so much that the Indinn Amor wan afflicted on account of
the offence against conjugal love as the defeat of Mar», the Indian Satan. To
oouquer the senses and serisuality is to vanquish Mara, who is the same as Kam».
Cp. the note ou jat. I, st. 37-

288 j&TAKAM&li,
affected with the utmost admiration, magnified the Great
Being.
95. »Oh! the wide distance which is between the righteous
conduct and that of the impious! Such as have not purified
their hearts will be hardly even capable of believing this
great performance!
9fl. //To cherish an affectionate wife and much beloved
children, and yet to give them up, obeying to thu self-
imposed vow of disattachment — is it possible to conceive
any loftiness like this?
97. //When thy glory will be spread throughout the world
by eulogizing fame, the brilliant reputations of others will
disappear in thine, beyond doubt, just as the splendour
of the sunlight makes the other luminaries dissolve in itself.
98. //Even now this superhuman fact of thine is praisingly
approved by the yakshas, the gandharvas, the snakes
and by the Devas, Vftsava ' included."
After so speaking, Qakra reassumed his own brilliant,
figure and made himself known fo the Bodhisattva. Which
being done he said:
!)!). //To thee 1 now do give Madrt, thy wife.
«Where else should moonshine stay but with the moon?
100. «Nor shouldst thou have trouble about the separation
from thy son and daughter nor grief for the loss of thy
royal dignity. Before long thy father will come to thee ,
accompanied by both of thy children and provide his king-
dom with a protector restoring to thee thy high rank."
Having thus said (,Jakra disappeared on the very spot.
Now that brahman in consequeuce of Qakra's power
brought the children of the Bodhisattva just to the laud
of (,1ibi. And when the Qibis and Samjaya, their king,
heard of' the Bodhisattva's performance, of the greatest com-
passion, hardly to be done by others, their hearts became wet
with tenderness. They redeemed the children from the hand of
the brahman, and having obtained the pardon of Vicvantara,
led him back and reinstated him in his royal dignity.
Tn this way, then, the behaviour of a Bodhisattva is
au other urime of Qakra.

jaTAKAMJlLÉl. 289
exceedingly marvellous. For this reason such distinguished
heings as strive for that state, must not be despised or
hindered. This story is also to be adduced when discoursing
on the TathAgata and when treating of listening with attention
to the preaching of the Law.
Vicvantara's birth being the last but one uf fche Lord, the person .if
that charitable king ia held very high among Buddhists. His largesses
arc also considered to constitute the highest degree of practising the
paratnita of oharity. Iii the memorable night whioh preoeded his attain-
ment of the Buddhahood , the OAkya prince had but to refer to his actions
in the Vievantara-existence to demonstrate his having fulfilled that
paramita. — In the pali Jataka that existence is the subjeot-matter of the
longest and last (550''' ) number of the collection, but because it is
the last it is still unpublished; its contents, however, have been oom-
munionted by Spenoe Hardy in IIIB jWanuai o/ /W/iwm (p. 118—127
of the 2d ed.). From hence prof. Kern borrowed his exposition of the
tale in his Oesc/«f</c?i« ran A«( iJ/'cM/tismt I, p. 303—317, to whioli lie
added copious notes with the ten lenoy of exploring and expounding the
mythological substrate which underlies it. Il is curious to compare the
redaction of the pali Jataka with that of Cüra. The latter omitted
purposely, it seems, some particularities, f. i. the name of the old brahman ,
that of the mother of Vievantara and the etymology of his name; his
narration is discordant in some slight details. But the main features
are the same, likewise in the redaotion of the C'ariya-pifaka, where
Viyv.'B story is n. 9 of the danapainmita and is told in 58 9lokas.
From this version it appears that the earthquake, caused by the great
liberality of the prince, is something most essential; or rather earthquakes,
for this miraole occurred seven times, unoe when he took the letermi-
nation [not mentioned by Oüra] of giving his heart, eyes, nosh or blood
if requested, «erontMy after the gift of the white elephant, (Aircily when
he had made his great largesses preceding his withdrawal to mount
Vaiika, JiwrtMy and /f/ïWy after giving his ohildren aud his wife; the
sixiA time was when he met again with his father and mother in the
forest, the aewn<A at his entrance in his capital The sevenfold earth-
quake is also disoussed in the Milindu Pan ha 119 foil. Cp also the
parallel performance told of tho Bodhisattva, who afterwards was Man-
gala Buddha (Fauab. Jataka 1, p. 31, translated by Rhys Davids
2KriA-£fone« I, p. 33).
In Kshomendra's Avadauakalpalata the story of Vicvautara is
u'. 23, not published.

290
J SACRIFICE.
(y ajiiaj ataka)
Those whose hearts are pure do not act up to the euti-
cemeut of the wicked. Knowing this, pureheartedncss is
to be striven after. This will be taught by the following.
liong ago the Bodhisattva, it is said, was a kiug who
had obtained his kingdom by order of succession. He had
reached this state as the effect of his merit, aud ruled his
realm in peace, not disturbed by any rival, his sovereignty
beiug universally acknowledged. His country was free from
any kind of annoyance, vexation or disaster, both his home
relations and those with the foreign being quiet in every
respect ' , and all his vassals obeyed his commands.
I. This monarch having subdued the passions, his enemies,
felt no inclination for such profits as are to be blamed
when enjoyed, but was with his whole heart intent o»
promoting the happiness of his subjects. Holding virtuous
i. practice (d har ma) the only purpose of his actions, he
behaved like a Muni.
SJ. .For lie knew the nature of mankind, that the people set
a high value on imitating the behaviour of the highest.
1'or this reason, being desirous of bringing about salvation
for his subjects, he was particularly attiiched to the due
performance of his religious duties.
3. He practised almsgiving, kept strictly the precepts of
moral conduct (91 la), cultivated forbearance, strove for the
benefit of the creatures. His mild countenance being in
accordance witli his thoughts devoted to the happiness of
his subjects, he appeared like an incarnation of the God of
Righteousness (ü har ma).
Now it once happened that, though protected by his mighty
arm, his realm both in consequence of faulty actions of its
inhabitants and by lack of advertence from the side of the
' The literal translation is: „the otilnmities (which might occur) from his own
sphere (of government), from that of othore [viz. from foreign countries] and the
reet being extinguished."

291
angels charged with the can; of rain, was afflicted in several
districts by drought and the troublesome ellects of such a
disaster. Upon this the king, fully convinced that this plague
had been brought about by the violation of righteousness
by himself or his subjects, and taking much at heart the
distress of his people, whose very welfare was the main
object of his thoughts and cares, took the advice of men
of acknowledged competence, being reputed for their know-
ledge about matters of religion. So keeping counsel with
the elders among the brahmans, headed by his family-priest
(pur oh it a), and his ministers, he asked them for some
means of putting an end to that calamity. Now they, sup-
posing a solemn sacritice as is enjoined by the Veda to be
a cause of abundant rain, explained to him that he must
perform such a sacrifice of a frightful character, inasmuch
as it requires the massacre of' many hundreds of living
beings. But after being informed of everything about such
slaughter as is prescribed for the sacrifice, his innate com-
passionatencss forbade him to approve of their advice in
his heart; yet out of civility unwilling to offend them by
harsh words of refusal, he slipped over this point turning
the conversation upon other topics. They, on the other
hand, no sooner caught the opportunity of conversing with
the king on matters of religion than they admonished him
to accomplish the sacrifice, for they did not understand liis
deeply hidden mind.
4. «You constantly take care not to neglect the proper time
of performing your different royal duties, established for
the sakes of obtaining the possession of land and ruling it. The
due order of these actions is in agreement with the precepts
of Righteousness (d liar ma).
5. »How then is this that you who (in all other respects)
are so clever in the observance of the triad (of d h a r m a ,
art ha and kftma), bearing your bow to defend the good
of your people, are so careless and almost sluggish as to
that bridge to the world of the Devns, the name of which
is jsacrifice' ? -'< '
6. '/Like servants, the kings (your vassals) revere your com-
mands , thinking them to be surest gage of success. Now
the time is come, o destructor of your foes, to gather by

292 jaTAKAMaLïL
means of sacrifice superior blessings which are to procure
for you a blazing glory.
7—S. //Certainly, that holiness which is the requisite for a
dtkshita' is already yours, by reasou of your great
attachment to charity and your strictness in observing the
restraint of good conduct. Nevertheless, it should be lit
for you to discharge your debt to the Devas ' by such
sacrifices as are the subject -matter of the Veda. The deities
being satisfied by duly and faultlessly performed sacrifice *
use to reward the creatures by sending rain. Considering
thus, take to mind the welfare of your subjects and your own
and consent to the performance of a regular sacrifice which
will enhance your glory."
Hearing them thus speaking, he entered upon tins thought:
'/Very badly guarded is my poor person, indeed, being
given in trust to such leaders. While faithfully believing
and loving the haw, 1 were to unroot my virtue, of tender-
heartedness by reliance upon the words of others. 1W, truly,
!). «wlio are reputed among men to be the best refuge,
those very persons intend to do harm, borrowing their
arguments from the Law. Alas! such a one as follows the
wrong patli shown by them, will soon find himself driven
to straits, for he will be surrounded by evils.
10. "What connection may there be, forsooth, between
righteousness and injuring animals? ilow may residence in
the world of the Devas or propitiation of the deities have
anything to do with the murder of victims?
11—12. «The animal slaughtered according to the rites with the
prescribed prayers, as if those sacred formulae were as
many darts to wound it, goes to heaven, they say, and
with this object it is killed. In this way that action is
' Beforo undertaking tliu performance "f a groat sacrifice, its performer has to
bo purified by the initiatory ceremony nf diksha. Prom that time till the final
bath or avabhrtha at the ol<>se of the sacrifice he is called a dikshita and
bound to the observance of many detailed prescriptions about his food, dress,
residence and his whole mode of living.
* By sacrifioe, is the saying of the Hindus, tnau pays his debt to the Devas,
by the oraddha and by offspring to his ancestors, by study and peiianoe to the
rshis or old sagos, by benevolence and kindness to men. Sec f. i. Mhbh. I, 120,19.
* Tho term svishti, used here by (^ftra, bears the import of frftwe and
)' with the ancient Romans and Greeks,

293
interpreted to be dune according to the Law. Yet it is a
lie. For how is it possible that in the next world one
should reap the fruits of what lias been done by others?
Aud by what reason will the sacrificial animal mount to
heaven without having abstained from wicked actions,
without having devoted himself to the practice of good
ones, simply because of his having been killed in sacrifice
and not on the ground of his own actions?
ltf. »And should the victim killed iu sacrifice really go to
heaven, should we not expect the brahmans to offer them-
selves to be immolated in sacrifice? A similar practice is
nowhere seen, however. Who, then, may take at heart the
advice proffered by these counsellors?
14. //As to the Celestials, should we believe that they who
are wont to enjoy the fair ambrosia of' incomparable scent,
flavour, brilliancy and elective power and served to them
by the apsarasas, would abandon it to delight in the
slaughter of a pitiable victim that they might least on
the omentum aud such other parts of his body as are
offered to them in sacrifice?
'/Therefore, it is the proper time to act so and so."
Having thus made up his mind, the king feigned to be
eager for undertaking the sacrifice; and in approval of their
words he spoke to them in this manner: "Verily, well
protected 1 am, well gratified, having such counsellors as
Your Lordships are, thus bent on securing my happiness!
Therefore 1 will have a human sacrifice (purush a in ed ha)
of a thousand victims performed. Let my officials, each
in his sphere of business, be ordered to bring together the
requisites necessary for that purpose. Let also an inquiry be
made of the fittest ground whereon to raise the tents and
other buildings for the sattra. ' Further the proper time
of the sacrifice must be fixed (by the astrologers) examin-
ing the auspicious lunar days, kar anas*, muhur-
• This i» the appellation of great s u m a-sacrifices lasting fur tuauy days, some-
times eveu for years.
'A kar a;i a is a space of time less than a t i t h i ur lunar day, and mure
than a muhiirta. Two kar arias fill up oue tit hi; yet there are more
than two, viz. eleven, as they relate not only to the former or latter p..rt of
the lunar day, but also to the position of thu moon with respect to the earth.

29 i
tas' and constellations." The purohita answered: "In
order to succeed in your enterprise, Your Majesty ought
to take the avabhrtha (final bath) at the end of one
sacrifice; after which you may successively undertake the
others. For if the thousand human victims were to be
seized at once, your subjects, to be sure, would blame you
and be stirred up to great agitation on their account."
This words of the purohita having been approved by the
other brahmans, the king replied: '/Do not apprehend the
wrath of the people, Reverends. 1 shall take such measures
as to prevent any agitation „ of my subjects."
After this the king convoked an assembly of the towns-
men and the landsmen and said: '/I intend to perform a
human sacrifice of a thousand victims. But nobody deserves
to be designated for immolation from my part, provided
lie behave honestly. With this in mind I decree as follows.
'Whomsoever of you I shall henceforward perceive trans-
gressing the boundaries of moral conduct, despising my
royal will, him 1 shall order to be caught to be a victim
at my sacrifice, thinking such a one the stain of his family
and a danger to my country. With the object of carrying
this resolution into effect, I shall cause you to be observed
by faultless and sharp-sighted emissaries, who have shaken
oil' sleepy carelessness and will report to me of your couduct.'
15e well aware of this my command."
Then the foremost of the assembly, folding their hands
and bringing them to their forehead, spoke:
15—Ki. «Majesty, all your actions tend to the happiness of your
subjects, what reason can there be. of despising you on
thai account? Even (god) lirahma cannot but sanction your
behaviour. Your Majesty, following the autliority of Virtue,
is our highest autliority. For this reason anything which
pleases Your Majesty must please us, too. Indeed, you
are pleased with nothing else bul our enjoyment and our
good."
After the notables both of the town and the country
had accepted in this manner his command, the king sent
> A m u hit v t a is the Indiiui hour of 48 minutes, thirty of whioh make up
a day aud night.

295
about his towns and all over his'country officers, notified
as such by their external show visible to the people, with
the charge of laying hold of the evil-doers, and everywhere
he ordered proclamations to be made by beat of drum day
after day, of this kind:
17. //The kiug, a granter of security as he is, warrants
safety to every one who constantly cultivates honesty and
good conduct, in short, to the virtuous. Yet intending to
perform a human sacrifice for the benefit of his subjects,
he wants human victims by thousands to be taken from
those who delight in misconduct. ••}!':<>ƒ•
] 8. '/Therefore, whosoever henceforward licentiously indulging
in misbehaviour will disregard the command of our monarch
which is even observed by the kings, his vassals, shall
be brought to the state of a sacrificial victim by the very
force of his own actions, and people shall witness his mise-
rable suffering, when he shall pine with pain, his body
being fastened at the sacrificial post.
When the inhabitants of that realm became aware of
their king's careful search after evil-doers with the aim of
destining them to be victims at his sacrifice — for they
heard the most frightful royal proclamation day after day
and saw the king's servants who were appointed to look
out for wicked people and to seize them appearing every
now and then everywhere — they abandoned the attachment
to bad conduct and grew intent on strictly observing the
moral precepts and self-control. They avoided every occasion
for hatred and enmity, and settling their quarrels and
differences cherished mutual love and mutual esteem. Obedience
to the words of parents aud teacher?., a general spirit of
liberality and sharing with others, hospitality, good manners,
modesty prevailed among them. In short, they lived as
it were in the krta yuga.
19. The fear of death had awakened in them thoughts of
the next world, the risk of tarnishing the honour of their
family had stirred their care of guarding its reputation,
the necessity of striving after a pure life had strengthened
their sense of shame. These factors being at work, people
were soon distinguished by their spotless behaviour.
20. Even though every one became more thau ever intent

290
on keeping a righteous conduct, still the king's servants
did not diminish their watchfulness in the pursuance of
the evil-doers. This also contributed to prevent people from
falling short of their moral and religious duties.
21. The, king, learning from his emissaries this state of
tilings in his realm, felt extremely rejoiced. He bestowed
rich presents on those messengers as a reward for the good
news they told him, and enjoined his ministers speaking
something like this:
22—24. "The protection of my subjects is my highest desire,
you know. Now A?#/ have become worthy of being reci-
pients of sacrificial gifts ' and T have provided this wealth
for the purpose of my sacrifice. Well, I intend to accomplish
my sacrifice in the manner as T. have considered to be the.
proper one. Let every one who wishes for money that it
may be fuel for his happiness, come and accept it from
my hand to his heart's content. In this way the distress
and poverty which is vexing our country, may be soon
driven out. Indeed, whenever I consider my own strong
determination of protecting my subjects and the great assistance
I derive from you, my excellent companions in that task,
my mind often seems to me to be burnt with :inger and
annoyance as by a blazing fire, by those sufferings of my
people."
The ministers accepted the royal command and went to
its execution. They ordered alms-halls to be established in
all villages, towns, and markets, likewise nt all stations
on the roads. This being done, they caused all who begged
in order to satisfy their wants to be provided with the
boons of those objects, just as had been ordered by the
king.
2:"). So poverty disappeared, and the people, having received
wealth from the side of the king, dressed and.adorned with
manifold and fine garments and ornaments, exhibited the
splendour of festival days.
2fi. The glory of the king celebrated by the eulogies of Ihe
rejoiced recipients of his gifts, spread about in all directions
in a similar way as the flowerdust of the lotuses carried
• Viz. by the purity of thoir life and (.lie lu.liiieiw of their conduct.

J&TAKAMAIJI. 297
forth by the small waves of a lake extends itself over a
greater and greater surface.
27. ' And after the. whole people in consequence of the wise
measures taken by their ruler had become intent on vir-
tuous behaviour, the plagues and calamities, overpowered
by the growth of all such qualities as are conducibh> to
prosperity, faded away, having lost their hold.
28. The seasons succeeded eacli other in due course, rejoicing
everybody by their regularity and, like kings newly esta-
blished , complying with the lawful order of things. Conse-
quently the eartli produced the various kinds of corn in
abundance, and there was fulness of pure and blue water
and lotuses in all waterbasins.
29. No epidemies afflicted mankind; the medicinal herbs
possessed their efficacious virtues more than ever; the mon-
soons blew in due time and regularly; the planets moved
along in auspicious paths.
80. Nowhere there existed any danger to be feared, either
from abroad or from within or such as might be caused
by derangements of the elements. Keeping on righteousness
and self-control, cultivating good behaviour and modesty,
the people of that country enjoyed as it were the prero-
gatives of the krta yuga.
By the power, then, of the king performing his sacrifice
in this manner in accordance with (the precepts of') the
Law, the sufferings of the indigent were put to an end
together with the plagues and calamities, and the country
abounded in a prosperous and thriving population oH'eriny
the pleasing aspect of gladness. Accordingly people never
became tired of repeating benedictions on their king and
extending his renown in all directions.
One day one of the highest royal officials, whose heart
had been inclined to the (True) Belief, spoke thus to the king:
31. «The monarchs, because they are dealing with all kinds
of business, the highest, the lowest and the intermediate,
surpass by their wisdom any wise men by far.
' In the printed text the first line of this stanza is deficient, two syllables at
the end being wanting. I think, this second p.1da should bo restored by the in-
sertion of j a n o after n i k h i 1 e.

298
«Por, Majesty, you have obtained the happiness of your
subjects both in this world and in the. next as the effect
of your sacrifice being performed in righteousness, free
from the blamable sin of animal-slaughter. The hard times
are all over and the sufferings of poverty have ceased, since
men have been established in the precepts of good conduct.
Why use many words? Your subjects are happy.
32. ' "The black antelope's skin which covers your limbs has
the resemblance of the spot on the bright moon's surface,
uor can the natural loveliness of your demeanour be hin-
dered by the restraint imposed on you by your being a
dikshita. * Your head, adorned with such hair-dress,
as is in compliance with the rites of the d i k s h a, possesses
no smaller lustre than when it was embellished with the
splendour of the royal umbrella. * And, last not least, by
your largesses you have surpassed the renown and abated
the pride of the famous performer of a hundred sacrifices. *
;33. »As a rule, o you wise ruler, the sacrifice of those who
long for the attainment of some good, is a vile act, accom-
panied as it is by the injury done to living beings. Ktfw.r
sacrifice, on the contrary, this monument of your glory,
is in complete accordance with your lovely behaviour and
your aversion from vices.
* The oorruptioiiB of this stanza in the mss. have been corrected in the edition.
Ill some poiuts, however, I venture to propose some alterations.
To gatrena of the mss., gatro ua of the ed. I should prefer gatreshu.
To mandodyamah of the mss., maudodyamah of the ed. I Bhould prefer
mandodyama, and in pada 3 kefaracanaeobhft is, methiuks, one com-
pound.
' Cp. note 1 on stanza 7 «upro. As long as tho sacrifice is being performed, for
as long time the s a 11 r a and the d i k s h a continue. The king, therefore, is
still wearing the skin of the black autelnpo, which he has put on at the timo of
his oonsecratioii for tho sake of performing the sacrifice, as well as he is obliged
to observe the many other restrictions of the d i k s h a. The minister says that
to the pious monaroh those obligations are no restraint as far as they have refe-
rence to his behaviour, which has always been in accordance with the strictest
precepts of the Law by his innate disposition.
* The white umbrella or pajong, the well-known badges of royal authority, has
been put aside for the time of the d i k s h a.
* viz. (Jlakra, the Lord of the Devas. Here he is called fatayajvan which
is well-nigh synonymous with his oommon epithet of catakratu that is, accor-
ding to tho vulgar aooeption, the performer of a hundred saorificos. Accordingly
he is called sometimes also catamakha.

J&TAKAMiÏT.a, 299
34. //Oh! Happy are the subjects who have their protector
in yoK.' It is a certainty that no father could be a better
guardian for his children."
Another said:
35. «If the wealthy practise charity, they are commonly
impelled to do so by the hopes they put in the cultivation
of that virtue: good conduct, too, may be. occasioned by
the propensity for obtaining high regard amonsr men or
the desire of reaching heaven after death. But such a practice
of both, as is seen in your skill of securing the benefit of
others, cannot be found but in those who are accomplished
both in learning and in virtuous exertions."
Tn such a way, then, those whose hearts are pure do
not act up to the enticement of the wicked. Knowing this,
pureheartedness is to be striven after.
Tn the spiritual lessons for princes this, too, is to be said:
30- //Who to his subjects wis hing good , himself exerts,
//Will bring about salvation, glory, happiness
«No other should be of a king the business."
And it may be added as follows: //(the prince) who strives
after material prosperity, ought to act in accordance with
the precepts of religion, thinking a religious conduct of
his subjects to be the source of prosperity."
"Further this is here to be said: //Injuring animals never
tends to bliss, but charity, self-restraint, continence and
the like have, this power; for this reason he who longs for
bliss mii't devote himself to these virtues." And also when
discoursing on the Tath&gata: »ln tins manner the Lord
showed his inclination to care for the interests of the world,
when he was still in his previous existences."
This story is not mot with elsewhere, it seams; at least it is not
found in the pdli Jfttnkn, ns far aa it is published, nor in the Cariyft-
pitalca, the A va d an a k al p al at ft and the Divy ft vad ft n a.
5« Volgr. VIII. 21

300 jflTAKAM&Lil,
XI.
THE sïoiiy OF GAK RA.
(Cnk rajfitaka.)
Neither adversity nor the brilliancy of sovereign power
are able to relax the virtue of compassion towards living
beings in the high-minded. This will be taught now.
In the time when the Bodhisattva, having well practised
meritorious actions for a long, long time and got into the
possession of the virtues of charity, self-restraint, continence
and compassion, was directing his extraordinary performances
to the benefit of others, once, it is said, he became Cakra,
the Lord of the Devas.
1. The magnificence of the Chief of the Celestials shone
in a higher degree and displayed a greater majesty, since
that rank had fallen to his lot. Something analogous may
be seen, when a palace adorned by the covering of its
fresh stucco, is made resplendent by the moonbeams
2. The rich lustre of that mighty state, to conquer which
the sons of Diti dared push forward against the impetuous
advance of the world-elephants and expose their breasts to
the pestle-like tusks of those huge animals, that brilliancy
was /fcw. But though lie easily enjoyed the immense happiness
of that state, nevertheless, that bliss did not stain his
heart with pride.
Ruling heaven and earth in the proper manner he ac-
quired splendid glory, which pervaded all the worlds. Now
the Demons ' could not bear that renown nor that very
wonderful bliss he enjoyed and waged war against him.
They marched to his encounter to fight him with an enorm-
ous army of elephants, chariots, horse and loot, being the
more terrible, as they were drawn up in the proud array
of battle and making a noise as awful as that of the wild
Ocean. Through the glittering blaze of their various kinds
' The Demons. the godp or spirits of the darkness, are the same as the sons of
Difci or Ihiityas ur Asuras. Their war witli the Doviis nr gods «if lipht is eternal,
aud a oomniou topio iu Indian mythology and literature.

jflTAKAHftl/l. 301
of offensive and defensive weapons they hardly suffered them-
selves to be looked at.
3. He for his part, though attached to the precepts of
righteousness, felt however within his heart the disposition
to indulge in the frenzy of fighting. He was prompted to do
so by the pride of his enemies, by the danger of his own
men, unpleasantly interrupted in their peaceful sport., also
by the regard of his majesty and of' the traditional line.
of conduct along the path of' political wisdom.
So he mounted his excellent golden chariot, to which a
thousand excellent horses were put. This chariot was de-
corated in front with a beautiful, high-floating banner which
bore a figure in the attire of an arhat ' for its emblem.
Its outer appearance was exceedingly brilliant, owing to
the lustre reflected by the manifold precious stones and jewels
that adorned it and to the shine, which irradiated its flanks,
emanating from the different weapons sharp-pointed and
well-disposed to be ready for use on botli sides of the
chariot. Within it was covered with a fine white blankei.
Standing on it and surrounded by his great divine host
of different arms, elephants, chariots, horse and foot, the
Great Being met the forces of the Demons just on the
border-line of the Ocean.
4. Then a great battle took place, destructive of the firmness
of the timid as well ns of the shields and mail-coats pierced by
the strokes of the weapons, wherewith they fought each other.
5—f>. Various cries were heard in the tumult of that struggle.
Stay! Not in this manner! Here! Look out! Where an;
you now? You will not escape me! Strike! You are a dead
man! So challenging one another they fought. And this
noise mixing with the clashing and crashing of the arms
all over the battle-field and the sound of the drums made
heaven shake and almost burst.
7. The elephants of both sides, rushing on each other with
great fury increased by the smell of the flowing juice,
offered the frightful spectacle of mountains swept along
by the wind of a world-destruction-period.
' The arhate arc Buddhistic sainte. The Oafcra "f our tale makes in this
mauncr a confession of his faith.

302 J&TAKAM&La.
8. Like portentous clouds the chariots went all over the
field, their floating standards resembling the lightning and
the rattling noise they made being as the roaring of the
thunder.
9. Sharp arrows were Hying over both armies and fell down
amidst the warriors of both the Devas and the Demons,
hitting banners and royal umbrellas, bows and spears, shields
and cuirasses, and the heads of men.
10. At the end the army of Cakra took to flight, frightened
by the fiery swords and arrows of the Demons. The Lord
of the Celestials alone was still keeping the field, barring
with his chariot the host of his enemies.
When M&tali, the charioteer of the Lord of the Devas,
perceived that the army of the Demons, high-spirited and
overjoyed, was coming over them with a tremendous noise
of various warcries and shouts of victory, whereas the army
of the Devas was almost intent on flight, he thought it
was now the proper time to retreat and so he turned the
chariot of the Lord of the Devas. While they were making
the ascent, ' Uakrn, the Lord of the Devas, caught sight
of some eagle-nests which were placed on a silk-cotton tree
just in the line of direction of the chariot-pole, so that
they must needs be crushed by it. No sooner had he seen
them than affected by compassion he said to MAtali, his
charioteer:
11. «The birds-nests on this silk-cotton tree are filled with
not yet winged youngs. Drive my chariot in such a manner
that these nests will not fall down crushed by the. chariot-polo."
Miitali answered: //Tn the mean while the crowds of the
Demons will overtake us, sir."
Qakra said: «Never mind. Do you but take the proper
care of avoiding these eagle-nests." Upon which M&tali
answered:
12. //Nothing short of stopping the chariot can save the
birds, o Lotus-eyed One. But we have at our heels yon
host of foes who after a long time are at last having the
better of the Devas."
• Returning from the battle-field on the border nf the Ocean to his residence
in heaven, Qakra must needs drive upward.

803
In this moment Cakra, the Ijord of the Devas, moved
by tlie utmost compassion , showed his extraordinary goodness
of heart and iirinuess of intention.
13. wWell then, said he, stop the chariot. Better is it for
me to die by the terrible club-strokes of the chiefs of the
Demons than to live blameful aud dishonoured, if 1 should
have murdered those poor terror-struck creatures."
Matali promised to do so and stopped his car, drawn
by a thousand horses.
14. Now the foes, beholding this deed of heroism aud seeing
that the chariot stood ready for the fight, were overtaken
with fear and got into confusion. Their ranks gave way
like dark rain-clouds driven away by the wind.
15. In the case of a defeat one single man turning to the
enemy and barring the way of' the enemy's forces will
sometimes abate the pride aud haughtiness of the victors
by the unexpectedness of his heroic valour.
16. The sight of the broken ranks of the hostile army en-
couraging the host of the Devas made them return. For
the Demons, terror-struck and fleeing did no more think
of rallying and resisting.
17. Then the Devas, whose joy was mingled with shame,
paid homage to their Lord; after which, brilliant and
beautiful by the radiance of victory he quietly returned
from the battle-field to his city, where his zenana impatiently
longed for him.
In this way the victory was gained in that battle. It is
for this reason that the saying goes :
18. The low-minded do wicked actions in consequence of
their cruelty. The average men, though pitiful, will do so
when being in distress. But the virtuous, even when in
danger of life, are as less capable of transgressing their
proper line of conduct as the Ocean its boundary.
Tn this way the Lord long ago did protect animal life
even at the risk of his own and of the loss of the Celestial
sway. Keeping then at heart that it does not befit at all
a wise man to oftend living beings, much less to sin against
them, a pious man (arya) must be intent on practising
compassion towards the creatures. Aud the saying that

304
üharma forsooth watches him who walks in righteousness
(d liar m a), is to be propounded here too. Likewise this
(story) may be adduced when discoursing on the Tathagata,
and when treating of listening with attention to the preaching
of the Law.
The pali Jataka contains a rodaction of tills deed of the Bodhisattva,
when possessing the rank of Sakka. Its author going back to the time,
when the Demons were the real masters of the celestial abode, rolatis
how Sakka cunningly making them drunk with ambrosia throw thorn
down in tho depth. Upon tho whole , the mythological nature of tho
tale is woll preserved in that redaction. See tho text in Fausböll,
Jataka I, p. 202 f. aud its translation in Rhys Davids, Buddhist
Birth-Stories p. 284—287.
XII.
THE STORY OK TUK UIIAHMAN.
(brah in anaj ;1 taka).
What forbids the virtuous to transgress the boundary of
good behaviour is the very shame of the Self within their
hearts. This will be taught by the following.
Once tlie Bodhisattva, it is told, came to life in some
illustrious family of brahinans, well-reputed both on account
of their ancestry and their conduct. They were highly
esteemed and renowned, observing their traditional customs
and setting a high value on good education and good manners.
Having received in due order the initiation of the different
sacraments: garbhad hana, puinsavana, simanton-
nayaua, jatakarina and the rest, > he dwelt at his
' The garb h Ad ha n a is tho religious consecration of matrimonial copulation
with the objeot of purifying the future fetus; the ceremonies, called p u ra s a-
va n a aud s i m a n t o 11 n a y a n a must be performed on the mother when pree-
uaiit, in due time aud manner, they tend to the purification of the embryo;
the jataka r ma is performed on the child, as soon as it has been born. These
sacraments and tho others, hinted in the text, to be performed on every membor
of the three upper castes, are prescribed by the law-books and desoribed in tho
g r h y a-rituals. Seo f. i. Manu II, 26—38 ; Ü5—68, Acvalayana G r h y a s.
I, 13 foil., Paraskaral, 12—17; 19; II, 1 foil. The sacrament, called
upanayana introduces the period of study; by it the boy is delivered to
his guru, with whom to dwell kill the end of his time of learning the Veda.

305
teacher's, who was a brahman distinguished by the superiority
of his learning, by his birth and by his practice of the
customary conduct.
1. His smartness in mastering and retaining the texts he
was taught, his devoted obedience such as for which his
family had always been reputed, his correctness of conduct
embellished by tranquillity, a rare ornament in a youth ,
made him obtain the love and affection of his teacher.
2. For virtues practised without interruption are magic charms
to win the affection even of such as are burnt by the fire
of hatred, how much more of the sound-hearted.
Now his teacher in the intervals of rest from sacred
study, with the object of trying the morals of all his
disciples, was used to tell them frequently of' his own
sufferings, the effect of his poverty.
Ii. '/To him no help his family affords,
'/No joy is his, not e'en on holidays,
'/And wretched alms-requesting pines him sick.
'/A pauper's wish, how may it be fulfill'd ?
4. '/The state of a moneyless man is the home of disregard .
the abode of toil. And a very hard condition it is, devoid
of pleasure, abounding in scantiness and incessantly afflicting
like a calamity."
Like excellent horses, pricked with spurs, his disciples,
excited and agitated by their attachment to their spiritual
teacher, did their utmost to deliver to him ever more and
better prepared food from their daily begging round. But
he said to them: «Good sirs, do not exert yourselves in
this way The food got by daily begging does not diminish
the distress of poverty to anybody. If you cannot bear my
hardship, you ought rather to apply these your efforts to
~ taking wealth. Doing thus, you would act in the proper
manner. Why do 1 say so?
5. '/Hunger is driven away by food, and thirst by water.
The spell-uttering voice together with medicine expels
illnesses. But poverty's pain is destroyed by wealth, that
universal charmer."
The pupils answered : '/What can we 1o for you? Unhappy
we that the weight of our power is thus little. Moreover,

806 J&TAKAMiWl.
6'—7. //if wealth, Jiku lood, wore obtained by begging, we
would not allow you to suffer by poverty in this degree,
master. But the case is this. The proper, though weak,
means for bralimaus of gaining wealth is receiving gifts; yet
people here are not willing to make such boons. So we are
powerless, and by this impotency we are smitten witli
grief."
The teacher replied: //But there are still other expedients
for earning money, and they are explained in the law-books.
Yet, my strength being exhausted by old age, ƒ am not
lit to put them into effect."
The disciples said: //But wtr strengtli is not impaired by
old age, master. If, then, you think us capable of acting
up according to those precepts of the law-books, inform
us of them, that we may requite you for your labour of
teaching us.
The teacher said: //No, such means of earning money
j are hardly available, indeed, for young men, whose mind
is too loose to carry out a strong resolution. Nevertheless,
if Your Honours urge me, well, * you may learn from me
what one of the said expedients is.
8. //In the law-precepts for the time of distress * theft is
.;.., *" approved livelihood for brahmans; and poverty, I sup-
pose, is the extreme distress in this world. By consequence,
it is no sin for us to enjoy the wealth of others, and the
whole of these goods belongs, of a truth, to the brahmans.
D. «Men such as you are would doubtlessly be able to
rob wealth even by violence. You should, however, not
practise that mode of taking, minding your reputation.
Therefore, you must show your energy in lonely places
and times."
' Instead of s A d h u Ij wo must read s a d h u.
' Head apaddharme steyam eto. The a p a d d h a r m a substitutes to
the preoepts of right oonduot and right Iivolihood some others to be followed
m times of distress, if the primary ones cannot be observed. The permission to
brahmaus of making money by theft is of oourse not lawful; it is inferred
from the woU-kuown pretentiou of the brahmanioal oasto tu be owners of the whole
earth. Even (^arvUuka, the thief in the M r o oh a k a t i k a, does not venture to
defend his deeds by arguments borrowed from the lawbooks; he avows that theft
is blamable, „I blame it, says he, and yet I do it."

807
By such language he loosened the bridle from his dis-
ciples. Accordingly they exclaimed '/very well'", approving
ol' his bad words, as if they were good, and all of
them engaged themselves to do so, all — save the Ho-
dhisattva.
10. Him his innate goodness forbade to comply with the
teacher's advice, and compelled him on the contrary to
oppose it without delay, though it had been accepted as
a duty by the other pupils.
Ashamed and with down-cast looks he heaved a soft
sigh and remained silent. The teacher perceived that the
Hodhisattva did not approve of that fashion of making money,
but neither did he cry it down; and as he had a high
regard of the virtue of that Great Being, he entered upon
this reflection: //For what reason does he disapprove theft?
Is it want of aourage or disaffection towards me? Or does
he really know it to be a wicked action?" Then in order
to prompt him to open his true disposition of mind, he
spoke iu this way to the Bodhisattva: //Say, great
brahman,
11. //those noble youths, uncapable of bearing my misfortune ,
are willing to resort to the course of life followed by the
energetic and the heroes; but in you I find nothing but
indolence and dulness. Surely, it is not you who are
affected by our distress.
12. »My grief is evident. Its whole extent lays open to
your eyes. I have made it plain by speech. Notwithstanding
this, you arc keeping quiet! How is it that yawr mind is
undisturbed and untouched by sorrow?"
Upon this the Bodhisattva after making his respectful
salute to the teacher, said quite alarmed: //Heaven forbid
such feelings! Verily, it is not want of affection or hard-
heartedness which causes me to keep apart, nor am 1 unmoved
by the sufferings of my gum, but I think the mode of
acting, my master has shown us, to be impossible. It
cannot be, indeed, that a wicked action should be performed
by anybody without being seen. Why? Because there does
not exist anything like loneliness.
13—14. //No, loneliness is not to be found anywhere in the
world for the evil-doer. Are not the invisible Beings and

308
the purified Mil nis whose eye is endowed with divine
power, lookers-on of men's actions? Not seeing them, the
fool thinks himself alone and commits sin. '
15. '/Hut 1 know no lonely place at all. Wheresoever 1 do
not see anybody elee, is such a place for that reason empty
of my own Selt'r"
16—17. «And of a b;ul action my Self is a witness by far more
sharp-sighted than any other person Another may perchance
perceive me, or he may not, his mind being troubled
witli his own business, but my Self, eagerly surrendering
my whole mind to passion, knows with certainty my
doing evil.
//For this reason, then, 1 keep aloof from the others."
And understanding that his teacher had become fully ap-
peased, the Bodhisattva continued:
IS. //Nor can I persuade myself into the belief that you
would deceive us in this way for the sake of obtaining
wealth. Who, indeed, knowing the difference between virtue
and vice, should allow himself to oppress virtue on the
ground of making money?
//As to my own determination, I will inform you of it.
I!). //Better it is to take the alms-bowl and vile garments, *
beholding the opulence of the mansions of one's enemies
than abandoning shame to bend one's mind to the murder
of Righteousness, be it even with the goal of attaining the
Sovereignty of the Devas!"
On these words his teacher, rapt with joy and admiration,
rising from his seat embraced him and said to him: «/Very
well, very well, my son! well-said, well-said, great brah-
man ! This is becoming to your keen intellect adorned by
tranquillity.
20. '/The fools-' leave the path of their duty, stirred by
' C[>. Manu VIII, 85 „tho ovil-doers think forsooth .nobody aces us', but tho
divine beings (dovas) aud their internal «elf see them." Tlio same sentence, but
slightly modified is to bo found in Mahabh. (ed. Bombay) 1, 74 , 39.
* This passage reminds of Manu VI, 44, where vile garments (kuoela), the
alina-bowl (called tlioro kap ill a, the same word as is hero used by Cura) together
with food consisting of r,.nta and fruits, loneliness and equanimity are said to bo
the characteristics of a raukta, viz. one emancipated fr..m the bonds of existence.
3 Cp. the footnote on jat. VII, st. 22.

JaTAKAMalA 809
any motive whichever, hul the virtuous Ho not allow them-
selves to be led astray even in tliu greatest distress, penance
learning and wisdom being their wealth.
21. «As the inoon rising in autumn adorns the iirmauieiit,
so _yo# are the ornament of your entirely spotless family.
For ^o« the sacred texts, you have been taught, have
their full import; that you have well understood them is
made plain by your good behaviour; and my labour is
crowned with success, it has not been fruitless."
So, then, it is the shame of' their Selves that prevents
the virtuous to transgress the boundary of good behaviour.
For this reason the pious man (arya) ought to have a
powerful shelter in shame. (This story) is to lie adduced
on account of such texts ' like this: >/iu this way the
faithful votary of our creed (&ryacr& v aka), being well-
guarded by the trench of his shame, avoids what is noxious
and fosters what is wholesome." Likewise in texts dealing
with the feeling of shame and treating of the Lord of the
World. «
The story of the brahman has tho appearance nf being the clumsy
invention of some monk engaged in giving lessons of morality and in
want of some story to illustrate the sinfulness of theft. I can scarcely
' believe it did partake of the old Btook of traditional talcs and folklore,
ae little as the story of the sacrifice (X). Yet, I have found its parallel
iu the pali Jataka, in n. 305 of that collection of jataka-talcs, which
bears tho name of silavimamsnn aj ataka (od. Fausb. Ill, p. 18, l'J).
But here the old teacher's tiial of his disciples is bettor accounted for.
Desiring to give his daughter to one of them, ho declares to thorn his
being too poor to buy the dress and ornaments wantod for her marriago,
l The original has sutroshu. I am not sure, I have wholly oaught tho
moaning of this passage, but comparing the parallel wording of the conclusion of
jat. XXI, I think I have rendered it as well as I could without any commentary.
The Sanskrit text of the Jatakamala has none, and tho Chinese commentary,
montionod by Bunyiu Nanji» in his Catalogue sub. n. 1312 is not translated.
- hri var;iap ratisamy uktoshu lokadh i p atoyeshu ca. Query what is
meant here by this expression „Lord of the Worl I." Considering the contents of
stanzas 13—17 and comparing Kaushltakibrahmavopanish nd III, K at the
on.i, where the self within every individual is styled lokapala, lokadhipcti
and lukeca, I guess we are not far from truth if we ast-umo that the term
„Lord of the World" iudioatos here nearly tho same as is called by tho brahma-
nical Hindu» the individual iitinau or Self, ideutitied with the Universal Soul.

310
and exhort» them to proouro these objects for him by taking them
unseen eaoh from his own kinsmen. All obey, save the Bodhisat. Asked
what he ha» not taken by sloatth for, like the others, he answers in
the same manner as in our tale, and pronounces two gathas (17 and 18
Fausb.), which are essentially the same as Qura's st. 13—15, the ditfereiioe
being but slight.