TITLE: On the Buddhist Jātakas
AUTHOR: Serge d'Oldenburg (tr. H. Wenzel)
YEAR: 1893
LANGUAGE: EN
SOURCE: Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (1893): 301–356 | DOI: 10.1017/s0035869x00022401
TYPE: Classic Journal Article (PDF)
EXTRACTED_CHARACTERS: 112615
STATUS: OK============================================================

Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society
http://journals.cambridge.org/JRA
Additional services for Journal of
the Royal Asiatic Society:
Email alerts: Click here
Subscriptions: Click here
Commercial reprints: Click here
Terms of use : Click here
Art. VIII.—Dr. Serge D'Oldenburg “On
the Buddhist Jātakas.”
H. Wenzel
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society / Volume 25 / Issue 02 / April
1893, pp 301 - 356
DOI: 10.1017/S0035869X00022401, Published online: 15 March 2011
Link to this article: http://journals.cambridge.org/
abstract_S0035869X00022401
How to cite this article:
H. Wenzel (1893). Art. VIII.—Dr. Serge D'Oldenburg “On the
Buddhist Jātakas.”. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 25, pp
301-356 doi:10.1017/S0035869X00022401
Request Permissions : Click here
Downloaded from http://journals.cambridge.org/JRA, IP address: 169.230.243.252 on 12
Apr 2015

301
ART. VIII.—Dr. Serge D'Oldenburg " On the Buddhist
Jatakas." By H. WENZEL, Ph.D.
[Dr. Serge D'Oldenburg has been kind enough to send me a copy of his
monograph on the Jatakas, written in Russian, from the Proceedings of the
Oriental Section of the Imperial Russian Archaeological Society. As it deals
with a subject of very general interest, and adds considerably to our knowledge
of the history of the Jatakas, it seemed advisable that the paper should be made
accessible to Western scholars; and Dr. Wenzel has been kind enough, at
my suggestion, to prepare the following translation of the greater portion of the
paper.—Eh. D.]
I.
THE extensive literature of Buddhist legends may be divided
into three groups: (1) the legends on the rebirths of the
Buddha anterior to his last life in this world, these are
the ' Jatakas' (proper); (2) legends of the Buddha in his
last, historical, existence; (3) legends of the Buddhist
disciples, these are the 'Avadanas,' which last name, how-
ever, is also applied to legends in general.
We confine our remarks chiefly to the Jatakas, which
class occupies a specially prominent position in this litera-
ture, thanks to the manifold themes and 'motifs' touched
upon therein. In them Buddha appears in the most various
shapes, from god to beast; and, accordingly, the outward
form varies between stories, moral tales, fairy tales, and
fables.
The Jataka, like most productions of Indian literature,
has its fixed pattern, strictly preserved in the Buddhist
(Pali) canon, which in general distinguishes itself from the
Sanskrit and Prakrit books by its propensity to systematize.
Therefore, before we pass on to a further examination of

302 DR. SEEGE D'OLDENBUEG
the Jatakas, we give here the translation of the Khanti-
vannanaj., which is, as far as we are aware, not yet
translated.1
The actual text of the Jatakas consists of the verses,
according to the number of which the 550 of the Pali canon
are disposed, beginning with those having only one verse.
These verses, together with the actual prose commentary
(vannana or atthakatha), form the so-called atitavatthu
' relation of the past,' and therewith is connected the
paccuppanna-vatthu ' relation of the present,' i.e. the oc-
casion on which Buddha tells the Jataka. Finally follows
the samodhdnam, the identification of the persons in the
atlta-vatthu with those in the paccuppanna-vatthu. -Besides
this, the verses have a grammatical and lexical commentary
}
in which only rarely remarks concerning the matter find
place.
The verses, accordingly, must be regarded as the most
essential, and also the oldest part of the Jatakas, which
is proved, first by the archaical word-forms occurring in
them, and then, by the great(er) similarity between the
various recensions of the Jatakas in their metrical parts,
while they widely diverge in the prose. And this is only
what might have been expected. The original narrator
strove to embody the chief facts of his tale in the simplest
form, viz. verses ; usually a dialogue, or monologue, was
chosen : the painting of the situation, the transitions, had not
yet acquired such importance, as this dialogue or monologue
might serve for different personalities and situations. But
if it was desirable to connect them with distinct events,
hints to that purport were inserted into the verses, while
it was left to the individual genius of each successive
recitator to redact the connecting prose. How far already
in the remote antiquity of India this literary type was
1 I have omitted this translation of Jataka, No. 225, as the Pali is easily
accessible, and as the form and scheme of the Pali Jatakas is well-known here
from the versions published by Prof. Ehys Davids and others.

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 303
developed, is shown by many Yedic hymns (itihasa), which
now often are the despair of the translators by the utter
obscurity of their verses, seemingly jumbled together at
hazard. Only in the latest redactions of the subjects of
such hymns, which are far removed from the original type,
the prose connection of the verses is sometimes preserved.1
As a further development in the same direction must be
considered the argumenlum, i.e. a verse put at the head of
the tale, which gives the substance of its contents; these
argumenta are very generally in use in Indian literature,
whether Brahmanical, Buddhist, or Jain.2 As a final off-
shoot (of this development), we may regard the abridgment
of a tale to a single proverbial phrase, as e.g. ajakrpaniya
' unexpected'—properly, ' as (in the tale of) the goat and
the knife.'3
Besides this special collection of 550 Jatakas, the Pali
canon contains yet two other books of Jatakas—the Cariyd-
pitaka, of which we shall speak in more detail below, and
the Buddhavamsa. Moreover, many other Jatakas occur
separately, either in the collection of 50 Jatakas (L. Feer,
Les Jatakas, Premiere partie, 417-422), or dispersed in
the commentaries to the different books of the canon, most
1 The first to call attention to these facts was, as far as we know, E. Windisch,
see his TTeb. d. Altirische sage des Tain Bo Cfialgne, der Raub der Kinder (Verh.
33, Phil. Vers. Gera, 1878), Leipzig, 1879, 15-32 ; and, regarding India, p. 28,
where the legends of Hariscandra, Sunahsepa, TJrvasI-Puriiravas, are mentioned.
Further investigations by H. Oldenterg, Das altindische Akhyana, in ZDMG.
37, 54-86, and Akhyana-hymnen im JJigveda (ZDMG. 39, 52-90) ; S. Pischel
and K. Geldner, vedische Studien, i. ii. 1, Stuttgart, 1889-92; particularly
Geldner's monograph 'Puriiravas und TIrvasi,' pp. 243-295; of. review by
Oldenberg in GGA. 1889, 1 sq. and 1890, 405-427. See also the interesting
remarks in the same province in if. Zimmer's review of Hist, litteraire de la
France, t. xxx. (GGA. 1890, 806-808, and Th. NUdecke, Persische Studien, ii.
11, "Wien, 1892 (Sitz.B.W.A.H.Ph. Cl. cxxvi).
2 Sometimes it happens that, while the tale itself is lost, the argumentum
only remains; e.g. in the Jain collection SamyaktvakaumudI {A. Weber,
S.B.Berl.Ak. 1889, pp. 741-743 sq.), the tale of the potter crushed by a falling
wall is only preserved in one MS., while the two others give only the argu-
mentum. This tale, in a somewhat different shape, is also found in the Pali
canon, in No. 432, Padakusalamanavaj., of which below a translation will be
given [omitted here.—H. W.], together with a comparison with the Samyaktva-
kaumudI.
3 To the abundant literature that has already accumulated about this little
fable we may add the version in Takkariyaj. (481). It is interesting to see that
this fable, in a very similar form, occurs also in the M akames of Hariri, see Fr.
Mickert, Die Verwandlungen des Abu Seid von Serug. Stuttgart, 1837, i. 9.

304 DR. SERGE D'OLDENBURG
of which are not yet published.1 From the Northern—
Sanscrit, Prakrit—documents, the following, as far as we
know, contain Jatakas: Mahavastu, Avaddnasataka, and the
collections related to it (Dvavimsatyavadana, Ratnavadana-
mala, Kalpadrumavadanamala), Divyavadana, Jatakamala,
Dsanglun [Dhamamiikho], Bodhisattvavadanakalpalata,
Bhadrakalpavadana, Asokavadanamala, Avadanasarasamuc-
caya, and separate Jatakas; cf. also Lalitav. ch. 13. The
large Jatakamala, with 565 tales, of which Hodgson speaks
(Essays on the Languages, etc., of Nepal and Tibet,
London, 1874, p. 17 sq.), is at present unknown, though it
is possible that it may be found even yet, so e.g. it is known
that a collection of 101 tales exists, under the same title, in
a Tibetan translation, including the Jatakamala of Sura.2
The extraordinary popularity which the Jatakas, as well
as the legends of Buddha's earthly life, enjoyed is evidenced
by the numerous representations on the stupas and mona-
steries, beginning with the famous Bharhut stupa. The
history of these sculptures, doubtless, merits greater at-
tention than has been as yet extended to it, and surely will
help us not a little in the clearing up of the entangled
questions about the chronology of the Buddhist literature.3
Thus we cannot as yet answer with any precision the
question to what date the now existing Jatakas are to be
referred. Only this seems certain to me, that they, in one
shape or the other, belong to the oldest product of Buddhist
literature 4 They must have proved an especially convenient
1 See Rhys Davids' ' Buddhist Birth Stories,' p. lii., who discusses this
question at length and gives instances.—H. "W.
- Further details on this collection will be given by A. 0. Ivanovski. Doubt-
less a closer examination of the Chinese and Tibetan literatures will supply us
with translations of most, if not all, Jatakas and legends found in the Pali
oanon ; and we may also hope to find yet many Indian originals, when once Tibet
becomes more accessible.
3 Prof. Rhys Davids has a comparative table in his ' Buddhist Birth Stories'
showing the instances in which the Bharhut sculptures could be identified, when
that work was published, with particular Jatakas. There remains a good number
still unidentified. See also Cunningham and Ilultzsch in the Bibliography at end
of this article.—H.W.
4 [I would respectfully point out that it is quite certain that the Jatakas
belong, not to the oldest period, but to the oldest period but one, of Buddhist
literature. As I showed in the Introduction to my 'Buddhist Birth Stories,'

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 305-
material for the explanation of the many unintelligible and
doubtful cases of the due reward of good and bad actions—
so important in every religious doctrine. We do not
pretend, of course, that the very ' relations of the present'
which we find now in the Jatakas give us real events in
Buddha's life, but only that the actual occasions for the
appearance of the Jataka stories often were analogous to-
these ' relations.' The great importance, within the history
of Indian narrative literature, which has been ascribed to the
Jatakas and the Buddhist legends in general, particularly
since the publication of Benfey's famous 'Pancatantra,' is
certainly justified. But this importance lies elsewhere than
is commonly supposed. It was not Buddhism with its
legends that produced such really artistical creations as the
Pancatantra and Hitopadesa, which are in fact the offshoot
of the ancient itihdsas and akhyanas, products of free creative
genius, not bound in the trammels of ecclesiastical dogmatics,
and utilitarian convictions. To Benfey only fragments of
this monastical literature were accessible. And it is safe
to say that, if he had known these Jatakas, Avadanas, the
Peta Vatthu, Vimana Vatthu, etc., which we have at our
command now, he would have changed his opinion. But
these Buddhist documents have one great advantage. They
have preserved for us, though only in pale and tendentious
reflection, the subjects and the spirit of the ancient products
of the Indian genius, and thus make it possible for us to
reconstruct a whole period in the development of Indian
literature, which, without them, would be scarcely known
to us.
there are a fair number of what are now included as Jatakas in the Jataka
Book, which appear, not as Jatakas, but simply as stories in the older books, such
as the Nikayas and the Vinaya. The stories in the Cariya Pitaka are already
Jatakas. It follows that the transition from stories to Jatakas took place in the
intervening period ; that is to say, that the stories first became Jatakas after the
oldest period of Buddhist literature had closed. We can even go further and fix
the date at approximately between 450 and 250 B.C., and probably nearer to the
earlier of the two.—Eh. D.]

806 ' DR. SERGE D'OLDENBTTEG
II.
Jdtaka Mala.
The Jdtaka Mala, ' The Garland of Jatakas,' the work
of the Buddhist poet Sura, is the only Sanscrit text
known up to now, consisting entirely of Jatakas. Un-
fortunately the history of this book is very obscure. Prof.
Kern, to whom we owe the excellent edition, does not speak
with any certainty on this point, and we can only (from
some remarks in the preface to his edition, and his essay
on ' The Buddhist poet Sura,' Festgruss an Otto v. Bohtlingk,
Stuttgart, 1888, p. 50 f.) form some conception of his
opinion. He places the work approximatively between
550-650 A.D. ; and thinks that the tradition, found in
Taranatha, viz. that the author of the 34 tales of rebirths
at first had had the intention to write 100 tales, not
probable, though he concedes that there may be ' a residue
of truth in the story' (Preface, vi). He thinks it not
impossible that there existed a collection of 35 Jatakas in
the gdthd dialect (ibid, vii), which latter conjecture seems
necessary to him for the explanation of the presence, in one
MS., of the Kacchapa Jataka—but this Jataka is taken from
the Mahavastu (ii. 244 sq.), and apparently only added by
the scribe. Our materials for forming an opinion of the
importance and position of the work are very meagre. All
known MSS. are almost certainly derived from one, probably
not very old, original.1
The Chinese translation, with which we owe our acquaint-
ance to A. O. Ivanovski, not only clears nothing up in the
1 Preface, v.—Of the MSS. which Prof. Kern did not inspect, we may
observe that that of the Petersburg University entirely coincides in its text with
those used for the edition, and the same is the case with the MS. of the late
Prof. J. P. Minayev (now in the Public Library, fol. 130, 1. 7). The MS, of
the Bengal Asiatic Society (Rajendralal., 49-57) probably belongs to the same
family of MSS. ; the different beginning there seems to us to have got there
erroneously from the immediately following Bhodisattvavadana-Kalpa-Lata,
where it really is in its place; there are not a few examples of a like negligence
in this, otherwise most useful, catalogue.

"ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 307
history of our text, but makes the question still more
obscure; nor does the Tibetan translation give any further
data in' this respect. There remains, then, only the tradition
communicated by Taranatha (Schiefner's translation, p. 92),
who indeed wrote his 'History of Buddhism' only in 1608,
but who had in his hands older sources. It is to the follow-
ing effect: ' The teacher Mdtrceta is no other than the same
Durdarshdkala, of whom we spoke above. He is known
under different names, as Sura, A-smghosha, Mdtrceta,
Pitrceta, Durdarsha, Dharmika, Subhuti, and Maticitra . . .
Besides the rebirths of Buddha, mentioned in
the Sutras and other books, he proposed to put down in
writing the ten times ten rebirths of Buddha, which up
to his time circulated only orally, and which corresponded
to the ten Paramitas, but, when he had finished 34, he
died. In some legends it is related, that, pondering on
the Bodhisattva's gift of his own body to the tigress, he
thought he could do the same, as it was not so very difficult.
Once he, as in the tale, saw a tigress followed by her young,
near starvation; at first he could not resolve on the self-
sacrifice, but, calling forth a stronger faith in the Buddha,
and writing, with his own blood, a prayer of 70 slokas,
he first gave the tigers his blood to drink, and, when
their bodies had taken a little force, offered himself.'
We think it is quite clear that Taranatha had our
collection in view. The probability of the facts of this
tradition is, in some manner, established (1) by its great
verosimilitude, (2) by the fact that apparently the MSS.
of the Jataka Mala have preserved a trace of it, for after
each ten stories, that is after the 10th, 20th, and 30th,
follows an udddna or ' table of contents. ' Prof. Kern says
that ' the official number of Jatakas according to the
Northern Buddhists' is 34 (Preface, p. vi; Buddhismus,
transl. Jacobi, i. 327), but does not indicate the source
whence he has taken this ' fact.' The epithet of Buddha:
catustrimsajjatakajna (' Who knows the 34 Jatakas') occur-
ing in Hemacandra (v. 233), to which he appeals, might
have been formed just on the ground of this collection,

308 DH- SERGE D'OLDENBURG
an opinion which seems to be supported by the commentary,
which runs as follows J:
catustrimsatam jatakani Vyaghrl prabhrtini janati catu° | yad
Vyadih
jatakani punar Vyaghrl Sibih Sreshthl Saso Bisam
Hamso Visvantarah Sakro Maitrlbala-Suparagau
Aputro Brahmanah Kumbhah Kulmashapinda jatakam
Avishahyah (?) Sreshtbijatonmadayanti Mahakapih
Bodhir Brahma Mahabodhir Vanarah Sarabho Ruruh
KshantivadI ca Hasti ca Kuthas (?) cotpacamadayah (?).
The Pali text Cariydpitaka, somewhat akin to the Jataka
Mala, and apparently belonging to the latest documents
of the Southern canon, unfortunately gives us scarcely
more light on this question, at least as long as the com-
mentary is not published. In the printed text there are
35 Jatakas; but there is a circumstance, unfortunately
not mentioned by the editor, that calls forth some doubt
as to the real number, and also the composition of the Jatakas
of this collection, viz. that in the introduction to the large
Jataka-collection, the Niddnakathd, there is found as an
excerpt from the Cariyapitaka? a table of contents of 34
Jatakas, only half of the titles agreeing with those in
the printed text, in which also we only partly find the
verses quoted in the Niddnakathd.3 Below we shall give
a comparative table of both texts. With the materials
accessible at present we must renounce the hope of clearing-
up this entangled question.4
Regarding the chronology of the Jataka Mala we may
add to the indications of Prof. Kern, that it apparently
could not have been written after the end of the seventh
1 "We had only the use of Bb'htlingk and Rieu's edition, trying, in one instance
perhaps even too boldly, to reconstruct the titles of the Jatakas.
2 See Fausboll Jataka i. 45-47. In Morris' edition we must read, p. xiy.
;
ii. 1 =455; ii. 5 = 278 ; in ii. 9, 2 (p. 90), sutadhammo is not a proper name,
and, in the same v. read Alinamttu, p. xvi, Jatakamala is the same book
as Bodhisathvavadana.
3 According to this, Rhys Davids' Birth St. p. 54, note 2, must be corrected.
Ibid. p. 55 (written before the publication of the Cariyapitaka), instead of Snake
king Silava read elephant king Sllava, and, further on, elephant king Chaddanta*
* Cf. also Hardy, Manual of B. 101-103.

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 309
century, as it seems that the Chinese traveller I-tsing speaks
of it.1 He may have meant another work with the same
title; only the circumstance that, as he says, the Jataka
Mala was, in his time, not yet translated into Chinese, would
argue that he saw Sura's work, as in fact this was only
translated much later.
We now give a detailed account of the Jataka Mala,2
then comparative tables of the Jataka Mala and the Cari-
yapitaka, and an account of the contents, with excerpts from
the text of the Sutasoma Jataka according to the version
in the Bhadrakalpavadana (ch. 34), which proves to be
a slavish imitation of our text. For the Bhadrakalpavadana
we make use of the MS. of the Paris Asiatic Society, to
whom we express our thanks.
THE GARLAND OF JATAKAS.
1. VYAGHRI. The Tigress.—Born in a Brahmin family,
the Bodhisat becomes an hermit. Once he sees in the
jungle an hungry tigress, who is just about to devour her
fresh-born young ones. He sends off his disciple to collect
food, while he himself, filled with compassion, throws him-
self down before the tigress, who at once joyfully begins
to eat his body. The disciple, returning, finds the dead
body of his master, and, weeping, goes to inform his com-
panions, while the remains of the Bodhisat are strewed
with a rain of garlands, jewels, and sandal-powder.
2. SIBI.3 The king of the people of Sibi.—The Bodhisat
was king in the land of Sibi, distinguished by all virtues,
and particularly that of charity. But, not content to give
away his riches only, he conceived a desire to offer also
his own body. From this, his desire, the earth trembled.
Indra remarked this, and, on reflection, finding out the
reason, goes in the shape of an old blind Brahmin to tempt
1 Byauon Fujishima, Deux chapitres extraits le memoires d'1-tsing, J.A. 8. xii,
424.
2 In this excellently edited text we have found only four unimportant misprints:
42, 33 read svastyayana; 58, 7 r. soha; 97, 8 r. payoda; 111, 24 r. Sakras.
[Two more are on p. 21, 21, where we expect jananas ca rivatyayatam.—E.L.]
3 [This Jataka is apparently a combination of the Brahmanic tale relating to Sibi
and of the Jain tale concerning the offering of one's eye (ZDMG. xlvi. 611).—E.L.]
J.K.A.S. 1893. 21

310 DR- SERGE D'OLDENBUEG
the king, and begs of him one of his eyes. The king
asks whether somebody had not instigated him. The
Brahmin answers that Indra had instructed him. The king
promises to give his two eyes. The ministers dissuade the
king, particularly one of them. The king first gives one
eye, which, by a miracle produced by Indra, adheres to
the face of the Brahmin (Indra) ; then the king tears out
his other eye, and gives it likewise to the Brahmin. After
some time Indra appears again before the king, who is
sitting on the bank of a pond in his park, and promises
him the fulfilment of a wish, and, one after the other,
the eyes of the king appear again; the earth trembles,
the sea overflows, and other wonderful phenomena are seen.
Then Indra, furthermore, adds to his present to the king
the abilities to see one hundred leagues in every direction,
and even what is hidden by mountains, and then disappears,
but the king, rejoicing, turns to his people with a sermon,
admonishing them to be liberal.
3.1 KDLMASHAPINDT. The giver of a dumpling of fruit-pap.
-—The Bodhisat was king of Kosala, pious and charitable.
Once he remembered his foregoing rebirth, and pronounced
two verses about what he had done then. Nobody under-
stood them, and the queen asked him to explain them. The
king explained that he formerly was a slave in the same
city. Once he gave to four sramanas, who asked for alms,
fruit-pap (kulmasha) with pious thoughts; for this good
action he had attained such a high position. The queen,
again, urged by the king's questions, remembers her former
rebirth: when she was a servant, she fed a hermit, for
which action she now had become queen. The king, finally,
speaks in praise of charity.
4. SRESHTHI. The Merchant.—-The Bodhisat was a rich
and pious merchant. A pratyekabuddha once came to his
house for alms. Mara, wishing to hinder the merchant's
charity, made, between the pratyekabuddha and the threshold
of the house, a deep, flaming abyss. The merchant sends
his wife to give food to the Buddha, but she returns in
1 [A Jain parallel to this story oceurs in the commentaries on the Avaayaka-
niry.—E.L.]

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 3H
fright. Then he goes himself. Mara, from the sky,
dissuades him. But the merchant, seeing that these are
Mam's tricks, boldly steps into the fire, in the place of
which, in consequence of his virtue, suddenly appear
lotuses; he comes up to the Buddha and hands him the
food. The Buddha flies up into the air, but Mara disappears
confounded.
5. AVISHAHYASRESHTHI. The Merchant Avishahya (' Un-
conquerable ').—The Bodhisat was a rich merchant called
Avishahya, and distinguished himself by boundless generosity.
Indra wished to try him, and little by little made all his
wealth disappear, leaving him at last only a sickle and a
string. Avishahya begins to seek his livelihood by collect-
ing grass and selling it, continuing at the same time to
help the needy. Then Indra appears to him and tempts
him, but Avishahya does not succumb, and shows the
necessity to give away all. Indra, satisfied, overwhelms
him with praises, and promises that in future his wealth
will not decrease.
6. SASA. The Hare.—The Bodhisat was a hare in the
forest; with him together dwelt an otter, a jackal, and a
monkey. They lived in friendship, and the hare taught
the other three the law. Once the hare observed from
the moon that on the following day would be full moon,
and, consequently, the feast of poshadha, and that they must
prepare food for possible guests. The hare began to ponder
what he was to do, because all other animals may gather
something, but he not; he decided to offer himself. From
this his resolve the whole nature is agitated; Indra remarks
it, and goes to try the hare; he shows himself in the shape
of a hungry Brahmin, and asks for hospitality. The otter
brings seven fishes, forgotten by the fisher; the jackal, a
lizard and a vessel with milk, forgotten by somebody;
the monkey, mango-fruits; the hare gives himself. Indra
says that he, of course, could not kill him; then the hare
throws himself into the fire. Indra reverts to his proper
shape, praises the hare, and embellishes with his likeness
the moon, thence called sasdnka. The three other animals

312 DR. SEEGE D' OLDENBURG
are reborn in the world of the gods and reunited with their
friend.
7. AGASTYA. The hermit Agastya.—The Bodhisat was born
in a rich Brahmin family, and distinguished himself by his-
generosity. He became a hermit, and the fame of his virtue
attracted many people, so that he went away and settled
down in Karadvipa. Indra decides to try him. He gradually
makes disappear from the forest, where Agastya lives, all
fruits and eatable roots. Agastya then begins to eat the
leaves. Indra burns up leaves and grass; he eats the fresh
leaves lying on the ground. Indra appears to him in the
shape of a begging Brahmin, and asks him to what purpose
he had undertaken this penance. The hermit declares that
he wishes to be freed from the wheel of births. Indra,
seeing that the hermit does not covet his (Indra's) own
seat, promises to give him whatever he may wish.1 In the
subsequent conversation the hermit gives Indra a whole-
series of moral rules.
8. MAITRIBALA. The force of pity.—The Bodhisat was a
king, Maitrabala, righteous, pious, and charitable. Once
there entered into his kingdom five yakshas (ojohara ' taking
away one's force), expelled by their lord for some trans-
gression. But, notwithstanding all their efforts, they were
not able to rob even one inhabitant of his force, thanks to
the king's virtues. Once they met in the forest a shepherd,
sitting under a tree, and singing merrily. Oh their wonder-
ing how it was that he had no fear in such a lonesome place,
he answers that he has nothing to fear, because there is
in the land a guard for all men—the king Maitrabala, and
counsels them to go and see the king. They go and ask
the king for food, but reject that which is brought them,
remarking that they eat only human flesh. The king,
notwithstanding the dissuasion of his ministers, gives them
his body; the physicians open his veins, and the yakshas
drink his blood; he cuts off his flesh, and they eat it.
Finally, astonished at the endurance of the king, they ask
1 Necessarily we observe here the similitude of this conversation with that of
Ymna and Naeiicetas in the first valll of the Kathakopanishat.

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 313
him what for he does all that. He answers that his aim
is to free the world out of the wheel of births. They beg
him to pardon them: he says that as they had only helped
-them in his purpose he had nothing to pardon, and takes
•a promise of them not to destroy in future living beings.
The yakshas disappear. The whole world rejoices, Indra
appears, and, with magic medicaments, heals the king.
9. VISVANTARA. Prince Visvantara.—The Sibi (v. above)
had a king with name Samjaya. The Bodhisat was born,
•as his son, under the name of Visvantara, a prince resplen-
dent with every talent and virtue. He distinguished himself
by an extraordinary charity, and on feast days he used to
ride about on a white elephant to inspect the places where,
•according to his orders, the poor were fed. The neighbour-
ing king much wished to have this white elephant, and sent
his Brahmins to beg it of the prince. He at once gave
it. The inhabitants, irritated at this generosity towards
a foreigner, demanded the punishment of the prince. The
king was compelled to consent to his expulsion. The prince
and his wife Madrl, with their children, willingly go into
exile. Visvantara tries to persuade his wife to remain
behind, but gives way to her entreaties (to go with him).
All their wealth they distribute before their departure, A
throng of people accompanies them, whom the prince,
only with some pains, persuades to return. On the way
some Brahmins ask him for the horses of his waggon; he
willingly gives them. Suddenly four yakshas appear and
drag the waggon. Further on, another Brahmin asks the
prince for the waggon itself. He gives away that also.
Visvantara leads by the hand his son Jdlin, and Madrl
her daughter Krshnajina. They settle down near Mount
Vanka, in a hut constructed, on Indra's orders, by Visva-
.karman. Once, when Madrl had gone out to gather fruits,
a Brahmin came, sent by his wife, to ask for a servant.
He begs Visvantara to give him his children as servants.
Visvantara asks him to await the return of their mother,
that she might take leave of them, but the Brahmin, does
not consent. Then Visvantara, remarking that such little

314 DE. SEEGE D'OLDENBUEG
children would only be ill servants, counsels him to go to
their grandfather, the king of the Sibi, who would give him
a ransom for them. Again, the Brahmin does not consent.
Then Visvantara hands him the children, and, according
to custom, pours water over his hands. The children ask
to wait for their mother, but the Brahmin drives them
off. The little girl weeps; the boy thinks with emotion
on the grief of his mother. Visvantara sees all this, but
remains firm. Madrl returns, and, not seeing her children,
is disquieted. On her questions Visvantara gives no answer,
so that she falls down despairing. Visvantara brings her
round again, and tells her how he had given the children to a
Brahmin. She entirely approves him. The earth trembles
from the effect of such high virtue. Indra, in order to
finish the trial, goes to Visvantara in the shape of a
Brahmin, and asks him for his wife. Visvantara gives
her away with her full consent, and, in token of the
delivery, pours water on the hands of Indra. Indra
praises Visvantara, and, returning to his proper shape,
gives back Madri, prophesies that also his children and
kingdom will be returned to him, and disappears. The
children are ransomed by the grandfather, and the people,
hearing of the wonderful virtue of Visvantara, calls him back.
10. YAJNA. The sacrifice.—The Bodhisat was a king.
Once in his country there was a drought. The king,
ascribing it to his own or his people's sins, turns to his
councillors and Brahmins for advice what to do in this
affliction. They counsel him to bring a sacrifice of a
hundred living beings. The tenderhearted king becomes
thoughtful, and considers how he shall proceed. Finally,
he calls the Brahmins, and declares that he proposes to
bring a sacrifice of 1000 men. The Brahmins are content,
but afraid lest the people revolt. The king answers, he
should manage it thus, that the people would remain quiet.
He announced to the people that he would bring a sacrifice
of 1000 men, but that he only would take such as should
behave badly and sin. Every day it was proclaimed in the
kingdom that well-behaved people would not be molested,

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 315
but all evildoers would be seized for the royal sacrifice.
At the same time the king erected everywhere refuges for
the poor. All now lived well, fearing the sacrifice; and
in this manner the king brought the 'sacrifice of the law ;'
the earth again began to bear fruit, and abundance returned.
Seeing this, the councillors praised the king.
11. SAKRA. Indra.—The Bodhisat was Indra. Once the
Asuras invaded the gods ; in the battle the gods' army fled,
also Indra. On his flight he remarks that in the forest,
from the movement of his car, the birds' nests fall down;
from pity towards the birds he bids Mdtali, his coachman, to
return. The latter points out the persecuting enemy. Indra
prefers to'perish by the hand of the foe rather than destroy
the birds, and they return. The enemies are confounded
by his return, and victory remains with Indra and the army
of the gods.
12. BRAHMANA. The Brahmin.—The Bodhisat was born
in a Brahmin family. On attaining the proper age he
began to learn. The master, in order to try the virtue of
his. disciples, begins to complain of his oppressing poverty.
The disciples eagerly collect alms to assist him. But he
says that this would not suffice, and, on the question of
the disciples, what to do ? he tells them to steal, as a
proper method of acquiring means. All the disciples
willingly accept his instructions, except the Bodhisat, who
stands silent, his face bowed down in shame. The master
turns • to him, to learn the reason of his disapprobation.
The Bodhisat pronounces a long speech about its not being
right to sin. The master congratulates him on his virtue.
13. UNMADAYANTT. The belle Unmadayanti (' The Mad-
dening').—The Bodhisat was a king of the Sibi. To a
prominent inhabitant of his capital, Kirltavatsa, a daughter
of extraordinary beauty was born. The father informed
the king, proposing to give her to him as his wife. The
king sent expert Brahmins, who, on seeing the beauty of
Unmadayanti, were struck with admiration. Fearing lest the
king, when he saw her, might neglect his royal duties, they
declared to him that the girl had bad signs, and he abstained

316 DE. SEKGE D'OLDENBURG
from taking her. Then the father gave her to a minister,
Abhipdraga. Once, when the king passed the house of
Abhipdraga, Unmddayanti, desiring to see the king, ascended
the roof, The king saw her, and was amazed at her beauty.
He inquired of his coachman who this was, and he told
him; then the king, thinking it a sin to look at another's
wife, went away. From this time he began to grow thin
and wan. Seeing his grief, Abhipdraga, on learning the
reason, presented himself before the king, and told him
that at the time of sacrifice, suddenly, from somewhere, a
yaksha had appeared, and told him that the king loved
Unmddayanti; therefore he now offered her to him, if it
really was so. The king declares he will not commit an
unlawful action, and declines. Abhipdraga long tries to
persuade him, but the king remains firm. Abhipdraga
praises his constancy.
14. SUPARAGA. The pilot Supdraga ('Well crossing over').
—The Bodhisat was a pilot, with name Supdraga, in the
city Supdraga. Once there arrived from Bharukaccha certain
merchants, who asked Supdraga to come with them. At
first he excused himself on account of his blindness and
age, but finally consented. They went a long way, till
finally a storm carried them very far, where in the sea there
appeared strange fishes, resembling men, with mouths like
knives. The terrified merchants asked what that was.
Supdraga tells them that these are fish, and that this sea
is called Khuramdlin. Further on they, in similar manner,
pass the seas Udadhimdlin, Agnimdlin, Kusamdlin, Nalamdlin,
and, finally, arrive in the sea Vadabamukha, where, as Supd-
raga informs the merchants, destruction threatens them.
Suparaga saves them, by conjuring the ship to return, on
the force of his never having deprived of life a living
being. The ship obeys. On their return journey the
merchants, on the advice of Supdraga, collect jewels in
the mentioned seas; and then, in one night, the ship returns
to Bharukaccha.
15. MATSYA. The Fish.—The Bodhisat was king of the
fishes, and lived in a lake; once, for a long time, no rain

"ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 317
fell, arid the lake began to dry up. The birds collected
round the lake to eat fishes. Seeing this, the Bodhisat
prayed for rain, relying on the circumstance that he never
had killed living beings. An abundant rain fell. Indra
appeared and congratulated the fish king.
16. VARTAKAPOTAKA.1 The young quail.—The Bodhisat was
a young quail, and lived in a nest in the forest; when his
parents brought living food he did not eat, but only berries
and grass. Therefore he was small and weak-winged, while
his brothers grew up strong. Once a violent fire broke out
in the forest. The frightened quails all flew off, and only
the little one remained, who, from weakness, could not fly.
He turned to the fire, pointing out his helpless condition,
and begged it to stop. The fire did so.
17. KUMBHA. The Pot.—The Bodhisat was Indra. Once
he saw that king Sarvamitra, with his subjects, was given
•to drunkenness: he resolves to save him. He appears to
him in the shape of a god, in the air, holding in his hand
a pot of wine, crying, " Who wants to buy this pot ?"
The king, amazed, asks him who he is. Indra answers that
he will learn it later on ; and on the question, what sort
of pot that is, he says that in this pot is that on which the
direst consequences will follow, whereon he accurately
describes the consequences of drunkenness. This sermon
so strongly impresses the king that he resolves to give up
drunkenness, and wants to reward the preacher generously.
Indra shows himself in his real shape and disappears. King
and people give up drunkenness.
18. APBTRA. The Sonless Man.—The Bodhisat is born in
-a rich family. On the death of his parents he distributes
all his wealth, and makes himself a hermit. Once a friend
•of his father visits him, and praises the condition of a family
man. In answer, the young man pronounces a long speech
in praise of hermitage.
1 It is extremely interesting that the verses quoted on p. 98, 20 as comin» from
.the aryasthaviriyakanikaya, are found, in fact, nearly identical in the Khudda-
kanikaya of the Pali canon, Dhammap. 244, 245—
sujivitam, etc. sujlvam, etc.

318 DK. SERGE D' OLDENBURG
19. BISA. The Lotus-stalk.—The Bodhisat was born in
a Brahmin family; he had six younger brothers and a sister.
"When his parents died, he declared to his brothers that he
meant to take orders; after his departure his brothers and
sister declare that they will follow his example. All go
to the forest; with them a friend, a servant, and a maid.
They dispose themselves each in a separate hut; each fifth
day they assemble, and the Bodhisat preaches the law to
them. The maid prepares their food from lotus-stalks,
setting before each an equal portion on lotus-leaves; and
announces the time by striking one piece of wood on another,
when, one after the other, they come to fetch their portions.
In order to test the Bodhisat's virtue, Indra steals his part.
The Bodhisat quietly returns to his hut, thinking that
someone had taken his food, and says nothing to the brothers.
So the five days pass. When they all assemble to hear
the law, they see that the Bodhisat has grown thinner,
and ask him whence. The Bodhisat tells them; then all,
to clear themselves of suspicion, swear that it was not them
who took the lotus-stalks. This oath consists of wishing-
to him who had stolen the food all worldly enjoyments.
A ydkslia, an elephant, and a monkey hear them, and also
swear. Indra appears, and asks them as to their strange
oaths. The Bodhisat explains to him the vanity and in-
juriousness of the worldly enjoyments. Indra confesses to
the theft, and, on the severe stricture on this head, answers
with excuses and disappears. Identification of the person
in the Jataka.
20. CRESHTHI. The Merchant.—The Bodhisat was born in
a merchant family, and became merchant to the king. Once,
when he was with the king, his mother-in-law comes to
visit her daughter, in order to learn how she lives. On
her questions about her daughter's husband, she answers
that it would be difficult to find even a hermit so virtuous
as her husband. The mother was a little deaf; hearing the
word ' hermit,' she thought that her son-in-law had become
a hermit, and, commiserating her daughter, she began to
vociferate; the daughter, provoked at this, repeated what

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 319/
she had said before; the people (a mob) gathered. Return-
ing home, the merchant sees this crowd, and hears complaints.
He asks what it is, they answer him that the master of
this house has become a hermit, and that now his relations
lament his departure. He at once returns to the king to
ask him for leave to take orders. The king, on learning
that he had taken this resolve from the words of the multi-
tude, dissuades him. But he is inflexible, notwithstanding
all entreaties of his relations and friends, and becomes a
hermit.
21. CUDDABODHI.—The Bodhisat is born in a Brahmin
family. He becomes a hermit, his wife follows his example,
and accompanies him, notwithstanding his dissuasions. They
live in the forest; once the king comes there with his suite
to 'make jolly.' He sees the female hermit, and, struck
with her beauty, wants to steal her. He commands to carry
her to his court. The hermit keeps entirely quiet; the
king is struck. The Bodhisat makes a sermon on anger.
The king returns him his wife, and himself becomes his
servant.
22. HAMSA. The Swan.—The Bodhisat was the king of
a drove of swans, with name Dhrtardshtra. He had a
general called Sumukha; they lived on the banks of a lake.
At this time Brahmadatta was king at Benares. Hearing
of these swans, he vehemently wished to see them, and
advised with his councillors how to allure these swans. The
ministers counsel him to construct somewhere in the forest
a beautiful pond, and to proclaim every day that the birds-
near this pond shall be undisturbed. The king accordingly
has the pond dug not far from the city. Once, a pair of
swans from the lake secretly flew thither, and the pond
pleased them so much that they came before their leader
to call him also there. Sumukha dissuades it, but Dhrtara-
shtra, nevertheless, flies to the pond with his drove. The
attendants notified the king; he sends a huntsman to catch
some of the swans. He cleverly disposes his springs, and.
the leader is caught. In order to save the others, he cries •
the swans fly away, only Sumukha remains, who will not

•320 DR. SERGE D'OLDENBURG
leave his master, notwithstanding all Dhrtarashtra's en-
treaties. The huntsman steps up, and, in astonishment,
asks Sumukha why he does not fly away. He answers
that he could not forsake his king in misery,.and tries to
persuade the hunter to release them both ; and when the
hunter tells him to fly away, he begs him to take himself
instead of Dhrtarashtra (and release the latter). The
hunter is persuaded, and releases Dhrtarashtra. Then
Sumukha proposes to him to bring them both before the
king, unfettered. The king rejoices on seeing the swans,
and asks the huntsman how so he could bring them unfettered.
He tells him all. The king generously rewards the hunter;
and puts Dhrtarashtra (as king) on a golden, and Sumukha
(as minister) on a bamboo, seat. After a long conversation
with the swans the king dismisses them. After some time
Dhrtarashtra again appears before the king, and, honoured
by him, preaches to him the law.
23. MAHABODHI. The hermit Mahabodhi.—The Bodhisat
was a hermit, with name Mahabodhi, and famous for his
virtue and knowledge. Once, on his wanderings, he came
into the territory of a certain king, and settled in the
royal park. The king received him with honour, and he
constantly converses with him on the law. The king's
ministers began to envy the hermit, and inspired the king
with suspicion against him, saying, that probably he was
the spy of some enemy. The king lends an ear to these
suggestions, and begins to treat the hermit coldly; this
latter remarks it, but at first gives it not much thought;
only when he finds that the people about the king treated
him worse than usual, he resolves to go away. The king
seeks to persuade him to remain. While they speak
together, the favourite dog of the king, barking, attacks
the hermit. He calls the king's attention to this, and
tells him that the best evidence of the changed feelings of
the king was this dog, formerly fawning, but now barking
at him. The king continues his entreaty, but the hermit
persists in his purpose, and even will not give the promise
to return. The hermit becomes absorbed into meditation,

"ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 321
and soon attains the four contemplations and the five
knowledges ; then he remembers the king, and sees in his
mind that the king is in the hands of his five ministers,
who confess to the five false doctines—(1) ahetuvada ('cause-
lessness'), all depends on the proper nature of a being or
a thing; (2) Isvarakarana (' God, the cause'), the world
is created by a divinity; (3) punakarmakrta (' what was
done in former births'), everything depends on that what
has been done in former rebirths; (4) ucchedavada (' the
doctrine of annihilation'); (5) kshattravidyd (' the know-
ledge of government'), for the king there is no lawlessness.
The Bodhisat resolves to save the king. He creates by
magic a large monkey, in whose hide he clothes himself,
and comes before the king. After the salutations, the king
asks by whom the monkey-skin was given to him. He
answers that he himself has killed the monkey and taken
his skin. The ministers malignantly exclaim at this fearful
sin of the hermit—the murder of a living being. The
Bodhisat, on his part, shows to each one of them that from
the standpoint of their different doctrines there was no
sin in it. Then he explains that he had not killed the
monkey, but that it was only a magic trick, turns the king
and his followers towards the right path, and then, flying
up in the air, withdraws.
24. MAHAKAPI. The Great Monkey.—The Bodhisat was
a great monkey, living at the Himalaya. Once a man,
going in search of a lost cow, lost his way in the neighbour-
hood. As he was hungry he tried to pluck the fruit from
a tree, standing on the verge of a declivity, and fell into
a deep ravine. Unable to disengage himself, he began to
cry and weep. On his cries the monkey came up and drew
him out. Then, tired from his exertion, the monkey lay
down and slept. The man, with the purpose to use his flesh
for food, resolved to kill him, and threw at him a stone;
but this failed to kill. The monkey, awaking and seeing
that the man had tried to kill him, only reproved him, and
then led him on his way. This man afterwards fell ill of
a disgusting malady, so that the people drove him away.

322 DE. SEEGE D'OLDENBUKG'
Once in a forest a king, in hunting, met him, and asked
who he was. He told him that he was a man punished for
treason against his friend.
25. SARABHA. The animal Sarabha.—The Bodhisat was
a sarabha (kind of stag), and lived in the forest. Once a
king, in hunting, came to the same forest. Seeing him,
the king gave chase, but, on his way, fell into a cleft
that hi* horse would not jump. The sarabha, not hearing
the sound of the hoofs behind him, turned round, saw
the king in the cleft, carried him out of it, and showed
him the way home. The king invites the sarabha to
settle down in his city, but the sarabha declines, and
begs the king to abstain from the murder of living
beings.
26. RUKU. The deer Ruru.—The Bodhisat was a Btint-
deer. Once he heard the cries of a man, borne along by
the river. He drew him out. The man profusely thanks
him. The ruru asks him to promise to tell nobody who
had saved him, that the people, attracted by his beauty,
might not come to hunt him. At this time the queen of
this country always had dreams that, afterwards, were
realized. Once she saw in her dream a golden deer preach-
ing the law to her, and asked the king to find this deer.
They call together all huntsmen, promising them a large
reward for the capture of this deer, but no one can find
him. Then the man who had been saved by the deer
promises to point him out. The king inarches with his
army and they surround the deer. This latter asked the
king who had led him. The king pointed to the man ; the
deer reproves him for his ingratitude, but so that only he
understands the meaning of his words. The king asks
for explanation, and, guessing the truth, wants to kill the
man; the deer intercedes for him; then, together with
the king, the deer goes to his court and teaches the law.
The king ceases to kill animals.
27. MAHAKAPI. The Great Monkey.—The Bodhisat lived
on the Himalaya, as leader of a herd of monkeys. The
monkeys lived on a large nyagrodha tree, subsisting by

"ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 323
its fruits. One branch of the tree stretched out above a
river. The leader cautiously ordered the monkey, before
all, to cull the fruits from this branch. But once the
monkeys overlooked one fruit, which, when grown ripe,
fell into the river. It was by the current borne down to
where the king bathed. The king was so much pleased
with it that he decided to find out the tree on which such
wonderful fruit grew, and, with his army, marched up the
river till he saw the tree, and, on it, the monkeys, which
latter he ordered to be killed, as they ate the coveted fruit.
The leader encouraged the frightened monkeys, climbed
to the top of the tree, and jumped from thence to a near
hill, but he saw that the other monkeys would not be able to
take such a jump; then he bound his feet to a strong liana,
jumped back, and caught hold of the tree with his hands,
so that he formed a bridge on which the other monkeys
did not tarry to fly from the tree. The king and his army,
beholding such force and courage, were astounded. The
king ordered the monkey, who, from exhaustion, had lost
consciousness, to be cautiously taken from the tree and
put on a soft couch. When he had recovered his senses,
the king asked him why he had acted thus. The monkey
answered that such was his duty as leader, and pronounced
a long sermon on the duties of a king. Then, leaving his
body, he goes to heaven.
28. KSHANTI. Patience.—The Bodhisat was a hermit, with
name Kshantivadin, and settled in a forest. Once the king,
with his women, came into the forest; when the king fell
asleep the women walked about and found the hermit. They
sat down near him and he preached the law to them. When
the king awoke he went to seek his women, and found them
listening to the hermit; he became angry and began to
upbraid him. The women interceded for him, but the king
grew only the more angry, and the women went off. The
king drew his sword and began to hack the hermit to pieces.
Though he hewed off the hermit's hands, feet, ears, and
nose, the latter suffered and was silent. On completing
this horrible work the king felt a great heat; and, as he

324 DR. SERGE D'OLDENBURG
just came out of the forest, the earth opened with a crash,
fire came out, and the king was swallowed down. On
the noise the people assembled in fright, and asked the
hermit that the whole country might not be destroyed
like the king. The hermit appeased all and flew up to
the sky.
29. BRAHMA. The god Brahma.—The Bodisat was born
in the world of Brahma. Once he saw that king Angaddina
of Videha cherished heretical opinions, denied the existence
of another world, and the reward of good and bad actions.
He descends from heaven and appears before the king.
Struck with this appearance, the king asks who he was ;
he answers that he is one of the devarshi's of Brahma's
world, and begins a sermon on the other world; the king
listens to him but is not convinced, and interrupts him by
the ironical remark that, if there is indeed another world
the devarshi should give him 500 nishka (cash), and he
would give him back in the other world 1000. Seeing
his obstinacy ('the') Brahma points to him the tortures
of hell. The king, frightened at this, turns to the true
path. Brahma disappears.
30. HASTI. The Elephant.—The Bodhisat was an elephant.
Once he saw 700 people who had lost their way. They
had been exiled by the king; at first they had been 1000,
but after their long wanderings only these 700 were alive.
The elephant conceived the thought to feed them with his
own flesh, in order to save them from starvation. He shows
them the way to the water, and says that on the way
they will find the body of an elephant that might serve
them for food. They go ; he, by another way, gets the
start of them, and, throwing himself from above down
on their road, kills himself. At the time of this his self-
sacrifice several miracles happen. The wanderers find the
body, and, on looking at it, see that it is their former guide.
Then some of them say that it is impossible to take of
his flesh, but that they must honour his body and go their
way. But others point out that this would be to act
contrary to the elephant's wishes, who had died just for

" OS THE BXJDBHIST JATAKAS." 325
this purpose. Then all satisfy their hunger with his flesh
and safely go on.
31.* SUTASOMA. Prince Sutasoma.—The Bodhisat was born
in the royal race of Kuril, and was called Sutasoma. He
distinguished himself by knowledge and virtue. Once,
on his walk, a Brahmin appeared before him, who pronounced
beautiful sentences (subhashita). Suddenly a noise arose,
the frightened servants run up, shouting that Saudasa had
come. The Bodhisat, though he knew, asked, who was
that. They told him that once king Suddsa went hunting,
and carried by his horse into the depths of the forest,
met there a lioness, with whom he had relations, and who
bore him Saudasa. Suddsa brought him up. From his
mother the boy inherited the taste for different sorts of
(raw) flesh, he also ate human flesh, and, for that purpose,
killed his subjects (having become king after his father's
death). These latter, at last, resolved to kill him. Saudasa
became afraid, and promised to the bhutas (evil spirits) a
sacrifice of 100 princes if they would deliver him from
his danger. As soon as he was free from his enemies he
began to steal princes, and now came here to fetch Sutasoma.
Sutasoma, on hearing this, goes up to Saudasa, who carries
him off to his seat (durga). Sutasoma remembers the
Brahmin, whom he could not hear to end, and sheds tears.
Saudasa, thinking that he weeps from fear, scoffs. Sutasoma
explains the reasons of his tears, and begs Saudasa to allow
him to go and hear all the Brahmin has to tell, promising
to return. Saudasa does not believe in Sutasoma's resolution
to return to certain death. Sutasoma declares to him that
truth goes before all, and that he always keeps his promises.
Saudasa, to try Sutasoma, allows him to go home. Sutasoma
hears to end the four verses of the Brahmin, generously
rewards him, and, notwithstanding the entreaties of his
father, returns to Saudasa, who expresses his astonishment.
Sutasoma replies that now he has heard the Brahmin's
1 [The Jain tale corresponding to this Jataka is found in the commentaries on
Avasyaka-niryukti, ix. 32 (more exactly on Viseshavasyaka-bhashya, v. 189, 5);
it is alluded to also in Av.-niry. xix. 164, 4.—E.L.]
J.B.A.8. 1893. 22

326 DR- SERGE D'OLDENBTJRG
four verses he is ready to be made a sacrifice. Sauddsa
;
wishes to hear these sayings, but Sutasoma replies that
to the lawless the hearing of the law will be no use.
Sauddsa excuses himself, saying that, as others hunt game,
he hunts men. Sutasoma answers that also the hunt for
game is sinful, much more that for men ; then he speaks
to him on the truth, and on the question of Sauddsa; how
it is he does not fear death, explains why it is not to be
feared. Sauddsa is struck by his words, renounces his
resolution to kill him, again begs him to tell the four
strophes, and constructs him a teacher's seat. Sutasoma
pronounces the four verses. Sauddsa is so much pleased
that he offers to him anything he may wish. Sutasoma
answers, how could one give presents to others, who is
not even his own master. Sauddsa says that he is ready
to give his life. Sutasoma demands four things : that he
be honest; do not kill living beings ; set his prisoners free ;
and do not eat human flesh. Sauddsa consents to the three
first demands, but asks to have the fourth one changed.
Sutasoma explains to him that the three, without the last,
had no meaning. Sauddsa says that it is quite impossible
for him to abstain from human flesh. Sutasoma continues to
preach to him, and he at last surrenders. The imprisoned
princes are set free, and they all, with Sauddsa and Sutasoma,
return to their different countries.
32. AYOGRHA. The iron house.—The Bodhisat was born as
a prince. All the children the king had had before him
had died. Therefore, when the Bodhisat was about to be
born, the king erected an iron house, embellished with all
precious things; here the Bodhisat was born; here he grew
up and was educated. Once the king allowed him to take
a ride. On the sight of all surrounding beauties of nature,
and the products of human hands, he begins to meditate on
the transitoriness of everything earthly, and turns to his
father with the request to allow him to become a monk. The
king will not give his consent; the son, by long persuasion,
finally brings him round to his side. The prince becomes
an hermit, and eventually is born again in Brahma's world.

"ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 327
.33. MAHISHA. The Buffalo.—The Bodhisat was a buffalo
and dwelt in the forest. There also lived a monkey,
who constantly tortured and tormented the buffalo,
but he suffered all. Once a yaksha asked him why he so
patiently bore the persecution of the monkey. The
buffalo answers with a long sermon on patience. The
yaksha praises him, and, throwing the monkey from his
back, goes. away.
34. SATAPATTRA. The Woodpecker.—The Bodhisat was a
woodpecker. Once he saw a lion, struck with whose sorry
aspect, he asked what was the matter with him. The lion
told him that a bone stuck in his throat. The woodpecker
put a piece of wood, as a prop, between his jaws and took
out the bone. After some time he, being very hungry, met
the lion, who had just killed a deer, and asked him for some
meat; the lion- gave him nothing, and added that he ought
to be glad to have saved his head from his jaws. The
woodpecker quietly flew away: the divinity of some tree
there asked him why he had not torn out the lion's eyes,
or at least taken a bit of meat out of his mouth while he
could have done so. The woodpecker makes him a sermon—
that we must not get angry (give way to anger), nor give
attention to the ingratitude of others.

328 DR- SERGE D'OLDENBURG
TABLES OF PARALLELS.
I. The Jataka Mala.1
Jataka Mala. Jataka. Cariyd Pitaka.
1. Yyaghrl * (Hardy, Manual,92)
2. Sibi 499 8
3. Kulmashapindl 415
4. Sreshti 40
5. Avishahva 340 *Nidanakatha, p. 45>
6. Sasa 316 10
7. Agastya 480 1
8. Maitribala ?
9. Visvantara W. 539 9-
10. Yajna cf. *50
11. Sakra 31, p. 202 sq.
12. Brahmana *305
13. ITnmadayantI *527
14. Suparaga 463
15. Matsya 75 30
16. Yartakapotaka 35 29
17. Kumbha *512
18. Aputra p
19. Bisa 488 24
20. Sreshti 171
21. Cullabodhi 443 14
22. Hamsa 502
23. Mahabodhi. *528 *Nidanakatha, p. 46-
24. Mahakapi *516
25. Sarabha 483
26. Ruru 482
27. Mahakapi 407
28. KsbSnti 313
29. Brahma *W. 536
30. Hasti ?
31. Sutasoma *537 32
32. Ayogrha 510 23
33. Mahisha 278 15
34. Satapattra 308
1 On this table and the third compare the similar tables at the end of Prof.
Rhys Davids's introduction to his ' Buddhist Birth Stories,' London, 1881.
Those signed with an asterisk are not in Prof. Kern's table (Preface,
p. viii sq.). The greater part of these omissions is explained bv the fact
that, at the time when the Jataka Mala was being printed, the fifth part of
the Jataka was not yet published. Yet other parallels are: 1 =in another
redaction Divyav 32. Bodhisattvavadanakalpalata (B.K.) 51. 95. Dsanglun
2; 2=Ds. 35; 6 = B.K. 104. Av. Sat. 37; 8 = Ds. 12; 9=B.K. 23;
S8 = B.K. 38. [Ds. 11. H.W.]; 29 cf. Beal, Rom. Leg. 306-310; 31=Ds.
36, Bhadrakalpavadana 34.

' ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 329
II. The Nidana Kathd.
Nidana Katha. Jdtaka.
1. Akittibrahmana dana 480
2. Samkhabrahmana 442
3>
3. Dhananjayaraja 276
y>
4. Mahasudassana 95
JJ
5. Mahagovinda ?
JJ
6. Nimimaharaja W.533
))
7. Candakumara W.534
)>
8. Visahyasetthi 340
3)
9. Siviraja 499
)»
10. Vessantara W.539
JJ
11. Sasapandita 316
)>
1. 12. Sllavanagaraja sila 455
2. 13. Campeyyanagaraja 506
3. 14. Bhuridattanagaraja W.535
)?
4. 15. Chaddantanagaraja 514
!>
5. 16. Jayaddisa (Alinasattu) 513
»)
6. 17. Samkhapalaj. 524
>3
1. 18. Somanassakumara nekkhamma 505
2. 19. Hatthipalakumara 509
j»
3. 20. Ayogharapandita 510
33
4. 21. Ciilasutasoma 525
3)
1. 22. Yidhurapandita paniia W.537
2. 23. Mahagovmdapandita >> ?
3. 24. Kuddalapandita >( 70
4. 25. Arakapandita >> 169
5. 26. Bodhiparibbajaka 528
s»
6. 27. Mahosadhapandita W.538
33
7. 28. Senakapandita (Sattubhattaj) 402
)?
1. 29. Mahajanaka vlrya W.531
1. 30. Khantivada khanti 313
1. 31. Mahasutasoma sacca 537
1. 32. Mugapakkha adhitthana W.530
1. 33. Ekaraja metta 303
1. 34. Lomahamsa upekkba 94 (P)

330 DR. SERGE D'OLDENBUKG
III. The Cariya Pitaka.
Cariya Fitaka. Jataka.
i. 1. Akatti 480 dana
2. Samkha 442
3. Kurudhamma 276
4. Mahasudassana 95
5. Mahagovinda Mahavastu
JJ
6. Nimiraja W. 533
iy
7. Candakumara W. 534
}}
8. Siviraja 499
n
9. Yesantara W. 539
t>
10. Sasapandita 316
>t
ii. 1. 11. Sllavanaga 455 slla
2. 12. Bhuridatta W. 535
jj
3. 13. Campeyyanaga 506
)>
4. 14. Culabodhi 443
>>
5. 15. Mahimsaraja 278
?>
6. lfi. Rururaja 482
>}
7. 17. Mataftga 497
!>
8. 18. Dhammadhamma-
devaputta 457
>>
9. 19. Jayaddisa 513
*>
10. 20. Samkhapala 524 '
)9
iii. 1. 21. Yuvanjaya 460 nekkhamma
2. 22. Somanassa 505
t>
3. 23. Ayoghara 510
y)
4. 24. Bhisa 488
;>
5. 25. Sonapandita W. 524
H
6. 26. Temiya ' W. 530 adhitthana
7. 27. Kapiraja 407 sacca
8. 28. Saccavhayopandita ? )>
9. 29. Yattakapotaka 35 >>
10. 30. Maccharaja 75 >)
11. 31. Kanhadipayana 444
>y
12. 32. Sutasoma 537
:>
13. 33. Suvannasama ? metta
14. 34. Ekaraja 303
15. 35. Mahalomahamsa 94 upekkha [not en
tirely identical]

"ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 331
Bhadrakalpuvadana, ch. 34 (f. 424 V.-448 v.).
The Buddha came into the city to king Suddhodana with
his disciples. The King fed Buddha and his disciples ;
after dinner Buddha blesses the king and his ministers, and
goes back to the wood. The king follows him to hear the law.
Turning to Ananda, he (Buddha) effusively praises monkdom
and hermitry, and on this occasion, remembering a former
rebirth, tells the legend of Sutasoma (Sutasomdcaddnaka).
In Kdsi there was at one time king Suddsa, a worshipper
of the three precious things, and very virtuous (long
description !). Once he, with his women, repaired to his
park to enjoy himself. All disperse in the beautiful park ;
suddenly the king's horse bolts, and bears him into the
jungle. Tired of racing, after four yojanas, it stands still
under a tree. The king dismounts to take breath. He
begins to upbraid his horse, that it had borne him to so
lonesome and dangerous a place. Feeling thirsty, the king
looks out for water, having before bound his horse to the
tree. He hears from afar the noise of a waterfall (prapata),
goes there, drinks, washes himself, and takes breath:
remembering his women, he is seized by love, and, loudly
complaining that he is deprived of the means to gratify it,
from grief falls senseless. At this time a young lioness
wandered about in the wood, seeking a male. Hearing the
complaints of the king, she goes up to him. The king is
frightened; she speaks to him with human voice, quieting
his fears, and expressing her desire; from fright the king
again falls into a swoon, but the lioness with blandishments
brings him round, and persuades him to fulfil her desire.
Then the lioness tries to induce him to live, as her husband,
entirely with her in the wood, as she too was the daughter
of a king, that of the beasts. The frightened king does
not decidedly refuse her, but, under the pretext that she
must find food, he sends her off, himself mounts his horse
and flies. He falls in with his suite, and, returning to the
city, tells what had happened to him, only concealing his
relations with the lioness. The lioness, returning, and not

332 DE. SEEGE D'OLDENBUBG
seeing the king, from grief falls into a swoon. Soon it
appeared that she was with child; upbraided by her parents,
she goes out into the wood, and there brings forth a
beautiful boy. Until the twelfth year she nourished him
in the wood, but then she gave him to some merchants
coming through the city, and goes herself back into the
wood. The merchants were struck with the boy's likeness
with the king, and decided that this must be his son, born,
in some miraculous way, by a lioness, when he had been
carried away by his horse into the wood. They brought
the boy to Benares, and presented him to the king, who
gladly acknowledged him as his son, giving him the name
of Saudasa Narasimha ('Son of Sudasa, Man-Lion'). In
the course of time the king married him, and afterwards,
being old himself, went with his wife to the forest, after
having anointed his son as king. The young king was
fierce, and ate very much meat; constantly animals and
birds were killed for him. But, not content with this, he
himself went into the forest, killed animals and ate them,
trying all kinds of raw meat. His councillors tried to
dissuade him from eating raw meat, as that was not seemly
for human beings. He retorted that raw meat, more than
anything else, gives force, and declared to them that he
was resolved even to eat human flesh, as the best of all.
In the night the king secretly goes to the gaol, fetches a
man, and eats him; so he did every night. This was
remarked, and the councillors were informed of it. They
took counsel together, and also questioned queen Dharma-
ganjd, who confirmed the information as to the king's
behaviour. The councillors go to, and remonstrate with,
him, but he does not listen to them, and objects. Then
they decide to drive him away, and, in the following night,
meeting him in the place of his crime, drive him out of
the kingdom, notwithstanding his entreaties. In the forest
he meets his mother, the lioness, who asks him who he is:
he answers, and she tells him that she is his mother, and
then asks him what his father is doing, and why he has
left Benares. He tells her all that has happened. Then

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 333
she counsels him to collect a hundred princes for a sacrifice,
telling him. not to kill them before the hundred is full.1
The son obeys his mother; he seizes prince after prince, and
puts them into a cavern; soon he has collected ninety-nine.
At this time the pious king Sutasoma, of the race of
Kuru, was reigning. Once, in spring, he repaired with
his suite to the park to enjoy himself. There a monk
presents himself before him, who wishes to communicate
to him some beautiful sentences. Sutasoma promises him
a liberal reward, and prepares himself to listen; suddenly
a noise rises, the servants come running and shouting that
the terrible Sauddsa has appeared. On the question of
Sutasoma (who, of course, knew what he asked about) who
this was, the servants relate : Once the king went hunting
and his horse carried him far into the forest; here he met
a tigress, and, inflamed by love, had relations with her.
She bore a son, who, later on, was brought to his father,
who gladly acknowledged him; he succeeded to his father.
Sauddsa very much liked flesh, and ate even that of men.
His subjects resolved to kill him and he fled. Finding
himself in the forest, he made a vow for his deliverance
from misery to bring a sacrifice of a hundred princes. The
servants bid Sutasoma save himself, as Sauddsa apparently
had come for him. But Sutasoma wishes to turn Sauddsa
to the right path and goes to meet him. Sauddsa says
he came to seek him, seizes him, and carries him off to
his cavern. Here Sutasoma, remembering the monk from
whom he was to hear the beautiful sentences, and whom
he had promised to reward, weeps, thinking of the dis-
appointment of the poor monk. Sauddsa, seeing his tears,
thinks that he is afraid of death, and ridicules him. Sutasoma
explains to him the reason of his tears, begs to be allowed
to go and reward the monk, and promises afterwards to
return. Sauddsa at first expresses a doubt whether Sutasoma
would return to a certain death, but then, to try his truth-
fulness, dismisses him. The relations, seeing Sutasoma
1 The text apparently is corrupt, and it is not clear to whom the sacrifice is
to be brought, and what is its aim.

334 DIt. SEfiGE D'OLDENBURG
return, rejoice. Sutasoma tells them he is only come
to hear the monk. The monk pronounces his verses;
Sutasoma gives his presents. Sutasoma's father finds his
liberality excessive, and reproaches him. The son justifies
his act, and declares that he must return to Sauddsa. His
father decidedly dissuades him, but Sutasoma is firm, and
returns to the man-eater, who is struck with wonder. Suta-
soma thanks him that he had allowed him to hear the
beautiful sentences. Sauddsa wishes to hear them also, but
Sutasoma declines to impart them to one living so lawlessly.
Between them a conversation takes place, in which Sauddsa
is struck so much by the merits of Sutasoma, that he
renounces eating him, and again begs him to tell him the
verses. He, as disciple, sits down below his teacher, and
Sutasoma tells him the sentences of the monk. Saudasa,
charmed by them, bids him take anything he likes. Suta-
soma asks him (1) to be true to his word; (2) not to destroy
living beings; (3) to dismiss the prisoner princes; (4) not
to eat human flesh. With the three first points Sauddsa
agrees, but says that he cannot fulfil the fourth : at last
he surrenders to the persuasion of Sutasoma. All princes
and Sutasoma are released, and return each to his kingdom;
after a sermon of Sutasoma's that we must aspire to brahma-
carya and always be honest,
Buddha identifies himself with Sutasoma.
Content with the sermon, king Suddhodana and the people
return to the city.
This extract will suffice to show how near the author
of the Bhadrakalpavadana kept to his original in its pro-
saical parts; the verses he mostly copies word for word.
Closing herewith our remarks on the Jataka Mala, I
would point out yet another, though not quite convincing
datum, on the question of the chronology of this collection.
In Bunyin Nanjio's catalogue (No. 1349), a work of drya
Sura is enumerated, as translated into Chinese in the year
434 A.D. If this date is correct, and our author is really
meant, then the Jataka Mala could not be later than the-
end of the fourth or the beginning of the fifth century.

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 335
III.
Jatakas in the Mahavastu.
In the Mahavastu are found a considerable number of
Jatakas, partly complete and partly abridged. The following;
list thereof is compiled after the excellent edition of Mr.
Senart, and the Catalogues of Rajendra Lai Mitra and
Bendall; we have included all the rebirths of the Buddha
mentioned in the work, notwithstanding that, according to
the indication of the Mahavastu itself, Jatakas are only
to be found in the 8th, 9th, and 10th bhumi (' grades ' which
the Bodhisattva must traverse before he becomes a Buddha),
since this indication is directly contradicted by the mention
in the 3rd and 7th bhumu of Jatakas, which occur in the
Mahavastu and other collections.
1. Buddha was a cakravartin king, by name Drdhadhanit,
and lived at the time of Buddha Aparajita-dhvaja; he
honoured him for 1000 years, and on his death erected him
a stupa, i, 1. 60 sq.
Buddha was a merchant's son under Sakyamuni, to whom
he gave a rice soup, i, 1. 47 sq. 111.
was a cakravartin king, living under the Buddha
Samitavin, to whom he gave a palace built of the seven
precious materials, i, 1. 48-53.
was the young Brahmin Megha, who lived under
Buddha Dlpamkara, i, 1—2. 193-248; cf. Dharmaruci.
Divyav. xviii ; Bodhisattvavadanak. lxxxix.
was the monk Abhiji (Abhiya), who lived under
Buddha Sarvabhibhu, i, 2. 35-45.
was the Brahmin Jyotipala, who lived under Buddha
Kagyapa, i, 2. 317-338.
gave to Buddha of his time 80 sandal palaces, i, 54.
was king Arka, who gave to Buddha Parvata 80,000
caverns for the monks, i, 54.
was under Buddha Ratnendra, who taught him
during six years.

336 Dfi. SEEGE D'OLDENBUKG
Buddha was a cakravartin king, who lived under Buddha
Ratna, for whom he made 84,000 palaces embellished with
jewels.
gave away his wife and children in order to hear
a wise saying, i, 91 sq.1
gave his head to a brahmin, to hear from him a
wise saying, i, 92.
was king Surupa, with the same purpose, gave his
wife, his son, and himself, to a rakshasa, i, 92 sq.
was minister Samjaya, with the same purpose, gave
his heart to a pisaca, i, 93.
the merchant's elder Vasumdhara, gave, with the
same purpose, all his wealth to a poor man, i, 93 sq.
was king Surupa, gave, with the same purpose, all
Jambudvlpa to some man, i, 94.
the deer Satvara, gave, with the same purpose, his
body to a huntsman, i, 94 sq. This is the Mrgarajaj. Mhv.
ii, 255-257, where the deer is called Surupa, and the ' wise
saying' is read with slight variation.
was king Ndgabhvja, with the same purpose, gave
away his kingdom over the four dvlpas, i, 95.
with the same purpose, threw himself into an abyss,
i, 95.
with the same purpose, left a ship (?) in the sea,
i, 95. As we do not know what tale is alluded to here,
we can translate only tentatively; pota might mean also
' a young one.'
with the same purpose, gave away his eyes, i, 95 ;
cf. Dsanglun, i.
with the same purpose, threw himself into the fire,
i, 95 ; cf. ibid.
was the cakravartin king Dharanlmdhara, who lived
under Buddha Sudarsana, to whom he gave all necessaries
of life, i, 111 sq.
1 In this place the text is very much corrupted, and we cannot form a clear
idea what tale here is related, as also further on there is a lacuna; also the tale,
how Buddha ohtained a wise saying from the snake-charmer, is not clear.

"ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 337
Buddha was the cakravartin king Aparajita, who lived
under Buddha Naresvara, to whom he gave eighty-four
monasteries, i, 112.
was minister Vijaya, who lived under Buddha
Suprabha, to whom he gave an entertainment, i, 112 sq.
was the cakravartin king Acyuta, who lived under
Buddha Ratnaparvata, for whom he constructed 84,000
palaces, i, 113 sq.
was the cakravartin king Priyadarsana, who lived
under Buddha Kanakaparvata, to whom he gave his
kingdom, i, 114 sq.
was king Biirjaya, who lived under Buddha Pushpa-
danta, to whom he gave a luxurious entertainment, i, 115 sq.
was a king who lived under Buddha Lalitavikrama,
to whom he gave forty kotis of palaces and yet another
magnificent palace, i, 116 sqi
was king Mrgapatisvara, who lived under Buddha
Mahayasas, to whom he gave a magnificent entertainment,
i, 117 sq.
was the cakravartin king Manivishana, who lived
under Buddha Ratnaciida, to whom he gave ninety-two
myriad kotis of palaces, i, 118 sq.
was king Kusa, i, 128-131. This redaction is
entirely different from the other Jatakas about Kusa; only
this it has common with them, that also here they wish
to carry off the queen.
was king of the snakes Ugra, charmer of snakes,
who pardons the ignorant, i, 131.
was a lion, wounded by the hunter with the poisoned
arrow, i, 131 sq.
was leader of a caravan, misled by the treacherous
guide, i, 133.
was a king, pardoning his transgressing wife, i, 133 sq.
was a nagaraja (' king of elephants' or ' of naga's';
it is not clear, from the tale, which is meant) Atula, who
lived under Buddha Mangala, i, 248-252.
was a brahmin, who erected an umbrella on the stupa
of his son, who was a Buddha, absorbed into nirvana, i, 267.

338 DR. SERGE D'OLDENBURG
*Trisakunaj. 282 = Tesakunaj. (521) (translated from the
MS. by T. P. Minayev).
Buddha was the hermit Rakshita, who saved the city of
Kampilya by appearing from the sea, i, 283-6.
was an elephant in VaranasI; he saved from the sea
the city of Mithila, i, 286-8.
Rshabhaj. i, 288-290.
Buddha was the leader of a herd of deer, of name
Nyagrodha, who wanted to sacrifice himself in order to save
a deer, i, 359-366 ; cf. Nigrodhamigaj. (12).
*Manjarij. ii, 48-64=Sudhabhojanaj. (535) ; cf. also the
Bitarikoaiyaj. In regard to the uncertainty expressed by
the editor (p. 509) as to the title of this Jataka, we allow
ourselves to opine that this title refers to the flowers that
call forth the quarrel of the goddess. On the rale of
Narada cf. the Markandeyapur. and Simhas. Introduction
(dispute between Rambha and Urvasi).
Godhaj. ii, 64-67=Jataka, 333 ; cf. Beal, Rom. Leg. 82 sq.
Harapradanaj. ii, 67 sq.
Yasodhara-vyaghribhutaj. ii, 68-72 ; cf. Beal, 99 sq.
*Dharmapalaj.=Mahadhammapalaj. (447).
Sara-kshepanaj. ii, 82 sq.
Amara-karmara-darikaj. ii, 83-89; cf. Sucij. (387).
*Maha-ummaggaj. Channa-patha-panho; *Mahaushadha
and Visakha: Schiefner, Tibetan tales—Ralston, particularly
p. 157. *Minayev, Buddhism, i, 151—4 ; Beal, Rom. Leg.
23-6. *Divyav. xxxvi, 521 sq. Sirij. ii, 89-94.
*KinnarIj. ii, 94-115; cf. Divyav. xxx. Sudhana-kuma-
ravadiina. Schiefner-Ralston, Sudhana-avadana, 44-74.
*Syamaj. ii, 166-177; cf. Kanaveraj. (318); cf. also
No. 419 and Petavatthuvannana, i, 1.
*Campaka-nagaraja-j. ii, 177-188 = Campeyyaj. (506).
Cariyapitaka, 85 sq.
*Syamaka-j. ii, 209-231. Samaj. Westergaard, 532.
Siriprabhaj. ii, 234-7. Suvannamigaj. (359).
Sakuntakaj. ii, 241-3.
Kacchapaj. ii, 244 sq. This tale, as was mentioned above,
found its way into one of the MSS. of the Jatakamala.

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 339
Markataj. ii, 246-250 ; cf. Jat. 208. 342 (also 57. 224).
Sakuntakaj. ii, 250-5.
Surupa-mrgarajaj. ii, 255-7; cf. Mahavastu, i, 94.
Kusaj. ii, 420-496; cf. Kusaj. (531). Schiefner-Ralston,
21. Dsanglun, xiii, p. 91 sqq. Bhadrakalpav. xxx; cf.
Mahavastu, i, 128-131.
Vrshabhaj.1
Vanaraj.
Vanarlj. (?).
Punyavantaj.; cf. Bhadrakalpav. xvi and Tib.; Benfey,
Pantschatantra, ii, 535-7 (Nachtrag).
Vijitavij.
Rakshasadvipa-pakshika-j. ; cf. below Dharmalabdhaj.
Yalahassaj. (196). Divyav. 119-121. 523-8. Avalokites-
varaguna-karanda-vyuha (ed. Calc. pp. 52-59 ; cf. Burnouf,
Introd. p. 223 sq. Rajendralal. p. 96 sq.). Wenzel,
A Jataka tale from the Tibetan. Beal, Rom. Leg. 332-340.
Hiouen-Thsang (St. Julien, ii, 131-140. Beal, ii, 240-6) ;
cf. also Telapattaj. (96).
Kakaj.
Hastinij.; cf. Bhadrakalpav. xxxii.
Nalinlj. ; cf. JSTalinij. W. 519. Bhadrakalpav. xxxiii.
Padmavatlj.; cf. Bodhisattvavadanak. lxxxiii. [Candra-
Suryaj.] ; cf. Bhodisattvavadanak. lxxxiii, Bhadrakalpav.
xxvii. Beal, Rom. Leg. 361-3.
Upaligangapalaj. Gangamalaj. (421); cf. a similar story
in the collection Karpuraprakaravacuri: Kapilabrahmana-
katha.2
Mahagovindaj. ; cf. Cariyap. i, 5.
Dhar m alabdha j.
Ajfiata-kaundinya-j.
Pancabhadravargiy aj.
1 Hfre M. Senart's edition stops unfortunately at present. The remainder of
the titles, here added hy the author from Rajendralal, p. 145 sq. and Bendall,
p. 56 sq., will doubtless be found in the forthcoming volume of M. Senart's
edition.—H.W.
2 This collection is apparently very near related, if not identical, with the
Kataa-mahodadhi of the poet Somacandra.

340 DR- SERGE D'OLDENBURG
Sarabha[nga]j.; cf. Sarabhangaj. (522). Commentary on
the Upalisutta (Feer).
P urna-maitrayani-puttraj.
Yasodaj.; cf. Bhadrakalpav. xv. Beal, Rom. Leg. 250-6 ;
cf. Minayev, Buddhistische Fragmente, 584 n.
Ashtisenaj.
Uruvilva-kasyapa-nadl-kasy apaj.
Arindamaj.
As we do not feel ourselves justified, before the completion
of the exemplary edition by Senart, to enter into a critique
of the text, we confine ourselves here to adducing some
more parallels: ii, 166 and 198-200 = Suttanip., Pabbajjas.
pp. 71-74; ii, 238-240=Suttanip., Padhanas. pp. 74-78;
ii, 191-5 = Kanthakavimana, Yimanavatthu, p. 73 sq.
(No 81).
Misprints, i, 27. 4 read tiryaf; i, 630. 32 read jjp; ii,
54. 37 read brahmana; ii, 78. 17 read imdni; ii, 83. 17 read
adhvdnam ; ii, 363. 11 read sphiteshu ; ii, 362 sqq. is found,
with rather considerable variants and transpositions, as a
quotation in the Sikshasamuccaya of Santideva, beginning
of oh. 17 :
ukto vandanavidhih | tena punyavrddhir bhavatiti kuto
gamyate || aryavalokanasutrdt \ evam hi tatroktam ||
varjayaty akshanany ashtau ya ime desita maya
kshajjam caragayety ekam buddhotpadam susobhanam, etc.
1 (Copy of Minayev, from MS. in India Office, fol. 174 v. sq).

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 341
IV.
The Jataka of the " Young Trailhunter " and the Jain
parallels to it.
(Padakusalamanava Jataka, No. 432.)
Interesting parallels to this Jataka are found (1) in the
Jain collection Samyaktvakaumudl}
(2) In the commentaries to the Uttarajjhayana, ii, 44.2
The parallelism extends to the general idea as well as
to the tales. There is no doubt of the relation between
the Buddhist and the Jain texts, though the character of
this relation, on account of the insufficiency of the material,
is at present difficult to define. This only is certain, that
those Jain texts which we could make use of are younger
than the Pali text.
In the Samyaktvakaumudl the group of tales and the
' frame' to them are the following :
At the time of the campaigns of king Suyodhana, the
general of police Yamadanda represented him ; and he
governed so wisely that he conquered the love of all. The
king, returning from his campaign, began to envy him, and
resolved to destroy him. In the night, together with a
councillor and the house-priest, he robs the treasure-house,
and on the following day, under pain of death, demands
of Yamadanda the discovery of the thiefs. Yamadanda,
inspecting the place of the burglary, finds the king's shoe,
1 Cf. "Weber, A. Ueb. die Samy.; SBBA. 1889, xxxviii. For the text we
had the use of the MS. from Minayev's collection, which resembles the redaction
AB. of Weber (fol. 133, 11. 9-12; Samvat, 1629). It is in different hands-
Jain Devanagari; we denote it by M.; this MS. is now in the Imperial Public
Library. The tales that are not found in M., or that are different from the
redaction ABM., we give after Weber.
2 Cf. Weber, p. 30 (756), after the indication of Prof. Leutnann; for this
text we only could make use of the Calcutta edition (Samvat, 1936), and two-
MSS. from Minayev's collection, nearly coinciding with the Calcutta text, viz.
i. Samvat, 1839, fol. 293, with a taba in bhasha; ii. The Commentary (Uttara-
dhyayanasutrarthadlpika) of Lakshmivallabha, fol. 470, 1. 16 ; Samvat, 1909.
Besides, we had a MS. of the Avactiri to the Uttarajjhayana, from the same
collection, fol. 73, 11. 20-21, s.a.; it gives the tales nearly in the form of a
conspect, not differing in any material point from the text of Lakshmivallabha.
J.E.A.S. 1893. 23

342 DR. SERGE D'OLDENBURG
the seal of the councillor, and the priest's Brahmanic string.
Understanding the king's purpose, he gives him, in the
shape of tales, seven cautions, in the course of seven days
of respite which the king had accorded him at the people's
request.
i. On a tree there lived flamingoes. Once near the root
of this tree a liana-creeper began to grow. An old flamingo
bade the young ones to root it up, as it might become the
source of disaster. The young ones laugh at him. A
huntsman comes there, and, by the help of the liana, catches
the birds; the birds, fallen into captivity, call to the old
flamingo for aid; he counsels them to feign themselves
dead.1 The huntsman, thinking them really dead, climbs
the tree ; he throws them down and they fly away. [B. ac-
cording to Weber more detailed.]2
ii. The clever potter Palhana, who, having grown wealthy
little by little, liberally give3 alms, was eventually crushed
by the earth of the pit, whence he used to take his clay3.
iii. In the country of Pancala was the town Varasakti,
where king Stidharma lived, given to Jainism; his wife
was Jinamati. His minister Jayadeva was a Ciirvaka; his
wife was called Vijayd. Once the king, after a victorious
campaign,4 wished to have a triumphal entry into his
capital; but the principal street fell in and continued to
fall for three days, notwithstanding all props. Then Jaya-
deva counsels the king to make the street firm by the
1 This conceit is often repeated in Indian tales.
2 Weber has already remarked (I.e. p. 18) that the Samyaktvah. has many
quotations in common with the Pancantantra and the Hitopadesa; we do not
think it superfluous to adduce three argumenta from the Pancantantra that we
have found in the Samyahtvak.
i. tale: varam buddhir na sa vidya vidyato huddhir uttama
buddhihlna vinasyanti yatha te simhakarakah (Pane, v, 5, Koseg.).
ii. tale: vrddhavakyam sada krtyam prajfiaih ca gunasalibhih
pasya hamsan vane baddhan vrddhavakyena mocitan (Pane. Benfey,
ii, 139^.).
iii. tale: bubhukshitah Mm na karoti papam kshina nara nishkarunii bhavanti
akhyahi bhadre priyadarsanasya na Gangadattah punar eti kupam (Pane,
iv, 1, Koseg.).
3 The tale is in C.; in the other MSS. only the verse; in M. only a reference
to the potter.
4 Weber does not mention the campaign.

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 343
blood of a man, whom he had killed himself; this, he says,
was a kaulavdk} The king does not consent, though the
people assure him that they will take the sin upon them-
selves. Then they give another advice,2 viz. they make
the figure of a man in gold and carry it about in the city,
announcing that this golden statue and a koli of gold will
be given to the mother who herself will poison her son,
or to the father who will suffocate his son. A poor brahmin
Varadatta and his wife Nirghrna 3 are found, who are ready
to sacrifice their seventh son Indradatta. The youngster
laughs, and, on the question of the king, why he, at a
time so terrible for him, is joyful, replies by pointing out
the strangeness of his position. But the gods are pleased
with the courage of the youngster and the behaviour of
the king, who had not the intention to kill him, and every-
thing ends happily.
iv. A deer with many young ones lived quietly in a park;
the king of this town, Ripumardana, had many sons, to
one of whom a huntsman once brought a little deer; the
other princes also wished to have little deer, and a hunt
was made in the park.4
v. In Nepal, in the city Patallputm, lived the poet king
Vasupala, whose wife was Vammati. His minister, Bhdratl-
bhushana, had a favourite wife, Devaklrtimanohara? Once,
in the assembly, the minister criticized a poem of the
king's ; the latter, becoming angry, had him thrown into
the Ganga. Being in the water, the minister pronounces
some beautiful sentences, and the king pardons him.
vi. In the country oi^Kurujamgala is the city of Patali-
putra? where king Subhadra lived with his queen Subhadrd.
This park is devastated by monkeys, drunk with palm-wine.
He sends, for the protection of the park, his domestic
1 "Weber, Kulamatam.
2 Cf. Jacobi Ausg. Erz. in Maharashtri, p. 51 sq.
3 Weber, Nihkaruna, both = 'pitiless.'
4 The tale is in B. only; the others have no more than the verse; from the
fragment, preserved in M., it is still apparent that the deer begs for forbearance.
5 Weber does not mention the wife.
6 Weber, Patalipura.

344 DE. SEEGE D'OLDENBUEG
monkeys, notwithstanding the objections of the park-
keeper.1
vii. In the country Avanti is the city of Ujjayinl; there
lived the rich merchant Subhadra. Going out once, he left
his two wives under the care of his mother. Returning
suddenly home, he finds his mother in the embraces of a
paramour.
The king Suyodhana does not understand these hints.
Yamadanda then shows the shoe, the seal, and the string,
and makes known the thieves; the people expel them,
and put their sons in their places.
As is seen from this abridgment, the theme is the same-
in the Pali and the Jain texts—the king with some men
placed near him, commits a robbery, and demands that the
thieves be found; the person to whom he addresses himself
knows the thieves, but before exposing them before all the
people, tries by tales to hint that the truth is known to him.
Every tale includes a verse as a kind of argumentum, always
ending by the proverb "from the protection the injury
arose," corresponding with the contents of the tales, which
are about occasions when a thing or a human being, which
or who should have been a refuge, turns out the source of
misery. In the case put, the occasion for all these tales,
i.e. their ' frame,'—the king-guardian, who ought to be the
refuge for all his subjects, becames a thief, the source of
damage. This explanation, the undoubted correctness of
which is attested by the Pali version, makes all the tale*
completely clear, and removes all scruples, formerly felt by
Weber and myself.2
Of the tales only two are identical: Pali i=Jain v. and
Pali ii=Jain ii; and even then in the first of these the
tale presents great variations, and only the verses in both,,
taken together, have a remarkable likeness.
1 B. adds that the domestic, together with the wild, monkeys devastate the
park.
2 The doubts of Weber arose from the explanation of the hidden meaning of
the tales "die {i.e. the tales) samtlich darauf hinausgehen, dass man durch
XJnvorsichtigkeit und Unklugheit, gelegentlich freilich auch ohne eigene Schuld,
zu Schaden komt," I.e. 14).

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 345
Jdtaka. Samyalrfvakaumudi.
i. yena sincanti dukkhitam jena blya parohanti jena sip-
yena sincanti aturam panti payava
tassa majjhe marissami tassamajjhemarissamijayam
jatam saranato bhayam saranao bhayam.
ii. yattha brjani ruhanti satta jena bhikkham balim demi
yattha patitthita jena posemi appayam
sa me slsam niplleti jatam. tena me puhiya bhaggajatam
saranato bhayam saranato bhayam
i. Amidst that, by the aid of which the seed grows, with
which they water the trees
I die, from the refuge (my) misery arose.
In the translation of the second verse we allow ourselves
to differ a little from Prof. Weber: appayam we take as
an accusative sing, 'myself; jena we do not understand
in the sense of ' because,' but simply ' that by which,' ' by
the aid of which,'—this refers to the clay, which gave the
potter the means to live—accordingly we translate :
ii. That by the aid of which I give alms, and bring sacrifices
wherewith I feed myself
That crushed my back, from the refuge misery arose.
The other group of tales which we bring together with
the Jataka, differs considerably in the subject, though the
same 'motif of the hint or admonition lies at the root of
them all. The abridgment of this version, to which we
now pass on, is made after the Calcutta edition, with the
help of the above-mentioned two MSS. We give an abridg-
ment only, thinking that a translation of a text not yet
critically constituted, has no superiority over an abridgment,
and, moreover, lacks an advantage the latter possesses, viz.
brevity.1
1 By reason of deficient material for the constitution of a good text, we had
to renounce the production of all Prakrit verses, and confine ourselves to those
that are parallels to the Pali ones; to omit those we thought not advisable, in.
consideration of the importance of showing the identity of particular expressions
in the compared texts.

346 DE. SERGE D'OLDENBURG
In the country of Vatsa, among the followers of the
sect of Ashadhabhuti, there was this custom: to the dying
they said,1 " You will become gods in heaven, show your-
selves then to us." But the dead transferred to heaven
did not appear any more, and among the followers of this
sect doubt about a life after death arose. Once a disciple
died, and, before death, they said to him: " You by all
means must appear again to us when you become a god
in heaven ; do not forget it." But he, having become a
god, distracted by the various enjoyments and representa-
tions of heaven, forgot to show himself. After having
in vain waited for some time for his appearance, all the
followers of this sect were confirmed in their doubts regarding
life after death, and dispersed, fallen into error. At this
time a disciple, after becoming a god, driven by love for
his teacher, showed himself on earth, and saw that his
teacher had fallen into error. In order to instruct him,
he held at the end of some village representations; his
teacher amused himself for six months with these repre-
sentations, feeling neither hunger nor thirst; when the
god ceased his representations the teacher went away. In
order to try his self-command the god sent six youths,
embellished with jewels; the first youth was called " He
of the Earth." When the teacher saw him he said to him,
"Little one, give me your ornaments?" When he would
not give them the teacher seized him by the throat. The
frightened youth said: "I am the youth of the earth
(Prthvtltayika); in this terrible forest I have come to you
for aid ; it is not seemly for people like you to act thus;
I will tell you a story, listen to it."
i. He of the Earth. A potter, digging clay in a pit,
was crushed by the earth, and complained that he was
1 Here, and_further on, the plural number is used; apparently only a pi.
majest. On Ashadhabhuti, who in the Ayacuri is called Ashadhacarya; cf.
Leumann, j?., Die alten Berichte Ton den Sohismen des Jaina, Ind. St. xvii,
109-112 (Drittes Sch.). In the Karpuraprakaravacuri (MS. of Minayer) there
is a story about Ashadhabhuti. In the Brahminical literature this name is
known from Paficat. i, 4, where a clever thief, robbing a monk, is called thus.

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 347
struck down by that which had been his source of sub-
sistence.1
The teacher, notwithstanding the youth's prayers, took
his ornaments and put them into his bowl.2
ii. The youth of the Water (Apkdyika) relates: The actor
Patala, taking a walk, went into the Ganges; when the
current carried him away, some one standing on the bank
said: " 0 wise Patala, pronounce some beautiful sentence."
Patala pronounced a verse, wherein he bewails his situation.3
iii. The youth of the Fire {Agnikdyika) relates: A hermit's
hut burned down, whereon he pronounced a verse describing
his situation.
iv. 2. tale of the same youth: Some wanderer, from a
fear of tigers, had recourse to fire, and, being severely
burned by it, pronounced a verse.
v. The youth of the Wind (Vdyukumdra): There was a
corpulent youth, whom once the wind (-disease) crippled;
seeing him going in the streets, leaning on a stick, some
one asked him: "How have you, so strong, become such";
he answers with a verse.
vi. The youth of the Tree (Vanaspatikayika) relates: On
a tree there lived some birds, who had many young ones;
from the root of the tree a liana began to grow, and, wind-
ing round the tree, reached the summit; once a snake
climbed up by this liana, and ate up the young ones; the
birds, complaining, pronounced a verse.
vii. (Not in the Atacuri). The Moving youth (Trasakd-
yikd): In a certain town they expelled the candalas, who
had come in from fear of defilement; the fair-minded
(madhyastha) of the people expressed their disapprobation
by a verse.
1 We shall not repeat again this proverh, already known from the Jataka and
the Samyaktvak.
2 The robbery of the ornaments is repeated on the appearance of each follow-
ing youth, and therefore, without repeating this circumstance, we give just
the series of the remaining tales.
3 Those verses of these tales, which offer parallels with the tales in the Jataka,
we give below with a translation.

348 DR. SERGE D'OLDENBURG
viii. 2. tale of the same: In a certain town the king
and his house-priest were thieves; the people, seeing this
criminality, pronounced a corresponding verse.
ix. 3. tale of the same: In some village a brahmin had
a beautiful daughter; he was inflamed by passion towards
her, but, being ashamed of it, told nobody; his wife re-
marked his unhappy appearance, and, learning the reason,
contrived to help him. She said to her daughter that they
had the custom, before marrying their daughter, to deliver
her to a yaksha, and announced to her that on the fourteenth
day, between full moon and new moon, the yaksha would
come to her at night, and bade her not to light a fire. At
the appointed time the father appeared to her in the night
under the shape of a yaksha, and had relations with her.
When he fell asleep from exhaustion, she took a candle to
look at the yaksha, and recognized her father. She said,
" What must happen cannot be avoided," and again gave
herself to him. Her mother, seeing in the morning that
they are long in waking, breaks out in complaints; the
daughter, on awaking, tells her she herself is guilty, now
she might find out another husband for herself. The mother
again (in verses) complains that her own daughter had
deprived her of a husband.
x. 4. tale of the same (not in the Avacuri): In some
village a. brahmin dug a pond for the use of sacrifice, and
thereby planted a grove, and brought his sacrifices there. In
his next birth he became a goat in the same village; and
walking about he came to the pond, and remembered his
former existence. Once his son, about to bring a sacrifice,
took this goat (not knowing it to be his father), and led it
to the grove. The goat bellowed; a hermit, hearing it,
addressed him (the goat), reminding him how he had dug
the pond and planted the grove. The goat was silent.
The son asked the hermit what was the meaning of all this,
and he informed him that this was his father, who, precisely
because of his bringing sacrifices, had fallen to such a state.
The hermit adds that the goat could, with her foot, indicate
the place, in the courtyard of the house, were a treasure

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 349
was hidden in the earth. This was done, and afterwards
father and son were transferred to the world of gods1.
In the same manner the teacher, not listening to the
warnings of the six youths, robbed them, and went away.
In order to try his piety the god sends a woman to meet
him on the way, but the teacher drives her off; going, she
pronounces a warning, but he pays no attention to it. Then,
going on his way, the teacher meets the king, who bade
him to hold out his bowl, wishing to fill it with sweets.
Fearing to show to the king the jewels he had stolen, and
which were in the bowl, he answered that on this day he
did not take food. Then the king by force takes hold of
the bowl and discovers the jewels. The king says, " How
is this ? you scoundrel, then, have killed my sons! " The
teacher, frightened, was silent.
Here the god explains that all this was a magic trick
for the instruction of the teacher.
As we have in our hands only the very modern text
of Lakshmlvallabha, and the very much abbreviated text of
the Avacuri, we cannot enter at present into an examination
of the relation of our text to the Jataka on one side and
the Samyaktvak. on the other, and therefore confine ourselves
to the pointing out the parallels, and the remark that, in
our opinion, our text most probably is only a slight variation
of an ancient text. The parallels with the Jataka are the
following: i=Jataka ii ; ii=Jataka i; iii, iv are here
•similar to Jataka iii; v=Jataka v; vi similar to Jataka vi
(cf. verse in viii B.); viii=frame of Jataka. With the
Samyaktvak.: i=Samyaktvak. ii; ii similar to Samyaktvak. v;
vi= Samyaktvak. i; viii=frame of Samyaktvak.
Zfttaradhyayanasutrarthadipika.
ii. jena rohanti blyanl jena jivamti kachava2
tassa majjhe marissami, jayam saranao bhayam.
(Jataka i, yena sincanti.)
1 The meaning ia this, that the sacrificial grove round the pond, which the
Brahmin had planted, thinking to merit a reward by this, became the source of
misfortune for him, as in it himself nearly was offered up as a sacrifice, having
been reborn for his sacrifices in the shape of a goat.
* ' " va.—EX.

350 HE. SERGE D'OLDENBURG
i. jena bhikkham balim demi jena posemi nayae
sa me mahl akkamai, jayam saranao bhayam.
(Jataka ii, yattha bijani.)
iii. jam aham diva ya rao ya tappemi mahusappina
tena me udao daddho, jayam saranao bhayam.
iv. mae vagghassa bhlenam piivao saranlkao
tena daddham mamarn arigam, jayam saranao bhayam.
(Jataka iii, yena bhattani.)
v. jetthasadhesu masesu jo suho hoi maruo
tena me bhajjae angam, jayam, saranao bhayam.
(Jataka v, gimhanam.)
vi. Java vuccham1 suham vuccham1 payave nirupaddave2
mfllao utthiya valli, jayam saranao bhayam.
(Jataka vi, yam nissita.)
viii. jattha raya sayam coro bhandio ya purohio
disam bhayaha nagaraga, jayam saranao bhayam.
(Jataka, p. 513, v. 60, raja vilumpate.)
Translation of the Jain verses :
ii. Thanks to which the seeds grow, by which the tortoises
live,
In midst of this I die, from the refuge etc.
i. Thanks to which I give alms, and offer sacrifices, with
which I feed my relatives,
This earth crushes me, from etc.
iii. That which I feed day and night with honey and fat,
That has burned down my hut, from etc.
iv. From fear of a tiger I took my refuge with the fire,
But it burned my body, from etc.
v. The wind that is (a friend) beneficent in the months of
Jettha and Asadha,
That has broken my limbs, from etc.
vi. As long as we lived on the dangerless tree, we lived
happily,
From the root a liana sprang up, from etc.
viii. Where the king himself is a thief, and the priest a
scoundrel,
From there fly, 0 citizens, from the refuge the misery
arose.
1 vutthara.—E.L. 2 niruvaddave.—E.L. [See note on p. 356.]

"ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 351
V.
Bibliographical List.
We think it useful to give here a list of works regarding
the Jatakas; we have purposely excluded from it writings
on Buddhism in general, in which usually, among other
things, something is said of the Jatakas, but only in a
general way ; some archaeological works, where there are
separate representations of Jatakas, but no part specially
devoted to them; as well as the Singhalese and Burmese
editions of texts, that are almost entirely unaccessible to
the student at St. Petersburg. Some incompleteness resulted
also from the absence, in the St. Petersburg libraries, of
a complete set of the Journal of the Ceylon Branch (indeed,
our acquaintance with this Journal in the British Museum
and India Office makes us doubt whether any one of the
European libraries possesses a complete set; it is much
to be wished that the Ceylon Branch of the Asiatic Society
would give a good bibliographical description of this publi-
cation, so important for the students of Buddhism).
Seal, 8. The Romantic Legend of Sakya Buddha : from
the Chinese-Sanscrit. London, 1875.
Bendall, C. Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanscrit Manu-
scripts in the University Library, Cambridge. Cambridge,
1883.1
Bigandet, P. The life or legend of Gaudama, the Buddha
of the Burmese. London, 1880, third ed. (Triib. Or. Ser.),
vol. ii, pp. 153-176: an abstract of a few small Dzats, and
of the principal ones called Nemi and Dzanecka.
Buddhavamsa, ed. R. Morris, p. i. London, 1882 (P.T.S.).
Cariyd-pitaka, ed. R. Morris, p. i. London, 1882 (P.T.S.).
Id. Gogerley, D. J. Buddhism : Chariya pitaka. Jour.
Ceyl. Br. 1853, pp. 1-11 (translation of the first ten tales).
Chalmers, R. The lineage of the proud king [Illlsaj.
No. 78], J.R.A.S. 1892, 39-51.
1 Information on the collections and lists of Jatakas, cf. particularly the Index.

352 DE. SERGE D'OLDENBURG
*Cjlombo, Bishop of. Jour. Ceyl. Br. 1884.
Id. Nakkhattaj. [48], Orientalist, ii, 83 sq.
Id. Translation of the jatakas [91-95]. Ibid, ii, 121—
128.
Id. Kapotaj. [42]. Ibid, ii, 158 sq.
Id. Dummedhaj. [50]. Ibid, ii, 192 sq.
Cunningham, Sir A. The stfipa of Bharhut. London,
1879. E. Sculptured scenes, i, Jatakas, or previous births
of Buddha, pp. 48-82 foil.
Sura, arya. The Jatakamala or Bodhisattvavadanamala.
Ed. by H. Kern, 1891 (Harvard Oriental Series, i).
Dhammapadam. Ex tribus codicibus Hauniensibus palice
•edidit, latine vertit, excerptis ex commentario palico notisque
illustravit V. Fausboll. Hauniae, 1855 (the commentary
contains many jatakas).
Id. Buddhaghosha's parables: translated from Burmese
by Capt. T. Rogers. With an introduction, etc., by F. Max
Miiller. London, 1870.1
Dsanglun. Der Weise und der Thor. Aus dem Tibetischen
iibersetzt und mit dem Originaltext herausgegeben von I. J.
Schmidt. St. Petersburg, 1843.
Fausboll, V. Five Jatakas. Copenhagen, 1861.
Id. Two Jatakas. J.R.A.S. n.s. V, 1-13 (1170).
Id. The Dasarathajataka, being the Buddhist story of
king Rama. Kopenhagen, 1871.
Id. Ten Jatakas. Copenhagen, 1872.
Id. Nogle Bemaerkninger om enkelte vanskilige Pali
Ord i Jataka-Bogen. Overs, over d. K. D. Vidensk. Selsk.
Forh. 1888, 7-58.
Feer, L. Les Jatakas. J.A. 7. v, 357-434; 7. vi,
243-306 (1875).
Id. Maitrakanyaka-Mittavindaka, la piete filiale. J.A.
7. xi, 360-443.
Id. Le livre des Cent legendes (Les avadana-jatakas).
Paris, 1881. Extr. du J.A. pp. 327-364.
1 Translations from the commentary to the Dhanrnapadam; the complete
Pali text of this commentary, to be printed by the Plli Text Society, is pre-
paring by Prof. T. W. Ehys Davids.

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 353
Id. Le commentaire de l'TTpalisuttam. J.A. 8. xi
r
112-154 (jataka 423 and 522), 1888.
Id. Avadana Sataka Cent Legendes (Bouddhiques) traduites
du Sanskrit. Paris, 1891 (Ann. du Mus. Guimet, xviii),
passim.
*Francis, H. T. The Vedabbhajataka [48] translated and
compared with the "Pardoner's Tale." London, 1884. Cf.
Academy, Dec. 22, 1883 (also Or. ii, 50-53).
Hultzsch, IE. Ueber eine Sammlung indischer HSS. und
Inschriften. ZDMG. 40, 1-80 (1886) (Bharhut Inschriften,
corrections and additions to Cunningham's edition).
Jatakatthavannand. The Jataka, together with its Com-
mentary, being tales of the anterior births of Gautama
Buddha. For the first time edited in the original Pali by V.
Fausboll, and translated by T. W. Rhys Davids, vols. 1-5.
London, 1877-91.
*Kern, H. Bijdrag tot de verklaring van eenige worden
in Pali-geschriften vorkomende. Amsterdam, 1886. Letterk.
Verh. Kon. Akad. Deel, xvii, pp. 1-80.
Id. Der Buddhistische Dichter Sura. Festgruss an Otto
v. Bohtlingk. Stuttgart, 1888, p. 50 sq.
Kshemendra. Avadana Kalpalata, a collection of legendary
stories about the Bodhisattvas, with its Tibetan version, now
first edited by Sarat Chandra Das and Pandit Hari Mohan
Yidya bhushana. Bibl. Ind. Calcutta, vol. i, fasc. i-iii;
vol. ii, fasc. i, 1888-90.
Leumann, E. Die Legende von Citta und Sambhuta
[Jataka 498], W.Z.K.M. v, 111-146 ; vi, 1-46 (1891-2).
Mahavastu. Le Texte Sanscrit publ. par E. Senart,
vol. i, ii. Paris, 1882-1890 (in the introduction an abridg-
ment of the text is given).
Minayev, I. New facts concerning the connection of
ancient India with the West. J. Publ. Instr. Off. 1870.
No. 8, 225-239. Cf. Buddhistische Fragmente, Mel. As.
vi, 577-599.
Id. Some tales of the rebirths of Buddha, J.P.I.O.
1871, xi, 87-133.
Id. Some words on the Buddhist Jatakas. Ibid. 1872.

354 DE. SERGE D'OLDENBURG
Id. Indian tales. Ibid, 1874, xi, 68-104 ; 1876, ii,
185-224 ; ii, 368-403 ; iv, 314-340; v, 69-97.
Id. [The 77th Jataka in the book of A. N. Yeselovski,
The legend of the twelve dreams of Shahaish. St. Peters-
burg, 1879, pp. 28-34.]
Id. Abridgment of some unedited Jatakas of the Pali
•canon (Posthumous) Zhivaja Starina, 1891, iii, 161-164;
iv, 118-120.1
Morris, JR. The Book of Birth Stories, Oontemp. Rev.
My. 1881, 728-749.
Id. Jataka-stories. The Myth of the Sirens, Academy,
1881, Aug. 27 (also Ind. Ant. 1881, p. 292 sq.).
Id. Folk-tales in India, translated from the Pali Jatakas,
or Book of Birth Stories, etc., ed. by Prof. Fausboll, of
Copenhagen. Folk-lore Journal, ii, 304-310, 332-340,
370-377 ; iii, 56-79, 121-133, 242-256, 328-366 ; iv,
45-63, 168-182.
Id. Notes and Queries. J.P.T.S. 1884-9 (chiefly remarks
of grammatical and lexicological character).
Miiller, E. A simplified grammar of the Pali language.
London, 1884, pp. 128-132 (Valahassaj.).
Nell, L. The AppannakajStaka [1], Or. i, 156-63.
*Nevill, Hugh. Notes on the Dasarathajataka (1887), the
Taprobanian, ii, 4, 101 sq.
Oldenburg, S. A Buddhist parallel to the Jain legend
on the destruction of DvaravaM, Zap. Vost. Otd. I. R. Arch.
Obstc. vi, 335 sq.
Panebokke, T. B. The reward of covetousness [Vedab-
bhaj. 48]. Orientalist, i, 165 sq. (1884).
Id. Translations of the Jatakas Ekanipata Asimsavagga.
•Or. i, 267-271 [Jat. 51]; Or. ii, 37-39 [Jat. 52-54] ; Ibid.
172 sq. [Jat. 55] ; Or. iii, 103 sq. [Jat. 56].
Pischel, E. Kalilag und Dimnag. Ausland, 1876,
pp. 756-758 [Jat. 32. 38].
Rdjendraldla Mitra. The Sanskrit Buddhist literature of
Nepal. Calcutta, 1882.
1 These writings of Minayev's are all in Russian—mostly in the ' Journal
•of the Puhlic Instruction Office.'

" ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS." 355
Rhys Davids, T. W. Buddhist Birth Stories, or Jataka
tales. Translation, vol. i. London, 1880 (Triib. Or. Ser.).
[Nidana-Katha and Jataka, 1-40.]
Bouse, W. H. D. Index to the Jataka. J.P.T.S. 1890,
pp. 1-19.
Id. A Jataka in Pausanias. Folk-lore, i, 409 (1890).
Schiefner, A. Tibetan tales derived from Indian sources.
Translated from the Tibetan of the Kah-gyur. Done into
English from the German, with an introduction, by W. R. S.
Ralston. London, 1882 (Trub. Or. Ser.). The German
•originals in Melanges Asiatiques, torn, vii, viii.
St. Andrew 8t. John, Rev. F. A. Chattapani (from the
Burmese). The feud between the owls and the crows.
Triib. Or. Rec. 3. i, 72' sq.
Id. Buddhist Jataka. Laludayijataka. Ibid. 3. i, 175 sq.
(from the Mahajanaka).
Id. Buddhist Jatakas from the Burmese. Maha Kap-
pinna. Ibid. 3. ii, 35 sq.
Id. Bhuridattajatakavatthu. J.R.A.S. n.s. 1892, pp.
77-139 (cf. Id. Bhuridatta. Folk-lore ii, 90-98, 1891).
*Id. Mahajanakajataka, transl. Ind. Magazine, 1887.
Steele, Th. An eastern love-story. Kusa Jatakaya.
London, 1871.
Tawney, C. S. Indian Folk-lore notes from the Pali
jatakas and the Kathasaritsagara. Jour, of Philol, xii,
112-126 (1883).
Id. The Buddhist original of Chaucer's ' Pardoner's Tale.'
Ibid, xii, 203-208.
Id. Mahakapijataka [identification of a Bharhut relief,
tal. xxx, 4, with Jat. 407]. Proc. As. Soc. Beng. 1891,
pp. 120-22.
Thiessen, J. H. Die Legende von Kisagotami. Eine
literarhistor. Untersuchung. Breslau, 1880.
Upham, E. The Mahavansi, the Raja Ratnacari, and the
Raja-vali, etc. London, 1833, vol. iii, 266-313. Particulars
referring to the five hundred and fifty tales, forming the
celebrated Buddhist book, termed the Pansiyas Panas Jutaka,
or incarnations of the Budhu Gaudma, with translations of
several of the stories.

356 DR. D'OLDENBUKG "ON THE BUDDHIST JATAKAS."
Id. The History and Doctrine of Budhism, etc. London,
1829, pp. 25-40. The transmigration of souls and the Jutakas
of Budha (three Jatakas: Bambadat-rajah, Useeratanam-
rajah, "Wessantara-rajah, with five tables of illustrations).
* Warren, 8. J. Two Bas-reliefs of the Stupa of Barhut.
Wasiliev, W. Remarks on Buddhism, v and vi, Zap.
Imp. Ak. Nauk. t. 62, 25-37 (1890). [Russian.]
Weber, A. Ueber das Makasa jatakam [44], Mon. Ber.
Berl. Ak. 15 Apr. 1858, pp. 265-275; cf. Ind. Stud, iv,
387-389; Ind. Str. i, 228-332.
Id. Ueber das Ramayana. Berlin, 1871 (Abh.B.A. 1870).
Wenzel, H. A Jataka tale from the Tibetan. J.R.A.S.
M.S. XX, pp. 503-511; Corr. ibid. XXI, p. 179.
Westergaard, N. L. Codices Indici Bibliotheca Regia
Havniensis Havniae, 1846, pp. 36-42 (Jatakassa Attha-
vannana).
* Vikremasinghe {N.D.M. de Zilva). List of the Pansiya-
parasjataka. Jour. Ceyl. Br. No. 35 (for 1887).
Zachariae, Th. Die Sechzehnte Erzahlung der Vetala-
pancavimsati. Bezz. Beitr. iv, 360-383.
Zoysa, L. de. Notes on certain Jatakas relative to the
sculptures recently discovered in Northern India. Jour.
Ceyl. Br. x, 175-218, No. 35 (1887). Colombo, 1889.
With an asterisk are denoted those works which we have not seen ourselves.
St. Petersburg, October, 1892.
Note.—Prof. E. Leumami, of Strassburg, has communicated to me a few
additional notes in reference to the Jain parallels (see pp. 309, 310), and also
some corrections to the Prakrit verses, p. 349 sq. below, all of which appear
there signed with his initials (E.L.).—H.W.
Note.—It does not seem out of place to mention here that Dr. D'Oldenburg
has given a short bibliography of works on the Indian collection of tales
'Brhatkatha' (and Katha-Sarit-Sagara) in vol. iii. of the same Journal; and,
in vol. iv., a review of Weber's Ueb. die Samyaktvak. (see above, p. 341), also
with a bibliographical list of works relating to this literature.—H.W".