JATAKAMALA
(GARLAND OF BIRTH-STORIES),
TRANSLATED FROM TUB ORIGINAL SANSKRIT
BY
J. S. SPEYER.
Introductory
S
1.' Grand and glorious, praised and charming, comprising
excellent virtues and thereby auspicious are the wonderful
exploits which the Muni performed in previous births. Them
I will devoutly worship with the haudful of flowers of my poem.
2—3. *By those praiseworthy deeds the way is taught that is
leading to Buddhahood ; they are the landmarks of that way.
Further even the hard-hearted may be softened by them.
The holy stories may also obtain a greater attractiveness.//
So I considered and for the benefit of meu, by treating of
the extraordinary facts of the Highest One in the world in
a manner which is in accordance with the course of facts as
recorded by Scripture and Tradition, I will attempt to find
a favourable audience for my own genius.
4. Him, whose beautiful exercise of virtues, while acting
for the sake of others, no one could imitate, though bent
on self-interest; Him, the blaze of whose glory is characterized
by the well-deserved name of the All-Knowing; Him the
Incomparable together with the Law and the Congregation
I venerate with bowed head.
* The cipher on the led denotes the number of the stanza. The prose parts of
the original are indicated by the absence of the cipher.
5e Volgr. VIII. 10

130 J&TAKAM&lA.
1. THE STORY OP THE TIGBESS.
(vyaghrïjfttakam)
Even in former births the Lord showed His innate, disin-
terested and immense love towards all creatures and identitied
himself with all beings. For this reason we ought to have
the utmost faith in Buddha, the Lord. This will be instanced
by the following great performance of the Lord in a previous
birth, which has been celebrated by my g u r u, a venerator
of the Three Jewels, an authority because of his thorough
study of virtues, and beloved to his own guru by virtue
of his religious practices. '
In the time that the Bodhisattva, who afterwards became
our Lord, benefitted the world by manifold outpourings of
his mercy: gifts, kind words, succour and similar blameless
deeds of a wisdom-possessing mind, quite in accordance
with the excessive engagements which he had bound him-
self to, he took his birth in a most eminent and mighty
family of brahmans, distinguished by the purity of their
conduct caused by their attachment to their (religious) oblig-
ations. Being purified by the jatakarma and the other
sacraments in due order, he grew up and in a short time,
owing to the innate quickness of his understanding, the
excellent aid in his studies, his eagerness for learning and
his zeal, he obtained the mastership in the eighteen bran-
ches of science and in all the arts which were non incom-
patible with the custom of his family.
5. To the brahmans he became as venerable as Brahma; to
the kshattriyas as venerable as a king; to the masses he
appeared like the Thousand-eyed One * ; to those who longed
for knowledge he was a helpful father.
By the power of the exceedingly good fortune of his des-
tiny (the consequence of merits formerly earned) a large
store of wealth, distinction and fame fell to his share. But
the Bodhisattva took no delight in such things. His thoughts
had been purified by his constant study of the Law and he
•) It does not appear from the wording of the original, whether the guru of
Arya f ilia, praised here, was still alive or not at the time when the Jatakamala
was written.
•) viz. fakra, the Indra or Lord of the Devas. .

181
had become familiar with the idea of renunciating the world.
6. His former behaviour had wholly cleared his mind , he saw
the many kinds of sin which, beset (wordly) pleasures. So lie
shook ofl' the householder's state, as if it were an illness,
and retired to some plateau, which he adorned by his presence.
7. There both by his disattachnient and by his wisdom-bright-
ened tranquillity he confounded the world, which by attachment
to bad business is disinclined to the calmness of the wise.
8. His calmness joined to his frieudliness spread about, it
seems, and filled the hearts of the ferocious animals so, that
they ceased injuring one another and lived like ascetics.
9. By the pureness of his conduct, by his self-control, his
equanimity and his compassion he was dear even to the people
in the world, who were unacquainted with him, in the
same way as people were dear to him.
10. As he wanted little, he did not know the art of hypo-
crisy, and he had abandoned the desire for gain, glory and
pleasures. So he caused even the deities to be well-disposed
and affectionate towards him. • • *
11. On the other hand, those whose affection he had gained (in
his former state) by his virtues, hearing of his ascetic life,
left their families and their relations and went up to him
as to Perfect Wisdom itself in order to become his disciples.
12. He taught his disciples, as best he could, trood conduct
(ctla), chastity, purification of the organs of si-nse, constant
attentiveness, disattachment of the world, and the concen-
tration of the mind to the meditation on love (m ait rf) and
• the rest. '
Most of his numerous disciples attained perfection, in con-
sequence of his teaching by which this holy road to salv-
ation was established and people were put on the excellent
path of world-renunciation. Now, the doors of evils being
shut, as it were, but the ways of happiness widely opened
M.Ï :,..like the high roads, the Great-minded One (mahitmil) was
s>: one day rambling along the shrubby caverns of the moun-
-H: -• tain well adapted to the practising of meditation (yoga),
.... in order to enjoy at his ease this existing order of things.
Ajita, his disciple at that time, accompanied him. . .. .
i The four or five — bhftvanfts or «meditative rites» are meant. See Rhys
Davids, £uAtot»m p. 170; Kern, #et fiucWA'jmcI , 395.

132 J&TAKAH&L&.
18—15. Now, in a precipice underneath the mountain , he beheld
a young tigress that could scarcely move from the place, her
strength being exhausted by the labour of whelping. Her
sunken ejes and her emaciated belly betokened her hunger,
and she was regarding her own offspring as food. Thirsting
for the milk of her udders, her whelps had come near her,
trusting their mother and fearless, but she brawled at them,
as if they were strange to her, with a prolonged harsh roaring.
16—17. On seeing her, the Bodhisattva, though composed of mind,
was shaken with compassion by the suffering of his fellow-
creature , as the lord of the mountains • is by an earthquake. It
is a wonder, how the compassionate, be their coustancy ever
so evident in the greatest sufferings of their own , are touched
by the grief, however small, of another!
And pity made him utter, agitation made him repeat
to his pupil the following words, manifesting his excellent
nature; «My dear, my dear,
18. "behold the worthlessness of the sains dra!* This animal
seeks to feed on her own young ones. Hunger causes her
to transgress love's law.
19. »Alas! Pie upon the ferocity of' self-love, that makes a mother
wish to make her meal with the bodies of her own offspring!
20. «Who may foster (lie foe, whose name is self-love, whose
constraint is able to compel to actions like this?
«Go, then, quickly and look about for some means to
appease her hunger, that she may not injure her young ones
and herself. I too will endeavour to avert her from that
rash act." The disciple promised to do so and went oft* in
search of food. Yet the Bodhisattva had but used a pretext
to turn him off. He considered thus:
21. «Why should 1 search after meat, got from the body
of another, whilst the whole of my own body is available?
Not only is the getting of the meat in itself a matter of
chance, but I would also lose the opportunity of doing ray duty.
^Further,
22—24. this body being brute, frail, pithless, ungrateful, always
impure and a source of suffering, he is not wise who should
i Cp. *n/rn, p. 10.
' SaipsAra, the most common designation of the sequence of repeated existences,
the whirlpool of life, to escape which nirvaga is sought after.

138
not rejoice at its being spent for the benefit of another.
There are but two things that make one disregard the grief
of another: attachment to one's own pleasure and the absence
of the power of helping. But I cannot have pleasure, whilst
another grieves, and I fct>« the power to help; why should
I be indifferent? And if, while being able to succour, I
were to show indifference even to the grief that is over-
whelming a harmful being, I should feel, I suppose, as
one who has done evil, the remorse of conscience which
burns like shrubs caught by a great fire.
25. «Therefore, I shall kill my miserable body by casting
it down into the precipice and with my corpse I shall
preserve the tigress from killing her young ones and the
young ones from dying by the teeth of their mother.
//Even more, by doing so
26—29. »I set an example for those who long for the good of
the world; I excite the feeble; 1 rejoice those who under-
stand, the meaning of charity; 1 stimulate the virtuous;
T cause disappointment to the great hosts of Mara, but
gladness to those who love the Buddha-virtues; I confonnd
the people who are absorbed in selfishness and subdued by
egotism and lusts; T give a token of faith to the followers
of the most excellent of roads,' but I make those astonish
who use to sneer at deeds of charity; I clear the highway
to Heaven iu a manner pleasing the charitable among men;
and finally that wish which I longed for «when may I do
good to others even with the offering of my own limbs?", I shall
accomplish it and so acquire erelong Complete Wisdom.
30—31. vVerily, as surely as this determination does not proceed
from ambition, nor from passion for glory, nor is a means
of gaining Heaven or royal dignity, as surely as 1 do not
.'•'!"'' ' care even for supreme and everlasting bliss for myself, but
for securing the benefit of others: * as surely may I gain
by it the power of taking away and imparting tor ever at
the same time the world's sorrow and the world's happiness,
just as the sun takes away darkness and imparts light;
') The excellent path, taught by the Buddhas, is meant. Here it is named
y&navara, above it was styled sugati.
') The original is here rather ambiguous, for we may also translate: «but for
the attainment of the highest object».

i'34
32. "Whether T will be remembered, when virtue is seen to
be practised, or made conspicuous, when the tale of my
exploit is told; in every way may I constantly benefit the
world and promote its happiness!//
33'. After so making up his mind, delighted at the idea of
destroying even his life for securing the benefit of others,
to the amazement even of the calm minds of the deities —
he gave up his body.
The sound of the Bodhisattva's body falling down stirred
the curiosity and the anger of the tigress. She desisted
from her disposition of making a slaughter of her whelps
and cast her eyes all around. As soon as she perceived
the lifeless body of the Bodhisattva, he rushed hastily upon
it and commenced to devour it.
But his disciple, coming back without meat, as he had
got none, not seeing his teacher, looked about for him.
Then he beheld that young tigress feeding on the lifeless body
of the Bodhisattva. And the admiration of the extraordinary
greatness of the feat driving back his emotions of sorrow
and pain, he may have given a fair utterance • to his vener-
ation for his teacher's fondness of virtue by this monologue:
34—37. '/O, how merciful the Great-minded One was to people
afflicted by distress! How indifferent He was to His own welfare!
How He has brought to superiority the virtuous conduct of
the pious, and dashed to pieces the splendid glory of their
••• '• adversaries! How he has displayed, clinging to virtue, His
heroic, fearless and immense love! How His body, which
was already precious for its virtues, has now on a sudden
turned into a vessel of the highest veneration! And although
by His innate kindness He was as patient as Earth, how
intolerant He was of the suffering of others! And how
much my own roughness of mind does appear by the con-
trast of this splendid act of heroism of His! Verily, the
creatures are not to be commiserated now, having got Him
as a Protector, and Manmatha *, forsooth, is now sighing
• away, being disturbed and in dread of defeat.
>) The text has yobheta, not ac.obb.ata, as might have been expected.
') Manmatha, Kama, Kandarpa and the other names of the god of seusual love
and pleasure are common equivalents of Mara, the Satan of the Buddhists.

185
//Tn every way, veneration be to that illustrious Great Being
(inahasattva), of exuberant mercy, of boundless goodness,
the refuge of all creatures, yea that Bodhisattva for the
sake of the creatures." Aud he told the matter over to his
fellow-disciples.
38. Then, showing by their countenance their admiration for his
deed, his disciples and also the Gaudharvas, the Yakshas,
the snakes and the chiefs of the Devas covered the ground
that held the treasure of his bones, with a profusion of
wreaths, clothes, jewel ornaments and sandal powder.
So, then, even in former births the Lord showed His
innate, disinterested and immense love towards all creatures
and identified Himself with all creature:» For this reason
we ought to have the utmost faith in Buddha, the Lord.
And this is to be propounded too. Faith in Buddha the
Lord having arisen, the utmost delight must be produced ; so
our faith will have its sanctuary. Likewise we must listen
with attention to the preaching of the Law, 9ince it lias
been brought to us by means of hundreds of difficult hard-
ships. ' And in sermons on the subject, of compassion, thus
' is to be said: win this manner compassion, moving us to
act for the benefit of others, is productive of exceedingly
excellent nature." *
The story of the tigress, which does not appear in the Pali Jataka
nor in the Cariyapitaka, is alluded to in the Bodhisattvavadanakalpalata
of Kshemendra 2, 108. There the Bodhisattva, on the occasion of a
similar fact ol sell-denial and heroism in a later birth, says
purft. drshtvodayatam vyaglirin» kshut kshaTna-m potabha-
k.shave
108. tadrakshayai maya dattaip cariram avicftrioa.
gibijanmani candhaya dattam netrayugam mayi
109. rakshitacca svadehena kapotalj cyenakad bhayat. '
And in the 51th pallava the story is narrated at length, vs. 28—50.
It differs in some points from ours. The Bodhisattva, who at that time
was a brahman, named Satyavrata and was leadings ascetic life, though
a youth, takes the determination of giving up his body to the tigress, on
seeing her being with young, on the seventh day before her whelping,
as he foresees that otherwise hunger and infirmity will put her into
the necessity of devouring her whelps. No precipice is mentioned, nor
a disciple, who witnessed the deed.
' dushkaracatasamudanitatvat, cp. Divyavadana, p. 490, 14.foil.
• viz. as far as gathering merit, the consequence o!' good actions, improves our nature.
• Cp. Kathasarits. 7, 88 foil, and Tawney in his translation I, p. 45, with his
note on p. 46.

186 jaTAKAM&La.
THE STORY OF THE KING OF THE QIBIS.
(Qibij fttakam)
The preaching of the excellent Law must be listened
to with attention. By means of hundreds of difficult hard-
ships the Lord has obtained this excellent Law for us. Here
is another example.
In the time, when this our Lord was still a Bodhisattva,
in consequence of his possessing a store of meritorious actions,
collected by practising them from time immemorial, he once
was a king of the Qibis. By his deference for the elders
whom he was wont to honour from his very childhood, and
by his attachment to good manners, he gained the affection
of his subjects; owing to his natural quickness of intellect he
enlarged his mind by learning many sciences; he was dis-
tinguished by energy, discretion, majesty and power and
favoured by fortune. He ruled his subjects as if they were
nYs own enii'uren.
1. The different seis of virtues, that accompany each member
of the triad (of dharma, art ha and kam a) gladly took
, ; their residence, it seems, with him all together; and yet they
did not lose of their splendour in spite of the disturbance
which might occur from their contrasts.
2. And felicity, that is like a deception to those who
have attained a high rank by wrong means, like grievous
calamity to the fool, like intoxicating liquor to the feeble-
minded — to him it was true happiness, as is indicated
by its name.
3. Noble-hearted, full of compassion and wealthy, this best
of kings rejoiced at seeing the faces of the mendicants beaming
with satisfaction and joy by the attainment of the wished
for objects.
Now this king, in accordance with his propensity for
charity, had caused alms-halls to be constructed, that were
provided with every kind of utensils, goods and grains.
In this way he poured out the raiu of his gifts, not unlike a
cloud of the krta yuga.' And he distributed them in such
viz. the golden age of Hindu mythology.

137
a manner, as well became the loftiness of his mind, sup-
plying the wants of each according to his desire, with
deference and kindness and without delay; whereby he enhanced
the benefit of his gifts. He bestowed food and drink on
those who were in need of food and drink; likewise he dis •
pensed couches, seats, dwellings , meals, perfumes, wreaths,
silver, gold etc. to those who wanted them. Then, the fame
of the king's sublime munificence spreading abroad, people
who lived in different regions and parts of the world went
to that country, with surprise and joy in their hearts.
4. The mendicants, when letting the whole world of men pass
before their mind's eye, did not find in others an oppor-
tunity of putting forth their requests; to him it was that
they went up in crowds with gladdened faces, quite as wild
elephants go up to a great lake.
The king, on the other hand , when beholding them , whose
minds were glad with the hope for gain, flocking together
from all directions, though the outward appearance of that
mendicant people in travelling dress was all but handsome , —
5. nevertheless he received them, as if they were friends
come back from abroad, his eyes wide-opened with joy; he
listened to their requests, as if good news were reported to
him, and after giving, Aw contentment surpassed that of
the recipients.
fi. The voices of the beggars spread about the perfume of
the fame of his munificence and so abated the pride of
the other kings. In a similar way the scent of the juice
that runs out of the temples of the sceut-elephant in rut,
being scattered by the wind, causes the bees to neglect the
like fluid of the other elephants. '
One day the king, making the tour of his alins-halls,
noticed the very small number of supplicants staying there
in consequence of the wants of the mendicant people being
supplied. When he considered this, he was uneasy, because
his habit of almsgiving could not well proceed.
7. The indigent, when coming to him , quenched their thirst
') In the original this simile is expressed by the rhetorical figure, called c les ha.
The word dftna means botli the «fluid" in question and «charity»; ma da is an
other word for that fluid, but it signifies also «pride»; arthin = «desirous of,
begging» is said of the mendicants as well as of the bees.

138 J&TAKAM&La.
[for the desired boons], not he his [thirst for giving], when
meeting with them. His passion for charity was so great,
that no requester by the extent of his request could outdo
his determination of giving.
Then this thought arose within him: wO, very blessed
are those most excellent among the pious, to whom the
mendicant utter their desires with confidence and without
restraint so as to ask even their limbs! 15ut to me, as if
they were terrified by harsh words of refusal, they show only
boldness in requesting my wealth.
8. Now Earth, becoming aware of that exceedingly lofty thought,
how her lord holding on to charity had stopped the very
attachment to his own Hesh , trembled as a wife would do,
who loves her husband. .i,.,r, ^
The surface of the earth being shaken, Sumeru, the lord
of the mountains radiant with the shine of its manifold gems ,
began to waver. Qakra, the Lord of the Devas, inquiring
into the cause of this wavering, understood that it was the
sublime thought of that king which produced the shivering
of Earth's surface; and as he was taken up with amazement,
he entered into this reflection:
9. «Mow is this? Does this king beur his miud so high and
feel so great a rejoicing at giving away in chanty as to
conceive the thought of girding his resolution to give with
the strong determination of parting with his own limbs?
*Well, 1 will try him."
Now the king was sitting (on his throne, in his hall)
in the midst of the assembly. The usual summons by pro-
clamation had been given, inviting anybody who was in
need of anything; stores of wealth: silver, gold, jewels,
were being disclosed by the care of the treasurer; boxes,
tilled up with various kinds of clothes, were being uncovered;
various excellent carriages, the yokes of which enclosed the
necks of different well-trained beasts of draught, were being
made to advance; and the mendicants were crowding in.
Among them Qakra, the Lord of the Devas, having assumed
the shape of an old and blind brahman, drew the attention
of the king. On him the king fixed his kind and mild
looks which were expressive of compassion and friendliness,
and he seemed witli them to go to his encounter and to

J&TAKAMftlA.
embrace him. The royal attendants requested him to say
what lie was wanting for, but he drew near the king and
after uttering his blessing addressed him with these, words:
10. "A blind, old man I have come hither from afar begging
thy eye, o highest of kings. Fur the purpose of ruling
the world's regular course one eye may be sufficient, o lotus-
eyed monarch."
Though the Bodhisattva experienced an extreme delight
at his heart's desire being realized, a doubt arose within
him as to whether the brahman had really said so or, this
thought being always present to his mind , himself had fancied
so, and since he longed after hearing the very sweet words
of the eye being asked, he thus spoke to the eye-asker:
11. '/Who has instructed thee, illustrious brahman, to come
here and to ask me one eye ? No one, it is said, will
easily part with his eye. Who is he, that thinks the con-
trary of me?"
Qakra, the Lord of the Devas in the disguise of a brahman ,
knowing the intention of the king, answered:
12. //It is Qakra. His statue, instructing me to ask thee
thy eye, has caused me to come here. Now make real his
opinion and my hope by giving me thy eye."
Hearing the name of Qakra, the king thought: «Surely,
through divine power this brahman shall regain his eye-sight
in this way", and he spoke in a voice, the clear sound of
which manifested his joy :
13. "Brahman, I will fulfil thy wish which has prompted
thee to come here. Thou de.sirest one eye from me, 1 will
give thee both.
14. //After I have adorned thy face with a pair of bright
lotuslike eyes, go thy way, putting the bystanders first into
doubt as to thy identity, but soon amazing them by the
knowledge of it, since they will have witnessed the fact."
The king's counsellors , understanding that he had decided
to part with his eyes, were perplexed and agitated, and
sadness afflicted their minde. They said to the king:
15_16. //We beg Your Majesty's pardon for observing that your
great fondness of charity makes you overlook your being
on the wrong track that leads to evil. Desist, desist from
your purpose; do not give up your eye-sight! Tor the sake

140 jaTAKAM&La.
of one twice-born man you must not disregard all of us.
Do not burn with the fire of sorrow your subjects, to whom
you have hitherto procured comfort and prosperity.
17—18. //Money, the source of opulence; brilliant gems; milch
cows; carriages and trained beasts of draught; vigorous
elephants of graceful beauty; dwellings fit for all seasons,
. resounding with the noise of the anklets,' and by their
brightness surpassing the autumn-clouds: such are boons
fit to be bestowed. Them give, not your eye-sight, o you
who are the only eye of the world.
«Moreover, great king, you must but consider this:
19. //How can the eye of one person be put in the face of
another? If, however, divine power may effect this, why,
-••.[..>., then, your eye is wanted for?
«Further, Majesty,
20. »Of what use is eye-sight to a poor man ? That he might
witness the abundance of others? Well then, give him
money; do not commit an act of rashness!"
Then the king addressed his ministers in soft and conci-
liating terms:
ill. «He who after promising to give makes up his mind to
withhold his gift, such a one puts on again the bond of
cupidity which he had cast off before.
22. //He who after promising to give, does not keep his pro-
mise, being driven from his resolution by avarice, is to be
held for the worst of men.
28. //Who after strengthening the hope of the mendicants
by engaging himself to give, pays them with harsh words
of refusal, for him there is no expiation.
«And with respect to your asserting //is divine power
itself not sufficient to restore the eye-sight to that man?"
you should be taught this.
24. «That different means are wanted to carry purposes into
effect, is well-known, indeed. For this reason even Destiny,
though a deity, needs some means or other.
«Therefore, you must not exert yourselves to obstruct my de-
termination of accomplishing an extraordinary deed of charity."
' Not only the houses, therefore, are meant, but also the (female) attendance;
in other terms, the epithet is indicative of the richness and magnilicenoe of the
habitations. • . •..-.-•

J&TAKAMatl. 141
The ministers answered : «We have only ventured to
observe to Your Majesty that you ought to give away goods and
grains and jewels, not your eye; when saying this, we do
not entice Your Majesty to wrong."
The king said:
25. «The very thing asked for must be given. A gift not
wished for does not afford pleasure. Of what use is water
to one carried off by the stream ? For this reason, I shall
give to this man the object he requests."
After this, the first minister who more than the others
had got into the intimate confidence of the king, allowing
himself through his sollicitude to overlook the respect due
to the king, spoke thus: "Pray, do it not.
26. «How is this? You are holding an empire, which is
vying with the riches of Qakra, to the attainment of which
no one can aspire without a large amount of penance and
meditation, and through the possession of which numerous
sacrifices may pave the way to glory and heaven; and you
do not care for it! and you are willing to give away both
of your eyes! Where on earth has there been seen such a
way of proceeding?
27. «By your sacrifices you have gained a place among the
celestial gods, your fame is shining far and wide, your feet
reflect the splendour of the head-ornaments of the kings
(your vassals) — what then is it that you long for to give
up your eye-sight?"
But the king answered that minister in a gentle tone:
28. »Tt is not the realm of the whole earth , whicli T am striving
for in this manner, nor is it heaven, nor final extinction,
nor glory, but with the intention of becoming a Saviour of
the World I now provide that this man's labour of asking
be not fruitless."
Then the king ordered one eye of his, the lovely bright-
ness of which appeared like a petal of a blue lotus, to be
extirpated after the precepts of the physicians gradually and
intact, and with the greatest gladness he made it handed
over to the beggar, who asked it. Now Qakra, the Lord of
the Devas, by the power of magic produced an illusion of
such a kind that the king and his bystanders saw that eye
filling up the eye-hole of the old brahman. When the king

142 J&TAKAMUL&.
beheld the eye-asker in the possession of one unclosed eye,
his heart expanded with the utmost delight, and he pre-
sented him with the other eye too. .-.; Vinrw
29. The eyes being given away, the king's visage looked like
a lotus-pond without lotuses, yet it bore the expression of
satisfaction, not shared however by the citizens. On the
other hand, the brahman was seen with sound eyes.
:i(). In the inner apartments of the palace as well as in the
town, everywhere tears of sorrow moistened the ground. But
Qakra was transported with admiration and satisfaction,
seeing the king's unshaken intention of attaining Supreme
Wisdom (sambodhi).
And in this state of mind he entered into this reflexion:
31. //What a constancy! What a goodness and a longing for
the good of the creatures! Though I witnessed the fact,
-..,•..' I can scarcely believe it.
//It is not right, then , that this person of marvellous
goodness should endure this great hardship for a long time.
J wiJJ toy to reader him hi* e/e-.«i^ht b/ showing him the
way for it."
Afterwards, when time had healed the wounds caused
by the operation, and lessened and almost vanished the
„;,, ,• sorrow of the inhabitants of the palace, the town and the
...j-.:.'v country, it happeved one day that the king, desirous of
solitary retirement, was sitting with crossed legs (in the
attitude of meditation) in his garden on the border of a
jji pond of lotuses. That spot was beset by fair and fine trees,
bent down by the weight of their liowers; swarms of bees
were humming; a gentle, fresh and odoriferous wind was
breathing agreeably. Suddenly Qakra, the Lord of the Devas,
presented himself before the king. Being asked who he
was, he answered:
„• 8$a. wi; am Qakra, the Lord of the Devas, I have come up
to you."
Thereupon the king welcomed him and said that he waited
for his orders. After being so complimented, he again ad-
dressed the king: ....,'.;
«Choose some boon, holy prince (rajarshi); say on what
do you desire?"

Now the kijig who was ever wont to give and was not
in the habit of treading the way of miserable begging, ans-
wered so as to express his astonishment and his haughtiness.
88—84. «Great is my wealth, Qakra, my army is large and stroug;
my blindness, however, makes death welcome to me. It is
impossible for me, after supplying the wants of the mendic-
ants, to see their faces brightened by gladness and joy;
for this reason, o Tndra, I love death now."
Qakra said: «Away with that resolution! Such events as
have befallen you are not met with but by excellent persons.
But this you must tell me:
85. '/It is the mendicants who have caused you to come in
this miserable condition; how is it that your mind is oc-
cupied with them even now ? Say on! do not hide the
truth from me in order that you may forthwith get rid of
your misfortune."
The king replied: »Why do you insist upon my boasting
myself? Hear, however, Lord of the Devas.
86. «As surely as the supplicatory language of begging people
now as well a« before is as pleasing to my ears as the
sound of benedictions, as surely may one eye appear to me!"
No sooner had the king pronounced these words than
by the power of his firm veracity and his excellent store
of meritorious actions one eye appeared to him, resembling
a piece of a lotus petal, encompassing a pupil like sapphire.
Rejoiced at this miraculous appearance of his eye, the king
again spoke to Qakra:
37. "And as surely as after giving away both eyes to him
who asked me one, my mind knew no other feeling but the
utmost delight, as surely may 1 obtain also the other eye P
The king had hardly finished, when there appeared to
him another eye, the rival as it were of the first one.
38—40. Upon this the earth was shaken with its mountains; the
ocean flowed over its borders; the drums of the celestials
spontaneously uttered deep-toned and pleasing sounds; the
sky in all directions looked placid and lovely; the sun shone
with pure brightness as it does in autumn '; a great number
' It was spring, when the miracle happened, as is to be inferred from the flowers
being mentioned above.

144 J&TAKAH&liL
of various flowers, tinged by the sandal powder which was
whirling around, fell down from heaven; the celestials,
including apsarasas and ganas came to the spot, their
eyes wide opened with amazement; there blew an agreeable
wind of extreme loveliness; gladness expanded in the minds
of the creatures.
41—43. From all parts there were heard voices of praise, uttered
by crowds of beings endowed with great magic power.
Taken up with joy and admiration, they glorified the great
exploit of the king in such exclamations: »Oh, what a lo-
ftiness! what a mercy! see the purity of his heart, how
great it is! oh, how little he cares for his own pleasures!
Hail to thee, renowned one for thy constancy and valour!
The world of creatures has recovered their protector in
thee, forsooth, as the lustre of thy eye-lotuses has again
expanded! Surely , the stores of merit are solid treasures!
After a long time Righteousness has obtained an intense
victory, indeed!"
Then Qakra applauded him «very well, very well!" and
spoke again :
44—45. //Your intention was not hidden from me, pure-hearted king;
in this very conviction, then. I have rendered you these
eyes of yours. And through them you will have the un-
encumbered power of seeing in all directions over one hun-
dred of yojanas, even though mountains were to obstruct
the sight.»
Having said so, Qakra disappeared on the very spot.
Then the Bodhisattva, followed by his oflicials, • whose
wide-opened and scarcely winking eyes indicated the astonish-
ment that filled their minds, went up in procession to his
excellent capital. That town exhibited a festival attire,
being adorned with hoisted flags and manifold banners, the
citizens looking on and the brahmans praising the monarch
with hails and benedictions. When he had seated himself
in his audience-hall, in the midst of a great crowd, made
' The sudden appearance of these officials and ministers is somewhat strange
here. The pali Jataka may account for it. «At the same time, it is said there
(IV, p. 411, line 1 and 2 of Fausböll's ed.), that [the eyes] reappeared, the whole
attendance of the king (sabba raja pa rise) was present by the power of Sakka.»

145
up of the ministers in the first place, of bralunans and
elders, townsmen and countrymen, all of whom had come
to express their respectful congratulations; he preached the
Law to them, taking for his text the account of his own
experience.
46—48. "Who in the world, then , should be slow in seeking
to do good to the mendicants with his wealth, who has
beholden how I have gained these eyes of mine, endowed
with divine power, in consequence of my merit of charity?
Tn the circumference of one hundred of yojanas I see every
thing though hidden by many mountain» as distinctly as
if it were near. What means for attaining bliss is superior
to charity, accompanied by commiseration with others and
modesty? since I by giving away my human eye-sight have
got already in this world a superhuman and divine vision.
49. '/Understanding tliis Qibis, make your riches fruitful by
gifts and by spending. ' This is the path which is leading
to glory and future happiness both in this world and in
the next.
50. '/Wealth is a contemptible thing, because it is pithless;
yet it has one virtue, that it can be given away by him
who aims at the welfare of the creatures; for if given away,
it becomes a treasure (nidhfma), otherwise its ultimate
object is only death (u i d h a n a)."
So, then, by means of hundreds of difficult hardships the
Lord has obtained this excellent Law for us; for this reason
its preaching is to be heard with attention. This story is
also to be told on account of the highmindedness of the
Tathagata, just as the foregoiug. * Likewise when dis-
coursing about compassion, and when demonstrating the
' The purport of this royal precept may be illustrated by the corresponding
parts of the narrative in the pali Jfttaka. The precept is there given twice, in
prose and in verse, see Fausböll's Jataka IV, p. 411. 22 and H2, 7. In the
prose version the king orders a proclamation to be made by beat of drum,
enjoining his subjects: adatva ma bhunjitthu. In the verse it is said Sivayo
detha danani bhunjatha |datva ca bhutva ca yathanubhavam |
anindita saggam upetha than am. The king praises charity and blames
avarice; wealth is fit, he says, to the purpose of practising almsgiving in the first
place and of being spent secondly, but never to be laid up as a treasure.
') viz. the story of the tigress.
5e Volgr. VIII. "

146
result of meritorious actions appearing already in this world:
*in this manner the merits, gathered by good actions, show
already here (in this world) something like the blossom of
their power, the charming flowers of increasing glory."
The Qibijataka is n". 499 of the pali Jataka, where it is told at full
length and except s;oine trilling discrepancies nearly in the like manner.
But Qüra avoided the hideous particulars of the operation dwelt upon in the
holy text of the Southern Buddhists, nor does he name the physician, who
in the Jataka is called Sivaka. There is a close correspondance between
a great deal of his stanzas and those of the Scripture. Cp. his 10—12
with 1—3 of the .lat.; his 13—14 with Jat. 5—6; his 16—18 with Jat.
7—9; his 21 and 22 with Jat. 10 and 11; his'25 with Jat. 12; his 20 and'27
with Jat. 13; his 28 with Jat. 14. His stanza 32 is nearly the same as
Jat. 20; his 33 nearly the same as Jat. 21. Cp. also jura's st. 36 with
Jat. 23, st. 37 with Jat. 24—'25 and st. 44-49 with Jat. 26—31.
The Cariyapitaka relates the gift of the eyes in 16stanzas, which make
up the n" 8 of the d a n a p a r a m i t a. This redaction which is dif-
ferent from that of the pali Jataka, is confined to the narrative of the
gift; neither its result nor its reward are dealt with in these scripture
verses. But the doctor Siwaka appears in it and also the name of the
capital, Ariftha [= skrt Arishfa].
In the list of the contents of the Avadanakalpalata which
Somendra added to that poem of his father Kshemendra, I do not find
our avadana, unless it will happen to he included in n" 91, which deals
with a king of the Cibis. But the edition which is being published in
the Bibl. Indica is not yet so fir advanced. For the rest, see above the
quotation on page 7.
IJT.
THE STORT OF THE SHALL PORTION OK GRUEL.
(kulmashapindijataka)
Any gift that proceeds from faith of the heart and is
bestowed on a worthy recipient produces a great result;
there does not exist at all anything like a trifling gift of
that nature, as will be taught by the following.
In the time, when our Lord was still a Bodhisattva, he
was a king of Kocala. Though he displayed the royal virtues:
energy, discretion, majesty and the rest in an exceedingly
high degree, the brilliancy of one virtue, his great felicity,
surpassed the others.
His virtues shone the more, as they were embellished by

jftTAKAM;"n.n. 147
his felicity; as the moon-beains do, when autumn exhibits
their splendour.
2. Fortune, who dwelt with him, distributed her wrath and
favour to the other kings in sucli a manner, that she aban-
doned his enemies, however mighty, but like an amorous
woman cherished his vassals.
3. His righteousness, however, prevented his mind from
doing ill; so he did not oppress at all his adversaries. On
the other hand, his affection for his dependents was displayed
in the same degree, as Fortune was disinclined to his foes.
Now one day this king recollected his last previous existence.
Tn consequence of remembering this he felt utterly moved.
He bestowed more than ever gifts in charity — the motive
and essential cause of happiness — on cramanas and brah-
inans, the wretched and the beggars; he fostered unceasingly
his observance of good conduct (cïla); and lie kept strictly
the pos had ha'-restrictions on sabbathdays. Moreover, as he
was eager after bringing his people into the way ol'salvation,
he was in the habit of uttering in his audience-hall as
well as in the inner appartments of his palace with a be-
lieving heart these two stanzas, full of import:
5. "Attending on Buddhas * by paying them honour, how-
soever little, cannot, produce a trifling fruit. So lias been taught
before only by words, now it may be seen. Look at. the
' poshadha in buddhistic Sanskrit = pali uposatha, which is of coui-se
the same word as upavasatha in classic Sanskrit. A fuller form upnshailha
I have met with in the A vadanak alpalatii (G,7W.
«The text has in Su g a tap a r i ca r y a vidyate svalpiknpi, Hie
parallel passage in the pali Jataka may servo as its commentary:
Na kir' atthi anomadassisu
paricariya Buddhesu appikft
It is evident, that in both redactions the Pratyekabuddhas are considered to belong
to the general class of the Buddhas. Though they are different from the Supreme
Buddhas (Samyaksambuddha), they are nevertheless also sugalas or bud-
dhas. Cp. Spence Hardy Manual p. 37—39; Kern Het Buddhism.; I, '204—296.
In stanza 18 of this jataka the purport of these words of the king is rendered by
kshivasraveshu na krtam tanu nama kimcit; therefore,
kshinftsrava - pftli khioasavo «who has extinguished his passions»
is here synonymous with buddha. In a certain sens', then, all wandering
monks, who are earnestly performing their duties as such, may be styled
ibuddhas» , cp. f. i. Suttanipata, S a m m a p a i i b b a j a n i y a s u 11 a vs. 1 '2;
in other terms, buddha is almost = in u n i.

148
great abundance of the fruit, produced by a small portion
of saltless, dry, coarse, reddish brown gruel.
6. «This mighty army of mine with its various chariots and
horses and its dark-blue masses of tierce elephants; the
sovereignty of the whole earth.; great wealth; Fortune's
favour; my noble wife: behold the beauty of the store of
fruit, produced by a small portion of coarse gruel.//
Neither the worthiest among the bralunans nor the foremost
among the townsmen , though tormented with curiosity, ven-
tured to question the king what he meant by these two
stanzas which he was in the habit of reciting every moment.
Now by the king's incessant repeating them the queen also
grew curious; and as she felt less embarrassment because
of her intimacy, one day, the opportunity of entering into
conversation upon this subject presenting itself, she put
this question in full audience to him:
7—8. //Verily, at all times, my lord, you are reciting as if
you were giving vent to the gladness which is within your
heart. But my heart to me is troubled by curiosity at your
speaking so. If, therefore, my person is allowed to hear
it, say on why do you make this utterance, sir. Were it
a secret, you would not proclaim it in this manner;
therefore, it must be a matter of public knowledge that T am
asking you about."
Theu the king cast a mild look of gladness on his queen,
and with a smile-blooming face he spoke:
8—9. //When hearing this utterance of mine without perceiving
its cause, it'is not only you, that are excited by curiosity,
but also the whole of my officials, my town and my zenana
are troubled and disturbed by the desire of knowing the
meaning of it. Listen, then, what I am going to say.
10. "Just as one who awakes from sleep, L remember my
existence, when I lived a servant in this very town.
Although I was keeping good conduct (cila), 1 earned a
sorry livelihood by performing hired labour for people
elevated only because of their wealth.
11. «So one day 1 was about to begin my service for hire,
that abode of toil, contempt and sorrow, striving to sup-
port (my family) and fearing lest I should lack the means
of sustenance myself; when I saw four cramanas with subdued

ja.TAKAMa.La. 149
senses, accompaTiied as it were by the bliss of monkhood ,
going about for alms.
12. »After bowing to them with a mind softened by faith,!
reverentially entertained them in my house with a meal of a
small disli of gruel. Out of that germ has sprung this tree
of greatness, that the glitterings of the crest-jewels of other
kings are now reflected in the dust on my feet.
13. «While keeping my mind on this, T am reciting these
stanzas, my queen, and for this reason I find satisfaction
in doing meritorious actions and receiving holy persons."
Then the queen's face expanded with gladness and sur-
prise. She raised her eyes respectfully to the king, saying:
'/Highly probable, indeed, it is that such a very great
prosperity is the fruit produced by meritorious actions, since
you, being conscious of owing your royalty to a meritorious
action, are so caring for (gathering) merit. For this very
reason you are disinclined to evil actions, disposed to pro-
tect your subjects rightly like a father, and seeking to
earn plenty of merit.
14. '/Shining with the illustrious glory of great charity, com-
manding the kings, your adversaries, who do wait for
your orders, may you for a long time rule with right-
eousness the earth up to its wind-wrinkled ocean-border!
The king said: //Why were this not to be? my queen!
15. „In fact, T will endeavour to keep once more the path
of happiness, the lovely signs of which 1 have noted.
People will love giving, having heard the fruit of charity,
and how should not I be liberal, having experienced this
in myself?"
Now the king, tenderly looking on his queen, beheld her
shining with almost divine splendour, and desiring to know
the reason of that brightness, he said agai)\:
16. //Like the crescent amidst the stars you shine in the midst
of the women. Say, what deed have you done, my dear,
having such a sweet result?"
She replied: »O yes, my lord, 1 too have got some
remembrance of my life in my former birth." Now, as the
king gently entreated her to tell it, she spoke:
17—18. «Like something experienced in my childhood 1 recollect
that being a slave, after giving with devotion to a muni with

150 Jill'AKAM&I.A..
extinguished passions the remnants of one dish, I fell asleep
there, as it were, and aroused from sleep here. By this wholesome
action, my prince, T remember, it is that I have obtained
you for my lord, sharing you with the earth. What you
have said: //surely, no benefit given to holy persons who
have extinguished their passions, can be a small one" —
these very words were then spoken by that muni."
Then the king, perceiving that the assembly was occupied
by feelings of piety and amazement and that the manifest-
ation of the result of merit had roused in their minds a
high esteem of meritorious actions, earnestly pressed on the
audience something like this:
19. '/How is it possible, then, that anybody should not
devote himself to performing meritorious actions by practising
charity and good conduct, after seeing this large and splendid
result of a good action however small? No , that man is
not even worth looking at, who inwrapt in the darkness
of avarice, should decline to make himself renowned for
his gifts, though his wealth be sufficient for that purpose.
20. //If by abandoning in the right manner wealth, once
necessarily to be left and of no use at all, any good quality
may be acquired: who, then, knowing the charm of good
qualities would follow in this matter the path of selfishness?
Many virtues, forsooth, gladness and the rest, being ac-
companied by fame, are founded on charity.
21. ^Almsgiving is a great treasure, indeed, a treasure
which is always with us and is inaccessible to thieves and
the rest.' Almsgiving cleans the heart from the dirt of
the sins of selfishness and cupidity; it is an easy vehicle,
by which to relieve the fatigue of the travel through the
sams&ra; it is our best and constant friend, that seeks
to procure manifold and pleasing comfort for us.
22. //All is obtained by almsgiving, whatever may be wished
for, whether it be abundance of riches or brilliant domination ,
or a residence in the city of the Uevas or beauty of the
body. Who, considering this matter so, should not practise
almsgiving?
28. //Almsgiving, it is said, constitutes the worth of riches;
it is also called the treasure of dominations, the grand
• That is: to (ire, water, seizure from the part of the king. Cp. M0v V, 8.

J&TARAMftLR.
performance of pietj. Even rags for dress given away by
the simple minded, are a well bestowed gift." •
The audience respectfully approved this persuasive discourse
of the king and felt inclined 1o the exercise of charity and
the like.
So any gift that proceeds from faith and is bestowed on
a worthy recipient, produces a great result; there does not
exist at all anything like a trifling gift of that nature. Tor
this reason by giving with a faithful heart to the Congre-
gation of the Holy - — that most excellent ground for cultiv-
ating meritorious actions — one may obtain the utmost
gladness, considering thus: «such blessings and even greater
than these may erelong occur to me too."
This jataka is n» 415 of the pali Jataka, Kausbölls ed. Ill, p. 406—
414. In the main points it is told there in the same way, but the com-
position and some particulars are different. It is added that both reached
heaven alter death. By comparing the stanzas of the pali text with those
of fura it appeal's, that vs. 1 of the pali Jilt, points to a well-nigh
identical redaction of the North.-Buddh. sacred text, which underlies st.
4 ot £ura; his St. 5 is of the same import as pali 2. Up. also his 6
with pali 3, his 10—12 with pali 4—7; his 14—18 correspond more
or less to pali 8—11. Pali 3 has the term ariyacaritam whereas
Qüra says grey a h p a th a m. — Cp. also Divyavadana VII, p. 88 of
Cowell's ed. Not four mendicant monks, but one Pratyekabuddha is the
person on whom the scanty meal is bestowed there.
Kathasarits. 27, 79—105 tells a similar tale of a king of Kocala, named
Dharmadatta and his queen Nagacri. These prove to have been hus-
band and wife also in the former birth. In this redaction of our story
the person of the king is not identified with our Bodhi«attva. In fact,
that tale seems to have nothing to do with Buddhism at all. Their good
action consists in giving away at a time of famine their own scanty
food to a tired brahman who arrived at meal-time as a guest.
' The original text of this stanza is very skilfully wrought, being adorned with
well-chosen homoeotelcuta ending in the syllabes 'dan am, which by itself means
• gift, charity».
' aryasamghe. I prefer to render the term a r y a of Buddhistic writings by
•holy» or «pious» rather than by «noble» or «gentleman»; the latter meaning,
however, appears now and then, f. i. m/ra V, 11.

152 jflTAKAMalii.
IV.
THE STORY OF THE HEAD OF A GUILD.
(creshthijataka)
The pious wish to exercise almsgiving without minding
even perils, who, then, should not be charitable in a
normal condition H This will be taught as follows.
In the time, when our Lord was still a Bodhisattva, he
was a head of a guild. In consequence of the excessive
favour of his destiny and owing to his own great activity
he had acquired a large estate. His fairness and integrity
in commercial transactions procured him the highest esteem
with the people; he was born of an illustrious family; he
had studied various branches of learning and art and by
them purified his mind These qualities and his noble virtues
caused him to be honoured by the king. As he was always
keeping the precept of almsgiving, he shared his opulence
with the people.
1. The mendicants, rejoiced in their hearts, praised his
name far and wide, so as to make spread abroad in every
direction his high reputation of the utmost liberality.
2. With him, no one indigent was floating on the swing
of doubt as to whether he were to give or not. Trusting
in this renowned beuefactor, the mendicants were bold enough
to put forth freely their wants.
8. And he, for his part, did not keep his wealth from them ,
neither for his owii pleasures nor striving to emulate others,
nor overcome by avarice. It was impossible for him to see
the suffering of any mendicant, • and for this reason he.
avoided saying »no" to them.
One day, at mealtime, when the Great Being had just
bathed and anointed himself', and a complete dinner made
up of' various dishes of' hard and soft food and the rest,
dressed by skilled and excellent cooks and so prepared as
to please by their colour, smell, taste, touch etc., was
' Instead of the corrupt reading of the mss. sa tvarthi' I read sarvv&rthi'.
By the bye I remark that in stanza '2 "praiiayArthivargah is an obvious
misprint; it is to be written "praoayo rthi". In stanza 4 prapamA" is likewise
due to an error of the printer; read p rag am A".

158
served in, a mendicant came near his house. It was a
Pratyekabuddha who by the tire of his knowledge had
burned away all the fael of innate evil passions and now
desired to increase the merit of the Bodhisattva. lie placed
himself iu the gate-way.
4. There he stood without apprehension, without agitation ,
looking firmly and quietly to no greater distance before him
than the length of a yoke ' in a quiet attitude, holding
his lotus-white fingers clasped on his almsbowl.
Now Mara, the Wicked One, could not bear the Bodhi-
sattva enjoying that bliss of almsgiving. In order to put
an obstacle in his way, he created by magic between the
Reverend and the threshold of the entrance-door a very
deep hell, measuring several fathoms in width. It offered a
dreadful sight, accompanied with awful sounds; tremulous
flames were burning terribly within; it contained many hun-
dreds of men in great agony.
In the mean while the Bodhisaltva, seeing the Pratyeka-
buddha come in want of alms, said to his wife: //my dear,
go yourself and give an abundant portion of food to the
holy man." She said she would do so and went oil" with
excellent hard and soft food, but beholding the hell near
the gate-way, she suddenly turned on her heels, terror-struck
and with bewildered looks. When her husband asked her,
what was the matter, she could hardly tell it; the sudden
fright had almost barred her throat. As the Bodiiisattva
however was uneasy at the thought that this holy man
might turn back from his house without receiving his begged
meal, he did not heed what she told him, but taking the
excellent hard and soft food, he went himself desiring to
fill with it the almsbowl of the Great-Minded One. When
he arrived near the gate-way, he saw that most dreadful
hell between. And whilst he considered what could be the
meaning of this, Mara, the Wicked One, went out of
the house-wall, and showing his divine and marvellous
shape, he stood in the air, and as if he wished to do good
i See Lalitavistara p. 230 infra, Spence Hardy Eastern Monachism,
p. 70 and Kern Het li u d d h i s in e II, p. G8, especially note '2; the supposition
put forward there is conlirined by our text.

154
to the Borihisattva, he spoke: «Householder, this is the
great hell, named Mahfiraurava.
5. "Here is the abode—an abode, out of which it is difficult
to escape— of those who allured by the praising voices of the
beggars, are eager for giving because of a vicious passion for
charity. In this hell they must stay for many thousands of years.
6. «Material prosperity (art ha) is the principal cause of the
world's regular striving after the triad of objects. ' Who
injures art ha, does injure righteousness (d harm a) too.»
How is it possible, then, that the injurer of righteousness
by destroying material prosperity, should not stay in hell?
7. '/You have also sinned, being attached to charity and
destroying your wealth, which is the root of dharma.
Consequently this flame-tongued hell, that looks like the
face of Narakautaka ', has come to your encounter in order
to devour you.
8. //Now then, refrain from giving, lest you immediately fall
down and share the fate of those almsgivers, who are
shrinking away from ache and are weeping in a miserable
manner.
9. //The recipients, on the other hand, who have ceased
from the bad custom of giving, obtain the rank of Devas.
Therefore, desist from your passion for charity, whicli
obstructs the way that leads to heaven, and do rather apply
yourself to restraint." *.
The Bod'iisattva however knew him: '/Surely, this is
' viz. the well-known trivarga, made up of dharma, artha and k&ma
(sensual pleasure). Cp. jut. II, stanza 1.
' The idea which underlies this assertion is often met with in brahmanical
literature. If practising dharma is the same thing as performing the sacritices
to the deities, material prosperity may be justly slyled the foundation-ground or
substrate of dharma; for the right performance of sacrifices requires the pos-
session of goods.
' Narak&ntaka is Vishfui, who is told to have vanquished in a battle and
killed the demon Naraka, a brother to Kfihu and Namuci, being born from ihe
same parents, Vipracitti and Simhika. See Vishpupur&ua IV, ch. '29, p. 581
of Wilson's translation.
* The Evil One uses purposely ambiguous expressions. The worthy recipients of
the gifts are indeed on the way that leads to salvation; and the «restraint»
(s a in yarn a) he recommends, may imply the meaning of the self-restraint and
wold-renunciation of the monks. The Bodhisattva in his well-turned answer takes
care to keep the same ambiguous word (see stanza "15 samya mayishyat&pi).

155
an enterprise of the. Evil One to thwart my almsgiving."
And understanding so, he made, forsooth, a vigorous
reply, yet in accordance with his firm attachment to virtue,
without breaking modesty and kindness of words. He spoke
thus to him:
10—12. «It is with respect to my welfare, that you have had
the kindness to show me the right way '. It is, indeed,
most becoming in divine beings to show by their actions
their skill in feeling compassion with others. Nevertheless,
it would be fit to take that path of quietude before sin have
appeared or immediately after its first symptoms; for if a
sickness have made progress ' by the fault of bad treat-
ment, the desire for medical art will but tend to calamity.
So this mania of mine, that makes me practise charity,
has already spread, I fear, beyond the compass of medical
cure, in as much as my mind will never shrink from alms-
giving notwithstanding your well-wishing counsel.
13—14. ,/As for what you have said about unrighteousness aris-
ing from charity and wealth being the principal cause of
righteousness, my weak human understanding cannot catch
how wealth without charity can be called the path of
virtue. Why, tell me, please, at what time is it that
wealth does produce virtue? whether when laid up as a
treasure, or when robbed violently by thieves, or when
sunk away on the bottom of the sea, or when having be-
come fuel to fire?
15—16. //Further you said: ////the giver goes to hell and the
receiver to the celestial abodes.'"' Speaking so, however,
you have increased my longing for works ot charity, though
endeavouring to restrain. Yea, may that word of yours be
fulfilled and those who beg from me rise to heaven! For
it is not a means of procuring my own happiness that 1
give in charity, but I do so in order to promote the wel-
fare of the world."
• that is, the ftryamftrga, of course not «the noble path», as it is often
translated, but either «the holy path» or «the path of the aryas, the worthy, the
noble, the holy ones.»
' The reading prayamam, proposed by prof. Kern in the various readings of
his edition, is undoubtedly right. Cp. p. 78, 2; 96, 23; 111, 16; 171, 15; 182,
3; 238, 11 ol his edition. In all these passages prayama has almost the same
meaning as classic pramipa.

156
Then Mara, the Wicked One, once more addressed the
Bodhisattva, speaking earnestly as though he were a well-
meaning friend. ' '
17. //Decide yourself, whether T have spoken for your good
or idle talk and afterwards go as you desire. Either happy
and respected, you shall remember me — or repenting."
The Bodhisattva said- «Sir, you must excuse me.
18. //I will fall of my own accord in this fiercely blazing
hell headlong, a prey to the flames, that will lick at me,
rather than at the due time of honouring the mendicants,
who show me their affection by requesting from me, incur
the guilt of neglecting them."
After so speaking the Bodhisattva, resting on the power
of his destiny • and knowing that almsgiving cunnot at auy
rate entail evil, stepped forth across the hell without heeding
his family and his attendance, who were, eager to withhold
him; his mind was not overcome by terror and his desire
of giving was still increased.
1!). Then, owing to the power of his merit, in the midst of
the hell a lotus sprung up, not rooting in mud like other
lotuses*. With its row of stamen-teeth ^ it seemed to laugh
contemptuously at Mara.
And with the aid of the lotus, produced out of the large
amount of his merit, the Bodhisattva having reached the
Pratyekabuddha, rilled his bowl with food, while his heart
was expanding with gladness and joy.
20. The monk, in order to show his satisfaction, rose into
the iiir. There he shone raining and (taming with as great a
majesty as a cloud from which appear flashes of lightning.
Sil. M&ra, on the other hand, seeing his design overturned,
was in low spirits and lost accordingly his splendour. He
dared no longer look in the face of the Bodhisattva, and
soou he disappeared witli his hell.
Why has this been taught? (For this purpose): in this
manner the pious wish to exercise almsgiving without ïnind-
' Since destiny is the result of every one's works.
^ In the original there is a pun, pamkaja «originating in mud, born Irom mud»
being a common word for «lotus.»
* Instead of d a n t i I read ilanta.

J&TAKAM&L&. 157
ding even peril; who, then, should not be charitable when
in a normal condition? Further this too is to be, inferred:
the virtuous cannot be induced even by fear to tread on
the wrong way.
This story corresponds to n» 40 of the pftli Jataka (Fausböll.I, 231 foll>
which has been translated by Rhys Davids in the Buddhist Birth
Stories, Vol. I. Though the main lines of the tale agree in both
redactions, there is an essential difference between them. In the sacred
pali text Mara does not feign, his opposition is open and straight.
He avows his creating the fiery hell in order to stop the B.'s almsgiving
and also to destroy the life of that Pratyekabuddha, and the B. answers
him: «let us see this day whether your power or mine is the greater.»
Moreover, it is told there that the Praty. was to die, and why, if he
should not obtain food at that time. The sacred pali text has but one
verse, corresponding with stanza 18 of Qiira; if the text of the Northern
sacred Jataka — unknown as yet — has no more, f.ura must have
composed the other stanzas out of his own genius.
V.
THE STORY OP AVISHAHYA, THE HEAD OP A GUILD.
(Avishahyacreshthijalaka)
The virtuous do not allow themselves to be deficient in
the virtue of charity neither by respect of the loss of their
fortune, nor by the prospect of riches, as will be instanced
in the following.
In the time, when our Lord was yet a Rodhisattva, he
was the head of a guild, born in an illustrious family and
well-educated. Besides these qualities he possessed many
other virtues: liberality, morals, learning, insight, humility
etc. His affluent riches made him appear an other Kubera.
He spent them by admitting every body as his guest and
practising charity like an everlasting sacrifice (sattra). In
short, he was the best of almsgivers and lived for the
good of mankind. On account of his being invincible by
vices: selfishness and the rest, he was known under the
name of Avishahya (that is //the Invincible One").
The sight of the mendicants had the same effect upon
him, as his upon the mendicants. On both sides it was a

158 jfi.TAKAMal.it
principal cause of gladness, since it destroyed the uncer-
tainty as to the attainment of the object wished for. '
Si. When requested to give, he was not capable of saying
"no." His great compassion had left no room in his heart
for attachment to wealth.
3. His joy rose to the highest pitch , when mendicants carried
away the best things out of his house. For he knew those
so called goods to be the source of'violent and heavy calam-
ities , and therefore to cause dissatisfaction in a short time
and without any apparent reason.
4. As a rule, indeed, riches being joined with covetousness
may be called caravans on the road towards wretchedness.
With /aw,, on the contrary, they conduced to the bliss
of both others and himself; Aw goods appeared to be what
is signified by their name.
So then, that Great Being bestowed large gifts on the
mendicant people all about, and satisfied them wholly,
giving to each according to his desire and without difficulty
and adorning his bounty by paying a pious respect to the
requesters. When (^akra, the Lord of the Devas, heard of
his lofty munificence, he was transported witli amazement;
and wishing to try the firmness of his resolution, he caused
the everyday provisions of money, grains, jewels, clothes
to disappear day after day; //perhaps, so he thought, his
apprehension at least of the loss of his goods may entice
him to self-interest." Nevertheless, the Great Being remained
intent on the virtue of charity.
5. As often as his goods disappeared, like water-drops hit
upon by the sun-darts, as often he ordered them to be
fetched again from his house, as if it were on fire, and
continued his large gifts.
Qakra, the Lord of the Devas, understanding the Great
Being to be as intently bent as ever on deeds of charity,
although his riches went always on decreasing, his amazement
* I have rendered the compound ish(Arthasampatti so as to suit at the
same time both acceptions. On the side of the mendicants art ha, tthe object»
wished for, may also mean «goods, property, wealth;» on the side of the king the
ambiguousness is in sampatti. When analyzing i s h t ft y ft arthasam-
patteb we get this translation: «the uncertainty] as to the longed for bliss, to
be caused by lus wealth.)

J&TAKAMiWL 159
grew. Now lie concealed in one night tlie whole of his
wealth except a coil of rope and a sickle. When the Bodhi-
sattva, as usually, awoke at daybreak, he nowhere saw his
household goods, neither furniture and money, nor grains,
nor clothes, nor even his attendance. His house looked quite
empty, desolate and sad, as if it. were plundered by rfik-
shasas; in short, it offered an afflicting aspect Then he
began to reflect upon the matter, and searching about, he
found nothing left but that coil of rope and that sickle.
And he considered thus: //Perhaps somebody, not accustomed
to begging, but wont to get his livelihood by his own
energy, has showed in this manner a favour to my house.
In this case, my goods are well spent. If however, incon-
sequence of my ill-fate, some person whom my high rank
has made envious, has caused them to run away without
being of use to any one, it is a great pity.
6. //The tickleuess of Fortune's friendship was known to me
long before; but that the indigent have come to grief by it,
on this account my heart aches.
7. //When coming to my empty house, how will they feel,
my mendicants, who for a long time were accustomed to
the enjoyment of my gifts and my hospitality? Are they
not like thirsty people meeting with a dried-up pondP"
Nevertheless the Bodhisattva did not yield to the feeling
of affliction and sadness, but kept the constancy of his
miud, and though being in this condition he was not capable
of asking others, not even his intimates, and applying to
a practice in which he was unskilled. Moreover, as he
experienced himself that it is hard to beg, his compassiou
with the begging people became still greater. Then that
Noble-minded One, always having in view to welcome and
entertain those who were begging their food, took that coil
of rope and that sickle and went on to weed giass day
after day. With the little money he earned by selling the
grass, he attended to the wants of the mendicants.
But Qakra, the Lord of the Devas, on seeing his imper-
turbable calmness and his devotion to almsgiving, though
he happened to be in extreme poverty, was tilled not only
with astonishment, but also with admiration. Showing his
wonderful celestial body, he stood in the air and spoke to

160 J&TAKAM&L&.
the Great Being to dissuade him from giving: "Householder!
8—10. «Neither thieves have robbed thee of thy wealth, nor
water, nor tire, nor princes. It. is thy own largesses, that have
brought thee into this condition, which alarms thy friends.
For this reason I tell thee to thy own best: refrain thy
passionate love of charity Though being as poor as thou
art now, for aught thou dost not give, thou mayst recover
thy former beautiful riches. By constant consuming of however
little at once acquisitions are fading away; by gathering
anthills become high. For him, who sees this, the only way
of increasiiig his property is self-restraint."
The Bodhisattva however displayed his high-minded-
ness and his constant practice of charity, when he answered
to Qakra in this manner:
11. '/A gentleman (drya), however distressed, will scarcely
do anything ignoble (anarya), o thou Thousand-eyed One!
Never be mine such wealth, o Qakra, to obtain which [
should have to live a miser.
12—13. «Who that boasts of being of an honest family, would
strike with the clear-sky thunderbolt of his refusal the
wretched who by death-like beggiug desire to find a remedy
to their misery? Is it possible, then, that such a one as
I am, should accept any jewel or wealth or even the realm
among the celestials, not to use it for the purpose of glad-
dening the faces of the beggars, grown pale by the pain
of asking?
14. '/Such receiving as would only tend to increase the vice
of selfishness, not to strengthen the propensity of giving
away, must be entirely abandoned by such like me; for it
is a disguised calamity.
15. «Wealth is as fickle as a flash of lightning; it may come
to every one; and it is the cause of many calamities; but
almsgiving causes happiness. This being so, how may a
gentleman cling to selfishness?
16. //Therefore, Qakra, thou. hast shown me thy good nature,
I thank thee also for thy commiseration and well-wishing
words; yet my heart is too much accustomed to the gladness
caused by deeds of charity. How, then, can it get the
firmness of taking the wrong way?
17. » Do not, however, bend thy mind to anger ou this account,

J&TAKAMIILA. 161
I pray thee! Indeed, it is impossible to assault the hostile.
fortress of my native character with small forces."
Qakra spoke: "Householder, what thou sayest is the line
of conduct for a wealthy man, whose treasury and granary
are full to the top, for whom manifold and abundant work
is well-performed (by his servants), who has settled his days
to come and has gained domination among men, but that
conduct does not suit thy condition. See,
18—20. '/Thou must, before all, through honest business either
carried on by exerting thy own sagacity or by following the
traditional line of trade of thy family, in as much as it be
compatible with thy lame, gather riches outdoing sunlike
the splendour of thy rivals; then on proper occasions display
thy opulence to the people and rejoice by it thy relations
and friends. Afterwards, having obtained due honour even
from the side of the king and enjoying Fortune's favour, as
if it were the embrace of a loving sweetheart, if then there
may arise in thee the inclination for charity or worldly pleas-
ures, nobody will blame thee. Bat one who strives for
almsgiving with no other means than his sole love for
charity, comes to calamity, acting like a bird that desires
to rise in the air before his wings are grown.
21. "Therefore, thou must acquire wealth by practising restraint
and pursuing humble scopes and meanwhile give up the longing
for almsgiving. What can be the meanness in this after
all, if thou dost not give possessing nothing?"
The Bodhisattva replied' «Pray, do not urge me.
22—28. «Even he who heeds his own interest more than the
benefit of others, ought to give in charity, not caring for
riches. ÏW no such gladness is afforded to him by great
opulence, as is caused by the satisfaction he enjoys by
subduing covetousnesa through charitable deeds. Add to this
that mere riches do not lead to heaven, but charity alone
is sufficient to obtain a good reputation; further that riches
are of no avail to subdue selfishness and the other vices.
Who, then, should not observe charity?
24. »He however who in order to protect the creatures. sur-
rounded by old age and death, desires to give away his
very self in alms, moved by compassion; he whom the
sufferings of others forbid to enjoy the relish of pleasures; say,
5e Volgr. VIII. 12

162
of what use will be to him the very great bliss, possessed
by thee?
»Hear also this, Lord of the Devas.
25. »The duration of our life is as uncertain as the prosperity
of our wealth. So reflecting, we should not mind riches,
when getting a mendicant.
26. *If one carriage has beaten a track on the ground , a second
goes by that track with some confidence, and so on. For
this reason I will not spurn this first good road, nor prefer
conducting my carriage on the wrong path.
27. «And should my substance once more grow into wealth,
it shall to a certainty captivate the minds of the mendicants;
and as yet, in this condition I shall give alms according
to my means. May I never be careless in keeping my vow
of charity, Qakra!"
On these words Qakra, the Lord of the Devas, being
wholly propitiated, exclaimed with praise: //excelleut, ex-
cellent," and looking at him with admiration and kindness,
he spoke:
28—29. «(Other) people run after riches by every trade, be it
low and rough and prejudicial to their reputation; when
doing so, they do not mind danger, being attached to their
own pleasures and deceived by their inconsiderateiiess. Thou,
on the contrary, dost not mind the loss of thy wealth nor
the deficiency of thy pleasures, nor my temptation; keeping
thy mind firmly intent on promoting the welfare of
others, thou hast manifested the greatness of thy excellent
self!
80. #Ah! how thy heart shines with the lustre of exceeding
loftiness and how it has wiped oft" entirely the darkness of
selfish feelings, that even after the loss of thy wealth
the hope for its recovering cannot spoil it by bringing
about reduction of its charitableness!
31. «But since thou suft'erest at the suffering of others and
moved by compassion strivest for the good of the world,
it is no wonder that 1 have not been able to shake thee
from almsgiving. As little a mountain, bright with snow,
is shaken by the wind.
32. «But it is in order to enhance thy fame by trial, that
1 have hidden that wealth of thine. No otherwise than by

JATAKAlifll/l. 163
trial can a gem, though beautiful, reach the great value
of a renowued jewel.
33. //Well then, pour thy gifts down on the mendicants,
satisfy them as a great rain-cloud tills the pools. By my
favour thou shalt never experience the loss of thy wealth,
and thou must forgive me my behaviour towards thee."
After praising him so, Gakra restored his large estate to
him and obtained his pardon, then he disappeared on the
very spot.
In this manner, then, the virtuous do not allow them-
selves to be deficient in the virtue of chanty neither by
respect of the loss of their fortune nor by the prospect of
riches.
In the pftli Jataka this story is the n« 340. It is told of the seHhi
Visayha, not Avisayha, owing as it seems to the misinterpretation of
the first pada of the first scripture-verse dealing with it; that line should
be read as follows: Adasi denarii pure 'visayha (see Fausb. Jfttaka
III, p. 130). Of the four pali stanzas the first corresponds with
stanza 9 of Qura; the second is almost the same as stanza 11 of his,
and Qüra's redaction makes it nearly evident that n o is the true
reading of the pftli text, not vo. The third has been paraphrased and
embellished by Qura in stanza 26, and the fourth in 27.
Though in the pftli redaction the course of the tale of Avishahy.i
nearly agrees with ours, an important discrepancy ie to be noticed.
It is not for trial's sake that Sakka causes Die furniture, goods, slaves
of the merchant to disappear, but he acts so because he is apprehending
the transcendent might and power to be gained by the merchant by his
immense munificence and charity, lest this man should dethrone him
and take in his place; accordingly, when hearing that this love for
charity did not arise from the longing for Sakkahood nor Brahmahood,
but is practised in order to obtain Allknowingness, he is forthwith
appeased. The mode of thought here prevailing is rather ancient, to be
sure. Qakra, afraid of human magic power earned by tap as, is a
well-known figure in the mythology of India. In jura's redaction that
old feature of the tale has been impaired. Yet it has not wholly
disappeared. Its trace may be found in the passage, where Avishahya
surmises that his wealth has been destroyed «by some person, whom
my high rank has mailc envious» («upra p. 31, I. 5); cp. also stanza 24
at the end. In the seventh story we will meet again with the same
motive, see tn/ra, p. 48.

164 J&TAKAH&L&.
VI. THE STORY OF THE HAKE.
(9 a 9 aj & t a k a)
Though when in the state of beasts, the great-minded
display, it is known, their charity according to their power;
who then, being a man, should not do so? This is taught
by the following.
In some inhabited region of a forest there was a spot,
frequented by ascetics. It was beset with thickets made up of
lovely creepers, grasses and trees; abounding in flowers
and fruits; adorned on its boundary with a river, the stream
of which was as blue and as pure as lapis lazuli; its ground ,
covered with a carpet of tender grass, was soft on touching
and handsome to look at. There the Bodhisattva lived a hare.
1. In consequence of his goodness, his splendid figure , his
superior strength and his great vigour not suspected by the
small animals nor fearing olllëfs, liê bêhaVêd like thê kïllg
of animals in that part of the forest.
2. Satisfying his wants with blades of grass, he bore the
handsome appearance of an ascetic (m u n i). Por the ascetic's
skin he wore his own, his bark-garment was the hairs of
his body. '
3. As everything he did in thought, speech and action,
was purified by his friendliness, the animals most given to
wickedness were like his pupils and friends. *
But more especially he had caught the hearts of an otter,
a jackal and an ape. They became his companions, attracted
by the love and respect, which his eminent virtues inspired
them. Like relations whose affection is founded on mutual
relationship, like friends whose friendship is rooted in the
affection and the esteem of each other, they passed time
rejoicing together. Opposed to the nature of the brutes,
they showed compassion to living beings, and their cupidity
• Jfore majofum the dress of the spiritual pupil (b r a h m a c ft r i 11) and also
of the brahraanical ascetic consists of a bark-garment and a deerskin.
* The text is here corrupt. The rass. have sukhah, first rejected afterwards
adopted by the editor. Now prof. Kern has suggested in a letter to me to read
sak hah, and as I suppose this emendation to be right, I have translated accor-
dingly.

165
being extinguished, they forgot to practise theft. By this
behaviour aud by their attending to good reputation without
encroaching on (the precepts of) righteousness (d h a r in a) ' ,
by their keen understanding and, owing to this, by the
close observance of religious obligations in the manner as
is approved by the pious, they roused even the surprise of
the deities.
>—5. If out of the two lines of conduct: that which complies
with pleasures and checks virtue and that which is in ac-
cordance with virtue and obstructs pleasures, a man applies
himself to the virtuous side, he is already illustrious, how
much more a being that has the shape of a beast! But
among them , he who bore the figure of a hare and was
their teacher, was so pious, he esteemed the practice of
compassion for others so high, and his excellent native
character was accompanied by such a set of virtues, that
their renown reached even the world of the Devas.
One day at evening-time, the Great-minded-One was in
the company of his friends who had come to him to hear
him preach the Law and reverentially sat down at his feet.
The moon, then being at a great distance from the sun,
showed its orb almost full and resembling by its bright
beauty a silver mirror without handle. When the Bodhi-
sattva beheld it showing its disc not fully rounded on
one side * , and considered that it was the moon of the four-
teenth of the bright half, that had risen, he said to his
comrades:
6. "See! The mooii by the beauty of its almost complete
orb is announcing with a laughing face as it were the
liolyday of sabbath (p o s h a d h a) to the pious.
"Surely, to morrow it is the fifteenth. You must per-
form accordingly the religious duties which are prescribed
for the sabbath, and not satisfy the want of sustaining your
• It would have been better, perhaps, I had translated «without encroaching on
(the precepts of) the Law." The Law preached by the Buddhas is thought to have
existed and to have been practised many thousands of kalpas before the preaching
of the last Buddha. Cp. f. i. ««pro p. 3 and 19.
' Instead of ishatpftrg vapavrttabimbam, the reading ol the mss., I guess
we should read 'Apakrttabimbam. In the evening before full-moon's day the
disc of the moon is not completely round, presenting one side so as to seem
a little curtailed.

166
body before honouring some guest at the time happening
with excellent food obtained in a right manner. You must
consider thus:
7—g «Every union has separation at its end, of high rank
the conclusion is dreary downfall; ' life is as tickle aud
frail as a flash of lightning. Tt is for this very reason you
must be upon your guard against carelessness (in the fulfil-
ling of your duties), and also endeavour to increase your
merit by charity, which has good conduct (cila) for its
ornament. Meritorious actions, indeed, are the strongest
support for the creature» who are moving round in the
troublesome succession of births.
9—10. //That the moon by its lovely brightness outdoes the lustre of
the host of stars, that the sun's splendour overpowers the (other)
luminaries, is due to the exaltedness of the qualities produced
by merit. It is also by the power of their merit that the
mighty kings cause presumptuous high officials and princes
to bear, like, excellent horses, willingly and with abated
pride the yoke of their command.
11. «But if they are devoid of merit, misfortune goes after
.them, be they ever stirring about on the road of political
wisdom (nïti). * For that unhappiness, being rebutted by
'"' those who are their superiors by merit, hovers as if moved
by wrath round the possessors of demerit.
12. «Leave then that path of dement; suffering is underlying
it and it is connected with dishonour. But merit is the
illustrious source and instrument of happiness, keep then
your mind intent on all opportunities of gathering it."
The others after listening to his teaching, said amen and
saluting him with respect circumambulated him from left
to right, then they went off each to his dwelling. When
his comrades were gone not far, the Great-Minded One
entered upon this reflection:
13—15. «T!^ are able to honour with some food or other the
i Cp. D i v y ft v a d a n a p. 27 and p 100.
* The political wisdom, which aims at attaining worldly ends by worldly means,
and makes morals subordinate to self-interest, is taught in such books as Kaman-
daki's Ni tiga-s t ra, Qukra's Nitisaia, in Ihe Pancatantra and the
H i t o p a d e <; a. It is considered sinful by Buddhistic lore. The Jatakamala
reproves it in several places, see f. i. IX, 10; XXIII, 51 foil.

J&TAKAM&L&.
guest that may happen to arrive, but ƒ am here in a
pitiful condition. It is in no way possible to present a
guest with the very bitter blades of grass, cut oil' with my
teeth. Alas! how helpless I am! My powerlessness ails me.
Of what use is life to me, since a guest that ought to be
a matter of joy to me, must so become a matter of
sorrow!
»On what occasion, then, my worthless body which
lacks the faculty of attending on a guest, may be given
up so as to conduce to the profit of anybody?" When his
reflection had come to that point, he recovered his keenness
of thought. wVTell!
16. »The property which will suit the purpose of honouring
any guest is easy to be got, for it is in my power, it is
irreproachable, it belongs to none but me, indeed, it is
the property of' my body.
"Why, then, should I be in trouble?
17. "Yes, I have found proper food for my guest; now, my heart,
abandon thy grief and thy sadness. With this vile body
of mine I will practise hospitality and satisfy the desire of
the guest happening."
Having thus resolved, the Great Being felt an extreme
delight as though he had obtained a very great gain, and
remained there (in his dwelling, waiting for some guest).
IS. Now, when that sublime reflection had presented itself
to the Great Being's mind, the celestials manifested their
propitiousness and their power.
19—21. Earth shook with her mountains, as if from joy, nor
was her garment, the Ocean, quiet ' ; divine drums resounded
in the sky; the regions of the horizon were ornamented
with a placid sheen; all around clouds of a pleasant aspect,
which were girded with lightnings and gave forth prolonged
soft rattlings of thunder, strewed on him a shower of flow-
ers falling close together, so as to spread the pollen through
the air by their contact. The god of wind, too. showed him
his esteem; blowing steadily he bore to him the fragrant
flowerdust from various trees, as if he bestowed on him
' Read babhuvAnibhrtA"; short o, not agreeing with either metre or
sense (cp. II, st. 38) is a misprint.

jflTAKAM&La.
gauzy veils, bearing them up and so disarranging the figures
interwoven in them.
As the deities, rejoiced and astonished, were praising
all about the marvellous resolution of the Great Being,
(>kra, the Lord of the Devas, became aware of it; and
•f-v;ri.-r curiosity and surprise overtaking his mind, he was desirous
of knowing the truth about his disposition. The next day,
at noon-time, when the sun, ascending in the midst
of the sky, darts his sharpest beams; when the horizon,
clothed in a net of trembling rays of light and veiled with
the outburst of radiant heat, does not suffer itself to be
looked at; when shadows are contracting; when the interior
of the woods resounds with the increased shrieks of the
cicadae; when birds cease to show themselves and the vigour
of travelling people is exhausted by heat and fatigue: in
that time of the day, then, Qakra, the chief of the Devas,
having assumed the figure of a brahman, lamented not far
from the spot where the four animals were living. He wept
and wailed aloud like one who has lost his way, and as
one worn out from hunger and thirst, weariness and
sorrow.
22. «Alone and astray, having lost my caravan, I am roaming
through the deep forest, exhausted by hunger and lassitude.
Help me, ye pious!
23. »Not knowing the right way nor the wrong, having
lost my faculty of orientation, wandering at random, alone
in this wilderness, I suffer from heat, from thirst, from
fatigue. Who will rejoice me by friendly words of
hospitality?"
The Great Beings, touched in their heart and alarmed
by the sound of his piteous outcries for help, quickly went
to that spot, and beholding him who offered the miserable
appearance of a traveller gone astray, they approached him
and in a respectful manner spoke to him these words of
comfort:
l<—25 »Be no more disturbed, thinking you are astray in the
wilderness; with us you are quite as if you were with your
own disciples. Therefore, grant us the favour of accepting
to day our attendance, gentle sir; to morrow you may go
your way according to your wish."

169
Then the otter, understanding from his eilence that lie
accepted the invitation, went oft' hastily; joy and agitation
quickened his paces. He came back with seven r o h i t a-tishes,
which he offered him saying:
26. «These seven fishes I found on the dry ground, where
they were lying motionless as if asleep by lassitude; either
they have been left there by fishermen who did forget them ,
or they have jumped upon the shore by fear. Feed on them ,
and stay here."
Then the jackal also brought to him such food as he was
happening to have got at that time, and after bowing re-
verentially , he spoke with deference thus:
27. "Here are one lizard and a vessel of sour milk, left by
somebody, traveller: grant me the benefit of your enjoying
them, and take your abode in this forest this night, o you
who are an abode of virtues!"
So speaking he handed them over to him with the utmost
gladness of mind.
Then the monkey drew near. He brought ripe mango-
fruits, and accordingly distinguished by their softness, their
strong orange colour, as if they were dyed with red or-
piment, their very red stalk-ends and their roundness; and
performing the reverence of the a n j a 1 i, he spoke:
28. »Ripe mangos, delicious water, shadow refreshing like
the pleasure of good society, these things, o best of those
who know the b rah ma, I have for you. Enjoy them and
stay this night here."
Then the hare approached, and as soon as he had made
his reverence he bade him to accept the offer of his own
body. Thus he spoke, looking up to him with great regard.
29. »A hare, grown up in the forest, has no beans nor
sesamum seeds nor grains of rice to offer, but prepare thia
body of mine with fire and having fed upon it stay this
night over in this hermitage.
80. "On the holiday of a mendicant's arrival every one pro-
vides him with whatever of his goods may be a means of
supplying his wants. But my wealth to me is limited to
my sole body; take it, then, this whole of my possessions."
Qakra answered :
31. //How is it possible that anybody like me should kill

170
another living being? And how much less kill a being like
you, who have shown friendship to me?"
The hare said: wVerily, this becomes well a brahman,
inclined to compassion. Well then, you must grant me
at least the favour of resting here in the very spot; in the
mean while I think ] will find in some way or other the
means of showing ray favour to you." Now Qakra, the Lord
of the Devas, understanding his intention, created by magic
a heap of charcoals burning without smoke; this mass had
the colour of purified gold, very thin flames shot forth out
of it, and a multitude of sparks were being scattered about.
The hare who was looking around on all sides perceived
that fire. On seeing it, he said rejoiced to Qakra: »1 have
found that means of showing you my favour. You then
must fulfil the hope with which I give you this boon, and
feed on my body. See, great brahman,
32. wit is my duty to give in charity, and my heart is
inclined to do so and in a person like you 1 have met
with a worthy guest; such an opportunity for giving cannot
easily be obtained. Let then my boon not be useless, in
as much as it depends on you."
So the Great Being persuaded him, and after showing
him by his salutation his esteem, his respect and his hos-
pitable mind,
33. then, with the utmost gladness, like one desirous of
wealth on suddenly beholding a treasure, he threw himself'
in that blazing fire, as the supreme hamsa ' plunges into
a pond with laughing lotuses
When the chief of the Devas saw this deed, he was
affected by the highest admiration. Reassuming his own shape,
he praised the Great Being with words equally agreeable to
the mind and the ears and preceded by a shower of cele-
stial flowers. Then with his delicate hands, whose rich
lustre may be compared with that of the petal of the white
lotus, and whose splendid fingers embellished them like
jewel ornaments, he took him up himself and showed him
i The fabulous bird, called «supreme hamsa" or ekahamsa is also a
rhetorical appellation of both the individual and the universal soul, in the pali
J&taku almost the same simile is here used, see Fausb. J a tak a ill, p. 55,1. 13.

1T1
to the Celestials. «Behold, ye Devas, inhabitants of the
celestial residence, behold and rejoice at this astonishing
deed , this heroic exploit of this Great Being.
34. '/Oh, &/<? has given away his body without hesitation to day,
to be charitable to his guest, whereas the fickle-minded '
are not able to give up without trembling even faded flow-
ers, the remainder of a sacrifice.
35. //What a difference between the animal species, which
he belongs to, and the loftiness of his self-sacrifice, the
sharpness of his mind! Indeed, he confounds all such as
are slow in striving for meritorious actions, deities as well
as men.
36. "Oh, how excellent his mind is, impregnated with the
fragrance of constant practice of virtues! How he loves
good conduct, as he has manifested by his sublime deed!"
Then , in order to glorify that extraordinary fact and having
in view the good of the world, Cakra adorned with the
image of the hare as a distinclive mark both peaks on the
top of the belvederes, — one on his most excellent palace
Vaijayanta and the other on Sudharma, the hall of the
Devas — and likewise the disc of the moon."
37—88 At full-moon even now that image of the hare (caca)
appears in the moon's disc in the sky, as a reflected image
shines in a silver mirror. From that time down Candra
(the Moon), named also the Ornament of the Night and
the opener of the brilliancy of the night-waterlilies, is
famous in the world as the Hare-marked ((.lacanka).
And the others, the otter, the jackal and the ape dis-
appeared thereafter (from the earth) and arrived in the
world of the Devas, thanks to their possessing such a holy
friend.
So then the Great Beings practised charity, though in
the state of beasts, according to their power; who, then,
being a man, should not be charitable? Moreover this too
is to be propounded: «even beasts are honoured by the pious
• Strength of mind, constancy, earnestness, wisdom and virtue are all implied
by the buddhistic term d h i r a ; its contrary, a d h i r a denotes therefore the
inverse of these qualities; the «fickle-minded" are also worldly and sinful, nor
have they subdued their innate evil passions.

J&TAKAM&lA
for their attachmeiit to virtues; for this reason one must
care for virtues."
This popular story is n» 316 of the pali Jataka. As it is told there,
it agrees in the main points with the redaction of the Jatakamala, but
Qakra is not represented as a way-worn brahman gone astray, on
whose outcries for help the four animals rush out of their dens. In the
pali Jataka he goes about the dens begging from each of them severally.
Each of them pronounces one gat ha, and these four stanzas corres-
pond exactly to stanza 26—29 of Qura. Sakka accepts the offer of the
hare at once. When the hare is being about to jump into the fire, he
prays that it may nnt hurt the parasites living within his hairs. Hut
the fire on touching his body, loses its heat and Sakka revealing himself
praises the Great Being and puts his image into the moon's disc. After
Sakka has withdrawn, the hare and his comrades remain on earth and
live in the forest as before. — The poetical recension of the Cariyapi(aka
is much shorter. There also the (ire loses its heat, at least the Bodhisattva
on entering it experiences the pleasing feeling of cold water.
In Sanskrit Buddhist writings I found the story of the hare twice
mentioned, in the Avadanagataka and in the Avadanakalpalata.
As to the former, see L. Féer vol. XVIII, p. 142 of the Annales du
Musée Guimet; the exposé of this redaction shows a very different
form of the tale; instead of the four animals it treats of an rshi
who has the hare as his companion. In the Avadanakalpalata «the
hare who gave away his body" is n° 104 of the collection; it has not
been edited as yet.
VII.
THE STOEY OF AGASTYA.
(Agasty ajatakam)
A heroic practice of liberality is an ornament even in
ascetics, how much more in householders; as is taught by
the following.
In the time, when our Lord, still b'.-ing a Bodhisattva,
was moving on his load though the s am sura, he was
born in an illustrious family of brahmans which being
distinguished by great purity of conduct might pass for
an ornament of the earth. Of this family his birth enhanced
the lustre, in the same way as the moon rising in autumn
with full and spotless orb beautifies the firmament. He had
obtained in due order the different sacraments, ordained by
the sacred texts and the tradition: jatakarma and the.

178
rest: he had studied the vedas with their augas • and the
whole ritual, and the fame of his learning filled the world
of men. By the large gifts which he received, requesting
charitable people who loved his virtues, he got a considerable
wealth.
Like a big cloud showering over the fields, he gladdened
with his wealth his relations, his friends, his clients, his
guests, his teachers, in short the distressed as well as
those to be honoured.
Owing to his grand munificence, the bright glory which he
had obtained by his learning shone the more. So the com-
plete beauty of the moon's full disc is enhanced by loveliness,
when autumn purifies it.
Yet the Great-Minded One soon understood that the state
of a householder is a source of sorrow and affords but
meagre comfort; for by its close connection with wrong
business it is thronged with noxious qualities, it is the
abode of carelessness (about the religious duties), it is a
troublesome state, being connected with occupations for
gathering and guarding wealth, it is also an obstacle to
tranquillity, being aimed at by calamities like a scope by
hundreds of arrows, and it causes weariness by its encom-
passing the necessity of accomplishing numberless tasks. On
the other hand, he came to the insight that renunciation of
the world brings about comfort by its ireeness from those
evils, that it is a state favourable to the performance of
religious duties, and that it may be called the proper basis
for undertaking the religious practice required for salvation.
So casting away, as if it were straw, that great abundance
of wealth which he had obtained without trouble, and which
must have possessed charm for him because of the high
regard which he enjoyed with the people, he engaged him-
self to the observance of the discipline and the selfrestraint
of wold-renunciating ascetics. Yet while in this state of an
ascetic, his celebrated fame, the recollection of former inter-
course , the respect for his virtues and his being renowned
i The six angas or auxiliar sciences of the veda are: pronunciation (ciksha),
ritual (kalpah), grammar (v yak a rao am), explanation of words (niruktam),
prosody or metrical science (chandah) and astronomy (jyotisham).

r
174
for his tranquillity of mind caused the Great Being to be
frequented as before by people longing for salvation, whose
affection he had gained by the multitude of' his virtues.
But disliking the contact of householders as prejudicial to
the happiness to be derived from entire detachment from
the world and an obstacle to throwing away the bonds by
which he had stuck to it, he repaired to the island of
K&nï, aspiring to solitude. That island is situated in the
Southern Ocean. Its outskirts are moistened by the play ol
the wanton waves, which moved by the wiud have the
blue colour of pieces of sapphire; white sand covers its
ground; various trees, the branches of which are adorned
with twigs, Üowers and fruits, enhance its beauty; uear its
shore there is a lake of pure water. This lovely country he
embellished by the splendour of his hermitage.
3. There he lived, manifesting the lustre of his heavy
penance by his body emaciated by it, as the crescent appears
in the sky, joining great loveliness to a small size.
4. That this man living in the forest, absorbed in vows
and penances, and whose humble actions and sensations
attested his tranquillity of mind, was a muni, even the
wild quadrupeds and birds of the forest did understand,
even their small intellect became aware of it.
While staying in the grove of penance, the Great-minded
One, being in the habit of giving, continued also honour-
ing the guests that happened to arrive with such roots
and fruits as he had just got, with fresh water and such
hearty and kind words of welcome and blessings as are
appropriate to ascetics ', and himself lived on as much of
his forest-produced food as his guests had left, strictly li-
miting his meals to the sustenance of his body.
Now, the glory of his excessive penance having spread
about, Qakra, the Lord of the Devas, touched by it,
desired to learn his constancy. In that part of the forest,
where the Great Being dwelt, he made disappear successively
all roots and fruits fit for the food of ascetics. But the
' Kind words are an essential part of Indian hospitality. See f. i. Manu III, 101
«Grass, water, a resting-place and fourthly kind words are never lacking in the
home of the pious."

J&TAKAMaLa. 175
Bodhisatfcva, keeping his mind intent on meditation, being
accustomed to the feeling of contentment, insensible to the
perplexing influence of stupefaction, and indifferent about his
food and his body, did not direct his thoughts to the cause
of that disappearance '. And having dressed on the fire
young leaves, he accomplished with these the action of
taking his meal, without any feeling of discontent nor
longing for a better meal, but as calm as ever he went
on living in the same way.
5. The livelihood of those who in earnest practise continence
is nowhere difficult to be obtained. Say, where are not found
grass and leaves and ponds?
Yet Qakra, the Lord of' the Devas, though his astonish-
ment waxed in consequence of the Bodhisattva's behaviour
in that situation, and his high opinion of his virtues grew
stronger, resorted to another trial. Like the wind at summer-
time he stripped of their leaves the whole of the trees,
shrubs and grasses, that were in that grove. Then the
Bodhisattva, taking such fallen leaves as were still fresh
and boiling them in water, lived on them without feeling
any uneasiness; rejoiced by the comfort of meditation, he
stayed there as if he had feasted upon ambrosia.
6. Modesty in the learned, disinterestedness in the wi-althy
and contentment in the ascetics, each of these splendid virtues
is the highest treasure * of each of them.
Now that very marvellous constancy of his contentment
increased the surprise of Qakra , and as if he were angry on
account of it , having assumed the shape of a brahman,
that he might be a guest of course, he appeared before
the eyes of the Great Being, when at the time prescribed
by his vow, after performing the agnih ot ra-sacrifice
and muttering his prayers, he was just looking about for
some guest. And the Bodhisattva rejoiced went to his encounter,
and welcoming him and addressing kind words to him, he
invited him to take his meal by announcing to him that it
' For, if he had, he would have discovered it, owing to the transcendent power
got by his penance.
* I have rendered this stanza after slightly modifying the reading of the edited
text. Instead of gimaQobhavidhib parab I suppose we should read 'nidhib
parab, compare p. 51, 1. 11 of the ed. text guoabhyasanidher udarata.

176 j& TAKAMitlil.
was meal-tirae. Understanding by his silence that he ac-
cepted, the Great-Minded One,
7. manifesting by his expanding eyes and his blooming face
the gladness he experienced in practising charity, and
rejoicing his guest with gentle words both pleasant to the
mind and to the ears, entertained him with the whole of
liis boiled leaves, which lie had had so much trouble to
get, and himself became satisfied with joy alone.
And even so he entered his home of meditation ', and
passed that day and night in that very ecstasy of gladness.
Now Qakra reappeared before him in the same manner
the other day at the time destined for (the accomplishment of)
his vow (of hospitality). So he did also on the third, fourtli
and fifth day. And the other received him as his guest in
the same way (as on the first day) and with still more joy.
8. No suffering, indeed, not even peril of life is able to
compel the virtuous to a miserable infringement of their
love for giving, a love still increased by the habit ofcom-
miserauo.il.
Then Qakra, whose mind was overcome by the utmost
amazement, knowing him to be enabled by his excess of
penance to get into the possession of (his own) brilliant
realm of the gods, * if he did but ask for it, commenced
to feel uneasy, and fear arose within him. Displaying the
wonderful beauty of his own celestial shape, he questioned
him for what purpose he performed his penance.
9—10. "Say, to what have you directed the hope, your stimulus,
when you left your beloved relations who shed tears at
your departure , your family and attendance who had been
a source of happiness for you, to resort to this toilsome
life of peuauce? For it is not for a trifling motive that
earnest and energetic meu «ill despise pleasures easily ob-
tained and afflict their relations with grief, leaving them
to go to the penance-forest, devoid of comfort.
11. *If you think it may be told me, please, satisfy our
' In other terms: his hut. Both p&li redactions, the longer one of the Jataka
and the shorter one of the Cariyaj>i(aka mention here his pamiasalü «hut made
of leaves."
* Cp. supra, p. 35.

JilTAKAM&liL 177
curiosity, what at all should be the object of your wishes , the
penetration into the excellent qualities of which has fasci-
nated to this point a mind like yours."
The Bodhisattva replied: '/Hearken, sir, what I am
exerting myself for?
12. "Repeated births tend to great sorrow; so does old age,
that calamity, and illnesses, those dismal plagues; and the
necessity of death is a disturbance to the mind. From those
evils I am resolved to save the creatures."
Then Qakra, the Lord of the Devas, understanding that
it was not his own celestial splendour that was claimed
by the Bodhisattva , was set at rest, and as lie was very pleased
by that well-said sentence, lie honoured it by exclaiming
«very well!" and requested him to accept some boon:
13. "Ascetic, Kacyapa,' for this right and well-said sentence
1 give you some boon; choose then what you desire."
The Bodhisattva, being not desirous at all of pleasures
and rejoicings connected with existence, and thinking it
painful even to ask for anything, since he had attained the
state of contentment, said to Qakra:
14. '/If you wish to give me some boon, that may please
me, T ask the foremost of the Devas this boon.
15. «May that fire of covetousness, which after obtaining
a beloved wife, children, domination , riches more abundant
than had been longed for, still goes on heating the mind
of men never to be satisfied — may that fire never enter
my heart!"
The propensity to contentment declared by this well-turned
saying charmed Qakra in a still higher degree. He praised
the Bodhisattva again, saying: "excellent! excellent!" and
once more he urged him to choose some boon :
' This term may admit of three modes of interpretation. Firstly it is possible that
our Agastya is said to be a KAcyapa by descent, belonging to the go tra which
has Kacyapa for its ancestor. Yet K&cyapa may be perhaps also = «follower
of Kacyapa" and denote some special category of hermits and anachorets, Kacyapa,
the personified dawn, the father of the Adityas and well-nigh the creator of the
Universe, being represented as an ascetic. Or it is only a general appellation to
address a man of the bralimanieal class. Cp. the «oneral use of the name of
Gautama (Kern, Geschiedenis van hel Itiiddhismc I, 245, 240).
5« Volgr. VIII. 13

178 J&TAKAM&La.
16. «Muni, also for this right and well-said sentence T offer
you gladly as a present in return a second boon."
Then the Bodhisattva, in order to show him the diffi-
culty of getting entirely rid of the innate evil passions
(klec,a), ' preached him the Law once more under the
guise of asking a boon.
17. "If you give me some boon , you Vasava, abode of excellent
qualities, then T ask you another boon and no mean one,
Lord of the Devas.
18. «May that fire of hatred, subdued by which the creatures
come to loss of wealth, loss of caste and of good reputation ,
as if they were vanquished by the enemy — may that
fire be far from me!"
On hearing this, Qakra the Ruler of' the Devas , highly
admiring him, praised him : //excellent! excellent!" and again
he said :
19. «Justly Fame like a loving woman attends upon those,
who have renunciated the world. Well, accept some other
boon from me for this well-said sentence.'"
Then the Bodhisattva, induced by his hostility to innate
evil passions to blame the intercourse with such beings as
are not free from those passions, under the guise of accepting
the boon said this: *
20. //May I never hear a fool, nor get the sight of such a
one, nor endure the annoyance and the. pain of staying
with such a one! This is the boon, I ask you for."
Qakra spoke:
21—22. //What do you say? Anybody being in distress is most
deserving of the commiseration of the pious. Now, foolish-
ness being the root of calamities, is held to be the vilest
condition. How is this that you, though compassionate,
abhor the sight of a fool, a person especially fit for com-
miseration ?" *
' See Kern, quoted above, I, p. 869, 370.
' The reading vrati", as prof. Kern writes to me, is to be changed into vrti*.
In stanza 18 pada 1 in order to restore the metre, I read bhramcam avapnu-
vanti.
* It may be observed that bala «fool", opposed to dhira awise" is also a
term for denoting the inconverted opposed to the faithful and the followers or the
right way, taught by the Buddhas. See Childers, Dictionary of the Pali
language s. v. b a 1 o.

jftTAKAlfAT.fl. 179
The Bodhisattva answered: «Because there is no help
for him. Do but consider this:
23 «If a fool were at any rate curable by treatment, how
would anybody like me be wanting in effort to bring about
his good?
«But to such a one, you must understand, no profit at
all can be derived from medical treatment.
24—25. «He follows the wrong course of conduct, as if it were
the right one, and desires to put also his neighbour on
that way, and having not been accustomed to decent and
upright behaviour, he becomes angry, when being admo-
nished for his good. Now to such a person who burns
with the infatuation of self-conceit, thinking himself wise,
whose harsh anger is provoked by those who speak for
his good, and whose iinpetuousness has not been softened
because of the deticiency of his moral education — say,
what means does there exist to bring profit to him?
26. «For this reason, then, o most excellent of the Devas,
because there is no help for him not even in the power of
the compassionate, I do not want to see a fool, being the
most unfit object."
On hearing this, Qakra praised him exclaiming «very well!
very well!" and charmed by his right sayings, he spoke again :
27. «The jewels of well-said sentences cannot be equalled by
any price (given in exchange). Gladly I give you some boon
for this too, look upon it as a handful of Howers to
worship you."
Then the Bodhisattva , in order to show that the virtuous
are welcome in any case, spoke:
•28. «May I see a wise man and hear a wise man, dwell with
such a one, (>kra, and converse with such a one! This
boon, best of the Devas, do grant me."
Qakra said: //YOB seem, indeed, to be a warm partisan
of the wise. Why , tell me then,
29. «what have the wise done for you? say, Kacyapa, what
is the reason that you, as if you were unwise, do show
this greediness of the sight of a wise man ?"
Then the Bodhisattva in order to show him the magnan-
imity of the virtuous spoke: «Hearken, sir, for what
reason my mind longs for the sight of n wise man.

jaTAKAMllLa.
80—3J. «He walks himself in the path of virtue and brings also
others on that way, and words said for his good, be they
even harsh, do not rouse his impatience. Being adorned by
honesty and a good education, it is always possible to
make hi:» accept, what, is said for his good. For this reason my
. , mind , adhering to virtue. is inclined to the partisan of virtue "
Then Cakra praised him, exclaiming: «well said! very
excellent!"' and with still increased satisfaction he again
summoned him to ask some boon.
82—33 «Surely, you have obtained already everything, since
you are wholly satisfied, yet you should take some boon
from me , considering it a means of gratifying me. For a
favour offered out of reverence, from abundance of power
and with the hope of affording a benefit, becomes a cause
of pain, if not accepted."
Then the Bodhisattva, seeing his utmost desire of doing
good and wishing to please him and to benefit him, ans-
wered so as to declare him the superiority of the strong
desire of almsgiving.
34. «May your food, which is free from destruction and
corruption , your mind embellished by the practice of charity.
and mendicants adorned by the pureness of their good
. . conduct, be mine! This most blessing boon 1 ask".
Qakra said: //Your Reverence is a mine of jewels that
consist in apposite sayings. Not only
85. //everything you have requested will be accomplished,
but on account of this well-said sentence 1 give you some
other boon."
The Bodhisattva said: ....... ...-.-•
86. //If you will give me a boon which incloses the highest
favour for me, o most excellent of all Celestials, do not
come to me again in your blazing splendour. For this boon
I ask the destroyer of the Daityas."
Upon this Cakra was somewhat irritated, and highly aston-
ished he spoke thus to him: //Do not speak so, sir.
87. »By every kind of ritual: prayers, vows, sacrifices, with
penances and toilsome exertions men seek to obtain <he
sight of me For what reason is it however that you do
not desire it, though 1 have come up to you, wishing to
bestow my boons on you?"

JaTAKAMflLa. 181
The Bodhisattva said: «Do not yield to your anger. I
will pacify Your Highness, king of the Devas. It is not
want of courtesy, that makes me ask so, nor is it a deed
of irreverence, nor do I aim at showing lack of devotion
towards Your Majesty. Not at all, but,
38. "Contemplating your superhuman wonderful shape, which
though shining gently is still blazing with brilliancy, 1 fear
the sight of you however mildly shining, lest it should
cause any want of strictness in the fulfilling of my penance."
Then Cakra bowed to him, circumambulated him from
left to right and disappeared on the very spot. And at daybreak
the Bodhisattva perceived plenty of divine food and drink
brought thither by the power of (^akra, and many hundreds'
of Pratyekabuddhas railed by the invitation of £akra. also
many angels ' with high-girded clothes, ready to wait on
them.
39. Supplying in this way with food and drink the wants
of those most holy sages, the Muni obtained a sublime
joy, and he delighted in living after the mode suitable
for ascetics, in performing his boundless vow of meditation
(dhyana) and in <rauquillity.
Tn this manner, then, a heroic practice of liberality is
an ornament even in ascetics, how much more in house-
holders. So considering, a virtuous man must adorn him-
self with heroic constancy of giving. This (story) must also
be adduced when treating of the gladness caused to the
giver, when blaming covetoasness, hatred, infatuation and
foolishness, when preaching on the virtue of the inter-
course with a pious friend or on contentment, l/ikewise in
discourses on the magnanimity of the Tathagata: "So our
Lord was an inexhaustible mine of jewels of excellent sayings,
when being still in his former existences, how much more
he was after attaining Complete Wisdom."
The story of Agastya or rather Akitti, as he is called in pftli, is n'480
of the pftli .lataka. Save some slight differences — Akitti is born in a
wealthy family, he renuneiates the world after the death of his elders^
and his sister with him — it runs upon the whole as ours. It is likewise
the island of KarA, whither he withdraws leaving his admirers and his
' So 1 translate the term d e v a k u m a r a or deyaputra, which some-
times occurs in this book.

182
sister. That island is said to be situated near Nagadipa «Ihc island
of the snakes" and to have been called at that time Ahidipa «the
island of the serpents." Of the 2"! stanzas which are afforded by this
scripture-text, st. 1 may be compared to 9—11 of (Jura, St. 2 to 12.
To his 13"', 16"', 19*, 27ih, 32—33"' and 35"' corresponds one and
the same stanza of the pali text, recurring six times (st. 2; 5; 7; 11;
15; 18), the Sanskrit equivalent of which in the Northern sacred text
our author seems to have diversified and paraphrased in a very elegant
and fine manner. As to the rest,
pali 6 may be compared to (,"s 17.18 pali 14 to Q's 30.31
» 8 » » » » » 20 16.17 » » 34
» 9 » » » • » 21.22 19 » » 36
• 10 » » » » » 23—26 20 » » 37
» 12 > » » » » 28 21 » » 38
» 13 » » » » » 29
Our story is also to be found in the Cariyapitaka, of which it is the
lirst exploit. It is there told in a rather concise manner, and finishes
with the Bodhisattva's avowal as to the purpose of his penance, so that
it contains nothing about the boons and the witty sayings of the B.