=== PAGE 1 ===
unr

JATAKA

TOGEFHFR WITH ITS COMMPNs apy

‘TALES OF THF AMIERIOn BIRTHS

G0TAMA BUDDHA.

¥ FauSBOLL
vor vt

‘@orrsersrroM AnD mDey

LONDON
REGAN JAUL FRENCH TROBVER & 0G yyy
eer

[AIL Raghts Roverseat


=== PAGE 2 ===
INDEX TO THE TATAKA

AND ‘ITS COMMENTARY

CONTAINING

COMPLETE INDEX OF PROPNR NAMES AND TITLES, TOBRTHER WITH
A LIST OF 1HE INTROMUCTORY GATHAS AND AN INDEX
OF PARALLEL VERSES.

th

DINES ANDERSEN,

pn Pitt

ens

LONDON
KEGAN PAUL TRENCH TRUBNER & CO,, Ltd.
1897 ;

[AN Rights Reserved]


=== PAGE 3 ===
70

ALBRECH y WEBER

4 GENT RATION HAS BLFS

9 TOR MORT THAN

TLLUSTRIOUS LE

wil!
ADER

AN

oF
iB STUDY OF JNDIAY LANGUAGES AND JATERAT URE
s Most pesPLorrubhy pppicalyD


=== PAGE 4 ===
POSTSCRIPTUM

Born in a country parsonage J, unti) my twelfth year.
associated much with peasants, and listened with attentive interest
to their legends and stories, Amongst these there were two
especially which made a strong impression upon my childish
mind:

One was the legend of the sunken church lying at the
bottom of the Inke where it might be scen deep down in the
water when it was clear and calm, and whose bells might still
be heard 1inging in the stillness of the evening; the other
was the story of the treasure-seeker who at sunset, in perfect
silence, without uttering a word, sought to bring the long burried
treasure up to the surface.

1 also laboured and strove for years digging silently, until
I could bring the treasure forth to the light of day. Here we
have it! But it has long lain hidden and may require a little
furbishing in coming times, before it can shine in all its glory.

What induced me with eagerness to begin to work at the
Jataka Book was particularly three utterances I met with: The
first I found in Spence Hardy’s Manual of Budhism. p. 1, viz.
~The Singhalese will listen the night through to recitations from
this work without any apparent weariness. and a great number
of the Jatakas are familiar even to the women‘. The second I
read in Clough’s Singhalese Dictionary under the word Jataka-


=== PAGE 5 ===
n° Poateerptane

ota where st says tht book as so sacred emonget the Bud
dlbets that they will ofer to xt and worship it And the third
T policed 19 the Ceylon Friend 1837 where at says, The more
T thunk of Buddha, the mare I love hin" When we have read
‘the Jateka through no one will wonder af thete eentimente

01619 1 bad strats commenced trnseibing pacts of the
dntke, but Tid vot sroly take a up tat 1 tad Bose
fey ediion of the Dhsomapedn mv 1855. The ffter {gt
tnt the ook, the clesrer I euw sly ampertnts, ot col) 8
Noga wove bat slo fro a eltre stone past fey
sod tn order to avalen intrest fr ib tn the Ierary word 7
‘an pashing qpeemens ofan 1851 Proteoe Weserganrd
vrs uot at fiat in favour of couplet edition, be wold tare
referred an anslas aly Peslops be thoght the underakiog
Uejoud my. sbi ater on healed opiion and
supported the work Te was hovever principally The encourage
reef, from the very lepanng, veered. fom Prfeost A
ele tha hept up ty evarage And len materal fed me
xt wa epeuly the ey Sabbutt' aatiroy perseverance in
tpleadd preset of © complete Durwere copy of the Jake (at
{ie vgn of Bony © H Chad) thet wade vt posible
for me to tah my woderabing

now trst that the fat wll aot be overlooked, that 2
ave bat) but le meter to work fomy sso that wen T
egos the atuy of Pil the language way nestiy acaleste
1 therefore veatre to hope foe mil ecm of tha ey work

1 Anat ell known a, Tatelnt om the Tataka Atthe
anand counts of foor parts, viz (eee Tet TMs) a) 8
Paccuppanaa-vatthu, an ancedeat from the time of the
Gotacs Doddha that feemcs, ax at were and gives rue to
Gotana Buddha felling an event of olden tame, B) an tite



=== PAGE 6 ===
Postscript. WW

vatthu which Jatter bas originally been in verse, but after
wards been retold by G.B, partly in prose and partly in vers,
with moral teaching in view. c) (J, I 4}4) a Veyyfkarana
or Commentary which elucidates both the tale and certain words
in the metrical pieces, and ultimately d) x Samodhana, «
winding up of the story, The two last belong properly to the
Paccuppannavatthu.

In the Paccuppannavatthu a number of books are
quoted appertaining to the Tipitaka, it consequently belongs to the
period following the Buddhistic canons genesis, and is therefore
doubtless an utterance of clerical tradition, The P, V. ends in
J.1—18 with ,pikatam akisi*, but in all the others with
patitam dhari” (ofr. I 444), That the Nidduakatha is a part
of the P. V., we must conclude, as it appears, from I 437, and
_that the P. V. belongs to the Atthakatha (i. e, the Jata-
katthakatthd I 2?) may be seen from the ‘postscript of J.

which runs as follows:

»Parinibbute pana Bhagavati usabhad-rukkhadini tint padani

Atthakatharh Avopetva Jabiniti ddini pafica (for paiica read

cn) padani ekath gathath katvi Ekanipatapilith aropesun

Hi’, he.

» When Bhagavat was dead the Council-holders put the three

padas usabhi-rukkha ete. into the Atthakatha (see p. 336),

and made lapiini and the other padas into one githd and

put it into the verses (Pili) of the Ekanipaita2

So the Atthakathad and its translation into Pali (Jata-
kassa Atthavannana) begin with: Sa paniyamh Jatakassa
Atthavannana, see vol. I p. 2.

As a contrast to Atthakatha, Pali is often mentioned by
which is understood the verses both in the present Jataka and
in the Singhalese Atthakatha on which it is founded. Thus
when it is said in J. I 48%: paliyar pane phalarh papetiti likhanti
tath vyafijanath Atthakathiya n’ atthi, we must by this understand
rin the vorses (pili) of the Atthakathi", likewise in IT 742 227,
VI 22 222; sometimes Potthaka (IV 22° V 32) and Palipottbaka

30
(VI 533) are usod, as it' seems, with the same meaning as Pa



=== PAGE 7 ===
Vv Poatserptom

Te the Atttaratthe we have the olde element of the
{Taha ‘The ile of the AY, funded on on eval sory,
erigsllycompored inverse, from which Gotu Deda quotes
tometinen single vers somites more We Inve dere an
oti parallel to many of the Teelandc Saga works whch are

Dutt up on the od lye of the Bards That G2 nel
‘a not the author of these wren, wort lestly een frm te
Inter Jntalas, the verses of whch im waa) places sy the same
bs uot teen told an prow It wosld aneed be, edealus
fo waypoce that GB should have exerted, bse {0 expres
vm potty ood even un old Inngunge what be bed gst aul
prove Nobo en aiae whet be Bas and w pore by

quotations fom the poem on which lus tale 1 founded Ie
tances he does ot eren convert the old song into prose,
but Iete the tale go on sm the very words of the song, only now

and then patting 1 some explanatory remarks seo f ex TT
TIL 699,18 6041 o1¢ VEE, 220,08 221,19 495,19 12,518.17 96
548.1 10, 5572.9 ete Compare thie with what I have end 19
ry edition of the Satta Nipate p VI—VIIT Tks also worth
noticing certain reecrring phrases which seem to posat fo our
having here before us fragments of old popular epie poetry,
ex, kacer Yo kusalam VE eft Mahabharata (Calcutta
edition) XI ae727, see farther VE PE fol gy gg ty Are a
vey
That 1 Attia

be clearly teen from the Language of the Pals Vers
tm these we find many pacaliantien, espectally old forms which
do not occur sp the protic Pah, and some of which point to
the north west of India they beiog found an the Vedss A. few
fof them are due to the metre I aball make m note of {he

(tha oe the oldest part of the Jatake may

1 A vowsl say be made long f ex araho VI
soudake VIZ}, banter IV 2 etl HE 24% at
TID 32, ava THR or short

shatoofionn dabbbien IV 28, ryan VE 22, dara

Teseretee VIN, and « half vowel way be



=== PAGE 8 ===
vw

Postienptua

\E'Y, of 8 BEX, SN OND apucchan, cease
= stern TV fy eyavagante VO

‘That the Atttaratthu contains the oldest part of the ook,
0 cleat when we look at the scenes of the tales

Iv the Atftavatthu fates the scene ay Ind
498 tumes an Kanirttha (Baranns))
95 — om Gandbararattha (Palkasls)
9 — tm Karurattha (Karpill, Toda
eBedlanegars)
7 tm Magedbarattha (Raysgahs)
3 ~ ww Swrattha (Arittbapuranagers, Jetotarsoagers)
8 — ww Kosnlarattha (Savatths, Sakata)
‘eviee am Bharasatths
‘twice tn Kalingaratthe (Dantaparan gers)
tveice an Voniearatths (Rorambi)
‘ouce 1m Sovsraatthe (Roravanagers)
‘once in Mabirmakarsttha (Sskulsoegara)
‘once an Mallarattha (hueavati)
fouce an Seruearattha
conve in Tamnbapannidipa
fouce 1m Aventiatths (Uest)
‘once in Vodebarsttha (Mutha)
‘ice 1m Uttarapatba
‘once an Hemovanta (Chaddantadah
fonce 14 Kampillaraths (Uttaapancalanngars) eft Raveratthe
apes
Jn the Paceuppannaratthuctales the stene 16 laid
498 times an the Kovala
58 — a0 the Magan
4 — in the Saleya
3 — am the Vasase-
toric a0 the Laechavt
tiice on the Malla
‘once 18 the Sumbha
coco im the Bhager

ctomagara Uitare



=== PAGE 9 ===
Po teeriptin,

once in the Kitei-
onee in the Koliya-
once im the Videha-

ru

Tn these {wo litt’ the following names ste ite com ian,

Kasiratthn
Magadha-
Videbo
Malle-
Kosala-

Vatiisa-

occurs as the scene of the tale in the PL Vy eres

in the A. Vo dis frase

in the PL VL 55
inthe A.V, 7

in the PL VY oper

in the AL Ve once

jn the PL OV. thrice
in the AL Ve once

in the PL V. 4S time
in the AL Vo 3 tines
PL V3 times

mm the A. V2 tyre

in the

But the following are only to be found in the PL Vi:

Licchayvi twice

Sikiya- 4 times

Sumbha- once
Bhaggas once
Koliya- once

and ,the following only in the A, Vi:

Gandhiia- 25 times

Kura 9 times
Sivi- 3 times
Sovira- once
Mahithsaka- once
Seriva- once
Bharu- twice
Tambapannidipa once
Kalifiga- turee
Avanti- once
Uttaripaths once

Himavanta onee


=== PAGE 10 ===
vant esteenptess

‘That w fo ny ‘The tater of the Atitavattl u play
mostly im the northern and western part of India,
and tle tales of the Paccuppannaratthy prineipally
an the eastern India In other words the Attlavattha 15
the oldest elewseat of the Jatika This seems eapecsally to be
orient from the tales 1m which the Tabhanls us mentioned as
4 Unieceety town to whiel young men resorted from Titranast
aot aller evsterly cities €0 etudy the theee Vedan and acquire
every sort of secomplist ment under the guidance of renowned
raaster (Ste the Index under Takkaslt) «

‘he Paceappavnavatt! wand the Atitavattha together
wth the Vevyakarana ad t
the Jntaba-Apthakatha (I
Sioghalese with the exception of the verses which wi
te original Pals, and this Sing) love J4tsho Atha)
later been re tenmslated rato Pah under the namo of Jats
Kasse Atthavannans of Jntkecy’ Attharannana (eT 3b 2h
i, VY") which 1 the Tetaka that now lies before us and
Degine at page 2 of the frst volume

‘That the pronase part of the Atftavattha belongr to the old
atsha oe quite clear from the fact that the verers ould be
thoroughly unsateligable without at

Te may be doubted ebether tle Tetreductory Vers:
at p 1, although they are to be found both 1s C aad B, ong:
ally belong tto the Jatekavea Atbavannen', a2 they do’ not
‘appear in 8 which has quite a dsfereot Tatroduction (eee yol 1V)
fod only agrees with © and Bi from the beginning of p 2 Ba
anagem Jatakuesa Atheeornsaa If we euppore that they are
part of the JA then the author of st Las been called pon

12, Baddbamitta and Brddbedevs

by three persoos wiz Atthadas
to wee at

TL Bat who s the Author? ‘To be eure, wo are told
bbe the wnter of the Gantha Vara (‘ee Joureal of the P
Soe 1885 p 69) thet Buddhoghosa as the acthor bot on thie
you can veateely rely Tt a certain Yat Baddhaghoes. hae

‘waite Vienddlimoggs, Sooangelonlasct, Papaneasudeni, Sa



=== PAGE 11 ===
Postseriptom ix

ratthappakisini, Manorathaptrani and Samantapisadika, for thie
clearly appears from the Introductory Verros to these commentnrins,
but that bo, besides these voluminous works, should have written
six others equally large whose author he is supposed to be, is very
ineredible, especially if he only stayed three yearz in Ceylon,
and was not barely a translator, but an independent writer.

Farther, it is not granted cither, that the Buddhamitta
who is spoken of in the Introductory Verses of the Jitaka-Attha-
vannand, is the same with the one that is mentioned in the

Samantapfsidiki and the Papaicasidani, this one being more
likely to be identical with the Buddhamitts that, according to
Vasilicf’s Bouddhisme p. 218 lived ,,vers la neuf-contiime annte
aprés Ja mort de Bonddha* and consequently was a contemporary
of Buddhaghosa. This last mentioned Buddhamitta, further.
may be the same with the one who is mentioned as having, ia
the time of Kumaragupta. Samvat 126 crected a Statne of
Buddha, (Cir, Westergaard’s Indiske Kejsethuse p. 108, and
A. Cunningham's Archwol, Suvey of India X p. 7).

XW. Phat the original Pali Atthakatha (sec Index)
~ Jitaka-Atthakatha (I &) which was translated into
Singhalese, already has existed as a Book at the time when
the Safigitikirakas made the above-mentioned transposition

(see supra p. ITI) seems evident.

IV. The now existing Jatakaesa Atthavannana precents
itself partly as a recast of the Jiitaka-Atthakathi, an earlier
arrangement of the stuff being kept formally but baying in
reality been altered, while several, formerly independent, Jatakas
have been incorporated in others, We find namely that 12
(110. 111. 112. 170, 192. 350. 864 452. 471. 509. 508. 517.)
from their original place have been transferred to 546 Maba-
Ummagga-, 2 (341. 464) to 536 Kunila-, 1 (441) to 516 Vi-
ahura-, and 1 (470) to 535 Sudhabhojana-; consequently, when
we subtract these 16 from the curtent statement of 559, we only
get 534. but formally there are 547 according to the older
redaction, In this both C and B agree. It would be of interest
to learn what position the Sixmese Jataka holds in regard to



=== PAGE 12 ===
x Postenptom

© and B, af, on the whole, © complete copy nowadays exits
im Siam
V The Buddhist Canon ss meatiooed am the Jataka
wader three names ‘Timi Patskans, Pitabattaye aud
Tepataka Buddbavacans (see for theve nswer the Intex)
And if wo can depend upon the statement an JIL 1! of
the following smport
‘Tada lira pancarate Uerhinana timnem vedanam pltragu
osane pubbapted ‘Tin Patales ugganbitea mnamadametia
Intva ‘Sammasambaddho pi'Tin' era Psteklay janali maysm
i tans yansent, evar stnte kins tose cmbehy nfcakarenan”
fa Buddhupatthrsam wa gacchantt + @
‘wAt that time fire hundred Bralimanae who where perfect
fu the Gree Vedes, and bad embricad the doctrine (of the
Badabs) and acquired the three Pitakse were seized wath
the madness of pride and aud ,Samndvambuddha,
tobowure Knows the three Pitakes, int we too know
them, s0 what then conmste the diferenco between him and
‘ust, to thioking they do aot go and verve Buddha,
the the Tipiteke must have existed at the time of
Gotema Buddha, and G B would cossequeatly, ke his
antagonist Devadatta (II 14), bave been Tupiteke dhare, Joo
who knows te three Pitakas Compare with tha J If
ME javuto Devadatta, Sammacambuldho toyban geariyo {vam

Scrambuddham niesaye Thar Petakans tgpeahes, aod
the bepenig af te Commenters to Diamoepate vy 1929
Bahar p eet Ina dhamnadeanar Sata Jetoyane waren

Adee eabayake arabia katben Sdeatthieiiso by dro Kelapett
ram sabiga (pahaya2) wiaceta gaotS. Satthe dhammadrsse
rotva Kame palaye sisnne uram datya.pabbaty pancsvassao:
ecangsopaybayaoatn aanGke vasttvd. Sstthtram apasainkamtrs
seave dhuram poetbitva vipaaessadburan ea gaathedbural ca
‘nitharate eutva eko fara qthamn bhaste rshallaksksle pabbsyto
os aakkhise ims ganthadhuram plretum vpastartaburam
[ptoa pitresauati* yi arabetlt yapisesnam hathopetva glafento
saymanto asbo patrambbiJabs atahattarm prapuns, stare ela

