BIBLIOGRAPHIC METADATA:
AUTHOR: C. O. Blagden
TITLE: XXI. A Further Note on the Inscriptions of the Myazedi Pagoda, Pagan, and other Inscriptions throwing light on them
JOURNAL: Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland (1910), pp. 797-812

urma somewhere about A.D. 1170-80. From this 
^’period the date of Buddhas death was (he supposes) 
assumed to have occurred at a time corresponding with 
R.C. 544 of our reckoning. 

4 find it difficult to reconcile this view with the 
following facts: — 

1. We have the Myazedi inscription, at Pagan, in three 

, The Rgvedic passages have all been <lealt with M Oldenberg in his 
Ryveda-NoteUi i, 25-9, who appears to accept the u^e of tc as accusative 
in the Epic on the strength of Hopkins’ remark in JAOS.^jp| 222; see 
Oldenberg, p. 25, n. 2. The explanations given of the'^^i^s^es in 
question in this article, written before the appearance^pf Oldenberg’s 
book, diflfer somewhat from and are perhaps inferior to those given by 
him, but they agree in rejecting the theory of te as accusative. 



THE BEVISED BUDDHIST ERA IN BURMA 


47S 


deciphered versions, recording a date 1628 “ expired *’ of 
the Buddhist era as the time at winch a certain king was 
reigning at Pagan. The Burmese and Talairig expressions 
(for which see JRAS , October, "*1909, pp. 1019. 1023) refer 
in the usual way to the era intended being that of the 
Religion The Pali text, even inoix* explicitly, says • — 

Nibbana Lokanatbassa attha\ js.idbike gate 

sahasse pana vassanam cha-s'Re va puie fatha. 

On ilie oi'dinary Computation, this appareuti^ coiiesponds 
(the year being “expired’’) to A.]> 1085. Foi a reason 
which will presently appear, 1 am not piepaied to 
guaiantee that that is the piecise A I), year. But anyhow 
it must have been somewliere theT’eatx)uts, and nearly 
a century earlier than tht period suggested by Mr. Fleet 
for the introduction ol the revised Buddhist era into 
Burma. 

2. A glance thiough the English translation of the 
Burmese inscriptions of Pagan, Pmya, and Ava (Rangoon, 
1899) reveals the cut ions fact that for more than two 
centuries after the prestimed date of the Myazedi 
inscription th(» initial point assumed for the Buddhist 
era was not a date corresponding with our B.c. 544, but 
vaiied to the extent of some years before such date. 
At least that seems lo me at present the only possible 
explanation of the following statements : — 

(a) “ In the year 1796 of the Religion . . the 
minister . . erected a large monastery . The 
following were the slaves dedicated by the minister and 
his vife . . . to their monastery, which was completed 
on Wednesday, the 5th waning of Nadaw, 599 Sakkaraj ” 
(p. 52). Now Sakkaraj here means the Burmese oia 
beginning A.D. 688, so that assuming only one monastery 
to be referred to, which was begun and finished within 
the year, the initial point of the Buddhist era in this case 
must have been some sixteen years before the usually 



THE REVISED BUDDHIST ERA IN' BURMA 


received date. 1 must leave it to Burmese scholars to 
decide wlicther this is a coirect interpretatfon of the text 
of the inscription. 

(h) “ In the year 1887 ol the Religion, or on Thursday, 
the Oth waning of Tazaungm/)n, G54 Sakkaraj ” (p. (J3). 
Her\.‘, apparently, the initial point of tlie Buddhist era is 
s<;me two years earlier than B.c. 544. 

Subsequent entries (pp. 5, 08, 94, 187) from A.D. 1299 
onwards show at most a discrepancy of a year, if indeed 
there is any at all. But it really seems as if prior to 
about A.I). 1800 the initial point of the Buddhist era in 
Burma had partaken somewhat of the nature of a movable 
feast. Under these circumstances one hesitates to put 
a date to the earliest of tliese inscriptions, that of the 
Myazedi pagoda at Pagan. The matter is further c6ra-^ 
plicated by the statement contained in JRAS., October, 
1909, p. 1084, that an inscription has been found dated 
in the year 398 of the Burmese era (= A.D. 1086) during 
the rt‘ign of Kyanzittha. Now this is the very king 
who, according to the Myazedi inscription, reigned for 28 
years and died (as it seems) in 1628 “ expired ’’ of the 
Buddhist era. How, then, could he have l)een on tlif‘ 
tliroru' so early as a.d. 1036 ^ And if lie was, then from 
what 11. c. date are we to suppose that th(‘ Myazedi 
inscription reckons its 1600-28 years of the Buddhist 
era, between which he is supposed to have reigned ? 

C. O. Blagden. 


Remarks on the above Note 
I am glad to find that my article on the Buddhavarsha, 
the later reckoning from the death of Buddha which 
assumes an initial point in B.C. 544, has attracted 
Mr. Blagden’s attention : discussion should certainly help 
to elucidate the matter. 

1 arrived at the conclusion that this reckoning was 



■'d^E BirvisEI) Bui)BHIST' feBA’ 1351 BUMIA i 


devised in Ceylon shortly after A.r>. 1165. And I suggested 
that it was carried from Ceylon to Burma and those parts 
in the decade A.D. 1170-80. But, if it can be shown that 
the opposite was the case, and that the reckoning had an 
earlier origin in Burma and was taken thence to Ceylon^ 
I shall have no objection to accept this position instead. 

Mr. Blagden suggests that evidence to that effect may 
be found in the Myazedi inscription, from Pagan, one text 
oj which has been edited by him. The object of this 
record was to register the making of the cave-pagoda in 
which it was engraved, and the enshrining blierein of 
a golden image of Buddha. And th<^ 1‘act that the record 
was framed and engraved In four languages, VhVi, Burmese, 
Talaing, and an unidentified tongue, seems to mark it as 
commemorating an event of some very •special importance. 
It presents according to the Talaing text the date “ after 
the religion of my lord the Buddha had been going on 
for 1628 years past ; according to the Burmese t(*xt, the 
date in the year 1628 of the Religion If they stood 
alone, and without some extraneous guide, these expi’ossions 
might Tte understood to mean 1628 years after the intro- 
duction^^ the Buddhist religion into Burma, in B.c. 308 
accordiiSWto tlie Burmese belief and chronology. But 
the moaMng is explained by the Pali text, (quoted by 
Mr. Blagden, which distinctly says that the year is the 
year 1628 after the nirvana, the death, of Buddha: that 
is^ with B.c. 544 as the date of the death, A.D 1085-86. 
And this places the datti nearly a century before tlie time 
arrived at by me for the invention of the reckoning. 

’ imeriptiom of Pagan, Pinya awl Ava, translations (1S90), p. 97. 
The expression “the year (so-and-so) of the Kcligion’’ is also found on 
pp. 5, 9, 22, 52, 6.3 (No. G), 94, 1.37, 107, 173, 175, 176, 183 ; and on p. 63 
(No. 7) wo have “ the y^i,|^3052 of the Religion of Gautama Buddha*’ : 
we should like to what the originals have for “the year of the 

Religion ”, On p. 14 we have “the year 2312 Anno Buddhae”, and on 
p. 16 “ Anno Buddhae 2307 ” : is the term here Buddhavassa, or is it 
Jinachakka ? The dating is expressly referred to the nirvana in the case 
of the years 1986 (p. 37) and 2295 (p. 15). 

JBAS. 1910. 


31 



tHE EEViSED BUDDHIST ERA IN BURHIA 

It appears that this Myazedi date is the only such 
instance that can be adduced, for the present at least. 
And, looking through the book mentioned by Mr. Blagdcn,^ 
I find that the next instances of the use of this reckoning 
^re the two which he has cited : one (p. 52) is a date in 
the year 1796, = A.D. 1253-54; the other (p. 63, No. 6) 
is a date in tlie year 1837, = a.d. 1204-95. 

But of course one thoroughly reliable instance, given 
by an inscription undeniably engraved before (say) 
A.D. 1150, would be quite enough. The present question, 
therefore, seems to be : is the Myazedi date such an 
instance ? 

This inscription mentions a king Tribhuvanrf&itya- 
dhammaraja, who is otherwise known as Kyanzit, 
Kyanzittha.‘^ It opens by saying that he was reigning 
at Arimaddanapura (Pagan) in the year 1628 expired. 
It proceeds to state that he reigned for 28 years. And 
it then records the acts (stated above) which were 
performed by his stepson when he (the king) was lying 
'‘sick well-nigh unto death”. We should ordinarily take 
this as meaning that the acts were performed in the year 
1628 + 28 = 1656, = a.d. 1113-14, and that K^'anzittha 
died then or soon afterwards. It appears, however,^ that 
we are to understand that Kyanzittha died in the year 
1628 expired itself, = a.d. 1085-86. He began to reign, 
then, in or about A.D. 1058. But Mr. Blagden has drawn 
attention to a statement that there is another inscription, 
which mentions Kyanzittha as reigning in the year 398 
of the ordinary Burmese reckoning, the Sakkaraj era 
commencing in a.d. 638 ; that is in a.d. 1036-37 : and, 
as Mr. Blagden has remarked, that is incompatible with 
his commencing to reign in or about A.D. 1058. It is also 

^ The one referred to in the preceding note. 

2 See this Journal, 1909. 1050, note 1, and Mr. Blagden’s remarks 
above. 

^ Seeloc. cit., preceding note. 



THE REVISED BUDDHIST ERA IN BURMA 4 / 7 ^. 

incompatible with a third inscription, framed in a.d. 1668 , 
which ^ places Anawrata (the predecessor of Kyanzittha) 
in Sakkaraj 421 , = a.d. 1059 - 60 . But we may add that 
this last statement, which is accompanied by one which 
places Kyanzittha himself in the year 432 , = A.D. 1070 - 71 , 
is reconcilable with the statement in the Myazedi in- 
scription : for, provided no later date is forthcoming for 
Anawrata, we may assume that lie d^ed, and Kyanzittha 
succeeded, in a.d. 1059 , so that the latter had practically 
reigned for 28 years by A.D. 1086 . It appears, however^ 
that there are still other inscriptions, which show Kyan- 
zittha as reigning in a.d. 1107 .^ Altogether, his date 
seems to be rather a mi.5;od matter : he was reigning in 
a.d. 1036 , but he only began to reign in a.d. 1068 : he 
died in A.D. 1085 , yet he was still reigning in a.d. 1107 . 

It appears to me an important point that the Myazedi 
inscription presents only a 7iirvdna~da,ie for Kyanzittha. 
Nearly all the other similar dates, in the inscriptions 
translated in the volume which gives the translation of 
the Burmese text of the Myaz(;di record, were accompanied 
by the corresponding dates in the era of A.D. 638 . Why 
did the Myazedi inscription omit to give this equivalent ? 
It seems to me that the reason very probably is that the 
record is not a synchronous one; that is, that it was 
framed and engraved, not when the acts registered by 
it were performed, but a considerable time afterwards, 
when, having received the new reckoning, the Burmese 
were commencing to make out their chronology in its 
terms, and, in doing that, were very possibly putting up 
inscriptional records of some of the leading events of 
previous times.® Mr. Blagden has said that in the next 
few records the equations between the nirvana-reclionmg 

^ See p. 19 of the book mentioned in note 1 on p. 477 above. 

^ 2 Report on Archajological Work in Burma, 1906-6, p. 10. 

^ The characters of the Talaing text are described as agreeing with 
the date mentioned in it. But there can, I imagine, be no difficulty 
about accepting them equally well for a century or so later. 



480 THE REVISED BUDDHIST ERA IN BURMA 

and the Sakkaraj era are not correct : does not that look 
as if the Burmese were then handling a new reckoning 
about which they wore not quite sure ’ The discrepancy 
in the date of Kyanzittha, whicli exists on one side or 
the other, points in the same direction. And there 
appears to be something of the same kind in connexion 
with Anawrata : the Sasanavamsa says (p. Gl) that he 
began to reign in the Jinachakka year (the 'iii rvCtmt-yoar) 
1561, = A.D. 1018-19 * and it gi\es as tlie equivalent, in 
the same sentence, the (Sakkaiaj) year 871, = A.i). 1009-10, 
nine years earlier. 

Another instructive indication, in the direction whicli 
I suggest, seems to be the point that tlie Myazedi in- 
scription states only tli(‘ year , omitting to give the month, 
fortnight, lunar day, and weekday, which details are 
furnished in almost every other inscription translat(‘d in 
the book to which I have referred above. Th(‘ bare 
mention of the year is just what we may always expect 
to find in records commemoiating evi'uts of presious tinu‘S 
And, in the same fashion, the inseiiption of \ i>. 1608 
simply tells us, without details, that th(‘ Shvvezigon 
pagoda was built by Anawiata in SakkaiTij 421, and the 
tee was offered by Kyanzittha in the y(‘ar 482 ; thougli 
it gives, in the same sentence, all tlu' usual details foi 
the date when the tee was i(‘movi‘d by the gods in older 
to give the reigning king the opportunity of acquiring 
merit by supplying a new one. 

It remains to be seen what discoveries may be made 
hereafter. Meanwhile, we must beai in mind that the 
Kalyaiii inscription of a.d. 147G tells us plainly (see this 
Journal, 1909. 845) that the religion from Ceylon was 
established at Pagan in a.d. 1181-82. If a form of the 
religion was then carried from Ceylon to Buirna, w^ould 
not a new and interesting reckoning, just established in 
Ceylon, have been naturally taken with it ? It may of 
course be argued, to the contrary, that the new reckoning 



GENITIVE- ACCUSATIVE IN MABATHI ■ 

was taken from Burma to Ceylon in A.D. 1170-71, when 
the Mahathera Uttarajiva went there. But the date put 
forward in the Myazedi ins-'-ription seems insufficient 
to upset what appears to be so clear from the Ceylon 
records ; namely, that the reckoning with the initial 
point in B.c. 544 was devised tlu^re, and was put together 
in its complete form just after A.D. 1165. 

J. F. Fleet. 


The Constkuction of Gexitivk-Acx^lsativi: in 
Mabatht 

A serious study of Indian Vernacuh rs is v(jry interesting 
and useful, not only foi* a Sanskrit scholar, but, I am glad 
to be able to show, for a comparative philologist too. 

In Old Slavonic, as in Indian Vernaculars, the accusative 
termination of i- and 76-stoms and of inasculini'. o-sterns 
being dropped, the form for the accusative case was the 
same as for the nominative, and thus the sentence “ synb 
viditii otbci* ~ filius videt patrem was ambiguous, and 
could mean also filium videt pater ”, the position of the 
subject being free. Therefore the language, for the sake 
of avoiding ambiguity, used the genitive instead of 
accusative in the case of living beings: '' syn^ viditt 
othca” 

The same process is to be seen in Indian Vernaculars, 
and is especially clear in Marathi, grammatically the 
most important and most interesting dialect of all Indian 
Vernaculars. In so far as I have read Hindi, I find that 
the same construction exists there also, though rather 
complicated ; this being so, it must be treated in a separate 
way, which I hope to do later on. 

The Marathi verb “ to see,” governs the accusative 

case, when the object is a thing, e.g. : ^ 

^Tir^ = '' having seen that 

Os 

( = acc.), the doe began to go after Sabaktegin ” ; but it 



m 


OBrnTIVE-ACCUSATlVE IN MABATHI 


governs the genitive, when the object is a human or other 
living being, e.g. : t?rajtTT fSITT iNUT 

wm. WT« W»» TTWft ^fTSrrar = “meantime liis son 
^iva came with the food. Having scon him {= gen.) 
Bamji said 

' The verb ( = pr. genhai, s. ^rhiiati), “ to take,” 
jjjoverns in tlie last sentence the acciisativ’o : 

= “ tlie food having taken”; but by living beino's it 
j|gjff‘rns the njeiiitive ease : ^oft 

mftff TT^TfT " Tlien the doc, 

havino- tak(‘n tlie fawn, ran away with joy into the 
forest 

Now the questions are: (f'c) Why is this ^oiiitivT‘ construc- 
tion used only in respect ol' human and other living beings ^ 
(b) why is th(‘ ^eniti\e only u-.ed and not, for instance, 
the dative,^ and what is tin* .s/yn/f/r/Zc ('xpJanafion of it i' 
The hrst question is not diilicult. So far as 1 am aware, 
all scholars are of oiu' ojiinion in r(‘i>ard to Old Slavonic, 
but in re<(ard to Mai'athi no on(‘ st‘(‘ms to have as yet 
given a satisfaetoiy ex[)lanation. 

We know that in most cas(‘s the subject of a sentence is 
a human or oth(*r living being. Tlnu-cfore when two 
names of animate objects occur in a sentence, without 
any distinction in case termination, the sentence could be 
misunderstood; that is to say, the sentence “synj> viditi> 
otbci, ” = filius videt patrem ” could be misunderstood 
(= filium videt pater), but not otbei» vidili. gnidb " = 
“ pater videt arcem ”, because it is not possible to say 
arx videt patrem ”. 

More difficult is the second question. In the last volume 
of Indg. Forschungen (xxiv, 3-4, pp. 293-307) Professor 
A. Thomson treats this question as to the origin of the 
genitive construction in Slavonic languages. Tins article 
is, in fact, a refutation of Professor E. Berneker’s theory 


' This has no bearing on Marathi. 



SENITIVE- ACCUSiTlVB IN ' MABAtpl ’ 

expressed in Kuhn’s Zeitachrift 1904, xxxvii, p. 364,^ 
that the negative sentences, in which the object must in 
Old Slavonic be in the genitive case, have had an influence 
on this construction. For example, the positive sentence 
runs “ syn^ viditb oti*Cb ” ( = acc.), but the negative “ sym. 
ne viditii otf*oa” ( = gen.). According to Professor Berneker, 
the influence of tlie negative s<^iitonce with the genitive 
case brought about the use of the gonitivo instead of the 
accusative in poaiti'f'r sentences also. 

But this theory cannot be applied to Marathi, because 
in this language no such change of cases takes place. 
Therefore the influence of the negatne sentences cannot 
have produced the genitive construction now existing in 
Marathi, and in all probability the same holds good for 
Old Slavonic. 

Professor Tliomson also does not believe that the 
syntactic value of a genitive in negative sentences should 
have been tin* same as the accusative in positive sentences. 
Hi' explains in the first part of his article ^ that this 
construction was due to a desire of repressing the 
psychological subject in the sentence and making it 
evidently into the object. 

To express myself more clearly in reference to Marathi, 
I venture to modify a little what Professor A. Thomson 
has so well expressed. I state that the Marathi language 
conclusively proves that the genitive construction in 
question is really the outcome of nothing else than a 
desire to avoid ambiguity. 

We see this clearly from the construction, which we 
call the double accusative (direct and indirect object), in 
Latin, Greek, and Sanskrit ; for instance, in Latin puto 
te amicum ”, in Greek <f)CKov ^iXiinrov r^yoOvTo ”, in 
Sanskrit nd vdi hatilm vrtr^m vidmA ni jivdm ”, 

In Marathi the direct object is always put into the 


^ The date of the article is 1901, 


^ He promised two parts. 



THE SEVEN-HEADED PE^OON 


48r 

genitive, not only in the case of a living being (according to 
the rule mentioned above), but also in that of an inanimate 
object, and this is done, in my opinion, simply for the sake 
of distinguishing it from the indirect object. 

Cf. in Marathi ^ “ every- 

one believes in difference of castes among Hindu people ” ; 

governs the accusative Here the 

accusative is used, because there is only one object. 

But in the sentence 

TTWTO = “the people of 

the Vedic religion believe in the Vedas, Sinrtipuranas, etc., 
in these religious books, as an authority where the same 
verb (?nf^HTH) with the same meaning occurs, the din^ct 
object tkey believe in . . . which in the 

former sentence is rendered by the accusative (arrfw^), i« 
here put in the genitive, obviously to avoid ambiguity. 

All instances are taken from Marathi reading-1 x)oks, 
these two last, for example, fi*om 1908, 

p. 20. Such instances are v(n*y many, and, as I said 
before, they go to confirm Professor A. Thomson’s views 
on the subject witli regard to Old Slavonic. 

V. L^:sN\^ \ 

Oxford, Januari/, 1910 . 


The Seven-headed Dkagon^ 

Wlien the Sufi martyr, Mansfir llallfij, Avas being led 
to execution, he cried out — 

“ My Friend is doing me no unkindness, 

He gives me the cup that he as the host drank, 
He invites me to taste stake and headsman’s mat, 
Like one who in summer drinks wine witli the 
dragon.” 


^ See JRAS., 1908, p. 552. 



THE SBVEH-HEADBH DEACION 


.48S* 


And in the Mantiqii-l Tair wc read — 

“ Whoso has fel]ow\ship in sleep and food 
With the seven-head(‘(l di-ayon in Taniuz (July), 

In this pastime incurs dire misfortunes, 

Whereof death on tlie gibbet is the least.” 

The dragon legend here referred to seems to be a folk-lore 
amalgam or * conflation” of (a) th<' juimeval dragon myth, 
(b) the Arrow” ddiion myth, and (r) tl^c customs of 
partaking of sacrifices and sleeping in temples or ' per- 
noctation 

(а) The primeval dragon myth. Jn his Anfirhr^itit 
Legends (translated by Koanc) Boustsot has tract^d the 
progress of this famcms myth, rolling on turongh suc- 
cessive generations, gathering continual accn'tions, such 
as the legend of Nero redic^ms (Antichrist), and k^eoming 

*so transfigured that now its original form can only be 
deciphered as from a palim])sest. But most of tlie details 
of the full-blown dragon story, given in Revelation xii 
and XX, viz., his seven heads, his attacks on the woman, 
and his being bound and loosed, seem to belong not to 
the Babylonian dragon Tiamat, but rather to the old 
Persian dragon Az or Azhidahak. (Hee Mills, Avesta 
EscltaioJogy compared ivifh the B( oks of Daniel and 
Revelation, and West's note on p. 110, vol. xviii, of 
Sacred Boohs of the East.) The picture of the constellation 
Draco {AUTannln) in the old star maps exactly rojn-esents 
the conception of the dragon in the mind of the writer 
^of Revelation xii, 4, viz., a great serpent stretching 
across the heavens and drawing a third part of the stars 
with its tail”. The traditions collected in Mi^hkatn-l 
Masahih (translation by Matthews, vol. ii, pp. 551 seqq.) 
give the Muhammadan additions to the portrait of Dajjal 
or Antichrist. 

(б) The clue to the “ Arrow ” demon was kindly given 
me by Professor Houtsma. This demon is thus described 



THE SEVEN-HEADED DRAGON 


in Rapaport’s Talen from five Midnuhr. “There is one 
great demon whose name is ‘Arrow* (Kative), Thct 
Psalmist alludes to this when he says (Ps. xci, 5), ‘ The 
arrow that flietli by day.* His pl»ysiognomy is described 
as follows : Head similar to that of a calf, one horn rising 
out of his forehead in the shape of a cruse or pitcher. 
((Joinpare the descriptions of Dajjril.) No one, man or 
Ij^st, beholding him can live, but drops down dead at^ 
mice. ' There is a certain period during which this demon 
has special sway, and that is the three w^cs between 
the 17th Tainiiz and the 9th Ab. The Rabl^ prohiJ^ited. 
schoolmasters chastising their pupils during this period *’ 
(p. 23). Mr. Rapaport tells me that he has not found 
this demon described as a dragon either in the Midrash 
or the Talmud, but the special mention of the month 
Tamuz in the passage under discussion shows beyond^ 
doubt, I think, that this demon had been identified with 
the dragon in the folk-loi-e of the time of Hallaj. 

((.') The third element in Ilallaj’s story is probably 
derived from the ancient customs of eating the food offered 
to idols and of sleeping in the temples. The first is 
illustrated by the story in “Bel and the Dragon** of the 
priests who were “partakers of the altar*’ of Bel and 
“drank the cup of devils” (1 Cor. x, 18, etc.); and the 
second by the story of the Deadly Mosque given in 
my translation of tlie Masnavi of Jalalu-d Din Ruini, 

p;i6(). _ J' , , 

Dr. Nicholson, to whom I am indebted for much 
assistance, suggests that the story mayJiji^sibly contain 
an allusion to the ritual of Tamuz worship. But all we 
know of that ritual is that women wailed for Tamuz, 
as they do now for Ilasan and Husain. 

E. H. Whinfield. 



THJE -KELiJDI - RAJAS OP lEKEKI AND BEDN0R ^ 4t87 

The Kelai)I Eajas of IkkEki and Bedncr 

I have not as a rule cared to reply to criticisms levelled 
against mistakes or omissions in my Sketch of thf, Dynadles 
of Southern Indict^ which was published twenty-five jears 
ago, because it always seemed needless to offer an apology 
or to attempt to explain the reasons for errors due to the 
imperfect information then at our command. And if 
I now venture to make a few remaiks on Dr. Ifarn eft's 
paper in the Journal for January last (pp. J40-o0) it is 
only because, while in the main I agree with iiiin, T consider 
it necessary to ask readers to suspend judgment on at 
least one point. 

The pedigree published by om* of the K(‘huii Rajas was 
based on the account of tliat dynasty put forward by 
Buchanan in his Myaotr, ct< ^ This in its turn was based 
•on information given in AO. 1801 to the author by 
Ramappa Varmika, an hei'editary accountant iu the 
district of Barkur. Buclianan writes that this man had 
a book iu S^iNskrit called Vid^antyuna Sicca; and from 
thence, and his family papers, he has made out a Raya- 
2 Jaditti, or succession of the Rajas who have governed 
Tuluva My gcmealogical tree is correct according to 
RaTnaj)pa’s chronicle as described by Buchanan. There 
was little else to guide me when 1 compiled my Sketch 
in 188;}. 

Dr. BariK'tt seems to accept without question the 
assertion of a certain court poet, called Shadakshari 
(whose patroh Basavappa Nayakka was, about tlu^ year 
A.D. 1750, ruling over the Bednur country), that this 
Basavappa's grandfather of Ihe same name, who governed 
that tract from A.D. 1697 to 1714, had been the legitimate 
son of the body of SOmasekhara I and his wife Clianna- 
jmamba. Ramappa's compilation, however, asserted that 
this Basavappa I, or Praudha 8rl Basavappa, had been 


1 Madras ed. of 1870, ii, 278. 



'1188 THE KELADI EAJAS OF IKKEKT AND BioNUR 

only an adopted son. He relates the story of Soina- 
^ekliara I’s atrocities, his assassination at the hands of 
a Brahman named Sauinya, and the assumption of the 
government by the widow, Channama. Ramappa then 
states tliat ihis Rani, “ having no cliildron, adopted 
Baswuppa, the son of M(mnpa Chittij, a Bamjiga 
mercliant of liide^^unc (Bednore), where the seat of 
government tlien was The male descendants of this 
adopted son also ended in Bmli Ba^inippa ” ^ This 
account is very explicit. The murder of SOniasekhara is 
confirmed by Fryer {Tmveh, od of 1G08, p. 102), who was 
in the neighbourhood of Bednfir during the rule of 
Channama Fryer calls Basava I ‘‘son ''of SOma^ekhara 
and Channama, but his evidence as to the exact relation- 
ship counts for very little Mr. Rice, our best authority 
on minor Mj’sore principalities, states {Epiy. Cam, VII, 
SJmnoya, Introd., p 48) that Basavappa I was an adopted 
son, and he lepeats this assertion in his latest \olume 
{Mysore and Coory from the Inscriptions, p 130). 
I presume tliat lie has sound reasons for the statement, 
though apjiarently we can get no information fi*oin the 
published insciiptions. Peihaps he will state liis 
authority. 

In the face of the clear account of the dynasty furnished 
by Ramappa, in part supported by Fryers testimony, 
I think that the weight of e\ idence is in favour of 
Basavappa I being an adopted, not a natural, son. Shadak- 
shari Avould, of course, conceal the fact in order to glorify 
his patron , though, indeed, there is no necessity for us to 
vilify tliat wiiter, foi a son pioperly adopted is always 
consideied as a son in India. 

As to the proper spelling of tlie name of Soma^ekhara’s 
Rani, my owm was obtained from Buchanan. Dodda is 
only an adjective, meaning “the elder". The lady was 

^ Shatlakshdij s patron (Buchanan’s Mysore, Canara, and Malabar, 
Madras ed. of 1870, ii, 290). 



PO-LO-HIH-Md-PtJ-LO AND SD-FA-IA-NA-CHD-TA-LD 


probably as often called “ Channamamba ” as “ Chan- 
namaji In the Shimoga and Shikarpur Inscription 
volume of the Epig, Cam. I find the name twice spelt 
^^Chennama” (Sh. 17, Sk. 213) and twice “ Chaimaina 
(Sk. 79, 82). 

Sivappa Nayaka, son of the younger Saiikanna, certainly 
had a younger brother Venkata. Mr Rice includes him in 
his list as having reigned one y» nr (Epig. Cifrn VII, 
Shimoga, Introd, pp. 42, 43), and I)i. Hultzsch mentions 
him in his Second R( port on Sanskrit MSS., 189G, p. xii, 
in connexion with a copper-plate iii'^ciiptiun of v.o lliGO- 1 
from Honawar. Ramappa omitted to notice him. 

R. Skwell. 


Note on a hove 

• Mr. Sewell is doubtless right in inciiiitaiiniii; that 
Basavappa was really an adopted son , it was not my 
intention to dispute the statement, but 1 wished to call 
attention to the language used by Shadakshaii, who is in 
any case our earliest autliority. 

L. D. Barnett. 

Note on Bo-lo-uih-mo-pit-lo and Su-fa-l\-n\- 

OHU-TA-LO 

The name Po-lo-liili-mo-pu-lo (Hiuen Tsiang) lias been 
correctly transcribed as Brahmapura But the town of 
Brahinapura has been eiToneously looked for in (Jlarliwal. 
I am convinced that the ancient Brahmapura, the capital 
of the Chamba State, is meant. This town is now called 
Brahmaur. (Compare Dr. Vogel’s Chamba Inscriptions.) 
Po-lo-hih-mo-pu-lo is given as one of the frontieis of 
Su-fa-la-na-chu-ta-lo, which has been cornctly identified 
with Suvarnagotra (golden family), evidently the ancient 
name of Guge, Ruthog, and Eastern Ladakh. The name 
“ Golden Family ” was given to these countries on account 



490 


THE ELEPHANT STATUES AT D^ILHI 


of their richness in gold. The frontiers of Suvarnagotra 
are described so plainly by Hiucn Tsiang that there can 
be no doubt with regard to its situation. It is situated 
north of Brahiiiapura (tlie ancient Chaiiiba State) ; south 
of Kustana (Khotan); east of Sainpaha (Sanpoho or 
Ladakh) ; west of Tibet. 

' Hiuen Tsiang identities Suvarnagotra with tlie “ Empire 
of the Eastern Women”; but this is not agreed to by 
Bushcll, who places this empire east of Tibet. Still, 1 am 
convinced that Hiuen Tsiang is right in liis identification. 
But it is quite possible that tliere was anotlier “ Empire 
of the Eastern Women ” farther east. The Je River of 
this empire, flovdng to tlie south, would be the Jhelum, 
which turns to tlie south within its limits. “ The Turks 
invaded the country.” They could easily do so, for 
they were the next neighbours. “The people used the^ 
Indian characters for wi-iting.” Traces of Indian in- 
scriptions earlier than 1000 A.D. are found everywhere 
in Eastern Ladakh. Grave finds in Ladakh show that 
the ancient inhabitants of the country had the same 
extraordinary kind of burial which is described in the 
Sni fihu as having been practised in the Empire of the 
Eastern Women. 

A. H. Fbancke. 

The Elephant Statues at Delhi 
In the July number of the Society’s Journal there 
appeared an interesting article on “ The Elephant Statues 
of Agra and Delhi ” from the pen of Mr. H. Beveridge, in 
which he appears to favour the theories which derive the 
Delhi statues either from Gwaliar or from Agra. He also 
introduces a new suggestion as to the origin of the elephant 
riders, the torsos^ of which were excavated at Delhi, and 
which are now to be seen, together with the broken 
fragments of the elephants, in the Museum of Archaeology 
there. 



’ THE ELEteANT STATUES AT DELHI 


491 


Mr. Beveridge draws attention to a reference by the 
Emperor Jahangir in his Memoirs to certain stctues of the 
Rana of Chitor and his son whi^h were set up by him 
in the garden below the Darshan Jharoka of Agra Fort. 
This statement is of much interest in itself, for it adbrds 
contemporary confirmation of the legends relative to the 
esteem in which these noted wsruois were held by their 
Mughal conquerors. 

The royal historian, however, makrs no mention of the 
statues being those of mounted men, nor does he indicate 
that there were more than two of tlumi. Rut if w'e are 
to give credence to Mi. Bevoiidge’s suggestioi* that these 
are the very statues seen ty Bernier tu the l)(‘lhi Gale of 
the Dellii Fort we must presuppose that they were already 
mounted on elephants when tiny were at Agra This 
being so, it seems strange that the presence of a pair of 
elephant statues, witli their riders, on the east side of the 
fort, in addition to the well-known statues at the western 
gate of the palace, should not have called for comment, 
if not from Jahangir himself, then from some later writer. 

There are further difficulties in the way of the proposed 
solution : at Delhi wo have two Mahauts, of whom there 
is no mention in the Agra group ; while Jahangir’s statues 
are stated to have been of maible, those at Delhi are of 
red sandstone 

That there was a life-size statue of an elephant at the 
gate of Gwaliar Fortress is amply testified both by Baber 
and Finch, but neither of these writers tells us if this 
statue was carved in the round, as are the Delhi elephants, 
or in high relief, like those at Fathpur-Sikri and else- 
where. The descriptions, however, leave no doubt that 
thy{‘e was but one statue, while, not only does every i-ecord 
f the Delhi elephants refer to two of them, but the 
/agments excavated in 1863 proved to be portions of two 
6gures. Mr. Beveridge inquires : If the Queen’s Garden 
elephant was not the Gwalior elephant, what has become 



StAttTIES AT DELHI;:? 

6i the latter ? ” If we were to assume that the writer has 
propounded this problem serious! we might well ask in 
return; “Where are the elephants from Agra, from Mandu, 
and from the many other Mughal citadels, once adorned 
with this favourite subject ? ” I would still inquire of 
him ; “ Supposing that tlie Queen’s (harden (dephant be 
partly composed of the Gwaliar elephant, from where do 
the parts of the second elephant come ? ” Th(‘ fact that 
tlie elephant set up in the Queen’s Gardens was composed 
of the fragments of hvo elephants is lost sight of by 
Mr. Beveridge, and also in the fallacious inscription which 
was attaclied to the reconstructed elephant. 

With r ^gard to this inscription, it may be w'cll to point 
out that it dates from ISGG, and that the assertion I3i(‘r(‘in, 
that the elephant in the Queen’s Gardens came from 
Gwaliar, was due to Cunningham’s first article on the 
.subject, in which he expressed that view. He afterwards ^ 
.abandoned the theory, however, as is clear from his article- 
in the ArchaBological Survey of India Report, vol. i, which 
was not published till 1871. 

It is ti'ue that there is a superficial resemblance between 
tile measurements of the pedestals at Agra and those of 
the newly erected statues at Delhi ; but there are one or 
two points which render it most improbable that the Delhi 
elephants can be identified with those which once stood at 
Agra. The original fragments of the former show that 
tlie trunks were attached by chains to heavy blocks of 
.stone. At Agra all the original stones of the pedestal 
remain in situ, but there is no trace of these blocks on 
them. Their absence is all the more noticeable becau^^j^^. 
the existing fragments clearly show the elephant tr^ourse 
to liave been built up in courses, and this would, o|^» 
be impossible without support from the grour^^^ 
traces in the Agra pedestals indicate that the /diameter or 
elephants were but 5 inches, to inches in^enQj^g of that 
what is much more probable, that they had ’ 



THE BLEPHAJ3T STATtTte AT ^LHt 

pe which fitted into the existing sockets. The feet of the 
riginal Delhi eJephants, however, average 21 inches across 
iid have holes inches square pierced right through, 
lem for dowels. 

^ In conclu8ir»n, Mr. Beveridge quotes a paragraph from 
to article on th(i statues which I contributed to the Delhi 
luseum Catalogue, and then observ^'s that the paragraph 
does not seem to be quite accurately expressc^d 
I think that Mr. Beveridge s objection to Jii} use of the 
lural ill tills passage (which is misquoted by liiin^ will be 
rithdrawii when he considers the following facts : —Every 
escription of the statues, either by court historians or 
luropcan travellers, speaks of two Kstatues ; fragiiiCiits of 
iwo elephants and of four ridor^: were dir.covered ; and, 
vhen the new statues were being put up, the original 
oundations of the two pedestals were disclosed. Perhaps 
[ may also be allowed to point out that in the article 
referred to I did not mention the inscription, on which 
Mi*. Beveridge appears to base mucli of his argument, as 
my endeavour was to give authentic references only ; and 
the theories to which I referred were those of the various 
writers — whose ranks your correspondent has joined — who 
desire to prove a foreign origin and a previous existence 
for the elephant statues which, with their riders, were set 
up by Shah Jalian at tlie gate of his new palace. 

It may not be without interest to add that there has 
lately been £f»und additional evidence to confound those 
who have questioned the accuracy of the Archaeological 
Department in re-erecting the elephant statues at the 
Delhi Gate of Delhi Palace instead of at the Lahore Gate. 
In addition to the evidence forthcoming at the time, and 
detailed in an article which a})peared in the Annual Report 
of the Archaeological Survey of India for the year 1 905-6, 
the following passage (from Amal-i- Salehs MS. by 
Muhammad Saleh of Lahore, a com*t historian of the reign 
of Shah Jahan) is now published for, I believe, the first 
JBAS. 1910. , 



AUSTIN OF BORDEAUX 

time : — “ . . . and before each of the doors of the Fort 
whicli are adjacent to the above bazaar, on the Gate 
towards Alcharahad, two shade-giving statues of elephants 
of very great size, have been built, so correct in form and 
so noble in appearance that the like of these four rare 
pictures cannot be conceived in tlie mind, then liow much 
more wonderful is it that they actually exist ’ ” The 
passage is difficult to translate, but it admits no doubt of 
tlie essential fact, that elephant statues were built by 
Shah Jahan at the Dellii Gate of liis new hnt. 

The following quotation (from Waqm Nunaf Kluiv-i- 
Ali) is also of interest: — “Why has this man, like in 
appearance to the Mahav’^at (Malniut) of the Elephants 
at the Hatya Pol, stopped our pay ^ ” 

K. Froude Tr( keu 

AuS'UN of floUDEMJX 

In a recent article on the travels of Heiniich von Poser 
{Impert(tl and Asiatic Qiutrlerly Rev ieiv, Jnnmiiy, 1910) 
Mr. Beveridge has shown that Austin of Bordeaux, whose 
name is so often mentioned in connexion with the decora- 
tion of the palace at Agra and the Taj Mahal, was in 
India at least as eaily as 1()21, for Von Poser states that 
he met at Agra, in December of that year, “Herr Augustinus 
Hiriart, von Bourdcaux aus Gasconien, Ingenieur dos 
Grossen Mougouls.” 

May I suggest that we can probably carry the stoiy 
back another seven or eight years, and identify him with 
the Frenchman who travelled with John Midiiall (or 
Mildenhall, as he is sometimes called) from Peisia to 
India, and in whose house at Ajmer Midnall died in 
June, 1614 We are told that this Frenchman was in 
the Mogul’s service {Letters received h\j the East India 
Company y vol. ii, p. 105) ; and there is a letter among the 
India Office archives {Factory Record^, Surat, vol. Ixxxiv, 
part i, p. 131) which gives his name as “Augustine”. It 



THE TOMB^OE JOHN MILIMENHALt 




seems very improbable that ther«^ were two Frenchmen 
of that name in the employment of the Mogul within 
a comparatively short period , and I venture to think 
that we have here an indication of the date when Austin 
of Bordeaux arrived in India, as well as an incident which 
brings him very close to a well-known countryman of 

W. Fostek. 


The Tomu of John Milhenhall 
In March, 1909, I lound a tomb in the oid Koman 
(catholic Cemetery at Agia with the tol lowing inscription • 
Joa de Mendenal Ingles rnorroo aos [illegible] 1614” 
The portion now illegible was doubtless the date and the 
month. I thought at the time that this must be tlie tomb 
of John Mildenhall , but I was only able to verify my 
guess, with the kind assistance of Mr. W Foster of the 
India Office, when I came home later in th(' year. 

John Mildenhall, or Midnall, self-styled ambassador ” 
of Elizabeth to the Great Mogul, left England on his first 
journey to the East in 1599, and returned in 1608 or 1609. 
He spent some time in an unsuccessful attempt to sell 
to the East Iiulia Company the concessions which, as lie 
alleged, he had obtained from Akbai He then disappears 
for four years, to emerge from obscurity once more in 
1614. In that yeai the letters from English factors in 
India to the Company are full of references to him, and 
for sufficient reasons He had been entrusted by London 
merchants with goods to sell in the Levant , but on 
arriving then' he fled into Persia with this merchandise, 

' pursued by Bichard Newman and Richard Steel They 
overtook him, forced him to leturn to Ispahan, and there 
made him disgorge the value of the stolen property. 
Mildenhall then went on to India together with Steel ; 
but he fell ill at Lahore (according to Purchas he 
accidentally drank poison he had prepared for others, 



THE TOMB OF JOHN MILDENHALL 


the Fori 

but there is no evidence of this accusation) ; and thou^^*^ 
he managed to get as far as Agra, and on to Ajmer, he 
died at the latter place in June, 1()]4 

The English factors at Surat had already determined 
to claim his goods, and sent Thomas Kerridge to Ajmer 
for thdt purpose. Had they known at the time they 
sent Kerridge that Mildenhall was dead, one might have 

f posed that they were claiming tlic property (nominally, 
all events) on behalf of his next of kin in England , 
as indeed they always did in the cajjie of their fellow- 
countrymen who died in India But Kerridge arrived 
in Ajmer on this mission on the very day of Mildeiihairs 
death , so that it seems more probable that ^they were still 
in ignorance of the action taken by Newman and Steel 
in Ispahan, and were claiming, not on behalf of llilie nexi 
of kin, but of the defrauded merchants in London Ir 
Ipitc of opposition fioin the Jesuit Fatheis at Agra (foi 
as Purchas tells us, Mildenhall was a Papist), Kerridge 
managed to recovei £500, which sum was duly remittee 
to England. And from a letter written latei by Kerridge 
and Eastell we learn that the former had expended 25( 
rupees in legacies to Mildenhall s se^^ ants and iu carrying 
his body to Agra and inter rin^t there 

The old Roman Catholic (^^jj^etery was certainly in us( 
in 1614. It contains, indeed, a tomb (of an Arim^an ii 
the Padre Santos Chapel) which is dated 1611. W^learr 
from the Calendar and Directory of the Agra Archdiocese 
1907, that it goes back to the reign of Akbar, wher 
a Father Joseph obtained a plot of land for a cemeterj 
in the village of Lashkarpur, and a lady named Marian 
Pyari granted two groves in the same village for tin 
same purpose — doubtless as an extension of the arer 
acquired by Father Joseph. There were probably othei 
Roman Catholic cemeteries in Agra. Father Hosten, S. J. 
in an article lent me by Mr. W. Irvine, mentions tw( 
more — one in a village a mile north of Lashkarpui 



THE TOMB OF JOHN MILDENHALL 


497 


granted to the mission by Jahangir, and one in Padritola, 
by which he appears to mean the graveyard of the old 
Roman Catholic Cathedral. But of these two. nothing 
seems to be known now of the former, and the lattcjr was 
not used till at least a century later; and it is difficult 
to see what possible need existc^d for more than one 
cemetery so early as 1G14, or even at the end of Jahangir’s 
reign, seeing that the cemetery iii (juof.tion is not by any 
means full even at this day. It frdle^v*^ tliat the only 
burial-ground wliicli we know positively to have existed 
in 1614 is the one in which this tomb Htand>s. 

Mildtnihall, as a Papist, was jiaturally buried by the 
Jesuits in tlndr ceunderv That ‘‘ de Mendonal is 
Mildenhall tliei’e enn be no doul t. There w(‘re certainly 
other EnglLslnnen (factors) in Agra in 1014, but only one 
of them (Milford) had a name which so inucli as began 
with M. None of them died in 1014, and all of them 
were doubtless of the English Church, and th(‘ Jesuits 
objected strongly to burying ‘‘ heretics ' in their cemetery, 
as they showed in 10 18, when one (Maiming died in Agra 
and was buried there without their leave. Name, date, 
and religion alihe point to the fact that Joa de Mendenal 
Ingles” can b<‘ no other tliau John Mildenhall. 

It w^as not at all unnsual to transport bodies some 
distance for burial, especially if it (*nsured a resting-place 
in consecrat('d ground. We find Jesuits so brought from 
Lahore, Deilii,v arwar, Lucknow, and elsewhere to be 
interred in John llrake, a factor, who died at 

,])holpur in 1087, was similarly brouglit to Agra to be 
J buried in the garden of the Dutch factory. 

John Mildenhall was not an estimable charactcT. In 
plain words, he was a dishonest scoundrel. cheated, 
or tried to clieat, Akbar with an assumption of ambassa- 
dorial dignity ; he tried to cheat the Company with 
concessions that, in all probability, ho had never received ; 
he ended by cheating his own employers, the merchants 



tA 'l&^NDATION nit bOE J1 


in London. Even after his death he keeps up his evil 
courses ; in the pages of many historians, not to mention 
occasional periodicals, he still mas(iuorades as “ Sir” John, 
ambassador of Elizabeth. But he was of some note — of 
a kind — even in his own day ; lie was a pioneer of Anglo- 
Indian enterprise, not less enterprising than his many 
enterprising successoi's. He was one of four Englishmen 
who spoke with Akbar face to face, and much tlie greatest 
of the four. In gratitude for the deeds ho did, h.’i^ 
memory, like his bones, may be allowed to rest in peaciP 
and the discovery of his last resting-place, which ^ 
certainly the oldest English tomb at present known 
Upper India, if not in all India, may be recorded with 
pleasure. 

E A. U. Bi.uvr, LCS. 

La F()NJ)ation de G()e.ie 

]. Au mois de juillot, 1909, Serial de I’uiiivei'site 
de Leyd(^ a uomme iruaubni du consc'il de la fondation 
M. le professeur lloutsma, a la place do AI. de Coeje. 
Lc conseil (\st done coinpos6 comme suit: AIM. C. Snouck 
Hurgronje (president), Jl, T. Karsten, J. A. Sillem, Th. 
Houtsma, et C. van Volh*nho\(*n (secretaire-tresorier). 

2. Lc capital de la fondation etant reste lo meme, 
lc montant uoiiiinal <*st d(^ 19,500 ilorins hollandais 
(89,000 francs); eii outre, lc 1 novemhi-e, 1909, les rentes 
dwponibles inoniaiciii a ]»las do 1500 florins (8000 francs). 
^3. Grace a la liberaliic de Al. le professeur A. A. Bevan 
a Cambridge ct de AI. H. Y. Amedroz a Londres, la 
fondation a fait pai-aitr(», au mois do novembre, 1909, 
chez I’editcur Brill a Iji'yde uiie reproduction photo- 
graphiqiie du maiiuscrit d(‘ Leyde repute unique dc la 
Hamflsah d’al-Buhfcur*i. Quelques cxemplaires seront 
offerts a litre gratuit aux bibliotlieques publiques ou 
privees qui sembleut pouvoir y preteiidre et les autres 
seront mis en rente au profit dc la fondation. 



NOTICES OF BOOKS 


Ancient Ceylon. By H. Parker. 

Mr. Parker has in this valuable and monumental book; 
brought together the results of his investigations during 
his service in the Irrigation tment of Ceylon fron; 
187e3 to 1904. He deals nminl^^^ with tlie history and 
life past and present of the more primitive inhabitants of 
the Island, that is to say, with the Veddas (or Vaeddas, 
as he prefers to write the word), and with their kith and 
kin among the speakers of Sinhalese and Tamil. Iii the 
first part he deals first wdth theii‘ ancient history, 
identifying them with the ‘‘Yakkas’^ of early legend 
with whom the Northern Invaders had t6 contend, and 
he gives good reason for believing that they arc the 
modern representatives of an organized and comparatively 
civilized pre-Dra vidian race once in possession of the 
greater part of the Island. Their present condition, 
social divisions, and customs are fully described ; and in 
part iii their weapons and tools arc exhaustively dealt 
with, and a full account is given of their games, which 
are compared with those of India, Arabia, and parts of 
Africa, and even occasionally with those of England, as 
in the case of the Gal-keliga or stone game, which 
has a strong resemblance to the Checks ” or Five 
Jacks of the Midlands of England. 

Part ii is mainly archaeological (i.e. chaps, vi to xii). 
In these chapters he discusses several very important 
points, more or less detached one from the other. The 
first relates to the measurements of bricks and the 
important deductions to be drawn therefrom as to the 
age and history of the ancient buildings. He has 
accumulated a large body of facts, and his deductions. 



NOTICES OF BOOJKS 


will probably be generally accepted by archseologists. 
Then follows a study on rock cup-marks. The chapters 
on ‘‘ The Lost Cities of Ceylon ” and “ Tlie Earliest 
Dagabas are extremely full and interesting, and deserve 
independent discussion by arehfeological experts. It is 
impossible liere to do more tlian allude to them. The 
same remark applies to the chapter on “ The Earliest 
Irrigation Works ”, which deriv(‘s an added interest from 
Mr. Parker’s experience as a modern irrigation officer and 
from his personal excavations and investigations on the 
site of the ancient works. In estimating the age of the 
different works, many of whicli seem to go back to 
the third or second century before the Christian era, 
Mr. Parker lias been able to utilize tlie conclusions he 
has come to as to the age of bricks wliicli lu' arri\ed 
at in chapt(‘r vi. 

In chapter \i Mi-. Parker carrits on tlu^ work begun 
by Rliys Davids, and continued by ]\Iuller, Bell, and 
Goldschmidt on the ancit^nt inscrijitions of Ctylon, and 
here again his work lecpiires tin* attention of experts. 
In chaptei* xii Mr. Parker deals A\ith the earliest coins 
of Ceylon, most of ^^hich ha\e come to light since Rhys 
Davids dealtwith the subjt*et in the Xnni ts)nai(( Ovipiital l<t. 
These are mainly silver “purauas”, or punch-mark t‘d 
coins of tin* type familiar in North(‘in India, and oblong 
coins of copper which app('ar to have oiiginated in Ceylon, 
as most of them bear the peculiar (kylon type of Sw'astika. 
The purfuias, on the other hand, may possibly have been 
brought from India. The principal finds have been at 
Mulleittivu and Anaradhapura, and also at Tissa, where 
Mr. Pdrk(‘r himself made a discov'ery during the excavation 
of a canal. The intaglio of a seated figure found at the 
Yatthala Dagaba at Tissa is also of tin* greatest interest. 
This chapter is illustrated by some admirable plates. 

Mr. Parker’s discussion of the symbols on the coins 
requires careful attention, and the same may be said of 





the full inquiry into the origin of the Cross and Swastika : 
with which thfi volume concludes. 

Mr. Parker has produced a most complete and instructive 
work, and one which no student of tiie subjects dealt 
with, whether historical, archaeological, or anthropological, 
can aftbrd to neglect. 

M. Longwortit Dames. 


Professor Dr. Hermann Goj.lancz. Translations from' 
Heurew and Aramaic, pp. 211L London : Luzac, 
1908. 

In the year 1902 Professor Gollancz published the 
philosophical compilation of Bcrcchyah the Puntuator. 
This work introduced into the West the leading principles 
of the system evolved by the first Jewish philosopher, 
the Gaon Seadyah who flourished in the tenth century. 
Berechyah’s compilation contained the ethical portions of 
that system dealing with the practical duties of man in 
his l^elation to God. Berechyah left out almost the whole 
spjeulative matter. Professor Gollancz appealed then to 
narrower circle of readers interested in mediaeval philo- 
ysophical speculations. He turns now to the wider public 
yhiore int(n*csted in the poetry of those ages, and he 
endeavours in this small collection of translations to make 
a wider circle of readers better acquainted with some of 
the poetical and humorous productions of known and 
unknown authors found in the Hebrew literature of post- 
Biblical times. 

Professor Gollancz has selected such specimens as lent 
themselves to popular treatment and would appeal to 
a large number of readers. For this very reason he has 
avoided any literary apparatus or any critical examination 
of the texts selected for translation. Not that he had 
|||^ examined the originals carefully, but he gives . 
us only the results witliout the apparatus. The book., 



NOTICES OF BOOKS 


contains, in the first place, a translation of the Aramaic 
paraphrase of the Son^ of Songs. It is a pity that 
.Professor Gollancz has dealt so briefly in his Introduction 
with the date and origin of the texts chosen by him. For 
this very Targuiii, or Aramaic translation and embellish- 
ment of the Song of Songs, deserves a fuller and more 
detailed exposition. It represents, without doubt, one of 
the oldest examples of allegorical interpretation of the 
Scriptures, and carriers us back to conqjaratively high 
anti.quity. It is needh'ss to point out how great the 
influence of such interpretation lias been upon the oldest 
commentators of the Bible. The translation is faithful 
and accurate, and follows tlie text as clos(‘ly as one could 
go without affecting the spirit of the English language. 
The same can be said of all the other pi(^c(‘s, for ]h*oft‘Ssor 
Gollancz follows the original in his translation without 
being too liteial. 

Tlie second pi(‘ce is tlu^ “ Book of th(* Apple ”, one of the 
numerous ps(mdo-Aristotelian compositions so jn'ominent 
in the Araliic literatur<‘ of the tim(\ when, through the 
intermediary of tin' Syiians, (i}rt‘ek litei'atun^ was made 
known to the Arabs It is a shoi*t dialogue between 
Aristotle, on his d(‘ath-bed, and his disciples, and treats, 
in the form of maxims and terse seiitences, of eschato- 
logical problems of death and immortality. From the 
Arabic it had been translated and assimilated to the 
Jewish point of view by Abraham aben Ilisdai of 
the tliirteenth century (12J0-o) 

In liis translation of this by no nutans easy treatise, 
Dr. Gollancz did not rely only on the printed texts, 
which ar(^ not free from bhniiishes, but made good use of 
manuscript matcTial, and he has thus been enabled to 
clear up some obscure points found in the printed 
editions. 

A faithful rendering, as well as a rhymed paraphrasef 
the latter from the pen of Professor Israel Gollancz, of 



' cotTRt^TXWEs nriS'RAstr iNfftii 


the oldest Jewish Martyrology, the death and niartyrdon* 
of the Ten Sages, is the subject of the next piece ; and 
the book concludes with the translation of Leo da 
Modena's satire on ‘"The Gaines of Chance". The author, 
who flourished towards the end of the sixteenth century, 
handled tlie Hebrew language in a masterly manner, and, 
foliowdng the exam]jle of the older Spanish writers and" 
tliat of Immanuel of Rome, adopts the style of the^ 

Makame making free us(‘ of Biblical phrases, and 
creating thus a mosaic not oasil} to be imitated by any 
translation. Dr Gollancz, however, has endeavoured to 
reproduce, as he says, “ the doggerel character of the 
original " in the rendering of little poems inserted in 
the text. 

A succinct Tiitroduetion giving the main points of 
literary interest, make tins new book of Dr. Gollancz 
an int(‘resting and valuable contribution to mediaeval 
Jewish literature in the English language. 

M. G. 

A Calendar of the Court Minutes, etc., of the East 
India Company, 1 640-43. By Ethel B. Sainsbury. 
With an Introduction and Notes by William Foster. 
Oxfoid, 1009. 

In this v^olume Miss Sainsbury gives us in summarized 
form the Court Minutes of the East India Company and 
cognate documents, mostly from the Public Record Office, 
the period covered being the four years 1640 to 1643: 
At the end of the previous volume (sec tliis Journal for 
1908,pp. 915 et seqq.) we left the committees in joyous mood, 
with everything appar«‘ntly promising well ; and in the 
early part of the present volmne the same hopeful tone 
is apparent. But soon clouds begin to gather, and the 
Company enters on troublous times. One great matter of 
anxiety to the Court is, that, in spite of renewed appeals, ^ 
it cannot obtain the additional capital it needs. And no 



NOTICB^ OF BOOKS 


wonder ; for, as Mr. Foster points out in his Introduction, 
the period covered ends (in the middle of the Civil War) 
with tlie death of Pym and tlie southward march of the 
Scottisli troops to aid tlie forces of the Eiif^^lish I^irliament 
Of the stirring events of tliose times we have but faint 
echoes in these Minutes, whicJi are naturally very guarded 
in tlieir references to political matters. Thus when after 
the battle of Edgehill the Royal troops marched on London 
the Company’s ordnanct* at Deptford was ordered to be 
brought to the city, and their gun-carriages wore also 
requisitioned. Four months later a Parliamentary com- 
mittee re(]uosted the loan of th(' Company’s oidnance to 
place on th(‘ (‘artln\oiks which had been hastily thrown 
up round London. Tlu're wei-e many Royalists, however, 
among the committees, and the ie(|iies( was twice refused, 
wher(ni])on the gun^ WH‘re taken by force. A curious 
incident that bulks laigcdy in these ^linutes is the 
purchas(‘, by th(‘ king, in ordvr to suj)ply sitiews of wav 
for his canqiaign in the noith, of the whole of tlie pepper 
in the (\)mpany’s hands. For the iirst time Mr. Fost(*r 
gi\(‘s the coriect Ncrsion of the transaction, and shows that 
Charles acted in good faith, and really inttnjded to pay for 
the pep])<n. Tli(‘ stoiy does not (‘iid in this \olume, and 
the Comjuny had not obtaimsl their money when we last 
hear of the matter Wo find the Company still trying to 
get satisfaction fioiii tlu* Dutch for the Amboyna, Pulorun, 
and oth(‘r affairs, and w^e are glad to note that the 
reprinting of the “Amboyna Massacre” pamphlet, which 
the Court had taken in band, was peiemptorily stopped by 
Parliament and the sheets impounded. Though the Court 
and Pail lament were not generally on the best of terms, 
the former occasionally received some favour from the 
latter, and it is significant to read of sums of £100 being 
twice voted for distribution amongst friendly “ Parlyment 
men”. In 1640 Portugal regained her political inde- 
pendence after sixty years’ subjugation to Spain ; and one 



COtrRT MIKUTES OT THE EAST IM>U COMPjtKlfV 


of her first acts was to send an ambassador to England to* 
conclude a treaty of peace with this country. In this 
volume we have a number of references to this matter. 

One of the most extraordinary incidents referred to in 
these records is the kidnapping of the French captain 
Gilles R^zimoiit from his ship by one of the Company's 
captains and conveyance to England, where he was thrown 
into prison on an accusation of piracy, a charge for which 
thcT*e appears to have been httle foundation. Mr. Foster, 
who gives details of the affair in a foot-note, says : The 
kidnapping of a Frcncli captain on mere suspicion of piracy 
was an outrage for wliich one would have expected the 
Company to make immediate atonement and apologies, but 
instead of this they entered an action against Rezimont 
in the Admiralty Court for £50,000 After much delay, 
however, they consented to withdraw the charge, and the 
unfortunate captain was released in June, 1G41.'' We fii 
the King of Bantam in this volume getting his present of 
300 muskets, 150 barrels of gunpowder, and 1000 iron 
shot. As in the last volume, so in this, Thomas Smithwick 
continues to worry the Court by proj^osing frivolous or 
annoying motions and once again his conduct at a court 
becomes s> outrageous that he has to be ejected by the 
beadle, against wlioin he promptly enters two actions for 
damages. An Answer of Mr. Smithwick to certain 
charges printed here from the original in the Public 
Record Office, is a most comical document. However, at 
the end of 1641 or beginning of 1642 Smithwick died, 
and I am afraid the committees received the news with 
deep sighs of relief rather than of sorrow. At the end of 
the last volume we read how Methwold had presented to 
the Court the young German traveller, Johann Albrecht 
von Maiidelslo, who had been his fellow-passenger from 
England, and how the Court decided that he must pay for 
his passage. In this volume, however, we find the Court 
rescinding its former proposal, on the suggestion ci 



NpTICI^ of JJOOKS 

::Methwold, “ he being a man of quality and one of whom 
the king had taken special notice and had private con- 
ference with.’’ We have here the first mention of 
. Madraspatam ”, and Francis Day, the founder of Fort 
St. George, appears *011 tlie scene, but nothing is said of 
that event, which was to prove so important in the history 
of the Company. 

amusing incident is that in wliich John Woodall, the 
■l^pany’s Surgeon-General, is accused of reboiling the 
salves returned from the East and supplying them to 
the Company again at full prices. This he denied, “upon 
his reputation,” but admitted that he used them at 
St. Bartholomew’s Hosi)ital, “for ilu^ curing of poor 
people.” The retirement of the old man is here recorded, 
and also his subsequent attempt to extract money from 
the Company on false pretences. His death occurred soon 
aftei*. Finally, I would mention two instances where the 
Company tried to be charitable on the cheap. In one case 
we read : “ The trees behind tlie almsJiouses at Blackwall 
ordered to be lopped and the * lopps ’ distributed among 
the almsmen, instead of the coal which is given to them 
each Christmas.” The other case is worse : “ The beef 
returned in the ‘ llaiy ’ to be divided among the poor of 
Blackwall, if it is unseiwiceable for use in the harbour.” 

The extracts will suffice to slunv somewhat of the nature 
of this valuable \ olume of records. 

Donald Ferguson. 

Hammuraiu's Gesetz. Von J. Kohler, Professor an det' 
Universitat Berlin, und A. Unonad, Professor^ an 
der Universitat Jena. Band II: Syllabische’’ und 
zusammenhangindc Umschrift nebst vollstaridigem 
Glossal*. Band III : Ubersetzte Urkunden, 'Von A. 
Ungnad. Leipzig: Eduard Pfeiffer, 1909. 

The first part of vol. ii of this work was noticed in the 
Journal o^this Society during last year (pp. 795-6), and j 





the innovation oi the twofold transcription — syllabic and' 
in words — was pointed out This transcription goes as 
far as p. 100, after which comes the Glossary (pp. 109-79). 
This latter will be exceedingly useful, as it gives every 
occurrence of the words in the Code of Hammurabi, thus 
making it a Babylonian concordance to the whole text. 
The transcription in words shows clearly the roots to 
which they are assignable (which is not always clear 
from the original text) as well as the vocalization in 
a fuller form. 

One of the tiist things wiiich strike the reader on 
beginning to read through the Glossary is the word 
ahlum, translating tlie well-known generally 

rendered Son”. Here however, it appears as heir 
{Erhe), a meaning which fits cxL‘llentIy in all the 
passages quoted In a foot-note it is stated that the 
root is uncertain, y being possible instead of 6, which 
in fact, Hebrew and Greek transcriptions favour (cf. 
Tiglath-pileser, the Assyrian TiiLwlti-apil -S^array and 
Nabopolassar, the Babylonian Nahu - abla If, 
however, the Sumero-Akkadian ibilay which translates 
abhim, be borrowed from it, the Sumema7is would 
seem to have heard 6. This agrees with the indications 
of the Biilisli Museum fragment K. 5422a, which, after 
Mbulu (snm), “to gi'ow, of grain,” has the above 
group and both i*cndercd ablw. This 

ety mology would indicate that the “ son ” was regarded 
as the ‘ bairn ”, the one brought forth, and that the 
meaning of “ heir ” was secondary. But is the root 
initial K or initial 1 ? 

Our old friend, the ^ihmmu or “ghost”, appears under 
the form of eiemmmn, and the author asks why it is 
written with the character GEKIM (it is glossed in 
the syllabaries as g^diin) twice repeated in the Laws 
jfcol. xxvii, 1. 89) ^ This is naturally a difficult question 
Ip answer, but it is worthy of note in this connexion. 



NOTICES OF BOOKS 


5m 

that the word for “life” or “soul” is generally written 
in the plural, nap.sdtL Did more than one spirit go to 
form the essence of the spiritual man on the other side 
of the grave, just as the living man is conceived as 
consisting of “ body, soul, and spirit ” ^ 

Another important point in the \ocabulary shows that 
the characters are not to be read 

“lordship,” but illilutn, with the same meaning. This 
is from the Suinero- Akkadian (mid {elld, illil ) — 

a 'fading indicated by the Aramaic dockets found by 
the American explorers at Niffer, and referred to by 
Professor Clay, who has published excellent renderings 
of the texts in which the word is found. 

Among other things, it may be noted that Professor 
Ungnad suggests that the reading of the enigmatical 
IrH meaning “priestess”, should be isij)ptitumj which 
would be the regular feminine of Uippxi, “priest.” 
^ 11 dua in Sumeiian, is quoted from Meissner 

as meaning probably “ l)aker ” (“ cook ” in general would 
also be probable). The pay of a cook or a baker would 
then have been a thirty-sixth part of a shekel daily. 
Under wabdlu is ranged the form ibbahtl, '‘it was brought,” 
for iivwabd, and, from the same root, also bihlumy 
hibhulwm {^). This seems correct, and may explain 
other forms 

Interesting, also, is Professor Ungnad’s explanation of 
bi^dtum (read by Scheil kazzaiiiiii) as being for pi^dtum, 
and meaning “ whitebloodedness ” (leuchseinia). This is 
naturally interesting from a medical point of view, 
especially when we consider that the diseasife was *one 
which affected sheep. Veterinary doctors should be 
able to say whether the shepherd could justly be held 
responsible for it. 

Whether kandku, “ to seal,” were originally written 
qandqu or not, it occurs most frequently with k, and 
the author is ^ci^ht in keeping this transcription, which 



HAitiKpRAB1^9 OESISTZ 

is iix,^<any case that which the Babylonians preferred. 
Referring to kisallum, he suggests that the real meaning 
is bulwark ”, not ‘‘ court ”, which seems probable, though 
the word may have meant “ surrounding wall in general. 
Referring to “ sesame-wine ” (kurunnum) Mr. Rassam 
once asked the present writer, *'What kind of drink is 
that ? ” This was an embarrassing question, as he had 
never heard of it except in connexion with Babylonian 
inscriptions- Did the Babylonians really make “ wine ” 
from sesame, or is “sesame-wine” a mere name, like 
“ the Virgin's milk ” (Liebfraumilcli), the well-known 
Rhenish wine ? 

The tliird volume of Kohler and Ungnad s Hammurabi’s 
Oesetz contains ti’anslatlons of documents, with explanatory 
text. Their numb(^r is very large, there being no fewer 
than 775 of them. These ore classified under numerous 
headings, and deal with marriage, divorce, adoption, 
dismissal, wet-nursing ; management and division of 
pro^^brty, boundary-walls ; loans, purchase and exchange, 
gift, hire ; inheritance ; lawsuits ; taxes, military service, 
fiefs, etc. In all probability no such complete series of 
examples has ever before been brought together, and it 
is needless to say, that an enormous amount of informa- 
tion conceridng Babylonian life, manners, and customs, is 
contained therein. 

As to give even one example of each class would take 
up a great deal of space, I confine myself to two tablets 
only, upon which I am able to make supplementary 
remarks. The first is Professor Ungnad's No. 441 
(redemptio| of patrimony): — 

“7/8 of a gan, a field in the lowland (?), beside the 
field of Aya-kuzub-matiin, daughter of Nur-ili-su, and 
beside the field of Amat-Anim, daughter of Siii-putram, 
which Beltani, daughter of Nhrum had bought from 
Amat-^amas, daughter of Sin-fem^. With Erib-Sin, son 
of Sin-ikisam, Anum-habil and Sin-magir, sons of 
JBAS. 1910 . 33 



NOTICES OF BOOKS 


Tanilahnm, Naram-ili-su and Samas-bani, sons of Nani- 
mansum, and Aya-rimti-ilati (?), daughter of Sin-nasir, — 
Sakkuin, son of Nurum, has weighed out to them 2/3 of 
a mana of silver, and freed thereby the field of his 
fathers house. At no future time shall they make 
claim against each other. They have sworn by Manias, 
'Aya, Mcrodach, and Samsu-iluna, the king.” 

Here follow the names of six witnesses and the date. 

A fragment numbered Bu. 88-5-12, 706, is apparently 
jjart of the envelope of this document. After “ field ” in 
the first line, it has ^ nidatim, “of neglect” — 
“neglected field.” (or snijxdu'i) is followed by 

the plural-sign with suffix for “place”, indicating 
that it was regard(‘d as a place-name and was plural. 
Aya-kuzub-matim was a priestess of the sun ^). 

Amai-Aniiti is given as An)mt-Aya, and S'l'iiqmiram as 
Sarriasqmfraia, (There seems to have been a tendency to 
write the inner tablf^t, which was hidden, mortj carelessly 
than the outer on(‘.) 

Professor Ungnad’s Xo. 73 (sharing of property) has 
some interesting words 

“ 2/3 of a s<tr, a built liouse, beside tlie house of Sakkut- 
muballit, and beside the house of Samas - tappi - wedi : 
1 female slave Zarrikum : 2 (?) oxen (instead Ili-awelim- 
T*abi has taken a female-slave). (This is) the sharing of 
Samas-suzibaiini and Uttaturn, sons of Zuzanum, which 
they have shared with Ili-awelim-rabi. They have shared, 
they have completed (the matter). Their heart is con- 
tent. They have sworn by Samas, Ay a, Mcrodach, and 
Samsu-iluna, the king.” ^ * 

^ The envelope differs somewlnii, aud a leiulcring of this may bo not 
without its \alue. It reads as follows: — “2/11 of a .s«r, a built house, 
beside the bouse of Sakkut muballit, and boMde the house of SamaJ- 
tiippi-wedi ; 1 female-slave Zarriktum ; ‘2(?) oxen (instead [kima) Ili- 
awelim-rabi has taken a female-slave). (This is) the sharing of Samas- 
guzibaniii and Uttaturn, which they have shared with Ili-awelim-rabi, 
their brother. They have shared. It is finished {gamram). Their heart 



A HlSTORir OUJA1RAT 


Such a work as this, which practically a Virrpus of 
the Business — and Legal — documents of the period, is 
a thing which has long been needed, and is exceedingly 
well done. The cuneiform text of the laws, which will 
be given in vol. i, will foniri a fitting completion of the 
work. Author and publisher may both be congratulated 
thereon. 

T. G. PlJJCHES. 


A History of Gujarat. By Mjr AaV Turab Vali 
(Persian text) ; edited by E. Denison Ross, Ph.D. 
Bibliotheca Indica, No. 1197. Calcutta, 1909. 

By the publication of this Tdrllrli-i-Ovjarat, Dr. E. 
Denison Ross furnishes one more contribution to tlie good 
^ work in Muhammadan history, bibliography, and lexico- 
graphy which is to be placed to his credit since he went 
to India a few years ago. Between 1903 and 1907 ho 
collected 1106 Arabic and Persian manuscripts on behalf 
of the Government of India, as entered in the hand-list 
issued in July, 1908; and he may well be styled “the 
only begetter ” of Maulavi 'Abd-ul Muqtadir’s Catalogue 
of Persian Poets (in the Oriental Public Library at 
.Bankipoi’e), vol. i, also published in the same year. It 
is to Dr. Ross’s initiative, and the training he gave, that 
w;e owe this first specimen of a catalogue raisonne on 


is content. At no future time Rhall one bring action against another. 
They have sworn by Samas, Aya, Merodach, and Rainsu-iluna, the king.” 

In the published text the words corresponding with kima^ “like,” 
“ instead of,” are maki-nm. This must be the ammaki or ammaku 
{ana makif ana rnakn) of the Flood -tablet, lines 187ff., where, instead of 
a deluge, reduction of mankind by the lion or the hyu*na(?), or the 
destruction of the country by famine or pestilence, is recommended as 
being preferable. From the texts quoted, the pre.sence or absence of the 
enclitic particle -ma would seem to have made no difference. The word- 
order on the tablet is Sina{F) alpe ana maki-ma lli-awdim-rdbi amtam 
Ukif and on the envelope Mna(?) dipt kima^amti lli-dwelim-rdhi ilku 
(for Uqd). 



512 


NOTICES OF BOOKS 


European lines prepared by an Indian scholar. We are 
also indebted to him for a pol^ glot List of Birds in Turki, 
Manchu, and Chinese (Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal, voL ii, No. 9, 1909). The present work on 
Gujarat by Abu Turab is a welcome addition to that 
most valuable of all historical material, personal narratives 
by contemporaries of, and participators in, the events 
recorded. 

The history of the Muhammadan period in Gujarat 
has received a large share of attention from European 
scholars; it has been dealt with by Dr. J. Bird (183.5), 
Sir E. C. Bayley (1886), and Colonel J. W. Watson in 
the Bombay Gazetteer (1896), to which we may add 
Mr. A. Rogers' unpublished translation of the Mwat-i- 
AhTnadi. Abu Turab’s narrative covers the period from 
940 H. (1532), when Humayun quarrelled wi^i Sultto 
Bahadur (1526-37), down to the year 992 111^584), when 
Akbar s authority had been established in^Gujarat for 
some years As Abfl Turab died in 1003 H. (1594) he 
was probably ^ contemporary throughout the period 
treated of; at any rate, from 980 h (1572-3) he had an 
intimate personal knowledge of all that was going on. 

Our author, Abu Turab, belonged to a family of saintly 
and learned men, which emigrated from Shiraz in the 
year 898 h. (1492), and settled at Champaner, in the 
Panch Mahals, then the capital of Gujarat. Nothing has 
been learnt so far of his early life, but he was probably 
from the first a man of some influence, and in 980 H. 
(1572) we fin(feim in the service of Ptirnad KhaUj^a msi^ 
prominent in wie disturbed politics of that penod, in 
whoso counsels he seems to have had a predominant 
voice. 

'Abd-ul-Karim, I‘timad Khan, a converted Hindu slave 
and probably a palace eunuch, had gained the confidence 
of Sultan Mahmud (1537 - 54), and rose about 1545 
to be one of his chief advisers. Nine years afterwards 



A H113T0BT or OUJABAT 


S1& 

(1564) occurred the plot o£ the slave Burhan to seize 
the throne after the assassinaHon of the king and nobles. 
I‘timad Khan escaped the fate of the rest, and the incident 
is graphically desciibed by ALti Turab (pp. 44 to 49). 
I‘timad Khan became guardian of the minor successor, 
Ahmad Shah II (1554-1561), and the country was divided 
into five satrapies, I‘timad Khan and his friends obtaining 
ten parganahs. In 1561 Alimad Shah was assassinated 
by 1‘timad Khan, and a youth of doubtful parentage w’^as 
raised to the thionc under the title Muzaffar Shah (III). 
Then began a very perturbed period, due to the dissensions 
of the nobles, an invasion from Khandesh, and an attempt 
by one of the nobles to seize iho throne. 1‘timad Khan 
was faced by so many foes at once that he did not know 
which way to turn. 

In the end (1572), acting on the advice of Abu Turab, 
1‘timad Khan invited an invasion by Akbai, who had 
come to the borders of Gujarat in pursuit of a fugiil^e 
kinsman. Akbar responded to the invitation, soon over- 
bore all opposition, and occupied Ahmadabad, Cambay, 
tod Surat. At first I'timad Khan was well received by 
Akbar but one of the chief nobles having fled, Akbar 
grew suspir*ious and withdrew his favour. Abu Turab 
stood up manfully for his master, who was soon received 
back into Akbar s good graces But Mirza ‘Aziz, Kokal- 
tash, was left as governor of Gujarat. 

The arrai^emcuts made by Akbar for the government 
of the newly -acquired province failed to restore order, 
and in 1573, on the urgent entreaties of the viceroy, 
the king made his famous nine days’ ride from Fathpur 
Sikri to Ahmadabad, dispersed the malcontents, and 
incorporated Gujarat into the empire. Abii Turab was 
appointed chief leader of tlie Mecca pilgrimage in 985 H. 
(1577-8), and I‘timad Khto went with him. They 
brought back a stone bearing on it the qadam-i-rasul, 
or impression of the Prophet’s foot, which was presented 



NOTICES OF BOOKS 


to Akbar, and finally deposited at a shrine in Gujarat. 
From 987 H. (1579-80) to 992 H. (1584-5) the country 
was disturbed by various risings, until in the latter year 
Abmadabad was occupied by Muzaffar Shah (III), who^ 
had escaped from the Mogul court. Shortly before this 
civent I'timM Khan had been appointed viceroy. The 
narrative breaks off* just after the new viceroy had 
been defeated by Muzaffar Shah outside the walls of 

►*s style is on the whole easy, though 
occasionally he is a little archaic and uses peculiar words 
and constructions. Of course, especial prominence is given 
to I'timad Khto^s proceedings, in which the hoau rdle is 
always played by Abu Turab ; if his advice had been 
followed, this, that, and the other misfortune would liave 
been averted. Making slight allowances for this bias, the 
record appears a truthful one, and yields us V living 
picture of th(* constant intrigues and perplexing instability 
of Oriental state aff*airs. Dr. Ross has done liis part well, 
and we are indebted to him for a valuable addition to 
an interesting period of Indian history. Tliere are still 
some misprints left unnoticed in his Notes and Corrections, 
but they are of little importance. 

There are, however, one or two words as to which 
I may offer some suggestions. On p. 14, 1. 14, for^;^, 
interpreted as chapri, “ bran,’’ I would propose the Hindi 
ohhappar^ ‘‘a thatch” (Platts, 458), making 
the passage read, “ grass three years old from thatches ” ; 
and on p. 29, IJ. 3 and 11, Sfirat and Sorath possibly 
do not refer to the same place, one being meant for the 
well-known port on the ocean, and the other for the 
province in the peninsula of Kathiawar (see Constable’s 
Hand Atlas, pi. 31, Ba, Aa). 



William Irvine. 



^ mff'^ooovm OP BAST imyu. Am nmx 51 S 


A New Account of East India and Persia. By 
John Fryer. Edited by William Crooke. Vol. I. 

Hakluyt Society, 1909. 

In 1673 the East India Company’s fleet carried out, 
as chirurgeon for Bombay ”, a young man of the name 
of Fryer, who had just taken a medical degree at 
Cambridge. He was seen off from Gravesend by a friend, 
to whom he made the usual piomise of a full and faithful 
account of all that should befall him in the strange lands 
to which lie was going In fulfilment of this undertaking, 
during the nine and a half years that elapsed before 
Fryer again set foot in England he dispatched to liis 
correspondent seven long letters, and he followed these 
up with an eighth, written from Dov 3 i on liis return, 
bringing the narrative to a conclusion. Sixteen years 
later (1698) tlie worthy doctor, now become a Fellow of 
the Royal Society, published the whole seiies — piobably, 
as Mr. Crooke conjectures, revised and augmented —under 
the title of A New Account of EasUhuha and Peraia, 

It is unnecessary to say much in praise of a work so 
well known to everyone interested in seventeenth century 
travel. Parts are written in a turgid, affected style, 
copied, it may be, from Sir Thomas Herbert ; but, as his 
editor rem.irks, '' his pages display many instances of 
graphic description, terse and vivid narrative ; and he can 
tell a good story wdth quaint, dry humour.” The w’^ork 
is a mine of information about Western India and Persia ; 
and Sir George Birdwood has gone so far as to pronounce 
it “ the most delightful book ever published on those 
countries ”. 

Fryer’s Nev) Account was many years ago placed on 
the Hakluyt Society’s list of works to be included in its 
series. About 1896 the task of editing it was actually 
undertaken by Mr. A. T. Pringle, Assistant Secretary to 
the Madras Government : but his untimely death a few 
years later left the book again without an editor. 



NOTICES OF BOOKS 


Recently Mr. William Crooke stepped into the breach ; 
and the first of the three volumes of which the edition 
will consist has now been issued to members of the 
Hakluyt Society. 

To those who know Mr. Crooke’s work in other fields, 
it Mull be superfluous to say that lie has discharged his 
duties in a most painstaking and efficient manner. Besides 
utUmng his own wide reading and personal acquaintance 
’vmii India, he has enlisted the aid of several experts 
(such as Colonel Prain and Sir George Watt for botanical 
niatters), and has diligently sought information from every 
available source. Further, in an excellent introduction, 
he has given us a good deal of fresh information about 
Fryer himself. 

Tlie narrative is not an easy one to annotate, and 
j^aturally there arc some openings for criticism! On 
p. xxvi of the introduction it is stated tliat the holding 
oi stock was a necessary preliminary for admission to the 
** freedom of the East India Company ; in point of fact 
the exact opposite was the case, and Fryer must have 
claimed liis freedom (by patrimony) in order to hold the 
stock whicli was thereupon transferred to him. The note 
(p. 105) on the acquisition of Madras requires icvision ; 
and in one on p. 225 the establish nie&l) of a French 
factory at Surat is much antedated. Fryers error (p. 161) 
as to the year of Vasco da Gama’s voyage is not corrected, 
and liis reference to “Dr. N. G.” (p 296) is left un- 
explained. These initials stand for Nehemiah Grew, 
Secretary to the Royal Society, 1677-9. The Oxenden 
Medal (p. 228) might well have been accorded the honour 
of a not(\ materials for which are to be found in J. H. 
Mayo’s Medals and Decorations (vol. i, p. 55). The 
Anglo-Portuguese conflict at Swally mentioned on p. 224 
was in 1630, not 1615. And finally, we may express 
a doubt as to the correctness of Mr. Crooke’s identification 
of the “Naran Sinaij” ofjp. 199 with the “Narun Gi 



THB KAtHAEA SAHHXTA 517 

Pundit” of the following page, who seems to have been 
quite a different person (cf. p. 204). 

These, however, are but sliglit blemishes. Most of the 
notes are excellent ; and we shall look forward with some 
impatience to the issue of the remaining two volumes. 

W. F. 


The Kathak^^ Samhita, Books I ami II. Edited by 

Professor voN Schboeder. Leipzig, 1900 anJ 1909. 

The fate of the Kdfjwblca Samkitd has been somew’^hat 
peculiar. A MS, of the Avork is iiK*ludod in the Cliambers 
Collection at Berlin, ai;J it was used by W^eber in preparing 
Ids Indian Literaivrc, and formed the theme of an essay 
in the third volume of the Indische Studien, while much 
of its lexicographical material was rendered available by 
Weber’s energy to the authors of the St Peter&hurff 
Dictionary. But publication of this imjxjrtant and 
interesting text has been long delayed by the absence of 
adequate manuscript material. It is due to the energy of 
Dr. Stein that further material has been made available, 
and even his efforts have not succeeded in obtaining 
a complete eopy of the text, the MS. of Dayaram Jyotsi 
of Srinagar, which alone can be compared for importance 
wdth the Chambers MS., being deficient for a portion of 
book i and for the whole of book ii. 

Despite the lack of manuscript material, the edition of 
both books is an admirable piece *of work, as was only to 
be expected from the editor of the MaitrCiyanl Sainhitd. 
It is inevitable that tlie text should here and there remain 
doubtful, and unquestionably in several places the sense of 
the original is impossible to discover, but it may fairly be 
said that the editor has done practically everything that 
can be done with the materials available. Fortunately 
the KapiMhala Samhitd in the fragments preserved shows 



KOTICES OF BOOKS 


such considerable similarity with the text o£ the Kdfhaka 
that it has served to suggest many corrections of that text 
and to confirm others. 

One general criticism only would we offer on the text, 
and that is regret that the editor should have declined 
to adopt a system of punctuation It is true that he 
has authority on his side, and in particular Dr. Caland, 
whose assistance in constituting the text of book ii is 
acknowledged by Professor von Schroeder, has declared 
himself against punctuation. But the arguments on the 
otter side are, in our opinron, overwhelming.^ The editor 
of 3uch a text as this must while preparing the text mak(' 
himself master of tlie sense, and the probability tliat he 
will commit a few mistakes in his division of sentences 
is of no importance compared to the saving of time and 
trouble to users of the book by the simplification of its 
study through the adoption of a rational system of 
punctuation It is true that punctuation can be oveiiione, 
as is the case with Bohtlingk's text of the Brhaddrar^- 
yalca and Chdndogya Upammd's, where the punctuation 
increases the difficulty of tlie text, but tliere is no valid 
excuse for a chapter of two large pages with continuous 
Sandhi, including the assimilation of sibilants, and without 
a single punctuation mark or distinction of quotations. 
Moreover, comparison with Weber’s text of the Taitiirlya 
Sariihtid shows how incomparable is the advantage of 
using transliteration ^ in dealing with Vedic texts, at any 
rate if the purpose of editing such texts is the legitimate 
desire to render readily ^tvailable their contents. 

As Weber had access to the Chambers MS the publica- 
tion of the text adds little to our knowledge of the 
subjects with which it deals, though an examination of 
it adds — if poi^sijble — to our admiration of the ability wdth 

^ Cf Laninan mUtertel’s Panclmtantra^ pp xxvi seq 

2 That Devanugari 'w as used in my A itareya Aranyaka was due to the 
exigencies of the Anecdota senes of which it formed a volume. 



T&B EATHAKA BAWSJXk 


which he handled the KaLhaJca} But it is of some interest 
to note that the parallel passas^e ^ to those in the Taittirlya 
8amhitd , ® and the ^atapatli/i Brdhmaiia* on which Biirk ® 
has founded his theory that the Pythagorean problem 
was known in India in the eighth century B.C., like the 
passages themselves, is silent on the most important point, 
the dimensions of the hypotenuse. It contents itself with 
saying: vedim viwimUe iriw^ata pededt prakramair 
mimltp mttrirnsatd prdcl^ caturvimsafyd 2 urabint No 
doubt this means that the prdcT, a line bisecting at right 
angles the western and eastern sides of the Vedi, is 
36 units, and no doubt the hypotenuse oi the triangle 
formed by tlie (30), with half western side of 

the altar (15), would have a hypotenuse' of 39 units. But 
there is nothing in the San)hitas o>* Bi'ahmana to show' 
that the hypotenuse was ever measured, much less that it 
was of any importance at all, and even if the nK'asurement 
of the hypotenuse were given, we w^ould still be as far as 
ever from a knowledge of the Pythagorean theorem. To 
put it plainly, if anyone construct atiguio wdth a right 
angle — one of tlie simplest tigur(\s possible — and then 
measure the sides, they will, of course, present the result 
(assuming any correct measurement) that the squares of 
the nurabeis representing the sides will equal the square 
of the number representing the Jiyp'^enuse ; but to ascribe 
the knowledge of this fact — much less the knowledge of 
the theory underlying it — to a man who merely knew the 
measures of the sides is quite fantastic, and the absurdity 
of the whole construction is more obvious still when the 
man, as far as the records go, never even mentions, or 
knew the length of, th(* hypotenuse. 

Nor does the Kathalcd support in any w^ay the other 

^ The Mantra material is embodied in advance of publication of the 
text of xix, etc. , in Bloomfield’s Vedic Concordance, 

2 XXV, 4. * VI, 2, 4, 5. * X, 2, 3, 4. 

« ZDMfi . Iv, 553-0. 



NOTICES OF BOOKS 


argument^ on which Burk bases the view that the 
Pythagorean problem was early known in India. It is 
perfectly true that like the Taittirlya Samh Ltd — to which 
Burk might have added the Maifrdyain Samhitd^ — the 
Kdthaka^ gives a series of optional forms of the sacrificial 
fire fpr the case when a man has some special desire. 
Burk ^ lays down that in all these forms the space occupied 
by the fire must be the same as in the normal form, and 
he deduces thence — as one of the optional forms is that 
of a chariot wheel (ratha-cakra) — that the Indians knew 
at the time of the Samhitas how to construct a circle 
with an area equal to that of a square, and that they 
could transform one rectilinear figure into another. 
Unfortunately he does not quote his authority for the 
statement that the sizes of the figures must be the same, 
and unless it occurs in the Samhitas or Brahmanas the 
argument is worthless. But even if there were to be 
found there a ritual direction that the size must be the 
same it would be absurd to assume, unless more details 
were given, that the priests leally could make them 
identical and knew enough geometry to further this 
result. Empirical measurements would serve to obtain 
an approximately adequate result Nor can we ]:;nake 
anything out of the fact that the &afaixitha Brdltmana^ 
contemplate the building of successive altars each larger 
than the other : the exact sense is obscure, and apparently 
the passage means no more than that each successive altar 
is to be larger than the former one by one unit (the length 
of a man) on each of its four sides ^ We are therefore 
faced with the fact that no geometrical knowledge like 
that of the Pythagorean problem can be asserted before 

^ ZDMG , Iv, 546 deq. - v, 4, 11, 1 seq * iii, 4, 7. 

^ XXI, 4 ® Loo. cit , p 548. 

X, 2, 3, 18. The reference in Burk (p. 549, n. 1) to Weber’s Indische 
Studim IS incorrect. 

’ Cf Eggehng, SBE , 310 seq. 



THE K4THAKA SAHHITA 52T; 

the time of the Sulba Sutras, the date of which remains 
doubtful.^ 

The Kdthalca was clearly composed in the land of the 
Kuru-Pancalas, like most of the Brahmana literature. 
This is shown by the references to that people and to 
Dhrtarastra Vaicitravhya,- and the special interest shown 
in the Pancalas and Kuntisr* Unhappily the references 
are too slight to show us ex.’ctly the relations of the 
peoples, but they lend no support to the vuew recently 
adopted by Mi. Pargiter^ that th Kuru-Pahcala alliance 
dates from after the great war. It is c]uite possible, as 
Mr. Pargiter argues, that the tra<iition of the priests as to 
secular matters was not good, but the utter confusion of 
the Epic and Puranai traditions renders it very doubtful 
whether it is wise to say ^ that the account of tlie tradition 
of knowledge as to Soma - drinking in the Aitareya 
Brahmana^ is chronologically erroneous. When we can 
control facts wo see something different : wo see, as in 
the Devapi and ^antanu legend, the misunderstanding of 
a Vedic tradition.'^ 

The style and grammar of the Kdthaka offer few 
surprises : indeed, the work conforms in this regard to 
the most iipproved Brahmana traditions. This is shown 
strikingly by the statistics of the use of the narrative 
tenses, figures for which as far as book i is concerned 
have been given in an earlier number of the Journal.® 

^ See my remarks, JR AS., 1909, 590 seq., to whicli T have nothing to 
add. Professor Garbe very kindly called my attention to the fact that 
I had not in my note dealt with Burk’s evidence, and this omission 
I now repair. 

2 X, 0. *" Cf, xxvi, 9 ; and for the Pancfilas, xxx, 2. 

^ JRAS., 1910, p. 51, 11 . 5. The great war is unknown to the 
Brahmanas, and it is legitimate to suppose th(at it was of later date, 
if it occurred at all. 

® Ibid., p. 53, n. 4. « vii, 34. 

Cf. Si eg, Die Sagemtoffe des Rgmda^ pp. 129 seq. ; Muir, Sanekrit 
Texta^ i, 272 ; Macdonell, Brfmidcvatd^ i, p. xxix. 

® JRAS., 1909, pp, 149 seq. 



NOTICES OF BOOKS 

In book ii (xix-xxx) there are approximately ^ 891 cases 
b£ the narrative imperfect : section xix has 49 ; xx, 49 ; 
xxi‘ 40 ; xxii, 44 ; xxiii, 118; xxiv, 88; xxv, 113; xxvi, 
63 ; xxvii, 109 ; xxviii, 02; xxix, 79 ; xxx, 77. Against 
these the narrative perfects are extremely few : vidam 
cah^ra occurs in xxi, 4, 0, and xxvii, 5, with viddTrh 
cakrma in xxii, 6. In xx, 1, uvdca alternates with 
vividulp and veda ; in xx, 8, upadadkavu and jagdrua 
follow ; uvdca occurs alone in xx, 9, and xxii, 7 ; 
abhyanuvdca in xxviii, 4 ; uvdca and ninynh in xxvi, 7 ; 
uvdca (bis), ucuh, and jagrhuh in xxx, 2 ; dnardha in 
xxi, 4. The other perfects which occur are like dha, 
dliuhy veda, viduh (xxiii, 2), present in sense, and include 
dnaJe, xx, 5, 11; xxx, 4, and (yagdma, “it is here,” 
xxvi, 6. Most common is dadhara, xix, 11, 12 3^1:, 7, 

10, 11 (bis); xxi, 3; xxvi, 1 ; xxviii, 10 (eight times 
repeated). In this use the form is so predominantly 
dddhara that we would not hesitate to emend dadhdra 
in XX, 5 (p. 23, 1, 10). In xxii, 3, von Schroedcr himself 
has made a similar emendation, because dadhara is 
followed by dddhdra, and in xx, 5, there is no reason to 
cling to the text of the Chambers MS. In striking 
contrast are the verse and prose Mantra portions of the 
work, where, e.g. in xxii, 10, a single verse equates 
uddyan and dnanuh. 

The aorist is used practically only ^ the sense rendered 
by “have” in English, in which it Occurs some twenty* 
three times ; curiously enough, the sense of a present, 
which is so marked a feature of the Maitrdyani Samhitd, 

^ Absolute accuracy is not aimed at, but the figures are such as to 
render it needless. The imperfect is in fact the only narrative tense; 
the perfect is sporadic and rather peculiar (nrdca, etc., predominate). 

® Acuci/avat, xx, 1 ; ahhut, xx, 7 ; ahhumn, xxiii, 7 ; xxix, 1 ; acaih, 
acaimm, xxii, 6 ; acesta, xxii, 7, 8 ; upagdt, xxii, 8 ; agan (bis), xxv, 5 ; 
upagdlh, xxvi, 2 ; ahramlt, avocathdh, xxv, 2 ; asprk^ah, dprdh, adrmhlh, 
xxvi, 5 ; agdm, xxix, 7 ; agdt, xxviii, 4 ; amihat, adrdpmt, xxviii, 4 ; 
agrahlf^, xxx, 2 ; addbhat, xxx, 7. 



*rkE kathAIka'samhita 


is quite rare ; it is found in xx, 9 — yajnasyaivdntau 
samagraMt 

Of the use of the moods there is littlt to be said : in 
the Brahmana proper the optative as conditional, as 
injunctive, and as optative occurs frequentlj’’, but without 
irregularities of usage. In paiticiilar there is nut a single 
irregular conditional sentence in xix-xxx. The subjunctive 
is found in its usual senses, once in both clauses of a 
conditional sentence, but it is not common.^ The in- 
junctive, both affirmative and neg^^tivo, occurs, but also 
infrequently. 

More characteristic is the distinct adv^ance in the iise 
of the infinitive in inm The use is found more often 
with arludi^ but also with other verbs, viz., anvedum 
adhriyanta, xxiv, 7, and xxx, 4 , unrav^niiun adhrminvan, 
xxiv, 10 ; dcfhdhu7)i ndsaJenuvan , xxx, 9,^ and lulaiUthad 
hotum, xxviii, 9. The only other form at all usual is the 
genitive with Uvara, as in xxvi, 1 (abh yusaJi) ; xxx, 5 
(prametoh), 9 {pardhliavitolt). On a par witli tliis is the 
frequent use of the verbal in tavya, and the repeated na 
nedrd na potrd bluiritavyam, xxvi, 1, etc. 

In the use of the participles there is little of note, 
except that as to the other Brahmanas, the perfect middle 
is of freqiiem occurrence A good examph^ of t}i(‘ apparent^ 
use of the present participle as a finite verb is to be seen 
in xxi, 2 ; devd mi fivaryani lolcain ytniias tesCun ydni 
chanddm^y a^iirulddni svaryydny dsarns iais saha 
svargam lokam dyan. Here the writer has reco\ ered the 
construction after the bieak, but if he had forgotten it 
an apparent finite use of yantas would liave been shown. 
On the other hand, in xxi. 8, there does occur an interesting 

^ Adaf in x\, 9, is a clearly coiroct conjecture of von Schioeder. 

® Apfimi arhati, xxi, 12; xxix, 3, 6 (bis); qantiiin arhafu xxx, 9; 
samastum arhati, xxix, 1 ; hodhayitum arliati, xxii, 2. 

^ So aiaknamn pramtim, xxvii, 3, h\xt 'itdyamam ndhaknutuuj xxviii, 7. 

^ See my notes, ZDMG , Ixiij, 336 seq. ; JRAS. , 1910, pp. 226, 227. 



NOTICES OF Mdks 


example of the development of a real dependent con- 
struction ^ in place of the use of the direct speech with 
iti. Tlie sentence is : ekaikayd jnhtiyad yadi kdTnayeta 
dram papmaiw mneyeteti dram eva pdpmano mucyate | 
sakrt sarvdn anudrufyottamayd juhtiydcl yadi kdma- 
yetdjiram pdpmano mucyeMy ajiram eva pdpmano 
mucyaie. Von Schroeder does not even query the text, 
yet the ordinary use would be mucyeyeii, an easy 
conjecture, and one parallel to his ^ correction of aydt to 
aydm in the Maitrdyani Samliiid, ii, i, 11. But the text 
may well stand as a grammatical irregularity of the 
legitimate kind, admitting of easy if illogical explanation. 

A few small points may be more briefly noticed. It is 
hardly consistent to let invai stand in the t^t in xix, 1, 
when in nvai is printed at p. 81, 1. 8; 8. The 

omission of double letters is a characteristic of every 
Sanskrit MS., and has no value. In xxii, 8, the name 
■ 6arkarakhya seems doubtful as a proj^er name, and it is 
obvious and easy to read Sarkaraksa instead, or even 
^arkaraksya. The former name is found in the Gana 
Gargadi, and the latter in Sankara’s commentary on the 
Chdndogya Upanisad^^ while Sarkaraksya occurs in the 
J^atapatha Brdhmana, Chdndogya JJpaniaad, and Tait- 
iirlya Aranyaka,^ In xxix, 4, the Chambers MS. has the 
form aatakapdla ] von Schroeder remarks “ in Bohtlingk’s 
Worterbuch mit Sternchen versehen, also tiberliefert, aber 
nicht belegt ”. But in point of fact it is so quoted in the 
KddJcd on Panini ® in the form aatakapdlam brdhmavasya, 
which is conclusive evidence of its legitimacy. It is. more 
doubtful if the authority of the Chambers MS. is adequate 
to allow the form in the Kdfhaka, which has repeatedly 
mt^kapdla. Similarly I think von Schroeder attributes 
too much weight to his MSS. when he reads the ihcorrect 

1 Cf. my ^dilkhdyaimiiAramyaka, p. xv. ^ 

^ Maitrdyani Sam hitd^j 13, n. 5. ^ v, 11, 2. 

^ Cf. my Aitareya Arcmyaka, p. 204. ® vi, 3, 46. 



THE FAtl M^BATtrSE Or BUI^A 


ta drtim drchanti in xxi, 6, for the correct sa-drchati of 
the Maitrdyanl Samhitd, xii, 8, 4. Again, in xxix, 8, the 
text adopted by von Schroeder seems open to objection. 
It runs : tasmad utailw hah^nr jdyd vindate naikd bahUn 
pat In upaAayaJp 1. The form a paAayah presents difficulties, 
and the obvious correction upasaye (^namel^ e for o) 
restores ihe necessary parallelism with vindate, 

0£ the uses of the cases it may be worth while 
mentioning the ablative of comparison in xxix, 8 : striyaJp 
pumso 'tirikidli, and the apparent accusatives in xxi, JO : 
sa rdstram ahlmvad yam kdmayeta raRtra^u sydt The 
first rdfitram and the second must presumably be construed 
alike, and the accusative \\ith ayat is even more difficult 
than that with hltd, of which we nave wiitten elsewhere.^ 
Probably in both cases the nominati> e must be taken to 
be meant, and the abstract stand for the concrete, royalty 
for king.^ In xix, 1 , jJvitaniaJi must replace jlvitatamah, 
wliich is most improbable. The Kapisthala Sariihitd has 
jlvitrtamah^ which is also possible, but nothing is easier 
than a duplication of ta. 

A. Berriedale Keith. 


The Pali Literature of Burma. By Mabel Haynes 
Bode. Printed and published by the Royal Asiatic 
Society, 1909. 

After a short introduction Mrs. Bode begins her review 
of the Pali literature in Burma with the arrival of the 
Pali Tipitaka in that country. As to the Suttapitaka, 
she states that among the great Nikayas claiming to be 
the word of the Buddha the Dighanikaya is the best 
known and the moat frequently to be found. The reason 
for this preference is, according to Mrs. Bode, that it is 

^ JBAS., 1910, pp. 151 seq. 

® See e.g. Pcmcavirjfi^a Brdhrm'm, xxi, 12, 2! aa rdstrarti aJbhavad 
Hare. 

JRAS. 1910. 


34 



'NOTIONS. OF BOOltS 

the shortest among these collections and contains , all the 
. essential doctrines of Buddhism. 

The Vinaya offers tlie author an occasion to speak about 
the beginnings of Buddhist culture in Further India. 
Here Mrs. Bode might liave mentioned the two merchants, 
Tapussa and Bhallika, who were travelling from Utkala 
to Madhyadeza with 500 carts, when a deity stopped 
i^m and exhorted them to offer cakes of barley and 
^9roney to the Lord (Mahavagga, i, 4). These merchants 
became the first lay disciples of the Buddha. The story of 
thfe Mahavagga is confirmed by tlie celebrated inscription 
of the Shwc Dagon Pagoda in Rangoon (mentioned by 
Mrs. Bode at p. 78, n. (>), which dates from 1485 during 
the reign of King Dliammaceti. There is olily one 
difference between the two records. The Mahavagga 
states that the two merchants made their way from 
Utkalil to the Rajayatana tree on the road {addhana- 
mag<japaiip(tnn(i Itonii), while the Sliwe Dagpn'inscription 
says that they came by ship. From this conclude 

that the author of the Mahavagga believed Utkala to 
mean Orissa in anterior India, from where they could 
easily go by road to the Rajayatana tree. Dharnmaceti, 
on the contrary, the author of the Shwe Dagon inscription, 
believed Utkala to be the country from the foot of the 
Shwe Dagon Hill down to the Irawaddy, where there 
must have been a settlement of colonists from anterior 
India in very early times. This is the reason why in his 
opinion the two merchants make their voyage by ship. 

If w6 consider the later Buddhistieal literature, we shall 
find the story of Tapussa and Bhallika in the commentaries 
of Buddliaghosa to the V^aya and to the Anguttara- 
nikaya, which belong to the fifth century A.D. There also 
the place from where they came, and where they erected 
a dagoba aftei^their return, is called Asitanjananagara, 
as in »the i^|^tion of Shwe Dagon. It therefore 
seems to be out of question that Buddliaghosa, the most 



THE PALI LlUBnaAtUtkE X)F BT?JrtlA 


celebrated of the commentators, believed the country to be 
Burma and not Orissa, and that the dagoba was erected 
in the same place where the merchants liad buried the 
relics which the Buddha had given them.^ Buddhaghosa’s 
opinion is of the utmost importance for us, because he has 
written most of his commentaries in Burma after having 
spent a certain time in Ceylon. Formerly Burmese 
historians believed him to have been born in Burma, but 
#this opinion cannot hold good against the testimony 
of the Mahavamsa, according to vhicli ho was born in 
the neighbourhood of the holy Bo-tree , cf. Mrs. Bode, 
p. 8, n. 1. 

From her remarks on p. 10 it seems that Mrs. Bode 
is not inclined to attach much faith to the story of the 
Buddhist mission to Burma in llie time of Asoka. 
I should like to say a few words about this matter. The 
place where the two missionaries, Soma and IJttara, landed 
in Burma is called Golanagara or Golamittikanagaia 
(Sasanavamsa, p. 38). About this place diflerent opinions 
have been uttered Forehhammer believed that it is the 
same place which is mentioned by the Arabian geographers 
under the name of Kalah. In the eighth and ninth 
centuries it was the centre of the trade in aloe, camphor, 
sandal- wood, ivory, and lead. The ships coming from the 
east" (China) and from the west (Persia) used to meet in 
Kalah and to excliange their merchandise there. In the 
neighbourhood of this Kalah there was a group of small 
islands which may help us in identifying the place. If 
we take the islands to be the Maldives, or the islands 
forming the Adam’s Bridge, then Kalah must be in 
Ceylon ; in the former case it could be identical with the 
modern Point de Galle in the south of Ceylon, ^ in the 

* The name Dagon corresponds to the Pali Tikumbha (three bowls), 

. and hence the legend originated that Gotama and his two favourite 
disciples, Sariputta and Moggallana, had buried their bowls in this place. 

2 This is Sir Emerson Tennent’s opinion. 



528* NOTICES OF BOOKS 

latter it could be the north-east coast of this island. In 
both cases it cannot be the Golanagara in Burma, where 
the Buddl)ist missionaries landed. If, on the contrary, 
we take the group of islands to be the Nicobar Islands, 
we might identify Kalah with the modern Queddah in 
the' neighbourhood of Penang in Further India. This is 
the opiuion of the author of the anonymous book, Ceylon^ 
a general description of tlie island, historical, physical, 
^statistical (London, 1876). He believes that the 
ships coming from Persia took their way to China directly 
from Cape Comorin through the Gulf of Bengal to the 
Nicobar Islands, and touched Kalah afterwards. This 
opinion seems preferable to that of Forchhammer and 
Sir Emerson Tennent, because the ships had to pass 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of Queddah, while they 
would have been obliged to take a roundabout way to the 
north if they had wanted to touch Golanagara. 

After these remarks I have only little to add. As on 
former occasions, Mrs. Bode has given heijp also an 
excellent specimen of her scholarship. Following her 
sources, among which the Sasanavamsa and the Gandha- 
vamsa are the principal, she gives us a vivid picture of 
the development of Pali literature in Burma from the 
eleventh century down to the present day. Chapter ii 
deals with the rise of Pali scholarship in Upper Burma 
and the relations between this country and Ceylon in the 
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Chapter iii is divided 
into two sections, of which the first gives us the Pali 
literature in Pegu and the Kalyani inscriptions of King 
Dhammaceti, while the second contains the literature 
in Upper Burma from the foundation of Ava to the end 
of the sixteenth century. 

Chapters iv— vi are dedicated to the literature of 
the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries 
respectively, and in the appendix on p. 101 ff. Mrs. Bode 
gives us a list of 295 Sanskrit and Pali books from an 



THJE aiXIOION OF BABYWKIA AliTD ASSyRIA^/ 529 


inscription dated A.D. 14^2. We notice here a number 
of titles of Sanskrit works, sometimes greatly disguised 
in the Burmese transcription, but most of them (not all) 
still recognizable. I shall add a few suggestions to the 
explanations which Mrs. Bode gives in the foot-notes: 
No. 193, Vrndatika, is mentioned among othti* medical 
treatises by Aufrecht, Oat. Cod. Oxon., 31 1&; No. 197, 
Dravyaguiia, ib p 86a (cf. N(». 254). I do not believe 
that No. 208 refers to Dandm, because this name occurs 
again in its right form, Nos. 256-8, but rather t<' Tandiiu 
No. 219, Tarkabhfisha, is a book mentioned by Aufrecht, 
1.1., 244a, and by Westergaard (Jodicps Orinilales Bihlio- 
thecoi Havnieubib, p. 8a ; Cabaton, Caialogue bommaire 
des maTiwcTipts san^lr^fs ef pal'is de la hihliotheque 
naHonalr, fasc i, Nos 296, 884, 885. Foi No. 253, 
Roganidana, see WestcTgaard, 1.1., p. 104a , No. 265, 
Vidagdhamukhamandana, see Cabaton, 1.1., Nos. 529, 686. 

I have now reached the end of this review, w'hich is 
a good deal longer than most of the reviews 1 have written 
for this Journal. But I can assure Mrs. Bode that the 
only reason of my verbosity is that I have found so many 
interesting points in her valuable book which I could not 
dismiss witliout fully discu&sing them. 

E. MOller. 


The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, especially in 
ITS relations with Israel. Five lectures delivered 
at Harvard University by Robert William Rogers, 
Ph.D. (Leipzig), Litt.D., LL.D., F.R.G.S., Professor 
in Drew Theological Seminary, etc. London : Luzac 
and Co., 1908. 

In this little book of 235 pages we have a liistory of 
the recovery of the lost religion of Assyria’ and Babylonia, 
an account of its gods, its cosmologies, its sacred books, 
and its myths and epics. It is needless to say that the 



NOTICES OF BOOKS; 


picturesque faiths of these two ancient peoples can always 
be made interesting, and Dr. Rogers has well succeeded 
in his task. The pictures, tliough mainly reproductions 
of tablets and inscriptions, ai*o well chosen to rouse the 
reader’s interest and make him desirous of more light 
upon tlie faith of the two nations with whom it originated 
—a faith which must have had considerable influence 
upon their near kinsmen, the Israelites. 

Naturally the first deity to be treated of is the head 
of ‘the pantheon, and the author begins (p. 59) with 
a comparison between the Assyrian AiCsur and the 
Babylonian M(‘rodach. Assur, lie points out, was a local 
deity, as was Merodaeli at Babylon : but though Merodach 
always remained at Babylon, Assur accompanied his people 
when the capital was changed to Cal ah, and then to 
Nineveh, and thence to Dur-f)arrukiu (Khorsabad), and 
back again to Nineveh. But when the Assyrians had 
conquered Babylon they made no atti^mpt to introduce 
the worship of Assur into the southern capital, much less 
to supplant Merodach, And tlu^ j-eason of this is not 
far to seek — they were ihemseixes the willing worshippers 
of Merodach, and it might be added, they regarded Assur 
and Merodach as one and the same. And here I should 
like again to speak of the mysterious deity Nisroch, 
which Dr. Rogers (p. 65, foot-note) suggests may be 
a malforming of the name of Merodach. J had thought 
(see Hastings’ Dictionary of the Bible, s.v.) that Nisroch 
was a malformation of Assur, or a combination of Assur 
with the name of the moon-god Aku (otherwise Sin and 
Nannar), for the first element of Sennacherib’s name being 
Sin, he would naturally regard that deity as his special 
protector, and might try to identify him with the national 
god of Assyria, especially if, as the tablets show, there 
was a desii-c to regard them all as manifestations of one 
and the same deity (in Babylonia Merodach, and in Assyria 
As^ur). 



■ Tsa; mmioyt of mBYtoK ! a and jOT'? 


Professor Rogers's treatment of the subject is historicab 
and therefore different from what we are accustomed to. 
This naturally makes a refreshing change, and gives him 
an opportunity of writing about the gods of the Assyrians 
from the point of view of the nation itself. When 
speaking of the conquests of Esar-haddon, therefore, he 
points out that he ascribed his success in war to Assur, 
th(^ great Assyrian deity. The gods of Babylonia could 
not help him ; there was needed the strong bow of Assur 
— the great god of war. And 3veii Assur had never 
wrought a greater wrong than the sad desolation of 
Egypt. But on the fall of Nineveh in G08 b.c., the god 
Assur went down with his people. “He was but a god 
of blood and fire, and could not survive th(^ powers of 
blood and fire which alone had made him grt^at." And 
here we may make a comparison. The god Assur, as 
the author says, was not any better than his people, but 
how about the Babylonians, the worshippers of ‘‘ the 
merciful Merodach ” ^ When Nebuchadrezzar came to 
the throne of Babylonia, which had taken Assyria's place 
as a world-power, he, too, conquered the nations, including 
Egypt. And this reminds us that even Christians have 
been known to invoke “ the god of battles ". 

Professor Rogers's examination of the religion of 
Babylonia is closer than that of Assyria, and in the main 
he seems to follow Jastrow and Sayce. A very interesting 
section is that in which Yau is treated of (pp. 90 ff.). 
As is well known, the name Yaum-ilu (the Heb. Joel) 
occurs on a tablet copied by the present writer for the 
Trustees of the British Museum some time before 1898, 
in which year Professor Sayce spoke of it, and Professor 
Delitzsch referred to it again in his well-known lecture 
Bahel und Bibel in 1902. This is naturally not the name 
Yahwah, but Yah (Jah) simply. Whether Delitzsch is 
right in reading Ja-a-pi-tlu as Ya-a-ve-Uu or not is a 
matter of opinion — the reading is possible, but still better 



‘ NOTICES OF BOOKS 

would be the reading Ta-a-wa-Uu, which is also a likely 
one. As I showed, as long ago as 1892,^ the late 
Babylonian form of Yahwah was Ydwa or Ya'awa, and 
it is hardly likely that any other form existed 2000 B.C. 

Professor Rogers’s Religion of Babylonia and Assyria 
gives an interesting insight into the beliefs of those ancient 
pebples, and will be appreciated by many. His treatment 
of the Creation and Flood legends is attractive, and 
quotations from these ‘'sacred books” are given, as well 
as a selection from the other legends, and numerous 
hymns, incantations, and chants. 

T. G. Pinches. 

The Earliest Cosmologies, the Universe as Pictured 
in Thought by the ancient Hebrews, Babylonians, 
Egyptians, Greeks, Iranians, and Indo -Aryans : A 
Guide-book for beginners in the study of ancient 
literatures and religions. By William Fairfield 
Warren,' S.T.D., LL.D., M.R.A.S., etc. New York: 
Eaton H Mains, 1909. 

The main object of this interesting work seems to be 
to try to show what was the most probable Babylonian 
(and general Semitic) idea of tlie universe, comparing it 
with other systems known, at the same time showing 
that they present certain points of agreement. The first 
two chapters aim at disproving the generally accepted 
theories of the Hebrew ideas of the universe as being 
a flat but more or less rugged disc, arched over by an 
impermeable vault, with the heavenly bodies and the 
stars on either the inner or the outer side of the same, 
and various devices for allowing the waters of the springs 
and rivers and the rains to enter and fertilize this 
hermetically sealed abode of living things. In some places 
the author is genially sarcastic, and probably rightly so, 

^ “ Yl. and Y S,wa ( J ah and J ahwah) in Assyro-Baby Ionian Inscriptions * * 
Proceedings of the Soc. of Bibl. Arch., November, 1892, pp. 13 ff. 



"the SABtlBST COSMOLOOIES 


but the writers whoiKi he quotes probably did their best 
with the material and knowledge at tlieir command, and 
we must take into consideration that the^’e were many 
things which they found diiKeult to reconcile. 

Professor Warren contends that the ancients had a much 
more correct idea of the world and the univ^erse than 
they art' generally credited with, such as the eartli’s 
globular form, though the rnoti ms of che sun, moon, and 
stars naturally confused them. With T*egard to the 
Babylonians liowever, he contends-- to all appearance 
with Professor Sayce — that they thought of the^world 
as a double seven-staged temple-tower within seven con- 
centric spheres, these spheres being the seven heavens, 
the upper half the legion of light, and the lower that 
of darkness. This double ^ein pie- 
tower was so arranged that its 
counterpart, reversed, appeart^d be- 
low it ; and being, with the spheres 
of the underworld by which it was 
surround('d, in darkness, the whole 
looks like a seven - staged Baby- 
lonian ziqqnrat with its seven 
over-arclnng hemispheres reflected in the waters of a great 
sea. Th(' idea is strange and somewhat weird, but an 
examination of the texts and also the characters of the 
Babylonian syllabary shows it to be not altogether so 
improbable as it seems. 

As is well known, the staged tower or step-pyramid 
was a common form of temple (and at the same time^ 
it is supposed, observatory) in Babylonia and Assyria. 
ProbabljT' comparativeh' few of them had seven stages^ 
bhe commonest number being no more than three or four. 
The most noteworthy of them, however, had the full 
number, seven — that at Babylon, which is df*scribed by 
Herodotus, being the one best known to us. This tower 
of Babel, which was probably attached to the neighbouring 




NOTICES OF BOOKS ' 


tefeple of Bel-Merodach, was called E-temen-ana-lcia/^ the 
house of the foundation of heaven and earth.” Another, 
that at Borsippa (the traditional, though probably not 
the real, tower of Babel) was similar as to its form, and 
also, probably, in the number of its steps or stages. 
This had a similar name, E-ur-imina-ana-hia, ‘‘the house 
of £he seven regions of heaven and earth ” (formerly 
rendered tlie temple of the “ seven spheres ”) Similarly 
emblematical, seemingly, was either the temple or the city 
of Erech, which is called, in the geographical lists, Ar- 
Da^imina, and Oipar-imina, the seven regions, 
sometimes with the prefix for “city”, leading to the 
probability that the temple-tower there may either have 
been in seven stages, emblematical of the seven regions of 
earth and heaven, or, if in fewer than seven stages, never- 
theless typified that number. That Erech w’^as especially 
a city associated with the seven regions or enclosures is 
also indicated by the fact that in the Legend of Gilgames 
it is always called Uruk s^vpuri, “ Erech of the enclosures,” 
as though that wei e tlie city’s distinctive characteristic. 

Naturally an objection might be made that the elevation 
of the great temple-tower of Babylon, according to the 
tablet (all traces of which have now disappeared), which 
was for a time in the hands of the late George Smith, 
was not exactly like that of the diagram published by 
Professor Warren, the lowest and the second stages being 
about half the height of the whole erection, and the top- 
most a hall of considerable height In all probability, 
however, this does not invalidate the idea, as the pro- 
portions, in the main, are preserved, the width, length, and 
height being the same. What seems really not to agree 
is the map of the world brought back by Mr. H. Rassam 
from Abu-Habbah, the site of Sippar, which he discovered. 
In that the world appears as a circle, with the salt sea 
around it, and eight gore-like districts on the other side 
of that sea, giving the world the appearance of a great 



star whose points have intervals between. This map, 
however, would seem to be late, and perhaps drawn at 
a time when tlie ideas of the Babylonians had changed 
upon the subject. It is doubtful whether anything can 
be argued in favour of Professor Warren^s theory from the 
ideogram for “earth”, ^ in its ancient forui. Though 
it appears as a kind of lozenge with cross -lines (about 
five in number) in the middh archaic style, the oldest 
forms show it with the right-hand side flat, or nearly 
so, which, as tiip line-forms of th Babylonian characters 
have to be turned round to get the true position of the 
original hieroglyphic, points to something like the following: 
/hK • This would naturally agree with the author’s upper 
part — ^the earth pioj)ir - Init the vertical lines which would 
then replace tfie horizontal^ would in that case require 
another explanation More satisf.ictory, perhaps, would 
be the ideograph <0>, late form the meaning of which, 
like and is hsiaiu, “the universe,” “world-all.” 
In connexion with the name of Enlila’s temple at Nippur, 
E-kura, the common ideograph for ‘ country ”, regarded 
as a picture of three mountains, would naturally come 
into consideration. 

But it i^^ probable that more than one idea of the world 
existed in Babylonia, and in connexion wdtli this the 
author’s remark that the ancient Semites knew” that the 
eatth was a globe is noteworthy. The ehai acter may 

just as easily have originated in a hemisphere as in 
a pyramid, and may have been in reality not a lozenge 
or double pyramid, but a circle. And in this connexion 
the words of that important and remarkably perfect tablet 
found lit Nineveh by G. Smith may be quoted. It is 
a hymn to Tstar, and the first three lines read as follows : — - 
“The light of heavem, which like fire daw”neth in the 
land, art thou, 

0 Goddess in the earth, in thy fixed abode, 

She w”ho, like the earth, stately advanceth, art thou.” 



NOTICES OF BOOKS 


;« 8 «- -■ 

Here we have a comparison between Istar (Venus) and 
the earth, in which, as a planet, she is said to advance 
{Sutuqat, “she is caused to cross,” suphiil of Hequ) like 
the earth. As the Babylonians knew the phases of Venus, 
they must have recognized that she was disc-shaped or 
circular, and to say that the earth was like her is as much 
saying that the eartli was a globe too. 

The Cosmology of the Babylonians is not, however, the 
only thing of which Professor Warren treats — he speaks 
also of the Egyptian, the Homeric, the Indo-Iranian, the 
Buddhistjc universes, Homer's Abode of the Dead and of 
the Living, and many other things, the discussion of which 
would take up much space and need the pen of a specialist 
in each branch of study. In more ways than one, there- 
fore, Professor Warren’s Earliest Cosinolocjies is a book to 
attract the student and the thinker. 

T. G. Pinches. 

Psalms of the Early Buddhists. — I. Psalms of the 

•V 

Sisters. By Mrs. Rhys Davids, M.A. London: 
published for the Pali Text Society, 190^. 

This is the second European translation of the collection 
of stanzas commonly known under the name of Therigatha, 
“ psalms of the sisters.” Tlic first attempt was made by 
Dr. K. E. Neumann, who translated this collection, together 
with the songs of the brethren, into German verse in 
1899, just ten years ago. The principal difference between 
Neumann's work and that of Mrs. Rhys Davids is that 
the former is totally independent of any commentary on 
the brethren's verses and treats the commentary on the 
sisters with utter scepticism, while the latter professes 
her indebtedness to Dhammapala’s work in a great many 
instances. Mrs. Rhys Davids even tells us in her intro- 
duction that the principal reason why she translates the 
psalms of the sisters before those of the brethren is that 
the commentary on the Theri^tha is ready at hand in 



OF THE ZktSlX BUPOHISTS 

my edition of 1893 published by the Pali Text Society, 
while she could only procure' a single manuscript of the 
commentary on the Theragatlia through the exertions of 
Professor Charles Duroiselle of Rangoon College. 

If the first European editor of the Therigatlia, Professor 
Pischel, acknowledged the help he derived from Dhamma- 
pala, it seems to me that the translator sliould be even 
more thankful for this help, and in this respect I entirely 
agree with Mrs. Rhys Davids when in many ambiguous 
terms she has been determined by the ruling of the 
commentator without accepting it in blind faith. 

Another question treated in the introduction is that 
about the identity of the sisteis. One of the most 
interesting persons is the tlieii Uppalavanna, whom we find 
not only in our Therigatha but also in different passages 
of the Vinaya, and who, according to Mrs. Rhys Davids, 
is as difficult to identify as our own 8t. George ” 
I have tried to give some information about this theri 
in the introduction to my edition of the Paramatthadlpani 
(xiv f ), and I will add a few more notes here : — 

Uppalavanna seems to be identical with Padmavati 
in the Bodhisattvavadanakalpalata (Rajendralalamitra’s 
Sanskrit Buddhist Literature in Nepal, p. 65). The 
story of IJmmadini is also related in the Kathasaritsagara 
(Tawney's translation, i, 104, ii, 322); and the story of 
the thera who married his own mother and sister (Para- 
matthadJpani, p. 195 f) occurs again in Ralston’s Tibetan 
Tales, translated from the Kah-gyur (London, 1893) as 
No. X. With regard to Patacara, Mrs. Rhys Davids 
states (p. xxi) that of the two poems attributed to her 
one has been lost or merged with that of Kisagotami 
Indeed, there seems to have been a confusion between 
the stories of Patacara and Kisagotami, as the tale which 
is related of Patacara in the Parainatthadipani occurs 
again in Ralston’s Tibetan Tales as No, XI with the title 
Kisagotami. Moreover, the same story is related in the 



538 


KOtlGES OF BOOKS 


twenty - fifth chapter of the Dsanglun with the title 
Uppalavanna (see T. T. Schmidt, Der Weise und der Thor, 
pp. 206 tf.). 

The translation reads very well. Mrs. Rhys Davids has 
not attempted to adhere more literally to the Pali text 
than her predecessor, Dr. Neumann, and, besides, the 
peculiarities of the English language have compelled her 
in some instances to adopt even a more independent 
rendering. In the following lines I shall give my opinion 
on some details that have stiuck me in the translation and 
in the notes : — 

Page 29, note 1, we read niittd = a mica, which is 
certainly right, but the derivation of the names Mitta 
and Mettika from the Vedie Sun-god seems to me 
far-fetched and totally unnecessary, p. 61, instead 
of Manoratanapurani read Manorathapurani. p. 122, 
stanza 258, upalcwhta is correctly translated by '' seared”. 
The same word occurs Jat. i, 405, where Chalmers has 
“nigh roasted”. In Sanskrit we find Icdhia, SuSruta, 
2. 435. 20, kudayati, Rigveda, 8. 26. 10, Icundate, Dhat. 
8. 17, all with the meaning “to burn”. 

The translation in stanza 265, “ They with the waste of 
the years droop shrunken as skins without water,” is based 
on Kern's suggestion {Bijdragc tot de verldariiuj van eenige 
voorden in Pali gescliriften toorlcomende, p. 15 f.) to read 
rifl instead of rindi, and to identify this with Sanskrit 
drti, “ a leather bag.” This suggestion is confirmed by 
the commentary. Neumann reads rdti, and translates 
accordingly. As far as the meaning of the whole stanza 
is concerned, both renderings are equally good. In 
stanza 267 I cannot understand why Mrs. Davids follows 
Neumann and not the commentary. The comparison of 
a woman’s thighs to the trunks of an elephant is very 
frequent in Indian erotic literature. See, for instance, 
Weber, Saptaiafakam des Hdla, stanza 925. 

In the translation of stanza 419 I agree in principle 



THBT lUMJt 


53W 


with Mrs. Davids, who follows the ideas of Kern (1,1,^ 
p. 21). Perhaps it would have been better to say, 
“ Alas ! we have lost the pretty luck,” instead of “ We 
are beaten, pretty luck.” At any rate, this translation 
is preferable to Neuraann^s, who treats the text with the 
utmost violence. Stanza 443 is a very difficiilt passage, 
and neither of the two renderings seems to mo quite 
satisfactory. If I give the preference to that of 
Mrs. Davids It is on account of Mahavagga, i, 46, where 
we find nearly the same woi*ds a 5 in the commentary to 
this stanza. 

In stanza 458 Mrs. Davids translates the words hlya- 
kalina asarena by in this poor body, froth without 
a soul”, with special reference to Jat. v, 134. If wc look 
at the Cambridge Jataka tianslation wc find that the 
word Imli in this passage is rendered by ‘"sin”, and thus 
I should prefer to say here also, in this sinful bodv 
without a soul.” 

In stanza 504 kiithita is tianslatcd by '‘boiling”, 
while Neumann puts " Stank ” instead. I think the best 
would be "distressed”, just as it is lendered by Ehys 
Davids in a similar passage, Milindai)anha, p. 250. 

In stanza 509 both translators agree in reading kdhinti, 
instead ol Ihdhinii proposed by Pischel and translated 
accordingly. I confess that both readings seem to me 
equally good, and that I cannot give the preference to 
either of them. 


I conclude this review with best thanks to Mrs. Ehys 
Davids for the capital woik she has given us in her 
translation of the psalms of the sisters, and hope that 
the psalms of the brethren will follow soon. The reader 
has seen that in going through this book of 200 pages 
I had only a few remarks to make, and that even of those 
remarks most were in favour of Mrs. Davids' readings of 


the text and of her translation. 


E. Muller. 


Berne, March, 1910. 



KOTffcBS O?*BO0KS , 


m 

Auf neuen Wegen durch Sumatra, Forschungsreisen 
in Ost- und Zentral-Sumatra (1907). Von Max 
Moszkowski. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer (Ernst Vohsen), 
1909. 

This is a well -illustrated and interesting account of 
travel by land and water tlirough some little-known 
^parts of Siak and the Rokan (or Rekan) States. The 
author is a keen observer, and writes S37'inpathetically and 
graphicallj^ of the things and people he has seen. In fact, 
the book is very suggestive, and raises a number of 
interesting points which it would be impossible to discuss 
fully ill the space here available. I must confine myself 
to noticing a few of those that have struck me while 
reading it. 

A considerable part of the book deals with the primitive 
jungle-tribes visited by the author, and as he has given 
an account of these in a paper published in ttie Journal 
for July, 1909, I need not recapitulate the facts he has 
recorded. Referring rather to his mode of presenting 
those facts and to the inferences which he ^as drawn 
from them, I am inclined at times to differ from his 
judgment. For instance, his view appears to be that the 
Sakai tribes have practically no material culture of their 
own, the little that they possess having been borrowed 
during the last few years from their Malay neighbours. 
Against this, however, there are several weighty arguments. 
In the first place, their Sakai relatives in the Peninsula 
(assuming the Sumatran tribes to be really of the same 
race) undoubtedly have some elements of material culture 
which they have not derived from the ^alays, but appear 
to have possessed for many centuries ; lor they are things 
that the Malays either do not possess a^t all or only in 
some other form, and the Sakai names fo^them are quite 
unconnected with the Malay ones, and *pomt back to 
a long distant past when the Sakais were connected with 
Indo-Chinese races. Secondly, the Siak Sakais now 



spehk only Malay. But if they are really related to the 
Peninsular Sakais, they mus^ have had a language of their 
own formerly, and it takes some time for a language to 
disappear completely ; tlu^ Peninsular Sakais have still 
in a great measuiv^ preserved theirs, though Malays have 
been hemming them in with ever-increasing persistency 
for the last five centuries or more. Moreover, the Malay 
spoken by the Siak Sakals ’s not the dialect of the^'r 
Malay neighbours, but the remoter Menangkabau Malays 
of the West Sumatran uplands. It is evident, therefore, 
that they must have come under the direct influence of 
a Menangkabau-speaking community a long while back, 
before they settled in their present h)*iations ; at what 
period they left the uplands and cauKi down into the 
lowlands of East Sumatra is unknown, but the event 
.cannot possibly be a very recent one, or there would be 
some better recollection of it than the “old legend” with 
which the author (no doubt rightly) connects it. 

So far as I can judge, it seems to be true that the 
Sakais of Siak have to a great extent borrowed their 
existing material culture from Malays, but probably this 
borrowing occurred in a much more distant past than he 
appears to suppose. It is likely enough that a good deal 
of racial admixture also took place, and that this accounts 
foi the change in culture and language. But that in no 
way proves that the Sakais never had any culture of 
their own, though I admit that it must have been of 
a very primitive kind. One might just as reasonably 
argue from the same facts that they never had any 
language of their own, which surely would be a red/actio 
ad abmrdum. 

Similarly in the matter of religion. Dr. Moszkowski 
"'spent some time amongst these people and made many 
inquiries, yet failed to find among them any original 
religious ideas. From this fact he is inclined to infer^ 
first, that they have no such ideas now, and secondly, tha^ 

J&AS. 1910 . 35 



IfOTICES or BOOIOS 


they ^ever had any. Neither inference is absolutely safe. 
The religious ideas of a shy and primitive people are 
about the very last things which they are likely to 
communicate to a foreigner sojourning for a few week® 
""in their midst, however sympathetic he may be and 
however much trouble he may take to investigate such 
matters. On the other hand, all a priori tlieories on these 
subjects (of which we meet with so many nowadays, 
particularly in German works) are just as likely to 
mislead as to help us. Dr. Moszkowski has, if I under- 
stand him aright, the view that primitive races fail to 
form religious conceptions because, amongst otlier reasons, 
they are deficient in a sense of causality ; they do not ask 
themselves who created the world ? and so forth, for 
the reason that the perception of a causal nexus in events 
has not occurred to them. This is an opinion hard to 
reconcile, as it seems to me, not only with the exuberance 
of the mythopoeic imagination amongst many savj^ge 
peoples, but also with the common fact that even very 
young children (whose individual development fti so many 
respects seems to reflect the past evolution of the race) 
are continually and quite spontaneously asking “ why ? 
and in default of a satisfactory explanation from their 
elders as to the cause of what they see, very frequently 
make up some sort of childish explanation for themselves. 

How extremely unsafe it is to rely on inferences drawn 
even by careful and scientifically trained observers from 
comparatively simple facts may be aptly illustrated by an 
instance out of the work now under review. ,One of the 
leading cases of what has been called ‘'protective mimicry” 
is the Kallima butterfly in its various allied species. 
Wallace in his standard work on the Malay Archipelago 
draws special attention to it as an instance of the way 
in which variation and natural selection may give rise 
to forms which serve to give a special degree of pro- 
tection to the individuals that embody them, by reason 



• 'iw ' Kmisa ' WB&EN DVKCa StJMAra^' 

> ' 

of their dose resemblance with their usual environment* 
Dr. Moszkowski, on the otVier hand, uses this very butterfly 
as an argument against any such directly protective 
adaptation, holding that such protection as may in fact 
be afforded is merely a secondary by-product not traceable 
to natural selection at all, and having no real connexion 
with the efficient causes which have given rise to these 
particular forms of variation. It is certainly not the 
business of a mere layman in tlu se nuitters to express an 
opinion on a technical point of this kind ; but it seems to 
me to afford an illuminating commentary on the touching 
faith in the results of modem science " displayed by 
a number of estimable people who have not been trained 
to distinguish betweexi facts and theories Dr.Moszkowski’s 
remarks on tliese subjects, w hether w^e agree with them or 
not, at any rate conduces to clearer tb in king. 

Another trifling point may be mentioned in illuRtrati"‘n 
of the same principle, and it happens to be a case in which 
one can come to a definite issue with our author. Finding 
that a small speci(*s of bee, called by the natives damar- 
damar, is concerned with tlic outflow of resin from 
certain trees, which it facilitates by its boring operations 
in their trunks, he infers that the native word for resin, 
damar, xj* derived from the name of this kind of bee. 
In fact, of coui-sc, it is the other way about, the little bees 
taking their name from the product with which they are' 
associated. In numerous languages of the Archipelago 
the word damar (or its phonetic equivalents) bears such 
meanings as light, torch, resin ”, and one of these must 
be its primary meaning : I am not concerned at present 
to inquire which one it is. The transference of the name 
to the bees is clearly secondary, as the form itself, being 
doubled, serves to show. I cannot find this last in the 
Malay dictionaries on my shelves, so I presume that it 
is a local word. The ordinary name foi' the tiny bee (or 
at least one species of it) is IMulut 





ITnfortunately it is not always possible to test our 
author’s theories so easily. His view of the relation of 
the white race to the coloured races is that the latter are 
inferior beings whose evolution has come to a standstill, 
like that of the anthropoid apes, while tlie white man 
still has long \istas of progress before him. Well, every 
conception of superiority seems to me to involve a reference 
to some end ; in other words, it implies some particular 
form (or forms) of efficiency. And my own experience, 
such as it is, lias convinced me tliat if tlie white man is 
more efficient in some departments (as he undoubtedly is), 
the coloured man surpasses him in others. Besides, who 
can tell for certain that the coloured man’s cvx?i|ution has 
already come to an end ? We none of us have the gift 
of infallibility in matters of tliat kind. But I can well 
imagine that if some cultured Egyptian or Babylonian of 
(say) three thousand years ago had come into contact with 
our Teutonic ancestors in their nati\e J&(5rests, he might 
v'ery probably liave uttered much tlie sai® sort of opinion 
about them as Dr. Moszkowski has expressed about Ihe 
coloured races, namely, that th(‘ idea of (‘vor educating 
them to our level is just as utopian as the idea of turning 
an ape into a man hy some pi*oeess of training. It would 
have been a singularly unfortunate obiter chvtwm. but 
what guarantee have we tliat ])r. Moszkowski’s \iew may 
not in some distant future be negatived with equal 
conclusiveiicss by the couise of e\ents^ 

It must not be supposed that the book is full of theories 
like these if I have singled out some for criticism, it 
is because I find the authors views stimulating and 
suggestive, even when I cannot bring myself to agree 
with him. But there is much more in his book that 
I should like to mention if there were room to do so. 
His descriptions of his journeys through tropical forests, 
of the native inhabitants, their social and political 
organization, customs, superstitions, and religion, their 



material culture, and so forth, ail make very interesting ' 
and instructive reading. I can cordially recommend 
the book. 

C. 0. Blagden. 

Archaeological Survey of India. Annual Report 
FOR 1906-7 ; pp. 267 ; 74 plates, and numerous text-, 
iJJustrations. Calcutta : Superintendent of Govern-, 
meiit Printing, India ; i 909. 

The pubiicaiion of tliis volume so soon after the pre- 
ceding one has done much towards bringing the issue of, 
the series up to date. 

The first part of the volume, pp. 1 -iV?, with 11 plates,' 
deals as usual wdth oonH«}rvation in wlneli line some 
specially important work was dotie at Jaunpur, Agra, 
Lahore, and ghahdarjr, in addition i-o good progress having 
been made at other places in India and in Burma. 

The bulk of the volume is devoted to exploration and 
research : pp. 84-205, with j^Jates 12-74. Operations 
were continued at Kasia by Dr. Vogel (pp. 44-67), and 
at SarnMk by Mr. Marshall and Dr. Konow (pp. 68-101). 
Some valuable discoveries were made at Sahribahlol by 
Dr. Spooner (pp. 102-18), ineiuding, notably, a fine group 
of Kubto and HaritI witli attendant figures (plate 82, c), 
and a beautifully executed seated Buddha (plate 34, a). 
The latter article is followed by a second note by the late 
Dr. Bloch on his excavations at tlie funeral mounds at 
Jjauriya (pp. 119-26). And Mr; Taw Sein Ko has given 
UB, from the excavations at the Pet-leik-paya pagoda near 
pagan in Burma, anotluT series of the curious terra-cotta 
plaques illustrating the Jataka stories (pp. 127-36). 

We have next the first instalment of an article 
Dr. Vogel on the Mathura school of sculpture (pp. 137-60). 
What he may have to say on this topic will naturally 
be best understood and weighed wHen we have th^ 



NOTICES OF BOOKS 


complete article before us. Meanwhile it appears from 
Mr. Marshalls resum6 on p. 43 that the results so far are, 
that the Mathuril school was lar^i'ly dependent on that 
of Gandliara, tliou^h it did not owe its origin to that 
school ; that its <‘xistencc is carrit'd back to at least the 
second centuiy n.c. ; that it liad come under tlic influence 
of the fully developed Gaiidhara art in the time of the 
early Kushan kings ; and that, consequently, “ the art of 
Gandl^tja itself must bo pushed back to a considerably 
earlier period ; sufficiently far, that is, to account for the 
relatively great decadence of the Mathura as compared 
with the Gandhara work.” 

A contribution on Muhammadan architecture in Kashmii 
by Mr. W. H. Nicholls comes next (pp. 161-70). Then 
follows one by Mr. Cousens on the temple of Brahma at 
Khed- Brahma (pp. 171-8). And then a contribution 
by Mr. I). R. Bhandarkar on the Lakuli^a form of ^iva 
(pp. 179-92), in which he has very usefully given m 
a brief abstract of the Karvan Mahatmya, and the text 
with translation, of an extract from a Jain work entitled 
Tarkarahasyadipika, which presents a summary of tin 
6aiva doctrine of the Naiyayikas : regarding Lakuli^a 
something has already been said in this Journal, 1907 
419-26. 

The remainder of this part of the volume (pp. 193-205 
is occupied with some notes by Pandit Day a Ram Sahn 
on the results of a short tour of inspection made by hin 
in the Gorakhpur and Saran Districts under instruction! 
given by Mr. Marshall on a request made by the writer o. 
this notice. The request was largely based on “ informa 
fcion received ” which does not seem to have been of a verj 
reliable nature, since various reported indications of stupai 
and other remains were not found to exist. The results 
however, are not wholly unremunerative, though thej 
have not at all come up to what was es^pected. And thej 
do not upset the writer's belief that Kusinara, wher< 



A'ROUmLOGtlCJOi StTKTOY OF 


Buddha died, is to be looked for somewhere near Pachrukhi, 
a railway station about 82 miles north-w est-by-north from 
Chhapra. 

The epigraphic portion of th^ volume contains a general 
progi’ess report for the year written by tlio Epigraphist, 
I)i. Konow (pp. 206-16), an I a comprehensive monograph 
on tlie Pallavas by the [>resent Epigraphist, Mr. V. 
Venkayya (pp, 217-43), which is a Mny useful addition 
to previous treatments of tlie liistory ot that g'eat ruling 
family of Soutl.ern India. 

On p 210 Dr. Konow has brought to notice, apparently 
from the Hazara District, an irNuesting date recorded in 
the Laukika or Lokakala reckoning which is well known 
in coruiexion with Kaslanir, the Kangra District, and 
some of the uoighhouring Hill States. The characteristic 
feature of this reckoning is the omission of the hundr* Is 
(both centuries and millenniums) ; so that, e g., the year 
38 ” may mean also any such year as 138, 238, 338, and 
so on, up to 4038 (we liave not yet come to the year 
5038). In this new inscription, the year is stated in 
figures as simply Saitivat 38, in the usual fashion, but 
also full} in words as Laukya- or Lokya-saxhvat 538. 
The other given details are Karttika ^ukla 13, Saturday. 
And they place the record on Saturday, October 17, 
A.D. 1461. 

The interest attaching to this date lies in its stating 
the century, and in tlie point that according to the usual^ 
reckoning the date should fall one year later, in A.D. 1462. 
We find the explanation of the matter in Alberuni's 
account of the Lokakala : sec his India, translation by 
> Sachau, 2. 8. He has told us that his gauge-year ^aka- 
saihvat 953 expired, =- a.d. 1031-2, was the year 6 
(expired) according to the Kashmir custom, but was 
counted by the people of Bardari and Marigala (Taxila) 
as the year 110 of an era of their own, and by the 



NQTICES or BOOKS 

i)eople of Nirahara, ** behind Marigala ”, and of Lanbaga . 
(Lamghan) as the year 108. From that we see that the 
reckoning had been introduced into countries outside 
Kashmir at some time between A.D. 925 and 1025 ; and 
the people of tlie territories named by Alberuni, not 
recognizing its purely centennial nature, had continued 
the numbers of that century into a new century instead 
of beginning again with a fresh year 1. The people of 
Nirahara and Lanbaga had dislocated the reckoning to 
the extent of four months, by using it with a year which 
began witli the Margasirsha 4ukla 1 preceding the Chaitra 
^ukla 1 with which the year of the. same number began 
in Kashmir, Subsequently, their reckoning must have 
been further dislocated, by eight months more, by an 
adoption of the Chaitra ^ukla 1 preceding Margasirsha 
sukla 1 as the initial day of the year. And so it came 
about that Karttika of the year 538, in which numbering 
we recognize a continuation of the era set up by the 
people of Nirahara and Lanbaga, fell in A.D. 1461 instead 
of 1462. 


J. F. Fleet. 



NOTES OF THE QUARTER 

(January, February, March, 19J0.) 


Principal Contents of ORiENT\b Journals. 

I. ZeITSCIIKIFT RER DEUTSCilEN MOROENr/ANlHSOUEN GeSLLLSCH AFT. 

Ed. LXIII, Heft iv. 

Schmidt (H.). Kama’s Manmathojimatliaua. 

Bloch (T.). Duldul als Centaur. 

Bailey (T. Grahaine). Brief (jrammar of the Kanauri 
Language. 

Reyling (K.) u. C. F. Lehmann Haupt. Die Sonderformen 
des babylonischen Gewichtssystcra. 

Simon (R.). Bemerkungen zum Arseyakalpn nnd Puspa- 
sutra. 

Stissheim (K.). Die moderne Gestalt des tiirkischen 
Schattenspiels. 

Horten (M.). Dio Lehre vom Kiimum bei Nazzam. 

II. Yienj^a Oriental Journal. Vol. X