=== [Page 1] ===
A Selection of Middle Mon Inscriptions

from Lower Burma

Mt. Kelatha Mon inscription, dated 1486 (BE 2029)
Recording two major Mon myths:

a) six-hair relics granted by the Buddha to six
hermits.

b) a tooth-relic retrieved by the monk
Gavampati at the Buddha’s cremation.

=== [Page 2] ===
Shwedagon Pagoda

Mon and Burmese
inscriptions on the stupa
platform from c. 1470s tell
the story of two merchant
brothers returning to
Lower Burma with hair-
telics from Bodh Gaya,
forming a core myth
greatly expanded over the
centuries.

The Golden Rock
(Kyaikhtiyo)

The 15th-century myth
about the six hair-relics was
later adapted to this site,
with many acctetions.

=== [Page 3] ===
The Four Buddhas of our Era

Mon inscription in compound of the

Kyaik Pun, dated 1476.

The monument upon its discovery
(left) and one of its many
refurbishments (above).

=== [Page 4] ===
Sakka’s Washing Stone

Sag Reams |

t SE 7 ‘ iy oe
A stone to wash and dry a castoff robe, given to the
Buddha by Sakka, an episode in the Vinyaya Pitaka and a

number of Pali and Sanskrit sources, with variations.
The stones in Pegu are identified by a 15th-century
inscription.

This episode, depicted visually with stones, is perhaps
unprecedented in the Buddhist world.

This pavilion for the stones is F ne

close by the Mahabodhi
Temple replica at Pegu. :

=== [Page 5] ===
A Mon King’s Atonement

Pegu’s reclining Buddha was tied in the late 19th
century to a legendary heretical Mon king who
converted in the face of his daughter’s Buddhist
devotion.

The king’s bad karma, despite his conversion, was
responsible for the Mon defeat by the forces from
Pagan, recorded in later Mon chronicles. Pegu’s famous
reclining Buddha was established by this legendary
repentant king.

This example illustrates how ancient Buddhist themes
wete woven into political narratives played out over
centuries and into our own times.

=== [Page 6] ===
The Mon Realm in the 15th century

Gwa
¢ Tharrawaddy

Taik Kyi

Hmawbi
Yangon

FRF

9

»e Pathein
9936
Ly

Thanlyin

Kyanginsu aofogé

Mawlamyine «a.
620086: 60:

Pyapon
ape

Bogale ri

SpoD6C0

Kan Man Tar,
mes

Nai Pan Hla
(1923 - 2010)

Rangoon, 1987

Daughters of Mara tile, c. 1479

“Daughters of Mara assume the
form of barren women” (kway
beau ma ma pa cup bras mnek).

From inscription on upper edge of
tile. (Nai Pan Hla translation)

=== [Page 7] ===
A Selection of Middle Mon Inscriptions from Lower Burma

These fifteenth-century Middle Mon stone insctiptions treat a handful of myths
that shaped the course of Buddhist history in Burma A small number of have
been translated into English and others in bits and pieces, but these translations,
made by the late Nai Pan Hla in Rangoon in 1987, appear to represent the most
complete single collection in English.

Three distinct narrative cyles emerged in Lower Burma by the fifteenth century.
Some material stemmed from Pali Commentaries while others likely reflected
circuitous adaptations of Sti Lankan sources. The inscriptions translated here date
from the second half of the fifteenth century but how early did these myths arise
in Lower Burma and the steps by which they evolved is hard to say. The three core
fifteenth-century myths spawned innumerable later narratives, starting in the
sixteenth century when Lower Burma came under Burmese administration.
Indigenous additions stressed the Buddha’s special relationship to the Mon of
Lower Burma. The majority of the records fall during the reign of Dhammaceti,
(c.1470-c.1490), whose capital was Hamsavati, or Pegu.

One of the three cycles centered on two merchant brothers from Lower Burma
who received hair-relics from the Buddha at Bodh Gaya and who returned home
to enshrine the relics in the Shwedagon Pagoda. The fullest discussion of the Pali,
Mon and Burmese fifteenth-century inscriptions at the Shwedagon and the later
related Mon and Burmese myths is Pe Maung Tin’s “The Shwe Dagon Pagoda”,
Journal of the Burma Research Society, 1934, v. 24. 1.pp. 1-91.

The second fifteenth-century tradition focussed on the Buddha granting six hair-
relics to six hermits in Lower Burma (two later multiplied for a total of eight). The
relics were taken by the hermits and enshrined in stone stupas at their hermitages
in various locations. The myth’s possible model was the Sti Lankan episode of the
Buddha presenting an unstated number of hait-relics to the indigenous Sumana-
deva at Mahiyangana. (Mhv: 1.34) One ot mote hait-relics are now believed to
have been placed within the Golden Rock but this site was almost certainly not
one of the original fifteeenth-century locations. However, the myths that later
enveloped the Golden Rock point to a direct debt to the fifteenth-century

=== [Page 8] ===
nartative. Yet to be worked out is the connection, if any and to what extent,
between this fifteenth-century Mon tradition and two Pali texts, ‘The Chronicle of
the Six Hair Relics” (Chakesadhatuvamsa) and “Chronicle of the Eight Hair Relics
(Atthakesadhatuvamsa). The former, for example, centers on six arabants who
received six hair-relics, (O. Hinuber, A Handbook of Pali Literature, 1996, p. 95)

The third key fifteenth-century legend revolved around the monk Gavampati who
retrieved a tooth from the Buddha’s funeral pyre. This tooth replicated itself
thirty-three times in Kusinara from where Gavampati removed all the tooth-relics
to Thaton in Lower Burma; in Thaton, the relics were enshrined by a legendary
Mon king in the same number of stone stupas, or “cela cett” (sila cetiya) (p. 6). A key
part of this myth was almost certainly modeled on the monk Khema who also
tettieved a canine tooth at the cremation; this tooth, rescued by Khema, is thought
to be now in Sti Lanka and was the subject of the thirteenth-centuty Pali
Dathavamsa, or Chronicle of the Tooth-Relic. (O. Hinuber, A Handbook of Pali Literature,
1996, p. 94)

Gavampati and the legendary Mon king at Thaton were believed in the fifteenth
century to be kinsmen in their former lives but a century or two later they were
taken to be twins, born from a union between a snake-goddess, or naga-ma, and a
wizard, or zawgyi. Even the king’s queen was later thought to be a product of an
identical union between another snake-goddess and a second wizard. In each case,
after the snake-eggs hatched, the children were reared by hermits. Other later
Mon and Burmese myths involved children born from does, usually impregnated
by hermits. Many such themes probably reflect ancient Indic lore from which Pali
traditions derived and provided themes likely blended with indigenous Southeast
Asian narratives.

‘An element uniting all the aforementioned stupas was the belief that the
monuments fell into disuse and became lost following the death of the first
legendary royal Mon patron: “After long, no men knew to worship such relics of
Buddha, the relics had become jungle [sid] and people did not know the
whereabouts of them” (p. 6), or “disappeared in the jungle” (20, 33). These were
discovered by two arahants named Sona and Uttara sent to Lower Burma at the
time of Asoka and well known from the Mahavamsa. The arahants also tepaited the

=== [Page 9] ===
tooth-telic stupas at Thaton but it is possible that a second contemporaneous
tradition existed, evidently recorded in a fifteenth-century Pali inscription in Pegu
and palm-leaf manuscripts, that claimed that the thirty-three tooth-relics were
dispersed in Lower Burma by the two arahants. (pers. comm., Jason A. Carbine)
Only one stupa was named, Madhava, variously spelled in the manuscript
traditions, and this stupa was likely Pegu’s celebrated Shwemawdaw. (pers. comm.,
Jason A. Catbine) The role of the two arahants in the Mahavamsa was only to
missionize Suvannabhumi (understood by the Mon to be Lower Burma) but
nothing in the Mahavamsa referred to the arahants restoring stupas.

The dispersal of the thirty-three tooth-relics is also recorded in a later Mon text
titled Gavampati, c. 1710. Why the number thirty-three? Geographical divisions
numbering thirty-three and thirty-two are recorded in Burma, Sti Lanka and
elsewhere, together with symbolic associations. (H.L. Shorto, “The 32 Myos in the
Medieval Mon Kingdom”, BSOAS, 26, 1963, 572-591) For example, by the mid-
seventeenth-century, each of the three major Mon divisions had a total of thirty-
two cities, with the capital, Hamsavati, making up thirty-three. (Shorto 1963: 573)
‘A famous Sti Lankan dispersal of Bodhi trees may have been the model for the
narrative in Lower Burma. In this case, the total dispersal of Bodhi saplings was
forty but thirty-two were recorded coming from four fruits. (Mhv: 19. 63) Lost
relics miraculously discovered and re-enshrined or widely dispersed is a well-
trodden theme in Theravada traditions, with Asoka serving as the untivaled
archetype.

A number of inscriptions speak of stupas marking familiar events in the Buddha’s
lifetime. The centerpiece in Pegu was a large brick replica of Bodh Gaya’s
Mahabodhi Temple, set amidst monuments commemorating the Seven Week
period the Buddha spent at Bodh Gaya, each location identified by an inscription.
Other monuments commemorated the episode of the alms bowl released into the
Neranjara River and the First Sermon at the Deer Park. Other tales are less well
known or were conflated or slightly muddled, such as the Buddha receiving a filthy
tobe that wrapped the corpse of Punna, said in the inscription to be a servant of
the Sujata who offered food to the Buddha at Bodh Gaya; there was a Punna who
was Sujata’s servant but the story of the robe involved an altogether different
Punna who cast het robe into the cremation grounds. (MA. ii. 696) The same

=== [Page 10] ===
inscription speaks of Sakka providing a lake and a stone for washing and drying
the robe, an episode that closely followed a story in the Vinaya (“The Rag-robe
Miracle”) but the Pali passages included nothing about Punna or even the origin of
the robe. This Vinaya episode with Sakka and the washing stone appears solely in
the context of miracles designed to convert Uruvela-kassapa, a feature also in
agreement with the Mon inscription. (Vin. 3. 27) The Mon version of the rag-robe
thus blended various Pali sources.

Sakka’s gift, in Pegu, is represented by several enormous dressed flat stones,
identified by an accompanying Mon inscription (p. 44). This gift of washing-stones
from Sakka is omitted in the Pali Nidanakatha and the Sanskrit Buddbacarita but
appears in the Lalitavistara and the Mahavastu in which there is no mention of
converting an ascetic. These huge cut stones are steps away from the Mahabodhi
Temple at Pegu and appear to be the sole visual depiction of this episode in the
Buddhist world.

Another inscription, dated 1469 CE, records the story of a Mon Buddhist queen
named Subhadda who converted her heretical husband, Tissa, “Lord of the
Hamsavati kingdom” (p. 12). Tissa had discarded seven Buddha images but
Subhadda rescued them and caused them to fly, a miracle effecting Tissa’s
conversion. The theme of a woman converting an heretical husband or father may
have been inspired by a commentary on the Dhammapada about about a Cula-
Subhadda whose non-Buddhist father had entertained niganthas but later converted.
(Dh.A. iii, 465) There was also a Maha-Subhadda, a daughter of the famous
Anathapindika, who married an heretic who also converted. (AA. 1. 146)

King Tissa’s bad actions, despite his embrace of Buddhism, was construed as the
reason for the disastrous collapse of the Mon dynasty at the hands of the Pagan
dynasty, recounted in a Mon chronicle from 1766 CE, the Slapat rajawan datow smin
ron. (R. Halliday, transl.; reprint 2000: pp. 96, 116) An added twist was that the
myth about Tissa was attached, for unknown reasons, in the nineteenth century
when Pegu’s famous reclining Buddha was discovered after it was cleared of
vegetation; its construction was attributed to Tissa as an act of contrition. In this
instance, the basic myth probably lay dormant in local lore but took on a new life
of its own upon the monument’s discovery. This example illustrates how myths

=== [Page 11] ===
drawn from ancient Pali or indigenous sources were woven into legendary political
narratives that were reinforced for all to see by being attached to public
monuments, images or relics, Anuradhaputa’s Ruvanvali stupa, the Kiri Vihara
Stupa at Kataragama, Kandy’s Tooth-relic, and Mandalay’s Mahamuni Buddha are
among the more well-known instances.

Gotama and the three previous Buddhas also merited a monument and its
inscription, dated 1476, has remained in the compound of Pegu’s famous four-
sided Kyaik Pun. Another brick monument in Pegu commemorated a spot
between Bodh Gaya and Mt. Gayasisa where the Buddha met the Ajivika ascetic
named Upaka. Another inscription treated several of the miracles that the Buddha
performed to convert the three Kassapa brothers. These inscriptions were erected
in proximity to the brick monuments that were generally rather small and now in
ruins. The restored Kyaik Pun is an exception because of its huge dimensions.

Some inscriptions placed equal emphasis on the hair-relic and tooth-relics, and it is
therefore difficult to determine if the ‘restored’ stupas of the fifteenth century by
real Mon kings were believed to contain one or the other type of relic or possibly
both. Some inscriptions place slightly more emphasis on the tooth-myth (Kawa, p.
19; Payagyi, p. 27), while others highlight the hair-relic tradition (Kyaikmakaw, p.
24; Kelasa, p. 33). In later Mon traditions, Mt. Kelasa and the Golden Rock were
associated with hair-relics, The Thaton inscription mentions only tooth-telics since
it was here that the 33 tooth-relic stupas were established. However, what was in
reality believed to be enshrined in many of these stupas in Lower Burma may be
forever lost in lacqunae, often located at the bottom of the stone slabs where the
weathering is often most sevete.

The inscriptions drew from a deep well of Pali literature that has yet to be fully
unraveled but this vast complex of monuments at Pegu was designed for visitors
to envision well-known Buddhist spots far beyond Bodh Gaya in greater Magadha.
The many monuments distant from Pegu, such as the Shwedagon in Rangoon and
the stupas at Payagyi and Thaton, fell squarely within this wide orbit. There were
three major divisions of the Mon realm, Kusimmandala (Pathein), Muttimmandala
(Mottama) and Hamsavatimandala (Pegu), but nothing relating to these
aforementioned myths have yet been discovered in the Pathein and Mottama

=== [Page 12] ===
tegions. (The three divisions are noted on the reverse face of the first of the
Kalyani stones.) Several inscriptions were found in Pathein but have not been
edited (see list no. 2, pp. 1-2).

A group of fifteenth-century brick monuments at the Wat Chet Yot complex in
Chiang Mai and a slightly later set at Wat Bang Phuan in Non Khai Province also
commemorated the Seven-Weeks but Pegu appears to be unique in the Buddhist
world to the degree that its layout was far more extensive with far more episodes
and accompanied by a rich inscriptional record.

Likely Influence from Sri Lanka was evident in the monk Gavampati but one
episode was adapted unequivocally from the fourteenth-century Pali Dhatuvamsa,
ot Chronicle of the Relic, often called the Nalatadhatuvamsa, or Chronicle of the Forehead
Relic from Sri Lanka. (Kevin Trainor, Relics, Ritual, and Representation in Buddhism,
1997, p. 25 & pp. 145ff£; O. Hinuber: A Handbook of Pali Litetrature, 1996, p. 95)
This centers on a nagaraja who absconded with two hair-relics given to the two
merchant brothers, detailed in a long passage found in the Mon and Burmese
Shwedagon stelae and borrowed from the Dhatuvamsa; the passages even included
the names of the legendary Sri Lankan king and a monk found in the Dhatuvamsa.
(See Pe Maung Tin above, pp. 18, 29.) This king’s name was also repeated in the
Shwedagon Pali inscription (9). The same Pali text, under its name
Nalatadhatuvamsa, was even invoked to determine the origin of the forehead bone-
relic in the early nineteenth-century Glass Palace Chronicle (Luce & Pe Maung Tin,
pp. 17, 86). The Kalyani Inscription at Pegu ptovides ample testimony to the well-

known strong bond with Sri Lanka. (Jason A. Carbine, The Kahani Stone Inscriptions,

Texts and Translation, Pali Text Society, in preparation; pers. comm.)

Upper Burma developed its own traditions unrelated to the Mon myths of Lower
Burma. Central to Upper Burma ate myths recounting the Sandalwood Monastery
and two related footmarks impressed in stone by the Buddha for a nagaraja and an
ascetic named Saccabhanda, events commemorated by two footprint-sites in the
Minbu atea between Pagan and Prome. The earliest traces of this myth in Upper
Burma belong to the early sixteenth century and reveal a debt to a Pali
commentary, the Punnovadasutta-atthakatha, For an overview of these Burmese and
Mon myths, see Patrick Pranke and Donald Stadtnet, “Foundation Myths of

=== [Page 13] ===
Myanmat”. In Buddhist Art of Myanmar. (Asia Society & Yale University Press,
2015)

The following English translations were made by Nai Pan Hla in 1987 and were
based mainly on U Chit Thein’s Burmese translations of Mon inscriptions. (See U
Chit Thein, ed. & transl., Mon kyauk-sa Paung-khyup, o Collection of Mon Inscriptions,
Rangoon: Ministry of Culture, 1965.) Nai Pan Hla however appears to have
consulted translations made by Blagden in manuscript form for these translations.
This now-lost Blagden-manuscript was probably once in Luce’s possession and
later likely passed on to Nai Pan Hla in Rangoon in the 1960s when Luce was
forced to quit Burma (pets. comm., Christian Bauer). Also attached here is
Blagden’s Epigraphia Birmanica, IV, Pt. 1, (1934), that includes many of the key Pegu
inscriptions.

Nai Pan Hla also appended four lists of inscriptions but the sources for these lists
ate unstated. List No. 2 was ptobably based on Blagden’s manuscript. Yet another
list of Mon inscriptions is found in H.L. Shorto’s A Dictionary of the Mon Inscriptions
from the Sixth to the Sixteenth Centuries, 1971).

For a teliable overview of Mon inscriptions, see Christian Bauet’s “The Mon
Inscriptions of Thailand, Laos and Burma”. In Writing for Eternity: A Survey of
Epigraphy in Southeast Asia, EFEO, (2018), 135-149. For the most solid review of
Pegu’s Mon history, see Tun Aung Chain, “Pegu in Politics and Trade, Ninth to
Seventeenth Centuries.” In Recalling Local Pasts, Silkworm Books, (2002), 25-52. An
insightful and comprehenisve work treating Buddhist relics is John S. Strong’s
Relics of the Buddha, 2004. For the most exhaustive list of Mon inscriptions, see

“Preliminary Inventory of Mon Inscriptions” @ http://sealang.net/oldmon/

These translations made by the Nai Pan Hla certainly contain errors of various

types but only a careful examination of the stones themselves or old rubbings will
yield more trustworthy readings.

Don Stadtner
Walnut Creek, California
May, 2023 / dstadtner@gmail.com

=== [Page 14] ===
Kyaikmaraw . no. 1 U Chit Thein, 62.

(ins. installed in temple of Kyaikmaraw Pagoda. Kyaikmaraw is I miles s.e
of Moulmein. Also ed. by Shorto, BSOAS, XXI, (1958), pp. 361-67.

On Friday, the fullmoon of Asut (Oct.) in the year 817 (1455) Her Majesty

Bana Thaw (Shin Saw Pu) granddaughter of the Lord of White elephant
(Bana U) gives gifts of land and makes donation at the foot of the Kyak Moh

Smin (Kyaikmaraw) in the presence of the monks ( P. ceti, Middle Mon, ceti
or sometimes Kyak). In and around the high land of Tko’ Mboon, all
Treasures and properties of wealth which arise also; such herbs and trees
which yield from this place also; I donate to Kyak Mah (Kyaikmaraw,
modern name). Either males or females who support it, may they obtain
the great bliss (P. yasapatti) of physical world and the world beyond! In

‘the physical world may they become such as the four richmen (P. setthi),
namely Jotikasathi, Mendasathi, Dhaneneyyasathi and Punnasathil If they a

becme kings let them be as King Asoka, Dhathawana, Nandiy or Silawa. If

they become gods (deva) let them be as Catumarhat king, king In (Indra),

king Yama, king of the devas of Tussitapu, king Nimmarati or king

Paranimithvasivati! In the bliss of the world beyond may they attain

Buddhahood or become Paccekabut (P. Paccekabuddha) or become disciples

of Buddha excelling all others! Bither males or females who destroy this :

meritorious deed may they fall into the four hells such as Narak, Pret,

Tiricchan and Asurakay! Among eight Narak may they be boiling in /

Sanjiva, Kalasu, Sanghata, Roruwa, Maharoruwa, Tapan, Mahatapanna (7),

and Mahawik (Mahaavici)! Let them boil in Usadda hell for 128 times and

for 320 times in the hell of king Yama. Let them suffer in the hell of Pret

(S. Preta) such as the four Pret, namely Nimma-

-l-

=== [Page 15] ===
mantaanapeta, Mamsapuna, Attirasi and Pabhaatakutal Let them suffer in
the four Asurakay such as Samuddadipa, Pabbatapada, Nadisota and
Kannawana! Let them become in the four Sattanicchan such as
Goddhabhakkha, Kannaakbhakkha, Bhanapanabhakkha and Carakawasa!
When they become human beings let them serve as cleaners of water

closets and disposers of corpses who are persons without ancestry!
Kyaikmaraw no. I] U Chit Thein, 63

It is not complete ; contains twenty-four fragmentary lines. Similar to
Stone insc. above. mentions son and nephew of the king and Mahasami who
is dwelling in Ko' Mbon which are not found in stone insc. above. It ends in

blessings on supporters of the presentations.

Shwegugyi, no. | U Chit Thein, 82 ‘Mahabodhi’
Shovte: $+

L In a city called Jarapura, a heretic

2. king... delighted in the religion of the exalted Buddha .. .

3. worshiped the Mahabodhi banyan (M.M. ‘jey’) tree

4.to destroy .... after .... army (MM, (army) pnan) officers

.... coming ... when arriving near the Mahabodhi . . . welcoming

Shavte

6. saying . . . this place is auspicious
7.... living . .. continously

-2-

=== [Page 16] ===
8..... the kings .... Mahabodhi tree...

..- Planted by Dheli king . .

Oia ss one .... later small banyan tree

10.... after... at that time the orthodox gods (P. samaditthideva) residing
at that place considered ...

il. ... seing that they would destroy the banyan tree... the gods...

12. small banyan ... after a long time . .

13. king Dheli saw . .. cur good deed. ... the land

14. caused to dig all around

15. ... adorned with the two articles .. .

16. Bodhi banyan. .. . King Dheli

17. saw .. . small Bodhi also . . .

18... the good gods assumed the form ... came .. army officers . . King
Dheli fell sick

19 seriously . . and died. .. small Bodhi tree . . though burned with fire, it
grows up and therefore it is called Angara Bodhi

Htandawgyi Sutaungpyi (A) U Chit Thein, 85 +f 6
Htandaweyi is a village near Pegu. 29 lines on two fragments. /F m. wy. Pésw R.
ASB 1494/40,
1921/26
L..... arrived thate/ bg
2.... thousand five hundred... ruled that direction . . . went to [Sees

3.... together with many monks that is
4. to say twenty thousand 920,00 U

=== [Page 17] ===
5... reflecting that a group of his kinsmen in the previous existence had
come into being in the neighbouring country of Suwanabhumi Sia berren bhwennt
6. King Sirimasoka, lord of the city of Sudhuim also was our lord's kinsman

in the past existence

7. having instructed the king with the doctrine and the king being pleased

because he might encounter the Buddha might behold the Buddha and

gives alms to Him,

8. the king requests that saint Gavampati. At that time our lord Mahathera

Gavampati accepted Mest responsibility as requested by King Sirimasoka.

After returning to iliac ke Se saint Gavampati informs all the matters
eurinindda OO

9. Our Lord Buddha, having heard the saying or our Lord Gavampati,

because He wished to practice loving kindness towards king Sirimasoka

together with the people who dwell %
10. in the county of Suvannabhum, flew over the sky together with twenty

thousand saints towards the city of Sudhuim.

i. At that time, king Sirimasoka, having heards that Lord Buddha togaf\er

with twetny thousands saints have arrived the city of Sudhim, being

overwhelmed with joy and happy at heart came out to welcome and built

12 a great pavilion (p. pasada) and gave the great pious charity (P.

mahadana) for seven days. Our Lord the exalted Buddha, during seven

days having preached the Law, taught gods (devas) and men, announced

that he was returning home.

13. at that time, king Sirimasoka, ;
ing begged for an object of worship, to with an object

having realized that the exalted Buddha

was going back, the ki
that was if the body of the exalted Buddha, that was fit to worship Lord

Buddha.

abe

=== [Page 18] ===
14. At that time, our exalted Buddha replied to the king thus" Oh great king,
I have given objects of worship to that six hermits already. Among my hair
relics, I shall not give to your Majesty now.

15. Thrity-seven years after this year, in the city of Kusinaram, in the Sal
(Shorea robusta) forest at the park of King Mar (S/P. Malla) (I) Lord |
Buddha will attain Parinibban.

16. At that time, among my forty teeth, by virtue of the solemn asservation
which I pronounced, the relic of one teok (M.M.nek) of mine having become
thirty three, the saint Gavampati shal! bring to your Majesty.

17. The 33 relics which Mahatter Gavampati would bring, your Majesty
venerate and worship.” Having said thus, Lord Buddha was unable to give
object of worship to the king.

18. Thus after preaching the Law to King Sirimasoka together with all the
people for the cuase of the prospetity and advancement of the people in
furture in the country of Suvannabhum

19 and having entered the attanment of furituion (P. phalasamaptti) in the ,
13 regions, returned to the country of Majjhimadesa. During 37 years from
that year,during 40 years from the year he became Budddha. . .

20five years ... by preaching the immortality of the Law that is as it was a
great rain (falling) throughout the four continents which extinquished all

the principles of immorality as conducted by human beings that is to say

the fire

21 that destroys the universe, after performing the measure of work proper
for an exalted Buddha to perform, on the fullmoon of Vaisakha (May), in

the city of Kusinaram, in the Sal

-5-

=== [Page 19] ===
22. forest at the pleasance of Mar king (Malla prince), the exalted Buddha
achieved Parinibbana. At that time our lord Mahatter Gavampati
remembered the injunction which the Buddha has instructed, before the
fire or funeral

23 pyre had been extinquished to an end, took in time, the one tooth relic
(dhat) of the exalted Buddha which became 33 as vowed by the exalted
Buddha, and came to give to king Sirimasok. At that time,

24. King Sirmasoka having received the 33 relics, built 33 small stone
suptas (literally : dot cela ceti) and during the whole of his life span the
king worshipped, revered and venerated, gave gifts and kept the precepts.
Departing from that existence, the

25. king went into being in heaven. After long, no men knew to worship pr
such relics of Buddha, the relics had become jungle and people did not ‘4
know the whereabouts of them. In the 236th

26. year after the exalted Buddha attained Nibbana, our lord
Maoggliputtatissa, Mahather being friendly with king Asokadhammaraja,

cleared away the

27. impurities and thorns of the religion and held the Third Council. At the
close of the Thrird Council, our lord

28. reflected and realized that in the future the religion would be
established in foreign lands, urged the mahatheras and caused them to go
to establish the

29 religion in all countries and places. At that time, our lord
Sonamahathera together with Uttaramahather came and established the
religion in the country of Suvannabhum. In the country of Suvannabhum

the religion ...

26.

=== [Page 20] ===
Buddha's SATTASATTAHATHANA (Seven Weeks surrounding
Englightenment)

(based upon U Pan Maung compilation of Pali texts published by
Sudham mavati Press, Rangoon, 1940 (?) ; Nai Pan Hla does not specify
which Pali texts).

cubit (Burmese-ton; Middle Mon.-hat) end of fingers to elbow
fathom (Burmese-iam; m.m.phih)

1. For the Ist week the Buddha remains under the Bodhi tree--meditation
on the Paticcasamuppada (chain of casation)

2. In the second week the Awakened One stays at Animisa- ne. of
Mahabodhi, 14 fathoms distant, unwinking his eyes to clear up the
suspicions of the gods-ascends up one yojana and performs miracles by
issuing rays of fire and vapour.

3. In the 3rd week the Blessed one creates Ratanacankarmana (jeweled
walk) a passage of gold 60 cubits long. It is 15 fathoms distant from the
center-spot between Mahabodhi and Animisa. He walks to and fro
(Malalasekera also says it is 3rd week in Dictionary of Pali Proper Names)
4. In the fourth week, the Omniscient One spends in the Ratanaghara
(jewelled hall) created by the gods made of seven gems-40 cubits n.w. of
the Bodhi tree, where he grasped the Abhidhamma Pitaka and issued 6
rays (Malalasekera also says the fourth week)

5. Gotama Buddha stays under Ajapala (goat lord) tree which is 32 fathoms
east of Mahabodhi--a Brahmin Huhunka comes to pay repsect. Three
daughters of Mara king come for temptation in various forms and charm
(Tanha, Arati, Raga). (Malalasekera says it is in the 2nd week)

6. The Buddha stays in the 6th week under Muchalinda tree near a

lake--50 fathoms s.e. of Mahabodhi--when heavy rain storm come and

a

=== [Page 21] ===
the Naga (serpent) king came out from his mansion and encircled seven
times around the Buddha with his windings (coils) and kept his large hood
over the Buddha's head. After 7 days the seprent assumed the form of a
youth paying respect to the Buddha. It is said that the space of the coils
was as big as the floor of Lohapasada pavilion (Malalasekara says it's in the
3rd week).

7. In the 7th week Lord Buddha meditates under Rajayatana (Buchanania
Lalifolia) tree when Taphussa and Bhallika, the two merchants from
Ramannadesa, came and offered honey: cakes and obtained hair relics

(Malalasekhara says it is in the 4th week). See carte

Mokkhaingpaya inscription U Chit Thein, 89
5 es m khar iw
Village in Pegu township; cf. Phayagyi inscription. ok 2 ioe gut. $s

. Reflecting that he was born in the foreign (P. Paccantrah) country of
Suvannabhum King Sirimasoka, the king of Suddhium alsc also
2 was his relative in the former lives ....
3.With his doctrine, after instructing the king, the king was delighted and
because of desiring to behold the Lord Buddh and because
4. of willing to give gifts to Lord Buddha, the King made a request to our
Lord Gavampati. At that time, our lord Gavampati having accepted the task
from King Sirimasoka, flew back to
5. Majjhamadesa. There, he informed all of the matters to Lord Buddha.
Hearing the words of Gavampati

~N

=== [Page 22] ===
6 and because of having kindness and love for king Sirimasoka together

with the mass of people of Suwannabhum, came flying over the sky to the
sity of Sudhuim with 20,000 saints.

7. at that time, hearing the arriving of Lord Buddha together with 20,000
saints to Sudhuim, so delighted

8. and happy at heart, came out to welcome and built a great pavilion
(pasada). For seven days, the king

9. gave a great offerings. For seven days, after preaching and instructing
his Doctrine to all gods and the people,

10. Lord Buddha announced that he would return. At that time, King
Sirimasoka, knew that Lord Buddha is about to return, begged for

il. a relic that is from the body of Lord Buddhat that is fit for worshipping
the Buddha. At that G Heats
12. time, Lord Buddha replied to the king thus: "Your Majesty, as I have
given my bodily relics to those six hermits,......
13 1 am unable to give to your Majesty now. However, after 37 years from
this year, I would achieve Nibbana in the district of Kusinagaram, at the
garden of the Malla prince in the forest

14. of Sal trees. At that time, among my 40 teeth according to the wow, one
tooth

15 relic becomes 33 relics which the great spirit Gavampati would bring to
you. Your Majesty worship the relics which Gavampati

16 brings.”" So saying, Lord Buddha does not give a bodily relic to the king.
Thus for 7 days Lord Buddha preaches the Law to King Sirimasoka

17. together with the people and because of willing for the benefit of all
beings in future.

=== [Page 23] ===
18 in Suvannabhum, Lord Buddha enters to meditate of his realization of
attainment in 13 places. Then Lord Buddha went back to

19 Majjhimadesa. From that year after 37 years have elapsed or 45) years
after enlightenment, expounding the essence of the Doctrine as if the great

20.... all over the four continents, extinguishing the lust that are adhered
in the bodies of all beings even as the fire

21. that burns out the universe--after performing all that a Buddha ought
to perform, in the year .... the fullmoon of Basak (May)

22. in the district of Kusinaram, in the Sal forest at the park of the Malla
prince, Lord Buddha achieved Nibban. At that time our Lord Gavampati
remembering the Buddha's instruction

23 takes the one tooth relic which becomes thirty three before the fire of
funeral pyre extinquished, and brings to king Sirimasoka

24 At that time, King Sirimasoka, after receiving the 33 tooth relics, built
33 small stone stupas to pay

25 homage, to give gifts, to pay respect and to worship for the whole life.
Passing from that existence, the king went to heaven.

26. Long after that, people did not know the whereabouts of the relics and
the relics were lost in the forest

27. After 236 years have elapsed for the year the Lord Buddha achieved
Nibban, our lord Moggalaputtatissa being friendly with King

28 Asokadhammarat, for the sake of purifying the religion, held the Third
Buddhist Council

-10-

=== [Page 24] ===
29 At the end of the Council, our Lord observed that in future, the religion
would be established in foreign countries. So our lord

30 persuaded the great saints to go and establish the religion in such lands
31 At that time, our lord Sonamahather togeteher with Uttaramahather
came to establish the religion in the country of

32 Suwannabhum. After establishing the religion in the country of
Suvannabhum, there are male and female monks, male and female novices.
At that time, King Sesion

33. Sirimaksoka makes a requests to the two saints (arhanta) ... we have
the Law gem and the Clergy gem (Dhamma, Rat, Sangha).

(based on Blagden's reading and U Chit Thein; cf. Phayagyi inscription)

Htalupaya inscription 804 / 1442 AD. U Chit Thein, no. 61
(at Kyaiklat Town, near Bassein)

1. 804 (1442 A.D. ) on seventh religious waxing of the month of Gathuik
(Skt. Kartika-November)

2. 6th waxing of Hakhraura (unclear), on Friday at the rising planet Libra
(Skt. Lagna tula), the season ?

3. Sutta (silk?), Punna tithi ansa 25 pubbasa

4. naksat (Skt. naksatra) sign, 14 bijana (seeds; essential elements)
enshrined the relics (dhat) in this pagoda.

B.
1. The meritorious deeds holder Siwaka by name together with attendants
Was the donor
2. of the pagoda.
-Il-

=== [Page 25] ===
r
The Seven:Pagoda Mon Inscription (small stone) U Chit Thein, no. 65°C 7 ?
(2 faces. A, 18 lines; B, Il lines) 1469 AD. (aa! Shote fro?
B31 GE oak paw,
A. (obverse)

1. Reverence to the Buddha. These seven pagodas were built long ago by
2. Queen Mahasubhadda, chief queen of
3. king Mahatissa, lord of Hansawati kingdom. Due to lengthy duration
4. since they were erected, and the treasure seekers’ destruction in
diggings, they were all destroyed completely. (treasure seekers:
mnih glayrat)
6. Later on when 2013 years have elapsed from the year the lord of merit
7. the exalted Buddha achieved Nibbina (Skt. nirvana), a Aye
8. prosperous queen namely Sri Tribhuwan P) h ww Sow $ nw
9. nadityaprawaradhar majetralokyanathaprawaramahadham marajadhiraja
10. devi who is full of virtues such as dana (charity), sila (right conduct),
samadhi x 5 $
Il. (steadfastness) and jana (sp.?) (knowledge or wisdom), together with a
precious son
12 by the name Ramadhipati Sri Parama Mahadharamma
13 Rajadhiraja, reigning the royal power of the city of Hansawati

14. according to law, conducting the ten rules of a king, causes to rebuild

these force?

15. seven pagodas very firmly as
{6 they are in ruins. Enshrining all the
17. old relics not be destroyed, a lot of new
18 relics also put
relics. put together

=== [Page 26] ===
B (reverse) UL yeradvon'
19. In each stupa, four Buddha images

20 made of bronze (eam.alak) ore placed at four cardinal points (desa),
dedicating the relics with 7 precious gems after

22 which these seven pagodas are

23 erected in the year 831 (1469) Ist waxing of the month of Mak (Skt.
Magha, February) on Wednesday at Nanda tittha Sravana Naksat
Vuddhiyoga Lak Bruih (Skt, Vrisha = the rising constellation Taurus)
24?

25. All the meritiorious deeds, the virtues of this good action of the two
monarchs

26 mother and son, may go to all

27 beings. May the virtues be the cause to get the freedom to escape the
suffering of sansa (p. sansara).

28. May this virtue be the cause in furture to obtain the wisdom of

29. Sabbannutanan! (p. sabbanutanana-wisdom of
omniscience=Buddhahood)

(based on Blagden’s reading and notes)

-13-

=== [Page 27] ===
a
co

Ae ala
-Pj inscription 1] (big stone 1469 AD. “ayn tt
(Blagden’s ms. mentions as v.c. 33 Pegu Kyaukdainggan village, in the
compound of Appadukaphu--"an Indian richman’s house"--sounds like a
Tamil name to me) See Asa 1ast-SaNy meme 1s ABDUL GAatoor.
Based on Bladen’s readings and U Chit Thein’s conjecture words in the text.

See the legendary story of Subbhadda (also known as Behaddradevi) and a

“aan tl?

heretic king Tissa in the history of Pegu in Harvey's History of Burma.

2... .yo... after...

3.... At that time, king Tissa was very astonished and highly admired the
young

4. lady Subhadda and placed her as his chief queen. All the Buddha images
are properly washed and (he?) built a temple where the images déended
and put them for worship.

5. The king was delighted and adhered to the Buddha images and raised his
hands to pay homage and worshipped.

6. At that time, the people saw such a miracle and uttered : “Hey folks, the
Buddha flies! Hey folks, the Buddha flies". Because of such saying, the
image are known as Kyak Paw (flying Buddha)

7. Later on, the king together Queen Subhaddha caused to build seven
pagodas enshrining the images and called them as Kyaik Paw ae

8. The king, after seeing the miracle of the Buddha images, felt so pleased -
and delighted in the religion. Later,

9 the king caused to collect the images and said : “These images have been

neglected by me and were thrown out in an unproper place. Now together TISSA
fe thrown out in an unr :
with this young damsel Subhadda needs

Imeges

-14-

=== [Page 28] ===
10 1 have washed and cleaned them and I have placed these Buddha
images in the suitable place. At this time, for the sake of performing merit
in building stupa for this young lady

I. to be named as Kyaik Paw, I would like the people to wash and clean the
images at the pond in the north of the city Hansawati so as to build the
stupas

12. for this young lady Sudbhadda. " After saying that the king causes the
people to collect the images and said: "Dear

13. people, take all the images to wash with perfume water in the pond at
the north of

14. Hansavati city.” The people said among themselves, "We must take the
images out to the pond at the orth o of the city to wash

15 with water and then clean with fragrant water.” After saying that they
took out

16 the images and washed with pond water and again with perfume water
and placed the images near the pond at the north of

18. the city Hansawati. At that time, king Tissa together with Queen
Subhadda caused to build the seven pagodas of Kyaik Paw (flying Buddha)
in

19. which the images are enshriend. In erecting the stupas, each one is 20
fathoms high built in

20 a row. For the people to pay hoamge to the seven Kyaik Paw Pagodas, a
Pavilion is built

-15-

=== [Page 29] ===
21. on the the north side of the pagodas. For the people who have desire for
water, a Prasat (skt, prasada) is caused to build at the pond near the
pagodas. In such a way, the king
22. and queen were able to build the Kyaik Paw pagodas and pavilion to
pay homage to the Buddhas and to construct a building with tiered roof for
drawing water from the pond, the king went
23. up to the edge of the forest and found auspicious earth and brought it
and built the Kyaik Paw Pagodas for Queen Subhadda. Queen Sudhadda

: 24. and King Tissa after building the seven stupas--enshring the images,
iad lived to their life-span and finally all passed away.
25. Later on, when His Majesty Ramadhaipati Sri Parama
Mahadharm maraja
26. dhirat together with His Majesty mother namely Queen Sri
Tribhuwanadhityaprawaradhar mmajetra
27 lokyanathaprawaramahadharmmarsjadhirajadewi, tuling the kingdom
of Hansawati, the seven pagodas built by Subhadda were
28. in ruin. By seeing this, the two majesties, mother and son, have such a
thought " In this location the seven pagodas which were built
29. by Subhadda are really destroyed. We must not let this Place be ruined.
Just like before, the seven pagodas should be built.” After considering
30. thus, they caused to Prepare all the sites properly to build the seven
Pagodas. In the year 831 (1469 A.D.) the first waxing of Mak (Feb.) on
Wednesday . ... these Kyaik Paw pagodas are built, / 470 ch a ic

eo

-16-

=== [Page 30] ===
Mucalinda Inscription 841 (1479 A.D.) U Chit Thein, no. 75
Muncalinda Inscription; see U Lu Pe Win's report and translation in ASB,

AR. year 1938-39, p. 23. (Lord Buddha spent his Third week under this
tree).

1 At the time our exalted Lord Buddha completes seven days of his stay
under the Ajapala tree (goat=-herd banyan), the exalted Lord Buddha rises
up and walks

2. towards south direction and reaches the bank of the Mucalinda lake and
under the Mucalinda tree which is situated at the eastern side of the lake
and rather falling a little towards south

3. it is to say in the southeast (agnay) direction (Skt. agneya, southeast) of
the Mahabodhi, the exalted Buddha sits for seven days enjoying the blissy
of (P. wimuttisukha) emancipation.

4. At that time, a heavy rain storm occurs with cold wind blowing from all
around without stop. At that time,

5. the Naga king of Mucalinda, because of not being willing for the exalted
Buddha to be touched by rain or cold wind, with his body he coils seven
founds around the exalted Buddha and shelters the exalted Buddha with
his hood. The area

6. of the coil for the Buddha to live is as big as the size of a pavilion

7. At completing seven days, he entirely reduces his windings of serpent
body and assumes the form of a bachelor and attends the exalted Buddha
with reverences.

-I7-

=== [Page 31] ===
8. At the site of the Mucalinda (L. Barringlonia Racimasa) tree which is to

Say it is the place of enjoyment of the exalted Buddha--former pious kings

who were generous and adhered to the faith starting from king

Asokadhammarat

9. built a pagoda called Mucalinda pagoda and performing meritorious

deeds and worshiped continously since then. In our country of

Ramannadesa also imitating this site of Mucalinda

10. pagoda so as to say according to the distance and situation from v
Se ee

Mahabodhi model, His Majesty Lord of White elephants issued order to an

official namely Yogarat, who is the

I. governor of Hamsawati (City of Brahmanidevata) also called Pago

(lit.=beautiful) to build this Mucalinda pagoda in the year 841 (1479 A.D.)

12 the 5th waning of the month Asat (July) on Thruday at lak min (Skt,

lagna mina) the rising planet of Pisces.

“Ban kwew engraved the writing”

-18-

Hemavet i

=== [Page 32] ===
GAR BELACS %

po THe pe l-7)

Bay
Dhammathaik Pagoda inscription U Chit Thein, 88 ne er jane He
z E : me b& '
Myin Mangu village, Kawa fownahip, vehye a 33 191 ASE. 172/24
(20 fragmentary lines ; cf. Kelasa mon inscription) F chavo Lt

1... paying homage and worshiped. Out of six hermits one hermit dwells Aro Rew
at the edge of the forest ... a ‘
kawa tt

Pay mikes
comes back to his hermitage, two other hermits living together approached. 4 Pegeu

him saying : Coase oe

* 2. It is towards west . .. obtains a hair relic of the exalted Buddha. When he

3. “reverend Sir, you have obtained the hair relic of the exalted Buddha for
4. worship. But we have not received such relic of the exalted Buddha to
worship.”

5. At that time, the senior hermit replies: “Reverend sirs, if two of you say
$0, let three of us make a vow..."

6. After that they make a solemn asservation. "Oh, our reverend the
Blessed One, having great compassion (p. mahakaruna) and fulfilling the
propserity to all beings if it is true that our lord, the exalted

7. Buddha being so, let this one hair relic become three for three of us to
worship.” After a while, as vowed by the three hermits, that one hair relic
becomes three.

8. At that time, the senior hermit takes one hair relic and builds a stone
stupa to worship. The middle hermit takes one hair relic and builds a stone
stupa at his

9. dwelling place to worship. The young hermit takes also one hair relic and

stme
builds a stone stupa at his dwelling place to worship. sted
10. From that time all the hermits lived according to their life-span and

they all/passed away.

=== [Page 33] ===
i. After a long time, such places became jungle and people did not know
the existence of the relics there. From the year the exalted Buddha
achieved Nibbana 236 years had elapsed,

12 our two saints namely Sonather and Uttarather sent by our saint Soma uth

Moggalatissamahather to establish the religion in the country of this

13. Suwannabhum. When the religion has been established in
Suwannabhum having male and female novices and male and female
monks, king Sirimasoka comprehends our two great saints

14. “reverend Sirs, since my lords have arrived in our land, we could pay
repect and worship the Dharma gem, the Sangha gem but we have

15. no object of worship (relic of the Buddha) to pay homage and to
worship. Would our lords search for us?” At that

16. time the two great saints show the King Sirimasoka Qe) all the 33 tooth
relics which were brought to the great king Sirimasoka (Sr.) by our great
saint Gavampati that he enshrined in 33 pagodas which were

17. conceiled and also the hair relics which were enshrined in the stone
stupas by the hermits that had disappeared in the jungle. At that time king
Sisiinasckacip) causes to rebuild all the old

18. pagodas of tooth relics and hair ‘felics. Pavilions are also built.

19. Starting from that time, all the kings ruling the Rman { Rman(Mon); Old
Mon-Rmen; Middle Mon-Man) country and also the people who dwell in
the Mon country from time to time pay homage, perform good deeds and
worship. The stupas of tooth relics

20 of the exalted Buddha...

the Stupa in the forest at west side of the city known as Jayabhum.... 2@6%

a
...- Siridnhammasok. .. Sudhuim (Sudhammapura) . . . that brought back snston z

the hair relics.

-20-

torth on

how
steget

isapepen

=== [Page 34] ===
Bowl

6 yet
Inscription 1 840 «1478 ALD, shat deo ma er
cf. The Legend of Gotama, I, pp. 82-3, by Bigandet. U Chit Thein, no. 7! Fier vi eds
“Suppatitha Pagoda Inscription” (17 fragmentary lines) thd A
1 At that time the Bodhisat (sic) received the golden bow! full of ig
(milk-rice).... under the Ajapala banyan prc oe tr ~
2 and walks down to bank of Neranjara river, peciarateer

3. leaving the golden bowl, the Bodhisat immersed himself in the water of 227. A Atu
Neranjara river to cool down his body.

4. Later, the Bodhisat eats 49 handfuls of milk-rice--each handful is

equivalent to the size of a fruit of the pal (p. tala)

5. After partaking the milk-rice, the Bodhisat goes down to the river and

washes his mouth and feet. ...

6. After that the Bodhisat makes a vow. "Today, if I could certainly become

the Buddha, let this golden bow! (go upstream) |"

7. After saying that the Bodhisat places the golden bow! on the water and

pushed

8 it out and it goes upstream for four hat (p. hatha-cubit,a meausre from  c»4 +t

elbow to tips of fingers) and reaches the mouth of a small river ... and at
Neranjara river the bow! dives down to the bottom of the earth and
reaches the abode of Kala Naga King (seprent king) .... (rests)

9 under the Kayons (dishes or bowls) of the three previous Buddhas such
as Kakkusan (Kakkusanda), Konaguim (Konagamana) and Kassapa.

10. At the mouth of the small river... it goes down. .

tiver was known as Kanakkasothi.

-- Later on the small

il. By seeing the bow! going upstream for eighty cubits and sinks in this

-2I-

=== [Page 35] ===
12. river--the Bodhisat says : “Certainly I would become Buddha!" and feels
happy at heart.

13. Bodhisat returns to the ghat of Suppatitha which is the common site of
the Buddhas to which pious kings of yor

14 came to worship and did meritorious deeds, after (building) Suppatittha
(pagoda)

15 In this our Ramannadesa also, imitating the model of Suppatittha —

veel |

(causing to found) according to its angle and (plan) *

16 His majesty, Lord of (white) elephants (caused) the governor of Sren
whose name is Lord Syen to...

17. in the year 840 (1478 A.D. ) the 5th waning of the moénth of Asat (skt.
asadha, the fourth lunar month corresponding to July) on Thursday at lak
min (Skt. lagna=the rising of planet Pisces), caused to build the Suppatitha

Ath, 7

pagoda.

a yt
Shwegugvi Inscription 1V UChit Thein, 74. F4/ 5 1474 bree re
( Pegu Nahana Pagoda inscription) 10 fragmentary lines oe: ook
1... suitably ministers his person (cool down his body)... :
2.... after saying ... descends to Soins Pea Ge tery
3. the shore of the river ... Shek '/
4.... at the foot of the tree...
5....at this site which the Buddha ministers his person, the previous
6. pious kings beginning from king Asokadhammarat who were adhered to

the religion built a pagoda and called it (Nahana pagoda).

-22-

=== [Page 36] ===
7. In our country of Ramannadesa also, imitating those at (Mahabodhi)
8. according to its model, position and plan of Nahana pagoda. . . His

Majesty Lord of the White Blephants

9. causes his daughter princess Talamew (sp.?) Wandawati togeter with her
husband

10. In the year (841, the 5th waning of the month Asat on Thurdsay at lak
min to build the Nahana pagoda).

(based on Blagden’s reading and U Chit Thein's conjectured words)

ps,

Shwegugy Inscription V 841 1479 AD. UChit Thein, 72 “s/,4 age
( Pegu Diwawihara Pagoda inscription) parttmA) 2

1 At that time the Bodhisat after throwing the dish-bow! ascends

2 from the Suppatittha ghat to the pleasant shade

3 of the Sal tree in the Sal park near the Suppatittha ghat which is suitable
to :

4. rest to get peace of mind, the Bodhisat takes rest.

5 For one day the Bodhisat mediates at Diwawihara monastery. In the

6. the Bodhisat sees the Sal flowers (p. sala, shorea robusta) dropped down
7. all over his body, he considers : "I better minister (to) myself" So saying
8. The Bodhisat comes out from the Suppatitha ghat and walks down to
Neranjara river...

9. At this site... . Diwawihara .. . Former kings who were generous and

10. adhered to the religious beginning from King Asokadhammarat built
Diwawihara pagoda and worshipped.

-23-

=== [Page 37] ===
I. In this our Country of Ramannadesa also, imitating that of Diwawihara
pagoda according to its model, position and plan

12. His majesty Lord of White elephants together with (princess namely
Tala) May Knok

13. together with her husband ... governor of Camrandun .... caused to
build

14. Diwawihara Pagoda in the year

15. 841 (1479) the Sth waning of the month Asat (July) on Thrudsay at fak
min (the rising of constellation Pisces).

chee
SS as
Kyaikmakaw Pace U Chit Thein , 95 697%. 1420 /9Y.
inscription in Phalay village, Pegu Township PTY mp hy hoor lena
tae Randanaguiw one ... 6 Hae
Feat or . RECS
Eevee hearing the news of the arrival of Lord Buddha KAndin e fi W/
ree . t wh
4..... Lord Buddha also ate ws p Pt mA
u. L. thteen 9)

5.... begged from Lord Buddha
63355 my lord the exalted Buddha
7... pagoda... to worship. ... Buddha
een Lord Buddha rubbed his head and obtained six hair felics .... the
six hermits
9. having taken back to their dwelling places . . . enshrined in the stupas
10. One hermit who lives[at the west of the middle forest}having brought
back the hair relic to his dwelling place, was approached by
1. two other hermits who live in the same forest. They said : “Reverend
Great Hermit, you have
12. got an object of worship that is hair relic of the Lord Buddha for you to
Worship. But two

-24-

=== [Page 38] ===
13 of us got no such relic to worship.” At that time the great hermit replied
to the two hermits, if two of you said so, let three of us pray and make a
vow" Then make a solemn asservation: --

14. "Reverend Lord Buddha, you have great pity towards all beings and
fulfiling the Prosperity of all beings, if such are true, May this one your

hair relic becom ip” ing, after for a
ome three for all three of us to worship" So saying,
while ... the three hermits ....

(based on Blagden’s reading and U Chit Thein)

Monetpaya Uchit Thein,90 © 42//3e. 7

Inscription in Phuchaung Village, Kawa Township. Similar to Dhammathaik
Mon Inscription. 42 lines, 29 of which very illigible

Haves Te ETA
1..... King Sirima RELLES
2....Sirma
3.
4 exalted Buddha
5-923%:3
10. ... come
I.
12... that
13. ... exalted Buddha
14... . stone
15... . forest

16... that is to be be

17.... delighted and happy at heart
18... all.... at that time.

=== [Page 39] ===
19... my lord the Blessed One having merits. .
20... at that time the Buddha rubbed his head ..
21. ... edge of the forest...

22... hair relics of the exalted Buddha...
23.... "Reverend lord hermit the great...
24... we two have no objects of

25. worship . .

26-29...

30. Builds a stone stupa at his place to worship. The

31. young hermit also takes one hair relic and builds a stone stupa to

worship at his place.

32. From that time, the hermits lived according to their life-span and

passed away. For a long time after that, people did know the places of such

relics and they were lost in

33. the jungle. For the year Lord Buddha achieved Nibban, 236 years had

elapsed, as persuaded by our great Lord Moggalaputtatissa our two lords

namely Sonamahathera (sp.?) and Uttaramahatthera came to establish the

religion in the country of Suwannabhum. As

34. monks, nuns, male and female novices are there . -- but... King

Sirimasoka supplicates the two saints thus : “Reverend our Lords...

35. since your arrival, we have the Law gem and Clergy gem to venerate Dharma,
and worship. We would like to venerate and worship the bodily relics of oe
Lord Buddha.

36. Shall our lords search out for us? At that time, the two Sreat saints

show king Sirimasoka all the 33 tooth relics which were brought by our fositl,

lord the great Saint Gawamapati to king Sirimasoka the &reat and which nar
were

-26-

=== [Page 40] ===
] On30.November.Secretary 1 of the State Peace and Development Council General Khin
Nyunt and party made @ day trip to Bago and its environs to inspect on going works in
preservation of cultural heritage sites infrastructure building and economic development. The

was Phayagyi a model village about ten miles to the north of Bago, where
roa. Pogode named Phayegy ‘Stuated. The vilege atthe junction of the Yangon-
Mandalay highway and railway is sprawling into a minor town. There is another village called
Phayagale in its neighbor hood. where a smaller pagoda stands. The name of these two
villages are derived from Phayagyi and Phayagale pagoda, which figure prominent in local
Pagoda at : history. ‘5

isuyapanthi

Phayagye 3 $5 In the Aung Setkya preaching hall in the pagoda precinct the Pagoda Trustees briefed
Model _-|Secretary 1 and party on the background history of the Pagoda and renovation work they had
ws ‘ already, started. We learnt from the trustees that the Pagoda was repaired , by one Monk

Sayadaw from Yangon who gave it the name Maha Vijaya Yanthi. The site where it stands is

Ville,
5 ‘Savanna Mandala. When | walked around the Pagoda compound | found one stone.
Bazo inscription in old Mon language and two bronze bells with inscribed letters. Secretary 1 and
@ party visited a wooden monastery Sarthintaik and Secretary 1 supplicated to him about the

Township. a renovation of the Phayagyi Pagoda. After receiving ovada from him we left for other places.

The home work this trip gave me was the old Mon stone inscription and the Phayagyi's past.
[The names of Phayagyi and Phayagale are quite familiar to me since my younger days.
Particularly Phayagyi is a landmark on the Yangon-|

quite often. | went to the reference library of Archaeology Department and dug up the past of
this pagoda. On page 122, volume A of Pegu District gazetteers compiled by Mr A J Page,
ICS, settlement officer and published in 1917 the foltowing brief references are found:

me 5 >> Saal "Payagale-the old headquarters of the township, but now an ordinary vil; i i
~ Station. There is a railway station here. Payagyi- A notified railway town with a bungalo. The Pagoda is one of a line of Pagodas slong the ai rintane ft

was built by Nga Ga Yu, son of a minister of one of the early Pegu kings. it contains some inscriptions. The village is a road Centro Though no reference
's given in the gazetteer regarding the history of the Pagoda the compller must have obtained much information from the local authonties,

g
3
ey
3
5
g
FA
A
2
°
3
i
&
z
a
8
z
2
g
é
:
g
y
FA
g
z.
a
=
3

g
¢
g

g

&
=
3

Z

g

The 43 lines that are legible tell us the story of the arrivals of , Buddha sasana in Ramanna
. Buddha s desa, Mon kingdom: : i
Busha; who came thera he eqs Ahn Cavampal. King Trmar of Mon kingdom poopie aftr receiving the arava 3,9 thotiveg Bn
a \. ived emy ic is at }
Bhumi Thaton was headed by two Maha Theras Sona and Uttara, They prescient Gogg SOUs missions abroad. The mission that came to Swvana

nshrining 33 tooth relies ofthe Buddha were bul in the time of Ashin Gavampatl. The stecec vor epaled and enovatea te? Where 33 stone stupas

‘That much we lear from the 421ines. The erased 191ines may contain facts about Phayagyi and its donor
From the data so far collected we glean firstly that Phayagyi was built by Nga Ga Yu, son of a minister of one Bago King,

side of old Minlan ( Royal highway) it must have some historical sien i arc secondly as itis |
may be ascribed to the reign of Mon king Dhammzedi(A.D.1472.14g0) 0 and thr the stone inscription being the work of the medieval period, te date

=== [Page 41] ===
37. enshrined in 33 stone stupas which were disappeared and also the hair
relics which

38. were enshrined in the stupas by the hermits and lost in jungle. At that

. time, all the hair relics and tooth relics which

39. were enshrined in the stone stupas .. .. the king caused to rebuild with
“pavilions. From that time onwards, all the kings who ruled over the Rman
country and also the mass of the people who live

40. the Mon country venerated, gave gifts and worshipped. Hair relic
pagoda .... at the east... Sirdhammasok. . .

41. . this stone.

42. ... Lord of white elephants . .
(Based on Bladgen and U Chit Thein)

Phayagyi 848/ 1486 AD. UChit Thein,87 0 “ict/22. 7 4-
(situated in the compound of the big pagoda in Phayagyi village, 10 miles
north of Pegu. one slab, 67 lines)

1. In the year 848 (1486) the 3rd waning of the month Srawan (Skt.
sravana=August) on Sunday. Our lord Buddha having fulfilled the
perfections to come Buddha at the foot of .... the exalted Buddha
(Dipankara).

2. Fulfilling the perfections--that is to say the thirty perfections . . . for long

3.... like that . . . sitting on the throne under the Bodhi tree ... the Mara’s
armay attacked

4. the Bodhisat ... lord... conducted .... cut off

-27-

=== [Page 42] ===
5. all... the Bodhisat . . . that is to say the wisdom of Sabbanutanan
(Omniscience)

6.... fully enlightened to become the exalted Buddha. In the eighth year
after becoming the Omniscient One, the Lord having compassion toward all
7. beings . . . together with twenty thousand saints . . . arrived in the city of
Mituiw (P. Mithila). At that time, the great saint Gavampati (a native of
Mithila who joined the order at the age of seven. He is well known as the
Mon saint. Popular as co-founder of Sri Ksetra and protector of Pagan in Old
Mon inscriptions) reflects his previous existence where he was born in a
foreign country of Suwannabhum. Seeing the group of

9. his former relatives there, the king of Suddhuim--king Sirimasoka was
also his relative (note: his brother in the legend) in the past existence, our
lord preached so much of the Buddh's doctrine to the king and the king
having acquired faith (converted) and rejoiced and desired

i. to make alms-giving to the Buddha. The king makes a request to our lord
the great saint Gavampati. At that time, our lord Gavampati takes the
responsibility as requested

12. by king Sirimasoka and then flew back to Mithuiw city. There he
informed all the events to our lord the exalted Buddha

13. By hearing the words of our lord Gavampati, our lord the exalted
Buddha because of having kindness and love for king Sirimasoka together
with

14. the people who are living in the country of Suwannbhumi, came flying
over the sky together with twenty thousand saints and reached the city of
Sudhium. At that time, king

-28-

=== [Page 43] ===
15. Sirimasoka, having heard the news of the arriving of the exalted Buddha
together with 20,000 saints to Sadhuim, being f\ ull of joy and happy at
heart, came out to welcome and built a temporary huge pavilion. Our lord
16. the Englightened One, after preaching the Law for seven days to the
gods and all the people, announced of his going back home. At that time,

King Sirimasoka

17. knew that the exalted Buddha is about to return, begged for an object of
worship, that is to say an object

18. from the body of the Buddha which is suitable to worship on behalf of
the Buddhas. At that time, our lord the exalted Buddha replied to the king
thus : "Your Majesty, as

19. I have already given such object of worship to those six hermits, | am
unable to give to your Majesty now. However, after 37 years have passed
from this year

20. I would achieve Nibban at the park of king Mar (P. Malla) in the Sal
forest in the jurisdiction of Kusinaram city

21. At that time out of 40 of my teeth, according my my vow, one tooth x0
becomes 33 which the great saint Gavampati would bring--at which your sey
Majesty pay homage,

22. offer and worship.” So saying the Buddha does not give any object of
worship to the king. Thus after preaching the Doctrine to king Sirimasoka
together with all the people, because of

23. willing for the prosperity of all beings in the future in the country of
Suwannabhum, the Buddha enters his meditation of realization of
attainment (P. phalasamapatti) in 13 places. After that

24. the exalted Buddha went back to Majjhimadesa. After 37 years from

that year or 45 years from becoming Buddha, having

-29-

=== [Page 44] ===
25 preached the Doctrine as if the great rain .. .. all the four continents,
extinguished all the lust which are adhered in all beings,

26. that is to say, the fire which destroys the universe. When all works that
a Buddha is suitable to do had been performed, in the year...

.. the month of Basak (Skt. Vaisakha, May),

ow

27. the exalted Buddha achieved Nibban at the garden of Mar king of the
Sal forest in the jurisdiction of the city of Kusinaram. At that time, our lord
the great saint Gavampati, remembering the instruction that

28. Buddha has instructed him to do, before the fire of funeral pyre
extinguished, took one tooth relic of the exalted Buddha which became 33,
as vowed by the Buddha

29. and brought to king Sirimasoka. At that time, after getting the 33 relics
king Sirimasoka built 33 relics king Sirimasoka built 33 small stone stupas
and for the whole life,

30. the king pays homages, makes offerings, takes Precepts and worships.
Passing away from that existence, the king goes to

31. heaven. After a long time, no one knows about the presence of the
Buddha's relics ‘The relics are covered in the jungle/, People do not know
such places. From the year that the exalted Buddha achieved

32. Nibban, 236 years have elapsed, our lord Moggalaputtatissa Mahather,
being friendly with king Asokadhammarat, in order to purify the religion,
to clean

33. out the thorns (impurities) of the religion, held the third Buddhist
Council. At the conclusiion of the Council, our lord

34. observed that the religion would be established in foreign lands. So he

Persuaded the senior monks to establish the reliion in those countries. At
that

-30-

=== [Page 45] ===
35. time, our great Lord Sonather, together with Uttaramahather, came to
establish the religion in the country of Suwannabhum.

36. After establishing the religion in the country of Suwannabhum, ....
there were male and female novices, male and female monks...

37. king Sirimasoka supplicates two senior saints : "Reverend sirs, since
your arrival in our land, we

38. could pay homage, make offerings and worship both the gem of the
Doctine, and the Church gem. We would like to do the same to the Buddha
gem. But we

39. have none. Would you search for us?” At that lime, our two great
saints, show the king all the 33 tooth relics which our great saint
Gavampati brought to 4e-the former great king Sirimasoka which the king
enshrined in 33 stone stupas

40. which were concealed in the jungle and also the hair relics that were
enshrined in stupas by the hermits which were covered

4l. in the forest. At that time, the king causes to rebuilt all the 33 tooth artes

utters
relic pagodas with 33 pavilions andthe 6 hair telic-pagodas and weg lf,
n ie Se Pa0th - 4%
worshipped stapes

42-49--illigible

50. From that time onwards all the kings who ruled the Rman (mon)
country together with the great mass of the Mon country...

51. together with the king...

52. thirty three .... the exalted Buddha

53....Buddha.... after

54. At that time ... the king. .

55. also... the king...

56. the king...

=== [Page 46] ===
57. Long time after that .. ) De ported as
58. the King... footh ywthe
59. the king ... In this forest... L

60. the stupas with the tooth relics lying in the forest...

61. In the time of his Majesty king... arich man by the name...
Pavilion . . caused to make a big scaff folding (encasement)

62. In the reign of His Majesty Sri Rajadhirat, minister Udin, son of the rich
—_—_eet
man (treasurer)

63. In the reign of Her Majesty Sri
Tribhuwanadityapawaradharma-Trialikyanathamahadhaam marajadhirajad
ewi, together with a son of hers, namely (Sri Ramadhipati)

64. The pagoda built by minister Udin has been in ruins, His majesty

Ramadhipati Sri Paramamaharajadham marajadhirat caused to encase and
enlarge.

65 Starting from that time .. the pagoda... after... In the year
(848) the month of Bhat (Skt. Bhadra-September) the 3rd waxing on
66. Friday .. . Ya Sin Tarema wrote this writing . . .

67. servant of his Majesty, an Indian stone carver engraved.
Based on Bladgen’s reading and U Chit Thein. engraving started in August

and finished in September in the year 848 (1486).

CB: XU. e.thedn ~ oly 42 Liner

-32-

=== [Page 47] ===
Have 2 L106

Kelasa Inscription (A) U Chit Thein, no. 91 FAwegeer ¥ Un

rig ete) Sg

(94l / zl. (a
Rae From the year the eralted Buddha... Sherto, 72,
2.... together with 20,000 saints 73.
3. ... observed that this relatives in the fomer lives are born in the foreign ponevoum
country of Suwannabhum ... +07 3, -
4. King Sirimasoka, the lord of the City of Sudhum also his relative in the w/ 2 Ae,
previous existence (his younger brother in Mon tradition) 1486.
5. After preaching the Law and instructions given, the king was so pleased
Shorts — XKKI

and delighted to venerate Lord Buddha

6 to behold Lord Buddha and give gifts to Lord Buddha. So the king made a
request to our lord Gavampati. At that

7. time, our lord the great saint Gavampati promised to undertake the task
and went back to Majjhimadesa. There, he informed all matters to Lord
Buddha. By hearing the

8. report of Gavampati. Lord Buddha, because of having kindness and love
for kng Sirimasoka together with the people living

9. in Suwannabhum, came flying in the sky to the city of Sudhuim togehter
with 20,000 saints. At that time, King Sirsimasoka hearing that Lord
Buddha together with

10. 20,000 saints are arriving at Sudhium, felt happy at heart, delighted
and came out to welcome and built a : A .
i. great pavilion. For 7 days the king gave his great offerings. Lord Buddha ea =
after preaching and instructing his Doctrine to the gods and people for 7
days,

12. announced that he would return. At that time, the lord hermit .._.

-33-

=== [Page 48] ===
13... one at the Mt. Kelasa ... lord hermit dwelling at the middle of the
forest of Randanaguiw ; lord hermit ... at .... Randanaguiw

ae

14. one; lord hermit dwelling in the forest situated to the west of the middle
of the forest ...

15. at the east of the city of Asitanjananaguiw (Rangoon) one; all the six
hermits having heard the news, came flying through the

16. sky, and venerated and attended Lord Buddha. Lord Buddha ... Wows
17. instructed all the gods and the mass of the people, announced of his

return. At that time, the six hermits knew the manner of Lord Buddha ...

18. supplicated to Lord Buddha thus : “Reverend Lord Buddha, lord of

merit,...

19. Let us give gifts, venerate and worship” At that time, Lord Budha

rubbed his head and obtained six hairs and

20. gave to the six hermits. At that time the six hermits took back the hair

relics to the their dwelling places .... :

hiss venerates, gives gifts and worships. Among the six hermits, the

hermit who dwells at the west of the middle forest, obtains one hair relic
and

22 when arrived at his hermitage, two other hermits dwelling in the same
forest approached and informed him. : “Reverend

23. Great Hermit, you have obtained an object of worship, that is to say
Buddha's hair relic to worship. Our lord could venerate

24 give gifts and worship. But two of us Bot no such object of worship!!"
25. At that time, the senior hermit replies to the two j 7 two junior h hermits:

“Reverend lord, two hermits, if two of you say So, let all of us ey and
make a vow" So Saying

-34-

=== [Page 49] ===
26 they make a solemn asservation : “Reverend Lord Budha, having great

pity and fulfiling the benefit of all beings, if that is true, this one hair relic

of Lord Buddha,

27 may become three. So that all three of us could worship.” 4 oth

28. For a while after saying that, as vowed by the three hermits, the one % pics
hair relic becomes three. At that time,

29. the senior hermit takes one hair relic and builds a stone stupa at his

dwelling

30. place to worship. The middle hermit takes one hair relic and build a

31 stone stupa to worship. From that time all the hermits living according to

32. their life-span and passed away. Long time after that such relics were

unknown and lost in the forest.

33. Two hundred and thirty six years after Lord Buddha achieved Nibban,

our lord Moggalaputtatissa persuade

-35-

=== [Page 50] ===
Mon, Apr 3, 2023 at 11:53
AM

hristian Bauer-<christian.bauer@staff.hu-berlin.de>
o: Stadtner Don <dstadtner@gmail.com>

Don,

here is my translation of line 17-18 of inser. #92 (Chit Thein's line 1 is actually line 2, line

4 on stone being illegible -- he never counts those); so you have to add these two lines to
the very end of Nai Pan Hla's translation:

line 17: . From the year in which the Holy One reached parinibban being two

thousand twenty-nine years i! In the era. ...

line 18: . waxing, a Wednesday t! The Lord of the (White) Elephant xxxxx

| (ra)madhipati Srlparama(ma)hadhammarajadhirat who . . .

That is the last line of the inscription.

What follows is a four (?) line graffiti added later, in a totally different hand, most of which
is illegible, it begins with line 1 sakkarat, line 2 dhamama (sic, for dhamma); | can't make
out the rest. The engraving is much shallower.

(1486 ce)

What counts is 2029, a Wednesday, during a waxing cycle (had we the number of day in
that cycle, we would be able to determine the exact day).

The fact that Chit Thein's text ends at line 16 (his 15) is, | am sure, due to the fact that
his rubbing was cut off there. | know for a fact that Mme Saveros Pou-Lewitz (of EFEO,
Paris) had a similar case in Middle Khmer where she ‘omitted’ 4 lines at the end; an

alternative published rubbing (unknown to Pou) showed the complete text down to the
bottom.

That is a mere accident.
Lines 17-18 are integral part fo the inscription, so the date is safe.

That he treats #92 and #91 as two different inscriptions (DMI 72 and DMI 73 resp.) is the
usual muddle when people haven't seen the actual stone, and have only the rubbing in
hand. Just like DMI 63 and DMI 64 which is actually a single stone, split into two pieces,
_9ne in situ, one in the monastery shed.

=== [Page 51] ===
lasa Inscription (B U Chit Thein, no. 92

1. Since our lords have come to our land, we could worship the Law gem,

the clergy gem. The object of worship, that is to say the bodily relic of the

Lord Buddha, which we would like to worship, shall our lords seach out for

us?" At that

3. time, the two great saints show to King Sirimasoka (Jr.) all the 33 tooth

relics brought to king Sirmasoka (Sr.) by the great saint Gavampati which

were

4. enshrined in 33 stone stupas which are unknown now, also the hair terth

relics which were built by the hermits which are now lost in the jungle. At
that time the king caused

5. to rebuild all the tooth and hair relics
6. pagodas with pavilions. From that time
7. onward, all kings of Rman (Mon) country together with the mass of the
people of Mon country have venerated, offered gifts and worshipped. Our
lord...

8.... people call it Kyak Kelasapaw. Our lord the relic of Kelasapaw. .. .
9.2, namely Talamer (Sr) together with lord Jayasura, His Majesty's
son-in-law, pavilions .... ia

10. .. octagonal. . . each side has 16 cubits in length. In future, when his
Majesty Ramaraja...

Il. caused to build. Only the big bell had cast... .

12. Later, in the reign of His Majesty Bana

SEE

132255 namely Brataja caused to finish building. Later in the reign of
Beas DATED
Z.E. 20294 = 1486 6-€.
-36-

=== [Page 52] ===
14... Dhammarajadhirajadewi together with her son, namely Ramadhipati
Sri Paramamahadhammarajadhirat. .. .

D2. cot caused to be enlarged the Sim (simi, chapter House-Ordination Simi
Hall).
The Sim also built in octagonal. Bach side is 40 cubits in length. Caused to Ade b oat
be built....... ([S~ amere
peed: (Based on Blagden's readings and U Chit Thein’s text) G es form
any p hito
Shwezayan Inscription U Chit Thein, 93 4h a
: on
(in compound of Shwezayan pagoda, Thaton) *24t--- hopper | teeth
Re
: po War
heer yebicl
dpe Oe

bee Alll performances which the Buddha outght to perform

Se... on the fullmoon day of Basak (May) in the district of Kusinaram, in
the Sal forest, at the park of Malla prince, Lord

5. Buddha achieved Nibban. At that time, our lord Mahather Gavampati
remembering the instruction that Buddha has instructed him, before the
fire of funeral pyre is

6. extinguished, takes one tooth relic which becomes 33 as vowed by the
Buddha, and brings to king Sirmasoka. After

7. obtaining the 33 relics, the king built 33 stone stupas and venerated,
offered gifts, took precepts and worshipped until he died

8. according to life-span. The king went to heaven after that existence.

Long after that
9. the relics were lost in the forest and people did not know the

whereabots of them. From the

373

=== [Page 53] ===
10. year Lord Buddha achieved Nibban 236 years have elapsed, our lord
Moggaliputtatissa

i being friendly with King Asokadhammarat for

12 the sake of purifying the religion and for Sleaning t the thorns of the
religion, held

13. the Third Buddhist Council. In the end of the Council, our Lord
foreseeing that religion would establish in foreign lands

14. persuaded the senior saints to go and establish the religion in such
regions.

15. At that time, our lords Sonather together with Uttarather came to
establish the

16 religion in the country of Suvannabhum. After establishing the religion
in Suwannabhum there were monks, nuns, male and female

17. novices. At that time, king Sirimasoka informed the two senior saints :
“My Reverend

18. two saints, since your arrival in our land, we have the Law gem and
Clergy gem

19. to worship ..

-. to be happy at heart, the Buddha gem we would like to
Worship ....

20. shall our lords search for us?” At that time, the two saints ..
tooth relics which were brought by our lord Gavampati

21 to King Sirimasoka the Great which were enshrined ..
the forest.

- the 33

.- disappeared in

22. King Sirimasoka together with our fords the two

senior saints, made a | Sinimncoks
search for the stupas

V/ Sowm -

we there

Slanted

-38- hr potces

=== [Page 54] ===
23.... thirty three relics were brought back to the place at north east...
cosas

24... .. thirty three

25.... golden caskets. ... caused to...

26. ... umbrellas, flags .... placed in the chabmers of 33...

27. ... Buddha's relics... . in
285..5%

29208 that .... 33 places

30... . to venerate, to give gifts and to worship . ...

31... nobody knows the whereabouts . . .

32 ... the request of the king also, the reply of the two saints also, ....
33.... the king caused to enshrine the 33 relics in the pagodas.

3408 that paogoda.

35..cee: toget...
36....33
37... that...

38... pagoda ... our
illigible lines seem to go to 58 lines.
(based on Blagden and U Chit Thein)

hwemawdaw iption _U Chit Thein, 94 Shwe maw HO
(eastern stairway, right side of platform, Pegu) Sh ots
1... .. thirty three

-- exalted Buddha. Later on, in... .
-- exalted Buddha . . . have gone to

2
3
4.... informed the exalted Buddha. From the city of Mithila... .
5. ...our lord

ea

=== [Page 55] ===
6.... the king supplicated our lord...
At that time our lord Gavampati.... Covamy? Ry
7... our lord Buddha .. . together with the gathering of monks. ...

having heard ... delighted and generous... . that city ... the king caused to
spread ... for the Buddha and the monks to sit on that mat and with
fragrant flowers... .

10. For seven days... . Lord Buddha. . . to king Sirmimasoka with the
essence of immortality that is to say the Doctrine, for seven days without
interruption ... At our lord...

Ml... announced. At that time the six hermits... came... the form of the

exalted Buddha having splendour, Prosperity, purification and excellence ..

12.... delighted and glad at heart, begged for an object of worship from
Lord Buddha

Becuase of having kindness and love for the hermits,
With his right hand Lord Buddha stroke his head and six hair relics...
13. ... Ater the Buddha has given hair relics to the hermits, the king begged

the 2

‘heir rélics from Lord Buddha. At that time, Lord Buddha obstructed OS jecteot
. : ‘ooth

saying : “Your majresty, is not Proper for you to ask for hee Tellics now.

After 37 years from this year, in the :

14. vicinity of the city of Kusinaram, in the Sal forest at the park of the
Malla prince, I will achieve Nibban. At that time, the People depending on

the Malla king also, the 80ds who are followers of King Indra also, put my
remains on the funeral pyre...

-40-

=== [Page 56] ===
15. ... one tooth relic of mine which became 33, taken from the funeral

Pyre,... brought to... then your Majesty got to worship my thirty three

relics." So saying Lord Buddha does not give hair relics to.....
16.... in the Mon country also... . also, in the 13 places Lord Buddha

enters phalasmapatti. After that together with the monks, Lord Buddha

went back towards Majjhimadesa. After 37 years ....

17... . at the place near to the city of Kusinaram, in the Sal forest at the

garden of Malla king, lord Buddha achieved Nibban. Before achieving

Nibban, as he has vowed--one tooth relic that became 33--Lord Buddha

has given the task of bringing to the city of Sudhium .. .

3 phe

?

Vassar:

18.... our lord the great saint Gavampati took out the one tooth relic which

became 33, from the funeral pyre, and brought to king Sirimasoka. After

obtaining the 33 relics...

19.... at the place where Lord Buddha had partook alsm-food for seven

days when he came ... the king went out . . . at the site near to well

wk
Si Adaw

(correct reading for “well” ?? ) of King Indra . . . built the 33 relic chambers

20 .... built the 33 small stone stupas and worshipped. Thus, king
Sirimasoka performed for the enshrining of the 33 relics and made
offerings, took precepts... . for life.
21..... thirty three ~ i “[aoboby knows the whereabouts of the| °
relics .... Seco wos ep mot LLing dont
(based on Blagden and U Chit Thein)

LA. C. then. no. 9

ALE kya makaw ede
ee Pesu township . 9 14/1221 /a9>. KY

Z3 TEETA. ea: o mites from haven

-41-

43 gm stw

=== [Page 57] ===
u
; pd
: Santa Shweser'
Pea! itThein,80 L Yew te
Pegu Patihariva (A) U Chit Thein, seg nce = ait
aie i the; bere f

st ot -

Loe. that, because of wishing to preach the Law to the five Vaggiyas, on gas é

the fullmoon day of the month Asat (Skt, Asadha-July) I } stk : § hate,
2.... left Ajapla.... reached Isipatana forest in Banaras

3.... At that time, Lord Buddha preached the Dhammacakka sermon to the

five Vaggiyas ....

4... all became Sotopanna (P. one who has entered the the Nobel Path). On | Fier} the. 2%
the fifth waning of the month Asat, Lord Buddha preached Anattalakkhana

7)
fs

Sutta (P. soul-less characteristic discourse) * AnTie ~Lalekhann ~Se (f

- fe Gronp>
5... the five Vaggiyas. All the five became saints. After that... “ered #2 Gromnet

P20 NM KETKS Five .

6.... preaching .... 61 saints dwelling with the five of our lords Samy « He -
7 .... because of desiring to preach the sermon to the hermits beginning “~’ kaya, « 34°

from Uruvelakassapa who are dwelling in Uruvela forest... .

8. Lord Buddha reached the district of Banaras on the Ist waning of the 272°

month Kathuik (Skt. Karttika-November) Viger so:

9. In the evening Lord Buddha went to the hermitage of the hermit Bal ae 8
Uruvela and Lord Buddha begged to reside in the fire place... eg 2tE
10. At that time, the Naga king saw the Buddha and issued smoke and ay
attaked the Buddha. Lord ae :

I. Buddha using his supernatural Power destroyed all the Naga’s mighty jut. F

slory and seized him and coiled him Paks tert
IL in the alsm bowl. Lord Buddha took out the Naga and showed it to the es

hermit Uruvelakassapa,

12. At that time Uruvelakassapa said to Lord Buddha, “My lord, from now
on your are invited to come

-42-

=== [Page 58] ===
13. everday to this place for alms.” Because of willingness to guide the
hermits to know the noble truth, Lord

14. Buddha accepted the invitation. After that night, Lord Buddha went to
the bank of Neranjara river near the ghat of Suppatittha (sp.?) and near

15. the Diwawhihara and the north of Tanakkasola and stayed there. At that |
night the four kings of 7/4 V4Aen (rronm) “nhend Spend day")

iL

ahF

16. four quarters illuminated the whole forest and attended Lord Buddha.
In the morning, the hermit

17. asked Lord Buddha and Lord Buddha told them all about the event of
the four regents of the four quarters attending him. Knowing that the
hermit said to himself : “This

18. great monk has great power and splendour indeed. But he has not
attained the sainthood like me yet.” In the next night king Indra
illuminated

19. the whole forest and attended Lord Buddha. In the morning as asked by
the hermit, Lord Buddha

20. explained to him about the attendance of Indra and the hermit thought
as before. In the next night

21. Brahma king illuminated the whole forest and attended Lord Buddha.
In the morning, by knowing such that the hermit Uruvelakassapa amazed
(garbled translation here)

22. Bvery time he knew that the devas came down as such, the hermit
Uruvelakassapa (was) astonished. After that, the hermit Uruvelakassapa

thought: “The next day, the people of Magada would come to make a great

offering. At that time how to do for the great monk not to be here.” As Lord
Buddha knew the thought of Urvuvelakasappa

<49-

=== [Page 59] ===
24. he went to take alms-food the next morning in the Uttarakura (country . pict
of northern Kuru in n. Indian) and partook the food in the bank of the lake &?

Anotatta (the big lake in the Himalayas from which several rivers flow)

and returned to usual place. The next morning

25. the hermit Uruvelakassapa asked : “Why our lord did not come to our

place?” “As I know your thought that you did not like me to come, I went ee
to get alms-food in Uttarakuru and did not come.” When ne we’
26. hearing the Lord Buddha's words, the hermit was amazed. One day, lord até.
Buddha went at night to take the robe Pansuku (P. pamsukula=rags from a

dust heap) which was wrapped on the corpse of

27. the slave woman Punna, being the slave of Sujata. A strong earthquake
occurred. In the morning the hermit asked again. After knowing the event,

the Bai

28. hermit Uruvelakassapa was amazed. After obtaining the robe, the

Buddha thought of washing it and at that moment King Indra created a

29. pond by scratching the earth with his hand. When the hermit knew

that king Indra has created a pond

30. for the Buddha, he was astonished. After that Lord Buddha thought of

rubbing the robe and king Indra knew it and created a stone slab for

31. Lord Buddha to rub the robe. When the hermit knew that king Indra

has created a stone

32. slab he admired. After rubbing the robe Lord Buddha thought of

coming up from the pond and felt to pull a support. Then the spirit of the

Klon tree (P. rayayatana) knew it and lowered down a branch for Lord Fajey pines
33. Buddha to pull in coming up the pond. By seeing that Uruvelakassapa es
admired. After that the Buddha thought : “Where shall I dry

34. the robe?" King Indra knew the Buddha's thought and created a big Flor She
stone slab and the Buddha dried

-44-

=== [Page 60] ===
35. the robe. The hermit Uruvelakassapa was astonished by knowing that
king Indra has created the big stone slab for the Buddha to

36. dry the robe. One day, at the time close to partake the alms-food, the
hermit himself went to invite Lord Buddha. "You go first. I will

37 come later,” said the Buddha. By his supernatural power, Lord Buddha
went to take the big Bugenia fruit, because of which this continent got the
Name Jambudip (the continent tying south of Mt. Meru), and before the
hermit's

38. arrival, the Buddha arrived earlier at the hermit's hermitage. “From
what way my lord comes and arrives earlier than me?,” asked the hermit.
“I went to take the big Eugenia fruit at Himalaya and now | have come.”
Thus lord

39. Buddha said and showed the Bugenia fruit. By seeing it the hermit
admired (it). After that the hermit informed the Buddha to come for alms-
40. food at his hermitage again. “You go first. 1 wil come later." Lord
Buddha said and went to get the mango fruit near the big Bugenia fruit and
quickly came to the hermitage. The hermit said : " My lord arrived earlier
than me indeed!"

41. I went to get the mango fruit which is near the Bugenia fruit and now I
have come.” Said Buddha and

42. showed up the mango fruit. At that time the hermit was amazed. Later
one, life before, Lord Buddh sent back the hermit and went to get emblic
myrobalan

43. fruit tying near the Bugenia fruit and came back earlier than the hermit

and showed him the fruit. The hermit was astonished. Later on, lord
Buddha

-45-

=== [Page 61] ===
44. sent back the hermit and went to get chubulic myrobalan fruit lying
near the big Bugenia fruit and came back before the hermit and showed
him the fruit. The hermit was amazed. Later,

45. the Buddha sent back the hermit and with his supernatural power,
went up to the Tavatimsa heaven and took the Brythrina Indica fruit and
came down and showed it to the hermit. The hermit was amazed. Later on,
the 500 hermits

46. came to offer fire. They bagan to break 500 fire wood pieces. Lord
Buddha vowed that let not the firewood break. As

47. they could not break the firewood, they begged Lord Buddha and Lord
Buddha made a vow and they could break all 500 pieces of firewood. The
500 hermits were amazed.

48. Lord Buddha made a vow for not let them make fire (literal) and they
could not make fire. So they begged the Buddha and the

49. Buddha made a vow to enable them to make fire

Evythninn varleste= Teoiae Cor tree

-46-

G20 hev mt
Fivewe

=== [Page 62] ===
Pegu Patihariya (B) U Chit Thein, 81

50. Then the 500 firewood pieces began to burn. All the 500 hermits were
astonished. After that Lord Buddha made a vow. “May

51. they cannot extinguish the fire!” So they were unable to put out the fire
and they begged Lord for permission. Lord Buddha made a vow to enable
them to

52. extinguish the fire and they could put out the fire. So they admired
Lord Buddha.

53. One night in the cold and dry season, the 500 hermits went down to
Neranjara river

54. to bathe. When they came up to enable them to warm up, Lord Buddha
created 500 firebrands on the bank of Neranjara

55. river. When the 500 hermits came up from the river, they got the
chance of warming up the such firebrands. At

56. that time, the 500 hermits said, "This great monk

57. So saying they were amazed. From there, lord Buddha went to the place
at north of the ghat of

58. Suppatittha and walked to and from from east to West and from west to |
east at the bank of the Neranjara

59. river. At that time, heavy rain came and then banks of the river
flooded. Lord

60. Buddha made a vow. “May this earth on which I am walking to and fro
be not wet and

61. let it have dust and let the water surround it and let it be like a

chamber of passage!” At that time, the hermit Uruvelakassapa saw the

-47-

ghi

=== [Page 63] ===
62. flood and thought that the great monk must be floating so he took a
boat and came to rescue.

63. When the hermit came and saw that the Lord Buddha was walking to
and from on the dust surrounded by water, he was amazed. From the time,
64. Lord Buddha has put the | Naga in the alms-bow! until Lord Buddha was
walking to and from from the passage with dust, Patihariya
65. together with ..... three thousand and five hundred. Another group of
Patihariya
66. of sixteen. Lord Buddha has shown his supernatural power and the
hermit admired . But the hermit considred that this great monk has not
attained arahantship
67 (saint) like him yet. At that time Lord Buddha said to the hermit
Uruvelakassapa, " Hey hermit, you said you are a saint. But you have not
become a saint. You do not even know the law of Patipatti (conduct .
practice) necessary to come a saint.” Then the hermit got sayvega
68 (P. anxiety, repentance, religious emotion) and said, “Yes. I have not
become a saint and I do not really know a certain law of Patipatti which is
necessary to become a saint.” After saying thus the hermit Uruvelakassapa
together with five hundred hermits then became monks at the foot of Lord
Buddha. The hermit Nadikassapa seing the 500 hermits have become fl
monks, he and togehter with 300 hermits
70. became monks. The hermit Gayakassapa togeteher with 200 hermits
also became monks. Lord Buddha uttered, " Btha Bhikkhu!” and all one
thousand of them were ordained as monks.
(P. etha= here, upasampadeti, to ordain. Lord Buddha has also used the
phrase "Ehi Bhikkhu” in ordaining his disciples. It is the oldest formula of
admission to the order, meaning “come o, monks.” )

Based on U Chit Thein’s text.

-48-

=== [Page 64] ===
Pegu Thingandan Inscription 1] 841 / 1479 AD. U Chit Thein, 77

fire ert :
1-4 illigible fot OE ek
Shnegmsy! A wil
2 wobeet 2
5. Wednesday.... Sarre. n= wee
6.....from there ... ferred» 19477

7....from there...

Bia banyan tree (Ajapala) Ne ae «

: baal
9 aa Shwepv5y | ws. F
ace in the island .... [term 1 te SoA
10... . to the youth

4yom Banter

j Feat one given....
Brees lord.
14.... banyan

IS. .. His Majesty, lord of elephant ...

16... many . . . His Majesty, lord of elephant . .

17... in theyear 841 (1479 A.D.) the 5th waning of Asat (Jul) on Thursday | |
at the rising constellatin Pisces.

18..... our lord the clergy ...

19.... from there ...

20... . two yojana (P. yojana= 7 miles)

21.... north of...

22... that anger... wind...

VE ial arrrived ....

= ee
24....twenty...from Murathi °”~“* fe
pein i ls bs

25... .Rajagraha.... Rajagraha ... from the bank of Neranjara....
26.... reached Kantari... from there ... Rantarni ?
27.... .one... our lords... .

-49-

=== [Page 65] ===
28.... between ...river....
2955.5. stone ....

30... a pagoda called...
31.... water of that river...
32.... Lord Buddha .... big
33.... towards ... pagoda

aot gr wh: thats 62 :
Bhumicankamanapaya Inscription 841/1479 AD.  UChit Thein,73_£i#T/2/ i pavnsd
St Ore
Tee aby, shed:

1. One day our lord the exalted Budha goes out from his dwelling place and
walks down towards north of the the ghat of Supatitha and walks to and

——

from from east to west and from west to east.

2. Lord Buddha walks to and from at the bank of Neranjara river. At that
time a heavy rain came and the bank of the river Neranjara submerged
under

3. water. At that time, Lord Buddha makes a vow : “Let the earth on which
I am walking be not wet and let the dust appear. Let the water flow
outside my walking chamber all around!"

4. At that time the hermit Uruwerakassapa thinks that the great Samana is
floating on water and takes a boat and comes out

5. on rescue. After searching they are so astonished to see that Lord
Buddha

6. is walking on the dust which is like a chamber surrounded by water.

7. At the place which Lord Buddha walks to and from, former kings who

!
were pious and delighted in religion, built two stupas each at two ends of
the walking passage.

_—_—_———

-50-

=== [Page 66] ===
8. The stupa at the eastern ends has fallen down due to the sliding of the
river bank. Only one stupa at the western end has remained. In our
country of Ramannadesa, by imitating the stupa at the end of the walking
passage, according to the plan and its position from Mahabodhi, His
Majesty, lord of White Elephant, cause ...

Yasura governor of Drala town in the year 841 of common era (1479 A.D.) 8) Ae
the 5th waxing of the month Asat (Skt. Ashada= July) on Thursday, at the Da LA 3

rising of the constellation Pisces, to build this Bhumicankamana pagoda.

Based on U Chit Thein’s text ; compare with Blagden’s Shwegugyi Pagoda
Inscription, EB. IV, Pt. 1, pp. 17-19.
# Adivatea "!

Upakasamagama Pagoda Inscription 841/1479 UChit Thein, 76 /42//2¢- z
IVS perry. if

(It is to the north of Shwegugyi)
1 The lord of merit, our Lord Buddha while sitting under the Ajapala
banyan tree, feels not to preach the doctine to any being in the three
worlds.
2. At that time, the Mahabrahma knows the feeling of Lord Buddha comes
down
3. and pays respects to Buddha and because of wishing the Buddha to
preach
4. the law to beings, asks a boon to Lord Buddha, Lord Buddha granted
5. the boon to Mahabrahma and for the sake of preaching his doctrine to
the five waggiyas (sic) (hermits) who are in the
6. deer forest known as Isipatanamiga (sp. Is miga for skt. mrga?) in the
district of Banaras, Lord Buddha leaves the 8 the Ajapala tree tree on the f rullmoon / /
day of the month Asat.

-5 1-

=== [Page 67] ===
7. When Lord Buddha reached the place between Mahabodhi and Mt.
Gayasisa, Ajiwaka approached and
8. asked a question. After hearing the answer replied by Lord Buddha,
Ajiwaka was pleased and delighted
9. at Lord Buddha. From Ajiwaka went to Wanga village. In the place
between
10. Mahabodhi and Mt. Gayasisa, the former pious kings who have faith in
religion starting from king Asoka--
1. dham marat built a pagoda known as Upakasamagama and worshipped .
12. In our land of Ramannadesa, also, imitatiing that place, according to the
model of that Upakasamagama
13. pagoda between Mahabodhi and Mt. Gayasisa His Majesty, Lord of
elephant, ordered the governor of Mruin namely
14. Aai Gam Bin to build Upakasamagama also called Jibbala--according to
the model of that Upakasmagama pagoda situated between Mahabodhi and
15. Mt. Gayasisa--about three gawuta (league, little less than 2 miles)
distant. This Upakasamagama pagoda was built according to the model of
that Upakasamagama pagoda situated between Mahabodhi
16. and Mt. Gayasisa. In this our land regarding it as the original paogoda,
this Upakasamagama pagoda was built in the year 841 (1479 A.D.), the 5th
waxing of Asat on
17. Thursday at the rising planet of Pisces,

(Based on U Chit Thein only)

pi pawk Keath é
pi o4
pnettl pela on

Sane olny es reac,

Peen park pelea, han atcefie
Me Agivtha re -52-
GOES ISOOW

Geyesis ee NM, Ky pl]

=== [Page 68] ===
PLAN
OF
SHWEGUGY! AND AJAPALA
PAGODAS
Scale=100 feet! inch

vwoo9"d vIvdYry

NB.
2,3, 4,5,6«Mounds

+ mae.
head of

yaosve 1KeNSzMHS

right hand corr
first words on t
the

heads of cats, *
ma (rap) tia.
of Mara with r
ut contains tv
of Mara with
demon and st
Burmese minc
common amo
colloquially, 4
appearance un
reaching almo
pot in Haswell
think, pure T
Malay Ari's';
the Talaing |
and I can not
known that th
it may be that
a knife or dag
However the
Talaing word
itself leave no
is foreign to I

Doubtles
along the wi
vegetation.
+ in some muse

Ajapala tree.
completely ct
It is at this S
“ was subjecter
retrieve their
numerous pl
Gressed and:
in private ct

+ while examin
the latter duy

Agen
original brick ait
ee age

=== [Page 69] ===
VOLUME IV
Rie 10. ¢.
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANI

LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS
OF BURMA

EDITED BY

U MYA

SUPERINTENDENT, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY, BURMA CIRCLE

MON INSCRIPTIONS
Section II—The Mediaeval Mén Records

Nos. XITI—XVIII

BY

Cc. O. BLAGDEN

RANGOON
SUPERINTENDENT, GOVT. PRINTING AND STATIONERY, BURMA
1934
ts

cB

PART I

CA

see frebiny

fe hn ods

=== [Page 70] ===
CONTENTS.

MON INSCRIPTIONS ee fh ary

No. XIII—An_Inscriprion OF THE AJAPALA PAGODA,

e
Pecu.
/ No. XIV.—AN Inscriprion OF THE SHWEGUGYI PaGoDa,
platelets
Pecu. %
No. XV.—AN INscrIPTION OF THE SHWEDAGON PaGopa,
v Rancoon. sae

VY No. XVI.—AN InscriPrion OF THE YATHEMYO MONASTERY,
PrEcu.

No. XVII.—AN InscrIPriON OF THE KyAK Pan PaGopa,
Pecu.

a No. XVIII—An InscriPTION OF THE GaUNGZEGYUN
Pacopa, PEGu.

| PosTscRIPT ... oe on ae

causa prtte

Ientyars
Cis. por ToSz-
(orey Paci rea tim J

PARA.

8488

89—90

91-94

95—96

97-98

99

100

‘2 j
[126 B (1766 }

Pace
14
16 S

vis X +2 7:

2043 ~L

44-52 wi
53—59 vA :

60—64

64

=== [Page 71] ===
©

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA

MON INSCRIPTIONS.
No. XIII.
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE AJAPALA Pacopa, Pgcu.

Descriptive Account.

84". This record is engraved on two faces (presumably: of the same
stone), the parts occupied by the lettering here transcribed being on Face
A 4 ft. in height by 3 ft. 9 in. in breadth and on Face B 3 ft, 2 in. by
3 ft. 6 in. The letters are about + in. high, letter ¢ is about ¥ in. long,
and the interlinear space is about 1 in. Though a good deal weathered, as
are many Of the other stone inscriptions of Lower Burma, this one is still
for the most part legible.

85. Like the two following inscriptions, it is connected with a sacred
building erected in commemoration of episodes in the life of Buddha
shortly before or after his attainment of supreme enlightenment. -

In this case the events are those which occurred under an Indian
fig-tree (or banyan, Ficus Iitdica) known as the Ajapala, or goatherds’, fig-
tree, in the immediate neighbourhood of the Bodhi tree under which the

supreme enlightenment was attained. Before going to sit under the Bodhi —

tree, the Bodhisattva rested under the Ajapala fig-tree, where he received
from the maiden Sujata an offering of rice cooked in milk (A 1—22).
The next seven weeks, beginning with the one during which he became a
Buddha under the Bodhi tree, are especially celebrated. After his attain-
ment of Buddhahood he spent another week gazing steadfastly at the
Bodhi tree and satisfied the devas of his Buddhahood by performing a
miracle ; during the third week he walked up and down a “cloistered
walk” which they prepared for him. These incidents are commemorated
in the next record, No. XIV. The fourth week was spent in a “house of

* Numbering of the paragraphs in this part is continued from Part I of Volume III,

e

PECK Ghs

ay

=== [Page 72] ===
* t
2 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (vor. Iv

gems", also prepared by the devas and mentioned on Face A of the
present record, 1. 24, from which he then returned to the Ajapala fig-tree
to spend the fifth week (A 23-4). ‘During this week he was visited by a
Brahman, to whose question, as to what really constituted a Brahman he
replied by laying stress on: ethical qualifications, not on caste and birth
(A 25-6). Another event in this week was the recognition by the evil
spirit Mara of his failure in his conflict with Buddha and the fruitless
efforts of Mara’s three daughters, the personifications of the passions, to
tempt the enlightened one (A 26-35). The sixth week was spent under a
Mucalinda tree (Barringtonia acutangula), where a Naga king, also named
Mucalinda, sheltered him from the rain with his hood ; and the seventh: .
under a Rajayatana tree (believed to be Buchanania latifolia) where he

was visited by two travelling merchants, Tapussa and Bhallika, to whom‘he Se,
gave eight hairs from his head, which according to the traditions of Burma
are now enshrined in the Shwedagon Pagoda at Rangoon. This ‘episode, .:
as well as much of the preceding, is related on Face A of No. XV, '-but
unfortunately that part of the record is in a very damaged condition,
After these seven celebrated weeks, Buddha returned again to the Ajapala
fig-tree and there reflected as to whether he should preach the Law, and,
if so, to whom. This is related in our present record, and when he had

decided the matter in his mind he left the Ajapala fig-tree to go to th
region of Benares (B 1-—21).

86. The last four lines of our record tell of the building of 1
Ajapala pagoda at Pegu in imitation of the one that had been erected I
before on the site of the Ajapala fig-tree. It is unfortunate that
deal is missing in the text here. In the last line there is a date, but
year number is not quite certain. If the text as here printed repri
the true reading of the year, the date fell into the summer of 1480.

As however both the year and the week-day are in doubt,
possible to check it.

87. For the episodes in the life of Buddha that have ‘been
noted in § 85, reference can be made to various translations from Bi
works, among which the following have been consulted :— i

T. W. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Birth Stories, Vol. I, Lo

(especially the revised edition by Mrs. Rhys Davids, London, -n.
on the Nidanakatha, ‘

=== [Page 73] ===
ry ¢

PART 1] _. MON INSCRIPTIONS ee |

The Mahavagga of the Vinaya Pitaka, translated by T. W. Rhys
Davids and H. Oldenberg, in Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XIII, °
Oxford, 1881.

E. H. Brewster, The Life of Gotama the Buddha, London, 1926.
The Sarhyutta Nikaya of the Sutta Pitaka, Book IV, Sierae || :

translated by Mrs. Rhys Davids in The Book of Kindred Sayings, London,
1917 (Part I, Sagatha-Vagga, p. 153-9).

P. Bigandet, The Life or Legend of Gaudama, Vol. I, 3rd ed.,
London, 1880. :

In my notes I have given mainly references from the last named
work as it is Particularly connected with Burma.

88. It should perhaps be mentioned here that at the Upakasamaga (or che
Bhikkhunima) pagoda, Pegu, there is a fragmentary inscription of which
lines 1 to 7 contain a much abridged version Corresponding roughly to
parts of lines 2, 3, 6—10, 20 and 21 of Face B of our record. A .

comparison of the two has been of some assistance in thé reading of
doubtful words in both.

ae
~~ O AS 3
1. II If Bodhisaft pui]y lu{kau fJufrau cnajm pa dukka[rachariy[a]

pda[y Uruwela tuy] IJ [het ma cwin brjapui[n? mJa(j)jhimapatipat®
ma dah rah gah II dhar

te

2. paffija [sat]}i [samadh]i gafh jJno[k mar a tuy] II (pday] prayam
[batarh] (14)' [bra]ma[k kitu? ba[sak gah go]’ fa(t s]wap [lJapo’
ja[m]nok

' Above the continuous text and separated from it by an empty space of two to three inches, there is
a replica of Il, 1 and 2 of the text as far as the word swap (which in the replica is near the beginning
of its third line). It has the variant reading dukkaracaviyat (I. 1) and Probably Ratu (I. 2), Much of it is
illegible, -

* Ct. 1 A 52, XII D 39, J 17, 18, In the last two places the ceading should be bapuin,

* The complex letter occurring here Probably represents only jh, not jjh, ee

‘There is no room for the words, so it is assumed that the fourteen"
figures. As to the date, see the note on the’ text,

* Possibly katu,

is expressed in numeral

=== [Page 74] ===
é
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1v

3. masun Praka [tuy II tradah’ [ma sgo’ dah kyak] (cmat)* [gah
ph[yuih lar cuit ra II pday thay] si [brapeh] (gah) [yah lana]
ga{h klJon Ibuit k[u] j[rjaku

4. [tluy II pralp a] jafren jray slum’ Aja[phala [tuy I]... . (tuy)
+... (wen)... *[pindapat-glah II... .. (tuy II) [gata ket FY
bwai . . n} duih brama[k dand]ay :

5. [ke]t tnarh [jJray tu[y] II [BJodhisa{t dmaJi [tJau ra [II pday
prayam gah II Sujata thi[y ma] c(u)i[n dah tau kwon] (samaeh)*
[Senani gah] kha [ma dah] samat lwuit [te]- i

6. [' gah] I [& pday t]narn [jray sum] Ajapa{la tuy II kha ey
ma go’ gayon tuy ma] nom jati]........ [II pday patis
dhi ey] kufiJp [t]la gafh] II kwon [trjuh

7. mwaly II ey go’ ma II braman dak] ta[h hei ey sbali] (ta) [ey
fii gah tuy II pa lar patthana)...... (tuy) [II atuia patthana:
deh ma pa gah] dok pen uiw [t]uy II he-

8. [t] ma [sbal]i dewa{t]au [jray sum Ajapala gah II] bra{m,
(dak tah gah deh tw]im phyufiJn lar [ra I] dik brau “Puy
tuy ma] cu[in dah tJau [mbo]’ tafh deh gah) II [d]e[h] cafka
tu}-

9. y [kJuliw tit 4] Aah [t]ah da[maa ma sbali dewaltau [ra Tl
gah Punna tit 4 tuy II] fiat ket Bodhisat ma gata kel
duih® bram&k] ma dan{d]a[y dmaa tnarh jra}- :

10. [y] s(ulm I no [jraku lyah ma dre]p ¢{it 4 gah] II [uit
janok] tnarh [chu ma] dafh s]a[k thar uit gah deh fiat’
II na jraku hen dewatau ma sduJi [bali]

1 Fairly -probable reading.

* Or sutim, %

2 The preceding looks like sgaweii wt (or ww), If the first word is meant for sganed it §
“to wander”, ie, collecting alms.

* Looks like ban or pan.

* The reading is nearly certain,

* Looks like duiy.

=== [Page 75] ===
PART 1]

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

MON INSCRIPTIONS’ 5

(bakar pluily rw]o[f sdah JI.deh k]sap [tuy deh] cau [a IT
atuin’ trjada[h] de[h ma fiat gah deh huim ku Sujata ra] II
kh[a gah] Suja[ta sdik mKu)ik milp cui[t pa]}-

ma{h san tlu[y II th]ah thfor ma nwom] “bnat [iuh mwoy, lak
kasap gah II cut brapen bramian’ uit suim tuy II°na thah]
thfor m]wafy] (ra) [c-aa grop braman’ gah t]uy na

[ya]t ma glwu c-Jah gah [gwi tuy II na kriya thar uit suim gah
ghi gfiat ket tlu[y II thah thor suim braman gah II kdip gah
yuiw ke}t [t]uly II na a}nfuJbho[w ma j]nfo]-

(k] tlah gafh] II [k]w[om kJu [dik brau Punna gah tit 4 ra II
kha gah na jamhay hen na lyjah [jrak]a Bodhisat ma krajo’
(dmaf tau gah 11) ufit kJu[i} janfok tnam chu ma dah sa]}-

{k] thor gah [deh/fja[t ket, t]u[y II samtim dewatau jray sum
hen lar] c{uit tuy II suim kuiw ma kuiw braman‘ hen jo’ joy
~ [a tJuly II [thah] tho[r ma cut]

p{rjaman gah phy[uih nJu lata [kdip tu]y [II yat kambu ma gwi]
p{raman gah sah kle’ tuy II thah thor ma grop gah pok k]l[e’
tuy II na padJak [thor]...... [nlp eet

lafr] na dak mramar gah deh] ra[p ket t}uy II [prap] a (jaren
Bodhisat tuy deh dm&n tau II pday kala gah II. praben
Ghatikara Mahabruim ma kuiw] (d).

(n). [n* a] ra Il Bfodhisat] (ha) [fat] prafben gah t]uy II [tay
stum gah rJa(lah) [tuy dJun [kJe[t d]a{k ra II kha gah Suljfata
prap 4 tuy II thah thor tuy] (ma pe)-

(a tjau na prama{n] d[ak tah glah II drabu[t cJuft] la[ta gata
tay BoJrisat’ ra II [kh]a ga[h rau wo’ deh] (gah II yo’) [tila]
ey dewa[tau patthana tuy ma ey rada]-

1 Looks like atuiw,

? Perhaps praman,

3 For kuiw,

* Perhaps praman,

* Possibly danan or dandan, Cf, VII A 3,
* For Bodhisat,

=== [Page 76] ===
20.

-21.

22.
gah pa pajr[ibho}k [praman gah ra] II II pda[y] than jalrlefs
bodhi gah II lukau ba coh dJac{am tia]-

23. [y pan sattaha gah II k]ya(k] trey dm[4Ja [tJuly hea I
thay] cafh] pi {bram&k k}i[t}u {jih] gah [II ylab (anf
ky]a[k tray daloh’ ktuiw a] Il :

24. [na ratanjaghara [tuy Il a dmia tau) (a)sma{r tn:
sJurh[m] Aja[pala tuy] lu[kJau da{pah tiay] gafh IT bic]al
ket [dhar c]as[uih ket] dra[sok phalasamapat] :

25. [tuy] kfyak trlay d[marh]’ tau [11] IT [pday kala gah] bali
mwafy ma himu] (Hunhukajati® gah) [prap] tlua, fi
sram[4n ku ky]ak [tray [t]uly II kyak tray le}- re

26. [r sah kuilw [srama}n [ku deh ra] II (10) pld]ai (kal
tray ma dman pdai phar Ajap]a[la] gafh kuim] II sf}
prfap 4 tlju[A-jaren® ky}sk [tray t]uly] (II)... 2.
ui}

27. [t] cufit ma phyJu[i}h sa{nnithan] tradah k[yak tray
ky[ak cmat II tradah plufgglufi]Jw [ma c-ah cmat
hfuim tuy II deh] bluiw 4 nor jray Ajapala IT bwoy:

1 For dalok?

? For dmdh.

* For Huhutikajatt.

4 For kyak.
‘The # of fun appears to be superscript over the f of jarer.
© The missing word looks something like Jahuim, “ speech",

into the passage.

[voL.. Iv
[na mik tarh] j[oA tila ey gah II dok pen ku ey tuy] ra [II] rau
paftthan]Ja cui[t] ey dilk ma] d[ok pen] (gah) [hen II patthan}a
cui[t tila ey ler kuiw dok} it

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA

[pei fii gah tuy IJ thah thor tluy [ma nwom yuh [mway lak]
kafs}a[p gah] . . (k ku br]. - (y) (eluly 11 Sujata twak chau £
ra II kha gah Bodhisat twak cui}

[h a] pday [cram kruJa Nerafijara tu[y II pday cniJh Su[patit

but it seems diffe

=== [Page 77] ===
part 1] MON ‘INSCRIPTIONS * 7

28. bframdk] (gah) [twak a tuy II pday dor t}arau [jnok deh kajo”
tuy II carit cah tarJau ga{h] de[h] cari[t ket tuy deh dawin]
(den) [dmarn® tau II kha [gah]

29. [tradok cuit deh that lwon san tuy II tan tuy ma deh]... .*[d]
... [lor] pldjai kana(t)’ [deJh [k]Ju[im ler Ta(luy) [e(u)it
kuim] (deh) [ha tim ra II kha]

‘30. [Ma ma laluy cuit gah II smin] I[n go]’ [lapah ket tuy II smin
In (h)uim ku PaficasiJkha [ihah gah II kha gah kw(a)n_ brjau

Ma [pi tuy ma himu] (II) [Tanha IT Alra{ti]
"31. [IT Raga II gah fiat ket s]m[in mba deh tuy ma den] d[m]i[a
tau gah II cuih tluh] ....------ “ [ku mJba dfeJh [tluly

Ul prap] 4 [jaren kyak tray] . . . (ra) [II] rup

32, [brau samat Iwut p]i [klarh mwai wa] II [rjup brau lwut ma ha

go]’ [kwan pi klarh mwoy wa II rup brau ma go’ kwa]n mwaly
pi klarh mJwfoy w}t [II rup] bfrau ma go’ kwan ba pi klarh

-mwoly
33. [wa II rup brau ma eieey pi klarn mwoy wa II rup
Woy [wa II rau wo’ turau he}i

brau ma jnok fii pi klam
[b]rau pi pi [klath deh to’] (nimit bdah)* [tuy II deh]

[to’ prap  jare(n-)kyak* tray] (tuy deh to)” huilm juim] (tau)
[ku kyak tray deh to’ ha go’ akhwon deh to’ tuy] (deh to’)

[kalen cau]

34.

35. [jaren mba deh to’ ra II II]

\ Between ajo’ and fuy there is either an original flaw in the stone or some small word (such at
i has been effaced.

2 For dman.

* Conceivably kanak.
“There are two words here that have nof been identified. Each seems to begin and end with

orf.
* These two words seem almost cerlain readings, though the second one might be bat,

| “It is very doubtful whether there is any superscript # here at all.
| 7 Conjectural restoration,

=== [Page 78] ===
> sect 3

Le ©
BE Ag v ; “4 eo Fs
: Ge Oy @: ay
8 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vor WS
B
; IX] kh{a] til ie tera tay lives Abiet oLicevess 7 afohU
_ 1. [1 1) khfa) tile pluiy kya y] Ee ieee

Rajayatana dapah tiay July gah II tit tlun
tuy kale]

2. p[lan [8] pdaly than’ jray su(rh)m
~ samapati kyak tray dma’ tau ra
pday than gah] ss

3. [glasa[p cuit] mwam’ ma cdi that ktuiw dah ku kyak tray rl
dhfar tuy ma ey kuli go’ gran ke}t®)(wo’)' [gah II sjoh ler sj
san II II] pais

4. s[j(ujin na fiah s]fa[t san] II s[jJuifi na fiah s]gra[n ket san IY.

(aiy tdim)* [san II at]ufiJh dhar ma [ey go’ gran ket] (wo’)* [e
ma twah ku fiah c-an] II [fiah ha gran] ‘{i]-

Ajapala II] (casuin ket) [phala-
II pday kala tuy ma dma

5, [m] ra sdah [mJA IJ [lam-Jof la[m]-a[t] j[r}afk]u [ey hen ma s
uiw so] II atu[ija [dhJar ma [ey go]’ graf ket wo’ gah] II.
(h)ea}’ spa ke[w srajuin tladui-

6. [a II s-aly [puray spujau sak t]uy II [sdmaa ket ra IL
caja [ta ey ha mik tw]ah ra gah tuy II. [clu[it mway [mJ
t{uy] ma spa (an’ kabut) [pday ma stwah] dhar [ku] 6

7. fafh gah] k[tuliw [dah] ku kyak trafy ra II khia
[Sahampati Maha]brui[m tim ke]t [gasap] cui[t’ kyak
II grakwom bruim grakwom dewa[t]au ma

1 ‘The reading is not quite certain, but cf, A 24,

+ Between dmd and 7 there is an original flaw which also separates ¢ from & fin

* Far meay,

“In I, 3, 4, it is possible to read tc’ instead of wo’ but in 1, 5 the reading wo’ is cer

* ‘Though the letters seem fairly clear the actual reading is doubtful because the wards!
definitely identified, :

©The word heii might perhaps be read ther.

7 It might be-possible to read ara,

* Presumably for gah, and translated accordingly.

* Presumably for tray.

=== [Page 79] ===
Parr 1] - MON INSGRIPTIONS ‘ 9

8. [thu ay Plday cah Inim] cak{kjawa [gah trawt] balwuii ket tuy
II: palp’ a jalreh_kyak] tray ra [II] kha gah k]baa mway duih
Pan{dah ti] yok ket samim? ‘ta- .

9. need Ckyak] tram’ tuly "IT het tuy ma] (sgo’)* [kuiw twah
aw. ku sat gamluija gafh TI) att wuiw ku k[yfk tray ra II
Ckyak tray tJun ler

10. [kjuiw wuilw ku S}ahampa[ti Mahabruim tuy hea II]......
a [tialy gah II pday than trawi w[a] Mafha]bodhfi glah
guim' IT kyak tray gaigefa plifn}da{phalt] :

11, tuy I d{m&a tau pdaly thla[n gah] ra 11 [pday. payam saga]
(thay) [cah pan bramk [kitu a(sa)t gah II gasap rau wok]’
k(t]ui[w] dah ku [k]yak tray ra IT isi A{tjara

12. [K]ala[ma] gah II [ma salah taJbah [k]u[iw dhaw] (lo)... .
[samapat’ dap&h] (ku ey dah) ufiw] da ci Il [upaka jnok (ku
ey san IT ku isi A[|Jara Kala-

13. [ma] hen [ey ma glap gwlor stwah dhjar [twa ra Tau gah] (ksap
tuy) [II kha gah] (tradah isi) [Alara]... plday dapah thay
ma Iwon t]u[y ma khy(u)it 4 IT] ma 4

14. k{t]uiw dah] p[day akiJeca[fiayatan]Jabhu{m" gah tim] (ket) [tuy
II isi) Alara] (Kalama) [ha mway ra ci IT is}i U[d]aka kwon
[Ram] tu[n ler II het tuy ma]

" For prapr/

* For samip.

* This seems the most likely reading. At first I was inclined to read -or ma,

* There is no virama visible on the ft, *

§ For kuim,

* For wo’. :
4 in This looks like Jokiyasamapat, which seems improbable a lokkufarasamapat would be more
tuitable,

* Restored, but supported to some extent by traces of letters,

"1 take this to be an error for’ tla,

” Almost certain, .

" Possibly wo',

" For akifcafifia’, in Pali spelling,

2

=== [Page 80] ===
10 ‘EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. IV

yatanasamapat dah ui’

15. [deh salah tabah kuiw dhar. newa[safianasafia, ;
s : : [ku isi Udaka hen

da ci II] (jnok tau) {upaka] ku [ey]. -- >
ey ma ga}

. 16. [p gwor stwah dhar tla’ ra gah tuy II gasaj
dah tun II] (kha gah) [tradah isi] Udaka ma
ba[tarh gah ma 4 ktuiw] (dah)

p cuit kyak tray ktuiw
khyuit [traday]

17. [pday newasafianasafayatana]bhum [gah] (tim) [ket tuy Il isi]
cawar! to’) ma klo[n

(Udaka ha) [mway ra ci II tipuin pac
bluift] .:. [ku ey] (kha)

18. [ma pa dukkaracariyat gah IJer II [u]paka jnok ku ey sa]n da[h]
uifw da ci II ku tipuin paccawJar [to’ hen] ey ma [gap gwior
s[twah dhar tla’ rwo]}-

194 {fA} Mia j. Ble Res afk aes [’ ci IJ] tipui{n paccawor] (to?

tau)* [pday than tuy deh] to’ [ma] dmg* ro [g]ah tuly II kyak
tray ksap bicarana] (mwa)- :

20. (y tuy)’ [II tradah tila puin paccawor to’] (ma pa datau)’”* [pda
dun Baranast pdlay grlip Isipa[t]ana ga{h tim ket] tuy [IIe
s-4] (dua Bara)-

21. (nasi fii) [glah [tuy] II [pd]ay [thay si] brape[a kitu asat gah

I} (HW) «sy oe die 8

22. [jray sum Aljapafla tuy] ma cui[n dah tau] (than) [paribho
tray gah smi ma nwom ku puin tamla] (ma sjun) [sduik
sasana] (ma pa) [tarh ku] : hes

For wiv.
* Looks like Anif and is perhaps for Auim,
3 Or kla.
« For paficawar (Sanskrit paftcavargya), The Pali form is pafcavaggiya,
§ Or kia, et z
* Very doubifl, especially the second word, which might perhaps be read rm rau
For fo', It is, however, conceivable that the letter read ma i which
pee ia is really the final which
* For dmdi.
* Cf VIIA 1,
%© This seems to be the actual reading ; but the Upakasamiga inscripti
i ion, 1.
context is not quite identical, . eee Nena
4 This supposed reading would be an error for smar ; but both wotds are doubtful,

Cd

=== [Page 81] ===
part 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS * 11

23. (smin) [Asokadhammarat ta gah IJ dak lo}r [ceti mway Japalaceti-
(ya)' tuy ma tluf tau pujau saka II II pday than puiy Rama-
fladesa] fie. %c0-) 35 =

24, .... [I(e)r II ptup] (ca)? [kuiw Ajapalace’ te’ gah tuy atuin
duih tlan] (ca)... (than) [te’ hen II tila fiah tila cin
batan]

ph vera rran ma [himu Maharaja] . . . . (tuai)® [II pdai sakkarat
84(2) kitu asat masun crawek] (thay)... ... {lak min] (gah)
{II] (ma kuiw kanarh lor)* [Ajapalaceti] (wo’)......

Translation.

A.

Our Bodhisattva, having for six years practised asceticism in Uruvela,’
because of* following the proper middle way, the principles of (2) wisdom,
attention and meditation had grown great (in him). In the night of the
(14th ?)° of the waxing (half) of the month of Vaisakha he beheld five
great (3) dreams and made up his mind that he was to achieve (true ?)
Buddhahood. On the full moon festival day, early in the morning, after nw Mf
attending to himself,’” (4) he approached the Ajapala fig-tree (and having ?)

Etec aac sete alms," (having ?) ......., facing towards ... the

eastern quarter (and) resting (5) under the fig-tree, our Bodhisattva

emained (there). .
At that time Sujata, who was the daughter of the (rich man ?) Senani,”

hile she was still a maiden, (6) having gone to the Ajapala fig-tree, had

| vaient

1 For Ajapala’.

* Doubtful. .

+ For Ajapalacctl.

* This might be wo’,

§ Very doubtful. : 5

® Mostly a conjectural restoration, but the traces of letters still legible make it probable,

1 Cf, Bigandet, I 72-6, Uruvela was a forest country,

* The original seems ambiguous : either “in order to follow" or “because he followed” (in the latter .
fase giving the reason why he attained the higher facullies mentioned immediately afterwards), But for
¢ first sense one would expect scwin (cf, Il. 7, 8 infra),

* This, though illegible, must be the right reading. Cf. Bigandet, 1 79—81.

® Or “to his parson.” Bigandel, I 81, has “washed his hands and face, put on his dress,”

" See the note on the text.

1 This was the name both of Sujita’s father and of the village where they lived (Buddhist Birth
tories, p, 184), But Bigandet, I 77, has it, spelt in the Burmese fashion, under the form “ Thena,”

=== [Page 82] ===
“12 PIGRAPHIA, BIRMANICA [vou 1v

said, ‘When I have got a husbund of (suitable ?) family, (and if) in my
first confinement I get (7) a male child, I will offer rice cooked in milk’
to my (lord 2),” (thus she) prayed’... . The prayer’ she had made
having been fulfilled, in order (8) to make an offering to the deva of the
Ajapala fig-tree, she boiled milk rice (and) sent Puna,’ a female slave whom
she employed, who had been her foster-mother, (9) to go out and clear
the place (where she) was to make the offering to the deva. Then Punna,
having gone out, saw the Bhodhisattva, who was facing towards the eastern
quarter and resting under the fig-(10)tree. She saw that a radiance was
issuing from his body and that the whole mass of the tree was of a golden
colour. ‘Surely the deva in his own person is going to accept our (11)
offering, it seems,” she reflected, and returned home ; and, in accordance
with what she had seen, she spoke to Sujata. ; :

Then Sujata was very glad and happy (in her) heart. (12) She filled
a golden dish of the value of ten thousand kasap' quite full with the rice
milk, covered the rice milk with another golden dish and (13) wrapped © ..
them in a clean white cloth, decked herself with all her golden ornaments,’ «
and carrying on_her head the golden dishes with the rice milk, in great
splendour (14) of beauty, she went out together with the female slave
Punna. Then from afar, with the radiance of the body of the Bodhisattva
who was sitting (there), she saw the whole mass of the tree was of (15). a!
golden colour and thinking (that she) was beholding the deva of the fig-
tree, she went, bowing low, to give (him) the rice milk. The golden dish
wherein she had put (16) the rice milk she took down from her head,
unwrapped the white cloth wherewith (she had) wrapped the (dish of) ri
milk, took off the golden dish which covered (it), (and) from’ a goldey
water vessel... +--+ ee (17) with scented water .... Ve SB
approached the presence of the Bodhisattva and (there) she remained. S

1 This is in accordance with Buddhist Birth Stories, 1.c., and Bigandet, 1 79, 80, though i

case are we told exactly how the rice came in.
Literally “in accordance with the prayer.”

* Bigandet, 1 80, calls her “* Sounama”.
“ Sanskrit karsapaya, Pali kahafayia, a small coin of varyi
Bigandet (I 82) h

alue, according as it is of goldy
00,000 pieces of silver.” 6g

or copper, but apparently usually the latter.
> Bigandel, 1.c., has “she forthwith put on her finest dress.” oe
© Or “with.” Owing to the lacuna in this line it is not clear how the words rap ket in the 0

should be translated ; they may mean “ hold” or “use”, Bigandet, 1.c., has “ offered him in a g'
scented water to wash his hands.”

=== [Page 83] ===
part 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS’ * 13

At that moment the almsbowl, that the Mahabrahma Ghatikara’ had
presented, (18) (disappeared ?)* and the Bodhisattva, not seeing that
almsbowl, (stretched out his ?)’ right hand and took the water. Then
Sujata approached and set the golden dish that was (full ?) (19) of rice

milk on the palm of the Bodhisattva’s hand. Then she spake thus:

“O my lord deva, the prayer that I prayed (20) at my lord’s feet has
been fulfilled for me; as the prayer of my heart was fulfilled, so also may
the prayer of my lord’s heart be (21) fulfilled !,” (she) said ; and, having
(offered ?)* the golden dish which was of the value of ten thousand kasdap,

Sujata walked home.

Then the Bodhisattva walked down (22) to the bank of the river
Nerafijara. and at the bathing place (named) Supatittha he partook of the
rice milk. On the ground in front of the Bodhi (tree) for twenty-eight
days, (23) four wecks, the exalted Buddha remained ; and on the thirteenth

day of the waxing (half) of the month of Jyestha, early in the morning

the exalted Buddha went away (24) from the house of gems‘ and went to
stay under the Ajapala fig-tree ; for seven days, meditating on the Law
and enjoying the bliss of the attainment. of fruition,’ (25). the exalted
Buddha remained (there). At that time a Brahman named Huhunkajati
approached (and) asked a question of the exalted Buddha; and the
exalted Buddha (26) gave him .the answer to his question.° ©

Also during the time that the exalted Buddha was staying by the side
of the Ajapala (tree),’ King Mara approached the presence of the exalted
Buddha, and ...... (being at) his wits’ (27) end, he concluded that

1 ‘The name means “potter”. According to Bigandel, Lc., the almsbowl that disappeared was of
earthenware.

? 1 follow Bigandet in regard to these two words, but the second one is supported to some extent by
the text,

» Bigandet, lc, has “making then the offering of the gold cup, worth 100,000 pieces of silver, with
the same disinterestedness as if she had given over only the dry leaf of a tree, she withdrew and returned

to her home with a heart overflowing with joy.” 5
“This was the fourth of the seven weeks thal began when the Bodhisattva took his seat under the

Bodhi tree. Cf. Bigandet, I 100.
* ‘That is, of the attainment of the several kinds of spiritual insight that a Buddha has. Cf. Bigandet,
1 102,
® In Bigandet (I 104-6) this incident is mentioned afler the appearance o: Mara and his daughters
and the Brahman is called Mingalika, ‘The Mahavagga of the Vinayapilaka (I 2) has Auhusikajatito,
interpreted as “of a haughty disposition”, not as the man’s name; Buddhaghosa adds that he was
dil{hamaigalika (F, Max Miller, Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XIII, p. 79).
T With the remainder of Face A of this inscription Bigandet 1 1024 can be compared, j

=== [Page 84] ===
14> EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1v

the exalted Buddha was a true Buddha, “a pure, true man”, he said.
¢ looked away from the Ajapala fig-tree (and) having walked towards
A (28) the eastern quarter, sat down in the middle of the high road, (where)
he drew sixteen lines (and then) remained anxious and dazed. At that
time: (29) his distress of mind was very great,.... . (having remained ?)!
vtsssss ein (the end?)! he lost consciousness, he knew no more.
= When (04 ara had lost consciousness, King Indra lifted him up and
‘king Indra informed Pajficasikha of this. P
At that moment the three daughters of Mara, named Tanha, Arati- and
(31) Raga, Seeing their royal father was in a dazed state, came down
(and), having ......, * to their father, approached the presence of the . i:
exalted Buddha... ........, Forms of (32//young maidens, three
a hundred at one time, forms of girls that ha&>hot borne a_child, three
hundred at one time, forms of women who had borne oné<child, three
hundred at one time, forms of women who had borne two children,”
three hundred at one (33) time, forms of women of Selling age, three

hundred at one time, (and) forms of somewl alae

er‘) women, three
hundred at one time, in these six ways, (as) three hnndred women at a

re: - CRSA en,
time, did they create,’ and, (34) approaching the Presence of the exalted
Buddha, addressed the exalted Buddha. (But) they had rio chance, (of .
success) and (35) they returned to their father. :

B
After our lord the exalted Buddha

| Rajayatana tree for seven days,’ (he) came away from the Raj
and returned (2) again to the place of the Ajapala fig tree, (where) th
exalted Buddha remained (enjoying ?)* the fruition of attainment? DB

the time when he was Staying at that place (3) a very anxious thought

' There is some doubt as to the meaning here owing to the lacuna and the Teading kanat is not ‘
certain, net cal

; Presumably this is what is meant, thongh the reading is not quite certain, Paficasikia was a

* Some expression like “given help” (or “ comfort") would be appropriate h i
words in the text have not been identified, ere. The two illegible

¢ Literally, “ big” or “ bigger”.

* The translation assumes that in the reading of the text, which
in the sense of “to form, to create” and bdah means the same this
“‘Jikeness ", there is no substantial differs

* Conjecturally restored,

7 This was the seventh of the seven Great weeks, Cf. A 24 su,

"Cf. A 24 supra, and Bigandet, 1 111-5, for what follows,

is doubtful, nimit is used as

ing. If instead of. bdah we read 2
‘ence in the sense but the construc! " tae ns

‘pra, and Bigandet, 1 107,
down to B 21 infra,

=== [Page 85] ===
PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 15

occurred to the exalted Buddha: “This Law, which I have succeeded in
getting to understand is deep, very deep, (4) very hard for men to
perceive, very hard for men to understand, very.......' If I preach
to other people in accordance with this Law which I have succeeded in
understanding they will not understand (it) (5) and I myself’ shall surely
be tired out. In accordance with this Law which I have succeeded in
understanding, I will ..... ......' (6) worship (and) make offerings
and I will continually keep (it). To other people I do not want to preach
(it), (he) said. (Thus), one by one, thoughts, of how to exert himself
but little’ in preaching the Law to (7) others, occurred to the exalted
Buddha. :

Then the Mahabrahma Sahampati, having become aware of the
thoughts of the exalted Buddha, assembled a retinue of the company of
Brahmas and the company of devas who (8) dwell in a hyadred thousand
universes and approached the presence of the exalted Buddha. Then,
bending one knee to the ground and lifting up his joined hands, (9) (he)
revered the exalted Buddha and asked as a boon from the exalted Buddha
that he would preach the Law to all beings.’ The exalted Buddha, on his
part, (10) granted the boon to the Mahabrahma Sahampati. ...... ‘
that day,’ on the land around the Mahabodhi tree the exalted Buddha
wandered for alms, (11) and then remained on that land.

At the hour of midnight, (on) the fourteenth of the waxing (half) of
the month of Asadha, this thought occurred to the exalted Buddha:
“Inasmuch as the hermit Alara (12) Kalama, who taught (and) expounded
(to me?) the law of the seven stages of ...... attainment,’ was of very
great service to me, to the hermit Alara Kalama (13) it is fitting that
the Law first,” thus he (resolved ?). Then, having
had died seven

I should preach
become aware of the fact that the hermit Alara ....

1 Reading doubtful and meaning undetermined.
1 Or “my body”. 7 a
2 The meaning of the rest of the line is doubtful. As it stands it might be “make clear (and)
delight \in)" or “set my heart on", but this leaves faguiti, which has not been identified, untranslated,
Perhaps we should read fa ke# “practise”. Cf. 1D 19. If we read then \instead of he) the meaning
would be “I think I will”, etc,, but this seems less probable. :
«The reading not being quite certain, there is some doubt as to the meaning.
5 The literal sense appears to be * a
beings (the Mahabrahma Sahampati) asked the exalted Buddha for a boon",

that Ruddha would preach the Law. : Wise x
© Owing to the lacuna it is not clear whether it should be “day” or “ days". ‘
7 That is the first seven of the ecstatic states enumerated under the head of samapatti.

“in order that he might get (him) to preach the Law to all sentient
ie, he asked the favour,

=== [Page 86] ===
16 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. Iv

days before and gone (14) into existence in the region of “ nothingness ”,’

(he said), “Inasmuch as the hermit Alara Kalama is no more, (and) seeing
that the hermit Udaka; son of Rama, (15) taught (and) expounded the law
of the attainment of “ neither consciousness nor unconsciousness ”* (and)
was ‘of (great) service to me, --- to the hermit Udaka it is fitting (16)
that I should preach the Law first.” (Thus) saying, (this) resolve of the
exalted Buddha arose (in his mind). (Then ?) having become aware of the
fact that the hermit Udaka had died in the middle of that night and gone
into existence (17) in the region of “neither consciousness nor uncon-
sciousness,”* (he said), “Inasmuch as the hermit Udaka is no more, and
the five monks, who ministered . . . to me (when 2) (18) (I was) practising
were of very great service to me, to (these) five monks it is

“In

asceticism,
fitting that I should preach the Law first.” (19)... +e eee eee
dwell?” (he) said; and the exalted Buddha

what place do the five monks

reflected . . (20) Having become aware of the fact that the five monks

had made their dwelling-place in the country of Benares in the forest of
es ?),” (21) (he) said ; and —

“JT will go (to the. country of Benar
y of the full moon of Asadha, the exalted Buddha went wo

?) the Ajapala fig-tree..- ++:
(The place of ?) (22) the Ajapala fig-tree having been a place of
sustenance of* the exalted Buddha, the kings of old who were possessed 2
of piety, who took delight in the religion, beginning with (23) King
Asokadhammaraja, having built a caitya, the Ajapalacaitya, came (there

and) worshipped (and) made offerings. In our country of Ra&mafifiadesa --
“Imitate yonder Ajapalacaitya,” in ‘al

Isipatana,
on the festival da}

away from (beneath

Poles Al (24). 6: (also ?), saying
/| accordance with the orientation of (the) sides... .-- (of) that (place ?),
His Majesty, the Lord of the White Elephant. ..--++++5 * (25)
Eh who was named Maharaja ...., in the year 842° of the:
Common Era, the fifth of the waning (half) of the month As&dha, (a - -
)* this Ajapalacaitya....-- 1460

day ?), Pisces being lagna,’ (built ?
1 The third of the Ardpabrahmaloka regions, Thi:

, 2.
2 The eighth stage of samapalli. -
3 The fourth of the Ardpabrahmaloka regions. ye Tod ‘ :
Or simply, “a place used by". See Lure inf:
5 Tt seems as if some expression like “gave orders to” were needed hete, Cf. XIV 12.
—> © The last numeral is not quite certain, nor is the week-day. p
1 That is, tangential to the eastern horizon, ond va:
* Very doubtful, see the note on the text, per /7 a é

3 assumes an emendation of the reading it

text

=== [Page 87] ===
ParT 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 17

No. XIV.
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEGUGYI Pacopa, PEcu.
Descriptive Account. i

89. This is a mere fragment containing only the last 13 lines of a
record, and most of them in an imperfect condition. It measures 1 ft.
8 in. in height by 2 ft. in breadth. The letters and the interlinear space
are of the same dimensions as in No. XIII.

90. So far as it is Preserved, this record is concerned with the events
which happened in the second and third of the seven weeks that began
when Buddha took his seat under the Bodhi tree. For these, reference
may be made to the account contained in Bigandet, I, pp. 99-100. Put
shortly, after leaving his majestic seat under the tree of enlightenment,
Buddha stood gazing at it steadfastly without winking an eye, and in deep
meditation, which caused the devas to think that he regretted having left
it and that he had not yet attained Buddhahood.' At the end of those
seven days, in order fo remove their doubts, he raised himself ¥
miraculously into the air and performed miracles which convinced them
that he was really a Buddha (cf. Il. 1-6 of the inscription). Having come
down to earth again he proceeded to spend the following week, the third’
of the great seven weeks, still in deep meditation, walking up and down!
the “cloistered walk” or ambulatory which the devas had Prepared for
him, and it is especially this that the inscription is intended _to

commemorate (cf. Il. 8-13).

Text.
5 eee ne ee (kyak tray) [gah II lukau dapah tai] (nda)?
[mat ma ha go’] é
2, ....[labay] (gah) [II het]. .... Fas SOR Se sccph eee wie
ees; eee Liles, cc, we fey)

' The Nidanakatha has a slightly different version, viz, that the doubts in the minds of the devas
arose while Buddha was still under the Bodhi tree, from which they inferred that “there must be
something more Siddhattha has to do, for he still lingers seated there." (Buddhist Birth Stories, new: and
200). Presumably this is an older version than the one in our record and in Bigandet,
ped as if it were nda (as also in XII C 49, D 28, 36, 38, 47, 50) and should Perhaps be

tevised edition,

* This )
to transliterated. I think, however, that it is identical with’ the modern particle da (pronounced te)
though it may be merely a damaged ra here, The subscript d in (salndeh, Il, 3, 4, is also of much the
same shape. i : :

* The reading is doubtful, ‘The initial letter, which is blumred, looks like a dh,

3

ry AT YI
wk

ern

=== [Page 88] ===
18 f£&PIGRAPHIA-BIRMANICA [vou. 1v

3: altrayyes See ss ONS Sit ghee Cuetec aie teats eo (sa)nd[e]h
de[wlatau gam[JJuin tloy [ktuiw dah]

4. < Nosyeenicaaittmede @ + a's «  « (sa)nd(ejh
Sieg. pAnaatee. oa ic Parintcat: Sort MUsAeaL goats 3 tu(y) II talbkh
kuiw pat[iha kuiw] (dewa)tau ga-

6 (mluih)... ee ee ees SE eke Cae aiore coke wie ie oe [’ tuy]
TI kyak [tray cuih] tl[ula

RRS IE soto APT Ae hel ep OR IE RE IE Oe [aka] (ra kuim) [ma
datau glah II [bramak] a paluit[t II no(r)]

8. [plluit [a] bramafk] 11 ae) tinal [kyale]) tra
Ce ra Il pdaly than cankrarn] (oo a. i

9. ga{h] smin tamla {mJja sadha ma pa tam ku smi
A{s]oka{dhammarat] ga{h II cahkrarh k]wom

10. [ku] cfe]ti ba [r]a-i[t] cahkrarn gah II [kJu[iw] kanarh lar’ cui
ku lamah nw([{]m tau II p[djay than puiy :

11. [RamafiJadfe}sa wo’ [g]ah II [ptu]p ca [ku th}an [te’] tuy II [tui ;
duih [t]lan [b]na[t] pLrjabat tobe te Lu l L vh :

1250 iF eitsoske ().. Cay! II [tila fiah tila cjin [bath[a Mpa
k{w]on [truh] m[way ma h]im[u Ba Y
13. (fay). ee [II ma k(a)ndarn} (law) [ceti ba kwam
ratanacankrarh wo’ II IT] 4

1 Conjecturally restored. 3 s

+ Conjecturally restored. It may have been gah, not gamluii.

1 Thie can also be transliterated 1d, a modern spelling for Ja’ (pronounced Jo"), which occurs
records as Jo', with the sense of “a long time”, I can make nothing of either lark or Id and
that Jaw was intended, as in 1, 13 where it is the probable reading.

‘One may conjecture than te hei (cf. XIII B 24).

8 ‘The reading is doublful. If correct, it means “ prince ".

«The dis written as q. The vowel of the first syllable may possibly be i,

=== [Page 89] ===
MON INSCRIPTIONS ~

PART I]
exe ee
(ee Hes Translation.
the exalted Buddha, during the seven days (when he)
ie eee the exalted

could' not (2) . . . blink (with) his eyes ; because,
(3) Buddha. ....- doubts arose in the minds of the devas (4)
... the doubts of the devas.... (5).-.-++++e+ and the exalted
Buddha showed forth miracles to the devas, (6)..----+:+-+° and
the exalted Buddha came down (7)..-+-+-++++°> + (from) the east
going to the west, from (8) the west going to the east, during seven days

the exalted Buddha kept walking to and fro.’

In the place where he had walked (9) the kings of old’ who had
faith, beginning with Asokadhammaraja, caused to be built an ambulatory
together (10) with two caityas at the ends of the ambulatory ; (they) stand

paces ar

even until now.
In this our country (11) of Ramafifiadesa, in imitation of that

place, in accordance with the orientation of the sides and the dimensions
(12) (of that place ?), His Majesty the Lord of the White Elephant,
ordered a son (of his) who was named (Bafia?) (13) to erect

two caityas together with this precious ambulatory. won

1 This is the literal rendering but the sense is “did”.
4 In the absence of a context it is not possible to make sure of the sense of #fa datau gah,

mean “where (he) was”. If we may conjecture that #ka is a remnant of bodhipallanka, the seat under
the Bodhi tree (as the superscript # in 1, 2 may also be), the words could mean “where (he) had stayed.”
‘The ambulatory ran from the Bodhi seat to the place where he had stood gazing at it (Buddhist Birth

It may

Stories, new and revised edition, p. 201.)
* With the first part of this inscription compare XV 5-9.

St
ner

=== [Page 90] ===
. 20 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA , [voL. Iv

No, XV.

AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEDAGON Pacopa, RANGOON.
; Descriptive Account.

91. This inscription is engraved on two faces of a stone slab. On
the obverse one (Face A) the space originally occupied by lettering appears
to have been 5 ft. 3 in. (or more) in height by 4 ft. in breadth. On the
reverse (Face B) it is 5 ft. 8 in. by 4 ft. The letters are about + in.
high, letter ¢ is. about $ in. long and the interlinear space is about
in. but becomes less in the lower part of the obverse. This face must hav
contained at least 56 lines, but it is in such a bad state that” no consecu:
tive transcript or trarfélation can be made of it as it stands. Enough of if
has been preserved to make it plain that, after a reference to his meeting:
the early Buddha Dipankara in a former life, it deals briefly with | th
events in Gautama Buddha's career during the momentous seven week
and especially, at greater length, with the story of the brothers Tapu
and Bhallika and their meeting with him, mentioned in §85. The reverse,
though a good deal weathered and otherwise damaged, especially in °th
first twelve lines, is in a much better condition. But there also ther
many gaps, which interrupt the continuity of the narrative and obscure
meaning. F

92. After repeated and intermittent study, spread over a numb
years, it appeared to me that I had done all that I could do in the
of deciphering and interpreting this record. But in October 1932 Prof
Pe Maung Tin was good enough to send me an extract, with trans!

‘lof a Pali text entitled Nalatadhatuvarnsa, which at that moment I ‘cé
'" not deal with as my tifme was tu ly taken up with other duties. I
following summer_he drew my attention to further evidence capabl
throwing light on the Mén Shwedagon inscription and eventually.
_ duplicate copy of the Pali extract and translation, a translation of
F Burmese inscription of the same pagoda, and also his own transect}
translation of the Mon inscription. [The Burmese record runs on mu
same lines as the obverse of the Mén one, while the Pali extract ilh
the first few lines of the reverse. ] As he proposed to publis

Ree Sag ee

1432-1933

=== [Page 91] ===
PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS ~

material, we both considered that it would be bett
than work apart. For all this assistance I am muc
it I should not have been able to produce the pr:
which, though still inevitably’ far from perfect, are much better than my
former drafts. Where I have-either adopted Professor Pe Maung ‘in’s
readings or modified them, the fact is indicated by his initials in the notes
on the text. In some cases I did not venture to adopt them because the
words were not legible in the ink-impressions which I had.

er to collaborate, rather
h indebted, for without

21:

esent text and translation,

93. In view of Professor Pe Maung Tin’s intention to publish all the

relevant material above mentioned and having regard to the condition of

the obverse face of the Mén record, it does not seem necessary to, say
much more about its presumable contents in this place. Besides the
sources mentioned in § 87 reference may be made to the brief account of
Tapussa and Bhallika in the Slapat Rajawan (edited and translated by
Father W. Schmidt in Siteungsberichte der Kais. Akademie der Wissen-
schaften in Wien, philosophisch-historische Klasse, Band CLI (1906) pp. 63
seqq. and 77-8, and again by R. Halliday in the Journal of the Burma Research
Society (1923) Vol. XIII, pt. I, pp. 40-3), and a summary mention in
G. H. Hough, Translation of an inscription on the great bell of Rangoon
(in Asiatic Researches (1828) Vol. XVI, pp. 273, 282-3). Bigandet's

account (in his work mentioned in § 87, Vol. I, pp. 108—10) is somewhat

A

more. detailed.
ae Pod.
wh"

94. The story told on the reverse .differs from these narratives by
bringing in the Ceylon king and the two monks who play a prominent
part in it. But from the historical point of view the second half of this
face is the more interesting one and may be compared with a number of
passages in the above-mentioned historical work which tell of the repairs
and improvements made at the Shwedagon pagoda by successive Mén
sovereigns.

The inscription itself is not dated, but as the concluding lines give a
detailed account of what was done in this respect. by King Dhammaceti’s
royal mother-in-law and by Dhammaceti himself, it may reasonably be
surmised that the record was made in his time. There is, however, one
date, in 1, 26 of Face B, connected with the celebrated Mén King
Ramarajadhirat, who reigned in the first half of the 15th century.

Ceyl

=== [Page 92] ===
22 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. wv /

Text.
A

ge eS SS + [gah pa papidha}n’ [pday] [tath jon kyak’
[tray] [Dipaakuiw tuy} ee :

Qe eee eee eee te. (bape bwoy ramen) [tuy IN] (II dh
bodhisambhar)' [ma 4 cuip]..... (ma Iwon)..... :

Seoe ete: ates (pday smar tnarh ‘jray bodhi)! Be oe

+ (ku pradhan jnah gah)! [krajo’ dma fy II buiw -Pnan]

[dewaputta Mal’... (h sjuif ra)...

“Adi pebiee, ad tt ae [ma twah] (bgah)? [sabbafiutafian 1
gfi tau na] (trawah)‘ [ma twah] (bgah)* [grakwom gun ma] .(sz

eee (tradah)’ [kyak] (ra II go’ tradah)! [kyak tuy II] -(pda
jaren bodhipallan)' [gah II] [casuii wimuttisukha]' [tuy: IT (
thawhay mwoy)’ lu[kau dapah thay II] (ka)’..... .

6. OSS, [kyak tray ha go’ ktuiw] (na pallaa)’.... 2. e {ma
pa kuiw tradah kyak gah] (snom)' [niJm ra gil [tuly [II, sani

\e 4 ktuiw dah]... ..
Ve % 7 Be a (ma randuk ku dacam thay) ......5,
sie nc) [tuy het ma] [ple kle’ sandeh’ dewatau]} ta ealh] II
& bwoy lamhja(y).....
Boe. (plen kle’)' [sandeh’ dewatau] (ta’ gah tuy IT na

siishe eaeke, Ag. Hated + +++. [II cuih dah dia tholy

’ PMT.
* The dots at the beginning and end of the fir sixteen lines merely indicate’ that’
ing without precise reference to its amount, Elsewhere on this face a dot indicates
(not two, as in other parts of these inscriptions), approximately,
3 Looks like ggah,
« Perhaps an error for fradah,
* Based on P.M.T. but very doubtful, The last word looks like mwoy. Cf, XVII ee,
‘ This may be for hajo'or kale, The vowel of the second syllable is either ¢ o. 8
7 Cf, XIV, 3, 4. The d has the form of ¢.

%:

=== [Page 93] ===
PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS « 23-
De recat [pallan}' [ku jray bodki] (ra I)... 1. ee ee ee
(pday: catkvam) 32553025. 05 6: ia paluit gah BOG lukau
[dapah] (thay)?..... 3
WO, P50 265. 02089 [bwoy paluit caikram] (gah)).. 1.0... 0.00 eee ‘
NEE RE oe be (gah) [II kyak tray wictrana]..... 4
11. ..... (pan) [sattaha! tuy ..... (pay)... 0. eee
(jaren bodhi)..... Pa ee (tnarh jray sum)! [Ajapala] ra II
(pday tnarh (jr(ay)... .
12s tie PRE eS wegen hea (dah) 23 pussevec0p8 2s .
eaesce ace [Mucalin® ma tau bwoy dui(h)].....
DK ea eerpr te nce i gr Pricer wit by ver cant on tn ete ae Oe
Bo ENG. WE MCD fells (ey) [dman tau ra] II ga[ta na
Balific oaks
3 A eae rae ena ier ere RTE ie ee ant re OPE Meera es | PROPIA 27 Cc ae
[tuy casuin ket] [wimuttisukha]' [tuy dm4n tau ra II] .....
(go! dah tradah] (kyak) .«
pies Race sgl ieee [raeIT Deets aes (kyak tray’ ha go’)
[klon buit ku jraku] qu Tha) ses step bas ese gs ss (4hara] hen ra
II na jha[na].....
16:00 Scheel, Cok (dmfa tau) [ra II pday ra-uit thay]... ......
apes scectpeos (pamik ca)......... 4 (kyak tray)’ . . (pday’
ka) [gah smin In}..... s
17. (t tuy) ...--- (tuy) [gah II] (rau ma kuiw ku) [kyak tray]
Do... (kyak tray)... (tuy TU) ie PR ye Ssh Senco hs
Lig [kwom ku]. . -
18. LO ab aba [smin In] (tun ra) [II kyak tray]. ..---.--
BES oe ad te aalte tata tee, wid, bk ey (ku) [Taphussa II
Bhallika HW]... ++
PMT.
} Conjecturally restored, a virama here, But the name should be Mucalinda,

* Possibly Mucalind, There appears to be
+ P.M,T. reads jhanasukha,

=== [Page 94] ===
BrIgRArDls ene

20.

21.

22,

‘PMT.
1 Very doubtful.
J I righlly read this is presumably the fist eylable of Rajayatana,

=== [Page 95] ===
parT 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS

82, ooisptce o 3 [magga’ II pnor fiah](ma 4 cuip)'.........
+ Wire HBP ter ofe suits Leb a Pee p QO]... (a).

33. (Saat os (dewa manussa)' [deh ta’] (gahgen tlun tuy II pday
kala lakthak kyak tray)... . eee eee [tuy II kwén]
(dakuip).....

i Sooner eros oss [II ma kuiw dan gets Be, ak sae peta

SU rent i hu ges
(deh) .

35... (tuy II)' [deh ta’ " prap & jaren kyak tray)... .......005
ore ane AAT Gok gel went Nee} Mba ed [tila ey kyak].

36. [tray] [gah kuiw puiy dik go’? (kuiw ahara kla fii!'........
welt ASL BRS Bie aed Bere ene eee [deh ta’]

37. - (dewa manussa)’ [gangen tlui tuy] (II pday kala)! [kyak tray]

SEL kwon] sak ho! aS. ot

‘(tuy) [1 ates “nan (iid gluiay

38.

i)

Bodhisat puty)/ 2 .2 237 O88 OR. PAG hai ta er goay
[go’ yamu] (Pokkharawati)’ . . ;
sO ea

39. [deh ta ktuiw dah kwon samneh ma dah dakuip banik mwoy ra
(gah)"s-7 foots Fete esas (deh ta’ fiah ba)’ [ma tau

Ij..
pday] .... [II pday] (kala ma dah rah gah II)

40. [kwom ku kwon bani’ masun klarh] (dok kbah tuy klo’ a)!
[mhasamut tuy II] (4 cuip). . 2... ee eee (pday kwi
masun)‘ (klarh tuy cut bapen drap)* [wan pa tau banik tuy II
deh ta’]

PMT, ——S
Or wo!, a
For banik,

Very doubtful,

4

(deh ta’ gah) [II ku bhikku san]' [kuiw dan tau tuy II] (kla na-
Yy

=== [Page 96] ===
26

“EPIGRAPHIA -BIRMANICA [VoL. 1V
41. (gaigen tau)! [hei II rau.wwo'] (hea)’ [patthana deh ta Pa
tay? ‘(gary ipday) 2 et a res ee

. * x 2
deh ta’ rwon II)! [kha gah Taphussa Bhallika] (fiah ba)

» 42, (ko ku de’ min ket galan®™ dewatau ma huim II)! [mip cuit pumah

tuy IT] (na yan deh ta’)... ee [lo’ san II]

(thaboh jamkah kuim Jar II thaboh)’. . :
43. Se ee LE, [klen brawut]}' [kuim lar II] [cut lar tuy ... ;

Pe he oake (kyak tray)... . os. [kyak tray IT] (het

hitasukha)' [ma sdah ku puiy dik] (ta’)*

CT are args cee ... [tila ey duh ket dan puiy dik fii IJ rau gah deh
ta’ huim] (ku kyak tray ra II)' (kyak tray tun ler) [II gasap ma
rau w(w)o’ ktuiw dah ra II baben Ghatikara Mahabrui]-

45. (m ma kuiw dan ku ey pday) [crai krua Anoma gah ler II]...
- = (ey. dun praman)": (Sujata)’ oo. es eS (IT kyak ~
tray taml4 tun ler II pday gata tay hen] (ma dun)!

46. (ket pindapat)' [fiah ma kuiw dan ka’ mwoy] . .

wwatthu anwoy)'*s ses 5 ie ih tees (pindapat Tapus:
Bhallika)' [ma kuiw dan wo’] ro II rau [gah gasap cuit kyak

47. [tray ktuiw dah ra II kha gah smin Catumaharat] (pan tim)” [k
(gasap cuit]' (kyak tray tuy IF) k

CAiewescd gare r [ku

48. (badah phuiw ma jnok)' [ku smin Catu;
[pabeh pan gah] (dua ket tuy)!.. . ,

ba
maharat pan tuy II] (uit}}
[bdah paben mwoy ra II pday paben kyak]
: PMT,
Possibly gah,
* Not clear on the ink-impression,
* Or brabut, the text reading is from P.M.T,
£ The actual reading may be Act but the sense requires het,
* Very doubtful,
? Porhaps ha, as P.M.T.
* The doublful ward here looks like rai, which may be an err,
* P.M.T. But for yarau he reads mf raw, which seeme to make bale ee
 Conjecturally restored, sairsorg

=== [Page 97] ===
PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS - 27

| 49. [tray gah II deh ta’ fiah ba ko du de’ cut ket] (thaboh jamkah)* Va
tone gaie teste gtivaias ae . (II pday kala)! [kyak tray]... ..

| 50. [gah tun ler IT dak]. . [deh ta’ ket nah kuiw ku kyak tray]...
Pasengak tne 3a ute Meena Moe aE (deh ta’) (tun IT kha gah)’

I (kyak tray)

51. [dando’ batwon dhar ku deh ta’]........0.0005 fr
| 52. (gah rau)' [wwo! deh ta’ fiah ba] (gah kyak tray)... ... oA
if 2
{ wives esac taa s UH dere, die dd eae
B

aie eo ER POO (t)* de[h} ta[’] ma [spa pajau  ta]w[ak
gla(h) [II kha gah t]a(d)a[h] deh‘ ta’ [ma het mbay] (. . .)° II
[smiJa [nak mwoy ma him]Ju Jayasena [mk tau [tau pldaly
bhamindhara* n](agabhow)’

Qe ok Pikes (deh ta’)-[fiJah ba ma het mba[y t}uy IT (k)e[t] phyfih®
na lar pday thajn jaku (d)e(h)* [ta’] (tuy ma tau pa)j(au ra) [IT

II pday) Kala krau].......... (Daya) Ing As sce ec Se ee :

Bo eT Sabet aah: (g)a{h] IT [miJk [kan](h)arh" ceti [tuy II dlarn
dhat le}r [kuiw kan(h)arn"® II Buddhapat]i[ma ler kuiw kan](h)arn”®
(tuy II nalatadhat gah cut" pday) [tne Buddhapatima ra II
Pday} i. a Levees Leads sbeas (dha)-

I: PMT.

gon appear to have been about half-a-dozen more lines, now illegible,

rk,

, Looks like dey (which is impossible here),

, The first lettor looks like pa or ma, the second like ¢ or h.

; The dis is perhaps for t, See the note on the text,

Conjecturally restored (cf, 1.5.)

The contemporary spelling is phyuih, but no w is visible here.
Rither at this point or between the ¢ and the &, there is a blur which in the latter case
Ga. If not an original flaw, there is a lacuna of the size of two or three aksharas;

The contemporary spelling is variable, but in the occurrences of the word in this line there is a

i 4 (or conceivably it might be a d formed like aq). Between the first kan(h)amh and the next
ere is a small flaw.

“" The three preceding words are due to P.M.T,

=

may be an
1

Pe

ye

=== [Page 98] ===
-: 28

the name, the first being hardly legible. In medieval Mén inscriptions the lett
hard to distinguish when the stone is weathered or otherwise damaged,) is Be RT ae

. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. Iv

. «milk? go] [cut k]wfom tuy II smin]
4. (t swo)k k[ylak [tray s]min milk’ go] [ i Ca

(pa)* [sajuin Calapindapat](ikatissathe kui
swok ra II Calapindapat](ikatissathe)* a teipan ease tian Puente ts
waa soacsnecmna® :

. [himu Si]wa[th]e® [kuiw 4 cuih kJe{t dhJa[t swok smin nak
Jayasena ma 4 lar pday bhamindhara nal(gabhow ra jh eae
. . [Siwathe gah] cu[ih 4 cuip smih nak] (ra) [II smi nak]. .

wn

[ma sket] dh{at] tuy II [dh}a[t sluim [kr]o[t] sm[ia nak nit lar®

6.
tuy II dhat ha bwoy ku ey II tila ey’ fiat] (ra II tila ey ket) ;
[kle(t ra] II [iJaa[h] smith nak [gah HW). eee ee eee }
7. [t] ket patifia[n kJu [s]mii nak (pi’ leh)" (tay? II na idhi gah]

dha{t swok gah ket ket tuy Il kuiw ku smih Kakawannatissa”
ra] II s[mii Kakawannatissa]* {un ler TE] chee Res sae

8. [gah] (uy I ata kdip Buddhapaft]ima [gah Jar tluo[y] IT: >
[Bud]dhapaftim]s gah [th]Ja[pana lar pdJay [dlJarh [tuy IT] (kuiw)
{II II Tapussa Bhallika filah bla ko

9, t{au] p{day] w(ih]a" Jetalwan gah II uit upjah [gamluii kuijm II 3
pafbwoy ramen hen] (I) kya{k tray dabut].... 2... ake
(tuy II) [pnor Alah [ma a saranagamana gah p]day [than] . .

" Looks like mit.

? PM.T, (one could read ma, but pa seems to be required by the sense),

3 P.M.T, (but the last word may be nai).

‘PMT.

® Conjecturally restored.

* Possibly Srwathe.

TOL

® PM.T, (I had formerly read this as witak ra and interpreted il as “ reflect"), *

vat in point there is a small gap; 1 can see no letler in it, P.M.T. reads ra.
P.M.T. Actually this looks like 7, “ ocean, river", but that m js damage

1 Doublful, See the note on the texl, I had fotmerly read hey atsck noesial pont :

” Or My. i Lacs

3 PMT. (I had read the initial letter as f, which is in fact ils shape in the second occurrence

4 Or wiha (the more correct spelling).

=== [Page 99] ===
PaRT 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS, 29

10, [ma dabut lar] rwoi II [krgu] wwlo]’ kha kyak traly ma tau
pday Rajagruih IT] de[h fa’) (fiah ba plan a)! [mwoy] (thay ra) LO
(t]un II. [tuy prap a jaren klya[k tray linwor tuy pday] (than
Se tk ee ae (ka)-? ”

11. jfo’] d[m}i[m’ tau) ra [II k]yak [t]ra[y t]wa[h. dhar ku deh ta’ ra
II Tapussa] gah go’ [sotapatiphuiw' ra II] (tuin lamih)s
[u]p[asaka dm4n tau ra II Bhallika gah pa gam-I_tlu[y] (pa
mar)* [wi]p[assana] (tuy II go’). ... 2.2... ane : ce So

12. [ra tuy II Bhallikathe}’ gah [yamJu_ [tila]? gah [ra II T]apus[sa
tun gah] II [plan cau toh tuy II pday ceti
dhat_swok kyak tray ma déh~f’ thapana]. . . . [la]ta kdip
tm Tambagiutt”> Were. (duk)"

13. (pen wat) [pJati[pat tluy II dm[Zn] ya{m] bna[t ayuk tuy] II
, Ceju[ti] a n[a) gafh] a ktuiw dah pday duh swar ra II II ceti
[dhat swok] (te’)® [fiah] (ma" ti)m pa{ray] (wat) [1]i[n]wor
(pajjau [tJau ra II krau wwo’ [tno]r {fiah] (ma tim) [paray
dhjat [swok] :

14. [kyak tray ma sgut] a tuy II pday [th]an [rah] rman wwo’ tun
ler II sdsa[na ha go] tan (cu)i-[p dah uiw da ci] (II ceti)*
[dhat swok gah] fiafh ha tim tuy] II [fiah ha] go’ Yinjwfok «
(p}ajau [hJe[n] ra [II II het] fiafh ma ha go’] 6

1 PMT.
? Conjecturally restored,

* Looks like dmdw.

‘ The first i looks like 7. I owe the ph to P.M.T.

* P.M.T.'s reading fuin lamih is by no means clear on my ink-impressions,

*PM.T, (I had read pa-a).

* The last word is very doubtful, but cf, the preceding go’,

* The Bh resembles an A.

* Or fila (P.M.T,) -
This seems to be the actual reading, though the T might be K both here and in Il, 20, 23.

™ Conjecturally restored, 5

¥ Very doublful. ‘The final letter looks like m and the virama is uncertain,

© Very doublful. It may be merely a damaged space.

™ Possibly gah,

* Very doubtful, One would expect dnay (cf. 1. 20, infra).

=== [Page 100] ===
pee
| ice
et
1A

my

30

Wwe

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vo.. Iv
nda’ II [pday] tha[n cleti ga{h] IT ma
k gruip kambat han tha gafh] (klut
dan)’ uiw tuy II fiah ha tim
lat puiy kya)k traly]

16. [ma pa parinibbaJn [gah] II ba [k]la[zh pi cwoh turau cnam gah
ra twon] a ie II [¢}ila® puiy [a}ra[han] bla ma himu
Sonathe Uttarathe gah tlui ptan saJsar[4 pday d{uJi S[uwann]a-

7 " bhum [ra] 1 kh[a s]a[sana ma tan] (tuy IT gam-[i]
brau II samaJpi [trlu[h] IJ [saman]i br[au] II
II] kha [gah] smi Si[ri]ma[soka gah
8 [tila ey] I] dha[m]mafrat]

15. [linwor pijau gah] kuim, 1
[pa tlarh [ku tnJarh [chu jul
tuin tuy II dah)’ [gruip gah] (ba
dnay wh[y hea ra II II nor cnam ti

17. [truh] 11 gam-[i
kha [ma nwom® tuy gah
II gah] ku tifla’ puiy ba] (ra II t)o
II sa{ngharat ga{h puiy dik go’] lilwwo]r’ pajau

i8. (ra II [BuddharJatana m[w]o[y gah puiy dik] mik Ifinwor pafjJau
ha go’). . (’) [II] dhfat] kya[k] tray [tuy puiy dik] ma [sgo’]
phyuifh cuit BuJd{[dhJara[t puiy dik ma sgo’ lihwor pajjau [ey]
pura[y”® gah] II ti[la cy]

19. [ta’ rei ku puiy dik fii II rau gah] sm[in pa ayacjana [ku tila
puiy ra IJ IJ kha gajh tila puify mahathe ba gah II ce[tt dh[at]
s[w]ofk] kya{k tJra[y] IJ m[in TJap[ussa] II [Bhallika II ma
thapan]a lar p[day lata kdi]'-

20. [p tmo’ Tambagutta’ II dasuiw gruip ma grop badan lar tuy ma]
fiah ha tif[m dnay gah II tabah] k[uJiw ku [smin - Si}r[imasoka]*
ra II [kha gah smin-Siri]m[asoka]* II kuiw [Jah tah [kle’ ca]a[h
janah] (kle’) [dasuiw gruip tuy] II [ce]- ‘

1 See XIV Ion, (and cf. 1, 21, infra),
2 The last word is very doublful.

* P.M.T. But the word seems doubtful, Cf, 1. 20, however.
« Perhaps fila,
5 Or fila,

© An original y has been corrected to m, :

” Or tila,
“8 Or ho’ (P.M.T,) But it must be meant for the introductory interjection yo’ (cf, XII A 34, 50.

® Error for Htwor,
% There is a marked stroke under the , but possibly it is a later disfigurement, not the symbol f
4 Possibly kdui.

" Cf, 1, 12 n,
™ The ti in smizt (if there is one) is superscript over the following letter. Siri? may be Siri’,

=== [Page 101] ===
* &:3
MON 4NSCRIPTIONS * 31
dah} (g)[uim] cet[tyaghara kuim lar] Le

II k{uJiw kanarh‘ [tuy] (pa) [tau pajjau ra [II I pa tay’ no
gah [kuim] nda’ II [uit ku fia) ma tau pdafy] than [rJah
[rma]n [wwo' gah] II [pabwoy* ram]en he[i] (ma)’ tlua [tau

PART 1]
21. [ti kuiJm [lar II_prasat! ma.

pajau hen ra IT]

rau [wwo'] s[mJii ma [n]wfom tau ku sjaddha ma [pa t}i[la] rah
[rman ta gah II cletiyaghara w{wo’ tadah] thawara' la[r culit
[tluy II [ce]tiyaghara gah cladah k[le[’ tuy II ma dak grop ©
grop] janwo[k] (tlai”’ ceti)

. [wwo’ bwoy. ram[en t{uy] II ce[t}t wlwo' dah mfahafc]e[t} [rwon

22. ki

23.
II II II) It [tila puiy ceti dhajt [swok kyak tray] m(in)
Ta[pus(sJa Bha[llika] ma [thapan’ lar pday] la[t]o kd[ui]p” tmal’
Tamb: 12 wwo! Be :
‘ambagutta’? wwo Al pay k : (ger Ae me Bpol
24, [la tila fijah [tala cin batah ma hilmu Dhamina[trailo}kyana[th]a- aa
5

rfajadhijra[t ma pa smin gah II prasat’ ma dah cetiyaghara gah (pV
cadah kle’ tuy II (ma dak)" .... {jJanwot" [r]wfon] II [kha
ma dak] gah da{h 40] ha[t]

25, [salJua [ra krau] w(o’ pHaly kala tila fiah Sutasomarajadhirat ma a or? &£
janok” plan tun II] da[k 1Jh[om ” @ ann

pa smin gah] II [kuiw_dak lhom j
iJano[k” tuy hen II yok]. . (cjallan II yok t}dfon I] (dlahy
sljuly gah] ,

1 For prasat,
2 Or dak.
2 The last letter seems to be definitely m; the first might be w, Possibly the word is a badly-spelt
o

im, Cf. 1. 24,
‘There is litlle or no indication of a subscript letter here, but cf. 1. 3.
* The supposed pa very much resembles II.
* Or gata (P.M.T.) But there seem to be traces of an anusvara,
7 Cf XIVIn,
* Possibly babwoy, :
* Looks like pa, or conceivably II (P.M.T.) =
" Doubtful. The first letter may be &. bg inven
© Possibly Adép.
"Cf 12 n,
™ Perhaps tila,
"Cf 21,
“PMT.
bs For janwok,
Probably the word is spelt without w in these two cases,

=== [Page 102] ===
»

%

32 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. Iv
A i h

i Yar mafiah II kuiw lah

26. [lar b]w[oy pldafy] II dlah [thJar gafh ab ET :
bapen] (cali) [uit IT krau, wo’) pdaly k]ala [tila fiah Rajma

rafjJadhira[t ma pa smia gah II pday] sak[karat 798, II ga
et dhat s]w{ok] re

, wo’ ch h ija [iw 4 cuip lata) gafh I lak’? a
sm]ii Sarhm Mlam [tu]y [II tlh sa{mah] .(i)*..-. - + (p)-(n)
[tJu[y] ma kufiw] dak [p]la[n] II

28, (1) dafk plan tuy tJuly hJe[a 11 kJuilw 4k afJkafde IT kha gah]
LS [san Teleh [t]uly no tarh pajrjah [jnok he]a ma
kui[w] da[k lho}m [plan m]way (tuy® ra) [tun II] c[e]ii ma dak
lho}m [plJan ga{h le]r [h]a ga-

29. ta[p tuy] II [tala Jah Ramafrajladhfirat (a)* [d]u[A] d[ewat}au : *:
[hen II krau wo’ pdjay [kalla t{ila’ fijah Baffia Barwor ma
hjimu [Jaya]d[dislarajfadhirat® ma pa smin gah. IT tila’ fiah] ,
kwom ku [g]nakya[k] Ra(y) [ler II]

30. [salah watthu ma] g[luiJi [tuy ku]i[w dak lhom]? II [mi &k tila”
fijah [g]nakya[t" Wiharade]w[i]* II [kwom ku smJii buiw:
Yogarat ptit darhat hen II uit som’ dik ska’] ararh [pariw]a [mbha.
n[w]o[m hen] II jak 1-i[t tuy] (ma)"* [da]- vid

' For Atuiw, probably, But the reading is not quite certain,

* Looks like lal,

* Or fila, ict

‘ One would expect fi, and the leller mder the i looks like a f, but the next one has a virdi
ovenit; aE

5 The u is very doubtful, Probably the word intended is thap,
* Possibly can.
7 Or fila.
® Or -ddisa-
‘4 © This looks like kwom but seems to be really thom,
© Or fila,
" For gnakyak,
™ For Wi-
8 Looks like yam,
™ Or Luit,
“Probably this is what is meant, though the letter looks a little like sa;

in ii but it has a at
in it, Be

=== [Page 103] ===
parr 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS « 33 -

31. [k] II [ma dak gah Yer [ha glatap [tuy II tila fiJah [Jayaddisara jja- ”
2 [dhirJat' [gah a dun dewatau II] k[rJau [wwo]' pday [k]ala [ti]la?

[fiah Bafia Ken Dau ma *hiJmu Dhammaftr]ai[lokya Jn[atharaja-

dhirat ma pa smin] (ga)- -

[h mi ak tala fijah ma [h}ifmu g)naky[ak] Wihfarlade[w}t ma dafk
tluy ma {uly II [kha ma tluy gafh tala fijah Bafta Ke]n [Dau
ma_ himju (DhammatraiJlo[kya]na[tha gah ma] kufiw lik
ankJad[e] II ma [yok caléa II II] (ma)

33. [yok tdoa] IL [krau] w[wo’ pday kjafla thfla fijah [Shr]
Tribhawa[nadityaprawaradhammatraiJlo[kyanatha* Mah}a[dham-
ma)raj[adhirajadewi II kwom kju [k]w[o]n t[ila’: fJah ma
[himu] Ra[m]adb[ipati? Sripa{ramamahadhammara]-

34. [jadhirat ma pa smin gah II whatth[u ma gllui[a] I[e}r [kle]’ (1
uit suim k]w[om ku] dar{hat. builw [pna]n fhen) II tila* fiah ba
mi ku kwon 4 dmanj (t&m)’ [joa dhat swok tlu[y II] ma kufi}w
(bar jrah II jrah] ma sjofh san ler]

35. [kuiw] (bar bapen)’ [II duiw ma slun gah Jer k{u]i[w khay
sat]ah [samah II ti bawar* ma bar gah] (ma) [II tma’ lwan kalo'-
kalo’] (gah II bar ren) d(un) [tui]n tuly] (ra) I mafajah [deh
ma kuiw dak tuin l-uJi[t’ II pday kala gah] (ma).

36. [II pajrah miway] (thap” ma) dak du[a ce}ti (gah II p]day [bJan”.
(pajrJah [lata gah] II reff lar tdon tma’ ma I[k na thar II

32.

nv

|

| akrja [tdon] (kuim k)ui(w)” jon pafjrah ceti gah II lah bapen]
t{may’ [I]ah II [jon] pajrafh gah] (ma) [IT dak tui]-
I For -rajadhirat, ‘
” Or fila,
* For Tribhuwa-,
Or tila, :
Possibly -patr.
Or tila. =
7 The treading, though not certain, seems very probable, °
Possibly bawwar, % sy
Or 14; but the « seems pretty definite. as
Possibly taw, ;
sais, OF Perhaps bai, seems to be the reading of the text but no such words are recorded in x

fi, whi d,
P.M-T. has suggested paii, which may have been the word intended, :
eems to be ‘the shel reading, though owing to the condition of the stone as shown in the
‘ession either word might be either kuim or kuiw,
\ 5 i

=== [Page 104] ===
oy

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. IV
if A ? afi? c[dau jon] ma
; batan' gnia)’ tluly HM] ,ma [ren calo] [sali] c{d
. awe ie [na tma’ II plda[y lat]a [cJetitiyangan()* ma pa
glah [pan](nasa)’ [ma fiali padaksuin’ gah ler II uit waduih]
(tdon TI)’ [lah bape [tma’ lab pa-uit] :

34

‘38. [II pday ra-uit® pannasa gah tun ler IX] (d)a{k 4 kamban ma cuin
dah tau ali}wa[’ ma fiah kan(h)arh® Jar rup pkau dakah 1
(B) (cass 4 [pday ra-uit dacuit !? (mway thap) [ra] (tun) [gah

II kuiw kJan(d)arh” [cal(w)o’ jrap] (tamliw)* [waduih]

39. [pa-uit hen II dacuih glah panna{sa dak taluih mway thap ra
tun] (II) [dacuih gah mway thay“ ra tun II kuiw dak callfo
kamban waJdu[ih pa-uit II pday kamban gah t]un [ler kuiw
tuiw bapen] (tnam)”

40. [brau pa-vit] II [mJanal [kJam[b]Jafi gah kuiw] (bar)'* (sa}tah
{samah ti gah pa-vit II 1 II 1]

1 Do: biful, The initial may be p. The final might be #, but not if the next word is guitt ; and it is
to be noted that in 1, 27 this word is spelt gaudiit.
* Doubtiul but. probable, x,
3 Possibly siiZ.
« This appears to be the actnal reading, though one world expect celtyarigana.
* There appears to be a flaw between pan and nasd, which are separated by a blurred space of the
breadth of one akshara,
© Or pa daksuin, according to modern Mén rsage.
? Extremely doubtful.
§ Possibly ra-it. er
° Or aliwat, 1 take this (whether a compound or two words} to represes
ali, “mound of earth”, etc, and vafa, “enclosure, wall", A ae pace ah at
' As to the reading, cf. 1, 8 n.
" Possibly pannasd (as P.M.T.!, the matter being icated’ by i
with the last tine, : CIEE asi Pes Ba efesteg fg cont
¥ Bor dacuih, :
8 The f is doubtful and the fiw may be Init,
for 7,
“ Or possibly (hah ; in either case an error for thap,
8 Fairly cerlain, though the final letter is illegible,
6 Extremely doubtful,

It is also possible that the final w may be an érror

=== [Page 105] ===
PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS - 35°
A
Translation. :

= - ++. having made a resolution’ at the feet of the exalted Buddha
Panera 25.5.4 (2) 3 08 having been fulfilled in due order, the rec
Conditions of supreme enlightenment to attain? ..... . . (Very?) 20, ee
(3) tee beneath the Bodhi fig-tree .. . . . with the intention of victory,
remained sitting. The host of the deva Mara (undertook Dee... (4) acd
+++ + to wit, omniscience that is adorned with the (state 2) of an
assemblage of virtues (without)... ., (3) tess tee (the status ?) of a
Buddha. Having attained Buddhahood, (he) enjoyed the bliss of emancipa-
tion, (seated Crosslegged ?)’ by the Bodhi throne for seven days... .
(6) ....7 the exalted Buddha had not been able to rise (from the
throne 2): 3... saying that .... . .* which usually confer Buddhahood
(were ?) not yet (present 2), doubts arose’ . . . + (7) 2... (for full eight”
days?) .... (the exalted Buddha?) .... in order to dispel the doubts |.

of the devas, floated up to the sky .... (8)... (having dispelled ?) the >”
doubts of the devas, (from the throne?!" ....., descended and remained
for seven days (with eyes Perr: ; (9) .... the throne and the Bodhi 3
fig-tree. 0... upon an ambulatory... . to the west for (seven ?) days
eae (10)Fs,, Bets to the west of the ambulatory®...... the exalted
Buddha meditated... . (11). . . (for) four weeks... |. (in?) Zeer week
++... (mear the Bodhi tree?)........ the Ajapala fig-tree. By ‘
the (Ajapala) fig-tree. . . . . (12) ire os an (was) ix oe RES (the)

' Namely to become a Brddha.
* The qualities essential to perfection must be understood here.
* Supply something like “ the status of a Buddha wi
* Reading tradah ; trawak world mean “a saying”. :
. ing is doubtful. 3 : :
s th scaiheties autos to whether at this moment Buddha was still on the throne (Buddhist Birth
Stories, p. 200; or had already descended from it (Bigandet, I 99), See 1. 6 and also § 90, note. z
” Perhaps supply “seeing that ".
* Supply “ the qualities", or the like.
"In the minds of the devas. Cf, XIV 3-8. pane
” This be the reading. One would expe: a”, e
* oe “Srobably fonowed a alatesieat of the direction and distance Buddha went, viz : north-east, ten
fathoms, (Bigandet 1c.) Z
" Probably supply “not blinking”. Cf. XIV 2-3. :
™ This refers to the “house of gems”, of the fourth week.

=== [Page 106] ===
- 36 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ' [voL. Iv

_ of emancipation and remained (there)... .. obtained the status of a

ain

Mucalinda (tree ?) which was: towards.... (13).......05 (he)
remained. After that... (14).......... (he) enjoyed the bliss

Buddha...... (15) FS ae ; (the exalted Buddha was not able)
to attend to his personal needs, (did not?)...... food. With’ mystic
contemplation ...... (16)... . (remained ?) aoe

At the end of the (forty-nine ?) days’. .... (desire to eat?)......
(the exalted Buddha?) .. At that time King Indra ........ (17)
or eee (to give to?) the exalted Buddha ... .(the exalted Buddha ?)
Setaten ts together with .... (18) ...... King Indra. The exalted +7
Buddha ...... . Taphussa (and) Bhallika .. (19)... the city of
Asitafijana.. 6... we. (having crossed ?)‘ the ocean....(20)....
(rested ?) on the bank of the river®...... (21) towards ......
south (they?)..... in 2)23c5 sas (22)3t eet (my children ?)*
(24) . . . . (pulled the carts ?).... (25)... (having?)..... (self)...
(26)i2:. that =. 3 ees the (Rajayatana?)’ tree ...°(27).......
(that) sae (Ie) ate gift’ ‘of “alms‘s3 .: (28). Sones fn oS. (they ?)
SES Sn ok (29) ...... (having?) ..... (water ?), merit ..... (30)
wag aee'es (one ?).... the exalted Buddha... (31)..... to the exalted
Buddha... --.-. (32).2)....7 (path ?), among those (who were on the way
tot Attain?) is7 sree (33) ... they, (having passed through the
states of devas and men, in the time of the exalted Buddha?)......
sons (of a leading merchant ?)’.. . (34)... . (to) give a gift of alms to
the exalted Buddha ...... (amonge?ye hho s le ae (they?) .....
(35) . . (having?) . . . they approached near to the exalted Buddha
fees Se a Se “My lord the exalted (36) Buddha grant that we may give :
(thee thy) food first!" ....- aa

.... they... (37)... having passed through (the states of devas
and men?), in the time of the exalted Buddha ......... (having. . 2

' P.M.T. inserts “the bliss of ".

* Or “of the day "}-(viz : the 49th).

2 where the brothers dwelt.

soe can ‘ ion, cf. XII A 22, .

. i cording to the Burmese version, cf. .

x ™ re Tsbesaby a part of the thoughts or speech of the earth spirit, who had in one of their
previou incarnations been the mother of the two brothers and who stopped their carts in order that they

should minister to Buddha. a ae oar ke is
ia
? Conjectural, Cf, XIII B 1, 5 bnguct ae Pes
* Conjectural, Cemm

Ch S FEA,

=== [Page 107] ===
PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS . 37.

been?) . . . , children... for (many?) years (38) (they?) had been
giving ae to monks of the Order. (Before our Bodhisattva Dseaewricie;
+++. had the name (of Pok haravatt ?)' . . (39) they came into existence
as the sons of a rich oar eee leading merchant... . , , (the two
of them) who remained in... , , At (the fitting time ?), (40) together. with
five hundred merchants,? (having gone on board ship and crossed ?) the
ocean, (they arrived aie oer (having fully loaded five hundred carts*
with goods they ?) became merchants, (and) they (41) (roamed about 2).
Having thus made (their) prayer, in... . (instructed* them ?). At
that time Taphussa (and) Bhallika, the two, (42) the elder and the younger
brother, heard (the words ?) which the deva spoke, and being glad at

heart, (from their cart they?) coe a, very (long?) . . . dry rice cakes
and... . cakes (43). rey butter rolls also (they) laid out... ..,
- « (the exalted Buddha?)....., “ exalted Buddha, that we may (obtain
happiness ?) (44)5 5 5 . may my lord accept our gift.” Thus did they

Speak (to the exalted Buddha ?); And there arose in the mind of the
exalted Buddha this thought: “The almsbowl that the Mahabrahma
Ghatikara (45) (gave me on ?) the bank of the river Anoma... . ,
(wherein I received the milk rice of Sujata NP... None of the
Buddhas of old received on their hands (46) the alms of those who gave
(them) gifts . . On what’ thing... 2... the alms that Tapussa (and)
Bhallika give me?’ Such .was the thought (47) that arose in the mind
of the exalted Buddha. At that moment the four Catumaharaja kings®
(being aware of ?) the thought (of the exalted Buddha ES aes
to the exalted Buddha. And the exalted Buddha, in order to confer
(48) great merit on the four Catumaharaja kings, (accepted all ?) the
four almsbowls....... , (and) made them into one almsbowl. In

' Apparently another name for the Asilafijana of 1. 19,

” Literally “sons of trade ae

* According to the story there were five hundred carts, but the reading of the text is extremely,
doubtful,

“ As appears from the following line it was the earth spirit (referred to in 1, 22, n.) who instructed
them,

¢ Presumably “descended, but the text is illegible here.

‘The last word is very’ doublful. The vessels referred to were no longer available. Cf, XIII
A 1719,

’ This is rather a rendering of the alternative reading ma rau, With Jarau, which seems to be the
Teading of the text, the meaning wotld probably be “whenever” for “if") “on a thing”, At the end of
the long gap that follows one must supply “shall I receive ",

“The guardians of the four quarters of the world,

L Brothers

Soo carts

=== [Page 108] ===
38 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. Iv

this almsbowl of the exalted Buddha (40) the two of them, the elder
and the younger brother, put the dry rice cakes. ....... at the time
the exalted Buddha... . (50)... : water... they brought (and) gave
‘to the exalted Buddha ........ (them. Then the exalted Buddha ?)
(51) expounded the Law to them..'......... (52) thus did the two a
of them (speak: “Exalted Buddha”?)....... vo meytim
2 of PrEsgntive
HAir RECIOS

B ; Cf Buvmete:

text 3
ghee (that) they might worship (them while) travelling.’ At that time,
(perceiving that ?)? they were negligent, a king of the Nagas, named
Jayasena, who dwelt in the Bhamindhara (Naga world ?)*.... . as (2)

+ +++. because the two men had been negligent, took (the hair relics
and) carried (them) down to theirt own country (and worshipped them ?).
At a later time... .. (time 2555 cane (Geers * desiring to build
a caitya (and) having -had a relic chamber made and also having had an
image of Buddha made, placed the frontlet’ on the forehead of the image
of Buddha... .... (4) the king, wishing also to place the hair relics of bey
the exalted Buddha, made the Thera Calapindapatikatissa responsible for! p

procuring® the hair relics. (The Thera) Calapindapatikatissa...-..... 7
. .” (5) named Sivathera (and) caused (him) to go down (and) get the’ hair
relics that the Naga king Jayasena had gone (and) placed in the Bhamin-
dhara (Naga world ?)*. . . . this Sivathera went down to the Naga king. The
Naga king .-. 0. es (6) to get the relics,” the Naga king, having ~.

' The meaning is not quite certain, But the Burmese inscription explains that Tapussa and Bhallik.
enshrined six of the eight hairs given them by Buddha but kept the other two for privale veneration
These were the ones stolen by the Naga king. The others are referred to in 1. 12. =

? Conjecturally supplied. : j

* The words in parenthesis are conjectural but fairly certain, ‘The Pali Nalaladhdtavathsa uses the
expression fin the form bliamidhara) in the sense of the Nagas supporting or bearing up the earth. Before’
I saw this text I took it for a” mis-spelling of blimintara, in the sense of “ the interior of the earth's
which would be equally appropriate.

‘ That is, the Nagas’ country. But the reading of this passage is not quite certain. i

= Somewhere in the preceding passage must have come the king's name (see |. 7), and description.
The Birmese inscription locates him in Ceylon. oe
© The reading is not quite certain, “Literally “cause to bring.” :

’ Here there must have been a statement that the monk mentioned in the next line was a pupil of
Cajapindapatikatissa, and perhaps that the latter summoned him, as in the Burmese version.

SCE i: ;

* Probably these words were preceded by some statement that the Naga king was aware of the 4
monk’s putpose in visiting him,

=== [Page 109] ===
Parr 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS - "39°
swallowed the relics (and) the reliqyary, (said) “The relics are not with
me. (If) my lord sees (them, let) my lord take (them)”.! Thus the Naga
king spake... . . faa ies * (7)"having obtained permission’ from the,

Naga king (three times‘ and) having by magic power taken the hair relics, | 2

gave (them) to King Kakavannatissa. And King Kakavannatissa, having .. | .
aha tear (8) (and) having put (them) on the head of the image of
Buddha, (and) having enshrined the image of Buddha in a relic chamber,
(caused ?)........., 7

The two (brothers) Tapussa (and) Bhallika, the elder and the younger
* (9) dwelt in the Jetavana monastery (and)

brotherze. fe. eee
the exalted Buddha set all the (lay) disciples in (their due) order,.....
+ among those who went for refuge’ in (that?) place........... u

(10) (he) set. After that, when the exalted Buddha dwelt at Rajagriha,
these (two again?) went one (day? and) having approached the presence
of the exalted Buddha (and) made reverence, in (that place?)........
. «+ (11) sat down (and) remained (seated). The exalted Buddha preached
the Law to them. Tapussa attained the fruit of conversion,’ (he entered
.the number of ?)’ the lay disciples (and) remained (in that status). But
Bhallika having become a monk and developed spiritual insight, (attained ?)
Sse. gt iO AES (12) was named Bhallikathera. Tapussa, on the other |

hand, having returned_again to the town of_Asitafijana, in the caitya where |
they had enshrined the hair relics . . . qn the top of the Tambagutta™ hill ;
sig he Mee fulfilled (13) (his religious) duties, and after dwelling (there) for
the term of his life passed away from there and came into existence in

the heavenly city.
‘(As for) the caitya of the hair relics, those who were aware of the

benefits" (of its observance ?)” continually venerated (and) worshipped it.

! Literally “my Lord see” (or “ look"), ‘my lord take ", both verbs being in the imperative,

* Here the monk Sivathera must have been mentioned or referred to again.

* Or “consent”, “ promise ”.

‘ The Nali{adhdtuvamsa here speaks of a thrice repeated promise or consent, £~

* From the Burmese version it is plain that the preceding gap contained a statement that it was
Buddha who was dwelling in the Jetavana monastery at this time,

“In the technical Buddhist sense, #.e. in Buddha, the Law and the Order,
? From the Burmese version it appears that the two brothers oblained first place among the first disciples.

* The word contains a metaphorical reference to entering into the “stream, i.e, the Buddhist path of

holiness,
* Very doubtful,
"° See the note on the text.
i That is, primarily, “ spiritual benefits ".
Very doubtful,

=== [Page 110] ===
40 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1v

te ay ‘Ghee ey those, avho were aware of the benefits’ of the
se thie Mone caun ie ted. Buddha, having been broken, and because
Inew Hot (th try e religion had not been (firmly) established, people 3
fe gene: caitya of ?) the hair relics and they could not venerate (and) :
or ip (it). Because they could not (15) venerate (and) worship (it), on e
the land of the caitya such things as trees, jungle creepers, grass and é
rubbish had sprung up, (and had become ?)’ a forest (concealing it 7)’,
people Were, not aware of its site. From the year of the exalted Buddha's
(16) achieving parinirvana two hundred and_ thirty-six, years had elapsed,
(when) our lords the two arhats named Sorathera and Uttarathera came
(and) established the religion in the country of Suwannabhum.' When the
religion had been established (and) when there were monks, (17) nuns, male
novices, and female novices, then King Sirimasoka said to the two arhats,
“© my lords, the gem of the Law and the gem of the Order are we able
to venerate (and) worship, (18) (but) the gem of the Buddha, (though) we
desire to venerate (and) worship (it), we cannot." A relic of the exalted
Buddha, that we may set our minds (at rest upon), a gem of the Buddha
that we can venerate, worship (and) adore, let my lords provide for us!”
Thus did the king make (his) petition to our lords. Then our lords the
two Mahatheras’ showed to King Sirimasoka the _caitya of the hair relics of
the exalted Buddha that Tapussa and Bhallika had enshrmed® on the top
(20) of the -Tambagutta* hill, which the forest bushes’ had covered (and)

‘concealéd, and people did not know (its) site. Then Kirig Sirimasoka had -.
the forest bushes’ cleared away (21) and also caused the caitya and the
prasada (which was also ?)* the cetiyaghara to be built up and offered’

le who dwelt in this Mon.

‘(them). From that time also all the people who d
e course” kept coming and worshipping (it).

12.7

‘4+ country_in du

1 That is, primarily,

2 Very doubtful. ‘

3 Suvannabhami is here identified with Lo
parts of Indo-China. ¢

« Or, possibly, “have not igoti"s
may either have added to the sense or |

* or “set up", the object then being

© cf 1 120. ;

7 Or, “bushes (and) forest”. ay

* The reading is doubltul, especially a8 regards ‘also

» Or “ worshipped”.

W That is, at the appro!

«4 spiritual benefits". :

wer Burma. The name has also been claimed by thet,

Here follows in the text an illegible word of one syllable whi
en a mere parlicle.

the caitya.

», For the rest, cf. 1. 24.

priate seasons.

=== [Page 111] ===
parT 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS -

(22) Later on the kings that possegsed faith who were lords of the
Mon country, determining that this Camsdiara poo be permanent, the
cetlyaghara having been severed asufider,” encased and enlarged (the sides,
of the caitya ?)' (23) successively and this caitya became a great caitya.
This venerable caitya’ of the hair relics of the exalted Buddha enshrined‘
by Tapussa (and) Bhallika on the top of the ‘ambaguttaJhill, at the time
(24). when His Majesty the Lord of the
Dhammatrailokyanatharajadhirat, was king, the prasada which was the
celiyaghara, having been severed asunder,’ was encased (and) enlarged’
(by him and) when encased was 40 cubits (25) high. Thereafter, at
the time when His Majesty Sutasomarajadhirat was king, (he) caused it
to be encased (and) enlarged” again, and when it had been encased
(and) enlarged (he) erected . . *the spire (and) set up the umbrella (and)
putting a layer of copper (26) within (and) putting a layer of gold
outside (he) had the whole of the spire fully overlaid. Thereafter, at the
time when His Majesty Ramarajadhirat was king, in the year 798 of the
Common Era,’ this venerable ‘caifya™ of the hair relics, (27) (so far as) all
that had been raised from the shoulder of the bell upwards" (is concerned)
having collapsed, His Majesty together with (his) queen Narajadevi ordered
Princ Sarhm Mlam ‘to level and have (it) built up again (28).
When (it) had been buil' up again (they) had it_plastered. Then, saying
that the caitya was very” small, from the large plinth (upwards they) had
it rebuilt (and) encased once more. The rebuilding (and) encasing of the
caitya had not been completed (29) when’® His Majesty Ramarajadhirat

' The sense is doubtful, the word cadah primarily means “apart from, to be separated from". It is not
clear whether the destruction (if it is that) was accidental or an intentional part of the scheme of enlarging

the caitya. The phrase recurs in 1, 24,
+ Doubtful reading.
* Literally “our lord this caitya”.
“C119 n.
SCE Liza.
© C1 22 2.
1 To preserve the order of the original these verbs have been turned into the passive.
* Here there is a small illegible word.
* AD. 1436-7.

¥ Cf1 23 2
" ‘This seems to be the meaning, though it might conceivably be rendered “having only been raised

P as far as the shoulder of the bell.” In view of Il, 25-6, this interpretation does not seem to be accept-
le. By “bell” is meant the bell-shaped body of the pagoda,

™ Or “ too,

™ The word gatap means “to be in time.”

6

"at:

White Elephant, named,\- te

eta
Boe

NS
© ‘
rah As

=== [Page 112] ===
ona Gh
ee eae

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA {VoL. Iv

departed to the city of the devas, Thereafter, at the time when His
Majesty Bafa Barwor, styled Jayaddisarajadhirat was king, His Majesty
together with (his) queen Ray, (30) having given many offerings, had (it)
built up (and) encased. His Majesty's mother, the Queen Viharadevi,
together with Cogarty the commander-in-chief of the army, exerted them-
selves : all the Slave followers (and) retainers that there were (they) led
forth to build (31) but the building had not been completed when’ His
* Majesty Jayaddisarajadhirat departed to the city of the devas. Thereafter, :
at the time when His Majesty Bafa Ken Dau, styled Dhammatrailokyana- | +56
tharajadhirat, was king, what His ‘Majésly’s ‘mother named Queen Vihara- 146
ab devi had built was finished. When it had been finished His Majesty Bafa
~~" Ken Dau, styled Dhammatrailokyanatha, had it plastered, erected the spire
(and) (33) set up the umbrella. Thereafter, at the time when Her Majesty
Si Tribhuwanadityapravaradhammatrailokyanatha Mahadhammarajadhiraja- :
devi together with her son named Ramadhipati Sri Paramamahadham- | Dhew"
mara(34)jadhirat? were rulers, (they made) many offerings together with all
the forces of their army. Their Majesties, mother and _Son, having gone -
to dwell at the foot of the hair relics, had the hollows (of the ground)
filled up, hollows that were very deep (35) (they) caused to be entirely
filled up, high mounds (they) caused to be dug (and) levelled, (on) the
: earth which was filled in (they) piled up blocks of laterite stone and out-
side (it) they had it all faced. Then (36) (on) the firs®™ plinth supporting
the! caitya} on the upper..... “of the plinth, (they) arranged stone -
umbrellas overlaid with gold, and between the umbrellas (they) had the -
foot* of the plinth of the caitya paved throughout with flat stones, (and) ;
having (on) the foot* of this plinth built (37) upt the bell®) (they) arranged :
i} standing lanterns made of stone,’ (and) on the top of the cetiyangana,’
{| i " for people to d, i Y
| what is termed a pannasa’ T peop go round, (and) outside (the

See 1, 29 n.
? This is the celebrated king, more commonly known as Dhammaceti, who Probably had this ins,
scription set up. The queen just mentioned was his mother-in-law,
* This appears to be the top storey of the several storeys leading vp to the actual pagoda,
‘ The reading and meaning are doubtful.
* This really must be the surface from the context.
* Doubtful reading.
™~ 7 Doubtful reading, See the note on the text,
* Or, perhaps, “adorned with (precious) stones.”
* The area surrounding the caitya, See the note on the text,
" Doubtful reading. ‘The word should mean a “hermitage.” Literally “leaf hut,"

7

=== [Page 113] ===
part 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS - "43
umbrellas ?, they) laid down flat stones throughout ; (38) at the end of
the pannasa (they) built a wall, with an earthwork, whereon (they) made
lotus patterns..... at the end of [one ?) lower level (they) had perma-,
nent zayats' built all around. (39) On that level (they) built the pannasa

(apart 7)’ on one level, (and) on the next (lower they) had a wall built all
Within the wall (they) had (40) coconut palms planted

around it.

throughout. Outside the wall (they) had the ground levelled throughout.
'“ Rest houses." The word may be in the singular,
* Doubtful.

un Cfelre pees Aly vane bee

a

=== [Page 114] ===
1 457-8 date given (in 1. 1) is 819 of the Common Era (=A.D. 1457-8), a year

fe

44 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. Iv .

&,

No.” XVI.

AN INSCRIPTION OF THE YATHEMYO MONASTERY, PEGu.

Descriptive Account.

95. This inscription is engraved on one face of a stone of which
about a fifth has been broken off and was not available. The dimensions
of the inscribed area are as follows : height, 2 ft. 14 in., breadth, 3 ft. 5
in. The letters are $ in. high and letter ¢ is § in. long. The inter-
linear space is about 4 in. Except in places where it has been damaged,
the writing is clear.

96. The inscription commemorates the founding by King Dhammaceti
of a large monastery, the Maharamavihara. It is noticeable that the first

earlier than the first date referring to this king in the Kalyani inscriptions.
This was, apparently, the time when a beginning was made with the
erection of the monastery, the dimensions of which are given in some detail,
though unfortunately a good deal of this description is lost. In the year
823 most of the work had been completed and on the 10th of the waxing »
half of Vaigakha in 824, after all was ready, the monks were invited to;
enter into occupation, to the number of 17,174 all told. The remainder _
of the record gives particulars of the king’s bounty towards the monks, ‘
whom he provided with large quantities of necessaries, the details’ of which
are of some interest. Some of these agree with similar gifts mentioned
in various parts of the Kalyani inscriptions to which reference is made

the notes on ll. 20, 21.

...» [pajrinibban gah [2001] cnam kuli lofn] a tuy hea: I
pday sakkarat 819 tila nah [smin dhar] (Ramadhipati-Sriparamas
mahadha)- ¢

=== [Page 115] ===
RT 1]

2:

6.

7.

MON INSCRIPTIONS - "45.

(mmarajadhirat) .., . | Chinas he aie, i aaiion vascineg cae

. suim bed ma Jhif tau Pday sabguiw sa[sana kyak]' tray I ma
pkaf raf tau kramin brabWey’ dhar Bald tari oi tn paso te
. [Maharama]wiha[r] ; t

[kar gah I ma] kuiw yok dayoh Ma{haramawihar] I pa tarh no
[gah kJuim ra I (ka nat kuim)-lar I ka [Lit Iwan kuim] (lar I)
blwoy ramen]. .

SiS ere ae ee Se LA AEG CSE Dan, PE ALO | ae h na
ha[t plakati ma twah bgah hat basa[y I jaJliff 38] hat I janok
34 hat I saluf 33 hat I [tmit] (muk) pan talfuih].......

waist ona Sure a sa: Soe Ee, Thame gs See L ay aay Mees a (32]* hat
I jalif 38 hat II wiha tawi clat Jetawa{n] 26 ga{h] I[e]r suim ku
™ . fi. canor hen I wiha [mway mway gah jalii 32]

(hat) ee, ahs ice ads torches cap an let hoe cas Pann (tal)uih* 11
[no wiJha [j]nok I bwoy duih esan gah I clat cankrarn bwoy*
I [jalin 64 hajt I jano[k] . . [hat I salua ]. . [hat I ba talui]-

(H) Rca hte eee ae ee a Sen er ee (jra)y’ bodhi
mwoy I ceti ler mwoy II clat upuh gah I jalih 38 hat I [janok]
(1)9 [h]at I sa{lua 23] ha[t I] ceti (ta’) cléa jon ceti

Fest foe AME AED ee eae Sane OSes gees - Gno}k
bwfo]y duifh] smar ky4 manah kamba[h wiha glah I [k]...
(1) . ... [ca mwoy 30 maflarh] caturah [I layoh I] (8) [hat] I
dapah taluih I ui[t]....

2 oie h ERE yeti. OREO CG), AOR OBS te (bwo)y” ramen
klon 4 tau tuy II p[d]ay sakka[rjat [823 gah] uit ka ta[buija
ka[mban] (le)r [tuy] uit I ma pa [tarh ku]

“' Conjecturally restored, cf. XVII 2,
” Error for kyak,
Error for brabwoy,
Possibly ra, or cha.
(, Possibly 33,
Conjecturally restored.
For nor,
Error for mwoy,
yp COniccturally restored.
Conjecturally restored,

=== [Page 116] ===
46

11.

13.

* Conjecturally restored,

+ There is no virama visible.

* Or san,

‘ This a ise dma or dapuh, but the additional strokes may be accidental,
* Conjecturally restored,

It is doubtful if there was a word here. If so,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. Iv

ni ta
gah tuy uit hen ra II [aleha ka wiha ma tu[y gah] I act aren
ma sbala[h wiha gah s]min-dhar [tala cin]

(batan)! ie grcck Gece ort ise 6a GOEL AIAN w{ih]ar’

[gah] I [kJuiw [nJah tah samah saman tuy I run jamlif im
gluii [ku] cnor [fian]’ gah kanarh [tuy] I swa[k aca] sah jamno

tade’ I bwoy athu[i]k atan gah salarh kana(th)m lor na bata[n]
tanay I kwa[k] I[o]r [na] janik I da(pah)‘ [thap I]

Sets One epee cotta gate fe to abe e aes LIES a8 teen see . [sa]

samat to’ gamluin [tu]n ler I kutti mway la{k masun IJhim
dapah klarh pan cwoh paray gah I ma pa tarh [ku] da[ka]r dnt

Sob gees ance dagen oe ato Roe nee Se ee a a (I pday) [sa]- ts
kkarat 824 kitu basak [cah] bramak gafh I tiJla flah smin dhar

tifla] cif batah het [ma sa]d[dha] pdaLy] raft pli

sore Os ted & ba LP Map A dee (p) tna. (RB) ah hk
. . Maharamawihar tuy I san ma dah gamawa[s]i arafiawasi

I ma nwom bnat galuin dlamh* I kutti ta gah I kufijw wath
pllop [damian]

Sih aye Vip Gam seek (kutti ta)* [gah]
I na pindapatapaccay ma nom
pgah I kha{d]aniya bhojaniya gal

ta II lukau dacam the[y] (he)a
tau ku rah ma pray ma twahs
[h ta]ruip tau [ku] (kala) .
BA ae ee an ge Tamu [mway mway thely heh watthu aim)
a (1
. . ‘klarh masun basa I dacam thay hea watthy paee
[dJapah thim dfaca}m [c]woh pi basa I watthy ma n{wo]m bna
ga-

it must have been ba or pi

=== [Page 117] ===
part 1) MON INSCRIPTIONS ~~ 47

18. (luin)' [wo’] ma pru Pren [yindapatapaccay] I gilanapaccay [ta]
gah I ra-it ma phap dacam thay tu[y gah] I tila fiah smi
ad tala [ciJh ba[tJan [gah] I day[yJadhar lak{khap Jada[n Jawat:
thu.

19. [ma pa] tarh [thay]... . [dacam ma twah pgaJh bray j[ma glah
T bga tau ku [t]ila sai to’ ga[m]luia tun IT pday [san] m[why
lak dapah I[Ajim klarh [dapah c]woh pan gah I [ca® s]an
jamnok (I) ta(day)*

20. ... .* [Ihim dapah klarh ba cwoh] gah I [suim] suim ku kraya
dlarn [k]wo[m] ku [p]ari[k]khara dacam I sanga gah ya[t sn]a
bap [I]}nim [dapah] klarh [ba cw]oh mre[k gamih] pan Inim
masun [k]Jlarh pi [basa]

21. (I) [mrek gala ba lak pan] Inim turau Klarh [bJa cwoh [basa I
[a]parh’ ba ra ba [l]ak daci[t] laim Klath ba cwoh pi [bJasa I
[sat basiw daci]t klarh pa{n] cwoh dacam kdon I [kwom pha]-

mm mH Hm DH EE EE OE EE la

22, (la suim bi gapuiw panak sat)* [bun sablu] me[{k sut] I parafa
ka suilm camb[a]y I han ra [sui}m panga[n] cwa I [kammlali I
(buJn kneh brakuih I (mamar jragan)’ k(w)uiw . [r].. . (n) .
{r] . (ta)ray* I b[uJn ksa (I) na (tarn)* \

23. mye[k] (c)e(n) I [klen ka-uy I klef lanau] I tlak pamat I basay
pamat I juk st{eJi I sakep. dun I dako’ sa[t I] tamah I pareh
[ Inua] (d) . . . [suim jon] I. nua swiuh)...... [k I palye
I (t)am-ot

| Conjectural, but cf, 1. 15, supra.
For aca, %
2 The @ is shaped rather like the numeral 3. :
Looks like thane’ but the th might be &, f, or / and the » might be r.
For apd,
eee the last two words which are practically certain, this is conjecturally restored from the
7' Passages referred to in the notes to Il. 20, 21 of the translation. :
Very doubtful reading ; the first word is quite uncertain, except the initial letter, and in the second
© & might be dh, :
Very uncertain, A conceivable reading is braba ray the former representing thé modern baba
* Some sort of knife, and the latler raai (=rai) “mustard plant, radish"; faray might mean

VF bud", which iat
"Or ant, does not seem appropriate.

ae |

a
ma <

=== [Page 118] ===
OL. 1V
48 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [v

... [ma do]k pen san
24: (bwoy)! tee eae ce Ra 6 lone see Fl : : bli
hen I tila cin ba[t]an ma ciren kuiw dan I mete a aes
san (sJama{t] ma nwo[m Bnat] mwafy IJak [masun In
masun cwoh-pan’ ta -

25. [gah tun] (ler) [parikkhara] (dacam I)* [ma pa tari kJu lee
dni [Jer I [mw]ay lak masun lhim pan klar masun ¢
(plan gah I [m}rek mway lak masun [him dapah] kla[rn p
cwo]h sun‘

26. basi I sat Inim] pafn klarh dapah cwoh] pi kdon II I a{pa]a
sah pa-uit mwa[y] lak dapah Inim Klarh dapah cwo[h pa]n I-
a{pan] mrfek] ba [I]ak da[pah] In[im dapah] kla[rh]

27. pan [cwoh turau] basa [II apah sat ba Inim] pa{n klJarh [ba]
ewo[h] m[waly kdon I [sak w]o’ hen smin dha[r tila cin
“ ba[tah] tam[o’ sabbafiutafian tuy lon watthu dayyadhar] ma
[twah]

28. [pgah bray jma gah] (I) [bga tau ku san ta’) gamluin hen fra 11
(II)

Translation. _

Fara Samira a ies Sarge 2001 years having elapsed (after the exalted
Buddha had achieved) Parinirvana, in 819 of the Common Era’ His

Majesty the King of the Law (Ramadhipati Sriparamamahadha(2)-
mmarajadhirat)* ., spade TR together with the Vedas,” who
delights in- causing the religion of the exalted Buddha to shine, who
wields sovereignty in accordance with the Law, who ..., : . the

Maharamavihara (3)............, the .. » who caused - th
__ Pillars of the Maharamavihara to be set up. From thenceforward, (at) th

' Conjecturally restored,

? The h seems to be superscript over the p,

* Practically certain,

* For masun,

5 1457-8 A.D.

* The reading of the name is practically eerlain to the end of 1.1; the reat h : ‘
restored. The king is Dhammacet, and the dale is a year earlier than the ccctee geet, coniecturall
in the Kalyipt inscriptions (ef. XII B 32 and the commentary in § gt), st date referring to him

"This may refer to the Buddhist Canon (cf, XII B 33n, and XVIi 2)

=== [Page 119] ===
MON INSCRIPTIONS 49

PART 1]
2 in due order... (4)...

time (of).....' and at the end... ..,
vee with pakati® cubits, that is to say iron cubits,‘ (in) length 38
cubits, (in) size* 34 cubits, (in) height 33 cubits, (the)... .° (of the)
(sides was ?) four faluih’.... (5).......... 32° cubits, (in) lepgth
38 cubits. The viharas surrounding’ the central hall of the Jetavana
(were) 26, together with... .. . row(s); each vihara was 32 (cubits)
long (6) se Feds . taluih (2) From the great vihara, towards
the North East, an ambulatory hall, (in) length 64 cubits, (in) size”
cubits, in height . . cubits, two faluih® (7)......44. a Bodhi tree, a
caitya also. The uposatha’ hall (was) (in) length 38 cubits, (in) size* 19
cubits, (in) height 23 cubits. The caitya(s), (from ?) the spire (to ?) the foot
of the caitya(s) (8)... .. 6.0... 00005 great... . towards the South,
outside the wall of the vihara, a... . (tank 2)" 30 mavilan square, (in)
(in) succession

depth 8 cubits, seven faluih,” all... (9)
having gone on working,”* in 823" of the Common Era all the work on the
the

moat and wall was quite finished. Beginning with (10)........
Ee a were all finished. When the work” on the vihara was finished,
arrangements for the ceremonial opening of the vihara (were made by ?)”

the King of the Law, the Lord of the (White)” Elephant, (11)......

' Reading and meaning doublful.
2 The meaning of han has not been determined, Perhaps it is an error for /wou.

be

A inlallé
batt

31 e, “standard "; literally, “original, natural ".
«This is probably the Mon equivalent, in sense, to the expression ssh dd, another name for the |
fof which CSA (4
XS

standard cubit (194 inches) and poiuts to a Burmese origin of the latter term, the first hal!

closely resembles the Burmese word for “iron”.
5 Presumably this means “ width, breadth”.
© The meaning of {mit has not been determined.
| is wearly certain ; faluie seeins to be a unit of measurement, Cf.

fh Sanskrit and Pali ala, “ span, palm of hand, sole of foot”.

Possibly it may be from fit, “to come out” and

refer to something jutting out.
7 The reading muk, “face, sid
Il. 6, 8 infra. I is difficult to connect it will
©The second number is nol quite certain, It may be 3.
* Or “dependent on”.
® See note 7 supra. ai
" See note * supra,
# See note 7 supra.
A Buddhist religious service.
“ See note * supra.
' Assuming Jaca, with a flaw between / and ¢.
One marta =7 cubils,
" See note 7 supra, y
" Or perhaps mie works having been carried on in due order".
“ time" bul I think it may here refer to kara,

” 1461-2 A.D.
” The word kd al this period was used also for Aalay

*' Cunjecturally restored. 1

7

=== [Page 120] ===
50 ‘EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. Iv

. ++... the vihara; having caussa it to be cleared and levelled evenly
(and) made long sheds in many rows near to it! for the leading teachers

of athe Orders (12) 3.2. 7805 Sak eatin 2 in the customary manner
draped’ (them) with embroidered canopies,‘ (and) hung (them) with
curtains, sevenfold, (13)............ (for) the minor clergy also,
fifteen thousand seven hundred and forty cells, and more, beginning with
mats, pillows, (14). .........0. (in) 824 of the Common Era, theDate a

tenth of the waxing (half) of the month of Vaisakha, His Majesty the i
King of the Law, the Lord of the White Elephant, because (he was) —
faithful to the Three Gems (15)..... Suen SES having (completed)
the Maharamavihara, caused the clergy who dwelt in villages and in the
forest, in accordance with the number of the rooms (and) cells (available),
to be inducted into (their) dwellings (16) . . (the cells ?).
During eight days with food requisites that were of excellent flavour, that
is to say, hard foods (and) soft foods, (he) fed (them) at (the proper) times’
wee eae (AD ane ste a every day offerings (amounting to) two (thousand)*
_.. hundred’ and five viss," (in) eight days offerings (amounting to)
oficrings to (18) this (amount ?)°

seventeen thousand cighty-three viss,"
were prepared, food requisites (and) m dical requisites. At the end of
this entertaining for cight days, His Majesty the King of the Law, Lord:
of the White Elephant, (made) donations of auspicious offerings (19)
beginning with 4. 4 the cight days, he) poured down, as it were, a
heavy rain upon the lords of the clergy. Among the seventeen thousand y
seven hundred and seventy-four clergy, (for) the leading teachers (among)
the clergy)... +--+ - w (20)... ," a thousand seven hundred and twenty, ©

together with all the furnishings of the rooms and the eight

nee

1 Or, if san is to be read for fan, “ made the long sheds in very many rows for", ete.

2 The meaning of fade’ is undetermined.

+ Literally, “ dressed ”.

‘The meaning is not quite cer!
VIII A 18 and the modern faydai,
carving".

* Possibly “at those times

© Practically certain restoration.

1 Bither a hundred or two or three hundred,

8 It is difficult to reconcile these (wo figures.

* Fairly certain restoration.

" The reading and meaning f
but the word at the beginning of |. 20 is unide
these 1720 higher clergy.

lanay is probably the Hnlay of

fain ; for balan, cf. VILA 15, 185
: ‘ nentation, floral design,

Inaai (pronounced fanai), “tracery, orn;

» (reading gah afler kala),

“iniddle", and perhaps “intermedia!

may be
dicates some degree of rank among

Perhaps it iu

are doubtful:

=== [Page 121] ===
paRT 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS . “51

appurtenances, a thousand seven hundred and twenty robes and cloth

mats,’ four thousand _five hundred’ an@ three viss of black pepper, (21)

twenty-four housand six hundred and=twenty viss of Indian pepper ; total

of the two items, twenty-nine thousand one hundred and twenty-three”

viss ; nine hundred and forty-eight barrels of basiw areca-nufs,” boxes for
areca-nuts,’ (22) together with bottles of lime, areca-nut slicers, knives for
betel leaf, napkins,’ .........° with slings «i. and bowls,’ woollen

10

cloth,? knives and styles (for writing) books, ... +++ + eens ees
(23) eye medicine,” medicinal oil, sesamum oil, lanterns, fire steels,”

stretched cords," bamboo tongs, areca-nut cases," brooms, baskets, . . -

. . waterpots with stands," drinking pots, ......” portable stoves, ..
J (24) (for)... 2.2... +» very Complete.” The Lord of the

White Elephant arranged to give gifts, besides these, (to) the minor

1 Or “clothes (and) mats”. Cf, XII F 46, H 38, M 27 and N (conclusion, after 1, 28), It is to be
noted however that the Pali version of the first two passages speaks only of “cloths for ficlvara robes",
not mats at all, See XII H 39, trans. n.

1 Cf, XI N (conclusion after J, 28). ‘The word saf also means fruit in general but the meaning is
determined by the 948 barrels here, added to the 1473 in 1, 26, making the total of 2421 barrels of areca-
nuts in 1. 27. : h

3 The rendering is doubtful, as it depends entirely on the Pali version of XII H 38, See XII H 39

trans, n. and the passages there cited.
4 Or “monks' cloths”. Cf. XII H 39, J 24, N 9 and ils conclusion after 1, 28,

5 The sense of para’ ka is not clear: para% may mean “a present” and kd may be “a vessel
with a spout", But there is a word palai, “botlle” of which parai might conceivably be a variant

form, In that case the sense might be “water vessels with spouts,” simply.
© Or “straps” for carrying the vessels, The meaning of hai rd is unknown,

? Literally “ plates (or dishes, or other crockery) for broth (or curry) ”.
Pali kambaliya has the latter sense, Sanskrit and Pali

® Or “blankets” or “ woollen garments";
hambala all three meanings, The form kambar in XII E 17 comes from one of the last two
and is represented by the modern kimaw (=kamd), which means “mat, carpet, blanket, woollen

garment”,

* Or “knives, styles, books”.

” The remainder of this line is for the mos!
which may mean a knife for splitting bamboo (modern &i

t part doubtful : ‘wuiw, “spade or shovel”, and bua Asa,
nya = éha), seem reasonably probable ; wa may

mean “ basket ”, =

"The reading of myck cen is a little doubtful, but it probably represents the similar Burmese words
With the meaning given, * ae ;
th the actual word is iron",

™ Presumably flint and sfecl are meant, thong!

4 Perhaps for.hanging clothes on,
“ Vessels made from a joint of bamboo, like quivers.

"© Literally, “ feet ”.

| A word qualifying “ waterpots " is illegible.

ta The word or wards after “drinking pots" are illegible.
j, The meaning of fam-of is undetermined.
| Or “ sufficient",

\

=== [Page 122] ===
52" EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou 1

u
clergy, who numbered fiftecn thousand (four ?)! hundred and fifty-four, (25)
as well, (namely) the eight appurtchancés, beginning with fifteen thousand
four hundred and fifty-four mats- and pillows, fifteen thousand seven
“hundred and thirty-five viss of red pepper, (26) (and) one thousand four
hundred: and seventy-three barrels‘ of areca-nuts. The total of all the
clergy was seventeen thousand one hundred and seventy-four. The total
of red pepper was twenty-seven thousand seven hundred and (27) forty-
Six viss;* the total of areca-nuts was two thousand four hundred |
and twenty-one barrels. Thus did the King of the Law, the
Lord of the White Elephant, having . . .* omniscience, (give) offerings’ of

meritorious gifts, as it were (28) a heavy rain, (which) he poured down
upon all the lords of the clergy.

* The word paw “four” seems to have been wrongly omitted before Alash “hundred, ‘This appears
to follow from the number of mats and pillows in 1, 25 taken in connection with the number (1720) of
the leading clergy in 1. 19'and the full (olals (17,1741 in II, 19 and 26, which leaves 15,454 for the minor
clergy.

* It is impossible to reconcile this num

ber with the numbers given in I, 21 and 25.
* The meaning of famo' is undetermin:

ed, It can hardly be tmo* “rock, stone ”,

=== [Page 123] ===
\ A ;
% \ ‘ oat
parr 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS- "58
nt et
. No..XVIL.

AN INSCRIPTION OF THE KYAK Pan Pacopa, PEcu.

Descriptive Account.

97. This inscription is engraved on one face of a stone which appears
to have been broken into three pieces. The two upper fragments adjoin
pretty closely and form a continuous text, though at the junction it is
often blurred, apart from the fact that the whole document is much
weathered and to a great extent illegible. The lower fragment is detached
and it has not been possible to fit it with certainty on to the upper parts.
The height of the inscribed area, therefore, cannot be stated exactly, but
it appears to have been a little over 3 ft, ; the breadth is 3 ft. 3 in, The
letters are $ in. high, and letter ¢ from 4+ in. to § in. long. The
interlinear space varies from # in. near the top of the inscription to 1 in.

near the bottom.

98. This record commemorates the setting up by King Dhammaceti in
the last quarter of the year 837 (the first quarter of A.D. 1476) of four
great statues of Buddha and _his_ three immediate predecessors on a
common base, whence this monument derives its name which means “ the
Four Buddhas”. Unfortunately the inscription is in such a bad state of
Preservation that only a relatively small part of the text could be-deciphered
and translated. Some portions run parallel with passages in XII M, and
a comparison of the two records has thrown light here and there on what
would otherwise have been treated as practically illegible or at any rate so
dubious that nothing could safely be said about it.

Text.

5 1. II namo Buddh{aya] II nfor c]nam tuy [tila puin kyak] tray
Sa{kyamuni ma pa parinirbbaJn gah 2019 [cnam kuli lon a tuy

| : hea] I  pday sak[karat 837 gah I tila] fiah [smin dhar
Ramadhipati Sripa]-

oricgenel

oz enti
19765 ¢

x
“

=== [Page 124] ===
54.

modern thawdai (thawai), “lap”, seems doubtful. But cf. XV A 5,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. Iv

2. [rama}ma[h]adha[m]mafraja]dhirat I ma [cuin dah tau tila cin
bata I ma pkan ran tau” pitakat pi suim bed I ma lhin tau
pday ma pa puin sasana]ekya[k tray ma pkaiy rai tau kramin
prab]woy dhar [gah I kha gah gasa]-

3. p cuit [ma] rau wo’ [ktuiw dah ra I pday] (kala) [puiy wo’ gah
I kyak tray Kakkusan] (ma nwom bnat salua pan) [cwoh hat
pakati ler mwoy I kyak tray Konaguim ma nwom bnat salun]
pi [cwo]-

4. [h hat pakati ler mwoy I kyak tray Kassapa] (ma nwom bnat
saluh ba cwoh hat pakati ler mwoy I) [kyak tray Gotama ma
nwom] (bnat salu cwoh dacam) [hat pakati ler] mwoy I

5. tila puiy kyak tray pan wo’ dah (tuy ra] (I uit tila puiy) [kyak
tray pan wo’) (tuy) [ma nwom bnat salun tuy] (ma gah IJ pan)
[cwoh hat] (I pi cwoh hat I) [ba ewoh hat]

6. [I cah daciam hat I ma gah wo’ gah I bnat] [tuy

ma fiah].... [bnat] . . . [tila puiy] (te’ gah)
rier aug .+ + (dah uiw da ci) [bnat yam wo]-

7.’ xa [fiah ma] sbat gah I [bat ha go’ bnat toy] eicemensias. bs

Re ereese A pots sees ee (kuiw dah). (kui). (dah)
[uiw da ci I patimarup pan wo’) (tu)-

8 y I [ma] ey ska{nam] wlo’ gah I... gah cy... . (tila puiy)
[kyak tray]Jici sient floes tes [wo'] ra T [bnat janok] (thawhay)?
. « [yamebnat]}ii x ei asegg (da)-

9. [ca]m ewoh [hat salu’ ma] (dah) [2lman] (thawhay? tuy) . . (dah)

[pi ewoh pi hat ku mwoy] (pat? pakati) [gah hea 1] ey s{kanarh
fii I patima](ghara ku)... . 2. (patimarup pan]

10. ma sdm&n I ma nwdm bnat [mway mway flan klarh kKlarh_ hat]
(pakati) < cies. be (ma nwdm bnat saluh).. 2... |
... [ey skanarh fi I I rau gah ksap] (tuy hei) [11 pday
sakkaraj II 837 II kitu] : ae

' Except where otherwise stated, a dot in this transcript represents one missing afsara,
1 This appears {o be the reading, Whether the word is to be regarded as connected with the.

3 Very doubiful reading. Presumably the word represents a subdivision of the enbit,

=== [Page 125] ===
PART 1]

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

18.

19.

20.

e e ;

‘ ' ee

MON INSCRIPTIONS’ 55

mak mway [crawek titay byab(b)ati] (lak krakat hen II) . . . (Iwon

tay TY) 4.62 Sse ORE. .. [II kitu cay cah ba bramok thay]
(buddhawa II lak bruih I*ma yok ton) [pati]- ;

(m]aghara (nda)' [II 1 (gata. . kuim II)... .--- evans
Set hans NE ES Te Ae Ba ed ARs (bwoy ramen) ...
. . [hen ra II If akha] (ma cuip ara ma sdabut)’. .

(t)® gah [I] pday dwor}.. ee ees if :
oe SE, ree (ler) II. (dlarn) . . (ti). . (lak Jar
ankade bwoy).......- [kwo]-

(m ku] (garhah) [truh brau] (het mik kuiw go’ dmanh gah tuy)
Seti ies ea ae (waduih) [pa-uit] (I bway manah gah grop)

.. + (pa-uit I bwoy) [pday sala kambu pa-uit I rau gah pren]
(tuy heh)... . (dlata)

dhfat dwor gah]... -- eee eres (gali)?255 Ns tee Rs
... (ma cicwon kuim lat); pita age st sce (gah kuim lar)... ..
. . (kuim Jar) oe ee ee

(n] bufddharup pan duih] (ler rau gah kuim gafi galau)....
(dlarn gah)... - eee eet (lana): Ae dees [ma
cicwon] (gah) ..--+- + Was Ger ei aan

. (waduih dla gah tun dak nan garay) [mwoy thap pnan kamak
mway thap I pnan dalan_ mwoy thap] Ae, BE (gah) [gafii
galau lar] (ra II patil) oe ee ee ees

. {II kwom ku amat dakuip pnan]) (ararhpariwa gamluin) [ma
sadmanh II swak ma pa sabhan}’ . Saget as eye o Cahese ee
ZA mw sae [tuyy}...- +e:

op (lari “dhat): dete eo GNBb a eb espe?

¥ 6

[HicTbskewom Ku), aieseyesrorvnc tat ted ab et bel: tag” ae

1 Spelt nda (Cf. XIV 1).

* Probably for sda but,
* ‘This is probably the last
* With this passage,

dhal, Cf, XL M9 . :
4. eg whic have helped in the conjectural restorations,
cf. 3 i

can ae eae the 80-26. are intended merely {o fill up the line, not to indicate the
* The dots afler the wo! .
amount that is missing.

=== [Page 126] ===
56 ’ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
21. (brau) [tila flab]... eee gee eet
23..-(h sabhah tuy). i) ke ccete e's fia eae seen eB wae 08

24... {il&obways Ghat ra)... 6 cee gree gee ee Oe a Cece tate

2552 sys tau). ou os sas 3 PR Cre | RE 3 Rael Se ands heer at
26. [truh ma go’ etadagga] (cah mway II rup upah brau ma go’)
[etadagga])...... alowed) = 2 oo geal Ao tee ees see
27. z Shi speaela suet 4. ieee 2 Gee Pe Adabut-lar)? ea.
DB 88 Sa) Berns sand ake pebal ode reid camels Ske ce
D9 2 ite ot ER RS ++ (tup mba) [kyak tray]... (rup

Klarh cah dacam te’ wo’) .

31.
32.
33. (kuim) [lar II rup dapuin the brau ma ‘lu pday]
Ren ee a a Seca ene el melt
34,

watthu [kuim lar, II kuiw
lay pajrah kyak pan duih tun]

kanarh calo’ lar pa-uit hea II pd
(ler IT pday) .

' Compare XII M 35. Here the legible part of the y
: per fragment iteenpu
wo Probably ie dagut lar, which may be the actual reading i L vie Here the ae 24
rae eet Begins. ‘The dots following the words indicate their position with ep Ele Part of the
Sime atte which precede the words merely fill up the line. ‘This alga pre rrenee £0 the right
seni cessor, What interval there is between the two fragments ie nol ence £0 lines 28-33
-36 it is even possible that they overlap to the extent ing 1 aett: On the anal
126, “nt of making 1. 29 the continuation

=== [Page 127] ===
oN
PaRT 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS. - : 57:
35. [lua II rup buiw Ma kya] II pday [pajrah] (II). .... [lata :
gah II tuih rup dewataYtruh brau gamluih ma tau tau pday
cah Inim cakkawa II ma tlw] (pa *pujau) «fcc Pee :

36. [masun cwoh II rup gam-i truh II gam-i brau] (IJ rup dewatau)
(II rup pruit II rup buil pnan Ma II rup dewatau truh brau]
(ma tluA pa pujau) [kyak tray]... eee

SFr s 6 CeO teh] ook. Aken 2% See ee (ra) I uilt kuiw
Pe dayon) sas r ts ei oN ots foatiee [lar cut thar sranJ........

Translation.

Honour to Buddha! 2019 years having elapsed from the year when
the Lord of Merit, the exalted Buddha Sakyamuni, achieved Parinirvana, in
the year 837 of the Common Era His Majesty the King of the Law Rama- /47/
dhipati Sri Pa(2)ramamahadhammarajadhirat, who is the Lord of the White while ghey?
Elephant, who supports the three Pjtakas together with the Vedas, who
delights in rendering meritorious service to the religion of the exalted
Buddha, who wields sway in accordance with the Law, at that time a
thought (3) of this sort arose (in his) mind: “In this (time ?) of ours, a
(statue of) the exalted Buddha Kakusandha measuring forty standard
cubits in height, one of the exalted Buddha Konagamana measuring
thirty y_(4) standard cubits in height, one of the exalted Buddha Kassapa
measuring twenty standard cubits in height, and one of ‘the exalted
Buddha Gotama measuring eighteen cubits in height (5) these four (statues
of) our lords the exalted Buddhas being made, (all ?) these (statues of) our
lords the exalted Buddhas, measuring in height forty cubits, thirty cubits,

twenty cubits (and) (6) eighteen cubits, as aforesaid, the measurement. .... #

which they . . . . the measurement..... these Buddhas... . ”) is

(because eis to measure the measurement (7) at this time (?), not

having been able to measure the measurement ........ (caused to

bed): eg these four statues (8) that I shall make... 1.... our
this... . the measurement (of the

lords the exalted Buddhas .-....-

CL XM 9, It would be possible to read Ach,

8

=== [Page 128] ===
. 38 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1v

size af the seat ?)'.... measurement .. . (9) eighty cubits, in height to
be (a seat?)'.. . thirty-three standifd cubits and one pat (?)', I will make,

@ statue (hall and?)..... (where) the four statues (10) are to be,
measuring on each side one hundred standard cubits weg aie measuring
in height. ..7.. T shall make 1” me

Having thus reflected, in the year 837 of the Common Era, (11) the
first (day) of the waning of the month of Magha, the day (being)
Thursday,’ (Cancer being lagna?), .... (was finished ?)....... (on)
the twelfth (day) of the waxing of the ‘month of Caitra, the day (being)
(Wednesday, Taurus being Jagna 2), (they) set up P th paso the statue

(12) hall) (?). (In front of 2) . « (also?) . socabcae «the. gt satas
(successively ?)'. 2... When the time came ‘to set up’ on 13)
..in the middle... ..... (chamber?) ..... sme ton
+ + « together (14) with the laity, men and. women, for them to be, (he)

Said, s,s ce toe OR (all around ?), Outside (they) covered... .

throughout ; inside (they) hung white (cloth) throughout. Having thus iy 4
Rete.

prepared it, ...... the central (15) relic (chamber ?)..........

which (they) also decorated .... also.... also
Buddha statues (they) thus adorned also... .. (the chamber ?)......

1476 &

gee (16) the four Aawter!

. adorned... (17) . around the chamber too (with) watering pots, -

one row, hanging lamps, one row, altar candles, one row,..... (they)
adorned. Throughout........ (18) . . together with the ministers

(and) chiefs of the army (and all the retinue 2), to be, in order to hold a-

festival. ccs ee .scee eS (one)* 6. 5.2 (having?)... (19)... .
. (relic chamber?) . . . (20) . together with... .. (21) (daughter of ?)
His Majesty... - ++ (22). Adal eo eS. (23) (having held the
festival?) ....-- (24) . . (went to the relic?).... (25). 2.0.0. (26)
(eleven statues of)’ male (devotees)’ who had attained pre-eminence, (ten)*
statues of female devotees who had attained pre-eminence ....... (27)
see G s (set up ?)’....» (28)...... (29)... . « (@ statue of the

1 See the note on the text. :

* See the note on the text. It is not clear which of the dimensions in this line applies to the height
but the second one seems the more likely.

© This date appears to comespond with Thuraday, 11th January 1476 and the next one with Wednes-
day, 6th March 1476,

“Or “in a row", or “in due order".

5 See the note on the text.

* Conjecturally restored, following XII M 35.

7 See the note on the text. -

=== [Page 129] ===
re

x s
part 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 59 :
father of ?) the exalted Buddha . off} hundred and eighteen statues ?)
Pgs (|) tie ere pas a statue ot Natabise, astatue.: ss a ey stanes AAS spor
(of devas?) . 2... , (3b (having?).. 2.0... U2 se SS :
(having ?)......, (in accordance with the shapes ?)'. . . . (33) ae
(also 2), statues of senior nuns who came......, (34) ie a5 offerings
(?) also, caused to be made and set all around. On the plinth of the
four-sided Buddha (statues) also, on.....,.,.., (35) came, statues | HL A,LA
of the vanquished army of Mara, on the Plinth... ... above, in accord. }
ance with the many shapes of male and female devas that dwell in!/
ten thousand universes, who came (to do reverence?)........ (36)

fifty ; statues of monks (and) nuns, (statues of devas ?), statues of pretas,
Statues of Mara’s army, Statues of male and female devas (who _came to do
Mserence to?) the exalted Buddha... . . (37) . . . . “engraved and
carved)... . all the pillars... , applied gold and silver’... .

; Doubtful reading and meaning. But of. 1, 35,
"Ch XI M 9.

=== [Page 130] ===
' ae aa |
w age m ‘
; : ;
‘ a“
60 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA _ [vot 1v
oc
No. XVIII.

AN INscRIPrioN oF GAUNGZEGYUN Pacopa, PEGu.

Descriptive Account.

99. This inscription is on two faces and a detacheg, fragment of stone.
The parts occupied by the lettering here transcribed are on Face A, 1 ft.
10 in. in height, 1 ft. 44 in. in breadth, on Face B, 1 ft. 9 in. in height,
1 ft. 44 in. in breadth, and on the fragment C 2} in. in height by .9 in.
in breadth. The letters and interlinear spaces are nearly of the same
dimensions as in No. XIII. The inscription contains imprecations on
persons who are not true to the faith, and blessings on those that are. It
seems to be only the remnant of a more extensive record, and owing to
the bad state of preservation of some parts of it, it has not been possible
to make a complete translation of the portion that is available.

Text.

1 eal eos ew es . [kuiw] dah mran sapa
eee arr ree va .eee« [narfak jamnok dacam kuiw cin.

[tun] II kuiw ktuiw dah. pruit mwai

Eee eT eee Dy Gr ee
jaku mwai wa sr[ot]

AS EG eae eee en [nd] . [a] I] yar pluJa mwai ma II dak
mwai tandat’ lamlan la -

5. [go’] lop ka’ II blah na gah tun II ktuiw dah mnih II.

6 [na glaw 500 Jeh II kamlau nd gaw 500 leh II damlu na.

sare
1 Brror for tandah, or thandah if the word meant .

=== [Page 131] ===


=== [Page 132] ===
NICA -
ree (paw

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMA

Piligty Sale ce este eae *

“ay (skandavt] sae

ES Ebene ess ®

: enla tamia] (ta) oe

8. Gacnayaney vee oe
da{rhat] II ;

=== [Page 133] ===
\ .
SS Z
parr 1) MON INSCRIPTIONS mk. 68
Cc ; ? ‘
1, ... (ta)ndah tha(mbat} hah Jamm(u)dift] kuiw ar. /..
a. rg ae [iw] . . [A] IT sam(-a)r p(d)ai mhai akah (tau)... -
s : aly
= Translation. , ‘
i ; $ 2 d
ie ees may (he) have-smallpox (resulting in) blindness, may” (he be,
dispersed ?) (2)...+... (in) the eight great hells may (he) be cooked
pete Bs (3)... . again; may (he) become a prefa for one existence,
sucking (4)....-.- if one grain of boiled rice, one drop of water, dew _
. . » (5) (may it not ?) be able to enter (his) throat. And thereafter again
(may he) become a human being, . - - (6) . . from birth 500 times, dumb -
from birth 500 times, blind from birth 500 (7) times, leprous from birth

500 times, (may he) become leprous creatures (8) from. birth 500 times,
may he become ! A man who is not true to the faith, (9) may all this

that we -have ‘said befall that person !

hand, in accordance with this saying that we ufter,

(10) On-the other
n y according to the law, (11) in this world may (he)

if a person follows trul:

be free from calamity, (12) may (
pleasing to men and devas also, (13) may (he) be able to enjoy much .

happiness in the world’, (14) may (his) life also (be) long, (and when he) «
dies (and) goes hence, (15) may (he) be able to go into existence in the’

heavenly land (and) may
every form of being (into) . whi
accordance with the. paritta (17) pra}
may (it) be fulfilled for that person i

ich (he).comes be free from suffering ; in
hat. (the men of) old prayed?

y orids.” But in view of what follows this seems a less probable
_ 2) Or “enjoy happiness in many W
interpretation. a
1 Or “the ancient parila prayers that (men) pray.’

the) be free from suffering, may (he) be

(he) be able to enjoy celestial bliss ; (16) may ~

=== [Page 134] ===
64 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (vou. 1

: B
sunrise (and suneeth ois. hcenc. 1+. (2)... in the future C) cas
3). or... once again will die... 0. (4)... deeds that are
now ee (5). ...... who shall be (creatures?) .. 0... (ass
Once again... . . shall make. . (7): ee Fe (besides ?) the deeds of
the men of olden times . . : (8) (because ?)...., (this). + + great in
Strength (9) gray biota oh violent (persons ?) shall seize (and drag ~
away). c(10)e. having been able to do... . also restore
. (his 2) (11) property... .. in accordance with this Saying, once again
i 0(12)

ABS 2 EELS Fa (this) Pear (this) (13) (faith ?)

BLOG (14 ty may... (go out ?), travel by boat. .

+ +. (may the
planets?) ..., (15517) oh te soe Gag ae

+ may (the offerings of ?) the peo

ple of Jambudvipa
ae gis te Santon cen ae in the heavens :

Postscript,

100. In concludi,
obligations for help
undertake the work,
mentioned in §

ing this series of inscriptions, I desire to express my
given me by the authorities who Commissioned me to ‘
by their official @ number of friends already ~
21, to whom mu:

Sst now be added
Davids, my two former Pupils, Professors Gea _Dr. C. A. F. Rhys
and my colleague, ‘Dr, JA Stewart,

+ Luce'and Pe Maung Tin,

* Or “east (and) vest,”

G.B.C.P.O.—No. 1, SAS, 1-12-1934_350,