=== PAGE 1 (Journal p. 1) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

GREGORY SCHOPEN

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE:
MONASTIC FUNERALS IN THE
MULASARVASTIVADA-VINAYA

Funeral rites and burial practices in Indian Buddhist monasteries have
received very little scholarly attention. This is, perhaps, because such
rites and practices — like those in so many other religious traditions
— call clearly into question the degree to which “official” and pur-
portedly “central” doctrines were known to the members of actual
Buddhist monastic communities, or — if known — the degree to which
they had actual impact on behavior. This may be particularly annoying
to modern scholars of Buddhism because they seem to like “official”
literary doctrine, and seem to want to think — in spite of the apparent
absence of good evidence — that it somehow had importance beyond
a narrow circle of scholastic specialists. It is, however, perhaps more
certainly true that certain statements made by early and good scholars
did little to direct attention towards such rites and practices. Hermann
Oldenberg, as early as 1881, said “... the Vinaya texts are nearly
altogether silent as to the last honours of deceased monks. To arrange
for their cremation was perhaps committed to the laity”.! T. W. Rhys
Davids went even further only eighteen years later. “Nothing is
known”, he said, “of any religious ceremony having been performed by
the early Buddhists in India, whether the person deceased was a
layman, or even a member of the order. The Vinaya Pitaka, which
enters at so great length into all details of the daily life of the recluses,
has no rules regarding the mode of treating the body of a deceased
Bhikkhu”?

That such statements would not have encouraged further research
would hardly be surprising. If, too, they were entirely correct, there
would be little need for it. But they are not. There are at least two
things wrong with statements of this kind. First of all, both Oldenberg
and Rhys Davids — like so many scholars still — axiomatically
assumed that evidence for Buddhist practices can only be found in
texts, that texts and texts alone reflect what actually occurred. It does

Journal of Indian Philosophy 20: 1—39, 1992.
© 1992 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 2 (Journal p. 2) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

2 GREGORY SCHOPEN

not seem to matter that there was and is clear epigraphical and
archeological evidence that proves that Buddhist monastic communi-
ties at Safici, Sonari, Andher and Bhojpur, at Bhaja, Bedsa and
Kanheri, at Amaravati and Mathura were concerned — even pre-
occupied — with ritually depositing and elaborately housing the
remains of at least some of the local monastic dead. It does not seem
to matter that a good deal of this evidence was available long before
either Oldenberg or Rhys Davids were writing, or that a good deal of
it dates to the earliest period of Buddhist monasticism that we have
certain knowledge of. But even if we put aside — as we must here —
this epigraphical and archeological evidence,‘ the fact remains that
both Oldenberg’s and Rhys Davids’ statements are still distortive. Both
refer to “the Vinaya”, but that meant for them — as it still means for
many — only the Pali Vinaya. We now know, however, that the Pali
Vinaya, in fact the Pali canon as a whole, is — in K. R. Norman’s
words — “a translation from some earlier tradition, and cannot be
regarded as a primary source”, that in some cases the Pali Vinaya is
“markedly inferior” to the other Vinayas, and in some cases appears
decidedly later. Moreover, Csoma’s analysis of the Tibetan ‘dul ba,
published almost fifty years before Oldenberg, contained enough in
summary form to make it clear that if the Pali Vinaya as we have it
had “no rules regarding the mode of treating the body of a deceased
Bhikkhu”, the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya did.° Rockhill’s extracts from
the same Vinaya — published only two years after Oldenberg and six
before Rhys Davids — should have put this beyond all doubt.’ This
Miulasarvastivada material, however, was and has remained largely
ignored, while Oldenberg’s, and especially Rhys Davids’, assertions —
although demonstrably distorted if not entirely wrong — have come to
be taken as established fact. P. V. Kane, for example, in his influential
History of Dharmasastra simply paraphrases Rhys Davids’ remarks
concerning the Buddhist treatment of their dead.® This clearly will not
do, and the Mulasarvastivada material — available in part in Sanskrit
from the Gilgit manuscripts,’ in part from a partial and far from
perfect Chinese translation,'° and in its entirety in the Tibetan Kanjur
— needs to be brought fully into the discussion. There have already
been, to be sure, limited and partial attempts to do this, notably by L.
de La Vallée Poussin.'! What follows is only, I hope, a more concerted

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 3 (Journal p. 3) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 3

attempt to be added to those that have gone before, but it too remains
very much in the category of the tentative: it is based only on a far
from full familiarity with two Vinayas; it does not take into account
the important monastic codes preserved in Chinese — but hopefully
might stimulate others to do so; it does not solve — but in fact exiles
to the forest of footnotes or ignores — numerous lexical, termino-
logical and textual problems which are encountered in these legalistic
codes; it merely suggests — it does not necessarily establish — some
possible lines of interpretation which might or might not prove fruitful.
It does, however, I think, make more fully available some interesting
data.

There are literally dozens of references to the death of a local monk
in both the Pali Vinaya and the Vinaya of the Milasarvastivadins, but
the bulk of these in both Vinayas occur in what at first sight might
seem an unlikely place. In both Vinayas the death of a local monk

is treated most fully in their respective “section on robes or robe-
material” (Civaravastu, Civarakkhandhaka). The explanation for this,
however, seems to be that the death of a local monk raised for the
Vinaya masters one of the same problems that death in almost every
community, whether secular or religious, raises: the problem of
property and inheritance. Since the “robe” was one of the primary
items of personal property that belonged to a monk, and since inherit-
ance might be an important means by which other monks might
acquire robes, it is only natural that the disposition of a deceased
monk’s property would be discussed together with the other means of
legitimately acquiring robes and the rules governing such acquisition.
In the Pali Civarakkhandhaka inheritance of a monk’s property is not
heavily legislated or encumbered. The formal rules are kept to a
minimum. Typical is the first promulgation in this regard: two monks
tend to a sick monk who dies. They take the deceased monk’s robe
and bowl and report his death to the Buddha. The latter says:

Monks, the Order is the owner of the bowl and robes of a monk who passed away.
But truly those who tend the sick are of great service. I allow you, monks, to give
through the Order the three robes and the bowl to those who tended the sick.”

The formal procedure is then explained. This relatively simple legisla-

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 4 (Journal p. 4) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

4 GREGORY SCHOPEN

tion becomes, of course, more complicated when the property of a
dead monk is more extensive, when, for example, it involves both
what the texts call “biens légers” (Jahu-bhanda, lahu-parikkhara) and
“biens lourds” (garu-bhanda, garu-parikkhara).'> But on the whole the
Pali Vinaya legislates far fewer situations than does the Mulasarvasti-
vada-vinaya, and limits itself to the enunciation of a few general
principles. The Mulasarvastivada-vinaya, on the other hand, devotes
nearly thirty-five pages to the disposition of a dead monk’s property,
taking pains to make detailed rulings on a large range of specific
situations.'4

There has been a clear tendency to explain differences of this sort
in the Vinayas as reflections of differences of chronology, to see an
increase in number and specificity of rules as an indication of later
composition. But this explanation — though a favorite of Western
scholars — is only one explanation, and a very narrow one at that. It
completely overlooks a number of other equally possible explanations.
It is equally possible, for example, that what has been taken as a
reflection of a chronological difference may in fact reflect “sectarian”
differences in legal rigorism which need not involve any chronological
component at all. Looked at in this light the Pali rules governing the
disposition of a deceased monk’s property may simply have been
loose, if not lax. They would have allowed a fair amount of ambiguity
and leeway for individual judgement. The compilers of the Mula-
sarvastivada-vinaya appear to have intended to prevent both and to
frame a far stricter and more comprehensive code, a code in which
little was left to an individual's or local community’s discretion. The
Miulasarvastivada-vinaya may, then, represent a far stricter rule, rather
than a later one.

The Milasarvastivada-vinaya also appears to be straightforward
about the kind and range of problems that could arise in the distribu-
tion of a dead monk’s property. It contains, for example, the following
detailed case which concerns a monk named Upananda who had
amassed a considerable estate.!° The community at Sravasti, after
establishing its right to the estate which was initially impounded by the
King, proceeded with its distribution among the monks in Sravasti. But
then the monks from Saketa heard about Upananda’s death and came
to claim a share (asmakam api bhadantopanandah sabrahmacani.

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 5 (Journal p. 5) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 5

asmakam api tatsantako labhah prapadyata iti). As a result, the text
says: bhiksubhih patayitva taih sardham punar api bhayitah, “after
having brought (the estate) together again, the monks (of Sravasti)
once more divided it together with those (monks from Saketa)”. But
this too was not the end. Monks from Vaisali, Varanasi Rajagrha and
Campa came and the whole procedure had to be repeated again and
again. The situation reached the point that, according to the text:
bhiksavah patayanto bhdajayantas ca rificanty uddesam patham
svadhyayam yogam manasikaram, “the monks (because they were
always) bringing together and dividing (estates), abandon (their)
instruction, recitation, study, yoga and mental concentration”.!© The
Buddha is informed of the situation and as a consequence he declares:
parca karanani labhavibhage. katame parica. gandi tridandakam caityam Silaka jraptih
paficakam. yo mrtagandyam akotyamanayam agacchati, tasya labho deyah. evam
tridandake bhasyamane caityavandanayam kriyamanayam silaka[yam a]caryamanayam.
tasmat tarhi bhiksavah sarvam mrtapariskaram jnaptim krtva bhdajayitavyam. akopyam
bhavisyati.!”

There are five occasions for the distribution of (a deceased monk’s) possessions.
Which five? The gong; the Tridandaka; the caitya; the ticket; the formal motion is the
fifth. Who, when the gong for the dead is being beaten, comes — to him something is
to be given. It is the same for when the Tridandaka is being recited, when the worship
of the caitya is being performed, when tickets are being distributed, [when a formal
motion is being made].!* Therefore, then, monks, having made a formal motion
concerning all the personal belongings of the deceased, they are to be distributed. It
will be a fixed procedure [which is then described].'°

A passage such as this is an explicit recognition that Buddhist
monastic communities had a wide range of potentially conflicting
concerns and preoccupations, all of which were accepted as legitimate.
Notice that concern with the distribution of a deceased monk’s
property is not here — nor in the Pali Civara-kkhandhaka — in itself
ever criticized. It is presented as perfectly legitimate. A problem arises,
or a situation requiring legislation appears, only when that concern
distracts monks or communities from other legitimate concerns. In the
present case there is no hint that one set of concerns was considered
more important than the other. The problem was to accommodate
both. Since there is no legislation in the Pali Vinaya for the particular
situation addressed in this Mulasarvastivadin passage, and yet we
know that the kinds of activities involved were known to, and

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 6 (Journal p. 6) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

6 GREGORY SCHOPEN

recognized as legitimate concerns of a monastic community by the
compilers of the Pali Vinaya, we might be able to see in this Mila-
sarvastivadin passage another good example of the consistent tendency
on the part of its compilers to insist on a far stricter and more
comprehensive code than was framed in the Pali Vinaya. Again,
chronological considerations need not enter in. It is, finally, also
important to note that this passage presents us with the first direct
indication of the intimate connection in the Civara-vastu of the
Miulasarvastivada-vinaya between the distribution of a deceased
monk’s property and what it presents as the proper performance of his
funeral: the first of the “occasions” for the distribution mentioned in
this passage, and very probably the second and third as well, are — as
we shall see — particular moments in a Mulasarvastivadin monastic
funeral. We know — again as we shall see — from a variety of
Miulasarvastivadin sources that the sounding of “the gong or bell for
the dead” (called variously the mrta-, anta- or mundika gandi in
Sanskrit,?° and shi ba’i gandi or gandi mjug (v1. jug) med pa in
Tibetan?!) was used “pour l’annonce d’une mort”, and appears to have
signalled the beginning of the formal funeral proceedings.”? We know
too that the recitation of the Tridandaka,” or giving a recitation of
Dharma (dharmasravanam dattam)** or of “the Dharma connected
with the Impermanent” (mi rtag pa dang Idan pa’i chos dag bshad
nas)*> took place at the end of, or during, the cremation, and that
“worshipping the Stupa or caitya” (mchod rten la phyag ’tshal bar
bya’o) appears to have formally terminated the proceedings as a
whole.” The moments chosen for the distribution of a dead monk’s
property do not appear to have been arbitrary, but appear initially to
have been closely linked to significant moments in his funeral. The
order in which they occur also does not appear to be arbitrary, but
seems to reflect a sequence of moments which are increasingly
removed from the moment of death and would appear to involve a
decreasing degree of participation in the funeral activities. He “who,
when the gong for the dead is being beaten, comes” is present and
participates from the very commencement of the funeral. But he who
comes “when the worship of the caitya is performed” need only be
present at the end, and he who comes only “when a formal motion is
being made” need not have been present at all. That the ‘first’? moment
is ‘first’ in more than just a numerical sense and involves both a

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 7 (Journal p. 7) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 7

priority in time and a priority of rights to inherit is virtually certain. If
the distribution takes place at the ‘first? moment, there will be no
others and only those present at that moment could partake in the
distribution. Priority of rights therefore seems directly linked to degree
of participation in the funeral. Even if, it is important to note, one
might argue that ‘the recitation of the Tridandaka’ and ‘the worship of
the caitya’ referred to here need not necessarily refer to moments in
the funeral — both activities, after all, as we shall see below, occur in
other contexts as well — still the principle holds: preference and
priority are still given to those “who, when the gong for the dead is
being beaten, come”, and there can be no doubt about whether this
refers to participation in the funeral. It is also worth noting that the
fact that the funeral commences with the sounding of the gong
significantly underlines its communal character — this means of
summons is only used for activities which concern the entire
community: it is used “pour la convocation des moines, . . . ’appel au
travail, ... pour le repas”, and “pour annoncer un danger”.” It is
perhaps unnecessary to point out that by making physical presence at
key moments of the funeral the determining factor in defining who
had first rights to participate as a recipient in the distribution of the
estate the compilers of the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya assured or
reinforced the communal character of the proceedings.

The linkage between the distribution of a deceased monk’s property
and the performance of his funeral is in fact a central theme of one of
the two promulgations of rules governing monastic funerals found in
the Miulasarvastivada-vinaya that we will look at here. This promulga-
tion is the least known and consists of three interlocked texts which
mark out individually what appear to have been considered the
important elements of a monastic funeral. They are now found
together, one after the other in the Civara-vastu. The edition of these
texts published by N. Dutt is not always satisfactory so, although I cite
his edition here, I have inserted into it in brackets at least the more
important “corrections” which a study of the manuscript itself has
indicated are required. I have also occasionally likewise inserted the
“corresponding” Tibetan in parentheses.

I. Sravastyam nidanam. tena khalu samayenényatamo bhiksur glano layane kdlagatah.
amanusyakesupapannah. civarabhajako bhiksus tam layanam pravestum arabdhah.

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 8 (Journal p. 8) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

8 GREGORY SCHOPEN

Ppatracivaram bhajayamiti. sa tivrena paryavasthanena lagudam adayotthitah kathayati:
yavan mam abhinirharatha [but ms: mamébhinirharatha] tavat patracivaram bhdjaya-
theti (re zhig kho bo dur khrod du yang ma phyung bar lhung bzed dang gos ’ged par
byed dam). sa samtrasto nispalayitah.

etat prakaranam bhiksavo bhagavata drocayanti.

bhagavan aha: purvam tavan mrto bhiksur abhinirhartavyah; pascat tasya patra-
civaram bhdjayitavyam iti.

Although the sense of this text — and the two following — is
generally clear, it is still not always easy to arrive at an altogether
smooth or satisfying translation. This is in large part due to the
language of the greater part of the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya, to what
Lévi calls “ses étrangetés”, and to its “almost colloquial style”.?? There
is, for example, a heavy reliance on pronouns, and sometimes the
same pronominal form is used in close proximity with two entirely
different referents. This, together with an even more general tendency
towards elliptical expression sometimes requires that a good deal of
padding be added to any translation. The Tibetan translators too have
sometimes been forced in this direction. Moreover, each of the texts in
this series employs a ydavat. . . tavat construction, the exact sense of
which is neither easy to determine nor easy to render into English,
and there is some disquieting variation. The Tibetan translations —
though sufficiently clear — seem to presuppose a slightly different text
as well. Either that, or they have settled for a far looser translation
than usual. With these provisos, the first text may be translated:

I. The setting was in Sravasti. On this occasion a certain monk, being sick, died in his
cell. He was reborn among the non-human beings. The monk who was the distributor-
of-robes started to enter the cell (of the dead monk) saying “I distribute the bowl and
robes”. (But) he (— the deceased monk —) appeared there with intense anger wielding
a club and said: “When you perform for me the removal of the body, (only) then do
you effect a distribution of (my) bow! and robe” (Tibetan: “How could one who had
not even carried me out to the cremation ground effect a distribution of (my) robe
and bowl?”)*° He (— the distributor-of-robes —) was terrified and forced to flee.

The monks ask the Blessed One concerning this matter.

The Blessed One said: “Now first the removal of a dead monk is to be performed.
Then his robe and bowl are to be distributed.

Here we have legislated what appears to be the minimum funereal
procedure that must be effected before any distribution of a dead
monk’s property can take place. This procedure is here expressed by

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 9 (Journal p. 9) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 9

forms of the verb abhi-nir-hr. This verb, or close variants of it with
or without the initial abhi-, is in fact something of a technical expres-
sion for the initial act of funereal procedures described in a variety of
Buddhist sources.*! It also occurs in Jain texts dealing with funerals.**
But even when this exact expression is not used, we find a whole
series of parallel expressions — adahanam nitva, Smasanam nitva, tam
adaya dahanam gatah, ro bskyal nas, etc? — which indicate that the
removal of the body, undoubtedly ritualized, was a first and minimal
procedure involved in carrying out a monastic funeral or a funeral of
any kind. It would appear, however, that the compilers of the Mila-
sarvastivada-vinaya did not consider this minimum procedure to be
necessarily sufficient. After the passage cited above the second in the
series immediately follows:

Il. Sravastyam nidanam. tena khalu samayendényatamo bhiksuh kalagatah. bhiksavas
tam abhinirhrtya evam eva SmaSdane chorayitva viharam agatah. civara-bhajakas tasya
layanam pravistah patracivaram bhdjayamiti. so ‘manusyakestipapannah; lagudam
Gdayotthitah sa kathayati: yavan mama Sarirapijamr kurutha tavat patracivaram
bhajayatheti (re zhig kho bo’i ro la mchod pa yang ma byas par chos gos dang lhung
bzed ’ged par byed dam zhes).

etat prakaranam bhiksavo bhagavata arocayanti.

bhagavan aha: bhiksubhis tasya pirvam Sarirapuja kartavyeti. tatah pascat
patracivaram bhajayitavyam. esa ddinavo [na] bhavisyatiti (nges dmigs ‘dir mi ‘gyur ro,
supporting Dutt’s /naj)**

Il. The setting was in Sravasti. On that occasion a certain monk died. The monks,
having performed the removal of that one(’s body), having simply thrown it into the
burning ground, returned to the vihara. The distributor-of-robes entered his (— the
dead monk’s —) cell saying “I distribute the bowl and robe”. He (— the dead monk —)
was reborn among the non-human beings. Wielding a club he appeared (in his cell)
and said: “When you perform the worship of the body for me, (only) then do you
distribute (my) bowl and robe” (Tibetan: “How could one who had not even
performed the worshipping of my body effect a distribution of (my) robe and bowl?”)

The monks asked the Blessed One concerning this matter.

The Blessed One said: “By the monks the worship of the body for him (— the
deceased monk —) is first to be performed. After that (his) bowl and robe are to be
distributed. This will (otherwise) be a danger (Tibetan: There would not be in this
case a calamity/fault)”.

This second text, while indicating that the first procedure was still
required, indicates as well that it might not prove sufficient, and
provides separate legislation for what appears to have been considered
a second necessary component of a Mulasarvastivadin monastic

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 10 (Journal p. 10) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

10 GREGORY SCHOPEN

funeral. This procedure is called here — and in a considerable number
of other places — Sarira-puja. And this is a term which, although
widely cited, has generally not been carefully studied and has, perhaps,
been very badly misunderstood. It has very commonly been taken to
refer to the worship of relics, but I have recently tried to demonstrate
“that Sarira-puja — whatever it involved — took place after the body
had been removed and taken to the cremation ground, but before it
was cremated, before there could have been anything like what we call
relics”, and that it is “fairly certain that Sarira-puja involved the ritual
handling or treatment of the body prior to cremation . . .”°5 Not
surprisingly this second text played a part in that attempted demon-
stration: it, perhaps better than any other passage, points towards what
Sarira-puja involved by clearly stating what its opposite was. Sarira-
puja is presented in our passage as the opposite of, and correct
alternative for, ‘having simply thrown the body into the burning
ground’, or unceremoniously dumping it. That this alternative involved
what we understand by the term “worship” seems unlikely, and from
this point of view at least “worship of the body” is undoubtedly not a
very good translation of Sarira-puja. I have retained it only to maintain
some consistency with the way in which the term puja is generally
rendered.** The Pali sources here offer little aid. In fact the term
Sarira-puja, although found throughout Milasarvastivada literature,

is curiously uncommon in Pali canonical literature outside of the
Mahaparinibbana-sutta where it is not impossible that it — like several
other lexical items there — may represent a borrowing from con-
tinental Sanskrit sources.*” Although it also is not common, a Pali
parallel expression may be had in the term sarira-kicca, but it too
lacks a precise definition, being defined only as “the duties of the
body, i.e. funeral rites”.**

We have, then, in these two texts the legislation of two distinct
funereal procedures which appear to have been considered necessary
to keep angry ghosts at bay and allow the distribution of a dead
monk’s property to go forward unobstructed. These same two proce-
dures, however, are by no means exclusive to a dead monk’s funeral.
They are also components of, for example, the funerals of the Kings
Asoka (. . . Sibikabhir nirharitva Sarirapijam krtva) and Prasenajit (.. .
dur khrod du skyol cig . . . ‘di’i khog pa la mchod pa lhag par bya

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 11 (Journal p. 11) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 11

ba),*° and therefore do not specifically define a monastic funeral.
Something more would appear to be required, and this is precisely
what we find in the third and final text of this series:

Ill. Sravastyam nidanam. tena khalu samayendényatamo bhiksur glano layane
kdlagatah. sa bhiksur ddahanam nitva Sarirapujam krtva dagdhah. tato viharam agatah
[but ms: dgata]. civarabhajakas tasya layanam pravistah. sa lagudam adayotthitah, tat
tavan [ but ms. clearly na tdvan, in this instance agreeing with Tibetan] mam uddisya
dharmasravanam anuprayacchatha tavac civarakani bhajayatheti (re zhig bdag gi ched
du chos bsgrags pa ma byas par chos gos rnams ’ged par byed dam).

etat prakaranam bhiksavo bhagavata drocayanti.

bhagavan aha: tam uddigya dharmasravanam dattva daksinam uddisya pascac
civarakani bhdjayitavyaniti (de’i ched du chos bsgrags pa dang / de’i ched du yon bsngo
ba byas nas chos gos rnams bgo bar bya’o).*°

TI. The setting was in Sravasti. On that occasion a certain monk, being sick, died in
his cell. After having brought him to the burning ground, (and) having performed (for
him) the worship of the body, that (deceased) monk was cremated. After that they
(— the monks who had performed these procedures —) returned to the vihara. The
distributor-of-robes entered that (dead monk’s) cell. He (— the dead monk —)
appeared wielding a club, saying “you do not yet give a recitation of the Dharma for
my sake, (but only) then are you to effect a distribution of my monastic robes”
(Tibetan: “How could one who had not performed a recitation of Dharma for me
effect a distribution of (my) robes?”).

The monks ask the Blessed One concerning this matter.

The Blessed One said: “Having given a recitation of Dharma in his (— the
deceased’s —) name, having directed the reward (to him), after that his monastic robes
are to be distributed”.

In this third and final text of the series the monks, although they
have performed the removal of the body, and although they have
performed as well the worship of the body, are still confronted by the
belligerent ghost. He still has not relinquished ownership rights to his
property. For that to happen one further — and by implication final —
procedure appears to be required. This procedure is the most distinc-
tively Buddhist of those so far met and appears to be particularly —
perhaps exclusively — associated with monastic funerals. Although, as
we have seen, both the ‘removal’ and ‘the worship of the body’ occur
in the descriptions of the funerals of the Kings Prasenajit and Asoka,
there is no reference in either account to a ‘recitation of Dharma’
having been made for their sake or a transfer of the resulting merit to
their account. This stands in clear contrast with what we often find in
the accounts of funerals performed for monks or nuns. In the latter

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 12 (Journal p. 12) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

12 GREGORY SCHOPEN

accounts there is not infrequently reference either to a recitation of
Dharma, or to the transfer of merit, or both.*! The recitation and
transfer of merit are the last and apparently sufficient elements of a
monastic funeral that are separately legislated here. They appear to
achieve the definitive separation of the deceased monk from his
property and allow the distribution of that property to go forward
unencumbered. It is important to note that the monks who participate
in the funeral generate the merit by giving a recitation of the Dharma,
and it is the monks who assign the merit to the deceased. This appears
to be a straightforward case of religious merit being transferred or
assigned to one that did not produce it.*” This straightforward transfer
of merit is in fact characteristic of many parts of the Mulasarvastivada-
vinaya, and this Vinaya contains as well numerous indications of its
compilers’ concerns with making such transfers to several categories
of the dedd.*? There is, however, more here.

It is, of course, not simply the merit itself which allows the distribu-
tion of a dead monk’s property to go forward. It is perhaps more the
proper and complete performance of his funeral by the monks in
attendance. The distribution, therefore, would appear to turn on two
points: one, before the property is unencumbered, before any distribu-
tion can take place, a set of ritual procedures must be performed or a
set of ritual obligations owed to the deceased must be met; two, those
who participate in these rituals or in meeting these obligations are —
as the account of Upananda’s estate makes clear — precisely the same
individuals who have a first and prior claim on the estate (“who, when
the gong for the dead is being beaten, comes — to him something is to
be given”; etc.). It is, moreover, almost certainly not accidental that the
monks who perform or participate in the dead monk’s funeral are the
monks who have the first rights and opportunities to receive or
‘inherit’ the deceased’s property. In fact such an arrangement would
appear to suggest that — at least — these Buddhist monastic regula-
tions governing the distribution of a dead monk’s property were
framed to conform to, or be in harmony with, classical Hindu laws or
Dharmasastric conventions governing inheritance. In his History of
Dharmasastra Kane says, for example, that “there was a close connec-
tion between taking the estate of a man and performing the rites after
death up to the 10th day”, and “that it was obligatory on everyone

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 13 (Journal p. 13) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 13

who took the estate of another . . . to arrange for the rites after death
and sraddha”.“4 The Baudhayana-Pitrmedha-sutra says that “proper
cremation-rites” should be performed not only for one’s mother,
father, preceptor, etc., but also for any “person who leaves inheritance
for one whether he belongs to one’s gotra or not”.*> This congruency
between Buddhist monastic rule and “Hindu Law” is not only inter-
esting,“ it is also in striking contrast with the apparent lack of con-
gruency between the same Vinaya rule and formal Buddhist doctrine.

There can be little question that the promulgation of this set of
tules is based on a belief in an individual “personality” that survives
after death. That “personality”, moreover, was thought to retain an
active interest in, and ownership rights to, his former possessions. The
claims of that “person” had to be compensated before any distribution
of those possessions could take place. This belief — it is important to
keep in mind — was assumed and articulated by monks in a code of
behavior meant to govern monks. It is not part of some ill-defined
“lay” or “popular” Buddhism. It is an element of official monastic
Buddhism, and precisely for that reason its seemingly total lack of
congruency with the supposedly fundamental Buddhist doctrine of the
absence of a permanent self is even more striking. In speaking of the
“traditional Buddhism” of the rural highlands of modern Sri Lanka,
Richard Gombrich has said that

though the doctrine of anatta can be salvaged by the claim that the personality
continuing through a series of births has as much reality as the personality within one
life, prarthana for happy rebirths and the transfer of merit to dead relatives show that
the anatta doctrine has no more affective immediacy with regard to the next life than
with regard to this, and that belief in personal survival after death is a fundamental
feature of Sinhalese Buddhism in practice.*’

The set of rules governing monastic funerals and inheritance that we
have been looking at suggests the very real possibility that there is
nothing new in the modern Sri Lankan case. It suggests as well the
distinct possibility that purportedly “fundamental” Buddhist doctrine
may not only have had little influence on lay Buddhist behavior, it
may as well have had equally little influence on even highly “educated”
literate monks.‘® The implications of this possibility are, of course, far
reaching, and there are some equally interesting implications for our
understanding of monastic Buddhism in a second promulgation of rules

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 14 (Journal p. 14) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

14 GREGORY SCHOPEN

concerning monastic funerals which occurs in the Mulasarvastivada-
vinaya.

Unlike the set of rules for monastic funerals that occur in the
Civara-vastu, the second promulgation, perhaps because it is preserved
as well in Chinese, has been referred to several times in the scholarly
literature. In fact, apart from short or incidental references we also
have several paraphrases or summaries of the text — the earliest,
perhaps, by Rockhill, based on the Tibetan;*’ the fullest, based on the
Chinese, by de la Vallée Poussin;*° and the most recent, again based
on the Chinese, by Anna Seidel.*! None of these paraphrases or
summaries is, however, entirely satisfactory from at least one point of
view. This text — which is preserved in Tibetan in the Vinaya-
ksudraka-vastu — does not link the proper performance of a monastic
funeral with the distribution of a deceased monk’s property as do the
texts preserved in the Civara-vastu. The text in the Ksudraka-vastu is,
rather, preoccupied with yet another problem which the death of a
local monk would have raised for a Buddhist community. Unlike the
Civara-vastu texts which appear to respond to the kind of problems
which such a death would occasion within the group — to what might
be called internal problems — the text in the Ksudraka-vastu appears
to have been intended to respond to the kind of problems that such a
death could occasion between that group and the larger world that
surrounded it and on which it was almost entirely dependent. These
external problems are most fully articulated not so much in the rules
themselves but in the frame-story which accounts for their promulga-
tion, and it is this frame-story which has suffered the most in the
paraphrases. As a consequence there are good reasons for citing here
the Tibetan text as a whole. The text I cite is based on the three
Kanjurs available to me: the Derge, Peking, and Tog Palace.*?

sangs rgyas bcom Idan ‘das mnyan yod na rgyal bu rgyal byed kyi tshal mgon med zas
sbyin gyi kun dga’ ra ba na' bzhugs so /

mnyan yod na khyim bdag cig’ gnas pa des rigs mnyam pa las chung ma blangs te /
de de dang than cig ces bya ba nas / bu pho zhig *btsas te de* btsas* pa’i btsas ston
zhag bdun gsum nyi shu gcig tu rgya cher byas nas rigs dang mthun? pa’i ming btags te
bsrings bskyed® nas chen por gyur to zhes bya ba’i bar snga ma bzhin no /

ji tsam dus gzhan zhig na legs par gsungs pa’i chos ‘dul ba la rab tu byung ba
dang / de’i khams ma’ mnyam nas na bar gyur te / de rtsa ba dang / sdong bu dang /
me tog dang / ’bras bu’i sman dag gis rim gro byas na ma phan te dus las ‘das so /

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 15 (Journal p. 15) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 15

de dge slong dag gis Ihung bzed dang bcas / chos gos dang bcas par* lam dang nye
ba zhig tu bor ro/

ji tsam na lam de nas bram ze dang khyim bdag ’gro ba de® dag gis de mthong ste /
de ni'® kha cig gis smras pa / shes" Idan dag Sakya’i bu'? zhig dus las ‘das so / gzhan
dag gis smras pa /tshur sheg'> blta bar bya’o / '+de dag gis mthong nas ngo shes te de
dag gis smras pa / shes Idan dag ‘di ni khyim bdag che ge mo’i bu yin te / dge sbyong
Sakya’i bu pa mgon med pa rnams kyi nang du rab tu byung bas gnas skabs ‘di ‘dra
bar gyur to / ’di dag gi nang du rab tu byung bar ma gyur na de'* nye du dag gis ‘di
rim gro byas par ’gyur ba zhig /

skabs de bcom Idan ‘das la dge slong dag gis gsol ba dang / bcom Idan ‘das kyis
bka’ stsal pa / dge slong dag de Ita bas na gnang gis dge slong shi ba’i rim gro bya’o /
bcom Idan 'das kyis dge slong shi ba’i rim gro bya’o zhes gsungs'* pa dang / dge slong
dag ji ltar rim gro bya ba mi shes nas / bcom Idan ‘das kyis bka’ stsal pa / bsreg'” bar
bya’o /

bcom Idan ‘das kyis bsreg par bya’o zhes gsungs pa dang / bcom Idan ‘das la tshe
dang Idan pa nye ba ’khor gyis zhus pa / btsun pa bcom Idan ‘das kyis lus ‘di la srin
bu’i rigs brgyad khri yod do zhes gang gsungs pa de dag ji Ita bu lags / bcom Idan ‘das
kyis bka’ stsal pa / nye ba'® ’khor de skyes!? ma thag tu de dag kyang skye la / shi ba’i
tshe de dag kyang ‘chi mod kyi ‘on kyang rma’ sgo rnams su brtags te bsreg par bya’o /

bcom Idan ‘das kyis bsreg par bya’o zhes gsungs ba dang / shing ma ’byor nas skabs
de bcom Idan ‘das la dge slong dag gis gsol ba dang / bcom Idan ‘das kyis bka’ stsal
pa/ chu klung dag tu dor bar bya’o / chu klung med nas bcom Idan ‘das kyis bka’ stsal
pa/sa brkos te gzhug par bya’o / dbyar kha sa yang ’thas la shing yang srog chags can
du gyur nas / bcom Idan ‘das kyis bka’ stsal pa / thibs po’i phyogs su mgo byang
phyogs su bstan te sngas su rtsva’i?' bam po bzhag la glo g-yas pas bsnyal te rtsva??
‘am lo ma’i tshogs kyis?> g-yogs la yon bsngo zhing rgyun** chags gsum gyi chos
mnyan pa byin nas ‘dong bar bya’o /

dge slong dag de bzhin du dong ba dang / bram ze dang khyim bdag dag sakya’i
bu’i dge sbyong rnams ni ro bskyal nas khrus mi byed par de bzhin ‘dong ste gtsang
sbra med do / zhes ’phya bar byed nas / skabs de bcom Idan ‘das la dge slong dag gis
gsol ba dang / bcom Idan ‘das kyis bka’ stsal pa / de bzhin du ‘dong bar mi bya’i ’on
kyang khrus bya’o / de dag thams cad bkru bar brtsams pa dang / bcom Idan ‘das kyis
bka’ stsal pa / thams cad krus mi bya’i gang dag reg pa de dag gis gos dang bcas te
bkru bar bya’o / gzhan dag gis ni rkang lag nyi tshe bkru bar bya’o /

de dag mchod rten la phyag mi ‘tshal nas / bcom Idan ‘das kyis bka’ stsal pa
/mchod rten?> la phyag ’tshal bar bya’o

NOTES

'P omits na. ? P gcig. > P omits btsas te de. +P bcas. 5 P ’thun. © P bskyad.

7T mi. °P bad. °P da. '°T na. ''P shas. '? T adds pa after bu. |? T shog.

'* T has an additional de before de dag gis. '* T omits de. '° P gsangs. '’ P bsregs.
18 P, T bar; the name is commonly spelled nye bar ’khor. '° T skyed.

20 P gsung. *! P rtsa’i. 2 P rca. >> P kyas. 4 P, T rgyud. 5 P, T both add dag after
rten.

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 16 (Journal p. 16) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

16 GREGORY SCHOPEN

The Buddha, the Blessed One, dwelt in Sravasti, in Prince Jeta’s grove, in the park of
Anathapindada.

In Sravasti there was a certain householder. He took'a wife from a family of equal
standing and, having laid with her, a son was born. Having performed in detail for
three times seven, or twenty-one, days the birth ceremonies for the new born son, he
was given a name corresponding to his gotra (¢rini saptakani ekavimSatidivasani
vistarena jatasya jatimaham krtva; gotranuriipam namadheyam vyavasthapitam).*> His
upbringing, to his maturity, was as before.**

When, at another time, he (— the householder’s son —)** had entered (the Order
of this) well-spoken Dharma and Vinaya, his bodily humors having become un-
balanced, he fell ill. Though he was attended with medicines made from roots and
stalks and flowers and fruits, it was of no use and he died (sa . . . miilagandapatra-
puspaphalabhaisajyair upasthiyamano na svasthibhavati ... sa ca kalagatah).°°

The monks left him (i.e. his body), together with his robe and bowl, near a road.

Later, Brahmins and householders who were out walking saw him from the road.
One said, referring to him: “Good Sirs, a Buddhist monk (Sakyaputra) has died”.
Others said: “Come here! look at this!” When they looked they recognized the dead
monk and said: “Good Sirs, this is the son of such and such a householder. This is the
sort of thing that happens when someone joins the order of those lordless Buddhist
Sramanas. Had he not joined their order his kinsmen would have performed the
funeral ceremonies for him”.*’

The monks reported this matter to the Blessed One, and the Blessed One said:
“Now then, monks, with my authorization, funeral ceremonies for a (deceased) monk
are to be performed” (“Bhiksus, il faut rendre les derniers devoirs au cadavre”).°*
Although it was said by the Blessed One “funeral ceremonies for a deceased monk
are to be performed”, because the monks did not know how they should be per-
formed, the Blessed One said: “(A deceased monk) is to be cremated”.

Although the Blessed One said: “(A deceased monk) should be cremated”, the
Venerable Upali asked the Blessed One: “Is that which was said by the Reverend
Blessed One — that there are 80,000 kinds of worms in the human body — not so?”
The Blessed One said: “Upali, as soon as a man is born, those worms are also born,
so, at the moment of death, they too surely die. Still, (only) after examining the
opening of any wound, is the body to be cremated” (“Quand le corps présente des
ulcéres, on doit voir s'il n'y a pas d’animaux, et alors le briiller”. “Si le cadavre a des
plaies, on ne peut le briiler qu’aprés avoir vérifié s’il n’y a pas de vers”).°?

Although the Blessed One said (a deceased monk) is to be cremated, when wood
was not at hand the monks asked the Blessed One concerning this matter, and the
Blessed One said: “The body is to be thrown into rivers”. When there is no river, the
Blessed One said: “Having dug a grave, it is to be buried”. When it is summer and
both the earth is hard and the wood is full of living things (“En été, la terre est
humide et fourmille d’animaux”; “[et] en été, [quand] la terre est humide et fourmille
de vers et d'insects?”),°° the Blessed One said: “In an isolated spot, with its head
pointing North, having put down a bundle of grass as a bolster, having laid the corpse
on its right side, having covered it with bunches of grass or leaves, having directed the
reward (to the deceased),°' and having given a recitation of the Dharma of the
Tridandaka, the monks are to disperse”.°

The monks dispersed accordingly. But then Brahmins and householders derided

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 17 (Journal p. 17) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 17

them saying: “Buddhist sramanas, after carrying away a corpse, do not bathe and yet
disperse like that. They are polluted.” The monks asked the Blessed One concerning
this matter, and the Blessed One said: “Monks should not disperse in that manner, but
should bathe”. They all started to bathe, but the Blessed One said: “Everyone need
not bathe. Those who came in contact (with the corpse) must wash themselves
together with their robes. Others need only wash their hands and feet”.

When the monks did not worship the stiipa, the Blessed One said: “The stiipa (v.1.
stupas) is to be worshipped” (“Rentrés au couvent, ils ne vénéraient pas le caitya. Le
Bouddha dit: ‘Il faut vénérer le caitya’”).

Anyone who has read even a little Vinaya will immediately recog-
nize this promulgation of rules as yet another instance — though
perhaps a particularly striking one — of the preoccupation of the
compilers of these codes with avoiding social censure. This preoccu-
pation — which not infrequently appears obsessive — has been
described in a number of ways. I. B. Horner has said, for example, in
referring to the Pali Vinaya:

For the believing laity, though naturally not to the forefront in the Vinaya, are in a
remarkable way never absent, never far distant .. . thus the Vinaya does not merely
lay down sets of rules whose province was confined to an internal conventual life. For
this was led in such a way as to allow and even to encourage a certain degree of
intercommunication with the lay supporters and followers, no less than with those lay-
people who were not adherents of the faith. What was important, was that the monks
should neither abuse their dependence on the former, nor alienate the latter, but
should so regulate their lives as to give no cause for complaint. With these aims in
view, conduct that was not thought seemly for them to indulge in had to be carefully
defined; and it became drafted in rule and percept.®*

Elsewhere Horner again says: “It must be remembered that it was
considered highly important to propitiate these [lay followers], to court
their admiration, to keep their allegiance, to do nothing to annoy
them”.® But she also raises another point which may be germane to
our Ksudraka-vastu passage and — when seen in a certain light —
only underscores the curious absence of such a passage in the Pali
Vinaya. She says: “We cannot tell with any degree of accuracy the
historical order in which the rules [in the Vinaya] were formulated”,
but she notes too that “it is, however, more likely that the majority of
the rules grew up gradually, as need arose, and are the outcome of
historical developments that went on within the Order”.°°

Miss Horner’s observations concerning the monastic sensitivity to
lay values are important for a full understanding of our passage

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 18 (Journal p. 18) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

18 GREGORY SCHOPEN

because there can hardly be a doubt that this passage — and the rules
promulgated there — concern two related topics on which any even
partially brahmanized social groups would have been acutely sensitive:
death and pollution. Professor Malamoud has not only said that “le
rituel funéraire est le sammskdra par excellence”, but has noted as well
that “les injonctions, les instructions techniques et les justifications
théologiques qui traitent de la maniére dont les vivants doivent se
comporter 4 l’égard des morts forment une part considérable de la
littérature normative de I’'Inde brahmanique (hymnes védiques,
Brahmana, Kalpasttra, Dharmasitra et Dharmasastra). Le rituel
funéraire ... frappe par sa richesse, sa complexité, sa cohérence”. “Le
service des morts,” he says, “l’institution des morts pésent d’un poids
trés lourd dans la vie des Indiens qui se rattachent en quelque maniére
au brahmanisme”.®’ Much the same, of course, has been said of
‘purity’ and ‘pollution’. “Normative literature”, says Dumont, “the
literature of the dharma or religious law, has purification (Suddhi) as
one of its main themes, the impurity resulting from birth and death
being specially designated asauca ... Family impurity is the most
important: it is that of birth (siitaka) and above all death”.

As the sources cited especially by Malamoud would indicate, the
brahmanical preoccupation with the proper ritual treatment of the
dead was not only broad but very old. It would presumably have
informed and presumably have framed the attitudes of any brah-
manical or brahmanized community that Buddhist monastic groups
came into contact with, and such contact must have been early and
frequent at least in the middle Gangetic plains — the area including
Sravasti, Kausambi, Rajagrha, VaiSali, etc. Any disregard of such set
attitudes in the surrounding population, especially of those touching
on the treatment of the dead and pollution, would have opened the
Buddhist monastic community to immediate criticism and opprobrium.
Such criticism would have been especially strong if the case involved a
deceased individual who had originally been a member of the local
group, an individual whose history and birth were widely known. The
compiler of our Ksudraka-vastu passage seems, in fact, to have
encountered or envisioned just such a situation. He seems to have
taken some pains to clearly indicate that the deceased monk had been
born from a perfectly regular, normatively sanctioned marriage; that

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 19 (Journal p. 19) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 19

the full complement of normative birth rituals had been performed for
him; that he had been named according to his gotra. The proper
performance of ritual that accompanied his birth, however, only
provides a stronger contrast for the initial total disregard of normative
procedures in regard to his death on the part of the Buddhist
monastic community. The response such disregard is said to have
provoked seems entirely believable — even the language seems
particularly appropriate here: “Come here! Look at this! . . . This is the
sort of thing that happens when someone joins the order of those
lordless Buddhist sramanas”. Such behavior would most certainly have
‘alienated’ “those lay-people who were not adherents of the faith”, and
almost certainly would not have been long tolerated by either that
group or — importantly — the Buddhist community that had to
interact with and depend on it. In fact, unless the extent and depth of
brahmanical attitudes among actual communities have been badly
overestimated — and this is not impossible — it is almost inconceiv-
able that such blatant disregard of established custom and local feeling
would not have been immediately checked and regulated “in rule and
precept”. But this would in turn suggest that such rules, regardless of
where they now occur, would probably have been in place very early
on, and would suggest that a Vinaya which — like the Pali Vinaya —
did not contain such rules would have been poorly equipped to deal
with monastic communities in close contact with brahmanical societies.
The first of these suggestions has historical implications: it may be that
this set of rules — like much else in the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya — is
very old indeed;°’ the second may underscore the importance of
geography for understanding the various monastic codes: a monastic
code framed in a predominantly brahmanical area would almost
certainly — regardless of chronological considerations — contain rules
and sets of rules which may differ from or not be included in codes
that were redacted in, or meant for, communities in, say, predomi-
nantly “tribal” areas. Local or regional standards may have determined
a good deal.

But if this second promulgation of rules concerning the local
monastic dead in the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya was, unlike the first,
intended to respond to a particularly sensitive concern of the larger
social group with which Buddhist monastic communities had to

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 20 (Journal p. 20) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

20 GREGORY SCHOPEN

interact, and from which they drew recruits and economic support,
still the funereal procedures which it prescribed were essentially
similar to those of the first promulgation. Formal removal of the body
— abhinirhara — though not explicitly mentioned in the rules, is taken
for granted throughout: the body is not to be casually dumped by the
road side; there is clear reference to the monks having carried away
the corpse (Sakya’i bu’i dge sbyong rnams ni ro bskyal nas) in the
remarks of the brahmins and householders concerning monks not
having washed. Although the term Sarira-puja / ro la mchod pa is not
explicitly used, rim gro bya ba — which generally translates some form
of sat{kr — is contextually clearly its equivalent here: whereas in
Civara-vastu II Sarira-puja is the prescribed alternative to simply
dumping the body in the burning ground, sarkara here is the pre-
scribed alternative to throwing it unceremoniously alongside the
road.’”? The Ksudraka-vastu passage differs, to be sure, in stipulating
certain contingencies when alternative means of disposal could be
used, but in doing so it only emphasizes the fact that the first choice
in normal circumstances was cremation. The two related elements in
the Civara-vastu monastic funeral which appear to be both most
peculiarly Buddhist and, perhaps, restricted to funerals for monks —
the recitation of Dharma and the transfer of merit — are also both
explicitly mentioned and taken for granted. Although only actually
mentioned after the last of the series of alternative means of disposal,
it seems fairly certain that it was to be understood that both the recita-
tion and the transfer of merit were to follow whichever alternative was
undertaken.”!

We have, then, in these passages from the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya
that we have looked quickly at two sets of similar and mutually
supplementive rules meant to govern a monastic funeral. They
establish — contrary to the old and established conventional wisdom
— that Buddhist Vinaya texts are by no means “nearly altogether silent
as to the last honours of deceased monks”, and they point to yet
another concern in regard to which the Pali Vinaya as we have it
appears to be markedly deficient and possibly unrepresentative. They
also — together with various narrative accounts scattered throughout
Miulasarvastivadin \iterature — allow us to reconstruct the complete
outline of a Mulasarvastivadin monastic funeral, from the tolling of the

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 21 (Journal p. 21) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 21

bell to the post-funeral bath, and they indicate that the laity was
allowed no place in these procedures, that the funeral of a local monk
was an exclusively monastic affair, participation being limited to
monks and monks alone.”? Even more than this, they allow us entrée
into the ‘mentality’ and concerns of the Vinaya masters that framed
this code. They allow us to see learned monks and Vinaya authorities
framing rules which were intended to avoid ghosts”? and occupied
with the problems of inheritance and estates; monks concerned with
carefully regulating behavior to avoid social censure, and monks —
perhaps most importantly — that appear to have been influenced and
motivated as much by Indian mores, beliefs, and ‘legal’ conventions, as
by specifically Buddhist doctrines. They allow us to see, in short, a
Buddhist monk who is far more human, and far more Indian, than the
monk we usually meet in the works of Western scholarship.”

TEXTUAL SOURCES CITED & ABBREVIATIONS

ACF = Annuaire du collége de france

Anguttara = R. Morris & E. Hardy, eds., The Ariguttara-Nikaya, Vols. 1—5S (London:
1885—1900) — cited by volume number & page.

Avadanasataka = J. S. Speyer, ed., Avadanagataka. A Century of Edifying Tales
belonging to the Hinayana (Bibliotheca Buddhica, III) Vols. 1—2 (St.-Pétersbourg:
1906—9) — cited by volume, page & line.

BEFEO = Bulletin de l’école francaise d’extréme-orient

Derge = The Sde-dge Mtshal-par Bka’-’gyur, A Facsimile Edition of the 18th Century
Redaction of Si-Tu Chos-kyi-’byur-gnas Prepared under the Direction of H. H. the
16th Rgyal-dbar Karma-pa, Vols. 1—103 (Delhi: 1976ff) — cited by volume,
‘folio’ number in the facsimile (not by original pagination), & line.

Divyavadana = P. L. Vaidya, ed., Divyavadana (Buddhist Sanskrit Texts, 20)
(Darbhanga: 1959) — by page & line.

Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts = R. Vira & L. Chandra, eds., Gilgit Buddhist Manu-
scripts (Facsimile Edition), Part 6 (Sata-Pitaka Series 10 (6)) (New Delhi: 1974) —
by volume number, ‘folio’ number assigned in the facsimile, & line.

Gilgit Manuscripts = N. Dutt, ed., Gilgit Manuscripts, Vol. I, Part 1 (Srinagar:
1947); Vol. II, Part 2 (Srinagar: 1942); Vol. Ill, Part 3 (Srinagar: 1943); Vol. III,
Part 4 (Calcutta: 1950) — cited by volume, part, page & line.

HJAS = Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies

IBK = Indogaku bukkyégaku kenkyu

THQ = Indian Historical Quarterly

JA = Journal asiatique

JAOS = Journal of the American Oriental Society

JIABS = Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 22 (Journal p. 22) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

22 GREGORY SCHOPEN

JOIB = Journal of the Oriental Institute, Baroda

Mahaparinirvana-sutra = E. Waldschmidt, ed., Das Mahaparinirvanasutra. Text in
Sanskrit und Tibetisch, verglichen mit dem Pali nebst einer Ubersetzung der
chinesischen Entsprechung im Vinaya der Mulasarvastivadins, Teil 1 (Abhand-
lungen der Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Philosophisch-
Historische Klasse. Jahrgang 1949 nr. 1) (Berlin: 1950); Teil It (Abhandlungen ...
zu Berlin, Klasse fiir Sprachen, Literatur und Kunst, Jahrgang 1950 nr. 2) (Berlin:
1951); Teil II (Abhandlungen . .. und Kunst, Jahrgang 1950 nr. 3) (Berlin: 1951)
— cited according to the “Vorginge” and section numbers imposed on his restored
text by Waldschmidt.

Pali Vinaya = H. Oldenberg, The Vinaya Pitakam. One of the Principal Buddhist
Holy Scriptures in the Pali Language, Vols. 1—5 (London: 1879—1885) — cited
by volume, page & line.

Peking = D. T. Suzuki, ed., The Tibetan Tripitaka, Peking Edition, Reprinted under
the Supervision of the Otani University, Kyoto, Vols. 1—169 (Tokyo/Kyoto:
1955—61) — cited by volume, page, ‘folio’ & line.

Pravrajya-vastu = C. Vogel & K. Wille, eds., Some Hitherto Unidentified Fragments
of the Pravrajyavastu Portion of the Vinayavastu Manuscript found near Gilgit
(Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Gottingen I. Philologisch-
Historische Klasse, Jahrgang 1984, nr. 7) (Gottingen: 1984) — cited by page or
folio number & line.

Rab tu ‘byun ba’i gzi = H. Eimer, ed., Rab tu ‘byun ba’i gii. Die tibetische Uber-
setzung des Pravrajyavastu im Vinaya der Milasarvastivadins, Teil 1—2 (Asiatische
Forschungen, Bd. 82) (Wiesbaden: 1983) — cited by volume, page & line.

Sanghabheda-vastu = R. Gnoli, ed., The Gilgit Manuscript of the Sanghabhedavastu.
Being the 17th and Last Section of the Vinaya of the Miulasarvastivadin, Parts I—II
(Serie Orientale Roma, XLIX, 1—2) (Roma: 1977—78) — cited by volume, page
& line.

Sayandsana & Adhikarana-vastus = R. Gnoli, ed., The Gilgit Manuscript of the
Sayandsanavastu and the Adhikaranavastu. Being the 15th and 16th Sections of the
Vinaya of the Milasarvastivadin (Serie Orientale Roma, L) (Roma: 1978) — cited
by page & line.

Tog = The Tog Palace Manuscript of the Tibetan Kanjur, Vols. 1—109 (Leh: 1975—
80) — cited by volume, ‘folio’ number assigned in the reprint (not by original
pagination) & line.

TP = Toung Pao

Udana = P. Steinthal, Udana (London: 1885) — cited by page & line.

NOTES

' H, Oldenberg, Buddha. Sein Leben, seine Lehre, seine Gemeinde (Berlin: 1881)
384 n; H. Oldenberg, Buddha. His Life, His Doctrine, His Order, trans. W. Hoey
(London: 1882) 376 n.

? T. W. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Suttas (Sacred Books of the East, XI) (Oxford: 1900)
xliv—xlv. — In light of the references by both Oldenberg and Rhys Davids to the
Vinaya, it is worth noting that there is good evidence for suggesting that the

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 23 (Journal p. 23) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 23

Mahaparinibbana-sutta — which contains, of course, elaborate rules for funerals —
was originally a part of the Pali Vinaya; see L. Finot, “Textes historiques dans le
canon pali”, JA (1932) 158; Finot, “Mahaparinibbana-sutta and Cullavagga”, IHQ 8
(1932) 241—46; E. Obermiller, “The Account of the Buddha’s Nirvana and the First
Councils according to the Vinayaksudraka”, JHQ 8 (1932) 781—84; E. Frauwallner,
The Earliest Vinaya and the Beginnings of Buddhist Literature (Serie Orientale Roma
8) (Roma: 1956) 42 ff. There are as well indications that when read as a piece of
Vinaya, a number of puzzling elements in the Mahaparinibbana-sutta begin to make
much better sense; see below notes 46 and 72.

3 For a discussion of the differential treatment of archeological/epigraphical and
textual sources see G. Schopen, “Archeology and Protestant Presuppositions in the
Study of Indian Buddhism”, History of Religions 31 (1991) 1—23. One might suspect,
moreover, that the inclination to locate Buddhism in canonical texts has had an
inhibiting influence even on anthropological investigations. C. F. Keyes, for example,
says — quoting Rhys Davids: “Because both men [i.e. two modern Thai “Saints”] were
considered to be Buddhist saints, their deaths were interpreted in terms of Buddhist
ideas about death and its aftermath. There is really only one source for these ideas,
particularly since nothing is said in the Vinaya, the discipline incumbent upon monks,
about the disposal of the corpses of members of the Sangha (Rhys Davids: xlv); and
that is in the account of the death of the Buddha himself as given in the Maha-
parinibbana sutta” (C. F. Keyes, “Death of Two Buddhist Saints in Thailand”, in
Charisma and Sacred Biography (JAAR Thematic Studies XLVIMI/3 and 4) 154; my
emphasis). This seeming restriction of “Buddhist ideas” to canonical texts appears
especially odd coming from an anthropologist. In fact Keyes himself has done perhaps
more than anyone else writing on South East Asia to show that “Buddhist ideas about
death” can come from a variety of sources: C. F. Keyes, “Tug-of-war for Merit:
Cremation of a Senior Monk”, Journal of the Siam Society 63.1—2 (1975) 44—62; P.
K. Anusaranasasanakiarti & C. F. Keyes, “Funerary Rites and the Buddhist Meaning
of Death: An Interpretative Text for Northern Thailand”, Journal of the Siam Society
68.1 (1980) 1—28; cf. S. J. Tambiah, “The Ideology of Merit and the Social
Correlates of Buddhism in a Thai Village”, in Dialectic in Practical Religion, ed. E. R.
Leach (Cambridge: 1968) 41—121; esp. 88—99; etc. Significantly, there has been —
in so far as I know — no work done on monastic funerals, and little on the disposal
of the dead in general, in Sri Lanka, for example, in spite of the fact that we have a
reasonably detailed description of a monastic funeral which took place there in the
5th century (Fa-hsien, A Record of the Buddhist Countries, trans. Li Yung-hsi (Peking:
1957) 83—84. (For some incidental references to monastic funerals in Tibet and
Tibetan speaking areas see T. Wylie, “Mortuary Customs at Sa-Skya, Tibet”, HJAS 25
(1964—65) 229—42; M. Brauen, “Death Customs in Ladakh”, Kailash 9 (1982)
319—32; C. Ramble, “Status and Death: Mortuary Rites and Attitudes to the Body in
a Tibetan Village”, Kailash 9 (1982) 333-56; T. Skorupski, “The Cremation
Ceremony according to the Byang-gter Tradition”, Kailash 9 (1982) 361—76; etc.) It
is, finally, worth noting that although an immense amount of work has been done on
Medieval Christian monasticism relatively little has, again, been done on monastic
funerals — see, however, for some interesting comparative and contrastive material, L.
Gougaud, “Anciennes coutumes claustrales. La mort du moine”, Revue Mabillon
(1929) 283—302; J. Leclercq, “Documents sur la mort des moines”, Revue Mabillon

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 24 (Journal p. 24) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

24 GREGORY SCHOPEN

(1955) 165—79; (1956) 65—81; J.-L. Lemaitre, “L’inscription dans les necrologes
clunisiens, XI*—XII* siecles”, in La mort au moyen age. Colloque de l'association des
historiens médiévistes francais réunis a Strasbourg en juin 1975 au palais universitaire
(Strasbourg: 1977) 153—67; J.-L. Lemaitre, “La mort et la commémoration des
défunts dans les prieurés”, in Prieurs et prieurés dans l’occident médiéval, ed. J.-L.
Lemaitre (Genéve: 1987) 181—190; L. Gougaud, Dévotions et pratiques ascétiques du
moyen age (Paris: 1925) 129—42 (“Mourir sous le froc”); etc.

‘4 For a preliminary survey and discussion of this evidence see G. Schopen, “An Old
Inscription from Amaravati and the Cult of the Local Monastic Dead in Indian
Buddhist Monasteries”, JIABS 14.2 (1991).

5 K. R. Norman, “The Value of the Pali Tradition”, ‘Jagajjyoti’ Buddha Jayanti
Annual (Calcutta: 1984) 1—9, esp. 4, 7; cf. K. R. Norman, “Pali Philology and the
Study of Buddhism”, The Buddhist Heritage (Buddhica Britannica, Series Continua I)
(Tring, U.K.: 1989) 29—53; also the much earlier S. Lévi, “Observations sur une
langue précanonique du bouddhisme”, JA (1912) 495—514, esp. 511.

® A. Csoma de KGrés, “Analysis of the Dulva”, Asiatic Researches 20 (1836) 41—93,
esp. 71, 89; cf. A. Csoma de Korés, Analyse du Kandjour, traduite et augmentée par
L. Feer (Annales du musée guimet, 2) (Lyon: 1881) 175, 192, 194.

7 W. W. Rockhill, The Life of Buddha and the Early History of His Order derived
from Tibetan Works in the Bkhah-hgyur and Bstan-hgyur (London: 1884) 112, 116,
150, ete.

8 P. V. Kane, History of DharmaSastra, Vol. TV (Poona: 1953) 234—35. The idea that
“the Vinaya” treats “all details of the daily life of the recluses” rather than simply the
staggering number of areas in which there were problems is also still with us: “As the
sarigha evolved, regulations developed governing the cenobitical life. These ordi-
nances, preserved in the Vinaya Pitaka of the Pali Canon, detail every aspect of the
lives of monks and runs [read: nuns] in the sangha”; K. G. Zysk, Asceticism and
Healing in Ancient India. Medicine in the Buddhist Monastery (Oxford: 1991) 39. If
such characterizations of the scope of “the Vinaya” are accepted, then we are stuck
with an interesting irony: “... les Vinayapitaka . . . ne soufflent mot des nombreuses
pratiques spirituelles, méditations, recueillements, etc., qui constituaient essence
méme de la ‘religion’ bouddhique” (A. Bareau, “La construction et le culte des stipa
d’aprés les Vinayapitaka”, BEFEO 50 (1960) 249). To say that the Vinayas “ne
soufflent mot” about such matters is too strong, but the point remains: if we had to
judge by the Vinayas, we would have to conclude that “pratiques spirituelles” had
little, if any, place in the daily life of monks and nuns.

° See most recently A. Yuyama, Systematische Ubersicht iiber die buddhistische
Sanskrit-Literatur. Erster Teil. Vinaya-Texte, Hrsg. H. Bechert (Wiesbaden: 1979)
12—33; K. Wille, Die Handschriftliche Uberlieferung des Vinayavastu der Mila-
sarvastivadin (Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland. Supple-
mentband 30) (Stuttgart: 1990).

10 Et. Lamotte, Histoire du bouddhisme indien. des origines a l’ére Saka (Louvain:
1958) 187, for example, refers to the Chinese translation as “médiocre et incomplete”;
E. Frauwallner, The Earliest Vinaya and the Beginnings of Buddhist Literature, 195
says it “is not only incomplete but also full of gaps”. “The Chinese translation”, he
says, “is also much less exact than the Tibetan one”. Lévi, JA (1912) 509 had even
earlier said: “Du Vinaya des Mila-Sarvastivadins, nous avons deux traductions: une en

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 25 (Journal p. 25) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 25

chinois, par Yi-tsing, du type des ‘belles infidéles’; une autre en tibétain, scrupuleuse-
ment littérale”. J. W. de Jong, “Les swtrapitaka des sarvastivadin et des milasarvasti-
vadin”, in Mélanges d’indianisme a la mémoire de Louis Renou (Paris: 1968) 401,
has, “en comparant les versions chinoise et tibétaine du Vinaya des Milasarvasti-
vadin”, argued that some of these characterizations are unjustified, that some of the
omissions in I-tsing’s translation can be accounted for since “les manuscrits de Gilgit
prouvent qu'il [I-tsing] a di traduire une recension plus bréve”; but see also E. Huber,
“Etudes bouddhiques I. — Les fresques inscrites de Turfan”, BEFEO 14 (1914) 13—
14.

1! See below and n. 50.

12 Pali Vinaya i, 302 ff; I. B. Horner, The Book of the Discipline (London: 1951)
Vol. IV, 434 ff; for some discussion on the problems of inheritance and the Pali
Vinaya see U. Gaung, A Digest of the Burmese Buddhist Law concerning Inheritance
and Marriage (Rangoon: 1908) Vol. I, 447—68; R. Lingat, “Vinaya et droit laique.
Etudes sur les conflits de la loi religieuse et de la loi laique dans l’indochine
hinayaniste”, BEFEO 37 (1937) 415—77; esp. 443 ff.

13, See J. Gernet, Les aspects économique du bouddhisme dans la société chinoise du
v’ au x* siécle (Paris: 1956) 61 ff — though dealing primarily with China, Gernet’s
study is still probably the best thing we have on the economic structures of Indian
Buddhist monasteries as they are described in texts of Indian origin.

14 Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 113—48.

15. Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 117 ff.

16 For yogam manasikaram the Tibetan translation has only yid la byed pa (Derge 3,
204; Tog 3, 267; Peking 41, 279-5). Compare the list of activities ignored in the
Miulasarvastivada passage with the similar but divergent list found at Pali Vinaya i
190 (riricanti uddesam paripuccham adhisilam adhicittam adhiparinam — said of
monks preoccupied with making and ornamenting shoes), iii 235 (said of nuns
preoccupied with washing, dyeing and combing sheep’s wool).

'7 Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts vi, fol. 848.7—9; Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 120.3—4 —
Tibetan: Derge 3, 204; Tog 3, 267; Peking 41, 279-S.

18 Tibetan gsol ba byed pa na, and context, both suggest that something like jriaptyam
kriyamanayam has dropped out of the Gilgit manuscript; cf. the following note.

19 The Civara-vastu, the vastu in which this passage occurs in the Sanskrit text may
not have been translated by I-tsing into Chinese (See Frauwallner, The Earliest Vinaya
and the Beginnings of Buddhist Literature, 195). Durt, however, refers to a very
similar list of “five occasions” which occurs in the Vinaya-samgraha (Taisho 1458):
“1° battement de gong ... 2° récitation du Sankei Mujoky6 . . . le sutra tripartite .. .
3° salutation profonde . . . 4° distribution de Batonnets . . . 5° proclamation d’une
motion . . .”, (H. Durt, “Chi”, Hobégirin, cinquiéme fascicule (Paris/Tokyo: 1979)
437) and I-tsing certainly knew the Civara-vastu. At least one entire chapter of his
Record is in fact a translation of a long passage from this vastu, as N. Dutt pointed
out long ago (Dutt, Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, x—xi) — the chapter in question is
number xxxvi (see, A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practiced in India and the
Malay Archipelago by I-tsing, trans. J. Takakusu (London: 1896) 189—93). — The
failure to recognize that this chapter of the Record was a translation of part of the
Milasarvastivada-vinaya has misled a number of scholars who have presented it as a
reflection of actual monastic practice in India at the time of I-tsing’s visit — cf. Lingat,

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 26 (Journal p. 26) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

26 GREGORY SCHOPEN

BEFEO 37 (1937) 464; Gernet, Les aspects économiques du bouddhisme dans la
société chinoise du v au x* siécle, 71—73; A. Bareau, “Indian and Ancient Chinese
Buddhism: Institutions Analogous to the Jisa”, Comparative Studies in Society and
History 3 (1961) 447; A. Bareau, “Etude du bouddhisme. Aspects du bouddhisme
indien décrits par I-tsing”, ACF 1989—1990, 631—40.) The fact that the Civara-
vastu is not now found in the Taishé may only indicate that it was one of I-tsing’s
works that was lost after his death (cf. A. Hirakawa, Monastic Discipline for the
Buddhist Nuns (Patna: 1982) 12). For a detailed description of the procedure
involved in distributing “tickets” mentioned in our passage see the article by Durt
mentioned above.

20 Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 120.6; Gilgit Manuscripts iii 4, 79.13; AvadanaSataka i
272.1 (cf. L. Feer, Avaddna-cataka. Cent légendes bouddhiques (Paris: 1891) 185,
who translates mundika gandi by “la cloche funébre”.)

21 Peking 41, 279-5; Gilgit Manuscripts iii 4, 79 n. 3; Peking 40, 184-3.

22 This is especially clear in the monastic funeral described in AvadanaSataka i

271 ff: tato ‘sya sabrahmacaribhir mundikam gandim parahatya Sarirabhinirharah
krtah / tato ’sya Sarire Sarirapujam krtva viharam agatah /. It is almost equally clear
that this avadana is a narrative elaboration of the much simpler accounts in the
Civara-vastu of the Milasarvastivada-vinaya in which the first set of rules governing
monastic funerals is presented (see below; on the ‘sectarian’ affiliation of the
AvaddnaSataka see J.-U. Hartmann, “Zur Frage der Schulzugehorigkeit des
Avadanasataka”, in Zur Schulzugehdrigkeit von Werken der Hinaydna-Literatur, Hrsg.
H. Bechert, Erster Teil (Gottingen: 1985) 219—24).

23 See below n. 62.

24 Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 144.14, in the account of the death of a monk who had
left his bowl and robe in the keeping of others: visucitah kalagatah / sa bhiksubhih
Smasanam nitva dagdhah / dharmasravanam dattam / anupurvena viharah pravistah /.
25 Derge 10, 226.2, in an account of the funeral of Mahaprajapati in which the
Buddha himself is given a prominent part.

26 See below n. 63.

27 M. Helffer, “Le gandi: un simandre tibétain d’origine indienne”, Yearbook for
Traditional Music 15 (1983) 112—25; I. Vandor, “The Gandi: A Musical Instrument
of Buddhist India Recently Identified in a Tibetan Monastery”, The World of Music
17 (1975) 24—27. (cf. S. Lévi & Ed. Chavannes, “Quelques titres énigmatiques dans
la hiérarchie ecclésiastique du bouddhisme indien”, JA (1915) 213—215.) References
to the use of the gandi are frequent in the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya — see, as a
sample, Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 145, 156, 158; iii 3, 9; iii 4, 35, 36, 37, 81, 92;
Sanghabheda-vastu ii 83; Sayanasana & Adhikarana-vastus 41, 55, 85, 106; etc. It is
interesting to note that striking “la tablette du cloitre, . . . cette sorte de gong funébre”,
also signalled the beginning of monastic funerals in Medieval Western monasteries
(Gougaud, Review mabillon (1929) 281, 290), and its function there too marks the
communal nature of the event (Lemaitre, Prieurs et prieurés dans l’occident médiéval,
185: “... on sonne le claquoir (tabula) pour réunir les fréres . . .”).

28 Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts iv, fol. 852.3—5; Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 126.17—127.3
— Tibetan: Derge 3, 210.2—4; Tog 3, 275.5—276.1; Peking 41, 280—5—4 to S—6.
29S. Lévi, “Les éléments de formation du Divyavadana”, TP 8 (1907) 105—22, esp.
122 (“De ce point de vue, la langue du Mila Sarvastivada Vinaya prend, par ses

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 27 (Journal p. 27) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 27

étrangetés méme, une importance exceptionnelle; elle montre le sanscrit de Panini
entrainé par la circulation de la vie réelle, en voie d’altération normale, sur les confins
des pracrits . . .”); Gnoli, Sarighabhedavastu i xx n. 2.

3° Both here and in II and III below, the Tibetan translators appear to have
construed the dead monk’s speech as a rhetorical question. The Tibetan in fact looks
like it might be translating an interrogative md construction (cf. BHSG §§ 42.12—
42.16); in Il, the final text in this series cited below, the manuscript itself has a
negative in the parallel construction, but it is na not ma.

3! Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 127.5 (bhiksavas tam abhinirhrtya, of the dead body of an
ordinary monk); Pravrajyavastu, fol. 121.2 (bahir api nirhrtya, of the dead body of the
teacher Samjayin), Divyavadana 281.30 (Sibikabhir nirharitva, of the dead body of
Asoka); AvadanaSataka i 272.1 (sabrahmacaribhir . . . Sarirabhinirharah krtah, of the
body of a dead monk); Uddna 8.21 (sarirakam maricakam aropetva niharitva, of the
dead body of an ascetic); Pali Vinaya iv 308 (bhikkhuniyo tam bhikkhunim niharitva,
of the dead body of a nun); etc. — there are, of course, other technical meanings for
abhinirhara, cf. M. H. F. Jayasuriya, “A Note on Pali abhinihara and Cognate Forms
in the Light of Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit”, in Avijali. Papers on Indology and
Buddhism (O. H. de A. Wijesekera Volume) (Peradeniya: 1970) S0—54.

2 J. Jain, Life in Ancient India as Depicted in the Jain Canon and Commentaries. 6th
Century B.C. to 17th Century A.D., 2nd ed. (New Delhi: 1984) 281—84; esp. 283
where niharana is cited as the term for “the ceremony of taking out the dead”.

33. adahanam nitva: Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 127.13 (dur khrod du khyer te; of the
body of a monk); iii 2, 125.14 (sreg tu khyer nas; of the body of a monk); smasanam
nitva: Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 144.14 (dur khrod du bsregs nas; of the body of a
monk); tam adaya dahanam gatah: Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 118.15 (de khyor te sreg tu
dong ngo; of the body of a monk) — cf. Sarighabhedavastu i 70; 163, Derge 10, 224
ff; 444; 472; Divyavadana 428; etc. It will, perhaps, be clear from even the small
sample cited here that the Tibetan translations of the terms and phrases involved are
neither consistent nor exact; cf. n. 38 below.

34 Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts vi, fol. 852.5—8; Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 127.4—11 —
Tibetan: Derge 3, 210.4—6; Tog 3, 276.1—5S; Peking 41, 280—S—6 to 281—1—1.

35 G. Schopen, “Monks and the Relic Cult in the Mahdaparinibbanasutta: An Old
Misunderstanding in Regard to Monastic Buddhism”, in From Benares to Beijing:
Essays on Buddhism and Chinese Religions in Honour of Prof. Jan Yiin-hua, ed. G.
Schopen & K. Shinohara (Oakville: 1991) 187—201.

36 On the meaning of the term puja and the kinds and range of activities it can refer
to see J. Charpentier, “The Meaning and Etymology of Puja”, Indian Antiquary 56
(1927) 9399, 130—36; L. de la Vallée Poussin, “Totémisme et Végétalisme”,
Bulletin de la classe des lettres et des sciences morales et politiques, Académie Royale
de belgique, 5° série, T.XV (1929) 37—52; P. Thieme, “Indische Worter und Sitten”,
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlindischen Gesellschaft 93 (1939) 105—39; esp.
105—23; A. L. Basham, “The Evolution of the Concept of the Bodhisattva”, in The
Bodhisattva Doctrine in Buddhism, ed. L. S. Kawamura (Waterloo: 1981) 19—S9; esp.
35—36; G. E. Ferro-Luzzi, “Abhiseka, the Indian Rite that Defies Definition”,
Anthropos 76 (1981) 707—42; A. Ostor, Puja in Society (Lucknow: 1982); D. D.
Malvania, “The Word pija and Its Meaning”, Indologica Taurinensia 14 (1987—88)
269—73; etc.

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 28 (Journal p. 28) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

28 GREGORY SCHOPEN

37 See below n. 43.

38 T. W. Rhys Davids & W. Stede, The Pali Text Society’s Pali-English Dictionary
(London: 1921—25) 698 s.v. sarira. It is worth noting here that the handling of the
term Sarira-puja by the Tibetan translators is far from satisfactory and a long way
from their usual consistency. In this passage and in III cited below Sarira-puja is
translated by ro la mchod pa, ro la mchod pa byas la, and ro la mchod pa byas; ro
means first “dead body, corpse, carcass”, then “body”, then “residue, remains,
sediment”. AvadanaSataka ii 272.2, however, which reads Sarirabhinirharah krtah /
tato ’sya Sarire Sarira-pujam krtva is translated rus bu phyir phyung ngo / de nas de’i
rus bu la rus bu’i mchod pa byas nas. Here, then, where the first occurrence of Sarira,
and almost certainly the second and third, can only mean “body”, the Tibetan
translates it in all three instances by rus bu which can only mean “small bone” or
“bones in general”. Again, especially in the first instance, Sarira cannot possibly mean
“bone” since the context makes it certain that it refers to a newly dead “body” which
has not even been removed from the monk’s cell, let alone cremated. Likewise, in the
Mahaparinirvana-sutra there are several occurrences of the term Sarira-puja in
passages narrating events which preceded the cremation, that is to say prior to the
time that there could have been any “bones” or “relics”. At 36.2, where Ananda asks
what should be done with the body of the Buddha after his death, Sarira-pujayam
autsukyam apadyemahi is translated by sku gdung la... mchod pa ji snyed cig brtson
par bgyi lags (similarly at 46.4); at 48.8, where the wandering Ajivaka tells Maha-
kasyapa that the Buddha is dead and that his body was honored for seven days, Sarire
Sarirapuja is translated by sku gdung la mchod pa bgyis pa); but at 49.19, where
Kasyapa formulates his intention to personally repeat the Sarira-puja of the Buddha’s
body that had already been performed by the Mallas, he says: yan nv aham svayam
eva bhagavatah Sarirapujayam autsukyam apadyeya, and this is translated into Tibetan
by ma la bdag nyid kyis bcom Idan ’das la mchod pa’i las bya’o snyam du spro ba
bskyed nas. In other words, in the same text, Sarira is sometimes translated by sku
gdung, which is the respect form of rus and means first of all — if not exclusively —
“bone”, in contexts where there could not yet have been any “bone”; or it is some-
times not translated at all: 49.19, where the Sanskrit text has “worship of the body of
the Blessed One”, the Tibetan has simply “worship of the Blessed One” himself. There
are, moreover, numerous instances where we do not have the Sanskrit original, but
where it was almost certainly Sarira-puja. Here too there is considerable variation: at
Derge 10, 480, for example, immediately after Sariputra’s death a fellow monk is said
to have Sa ri’i bu’i ring bsrel la lus kyis mchod pa byas te. Context makes it virtually
certain that this can only refer to funeral procedures, and it is very likely that the
original read Sarire Sarirapuja, but in spite of this the Tibetan literally means some-
thing like “performing the worship with the body on the relics of Sariputra”. Later in
the same account — Derge 10, 488 — where again the original almost certainly had
Sarire Sarirapuja, and where the reference is undoubtedly to post-cremation remains,
the Tibetan has ring bsrel la ring bsrel gyi mchod pa bgyi’o. In the account of the
death of Mahaprajapati (Derge 10, 224 ff) we find Jus la mchod pa; in the account of
the death of Prasenajit (Derge 10, 174) we find both khog pa la mchod pa and lus la
mchod pa; in the account of the death of the monk Gavampati, rus pa la rus pa’i
mchod pa (Derge 10, 606) — in all these cases the original was almost certainly
Sarirapiija or Sarire Sarirapuja. It is not impossible that a systematic survey of the

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 29 (Journal p. 29) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 29

Tibetan handling of the term might reveal meaningful patterns in what now appears to
be confusion, but such a survey has yet to be done. It is also worth noting that —
although rare — there are traces of the use of the term Sarira-pija to refer not to a
funereal procedure, but to honor directed towards post-cremational remains. This
appears to be the case several times in the account concerning the remains of
Sariputra at Derge 10, 488 ff; likewise, at Divyavadana 252.10, when Asoka
expresses his desire to honor the stupas of the Buddha’s famous disciples, the Sanskrit
text has him say tesam Sarirapujam karisyami (J. Przyluski, La légende de l’empereur
Agoka (Acoka-avadana) dans les textes indiens et chinois (Annales du musée guimet,
32) (Paris: 1923) 257, however, translates the parallel passage in the A-yd-wang-
chuan (Taisho 2042) as “‘Je veux maintenant honorer les stupa des grands disciples
...’"); see also Schopen, From Benares to Beijing, 195 ff. Note, finally, that the
Sanskrit sources themselves do not always use the term Sarira-puja; cf. n. 70.

3° Divyavadana 281.30 (note that for Vaidya’s sibikabhir nirharitva Sarirapijam krtva
rajanam pratisthapayisyama, the text given in S. Mukhopadhyaya, The ASokavadana.
Sanskrit Text compared with Chinese Versions (New Delhi: 1963) 132.7 provides an
important variant: Sivikabhir nirharitva Sarirapujam krtva dhmapayitva rajanam
pratisthapayisyama — this reading makes it very clear that Sarirapuja preceded
cremation); Derge 10, 174. The fact that known kings — including and especially
Asoka — did not receive the funeral of a Cakravartin only emphasizes the purely
ideal, if not entirely artificial character of both the idea and the description of such a
funeral in the texts and the fourfold classification of those “worthy of a stipa” as well;
cf. A. Bareau, Recherches sur la biographie du buddha dans le sutrapitaka et les
vinayapitaka anciens: II. Les derniers mois, le parinirvana et les funérailles, T.11 (Paris:
1971) 50 ff; G. de Marco, I “Kusana” nella vita del Buddha. Per una Analisi del
Rapporto tra Potere Politico e Religione nell’ Antico Gandhara (Supplemento n. 34
agli Annali) (Napoli: 1983) 47—54; etc.

40 Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts vi, fol. 852.8—10; Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 127.12—18
— Tibetan: Derge 3, 210.7—211.2; Tog 3, 276.5—277.1; Peking 41, 281—1—1 to
1—3.

41 Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 144.14; Derge 10, 472.2 ff; Derge 10, 224.6 ff; Avadana-
Sataka i 272 ff; etc. — reference to both or either is not, however, invariably found in
references to monastic funerals. Sometimes such references contain only phrases like
tam ddahane samskarya or tam adahanam nitva samskarya (Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2,
118.16; 125.4), where a recitation of Dharma and transfer of merit are probably
simply understood. — For the importance of performing a “puja of the teacher (i.e.
the Buddha)” (Sastus ca puja) for a dying but not yet dead monk see Gilgit Manu-
scripts iii 2, 124.11 ff. — It is again worth noting the similar procedures stipulated in
“les coutumiers monastiques” composed in the Medieval West: “.. . on annonce la
nouvelle au chapitre et l’on fait aussit6t un office pour le défunt, avec sonnerie de
cloches”; “les fréres résidant dans cette dépendance (prieuré, prévoté, etc. . . .) font
pour le mort ce qui se fait dans le monastére, c’est-a-dire l’office des morts pendant
sept jours, avec glas le premier jour, distribution d’une pitance (justicia) pendant
trente jours avec chant du psaume Verba mea (Ps. 141) et de cing autres psaumes
pour le défunt” (Lemaitre, Prieurs et prieurés dans l’occident médiéval, 185, Gougaud,
Revue Mabillon (1929) 281 ff.

42 For what is probably still the best discussion of the subtleties sometimes involved

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 30 (Journal p. 30) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

30 GREGORY SCHOPEN

in what is called the “transfer of merit” see J. Filliozat, “Sur le domaine sémantique de
punya”, in Indianisme et bouddhisme. Mélanges offerts 4 mgr. Etienne Lamotte
(Louvain-la-neuve: 1980) 102—116.

43 See — noting the language used to express such “transfers” — Gilgit Manuscripts iii
1, 220.12 (naémna daksinam adiseyam — to pretas who were the deceased relatives of
a group of laymen); Gilgit Manuscripts iii 4, 181.5, 18; 182.12 (namnda daksinam
adeSaya — to deceased relatives); Derge 10, 472.2 ff (yon bsngo zhing — toa
deceased monk); Sayandsana & Adhikarana-vastus 37.7 (nadmnd daksind adestavya-
37.11; namnda daksiném uddisasi — both to deceased donors who had given viharas
to the Order); Gilgit Manuscripts iii 4, 161.1 (namna daksinam adeksyati — to
deceased parents by a son); Rab tu ‘byur ba’i gzi ii 41.9 (min gis yon bsrio ba byed
par gyur cig — to deceased parents by a son); for literature related to this Vinaya

see Avadanasataka i 272.13 (namna daksind adista — to a deceased monk by the
Buddha); Divyavadana 1.23; 286.24; Avadanasataka i 15.1; 197.3; 277.2; etc. — all
to deceased parents by a son). There are as well instances which use the same
vocabulary but where the transfer is directed to living beings: Sarighabhedavastu i
199.25 daksina adista — by the Buddha to his father); Gilgit Manuscripts iii 4, 80
(daksinadestavyeti — connected with the Posadha — cf. the last verse of the Mula-
sarvastivada Pratimoksa Sutra: pratimoksasamuddesad yat punyam samuparjitam /
asesas tena lokoyam maunindram padam apnuyat // — A. C. Banerjee, Two Buddhist
Vinaya Texts in Sanskrit (Calcutta: 1977) 56); Mahdparinirvana-stitra 6.10, 6.13
(namna daksinam adisava; daksinam adiset — to local devas). In his work on the Pali
Petavatthu H. S. Gehman noted and carefully studied parallel expressions (H. S.
Gehman, “Adisati, Anvadisati, Anudisati and Uddisati in the Petavatthu”, JAOS 43
(1923) 410—21). In a short note written long before the Sanskrit text of the
Mulasarvastivada-vinaya was available, he also argued that expressions like namna
daksinadesana in the AvadanaSataka were “Palisms” (H. S. Gehman, “A Palism in
Buddhist Sanskrit”, JAOS 44 (1924) 73—75). But in fact it now appears that such
expressions are much more firmly anchored in Sanskrit — especially Mulasarvastivada
— sources and are of limited and late occurrence in Pali sources: they occur
frequently only in texts like the Peravatthu, very rarely elsewhere — at Aviguttara iii
43 (petanam dakkhinam anuppadassati) and once in the Pali Mahdparinibbana-sutta
(I. 31: tasam dakkhinam adise — the same expression in the same verse also appears
in the parallel accounts to the Mahdparinibbana passage that are now found at Udana
85 ff and Pali Vinaya i 228 ff). This pattern of occurrence of the expression
dakkhinam ddis- in Pali sources — noting especially its occurrence in the Maha-
parinibbana-sutta — parallels that of the term Sarira-puja. Both are firmly rooted and
frequent in Mulasarvastivada sources (see above n. 38), both are rare in anything but
“late” Pali sources, but both occur prominently in the Pali Mahaparinibbana-sutta (cf.
J. P. McDermott, Development in the Early Buddhist Concept of Kamma/Karma (New
Delhi: 1984) 41 ff, although his views are not themselves free of problems). It is
possible that we may have in both expressions indications of the influence of
continental sources on canonical Pali. It is worth noting too that at least the expres-
sion daksinddeSana is not limited to Milasarvastivada sources. In the Sphutartha
Srighanacara-samgraha-tika of Jayaraksita, for example, the term occurs and is
provided with a ‘definition’: daksinddeSanan ca danagathapathah (Sanghasena, ed.,

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 31 (Journal p. 31) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

-ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 31

Sphutartha Srighandcarasargrahatika (Tibetan Sanskrit Works Series XI) (Patna:
1968) 36.10): “ ‘Assignment of gift’ is the reading of gift-verses” (J. D. M. Derrett, A
Textbook for Novices. Jayaraksita’s “Perspicuous Commentary on the Compendium of
Conduct by Srighana” (Pubblicazioni di Indologica Taurinensia XV) (Torino: 1983)
44). This work it appears is affiliated with the Mahasanghika (cf. M. Shimoda, “The
Sphutartha Srighanacarasarigrahatika and the Chinese Mahdsanghika Vinaya”, IBK
39.1 (1990) 495—92. Finally, for some interesting suggestions concerning the
background of the expression see B. Oguibenine, “La daksina dans le Rgveda et le
transfert de mérite dans le bouddhisme”, in Indological and Buddhist Studies. Volume
in Honour of Professor J. W. de Jong on his Sixtieth Birthday, ed. L. A. Hercus et al.
(Canberra: 1982) 393—414.

+4 Kane, History of Dharmasastra, Vol. IV, 257.

4S SrautakoSa. Encyclopedia of Vedic Sacrificial Literature, Vol. 1-English Section;
Part II (Poona: 1962) 1037.

‘© This same congruency may also allow us a better understanding of some otherwise
puzzling elements in the Mahaparinirvana-sutra. The Sanskrit version, for example,
goes to some trouble to indicate that although the funereal Sarira-pija had already
been performed for the Buddha when Mahakasyapa finally reached Kusinagara he
nevertheless is made to repeat the entire procedure himself (49.18—20). This at first
sight seems both odd and unnecessary. But it makes perfect sense if — as is not
unlikely — the compiler of the text ‘knew’ that Kasyapa was the chief heir of the
Buddha (cf. Gilgit Manuscripts iii 1, 259—60), and if he ‘knew’ that for a monk to
inherit he must perform or participate in the funeral of the deceased. Seen from this
point of view Kasyapa could not be what he was supposed to be unless he had
performed the Sarira-puja or had participated in the funeral. Kasyapa’s role in the Pali
version of the text — though slightly less odd — can also be explained in this way.

47 R. F, Gombrich, Precept and Practice. Traditional Buddhism in the Rural
Highlands of Ceylon (Oxford: 1971) 243.

48 Something similar has somewhat hesitantly been noted by Knipe in regard to
Hindu funereal practice: “The doctrines of transmigration and liberation transformed
the whole of ancient Indian speculation and practice, but the rites accorded the
ancestors bear a stamp of rigorous antiquity. They appear to endure beside the newer
sentiments of samsdra and moksa”. “The ritual world view of early vedic religion
could abide through several strenuous periods via the directives of the sutras and
Sastras for individual funeral and ancestral rites, with remarkably little tampering from
innovative doctrines, theologies, and cosmographies that gradually eroded the official,
institutional structures of vedic religion. Although the concern shifted from the early
vedic desire for a state of perpetual non-death or immortality to the dilemmas of
samsara and the ideal of moksa, the intention of the sraddhas survived, and the
understanding of the passage of the deceased as a cosmogonic progression, with an
individual’s salvation dependent on the correct ritual activity of his descendants,
permitted these archaic ceremonies for the dead to continue to the present day”; D.
M. Knipe, “Sapindikarana: the Hindu Rite of Entry into Heaven”, in Religious
Encounters with Death. Insights from the History and Anthropology of Religions, ed.
F. E. Reynolds & E. H. Waugh (University Park & London: 1977) 111—24, esp. 112,
121—22.

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 32 (Journal p. 32) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

32 GREGORY SCHOPEN

49 Rockhill, The Life of the Buddha and the Early History of His Order, 112.

5° L. de La Vallée Poussin, “Staupikam”, HJAS 2 (1935) 286—87.

5! A, Seidel, “Dabi”, H6bégirin, sixieme fascicule (Paris/Tokyo: 1983) 577 f.

52 Derge 10, 472.2—474.1; Tog 9, 704.7—707.5; Peking 44, 91—4—3 to 92—1—1.
The footnote numbers inserted into the text refer to the separate critical apparatus
which follows it and in which variants — most of little consequence — are recorded.
53. This entire paragraph is made up of sterotypic phrases used to describe an
orthodox union and birth — cf. Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 1—2, 52; iii 4, 6; 15; 23; 24;
28; 29; 53; Sayanasana & Adhikarana-vastus 13; Sarighabhedavastu i 27; Rab tu
’byun ba’i gzi ii 7; 21; 23; 42; Pravrajyavastu, 312; Divyavadana 2; Avadanasataka i
206; 261; 295; etc.

54 For the whole of what has been abbreviated here see Feer, Avadana-cataka, 3;
Pravrajyavastu 16.

55 As with the Sanskrit texts from the Civara-vastu treated above, so here in the
Tibetan text the style is sometimes elliptical and there is a considerable reliance on
pronouns whose referents sometimes need to be drawn out.

56 The Sanskrit is cited from Gilgit Manuscripts iii 2, 140.14.

57 For the Sanskrit underlying much of this paragraph cf. Gilgit Manuscripts iii 1,
285.17 ff: (said of a monk bitten by a snake) sa tatha vihvalo brahmanagrhapatibhir
drstah / te kathayanti / bhavantah katarasydyam grhapateh putra iti / aparaih
samakhyatam / amukasya iti / te kathayanti / anathanam SramanaSakyaputriyanam
madhye pravrajitah / yadi na pravrajito ‘bhavisyat jhatibhir asya cikitsa karita
abhavisyad iti /, see also Gilgit Manuscripts iii 1, ix. 10, although the passage there
involves considerable reconstruction. Note too that our text has no word for “funeral”
which I supply both here and below. A literal translation would be more like “would
surely have performed the honors/ceremonies”, “honors/ceremonies for a (deceased)
monk are to be performed”, etc. — For Sanskrit phrases which might lie behind rim
gro byas par ’gyur ba, etc., see below n. 70.

58 So de La Vallée Poussin, HJAS 2 (1935) 286, translates the Chinese. In a note he
suggests the Chinese was translating Sarira-puja, but the Tibetan would not support
this; cf. n. 38 above.

5° So de La Vallée Poussin, HJAS 2 (1935) 286; Seidel H6bdgirin, sixieme fasc. 578.
6° So de La Vallée Poussin, HJAS 2 (1935) 286; Seidel Hébégirin, sixieme fasc. 578;
cf. J. Przyluski, “Le partage des reliques du buddha”, Mélanges chinois et bouddhiques
4 (1935—36) 341—67; esp. 345—46.

®! It is virtually certain that Tibetan yon bsngo zhing here is translating some form of
daksinam adis-; cf. Mahdaparinirvana-sutra 6.10: namna daksinam adisasva = yon
sngo ba mdzad du gsol; 6.13: daksinam adiset = yon bsngo byas; Gilgit Manuscripts
iti 2, 127.18: daksinam uddisya = yon bsngo ba byas nas; etc.

© Determining the precise referent of the term or title Tridandaka is not as easy as
one might expect. Modern scholars, on the basis of good Chinese evidence (I-tsing,
colophons from Tun Huang) have with differing degrees of certainty seen in
Tridandaka a reference to a specific text. Taish6 801, the text in question, has in fact
been assigned in various Chinese sources two titles: (Fo shuo) wu ch’ang ching, “Sutra
(Spoken by the Buddha) on Impermanency”, a title which has been taken as a
translation of a Sanskrit title something like Anityata-sutra; and San ch’ ching, “Sitra
des Trois Ouvertures” or “les trois ‘informations’”. Sometimes the second title is given

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 33 (Journal p. 33) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 33

as an alternative, sometimes the two titles are simply combined into one: Fo shuo wu
ch’ang san ch’i ching (de La Vallée Poussin renders the Chinese corresponding to our
Ksudraka passage by “récite les trois ‘informations’, K’i [et] le Siitra sur rimper-
manence”, HJAS 2 (1935) 287). Taish6 801, or the Anityata-sutra, would appear to
be well suited for a funeral text (see the Sanskrit version edited in I. Yamada,
“Anityatasutra”, IBK 20.2 (1972) 1001—996); it appears, moreover, from at least
Takakusu’s translation, that I-tsing says in his description of a monastic funeral in his
Record that “while the corpse is burning . . . the ‘Sitra on Impermanence’ (Anitya-
sutra) is recited” (Takakusu, A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practiced in India
and the Malay Archipelago, 81—82 — Bareau, however, in summarizing the passage
says only: “Un moine récite un bref sermon (sutra) sur impermanence (anityatd) . . .”,
ACF 1989—90, 636); in the account of the funeral of Mahaprajapati in the
Ksudraka, finally, the Buddha himself is said to have expounded teachings connected
with impermanence” (mi rtag pa dang Idan pa’i chos dag bshad nas; Derge 10, 226.2).
All of this would seem to argue for identifying the Tridandaka with the Anityata-
sutra. But there are still other indications that would seem to suggest that the
Tridandaka was not, in fact, a specific text but a kind of ritual formulary into which
any given text could be inserted. Although I-tsing does not appear to refer to the
Tridandaka in his description of a monastic funeral, he does refer to it elsewhere in
his Record and his description of it is of considerable interest. Lévi has translated the
passage as follows: “Dans les pays occidentaux, l’adoration des caitya et le service
ordinaire se font a la fin de l'aprés-midi ou au crépuscule . .. Quand tout le monde
est définitivement assis, un maitre des siitra monte sur le siége aux lions (simhdsana)
et déclame un peu de sutra ... Quant aux textes sacrés qu’on récite, c’est surtout les
Trois Ouvertures qu’on récite. C’est un recueil di au vénérable Ma ming (Asvaghosa).
La premiére partie compte dix vers; l’objet du texte est d’exalter les Trois Joyaux.
Ensuite vient un texte sacré proprement dit, prononcé par le Buddha en personne.
Aprés l’hymne et la récitation, il y a encore plus de dix vers, qui ont trait a la
déflexion des mérites (parindmana) et a la production du voeu (pranidhana). Comme
il y a trois parties qui s’ouvrent successivement, on appelle ce texte sacré les Trois
Ouvertures” (S. Lévi, “Sur la récitation primitive des textes bouddhiques”, JA (1915)
401—47, esp. 432—34; cf. Takakusu, A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practiced
in India and the Malay Archipelago, 152—53; R. Fujishima, “Deux chapitres extraits
des mémoires d'I-tsing sur son voyage dans l’inde”, JA (1888) 411—39, esp. 416—
18). This passage is important in at least two ways. First, the Tridandaka described
here is not a specific text, but a set form of recitation consisting of three parts: (1)
praise of the three precious things; followed by (2) the recitation of “un texte sacré
proprement dit”; with the sequence concluded by (3) a formal transfer of merit. The
“texte sacré” is unspecified and can apparently be any text suitable to the occasion of
the recitation. The second important thing that I-tsing’s description indicates would
point in the same direction. We have seen so far in the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya that
the recitation of the Tridandaka is one of the specified moments for the distribution
of a deceased monk’s estate, and that it is recited as a part of a monastic funeral.
I-tsing’s description, however, makes it clear that these were not the only ritual
contexts in which the Tridandaka was used. His description would seem to indicate
that it was also used during the daily “adoration des caitya et le service ordinaire”,
and to these ritual moments we can add others. The Posadha-vastu of the Mulasarvas-

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 34 (Journal p. 34) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

34 GREGORY SCHOPEN

tivada-vinaya, for example, associates the recitation of the Tridandaka with the
fortnightly communal recitation of the Pratimoksa which is often presented as the
most important congregational ritual in Buddhist monasticism (see Gilgit Manuscripts
iii 4, 80.5 where details concerning the appropriate length of its recitation are given)
and this association is repeated in the Bod rgya tshig mdzod chen mo which
characterizes the Tridandaka as a procedure or method of practice connected with
the Uposadha (gso sbyong gi sbyor chog cig ste — its description of the Tridandaka as
a recitative formulary corresponds almost exactly to I-tsing’s: . . . phyag ‘tshal ba’i
rgyud / mdo ‘don pa’i rgyud / bsngo ba’i rgyud de rgyud gsum dang Idan pa’i sgo nas
tshul khrims rnam dag gi mdo la sogs pa’i chos bshad cing nyan par byed pa’o /; Kran
dbyi sun, ed., Bod rgya tshig mdzod chen mo (Beijing: 1985) Vol. 1, 577). Elsewhere
in the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya, moreover, the recitation of the Tridandaka is
prescribed in the ritual required before cutting down a tree (see the text cited in K.
Tokiya, “The Anityata-sutra Quoted in the Tibetan Version of a Mulasarvastivada
Text”, IBK 34.1 (1985) 164); etc. It is, therefore, not just the structure of the
Tridandaka as it is described by I-tsing, but also its use in a variety of different ritual
contexts which suggests that it might well have been not a specific text but a specific
set type of recitation or an established formulary into which any given sutra text could
be inserted. The Chinese identification of the Tridandaka with the Anityata-sutra may
have resulted from the fact that I-tsing sent home the version of the formulary used
for monastic funerals into which the Anityata had been inserted and this came to be
considered the only version. All of this will, of course, require further research to
settle; so too will the attribution of the formulary to Asvaghosa. For material bearing
on both questions see — in addition to the sources already cited — P. Demiéville,
“Bombai”, Hébogirin, Premier fasc. (Tokyo: 1929) 93 ff; R. Sankrtyayana, “Search for
Sanskrit Mss. in Tibet”, Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society 24.4 (1938)
157—60; E. H. Johnston, “The Tridandamala of Asvaghosa”, Journal of the Bihar and
Orissa Research Society 25 (1939) 11—14; Lin Li-Kouang, L ‘aide-mémoire de la vraie
loi (Paris: 1949) 303—05; L. Giles, Descriptive Catalogue of the Chinese Manuscripts
from Tunhuang in the British Museum (London: 1957) 114—15; Durt, Hébégirin,
Cinquieme fasc., 437; P. Demiéville, “Notes on Buddhist Hymnology in the Far East”,
in Buddhist Studies in Honour of Walpola Rahula, ed. S. Balasooriya, et al. (London:
1980) 50 n. 31; Seidel, Hébégirin, Sixieme fasc., 577—78; etc.

63 de la Vallée Poussin, HJAS 2 (1935) 287 — here again we have a case where
what should be a straightforward referent turns out not to be so. The problems start
with an old one. Tibetan translations almost never distinguish between stupa and
caitya, both terms almost always being rendered by mchod rten (there are apparent
exceptions, but they are extremely rare — see the Mchod rten gcig btab na bye ba
btab par ’gyur pa’i gzungs (Peking 6, 151—2—2 to 3—2; 11, 168—4—8 to 5—8)
where the transliteration tsai tya occurs several times). The original that was translated
in our passage by mchod rten la phyag mi ‘tshal nas and mchod rten la phyag ‘tshal
bar bya’o cannot therefore be determined. There is also the fact that the Tibetan
versions are not in agreement as to whether the text is referring to one or to several
mchod rtens: the Derge has in the second occurrence mchod rten la, but both Tog
and Peking have mchod rten dag la (de la Vallée Poussin translates the Chinese as
singular). Both considerations may bear on an even more important point: we do not
know to whom the mchod rten or mchod rtens belonged; we do not know whether

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 35 (Journal p. 35) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 35

the reference is to a stupa or stiipas of the Buddha, or to the stiipa or stipas of the
local monastic dead — it is now clear that the latter were found in considerable
numbers at a considerable number of mostly very early monastic sites in India (cf.
Schopen, JIABS 14.2 (1991); for some regional variation in regard to whether such
structures were called stupas or caityas see p. and n. 38). Taking this category into
account it is, of course, not impossible that our text might be referring to a stupa built
for the deceased monk whose funeral has just been performed. It appears, however,
that at least Mulasarvastivada texts do not seem to link funereal activity per se with
the erection of stupas for the local monastic dead. In none of the numerous references
to monastic funerals in Mulasarvastivada literature that I know is there any reference
to erecting a stiipa. In fact the erection of stiipas for the local monastic dead is
legislated separately in the Mdlasarvastivada-vinaya not in an account of a funeral, but
in an account concerning the post-funereal “relics” of Sariputra (Derge 10, 488 ff).
This would suggest, I think, that in this Vinaya funeral ceremonies and cult activity
directed towards relics or reliquaries of the local monastic dead were conceived of as
fundamentally different forms of religious behavior. (It is — in so far as I know —
only in a few Pali narrative passages that funeral ceremonies for local monks or nuns
are directly linked with the erection of stupas for them — cf. Udana 8.21; Pali Vinaya
iv 308.) In light of these considerations it might be well to assume — until it can be
shown otherwise — that mchod rten (dag) la phyag ’tshal bar bya’ o in our passage
refers to worshipping the stipa or stupas of the Buddha, and that such an act was the
final moment of a monastic funeral. What ‘external’ evidence we have also would
seem to indicate that funeral activity and activity connected with stupas were thought
of as distinct. I-tsing in his Record refers to something “like a stiipa” for the local
monastic dead, but he seems to indicate that such was not always erected and that
when it was it was made an indeterminate time after the funeral: the monks, he says,
“on returning [from the cremation] to their apartments, . . . cleanse the floor with
powdered cow-dung. All other things remain as usual. There is no custom as to
putting on a mourning-dress. They sometimes build a thing like a stiipa for the dead,
to contain his sarira (or relics). It is called a ‘Kula’, which is like a small stupa, but
without the cupola on it” (Takakusu, A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practiced
in India and the Malay Archipelago 82; cf. Bareau, ACF 1989—1990, 636: “Aprés la
crémation, on recueille les restes corporels (Sarira) et on éléve sur eux un petit
tumulus appelé kula. Celui-ci ressemble a un stupa, mais on ne dresse pas de parasols
(chattra) 4 roues (cakra) 4 son sommet . . .” — for an attempt to identify what I-tsing
calls a kula with what is found at a number of monastic sites in India see G. Schopen,
“Burial ‘ad sanctos’ and the Physical Presence of the Buddha in Early Indian
Buddhism: A Study in the Archeology of Religions”, Religion 17 (1987) 193—225,
esp. 198—199). Note too that Rockhill’s summary of our text is particularly unsatis-
factory at this point: “Previously to being interred the body must be washed. A cairn
or tchaitya (mchod rten) must be raised over the remains” (The Life of the Buddha
and the Early History of His Order, 112). There is no justification in the text itself for
his interpretation of either injunction: it is the monks who participated in the funeral
who must wash, and the mchod rten is to be worshipped not “raised”.

4 I, B. Horner, The Book of the Discipline, Vol. 1 (Oxford: 1938) xvi—xvii.

65 Horner, The Book of the Discipline, Vol. 1, xxix.

°6 Horner, The Book of the Discipline, Vol. 1, xv.

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 36 (Journal p. 36) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

36 GREGORY SCHOPEN

67 Ch. Malamoud, “Les morts sans visage. Remarques sur l’idéologie funéraire dans le
brahmanisme”, in La mort, les morts dans les sociétés anciennes, ed. G. Gnoli et J.-P.
Vernant (Cambridge & Paris: 1982) 441—453, esp. 445, 441, 449.

68 L. Dumont, Homo Hierarchicus. The Caste System and Its Implications; Comp. rev.
Eng. ed. (Chicago: 1980) 49—50.

6° Jain has recently argued that the “elaborate rules for disposing of the dead bodies
of Jain monks” found in Jain literature are also early: “The material contained in the
Bhagfavati] Ara[dhana] belongs to the time of early Jainism when the division of
Svetambara and Digambara did not exist in the Jain sarigha” (J. Jain, “Disposal of the
Dead in the Bhagavati Aradhana”, JOJB 38 (1988) 123—131. — Though a late text,
see the interesting description of “The Funeral of a Renouncer” in J. P. Olivelle (ed.),
Samnydasapaddhati of Rudradeva (The Adyar Library Series 114) (Madras: 1986) 63
ff). It should be noted too that the scholarly literature in regard to the date of the
Miulasarvastivada-vinaya is marked by ambivalence and seeming contradictions.
Lamotte, for example, notably on the basis of the fact that this Vinaya contains a
“prediction” relative to Kaniska and was not translated into Chinese until the 8th
Century, asserts that “on ne peut attribuer 4 cet ouvrage une date antérieure aux
IV°—V* siécles de notre ére” (Histoire du bouddhisme indien des origines a l’ére Saka,
727). But Huber, already in 1914, had drawn very different conclusions from the
presence of this prediction relative to Kaniska. He had said: “Ce petit fait vient
s’ajouter a un certain nombre d’autres déja connus qui tendent 4 montrer que le Vinaya
des Mila-Sarvastivadins a subi un remaniement aux environs de l’ére chrétienne”, and
then added: “sans discuter la date exacte du roi Kaniska, on peut dire que la mention
de son nom nous reporte vers le méme temps” (E. Huber, “Etudes bouddhiques III.
— Le roi kaniska dans le vinaya des milasarvastivadins”, BEFEO 14 (1914) 19 —
Gnoli, Sarghabhedavastu i, xix, has more recently made much the same observation).
Moreover, and again long before Lamotte, Lévi had already counseled against
attributing too much significance to the date of the Chinese translation: “La date
tardive de la traduction chinoise . . . ne doit pas non plus nous entrainer trop vite a
tenir Pouvrage pour récent” (S. Lévi, TP 8 (1907) 115 f). To this might be added the
fact that dating the compilation of a work does not necessarily date its specific
contents: “dans |’état fragmentaire de nos connaissances sur le bouddhisme indien, la
date récente du document qui nous fait connaitre une légende, ne permet nullement
de conclure a la formation récente de la légende elle-méme” (Huber, BEFEO 14
(1914) 17). This is made strikingly evident in regard to the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya
in another series of observations and investigations. Although he repeatedly charac-
terizes the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya as “tardif” or “le plus récent de tous les recueils
disciplinaires”, Professor Bareau says as well that the form of the stupa it describes
appears to be the ‘most ancient’ (A. Bareau, “La construction et le culte des stupa
d’aprés les vinaya-pitaka”, BEFEO 50 (1960) 233). Elsewhere, while still pointing to
its ‘late’ character he says: “. .. d’aprés des études comparatives approfondies mais
trés partielles, le Vinayapitaka des Milasarvastivadin parait nettement plus archaique
que celui des Sarvastivadin et méme que le plupart des autres Vinayapitaka” (A.
Bareau, Les sectes bouddhiques du petit véhicule (Paris: 1955) 154). More specifically
Lévi, in a detailed study of certain linguistic forms in the Vinaya, says for example:
“L'interdiction de ‘boire a la sangsue’, promulguée d’abord dans un dialecte qui
pratiquait l’adoucissement de la sourde intervocalique, est arrivée telle quelle aux

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 37 (Journal p. 37) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 37

rédacteurs du canon pali qui n’ont plus reconnu sous son altération le terme original;
ainsi des autres écoles, a l'exception des Mila-Sarvastivadins, qui montrent encore sur
d’autres points du canon une incontestable supériorité”, JA (1912) 510); M. Hofinger
in his study of the Second Council argues that the oldest extant accounts of these
events are preserved in the Mulasarvastivada- and Mahasanghika-vinayas (M.
Hofinger, Etude sur le concile de vaigali (Louvain: 1946) 235—41; 256); I myself
have suggested that the account of the remains of the former Buddha Kasyapa found
in the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya appears from every angle to be earlier than the
standardized, revised, and probably conflated accounts found in our other Vinayas (G.
Schopen, “Two Problems in the History of Indian Buddhism: The Layman/Monk
Distinction and the Doctrines of the Transference of Merit”, Studien zur Indologie
und Iranistik 10 (1985) 18—22). If these divergent opinions and observations suggest
a state of some uncertainty concerning the date of the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya, then
their presentation has succeeded in representing the actual state of our knowledge.
We simply know very little that is definitive about it — the illusion, of course, is that
we know anything more about the dates of our other Vinayas, including that
preserved in Pali. It does, however, seem that there is mounting evidence that the
Miulasarvastivada-vinaya — whatever its date or the degree of its “remaniement” —
contains a good deal of very early material. The rules concerning monastic funerals
may, in fact, be just another case in point.

7° For the Sanskrit translated by rim gro bya ba see L. Chandra, Tibetan-Sanskrit
Dictionary (New Delhi: 1961) 2268—69, and note that Sanskrit satkara when not
actually a “w.r. for samskara”, can itself in one form or another mean “doing (the last)
honour (to the dead), cremation of a corpse, funeral obsequies”, “to pay the last
honours to (acc.), cremate”, etc. M. Monier-Williams, A Sanskrit-English Dictionary
(Oxford: 1899) 1134. Note too that — as has already been pointed out — Sanskrit
accounts of monastic funerals do not always use the expression Sarira-puja: at Gilgit
Manuscripts iii 2, 118.15, for example, we find bhiksavas tam adaya dahanam gatah

. .. bhiksavas tam ddahane samskarya viharam agatah; at iii 2, 125.14: bhiksavas tam
a@dahanam nitva samskarya viharam agatah.

7) Although it contains some details not yet found in the texts, I-tsing’s description of
a monastic funeral also contains — in one form or another — the same basic elements
— Takakusu, A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practiced in India and the Malay
Archipelago, 81—82; Bareau, ACF 1989—1990, 636.

7 Tt would appear from Jain’s remarks (Life in Ancient India as Depicted in the Jain
Canon and Commentaries, 281—84; JOIB 38 (1988) 123—31) that the funeral of a
dead Jain monk too was by preference and when at all possible an exclusively
monastic affair. But Jain sources explicitly legislate for contingencies: “The question of
carrying the dead [monk] for disposal was rather complicated . . . If there were only
one single monk and it was not possible for him to carry the dead, ascetics belonging
to non-Jain religion or laymen should be called, or help should be taken from the
members of the Mallagana, the Hastipalagana or the Kumbhakaragana, or in the
absence of these a village-headman, candalas, people from degraded castes, sweepers,
barbers and others should be approached”. It is not impossible that the Buddhist
Vinayas also contained such legislation and it simply has not been recognized as such.
The well-known passage which we associate with the Mahdparinirvana-sutra, and
which has been taken wrongly to establish that “Sarirapiija, the worship of relics, is the

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 38 (Journal p. 38) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

38 GREGORY SCHOPEN

concern of the laity and not the bhiksusamgha” (Schopen, From Benares to Beijing,
187—88), may be in fact just such legislation. In the passage in question (Sanskrit
36.2—3; Pali V.10) Ananda asks how the funereal Sarira-puja for the Buddha could
be performed and the Buddha responds in the Sanskrit version: alpotsukas tvam
ananda bhava Sarirapujayah. prasanna brahmanagrhapataya etad apadayisyanti — all
of the other known versions are essentially similar: Pali, “‘ne soyez pas occupés
(avyavata tumhe hotha) du culte [a rendre au] corps du Tathagata’ ”; Chinese D, “‘ne
vous souciez pas de cette affaire’”; Chinese A and C, “‘restez tranquilles’”; etc. All
versions as well indicate essentially the same reason why Ananda need not be
concerned: “ ‘les pieux brahmanes et maitres de maison (grhapati) s’en chargeront’
(all quotations are from Bareau, Recherches sur la biographie du buddha dans les
sutrapitaka et les vinayapitaka anciens: Il. les derniers mois, le parinirvana et les
funérailles, t.11, 36—37). Previous interpretations of this passage — and they have
been many — have it seems never asked why Ananda should have been so concerried
in the first place. They have, moreover, failed to take into account, among other
things, that the Mahdparinirvana-sutra was almost certainly a piece of Vinaya; that the
Buddha’s declaration came at almost the very end of the various Vinayas and
certainly at the very end of the narrative time or internal chronology assumed by the
canonical texts; and that — finally — Ananda found himself, in so far as we can tell,
alone. This would mean in terms of the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya, for example, that by
the time the reader or redactor of this Vinaya had reached this passage he would
have seen or inserted both sets of rules governing monastic funerals that we have
looked at here, and a host of narrative descriptions of monastic funerals, in all of
which it was monks and monks alone who did and were explicitly directed to perform
the funeral of a fellow-monk. But — again in so far as we can tell — Ananda found
himself alone or virtually so. He could not therefore fulfill the Vinaya rule. This
situation can explain well Ananda’s concern, the Buddha’s assurance, and the sense of
the passage: the Buddha was allowing an exception to the rule. This interpretation,
though differing markedly from others, is perhaps worth pursuing. It is also perhaps
worth noting that it — or some residual sense that Ananda had indeed broken the
rule — may explain too one of the charges brought against Ananda by Mahakasyapa
at “the council of Rajagrha”. Among other things and in all versions, Ananda is
criticized, in fact charged with a fault (duskrta), for having allowed apparently
unauthorized individuals — lay men, nuns, and especially women — to participate in
what could only have been the funereal Sarira-puja: most of the versions emphasize
that the women saw the Buddha’s penis, and that could only have happened during
the preparation of the body before it was wrapped (see, for the various accounts, J.
Przyluski, Le concile de rajagrha. Introduction a Vhistoire des canons et des sectes
bouddhiques (Paris: 1926—28) 15, 50—51, 64, 153, 157, etc.).

73 The role of ghosts, demons, etc. in the promulgation of Vinaya rules would make
an interesting topic of study. In both the Pali Vinaya (i 149 ff) and the Mulasarvasti-
vada-vinaya (Gilgit Manuscripts iii 4, 149 ff), for example, problems with or the
presence of pisdca or amanusyas are cited as legitimate causes for cutting short the
rain retreat, an act which otherwise was forbidden. Again in the Pali Vinaya the case
of a monk who had “a non-human affliction” (amanussikabadha) or was “possessed”
prompted the Buddha to allow monks to eat raw flesh and drink blood (Pali Vinaya i,
202, I. B. Horner, The Book of the Discipline, Vol. TV (London: 1951) 274 n. 6); etc.

29

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers


=== PAGE 39 (Journal p. 39) ===
SCHOPEN, GREGORY, On Avoiding Ghosts and Social Censure: Monastic Funerals in the
Mulasarvastivada-Vinaya , Journal of Indian Philosophy, 20:1 (1992:Mar.) p.1

ON AVOIDING GHOSTS AND SOCIAL CENSURE 39

It would appear, moreover, from Jain’s remarks that many of the rules governing Jain
monastic funerals were also connected with the fear of “ghosts”: “If these rites are not
followed, it is possible that some deity might enter the dead body, rise, play and
create disturbances to the sangha” (JOIB 38 (1988) 127).

7 Unfortunately, the material studied here makes little specific reference to nuns and
in this it is probably typical of textual sources on the whole and unrepresentative of
what actually occurred (see G. Schopen, “Monks, Nuns and ‘Vulgar’ Practices: The
Introduction of the Image Cult into Indian Buddhism”, Artibus Asiae 49.1/2 (1988/
89) 153—68, esp. 163 ff). It is, however, true that none of the inscribed — and
therefore certain — stipas of the local monastic dead found at Indian monastic sites
was erected for a nun (see Schopen, JIABS 14.2 (1991)). The subject requires — and
will undoubtedly reward — future research.

Copyright (c) 2005 ProQuest Information and Learning Company
Copyright (c) Kluwer Academic Publishers
