m
PRESIDENT’S SECREXA^RIAX
(LIBRARY)
Accn. Class
Xlie b>ook should t>e returned on or before the date
last stamped below.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA.
ANNUAL
REPORT
19067.

#
Agents fot the Sale ofBooks
PUBLISHED BY
The Superintendentof Government Printing, India, Calcutta^
In England.
E. Arnold 41 3c43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, Grindlay & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London,
London, W. S. W.
Constable & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Bernard W Q . uaritch, ii, Grafton Street, New Bond
Square, W.C. Street,
P. S. King & Son, 2 & 4, Grent Smith Street, West- Deighton Bell & Co., Cambridge.
minster, London, S.W. B. H. Blackwell, 50 51, Broad Street, Oxford.
H. Lo S. nd K o i n n . g & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, T. W. Fi C s . her Unwin, i, xAdelphi Terrace, London,
Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., 43, W. Titacker Sc Co., 2, Creed I.ane, F.ondon, ICC.
Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W. Luzac & Co., 46, Great Russell Street. London, W'.C.
On the Continent.
R, Friedlander & SoHN,-ii, Carlstrasse, Beidin, Ernest Leroux, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris.
N.W.
Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague, Holland.
Otto Harrassowitz, I.eipzig.
Karl W. IIiersemann, Leipzig, Rudolf Haupt, i, Dorrienstrassc, I.eipzig,
In India.
'Thacker, Spink & Co., Calcuttaand Simla. A. J. CoMBRiDGE Sc Co., Bombay.
Newman k Co., Calcutta. t). B. Taraporevala, Sons & Co., Bombay.
S. K. Lahiri & Co., Calcutta. Radeiabai Atmaram Sagoon, Bombay.
R. CamBRAY & Co., Calcutta, Sunder Pandurang, Bombay.
B. Banerjee & Co., Calcutta. GoPAL Narayan Sc Co., Bombay.
Higginbotham & Co., Madras. N. B. Mathur, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind
V. KalyanaRama, Iyer & Co., Madras. Press, Allahabad.
G. A, Natesan Sc Co., Madras. A. Chand Sc Co., Lahore.
S. Murthy & Co., Madras. Rai Sahib M. Gulab Singh and Sons, Mufid-i-
Thompson & Co., Madras. Am Press, Lahore.
Temple & Co., Madras. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission
CoMBRiDGE 3c Co., Madras. Press, Rangoon.
P. R. Rama, Iyer Sc Co., Madras. A. M. Sc J. Fergusson, Ceylon.
A. R. Pillai Sc Co.,Trevandrum. S. C. Talukdar, Proprietor, Students and Company,
Thacker Sc Co.^ Ld., Bombay. Cooch Behar.

#
ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA.
ANNUAL REPORT
1906-7,
CALCUTTA
SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA
1909

CONTENTS.
Page.
Conservation {General)
. . . r
Policy of the Department with regard to the preservation of ancient monuments, i ;
United Provinces Jaunpur and Agra, 3 Mughal monuments at Lahore and
: ;
Shahdara, 5 ; Delhi, 6; Gardens of Kashmir, 6; Eastern Bengal and Assam, 7 ;
Bengal, 8; Burma, 8 : Bombay Presidency, 9 ; Monuments in Madras Presidency,
9; MuseumSj lo. ..........
Jahangir's tomb at Shahdara 12
Removal of skylight, 12; Literary and structural evidence regarding original form of
tomb, 13.
Railing in the Anguri Bact at Agra .15
. . . . . . .
J.)isappearance of original railing ; its proportions and design^ 15.
Conservation in Assam .17
. , . . . . . . . .
Sanctity of ancient monuments in Assam, 17 Remains at Gauhati and Tejpur, 18
; ;
Stone columns at Dimapur, 19 : Similar columns at Kasomari Pathar^ 23 ; Original
meaning of these columns^ 24 Copper temple at Kundilnagar, 25; Carved tiles
;
from Kundilnagar, 27 Tirtha of Brahmakund and its bearing upon date of
;
Bhishinaknagar, 28.
Some conservation works in Burma 29
Totalcostj 29; Pagan: NgakyweNadaungandPatleik Pagodas^ 29; Kyaukku Onhmin
andThamivvhet OnhmiiL 30 SeinnyetPagoda, 30 Sapada Pagoda, 31 Mahabbdhi
; ; ;
Pagoda, 32 Bidagat Taik, 32 Okkvaung at Ava^ 32; Shwenandaw Kyaung and
; ;
Salin monastery at Mandalay, 32.
Exploration and research [General] 34
Excavations at Kasia, 34 Sarnarth, 35 Sahrlbahiol, 37 Pet-leik-paya Pagoda
; ;
at Pagan, 38 ; Jataka illustrations in corridor, 39 ; Amaravati : Mauryan
inscriptions, 40 ; Caves in Madura and Tinnevelly districts, 40 ; Black Pagoda
at Konarak, 41 ; Lat at Ghatiyala, 41 ; Temples at Osia, 42 ; Work in Kashmir, 42 ;
Mathura School of Art, .42. ... ......
Excavations at Kasia zj4
Introduction, 44; Monuments: Monastery N—O, 46; Monastery £,51; Building
I Finds^ 54; Inscribed objects, 57 ; List of inscribed objects, 61 ; Inscribed
clay sea.ls, 6.3 ; No.n-ins.cribe.d cl.ay seals, 66 ; Votive tablets, 66. ...
Sarnath . » . 86
Area to the west of Main Shrine, 68 ; Eastern area, 76; Monastery area: Late
monastery, 81 Earlier monastery, 85 The so-called Hospital and other excava-
; ;
tions, 88 ; List of sculptures : Images, 90 ; Scenes, 92 ; Decorative Sculptures
etc., 94; Inscriptions, 95:

;
11
......
Page
...
Excavations at Sahribahlol o - 102
The inodern village. 102 Discovery mound excavated, T04 The little stupa^ 105;
; ;
Sculptures in situ in front of main stilpa^ 105 ; Monastic quadrangle, 105 j Sculp-
tural finds, 106 Arrangement in Peshawar Museum, 106 Miscellaneous stucco
; ;
fragments, 107 Fragments illustrating archaic elements in Gaiidhara art, 107;
;
Fragments illustrating newly imported elements, 108 Legendary sculptures, 109
; ;
Conversion of Ugrasena, iii; Attempted escape of Nanda, iiSi Devotional
sculptures, 114; Bodhisattva figures, T15; Buddha figures, 117; Kubera and
Hariti, 117.
Excavations at Lauriya 119
Introduction, 1 19 ; Excavations of 1905 , 120 ; Mounds M and N, 122; Their con-
nection with Vedic funeral rites, 123 Figure of Pn'thivi on gold leaves, 124;
;
Connection between earthen mounds and Nandangarh, 125; Probable date of
mounds at Lauriya, 126.
....
The Plaques round at the Petleik Pagoda, Pagan. ,127
Pagoda, 127 Discovery of plaques with Jataka illustrations, 128 Description of 50
; ;
of them, 128.
The Mathura School of Sculpture
,137
Exploration at Mathura, 137; Topography of ancient Mathura, 140; Disposal of
sculptures, 142; History of Mathura School, 143; Classical influence, 444;
Essentially Indian character, 145 Buddha and B5dhisattva images, 148 Scenes
; \
from Buddha^s life, 15 1 ; Jatakas, 155 ; Decorative devices, 157.
Muhammadan architecture in Kashmir 161
. .
Classification of Muhammadan architecture in Srinagar, 161
;
Tomb of Zainu- 1-
'abidin^s mother, 161 Tomb of MadanI, 163; History of wooden style, 165;
;
Mosques of MadanI and others, 166 Afghan influence on this style, 167 Buildings
;
in Mughalstyle, 169.
The temple of Brahma at Khed-Brahma
171
The worship of Brahma rare, 171 Description of Brahma, 17 Brahma in sculp-
; 1 ;
ture, 172 Temples to Brahma, 173 Temple of Brahma at Khed-Brahma, 174
; ; ;
Rites observed in the worship of Brahma, 177.
DAKULiSA
179
Summary of the Karvan mdhdtmya^ 179; Meaning of the term Lakullsa, 182; find-
spots of Lakullsa sculptures, 184 Position ofimages in temples, 185 Character-
; ;
istics of Lakullsa, 186; Ascetics of the Lakullsa sect, 188; Extract from the
Tarka-rahasya-dipikd^ 189 Translation of same, 190.
;
Notes in the Gorakhpur and Saran Districts
Results of the journey, 193; G 5rakhpur, 193; S5hgaura, 194 Rudarpur, 194;
;
Majhauli, 196 ; Salempur, 196; Sohnag, 197; Bhagalpur, 199; Khaira, 199 ; Don
Buzurg, T99 ; Mairwa, 200; BhanUpokhar, 201; Titira, 201; Kalinjra. 201
Siwaij, 202 G 5sopali, 202 Papaiir, Andar and Balahuih, 203 Hasanpura, ;
; ; ;
Sarangpur and Bhikhaband, 304 ; Pachrukhi, Tajpur Basahi and Chiran, 205.

Epigraphy {General)
^ •
Papers published in the Epigraphia Indica during the }'ear, 200 Brahmi inscrip-
;
tions of Southern India^ 20S Coins of Nahapana found at Nasik, 208 Gupta
; ;
inscriptions, 208 The Chaulukyas, 208 The Pratiharas, 209 The Paramaras of
; ; ;
Chandravati; 209 The Chahamanas, 210; Inscriptions transferred from Dr. Stein^’s
;
office to the Archaeological Superintendent of the Frontier Circle, 310 ; Fresh
materials collected in Southern India. 210 ; Ihe Vijayanagara kings, 210 ; The
Pandyas, 21 1 ; The Cholas, 212 ; Inscriptions discovered in Burma, 213 ; Mr. Taw
Sein Ko’s theory about the development of the Burmese alphabet^ 213.
The Pallavas
.
Pahlavas mentioned in the epics and Puranas, 2^7; Earliest Epigraphical references to
the Palhavas and Pallavas, 218; Connection between the two tentatively explained,
219 Pallavas called Tondaiyar in Tamil literature and their territory Tondaka or
; ;
Tundaka-rashpaor Tondai-mandalam, 220 Prakrit charters of the Pallavas, 222;
;
Their Sanskrit copper-plate grants, 223 ; The Kadamba revolt, 224 ; Sirhhavishnu
line and its pedigree, 227 ; War with the Chalukyas of Badami, 227 ; Capture of
Vatapi by the Pallavas, 228; Capture of Kahchi by the Chalukyas, 231:
Monuments of Pallava rule, 232; The religion of the Pallavas, 234; Literature
during the Pallava period, 236 Other southern kingdoms and their history during
;
t 2 h 4 e 0 pe T r h io e d, No 2 l 3 a 7 m ; b T ar he of Ga N n o g l a a -P m a h l a l v a a v d a i s , , 2 2 3 4 8 1; ; D P e a s l c l e a n va d s an i t n s o S f out t h h e e rn ori I g n i d n i al a P d a o ll w a n va t s o ,
a ver ; y late period, 241 Modern representatives of the Pallavas in Southern
;
India, 242.

—
LIST OF PLATES.
Facing
— PAGE
Plate 1. Conservation in Madras: 'a) Fort, Gooty [dj East view of Rajagiri
;
— hill, Gingee . . . . . , . . . .10
11. Conservation in xMadras: (^2:) South-East view of the Kalyana Mahall
— Gingee ; (d) North-East view of the G3’mnasium hall, ^ following PI. I
5, III. Conservation in Madras : {d) South-West view of Flagstaff tower,
Rajagiri hill,Gingee {U) Twelve-pillared mandapain, following PI. 11
— ;
IV. Jahangir^s tomb, Shahdara : [a) Skylight above tomb ; [f] Top of tomb
after restoration of interior dome ,12
— . . . . . .
V. Conservation in Assam {a\ and (b) Chess-columns at Dimapilr 18
5, — : . .
5, W. Conservation in Assam : {d) Broken V-column at Dimapur ; if) Broken
column shaped like buffalo horns, Dlmapur .20
— . . . .
,, Vn. — Conservation in Assam : Sword-blade columns at Kasomari-Pathar . 22
VIII. Conservation in Assa.m: C.arved.tiles.from.wall.s of K.undi.lnaga.r . 28
— .
iX. Conservation in Burma (a) Seinnyet Pagoda, Pagan {b) Sapada
: ;
Pagoda, Pagan 30
—
,, X. Conservation in Burma: (a) Mahabodhi Pagoda, Pagan; [b) Bidagat
— Taik, Pagan .. . .... .. .. .. . . .32
,, XI. Conservation in Burma; {a) Okkyaung (Main building), Ava ; [b)
Okkyaung (Chapel), Ava following PI. X
— ....
XII. Kasia Excavations General plan -44
— : — . . . . . .
„ X X I I I V I. . — K K a a s s i i a a E E x x c c a a v v a a t t i i o o n n s s : M Mo o n n a a s s t t e e r r y y L L O 0 from South-West . . .4 4 8 6
,, . — : , . .
„ XV. Kasia Excavations : Monastery E. . . . . . . .52
„ XVI. — —Kasia Excavations: Monastery E, from Nor.th-Ea.st .. .fol.lowin.g PL XV^
.68
XVII. Sarnath Excavations General plan .......
, — : . . . . . .
XVIII. Sarnath Excavations Asoka pillar 70
— : ...
„ XIX. — Sarnath Excavations : Sculptures 72
, X X X X L . - Sarnath D E i x t c t a o vations ditt S o tupas and other monuments . f . ollowi . ng PL , X 7 X 4
,, — : .
XXII. Sarnath Excavations: (a) Eastern .area,.sti.ipas \.xi N. . -E. corner; (h)
,,
Eastern area, general view from N .76
— . . . . .
XXllI. Sarnath Excavations Sculptures 80
,, — : . .
.82
, XXIV. — Sarnath Excavations : Plan of m . onas . tery . area ... . ,
XXV. Sarnath Excavations Late monastery inner corner of quadrangle;
,, : (*^) .:....
if) steps inside quadrangle following PL XXIV
—
XXVI. Sarnath Excavations Sculptures 84
„ — : . , .88
XXVII. Sarnath Excavations; Pottery specimens
— ..... . . . . .
XXVIll. Sarnath Excavations .Sculptures ....... 90
, XXIX. — Sarnath Excavations Sculptures . . . . . • 92
„ — ; . . .
XXX. Sarnath Excavations Inscriptions 96
— :
XXXI. Sahribahlol Excavations Sculptures [a) Asita casting the horoscope;
,, : :
{b) Central portion of false niche; {c) Right side of false niche . no
XXXn.--Sahribahlol Excavations (a) Sculptures in situ in front of main stujpa
,, : ;
[b] Buddha with two Bodhisattvas ; (c) Kubera and Hariti • .114

——
;
VI
Facing
page
— .116
Plate XXXIII. SahribaWoI Excavations : Bodhisattva figures . . . -
„ XXXIV.—Sahribahlol Excavations: Buddha figures . ,follonnng PI. XXXIII
,, XXXV. — — Sahribahlol Excavations : Sculptures . . .follow'ing PI. X X X X X X IV V
XXXVI. Sahribahlol Excavations Site plan following PI.
, , , , , , X X X X X X V V I I I I I, . — — — S L a a h u r r i i b y a a hl E o x l ca E v x a c t a i v o a n t s io : ns Ma : : p Pl o a f n L o a f ur a i s y t a upa . . . . . , - . foll . . owin . g . P . L X . X 1 X 2 VI 0
„ XXXI X X L. . - — — L L a a u u r r i i y y a a E E x x c c a a v v a a t t i i o o n n s s : : E (^ n ) d M o o f u w n o d od D en ; p (d o ) st M i o n u M n o d un N d . N. . . .12 12 4 2
.128
3, XLI. — Petleih Pagoda, Pagan ; Plan . . . . . . — .
,, XLII. Pe ( t 0) le L i a k — k P k a h g a o n d a a — , P Ja a t ga ; n (d : ) ( A a y ) ac D h e i v ta a b d h h a a t r t m a— a— Ja J t at ; ; (e ( ) 5 ) Na M l a a k p h a a n d a e — v J a at ; J ( at /) ;
— Titthi Jat . . . . . — . . . . — . • L3f>
,, XLIII. P V et a l t e t i a k ka P — a J g a o t da ; , (d) Pa A g m a b n: a— (a J ) at N ; ai ( i 0 d ) iv R i a s j M 5 a vad J a at — ; Ja ( t 3 ) ; V ( a / n ) a S ri o n m d a a dat J t a a t — ; J ( a 0) t
following PL XLII
— —
XLIV. Petleik Pagoda, Pagan [a) Kamaniggaha Jat [b) Dutiya-palayi
— : ... ; ....
J — at ; (t) Tila-muUhi — Jat; {d) Mani-kantha—Jat ; (e) Kundakasindhava
Jat; (/) Saluka Jat 132
— — —
XLV. Petleik Pagoda — , Pag . an : .(a) N . ana- . chhan . — da .Jat;.(b) Supatta Jat —; (^)
Kayachhinda Jat; {d) Kama-tappata Jat; (^) Komaya-putta Jat;
—
(f) Tittira Jat following PL XLIV
—
XLVI. Petleik Pagoda, Pagan: {a) Mata-rodana—Jat {b) Suchcha—Jat;
— ; —
(c) Daddabhaya Jat, {a) [d) Daddabhaya—Jat, {b) (e) Godha Jat
XLVIL—Pe ( t / l ) ei V k i P s a a g y o h d a a — , J P a a t gan: (a . ) ; Aya . kuta — . Jat . {b) Ar . anfia . ; — Jat . (c) Uraga -134
— Jat ; [d) Ahigundika—Jat ; (e) Gangama ; la—Jat ; (/) Chatu ; dvara— Jat,
following PL XLVI
XLVIIL— Petleik P.agoda., Pa.gan .{a) K.anhad.ipay.ana — .Jat .5 .Nigr.odha — Jat
— : ;—( ) ;
[c] Udaya Jat; {gi) Mittamitta—Jat
:
{e) Kalinga Jat; (/) Sadhina
Jat 136
— .
XLIX. Petleik Pagoda, Pagan: {a) Dasa-Brahmana—Jat (i) Bhikkhu-param-
— — ...;.—
para Jat {c} Sumedhapaiidita Jat {d) Matanga Jat {e) Sivi-raja
; ; ;
— —Jat ; (/) Kirh-chhanda—Jat following PI, XLVIIl
L. — Pe S t a l m e b ik ha P v a a go — d J a a , t ; P ( a ^ g J a D n i : pa { n a k ) a K r u a m ; b ( h e) a T — al J a at in ; g ( i b n ) sc C ri h p h t a io d n d f a o n l t l a o — wi Ja n t g ; PI. (c) XLIX ;
LI. Mathura Sculptures : Bhutesar railing pillars (a) Obverse (b) Re-
;
verse .146
— ....
LII. — Mathura Sculptures : (a) Buddha statue ; (b) Bodhisattva fragment . 15O'
LIII. — Mathura Sculptures : (a) Obverse ; Reverse 152
LIV. Mathura Sculptures -154
— . . . , . . , ,
LV. Gandhara Sculptures (a) Pediment in Mission House of Peshawar;
n L L V V I L L - —T S ( o c b u ) m l b p P t e u o d f r i e M m a i e n d n a t M n a i f t , r h o S m u r r i B a n r . a i M g n a u g r s a e n : u T m il : e ( - a w ) o . r O k bv o e n rs , e e nt ; r ( a b n . ) ce Re a v r e . c r h se f . . ollow , i . ng P , . L 16 L jd V 4 o-
LVIII. Mosque of Madani, Srinagar general view showing cornice
. :
— following PI. LVII
n LIX. — Mcsque of Madani, Srinagar : Doors > 168
)} LX. — Doors from tomb of Mahmud of Ghazni following PL LIX
,LXI, — Doors from tomb of Mahmud : Detail following FI. LX
yj LXII. Jami* Masjid, Srinagar: Ground plan following PI, LXI

vii
Facing
Page
Plate LXIII.—Jami^ Masjid, Srinagar Detail of south spire following
: .... ..
„ LXIV.—Jami‘ Masjid, Srinagar : Detail of north spire . . following "PX. LXIII
—
LXV. Jami‘ Masjid, Srinagar Section following P\. LXIV
j „ , LXVI. — Jatni^ Masjid, Srinagar : : Carved ornament • . following PL LXV
„ LXVII.“Jami^ Masjidj Srinagar : Detail of columns and caves following PL LXVI
LXVIIL—Mosque of Shah Hamadan: Ground plan following Pl^ LXVII
,, — .
„ LXIX. — Mosque of Shah Hamadan: Plan of first floor 4 following PL LXVIII
„ LXX. — Mosque of Shah Hamadan : Cross Section . . following PL LXIX
LXXI. — Mosque of Shah Hamadan : Main elevation . . following PL LXX
LXXH. Mosque of Shah Hamadan : Detail of pillar and panelling on interior
.170
walls
— , . . . . . . . . . .
5, LXXIII. Khed-Brahma: [a) Temple of Brahma, exterior; ( 5 ) Temple of
Brahma, interior (r) Temple of Brahma, north wall of shrine {d)
Temple of Brahma ; , north*west corner of shrine wall . . ; .176
—
LXXIV. Sculptures fro.m Gor.akhp.ur di.strict.(^).Statu.e of.Vish.nu, R . udar . pur;
:
{V) Vishnu, Sohnag ; (c) Mahishasuramardini, Silaur ; {d) Vishnu,
Sohnag 194

— — —— — —
1
TEXT ILLUSTRATIONS.
Page
Jahangir’s Tomb at Ssahdara
Fig. I, Section of vault of Jahangir'^s tomb at Sbahdara
.
13
Railing in the Angurt Bag-h at Agra
Fig. I. Fragment of a railing in Lucknow Museum 15
....
Conservation in Assam
Fig. I. Pillars in wall of Dimapfir 20
,, 2 , Broken chess-column at Dlmapur 2
3. Chessman-pillar at Kasomari Pathar . 22
4* Interior of copper temple, near Sadiya ^5
5. Ruined gateway of copper temple, near Sadiya 26
......
Excavations at Kasia—
....
Fig. I. Circuhr disc of schist ..... 54
•
n 2. Rectangular tablet of schist 55
•
,, 3. Fragmentary pot image . 56
Sarnath
....
FFiigg.. I. Steps and stone pavement aroun . d As . oka . colu . mn 69
2. Wall to west of mam shrine 71
,, •
„ 3. Stupas to south of Asoka pillar 73
•
„ 4. Stupa to N.-W. of w-estern entrance of ?nain shrine 74
‘
„ 5. Section of stupa (No. 40 of eastern area) . 80
„ 6. Base of corner pilaster in Late Monastery . 82
,, 7. Carved stone from La.te M.onast.ery... . 83
j, 8. Arrangement of brickwork in well in Late Monastery . 84
9. Image of Buddha 91
,,
Excavations at Sahribahlol
Fig. t. General view of site after excavation 102
2, Miscellaneous stuccoheads 107
Excavations at Lauriya—
Fig. t. View of Nandangarh, from south 119
2. Clay from funeral mounds with traces of grass 12 1
j, 3. Clay from Lauriya mounds with sal leaves . 122
4. Gold leaf with image of Prithivi ib.
,,
.....
The Plaques found at the Petleik Pagoda, Pagan
Fig. I. Petleik Pagoda, Pagan 1 28
The Mathura School of Sculpture—
....
Fig. I. Fragment in Mathura Museum . . - • 157
2 . Freize in Peshawar Museum . 158

—
X
Page
....
Muhammadan Architecture in Kashmir—
....
Plans of tomb 162
. .
„ 4. Moulded brick ..... . ib.
Wood carving. 166
„ 5. . . . , .
,, 6. Plan of tombs ..... . 167
,, 7. Plan of Jami^Masjid in Srinagar . ib.
8-10. Timber piers 168
„ .
......
The temple of Brahma at Khed-Brahma
.....
Fig. I. Brahma • J71
2. Brahma 172
,,
,, 3. Brahma with one face bearded • . ib.
,, 4. Brahma with vdhana • 173
„ 5. Plan of temple of Brahma at Khed-Brahma . 174
j, 6. Shrine wall • >75
,, 7. Niche containing image . . 177
Lakulisa—
Fig, I. Dirghika at Karvan . . 179
2, Exterior wall of central temple at Belar 183
•
3. Shrine door of central temple at Atru 184
.—
4-5. Lingas wdth Lakulisa image 185 186
,j
„ 6. Image of Lakulisa from Mandalgadh . . 188
„ 7. Image of Lakulisa from Tilasma 189
.
»

0
CONSERVATION.
Amid
the multitude of conservation works that come under review year by year in
these Reports it is notunnatural, perhaps, that the attention of the reader should
be directed rather to the few monuments that have undergone conspicuous improve-
ments than to the much larger number that ha\e been saved from decay by simpleand
insignificant measures. The disproportionate emphasis, however, which thus comes
to be laid on works of restoration, is not a little unfortunate, as it is apt to create a
false impression as to the attitude of Government towards such undertakings, and a
fear, too, that it may net be fully alive to the dangers attendant on them. Nay more,
it may even appear to those who are unfamiliar with Indian monuments and ignorantof
the circumstances attending each particular case, that the general policy of Govern-
ment is lacking in consistency. In order to remove any such erroneous impression,
I propose to take the present opportunity of explaining as shortly as I can what are
the guiding principles of action followed by tlie Archaeological Department and to
illustrate my explanation by some concrete examples.
There has been waging for more than thirty years a heated discussion, which is
—
still going on in Europe, on the merits and demerits of “restoration ” a term which
is used by antiquarians to imply the putting back or reproduction of w'hat has fallen
or been lost. The and cor/s of the case are briefly and lucidly set forth in Prof.
Baldwin Brown’s book on The Care of Ancient Monuments} and it w'ould be super-
fluous for me to recapitulate them here. Suffice it to say that in England public
opinion is now gradually becoming opposed to the restoration of ancient monuments
merely for restoration’s sake and there is no doubt that the movement of the
;
anti-restorationists, which started with Ruskin, William Morris and others more tbaji
thirty years ago, and which has since been kept vigorously alive by the Society for
the Protection of Ancient Monuments, done much to preserve the beauties and
romantic charm of many of our most cherished buildings. With the general princi-
ples underlying this m.ovement the Archaeological Department in India is in close
sympathy but its sympathy cannot extend to unreserved acquiescence in the w-hole
;
of the strict and rigid manifesto issued by the Society referred to, in 1877’; nor can it
go to the same lengths as the Society in indiscriminately condemning every case of
^ 1 Pp 46_56.
B

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
2
restoration. The attitude of the Department, in fact, coincides very closely with that
of the moderate thinkers at home, who fully recognise the deplorable harm that can be
done in the name of restoration, but recognise also that there may be religious,
social, political or other considerations to be taken into account, which render
it impracticable to lay down one law, which will be applicable to one and every
case.
In the penultimate paragraph of their manifesto the Society plead "to put
Protection in the place of Restoration, to stave off decay by daily care, to prop a
perilous wall or mend a leaky roof by such means as are obviously meant for support
or covering, and show no pretence of other art, and otherwise to resist all tampering
with either the fabric or ornament of the building as it stands if it has become
;
inconvenient for its present use, to raise another building rather than alter or enlarge
the old one in fine, i^to treat our ancient buildings as monuments of a bygone
;
art, created by bygone manners, that modern art cannot meddle with without
destroying.”
Now, let us suppose that this method of dealing with structures had been applied
throughout to the most famous and perhaps the most extensively restored of our
—
Indian monuments the Taj Mahal at Agra. What would have been the state of that
priceless tomb to-day ? It would have been a ruin, stripped of half its marbles, tied
together with bands, propped up with buttresses or scaffoldings, and disfigured by
other accretions and eyesores. Instead of that, the counsel of perfection which
has prevailed in its restoration, has given back to India a gem of unblemished beauty,
perfect in itself and perfect in all its surroundings. I cannot think that even the
staunchest opponent of restoration, if he viewed the Taj as it is to-day, could wish
m
it back its old state of dilapidation, or could regret for one instant that
the charm that lingered round it in its decay has been replaced by the more
abundant loveliness of life. But apart from jesthetic sentiment, which can hardly
fail to endorse all that has been done for the Taj, there were other very potent
reasons which demanded its restoration. For the Taj is not a ” dead ” monument.
It is still the resting place of the Great Mughal Emperor and Empress, for whom it
was erected, and as such it deserves to be maintained in all its original splendour.
Nor does it appeal to the Indian people as an antiquarian relic. It is to them a
national heritage, of which they are justly proud, and which they have a right to
expect will be preserved to posterity as something more than an interesting ruin.
Indeed, I think I may truly say that there is no archaeological work in India that has
given more profound gratification to the people than the rescue of this cherished
mausoleum from neglect, and the effacement from it of all signs of the vandalism
committed by earlier generations of Englishmen.
The same argument applies also to the restoration of the pietra dura mosaics in
the hack of Shah Jahan’s throne at Delhi, many of, which were carried off by the
British during the mutiny. ' But in this case there was an additional reason for the
restoration of the plaques, inasmuch as the palace of the Mu^al Sovereigns, although
it no longer does duty as a residence for the rulers of India, still serves on occasion as
the noblest and most imperial setting for the highest functions of State, and for this
reason alone, if for no other, could not be left in a state of semi-ruin.

CONSERVATION.
Again, if we consider the climatic conditions of India, the remoteness and inac-
cessibility of many of our monuments, and the difficulties that have to be faced by
the Public Works Department in their repair, it must be acknowledged that the policy
advocated by the Society of staving off decay by daily care, of propping up here
or buttressing there, as occasion may arise, is unfeasible. Many a valuable monu-
ment hidden away in the jungles can only be visited once a year, or perhaps even
more rarely, and in the meantime it is subjected to the ravages of a tropical climate
with all its exuberant and nocuous growths, or perhaps to the still more destructive
ravages of man. In such cases, the measures taken must be thorough and lasting;
though I need hardly say that no pains ought to be spared (nor in this country
are they spared) to interfere as little as possible with the original fabric or ornament
of a building. Saracenic structures, in particular, as I pointed out in a previous
report, defy the application of the simple methods advocated by Ruskin. For,
when once their domes or arches have become cracked, and heavy masses of brick-
work displaced, nothing short of the most radical treatment will avail to secure
their permanent safety nor will mere surface patchwork suffice to arrest decay
;
which has penetrated to the core of their rubble walls.
With such reservations as I have indicated above, demanded either by the
peculiar climatic or other conditions prevailing in India, the policy pursued by the
Archaeological Department is that favoured by the anti-restorationists and, in con-
;
formity with this policy, a small manual, emphasising the real aims of conservation
wmrk, and explaining the methods to be pursued in carrying it out, has been widely
circulated during the past year throughout India and Burma. The generalisations
contained in this manual are based partly on the advice given by the Society for the
Protection of Ancient Monuments, partly on that of the Royal Institute of British
Architects but the more specific instructions are mainly the outcome of practical
;
notes w'hich 1 have made from time to time in the course of my inspection tours,
amplified by various suggestions from a pamphlet issued many years ago by the
Madras Government. That this manual is likely to prove of some service, has
already been demonstrated by the use that has been made of it in Native States, and
by private owners or trustees of monuments over which Government exercises no
control. - It is hoped, also, that it will be found no less helpful to the Public Works
Department, and, particularly, to the Indian members of it, who so often find them-
selves in charge of archaeological work, and upon whose sympathy for what they are
doing, the success or failure of it depends.
Let me turn, however, from this explanation of the principles on which we are
working to review briefly the main achievements of the past year.
In the United Provinces, a most admirable piece of work has been done by the
Public Viforks Department in the conservation of several important monuments at
Jaunpur, which have now been systematically overhauled and taken in hand for the-
first time. As regards these repairs, I cannot do better than quote the account of
them which Mr. Nicholls gives in his Provincial Report. " Nowhere in this circle,’’ he
writes, “has conservation work been carried outwith more careful attention tothe advice
given, and with more evidence of constant supervision than in the important mosques
ofJaunpur. The Executive Engineer at Benares was ably seconded in this work by
B 2

ARCH.^;OLOGICAL REPORT.
4
Mr. Clarke, the Assistant Engineer, who was resident in Jaunpur. Part of the work
was of a difficult nature forinstance, the substitution of new stone lintels in the heavy
;
ceilings of the mezzanine floor in the prayer chamber of the Jami‘ Masjid. In the Lai
Darwaza Masjid extensive structural repairs have been carried out in the colonnades
round the courtyard. These were seriously decayed, and parts had already fallen.
Some repairs had been carried out several years ago, and the bricks of British pattern
which were then inserted, and which frowned upon the courtyard from the parapet of
the colonnade, have now been replaced by bricks of an old pattern. Much of the
sandstone facing on the outer wall of the courtyard has also been replaced, to protect
the wall, and the former existence of the outer colonnade, of which there is
unmistakeableevidence, has been placed on record by rebuilding one bay on each side
of the main gateway. But the great triumph of the year’s work has been the
removal of the whitewash in the Atala Masjid. This was rendered all the more
difficult and tedious by the intricate patterns carved on the stone work. Mr.
Clarke himself took part in this work, since, if the acid, which is used for dissolving
the whitewash, is not washed off at the right moment, it eats into the stone under-
neath. Those who remember the mosque asit was ayear ago, would hardly recognise
it now. Imposing it has always been, but now the prayer chamber has been com-
pletely transformed by the exposure of its delicate carved ornament and the coloured
scheme, which is admirably carried out by the selection of different shades of stone,
varying from yellow to red and dark grey, for the different architectural features ”.
At Agra, the transformation of the colonnaded court in front of the main gate
of the Taj Mahal is now almost complete, two more colonnades having been rebuilt
during the year namely, one on the. north, and one on the west side, of the second
:
Saheli Burj. The garden, too, of the s.ime Saheli Burj has been excavated and laid
•out again on its old plan, with its waterfalls, channels, causeways and parterres
complete, just as was done two years previously in the case of the corresponding
tomb on the other side of the quadrangle. Yet another striking improvement in this
quadrangle has been the reconstruction of the low balustrade, which borders the
broad platform in front of the eastern gate of the Taj, and the reduction of the steps
leading up to the platform to their original dimensions. Both steps and balustrade
are delineated in adrawing of the Daniel! brothers, made in the last decade of the
i8tb century, while the old viutakka holes, which existed in the floor of the platform
furnished an accurate guide to the width of the steps and panels of the balustrade.
In the Agra Fort, the appearance ofthe Jahangiri Mahal has been muchimprov-
•ed by the repair of the marble lotus buds and other features on its western fagade
and all disfigurement has been effaced from the Hall of Public Audience by complet-
ing the restoration of the polished w'hite plaster and gilded decoration on its columns.
But the chief and by far the most difficult operationin the Fort, has been the struc-
tural repair of the great Delhi Gate, the condition of which has been going rapidly
from bad to worse in recent years. This gate—which is also known as the
— Hathya Paul, from the two elephant statues which stood on each side of the entrance
is one of the most massive and imposing edifices of its kind in India, second only
indeed, in size to the Baland Darwaza at Fathpur Sikri, and in some respects
surpassing it in beauty, especially in the singularly pleasing proportions of its inner

;
CONSERVATION.
5
•face, in its deeply shadowing cornice and in the fine appreciation displayed for the
value of plain surfaces. The gateway is of two stories, and is flanked by massive
octagonal bastions, crowmed with small domed pavilions. The entrance is through
a fine vaulted chamber, octagonal in plan, with a raised dais and alcoves for the
guard on either side. The rest of the ground floor is occupied by roomy chambers
now used for the garrison churches while on the upper storey is an open terrace
;
with a pillared gallery facing the east, and several smaller chambers behind. The
whole is of red sandstone lavishly carved and decorated with desigfns of inlaid marble
-and enamelled tiling. Many of the original designs were of animals or birds, but
these have been either broken or concealed beneath a layer of plaster, perhaps by
order of the Emperor Aurangzeb and it will be a feature of the repairs that have
;
now been taken in hand to expose to view again all that are sufficientlv well preserved
-not to detract from the beauty of the structure. But the most pressing need has
been to secure the structural stability of this vast fabric. The part where the danger
was most threatening was on the east side, and particularly in the upper storey,
•where many of the brackets carrying the balcony had decayed, leaving the super-
structure above insecure. None of the old carved stones, it may be mentioned, are
being taken out on the ground of superficial decay, but only if they are positively too
rotten to be left where they are in safety.
In the Punjab, the wmrk done among the Mughal monuments at Lahore is
peculiarly edifying, as there were several more than usually difficult problems to be
faced, and in every case the Public Works Department has surmounted them with
success. One of these problems was presented by the Naulakha Pavilion, the found-
ations of which had subsided, causing the building to crack and lean dangerously
outwards over the edge of the Fort wall. The weight of the west wall of the pavilion,
•which was resting mainly on a perforated marble screen, has now been transferred
to iron rails imbedded in its masonry, while the screen itself has been taken out and
—
reset the whole being so cleverly done that itwould, as Mr. Nicholls states, be difficult
to detect any change, except for the fact that the cracks in the pavilion are no longer
gaping open. Another difficulty to which I have referred in a previous Report and
which has been equally well surmounted, has been the repair of the ugly rent in the
Shisb Mahal celling. There, as well as in the Hazuri Bagh Pavilion, where mirror
decoration is also used, the new work has been most skilfully treated, soasnot to clash
Tvith the old, and the result leaves nothing to be desired.
The restoration of the vaulted roof over the tomb of the Emperor Jahangir at
'Sbahdara is the subject of a separate contribution to this Report, and there is nothing
-that I need say aboutit ; but I cannot pass by this famous mausoleum without noticing
the improvements that have been effected in itsgarden and in the spacious quadrangle
-of the Akbari Sarai adjoining it. The latter has been completely cleared ofthe heaps
of refuse that used to disfigure it, and a wide expanse of green lawn has been laid
down in theirplace, with shade-giving trees dotted here and there upon it. The
Sarai buildings, too, have been patched up, wherever it -wms necessary for their safety
.and it is intended to conceal the new patches with innocuous creepers. At the
•same time, the approach to the Emperor’s tomb has been diverted, so that it will
mow lead through the main gateway on the south side of the Sarai. which was the

6 ARCH/^;OLOGICAL REPORT.
original entrance in approaching the garden. For the time being, funds permit only
of the western half of the garden being taken in hand but the striking transformation
;
that is being effected in it by the restoration of the old tanks and channels, the laying
down of grass swards and the removal of unsightly trees and hedges, will no doubt
eventually induce Government to treat the rest of the garden in a similar manner.
The quality of the work done at Delhi has not, in some particulars, been quite so
good as at Lahore, apparently because the contractors were left too much to their
own devices. Mr, Nicholls draws attention to this in connection with the laying out
of the Hayat Bakhsb garden, where the repaving of the stone channels was finished,
before the discovery of the original fountain bases was brought to his notice.
Another case in which there was some room for improvement was that of the repairs
to the low terrace wall around the tomb of Tsa Khan, which have not been carried
out in accordance with the instructions given. Apart, however, from these defects
the quality of the work at the Fort and elsewhere has been up to a good standard,
w'hile the restoration of the mosaics in the Throne of Sbah Jahan, which I described
in mv Report for 1902-03, surpasses anything of its kind that has ever been done
in India.
Before leaving the subject of Mughal monuments in Northern India, I should
like to say a few words about the celebrated gardens of Kashmir, for the restoration
of w'hich a complete and carefully thought-out scheme has been prepared during
the past summer by Mr. Nicholls. The claims which these gardens have to be
cared for and tended by the State need no emphasis for there are no other gardens,
;
perhaps, in all Asia, round which history and legend have woven so much romance,
which nature and man have combined to make so lovely, and which could be restored
to their former perfection at .such little expense. The gardens of the Taj at Agra,
of Shalimar or of Shahdara are beautiful of their kind and may with proper care-
,
be made more beautiful still but they can never hopeto rival their sisters in Kashmir,
;
because they lack entirely the majestic surroundings of mountain, pine forest and
snow field, in which the latter are set and because no flowers or grass or trees can
;
ever attain the same perfection in the plains of India as they can in the highlands of
Kashmir. That the present rulers of Kashmir should be induced to lavish on
these gardens the care which they received under the Mughal Emperors, is not,
perhaps, to be expected ; forthe love of such things is not inherent in them, as it was
in Baber and his successors. -For this reason, Mr. Nicholls’ scheme aims at laying
out the gardens on simple and bold lines, though in strict conformity with Mughal
taste. He rightly deprecates the planting of innumerable little flower beds, such as
,
the modern Indian gardener loves and he deprecates also the planting of thickly
;
set fruit or other trees. In place of these, his scheme provides for stately avenues
of chenars and cypresses and yew'S for wide expanses of lawnand for bright stretches
;
of colour flanking the waterways. As to the pavilions and other buildings in the
gardens, his idea is to dp only such repairs as are essential for their safety or to
prevent them detracting from the beauty of their surroundings. What is needed
more than the repair or restoration of the old work, is the demolition of the many
modem accretions that offend the eye so sorely and destroy the old-world charm of
these gardens. One of the most conspicuous of these is the gatehouse of the

COMSERVATION.
7
'Shalimar Bagh, as one approaches it from the Dal Lake. What sort of structure ori-
ginally existed at this point, there is no evidence to show but since a gatehouse is
;
needed, it is manifestly preferable to have some simple erection in keeping with the
rest of the garden than the present dismal-looking building. The modern ugly wall
which juts out from the gatehouse across the channel, I have advised the Darbar
not to rebuild in any form, when it has once been dismantled, notwithstanding that
for fardah purposes some sort of wall or screen must once have existed in this
position. My reason for offering this advice is a strong one. On the one hand,
there is nothing to be gained by such a restoration for mere restoration's sake
;
on the other, there is much to be lost by screening off from view the magnificent
vista down the long avenue of stately chenars that stretch to the Dal Lake. In
place of the wail, I have proposed that an inoffensive chain should be drawn across
the water channel, so as to prevent cattle straying into the gardens.
How far the Kashmir Darbar will find itself able to carry out Mr. Nicholls’
scheme, remains to be seen. Up to the present, in spite of the creation of a State
Archaeological Department in igoz, nothing has been done for the Moslem monu-
ments of the State and next to nothing for the Hindu. The majority of the latter
are in the familiar “ Kashmir ” style, which has attracted more attention, perhaps,
from European travellers than any other class of Indian architecture, owing, no doubt,
to its close affinities with the classical Doric order. But there are a number of
other temples in the State of a different type,, which merit attention no less than
the better known ones, .^mong these, may be mentioned a group of seven
temples at Babor, the ancient Babbapura of the Rajatarahginl, situate some 17
miles east of Jammu. These temples, which appear tojcombine the Indo-Aryan with
the Kashmir style, are all in a more or less advanced state of decay, though not
so advanced as to have lost their archaeological value or to defy preservation.
Nothing is needed for their protection beyond the careful clearance of debris and
a few other simple remedies, on which the Darbar has been fully advised. It is
sincerely to be hoped that these will not be indefinitely postponed.
I must not, however, dwell longer on works that are only in their inception, while
so many that have been completed remain to be noticed. Both in Bengal proper
and in Eastern Bengal and Assam the progress made during the year has been
exceptionally good. As to the last named district, there is a special article in this
Report from the pen of Dr. Bloch, which deals with the strange groups of monu-
ments at Dimapur and Kasomari Pathar, with the ruins on the Bamani Hill, and with
the so-called Copper Temple and other antiquities at the ancient Bhishmaknagar.
Along with these monuments must be mentioned also the temple of Hayagriva at
Hajo in the Kamrup District, which has been rescued from ruin at a more than
ordinary cost.
The new Local Government of the Eastern Province, it will be seen, has fully
maintained the liberal attitude of the previous administration of Assam towards
archaeology. But it has done more than this. It has devoted greater attention than
was ever given before to the monuments in Eastern Bengal itself ; to the Fort at
Munshiganj, and the Lai Bagh Fort at Dacca to the Eklakhi Tomb and the Adina
;
.and Qutbshahl mosques at Panduah to the Sona Masjid at Firozpur; and to many
:

j
8 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
of the celebrated monuments at Gaur, including among them the Lattan and'
Tantipara Masjid, the Firoz Mlnar and the Dakhil Darwaza. An account of many
of these monuments and of the measures necessary for their repair appeared in
my Report for 1902-03. That the campaign of operations among them has received
such added impetus during the past year, is largely due, there is no doubt, to changes in
the Local Administration, A few years ago there were relatively few monuments,,
except the most famous ones, in Bengal, to which the Local Government could
devote its care, and some of those that were remote from the centre of Government
at Calcutta, seemed doomed to suffer irretrievably before they could be taken in
hand. With the creation, however, of a new Province and the transference to it of
the important groups of buildings at Gaur and Panduah, the prospects of conserva-
tion work in the Eastern districts have rapidly brightened, while the improvement
in Bengal proper has been equally marked. In the latter Province there have been
some fifty monuments in all in the repairer’s hands, among which are to be numbered
several historic memorials of the British. The most extensive operations have been
those connected with the Black Pagoda at Konarak, where the removal of debris
from around the fallen iikhira has led to the discovery of a large and valuable
collection of remarkably well preserved statues, that add substantially to our
knowledge of Hindu sculpture. Other undertakings of importance have been the
repairs of the Sat Gumbaz and the tomb of Khan Jahan ‘Aliat Bagerhat,^ of Bakhtiyar
Khan’s tomb at Chainpur of the Minar at Pandua in the Hooghly district; and of
several of the temples at Bhubanesvar.
Another Province where the past year presents a very good record is Burma-
Here a sum of some Rs. 64,000 had to be devoted to the reconstruction of the spire
of the Mandalay Palace, which, as 1 explained last year, had been found to be in the
imminent danger of collapse. Besides continuing this work, the Local Government-
madea generous grant for the repair of other Palace buildings and monasteriesat Man-
dalay, as well as of a number of monuments at Pagan. The photographs of some of
the latter, e. g., of the Selnnyet and Sapada Pagodas figured on Plate IX of this
Report, afford good illustrations of what I have said above about the policy of the
Archaeological Department towards conservation work. The time-worn appearance of
these pagodas has been most religiously respected, and every care has been taken tO'
add nothing which was unnecessary and to take away nothing that could be saved.
A
great difficulty to be faced in connection with the preservation of pagodas in
Burma, arises from the fact that their management is vested in Trusts created under
section 539 of the Civil.Procedure Code, over which the Local Government exercises
no control, and which are seldom alive to the responsibilities of their position. When
I was in Burma in 1904, I urged upon Government the importance of investigating
the management of these Trusts and seeing if some arrangement could be made for
checking the expenditure of Trust funds. In response to my suggestion, an inquiry
was held by the Archaeological Superintendent into the management of twenty-five
Trusts, and a full report on them submitted to Government in December 1906. He
f o a r m p o e > u 3 r s C h B —f a a S . p k h s h A e t . r o i f y ^ S S . a h h i r s R a . h s , K , o h n a 1 , a t 9 n 0 I 3 ' . s - S s l 0 a a 4 y m , s t e o p S r m p a h b . m a , . ^ n 52 i- ; - t- I 5 b t 3 m u . — i t a s y p n r o o b — r b e e a l b i l n a e b o l t e i t c h i e a n d t f , or B i- m sw a a k aw t . h i t o c i n o y p e a y x r is o K t f s h a a t t n h o e u w t t a o s h m i b o m n . o e f H of asa th n e K g h r a an n d , ee th s e of fat S — h h p e r r r S f ha ft h . ®

CONSERVATION.
9
found that, owing to the absence of efficient control, there had been malversation of
funds, and that, while the preservation of the shrines had been neglected, inordinate
sums had been expended on providing entertainments and showy decorations. The
recommendations, however, which he made for controlling the administration of Trust
funds were not accepted by the Local Government, the Lieutenant-Governor holding
that “the examination of Trust funds, the erection of new buildings and the mainten-
ance and repair of pagodas are not matters with w^hich officers of Government should
concern themselves in their official capacity, except in so far as is provided by the
Ancient Monuments’ Preservation Act.”
Of the year’s campaign of work in the Central Provinces I need say nothing
more than that it has been prosecuted vigorously and steadily by the Local Govern-
ment. The same remark applies to the Bombay Presidency, where the Muhammadan
monuments at Bljapur, Sarkhej and Dholka have continued to claim especial atten-
tion.- I ought not, however, to leave this part of India without mentioning the Jaina
Tower at Chitor, the reconstruction of which, described in last year’s Annual, has now
been brought to a most successful issue by the Udaipur Darbar. Nor should I omit
to notice that steps have been taken during the year for effectively conserving the
caves at Dhamnar in the Indore State, which are described and illustrated in the
.same Report by Mr. Cousens.
If there is little to be said of the work in Western and Central India, there is
more than enough to be recorded of the Southern Presidency. I had hoped, indeed,
that the achievements in this part of India would form the subject of a special article
from Mr. Rea and had gone so far as to print off the illustrations to accompany it.
;
But at the last moment the letterpress is not forthcoming, and in its absence I must
content myself with publishing the photographs alone. The first of these (Plate
I, a) is a view of the Fort at Gooty. The appearance of this stronghold has been
remarkably improved by the cutting down of the jungle in which parts of it were
enveloped, and much also has been done to safeguard the walls and bastions, partly by
underpinning or rebuilding them, partly by protecting them against the rain with a
coping of cement. Another important Fort which has come in for a great deal of
— —
attention is that of Gingee as it is commonly spelt in the South Arcot district,
a place of importance as far back as the 14th century, and one which played a
dominant part in the vicissitudes of the country up to the time of its final capture by
the British in 1761. Mr. Rea likens the remains here to those of the more
famous Vijayanagar, and notices that many of the earlier structures owe
their existence to kings of the latter city. The main part of the Fortress, which
-contains the principal civil and military buildings, consists of three strongly fortified
—
hills the Rajagiri, which is shown in Plate I, b, the Krishnagiri and the Chandayan
Durham but beyond the limits of these hills are many miles of defences and a
;
multitude of other edifices, all of which it is manifestly beyond the power of Govern-
ment to keep in a good state of repair. As a fact, the operations here are being
strictly limited to preserving as permanently as possible the finest of the structures, and
to saving the remainder from unnecessarily rapid decay. Of the Palace buildings,
which have been marked out for repair, the chief one is the Kalyana Mahal
,(Plate If, a), a lofty eight-storeyed structure, situated at the base of the Rajagiri
c

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
lO
Hill. “It is surrounded,” writes Mr. Rea/‘ by a number of arcaded buildings which
have been used as barracks. These have rows of arches in front, and barrel-vaulted
roofs. Many of the supporting piers have gone, but the arches remain in position, and
project like huge brackets, thus testifying to the soundness of the ancient mortar.”
All the vegetation has been removed from this building and the most urgent repairs
executed but much still remains to be done, particularly in the matter of filling gaps
;
in the w'alls, substituting stone for decayed wooden lintels, and putting in relieving
arches. At the Flag Staff Tower, shown on Plate III, a, the fallen debris on the
north side is being removed, provision is being made for draining off rain water from
the interior, and the retaining walls around are being brought up to their original level.
—
The "Gymnasium Hall” illustrated on Plate II, b, is a type of building a plain
—
rectangular structure roofed with a single barrel vault of which anumber of examples
are to be found at Gingee, including a so-called gymkhana Hall and two granaries.
The gymnasium itself is in a relatively good condition, but others are much damaged,
and all have suffered more or less from the uneven settlement of their foundations,
which are much too superficial for the weight they bear. In some cases, wide
splayed bases have been built around the exterior of the walls, and, if these had been
properly looked after, it is unlikely that any damage would have happened to the
walls; for they themselves are thick and massive enough. But the bases have been
allowed to fall to ruin, plants have taken root in them, moisture has percolated
through, and the consequent dilapidation has been followed by fractures and settle-
ment in the walls they support. In the case of one of the granaries, indeed, the
southern w'all has split right away from the body of the building, and buttresses will
have to be inserted to hold it up. Much also will have to be done in this as well
as in other cases for getting rid of rain water, and filling in gaping cracks in the
structures.
The last undertaking that I need notice in the Madras Presidency is the con-
servation of some of the rathas at Mamallapuram or the " Seven Pagodas,” as it is
more popularly known. " The chief work here, ” says Mr. Rea," and one w^hich
presented some difficulties in execution, was the resetting in position of three huge
blocks of carved stone, which had fallen from the west side of the monolith known
as BhlnicHs ratha. The block from the south-west corner, which is triangular in
shape, must weigh several tons. To reset It in position, three large holes were cut
in the fallen block, and three more, to correspond to them, in the fractured corner of
the monoliih. A specially hard-grained black stone was then selected and cut into
bars, which were fixed with cement into the holes in the monolith. The fallen block
w^as then hoisted and set in position, and liquid cement, forced into the cracks, while
metal clamps were fitted at the edges to make the work doubly secure. The block
which had fallen from the centre of the west side had no bed on which it could rest;
so a pair of chisel-dressed stone piers had to be inserted and the block placed on
them, the joints being cemented and metal clamped. No special difficulties occurred
wdth the refixing of the north-west block.”
To complete the picture of what has been done during the past year, it remains
for me to say something of the collection and housing of moveable antiquities.
During the past twelve months the building of two new museums, one at Peshawar

CONSERVATION IN MADRAS.

pwi

MAJDKAS,
UM
UUlNiSiliKVA’nUiN

CONSERVATION.
I I
and the other at Ajmer, has been finished. Both museums supply a long felt want,
and there is every promise that both will develop rapidly and prove of great value.
In Rajputana, a few States already possess independent museums of their own, but
archaeology plays only a very subordinate part in them, and in the majority of States
there are no museums at all. The newly instituted museum at Ajmer, which is located
in the old Treasury of Akbar in the Fort, is accordingly intended as a central museum
for the whole of Rajputana, and it is hoped that, with the co-operation ot the Darbars,
we may beable to get together a thoroughly representative collection of all classes
of antiquities and keep them classified and catalogued on really scientific lines.
Everything, of course, will depend on the degree of assistance given by the ruling
Chiefs, but there is good reason to expect that their assistance will be given in no
illiberal spirit. Indeed, the mere fact that in this museum willbe crystallised, as it were,
the past history, traditions, and glories of the Rajput races, is a sufficient guarantee in
itself that it is not likely to languish for lack of interest on the part of the leading
Rajput families. As to the Museum at Peshawar, it is, if possible, even more urgently
needed than the one at Ajmer, for there are crowds of sculptures and other antiquities
that have long been waiting to be stored in it, and there are crowds more in the
Province, which will no doubt quickly hnd their way to it, when once the building has
been formally thrown open to the Public. It is a little unfortunate that this museum
should have had to form part of the new Victoria Memorial Hall, as the accommoda-
tion provided is far from being as spacious as could be desired, and, moreover,
there are no facilities for expansion. How-ever, it will serve its purpose well enough for
three or four years, and the strongest argument for the erection of a separate building
will no doubt be found when the present accommodation has all been used up.
Besides the completion of these two central museums, the past year has seen the
inception of two local museums, at Khajuraho and Sarnath. In both cases they are
meant for the reception only of antiquities belonging’to the site, which it would be
inconvenient to take away and which might lose focus and value, if dissociated from
their natural surroundings. The former building is to be of the simplest description,
a large rectangular enclosure, against the outer w'all of which and some inner dwarf
walls the sculptures will be placed; afterwards, as funds become available, lean-to
roofs may be added for the better protection of the sculptures. The museum at
Sarnath is to be a more elaborate structure, as the sculptures and other finds from
the excavations there require to be more carefully housed. In plan it will eventually
be somewhat like that of theold Buddhist monasteries, with an open courtyard in the
centre and a projecting hall in the middle of each face, but the design of the
elevation, for which the Consulting Architect is responsible, has many Saracenic
features in it. For the present, rather less than half of this building is being con-
structed, and it is not intended to complete the rest until the excavations have pro-
gressed further, and the need for more accommodation has been demonstrated.
H. Marshall.
J.

JAHANGIR’S TOMB AT SHAHDARA.
The
problem of ascertaining what was the original form of the central portion of
the tomb of Jahangir has exercised the imagination of many visitors to Shahdara
during the last century. There can be no doubt that the building as it stands to-day
is incomplete, and that there was some structure upon the raised platform in the centre
of the flat roof. From the imitakka holes, weather marks and depressions round
the edge of this raised platform, the natural deduction seems to be that a stone screen
formerly stood there, the bottom rail being 7 inches wide, set back from 2 to 2^ ihches
from the edge of the platform, with openings 3 feet 6 inches wide in the centre of
each of its four sides. There are no indications to warrant the traditional domed
structure or pavilion surmounting the raised platform.
As regards the vaulted roof of the central chamber, which must not be confused
with the traditional pavilion or marble dome surmounting the raised platform on the
roof, the structural evidence strongly indicates that the vault had no hole in its crown
originally. The modern skylight (Plate IV) in the middle of this vault, was, apart
from its ugliness, given to leaking in the rains. It was consequently dismantled in the
beginning of the year, and the edge of the opening in thevault, which had hitherto been
concealed by the lining of the skylight, was laid bare for examination. From the
.
broken edge of the brickwork it was at once clear that the opening had not been part
of the original construction, but that it had been subsequently formed by hacking
through the brickwork of the vault. An opening for light in the crown of a vault is, I
believe, a thing unknown in Mughal architecture. Further, the curve of the vault
was found just to complete itself without rising above the raised platform on the
—
roof of the tomb a fact which pointed to the raised platform having been designed
to take the vault,.and prevent its extrados from showing above the roof. Now that
the vault has been completed the central chamber is, of course, much darker than it
was when lit by the skylight; but, with its four passages. leading into it, the chamber
is, even now, considerably lighter than the corresponding chambers at the Taj and
Sikandarah, where Jahangir’s son and father are buried.
The accounts given by various writers do not agree, one with another, regarding
the original form of the tomb. Some corroborate while others contradict the struc-
tural evidence, which, in a case of this kind, naturally outweighs tradition. Muhammad

X
^ ' f' *'*k’'‘'''''^-i!{.i'''‘UVi. '^L ' ' ‘

^
JAHANGIR’S TOMB AT SHAHDARA.
*3
Salih\ in his ShahJahan Namah, says : “ His majesty (Jahangir) further willedthat his
tomb should be erected in the open air, so that the rain and dew of heaven might fall
on it. In pursuance of this will the Emperor Shah Jahan, his son and successor,
built a lofty mausoleum of red sandstone, measuring one hundred yards in length,
round the tomb of his father, the tomb itself having been built on a raised and open
platform of white marble inlaid with precious stones and wrought with w’orks of
peculiar beauty . . It is conceivable that, if this wish of Jahangir’s was ever
carried out at Shahdara. the sarcophagus was placed in the middle of the raised
platform on the roof, and that the stone tomb in the vaulted chamber is the cenotaph.
At all events the pietra dura in the vaulted chamber bears little evidence of having
been exposed to storm and rain. —
Moorcroft,® writing about 1823, gives the following description ; “ In the interior
of the mausoleum is an elongated sarcophagus of white marble, enshrining the
remains of the sovereign of Delhi, the sides of which are WTought with flowers of
mosaic . . . The building was surmounted, it is said, by a dome, but it Avas taken
off by Aurangzib, that his grandfather’s tomb might be exposed to the weather as
a mark of his reprobation of the loose notions and licentious practices of Jahangir,
Such is the story, but more probably the building was never completed.”
In speaking of the ‘ dome which surmounted the building,’ Moorcroft seems to
confuse the traditional structure on the raised platform on the roof, with the vaulted
roof of the central chamber. Evidently Cole was thinking of this superstructure w’hen
he said he did not believe the building ever had a dome®, since two-thirds of the
vaulted roof over the central chamber undoubtedly existed in Cole’s time, as it did
until the present year.
—
5 10 15 20
I .-.-I - I - I 7ee/
Fig. I.
Hugel^ circa. 1835, speaks of a small vaulted chamber very similar to that
in the Taj at Agra. “ The light falls on it (the tomb of Jahangir) from above.”
Von Orlich®, in 1843, says: “The white marble sarcophagus with Arabic and
2 2 > T S M . h o i o M r rc d . ro r L f e at t p i o f a r , n t d i o T a f r W t e h b , e ec C p k u p , r . a T 1 t r 0 o a 6 r v - e 1 o l 0 f s 7. A i n n c t i h e e n H t i M m o a n l u a m y e a n n t P s r , ov p i . nc C es X , I e X tc . .,London,John „ Murray,, V , ol,. , I,pp.io8o-iop,
* Hiigel: Travels inKashmir andthePunjab, London, John Petheram, 1845 : p. 255.
5 Von Oilich, Travels, London, Longmans, 1845, Vol. I, p. 220.

H ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
Persian inscriptions, stands in the centre under a dome which Shah BahaduP
caused to be destroyed in order that the rain and dew might fall on the tomb of his
ancestor.”
Upon comparing these accounts with the structural evidence which came to light
after the removal of the modem skylight, one is forced to the conclusion that the
account of Muhammad Salih is not reliable, if the sarcophagus to which he refers
stood on the floor of the central chamber where the inlaid tombstone stands to-day.
On the other hand, the accounts of Moorcroft and Von Orlich can well be reconciled
wdth the explanation of the hole in the vault afforded by the bricks and mortar.
The section given in the text t^Fig. i) show^s how much of the original vault was
still in existence, and the part which has been filled in this year
It is perhaps not generally known that there is some reason for doubting whether
the tomb at Shahdaracontains the mortal remains of Jahangir at all: and as the
subject in some measure affects the question of the vault over the central chamber of
the tomb, it may be of interest to quote the authorities for this unbelief. The most
important of them is no less than the reliable Tavernier, to whom we are indebted for
so much valuable information regarding the buildings and court life of the Mughals in
the time of his contemporaries, Shah Jahan and Aurangzeb. In one passage^ he
states that when you reach Agra from the Delhi side you meet a large bazaar, close
to which there is a garden where the king Jahangir, father of Shah Jahan, is interred
and again later on,^ “He (x\saf Khan) spread the report that Shah Jahan
. . .
was dead, and that, having desired to be interred near Jahangir, his father, his body
was to be brought to Agra.”
Secondly, the traveller Herbert,'' who was contemporary with Shah Jahan, men-
tions Jahangir’s death in the Bhimber hills, and says of the Umbraves “ conveighing
the old Mogul's dead body to Lahore, where preparing for his funeral they carry it to
Tzecander three course from J\.gray, and intomb him in King Ecbar’s monument.”
Later on he speaks of certain persons “ all w'hose carcases were without any respect
buried in a garden in Lahore neere the entrayls of Jahangheer,” Herbert perhaps was
given to believe that the entrails only of Jahangir were buried near Lahore, and that
the body was buried at Sikandarah.
The traveller Terry®, who came to India in the time of Jahangir, bears out the
story of Tavernier in the following words : “ It (Secandra) was begun by Achabar-
sha the Irte Mogul's father, who there lies buried and finished by his son who since
...”
was laid up beside him
—
If these accounts are true and they have at least as good a claim to credence
—
as the account of Muhammad Salih the wish attributed to Jahangir that his
body might be exposed to the rain and due may have been fulfilled by his burial in
the garden at Sikandarah, with.no stone even to mark,his humble grave.
- - W. H. Nicholls.
^ Presumably' the successor of Aurangzeb, A.D., 1707-1713.
2 Travernier : Travelsin India, London, Macmillan & Co.,1899, translated fromthe Frenchedition of 1676
Vols. I-IIL
^ Ibidem i,33S.
^ Herbert : Travels into diversparts of Asia, London, Richard Bishop, 1638, pp. T05-107.
^ Terr'v; A Voyage toEast India, London, 17/7, p. 2^)i,

RAILING IN THE ANGURI BAGH AT AGRA.
T is not known when the railing disappeared from the pavement which surrounds the
I Anguri Bagh in Agra fort, but there is little doubt that it existed in 1844, since
it figures in a drawing which Colonel Sleeman published in that year.^ This drawing
purports, according to the title on the plate, to represent the palace of “ Dewan
Khan ” at Delhi, but this is a mistake it is obviously a view, and a very accurate one,
;
of the Anguri Bagh in Agra fort, with the Khas Mahal and its adjoining pavilions in
the background, the Muthamman Burj being on the left, and the octagonal tower
on the right of the picture.
m I -fc
i , ” }
1
tk-.
I
'A' a'!' .
iw m
iH
0:
^ -:V.t
M
il®;

l6 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
The railing was evidently of red sand-stone, and contained six independent shafts
in each bay. Although the kerb on which the railing stood is full of mortise holes,
it is impossible to deduce from them the exact proportions of the railing. As there
was a bottom rail, there is nothing to show that the tenons between the bottom rail
and the kerb corresponded with the uprights in the railing and besides, the mortise
:
holes are very irregular. They do, however, indicate that there were three bays, or
at any rate, two uprights between the sides of the causeways, and in this respect they
are in confirmation of Colonel Sleeman’s drawing. The distance between the bays,
which is thus indicated, is just under six feet (centre to centre).
Curiously enough a fragment of a railing, answering very closely to that shown
on Colonel Sleeman’s drawing, was found some years ago, in Agra Fort, so it is said,
and is now preserved in the museum at Lucknow. The similarity between the frag-
ment and the drawing is, in fact, so remarkable that there is ground for the suspicion
that the fragment in Lucknow museum is actually part of the original AngOri Bagh
railing. The details of this fragment have been followed in the restoration of one
bay on each side of the central causeway, as a suggestion of what the original effect
was when the railing was standing. (Fig. i.)
The pattern of the railing is of a type which was not uncommon in Mu ghal
work. An old photograph of the Dlwan-i-‘Am at Delhi shows a similar railing in
front of the hall of audience. Another example stands in the garden of the Amber
palace at Jeypore. In Agra fort, too, there is a similar old piece fixed as a make-
shift in an opening on the north side of the octagonal tower, south of the Khas Mahal
and, when the ground west of the Jahangiri Mahal was being levelled, another
fragment was discovered. Neither of the latter pieces were found to agree with
the evidence deduced from Colonel Sleeman’s drawing and the mortise holes so
closely as does the fragment in Lucknow museum.
W. H. Nicholls.

;
CONSERVATION ASSAM.
IN
O
F all the countries in India, to which the civilisation of the Aryans gradually
extended, Assam seems to have been one of the last. If in the famous story of
the Satapatha-Brahmana, Agni Vaisvanara, the personification of Brahmanical culture,
in the course of his progress towards the east, made halt at the frontier of Magadha,
or Bihar, it probably took him another thousand years before he could cross the
frontier of Assam. Even the ancient name of Assam, or rather of the western part of
it, Pragjyotisa, implies the notion of its having been looked upon in antiquity as the
benighted province” of India, a sort of dark continent for the name evidently means
;
“ that which lies to the East of the light,” a country, where the sun never sets,
because he never rises there.
The introduction of Aryan civilisation into Assam is attributed to Krsna, As
in Magadha he overthrew the barbarianrule of Jarasandha, so, in his progress towards
the rising sun, he defeated Naraka, the King of Pragjyoiisa, and restored to Aditi,
the goddess of the earth, her ear-rings, which had been stolen by Naraka.^ The name
Naraka itself, a diminutive form of nnra ' a man,’ seems to imply a notion of contempt,
and the crime, with which he stands charged, uiz., the theft of the ear-rings of Aditi,
the earth-goddess, might be expressed in the dry matter-of-fact language of modern
days, by saying that his very existence was looked upon as a disgrace to civilisation.
For to an Indian woman her ornaments form part of her personal honour, and it is
only when she becomes a widow, or otherwise disgraced, that she is not allowed to
wear them in public.
The course of Aryan civilisation in its progress towards Assam naturally followed
the valley of the Brahmaputra. It is here that we meet with the first Aryan settle-
ments. However, owing to the unfavourable conditions of the climate of Assam,
with its torrents of rain and perpetual recurrences of seismic disturbances, it cannot
surprise us in the least to find scarcely any ancient buildings left to us, of the time
previous to the conquest of Assam by the Ahom kings, towards the end of the seven-
teenth century A.D, The modern cml stations of Gauhati andTezpurseem to occupy
the sites of two of the oldest and most Important among the early Aryan settlements
in Assam, called Pragjyoiisapura 3x16. HaruppePoaram Sanskrit. Like the modern
See Nowgong copper-plate of Balavarman, 1. 4.: A. S. B., Vol. LXl'f, Part T, JS97, p. zSg also
Bargaon elate of Ratnapala, 11. 6-8:J. c., ^oL LXV//,J’art /, iSgS,p. 107. •.
L)

—
ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
Champanagar, the site of Champa, the ancient capital of the kingdom of the Aiigas,
west of Bhagalpur in Bengal, both Gauhati and Tezpur have been built upon a
sort of artificial plateau, raised by the underlying debris of the ancient settlements.
A great number of mediaeval Indian carvings, brought to light during modern building
operations, bear ample evidence of this fact. In regard to Tezpur, It seems worth
mentioning here a discovery made a short time ago, towards the end of i905>
reported by Mr. F. Monahan, I.C.S., in a letter dated the iSth January, 1906.
J.
Mr. Monahan writes as follows ;
“ On digging for foundations, for the additions, which are being made to the Deputy
Commissioner's ofSce at Tezpur, the builders came upon a layer of hewn blocks of granite,
underlying the present building. Some of the blocks, which have been dug up, are elaborately
sculptured, as cornices, bases, or capitals of columns, etc., like the pieces, which one sees lying
here and there, on and around the Tezpur maidan. There seems to be every probability^
that the extent of the underground layer of hewn stone may be not less than that of the
cutchery site it may, of course, be much greater. The layer of stones is also, apparently,
;
of considerable depth. I saw a hole, about 4 feet deep, opened by the removal of seme of
the granite blocks, below which there were more stones, apparently of the same kind. These
remains point to the existence of a great building, of massive and ornate architecture, on the
Tezpur maidan site. There are ruins of a similar building on the Bamani Hill, two miles
east of Tezpur. The top of this hill is a mass of granite blocks, many of them most curiously
carved, and piled one on the other to an unknown depth.’'’
The ruins on the Bdrnanl Hill near Tezpur, referred to at the end of this
extract, evidently belonged to some Hindu temple of considerable size, and the
remains, found below the modern cutchery building, seemingly formed part of a
similar structure. So far as one may judge from the carvings above ground, both
at Tezpur and at Gauhati, the entire absence of anything Buddhist among them
is remarkable. The mild religion of Buddha probably never ventured to force its
way into the wilderness of Assam, and we may well understand, why it was that
the cult of such blood-thirsty goddesses as Kali, called Kdmdkhya ^ at her prin-
cipal shrine near Gauhati, has been able to take such deep root in the mind
of the indigenous population of the Brahmaputra valley, after it had been wielded
into that heterogeneous conglomeration of various races and creeds, which we now
call “ Hinduism. ”
The climatic conditions of Assam, alluded to above, also explain why this
province forms a comparatively easy charge, so far as conservation work is concerned.
The ancient cities, buried under the modern stations of Tezpur and Gauhati, un-
fortunately, cannot be unearthed again, and among the many temples, dating from
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries A.D., which still remain preserved to us,
there are but few, that either require or justify any extensive scheme of conservation
work. On the other hand, it is a matter of some satisfaction, that, in certain outlying
places of Assam, a number of remains are to be found, still fairly w'ell preserved and
forming, as it were, quite a separate group of antiquities, almost original in many
respects and distinguished from anything seen in other provinces of India.
It is to this latter class of antiquities that conservation work in Assam has been
almost exclusively directed. Some of these, in fact, are so much hidden away inside
an impenetrable jungle, that one does not feel justified in recommending their
1 Thisname appears tobe a corruption from SanskritKamaksi,dpe tothe Assamesepronunciation.

CONSEEVATION IN ASSAM.
Half-tone.
SurveyofIndiaOffices,

CONSERVATION? IN ASSAM. 19
preservation to Government. For, apart from the cost of getting up labour, they a.re
never likely to be visited by anyone, with the exception, perhaps, of a few isolated
sportsmen, who may chance to come upon these remnants of bygone civilisation.
However, the recent opening up of the province by railways has helped to bring
some of the more important ancient monuments of Assam into closer and more
convenient reach for anyone interested in them. I refer especiall}'' to the remains
of the ancient city of Dimapur, doubtless the most curious group of ruins in Assam,
which now lie Avithin easy reach from the Assam-Bengal Raihvay, less than a mile
distant from the Manipur Road Station on that line.
The modern name Dimapur, meaning “ the city on the Dima, ” seems to have
been derived from the river, now called Dhunsiri, close toit.^ The flourishing time
of the place seems to haA’e been the fifteenth century A.D., for, according to Gait,^
the Kacharls deserted their capital at Dimapurafter its invasion by the Ahoms, in 153d
A.D., and established a new capital at Maibong.® The style of the gateway in
the eastern wall of the ancient city of Dimapur points to the same period;^ for in
its curved battlement, its narrow, pointed arch over the entrance, and its clumsy,
octagonal corner turrets, it exhibits all the characteristic elements of that style
of Muhammadan brick architecture in Bengal, which flourished in the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries A.D., during the period of independence, and died out soon after
Bengal had been annexed to the Mughal Empire by Akbar.
The total length of the city wall, which appears to consist of earth, raised
upon an underlying brick structure, has not been measured by me however,
;
from Major Godwin-Austen’s plan®, 1 make it to be 4,250 yards, or about 2*4
miles, in circuit, including the broken portion along the Dhunsiri river. The
principal remains stand close to the gate, in the eastern part of the city. They
consist of two groups of stone pillars, running parallel to each other from north
to south. Each of those two groups is, again, divided into two rows of pillars. The
pillars in the first two rows, nearest to the gate, will be referred to in the following
pages as “ chessman-columns ''' a name given to them by Major Godwin-Austen on
account of their shape, which somewhat resembles that of chessman-figures. This
will best be seen on Fig. i also on Plate V.
;
Major Godwin-Austen, likewise, is responsibleforthe name of " V-shapedcolumns ”
for the bifurcating stone pillars, which make up the third and fourth rows from the
entrance to Dimapur city. Unfortunately, very few of them are at present erect, and
none of them could be shown in its unbroken condition in any of the illustrations
accompanying this article however, one-half of a V-column may be seen on
;
Plate VI \,a). A peculiarity, that should be noted at once, is, that the
1 See Gait, A History cf Assam, Calcutta, igo6, p, 8g, Note. Dimd is explained as a Kachariword,
meaning ‘any large collection of water,’ from di ‘water/ and wa ‘great/ TheAhoms called Dimapur ‘ the
brickcity’ : che-din-che-pen,\\ierB\\y ‘city-earth-burn-make/
2 L.c.,p. 244.
3 Remains ofthis secondcapitalof the Kachari kings still exist close to the Railway Station of Maibong,
onthe Assam-Bengal line. Themostinteresting among these remains is asmall rock-cut temple, in the shape
ofaBengali house,with acurvedroof. Itbearsan inscription, dated the 5th Mdvgafirsa in the Saka year 1643
(end ofT721 A.D.), andreferringto akingHariscandra Ndrdyana,th.e Lord ofHidimbd, perhaps Kachar.
^ A lithograph ofit has been publishedby Major H. H. Godwin-Austen,along with his note on the Ruins
atDimapur, J . A. S. B., Vol,XLIII, 1874*
^ Loc.citi Plate /.
D2

archeological report.
20
upper ends of the two stone beams, making up the \\ have one mortise
Zle each, as if they had been intended to receive some other structure^ raised
over them. The ornamentation on the chessman-columns is entirely flora or
eeometrical, and remarkable for the absence of any animal figures whatever. Some-
Smes the ornamental bands, hanging down the columns, harm swords or daggers
carv-ed upon them. The most striking leature, however, apart from the heraispheucal
capital, is the band, tied around the neck of the column, plainly visible in Fig. i.
Fig. I. Chessman-columns at Dimapiir.
On the V-columns, animal designs are frequently met with between the three rosettes,
which divide each half of the V into two separate fields of ornamentation. Thus, we
find on the broken half, shown in Plate VI {a), below two figures of birds, perhaps
peacocks, the well-known Indian design of a tiger, overpow'ering an elephant. 1he
design is purely conventional and, to add to its strange appearance, the sculptor
in some cases provided it with horns, as on the stone showm in Plate VI (a), almost
as if he had thought of fabulous monsters, such as the unicorn, of w'hich, of course,
w^e can hardly expect him to have had any knowledge.
A third type of stone monument, found at Dimapur, will be seen in Plate VI (6).
It differs from the V-columns only in so far as the two bifurcating stone beams havi;
been slightly curved, so as to resemble in shape somew'hat the horns of a
—
buffalo ; thus : As will be seen later on, this form is probably more than a mere
conventionality, and the name, “buffalo-horn columns” accordingly seems to be

'I
(a) BEOEEir Y- COLUm AT D'lMAPUE.
•>'ni<
SurveyofIndiaOffices,Calcutta,1900.
(b) BEOEEN COLUMN, SHAPED LIEB BUPPALO-HOENS, AT DIMAPUE.

CONSERVATION IN ASSAM. 21
suited for them. Here, again, not a single column is now erect, and any illustration,
accordingly, can only give an approximate idea of the original shape of these curious
monuments. Their ornamentation is remarkable for the groups of three rosettes,
shown on Plate VI {b). A dagger or sword, and a few animal figures are generally
placed between the triangular bands, which develop, as it were, out of the three
spirals that encircle the rosettes on the upper end.
The broken and dilapidated state of most of the monuments inside the ancient
city of Dlmapur, will be seen clearly enough from the illustrations published with this
Fi-,' 2. Broken chessman-columnsat Dlmapur.
article. Fig. 2 affords a good illustration of their present condition. It was of
course out of the question to attempt anything like a complete restoration of any o
those various groups of stone monuments. Actually in the two rows of chessman-
t c a h a g w a c n a o s d J i I n r c a^ n o o c s s w c , t ; o l B r v i u o d t f t p b w l g V a t a ^l o ^ n t y t ^ c l , p i a f L o t b n L m e d a i e n n b m n d s l a e l c r i 5 h e t m i p o i n o l t e u a s e r t c a d e y v t o , e o f br a X r 1 o 3 n e 5 k d s , e t o a t n o u h r n t i e d s n o t g p f o o r n n x o e o e 6 s n g , , e o r a u a o w t n m r e d • m o i n f t g e p 1 w h r 5 o i o m 1 f n 7 a o g n u s c - e t p o n - e n s t o r c s e f e e i v r e m u 1 v r e 7 p c a a . n k a l t s p 0 i w t a 6 o h o o b n p i f n l s e w e , e o o a o f i r f n c r k e h t t q b h h a u g e t 6 e i r i r D o f n e i r o u g s e m l p s l s a h t e o o p e t o w n u a r i r u ^ o n 5 , y p d g ^
, how what the 1
3
monuments, moreover, entails a coon!t;r^m»oouLsj gg g
an Assam jungle, k w ” h - ich one “'S J j ^ j , ^ hundred years,
that we often ‘\t 'aterir definitely about the existence
So tar, “mo^rments already known to us represent all the ante
Se am informed that a careful search
° ifieT'Sd n the Dlmapur jungle, at least I

22 archaeological report.
of the remaining area inside the city walls, made with the promise of small pecuniary
rewards for any discoveries, has ended without any result whatever.
Before entering into the question of the signification and date of the pillars at
Dimapur, seems worth our while to mention briefly a group of similar remains at
it
Kasomari Pathar, close to the Doyang river, about one day’s journey] off Jamuguri
Station, on the Assam-Beugal Railway.
Fig. 3. Chessman-pillar at Kasomari Pathar.
Their discovery appears to be due to the local Forest Officer. The place is so
very secluded, that it will scarcely be visited by any other official in the course of his
tours of inspection, and even at Jamuguri, before starting on my boat journey, I was
advised to employ a special guide, w^ho had visited the site on a previous occasion,
as my boatmen professed complete ignorance of the locality.
As in Dimapur, the remains here also are found within the area of an old city.
The earthen ramparts and moats are still visible, and inside are several mounds of
earth, w^hich may contain theremains of some buildings. The monoliths belong to the
northern section of the town. First, there is an isolated chessman-column 9' high.

t/xi.

CONSERVATION IN ASSAM. 23
with a circumference of 2 6 at its base. It is identical in style with the Dimapur
chessman-pillars (Fig. 3). The hemispherical capital has a number of garlands
falling down from its top. Among the carved emblems we again meet with the figure
of a sword or dagger, similar to that now used by the Nagas and other wild tribes of
Assam. At a distance of 55 from this column is a double row of stones — 24
altogether. It looks as if each line consisted of 12 stones, but the ruinous state of the
place and the thick jungle made it impossible to take accurate measurements. The
distance between the stones was about 10 Here, again, the two lines run from north te
.
south. The stones in the western line appear to have been larger than those in the
eastern line. There are also some indications of the height of the stones gradually
decreasing from the centre towards each side, as in the Dimapur pillars. My
measurements of four stones recorded the following heights — 6' 5" 8' 9' 4" 8' 6".
: ; ; ;
The position of these stones is such that the first, or lowest, stands near the northern
end, the third, or highest, almost in the centre, while the remaining two are more or
less close to it. The average breadth is 2' 6 " in circumference.
Only four out of the two dozen of stones are still erect. The remaining stones all
lie prostrate on the ground, some broken and some complete, some upside down, and.
others with their carved faces turned upwards. It was impossible to photograph any
of the fallen stones, but the three specimens shown on Plate VTI will supply a general
idea as to what these stones looked like. Only one side is carved. Its pointed shape,
narrowing a little towards the base, somewhat resembles the blade ofasword or dagger.
Perhaps the name ‘ sword-blade ’ or ‘ dagger-columns ’ would be appropriate for
them, to distinguish them from the chessman and V'-columns. The base has a hori-
—
zontal band of ornaments. The panelbelow it has some animal figures elephants or
—
lions carved upon it on some of the stones. From the horizontal bands rise gener-
ally two, but in a few instances only one pair of projecting bands, which at the end
develop into a circle, filled upwith rosettes and similar designs. The irregulartriangle,
which is formed by the two curves nearing each other towards the top, is either left
empty, or has a sword or some other emblem carved upon it. The top is filled with a
heart-shaped panel, containing various patterns of ornamentation. At the north-
eastern end of the group stands a small square pillar, 3' high and i' 4" broad. It
has a hollow in the top, 7^" square.
From the very outset, there can be no room left for doubting the intimate
connection of the Kasomari Pathar columns with those at Dimapur. So far as their
ornamentation is concerned, there is very little that connects them with the ordinary
class of Northern Indian works of art. In studying the designs exhibited on
those columns, one certainly feels a slight touch of mediaeval Northern Indian Art
here and there, e.g., inthe rosettes so common on the pillars, and especially in
animal groups, such as the lion rampant, over an elephant, to which allusion has
been made above. But, inasmuch as the general shape of those columns, includ-
ing the patterns of ornamentation employed in their carvings, bear such a
marked un-lndian appearance, the suggestion offers itself that the people, to whom
we owe their erection, came from a foreign, non-Aryan stock, and that we have
to look into the religious or social customs of the many aboriginal tribes inhabiting
the Assam border-lands, in order to grasp the true meaning of these curious stone

—
24 ARCH^.O[,OGICAL REPORT.
monuments. Fortunately enough, a certain amount of evidence has recently been
brought to light, mhich helps us a great deal further in this direction.
It has already been variously suggested, that the columns at DimLipur were
memorial stones, put up in honour of some great man or event, or commemorating
some meritorious act, such as the killing of a miihtm, or bison, or the feasting of a
village. This suggestion was first brought to my notice by Mr. B. C. Allan, LC.S.,
sometime Superintendent of Gazetteer Revision in Assam. Later on, I found it
expounded in an interesting report by Mr. Mitchell, Executive Engineer, Naga Hills
Division. The custom-, I understand, is still in vogue among the Naga tribes, who
put up in their villages single blocks of stone, or bifurcated wooden posts, as
memorial tokens of .their national heroes, and of events like those mentioned above.
The shape of one- class of bifurcated columns, which above, on page 20, 1 proposed
to call “ buirfalo-horn columns,” fits remarkably well with this theory. For we
may well understand their form to have grown out of the custom of putting up the
horns of the slaughtered .buffalo as an offering to the deity. Later on, w'hen the
barbarous hill-tribes of Assam took to a more sumptuous style of living, this old
national custom used to be continued by setting up stone memorials, imitating the
shape of the buffalo-horns, but of much larger size, and covered with elaborate and
delicate carvings.^
Some modern analogies to this custom, which are still found in some of the
Naga villages, have been observed by Mr. (now Sir Bampfylde) Fuller, the late
.
Chief Commissioner of Assam. His interesting note on them is as follows :
“ The Chief Commissioner has recently visited the ruins of Dimapur, after having marched
through the Naga Hills, and has been struck with several points of similarity between the
V-shape'd pillarsand the memorials used bythe Nagatribesto commemorate sacrifices. Mr. Fuller
found in Serna villages w'ooden ‘shields ’ cut out in the shape of the letter U, standing 7 or 8 feet,
high and covered with rough carving, amongst which were symbols of the Sun, of the Moon,
and of Lightning. He noticed that these shields all faced the east, and was told on enquiry
that for some reason now unknow'n they were all turned to the rising Sun. In general shape
as well as in being definitely orientated, they were not very unlike the V-shaped stones recently
discovered at Dimapur. The Rengma Nagas use row's of stones, of gradually decreasing size.
The Chief Commissioner noticed in the Garo Hills wooden pillars, set up before houses in
memory of dead relations, which are something like the ‘chessman’ shape.”
There are, of course, and ever will be, a number of more or less curious
stories current in Assam about those interesting monuments. Thus, w'e are told that
the chessman-pillars at Dimapur each marked the appointed seat of some grandee,
or the place where criminals used to be executed, leaving aside the common
belief, that they indicate the sites of buried treasure. Unfortunately, history is
reticent about them, and they do not offer us any definite clue in the shape of
inscriptions, that might help us a little further. We must, therefore, for the present
remain satisfied wfith the information collected above, and it seems very doubtful,
indeed, if future discoveries will enable us to speak of them in terms more definite
than those in which I have described them here.
^ The figures of wild .sniraals, seenamong thecarvingsof the bifurcating columns, likewise point towards
thesame direction, and I think we canhardly go W’rong in looking upon those stones as some kind ofhunting
memorials,similar to otherones, found in various parts of India; see e.g., Ep. Ind., Vol VI pp and

—
;
CONSERVATION IN ASSAM. 25
1 cannot, however, conclude this article, without noticing briefiy another group of
interesting remains in Assam, which I visited early in 1905, at the e.xpress wish of Sir
Bampfylde Fuller. I refer to the so-called Copper Temple,” near the ancient cityof
Bhismaknagar. at Kundilnagar,* from four to five days' journey byboat and elephant to
the east of Sadiya. The temple itself has become famous owing to the fact that almost
down to the memory of the present generation, human sacrifices ® have been offered
Fig. 4. Interior ofCopper Temple, near Sadiya.
there to some form of Durga, evidently worshipped under the name of Tdmresvart?'
This name, probably, originally meantsimply the I§varl, or Durga, put up by Tamra
^ No remainsare known to exist at Bhisrnaknagar,which lies a short distance off Kundilnagar. Its earthen
wallshavebeen followed by me on an elephant for about twomiles. Before attempting to clear this large area,,
some definite information in regard toanypossible remainsseems to be calledfor. Historically both places are
closelyconnected,
' See A. S. B„ LXVIf, iSgS, Part III,p. $8. We meet with another interesting reference tobiimaiii
sacrifices, offered to Siva at Girivraja, or Rajgir, by king Jarasandha. '\he passage is found in the Maha-
Bharata, Sabhdparvan, 21, v. 16. Here we read of a flesh-eating bullock, killed by Brhadratha yatra
nidmsddam rsahJiam dsasada Brhadrathah ; tarn hafvd,etc. What is meant by this curious tale becomes : evident
later on, when f22, v. 11 j we read that Krsna blames Jarasandha for having offered hum.an scarifices to Siva:
Maniisyat/dm samdlambho na cadrsta/i kaddcana
sa kaiham mdnusairdevamyastiim icchasi Savka^'am ?
This very curious verse, like a similar one just before, v. 9, thus shows that Jarasandha was
believed to have offered human sacrifices to Siva, whose image was represented under the form of
a bull. In regard to Sadiya, I understand, that the reason, why no tea-gardens are allowed to settle
inside the neutral zone, north of the Brahmaputra,near Sadiya, is thefear, thatsome ofthe wild hilltribes,
like the Aborsor Mishmis, mightcarryoffsomeof the tea-garden coolies into slaver}-. However, they might
do so for the purposeof selling those unfortunate cooliesasslaves, but hardlywith the object of sacrificingthem
to oneof theirdeities.
3 Very oftenthe first part of similar compound-names of Indian deities contains the proper name of the
person who put up that particular image. Thus, to mention one single instance instead of many, at Belamla,
inthe Rajshahi Districtof Eastern Bengal, are two ImgaSt one called GopeS'vara, and the other Kantes'uara.
Now, as we know that each of them has been put up, only acouple ofhundredyears ago, by a person called
Gopihdntih E is evident that each word has been formed with one of the two parts of Gopik^nta's name, and
we mustaccordinglytranslatebothwords alike, as “thelirtga, putup by Gopikanta.'’
E

—
26 a;<ch/«ological rkport.
It is, of course, impossible to say, who this person, called la-nira, may have
been; however, it seems worth mentioning, that in the Bhagavata Purana, lo, 59, 12
I quote from Bohtlingk and Roth’s Sanskrit Dictionary lamra is the name of one of
the sons of Naraka, the famous mythical king of Pragjyotisa, to whom allusion has
been made in the beginning of this article. This explanation of the word
Tmiresvari, at the same time, helps us to a proper understanding of the modern
English name, “ Copper Temple,” for tamra, as is well known, means “ copper ” in
Sanskrit, and the legend of the temple originally having been covered with copper,
almost certainly sprang out of a misunderstanding of the word Tamre'%varl, the name
of the goddess worshipped inside the temple. It is needless to say that no copper
has been left anywhere close to the temple, and the clamps holding the stones
together are all of iron.
As will be seen from the two illustrations in Figs. 4 and 5, the Copper Temple
is far beyond any possible repairs. It must have been a small shrine only, and from its
Fig, 5. Ruinedgateway of Copper TemplOj near Sadiya.
position in a remote corner of the area marking the site of the old city of Kimdil-
nagar, we should hardly be justified in looking upon it as a very important
sanctuary perhaps it was nothing more than a small family chapel, used by the
;
ancient rulers of Bhismaknagar for their private devotion. As will be seen from the
illustration of the ruined gateway of the temple in Fig, one of the jambs had carved
5,
—
upon it an image of Siva who acted here as a dvdrapala or guardian of the temple.
Far more interesting than this small temple, were a number of carved tiles,
which w'-ere fixed into all the inner sides of the city wall, except the eastern
one. The number found by me amounted to sixteen, of which twelve were

—
; , , ;
CONSRRVATIOX I\ ASSAM.
2y
still in situ, the balance being recovered from the liebris and mud in front of
—
the wall. Could I have devoted more than a few hours to this digging, which,
by the way, had to be done with implements prepared from wood, — I have no
doubt but that it would have been possible to recover some more tiles from the debris.
However, they probably would have been found in small fragments only, like some
of those dug out by me. and moreover, it was absolutely out of the question to camp
anywhere in the jungle, except on the bed of the river, which was a good distance
off the Copper Temple and the ancient city of Bhismaknagar.
Nine of the best specimens of tiles are shown on Plate VIII. Generally speaking,
the carvings represent figures of men, animals, birds, flowers and geometrical patterns^
evidently without any symbolical meaning attached to them, whether religious or
otherwise. The style is of the semi-barbarian kind, as in the carvings at Dimapur
and other places in Assam. As instances of this, I may refer to the figure of a tiger
or lion (Plate VHI, 5), ^vhich is very similar in treatment to the figure of a lion
mounting on an elephant, seen on the broken V-columns from Dimapur. The type,
of course, is Indian and only too common in mediaeval Indian Art, but the design,
especially of the mane and tail, in the Assam figures is peculiar. The peacocks, of
which two are represented on another tile (Plate VIII, 4), with their bodies twisted
around each other, are also a favourite device on the Dimapur columns and the orna-
;
mental pattern of the tile No. 7 in the following list, occurs again on some of the
V-columns in the newly-discovered third group of pillars at Dimapur. The following
is a descriptive list of the carvings represented on the tiles :
(i) bearded man, dancing, holding staff in right hand, and unknown object in uplifted
left hand, see Plate VIII ^ i ;
T) beardless man, with conical cap, running, holding spear in right hand; dagger
fastened to left side of girdle ; see Plate VIII ^ 2 ;
pair of dancers; their uplifted right hands hold some sort of musical instrument
(3) (?) :
the left hands, holding a stick, rest on the hip; perforated ears; eyes and mouths
wide open snub noses and hair arranged in strands ending in spirals see
; ; ;
Plate VIII, j;
two peacocks, with their bodies twisted around each other small tree or flower on
(4) ;
each side; see Plate VIII, 4 ;
f5) lion or tiger, standing against tree, with forelegs uplifted ; tongue protruding from
mouth tail ending in a cluster of five bunches of hair see Plate VIII, 5
; ;
(6) horse, with saddle and bridle; see Plate VIII, 6 ;
(7) circle, formed by two lines, with dots between ; inside ornament, formed by twisting
a rope or cord into four larger and many smaller irregular circles or ellipses
;
(5) plant, with five long, pointed leaves ;
two squares, laid crosswise into each other; corners filled with ornamental sprigs;
(g)
in inner square, ornamental flower, with four small and four large petals
;
(10) group of four flowers ; the largest one is cup-shaped, with four leaves or petals on
each side two small flowers below, and a bud, rising over largest flower
; ;
(11) lotus-shaped ornament, with eight petals arranged around circle in centre, having
cluster of nine drops see Plate VIII, y
;
(12) falcon carrying heron ; see Plate VIII, S
dancing figure; right hand uplifted, left hand resting on hip; head resembles
(13)
those of dancers on tile No. 3 ; broken; see Plate VIII p;
irq) five fragments, making up half the original tile, which evidently had a hird,„
resembling a cock, as ornament;
E 2

a
28 ARCH/EOLOGICAL report.
(15) fabulous bird, with pointed crest ; I am unable to suggest what kind of bird this
is two pieces corner missing
; ; ; n
(16) three pieces ; lotus-shaped ornament, similar to that in tile No. ; inside, circle
formed by two lines.
It seems impossible at present to offer any suggestion as to the age of the remains
to which these curious tiles belong. We are left in complete Ignorance about the
period when the ancient city of Bhismaknagar was inhabited, and about the nation
or tribe who used it as the seat of their government, 1 may notice, however,
another fact, which confirms me in the opinion that the country east of Sadiya,
was at a former time better known to, and in closer touch with, the Aryan population
of Northern India than at present. When I travelled up the river from Sadiya
to Bhismaknagar, I met with numbers of Panjabis going in the same direction.
Panjabi milkmen were selling milk to their countrymen all along the river-bed, and
small marts had been established at various places where I halted. On enquiry,
P
I was informed that somewhere in that direction is a locality, called arasjLrame-
ivara-tlrtha. It was described to me as a sort of waterfall, formed by one of
the many arms of the river up there, perhaps something like the " Hardvar
of the Brahmaputra,” where that river turns down to the plains. The knowledge
of this secluded spot, coupled with the fact that it annually attracts a number of
pilgrims from such remote distances as the Panjab, certainly goes to show that,
at one time, the country east of Sadiya was not, as at present, so very much out of
the reach of civilisation, and it seems natural to surmise that the establishment
P
of ara'suramesvar as a regular place of pilgrimage, a sacred tirtha to the Hindus,
dates from a time when the ancient city of Bhismaknagar was inhabited, and formed,
perhaps, the seat of the Governor of one of the frontier provinces of Assam, the
Koflapala of the Kingdom of Prdgjyotisa, as his title then may have been.
T. Bloch.

CONSEEVATION IK ASSAM

SOME CONSERVATION WORKS
IN BURMA.
I ''HE total amount of expenditure incurred on archaeological works during the year
1906-07 was Ri,25,930, as compared with R72,rs3 expended in the previous
year. Of this amount, Rio,000 was a contribution from the Imperial grant towards
the restoration of the Spire of the Palace at Mandalay. The bulk of the expenditure
was incurred at two centres, namely, R93,95o at Mandalay, and R28,039 at Pagan,
The former represents the religious and ceremonial architecture ofthe Burmans designed
and executed in wood, while at Pagan are congregated masonr)' temples and shrines,
whose prototypes may be looked for in China, Tibet, India, and Ceylon. At Mandalay,
R8o,620 was devoted to the repair and restoration of the buildings connected with the
Palace and, in view of the possible risk of fire, an additional sum of R6,84o
;
was spent on the construction of a set of models of the Palace buildings and on the
erection of a shed of harmonious architecture to house them.
Of the buildings repaired at Pagan during the past year, the most interesting are
the Ngakywe Nadaung and Petleik Pagodas. Both are of unpretentious dimensions,
and the architecture of the first bespeaks its Chinese origin. It probably antedates the
introduction of the Southern School of Buddhism into Pagan in the eleventh century
A. D. It is bulbous in shape, and is crowned by a small chamber, now roofless,
which apparently served as the Sanctum. The striking peculiarity of this shrine is
that its face bricks were moulded to size, were well finished and well baked, and
dipped in a kind of green glaze, which cannot now be reproduced. The Petleikpaya
or the “ Pagoda of the curling leaf ” has, around it, an ambulatory corridor, the w'alls
of which, both inside and outside, are decorated with double rows of square terra-cotta
reliefs, illustrating a variety of scenes In the life of the Buddha during his former
existences. The figures are vigorously modelled and almost as sharp and clear now
as when they left the kiln. Their legends, too, which are in the Pali character, are
cut clean and distinct, so that every letter that remains of them is easily decipherable.
While they afford us authentic and reliable records of the orthodox Buddhist icono-
graphy of the eleventh century, they also furnish us with specimens of art of no mean
order.
At Pagan, there are Cave Temples, which were intended to be a combined chapel
and residence in the torrid climate of the locality. Some are built against the
precipitous sides of ravnies, w'hile others are hollowed out of sand dunes of alluvial

: ; ;
ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
30
formation, which are numerous in the neighbourhood, thereby indicating that the
channel of the river Irrawaddy has changed its course westward. The Kyaukku
Onhmin and the Thamiwhet Onhmin were selected as representative types, and were
repaired by the Public Works Department.
For the first time in the history of the Archaeological Department, which wms
created in 1899, conservation works were undertaken at Ava, which was the capital
of Burma for nearly four centuries, namely, from 1364 to when it was
captured by the Takings. A sum of 81,585 was expended on repairing the Watch
Tower attached to the Palace, and a masonry monastery called the Okkyaung.
Of the monuments selected for conservation during the year 1906-07, a descrip-
—
tion is given below' of the following : The Seinnyet and Sapada Pagodas, Pagan
(Plate IX) the Mahabodhi Pagoda and Bidagat Talk or Library, Pagan (Plate X)
the Okkyaung Monastery, Ava (Plate XI); and the Shwenandaw and Salin
Monasteries, Mandalay.
Situated half-way between the villages of Myinpagan and Thiyipyitsaya, which
w'ere, at one time, centres of Taking and Indian influence, the Seinnyet Pagoda, a
cylindrical structure of the eleventh century, represents a distinct stage in the develop-
ment of Buddhist religious architecture in Burma, and reflects the streams of
influences from China, Tibet, and Ceylon. In this connection, the following Chinese
explanation of the symbolism of the different component parts of a pagoda is of great
interest
“ A jew-elled pagoda, paofa, of portentous dimensions is supposed, in the Buddhist
Cosmos, to tower upwards from the central peak of the sacred Mount Meru, to*
pierce the loftiest heaven, and to illuminate the boundless ether with effulgent rays
proceeding from the three jewels of the law and the revolving wheel with which it is
crowned. Speculative symbolism of this kind is carried out in the form of the
pagoda. The base, four-sided, represents the abode of the four Mahdrdjds, the
great guardian Kiings of the four quarters, whose figures are seen enthroned here
within the open arches. The centre, octagonal, represents the Tushita heaven, with
eight celestial gods, Indra, Agni and the rest, standing outside as protectors of the
eight points of the compass; this is the paradise of the Bodhisats prior to their final
descent to the human world as Buddhas, and Maitreya, the coming Buddha, dwells
here. The upper storey, circular in form, represents the highest heaven in wTich the
Buddhas reside after attaining complete enlightenment the figures in niches are the
;
five celestial Buddhas, or Jinas, seated on lotus pedestals.”^
A detailed examination of the Seinnyet Pagoda shows its mixed origin, in which
the Chinese element preponderates. Unlike the Shwesandaw Pagoda at Pagan, and
the Sinbyume Paya at Ivlingun, each of which has five receding terraces representing
the five-fold division of Mount Meru, it rests on a triple square basement, which
symbolises the abode oi the four Mahardjas. At each corner of the first terrace, is
a small Chaitya resting on a high plinth. Each corner of the second terrace is
decorated by an ornament, which looks like a flower-vase or relic-casket, and which is
guarded by the figure of a lion w'ith distinctly Chinese features, while the correspond-
^ Bushell’s Chinese Art, Volume i, page 62.

”
SOME COXSERX'ATION WORKS IN’ BURM.v. 31
ing decoration on the third terrace is a stunted Chaifya guarded bv the figure of an
animal, whose remains indicate it to be a winged dragon. All the three terraces are
fringed with miniature battlements, and are embellished with mouldings in brick and
plaster, which are a characteristic feature of the basement of all Burmese religious
and ceremonial structures. Then comes the octagonal band encircling the building,
which represents the Tushifa heaven, the abode of all Bodhisats or Buddhas in
embryo but the eight gods Indra, Agni and others, each of whom protects a point
;
of the compass, are absent. The next tier is a circular moulding, which the Burmans
call the “ Kyi-waing '' or circular band of copper, but which, the Chinese say, repre-
sents the highest empyrean, where Buddhas dwell after fulfilling their sacred mission
on earth. Next succeeds the or bell-shaped dome, near whose
rim is a circle of small battlements, surmounted by a double band of lotus petals.
The dome is bisected by a bold moulding, and to the upper fringe of the lower half is
attached a row of ogres disgorging chaplets of pearls, a form of ornamentation which
is very common in Tibet.^ Right across the bisectional moulding are small niches
facing the cardinal points, which are crowned by miniature structures resembling the
Temple at Bodh Gaya. In each niche sits enshrined the small figure of a Buddha of
exquisite proportions in a preaching attitude. The figuresrepresent Kakusandha, Ko-
nagamana, Kassapa, and Gautama. In China, Metteyya or Maitreya, the Buddhist
Messiah to come, is acknowledged and adored ; but, at the present time, he has no
votaries in Burma. The upper half of the dome is decorated with a band of lotus,
petals, and is surmounted by a foliated capital, which takes the place of a dhatu-
gabbha” or relic chamber in a Sinhalese pagoda. The whole shrine is crowned by a
sikkhdra or gradually attenuate spire with eleven concentric circles, which assume
a slightly different form in tlie Sapada Pagoda, which was built on the model of a
Sinhalese Dagoba (fig. b, Plate X\TI).
The expenditure incurredonthe conservation of this Pagoda was R3,g5o. Neces-
sary repairs were executed to the terraces and the battlements, to the small subsidiary
Chaityas, the foliated capital, and the sikkhdra. On the eastern face, a hole made by
treasure-hunters was arched up, so as to disclose a smaller shrine encased within the
larger structure, as in the case of many other pagodas.
In the following century, that is, the twelfth, the Sapada Pagoda was built by a
Burmese monk of the same name, who received his ordination in Ceylon and who
founded a sect at Pagan during the reign of Narapatisithu (i 167-1204 A.D.). It is
the prototype of similar structures in the Province, and is a landmark in the history of
Buddhism, as it commemorates the religious intercourse between Burma and Ceylon.
It rests on a raisedplatform of 88 feet square, andaccesstoit is obtained by emans of
stairways on the eastern and western sides. Its distinctive features are the circular form
of its three terraces, the absence of ogres’ heads on the bell-shaped dome, the square
capital, which is the relic-chamber, and the conical sikkhdra ornamented with seven
concentric mouldings. The retaining walls and the platform were strengthened, the
mouldings on the terraces, the relic-chamber, and the sikkhdra w^ere repaired, and the
patches of the existing plaster w’ere edged wdth cement mortar, thewholew’ork costing
R2,i48.
^Also in India from the earlie^^t period. [Ed.]

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
32
The Mah^bodhi Pagoda is still an object of worship and is in an excellent state of
preservation It was built by King Nandaungmya in 1198 A.D., after the model of
the Temple at Bodh Gaya in Bengal, and is the only specimen of its class to be found
in Burma. According to tradition, a cutting from the original Bodhi tree was planted
at the back of the Temple, but it died. In front, is a wooden chapel, which will be
repaired. The central pyramidal spire, surmounted by an attenuated sikkhdra, rests
on a rectangular terrace, which enshrines a huge image of Buddha in a sittingattitude.
The walls of the terrace and the sides of the spire are cut into square panels, each of
which contains a figure of Buddha in one of the conventional attitudes, sitting, standing,
or recumbent. It is interestingto note that the upper portion of the terrace is deco-
rated by a frieze of ogres’ heads disgorging chaplets of pearls, and that, within the
enclosure, have been found traces of subsidiary buildings commemorative of the
Seven Attitudes ” of Buddha, assumed by him immediately after his attainment of
enlightenment. The repairs executed, which cost R681, were of a petty nature, and
consisted of inserting drainage pipes on the terrace, making the whole structure water-
tight, and of restoring low circuit walls to keep out cattle.
The Bidagat Talk or Library (fig. b, Plate X is one of the buildings selected for
)
conservation, but no work had yet been begun on it, when the year closed. It is a
masonry building measuring 51 feet square, with three stairways on its eastern face.
Inside, there is a central chamber, with an ambulatory corridor around it, in which
Buddhist manuscripts on palm leaf were, at one time, kept. Light and ventilation are
afforded by means of three perforated stone window.s on each of the sides other than
the eastern. Its architectural interest lies in its approximate simulation of forms in
wood, in that it is covered by five multiple roofs .surmounted by a duhikd or elongated
capital, like the Mandalay Palace Spire, and ornamented with peacock-like finials in
plaster carving. Its historical interest resides in the fact that it housed the thirty
elephant-loads of Buddhist scriptures in Pali, which Anawrata brought away from
Thaton in 1058 A.D., and that it was repaired in 1 178 A.D. by King Bodawpaya of
the Alompra dynasty.
The simulation of wooden forms of architecture in masonry reaches its highest
development in the Okkyaung (Plate XI), a monastery at Ava, built, in i8i8 A.D., by
Nanmadaw Me Nu, the famous Chief Queen of Bagyidaw, for her religious preceptor,
the Nyaunggan Sadaw. Shattered by the earthquake of 1838, it lay in ruins till 1873
when it was restored to its pristine splendour by Sinbyum.ayin, Queen of Mindon and
daughter of Nanmadaw Me Nu. Originally intended as the “Lodge” for the
“ Sadaw ’ or Master, it was constructed on a low elevation, and was surrounded by
the residential quarters of junior monks. It is a rectangular structure of 140 b^ 100
feet and is supported by masonry pillars on the inside, and by arches on the outside,
which are 10 feet high. The main building (PI. XI, a) is covered by three receding
roofs, the topmost of which is crowned by a sikkhdra, while the Chapel (XI,
is a superb structure with seven roofs. The monastery nestles amidst a grove of
trees, and strikes one with its harmony, proportion and symmetry, and with its air
of calm repose. The Public Works Department has estimated the cost of its repair
at Ri,i66, and work on it will soon be commenced.
Mandalay, the centre of wooden architecture, is represented in this article by two

SOME CONSERVATION WORKS IN BURMA.
33
buildings, namely, the Shwenandaw Kyaung and the Salin Monastery. The architec-
ture of the former compares very favourably with that of the Queen’s Monastery.
It was built by King Thibaw in i88o, mainly of materials obtained by dismantling the
apartment occupied by his father, Mindon, just before his death, at a cost of about
one lakh and twenty thousand rupees. Being a memorial to a great ruler, time, labour,
and expense were utterly disregarded, and the entire building was heavily gilt and
adorned with kashi or glass mosaic work. The petty repairs, which cost only R724,
consisted of making the roof water-tight, strengthening the verandah flooring, and
renewing, by means of splicing, some of the wooden posts.
The Salin Monastery, which was built by the Salin Princess in 1876, is generally
regarded as having the best carving in Burma. Happily, it was notgilt, thereby facili-
tating the work of preservation by means of earth-oil. Both the roof and flooring were
strengthened and made water-tight, and the rotten ends of the rafters were cut away,
the cost of repairs amounting to R2,845. Among the carved figures, Indra, in his
various attitudes, predominates, and the effect of the carving is much heightened by
symmetrical geometrical designs, and by bold arabesque work.
Taw Sein Ko.

EXPLORATION AND RESEARCH.
N the field of exploration, the two most important undertakings of the year have
I been those at Kasia and Sarnath, both of which sites are now' being exhaustively
'examined. At the Maths,-Kuar-ka, Kdt^ close to Kasia, Dr. Vogel has now completely
laid bare the whole ofthe large monastery already partly exhumed in previous years,
and has continued the excavation of the earlier monastery, which now proves to
extend over all the south-west portion of the mound. Among the objects found in
this earlier monastery were a fragmentary record of the early Kushana period and a
broken Buddha statue with a votive inscription in characters of the sixth century,
while in front of it was turned up a gold coin of Chandragupta II Vikramaditya. From
the evidence of these and previous finds. Dr. Vogel conjectures that this monastery
dates back to the first century of our era, that it was in occupation in the days of
the earlier Guptas, and that it was destroyed towards the end of the sixth century.
Besides excavating these two monasteries, Dr. Vogel has also unearthed a
number of smaller monuments, mostly stupas, to the south of the central shrine, and
three larger buildings in the ground recently acquired by Government outside the
mound proper. Oneof these buildings is a typical monastery the other tw'O may
;
have been meant for the accommodation of pilgrims.
The minor finds made during the past season include some 500 or more clay
:sealings, broken or complete, of which 464 belong to the “ Convent of the Great
Decease,” 9 to other monastic establishments, and the rest to private individuals.
In my annual Report for 1905-6 Dr. Vogel pointed out that the presence of sealings
in .such preponderating numbers from the " Convent of the Great Decease ” could not
but suggest avery close connectionbetween the Kasia Sangharama and that convent,
while at the same time they cast doubt on the supposed identity of the two buildings,
for it is difficultto see for what other purpose but that of letters so many seals could
have beenused. If, then, Kasia does not represent Kusinara, the question naturally
.ariseswhether weknow of any other ancient Sangharama with which we can identify it.
This question. Dr. Vogel thinks, is nowansweredby the discovery of aseal die nearthe
earlier monastery, bearing the inscription ^rl-Vishnudvlpa-vihare hhikshusanghasya,
“ of the community of friars at the convent of Holy Vishnudvipa.” Vishnudvipa
corresponds with the Vethadipa of the Pali books, and Dr. Vogel is now of opinion
that the remains at Kasia represent the ancient Vethadipa,which received a portion of

EXPLORATION AND RESEARCIL
35
therelics of Buddha after the maha'pariniroana. No doubt the evidence of this die
is of avery tangible nature at thesame time it must be conceded, as Dr. \'ogel himself
;
realises, that the die in question might easily have been brought from elsewhere, and,
until further confirmatory evidence is forthcoming, we cannot look upon the question
as settled. There yet remain to be examined at Kasia two important siilfas, the
Ramahhar stupa and the one on the Matha-Kuar-ka-Kot, besides a number of other
edifices, and it is not too much to hope that something or other will be found which
will settle thematter bevond dispute.
In continuing the operations at Sarnath we had before us tw'o main purposes
:
first, to deepen the excavations in the immediate vicinity of the Main Shrine after
cutting through the concrete pavement secondly, to wnden out the excavations in all
;
directions. Prominent among the buildings which have come to light near the Main
Shrine, is a group of admirably constructed stupas close by its south-west corner and
;
not far from them, but at a still tower level, has also been found part of the plinth
of a much larger structure, which, how'ever, has still to be followed up. The stone
pavement, which had been parti}' laid bare around the A§6ka column in the previous
season, proved to be composed mainly of slabs cut from a railing of decadent Mauryan
style, and it may be surmised that this depression was purposely made, at a time W'hen
the ground around had risen, to keep the inscription open to view. On the east, this
pavement ends in three steps rising to the level of the concrete floor above.
Most of the area excavated under the floor, to the east ofthe Main Shrine, is
occupied by a large rectangular chamber or court, with a variety of other structures
adjoining it. This chamber was surrounded on three sides by a stone railing of
Mauryan date, built into the brickw'ork of the walls. Much of this railing has, un-
fortunately, perished, but the position of all the columns and crossbars is clearly
marked by indentations in the brickwork. One of the coping-stones belonging to
this railing was, according to a monumental Prakrit inscription incised on it in the
Brahmi character, presented by a nun named Savahika w'hile a short column found
;
close by appears, from two Kushana or early Gupta epigraphs carved on it, to have
A
been used as a lamp-holder in a gandhakufl. second column bears two Sanskrit
inscriptions in the same script as the above, from which it seems that it was the gift
of a monk named Bodhishena and w'as afterwards converted into a lamp-post by a
certain layman named Bhavarudra,
Among the small antiquities found below the concrete floor may be noticed an
interesting capital wdth Perso-Ionic volutes, and another capital belongingto the
Mauryan period, decorated on one side with a group of dharmachakra and triratna
symbols, and with the Bodhi tree overhung with garlands, the Vajrasana, and a
column wnth Persepolitan bell-shaped capital, on the other.
In a short article regarding these and other excavations, which I coiitributed to,
the RoyalAsiatic Society’s Journal, I statedthatnothingofalater datethan the Kushana
period had been found beneath the concrete floor, but this statement must now be
modified, as one of the blocks of the stone pavement around the A§oka column proves
to have been taken from an early Gupta building, and the lowest layer of the concrete
floor above it can, therefore, hardly be earlier than the later Gupta epoch.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
36
Further out, and beyond the limits of the concrete floor, our excavations were
carried to a considerable distance on every side of the Main Shrine, for the most part
down to the level,,approximately, of the concrete floor, but descending deeper in
places. The majority of the architectural remains unearthed consisted, as we natur-
ally expected, of small chapels and stupas, the largest group of which (comprising
more than fifty structures) lies to the west of the M ain Shrine. A smaller, but more
ancient and interesting, group came to light at some distance to the north-east. That
this group marks some exceptionally hallowed spot seems certain, not only from the
fact that the stufas there are crowded together more thickly than anywhere else, but
also from the fact that they have been added to and built over, time and again.
Several of these stupas are of peculiar importance, because within the outer and later
shells the earlier structures are to be found in practically perfect preservation, while
the relic-chambers in others have yielded numbers of sculptures and tablets of sun-
burnt clay.
But the most attractive of the structures brought to light this year is a large
monastery (for there can be little doubt about its character) away to the north-east,
beyond the group of stupas described above. The part of this monastery which has
so far been unearthed consists of a very fine block of buildings with a spacious
entrance facing the east, and a courtyard on the west, surrounded, we may suppose,
on the other three sides by buildings generally similar to the block already unearthed.
The basement of the monastery is of brick, admirably moulded and carved, and stand-
ing to a height of about eight feet. The superstructure was of stone massively
constructed but all of it, save the lowest courses, has fallen, and the ponderous blocks
;
are lying in great heaps over the basement and in the courtyard below. The precise
date of this building is not yet fixed, but, on the evidence of style, it may be assigned
approximately to the eleventh century A.D.
To the east of this monastery and belonging to it is a spacious court flagged with
— —
heavy pavestones, beneath which at a considerable depth is another and
much earlier monastery. Only a small portion of the western end of this second
monastery has, as yet, been exposed, but there seems little doubt thatthe structure
dates back to the Gupta period, and that it will prove to have the same general plan
as the monasteries excavated by Dr. Vogel at Kasia. Yet a third monastery, that has
been partly brought to light, is situated near the north-west corner of the site. Its
construction is much the same as that of the second monastery, and the upper parts
-of its walls belong at any rate to the same period the lower parts are referable to an
;
•earlier date. -
It thus becomes apparent that in the Gupta period, and probably in earlier
ages as well, the northern side of the Sarnath site was occupied by a row of monas-
teries, and that on their ruins was afterwards erected the large monastery first de-
-scribed, which seems to have been sufficiently large to extend over them all.
It is unnecessary in this place to notice any of the detached sculptures or
minor antiquities found in these monasteries or in other parts of the site above the level
of the concrete floor. The fact which our discoveries have now made abundantly
•clear, is that the most important building age at Sarnath was the age of the Imperial
Guptas; yet mote, they establish the existence of an important and wide-reaching

EXPLORATION AND RESEARCH.
37
•school of sculpture at that epoch, and open up for us an almost new chapter in the
history of Indian art. Specimens of Gupta architecture and sculpture have, of
course, been known to us for many years past, from different sites in Northern and
Western India, but how little the essential characteristics of this school have hitherto
ibeen understood, may be gauged from the fact that one of the finest examples of
Gupta art has been generally assigned (on the authority of Fergusson)' to the
eleventh century of our era- I refer to the Dhamekh Stupa at Sarnath. Of the
Gupta origin of this famous monument there can now' no longer be a shadow of a
doubt for there is not a motif in its decoration w'hich does not find an exact counter-
;
part in one or other of the Gupta sculptures recently unearthed. This, however, is a
subject w’hich will deserve to be specially dealt wdth w'hen the excavations are more
advanced.
In the Frontier Province some very valuable discoveries were made by Dr. D. B.
Spooner in a small and insignificant mound at the village of Sahribahlol, near the foot
of Takht-i-Bahai, which he found the villagers exploiting for sculptures. “ Of the
architectural finds made in this mound,” says Dr. Spooner, “ the most interesting
was a little stilpa measuring six feet square. The three friezes on the sides are made
up of elephants and Atlases alternating. When first uncovered these w'ere in nearly
perfect condition, but unfortunatelysome person or persons demolished them in our
absence, and before it was possible to photograph them, asthe stupa had been only
partially uncovered at that time. Perhaps next in interest to this, was the row'’ of
standing Bodhisattva figures which we found, badly broken but still in situ, along the
front of what would appear to have been the central stupa. At either end of this row,
and set a little back from the alignment, was a seated Buddha figure; the pedestal of
•one of them was particularly noteworthy for the delicacy and intricacy of its pattern,
.and for the unusual naturalness in the postures of the many tiny animals it contained.
It was among the debris ofthebuilding behindthese statues, and alongthe westernmost
side of the mound, w'here a line of chapels may have stood, that the major portion of
our sculptures w'ere obtained. These are of all sizes and of various degrees of
excellence, and, moreover, in a variety of materials, stone, and stucco, and what
-might be called stucco-faced, where the figure is a mere stucco shell filled with soft
earth. The most remarkable example of this kind was an apparently female head
some six inches in height, wearing an elaborate fringe of curls and adorned with a
curious lofty crown with well-defined points. The plaster of which this is made
is singularly white and delicate, and only about 75 of an inch in thickness. The
modelling is distinctly inferior, but the w'hole is of great interest, nevertheless. Taking
the sculptures as a whole, I have no hesitation in ascribing them to one of the very
best periods of the Gandhara school. The numerous heads found, both stone and
stucco, compare very favourably with those in any other collections, and a few of the
larger pieces—such for example, as one or tw'o of the seated Buddha figures and the
—
Kubera and HaritI statue would seem inferior to few, if any, of the sculptures of this
school yet found. Another point of interest is the large number of well-defined
1 See Indian andEaHern Architecture, pp. 66-8. Sir A. Cunningham's earlier opinionhas now been com-
^pletely vindicated.

38 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
We
Bodhlsattva types encountered. have several distinct types, repeated vrith great
fidelity to detail, especially in the case of the head-dresses, so that the conviction is
forced upon one that they must have been intended to represent individual and
particular Bodhisattvas. That, with increased material, further study will lead to a
satisfactory differentiation of these figures, seems reasonable to expect. And, judging
by these Sahribahlol finds, the head-dress will prove to be of special significance in
any such enquiry. One is reminded of the passage in the Amitayiirdhyanasutra :
‘ All beings can recognize either of the two Bodhisattvas (Avalokitesvara and
Mahasthama) by simply glancing at the marks of their heads.’^
‘‘ Among the fragmentary sculptures one small piece in particular calls for
A
mention. mere broken piece of a stone halo, it still preserved its ancient coating of
stucco, and this in turn its original painted design, a pattern of radiating rays in gold
on a brilliant red background. Many of the sculptures showed traces of colouring or
gilding, and some of them elaborate traces, but none of any such interest as this little
fragment.
“ Of the monastic quadrangleto the east ofthegreatwall, which divided the mound
from north to south into two nearly equal halves, there is little need to speak here.
The finds from this side were naturally fewand of comparatively slight interest, except a
couple of copper spoons of excellent design, and a metal leaf still retaining the bril-
liant colouring with which it w'as originally adorned. The usual arrangement of cells
was found, the only noticeable thing about them being that they were all built of
extremly kachcha walls, mere unshapen earth mixed with the crushed ends ofgrain left
after threshing, Even the fine stone foundationsof the outside walls of this quadrangle,
fully four feet wide, show traces of having been built up originally in the same way.
But, that wood was used somewhere in the construction, presumably in the roofing,
seems certain from the large quantity of charcoal found here and there in the debris,
which points also to fire as the primary agent in the destruction of the place. The
centre of this quadrangle, however, presents an unexpected feature of considerable
interest, namely, another quadrangle, also in stone, which appears, from the presence
of a drain leading to the south, to have been a central tank. The curious thing about
this, however, is that the outer side is broken into a number of deep bays, whose pur-
pose It is difficult to determine. Possibly further excavations in the neighbourhood
wdll throw some light on the problem.”
Another excavation that has yielded results of much value for the history of
Buddhist iconographic art is that of the Pet-leak-paya, or ' Pagoda of the curling
leaf, at Pagan, in Burma. This pagoda, as well as another one close by known
it,
locally as the ‘ Elder Sister,’ had attracted my attention some time ago, by reason of
its peculiar shape and character, which distinguished it from those around and pointed
to an earlier origin. As only its superstructure was then visible above ground, made
I
arrangements for the removal of all the debris which enveloped its base, though, when
I did so, I had little idea that under this debris would be found such a treasure-house
of relics as has now come to light. As the structure now stands, it can, on the
strength of epigraphical and other evidence, be assigned with some confidenc’e to the
1 .S'. B. E., vol. xlix, p. 187, para. 21, Takakusu’stranslation.

EXPLORATION AND RESEARCH.
39
period of Anawrata—that is, to the time of the Norman conquest of England but
;
-at one or two places, where the brickwork of the basement has broken away, the
mouldings of an older structure can be traced beneath. This fact is of some interest,
because it confirms a supposition, already formed on other and stronger grounds, that
Buddhist buildings existed at Pagan before the reign of Anawrata, and that that
monarch was responsible, not for the introduction, but for the development of that
religion in Upper Burma
Around the Pagoda proper excavations have now revealed the existence of an
arched corridor or ambulatory, the walls of which, both inside and outside, are decora-
ted with double rows of square terra-cotta reliefs, illustrating a variety of scenes in
the life of the Buddha during his former existences,
Illustrations of these Jataka stories from the mediaeval epoch were not altogether
unknown in Burma before the present find, for there is quite a long series of them on
the Ananda and Shw’ezigon Pagodas at Pagan but these illustrations were executed
;
on enamelled tiles of Chinese manufacture, the technique of which was of the coarsest
description, and their surface, besides, has been much damaged by age and illtreat-
ment so that it is well nigh impossible in many cases to make out even the figures,
;
while as often as not the legends they bear are quite illegible. In the new Pet-leak-
paya plaques, on the other hand, the figures are vigorously modelled and almost as
sharp and clear now as when they left the kiln. Their inscriptions, too, which are in
the Pali character, are cut clean and distinct, so that every letter that remains of them
is easily decipherable. The various stories, of course, are handled in the conventional
manner of the day, and, as a result, cannot avoid a stereotyped appearance but this
;
notwithstanding, the spirited touch of the artist shows itself in much of the modelling.
“ The custom,” writes Dr. Konow, “ of decorating stupas with illustrations from
We
the Jatakas is, of course, a very old one in India. meet with it both at Bharhut
and Sanchi and in the Gandhara sculptures. There would seem to be several distinct
schools represented in these illustrations for in the Gandhara sculptures the story
;
depicted differs from that found in Central India; while a third school can probably
be distinguished in Burma, though it is too early to state this definitely before all the
plaques have been carefully examined- So far, however, as I can see now, there is
little probability of these Burmese plaques becoming of importance for the identifica-
tion of sculptures on old Indian stupas. They will, on the other hand, certainly prove
of great interest for the history of mediaeval Buddhist iconography. The conven-
tional and stereotyped character of the representation of the Jataka scenes makes it
probable that parallels may some day be traced in India.
“The names of the Jatakas, and their numbers, broadly agree with Fausboll’s
edition, just as is the case with the Mangalacheti plaques. This fact is of interest,
because it shows that the Jatakas were told in Pagan in the form in which they occur
in the Jataka-commentary of Ceylon. In some few cases there is, it is true, a slight
•difference between Fausboll’s edition and our plaques. Thus, Jataka 296, which is
ealled the Samuddajataka in Fausboll’s manuscripts, here occurs under the name of
Anantapayijataka, taken from the beginning of the second gatha of the tale. This
discrepancy in the names of the Jatakas is no new fact. It is not greater than that
-which exists inthe various manuscripts made use of by Professor Famsboll.

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
40
“ Of Still greater interest is the fact that the Pet-leak plaques portray some
Jatakas which do not occur in Fausboll’s manuscripts, So far as I have been able to
examine the plaques, it appears that the titles and numbers closely agree with Faus-
boll’s edition up to Jataka 496, the Bhikkhaparamparajataha. But here the plaques
insert three new Jatakas, the Velama (497), the Mahagovinda (498), and the
Sumcdhapandita-jatakas (499). The Matangajataka, which is No. 497 in Fausboll’s
edition, is accordingly No. 500 in the Pet-leak collection. Then the numbering runs
on in the same way in both series up to the Ntmijataka {¥a.\ishb][
544), after which a new Jataka, the Mahosadhajataka, is again inserted, as No. 545.
Velama is mentioned in the introduction to the Khadirangarajataka (J.A., i, p. 228) ,-
Mahagovinda, Sumcdhapandita, and Mahosadha are all mentioned as Bodhisattas in
the Niddnakatha. We do not know why the tales about the Buddha’s doings in
these births have not been incorporated in the recension of the Jatakas published by
Fausboll. The Pet-leak plaques show that they were all found in the collection of
birth-stories current in Pagan at the time when the Pet-leak pagoda was erected.
\¥e are unable as yet to determinewith certainty when this was done, but it cannot well
have been later than the reign of King Anawrata, for votive tablets bearing his name
have been unearthed together with the plaques.
“ Several hundred of these Jataka illustrations have already been found at the
Pet-leak pagoda, and, as the sister pagoda mentioned above, which appears to be of
an almost precisely similar character, has still to be excavated, there is every reason
to hope that the number will be doubled before the site is exhausted
Inthe Madras Presidency, Mr. Rea has continued the excavations at Amaravatl,
described in last year’s Annual, and has unearthed there a large number of marble rails,
sculptures, inscriptions, and other miscellaneous antiquities, an account of which wall
appear in a subsequent Report. A fact of much interest connected with these dis-
coveries is that several of the inscriptions on the newly-found rail-posts date from the
Mauryan epoch, and prove thatat that early date the Buddhists were already in occu-
pation of the famous site of Amaravati.
Another discovery in the Madras Presidency that deserves notice, is that of some
ancient caves, with beds chiselled out of the rock, that haverecentlybeen foundin the
Madura and Tinnevelly Districts. One such cave, situated at Marugaltalai, ten miles
from Palamcottah, has already been known for some time. Butthe last year brought
five new ones to light inthe Madura District, one on the Anairaalai hill, six miles north-
east of Madura, and four on the Kalugumalai hill, eight miles from Melur. They
alf
appear to benatural caves with beds chiselled in the rock. The popularname forthese
beds is Pahehapandavar-padukkai, ‘the beds of the five Pandavas’, in accordance with
the common custom in these parts of attributing everything that is ancient to the
Pandavas. These caves are probably connected with the earliest history of Buddhism
inSouthernIndia. They cont^ some few inscriptions in old Brahmi character. ‘‘ The
estampages,” says Dr. Konow, “are too imperfect to make it possible to read them
and I am not even certain that they are written in monumental Prakrit, and not in a
^ R, S^, Oct. IQ07,pp. looi^ sq.

EXPLORATION AND RESEARCH.
4*
—
Dravidian dialect. One of them seems to run : Chanataritana kotupikana, which
apparently means ‘of the Chanatarita householders’. If my reading and interpretation
are correct, the form kotupikana shows certain influence of the Dravidian idiom of
the district. The alphabet is, in most characteristics, identical with that in use in the
Aioka edicts. The only point of interest is the form of the letter ma, which agrees
with that in use in old Burmese.”
In Bengal, owing to the unfortunate absence of Dr. Bloch on sick leave, the explo-
ration of Rajagriha, which had opened with such promise in the previous season, could
not be resumed. The work, however, of excavating the Black Pagoda at Konarak
continued uninterruptedly, and is now nearing its close. While the ‘ Dancing Hall ’
3XiA mandapa ofthe temple were being cleared, it was merely a matter of ladling out
sand and carting it away but as soon as the shrine was reached, the undertaking
;
entered on a farmore laborious phase, as the spire above it had long ago collapsed and
buried the sanctum in a vast heap of debris more than fifty feet high. Fortunately, it
was possible to lay down a light railway and remove all the most colossal blocks of
stone by the aid of a running crane, with the result that the work has been pushed on
this season far more rapidly than would otheryuse have been possible, and the whole of
— —
this stupendous temple all at least that remains of it is once more exposed to view.
It is, indeed, an imposing and magnificent fabric. The garbhagriha, which is still
standing to a third, roughly, of itsoriginal height, proves to be decoratedwith the same
class of erotic reliefs as the rest of the temple, but it possesses also large niches onthe
north, south, and west sides, in which statues were placed, while below them are door-
ways giving access to the shrine. Among the debris around the spire have beenfound
some twenty statues, of the same beautiful green chlorite stone that is used in the con-
struction of the temple, and of excellent workmanship. Among them may be noticed,
in particular, one of Bala-Krishna sitting in a chair which is being gently rocked by
attendant figures. The chains by which this chair is suspended are cut with such
remarkable skill that it is difficult to believe they are not of metal. Another statue in
a wonderfully fine state of preservation represents Vishnu standing on a lotus pedestal
beneath a trefoil arch. The rest of the collection comprises, among others, statues
of Surya, Vishnu, Siva, Yamaraja, Eishis, an Acharya with students round him, and
the river Ganges. An account of these important finds will appear in a later Report,
when the excavations are nearer to completion.
It remainsto mention, in conclusion, some not unimportant discoveries that have
been made in the course of the past yearwithout the help of the spade. One of these
relates to Ghatiyala, a spot of much interest about twenty-two miles west of Jodhpur.
.Here Mr. Bhandarkar foundalat or pillar, consisting ofthree separate pieces one above
the other, the whole surmounted by a capital wdth four images of Ganapati, facing the
cardinal points. On the shaft of the columnare four inscriptions, from which w« learn
that it was erected by Kakkuka, of the' feudatory Pratihara dynasty. These records
alsotell us that the old name of the place was Rohitiisakupa, and that it was infested
by Abhirasand was consequentlyleft almost desolate, butthat Kakkuka routed them
and repeopledthe place.
G

:
42 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
Another site to be noticed is that of Osia, thirty-two miles north of Jodhpur.
Round about the village are the remains of twelve temples, one of them Jaina and the
rest Vaishnava. “They resemble in style,” says Mr. Bhandarkar “those found at Eran
;
and Pathari in the Central Provinces, and Jhalrapattana and Arhvarh in Rajputana.
In a porch of the Jaina temple is an inscription which is unfortunately mutilated, but
the portion of it preserved speaks of the templeas existing in Ukesa (Osia) in the time
of Vatsaraja of the (Imperial) Pratihara dynasty. Vatsaraja is doubtless the same
prince of that name who was a contemporary of the Rashtrakuta sovereigns, Govinda
II and Dhruva, and for whom the date705 ^aka (A.D. 783) has been furnished by the
Jaina Harivathsa.” A feature worthy of remark in these temples is the prominence
given to Kubera, god of riches, who isfigured with Gane^a on the lintels of the shrine
doors, in the interior of the sancta, ontheoutside walls of the shrines, and on the front
of the raised terraces on w'hich the temples stand. Some scenes in the life of Krishna
are also depicted, such asthe uplifting of Govardhana, the release of the Elephant,
and so forth.
Two ancient temples of exactly the same style as those at Osia were also found
at Buchkala in the Bilar district, and one of them has an inscription dated Saitivat 892,
which refers itself to the reign of Srl-Nagabhatta, son of Sri-Vatsaraja. This is the
first date, furnished by an inscription, of a prince of the Imperial Pratihara dynasty
earlier than Bhoja I.
In Kashmir too a most useful piece of work has been done by Mr. Nicholls
in surveying the most important examples of the wooden architecture of that coun-
try. Practically nothing had been done in this direction by earlier archaeologists, and
a long felt want is now supplied by the carefully measured drawings which Mr.
Nicholls publishes in the present Report. This work will soon, it is hoped, be followed
by an effort to deal more accurately and exhaustively with the older stone buildings
of Kashmir. These have already been illustrated in some detail by Gen. Cunningham,
Lieutenant Cole andothers, but the plans and drawings which they have left us are,
unfortunately, as I have satisfied myself by personal observations and measurements,
full of errors, while many of the ideas that are prevalent regarding the purpose, con-
struction, and decoration of these buildings are plainly untenable.
One point only in Mr. Nicholls’ article appears to me to call for remark. In
speaking of the tomb of Madani near Srinagar, he states that its date is determined
by the inscription on the mosque bard by, which records its erection in A.D, 1444.
Mr. Nicholls is perfectly correct in ascribing the tomb to the same period as the
mosque, but be is undoubtedly wrong in assuming that the tile work on the porch
belongs to the same epoch. This is sufficiently manifest, to my mind, from a con-
-sideration of the fabric, technique and colouring of the tiles, which proclaim them
to be m of the best Mu^al period ,• but it is proved beyond dispute by another inscrip-
tion Persian, which tells us that the entrance to the tomb was added by Shah
Jahan
- Jyt
Among
the other special articles contributed to this section, I should like to
invite particular attention to Dr. Vogel’s admirable discussion of the Mathura School

EXPLORATION AND RESEARCH.
43
of Sculpture. This article is to be continued in a future Report, but one fact which
Dr. Vogel has already made abundantly clear, is that the Mathura School of Art is
largely dependent upon that of Gandhara. Let it not be supposed that the Mathura
School owed its origin, in the first instance, to Gandhara, or that either school sprang
suddenly into existence like an Athene fully armed. So far from this being the case,
the Mathura School can be shown to have existed at least as far back as the second
century B.C to which epoch several sculptures in the local Museum belong. The
,
same, also, is undoubtedly true of the Gandhara School for we must presuppose
;
for it a prolonged development under Hellenistic influences on Indian soil, before
it reached the highly conventional phase in which we know it. The important
deduction, however, which results from Dr. Vogel’s inquiries is that the MathurS
School had come under the influence of fully developed Gandhara art in the time of
the early Kushanas, and consequently that the art of Gandhara itself must be pushed
back to a considerably earlier period sufficiently far, that is, to account for the
;
relatively great decadence of the Mathura as compared with the Gandhara work.
H. Marshall.
J.

EXCAVATIONS AT KASIA.
An account of my excavations at the Matha Kuar ka Kot near Kasia in the cold
seasons of 1904-05 and i905"o6 has appeared in the Annual Reports for those
years.^ In the course of last year’s explorations it became evident that the group of
Buddhist monuments extended beyond the boundaries of the mound, covering a much
larger area than could be foreseen. 1, therefore, proposed that the excavation of the
site should be continued in the winter of 1905-06, and that a strip of land round the
mound proper should be acquired by Government, so as to enable me to explore the
outlying buildings also. Before resuming the work, it appeared necessary to remove
the debris of former excavations, which had been thrown along the outskirts of the;
mound in the supposition that these marked the limits of the site.
My proposals met with the approval of the Provineial Government, and a sum of
Rs. 3,700 was sanctioned for the work. This sum included Rs. 500 for the acquisition
of land, of which Rs. 108-14-8 was spent, the chief land-owner declining to accept any
compensation. The area of land acquired amounts to 9 acres, to which are to be
added 3 acres acquired by the Public Works Department for the removal of debris.
The mound proper which came into the possession of Government in 1893, covers
3 acres, so that the whole area now available for excavation, enclosed by a quadrangle
of 990'by 700', extends over 15 acres. For theremoval of debris Rs. 800was provided
in the estimate, but this sum proved to be sufficient only for clearing the
south-west end and a portion of the northern side of the mound, This part of the
work was done by the Public Works Department priorto my arrival at Kasia. I may
mention here that, owing to a misunderstanding, the debris was removed to a place
south-west of the mound, between the latter and the Bodhi image known as Matha
KBar, instead of being thrown outside the boundary marked by he brick wall which
had been traced in the previous season. There is no immediate intention to explore
the ground which is now covered with this ddbris, but, as it is situated within the
ancient enclosure, there exists the possibility of its containing ancient remains which
in the future it may become desirable to unearth.
After de ucting the amounts mentioned above and Rs. 200 paid to the Brahman
fujarl as compensation for loss of income derived from the Buddhist temple, there
• A. S, R., 1904-05, pp. 43ff. and 1905-06, pp. 61 ff.

EXCAVATIONS AT KASIA,
45
remains Rs. 2,470-1-1 spent on the excavations proper. This sum includes the wages
of masons employed in protecting the tops of the walls of the monastery D with
-concrete, a work which appeared necessary for the preservation of this building. The
materials were supplied and paid forby the Public Works Department, who reported the
work completedby the end of March 1907. It is intended to protect the walls of the
old monastery also by laying the upper two courses in mortar so as to prevent the
percolation of rain water and consequent disintegration.
The excavations were started on the 3rd December, 1906, and carried on without
interruptiontill the end of February. My clerk, Babu Gursaran Das Mehta, renderedme
much help in the supervision of the workmen during the first month and was left by me
in charge of the work during Christmas week, when I proceededto Benares. He had
to return to Lahore in the beginning of January owing to his transfer to the office of the
Examiner of Accounts, Public Works Department, Unfortunately my head draftsman
was prevented from joining me after Christmas owing to an eye complaint, which
necessitated his taking leave forthree months. My photographer, Ghulam Nabi, had
therefore to plot the buildings newly excavated on the general plan in addition to his
other work. Four separate drawings of these buildings were preparedby my second
draftsman, Bhura Mall.
To Mr. B. C. Lai, Executive Engineer, Gorakhpur Division, and Mr. W. C.
C. Francis, District Surveyor, both stationed at Gorakhpur, I wdsh to express my
thanks for their assistance and advice in carrying out the repairs mentioned above. As,
however, these officers can only payoccasional visitsto Kasia, it is highly desirable that
A
a sub-overseer should be stationed again at that place as in former years. special
chaukidar has now beenappointed on the site by the Public Works Department, which,
it is hoped, will prevent anywilful damage being done to the ancient buildings.
Though I felt handicapped by the reductions in my staff, the results of this year’s
excavations are by no means unsatisfactory. The excavation of thelarge monastery
D was brought to an end, the central courtyard and adjoining rows of cells being com-
pletely cleared of debris. The measures taken for the conservation of this edifice
hiave already been noted. Forks description I may refer to my previously published
reports. To the south of D an earlier monastery had been discovered and its northern
portion (L-M) explored in last year’s excavations. This building, which was found
to extend as far as the south-west end ofthe mound, has now been completely exposed.
In the course of its excavation some inscribed documents were found, which help us
approximately to fix its date. The space between the ancient monastery and the
Nirvana temple, which once formed an inner courtyard, was cleared down to the
pavement, and the exploration ofthe southern group of minor monuments continued.
The excavation of the detached monastery (E), situated to the north-east ofthe
main group of monuments which had been traced in the previous season, has likewise
been completed. To the north of the main group I found two more buildings of the
monastery type ( I and J ) adjoining each other and facing south. These two buildings
are separated from the main group by a heavy brick wall, which starts from the north-
east corner 6f monastery D and has been referred to in my previous paper. This wall
was traced fora distance of 200 feet, but as yet it is uncertain whether itis connected
with the wall running north from the main stUpa A,

archaeological report.
46
I now proceed to give a detailed account of the monuments newly unearthed, after
which the objects brought to light in the course of the work will be separately noted.
From my account of the monuments I wish to exclude the southernmost group of
buildings, as their excavation is still in course of progress, and at the piesent stagetheir
description would be attended with much uncertainty.
MONUMENTS.
—
Monastery N O.
The northern portion of the early monastery, which was excavated in 1904-05, is
composed of two distinct buildings. That to the east (L on PL XIII), opposite the
Nirvana temple, consists of fourrows each of three cells grouped round a square court-
yard, the centre of which is markedby a well. The western building (M) likewise con-
tains a court-yard, which is provided with a small water tank and enclosed to the north
and west by a series of five chambers larger in size than those of the other edifice.
M
It will be seen that both from L and a doorway leads into the southern por-
tion of the old monastery which has been excavated in the year under report. Here,
also, we notice two distinct structures, N and 0 so that thewhole of the old monastery
,
may be said to consist of four buildings adjoining each other and forming one
compact block.
The central portion, marked N, contains a rectangular space enclosed by a low
wall, which along the east side is provided with a series of depressions placed at regular
distances. We may assume that from this low wall once rose a line of wooden posts
supporting a wooden roof and thus forming an open hall. The fact that this
hall was exposed to view precludes the possibility of its having served the purpose
oi d.SdhhaAh {Skr. pdsathagara). With more probability it may be surmised
—
to represent the refectory a no less essential part of a Buddhist convent. This
supposition receives some support from the presence of two large earthenware vessels
found in situ immediately outside this hall. One of them measures 60 cm. in diame-
ter at its top.
The western side of N contains what from the plan would appear to be a series
of three cells. The walls, however, separating the supposed cells are beneath the
floor level, and, for this reason, must be either foundation walls or, more probably,
remains of some earlier structure. That in reality we have only one large room on
this side of N, follows from the circumstance that there is only one doorwav in the
centre of the east wall giving access to it from the courtyard. It should be rnentioned
here that large quantities of broken pottery were found in the corner formed by the
outer (west) wall of N and the southern wall of room M5. An iron spoon found
on the same spot would likewise seem to have served culinary purposes.
On the east side of N we find two rooms, which form, as it were, a continuation
of the eastern row of cells of L. One of these two rooms has the same shape and
nearly the same size as the entrance room, L12. In it some earthenware vessels w'ere
found, together with a clay seal-die. From their position it is evident that these
objects were in actual use whenthe buildingwas destroyed. This point is of special

EXCAVATIONS AT KASIA.
47
interest as the seal-die contains an inscription which can be approximately dated. Be-
low the floor-level were found remains of walls evidently belonging to a little shrine
which had fallen to ruins at tiie time when the monastery was built.
The southern-most portion (O) of the old monastery presents the usual arrange-
ment of a chatiili'sala with four rows of cells enclosing an inner courtyard (PI.
XIV). The building is approximately square, measuring nearly no' in each direc-
tion, and is of about the same size as the monastery of Sarnath excavated by Major
Kittoe.^ The width of the outer walls is about 5', the w'alls round the courtyard are
4' 2" and those between the cells 3' 6" w'ide. They are built of bricks measuring 14"
by 8-5" to 9" by 2" to 2-^", which is the same size as found in the early stupa plinth.
The walls are best preserved onthenorth andeast sides the north wall of room O 6
;
has the maximum height of 8' 5". They are 6' 6" high in the north-east corner of the
courtyard. Towards the south they diminish in height. Those of the southern row
of cells could only partially be traced below the original floor-level, and the outer
wall on this side has entirely disappeared. In places in rooms 0 9 and 10)
patches of plasterwere found still adhering to the walls.
The building must once have been covered with a flat, terraced roof, large pieces
of which turned up among the debris. The same, as noted in my previous report, is
the case with monastery L, but in M and N no remains of terraced roofing were found.
Here, it would seem, the material usedfor the roof wms wood. We may further sur-
mise that in O the courtyard also was partly covered over. Along its northern side we
find traces of a lowwall, which, as we have assumed in the parallel instance of L, must
have supported the wooden posts of a colonnade forming a covered passage or
verandah in front of the cells. It should be noted that the space between the wall in
question and the cells is paved with concrete, whereas the open space comprised with-
in the supposed verandah and, therefore, exposed to the rain has a pavement
of brick tiles, which in the north-west and north-east corners is partly preserved.
Towards the centre of the square some indistinct masonry remains were found, which
perhaps represent the north-wmst corner of the base of a small stupa. Some frag-
ments of bevelledbricks found here seem tobelongto such a monument.
The number of cells on each side of the building is five and their total number
consequently twenty, if we may assume that the arrangement of the southern row was
similar to that of the three w'hich are preserved. Itwill be seen that in the present
instance we do not find each row of cells separated from its neighbour by a closet, as
we have had occasion to notice indescribing the buildings D and L. Obviously those
closets were constructed in order to provide a communication between the corner
rooms and the courtyard. Inthe case of O, this object has been obtained in a simpler
manner. Whereas here also the cells in general are approximately square, measuring
about 10' in both directions, the corner chambers have an oblong shape, their length
amountingto more than double their breadth. In this manner it was possible to provide
them with doorways opening out on the courtyard. We may assume that these large-
sized corner-rooms served a different purpose from that of the cells of the ordinaiy
type. Inthe caseof thenorth-east cornerroom wehave, indeed, evidence to that effect.
The eastern side of this room is occupied by a masonry platform, 9" high, provided
Vol. I, p. 127, PlateXXXII.

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
48
with two grooves, which seem to indicate the previous existence of a wooden frame-
work. When clearing the room, a charred beam was found 13'ing from east to west.
Along the north side of the low platform just noticed there is a brick structure,
measuring \ (i' in height, 2’ 1 in width and 9^ in length, and presenting the
appearance of a bench. It is not built against the north wall of the room, but
between it and the wall there remains a narrow space, apparently a drain, i' 10" deep.
We further notice that at the south-west corner of this room the floor shows a
depression enclosed within a low wall.
It will be seen from the subjoined plan that, besides the four corner rooms, there
are two chambers which exceed the ordinary size, namely, those in the centre of the
western and eastern rows. Nos, 3 and 13. The result is that some of the other cells
on these two sides are below the average, especially Nos. ii and 12. From the
analogy of the monasteries D and L, we may assume that No. 13 represents the
entrance room, though here no distinct traces of a gateway remain. It will be noticed
that the east wall, at a distance of 32 feet from the south-east corner, forms aright angle
with a wall running eastwards for a distance of about 20'. This wall evidently belongs
toa projection of the kind usually found at the main entrance of a Buddhist monastery.
In the present case, howmver, we find in connection with this projection a rectangular
.chamber of much larger size than any of the rooms in the monastery proper. It has
a narrow doorway in its northern wall. The position of this hall, apparently in front of
the main entrance of monastery 0 is difficult to account for. As to its purpose, I feel
,
inclined to regard it as a Sabbath Hall (Posathagara), which forms an indispensable
attribute of a monastic establishment.
Anyhow^ the large size of room No. 13 can be best explained on the assumption
that the main entrance to the building was on this side. This agrees with Hiuen
Tsiang’s description of a sangharama winding up with this .sentence: “ The doors
open towards the east; the royal throne also faces the east.” The mention
of "a royal throne” may, at first sight, seem out of place in the description of a
.Buddhist monastery. The following, I believe, affords a clue as to its true meaning in
We
this connection. noticed that the central room of the W'estern row also exceeds
the size of an ordinary monk’s cell. In clearing this room, remnants of a large-sized
terra-cotta Buddha image came to light, together with a fragment of an inscribed
stone slab. These finds make it highly probable that the room in question served the
purpose of a chapel. It is interesting to note that in monastery D, also, the room
on the west side, opposite the entrance, is larger in size than the others. In this
connection I may recall that Mr. Thomas, when completing Major Kittoe’s
excavation of the Sarnath monastery, discovered in the central room on the south side
“a square, elaborately corniced block ” which he believed to have been the throne for
a seated figure of Buddha.^ Cunningham, on the other hand, inclined to the
opinion "that it was the seat of the teacher for the daily reading and expounding of
We
the Buddhist scriptures.” are now in a position to say that Thomas’ explanation
is presumably the right one, and that the room marked as "hall” in Cunningham’s,
plan is the chapel, whereas the one opposite marked as "chapel” is in reality the
entrance room. That indeed the entrance of the building was to the north may be
' A. S. R., Vcl. I, p. J27. Plate XXXlh

EXCAVATIONS AT KASIA.
49
inferred from the projection shown on the plan, as well as from the position of Jagat
Singh’s stupa. For it is highly probablethat Kittoe’s monastery belongs to this monu-
— —
ment just as the so-called hospital in reality another convent belongs to the Dhamekh.
All evidencepointstothe factthatthe chapel of a Buddhist convent is to be sought
right opposite the main entrance. It follows that, as the sangharama, according to
Hiuen Tsiang, ought to face east, the chapel will have the same orientation, and we are
led to the conclusion that his “royal throne” (nseA. SiS. pars pro toto) is nothing but
the simhasana of the Buddha image enshrined in that chapel. In the Samath
monastery this simhasana was still found in situ; but there the orientation of both
monastery and chapel is north instead of east. It seems to me highly probable that
the orientation of the sangharama was originally determined by the position of the
Buddha image placed in the chapel. It should be remembered that images represent-
ing Buddha at the moment of his enlightenment are the most common, and that such
images ought to face east in accordance with the tradition that Sakyamuni himself
was seated with his face eastward when he attained Buddha-hood.^
In the course of excavation, we were fortunate enough to collect a number of
inscribed objects which, in addition to those found previously, enable us to fix approxi-
mately the date of the old monastery L-0. Oldest among these is the fragment,,
already mentioned, which came to light in the chapel O 3. From its find-place we
may conclude that probably it made part of an inscription recording the foundation of
the convent. The preserved portion, however, contains only four aksharas, three
of which are injured, so that it is impossible to make out the purport of the epigraph.
I read them ya ku sa na. The lastthree syllables suggest a restoration Ku^anal^garai]^
So much is certain that the character is Brahmt of the early Kushana type. If,
therefore, my supposition is correct, the foundation of the old monastery would fall;
about the time of Kanishka, the great patron of Buddhism.
As regards the period at which the building ceased to exist, we can speak with
greater confidence. In the courtyard outside the chapel were found numerous frag-
ments of a Buddha statuette in red sandstone. It shows Buddha standing, his right
hand raised in the attitude of imparting protection {abhaya-mudra), the left holding the
hem of his robe. The base contains a dedicatory inscription in two lines which I read :
Deyadharmo ya\m Sa\kyabhikshdh{r) Bhadanta-Suvzrasya kriti\_r'] {2)Dinnasya
“This (is) the pious gift of the Buddhist friar, the venerable Suvira, [and] the work
of Dinna.” This short inscription is of particular interest, because it enables us to-
restore the final portion of the inscription onthe colossal statue of the dying Buddha.
The latter has been read by Dr. J. F. Fleet Deyadharmo yam mahdvihdrasvamma
Haribalasya 2 pratimd cheyam ghatitd Dine...nidsvarena, A comparison of the
{ )
two epigraphs at once will show that both belong to the same period. The first five
aksharasaxe almost identical. Either of them consists of two portions, one containing
the name of the donor, the other that of the maker. On the Nirvana image we find
at the end of each sentence a slightly curved line which evidently is meant for a stop.
In the other inscription we find a similar sign betw’een the words Suvzrasya and
kriti. In the concluding portion of the Nirvana inscription I propose to supply nalor
the missing syllable, and for the rest to adopt Dr. Fleet’s reading, except that for sva
1 Cf. A.S. R., 1905*06, p. 76.
H

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
50
I read tku. In the akshara preceding the supplied na I believe I can distinguish traces
of a second beneath We thus obtain the following reading: Pratima, cheyam
ghatita Dinnena Mdihurena. “And this image [was] wrought by Dinna of Mathura.”
Both these images, therefore, not only belong to the same period, but .were pro-
duced by the same workman. The circumstance that this workman came from
Mathura is another proof of the great importance of the school of sculpture which
flourished in that town during the Kushana and Gupta periods. If there remains any
doubt with regard to the proposed restoration, it ought to be removed by the fact
that the Buddha statuette found near the chapel of the old monastery is made of the
well-known spotted red sandstone exclusively used by the Mathura sculptors.
The Nirvana inscription Dr. Fleet assigns to the end of the fifth century, and we
must assume the same dateforthe Buddha statuette. It was found brokenin numerous
small fragments, as if it had been crushed by some heavy object, possibly a beam of
the verandah. On the other hand, it is remarkable that the surface does not show any
signs of disintegration and that the cutting of the letters is in general very sharp.
Considering the nature of the stone in which it is made, we may conclude that the im-
age had not been in use as an object of worship for a very long time, when it shared
in the destruction of the sanctuary in which it was placed.
Among the inscribed objects noted in my previous paper there is an inscribed
seal-die of clay, which was found in cell No. L 1 1. It shows a palm-tree betweentwo
indistinct objects, and beneathit thelegend [_A\rydshta-vriddhai, in characters of about
the fifth century. It is not a little curious that in the larger of the two rooms on the
east end of N a similar die was found bearing the same symbol and the same legend.
The only difference is that on the newly-found specimen the letters are more distinct
in shape. Whatever the meaning of the legend may be, it is evident that these dies
were in actual use at the time when the edifice to which they belong became des-
troyed. They, therefore, point to the same conclusion as the inscribed statuette,
namely, that the destruction of the old convent happened about A.D. 500,
Two objects, thoughfoundoutsidetheold monastery, are also ofinterest in deciding
the date of this building. One is a gold coin^ of Chandragupta II Vikramaditya
(c.A.D. 400), which was found on the pavement of the courtyard between the old
convent and the temple of the dying Buddha. From its position it w'ould seem to
have been lost by its owner in the conflagration which enveloped the former building.
As the coin is much worn, the time during which it was current can hardly have been
less than a century. Thus it may be considered to confirm the conclusion arrived at
above.
The other object is of a less common type, and, as will be shown in the sequel, of
special interest for the identification of the Kasia site. Here it will suffice to note
that it is an inscribed seal-die of baked clay, which was found at a distance of 19' 6"
from the east wall of 0, near the south-east corner of the projecting structure and at
a depth of 3'
6"
below the surface of the mound. Dr. Fleet agrees with me that
this die mustbe of approximately the same date as the clay seals of the Mahapari-
nirvapa and Makutabandha[na] monasteries discussed in my previous paper, vis. c,
A. D. 400. Epigraphical evidence, therefore, showsthatthe early monastery of the
p.80 ' , T a h nd ec 1 o 8 i 9 n 3, is P- ot 10 tl 4 i * earchertype, class II,variety Aa (I), weight 120.5. Cf.W.A. Smith, J-. R. A. R, 18S9,

EXCAVATIONS AT KASIA.
51
Kasia site most probably was founded in thedays of the early Kushana rulers, that
certainly it flourishedunder the great Gupta emperors and ceased to exist about A.D.
500. It is a point worth noticingthat the time of its destruction coincides with that of
the Hun invasionswhich harassed the Gupta empire inthe fifth and sixth centuries.
Our conclusions as to the age of the old monastery have a distinct bearing on that
of the other buildings of the site. It was noted in my previous paper that from the
south-east corner of X there runs a w'all eastward, which forms the southern enclosure
ofthe courtyard in front of the Nirvana temple. This wall is continued and encloses
also the group of minor monuments to the south of that temple. These monuments,
therefore, must have existed contemporaneous with the old monastery, and probably
their destruction also coincided. If, then, the accumulation of small stupas to the
south of the Nirvana temple took place during the later Kushana and early Gupta
periods, the early plinth on which the Nirvana temple and stupa are raised m.ay be
safely assigned to the time of the great Kushana rulers. All evidence now available
points to the fact that both the old monastery and the oldest portion of the central
monument were built at that period.
In this connection I may also mention a collection of clay sealings belonging to
the Convent of the Great Decease, which were found not far from the entrance of 0
.
They exhibit a new type and must date from about A. D. 600. We may assume that
they belong to the period between the destruction of the old monastery and the foun-
dation of the new one. The latter event must have taken place about A.D, 700, as the
sealings found outside this building do not date further back than the eighth century.
Monastery E.
This building, situated outside the mound, north-east of the central group of
monuments, was discovered and partly excavated in the course of last year’s explo-
rations. As noted in my previous paper, its existence was not even indicated by any
elevation of the soil. The ground on which it stands having since been acquired bv
Government, it was now possible to complete its excavation. The foot of its walls
b he fields. T'hou^^h in places large portions of the walls
are missing, its ground-plan can be restored with certainty. The building forms a
quadrangle and consists of rows of cells grouped on the four sides of a square
XV—
(Pis. XVI). Though it is the usual type of a Buddhist monastery, it possesses
some special features which are worthy of notice. We find on both sides of the main
entrance (which faces east) the same rectangular projections which are found in
monastery D. In the present case, however, these projections (13' wide) do not
consist of solid masonry, but each of them contains a narrow room (15^ ^'' '>^^ s")
which communicates through a door-way with the cell (9 f) adjoinino- the
entrance chamber.
The entrance chamber itself (i8'x 12' 8") is, asusual, larger in size than other
cells. It will be seen from the plan that it is entirely open towards the courtyard
but there is reason to assume that originally there existed here a partition of wood-'
work. This, I believe, may be inferred from the existence of a kind of threshold
provided witJi four grooves probably used as mortises. In the outer doorway giving
access to this room we notice similar grooves which are evidently meant to receive

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
52
the tenons of a wooden threshold or door-frame. It is of much interest that at both
m
ends of the doorway two iron sockets were found situ, which evidently were once
let into a woodenthreshold and served the same purpose as our hinges.
The plan shows that here again we find the ranges of cells alternating with
closets suchaswe have noticed in the monasteries D and L. In the present case, how-
ever, the arrangement is somewhat different, as the north-west and south-west corner
rooms have such a closet on each side and consequently are isolated from the other
cells. The purport of this peculiar arrangement is not apparent.
The most striking feature of building E is that the space between the cells (43'
by 42'-6''') is not left open, but contains a detached chamber of considerable size
(c. 30' square) provided with a doorway in the centre of its north wall and with two
windows (2^-1 1" wide) on each side. From the existence of these windows it may be
concluded that the passages between the central hall and the cells, which measure
about 6\' in width, were not covered over. In the middle of this chamber we find a
kind of masonry platform, 12' square, having on each side two grooves 2-g" long, 5'
wide and 4'-6" deep, and in its centre a brick square 3'-5''' by q", which is built of
large-sized bricks (16''' X Io'' X 2^") . The grooves seem to be meant as mortises for
woodwork.
The purpose of this structure is by no means clear. Nor would it be easy to
decide what was the object of the chamber itself. Hiuen Tsiang, in describing a
sangharama, says : “ In the very middle of the building is the hall, high and wide.”
This might be well referred to the edifice in question. Unfortunately the Chinese
pilgrim omits to inform us of the purpose of that central hall, but most probably he
means the Sabbath Hall {Posathagara) in which the weekly assembly of the chapter
took place for mutual edification.
It is true that we have already assigned the same use to the large room which
projects from the monastery O. But I feel inclined to group E with the later build-
ings, which were raised after the old monastery had become destroyed. It is, in any
case, remarkable that both halls are nearly equal in size. The finds made in E were
very few. Evidently the building was gradually deserted for the same reason, as we
have assumed with regard to monastery D. The only objects worth mentioning are
a cornelian bead discovered inside the central hall and a clay tablet inscribed with the
Buddhist creed, which was found on the top of the outer wall of the southern projec-
tion on the south side.
It is a curious circumstance that the entrance of E is turned away from the
central group of monuments. This feature may perhaps be accounted for by the
rule quoted by Hiuen Tsiang that a sangharama should be orientated east, though in
practice the exceptions are far from rare. At the west end of the southern corridor
there is a second doorway pointing in the direction of the Nirvana temple.
Buildings 1-J.
In the ground outside the mound lately acquired by Government, to the north of
the central group of monuments, the remains of two large buildings were discovered
completely hidden below the level surface of the fields. That to the west (I) was
entirely excavated except the western-most portion, over which a path leads from the

EXCAVATIONS-
A
KASl

EXCAVATIONS AT KASIA.
53
Buddhist dharmsala to the Nirvana temple. There can be little doubt that this por-
tion is similar to that on the east side. The building presents the general character
of a Buddhist monastery. It is a large quadrangle, 103' by 97", containing the usual
rows of cells on its four sides. The space compassed by these cells, measuring
^I 'l" by 66'-6", contains a tank 44' square and 2' deep. This tank is enclosed by a
wall 2' wide, on which alow wall is raised in v/idth. On the top of this wall
large sized bricks are found, measuring \ 6 " by 10" by We may assume that this
wall supported the wooden posts of a covered passage or verandah built in front of
the cells. This passage, wide on the east side, shows remnants of a concrete
floor, which is 3' below the ground-level.
The tank is paved with brick tiles laid alternately lengthwise and breadthwise
and measuring 12Y bv gY by lY This pavement is broken at several places and
shoves two large round gaps possibly due to pits having been dug from the fields
above. It is more difficult to account for a narrow strip left unpaved along the wall
which encloses the tank.
The main entrance to the building I is marked by the twousual projections which
are nearly square and contain each a rectangular chamber.. We may assume that these
chambers communicated with the adjoining cells, as is the case in building E, but no
traces of doorways are left. The main entrance, also, is now only indicated bythetwo
projections and by the large size of the adjoining room(23'-3''' by i3'-4'’'') as compared
with that of the other cells. The entrance room contains a brick platform, 4'-3''' by
and 9" high, built against its west wall. It is curious that something similar is
found inthe monastery excavated at Sarnath by Major Kittoe, who notes “two large
stones placed against the w'alls as if intended for the reception of statues in what
must have been the entrance room of that building.” It is remarkable that, though
Kittoe’s monastery faces north and the building here described south, in both cases
the platform in question is placed against the west wall. This circumstance supports
Kittoe’s theory, for we may assume that the entrance room contained an image
representing Buddha at the moment of his enlightenment and consequently facing
east.
Of building I little more than the foundation now remains. Near its south-east
comer the outer wall reaches the maximum height of 4' measured from the foot, but
the wall inside is not more than x" to 2" above the pavement of the courtyard, which
must represent the original floor-level. The width of the outer wall is ofthe
wall surrounding the courtyard 2'-8" to c'-iT', and that of the walls between the
cells 2 -4’.
A clue to the age of building I is given by some inscribed seals, which are of the
same type as those found near the entrance of the monastery D. One of them, found
at the foot of the east wall inside the courtyard, can be dated about A.D. 900 (List of
finds 312).
Building J, adjoining I to the east, probably belongs to the same period, though it
wasbuiltsubsequently. Thisis clear from the fact that its south wall is built on to the
south-eastcornerof I. Both buildings are separated by a corridor, in which fragments
of pottery were found. The excavation of J has not yet been completed but thepart
;
excavated shows it to be also a building of the monastery type containing rows of cells

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
54-
arranged round a courtyardnearly 30' square. Whether every building of this type
necessarily represents a Buddhist monastery may be rightly doubted. It is quite
possible that the buildings I and J were intended for the accommodation of pilgrims.
For it should be noted, ISt, that they have not the eastern orientation; 2ndly, that
they do not contain a chapel and 3rdly, that they are separated from the sacred
;
buildings by a heavy wall. This has not yet been completely excavated, but it most
probably connected with the wall running north from the main stupa (A).
FINDS.
Those objects which have a distinct bearing on the history of the buildings in
which they were discovered have been noticed above. Among them I have
mentioned an inscribed Buddha statuette of Mathura sandstone assignable to the fifth
century and a fragment of an inscribed slab dating back to the early Kushana period.
Both these objects were found in the monastery O, and supply the approximate dates
of the foundation and destruction of this building. The inscribed fragment is the
earliest inscription hitherto foundon the Kasia site. The Buddha statuette is contem-
poraneous with the colossal Nirvapa image and, as demonstrated above, presumably a
work of the same sculptor whose name is partly preserved on the latter.
—
For the rest, last year’s excavations -like those of theprevioustwo years — yielded
butvery few objects of stone. Nearly all of them served some utilitarian purpose, and
consist of mill-stones, grinding slabs and pestles. Mill-stones were found in the centre
of the western room of N, in room 0 9 and near the entrance of 0 . The last
mentioned specimen
measures 35 cm. in
diameter and 32 cm.
in height. Fragments
of flat slabs, evidently
meant for grinding,
turned up in rooms
6,7,8 and 13 of monas-
tery O. In room 0 8
we also found the lego"
of a stone stool.
Two stone objects
of a more ornamental
kind deserve special
notice. One is half a
circular disc of schist,
16 cm. in diameter,
seven fragments of
which .were found in
the courtyard of
building I on the ori-
ginal floor-level. It has inits centre a plain circular space, 6 cm. in diameter, enclosed
by a raised border ornamented with lotus petals. The outer border consists of arow of

EXCAVATIONS AT KASIA.
55
four rudely carved animals alternating with conventional flowers. Only two animals,
ahog and a deer, are preserved, but from w^hat remains of a third animal it may be
inferred that the last half was identical with the preserved portion.
On the north side of stupa No. 31 numerous fragments were found of a rectangu-
lar tablet of schist. 1 1 cm. in width. In its centre there is a slightly concave plain
space, circular in shape and measuring about 6-5 cm. in diameter. The rest of the
surface is curiouslv carved with a cjuaint design. The plain circular centre of these
two objects suggests that both served the same purpose. Perhaps they were dishes,
but it is impossible to decide in what exact manner they were used.
In the southern portion of the old monastery no such important discoveries of
metal vessels were made as in the previously excavated northern part. I may mention,
however, the discovery of a small brass vessel of the ka^rt type in room O 8, and of
two spoons of copper among the debris which filled room O 10. One spoon is entire
and measures 21-5 cm. in length. The blade, which is 9 cm. long and 4 cm. wide, has
the shape of an elongated oval slightly
shoulderedtowardsthe handle. The handle
is somew'hat curv^ed near the blade and
broadens towards its end. The other
spoon, I5’5 cm. in length, has nearly the
same shape, but the blade, most of which is
missing, is not shouldered.
i\n iron spoon, presumably used for
culinary purposes, which was found along
the western outer wall of N, has already
been noticed. Other objects of iron are a
hatchet from room O 9 and a knife blade
found inroom 0 13. Iron nails and hinges
must have belonged to the woodwork, of
w'hich only shapeless lumps of charcoal now
remain. Nails, 12 and 15 cm. long, w^ere
found in rooms 8 and 10 of monastery O
;
in the latter room also hinges which once belonged to the door. The two iron door
sockets found in situ in the main entrance to monastery E have been mentioned in
the description of this building.
Though the finds in stone and metal were comparatively few, objects of baked
clay turnedup inno less numberthan inthe previous years. First of all are to be men-
tioned rhose which must once have formed part of monuments now partially or wholly
destroyed. Carved bricks were found in considerable quantity among the groups of
minor buildings to the south of the Nirvana temple and stupa. Some of large
size evidently belonged to the facing of the early plinth on which those two buildings
are raised. Others originate from small sized stupas of ornamental brickwork, one fine
specimen of which is still extant among the southern group of monuments. Two frag-
ments of carved bricks of a later type were found in building I. Rings and cones of
baked clay would seem to have belonged to the pinnacles of small stupas, whilst some
terra-cotta fragments may have belonged to the parasols whichonce surmounted them.

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
56
In this connection I may mention two fragments of an inscribed brick found on the
north side of stil-ba No. 33. The inscription, apparently the Buddhist creed, may be
assigned to the seventh or eighth century. From the fact that the top surface also is
inscribed, it appears doubtful whether this tile was inserted in the masonry of some
building. It may have served the purposeof a votive offering. The same uncertainty
exists with regard to a broken terra-cotta panel representing Buddha’s Nirvana, which
was found to the west of stupa No. 33. The remaining part of this panel shows the
lower portion of the Buddha figure reclining on his couch. The total absence of
attendants is noteworthy.
A fine and well-preserved Buddha head of terra-cotta came to light in the
southern stupa court where it was lying on the pavement at the foot of the northern
wall oi stupa -No. 41. Itis34'5cm. in circumference and i8‘5 cm. in height. Its size
and appearance closely agree with that of the head of which two fragments were found
K
near shrine in the course of last year’s excavations. It seems, therefore, certain
that these heads belongto those Buddha figures which once occupied the niches of the
early stupa^Yinih, and one of which, partially preserved, is still extant in the niche ad-
joining the flight of steps to the north. In the course of my paper, I have mentioned
the discovery of fragments ofa large sized terra-cotta Buddha figure in room No. 10,
presumablythe chapel of monastery O. They are, unfortunately, too indistinctto enable
usto decide on the size and attitude of the image. Their chief interest is the evidence
they afford that the chamber in which they were found was used as a chapel. If con-
temporaneous with the inscribed fragment found in the same room, the Buddha image
would have to be assigned to the early Kushana period.
Numerous fragments of terra-cotta figurines were recovered, some among the
southernmost group
u monuments and some
*•' in-
'' ' courtyard of building I.
X
Among them are several
I'
^ the courtyard of monastery
/ \ / \ 0, and a tortoise from
my
/ \ 1 In previous paper I
/ have given a description of
certain earthenware vessels
V
roughly shaped as human
/ 1 )
/ \ j figures, the head serving
the purpose of a stopper.
In the course of this year’s
excavation a few more
specimens came to light between the shrines K and G, in the rubbish heap east
of Band to the south of building I. A fragment of a similar image-pot, which

EXCAVATIONS AT KASIA.
57
presents a somewhat different type, was found outside the western wall of monastery
D. It is the upper portion of a vessel, about i cm. thick, made in the shape of a
clumsy female figure seated with her arms resting on her knees. .She wears a
necklace and two bracelets round her left arm. The right arm and the legs beneath
the knees are broken. The head is missing, but it appears from a tenon still sticking
inside the neck of the figure, that it was detached and used as a stopper, as is the
case with the image-pots previously discovered.
Earthenware lamps were found inside some of the. cells of monastery O, in the
courtyard of D, in the rubbish heap east of D and in the tank-of building I, Spin-
dle whorls, balls, miniature stufas and other nondescript objects' of bakedclay turned
up in nearly every part of the site. An ivory die, 3'4 cm. long and r3 cm. wide and
thick, was found inside the room ofthe eastern projection of building I. Its four sides
are marked with one to four circular marks. It has the same shape as the dies
now-a-days used in India. A similar specimen, 4 cm. long, on which the numbers are
fromthree to six, has been excavated at Sarnath.
Inscribed Objects.
Besides the two inscriptions on stone noticed above, a vast number of inscribed
objects of baked and unbaked clay 'were discovered in this year’s excavation. They
present, on the whole, the same types as those found in the preceding year and de-
scribed in my previous paper, but far exceed those former finds both in number and
variety. Especially numerous are the clay sealings inscribed either with the name of
a monastic establishment or with that of a private person. The bulk of them were
found in a low mound situated to the east of monastery D and to the south of the
wall, which runs eastward from the north-east corner of this building.^ This mound
may be well described as a rubbish heap, for it contained, besides clay sealings,
potsherds, earthen lamps, terra-cotta fragments, iron nails and pegs. Most probably
the sealings were originally attached to objects of perishable material, which were
regularly thrown away outside the monastery and thus, in the course of time, formed
the mound in question.
I may state at once that the inscriptions extend over a period of some three cen-
turies, as the approximate date of the character used in them varies from about
700 to 1000 A. D. They, therefore, prove that this must be the period during which
the. monastery D was occupied. Some twelve inscribed clay sealings of a somewhat
earlier date were found outside the main entrance to monastery O, on the site once
A
occupied by Mr. Carlleyle’s bungalow. few detached specimens turned up on
other spots.
There can be little doubt that the inscribed sealings were used to secure parcels-
and letters addressed to the inmates of the Kasia monasteries. Most of them have
distinct impressions on their backs in several cases the marks of strings are
;
plainly visible. The use of strings to secure parcels or letters is -well illustrated by a
passage from the Harshacharita^ where we read of a messenger “ having his head
^ This mound isindicatedon Mr. Carlleyle’splan ofthesite, A, S. i?., VoL XXII, Plate III.
^ Harshacharita (Bombay 1897), P- 52» CowelPstranslation (quoted above), pp.40 f.
I

'
ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
58
wrapped with a bundle of letters, which had a deep division pressed into it by a very
thick thread that bound it.”
Mr. E. H. Hankinto whom I sent some specimensofthe Kasia sealings for chemical
examination, favoured mewith his opinioninthe following terms “ The impressions at
:
the back of the mass of clay contain vegetable remnants, which are not charred, proving
that the clay mass has been dried but not burnt. I took a cast of one of the impres-
sions in sulphur, and then carved away the seal. The result showed that the seal had
been made over aknot in apiece of rope. From thenature of the debris I conclude that
the cord was not made of cotton or any fine fibre.” In this connection it should also be
notedthatmostoftheinscribed sealings werefound in a fragmentary state. This circum-
stance also may easily be accounted foronthe assumptionthatthe seals had to be broken
in order to enable the recipient to open the parcel to which they were attached.
The total number of clay sealings found in last year’s excavations amounts to 895
(314 complete and 581 fragments), of which 856 bear inscriptions. Of these, 521
belong to Buddhist monasteries and 335 to private individuals. Those of the former
type, except only 10 specimens, belong to the Convent of the Great Decease, which
stood on the traditional spot of Buddha's Nirvana near the Malla capital Kusinara.
The great majority represent the two types of c. A.D. 750 and 900 described in my
previous paper. The type of c. A.D. 750 is represented by two hundred and forty,
that of c. A.D. goo by two hundred and sixty examples. Nearly all these sealings
were found in the refuse-heap outside D, a few in the courtyard of that building.
There are eleven specimens of three other types of seals likewdse belonging to the
Mahaparinirvana Convent, but evidently of an earlier date. Two of them I would
assign to about A. D. 600 and the third to about A.D. 650. They thus form alink
between the early Gupta seal of c. A.D. 400, which has the coffin between the twin
sal trees, and the two later seals of c. 756 and 900 A.D., marked with the wheel-and-
deer symbol. The three new types of 600-650 are similarto the laterseals both as re-
gards their size, general appearance and legend. One ofthem bears the wheel-and-deer
symbol ; on the other two the symbol is indistinct. It is of interest to note that these
earlier sealings were mostly found outside the old monastery 0.
One specimen and eight fragments came to light of amonastic sealwhich— my
— if
readingof the somewhat defaced legend is correct belongs to a convent known by the
nameof Eranda. A monastery of this name has— as faras I know— not been found
mentioned anywhere else. It is, therefore, uncertain whether eranda is to be taken in
its ordinary meaning of " Ricinus plant ” or designates some locality. As a proper
name Eranda is used to designate a river, a confluence {samgama) and a place of
pilgrimage {ftrtha), but I am unable tolocate any of them. A connectionwith Eranda-
palla, a locality mentioned in the Allahabad pillar inscription of Samudragupta, seems
out of tffie question, considering that this place was situated in Southern India.
It is interesting to note that on this seal we find againthe wheel and the two deer
which, orginally indicative of Buddha’s first sermon in the Deerpark of Benares, had
gradually become a general Buddhist symbol, extensively used on the seals of monas-
tic establishments.^ The Lucknow Museum possesses a clay seal, elliptical in shape and
on Buddhist

.
EXCAVATIONS AT KASIA.
59
measuring 5’5 by 4’5 cm., on which we find the same symbol and the legend Sri
Dvetavanarama-viaha (2) vihara-bhikshu-sanghasya. The reading is uncertain, owing
to thelettersbeingpartly defaced the date seems to be that of the early Guptas. The
;
Dulva contains rules regarding the use of seals by Buddhist monks inwhich it is
prescribedthat "a man of the religious order must have on his seal or stamp a circle
with two deer on opposite sides, and below them the name of the founder of the viha-
ra". That this rule was first framed in India is evidentfromthe Kasia seals which
afford such clear examples of its practical application.
The remaining 335 sealings, pertaining to private individuals, show 63 different
seal impressions. They do notpossess the same interest as thos(i of monastic estab-
lishments for we can hardly ever hope to identify the persons to whom they belong.
;
They contain nothing butthe names of their ownerseither in the nominative or genitive
case, often accompanied by some common symbol such as a goose, a lotus-flower or
conch-shell. All we can say is that the persons mentioned on these sealings were
presumably Buddhists, though their names, on the whole, do not afford any clue as
regards their creed. In one case we may perhaps go a step further and surmise that
Silagupta, whose seal occurs combined with that of the Monastery of the Great
Decease, was an office holder of that Convent.
There are numerous other instances in which we find impressions of different
seals onthe same lump of clay. Very frequently also w'e find the same sea! repeated.
Sometimes we find different seals bearing the same name. It is, of course,
impossible to say whether such seals belonged to one person or to different persons
bearing the same name. The former alternative isfavoured by the similarity of the
character and of the symbols which is presented by such homonymous seals.
Though, as stated above, the namesare not as a rule typically Buddhist, we notice
thegreat number of those which contain the name of the goddess Tara, such as
Tarabala, Taramitra, Taraiarana and Tarairaya.
Thereare a certain number of seals which contain merely a symbol. Most remark-
able among them are those which represent a skeleton seated cross-legged as in medi-
tation or in one instance standing. As surmised in my previous paper, such figures
possibly are meantto represent the corporeal relics of some Buddhist saint.^
This year’s excavations yielded several more specimens of inscribed clay tablets
which apparently were not attached to parcels or other objects, but must have served
the purpose of votive offerings. They are of two distinct types. The larger ones,
mostly elliptical in shape, show the figure of a Buddha or Bodhisattva surrounded by
the Buddhist creed. Such tablets, which are found in most Buddhist countries, seem
to have come into use at a comparatively late date. Those found at Kasia may be
assigned tothe tenth century. In the course of last year’s excavations five specimens
were found, three of which are identical with the two discovered during the preceding
year. Onerepresents Buddha under the Bodhi tree, and the other two the Bodhisattva
Maitreya. The two which represent new types are unfortunately incomplete but
;
seem both to contain a Bodhisattva figure. Theirfind-spot was the refuse mound,east
' Cf, my r\ott Leparinir'i}ana Ananda E. O. Tome V, i9o5» pp. 4i7“8. Dr. Spooner suggests
thatthe skeleton represents the Ascetic Gautama figured in Gandharasculpture. Dr- Bloch thinks that it is
meantfor apreta andremarksthat such figures occurasattendantsof Buddhist images of the Pala time from
Magadha.

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
6o
of monastery D. A fragment found among the southernmost group of stupas may be
reckoned among this class. It shows three stupas and has an indistinct inscription,
apparently the Buddhist creed, beneath.
The second class of votive tablets are those inscribed with the Buddhist
creed. Eighty specimens of these were found, nearly all of them among the ruined
stupas which the space south of the central group of monuments. They are of
fill
eight different dies and range in date from about A.D. 600 to 1000. The use of
these tablets also would seem to be peculiar to the concluding period of Indian
Buddhism. Here I must note also two clay cones with eight stilpas in relief round the
top and impressions of the Buddhist creed. Both were found in the refuse heap east
of monastery D.
In discussing the date of the old monastery L-0 I have mentioned the disco-
,
very of two dies of burnt clay. One of them, found in the large chamber on the east
side of building N, has the same legend and symbol as the two similar dies discovered
in the oldmonastery duringlast year’s excavations. The newly-found specimen confirms
my reading ofthe inscription Arydshtavriddhai, which evidently stands iox Arydsh-
tavriddhyai. I wish to note that Dr. Fleet, to whom I senta castof this die, proposes to
read the first letter i or a The original, however, does not seem to me to admit of this
reading. The Brst letter shows a type of <2 found in inscriptions of the third andfourth
century, in which a horizontal stroke attachedto the proper left of the letter differen-
tiates it from the short a.
It is remarkable that, though no less thanthree dies of this kind were foundon the
Kasia site, not a single impression of them has come to light among the numerous
clay sealings and tablets. It may be inferred that the tablets produced with these dies
were given to pilgrimswho visitedthe site and that “ the noble eight,” referred to inthe
inscription, are the eight principal places of pilgrimage. In this connection it is of
interest to notethat elsewhere clay tablets havebeen found bearingthe legend Ashtavri'
ddh [fl?], the purport of which is undoubtedly the same as that ofthe Kasia dies. One
of them was foundby Cunningham at Pakna Bihar and shows over the legend a tree
within an enclosure between the letters va and
The Lucknow Museum possesses another specimen of uncertain provenance
(4 by 3'5 cm.), on which a surmounted by six umbrellas is shown, with
a human figure standing on each side. The lower portion of the inscription beneath is
injured, but there can be no doubt that we have again the, same legend Ashta-
Tnddh{ai). Judging from the character, these tablets belong to the same period as
the Kasia dies, namely the fifth century.
The other die^ excavated at Kasia is of still greater interest. As stated above, it
wasfound near the entrance of the monastery 0, and must have beenin use at the time
when this building was occupied. Like the die just described, it has a pierced handle
fromwhich we may suppose that such objects were worn attached to a cord. The
flat surface is elliptical and measures 6 by 4-8 cm. Both as regards size and general
appearance the seal produced with this die agrees closely with theearly Gupta seals
of the Mahaparinirvana and Makutabandha [na] monasteries discovered previously on
^ Cunningham,A.S. R., Vol. XI, p. 36, Plate XII, No, 4.
- A preliminarynoteon this die has been published, J. R.'A. S., for 1907, pp, io49ff.

EXCAVATIONS AT KASIA. 6l
the Kasia site. The date also must be approximately the same, namely about A. D,
400. The upper half contains a tree within an enclosure rising from a flat mound and
flanked by two indistinct objects, perhaps likewise meant for trees. The lower half,
separatedfrom the upper one by a double horizontal line, contains thelegendin two lines
which I read : ^ri-Vishnudmpa-vihare (2) bhikshu-sanghasya “Of the community of
friars at the Conventof Holy Vishnudvipa”. This short inscriptionis of special interest
for the topographical question connected with the Kasia remains. As I will endeavour
to show, it renders it highly probable that these remains represent not Kusinara, but
Vethadipa, another of the eight places at which a portion of Buddha’s relics was
presen’ed. That Vishnudvipa is the Sanskrit, or ratherthe Sanskritised form of Pali
Vethadipacannot rightly be doubted, though at first sight an etymological connection
between the two would seem to be impossible. The Sanskrit word, it is true, does not
occur in literature, but in the Tibetantext dealing with Buddha's Nirvana we find as
equivalent of Pali Vethadipa thename ‘Khyab-’jugg-Ling, which has been recognised by
Tibetan scholars as a literal renderingof SanskritVishnu-dvipa “ the island of Vishnu.”
It is notalittle interestingto find this hypotheticalversion thus confirmed by an authentic
document.
We may, therefore, conclude that the seal-die belongs to the convent of Vetha-
dipa, the place mentioned in the Book of the Great Decease as one of the eight
depositories of Buddha’s corporeal relics. It would follow that the remains of Kasia
represent that very sanctuary, if we are allowed to assume that the die originally
belonged to the buildings, amongthe ruins of which it was found. Itis possible that
it was used to seal letters issued by the inmates of the Kasia Convent, just as the
numerous clay sealings, in all probability, originate from documents received by them.
That among these sealings such a large number belong to the Convent of the
Great Decease need not prevent us from identifying the Kasia site with that of Vetha-
dipa. As both places were intimately connected with the tradition of Buddha’s death,
we may assume that between the two convents there existed a close relationship
necessitating a continual interchange of documents. The colossal Nirvana statue on
which Cunningham’s identification w-as mainly based would seem natural at the sanc-
tuary of Vethadipa for the reason just quoted.
It must, however, be admitted that the inscribed seal-die on which the name
Vishnudvipa occurs ma)’' have been brought from elsewhere. It would behazardous to
consider the Identification as proved by a small object of portable size, and it is hoped
that the excavations whichwill be continued next winter will yield some conclusive
evidence to settle this important topographical problem.
LIST OF INSCRIBED OBJECTS.
Inscriptions on Stone.
I. Fragment of red sandstone (height 10 cm. width 8cm. ) containingfour aksharas of
whichonly thelast one is entire. The height of this akshara is i cm. but that of the second
akshara seems to be 4 cm. The character is Brahmiof the early Kushanatype. The va which
forms the lower portion of the first ligature is expressed by the complete single form and not by
a loop as in the latter Kushana inscription. The reading i.t :-ya~hu-sa-na ihnt it isdoubtful

62 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
whether the first andthird aksharas 'were provided withavowel mark. The fragment was found
in room No. 3 of the monastery 0 which presumably servedthe purposeof a chapel.
,
2. Four fragments forming the inscribed base of a standing Buddha statuette of Agra
sandstone. The inscribed surface measures 25'2 cm. in width and 5 cm. in height. The inscrip-
tion consists of one line coveringthe whole width of thestone and a second short line 3.5 cm. in
length. The size of the aksharas varies from 0.7to 1.7 cm. The fifth, sixth and ninth aksharas
are partly destroyed, but can be restored with certainty. The character is Gupta ofaboutthe
5th century similar to that used inthe 'inscription on the colossal image ofthe dying Buddha.
The language is Sanskrit, correct but for twomistakes in Sandhi. The reading is : Deyadharmo
ya{m Sa-lkyabhikshohikshor) bhadanta-Suvirasya-kriti fr*J (2) Dinnasya “This (is) the
pious gift of the Buddhistfriar the venerable Suvira (it is) the work of Dinna.” The inscribed
;
fragmentstogether -^vith numerous other pieces ofthe Buddha-statuettewere foundinthe courtyard
of monastery 0 not far fromroom No. 3, the supposed chapel.
Inscriptions on Terra-Cotta.
Two terra-cotta fragments, apparently belonging to one panel, 10 cm. high and 5-5 to 6 cm.
thick and containing an inscriptionin two lines enclosed within an ornamental border. Only
one akskara is entire measuring 2-5 cm. in height. The character is that of about A. D.
700. The larger fragment contains the proper right end of the inscription with rmma in
the upper line and nah in the lowerline. On the smaller fragment only the lower portion
of two aksharas, probably ma and ha, are preserved together with part of the r stroke of the
following letter. The legend presumably was the Buddhist creed, the two fragments yield-
ing the concluding word mahasramana/i. But as rmma of dharmma is placed at the end of
the first line, there is reason to assume that it was preceded by a dedication, if my supposition
is correct, the second line must have consisted of thirty-two aksharas and the panel must have
been more than im. in length. On the top surface W'e find again the beginning portion of the
Buddhist creed in two lines. In the upper line Ye dharmma he- is preserved and in the second
line dat-tesham cha. The height of the letters is only 0-5 to i cm. Under it is a detached ma-
of somewhat larger size, perhaps meant for a mason’s mark. The two fragments w'ere found
immediately to the north of stufa No. 33.
Inscribed Clay Seal-Dies.
4. Seal-die of baked clay with pierced handle. The inscribed surface is oval and measures
6 cm, in height and 4-8 cm. in width. Round the edge of the inscribed surface runs a plain
ornamental border. Thespace within this border is divided in two halves by adouble horizontal
line. The upperportion shows a sacred treewithin an enclosure rising from a flat hillock. On
both sides there is an indistinct object, perhaps meant for a tree. The lower half contains the
legend in two lines 3-5 and 3 cm. respectively in length. The size of the aksharas which are
reversed, vanes from 0-5 to i cm. The character is Gupta of about A.D. 400 of the eastern
variety, as shownby the signs for sha and ha. The legend reads srl-Vishnudvifa-vikare
: (2)
hhtkshusafighasya “ Of the community of friars at the Convent of Holy Vishnudvipa ” The die
was found at the south-east corner of the projecting portion of monastery O, at a distance of
19-b from the east wall and 3'-6" below the surface of the mound.
5. Seal-die of baked clay with pierced handle. The inscribed surface is elliptical and
measures 4 cm. in height and 2‘8 cm. in width. It is divided in two halves by a double hori
zontal line turned upwards andjoined on both ends. In theupper portion is a palm tree with an
T md h i e sb si n z c e t o o f b t j h e e ct le o t n te e rs a , ch wh s i i c d h e. are T r h e e ve l r o se w d e , r v h a a r l i f es co f n r t o ai m ns 07 th t e o l 1 e - g 3 en c d m. in o T n h e e l c i h n a e r 2 a - c 5 ter cm i . s G in up l t en a gt o h f
a^out the fifth century. The earlyshape of the initial a. deserves special notice. Thelegend reads
Ary-ashta-vnddhm {ddhyai) growth of the noble eight.” The die was round in'"the

EXCAVATIONS AT KASIA.
.63
largerof the two rooms on the eastside of N. Two similar dies have come to light in L and M
in the course of last year’s excavations.^
INSCRIBED CLAY SEALS.
Seals of Monasteries.
6. Clav seal, circular, 2 cm. in diameter. In upper half human (?) Bgure wdth indistinct
object to proper right. In lower half, legend in two lines: srt-Mahdparutirvdna- (2) vihare
bJiikshu samghasva ” Of the community of friars at the Convent ofthe blessed Great Decease."’^
The character is that of about A. D. 600. Six completespecimens and two fragments of this seal
were found on the site of Mr. Carlleyle'^s bungalow. They all show very distinct marks of strings
on the back,
7. Clay seal, circular, 2 cm. in diameter. In upper half wheel-and-deer symbol. In
lower half, legend in three lines: Sri-Mahdpariyiirvdna'ip) \yihdriydrya-^ bhikshu- (3)
Samghasya Of the community of reverend friars belonging to the Convent of the blessed
Great Decease.^' The character is that of about A.D. 600. One fragment of this seal was
found it has string marks on the back.
;
8. Clay seal, circular, 2*7 cm. in diameter. Symbol in upperhalf lost. Legend in lower half
apparently in three lines Malta'] parinirvvdna {^\yi]hd^riyd) rya-bhikshvi {^p)\sahghasyd\
Of the community of reverend friars belonging to the Convent of the blessed Great Decease.
Date about A. D. 650. Two fragments, one of which was found on the site of Mr. Carlleyle’s
bungalow. A defect specimen has been found in L 7 in the course of last year’s excavations
(List 1905-06, No. 7).
9. Clay seal, elliptical, 2*6 x 3 cm. Wheel-and-deer symbol over legend in three lines.
Sri-Mahdparinirvvdna-ip] mahdvihdriydrya-{'^) bhikshu-sanghasya ^^Of the community of
reverend friars attached to the great Convent of the blessed Great Decease."” Date c. A.D. 750.
Some forty specimens and two hundred fragments were found in the corner between monastery
D and the wall connecting it with A. {Cf. List 1905-06, No. 9). On one fragment the legend is
combined with Silagupta (beneath No. 37).
10. Clay seal, circular, 2 cm. in diameter. Wheel-and-deer symbol over legend in three
lines : Sri-Mahdparimrvvdna (2) vihdriydrya-bhikshu-{'^ sanghasya ^^Of the communityof re-
verend friars belonging to the Convent of the blessed Great Decease.” Date A.D. 900. Eighty
specimens andhundred-and-eighty fragments w^ere found in the corner betw^een monastery D and
the wall connecting it with A. [Cf. List 1905-06, No. 12.)
11. Clay seal, circular, 3 cm. in diameter, Wheel-and-deer symbol over legend in two lines :
Srhnad-‘Eranda-7na}idvihdri{2)ydrya-bhikshu-sanghasya the community of reverend friars
belonging to the great Convent of Eranda."’ Date c. A.D. 750. One complete specimen and
eight fragments werefound in the corner between Monastery Dand the wall connecting it with A.
12. Clay seal, circular, 2*5 cm. in diameter. Wheel-and-deer symbol over legend in two
lines, illegible, except last three sanghasya. One defaced specimen.
Personal Seals.^
13. Circular seal, 1*8 cm. in diameter. \ Ghandakasya, Conch-shell above and
conventional lotus under legend. 107 specimens, of which 50 are complete and 57 fragments. On
fourteenof these seals the legend is combined with Vidhisamparasya (beneath No. 14), on ten
with Tdrdsrayah (No. 25), on one with Apramada (double legend, No. 15), on one wdth
Prasdntasrzprabha 16), on one with (No. 39), and on one with skeleton
1 Cf. A.S. R., 1905-06, p. 83.
2 Nearlyall the seals described herewere foundin the refuse heapbetween theeast wall of Monastery Dad
the wall runningeast frcm itsnorth-eastcorner. Ofthose found elsewhere, the findspot will be speciallv staled
Their date mustliebetween A. D. 700 and 1000 exceptperhaps No. 13, which may belong to the seventh century

.
64 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
seal (No. 76). One of the seals on which thelegend occurs combined with Vidhisamparasya was
found on the site of Mr. Carlleyle^s bungalow.
14. Circular seal^ 2*2 cm. in diameter. Legend : Vidhisamparasya, Conch-shell above,
conventional lotus under legend. Nine specimens, of which one complete and eight fragments.
Besides thirteen specimens (three complete) combined with Ghandakasya (No. 13.)
15. Oval seal, i*6 by i cm. Legend, Apramada. Sixteen specimens (eight complete) :
of which one with triple legend, three with double legend, one combined v/ith Ghandakasya (No.
13), one with Abhiprasiddhi (No. 39), and one wnth Vdsukasya (No. 20), The one with triple
legend was found on the top of the east wall of L, at the entrance of this building. Cf. List
1905-06, No. 15.
16. Circular seal, 2 cm. in diameter. Legend : Prasdntasriprahha. Conch-shell above, and
conventional lotus underlegend. Twenty-three specimens (seven complete), of which one with
triple legend and combined with Ghandakasya (No. 13). One seal on which the triple legend
is combined with Vikkakasya (No. 35) was found in the courtyard of I and a defaced single
specimen on the top of the east wall of L. Cf, beneath No. 45.
17. Circular seal, i*8 cm. in diameter. Legend : Sdntajndna, Twenty-three specimens
(seven complete), of which one with triple legend, two combined with Vikkakasya (No. one
35),
with \Cchatf 7'a'\ datta (No. 74) and one with goose seal (No. 77).
18. Circular seal, 1-5 cm. in diameter. Legend : Anandasi{m]ghasya. Bee (?) above, flower
vase under legend. Twelve specimens (five complete), ofwhich one with double legend. A bad
specimen of this seal was found in the entrance room of J.
ig. Circular seal, 2 cm. in diameter. Legend : Gangajasya (?). Radiated ornament above.
Nineteen specimens (three complete), of which one with double legend.
20. Circular seal, rS cm, in diameter. Legend : Vdsukasya. Fifteen specimens (five com-
p A l b e h te i ) p , r o a f s w t h d i d c M h h o ( n N e o. co 3 m 9 b ) i a n n e d d o w n it e h w G it a h ng A a b j h a i s p y r a ds ( i N d o. dh 1 i 9 h ), ( o N n o e . w 3 i 9) th a A nd pr s a ke m l a e d to a n ( ( N N o o . . 1 7 5 4 ) ) , . two with
21. Circular seal, 17 cm. in diameter. Legend: Vdsukasya. Sun beneath. Three speci-
mens (two complete), of which onecombined with Tdrasrayah (No. 26). Cf. List 1905-06 No -
22. Elliptical seal, 17 byo’S cm. Legend: Vasu{kasya). One specimen with double’legen 1 d’
which
23.
on
E
e
ll
w
ip
i
t
t
i
h
ca
d
l
ou
s
b
e
l
al
e
,
le
I
g
'
e
6
nd
b
.
y i cm. Legend: Srinda. Nine specimens (.six comp^lete)
'
, of
.4. Elliptkal „al, .7 by .-2 cm. L.gcad . nralr„.l,. Seen specimen, (three com-
C pl f e , te, Li o s f t w 1 h 9 . 05 c - h 06 o , ne No w . t. 2 h 1. double legend aod one combined with i V (No 7=)
25. Circular seal, 1-2 cm in diameter. Legend : Tdrasrayah. Sun above. .Seventeen
combined
...ifb
^pcdmen combined ,ritb
2 - , 8 . . C C i i r r c c u u l l a a r r se s a e l al, 1- 1 6 7 cm. cm i . n m dia d me m t m e e r t . er. Leg L e e n g d en : d rnVdfrnyurym One specimen.
complete), of which one with doublelegend.
; Five s^pecciimmeennss f(ttwmoo
under 29 l . eg C e i n r d c . ular Fi s v ea e l, sp . e - c 6 i c m m e . ns in ( d t i h a r m e e e te c r o . mple L t e e g ) e . nd . Tarm.r.na, Conch-shell aboovvee. bDeeee P {. I 7
30. Circular seal, 1-4cm. in diameter. Legend
bolt (?) under legend, two fragments. : Jartfiarau ’ tr rcmv-iu u ^11 ab u ove, thunder-
31. Circular seal, 1-5 (?) cm. in diameter T Armr..;! . r-T-- -i
separated from legend by horizontal line. Tw'o fragments." Conch-shell above,
32. Circular seal, 1-4 cm. in diameter. Legend: Tdrdbala
.
and under legend. Six specimens (three compl ^ ete). One fra^gment was fo"
of J. Cf. List 1905— 06, No. 20 ‘ side

a
EXCAVATIONS AT KASIA. 65
33. Circular seal, i cm. in diameter. Legend : Taraka (?). Om symbol above. One spe-
cimen with double legend.
34. Elliptical seal, 2 2 by i cm. Legend : Jakshapalita, Four specimens (three complete),
of which one with double legend.
35. Circular seal, 2 cm. in diameter. Legend : Vikkakasya. Sun above, goose under
legend. Nine specimens (two complete).
36. Elliptical seal, 1*6 by 0*8 cm. Legend: Vikkdkasya, One specimen combined with
P
rathdnasriprabha (No. 16),
37. Circular seal, 1*7 cm. in diameter. Legend : Silagupta. Half-rosette above, twig
underlegend.' Fourspecimens (two complete).
38. Circular seal, 17 cm. in diameter. Legend : Silagupta, Half-rosette above, twig under
legend. Two fragments, one combined with Mahdparinirvdna seal No. 9.
39. Circularseal, i*8 cm. in diaaiieter. Legend in two lines : Abhiprdsi{2)ddhih. Rising
sun above. Seven specimens (threecomplete), of whichonecombined with Gharidakasya (No. 13),
two with Vdsukasya (No. 20), one with skeletonseal (No. 76) and one with both,
40. Elliptical seal, i'6byo*6cm. Legend: Abhiprasiddhi, Nine specimens, of which six
combined with Kumlafi ll (No. 43) and one with Kusalah || and Apramdda (No. 15). One with,
single legend was found in the courtyard of D. Cf. List r905-06, No. 16.
41. Circular seal, 1*4 cm. in diameter. Legend : Ratnamati, Thunderbolt (?) above. One
specimen.
42. Elliptical seal, i‘8 by 07 cm. Legend : Dejiukasya. One specimen.
43. Elliptical seal, 1*5 by 0*5 cm. Legend : Kusalah 1| . Eight specimens, of which six com-
bined with Abhiprasiddhi (No. 39). Cf. List 1905-06, No. 17.
44. Circularseal, 17 (?) cm. in diameter. Legend : Kamalasriprabha. Scrolled ornament
beneath. Four fragments.
45. Elliptical seal, i*6 (?) by 0‘6 cm. Legend : {^Prdd\s\^d'\ntasriprabha. One fragment
with triple legend. Cf, above No. 16.
46. Circular seal, i*6 cm. in diameter. Legend : Kamala\j>ra'\bha. One specimen,
47. Circularseal, i cm. in diameter. Legend: Sarvvasiddhi, Foliated ornament above.-
One specimen.
48. Oblong seal, i by o’6 cm. Legend : Sarvvamitra. One specimen,
49. Elliptical seal, 1*6 by 0 8 cm. Legend : Yakhuka\syad\ One specimenwith double legend,
50. Circular seal, 1*5 (?) cm. in diameter. Legend : Padmauala , .Conventional lotus
beneath, indistinct objectabove both separatedfromlegend by horizontal line. Two fragments.
;
51. Elliptical seal, i*i by o*8 cm. Legend: \Sar\vakasya. One specimen with triple-
legend.
52. Oblong seal. Legend : . . sila. One fragment.
53. Oblong seal, i*6 (?) by 0*8 cm. Legend : Dugasarana. One fragment.
54. Elliptical seal, 1*8 by 07 cm. Legend : \Chchhaffra'] daitah. One specimen.
55. Elliptical seal, 2*2 (?) by o 6 cm. Legend : Ydgadattah. One specimen,
56. Oblong seal, 1*5 by 0*5 cm. Legend: \_Bhurdva'\radattasya, One specimen.
57. Circular seal, i cm. in diameter. Legend: Valabha. Tw’O fragments, wdth three
impressions.
58. Oblong seal, height I'l cm. Legend : Srimamd\ka'\, One fragment.
59. Circular (?) seal, 1*5 (?) cm. in diameter. Legend in two lines : Priya ..(2) gupta.
Ornament above. One fragment.
(?)
60. Oblong seal, 17 by 0*5 cm. Legend: \_HaraYR,asya. Two specimens with double-
legend.
61. Oblong (?) seal. Legend in two (?) lines : iBdldl ..One fragment.
62. Circular seal, 2 cm. in diameter. Legend .dry Sun above, Two fragments,
.
63. Oblong seal, i cm. high. Legend: . .One fragment.
K

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
66
64. Circular seal, i‘5 cm. in diameter. Legend '....manasya. Date 7th century. One spe
cimen found on the site of Mr, Carlleyle’s bungalow.
65. Circular seal, 2 cm. in diameter. Legend effaced. Bull couchant to right overlegend.
One specimen found outside i.
66. Circular seal, 3*5 (?) cm. in diameter. Winged flying figure (Gandharva ?) to right
One
apparently carrying flowers. Legend alonglower edge indistinct {Sri]mad-{d]-ina...sya.
:
specimen much defaced.
67. Oblong seal, 1*5 by i (?) cm. Legend : Virasenasya. One fragment found near entrance
of I, at the south-west corner ofthe eastern-most projection.
68. Oblong seal, 1*5 by i cm. Legend: Srihalah. Lotus^budbeneath. One complete speci-
men with double legend and one fragment.
69. Circular (?) seal, 3 (?) cm. in diameter. One fragment on which one line of writing
and foliage beneath. Legend : Srisl^e"] nasya.
70. Elliptical seal, 1*9 by 07 cm. Legend: Ldchekasyah. One specimen with triple
legend.
71. Circular seal, i cm. in diameter. Legend: Sdntajndna II (?). One specimen with
double legend.
72. Circular seal, 1*5 (?) cm. in diameter. Two geese facing each other. Traces of legend
beneath. One fragment.
73. Circular seal, V2 cm. in diameter. Legend: Vinltamata (?). Two specimens.
74. Elliptical seal, 1*3 by 0*5 cm. Legend: {Cchatfra]datta. One specimen with double
legend combined with Sdntajndna (No.17 C/. above, N0.54).
75. Elliptical seal, 2(?) by 07cm. Legend : {Divoilharaprabha^ One fragment.
Non«inscribed Olay Seals.
76. Circular seal, i*5cm. in diameter. Skeleton seated cross-legged within circle.
Twenty-three specimens(fifteen complete), of which twocombined with Ghandakasya (No. 13)
and two with Abhiprdsiddhi (No. 39). One fragment was found on the platform to the east of
N. Cf, List 1905-06, No. 30.
77. Circular seal, 1-5 cm. in diameter. Skeleton seated cross-legged within circle.
Skullon both sides and bird perched on each shoulder. Three specimens. Cy*. List 1905-06,
No. 32.
78. Circular seal, r 6 cm. in diameter* Skeleton standing. On both sides a bird perched
on a skulL One specimen.
79. Oblong seal, 1*6 by i cm. Goose to right. Two specimens, of which one combined
with Sdntajndna (No. 17).
80. Oblong seal, r6 by 07 cm, Goose to left. One ^specimen.
81. Oblong seal, r6 by 1 cm. Tridented thunderbolt (?) resembling fleur-de-lis. Two
specimens, of which one combined with bossed seal (No. 86).
82. Circular seal, 2 cm. in diameter. Scrolled ornament. One specimen.
83. Elliptical seal, i by 07 cm. Nine dots, one in centre and eight forming a circle
around. One specimen with four seal impressions.
84. Square seal, 3 cm. long and wide. Four square bosses. Two specimens,
85. Circular seal, 3 cm. in diameter. Three square bosses. Three specimens.
86. Circular seal, 2*5 cm. in diameter. Three square bosses. Five specimens (two
complete), of which one combined with thunderbolt seal (No. 81).
Votive Tablets.
87. Fragment (height 8 cm.) of large circular (?) tablet, containing tw^o over three
lines ofobliterated writing (Buddhist Creed?). Found to the east of stupa No, 34.

EXCAVATIONS AT KASIA. 67
88. Fragment of elliptical tablet with seated Buddha figure described in List 1905-06,
No. 28. Found east of D.
89. Two elliptical tablets with seated Maitreya figure described in List 1905-06, No. 29.
Found east of D.
90. Elliptical tablet, die surface 5*5 by 3*5 cm. Raised border partly broken. Bddhisattva
seated on lotus, right arm resting on right knee Left hand holds flower stalk.
Triple halo round head. Found east of D.
91. Fragmentof elliptical tablet about 4 cm. wide. Lower portionof Bodhisattva (?) figure
seated on lotus, the right leg hanging down. Traces of inscription beneath. Found east of D,
92. Circular tablet 2*2 cm. in diameter. Buddhist Creed in four lines. Date c. A.D. 600.
Eighteen complete specimens and six fragments. Five were found among the southern-most
group of monuments. Cf. List 1905-06, No.26.
93. Circular tablet, i’8 cm. in diameter. Buddhist Creed in five lines. Date c. A.D. 600.
Four specimens found among the southern-most group of monuments.
94. Circular tablet, i*8 cm. in diameter. Buddhist Creed in four lines. Date uncertain.
Fifty-six specimens all more or less obliterated, found on site of Mr, Carlleyle's bungalow.
95. Circular tablet, 2 cm. in diameter. Buddhist Creed in five lines. Date c. A.D. 800.
Three specimens found east of D.
96. Circular tablet, 1*4 cm. indiameter. Buddhist Creed in si lines. Date uncertain. Two
specimens.
97. Elliptical tablet, 3 by 2*6 cm. Buddhist Creed in six lines. Date c. A.D. 1000..
One specimen found among southern-most group of monuments.
Ph. Vogel.
J.

SARNATH
The bulk of the excavations carried out at Sarnath in the spring of I9°7 ^ 3-7
be saidto cover, generally, three distinct areas of ground : namely, (i) the area
to the west of the main shrine, which was brought to light by Mr, F. 0 , Oertel in
1905, (2) the areato the east ofthesame structure, and (3) the area to the north of
the last mentioned, whichwe may designate the “ monastery” area. To facilitate our
description of the work, each of these areas will be dealt with separately in the
order indicated. In addition, there will also be a few other miscellaneous items of
work to be described, which do not fall naturally into any of these three divisions.
Area to thewest of the Main Shrine.
The concrete floor around the main shrine marks a relatively late epoch in the
history of Sarnath, and one of the initial objects of last season’s excavations was to
examine the ground below it, particularly in the neighbourhood of the Asoka pillar.
The floor was accordingly removed in front of the western porch, leaving a strip of
concrete, approximately 3' 10" wide, parallel to the shrine, in orderto afford a passage
way and at the same time keep the foundations of the shrine secure. At this place,
the concrete is about one foot thick, consisting of several (atleast five) distinct layers,
superimposed one above the other at different epochs. Underneaththe floor, at a dis-
tance of 12' from the shrine, three stone steps werelaidbare, the topmost of which w'as
found about i' 1" below the upper surface of the concrete, while the lowest was some
3' below. These steps do not appear to bear any relation to the main shrine, as
neither do they run parallel to it nordoes their centre line coincide with the centre of
the west facade.
The stairs lead down to a stone pavement which surrounds the A 4oka pillar, and
measures 18 1 from north to south and 16' 9"'’ from east to west. This pavement
(No. I in site plan), which was broken on the south side, was to a great extent com-
posed of stones taken from older structures, amongwhich were found bases of images,
carved stones, rail-bars and other architectural fragments. Among them may be
noticed, particularly, the sculpture shown in Plate XIX, i. It belongs tothe Gupta period
and is the latest of all. The rest, which belong to the late Mauryan epoch, are ex-
emplified in Plate XIX, 2 and 3. A photograph of the steps and stone pavements

SARNATH.
given in figure i. It may be surmised that both were constructed at a time when
the ground around the pillar had risen, in order to keep the inscription on it open
to view.
\\ ith a view to examine the ground below the stone pavement round the pillar
the stones on the west and north side were carefully numbered and removed to the
museum. Digging was then continued and, at a depth of 2^ feet below the stone
pavement, the brick walls shown in Plate XVI II were laid bare around the pillar. The
Innermost one, which had alreadybeenstruck by Mr, F. O. Oertel when he sank a shaft
Fig. I.
to the bottom of the column, contained six layers of large bricks (average size, i6f
X X The next, which was separated from the innermost bya narrow space
1 2f").
about 2" broad, contained five courses and rested on a thin layer of concrete which
exterided outwards from the foot of the inner wall, and had evidently done duty as
..a floor. Extending over the top of both these wallg was another concrete floor, the
limits of which could not be ascertained. It averaged 3^" in thickness, and was 2' 6"
below the stone pavement described aboye,- thus marking another stage in the various
floors which were laid one above the other at different dates as the ground around the
•column gradually rose.' The.third and fourth w’alls start approximately from the
• ,
same foundation level as the inner ones, and the fourth rises to .within about eight
^ Overthis concrete floor,ontheeastside, were^fivelayers of brick.

70 ARCH.EOI.OGICAF, REPORT.
inches of the stone pavement. The third wall is composed of bricks of the same size
as the second the fourth of brickbats, well cut and moulded on the outer surface.
;
What preciselywas the purpose of these walls is not altogether evident, but they would
seem to have formed asort of cJiabutra or platform round the column, the size ofwhich
increased as time went on. A little to the north of the stone pavement, and near its
north-west corner, a fine alms-bowl was brought to light, about 3' below the level
of the pavement. It is of black clay, smeared apparently on the outside with a
mucilaginous gum, which has imparted to it a glossy surface. From the section of
the pillar and its surroundings, it will be observed that thelower partof the shaft to a
height of 7' 5" was left undressed. This portion was, of course, left buried in the
ground from the outset, and we may assume thatthe dividingline between the rough
and polished surfaces marks the ground level when the column w'as first erected.
We
shall see later on that bases of various buildings have cometo light approximately
at this level and we can hardly be wrong in assigning themto the Mauryanperiod.
The polished part ofthe pillar, it should beadded, beginsat a depth of 6' g^" below the
stone pavement, and 8' below the bottom of the inscription, while the distance from
the top of the innermost,brick wall to the stone paving is 2' 8^", and up to the base
of theinscription 3' i T'.
Continuing the digging, a trench was next sunk to the east of the stone steps,
in order to ascertain if traces could be found of the foundations of any structure to
'which the steps might have led. No such structure, however, existed, the only
remains which came to light being two small walls which run in an easterly direction
under the mam shrine. The wall to the north was plain that to the south was
;
faced with plaster, with traces of painting on it. Probably it belonged to a small
stu^a or shrine.
At the north end of the steps is a short brick wall {a, a, in plan) running in a
northerly direction, between wbiich and the main shrine four stupas came to light.
The one near the north end of the stairs (3) is square with recessed corners, built of
bricks measuring 8" to io"X5" X 2|" and bearing traces of plaster. It has, on the
w'est side, been partly overbuilt by another square stupa (2), which runs on under the
topmost stone of the steps. To the north of this stupa are two other ones and
(4 5)
built on the same level, side by side, 2' 1 1" below the concrete pavement. The
former has the same shape as that just described (bricks 8f"x6f" x 2 No.
f") ; 5 is
quadrangular with plaster-covered mouldings. No small finds were made in laying
bare these structures, but a defaced sitting Buddha was dug out about 4 below the
concrete floor between them and the A 4oka pillar.
A
little to the east of this group of stupas is another long wall {b. b, in plan)
running'along the west front of the main shrine and beyond k towards both the
north and the south. (See fig. 2.) It has not as yet been laid bare in its whole
length in either direction, but its length, as at present ascertained, is some 145 feet
In the course of following it up and clearing the early structures alongside was
it, it
necessary to remove one or two of the later foundations brought to light' by Mr.
Oertel. In the case of one of these, vtz., the round stupa with irregular base
shown in Mr. Oertel’s plan to the north-west of the main shrine, it was found that an
older structure existed beneath it, in which an image of Avalokite§vara was found

SARNATH.
71
(Plate XIX, 8).' Another image of the Buddha in the teaching attitude with traces of
red paint (Plate XIX, 7)® also came to light in this building®, a little to the east of
the last mentioned.
To return, however,
to the long wall w'hich
we were describing.
In front of the main
shrine it follows,
roughly, the conforma*
tion of thebuilding, but
extends well beyond it
to the north. Near the
north-west corner of
the shrineit was giving
way, and had to be
partly rebuilt in order
to secure the founda-
tions of the shrine.
Along the westfront of
the shrine the wall
runs under the fagade
of the shrine itself and
in order to provide a
passage in front, a new
wall had to be built up.
This addition has been
shown without shading
in the plan.
At the south-west
corner of the shrine.
Fig- 2. also, thewall had partly
fallen, but it Tvas picked
up again, parallel to the shrine, in the first recess, and thence traced south-
wards, partly overbuilt by more modern structures. The base of this wall goes
down about six feet below the concrete pavement. Here and there on its western
face are remnants of chunam plaster, which, however, are too broken to allow- us to
determine with certainty the precise level of the original floor on this side. The size
of the bricks used in it varies from 1 5^" to 8" X bi" X 2-J", the biggest ones being
found generally towards the base. Various small antiquities were found alongside
the wall. About 18' south of the main shrine, a fragment of highly polished sand-
stone, perhaps originally belonging to the sandstone railing in the south chapel of the
shrine, was found three feet below the concrete on the north side of the wall.
Carved stones and bricks and pieces of pottery were brought to light at different
^ Cy. Listofsculptures,No. 32. ^ No. i.
|
*Indicated in Mr. Oertei’splan byan irregular line.

.
ARCH/EOI.OGICAf. REPORT.
72
levels all along the wall. Of more importance was a fine capital of a pillar, found 4
below the level of the concrete floor, 10^ from the north-west corner of the mciin
shrine. The capital belongs to the late Mauryan period and is finely carved (PI.
XlXj 4-5 and 6). On one face is represented a horse and rider, and on the other
an elephant with two mahauts, while on the sides are Perso-Ionic volutes and pal-
mettes. Above the capital was a layer of bricks, (152^^ [long X iiM' thick). These
were abutting against the wall, and had to be removedin order to reach the capital.
Six feet further north was found a boldly carved terracotta ornament, of the
earlv Gupta period, 2^ feet below the level of the concrete, and 20 feet still further
north, at the point where the wall turns eastward, a defaced mediaeval Buddha statue.
It is noticeable that the concrete floor around the main shrine does not extend as far
north-west as this point.
x^i.mong the structures at the north end of the long wall two broken bowls, a'
plaster head, some clay lamps and parts of statues, etc., were found. The most
interesting of these is a small votive stiipa of the late mediaeval type (PI. XIX, 9^).
A
very fine alms-bowl of brown clay was also found 9' north of the wall and 18'
north-w'est of the north-west corner of the main shrine.
To the south-west of the main shrine, the long w'all is overbuilt w'ith several
other structures. One of these was the building shown on Mr. OerteFs plan near the
south-west corner of the main shrine. In this building, several antiquities were
found, notably a fine pilaster and a terracotta spiral on the north, and the capital of
a pillar on the west. At this point, the long wall runs under the eastern side of the
quadrangle. This quadrangle is composed of tw^o la3'’ers of walls, one built above
the other with a slightly different orientation. The average size of the bricks in the
lower walls is ii"X 2^" on the exposed face; those of the upper walls are of various
irregular sizes. The building K on Mr. Oertel’s plan on the north side of this quad-
rangle appears to be thebasement of a sttlpa it stands 3' high and is built of bricks
measuring 17^'X 10^"X 2\". As it now became difficult to follow up the long wall om
its west side, an attempt was made to pick it up on the east. The trial trench sunk
for that purpose, however, soonmevealed the existence of several structures which,
unfortunately, there was no time to lay bare completely. The most important of these
is the building marekd 7 in the plan. The plinth will probably be found to be rect-
angular in plan with recessed corners. Only one corner, however, has as yet been-
excavated. It is builtof bricks measuring to iii'''X2r. The moulding^ of.-
this plinth {cf PI. XXI, b) are of interest by reason of their quasi-classical form.
' >
They consist pf a torus and scofia with 'fillets between. .The bricks for theses-
mouldings were modelled before being baked, There is no trace of chiselling on
them. A few' remnants of plaster w-ere found adhering here and there when the
plinth was first laid bare, but they quickly fell off on exposure to the air.
BeW
this plinth remnants of an older w^all (8) protrude, built of bricks i6|'''x 12"":
X3^ It is of interest to compare the levels of these walls with that of the stone
pavement round the A§oka pillar. The base of the protruding wall (8) is f \" below-
the stone pavement, and a few inches below theline that divides the rough and polished:,
surface of the pillar, while the base of the plinth above (7) is a few inches higher.
^ Cf: List ofsculptures, No. 5S.

SARNATH.
AT
EXCAVATIONS

;
SARNATH.
73
Four and a half feet east of the protruding wall another one, parallel to it and con-
structed of the same sized bricks, runs underneath the plinth referred to. At this
place various broken potteries and sculptured stones were brought to light. Among
them may be noticed a piece of Mauryan carving (PI, XX, i and 2), found 4' to-
the east of this wall and 3' below the concrete. On one side of the stone is adhar-
machakra surrounded by four symbols (? kurmachakra) and by four lotus flowers
;
and flanking it on either side is a triifda surmounting a wheel. On the other side
of the stone is a tree with hanging garlands and apparently a platform around it or a
throne in front of it. To the left of this tree is a pillar with a Persepolitan capital
surmounted by an uncertain figure. The remainder of this side is taken up with
foliage.
The only other structures on the south side of the A§6ka pillar to be noticed
here are a group of stupas marked 10, n, and 12 in the plan. All three are of the
same shape and are built side by side on the same floor, which consists of a double
course of bricks and brickbats of varying sizes covered with a thin layer of plaster.
—
This floor is 4' 4" below the level of the concrete surrounding the main shrine as
will be seen from the plan and photograph (fig. 3). The plinths of the stupas
Fig. 3.
are cruciform, with recesses in each corner. Above the plinth is a round drum sur-
mountedby a dome. The upper part has been much damaged in all the stupas but
least so in the westernmost (12), which has not yet been completely excavated.
The northernmost of these stupas was opened but nothing was found inside nor were
;
any antiquities of interest discovered near them, with the exception of some carved
terracottas of the Gupta period.
To the west and north-west of the A§6ka pillar numerous small stUpas were laid
bare. Most of them are approximately on the same level as the concrete pavement
L

.
akch.-eological report.
3 a . n r d oun i d n J i a t,\, n \Q um 7n b ai e i- r i o s f hIru c i a e s ^. es b T r th i n c pe ks bb o rn f icc d Kk i Ss ff uu er ss e ee n da t s i i n ze t s he ,h s a e ve st b, r e u e ct n ur u e s s ed a i r - r e n not sp a e nr c i ia tt l hh ly ee l ss ar aa g mm e ee ,
building, quantities of them having obviously been taken from older
of these memorials can, on structural and other grounds, be assigned o
l e a p t o e ch p . erio T d hi a s s t d h i e ve f r n g a e i n n ce sh o r f i d im a , tes wh i i s le re o f t l h e e c r t s e , d a a l g s a o in i , n t a h r e e m r i e n e o r r a a e nbq^uities founda «neeaarr
the different buildings. One of the earliest finds made in this part of the site was a
Buddha image (PI. XX, 6 with an inscription belonging to the eleventh century A. .
As can be seen from the ) plan, these sttipas are arranged for the most part iii rows,
apparently in relation to the main shrine. Several rows run, roughly, parallel with the
west front of the tnain shrine, while others follow the line of the north side.
Of the stupas not contained in these rows but set here and there apparently
we may
without any definite plan, several are of exceptional interest. In particular
notice the'structure marked .3 in the plan, north-west of the western entrance of the
main shrine. The accompanying illustration (fig. 4) shows its general features
Fig. 4.
a square moulded plinth, and a round superstructure with a niche facing the east, in
which there must once havebeen a statue. In the narrow passage between this struc-
ture and the neighbouring onetothe south was found a fragment ofa stone umbrella
with a Pali record inscribed upon it, belonging to the second or third century A.D
(See below. Inscriptions No. III.)
Other interesling antiquities were found in the same neighbourhood, just
in front of the neighbouring to the south (14) the base of a mediaeval image
Cf, Listofsculptures, No. 5.

a
SARNATH.
75
was unearthed, i' below the level of the concrete. To the west of the sa.rcie stuf:a,
again, and about 4' below the concrete, part of a lintel of Gupta date (PI. XX, 5)
was turned up, and, further west, part of a statue of Gupta date with a garland-bearing
Gandharva flying to the right. A carved stone also of the Gupta period was found 8"
north of the north-west corner of the stupa (13) and 5-|'' below the surface.
Some antiquities were likewise dug out in the neighbourhood of the series of
stupas shown on the plan as running east to west to the north of the stupa 13, notably
some fragments of Buddha statues, including a seated image (PI. XX, 3) h
To the west of the stupa 13 are a series of four stupas, running from north to
south, the southernmost of which is figured as No. 15 in the plan and to the w'est of
;
these, again, is another row of eight structures. At the north-west cornerof this latter
rowwas found a carved stone similar tothat illustrated in Plate XX, 5 and between the
;
second and third5/27/1^5 from the north, Nos. 17 and 18, a relief with several figures of
the Buddha" together with asmall terracotta jar. Another similar relief ®was lying on
the top of the stupa No. 18 [cf. PI. XX, 4). Of greater interest was a sculptured
slab found in situ fixed into the south side of the stupa 20, and containing illustrations
of the principal scenes from the Buddha’s life^ The Buddha image illustrated in
Plate XX, 6. andbearing an inscription of the eleventh century A. D., was found close
to the south-east corner of the structure.
In addition to the host of small stupas to the west of the main shrine, some
larger structures were also brought to light. One of them, in the south-w'est corner
of this part of the site (22 on site plan), had already been struck, by Mr. Oertel. It
is, without doubt, a stfipa, divided up, as often happens, into compartments, which were
filled with debris and constituted the foundations of the building. A.ll the corners of
this edifice, with the exception of the south-east one, are more orless damaged®. The
central room in the western row is longer than the others. In front of the stupa, on
the east side, at a distance of i' 4" from it, is a wall 3' thick and 2' 2" high, built of
brickbats. This wall may be assumed to havebeen returned around all four faces of
the stupa, and to haveformedthe foundation of its outer platform. Its exterior face has
athin coating of plaster. Atalaterdate, a second wall of rubble, about 3' 6 " broad, was
added, and above it a thick layer of concrete, which extends over part of the inner
wall also. Very few small antiquities were found inside this building. In the central
chamber, on the w'est side, the fragment ofa hand holding the fold of a garment turned
up, and at the north-west corner, a gold nose ornament and the arm of a statue.
Outside, however, the minor antiquities were more numerous. Among them may be
noticed a carved brick, dating from about the eighth century A.D. and part of abrittle
stone ring found onthe north side a seated Buddha found on the south side and a
; ;
carved brick with a short inscription in Guptacharacters, and several sealsnearthe east
side. The seals bear a legend which refers them to the “ Gandhakuti of the Exalted
—
One in the monastery of the wheel of the good law ” {Cf. Inscriptions No. V
below.)
1 Cf, List ofsculptures No.3. Found3' C’ below thesurface to thenorth of theeasternmost ofthese
2 List,55. Found3' below surface.
M
’
J
List, 54-
3t, 5i.
® The bricksused in this building are of varyingsizes,such as 9‘'X44''X2|'’; 1.0^' 54-^ x 2J'' ;
L 2

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
76
To the north of the last mentioned structure is another building of considerable
dimensions (23 in plan). It consists of walls built at various periods. 1 he oldest
of it appears to be the quadrangular foundation at the north-east corner, which is ui t
of large bricks, 5"X 10"X Thenorthern wall is also relatively early, and is better
1 much
preserved than most of the remaining portion. 1he building is, unfortunately,
damaged, and it will never be possible to reconstruct its plan in its entirety. More of
it, however, mav yet come to light in the ground towards the north and west. Archi
tectural fragments, carved bricks and stones and pottery were found at several points
in and around this building, among them being part of a seated Buddha statue found
at the south-west extremity of the building, and some finely carved terracotta bricks
of the Gupta epoch {C/. PL XX, 7).
To the north of the structure just described a deep trial trench was carried in a
north-westerly direction. \’ery few and unimportant finds were made here until
near the edge of the where a singularly massive wall was struck, running from
north to south. The extent to which this wall has been followed up will be clearly seen
from the plan. That it forms the boundary of the sanghdrdma on the western side is
plain from its proximity to thej'/m, butthesmaller walls abutting on to it at right angles
and at regular intervals on its eastern face leave no room for doubt that it formed
also the outer wall of a monastery. The wall has been opened up to a depth of 14
from the surface. It appears from its construction to belong to two different periods,
but further investigations will be necessary to determine this. A finely carved
—
stone—part of a nimbus was found a little east of the southern end and about 7'
below the surface and immediately at the southern end a refuse heap was disclosed,
;
containing potteries, carved bricks, beads, etc.
Eastern Area.’
The excavation to the east of the main shrine covered a rectangular area measur-
ing about 200 feet from north to south and some i 25 feet from east to west. The
first thing taken in hand in this area was the laying bare of the concrete floor which
had been exposed by Mr. Oertel on the other three sides of the main shrine and was
also visible here and there on this side, A trench about 10' wide and 55' long was
drawn in the first instance in front of the shrine, and, on the appearance of a floor, the
digging was extended both north and south and the floor followed up. In the northern
direction it came to an end some 20 feet north of the structure marked 36 on Plate
XVH, and was terminated on the south by the ruinous structure numbered 32 on the
plan. Towards the east it continued intact for some 60 feet from the eastern fa9ade
of the main shrine as far as the low concrete step abutting on the broad approach to
be descrined presently. A large gap, measuring over 36 long by S'broad, exists near
the eastern limit of the floor, due obviously to a cutting made by previous excavators.
As regards the construction of the floor, what has been said above about it on the
west side of the main shrine applies equally to it on this side, only that the concrete
floor in this eastern area was found to have been laid on a substratum of stone work
practicaily co-extensive with the concrete above. The stone foundation was, however,
^ The account which follows of the Eastern Areahas been mainlywritten by Pt. Daya Ranij whotook
charge ofthe diggingin this partof thesite.

C3-EasrE:R-A.i< viiEJ'Vvr ictoiS/Tk:

—
—
,
SARNATH.
77
by no means quite continuous for there were gaps noticeable everywhere. The best
;
preserved portion occurred immediately in front of the eastern doorway of the main
shrine, and, when it was dismantled, it was found to be composed of slabs of varying
sizes and character. Some of them were mere undressed blocks, while others were
elegantly carved, the most conspicuous among them being:
(1) A rectangular ayagapata slab in the Mauryan style, broken at one end.
The left portion is occupied by a figure similar to the one which opens the
Hathi gumpha inscription at Khandagiri, and is identified by Dr.
Raiendralal Mitrawith the tantric kurmachakra, though, as herightlypoints
out, the omission of the tail cannot be accounted for. The remaining sur-
face is taken up by an ornamental wheel surrounded by four tri'sulas and
lotus buds. The slab was originally painted red.
(2) Another slab in the same style, incomplete at both ends, representing
a double iriratna and a svastika engraved in the fashion ofthe Greek fret.
A
smaller piece of the stone foundation, 10' to the south of the portion noticed
above, yielded four specimens of typical Gupta sculpture -vide Nos. 15, 59, 60, and61
of the list of sculptures at the end of this article. A few feet further south was found
a base stone {alabanani) bearing a short inscription (No. 1 of the list of inscriptions)
in characters of the second century B.C. Another inscribed railstone (No. II of list
of inscriptions) was originally dedicated about the same period, but was converted into
A
a lamp-post of the millagandhakutl in the fourth or fifth century A. D. third rail-
stone found not far from the above dates from the sixth century A.D-, (List of in-
scriptions, IX).
The approach alluded to above is a well-built pathway paved with concrete, by
which the monks approached the main shrine from the east. It is wonderfully well
preserved for the fifty feet or so that have so far been exhumed, and is flanked on the
south by three cruciform plinths joined one to the other by a common wall fc. c. on
PI. XVII). A considerable importance attaches to the approach from the stately
array of carvings that were found scattered over it. The most interesting among
these are fragments of a slab of the eighth or ninth century A.D., representing the
eight chief events of the Buddha's career (PI. XXVIII, fig. 4), images of ManjusrI
(PI. XXIII, 10), the Buddha (PI. XXIII, 8), a Bodhisattva (PI. XXIII, 2) and an
inscribed votive stupa k Among the rest were the arms and head of a colossal
sandstone statue anda stonepanel of theseventh or eighth century, carved with scroll
work of a peculiarly intricate type, interspersed with birds, etc.
Built on to this approach was a ruined plastered niche. No, 33 in the plan, 5'
square Internally and composed of bricks measuring x 7 V"X 2". Inside it were
found six carvings, two of which, presumably representing Tara and Vajrasattva, are
described in the list below (Nos. 45 and 37). Two others, constituting the kala'sa of a
donative stupa, are reproduced in Plate XXllI, 7.
That the concrete floor was also not devoid of buildings was proved by the
discovery of the foundations of two square structures (Nos. 34, 35 in plan) consisting
of moulded stones about a foot high, of which there were eight in No. 34 and nine in
the other. The interior was filled with earth, in which were found two fragmentary
^ For descriptions ofthese see Nos. 50, 33, 9, 38, and 58 ofthe list belo^v^.

ARCll/ROLOGICAL REPORT.
78
A
sculptures, representing a full-blown lotus and a broken arm. little to the east of
No 34 lay seven carvings, ofwhich a Buddha head and a fragment of a halo may be
mentioned
About a dozen other structures, which were unearthed on the level of the con-
crete floor and are approximatelv contemporaneous with it^ are plinths of stupas of
the usual square shape. Two of these, found towards the northern end of this area,
had to be demolished to bring to light the structures concealed underneath them. Of
the rest, the largest one (No. 29 of plan) is cross-shaped, measuring 151-' along each
side. Its present height is only 13''', and the usual size of bricks i5"x6"X2^'h
No. 25, situated a few feet to the south of it, is an irregular platform interesting by
reason of two sandstone pedestals standing on it. The one facing w^estward is 3' long
and 1 broad, and belongs doubtlessly to the huge Bodhisattva statue. No. 237 of
h r. Oertel s finds. The connection between them is proved by the fact that the feet,
which still remain on the pedestal, precisely fit the base of the broken statue and
retain, like the statue, clear vestiges of the red paint which covered the whole. It
should be noticed that this statue is in the Kushana style and must originally have
belonged to some building of that period. The image which stood on the other
pedestal could not be traced. The remaining plinths arrange themselves into two
rows running nearly parallel to each other to the east of the last-mentioned structure.
The southern row, w'hich comprises four suchstructures, is partially buried under a long
nail to be noticed below. All these structures have nearly the same orientation and
are made up of bricks varying in size from SY'x6kJ'X2^" to i3"X9"X2i'' laidin
mud, but plastered on the outside with chunam which still adheres to a few ofthem.
Underneath Nos. 26 and31 w^ere observed remains of earlier stupas which could not be
exposed for lack of time.
The digging was then continued to low'er levels, and the first edifice that came to
llghtwasakrge court (No. je.Pi.XVIl) measuring 47!' from north to south and
27r broad rntemally. The walls are only a's" thick, and the foundations about a foot
deep, so that, if they ever earned a roof, it must have been a light wooden one
supported on wooden column,. Therewas only one entrance, »>, in the middle ofthe
eastwall, and thatwithout doors. The commonest
ingare -T'X.if Xsi" and .s'xp'xrr, but man s y ize h s at o s f b a r r i e ck v s is u i s bl e e d in T t h h e e b b ui a l c d k -
wal shows only the larger size and is, with its extensions on both the north and
t a s h p ou p e t e m h a s r e s v o i e d n s es a o a n f r y e t o h o f e nl t c y h ou e r b t u , r il e t m c a o i o v n n e i r n e t g d o w wa t i l t h l h e s. a we t s T h t i h c e w k al c l l o , a a tt w l e i h r n i , g ch o to f o c , l o i n t m s h e e o q p u u l g e a h n st t b e l r o v n w d h s e i e d c e h m in s d b o . e e 0 t s w ha n e v o n e t
3shL
^ presuLbly huned
w ' , al bb l ee I ll S olww a r t p h t r e o f j ’ e c c ” o t n i c o r n et i e n t f h l e oor for a m ro o u f nd a s t o h li e d m n a l i at n fo sh r r m ine , , ,i’ A curious featur p e av o i f n ff g htec a w b e o s u t t
t w u a r l n ls ed a 6 t ' l t o h n e g t a o n p d a r n u d nn it in w g as ab n o o u t t 2 p ' os i s n ib a l d e va to nc a e sc o e f tta t i h n e h f s or ; iT ; e o U’ se The ' nttf""" "
Ihe souths ea . st . , a . nd . n . or . th walls of the buildincr 'w/ArA:. -f * u j
. ....

SARNATH.
79
uprights mth lozenge-shaped cross-bars, lo^" long and 4f" wide, now remain in
position at the w'estem end of the north wall, but the marks on the face of the W'allsj
W'here others have been, are distinctly visible (PI. XXI c). In order to secure
the rails in position against the face of the wall, the interstices between the uprights
and the cross-bars were filled in with brickwmrk, which projects to half the width of
the stone uprights. This brickwork has mostly decayed between the uprights, but
is well preserved at their back. The two uprights which are extant, measure Sf'"' deep,
lol" broad and 5' high, of which the low'est foot is burled in the ground. The cross-
bars are 2' 2" long. Of the coping-rail only one stone was found, {c/. No. i of list of
inscriptions). It is 6' 6" long, i\" broad and 14" high, with curved edges at the top.
The few' parts ofthe railing so far discovered are quite plain, but its age is determined
by the Mauryan inscription on the cope-stone, referred to above. Now, if we judge
by the antiquities found on the floor ofthis court and the level it occupies with regard
tothe monuments unearthed in the western area, w'e find that the dateof the court can
not be earlier than the fourth or fifth century. It is obvious, therefore, thatthe railing
attached to it originally surrounded some earlier building and was shifted here at a
later date.
Only four antiquities w’ere discovered in the interior of this building. The earliest
of these are two very highly polished convex fragments of reddish sandstone, closely
grooved on the concave side, In early Mauryan style. Somewhatlater than these is
the top portion of a corner column ofa railing measuring 2' 5" high and 6^" square.
Two of the faces contain socket-holes to receive the ends of cross-bars. One of the
other two Is divided into panels, of which the upper one represeirts a stuj^ia complete
with relic chamber hti and flags, and encircled by a railing ofthe usual type. Beneath
the stiipa appears a structure with two doors, in each of which stands a figure now
much defaced. The lower panel is canned with a conventional lotus plant bearing
flowers in different stages of development. The other face is decorated with five full-
blown lotuses springing from a wavy stem. The delineation is quite vigorous and well
worthy of the age to which it belongs. The lastand latest of theseobjectsisa fragment
of a pillar decorated with a male figure and jewelled foliage In the typical Gupta style.
In front of the north jamb of the court described above there came to light a
small rectangular cell about 2^' broad internally. The ends of the east and west
walls are both broken and their length could not therefore be determined. The walls
now stand 2' high and are 1' 10" thick, the bricks used in them measuring approxi-
mately lo" X lOf'x The floor is paved In brick and the walls plastered with
chunam. On its back or south wall was the ruin of a later wall, 9' long and 3' thick,
with the end of a long stone threshold fixed into its eastern end, me other end of the
threshold being fixed into a similarly constructed ruined wall, 13' to the south. This
threshold and the walls on each side of it belong to some epoch intermediate
between the date of the concrete floor around the mam shrine and that of No. 36,
but to what building it gave entrance is not apparent.
The other jamb of the entrance has got a solid platform attached to it. Its north
face measures five feet, and begins about a foot above the level of No. 36. The
bricks of which it is composed, are about 16" long and thus seem to have been appro-
priated from some earlieredifice.

8o ARCH.GEOLOGICAL REPORT.
The other structures unearthed on this level are, save a few walls, all stiipas in
different states of preservation Three of them (Nos. 37, 38 and 39) have, practically,
only their plinths left, the superstructure having totally disappeared in No. 38, w’hile in
the other two it survives in a few circular rings of brickwork which rise to the height of
some 5 feet. No, 37 was opened but yielded nothing. Outsidethe structure, however,
several objects of interest were found. One of them is a clay tablet, f" in diameter,
found at its foot on the west. It is stamped with a faduka accompanied by the name
Maghasya in Gupta characters. Some 12 feet to the south of its south-east corner
lay a broken rail-post with an incomplete rosette, and, a little further away, a frag-
ment of a stone frieze, 2' 6" high, containing a figure of the Buddha in the dharma-
chakramndra in a deep circular niche. A head (PI. XXIII, 3) found close to the
above-mentioned corner, is somewhat remarkable, for w’hile the hair is arranged in
spiral curls precisely in the fashion of the Buddha’s hair, the excrescence or bump of
intelligence, one of the 32 greater marks of a Buddha, is absent.
Connectedwith No 38 is a brick floor, measuring about 23' along each side, on
which were discovered several pieces of sculptures and sundry architectural fragments.
The most attractive among them is a broken pediment, representing a woman sitting
with her face concealed between her arms on the knees. In front of the woman is
some sort of a vessel and behind her a lotus bud,
A few' feet 10 the west of No. 39 is a solid platform (No. 32) measuring 16' 6 "
along the south face, which was exposed to a depth of 3' 6T The size of bricks used
in it is 14" X 9'" X 25". On its top exists a stone pedestal 5' long and 14" high, but
none of the images which stood on it were found.
Turning to the northern portion of this area, we find an important structure
(No. 40), brought to light some 34' to the north of No. 36. It is the plinth of a large
stupa, the largest so far unearthed on the
site except the Dhamekh and Jagat Singh
stupas. It measures about 1 8' square and
has a projection 8' broad and 6 " deep
\
in the middle of each face. The mouldings
with w'hich it is adorned at the base are
shown in fig. 5. The plinth is partly
broken onthe south side, but quite intact on
the remaining three sides, where it rises- to
the height of 5' i" above the level of the
brick floor which surrounds the structure
on all sides. The superstructure has all
decayed away with the exception of re-
mains of tw'o niches, 2' 6^" wide and 4' deep, which adorned the drum on the
east and north side?. These niches were bricked up at some later date, w'hen the
whole structure w’ould seem to have been renewed. The eastern niche was freed from-
this filling and found to be plastered like the plinth below.
The structure w'as opened and a little below the top we came upon a.stratum of
unbaked clay tablets. In shape they are hemispherical with a diameter of between
five and six inches. In the centre of the composition appears the Buddha, sitting

,
SAKNATH. 8r
in the blulmisparsaniudra in a shrine surmounted by a spire, the latter having plainly
been introduced by later engravers in imitation of the Bodh-Gaya temple. The
rest of the space is occupied by representations of votive stupas, while below the
Buddha is inscribed the Buddhist creed in characters of the eighth or ninth century.
A little further down in the structure were found four sculptures, all of which are re-
produced in Plate XXIII and describedin the list as Nos. lo, ii, 12, and 40. It will be
seen that all of these are Buddhist, with the exception, perhaps, of No. 1 1, which may
depict Tryambaka holding the club {khalvaiiga) in his left hand and wearing the
characteristic garland of skulls {saDa'sirah-sreni) engaged in a merry dance on the
body of a Jaina patriarch whom he has subdued.^ The presence of an image of
a Brahmanic god and the disparity between the age of these sculptures and the
structure in which they were found, can easily be explained on the hypothesis that
thev were thrown into the structure at the time of the reconstruction referred
to above.
A little to the east of No. .^lo was exposed a wall running from north to south
under a later one with a slightly different orientation, and, about the same distance to
the north, another wall 16' long and 2'-2" thick. This wall is about 2' high and
imbedded in its top was found a well-baked bowl of black clay. A small area to the
north of this wall would appear to have been one of the most sacred spots of Isipatana,
consecrated, perhaps, by some hallowed associations, unknownat present to us. Seven
stupas are to be seen on it, and there are probably many more still concealed under
the later structures. In style these stupas are identical with the two unearthed a few
feet to the south of the Asoka pillar in the western area, and are still standing to the
height of about 6 feet. Six of them are arranged in two row's of three, each perched
on common terraces 2' 6 " high. The drums are 2' in height, but the domes survive
only in a few courses. That the sanctity of tlie spot was maintained for a long time
may be inferred from the fact that all of these structures have been rebuilt several
times. Two of these stupas were opened, but yielded nothing, and w'ere built up again
with the selfsame bricks. Another stupa w'hich came to light a few' feet to the west
ofthese does not differ from them in any respect.
Monastery Area.®
A trial trench drawn through this area in a northerly direction early showed signs
of promise. After only a few hours’ digging several large carved stones were found
near the surface, plainly belonging to a building of massive dimensions then came a
;
small headless statue of the Buddha, bedded in ashes, three feet from the surface and
;
next a narrow passage between plastered walls with a mortised pedestal close beside
it. As the digging widened out, a brick w'all with a finely moulded plinth ending in
w'hat looked like the reveals of a doorw'ay came into view'. This plinth was at once
followed up, first in a westerly and then, turning a corner, in a southerly direction,
and it soon became manifest that it formed part of an important structure, and that
this structure was the one from which the ponderous stone blocks first unearthed had
^ Dr. Konow doesnotassent to thisidentificathm ofthesculpture. — [J. H. M.]
- Incompilingtheaccountof the Monastery Areawehave had the’ advantage^ of the'daily, notes made by
Mr. W, H. Nicholls, late Archaeological Surveyor, United Provinces and the Punjab. -
I\l

; .
52 ARCH.-EOLOGICAL REPORT.
come. At the point where the plinth was first struck, it was standing only to a height
of a little over two feet. Behind it, however, towards the west were the deep brick
foundations of various small chambers, and on the other {i.e., western) face of these
the moulded plinth was again picked up and proved to be in a much better state of
preservation, there being several additional mouldings above those which had appeared
on the eastern face. The height of the wall at this point up to the top of the mould-
ings is 5' \\ in addition to which there are remains of the plain brickwork above.
With the two faces of the edifice thus ascertained, digging proceeded apace, and,
before the season’s work was brought to a close, we had laid bare enough of its walls
to make sure of its character and practically of its plan also. That the building, with
its rows of chambers, its paved courtyard and its well, was a monastery, must indeed
be patent to anyone familiar with Buddhist architecture, and that it rvas designed more
or less after the usual fashion with a large open court in the middle and rows of
chambers around, may be regarded as an almost foregone conclusion. The extent
of the structure excavated up to date is clearly indicated in red on the plan on Plate
XXIV. The main body of the building, so far as it has yet been excavated, mea-
sures 123' from north to south, but it may be expected that we shall find, furtherto the
west, the same sort of projection on the north and south sides that we already have on
the east, and the total measurement, north to south, will then amount to some 170'.
The average height of the brick plinth on the inner face is about 5' 7", and on the
outer face a few inches more. A photograph of the inner corner of the quadrano-]e
is
shownon Plate XXV, a, and a drawing of the details of the mouldings on Plate XXI\’
Though flat and stencil-like, the carving on the brickwork is generally effective The
bricks themselves vary very much in size, but none hitherto measured have exceeded
! 2 inches in length, and an average size seems to be 8j-'''x 71-''' X 2"
The facing bricks have true edges, the surfaces being chiselled, and in the neat-
ness of their fitting bring to mind the beautiful brickwork of some of the earlier
Pagan
buildings. The
inner foundations are
built ofroughunchiselled
bricks; both foundation
and superstructure walls
are constructed with a
core of brick-bats and
debris, No mortar, it is
perhaps needless to say,
is used.
It will be seen, on
reference to the plan on
Plate XXIV, that the
interior of the plinth was
divided upinto anumber
o, c am ers by cross foundation walls. We may take it that these foundations
correspond to the rooms in the superstructure above. Of the latter little remains
-in s^tu the best preserved chamber is the little one at the north end of the eastern

' w, .

SARNATH.
row, with the stone bases offour corner pilasters {cf, fig. 6), and chiselled brick walling
between them, rather less than two feet high. The floor of this chamber is 5'
A
above the ground level outside. vast array of massive stones, comprising door
jambs, lintels, cJihajjas, ceiling slabs and other architectural members, were found
among the debris in the courtyard and on the outside of the building, and it is plain
from these that the superstructure was composed largely of stone, the brick-work
seemingly being used only for walling between the carved stonework. Whether
plaster was intended to be added on the chiselled surface of the w^alls, as was done in
the case of the stupas similarly built, is uncertain. No traces of it have been found,
and it is probable that it never was applied to the walls, though it is pos.sible that it.
may have been intended in the first place.
.A.I1 the stone-work employed in this building appears to have been expressly made
for it, for it is all carved and chiselled in precisely the same style \ while, on the
other hand, no architectural members belonging to older structures have been found
among its debris. As in the case of the brickwork of the plinth, the stone carvings
are verv distinctive, bold and flowing in outline, but quite flat on the surface, and with
none of the vitality and realism which characterise the work on the Dhamekh stilpa
and other sculptures of the Gupta age. Compare fig. 7 and Plate XXVI, 5.
The eastern entrance of the monastery must have presented an imposing appear-
ance. The distance between the reveals is nearly 29', and the whole of this space-
was apparently occupied by a broad flight of steps leading up to the plinth. The
steps themselves no longer exist, but their position seems to be indicated by brick
foundations rising to the height of the plinth between the reveals. The central
chamber of the eastern side may thus be supposed to have done duty as a hall
through which the monks could pass into the interior of the courtyard, the lower
level of which was reached by another flight of steps shown in the photograph on
Plate XXV, h. This latter flight is narrower than the steps on the outside, measur-
ing only 11' 5" across.
The interior of the courtyard has a floor of hard lime plaster. Near the north-
5"
east corner is a well surrounded by a low parapet, 2' broad and rising about one
foot above the level of the courtyard. The layer of plaster with which the parapet
is covered averages 6" in thickness. The interior diameter of the well measures
^ Itisnoteworthythatlayers of masons' chipswerefound onthetop of the plinth and at otherplaces round
aboutthe monastery.
M
2

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
-84
5', and the bricks, which are laid most carefully, are of the same size as those used
in the monastery walls. The courses are laid in the ordinary way for the first 4' 4",
measuring from the top then comes a ring laid as shown in fig. 8, then another 4' 4"
;
of the usual brick-work, followed by another band, and so on down to the bottom.
As regards the date of the building, a certain criterion that we have to go upon
is the style of the stone and brick carvings, which proclaim it to be of approximately
the eleventh century A.D. Carving of a very similar character is to be found in
Hindu buildings at many other places in India, but among the multitude of sculptures
at Sarnath itself the evolution and chronological history of sculpture is so clearly
and strikinglv demonstrated that external evidence is here superfluous. That the
monastery is one of the latest
Buddhist erections at Sarnath is
certain, and that it had not long
been built when destruction over-
took seems manifest from the
it,
unusual freshness of the carvings
in both stone and brick. Indeed,
the discovery, to the west of the
monastery, of a number of unfin-
ished carvinys of identically the
same pattern as those belonging to the structure, suggests that the superstructure
may not have been actuallv completed when ruin overwhelmed it.
Connected with this monasterv and built at approximately the same date are
several walls marked in red on the plan. Two of these start from the south-east cor-
ner, and two more, apparently corresponding to them, from the north-east corner of
the building. All four are of the same construction, being faced with chiselled
bricks averaging about 9^" X 7" X and with a core of brickbats and rubble.
The two walls stretching in an easterly direction average 2' i" thick the two stretch-
;
ing in a northerly and southerly direction average 2' 9" and 2' 8" thick, respectively.
None of these walls has yet been traced to the end, although the one stretching east-
ward from the south-east corner has been followed up for 121 feet. Whether they
divided off courts and gardens belonging to the monastery or what other purpose they
may have served, is not evident, and it would be idle to speculate about it until the walls
themselves have been further followed up.
That there was an open court in front of the eastern approach to the monastery,
is clear from the existence of a massive sandstone pavement, w'hich first appears in
front of the east porch and is found again at a considerable distance further outin a
south-eastern direction. Its extent,' as far as it has yet been traced, will be found
indicated on the plan. Many of the blocks belonging to this pavement appear to have
been taken away by former excavators or for the construction of later buildings, and
relatively few' have so far had to be removed by us in order to carry the digging
down to a lowmr level. It seems, however, practically certain that the whole area
intervening betweenthe existing patches of pavementwas originally paved over.
Above this pavement no structures of any kind have yet been discovei'ed,
-and it is prob.able that none existed, though in view of the disappearance of so much

<XXX\X\\\’KXv

—
SARNATH. S5
'of the pavement itself the fact that no structures have been found could hardly be
taken as evidence that the area covered by the pavement was entirely free of buildings.
Among the multitude of sculptures and terracottas found inside this building
or in the courtyard in front may be not’ced the following three in particular ;
1. Pilaster (PL XXVI, 7) <^-2" high, decorated in the style of the later Gupta
period, of which the treatment of these designs is peculiarly characteristic. The
imitative jewel work, the garland-bearing birds, the makara, the flower vase with
palmettes at the corners, the rosette border and the little figure in the niche beneath
are all motifs well worth noticing.
,2. Slab (PI. XXVI, 3) 14-I" high and i broad, wnth two niches sunk in it. The
purpose of the slab is uncertain. The carving is unfinished.
3. Fragment of a half octagonal door jamb wnth a sculptured border (PI. XXVI,
6). In the border is a line of winged animals and men alternating, the latter attacking
the former with daggers. The pilaster of the jamb is decorated with the familiar
design of chains and bells, garlands and kirtimukha heads. The carving of the
border is particularly vigorous. Height. 5'.
In addition to the above may be noticed also the following sculptures enumerated
in the appendix list below : Nos. 2, 4, 26, 36, 44, 47, 56, 69 and 73.
These antiquities belong to a variety of periods from the early Gupta down to the
twelfth century A.D., and it is obvious that many of them must have been rescued from
-earlier buildings belonging to alower stratum. This is what happened also to the early
statues and other carvings found by Mr. Oertel around the main shrine, and it is a
fact which, unless it is carefully borne in mind, may lead anyone who attempts to date
the later buildings at Sarnath by the help of detached finds or by architectural members
built into them into great error.
Earlier Monastery.
A
second important structure, partly unearthed, in the "monastery” area, belongs
to a much earlier date than the one described above It is indicatedin blue on the plan.
Its interior is about nine feet, and the floor level outside about eleven feet, below the
heavy sandstone pavement previously mentioned, or at a depth of 16' and 18', res-
pectively, below the surface of the ground. The laborious digging entailed in remov-
ing so much earth has made itimpossible to excavate much of the building during the
past season, but sufficient has been brought to light to make it practically certain that
we have here a second monastery. The long wall running from north to south has
been traced for 74 feet 6 inches, but its end has not been reached towards the north.
-It is of particularly massive construction, with a thickness of 5' and is provided with
,
21 footings, which at the base project T 7'' beyond the curtain of the wall On the
eastsideof this -wall six compartments have at present been traced of unequal dimension
.and with party walls between them of unequal thickness. The bricks used in the
monastery vary in size, an average measurement being ig'^X Si" x they are
;
chiselled on the outside face of the building, but of the walls so far exposed in the
interior only the faces opposite to each other of the first and second party walls from
the south are chiselled, and we may take it, therefore, that between these two walls

86 ARCH/EOL-OGICAF, REPORT.
was an open passage to give access to the corner cell. The inner walls of the cells-
were left rough and may have been plastered.
The southern end of the main wall we may assume to be the south-west corner of
themonastery, as the footings here turn the corner in an easterly direction. At this
pointthere is a mass of brickwork, seemingly of later date, whichW'e may judge to have-
been built on as a buttress. To the south of this corner of the monastery is the
beginning of what appears to be a paved court, the floor of w'hich is laid at a consider-
ably higher leyel than the original floor leyel of the monastery and almost certainly
belongs to a later period. It appears to haye been laid about the same time as the-
buttress at the south-west corner, and to approximately the same period also we may
assign the wall marked a Avhich Avill be noticed below.
South, again, of the payed courtyard and in a line with the back w'all of the
monastery, another substantial brick wall shoAvs itself at a distance of some 26'
south of the south-AA'est corner of the monastery, but it has only yet been traced for
eleven feet. From it breaks off in a westerly direction the Avail a a, Avhich is plainly
of later construction. This AA^all has been folloAved up for 51 feet up to the point
Avhere it disappears beneath the eastern front of the later monastery described above,
beyond Avhich it Avill not be possible to open it out.
As to the date of this earlier monastery, too little has yet been unearthed to
alloAV us to speak Avith complete certainty, but from the style of its construction
coupled AA’ith such little cumulative evidence as the smaller finds afford, Ave may feel
fairly safe in ascribing it to the late Gupta period.
Connected with this monastery are several AA’alls unearthed in the deep trenches
further south. That marked e on the plan is the corner of a wall with chiselled
surface and footings similar to the back Avail of the monastery, and there seems no
doubt that it is of the same date. The Avails did, with the pavement on the south
side, and the walls c c appear to be contemporary Avith the later additions to the-
monastery. The size of the bricks, AA'hich are unchiselled, averages about
i4^"X9" X2J", but most of them are broken, and all appear to have been used up
from some earlier structure. Beneath the east end of the wall d d x's, z. small piece-
of earlier w-all (m.arked g on plan) which is perhaps of the same age as the monastery
or even earlier.
The number of loose sculptures and other antiquities found on the level of this
monastery was very small, and the only objects of any interest that we can definitely
assign to the same period, are the three pieces of pottery shown inPlate XXVI I, 1,2,3.
The second and third (diameter and 4^-", respectively) are of fine pink clay, not
baked through, Avith a slip of the same colour and a thin w'ash of darker red paint
Avhich has mostly Avorn off. The first (diam. is of coarser clay and without
paint. The exterior decoration of Nos. 1 and 2 consists of rosettes, lines and dots
stamped upon them in relief. The interior pattern of- No. 1 is roughly incised.
Among the medley of other remains to the south of the old monastery there-
is not much that calls for notice. Various periods intermediary between the earlier
and later monasteries are represented, as is obvious from the stratification, and
these are marked in a mauve colour in the plan but the remains are as yet too scanty
;
to alloAV us to predicate anything definite as to the characteristic construction of any

—
•sarnath.
87
'One of these periods. A variety of small detached antiquities were found at different
levels, but singularly few of a distinctive character, and in every case it would be
dangerous in view of the confused state of the debris to deduce anything from them as
ro theprecise date of a particular stratum.
The best preserved structures in this group are the small stupas, numbered 43, 44,
45 and 46. .All are built of brick, carved and chiselled on the exterior face and
movered originally with a coating of plaster Y thick. The interior faces of the walls,
ie., around the relic chambers, are of rough unchiselled brick, and the core between
is composed of brickbats and rubble. All these stupas are later than the wall jj,
over which they are built, but earlier than the structures 00, p p, and q q. 'I'he wall
0 0 Is constructed of singularly well-cut face bricks nith a rubble core. Of the building
pp only 4 courses of the superstructure of cut brick remain, below which is a founda-
tion, 2' Y deep, of rough brickwork. The foundations q q are about half as
deep.
No. 42 on the plan is the corner of what appears to be another stupa of the
same character and approximately the same date as the stupas described. All that
Is left of the walls above it consists of rough foundations the superstructures above
;
were no doubt of chiselled brick.
m
Near this stupa and also at the point are several carved blocks of stone taken
from some Gupta building, and used apparently for the construction of a channel.
They were laid in the position they occupy before the buildings p p and q q were
erected.
The drain built beneath the wall k k, zX. a depth of 6' 6" below its foundations,
is approximately in the same stratum as the “ earlier monastery ” structures, but there
is little doubt that it belongs to a later epoch, as drains of this kind are naturally set
below the level of the buildings to which they belong. The interior of the drain
measures i' 6" deep X i' 3"‘across, It is lined with brick, and was probably covered
over, like other drains discovered on this site, with slabs of stone.
As to the sculptures and small antiquities found among the remains described
-above or further north between the levels of the earlier and later monasteries, very
many of them, like those found in thelate monastery also, belong to an earlier period.
Among them the following only need be noticed
:
(1) Fragmentary slab (PI. XXVHI, 5). For description see list of sculptures
below. No. 52.
(2) Stone pilaster (PI. XXVHI, i), 3'' 2" high. On the base is cut in high
relief the figure of a woman holding an uncertain object in her raised right
hand, Above her the shaft of the pilaster is adorned with horizontal
mouldings and kirthnukhas, spouting forth garlands from their mouths
The pottery found in this stratum, being of a perishable nature, is hardly likely
to have belonged to an earlier epoch. Some representative pieces are
figured on Plate XXVII. They were all found at a depth of some ten
feet from the surface. The clay is coarser than in the case of those
illustrated in Plate XXVII, i, 2 and 3, and the decoration is without
interest. The shapes of the modern kuzas, handis, and chdtls will be at
once recognised among them.

—
ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT
ss
The so=caIIed “ Hospital ” and other Excavations.
It rernains to notice, finally, some trial and other excav’ations made on the south*-
ern side of the site. The first of these was a little to the west of the Dhamekh siiipa^
At this point IMajor Kittoe unearthed, in 1848, a building rvhich on the strength,
apparently, of some pestles and mortars found in it he took to be a hospital, and
which is described as such by General Cunningham in the first volume of his Survey
Reports.^ Unfortunately, Major Kittoe left practically no reliable record of his work,
and all that General Cunningham had to go upon in publishing his results was a very
crude plan accompanied by some equally crude notes. Accordingly, it seemed
advisable when earth was wanted in connection with repairs to the Uhamekh
close by, to take the opportunity of clearing the site afresh and completing what
Major Kittoe had begun. This work was carried out by the Public Works Department
under the superintendence of Rai Bahadur B. B. Chakravartti, who has throughout
manifested the keenest interest in the work of excavating and preserving the monu-
ments at Sarnath. Mr. Chakravartti's excavation was confined mainly to the court-
yard ofthe “ hospital ”, and relatively little of the row of chambers surrounding it was-
laid bare. A minimum of evidence was thus obtainable this year as to the precise-
character or date of the building, and a detailed description of what has been done
may well be postponed until another year, when more of the building will have been
exposed and more certain conclusions arrived at. In the meantime, however, it may
be noticed that the excavations have revealed the existence of an earlier structure
under the one unearthed by Major Kittoe, and that, so far as can be judged at present,
the upper building appears to belong approximately to the eighth century of our era,
the lower to the early Gupta epoch. It may be added, also, that several pieces of
sculpture of the Gupta epoch have been recovered, besides an interesting fragment
of a metal diadem inlaid with gems.
Another excavation in this part of the site -w-as made for trial purposes only, in
order to ascertain whether anything of value existed in the mound to the west of the
Jain Temple, on which the Museum stands, and whether the museum building, w^hich
is much too small for its requirements, could safely be extended. With this end in viewy
a pit was sunk near the north-west corner of the museum and trenches carried from-
it tow-ards the east and south. In both directions a well-laid brick pavement was'
brought to light at a depth of 8' from the surface, as well as a circular structure
probably a st2'ipa -and other remains. With the existence of these established,,
further digging wms unnecessary. A new and larger museum will now be built on the-
low ground to the south, outside the limits of the old sangharama ; and w'hen this has-
been done the present building can be demolished, and the excavation of the site-
Avhere it stands, continued.
A
third spot that claimed our attention, w-as on the south side of the Jagat Singh
stupa, w^here there existed a mound of considerable dimensions rising some 15 feet
above the surrounding level. A very little digging sufficed to prove that this mound
was composed of little but spoil earth thrown up by earlier excavators, probably
by the workmen of Jagat Singh himself but it w'as also manifest that the ground at
;
’ Page 124.

- - „ -

sarnAth.
89
its base had never been disturbed, and it was decided therefore to clear away the
whole of the spoil earth, preparatory to exploring the surroundings of the stupa.
This was effected down to the level of the small stupas excavated by Mr. Oertel
on the west of the Jagat Singh stupa. At this level, we came upon a round stupa
with a niche for an image, facing towards the great brick stupa, and round about
it several sculptures of value, among which may be noticed especially a fine
standing Buddha in the ahhayamudra, belonging to the Gupta period (List No. 16,
and PI. XXIX, a) part of a seated Buddha with an inscription of the fifth century
A.D. (see Fig. 9 and Inscriptions, No. VIII), and a primitive-looking relief in red sand-
stone (List, No. 70).
In conclusion, there remains something to be said about the remarkable stone
railing in the chapel on the south side of the main shrine. This railing was discovered
by Mr. Oertel during the operations of 1904-5, and is referred to by him on p. 68 of
the “ Annual ’’ for that year. Mr. Oertel, however, only had time to excavate its
east face, and it was left to us this year to clear the interior of the rail and, as far as
possible, the other three faces. One inscription had been found by Mr. Oertel cut
on the east plinth, and a second one was brought to light this year on the south side.
This is described as No. IV in the List of Inscriptions appended below. The railing
consists of 16 uprights, 5 along each side, with a massive plinth below, a bevelled
coping above and three lo2enge-shaped horizontal bars between. In the corners are
quarter-circle brackets pierced with stanchion holes, intended, perhaps, to receive
supports for an overhead canopy or for flags. Apart from this feature, the railing is
of a familiar enough type ; but what invests it with a special interest is the fact that
the whole was hewn from one single block of stone and chiselled with that extra-
ordinary precision and accuracy which characterises all Mauryan work and which has
never, we venture to say, been surpassed even by the finest workmanship on
Athenian buildings. The railing is in fact a remarkable “tour de force”, and was
undoubtedly erected, in the first instance, on some especially hallowed spot.
Whether this spot is the one on which it now stands, cannot be definitely affirmed.
The railing is unfortunately badly fractured, and must have been so from an
early age, as there are large breakages on the north and west sides, which had been
made good with brick-work long before the main shrine, as it now stands, was built.
It is quite possible, therefore, that the railing originally stood elsewhere and was
transferred to this spot in sections, after it had been broken, perhaps at the time that
the later inscription was engraved upon it. Some colour is given to this supposition
by the fact that the stupas inside it are not set in the middle of the railing but are
pushed somewhat to one side.
Of these stupas the earlier one rises from the same level as the railing itself,
and is still standing to a height of 4' ; so much as remains of it is square in plan,
with a plinth of two steps at the bottom, and a projecting moulding at the top, but
at one time, no doubt, it was surmounted by the usual curved dome. The stupa
appears to have been the original memorial at this spot, around which the railing
was set up. At a later date, when this stupa and the railing were buried in debris^
another memorial was erected above it. This happened, perhaps, about the time that
the main shrine was erected. The later structure, which is figured in Plate XIX of
N

5 ,
archeological report.
90
Mr. Oertel’s article, is somewhat larger than the earlier one and of a different form.
Above the plinth, which measures 4 8'^ across, was a round drum surmounted by a
dome, wuth a projecting moulding intervening between the dome and drum. Jn the
centre of the structure was a circular stone shaft broken off a few inches above the
top of the dome, w^hich no doubt once supported an umbrella. Both stupas were
examined for relics, but nothing wms found in either of them, and the sections removed
were afterwards replaced brick by brick.
LIST OF SCULPTURES.
The following list contains only representative sculptures of the different kinds
discovered duringthe season. In addition to these there were some 170 other small
sculptures, besides several hundred architectural members, etc.
I.—IMAGES.
Buddha Images.
1. Buddha in dharmachakramudrd ; upper part only. He is seated on a throne, the back
of which is visible. At side of throne, winged leogryphs. To the proper rights
below, a Bodhisattva. Height i' (PL XIX. 7).
2. Buddha in dhai'inachakramudra, seated in European fashion one Bodhisattva on each
;
side, probably Avalokitesvara to the proper left and Maitreyato the proper right,
both standing on raised pedestals. Below left hand B5dhisattva a figure is visible,
probably a worshipper. Traces of similar worshipperon opposite side. On both
sides of Buddha^shead, celestialbeings carrying garlands. Height
3. Buddha in dharmachakramudrd^ sitting in European fashion, on a throne feet
;
apparently restingon lotus. Wheel and deer symbol below. Someindistinct figures
visible underneath. Two celestial beings carrying garlands above. Halo round head.
Height 3' (PhXX,3).
4. Buddha in dharmachakramudrd seated in European fashion, with feet resting on lotus.
Below, three worshippers on each side. To his proper left a figure,probably Aval5ki-
tesvara, with lotus-stalk in left and fly-whisk (?) in right hand. To his proper right,
another figure, probably Maitreya, whose attributes have disappeared. The heads
10. of the Buddha and of this latter attendant are missing. Height
5. Buddha in dharmachakramudrd^ seated cross-legged on lotus. Below, wheel and deer,
and five worshippers [the panchaDaggiyas). Inscribed with creed in characters of
the eleventh century. Head missing. Throne and halo, finely carved. Height 2' 4"
(PL XX, 6).
6. Buddha in dharv'iachakramudrd^ seated cross-legged on lotus; throne indicated behind;
traces of halo. Sandstone, with red paint. Height i' 9".
7. Buddha in dharmachakramudrd, seated cross-legged on lotus head missing. Five
;
worshippers below. Height i'
8 . Defaced Buddha in dharmachakramudrd^ seated cross-legged on lotus. Lower part
defaced. Height
9. Buddha in dharmachakramudrd^ seated in a chapel. To the left Makara head, with
human being above. Height loj". (PL XXIII, 8.)
Buddha in dharmachakrainudr d, seated cross-legged on lotus. Below, lotus decoration
and one small replica of the main figure on each side. Head missing. At base,
Gupta inscription (No. VI) of fourth or fifth century, ascribing the statue to
Dhanadeva. Height i', (PL XXIII, 6).

1
^ ^'4'
5
'^'-,•’'.,•-.'..11'-., /’-'<'
;,;/;
''v;;-;:f.
-

,
sarnath.
91
11. Buddha in dharmack(tkramudrdystated on a throne with halo. Below, wheel and deer.
;
On base, creed in characters of ninth century. Height (PL XXIII, 9.)
12. Fragment ofseated Buddha, probably in dharmachakra^midra. Below, wheel, deer, and
nine worshippers. To proper left, traces of standing figure. Height g'L (PI-
XXIII, 5).
13. Fragment of seated Buddha. Only legs left. Below, wheel and deer and five wor-
shippers. Height 5".
14. Fragmentary bust of Buddha in dhar 7 nackakramudrd. Height 9".
15. Fragment of Buddha in dharmachakramudra. Traces of halo. Being wdth garland
above to proper right. Height
16. Standing Buddha in abhayainudra, with finely executed halo. Left hand, feet and
part of halo missing. Height 4' 7-l'L (PL XXIX, a.)
17. Standing Buddha in ahhayamudrd. Feet and left hand missing. Halo with scalloped
border, as in Mathura sculptures. Height 3' (PL XXVJII, 2.)
18. Fragment of Buddha in abhayamiuird. To his proper left, traces of god holding
umbrella (Indra). To his proper right, traces of other god (Brahma). Head and
feet missing. Height 6^".
19. Lower part of Buddha in bhumisparsamtidra. On pedestal below, lion's head amid
20.
conventional rocks. On proper
right, kneeling female with
bowl. On proper left, male and
female fleeing. Inscription (No.
VIII) of fifth century, ascribing
the gift to Kumaragupta. (Fig.
9.)
Buddha seated cross-
legged in bhumzsparsamzidrd.
Lower part defaced. Above,
foliage of Bodhi-tree and two
celestial beings, perhaps show-
ering flowers. Height sr-
21. Fragment of Buddha seated in bhilmisparsamtidrd^ with halo. Lower portion defaced.
Height i' 4r.
22. Fragment ofBuddha seated in dhydnamudra. Below, man kneeling, and demon with
animal-head in front. Height g",
23. Buddha standing in varadamiidra. Left hand raised towards shoulder. Feet and right
hand missing. Height loi'L
24. Similar statue. Much defaced. Height i' I'L
25. Defaced seated Buddha. Height 7 4''.
26. Fragment of standing Buddha. Left band holds garment against shoulder. Legs from
knee and right arm missing. Height 10'''.
27-31. Buddha heads.
Bodhisattvas, Qod, and Goddesses.
32, Avalokitesvara seated in lalitdsana on lotus. Right hand in varadamud^'d, left hand
holds rose. Above, five Dhyanibuddhas in the centre, Amitabha in dhydnamudra
;
To his right, Tara, left hand holding blue lotus, right hand in explaining attitude below
;
her, Sudhanakumara, his handfolded in supplicating attitude [kritdhjaliputa)^ holding a
book in his left armpit to Avalokitesvara^sleft,above, Bhrikutl(?), sitting withleft knee
;
N 2

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
92
drawn up, right hand raised against the Bddhisattva, left hand holding object [kaman^
dalul), Berow her, Hayagriva (?), right hand raised towards the Bodhisattva, left
hand holding stick. On the base, under Avalokitesvara-’s right hand, Suchimukha, his
pointed face turned upwards. On the opposite corner two worshippers, male and
female. Height 2^^. (Ph XIX, 8.)
33. Mahjusri, seated on a lion; blue lotus to his right, and stalk of similarlotus to his
The Dhyanibuddha Akshobhya in hhumhparsamudrd in his headdress. One
left.
worshipper on each side. Height XXIII, ro.)
34. Upper part of Maitreya(?) Only Dhyanibuddha in abhayamudra^ part of halo, and full
blown lotus on proper right. Height
-.5. Seated figure in bhumispariamudrd, sitting cross-legged on lotus. Necklace; traces of
halo. Probably a Bodhisattva. Height iof''.
36. Image with necklace, armlets, girdle and other ornaments. Head, arms and feet missing.
To his proper right figure holding object. Height T 1 1|'". (PL XXIX, c,)
37. Lower part of image, seated cross-legged on lotus, holding thunderbolt in left hand.
Below, sitting worshipper. On base, creed in characters of eleventh or twelfth century.
Perhaps Vajrasattva ? Height Sp'.
38. Four-armed figure, seated cross-legged on lotus. Two hands joined over breast. High
head-dress. Probably a Bodhisattva (Avalokitesvara?). Below, traces of inscription.
Heightsr. (PI. XXIII, 2.)
<59, Attendant standing on lotus and holding lotus-stalk. Right hand raised over head.
Mainfigure missing. Sandstone. Height 10.''
40. God dancing on prostrate figure lyingfulllength onlotus. Left arm holds mace. Rightarm
uplifted, probably holding bowl, Snake (?) hanging down roundbody. (PL XXIII, ii.)
41. Lower part of image seated in lildsana on lotus. Two kneeling worshippers below.
Perhaps Aval5kitesvara. On base, inscription of tenth or eleventhcentury. Height 6|".
42. Fragment of Bodhisattva or goddess seated in lildsana ; right hand in varadamudra.
Worshipper kneeling below to proper left. Height
43. Fragment ofsimilar statue, in blue stone. Below, one female attendant, kneeling, To
proper left, at feet of image, female attendant with flower in left hand theright held up
;
before breast. Below, inscription incharacters oftenth or eleventh century. Probably
Avalokitesvara. Height y'L
44. Standing Deity four arms halo ornaments. Below, to the proper right, headless bull.
; ; ;
Attributes and hands lost. Perhaps Siva. Height 3' 4I'''. (PL XXIX, dl)
45. Fragment of broken goddess lowerpart missing. Apparently four arms, upper left hold-
;
ing flame (?), other arms broken. To her properleft, two roses halo. Perhaps Tara.
;
Height loi".
46. Female figure in seated posture. Right foot sw'ung over left thigh long hair falling
;
down almost to ground ornaments. Lotus-stalk rising at herback. Head and arms^
;
missing. Height 2' yI'L
47. Similar figure. No traces of hair or lotus a band seems to go roundthe waist and
;
the right calf. Height 2' 2^'^.
48. Lower part of image probablygoddess, standing onlotus, with lotus-stalks on both sides,
;
One attendant on each side. Height
49. Head and bust of three-headed goddess, with three eyes (the central one conventional)
in central head, Amitabha in head-dress. Probably Ushnishavijaya. Height 6
IL—SCENES.
50. Sculptured slab containing illustrationsof the eight big scenes, (PI. XXVIIL 4.) Two
parts of the slab were unearthed during the season under review, a third piece
was found amongst the stones excavated by Kittoe.

SARNATH.
93
The four principal scenes, connected with Kapilavastu, Gaya, Benares, and Kusanagara,
respectively, are found in the four corners the four secondary scenes, supposed to
;
have taken place at Sahkasya, Vaisali, Rajagriha, and Sravasti, respectively^ in two
rows between.
In the lower left-hand corner, we have Buddha^s birth in Kapilavastu. In the centre, Maya
raising her right arm. To her right, traces of Indra and Brahma receiving the child.
To her left, the washing of the child by two Nagas (Manda and Upananda). Two
attendants below.
In the lower right-hand corner, the Bodhi, at Gaya. In the centre, the Buddha, seated cross-
legged on lotus throne in bhumispariamudra. To his right, Mara; to his left Mara’s
daughter. Above, two demons. To Mara’s left, a rose (cf. kusumayudha ?)
In upper left hand corner, the first sermon in the Deerpark near Benares. In centre, the
Buddha seated cross-legged in dharmachakramiidra Buddhas in varadamiidra stand
;
on both sides. Below, wheel, deer, and, in the right corner, a lion a corresponding
;
lion in the left corner, now indistinguishable.
In upper right hand corner, Buddha’s death in Kusanagara, He is lying on his right side on
a couch. Three mourningfigures above and three below.
Under the first sermon, the descent from the Trayastrimsa heaven at Safikasya. In centre,
the Buddha in varadainudrd to his proper left, Indra with umbrella to his proper
; ;
right Brahma with water gourd {ka^tiandahi).
Below last, the presentation of madJm by the monkey atVaisall. To the left, the monkey
standing with a bowl, which he offers to the Buddha, who is sitting cross-legged
on lion throne the bowl is repeated in the Buddha^s hands. To the right, are seen the
;
feet and tail ofthe monkey, who disappears in a well, and, above, a figure holding
object in hisleft and saluting the Buddha with his right, perhaps the monkey reborn.
To the right of preceding scene, the taming of the elephant at Rajagriha. In centre,
standing Buddha. To his right, the elephant Nalagiri, kneeling, surmounted by a
stilpa. To Buddha^sleft, Standing figure, perhaps Devadatta.
Above the preceding scene, and immediately below the parinirvana scene, the great miracle
at Sravasti. The Buddhaseated crosslegged on lotus in dharmackakramudra on both
;
sides, replicas of the main figure below, two worshippers. As pointed out by M.
;
Foucher, a fourth preaching Buddha must probably be supposed to sit behind the
main figure [cf, Divyavadana, chaturdisam chaturvidhaTn riddhiprdtihdryam
vidarsya). Height 3' i".
51. Defaced slab divided into three horizontal bands, probably illustrating the four principal
scenes.
In lower band traces of standing Maya.
Above, to the right, the first sermon. The Buddha seated in dharmachakramudra. Below,
wheel and worshipper. Above, on each side, a Buddha with stupa^ standing on
lotus.
To the left, traces remain of the Bodhi scene, but too defaced to be made out. Traces of
halo and celestial beings on both sides.
In upper band, Parinirvana scene, with nine mourning figures in front of the couch. The
central one, who turns his face towards the Buddha, has been identified with Subhadra.
One person is standing at Buddha’s feet (Mahakasyapa), and another at his head.
Traces of five mourning figures above. Height
52. Fragmentary slab (PI. XXVIII, 5). In lower portion, Maya’s dream. Maya lying on
her right side (as usual in the older sculptures in Bharhut and Sanchi). At her feet,
attendant squatting. Behind, three female attendants, one with fan or flag, two with
chamaras. Above, elephant, on proper right of which two attendant Sr

ARCH/^:OLOGICAL REPORT.
To the right of slab, birth scene,the child being received by Indra. To Maya s proper left, a
female figure (Prajapati).
Between these two scenes the first bath by thetwo Nagas, the child standing on lotus. To
his proper right, two worshippers.
In panel above, to the left, the Bodhisattva sitting on his horse. Belowthe horse, a kneeling
attendant. To the right of horse, the Bodhisattva divesting himself (?) ; below
seated figure with bowl.
Furtherto the right, the Bodhisattva, sitting cross-legged, on a lotus in dhyanamudra.
Height 2' 5\
53. Fragment of slab. Below, to the right, three demons, belonging to Bodhi scene.
Above, a lion supporting throne, and perhaps a deer. Between the two, a seated figure.
—
To the right of throne, Aval5kitesvara standing on a lotus, the first sermon.
Height 2' 2".
54. Slab with nine Buddhas, all with halos. In the centre below, Buddha in dharma-
chahramudra^ sitting cross-legged on lotus. On each side standing Buddhas.
Above, in the centre, Buddha sitting cross-legged on lotus in dhydnamudrd. On
each side a Buddha seated cross-legged in dhydnamudrd.
In top range, in centre, Buddha, sitting cross-legged on lotus in dhydnamudrd. On each
side, standing Buddhas.
In both upper corners, celestial beings.
At the base, in the centre, two Nagas, holding the lotus stalk, and on each side two sitting
and one standing person (lokapalas and yakshas ?) Height 3' 2Y (PI. XX, 4.)
55. Similar slab top broken. Height 2' 8''.
;
III. Decorative and Miscellaneous Sculptures.
56. Architectural fragment representing double roof with row of pillars between. Above
upper roof, the Buddha in bhumisparsdmudra. To his right, Mara and demon
;
above, celestial being. Below low^er roof, bands of geometrical and floral patterns.
Height 2'
57. Fragment divided into panels, in one of wdiich small figure of Atlant. Height 9|".
58. Votive Stupawith the Buddha in dhydnamudrd. (PI. XIX, 9).
59. Votive Stupa with goddess in niche. Below, illegible inscription. Height ii"".
60. Panel wuth leogryph and rider. Typical Gupta work : wig, thick lips, long nose, high
cheeks. Height 2^ 5^'^
6r. Opposite panel. Only part of leogryph left. Height H
62. Fragment of man with sword ; from same decoration. Height i' 6"''.
63. Akroterion ornament (?) and Makara gargoyle, unfinished work. The elephant and lion
fighting are very vigorous. Height (PL XXVI,
i 2).
'
64. Decorative slab, illustrating Makara, with trunk, fins and fish tail, holding garland in
trunk. Height i' 2".
65. Hand holding hilt or vajra with rings. Height 5".
;
66. Fragment of lion^s head in medallion good Gupta work. Height g".
A ;
67. woraan^s head with grinning mouth and long floating hair. Height
68. Fragment of male figure wuth beard, holding object over shoulder. Height
3I".
69. Small image of standing deity, with garland. Sandstone. Height bj".
70. Fragment of male figure standing on lotus. Head missing. Height 2!"".
71. Singularly beautiful fragment of sitting wmman, head leaning on hands, which rest on
knees. Hair floating down back ; dhoti and anklets. Behind back, blue lotus. Per-
haps Mauryan, Height 8|'^

—
.
SARNATH.
95
'2. Bust and head of grotesque figure in terra-cotta, with protruding eyes. It apparently
did duty' as a bracket. Height 7", (PI. XXVI, i.)
73. Head of male figure, with earrings, necklace, etc. Traces of red paint. Typical
Gupta work. Height
9.I".
74. Fragment of standing figure holding chamara. Traces of red paint. Height 9'^.
INSCRIPTIONS-
The number of inscriptions found during the season’s excavations is not great,
only about 25, and several of them are simply repetitions of the creed, or dedicatory
inscriptions with relatively little archaeological value. The various dates of the
epigraphs extend from the second century B. C. to the ith or 12th century A. D.
i
I.
The oldest record found this year is incised on a rail stone. It is written in
Brahml characters of the second century B. C., the legend being as follows (see Plate
XXX, No. i),—
bhikhunikdye Samvahikdye dcinam ala\yih*’\hanarh.
This base stone is the gift of the nun Sarhvahika.
It will be seen from the designation dlambana that this stone was originally the
lower horizontal stone of a rail.
11.
To about the same date must be ascribed the inscription on another railstone
:
\_Bha\rhitye saham Jateyika,\ye ... ] (the gift) of Jateyika together with
Bharinl. The reading and translation, however, are not quite certain. Jateyika
occurs in the form Jamteyikd on an inscription unearthed by Mr. F. O. Oertel, which
I would read Slhdye sahi J-amteyikdye thaSjn^bho, “the railstone of Jariiteyika
and Siha ”. Bharinl, it may be noticed, brings to mind the name Bharinideva on the
Bharhut Stupa'.
This railstone appears to have been moved later on from its original position and
put up as a lamp post. Compare below’’ Inscription No. V.
III.
The next inscription brings us down to the Kushana period. It wms found
incised on a fragment of an old stone umbrella w'hich turned up at the base of one
of the small stilpas to the w’est of the Main Shrine, and it belongs to the third or
perhaps the second century A. D. It contains four lines, and the fact that the inscrip-
tion is complete, seems to indicate that the stone was already broken when the
inscription was cut, as it is very unlikely that it would have been arranged in such
a way if the stone umbrella had still been entire. The contents of the inscription
are :
I I Chattdr-imdni bhikkhave ar\i*'\ya-sachchdni
I 2 katamdni \chd]ftdril dukkhci\yci\ di \bhi\kkhave ard{ri)yasachcham
dukkhasamuday[d\ ariyaya{sa)chcha'm dukkhanirodhd ariyasachcham
I 3
1 4 dukkhanirodhagdmini \chd\ patipadd ari\_ya^'\sachcham
^ Cunningham. The StupaofBharhut, p. 142, and Plate XXXI. 4.

—
ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
6
q
Four are, ye monks, the Noble Axioms, And which are these four? The Noble
Axiom about suffering, ye monks the Noble Axiom about the origin of suffering the
; ;
Noble Axiom about cessation of suffering, and the Noble Axiom about the way
leading to the cessation of suffering.
It will be seen that the inscription contains a resume of the principal teaching
of the Buddha {Buddhanam samukkamsika dhammadesana, Mahavagga i, 7, 6, &c),
which according to old traditions formed the text of the Benares Sermon, It is
peculiarly appropriate, therefore, that such an inscription should have been found in
Sarnath.
A special interest attaches itself to the fact that the inscription has been written
in Pali, the church language of Southern Buddhism. No other old Pali inscription
has been found in North India, and our inscription accordingly affords a unique and
valuable proof that the Pali Canon existed and was known in Benares in late
Kushana time^.
IV.
On the upper side of the lower horizontal stone of the railing surrounding the
old Stupa in the south chapel of the Main Shrine, an inscription was found similar to
that described by Dr. Vogel in the Annual for 1904-1905, p. 68. It runs as
follows :
(a) Scharyyanam sarvvastiva-
(b) dinarh parigrahe
Homage of the teachers of the Sarvastivadin sect.
The inscription is divided into two parts, one on each side of the central bar of
the south side of the railing. The other inscription, discovered by Mr. F. 0 . Oertel, is
found on the front of the lower stone on the east side. The beginning of this latter one
acha[ryyd}-]nam sarvvastivadinam, is practically identical with the beginning of our
inscription. Both are written in Sanskrit, and both may roughly be assigned to the
fourth or perhaps to the end of the third century A. D. The end of the inscription
discovered by Mr. Oertel is, however, quite different. It is written in a form of Prak*
rit, and in an older alphabet, which may be roughly assigned to the first or second
century B.C. Now, the stone shows distinct signs of an erasure before the
Prakrit portion, and the inference seems unavoidable that the Sarvastivadins have
substituted their own name for that of another sect, which they had previously struck
out. The result was not quite satisfactory, and so they proceeded to add the newly
discovered epigraph in a second place. A double conclusion apparently follows from
these facts. In the first place, the anxiety evinced by the Sarvastivadins to be con-
sidered as the donors of the railing points to the spot where it stands having been
a particularly sacred one—a conclusion which has already been drawn from other
reasons. In the second place, the facts show that the Sarvastivadins must at that
period have been trying to assert themselves as a predominant sect at Sarnath. That
they should have scratched out the name of some other sect and written their own in-
stead certainly indicates that their predominance cannot have been of long standing.
Now, Hiuen Thsang in the seventh century found the Sammitiyas playing the leading"
' CompareEp. Ind., Vol. IX, pp, 291 & f.

EXCAVATIONS AT SARNATH.
3CI.

—
:
SARNATH.
97
part in Sarnath. And from an inscription on the A^oka pillar of that period, which
has been published by Dr. \'ogel,‘ we know that their connexion with the Mrigadava
monastery must go back to about the fourth century.
It seems, therefore, thatthe Sarrastivadins and the Sammatiyas were both settled
in Sarnath about the year 300, but that the latter sect later on succeeded in asserting
itself as the leading one in the monastery.
V.
It has already been remarked under the head of inscription II that the old rail
stone referred to was in later time remov^ed from its original position and put up as a
lamp-post. This appears from an inscription in characters of the fourth or fifth cen-
tury A. D., which runs
1 I dcyadhartmno—yam faramofa-
1 2 \_sa\ka - Klrtteh SynTila-ga^ ndhaku-
* 3 [_p}'a\dl\j> ddhah'\
K
This is the pious gift of the devoted worshipper Irtti, a lamp put up in the
M
ulagandhakuti.
Farts of this inscription are ajl but illegible. There cannot, however, be much
doubt that the above reading is, in the main, correct. Several lamp-posts of a similar
kind have been found in Sarnath; cf. below, Inscription XII, and the inscription pub-
lished in the Report of Mr. F. O. Oertel’s excavations (1904-1905, p. 66) where
Dr. Vogel is of opinion that the missing portion should be read gandhakutydin.
The key to this restitution has been furnished by a number of seals found to the
west of the main shrine. A similar seal had already been found by Cunningham
{Reports, I. p. 129, and Plate XXXIV. <5), who was not however, able to read the
legend. The seals contain the usual w'heel and deer symbol, and the inscription
reads :
sri-saddharmmachakkre mu~
1. I
1. 2 la-gandhakutyam bhaga-
1. 3 vata\_Ii\
In the mfilagandhakuii of the Exalted one In the illustrious Saddharmachakra.
In this legend Saddharmachakra is the name of the whole monastery, which
had received this name because it w'as situated on the spot where the Buddha first
turned the wheel {chakra) of the good law {saddharma). We shall see later on
that this name was retained down to the i ith century. The character of the
inscriptions of the seals carries the denomination back to the 6th or 7th century, and
there is no reason for doubting that it is much older. These seals thus furnish us with
the name of the old Sarnath monastery.
They further mention a locality within the monastery which was known as the
Mulagandhakutl of the Lord. The denomination Mulagandhakutl, i.e,, principal or
original gandhakuU, and the fact that seals were struck with a legend denoting them
as hailingfrom this place, where, as the findingof alamp-post shows, sacred lamps were
kept burning, seems to show that this place must have been considered as especially
sacred. It is much to be deplored thatwe do not know for certain what a gandhakutl
^ Ep, Ind,,VIII, p, 172.
O

ARCH/EOLOGIC/VL report.
98
is, and still less what the Mfdagandhaktdt may have been. The literal meaning of
gandhakutl is “hall of fragrance,” and it is stated that any private chamber devoted
to the Buddha's use was called so, but especially the room he always occupied in
Savatthi ^ The word often occurs in later Pali literature, but apparently not in canoni-
cal texts The oldest source for our knowledge of the meaning of the word is there-
.
fore the representation of the gandhakuii in the Jetavana in the sculptures of the
Bharhut Stupa.'
It is there depicted as a kind of shrine, and it does not differ essentially from
another building, which is there denoted as a kosa\jh\bakutt. This kosamhakuti is
known from another source, for there it was that the friar Bala dedicated the
Bodhisattva statue described by Cunningham® and Bloch.^
It was a shrine or temple, and there is every probability that the same is the case
with the gandhakuii. Cunningham® tried to trace the locality of the gandhakuii of the
Jetavana in a small temple excavated by him in 1876. ox\g\x\.<iS. gandhakuii,
which tradition traces back to Anathapindika, he maintains must have been a wooden
structure. He further urges that the gandhakutl was the plac—e where the famous
sandalwood image of the Buddha was placed, and remarks, “In the view of the
gandhakutl, takenfromthe Bharhut sculpture, it will be observed thatthe seat, orthrone,
of Buddha is empty. This is in strict accordance with all the sculptures of Bharhut,
in none of which is Buddha himself ever represented. His head-dress and his
foot-prints are frequently seen, as well as the dharmachakra symbol, but in no single
instance is he represented in person. It seems probable, therefore, that the story
of the sandalwood statue must be of later date than the Bharhut Stupa, that is,
subsequent to the time of A§oka. Gandhakuii means “Hall of perfume,” and the
name was applied to the house in which every Buddha had lived because perfumes
;
wmre burned there in honour of the departed Teacher. According to Burnouf, the
gandhakutl was “la salle ou Ton brule des parfums en I’honneur d'un Buddha, et
devant son image.”
It seems probable that gandhakuii means a chapel, dedicated to the memory of
the Buddha, whether it contains an image or not, and it was only in later times that
these chapels w'ere supposed to have been the personal apartments of the Buddha
when he w'as living on earth,® The Mulagandhakuil must, then, be the principal
gandhakutl, perhaps the place where the colossal statue seen by Hiuen Thsang was
put up. It is of course as yet impossible to locate it with certainty. The fact, how-
ever, that the big lamp-posts with inscriptions assigning them to the mulagandhakuil
have been found to the east of the Main Shrine, while the other inscriptions mention-
ing the place are found on small seals, which could easily be carried away, makes
it
probable that the principal gandhakutl must indeed be looked for amongst the remains
excavated in that quarter.
1 Chl
V
M
o
&
l
r
.
s,
IV
D
.
ic
1
t
9
i
08
o
,
na
p
r
p
y
.
o
1
f
&
the
ff.
Pali Language, sub vocei H. C. Norman, Journal of As Soc of Bens^ral
’
- Cunningham. TheStupa ofBharhut. London, 1879, p. 87, and Plate LVII.
* Reports, 1,p- 339; V, p. VII ; XI, p. 68.
* J. A. S. Bengal, Vol. LX VII, P. I, 1898, pp. 274 ff ; Ep. Ind, VIII, p. 179.
* Reports, XI, p. 84.
Its’ng mentionsvarious ru’es to beobserved whenapproaching b.gandhahuti: see Takakus’s Translation?
pp. 22, 123, 155. A mulagandhakutiatNalandaismentioned,
p.
XXXII.

SARNATH.
99
The designation "principal ^andhakidl" seems to show that there were also
other gandhakutls in Sarnath. Some probability is given to this conclusion by the
fact that a new gandhakutl has been mentioned in the Mahipala inscription of Satnvat
1083. In dealing with this inscription Dr. Vogel* translates the passage tan Dharm-
niarajikam sangam Dharmmachakram punar-navam kritavantau cha navindm—
ashtamahdstliana-sailagandhakutTm as follows “ they restored Anoka’s stupa and
:
[the shrine of] the wheel of the Law completely, and built this new temple of stone
from the eight holy places.”
The finds of the last season throw' new’ light on this inscription. In the first
place, we have already seen that Dharmmachakra is the name of the whole site
and not of a temple within it. Then the sculpture described above (No. 50) illustrating
eight scenes of the Buddha’s life connected w’ith the eight chief places, apparently
explains the ^expression ashtamahasthanatailagandhaktitz, which should be transla-
ted ‘‘a sion& ga}idhakutl (temple) of the eight great places,” i.e., containing a slab
illustrating the scenes that took place on the eight principal places.
With regard to the form Dharmarajika occurring in the Mahipala inscription, no
new facts have come to light, and Dr. Vogel’s translation as “A§6ka StDpa” has not
been disproved. The name Dhamekh cannot, however, have anything to do with the
word Dharmarajika, because the final sound is distinctly aspirated. Dhamekh there-
fore regularly corresponds to an older dharmeksha, as supposed by Professor Venis.^
VI.
On a headless image of the sitting Buddha (Sculpture No. 10), 4th or 5th
century A. D.
deyadhariiimd—yam Sdkya-bhiksh^r*~\ Dhanaddvasya. The pious gift of the
Sakya Friar Dhanadeva.
VII.
The same Dhanadeva is apparently mentioned in an effaced inscription on the
base of a small Buddha statue w'hich is still standing in ata in one of the small chapels
unearthed by Mr. Oertel to the w’est of the Jagat Singh Stupa. With the help of the
above inscription the legend can w’ith some certainty be read as \deyadharmmd—yam
Dhanai\devasya, this the pious gift of Dhanadeva.
The characters of both inscriptions are practically identical. This is of import-
ance because it helps us to date the various structures round the Jagat Singh Stupa.
VIII.
On the base of a broken Buddha statue (Sculptures No. 19) found in clearing
the mound of spoil earth to the south of the Jagat — Singh Stupa, at the level of
the small shrines surrounding it. The inscription reads
de\ya*'\dharmd=-yam Kum draguptasya.
This the pious gift of Kumaragupta. The characters belong to the fifth century,
and it is possible that the donor was in reality the emperor Kumaragupta I, from
whose reignw'e possess inscriptions dated between the years 415 and 448 A. D.
^ Archaeological Surveyof India, Annual Report, 1903-04, pp. 222 & f.
2 JournalofAs. Soc. ofBengal, N. S., VoL II, p.445. Mr. Vincent A, Smithes attempt, in the Journal R.
ils.Soc.i 1909, p. i67jto derivethe wordfrom dharviapehshaisnot convincing.
O 2

—
.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
lOO
IX.
On a rail post of the 6th century A. D.
^akyabhikshu{d)r— Vodhishenasya.
(Gift) of the Friar Bodhishena.
X.
On the same post, which has been put up as a lamp post, under the lamp hole,
\_paraniopdsd\ka-Shavarudrasya pradlpah.
A
The lamp is a gift of the (devoted worshipper) Bhavarudra. littlelater than the
preceding, but still sixth century.
XI.
On a. s\.3Axji& oit\i&BviAdh.dLm dharmachakramudra, (Sculptures No. ii) of about
9th century, the ordinary Buddhist creed. Beginning broken off,
XII.
On the lower part of an image (Sculptures No. 41) of the tenth or eleventh
century, Buddhist creed, and below,
deyadharmmdz=.yam=updsaka-Mdbhiikasya {?), This the pious gift of the
layman Mabhuka.
XIII.
A broken and fragmentary stone inscription, written in corrupt Sanskrit and
—
found in the trench to the north of the Jain enclosure, west of the Dhamekh the
“Hospital” of earlier excavations. There are altogether six inscribed fragments.
All proper names are missing, and the end, moreover, is very fragmentary. The
date is, however, almost intact, and Professor Kielhorn has been good enough to
calculate it. He shows that the inscription is one of the Kalachuri (Chedi) Karpadeva
of Tripuri and is dated in the (Kalachuri) SarhvatSio, on the 15th day of the bright
fortnight of Alvina, on a Sunday, corresponding to Sunday, the 4th October A. D.
1058. His unparalleled knowledge of Indian inscriptions has also enabled him to
restore the missing words of line 6, referring to the date. The missing syllables at
the end of line 6 can also be restored with tolerable certainty.
TexH.
1 I. sta-sarw-andhakara-va
.
mrupa
2. .par-aikaganta[h) hhuvana
„ . . . .
1 3. paramabhaUd\raka-mahdrdjd\dh\i\rdja-parameivara-trt-Vdma\deva-ydd-dnu~
dhydta-paramabhaUd]-
1 4. raka- m ahdrdj\ddhirdja-pard\m esvara-paramamahesvara-Tri(Tri) Kalimgddhi~
[
pati-nija-bhuj-o]~
1 5. pd7'jit-AsvapciH‘\Jjajapati-N(i^ ^<^pdtt-rdja-trcty-ddhipati-STimcit-Karnct \de'va-
kalyd\-
1 6. na-vijaya-rdjye sa\m'vatsare <5’]/[i)] Asvina sudi ig ravau A [dy=eha irf-
Saddharmmd]- ||
* Forthewording of the beginning ofthis inscription comparee.g. Indian Antiquary, Vol. XVII,p. 225

.
SARNATH.
lOI
chakra-pravarttana-malia-v mahdvihare aryya-bhikshii~samg}iasya stha
1 7. . . . . .
1 8. pdirika ?nandrathagujfa {^au ?) dslrvddapada\^h~\ samaddpitau mandjd\ndnu-
jdyiy-
paramopasakali Dhaii£si'arah damanema{pid) sanj amma {sarnyameua) rag^adi-
1 9.
malu'p}'akshd\lana-para
//]
1 10. tasya hhdrja. ibharyd) jnahdjdn-dnujdina- paramdpdsikd Mdmakd yd ati . . .
1 ii. gan-dlankrit \a*^-sarird tayd likhdpit-drya . . .td sarwa-vuddha-jan . . ,
1 12. ashtasahasrikd prajdpatha-nivandhand . .ttam d-chandr-drka-?jied
1 13. ni ydvat dryahhikshu-sanghasya samarpitah . . .vddhakam kare~
I 14. [t~\sa pishidydm kriini\r*~\bhfito fitribhili saha pa\chyatf\.
Translation.
In the [happy] victorious reign of the [Paramabhattaraha Maharajadhiraja
Parame4vara], the devoted worshipper of Mahe^vara, [the lord over Trlkalihga, who
by his own arm] had acquired the title of lord over three Rajas, vis., the lord of
horses, [the lord of elephants, thelord of men], the illustrious Karna(deva), [who medi-
tated on the feet of the] Paramabhatta[raka Maharaja]dhiraja Pararne§vara, the
illustrious Vama[deva], in [Kalachuri] Saifivat 810, on the fifteenth day of the bright
fortnight of Asvina, on a Sunday. Here to-day, in the big Vihara called Saddhar-
machakrapravarttana, of the order of the friars, the Sthaviras .and Manoratha-
. .
gupta were caused to give their blessing.
The te-xt then goes on to state that the devout worshipper Mamaka, a follower
of the Mahayana, whose body was adorned with a multitude [of various virtues], the
wife of thefollower of the Mahayana, the devoted worshipper Dhane^vara, who was bent
on washingawaythe stains of passion and so forth by self-control and restraint, caused
a copy of the Ashtasahasrika to be written, and presented something (we cannot say
what) to the order of monks, for as long a time as moon, sun and earth endure,
apparently in order to ensure recitations of the book.
The inscription then ends with one of the usual imprecations, to the effect that,
whosoever makes an obstruction, he will become a worm in the intestines and be
cooked together with the Fathers.
The translation of the above is not quite certain in all details. The beginning
probably contained some blessing, which cannot be restored.
The language ofthe inscription is corrupt Sanskrit, and there are several incorrect
forms and spellings. Such blunders do not, however, interest us here. The import-
ant fact disclosed by this epigraph is, that a monastery at Sarnath as late as the
I ith century A. D. was known as the Saddharmachakrapravarttanavihara, the
ihonastery of the turning of the wheel of the noble law. This is of course the fuller
form of the Saddharmachakra of the seals and the Dharmachakra of the Mahipala
inscription.
The remaining inscriptions discovered during the season’s work are late donative
nscriptions or contain the Buddhist creed, none of them being of special interest for
Archaeology or Epigraphy. Some, it may be noticed, have already been mentioned
in connection with the antiquities on which they have been found.
H. Marshall.
J.
Konow.
S.

EXCAVATIONS AT SAHRIBAHLOL
Fig". I. Generalview of the site afterexcavation.
itself is alarge modern village perched high onan extensive mound
some seven miles north of Mardan in the North West Frontier Province, not far
from the Swat canal, to which, I understand, the village in large measure owes itsorigin.
As is usual in such cases, the new settlers, mostly Pathans from beyond the Border,
have selected the largest and highest of the mounds in the vicinity as a site for
their village, as it was on the one hand too high for irrigation and consequently
uncultivable, and as, on the other, the numerous remains with which the place must
hbuutt II 7amm^.unnaahb}lL'e"ftno offer any satisfac m t e or a y ni e n x g pla “ n t a h t e io c n it o y f o t f h B e a w h a l r ol d ” Sa i h s ri d . eclared incorrect by people in the district,

—
,
EXCAVATIONS AT SAHRIBAHLOL.
103
originally have been covered furnished abundant material for the construction of the
rude dwellings which the present occupants erect. Even to-day foundation walls
appear here and there in those parts which have not yet been built over, and these,
as well as the immense amount of ancient stone used in the modern hovels, and
})ortions of the high and massive retaining wall, of the most perfect Gandhara con-
struction, which are still found at rare intervals about the whole, lead to the conclusion
that at some early period the modern Sahribahlol was the site of an important settle-
ment. From the nature of the retaining wall above mentioned, furthermore,
it would seem that this settlement was not a religious community, but a strongly-walled
and fortified town, with large numbers of houses scattered here and there as at Tarali,
and similarly all built of stone on the well-known principles of Gandhara construction.
This hypothesis, I would add, appears to be strengthened by the fact that, so far as I
know, no sculptural finds of a religious nature have ever been made in the main mound
itself, whereas the surrounding mounds have yielded large quantities. 1 judge, there-
fore, that the main mound marks the site of an ancient town or city, which may or
may not have been a royal residence (the local tradition, 1 believe, has it that it was)
and that the cuirously large number of lesser mounds, which to the number of a dozen
or moresurround the main mound on all sides, at a distance of from one to two miles
from it, are the remains of the many temples or erected in connection there-
with. That so obviously large and important a centre should have passed entirely
from the memory of man is as strange as it is regrettable. Even if we agree with M.
Foucher that the Chinese pilgrims were not archteologists as such, it remains curious
that sites, which still have so much interest for even the layman, as Sahribahlol and
—
more particularly Takht-i-Bahi distant only some three or four milesfrom theformer
should not at all have appealed to such devout pilgrims as Fa Hian and Hiuen
Thsang, and I cannot find their silence in regard to both at all easy to understand.
For it is amply evident from the frequency with which ruined and deserted sites are
mentioned in their writings that they were not so entirely lacking in archaeological in-
terest as has been asserted. But whatever the explanation, the fact remains that
neither Takht-i-Bahi nor Sahribahlol is mentioned in any of the Chinese accounts,
—
and until further excavations lead to the recovery of ep — igraphical material which is
unfortunat-ly altogether lacking among the present finds the identification of the site
must remain unsettled. It is much to be regretted that the presence of the modem
village closes the principal mound to exploration. There, perhaps, evidence might be
found which would shed light on this important question. But the cost of compen-
sating the present inhabitants, were they to be dispossessed, would be so large that
one he-itates to recommend the step, the more particularly in viewof the large number
of unoccupied mounds; in the Province which still await examination. But I should
like in this connection to call attention to the desirability of preventing, in so far as is
practicable, a similar occupation of important archaeological sites in future, and I
would .specially mention the unfortunate practice of selecting ancient mounds as places
of sepulture for the dead. When once a modem grave is placed on the summitof a
mound, the mound and all its contents are lost to present-day science, and in some
cas>'S theloss isverygreat. Thus more than one of the mounds at Sahribahlol itself are
closed to examination by the mere presence of a few graves somewhere on their slopes.

ARCHiEOLOGICAL REPORT.^
104
The discovery of the site whose excavation is here described (itself almost the
smallestand most inconspicuous of all the mounds in the neighbourhood) isinteresting
as showing how much of the deplorable destruction of antiquities in this district has
come about, and as illustrating how the European, even when not directly, is indirectly
responsible forit. A certain wealthy man in a neighbouring town had commissioned
a peasant of Sahrlbahlol to procure buts for him that he might in turn present them,
or rather the best among them, to the officers of the regiment in which his son was
serving. The peasant naturally set about filling the order, but fortunately had not
made very much progresswffien in the course of my winter’s tour I visited the spot
and learned from him the facts of the case. He lead me to the place and assisted
me in examining it, when the truth of his statements became evident, and the urgency
of preventing the further spoliation of the site obvious. I accordingly decided to
excavate the site at once, with the consent of the Local Government and the financial
aid of the Director General of Archaeology, who gave me a grant of R500 for the
purpose. The work was accordingly taken in hand on February 12th, 1907, from
which date it continued until April 20th, the total cost being 8685-11-5, of which the
amount over and above the grant of 8500 was drawn from the funds providedfor
archaeological wmrks in the budget ofthe Public Works Department.
My starting-point was given me by the discovery on my return that in a pit sunk
in the southern side of the mound by the villagers subsequent to my first visit, the
corner of a w-all had been disclosed. I accordingly sank a trench from the outermost
edge of the mound to meet this w-all, which proved to be the foundation of a religious
building still showdng traces of the stucco ornamentation, consisting of Buddha figures
seated between Corinthian pilasters, with which it had originally been decorated.
After ascertaining the general orientation of this building, therefore, I crossed the
mound and led a second trench from the northern edge due south, along the alignment
of the first building, and disclosed a wall of Gandhara masonry approximately 4 feet
wide and 69 feet long. As this wall rose everywhere to a height of about 3 feet, and
showed an absolutely smooth and level surface, it was apparent that it was merely a
stone substructure or basement. Nay, traces of the kachcha superstructure it had for-
merly supported were still to be found in the layer of earth mixed with bhusa, which
lay along its top. The further fact that it nearly bisected the mound from north ta
south led to the conclusion that it was the main divisional wall of the site, and the
discovery of a further wall leading to the east at right angles to the northern end of
the main wall, together with the discovery of a small stupa to the west of the religious
building first disclosed, pointed to the fact that the mound represented an ancient
religious establishment with the monastic quadrangle to the east and the religious pre-
cinct to the west. Assuming, therefore, that sculptural finds would be largely, if not
entirely, restricted to thelatter portion, andbeinganxious to secure whatever there was of
this nature as soon as possible, lest our operations might be terminated bythe approach-
ing harvest season before the completionofthe excavation as a whole (as it was impos-
sible to foresee how slowly thework might progress), wedevoted our attention as scon
as th W e e abo h v a e d f n a o c t ts un w c e o r ve e r d e e d te t r he mi l n i e tt d le t s o t t u h p e a e a x b p o l v o e ra r t e i f o e n rr o e f d t t h o e w m e o s r t e er t n ha h n al a f o f f e t w he in s c it h e es
before it became apparent that it still preserved its original ornamentation in stucco’

EXCAVATIONS AT SAHRlBAHLOL
Ios-
consisting of a line of friezes composed of elephants and Atlantes alternating, and not
only in situ, but in most admirable preservation. In the hope, therefore, of protecting
these delicate friezes, it was decided not to uncover it further for the present, and a
trench was led past it merely, but at such a distance as to leave it enveloped in its
covering of earth. However, despite these precautions, I found on returning to the
site one morning that some one had been there in our absence and either out of fanati-
cism or out of pure wantonness scraped away the earth, and with some strong instru-
ment totally demolished the frieze of Atlantes and elephants so far as it was access-
ible, namely, on three sides of the building 1 I therefore determined to complete the ex-
cavation of this stupa first of all, in order to register photographically whatever artistic
evidence might yet be preserved before further accidents might happen, and was de-
lighted on laying bare the northern side, the one untouched by the vandals, to find that
it had been the front of the building, and therefore adorned with a frieze of stillgreater
interest than those which had been wrecked. And it was found, too, that there was
still another frieze on each side of the building below the one at first uncovered, the
lo\ver one being composed of seated Buddha figures between Corinthian pilasters, as
in the case of the religious building already mentioned. The workmanship In the
case of the stupa friezes, how’ever, was distinctly superior to that of the temple
facade.
To our great disappointmentj on continuing our trench to the west in alignment
with this stupa no further buildings of any kind were found. On the other hand^ we
did find, on clearing the spacein front of the long central wall, a stone platform some 4
feet square approached by a well-preserved llight of stone steps rising from a stone-
pavement. This proved to be the main pavement of the enclosure, and led along in
front of what must have been the central religious edifice of the community, presuma-
bly a stfipa, but so far destroyed as to furnish no conclusive evidence. The most
interesting and important feature of the whole, though, was this, that a line of stone
sculptures, with one exception Bodhisattva figures, originally about 4 feet 6 inches
high, was found still in situ on either side of the approach to this now lost building,
which line of standing figures was flanked on either side by a seated Buddha figure,
only one of which was found actually in position, set a little back from the main row,.
Plate XXXII. So far as I know, these are the first free standing sculptures to be found
in situ in Gandhara, which fact invests them with considerable interest, though it is to-
be deplored that they were all badly damaged, inlarge measureapparently owing to the
fact that the greatest depth of the mound in this part was not sufficient to cover their
original height. Indeed, the jagged points of the neck of one Bodhisattva were found
protruding slightly above the surface of the mound before our first trench here was.
sunk.
As regards the eastern portion of the site containing the monastic quadrangle,,
there is little of interest to note. The usual arrangement of cells was found built
around the sides of a courtyard. The centre of this court, however, showed a feature
of some interest in what appears to have been a tank whose nature as such, however,
depends for its determination chiefly upon the covered drain that leads from it to the-
south. The numerous irregular orifices or bays in the outside wall of this tank,
however, are not so easy to explain. The size of the individual opening makes one-
p

arch.^;ological report.
io5
hesitate to explain them as sockets for wooden pillars supporting a superstructure and
yet there seems no other explanation for them.
The sculptural finds were singularly rich and numerous. No complete detailed
list of them is here given, as this will find its natural place in the illustrated catalogue
of the Peshawar IMuseum, where the collection is now exhibited. But an even
better idea of the extent of the finds than such a list would give, can be gathered from
the statement that they number nearly 300 fragments and fill twelve cases in the
Museum, where they take up more than one entire side of the main gallery. Consi-
dering the entire insignificance of the site itself, a hardlynoticeable mound measuring
125 feet in diameter, and nowhere rising more than five or six feet above the plain,
this yield may fairly be considered phenomenal. And when it is further remembered
that the site had already been exploited by the villagers to a considerable extent (for
along the western edge large pits were traceable at intervals over a length of sixty-
five feet) the wealth of sculpture which must originally have adorned even this little
centre of the cult is seen to have been enormous, and enables us to form some idea of
what a dazzling scene of splendour such a stupa site must have presented in its prime.
For the ample traces of painting and gilding which were found show conclusively
(as indeed is well known) that in the days when these Graeco-Buddhist sculptures
were set up and worshipped, they did not then present the dull dreary monotony of
their present-day slate-colour, but blazed wdth a barbaric splendour of red and geld as
well as other brilliant colours. To form any adequate conception of the pristine
beauty of these ancient shrines one must compare the wealth of gold and colouring in
the modern temples of the faith in Burma and especially Japan for with nothing
;
before one but the dull greyness of the present ruins, thick with the dust of centuries
and given over to the sombre lizard and other crawling things, the imagination fails
utterly to paint again the brilliant beauties of the ancient times.
In arranging these sculptures in the Museum an attempt has been made, so far as
I know the first attempt of the kind, to exhibit them with some classification, and the
collection has accordingly been divided into groups following in the main ihe classifi-
cation adopted by M. Foucher in his brilliant study of the Gandhara school, and the
same order will be followed in the present paper.
The first section of the collection is a miscellaneous one, containing the stucco
fragments recovered. The majority are heads of either Buddhas or Bodhisattvas
(fig. 2) but of no special interest and calling for no special remark, although
several are of admirable execution and considerable beauty as can be seen from
the one shown in figure 13 ofPlate XXXV. There arealso several animal heads, lions,
cows, and one horse’s head showing the bridle, etc., but the most interesting figure
in the group is that of a warrior in armour. This figure, which is in three pieces and
unfortunately lacks the head and right arm,stood originally above the volute at the left-
hand side of anarch. But as the arch w'as itself of earthwork merely faced with stucco,
it was found impossible to preserve it, butit was registered photographicallyand is here
reproduced in figure 3 of Plate XXXV. The figure of the warrior itself is of solid
chunam and hence easily removable. It wears a double-skirted, imbricated coat of
mail, falling to the knees, reminding one of the armour worn by Mara and his hosts in
many of the scenes representing the Temptation of the Buddha, though here it

EXACVATIONS AT SAHRiBAHLOL.
107
appears in most cases to be rather quilted than imbricated in the true sense. In the
sculpture depicting this scene in the present collection, however, the armour is the same
Fig 2. Miscellaneousstucco heads.
as in the figure under discussion. The feet are encased in high boots reaching
half-way to the knee, but the rest of the leg appears to be bare. The elbow of the
left arm rests against theside, but the hand is raised to the shoulder and holds a shield
narrow in the centre but with broad round ends, resembling a figure 8. The face of
this is roughly decorated. On the whole, the pose of this figure is graceful and
natural, and the modelling good and without exaggeration. 1 am not aware of any
exact parallel to it among the sculptures so far recovered in Gandhara and regret the
more that our search failed to afford any trace of the correspondingfigure at the other
side of the arch. The fragment was found near the north-east end of the main stupa,
between it and the raised platform mentioned above, but there was unfortunately
nothing to indicate its correct original position.
The first section of the main body of the collection, namely, thefragments of stone
sculpture, contains those pieces which illustrate specially archaic elements in the art of
Gandhara, that is to say elements which are known to have been either indigenous in
Indian art, or, if of foreignorigin, of earlierimportation and adoption thanthose irnported
for the first time by the Gandhara school. The majority of the pieces in this section,
numbering in all 83 stones, are fragments of cornices and borders and portions of
,
friezes showing commonly kneeling figures under ogee arches, separated one from
.
another by pilasters of the Persepolitan type. {cf. fig. 2 of PL XXXV). The
'
cornices and borders show the imbricated or cone pattern, and frequently a row of
brackets (not archaic),decorated above with a long line, of the saw-tooth ornament.
Other figures have the form of the archaic Buddhist rail. .Thus fragment No: 64. is a
rail of this nature with three crossbars bordered above with a row of pipal leayes with

akRCH/€OLOGICAL REPORT.
loS
points turned upwards and surmounted by two complete merlons, the component cubes
ofwhich are indicatedbylines drawn on the face of the stone. Others show the familiar
eglantine motifwith from four to six petals {cf. Nos. 67 and 97), and the same design
appears on a number of square medallions (Nos. 74, 75, 77, etc.). Other archaic
•elements represented are the latticed balcony (No. 86), the bead and reel design (No.
102), the lotus, and a number of elephants. A particularly interesting stone is the
onereproducedin figure i of Plate XXXV, where a parrot is shown beside an arch,
the interior of which is decorated with a row of plain brackets. The execution both
of the bird and of the fruit it is eating is excellent, even to the expression of the eye,
and the feathers, especially those of the tail, are indicated with great delicacy and
success. But I fear we are not warranted in interpreting the fruit as a custard-apple,
despite its appearance, for if Crooke is right in saying that this is an importation
from America, it would be a sad anachronism. (Or are w'e perhaps justified in
thinking that this sculpture is itself evidence against this theory ?). But perhaps the
most interesting stone In this group is the one shown in figure 4 of the same
plate, a large square medallion, broken at the upper left-hand corner, showing an
exceptionally good example of the Assyrian honeysuckle motif. Curiously enough no
•other fragments of this design were recovered, which is the more to be regretted as
the present stone is distinctly above the average of those showing this design, both
in feeling and in execution.
Of the new elements in Indian art originated or newly Imported by the Gandhara
school, by far the most important is of course the figure of the Buddha himself. But
although a few such figures have been introduced into this section of the Sahribahlol
collection in the Museum, for historical purposes, the consideration of them in this
paper will be reserved to the portion dealing with these figures separately. Of the
other new elements, the most important are the cornices with brackets showing
Corinthian capitals, of -R^hich numberless specimens were recovered. These and the
Corinthian pilasters speak eloquently of the Greek influence under which the school
arose, as do the friezes showing little Erotes carrying a long garland. Another new
foreign motifis seen in sculpture No. 109, a fragment of a frieze showing a very
ornamental scroll of vine-leaves and bunches ofgrapes. This design, as is well known
is not native to India, as the vine is not itself indigenous but it is less certain whether
;
we owe its appearance in Indian art altogether to the Gandhara school, or whether
it
was merely here introduced for the second time. There seems no reason, how^ever
to differ from M. Foucherin holding that at least its use as a scroll or border is new
in Gandhara, ^nd the piece has accordingly been includedin this section Foucher
{cf.
p. 222). .Another reason that might have excluded it altogether from the collection
was the fact that it is not strictly partof the present finds, as it was found not in the
mound excavated by me, but lying on the surface of one of the other mounds in the
Immediate neighbourhood. So long as this fact Is registered, however, it seems best
to include it with the others. It is in any case in every sense a “ Sahribahlol
sculpture.” The newly-imported winged marine monster appears on the triangular
-stone No. 1 1-2, and winged Tritons with long spotted tails occur in fragment No. 1 16
shown in fig. 5 of Plate XXXV. The largest of the other three compartments
in this sculpture appears to have contained one of the legendary scenes of the

EXCAVATIONS AT SAHRIBAHLOL. I09
Buddha’s life, but it is too far damaged to admit of identification. Finally, the
highly ornamental border of eglantine is to be noticed.
The next section, consisting of sculptures representing scenes from the legend
of the Buddha, is in some ways the most valuable of all. It comprises 28
stones, some of them of large size, and occupies two cases. First in the list come
the famous four chief scenes in Gautama’s life, the birth, enlightenment, first-sermon,
and death. The stones are all of the same size, and must have been companion
pieces, placed somewhere along the front of the main stupa, judging from the position
in which they were discovered. The several scenes are too well known to call for
special description here, as the present stones show no important deviations from the
usual type. The musical instruments depicted above the head of Brahma, as he
stands to receive the new-born infant, are perhaps worthy of mention in regard to the
Birth scene (fig. 6 of PI. XXXV),
Also, the well-defined imbrication in part at least of the armour worn by Mara’s
host in the scene of the Temptation is noteworthy, as well as the absence of any
bow-carrying figure, as Mara himself is usually represented. As is well knowm,
this representation of the Buddha’s temptation b)^ the hosts of evil typifies in
Gandhara art the moment of Gautama’s attaining supreme enlightenment, which
it does chiefly by reason of the near synchronism of the two events in the
legend. Of all the different postures of the hands in Buddhist sculpture, that associa-
ted with this scene, the posture, namely, oftouching the earth with the right hand as
the Buddha called upon the Eaith-goddess to bear wdtness to his right to retain the
seat from which Mara was seeking to dislodge him (the so-called bhumi-s^arka-
mudra) is almost the only one, w’hose association with a given episode is nearly con-
stant in the Gandhara school of art. The mudra associated later with equal invariable-
ness wdth the third of the chief scenes, the posture called " Turning the wheel of the
law ” (the dharmacha'kra-mudrd) is not so unfailingly associated with this scene in
Gandhara. Thus, the specimen in this collection shows the Buddha with right hand
upraised in the attitude of protection (the abhaya-nmdra). The symbolism of the
w’heel (representing the W'heel of the law*) above the tri§ul, (representing the “ three
jewels,’’ the Buddha, the law, and the order, the trinity of the Buddhists) and the two
deer recalling the site of the event itself, namely, the Deer-park at Sarnath, is common
in Gandhara and, as usual, occurs along the front of the Buddha’s seat in the present
instance. The death-scene shows no special deviations from the usual form of com-
position, though attention may be drawm to the fact that the sculptor has solved the
problem of the halo behind the head of the reclining Buddha with more success than
is usual, and the folds of the garment, while not strictly correct, are nevertheless much
less offensively those of a standing figure than is common. The whole pose of the
figure is distinctly good, and not even inthe case of the garment could it be called
“ a standing figure laid upon its side.” (Fig. 10 of PI. XXXV.)
Another well knowm scene is that of the Rishi Asita casting the horoscope
of the infant Gautama (PI. XXXI, fig. a). The royal father and mother of the
child are seen seated in the centre of the composition, separated by Corinthian
pilasters from the supposedly Greek girls in attendance on the (proper) left, and the
\?,ishi Asita on the right, seated on alow stool with the child on his lap. He is

;
no ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
understood to be making to the king that forecast, of his son s future great-
ness which so distressed Suddhodana. The extreme (proper) right of this stone is
of special interest. Here we have a portion of a second scene, in which the figures
of the child writing and again riding on a ram are distinct. The propriety of the ram'
is unknown to me, but the position of this fragment just beyond the scene of the
horoscope as one would naturally progress while making the customary circumambula-
tion with the right hand to the centre — a point which is often ofassistance iri determin-
ing the identity of a scene, as in this way some hint of chronological sequence is not
infrequently given—and the certain interpretation of the writing figure as typifying the
writing lesson of the young Siddhartha, both lead to the conclusion that’ the stone as a
whole was one of a series portraying in an abbreviated form the life of the Buddha in
chronological order, and that following the horoscope was a complex scene typifying
the whole period of his youth and early training.. But, so far as I know, a similar
form of representation of this subject has not been found before, which lends the
fragment added interest. Certainly in no stone that I am aware of is the young
prince depicted riding on a ram. Before leaving the subject of this sculpture, how-
ever, the singular delicacy and beauty of its execution should be noticed. Even the
faces of the leading figures are sculptured with skill and precision, although there
seems to be no attempt made to represent particular facial expressions.
Sculpture No. 138 in the collection (PI. XXXI, fig. h) is a large fragment
forming originally the central portion of one of those false niches built out from the
sides of a stiipa, on which portions of three legendary scenes are preserved, none of
them as yetidentified. The fragment shown in figure c of the same plate is the right
side of a companion stone to figure b and from the two the original form of the
;
whole sculpture can be seen, although the top of the fragment b is lost and should
be completed so as to make the top line of the whole represent the outline of the
double-domed chapel as seen in section or silhouette (5/. the illustrations in Foucher,
pp. 184and 185). The unbroken stone therefore originally showed in the centre at
least four such large legendary scenes as appear in figure b, arranged one above
another. On either side was a border of the cone-like pattern, beyond w'hich came
a vertical line of nine (or ten ?) small seated Buddha figures under rounded arches
(with the exception of the topmost one, where the arch is pointed). To the right and
left of these, again, was a furtherwider band of six legendary scenes arranged vertically,
each consisting of a standing figure of the Buddha with two companions, the outer
edges of each scene being closed by Corinthian pilasters, save in the uppermost panel,,
where a third attendant was introduced to fill the space. On the outer side of each of
these lines of legendary scenes, furthermore, were very narrow vertical lines of little
Erotes in a variety of attitudes, but all standing, and all facing the centre of the stone
and, like the rows of little seated Buddhas, so sunken or set back as to make the
vertical rows of legendary scenes both large and small stand out in conspicuous relief.
The extreme outer edges of the whole, to right and left, were decorated with a border
of acanthus leaves, the trefoil curve above showing a scroll of five-petalled eglantine-
just within this-border. , The irregular spaces between this scroll and the tops of the
rows of smaller legendary scenes and Erotes were respectively^ occupied by a wor-
shipping winged Triton and a figure keeling in adoration upon a Corinthian capital

EXCAVATIONS AT SAHR! BAHLOL.

EXCAVATIONS AT SAHRIBAHLOL.
1 1 I
Of this Original the present fragment (fig. b) shows only a portion of the central part,
with portions of three of the large legendary scenes as mentioned above. In the
lowest of these, the Buddha is seen seated cross-legged on a decorated throne under-
neath an arch adorned with the saw-tooth pattern supported by Corinthian pillars, now
broken, and connecting two balconies of lattice-workresemblingthe archaic rail pattern
and holding each two female figures apparently casting flowers upon the Buddha.
The latter holds a bowl in his left hand, which rests upon his knee, while the right
hand is raised with the palm turned outwards in the attitude of protection [abhaya-
iniidra'S. Both shouldersare draped and the hair isarranged in natural waves. Before
the throne is a verv small standing figure, presumably a child, either lifting up his
hands in supplication or making an offering, it is impossible to determine which. No
other figures are preserved save the head and uplifted right hand of a man underneath
the (proper) left-hand balcony. This scene is separated from the one above it by a
fairlvwide band of well-carved acanthus leaves. In this second scene the Buddha is
shown standing in the centre of the composition turned slightly to the, (proper) left.
His right hand is again upraised in the attitude of protection {abhayamudra) while in
hisleft he appearsto hold a small uncertain object, if he is not really catching up his
garment. At his right side stands a lay figure with the right hand wrapped in his
mantle, his hands seemingly clasped. Next to this figure stands Vajrapani with the
vajra in his left hand, and in hisright an uncertain object resembling a bunch of flowers.
The figure is nude to the waist as usual, and wears a short dhoti falling to the knees.
At his right, again, is a monk. The lower right-hand corner of the scene is lost, but
above the figures just described, all of which are standing in theright foreground, four
other figures are shown leaning out of the background. Three of these are, unfortun-
ately, too badly damaged to allow of certain recognition, but the royal head-dress of
the fourth leads to the conclusion that they all represent Devas, one worshipping, the
others casting flowers upon the Buddha. A similar figure is showm in the background
A
on the (proper) left. large part of this half of the scene is lost, but two complete
figures are preserved. The one immediately at the Buddha’s left is a young layman
with the right shoulder bare and the right hand raised, holding aloft what seems to be
a small jar. This isundoubtedly the leading figure in the scene, and the one whose
identity would give the clue to the interpretation of the whole. On his left, again, is a
female figure turned slightly away from him. Her left hand is raised to her head
while with her right she clutches the garment of the man. The presence of Vajrapani
and the monk ought to place the scene chronologically subsequent to the enlighten-
ment and it is barely possible that we have here a representation of the conversion
of Ugrasena {cf. Foucher, page 520). The embarrassed attitude of the young woman
and the youthful appearance ofthe male figure are in favour of this assumption, but
the total absence of any musical instrument makes it at least uncertain. If the exact
nature of the object held in the young man’s hand could be determined, the question
might perhaps be solved, hut 1 cannot myself feel any certainty as regards this point.
The composition wmuld, at any rate, represent this legend more adequately than the
sculpture tentatively so identifiedby M. Foucher (p. 522). The second musician inthat
scene hardly compensates for the absence of the girl. . And it is possible that were pur
stone complete, the more obvious clues to the scene would be given.. The third scene

ARCH.-EOLOGICAL REPORT.
12
I
at the top of the stone shows the Buddha again seated cross-legged on an ornamental
throne. His hands appear to be held inthe posture of turning the wheelofthe law (the
dharmachakra-imidra) but the scene certainly has nothing whatever to do with thefirst
sermon. At either side of the throne stands a diminutive figure with clasped hands,
just insidethe pillarswhich, though now^broken, must have originally supported balconies
connected presumably by an arch as in the lowest scene. The entire left side of the
composition is lost and the upper portion ofeven the fragment preserved is very badly
damaged, but the balcony on the right with one female figure is intact and two figures
beneath it are only slightly injured. The one nearer the Buddha is a w'oman seated
on a richly ornamented stool, with a female attendant standing behind her. Both of
these have their hands clasped in the direction of the Buddha. But the scene is so
badly damaged that I hesitate to make any suggestion as to its identity. It might
conceivably be any one of several, but a hypothesis in these circumstances could not
be more than a mere guess.
The fragment shown in fig. c of Plate XXXI shows only a very narrow^ strip from
the extreme (proper) left of the main central scenes of the original whole, eight of the
small seated Buddhas, and the arch of the ninth and missing figure below, four of the
smaller legendary scenes, the row’ of Erotes and the acanthus border, with the Triton
and kneeling figure above. Of the four large legendary scenes the lowermost frag-
ment shows merely the damaged bust of some royal or Bodhisattva figure (whose face
is missing) and the head and shoulders of a similar figure above it (a Deva?) holding
a flower in its raised right hand. Of the scene above this only one figure is preserved,
that of a wmman standing and holding in her raised right hand what might be a round
mirror, and in her left a long and narrow’’ object of doubtful character. Above this,
only the figure of one seated monk is preserved with another figure above and behind
it, while the uppermost fragment shows a small nude figure apparently waving a
cloth above its head. None of these scenes I fear are susceptible of interpretation, as.
the fragments preserved are far too slight to afford conclusive evidence. Nor can
any guess be hazarded as to the significance of the smaller and obviously much abbre-
viated legendary scenes to the right.
Several other similar fragments of the other false niches of the main stufa were
recovered, especially one large but badly damaged one representing certainly, in the
main scenes, the voluptuous life in the harem and the later abandonment of his home
by the prince Siddhartha, in other words the Great Renunciation.^ But the condition
of the stone does not permit of successful reproduction. The large fragment No
152 is especially interesting. This is also from the central portion of the original
whole, and the central one of the fragmentary scenes preserved calls for special
mention, as it appears to represent a scene hitherto unknown in Gandhara The
Buddha, standing with Vajrapani on his right, is turned slightly toward a figure
on his (proper) left who kneels on one knee before the entrance to some double-domed
building at the extreme left of the composition. This is undoubtedly the principal
figure in the group, and the one upon w^hose identity the interpretation of the whole
depends. The other figures in the scene are damaged and of no apparent importance
1 1 am indebted to Dr. Vogel forhavingpointed outthe agreementbetween the two fragments orthisTt^
No. 154, inthe coIleotioD.

EXCAVATION AT SAHRIBAHLOL. ”3
But whereas a mere kneeling figure would be practically impossible to identify
the present one is distinguished by the fact that he appears to be crouching behind a
large tree, whose base, however, is raised well above the surface of the ground.
This seems certainly to give the clue to the meaning of the composition, and unless
1 am much mistaken, the w'hole represents that one of Nanda’s several attempts
to escape from the monastery w'hieh is recounted by Beal on page 373 of his
Romantic Legend of Sakya Buddha. In the absence of the Master, Nanda,
whose conversion or consecration Buddha had effected by force regardless of
the subject’s w'ishes, attempted to run away from the monastery (which I believe
the double domed chapel to represent), but the Buddha realizing the situation by
virtue of his miraculous power, suddenly appeared in the Nyagrodha garden
through -which Nanda was hastening. Perceiving the Buddha, therefore,
Nanda attempted to hide behind a tree, but the Master observing this caused the
tree to rise suddenly from its place and thus disclosed the culprit, which is the
moment intended in our sculpture.
Other familiar scenes represented in this section are, the Departure from Kapila-
vastu (No. 134), the Dipankarajataka (No. 135) and a very interesting scene from the
story of the conversion of Kasyapa (No. 136). The Buddha is shown seated within
the fire temple in meditation, while the story of the fears of fire aroused in the minds
of the Brahmans by the effulgence of his person is amusingly called to mind by the
figures of two young ascetics mounting to the top of the building by a ladder carrying
large water-jars, obviously to put out the supposed conflagration. The venomous ser-
pent overcome by the Buddha on this occasion is seen meekly crawling into the
^begging bowl which is placed before the Buddha’s seat. The Dream of the Queen
Maya is depicted in No. 138, but there is nothing in the treatment of the theme
calling for special mention, I should like to add here that the Museum possesses
another representation of this scene, presented by Major Rawlinson, which
is of very special interest. As is well known, the sacred white elephant which Maya
conceived to be approaching her, entered and remained in her right side only,
according to the accepted legend. For this reason in all Gandhara sculptures
depicting this scene Maya is shown lying on her left side, with her head to the proper
left of the stone though it should be noted that the older school of Indian art is not
;
careful as regards this point {cf. Foucher, p, 293). But in the piece presented by
Major Rawlinson the queen is lying with her head to the right. This does not,
however, imply any negligence of the tradition on the part of the sculptor for once
;
having placed her so, he has not hesitated to keep with the tradition by the simple
-device of representing her as lying with her back to the spectators. Thus, in place
•of her face, we see merely her coiffure, and theapproaching elephant is still permitted
access to the traditionally correct right side. An admirable fragment of the wrestling
match is seen in No. 143, and the Slaughter of the Elephant by Devadatta
in No. i4'2. For despite one’s first inclination to call this stone the Sub-
jection of the Elephant by the Buddha, the nudity of the human figure precludes
the possibility of its being Gautama, and it must accordingly refer to Devadatta
jealously killing the elephant which was to bring back the victorious Siddhartha from
the games.
Q

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
114
Following these legendary scenes in the Museum come certain stones which I
have called Devotional Sculptures, as they appear to be connected with the cult of
Buddhism rather than to illustrate the storyofBuddha’s life. Such is the very fine stone
shown in Plate XXXII, fig. (No. 171 in the Museum). The Buddha is depicted
seated cross-legged (his hands in the dharmachakra-mudra) on a highly conventional
lotus supported by three kneeling elephants holding lotuses in their uplifted trunks.
(The one facing, it should be noticed, is injured.) His right shoulder is bare and he
wears no moustache. The protuberance on the skull (the u^nz^, one of the physical
characteristics of the Buddha’s person) is prominent, and the hair of the head combed
back from the forehead and waved in a natural and graceful manner. Beside him
stand two Bodhisattvas. The one on the proper right is nude to the waist, save for
some slight drapery over the left shoulder, and wears the usual necklaces and the
jewelled cord over the left shoulder and under the right arm. The hand (which is
damaged) is raised, while the left arm is entirely lost. The figure wears a moustache
and the elaborate head-dress shows a large medallion in front, without, however,
any trace of a lesser Buddha figure. Phis was probably relegated to a balcony at
the corner of the composition above the Bodhisattva’s head, as is seen in the
altogether analogous sculpture No. 158, but the corner is unfortunately lost. The Bod-
hisattva figure on the proper left of the Buddha is similarly nude to the waist but does
not wear the jewelled cord. There is no moustache and the head is decorated merely
with an elaborate coiffure strongly resembling a large wig. In this case also the
probable balcony above with a smaller seatedBuddha as well as theright hand is miss-
ing. Butthe left arm and hand were recovered after the photograph here published was
taken, and 1 am glad to be able to state that it holds the expected alabastron. Above
the Buddha’s head is an intricate mass of divine flowers, not unlike the passion-flower,
amid which little genii are seen in attitudes of devotion, the central one holding a
wreath directly above the Buddha’s head. It should be noticed that the carvina
here is exceptionally deep and fine, the stalks and many of the petals being in the
round. At the Buddha’s right shoulder appears a small figure leaning forward out of
the background, obviously in worship, which must obviously have had a pendant on
the left. Underneath the whole, finally, along the front of the base, is an elaborate
design in lotuses,- but badly damaged towards the left. As mentioned above, the sculp-
ture No.158 is very similar, the Buddha being seated- as before with his hands in
the same posture. {jdh{iym(tchcik'y^~Tyiztdycdj^ Similarly, the Bodhisattva on his ricrht
wears a high hsad-dress, of the same general type as that in the previous sculpture
but not identical. His right hand, which was raised, is lost, and in his left he carries a
doubled wmeath or garland like that shown in figure 8 of Plate XXXV. The
Bodhisattva on the left here, again, wears no head-dress, but has his hair arranged
in an elaborate loop to the left, as seen in fig. of Plate XXXIII. He does wear
the jewelled cord. The right hand is raised with the back of the hand outward but it
does not appear to be holdhg any attribute. The left hand is again held down-’at the
side but is damaged, and it is not certain whether it held an alabastronor not. Now, are
these the Bodhisattvas AvalSkiteSvara and Maitreya respectively ? I am inclined to
think-they are. - For although the right hand of the Bodhisattva standing on the
(proper) right of the Buddha in sculpture No. 171 is broken off, the shape of the

z>i.A.X23
EXCAVATIONS AT SAHRl BAHLOL.

E.KCAVATION AT SAHRIBAHLOL.
fracture above the hand points to its having originally held a lotus. Further-
more. the Buddha seated in the little balcony above the corresponding Bodhisattva
on the right in sculpture Xo. 158 has his hands folded in the dhymia-mudra
and seems to represent Amitabha. while the presence of the alabastron in the
left hand (recovered after the photograph) of the other Bodhisattva in the sculpture
shown in fig. b of Plate XXXI 1 is equally positive evidence for identifying him with
Maitrgva. Of course it is obvious that the figures do not absolutely agree in both
sculptures, but in general the correspondence is such that they may safely be assumed
to represent the same persons, and perhaps more could not be expected in the
Gandhara school.
Other interesting stones which have been included in this section for convenience
are shown in figure 2 of Plate XXXV. They represent, the upper one the cult of
Siddhartha’s turban, the second the cult of the bowl, and the third and the fourth the
cult of the relics. For, however improbable a form for this last subject the figure
occurring onboth these fragments may at first appear, the position of a precisely similar
figure following a representation of the Buddha’s cremationreproduced by M. Foucher
on page 587 of his work on Gandhara art leaves no doubt as to the identity and
significance of the figure here.
The Bodhisattva figures recovered (a few of which are shown in Plate XXXIII)
form quite a collection by themselves, and one of great interest and value. As is well
known, the problems connected with the Bodhisattvas and their identification are
among the most difficult with which the student of Gandhara art is concerned. The
question as to how far the Bodhisattva theory had been developed at this period, has
never beenfinally answered, and how far we arejustified in attaching specific names to
the Bodhisattva figures of this school is uncertain. But the Sahribahlol sculptures
alone show such a distinct fixation of type, particularly as regards the head-dresses
worn, that it is impossible to escapethe conviction that the development had already
advanced considerably, perhaps more than has been generally acknowledged. The
difficulties of the problem are many. In later Buddhist art the various Bodhisattvas
have certain attributes which serve to differentiate them and make their recognition
comparatively easy. But in Gandhara the caseis not so easy. Here we are dealing
with an earlier phase of both art and religion, and these attributes do not appear to
have as yet become so fixedand constant as in later times. It is the same here as in
the case of the various mudras mentioned above. The aids upon which the student
might hope to depend either fail him altogether or are misleading. A further
difficulty lies in the fragmentary nature of the majority of the sculptures recovered.
As in the case of large Buddha figures, the hands of the larger Bodhisattvas
also were not carved out of the same block as the main body of the figure, but were
from the beginning carved separately and added to the finished statue. For in this
way the artist was saved the labour of cutting aw’-ay the vast amount of superfluous
stone that would have been necessary had he worked with a block of sufficient
thickness to include the hands, w'hich regularly project considerably .beyond the
lines of the body itself. It thus happens that the majority of large Bodhisattva
figures lack the hands and consequently the distinguishing attributes. The only
significant characteristic left us in many cases is the form of Jhe head-dress.

ARCH/t'OLOGiCAL REPORT.
16
1
The importance of this for a right interpretation of the sculpture is clear from the-
importance attached to it in the later Buddhist literature, where it is expressly
stated that “theyare to be recognisedby theirhead-dresses But as yet unfortunately
we do not know the forms peculiar to individual Bodhisattvas in Gandhara. Nor,
indeed, considering how variable and indeterminate the other attributes and mudras-
are, is it perhaps to be expected that the type was so fixed and invariable as later.
But the sculptures under review seem certainly to justify the conclusion that the art
had already progressed well along the road to such fixation, at least. Thus, we have
noticed above that both the figures which appear to be Avalokite§vara in the devo-
tional pieces discussed wear similar high head-dresses, while boththe Maitreyas show
nothing but the coiffure. The ugly wiglike appearance of the latter in the sculpture
shown in figure h of Plate XXXII, is perhaps sufficient reason for its having yielded,
as the representation tended to approach uniformity, to the more graceful style shown'
in the case of the second sculpture. However this may be, no other Bodhisattva
figure was found showing the same coiffure as thatin this figure, whereas several
heads were recovered which reproduce more or less exactly the type of coiffure-
worn by the second Maitreya. Instances arethetwo figures b and c of Plate XXXI II,.
the former of which gives us in the posture of the hands a further reason to suppose
that Maitreya is meant ; for the dharmachahra-mtidra, according to Griinwedel, is the
normal characteristic of this Bodhisattva in Tibetan art. If, then, our reasons for
assuming that the Bodhisattva on the left of the Buddha in the devotional
sculptures is Maitreya, are sufficient, and if we are right in following the dictum
of the Amitayur-Dhyana-Sutra, are we not justified in assuming that this type
of head-dress, namely, a coiffure bound with pearls and characterized chiefly
by a large loop above and to the left of the forehead, regularly indicates
Maitreya in the Gandhara school ? I think we are, and if reference be made to-
figure 140 in Griinwedel and Burgess’s “ Buddhist Art in India ” (page 192)
it will be seen that here again in the Bodhisattva figure on the left, which
Griinwedel 'identifies with Maitreya, the same type of head-dress or coiffure
occurs.
The determination of the figures of Avalokitesvara is more difficult. The-
correspondence betw’een the head-dresses of the two figures so identified in the
devotional sculptures above is ‘not exact enough to give us a final standard, but that
Aval6kite§vara wears a high head-dress as opposed to the coiffure of Maitreya seems
certain. Such a high head-dress appears in figure a of Plate XXXIII, and this may
possibly be Avalokite§vara. If, furthermore, one of the two medallions recovered
at this site originally fitted on to the disc in the centre of the head-dress, the case
is much strengthened. For that this disc did originally support such a medallion is
certain, from the form of the medallions themselves (which are pierced to fit just
such a column as occurs in the centre of the disc) and both these medallions show a
figure coriesponding to the Amitabha of later times. Unfortunately, the sculpture
in its present condition does not allow of our determining exactly which one of the-
two belonged to it, but thabone'of them did, seems very highly probable, and if so,
the figure is almost certainly Avalokitesvara; but I fear that it is impossible to affirm,
it with certainty.

EXCA¥ATIONS AT SAHRI BAHLOL

EXCAVATIONS AT SAHRI BAHLOL.
BxrniDia:^ iFia-TmES.

p-LA-TE :si:20K.’\rxx.
A StuwDiscovered inThe
EXCAVATION OFA Mound
near
Sahribahlol
Plan
Stucco v/orkShownm
Earth Work immm
SC5ALE OF Feet

EXCAVATIONS AT SAHRlBAHLOL.
117
Another head witha similar high head-dress is shown in figure 14 of Plate XXXV,
but whether this originally supported the other of the two medallions is impossible to
determine. It is not improbable, however and if so, this head also would seem to be
;
AvalokiteSvara, but more than this cannot be claimed.
An entirely different type is seen in figure 12 of the same plate, where
the peculiar pose of the head is striking. That both pose and head-dress
are significant seems certain from the fact that the later excavations at Takht-i-Bahl
yielded an exact counterpart but unfortunately I have no clue to an identi-
;
fication either of this figure, nor of the exquisite little stone head shown in figure d of
Plate XXXIII.
Of the Buddha figures in ihe collection there is less to say.
Plate XXXIV illustrates some of the be.'t, and the exceptional delicacy and
beauty of figure a are obvious. The large standing Buddha in figure b is also
excellent, but the nose is slightly injured. The face of the head shown in figure c wms-
found split off, and has been fastened on in the photograph by a string
tied around the n^nlsha. The departure from the usual type is noteworthy,,
and the striking similarity between this head and the one shown in figure 15 of Plate
XXXV leads to the thought that possibly both are by the same artist. Figure d ini
Plate XXXIV represents the largest of the heads recovered, and will, I think, be
acknowledged as unusually strong and beautiful. But of equal interest with the
heads are some of the other fragments of Buddha figures recovered. Thus the hand
shown in figure 9 of Plate XXX\* is remarkable for the well-defined webbing between-
the fingers, one of the physical characteiistics of the Buddha figure, while the
edge of the bowl shown in figure 7 of the same plate is interesting for the careful
indication by means ofgrooving on its edge of the fourfold nature of the Buddha’s
begging-bowl.
Of all the stone sculptures recovered, however, perhaps the best, next to the
beautiful seated Buddha onPlate XXXIV, is the remarkablyfine group of Kubera and
Hariti shown in Plate XXXII, fig. c. That there is a tendency towards exaggeration
in the treatment of the trunk in the case of the male and of the breasts in the case of
thefemale figure is undeniable, and the legs are disproportionately short.^ But with all
these defects the sculpture is extremely graceful and pleasing the profile of Hariti
;
being hardly rivalled for delicacy and real womanly grace in Gandhara art. It is
marvellous that the piece has not been more damaged, but indeed the majority of
these Sahribahlol sculptures are in an unusual state of preservation, as can be seen
from the illustrations here given. Are we justified in concluding from this fact that
the site was never the scene of wilful vandalism ? That it was destroyed by fire is
certain from the abundant evidence afforded by the excavations, but the condition of
the sculptures would seem to indicate that the conflagration w'as accidental rather
than intentional. Only it must be acknowledged that if this w'as the case, it is extra-
ordinary that no attempt was made by the monks to recover the better preserved of
the images after the accident. But however this may be, it is to be hoped that it
^ Dr. Bloch suggeststhatthis shortness ofthe limbs may be intentional, in view of the dwarfish nature-
assignedto Kubera,asa Yaksha,in laterart.

ARCH/EOLOGICAL report.
1 iS
is an evidence that the other mounds in the immediate neighbourhood hold similarly
rich treasures. That Sahribahlol as a whole is one of the most important and
promising sites on the Frontier is amply proven.
D. B. Spooner,

EXCAVATIONS AT LAURIYA.
Fig. I. View of Nandangarh, from south.
A brief account of the excavations conducted by me at Laurlya^ to the north
of Bettiah, has already been published in the Annual Report for 1904-05, on
pages 3S-40. The excavations were carried out by me in March 1905 but
:
owing to ill-health and my subsequent absence from India on long leave, the publica-
tion of a more detailed report has been delayed up to the present time. As will be
seen from my previous account, my operations were restricted entirely to four of the
1 Thereare two Lauriyas in the Champaran District of Bengal, each of which derivesitsname from an
Asokacolumn standing there. The second Lauriya is some20 miles north-west of Kesariya, in the south-
western corner of the district. To distinguish it from the present Lauriya, it is sometimesreferred to as
Lauriya Araraj,* while the first Lauriya, which is 14 miles north of Bettiah, has been called ‘Lauriya®
^
Navandgarh." ‘Navandgayh', however, is a misspelt form of the modern name of the old fort, south-west of
the village of Lauriya. Its correct transliteration is‘ Nandangarh,’ The name Lattriya has been derived
from Zawr 'aphallus’ fSkt. -'a stick’), andis due to the modern worship of the two Asokacolumnsas
phallic emblems.

ARCH.^OLOGICAL REPORT.
•120
earthen mounds, which certainly form the most conspicuous group of remains
around the village of Lauriya. Unfortunately, neither time nor funds were then
available to attack the problem of the Nandangarh, an enormous mass of ruined brick
structures, as it appears to be, noiv thick!}' overgrown with trees and brushwood.
!t is, however, intended to attempt a solution of this very puzzling ruin at some
future occasion, for the discoveries made in the earthen mounds north of the
Nandangarh certainly lead me to expect that its thorough excavation will yield some
very important and interesting results. At present it will be sufficient to mention
that the Nandangarh forms an irregular quadrangle, the northern and eastern sides of
which measure about 2,000 feet, while the western side is only 1,600 feet long, and
the southern side has been shortened to only 1,100 feet. A distant view of the Garh,
A
-as it looks when viewed from the south, is published as fig, i of this article.
very similar structure, as far as one is able to judge from preliminary observation,
stands about 15 miles north of the Nandangarh ; its name is variouslyspelt Janktgarh
or Chmklgarh. There is a very striking resemblance between those two garhs,
which, by the way, may be seen one from the top ofthe other. 1n regard to the
Nandangarh, my subsequentaccount rvill, 1 think, demonstrate that it probably contains
the remains of an Arx, or Acrofolis, of an ancient city, and if this surmise ultimately
should turn out to be correct, the remains there must go back to avery remote
age.^
It was to the curious earthen mounds, north of the Nandangarh and of the
modern village of Lauriya, that my operations in March 1905 were entirely res-
tricted. They had remained a puzzle ever since Cunningham described them for the
first time in 1861-62,^ and no subsequent writer on the subject had been able to
solve the riddle. Only one clue seemed to exist, to which any significance could be
attached. I refer to the discovery, mentioned in the Bengal Administration Report
for 1868-69, of “ some leaden coffins containing unusually long human skeletons.
Mr. G. B. Moore, of the Lauriya farm, informed me that this discovery was
reported to havebeen made in the mound marked I on the map of Lauriya. Apart
from this, however, no other finds of any importance are known to have been made in
any of the mounds, and it was evident from the beginning, that, in order to solve the
problem, it would be necessary to dig a trench through the centre of several of them,
from the top right down to the bottom, irrespective of any possible chances of
making any finds of antiquities inside of them.
I selected altogether four mounds for this operation, vis., those marked M, N,
F, and H, in the map on Plate XXXVIII. Before, however, entering into details in
regard to my excavations, I have a few words to add about the arrangement of the
—
mounds
:
As will be observed from the map, the mounds are arranged in three lines of
five each, varying in height from 43' 8” to 1 6' 5'' and even less, for the four small
' Boththe Nandangarh andtheJankigarh have occasionally been looked upon as Buddhist Stupas, and
variousattemptshavebeen made by previous investigators to identify them with some of the stupas referred
toIw the Chinese pilgrims. Luckily,however,forour knowledgeof private lifein Ancient India, some of those
supposed“Stupas*' are the remainsof entirelysecularbuildings.
" A.S. R,, Vol. Ij pp. 68-72.
^ d. .S'. , Vol. I,p. 70, Note.

EXOAYATIOTS AT LAUEIYA.
SuiveyOfIndiaOfHces,Calcutta,ISOs-i.

EXCAVATIONS AT I.AURIYA. I21
moin'ids at U arc certainly not more than a few feet high. Two of the lines follow
the direction from north to south, while the third extends from west to east. The
-Aioka Column stands a little to the north of mounds A and B. The outer ap-
pearance of the mounds may be gathered from the photographs of mounds D and N,
shown oit Plate XXXIX. Some of them,, like D, are overgrown with low brushwood
;
while others, like X, are quite barren, the earth or yellow clay, of which they consist,
being almost as hard as stone. In shape they are more or less conical, but the
suggestion offers itself at once that, originally, they may have been somewhat
hemispherical, their present form being due to the action of rain-water. The material
of which the mounds are built has always attracted the attention of previous
observers. It is a vellow clav, now almost as hard as stone, and quite different from.
!
Fi^.2, Clayfrom funeral mounds, with traces of grass. Scale about
the white soil around them. A further feature, that should be kept in mind is the
remains of an old streamlet, or nala, now quite dry in the winter season. It may
be seen quite distinctly in front of mound N on Plate XXXIX ((5i), and it will be
observed on the map as an irregular, single line, encircling the group of mounds Tom
the north, west, and south, and separating them from the Nandangarh.
The first point that manifested itself on cutting through the mcunds, was :be fact
that they had been built up of layers of yellow' clay, a few inch.-s in thick less
with grass and leaves of trees laid betw'een them. The clay broke off ii irng-
ular cakes, such as the piece shown in fig. 2 , on which a number ( f irr. .<'ular
lines indicate the blades of grass that had originally been laid between this and the.
R

—
archeological report.
122
adjacent stratum. Two leaves of a tree are seen on the two lumps of clay shown in
Their shape may possibly suggest a sal-iret
fig. 3.
{shorea robusta). in regard to the provenance of the
yellow clay, the evidence pointed to the fact, that it had
been taken out of the bed of one of the nearest rivers,
presumably the Gandak, which is about 15 miles distant
from Lauriya. A number of calcareous concretions,
known to the natives as kankar or ankar, together
various kinds of pebbles, rounded and smoothed by the
action of running water, were found by me embedded
in the clay of the mounds. Specimens of them have
been examined by Mr. E. Vredenburg, of the Geologi-
Fig. 3. Clay from T.auriya
mounds, with leaves of stiZ-tree. cal Survey, whose note on them will, no doubt, be found
Scale : about T interesting. He wrote to me as follows :
“The limestone is of the form usually found as nodules in alluvial soils, to which the
name ‘kankar’ has usually become restricted in our geological literacure. It is, therefoie,
probable that the clay constituting the mounds has been obtained from some bed in the Gangetic
alluvium. At the same time,the presence ofrolled pebbles renders it veryplausiblethat itshould
have been obtained in the Gandak river, probably from a clay bed exposed in the river bank.
The pebbles consist of rocks that are abundantly found in the Himalaya, from wherethey would
have found their way into the Gandak river. There is one specimen of a fossil (or sub-fossil)
shell, resembling the fresh water ampullaria,though not sufficiently well preserved to identify
it with certainty. Itprobablycomes from the Gangeticalluvium just like the 'kankar.'’
—
The following identifications have beenmade forthe severalspecimens :
(1) Three pebbles ofquartzite, such as may have been obtainedfrom the denudation ofthe
ancient sub-metamorphic beds, common in the outer Himalayas.
(2) Decomposed slate or ‘ phyllite,’ probably from the same system.
(3) A mixture ofthe iron ores, ‘haematite’ and “ limonite,” containing a great deal of
mica. This is an alteration product, to which it is difficult to assign its age and
origin. It may havebeen derived from some altered bed ofthe ancient systems,
but itis just aspossible thatit may be a concretion from the Gangetic alluvium.
(4) Cast of ashell, apparently the fre.sh water ampullaria.
(5) Calcareous concretions, 'kankar,’ from the Gangetic alluvium.”
Of fargreater importance, however, werethe discoveries made in mounds M and N.
I found here, at a depth of from 6 to 12 feet, a small deposit of human bones, mixed
up with charcoal, and a small gold leaf, with the figure of a
standing female, stamped upon it. One of those two gold leaves,
found in M. is shown in full size in fig. 4. The fragments of bones
were exceedingly brittle and difficult to separate from the hard clay,
to which they stuck. However, a fragment of an upper human
jaw, about in size, showed in one place two holes, one above
the other, for one ofthe upper frontal teeth, and this may perhaps
wit F h ig i . ma 4 g * e o G f o P l r d th l i ea m f , j point to the fact that the person to whom it belonged, had
Full size. died at a young age, while he, or she, was changing his or her
teeth.^
1 I owe this suggestion to my friend, Dr. H. Finck, M.D., of Calcutta, to whom Ishowedthe fragmentsof
bones.

EXCAVATIONS AT LAUEIYA.
(b) MOTJHD I.

——
EXCAVATIONS AT LAURIVA.
123
A littk- below the two deposits of human bones, —which, by the way, exhibited
e\erv sign of having been burnt, before being deposited inside the top of the mounds,
I came upon a circular hole, a few inches in diameter at the beginning, but widening
considerably, as went deeper down. This hollow shaft ran right through the centre
I
of the two mounds, and it was perfectly evident, that it had been formed by an enor-
mous wooden post, which had originally been placed inside the middle of the mound,
and had been eaten up bv white-ants, the nests of which could be traced everywhere
around it. In fact, the end of one of these two wooden posts was found quite
intact at the bottom of mound N. where the yellow clay stopped and the grey, sandy
soil of the surrounding fields commenced. This shaft is shown on Plate XL. I
continued digging around it to a depth of about six feet, when water was reached, *
without, however, reaching the end of the wooden post.'^ The end of the second
M
hollow shaft in mound has not been followed up. This would have necessitated a
great amount ofvery heavy earth-work, for which neither sufficient time nor funds were
at mv disposal, and it appeared to me extremely doubtful if the result obtained would
in any way have justified such an expenditure. So much, atleast, has been made certain
by mv excavations, that the earthen mounds at Lauriya had some connection with
the funeral rites of the people who erected them, and it now only remains for me to
state how I believe this connection to have been effected.
If we turn to the ancient Prayogas, the Vedic books on ritual, ® we find that
after the bones of a cremated person had been collected and deposited in an urn, a
smasana, or funeral monument, either of bricks or of lumps of earth {losta), was built
over them. Such a monument evidently did not, under ordinary circumstances, reach
the stately height of most of the Buddhist Stupas, for we find it mentioned that it
should be built up to the height of a human body. Its shape, also, generally appears
to have been some form of a square, for we find round kmakanas referred to only
occasionally by Apastamba and Hiranyake^in. However, the Vedic Sutras appa-
rentlv donot describe the most ancient form of burial that existed in India. For in
the Vedic Hymns we meet with certain verses which help us much better to under-
stand the construction of the funeral mounds at Lauriya.
I refer especially to two verses in the i8th hymn of the loth book of the Rg-
\'eda, the famous Funeral Litany of Ancient India. In verse 13 we read as follows
:
“ I raise the earth around thee that I lay down this lump of earth, should not
;
do me any harm.
^ Thehollow opening of theshaft was filledwith water, when Iexposed it. Thewaterhad remained inside
it since the endof thelast rains,about the end of October,when thewaterlevel, of^course,is much higherthan
in thediy season, in March, when I exposed theshaft.
- The total length of the wooden shaft musthaveexceeded 40 feet, if itreally consisted of onesingle beam
only. Buteven foraSaltree,thiswould beanenormousheight,and I feelrather inclined tobelieve thatthehollow
inside the mound hadbeen formed bytwoor morepieces ofwood,placed one above the other. It thus becomes
possible toexplain a number of corroded iron nails, found especiallyin mound H, which may have been used
jn joining the various beams together. I feel, however, quite certain about the fact that the post found
inN,consistedof5aZ-wood. Scarcely any other kind of wood, available locally, would have been preserved
forsomany years inside the earth. Besides, 5a/-wcod could be had in great abundance from the lower slopes
ofthe Himalaya, which are at no great distance from Lauriya.
5 An admirablesummaryof the funeral rites of the ancient Indians according to the Vedic Sutras will be
found in Dr* W, Calaiid's book : Die ali^indischeii Todten undBestattungs gebrduche, (Verh^ des koninki
Akademie van Wefe?ischappen te Amsterdam^ i8g6)i also, somewhat shorter, in A, Hillehrandfs Riiual-LiU
teratuTfBuhlers Grundriss, III, 2 pp^Syff,
,
R 2

—
—
arch.-eological report.
124
“ May the manes hold this pillarfor thee, and may Yama prepare a seat for
thee in the other world ^
1 doubt if anyone, in reading this verse of the Rg-Veda, would not at once
M
remember the construction of mounds and N, as described above. They consist
of layers of earth or clay, raised around a wooden post or pillar, just as the funeral
monuments, referred to in the Vedic verse, must have been. Indeed, while I was
carrving out the excavations, this passage from the Veda occurred to me at once,
and it is only with the help of this verse from the Rg-Veda, that I have been able to
properly understand the results of my digging in mounds M and N at Lauriya.
But the same Vedic hymn helps us also a good deal further. We read in its loth
verse the following :
" Go to thy mother, this earth, the widely extending, very gracious Prthivl.
That maiden (sc. the earth), soft as wool to the pious, may protect
,
thee from the abode of destruction.” -
From this verse it becomes evident that we must look upon the two female
M
figures, found with the bone deposits inside of mounds and N (see fig. 4 as
)
images of Prthivi, the Earth-Goddess, to whose tender care the dead body had
been entrusted, to protect it against complete destruction {nirrter upasthat), as the
Vedic poet expresses himself. Mr. Marshall, to whom I communicated this explana-
tion of the Lauriya gold leaves, very kindly drew my attention to similar images of
a female deity, found inside the ancient tombs at Mycenae and other prehistoric
sites in Greece.® The image on gold leaves from Mycenaean tombs bears a very
striking similarity to the Lauriya female deity, and as I find it described as an
image of Kvbele, I gather that its meaning probably also was very much like that
of the PrtliivT frcm Lauriya, the underlying idea of both being that the remains of
the dead person are entrusted to the tender cares of Mother Earth, the all-preservin^y,
who, as the above-quoted Vedic hymn so neatly and precisely puts it, tvill protect
the dead from final annihilation (;z2 >/V^r I cannot, however, refrain from
pointing out specially in this connection, that it has been with the help of two passages
from the Bg-V eda. that 1 have been able to correctly understand the results of ^my
excavations at Lauriya.
This fact inspires me with rather sanguine hopes for the future exploration of the
' R. v.x, 18, 13:-
Ut te siabhnamiprtkivlm tvaipanmam :
logam iiidadhan mo aham risam.
Eidm sthihjdm pizaro dhdrayantu
teird yamalisadand te minotu.
“ R. \Yj 1. C.,V. TOt
Upa sarpa mdtaram, bhilmimetdm,
ttrtivyacasayhPrihiviThssusevdm.
e t s i d rI H f a m m. p r a a t d a dy n u ir v r a te ti r r u d p a as k t si h ' a if t m . ate
Lon, ^ o S n e , e .m T , s p ou . n . t 8 a . s ,N a o n . d .y Ma s n . atf C , om T p h a e re My f c u e r n th a e e r a , n H. Ag R e . , L Ha o l n l d , on u fi L Sg o y, i p L . iSk.Hd' pq • oicn
s 8 p " b 6 m . u " , a ri l N n a l o o l s g , c . o h l f 1 i a d 1 g m . f b a i e n g 3 u r d 8 r . i e f s s r . o A o m f an f t a d h u e f r P t e l s h m a t e a t o r l e n e . e , re a f f g o e e u r E n e u i d n r n c o w e F p i r a t a m ’ h n s a c t , y e h , d e e b o i r f e e U l s i w c c m h h d a i e c d - p h j e o o s n S i o t t 0 o p . h i t L u n h . s s e i J d M s i e o t r l o i t l n c h e e z e r e f k , h i , P a g i s u S p r i r e r p a a u o v s b f a s l h i a u s s r f h g S e e , d m p a a i l a g e n o •• ’ K. f i fg l o - l u u C n s R t d o r m a i t n n A T i s a . o i n r de 8 e v . a , - t tl i n s S 8 o q ' 8, p t x a T g s' e

:e’x«-A.'3
EXCAVATIONS AT LAUEIYA.
Surveyofludi.'iOffices, Calcxitta, 1909
ETO OP ¥00DE¥ POST IN BOTTOM OP MONNE N.

EXCAVATION’S AT LAURIVA.
125
Nandangaph, the citadel, or Acropolis, of the ancient city, to which the Smasana, or
buriai-ground, to the north of it belonged. That an intimate connection must have
existed between both sites, cannot, I believe, be doubted.’ And in regard to the
date to which the burial mounds belonged, I think that, apart from the fact of their
having revealed to us funeral customs which find an exact parallel in a \’edic
hvmn, it is evident that they must go back to a period before the time of ASoka.
I look iiprin the mounds at Lauriya as the remains of some royal tombs, similar,
perhaps, to the Chaityas of the Vrjis^ Mallas and other Rajput clans, of which
we find mention made occasionally in Buddhist literature.'* It looks as if these
royal tombs constituted some sort of national sanctuary for each of those tribes,
and we can scarcely go wrong in supposing that the tombs at Lauriya, likewise,
attracted annually at festive seasons large gatherings of people from the surrounding
villages and towns. It thus becomes evident why A§oka selected this very site for
the promulgation of some of his moral edicts they could be seen and read there by
:
a great number of people at the regular festive gatherings.^ A similar tendency may
also be observed in regard to other inscriptions of ASoka. Thus, at the second
Lauriya, and at Rupnath, near Jubbulpore, in the Central Provinces, we find A§oka’s
inscriptions in close proximity to the shrines of two very sacred lihgas, w^hich
may have been objects of worship in a time previous to Asoka. The broken column at
Rampurva, again, stood between two earthen mounds, which probably represent the
remains of two smpas, although, as far as I know, their recent excavation did not
yield any tangible results as to their original meaning. Near Dhauli, in the Puri
District of Orissa, we find, at a distance of some 7 or 8 miles, the sacred Ekdmra-
tirtha. now represented by the modern town of Bhubanesvar, wdth its cluster of
holy shrines, and a little further to the west is the Khandagiri Hill, w'hich, as we
^ The remains of an ancient river-bed, alludedto above, also point to theconnection between the funeral
mounds and the Nandangafh ; for it separated Smasana,the abode ofdeath, from the city of the livincr.
-Cunningham identifies the Lauriya mounds with the Chaizyas of the Vrjis; see T. R. Vol, XXII
p. 4Q; but this, of course, isnothingbeyond a mere guess. ^
'The origin of -worship among the Buddhists and Jains appears to be due to this veryancient
popular form of worshipping the tombs of kings Or deceasedheroes. The Buddhist scriptures are quite explicit
about this. According to the Ahguttara Nika\'a, II,-6 , 4, a Tathagataand a King areto receivea
Dve^ue, bhikkhave, thiJpdraha. Katamedve^. Tafhdgato cha arahaih samma^sambuddho, rajd cha chakkavattj
Tne Mahaparinibbana-Sutta adds a Pratyekabuddha and a disciple of the Tathagata to this list (see Kern'
Mtmiuil of Indian Buddhism, p. 44). This shows that the Mahaparinibbana-Sutta was written at a later
time, when the Buddhists already hadbegun_worshipping such monuments, as the famous two Siiipas erected
over the two parts of the body relics ofAnanda, on both sidesof the Ganges, thirty to the south-east of the
Svetapura Monastery, at some distance from Vaisall : see St. Julien, Memoires sur les contrees Occidenfales
par Hiouen Thsang, Vol. /, p. 400 ; Beal, Si-yn^ki, VoL //, p. y6: Waiters, O71 Yuan Chwang, VoL II, pp. yi
So, IS9- The numbers of Stilpasbuiltoverthe remainsof Buddhist monks and teachersnaturallywent on increas-
ing considerably in latertimes. Aboutthe worship of SUipasby the Jainas, see Biihler, Vmina Oriental l^ournal
iSgo. Vol. IV,p, 328f., andEp. Ind., Vol. II, p.jjj. '
«I have sometimes found it suggested that the fourpillars along the Gandak, -viz., the Bakra pillar (see
this Report, 1903-4, p. 83), which—bytheway, is onlyasupposed“Asoka-pillar,” as the inscription on it either
has vanishedorstill remainshidden on theportionbelowground— then the two Lauriya pillars and the Rampurva
column, marked the stages of Asoka’s journey from Pataliputra to Nepal, on his visit tothe sacred sites of
Buddhism. I do notthink, after all, that this theory has much to recommend it. We could hardly expect
Asokato haveselected thesits of his camping-grounds during one of his journeys,as places for the promulgation
of his moral and religious edicts, for he need not necessarilyhavecamped onlyclose to largely inhabitated and
much frequented localities, where.hemighthave been sureof his edicts beingseen and read by large multitudes
of people.

ARCH/EOLOGICAL report,
126
know from the HSthigumpha Inscription of Kharavela, contained a flounshiug
Jain settlement in the year 165 of the Mauryan Era, about one hundred years later
than Agoka’s time. There are, besides, scattered remains around the Dhauli rock,
which mav <^0 back to an old settlement that once existed there, and may, perhaps,
whom A§oka
be identified with the city cf Tosali, where the officials ^resided, to
addressed his first and second “separate edict of Dhauli.
With all these points in view, it seems indeed very natural to surmi ^ se, that the
reason why A§oka placed his pillar at Lauriya, must be searched for in the existence
there of the supposed royal tombs, and the festive gatherings which they attracted
THE FUNERAL MOUNDS IN LaURIYA GO BACK TO
annually, or, in other wmrds, that
THE pre-Mauryan EPOCH- The ancient citadel, now called Nandangarh ",
accordingly is likely to date from a period anterior to Mauryan rule in India, and a
careful and systematic excavation of this very important site appears to hold out
promises of antiquarian discoveries that may carry us back to a state of civilization
not very remote from, and intimately connected with, the Vedic Period of India.
T Rt nrH.
^Arch. Survey, Southern India, Vol. I, pp. 125 and 127.
- It has been suggested by previous writers onthesubject that the name probablycontainsareminiscence
of the Nandas,thepredecessors of the Mauryas. I donotwish toattribute too much importance to this rather
hazy assumption, but so far as it implies the general idea that the Nandangarh contains the remains of
a pre-Mauryansettlement, it is probablynot far from theltruth. I may mention, in passing, that the modern
word citadel, a fort,’ which is so comrnon in localnamesin India, goesback toasupposed Sanskrit
word^GARDH A,themeaning of which musthavebeen 'afenced off place.’ It is probably , identical with the
Slavonic word for ^town,’ of which we find various forms inmodern local names, such asStar-gard, BeUgrad,
No'w-gorod, audit is, perhaps, etymologically related to the Sanskritword for 'house’, grha. Thus, to
the ancient Indian, astothemodern Englishman, “hishousewas hiscastle.’*

THE PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK
PAGODA, PAGAN.
»
PET-LEIK-PAYA, or " Pagoda of the curling leaf,” is situated at Thiyipyitsaya
(Siripaccaya or ‘‘ accumulation of glory ”), a small village about seven miles to
the south of Nyaung-u, which was once the capital of the Pagan empire. Numerous
shrines of different types of architecture are found in its neighbourhood. The brass
utensils of Indian manufacture, dug up in its fields, and the striking traces of Indian
descent in the features of its people, appear to indicatethat prosperous Indian colonies
were, at one time, established in the locality.
Pet-leik-paya is so called because of its singularly shaped foliated capital
which connects the sikhara with the bell-shaped dome. On the band bisecting
the dome, and facing the cardinal points, are miniature shrines recalling the form
of the Temple at Bodh Gaya. On the northern face, a hole has been made by
treasure-seekers, which has exposed to viewterra-cotta tiles of an ancient, butunknown,
date. On these Dipahkara is depicted as prophesying that Sumedha and Sumitta, a
flower-girl, would respectively become Prince Siddhattha and his wife, Yasodhard.
The Pagoda, as it stands, appears to have been added to from time to time.
At one or two places, where the brickwork of the basement has broken away
mouldings of different patterns and of different periods can be traced beneath and the
;
width of the corridor on the east is only three feet and three inches as compared with
four feet, the width of the corridors on the three remaining faces.
The eastern fa9 ade is the most interesting of all. On this side is a rectangular
courtyard with a masonry flooring, whose northern, eastern, and southern sides arelined
by rows of very low pillars, each one foot six inches in diameter, and standing on a
plinth, which is almost flush wdth the ground-level. These pillars apparently served
as rests or sockets for wooden columns which, at one time, supported the roof of a
porch or mandapa. Near these pillars ashes of wood-work were found, and this fact
coupled with the discovery of a lump of vitrified tiles at a spot marked 6 on the
( )
Plan (PI. XLI), seem to show that the superstructurewas burnt down, either byaccident
or through persecution. Further, the approach to the entrance is lined by stone and
masonry figures of adeer and dragon, broken pieces ofwhich have been found. At aspot
marked (5) on the Plan, was discovered a fragment of an inscription in the Talaing
XXX
language (PI. 11), which has not yet been translated.

ARCH.EOLOGICAL REPORT.
128
The main interest of the Pagoda, however, lies in the iconographical importance
of the terra-cotta plaques, of which 184, in all stages of decay, were found. They
are arranged in a double row on the wall surface of an arched corridor or ainbulatoiy
passage, which runs around the basement of the building (fig. i). They are in low
reliefand illustrate strongly designed and well executedscenes m theJataka or Buddhist
Birth Stories. Each plaque bears a legend in the Burmese variety of the Pali charac-
ter, together with a numeral figure indicating the number of each particular story in
the jAtaka. It is remarkable that, except in a few instances, the numbering tallies
exactly with that of Fausboll’s edition of that work.
Fig. I.
A selection has been made of these plaques, and these are described and
illustrated below.
As regards the age of these plaques, they do not appear to be anterior to the
eleventh century A.D., when Anawrata conquered the Taking Kingdom of Thaton.
Devadhamraa-JM.—
-6.
The Bodhisat, Prince Mahirrishsa, sits on a raised seat and preaches on the
“ god-like character ” to a water-sprite, who kneels before him., with his hands clasped
together. Close to the latter is Prince Sdriya, the youngest of the three brothers,
while Prince Canda, the younger brother, is still in a pool covered with flowering
lotuses, the two younger brothers having been imprisoned by the water-sprite for not
knowing what is meant by the “god-like character.”

Q Loose' ^•JkcccO <f JDra^ru,
f- cLeef‘ xjTu stone' ^JBroke/v pieces cf plxxjCpA^^
(k^eocoCless), S-Broken^ pieced cf uiscriptcor^
£r(Jzerv pieces cfT JOrap'OTV. Ujunxp c/' oitr'i/ied/ t;Cl4s,
I»Xi-A.15r OS’ I>ETIiEI3£:

.
THE PLAQUES FOUiN’D AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA, PAGAN. 129
—
Makhadeva-Jat.
9.
King Makhadeva sits on a throne flanked by two white umbrellas, namely, the
Kanakadanda and the Manohara. His barber sits kneeling before him while receiv-
ing instructions to report any grey hairs on the head of the king. The latter plucks
out a grey hair with his golden tongs from the royal head.
—
Lakkhana-
Jat. 11
The Bodhisat is reborn as a stag, and is represented by the biggest figure on the
plaque. Below him is his elder son, K^la, who returns solitary and alone, having
been bereft, through his foolish leadership, of his entire herd of 500 deer. On the
left side, the topmost figure is Lakkhana, the younger son, who, through his sagacious
guidance, does not lose a single deer of his herd. The 500 deer of his herd are sym-
bolised by five figures.
—
Ayacitabhatta-Jat.
19.
The fairy of a banyan tree expounds on the inefficacy of animal-sacrifice offered
to him by the squire of a village.
—
N
alapana-Jat. 20.
The central figure represents the ogre of a lake, who has assumed the shape of
a horrible monster with a blue belly, a white face, and bright-red hands and feet, and
who devours any living creature that comes down into the water. On the right is the
Bodhisat, the Monkey-King, who is at the head of a troop of 80,000 monkeys. The
monkeys escape from death by sucking the water through canes, which have been
hollowed miraculously.
Titthi-Jat.-25.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, sits on a raised seat, and is informed by the
Royal Mentor that the state-charger, led by a groom, refuses to go down into the
water for a bath because another horse, a sorry beast, has been washed down at the
same bathing-place.
—
Nandivilasa-Jat. 28.
The Bodhisat, reborn as the NandiviHsa bull, wishes to repay his Brahman owner
the cost of his up-bringing, and suggests that a wager should be laid with a rich mer-
chant that his bull can draw a hundred loaded carts. The plaque represents Nandi-
vil^sa yoked to a string of a hundred carts and the Brahman driving him.
Vanarinda-Jat.-T-57.
The Bodhisat is reborn as Vinarinda, a monkey, who lives on the mangoes and
bread-fruits that grow on an island in a river. Midway between the river-bank and
the island is a rock, which is used as a stepping-stone by the monkey. A crocodile,
wishing to eat him, lies in wait for him on the rock. The monkey by means of a
s

ARCH.^OLOGICAL REPORT.
130
Stratagem, asks the crocodile to keep his mouth open, whereby his eyes are kept shut.
Now^, the monkey jumps on the crocodile’s head and regains the river-bank.
Vattaka-Jat—
118,
A fowler, who catches quails and fattens them for sale, one day, catches the Bod-
hisat, who is reborn as a quail, and puts him in a cage. The Bodhisat refuses both
food and drink, and gets thin. The fowler takes him out of the cage and places him
on the palm of his hand to see what ails the bird. When the man is off his guard,
the quail flies off to the forest, where he is accosted by other quails as to the reason
of his prolonged absence.
Araba-Jat.—124.
.
The Bodhisat becomes a hermit with an emaciated body and sits on a raised
seat. He is attended by twm other hermits practising similar austerities. The Bod-
hisat preaches to them that “ One man’s goodness has been the means of supplying
with food all these 500 hermits. Truly, w'e should always be steadfast in right-doing.”
The man referred to is one of the hermits, who, during a great drought, cuts down a
tree and hollows it into a trough, w'hich is filled with water for the animals to drink.
In order to compensate for such kindness, each animal brings its quota of mangoes,
Rambus or bread-fruits.
Rajovada-Jat.—
151.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, and Mallika, King of Kosala, each attended by
a charioteer, meet at a place where the carriage-road is so deeply sunk between
two banks that there is no room for one carriage to pass another. There is a dispute
between the two charioteers regarding the right of way, and it is conceded to the
King of Benares, because he conquers wrath with mildness, the bad wdth goodness,
the miser with gifts, and lies with truth.
Somadatta-
J
at.—211.
Somadatta’s father is a ploughman, who has lost one of his two oxen. His son
teaches him what to say when he meets the King and asks him for an ox. It takes
the old man a whole year to learn his speech. He is so bashful that when he does
meet the King, he presents the latter with his surviving animal instead of asking him
for an ox.
•
Kamaniggaha-Jat.—
228.
The King of Benares is given over to the desire of riches, the lust of the flesh
and the greed ofgain. The Bodhisatta, who is reborn as Sakka or King of the gods,
wishing to wrean him from such lusts, leads him to hope for the conquest of Pahcala
Kuru and Kekaka. Frustrated in such hope, he sickens, and no mortal doctor can
cure him. Sakka assumes the guise of a physician and exhorts the King that “one
ought not to be mastered by desire, as desire is the root of all evil.” Three attendants
in a kneeling attitude have a sardonic smile on their faces, and represent the three
.threatened States.

PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA, PAGA

THE PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA, PAGAN.
—
Dutiya-Palayi-Jat. 230.
Benares is attacked by the King of Gandhara. The King of Benares, sitting
on a canopied throne, discloses his glorious countenance, and addresses his enemy
:
Xmv will I destroy }'our host, as a maddened elephant crushes a thicket of reeds.”
—
Tila-mutthi-Jat. 252.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, received his education under a Brahman of Tak-
kasila, and was beaten with a bamboo stick by two of his school-fellows, under the
orders of his Teacher, for stealing, on three successive days, a handful of sessamum
belonging to an old woman. On attaining to sovereignty, he sends for his Teacher
and threatens him with death for his past castigation.
—
Mani-Kantha-Jat.
253.
Two Brahman brothers become anchorites on the banks of the Ganges, and the
younger is frequently visited by Mani-Kantha or Jewel-Throat, a Serpent-King, who
embraces his friend in his snaky folds.
—
Kundaka-Sindhava-Jat.
254.
An old woman owns a thoroughbred foal, which is sold to the Bodhisat, who
is-
reborn as a horse-dealer, and who re-sells it to Brahmadatta, King of Benares.,
The Bodhisat claps his hands, and holds out one palm upwards, and the foal gets-
upon it, and stands on his master’s hand with his four feet close together.
—
Saluka-Jat. 286.
In Benares, the Bodhisat becomes an ox named Big Redcoat and he has a
vounger brother called Little Redcoat.
One day. Little Redcoat says to his brother, “ Brother, we work for this family,
andwe help them to get their living. Yet they only give us grass and straw, while
they fee ” d yon pig with rice porridge, and let it sleep in a sty ; and what can it do for
them ?
“ Brother, ” says Big Redcoat, “ don’t covet his porridge. They want to make
a feast of him on our younglady’s wedding-day ; that’s why they are fattening him up.,
Wait afew days, and you’ll see him dragged out of his sty, killed, chopped into bits
and eaten up by the visitors.”
Nana-Chanda-Jat.—
289.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, rewards a Brahman for his correct observations
of the constellations. The Brahman’s wife, son, daughter-in-law and maid-servant
arelikewise rew'arded.

132 ARCH.«:0L0G1CAL REPORT.
Supatta-Jat.—292.
Supatta or Fairwing, a Crow-King, attended by his Chief Captain, Suraukhaor
Pretty beak, preaches to Brahmadatta, King of Benares, who is attended bv his
four queens.
—
Kaya-Chinda-Jat.
293.
A Brahman is afflicted with the jaundice. In consultation with his wife, he re-
solves that, if he evergets well, he will embrace the religious life. He does get
well and goes away to the Himalayas, where he dwells in the enjoyment of ecstatic
happiness.
Kama-Tappat
u-Jat.—297.
A poor man is prevailed upon by his wife to steal the safflow'ers of the King,
with wfflich she wants to dye her clothes. He is caught red-handed, and is impaled
under the supendsion of an executioner. Crows fly down to peck at his head and
face. His dying thoughts are of his wife, and he is full of regret that she should
have been deprivedof the pleasure of wearing dyed garments.
K —
omaya-Putta-Jat.
299.
Komaya-putta, attended by two other anchorites, admonishes a monkey, who
used to afford endless amusement to another fraternity of hermits by his grimaces
and antics.
Tittira-Jat.—306
(319).
While a fowler is asleep with his snares and freshly-caught birds by his side, his
decoy partridge questions a hermit whether its occupation is sinful. The reply is that
the absenceof intention in a state of coercion is absolutely sinless.
Mata-Rodana-Jat.—
317.
On the death of his elder brother, the Bodhisat does not weep. His kinsfolk
reprove him for his seeming hard-heartedness. His reply is that all things are trans
tent and that all creatures ate subject to the Eight Wordly Conditions
Sucacca-Jat.—
320.
A
w . as yet K a in P g ri o n f ce B . ena T re h s e ne Q g u l e e e c n ts c h o i m s pl C a h i i ns ef t Q o ue t e h n e , B w od h h o is h a a t s s w h h a o red his exile while he
and wife. ’ reconciles husband
uaddabhaya-Jat.—
322 (a), (b)
staX“
lit
fruit tl, vilva
mu ““
to for its life. The infection of imaginary fear spreads and b
atampedeof all the animals in the forest. The Bodhisal who comes tolfc Hr,

PLAQUES FODSD AT TIE PETLElK PAGODA, PAGAI
V-

PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA. PAGAN
••ni

THE PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA, PAGAN-
‘33
reassures the panic-stricken creatures, and saves them from imminent destruction by
finding out the origin of their fear, and by explaining to them its true cause.
Godha-Jat.—325.
The Bodhisat becomes a lizard, and pays frequent visits to a false ascetic. The
latterwishes to catch the lizard and eat its flesh; but his would-be victim runs away
and escapesfrom death.
—
Viseyha-Jat. 340.
Viseyha, a great merchant of Benares, is, liberal and fond of alms-giving, thereby
incurringthe jealousy of Sakka, who suspects that the former has ulterior designs on
his position. Sakka, by his supernatural power, deprives Viseyha and his wife of all
means of alms-giving and reduces them to abject poverty. The husband becomes a
grass-cutter to obtain money for the purpose of givingalms, and falls intoa swoon on
account ofhis unwontedlabour. Sakka appears onthescene and enquires why hegives
alms. He replies “Desiring neither Sakkahood nor Brahmaship, but seeking omni-
;
science do I give.”
Ayakuta-Jat.—
347.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, interdicts animal-sacrifice to the gods, who
commission a savage Yakkha to slay the King. He comes armed with a huge blazing
mass of iron, but his murderous intent is checked by Sakka, who appears most oppor-
tunely.
—
Arnna-Jat. 348.
A Brahman of Banares and his son embrace the religious life and dwell in the
A
Himalayas. border village is harried by brigands, and a damsel flies for refuge to
their hermitage, and, by her seductions, corrupts the virtue of the youth, while the
father is absent gathering fruit. The father, by his admonitions, succeeds in
Teestablishing his son in purity and virtue.
Uraga-Jat.—
354.
The household of a Brahman cultivator consists of six persons : the Brahman, his
wife, son, daughter, daughter-in-law, and a female slave. The son is bitten by a snake
-and dies. There is no lamentation inthe family, and Sakka comes and questions each
member about the cause. The reply given is that, when a man,dies, he shuffles off
his mortal coil as a snake casts off its slough, and that grief and lamentation are of no
.avail.
—
Ahigundiqa-Jat. 365.
The Bodhisat becomes acorn merchant at Benares. To him is entrusted a mon-
key for six days by a snake-charmer. On the seventh day, the owner returns and the
-animal is restored to him. The monkey is beatenby the snake-charmer three times
with a piece of bamboo, and, while the latter is asleep, escapes to the top of a mango-
tree and secures its freedom from bondage,
.. ,

. .
archaeological report.
134
Gangamala-Jat.—421
King Udaya shares his kingdom wth a water-carrier, who is known as King
Addhamasaka, because he persists inhis claim to a half-penny, which he has savedand
hidden in a brick in the City wall. Over each King is a white umbrella, and he is
attended by his Chief Queen,
Catu-dvara-Jat.—439.
MittaA’indaka, a merchant of Benares, is disobedient to his mother, and does not
practise virtue or charity. In the course of his adventures at sea, he unwittingly
reaches IJssada Hell, and espies a man in torment, supporting, on his head, a wheel as
sharp as a razor. Mistaking the instrument of torture for a lotus bloom, he asks for it,
and it is transferred to his head. The Bodhisat appears and preaches the law to him.
K anha-dipayana-Jat. — 444.
Kanha-dipayana, a hermit, is visited by Mandavya, a merchant, his wife and son.
The son, w'hile playing, is bitten by a snake and dies. The dead child is restored to-
life by the combined saccakiriya (Act of Truth) of his parents and the hermit.
N igrodha-Jat.—
-445.
Three students, Nigrodha, (Banyan), Sikha (Branch), and Pottika (Dollie), study
at Takkasila. On the completion of their education, they travel abroad. In the
course of their peregrinations, they sleep under a tree growing within thesacred pre-
cincts of a temple. On that tree roosts a cock, which crows, at dawn, as follows
:
“If any one kills me and eats of my fat, he will become a King this
very morning he that eats the middle flesh, becomes Commander-in-Chief who eats
; ;
the flesh about the bones, he will be Treasurer.” Pottika climbs up the tree, seizes
the cock, kills it, and cooks it inthe embers the fat he gives to Banyan, the middle
;
flesh to Branch, and himself eats the flesh that isabout the bones. The prognostica-
tions of the cock are entirely fulfilled.
Udaya-Jat.—458.
The Bodhisat becomes King of K^si. Having both passed out of Brahma’s
world, he and his Queen have an absolute control over their senses, and they live
together in chastity. The King dies and is reborn as Sakka. In order to test the
virtue of the widowed Queen, he visits her at night, and tempts her, on three
successive occasions, with an offering of a golden, silver, and iron bowl filled with
coins. His efforts being unsuccessful, he reveals his identity.
M
ittamitta-Jat.—
473.
- The Bodhisat comes to life as a courtier, who advises Bramadatta, King of
Benares, on matters spiritual and temporal. At the request of the King, he discourses
on the sixteen tokens of a friend or foe.

ii;••-X-.J:

THE PLAGUES FOUND AT THE PETLEIK PAGODA PAGAN.
135
Kalinga-Jat.-479.
The King of Kilihga is a universal Monarch and is possessed of the Wheel of
Empire and a White Elephant. Riding on this elephant, and in great pomp and splen-
dour, he visits his parents, who are living, as exiles, in a forest. The elephant is
unable to pass beyond the circuit around the great Bo-Tree, the throne of victory of
all the Buddhas.
Sadhina-Jat.—
494.
The virtues of Sadhina, King of Mithila, are noised abroad and the angels of the
Tdvatimsa heaven are anxious to see him. Sakka sends forth Mitali in a celestial
chariot to bring him. Tdvatimsa or the abode of the “ Thirty-three ” is represented
by three devas.
Dasa-brahmana-Jat.—
495.
Koravya, King of Kuru, attended by his two Queens, addresses Vidhura, his wise
Counsellor, expressing his dissatisfaction with the character of the Brahman recipients
of his alms, and requiring him to search for holy men. Accordingly, five hundred
Pacceka Buddhas are invited from the Northern HimMaya.
Bhikkhu-Parampara-Jat.—
496.
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, in the course of his peregrinations in disguise,
receives an offering of food from a rich land-owner, and passes it on to his Brahman
Counsellor (lowerrow of figures). The Brahman passes it on to an ascetic, who offers
it to a Pacceka Buddha (upper row of figures). This story illustrates the different
degrees of worth or sanctity, which entitles a person to receive gifts from others.
—
Sumedha-pandita-Jat.
499 (?)
Sumedha consults his treasurer and accountants before he gives away the whole
of his property in alms.
Matanga-Jat.—500
(497).
Mitafiga, a CandMa, is married to Dittha-mahgaliki, daughter of a merchant
of Benares. The issue of the union is a son called Mandavya, who gives alms to the
Brahmans. M4tahga renouncesthe world by becomingan ascetic. One day, at a great
almsgiving, he is beaten under the orders of his son, and the deities of the city, in
•order to avenge such injustice, make Mandavya and the Brahmans unconscious.
Dittha-mahgalik4, attended by a slave-girl, intercedes with MStanga on their behalf.
With the elixir of immortality given by him, she restores her son and all the Brahmans
0 consciousness.
Sivi-raja-Jat.—503
(499).
King Sivi, not content with giving away his property in alms, resolvesto give
-away any part of his own body. Sakka, divining his wish, appears before him in the

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
136
guise of an old and blind Brahman, and asks foran eye. The King summons his sur-
geon, and, after undergoing an operation, offers both his eyes to the Brahman amidst
the remonstrance of his minister and queens.
—
Kim-chanda-Jat. 514 (5li)*
Brahmadatta, King of Benares, turns an ascetic and lives on the banks of the-
Ganges. He is supplied with mangoesby a spirit, who was his chaplain and judge.
—
Kumbha-Jat. 5i5-(5i2).
Sabbamitta, King,of S3,vatthi, orders ajar ofintoxicating liquor to be brought for
him to drink. Sakka appears in the air holding a jar of liquor and discourses on the
eHls of strong drink, thereby saving the King from the imminent danger of acquiring
a bad habit.
—
Chaddanta-Jat. 517 (514).
Chaddanta, an Elephant-King, has two wives, Mahisubhaddci and ChlasubhaddA.-
The latter conceives a grudge against her husband because of his partiality to her
rival. She diesand becomes Queen of Benares. She sends forth Sonuttara, a hunter,
to bring her the tusks of Chaddanta. It being summer-time, the Elephant-King
lives under agreat banyan-tree. The hunter digs a hole under the tree and'shoots the
elephant with an arrow, w'hich, entering at the navel, comes out at the back. The
elephant dies, and the Queen also dies of a broken heart at the sight of the-
tusks presented'to her.
Sambhava-Jat.—518
(515).
Sucirata, Counsellor of the King of Kuru, is asked by his master to explain the-
nature of the Serviceof Truth.- - He confesses his inability , to solve the question, and
procures its solution from Sambhava, the seven-year-old sonof Vidhura, Chaplain of
the King of Benares.
Taw Sein Ko..

PLAQUES FOUND AT THE PETLEtK PAGODA, PAGAN
n"'>.},. ^’7

gDftOOT)/ A
3
)?r<nA’'-5

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
The first recorded discovery of sculpture at Mathura {vtdgo Muttra) is that of
the so-called Silenus obtained by Colonel Stacy in 1836and now preserved in the
Calcutta Museum*.
In 1853 regular explorations were started by General Cunningham* on the Katra
and continued in 1862. They yielded numerous sculptural remains; most important
among them is an inscribed standing Buddha image (height 3" 6"), now in the
Lucknow Museum. From the inscription®it appears that this image was presented
to the Ya§a-vihara in the Gupta year 230 (A.D. 549-50). We may conclude that the
Katra site was once occupied by a Buddhist monastery of that name. On the ruins of
.
that building there rose in afterdays a Hindu temple dedicated to Vishnu under the
name of Kesab Dev or Keso Rai, which is mentioned by Bernier, Tavernier, and
Manucci, but in its turn had to make place for a mosque built by Aurangzeb.
In i860, when the foundations were laid for a Collector’s Court house, miles
south-east of the Katra, this locality proved to be another important Buddhist site.
It is referred to by Cunningham as the Jail mound, whereas Growse calls it the Jamal-
pur mound, after a hamlet situated in its proximity. Here thirty,bases of pillars came
to light, half of which are inscribed with dedicatory in.scriptionsA Ten of them
(eight inscribed) were sent to Calcutta, w;here they are now preserved in the Indian,
Museum. These bases presumably belonged to a colonnade, enclosing, the inner
courtyard of a Buddhist monastery, w'hicb, according to the inscriptions, was built in
the year 47 of Kanishka’s era and during the reign of his son Huvishka. From the
wording of one of the inscriptions it appears that this prince himself wms its founder.
That this monastery still existed in the fifth century may be inferred from an inscrip-
tion dated Gupta 135 (A.D. 454-5) and from an inscribed standing Buddha image®
—
S, 15., ^ L V . ol R . . V Stac ( y 1836 J ) . , Pr p i p n . se 5 p 6 , 7 Note (Pl o a n te) t . hedi J s . co A v n e d ry er o s f on a , re C l a i t c a o l f og G u r e ec o i f an th s e cu a l r p c t h u c r e e olo i g n ica U l pp c e o r lle I c n t d i i o a ns , i J n . t A h . e
Indian Museum (Calcutta, 1883), PartI,pp. 169 ff (Cat.No. M. ij J.Burgess, Ancient Monuments^ Plates 60*61.
* Cunningham, i?., Vol. I, pp. 231 ff. Plates XXXIX-XL and VoU III, pp. 13 Plates I-XVI.
Growse. Mathura, <2 3rdedition,Allahabad, 1S83; pp. 103ff.
^ Fleet. Gupta Inscriptions, pp. 25 fiE, No. 4.
^ CfDowson, Ancient inscriptionsfrom Mathura, J. R. A. S.,Vol. V,N.S.(1871), pp. 182fi. Nos.i,2,5
10-17,21-23, and 27. B.L. TMitra,NotesonSanskritinscriptionsfrom Mathura, J. A. S.B., Vol. XXXIX (1870)
Part I, pp.117 ff, Nos. i-ioand 17-20, The Matliura Museum contains now, thirty-four pillar bases, of, which
eighteenare inscribed. One,likewiseinscribed,isinthe ProvincialMuseum, Lucknow.
® Cf. Fleet, Gtipta Inscr., pp. 262 ff, No. 63; Plate XXXIX A and Growse, op. cii.^ pp. 115, and Plate
facingpage 172. .
T

ARCH.-EOLOGICAL REPORT.
138
(height 7' 2") both found on the same site and preserved in the Mathura Museum.
They were discovered shortly after i860, when the Jamalpur mound was
completely levelled under the supervision cf Mr. Hardinge, the magistrate of the
district. The same officer trenched the Kahkali Tila, a mound i mile south of the
Katra, in which some sculptures had been found by men digging for bricks.
In 1869, Mathura was visited by Bhagvanlal Indrajl, who on this occasion
made two important discoveries. The first was that of a life-size female statue,
which he excavated at the Saptarshi Tila on- the right river bank, south cf the city.
It was first deposited in the Delhi Museum, but in October 1907 it was made
over to the Lahore Museum together with all other Gandhara sculptures in the Delhi
collection. The remarkable point about this image is that both its style and
material proveit to be a Gandhara sculpture, a circumstance of great interest for the
history of Buddhist art. Apparently not far from the mound which yielded this
image, Dr. Bhagvanlal discovered the famous lion capital with its eighteen Kharoshthi
inscriptions which throw so much light on the history of the Northern satraps who
ruled in Mathura before the time of the Skythians, It is now in the.British Museum^..
In November 1871, Cunningham resumed the excavation of the Kahkali mound^
which proved more prolific in sculptural remains than any other of the Mathura sites.
He obtained many Jaina images, partly inscribed, as well as portions of railings. The
twelveinscriptions discovered by him range in date from the year 5 of Kanishka’s
reign to the year 98 in that of Vasudeva. To these may be added an inscription of
the year 39 in Huvishka’s reign inscribed on an elephant capital, the present where-
abouts of which are unknown.
Between the Katra and the Kahkali Tila there rises a high mound, named after
the temple of Bhutesar (Skr. Bhute§vara), at the back of which it is situated. On
the top of this mound there stood once a large railing pillar carved with the figure of
a female parasol-bearer over which is a curious bas-relief apparently referring to some
jaiaka. It is now in the Mathura Museum (Cat. No. J i).
In the verandah of a native rest-house near this site Cunningham discovered five
railing-pillars^ (height 4' 4"). On the obverse ofeach there is a female figure standing
on a prostrate dwarf above is shown a balconyover which a pair of figures in amorous
;
attitudes are partly visible. The obverse of each pillar is carved with three reliefs
representing andperhaps, also, events of Buddha’s life. These five pillars and
one previously obtained-by Colonel Stacy must have belonged to the same railing.
Cunningham speaks of two more broken pillars of this railing which he saw in the
Museum at Agra and nowappear to be at Lucknow. It is much to be regretted that
at present they are distributed over different museums. Three, including the one of
Colonel Stacy, are inthe Calcutta Museum, two have remaine . d .at.Mathura, and one
has reached the Provincial' Museum of Lucknow. *
About this .same time Cunningham explored sonje of the Chaubara mounds
situated 3 miles south-west of -the Katra, in one of which a golden relic casket and
. ^ Cf. Buhler, Mathura, Lion illarInscriptions: B.- Indrajl, The Northern Kshatrapas, ]. R. A.S. for 1894,
A The Inscriptionsonthe MathuraLion Capital, Ep. \rrd.,Voh IX -pp 135 ff
(M. - 15 C a u , n D n , i c n ). gh G a r m u , nwede . l y - .i B ? u ., rg V e o s l s . , ri B I u , i p d p h . is 2 i 0 Ar ff t . i P n la I t n e d s ia VI (Lo a n n d d on V , II 1 . 901) A , nd p e . rs 4 o 1 n , , footnote i. Pa B r u t rg I e , s ’ s p , p. A ^ n 8 c 6 ien ff t .
Monuments, ?\3.ies send,
,

THK MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCUr.PlURE.
139
copper celt had been found in 1868 or 1869. His excavations yielded another relic
casket of steatite, norv in the Calcutta Museum, and some sculptures, among which
was a remarkable Indo-Persepolitan capital i3'X 2' X 2') likewise preserved at Calcutta^.
Subsequent exploration of these mounds by Mr. Growse led to the discovery of
numerous other sculptural remains, which were placed in the Mathura Museum.
During the period of his collectorate Mr. Growse examined most of the ancient
sites round IMathura and acquired an important collection of sculptures which he de-
positedin the local museum established on his initiative afewyearsafter 1874^ Perhaps
the most interestingofthis collection is the so-called Bacchanalian group, which Growse
obtained in 1873-74 from a mound outside the village of Pali Khera, It is a counter-
part of Colonel Stacy’s Silenus and there is reason to suppose that this sculpture
originates from the same site®.
In 1881-82, when Cunningham revisited Mathura in order to inspect the newly
established IMuseum, he discovered another sculpture no less remarkable for the
classical influence it betrays. Its subject is Herakles strangling the Nemaean lion
;
or, it would perhaps be more correct to say, it appears to be an Indian adaptation of
this subject. It was presented to the Calcutta Museum^.
Of other finds I need only mention a railing (?) pillar with a dedicatory inscription
in Brahmi of the Maurya period. It was found on the Arjunpura mound to the north-
west of the Sitala Ghatl site, and is of interest, as only one other Maurya inscription
has hitherto been found at Mathura®. To these is to be added the Parkham image
now in the Mathura Museum.
The last archaeological explorations at Mathura were carried out by Dr. Fiihrer
between the years 1887 and 1896. His chief work was the excavation of the Kahkalf
Till, in the three seasons of 1888-91. He explored also the Katra site. Unfortu-
nately no account of his researches is available, except the meagre information
contained in his Museum Reports for those years. The inscriptions and some of the
most remarkable sculptures obtained by him were fully discussed by Professor Biihler.
Subsequently Mr. V. A. Smith published a series of 108 plates which had been
prepared under Dr. Fiihrer’s supervision. These plates, of w^hich only a few are
reproductions ofphotographs andtherest of drawings, illustrate the sculptures acquired
in the course of Dr. Fiihrer’s excavations, but do not throw much light on the explora-
tions themselves. The editor has added brief explanatory notes and reproduced.
Professor Buhler’s readings of the inscriptions®.
1 Anderson, Catalogue,'PaxiI,p. i86(M. 14) and Part II, p.483. Burgess, Ancient Monuments, Plate55.
- Growse,op, cit, pp. 163ff,and Mathurainscriptions, Indian Antiquary, Vol. VI (1877;, pp. 216 ff.
^ Growse, op. cit., pp. 124 and 166 ff. (with two plates) andSupposed Greeksculptureat Mathura, J. A. S, B.,
^ Vol. XLIV (1875), pp. 212ff. (with threeplates).
Cunningham, A. S. R., Vol. XVII, pp. 107ff. Plates XXX andXXXI. Anderson, Catalogue, Part I,pp.
ipff. (M. 17).
5 Cunningham, A. S. R., Vol. XX, pp. 30 ff. Plates II-V. The original is apparently lost. The-other
Maurya inscription is in the Lucknow Museum.
® Fiihrer, Indo-scytkic architecture andsculpture of the Mathura school, J. I. A. I., Vol. V, p. 58. G.
Biihler, faina inscriptionsfrom Mathura^ E^, Ind.,Vol. I, pp. 371 ff. Furtherfaina inscriptionsfrom
Mathura, Ep. Ind.,Vol. I, pp. 393 ff. and Vol. II. pp. 195 ff. SpecimensofJaina sculpturesfrom Mathura, Ep.
Ind., Vol II>pp. 311 ff. Cf. also H. Liiders, Epigrapkical Notes, Ind. Ant., Vol. XXXIII (1904), Vincent
A. Smith, The JainStupa andother.antiquitiesof Mathura, Allahabad, 1901. Cf A. F[oiicher], B.E,F.E,G,
Tome
I, p. 375.

ARCH/EOLOGICAL report.
140
Fertile though the Mathura explorations have been, it is to be deplored that they
tvere not carried out on more systematic lines. Nearly every mound in the neigh-
bourhood was examined, but hardly any of them, except the Kahkall Tlla, was com-
pletely explored. It was aprimary mistake that such excessive importance was attached
to inscriptions, especially dated ones, that the architectural interest was wholly
neco^lected. There can be little doubt that, in the course of those excavations, remains
of buildings were found, and that in some cases architectural members were found in
situ. It is true that with regard to the Kahkall Tila Growse tells us “ that no definite
line of foundation has ever been brought to light nor any larger remains of plain
masonry superstructure but only a confused medley of broken statues without even
; .
the pedestals on which they must have been originally erected.” But Cunningham
distinctly states that, in excavating the west end of this mound, he came on brick walls
and pavements.^ Dr. Fuhrer speaks of two Jain temples discovered in the course of
his excavations, but the general plan published by Mr. Smith does not show the posi-
tion of these buildings. On the Chaubara site Growse notices a pavement with three
pedestals, two of which were still erect, and in the Pali Khera mound three bell-shaped
bases of large columns were found by him in situ. From Cunningham’s account it
w'ould appear that the railing pillars obtained from the Jamalpur (or Jallj mound
were, partly at least, standing in situ, and the same may be assumed with regard to
the thirty bases of pillars discovered on that site on the same occasion.
The number of Mathura sculptures now available is very considerable but, in the
;
absence of plans, no information is forthcoming regarding the buildings to which they
belonged. What is worse, in most cases it is impossible to decide from what parti-
cular mound the individual sculptures originate, as only in the case of inscriptions it
was considered essential to note the exact find-place.
The attempts made by Cunningham and Growse to identify some of the Mathura
sites with localities mentioned by Hiuen Tsiang have signally failed. Both assumed
that the Katra marks the centre of the ancient city, whereas the site of ancient
Mathura is clearly indicated by an extensive elevation of the soil to the south-west of
the town. Hence their identifications, based on a wrong location of the city, are
inadmissible, and both the Upagupta monastery and the monkey tank are still to be
discovered. In order to uphold his theories, Cunningham had to alter the wording of
the Chinese pilgrim’s account and to read "west” Instead of "east ” and "built of
stone” for "cut in the rock.” He proposes to identify Kesopura, the quarter in
which the Katra is situated, with " the Klisobora or Kaisobora of Arrian and the
Clisobora of Pliny.”' It is, however, evident that the Mahalla Kesopura was named
after the shrine of Keso or Kesab (Skr. Kegava) Dev. This temple stood, as
we noticed above, on the rums of a Buddhist monastery which still existed in ’the
middle of the sixth century. It is therefore highly improbable that the name Kesopura
goes back to the days of Arrian.
All we can deduce with certainty from past explorations is the following. The
Katra must have been the site of a Buddhist monastery named the Ya§a-vihara which
was still extant in the middle ofthe sixth century. It would seem that in the
? Grow.se, of. cU., p. ii8. Cunningham, R., Vol. Ill n ?o
2 .4.5. i?., Vol. XX.p. 31.

THE MATHFjRA school OF SCULPTURE.
141
immediate vicinity there existed a stupa to which the Bhutesar railing pillars belong.
Dr. Fiihrer mentions indeed in one of his reports that, in digging at the back of
Aurangzeb’s mosque, he struck the procession path of a stupa bearing a dedicatory
inscription. The Kahkali Tlla contained a Jain stupa named “ Vodva thupa” and
apparently of considerableage, as at the time of Huvishka’s reign its originwas ascribed
to the gods.' Dr. Fuhrer speaks, moreover, of two Jain temples found in his excava-
tion of this mound. Evidently there flourished a Jain establishment here down to the
Muhammadan period. But some sculptures said to have been found in or near the
Kahkali Tila are Buddhist.
The Chaubara mounds represent a group of Buddhist stupas, as is proved by the
discovery of two relic caskets and railing-pillars. One of these pillars, preserved in
the Mathura Museum,bears an undated inscriptionin Brahmiofthe early Kushanatype.
The three pedestals found by Growse near one of the Chaubara mounds may have
belonged to a temple.
On the Jamalpur site there once stood a Buddhist monastery foundedby Huvishka
in the year 47 of Kanishka’s era and, no doubt, connected with a stupa as we may
infer from the discovery of railing-pillars on this site. This Buddhist establishment
also must have been still in a flourishing condition in the middle of the. fifth century as
appears from the two inscribed Buddha images, one dated Gupta 135 and the other
undated, which were found here.
; :
The Arjunpura mound seems to contain the remains of a monument {stupa ?) of
the Maurya period. Jaina sculptures have been found on the site of the old fort
(Sitala Ghati) and in Rani-ki-niandl. Buddhist buildings are still to be discovered in
the Dhruv and Saptarshi mounds.
Though more systematic exploration of ancient Mathura audits monumentswould,
no doubt, have yielded more definite results, it would be unfair not to recognise the
great service rendered to science by former explorers in procuring and preserving so
vast an amount of archaeological material. It w^ould be equally unjust to blame them
for the injudicious disposal of the sculptures which are now distributed over the
Calcutta, Lucknow, and Mathura Museums. Above I have quoted an instance, of six
pillars of the same railing which are placed In three different museums. It is possible
that not only members of the same monument but fragments of the same sculpture
have thus become separated.
The bulk of the sculptures first discovered at the Katra, on the Jamalpur mound
and in the Kahkali Tila were sent to Agra and placed in the Riddell Museum which
then existed at that place. In or shortly before 1875 this institution was broken up
and the greater part of its contents removed to Allahabad. Some sixty pieces,
including ten Mathura sculptures, remained at Agra and were kept in the museum of
a local archaeological society, established in the Diwan-i-'am of the Fort.^
..
When, on the ist July 1884, the reconstituted provincial museum at Lucknow
was opened, most of the sculptures which had gone to Allahabad were removed
to that institution, but some hundred stone sculptures and some twenty terra-cottas
were left behind. Among these the sculptures originating from Mathura have now
1 Biihler, Epigraphia Indica, Vol. II, p. 20,i, No. XX, p.31. V. A. Smith, The JainStupa, p, 12, Plate' VL
- Cf. Transactions ofthe Archceological Society ofAgra (July to December 1875), Agra, 1876, pp. 30

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
142
been returned and added to the local collection. It seems that the sculptures which had
remained at A^ora, likewise reached the Lucknow Museum. The numerous pieces ex-
cavated by Dr. Fu ^ hrerfrom the Kahkali Tila were all sent to Lucknow whi^ch now
possesses the most extensive collection of Mathura sculptures. Unfortunately the
archcBolo^ical section of the Lucknow Museum is badly located and no catalogue is
available of the exhibits.^ It is, however, under consideration to remove the Museum
to a more suitable building.
The Indian Museum at Calcutta contains twenty-eight sculptures originating
from Mathura, which include the so-called Silenus and Herakles strangling the
Kemaean lion. They are well described in Anderson’s catalogue.
The sculptures which were collected by Mr. Growse from various sites round
Mathura are nearly all preserved in the local museum founded at that place at his
instance. It was meant by its originator to be a depository of any antiquities “w'hich,
without anv definite search being made, were bound to crop up and otherwise in
danger of being lost.” The building, originally intended for a rest-house, is well
suited for its present purpose, but does not admit of any considerable extension of
the exhibits. A catalogue of the collection will shortly be published.
The Mathura sculptures which Cunningham had placed in the Lahore
Museum have, at my request, been returned to the place of their origin and have been
added to the local collection. Thisis alsothe case with three inscribed Jaina sculptures
which I noticed in the Municipal Museum at Delhi. The Lahore Museum contains
moreover two fragmentary inscriptions from Mathura which will be returned to the
place of their origin.
If in future the archaeological explorations are resumed at Mathura, it is to
be hoped that the local museum will be extended so as to contain any sculptures or
other antiquities to be discovered. If once a suitable building is available on the
spot, it will be possible to restore to Mathura many sculptures which in the past have
become scattered over different museums, greatly to the benefit of the study of this
important branch of Indian art.
The vast amount of sculptural remains discovered at Mathura would suffice to
show the importance of this place in the history of Indian art. It is remarkable that
the only statue which, on the strength of its inscription, can be assigned to the
Maurya period is found at Parkhara half-way between Mathura and Agra.® The
satraps who ruled at Mathura in the first century B. C. patronised the arts of archi-
tecture and sculpture, as appears from the inscribed lion capital in the British
Museum. The great flourishing period of the Mathura school undoubtedly coincides
with the reign of the great Kushana rulers Kanishka, Huvishka, and Vasudeva.® The
bulk of the inscriptions found on or in connection with Mathura sculptures are written
in Brahmi of the Kushana type. Several of them are dated in the reign of one of
those three kings ; and we'know that the monastery which once stood on the Jamalpur
site was built in the days of Huvishka. That the Mathura school still existed in the
Gupta period is attested by some inscribed Buddha'images, two of which are dated in
1 Babu R. D. Banerji hassince undertaken towriteacatalogueof the Lucknowcollection.
3 - O Cf n . t C h u e n p n o i s n s g ib h l a e m, ex- A i . st S e . nc R e ,, of V a ol f . ou X r X t , h . K p u p s . h .3 a 9 na f. king,. ' H . ushka, cf, Luders^ Ind, Anf.^ Vol. XXXHL

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
143
Gupta 135 (A. D. 454*55) and 230 (A. D. 549-50). But the production during this
period is small as compared with that of Kushana times.
After A. D. 600 the activity of the Mathura sculptors apparently ceased, as hardly
any inscriptions of a subsequent period are found. We may perhaps connect this fact
with the fall of the Gupta empire and the decline of Buddhism.
There can be little doubt that the influence of the Mathura school made itself
“
largely felt throughout the period of its existence. Everywhere in the north-west,”
Cunningham^ says, “ I find that the old Buddhist statues are made of the Sikri sand-
stone, from which it would appear that Mathura must have been the great manufactory
for the supply of Buddhist sculptures in Northern India.”
This observation is remarkably corroborated by epigraphical records which have
since come to light. The colossal Bodhisattva image erected at Benares in the third
year of Kanishka’s reign and the contemporaneous Sravasti statue are not only carved
in the spotted red sandstone of the Mathura sculptures, but both were the gift of
the Buddhist friar Bala whose name occurs also on an inscribed image from that place.^
The famous Nirvana statue of Kasia, which may be assigned to the fifth century,
—
appears to have been thework of Dinna of Mathura the only one of those numberless
artists whose name, though imperfectly, has been preserved.®
A circumstance which from the beginning drew the attention of European scholars
to Mathura sculptures, is the Greek or rather Hellenistic influence which some of
them betray. The first piece of sculpture discovered at Mathura, the so-called
"Silenus” in the Calcutta Museum, was at once described as “a relic of Grecian
sculpture” and attributed to “ an able artist who could not possibly have been a
native of Hindustan.’’ Prinsep refers to it as “a piece of sculpture bearing reference
to Greek mythology, if not boasting as unequivocally of the beauty and perfection
of Grecian sculpture.” “There can be no doubt”, he says, “as to the personage
represented by the principal figure.”
It was at once apparent that, though the sculpture was classical in charac-
ter, it by no means reached even thelowest standard of Greek or Hellenistic art.. For
this reason Grow'se rejected Cunningham’s theory about the existence of “ a small
body of Bactrian sculptors who found employment among the wealthy Buddhists at
Mathura, as in later days Europeans were employed under the Mughal emperors.”
Growse, moreover, after comparing the group with the one found by him in the
Pali Khera mound, came to the conclusion that in neither case did the main figure
represent Silenus. While attempting to find an Indian subject disguised in a classi-
cal form, he was the first to recognize the true nature of Hellenistic influence in
Buddhist art. On both sculptures which apparently have belonged to Buddhist
monuments the main figure is not Silenus. This view was endorsed by Mr. V. A.
Smith.
I may note that among the sculptures recently returned from Allahabad to
Mathura there is a statuette of a corpulent male deity holding in his right hand a cup
‘ A.S.R., Vol. XI, p. 75.
*2 Cf. my Epigraphical discoveries atSdrndth, Ep. Ind., Vol. VIII,pp, 166 ff, ard T. Bloch. Two inscriptions
on Buddhistimages, ibidem,pp. 17Qff Dr. Bloch draws myattentiontoa pedestal with fragmentary inscription
foundin the ruins ofold Rajagriha in 1906. It is made of Mathura sandstone and.belongs to the Kushana
period.
^ Cf. above,p. 49*

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
144
into which a female attendant is pouring some liquid. I have little doubt that this is
the Bacchanalian group in an Indianised form. The interesting point is that here
the main figure holds in his left hand an elongated bag the typical attribute of
Kubera.
It may, moreoverj be remarked that the main figure, as regards its attitude,
bears some reseniblance to the Kubera statues of Gandhara. On the latter we
find regularly attending figures of Cupids evidently meant for Yakshas, and these,
it will be noticed, occur also on both the Mathura sculptures. One of these attending
figures seems to raise the right hand towards that of the main figure, in exactly
the same manner as in the Kubera statue of Mardanh The cups found on Colonel
Stacy’s Silenus may represent the treasure vases of the god of wealth, the rock on
which he is seated Mount Kailasa. We can imagine that the corpulent figure of
Silenus attended by Cupids suggested to the Indian artist Kubera with his Yakshas.''
As regards the architectural meaning of the two sculptures Growse remarked that
the shallow basin at the top of the stone seems to be nothing more than the bed for
the reception of a round pillar.
A question of considerable interest is the relationship between the Mathura
sculptures and those of the Peshawar district (the ancient Gandhara), which likewise
betray classical influence. On this point two widely different theories have been
advanced. Mr. V. A. Smith expressed the opinion that "the Mathura sculptures
have very little in common with those of Gandhara and seem to be the work of a
different school.” For this school he adopts the term Indo-Hellenic to differentiate
it from the Graeco-Buddhist school of Gandhara to which he assigns a later
date.® .. - .
Griinwedel, to whom hardly any specimens of Mathura sculptures were available
for examination, followed Mr. Vflncent Smith in assuming the existence of an Indo-
Hellenic school which flourished at Mathura prior to the Graeco-Buddhist school of
the North-West. He remarks that the Mathura school represents purely Greek
subjects, among which he ranks the representation of Mara with bows and
arro'ws.
I must remark at once, that in Gandhara reliefs, representing Siddhartha’s flight
from Kapilavastu, Mara is commonly shown with a bow in his left hand.' In Mathura,
on the contrary, no such representations have come to light. As to the subjects
themselves, we must assume that both In Gandhara and at Mathura they were
essentially Indian, notvvithstanding their classical form. This classical appearance
is on the whole much more prominent in Gandhara than at Mathura.
It did not, however, escape the notice of Grunwedel that “ some Buddha statues
found at Mathura have also the robe laid over both shoulders and the folds executed
on the dress point to the Gandhara sculptures as models.” This remark is not
quite in agreement with the theory that the Mathura school exhibits an earlier
Greek influence than that of Gandhara. Indeed it lends strong support to the
' Cf. my Noie sur tine statue du Gandhara conserves au muse'e de Lahore B E F E O Tom • e ITT
(1903), pp.6fi. Fig.3.
wine
2
p
I
ro
a
du
m
ce
i
d
n
b
de
y
bt
W
e
o
d
nd
t
e
o
r
D
-
r
t
.
ree
B
s
l
{
o
K
c
a
h
lp
io
a
r
vr
^
ik
v
s
d
h
e
a
r
)
en
i
c
n
t
t
t
h
o
e
M
c
e
o
g
m
h
p
a
a
d
n
u
y
ia
of
I
f
I
ai
3
r
,
d
w
a
h
m
e
s
r
e
e
ls.
Yakshasaredescribedas drinkin^g
pp. 1 ® 40 Gr a cp n c d o 1 R 5 o 6. man Influence on the Cimlization of Ancient India. J. A. S. Vol. LVIII (1880) Part I'

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
145
opposite view which has been propounded by M. Foucher with great lucidity and
which in the present paper I wish to endorse.
The Mathura school, far from being a direct and early expression of Greek
influence, received its classical inspiration indirectly through Gandhara. The influence
of the Grseco-Buddhist school on all later Buddhist sculpture has so clearly been
shown in M. Foucher’s standard w'ork, that no doubt can now subsist on this
— —
point. Mathura, owing to its geographical position and I may add to its political
importance during the Kushana period, w'as the first to feel- that influence. This
explains the mixed character of the Mathura school, in which we find on the one-
hand a direct continuation of the old Indian art of Barahat (Bharaut) and Sanchi
and on the other hand the classical influence derived from Gandhara.^
The Indian character of the Mathura school is nowhere more clearly expressed'
than on the carved railings which once surrounded the stupas and other sacred-
monuments of that place. Such railings, it should be noticed, do not occur in the
North-West. That those of Mathura are derived from Old-Indian examples is proved
both by their construction and decoration.
The most typical feature of the Mathura railing-pillar are the female figures,
standing under trees or balconies, which sincethe days of Cunningham have commonly-
been designated as dancing-girls. An obvious objection to this designation is the
circumstance that in no case are these figures represented dancing. Cunningham”
in-
order to obviate this difficulty, described them as “dancing girls posing themselves in-
various attitudes, some of them more or less immodest, during the intervals of the
dance.” But there is a peculiarity of these Tailing figures which militates against this
explanation. They are very often shown standing on prostrate dwarfs and over them-
we see the foliage of a tree of which they hold a branch. This latter point has led to-
a confusion of these figures with representations of Maya standing under the ^5/tree.
For the interpretation of the so-called “dancing-girls” of Mathura it is of interest,
to compare the well-known figures on the corner-pillars of the gates of Barahat.
Most of these are standing on animals in the case of Kubera, the king of the
;
Yakshas, the vahana is a dwarf. Of special interest are the two marked as Cha[n]da
Yakhi and Chulakoka Devata, which with theirright hand clasp the branch < of a tree-
over their head whilst the left hand touches the girdle. Cunningham remarks that
a corner pillar of the railing of Bodh-Gaya bears a Yakshi in exactly the same
position as Chanda and Chulakoka.
Griinwedel, in treating of these figures in Old-Indian art, refers to the Bhutesar
railing pillars (PI. LI), but without drawing the inference that in both cases the sub-
ject must be the same. The personages on the Barahat gates are denoted in the
accompanying inscriptions as Yakshas, Yakshis, and other demi-gods. They belong
to that class of godlings (Devatas), which play such an important part in Indian
folklore. Cunningham has well explained their meaning in sculpture as guardians of
the sacred monument, at the gates of which they are placed. They iriay thus be
compared with the Dvarapalas (door-keepers) of m.ediaeval architecture and with the-
Rakshasa figures which guard the temples ofJava.
^ A.Foucher, Hart greco-bouddhi^ue du Gandhara (Paris 1905), Tome I, pp. 222 and 615.
3 VoL HI,p. 26.
U

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
146
What reason is there not to assume thatthe Mathura railing figures have the
same meaningas their Barahat prototypes and represent semi-divine beings, presumably
Yakshis? This would explain why they are sometimes shown sword in hand^—an
attribute which would be hardly compatiblewith the character of a nach girl. I may
also note that Yakshas in literature sometimes assume the nature of tree-spiri ^ ts, and
this may account for these figures being so often placed under trees.
As to the dwarf on which the Mathura pillar figures are commonly placed,
w^e have seen that at Barahat Kubera, the lord of Yakshas, stands on a crouching
demon with pointed ears and a prominent belly. Dwarfs occur as Atlantes in the
capitals of the western gateway of Sanchi, where Fergusson surmises them to have
a mythological meaning. At Barahat also they are found as supporting figures.
On some of the Amaravati reliefs they are playing, dancing, and gambolling and,
w^hat is more important, on a relief representing Siddhartha’s flight from Kapilavastu
we see them supporting the hoofs of the horse Kanthaka.^ From this it is evident
that these figures are Yakshas, who indeed in Indian folklore play the same part as
the dwarfs of German mythology. Alternately malignant or beneficent, they are
regarded as the guardians of treasures, and thus their king Kuvera has become
the god of wealth. 1 may remark in parenthesis that the character of such imaginary
beings is necessarily somewhat vague and susceptible ofvacillations both in literature
and plastic art. In the Buddhist scriptures the Yakshas often occur as man-eating
demons and thus actually assume the character of Rakshasas, but under the holy
influence of Buddha’s preaching they promptly abandon their cruel propensities.
I have little doubt that, whilst the Mathura railing figures represent Yakshis,
the dwarfs on which they stand are meant for their male counterparts. may
I
mention here that on a railing-pillar in the Mathura Museum the dwarf is not
supporting the female figure, but crouches at her feet, raising both arms towards a
fruit which she holds in her right hand. xYbove her a head peeps over a curtain
W
suspended between two pillars behind her. e may compare a similar device on
one of the railing-pillars of the Barahat stupa} More commonly we find the top of
the pillar carved with a balcony over which one or two figures are partly visible.
The Bhutesar pillars afford an instance of this device which would seem to be
peculiar to the Mathura school. If, however, we compare the different specimens of
railing-pillars preserved in the Lucknow and Mathura Museums, there can be
little doubt that this feature also is ultimately derived from the Old-Indian
examples.
The Barahat pillar figures which are not placed under a tree are surmounted
by a half-rosette and in one case by abas-relief showing a stupa with its usual railing.
The Mathura Museum possesses two railing-pillars (Nos. J i and 2 ) on which above
the female figure we find a relief evidently referring to ^om^jataka. One of these tw’o
pillars is that, noticed above, which once stood on the top of the Bhutesar mound. The
scene pictured in the top panel seems to have some connection with that of Barahat
in which a giant, perhaps a Rakshasa, is having a tooth drawn by monkeys.
' V. A. Smith, The Jain Stupa, Plates LXII and ClII.
- Fergusson, TreeandSerpent Worship, Plates L, LII.LIX, LXVII, and LXXIV.
^ Cuiinintjbair, Bharhut, Plate XI.

,
THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
147
On the other pillar, the top relief is circular in shape and shows a man with an
umbrella apparently addressing an assembly of persons seated in three rows. This
pillar is also remarkable, because here the supposed Yaksha is not supporting the
female figure but is crouching in a cave beneath her feet. He has pointed ears,
protruding eyes, and a grinning mouth.
In one of the Chaubara mounds Mr. Growse discovered a railing-pillar carved
with a figure which he describes as a dancing-girH, but which undoubtedly represents
a male person of a faun-like appearance standing under a tree. Over the tree there
is the Buddhist railing, which apparently here is simply decorative, but, no doubt, is
the prototype of the balconies with figures which are so common on Mathura railing-
pillars. It should, moreover, be remarked that figures on balconies are very
common both on the bas-reliefs of Sanchi and on those of Gandhara. They form a
purely indigenous element directly copied from actual life and as often pictured in
poetry as in sculpture.
On the back of the Mathura railing-pillars we find either decorative medallions
with rosettes, phantastical animals and sacred symbols, such as are found onthe
Old-Indian monuments, or illustrative panels usually relating to jatakas. On the
peculiar treatment of the latter I shall speak further on.
The coping-stones of the Mathura railings are decorated with borders of conven-
tional floral design, sometimes interspersed with animals. It is interesting to note
that very often such borders are surmounted by a narrow band of bells similar to that
found on the coping-stone of the Barahat railing. The crossbars, bearing rosettes
of the same type as those found on the pillars, again prove the close relationship
between the railings of Mathura and those of the Maurya period.^
As to the toranas, that integral part of the Buddhist railing, no specimen has
been preserved at Mathura. That at Mathura also such gateways existed, is
proved by a detached architrave which was discovered by General Cunningham on
the Katra site in 1862-63 and after many peregrinations has been placed in the
local museum. It is profusely sculptured on both sides with buildings, figures, and
trees including a representation of a torana itself.®
We know of two tablets of homage (Skr. ayagapata) one complete and the
other fragmentary, which give us a picture of a Mathura stupa with a railing around
and in front a torana approached by a flight of steps.^ They show that structurally
these toranas do not differ from those of Barahat and Sanchi, though here their
decoration is less elaborate. It will be seen that on the complete specimen, the
so-called ‘‘ votive stupa” ofthe Holi gate, now in the Mathura Museum, flying figures
are seen hovering over the sacred monument which they adorn with garlands
and flowers. Here as well as on the fragment in the Lucknow Museum nude
female figures are leaning in graceful attitudes against the drum of the stupa. In
1 Growse, Mathura,p. 123, also Ind.Ant,, Vol. VI- p. 219,No. 6, and A, S.B., Vol. XLVII (187S), Pt,
I,p. 118;PlatesXVIII and XX. Itisnow preservedin the Mathura Museum. (Cat, No. J 7).
^ Forreproductions of pillars, coping-stones and cross-bars of Mathurd railings cf, V. A. Smith, The
JainStupa, Plates LIX-LXXXIV.
3 Cf. A. S. R., Vol. I, p. 237 and III, p. 15,and Growse, Mathura,p. jo6,
XV
^ V. A. Smith, TheJain Stupa,Plates XII, and CIII. Cf, also BhagvanlalIndraji Actesdu sixieme
congres international des Orientalistestenu en 1883dLeide Pt. III., Section 11 pp. 142 ff; with
,
plate.

.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
148
view of what has been remarked above, I take these figures to represent not dancing-
girls but Yakshis. Their occurrence together with other semi-divine beings on these
sculptures confirms the proposed Identification. The lost portion of this tablet
of homage must also have contained flying figures, as the feet of one of them are still
preserved. Finally, I wish to draw attention to the pillars placed in the corners of
the stupa railing, which give us a clue as to the actual position of such monuments.
On the northern gate of Sanchi we find the end of the lowermost architrave
supported by curious brackets in the shape of a female figure standing under a tree.
The Kahkali Tila has yielded similar brackets in which the figures are standing on an
elephant, a crocodile and a dwarf.‘ The position of these brackets must have been
the same as at Sanchi. The figures I take to represent Yakshis, which here play the
same role as their male counterparts.
The above remarks will suffice to show that the Mathura school of sculpture is
essentially Indian and in its main characteristics is derived from the art exhibited by
the monuments of the Maurya period. On the other hand, it contains many an ele-
ment which is not found in Old-lndian sculpture and which, as I shall endeavour to
show, can be traced back to the classically inspired school of GandhSra.
The most important innovation is the appearance of the Buddha image. It is a
well-known fact that the oldest Buddhist monuments do not contain any representa-
tion of the Buddha either as a detached statue or in bas-reliefs. Both in Gandhara
and Mathura Buddha statues occur in great numbers, and on the scenes relating to
his life his figure has replaced the ancient symbols. As regards artistic merit, the
Buddha of Gandhara with his expression of benign serenity, his Apollo-like face, wavy
locks, andampie-folded robe is Infinitely superior to the clumsy, rigid, and expression-
less Buddha of Mathura. So great is the difference that at first sight a connection
between the two seems inadmissible. But on closer examination it appears that the
attitudes in both cases are the same. The standing image has invariably the right
hand raised towards the shoulder in thegesturewhichin Buddhisticonography expresses
the imparting of security or protection {abhaya-mudra) The seated images exhibit
the same posture or both hands are placed in the lap in the attitude of meditation
;
[dhyana-mudra). It is noteworthy that other mudras, those of the touching of the
earth {hkumispar'sa-mudra) andof the turningof the w’^heel of the law {dharmachakra-
mudrd) hardly occur in Mathura sculpture. Of the latter I cannot quote a single
instance and of the former only two, representations of Mara’s attack on Buddha under
the bodhi trte. both in the Mathura Museum.
That both in Gandhara and Mathura the Buddha is clad in the garment of a
Buddhist monk, need not imply any dependence. But it is of interest that the folds
of the upper garment (Skr. sanghati) are clearly marked,'and in Gandhara in a much
more classical manner than at Mathura. From the treatment of the dress it has been
rightly inferred by Grunwedel that Mathura has borrowed its Buddha image from
Gandhara. The same is true with regard to the Buddha figure of Amaravati. It
should be noted that this treatment is un-Indian and, though continued at Mathura in
the Gupta period, disappears again inmediaeval Buddhist sculpture.
' V. A. Smith, op. cit. Plates XXXIV, XXXV andXXXVII.

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
149
A good example of the conventional treatment of the drapery is offered by a
colossal standing Buddha image (ht. S' 8") preserved in the Public Library at Allaha-
bad (PI. LII a). Both the style and material of this image prove that it originates
from Mathura or, at any rate, belongs to the Mathura school. The head, which is
refixed to the body, has the samewant ofexpressionwhich, as noted above, is peculiar
to theBuddhasof Mathura. The hair is arranged in schematic curls the ushmsha is
;
clearly indicated on the top of the head. Of the halo ^ only two fragments are left on
both sides of the shoulder. It shows the same scalloped border which is typical for
Mathura images. The robe with its schematic folds covers both shoulders and leaves
the outline of thebody clearly marked. The latterfeature is preserved on the Buddha
images of Sarnath, though here the drapery is no longer indicated. Both the arms of
the Allahabad statue are broken at the elbow, but there can belittle doubt that the
right was raised against the shoulder, whilst theleft held the hem of the garment.
Of still greater interest than the image itself are the three miniature attending
figures. Between its feet wenotice a figurine standing against a cluster of lotus flow-
ers and wearing an elaborate head-dress and ornaments. A mantle or shawl, sliding
down from the left shoulder over the left arm, is slung round the legs beneath the
right knee. Its right hand which is missing must have been raised in the attitude of
protection, its left hand holds a small vessel.
The two other figurines, somewhat larger in size, are apparently a monk and a
lay member {ufasaka) kneeling onboth sides of the Buddha’s feet. The monk, dressed
in a robe which leaves the right shoulder bare, holds a bunch of lotus flowers the
;
upasaka in secular attire holds a wreath as an offering. Itis curious that the monk's
figure wears heavy earrings.
Here I wish to draw attention to a peculiarity ofthe Buddha imageof Gandhara.
Usually its pedestal is carved with a relief showing a Bodhisattva between adoring
figures of worshippers. Elsewhere I havesuggested thatthe latter, originally at least,
were meant to represent the donors of the sculpture on which they occur.^ Anyhow,
it seems highly probable that the three figurines on the Allahabad statue are derived
from Gandhara examples. It is true thatin the present case the figures are placed on
the top of the base. This alteration may perhaps be accounted for by the circum-
stance that the front face is usually preserved for dedicatory inscriptions which at
Mathura are both much more common and more extensive than in Gandhara. The
similarity of the central figurine in dress and attitude with the figures occurring on
Gandhara pedestals leaves little doubt that it represents a Bodhisattva. We may go
a step further and, on account of the vessel in its left hand, identify it with Maitreya.
I may note here that very often between the feet of Mathura statues figures or sym-
bols are shown which possibly are intended fora cognizance of the personage repre-
sented. The kneeling figures of devotees placed on the top or on thefront of the
bases have been preserved all through the later history of Indian art.
The statue of Allahabad, besides showing the type of the Mathura Buddha, has
thussupplied us at the same time with thetype of the Mathura Boddhisattva. Here,
how^ever, we meet with a difficulty. In my opinion,the figurine in royal dress with the
^ Thehalo isafeatureyborrowed from Hellenisticart. Cf. Griinwedel, Buddhist Art inIndia, pp.86f,
2Cf. A,S. 1003-1904,pp.255ff, Plate LXVII.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT-
150
vessel in the left hand is undoubtedly derived from those well-known figures from
Gandhara which, originally designated as ” royal persons, ” have been identified by
Griinwedel as Bodhisattvas and have since been considered as such by otner autho-
rities. —
We possess, however, the two statues ^ of Sarnath and Saheth-Maheth both
—
belonging tothe Mathuraschool which in theirinscriptions are defined as Bodhisattvas
but present a type entirely different from the one just described. They wear neither
diadem nor ornaments, but only two plain garments. The under-garment is fastened
round the loins by means of a flat girdle the upper garment is thrown over the left
;
shoulder andarm, leaving the right shoulder bare. Itwould indeed be difficultto derive
these clumsy and unwieldy figures from the graceful Bodhisattvas of Gandhara. It
should, however, be remarked that here also there exists a distinct affinity both in
attitudeand drapery. The Bodhisattvas of Gandhara have their right handraised above
the elbow, whilst the left hand is placed on the hip. The mantle is thrown over the left
shoulder. All this we find in the Bodhisattva statues of Sarnath and Saheth-Maheth,
but treatedin a most unartistic and schematic fashion. The right hand is laid flat against
the shoulder, the left fist rests on thehip and the drapery is stiff and unnatural.
The absence of ornaments is a point still to be explained. Here it is only possible
to make conjectures; the following, however, deserves to be noticed. The two
Bodhisattvas in plain dress were erected on spots intimately connected with the career
ofSakyamuni “ on the place where, the Lord used to walk {Bhagavato chankrmne)
There is thus every reason to assume that they were meant to represent no other than
the historical Bsdhisattva.
What particular motive the donors hadin erecting a Bodhisattva and not a Buddha
statue on spots which Sakyamuni was supposed to have visited after his attainment
of enlightenment, it is impossible to decide. But there is every reason to assume
that the images of Sarnath and Saheth-Maheth were meant to represent the Bodhi-
sattva Sakyamuni, although the absence of ornaments would point to the period be-
tween the great renunciation and the hbdhi.
We
have seen, on the other hand, that theBodhisattva figurine on the Allahabad
statue, on account of its attribute, may be identified with Maitreya. I feel, therefore
inclined to assume that similar figures in royal dress represent celestial Bodhisattvas.
That these figures are derived from Graeco-Buddhist examples, will be confirmed in
the course of the present paper. As regards Friar Bala’s Bodhisattvas, I believe that
they likewise go back to Gandhara, though in a way they may be called a creation of
the Mathura school. They may indeed be styled Buddhas without monk’s robe or
Bodhisattvas without ornaments.
It is of interest to note here a standing statue in the Mathura Museum (No. A40)
which shows, as it were, a link between the plain and ornamented Bodhisattva type’
Unfortunately the head and the arms are lost, but the attitude was presumably the
same as that of the Sarnath and Saheth-Mahgth statues. The torso is nude, but round
the neck there are two necklaces. The lower portion of the body is clad in a plain
garment probably meant for a dhoti held round theloins by a double flat mrdle Tr^
find-place is unknov/n.
ISals > o C t f h . e A c . a S s . e R w . i , th 19 t 0 h 4 e . P 19 a 0 r 5 k , h P a l m at i e ma X g X e VI an . d is It a is ch n a o r t a e ct w e o r r i t s h t y ic t o h f a t t he bo M t a h th st u a r t a ue s s ch a o r o e l. carved in the round

avcxrsiEXJiM:.
Mi^i'iaixr^aA.
insr
Eaiis-A.T'X’-v-A.

;
THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
‘51
Another Bodhisattva figure \ which exhibits a close affinity with the Gandhara
tvpe, is preserved in the Lucknow Museum. It is said to originate from the ruins of
Gane§vara, 3 miles north-west of Mathura. The head and feet are lost. The attitude
is that of the Bodhisattvas of Sarnath and Saheth-Maheth. Specially noticeable is the
cushion-like pad between the raised hand and the shoulder, which is also peculiar to
the Sarnath statue. The torso is nude but for a flat necklace. The WTists are pro-
vided with heavy bracelets. The upper garment is partly thrown over the left arm
which is placed on the hip and partly slung round the right leg. The lower garment is
held up by means of a cord-like girdle ending in a tassel which hangs down between the
two feet. A comparison between this figure and the Gandhara Bodhisattvas will
clearly show both the close resemblance in detail and the enormous difference in style.
Still m-ore clearly is Gandhara influence expressed in an interesting fragment
preseiA-ed in the Mathura Museum (No. A47 PI. LII). It consists of the lower
portion of a figure seated in the European fashion on a wickerwork chair. The
sandaled left foot is placed on an ornamental footstool at the side of the empty right
sandal. Evidently the right leg, which is broken, was drawn up. This peculiar pos-
ture, which has become typical for the Bodhisattvas of mediaeval art, is first found in
Gandhara. It isobvious that this Mathura fragment is a copy of Graeco-Buddhist sculp-
tures like the inscribed Bodhisattva from Loriyan Tangai in the Calcutta Museum.^
From the above remarks it follows that both the Buddha and Bodhisattva images
of Mathura are imitations by Indian sculptors of the prototypes created by the Hellen-
istic artists of Gandhara. The process of deterioration of those types can be traced
in Gandhara itself where the work of the foreign sculptors was continued by their
Indianized descendants or successors.
It has been noticed above that at th'e same time that the Buddha statue is called
into existence, we also see the Buddha figure appear on the bas-reliefs representing
scenes from his life. These scenes are much less numerous and varied at Mathura
than Gandhara where w'e have a complete “Buddha-charita” sculptured in stone. In
mediaeval art such scenes are almost exclusively limited to the four great events of
Buddha’s life ; his birth, enlightenment, first sermon, and death.
Mathura represents an intermediary stage, at which we find, besides the four
great events, a few others of secondary importance. It is not unreasonable to expect
that future explorations at Mathura will reveal the existence of other scenes, but their
number will never reach the exuberant growth of Graeco-Buddhist art. Not only is
Gandhara influencetraceable innearly every individual scene, but their general arrange-
ment is evidently derived from the North-West. The scenes are either carved one
above the other on steles (Sanskrit urdkvapatta) or decorate the frieze of some reli-
gious building.
The most interesting instance of the latter device is presented by the drum of a
miniature stUpa from the Dhruv mound near Mathura, now placed in the local Museum.
M. Foucher in his able discussion of the Sikri stupa drum in the Lahore Museum,
^ V. A. Smith, The Jain Stupa,Plate LXXXVII. The image isneither ‘'Vardhamana” nor “ someBrah-'
manical deity/' The headfigured on the sameplatedoes not seem to belong tothe same image.
“A.S»R., 1903-04,Plate LXVIll C.
3 V. A, Smith, op cii,. Plates CV-CVII. A. Foucher, Les has-reliefs du stupade Sihri {Gandhdfa),
J. A. 1903, p. 323. I ventureto disagree with theauthoras regards the interpretation oftwo ofthe scenes.

archaeological report.
152
has first pointed out the close connection between these two monuments. In both
we find a series of scenes from Buddha’s life separated by little pilasters and surmoun-
ted bv a dental cornice. In the Gandhara example the classical character is much
more clearly expressed, and that from Mathura is merely a debased imitation.
The latter contains eight bas-reliefs representing the following subjects : Bud-
dha’s birth, his enlightenment (expressed by Mara’s attack), his first sermon, his
death, the Gandhakuti of Sravasti (?), his descent from the Trayastrirhga hea^ren, the
presentation of the four cups by the four Lokapalas, and Indra’s visit at the IndraSaila
cave. Thus we have the four great events, followed by four minor events. It is
noteworthy that the latter only partially correspond with the four minor events of the
Buddhist canon. At the time when the Mathura school flourished, they were
apparently not yet definitely fixed. It is also curious that, in order to obtain the five
great scenes in the right order, we have to circumambulate the monument in a direc-
tion opposed to that of the fradakshina.
On the panel representing Buddha’s birth we see Maya standing under the sd^
tree in exactly the same posture as on the numerous Gandhara reliefs relating to that
event. But the scene is here combined with another immediately following it in order
of time. The infant Buddha, marked by a circular halo, is standing between two
Nagas, which issue half-way from masonry wells and fold their hands in adoration.
There can be little doubt that these are the Naga kings Nanda and Upananda who,
according to the Lalita-vistara, issued from the earth and showered two streams of
water over the new-born Bodhisattvak Here we may compare a fragment from Ama-
ravati on which next to the birth-scene we find a bas-relief on which two females, one
carrying a kerchief with the sacred foot-prints and the other holding an umbrella over
it, approach a fountain enclosure from which issues a Naga, the hands joinedin
adoration. Anotheradoring female (?) figure is seen behind^
On Samath reliefs the two Nagas are commonly represented standing in the air
over the infant Buddhaand pouringwater overhis head. It is interesting to note that in
Gandhara sculpture the first bath is administered by Brahma and Indra. Considering
the frequency of Naga scenes in Graeco-Buddhist art, we are led to believe that the
legend of Buddha’s first bath by the two Naga kings must have beenunknown to the
sculptors of the North-West. It was in any case the Mathura sculptors who first gave
We
it visible shape. find it treated in exactly the same manner on a slab from the
. ,
Rajghat in the Mathura Museum (No. Hi). This sculpture contains the four main
events of Buddha’slife and his descent from heaven. There also the scene of the first
bath by the Naga kings Nanda and Upananda is combined with that ofthe Nativity.
The Mathura Museum contains another sculpture (No. H2; PI. LIII) said to-
originate from near the Kahkali Tila, which Cunningham, presumably misled by the
nudity of the central figure, supposed to represent a Jaina sainP. But a comparison
.
with the two sculptures just discussed proves that here again we have the scene of the-
first bath treated in the conventional manner peculiar to Mathura. It is curious that
,
already at this early stage of his life the future Buddha is shown in his. usual attitude
- 1 L F a er l g i u t s a s m o s n t , ar T a re (e e d. a L n e d f S m e a r i p m e ) nt j p W . or 8 s 3 h , i c p f. , H p i . u 3 e 12 n , Ts P i l a at n e g X Si C - I y . u-ki (transl. Beal), Vol. ii, pp, 24 f.
^ At. 5. R., Vol. XX, p. 35, PlateIV.

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
153
the left-hand on the hip, the right raised in the gesture of imparting protection. The
representation of the Nagas issuing half-way from wells, which we findat Amaravati
and on the Mathura sculptures, is a feature evidently borrowed from Gandhara art,
though here again the difference in treatment shows the artistic superiority of the
latter most clearly. The elegant fountain enclosure with its gargoyle has^become a
circular masonry well.
It is curious that, whereas the Sarnath sculptures closely agree with the Lalita-
vistara. in showing the trro Nagas‘‘ standingin the air half-bodied ”, the Mathura reliefs
follow another reading of the legend which is found in Hiuen Tsiangb When visiting
the Lumbini garden, the Chinese pilgrim noticed two fountains ofpure water, by the
side of which had been built two stupas. “ This is the place where two dragons ap-
peared from the earth. When Bodhisattva was born, the attendants and household
relations hastened in everv direction to find water for the use of the child. At this
time two springs gurgled forth from the earth just before the queen, the one cold, the
other warm, using which they bathed him Though, as noticed above, this scene
seems to be acreation of the Mathura school, there is one feature which apparently
isderived from Gandhara. It isthe “ heavenly music ” expressed by five or six musical
instruments suspended in the air which rve notice on the bas-relief in the Mathura
Museum’. The instruments are a flute, a conch, a drum, a lute {mna), a bag-pipe (?)
and a tabor.
Of Buddha’s enlightenment 1 know only two representations from Mathura : one on
the stupa drumofDhruv Tila, and the other on the slab from the Raj Ghat. Both are
now placed in the local museum. The attitude of the Buddha, here as in Gandhara, is
that of touching the earth {bhumispar'sa-mudra). The figure to his right seems to be
Mara to his left we see Mara’s daughters. The latter do not occur on Gandhara
;
examples of this scene andseem indeed to have been first introduced by the sculptors
of Ma'hura. In mediaeval art, on the contrawy, they are commonly shown as takingpart
in “ Mara’s assault.”
— —
Of thethird great scene the first sermon at Benares we possess three examples
from Mathura. Besides those on the stilpa drum of Dhruv Tila and the Raj Ghat
sculpture, we have thefragment of a frieze likewise preserved in the Mathura Museum
(No. H7, pi. LIV) which containsthefirst sermon and the Nirvana. It is interesting
—
to note the dwarf pilasterwhich terminates the latter scene evidently a degenerate
descendant of the Indo-Corinthian pilasters of Gandhara. The scenes representing the
first sermon are exact counterparts of some Gandhara reliefs {e,g., D-15 of the
Lahore Museum) on which we findtheMaster, surroundedby the five Friars, actually
turningthe wheel of the law, which is placed on a pillar at his side. On the Raj Ghat
sculpture the wheel is absent.
Besides the sculptures just noted, the Mathura Museum possesses another frag-
ment (No. H8) with the representationof Buddha’s death®. It evidently formedpart of
a stele {urdhvapaiia) onwhich the fourgreatsceneswere arranged oneabove the other,
1 5i-j/M-/!:/-(transL Beal), Vol. II, pp. 24!.
2 Foucher, U art greco-houddhique du Gandhara, p. 301, Cf. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Suttas S. B. E.,
Vol. XI, pp. loiand 249.
® Foucher, op. cii., p.569. figl-282.

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
154
the iSirv5n3. occupying the lowermost compartment. The close connection between
this sculpture and the Grmco-Buddhist representations of the farinirvana will at
once be apparent.. The mainfigure of the scene is the dying Buddha reclining on his
We
couch in the attitude described in the Pali text. notice again the halo with scal-
loped border peculiar to Mathura.
Of the twin sal trees between which the couch was placed only one is preserved,
the opposite corner of the panel being broken. Among the foliage we notice the
figure of the tree spirit in the act of showering flowers. In exactly the same manner
the genii of the sal trees are shown on some of the finest Nirvanas from Gandhara, eg.,
the two from Loriyan Tangai, now in the Calcutta Museumh The mourning figures
standing behind the couch, the hands raised in the attitude of grief, are also regularly
found on Gandhara reliefs. There their number varies. But in both the Mathura
Museum reliefs there are three figures, the central one raising both hands. On the
urdhvapatta fragment there is still some variet)' in the attitude of the two other
figures, one of which hasplaced his right hand on his head, w'hereas the other conceals
his face behind a handkerchief. But on the other sculpture these three figures present
a much more schematic appearance, the central one raising both hands, that to his
right the right and that to his left the left hand. Thus we see the parinirvana scene,
the creation of a Hellenistic artist, gradually modified by the tendency towards sym-
metry and conventionalism. This process is already noticeable in Gandhara itself, as
will be seen from a comparison of the six Nirvana reliefs published by M. Foucher.“
On the stele fragment we notice, next, two figures standing on both sides of
Buddha’s couch. That at his feet wearing monk’s dress has been identified by M.
Foucher with Mahaka§yapa. On the other sculpture these two figures are missing.
It seems that on the sfupa drum from Dhruv Tila the two figures re-occur. Here the
number of attendants is limited to three, the third one standing at the back of the
couch with both hands raised. It is remarkable that the usual figures in front of the
couch are absent here.
On the stele of the Mathura Museum we notice in front of the couch three figures,
one of which, a monk seated in meditation, has been identified by M. Foucher with
Subhadra, the Master’s last convert. The three sticks at his side I suppose to mark
him as a Brahraanical ascetic (Sanskrit tridandni). This figure is invariablv found
on Gandhara reliefs,^either alone or accompanied by a prostrate figure in monk’s dress,
probably meant for Ananda. On the other sculpture in the Mathura Museum we have
again three figures, Subhadra occupying the centre. The other two wearing royal
dress are perhaps meant for Malla chieftains. It would seem that the Mathura
school, out of a sense of symmetry, has retained these three figures which are still
found on the colossal Nirvana image of Kasia, a work of the fifth century which, as
noted above, appears to be wrought by a Mathura artist. At Kasia also the cross-
legged ascetic with his three staffs occupies the centre. The figure on the left is a
lay-member, but that on the right wears monk’s dress and most probably represents
Ananda, who plays such a prominent part in the legend of the Great Decease. This
^ Grunwedel; BuddhistArt in India, figs. 71 and72.
^ A. Foucher, op. cii., figs. 276-281.

SSiiii

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
155
instance illustrates how Mathura was the intermediary between Gandhara and the art
of the Gupta period.
Here I wish to note the curious fact that the mysterious Vajrapani who occurs in
Gandhara. not only in the death-scene, but in nearly every scene relating to the
Buddha legend, as a constant companion of the Master, is totally absent on corre-
sponding reliefs from Mathura. It would seem that the original meaning of this figure
had become lost and the Mathura sculptors did not feel any scruples in eliminating it
from the entourage of the Buddha.
Whereas at Mathura the scenes relating to the life of Sakyamuni are very
few as compared with the long and varied series created by the Graeco-Buddhist
school of Gandhara, the Mathura school exhibits a far greater number and variety of
scenes referring to his previous existences. In this respect, again, Mathura art
shows itself a true descendant of Maurya sculpture as exemplified on the stupa of
Barahat. Yet in the treatment of such scenes by the Mathura sculptors Gandhara
influence is unmistakable. In Old-Indian sculpture the whole story is condensed in a
single bas-relief, the actors being repeated in various attitudes peculiar to their con-
secutive adventures and actions. This treatment imparts an enigmatic character to
these sculptures -which it is only possible to understand with the aid of inscriptions. At
Jamalgarhl, on the contrary, the ViSvantara and Syama/^/flifl^ are pictured in a far
more lucid fashion and evolved in a series of scenes separated by trees. This method
which, simple though it may seem, had not commended itself to the sculptors of the
Maurya epoch, is also found at Mathura.
On the back of one of the railing-pillars of Bhutesar (PI. LI, h) in the Mathura
Museum, there are threescenes representing a passage of the ViSvantara-jataka, in
which that paragon of generosity gives his two children away to a Brahmin. In the
upper panel the Bodhisattva apparently pours water in the hand of his supplicant so
as to solem'-iize the donation. The hermit's hut with its covering of leaves is seen
in the background. In the central panel we see the two children being led away by
the Brahmin and in the lower-most relief theirmother is returning with water and fruit.
It is of interest to note, that, though the treatment of this jataka in a series of
scenes must have originated from Gandhara, the individual scenes of the Mathura
pillar do not show any dependence on the only representation of this jataka we know
of in Gandhara art—that of Jamalgarhl, now preserved in the British Museum. To a
certain extent the treatment of the story may be called original. This is also borne
out by a comparison with the representation of \kv\sjataka on the lower architrave of
the northern gateway of Sanchl.^
The back of the other Bhutesar railing-pillar In the Mathura Museui-n contains
also three bas-reliefs which unfortunately are much damaged. In the upper panel
there is a Buddha or more probably Bodhisattva seated in the usual posture on a
throne. Behindtwo attendants are standing, one of whom holds a fly-whisk {chamard).
Inthe central panel we discern the figure of a Brahmanical hermit seated on a cushion
of holy grass. Another figure seems to stand in front of him, but is too much
^ Fergusson, TreeandSerpent Worship,Plate XXXII, 2, cf. p. loi, where the firstpatof the story is
•describad. Plate LXV, fig. I,gives the Amaravati reading.
X 2

ARCH.EOLOGICAL REPORT.
156
defaced to be identified. The lowermost relief shows a lion or tiger seizing a human
figure between his teeth. In the background there are a hermit’s hut and a tree.
I feel inclined to assume that these three scenes refer to the Jataka of the tiger
{vyaghra-jataka). In this birth-story it is related how the Bodhisattva gave his own
bodv to feed a hunsrv tigress which was about to devour her own cubs. The ascetic
in the central scene and the hermit’s hut in the last one support this identification. It
remains to decide what connection the upper panel can have with this story. The
most plausible explanation seems to me that it represents the Bodhisattva in his
heavenlv abode previous to his taking birth as a Brahmin. It will be noticed that the
seated figure is draped in the same manner as the Bodhisattva statues of Sarnath
and Saheth-Maheth. Thus it would confirm my supposition that these figures
represent the Bodhisattva predestined to become the Buddha Sakyamuni.
The three scenes on one of the railing-pillars of Colonel Stacy, which, as noted
above, belongs to the same railing, have been explained by Cunningham^ as referring
to the miracle of Rajagriha in which Buddha subdued an elephant let loose against
him bv his malignant cousin Devadatta. The central panel bears indeed a strong re-
semblance to the Gandhara reliefs which picture that event but the final scene, in
;
which, according to Cunningham, Devadatta is himself destroyed by the infuriated
elephant does not seem to agree with the written tradition. It is, however, quite pos-
sible that the Mathura sculpture represents a different reading of the story not found
in extant Buddhist literature. Presently we shall meet with a similar instance in the
representation of a Jataka.
If Cunningham’s interpretation is correct, it would follow that the reliefs on the
Bhutesar railing-pillars not only picture Buddha’s previous existences, but also the
last one in which he obtained enlightenment. It is not unreasonable to hopethatsome
day more pillars of this railing will be found which will show whether this view is
correct. Two points are still to be noted with regard to this railing. First of all the
scenes carved on the back of the pillars leave not the slightest doubt that they have
belonged to a Buddhist monument, most probably a stupa. It seems plausible that
this monument belonged to the Ya§a-vihara, which once occupied the site of the
Katra. The other point to which I wish to draw attention is the occurrence of Indo-
Persepolitan pilasters at the side of each scene. This is not only a regular device on
Mathura railing-pillars, but a similar pilaster will also be seen on the urdhvapatta
fragment representing Buddha’s nirvana. It is a feature found also at Barahat
where the panels are enclosed between a pair of pilasters. In the case of the Bhutesar
railing-pillars each pair of pilasters supports an architrave carved with one ogee arch
in the centre and two half-arches at the sides. The ideaapparently was to place each
scene of the sacred legend within a little chapel.
abas- T re h l e ie M f a r t e h p u re r s a en M t u i s ng e t u w m o c m o e nt n a i i n ns th a e f a r c a t gm o e f n k t il o l f in a g r a ai t l o in r g t - o p i i s l e la w r it ( h No s . ti J ck 3 s 6 . ; T fi h g i . s i) sc w e i n t e h
evidently refers to the Kachchhapa-jataka, but it is noteworthy that the death of the
tortoise, as shown on the sculpture, agrees with the version of the Panchatantra and
not with that of the Pali Jataka-book. In the latter it is said that the tortoise, owing-
^ Cur.ningham, A, S. i?.,Vol. Ill, Plate VII. Cf. Anderson, Catalogue, Part I, pp. i86 ff, M. 15-a

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
>57
to his imprudent speech, fell into the open courtyard and split in t\vo\ whereas in the
Panchatantra it is definitely stated that he was “ made to pieces by the townspeople. ’
Under the panel there are two
letters which I read Dasa and
which prove the sculpture to
belong to the Kushana period..
In some jataka scenes pictured
on the Barahat stilpa there is a
considerable discrepancy in details
between the sculptures and the
canonical texts,“ The same
seems to be true of representa-
tions of birth-stories at Mathura.
It remains to consider some
decorative devices of Mathura
sculpture in which Gandhara
influence is even more clearly
expressed than in illustrative bas-
reliefs. Of special interest are
the garland-carrying figures of
Graeco-Buddhist art, because
here the classical prototype can
be pointed out with certainty. In
Gandhara “ they are represented
on string courses, plinths or
friezes, as boyish figures carrying
garlands or playing betw^een gar-
lands. In the intervening portions
]otus-flowers are sometimes intro-
Fig. I. Fragment in Mathura Museum.
duced, or the intervals are filled
in with symbols, animals or birds.”® The two sculptures shown in figure 2 (ht I t
width 3' 10") which are preserved in the Peshawar Museum are fine specimens of this
decorative device. Here the intervals also contain Cupids holding lotus-flowers and
palm-leaves.
Griinwedel was the first to point out that the same device in a modified form is
found on the rail coping of the Amaravatl stupa. Here “the boys at play have-
turned into men who, bearing huge snake-like bodies, advance in studied and graceful
attitudes.” In the intervening spaces "we notice purely Indian subjects such as
the Garuda holding a Nagain its beak. “ Nothing,” Fergusson remarks, “ can wellbe
better, as an architectural ornament, than the wavy flow of the long roll, borne by
^ The Jataka (ed.Fausboll), Vol. II, pp. I75ff. No. 215. English translation (ed, Cowell) Cambridge, 189”,
Vol. II> pp* Pafichatantra (ed. Kosegarten) Bonn, 1848, p. 76.
2 Oldenburg. Noteson Buddhist art, translatedby Leo Wiener in J. A. O. S., Vol. XVIII (1897), p. 185,,
footnote 2.
^ Griinwedel-Burgess, BuddhistArt in India, p. 148. Foucher op, cit., p. 140.

arch.eological report.
1-8
animated dgures and interspersed with emblems appropriate to the dedication of the
Tope.’^^
A coniiectinp; link between Gandhara and Amaravati is afforded by Mathura
where we find the garland-carriers in an intermediate stage of their Indian develop-
ment. The INIathura Museum possesses five specimens of friezes exhibiting this
design. The largest frieze (^Pl. LI\’, d ht. 2' contains one figure, the head of
;
which is lost. It wears ornaments like the Gandhara figures, but of a more elaborate
type. It is of interest to note that, whereas the Gandhara Cupids, apart from their
ornaments, have retained their classical nudity, those of Mathura have donned the
indigenous The open spaces between the garland are filled with palmettes
and lotus-rosettes. The sculpture clearly betrays thattendencytowards conventionalism
and uniformity which is characteristic of Indian art.
Another sculpture in the Mathura Museum (PI. L!V, c ht. 11") has a double
;
frieze; the lower one evidently represents Jataka scenes. In the upper frieze we find
Fig. 2. Frieze in Peshawar Museum.
again the garland-carrying figures. It is remarkable how here as at Amaravati all
proportion is lost between these tiny figures and the heavy garland under the load of
which they seem to succumb. On all Mathura sculptures the Cupids are shown
walking or running m one direction as is the case of Amaravati, whereas in Gandhara
they are standing alternately turned in opposite directions.
A comparison of the three types will clearly show how the Mathura figures re-
present an intermediary stage and bear a character far less classicalthan their parents
of Gandhara, but at the same time much less Indianised than their degenerate des-
cendants at Amaravati.
^ Fergusson. 7'7^ee andSerpent Worship, p. 169, Plate LVI.

THE MATHURA SCHOOL OF SCULPTURE.
159
Amon^ our Graeco-Buddhist sculptures -we possess several specimens of semi-
circular or curvilinear bas-reliefs which must have formed the pediments of chapels.
Of the two examphs reproduced on Plate LV one (ht, 2', vudth 2 Y) M'as obtained
in igo2 from Bringan near Rustam (Peshawar district) and is now preserved in
the Peshawar Museum. The other makes part of a collection in the Mission house
We
at Peshawar it- provenance is unknown.^ notice on the one from Bringan the
;
Indo-Corinthian capitals each surmounted by a divine figure in the attitude of adoration
and on the other a frieze of garland-carrying Cupids flanked by two double-domed
chapels. The division of these pediments by means of concentric arches is purely
Indian, for we find it on the pediments of chapels pictured on the Barahat stupa.
But the figures which fill the various compartments are singularly classical in
appearance.
The main scene which represents the submission of the Naga king Apalala^ is
of no special importance for our present subject. Of more interest are the two
upper divisions, in which we find, in one case, Buddha’s alms-bowl and Buddha him-
self, and in the other, two Bodhisattvas worshipped by a group of kneeling or standing
figures, their hands fold--d in adoration. At the end of each group of worshippers
—
there is a winged Triton—presumably meant for a Naga ihe coil of whose snake-like
body effectively fills the narrow end of the lunulate space,
I now wish to draw" attention to aninteresting fragmentamongthe collection in the
Mathura Museum (Cat. No. J i ht. 3') reproduced'on Plate LVI. From its shape and
;
from its being carved on both sides it is evident that it did not serve the same purpose
as the Gandhara pediments. In any case there can be little doubt that its design is
borrow"ed from the Gandhara sculptures just described. On each side w"e find three
lunulate areas separated by concentric arches.
On the obverse the centre of these three compartments is occupied respectively
by the alms-bowl, apparently filled to the brim with offerings, a Buddha seated in the
protecting attitude, and a Bodhisattva in royal garments seated in meditation under a
tree. On the reverse w'e have in the upper compartment Buddha’s head dress, which,
as we know, received the homageof the thirty-three gods, and in the central one a
—
Bodhisattva—perhaps Maitreya, judging from the vessel in his left hand ,who raises
his right handin the conventional attitude of protection. Of the figure occupying
the centre of the lowermost division, only aportion of the halo is preserved.
The worshipping figures are here divine or semi-divine beings flying, as indi-
cated by the position of their legs, and carrying cabbage-like bouquets from which
they are showering flowers. The classical Tritons in the corners are replaced by the
indigenous crocodile, less ornamental, but more familiar to the Indian public. The
connection between these animals and the crocodiles on the ends of torana beams of
We
Barahat is unmistakable.® find the same device on a fragment of a idrana
M
architrave in the Mathura Museum (Cat. No. 2 ; ht. 7f").
1 .For Other specimens cf. Grunwedel—Burgess, Bziddhht Art, figs.44,58, and83. See also p. 131. For
thephotographs of Gandharasculptures here reproduced I am indebted tothecourtesy of Dr. Spooner*
2 Cf. Poacher,op. cit. p?. 544^-, figs. 270-275.
3 Cunningham. Th^- Siicpa of Bharhut. Plate IX. C/.also V. A. Smith, TheJain Stupa, Plates XXIV
andXXV.

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
i-6o
On the Mathura sculpture it almost gives the impression that the Devas are
flying straight out of the yawning jaws of these monsters. This observation enables
— —
us I believe to explain a curious design found in later Indian art, namely, that of a
human figure issuing from the mouth of a ma.kara. Finally, we notice in the spandrel
a Garuda treated in a highly conventional fashion, with short clumsy wings, a crooked
beak, and the feathers of the tail spread out on both sides and ending in tendril-
like scrolls. On the Gandhara pediments we have, of course, nothing corresponding
to these Garudas, but it is noteworthy that in Graeco-Buddhist sculpture, the span-
drels of arches are very often occupied by birds, apparently parrots, treated in a
naturalistic manner. They will also be seen on the frieze of garland-carriers repro-
duced above.
With the sculpture in the Mathura Museum may be compared the interesting
sculpture excavated by Dr. Fuhrer from the Kahkall Tlla and discussed by Professor
Buhler.^ This sculpture evidently served the same purpose, but is much more
elaborate and for this reason probably later in date. The division of the slab is in
both cases exactly the same, but on that from the Kahkali Tila the dividing ribs are
richly decorated with various floral designs, and the three lunulate spaces as well as
the spandrels are crowded with figures of the mo.st varied description. Besides flying
celestials, we notice dragon-riders which contrast strangely with the homely country
carts which take part in the procession. I recall, in passing, the Cupids riding on
dragons which occur on the beautiful Nirvana relief from Loriyan Tangai preserved
in the Calcutta Museum.
In the corners we meet again with the ungainly shapes of the yawning crocodiles
but here a new element is introduced. In front of the unwieldly monster a boyish
figure (in one case two) is standing, apparently teasing it by pulling its tono-ue. A
similar device we find on a Mathura sculpture in the Lucknow Museum where the
teasing boy assumes the aspect of a kimnara with leafy girdle.^ Professor Buhler
remarks that a simi ^ lar scene occurs on the Amaravatl stupa where, however it is a
female who takes hold of the m-akara's tongue. It is another proof of the indebted-
ness of Araaravati to Mathura.
“““-f' fig"™, in the sculpture of Kahkali Tiia are unfortunately incomplete
atlnSerw «"'h"ones and are
ed by female fan-bearers. A comparison with the sculpture in the Mathura Mu-
seum ma esIt highlyprobable thattheyare Buddhas andBodhisattvas,
or, if Dr. Buhler
IS right in supposing the sculpture to beJaina, they ought to be Tirthamkaras.
(To be continued?)
Ph. Vogel.
J.
-if g 94 A. S. R.jSouthern India,Vol. I, Plate XXVII, 6

SIE-
12,
•VIE
3E
DR,
(b)
JvIXTBacsXTIvi:,
12<r
SSCJ-O-XiOPT-U-aEtE

MUHAMMADAN ARCHITECTURE
IN
KASHMIR.
-(S
DRO.A.DLY speaking, Muhammadan architecture in Srinagar seems to fall under
three heads first, there is the pre-Mug^al masonry style secondly, there is the
: ;
wooden style and thirdly, the pure Mughal style. Of the first there are very few
;
examples. Thebest known is probablythe tomb of Zainu-l-‘abidln’s mother,^ regarding
which Cunningham, Cole and Fergusson had a difference of opinion. Cunningham^ and
Cole® maintained that the enclosure wall of this building was once the enclosure wall of
a Hindu temple. Fergusson^ would have it that the wall was built entirely by Muham-
madans, dating it about i,ooo years later. But the fact remains that Cunningham and.
Cole saw’ the building, while Fergusson did not ; and nobody, I think, can observe
the massiveness of the stones used, and their unmistakably ancient appearance
without agreeing with Cunningham and Cole that the enclosure wall is an old Hindu
wall in situ. If further evidence against Fergusson’s theory is wanted, let me draw
— —
attention to the mouldings of the plinth not includedin FergussoiTs woodcut and to
the section of the coping. Both of these features are essentially Hindu. Again, the
plinth ofthetomb of Zainu-l-‘abidln’s mother is obviously the actual plinth ofan ancient
Hindu temple, and the brick structure above it is a Muhammadan tomb of a common
Persian type, adapted to the Hindu plinth. The torus moulding of this plinth is prac-
tically complete, and from the way the stone'is jointed at the angles on the plan, it is
quite certain that the plinth has never been appreciably disturbed. The small pointed
arches in the enclosure wall which deceived Fergusson, only look like Muhammadan
nt maybe ofinteresttonotethatthechroniclerJonaraja in thesecond Rajataranginf(V. 715) mentions Zainu-
U‘abidin*s motherbythename of Mera Devi,perhapsmeant for MIran (^^Devi” beingaSanskrit title of queens
or princesses), and calls her the daughter of Piruja (Firoz.) the King of Shahbhahga. I do not knowwhat
country is meantbyShahbhanga. The English translation by Dutt has Udabhandapura, which is the present
Undor Ohind onthe Indus,thecapital of Gandharaatthetime of theearly Muhammadan invasions. As the
ruling dynasty was known by the name of Shahi, it isjust possible thatthe name Udaka-bhanda hasbecome
corruptedinto Shahbhanga. It w^ould be Interestingif it could be ascertained from Muhammadan sources
whetherthere existeda King Firoz,somewhere inthe neighbourhood of Kashmir at the time of SikandarButslii’
kan. [J. Ph. Vogel.]
*-2 J. A. S. B., 1848, part 2.
® H. H.Cole, llhisirations ofancient buildings in Kashmir.
^
J.
Fergusson. HistoryofIndian Architecture,p. 281.
Y

ARCH.'EOLOGICAL REPORT.
162
work on a drawing in elevation, because the depth of the recesses and the size of the
stones is not shownh They are in reality quite unlike anything I have seen in any
Muhammadan building in India. It may be added that there are several large stones
bearing Hindu carvings and mutilated sculptures lying about m the courtyard, and
these Lnes, in all probabilitv, belong to the former Hindu building which occupied the
site, and which was demolished by the Muhammadans in the 15th century, when the
tomb of Zainu-l-‘abidin’s mother was built.
The manner in which the Muhammadans adapted their structure to the Hindu
plinth was simple. The usual form of plan used in Muhammadan tombs of this date
Fig.
was that showm in fig. 2. It will be seen at a glance that, given the plan, fig. 2, to
build upon, it required no great ingenuity to fit in the four small cupolas and the large
central dome to which the Muhammadanswere accustomed (fig. 3). Itwas, in fact, so
easy that they did not bother to alter the shape of the plinth at all.
It has already been mentioned that the brick structure on the Hindu plinth is the
tomb of Zainu-l-‘abidln's mother. She was the wife of Sikandar Butshikan, who
stands out as one of the most prominent figures among early Muhammadan rulers of
Kashmir, and whose importance is rivalled only by that of his son Zainu-l-‘abidin.
Sikandar earned his nickname by his wholesale destruction of Hindu temples. Zainu-
l-'abidin was evidently a more tolerant person^ indeed, there is a story that after
;
having been cured of some disease by a Hindu doctor, he gave orders that no further
persecution of the Hindus should be permitted. His grave is said to be one of those
within the disputed enclosure wall, close to the building over his mother’s grave. The
latter is a valuable monument since it is the only one of its kind near Srinagar.
Its principal features are the glazed and mouldedblue bricks,fig. 4, which arestud-
ded at intervals in the exterior walls, the semicircular brick projections on the drum of
the main dome, and the moulded brick string courses and sunk panels on
the drums of the cupolas.
There is one other pre-Muglial building in Srinagar which deserves to
be mentioned here. The tomb of Madani is a small building quite neglect-
ed and very dilapidated, and it does not appear to be included in the
accounts of any traveller or archaeologist. Yet it possesses a feature of
Fig-. 4. extraordinary value and interest in its coloured tilework, fragments of -v'hich
are still adhering to its walls. 1 have found no othersuch tilework in Srinagar, and it is
quite different from that which is commonly seen in India, though similar tiles exist
^ Similar nicheswith pointedarchesliavebeen found among the Gupta remainsat Sarnath. [Ed.]
- Zainu-h'abidin seems tohave been a particularly tolerantruler. This Is evident fromthe praise bestowed
on him by the authors ofthe 2nd and 3rd Rajatarahgini. They assert that he even visited Hindu places of
pilgrimage. [J. Ph. Vogel.]

MUHAMMADAN ARCHITECTURE IN KASHMIR. 163
on the mosque of Zakariya Khan near Lahore, and on a Hindu shrine opposite the
Salimgarh at Delhi. The latter evidently did not originally belong to the Hindu temple,
as the patterns are all jumbled together. Glazed and coloured tilework, as is well
known, was introduced largely into India, probably from Persia, by the Miighals.
Akbar employed it sparingly in Agra Fort and at Fathpur SikrI Jahangir employed it
;
more elaborately at Sikandarah, on some of the cupolas on Akbar’s tomb, and in
Shah Jahan’s time it was lavishly employed, particularly in the Punjab.
The tilework of the Muglials was almost invariably cut in small irregular shapes
according to the different colours in the flowers or ornaments which the tilework re-
presented. That Is to say, the outlines of the colours in the flowers or ornaments
settled the shape to which each tile was to be cut, and the pieces were put together
like mosaic, and stuck on the walls in mortar.
Another kind of tilework has its home in Multan and Sind. This tilework is also
glazed and coloured, and was largely used in Pathan buildings before the advent of
the Mu^bals. It is distinguishedfrom the so-called ^ Kashi' work used by the Mughals,
in that the Multan variety is cut always in squares, and different colours are worked in
contact with each other on the same square. In the old tiles hardly any colours were
used but light and dark blue, and sometimes yellow and brown.
The tilework at the tomb of Madani, near But Kadal in Srinagar, is made in
squares with various brilliant colours in contact with each other on the same piece
of tile. But its great interest lies in the subject which is represented in the southern
half of the spandrel of the great archwaj" in the east fapade (PI. LVII). It is hardly
necessary to remind the reader that animal life was rarely represented in any form of
decoration during Muhammadan rule in India. Akbar did not object to statues of
horses^ and elephants^ Jahangir allowed birds ® and butterflies^ to be carved, and
;
Shah Jahan also had elephants’ set up, and at Lahore Fort he indulged in a
panelled frieze representing elephant fights, and othersubjects, all in tilework. Aur-
angzeb was a bigot, who not only would have none of animal life in any form on his
buildings, but took a delight in smashing any instances of it which came to his notice
whether on Hindu or Muhammadan buildings. It is fortunate indeed that he never
chanced to see the tomb of Madani when he was in Srinagar. His indignation w'ould
surely have been roused at finding, on the tomb of a Muhammadan saint, a repre-
sentation of a beast with the body of a leopard, changing at the neck into the trunk of
a human being, shooting apparently with a bow and arrow at its own tail, while a fox
is quietly looking on among flowers and cloud-forms. These peculiar cloud-forms are
—
common in Chinese and Persian art, and were frequently used by the Mu gfials by
Akbar in the Turkish Sultana’s house at Pathpur-Sikri, Jahangir at Sikandarah, and
Shah Jahan in the Diwan-i-khass at Delhi, to mention only a few instances. The
principalbeast in the picture is about four feet long, and is striking quite an heraldic
attitude. The chest, shoulders, and head of the human being are unfortunately missing.
The tail ends in a kind of dragon’s head. As for the colours, the background is blue,
^ Statueofa horsenear Sikandarah, Agra.
- Hatya Paul, Fatehpur Sikri and Delhi gate, Agra Fort,
^ Akbars tomb at Sikandarah.
' Ditto.
* Hatya Paul, Delhi Fort.
Y 2

ARCH/EOLOCICAL REPORT.
164
the trunk of the man is red. the leopard's body is yellow with light green spots, the
dragon’s head and the fox are reddish brown, and the flowers are of various colours. It
is most probable that if this beast can be run to earth, and similar pictures found in
the art of other countries, some light will be thrown upon the influences bearing upon
the architecture of Kashmir during a period about which little is at present known.
Besides this spandrel there is more tilework in the building. The jambs of the arch-
way are lined with squares of tiles, many of which have fallen out and been put back
in the wrong place. None of these are of particular interest except that they show
that tilework was used on masonry buildings in Kashmir before Mughal days. There
is, however, an interesting narrow border, above the dado on the east facade, repre-
senting a flowing floral pattern interwoven with the heads of donkeys and lions.
We
are fortunate in knowing within narrow limits the date of this building. It
joins on to the mosque of Madam, a building the roof of which is in the wooden style
which willbe discussed presently. As both the buildings are in memory of the same
person it is likely that they were built about the same time, and a well-preserved in-
scription over the doorway of the mosque records that it was built in the year A. H
848 (A.D. 1444). Plate LIX. This falls within the reign of Zainu-l-'abidln.
Apart from its tilework, the tomb of Madani possesses no particular value. It is
evident that both it and the mosque are built on the site of an old Hindu temple
The stone plinth of the mosque is put together with Hindu stones, and the brick
work in the walls is xMuhammadan. Some carved Hindu columns have been used
in the porch of the mosque, and two similar columns are used in the inner chamber
•of the tomb—another indication that the tomb and mosque are of the same date since
columns from apparently the same Hindu temple are used in each of them.
Although Kashmir possesses a very distinctive style of wooden architecture
practically nothing is known about it by the outside world. Brief descriptions of some
•of the principal buildings are given by the travellers Bernier,^ Vigne,^ Hiigel,^ Moor-
croft^ and LowenthaP but these accounts being unaccompanied by
; illustrations and
written by men whose attention was mainly devoted to subjects other than architecture
•convey but a feeble impression of the reality. Fergusson,® though he never visited
Kashmir, shrewdly suspected from enquiries that he made, and from the few photo-
graphs which he was able to obtain, that the subject of its wooden architecture was
one deserving full investigation. Cunningham ’ and Cole « in their accounts of anti-
quities in Kashmir dealt almost exclusively with Hindu and Buddhist monuments, and
left the wooden style, exemplified in the more modern buildings, practically unnoticed
Having before us a clear field it will be worth while to’consider the conditions
under which the style was evolved or introduced. The consistent use of Sara-
cenic detail, and the fact that the style was and is still applied to Muhammadan tombs
and mosques, and not to Hindu structures, indicates in the first place that much ofits
^ Fran9ois Bernier, TraDels in the Mogul empire. Edited by A. Constable, iSgi. ^
2 G. T. Vigne, Travelsin Kashmir, Ladak, etc.
^ C.F. Hiigel, Travelstrans. by MajorJervis.
Moorcroftand Trebeck, Travels in the Himalayan Provinces.
' J ] . . Fergusson, B S i o s m t e or P y er o s f ia I n nd i i n a s n cr A i r p c t h i i o t n e s ct f u o r u e n . din Srinagar, A, S P Vol XyYFTT P- o 378 o , /(18 o 6 r 4)\.
J.A.S. B. September 184S, part 2.
* H H. Cole, Illustrations ofancient buildings in Kashmir, 1869.

KASHMIR.
IN
ARCHITECTURE
MUHAMMADAN

MUHAMMADAN ARCHITECTURE IN KASHMIR. 165
character was introduced into Kashmir from abroad and, secondly, that it came into
;
use in Kashmir with or subsequent to the invasion of Islam. Although Islam was not
widely accepted in Kashmir until the latter part of the 14th century A. Dh, the
chronicle of Kalhana indicates that there was a certain amount of trade intercourse and
pilgrimage between Kashmir and Upper India during the reign of Ananta, .A. D. 1028-
1063.
—
During one of the campaigns of Mahmud of Ghazni Dr. Stein thinks it was the
—
campaign of A. D. 1013 auxiliary forces vere.'sent from Kashmir to help to withstand
,
the invasion of Hindustan." Mahmud won the day, the battle being fought " in one
of the valleys leading towards Kashmir from the neighbourhood of the Jhelum ”5®
but he does not appear to have ever come into Kashmir.
In A. D. 1532 the invasion of Mirza Haidar from Ladak “forms part of the
great movement which carried the last wave of the northern conquerors, the Turks
of Babar, into India. Mirza Haidar took posse.ssion of Kashmir in A. D. 1540,
and the next important historical event was the incorporation of Kashmir into the
Mughal dominions by Akbar in A. D. t.s86.
We
learn from a passage in the Tarlkh-i-Rashidi, which Dr. Stein quotes,® that
a wooden style existed in Kashmir in the days of Zainu-l-'abidin, A.D. 1420-1470,
since reference is made to a palace, all of wmod, which that monarch built. It is
also evident that xAkbar found the Kashmiris more accustomed to building in wood
than stone, since it is recorded in an inscription over the Kathi Darwaza of Hari
Parbat that Akbar sent two hundred masons from India to build the fort. Bernier®
A. D. 1665, says “ some old buildings and a great number of ancient idol temples in
ruins are of stone but wood is preferred on account of its cheapness, and the facility
;
with which it is brought from the mountains by means of so many small rivers ”.
The earliest genuine example of the wooden style in Srinagar, of which the date
is known, is the mosque of Madani, which was converted into a mosque from a Hindu
temple in A. D. 1444, accordingto an inscription. Although the Hindu temple which
occupied the site of the present jami' Masjid wms destroyed shortly after the Muham-
madan conversion, and a mosque erectedin its stead, that mosque and subsequent
reproductions of it have been burned dowm and rebuilt several times. Similar visita-
tions have befallen the mosque of Shah Hamadan and others. It is therefore impossible
to say to what extent the original form and details were copied in the various
-restorations. According to the inscription over the south doorway of the Jami'
Masjid, the mosque was last rebuilt by Aurangzeb. There is reason to suspect that
he copied what w^as there before ' fairly closely, because the building is totally different
from anything that Auranzgeb can have seen in the plains of India and it is quite
;
certain that the present Jami' Masjid is not a first experimentin a new direction.
The lofty pillars in the propylons, the details of the spires and the uniformity of the
whole design, prove that the builders knew what they w^ere about from plinth to finial
1 Rajatarangini of Kalhana transl. M. A. Stein. Vol. I, p. 2S4.
2 Op. cit.
* Op. cii.
^ Op.cit.
^ Op. cit.
® Bernier, Travelsin the Moghulempb'e, p. 398.

3
archaeological report.
66
1
—that they were reproducing forms of which they were masters, and were not
evolving a fresh style as they went along.
Most of the woodwork in the mosque of Shah Ramadan has such a fresh
appearance, the fibres being so little worn, that it is difficult to believe that it has not
been to a great extentrestored within the last fifty years. The richly carved wooden
plinth looks very much older, but how much older I cannot presume to say.
Fig. S-
It is a significant fact that the heavy corbelled cornice at Shah Ramadan’s
mosque should bear a strong resemblance to that of the mosque of Madani and
a similar little mosque at Pampur, both of which have an ancient and genuine appear-
ance and it is therefore fairto assume that the mosque of Shah Ramadan is, in spite
; —
of its restorations, still a truthful example of the style except of course in certain
minor details such as modern turned balusters, mirror work and paint of the vulgar
Sikh style.
There are many other buildings of the same style in or near Srinagar, but the
few which have been mentioned contain all the chief features of the style.
To the travellers Hugel and Lowenthal the wooden style of Kashmir suggested
a Chinese origin. Fergusson^ thought the crowning ornament of Shah Ramadan’s
mosque “ evidently areminiscence ofaBuddhist Tee.’’ In another passage^ Fergusson
remarks upon the similarity between the wooden temples, situated between Kashmir
and Nepal, and the wooden architecture of Scandinavia. No one who has travelled in
’ Fergusson, History ofIndian and Eastern Architecture^p. 608.
* Ibidem p. 30S.

.
MUHAMMADAN' ARCHITECTURE IN KASHMIR. 167
Norway and Kashmir can have failed to notice this similarity. But when the wooden
buildings of the two countries are compared in detail, it is difficult to seize upon any
feature which points conclusively to a common origin or direct connection between
them, and it would be rash to deny that the characteristics which the two countries
share in common such as methods of laying logs horizontally, stepped roofs, and
the employment of birch bark and turf as a roof covering, might well have been
Independently evolved in countries where pine-woodis the staple building .material, and
where much the same considerations have to be paid to climatic conditions. It is
remarkable that the dragon, which plays such an important partin Chinese and Persian
art, andwhich is the prevailingmotif in numerous examples of Norwegian wood-carving
and metal work, should reappear on the spandrel of the entrance to the tomb of
Madanf at Srinagar.
On the other hand, there are undoubtedly marked similarities betw'een the
art of Kashmir and Afghanistan, if the famous old doors of Mahmud’s tomb, which
were erected at Ghazni and are now' kept in Agra Fort, may be taken as a fair
sample of the latter. Judging from the close resemblance in style and detail between
the distinctive patterns on these doors (Pis. LX and LX I) and those of the
mosques of MadanI (?1. LIX) and of Amir at Pampur, it w'ould not be unreasonable
to suspect that the wooden style of Kashmir owes much of its character to influ-
ence from the quarter of Ghazni.
The mosques and tombs of the wooden Kashmiri style are so similar that their
features need not be separately discussed. The tombs are square in plan (fig. 6)
The mosques are either self-contained square buildings like the tombs—such are the
mosques of Madani, Shah Hamadan (w'here the cloisters w'ere added later) and the
Jami' Masjid at Pampur or else they consist of a group of square planned buildings
:
connected together by a colonnade, like the Jami' Masjid in Srinagar (fig. 7.)
Fig- 7-
The walls are constructed sometimes of brick and mortar, sometimes of logs
laid across each other, the spaces between the logs being in some cases filled with
brickwork. Piers are also constructed of timber in the same way. (Figs. 8 to 10.)
In large chambers where the timbers of the roof or ceiling require intermediate
support, wooden columns are used with very good effect. Sometimes these columns
are elaborately ornamented, and there is a tendency in modern restorations, as for
instance at the mosque of Naqshband, to cover the capitals and bases with coarse

archaeological report.
i68
and unsuitable ornament. Timber trusses do not seem to have been “"derstood by
the ancient builders, but they are non- employed in restoration. The o.
supporting the rafters nas by building up piers formed of logs laid honaontally-a
veSy extravagant arrangement (PI. LXX). The typical roof covering consists of turf
l T a h id e b o i n rc b h i b r a c r h k ba is rk l , ai w d h o i n ch boa re r t d a s in a s nd wa t t h e e r s p e ro in of tu p r r n op a e r r e ti s e u s ppo fo r r ted a g o r n eat ra n t u e m rs b . er T o h f e ye r a o r o s f
is usually surmounted by a steeple, the finial of which is moulded, the largest moulding
being sometimes in the shape of an outspread umbrella, usually covered with metal.
A h l a l d t t h h e em ol r d e e s r tor b e u d i . ldin T gs he ap ol p d e e a s r t e u i m t b h r e e r l t l o a h m a o v u e ld l i o n st gs the a i r r e st p e r e o p b l a e b s l a y nd so fi m n e ials of or th t o o se ha o ve n
the Jami' Masjid at Srinagar, erected in the reign of Aurangzeb. (PI. LXIII.)
Fig. 9-
Fi.?. 8.
Fig. 10.
A remarkable feature in the steeples is the sloping gable which projects from the
sides (PI. LXIV). Window openings and balustrades are commonly filled with
elaborate jali screens, the patterns of which are formed by little pieces of wood fitted
together so as to form geometrical patterns.
The angles of the eaves are generally ornamented with wooden pendants
suspended from the corners, carved like little bells and shaped like cactus leaves
(PI. LX VI). The cornices are very heavy and are formed of logs corbelled out from
the wall face ontimbers laid crosswise. The butt-ends of the cross timbers form a dentil
course, and the space between them is filled with elaborate carving. The best
examples are at the mosques of MadanI in Srinagar and of Amir in Pampur (PL
LXXI).

!«UHAMMADAN ARCHITECTURE IN KASHMIR,
hj..

L3:i.

apichitecture
Ar>AlSr
ivr
AIM
M
U
IVI

KASHMIR.
IN
ARCHITECTURE
MUHAMMADAN

MUHAMMADAN ARCHITECTURE IN KASHMIR.
169
The interior of the mosque of Shah Hamadan is entirely covered with panelling
consisting of geometrical patterns (PL LXXII).
The mouldings are as a rule flat, not deeply recessed, and curved and hollow
members seem to be avoided. They generally consist of flat or nearly fiat fillets, each
of which is differently carved.
The carved ornament is generally Saracenic in character. In the older buildings
the patterns are conventional. In some later restorations realistic flowers are carved,
bearing much resemblance to the stone work of Shah Jahan in the Taj at Agra
and elsewhere.
Of the Mughal style as exemplified by buildings in Kashmir it is not necessary
to say much, because the style is practically the same as that with which we are
familiar at Agra, Delhi and Lahore. The only differences which suggest themselves
are that a local grey limestone was generally used in Kashmir for facework while
;
white marble, owing no doubt to the difficulties of transport, is hardly ever seen. The
only instances of white marble and inlay which I have seen near Srinagar are in the
tomb of Tug-i-baba, a building of uncertain date, but decidedly Mu^al. Here white
marble is used in one of the grave stones, the corners of which end in the characteristic
bed posts, which are found in the tomb of Shah Burhan at Chiniot and other places
in the plains of India. Here too there is a beautiful medallion inlaid with cornelian
and other precious stones over the entrance doorway.
The grey limestone which was used in the Pattar Masjid,^ the mosque of Akhun
Mulla Shah, and the pavilions in the formal gardens, is a splendid building material
for mouldings, carving and hard wear, and the Mu ghal workmen evidently found no
difficulty in working upon it all the details which they commonly used in India.
Although the stone buildings of the Mu^al period in Kashmir are few in number,
there are among them some of the finest examples of the style anywhere to be seen.
They have all been sadly neglected, and in- certain cases are still employed for im-
proper purposes, and their conservation is a most desirable object. The Pattar Masjid,
the mosque of Akhun Mulla Shah, and the large haradari in Shalimar Bagh are
unsurpassed in purity of style and perfection of detail by any buildings in Agra or
Delhi, and they are all the more precious in Srinagar because of the scarcity of other
remains of the Mughal days.
The earliest Mu^al building in Srinagar is the outer wall round the fort, Hari
Parbat, which was built by Akbar. One gateway still remains in good condition, but
the W'all has to a great extent crumbled away. It is probable that Akbar had some
sort of fortress erected on the hill, but there is practically nothing of the original
work left.
To Jahangir’s reign we owe the Pattar Masjid, a large mosque of the usual
shape. It has lost its domes, and the courtyard is now enclosed by store-houses, but
what remains of the prayer chamber is well worthy of preservation.
The mosque of Akhun Mulla Shah is a building of slightly later date, in much
the same condition. Its plan is singular, the design of the prayer chamber being
^ The Pattar Masjid is used as a grain store, and the mosqueof Akhun Mulla Shah is filled with gun-
powder. The tomb of Zainu-h^abidin’s motherj a pre-Mughal buildingpossessing archccological value,lis also
-usedas agrain store.

;
ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
170
repeated on the east side of the courtyard, and forming the gateway. On the north and
south sides of the courtyard are arcades, treated in the same way as the wings
of the praver chamber. Usually the arcades round the quadrangle in front of a
mosqueare treated quite differently from any part of the prayer chamber. The some-
what cramped proportions of the courtyard in this case may be due to the slope of
the hill on which it stands, and the difficulty which would have been experienced in
making the prayer chamber wider.
Another important branch of architecture in which the Mugljals excelled, and in
which they have left their mark upon Srinagar, is formal gardening. Though the
Dhal Lake was, in the days of Jahangir and Shah Jahan, fringed with a great number
of extensive gardens, only three of them retain any vestiges of their former splendour.
These are Shalimar Bagh, Ni^at Bagh, and Chasraas Shahi. The garden of Jahangir
at Aitchibal and the octagonal enclosure which he built round the spring at Vernag
are in much the same condition. These gardens conform strictly to the style of
Ba^
Shalimar at Lahore and Delhi, and other gardens of the same period in India
but nowhere is there to be found a group comprising somany examples as at Srinagar.
W. H. Nicholls,

THE TEMPLE OF BRAHMA
AT KHED-
BRAHMA.
^HE
worship of Brahma is very rare, and temples dedicated to him arefew, indeed,
and far between and, for this reason alone, his shrines are interesting objects
;
when met
w'ith.
It is not necessary to explain here at length who Brahma is, or was, for it is
presumed that most readers are familiar enough withthe triple-headed deity. But for
the uninitiated I may say that Brahma is not to be
confused with Brahma, the supreme self-existent im-
personal spirit, of which the deities Brahma, Vishnu
and Siva are manifestations, and from which all
created things are supposed to emanate. In this
triad of principal gods Brahma embodies the idea of
creation, Vishnu preservation, and Siva destruction or
dissolution. Half human and half divine, they are
credited with the fearsand passions of ordinary beings,
their actions and achievements partaking of the
miraculous nature of their divinity. According to
Manu, Brahma first created thewaters, and deposited
within them a seed which became a golden egg, from
which sprung Brahma. lie is also said to have
sprung from a lotus that issued from the navel of
Vishiju, w'hich has always formed a favourite subject
for the sculptor. Narayana is represented reclining
at full length upon the folds of the serpent Sesha, with his head supported upon his
right hand, as may be seen in the photograph in Fig. 2, p. 1 14 of A, S. R. for 1905-6,
The most characteristic feature of the images of Brahma is his four-faced head.
It is true that in most images only three are shown, but these are they which are in
relief upon wmlls and other surfaces where the fourth face at the back, cannot be
shown. The reason for his many faces, or, more correctly, many heads, is variously

archeological report.
172
given. One is that they represent the four vedas, which are supposed to have
originated with him. But in the Puranas he is even
said to have had five heads. The Matsya Purana accounts
for his five heads in this wise ; “ Brahma next formed, from
his own immaculate substance, a female who is celebrated
under the names of Satarupa Savltri, ijarasvati, Gayatn and
Brahmani. Beholding his daughter, born from his body,
Brahma became wounded with the arrows of love, and
exclaimed, ' How surpassingly lovely she is ! ’ Satarupa
turned to the right side from his gaze but as Brahma
;
wished to look after her, a second head issued from his
body. As she passed to the left, and behind him, to avoid
his amorous glances, two other heads successivelyappeared.
Atlength she sprang into the sky and as Brahma was
;
anxious to gaze after her there, a fifth head was immediately
formed ”, Another account tells us he was born within
the golden egg with five heads. It was not long however Fig. 2.
before he lost one. He and Vishnu having entered into a hot dispute as to who^
was supreme, a third rival, Siva, appeared upon the scene and asserted his pre-
eminence over them both. This moved Brahma to anger
and angry words, and, having abused Siva to his face, the
—
latter caused one of his five heads—the offending one to
be struck off.
One reason that is given for Brahma not being now
w'orshipped is the curse pronounced upon him at the time of
this contentionbetween him and Vishnu as to w'hich was
the greater. Siva, in all his glory, suddenly appeared before
their dazzled eyes w'hen the altercation was at its height,,
and claimed supremacy over both of them. To prove it he
caused his linga to appear, and then challenged the two
gods to find either the top or bottom of it. Vishnu, as a
boar, burrowed down into the lower regions in search of its
root, while Brahma took unto himself wdngs and searched
the heavens. Neither were successful, yet Brahma con-
cocted a lie saying he had reached the top, and, being
Fig- 3- found out, was cursed “ since thou hast childishly and with
:
weak understanding asserted a falsehood, let no one henceforth perform worship to
thee ^ “ The cessation, therefore, of Brahma’s worship appears to have taken
place during the interval that may have elapsed between the composition, or extraction
from the Vedas, of the Upanishads and the compilation of the Puranas for in these
;
last w'orks no mention occurs of either rites or ceremonies or festivals, or temples® or
holy places being dedicated to Brahma, nor in them is there recorded a single legend
to attest and m.agnify his divine power.®
^ Skanda Purdna,
- Exceptat Pushkara, now Pokur near Ajmer,
^ Kennedys Hindu Mythology, p. 281.

THE TEMPLE OF BRAHMA AT KHED-BRAHMA.
I7J
In sculpture Brahma is portrayed in various ways,
upon temple walls, represents him as a man with three
faces, the fourth, as said before, being engaged with
the wall and therefore not seen. Each face is bearded
and moustached, and the hair is generally done up In
rolls high upon the head. The only other deity who
wears a beard is Yama, the Pluto of the Hindu
Pantheonp
Brahma has four arms, two of which, one on
either side, are held In an upright position from the
elbows, while the other two rest upon the knees when
sitting, or straight down by his side wTen standing. In
the right upper hand he holds the sacrificial ladle, in
the left upper a book, probably one of the Vedas in
;
his right lower he passes the mala, or beaded rosary,
through his fingers, and holds the water pot In the
corresponding hand on the left side. He is furnished
with the sacred thread, which passes over his left
shoulder. Beneath him, or down to one side, will
usually be found tfe sacred goose, his vdhana or
vehicle. He is thus seen in the Image standing near
the village at Supara near Bombay (fig. 4). Sometimes
but one of the three faces is bearded, as seen in fig. 3
;
while, again, in most of the earlier images before the
nth or 12th centuries he is found with no beard at
all, as may be seen in the sculpture from Aihoje
in the Bijapur district (fig. 2). In this Image he holds the water pot in his left
upper hand, while allowing his left lower to fall upon his thigh, palm outward and
empty.
One of the most commonjy occurring positions in which we find Brahma Is above
shrine doorways, where, with Siva and Vishnu, he forms a triad of the principal gods.
Just above the lowest band of the door lintel are usually three or more little niches in
a row. The central one is occupied by the god to whom the shrine is dedicated, the
other two, one on either side, are filled with the reniaining two, Brahma usually being
placed on the right of the central figure. He is sometimes, but not often, found
among the deities in the principal belt of figure sculpture running round the walls of a
temple. When the latter has an inner shrine, with a pradakshind or circumambulatory
passage passing round it, between It and the outer walls, the inner walls often have a
large niche in each of its three sides, south, west and north, when thetemple faces east,
in each of which Is placed one figure of the triad. As a separate image for special
A
worship, he is not often met with. very interesting and old one in brass or some-
mixed metal, measuring 3 feet 2 inches high, was, three years ago, dug up in a field
In the Thar and Parkar district of Sind. The head has four faces without beards, but
Sanij one ofthe Nava-graha, ispersonified as aman with abeard.

ARCH.’EOLOGICAL report.
174
onlv two arms, which fact indicates considerable age. The hands are now empty, but,
from their position and the way the fingers are held, I would think that the right held
a book and the left a mala or possibly a water pot. At the Kailasa excavation at
Elura are life-sized representations of Brahma, Siva and Vishnu, standing side by side
with their vahnnas, in which Brahma is shown with three beardless facesd Amongst
the cave scupltures there is a favourite subject, the marriage ofSiva and Parvati, where
Brahma appears as the officiating priest, kneeling beside the ceremonial fire.^ There
is a panel of the same subject, from a very old temple at Ratanpur in the Central
Provinces. Another somewhat rarer sculpture, in which Brahma is portrayed, is that
representing the contention of the three gods, as described above, where Brahma is
represented in mid-air near the top of the lihga. Vishnu as a boar burrows below.
A good illustration of this occurs upon the old temple of Virupaksha at Pattadakal
in the Bijapur district. He occurs sometimes upon Jaina temples. On an old
temple at Sevadi, in the Jodhpur State, he is found with but twm hands and bearded.
In his hands are the viala and water pot.
Scale of 1 I 0 ; la L-j L-j i_j fb to 30 40Feet.;
Fig;-S'~PIati ofTemple ofBrahma at Khed-Brahma.
And this brings me to the subject of this article, the old temple of Brahma at
Khed-Brahma in the Idar State in Mahi Kantha.^ It usedto be thought that the only
temple dedicated to the worship of this deity in India was that at Pushkar in Rajpu-
tana, but this is not so. There is nothing of any age to be seen about the Pushkar
^ Elura Cave Temples (Burgess), Plate XXXI.
^ Elura Cave Temples (Burgess), Plate XXXVI.
3 Thistemple was firstbrought to my notice by the Reverend J. Stevenson of the Irish Presbyterian .Mission

THE TEMPLE OF BRAHMA AT KHED-BRAHMA.
175
temple, image and temple being comparatively modern. The late General Sir Alex-
ander Cunningham records the discovery of a richly decorated temple dedicated to
Brahma at Dudahi,^ over the centre of the shrine doorway of rvhich is an image of the
three-headed god. In the temple is a pilgrim’s record of about the loth or uth
century recording his adoration paid to " Chaturmukha ” and his wife Savitrl, Mr.
E). R. Bhandarkar found another Brahma temple at Vasantgaclh in Rajputana,* in
which the three-headed image still stands in the shrine. He has here but two hands.
Another temple, which the writer believes to have been a shrine of Brahma, before
being taken possession of by the Lihgayats, is at Unkal near HubH in the Dharwar
district. In the Government list of temples for this same district, to which annual
grants are given, are no less than eight temples of “Sri Brahmadeva.”
Khed-Brahma is situated sixteen miles north of Idar, in Mahi Kantha, being con-
nected with it by a very indifferent road. It is placed at the confluence of three
streams—The Bhima-Sarhkari, the
Kau§ambi and the Hiranya (Arana)
Gahga or Harana Gahga, which flow
into the Sabarmati. The temple
stands in the middle of the village and
faces east. It is a re-erection of
the old one, the present sabhamandapa
and roof being modern. The sculp-
tured walls of the shrine are old, and do
not appear to have been much; dis-
turbed. The work on them partakes-
of the twelfth century style (hg. 6).
The old walls of the shrine seem to
have been, in part, rebuilt when the
general restoration was made, but the
original masonry has been retained,
save here and there, where a new slab
has been inserted to take the place of
an old one decayed or broken.
One of the first things that
strikes one, on inspecting these old
shrine walls, are the number of female
images upon them. Apart from the
three principal niches on the north,
south and west, which each contain an image of Brahma, all the panels, save three,
hold goddesses and dancing girls. On temples dedicated to Siva or Vishnu this would,
if found, be most remarkable. On temples of Devi (Parvati) it is common
enough, but then such temples face the north and not the east. Even the usual
hund 1 re Co d lo y n e e a l rs T s o in d c , e h i e n w h r i o s te. Raja T s h t e h r a e n, are sa t y h s er th u i i s ns t o e f mp s l o e me wa r s em “ ar e k r a e b ct l e e d a t b em o p u l t es fou o r f y B e r a a rs hm a a go in Cam n b o o w di n a e , ar w l h y ere a -
thewhole spire of each is formedinto a colossal four-faced headof the deity.
- Arch. Surveyof India Report, Vol. X, p. 93.
® Prog. Reportof the .Arch. Surveyof India, W. C,, 1905-06, p. S®'

arcH.T,0LOGICAL REPORT.
l-jS
ashfadil-palas, or regents of the points of the compass, at the corners, appear in
their female forms. On the west wall, at the back of the shrine, we find the big
central niche occupied by an image of Brahma. On his right, at the north-west angle
of the temple, is \'arunf, with a chain around her shoulders and the 7nakara below.
Between her and Brahma are a dancing girl, a deDi with chakra in each upper hand
and a nude female figure. At the south-west corner is a mutilated figure which may
be Parvati or Durga, with a shield and lion or tiger below her. Between her and
Brahma are female dancing figures, a female chnw'i-\i&3.xQx and a nude Bhairava.
Upon the north wall we again have Brahma occupying the central niche, while among
the other figures are Jndra and several female figures in various attitudes. Brahma is
placed in the great central niche upon the south face, and uponthe same wall are some
six or seven female figures with the bearded Yama at the south-east corner. Brahma,
on the west face, has the usual symbols in his hands, viz., the sacrificial ladle, the
book, viala or rosary, and water pot, but he has Nandi below him On the north face
he has the same symbol and a horse belov/ him, while on the south side there is a
small human figure which might be Garuda. These are the vahanas of Siva, Sorya,
and Vishnu, respectively. The photographs on Plate LXXI 11 show the style of the
shrine walls.
I was, of course, not able to enter the temple, much less the shrine, and had to
content myself with what I could see from the mandapa door, and from what my clerk
and draftsman could tell me of the interior of the temple. I had, however, a good
view of the image, as will be seen from the photograph on Plate LXXIII which
was taken from the doorw’ay. The present image is quite a modern one, being made
of plaster, finished off with a wTite polished surface resembling marble. It is four-
armed and three-faced, has the usual symbols, and a goose stands on either side
below. The image is clothed in a pink cotton dress.
It will be seen that the shrine is not square but oblong, longer in width from
north to south than in depth, and this I consider was the original plan unaltered in the
restoration. On examining the outside of the walls of the shrine it will be seen that
the mouldings and panels are quite regular and show no indication of the south and
north walls having been contracted in their length to suit the shorter sides of the
shrine within. All the figure panelling and the basement offsets and recesses are
planned to suit the oblong shrine, and the principal projecting niches, containing the
Images of Brahma {cf. fig. 7), occupy the centre of each side, that is, they are onthe
twm axes of the shrine within. The shrine, therefore, could hardly have been a §aiva
shrine to contain a linga, as those are alwmys square. The plan w^ould lend itself to an
image of Vishnu and his avataras in line, had it been longer than it is. The width of
the shrine of the old Vaishnava temple at Kadvar in Kathia-w'ad, which seems to have
contained all the avataras, is two and a half times the depth, whereas this is hardly
one and a half But in this case we should expect to find Vaishnava images and
avataras on the exterior, but I find none. In the Lahke.§vara side chapel at Kailasa
at Eiura we have Brahma, §iva and Vishnu, life-sized images, sculptured in a row,
side by side.^ Similarly here, it is quite possible, there were originally images of
the same three deities, Brahma occupying the centre. The female images upon the
^ Elura Cave Temples (.Burgess), Plate XXX.

oo:E2*a^:H:3Ee,
3sro:E^’37:Ea:-''w:E]sar
zbir^^h^ve-a-,
:^
0
i*DE33VEapXiE!
sme/ijsriEi.
:^-
0
*w-a-XjXj
iiT03Ee,a?i3;
OIF*
'X’EaycipxjE!

THE TEMPL'E OF BRAHMA AT KHED-BRAHMA.
17.7
exterior might suggest a temple to a devi originall}', but all temples to dems that
— —
I can remember some ten all face the north. The three images of Brahma,
one in each of the three principal
niches, should settle the question
without further doubt, as to W'hat deity
the temple was originally dedicated
to, but there is the possibility that
the present images are not the original
ones. Upon a very close examination
of all three I have satisfied myself
that the workmanship and setting of
these images differ in no respect from
the other figure sculpture upon the
wmlls. Had the temple been convert-
ed to the w'orship of Brahma when
restored, one could not w'ell under-
stand the reasonwhy a common plaster
- image should have been made for the
shrine when excellent stone ones were
provided for the three outside niches.
Moreover there is a community of
Brahmanas here who have been here
from generation to generation, and who
devote themselves exclusively to the
Fig. 7. worship of Brahma.
Little need be said about the interior of the temple, or of the mandapa and
tower, w'hich are modern. The four pillars, within the hall, are perhaps original ones
re-erected. They are octagonal and are decorated wnth the pendant chain and bell,
above which is a band of Ktrtimukha faces. The doorway to the shrine may or may
not be original it is too much caked with successive coats of whitewash to determine
;
the point. On either side little groups of sculptures occupy panels, one above the
other. Inside of these appears to be a floral border. On the dedicatory block, above
the door, is Ganeia. This does not, of course, imply that the shrine was built for
^aiva worship any more than Gaja-Lakshmi over doors of temples in the south of
m
Maharashtra indicated Vaishnava worship. Both were used as favourite deities the
north and south respectively, even the Jains having freely used Gaia-Lakshmi upon
outer doors of their temples. I am doubtful, though, whether GaneSa would have
surmounted a Vaishnava temple door.
The temple worship is carried out by Khedavala Brahmanas (that is resident
Brahmanas of Khed-Brahma), who are Audicha Brahmanas and followers of the Sukla
Yajurveda. Worship is performed twice a day, in the morning before ten o’clock,
andinthe evening at aboutseven. It is conducted without reciting the Vsdic mantras,
the Puranic mantras only being used. The things used in daily worship are water,
sandal, rice and sugar. The image is bathed on both occasions. On the fifteenth
of ^ravana Buddha the annual maha worship is performed, when, in addition to the
2 A

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
178
things used in daily u'orship, other things are added, ’S12., the ablution with milk,
curds, ghi, honey, and sugar, and then the naivedya consists of cooked food. Maha,
ptijds are also performed on Divdli days, and on the fifteenth of the bright half of
Kartika. Upon the 9th day of Alvina, during the Nanardtra, a homa is performed.
As each offering is thrown into the fire a verse from the Sapta Siti is first recited.
There is no special Ncroardtra ceremony for Brahma as there is in the case of Devi
in Asvina, Rama in Chaitra, Khandoba in M argasirsha, and Surya in Magha,
If a fair be held on the fifteenth of the bright half of Magha, an annual alloAvance
of R28 is granted to the temple by the Durbar of Idar. To the temple was formerly
attached a piece of land, the rent of which was R25, but the Durbar has recently
resumed the land and promised the money equivalent.
Henry Cousens.

lakulTsa.
Fig. I.
wo
T years ago, I contributed, to the J-otir. Bo. Br. R. As. Soo., Vol. LXI, p. 151
and ff., a paper entitled “ An Eklingji stone inscription and the origin and history
of the Lakullsa sect”. Since then it seems to have attracted some attention amongst
European scholars and antiquarians. It was briefly but favourably criticised first by
M. A. Barth in Ccmptus rendus des seances de /’ Academie des Inscriptions et Belles^
Lettres, 1906, and subsequently by Dr. Fleet, who wrote in greater detail, and
approved of most of my conclusions expressed therein, in a paper published in the
Jour. R. As. Soc., 1907, p. 419 ff. Being encouraged by the favourable remarks of
these veteran scholars, I went on making further researches in this matter, and am,
glad to say that my efforts have not been futile. In the course of my travelling:
2 A2

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
i8o
in Rajputana as Assistant Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, 1 found some
more temples connected in some way or another with Lakulisa. It was only in
January last that I could seize the opportunity of visiting Karvan, with which has
heen identified Kayavarohana, where the incarnation of Siva as Lakullsa is sup-
posed to have taken place. This has enabled me to secure the local Muhdtmya
and make a copy of it, and also to personally inspect the objects of Lakulr^a w’orship
that have still survived there. Again, in the commentary on the Shad-darsana-
samncJichaya^ I came across a passage which, though In some respects fantastic
and incredible, is descriptive of the manners and customs of the Pa§upatas, and is
•consequently of some importance in this respect. What I propose to do here is to
supplement my previous paper by piecing together the various items of Information
I have lighted upon since I wmote it, and, as this paper will be accompanied by illustra-
tions, It wfill also add greater interest to the subject. I shall first give a short
summary of the Karvan mdhdtmya and describe the objects of Lakuli^a W'Orship still
to be met with there then enter into the iconographic details, and describe in full
;
the characteristics of the images of Lakullsa that have so far been found, and
finally close this paper with the extract from the Shad-darsana-sa^jmchchaya just
referred to.
Now^, as regards the Karvan mdhdtmya^ a brief summary of it has already
been published in Volume VII of the Bombay Gazetteer, w^hich is devoted to the
Baroda State. It ’was with the greatest difficulty and tact that I was able to secure
this mdhdUnya. There is but one copy of it now left in the village. Formerly
there w^ere two, but one of these wms carried aw’-ay, as 1 was told, by a Subha of
the State many years ago, much against the wishes and entreaties of the people.
So the people w^ere loath to show me the one that is now'’ left, fearing that this
also might share the fate of its companion. The Brahmanas of the place first flatly
denied that they had any copy of the mdhdtmya, but I w^as fortunate enough, after
a brief stay there, to inspire them with confidence, and, the owner of It, wffio seems
to be the head ofthe Brahmana community there, came one night stealthily to my
place and show^ed me the mdhdtmya. This work, however, does not seem to be
an old production, and, as it is, is full of lacunae, solecisms, inaccuracies, and even
inconsistencies. Nevertheless, an abstract of Its contents wfill, I believe, not be
uninteresting, as it wfill, in many points, confirm the views expressedin my first paper.
On the first leaf, the w^ork calls itself Srl-Lakutapdne{nz)sa-mdhdtmyay It begins
with obeisance first to Ganesa and next to Lakulapanl. The ?ndhdtmya consists of
four chapters, i he first ends with iti. STl-Vdyupurdne Sivaf-rasuti'’Sa7'gali [Here
(ends) the canto (describing) the birth of Siva in SrI-Vayupurana]. The second
chapter ends Srl-Sivaftirdne Lakullsa’mdhdtmye samtosha-karanah? ndm-ddhydyah
:
[Here (closes)^the (second) chaptercalled ‘^Generation of satisfaction’’ of Lakullsa md-
hdtmya in Sri-Siva-purana]. The third ends thus iti ^rl^Siva-ptirdnc LakulJsa-mdhdt-
:
myam ndma tritiyo^dhydyoh [Here (closes) the third chapter namedthe “Greatness of
LakuhSa “ in 6ri-Sivapurana]. The last or fourth ends with iti pizrane
Pdr'vatl-Maheha-samvade tirthdnukramanikdydm ^rl-^ulapdni-jafzma-patia-bandh
’ddi-mMdtmyam sampurnam. | Here closes the “ Greatness of the tying of silk
cloth, of the birth of gulapani and so forth” amongst the Catalogue of the

LAKULlSA.
l8l
:sacred places (specified) in the dialogue of Parvati and Mahesa in §ri-Siva-
Purana].
I now proceed to give a summary of the first chapter, which, as will be seen
from the ending words quoted above, is devoted to the birth of Siva, i.e., obviously
of Lakuli§a. The opening verse invokes the blessings of Lakutapani, who is said to
be Mahesa (Siva) incarnated in Kaliyuga. Then wm are informed that Parvati once
asked Mahadeva, when alone, to explain to her in detail the peculiar merits of
F atta-handha. Thereupon Siva gave the following account of his incarnation, which
took place between the Dvapara and Kali There was a sage named Atri,
and in his lineage was born Vi^varupa. His wife was Sudarsana. In order to favour
Virabhadra-gana, Siva incarnated himself in Ulkapurad He was conceived in her
womb in the month of Bhadrapada. In course of time as the month of Chaitra
arrived, she gave birth to a child after midnight on the 14th of the bright half, and
the mother saw, in the lying-in chamber, as soon as born, that her child was of
tawmy eyes and tawny hair, and like heated gold in complexion. The father
invited learned and pious Brahmanas, performed the rite of Jatakarma, and propitia-
ted them with handsome gifts. On hearing of a solar eclipse at the end of Sravana
following, he resolved to go on pilgrimage to Kurukshetra, He exhorted his wife
to perform agnihotra before sunrise, and offer homa after sunset and never to
forget the duties of hospitality to guests and ascetics. Lastly, he conjured her and
his pupils and dependents to take care of the child. And thereupon he left for
Kurukshetra.
The second chapter is a short one. It describes how faithfully the Brahmana-
woraan performed the agnihotra directed by her husband. One night she forgot
to discharge her duty, but the child secretly performed it. This she suspected, and
she kept herself awake the following night to actually witness the child going through
the ceremonial. Her surmise proved correct, and when the husband returned, the
Jact was duly communicated to him. Both the parents sat up to watchthe child.
The third chapter then begins by saying that, having beheld their son occupied
in the ceremonial, they asked him who he was. As soon as their words had been
nttered, he fell senseless on the ground, and Sudarsana was struck with dismay, and
also fell on the ground Afterwards having placed the dead child on her lap, she
threw' him in a pool of w'ater called Devakhata (also called Devahrada), from where
he was taken by the tortoises to where the maha-lihga Jale^vara lay. On making
offerings to the deceased son, the Brahmana fell into a swoon. In the meanw'hile,
through the exercise of miraculous powers, the boy came out of the water, and was
seen playing by the Brahmanas, who were wonder-struck. The sages, on knowing
this deed of the child, were also filled with wonder, and asked him who he was. He
replied : “I am the indescribable vital air abiding in a human body formed of the five
elements and possessed of the five senses.” The JRishis fell to praising him by de-
scribing his various attributes. Thus ends the third chapter, and the fourth com-
mences by telling us that the boy afterwards began to run away from them. He
was, however, followedby them, who were praising him all the while. In a moment
^ Ulkapura is identifiedbythe local Brahmanaswith Avakheh inthesamedistrict, but in the Senior sub-
division.

ARCH/EOr,OGICAL REPORT.
82
i
the child vanished, and stood playing on the bank of the river Aurva, which is Saras-
vatl herself, come down to oblige Bhrigukshetra. On its west is Kayavaro-hana.
His parents and all the Brahmanas then began to cry aloud, and search after him
in theforests that night. Being moved by their heart-rending lamentations, he returned
with the speed of the wind, and revealed himself as Mahe§vara. Thereupon they
trembled, but continued their bewailings for the boy. The child said “ Neither the
:
sages nor my parents dare touch me. There is some important work to be done.
Listen, O JRishis give up thy grief, O thou (woman) with broad eyes, for mother have
;
I none. Listen 0 JRishis, to the ancient history. I am Mahesvara in person, and have
incarnated myself in Ulkagrama for conferring boons upon JRishis, enlightening the
Brahmanas, and re-establishing religion.” The JRishis then praised him, and asked
him to narrate the greatness of Ulkagrama. Thereupon he replied that Ulkagrama had
been a sacred Saiva place for the last seven Manvantaras. Various merits are then
describedby him, that accrue tothedevotees who die after fastingthere who feast the
;
Brahmanas, who bathe in Devakhata, and offer oblations, and so forth. Although
all this explanation of the boy’s birth and incarnation was given, yet his parents with
eyes full of tears followed him, inducing him to return to^them. Thereupon he stupe-
fied them for amoment bythe mayd of Vishnu, and then repaired to Kayavi(va)rohana,
where were l§ana, who had incarnated himself to favour Bhrigu, and Malaksha with
his host ofgoddesses. After awhile he again saw at his back his father and mother.
He knitted his brows, andhis eyes flashed with anger. The Brahmana became sense-
less, The boy was moved with pity, and consoled him. “Let us all dwell together
here, O Brahmana ”, said he. So saying, with his staff he dragged the Ganges
there, and, as, while she was being dragged, long streaks were made, the place has
been known as Dirghikah He then approached the god Vriddhadeva,^ and requested
the latter to grant him a place of refuge. It was then the end of the Dvaparayiiga.
The god, however, replied that the place, where he himself lived, had been over-
crowded. The request was again repeated, and the god then directed him to go to-
Brahme§vara. Having heard the words of the god Vriddha, LakulL^a went to
Brahme^vara, and there merged himself into him. There divine Mahesvara remained
in bodily form, and as he descended to the earth in his very body the place was
called Kayarohana. And so he was merged into the linga called Brahma, with asi-
dandaJ in his left, and htjapiiraka or citron in his right, hand. Mahadeva said “ Thus
:
in Karohana I incarnated myself for sanctifying Bhrigukshetra.’* From the mind of
Brahman sprang Atri, from Atri Atreya, from the latter Agnigarma, from Agnigarma
Soma§arma, from the latter Visvarupa, and from Visvarupa I myself assuminga boy’s
form. In the first Yuga Igana was famous, in the second Mahabala, in the
third Viiddha, and in the fourth I myself, coming down in bodily form for the
purification of Bhrigukshetra. Inthe Krita yuga it was celebrated as Ichchhapurl,
^This isunquestionablythe spacious tank ontheoutskirts ofthevillageof Karvan. See illustration (fig. i}..
- There is still atemple at Karvan dedicatedto Vriddhesvara.
^ The mWtiatmya,aswill beseenfrom thesummarygiven above, speaksnot simply ofdan^abut of asi-dan^a
(staff-like sword) as held by Lakulrsa, but I have notyetfoundany image in which a swordis borne byhim.
Areweto dissolve the compound asi-dandaso as tosignify asword-llke staff?”
^Inthe manuscriptofthe mahatmya,it is stated in a footnotethat Bhrigukshetra isthattract of countries-
which is yojanas round about Bhrigu (Broach).

LAKULlSA.
183
in Treta Mayapuri, in Dvapara Meghavati, and in Kali Kayavarohana". Then are enu-
merated the various merits obtained by the performance of various rites connected
with Lakulifia. The
foremost of these
is pattabandhci
the performanca
of which liberates
a man from future
births. If MaheS-
vara is dressed,
says the Mahat-
mya, with a cloth
of palta or silk,
for as many
thousand yugas as
are the threads of
the cloth is the
man honoured in
Siva-loka.
This is in short the account of the incarnation of Siva contained in the Karvan
mahatmya. This confirms, in the first place, the sense first suggested by Dr. Buhler
for the name Lakullla. In our mahatmya occur the words LakuliSa and Lakuta-
panl§a, both denoting one and the same individual. Lakuln^a must, therefore, be taken
synonymous with Lakutapamsa, and must be interpreted to mean “the god who
bears a lakula or lakuta in his hand In the jEklihgji inscription also occurs the ex-
pression lakid-ofalakshita-karah used in connection with this god, signifying “ one
whose hand is characterised by a lakula^ There is thus a perfect agreement on this
point between the Eklihgjl inscription and the 'K^rv^'n.mdhat?nya, and the explanation
of the name first proposed by Professor Buhler must, therefore, be upheld as correct.
Secondly, the old name of Karvan, as given in the Mahatmya, is Karohana or Kaya-
vi(va)rohana. The Cintra prasasti gives the first name, and the second name is
mentioned in the Eklihgjl inscription. Kayavarohana appears to have been the ori-
ginal name, which was first corrupted into Karohana, and was still further corrupted
into the modern Karvan. The name Kayavarohana literally means “ (the place of)
the descent in bodily form”, and we are distinctly told in the Mahatmya, as we
have seen, that the place was so called because Siva 4sscended there in bodily
form. The Vdyupurdna, however, gives the name Kayarohana, w'hich, as pointed
out by Dr. Fleet, has not the same sense^. “It, on the contrary, means (the place of)
the ascent in bodily form”. This name is intelligible only on the supposition that it
refers to the merging of LakuliSa into the lihga Brahme^vara, also referred to in
the mdhdtm'va. Anyhow it can hardly be doubted that Kayarohana and Kayavarohana
both refer to one and the same place. If any proof were needed that the mahatmya
in question relates to Karvan, it is furnished first by the fact that there is still at this
' Jour, R. As.Soc., 1907. p.22,n.I.

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
184
Village a temple dedicated to Nakle.^var (Lakuli§vara), and that the image in the sanc-
tum is pointed out as the conjoint figure of Brahme§vara and LakuMa, confirming
the statement ofthemahatmya that Lakuli§a merged himself into BrahmeSvara. Again,
we have at Karvan a temple to VriddheSvara, whom Lakuli§a first besought for a
place of refuge. Other deities, specified in the mahatmya but not mentioned in the
summary, as they had no direct bearing upon the origin and worship of LakuliSa,
are still shown by the people there. No reasonable doubt need, therefore, be
entertained as to the mahatmya really being connected with Karvan.
I shall now enumerate the various places where I have found new sculptures of
Lakull^a since I wrote my last
paper. The places mentioned
therein, so far as Rajputana
was concerned, were from the
Jhalawar, Kotah, and Udaipur
States. But worship of Laku-
li§a was not confined to the
easternparts of Rajputana only.
In the Western States of
Rajputana also, such as Sirohi
and Marwar, instances are-
not wanting of temples contain-
ing image of Lakuliia. At
Kayadra,’ at the foot of Mount
Abu, there is a temple dedicat-
ed to Ka.§i-Vi§ve§vara. Above
the door of the ante-chamber
to its shrine figures LakuliSa.
At Achale.^vara on Mount
Abu, about six miles from
-Dilvada, Lakull§a can be easily-
recognised on the gateway of
the walled enclosure of the
temple. The same god is
sculptured in the principal
niche, on the southern face,
on the outside walls of the
temple close by. These places
are in the Sirohi territory and, in Marwar, Chohtan, Nana and Belar are the only places,
where images of Lakuli§a have been so far discovered. Chohtan is in Mallani about
twenty-eight miles from Badmer, the principal town of the province. About half-way
,
up the hill of Chohtan are three Saiva temples. One of them is dedicated to.
L.akulisa, on the shrine door of which that divinity is sculptured. On the front of the
lintel, resting on the porch pillars, is engraved an inscription, which begins with a
bow to Lakult§a, specifies the date samDat /jdy varshe fosha-kudi 6 guru-dind, and.

lakulHa.
185
speaks of the temple as being renovated for spiritual merit by Sri-DharmaraSi,
cheld {i.e., pupil considered as son) of SrI-Uttamaragi. Nana and Belar are both inthe
Ball district of the Godvad province. At the former place, on the outskirts of the
village, near the temple of Nilakantha-Mahadeva, are the ruins of three shrines, two
of which contain images of Lakullla in niches facing the south. Near one of these
shrines was an inscriptionstone, which is now stuck up in the ground near the hall
door of the temple of Nilakantha-Mahadeva. The inscription is dated samvat isga
mdgha vadi /j some, when Somasimha, a Paramara king, was mahdrdjddhiydj a, his
son, Kanhada-deva, was yuvardjd or heir-apparent, and one Laksha, a favourite
of the latter, was the jahagirddr of Nanaka (Nana), The object of it is to record
some grant made by Kanhada-deva to the god Lakula(Ii)deva. Three miles to the
north'westof Nana is Belar, outside of which village is a Saiva temple overlooking a
spacious tank, with only three of its attendant shrines now surviving. The outside
wa'ls, both of this temple and the subsidiary shrines, have all images of Lakull§a in
the principal niches on the south All these instances have been adduced so far as
Rajputana is concerned/ but other instances are not wanting. Thus at Ujjain, to
which I paid a private visit last year, I noticed two figures of Lakulf^a on the lintels
of the doors of two inner chambers of what is known there as Bhartri-hari’s gumphd.
Mr. Cousens, Superintendent, Archeological Survey, Western Circle, tells me that he
has found Bvo images of LakuliSa on monoliths found at Lalpeth near Chanda, Central
Provinces. Dr. Bloch, Superintendent,.
Archeological Survey, Eastern Circle,
also informs me that at Bhubane^varin
Orissa, LakulL^a is represented on the
porch of the temple of Para§urame§vara.
This shows that the worship of this divi-
nity was not restricted to Rajputana only,
but had spread as far south as iVIysore, as
pointed out in my last paper, and also,
as we see now, as far east as Orissa.
I have stated in my previous paper
that LakullSa is sculptured not oiily in the
principal niches on the outside w-alls of
a temple, but also on the lintels of shrines,
door-frames and in the interiors of the
sancta. This remark may be seen
thoroughly borne out by the illustrations,
which accompany this article. Illustra-
tion No. 2 represents the exterior wall,
facing the south, of the central temple
at Belar. Here Lakuli^a occupies the
4 principal niche, flanked, on his proper
-
right and left, by Yama and Agni, guardians of the southern and south-eastern
'All these instances Prog. Rep. Archceol. Stirv. Ind. West. Circ. for the year ending
31st March 1507, pp. 2+, 28, and43,andHid., 1908, pp. 49and50.
2 e

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
86
1
directions. Illustration No. 3 is of the shrine door of a dilapidated temple at Atru in
the Kotah State. Therein LakuIiSa figures above the door in the centre, with
Brahma and Vishnu on his right and left respectively. In figs. 4 and 5 we have two
lingas with the images of Lakuli^a sculptured in front, the first of which is in the
temple of Nakle§var, and the second, of Rajraje^var, both at Karvan. As Siva is never
worshipped except in the form of the linga, the figure of Lakuli^a by itself could not
be an object of worship, and had, therefore, to be conjoined to that of a lifiga.
Let us now see how Lakull^a is sculptured. In the Dekkan College Library
there is a MS. called Vikvakarm-a'vatdra-rdstib-'sdstram^ which gives the following
verse as descriptive of the images of Lakull§a
;
This means that Lakuli.^a should be represented with urdhva-medhra as
resting on a lotus seat, and bearing a citron in his right, and a staff in his left hand.
This description holds good in all respects only in the case of Lakuliia sculptured on
the south wall of the temple at Belar and a loose image of that god found in the temple
of Gupte§vara at Mandalgadh, inthe Udaipur State (figs. 2 and 6). Here the citron in
his right, and the staff
in his left, hand are
distinctly visible. He
also occupies a lotus
seat and the fourth point
also agrees. In the
case of the latter, the
lotus is represented as
springing from a stalk,
on each side of which
is a worshipper, thus
reminding us of similar
Buddha sculptures in
ancient cave temples.
The lotus seat is, how-
ever, absent in other
illustrations, but the re-
maining three charac-
teristics are present.
In fact, without them
no image can possibly
be one of Lakuliga.
The urdhva medhra
stamps him as Saiva,
5 - for Siva is often de-
scribed as urdma-retas and urdhva-lihga. Of the objects held in hands, the citron,
again, is not peculiar to Lakulisa, but is found also in the fiands of many forms of Siva

LAKUI.ISA.
187
and Parvatl, though I have not yet seen a case where this fruit is borne by a divinity
not connected in some wav or another with Siva and his consort. The plain staff,
however, is peculiar to Lakullsa, and has not yet been met with in the sculpture of any
form of Siva, The citron is, again, sometimes replaced by another fruit of around
form, which looks exactly like a cocoanut Two of such instances that have come
to my notice are the temples of TaleSvara at Tilasma in Bijolia, Udaipur State, and
the temple of Ka§I-Vi§vesvara at Kayadra in the Sirohi State, where LakuliSa is
represented above the shrine doors with apparently a cocoanut in one of his hands.
Possibly the rough uneven surface of the citron, which was originallv carved, has
worn out, and, therefore, now looks smooth and round, producing the impression that it
is a cocoanut. Sometimes, instead of the fruit, a bowl seems to have been heldin
his hand bv LakulUa. An instance in point is furnished b}'' the two monoliths found
at Lalpelh referred to above. In almost all the cases of LakullSa sculptures,,
however, the fruit can be unmistakably recognised to be a citron, and, in the
majority of instances, it is held in the palm in the right hand, resting on the
thigh. But in the images of the temple of Gupte§vara, the hand bearing the
citron is upraised. The staff {danda), which is also borne by the deity, is, in no two
cases, exactly the same. They are, however, all alike, and can, except in two cases,
be easily recognised as ordinary staves or sofas, as they are called in Marathi, which
are generally used by the ascetics. On the shrine door of the Atru temple, how'ever,
on the loose image in the temple of Gupte§vara in Pdandalgadh, and in the sanctum
of the temple of Nakle.^var at Karvan, it looks more like a police baton than an
ordinary staff.^ Sometimes the objects held in the hand are transposed, the right
bearing a staff and the left a citron. Such instances are rare but are not wanting.
At Belar itself, e.g., in the principal niche of one of the attendant shrines alluded to
above, Lakuliia is so represented. Again, Mr. Cousens informs me that at Man-
dhata, in the Central Provinces, Avhilst these objects are held by Lakull§a in the
proper hands above two of the shrine doors of Siddhanatha, they are seen reversed
on the remaining two. It is worthy of note that sometimes Lakull§a is sculptured
with his legs partially or fully crossed and with a band of cloth running round his
knees apparently to support him in that posture. Thus, of the two images in the
temple of Guptegvara, one that is seated on a lotus throne has the legs fully, and
the other partially, crossed. Another instance of the latter type is supplied by the
im.age inthe sanctum of the temple of Maklesvara in Karvan. In all these cases a
band of cloth may be distinctly seen going round the knee-caps What the signi-
ficance of this is, is unknown to me, but it cannot but remind one of Brahmana priests
sometimes assuming that posture and supporting themselves with their shoulder-scarf
in a similar manner, especially when they give themselves up to gossiping. One
curious image of LakulT§a I found at Chohtan. There Lakuli^a was represented with
his head canopied by a seven-hooded cobra, thus bringing to our mind its similarity
to the figure of the Jaina tlrthamkara Par§vanatha. But the closest correspondence
to the image of a Jina, that has so far been noticed by me, is presented by the
Danda, which is an ordinary staff, must^always be distinguished from khaUmt^ga^ a skull-crowned mace^
Thelatter isno doubtfound in some formsof Siva,but is not peculiar to l^akuliG?.. What is specially charac-
teristic of him is danda only.
2 B 2

ARCHyEOLOGICAI. REPORT.
88
1
singular image of Lakulisa in a principal niche of the temple of Tale§vara at Tilasma
(fig. 7). Here the woolly hair, long ear-lobes, lense-like eyes, the edge of the
garment going diagonally from the left shoulder down to the right thigh, and above
all the svastika mark on the breast, are sufficient to stamp the image as one of a
Jaina tirthamkara, in the eyes of a person who is only short of an expert in
iconography. Nay, the very
bull, which is carved in front
of the seat, but emphasizes
the above conclusion, and is
enough to lead him to regard
it as a figure of Adinatha,
the first tirthamkara, whose
cognizance is the bull. But,
on reflection, it will be seen
that it cannot be the image of
a Jina. The hands, unfortu-
nately, have been broken off
and, consequently, the citron
and the staff are not pre-
Fig. 6. served to distinguish it from
tlrthatnkaras. But the poseof the hands is distinct enough to show that they could
not possibly have been joined and placed, palm above palm, in the hollow between
the thighs, as those of a Jina invariably are. The serpent, again, which encircles
the neck, serves to distinguish it from the image of a tlrthamkara, and points to its
being a Saiva image. Lastly, the urdhva-medhra, which, though a little broken
off, is sufficiently preserved, is an unmistakable indication of its being a figure of
Lakuliga. The close similarity, however, between this image of Lakul§ia and those
of the tlrtha?hkaras can, in no wise, be controverted. But 1 do not think that
Jainism is to be supposed from this to have exercised any Influence on the worship
of Lakulisa. In my last paper, I had occasion to mention two ancient sculptures
of Lak.uli§a from Cave-Temfles, which no less an authority than Dr. Burgess had
thought to be evident copies of Buddha. The truth of the matter appears to be
that the Indian sculptors had their own conventional mode of carving figures of
ascetics, and that consequently the points of similarity, which a Buddha, &tlrthamkara,
and a Lakuli§a bore, were due to their all being sculptured as ascetics, but they w'ere
sharply distinguished from one another by the special characteristics w'hich gave
to each his own individuality.
In my previous paper, I stated that the ascetics of the LakuliSa sect hadtheir
names always ending in rasz. Thus in the Eklihgji iirscription edited by me, the
karapakas, who were in charge ofthe supervision over the building of the temple of
LakuliSa there, are Supu(pu)jitarasi(Si), Sadyorasi(§i), and Vini§chitarasl(§i). The
well-known Chintra prasasti, while introducing Tripurantaka, an ascetic-worshipper
of Lakulisa, to whom great homage was done at Prabhas Patan, speaks of Karttit
kara§i and Valmikira§i as his predecessors in the pontlficial line. Thirdly, the short in-
scription in the temple of Lakulisa, at Chohtan as stated before, records the rebuilding

r.AKULlSA.
of that structure by an ascetic named Dharmarasi, pupil of Uttamara§i. These
are the names of Saiva ascetics we meet with in inscriptions, wTich we for certain
know to be connected with the worship of temples of LakuliSa, But names ending
m
nlst also occur in other inscriptions which, though doubtless Saiva, are not with
certainty known to be Lakulisa, records. Thus a Chitorgadh inscription^ mentions
the names Haritaragi, Mahe§varara§i, and Sivara^l. This honorific suffix can also
be traced in the names of the line of Sawa. gurus specified in an Abu inscription.^
The latest inscription, in which a name ending with ?'asi occurs, was found bv me at
Karvan. It is engraved on a pilaster of about the eighth century now partly embedded
in the ground near the temple of Panche^vara It could not have been more than two
centuries old, and says that a certain sage named Vlrabhadrarasi(§i) observed the vow
of silence for twelve years in Kayavarohana (Karvan).
I have stated in my previous paper that the worshippers of Lakulisa were known
as Pasupatas. Thus, the Eklingji inscription speaks of Kuigka and others, pupils
of LakuliSa, as masters of
Pa^upata yoga. The Crintra
frasasti informs us that it
was for the rigid fulfilment of
the Pa^upata vows that there
appeared the four ascetic
pupils of Lakuliia. The well-
known Harltara^i, the pre-
ceptor of Bapa Raval the
supposed progenitor of the
Udaipur Gehlots, and the
founder of a line of Saiva
gurus, is spoken of in a
Chitorgadh Inscription as
i . i
^rl-Bkalinga-Har-aradhana
^ pasupatacharya. An inscrip-
tion in the temple of Bhadrakali at Prabhas Patan,® which speaks of Bhava
Brihaspati as possessing a body like that of Na(La)kullia, also tells us that he was
really NandlSvara, become incarnate to practise the Pa§upata vows. It will thus be
seen that in North India at any rate the Pa§upatas, mentiond in epigraphic and
other records, were followers of Lakuli§a. What became of these Pasupatas, whether
they were merged into an allied sect or assumed a different name, is a very interesting
question, but I propose to discuss it and give my solution of it in a separate paper.
I shall now, as said at the outset, conclude this paper with an extract from a
Jaina work entitled the Tarkaraliasya-dipika. The latter is a commentary, on the
Shad-dar'sana-samuchchaya, composed by Sri-Gunaratnasuri, pupil of Sri-Devasum-
darasuri (circa 1363 A.D.) of the Tapagachchha. The extract is as follows :
^ Joiir. Beng. As. Soc., Voh LV, pt. I, p. 40.
2 bid. Anf., Vol. XI, pp, 221-222.
3 WeinerZeitschrift, Vol. Ill, p. 7 ff.

ARCH/f;OLOGICAL REPORT.
go
I
^fTUT
flfT: lf^Tf^^?Tcr^ ?;rT^'(S^W ^®5rTrT«Tt f^^TTRlrTT I
“tmfiiaRT^T ?fF»Tr ff^ STTATSfl^ f^lTTf?3T%^’5r^” [l] ^ ^
^S#i7t^TTftWT?TT; ^wf%^TITT^frr ST^l-
fwTWi:
5^k^T^T«:T: ?rT^t
’?rr%^aR?tmT?rT: fsri^^T^ [i] f^:#^T^WTifiT: [i] ^ WirRi^T^ira^T;
^ TTT’llf^^W^T^TftT VfwfsfT [l] 3Tf5Rt ^g?TTW?5TT HTHT^ STjqr [|]
1?:^ TTTfT^Jrrm^Tf^^'gr fu^' f^f^: w^ififT fi]
^’^»TT5T: lffTT^f%W% ^T *TrT: ?iwt^ faj^ig' 5T?T TTm^% [l] #
f^4nrw^frr[l] ^WTITt’^d ’|1%^mTTf^iifT[l] cT^ 'gT^^^TTWfTT’CT
\ ^ n 'i. t^T^; ^ trK^T4: 'o*
^fcr^TWf : c frgTsr^; e \ <= % \ ftf^r^: ir g^sr^: t ^ f'w ^4: ^8
n u
^»r%: ^c[i]t]r^T^t
gr^siTiTfwwTSTf^f^^ rr?T»Ti7Ttf^?f55r:[i] wisTi «?:jt tjw t3^w^t:[i]
^WT^TT ^ H ^4; g fsrf^^TTT^ ’^irtTTT^rmrrfiR^
I
[l] 3T ^ i5Ff%JTr ^ ST fsTft;5TT ST WJT Sf
WW I ^ ST f^f^qr^f ?T|t} g^:TWgfsTvftf%rl?Tt^T^ [ll]^ ^ qg-
^fsTsri irqTTtsi^ irt^vrisiT [i] ^ ^rsqrf^isq^slfqqog^fii];W^ W
^ #; ^STSJT# [li]^?f^Tsf ^S[5^st\ qk?:Tq^TT^t [i] wsf
g fqf%rT [ll]^ gq q’T f? W%ST ggq^ q-qqTfqf: [l] ^sr ffsiiqcrT qT%
fqs^^ifr Hf^qii'iija ?1% qfT<5?l' ttfq^tr^cqqqTfrsq
i
^qrfqqilwfq^Mt fwqiqTTTWrrWTSTf ^RTSiff;;?! fTTqTSTTTTS^'HTq^-
»T^ WT^ ^Trfg^rfT ^»Tqr fml%%fiT^!^[|].
q ^ t^if^irtsT ’qaqx Hqt%[i]fr^# [ii] ’qmTT*TqT^il1sr5f2:Tq=^qqtf^5i:[|]
w:
WTqTT:Tf^fft^ =qgqT w^q%si:[ii]5» qr^^qfrrtq ?T^rq?TX?T:r^5Tr[l]gqT:
gs^iT t^T qq frqf4sn[lR] HqTqsavf^T ^T^3iTaitf^qifrTtr?n^^
Vf^fsrT [l] WTH’flf^q’^fsTqXTr stt%[i]W H ftit H%r
m%
^x^^Tf^%g[i] ^i: ^^qqn: ^Er^Tf^q^ifrqTg ^qr i<a=5i5^[i]
qllfqcRT^ qr^qcfT Tfcr[l]qsT qqifqqrsn^sT Iwfqqi^sf q- qj^-
q?TfxTftT[i]T^ ^rqr traigri ’qT^fw^H ciTrfqiaq^ cT^«ft fq’iq:[i]
Translation.
A summary of what is set forth in the Buddhist doctrine has been given, (and now)
let the abstract, which will be narrated hereafter of the doctrine of the Naiyayikas,,
(i.e.) of Saiva teachings, be heard. “ Yaugas is another name for Naiyayikas, I'and)
first their individuality constituted by special characteristics and others will be spoken
of.” And they bear staves, (and) wear a broad piece of cloth over the privities.

LAKULlSA.
191
They cover (their upper body) with woollen blankets, and bear matted hair. They
smear their bodies with ashes, and put on the sacred thread. They hold water-
pitchers, and take tasteless meals. They generally live in forests, bear gourds hang-
ing from (their) shoulders, eat bulbs, roots and fruit (of trees), and take delight in the
duties of hospitality. Some have wives and others not. Those without wives are the
best amongst them. They are engaged in the performance of the five fire penances,
and even bear a consecrated liiiga in their hands or matted hair. But those, who have
attained to the perfect state of self-restraint, w.^nder naked. After washing their
mouth, feet, and so forth in the morning, they draw' three stripes at atime of ashes on
their body, while meditating on Siva. The lay-W’orshlpper patron, w'hile doing
obeisance, folds his hands and utters “ Om, a bow' to Siva,’' and similarly the preceptor
responds with “to Sivaa bow' ” And they in assemblies asseverate that even he, who,
after resorting to the Saiva initiatory consecration fortwelve years, gives it up, obtains
absolution, be he a male or female slave. To them Igvara (Siva) is God, omniscient,
and causing creation, destruction, and so forth. The following are his eighteen incar-
nations:— (i) Nakuli, (2) Saushya-KauSika, (3) Gargya, (4) Maitrya, (5) Akaurusha,
(6) I§ana, (7) Paragargya, (8'> Kapilanda, (9) Manushyaka, (ic) Kusika, (ii) Atrl, (12)
Pimgala, (13) Pushyaka, (14) Brihadarya, (15) Agasti, (16) Sarhtana, (17) Ra§ikara,
and (18) Vidyaguru. These aretheir to be venerated. The mode of their
w'orship and prayers should be cognised from their scriptures. At all sacred places,
Bharatas only are their worshippers. Salutation to gods should not be made by any
with their faces turnedtow^ards them. Those amongst the^m, who are free from earthly
passions, point out this verse contained in their philosophical literature (verse i) Not
:
the Celestial river (Ganges), not the cobras, not the garland of skulls, not the digit of
the moon, not the daughter of the mountain (Parvatl), not the matted hair, not the
ashes, nor anything else do we adore but that form of I§vara, contemplated by the
primeval sages. (Verse 2) He alone is fit to be resorted to by theascetics. But (the
god Siva), who enjoys sensual objects, is of recent origin, and is meditated upon and
resorted to by those who are covetous of the pleasures of regal power and so forth.”
And ithas been said in their own yoga^sastra : (Verse 3). “ An ascetic, contemplating
(a deity) free from attachment, enjoys freedom from attachment, but the quality of
being possessed of attachment is certain to him, w'ho meditates on (a divinity)
possessed of attachment. (Verse 4) With whatever predominant object a Saiva wor-
shipper (literally the bearer of the mystic diagram) is filled, he is merged into it
like a mirror reflecting multifarious (objects).” All this description of the
characteristics, dress, object of worship, and so forth is to be taken as applying to the
Vaigeshika doctrine. Because although there are differenttheses of the Naiyayikas and
Vaigeshikas, yet, in consequence of theirbeingincluded one in the other, there remains
very little distinction (between the two schools). Hence there is a conformity of their
doctrines. They are both called ascetics {iapasvinah). They are distinguished into
four sects, such as Saiva and so forth. It has been said ; “ The ascetics, who use a
seat, ashes, cloth for privities, matted hair, and sacred thread, are four-fold, in
consequence of the difference of their own practices and so forth. (Verse 2) Saivas,
Pagupatas, Mahavratadharas and Kalamukhas are the four principal divisions amongst
these ascetics. ” Their sub-divisions, again, are Bharatas, Bhaktas, Laingikas

ARCHEOLOGICAL. REPORT.
192
Tapasas, and so forth. As regards the taking up ofthe religious vow in the case of
Bharatas and others, there is no restriction about the castes, such as Brahmanas, and
so forth. He who has devotion for Siva may become any vrati (taker of religious
vow), such as Bharata and others. Butin philosophical sciences, Naiyayikas, being
—
devoted to Sada§iva, are called Saivas. VaiSeshikas, however, are PaSupatas.
Hence the teachings of Naiyayikas are designated Saiva, and Vai^eshika philosophy
Pa§upata. And this has been here recounted by me, according as it has been heard
or seen. The particulars, however, of the various (sects) should be gathered from
their works.
The above extract speaks for itself, and does not call for many remarks. The
idea that the Pagupatas are Vaigeshikas and the Saivas Naiyayikas is no doubtfantastic,
though it is truethat Gunaratnasuri did not himself conceive this, but specified what he
merely heard or was informed of. It represents an attempt of the various religious
sects to affiliate themselves to one of the six recognised schools of philosophy.
One such instance, if required, is that of the Manbhav (Mahanubhava) pantha, well
known in Maharashtra. It is unquestionably aVaishnava sect, but its literature, which
is both in Sanskrit and the oldest Marathi, speaks of it as a branch of the Nyaya
school. Apart from this, the long account of the customs and religious practices of
the Pagupatas may be taken as reliable. And, as the Pagupatas were the worshippers
of Lakuliga, the account must be supposed to refer to the devotees of that god. If
any proof were needed, it is supplied by the list of the eighteen incarnations of Siva
accepted by them. The first five of them can easily be recognised to be Lakuli and
his four disciples, Kiigika, Garga, Mitra, and Kaurushya.
D. R. Bhandarkar.

NOTES THE GORAKHPUR AND
IN
SARAN
DISTRICTS.
The
following notes were collected in the course of a journey in the districts of
Gorakhpur and Saran undertaken by me in the latter half of November and
December, 1906. Dr. Fleet had suggested this area for exploration to the Director-
Generalof Archaeology, and was good enough to supply mewith alistofplaces supposed
to be of archaeological interest, numbering about fifty, which he was anxious for
me to visit and report upon. He also gave me a number of notes relating to the anti-
quities of the districts. As regards the suggested location of Kusinara near Pachrukhi
and cf the spot where Gautama crossed the Anoma, which Dr. Fleet had been inclined
to locate somewhere in the vicinity of Majhauli or at the village of Gautamaiii near it,
the results of my short tour must be regarded as rather of negative than positive value.
But the journey was fruitful in other respects. At Rudarpur I discovered a
colossal basalt statueof Vishnu, which is as interesting for its superior workmanship as
it is valuable for its early date. Another statue of this deity of about the same size
and age which exists at Hasanpura is too good for the malignant hatredwith which it
is looked upon by the population of the village. I have therefore suggested that the
statue may be either set up at a suitable spot at the village itself or better still
removed to the Lucknow Museum. At Sohnag there are the remains of a large
Buddhist establishment consisting of a big monastery and several stupas. These
remains seem to be comparatively late, but they obviously stand on structures of a
much earlier date. Of the inscriptions copied during the tour the most interesting is
one incised on two copper plates recording the endowment of a certain village upon a
brahman called Drona, whosename, I believe, is still perpetuated by the village of Don
Buzurg, where the plates have been found. Incidentally, also, I was able to determine
by' actual local enquiry the correct names of the places included in Dr. Fleet’s list,
some of which proved to be utterly devoid of any visible antiquities and will not be
noticed in the subjoined notes.
Gorakhpur.
-My object in visiting the city of Gorakhpur first of all was to secure a copy
of a vernacular chronicle .of the district called Gorakhpurd.arpan, which Dr. Vogel
2 c

—
ARCHy^;OLOGlCAL REPORT.
194
had kindly suggested I should have with me in the course of the journey. The book
was formerly taught in the schools of the district, but having fallen into disuse is now
exceedingly rare. The copy now before me was obtained through the kindness of
Mr. E.A. Molony, Collector and Magistrate of Gorakhpur, though unfortunately
it did not reach me until I was crossing on to the Saran district. From the preface to
the Gorakhpurdarpan I learn that it is a translation of a history of the district
published by Mr. A. Swinton, Commissioner of the Gorakhpur Division, in 1861. The
booklet contains much useful information about the antiquities of the district.
The remains at and near Gorakhpur have been fully' described by Cunningham,
Fuhrer and others. According to popular belief the present city was founded by
Gorakshanatha, the founder of a Bairagi sect about 1400 A. D.
Sohgaura.
From Gorakhpur I proceeded to Sohgaura, some 18 miles south of Gorakhpur,
and well known for the inscribed copper plate discovered there by Dr. Hoey about
1893. Tradition has it that Sohgaura formerly formed part of a large kingdom ruled
successively by Domras, Tharus and Bhars, the last mentioned of whom were ousted
by a line of Srinet Kshattriya Rajas of Satasi. According to the Vi^ven Vamsa
Vatika published by Raja Lai Khadga Bahadur Malla of Majhauliin 1887, Satasi
(which means eighty-seven) was originally the name of a gift of 87 square kos of land
bestowed upon the Srinets by a certain raja of Majhauli. The Srinet rajas recruited
their preceptors from among the Tiwari brahmans of Sohgaura, to whom they
frequently granted large endowments of rent-free land and other privileges. Paper
records of many such gifts are in the possession of a descendant of the above men-
tioned Tiwari family and would be very helpful in the compilation of a chronological
table of the Srinet clan.
Sohgaura stands on the remains of some very ancient city and the numerous
mounds of ruins which surround it on all sides offer a splendid field for exploration.
The largest of these mounds is Tikar Dih situated on the south bank of the Ami
River, measuring some 220 paces from east to west and about 8o from north to south.
j
It is impossible, of course, as yet to say anything about the nature of the remains
buried under this and the other mounds, but their antiquity is sufficiently attested to by
bricks measuring I'l" by 12" by 4", ancient coins, glazed pottery, broken figures etc.,
that turn up during the rains.
Rudarpur.
Rudarpur is situated some ten miles to south-west of Deoria and has for centuries
been the chief town of the Satasi Raj. The place was closely examined for miles
around by Mr. Carlleyle in 1885 and afterwards by Dr. Hoey. What chiefly attracted
me to Rudarpur was a report about certain very ancient brahmaksharas incised on the
lintel of the Dudhnath shrine. Nothing, however, could exceed my disappointment
when after a tedious journey by a miserable cart-road I found that the record referred
to was a vernacular epigraph consisting of 13 syllables of no value or interest, and
inscribed in — Nagarl characters of the j6th or 17th century. ' I propose to read :
Line 1. Orh (expressed by a symbol) Jbga pa dha ga

NOTES IN THE GORAKHPUR AND SARAN DISTRICTS.
^95
—
Line 2. Chanda jogi leshitah.
The reading of the first line is doubtful. It seems to contain some religious title
like Jogopadhyaya, etc.
Rudarpur is essentially a Saiva town and the only non-Saiva antiquities I
noticed there are (i) a small figure of Mahavira, the last Jaina tirthankara
of the present cycle, l^he Gaurl-Sahkara shrine in the Dudhnath temple,
and (2) a colossal statue, 10 feet high, of Vishnu (PL LXXIV, (a) in fine
grained black stone. This statue is contained in an arched opening cut through the
stone, which it touches only at the top and at the shoulders. The legs are broken
away up to the knees, and the feet, which are consequently totally detached from the
image itself, rest on a boldly executed full-blown lotus. There were originally four
arms, but only the upper right one, which holds the gada, now remains. The base is
adorned with exquisite acanthus decoration. The statue bears no inscription, but from
the style of carving, it may be safely referred to the 6th or 7th century A. D. The
sculpture is now fixed in the ground, to what depth cannot be made out, and is
supported from behind by a low brick built walk Badly cracked as it is both atthe top
and at the base, it can be preserved for a long time to come if only the wall behind it
is repaired and carried up a couple of feet-above its present height.
The ancient remains near Rudarpur are called Chhota and Bara Sahankot or
;
simply Kot. Various conjectures have been proposed regarding the origin of
Sahankot. According to popular belief it was founded by Brahma himself, when he
resided in Kasi, and the author of the Vi^venavarh^avatika surmises that the real name
was Syena-Kotta or the fort of the Syenas, which name he believes to be a corruption
of Vilvena.
Both the small and the great fort are now entirely desolate, and all that remains
of them are the foundations of their circuit walls, covered with heaps of earth.
The whole of the area enclosed by the Chhota Kot is under cultivation, but there
are still several large mounds of ruins in the Bara Kot. Of these, by far the largest
and highest mound is that situated some i oo yards east of the west wall. It is known
as the “ Bara deol,” and apparently represents the remains of some important monu-
ment. It is some 800' in circumference at the base. The top is occupiedby a Sadhu’s
hut, in front of which, on a small platform, I saw a number of mediaeval fragmentary
sculptures belonging to the Vaishnava and Saiva cults. Of the remaining mounds, two or
three, situated to the east of this, are said to have been opened out by Dr. Hoey and to
have yielded Hindu shrines of no great antiquity.
The circuitwall of the Bara Kot shows five large gaps, vis., two on the south side
and one on each of the remaining three, which seem to represent the gateways of the
castle.
The Dudhnath temple stands about a furlong to the east of the fort, in the centre
of a large quadrangle, along the sides of which there are no less than eight shrines,
all of which, with the exception of the octagonal one in the south-west corner, must
have been built within the last forty or fifty years. A few of the images worshipped
in them, together with some fragmentary ones stored in the verandah of the main
shrine, have been obtained from the ruins inside the fort, the most noteworthy being
the one in the shrine occupying the north-west corner of the quadrangle. It
2 c 2

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
196
represents Ganesa in the dancing attitude, and, according to a vernacular inscription
carved in stucco over the doorway of the Porch, was installed in Sarhvat 1936, Fasli
year 1286.
The central shrine has been covered up with a thick coating of plaster which
precludes all possibility of ascertaining its precise date. This much, however, is
certain that it is much older than the short epigraph on its lintel, which was possibly
incised at the time the shrine was surrounded by the verandah. The lingam in it,
which attracts a large gathering on the Sivaratri festival each year, is ail irregularly
shaped block of black stone, probably a meteorite.
Majhauli.
Since there was no route leading direct from Rudarpur to Majhauli, I had to
return to Deoria, where I took train for Bhatpar Railway Station, with which Majhauli
is connected by a good metalled road
That the name was spelt as Majhauli at least as far back as the time of Raja
Bodhmall, a contemporary of Aurangzeb, is proved by a paper document dated in
Samvat 1692 kindly shown to me by the Maharaja Sahib. The same spelling occurs
in a Persian inscription discovered by Dr. Bloch in the Pathar-ki-masjid at Patna,
which states that the material for the building of the mosque was obtained from a
temple and a fort demolished at Majhauli for the purpose.
The Rajas of Majhauli belong to the Visvena family of Kshatriyas, fabled to have
sprung from an ancient sage named Mayurabhatta, who practised penance at a place
now called Kakradih situated some 15 miles south-west of Majhauli. The place is
still considered holy and every new successor to the Raj is anointed at his installa-
tion with clay specially brought from there.
Majhauli at the present day possesses but few antiquities. Indeed, the only
•ones worth mentioning are an image of the Mahishasuramardini Durga, lying under a
tree near the Raja's palace, and a ruined shrine of Dirgheivara Mahadeva of unknown
date, situated among a mass of ancient remains a little to the east of the town.
Majhauli must have been a place of some importance in past ages, if, as suggested
by Dr. Fleet, it should prove to be the place where Buddha crossed the Anuma. It
is true that some four miles from Majhauli near the railway line between the stations
of Salempur and Bhatnl there is a small but ancient village called AnuarhpaP meaning
“across the Anuma ” or more freely “the crossing of the Anuma,” which may well be
an apabhramsa of Anuma, but the absence of any stream of such a name anywhere
in the neighbourhood offers a difficulty in the way of the identification. The channel
running past the village is called Pusi. Nor does the locality show any remains which
can be called Buddhist.
Salempur.
According to the Vi^venavarh^avatika, this village was formerly called Nagar,
and ils present name is due to Raja Bodhmall of Majhauli, who, having been converted
to Islam by Aurangzeb under the new name of Salemkhan, never returned to his
native place but retired to this village to pass his remaining days away from his
1 Dr. Fleet thinks itto be the ‘Anwanpur’ ofthe Indian Atlas sheet No. 102, in lal. 26°ao'long s . od iust
ivUc^eBurseepar. j

NOTES IN THE GORAKHPUR AND SARAN DISTRICTS. igy
relatives. The Raja now lies buried under a miserable brick grave 26' x 25' X 5'
high, some 200 yards to the south of Sain-ka-katara, on the east bank of the Little
Gandak oppositethe village of Navalpur. The grave is in the charge of a Muhammadan
faqir but is fast crumbling away.
In the middle of the village is a small temple consisting of a small square cell,
surmounted with a domical roof, which was originally encased in a closed-in brick
verandah, fragments of whose walls still survive. Inside the cell I noticed a few
modem sculptures of Vishnu, Siva, etc. A Muhammadan mosque with a well situated
in the Kasai Mahalla or Butcher Street also deserves notice. The prayer chamber
is a rectangle 41'-7" X i2'-3." The walls are 3' thick. Over the central archway
—
in the facade is a Persian inscription w'-hich reads : Zi daur-i-Shah-i-Jahan shud
bina-i-masjid-o chah. “This mosque and the well were built in the reign of Shah
Jahan.” The hemistich also yields the Hijra year 1065 (A.D. 1654) as the date
of the building.
Sohnag.
Situated some 3 miles to south-west of Majhauli. There is no regular road and
the pathway lies all along through cultivated fields.
The village is noted for Sohanchhatragarh, the popular name of a tank, and some
very extensive and important remains situated on the west bank of it as wmll as a few
comparatively late Brahmanical temples. The first of these is held in great
reverence by the Hindus, who assemble here in large numbers on the 3rd of the
bright fortnight of Vaisakha each year to have a dip in its sanctifying waters. Its
excavation and construction is attributed by the people to a Raja named Sohan, who
being cured of white leprosy by an ablution in its water, deepened and built it at the
instruction of Para§urama, who visited him in a dream. The western bank is still lined,
with a series of brick built stairs, of which the central one is still called Parasurama’s
ghat. The bricks used measure 9I" X f X 3".
The mins on the west bank of the pdkhara, described by Mr. V. A. Smith
in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1900, page 431, are interesting.
Of these the largest structure, the Vihara, is now but a mound of earth, all the
bricks having been used up in the construction of the Bengal and North-Western
Railway. The only portions of the building still under ground are the
south-west corner of quadrangle No. HI, and a part of the west block of cells in the
northernmost quadrangle (see Mr. Smith’s map). This excavation was a piece of
unpardonable vandalism. But perhaps not much has been lost. The interior of the
cells has in no case been disturbed, so that what antiquities were originally here can
still be easily recovered.
Regarding the seven mounds, situated six to the west and one to the east of the
Vihara, I have no doubt that they are all remains of stupas. This view is supported
not orily by the conical shape of the mounds and theforms of bricks peculiar to stupas
with which the tumuli are covered, but also by actual trial digging. The small low
mound, situated some 150' west of Parasurama’s shrine (see Mr. Smith’s site plan)
was opened and revealed a solid brick plinth, 18' east to west and i8'-7" north to
south. There is a double projection on each ofthe north, east and west faces. On the

— —
ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
198
south side there is only a single step, 4' wide and jutting beyond the wall, which
probably gave access to a narrow circumambulatory passage on the plinth. The
superstructure was all gone with the exception of a few layers of the drum. The top of
the plinth was found at a depth of between 2 and 3/ below the surface of the mound.
The sizes of bricks used in this stupa are identical with those in the Vihara. Some of
them are highly ornamental.
The following antiquities were found in the course of the excavation :
(1) A headless terra-cotta image of Buddha seated on a full-blown lotus in the
bhumispar^a attitude. The figure is 6^" wide at base. This was found embedded
in the plinth at a point west of east side and froiri each of the north and
south Avails.
(2) A circular clay tablet, complete in four fragments, 3''' in diameter. Contains
in an oval shaped incuse a figure of Maitreya standing in a somewhat crooked position
on a distended lotus and the Buddhist creed in the characters of about the i oth cen-
tury. The right hand of the figure is stretched out, and holds a flask, though the latter
generally appears in the left hand. The left one grasps the middle of a lotus which
rises from near the asana. To the proper right ofthe deity’s head appears a miniature
chaitya and an uncertain object to the left.
(3) Fragment of a large oval shaped clay tablet, long, bearing the figure of a
bodhiiattva-d.&vo\.&t seated on a lotus. The right hand is lifted up, and above it is
depicted a lotus and an asterisk.
I4) Small circular clay tablets stamped with the MahaySna formula, in mediaeval
characters.
(5) Copper coin of Abu-l-Fath Governor of Ibrahim Shah of Jaunpur. Found
near surface of mound.
(6) Copper coin of Shah ‘ Alam, King of Delhi.
(7) Small coin marked vinth a star surrounded with fragments of AA'riting which
cannot be recognised, d'he legend on the reverse is also unintelligible.
These antiquities have been all sent to the Lucknow Provincial Museum.
—
There are altogether three Hindu temples at Sohnag
(1) Mahadeva’s shrine, to the north of the Vihara. This is a modern building
consisting of two rooms, of which the north one contains an image of Vishnu, 3'-3'''
high and wide with the usual emblems and a large §iva-lihgam.
(2) Gauri-Sahkara shrine. Isa square room xi'-g" along each side. The
image enshrined in it is 9" high and 10" wide and is in black stone.
1
(3) Parasurama’s shrine, it is a square room i I'-e'' each way, surmounted by
a Saracenic dome, supposed to have been built by one Navaz Singh Chakladar some
200 years ago. Inside the shrine I saw several sculptures of which the following
deserve notice
:
{a) Vishnu standing, 3' high x 9" wide. (PI. LXXIV, b). On pedestal, Varaha,
Kachchhapa, Matsya, and other avataras. The Buddha-avatara is depicted near the
top of the mace. Material, stone.
{h) Brahma standing. Has 3 faces and 4 hands, of which the upper left holds
the usual palm-leaf manuscript. Material, stone. 2'-5''' highx wide.
(c) Paraiurama with usual emblems. 3'.3" highx i'-/' wide Material,
stone. ^

1
N’OTKS IN THE GORMiHPUR AND SARAN DISTRICTS.
'99
{d) Another image of Narayana. 4'X2'. Top piece missing. Material, stone.
Bhagalpur.
Some lo miles south-west of Salempur. The inscription on the stone pillar (A. S.
R. XVI, p. 130 and Pis. XXX, XXXI), for which the place is chiefly noted, has
suffered so much from the hand of both time and man that very little can be made ofit.
The first verse praises Bhujagahgaka the serpent-adorned Vishnu. In the second line
we read The third line begins with
This Dasaratha is probablythesame as the father of Ramachandra.
BVom these and other bits of information contained in the record one can easily infer
that the pillar was set up by a \'ashinava King of the solar race. The date, which was
recordedinthe Vikrama era, is unfortunately lost.
Khaira.
Khaira, situated on the right bank of the Ghagra exactly opposite to Bhagalpur
(A. S, R. XXI, p. 108), is the name of a large collection of ruins said to cover an area
of over 70 bighas. The remains are the property of a Vaishnava sadhu who dwells on
the spot, but are being fast swept away by the river which flows quite close to them.
next proceeded to Don Buzurg, visiting en route the villages of Sohagara (once
I
the head-quarters of the Majhauli State) and Silaur.
The former of these possesses extensive remains of a fort, now overgrown with
thick jungle, and a Sivalaya built on a high mound in Chhota Sohagara. Thetemple is
said to have been built by Rani Dilrajkuar of Majhauli, and contains besides the large
black stone lihgarh in the main shrine, a grey sandstone slab bearing figures of the
1
Rudras and other Brahmanic sculptures fixed in the west wall of the compound.
The temple isapproached from the east by means of an imposing flight of steps,
and is constructed in the late Saracenic style.
The village of Silaur is some 5 miles south-east of Sohagara. In the centre of the
village is a modern walled-in court with a collection of Brahmanic sculptures obtained
from the ruins to the south of the village. The most important piece is an image of
Mahishasuramardini, 2'-4'’''x T'-i" (PI. LXXIV, c). Close to this is a large Sivalaya
in a compound with .Saracenic cupolas in the corners. The latter contain well-carved
images of Ganesa, Surya on a chariot drawn by the seven horses, Durga and Hanuman
crushing Ahiravana with his left foot.
The remains referred to above are situated at the south end of the village and
are known as Bhrigu-ka-sthana and the garh. The former is a large platform now
almost level with the ground situated under an ancient Pakri tree, composed of bricks
measuring 15" long and 9" wide.
The garh consists of a small low mound, surrounded by four still smaller ones
which people call the towers ofthe fort. One of these was partly opened but proved
to be only a well 1 2' in diameter filled up with rubble.
Don Buzurg.
Ac Don Buzurg I vms to report on an ancient site known as Dron-ka-ghar, Dron-
ka-ghar or Drop-ka-garh, as it is also called, is now the name of a cultivated field

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
200
situated to the east of the village and separated from it by the pakka road leading to
Mairwa. The field is extensively worshipped by the Hindus with offerings of milk in
me
the month of Sravana. An old man, perhaps the oldest in the village, narrated to
the following legend about it : “ This field marks the exact site of the house of Drona
the well-known military preceptor of the Kaurava and Pandava princes. He was a
skilled physician, and was invited on one occasion to Lanka to prescribe medicine for
Bibhikshana, brother of Ravana, who suffered from some incurable disease. Dronawas-
therefore carried to Ceylon with the house in which he dwelt. On the recovery ofthe
demon king, Drona was permitted to see the capital of the country, and was surprised
to see the markets full of corn of all sorts though the agricultural condition of the coun-
try was far from prosperous. His host, however, explained to him that the abundance
of corn in his kingdom was due to his miraculous powers, which could draw the essence
of the cultivation of the whole world. Drona begged that his village might be ex-
empted from this drain and obtained the reply that a solitary bigha ofland in his village
should yield loo maundsof corn, while the rest would be treated like all else. Drona
thanked him and returned to his village Don) but his house did not.” This legend
(
has to be taken for what it is worth, but thefield, though now cultivated every season,
has certainly contained remains which have been dug away by the cultivators. At a
spot in the eastern edge one can still see survivals of a stout paving composed of a
thick layer of cement laid on a single course of bricks The village itself stands
on a vast plateau of remains extending in the eastern direction as far as the mound
known as Banasur-ka tila. The common size of bricks found does not exceed i i:}"
The people find many gold and copper coins in the rainy season. The
former, they say, are generally round and contain human figures on one side and some
writing on the other. The copper coins found are generally square, I was unable
to procure any specimens.
The village has now become famous in the neighbourhood for the discovery of
a Sanskrit inscription of Govindachandradeva of Kanyakubja carved on two copper
plates accidentally unearthed by a chamar in a field midway betweenthe villages of Don
and Mathiya. The plates are now in the possession of the Maharaja of Majhauli^
to whom 1 am much indebted for all the interest he took in my work. The plates will
be published as a postscriptum to the article I am preparing for the Epigraphia Indica
on the important copper plate found at Saheth in the Gonda District.
Mairwa.
At Mairwa, a Railway Station on the Bengal and North-Western Railway and
connected with Don Buzurg by a good metalled road, I saw :
(i) Chananniyam Dih, a lofty mound, over 600' in perimeter at the base, situated
on an extendve plateau running parallelto the Railw'ay Station. Chananniyarh is said
to havebeenan Ahirwoman about whom the people tell a very indecent story. She is
now worshippedas Durga in a tiny modern shed built in front of the Dak Bungalow,
which occupiesthe top of the mound. There are no means of ascertainingwhatremains
the mound contains. Its external appearance would lead one to consider it a siiipa,
ifi) Hart Baba ka sthan situated on the Jharahi River about miles from the

NOTES IN THE GORAKHPUR AND SARAN DISTRICTS. 201
Railway Station. It is a modern shrine built over the saniadh of a sadhu named Hari
Baba. The samadk is a mud platform, faced with stone slabs, and surmounted with
a small mud grave which contains the remains of the sadhu. This recluse is supposed
to have been a disciple of Tulasi. I gather the following account of the baba’s
death from a vernacular manuscript styled Baba Haris Path. “ Hari Baba was born
at Bamnauli 5 miles south-east of Mairwa. His dog and buffalo were snatched
from him by a chief of Mairwa, named Kanak Sahi (his seventh descendant is a
minor). The sadhu devastated his fort and himself committed suicide.”
(3) Mound, a furlong to south-east of (2), It measures 100' north to south and
93' east to west at top and about 200' along each side at the base. Average elevation
20" above surrounding ground. People call it the fort of Kanak Sahi mentioned above.
The small round mounds attached tothe south-east, south-west and north-west corners
seem to have been towers. On the top there is a narrow deep well made up of small
bricks.
Bhantapokhar.
This is another Railway Station on the Bengal and North-Western Railway.
Dr, Fleet was informed of the existence of remains of a brick stiipa at this place.
I carefully searched both the tolas into which the village is divided, but could not trace
any ruins.
Titira.
Near Titira, avillage situated a little to west of BhantSpokhar, there are two ruins
which Dr. Fleet conjectured might be stufas. One of these, known as Muyarngarh, is
a large enclosure 800' north to south by 700' east to west, surrounded by walls which
are all in ruins. In the centre of the enclosure stands a rectangular mound 18T east
to west and 137' north to south, in which brick is exceedingly rare but modern pottery
abundant. A pit on the top appears to be the remnant of a well. The south-west
portion of the enclosure is occupied by a low mound, 400' in perimeter, which appears
to cover a large four-sided brick structure.
The other ruin, called Bhangara and situated about 3^ furlongs south-w’est of the
village of the same name, is also a quadrangular building. It is much smaller in
dimensions (330' east to west and 382' north to south) than the Muyarngarh, but is in-
dicated as decidedly much older by the ancient glazed pottery and large-size baked
bricks with which the site is covered. Here, too, the middle portion of the building
is taken up by a mound 75' north to south and 66' east to west, of the character of
which nothing can be stated with certainty. At the south-east corner of the garh,
however, there is an eminence circular at thebase (180' in perimeter) and pointed at
top, which may perhaps be 3.stupa. It is approximately 20' high and shows indications
of considerable antiquity.
KalinjfS.
The village of Kalinjra, a few miles to the east of Bhantapokhar, is noted for
an earthen castledesignated Cheron-kd-garh by the Hindus : the hluhammadans of
2 D

ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORT.
202
the placeattribute its construction to one Raja ‘Ali Bakh^ to be referred to below.
It is a large place, measuring about 440' along each side and about 25' high, 'i'he
ditch around it is 100' wide. The corners are occupied by circular mounds, probably
remains of towers. The whole site is noAV overgrown with thick thorny jungle, and
is seldom approached by villagers.
Siwan.
The ancient remains at Siwan consist of two sites. One of these, known as
Jagattra, is the name of a very small earthern mound about a furlong to the north
of the Railway Station. It is 21' broad from north to south and 25' long from east
to west at the base, and is only 5' high above the level of the fields. An ancient pipal
tree that formerly stood on it has fallen down, and we now see on its top only a
small fragment, 16" high, of modern walling, a platform made of the same
sort of modern bricks, and a small broken sculpture. Two fairs are held on the
spot each year, namely, on the first Sundays occurring in the white fortnight of
argasirsha and Vai^akha. Old men of the place narrate the following story about
IVJ
the mound: “ Two Siaikhs named Bhikh and Kabir saved the state of Majhauli
from some enemy in the absence of the Raja. The latter was delighted and gave
them some land in the neighbourhood of Bhantapokhar. The Shaikhs began to
reside at the village of Khalispur near Kalihjra referred to above. Soon after
they invaded the fort of Raja Jagattra which occupied the whole of the area between
the Radw^ay Station and the Purana Qila‘ to be noticed presently. The fort was
won and the Raja slain. But the spirit of Jagattra haunted them and allowed them no
rest. The Shaikhs therefore approached a faqir named Rodasa, who advised them
to grant land to brahmans and Muhammadan faqlrs. The mound now known as
Jagattra marks the spot where the Raja was beheaded.’"' The grave of Rodasa
stands about 100' yards to the north of Jagattra.
The othersitestands two furlongs to the north of Jagattra and is called the Purana
Qila'or “ Old Fort."' It is alleged to havebeen built by the Shaikhs mentioned above.
It measures 331" from north to south and 221' from east to west. All the buildings
now extant are made of mud. The ditch surrounding the garh is deep and broad.
Another monument to be noticed here is a mosque bearing a Persian inscription
which may be translated as follows : “ The pious ‘Ali Bakhsh built this holy edifice in
A. H. 1165 (A. D. 1751) for the praise of God.”
Qdsopali.
At the village of Gosopali, situated on the Sundi Nadi, 1 was to find old remains
on both the banks of the river. Some remains I did find though not at Gosopali,
but near the village Renuath, i mile to north of Gosopali, and on the west bank of the
stream. They consist of an irregularly-shaped mound, 108" north to south and 42"
east to west. The accumulation of rubbish on the surface exceeds five feet, and
though I dug at one or two promising spots I only found small detached bricks
measuring 8 X8 X , and plenty of calcined bones, but no structures of any kind.

NOTES IN THE GORAKHPUR AND SARAN DISTRICTS. 203
Papaur
Possesses a large tank measuring 284' east to west X322' north to south and
lined with low mounds on all sides. That these mounds are not mere heaps of earth
is amply proved by the numbers of punch-marked coins that turn up here frequently.
Andar.
The village of Andar, or Annar, is situated some j 1 miles to the south of Siwan
and about a mile to the south-west of the confluence of the Daha Nadi with Sonna
Nara. To the west of the village there is a large mound of ruins called Masudaham-
ki-dih. It extends towards the east and west 600' and narrows down towards the
north and south to 300' only. Two prominent features of these remains are a conical
mound on the southern portion, and a small brick pavement composed of bricks of the
same dimensions towards the north. The remains on the surface are of a relatively
late date, but that the occupation of the place goes back to very early times was
proved by a little excavation made by me towards the western boundary of the site.
There are mounds also at the villages of Tiarhy and Asaorh a few miles to the west
of Andar on the road from Siwan, but of no great age. The villagers call them the
castles of Iksaria Rajputs, local chieftains of 200 years ago, and I have no reason to
doubt them.
Balahum (on the Jharahi).
At the village of Balahum, situated about 2 miles to the north of the 42nd mile on
the Chupra-Drauli road, there is a rather unusually large image of Mahadeva,
measuring 5^-3" high. The base of the image is rough and square, each way.
There is evidently no basin, though the villagers insist on their having seen it some
forty years ago when the old Pakri tree, under which it originally stood, fell down and
was replaced by the banyan now sheltering it.
From Balahurh I proceeded to Hasanpura where Dr. Fleet had heard of the
existence of considerable traces of remains and an image of basalt. In the course of
the first sixteen miles, which I had to travel by the Chupra-Drauli road, I saw several
temples, but none earlier than the 7th or i8th century, and two large mounds. One of
i
them standing close on the north of the village of Panjwar at the 3 1 st mile on the
road appears to be only a mud-built castle of a local zamindar like those noticed at
Kalinjra, Tiarhy, etc., but the other one situated between the 29th and 28th miles of
the sameroad is more important. It is known merely as the garhorcastle of Kachnar,
the modern village surrounding it on three sides, and measures about 100' each way.
The height exceeds 40 feet, of which the upper 15 or 20 feet are composed obviously
of mud. The lower strata, however, show indications of some very early monument,
which should be excavated. The bricks in it measure ip^X i
The rest of the journey to Hasanpura lay along the Siwan-Siswan road. No
antiquities were met with on the way with the exception of the Siva temple known as
Mehmdar situated near the village of Chainpur. The main shrine is said to have
been built by a certain Gurkha Chief about 200 years ago, but the verandah and the
accessory shrines containing images of Bhairava, Bhagavati, etc., are even more
2 0 2

—
;
ARCHi«;0L0GICAL REPORT.
204
modern. The temple is situated on the bank of a large tank, the extent of which is
described in the following vernacular couplet :
“ Tin sau bighe ka pokhara,
Anthanwe bighe ki ghat
Ek dhur bachal pa,
Uhi merh garal ja jath.”
Translation The tank measures 300 bighas and the landing place 98 the
; ;
wooden post aloneoccupies one dhur (equivalentto six cubits).
Hasanpura,
The village of Hasanpura, situated at the i ith mile on the above-mentioned road,
is said to have been founded by one Makhdum Hasan, who belonged to the Saiyyid
family of Arraq in Persia. Henow liesburied undera small grave in a large open court
{mizar) to the west of the village. The grave is lighted each evening with lamps
placed on a stone stand, probably the capital of a stupa. Itis in front of this enclosure
that the basalt image spoken of above is lying onits face. An ancient and exceedingly
beautiful image of Vishnu, about lo' high, it is being most ruthlessly treated by the
villagers. It is regarded as an inauspicious deoni (fiend) overthrown and turned into
stone by the holy Makhdum who founded the village, and must not be raised orplaced
erect.
Tile image had been lifted only twice before me, once by Dr. Hoey and again by
an officer of the Bengal Government, and no small persuasion had to be used for
permission to photograph it. The image containsno inscription, but onthe evidence of
its style it may be safely assigned to about the 7th century A.D.
This Is all I saw at Hasanpura. Enquiries were repeatedly made about the
existence of any remains of buildings (dihs), but the villagers were evidently not aware
of any.
Sarangpur.
This place was visited from Siwan ; the journey comprised ii-J miles, i.e., i-|
miles on the Chupra to Gorakhpur road, g miles on the Siwan to Basatpur road, and
the remainder by the Gopalganj to Barharia road.
According to the inhabitants of the village, there were formerly several mounds of
remains here, but they have all been levelled dowm. The only one which now
survives, in a small low eminence under an old pakri tree about 2 furlongsto the south-
east of the village, is called the Baramthan. Old coins have turned up in numbers,
but I could not procure any.
Bhikhaband.
Situated at the 14th mile on the Siwan to Tajpur road. The road is here lined
with a series of fields considerably higher than the ordinary ground level and
still
called dihs. The fields have been under cultivation for years, but pottery and
brickbats are still abundant. An ancient well has been recently opened up by the
cultivators in one of these fields, and I have no doubt that there are many other
structures still hidden under the ground.

NOTES IN THE GORAKHPUR AND SARAN DISTRICTS. 205
Pachrukkhi.
The village of Pachrukkhi ‘ five trees,’ is at a Railway Station on the Bengal and
North-Western Railway, and it is somewhere in the neighbourhood of this village that
Dr. Fleet is inclined to locate the scene of Buddha’s farinirvana. I carefully
searched several villages round Pachrukkhi for any antiquities that might be still
extant, but in vain.
Tajpuf Basahi.
At Tajpur Basahi, situated about a mile south-east of Saran Khass, I witnessed a
basalt slab carved with the figures of the Navagrahas on one side and an Arabic
inscription in the Tughra character on the other. The slab is now lying on the grave
of a Muhammadan Saint named Khwaja Badsbah, and should be transferred to the
Lucknow Provincial IMuseum.
Chiraiic
In connection wath this place I can only say that I agree with all that Mr.
Carlleyle has said in the A. S. R., Vol. XXII, though I must confess I was unable to
trace the stufa-\i\ke structure on the principal mound to the east of the village. All
these mounds undoubtedly cover numerous ancient remains, of the nature of which
nothing can be said until they are excavated.
D.aya Ram Sahni.

EPIGRAPHY.
'^HE number of inscriptions copied during the year was 771. Of these, 640 were
* copied in the Southern, 53 in the Western, 29 in the Northern, 11 in the Frontier
Circle, and 38 in Burma. To these must be added inscriptions discovered during the
—
excavations at Sarnath. See above pp. 95 loi.
—
Of the Epigraphia Indica, Parts IV VH of Volume VUI, and Part I of Volume
IX were published. They contain several important contributions to the history of
India. In the first place, I may mention Dr. \"ogers edition of the A§oka inscription
and other epigraphs excavated by Mr. Oertel at Sarnath and mentioned in my report
for 1904-05.’-
Dr. Bloch contributes a paper on two inscriptions on Buddhist images belonging
to the Kushana period. One of them is the famous Bodhisattva image found by
Cunningham at Saheth Maheth, which makes it highly probable that that place is
the old Sravasti.’®
Anew
inscription of the Parivrajaka Saiiikshobha, dated Gupta Sarhvat 199
has been published by Pandit Hira l.al, and Professor Hultzsch has edited two
new grants of the Valabhl king Dhruvasena, from the Gupta years 320 and 321 res-
pectively.
Some
interesting contributions to the history of Kanauj are due to Professor
Kielhorn. In a paper on two grants of the time of Mahendrapala, in which mention
is made of some Chalukya feudatories who are not elsewhere known, he shows
that Mahendrapala was also known under the name of Mahendrayudha. This name
recalls the names of kingIndrayudha, who accordingto the Harivamia-Ptirana reigned
in Kanauj in A. D. 783-84, and of Chakrayudha, who succeeded to the throne when
Indraraja (Indrayudha) was defeated by Dharmapala, and whowas himself overcome by
Nagabhata, of whom we have an inscription dated in A. D. 81 5. Another paper deals
' An inspection ofthe collotypeaccompanyingDr.Vogel’s paperwill show that something has been s-ratched
i o s o c f u o r t i v t p h i I t e m io 7 m o n e n , i d r f i 9 i r a 6 n o t a m l el h v y / a n s b i e c c f h o o n r t v e he i t n n h c e a e an d m o s e m t h h o e o e r f t r t t h n h a i e a t n m s d c t e o r h n i e p o i t f s r i i r o h s a n t a l s s w o o o b f r e f d e R o n a u o j f n e a d r t n a hi s i s e n A d i s . n a v s n a c o r A g t i h h p o s e t i i r s m o h i n a S la a p r r o a n n r a c i t a t g h n h e c e y e h l in e l A s i s c n b r o g i e k p l a t o o i f n o g n p t . i s h l e la t r C o o . o r m i a g p A i a s n ' r a i c e f < l ^ o h n s t m e a lv y m i e o n r l s d e n o e m c f r c a t t r i i h k n n e s n
2 It isnot, perhaps, impossibleto derive the form Set directly from Sravasti. A Prakrit Saatthi miaht
Ani., XXAyll^p. iSo, and Ep> Ind., IX, p. 2Qi. [Dr. Bloch informs me that the modern name of the of
D . S t r r s . a w vA a s y t o i c m h t I o S if S th a S e h a e h n t e a h t - m h ^ e ^ ? r ^ e ^ al a l n y d ca w n n h o a t b t e S c t a a a h u k e s e t e n d M a t a s h h e a e l t m a o st a d s e le r t n C te u r f n o t n r o i m b n e o g f h c t a h h m a e n a g s n e p c e d i l e t i n n t t i o t n . a am l ‘ e i I n t g S u r s a a e l v e a m s s s t o I u , t n o d' f . o m ^ r e /r h ’ v J o e - r w V y . d d V i o e d u n b k t t f l h u y e l y ’ a h . a ] f d i d n s d

EPIGRAPHY. 207
with fi\'e copper-plate inscriptions of Govindachandra of the Gahadavala dynasty.
Professor Kielhorn has also republished the important Vasantgadh inscription of the
Paramara chief Puriiapala, who ruled at Mount Abu. The inscription is dated Vikrama
Sarhvat 1099, and Purnapala was accordingly a contemporary of the Paramara Bhoja,
famous in the history of Indian literature. Two poems ascribed to bim and written
in Maharashtrl Prakrit, which were discovered engraved on stone slabs at Dhar in
November 1903, have been edited by Professor Pischel. They are of small literary
value, and certainly not the work of Bhoja himself.
A new dynasty has been brought to light by Pandit Hira Lai in a paper on
the Ragholi plate of Jayavardhana II. He is said to belong to the Sailavarh§a, and
the editor shows reasons for identifying this family with the Gahgavaiti§a. The
family ruled in the Yindhyas, and their capital was probably in the Nagpur district.
Professor Hultzsch has published some inscriptions which throw light on the
history of the Alupas, a little known dynasty which appears to have existed as a ruling
family from the seventh down to the eleventh century.
The same scholar also publishes a copper-plate inscription of the Eastern
Chalukya Sarvalokairaya dated in A.D. 673, and contributes a new edition of the
Nausari plates of Srya§raya Siladitya, who belonged to the Gujarat branch of the
Chalukyas. The inscripiion is dated in Sarhvat 421, which must refer to the Kala-
churi era. Fresh information about the Vaghela line of the Chaulukyas is contained
in a paper coniributed by Professor Liiders about some Jaina inscriptions from Mount
Abu. They also contain genealogies of Tejahpala, the minister of the Chaulukya
king Viradhavala, and of the Paramaras of Chandravatl, who seem to be clearly
connected with the Mount Abu line, to which Purpapala belonged. One of them,
named YaSodhavala, must have been a feudatory of the Chaulukya Kumarapala.
He is stated to have killed Ballala, the lord of Malava, who is not elsewhere known
but who must belong to the troubled times following on the death of Ya§ovarman
(between A.D. 1 135 and 1144).
The history of the Rashtrakutas has been dealt with by Professor Hultzsch and
Mr. Bhandarlar. The former republishes the Undikavatika grant of Abhimanyu, which
probably belongs to the seventh century, and contains the oldest mention ofthe family.
Thebranch towhich Abhimanyu belonged, residedin Manapura, which probably took
its name from Abhimanyu' s great-grandfather Manaiika, “ the ornament of the
Rashtrakutas.” Dr. Fleet has identified Manapura with Manpur in Rewa, but
this identification is not quite certain Mr. Bhandarkar publishes a copper-plate
inscription of the Rashtrakuta Karkaraja, dated Saka 701, in the reign of Govinda II.
The inscription is of importance as it has been doubted whether Govinda II. actually
ascended the throne. The same scholar also republishes two inscriptions of Indraraja
III., dated Saka 836.
Some Pallava inscriptions have also been published in these parts. Professor
Hultzsch’s paper on the Pikira plate of Simhavarman has already been noticed in my
reportfor 904-05. Another Pallava grant published by him, which is now in the British
1
Museum, furnishes the names of the queen of the Yuvamaharaja Vijaya-Buddha-
varman, Chdrudevi, and of her son Buddhyahkura. The same scholar also publishes
a set of copper plates of the second year of Kumaravishnu II,, the son of Buddha-

.
2o8 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
varman, the grandson of Kumaravishnu I. and the great-grandson of Skandavarman.
The inscription seems to be a little later than the Pikira grant referred to above
and the kings mentioned in it may therefore be assumed to have reigned in the
interval between Sirnhavarman and Sirnhavishnu. Mr. Venkayya contributes a paper
on an inscription of the Pallava Dantivarman, whom he assigns to the original Pallava
family of Conjeeveram, which may have continued to reign in a part of the old Pallava
kingdom after the Ganga-Pallavas had taken possession of the greater portion of the
country. The inscription seems to belong to the third quarter ofthe eighth century.
Professor Kielhorn continues his calculation of Chola and Pandya dates. Of the
inscriptions dealt with by him 36 belong to the Cholas and ig to the Pandyas.
Finally, I shall mention Professor Liiders* new editionof the Taxila vase inscription
with an excellent mechanical reproduction, and Mr. G. Venkoba Rao’s edition of
two epigraphs, one in Grantha characters and the other in the Vafteluttu alphabet.
These two papers are of especial importance on account of the characters used in
these inscriptions, viz., Kharoshthi and Vattejuttu.
Of the new inscriptions copied during the year, very few belong to the Maurya
and Kushana periods. The most important ones have already been dealt with above
in connection with the Samath excavations (see pp. 95 and ff. ). Some additional
old Brahmi inscriptions have been discovered in caves in the Madras Presidency.
Such caves have been found at Marugaltalai, ten miles from Palamcottah in the Tinne-
velly District, at Anaimalai near Madura, and at Arittapatti near Melur in the Madura
District. The inscriptions appearto belongto thethird orsecond century B.C., but it has
not as yetproved possible to make anythingout ofthem. The language does not seem
to be Aryan. The opening word of the Anaimalai inscription is apparently iva, which
might perhaps be connected with Tamil tvai, ivan, idii. Impressions of these inscrip-
tions have been sent to Professor Liiders for publication in the Efigraphia Jndica.
About 15,000 coins of Nahapana were found during the year at Nasik. They
have been dealt with in a paper by the Reverend H. K. Scotth who show's that more
than 9,000 have been countersigned by Gotamiputra Satakarni.
The Gupta period is represented by some short inscriptions from Sarnath (see
above pp. 97 ff.) and by a fragmentary image inscription from Kasia. This latter, and
a seal-die with the legend '^Tt-Vishnudvtpaviharihhikshusanghasya have been dealt
with by Dr. Vogel, above p. 60. A name in early Gupta characters has alsobeenfound
engraved in a cave near Mandor in Rajputana. An inscription now deposited in
the Historic Office at Jodhpur in the Marwar State, but W'hich originally came from
an old temple of Dadhimati between the villages Goth and Manglod in the Nagaur
District, IS perhaps dated in the Gupta era (samvatsara 589). It contains the name
of an unknown king Druhlana.
Kiradu is a ruined town near Hatma, about 16 miles north-wmst of Badmer in
the Mallaui District. An inscription of the reign of the Chaulukya Bhimadeva
and dated Samvat 1235, Karttika ^udi 13, was copied in a raised temple there. It
relates how the wife of Tejapala, an officer of the Chohan Madanabrahma, who
again was a feudatory of Bhimadeva, installed a new image in the temple, after the
original one had been broken by the Turushkas, i.e. by the Muhammadans. It
' Journal ofthe Bombay Branch ofthe R. A. Socy., LXII, p. 32i and ff

EPIGKAPHV. Op
2
seems tempting to identify Tejapala with Tejahpala or Tejapala, the minister of the
Vaghela Chaulukya king \nradhavala, who built the Neminatha temple on Mount
Abii.^ The family of the latter is stated to have come from Anahilapura, t.e.
Anahilapataka, the residance of Bhimadeva. It professed the Jaina faith and was
of the lineage of the Pragvatas. Tejapala’s wife Avas AnupamadevL The consecra-
tion of the Neminatha temple took place in Sariivat 1287, and, accordingly, 42 years
after the date of our inscription. This fact perhaps speaks against the identification.
Moreover it might be urged that the wife of a Jaina would not be likely to dedicate
an image in a Siva temple. The question of identification must, therefore, be left
open.
Some new Inscriptions belonging to the family of the Pratiharas have been
discovered during the year. In the outer porch of a Jaina temple at Osia is an
inscription of the Vikrama year 1013, which mentions that the temple was originally
built by the Pratihara Vatsaraja of Kanauj, for whom Jinasena’s Jainaharivam^a
furnishes the date A.D. 783-84. An inscription of Vatsaraja’s son Nagabhatta
dated Vikrama Sariivat 872, was found on the sabhamandapa of a temple in
Buchkala.^ We have seen above that Nagabhata conquered Chakrayudha of
Kanauj, and the succession must have been uncertain in the preceding years.
Two inscriptions of a feudatory Pratihara family have already been published
several years ago by Professor Kielhorn. One of them refers to a chieftain Bauka/
and the other to his brother Kakkuka.^ The former is now found in the fort wall of
Jodhpur, but has almost certainly been brought from Mandor. Professor Kielhorn
reads the date as Sarhvat 4, but Mr. Bhandarkar has shown good reasons for reading
894. The other is dated Sariivat 918, and hails from the Mata-kl sal temple in
Ghatiyala. In the Khdkhu devld temple in the same place Mr. Bhandarkar has now
found three new inscriptions of Kakkuka, on a red sandstone pillar, dated Sarhvat
918.® We learn that Kakkuka put up two pillars, one at Maddodara (Mandor) and
another at Rohirhsaka (Ghatiyala). The former has not been recovered, but in a
cave near Mandhr is a fragment of an inscription belonging to the tenth century, which
mentions a son of Kakka. Now, Kakka was Kakkuka’s father, and the son intended
is perhaps Kakkuka.
Some new inscriptions refer to the family of the Paramaras of Chandra vati. A
short genealogy is given in an inscription found in the Pattanarayana temple at
Girvad (Mount Abu). It only goes back to Dharavarsha, whose son, Somasiriiha,
was the father of Krisbnadeva, whose son Jaitrakarna, is said to have recovered
his kingdom from his enemies. The oldest date as yet forthcoming for Dharavarsha
Samvat 1220, is furnished by an inscription discovered on a stone now deposited
in a shed near the Ka 4i ViSvelvara temple at Kayadra, Sirohi State. Another
inscription from the Madhusudana temple near Mingthala (Mount Abu) couple?
his name with the date Sarhvat 1245. The last known date for this king is-
’ Compare Liiders, Ep. Ind., VIII, pp. 200 and ff.
2 Editedby Bhandarkar. Ep. Ind,, IX, 198 f^.
3 J, R. A. S. 1894, p.4ff.
^ J. R. A. S. 1895, p. 516if.
^ See Ep. Jnd-i IX, 278if
2 E

210 ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
Sarhvat 1274. A quite new family of Paramaras ha; been brought to light by an
inscription from Kiradu, dated Sarhvat 1218.
A new branch of the Chahamana dynasty is described in an inscription found on
the front wall ofthe sahhamandapa of the temple of Kiasaria in the Parbatsar District.
Before leaving the inscriptions of Northern India, mention should be made of < i
inscribed stones which were transferred from Dr. Stein’s office to the Archaeological
Superintendent of the Frontier Circle. One of them, which records the construction
of a tank near Navagrama (perhaps in the Hazara District) by Vanhadaka, in the name
of his father I§vara, the son of Suradi, is of interest on account of its date. The tank
is said to have been constructed laukya-samiach-chhara-tate gaja-trimsadhtke sam-
'vat 38 karitika-huti 13 sanau, i.e. in the Laukya-year 538, onthe13th tithioi the bright
fortnight of Karttika, on a Saturday. This date, which must refer to the Laukika era
usual in Kashmir, is of considerable interest. In the first place, the promiscuous use
of numerals and numeralwords such as sara (arrow) forfive and^aya: (elephant) foreight,
is not common. Then, as is well known, the hundreds are usually omitted in dates
referring to this era. This is so universally the case that it has recently been asserted
that “ if in a date the hundreds are mentioned, it is absolutely certain that it cannot be
referred to the Laukika era.” * Our inscription, which is expressly referred to the
Laukya, i.e., Laukika era, proves that this statement cannot be upheld, and KaSmiri
Pandits such as Mukund Ram inform me that the hundreds are sometimes actually
expressed lake, in common life. It is here of interest that the hundreds are omitted in
the repetition of the date by means of figures. The date corresponds to Saturday, the
17th October 1461. The inscription, which is written in ^arada letters, is also of
interest on account of the use of raised letters. Another Sarada inscription of the
same collection seems to have been a memorial stone. It does not contain any names
or any date, but is apparently a little later than the one just described. It is written
in Prakrit and impresses upon us the instability of everything only fame can make
;
one immortal. The rem iining inscriptions of this collection are too fragmentary to
yield any result.
As usual, the bulk of the new inscriptions comes from South India. An excellent
analysis has been printed in Mr. Venkayya’s Annual Report, and I shall here only men-
tion some of the most important facts brought to light, referring to the historv of
the Vijayanagara kings, the Pandyas andthe Cholas.
It was known before that Kampa I., the son of Sarhgama I. of the first Vijaya-
nagara dynasty,was the founder of a branch in Nellore, and that his son Sannyama II
was reigning in Saka 1278, The new inscriptions copied during the year under review
introduce us to another son of Kampa, called Vira§ri-Savaqna-Odeya, whose capital
was at Udayagiri. His inscriptions are dated §aka’ 1273, 1275 and 1283, and his
accession took place ^aka 1270-71. It therefore seems as if the two brothers were
reigning simultaneously.
Kampa’s brother Bukka 1. is in an inscription brought back to Saka I274-A.D.
•352*53) 3’2d he is stated to have ruled at Dorasamudra and Penugonda. Mr. Rice
has published a still earlier inscription of this kingMated ^aka i266=A.D.
1344-45,
’ See R. D._Banorji,Ir.d. Ant., Vol.XXXVII, 190S. p. 28.
* Epi^raphia Carnaiica X, Mg. 158-

—
EPIGRAPHY.
21
I
where the donee was the Telugu poet Nachana S5ma. This latter inscription also-
mentions the foundation of Viiayanagara by Vidyaranya.
For Devaraya I., whose coronation took place in A.D. 1406, we had formerly
dates down to 1410. Anew inscription couples his name with ^aka r34.o=A.D.
1417-18.
About his son Vira-Vijaya, we learn that he was also called Vijaya-Bukka. He
was made viceroy by his father at Mulbagal in Mysore sometime before A.D. 1408.
According to Nuniz, he reigned six years in ^Hiayanagara, where we find him as king
in Saka i344=A.D. 1422-23. He is probably identical with the Vira Bukka mentioned
in an inscription dated in A.D.1423-24. His son Devaraya II. is stated to have
begun his reign in Saka i343=A.D.1420-21. If Nuniz’ statement is correct, he must
have been anointed during his father’s reign.
The last inscription of Devaraya is dated in A.D. 1446. In the reign of his
brother’s son Mallikarjuna, there must have been an invasion by the Gajapati king
of Orissa. It is alluded to in the drama Gahgadasaprata-pavilasa, and the disturbances
caused by the raid are referred to in two inscriptions. The Gajapati king in
question must be Kapile§vara of Orissa (1434-70).
In my last report, I mentioned that the date of the Pandya Varaguna had been
fixed at A.D. 862-63. Some additional information about the old Pandyas can be
gathered from two sets of copper plates from Sinnamanur in the Madura District.,
One of them refer 6. s to a son of Arikesarin Asamasamari Alahghyavikranian Akala-
kalan Maravarman, the son of Jayantavarman. The prince intended was probably
Jatilavarttian as in the Madras Museum plates. The Sanskrit portion of the second
set, w’hich perhaps belongs to the first quarter of the tenth century, gives the following
genealogy
:
1. Arikesarin.
I
2. Jatila.
3. Rajasimha L
1
4. Varaguna.
5. Maravarman Srivallabba Ekavira.
!
Varagunavarman. 7. Parantaka Viranarayaua..
8. Rajasimha II.
The Tamil portion substitutes Parahku§an for Arikesarin (No. i) and passes from
him to his grandson Rajasimha. Maravarman (No. 5) is called Parachakrakolahala,
and No. 7 figures as §rl-Parantakan ^adaiyan, while Rajasirnha II. (No. 8) has the
epithets Raja^ikhamani Mandaragaurava Abhimanameru.
Arikesarin, who is called Maravarman in the Madras Museum plates, claims to
have defeated the Pallavas at Samkaramahgai. Now the Pallava king Nandivarman
in the Udayendiram grant claims a victory at Batnkaragrama, w'hich is probably
simply.ai Sanskrit translation of Sartikaramangai. If these two statements refer to the
same event, as they probably do, Arikesarin must belong to the middle of the eighth,
century.
2 E 2

,
ARCM.EOLOGICAL REPORT-
.2I 2
The genealogy given above shows that there were two kings of the name
Varaguna. The later of the two, Varagunavarman (No. 6) is then probably the king
whose accession took place in A.D. 862-3.
Maravarman (No. 5) is stated to have conquered, among others, Maya Pandya.
This statement points to the conclusion that more than one branch of the family was
ruling at the same time. This inference is also strengthened by other considerations,
and, on the whole, several points in the history of the Pandyas still remain to be
elucidated by future finds.
Towards the end of the ninth century, the Cholas became the paramount power
in South India. Before that time there was no Chofa kingdom of importance, and
an inscription from ElvanaSur in South Arcot, which was copied in 1906 and which
apparently belongs to the ninth century, seems to show that the Pandyas made their
influence felt even in the Pallava country.
The list of Chola kings represented in this year’s collection opens with Parantaka
I., who figures in more than forty records, ranging from his 3rd to his 41st year. His
accession tookplace between the 15th January and the 25th July 907. An inscription
copied in 1906 in the Manikanthesvara temple at Tirumalpuram in the North Arcot
District, informs us that his father, probably Aditya I., reigned 22 years and died at
Tondaimanarrur, and that he himself was known as Parakesarivarman “ who took
Madirai and I]am (Ceylon).” Parantaka seems to have been at war with the
Pandyas at least three times. His first expedition must have taken place early in
his reign, for the titles Madiraikonda and Madhurmtaka occur in inscriptions of
the third year of his reign. A second war is referred to in records of his 12th year.
After this engagement, in which the Pandyas were assisted by the king of Ceylon,
Parantaka assumed the title of Samgrama-Rdghava a Rama in warfare. After a
third war, towards the end of his reign, he assumed the title Maduralyum Ilam-
um konda, ‘he, who took Madura and Ceylon,’ which occurs in inscriptions ranging
from his 39th to 41st year.
The interval between Parantaka I., the last of whose inscriptions is dated in his
-41st year (A.D. 947-8), and Rajaraja I. Rajakesarivarman, who ascended the throne
between the 25th June and the 25th July 985, is still very unsatisfactorily known.
Parantaka’s son Kajaditya, whoAvas killed about A.D. 949-50 in the battle at Takkolam
against the Rashtrakuta Krishuaraja III., probably did not reign after his father. An
inscription of the 31st year of Parantaka on the west wall of the ^ivalskanatha temple
a Gramain shows that Rajaditya then had an army of his own. He had at least two
brothers, Gandaraditya and Arirhjaya, of both of whom we apparently possess
inscriptions. Arimjaya’s son Parantaka II. was called Sundara Chola, and an inscrip-
tion of his 5th year is found in the ^ivayoganathasvamin temple at Tiruvi§alQr in the
Tanjore District. It is, however, built into the temple and could not be copied in full.
His son Aditya II. Karikala has been identified by Professor Hultzsch,* with the
Parakesarivarman “ who took the head of Vira Pandya” of the Hkkal inscription,
though this king would be expected to have the name Rajakesarivarman. Two new
inscriptions copied during the year belong to the reign of the same Parakesarivarman.
South-Indian Inscriptions, Vol. HI, No. 14, p. 21.

—
EPIGRAPHY.
213
A feudatory of Aditya II. was perhaps the Parthivendradivarman “who took
the head of Vira Pandya,” whose name occurs in seven inscriptions copied during
the year. Another priiice, Anaiyaman or Paramandaladittan, must have been a
feudatory of his again. He is statedto have belonged to the Sagara-Virata dynasty,
and a short genealogy of his family is given, Virata, instead of which we also find
Ilada, must be the name of a country, probably in middle India. It cannot have
anything to do with
Rajaraja I. began to reign between the 25th June and the 25th July 985. An
inscription of his fourth year gives him the name Mummadi Choladeva. Another,
of his nth year, records the gift of a lamp to the shrine of Hanumat at
Tirumalpuram, and thus shows that the worship of Hanumat had been established in
the Tamil country in the tenth century at least. The last known inscription of this
king is dated in his 29th year.
From the time of Rajendra Chola I., who began to reign between the 27th March
and 7th July 1012, and onwards, Chola inscriptions in Tamil have been found in
PuhganurinNorth Arcotand adjoining districts. We learn from these and other records
that Jayahgonda Chola-mandalam or Tondai-nadu extended in the north from
Puiiganur up to the borders of the Nellore District.
The inscriptions discovered in Burma during the year under review are of little
historical interest. Mr, Taw Sein Ko, in his Report, uses some of them in support of
his theory that Burmese Buddhism was originally introduced from India in the
Mahayanist form. I regret to be unable to see that any proofs have been adduced
which make this hypothesis plausible. There can be no doubt that Burmese pilgrims
from the earliest times visited the sacred places in India, and such Indian influence as
can be pointed out can be sufficiently explainedby the intercourse which must naturally
result from the fact that Northern India was the birthplace of Buddhism. I am
however, here only dealing with the history of Burmese Buddhism, so far as
epigraphy is concerned, and I feel bound to say that the fresh proof which Mr. Taw
Sein Ko has found in the legend on a votive tablet from Kyinlo, about eight miles to
the south-east of Nyaung-u, in my opinion does not weigh much. The inscription
runs sabbanniitahanassa fachchayo. Taw Sein Ko translates “ the (attainment of
the) basis of supreme knowledge”, and adds that this expresses the pious aspirations
of a Mahayanist. It is, however, sufficient to refer to Childer’s Dictionary in order to
-show that sabbamiitanma is quite common in Buddhist Pali texts, and it seems
impossible to use the inscription as proof of anything but the fact that Pali, the sacred
language of Southern Buddhism, was in common use in Burma, a fact which does
not need to be proved.
Before leaving the subject of Burmese epigraphy it will be necessary to add
some remarks on a new theory about the development of the Burmese alphabet set
forth inthe Superintendent’s Report for 1906-07, where we read,
' “Priorto the eleventh century A. D., thelapidary art appears to have beenunknown
at Pagan, for no stone inscriptions antedating the rise of Anawrata have been found.
This has created a belief among writers on Burma that, before the conquest of
Thaton by Anawrata, the Burmese did not possess an alphabet, and much less a
literature. Such a belief has, however, been refuted by theresearches recently made

ARCH/EOLOGICAL report.
214
into the origin and development of the Burmese alphabet, and the broad facts elicited
—
may be summarised as follows
;
“ Third century /4.Z).—Burma was conquered by the Kingdom of Shu, one of the
Three Kingdoms into which China was then divided; and she became tributary to
China.’'
—
“ Fourthcentury A. D. The Mahayanistform of Buddhism was introduced into
Burmaby Chinese missionaries, who taught itin Chinese. No Chinese epigraphic remains
have, so far, been discovered, with the single exception of the Chinese inscription set
up by the Mongols at Pagan in the thirteenth century A. D.
—
“ Fifth-Sixth centuries A. D. The Chinese of the South were engaged in an
incessant struggle with the Tartars of the North, and Chinese control and influence
became considerably w’eakened, and Burma escaped from the thraldom of Chinese
•
hieroglyphs and ideographs.^ The Indian form of Mahayanism was introduced by
Indian missionariesfrom Northern and Eastern India, who taught it in Sanskrit, using
the alphabet of the Gupta period.^
—
“ Seventh-Eighth centuries. A.D. In 622 A. 0 under the auspices of King
.,
Srongtsan Gampo, the Tibetanalphabetwas invented on the basis of the Lanca letters, a
variety of the Gupta character, and an active religious propaganda was pursued. In
the eighth century, Nanchao, the Shan kingdom of Talifu, annexed Burifta, andbecame
a medium of communication between Tibet and Burma, and Tibetan religious influences
penetrated into Pagan.
" The Bon religion or Shamanism, and, later on, Lamaism or Mahayanism with a
peculiar hierarchy -superadded, were introducedinto Burma from Tibet. The Tibetan
Bon priests or “ Bon-gyepa” were the precursors of the Burmese pdngyi ofthe present
day. The new systems of faith were engrafted on the prevailing Indian form of
Mahayanism. The Tibetan priests left no appreciable impression on the language
and literature of Burma but the Burmese alphabet, judging from the arrangement of
;
the letters, and the sounds accorded to them, appears to be a blending of the Tibetan
and Sanskrit systems.'*
—
Ninth-Tenth centuries A. D. Tantrism was introduced from Bengal through
Assam and Manipur, and, possibly also, through .Arakan. Its priests, called “ Aris ”
favoured Naga-worship, and the Jus frimae metis prevailed amongst them. They
continued to use the Gupta alphabet, as well as the characters of the Pala dynastv of
Bengal (Soo to 1050 A. D.) Twm gold plates have been found at Prome, which are
inscribed in the Eastern Chalukyan character, a Dravidian script of this period.‘‘
—
“Eleventh centuryA. D. Hinayanism or Buddhism of the Southern School,who-e
vehicle is Pali, was introduced into Pagan after Anawrata’s conquest of Thaton in 1057
A. D. Copies of the Tripitaka in that language, were obtained from Thaton and
Ceylon.
* As remarked bytheauthor above, there are no proofs that they wereever used in Burma. Nor is there anv
evidencetoshow thatthe Mah.ayanist form of Buddhism was introduced from China inthefourthcenturv. Thisis
simplyaconclusiondrawnbythe authorfrom theChineseconquest, aboutthe duration ofwhichwe knownothing,
S), V . 1 —
- Thisis amereguess andnot supported on goodarguments. S. IC.
^ None ofthese statements about Tibetan influence havebeen proved or even-made probable. S, K.
The identification oftheAriswith Tantricpriestsis a mere guess.—S. K.

D
1
EPIGRAPHY. 215
—
“ Twelfth century A.D. Jain, Saiva, and \"aishnava influences completely dis-
appeared at Pagan, as evidenced by the Kyaukku Temple, which was built in 1188
A. D. An outburst ofarchitectural energy took place, which lasted from the eleventh to
the thirteenth centuries A. D. Pure Hinayanism as well as Burmese epigraphy
became firmly established.
—
"'Thirteenth century A. . The Mongols under Kublai Khan overran Burma in
1284 A.D. The Burmese empire broke up, and the Shans and Takings asserted their
Independence. These political upheavals produced no modification in the Burmese
alphabet, which had been fully developed, and had assumed a permament form.
“ The conclusion is inevitable that the Burmese alphabet was primarily based on
the Gupta script of the fifth century A.!3 ., which was imported overland through
Assam and Manipur, and, possibly, also through Arakan, and that it was modified, to
some extent, by the Eastern Chalukyan character of the tenth century A. D., which
reached Pagan by sea through the Takings . Pagan latterly received her letters and
religion from Aryan or Northern India, while Pegu received hers from the Dravidians
ofthe South. It, was in the eleventh century A.D. after the conquest of Thaton by
Anawrata, that the Aryan and Dravidian systems were harmoniously blended at Pagan
and that thenceforward Burmese civilization assumed a definite aspect.”
It will be seen^ that the arguments adduced are mainly based on the supposed
history of Buddhism in Burma, and it may perhaps be objected that so. long as this
history itself is not known, it is not safe to base any conclusions on it, It seems as if
the author is inclined to assume that several foreign alphabets have influenced the
development of the Burmese character.
The Chinese conquest would have left its marks on the general tendencies
towards Mahayanism which might have paved the way for a North Indian form of
Buddhism transmitted in Sanskrit and written in a North-Indian alphabet. In the
Indian Antiquary p. 21iff), Mr. Taw Sein Ko has put together some few
,
Buddhist terms which, he maintains, have been borrowed from China and which rnight
be considered as traces of Chinese influence on Burmese Buddhism. Considering the
fact, however, that Burmese and Chinese are closely connected languages, and the
-extreme uncertainty of some of the equations, the list at the utmost proves that there
has been intercourse between Burmese and Chinese Buddhism at some period. And
.at all events, Chinese influence cannot have played any role in the development
of the Burmese alphabet, and the author does not seem to think so either.
The assumptionthat the alphabet of the Gupta period was introduced by the
Indian missionaries, who, we are told, taught Mahayanism in Burma in the 5th and
6th centuries, is based on Phayre, who says that Pali inscriptions in Devanagari
characters of the time of the Guptas have been found among the ruins of Tagoung.
I have not seen any inscription answering this description, and Mr. Taw Sein Ko, In
an unpublished paper, declares that he has never found any. The discovery of
votive tablets written in Indian characters would not, of course, prove anything. They
might havebeen brought back from India by pilgrims. I am, therefore, unable to attach
Duringmy tour in Burma, in 1907 , communicatedtheremarks which follow to Mr, Taw Sein Ko, and
advisedhimtopostponethe publishingofhisnotes onthe Burmese alphabet till he would be able to adduce
...betterproofs.—'S. K,

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
2i6
anv importance to the argument. If Mr. Phayre’s statement is correct, it only shows
that a form of Gupta characters was used in writing Pali, but it, by no means, show's
that the character was the precursor of the Burmese alphabet. Still less can be
inferred from the find of an inscription in an unknowm language (Old Siamese ?) at
Halingyi near Shwebo.
1 now come to the alleged influence of the Tibetan alphabet, and I must confess
that I am unable to see any traces of it, The fact that the Burmese character has
retained even such Indian letters which are useless for wTiting Burmese and which are
not found in Tibetan, proves sufficiently that the Burmese alphabet is derived from an
Indian one, and there is absolutely nothing to point to any influence exercised by the
Tibetan character. Those points in which the Burmese and Tibetan characters agree
are such as are common to all Indian scripts. The fact that the Burmese alphabet
possesses all the sounds necessary for wTiting Pali, while some signs wdiich are neces-
sary in Sanskrit are missing, seems to make it almost certain that it has been borrowed
from the script used in Burma for noting down the sacred language of Southern
Buddhism, a supposition which agrees with the views commonly held in Europe. It
is in thorough agreement with the fact that the legend on the gold plates from Prome
mentioned by the authorunder the ninth and tenth centuries is in Pali. The remaining
remarks made in connection with these plates have no bearing on the history of the
Burmese alphabet, as there is no evidence to show^ that the Gupta alphabet and the
characters of the Pala kings w^ere used in Burma during this period.'
The whole deduction about the history of the Burmese alphabet before Anawrata
must, therefore, be dismissed till the author furnishes better proofs.
In Anawrata’s times the Burmese alphabet was very little different from the
alphabet then used for Pali. The earliest inscription found at Pagan, on a square stone
pillar near the Myazedi Pagoda, which was erected 1084 -A- l^-. shows side by side
the same text in Pali and Burmese language, and the difference in character is so
insignificant that there can be no doubt that both must be classed together as one
single form of script. The remarks made above about the adaptation in the Burmese
alphabet of signs which are necessary for writing Pali but not for writing Burmese, in
ray opinion show's that this script was originally devised for the purpose of w'riting
Pali. And there cannot, moreover, be any doubt that this Pali alphabet must be
derived from a South Indian character.
Sten Konow.
* See my remarksin my Reportfor 1905-06.

;
THE PALLAVAS.
T^HE
word Pallava is apparently the Sanskrit form of the tribal name Pahlava
or Pahnava of the Puranas. The Pahlavas are described as a northern or north-
western tribe ^ wTose territory lay somewhere between the river Indus and Persia.
They were conquered by Sagara but spared on the intercession of his family
priest Vasistha, Inchapter 64 of the Santiparvan of the Mahahharata, king Mandhatr
questions the god Indra about the duties to be practised by the Pahlavas^ among other
tribes, ^ the several castes that originated from the Brahmanas and Ksatriyas, the
Vai§yas and Sudras that lived in the dominions of Aryan kings. In the Harivam^a^
the Pahnavas ^are said to have been Ksatriyas originally, but become degraded in
later times. They are mentioned here along with the Sakas, Yavanas and Kambojas
and their chief characteristic was the beard ® which Sagara permitted them to wear.
In the Visnu-Purana^ the Yavanas, Pahlavas and Kambojas are said to have been
originally Ksatriya tribes who became degraded by their separation from Brahmanas
and their institutions. ^ In Manu, the Pahlavas are mentioned along with the Pundra-
kas, Dravidas, Kambojas, Yavanas, Sakas and other allied tribes. These were all
Ksatriyas originally, but gradually became degraded by their omission of the sacred
rites and transgressing the authority of the Brahmanas. ®
1 In chapter 9 ofthe Bhismaparvanofthe Mahdbkdrata^thQ Pahlavas are mentioned among the barbarians
{mleccha-jdtayah).
2 The form adopted in the edition ofthe epic which is beingpublished by Messrs. T. R. Krsnacarya and
T. R. VyasacaryaisPallava. The editors saythat their text is based mainly on South-Indian manuscripts.
3 Theseare the Yavanas, Kiratas, Gandharas, Ginas, Sabaras, Barbaras, Sakas, Tusaras, Kahkas, Andhras,
Madrakas, Paundras {Usirasin South-Indian texts), Pulindas, Ramatnas and Kambojas
isthereading of South-Indian texts.
^XIV, verses 15 to 19.
5 IntheRd^ndyana (I, 55, verse 18) the Pahlavas are said to have emanated from the bellowing of the
miraculous cow Nandini, which belongedto the sage Vasistha.
®Thebeards ofthe Westerns {i.e. the VavansLS), arealso mentioned by Kalidasa in his Raghuvamsa, IV, 63.
7 Muirs Sanskrit Texts, Vol. II, p. 259, andInd.Ant., Vol. IV,p, 166.
^
we[\ ii
ftnjcTT ij X. 45-44

218 ARCHyf;OLOGICAL REPORT.
The foregoing references may be taken to show that the Pahlavas must have
'
been a ruling tribe already in Puranic times. The admission that they did not con-
form to Brahmanical practices shows that they were either foreigners actually or were
connected with them. In case they were foreigners, their immigration must have
taken place in very early times.
The word fallava means in Sanskrit ‘ a sprout, ’ and the dynasty w'hich bore the
name claims to have been so called, because king Pallava, the progenitor of the race,
was “ suddenly born to him {i.e. Aivatthaman) on a litter of sprouts {^pallava) in the
words of the KaSakudi plates. ^ The form pallava occurs in two of the earliest
inscriptions of the dynasty ® and Palava in the third. ^ These three records are in
Prakrit. The word pahlava, from which the name pallava appears to be derived, is
believed to be a corruption of Parthava, ® Parthiva® or Parthia, and Dr. Bhandarkar
calls the Indo-Parthians Pahlavas.^ The territories of the Indo-Parthians lay in
Kandahar and Seistan,® but extended during the reign of Gondophares (about A.D. 20
to 60) into the Western Punjab and the valley of the lower Indus.® The Andhra king
Gotamiputra, whose dominions lay in the Dakhan,^® claims to have defeated about A.
D. 130 the Palhavas along with the Sakas and Vavanas.®^ In the Junagadh inscription
of the Ksatrapa king Rudradaman belonging to about A.D. 150, mention i.s made of a
Pahlava mini.ster of his named Suvi^akha.^^ The Pallavas of the East Coast (who
finally settled in Kahcipuram) were the political successors of the Andhras in the
Telugu country.^®
Consequently, the Pallavas must have existed during the period of Andhra supre-
macy, either as their allies or as their foes. The Ksatrapa king Rudradaman, whose
minister was the Pahlava SuviSakha, wagedwar against his own son-in-law, the Andhra
king Pulumayi II., who is credited with the removal of the capital to Paithan on the
* In the description ofthe ofking Raghu, Kalidasaseems to locate the Yavanas somewhere in
the West (of India). Raghu is said to have advanced from Trikuta by an inland route to conquer the
Parasikas. The conquestofthe Yavanas followedthat ofthe Parasikas; Raghii’vamsa, IV, 59 to 65.
2 South-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. II, p. 355,verse 17.
3Ep, Ind., Vol. I, p. 5, text line 2, and Vol. VIII, p. 145,text line 2.
^Ibid., VoL VI, p. 86,text line 2.
» Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II,p. 317/., and Ind. Ant, Vol. X, p. 224. The Parthians appearto have
establishedthemselves in the Kabul valley about B.C. i6i {ibid., Vol. XVIII, p. 126).
'Parthivawasthename ofabranch ofthe Kausikas descended through thesage Visvamitra from Kuiika
whowasbroughtup amongthe Pahlavas. InthePahladpurpillarinscription, a king named Sisupala bears the
t X it 5 l C e , " ^ p p p S r . e o e t 3 e h 5 c i 6 t s o t a r o rt o 4 i f 0 c 8 l t . e he en a ti r t m l y ed o “ f A the pe P e a p rt i h n i t v o as th ; e ” e D a r r . ly F h l i e s e t t o ’ r s y Gu of pt I a nd I i n a sc ” ri p p u t b i l o i n s s h , ed p. in 25 t 0 l . ie y. Bo. Br. R. A S ’ Vol
® Prof. E. J. Rapson’s Coins, 15.
Mr. V. A. Smith’s Catalogueof Coins in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, p. 36. From the Periplus com-
a
p
t
os
w
e
a
d
r
ab
a
o
m
u
o
t
ng
A.
t
D
h
.
em
8
s
0
e
,
l
w
v
e
es
le
{
a
I
r
n
n
d.
t
A
h
n
a
t
t
.,
th
V
e
ol
I
.
nd
V
u
I
s
II
v
,
al
p
l
.
ey
33
w
8
a
).
sunderthepower ofthe Parthians, who were continuall^v
o
B
f
ay
My
o “
s
f
o
B T
r
e h
e
n e g
a
a
n
A l n
d
d t
i
h o
n
r i
t
a t
h
s s
e
s e o
n
x u
o
t r
r
c e
t
e n
h
d i
a
e n
s
d t
f
h t
a
e h
r
ei W
a
r e
s
s a
t
t u
h
t e
e
h r o n
r
r
i
i
v
G t
e
h y
r
a a t
N
l s
a
o .
r
n
b
g
a
I t
d
n h
a
e t
.
h c e ou s r o s u e th o , f t t h h e e ir G d o o d m a i v n a i r o i n f w r a o s m c i a ts rr m i o e u d t i h nt o o n th t e he no s r h t o h re e s rn of ^Dar t t h s e
'^1“’ P- Andhra king’s victoryoverthesetribes was not individual but
col,l,ective. The Sakasheadedby Nahapana mighthavebeenthepredominant
partnersof thecoalition.
Ksat « ra I p b a id k ., in V g o - l. VIII, p.49. Suvisakha was not mer M elyaminister butthe governoroftwo rprovinces ' under tuhiec
a a t ls D o ha s f e i e ak p a , (j 2 a 2 J 1 , , (^ b .^ e ? l . ow A , ma n r ot a e va 3. ti m th _ e Gunt t u h r e e D a i r s l t i r e i s c t t), the capital hi o t f he t r h t e o A k n n d ow h n r , as ha ; d Rb ^ a h g i o d ver V n o o l r V un I der n h « i c m »

^
THE PALLAVAS.
319
^
Godavari.^ The Ksatrapa king was victorious but did not pursue his advantage to the
uttermost. Perhaps it was this war that brought about (in some manner at present
unknown) the removal or migration “ of the Pahlavas (or Palhavas\ who had been in
the service of the Ksatrapa king, to the eastern portion of the Andhra dominions.®
They must have remained here a pretty long time before acquiring sovereignty. Irr
fact, the Pahlavas (or Palhavas) must have moved into the Godavari and Kistna deltas
about the middle of the second century. The Andhras ceased to be the ruling
power in the third century A.D. * andtheir place on the East Coast was apparently
taken by the Palhavas, who seem to have transformed themselves into Pallavas. If this-
surmise be proved by future researches, the Pallavas of Kancipuram must have come
originally from Persia, though the interval of time which must have elapsed since
they left Persiamust be several centuries.® As the Persians are generally known to
^ Mr. V. A. Smith’s Early History ofIndia second edition, p. 200.
- It is true no tradition hasbeen preserved of this migration. But it mustbeborne in mind thatalreadyin
Puranic times, theyhadbeen settled in India andwere lookedupon practically as indigenous Ksalriyas.
^ A somewhat similar case is the movement ofthe Calukyasinto the Godavari delta during the reign of
Piilikesin II. from Badami in the Bombay Presidency. Here,thecircumstanceswhich brought aboutthe moveare
known. A branch ofthe Calukyas established themselvesinthe Godavari and the Kistna deltas, whilethe main,
line continued at Badami. In all probability, thewhole Pablava tribe did not moveto the East Coast, but only a
detachment of them. Fromthewayin which the Indian astronomer Varahamihira mentionsthe Pahlavas, it may
beconcludedthat the major portion of the triberemained in their original territory.
^ Mr. V. A. Smith’s Early History ofIndia^ p. 203. Mr. Smith remarks thatthe third
centuryA.D.is one of the dark spaces in thespectrum of Indianhistory, andalmostevery event of that time is.
concealedfrom viewbyan impenetrableveil ofoblivion.^’ Accordingly, we cannot expectto find any record of
themigrationofthe Pallavas into the Telugucountryor oftheirriseto power.
° In the second edition ofhis EarlyHistory ofIndia, Mr.VincentSmith discredits the theory accepted in
thefirsteditionthatthe Pallavasof Southern Indiawere from Persia. On p. 404. he states that the origin and-
affinities of the Pallavasremain obscure but remarks lateron (p.423) that recentresearch does not support the
theoryofthe foreign origin ofthe Pallavas. Hethinks itmorelikely that the Pallavaswerea tribe, clan orcaste
which wasformed inthenorthern part ofthe Madras Presidency, possibly in the Vefigi country, between the-
Krsnaand Godavaririvers (p. 423). This part of the Telugu country was included in the dominions of the
Andhras. Iftheclanwas actually formed there, the process must have commenced long before the Andhras
ceasedto betherulingpower. In fact, the clan must have acquired a distinct political status even while the
Andhraswereinpower. Thus we would have two tribes bearing almost the same name, the Palhavas in
Western India, whom the Andhra king Gotamiputra defeatedalongwith the Sakas and Yavanas, and the Palla-
vasinthedelta of the Godavari, whose political relationship to the Andhras would remain to be disclosed
by future researches. Why the indigenous tribe which was formed in the Godavari delta calleditself
Pallava, a name which wouldlead to their being mistaken forthe Palhavas of Western India is a question
which, to mymind, mustbesatisfactorilyanswered before the theory ofindigenous origin can beaccepted. One
pointwhich mightbetaken asaproofoftheforeign origin ofthe Pallavas has tobe noted here. The indigenous
Ksatriyatribes (oratleastthose which werelooked upon as such) belonged either to the solar or to the lunar
race. Forinstance, the Colas belonged tothe solarraceand the Pandyasto the lunar. The Ceras seem to have
belongedto the solar race. The Calukyas—both the Eastern and Western—were of the lunar race. The
Rastrakutaswerealso of thesame race. Ontheotherhand, the Pallavastrace theirdescentfromthe god Brahma
but not from theSun or the Moon, though they are admitted to have been Ksatriyas. Besides, none of the
ancient kings mentionedin the Puranas figuresinthe ancestry ofthe Pallavas. The indigenoustribes, however,,,
alwaystracedtheir ancestry from some of the famous kings knownfromthe Puranas. The Cslas, for instance
claimed Manu, Iksvaku, Mandhatf, Mucukunda and Sibi; the Pandyas were descended from the emperor
Pururavas;’the Cerashad Sagara, Bhagiratha, Raghu, Dasarathaand Rama fortheir ancestors. TheCalukyas
had along list of Puranic sovereigns in their ancestry. The Rastrakutas were descendants of Yadu and
belonged to the Satyaki branch crcla . n. The Ganga kings ofKalihganagarawere descended from the Moon
andclaimed Pururavas, Ayus, Nahusa, YayatiandTurvasufor their ancestors [Ind.Ant., Vol. XVIII, p. 170).
The Western Gahgas ofTalakad wereapparentlyof thesolar race and had Iksvaku for their ancestor (Mr.
,
Rice’s Mysore Gaz.etteer, Vol. I, p.308). The only king mentioned in the mythical genealogy of the Pallavas
is Asbkavarman, son of king Pallava, who, as Prof. Hultzsch rightly suspects, is probably amodification of
the Maurya emperor Asoka” [SouthHnd,Inscrs,, Vol. II, p. 342). No doubt, the earliest Pallava records were
found inthe Kistna delta, Butthiscannotbetaken topointtoanindigenousorigin ofthe family. Allthese facts
taken together raiseapresumption that the Pallavas of Southern India were not an indigenous tribe in the
sensethattheColas, Pandyas and Ceraswere.
2 Y 2

220 ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORi.
Indian poets under the name Parasika, the term Pahlava or Pallava must uenote the
Arsacidan Parthians, as stated by Professor Weber.
‘ Tondaiyar ’ appears to have beenthe name of the Pallavas according to Tamil
literature^ and the Pallava king was called Tondaiman. The Pallava country was
called Tundaka-visaya^ or Tondaka-rastra* in the 8th century A.D. The origin of the
name is obscure. Tradition has it that the first Tondaiman was the illegitimate son of
a Cola king by a Naga woman. ^ It has also been suggestedthat the original name of
the province bestowed on this illegitimate Cola prince was Tonda- or Tondar-
mandalam, i.e. “ the province of the slaves.” ® This story, if true, ® would make the
Pallavas a mixed tribe made up of the Colas and the-Nagas. ^ The Nagas may only
denote here some aboriginal tribe. But it is doubtful if this story explains the origin of
the Pallavas,® or if it only shows how they got possession of Kancipuram and the
surrounding country at some stage of their history. In the ancient Tamil poem
Manimegalai, reference is made to a Cola king named Nedumudikkifii (XXIV^ 29)®
^ The Pallavakingof Kaiicipuram isoften called Tondaiyar hdn, Toondaiyor marugan occurs in the
ancientTamil poem Perumbdnarruppadai.
2 Ep. Ind.^ Vol. V, p. 203.
3 South'dnd. Insets*, Vol. II, p. 359*
^ Ibid,, p. 377. We are not told where theadventurous Cola methis sweetheart, butthelatter was prudent
enough toobtainthe king’sordersaboutthe disposal ofher issue. It was settledthat sheshouldlet thechild float
on the sea with atwigofthe iondai plant tied roundhiswaist. Theking promised torecognize the child by
thisemblem andto provideakingdom for him. ‘Whetherornotthis is alaterimprovement ofthe story found in
thepoem Manimegalai (tobe mentioned presently) isa questionwhich cannot be answeredat present. The
prince appearsto havebornethe nameor surnameTiraiyan, asthe waves {tirai) ofthe seabrought him ashore.
This name ispreservedin Tiraiyan-^ri, the ancientnameof thevillageTenneri in the Chingleput District {Annual
Report on Epigraphy for 1900-1, paragraph 9). Samudradatta-catiirvedimahgalam, one of the boundaries
of the donative village in the Udayendiram grant, was probably calledaftera Pallava kingor prince named
Samudradatta. The word Samudradatta might, inthat case, be a Sanskrt translation of Tiraiyan, which is
derived from tirai, ‘waves’ or‘the sea’.
® Taylor’s Catalogue, Vol. Ill, p. 427.
® No reference ismadeto the story in any epigraphical record. There is, however, an allusion to it in
the Rayakola plates of Skandasisyavikramavarman, who must have been a Gahga-Pallava. The earlier
Prakrt and Sanskrt charters of the Pallavas do not furnish any mythical genealogy. Theysimplymention
theBharadvaja-§'r;2fr<2to which the dynasty claimed to belong. The Kuram grant of Paramesvaravarman 1.
{South-Ind, Insets., Vol. I, p. 152),theKasakueji platesof Nandivarman Pallavamalla {ibid., Vol. 11 , p* 355),and
the Udayendiram grant ofthe same king {ibid,, p. 370) tell usthat king Pallavawastheson ofthe Mahdbhdrata
hero Asvatthaman. The mother of king Pallava wasthecelestial nymph Menakaaccording tothe second ofthe
above-mentioned copper-plate grants and Madani according tothe Amaravati pillar (now set up in theMadras
Museum) whichmustbelongto a later period [South-Ind. Insets., Vol. I,p. 27). We haveno meansofascertain-
ing why the Pallavas chose A.svatthaman for their ancestor. I would,however, offeraconjecture. Atthe time
whenthemythical Pallavagenealogy was invented, the Panclyas, who were popularly believed to have been
descended from the five Pandavas, werethe enemies of the Pallavas. Asvatthaman’s enmitytothe Pandavas
iswell known. Itwas hethat conceivedand carried out the terrible revenge which ended in the treacherous
slaughter of thePanclavaforces. The Kas'akudi plates tell us [South-Ind. Insers., Vol. II,p. 355) that, “ atthe
risingof Asvatthaman’s anger, Krsna, Arjuna and Bhima became terrified and threw down their weapons
without! any opposition.” ThenamePallava is transferred in the copper-plate grants from the tribe tothe
.firstking. The sameisthe case in early Cola and Pamlya records.
’ThebirudaSamhirnajdtih occurs inthe UppercaveatTrichinopoly. Itwas perhaps meant to be applied
tothe Paliava KingGunabhara (Mahendravarman 1.) who excavatedthecave; Director-General’s Annual for
1903-04, p. 271.
H
* this story has any reference to the origin of the Pallavas, it can only show that they werenot indi-
genous;.
® 1his Colakingalso bore the names Killi-Valavan, Mavan-Killi, Vadiverkilli and Venverkilji, He is
believed tohave foughtabattle on thebank of the river Kari againstthe Cerasand Pandyas. During hisreign
toe town of Kavirippumbattinam appearsto have been submerged in the ocean. There was also a severe
faminein andaround Kaiicipuram duringhis reign. A Buddhist caityabuilt at Kaiicipuram bytwo Cola kings
namedTodukalarkijliandTiinaiyOangilli
is mentioned inthe poem Manimegalai (XXVIII, 172).

CHE PALLAVAS.
221
Avho casually met a Naga^ princess in a grove at his capital Kavirippumbattinam.
Her name was Pilivalai and she was the daughter of the Naga king Vajaivanan.
The Cola king had a son by the Naga princess. But there is nothing here to show
that the province of which Kancipuram was the capital, was conferred on this prince.
Consequently, this story appears to be different from the one mentioned above.^
The Pallavas with whose history we are now concerned, may, until their origin is
satisfactorily established by indisputable evidence, be supposedto be identical with the
Pahlavas, Palhavas and Pahnavas of the Puranas. This identification is based on ety-
mologicalgrounds and supportedbythe fact that the Palhavas formed adistinct element
in the population of Western India early in the second century. Their movement from
Western India to the East Coast is not only possible but rendered likely by known
historical facts. Future researches must disclose the actual circumstances which led
to the movement of the Palhavas to the East Coast and to their assumption of
sovereignty.
As I have already remarked, the Pallavas were the political successors of the
Andhras® in the Godavari and Kistna deltas and consequently, the former must have
acquired sovereignty soon after the latter ceased to be the ruling power. The
Andhras probably lost their dominion about the middle of the third century and the
Pallavas may be supposed to have taken their place about the end of the same
-century.^
Coming now to the history of the Pallavas, we find that the existence of the
dynasty as well as its dominion has been unearthed mainly through the efforts of
epigraphists. The family w^as altogether forgotten and only a few traces of its
existence can be found in South-Indian literature.® This may be partly due to the
fact that the bulk of the existing literature came into existence after the Pallavas
had ceased to be the dominant power in the South.® Mr. Vincent Smith explains
the fact by supposing that the Pallava power was superimposed upon the ancient
^ The Tamilpoem alsomentions atownnamedNagapuram in Savaka-nadu which appears
to be the Tamil name of the island of Java. Two kings of Nagapuram are here mentioned, mz. Bhumi-
candraand Punyaraja, who claimedto be descended from the god Indra. That there was communication in
ancient times between the Indian continentand the island ofJava is provedbytwo Sanskrt inscriptions found
atBuitenzorg mentioning king Purnavarman {Ind, Ant., Vol. IV, plate facing p. 356). These records may
-belong roughly to the sixth century A. D.
2 Thereis, however, considerable resemblance between the two stories. Perhaps the account found in
the Manimegalaiwas added to in later times.
3 Therearesome Pallavacoinswhich in stylebear some resemblance to those of the Andhras and may
therefore, possibly belong to the same period, i.e.secondandthirdcenturies A. D.j Professor Rapson’sIndian,
Coins, p. 37. It isalso worthyofnotethatone ofthelast kingsof the Andhradynastywas Sivaskanda, whilethe
earliest known Pallava kingis Sivaskandavarman. The language and phraseology of the earliest Pallava
recordsalso resemblethoseofthe Andhrainscriptions.
* According to Sir Walter Elliot, the greater part of Dravida bore in ancient times the name of
Kurumba-bhumi, which extended across the whole peninsula from the Coromandel to the Malabar Coast.
The eastern portion of this tract of country received thename Tonda-mandalam on its conquestbythe Colas.
The division of this province into twenty-four kdttamsis attributed to the Kurumbas. The Cola king Karikala
is said to have subdued the Kurumbas. The tribe is, however, noteven referred to in epigraphical records.
Nor isthereany mention of it in the Brhatsamhita of Varahamihira. In local records they are said to have
belongea to the Yadava raceand to havebeen Jainas by religion. It is difficultto decidewhether the Kurumbas
wereactually Pallavasor distinct from them. Sir Walter Elliot assigns some coins to the Kurumbas and
others to the Pallavas.
^ This might also beduetothefact thatthe Pallavaswere looked upon asforeigners.
® EarlyTamil literatureconcerneditselfmainlywiththeindigenoius Colas, Pandyas and Ceras.

archaeological report.
222
territorial states much in the same way as the Mahratha power was in later times
and w*as confined to the levying of tribute and blackmail.^ Accordingly, the very
existence, he says, of the Pallavas was forgotten and tradition never assigned any
normal limits to the Pallava dominions as it did to the Cola, Pandya and Cera.^
The earliest known records of the Pallavas are three Prakrt copper-plate
charters, v{2. (i) the Mayidavolu plates of Sivaskandavarman,® (2} the Hirehadagalli
plates of the same king^ and (3) the British Museum plates of Carudevi." The first
and the third have been found in the Guntur District, while the finding place of the
second is not known. The first two present to us king Sivaskandavarman, presumably
the son ofa king named Bappa. Sivaskandavarman may at present be supposedto have
reigned about the beginning of the fourth century A.D.® In the Mayidavolu plates he
figures as the heir-apparent {yummaharaj a) and as the reigning king in the other.
These two grants give us a glimpse into the condition of Southern India which it is
worth our while to examine for a moment. In the first place, Sivaskandavarman pro-
bably belonged to a period considerably later than the conquest of Southern India by
the Pallavas, whenever that might have been. In other words, it does notlook as if
Sivaskandavaraman had conquered Kancipuram.^ The king is said to belong to the
Bharadvaja-gJ//«. The earlier grant was issued from Kaficlpuram, while the order
contained in it was addressed to the governor at Dhanakada, z.e. Amaravati in the
modern Guntur district, and the donative village was situated in the Andhra country
{Andhreipatha).^ It thus appears that the Pallava dominions included at the time not
only Kancipuram and the surrounding province but also the Tclugu country as far
north as the river Krsna. In the Hirehadagalli plates, Sivaskandavarman is said to
have performed the agnistoma, vajapdya and a^vamedha sacrihees. The last could
have been undertaken by the king only after conquering all his neighbours. That his
dominions must have been extensive is clear from the grant, which is addressed to
“lords of provinces royal princes, generals, rulers of districts, custom-house
officers, prefects of countries ’’and others. The king’s father had presented many
crores of gold and one hundred thousand ox-ploughs. The land granted by
’ Early History of India, pp, 403 and 423.
2 Accordingto the Tondamandala-^atakam, Tondamandalam {i.e, the Pallava territory) was bounded on the
north by theTirupati and Kalahasti mounta A ins; on tlie south bythe river Paklr ; and on the west by the Ghauts
(Taylor’s Catalogue, Vol. Ill, p. 29). verse attributed to the poetess Auvaiyar describes Tondai-
mandalam as the country bounded by the Pavalamalai, i.e. the Eastern Ghauts in the west Vengadam,
;
Tirupati in the north ; the sea to the east ; and Pinagai, i.e. the Southern Pennar in the south. The greatest
length of the provinceis said to be full 20 hddam or nearly 200 miles. Another verse attributed to the same
poetess is said to describe the characteristics of the southern kingdoms; Malai-nadu [i.e. Kerala) has
e o l f ep l h e a a n rn t e s d ; t m h e e n. Col A a v c a o r u i n a t n r t y o h f as the ple n n a t m y e of To f n o d o a d; i- t m h a e nd P a a l n a d m ya is co D u a n n t d ry ak h a a - s na pe d a n r , ls w ; h a ic n h d t i h s e a T p o p n a d r a e i n - t n ly adu de i r s iv fu e l d l
from the Sanskrt Dandakaranya, i,e. the forest of Dandakamentioned inthe Ramdyana andthePuranas.
^ Ep. Ind., Vol. VI, pp. 84 to 89.
^ Ibid., Vol. I, pp.2 to 10.
® Ibid., Vol. VIII,pp, 143 to 146.
® The last Andhra king was Pulumayi III., whose reign might have come to an end in A.D. 236.
Consequently, the Pallavas may be supposedtohaveassertedtheirindependenceabout the end of the century!
Itis,however,possible that the event took placemuch earlier.
7 If he were the first Pallava king of Kancipuram, he would in all probability have mentioned his
conquest of the town. It may^ therefore, be supposed thatthe occupation of Kancipuram bythe Pallavas was
effectedby some pred.ecessorof Sivaskandavarman.
» Andhripatha_ is aterritorial term similarto Uttarapaiha and Dahindpaiha. Va^nga^vali, hich occurs in
1aterBanainscriptions, is apparently aTamiltranslation oftheterm Andhrapatha.

—
THE PALF.AVAS.
223
Sivaskandavarman was to be “ free from taxes. from the taking of sweet and sour
milk from troubles about salt and sugar, from forced labour, from the taking of the
oxen in succession, from thetaking of grass and wood, fromthe taking of vegetables
andflowers.” It thus appears that, unless specially exempted by the king, the vil-
lagers were liable to all these taxes and imposts. The earlier grant threatens with
corporal punishment those who transgress the terms of the royal order. The British
Museum plates appear to be later than the other two and mention three generations of
Pallava kings, viz. the Maharaja Vijaya-Skandavarman ^ his son, the Ymamahdraja
;
Vijaya-Buddhavarman and his son Buddhyahkura. These three Prakrt grants prove
;
thatthere was a time when the court language was Prakrt even in Southern India.
\hsnugopa of Kanci, mentioned in the Allahabad pillar of Samudragupta, might
be later than the foregoing.“ There is not much doubt that Visnugopa was a Pallava
;
and as the Allahabad pillar has been assigned to the middle of the fourth century,^ it is
evident that the Pallavas had by that time become firmly settled in Conjeeveram.
The Sanskrt charters of the dynasty are later, and three of them* furnish the
genealogy for five generations, viz. Skandavarman his son Viravarman; his
;
son Skandavarman II.; his son the Yuvamahdrdja Visnugopa; and his son
Sirhhavarman II/ The Dar§i fragment belongs to the time of the great-grandson
of Vira-Korcavarman,® i.e. Viravarman. Two other charters,’ which are
later, furnish different pedigrees.® The former are dated from Da^anapura,
3 Skandavarman is the earliest name derived from the Sanskrt charters,aswill be pointed out presently.
The interval of timewhich mighthave elapsed between thetime ofSivaskandavarman and Vijaya-Skandavarman
isnotknown. Thelatter was probably earlierthan Skandavarman I. ofthe Sanskrt charters.
Visnugopa may be supposed tobe laterthan Sivaskandavarman, because the latter cannot be assigned to
aperiodsubsequenttothe middle ofthe4th century A.D.
® Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p. 319*
^ These are (i) the Uruvupalli grant ofthe Yuvamahdraja Visnugopavarman [Ind. Ani.^ Vol. V, p. 50) ; (2)
the Mahgalur grant of Siiiihavarman {ihid., p. 154); and (3) the Pikiragrant of the same king {Ep. Ind,^ Vol,
VIII,p. isQ).
5 Inscriptions have been found only ofthe Yu'vamahdrdja Visnugopaand ofhis son Simhavarman, and all
thatwe canbesureaboutis that Simhavarman reigned foratleast 11 years. As regards the first three kings,
we cannot be certain that they actually ruled untilwe findrecords of their time. In the Tirukkalukkunram
inscription ofthe Cola king Rajakesarivarman {Ep. Ind., Vol. Ill, p. 279) reference is riiadeto a Skandasisya,who
was presumably a predecessor of the Pallava king Narasithhavarman I. of the Simhavisnu line. This
Skandasisyamightbe identical with one ofthetwo Skandavarmans mentioned in the Sanskrt charters.
6 Ep. Ind., Vol. I, p. 397f-
7 These are: (i) the Cendalur plates of Kumaravisnu II. {Ep. Ind.^ Vol. VIII, p. 233) and (2) the
Udayendiram grant of Nandivarman {ihid,, Vol. Ill, p. 142).
® Thesetwo are dated fromthe‘victorious Kancipura.’ The Cendalur plates givethe following pedigree :
Skandavarman.
Kumaravisnu I.
BuddhIavarman.
Kumaravisnu 'll.
Dr. Hultzsch, who has edited the inscription, concludes from palGeographical considerations thatthesefour
kings ruled in the intervalbetween Simhavarman II.' and Simhavisnu. The Udayendiram grant furnishes the
—
following succession:
Skandavarman I.
SimhavaIrman.
, . . . .
Skandavarman II.
,
Nandivarman. ~ .
Itisatpresentimpossible to sayhow thekings inthese two pedigrees were related to one another orif they
wereconnectedwith those Pallava kings whose grantsare datedfrom Palakkada, Dasanapuraand Meitmatura,

ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
224
Palakkada, and Menmatura. The grants belonging to this series have been
found mostly in the modern Nellore and Guntur districts. A single one has
been discovered at Udayendiram in the Gudiyatam taluka of the North Arcot district.
But Professor Kielhorn, who has re-edited the text, has called in question its genuine-
ness. The fact that the earlier inscriptions of this series are not dated from Kanci-
puram raises a presumption that that citywas not the Pallava capital for some time
during the interval. If this presumption is established by future discoveries, it may
be concluded that the Pallavas were driven out from Conjeeveram by one of the
indigenous tribes of the Tamil country—say the Colas^- and had to retire northwards
for a time. The kings of this series are generally described as fervent Bhagavatas
meditating on the feet of Bhagavat (Vignu) and as being devoted to the feet of their
fathers. They belonged to the Bharadvaja-^J/ra and were the rightful maharajas of
the Pallavas, who were the abodes of the fortunes of other kings overcome by their
own valour and who, accordingto rule, liad performed many horse-sacrifices. Several
kings of the series bore names connected with Visnu such as Visnugopa and Kumara-
visnu. Perhaps it was a time when the Vaisnava creed was in the ascendant. Future
researches may prove that some of the Vaisnava Ajvars flourished during the period.''^
Vaisnava tradition has it that Tirumalisai-Alvar, one of the early saints, was ill-treated
by the contemporary Pallava king, who had subsequently to repent of his conduct.
The boast of these Pallava kings to have performed horse-sacrifices may prove to
have been borrowed from Sivaskandavarman of the Prakrt charters, who must have
actually undertaken the task. If my surmise prove correct, the Pallavas must have
regained Kahcipuram towards the close of the period with which we are now dealing.
The time when the kings who issued the Sanskrt charters flourished is not known.
But, roughly speaking, they may be assigned to the fifth and sixth centuries A.D.^
The chief characteristic of Pallava history so far is that it has to be made out solely
from copper-plate grants. No stone monuments of the period have been hitherto
unearthed. Perhaps, the temples which did exist were of wood or some other
perishable material. Mr, Fergusson says : “The conclusion seems inevitable that
all the buildings anterior to the year A.D. 700 or thereabouts were erected in wood
or with some perishable materials, and have perished either from fire or from causes,
which in that climate, so soon obliterate any but the most substantial erections
constructed with themost substantial materials.”^
The Pallava dominions probably comprised at the time the modern districts of
^TheColaking Karikala, who probably flourished in the sixth century, claims to have been the overlord of
Trilocana-Pallava. The Cola king is also said to have beautified the town of Kaficipiiram with go\d{Ajinzial
Report onEpigraphy for 1905-6, Part II, paragraph 15). The astronomer Varahamihira,who probablyflourished
atthe beginning of thesixth century A.D., locates the Pahlavas in the soiithwvest division and Kancipuram in
the southern division. Ifthis is not due to a mistake, it maybethatthe Pallavas of the East Coast wereat the
timeoccupying an inferior position. But Varahamihira’s ideas of geography seem to havebeen somewhat haxy.
Helocates the Dravidas in the south-west division. j3utwe know from chapter 9 of the Bhlsmaparvan ofthe
Mahdbhdratathatthe Dravidas were asouthern tribe.
Threeof AeVaisnava.Alvarswerethe earliest, vie., Poygai Alvar, Pudaltalvarand Peyalvar. Thefirst
wasbornatKaficipuram,the secondatKadanmallai or Mavalipuram,j.e. the Seven Pagodas and the third at
T T i o ru n m d a a y h il m a a i n , da i l .e a . m M . ylapore. These three are believed to have been contemporaries. They were allborn in
3 'ihe Simhavisnuline musthavebecomepowerful either at the beginning of the seventh or the end of the
^ixth century A.D., and it may be supposed that therewas some interval oftime between the kings of the
Satxskrtcharter’sandthe Simhavisnuline,
^ Caw Temples of m,

THE PALLAVAS. 225
Nellore, Guntur, Kistna, Kurnool and, perhaps, also Anantapur, Cuddapah, and
Bellary. The Kadambas of Banavasi, who were originally Brahmanas, threatened
to defy the Pallavas. The founder of the Kadamba family was MayuraSarman.
He went to the Pallava capital in order to study the sacred lore. There
he had a fierce quarrel with a Pallava horseman. What the cause of the
quarrel was and how it ended we are not told. “ With the hand dexterous
in grasping the ktila grass, the fuel, the stones, ladle, the melted butter and the
oblation vessel, he {i.e. Mayura§arman) unsheathed a flaming sword, eager to conquer
the earth. Having overcome the frontier guards of the Pallavas, Mayura§arman
occupied the inaccessible forest stretching to the gates of Sriparvata, and levied taxes
from the circle of kings headed by the great Bana. The Pallava king was shrewd
enough to recognize the Brahmana’s bravery, and took him into his service. Mayura-
sarman was rewarded with territory bordered by the waters of the western sea.®
Thus a powerful enemy was gained over and treated as a useful ally. The Brahmana
warrior’s successors do not, however, appear to have been on friendly terms with the
Pallavas. One of them named MrgeSavarman boasts of having been the fire of
destruction to the Pallavas,® and another called Ravivarman is said to have conquered
Visnuvarman and other kings and overturned Candadanda, lord of Kahcl.^ Mr.
Rice mentions a Nanakkasa Pallavaraja as overcoming the Kadamba king
Krsnavarman and assigns him to the middle of the fifth century A.D.^ Discussing
the date of the Kadambas, Dr. Fleet concludes: “At present, all that can be
safely said is that the Kadambas are to be referred approximately to the 6th
century A.D.’’®
Later Eastern Calukya tradition refers to a battle between the Pallava king
TrilScana and the Calukya Vijayaditya,' who claims to have come from Ayodhya
in the north. The latter was victorious, but lost his life.® The battle probably
took place somewhere in the Cuddapah district, as the village of Mudivemu,
where the queen of the victor took refuge after the battle, has been identified by
Mr. Ramayya Pantulu with Peddamudiyam in the Cuddapah District.® The event
may be placed roughly about the beginning of the 6th or end of the 5th
century A.D.“ Though this story is found only in records of the iith century
and is not corroborated by earlier Inscriptions, it is evidently based on the
* Ep. Ind., Vol. VIII, p. 34, verse 13.
2 Ibid., p.35, verse 21.
® BombayGazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p. 288.
‘ Ibid., p. 289.
5 Ep. Cam., Vol. XI, p.5 (DG. 161.)
* Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I,Part II, p. 291.
’ His son Visnuvardhanamarrieda Pallava princess. He^boasts of having overcome the Kadamba, Gahga
andother kings. He was evidentlyon friendly terms with the Pallavas, though-his father had been killed in a
battlefoughtagainstthem.
® This account occurs for the first time inan inscription ofthe Eastern Calukyaking Vimaladitya, dated in
A. D. 1018 {Ep. Ind., Vol. VI, p.349).
’ Annual Reporton Epigraphy for 1905-06, PartII, paragraph40.
“ This result isarrived at asfollows: The Calukya king Pulikesin II. was reigning about the beginning
of the 7th century A.D. Four generations intervened between him and Vijayadityawhofoughtagainst TrilC-
cana Pallava. Itwasapparentlythe same Pallavakingthatwas afeudatoryofthe Colaking Karikala, as I have
already stated The C.alukyainvasion,the Cojaexpansionandthe Kadambarevolt musthave contributed to the
decline ofthePallavas inthe6thcentury A.D.; seealso note i on thepreceding page.
2 G

archeological report.
1226
belief current in the iith century, that the Pallava dominions extended in those early
times to the modern Ceded districts.
From the reference in connection with the Kadamba Mayurasarman to the great
Bana, it may be presumed that the latter was a Pallava feudatory and that his
dominions lay somewhere in the Ceded districts.^ We are not now concerned with
the later history of the Ranas, who claim to be descended from the demon Mahabali.
It is enough here to remark that a Bana king figures as a feudatory of the Pallava
king Nandippottara§ar—apparently the last of the family, about whom more will be
said in the sequel.^ The Banas seem to have played a very important part during the
period subsequent to the decline of the Pallavas. Accordingly, so far as it is known
at present, the only formidable opponents of Pallava expansion in the north during the
period were the Kadambas. In the south, the Cojas, Pandyas, and Kerajas or any
one of them who happened to be dominant in the Tamil country—must have offered
serious opposition.® But, at present, we have no records testifying to the struggle.
We now enter into a period of Pallava history for which the records are more
numerous. The facts available for this period are definite and the chronology is not
altogether a field of conjecture and doubt. The earliest stone monuments of Southern
India belong to this period.^ In fact, the foundations of Dravidian architecture were
laid by the earlier kings of this series.® The Pallavas now engage in a life-and-death
struggle against the Calukyas of Badami in the Bombay Presidency, which partly
accounts for the expansion of the former in the Tamil country. The hostility between
the two tribes became so intense, that each looked upon the other as its natural
enemy.® The history of this period consists mainly of the events of the war with the
Calukyas which lasted almost a century'^ and which seems to have been the ultimate
cause of the decline and dowmfall of both the Pallavas and Calukyas about the middle
of the 8th century.® The relationship which the Pallava kings ofthis series bore to
the earlier ones is nowhere explained, though four of the latter are mentioned among
‘ This seemstobe implied from the Tajagunda inscription, verses 14to 16 ; Ep. Ind.,Vol. VIII,p. 34 f.
2 AnnualRiport on Epigraphy for 1903-4, paragraph 11.
3 The Colas under Karikalaand Ki]ji-Valavan seem to have been in possession of Kaucipuram see also
5
above, p. 220, note9, and p, 224, note i.
^ Thebedscut intothenatural cavesand the Brahmi inscriptions accompan3dng‘ someof them are, ofcourse,
earlier* Buttheir origin is obscure.
^ The monolithic caves of the Tamil country were excavated by the Pallava king Mahendravarman L The
ratha’i Seven Pagodas probably come next. The temples of Kailasanalha and Vaikuniha-PerumaJ at
Kanclpuram and the Shore temple at the Seven Pagodas have probably to be taken as later developments of
Pallava architecture.
® No satisfactory explanation has, so far, been offered for this natural enmity between tke Pallavas and
Calukyas. Itispossiblethat thehatred had a religiousbasis. The Pallavas were Saivas andhad the bull for
their crest, whilethe Calukyas were devotees of thegod Visnu and had the boar for theircrest. Butthere is no
reasontosupposethatin those early days religious bigotry went so far. The Calukyasare said to have come
from Ayodhyainthenorth andthe firstthingthey didaftergoing tothesouth wasthe defeat cf the Pallava king
Trilocana. From thetimeof PuHkesin II. thisenmitycontinued. Mr. Ricesays: “The name Calukya bears
asuggestiveresemblanceto the Greek name Seleukeia, and ifthe Pallavaswere really of Parthian connection
as theirnamewould*imply, we have a plausible explanation of the inveterate hatredwhich inscriptions admit to
have existedbetw'eenthe two, andtheir prolonged struggles may have been buta sequel of the contests between
the Seleucidse and the Arsacidseonthe banks ofthe Tigrisand Euphrates” {Mysore, Vol. I, p. 320).
7 The war apparently began with the Eastern campaign of Pulike^in IL which musthave taken placesome
timebefore A. D. 634-5 {Ep. Tnd„ Vol. VI, p. 3). Thelastimportantevent ofthe war is theinvasion of Kaild by
the Calukya king Vikram5ditya II., who reigned from A.D. 733-4 to 746*7. Kirtivarman II., son of
Vikramaditya II., also claims to have led an expeditionin his youth against the Pallavas. The Pallava king,
unableta fight in openbattle, took refuge in a fort, bufwas defeatedbythe Calukya prince.
* Ep, Ind., Vol,V, p. 157.

—
^ , ;
THE PALLAVAS. 227
the ancestors of the former in a Pallava copper-plate charter of the 8th century
A. D.^ The following isthe pedigree of this line of Pallava kings :
Pedigree ofthe Simhavisnufa^nily}
Unnamed ancestor.
Simhavisnu. Bhimavarman.
1 .
2. Mah1 endravarman I. Buddhav 1 arman.
3. Nar I asiitihavarman I. A . di.tyava I rman,
4. Mahendravarman II. Govindavarman.
1
5.
Parame§varapotavarman Hiranya[varman]
Paramesvaravarman
1.
Ugradanda-Lokaditya Isvarapotaraja.
6. Narasirnhavarman II.
Rajasirnha-Kalakala
Narasirnhavisnu.
7. Paramesvaravarman II. Mahendravarman III. 8. Nandivarman
Pallavamalla
Nandipotavarman^
The earliest king of this series is Sirnhavisnu,^ who claims to have vanquished the
Malaya, Kalabhra, Malava, Cola and Pandya kings, the Sirnhala king proud of the
strength of his arms and the Keralas.^ His sonandsuccessor was Mahendravarman I.
The war against the Calukyas apparently began during this reign. The causes
which brought it about are nowhere stated. Pulike§in II. of Badami, who was
Mahendravarman’s contemporary, ascended the throne in A.D. 609 and soon
—
overcame the great Harsavardhana of Kanauj the hero of Bana’s Harsacarita.^
Inthe course of his digvijaya, Pulike§in II. turned his arms against the South.® Pista-
pura, the modern Pithapuram in the Godavari district, was first reduced. Pulike^in
subsequently caused the splendour of the lord of the Pallavas, who had opposed the
rise of his power,’’ to be obscured by the dust of his army and to vanish behind the
walls of Kahclpura.
This invasion of the Pallava territory is indirectly acknowledged by Mahendra-
varman, who claimsto have defeated his chief enemies at Pullalara.® The Pallavas were
1 Theseare Skandavarman, Visuugopa, Virakiirca and Simhavarman mentioned in the Kasakudi plates
South-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. II, p»343.
2 This pedigreeis copied from the genealogygiven by Dr. Hultzsch on p. 344 ofSouth-Ind. duscrs,, VoL II,
and revised by Dr. Fleet {Bombay Gazetteer Vol. I, Part II, p. 323).
^ The village of Manali in the Saidapet taluka of the Chingleput district was in ancient times called
Simhavisnu-caturvedimafigalam accordingto an inscription of the Cola king Kulottunga I ; South'lnd^ Inscrs,,
Vol HI, p. 134-
4 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 356,verse 20. | ® Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. T, Part [I, p, 355. | ® Ep. Ind., Vol, VT p. it.
This mayimply a previous encounter of Pulikesin againstthe Pallavas.
s South-Ind, Insert., Vol. II, p. 343- It washere that two.battles were fought between the English and
Haidar AH of Mysore.
2 G 2

—
2-28 ARCH.?:OLOGICAL REPORT.
driven out of their possessions in the Telugu country, and their capital Conjeeveram
must also have been threatened. The hostile army evidently advanced as far as
Pullalur near Conjeeveram, where a decisive battle was fought and the enemy was
driven back. The Calukyas permanently occupied the northern part of the Pallava
dominions, and Visnuvardhana, younger brother of Pulikegin 11 who was probably
.,
sent out originally as the viceroy of the newly-acquired dominions, eventually estab-
lished himself at Vehgi and started the Eastern Calukya dynasty sometime before
A. D. 632.’ It is just possible that this defeat and loss of dominion in the north led
the Pallavas to extend their territory in the South. At any rate, no Pallava monu-
—
—
ments either documentary or architectural have been found so far, prior to the 7th
century A.D. in the Tamil country.^
The son of Mahendravarman I. was Narasirtihavarman I., who retrieved the
fortunes of the family by repeatedly defeating the Colas, Keralas, Kalabhras and
Pandyas.® He also claims to have written the word ' victory ’ as on a plate, on
Pullke§in’s back, which was caused to be visible {i.e. which was turned in flight after
defeat) at several battles.^ Narasirtihavarman carried the war into Calukya territory
and actually captured Vatapi, their capital. This claim of his is established by an
—
inscription found at Badami in the Bombay Presidency the modern name of Vatapi
from which it appears that Narasirtihavarman bore the title Mahamalla.® In later
times, too, this Pallava king was known as Vatapi-korida-Naragihgappottaraiyati.'* Dr.
Fleet assigns the capture of the Calukya capital to about A.D. 642.^ The war of
Narasirnhavarman with Pulike^in II. is mentioned in the Singhalese chronicle
Mahavamsa? It is also hinted in the Tam\\ Periyapuranain. The well-known saint
Siruttonda, who had his only son cut up and cooked in order to satisfy the appetite of
the god Siva disguised as a devotee, is said to have reduced to dust the city of Vatapi
for his royal master, who could be no other than the Pallava king Narasirnhavarman.*
The Saiva saint Tirunanasambandar visited Siruttorida at his native village of
Tiruccehgattahgudi, and the Devara hymn dedicated to the Siva temple of the village
mentions the latter and thus helps to fix the date of the former as well as of the
,;^aiva revival of which he was the central figure.
1 Bombay Gazetteer, Vol, I, Part II, p. 352.
2 The earliest architectural monuments of the Pallavas are the monolithic caves and the documentary ones
arethePallava inscriptions found in them.
^ Southind. Inscrs., Vol. I, p. 152.
These took place at Pariyala Manimahgala, Silramaraand other places. If Pulikesin was defeated at
Manimangalam inthe Conjeeveram taluka,he must have advanced into the heart of the Pallava territory. It
is not unlikely that these battlesas well^ as the encounterat PuHalur, were fought in the samecampaign. In the
battlesof Pariayala, Manimahgala and Suramara, Narasirnhavarman probably foughtas against the
invading army and drove it back. The battleof PuHalur, which was apparently earlier, might have been fought
by Mahendravarman himself, who may be supposedto havebeen defending thecapital against the invader.
^ Ind, Ant,, Vol IX, p. 100, and Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p. 328.
Ei, lnd„-yo\. III, p. 280.
’ Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p. 359.
Mr. L. C. Wijesinhas Translation, p.41 ff. The Singhalese princeManavammawasa friendof Narasiha
andhelpedhim to crush hisenemyking Vallabha. The grateful Narasiha supplied Manavamma twice with an
army to invade Ceylon. Onthe secondoccasionhe wassuccessful and occupied Ceylon,which he is supposed to
haveruledfrom A.D. 691 to 726.,
y Ep. Ind.,Vo\. Ill, p. 277. Paramelvaravarman I.also claims to have destroyed the Calukyacapital. A
still later conquest of Vatapi IS also known. It was effected by a Kodumbalur chief, apparemly during the
secondhalf oithegth centuryA.D. {Annual Reporton Epigraphyfor 1907-8, Part II, paragraph 85].

—
,
THE PALLAVAS. 229
The war with the Calukyas resulted in the abeyance of their power for some time
in their dominions. The Pallavas probably held the territory during the time of
Narasirhhavarman, his son Mahendravarman II., and during the early part of the reign
of the latter’s son and successor, Parame^varavarman I.^ The Kuram copper-plates of
the last king give a lengthy description of a fearful battle which was probably fought
at a village called Peruvalanallur.^ The battle ended in the defeat of the Calukya
Vikramaditya I., whose army consisted of several laksas and who took to flight
covered only by a rag. But ParameSvaravarman is said in other records to have
destroyed the city of Ranarasika a.htrudaol Vikramaditya I.^ Perhaps the former
repulsed at Peruvalanallar a counter-invasion undertaken in consequence of his attack
on the Calukya capital Vatapi. On the other hand, Vikramaditya I, claims to have
"received by surrender the town of Kahcl after defeating the lord of the Pallavas who
had been the cause of the humiliation and destruction of his family,”* Apparently as
a result of this vdctory, the Kurnool District, or at least a portion of it, which, as I have
already pointed out, belonged originally to the Pallavas, passed into the hands of the
Calukyas. Two copper-plate grants of Vikramaditya and two of his son Vinayaditya
have been found in that district.® Parameivaravarman’s son and successor was Raja-
sirhha,® who bore the surnames Kalakala, Atyantakama,^ Ranajaya, Sribhara, Citrakar-
muka and Ekavira.® He claims to have got rid of all sins by walking on the path of
the §aiva doctrine.® The biruda Sivacudamani,^® which he bore, confirms that Raja-
sirnha was a follower of the Saiva creed.**
^Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p,.362. Paramesvaravarman bore the titles Ugradanda andLokaditya
andwasalso called Isvarapotaraja ; ibid., p. 329and South-Ind. Inscrs,, Vol. I, p, 145.
-Southlnd. Infers,, Vol. I, p. 153^. and ibid,, Vol. II, p.344. The name PeruvalanallSr suggeststhat it
musthavebeen situated inthe Tamil country, and if this be the case, the Pallavas must only havesuccessfully
repelleda Calukyainvasion.
^South‘Ind. insers Vol. I, p. 13*
* Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p. 362. The ‘humiliation-’ and‘destruction’ of the Calukya family here
referredto mustalludetotheeventswhich happened duringthereign of the Pallavaking Narasirhhavarman.
^ Ibid., pp. 363 and 369. A fifth Calukyagrant, belonging tothe reign of Vikramaditya, is edited in the
volume of Nellore inscriptions, publishedby Messrs. Butterworth and Venugopaul Chetty. It has been re-edited
by Professor Hultzsch [Ep., Ind.,Vol. IX, p. 98). But, asthevillage granted bythe charterhas not been identi-
fied, it isnot quite safeto speculate aboutthe influencewhich the Calukyas of Badami mighthave exercised over
thehistoryof the Nellore district.
® The Kuram plates of Paramesvaravarman mention prince Vidyavinita-Pallavadhiraja, after whom the
Sivatempleat Kuram was called Vidyavinita-Pallava-Paramesvara. One of the niches of the outer wall in the
Kailasanaiha temple at Kancipuram is called Sri-Nityavinltesvara grha, which might owe its name to a
Pallava prince called Nityavinita. Thesetwo princes, Vidyavinita and Nityavinita, do notfigure in the Pallava
pedigree sofaras it has been made out. Thelatter name occursin the Trichinopoly uppercave as a biruda of
Mahendravarman I; see the Director-Generars Annual for 1903-4, p. 271.
’ Atyantakama and Sribhara figure also as thetitles of Narasimhavarman in the Mamallapuram inscrip-
tions; South-Ind. luLiCrs., Vol. I,p, i. Sir Walter Elliotfiguresacoin (Coins of Southern India, PI. I, No. 34)
wh'ch bears on the obverse a standing bull facing the proper leftand the legend Srlbharah over its back.
The reverse seems to bear a star. Thelegend on No. 37 of the sarne plate has been deciphered by Professor
Hultzsch as Srlnidhi andthat on No. 33zsMdnapara.
® Ekavirappadicceri, a quarter of Kancipuram during the reign ofParantaka I.,was evidentlycalled after
Rajasiiiiha ; South-Ind, Insers., Vol. I, p. 139.
p. 14.
The village of Ukkal in the North Arcot District was called Sivaculamanimangalam, apparently after
Rajasiihha ; ibid, Vol. Ill, p. 2.
The birudas Isdnasaranah (South-Ind, Insers., Vol. I, p. 15), Samkarabhahtah and Isvarahhahtah (ibid,
p. 18) of Rajasimha show that he was a devotee ofthe god Siva. It istherefore not impossiblethat heisoneof
the sixty-three canonized Saiva saints. The name Rajasiihha w^ould connecthim with the saint Kalnrcinga-
Nayanar, while the surnames p. 14) and Sri-Ekasundarah (ibid, p. 17) w'ould tempt one to
dentifyhim with the saint Aiyadigal Kadavarkon. Both ofthesesaintswere Pallavakings.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REPORT.
230
Rajasirhha built the central shrine of the Kailasanatha temple^ at Conjeeveram^,
while the shrine close to it in the same temple owes its existence to Mahendravarman
III.,® son of Rajasirhha. Parame§varavarman II., another son of Rajasirhha,
seems to have constructed the Vaikuritha-Perumal temple at Conjeeveram, which
is called Parame§vara-Visnugrham^ in one of its inscriptions and Parameccura-Vinna-
garam® in one of the hymns of the Vaisnava saint Tirumangai-Alvar, It is not likely
that Parame§varavarman I. built this temple, because no records of his reign have been
found in it, while the death of Parame§varavarman II. is referred to in the ancient
records engraved on a wall of the verandah running round the central shrine.® The
events which took place after his death are depicted by sculptures cut on the walls of
the same verandah.^ The Ka§akudicopper-plates hintthatthere was some dispute about
the succession after the death of Parame§varavarman II.® Nandivarman, also called
Nandivarman Pallavamalla, a collateral cousin of Parame§varavarman, is said to have
been chosenbythe subjects andto havebeen ruling the kingdom of the latter.® At any
rate, there is not much doubt that internal dissensions had set in inthe Pallava family.^®
* Dr. Hult2sch calls the Siva templeon ihe rockin the middle o( the bund of the large tank at Panamalai
inthe Villiipuramtaluka of the South Arcot District a cave temple [South-Ind. Inscrs,, Vol. I, p. 24). The
description of it in the Gaseiteerof the South Arcot District, Vol. I, p. 385, does not warrant its being called a
'cavetemple,’ and Mr. Sewell in his Lists of Antiquities, Vol. I, p. 209, describes itas “an old Siva temple on
a small hill.” The last verse of Rajasiihha’s inscription in the Kailasanatha temple (Rajasimhd Ranajayahy
etc.) is engraved on the Panamalai hillock.
^ A miracle is reportedto have been wrought during the reign of Rajasiihha. He is said to have heard a
“heavenlyvoice without body {ambaragatd nodni sariram •vind). Perhaps this was the cause of his building
the Rajasiihhesvara temple at Kancipuram, though no statementtothat effect is maie. In giving an account of
the life of the Saiva saint Pusalar Nayanar,the Tamil Periyapuranam mentions the building of a Siva temple at
Kancipuram by a Kadava {i.e. Pallava) king. The god Siva is saidto have appeared to the latter in a dream
and informed him that he should alter the date ofconsecration of the temple constructed by him. This was
necessary as the godhad tobe present at an imaginaryshrine built by the saint Pusalar-Nayanar. In the Kaila-
sanatha temple inscription, the nature of the information conveyedby the''heavenly voice without body” is not
given. Consequently, wecannotbe sure if it referstothe story mentionedin the Periyapuranam. But it seemsto
me that a pretty long interval musthave elapsed between the time when the “heavenly voice ” spoke and the date
ofcomposition of the inscription engraved on thewalls of the central shrine in the Kailasanatha temple. Accord-
ingly, we shall notbe far wrong ifwe suppose that the "heavenly voice” was heard and the central shrine was
built duringthe reign of Rajasiiiiha, whilethe inscription commemorating the event was composed during the
reign of Rajasimba’.s son Mahendravarman. This, itseemsto me, would leave asufficient interval for the mysti-
fication of the event which took place in the reign of Rajasimha andfor itstransformation into a miracle.
3 South-Ind. Inscrs-., Vol. I, p. 23. It maybethat Mahendravarman III. did not succeed to the throne and
thereforehe.is not mentioned either in the Udayendiram grant or in the Kasakudi plates.
^ South^lnd. Inscrs., Vol. II, p. 344.
8 This is the Tamil form of the name Paramesvara-Visnugrha ; Ep. hid., Vol. VIII, p. 293.
® South-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. II, p. 344.
'^Annual Report on Epigraphy for 1905-6, Part II, paragraphs 2 and 3.
® Nandivarman is described as “descended from a pure mother” {suddha-matr-anvavnyah) and as belonging
totheline of Bhima. It may be thatthe composer of the Ka.sakudi plates wants to convey a hint that Parames-
varavarman n. or the Siihhavisnu line towhichhe belonged was not descended from a pure mother. If this
conjecture isproved by future researches, either Paramesvaravarman If. or Sirhhavisnu must have been the
illegitimate son ofhisfather ; alsosee p. 220 aboveand note 7.
9 South-Ind. Insc/'s., Vol. II, p. 344. How insecure his position W'as in spite of hischoice by the subjects is
shown bythe Udayendiram grant. Here wearetold that the Pallavageneral Udayacandra “ bestowed thewhole
kingdom manytimes onthePallava” {ibid., Vol. II, p. 372) by his victories against the enemies ofthe latter.
1he position whichthe members of Bhimavarman’s lineoccupied is not known. In fact there isno mention
of them except inthe Kasakudi plates. The circumstances that led Nandivarman to rise from the insignificant
position of his arcestors and to assert his independence are nowhere stated. His father Hiranya isevidently
identical with the Hiranyavarma-Maharaja mentioned morethan once in an inscription in the Vaikunlha-Perumal
temple atCorijeeveram. The Tamil Kdyirpuranam informsus thata Gauda princenamed Simhavarman went on
hhHrthaydtra to Cidambaram (thenaforest) wdierehew^as transformed into Hiranyavarman by bathingin a
tans. He is said tohave covered with gold the Sivatempleatthe place. Hiranvavarman is here spoken ofas a
Colaking.

.
THE PALLAVAS. 231
This conclusion is borne out by the Udayendirara plates of the same king. Here we
are told that his general Udayacandra killed with his own hand the Pallava king
Citramaya, who seems to have been allied with the Dramila princes.^ The Calukyas
of Badami were not slow to take advantage of the weakness of the Pallavas. Vikram-
aditya 11 grandson of Vinayadltya, having “ resolvedto uproot completely his natural
.,
enemy, the Pallava, who had robbed of their splendour the previous kings born from
his race, reached with great speed the Tundaka-visaya (Tondai-mandalam), attacked
at the head of a battle and put to flight the Pallava called Nandipotavarman, wno had
come to meet him”.^ The city of KancI was captured by the enemy. The proce-
dure adopted by Vikramaditya after the capture of the Pallava capital shows that the
frequent wars waged in India by ancient kings against one another did not much affect
either the country or the peaceful inhabitants. In fact, the atrocities of later Indian
warfare were unknown in early times. It is said of \ukramaditya that, though he took
Kanci, he did not destroy it and that, having made the twice-born, the distressed and
the helpless rejoice by continual gifts, he acquired great merit by granting heaps of
gold to the Rajasirhhe§vara (the modern Kailasanatha) and other temples. Manu lays
down the laws of war thus®
5T gn' ^ ^ 5T35I’ i
WJcf ^ TTT'ir vii. 201.
II
“ (Let no man engaged in combat smite) one who sleeps nor one who is without
;
the coat of mail nor one who is naked nor one who is disarmed nor one who is a
; ; ;
spectator but not a combatant; nor one who is encountering another.”
’EftrgitiTtrsmwTtw
i
^
vii, 201.
11
“ Having conquered (a country), let (him) respect the deities (adored in it) and
the virtuous Brahmanas let (him) also grant immunities (to the people) and publicly
;
proclaim safety (to all).’’
Megasthenes, who came to India in the 4th century before Christ, remarks as
follows about the Hindu laws of war “For, whereas among other nations, it is
usual in the contests of war to ravage the soil, and thus to reduce it to anuncultivated
^ South-Ind. Inscrs.y Vol. II, p. 372. We are told that Pallavarnalla was besieged in Nandipura by the
Dramilaprinces. It hasthereforeto beconcludedthatthe Dramilaprinces took up thecause of Citramaya, who
was probably the son of Paramesvaravarman II. or someoneelsewhohada righttothe Pallava throne. > Among
the Dramila princes alliedwith prince Citramaya,the Paiidyasmust have been prominent,as theyclaim to have
defeated the Pallavasat Sahkaramangai, w’hich is Sanskritisedin the Udayendiram grantas Sathkaragrama
[Annual Reporton Epigraphyfor 1907-08, Part II, paragraph 28).
2 South-Ind, Inscrs., Vol. I, p. 146. The expedition against Kahcipuram was probably undertaken'by
Vikramaditya II. soon aftpr his coronation in A. D. 733-34 [Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II, p. ’374).
The historical portion of tbe-Kendur plates of Kirtivarman II. edited by Professor K. B. Pathak (£'/>. Ind.,
Vol. IX, pp. 200to 206) is almost identical with that of the Vakkaleri inscription [ibid,, Vol. V, pp. 200
to 205). _
* Apastambasays: ''The Aryas forbid the slaughter of those who havelaid down their arms, of . those w'ho
(beg for mercy) with flying hair or joinedhands,and of fugitives ’’ (II. 5, 10, 11). Baudhayana declares ? “ Let
hirr'not fightwith thosewho are in fear, intoxicated, insane or outof their minds, nor with those whohavelost
theirarmour,nor wdth women, infants, aged men and Brahmanas’’ (L, 10, i8, 11)
^ Mr. R. C. Diitt’s Civilization in A^icientIndia, Vol. I, p. 22b. . .

;
ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT.
332
waste, among the Indians, on the contrary, by whom husbandmen are regarded^ as a
class that is sacred and inviolable, the tillers of the soil, even when battle is raging in
their neighbourhood, are undisturbed by any sense of danger ; for the combatants on
either side, in waging the conflict, make carnage of each other, but allowthose engaged
in husbandry to remain quiteunmolested. Besides theyneitherravage an enemy s land
with fire, nor cut down its trees." These principles inculcated by Manu and observed
in ancient times were evidently not forgotten in the 8th century A.D.
Returning to the capture of KancI by the Calukya Vikramaditya II., we find that
the event is corroborated by an inscription of the king found on a pillar in the temple
of Kailasanatha.^ This defeat of the Pallavas by the Calukyas seems to have dealt
the death-blow to the sovereignty of the former.® Thus the history of the Pallavas
emphasises the oft-repeated lesson of Indian history that, when internal dissensions
set in in a dynasty, its decline and disappearance is only aquestion of time. Powerful
kings could by their personal prowess only put off the downfall,to a more distant date.
Pallava ascendancy came to anendaboutthe middleofthe 8thcentury and, curiously
enough, their rivals, the Calukyas of Badami, also ceased to be the reigning power
about the same time.®
Before tracing the later history of the Pallavas, it is necessary to refer briefly to
the monuments of Pallava rule. A few Pallava temples have been already mentioned.
Architecture in stone began in the Tamil country with the cutting out of caves in the
living rock. Eight of these caves have been discovered so far, vis. (i) the two
rock-cut caves at Trichinopoly,^ (2) the cave at Vallam near Chingleput,® (3) the cave
at §Iyamahgalam® in the Wandiwash taluka of the North Arcot District, (4) the cave
at Mahendravadi near Sholinghur,’ (5) the cave at Dalavanur in the South Arcot
District,® (6) the cave at Mandagappattu in the same district® and (7) the unfinished
^Ef, Ind., Vol. Ill, p.359 f.
-Nandivarman Pallavamalla himself reigned not less than 50 years {Ep» Vol. IV, p. 137) and the
Pallavas appeartohave continued in someform orother untiltheywereconquered by the Cola king Aditya I.
{ibid, Vol. IX,p. 88).
^Ep.Ind., Vol. V, p. 157.
‘Thereare two caves at Trichinopoly, As statedJn two of its inscriptions, the upper one was excavated
during the reign of the Pallava king Gunabhara Satrumalla, i.e, Mahendravarman I. {South-Ind, Inscrs.,
Vol. I, pp. 28-30). The lower one bears no inscriptions, but in all probability it was also cut out by the
Pallavas.
® The inscription in this cave informs us that it was cut out by aservant of Pagappidugu Lajitaiikura
Satrumalla Gunabhara Mahendrappottarasar, z.e. of Mahendravarman 1. 5 South-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. II,.
P* 34^-
® Thiswasexcavated by king Lalitahkura, i.e, Mahendravarman I. and was called Avanibhajana-Palla-
vesvara; Ep. Ind,, Vol. VI, p. 320. I recentlyinspectedthecaveand the two inscriptions found in it. The two
outerpillars ofthecave on which they areengravedalsobearat the top a well-executed lion (one on each of the
two pillars) with^the tail foldedoverits back. Thetail resembles that of the lion figured in No. 54, Plate II, of
Sir Walter Elliot's Coinsof Southern India,w.hich has been attributedto the Pallavas. It has, therefore, to be
concluded that thelion wasthe Pallava crest atsome periodorotherof their history,
king 7 ^ T n hi a s bh i a s r d a ed “ ic o a n te (t d he t b o an th k e o g f) od the Vi M . a s h nu en a d n r d at w a a t s ak c a all ( e t d an M k a ) h i e n n t d h r e a g - r V e i a s t n ( u c g i r ty ha o . f) M I a t h w e a n s dr c a a p u u s r e a d . t ” o b { e Ep m , ad I e nd b . y ,
V01. 1V
,
p, 153/*
w 19 a 0 s 4- ® 5 c , K al i P l n a e g d rt N ^ a I a I r , t e r p n u a m d r a r a l . a l ( e 3 o . sv r ar N a a l r a e y n a d , ra i p . p e. o , tt t a h r e ai s y h a ri n n ) e w c h a o lle b d o S r a e tr t u h m e al s l u e r s n v a ar m a e ; S A a n tr n u u m a a l lla Rep c o u r t t ou o t n th E i p s ig ca r v a e p , hy whi f c o h r
IS mu • ch T m h d i a s ma c g a e v d e . wa C s ons d e e q d u i e c n a t t l e y d , t t o he t n he am g e od o s ft B h r e a k h i m n a g , wh Is o va e r - a xc a av n a d ted Vi i s t n c u a . nno T t h b e e . m i a n d sc e ri o p u t t ion se w e hi t c he h p i a t rag b r e a ar p s h ,
quoted the precedingnote.

THE PALLAVAS. 233
caves at Pancapandavamalai near Arcot in the North Arcot District.^ The first five
(excluding the lower cave at Trichinopoly) came into existence duing the reign of
Afahendravarman 1. as testified to by the inscriptions contained in themA Of these
five, the one at Mahendravadi is dedicated to Visnu and the other four to Siva. They
must have come into existence during the first half of the seventh century A.D,, as their
excavator Mahendravarman I. flourished during that period,* Of the remainingthree,
the Mandagappattu cave might also have come into existence during the same period.
The Pancapandavamalai cave is perhaps the last of them all,^
About the rathas at the Seven Pagodas, Mr. Fergusson says d “On the whole
it seems more probable that their date is somewhat earlier than 700, but their execu-
tion may have been spread over half a century or even more, so that absolute
precision is impossible in the present state of the evidence. Still until some fixed
date or some new information is afforded, 650 to 700 may, probably, be safely relied
upon as very nearly that at which the granite rocks at Mahavallipur were carved into
the wondrous forms which still excite our admiration there.” This, then, is the
approximate date of the construction of the rathas derivable from a study of the
sculptures and the architecture. Let us see if epigraphical research helps us towards
a closer approximation. The popular name of the Seven Pagodas is Mavalavaram®
which is believed to connect the town with the demon Mahabali overpowered by the
god Visnu in his vamana-avatara or dwarf-incarnation. Mr. Rice is of opinion that
the village owes its existence to the Banas mentioned above as descendants of the
demon Mahabali (or Mahabali-cakravartin).'^ But, in ancient Cola inscriptions
found at the Seven Pagodas, the name of the place is Mamallapurara
which is evidently a corruption of Mahamallapuram,® meaning ‘ the city or town
A
“ The monolithic caveat Paucapandavamalai consists ofseven cellswith six pairs of pillars. short distance
above the cells is arock-cut Jainaimage. On another portion of the same rock is an inscription of the Pallava
king Nandippottarasar, datedin thesoth year of his reign. It records the cutting-out of the image of a Jaina
goddess with that of apreceptor ofthe samecreed. In all probability themonolithic cave is alsoofJainaorigin ;
seeAT 2 ”- At Pallavaram n P e - ar 13 M 6 ad ! ras is a monolithiccavenow occupied by the Muhammada.ns. tT.h,e •inscriptions in
Pallava-Grantha characters found in this cavewere brought to mynotice by Mr. K. V. Subramania Aiyar, B.A.,.
of the Madras Archasological Survey. Theyconsistofbirzidas, som.e of which are similarto those engraved in
the Trichinopoly uppercave(AwitiiaHor 1903-4, p. 271). The Pallavaram cave may also have been excavated
durin'^ the reign of Mahendravarman I. On the hillat Tirukkalukkunram in the Chingieput District is a rock-
cut cavebelonging to the Pallava period.
^ See page 228 above.
There areanumberof other monolithic monuments which may be assigned with considerable certainty to-
the Pallavas. The Dharmaraja-ratha, the Ganesatemple, the Dharmaraja-mandapaand the Ramanuja-manilapa
atthe Seven'Pagodas andthe Atiranacandesvaratempleat Saluvanguppam bear inscriptions which prove beyond
doubtthat they were all excavated by Pallavakings. Besidesthese, there is a pretty large numberof caves at
the Seven Pagodas which bear no inscriptions. These may also be assigned to the Pallava period. At
Mamandur in‘the Arcot taluka of the North Arcot District are four rock-cut caves. One of them bears
an inscription in Pallava-Grantha characters which is very badly damaged. The irrigation tank which is not
far from the^e caves is called Citramega-talakain two Colainscriptions found ^in one of thecaves. Perhaps both
the caves andthetank owetheirexistence to a Pallava king named Citramegha (Director-General’s Annual
foriQO''-4 p 206). At Tirruvellarainear Trichinopolyare twomonolithic caves, onewithinthe enclosure of the
Visnu templeandtheother in the Sivatemple (Annual Report on for 1903-6, Part II, paragraph 4).
At‘Ara<randanallur near Tirukoilur in the South Arcot District is an unfinished rock-cutcave {Gazetteerof the
SouthArcot District, Vol. I, p. 371)- It may, for thepresent, be supposedthatall thesecaves came into existence
during the period of the Paliavas.
^Cave Temples of India, p. no f. = Carr’sSeven Pagodas, p. 66. _ ^ ’ _cS-ee ih..-s Mysore, Vcdi. tI P- 301.
8 Sonth-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. I, p. 64. The Vaisnava saint Tirumahgai_ Alvar calls the piace Kadaruiialli, z_.e-
t‘ Mallai in the sea.” Mallai wasevidentlythe popularform of Mallapuram or Maharnallapuram.

archaeological report.
234
of Maharaalla.’ I have already mentioned the fact that Mahamalla occurs as a
surname of the Pallava king Narasimhavarman I. in a mutilated record at a ami
in the Bombay Presidency.^ It is thus not unlikely that Mahamallapuram or
Mavalavaram ri-as founded by the Pallava king Narasimhavarman, the contemporary
and opponent of the Calukya Pulike^in II., whose accession took place about A. D.
609 Professor Hultzsch is of opinion that the earliest inscriptions on the rathas are
of a king named Narasimha.’- It may, therefore, be concluded that the
villacre was originally called Mahamallapuram or Mamallapuram, after the Pallava king
Narilriihavarman I., and that the earliest of the rathasvitxt cut out by him. The re-
maining rathas must also have come into existence during the period of Pallava supre-
macy, but, perhaps ata somewhat later date.' Other monuments of Pallava rule" are the
large tank at Mahendravadi built by the Pallava king Mahendravarman 1.® and the
resm-oir at Tenneri in the Conjeeveram taluka.® The original name of the latter was
Tiraiyaneri^ which is mentioned in the Kasakudi plates. Other tanks must also have
existed at the time.' But these two are the only ones which can be identified with
certainty.
The Pallavas appear to have been Saivas at first® and accordingly adopted the
bull for their crest’® and the club {khaivanga) for their banner. Some of the kings
*
Seepage 228above.
- South-Ind, Inscrs., Vol. I, p. i.
3 The Ganesa temple and the Dharmaraja-mandapaare called Atyantakama-Pallaves'uara-grha. The same
nameisengraved on theoutsideof thethird storey ofthe Dharmaraja-ratha. Perhaps the lastwas completed by
Atyantalcama,whomight have constructedthe remainingrathasaswell as theGanesatempleandthe Dharmaraja-
mandapa. The Saliivahguppam cave was excavated by Atiranacanda*Pallava and was accordingly called
Atiranacanda Pallavesvara-grha, The identity of Atyantakamaand Atiranacaiula with anyof the kings known
fromthecopper-plate grants remains tobeestablished by future researches. The Coia inscriptions in the Shore
Temple at the Seven Pagodas mention three shrines at Mamallapuram, mz., Ksatriyasimha-Pallava-Isvara
Rajasimha-Pallava-Isvaraand Pallikondaruliya-devar, which were situated in the temple called Jalasayana, i.c,,
the ShoreTemple. Dr. Hultzsch thinks thetwo latter denoterespectively the Kailasanatha (called Rajasithha-
Pallavesvarainancient times) temple at Kaucipuram and the Srirahganayaka temple at PaHikouda near Virifi-
cipuram. Itseemstomevery unlikely that thetwo latter hadanythingto do with theShore Temple atthe Seven
Pagodas. Ksatri3^adriih3-Pallava-Isvara was in all probabilitythe ancient name of the principal shrine in the
Shore Temple. Rajasimha-Pallava-Isvara might be the name of the smaller shrine in the same temple, while
Fallikondaruliya-devar probably denotesthe shrine connectedwith the larger temple, where a large mutilated
statue ofthe god Visuu is lying. If my conjecture iscorrect,it may be concludedthat the Pallava king Rajasiraha
built the smaller ofthetwo shrines which go bythename of the Shore Temple. It is just possible that Ksatriya-
siihha vas anothername ofthesame king. In thiscase, the wholeofthe Shore Temple must have been built by
thePallava king Rajasimha, who constructed the Kailasanathatempleat Kaucipuram.
^ Itisnot unlikely that the shrine of Kailasanatha at Tiruppattur intheMusiri taluka ofthe Trichinopolv
District was built during the Pallava period ; seetheAnnualReporton Epigraphy for 1907-8,Part II,paragraph 9.
® See page 232above. The town of Mahendravadi wascalled JVlahendrapura in ancient times. Itmight have
beenfounded bythe Pallava king Mahendravarman I. orrenamed by him.
® As pointedout intheearlier portionofthis article (see page 220above, note 4), this tank was apparently
constructed by the Pallava king Tiraiyan, whose identity with any of the kings known from the copper-plate
grants andstoneinscriptionshas tobe disclosedby future researches.
^ South-Ind. Iusers., Vol. II, p. 345.
® The tank called Paramesvara-tataka at Kuram in the Chingleput Districtwas evidently constbucted bythe
Pallava king Paramesvaravarman 1. The reservoirat Mamandurin the Arcottaluka of the North Arcot District
probably came into existence duringthe periodof Pallavasupremacy. The Kaveripak and Uttaraniallur tanks
were probablylater ; see the Director-General’s for 1903-4, pp. 203 to 206.
® This maybe presumedfrom names like f^ivaskandavarman and Skandavarman borne by some of the
•earlier kings. ^ One of the laterkings was so staunch a Saiva that he declares he got rid of all his sins by
following the Saiva creed ; seepage 229above,andnote ii.
ISee alsop. 226 above, note 6 .

—
.
THE PALLAVAS.
235
who Issued the Sanskrt charters were probably adherents of the \'aisnava faith as
I have already remarked^ Jainism seems to have flourished along with these two
creeds and, if the Tamil Peyiyapuranam is to be believed, was in the ascendant
about the beginning of the seventh century A.D. There was a big monastery at a
place called Patalipuram (in the South Arcot District).- At Mayilappur in Madras there
were Jainas at the time when Tirunanasambandar visited the place.^ The Pandya
king Nedumaran was originally a jaina but was converted to the Saiva creed by
Tirunanasambandar,^ According to the Periyapiiranam, the saint Tirunavukkaraiar
(also called Appar), an elder contemporary of Tirunanasambandar, was first persecuted
and subsequently patronised by a Pallava king® wTo is said to have demolished the
Jaina monastery at Pataliputtiram and built a temple of Siva called Gunadaraviccaram.®
As the younger Tirunanasambandar appears to have been a contemporary ofthe Pallava
king Narasirtihavarman I., the elder Appar may be taken to have spent most of his life
in the reign of Narasimhavarman’s father Mahendravarman 1., one of whose surnames
was Gunabhara according to the Trichinopoly cave Sanskrt inscriptions.’ Ifall this be
true, the Pallava king Mahendravarman I. must have excavated a number of rock-cut
caves and dedicated most of them to the god Siva with the proverbial zeal of the new
^ Names like Visnugopa, Kuinaravisnu, and Simhavisnu warrant such a presumption.
- This name occurs in the modern proseversion of the Tamil Penyapuranam, while the original poetical
version of Sekkijar has the form Pataliputtiram. The late Professor Sundaram Pillai identified it with
Tiruppadirippuliyiir, the modern TiruppapuliyurnearCuddalorein the SouthArcot District {Ind. Ant,Vol XXV,
p. 121, note 36). This identification seems unlikely^ because Tiruppadirippuliyur is an ancient place mentioned
in the Tamil De'Ddramasa place sacred to the god Siva. Pataliputtiram, on theother hand, wasthe seat ofJaina
learningand appears tohavebeen acity not far from Tiruvadi in the South Arcot District. The ruler of
Tiruvadi seemsto have been a Pallava feudatory wdth the title Kadava.
^ Ep. Ind.^ Vol. VIIIj p. 290, note 7.
^ He is called Ninra-sIr-Nedumaran, “ Nedumaran of enduring fame.” He is said to have fought a
battle atNelveli and might, therefore, be identical with the Pandya king Maravarman Arikesarin, who claims,
to have defeated the army of Vilveli at Nelveli {Amiual Report on Epigraphy for 1907-08, Part II, para-
graph 28).
5 Comparewith this the followingverse ofthe Trichinopoly Caveinscription :
4 C. N
“Whilethekingcalled Gunabharaisaworshipper ofthelidga, let theknowledge,whichhasturnedbackfrom
hostile {mpaksa) conduct,bespread fora long time in theworld by this linga The ''hostile conduct” seems
toreferto thekingwho seemstohavebecome aworshipper ofSiva shortly before the inscription was engraved
In fact, it is notunlikelythat Gunabharahad originallybeen a Jaina and persecuted the Saivas. In this case,
the identity of Gunabhara with the Pallava king who first persecuted and then patronized the Saiva saint
Tirunavukkarasar becomesveryprobable. This identification isconfirmed bythe fact that Tirunanasambandar,
whose friend Siruttonuawasapparently a general of the Pallava king Narasithhavarman L, was a younger
contemporary ofTirunavukkarasar. It isworthy ofnotehere that the sister's husband of Tirunavukkarasar—*
named Kalippagaiyar—losthislifein fighting for hissovereignagainst the kingof the North.”
® ThePeriyapurdnam hereseemsto use theword Kadava asa synonym ofPallava. in thecase of Aiyadigal
Kadvarkon, whowasadmittedly a Kadava, he issaid to have beenborn in the Pallava family and is called a
Pallava. The forms Kaduvatti, Kadvatti and Kadupatti also oecur in epigraphical records {Ep, Ind.^
Vol. VII, p. 25). How theyare connected with the word Kadava on the one hand and Pallava on the other
are questions which await solution by futureresearches. In thetime of Vikrama-Colatherewas achief ofGingee
in the South Arcot District who called himselfa Kadava {Ind. Ant,, Vol. XXII, p. 143). Kopperunjingadeva,
who subverted the Cola sovereignty duringthe reignof Rajaraja III. (A, D. 1216 to 1248), was a Kadava and
called himselfaPallava Vol. VII, pp. 164 and 167). The name Gunadaraviccaram was evidently
called afterthe Pallava king Gunadara^which is synonymous with Gunabhara, asurname of Mahendravarman 1.
^Accordingly, Tirunavukkarasar must havebeenacontemporary ofthe Pallava king Mahendravarman I. This
conclusion is also warrantedbyotherconsiderations ; see note 5 above.
y Souih'lnd, Inscrs.^ Vol. 1 , p. 29f.
2 H 2

archeological report.
238
This statement implies that he helped the former against the latter. Perhaps, the
three were allied together against the Pallavas. Though almost nothing is known
of the history of the Ceras during this period, it is not unlikely that they combined
with the Colas and Pandyas frequently against the aggressive Pallava, as they seem
to have done during the reign of Pulike§in II.
About the beginning of the 7th century, the Telugu and Kanarese districts of
the Madras Presidencjy w'hich once belongedto the Pallavas, were annexed, respectively
by the Eastern Calukyas of Vengi and the Western Calukyas of Badami.^ In spite of
the repeated boasts of the Pallavas to have conquered the Coks and Pandyas, no
inscriptions of the former have been found further south than Trichinopoly. It has,
therefore, to be concluded that the Pallava dominions in the 7th and 8th centuries
comprised only the Tondai-mandalam including the modern districts of Chingleput
North and South Arcot and the southern portion of Nellore.^
At what exact date the Pallava sovereignty came to an end, it is not at present
possible to say. But Nandivarman Pallavamalla, mentioned above as having been
defeated by the Western Calukya Vikramaditya II., is believed to be the last king of
the family, and he seems to have reigned for not less than 50 years.^ This may take
us to the third quarter of the 8th century.
The later history of the Pallavas has now to be noticed. One branch of the
family claiming some connection with the Gahgas of Mysore occupied a considerable
part of Tondai-nadu until the close of the 9th century.^ These have been called
Ganga-Pallavas in order to distinguish them from the other Pallavas.® The former
also claimed descent from the Mahahharata hero A^vatthaman and belonged to the
Bharadvaja gotra^ Five kings of the family are known, vis., Vijaya-Dantivikrama-
varman, Vijaya-Nandunkramavarman, Vijaya-Nrpatuhgavikramavarraan, Vijya-
Kampavikramavarman, and \diaya-Aparaiitavikramavarman.^ Other kings, who, to
^ After the eastern campaign of Pulikesin II , the kingdom of Vebgi was established by his younger
brother, Kubja-Visnuvardhana. That the Ceded districts had been annexed by the Calukyas of Badami is
rendered probable by their copper-plates found in them, see page 229above.
- See page222 above, note 2. The Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsiangcallsthis tract ofcountry Ta-lo-pi-ch’a or
—
Dravida nnt Tondai-nadu or Tondai-mandalam as it was known in later times. If thisis not due to mere
accident, it maybe thatthe latternamehad notyet been inventedor, at least, had notbecome quite popular.
^See page 232 above, note2.
^Though the Pauranic genealogyofthe Gahga-Pallavas isidentical with that of the regular Pallavas, the
two families have to be kept distinct. No mythical ancestors of the latterare mentioned in thethreecopper-
plates of the family hitherto known. WhileNandivarman Pallavamallaboasts of having been descended from
kings mentioned in earlier records, such as Skandavarman, Visnugopa, Virakurca and Siiiihavarman,
Nrpatunga claimed Vimala, Konknnika and other kingsforhis ancestors [Ep.lnd.> Vol. IV., p. iSi). Konkanika
is evidently connected with Kongunivarman, the first king of the Gaiiga dynast}^ Consequently, the
Gafiga-Pallavas appeartohavebeen related to the Gangas. The exact nature of this relationship must be
disclosed by future researches. The names of the Gaiiga-Pallava kings are in most cases preceded by the
words kdvijaya^ which donot occurin connection with those oftheregular Pallavas.
5 Ep- Ind., Vol. IV, p. 182. 6 p. i8r.
7 The inscriptions of Dantivikramavarman range from the loth to the 51st year of his reign and have
been found at Uttaramallur and Kuram in the Chingleput Districtand Gudimallam and TiruccanurIn the North
Arcot District. The epigraphs of Nandivikramavarman, so farcopied, are from Siyamangalam, Viriilcipuram
Tiruvallam and Sadupperi inthe North Arcot DistrictandfromKiiur, Dalavanurand Perumandur in the South
Arcot District. They range in date fromthe 3rd tothe 62nd yearofhis reign. Theseof Nrpatuboavikrama
have been found at Kaverippakkam, Ambur, Gudimallam and Tiruvalangadu in the North Arcot" District*
Uttaramallurand Kuraminthe Chingleput District; Kiiurand Tiruvadi in the’South Arcot District; Lalgudl
T in he t ^ he ea T r r l i i c e h s i t n k o n p o ol w y n D i i n s s t c r r i i c p t ti ; o T n ir o u f c h c i e s n r n e a i m g b n il i n s d d i a i t n ed th i e n T h a i n s j 7 o i r h e y D e i a s r tr a i n ct d ; t a h n e d la N t a e r st tta i m n a t l h a e i i 2 n 6t t h he y P e u a d r u . kko’ K t a t m a p i a S v t a at r e -
k m a a m n s a r n e d cor S d d s l a a r p e ur f a r m om m Ut t t h a e r N a o m r al t l h ur A , rc U o t t tu D k is k t a r d ic u t an a d nd Ka r v a a n n g t e a f n r d o a m la t m he int 6 h t e h C to hin t g h l e ep 2 u 5 t th Dis y t e r a i r ct; of and his Ka r v e e i r ^ i n ppa O k- f
Aparajita asingle inscription hasbeen copied at Tiruttaniin theNorth Arcot District.

THE PALLAVAS.
239
judge from their names, must have also belonged to the same family are Vijaya-
Narasiriihavikramavarman,^ Yijaya-SkandaSisyavikramavarman^ and Vijaya-Isvaravar-
man.^ The history of the family has not yet been completely worked out and, there-
fore, it is not possible to state what relationship the latter bore to the former.^ The
initial date of the earliest king Dantivikramavarman takes us roughly to A.D. 760,
which may overlap with the reign of Nandivarman Pallavamalla.® Nrpatuhgavikrama
was apparently the most powerful of the family, as his inscriptions have been found
over a larger extent of country than those of the rest." Aparajitavikrama was
evidently the last member of the family.’’ In the battle of Sripurambiya (Tirup-
pirambiyam near Kumbakonam) Aparajita defeated the Pandya king Yaraguna.®
The former was, later on, overcome by the C5la king Aditya and his dominions
annexed by the Colas about the end of the ninth century A.D.® The Western Gahgas
of Gahgavadi in the Mysore State and the Banas were feudatories of the Gahga-
Pallavas. The Banas seem to have been governing a considerable portion of the
North Arcot District, north of the river Palar.’^ One of the chief towns, if not the
capital,^® of the Banas was Tiruvallam in the Gudiyatam taluka of that district, A
number of kings of this feudatory family are knovvn.’^ But we are not concerned with
their history just now. It is enough to remark that the Co|a king Parantaka I.,
who reigned from A.D. 907 to about 948, claims to have uprooted the Banas
and to have made over their territory to a Ganga feudatory of his.^®
Side by side with the Gahga*Pallavas there was another family which probably
^ 'rhree records of this king are known, two from Kijmutlugur in the North Arcot Districtandthe third
from Bahgavadi inthe Mysore State.
2 'I'he Rayakota plates belong to his reign 5 Ep. Ind,, Vol. V, p. 49. Thevillage grantedbythe inscription
musthavebeen situated near Udayendiram in the Gudiyatam taluka ofthe North Arcot District.
Three inscriptions ofthiskingare known, roiz. two from Hanumantapuram inthe Salem District andthethird
from Hebbini inthe Mysore State. They have been editedbyProfessor Hultzsch {Ep. Ind,, Vol. VII,pp. 23 to 25).
^ The localities where the inscriptions of these three kings have been foundshowthat they were probably
governing some province between the Ganga and Pallava territories. The fact that: three ofthese inscriptions
are in Vaiteluttu [Ep. Ind.t Vol. VII,p. 23!.) and three othersexhibit affinities with that alpha.bst (ibid., Vol. IV,
pp. 177 and 360,and Vol. VII, p. 22) is significant. The Ceraswho used the Vattejuttu alphabet must have
indirectly had some influence eitherwith these kings themselves orinthe countryoverwhich they ruled.
5 Ibid.jVol. VIII, p. 292. Itis possiblethat the reignsof theGanga-Pallava kings overlapped with oneother.
In this case, the first Ganga-Pallava ruler might notbe contemporaneous with Nandivarman Pallavamalla.
6 Seenote 7 on page238 above.
7 The dates ofthe other kings do not leave any margin forAparajitavikrama. This isnota sufficientjusti-
fication for saying that Aparajita was onlyanothername of Nrpaiuhga. It is just possible that he was the co-
regent of Nrpatunga forsometime and reigned independently a short periodafterthe deathof Nrpatuhga. At
any rate, unless the identityof Aparajita with Nrpatuhga is established by indisputable evidence, we haveto
presume that they weretwo distinctkings.
8 Ep, Ind., Vol. IX, p. 87. " Ibid.,p. 88 f.
Prthivipati 1. wasthe feudatory of Nrpatuhga, and a certain Rajaditya, son of Prthivigangaraiyar, was the
feudatory of Vijaya-Kampa.
11 The Banas played a very important partduringtheperiod of Gahga-Pallava rule. Originally, they seem
to havebeen the enemies of the Gahgas. There was,however, anintermarriagebetweenthetwo. The daughter of
Prthivipati I. marrieda Bana king named Banavidyadhara. The Nolambas of Nolambavadi were the enemies
ofthe Banas.
12 Theprovince governed bythem wascalled Perumbanappadi, which extended from Puhganur in the west
to Kalahasti in theeast. The southern boundary oftheprovince was probably the river Palar ; Annual Report on
Epigraphyfor 1906*07, Part II, paragraph 45.
They claim to be lords of Parivipuri—perhapsidentical with Parigi near Hindupur in the Anantapur
District. Consequently, their capitalw^asprobably Parivipuri. Tiruvallam is called Vanapuram "the town of the
Banas’ in its inscriptions. Consequently, it may be presumedthatTiruvallam Was at least one oi the chief towns
oftheBanas
s
South-Ind. Inscrs,,Vol. Ill, p.89.
1^ See e.g\ Ep. Ind., Vol. III., p. 75.
1® Ihid.i Vol. IX, p. 217. Parantakaappearstohave reignednot less than 41 years.
1® Soiiih-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. II, p. 381.

1
archaeological report.
2^0
claimed descent from Nandivarman Pallavamalla and which appears to have
been reigning in a portion of Tondai-nadu Va a y n i d ra o m f eg t a h n e C m o e ] n a tio c n ou e n d tr m y. th D e a N n a t l . a v y a i r r m a a - -
p i M n r a s a h c b a ri a r p a n t j d io a h n a s o m f ha t a h v s e e t T b h r e e i e p n l k i f i c o n a u g n n e d of i i n t n s h c e r C i T o p o t n n i j o d e n a e i ; v y ^ e a r r am ; “ T a e n U d a a rr f e e n w nd v a il N l a a n ge d s ip m pot t t h a e ra T i a y n a ] r o , r w e ho a s n e d
South Arcot districts and Nandippottaraiyar, uho belonged to the Pallavatilaka
familv are the known names of this series of Pallava kings. The last mu.st have
been' a contemporary of the Gahga-Pallava Nrpatunga mentioned above, Future
research must decide what political relationship the Gahga-Pallavas bore to thi _ s family.
Dantiga, ruler of KancI, subjugated by the Rastrakuta king Govinda III. in or just
before A.D. 804,° might have been either a Gahga-Pallava or a regular descendant
of Nandivarman Pallavamalla.
The names of another series of Pallava kings are furnished by the Amaravatl
pillar now preserved in the Madras Museum.® Curiously enough, the inscription has to
be read from the bottom upwards instead of from the top downwards.^ Seven
kings are mentioned here, and their ancestry is traced to Bharadvaja through
Asvatthaman and Drona. Some of thenames occurring in this inscription figure among
those ofthe ancestors of Nandivarman Pallavamalla. Thelastof them, Sirnhavarman 1 .»
isreported to have goneto the mountain Sumeruin order to plant a pillarof victory.*^ He
thencrossedthe Bhagirathi (the Gahga river), the Godavariand Kr-snaverna rivers and
reachedthe townofDhanyaghata, i,e. Amaravatl in the modern Guntur District. There
he visited the Buddhist shrine and listened to a discourse on the law. The rest of
the inscription is mutilated. The importance of this record for Pallava history
is not apparent at present. But the alphabet inwhich it is engraved is not archaic.
As the end is lost, we have no means of ascertaining if it is an original document
or a copy of some older record.® If it is the former, the kings must belong to a
local family, which is mentioned now'here else.^®
' B-p. hid., Vol. VIII, p. 290. ^ ^ Ibid., p. 293.
3 Tillasthanam, Tiruccennambundi and Sendalai in the Tanjore District and Tiruvadiin the South Arcot
District.
^ Ep, hid,, Vol. VI5 p. 331. ° Ibid., Vol. VII, p. 292 f. ® SoutJi-Ind. Inscvs., Vol. I, pp. 25 to 28.
^ Anotherinscriptionwhichhas to be read from the bottom upwards is found at Budamanarayalapadu in
the Fodili division ofthe Nellore District. Itbelongs to the reignof the Eastern Calukya king Vi.suuvardhana-
Maharaja (P. i ofNdlore Inscriptions edited by Messrs. Butterworth and Venugopaul Chetty). A third simi-
larrecordis No. 393ofthe epigraphical collection for 1904from Malepadu in the Cuddapa District. It belongs
tothereignofthe Cola king Vikramaditya Satyaditya. Of the Manimangalam inscription ofthe Cola king
Virarajendra I. {Sonth-Ind. Inscrs,, Vol. Ill, p. 67), lines30 to 35, have toberead upwards from the bottom.
s Unlikethe earlier genealogical inscriptions ofthe Pallavas, the Amaravatl pillar mentionsas son of king
Pallava, a prince,who,to judge from his name, musthave flourished in historical times. This isMahendravarman,
who isprobably meant for Mahendravarman I. In the Kasakudi plates, Asokavarman is referred to as theson
cfking Pallava. Here A.sokavarman isevidentlya reminiscenceofthe Maurya emperor Asuka who lived long
beforethe Pallavas. The fact thata historical name like that of Mahendravarman isgiven in the Amaravatl
pillarto the son of the mythical king Pallava may be taken by itself to show that the inscription belongs
toa periodmuch laterthan thatof the first king whobore the name.
® The names mentionedare thoseof ancient kings. Consequently the Amaravatl inscription might only
beacopy of an older document. The Udayendiram plates ofNandivarman Pallavamalla contain a similar
record. They wereapparently copied 3t a later lime fromthe original document. The events described in them
must have taken place at .a period much earlier than that warrantedbythe alphabet in which the platesare
engraved. Anotherinstance is furnished by some of the stone inscriptions of the Banas foundat Tiruvallam
which are admittedlycopies of older records [Southdnd,Inscrs, Vol. Ill, Nos. 43, 44, 45, 47 and 48).
Onthe first sign of weakness ofthe ColasofTanjore, about the beginning ofthe 12thcenturyA.D.,several
lucal families came into prominence claimingrelationship with the Pallavas of Kaildpuram and theColas o^
Uraiyur. It maybe that Sirnhavarman 11. belonged to that period, if the Amaravatiinscription is an original
document. Neither henor any of his ancestors is,how’ever, known from other records hithertoaccessible.

THE PALLAVAS.
241
It has already been mentioned that the Ceded districts once formed part of the
Pallava dominions. Soon after the disruption of Paliava sovereignty, a separate pro-
vince, known as the Nolambavadi 32,000, came into existence. It comprised the
greater portion of the modern Bellary District and the northern and north-eastern
portions of Mysore. ^ The capital of the province was at first apparently Hemavati
in the Anantapur District, called Penjeru or Henjeru in ancient times.^ The
Nolambas claim to belong to the I§vara-vam§a and were descended from Trinayana-
Pallava,® ruler of Kahci, perhaps identical with the king of the same name, who
was defeated by the early Calukya king Vijayaditya, according to later tradition.* The
earliest records of the family belong to the ninth century A.D. ® At Dharmapuri
in the Salem District has been found a stone inscription of Mahendradhiraja Nolamba,
who boasts of having destroyed the Bana family.® The Nojambas also figure in
Tamil records as committing cattle raids during the Gahga-Pallava period. Two
inscribed stones found at Ambur in the North Arcot District refer to such raids.'' A
later record found near Vellore mentions a chief named Tribhuvanadhira-Nulamba
Pallava-Murari.® These references show how far the influence of the Nolambas
6
extended beyond Nolambavadi. The Western Ganga Marasimha II. (A.D. 963-4
to 974) boasts of having destroyed the Nolambas.® The Cola king Rajaraja I.
(A.D. 985 to at least 1013) also conquered Nulambapadi.^* Kampili in the Bellary
District seems to have been the capital of this province during the period of rule of
the Calukyas of Kalyani.^* Epigraphical references may be adduced to show that
the Pallavas continued in that part of the country and that they exercised some
sort of power as late asthe 13th century A.D.^®
The Pallavas of the Tamil country seem to have taken service under the
Colas after the Gahga-Pallavas were conquered by Aditya about the end of the 9th
century A.D.^® Karunakara-Tondaiman, who, accordingto the Tamil poem Kalingattti-
Parani led the expedition against Kalihga during the reign of Kulottuhga I.
(A.D. 1070 to about A.D. 1118), was a Pallava and was the lord of Vandal, i.e.
Vaiidalur in the Chingleput District.** Among the vassals of Vikrama-Cola mentioned
in the Vikkirama-^dlan-tdS., the Tondaiman figures first.*® In the wmr of Pandya
succession, which took place in the 12th century A.D., the Tondaiman played
a very important part and was the ally of Kula§ekhara, one of the claimants.*®
1 Bombay Gazetteev, Vol. I, Part II, p. 3^^*
2 Mr. Rice’s Mysore, Vol.I, p. 307.
^ Epigrciphia Carnatica, Vol. XII, Si- 28.
4 South’Ind. Inscrs., Vol. I, p. 50*
Ep. Cam, Vol.XII, Introduction, p. 5.
6 A7tnual Report on Epigraphy for 1900-T,paragraph n,
7 Ep. Ind., Vol. IV, p. 182 f. Inthereign of theGanga-Pallava king Nrpatuhga, the Nolambas invaded
Amaiyur (theancient name of Ambur) twice and seized cattle. They were driven back by two officers ofthe
Gangaking.
8 Ihid., p. 83.
9 Hebore thetitle Nolambakuldntakadeva ibid. Vol. V. p. 178.
South-lnd. Inscrs., Vol.Ill, p. 5.
11 Ep. Ind., Vol. IV, p. 214.
Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, Part II,p. 333'
See page 239 above.
Ind. Ant., Vol XIX, p. 337-
Vol. XXll, p. 143-
Mahavamsa, Chapter LXXVII, pp. 248 and 249

,njo archaeological reports.
From the account of this war given in the Mahavaihsa, it appears that the dominions
of the Tondaiinan could not have been very far from the Pandya country. In a
Tanjore inscription belonging to a later period, the name Tondaiman is applied to a
local chief named Samantanarayana, who granted to Brahmanas a portion of the
village of Karundiitaigudi,^ the modern Karattattahgudi. Thus, the name 1 ondai-
maii actually travelled from the Pallava into the Cola country. There is, therefore,
reason to suppose that the Tondaiman of Pudukkottai, who bears the title Pallava
Raja,^ is descended from the Pallavas, who form the subject of this paper.
In the Telugu country, inscriptions have been found of local chiefs tracing their
ancestry to the mythical king Trinayana-Pallava, whose name figures also as
Mukkanti-Kaduvetti.* These chiefs claim to belong to the Bharadvaja-j>‘J/ria: and to
have the bull for their crest. They were also lords of Kancipura and devotees
of the goddess Kamakotyambika, i.e. the KamaksI temple at Conjeeveram. Inscrip-
tions of these chiefs have been found in the Cuddapah, Kurnool and Nellore districts
and reach down to the 13th century." Thus, though the Pallavas ceased to be the
ruling power about the middle of the 8th century A.D., the memory of their dominion
was kept up in the Kanarese, Telugu, and Tamil countries down to a very late period.
We have now to examine if there are any Pallavas in our midst beyond the royal
family of Pudukkottai. The Pallavas are believed to be identical with the Kurumbas,
of whom the Kurumbar of the Tamil country and the Kurubas of the Kanarese
districts and of the Mysore State may be taken as the living representatives.® The
We
‘ aretold that after gathering his troops in the mountains of Tondamana, Kulasekhara regained the
stronghold of Mahgala—perhaps identical with Tirumafigalam in the Madura District. Again, the Singhalese
generalissaidtohave fought against the relationsol Tondamana sometime before capturing SivaliputtSr—the
modern Srivillipputtur in the Tinnevelly district.
- Soiitk-Ind. Inscrs,,\Q\. II, p. 113.
® SirWalterElliot’s Coins ofSouthern India^ p. 43.
KR. 61 I , ns 6 c 2 ri a p n t d io 6 n 3 s ; of an th d e K N G el . lo 2 y 4 e ; Di s s e t e ri 3\ ct s , o t e li d t it A e n d nu b a y l M R e e s p s o r r s t . on But E t p e i r g w r o a r p t h h y f a o n r d 19 V 0 e 7- n 0 u 8 g , op P a a u r l t C II h , et p ty a , ra D g . ra 4 p 3 h , 6 7 9 2’ ;
T Kr h s e na K v o e t r a na ch r i i e v f e s r” cla t i h m ro t u o g h h av t e he ob f t a a v i o n u e r d of the the dis g t l r o i r ct iou o s f T “ r si i . n ' a t y - a th n o a u - s P a a nd lla vi v l a lag l e E s p. o I n nd t . h , e Vo s l o . uth V e ] r , n p. ba 1 n 5- k ) of x t j h , "; g :
Velanandu chief Malia I. is reportedto have “enteredinto an alliance with Trinetra-Pallava, started^for the
conquest of the Dekhan, obtained possessionof the Satsahasracountry and tookuphisresidenceatDhanada-
g d W i n h f r f e a e . n r ” ent { t E h f p e r . o C l m o n a d l . n a , d V p o o m \ w . u e c r I h V b , e la g p t . a e n r 34 t t ) o h . an s P h e o t r w h h e a s T p i r s g i n l t s o h c e o a f n T a r w - i e P n a a a k l y l n a a e n v s a a s - o P a v a n e l d r l c a w o v h a m e e n a , b n y c d o t n h T s e r e i q a n u n e e c t n i t r e l a n y - t , Pa C l s a l o l a m u v e k a y h a o e f re k t i h n m e g en l t o V c i i a o j l n a e y f d a a d m i i w t l e v i r a s e
became possessed of sufficient strength to assert their individuality, they found it convenient to trace their
ancestryto theancient Cola king Karikala or to the ancient Pallava king Trinayana-Pallava The familv of
c t T C i h h n o e i e L l e s a u t f e s h s g e t o u w f - w o A C h . T o n o a d n n a u 1 o j s a p o h l e r e w n e y i R l t e y w h w p e h o r d i r o e t e s t , c t w o n a h n e u r e r m r e E e e b d p f e o i t t r r h g h l e e r e , e i n a s r o p s b h S r l y u r u i d a l g f m i r o e i n r a d f g i t 1 c o o 9 t r a 0 h i c t 5 e g l i - i o a 0 n c n i 6 , o s m , un c c s P t l o a o r a u r y m i l t . e m d e I p d I n o A , l o i t d t f p e i e a c s v w r a c e l a e r g c n r y h t r e i l a e a w p f f t e h s r i l o o l 5 n m c . s l b h a t e i i h F p e m a c w i m o i C n i n t o g l n h l i e a e P c t s s a h t l e e o l l d f i P a k a v e U l a b r l t " y a a h a v e i n d a y c K e s u e s o r s c t t e a a r n s L y t a o n a w p r i d p t c o h s V m e e e e l d i n a t t n h t i - e o o r I n n t d e h o „ d e f
= AnnualReport on Epigraphy for 1905-06,Part II,paragraph
7.
with ' th S e ee Pa p l . la 2 v 2 a 1 s a i b s o a ve s , su n m o e t d e . 4. The I y n M a r r . e C f r u o r l t e h ’ e s r M id a e n n u ti a f l ie o d f w t i h t e h C t h h i e n m g o U d P e u r i n Di P s a t l r l i i c s t a th n e R i V r , V . ntit ^ v of thhe« K v urunibars
ofSouthern India, p. 37, Sir Walter Elliotsays that the Kuru^^s“ wereaSJked
n H a e me e d nco A u d n o t n e d r a e i d o a r n To ob n s d t a i i n m at a e n, re t s h i e st s a o n n ce ( , il b le u g t iti a m f a t t e e r a su c s c t o a r i d ni i n n o g - t e o n s m o p me rp ) v/t o * rbrothe i r j oft j he i rul^er of^" TChhoAlam ^ andalam.
corporated itwith the Cholaterritorieschangingthenameto
Tondamandallm.-^ Atth^ ptrsent'day"the'ir'^
f
th
r
e
om
Cote.
prob.bl^, oFtel ° .f, ' ™ ’“ , P'"*""“““"y ™”<IConteoeram
b.

THE PALLAVAS. 243
kings ofthe Vijayanagara dynasty are also supposed to have been Kurubasd In one of
the inscriptions of the Tanjore temple belonging to the i ith century, a certain
Velan Adittan Is called Pirantaka-Pallavaraiyan, meaning “the chief of the Pallavas of
Parantaka.” ^ Sekki]ar, the author of the Tamil Periyapuranam, was a Vellala
by caste and got from his patron, the Cola king Anapaya, the title Uttama§o]a-
Pallavarayan, meaning “the chief of the Pallavas of Uttama^olaT Uttama-
§ola® and Parantaka"* are titles of Cola kings and the word Pallava seems to
be used in both of the titles as an equivalent of Vellala, or the caste of agri-
culturists to which both of them belonged.® In the Telugu country, too, some
of the Reddis who belonged to the fourth or cultivating caste, called themselves
Pallava-Trinetra and Pallavaditya? Sir Walter Elliot has told us that Pallavaraja
is one of the thirty gotras of the true Tamil-speaking Vellalas of Madura, Tanjore and
Arcot. It is borne by the Cola Vellalas inhabiting the valley of the Kaverl, in Tan-
jore, who lay claim to the first rank. All these facts taken together seem to show that
there was some sort of connection between the cultivating caste and the Pallavas in
the Tamil as wellas in the Telugu country. The available evidence is, however, not
sufficientto formulate the nature of this connection. But it maytentatively be supposed
that some of the Pallavas settled down as cultivators soon after all traces of their
sovereignty disappeared. The other sections of the agricultural class were probably
proud of their association and considered it an honour to be looked upon as Pallavas.
V. Venkayya.
^ In hisCoins of SouthernIndia, p. 90,Sir Walter Elliotsays : However uncertain the sourceof the other
families maybe, thecorrectness of thatassigned tothe earliest Vijayanagara dynastycannotbe questioned, forit
has always been known asthe Kuruba line/*
^ South-Ind. Inscrs., Vol. II, p. 140-
3 This was the surname first of Madhurantaka, son of Gandaraditya and then of Rajarajas .son Rajendra-
Cola I. It must also havebeen borne by Anapaya.
^ There seem to have been several Cola kings bearing thisname. Two ofthem arewell known to students
of Cola history,, viz., Parantaka I., sonof Aditya 1. and Parantaka II., father of Rajaraja I. There seem to
have been severalotherCola princes who bore the name.
« Similarnames are : Mummadi-Soja-Nirttamarayan (i), Pahcavaninadevi-Nadagamayyan (2), Nittavinoda-
Vadyamarayan Arinjigai-Kamarapperaiyan Mummadi-Sola-Kadigaimarayan Mummadi-Sola
(3), (4), (5),
Tongarperaiyan(6), Sembiyan-Perungavidi(7),Rajaraja-Perunayisan(8), Sembiyan-Korrapperuhgani(9),Rajaraja-
Ganitadhirajan (10), Pahcavan-Mahgalapperaiyan (11), Vira-Sola-Perundayyan (t2), Keralantaka-Perundayyan
(13), Ksatriyasikhamani-Perungannan (14), Rajaraja-Perundaccan (15), Ksatriyasikhamani-Perundattan
(ib'i, Mummadi-Sola-Brahmamarayan (17), and Rajendra-Sola-Brahmarnarayan (18). In the foregoing eighteen
surnames or titles, the first portion invariably denotes the nameofa king and the second portion gives the
profession or caste to which the individual belonged, with acomplimentary epithet, the whole title meaning
“ the great dancing-master, dramatist, carpenter, goldsmith, brazier, Brahmana, etc., of the king,’^whose nnme
is prefixedto the title,
6 Ep. hid.s Vol.Ill, p. 286,and Vol. VIH, pp. 9 and lo ; AnnualReport on Epigraphy for iSg^^oo, para-
graph 57.
7 Coins of Southern India, p. 42.
2 I 2

—
ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORTS PUBLISHED
UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY.
Nameand official designation Press, and date of
Title of work. ofauthor. publication.
India*
Illustrations of ancient buildings H. H. Cole, Lieutenant, R.E., W. H. Allen & Co.,
in Kashmir. Superintendent, Archaeolo- 13, Waterloo Place,
gical Survey, North-West- London, S. W., 1869.
ern Provinces.
Report in connection with oper- Lieutenant H. H. Cole l-C00 0
ations in the N.-W. Provinces
andthe Punjab; etc., for 1869-70.
Four reports made during the A. Cunningham, Director- Government Central
years 1862-63-64-65, Volume I. General, Archaeological Press, Simla, 1871.
(C. S.). Survey of India.
Four reports made during the Ditto Ditto.
years 1862-63-64-65, Volume II.
(C. S.)
Report for the year 1871-72, Ditto Superintendent, Govern-
Volume III. (C. S.) ment Printing,
Calcutta, 1873.
Illustrations of buildings near H. H. Cole, Lieutenant, R.E., W. H. Allen & Co.,
Muttraand Agra, showing the late Superintendent, 13, Waterloo Place,
mixed Hindu-Mahomedan style Archaeological Survey, London, S.W., 1873,
of Upper India. North-WesternProvinces.
“Tree and Serpent Worship'^ James Fergusson, D.C.L., Ditto.
from the sculptures of the F.R.S.
Buddhist Topes at Sanchi and
Amaravati.
Report for the year 1871-72, J. D. Beglar and A. C. L. Superintendent, Govern-
Delhi and Agra, Volume IV, Carlleyle, Assistants, ment Printing,
(C. S.) Archeological Survey of Calcutta, 1874.
India.
-T
of( TInd , ia . ) N , “T w b hich e h x e te c n o d nt o i v n e u r ed th s e er y i e e a s r o s f 1 r S e 6 p 2 o - r 1 t 8 s 84 b . y i A n . clu C s u iv n e n , i a n r g e h m a a m r ( k D e i d re ( c C t . or S - . G ) e i n n er t a hi i s o i f is t t. he Archteolog^ical Ssuurrvveeyy
Therepoits ofthe New Imperial Series, which began in 1874and are still inprogress, are marked (N. J. S.}.

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 245
Title ofwork. Nameand official designation Press, and date of
ofauthor. publication.
l]^D\k—contd.
Report of the first season^s opera- J. Burgess, Archaeological W. H. Allen & Co.,
tions in the Belgam and Kaladgi Surveyor and Reporter to 13, Waterloo Place,
districts. (N. I. S.) Government. London, S.W., 1874.
The Antiquities of Orissa, Volume Rajendraldla Mitra Wyman & Co., Calcutta,
I. '875-
Report for the year 1872-73, A. Cunningham, Director- Superintendent, Govern-
Volume V. (C. S.) General, Archaeological ment Printing, Calcutta,
Survey of India. '875-
Report on the antiquities of J. Burgess, Archaeological W. H. Allen. & Co.,
Kathi^w^dand Kachh. (N. I. S.) Surveyor and Reporter to 13, Waterloo Place,
Government, Western London, S.W., 1876.
India.
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum. A. Cunningham, Director- Superintendent, Govern-
Volume I, Inscriptions of Asoka. General, Archaeological ment Printing, Calcutta,
Survey of India. 1877.
The Rock Temples of Elura or J, Burgess 1877.
Verul.
Report on the antiquities in the Burgess, Archaeological W. H. Allen & Co.,
J.
Bidar and Aurangabad districts. Surveyor and Reporter to 13, Waterloo Place,
(N. 1. S.) Government, Western London, S.W., 1878.
India.
Report of a tour in Eastern Raj- A. C. L. Carlleyle, Assistant, Superintendent, Govern-
putanain 1871-72; and 1872-73, Archaeological Survey. ment Printing, Calcutta,
Volume VI. (C. S.) 187S.
Report of a tour in Bundelkhand J, D. Beglar, Assistant, Ditto.
and Malwa, 1871-72; and in Archaeological Survey.
the Central Provinces, 1873-74,
Volume Vn. (C. S.)
Report of a tour through the Ditto * Ditto.
Bengal Provinces of Patna,
Gaya, Mongir, and Bhagalpur;
TheSantalParganas, Manbhum,
Singhbhum, and Birbhiim, Ban-
kura, Raniganj, Bardwan and
Hughli in 1872-73, Volume
Vlll. (C. S.)
Pali Sanskrit, and old Canarese J. F. Fleet, Bombay Civil G. E. Eyre and W.
Inscriptions from the Bombay Service, and J. Burgess, Spottiswoode, London,
Presidency and parts of the Archaeological Surveyor, 1878.
Madras Presidency and Maisur, Western India.
arranged and explained,
The Stupa ofBharhut; a Bud- A. Cunningham, Director- W. H, Allen & Co,,
dhist monument ornamented General, Archaeological 13, Waterloo Place,
vi^ith numerous sculptures, illus- Survey of India. London, S.WL, 1879.
trative of Buddhist legend and
historyin the third centuryB. C.
1

— —
archaeological reports
246
Name and official designation Press anddate of
Title ofwork. ofauthor. publication.
India contd.
Rep 1 o 8 r 7 t 5- of tours in Central Doab A. C. L. Carlleyle, ist Assis- Superintendent, Govern-
and Gorakhpur in 1874-75 and tant, Archseological Survey, . ment Printing,
76, \"olume XII. (C. S.) Calcutta, J879.
Report of a tour in the Central A. Cunningham, Director- Ditto.
Provinces in 1873-74 and General, Archseological
11887746--75, Volume IX. (C. S.) Survey of India.
Report of tours in Bundelkhand Ditto Ditto, 1880.
and Malwa in 1874-75 and
77, Volume X. (C. S.)
Report of tours in the Gangetic D itto Ditto.
Provinces from Badaon to Bihar
in 1875-76 and 1877-78,Volume
XI. (C. S.)
Report on the Amardvati topeand R. Sewell, Madras Civil G. E. Eyre and W.
excavations on its site in 1877. Service. Spottiswoode, London,
1880.
The Antiquities of Orissa, Rdjendraldla Mitra W. Newman & Co.,
Volume 11. Calcutta, i§8o.
The Cave Temples of India. J. Fergusson and J. Burgess V/. H. Allen & Co.,
13, Waterloo Place,
London, S.W,, 1880.
First Report of the Curator of H. H. Cole, Curator of Government Central
Ancient Monuments in India Ancient Monuments in Branch Press, Simla,
for the year 1881-82. India. 1882.
Report of tours in the South- J. D. Beglar, Assistant, Superintendent, Govern-
Eastern Provinces in 1874-75 Archseological Survey. ment Printing,
and 1875-76, Volume XIII. Calcutta, 1882.
(C. S.)
Report of a tour in the Punjab in A. Cunningham, Director- Ditto.
1878-79, Volume XIV. (C. S.) General, Archaeological
Survey of India.
Report of a tour in Bihar and Ditto . Ditto.
Bengalin 1879-80 from Patna
to Sunargaon, Volume XV.
(C. S.)
Lists of Antiquarian Remains in R. Sewell, Madras Civil Government Press,
the Presidency of Madras. Service. Madras, 1S82.
(N. I. S.)
Pre A l n i c m i i e n n a t ry Mon re u p m o e r n ts ts b i y n C I u n r di a a t . or, H. cie H n . t M C o o n le u , me Cu n r t a s to i r n I o n f di A a n . - Go B v r e a r n n c m h ent Press, C S e i n m t l r a a , l
1881 to 1883,
[a) Madras Presidency
The. Seven Pagodas Ditto
Ditto,

— —— —
PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 247
Nameand official designation Press, and dateof
Title of work.
ofauthor. publication.
\nu\K—cont,L
[a] Madras Preside.ncy .cont.d. .
Velur H. PI. Cole, Curator of An- Government Central
cieiit Monuments in India. Branch Press, Simla,
.... r88i to 1883.
Trichinopoly .... Ditto Ditto.
Srirangam .... Ditto Ditto.
Madura .... Ditto Ditto.
ianjore Ditto Ditto.
Kombakonam Ditto Ditto.
Chillambaram Ditto Ditto.
Conjeveram .... Ditto Ditto.
.
Bijanagar Ditto Ditto.
5 Bombay Presid.ency...
( )
Ahmedab.ad .... Ditto Ditto.
Poona ..... Ditto Ditto.
«
Karli Ditto Ditto.
. . ,
Ambarnath „ . . . Ditto . . . Ditto.
Elephanta Ditto Ditto,
, . , .
Bijapur Ditto Ditto.
(<;) , . . . .
[d) Rajputana ....
Mount A.bu .... Ditto Ditto.
Ajmir Ditto Ditto.
Jaipur ....* Ditto Ditto.
, . . .
Ulwar . Ditto . . I Ditto.
ie] H. PI. the Nizam’s Territory
Kalburgan Ditto Ditto.
, <.
1

— —
ARCH/EOLOGICAL reports.
248
Nameand official designation Press, and date of
Title of work. 1 of author. publication.
—
i
India contd. 1
Punjab
(/)
(Memorandum on Ancient H. H. Cole, Curator of An- Government Central
Monuments in Eusafz^ai^ with cient MonumentsinIndia. Branch Press, Simla,
a description of the explora- 1881 to 1883.
tions undertaken from the 41^
Februarv to the i6th April
1883, and suggestions for the
disposal of the sculptures.)
Second Report of the Curator of Ditto Superintendent, Govern-
Ancient Monuments in India mentPrinting, Calcutta,
for the year 1882-S3. 1883.
Report on the Buddhist Cave J. Burgess, Archaeological Ballantyne, Hanson & Co.,
Temples and their inscriptions. Surveyor and Reporter to Edinburgh and London,
(N. I. S.)
Governmentfor Western and 1883.
Southern India.
Reports of tours in North and A. Cunningham, Director- Superintendent, Govern-
South Bihar in 1880-81, Volume General, ArchaeologicalSur- ment Printing, Calcutta,
XVI. (C. S.) vey of India, and H. B. W. 1883.
Garrick, AssistantArchaeolo-
gical Survey.
Preservation of National Monu- J. B. Keith, Superintending Ditto.
ments—Fortress Gwalior. Monumental Preservation.
Catalogue and Hand-book of the J. Anderson, Superintend- Ditto.
Archaeological Collectio—ns in the ent, Indian Museum.
Indian Museum, Part 1 Asoka
and Indo-Scythian Galleries.
Ditto ditto, Part II Ditto Ditto.
Gupta and Inscription Galleries.
Report of a tour in Gorakpur A. C. L. Carlleyle, ist Assist- Ditto.
district in 1875-76 and 1876-77, ant, Archaeological Survey.
Volume XVIIL (C, S.)
Report on the Elura cave temples J. Burgess, Archaeological Ballantyne; Hanson &
and the other Brahmanical and Surveyor and Repo W rter to Co., Edinburgh and
Jaina caves in Western India. Government for estern London, 1883.
(N. I. S.) and Southern India.
Report of a tour in the Central A. Cunningham, Director- Superintendent, Govern-
Provinces and Lower Gangetic General, Archaeological ment Printings Calcutta,.
Doab in 1881-82, Volume XVII. Survey of India. 1884.
(C. S.)
Lists of Inscriptions and Sketch R. Sewell, Madras Civil Government Press,
of the Dynasties of Southern Service. Madras, 1S84.
India. (N. L S.)

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 249
Title ofwork. Nameand official designation Press, and date of
ofauthor. publication.
—
India contd.
Preservation of National Monu- H. H. Cole, Curator of An- Plates prepared in Paris^
ments, India. cient Monuments in India. 1884-85.
(a) Agra and Gwalior Ditto Ditto.
(3) Golden temple at Amritsar, Ditto Ditto.
Punjab.
H)elhi t • • t Ditto Ditto.
[d) Grseco-Buddhist sculptures Ditto Ditto.
from Yusufzai.
{e) Great temple to Siva and his Ditto Ditto.
consort at Madura.
(/) Meywar . . , . Ditto Ditto.
(^) Buildings of the Punjab Ditto Ditto.
(h) Great Buddhist Tope at Ditto Ditto.
Sanchi.
(z) Tomb of Jahangir at Shahdara Ditto • • Ditto.
near Lahore.
(/) The temples at Trichinopoly Ditto Ditto.
Third Report of the Curator of Ditto Superintendent, Govern-
Ancient Monuments in India ment Printing, Calcutta,
for the year 1883-84. 1885.
Report of a tour through Bihar, H. B. W. Garrick, Assistant, Ditto.
Central India, Peshawar, and Archaeological Survey.
Yusufzai, during 1881-82, Vol.
XIX. (C. S.)
Report of a tour in Eastern Raj-- A. Cunningham, Director- Ditto.
putana in 1882-83, Vol. XX. General, Archaeological
(C. S.) Survey of India.
Reports of a tour in Bundelkhand Ditto • • Ditto.
and Rewa in 1883-84 and of a
tour in Rewa, Bundelkhand,
Malwa, and Gwaliorin 1884-85,
XXL
Vol. (C. S.)
Report of tours in Gorakhpur, A. C. L. Carlleyle, ist Assis- Ditto.
Saran, andGhazipurin 1877-78- tant, Archaeological Survey.
79 and 80, Vol. XXII. (C. S.)
Report of a tour in the Punjab H. B. W. Garrick, Assistant, a (40 0000
and RS-jputana in 1883-84, Vol. Archaeological Survey.
XXIII. (C.S.j

250 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORTS
Nameandofficial designation Press,and dateof
Titleofwork. ofauthor. publication.
—
India confd.
General Index to the Reports of V. A. Smith, Indian Civil Superintendent, Govern-
the Archaeological Survey of Service. ment Printing, Calcutta,
India, Vols. I—XXIII. (C.^S.) 1887.
The Buddhist stupas of Amaravati J. Burgess, Director-General, Ballantyne, Hanson Sc
and JaggayyapetaintheKrishna ArchcTeological Survey of Co., Edinburgh and
District, Madras Presidency, India, and G. Biihler, Ph.D., London, 1887,
with translations of the Asoka LL.D., C.I.E., etc.
Inscriptions at Jaugada and
Dhauli. (N. I. S.)
List (s) of photographs of Ancient Superintendent, Govern-
Buildings and Antiquities. ment Printing, Calcutta,
1887.
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, F. Fleet Superintendent, Govern-
J.
Vol. III. (Gupta Inscriptions.) ment Printing, Calcutta,
1888.
The Sharqi Architecture of Jaun- A. Fiihrer, ArchaeWological Ditto, 1889.
N
pur. (N. I. S.) Survey, orth- estern
Provinces and Oudh, and
E. W. Smith, Architectural
Assistant.
Jeypore Portfolio of—Architectural Colonel S. S. Jacob, C.I.E.
.
Griggs & Sons, London,
Details Parts I X. 1890-98.
;
South Indian Inscriptions (Vol. I). E. Hultzsch, Government Government Press,
(N. I. S ) Epigraphist. Madras, 1890.
List of photographic negatives of J. Wood-Mason and J. D. 1890.
Ancient Buildings and Anti- Beglar.
quities in the Imperial Museum,
Calcutta.
South Indian Inscriptions (Vol. II). E. Hultzsch, Government Government Press,
(N. L S.) Epigraphist. Madras, 1891-95.
The Monumental Antiquities and A. Fiihrer, Archaeological Government Press,
Inscriptions in the North- Survey, North-Western North-Western Provin-
Western Provinces and Oudh. Provinces and Oudh. ces and Oudh, 1891.
(N. L S.)
Epigraphia Indica of the Archcoo- J. Burgess, late Director- Superintendent, Govern-
logical Survey of India (Vol. I), General, Archaeological ment Printing, Calcutta,
(N. 1. S.) Survey of India. 1892.
Ma T a h t e a m b B p o u l d d e h d i h u a n o d r G e t a r h y e a t . G h r e ea B t od B h u i dd t h r i e s e, t A. S to u C r r u v G n e e n y n i e n o r f g a h l I , a nd m i , A a r . c la h t a e eol D o i g r i e c c a - l W. W S. at H W e . . r , lo A 1 l o 8 l 9 P e 2 l n . ac & e, L C o o n . d , on 1 , 3 ’ ,
Epi l ( o g N g . r i a c L p a h l i S S a . u ) r In v d e i y ca of of In t d h i e a [ A V r o c l. he I o I) - . J. S Ge u n r B e v u r e r a y g l e , o s f s, Ind l i A a a r t . c e hae D o i l r o e g c i t c o a r l - Su m p e e n r t in P t r e i n n d t e i n n t g, . C G a o l v cu e t r t n a - ,
1894.

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 25*
Titleof work. Name and official designation Press, and date of
ofauthor. publication.
—
India contd.
Notes on the Antiquities, Ethno- T. H. Holdich, Superinten- Superintendent, Govern-
graphy, and Historyof Las Bela dent, Survey of India. ment Printing, Cal-
and Mekran. cutta, 1894.
South Indian Buddhist Antiqui- A. Rea, Superintendent, Government Press,
ties. (N. I. S.) Archaeological Survey, Madras, 1854.
Madras.
List of Architectural and Archaeo- Ditto Ditto.
logical Remains in Coorg.
(N. 1. S.)
List of photographic negatives Ditto.
belonging to the India Office.
Bower Manuscripts. (N. 1. S.) A. Hoernle, Principal, Cal- Superintendent, Govern-
cutta Madrassah. ment Printing, Cal-
cutta, 1893-97.
The Moghul Architecture— of E. Smith, Archaeological Sur- Government Press, North-
Fathpur-Sikri, Parts I IV. vey, North-Western Pro- Western Provinces and
(N. I. S.) vinces and Oudh. Oudh, 1894-98.
On the Muhammadan Architec- J. Burgess, late Director- Eyre & Spottiswoode,
ture in Gujrat. (N. I. S.) General, Archaeological London, 1896.
Survey of India.
ChMukyan Architecture, including A. Rea, Superintendent, Government Press,
examples from the Ballari Archaeological Survey, Madras, 1896.
District, Madras Presidency. Madras.
(N. I. S.)
Lists of Antiquarian Remains in H. Cousens, Superintendent, Superintendent, Govern-
the Central Provinces and Archaeological Survey, ment Printing, Cal-
Ber^r. (N. 1. S.) Bombay. cutta, 1897.
Monumental Remains of the A, Rea, Superintendent, Government Press,
Dutch East India Company Archaeological Survey, Madras, 1897.
in the Presidency of Madras. Madras.
(N. 1. S.)
Revised lists of Antiquarian Re- H. Cousens, Superintendent, Government Central
mains in the Bombay Presi- Archaeological Survey, Press, Bombay, 1897.
dency. (N. I. S.) Bombay.
South Indian Inscriptions (Volume E. Hultzsch, Government Government Press,
III, Part I). (N. 1. S.) Epigraphist. Madras, 1899.
A list of photographic negatives Dr. T. Bloch, rst Assistant Superintendent, Govern-
of Indian Antiquides in the Superintendent, Indian ment Printing, Calcutta,
collection of the Indian Museum Museum. 1900.
with which is incorporated the
list of similar negatives in the
possession of the India Office.
List of Antiquarian Remains in H. Cousens, Superintendent, Ditto.
His Highness the Nizam's Archaeological Survey,
territories. (N. I. S. ) Bombay.
2 K 2

ARCH/EOLOGICAL reports.
252
Nameand official designation Press, and date of
Title ofwork. of author. publication.
—
India The cofi M c u ld h . ammadan Architecture J. Burgess, late Director- Eyre & Spottiswoode,
of Ahmedabad, Parti. (N. I. S.) General, Archseoiogical London, 1900.
Survey of India.
Report on results of explorations P. C. Mukherji, lately em- Superintendent, Govern-
in the Nepal Tarai, Part L ployed on Archseoiogical mentPrinting, Calcutta,
(N. I. S.) explorations under the 1901.
Government of the North-
Western Provinces and
Oudh.
The Jaina Stupa and some other V. A. Smith, Indian Civil Government Press,
Antiquities of Mathur^ (N. I. S.) Service. United Provinces, 1901.
Moghul Colour Decoration of E. Smith, ArchaeWological Ditto.
Agra, Part I. (N. I. S.) Surveyor, N orth- estern
Provinces and Oudh.
The Architectural Antiquities of J. Burgess, late Director- Eyre & Spottiswoode,
Northern Gujrat. (N. I. S,) General, Archaeological London, 1903.
Survey of India, and H.
Cousens, Superintendent,
Archaeological Survey,
Western India.
The Muhammadan Architecture of J. Burgess, late Director- Ditto, 1905.
Ahmedabad, .Part II, with General of the Archaeologi-
Muslim and Hindu Remains in cal Survey of India.
the vicinity. (N. I. S.)
Portfolio of illustrations of Sind H, Cousens, Superintendent, W. Griggs & Sons,
Tiles. Archaeological Survey of Li^mited, 1906.
India, Western Circle.
Annual Report of the Director- J. H. Marshall, Director- Superintendent, Govern-
General of Archaeology in India General of Archaeology ment Printing, Calcutta,
for the year 1902-03, Parts I in India. 1904.
and II.
Ditto for the year 1903-04, Ditto . Ditto, 1905-06.
Parts I and II.
Ditto for the year 1904-05, Ditto . Ditto, 1906.
Part
I.
Ditto for the year 1904-05, Ditto , Ditto, 1908.
Part 11.
Par D t itto for the year 1005-06, Ditto . Ditto, 1907.
I.
Ditto for the year 1905-06, Ditto
Part ll. Ditto, 1908.
0
Par D t itto for the year 1006-07 ^ . Ditto Superintendent, Govern-
I. ment Central Branch
Press, Simla, 1908.
Par D t it I t I. o for the vear 1006-07. Ditto . Superintendent, Govern-
ment Printing, Cal-
i cutta, 1909.

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 253
Title of work. Nameand official designation Press, and date of
of author. publication.
Madras—
Notes on the Amaravati Stflpa J. Burgess, Government Government Press,
Archaeological Surveyor for Madras, 1882.
Western and Southern
India.
Notes and Inscriptions from Tem- Ditto Ditto, 1885-86.
ples in the Madura District,
Vol. IV.
Tamil and Sanskrit Inscriptions Ditto Ditto, 1886.
with some notes on village
antiquities collected chiefly in
the south of the Madras Presi-
dency.
List of ancient monuments for Ditto Ditto, 1886-87.
,
conservation in the Madras
Presidency in 1^84.
Ditto, in 1891 A, Rea, Archaeological Sur- Ditto, 1891.
veyor, Madras.
Epigraphia Indica and Record of E. Hultzsch, Government Superintendent, Govern-
the Archaeological Survey of Epigraphist. ment Printing,
India, Vol. Ill, 1894-95. Calcutta, 1895.
Ditto Vol. IV, 1896-97 Ditto Ditto, 1897.
Ditto „ V, 1898-99 Ditto Ditto, 1899.
Ditto „ VI, 1900-01 Ditto Ditto, 1901.
Ditto „ VII, 1902-03 Ditto Ditto, 1904.
Ditto „ VIII, 1905-06 Ditto Ditto, 1907.
List of tombs and monuments of Government of Madras Government Press,
Europeans, etc., in the Madras Madras, 1898,
District.
List of tombs and monuments Ditto Ditto.
erected in Madras.
List of statues, monuments and Ditto Ditto.
busts erected in Madras in
honour of distinguished servants
of the State.
Annual Report of the Archaeolo- A, Rea, Superintendent, Ditto, igoo.
gical Survey, Madrasand Coorg, Archaeological Survey,
for the year 1899-1900.
Ditto, 1900-01 Ditto Ditto, igoi.
Ditto, 1901-02 Ditto Ditto, igo2.
Ditto, 1902-03 Ditto Ditto, 1903.
Ditto, 1902-04 Ditto Ditto, 1904.
Ditto, 1904-05 Ditto Ditto, 1905.

254 ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORTS
Title of work. Name and official designation Press, and dateof
of author. publication.
—
Madras concld*
Annual Progress Report of thei A. Rea, Superintendent Government Press,
,
Archaeological Survey Depart- Archaeological Survey. Madras, 1906.
ment, Southern Circle, for the
year 1005-06.
Ditto, for the year 1906-07 . Ditto Ditto, 1907.
Ditto, for the year 1907-08 . Ditto . Ditto, 1908.
Re a p c o c r o t mpl o i n shed Epi f gr r a o p m hic J a u l ly w 1 o 8 r 91 k : E. Epig H r u a l p t h z i s s c t h . , Government : Ditto, 1892.
to June 1892.
Ditto July 1892 to June Ditto Ditto, 1893.
1893.
Ditto do. 1893 to do. Ditto Ditto, 1894.
1894.
Ditto do. 1894 to do. Ditto
Ditto, 1895.
1895.
Ditto do. 1895 fo do. Ditto
Ditto, 1896.
1896.
Ditto do. 1896 to do. Ditto
Ditto, 1897.
1S97,
Ditto do. 1897 to do. Ditto
Ditto, 1898.
1898.
Ditto do. 1898 to do. V. Venkayya, ist Assistant to Ditto, 1899.
1899. theGovernment Epigraphist.
Ditto do. 1899 to do. Ditto
1900. Ditto, 1900.
Ditto do. 1900 to do. E. Hultzsch, Government
1901. Epigraphist, Ditto, 1501.
Ditto do. 1901 to do. Ditto
1902. Ditto, igo2.
Ditto do. 1902 to do. Ditto
1903. Ditto, 1903.
Ditto do. 1903 to do. ’ Officiating
1904 - Government Epigraphist. Ditto, 1904.
Ditto do. 1904 lo do. 1 Ditto
1905- Ditto, 1905.
Annual Report of the Assistant \ Venkayya,
Assistant
Archaeological Superintendent ArchaeologicalSuperintend- Ditto, 1906.
for Epigraphy, Southern Circle, ent for Epigraphy.
for the year 1905-06.
Ditto for the ; year 1906-07. Ditto
j ’ Ditto, 1907.
Ditto for the:year 1907-08. Dit—to
| . . j Ditto, 1908.

—
published under official authority.
25s
Title ofwork. Nameand officialdesignation Press, and dateof
of author. publication.
Bombay
The Antiquities of the Kolaba 1854.
Agency. (Ser. Sel. Rec.,
B^bay, N. S. No. 7.)
The Antiquities of Kolhapoor illus-
trated. (Ser. 350j Sel. Rec., 1854.
Bombay, N. S. No. 8.)
Extracts in connection with Maho-
medan Architecture at Beeja- 1857-
poor, in the Satara Districts, etc.
(1854). (Ser. 350, Sel. Rec.,
Bombay, N. S. No. 40.)
Observations on inscriptions on Major G. LeG.Jacob 1855-
copper-plates dugup at Naroor,
in the Koodal Division of the
Sawunt Waree State, 1848;
wdth translations and facsimiles,
1851. (Ser. 350, Sel. Rec.,
Bombay, N. S. No. 10.)
Rock-cut Temples of Western Fergusson, F.R.S., M.R. Cundall & Downes,
J.
India. A.S. London, 1864.
Report on the illustration of the Dr. Forbes Watson and 1869.
Archaic Architecture of India, Mr. Fergusson, General
etc. Cunningham, and Colonel
Meadows Taylor.
Notes to accompany a series of Captain Lyon, late of Her Carey Brothers, Old
^
photographsdesigned to illustrate Majesty^s 68th Regiment College Street, 3,
the Ancient Architecture of of Light Infantry. Geneva, 1871.
Western India.
Memorandum on the Buddhist James Burgess, Archaeolo- Government Central
I
Caves at Junnar. 1 gicalSurveyorand Reporter Press, Bombay, 1874.
to Government, and F.
J.
Fleet, Bo.C.S.
Memorandum on the antiquities James Burgess, Archaeolo- Ditto, 1875.
at Dabhoi, Ahmedabad, Than, gicalSurveyor and Reporter
Junagadh, Girnar, and Dhank. to Government.
Memorandum onthe remains at Ditto Ditto.
Gumli, Gop, and in Kachh, etc.
Provisional lists of Architectural Ditto Ditto,
andother Archaeologicalremains
in Western India, including the
Bombay Presidency, Sindh,
Berar, Central Provinces, and
Hyderabad.

archeological reports
256
Nameandofficial designation Press, and date of
Title ofwork. ofauthor. publication.
—
Bombay contd.
Translations of inscriptions from J. F. Fleet, Bo.C.S., and Hari Government Central
Belgaum and KalAdgi Districts Vaman Limaya, B.A. Press, Bombay, 1876,
in theReportof the first season^s
operations of the Archeological
Survey of WesternIndia and of
inscriptions from Kathiawar and
Kachh.
Buddhist Caves of Ajanta. Prepared by Major R. Gill Ditto, 1876.
Second edition. and revised by James
Burgess, F.R.G.S., M.R.
A.S.
Notes on the antiquities of the W. F. Sinclair, Bo.C.S., and Ditto, 1877.
Talukas of Parner, Sangamner, J. Burgess, Archaeological
Ankole, and Kopergaum form- Surveyor and Reporter to
ing the charge of the 2nd Assis- Government.
tant Collector, Ahmadnagar,
with revised lists of remains in
the Ahmadnagar, Nasik, Puna,
Thana, and Kaladgi Zillahs.
Architectural and Archaeological W. H. Property Collector of Ditto.
remains in Khandesh in 1877. Khandesh.
Reports (from the Collectors) re- Ditto.
garding the Archaeological re-
mains in the Karachi, Haidara-
bad,and ShikarpurCollectorates
in Sindh, with plans of tombs.
Report on the Architectural and Dalpatram Pranjivan Kha- Ditto.
Archaeological remains in the Khar.
Province of Kachh, with 5
papers by the late Sir Alex.
Burnes. (Selections from the
records of the Bombay Govern-
ment, Nc. CLII, new series.)
i%L
Notes on theBuddha Rock-Temp- J. Burgess, Archaeological Ditto.
les of Ajanta, their paintings Surveyor, Western India.
and sculptures, and on the paint-
ings ofthe Bagh Caves, modern
Buddha Mythology, etc.
Inscriptions from the Cave Tem- J. Burgess, Archaeological Ditto, 1881.
ples of Western India with Surveyor, and Bhagwanlal
descriptive notes, etc. Indraji Pandit.
Lists ofthe antiquarian remains in Burgess, Archeological
the Bombay Presidency, Sindh J. Surveyor and Reporter to Ditto, 1885.
and Berir, with an Appendix Government.
ofinscriptions from Gujarat.
Scheme for the protection and A. W. Crawley Boevy, C.S. EducationSociety'sPress,
conservation ofancientbuildings Bombay, i885.
in and around the City of
Ahmedabad.

1
PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 257
Title of work. Nameand official designation Press, and date of
of author. publication.
—
Bombay contd.
List of photographs of ancient Superintendent, Govern-
buildings and antiquities, mentPrinting, Calcutta,
Bombay. 1887.
The antiquities of the town of James Burgess, LL.D., C.I.E., George Waterston &
Dabhoi in Gujarat. Director-General of the Sons, Edinburgh, 1888.
Archaeological Survey of
India, and H. Cousens,
M.R.A.S., Archaeological
Surveyor, Western Inaia.
List of Photographic Negatives H. Cousens, M.R.A.S., Government Central
of ancient buildings and anti- Archaeological Surveyor, Press, Bombay, i888.
quities of the Bombay Presi- Western India.
dency.
List of Photographic Negatives James Burgess Superintendent, Govern-
.
of the paintings copied frotii mentPrinting, Calcutta,
the Ajanta Caves between 1872 1889.
and 1885 at the Government
School of Art, Bombay. Sup-
plement to the Bombay List of
Photographic.Nega.tives.. .
Bijapur Guide H. Cousens, M.R.A.S., Orphanage Preis, Poona,
1
Archaeological Surveyor, 1889.
Western India.
Notes on the buildings and other H. Cousens, Archaeological Government Central
antiquarian remains at Bijapur, Surveyor, Western India, Press, Bombay, 1890.
with translations of the inscrip- and E. Rehatsek.
tions.
An account of the Caves at Nad- H. Cousens, Archaeological Ditto, 1891.
sur and Karsambla. Surveyor, Western India.
Progress Report of the Archaeo- Ditto Ditto, 1890.
logical Survey of Western India
for the months of December
1889 to April 1890.
Ditto for the months of May 1890 Ditto , Ditto, 1891.
to April 1891.
Ditto for the months of May 1891 Ditto Ditto, 1892.
to April 1892.
Ditto for the months of May 1892 Ditto Ditto, 1893.
to April 1S93.
Ditio for the months of May 1893 Ditto Ditto, 1S94.
to April 1894.
Ditto for the months of May 1894 Ditto Ditto, J895.
to August 1895.

—
258 ARCHiEOLOGICAL REPORTS
1
Title of work.
Name andofficial designation Press,and date of
of author. publication.
Bombay
concld.
Progress Report of the Archaeo- H. Cousens, Archaeological Government Central
logical Survey of Western India Surveyor, Western India. Press, Bombay, 1896.
for the months of September
1895 to April 1896.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1897.
June 1897.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1898.
June 1898.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1899.
June 1899,
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1900.
June 1900.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1901.
June 1901.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1902.
June 1902.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1903.
June 1903.
Di J t u t n o e f 1 o 9 r 04 t . he year ending 30th Ditto Ditto, 1904.
Ditto for the year ending 30th Ditto
June 1905. Ditto, 1905.
Progress Report of the Archeo- Ditto
logical Surveyof India^ Western Ditto, 1906,
Circle, for the months of July to
March 1906, inclusive.
Ditto for the year ending 31st Ditto
March 1907. Ditto, 1908.
Ditto for the year endins^f 31st Ditto
March 1908. Ditto, 1908.
Pai T n e t m i p n l g e s s in of th A e jan B t u a d , dh K is h t and C e a s v h e , ^ Jo o h f n G t r h if e fiths S , ir late J P a r m i s n h c e i d p j a i l 'W. Griggs, London, 1896.
India. Volume I (Pictorial sub- Jijibhai School of Art,
jects) . Bombay, Fellow of the
University of Bombay,
Member
of the Bombay
Branch of the Royal Asia-
tic Society.
Dito
ditto, Volume
11 Ditto
(Decorative details). Ditto, 1900.
1

. .
PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 259
Title of work.
Nameand
official designation Press, and date of
of author. publication.
1
Bengal—
Account of a visit to Mount A. P 1861.
Parisnath (in Chutia Nagpoor)
and the Jain Temples thereon
in 1827. (Ser. 250, Sel, Rec.,
Bengal, No. 38.)
Ruins of the Nalanda Monasteries xA. M. Broadley, B.C.S, Bengal Secretariat Press,
at Burgaon, Sub-Division Bihar, Calcutta, 1872.
District Patna.
Report on the Archaeology of the H. L. Harrison, B.C.S. Ditto, 1873.
District of Midnapore.
Buddha Gaya, the Hermitage of Rajendraldla Mitra^ LL. D., Ditto, 1878.
Sakya Muni. C.I.E.
List of objects of antiquarian Ditto, 1879.
interest in Bengal.
A
List of the objects of anti- •»«..* Ditto, 1879.
quarian interest in the Lower
Provinces of Bengal (with his-
torical descriptions).
Revised list of ancient monuments Government of Bengal, P.W. Ditto, 1887.
in Bengal, 1886. Department, assisted by
J. D. Beglar and W. B. B.
Some Historical and Ethnical W. B. Oldham, C.I.E., Indian Ditto, 1891.
aspects of the Burdwan District. Civil Service.
Discovery of the exact site of L. A, Waddell, M.B. . Ditto, 1892,
Asoka’s classic Capital of Pata-
liputra, the Palihothra of the i
Greeks, and description of the
superficial remains.
A Brief History of the Bodh Gaya Rai Ram Anugrah Narayan Ditto, 1893.
Math. Singh, Bahadur.
Sikkim Gazetteer Ditto, 1894.
Some Historical and Ethnical W. B. Oldham,C.I.E., Indian Ditto.
aspects of the Burdwan District Civil Service. 1
with an explanatory Index (Re-
print)
List of Statues, Monuments, and Ditto.
Busts in Calcutta of historical
interest.
List of Inscriptions on tombs or C. R. Wilson, M.A., of the Superintendent, Govern-
monuments possessing historical 1 Bengal Educational Service. mentPrinting, Calcutta,
or archseolcgica] interest. 1896.
List of — Ancient Monuments in Bengal Secretariat Press,
Bengal Revised and corrected Calcutta, 1896.
up to 31st August 1895.
2 L 2

— —
ARCH/EOLOGICAL REPORTS
26'
Nameand official designation Press, and date of
Titleofwork. of author. publication.
~~
!
— 1
Bexgal concld. i
List of ancient monuments :
Dacca Division Bengal Secretariat Press,
•
Calcutta, 1896.
Rajshahi Division Ditto.
Orissa Division Ditto.
Chota Nagpur Division . ...... Ditto.
Bhagalpur Division Ditto.
Chittagong Division Ditto.
Burdwan Division Ditto.
,
Patna Division Ditto.
Presidency Division Ditto.
, ,
Report vv^ith photographs of the M. H. Arnott, M.Inst.C.E., Waterlow & Sons,
repairs executed to some of the Executive Engineer, Bengal Limited, London, W.,
principaltemples at Bhubanes- Public Works. 1903.
var and caves in the Khandagiri
and Udaigiri Hills, Orissa,
between 1898 and 1903.
Annual Report of the Archaeolo- T. Bloch, Archaeological Bengal Secretariat Press,
gical Survey, Bengal Circle, for Surveyor, Bengal Circle. Calcutta, 1901.
the year 1900-01.
Ditto for the year ended Ditto • • Ditto, 1902,
April 1902.
Ditto for the year ended Ditto . , Ditto, 1903.
April 1903.
Ditto for the year ended Ditto , Ditto, 1904.
April 1904.
Ditto for the year ended Ditto
Ditto, 1905.
April 1905.
Annual Report of the Archaeolo- Ditto
. Ditto, 1906.
gical Survey, Eastern Circle, for
1905-06.
Ditto for 1906-07 • A. PI. Longhurst, Officiating Ditto, 1907.
Superintendent, Archeolo-
... gicalSurvey, Eastern Circle.
Ditto for 1907-08 T. Bloch, Superintendent,
Ditto, 1908.
Archaeological Survey
Eastern Circle, ^
United Provinces
De.scription 01 the antiquities at F. Maisey
Kalinian, Baptist Mission Press
1848.

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY.
261-
Title of work.
Nameand
official designation Press,anddateof
ofauthor. publication.
United PROviNCEs-~<r^?;^/^/,
List of Photographic Negatives A. Fiihrer, Ph.D., Archaeolo- Superintendent, Govern-
of the monumental antiquities gical Surveyor^ and E- W. Printing,
in the North-Western Provinces Smith, Architectural Sur- Calcutta, 1889.
and Oudh. veyor, North-Western Pro-
vinces and Oudh.
Progress Reports of the Epigra- Ditto Government Press, North-
phical and Architectural Western Provinces and
Branches of the North-Western Oudh, 1892.
Provinces and Oudh from
October 1889 till 30th June
1891.
Annual Progress Report of the A. Fuhrer, Ph.D., Archaeolo- Thomason College Press,
Archaeological Survey Circle, gical Survej^or. Roorkee, 1892.
North-Western Provinces and
Oudh, forthe year 1891-92.
Ditto for the year ending June Ditto Ditto, 1893.
1893.
Ditto for the year ending June Ditto Ditto, 1894.
1894.
Ditto for the year ending June Ditto
Ditto, 1895,
1895.
Ditto for the year ending June Ditto
Ditto, 1896.
1896.
Ditto for the year ending June Ditto Ditto, 1897.
1897.
.Ditto for the year ending June Ditto Ditto, 1898.
1898.
Ditto for the year ending June V. A. Smith, I.C.S., and Government Press, North-
1899. E. W. Smith, Archaeological Western Provinces and
Surveyor. Oudh, 1899.
Ditto for the year ending 31st E. W. Smith, Archaeological Ditto, 1900,
March Igoo. Surveyor.
Ditto for the year ending 31st Ditto . , Ditto, 1901.
March igoi.
Annual Progress Report of the Government Press, United
Archaeological Survey Circle, Provinces, 1902.
United Provinces, for the year
ending 31st March 1902,
Ditto for the year ending 31st E. B. S. Shepherd, Archaeo- Ditto, 1903.
March 1903, logical Surveyor.
Annual Progress Report of the W, H. Nicholls, Archaeologi- Ditto, 1904.
Archaeological Surveyor, United cal Surveyor,
Provinces and Punjab^ for the
year ending 31st March 1904.

,
262 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORTS
Nameand official designation Press,and dale of
'1itle ot work. ofauthor. publication.
United Provinces—
Annual Progress Report of the W. H. Nicholls, Archaeolo- Government Press,
A rcbgeological Surveyor, United gical Surveyor. United Provinces, 1905.
Provinces and Punjab, for the
year ending 31st March 1905.
Annual Progress Report of the Ditto Ditto, 1906.
Archaeological Surveyor, North-
ern Circle, for the year ending
31st March 1906,
Ditto for theyear 1906-07. Ditto Ditto, 1907.
Ditto for the year 1907-08. R. F. Tucker, Archaeological Ditto, 1908.
Surveyor.
List of Christiantombs and monu- A. Fiihrer, Archaeological GovernmentPress, North-
ments of archaeological and his- Surveyor, North-Western Western Provinces and
torical interest and their inscrip- Provinces and Oudh. Oudh, 1896.
tions in the North-Western
Provinces and Oudh,
The remains near Kasia in the V. A. Smith, I.C.S. Ditto.
.
Gorakhpur District.
Portfolio of Indian Architectural E. W. Smith, Archaeological Griggs & Sons, London.
drawings. Part I. Surveyor, North-Western
Provinces and Oudh.
Report on the antiquities in the Poorno Chander Mukherji Thomason CollegePress
.
district of Lalitpur, North-Wes- Roorkee, 1899.
tern Provinces.
Platesillustratingthe Reporton the Ditto Ditto.
antiquitiesin the district of Lalit-
pur, North-Western Provinces.
Punjab—
Objects of Antiquarian interest in Public Works Depart-
the Punjab and its dependencies ment Press, Lahore.
compiled from statements fur- 1875-
nished by the several Deputy
_
Commissioners, His Highness
the Maharajah of Kashmir, and
the Superintendents,. Cis-Sutlej,
Bahawalpur,and Chamba Stales.
Descriptive List of the Principal A. Cunningham, Director-
Buddhist Sculptures in the General, Archaeological
Lahore Museum. Survey.
Descriptive List of Photographic J. L. Kipling, Curator COCO
Negativesof BuddhistSculptures Oh
in the Lahore Central Museum.
Report of the Punjab Circle of the iS. J. Rodgers, Archaeological W. Ball & Co., Lahore,
Archaeological Survey, 1888-89. Surveyor.
1891.
List of inscriptions in the Lahore Dr. M. A. Stein
Museum. . , 1899.
j j

—
PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 263
Title ofwork. Nameand official designation Press, and date of
of author. publication.
V\3]^]kB—concld.
Revised list of objects ofArchaeo- C. J. Rodgers^ Archaeological Baptist Mission Press,
logical interest in the Punjab. Surveyor. Calcutta.
Report of the Archaeological Dr. J. Ph. Vogel, Archaeolo- Lahore Caxton Printing
Survey, Punjab Circle, for the gical Surveyor, Punjab. Works, 1901.
period from istJanuary to 30th
June 1901.
Annual Progress Report of the Ditto Ditto, 1902.
Archaeological Surveyor, Punjab
Circle, for the year ending 31st
March 1902.
Ditto for the year ending 31st Ditto Ditto, 1903.
March 1903.
Annual Progress Report of the Dr. J. Ph. Vogel, Superinten- Ditto, 1904.
Superintendent, Archaeological j dent, Archaeological Survey.
Survey, Punjaband United Pro- 1
vinces Circle, fortheyearending
31st March 1904.
Ditto for the year ending 31st Ditto Economical Press,
March 1905. Lahore, 1905.
Annual Progress Report of the Ditto Ditto, 1906.
Superintendent of the Archeo-
logical Survey, Northern Circle,
for the year ending 31st March
1906.
Ditto for the year ending 31st Ditto Ditto, 1907.
March 1907.
Ditto for the year ending 31st Ditto Ditto, igoS.
March 1908.
N.-W. F. Province
Report on the explorations of the Lieut. A. Crompton, R.E. , 1874.
Buddhist ruins at Jamalgarhi
during the months of March and
April 1873. (Supplementtothe
Punjab Government Gazette of
12th February 1874.)
Report on the explorations of the Lieut. Skene Grant, R.E. 1874.
Buddhist ruins near Kharkai
during the months of March
and April 1874. (Supplement
to the Punjab Government
Gazette of iith June 1874.)
1
Report on the exploration of the Sergeant F. H. Wilcher, R.E. 1874.
Buddhist ruins at Takht-i-Bai
Yusafzai, during the months of
January, February, March and
Apiil 1871. (Supplement to
the Punjab Government Gazette
of 6th August 1874.)

—
archeological reports
264
Nameandofficial designation Press, and date of
Title ofv/ork. ofauthor. publication-
N.-W. F. FROVmCK—concId.
Report on the explorations at Lieut. C. A. Crompton, R.E. 1875-
;
mound Shahji-ka-dheri near
Peshawar. (Supplement to the
Punjab Government Gazette of
i8th November 1875.)
Report on the explorations at Lieut. P. Haslett, R.E. 1876.
Taikal near Peshawar. (Supple
ment to the Punjab Government
Gazette of r8th November 1875
and of 30th March 1876.)
Reports of Buddhist explorations Lieut. C. Maxwell, R.E. Public Works Depart-
in the Peshawar District by the ment, Punjab, 1882.
loth Company of Sappers and
Miners.
Memorandum on excavations at Capt. H. A. Deane, Assistant Punjab GovernmentPress,.
Sikri, Yusafzai. Commissioner. Lahore, 1889.
Detailed report of an Archaeolo- Dr. M. A. Stein, Ph.D., Ditto, 1898.
gical tourwith the Buner Field Principal, Oriental College,
Force. Lahore.
Report of Archaeological Survey M. A. Stein, Ph.D., Inspec- Government Pre.<!s,
work ill the North-West Fron- tor General of Education North-West Frontier
tier Province and Baluchistan for and Archaeological Sur- Province, 1905.
the period from January 2nd, veyor, North-West Frontier
1904, to March 31st, 1905, Province and Baluchistan.
Annual report of the Archaeologi- Dr. D. B. Spooner, Superin- Ditto, 1907.
cal Survey of India, Frontier tendent, Archaeological Sur-
Circle, for 1906-07. vey, Frontier Circle.
Ditto for 1907-08 Ditto ' Commercial Press, Pesha-
war, 1908.
Burma—
List of objects of antiquarian Dr. E. Forchhammer, Government Press,Burma,
interest in British Burma. Govenrment Archaeologist, 1880.
Burma.
Notes on the early History and
Geography of British Burma
T. The Shwe Dagon Pagoda Ditto . . 1 Ditto, 1883.
II. The first Buddhist Mission Ditto Ditto, 1884.
to Suvarnabhurai.
List of objects of Antiquarian and Ditto Ditto.
A.rchaeological interestin British
Burma.
Rep d o o r n t e s in on Bur Ar m c a ha d e u o r l i o n g g ic t a h l e y w e o a r r k s Dr. E. Forchhammer , 18S9.
x879-8g. (Being a Review,
dated 18th June |
1889.)
j

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 36c
Title ofwork. Nameand official designation Press, and date of
ofauthor. publication.
—
Burma
contd.
The Po U Dauncr inscription, Taw Sein Ko, Government Government Press,
^
erected by King Sinbyuyin in Translator, Burma. Burma, 1881.
1774 A.D.
List of objects of antiquarian Dr. E. Forchhammer, Ditto.
interest in Arakan. Government Archaeologist,
Burma.
List of objects of antiquarian Ditto Ditto, 1892.
interest in Burma.
Inscription of Pagan, Pinya, and Taw Sein Ko, Government Ditto.
Ava (deciphered from the ink Translator, Burma.
impressions found among the
papers of the late Dr. Korch-
hammer).
Report on the Antiquities of Dr. E. Forchhammer, Ditto.
Arakan. Government Archaeologist,
Burma.
Report on the Kyaukku Temple Ditto Ditto.
at Pagan.
The Kalyani Inscriptions Taw Sein Ko, Government Ditto.
Translator, Burma.
Memorandum of a tour in parts Ditto Ditto.
of the Amherst, Shwegyin, and
Pegu Districts.
Note on a tour in Burma in F. 0 . Oertel, Assistant Ditto, 1893.
March and April 1892. Engineer on special duty,
Public Works Department,
W
N orth- estern Provinces
and Oudh.
Not t e h s rou o g n h R a a n ma A n r n c a h d eo e l s o a g . ical tour Ta Tr w ans S l e a i t n or, Ko B , ur G m o a. vernment Rep I r n i d n i t a e n d Ed A u n c t f i r a q o t m u i ar o y na t b h l y e
the
(TheTalaing country of Burma.)
Society’s Steam Press,
Bombay, 1893.
A preliminary study of the Po U Ditto Ditto.
Daung Inscription of Sinbyuyin,
1774 A.D.
A preliminary study of the Kaly- Ditto . • Ditto.
ani Inscriptions.
Notes on antiquities in Ramanna- Lieutenant-Colonel R. C. Ditto, 1894.
Temple, late President,
desa.
Rangoon Municipality;
(The Talaing countryof Buiina.) 1
Burma.
2 M

266 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORTS
Nameand official designation Press, and date of
Title ofwork. ofauthor. publication.
B\5RUk~concld.
Some remarks on the Kalyani Taw Sein Ko, Government Reprinted from the
Inscriptions. Translator, Burma. Indian Antiquary by
Educational
the
Society's Steam Press,
Bombay, 1894.
Inscriptions copied from the Maung Tun Nyein, Officiating Government Press,
stonescollected by King Bodaw- Government Translator, Burma, 1897.
paya and placed near the Burma.
Arakan Pagoda, Mandalay.
Inscriptions of Pagan^ Pinj^a and Ditto Ditto, 1899.
Ava.
Translation with notes.
Inscriptions collected in Upper Taw Sein Ko, Government Ditto, 1900--1903.
Burma. Archaeologist, Burma.
IndeXj Inscriptionum B. Birmani- Ditto Ditto, 1900.
carum, Vol. I.
List of objects of antiquarian and Ditto Ditto, 1901.
archaeological interest in Upper
Burma.
List of Pagodas at Pagan under ! Ditto Ditto.
the custody of Government.
(
Report on archaeological work in j Ditto Ditto, igo2.
Burma for the year 1901-02.
DittOj for the year 1902-03 Ditto Ditto, 1903.
Ditto, for the year 1903-04 Ditto Ditto, 1904.
Ditto, for the year 1904-05 Ditto Ditto, 1905.
Report of the Superintendent, Taw Sein Ko, Superinten- Ditto, 1906.
Archaeological Survey, Burma, dent, Archaeological Survey.
for the year ending 31st March
1906.
Ditto, for the year ending 31st Ditto Ditto, 1907.
March 1907.
Ditto, for the year ending 31st Ditto Ditto, 1908.
March 1908.
Mysore and Coorg—
Mysore Inscriptions . L. Rice, Director of Public Mysore Government
!
Instruction. Press, 1879.
Coorg Inscriptions L. Rice, Secretary to Gov- Ditto, 1886.
ernment.

PUBLISHED UNDER OFFICIAL AUTHORITY. 267
Title of work.
Nameand
official designation Press, anddateof
ofauthor. publication.
Mysore and CooRQ—condd.
Inscriptions at Sravana Belgola, L. Rice, Director of Archaeo- Mysore Government
a chief seat of the Jains logical Researches and Press, 1889.
(Mysore). Secretary to Government,
Mysore.
—
Epigraphia Carnatica Inscrip- Ditto Ditto, 1894.
tions in the Mysore District,
Part I.
Ditto, Part il . Ditto Ditto, 1898.
Ditto, Inscriptions in the Kadur L. Rice, Director of Archaeo- Ditto, 1901.
District. logical Researches.
Ditto, Inscriptions in the Hassan Ditto Basel Mission Press,
District in 2 sections. Mangalore, 1902.
Ditto, Inscriptions in the Simoga Ditto Ditto, 1902.
District, Parts I and II.
Ditto, Inscriptions in the Chital- Ditto Ditto, 1903.
drug district.
Inscriptions at Tumkur Ditto Ditto, 1904.
Inscriptions at Kolar , Ditto Ditto, 1905.
Assam—
Report on the progress of his- E. A. Gait, I.C.S., Honorary Assam Secretariat Print-
torical research in Assam. Director of Ethnography ing Office^ Shillong,
in Assam. 1897.
!
List of archaeological remains in Ditto, 1902.
the Province of Assam.

List of Public Libraries, etc,, to which copies of the Director General’s Annual
Report, Part 11, are regidarly supplied.
r.—COUNTRIES OUTSIDE INDIA.
United Kingdom.
British Museum Library, Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, London.
Bodleian Library, Oxford.
London University Library, Imperial Institute, London, S.W.
Cambridge University Library, Cambridge.
Edinburgh Edinburgh.
„ „
Glasgow Glasgow.
„ „
Aberdeen „ „ Aberdeen.
Trinity College Library, Dublin.
Folklore Society, ii, Old Square Lincoln’s Inn, London, W.C.
National Art Library, South Kensington Museum, London.
W.
Royal Institute of British Architects, 9, Conduit Street, Hanover Square, London,
Advocates’ Library, Edinburgh.
The Royal Windsor Castle, Berks.
„
Royal Society, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London.
Royal Society, Edinburgh.
Royal Irish Academy, 19, Dawson Street, Dublin.
National Library of Ireland, Leinster House, Kildare Street, Dublin.
Royal Asiatic Society, 22, Albermarle Street, London.
W.
Society of Antiquaries of London, Burlington House, Piccadilly,
Royal Scottish Museum, Edinburgh, Scotland.
Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, National Museum of Antiquities, Queen Street,
Edinburgh.
Imperial Institute, London.
Indian Institute, Oxford.
Society for Protection of Ancient Buildings, 10, Buckingham Street, Adelphi, W.C.
The Royal Academy of Arts, Burlington House, London.
Society for the Pomotion of Hellenic Studies, London. W
Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 3, Hanover Street,
London.
France.
Biblioth^que Nationale, Paris.
Institute de France, Paris.
Musee Gulmet, 7, Place d’lena, Paris.

11
I.—COUNTRIES OUTSIDE INDlA-confd,
Germany.
Bibliothek der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaff, Halle (Saale), Germany.
Royal Museum for Ethnology, Berlin.
Konigliche Gesell Schaft der Wissenschaften zo Gottingen, Gottingen.
KgL Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften W. 35. Pots damerstrasse 120, Berlin.
Austria.
Imperial Academy of Sciences^ Vienna.
Hungarian Academy, Buda-Pesth.
Italy.
Biblioteca Nazionale, Rome.
R. Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale di Firenze.
The Societa Asiatica Italiana, Firenze.
British School at Rome.
American School of Classical Studies at Rome.
Other Countries in Europe.
Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam, Holland.
Royal Institute of Netherlands, India, The Hague, Holland.
Imperial Acadenw of Sciences (for theAsiatic Museum), St. Petersburg, Russia.
Royal Librayv, Copenhagen, Denmark.
National Museum, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Academie Royale d^Arch^ologie de Belgique, Anvers.
University Library, Upsala, Sweden.
Christiania, Norway.
,, ,,
British School at Athens, Greece.
La Societe Archeologique d^Ath^nes, Athens, Greece,
America.
American Oriental Society, 235, Bishop Street, New Haven, Conn, U.S.A.
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C., U. S. A,
Secretary, National Museum, Washington, U. S. A.
Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago.
British Colonies.
The Museum, Canterbury, New Zealand.
Literary and Historical Society, Quebec^ Canada*
Melbourne Library, Melbourne.
University Library, Sydney, New South Wales,
Victoria Public Library, Perth, Western Australia.
Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon Branch, Colombo.
Straits Branch, Ro3/'al Asiatic Society, Singapore.
North China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, Shanghai.
Museum of Arabic Art, Cairo, Egypt.

Ill
I.—COUNTRIES OUTSIDE INDIA—
concid.
Foreign Colonies.
Directeur del’Ecole fran9aise d’extrfeme Orient, Hanoi.
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen, Batavia.
Institut Fran^aisd' Archeologie Orientale du Caire, Cairo, Egypt.
Ethnological Survey for the Philippine Islands, Department of Interior, Manila.
II.—INDIA.
(i) Imperial.
Imperial Library, Calcutta.
Indian Museum, Calcutta.
Press Room, Calcutta and Simla.
Provincial.
(2)
Madras.
Secretariat Library, Fort St. George.
University „ Madras.
Public „ „
Presidency College
,,
School of Art, „
Government Central Museum, Madras.
Christian College Library „
Bombay.
Secretariat Library, Bombay.
University »
,,
Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, Town Hall, Bombay.
School of Art, Bombay.
The College of Science, Poona.
Bengal.
Secretariat Library, Writers’ Buildings, Calcutta.
University Library, the Senate House, Calcutta.
Presidency College Library, i. College Square, Calcutta.
Sanskrit College Library, i, College Square, Calcutta.
Asiatic Society of Bengal, 57, Park'Street, Calcutta.
United Provinces.
Secretariat Library, P. W. D., Allahabad.
Allahabad.
University
,,
Public Library, Allahabad,
Provincial Museum Library, Lucknow.
Sanskrit College, Benares.
Thomason College, Roorkee.
Museum, Mutha.
Archaeological

iV
INDIA—
ll,— conc/d.
Punjab.
Secretariat Library, Public Works Dc-partment, Lahore^.
Punjab Public Library, Lahore.
Museum Library, Lahore.
University Library, Lahore.
Government College Library, Lahore.
Delhi Museum and Institute, Delhi.
North-West Frontier Province.
Secretariat Library, Peshawar.
Museum Library, Peshawar.
Burma.
Secretariat Library, Rangoon.
The Bernard Free Library, Rangoon.
The Phayre Museum, Rangoon.
Central Provinces.
Secretariat Library, Nagpur.
Museum Library, Nagpur.
y\SSAM.
Secretariat Library, Shillong,
COORG.
The Chief Commissioner of Coorg^s Library, Bangalore.
Native States.
Hyderabad^
The Resident's Library, Hyderabad.
Central India,
Library of the Agent to the Governor-General, Indore.
The Librarian, Dhar Museum Library, Dhar.
Rajkinmar College, Indore.
Rajputana,
Library of the Chief Commissioner and Agent to the Governor-General, Ajme
College Library, Ajmer.
Baroda.
Library of the Resident at Baroda,

PRESIDENT’S
SECRETARIAT
library