TITLE: Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature: The Jātakamālā Traditions
AUTHOR: Michael Hahn
YEAR: 1995
LANGUAGE: EN/Sanskrit
ORIGINAL_FILE: A057_Notes_Buddhist_Sanskrit_Literature.pdf
EXTRACTED_CHARACTERS: 53504
STATUS: OK
============================================================

* Originally published in: Studies in Original B uddhism and Mah¢y¢na Buddhism in
Commemoration of late Prof. Dr. Fumimaro Watanabe [= Watanabe Fumimaro hakushi tsuit Ç ronsh¦.
Genshi bukkyÇ to daijÇ bukkyÇ], ed. Egaku MAYEDA, Kyoto 1993, pp. 31-58.
Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature*
Chronology and related topics
by Michael Hahn, Marburg
While working on various texts which can  be roughly characterized as `classical
Sanskrit literature composed by Buddhist authors' I repeatedly had to deal with the
questions of chronology, authorship and their mutual dependence. Unfortunately my
results are scattered over a number of publications, monographs as well as papers,
and sometimes buried in places where nobody would look for this kind of infor-
mation, e.g. footnotes on different topics. I have been requested several times to
publish them in a more coherent manner and in one place only. This commemora-
tion volume which is dedicated to the memory a good friend with whom I spent
many pleasant and enlightening hours in Japan seems to be the most suitable place
to comply with this request.
In order to make the best possible use of the limited space available to me
I would like to present only the basic facts and results concerning authors, works
and their mutual relationship. Where necessary, the evidence which led to a
particular conclusion, will be given in a summarized form if it has not been
published before. For further details and more complicated derivations I will refer
to the original publications.
1) N¢g¢rjuna, author of the Prajñ¢¡ataka
The Prajñ¢¡ataka is a short text which consists of an introductory portion (1-3),
95 moral maxims (4-98), and a concluding section (99-100). The work is available
only in its Tibetan translation which wa s prepared at the end of the eighth or
beginning of the ninth century AD. The original work was most likely composed
in the Anu¼¿ubh metre. Twelve complete  verses and two half verses could be
traced in other works. The content shows a great affinity with the N¤ti portions in
MICHAEL HAHN2
1 Hundert Strophen von der Lebensklugheit. N¢g¢rjunas Pr ajñ¢¡ataka tibetisch und deutsch .
Eingeleitet, herausgegeben und übersetzt von Michael HAHN. Bonn 1990. 124 pp. (Indica et Tibetica.
18.).
2 See D. D. KOSAMBI's edition, ¹atakatray¢disubh¢¼itasa¾graha: The Epigrams Attributed to
Bhart²hari Including the Three Centuries. For the first time collected and critically ed. ..., Bombay
1948 (Singhi Jain Series. 23.). There are more parallels between this work and the Prajñ¢da½Îa,
however none belonging to the first 200 stanzas which KOSAMBI regards as undoubtedly authentic.
3 Gopadatta's work will be discussed below. The parallel is discussed in the introduction to
my book Der große Legendenkranz (Mahajj¢takam¢l¢), Wiesbaden 1985 (Asiatische Forschungen.
the Mah¢bh¢rata and the C¢½akya N¤ti Text Tradition , i.e., the c. 2300 stanzas
attributed to C¢½akya which were collected by Ludwik STERNBACH. Nothing in the
content of the work, which seems to be a compilation from the `floating mass of
oral tradition' (STERNBACH), points to N¢g¢rjuna the M¢dhyamika as the author,
however there is also nothing in the stanzas other than their popular content which
excludes this possibility. The first critical edition and translation of the
Prajñ¢¡ataka has been recently published in Germany.1
2) N¢g¢rjuna, author of the Prajñ¢da½Îa (PD)
The PD is a text which consists of 260 N¤ti stanzas. The work too is available
only in its Tibetan translation which wa s prepared at the end of the eighth or
beginning of the ninth century AD. The original work was composed in a variety
of metres. I was able to trace 165 of its verses in other extant Sanskrit texts.
According to the colophon of the Tibetan translation the 260 stanzas form only the
second chapter of a bigger work. It is well nigh possible that this statement is true
as there is neither an introductory nor a concluding portion. The work would then
have consisted of at least three chapters. Judging from its content, style and arran-
gement it seems to be a fore-runner of later anthologies like the ¹¢rËgadhara-
paddhati and Vallabhadeva's Subh¢¼it¢val¤. In the case of the PD the authorship of
N¢g¢rjuna the M¢dhyamika can be positively excluded. The PD, which is obviously
a compilation from anonymous as well as literary works, quotes from the following
texts composed by individual authors:
a) N¢g¢rjuna's Ratn¢val¤ 4.8 = PD 196
b) ¨rya¡¦ra's J¢takam¢l¢ 5.10 = PD 116
c) Bhart²hari's ¹atakatray¤ 157 = PD 1012
d) M¢gha's ¹i¡up¢lavadha 16.26 = PD 67
e) Gopadatta's Matsaranand¢vad¢na 60 = PD 1033
Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature 3
88.), pp. 14-15.
4 Cf. Siegfried LIENHARD, A History of Classical Poet ry, Sanskrit - Pali - Prakrit , Wiesbaden
1984 (A History of Indian Literature. Vol. 3, fasc. 1), pp. 187-8.
5 She-rab Dong-bu or Prajnya Danda by Lu-trub (Nagarjuna). Ed. and tr. W[illiam] L[achlan]
CAMPBELL, Calcutta 1919, and Dpal mgon klu sgrub kyis mdzad pa'i chos dbyiËs bstod pa daË ¡es rab
sdoË bu bÓugs so , GoË gsal par, 1981 (no place), 1, 49 pp. (lithographed). None of these two
editions is a critical one.
6 In CAMPBELL's book and in the book Elegant Sayings. The Staff of Wisdom ..... by Nagarjuna
[and] A Precious Treasu ry of Elegant Sayings ..... by Sakya Pandit.  Dharma Publishing 1977. The
second translation (which omits stanzas 52, 61, 90, 125cd, 126, 127 and 222) is basically a
polished version of the first translation, with a few improvements and several new mistakes. Both
translations abound in gross errors.
7 77 out of 90 stanzas consist of 7 syllables per line, 11 of 9 syllables per line, 1 of 11
syllables per line, and 1 of 13 syllables per line. 6 out of 90 stanzas consist of 3 lines, 74 of 4
lines, 7 of 5 lines and 3 of 6 lines. In some cases it is very difficult to define a stanza.
8 The first one is contained in the valuable book Rasiyan-u dusul-un mong
(ol töbed tayilburi.
Mongolian and Tibetan Stories from Panchatantra , Ulaan Baatar 1964 (Corpus Scriptorum
Mongolorum ... Tomus VII), by Prof. Ts. D AMDINSUREN, pp. 55-68. D AMDINSUREN's text is
different from the canonical tradition. The second modern edition forms the first part (pp. 1-16) of
the book Skye bo gso thigs, Pe ciË [= Beijing], Mi rigs dpe skrun khaË 1984.
9 By Stanley F RYE: Nagarjuna's A Drop of Nourishment for People and its Commentary The
Jewel Ornament, Dharamsala 1981, 1985 2. This is based on a Mongolian literary adaptation and
therefore not a true representative of the canonical Tibetan version.
Since it is very unlikely that the five  authors mentioned above quoted from the
PD, we can safely assume that the unknown compiler of the PD borrowed from
their works. M¢gha is generally held to have lived not earlier than the beginning
of the seventh century4. Therefore the compiler of the PD is later than N¢g¢rjuna
the M¢dhyamika by half a millennium and cannot be identified with him. He must
have lived in the seventh or eighth cen tury AD. The PD has been edited twice 5
and translated into English twice 6. My own critical edition and translation of the
PD will appear in the series Indica et Tibetica.
3) N¢g¢rjuna, author of the Janapo¼a½abindu
The Janapo¼a½abindu (or: Jantupo¼a½abindu) is another N¤ti text in the Tibetan
Tanjur ascribed to N¢g¢rjuna. It consis ts of c. 90 stanzas composed in various
metres of a somewhat irregular structure.7 The Tibetan translation of the lost Indian
original was prepared at the end of the eighth or beginning of the ninth century
AD. The text has been edited twice 8 and rendered into English once 9. My own
MICHAEL HAHN4
10 Cf. John NEWMAN's unpublished dissertation The outer Wheel of Time: Vajray¢na Buddhist
cosmology in the K¢lacakra tantra, The University of Wisconsin - Madison, 1987, chapter 6: The
History of the K¢lacakra in India.
critical edition and translation of the Janapo¼a½abindu will appear in the series
Indica et Tibetica. 
The first half of the work (stanzas 3-45, 47-48) seems to be a collection of
moral maxims of the arth¢ntarany¢sa type. Most of these stanzas allude to stories
the majority of which can be found in the Pañcatantra and related texts. Apart
from the first of the two introductory st anzas which praises Mañju¡r¤ there is
nothing Buddhist in them. The major portion of the second half of the work (46,
49-90) is clearly Buddhist although it is also interspersed with a few moral
maxims of a general character (e.g. 67 and 75). There is again nothing in the text
which points to N¢g¢rjuna the M¢dhyamika as its author. The term k¢lacakra (dus
kyi 'khor lo) is mentioned twice (84 and 86-87). The first time k¢lacakra is used
in a non-technical sense, the second use seems to allude to the K¢lacakra doctrine,
thereby creating a serious chronological problem. According to the latest research
on the history of the K¢lacakra doctrine10 this system was developed in India only
in the first half of the eleventh century AD, and the Janapo¼a½abindu, as stated
above, is earlier by at least two centuries. I cannot account for this contradiction.
The three stanzas run as follows:
After the teaching of him
whose voice resembles that of a lion
has been destroyed by the wheel of time
it (i.e. the teaching) will quickly vanish.
(Bad people), calumniating the wheel of time,
of low descent and poor (or confused) knowledge,
not knowing how to rely on the virtuous,
adhering to vicious (people instead), abandoning morality,
afraid of solitude, longing for amusement,
uneducated, spoiling their instructions,
erring with theirteacher, harsh and mischievous,
full of arrogance and contempt—
Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature 5
11 |  seË ge'i sgra yi bstan pa ni |  |  dus kyi 'khor los rab bcom nas |  
| myur ba ñid du 'jig par 'gyur |  84 |  .....   |  dus kyi 'khor lo Ëan byed pa |  
|  ma rabs ¡es rab 'chal pa daË |  |  tshul can dag daË bsten mi ¡es | 
|  ñes pa bsten ÓiË tshul khrims spaË |  |  dben pas 'jigs ¡iË 'du 'dzi 'dod |  86 | 
|  mi mkhas bslab ñes slob dpon nor |  |  gdug rtsub Ëa rgyal brñas pa che |  
|  Ëan pa'i mi la yid rton pas |  |  saËs rgyas bstan pa ma ruËs byas |  87 | 
(Text and numbering of stanzas according to my own unpublished edition and translation.)
12 Cf. Dieter SCHLINGLOFF, Studies in the Ajanta Paintings. Identifications and Interpretations,
Delhi 1987, pp. 89, 128, 136, 139, 141, 145, 149, 152, 219, 250.
13 Op. cit., p. 393.
he who places confidence in (such) bad people
has destroyed the teaching of the Buddha.11
Stanzas 78 through 83 contain a poetical complaint about the degeneration of the
Buddhist doctrine which has taken place. This is again in accordance with the
spirit of K¢lacakratantra I, 155ff. Even if the Janapo¼a½abindu does not refer to
the actual K¢lacakra system, but only to a kind of fore-runner, these allusions in
connection with the content of stanzas 78-83 make it impossible that the Janapo-
¼a½abindu was composed by N¢g¢rjuna the M¢dhyamika.
4) ¨rya¡¦ra I, author of the J¢takam¢l¢
The only precise upper limit for the date of this famous poet of Buddhism has so
far been the year 434 AD in which Sa¾ghavarman  translated a work called Fen-
pieh-yeh-pao-lüeh-ching (= *Karma-phala-nirde¡a-s¦tra) and composed by a certain
Ta-yung (= *Mah¢-¹¦ra) from Sanskrit into Chinese. Opinions are divided as to
whether this Ta-yung can be safely identified with the author of the J¢takam¢l¢.
If they were different persons then the upper limit of his life-time is defined by
the Ajanta paintings some of which illustrate legends from ¨rya¡¦ra's work 12. If
we follow S CHLINGLOFF's dating of the painting of ¨rya¡¦ra's K¼¢ntiv¢dij¢taka
(fifth century AD)13 which contains quotations from this legend, it would point to
approximately the same time, only with a lesser degree of preciseness and
certainty. If my dating of Haribha¿¿a (the beginning of the fifth century AD, see
below) is correct, this would provide us perhaps with the best upper limit for the
time of ¨rya¡¦ra. In stanza 2 of the introduction to his J¢takam¢l¢ Haribha¿¿a
pays his respects to ¨rya¡¦ra as the unsurpassed master of poetical imagination
which proves the priority of ¨rya¡¦ra:
MICHAEL HAHN6
14 The whole introductory portion of Haribha¿¿a's  work is quoted (in its Tibetan version),
translated (into German) a nd discussed in my paper “Vorläufige Überlegungen zur
Schulzugehörigkeit einige r buddhistischer Dichter ” in: Zur Schulzugehörigkeit von Werken der
H¤nay¢na-Literatur. Erster Teil. Hrsg. von Heinz B ECHERT, Göttingen 1985 (Symposien zur
Buddhismusforschung. III,1) (Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen. Phil.-
Hist. Kl. Dritte Folge. Nr. 149.), pp. 239-56.
15 Cf. ¨rya-¹¦ra's Compendium of the Perfecti ons: Text, translation and analysis of the
P¢ramit¢sam¢sa by Carol MEADOWS, Bonn 1986 (Indica et Tibetica. 8.).
16 Op. cit., pp. 8-20.
17 Cf. the correspondences given by MEADOWS, op. cit., p. 121, note 57.
18 Op. cit., p. 21.
Other (poets) do not possess the creative power 
to imitate the J¢takam¢l¢ of ¨rya¡¦ra, 
maintaining the same standard of perfection; 
while the `cool-rayed' (moon) is able to open the night-lotus
this cannot be done by the other constellations, 
even if (they are) united.14
The difference in style between ¨rya¡¦ra's and Haribha¿¿a's works points to a span
of at least 50 to 100 years lying between them. This would bring down the date
of ¨rya¡¦ra to the middle or even the beginning of the fourth century AD.
5) ¨rya¡¦ra II, author of the P¢ramit¢sam¢sa
The P¢ramit¢sam¢sa is a work consisting of 363 verses composed in various
metres. It is divided into six chapters each of which deals with  one of the six
p¢ramit¢s or `moral perfections'. Carol MEADOWS, the second editor of the text15,
comes to the conclusion that the author of the P¢ramit¢sam¢sa is different from
the poet who wrote the J¢takam¢l¢.16 As the P¢ramit¢sam¢sa contains quotations
or adaptations of twelve stanzas of the J¢takam¢l¢17 this would place the author
between the fourth century (the date of  ¨rya¡¦ra I) and the end of the eighth
century (the date of the Tibetan translation of the P¢ramit¢sam¢sa). MEADOWS
suggests the seventh or eighth century AD18 for the date of ¨rya¡¦ra II, however
without giving any specific reason. 
I would like to add that, on the whole, I agree with MEADOWS' arguments.
She points to differences in style and in the doctrinal background between the two
works. Both differences cannot be de nied by anybody who carefully reads both
texts. The most difficult thing to  accept are the 12 quotations from the
Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature 7
19 Unfortunately even this argument loses its weight if we point to the fact that ¨rya¡¦ra
I, too, was obviously infl uenced by N¢g¢rjuna's Ratn¢val¤. In his legend 10.8+ (i.e. the prose
portion following stanza 8) he uses the term parapratyayah¢ryapelavamatir. It can hardly be
coincidental that in Ratn¢val¤ 2.38 we read: ah¢ryabuddhiÀ pr¢jñatv¢d aparapratyayaÀ sthiraÀ |
n¢tisa¾dh¤yate r¢j¢ tasm¢t prajñ¢paro bhava | |  — be this an allusion intentional or not.
20 Cf. Christian L INDTNER, “A Treatise on Buddhist Idea lism. Kambala's ¨lokam¢l¢ ”, in
Miscellanea Buddhica, ed. by Christian LINDTNER, Copenhagen 1985 (Indiske studier. V.), pp. 109-
221. See esp. pp. 113 and 114-5.
21 SRKK 87 = VAV 73, SRKK 89 = VAV 74.
22 SRKK 20 = PPU 5.
23 SRKK 30 = ¨JM 3.21.
24 SRKK 15 = ¹L 63.
J¢takam¢l¢. The P¢ramit¢sam¢sa is clearly a work of a high literary standard and
there we would not expect any verbatim quotations except from one's own works.
However, there is a second case where the P¢ramit¢sam¢sa quotes almost exactly
from another non-canonical work: stanzas 4.17-21 correspond very closely to N¢g¢-
rjuna's Ratn¢val¤ 3.2-8. This makes it easier to accept that an author of the calibre
of ¨rya¡¦ra II quoted from another literary composition. 19 I would rather place
¨rya¡¦ra II earlier than ¹¢ntideva, because his style reminds me more of Kambala-
's ¨lokam¢l¢ whom Christian LINDTNER, the first editor of this work, places “in
the first half of the sixth century AD or earlier”20.
6) ¨rya¡¦ra III, author of the Subh¢¼itaratnakara½Îakakath¢ (SRKK)
The SRKK is a short treatise consisting of 191 stanzas which are divided into 27
sections. Its main portion (sections 3-22 or stanzas 21-158) deals with various
aspects of generosity (d¢na) and the manifold kinds of reward gained thereby. The
introductory portion (sections 1-3 or stanzas 1-20) praises birth as human being as
the best form of life; the concludi ng portion (section 23-27 or stanzas 159-190;
191 is a concluding stanza) deals with the remaining five moral perfections
(p¢ramit¢). The third section might well be a later addition. 
The SRKK attracted the attention of scholars because of its ornate style. At
a closer look, however, it appears more artificial than artistic, full of cliches and
rather shallow in its content. The long discussion whether the SRKK was compos-
ed by ¨rya¡¦ra I was not necessary at all because it is quite clear that this work
is a compilation. Its author has borro wed verses from well-known works like
M¢t²ce¿a's two famous hymns Var½¢rhavar½a (VAV)21 and Pras¢dapratibhodbhava
(PPU)22, ¨rya¡¦ra's J¢takam¢l¢ (¨JM)23, Candragomin's ¹i¼yalekha (¹L)24, ¹¢ntide-
MICHAEL HAHN8
25 SRKK 17 = BCA 4.17, SRKK 18 = BCA 4.32, SRKK 18 = BCA 4.21, SRKK 20 =
BCA 4.20 (= PPU 5), SRKK 167-9 = BCA 6.1-3, SRKK 173-5 = BCA 6.47-9, SRKK 176 =
BCA 6.41.
26 SRKK 170 = PD 208.
27 SRKK 16 = VS 3036.
28 Die Subh¢¼itaratnakara½Îakakath¢. Ein spätbuddhistischer Text zur Verdienstlehre. Göttingen
1983. (Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen. I. Phil.-Hist. Klasse. Jahrgang
1982. Nr. 9).
29 For the details cf. my monograph, pp. 322-4.
30 For the structure of ¨rya¡¦ra's J¢takam¢l¢ cf. MEADOWS, op. cit., pp. 14-20.
va's Bodhicary¢vat¢ra (BCA)25, Pseudo-N¢g¢rjuna's Prajñ¢da½Îa (PD)26 and from
the work of an unknown author w ho is quoted in Vallabhadeva's Subh¢¼it¢val¤
(VS)27. The extensive quotations from the Bodhicary¢vat¢ra prove that the SRKK
was composed after ¹¢ntideva. The upper limit is given by the translation of the
work into Tibetan which was done in the eleventh century AD. In my monograph
on the SRKK28 I tried to determine more precisely the time of the composition of
the work. It would be the tenth century AD if ¨rya¡¦ra III is identical with the
Kashmirian teacher ¹¦ra (slob dpon dpa' bo) whom the Tibetan historian T¢ran¢tha
makes a contemporary of king Gop¢la. Th is date would go very well with the
style of the work, however more evidence is needed before this date can be accep-
ted.29 The date of the SRKK is important insofar as it forms the lower limit of
works like the Mahajj¢takam¢l¢, the Kalpadrum¢vad¢nam¢l¢, the Sarvajñamit-
r¢vad¢na and the Dv¢vi¾¡atyavad¢nakath¢ all of which have borrowed stanzas
from the SRKK.
7) Haribha¿¿a, author of a J¢takam¢l¢
Haribha¿¿a is the author of a J¢takam¢l¢ which is modeled on the J¢takam¢l¢ by
¨rya¡¦ra. I have quoted the stanza above  in which Haribha ¿¿a expresses this
clearly. Like ¨rya¡¦ra's work Haribha¿¿a's J¢takam¢l¢ consists of 34 legends, but
unlike his predecessor Haribha¿¿a makes the construction of his work conspicuous:
legends 1-11 illustrate the perfection of giving ( d¢na), legends 12-17 that of
morality (¡¤la), legends 18-21 that of forbearance ( k¼¢nti), legends 22-25 that of
striving or energy (v¤rya), legend 26 that of meditation (dhy¢na), and legends 27-
34 that of insight or wisdom (prajñ¢).30
The complete work is available only in the form of its Tibetan translation
which was done around the middle of the twelfth century AD. The Tibetan text is
Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature 9
31 Haribha¿¿a and Gopadatta. Two Authors in the Succession of ¨rya¡¦ra. On the Rediscovery of
Parts of their J¢takam¢l¢s. Tokyo 1977 (Studia Philologica Buddhica. Occasional Paper Series. I.) -
Second, thoroughly revised edition Tokyo 1992.
32 Das M²gaj¢taka (Haribha¿¿aj¢takam¢l¢ XI). Studie, Texte, Glossar. Von Michael HAHN und
Konrad KLAUS, Bonn 1983 (Indica et Tibetica. 3.)
33 Taish Ç Tripi¿aka No. 202. - For the details of this work cf. the important paper by
Junjiro TAKAKUSU, “Tales of the Wise Man and the Fool”, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 1901,
pp. 447-60, especially pp. 457-9.
very difficult to understand in many pla ces because the two translators usually
slavishly follow the word order of the Sa nskrit original, even at the expense of
violating the rules of Tibetan syntax. There are many cases where the translation
is ambiguous or even incorrect. In other cases an originally correct translation was
corrupted in the course of transmissi on. Hence the Tibetan version provides us
only with an approximate idea of the beauty of the original and the task of editing
and translating the whole work which comprises about 600 printed pages is a
formidable one.
In 1973 I discovered the original Sanskrit text of ten of Haribha¿¿a's legends
in unpublished anonymous collections of Buddhist birth-stories. In 1977 I gave a
first report about this discovery31 together with legend No. 4, the ¹a¡aj¢taka, as a
sample of Haribha¿¿a's style. In 1983 I published, together with my student Konrad
KLAUS, an edition (Sanskrit and Tibetan texts), translation and study of legend No.
11, the M²gaj¢taka.32 Four more stories were edited and translated on the basis of
their Tibetan version in a series of articles which appeared in Wiener Zeitschrift für
die Kunde Südasiens between 1973 and 1980.
After having studied the ten legends wh ich are available in their original
Sanskrit and seven more legends according to their Tibetan translation I gained the
impression that Haribha¿¿a is one of the most brilliant stars in the galaxy of early
classical Sanskrit literature. In my opinion he can be compared only with poe ts
like A¡vagho¼a, ¨rya¡¦ra I or K¢lid¢sa. For an assessment of the originality of
Haribha¿¿a the determination of his date is therefore of utmost importance.
The task at the outset seemed to be hopeless because the poet is hardly
mentioned anywhere and nowhere in a context of historical significance. More than
ten years ago, however, I discovered a pa ssage in the Chinese Tripi¿aka which
seems to offer the clue so long sought for. The passage can be found in the
Hsien-yü-ching33 or the “S¦tra of the Wise and the Fool”. This work was compiled
by eight Chinese monks in 445 AD after they had returned from Central Asia
where they had taken part in the recitation of various Vinaya and S¦tra texts. In
MICHAEL HAHN10
chapter 21 of the Hsien-yü-ching the story of king Prabh¢ sa and his elephant is
narrated. The same story form s the opening of Haribha¿¿a's J¢takam¢l¢. It is
available only in Tibetan. The Chinese te xt shares six details with Haribha¿¿a's
story which can be found in no other version of the legend. The sixth of these
correspondences concerns the central di alogue between king Prabh¢sa and his
mahout, and here the agreement is so striking that I would like to quote both
versions of this passage in extenso:
Haribha¿¿aj¢takam¢l¢ No. 1
   
(The king:)
31cd  “The mere body can be tamed,
however the fickleness of mind cannot be
eradicated.”
...................................
The king said:
“Who is capable to tame the mind?”
Sa¾y¢ta said:
33  “Those beings, who are called `Budd-
ha' and are born as the protectors of
human beings, they are capable of taming
their own mind as well as the mind of
others.”
34  As soon as he (viz. the king) had
heard the word `Buddha' from the ma-
hout, he was so pleased that his hairs
stood on end and he became full of faith.
The king said: “Good man, tell me now,
Hsien-yü-Ching No. 21
(Sa¾y¢ta:)
“O great king, I can only tame the body
of the elephant. I am not able to tame its
mind.”
The king then said:
“Is there any human being which can
tame both mind and body?”
(Sa¾y¢ta) said:
“O great king, there is Buddha, the
Exalted One, he is capable to tame both
body and mind.” 
When king Prabh¢sa (`splendour') had
heard the word `Buddha' he was amazed
and his hairs stood on end.
He said to Sa¾y¢ta (San-she): “He who
Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature 11
what the power of a Buddha is like.”
Sa¾y¢ta said:
35  “Because he has gone ( gata) to that
position to which one has to go in order
to prevent further rebirths for those who
are blinded by ignorance, he is called
`Tath¢gata'.”
Full of joy the king then said: “Well, tell
me how buddhahood can be obtained!”
[Sa¾y¢ta said:]
36  “Well equipped with (virtues like)
charity, morality, forbearance, energy,
meditation, and wis dom human beings
who have again become like students will
attain buddhahood by constant endeavour.”
Having learnt about the path leading to
buddhahood the king then made the
following vow:
37  “Well equipped with virtues like
charity etc. may I quickly become experi-
enced in attaining buddhahood in order to
give tranquillity to human beings!”
is called Buddha—what is he like?”
Sa¾y¢ta replied:
“The nature of Buddha, the Exalted One,
is of a twofold kind: one is knowledge
and wisdom, the other is great
compassion.
With great zeal he practises the six
virtues which are called the six moral
perfections ( p¢ramit¢), (thereby gaining)
merit and virtue, knowledge and wisdom.”
........................................
Kindling incense (the king then) made the
following vow:
“I vow: whatever merit and virtues I may
have, I dedicate all of them to (the
attainment of) the teaching of the
Buddha.
I will accomplish buddhahood by taming
my own heart and I will also tame the
hearts of others.”
While assessing the similarity between the two passages one has to bear in mind
that Chinese translations are generally much freer than Tibetan translations and in
MICHAEL HAHN12
34 This important study by Dr. Dieter M AUE, Gießen, is unfortunately not yet published,
however we were told recently that its publication is imminent.
this particular case it is known from the colophon of the Hsien-yü-ching that a
considerable span of time lay between the recitation of these stories in Centr al
Asia and their being written down in China. Given these circumstances there can
be little doubt that the Tibetan and the Chinese texts translated above represent the
very same Sanskrit text.
There are three possible explanations for the identity of the two passages: 1)
the Chinese text, viz. its Indian or iginal, had borrowed the passage from
Haribha¿¿a's J¢takam¢l¢; 2) Haribha¿¿a had borrowed the passage from the Indian
original of the Chinese text; 3) both Ha ribha¿¿a and the Indian original of the
Chinese text had borrowed the passage from an unknown common source. Taking
into consideration the specific character of Haribha¿¿a's work as an original literary
composition only the first possibility is a realistic one. Haribha¿¿a's work belongs
to that category of ornate poetry (k¢vya) where plagiarism is strictly forbidden. A
poet may borrow verses or ideas from his own works but he is not allowed to use
another poet's words other than by wa y of quotation. This rules out the
possibilities 2) and 3).
Once it is accepted that the Chinese text has to go back to Haribha¿¿a's
work, we are provided with a very precise upper limit for the date of this author
because the Hsien-yü-ching was written in 445 AD, as stated above. It then
follows that Haribha¿¿a's original work must have been composed at least a fe w
decades earlier to allow for its dissemination to Central Asia, i.e. not much lat er
than the beginning of the fifth century AD. This dating of Haribha¿¿a is full y in
accordance with the language and style of his J¢takam¢l¢ which are similar to that
of the works of K¢lid¢sa (beginning of  the fifth century AD) and Candragomin
(middle of the fifth century AD, see below). Recently one additional piece of
evidence has come to light. The “S¦tra of the Wise and the Fool” was compiled
from Indian works which had spread to Central Asia. Our conclusion presupposes
that Haribha¿¿a's work must have been brought there from India. A few years ago
a German colleague who at that time was working on bilingual texts in Uigur and
Sanskrit found in Central Asia, showed me two leaves containing poetry. I imme-
diately identified them as extracts from two of the stories in Haribha¿¿a's J¢taka-
m¢l¢ and this proves that his work was indeed studied in Central Asia.34 As far
as I can see the only danger that the date of Haribha¿¿a established with the help
of the Hsien-yü-ching might be jeopardized, is that its chapter 21 can be proven
to be a later interpolation.
Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature 13
35 That Haribha¿¿a was familiar with the Vinaya of the M¦lasarv¢stiv¢dins can be seen from
some of his legends which have parallel versions there, e.g. Prabh¢sa (No. 1), Badaradv¤pa (No.
2), Sudhanakinnar¤ (No. 25), ¨dar¡amukha (No. 30). Candraprabha (No. 5) is derived from the
version which can be found in the Divy¢vad¢na (No. 22), in the Gilgit Manuscript (there are
unpublished editions of this version by Jens-Uwe H ARTMANN, München 1977, and Hisashi
MATSUMURA, Canberra 1980) and in the TaishÇ Tripi¿aka (No. 166). The R¦py¢vati story (No. 6)
goes back to the story which can be found in the Divy¢vad¢na (No. 32) and in the Taish Ç
Tripi¿aka (No. 179).
36 For a list of these works cf. my book Candragomins Lok¢nandan¢¿aka. Nach dem
tibetischen Tanjur he rausgegeben und übersetzt . Ein Beitrag zur kl assischen indischen
Schauspieldichtung, Wiesbaden 1974 (Asiatische Forschungen. 39.), pp. 10-11.
37 gaË gis by¢ kar ½a ni ñuË ÓiË rab gsal yoËs rdzogs gÓan yaË mdzad gyur nas (line c of stanza
I.6).
Once the whole work of Haribha¿¿a will be published and analyzed one might
detect further pieces of evidence, be it stylistical peculiarities, doctrinal issues35, or
the identification of scholarly texts studied by the poet. The date of Haribha¿¿a is
also important for the date of Gopadatta, another Buddhist writer and author of a
J¢takam¢l¢, as we shall see below.
8) Candragomin, author of Lok¢nanda, ¹i¼yalekha and De¡an¢stava
Candragomin, the famous Buddhist grammarian, has more or less unanimously been
placed in the fifth century AD. Many non-grammatical works of Buddhist content
are ascribed to an author called Candragomin. 36 One of them, the ¹i¼yalekha or
“Letter to a Disciple”, is still extant in its Sanskrit original. The other works are
available only in their Tibetan translations. The question is whether some of these
works can safely be attributed to the grammarian or not. I believe that this is the
case with the three most important literary compositions among them: the drama
Lok¢nanda or “Joy for the World”, the “Letter to a Disciple”, and the De¡an¢stava
or “Hymn in the Form of a Confession”. My line of argumentation is as follows.
The playwright Candragomin expressly states that he has composed a work on
grammar which he characterizes with three specific attributes:
“(Candragomin is .....) a poet
who has also written a grammar of Sanskrit,
concise, abundantly clear,
yet comprehensive in scope”37
MICHAEL HAHN14
38 Cf. my paper “Über den indirekten Beweis bei literaturhistorischen Fragestellungen”, to be
published in Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens, 1992.
39 The identical stanzas are: Lok¢nanda II.6 = ¹i¼yalekha 91, II.15 = 69, II.16 = 72, II.19
= 74, II.20 = 75, II.21 = 55, II.22 = 101, II.23 = 102, V.48 = 116.
Two works belonging to the grammati cal system of Candragomin, the Candra-
vy¢kara½as¦tra and the Adhik¢rasa¾graha, are introduced by a maËgala verse
which runs as follows:
siddha¾ pra½amya sarvajña¾ sav¤rya¾ jagato gurum |
laghuvispa¼¿asa¾p¦r½am ucyate ¡abdalak¼a½am | |
There can be little doubt that by the use of the three epithets laghu, vispa¼¿a, and
sa¾p¦r½a a firm link is established between the playwright and the grammarian.
There remain two difficulties. It has been contended that it is not certain that the
maËgala verse was composed by Candragomin himself and further, the Chinese
pilgrim I-ching states that the playwright was still alive in the last quarter of the
seventh century. Scholars like Mark TATZ and Thomas OBERLIES who believe that
the statement of I-ching is correct are forced to assume that there were at least
two Candragomins: the grammarian who lived in the fifth century AD and the
poet, author of the Lok¢nanda and the ¹i¼yalekha, who lived in the seventh
century. Moreover they tend to assume that the passage of the play quoted above
or even the whole prologue might be a later addition. I have recently outlined the
enormous logical and historical difficulties which are created by such an
assumption.38 Because of these difficulties I am  still convinced that I-ching has
committed an error in his statement about Candragomin, as he has in the case of
Bhart²hari, and continue to believe in the identity of the pl aywright and the
grammarian.
The connection between the playwr ight and the author of the “Letter to a
Disciple” can be established by the nine stanzas which occur in both the Lok¢-
nanda and the ¹i¼yalekha.39 There is an additional feature which is shared by both
works, the `marking' (aËka) of both compositions by the name of the author. The
central marking stanza is identical in both works, Lok¢nanda V.48 and ¹i¼yalekha
116. The word candra “moon” also occurs in ¹i¼yalekha 1, and the full name
Candragomin is used in four of the five act-concluding stanzas: I.21, II.33, III.23,
and IV.35.
In the same way a connection can also be established between “Joy for the
World” and the “Hymn in the Form of a Confession”. In the latter work Candra-
Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature 15
40 Translation quoted from Mark TATZ, Difficult Beginnings, Boston, London, 1985, pp. 39-
40.
gomin uses the four “infinitudes” (apram¢½a), “love” (Skt. maitr¤, Tib. byams pa),
“joy” (Skt. mudit¢, Tib. dga' ba), “compassion” (Skt. karu½¢, Tib. sñiË rje), and
“equanimity” (Skt. upek¼¢, Tib. btaË sñoms) as the structural principle of the
stanzas 4-6.
[4] “To pacify the scorching fire of aversion,
Even if I develop the lotus pond of love,
There, wishing happiness for all people,
The mind ends in the mire of attachment.
[5] To purify the stains of the mire of attachment,
If I cleanse it with the water of even-mindedness,
There even the World-protector's compassion,
Which dispels the distress of all creatures, would decay.
[6] O Chieftain, if I cultivate compassion,
Great sorrow is generated in me;
If I rely on gladness to pacify this,
The distracted mind grows excited.”40
In a very similar, yet even more inge nuous way Candragomin has squeezed the
same four technical terms, together with their general designation apram¢½a, into
one stanza in the opening portion of the “Joy for the World” (benedictory stanza
No. 2):
[I.2] “O you whose loving (maitr¤) character is vast
beyond all measure (apram¢½a), 
you who were once so blissfully (mudit¢)
embraced by your wife Ya¡odhar¢—
in your great compassion (karu½¢)
should you also not show
toward us a similar equanimity (upek¼¢)?
But we of course must not behave as did
the noble mistress Ya¡odhar¢!”
O, may you gain the knowledge of the Buddha
MICHAEL HAHN16
41 Quoted from my popular English rendition of the play Joy for the World. A Buddhist Play
by Candragomin, Berkeley 1987, p. 3-4.
42 The stanza, together with its English rendering by SPEYER, is quoted on pp. 14-5 of my
monograph Haribha¿¿a and Gopadatta, cf. fn. 28.
43 Cf. his paper “Animadversiones Indicae 8. ¹aËkarasv¢min, ¹ivasv¢min and Gopadatta”, in:
Festschrift für Moriz Winternitz, Leipzig 1933, pp. 243-6.
44 Die Legende von den sieben Pr inzessinnen (Saptak um¢rik¢-Avad¢na). In der poetischen
Fassung von Guhyadatta/Gopadatta aufgrund der tibetischen Übersetzung herausgegeben, übersetzt
und bearbeitet von Lobsang D ARGYAY. Wien 1978 (Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und
Buddhismuskunde. Heft 2.)
who was so addressed by the envy-drunk daughters of
M¢ra, the god of desire!41
Stanzas 43 of the “Hymn in the Form of a Confession ” bears a striking
resemblance with Bodhicary¢vat¢ra 1.10. It seems that ¹¢ntideva had known Can-
dragomin's hymn. The blend of a hymn with a confession of sins is a remarkable
literary achievement on the part of Candragomin as is the combination of an
epistle with the embellishments of refined poetry in his “Letter to a Disciple. ”
These two works, together with the play “Joy for the World ” granted and will
grant Candragomin lasting fame as a Buddhist poet of the `golden age' of Sanskrit
literature.
9) Gopadatta, author of a J¢takam¢l¢
Gopadatta was mentioned as the author of a J¢takam¢l¢ by Somendra in the
preface to K¼emendra's, his father's, composition Bodhisattv¢vad¢nakalpalat¢.42 In
1933, Giuseppe TUCCI reported that he had purchased a fragmentary manuscript of
Gopadatta's J¢takam¢l¢ in Nepal and quotes  from the colophon. 43 The present
location of this precious manuscript coul d not be ascertained, despite repeated
efforts between 1977 and 1984. In 1974 the Tibetan scholar Lobsang D ARGYAY
completed his dissert ation on Gopadatta's Saptakum¢rik¢vad¢na which was
published four years later 44. DARGYAY's book is based on the canonical Tibetan
translation of the text whose Sanskrit original is still extant and has been prepared
for publication by me. In 1977 I established the hypothesis that 14 more legends
written in the Camp¦ style were also composed by the same Gopadatta who wrote
the Saptakum¢rik¢vad¢na and that all of them originally belonged to his now lost
(or at least inaccessible) J¢takam¢l¢. At that time only two of these legends had
been published, the Maitrakanyak¢vad¢na and the * Aj¢ta¡atrvavad¢na. The other
Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature 17
45 “Pu½yar¢¡yavad¢na — Another Legend by Gopadatta?” In: Frank-Richard Hamm Memorial
Volume. Ed. by Helmut EIMER. Bonn 1990 (Indica et Tibetica. 21.), pp. 101-32.
legends were found in anonymous and unpublished J¢taka and Avad¢na collections
from Nepal. In 1990 I published another legend, the Pu½yar¢¡yavad¢na, which I
have tentatively attributed to Gopadatta.45 I suspect that two more texts might have
also been written by Gopadatta, the ¹¢kyasi¾haj¢taka and the Karmaplotikas¦tra.
The following is the list of all the 17 legends together with their location.
No. Title JMAS ASS BKAM MJM AAM
1 Suprabh¢sa 0.3 . 7
2 Ú¼ipañcaka 35 1
3 S¢rthav¢ha 36 2
4 Sarva¾dada 37 3 . 32 . 45
5 Jñ¢navat¤ 38
6 Kap¤¡vara 39
7 Megha 40
8 M¢t²po¼ahastin 41 . 33
9 N¢ga 42
10 ¹van 43 . 8
11 Matsarananda 4 (and Ratn¢vad¢nam¢l¢ 20/24/25)
12 Bhavalubdhaka 51 2
13 Maitrakanyaka 54 DA 38 ( + BJAM 12)
14 * Aj¢ta¡atru   Palmleaf ms. from Tibet (JBORS 1937)
15 Pu½yar¢¡i 13
(16 ¹¢kyasi¾ha 55 BJAM 11)
(17 Karmaplotikas¦tra 56 BJAM 13)
Abbreviations:
AAM A¡ok¢vad¢nam¢l¢ (unpublished)
ASS Avad¢nas¢rasamuccaya (unpublished)
BJAM Bodhisattvaj¢tak¢vad¢nam¢l¢ (unpublished)
BKAM Bhadrakalp¢vad¢nam¢l¢ (unpublished)
DA Divy¢vad¢na (ed. COWELL/NEIL)
JBORS Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society
JMAS J¢tak¢m¢l¢vad¢nas¦tra (unpublished)
MICHAEL HAHN18
46 Cf. Haribha¿¿a and Gopadatta, p. 15.
47 Cf. “Das Datum des Haribha¿¿a”, p. 119.
48 Michael HAHN, “Indische und nepalesische Handschriften im Indologischen Seminar der
Universität Bonn”, in: Indology and Indo-Tibetology. Thirty Years of Indian and Indo-Tibetan Studies in
Bonn. Ed. by Helmut EIMER, Bonn 1988 (Indica et Tibetica. 13.), pp. 81-96, and Ratna HANDURU-
KANDE's paper “J¢takam¢l¢s in Sanskrit ”, in: The Sri Lanka Journal of the Humanities , vol. XI
(1985), pp. 91-109.
49 Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens XXVIII (1984), pp. 67-72.
MJM Mahajj¢takam¢l¢ (ed. M. HAHN)
 . indicates: metrical adaptation of the legend
From the colophon of the manuscript described by T UCCI it is clear that
Gopadatta's J¢takam¢l¢ was of almost exactly the same length as ¨rya¡¦ra's J¢-
takam¢l¢.46 Both ¨rya¡¦ra's and Haribha¿¿a's J¢takam¢l¢s consist of 34 legends. In
my paper on the date of Haribha¿¿a I was able to show that Gopadatta borrowed
a prose passage from Haribha¿¿a's Prabh¢sa legend which proves that he knew the
work of his predecessor. 47 If we combine these facts then it might not be too
presumptuous to infer that Gopadatta's J¢takam¢l¢ likewise comprised 34 legends.
This means that the legends tabul ated above, together with the Saptakum¢rik¢-
vad¢na, form approximately 50 per cent of Gopadatta's J¢takam¢l¢, provided that
my attribution is correct.
Meanwhile the stories Nos. 2-4 a nd 11-12 have been edited by Ratna
HANDURUKANDE, Nos. 1, 6, 10, 14 and 15 by myself and No. 13 by Konrad
KLAUS. Nos. 2-4, 11-13 and 15 are accompanied by translations into English or
German (No. 13). For the present state of research on Gopadatta cf. two papers by
Ratna HANDURUKANDE and myself.48
The next question in connection with Gopadatta is that of his date. His upper
limit is given by the lifetime of Somendra who lived in the eleventh century AD,
his lower limit by the lifetime of Haribha¿¿a, i.e. the beginning of the fifth century
AD (if not earlier). This span can be narrowed by the following considerations. In
my paper “Eine Anleihe Gopadattas bei Candragomin”49 I collected some evidence
for Gopadatta's familiarity with Candragomin's ¹i¼yalekha. This makes the second
half of the fifth century AD the earliest  possible date of Gopadatta. The upper
limit can be reduced by three centuries in accordance with one of Gopadatta's
verses which was incorporated into the Prajñ¢da½Îa by its unknown compiler.
Prajñ¢da½Îa 103 runs as follows:
Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature 19
50 |  'gro ba'i dri ma chags pa 'dra ba med |   |  gÓan la gnod pa phrag dog 'dra ba med |   |
mdza' bo sloËs mo pa 'dra yod min te |   |  gtoË daË mñam pa'i gñen b¡es gaË yaË med |
51 Quoted from Ratna HANDURUKANDE, Five Buddhist Legends in the Camp¦ Style, Bonn 1983
(Indica et Tibetica. 3.), pp. 108-9.
(Among) the impurities of the world nothing equals passion;
(among) the harm (done) to others nothing equals jealousy;
(among) the friends no one equals a beggar;
there is no relative which can be compared to generosity.50
The Sanskrit original of this stanza can be found in stanza 60 of Gopadatta's
Matsaranand¢vad¢na:
na janasya malo 'sti lobhatulyo
na ca m¢tsaryasamaÀ paropagh¢taÀ |
na ca y¢cakatulyam asti mitra¾
jagat¢¾ ty¢gasamo na bandhur anyaÀ | |
“For man there is no impurity equal to covetousness;
there is no offence to another like avarice;
there is no friend like a beggar;
there is no other kinsman like liberality for mankind.”51
The eclectic character of the Prajñ¢da½Îa has been pointed out above. Therefore
there can be no doubt that it was the unknown compiler of the Prajñ¢da½Îa who
borrowed the stanza and not the other way round. The context of the passage in
the Matsaranand¢vad¢na also excludes the third possibility that both texts
borrowed the stanza from a third source. As the Prajñ¢da½Îa was translated into
Tibetan at the end of the eighth or th e beginning of the ninth century AD the
second half of the eighth century AD is the latest possible date of Gopadatta. This
is well in accordance with the style of his legends.
We have to bear in mind that the determination of the lower and upper limit
depends on three assumptions: a) the correctness of my attributing the
Matsaranand¢vad¢na to Gopadatta; b) the supposed familiarity of Gopadatta with
Candragomin's “Letter to a Disciple ”; c) the contention that stanza 60 of the
Matsaranand¢vad¢na is the direct source of Prajñ¢da½Îa 103. Other opinions on,
or explanations of, these assumptions  and their underlying facts are possible,
however in my opinion not very likely. Further analysis of Buddhist poetical
MICHAEL HAHN20
52 Perhaps with the exception of the last stanza, No. 145, which consists of nine syllables
per line in its Tibetan translation, in contrast with the seven syllables per line in stanzas 1-144.
53 Cf. R. E. EMMERICK, The Siddhas¢ra of Ravigupta, Wiesbaden 1980.
54 This stanza does not mention the Buddha himself, however it is obviously modeled upon
Ratn¢val¤ 1.1: sarvado¼avinirmukta¾ sarvai r gu½air ala¾k²tam |   pr a½amya sarvajñam aha¾
sarvasattvaikab¢ndhavam | |  and perhaps also influenced by Pras¢dapratibhodbhava 1.1: sarvad¢
sarvath¢ sarve yasya do¼¢ na santi ha |   sarve sarv¢bhis¢re½a yatra c¢vasthit¢ gu½¢À | | .
works, their structure, and mutual relationship will offer new material and methods
for comparison.
10) Ravigupta, author of the ¨ry¢ko¼a
The ¨ry¢ko¼a is a collection of 145 stanzas all of which52 were composed in the
¨ry¢ metre which gave the work its title. The work is available only in its
Tibetan translation which was done in the ninth century AD and later incorporated
into the Tanjur. The ¨ry¢ko¼a has not yet been edited or translated. A critical
edition, translation and study by the present writer is under preparation.
Stanza 1 of the ¨ry¢ko¼a is an introductory stanza, stanzas 144 and 145 are
concluding stanzas. Stanzas 2-143 contai n moral maxims 90 per cent of which
follow the arth¢ntarany¢sa principle. Forty-two of these stanzas could be identified
in other anthologies of Sanskrit verses like Vidy¢kara's Subh¢¼itaratnako¼a (1 stan-
za), Jalha½a's S¦ktimukt¢val¤ (5 stanzas), Sundarap¢½Îya's N¤tidvi¼a¼¿ik¢ (9 stanzas),
S¦rya K¢liËgar¢ja's S¦ktiratnah¢ra (11 stanzas), ¹¢rËgadhara's Paddhati (6 stanzas),
and Vallabhadeva's Subh¢¼it¢val¤ (40 stanzas). All of these anthologies are later
than the Tibetan translation. We can therefore assume that the ¨ry¢ko¼a is an
original composition and that the other works quote from it, either directly or
indirectly. It cannot be said whether its  author is identical with the writer on
medicine who wrote the Siddhas¢ra53 or the Buddhist philosopher who wrote a
V²tti on Dharmak¤rti's Pram¢½av¢rttika. The introductory stanza and the concluding
portion (stanzas 141-5) make it clear that Ravigupta was a Buddhist:
1. (To him) who is in every (possible) respect
Endowed with virtues and has abandoned vices,
Who is a protector of the whole earth,
To him I always pay homage.54
Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature 21
55 In stanzas 141-3 four of the six “moral perfections” (p¢ramit¢) are mentioned directly:
“giving” ( d¢na), “energy” ( v¤rya), “meditation” ( dhy¢na), and “wisdom” ( prajñ¢). “Wrath” or
“anger” is the opposite of “forbearance” (k¼¢nti), the third p¢ramit¢; hence only “morality” (¡¤la),
the second p¢ramit¢, is omitted. “Defilements” ( kle¡a) and “propensity towards defilements ”
(kle¡av¢san¢) are two more Buddhist technical terms used in these stanzas.
141. That shameless person
Who has acquired wealth by donations (given to him)
And who does make donations to those in distress
Will in future not receive (any) donation
On account of the wrath (caused by him).
142. As long as the noble one does not show energy
(His moral) faults will become stronger and stronger.
By (the application of) energy the wise one
Should not be terrified with regard to mean defilements.
143. One should (first) burn 
The dirt “propensity towards defilements”
With the fire “wisdom” and (then) sprinkle it
With the water “meditation”
So that it will split into one hundred pieces
Like chalk which is (first) burnt into stone
(And then sprinkled with water
So that it will split into one hundred pieces).55
144. The path which is followed by the magnanimous ones
Is also practised by others.
(I) have first reflected upon it
And then spoken about it
So that one may somehow rejoice in it.
145. May (my words) therefore
Produce abundant fame and glory
As long as the God of Death 
Who is able to swallow the Three Worlds
Lets his club fall down on human beings
Because they have burnt 
MICHAEL HAHN22
56 The imagery of stanzas 144-5 is again common in Buddhist poetry.
57 Cf. my paper “Zu den Quellen einiger Str ophen aus Sa skya Pa½Îitas Subh¢-
¼itaratnanidhi”, in: Tibetan and Buddhist Studies Commemorating the 200th Anniversary of the Birth of
Alexander Csoma de KÅrös, ed. by Louis LIGETI, Budapest 1984, (Bibliotheca Orientalis Hungarica,
Vol. xxix/1), pp. 251-266.
58 “The ¹atag¢th¢ attributed to Vararuci ”, in: Tibetan and Buddhi st Studies .....  (cf. the
preceding footnote), pp. 17-58.
59 About 75 stanzas instead of about 45 stanzas.
With the fire of manifold vices
The seed which had been produced by good deeds.56
The main part of the work is of a gene ral nature and strictly avoids specific
Buddhist topics. Within the genre of N¤ti¡¢stras it is a work of the first order and
it has later exercised considerable influence upon the most popular Tibetan work
in the field, the Subh¢¼itaratnanidhi or Legs par b¡ad pa rin po che'i gter by Sa skya
Pa½Îi ta.57 The upper limit for the composition is  determined by the date of its
translation into Tibetan, i.e. the ninth century AD, the lower limit is the latter half
of the second century AD if my conten tion is correct that stanza 1 of the
¨ry¢ko¼a was influenced by Ratn¢val¤ 1.1 and/or Pras¢dapratibhodbhava 1.1.
11) Vararuci, author of the G¢th¢¡ataka
Little can be said about the G¢th¢¡ataka, a compilation of 107 moral maxims,
which is attributed to a certain Vararuci and available only in form of its Tibetan
translation which was done in the elev enth or twelfth century AD and later
incorporated into the Tanjur. An excellent critical edition and translation of the
work into English has been recently published by my Hungarian colleague Géza
BETHLENFALVY.58 I nevertheless intend to publish my own edition and translation
because I was able to identify a considerably greater number of Sanskrit parallels.59
The G¢th¢¡ataka itself shows little originality. Seventy-six of its stanzas can
also be found in the Prajñ¢da½Îa which therefore seems to have been the main
source for Vararuci. The second important source were the stanzas attributed to
C¢½akya. About 40 stanzas of the G¢th¢¡ataka can also be found in the so-called
C¢½akya N¤ti Text Tradition. Twenty-seven of them occur also in the Prajñ¢da½Îa.
Other sources of the G¢th¢¡ataka are the sayings of king Bharata which are
Notes on Buddhist Sanskrit Literature 23
60 Cf. Anton S CHIEFNER, Bharatae responsa tibetice cum versione latina , Petropolis [= St.
Petersburg] 1875.
61 Cf. Jñ¢na¡r¤mitranibandh¢vali (Buddhist Philosophica l Works of Jñ¢na¡r¤mitra) . Ed. by
Anantlal THAKUR. Patna 1959, 19872 (Tibetan Sanskrit Works Series. 5.).
62 Cf. Jñ¢na¡r¤mitras V²ttam¢l¢stuti. Eine Beispielsammlung zur altindischen Metrik. Hrsg.
von Michael HAHN. Wiesbaden 1971 . (Asiatische Forschungen. 33), pp. 5-7.
contained in the Vinayak¼udrakavastu60 (8 parallels), the Janapo¼a½abindu (3 par-
allels), and Ravigupta's ¨ry¢ko¼a (3 parallels). The lower limit for the compilation
of the G¢th¢¡ataka is therefore the seventh century AD (the earliest possible date
of the Prajñ¢da½Îa), the upper limit the eleventh (or twelfth) century AD when
the work was translated into Tibetan. The quotations from the sayings of king
Bharata and from Ravigupta's ¨ry¢ko¼a prove that Vararuci was familiar with
Buddhist works.
12) Jñ¢na¡r¤mitra, author of the V²ttam¢l¢stuti (VMS)
Jñ¢na¡r¤mitra is a well-known Buddhist philosopher, especially since twelve of his
works whose original Sanskrit manuscripts were preserved in a Tibetan monastery
were published by the Indian scholar Anantlal THAKUR.61 In the Tibetan Tanjur we
find the translation of a short but intricate text on Sanskrit metrics which is called
V²ttam¢l¢stuti or “Praise (of the Bodhisattva Mañju¡r¤) in the form of a garland of
metres.” After an introductory portion in the ¨ry¢ metre (stanzas 1-4) the VMS
illustrates 150 different metres in the form of a hymn directed to Mañju¡r¤ (stanzas
5-154). The name of the metre is always worked into the stanza in which it is
illustrated and whenever the metre has a caesura this is also indicated by some
kind of symbolical language. While editing, translating and analyzing the Tibetan
translation I came to the conclusion that the metrician is identical with the philoso-
pher.62 My main arguments were:
a) The twelve philosophical works contain an unusually great variety of metres,
namely 21.
b) Ni¡calakara, a commentator on the Cikits¢sa¾graha who lived in the
thirteenth century AD, mentions a Jñ¢nasr¤mitra who taught at Vikrama¡¤la
and was an instructor of metrics (
Evikrama¡¤l¢dhy¢pakacchandaÀ¡¢stropa-
de¼¿¢). The philosopher also taught at Vikrama¡¤la.
c) The V²ttam¢l¢stuti shows the greatest affinity to Ratn¢kara¡¢nti's Chando-
ratn¢kara, a theoretical work on Sanskrit metrics. Ratn¢kara¡¢nti was a friend
MICHAEL HAHN24
63 Cf. my paper “Sanskrit Metrics — As Studied at Buddhist Universities in the Eleventh and
Twelfth Centuries A.D.”, in The Adyar Library Bulletin, 1989, pp. 30-60.
and colleague of Jñ¢na¡r¤mitra at Vikrama¡¤la.
At the time when I published my study of the V²ttam¢l¢stuti it had escaped my
attention that the Sanskrit text of the work is still extant and had already been
published in Varanasi in 1956, by Yogi N ARAHARINATH in the Gorak¼a-
grantham¢l¢ (No. 55). I came to know this only in 1977. One year earlier I had
discovered the palmleaf manuscript of the commentary V²ttam¢l¢(stuti)viv²ti in the
collections of the National Archives, Kathmandu, Nepal. Its last leaf which
probably contained the name of the commentator is lost, however I was able to
show that it is in fact the commentar y by ¹¢kyarak¼ita which was used by the
Tibetan translators of the V²ttam¢l¢stuti.63 A new edition of the Sanskrit text,
together with the first edition of the V²ttam¢l¢viv²ti, is currently under preparation.