PREFACE
The present thesis is the outcome of my studies in Jaina dialectics - a subject which
was suggested by Professor BRUHN when I joined in 1969 the INSTITUI' FOR INDISCHE PHILO
LOGIE UND KUNSfGESCHICHTE (then SEMINAR FOR INDISCHE PHILOLOGIE) of the FREIE UNIVERSI
TAT BERLIN. I had the opportunity to discuss with Professor BRUHN questions relating to
Jaina literature in general and to Jaina dialectics in particular.
The present thesis is concerned with the canonical nik~epa, but it could not have
been completed had I not studied the rich post-canonical literature of the Jainas and
the post-canonical nik~epa as well. I have also studied dialectical problems from .Jaina
literature which were not connected with the nik~epa, viz. the naya concept or naya
technique. In a paper read in 1975 at the 19th German Oriental Conference (DElITSCHER
ORIENTALISTENTAG) I have discussed problems of textual stratification in connection with
the literary transmission of Umasvati's Tattvarthadhigama Sutra (the most authoritative
work on Jaina dogmatics). See the bibliographical references on p.XVIII.
For a study of the canonical nik~epa it is very important to have a thorough know
ledge of the Jaina canon - particularly of the Svetambara canon. Due to the lack of
reference works it was necessary to go through the entire canon in order to study both,
the nik~epa matter and related phenomena. The present study is the first attempt of
this kind, and I hope that shortcomings of the work can, to some extent, be explained
by the difficulties in the preparation of this study (for details refer to the Intro
duction).
A loan-scholarship granted by the INDIA FOUNDATION (Poona) enabled me to come to
Germany for higher studies, a plan which had been made long ago. Also, a scholarship
granted by the GRADUIERTENFORDERUNG and temporary employment in the "Konkordanz" (Jaina
Concordance - a project subsidized by the DElITSCHE FORSCHUNGSGEMEINSC~.AFT and carried
out at the INSTITUf FOR INDISCHE PHILOLOGIE UND KUNSTGESCHICHfE), enabled me to work in
Germany for a considerable time and to complete my thesis.
My thanks go to Professor Dr. HERBERT HARTEL and Professor Dr. KLAUS BRUHN, who have
included my study in the Series "Indologia Berolinensis".

x
PREFACE
I am specially indebted to Professor BRUHN who discussed with me the problems con
nected with this thesis during all the stages of the work. His scholarship and the keen
interest he took in my studies have been a constant encouragement.
A fellow-scholar - he does not want his name to be mentioned - has typed my thesis.
The reader who finds the text tolerably intelligible on account of the typographical
lay-out will appreciate the care bestowed by the anonymous co-worker on the execution
of his difficult task.
I am also grateful to my wife: VASUDHA and my children (son: ASOOK, daughter: NINA)
who had to live in India facing difficulties during my stay in Gennany.

Doch auch in dieser Region des Nichtmehr und des
Nochnicht wird eine Sprache gesprochen, der, wenn
ich mich so ausdrticken darf, etwas wie eine
Grammatik nicht ganz fehlt.
HERMANN OLDENBERG on the beginnings
of Indian philosophy.