Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies Vol. 41, No. 1, December 1992 (5)
On the Meaning of Jataka Carved
in the Bhrhut Vedika
Kanoko TANAKA
The blessed Lord said:
Numerous births of Mine have already taken place, as also those of yours, Ar juna!
I know them all, but you do not. 11
This recognition of numerous births seems to be one of the keys to
understand the thoughts of Indian people who live a life in the backgro-
und of samsara.2) The previous births are quite a long-term process to
the present birth, even for the blessed Lord. The ultimate end of his
teaching is to preach the salvation out of sarimsara, but birth stories should
be also worth being told to guide those who must bear births and ought
to improve them just in the present time. Among Buddhists, such sort
of stories have been called jataka whose narrative elements virtually
belong to folklore full of wisdoms based on life-experiences of the common
people, although every story seems to be consequentially embellished in
Buddhist way.
The aim of this article is to discuss the meaning of jataka earliest
visualized in plastic art in terms of the correlation between art and
religion. For the purpose, it is necessary to point out two principles of
plastic arts in connection with the eighteen scenes) with the title of
jataka in the bas-reliefs of Bharhut Vedika as the oldest remain of
stupa-art in India. They are lack of 'bodhisatto' not only in inscriptions
but also in leading characters acting their own instructive roles and more
familiar to the common people, still free from the clear purpose of praising
the Buddha himself in the previous births.
(1) First, plastic arts essentially narrate everything in the present
tense, and jataka stories told in the past tense are also presentized. The
viewer of jataka scenes comes to contact with them in the common
-536-

(6) Jataka Carved in the Bharhut Vedia (K. TANAKA)
dimension of time and space, in which the visual perception of their
meanings is repeated as he likes during his appreciation in front of the
bas-reliefs. This visual experience may be a truism, but must be more
effective for the viewer to read the moral of jataka stories, as com
pared with the auditory experience in which the listener has to recall
the plot and its main point of a story by himself against the flow of
time. It may explain the reason why the jataka scenes in Bharhut
Vedika are superior in numbers even to the monumental scenes of the
Buddha's life.
Moreover, the visual presentization of jataka stories full of life-expe-
riences leads to the positive affirmation of one's present life in the process
of samsara. Especially for those who had never got the chance to look
on the moral of their own lives by means of massmedia such as the
bas-reliefs of stupa-art, its visual effects in those days should have been
more considerable than we can imagine in modern times.
(2) Secondly, plastic arts unconditionally affirm the worth of everything
depicted there, and it may lead to the positive evaluation of one's body
not only in jataka scenes but also in the reality of this world, in spite
of its existential agony in samsara to be released by moksa or nirvana.
Therefore, neither the pessimism of karmic body nor the view of
impurity on body are out of quesition, rather one's body is given
promise of future as a result of deeds in the present days. The best is
to get the body because of its good conditions to come in touch with the
teaching of Buddha. It goes without saying that every viewer of jataka
scenes has a human body. In this sense, it may not too much to say that
we can extract a sort of existential optimism to encourage one's human
birth from the jataka scenes in which even animals play the leading
parts.
Furthermore, every body depicted in. jataka scenes is is nearly perpet-
uated in the form of stone work, along with other kinds of artistic
elements such as the design of lotus flowers, the images of Yaksa or
Yakshi, and the monumental scenes of the Buddha's life. All of them
-535-

Jataka Carved. in the Bharhut Vedika (K. TANAKA) (7)
belong to the stupa-art, They devote themselves to the stupa. The stipa
is the container of Buddha sarira as the monument of his last birth
just before parinirvana. In this context, the stupa-art seems to symbolize
the world of samsara in which everybody should follow the Way of
Buddha. Above all, jataka scenes are the most popular introduction for the
stupa-worshippers to have faith in Buddhism.
Two principles of plastic arts as stated above are usually subliminal to
those who are engaged in artistic works, but both of them can not help
coming out in correlation with the subject to be depicted. In the case of
a jataka scene, they seem to give full play to their intrinsic positiveness,
especially in relation to the recognition of births in samsara as the origin
of the conception of jataka. The Bharhut Vedika offers us its earliest
example in Buddhist way.
1) Bhagavad Gita, Ch. N-5
2) For instance, it seems to be very significant to find out such a Hindi movie
song in modern times as "Sau-Baar Janam Lenge" (Lyrics by Asad Bhopali,
Music by Ravi, Song by Mohammad Rafi, in the Film "Ustadon Ke Ustad")
in which lovers hope to see each other all through the repetition of birth and
death even for hundred times.
3) cf. E. Hultzsch, Jatakas at Bharaut, JRAS, 1912, p. 406.
4) Even some stages of time depicted in the same scene just as seen in Miga-
jataka (Pali 482) are presentized together.
5) In this article, there is no space to discuss on dharmabhanaka' who is said to
have been a commentator of stupa-art.
6) cf. SN. PTS., p. 174.
7) cf. Theri 19-20, Thera 567-576.
<Key words> jataka, samsara, plastic arts.
(Ph.D. Candidate, University of Delhi)
-534-