MwWjiwSilSiwftiftBh^^

lickrcn »v«*
CHAUNCEY LYfAftNPARSOHS

TRUBNER'S
ORIENTAL SERIES.

:
THE LIFE OR LEGEND
OF
GAUDAMA
"THE "BUDDHA OF THE BURMESE.
liti) Snnotati'ans.
THE WAYS TO NEIBBAN, AND NOTICE ON THE
PHONGYIES OR BURMESE MONKS.
BY THE
RIGHT REVEREND BIGANDET,
P.
BISHOP OF RAMATHA,
VICAR APOSTOLIC OF AVA AND PEGU.
IN TWO VOLUMES.
YOL.
II.
JFourtfj CcJitton.
LONDON
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO. L™.-
BROADWAY HOUSE, CARTER LAXE, E.G.
1912.

Therightsoftranslationandofreproductionarereserved.
Friiited by Ballantynk, Hanson <Sh Co.
At tlie Ballantyne Press,Edinburgh

CONTENTS.
LEGEND OR LIFE OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA,
CALLED GAUDAM A.
CHAPTER
I.
Buddha,beingseventy-nine years old, delivers instructions to
the Rahans—Preachings in the village of Patalie—Mira-
culous crossingof theGanges—Conversion of a courtesan
— SicknessofBuddha — Hisinstructionsto Ananda — Last
momentsanddeathofThariputra—HiseulogiumbyBud-
—
dha—Deathof Maukalan Reflections of Buddha on that
event
CHAPTER
II.
— —
Voyage to Wethalie Last temptation of Manh Causes of
—
earthquake Newinstructions to the Rahans—Last meal
of Buddha—His painful distemper—His conversation
with one of the Malla Princes—Sign foreshowing Bud-
—
dha'scoming death Arrival in the Kootheinaron forest
— —
Buddha lays himselfonhis couch Wonders attending
that event—Instructions to Ananda—Eulogium of An-
anda by Buddha—Conversion of Thoub.at—.Last.wo.rds
of Buddha to the Rahans—His death 28

CONTENTS.
vi
CHAPTER
III.
PAGE
Stanzas uttered after Buddha's death—Auanda informs the
Malla Princes of Buddha's demise—Preparations for the
funeral—Arrival of Kathaba atthe spot where the body-
wasexposed topublic veneration—He worships thebody
—Wonder on that occasion—The burning of the corpse
—Partitionof the relics made by a Pounha called Dauna
—
Extraordinaryhonourspaidtotherelicsby KingAdza-
-75
tathat—Death of that kingand of Kathaba . .
CHAPTER IV.
AfterBuddha's death, zeal of Kathaba in upholding genuine
doctrines—Heselectsfivehundred elders tobecome mem-
bersof a council orassembly—Radzagio is fixed upon for
the holding of the council—He repairs thither with a
—
portion of the appointed members Behaviour of the
amiable Ananda previous to his departure for Radzagio
— KingAdzatathatsupports Kathaba in his views — The
hall forholding the council is prepared by his orders—
Anandais qualified ina miraculous manner forsittingas
a member of the council—Holding of the council under
—
the presidency of Katliaba Establishment of the — Reli-
gious era—Destruction of Welhalie by Adzatathat The
successorsofthatPrince—InthedaysofKingKalathauka
asecond council isheld at Pataliputra under the presi-
dency of Ratha—Causes that provoked the holding of a
second assembly loi
CHAPTER V.
—
Kalathoka is succeeded by his eldest son, Baddasena And
—
finally by the youngest, Pitzamuka Thisprinceiskilled
and succeeded by a chief of robbers, named Ouggasena-
nanda—King Tsanda-gutta—King Bandasura—Miracu-
lous dreams of Athoka's mother—King Athoka—His

CONTENTS.
vii
PAGE
— —
conversion His zeal for Buddhism Finding of Llie
— —
relics Distribution of them Third council held under
—
the presidency of Mauggalipata Preachingof religionin
—
various countries, and particularly in Thaton Voyage
—
of Budhagosa to Ceylon Establishment of religion in
—
Pagan Various particulars relating to the importation
of the Scriptures in Burmah 123
An Absteact of a few small Dzats, and of two prin-
cipal ONES, KNOWN AS NeMI AND DZANBCKA . • ^53
Remarks on the Sites and Names op the principal
Places mentioned in the Legend or Life of Gau-
dama 177
The Seven Ways to Neibban 189
Art. I.—Of the Precepts 191
—
Art. II. Of Meditation and its various Degrees . . 202
Art. II L— Of the Nature of Beings 212
—
Art. IV. Ofthe Cause of the Form and of the Name, or of
Master and Si^irit 218
Art. V. — Of the True Meggas or Ways to Perfection . .227
—
Art. VI. Of the Progress in Perfect Science . . -233
Notice on the Phongyies, or Buddhist Monks, sojie-
times called Talapoins 241
Art. I.
—A
short Parallel between the Br.ahm.inic.al [.and
Buddhistic Religious Orders 244
Art. II.—Nature of the Religious Order of Phongyies . 251
—
Art. III. Hierarchy of the Order 261
—
Art. IV. Ordination, or Ceremonies observed at ithe Ad-
mission into the Societv 272

CONTENTS.
viii
PAGE
—
Art. V. Rules oftlie Order 282
—
Art. VI. Occupations of the Buddhist Monks . . . 296
—
Art. VII.—Religious Influence of the Phongyies Respect
and Veneration paid tothem by the Laity . 303
Addenda 321
On the word "Nat" 324

—
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA
CALLED
GAUDAMA,
CHAPTER
I.
—
Buddha, beingseventy-nineyea7-sold, d—elivers instructionstothe Rahans
—
PreachingsinthevillageofP—atalie Miraculousc—rossingofthe Ganges
Conver—sionofa courtesan SicknessofBuddha — Hisinstructionsto
Ananda
—
Last momentsand —death of Thariputra His culogium by
Buddha DeathofMaukalan ReflectionsofBuddha onthatevent.
During all this time Buddha was travelling about the
country, preaching the law to those that were worthy to
obtainthe deliverance. He hadreachedhis seventy-ninth
year.^ x\t that time there were eighteen monasteries in
1 The first particular related at disciples, or rather his spiritual chil-
length by the compiler of this work dren. Buddha charges them at first
is one of peculiar interest. Buddha to be always diligent in holding as-
summons the Rahans to his pre- semblies, where religious subjects
sence, through the ever faithful and should be discussed, controversies
dutiful Ananda, and addresses to settled, and unity of faith secured.
them instructions which form the Thisobligation haslongbeen heldas
basis of the duties and obligations abindingonebytheprimitiveBuddh-
of all truedisciples. Hestyles them ists, as mention is always made in
Bickus—that is tosay, mendicants their books of the three greatassem-
to remind them of the spirit of po- blies held during the three first cen-
vertyand of the contemptofworldly turies of the Buddhistic era, when
things which must ever be dear to the sacred writings were carefully
them. The epithet "beloved" is revised, amended, and, as it were,
always prefixed to the word Bickus, purged of all spurious doctrines. It
asconveying an idea ofthetrue and was during the last council that the
pure affection the master bore tohis canon of scriptures was adopted,
VOL. II, A

:
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
2
theneighbourhood of Radzagio,peopledby agreatnumber
of religious. On a certain day, Buddha said to Ananda,
" Invite all the Rahans to assemble in the Gny-Moora
hall." When they had gathered together in that place,
Buddha repaired thither, and spoke to them as follows
" Beloved Bickus, as long as you shall remain united,
and continue to hold regular meetings, you shall certainly
—
prosper and flourish as long as you shall agree together,
and come unitedly to a decision on all principal affairs, so
that you will impose no obligation where there is no pre-
which haseversincebeen maintained ing in themselves the principle of
by orthodox Buddhists. Nothing passion, and in particular concupis-
can be wiser than the desire he so cence. The general tendency of all
stronglyexpressesthat noone should his preachings is to teach men the
ever presume to alter the true and means offreeingthemselvesfromthe
genuine nature of the precepts, by tyrannicalyokeofpassions. Noone,
making, accordingto hiswhim, light indeed,canobtainthestateofperfect
what is heavy, or obligatory what is quiescence or Neibban unless hehas
but a matter of counsel. He ex- annihilated in himself all passions,
presses thestrongestwishtoseethem and therebyqualified himself for the
alwaysunitedamong themselves,and practiceofall virtues. The character
fervent in the observance of the pre- ofthegreat bodyofreligious Buddh-
cepts of the law. He establishes as istsis clearlysetforth in theexhorta-
afundamentalprincipletheobedience tions their great master directs to
to superiors. There is no society of them to love retreat and solitude.
a religious characteramongheathens The noise, tumult, and bustleneces-
where the various steps of the hier- sarily attending the position of a
archyareso well markedanddefined man living in the world are entirely
asin the Buddhistic institution. The opposed to the acquirement of selt-
whole bodyi^freligious hasageneral knowledge, self-possession, and self-
superior in each province, exercising control, so much required in a reli-
athorough controloverallthehouses gious. Aslong,concludesBuddha,as
within the limits oftheprovince ; he youshallremainfaithfultoyourregu-
may be looked upon as a regular lationsyouwillprosper,andsecureto
diocesan. Ineach houseoftheorder yourselvesand yourordertherespect
there isasuperior, having powerand andadmirationofall. Hewindsuphis
jurisdiction over all the inmates of speechbyexhorting themto act in a
the place. Under him we find the manner ever becoming their sacred
professed members of the society, calling. The greatest moralist, pos-
then those who may be called nu- sessingthemostconsummateandper-
vices, and last of all the postulants fect knowledge of human nature,
and disciples allowed to wear the could not lay down wiserregulations
clericaldress,oryellowgarb, without forsettingon afirmand lastingfoun-
any power or authority, and being dationagreat andmighty institution,
looked upon merely as students in destined to spread itselffar and wide
thewayofprobation. In his charge amidstnationsandtribes,andsubsist
to his disciples, Buddha lays much duringan unlimited ])eriod.
stress upon the necessity of destroy-

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
3
cept, and that you will fervently observe all the com-
mands, strictly adheringto all the rulesofyourprofession,
you will ever be in a prosperous condition. It is required
thatyou shouldbehave respectfullytowardsyour superiors,
yielding due obedience to their injunctions. Beware of
passions, and particularly ofconcupiscence, lest you should
everbe broughtrundertheirtyrannical yoke. Love retreat
and solitude endeavour to observe your regulations, as
;
well as all the ordinances and ceremonies of the law. Let
it be a pleasure to you to receive kindly good religious
who may come to your monasteries, and converse with
them. Avoid carefully to take pleasure in what you do
or say, or pride yourselves in the number of your attend-
ants. Shun bad company ; apply yourselves diligently to
acquire knowledge and wisdom meditate on the great
;
truths, mutability, pain, and unreality. As long as you
observe those important points and adhere to them, you
shall prosper and be everrespectedby all. Moreover, you
will be thereby enabled to avoid all thatwhich isbase and
unbecoming in your sacred calling."
When the instruction was over, Buddha called Ananda
and badehim informthe Rahans to holdthemselves ready
for going to Ampaladaka.
Whilst staying in a dzeat or bungalow, Thariputra a])-
proached Buddha, and having paid him his respects, said
to him, " most illustrious Buddha, there is no one that
surpasses, or that is even equal to you in the knowledge
ofthe law. There hasneverbeen, nor will everbe, abeing
that can be compared to you. This is what elicits my
admiration towards and love for your person." Buddha
replied, " You are not mistaken, Thariputra ; blessed are
they who, like you, know the value and the science of a
Buddha." Desiringtotry the wisdom ofhisgreatdisciple,
he added, " Beloved son, how do vou knowthat noone can
be compared to me, and that my knowledge of the law is
unrivalled? " Thariputraanswered, "I havenottheknow •
ledge of the present, nor of the ^last and future, but I

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
4
understand the law through yon, mostgloriousBuddha,
;
I have come to that understanding you have said that
;
you have infinite wisdom, hence I conclude that you know
the present, the past, and the future—you are to be ever
praised you are most excellent, ever glorious, and free
;
from all passions, and therefore to you I attribute all the
qualities inherentin him who is investedwiththe Buddha-
ship." FromAmpaladakaBuddhawenttothelargevillage
of Nalanda, wherehewas well received bytheinhabitants.
He preached to them and made a short stay with them.
Phra summoned again Ananda to his presence, and
directed him to tell the Eahans to be ready for a voyage,
as he desired to go to the village of Patahe. When he
arrived at that place, the people prepared for him the
dzeat- or hall, which had been erected by the order of
" A dzeat is a building erected by dzeats are, for the country,beautiful
the piety of Buddliists for the pur- buildings. Theedgeoftheroofand
pose ofaffording shelter and a place the front part are covered with a
of rest to devotees, travellers, and profusion of sculptures and carvings
strangers. These buildingsaretobe that vie with those that adorn the
found at the entrance of towns, in finestmonasteries. Thisfact,among
villages, and often in the neighbour- many, indicates the truly beneficent
hoodof pagodas. Those ofBurmah and philanthropic influence e.xercised
are erected in the plainest manner. bysometenetsofBuddhism overthe
A verandah in front extends to the followers of that creed. Pride and
fulllengthofthe building, aspacious vain-glory may have their share in
hall running parallel to the verandah the erection of those monuments of
occupiestheremainingplace. There benevolence, but it is not the less
is no partition between the hall and certain that those who build them
theverandah. Ithappenssometimes yield first and principally to tlie
that a space at one ofthe hall's cor- strong influenceofreligious feeling.
ners, screened by mats or dryleaves, On this occasion Buddha preached
offersan asylum tohim whodoesnot to the crowd, when we see a line of
like to mix with the vulgus. The distinction well drawn between the
carelessness of Government in all assembly of the disciples of Buddha
that relates to the comfort of the and those we may merely style
people is amply compensated bythe hearers. The latter are addressed
zeal of pious laymen, who readily by the name of darakas, meaning
undertake theerectionofthoseworks laymen that hear the reaching. A
j
ofpublic utilityin the hope ofsecur- daraka isnot as yeta perfect convert,
ing to themselves the attainment cf and therefore not a member of the
meritsto be enjoyed perhaps in this, assemblyofthe perfect. The daraka
but certainly in some future exist- differs from theUpasaka. Thelatter
enc I e n s. Burmah proper some of llic i h s e no i t s o a nl f y ir a m me be r l e ie h v e er a , rer an o d f t f h e e rve l n a t w ly ;

;
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
5
King Adzatathat, for receiving the Letziwy princes of
Wethalie, who hadcome to a conference for settling some
affairs with him. Everything being ready, they invited
Phra, who by his silence testified his acceptance of their
invitation. Water to drink, rinse the mouth, and wash
his hands and feet, wasready. Bnddha sat leaning against
thecentral post of the hall, facingthe east. His disciples
remained behind in a humble posture, whereas the people
sat opposite to him, having their faces turned towardsthe
west. Phra began to explain to thenumerous hearers the
demerits and punishments attending the trespassing of
the precepts of the law, and the advantages reserved to
those who religiously observe them. " Darakas," said he,
"whoever trespasses the moral precepts, or is remiss in
observing them, will see his happiness and fortune gra-
dually decreasing, and his good character falling away.
He will ever live in a sad state of doubt and uncertainty,
l pr a a y c m t e is n es a th p e io p u r s ec B e u p d ts dh : is h t e ; is th a e mo f n or g - b pa u r t ts. its f H u el n l da i m s e a nt p a l l ace an o d fp co u n n s i t s i h tu m t e i n v t e
mer is not so forward : he begins to and torment, as the Nats' seats are
hear and believe the doctrines places of reward and happiness.
preached to him. He has already There is no eternity of sufferings
s in o s m tr e uc f t a i i o t n h , i b n ut Bu h d e d c h a a nn ; o h t e b i e s c u a n l d l e e r d t d h a e rk un r f e o g r i t o u n n s at i e s i d n o h o ab m i e t d ant to of re t m h a o i s n e
a professed disciple. The rewards there, until the sum of his offences
of faith are both of a natural and has been fully atoned for by suffer-
supernatural order. Riches, happi- ings. Whentheevilinfluencecreated
ness, an honourable reputation, are by sin is exhausted, punishment
promised to the faithful observer of ceases too,and thewretched sufferer
the law. He is to be ever free from is allowed to migrate to the seat of
doubts,sincefaith makes himadhere man in order to acquire merits and
firmly to all the instructions of prepare himself for happier future
Buddha and after his death he isto existences.
migratet ; osomeoftheseats ofNats. In recording the account of the
The trespassing of the law is to be conversionofacourtesannamedApa-
attended with poverty, shame, and palika, her liberality and gifts to
misery, doubtsin an unsettled mind, Buddha and his disciples, and the
andat last punishmentinhell. Tliat preference designedly given to her
place of suffering is minutely de- overprincesandnobles,who,humanly
scribed in Buddhistic works. Such speaking, seemed in every respect
a description appears, in the opinion better entitled-to attentions, one is
of the writer, of no importance to almostreminded ofthe conversionof
those who desire to understand not the woman that was a sinner men-
the superficial portion of Buddhism, tionedintheGospel.

6 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
and at last, when death shall have put an end to his pre-
sent existence, he will fall into hell. But the lot of the
faithful observer of the great precepts shall be widely
different. He will obtain riches and pleasures, and gain
an honourable reputation. He will be welcome in the
assemblies of princes, pounhas, and Rahans doubt shall
;
never enter his mind, and his death will open before him
the way to the pleasant seats of Nats." The people were
so much taken up with the preaching that they remained
in the dzeat until a very late hour. At last they paid
their homage to Buddha, rose up, turned on the right, and
departed.
It is in the following year that the same king built the
city of Patalibot or Pataliputra, on that same spot. In
anticipation of that event, Buddha foretold that thevillage
would become a great city,which would obtain a renowned
celebrity among all other cities. Thither countless mer-
chants would resort from all parts of Dzampoodipa. At
the same timehepredicted the great calamities that would
befall it. Internal discords, fire, and inundation of the
Ganges would gradually work out its total destruction.
In the morning Buddha went to the southern bank of
the Ganges, and preached the law to some pounhas, who,
in return, made him offerings and paid him much respect.
He stood on that place as if waiting for some boat tocross
the mighty stream. Some of the people were lookingout
for boats, others were busily engaged in preparing rafts.
Whilst they were making all the necessaryarrangements,
i^uddha stretched both arms and found himself, with all
his Kahans, on the opposite bank. Turning his face in
the direction of those who were in search of boats and
rafts, he said : " He who has crossed the sea of passions is
an Ariah. The practice of the great duties are the boats
and rafts whereupon he contrives to cross the sea of
passions. He who desires to pass a river wants the aid
of rafts and boats, which are made up of different pieces
of wood joined together but he who has become an Ariah
;

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
7
by the knowledge of the great roads that lead to perfec-
tion, weakens all passions and extricates himself from the
whirlpool of concupiscence he can also, without the help
:
of boats or rafts, cross rivers."
Phra informed Ananda that he intended to go to the
village of Kantikama. Having reached that place, he
explained to the iiahans the glorious and sublime prero-
gatives of Ariahs, Thence he passed over to the village
of Nadika. It was in that place that Ananda asked him
what had become of a certain Kalian, named Thamula,
and of a certain liahaness, named Anaunda, who had both
just died. "The Rahan," answered Buddha, ''has con-
quered all his passions and obtained the state of Neibban.
As to the Rahaness, she has gone to one of the seats of
Brahmas thence she will migrate to Neibban without
:
reappearing in the world of passions."
Buddha went to the country of Wethalie with his dis-
ciples, and dwelt in a beautiful grove of mango-trees.
There he earnestly recommended his disciples to have
their minds always attentive and ready to engage in
serious reflections and meditations. In Wethalie lived a
famous courtesan, named Apapalika. She had her dwell-
ingin a beautiful place, near to an extensive and delight-
ful grove, planted with mango-trees. She went along
with others to hear the preaching of Gaudama, which had
the good effect of disposing her to make a great offering
to the distinguished preacher and his followers. Buddha
was submissively requested to come on the following day
with all the Rahans to receive his food. The invitation
was graciously accepted. The courtesan hastened to pre-
pare the meal for Buddha and his followers. On the
same day he preached the law to a number of young
princes who had offered to supply him with his meal on
the following day. He refused to accept the invitation,
because he had already promised to Apapalika to go to
her place for the same purpose. The princes had come
in their finest and richest dress in theirdeportment they
;

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
8
vied in beauty with the Nats. But foreseeing the ruin
and misery that was soon to come upon them all, Buddha
exhorted his disciples to entertain a thorough contempt
for things that are dazzling to the eyes, but essentially
perishable and unreal in their nature. The princes were
greatly disappointed at the preference given to the cour-
tesan. On the following day, Gaudama went to the grove
of mango-trees, attended by all his Eahans. After the
meal, Apapalika presented tlie grove to Gaudama, who
readilyaccepted the pious gift.
Having remained a while on this spot, Buddha went to
the village of Weluwa, where he spent the forty-fifth and
the last season. There he assembled the Rahans and said
to them : " I intend to spend the season in this place, but
you have my permission to go and remain in the neigh-
bouring districts." The reason that induced him to part
for a while with his disciples was the smallness of the
place and the difficulty of procuring rice, whilst in the
contiguous districts there were many monasteries and an
abundance of all the necessaries of life. He would not,
however, allow them to withdraw to too great a distance,
for tworeasons
:
first,because he knewthat in ten months
hence he would attain the state of Neibban and, second,
;
because he desired to see them assembled in his place
several times every month, that he might have oppor-
tunity to preach the law, and deliver to them his final
instructions.
Whilst he was living in that place Buddha was visited
with a most painful distemper, which threw him into a
state of prolonged agony. But owing to the absence of
his disciples, and knowing besides that this was not the
spot he was to select for his last moments, he overcame,
by his incomparable power, the evil influence of the
illness, and entering soon into a state of absolute trance,
he remained therein for a while. Awakening from that
situation, he appeared anew with his strength and usual
vigour. When he came out from the monastery to take

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
9
his wonted walk, Auanda went into his presence, and
expressed to him the profound grief felt by all those who
had heard of his illness. "When I saw you ill, illus-
trious Buddha," saidthe faithfulAnanda, "I was sodeeply
affected that I could scarcely hold up my head or draw
my breath. I always cherished the hope that you would
not go to Neibban ere you had preached once more the
law to us all." '• Ananda," replied Buddha, '•why are the
Rahans so much concerned about my person ? What I
have preached has no reference to what is within me or
without me. Besides me there is no one else to preach
the law. Were they not looking upon me as such, it
would be perfectly useless to attempt to preach to them.
I am now very old my years number eighty. I am like
;
an old cart, the iron wheels and wood of which are kept
together by constant repairing ; my earthly frame is kept
entire and whole by the force and power of trance.
Ananda, I feel truly happy whenever I consider the state
of Arahat, which is the deliverance from all the mise-
ries of this world, whilst at the same time it sets a being
free and disentangled from all visible andmaterial objects.
As to my disciples, as long as my religion shall last they
ought to rely on themselves, and take refuge in the law,
for there is no other refuge. They will truly rely on
themselves when, by a careful attention, profound reflec-
tion, and true wisdom, they will be bent upon the destruc-
tionofconcupiscenceandanger,andengagedonmeditating
upon the constituent elements of this body." Such were
the instructions he gave to Ananda.
Having spent the season in the village of Welouwa, the
most excellent Buddha desired to return by the same way
he had previously followed to the country of Thawattie.
Having arrived there, he took up his residence in the
monastery of Dzetawon.^ The great disciple Thariputra,
•' The duties performed by Thari- profouiul veneration he entertained
putra on this occasion exhibit more for Buddha. Hewaswith Maukalan
fully tlian language can express the the most distinguished member of

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
lO
having just returned from begging his rice, hastened to
render to Buddhathe usual services. Hesweptthe place,
spread the mat, and washed his feet. These duties being
the assembly; he occupied the first on the board whereupon are placed
rank among the disciples in point the dishes, or the articles intended
;
of intellectual and spiritual attain- to be offered, respectfullyapproaches
mentsandtranscendentqualifications, the elder, kneels before him, squat-
hestoodsecondtononebuttoBuddha. ting onhis heels, lays before himthe
Notwithstandinghisexalted position, object to be presented, bows down
he did not hesitate to render to his with the joined hands raised to the
superior the lowest services. The forehead, resumes then the article
high opinion he had of Buddha's with his two hands, presents it, with
supereminent excellencies prompted the upper part of the body bent in
him to overlook his own merit, and token of respect. Before accepting
toadmirewithoutreservethatmatch- it the elder asks. Is it lawful? The
lesspatternofwisdomandknowledge. answer,Itis lawful,havingbeen duly
Hence the inward satisfaction he returned, the article is either taken
sweetly enjoyed in serving as an from the hand ofthe offerer, orhe is
humble disciple him whose unutter- directed to place it within the reach
ableperfectionscast in the shade his of the elder. Any infraction of this
far-famed and much-praisedacquire- ceremonialisconsideredasasin. In
ments. The unaffected humility of thepresenceofthe people the monks
the disciple does the greatest credit neverfailtosubmit tothat somewhat
to the sterling worth of his inward annoying etiquette. Their counte-
dispositions, and conveys thehighest nance on such occasions assumes a
idea cf the respect and veneration dignified and grave appearance, that
entertained forthemaster's person. has always much amused the writer
In the houses where Buddhist whenever he had the opportunity of
monks are living it is a fixed rule witnessing this ceremony, which is
that the superior and elders of the called Akat. There is no doubt but
institution should be attended in the thiscustomisaveryancientone. We
minutest services by the youngest find it blended to a certain extent
memberswearingthecanonicaldress. with the manners of the nations in-
The framer of the disciplinary regu- habitingeasternAsia. It is minutely
lations, intending, on the one hand, described in the Wini, and carefully
to confer dignity on the assembly, observedbytheinmatesoftheBuddh-
and, ontheother, toopposea strong istic monasteries. It agrees remark-
barrier to covetousness and to all ably well with the spirit that has
inordinate worldly affections, wisely originated, promulgated, and sanc-
laid down a stringent order to all tioned the disciplinary regulations.
the members of the society never to Hewho in this instance would look
touch or make use of any article of atthe mereskeleton ofthe rulewith-
food, dress, &c., unless it had previ- outany referenceto the object aimed
ouslybeen presentedto them bysome at bythe legislator would showhim-
attendant,laymanorclerical. Hence self in the light of a verysuperficial
when waterisneeded forwashingthe observer. This, unfortunately, istoo
head, hands,and feet, or for rinsing often the case when we scorn and
the mouth, when meals are served laugh at customs, the demerit of
up,when offeringsaremade,ayoung which consists simply in not being
postulant, holding a vessel of water similar to ours, whereas the com-

1
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
1
performed, lie sat in a cross-legged position, entered into
a state of trance for a while, whence having awakened, he
thouo-ht within himself as follows
:
Has itbeen the custom
in former ages for the Buddhas to arrive first at the state
of Neibban, or for their great disciples to precedethem in
that way ? Having ascertained that the latter alternative
always happened, Thariputra examined his own existence,
and found that the period of his life was not to extend
beyond seven days. He next considered what place was
the fittest forhim to depart from and goto Neibban. The
remembrance of his mother occurred to his mind, and he
said to himself, My mother has given birth to seven
Kahandas, and she has not as yet taken refuge in the
—
three precious things Buddha, the law, and the assembly
oftheperfect. Is she capable of understandingandknow-
ingthe four waysto perfection ? Yes, she is indeed. P.ut
monest sense tells us that we ought ancethatencompasseshismind. The
tojudge them in connection with the more a man grows in the knowledge
institutions they have sprung from, of truth the farther he removes the
andtheendaimedatbyhimwhohas horizon of darkness. He who has
establishedthem. made the greatest and most perse-
The narrative of Thariputra's de- veringeffortsin ferventlyprosecuting
parture for his birthplace and ofhis theworkofsearchingtruthbystudy-
last moments suggests to the mind ing the law that teaches the way of
several reflections. He is certain of reaching it, contemplates and enjoys
t s h ee e s l w as i t th da a y p o r f o h p i h s et e i x c is g t l e a nc n e ce ; t h h e at fo h r i e s - a his po e r f t f i o o rt n s o a f nd tru s t u h cce c s o s m . men A su B r u a d t d e ha t , o
mother is well prepared for hearing who has reached the last boundaries
profitably the preaching of the most ofknowledge,hasthereforetriumphed
perfect law. By the incomparable over ignorance and indefinitely en-
powers of his memory he relates to largedthesphereoftruth. Heenjoys,
Buddha that 100,000 revolutions of infact, a cloudless sight of all that
natureagohe was possessedwith the exists; his science is unlimited, e.v-
strong desire ofseeinghim andhear- tending over all the countless series
ing his instructions, &c. How can of worlds, which, in the opinion of
these particulars be accounted for, the Buddhists, are supposed to form
accordingtoBuddhisticnotions? The a system of nature. Thariputra,
springall evils or demerits Alwfrom though much advancedin perfection,
isignorance. Abeingis imperfect in hadnotasyetreacheditsacme. His
proportion to his being sunk deeper knowledge, however,waswonderfully
in the bosom of ignorance. On the great and extensive ; it enabled him
contrary, a being perfects himself toobtainaclearinsightintothedark-
in proportion to the efforts hemakes ness of the past and a distinct fore-
fordispellingthethickcloudofignor- sightofthe future.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
12
who is destined to preach to her? I am the person who
ought to perform such a good office to her. I will go,
teach her, and, by my instructions, make herrenounce her
false belief and embrace the true one. The very room I
was born in shall be the spot wherefrom I shall depart
for the rest of Neibban. On this day I will ask Buddha's
leave to go to my birthplace. Having cometo this resolu-
tion, he called the faithful Tsanda, and said to him, "Go
and summon my five hundred Rahans to attend at my
place." Tsanda departed forthwith, and said to the
Eahans, " The great Thariputra desires to go tothe village
of Nalanda be ready to accompany him arrange every-
; ;
thinginyourown place, takeupyourpattasandtsiwarans."
The five hundred Rahans immediately complied with the
request,andwerereadytofollowtheirmaster. Thariputra,
having disposed everything in his own cell, rose up, and
casting an attentive and serious look upon the place he was
wont to sitonduringtheday,hesaid, " This isthelast time
I will ever see thisplace never will I any more enter into
;
this cell." Thereupon he left the spot followed by thefive
hundred Rahans, went to the presence of Gaudama, and
humbly requested permission to go and quietly enter into
the state of Neibban, and thereby be delivered from the
whirlpool of endless existences. Gaudama asked him
in what place he intended to obtain Neibban ? Tharipu-
tra replied "In the country of Magatha, in the village of
:
Nalanda,-^ in the very room where I was born." " You
4 The village of Nalanda, the site :ind is seven ynudzaiias or forty-nine
of which is at present occupied by miles distant from the tree Bodi. It
that of Baragacn, was the birthplace wasthegreatseatofi5uddhisticlearn-
ofthegreatdiscipleThariputra. His ing, renowned all over India. Now
illustriouscompanioninreligion,Mau- thewholesiteiscovered withancient
kalan, was born in the villageofKau- tanksand mounds of ruins on an im-
lita,about oneandahalfmilessouth- mense scale, offering fine specimens
west of that place. Nalanda, says of sculpture. The great monastery
Fa-Hian, the Chinese traveller, lies and five smaller oneswere all within
oneyoudzana northofRadzagio,that one enclosure. A row of lofty coni-
istosay, seven English milesaccord- cal mounds,runningnorthandsouth,
ing to Cunningham's measurement, 1600 feet by 400, indicates the place

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
13
alone, Thariputra," said Buddha, "know tht^ time of
your entering the state of Neibban. As it is difficult, if
not impossible, ever to find among all my disciples one
like unto you, I desire you to preach once more to the
assembly of Rahans." Thariputra, knowing that Buddha
wished him at the same time to show a display of his
power, prostrated himself before him, then rose up in the
air to the height of one palm-tree, and came down to
worship Buddha. He rose seven times in succession, each
and extent of those religious build- Nalanda and Buddha Gaya. It ap-
ings. Outside ofthe enclosure there pears that, during the three first
were several temples. General Cun- centuries of the Christian era, its
ninghamfixestheeraoftheconstruc- fortune alternated, and met with
tion of those edifices between A.D. variedresults,agreeablytothefavour-
425 and 625. Among the several able or unfavourable dispositions of
proofsadduced in support of hisopi- the rulers of the country towards
nion thereisonethatappearsconclu- the followers of the philosopher of
sive. Fa-Hian, who visited all the Kapilawot. This succession of suc-
placesfamousinthehistoryofBuddh- cessesandreversesrevealsthe impor-
ism, and describes them with a tant fact that Buddhism had not
minute attention, simply alludes to struck deep root in the heart of the
Nalanda as the birthplace of Thari- inhabitantsofCentral India, sinceits
putra, without saying a word about fate depended from thewill and opi-
monasteries or temples, whilst Hwe- nionsofthemonarch,andwasalmost
Thsang, whovisitedthesamespot in atthemercyofhiscaprices. Moreover,
thebeginningofthe seventh century, in the country north of the Ganges,
describes the splendid temples and such as Wethalie, Thawattie, Kapi-
monasterieswhich he saw, and from lawot, placeswhich had been favour-
his statementwe infer that the prin- ed with Buddha's incessant preach-
cipal edifices were not inferior to ings, religion was on its decline at
those of Buddha Gaya in size and thetimeofFa-Hian'svisit, that is to
height. Some of them reached to a say, in the beginning ofthe fifth cen-
height of 170 and 200 feet. The tury monasterieswere deserted and
greatestwas300feethigh. Thenumber empti ; ed, dzedies were crumbling
and extent of the tanks is trulysur- down andfastdecaying. Insomein-
prising. Twoofthem, in the north- stances, heretics,that isto say,poun-
east, were nearly a mile in length, has, occupied the dwellings formerly
while another in the south was half tenanted by holders of the gefiuiiie
amile. doctrines. This unexpected sight
The inference to be drawn from very much grieved the heart of the
the above is, that during the fifth good Chinese pilgrim. It must be
and the sixth century of our era, regretted that we have not the writ-
Buddhism was in a flourishing con- ten journals of some other Chinese
dition in the countryof Magaiha or travellers in the eighth or ninthcen-
South Behar, since the finest and tury to reveal to us the state and
loftiest structures in the shaj^e of condition in which they found the
monasteries and temples have been magnificent temples of Nalanda and
raised within that period, both at BuddhaGayawhen theyvisitedthem.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
14
time higher by the length of a palm-tree than the pre-
ceding one. On the last time he stood in the air for
a while, and announcedthe law to the multitude of Rahans
aud people then coming down, he submissively requested
;
Buddha to withdraw into the interior of the monastery.
Buddha, complying with his wishes, entered into a hall
studded with diamonds. Thariputra, having bowed to-
wards the four points of the compass, said " most glo-
:
rious Buddha, a hundred thousands of worlds ago I was
prostrated at the feet of Buddha Anaumadathi, and ear-
nestty prayed that I might enjoy the happiness of seeing
all successive Buddhas that would appear during the
period of my countless existences. My prayer has been
heard, and now I contemplate you. most glorious Bud-
dha, and it is the last time that I will ever enjoy your
presence. Now, Buddha, worthy to be adored by all
rational beings, I will soon be free from the thraldom of
existences, and this existence shall be the last ; this my
prostration before you shall be the last. The end of my
life is near at hand : seven days hence, like a man who
rids himself of a heavy load, I will be freed from the
heavy burden of my body." He raisedhisjoinedhandsto
his forehead, and from the extremities of his ten fingers
rays of glory shot forth. In this position he bowed to
Buddha, and withdrawing slowly, with his face towards
Buddha, he continued bowino- down as longf as he could
see him, because it was for the last time. When Buddha
was out ofsight he took hisdeparture. Atthe same time
the earth trembled with a tremendous shake. Buddha
saidtothe Rahans that surroundedThariputra " Beloved
:
children, your elder brother is departing ; accompany him
for a while." The people, too, hearing that Thariputra
was going away, came forward, and gathering in large
crowds, said to each other " The great Thariputi'a, having
:
obtained leave from Buddha, is going to prepare him-
self for the state of Neibban let us follow him, that
;
we may still enjoy his presence," Whereupon taking

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
15
flowers and perfumes in their hands, they ran in the direc-
tion he had taken, with dishevelled hair, crying aloud,
with tears and lamentations, " Where is Thariputra ? "
Having come up to him, they said " Illustrious Rahan,
:
you haveleft Buddha ; whom do you nowintend to join ? "
Thariputra, full of the most affectionate feelings towards
the people, mildly desired them not to accompany him
farther, and he added a few last words, enjoining upon
them ever to remember Buddha and the Rahans. During
the seven days that his journey lasted, Thariputra never
ceased to praise and exalt the affection and kindness the
people bore to him.
It was a littlebefore dark when the greatRahan arrived
at the entrance of the Nalanda village. He went to rest
at the foot of a banyan-tree close to that spot. At that
time there came a young man, his nephew, named Oopa-
rewata, who, perceiving Thariputra, bowed down before
him, and stood in that place. The great Rahan said to
him: "Is your grandmother at home?" Having been
answeredin the affirmative, he continued addressing him :
''Go now to her, and tell her to prepare for me the room
wherein I was born, and a place for these five hundred
Rahans that accompany me. I will stay for awhile in the
village, and willgoto her house somewhat later." Thelad
went in all haste to his grandmother's house, and said to
her
:
" My uncleis come, and is staying atthe entrance of
the village." " Is he alone? " inquired the grandmother,
" or has he with him a numerous retinue ? For what
pui-pose is he coming here ? " The young man related to
her all the particulars of his interview with his uncle.
Noopathari, the mother ofThariputra, thought within her-
self, Perhaps my son,whohas been aRahan fromhisyouth,
desires in his old age to leave his profession. She, how-
ever, eave orders to have the desired room cleaned, and a
place prepared for all his attendants.
In the evening, the great disciple went to his mother's
house with all his followers. He ascended to the room

i6 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
prepared for him and restedtherein. He bade all the Ea-
hans withdraw and leave him alone. They had scarcely
departed, when a most violent disease seized Thariputra,
which caused an abundant vomiting of blood, so great, in-
deed, that the vessel into which it flowed could not holdit.
His mother, at the sight of such an awful distemper, did
not dare to approach, but retired, with a broken heart, into
her own room, andleaned againstthedoor. Atthat time,
four great Nats, a Thagia their chief, and four Brahmas,
came to see him, and to minister to him during his pain-
ful illness but he bade them retire. His mother, seeing
;
the coming and going of so many distinguished visitors,
and the respect they paid to her son, drew near to the
door of his room, and callingthe faithful Tsanda, inquired
of him wherefore so many distinguished individuals had
come. Tsanda explained to her that the great Nats and
a chief Thagia had come to visit and assist her son, and
enjoy the presence of the great Rahan. Meanwhile he
informed the patient that his mother wished to see him.
Thariputra replied, that the moment was not a properone,
and he asked his mother the motive of her untimely visit.
" Beloved son," said she, " I am come here to contemplate
your ever dear countenance. But who are they that have
just come to see you ? " Thariputra explained to herhow
he had been visited by Nats, Thagias, and Brahmas. His
mother inquiring of him if he were greater than any one
of these, he unhesitatingly replied, that he was more ex-
cellent than any of them. His mother thought within
herself If my son be so exalted, how much more must
:
Buddha be Her heart then overflowed with the purest
!
Thariputra rightly understood that the moment had
come to preach the law to his mother. He said to her,
"Woman, at the time mygreat teacher wasborn, whenhe
obtained the supreme intelligence, and preached the most
excellent law, a great earthquake was felt throughout ten
thousand worlds. No one has ever equalled him in the

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA
17
practice of virtue, in understanding, wisdom, and in the
knowledge of and affection for the transcendent excel-
lencies of the state ofArahat." He thenwenton explain-
ing to her the law, and many particulars relating to the
person of Buddha. " Beloved son," said his mother,
delighted with all that she heard, " why have you been so
late inacquaintingme with such a perfect law ? " At the
conclusion of the instruction, she attained the state of
Tliautapan. Thariputra replied, " Now, woman, I have
repaid you for all the labours you have bestowed on me
in bearing, nursing, and educating me ; depart from me
and leave me alone."^
5 The conduct of Thariputra on Buddha lived in him : he desired to
thisoccasionwears an appearanceof see all beings availing themselves of
rudeness towards his aged mother, the means ofsalvation which he had
which at first hurts the feelings of itin hispowerto impart unto them ;
human nature. But a close exami- heloved themallwithanequalaffec-
nation of all the circumstances con- tion ; thestateofignorancetheywere
nected with this last episode of the sunk in deeply affected his compas-
great disciple's life, shows that he sionatesoul, andhe had but one de-
was far from being divested of filial sire, thatofdispelling the thick mist
piety. Heleaveshisbelovedmaster, of ignorance by the pure light of
undertakesalongandfatiguingjour- truth.
neyforthesolepurpose of preaching Whenthe instruction tohis mother
the law to his mother, and confer- was over, Thariputra desired to be
ringuponheraboonofgreatervalue left alone with his disciples. His
than that he had received from her. lastwordstothem bespeak the hum-
Inreturn forall thefavours bestowed blesentimentsof his mind. Though
upon him byhis mother, he initiates the first member of the assembly of
her in the knowledge of truth, and the perfect, he begs pardon of his
enables her to enter into the great inferiorsfor the causes of offence he
ways that lead to the deliverance, may have unwillingly given them
thatistosay,tothestateofNeibban. during the period theyhad lived to-
It cannotbedeniedthathislanguage gether: regardlessofall the goodhe
onthisoccasionpartookofanaustere haddoneunto them, hefeelsthat he
tone, sounding harsh to the ears of could notwell partwith them ere he
worldly men, but itmust bebornein had atoned to them for any wrong,
mind that Thariputra was an old however involuntary, he might have
ascetic, dead to all affections of na- donetosomeofthem.
ture,looking upon truth alone inan Forthoseuninitiated in Buddhistic
abstractivelypure form, without any metaphysics it is not easy to under-
regardto materialobjects. Heloved standand distinctlytoappreciate the
the law of truth, which he had situation of Thariputra at his last
learnedfromBuddha,andafterwards moments. Itisstatedthathefellinto
preached to others with an unparal- ecstasy or trance, though his soul
leledzeal and fervour. The spiritof remained as yet connected with this
VOL. 11. B

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
i8
Thariputra inquired of the devoted Tsanda whether the
moment had come. Having been informed that it was
nearly dayhght, he requested to be set up. By his order
all the Eahans were called to his presence, and he said to
them, " For the last forty-four years you have ever been
with me if I have offended any one ofyou duringall that
;
time, I beg to bepardoned." The Rahans answered him :
"Great teacher, we have lived with you during the last'
forty-four years, and have been your inseparable atten-
dants, following you everywhere, as the shadow follows
We
the body. have never experienced the least dissatis-
faction with you, but we have to request your forbearance
with us and pardon for ourselves."
It was on the evening of the full moon Tatsaongmon
(November), when Thariputra went to his mother's place.
worldbyslenderandalmost invisible mind, indeed, to do, after having
ties. This was the last and mighty found truth, but to cling to it, and
struggleofabeingtodisengagehim- remain ever attached to it? During
self from the trammels of existence the last trance, Thariputra, with his
and become free from all exterior almost immensely developed men-
influence. Soaring above all that tal faculties, knew comprehensively
exists, Thariputra's soul passed suc- truth, reflected on it, felt a pleasure
cessively through the four stages he in considering it,enjoyedit,orrather
had so often visited, whilst engaged fed upon it, and at last adhered so
inthe arduous effort ofinvestigating perfectly to it, that he became, as it
truth, preparing to enter the fifth were, merged into it. He then had
and last one, where shewas to stay reached the state of Neibban, where
finally and perpetually, without any he was for ever exempt from the in-
further change, in a state of quies- fluences created and put in motion
cence. When the sage, during his and activity by matter and passions
meditations, has brought his mind in every state of existence. Buddh-
to bear upon some object, hewishes ists, in Burmah, at least, owing to
to contemplate attentively and tho- their very limited and imperfect
roughly to comprehend, he at first education, are unable to give any
getsholdofthatobjectbyhisthought, satisfactory or even intelligible ac-
he then examines it by means of re- countofthestateofNeibban or per-
flection: the knowledge he thus ac- fection. Wliat is here but super-
quiresneverfails tocreate a pleasur- ficiallystated, has been found in one
ablesensation ; this pleasureorsatis- of the last Buddhistic compositions
faction conveystothesoulenjoyment on this and other metaphysical sub-
andhappiness ; he loves the truth he jects. Fuller particulars shall, here-
hasdiscovered,andherestsfixedlyin after, begivenastothestateofNeib-
it. This isthelast stageheever can ban, when the death of one greater
orwish to reach. What has human thanThariputrashall berelated.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
19
and lay down in the room wlierein he had been born.
During the night he was attacked with the most distress-
ing distemper. In the morning, at daylight, he was
habited with his tsiwaran and made to lie on his right
side. He entered into a sort of ecstasy, passed succes-
sively from the first state of Dzan to the second, third,
and fourth, and thence dived into the bottomless state of
Neibban, which is the complete exemption from the in-
fluence of passions and matter.
Noopathari, bathed in her tears, gave full vent to her
grief and desolation. "Alas ! " exclaimed she, looking on
the lifeless body, " is this my beloved son ? His mouth
can no more utter a sound." Rising up, she flung herself
at his feet, and with a voice ever interrupted by sobs and
lamentations, said, " Alas ! beloved son, too late have I
known the treasure of perfections and excellencies that
was in you. Had I been awareof it, I would have invited
to my house more than ten thousand Rahans, fed them,
and made a present of three suits of dresses to each of
them. I would have built a hundred monasteries to re-
ceive them." Day^having dawned, she sent for the most
s In Burmah, when a person has cries and lamentations of some old
just given up the ghost, the inmates women at certain intervals, no one
ofthe housesend for musicians, who could imagine, still less find out, the
soon make their appearance with real motive that has induced such a
their respective instruments. They crowd toassembleon that spot,
forthwith set to work, and keep up If the departed belong to a re-
an incessantnoiseduringthetwenty- spectable family in tolerably good
four hours that elapse before the circumstances, the funeral ceremony
corpseisremovedto the placewhere isarrangedin the followingmanner :
it is to be burnt. Relatives, friends. Presents, intended as offerings for
and elders resort to the deceased's the Buddhist monks, having been
housefortheostensiblepurposeofcon- made ready, theyare invited for the
doling with thosewhohavelost their occasion, and their presence is ex-
kinsman, but in reality for sharing pected in numbers proportionate to
in themirthandamusementsthat go the amount of offerings. The pro-
oninsuchoccasions. Strangetosay, cession starts from the deceased's
the thought ofdeath strikes no one's house, anddirects its course towards
mind ; the fate of the deceased is the placeofburning orthe cemetery,
scarcely pitied, nay, remembered. It is headed by the yellow-dressed
Were it not for the presence of the monks, carrying their broad, palm-
corpse, andthe perhaps conventional leaf fans on the shoulder, and at-

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
20
skilful goldsmiths, opened her chests, and gave them a
great quantity of gold. By her command, five hundl-ed
small piathats and as many dzedis were prepared: the
tended by their disciples. Next rapidly consumed by the devouring
follow thebearers ofthe offerings in flames. The bystanders talk, laugh,
twolines. Theyare partlymen and or busy themselves in stirring the
partly women, but walk separately fire. AstotheTalapoins,theysome-
and apart from each other. The times take position under a neigh-
coffin appears next, laid on thick bouring shed, repeat a few passages
poles,andcarriedbysixoreightmen. of Buddha's law, and when they are
Infrontofthe coffin, and sometimes tired they give orders to their dis-
at the sides, are arranged the musi- ciplestotakeuptheofferingsandthen
cians,whoperformallthewaywithout go back to their peaceable abodes.
an instant'sinterruption. Behindthe Very often they do not take the
coffinaregroupedthe malerelatives, trouble of muttering prayers ; they
friends, &c.,and lastlytheprocession depart forthwith, followed by the
isclosed bycrowdsofwomen,attired offerings intendedforthem.
in their finest dress. The coffin is The fire being extinguished, the
beautifullydecorated,and carried on ashes, charcoal, c&c., are carefully
the shoulders of six or eight stout searched, and the particles of bones
young men bymeans of bamboos or discovered are piously collected by
poles. An unnatural merriment is thenearestrelatives, and then buried
allowed, and generally kept up all in a hole dug for that purpose near
the way to the cemetery, and fan- some pagoda.
tastic gestures and dances are per- Personsingoodcircumstanceskeep
formed by the bearers and their up for seven days in their houses a
friendstothe imminentdangerofup- sort of solemnisation of the funeral.
settingthe coffin. Theburningplace Every day, in the evening particu-
is generally without the precincts of larly, musicians are kept up playing
thetown, andin thevicinity of some untilaverylate hour at night. The
large pagodas. The funeral pile isof house is all the while crowded with
a tha v t er o y fa s n im o p b l l e on s g tr s u q c u t a ur r e e ; of i a ts m s o h d a e p r e at i e s e pe n o j p o l y e m , en w t h . o c S o o m m e e fo p r l t a h y e a p t urp va o r s i e ou o s f
size. Two large pieces ofwood are games ; others drink tea; all chew
at first laid parallel, at adistance of betel-leaves' tobacco in profusion.
eight feet; other logs of wood, dis- Sometimes stories relating to Gau-
posed at about six or eight inches dama's former existences are read
from each other, are laid across the and listened to by the elders of the
two first mentioned, so that their party. This mode, intended either
extremities are su|jported on these to do honour to the deceased's me-
two pieces. A second set of logs is moryortoafford reliefto thegriefof
laid at right angleswith the first; a relatives, is rather expensive, and
third one placed across the second, might often prove a heavydrain on
and so on, until the pile is three, the limited means of most of the
four, or five feel high. The coffin is families. I5ut the spirit of mutual
deposited upon it. Fire is set below assistance on this occasion removes
the pile by means of inflammable thedifficulty. Everyvisitor, accord-
materials, which soon communicate ing tohis means, nmkes a present of
fire to the logs the pile is marie of. some money to the master of the
The whole is soon in a blaze and house. Though the present of the

;
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
21
outsides were all covered with gold leaves. The great
Thagia sent down on the spot a number of Nats, who
made also the same number of religious ornaments. In
the middle of the city a high square tower was erected
from its centre a tall spire rose to an immense height.
This principal one was surrounded by a great number of
smaller ones. Men and Nats mingled together, uniting
in their endeavours to do honour to the deceased. The
whole place was lined with countless beings, vieing with
each other in their efforts to show the utmost respect, joy,
and exultation on this extraordinary occasion.
The nurse of Thariputra, named Rewati, came and
deposited round the mortal remains three golden flowers.
At that very moment the great Thagia made his appear-
ance, surrounded with myriads of Nats. As soon as the
multitudes perceived him, they withdrew hastily to make
room for him. In the midst of the confusion, Rewati fell
down, was trampled upon, and died. She migrated to the
fortunate seat ofTawadeintha, became a daughterofNats,
and inhabited a niche made with the most consummate
skill, and adorned with the richest materials. Her body
shone like a beautiful statue of gold, and was three
gawoots tall. Her dress exceeded in richness, variety,
and beauty all that had ever been hitherto seen.
On the following day, Rewati came from her glorious
seat to the spot where crowds of people surrounded the
body of the deceased. She approached with the dignified
countenance and majestic bearing of a queen of Nats.
greatest numbers of visitors is com- torn of burning the dead prevails
paratively small, yet, when added amongst the Hindus, the Cingalese,
together,there isaconsiderablesum, Nepaulese, Burmese, Siamese and
whichisgenerallymorethansufficient Cambodians. Though holding the
to defray all expense that may be tenetsofBuddhism,theChinesehave
incurred. This custom or system of neveradoptedthisusage. TheMaho-
voluntary contributions burdens no medans, livingin Hindustanand the
one in particular, whilst it enables countries of eastern Asia, retain the
afamilyto make a showofliberality custom of burying the dead. Bud-
which,otherwise,would almostprove dhists have doubtless received that
ruinousia manyinstances. The cus- practice from the Hindus.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
22
No one recognised her, though the eyes of all were riveted
on her person, encompassed with the splendour of Nats.
While all the spectators, overawed by the presence of
that celestial being, remained motionless with a silent
admiration, Rewati said to them, " How is it that none of
you recognise me ? I am Rewati, the nurse of the great
Thariputra. To the offering of the three golden flowers
made by me and placed at the feet of the mortal remains
of the great Rahan, I am indebted for the glory and
splendour of my present position." She explained at
great length the advantagesprocuredbydoing meritorious
actions. Having stood for awhile above the cenotaph,
whereupon they had deposited the body of the deceased,
she came down, turned three times round it, bowing down
each time, and then returned to the blissful seat of Tawa-
deintha.
Duringseven consecutive days, rejoicings, dancings, and
amusements of every description were uninterruptedly
kept upin honourofthe illustriousdeceased. Thefuneral
pile was made of scented wood ; upon it they scattered
profusely the most rare and fragrant perfumes. The pile
was ninety-nine cubits high. The corpse having been
placed upon it, fire was set to it by means of strings made
of flowers and combustibles. During the whole night
that the ceremony lasted, there was a constant preaching
of the law. Anoorouda extinguished the fire with per-
fumed water. Tsanda carefully and piously collected the
remaining relics, which were placed in a filter. " Now,"
said he, " I will go to Buddha with these relics, and lay
them in his presence." With his companion Anoorouda,
lie took, together witli the relics, the patta and tsiwaran
of the deceased, and returned to Buddiia to relate to him
all the particulars concerning the last moments of his
great disciple.
Tsanda wastheyoungerbrother ofthe greatThariputra.
It was to him that the honour belonged of being the per-
son selected to convey to l)iiddha the precious relics.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
23
When, however, he had come to the monastery, he was
unwilling to go alone into Buddha's presence. He went
first to Ananda, his intimate friend, and said to him, " My
brother Thariputra has obtained the state of Neibban.
Here are the patta, tsiwaran, and relics," exhibitingbefore
him, one after the other, those precious articles. Both
went together to Buddha's place, and laid at his feet the
patta, tsiwaran, and relics of the great disciple. Buddha,
placing the relics on the palm of his right hand, called all
the Rahans and said to them," Beloved Rahans, this is all
that remains of one who, a few days ago, was performing
wonders in your presence, and has now reached the state
of Neibban, something resembling a pure white shell.
During an a thingie and hundred thousands of worlds, he
has perfected himself by the practice of virtue. Beloved
children, he could preach the law like another Buddha.
He knew how to gain friends crowds of people followed
;
himto hearhisinstructions. Exceptingme, no one inten
thousand worlds was equal to him. His wisdom was at
once great and cheerful, his mind quick and penetrating.
He knew how to restrain his desires, and to be easily
satisfied with little. He loved retirement. He severely
rebuked evil-doers. Beloved children, Thariputra re-
nounced all pleasures and gratifications to become a
Rahan ; he always shunned strifes and contentions, as
well as long and idle conversations. His patient zeal for
the diffusion of my religion equalled the thickness of the
globe. He was like a bull, the horns of which have been
broken. My beloved Rahans, look once more atthe relics
of my wise son, Thariputra." Buddha in this manner
eulogised the virtues of the illustrious deceased in five
hundred stanzas.'
^ The custom of making funeral present legend offers repeated in-
orationsforthepurposeofeulogising stances of eulogia made to honour
distinguished individuals after their the memory of the dead. On this
demise is of the highest antiquity. occasion Buddhawould not leave to
Thesacredrecordsbearwitnessto its another the honour of extolling the
existence amongst the Jews. The extraordinary merits and transcen-

,
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
24
Ou liearino" all that Buddha had said to honour the
memory of Thariputra, Ananda was filled with sentiments
of the tenderest emotion. He could not refrain from
shedding abundant tears. Buddha quickly remarked all
thatwas taking place in his faithful and lovingattendant,
and said to him, " Ananda, on former occasions I have, in
dent excellencies of the illustrious or village, when he sees several dze-
Thariputra. But he had a higher dis of various heights raising their
object in viewwhen he exhibited to white cones capped with the gilt
theeyesoftheassembled Rahansthe crown from the bosom of beautiful
relicsofthedeceased, whichwere all groves oftall cocoa-nut trees, grace-
thatremainedofso celebrated adis- fularecapalms
,
andmassivetamarind
ciple, who had lived with them for mango, and jack trees, all loaded
so many years, and had just parted with a green and luxuriant foliage.
from them. It was impossible to When the monument is on a grand
give them a more forcible illustra- scale, niches are made in the middle
tion of the truth he had so often ofeachsideofthesquare, facing the
announced to them, that there is four pointsofthecompass. In those
nothing permanently subsisting in nichesare placedstatues ofBuddha,
this world, but that all things are exhibiting him in the usual cross-
liableteaperpetualandnever-ending legged position. The size of those
change. The stern Buddha gently religious monuments varies much in
rebukedthe amiable Ananda forthe dimensions. They range from the
signs of inordinate grief he gave on height of a few feet to the colossal
this occasion
;
because, said he, the proportionsofthetallDagonPagoda
lawofmutabilityactinguponall that at Rangoon.
surrounds us, we must ever be pre- The custom ofraising monuments
pared to be separated from what is over the ashes of religious distin-
dearest to our affections grief on guished by their virtues and extra-
;
such occasions is useless, and quite ordinaryattainments,isaveryancient
inconsistent with the principles of a one, coevalin allprobabilitywith the
wise man. first ages of Buddhism. They were
TohonourthememoryofTharipu- real tumuli, surmounted with some
tra,and perpetuatetheremembrance ornaments in the shape of a cone.
of his virtues, Buddha directed that Such ornaments are seen towering
adzedi should beerectedonthevery over nearly all the religious monu-
spot where he had heard the news ments in Burmah. Royalty, in its
of hisdeath. A dzedi is a religious head paraphernalia, and initsabode,
monument verycommon in Burmah, hasappropriatedthemtoitsownuses.
and to be seenon all rising grounds We mayat once infer that theyare
intheneighbourhoodoftowns. With- of a Hindu origin. The great mo-
in theenclosureof all monasteries, a narchs who are called Tsekiawade
dzedi is invariablyerected ; it is the kings, because they ruled over the
only purely religious building to be whole of the Dzampoudipa island,
found in Burmah. The traveller in were,accordingto Buddha'sopinion,
thatcountryisalwaysdelighted, and entitled tothe honourofadzediafter
experiences the most pleasurabli; theirdemise.
sensationsonapproachingsometown

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
25
my preachings, endeavoured to shelter your soul from the
impressions caused by such and like emotions. Two
things can alone keep us separated from .father, mother,
—
brothers, sisters, &c., in a word, from all that we most
cherish, viz., death and distance. I, though a Buddha,
have been exposed to all those changes brought on by
distance when I practised the great virtues in the soli-
tude, when I displayed wonders and spent a season in the
seat of Tawadeiutha. In those circumstances, distance
kept me far from all those that were dearest to me.
Would it not have been considered as useless, if not un-
becoming, to shed tears either on my account or that of
others ? Can there ever be a time when any, how painful
soever, occurrence may warrant wailing and lamenting ? "
With these and other considerations, Buddha soothed the
affliction of Ananda, and filled his soul with consola-
tions.
Buddha, to complete, as it were, the work of praises in
favour of his great disciple, caused a dzedi to be erected
in his honour near the entrance of the Dzetawon monas-
tery. Having satisfied the sacred duty of gratitude to-
wards the greatest of his disciples, Gaudama resolved to
leave the monastery of Dzetawon for the country of Rad-
zagio. Ananda was, as usual, directed to inform the
Rahans to hold themselves ready for immediate depar-
ture.
The most excellent Phra havingf reached Radzagfio,
which he was to visit for the last time, took his abode
into the Weloowon monastery. He had not stayed long-
in that place when the other great disciple, Maukalan,
went to Neibban. Hereare the particulars respectingthe
last moments of the illustrious companion of Thariputra.
The heterodox Rahans, who lived in a state of complete
nakedness, were extremely jealous of the popularity of
Buddha, and coveted the abundant alms that were offered
to him and his disciples. Maukalan, who was living on

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
26
the Isigili moimtain, in the cave of the dark rock, was
supposed, on account of his great attainments and pro-
found science, to be the cause of the great respect the
people paid to his master. They resolved to kill him.
For that purpose they armed five hundred robbers, and
gave them one thousand pieces of silver to peqoetrate
the horrible crime. Theassassins went twice to the cave
;
but their victim twice escaped their fury. At last, owing
to the influence of a former bad deed, Maukalan resigned
himself iuto the hands of the rufiians, who put him to
death. They beat him soseverely,that hislifelessremains
were no more than a heap of mangled flesh, which they
threw into the midst of bushes. The news of the appal-
ling murder spread rapidly through the country. King
Adzatathat had the murderers arrested. Having known
from their own confession that the naked Rahans were
the instigators of the murder, he had them likewise
arrested. In front of his palace he orderedone thousand
holes to be dug in each hole a criminal was sunk up to
;
his navel. All the ground was then overspread with
straw, which being set fire to, all the wretches soon
perished.
On hearing such news the disciples were greatly
grieved, and asked each other what might have been the
cause whicli had brought the aged Maukalan to such a
cruel end. Buddha, appearing suddenly among them,
said, " Beloved sons, what is the subject of your conver-
sation? " They replied that they were conversing on the
tragical death of their great companion. " I declare unto
you," retorted Buddha, "that Maukalan has met a well-
merited death. In one of his former existences, my be-
loved son, at the instigation of his wife, misled his aged
and blindparents into aforest, where, leavingthem alone,
he went away for awhile. On his return, affecting the
manners andvoice of ahighwayman, he killed his parents,
and threw their bodies into a thicket. For this crime he

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA. 27
has suffered the torments of hell during- one thousand
years, and has had to undergo the cruel death that has
put an end to his last existence." Having thus spoken,
he ordered that a dzedi should be erected in honour of
Maukalan near the gate of the Weloowon monastery.

28
( )
CHAPTER
II.
— — —
Voyage to Wethalie Last temptatio—n of Manh Causes of— earthquake
New inst—ructionstothe Rahans Last mealofBuddha — Hispainful
distemper Hisconversation wi — thoneoftheMallaprinces Signfor—e-
showingBuddha'scomingdeath Ar
—
rivalin theKootheinaronforest—
Buddha layshimself07t—his couch Wottders attendijig tha—t event
Instructionsto A — nanda Eulogium of Ananda by Bud — dha Conver-
sion ofThoubat LastwordsofBuddha to the Rahans Hisdeath.
Having left Radzagio, Buddha intimated to Ananda that
he wished to return to Wethalie. On his way to the
right bank of the Ganges, he arrived at a place called
Oukkatsela, where he preached on the death of his two
greatest disciples. Thence he crossed the mighty stream
and shaped his course towards Wethalie. On the day
that he entered tiie city he went in quest of his food.
Having partaken of what he had received, he called
Ananda, bade him take his mat and cushion, and follow
him to the Tsapala dzedi, where he intended to spend a
part of the day. Complying with the command, Ananda
followed Buddha, and with him went to the beautiful site
of Tsapala, to the place prepared for his master. Ananda
a])])roached J'hra, and, respectfully prostrated, said to him,
"This is, indeed, a very agreeable place." Whereupon
Buddha, rejoicing, praised the different sites of that coun-
try which were in theneighbourhood of the Wethalie city,
as well as the dzedis that adorned them, and added,
" Ananda, everywise person oughttobe earnestin perfect-
ing himself in the four laws of edeipat. Havingadvanced
in the practice of these laws, he can, if he choose to doso,
rpmriin in a state of fixity during a whole revolution of

;
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
29
nature, and even more. I, the Buddha, have become per-
fect in those laws, and I may remain as I am now during
an innumerable number ofyears." Three timesthe same
words were repeated. But Ananda, entangled as yet in
the meshes ofthe tempter Manh Nat, remained prostrated
before Buddha. It never came to his mind to entreat
him to remain longer on earth for the benefit of mortals,
who would derive the greatest advantages from his pre-
sence.
At that time Ananda rose up, with his mind troubled
by the influence of the evil one, withdrew from Buddha's
presence and went to the footof atree at a smalldistance.
He had scarcely left Buddha alone when the Nat Manh,
jDerceiving that Buddha remained alone for awhile, ap-
proached near his person, and keeping at a respectful dis-
tance, said to him, " Great, illustrious, and glorious Phra,
who preachest an excellent law, it is now time for you to
enter into the state of Neibban. You said in formertimes,
that as long as your disciples were not much advanced in
knowledge, as long as they had not obtained a thorough
command over their heart, mouth, and senses, as long as
they were still wantingin firmness anddiligence for hear-
ing and understanding the law, or unequal to the task of
preaching the law, you would not go to Neibban. Now
the Rahans, members of the assembly and your disciples,
both males and females, are thoroughly instructed in all
the parts of the law they are firm in controlling their
;
passions they can preach the law to the other mortals
;
the Nats and Brahmas have heard your preachings, and
countlessnumbers amongthem have obtainedthe deliver-
ance ; thetime, therefore, is come foryou to enter into the
state ofNeibban." Buddha knowingthe wicked one, with
his evil dispositions, replied, " Ha wretched Manh, do
!
not concern yourself about me. Ere long I will go to
Neibban."
Whilst he was near the dzedi of Tsapala, Buddha, in a
moment of perfect calmness of mind, entered into a sort

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
30
of extraordinary state of contemplation, in which, for the
first time, he mastered completely the principles of life,
and appeared as if he had abandoned life. But it ought
not to be understood that he parted with life, as a man
lets go a stone that he has in his hands ; buthe estranged
himself from the material life, renounced it, and placed
himself beyond the reach of the influence that produces
reward in the material or immaterial seats, and above
that other influence which, procuring merits or demerits,
keeps a being in the whirlpool of transmigration. As a
mit'-hty warrior on the battle-field throws down every
barrier or obstacle that he meets, so Buddha broke down
all the ties that had hitherto linked him to the state of
existence.^ At that very instant the earth trembled with
1 It is very difficult to understand conditioninwhichGaudamabrought
the extraordinary state in which himself, and which caused a terrific
Buddha placed himself on this occa- shake of the earth, is this: He
sion. It must have been a remark- parted with the life of change, of
able occurrence, since it caused a mutability, that is to say, he had
violent commolion which shook our nothing more to do with existences,
planet. The only interpretation that which, in the opinion of Buddhists,
can be put on the terms used to areproducedbytheprincipleofmuta-
describe this particular action of bility. Buddha called himselfZina,
Buddha is this: He renounced ex- or conqueror, after he had obtained
istence, that is to say, not only the the perfect masteryoverhispassions.
actual existence that he enjoyed, but We may givehim the same titleon
alsoallotherformsofexistence. He the occasion when he has obtained
severed connection with this and the mastery over existence itself.
other worlds ; he broke the ties that This last achievement is the greatest
h f a o d rm h o it f h e e x r i t s o te r n e c t e a . ine H d e hi h m ad li c n o k m e e d n to ow a o t f or a y ll to : s t e h c e u f r i i r n st g o t n h e e w se a c s o o n n d l o y ne p . repa T r h a e -
totheendofalltransmigrations. By writer iswell aware that such a lan-
the power of hiswill, he placed him- guageisat variancewith the notions
selfin the state ofcomplete isolation that the reader is familiarwith. To
from all that exists, even from self, understand its true and correct
that is to say, into Neibban, a state meaning one must be initiated into
which death was soon to realise and thedoctrinesofBuddhism.
ri;nder visible to the eyes of his dis- The preaching of the law of the
ciples. It is not death that causes a wheel, which is mentioned as one
being to reach the stateor condition cause that produces the phenomena
of Neibban, but it is the abstraction of eartlK|uake, took place, as above
from all conceivable forms of exist- related, in the Migadawon forest, or
encethatconstitutesits veryessence. theDeer'sgrove,nearBenares,inthe
The expression made use of by our very beginning of Buddha's public
author to designate the particular life, after he had left the Bodi tree.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
31
such violence that it caused the hairs of one's head to
stand on end. Then he said to all present, " I am de-
livered from the influence of the world of matter, of the
worldofpassions, andfrom everyinfluence thatcauses the
migration from one existence to another. I enjoy now a
perfect calm of mind like the mighty warrior who on
;
the field of battle has conquered all his enemies, I have
triumphed over all passions. I have mastered existence
itself by destroying the principle that causes it." These
words were uttered by Phra, lest perhaps some people
might infer that he entered into the extraordinary state
on which he mastered the elements of life, from fear
caused bythelanguage ofthe tempter, inviting him to go
forthwith to Neibban.
Ananda, having felt the earthquake, respectfully ap-
proached Buddha and prostrated himself before him.
Withdrawing then to a becoming distance, he asked him
the causes that produce the extraordinary and terrify-
ing phenomenon of earthquakes. "My son," answered
Buddha, " eight causes make the earth tremble: ist, The
earth lies on a mass of water, which rests on the air, and
the air on space ; when the air is set in motion, it shakes
the water, which in its turn shakes the earth 2d, any
;
being gifted with extraordinary powers 3d, the concep-
;
tion of Phralaong for his last existence; 4th, his birth;
5th, his becoming a Buddha 6th, his preaching the law
;
of the wheel ytli. his mastering and renouncing exist-
;
ence 8th, his obtainingthe state ofNeibban. These are
;
the eight causes of earthquakes. Ananda. a little while
after having become a Buddha, 1 was in thf sulilade of
Ouroowela, on the banks of the river Neritzara, under the
shade of a banyan-tree planted by some shepherds. The
wicked Nat came into my presence and requested me to
go forthwith to Neibban. I refused then to comply with
The preaching of the law of the transcendent truths, which, as men-
wheelis nothing elsethan the mani- tionedin foregoing pages, constitute
festation of the four sublime and theessence ofBuddha'sdoctrines.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
32
his demand, and said to him, ' Wretched Manh, my dis-
ciples, members of the assembly, either males or females,
the believers, either men or women, have notyet acquired
sufficient knowledge, prudence, and penetration, courage,
and resolution. They have not been as yet properly in-
structed in the most essential and highest articles of the
law ; they are unable to teach others : my religion is not
yet resting on a strong foundation. The time, therefore,
is not yet come for me to enter intothe state of Neibban.
Now, near this very dzedi of Tsapala, he has come anew
and told me the same thing. Do not trouble yourself,
miserable wretch, have I said to him three months
;
hence, I will obtain the state of Neibban. On this occa-
sion I have fallen into the state in which I have mas-
tered the principles of life by the means of the four laws
of edeipat.'"^
2 Theparticularsof the apparition firmly established. The edifice, in-
of the evil one, or the tempter, re- deed, was raised, but it required the
latedby Buddhahimselfto the faith- action of a finishing hand the key-
ful and amiable Ananda, show the stone was yet wanting in ; the vault
incessant efforts made by Manh to to render it complete and durable.
render abortive, to a certain extent, Manhwas aware of all that ; hence
the benevolent mission undertaken his last andwilyeffort for impeding
by Buddha to procure deliverance to thefinishingand perfectingofawork
numberlessbeings, andsujjplyothers he had vainly opposed in its begin-
with adequate means for entering ningandduring its progress.
into,and steadily following, the way Theline of distinction between the
that leads to it. He had been de- members of the assembly and the
feated in his endeavours to prevent massofthosewho merelybelievedin
Phra from leaving theworld andob- the doctrines of Buddha, without
taining the Buddhaship. He had leaving the world, is plainly drawn
been thwarted in his wicked designs by Buddha himself ; therefore, there
to weaken the effects of Buddha's can be no doubt that, from the
preachings. Hereticsofallsortshad origin of Buddhism, there existed a
been summoned to his standard, to marked difference between the body
carryonamostactivewarfareagainst of laymen and that of Rahans.
his op|)oneiits, but he had failed in .Again, the body of the perfect, or
all his attempts. Buddha had now thosewhoformedwhatmayemphati-
almost completedthegreatandbene- cally be termed the assembly, was
ficial work he had undertaken : his composedofmenandwomen, living,
religious institutions, known over a asamatterofcourse,separately,ina
vast extent of territory, and zeal- stateof continence,and subjected to
ously propagated by fervent and de- tliedisciplinary regulationswhich we
voted disciples, seemed to be now find embodied in the Wini. In Bur-

;
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
33
Ananda said to Phra " Illustrious Buddha, please to
:
remain during a whole Kalpa in this world for the benefit
of men, Nats, and Brahmas." " Ananda," replied Phra,
"your present request is too late and cannot be granted."
Three times the faithful disciple begged of his great
teacher this favour, and three times he received the same
refusal. "Do you believe, Ananda, that I know the
four ways that lead to science and wisdom, and that I
am perfect in the four laws of edeipat ? " " I do believe
it," answered Ananda. " Do you recollect, Ananda,
that a little while ago I said to you three times that he
who was perfect in the laws of edeipat could remain, if he
chose, during an entire Kalpa in this world? I added
that I Avas thoroughly acquainted with these four laws
but you remained silent, and made no demand of me to
remain longer in this world. The time for making this
request is now irrevocably past. The term of my life is
for ever fixedly determined. Now, Ananda, let us go to
Mahawon Kootagara in the forest of the sala-trees."
Having reached the place and stayed therein for a few
days, he desired his faithful attendant to go to Wethalie
and assemble allthe Rahans inthe Gnyipoora hall. When
they had all assembled in that place, Ananda informed
iiiah, vestiges of female devotees, that of man. Who could think of
living secluded from the world, are looking upon the woman as a some-
to be met with in many places, but, what inferiorbeing, when wesee her
as already noticed in a foregoing re- ranking, according to the degrees of
mark, the order of religious females her spiritual attainments, among the
has much fallen off. Its professed perfect and foremost followers of
members arefew in number, and the Buddha? Hence in those countries
e.Kteriorobservanceoftheregulations where Buddhism has struck a deep
ismuch neglected. Thecomprehen- root and exercised a great influence
sivenessof Buddhism, itstendencyto overthemanners ofnations, thecon-
bring all men to the same level, and dition of the woman has been much
allow of no difference between man improved and placed onafooting far
and man but that which is estab- superior to what she occupies in
lished bysuperiority in virtue, its ex- those countries where that religious
pansive properties, all those striking system is not the prevalent one, or
characteristics have mightily worked where it has not formed or consider-
in elevating the character of the ably influenced the customs and
>voman, and raisingit toa level with habitsofthe people.
VOL. II, C

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
34
Buddha that his order had been duly executed. Phra
went to the hall, and sat in the place prepared for him.
He then, addressing the assembly, said: "My beloved
children, the law which my supreme wisdom has dis-
covered, I have announced foryour benefit and advantage.
You have attentively and perseveringly listened to it,
firmlyadheredto its tenets,andzealously propagatedthem.
Now my religion shall last for a long period, and prove
the source of great blessings to all Nats. But to the end
thatmyreligion maylast long, shine forth with splendour,
and be productive of incalculable benefits, it is necessary
that great attention should be paid to the thirty-seven
laws from which all good works proceed.^ These laws
you have been acquainted with by my preachings ; it is
3 The Buddhists of these parts, disposition to benevolence, to dili-
following thetrackof theirancestors, gence, to attention, to steady direc-
or rather copying their writings, are tion towards what is excellent, and
fondof arbitrarydivisions in all that toconsideratewisdom.
concerns the different parts of their The fifth class comprises theJiola,
metaphysics. Buddha, on this occa- or rewards or good effects resulting
sion, alludes to thirty-seven articles, from the above inclination, viz. per-
whichmaybeconsideredasthefoun- fectbenevolence,diligence,atten , tion,
dation whereon rests philosophical steadiness in what is excellent, and
and moral wisdom. Theyare called consideratewisdom.
Bodi-pek-kera; meaning, I believe, The sixth class comprehends the
fxjints or articles of wisdom. They seven followingvirtues, whichenable
aresubdividedintosevenclasses. In manto raisehimselfveryhigh in the
the first are enumerated the four scale of perfection: — Attention, con-
subjects most deserving of attention, siderationofthelaw,diligence,equa-
viz., the body, the heart, the sensa- nimityofthesoul,constancyin good,
tions, and the law. In the second fixity,anddelight.
are described four objects extremely The seventh class comprises the
worthy of our efforts, viz., prevent- ways that lead to good and perfe—c-
ing the lawof demerits tocome into tion. They are eight in number:
existence preventing its develop- Perfectdoctrine,intention, language,
ments, wh;en it exists; causing the actions, regular mode of life, dili-
law of meritstocome intoexistence, gence, attention, and fixityin good.
andfurthering its progresswhen it is A volume might be written upon
already existing. In the third are thesethirty-sevenprinciplesor points
found likewise four points meriting of moral philosophy, bywayof com-
control, viz., one's will, one's heart, ment and explanation but wethink
;
one'sefforts, and one'sexertions. In it better to leave the reader to make
the fourth class we find enumerated hisownreflections, andrunat liberty
five pre-eminently necessary disposi- over thisbroad fieldofmetaphysics.
tions or inclinations; that is to say,

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
35
to yon to announce them to all beings. Meditate with
unremitting attention on the principles of change and
mutability. As to me, ere long I will go to Neibban
;
three months more, and this last drama shall be over."
In the morning Buddha, putting on his dress, went out
to beg his food, carryingthe patta on hisleft arm. When
he had eaten his meal, he looked with the steadiness of
an elephant over the whole country. The reason why he
cast a look like an elephant over W — ethalie is, as he
explained it to Ananda, the following: The neck-bone of
all Buddhas is not like the links of a chain, but consists
of one single solid bone
:
hence when they wish toconsider
some object lying behind they cannot turn their heads
backwards, but the whole body, like that of the elephant,
nmst follow the same motion. On this aud other occa-
sions of this kind, our Buddha had not to make any effort,
but the earth turning round, like the wheel of the potter,
brought the objectto be looked at before him. The great
city of Wethalie was within three years to be destroyed
by King Adzatathat. As Buddha had always received
many marks of respect and attention from the inhabitants
of that city, he felt the greatest commiseration for them.
His last glance was a sorrowful farewell he bade to the
devoted city. This is the motive that induced Buddha to
cast a last look over it.
Buddha went to a place called l^autoogama. He passed
successively through Hatti, Tsampou, and Appara, and
thence toBauga. In the latter place he preached the four
laws of Padesa. Summoning Ananda to his presence, he
desired him to inform the Rahans to hold themselves
ready to go to the Pawa country. Having reached that
district, he went with all his Rahans to live in a monas-
tery built in a grove of mango-trees erected by Tsonda,
the son of a wealthy goldsmith. Tsonda had previously
seen Buddha, and obtained the state of Thautapan. His
gratitude induced him to build a monastery, which, toge-
ther with the grove, he had given over to Buddha. His

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
36
arrival at that place happened on the 14th of the waxing
moon of Katson.
Informed that Phra had come to the monastery, Tsonda
repaired hastily thither, prostrated himself before him,
and having taken a seat at a becoming distance, requested
Buddha to accept the meal he would prepare for him and
all the Kahans. Buddha by his silence acquiesced in the
request. Tsonda rose up, bowed down, and turning to the
right, left the monastery. During the whole night, all
sorts of the choicest dishes were prepared. He had a
young pig, neither fat nor lean, killed, and the flesh
dressed with rice in the most exquisite manner. The
Nats infused into it the most delicious flavour. At day-
break, everything being ready, Tsonda went to the monas-
tery, and invited Buddha and all the Eahans to come and
partake of the meal that was ready for them. Buddha
rose up, and, carrying his patta, went to Tsonda's house,
where he sat in the place prepared for his reception. He
took for himself the pork and rice, but his attendants
feasted upon the other dishes. When he had eaten, he
desired Tsonda to bury in the earth the remains of the
pork and rice, because no one in the Nats' or Brahmas'
A
seats but himself could digest such a food. little while
after, Buddha was seized with a violent attack of dysen-
tery, the pain whereof he bore with the greatest patience
and composure. He suffered so much, not because of the
food he had taken, as he would otherwise have been
exposed tothe same distemper. Thepain was rather alle-
viated by the eating of the pork and rice, because the
Nats had infused therein the choicest flavour.
Buddha desired Ananda to be ready to go to the town
of Koutlieinaron. While on the way he felt very weak,
and retired undrr thi- shade of a trciv cominanding Ananda
to fold his dugout- tu sit upon. When lu^. had rested a
little, he called Ananda and said to him : "Ananda, I am
very thirsty; bring nic s(jiiic water.' Ananda replied:
"One of thi' Malla princes. ii;uip d ronkatha, has just
passed through the I\akoii(la i\er with live hundred carts,
1

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA. 37
and the water is quite muddy." The Malla priuces ruled
by turn over the country. When the time for ruling had
not yet come, or had passed, many of them devoted their
time tothe pursuit of trade. Notwithstanding this objec-
tion,Buddharepeatedthreetimestheinjunction. Ananda
at last took up Phra's patta and went to the stream to
fetch water. How great was his surprise when he found
the water clear and limpid. He said to himself: " Great
indeed is the power of Buddha, who has worked such a
wonderful change in this stream." He filled the patta
with water and brought it to his great teacher, who drank
of it.
Prince Poukatha had been a disciple of the Eathee
Alara. He came to Buddha, and said to him, whilst he
was under the shade of the tree " Great indeed is the
:
peace and calm composure of mind of the Eahans. On a
former occasion," added he, " whilst the Eathee Alara was
travelling, he went to rest under the shade of a tree, at a
small distance, by the wayside. A merchant with five
lumdredcarts happened to pass by. A man thatfollowed
at a distance came to tlie place where Alara was resting,
and inquired of him if he had seen the five hundred carts
that had just passed by. Alara replied that he was not
aware that any cart had come in sight. The man at first
suspected that Alara was unsound in his mind, buthe was
soon convinced that what he was at first inclined to attri-
bute to mental derangement was caused by the sublime
abstraction of the Eathee from all that was taking place."
Buddhahavingheardthis story, rejoined "Which is, in
:
your opinion, the more wonderful occurrence, to see a man
in his senses and awake not to notice the passing of five
hundred carts or even of one thousand, or to see another
man, equally awake and in the enjoyment of his mental
faculties, who did not hear the violence of a storm, a heavy
fall of rain, accompanied with loud peals of thunder and
uninterrupted flashes of hghtning ? Tn former times, I,
the Buddha, was sitting under a small shed. A most

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
38
violent storm came on peals of thunder resounded more
;
awfully than the roaring of the sea, and lightnings seemed
to rend the atmosphere in ever}' direction. At that time
two brothers were ploughing in a field with four bullocks.
A
They were all killed, men and bullocks, by lightning.
man came to me whilst I was walkingin front of the shed,
and told me that he came to see the accident that had just
happened, and asked me some particulars concerning it.
I answered him that I was not aware that any storm had
raged near this place, nor any accident attended it. The
stranger inquired of me whether I was asleep ; or if not,
whether I was in possession of my senses. I answered
him that 1 was not asleep, and that I was in the perfect
enjoyment of my mental and physical faculties. My
answer made a powerful impression upon him he thought
:
within himself tliat great and wonderful is the -power of
Thauiabat, which procures to the Rahans such an imper-
turbable calm of mind, which cannot be disturbed by the
mightiest convulsions of nature. Now, Prince Poukatha,
in whom do you think that the greatest calm of mind has
prevailed?" "Most excellent Phra," replied the prince,
"the great respect I bore formerly unto the Rathee Alara
has disappeared like the chaff before the wind, and run
out like the water of a rapid strearju. I am now like a
man to whom the true road has been pointed out, who has
discovered hidden things, and who has a shining light
before him. You have announced to me the true law,
which has dispelled the cloud of ignorance and brought
happiness and calm to my hitherto disturbed soul. From
this moment I believe in Buddha, the law, and the assem-
blv. and tothe end of my life I will ever remain abeliever."
The 1^-ince called a young man, and directed him to go
and bring two beautiful and rich pieces of cloth having
the colour of pure gold thread. When they had been
brought over, the prince, holding them in his hand, said
:
" most glorious Buddha, these pieces of cloth I have
occasionally worn: they are in colour like gold, and the

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
39
tissue is of the finest description please to accept them
;
as an offering I make to you." Phra desired him to pre-
sent one of thepiecesto himself, andthe otherto Ananda,
that his merits might be greater, since the offering would
be made to Buddha and to the assembly in the person of
Ananda. This attention in favour of Ananda was also
intended toreward him forhis unremittingexertions dur-
ing the twenty-five years he had served Buddha with the
utmostrespect,care, and affection, withouthavingreceived
any adequate return for his services. Buddha preached
afterwards the law to the priuce. When the instruction
was over, Poukatha believed in, and firmly adhered to, the
three precious things, and became a sincere convert. He
rose up, prostrated himself before Buddha, turned on the
right, and departed.
Ananda, after the prince's departure, brought the two
dresses to the great Phra, who put one on his shoulders,
whilst the other was girded round his waist. His body
appeared shining like a flame. Ananda was exceedingly
surprised. Nothing of this kind had as yet happened.
" Your exterior appearance," said he to Buddha, " is at
once white, shining, and beavitiful above all expression."
"What you say, Ananda, is perfectly true. There are
two occasions when my body becomes extraordinarily
beautiful and shining
:
thefirstwasonthenightI obtained
the supreme intelligence and the second now, when I
;
am about to enter into the state of Neibban. Doubtless,
Ananda, on the morning after this very night, in a
corner, near the Koutheinaron city, that belongs to the
princes Alalia, in the forest of sala-trees, I will go to
Neibban. The shining light emanating from my body is
the certain forerunner of this great event."
Ananda, summoned by Buddha to his presence, re-
ceived the order to move to the banks of the Kakouda
stream.* Having reached the place, Buddha descended
•» The Kakouda streamwasoneof Gundak. It is at present driedup,
the arms or channels of the little but up to this day are to be seen

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
40
into the stream, bathed, and drank some water. Thence
he directed his steps towards a grove of mango-trees.
Ananda had remained to dry the bathing-robes of his
several marks indicating the ancient The forest which was close to the
bedofthatstream. vicinityof Koutheinaronwas planted
Theriver Hiranyawati isoneofthe with trees which the Burmans call
cliannels ofthe little Gundak, which ingien,theBengalies,sal. Thelatter
was flowing a -little west of the city name is evidently the Sanscrit and
ofKoutheinaron. TheGundakbeing Pali appellation of the tree, which
very winding in its course, and the the Burmese author has retained but
mass of water being sometimes very once or twice throughout the course
considerable, there is to be seen a of his work, and wrote Sala. It is
great number of old channels, now theShorea robusta.
dried up, oroccasionallyfilled in the Thefourlawsofedeipat, which, in
time when inundation is prevailing. theopinion of Buddha, can conferto
For this reason, it becomes difficult him who knows and possesses them
in some instances to follow the Chi- the extraordinary privilege of an in-
nesepilgrim, HwenThsang, through definitely prolonged existence, are,
his minute and accurate description absolutepoweroverthewill,absolute
of the places he has visited. The poweroverthemind, absolute power
mounds of ruins which stud the of exertion, absolute power over the
ground maynot be always correctly means to attain any object. How
identified, because they are not at can a man, in the present state of
present, relativelyto the river, in the existence, obtain the possession of
same position as that mentioned in such a power? Theonlywaythat a
t h h is ere in a t r e e res h t e i r n e g a i n t d ine t r h ar e y r . e so Ho m w e ev r e e r m , - f B o u l d l d o h w i i s n t g: h — as A to pe a r c f c e o c u t nt be f i or ng i , t is ha t v h - e
nants of the old channels which are ing estranged himself from all pas-
sufficienttoguidesafelythesure and sions, from matter and its con-
patient Government Archaeological comitant influences, solely by the
Surveyor, who now does so much, powerandenergyofhiswill,acquires
with the assistance derived from the a freedom from all impediments, an
books of the two Chinese pilgrims, unbounded liberty of motion, and a
to find out and identify on the spot lightness and swiftness which enable
mostofthe placesand localities men- him to do all that he pleases. He is
tioned in the Buddhist writings. It independent of the elements ofthis
is not a little surprising that we world, which can no more offer ob-
should haveto acknowledgethe fact stacles and resistance to his wishes.
that the voyagesof two Chinese tra- Several instances of something ap-
vellers, undertaken in the fifth and proaching tothose wonderful attam-
seventh centuries of our era, have ments have been mentioned in the
done more to elucidate the history course of this work. We have seen
andgeographyofBuddhisminIndia, how those much advanced in perfec-
thanall that hashitherto been found tioncouldraisethemselvesveryhigh,
inthe Sanscrit and Pali booksof In- and travel through the air with an
diaandtheneighbouringcountries. almostincredible velocity. This was
The young religious who is called butthebeginningof farsuperiorand
Tsanda was the younger brother of transcendent qualifications obtained
Thariputra. Heseemstohaveshared onlybythose that had made greater
with Anandathehonourof attending progress in science, in virtue, and in
on Buddha's person. tlie renouncing of all things ; in a

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA. 41
master. Phra called the Rahan Tsaucla, and directed him
to foldin fourhis dugout, because hewished torest. The
order having- been complied with, Buddha sat down, lying
on his right side, with the solemn and fearless appearance
of a lion. During his short sleep Tsanda watched by his
side. Ananda soon came up. Buddha called him, and
said, "The meal which the goldsmith's son has prepared
for me, which I have eaten, is my last meal. He is, for-
sooth, much grieved because of the illness that has come
upon me afterhaving eaten athis place.^ Go now tohim.
word, by thosewhohadmasteredthe their opponents by reminding them
fourlawsofedeipat. thatthe founderoftheircreed, whom
MahawonKootagarameansthehall they so much revered and exalted,
oftheupperstoryinthegreat forest. had diedfromtheeffectsofhishaving
Not far from Wethalie there was a indulged too much in pork. About
monasteryofgreatcelebrity,situated twenty-twoyearsago,whenthewriter
in a forest of sala-trees. It had, at was in Burmah, he chanced to meet
least, an upper story, in which was with ashrewd oldChristian, who, by
the hall where Gaudama often the way, was fonder of disputing
preached to his disciples and to the about religion than paying regard to
people. the practice thereof. He boasted of
5 The meal Buddha partook of iu havingathiscommanddeadlyweapons
companywithhisdisciplesatTsonda's against Buddhists, andunanswerable
residence is the last repast he ever argumentstobearwithan irresistible
made. The violent distemper which forceon thevitalpartsoftheircreed.
followed immediatelyis not, says the The chief one, which he always
authorofthelegend, tobe attributed brought forward with a Brahminical
to thefood he took onthis occasion. scorn and laugh, was that Gaudama
Onthecontrary,thatveryfood,owing had diedfromhishavingeaten pork.
to the virtue infused therein by the Healwaysdidit withso much mirth
agency of Nats and Brahmas, was andwit that hispoorignorant adver-
ratheran antidoteagainst the illness saries were completelyoverawed and
that was to come inevitably upon effectually silenced by his bold and
Phra's person. Previous to the dis- positive assertion, and left to him
solution of his bodily frame, it was uncontested the field of battle, and
decreed that Buddha should suffer. allowed him tocarryawayundisputed
No occurrence could ever cause or the palm of victory. This way of
avert thistragicalcircumstance. He arguing may prove a very amusing
had foreseen it, and with perfect one,but itcan neverbeapprovedof,
resignation submitted to what was as error is never to be combated by
absolutely to happen. In the early another error or a false supposition.
days of Buddhism, when a deadly TheBurmesetranslatorwasdoubtless
antagcnism with Brahminism began awareof theweakside offered tothe
to fill the peninsula of Hindustan attacks of malignant opponents by
with endless disputes between the the unpleasant distemper that fol-
supportersofthe rival systems. Brah- lowedthe last meal of Buddha. He
mins, with a cutting sneer, insulted strenuously labours to defend the

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
42
and make him acquainted with the merits he has gained
in making an offering to me. Two meals that I have
taken during this existence are equally deserving o£ the
o-reatest rewards. The first was the Nogana, served up to
me a little while before I obtained first the Neibban of
Kiletha, or the destruction of passions, and subsequently
the supreme intelligence the secondisthe onejust offered
;
character of his hero by proving, in the way of alms will secure to him
the best way he can, that such a countless advantages in future ex-
bodily disorder was necessarily to istences. Those favours, which he
take place, in order to set in relief anticipates to enjoyhereafter, areall
the patience, composure, and other of a temporal nature, relating only
sterling virtues of the founder of to health, pleasures, riches,honours,
Buddhism. The text of the legend and a long life either in the seat of
has been readover severaltimeswith manorin theseatsofNats. Suchis
thegreatestattention,forthepurpose the opinion generally entertained by
of ascertaining the reasons put for- all Buddhistsinourdays. Talapoins
ward to account for such an occur- make the preaching of the law con-
rence,but the result has proved un- sistchiefly in enumerating themerits
satisfactory. A thick veil wraps in andrewards attending the bestowing
complete obscurity this curious of almsonpersonsdevotedto a reli-
episode of Buddha's life. All that gious mode of life. In this respect
t c h a a n t be Bu sa d i d d h i a st s hi h s o : ul i d tw b a e sp vi r s e i o t r e d d ai w n i e t d h t is he ce p r r t a a c i t n i l c y al mo r s e t sul b t en o e f fi t c h i e a i l r t s o er t m h o e n m s -
a most painful distemper ere he selves. Thespiritually-minded Bud-
a p t e t n a e i d n . ed Neibban ; and so it hap- d co h n a cu s p e i e s m c s en t c o e ha a v n e d le c v o e v ll e e t d ou a sn b e l s o s w b a y t
To prove that the eating of pork opcalystatingthatalmshavenotthe
had nothingto dowiththedistemper power to stem the current of de-
that followed, we have the authority merits, togive rise andenergytothe
ofGaudamahimself, whocommended principleofmerits, orto leadtowis-
thedelicacyand flavour of that dish, dom, which enables man to weaken
and placeditonthesamefootingwith gradually concupiscence, anger, and
the delicious Nogana he ate on the ignorance,and to open and prepare
morning of the day previous to his the path to Neibban. True know-
obtaining the Buddhaship. He de- ledge,attended by tlie practiceofthe
sired his ever-faithful attendant, virtues peculiar to those who have
Ananda, to repairto Tsonda's place, entered intothecurrent of perfection
andexplain tohim the great rewards by following the four Meggas, can
reserved to him for having made the aloneenableamanto reachNeibban.
offering ofsuchanexcellentfood. Manyexcellent practicesenforced by
ThepracticalworkingoftheBuddh- Buddhismhave, so tospeak, been re-
istic system relatively to almsgiving duced to a mere lifeless skeleton by
deserves some notice. A man be- ignorance and passions, but they
stowsalms on the Rahans, or spends would appear in a very different
money towards promoting some reli- light were they animated with the
gious purpose he does so with the spirit that has brought them into
belief that wha ; t he bestows now in existence.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA. 43
to me by the goldsmith's sou, when I ate the dish of rice
and pork. That is the last food I will ever take iiutil 1
attain the state of Neibbau, that is to say, the Neibban of
Khandas, or the destruction of all the supports of exist-
ence. Both these meals were excellent, and are deserving
of an equal reward ; viz., beauty, a long life, happiness, a
large crowd of attendants, the happiness ofthe Nats' seats,
and all sorts of honours and distinction. Such are the
merits reserved to Tsonda, the son of the goldsmith go
;
andmentionthemtohim,thathissorrowmaybeassuaged."
Gaudama uttered on this occasion the following stanzas:^
6 The observance of the five pre- mulated in thoseblissfulregions, and
cepts incumbent upon all Buddhists proffered with an ever-renewed pro-
is thefoundationwhereupon is to be fusion to theirfortunate inhabitants.
erectedthespiritual edifice ; it is the ThevividimaginationofAsiaticshas,
first step towards the great ways one would say, exhausted its stores
leading to perfection; it is prepara- in picturingwith an amazingvariety
tory for the great exercise of medi- the riches to be possessed there. It
tation, bywhichtruewisdom may be would be ofno utility to attempt to
acquired. The faithful who observe giveacompendiousnarrativeofwhat
thefive precepts and the three addi- we meet with in Buddhistic composi-
tional counsels show that faith is tionsrespectingthoseregions. Suffice
living in their hearts, and give un- itfor ourpurposeto saythat the dis-
mistakable marks of their zeal in tinctionof sexesremainsin theNats'
the practice of religion. They are countries. In the tw-o lowest seats
real Upasakas, or laymen, fervently connection takes place between the
adhering to and taking refuge in sexes, butno procreationeverresults
Buddha, the law, and the assembly; from it; in the third seats the Nats
buttheycannottakerankamong the of different sexes are fully gratified
membersoftheassemblyorThanga. by a simple kiss; in the fourth, by
Practiceofandprogressinmeditation the touch of the hand ; in the fifth,
canalone usher an Upasakaintothe bymerelylookingateachother ; and
sanctuaryoftheperfect. inthe sixth, by themerefact oftheir
The rewards destined to thefaith- being in the same place, uponwhich
ful after their death are exactly pro- wemaymake twoobservations. The
portionate to their merits and the first is that pleasures thereinenjoyed
realworthof theirdeeds. The seats losetheircoarseness,andbecomemore
of Nats, placed immediately above refinedandmoreperfectinproportion
the seat of men, but under the si.x- asthe seatsaremore elevated. The
teenseatsreservedtothe perfect, are greaterarethemeritsoftheUpasaka
opened to the pious Upasaka who in this life, the higher is the seat he
migrates from the seat of probation is destined to occupy, and the more
and trial. The nature of the plea- refined are the pleasures and enjoy-
sures enjoyed in the Nats' seats are ments allotted to him. Hence our
all referable to the senses. All that Gaudama having, during the exist-
can be imagined best fitted for the enceprecedingthislast one,practised
delectation of the five sensesisaccu- moral virtues of the highest order,

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
44
"Alms-deeds can defend from and protect against the
influence and the sources of demerits, which are man's
true enemies. He alone who is full of merits and wisdom
shuns evil doings, puts an endto concupiscence, anger, and
ignorance,andreachesNeibban." Buddha,callingAuanda,
said to him, " Let us now go to thebank of theriver Hig-
narawati, in the forest of sala-treesbelonging to theMalla
princes." Attended by a crowd of Rahans, he went to
the bank of the stream. The forest was on a tongue of
land, encircled on three sides by the river. "Ananda,"
said Buddha, "you seethose twoloftytrees on the skirt of
the wood go and prepare a resting-place for me between
;
those two trees, in such a way that, when reclining there-
upon, my head should be turned towards the north. The
couch must be arranged in such a manner that one ex-
tremity may be near one tree, and the other extremity
close to the opposite tree. Ananda, I am much fatigued,
anddesire to rest." Though Buddha's strength was equal
to that ofa thousand koudes of black elephants, it forsook
him almost entirely from the time he had eaten the dish
of Tsonda's rice and pork. Though the distance from the
]-)lace of Pawa to tlie forest of sala-trees in the district of
Koutheiuaron isbut three gawots, hewas compelled torest
in traversing it twenty-five times, and it was by dint of
migrated to Toocita, the fourth seat merit held out to them for keeping
of Nats. The secondobservationis, up their zeal in bestowing alms,
that the duration of the enjoyments Theyadmirablysucceedin obtaining
in the Nats' seats increases in an theirobjectwithmostoftheirhearers,
a sa r y i , th t m h e e ti p c l a e l as p u r r o e g s re o s f si t o h n e ; se t c h o a n t d is sea t t o d It el c u a d n e n d ot fo b l e lo d w e e n r i s ed of that Bu t d h d os h e a po a o r r e
last twiceaslongas thoseof thefirst fully convincedofall that is narrated
or lowest seat. Those of the third to them byTalapoins respecting the
.seat lasttwiceaslongasthoseofthe Nats' seats. Such is the implicit
second,andsoontothelastorhighest faith of the mass of the Buddhists.
seat. One may occasionally meet with a
In the sermons that theTalapoins few individuals who laugh at those
address to the peoplefor stirring up fables, but these are looked upon in
their zeal chiefly in making alms to no better light than that of ration-
them, theyare mostfluent and abun- alists orfreethinkersbythe orthodo.x
dant in the promises of rewards in portion ofthecommunity.
theNats' seats, asapowerful induce-

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
45
great exertions that he reached the place after sunset.
Four places along the road from Pawa to Koutheinaron
became subsequently celebrated by the resort of many
pilgrims who visited them.
—
[Eemai'ks oftlic Burmese Translator. It has been often
asked why Phra allowed his body to experience fatigue.
The reason of his conduct was to convey instruction to all
men, and to make them fully prepared to bear pain and
sickness. Should any one ask why Buddha exerted him-
self so much to go to Neibban in that particular place, it
shouldbe answeredthat Buddha saw three reasons foract-
ingin the manner he did. ist. To preach thegreat Sooda-
thana. (This is the story of a prince called Maha Sou-
dana, who ruled over the country of Kousawatti. At the
conclusion Buddha declares that in that great prince the
law of mutability has acted throughout his life with an
irresistible force while, as for himself, he now delights at
;
being emancipated from its thraldom, and longs to be
freed from theprison of his body.) 2d. Toinstruct Tbou-
bat and lead him to perfection. 3d. To secure that the
disputes that were to arise on account of the division and
possession of his relics should be quieted by the Pounha
Dauna, who would fairly and jieaceably effectuate the
partition of those sacred remains.]
Phra, having reached the couch, lay down on his right
side with the noble composure and undaunted fearlessness
of a lion.' The left leg was lying directly on the right
" The posture assumedby Buddha we mustconfess that that art iswith
at this last stage of his life has sup- them yet in its infancy. The huge
plied the subject of an artistic com- idols I havemetwitharenevermade
position to the Southern Buddhist of wood or hewed stones, but are
sculptors. A slatue representing built up with bricks. The artist,
Phra in that reclining position is to havingmadein thiswaythe principal
be seen in almost every pagoda. parts of the statue, covers the whole
Some of these statues are made on with a thick coat ofmortar, the soft-
truly gigantic proportions. I have ness of which enables him without
measured one that was forty-five feet muchlabourtoput thefinishinghand
long. If we take such rough works to his work. These statues are in-
asexhibitingtheamount of skill pos- variably made after a certain pattern
sessedbynativesintheartofcarving, belonging to the antiquity, and toan

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
46
one but in order to avoid pain and the accompanying
;
trouble, the situation of the two legs was such as to pre-
vent the immediate contact of the two ankles and knees.
The forest of sala-trees lies at the south-west of the city
of Koutheinaron. Should any one wish to go to the city
from the forest, he must first go due east, and then turn
north. The place, therefore, where Phra stood was a
tongue of land, surrounded on three sides by the river.
AVhen Buddha was reclining on the couch, the two sala-
trees became suddenly loaded with fragrant blossoms?
which gently dropped above and all round his person, so
as almost to cover it. Not only these two trees, but all
those ofthat forest, and alsothose in ten thousand worlds,
exhibited the same wonderful and graceful appearance.
All the fruit-trees yielded out of season the best fruits
theyhad everproduced theirbeauty and flavour exceeded
;
all that had ever been seen. The five kinds of lilies shot
forth from the bosom of the earth, and from every plant
and tree they displayed to the astonished eyes the most
;
ravishing sight. T'he mighty mountain of Hymawonta,
which is three thousand youdzanas in extent, shone with
all the richness of the colours of the peacock's tail. The
Nats, who watclied over the two ingien or sala-trees,
showered down without interruption the most fragrant
epoch when the art was yet in its appearance, andcapable ofreceiving
very infancy : theyare, in an artistic a most perfect polish. About three
point of view, the worst, rudest, and mileswest of the old andruined city
coarsest attempts at statuary I have ofTsagain isaplacewherethemanu-
cver seen. Gold is, however, pro- facturing ofmarbleidolsiscarriedon
fusely lavished on those shapeless toagreate.xtent. Thestoneusedby
and formless works. The big idol the carvers is brought from a place
above referred to was covered with north of Amerapoora, where it is
gold, that istosay, gilt from head to abundant. It is soft, transparent,
•^eet. white,andsometimes,whenpolished,
Idols of smaller dimensions, those e.xhibits a slightly bluishappearance.
in particular representing Buddha The instruments used by the artists
silting in a cross-legged position, in arcsiniijleand few. Were it not for
the attitude of meditation, are like- thecustom which obligesthem to fol-
wise wretched sijccimens of art. A low always the same patterns, the
great manyaremade ofasoft stone, Burmese workmen would much im-
almost white, resembling marble in prove in thatbranch ofthefinearts.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
47
flowers. From the seats of Nats, the flower Mandarawan,
which grows on the banks of the lake Mandawan, and
glitters like the purest gold, with leaves expanding like
an umbrella, was showered down by the Nats, together
with powder of sandal-wood and other odoriferous plants.
The Nagas and Galongs, joining the Nats, brought from
their respective seats all kinds of flowers and perfumes,
which they let drop like dew over and about Buddha's
sacred person. Phra, seeing the wonderful display per-
formed by men, Nats, Nagas, and Galongs, to do him
honour, and hearing the sweet accents of Nats' voices,
singing his praises, called Ananda and said to him, " You
witness all that display^ which is intended to do me
8 IfBuddha ever deservedthe sur- called mydisciple. Myreligion can
nameofsage,itwasassuredlyonthis restfirmlyonly onsuch solid founda-
occasion that he entitled himself to tion.
such an honourable distinction. All Theseexpressionsmakeeveryreader
nature reversed its course on his ac- understandthat,inBuddha'sopinion,
count : wonders of the mostextraor- religion is not a mere theory, teach-
dinary character loudly proclaimed ing fine moral precepts, destined to
his supereminent excellencies : the excite avain admiration in themind,
i m n os e t xt e o x l a l l i t n e g d h b i e s in t g r s an un s i c t e e n d de t n h t eir me v r o i i t c s e , s o m r or e a li l cit an us d el p e r s a s ct a i p c p a l l au s s y e s s te ; m, but ma i k t i is ng a
andshowing theirunboundedrespect man acquainted with the duties he
for his person ; all that could dazzle has to perform in order to shun vice
theeye, pleasetheear,andflatterthe andpractise virtue. Nothing canbe
heart, was displayed on an unparal- more explicit and positive than the
leled scale to do honour to himwho notions he entertains of religion.
was about to leave this terrestrial They are worthy of the founder of a
abode. Buddha, however, solemnly religioussystem nowbelievedandad-
declares, and unhesitatingly says to mitted,withmoreorless considerable
Ananda, that such a displayis infin- variety, by nearly one-fourth, or at
itely below his merits and perfec- least one-fifth, of the great human
tions, and can bear no comparison family. It must be admitted that
with his fathomless wisdom and the high religious sense entertained
boundlessknowledgeoftruth. Such by Buddha,andcommunicated in all
things,inhisopinion, aremereexter- its purity to his immediate disciples,
nals, quite destitute of substantial has almost vanished away in all
worth ; theyconfer no realhonourto BuddhistCDuntries. With thepeople
him. They, adds he, who truly do religion consists in certain exterior
honour to me are thosewhopractise observances, such as giving alms to
allthatisenjoined bythemostexcel- theTalapoins,buildingpagodas,and
lentlaw ; nothingshort ofthe obser- making offerings during the three
vance of the lawcan please me ; the monthsespeciallyconsecrated toreli-
practiceof the virtuesleadingtoper- gious duties. The influence of reli-
fection alone give the right to be gious teachers, owing to ignorance

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
48
honour; it is not as yet worthy of me, who possess the
knowledge of the most sublime law. No one can be my
true follower, or accomplish the commands of the law, by
such a vain and outward homage. Every Rahan or Ka-
haness, every believer, man or woman, who practises the
excellent works leading toperfect happiness, these are the
persons that render me a true homage, and present to me
a most agreeable offering. The observance of the law
alone entitles to the right of belonging to my religion.
Ever remember this, Ananda, and let every believer in
my religion act up to it."
Why did Buddha, on this last occasion, lay little stress
on the offerings that were made, whilst on former occa-
sions he had much extolled the innumerable merits to be
derived from the making of offerings? The reason ofhis
conduct was to give every one to understand that religion
could not subsist unless by the practice of all the duties
it commands, and that it would soon disappear were it
supported only by alms-deeds, offerings, and other out-
ward ceremonies. Alms-deeds are px'oductive of great
rewards, but the practice of virtue alone secures to reli-
gion a prolonged existence.
At that time an illustrious Rahaness, named Oupala-
andwantofzeal, maybe thought by But, besides, the religious element
manyto be almost null,andscarcely almost predominates in the body of
d fe h l i t sts b . y t T he wo ma c s a s u e s s es o , f h n o o w m e i v n e a r, l s B e u e d m - t t h h e e c p iv e i o l pl l e a , ws a ; nd it a m c u t s s t in b di e re a c l t l ly ow u e p d on a
to be the generators and supporters greatshareofinfluencein all thatre-
of the religious sentiment that infiu- gards their morals. It is, therefore,
encesthepeople,—education,and the topolitical institutionsthatBuddhism
political institutions. The male por- owes much forthecontinuationofits
tion of the communityis brought up existence in these regions. Were it
in the monasteriesby the Phongyies. deprivedofsuch a powerful support.
All the books that are put into their there is every reason to believe that
hands, and most of those that they it could not perhaps long retain its
subsequently read, are treatises on hold over the masses, when regularly
religioussubjects. Thissystemkeep.s and extensively attacked by the fol-
up, inawonderfulmanner,theknow- lowers of another system. But the
ledge of religion, which exercises a firstcause isby far theweightierand
great controloverthe actionsofindi- themore influential,
viduals, and regulates their conduct.

;
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
49
wana," at a singleword from Buddha, loweredher fanand
went to sit at a certain distance. Ananda, who had seen
this Rahaness attending assiduously on Buddha's person
during more than twenty seasons, was surprised at seeing
that, without any apparent reason, she had been desired
on that occasion towithdrawto a distance. Phra, reading
in the soul of Ananda hisinnermostthoughts, said to him,
" Ananda, I am not displeased with Oupalawana but her
;
body being of a very large size, it prevents the myriads of
Nats that have come from ten thousand worlds to see and
contemplate me on this supreme moment. The Nats can
see through the bodies of the generality of men, but this
9 In the first edition of this work rightbankoftheIrrawaddy,aboutfive
thewriterhad made an error in sup- miles north ofTsagain. It contains
posing Oupalawana to have been a about forty or fifty inmates. Some
male religious. Another palm-leaf of them belongtogoodfamilies, and
manuscript that he has consulted reside in the house for a few years,
leavesnodoubtaboutherrealcharac- after which they return into their
ter. Shewas,amongthefemalebody home. That house is under the
of religious, the disciple of the left special protection of the king, who
and Kama, who had been for many supplies the nuns with all the neces-
years the first wife of King Pimpa- saries oflife. In thevalleyofTavoy
thara, was the disciple of the right. asmallconventalsohasbeenpointed
Oupalawana belonged to a distin- out tothewriter. Itwas situatedon
guished family of Kapilawot. The a beautiful spot, west of the river.
female portion of the Thanga or When he went to see it, hewassur-
assembly was constituted after the prised to meetwith two or three old
mode of the Rahans. Thariputra women, habited in the canonical
and Maukalan were respectively the dress,whoappeared tobewretchedly
disciples ofthe right andof the left. poor and slovenly in their habits.
Oneoftheduties ofthe Rahaness of The house was in every respect in
theleftwastofan Buddha on certain keepingwiththe exterior appearance
occasions, and render to him such of the tenants. The nuns do abso-
services as were compatible with her lutely no work, except in certain
sex. The order of nuns in Burmah localities where they try to do away
in ourdays hasfallen verylow. In- with a portion oftheirtime in clear-
stead ofthe yellowcolour, theyhave ing the weeds which grow so luxu-
adoptedthewhiteonefortheirdress, riantly in the enclosure of some
which, :n other respects, resembles famouspagoda. Theyhavenoschools
thatofthePhongyies. Theirheadis to teach girls the rudiments ofread-
shaved. They are to be seen in the ing and writing. They are on this
neighbourhoodofpagodas,andinthe head greatly behind the Buddhist
streets, going about to beg the food monks, who have assumed to them-
requiredfortheir maintenance. The selves the great and important task
only large convent of those nuns of teaching boys in tlie towns and
which I have ever met is one on the villages.
VOL. II. D

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
50
power falls short with persons much advanced in merits.
I therefore desired her to remove a little far, that the
Nats might not be angry at not seeing my person."
Ananda put a great many questions to Buddha, which
are related at full length in the Parinibana Thoots.
He asked him, among other topics, how the Rahans
were to behave when women should resort to their monas-
teries.^*^
"Ananda,"answeredBuddha, "a Rahan,desirous
10 Thefounder ofBuddhismshows solution given to them, &c. On
himself on this particular subject a such occasions the spiritual adviser
consummatemoralist. Hewhocould is nevertobe left alone, but he must
have spoken as he did on this truly besurroundedbysomeofhisbrethren
delicate point musthavebeen deeply or disciples, at all times very nume-
versed in the knowledge of human rousinthemonasteries.
nature, and thoroughly acquainted It is not without interest to place
with its frailties and weaknesses. one's self in the centre of the Bud-
Buddha desired to maintain the dhistic system, and examine there-
members of the assembly in a state from the motives that have induced
of spotless purity. To attain that Buddha to enjoin celibacyon all the
desirable object he raised thestrong- membersoftheassembly,andenforce
est barrier against the wildest pas- it with the utmost rigour by all the
sion of the heart. No virtue, in means that the profoundest moralist
his opinion, can withstand the in- could devise.
cessantassaultsdirectedagainstitby The philosophy of Buddhism has
daily and familiar intercourse with for its primarj' object to lead man
persons of another se.x. He would into the way of freeing himself from
have, ifpossible, the inmate ofacell the influence producedupon the soul
in a monastery out of the reach of by exterior objects, through the me-
temptation itself; he knows that the diumorchannel ofthesenses. That
best tactics against such an enemy influence sets in motion the various
do not consist in boldly meeting the passions which darken the intellect
adversary, but rather in carefully and trouble the heart, opposing an
avoiding encounter with him, ma- insuperable barrier to the acquire-
noeuvring in such a way as to keep ment and intuition of truth, and to
far from him. Hence idle conversa- the progress towards the state of
tions with female visitors are not quiescence, so ardently coveted and
only forbidden in a most positive longed for by every true Buddhist.
manner, but theverysight ofwomen No one is ripe for the state of Neib-
is tobe, ifpossible, avoided. When ban as longasheretainsaffection for
duty shall oblige a recluse to come things without self. The last and
face to facewith the enemy, it is his greatesteffortofwisdom istheeman-
boundenobligationtokeepatasgreat cipation of self from every possible
a distance from female visitors as influence created and produced by
practicable. The subjectofthe con- objects or things distinct from self.
versation ought tobe of a purelyre- Concupiscence,asthemeaningofthe
ligious character ; some portions of word implies, is that disposition of
thelawmaybeexpounded, doubtsof thesoul tosearchafter, long for, and
conscience may be proposed, and a cleave to things placed without self.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
51
to free himself from the sting of concupiscence and keep
his heart firm and steady, ought to have his door shut,
and never look at the women coming to the monastery or
Such a disposition is diametrically ismuchextolledforhavingcome out
opposed to the perfect independence fromthenetofpassions. Hisvictory
aimed at by a perfect Buddhist, and over concupiscence is repeatedly al-
leads to results the very reverse of luded toasthegreatestofallachieve-
thosetobearrived at; itretainsman ments. Themaster,therefore,having
in the vortex of never-ending exis- laid such stress on this favourite
tences, and precludes him from the andimportant maxim, could not but
possibilityof ever reaching the state preachandenjoin it on all his future
of Neibban. Concupiscence, taken imitatorsanddisciples. The earliest
in a more restricted and limited records of Buddhism bear testimony
meaning, signifyingthepropensityto to the paramount importance at-
theindulgenceofsensualpleasuresby tached to the practice of chastity.
the union of sexes, must ever prove It has ever been considered as an
thegreatestobstacle in thewaylead- essential requirement in all those
ing to perfection, inasmuch as it fos- that have desired to follow the foot-
ters in men the strongest affection to stepsofBuddhaandimitatehismode
external objects. of life. No qualificaton, ever so
Buddhaisgreat,inhisownopinion, greatandshining, couldbe admitted
because he has conquered all pas- asasubstituteforchastity. Science,
sions, notbycurbing themunder the talent, zeal, and fervour could never
yoke ofreason, butby rooting them entitleanindividualtothe distinction
out of his very being. When he of member of the assembly of the
wishedtobecomeanascetic,heprac- perfect without having previously
tised at first self-renouncing, not given up the gratification ofsensual
merely by giving up riches, palaces, pleasures. Independently of what is
dignities and honours, but chiefly found written on this subject in the
and principallybydenyingto himself Wini,orbookofdiscipline,iheopinion
andforever theenjoymentofsensual ofthe Buddhist public ison thissub-
pleasures. A firm and unshaken re- ject positive, universal, and absolute.
solution of parting for everwith his He who leaves the condition of lay-
wife andconcubines, andliving in a mantobecome a religious must live
perpetualcelibacy,wasconsideredas in a state of perfect continence. An
a preliminary and essential step for infraction of the regulations on this
enteringupon the courseoflife ofa point islooked upon with horrorand
sincere searcher after truth and per- indignation by the people at large.
fection. During the six years he The guilty individual is inexorably
spent in solitude, he laboured with expelled from the religious house,
unremitting zeal for securing to the afterhavingbeen previously stripped
spiritualprincipleanundisputedcon- of his religious dress and subjected
troloverthematerialone, bystifling to a humiliating degradation in the
thevehemenceandardourofhispas- presence of the assembled members
sions. His austerities and mortifica- ofthecomnumily. Nothing short ot
tions during that long period had no such a severe treatment could satisfy
other object than that of first weak- apublicso deeply hurt and offended
eningandthenfinallydestroying ijas- intheirreligious feelings. How isit
sions,andinparticularconcupiscence. thatthepracticeofperfect continence
Whenheispraisedin thewritings,he isnot merelya desideratum in anin-

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
52
standing at the entrance because through the eyes con-
;
cupiscence finds its way into the heart, and shakes its
firmest purposes." " But," replied Ananda, " what is to
be done when they come over to bring food tothe inmates
of the monastery ? " "Ananda," saidBuddha, " in such a
case no conversation is to take place with them. Much
safer and better it would be to hold conversation with a
man who, sword in hand, would threaten to cut off our
head,or with a female Biloo ready todevourusthemoment
we open the mouth to speak. By conversing with women,
one becomes acquainted with them acquaintance begets
;
familiarity, kindles passion, leads to the loss of virtue, and
precipitates into the four states of punishment. It is,
therefore, most prudent not to have any conversation with
them." " What is to be done, Buddha, in cases when
women come to the monastery to hear religious instruc-
tions, to expose their doubts, to seek for spiritual advice,
to learn the practice of religious duties, and render be-
comingly certain services tothe Eahans ? Should aKahan
be silent on such occasions, they will ridicule him and say,
' This Rahan, forsooth, isdeaf or too well fed ; hetherefore
cannot speak.' " " Ananda," replied Buddha, " when on
such occasions a Rahan is obliged to speak, let him con-
sider as mothers those who are old enough to be mothers,
as elder sisters those who appear a little older than he, as
younger sisters orchildren those that are youngerthan he.
Never, O Ananda, forget these instructions."
dividual consecrated to religion, but ever called a prejudice? Is it pos-
an absolutely required qualification, sible totraceitsconnectionwithsome
whichcan never beequivalently sup- of the noblest feelings of our natuie
pliedbyany other moral orscientific and the most refined ideas of our
attainment? How is it that such a mind? Toasuperficial and biassed
notion is universally adhered to by observer, many things appear con-
nations noted for the undoubted tradictory and irreconcilable, which
laxity of their morals? Can a no- a serious, acute, and dispassionate
tion so generally believed and so inquirer after truth readily compre-
tcnaciously retained, in spite of its hends, easily connects and accounts
direct opposition to the wildest and for, and satisfactorily reconciles one
the dearest passion of the heart, be withtheother.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
53
Ananda inquired of Buddha what ceremonies were to
be performed on his mortal remains after his demise.
"Ananda," replied Buddha, "do not be much concerned
about what shall remain of me after my Neibban, but be
rather earnest to practise the works that lead to perfec-
tion. Be not over solicitous concerning- the affairs of this
life, where the principle of change is ever entire put on
;
those inward dispositions which will enable you to reach
the undisturbed rest of Neibban. There are many among
the princes, rich men and pounhas who are well disposed
towards me, and who will gladly perform all the usual
ceremoniesonmyremains." "They will," replied Ananda,
"no doubt come to me, and ask advice as to the most
suitable mode of arranging everything in a becoming
manner." "Ananda," answered Buddha, "here are the
funeral ceremonies performed after the death of a Tsekia-
waday king. When such a monarch is dead, they wrap
his body with a new fine cloth of Kathicaritz, surround it
with a thick layer of the whitest cotton, wrap it again
with a second cloth of the same country, place over it
another layer of cotton, and repeat the same process five
hundred times. The body, thus prepared, is deposited in
an open cofhn, gilt outside, and rubbed inside with fra-
grant oil. Another coffin, also gilt, is turned over it as a
covering. The pile is made of sandal and other odorifer-
ous woods flowers, perfumes, and scented water are pro-
;
fusely spread over it. The coffin having been placed on
the pile, fire is set to it. Similar ceremonies shall be per-
formed on my body after my death. On the spot where
four roads meet, a dzedi is to be erected. Whoever shall
come to that place and make offerings of flags, umbrellas,
flowers, and perfumes, shall thereby perform an act of
religion, and give a token of his respect and affection
for my person.^^ He shall gain many merits ; among
11 It is curious to investigate tlie toGaudama, tohis relics, tohissta-
originand therealnatureoftliewor- tues, aswellastomonimicntserected
ship and honour paid by Buddhists for enshrining and shcltiring those

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
54
others, a complete exemption from all troubles and dis-
quietudes during a long period. Ananda, four sorts of
persons are deserving of the honour of having dzedis
objectsofdevotion. The attempt at tion a being can ever reach. The
elucidating this point is beset with first qualification entitles him tothe
difficulties. Themoreweattentively unbounded admiration of his follow-
reflect on the inward operations of ers ; it inspiresthemwith expressions
thesoulinall thatrelatestoreligion, the best calculated to eulogise him,
the more we find ourselves puzzled and represent him as the first and
andhesitatinginqualifyingandselect- greatest ofall beings, .^gain, Gau-
ing the appellation most befitting dama is represented to them full of
them. benevolence and compassion for all
All the simple terms of our lan- beings, whom heearnestly wishes to
guage intended toexpresstheseveral deliver from their miseries, and help
sorts of acts of worship and adora- to obtain that state in which they
tion paid to objects partaking of a come for ever to a perfect rest from
religious nature, are inadequate to all transmigrations, or to what they
represent to us, by sounds, the na- emphatically call the deliverance.
ture of the inward workings of the The second qualification is much in-
soul when shecarries on apious in- sisted upon by Buddhists, and from
tercourse with the object of her de- itoriginate those feelingsofloveand
votion. The terms that are used tender affection for him who has
merelyexpresstoustheexterioracts laboured so much for enlightening
of worship, as manifested by pecu- all beings, and showingto them the
liar attitudes of the body (which way that leads to the deliverance.
varyaccording tothe habits andcus- Buddhists on this subject are very
tomsofvarious nations), or singing, eloquent. The writer has often ad-
making offerings, and other visible mired many fine thoughts and truly
signs. They may be, in fact they beautiful expressions he has met in
are, used with equal fitness all over somewritings devoted to the praises
the world by the worshippers of the ofBuddha.
trueGodas wellasby theadorersof It may be asked whether the fol-
idols. The difference between the lowers of Gaudama in the worship
trueand false worship does notcon- they pay the author of their religion
sist, therefore, in the externals, nor expect any aid or assistance from
in the ceremonies or exterior signs him. The answer is an easy one.
that make impressionon the earand Gaudama to them is no more. His
the eye, but it is to be found in re- interference with the affairs of this
ality in the objects that the adorers world or of his religion absolutely
havein view. Ilere liestheessential ceased with his existence. He sees
differencebetween the true andfalse noone he hears no prayer he can
; ;
worship. afford no help neither here on earth
Thisbeing]jremised,weliavenatu- nor in any other state of existence.
rally toask : What isGaudama, the In fact, to the Buddhists there is no
greatand principalobjectofworship Providence, and, consequently, there
toallBuddhists? Gaudama, intheir can be no real prayer, none of the
opinion, is a mere man, that has feelings that constitute its essence.
attained, by the practice of virtue, All the worship ofGaudama may be
and principally by liis almost infinite summed up in a few words ; he is
science, the highest point of perfec- admired as the greatest, wisest, and

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
55
erected after their death : i. The Buddha who possesses
the infinite science ; 2. A semi-Buddha ; 3. A Rahauda ;
4. The Tsekiawaday king. He who builds a dzedi in
most benevolent of all beings ; he is Gaudama, previous to his death, in-
praised, eulogised as much as lan- timated tohis disciples that his reli-
g of ua a g t e en c d a e n ra e f x f p e r c e t s i s on ; fo h r e t i h s e t g h o e od obj t e h c a t t g th i a o t n , w a a s s he to wo la u s l t d fi b v e e n t o ho l u o s n a ge n r d a y m ea o r n s g ;
hehasdone. No ideawhateverof a his believers in a visible manner,he
supreme being is to be met in the wished that they would keep up his
genuineworshippaidto Gaudamaby statues as his representatives, and
his most enthusiastic adherents. It pay to them the same honour they
cannot be denied that, in practice, would paytohis own person. Rely-
Buddhists of these parts betrayoften ing upon this positive injunction,
without perceiving it that they have the Buddhist looks on the statuesof
some vague idea about a supreme Buddhaasobjectsdestinedtoremind
being, who has a controlling power him of Buddha : theyare the visible
in the affairs of this world and the mementoes of him who is infinitely
destinyofman. Butsuchanideadoes dear to his affections; they put him,
not comefrom their religious creed bytheir variety ofshapes and form,
;
it is theoffspring of that innate sen- inremembranceoftheprincipalevents
timent adherent in our nature, as connected with his existence. The
ismaintained bysome philosophers : princes thathave been most remark-
or itis aremnant of a primitive tra- ablefor theirreligiouszeal andpiet)',
dition, which error has never been suchasAdzatathatandAthoka, were
ableentirelyto obliterate, asasserted anxious to multiply the statues of
byothers. Buddhaandthereligiousmonuments,
TheworshippaidtoBuddhadoesnot tonourish in thesoulof allthe faith-
extendfurtherthanithas beenabove ful, as says our Burmese author, a
stated, since it is always placed ona feeling of tender affection, of lovely
footingofequalitywiththeonedueto disposition forthe person of Buddha
thelawand tothe assembly. These and his holy religion. The relics
Ihreeprecwusf/iingsarealwaysenume- being articles that have been most
r b a e t t e w d e t e o n ge t t h h e er m ; n t o he d y ist a i r n e ct e i q o u n a i l s ly ma e d n e - i p n e t r i s m o a n t , el a y re co d n e n s e i c g t n e e d d w t i o th act Bud o d n ha t ' h s e
;
titledtothevenerationofallbelievers. religious feelings of the people even
Letus comenow to theveneration more powerfully than the statues.
offered to the statues and relics of They are treasured up with the
Gaudama,andtothereligiousmonu- greatestcare,worshippedwiththepro-
mentscalleddzedis. Intheforegoing foundestrespect, looked upon witha
pageswehaveseen Buddhagiving to mostaffectionateregard. Noearthly
two brotherswho hadrequested him treasurecan be comparedwith them.
to supply them with some object of As Buddha's sacred person is more
worshipeighthairsofhishead. After valuablein theireyes than thewhole
his death andthe combustion of his world, his relics partake of that in-
body, the remaining bones, or parts valuableestimation. Itbecomesevi-
of bones, even the very ashes and dentthatthestatuesandrelics areso
charcoals, were piouslycoveted, with muchvalued,esteemed, andworship-
aneagerness that indicated the high pedbecauseoftheintimateconnection
valuepeoplesetonthesearticles. Ac- theyhavewiththepersonofBuddha,
cording to several F;iuddhist authors. and the great help they afford in

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
56
honour of Buddha, shall, after his death, migrate to a
place of rest inthe seats ofNats. To him that shallbuild
a dzedi in honour of a semi-Buddha, an inferior honour
shall be awarded in a lower seat of Nats, and a similar
reward shall be enjoyed by those who erect dzedis in
honour of Rahandas and Tsekiawaday kings. It may be
asked why the honour of a dzedi is conferred on a king
who lives in the world, enjoys its pleasures, &c., whilst it
keeping aliveareligious spiritand a shippers are generallyin a squatting
tenderaffection forhim. position,thebackrestingontheheels,
Intheworshipofstatuesandrelics, thebodyslightlybendingforwaid,the
superstition has had its share too in joined hands raised to the forehead.
giving an undue extension and de- Ordinarilyastringofflowers, orlittle
velopment tothe religioussentiment. bits of wood adorned each with a
This development has brought into small paper f^ag, are held on these
existence the beliefin prodigies and occasions. On the days of worship,
miracleswroughtby the virtue ofthe particularlyduring the three months
relics. Thispopularerrorhasalways ofLent, thecrowdofpeopleof ever)'
founda powerfulsupport among the age, sex, and condition, resorting to
ignorant masses ; it has been much the most venerated pagoda of the
propagated by that inordinate and place, is truly extraordinary. Men
irrational tendencytowardsallthatis and women of a certainage have in
newand extraordinary. Man wants their hands a string of beads, upon
but a pretext,even averyfutile one, which theyrepeat the formula Anei-
togive credit to the most incredible tsa, Duka, Anatta, orsomeother.
occurrences, when theyhave a refer- Since the Buddhist knowsthat his
ence to a deeply cherished, and, as Buddha is no more, and, therefore,
it were, favourite object. But in no can afford him no assistance what-
way do we find genuine Buddhism ever, that there is novirtue inherent
countenancing such spiritual eccen- in his relics or images, in fact, that
tricitiesorextravagances,whichhave there is no Providence, it is difficult
their origin in ignorance andan in- to account forthe zeal that he often
ordinatefondnessforthe marvellous. displays inhonouring thegreatfoun-
Thearticlesofworshipofferedtoor derof hisreligion, andall thathasa
placedbefore the statuesof Buddha, reference to him. To account satis-
and the shrines supposed to contain factorily for such a moral phenome-
someofhisrelics,arefewandremark- non, wemust bearin mind thebelief
able for their simplicity. Theycon- that he has in the intrinsic worth of
sist in flowers arranged in fine bou- thedevotional practiceshe performs.
quets, inflagsandstreamersmadeof Those works are good per se; they
cloth, sometimes of paper, and cut give rise, power, and energy to the
into a great variety of figures, with law of merits, or to the good influ-
considerable taste and skill. There encewhich will procuretohim abun-
aretobeseenalsosmallwaxcandles, dant rewards in future existences,
little earthen lamps, and sometimes andgraduallyleadhimtotheharbour
incenseand scented wood, whichare of deliverance, theobjectof hismost
consumedin largeburners, placedon ardent wishes. That hope is, as it
pedestalsmadeofmasonry Thewor- were, thegreatfeederofhisdevotion.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
57
is denied to a Rahan, who has renounced the world, and
practised the excellent works. Formerly, in Ceylon, the
dzedis erected in honour of deceased Rahans became so
numerous that they threatened to cover the superficies of
the whole country. It wasthenresolvedthat none should
be built for Rahans, though it is acknowledged that they
deserve such distinction. The same reason does not exist
for a Tsekiawaday king, who is alone, and appears in the
world at but distant intervals. But all the Rahans that
are full of merits are deserving, after their demise, of all
honours, except that of a dzedi."
When Buddha had finished his instruction, Ananda
thought within himself Phra, the most excellent among
:
all beings, has just taught me how to honour dzedis and
other religious monuments raised to the glory of religion
;
he has pointed out to me the source of merits ; he has
indicated to me the sure way to deal with women, when
they resort to our monasteries for the purpose of hearing
the preachingof the law, and, finally, he has declared that
there were but four sorts of persons deserving of the
honour of a dzedi after their death. From the tenor of
these instructions, I know with certaintv that on this
very day Buddha is to enter the state of Neibbau. Un-
willing to show his profound afiliction in the presence of
his illustrious master, he retired into the hall of the
Malla princes close by, and leaning on the door-bolt, wept
bitterly, and said, " Alas the most excellent Buddha
!
soon shall be no more. By what means shall I obtain
the three last degrees of perfection? Who shall be my
teacher? To whom shall I henceforth bring water in the
morning to wash the face ? Whose feet shall I have to
wipe dry ? For whom shall I prepare the place for sit-
ting, andthe couch for sleeping ? Whose patta and tsiwa-
ran shall I have to hold ready, and to whom shall I render
the ordinary services ? " In the midst of sobs and wail-
ings, he was giving vent to his deep affliction.
It was not long ere Buddha, not observing the faithful

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
58
Anandaamongthe Rahans, said, " My dear Rahans, where
is Ananda ? " Having been informed of all that was
taking place, he desired a Ralian to go and call Ananda.
The message having been conveyed rapidly to Ananda,
he hastened to come back into the presence of Buddha,
whom he saluted as usual, and then took his seat.
Buddha, addressing him, said, " Ananda, your tears and
lamentations are to no purpose do not give yourself up
;
to disquietude ; cease to shed tears. Have I not previ-
ously said to you that distance or death must separate us
from the dearest objects ? In the body there is a prin-
ciple which causes its existence and its preservation as
long as the opposite principle of destruction does not pre-
vail. It is true you have ministered unto me for many
years with allyour strength and the most perfect devoted-
ness. But you shall reap the reward due for so many
good offices. Apply yourself to the exercise of Kamatan,
and soon you shall be freed from the world of passions
and the influence of mutability."
Addressing then with a gentle voice all the Rahans
present, Buddha began to praise Ananda, saying, "Be-
loved Rahans, Ananda^^ has been during many years ray
12 On a former occasion, Buddha and zeal forthe propagation ofre-
hadraisedhis voicetobestowpraises ligion, which had ever distinguished
on the memory ofthe great Thari- the illustrious friend of Maiikalan.
putra, whose relicshewasholdingon In Ananda, ihe searching and keen
the palm of one of his hands in the eye of Buddha discovered excellen-
presence of the assembled Rahans. cies of a less shining and bright
Now, a short time before he yields hue, but, in point ofsterling worth,
up the ghost, he summons all his second to none. Anandaisa match-
strength, and at great length passes lesspattern ofgentleness, amiability,
thehighestencomium on hisamiable devotedness,andplacidreligiouszeal,
andever-devoted attendant, thetruly He loves all his brethren, and he is,
kind-heartedAnanda. Thesearethe in return, beloved by them all. His
only twoinstances mentioned in this superior goodness of heart and pla-
compilation, when Buddha has con- cidity of temper secure to him an
descended to eulogise the great vir- almost undisputed precedence over
tues and eminent merits of two dis- the other members of the assembly,
ciples. In Thariputra, Buddha ex- Tearingthe veilthatconcealsfuturity
tolled the transcendent mental at- fromoureagerregards,Buddhafore-
tainments, the heroic achievements tellsthe future conquests tobe made
in the practice ofvirtue, the fervour by themildand persuasiveeloquence

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
59
faithful aud devoted attendant. He has served him who
is worthy to receive all offerings, and is, moreover, ac-
quainted with all the laws of the physical and moral
world. Ananda is a true sage ; he is well versed in all
that relates to my person ; he can show to the male
Rahans and female Rahans, as well as to the crowds,
the time, the moment, and the place to approach my
person and paythe honoursdueto me. Ananda is grace-
ful and full of amiability amidst all other Rahans. He
has heard and seen much he shines in the midst of the
;
assembly. Rahans will come from a distance, on hearing-
all that is said of his graces, to see and admire him and
;
of his ever dearly beloved disciple. duringmanyagesforsuperiorityover
Thefar-spreadfameofAnanda shall the Indian Peninsula, subsisted free
in days to come attract crowds of from inimical feelings towards each
visitors, eager to see and hear him. other. It might be said that no line
The sight ofhis graceful and lovely of separation kept them apart, indi-
appearance shall rivet to his person cating or pointing out their respec-
the attention and affection of all. tive limits. The wide gap that was
Enraptured at the flow of this ten- during succeeding centuries to inter-
der, touching, and heart-movingelo- venebetweenthosetwogreatreligious
quence,visitorsshalleagerly listen to sects was not perceptibly felt. The
him ; they will experience sadness levelling results of Buddhism had
only when his silence shall deprive not yet awakened the susceptibilities
them of that food which their mind of the proud Brahmins. Buddhists
andheart werefeastingon. and Brahminists lived on friendly
TheeulogiumofAnandabyBuddha terms, andlookeduponeachotheras
is unquestionably one of the finest brethren. The discrepancies in the
passages ofthe legend. Divested of respective creeds were regarded with
itsoriginal beauties byhaving passed indifference, as involving only philo-
through several translations, it re- sophical subtleties, well suited to
tains, however, something that afford occupation to ideologists, and
charms and pleases. The reader is give to disputants the opportunity
involuntarily reminded of similar ofdisplayingtheirabilitiesinarguing,
specimens found here and there in reasoning, and defining. It is not
theearliestrecordsofantiquity. easy to determine whether the con-
In the instructions that Ananda is duct of Buddha was regulated by a
to give to laymen, it is somewhat well-calculated policy, intended to
curious to see Buddha distinctly calm the suspicious scruples of his
stating that Ananda will exhort the opponents, or whether he was actu-
people to malce offerings both to ated by plain and straightforward
s R a a y h , a t n o s th a e nd me t m o be p r o s un o h f a t s he ; t a h s a s t em i b s ly t , o t p h ri a n t ci t p i l m e e s. man It y i B s ra p h r m o i b n a s ble fol t l h o a w t ed a a t
and to the Brahmins. From this modeoflifealmost similar to thatof
passage, it becomes evident that, in the disciples of Buddha; they were,
thedaysofourBuddha,thetwosects therefore, entitled to the same hon-
that were subsequently to struggle oursandsupport.

:;
6o LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
all will agree in saying that what they observe surpasses
all that they had heard. Ananda will make inquiries
regarding their health they, on hearing his words, will
;
be filled with joy. He will then keep silent, and they
will retire with an increased desire to listen to him. He
will say to the female Rahans that will come to see him,
' Sisters,observethe eightprecepts.' On hearingAnanda,
they will be exceedingl}" glad. He will then remain
silent, and his silence will grieve them. The laymen and
laywomen on hearing all that is said of Ananda shall
come to contemplate him. He will say to them, ' Adhere
to the three precious things ; observe the five great com-
mands keep the four days of worship of each month
;
pay honour aud respect to your father and mother feed
;
the Eahans and pounhas that observe strictl}' the law.'
They will all be delighted at hearing his instructions.
His silence will leave them earnestly wishing to hear
something else from him. Beloved Eahans, Ananda
much resembles a Tsekiawaday king. Like him, he is
exceedingly beautiful, amiable, and lovely ; he can fly
through the air; he can teach the people and justly
administer the law."
When Buddha had finished his discourse, Ananda said
" illustrious Buddha,it is notbecomingyour dignity that
you should goto Neibban near such a small city, and in a
We
place almost surrounded by forests. are in the neigh-
bourhood of the great countries of Tsampa, Thawattie,
Thakila, and Baranathee, The kings, pounhas, noblemen,
and people of thosecountries are full of loveand reverence
for your person. They could render greater honours to
your mortal remains." "Ananda," replied Buddha, " do
not call the country of Koutheinaron a small country.
I have on former occasions often been to this place and
extolled its riches and crowded population. This is the
place where it is most becoming I should enter into the
state of Neibban. Go now to the city and inform the
Malla princesthat to-morrow morning, at the break of the

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
6i
day, the most excellent Buddha shall go to Neibban. Let
them not have reasontocomplain hereafterthat they have
not received a timely information of this event, nor say
that they had not had a last opportunity to come and see
me." Ananda, puttingon his dress and canying his patta,
went alone to the city. At that moment theprinces were
assembled in the hall to deliberate upon some important
affair. As soon as themessagewas delivered, the princes,
with their wives, their sons, and daughters, began to cry
aloud, "Alas ! themostexcellentBuddha is too soon going
to Neibban.'' Some appeared with dishevelled hair some
;
lifted their hands to their foreheads some, crying out
;
and wailing, threw themselves on the ground, rolling and
tossing about, as persons whose hands and feet had been
cut off. They all set out in haste with Ananda at their
head towards the place where Buddha was lying on his
couch. All of them were admitted into the presence of
Buddha and paid heirrespects to him.
t
In the city of Koutheinaron lived a certain personage
holding heretical opinions.^^ His nauu^ was Thoubat, a
!•* Buddha hiid so much at heart formerexistence,hewastillingafield
tlie conversionoftheheretic Thoubat, with oneof his brothers, when some
thatthe earnest desireof performing Rahans happened to pass by. His
thisgreatand meritorious actionwas brother gave abundant alms to the
oneofthethreemotives thatinduced holy personages, whilst Thoubat
him to select the comparatively in- showed less liberal dispositions,
significant city of Koutheinaron for When, then, Buddha appeared, the
the last stage of his existence. Par- law was announced to the generous
liculars regarding that personage donor, and in companywitheighteen
would prove interesting, because he koudes of Brahmas he obtained the
is the last convert Buddha made, stateof Thautapan. Theratherpar-
From what has been alluded to in sinionious Thoubat obtained the fa-
sonie Buddhistic writings regarding vour of conversion at the eleventh
Thoubat, it is certain that hewas of iiour. He nuist have, however, sub-
the caste of pounhas or Brahmins, sequently atoned for this offence, as
Hehadstudied insomeofthenumcr- his dispositions seem tohave beenof
ous schools of philosophy, at that the highest orderwhenhe came into
time so common in India. From his Buddha's [)resence. In a few hours
way of addressing Buddha, there is he hadgoneover thefourways lead-
nodoubtbut hewasacquaintedwith ing to perfection, and had become a
the principal theories upheld by the Rahanda.
mostrenowned mastersin thosedays. In the days of Buddha, the philo-
It is related of Thoubat that, in a sophicalschoolsofIndiaseemtohave

,:
62 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
pounha of the Ondeitsa race, whowore a white dress. His
mind, hitherto uncertain and unfixed, hesitated between
the belief in Buddha's doctrines and his former opinions.
hadsixeminent teachers, whose doc- ple.xedbysomanycontradictory and
trines exhibited on some points a oppositeopinionsanddoctrines. He
considerable variance. In a bookof had lived, it appears, in a state of
religiouscontroversybetweenaChris- doubt and uncertainty, fluctuating,
tiananda Buddhist, composed more as it were, between conflicting
than a hundred years ago by a theories which could not carry con-
Catholic priest at Ava, the writer viction tohissoul. Hehad heard of
had the chance of meeting with a Buddhaandwishedtoseehim,hoping
faint outline of the leading tenets thatperhaps he might fall in with
maintained by the six teachers, so the truth he was so ardently panting
often alluded to in this compilation. after. With these dispositions, he
Oneofthemmaintainedtheexistence cametothe spot where Buddha was
andagencyofnumberlessgenii,who, lying on his couch, in the hope of
at their will, could favour man with easing his mind from the state of
fortune and every possible temporal doubt and fixing it in truth. Like a
benefits, as well as visit him with man of consummate abilities in the
their displeasure, by depriving him way of arguing and convincing his
ofall happiness and heaping misery adversary, Buddhasetsaside allthat
and all sorts of calamities over his was put forward by his antagonist,
head. Geniolatrywas the necessary and, coming at once to the point,
consequence flowing from such a preaches to him the true doctrine.
principle. A second teacher denied As light dispels darkness, so truth
at once the dogma of metempsy- dispersesthemistoferror. Thoubat,
chosis, and maintained that every seeing truth, at once embraced it,
beinghadthe innate power ofrepro- gladly ridding himself ofthe burden
ducing by way of generation, &c. of errors that had hitherto weighed
another being of similar nature. A down his soul. All his doubts van-
thirdonehadsingularnotionsregard- ishedaway,and hefound himself, on
ingthenatureofman. Ilesaidthat a sudden, safely anchored in the
he had hisbeginningin the wombof calm and never-agitated harbour of
his mother, and that death was the perfecttruth.
end and destruction of his being Next totheconversionofThoubat,
suchadestructionhecalledNeibban. follows an interesting instruction de-
A fourth teacher taught that all liveredtoAnandaand the assembled
beings were without beginning and Rahans. Here Buddha displays the
ending, and that there existed no superiorityofhis lofty mind. Cling-
influenceofgoodand baddeeds. A ingtothe principlesofabstracttruth,
fifth doctor defined Neibban, a long hehasnoregardforpersonsorthings.
life like that of Nats and Brahmas. This material world, man included,
He saw no harm in the killing of is, in his opinion, a mere illusion,
animals,andheassertedtheexistence exhibiting nothing real, but only an
ofastateofreward and punishment. uninterrupted succession ofchanges,
The last teacher boldly asserted the whichexcludethe idea of imnmtable
existenceofaSupremeBeing,creator fixity. He apparently has no wish
of all that exists, and alone worthy to infuse consolation into the af-
ofreceivingadorations. flicted souls of his disciples. He
Thoubat's mind was rather per- supposes that, being all initiated in

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
63
Having been informed that there was a Buddha in the
neighbourhood,and that he was soon to go to Neibban,he
desiredto see him, and, in his conversation, to clear up his
doubts. His age was not great, but he enjoyed such a
renown for learning that he was called the master of
masters. Thoubat went at first to Ananda, stated to
him that he felt irresistibly a strong attachment to, and
a sincere affection for, the great Buddha, that his mind
waspreyed upon by doubts and uncertainties, and that he
hoped a short conversation with the great Gaudamawould
relieve his mind from its present painful situation. An-
anda, fearing that such a conversation might be much
protracted, refused to admit Thoubat into the presence of
Buddha, representing his extreme weakness and inability
to speak much. Thoubat made several entreaties, but
with no better success. Ananda persisted in his refusal
to introduce him. Buddha, hearing some noise, inquired
from Ananda what was the cause of the noise he heard.
Ananda related to him all that had taken place between
him and Thoubat. " Allow him to come," said Buddha
;
" I wish to hear him. Soon he shall be enlightened and
convinced. I have come to this spot.for the very purpose
of preaching to him the most perfect law." Ananda
returnedto Thoubat, and said to him, "Themost excellent
the knowledge of truth, and having earnestly invites them to lay stress
entered in the ways of perfection, onlyonthatdoctrinewhichtheyhave
they must know that the person of receivedfromhim.
a Buddha is subjected to the law of It is hardly necessary to notice a
mutability,and therefore,todestruc- serious anachronism made by the
tionortodeath. Hesaysplainly to unskilful compiler of this legend on
them that his absence from among this occasion. We know that Bud-
themisacircumstancescarcelyworth dha wrote nothing, and that the
noticing: by his doctrines contained compilation of his doctrines with its
in theAbidama, the Thoots and the division in threedistinctportions was
Wini, hewillever be present among the work ofthe three great councils
them. In thesesacred writings they lield afterGaudama's deathor Neib-
will possess something morevaluable ban. Howcouldthedyingoriginator
than his material being: they will ofBuddhismspeakofcompilationsof
haveand enjoythe truth that wasin his doctrines, which were not as yet
him, and that he has communicated existing?
to thembyhis oral instructions. He

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
64
Buddha desires to see you." Thoubat,full of joy, arrived
in the presence of Buddha, saluted him, and, sitting at a
becoming distance, said to him, " Do the six celebrated
teachers, who are always attended by a great number of
disciples, who are famous amidst other doctors, know all
laws? Are there some laws they are unacquainted with?
or do they teach some doctrines which they but partially
understand? " Buddha having gently reminded Thoubat
that such questions were not suitable and unprofitable,
said, " Thoubat, I will preach to you the law ; listen
with attention to my words, and treasure them in your
heart. No heretic has ever known the right ways that
lead to perfection, and, in the religion of heretics, no one
can obtain the state of Thautapan, and become a Rahanda.
But in ray religion there are found persons that have
become Thautapan, Anagam, &c., and finally Rahandas.
Except in my religion, the twelve great disciples who
practise the highest virtues, and stir up the world to free
it from its state of indifference, are not to be met with.
They are not to be found among heretics. O Thoubat,
from the age of twenty-nine years up to this moment, I
have striven to obtain the supreme and perfect science,
and I have spent to thatend fifty-one j-ears, followingthe
ways of Ariahs, that lead to Neibban." On hearing these
words, Thoubat, overwhelmed with joy, endeavoured, by
several similitudes, to express to his great instructor the
pleasure he had derived from his preaching. " most
illustrious Buddha," added he, "now I believe in you. and
adhere to all your doctrines ; I wish to become a Rahan.
But it is a custom with you, not to admit to the dignity
of Rahan a heretic who is newly converted, except aftera
four months' probation. I wish to remain during that
period as a probationer, and begafterwardsto beadmitted
among the Rahans." Buddha, who knew the fervour of
the new convert, desired to dispense in his case with the
four months' probation. He called Ananda and com-
manded liiiu to admit Thoubat to the dignity of Hahan.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
65
Ananda forthwith led Thoubat into a becoming place,
poured water over his head, whilst repeating certain
forms of prayer, shaved his head and beard, put on him
the tsiwaran, and taught him to repeat the formulas
whereby he j)rofessed to take refuge in Buddha, the law,
and the assembly. When this was done, Thoubat was
conducted into the presence of Phra, who desired he
should be promoted to the dignity of Patzin, and in-
structed in the knowledge of Kamatan, Thoubat went
into the garden, walked for a while, and soon learnt the
forty Kamatans. He was the last convert Buddha made,
before he entered the state of Neibban.
Buddha, calling Ananda and all the Kahans, said to
them: "When I shall have disappeared from the state of
existence, and be no longer with you, do not believe that
the Buddha has left you, and ceased to dwell among you.
You have the Thoots and Abidama which I have preached
to you you have the discipline and regulations of the
;
Wini. The law, contained in those sacred instructions,
shall be your teacher after my demise. By the means of
the doctrines which I have delivered to you, I will con-
tinue to remain amongst you. Do not, therefore, think
or believe that the Buddha has disappeared or is no more
with you."
A
little while after, Buddha, addressing the Eahans,
gave them some instructions regarding the attention and
respect the Kahans were to pay to each other. " As
long," said he, "as I have been with you, you have called
one another by the name of Awoothau, but after my
demise you will no more make use of such a title. Let
those who are more advanced in dignity and in years of
profession call those that are their inferiors by their
names, that of their family, or some other suitable appel-
lation ; let the inferiors give to their superiors the title of
Bante. Ananda, let a Eahan Haana be visited with the
punishment ofBrahma." "Butwhatisthispunishment
?
"
replied Ananda, •' The Bahan Hauna is indiscreet in his
yOL. II, E

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
66
speech he says indiscriminately all that comes into his
;
head. Let the other Eahans avoid speaking with him, or
even rebuking him. This is thepunishment of Brahma."
Addressinsf ao'ain all the assembled Eahans. Buddha
said to them '* : "My beloved Bickus, if among you there
'•* Buddha's zeal is not chilled in trines as to the centre of truth, and
the least by the cold ofapproaching never thinks for a moment to ques-
death. Hisboundlessknowledgeen- tion the veracity of his doctor, orto
abled him at a glance to obtain the call in doubt any portion of his in-
most intimate acquaintance withthe structions.
inward dispositions of his disciples' The last words of Buddha to the
minds. If, therefore,heasked them assembled Bickus are designed tore-
three successive times whether they mind them of the great and vital
entertained doubts on any doctrinal principlehehasendeavouredtoincul-
points, it was not to satisfy himself cate in their minds during the forty-
that their faith was firm and un- fiveyearsofhis preaching, viz., that
shaken. He wished to make them change and mutability are acting
consciousofafactwhichwasfeltand uponallthatexists, andareinherent
clearly understood by every one in in all parts of nature. This world,
particular, but was not as yet fully therefore, offering but an endless
appreciated bytheuniversalityofhis vicissitudeofforms, that appear and
disciples. Everyindividual in parti- disappear, hasno real existence. It
cularwaswell aware oftheunwaver- isanillusionfrom beginning to end.
ing dispositions ofhis mind respect- Aslongasmanremainstiedup,so to
ing Buddha's teachings, but no one speak, to nature, he is carried away
ever had the opportunity of ascer- bytheever-actingprincipleofchange :
t s a a i m n e ing fi t r h m a n t es a s ll o hi f s b be r l e i t e h f. ren O h n ad t t h h i e s n he owh qu e i r t e s c o a n n e he ex f i i s n t d en a c n e yr t e o st p o a r ss fix i it n y to ;
solemn occasion they witnessed the another ; he leaves one form to as-
most comforting sight of a perfect sumeadifferentone. Whathappens
unity of faith in all the members of to man befalls all other parts of
theassembly. Buddharevealedthen nature. From this notion, Buddha
one great truth which no one but infers that there is nothing existing
himselfcouldbeacquaintedwith. A butnameand/orm. Thereisnosub-
true Rahan, says he, has entered at stance in nature, and therefore no
last in thefirstwaythat leadstoper- reality. So much stress was laid by
fection; he is, therefore, no more Buddhaon thiscapital principle that
exposedtothedangerof waveringin hebequeathed it, ashis last Will, to
hisbelief; heknowsenough oftruth his disciples: he wished that they
toadherefirmlytoit, and is enabled should ever bear in their minds and
to prosecute safely his researches rememberthathe came amongthem
after what is still unknown to him. for the purpose of making them
Every member of the assembly is a thoroughlyacquaintedwithit. From
true believer, more or less advanced this cardinal point he inferred the
in the knowledge of the law, it is chief conclusions that form his reli-
true, but at least he is conscious of gious system, viz., metempsychosis,
hisbeing in the right way. On this thecontemptoftheworld,and Neib-
subject nodoubtsubsistsinhismind ban. Bythelaw ofendlesschanges,
he adheres to Buddha and his doc- ; man is hurried from one state into

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
67
be onethat has any doubtrespectingBuddha, the law, the
assembly, the wa^^s of perfection, andthe practice of vir-
tues, let him come forward and make known his doubts,
that I may clear them up." The Rahans remained all
silent. The same question was three times repeated, and
three times the Rahans continuedsilent. Then he added
:
"My beloved Bickus, if you have any resjaect for my
memory, communicate your dispositions towards my j)er-
son and doctrines to the other Rahans whom you shall
hereafter meet with." The Rahans still remained silent.
Ananda then said to Buddha " most exalted Buddha,
:
is it not truly surprising that among so many not one
should be found entertaining any doubt respecting your
doctrine, but all should feel so strong an attachment to
it?" "Ananda," replied Buddha, "I knew well that
doubt and false doctrine could never be harboured in the
another, or from one form of being the level occupied by the founder of
intoanotherform. Whereisthewise Buddhism. Unacquaintedwithafirst
man that could love a world, or an cause, orwith the existence ofa Su-
existence therein, when he finds no preme Being,he studies nature as he
substance, norealityin it? Ishenot findsit. Whatdoesheseeinit? Per-
induced, or rather compelled, to petual changes, endless vicissitudes.
search after a state in which he can The form that he perceives to-day
find fixity, reality, and truth, or at has undergone some change on the
least an exemption from the harass- followingday. Everythingabouthim
ing condition ofperpetual migration grows, reaches a certain point, and
fromonestateintoanother? then falls into decay. He finds no-
The reader who has been almost thingthatstandsalwaysin the same
born with and educated in theistic condition. Hence he proclaims the
notions, and who sees in the world great law of mutability pervading
nothingbut whathasbeencreatedby all nature, and concludes that all
asupreme andall-wise Being, isata thatwe feel, see, or hear, is illusion
losstounderstandhowagrave philo- and deception, &c. ; deprived of all
sopher,asundoubtedly Buddhawas, reality, fixity, and substance. His
gifted with great powers for observ- philosophical mind is not satisfied
ing,arguing,discussing,andinferring with such a discovery. He pants
conclusions, could have fallen into aftertruth andreality, which are not
errorssoglaringandsocontrarytohis to be found here. He feels that he
reason. That wemightproperlyap- must disentangle himself from tlie
preciate the efforts ofsuch a genius, condition of illusion and deception.
andhavesomecorrectideasabouthis But where is reality and fixity to be
process of arguing, we must divest found? Beyond all, that exists in
ourselves of the knowledge supplied Neibban.
to us by revelation, and descend to

68 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
soul of a true Rahan. Supposing a number of five
hundred Rahans, and taking the one who is the last in
merits, he is at least aThautapau, and as such there is no
demerit in him that could lead him to one of the four
states of punishment ; his heart is fixed upon the first
way that leads to perfection, and he constantly strives to
advance to the three superior ways of perfection. No
doubt, therefore, and no false doctrine can ever be found
in a true Rahan."
After a short pause, Buddha, addressing the Rahans,
said " Beloved Bickus, the principle of existence and
:
mutability carries along with it the principle of destruc-
tion. Xever forget this ; let your minds be filled with
this truth to make it known to vou, I have assembled
;
you."
These are the last words Buddha ever uttered. As a
man who is about to undertake a long journey takes an
affectionate farewell of every oue of his relatives and
friends, and fondly eiubraces successively all of them,
Buddha likewise wished to visit for the last time the
abodes wherein his soul had so amorously dwelt during
hislongand loftymental peregrinations. He entered into
the first state of dzan, then the second, the third, and the
fourth : he ascended therefrom successivelv to the first,
second, third, and fourth immaterial seats. When he had
reached the fourth state, which is the farthest boundary
of existence, Ananda asked the Rahan Anoorouda whe-
ther Phra had completed his Neibban. " Not as yet,"
answered Anoorouda, " but he has reached the last stage
of existence." A little while after, Buddha had entered
into the perfect state of Neibban.^^
1-^ TheepochofCiaudama'sdeathis difference of dates is but of a few
apoint on which the various nations years, andissoinconsiderableasnot
professing Buddliisni do not agree. tobe worth notice. 'Ihe Thibetans,
TheCingalese,Burmese,andSiamese and,asaconsequence,theMongolians
annals place that event somewhat with the Chinese, place that event
before the middle of the sixth cen- several hundredyears previoustothe
tury before the Christian era. The epoch just mentioned. Notwith-

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA. 69
Thus in the first watch of the night he had preached
the law to the Malla princes ; at midnight he had con-
verted the heretic Thoubat and in the morning watch
;
he hadinstructedthe Rahans. It was not quite full dawn
of the day when he entered the state of Neibban, in the
148thyearof the Eetzana era, onthe full moon of Katson,
on a Tuesday, a little before daybreak.^^
standing this discrepancy, it seems years, for which it is not easy to
difficult not to adopt the chronology accountwith sufficient precision, un-
of the southern Buddhists. The less we suppose that the reign of
savansinEurope, whohavebestowed Athoka began earlier than is gene-
aconsiderabledegree ofattentionon rally admitted. Cunningham has
this interesting subject, give a de- given very strong reasons for fixing
cidedpreferencetotheopinionofthe the periodofGaudama's deathsixty-
former. six years later than the usual one,
We have not to depend solely on hithertogenerallyadmitted,543; that
the chronological tables of kings, istosay, in the year 477 B.C. This
supplied by the Hindus, for settling new epoch enables us to adhere at
this point, but fortunately we are once with perfect safety to the com-
put indirectly by Greek writers in putation above related, and does
possession ofa fixed and well-estab- awaywith thesmall discrepancyofa
lishedepoch,fromwhichwe can take few years that has been mentioned.
with a sufficient degree of certainty Tradition and ancient inscriptions
our departure foi" arriving at a satis- leave almost no doubt upon this im-
factory conclusion. After the death portant point.
of Alexander the Great, Seleucus, Our legend is positive in stating
one of his lieutenants, obtained for that Gaudama died under the reign
his share all the provinces situated of Adzatathat, as will hereafter be
east of the Euphrates, in which the seen. But the Hindu chronologists
Indianconquered territories werein- placethereignofthatmonarchabout
cluded. Seleucus, at first in person, 250or260years beforethatofChan-
and nextbyan ambassador, camein dragupta, who, asstated, wasacon-
contactwith a powerful Indian king, temporaryofSeleucus Nicator. We
named Chandragupta, who had the have, therefore, the combinedautho-
seat of his empire at Palibotra or rity of both foreigners and natives
Pataliputra. This intercourse took for admitting the chronology of the
place about 310 B.C. The Hindu southern Buddhists respecting the
chronologicaltablesmentionthename epochofGaudama's death, in prefer-
of this princeas well as that of his ence to that of the northern Buddh-
grandson,called.^thoka,who,accord- ists, andfor fixing that event during
ing to the testimony ofthe Burmese the first part of the sixth century
authors, ascended the throne ofPali- before the Christian era, or rather
botratwohundredandeighteenyears sixty-sixyearslater, inthebeginning
after Gaudama's death. We may of the fourth part of the fifth cen-
suppose that Athoka reigned in or tury.
about 270 or 280 B.C. These two 1'' What is Neibban,theend atrue
periods added together will give but Buddhist ever longs for throughout
asum of five hundred years. There hisgreat struggles in the practiceof
willremain a difference ofonly forty virtue and his constant efforts for

70 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
Not to leave out a single particular connected with the
epochs of Gaudama's life, the Burmese author sums up all
that has already been related on this subject, by stating
attaining the knowledge of truth, much approximates to that of the
whichhefinallyreaches when hehas Brahmins that we may say it is
become p)erfect? The writer con- almost the same. The means of
fessesatonce his inabilit}' toanswer obtaining perfection are somewhat
satisfactorily this question, because different in both systems, but the
Buddhistsdonotagree amongthem- end to be obtained is precisely the
selves inexplainingthe natureofthe same.
stateofNeibban. From the earliest Settingaside idle speculations, let
period of their religion we see the us try toformsome idea of Neibban
Brahmins keenly taunting their op- by explaining the meaning of the
ponents for the discordance oftheir term, and the definition such as we
o i p m i p n o i r o t n a s nc o e n — a a s s u u b b j j e e c c t tw o h f ic t h he ha u d tm e o v s e t r fin T d he it in wo t r h d e B N u e r i m b e b s a e n, writ i i n ng S s a . nscrit
been prominent in Buddha's teach- Nirvana,accordingto itsetymology,
ings, and held up as the only one meanswhatisnomoreagitated,what
worthy of the most earnest and is in a state of perfect calm. It is
ardent desires, the fittest reward of composed of the negative prefix fiir
thegenerousand extraordinary exer- and va, which means to be set in
tions of a perfected being, and the motion, asthe wind. It implies the
finalstatein which his soul, wearied idea ofrest in opposition to that of
aftersuch a prolonged spiritual war- motion or existence. To be in the
fare, longed to rest forever. A cer- state of Neibban is therefore to be
tain school of Buddhists has main- carried beyondtherangeofexistence,
tained that Neibban implied the as understood by Buddhists ; there
destructionofthe stateofbeing, and can beno longer migration fromone
consequently complete annihilation. stateofbeingtoanother. This point
This opinion is at once practically is admittedby allsects ofBuddhists.
rejectedbytlieportionofthesouthern To the idea of Neibban is often
Buddhists, who are not so well ac- attached thatofextinction, asalamp
quaintedwith themore philosophical which ceasestoburnand whoselight
part oftheir creed. Theyassertthat becomes extinct when the oil isex-
aperfectedbeing,afterhavingreached hausted. Thesumofexistencebeing
Neibban, orhavingarrivedattheend exhausted,abeingceases to beorto
ofhis last existence, retains his indi- move within the range ofexistence
;
viduality, but they utterly fail in he Ijecomesextinctrelatively,atleast
their attempts at explaining the to all kind of existences we have a
situation and condition of a being notion of. In conversing with the
in Neibban. At a later period the Buddhistsof Burmah, the writerhas
opinion about a supreme Buddha, observed that the ideas of rest and
uncreated, eternal, and infinite, be- extinctionareinvariablycoupledwith
gantogain ground, and modified to thenotionofNeibban. Intheirrough
aconsiderableextent onmanypoints attemptatexplainingtheinexplicable
the views of the earlier Buddhists. natureofthatstatetheyhad recourse
Neibban, according to the compara- to several comparisons intended to
tively modern school, is but an conveytothe mindthattheybelieved
absorption into the supreme and Neibban to beastate of undisturbed
infinite Buddha. This opinion so calmanda never-endingcessationof

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
71
that he was conceived in his mother's womb, in the year
6y ofthe Eetzana era, undertheconstellation Outtarathan,
and born in 68, under the constellation Withaka, on a
existence, atleastsuch aswehavean ingtogiveananalysisofathingthey
idea of in this world. When ques- knew nothing about, approximated
tionedonthesituation of Buddha in to the opinion that Neibban is no-
Neibban, they answer that they be- thing more or less than a complete
lieve him to be in a boundless space or entire annihilation. Following
or vacuum beyond the boundaries the course of arguments, and admit-
ever reached by other beings, alone tingtheirpremises, one isreluctantly
by himself, enjoying, if the expres- compelled tocometo the awful con-
sionbecorrect, aperfectrest, uncon- clusion that the final end of a per-
cerned about this world, having no fected Buddha is the destruction of
further relation with all existing his being, or annihilation. This
beings. They assert that he is to opinion is still further corroborated
remain forevera stranger toallsen- by the short exposition of Buddhist
sations of either pain or pleasure. metaphysicsattheendofthisvolume.
Butit mustbeborneinmindthatthis The crudest materialism is openly
isthepopularopinionratherthanthe and distinctly professed. There is
philosophicalone. Talkingoneeven- nothing in mandistinct fromthe six
ing with awell-informed Burman on senses. The faculty of perceiving
Neibban,thelightofalamp thatwas the object theycome in contactwith
burning on the writer's table hap- is inherent in their nature. The
pened to die away for want of oil. sixth sense, that is to say, the heart,
TheBuddhist, with anexulting tone has the power of perceiving ideas,
ofvoice, exclaimed,"Donotaskany that is to say, things that have no
more what Neibban is; what has formorshape. Butthis power isnot
happenedto thelampjust now,tells distinct from theliving sense ; itdis-
you what Neibban is. The lamp is appearswhenthe lifeofthatsenseis
extinct because there is no more oil extinct, or, in other terms, when the
in the glass. A man is in Neibban heart is destroyed. To the holders
attheverymomentthatthe principle of such an opinion the cessation of
or cause ofexistence is atan end or existence, the going outof thecircle
entirely exhausted." How far such of existences, by the destruction of
an answer can satisfy a superficial kan, or the influence of merits and
mind likethatof ahalf-civilised Bur- demerits, mustbeandcannotbut be
p m e a a n r , s i c t e i r s ta d i i n ffi t c h u a l t t h to e s d a o y es ; b n u o t t i c t a a r p r - y co F mp r l o e m te a a l n o n n i g hil p a e t r i i o o n d . theplainsense
hisresearches nor pursuehisinquiries of the masses of believers, unpreju-
beyondthesenarrowboundaries. Any diced by sophistical bias, revolted
further attempt to penetrate deeper against such a doctrine, and at once
into the darkness of Neibban is, in rejected the horrible conclusion ar-
hisopinion, presumptuousandrash. rived at by former disputants. No
Buddhist metaphysicians in India, one in practice openly admits that
in their foolish efforts tosurvey that Neibbanandannihilationaresynony-
terraincognita,h2iXeoriginatedseveral mous terms. If their views can be
opinionsthat have had theirsupport- properly understood, we may infer
ers in the various schools of philo- from what they say that a being in
sophy. The more ancient philoso- Neibban retains his individuality,
phersorheadsofschools,in attempt- though isolated from all that is dis-

72 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
Friday. He went into the solitude in the year 96, on a
Monday. He became a Buddha in the year 103, on a
tinctfromself. Heseesthe abstract action of kan, i.e., the good or bad
truth, or truth as it is in itself, di- influence produced by merits or de-
vestedof the material forms under merits ; of Tsii, i.e., the principle of
which we in our present state ofex- all volitions, desires, and passions;
istence but imperfectly see it. Pas- of the seasons, and oftasteorsensa-
sions and affections are not to be tions. What meansthisrathercui-i-
found in such abeing ; hisposition, ous, not tosay almost unintelligible,
in truth, can scarcely be understood definition? To understand it the
aTid still less expressed by us, who readermust be awarethat ^au isthe
can never come in communication principle which causes all beings to
with anobject but through our pas- move incessantly from one existence
sions and affections. We know that into another, from a state of happi-
thereexistsaspiritualsubstance, but ness to one of unhappiness, from a
w W e e c v a o n uc h h av f e or n i o ts d e i x s i t s in t c e t nce id b e y a o w f ha it t . p in o t s o iti a o n n ot w h h e e r re wh m e e r r e its fu a r r t e her acq m u e i r r i e t d s
weobserveofits operations, but itis areto be obtained andgreaterprofi-
impossibleforustoexplainitsnature. ciency in perfection secured, from a
It is not, therefore, surprising that state of punishment or demerits into
Buddhists should be at a loss to aworseone,&c. A'anmaybecalled
account forthestate in which aper- thesouloftransmigration,thehidden
fected being is when in Neibban. springofallthe changesexperienced
The ideaof astate ofapathyor rest oy an existing being. In Neibban
must be understood as expressing the law of kan is destroyed, and
simply a situation quite opposite to therefore there are no more changes
that of motion, in which all being-, ortransmigrations.
are as long as they are within the By Tsiiisunderstoodtheprinciple
paleofexistences. If it be admitted of all volitions and desires. Bud-
that the perfected being retains in dhist metaphysicians, always fond of
Neibban hisindividuality, it must be divisions and classifications, reckon
inferred that he becomes, asitwere, onehundredandtwenty Tsiis. Some
merged into the abstract truth in aretherootofalldemerits, and their
which he lives and rests for ever. oppositesarethe principles ofmerits.
But we must distinctly state anew Some have forobject matterthisma-
that this view is in opposition to terial world ; others have for object
the doctrines of the earliest Bud- theimmaterialworld,or,as 1believe,
dhists,andthephilosophicalprinciples ideas and things that have no form.
andinferencesmaintainedasgenuine. The last of tsits, and of course the
This contradiction illustrates the most perfect, is entire fixity. This
truth of a remark made above, that isthelaststageeverto bereachedby
error can never entirely obliterate a perfected being in theworld ofex-
from man's mind the knowledge of istences. One step further, and he
certain fundamental truths, which has reached the undisturbed shores
are almost constitutive of his moral of Neii)ban. In that latter state
being. there is no more operation of the
Letus comenow toa definition of mind or of the heart ; or at least
Neibban translated from Pali by the thereisno intellectual working, such
Burmans. Neibban is the endofall as we conceive itin our actual con-
existences, the exemption from the dition.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA,
73
Wednesday(Witliaka). Intheyear 148, onthe full moon
of Katson, on a Tuesday (Withaka), he expired ; on the
The word Wdoo, or season,is evi- e,xistin Neibban ; theyaredestroyed.
dently used for designating a revo- One word more and the question
l o u b t v i i o o n us, of a n n a d tur a e f . for T ds he no me d a i n ff i i n cu g lty i . s w no o t ul b d ee b n e , s a e t tt l l e e a d st ; t b o ut m t y ha k t no w w o l r e d dg h e a , s
In Neibban there is neither nature ever distinctly uttered. It is pro-
nor revolutions ofnature. Neibban, bable that these five aggregates or
it a state it be, lies in vacuum or component parts are, in the opinion
spacefarbeyondtheextensivehorizon of many, the conditions of existence
thatencircles theworld or worlds, or suchaswenowunderstandit. Butit
systemsofnature. would be too hasty to conclude that
The word Ahara, which literally a being under different conditionsof
means taste, isintended todesignate existence could not retain his indi-
all sensations acquired through the viduality though deprived of these
senses. By means of the senses, in- fivecomponentparts. Buddhists, as
deed, we obtain perceptions and ac- already said, have very imperfect
quire knowledge ; but the perfected notions of a spiritual substance. It
being having come to the possession is not surprising, therefore, that
ofuniversalscience, nofurtherknow- they cannot express themselves in a
l th e e d r g e e for i e s ,u n s e e e le d s e s d . ; T t h h e e se s n e s n e s s e , s mo a r r e e - , m in a t n el n l e i r gibl m e or w e he d n ist t i h nc e t y , t p r r e e a c t is o e f , s a u n b d -
over,aretheappendageofournature, jects so abstruse and difficult. In
as it is during its existences. Neib- practice they admit the existence of
ban putting an end to further exist- something distinct from matter, and
ences, it destroysalso theconstituent surviving in man after the destruc-
partsorportionsofour being. tion of the material portion of his
Admittingthattheabovedefinition being ; buttheirattemptsat givinga
ofNeibbanisa correctone, andthat satisfactoryexplanation ofthenature
it has been understood in a purely of that surviving individuality have
Buddhistic sense, we may conclude always proved abortive. In their
that in that state there is no more process ofarguing the learned reject
influence,and consequently no trans- suchanadmission.
migration, no volition of the mind, The question, as may be inferred
nodesiresoftheheart,nomateriality, from theforegoinglines,ifconsidered
and nosensations. The difficultyas in the light of purely theoretical
to whether Neibban is annihilation notions, is philosophically left little
seemsallbutentirely and completely open to discussion, though it will
solved. There is another wayofar- probaljly ever remain without a per-
riving at a similar conclusion. Let fect solution. But the logical infer-
us ascertain what aretheconstituent ences to be deduced from the prin-
partsofanintelligent being,andthen ciplesofgenuineBuddiiisminevitably
inquire whether these parts are en- leadtothedark, cold, and horrifying
tirely destroyed and annihilated in abyss of annihilation. If examined
Neibban. In an intelligent being, from a practical point of view, that
according to alldoctors, we findma- is to say, taking into account the
teriality, sensations,perceptions,con- opinions of the massesof Buddhists,
sciousness, and Intellect. These five the difficulty may be considered as
aggregatesconstituteathinkingbeing. resolved too, but in an opposite
These,assertthesamedoctors,donot sense.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
74
12th, after the full moon of the same month, his corpse
was laid on the funeral pile.
At the very moment he had yielded up the ghost, a
tremendous earthquake was felt throughout the whole
world ; it took place with such a violence that it filled
every one with fear and trembling, and caused their hair
to stand on end.

( 75 )
CHAPTER
III.
—
Stajizas utteredafterBu — ddha!sdeath Ananda infor — ms theMallaprinces
ofBuddha!sde/nise Preparationsforthefuneral Arriv—alofKathaba
atthespo—t'wherethebodywasexpos—edtopublicvetieration Hew — orships
thebody Wonderonthatoccasion The burnittgoft—hecorpse Parti-
tion of the relics made by a pounha called— Dauna Extraordinary
honourspaidtotherelicsby KingAdzatathat Deathofthatkingand
ofKathaba.
On the occasion of the Buddha's Neib—ban, the chief of
Brahmas uttered the following stanzas: " Rahans, the
great Buddha who has appeared in this world, who knew
everything, who was the teacher of Nats and men, who
stood without an equal, who was mighty and knew all
laws and all the great principles, the most excellent and
glorious Buddha, is goneto Neibban. Where isthebeing
who shall ever escape death ? All beings in this world
must be divested of their terrestrial and mortal frame."
The chief Thagia,—on the same occasion, repeated aloud
the following words " Rahans, the principle of muta-
:
bility is opposedto the principle of fixity. It carries with
it the elements of creation and destruction. There is no
happiness but in the state of Neibban, which puts an end
to all changes."
The great Anoorouda said in his turn " Rahans, the
:
mostexcellent Buddha, freefrom all passions, has entered,
by this death, into the state of Neibban. He wdiose soul,
ever firm and unshaken, was a strangerto impatience and
fear, has gone out from the whirlpool of existences, and is
no longer subject to the coming into existence and to the
going out therefrom. Passions have no more influence

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
76
upon him. He is disengaged fromthe trammels of muta-
bility, and has ended like the light of a lamp, the oil of
which is exhausted."
Anandaadded " Rahans,whenthegreatBuddha,full
:
of the most transcendent excellencies, attained the state
of Neibban, the earth quaked with that violence which
fills the soul with fear, and causes the hair of the head
to stand on an end."
AfterthedemiseofBuddha,theRahansthathadreached
the two states of Thautapan and Thakadagan, lifting to
the forehead their joined hands, began to wail and loudly
lament. Men threw themselves down on the ground,
bitterlylamenting the loss the world had sustained. They
all exclaimed, " The glorious and illustrious Buddha has
too soon gone to Neibban. He who never spoke but good
and instructive words, he who has been tlie light of the
world, has sfone too soontoNeibban." In these and other
words they gave utterance to their grief and affliction,
with tears and lamentations. The Rahans who had
reached the two last states of perfection, the Anagans
and Rahandas, more calm and steady in their mind, were
satisfied with repeatingin solemn tones, " There is nothing
fixed in the principle of mutability. Buddha, entering in
the current of cliange, could notbut die his body was to
;
be destroyed." 'i'hey remained meditating on this great
truth, retaining an unchangeable and calm composure.
Anoorouda, assembling together all the Rahans, said to
them, " Cease now to weep and lament banish sorrow
;
and affliction from your hearts remember presently what
;
the most excellent Buddha has told iis, tliat all that exists
is liable to destruction, which it can never escape. What
will become of Nats and men ? What will they saywhen
they see the Rahans delivered up to grief, and giving vent
"
to it in loud wailiiigs ?
Ananda iiKpiin^d from Anoorouda what actually took
place among the Nats on the occasion of the death of the
great Buddha. He was told that some of them, lifting up

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA. 77
thejoinedbaudstotheforehead, loudlyweptandlamented;
but others more wise, bearing in mind what Buddha had
said onthe subject oftheprinciple of mutability, remained
wrapt up in a solemn and resigned composure of mind.
Anoorouda spent the remainder of the night in preaching
the law. He said to Ananda, ''Go now to the city of
Kootheinaron, say to the Malla princes that the great
Buddha is gone to Neibban ; that they ought to dispose
everything for the funeral." At daybreak Ananda put
on his tsiwaran, and, taking his patta, went alone to the
city. He met the princes assembled in the public hall,
deliberating on what was to be done when Phra should
have gone to Neibban. He said to them, " princes of
the Wathita race, the greatBuddha has goneto Neibban
;
the moment is come for you to go to the spot where are
his mortal remains." When the princes heard this sad
news from the mouth of Ananda, they, with their wives
and children, began to wail and lament, and give all the
marks of the deepest grief, unceasingly repeating, " The
most excellent Buddha, who was infinitelywise andknew
all laws, has too soon gone to Neibban." The princes,
now selecting one of their family, directed him to go
throughout the city and collect all the richest and rarest
perfumes, to keep in readiness the drums, harps, flutes,
and all other musical instruments, and have them carried
to the place where the remains of Buddha were lying.
Having reached the spot,the j^rinces began tomake offer-
ings of flowers and perfumes with the greatest profusion,
in the midst ofdancings, rejoicings, andthe uninterrupted
sounds of all the musical instruments. A temporary
canopy was erected with the finest pieces of cloth, and
they remained under it during seven consecutive days.
Afterthislapseoftime,eight oftheyoungestandstrongest
princes, having washed their heads and put on their
finest and best dresses, prepared to carry the corpse to a
place situated in the south of the city, where they in-
tended to have it burned. In spiteoftheir united efforts,

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
78
they could not remove it from the place it was laid on.
Anoorouda, consulted on the subject of this extraordinary
and unexpected occurrence, said, " princes, your intent
does not agree with that of the Nats. You wish, after
having performed all ceremonies aboutthe corpse, to carry
it to a certain place in the south ofthe city ; but the Nats
will not agree to this they intend to accompany the
;
corpse with music, dancings, singings, and offerings of
flowers and perfumes. They desire that thecorpse should
be carried to the western side of the city, thence to the
northern one, afterwards tore-enterthrough the northern
gate, and go to the middle square ; thence to sally forth,
through the eastern one, and take the body to the place
called Makula-bandan, where the Malla princes are wont
to assemble for their festivals and rejoicings." " Let it
be done," answered all the princes, "according to the
wishes of the Nats."
The funeral procession then set out.^ The Nats in
1 The lengthened description of desiccative substances for preventing
Buddha's funeral has suggested the putrefaction. The corpse is then
idea of laying before the reader a tightly wrapt with bands or swathes
brief account of the ceremonies ob- ofa white colour from head to foot,
served by Buddhists in Burmah, and then covered with the vellow
when funeral rites are performed on habit of the profession. Sometimes
the mortalremainsofTalapoins,who a coat of black varnish is put over
have been eminent in the profession and then leaves of gold, so that the
and have spent their whole lives in whole body is gilt. It is afterwards
monasteries. By comparing the fol- bound all over with ropes tight-
lowingaccount with the narrative of ened as much as possible, so as to
the legend, we will see that the bring it within the narrowest dimen-
rubricsofthe funeral service, in our sions. When thus prepared, the
days, are nearly the same as those corpse is placed in an open coffin.
existingattheoriginofBuddhism. The coffin is made ofthe trunkof a
WhenaBuddhistreclusehasgiven tree, rudely hollowed, and often so
up the ghost, the corpse is carefully imperfectly scooped out as not to
and diligently washed by laymen, or afford sufficient room for the corpse.
the younger inmates of the monas- In the middle of the interior part
tery. A large incision is made in ofthe coffin, an opening, about two
theabdomen ; its contents arc taken inches in diameter, has Ijeen made,
out and buried in the earth without to afford issue to the humours that
anyceremony being observed on the may ooze out through the swathes.
occasion. Theempty cavity is filled The coffinisunceremoniouslylaidon
up with ashes, bran, or some other the floor ofthe monastery. A bam-

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
79
the air honoured the corpse with their music, singing,
and the showering down of flowers and perfumes. Men
did the same all round the corpse. The way which the
boo,7or8feetlong,isprocured
;
one offeredbythecorpse. Thecarpenters
of its ends is inserted in the hole were determined not to be disap-
made in the coffin, and the other is pointed. Atthetwoendsandinthe
sunk into the ground below ; it is middleofthecoffin,ropeswerepassed
the channel through which the several times round it with the ut-
humoursflow intotheearth. Aftera most tension, in such a manner as to
lapseoftenor twelve days, thebody have six or seven coils in the same
issupposedtobe quite dry
;
they set place. Enormous wooden wedges
about putting a covering over the were inserted right and left in three
coffinandeffectuallyshutting it. places between the sides and the
WhilstresidingatTavoy,Iwished, coils. Onthesewedgestheworkmen
on a certain day, to go and witness hammered with their whole strength
all the particulars observed on such duringabout twenty minutes, to the
occasions. A most opportune event great amusement of all the by-
favoured the prosecution of my standers. Each blow ofthehammer
wishes. A Talapoinofmyacquaint- lessened the distance between the
ancehaddiedafortnightbefore,after cover and the brim of the coffin.
thirt)'yearsofprofession. Hisbody, Every perceptible success, gained
laid in the coffin, was to be for ever over the latent resisting power,
concealedfromhumansight. Iwent elicited a burst of applause, and a
into the monastery, where I met a cheer to the persevering workmen.
large party of the brethren of the x\t lastallresistancebeingovercome,
deceased,whohad assembledfor the the cover rested fixedly in its place.
ceremony. Mostofthemwereknown Itis needless to add that the corpse
to me. My reception was at once inside was but a hideous mass of
kind and cordial. Great was my mangled fleshandbroken bones.
surprise at seeing, instead of the According to the custom observed
grief and mourning which the cir- on such occasions, a rude building
cumstanceseemedtodemand,laugh- waserectedforthepurposeofplacing
ing, talking, and amusement, going therein the mortalremains ofthede-
on at aratewhichistobecalledscan- ceased, untilpreparationsonagrand
dalous. Nooneappearedtotakethe scaleshould have been madefordo-
least notice of the deceased, whose inghonourtotheillustriousdeparted
corpsewas lyingat our feet. Amo- individual. Thatbuilding,aswellas
mentarystop wasputto the indecor- those made for a similar purpose, is
ous behaviouroftheassistantsbythe butatemporaryedificeraised forthe
appearance of two stout carpenters occasion, andmadeofbamboos with
bringing a board four or five inches an attap roof. In the centre ofthat
thick, designed for the cover. They large bungalow was erected a kind
h va o i l n l l o y w t o r f ie t d he to co f f i f t in it w i a n s it n s ei p t l h a e c r e b ; ro t a h d e o w f ell est d r e a c d o e r , ate a d b . out Th t e wel u v p e pe f r eet pa h r i t gh i , s
nor deep enough for holding the often gilt, but always plated with
corpse, though reduced to thesmall- thin metal leaves and tinsels ofvari-
est proportions. The operation was ous colours. From the sides hang
notaveryeasyonetobringtheboard roughdrawings,representinganimals,
incontactwiththesidesofthecoffin, monsters of various kinds, religious
despite theresistance that was to be subjects, and others, but rarely of

8o LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
procession slowly moved through was strewed with the
finest and choicest flowers. When the corUgehad reached
the centre of the city, the widow of General Bandoola,
named Mallika, hearing of the approach of the funeral
greatindecency. Aroundthisestrade pile. Upon it was the coffin. Im-
are disposed posts, from the top of mense cheers, shouts of thousands,
whichare suspended small flagsand had announced the progress of the
streamers of different forms and cart with its precious relics, as it
shapes. On the summit is arranged passed through the crowd. The
a place for the coffin, but the four coffin was forthwith hoisted on the
sides at that place are about two or platform. Mats were then spread
three feet higher than the level round the pile, whereupon sat num-
whereupon rests the coffin, so that it bersofTalapoins,recitingaloudlong
is concealed entirely from the sight formulasin Pali. The devotions be-
ofthevisitors. ing performed, theyroseup andpre-
Things remained in that state for pared to depart, attended with a
four months, that is to say, until all retinueof theirdisciples, wholoaded
thearrangements hadbeen made for themselves with the offerings made
the grand ceremony, the expense of ontheoccasion. Theseofferingscon-
whichiscommonlydefrayedbyvolun- sistedofplantains,cocoa-nuts,sugar-
tary contributions. The arrange- canes, rice, pillows, mats, mattresses,
ments being all complete, a daywas &c. Masters and disciples returned
appointed at thesoundof gongs, for to their monasteries withtheir valu-
burning the corpse of the pious ablecollections.
recluse. At noon of that day, the The place being cleared, the eyes
whole population ofthetown flocked were all rivetedontwolarge rockets,
toavastand extensive plain beyond placed horizontally, each between
the old walland ditch in the north. two ropes, to which they were con-
Men and women, dressed in their nected by two side rings. One of
finest attire, swarmed in every direc- the ends of the ropes was strongly
tion, selecting the most suitable and fixed at posts behind the rockets,
convenient situations for enjoying a andthe other was madeas tight as
conmianding view of the/('ie. The possibleat the footofthepile. Ata
funeral pile occupied nearly the given signal, the rockets, emitting
centre of the plain ; it was about smoke, rushed forward with a loud,
fifteen feet high, of a square shape, hissing, and irregular noise, tremu-
encased with planks, which gave to louslyglidingalong theropes, andin
itaneatappearance. Itwaslargeat an instant penetrating into the inte-
the base, and went on diminishing riorof the pile, and setting fire to a
insizein theupper part, terminating heapofinflammablematerials,amass-
in asquare platform where the coffin edbeforehand forthat purpose. Ina
was to be deposited. A small roof, short while the whole pilewas in a
supportedon fourbambooposts, ele- blaze, and soon entirely consumed
gantlyadorned, overshaded the plat- with the coffinand the corpse. The
form. A huge four-wheeled cart, bones or half-burnt bits of bones
decoratedin the most fantastic man- that remained, were carefully col-
ner, was descried at a distance ; it lected, tobe subsequentlyinterredin
was drawn by a great number of abecomingplace.
men, and brought to the foot of the

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
8i
procession, took amagnificent piece of cloth, called Maha-
latta, which she hadneverworn since her husband's death.
She perfumed it with the choicest essences, and, holding
it in her hands until the pi'ocession reached the front
of her house, she desired the bearers to wait for a while,
that she might offer to the body her beautiful piece of
cloth, and extend it over it. Her request was granted.
By a very happy chance, the clothhad the desired dimen-
sions in breadth and length. Nothing could equal the
magnificent sight of the body ; it looked beautiful, like a
statue of gold, when covered with that splendid cloth,
finely worked and adorned with the richest embroidery.
The corUgc having reached the place Matulabandana,
where thefuneralpile was erected, the corpse waslowered
down. The princes inquired from Ananda what was to
be done to perform in a becoming manner the last rites
over Buddha's remains. Faithful to the last request of
Buddha, Ananda said to them that on this occasion they
were to observe the same ceremonies as were prescribed
for the funerals of a Tsekiawade prince. The body was
forthwith wrapt up with a fine cloth, covered with a thick
layer of cotton to which a second succeeded, and then
;
another layer of cloth, and so on, until the same process
was repeated five hundred successive times. When this
was done, the corpse was placed in a golden coffin, and
another of the same form and size was turned over itasa
covering. A funeral pile, made with fragrant wood and
sprinkled with the choicest perfumes, was prepared.
Upon it the coffin was pompously deposited.
Atthattime,thegreatKathaba,attendedbyfivehundred
Rahans, was going from the city of Pawa to the city of
Kootheinaron. On their way, at noon, the heat was so
excessivethatthe soilappearedto burnlike fire undertheir
feet. The Rahans, extremely fatigued, desired to rest
duringtheremainderoftheday, intendingtoenterthecity
of Kootheinaron during the cool of the night. Kathaba
withdrew to a small distance from the road, and, having
VOL, u. E

82 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
extended his dugout under the shade of a large tree,
rested upon it, refreshing himself by washing his hands
and feet with water poured from a vessel. The Eahans
followed the example of their chief, and sat down under
thetrees of the forest, conversing amongthemselves upon
the blessings and advantages ofthe three precious things.
Whilst they were resting, a heretic Rahan appeared,
coming from the city of Kootheinaron, on his way tothat
of Pawa, carrying in his hand a stick, at the extremity of
which there was a large flower, round like a broad cup-
board, forming as it were an umbrella over his head.
Kathaba perceiving the man at a distance with that
extraordinary flower, the Mandawara, Erithrinafulgens,
thought within himself, "It is very rare ever to see such
a kind of flower ; it appears only through the miraculous
power of some extraordinary personage and on great and
rare occasions. It shot forth when my illustrious teacher
entered his mother's womb, when he was born, when he
became Buddha, wrought miracles at Thawattie, andcame
down from the seat of Tawadeintha. Now that my great
master is very old, the appearance of this flower indi-
cates that he has gone to Neibban." Whereupon he rose
from his place, wishing to question the traveller but he
;
desired to doit in such a way as to show his great respect
for the person of Buddha. He put onhiscloak, and, with
his joined hands raised over his forehead, went to the
traveller and asked him whether he knew his srreat
teacher, the mostexcellent Buddha. Theasceticanswered
that he knew him well but that seven days ago he had
;
reached the state of Neibban, and it was from the place
where this occurrence happened that he had brought the
Mandawara flower. He had scarcely saidthis word, when
those among the Eahans who had but entered intothe two
first ways of perfection began to wail and loudly lament
over this untimely occurrence, exhibiting every sign ofthe
deepestgriefandgreatestdesolation. Theothersthatwere
more advanced in perfectionremained calm and composed,

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
83
remembei'ing thegreat maxim of Buddha,that everything
that has come into existence must also come to an end.
The name of this heretic was Thoubat.- He liad been
previous to his apparent conversion a hermit, leading an
ascetic's life. Subsequently he became a disciple of Gau-
dama, but retained in his heart an ill feeling towards his
spiritual master, which revealed itself in the manner he
communicatedthesadnewstoKathabaandhiscompanions.
Seeing them penetratedwiththe deepestaffliction, andex-
hibiting in an unfeigned manner the grief which weighed
on their heart, he said to them "Why do you weep and
:
cry? You have no reason fordoing so
;
we are now freed
fromthecontrolofthegreatRahan. He wasalwaystelling
us Do this, or do not do that. Ineveryway he annoyed
:
and vexed us. Now every one can act as he pleases."
2 In the course of this work, allu- fanatics delivered themselves up to
sion is often made to pounhas who cruel tortures,muchin the same way
appeartohaveleda mode oflife not aswesee some fakhirs and jogies do
altogetherthesame,but varying con- even inourdays,and underoureyes.
siderablyaccording tocircumstances. A third class of pounhas affected to
All the pounhas were doubtless reli- live in lonely places, on high moun-
gious, who practised certain duties tains, insmall hutsmadeofbranches
not regarded as obligatory by ordi- of trees, and sometimes at the foot
nary people, and lived under certain oftrees, exposedtothe inclemencyof
regulations, which separated them the weather. They were hermits.
moreor lessfrom society, and distin- They clothed themselves in the skins
guished them from those who fol- of wild beasts, allowed the hairs of
lowed the ordinary pursuits of life. the head to grow to the greatest
Thedifferenceamongthemoriginated length, divided them into several
in a sort of religious enthusiasm, parts which they twisted separately
which impelled many to perform like a rope, so that, when looking at
penitential deeds of the most cruel them, one would have thought that
andsometimesrevolting nature. instead of hairs, several small ropes
Someofthe pounhas are described were hanging down on the back and
as living in villages or towns, and the shoulders, giving to them the
wearing a white dress. In many of wildest and most fantastic appear-
their practices they appear to have ance. Someofthosehermits,famous
approximatedtothe Buddhistmonks, for their science, attracted round
except that in many instances they their persons many pupils eager to
married. Others are mentioned as acquire science and discipline under
living in a state of complete naked- them. Such were the three Katha-
ness,staying in the midstoffilth and bas, whom Gaudama converted dur-
dirt. It seems that those whom ing the first year of his public life.
Alexander the Great met in some Otherstravelled through thecountry,
parts of the Punjaub, belonged to exhibiting themselves in the capacity
thisclass. Manyofthese disgusting ofpreachersand mendicants.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
84
The Rahan Thonbat bore envy and revenge towards
Buddha for the following reason. Formerly he was a
barber in the village of Atooma, where he then became
a Kalian. At the time we speak of, Buddha was com-
ing to that place, attended by twelve hundred Rahans.
Thoubat wished to make an offering to Buddha and
his followers and give them food. For this purpose he
resorted to the following very questionable expedient for
obtaining from the villagers rice and other eatables, and
preparing them for the great occasion. Thoubat had two
sons who wore the dress of Samane. He gave to each of
them a pair of scissors, and desired them to go through
the street of the village and shave the head of all the
children they might meet with, as a token of their enter-
ing into religion. The order was punctually executed.
The parents of the lads were then told, that on such an
occasion it was customary to make considerable offerings.
The offered articles, however, would be on this occasion
employed for feeding the great Gaudama, who was ex-
pectedin the place with a greatnumber of disciples. All
the people brought in large offerings of various articles of
food, such as rice, oil, butter, and other comestibles. In
this manner, by means of such an expedient, the cunning
Thoubat, without any cost to himself, was able to make
a great display of the choicest dishes to be laid before
Gaudauia and his disciples ontheir arrival to Atooma, and
earn for liimselfthe reputation of avery liberal and gener-
ousman. Buddha, acquaintedwithhisconductontheocca-
sion, refused to accept the offering, and forbade allhis fol-
lowerstoeat of the food preparedby Thoubat. Fromthat
timethe lattereverentertained ill-feelingtowardsBuddha,
though he did not dare openly to give vent to liis ])assion.
Kathaba was thunderstruck at hearing such an unbe-
coming language^ from the mouth of the Rahan Thoubat.
3 Tin; virtuous and zealous Ka- meetingofthewisest members ofthe
thaba was at once convinced of the assembly, for tiie |)urpose of ascer-
absolute necessity of soon holding a taining, and authoritatively deter-

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA. 85
He said to himself: "If at this time, when there are
only seven days since Buddha entered Neibban, there are
to be found people holding such a language, what will
mining, thegenuineness ofBuddha's on Buddha's cloak, inherited as it
doctrines. Human passions were were his spirit and his authority.
already at work, deforming more or Hence his legitimate right to be ap-
less in various ways the instructions pointed presidentor head ofthefirst
ofthegreat preacher. Many, laying council, assembled a little while
more stress on their talents than on afterGaudama's Neibban.
the authority of their departed in- Our author maintainsthatthefirst
structor, began to entertain on cer- council was held three months after
tain questions views and opinions Gaudama's demise. This important
evidently at variance with those of stepwastakenat Radzagio,thecapi-
Buddha. The enemies oftruthwere tal ofthe kingdom of King Adzata-
numerous even during his lifetime, that, who doubtless made use of his
whenasyetoverawedbyhispresence royal power to secure tranquillity
andmatchlesswisdom. Kathabasa- during the deliberations of this as-
gaciously foresees that their number sembly, under the presidency of
and boldnesswould soon increaseto Kathaba. The number of religious
afearfulextentand threatenthevery that formed the council is reckoned
existenceofreligion. Hewasroused at five hundred. Its object was, as
to exertions by such considerations, mentioned by Kathaba himself, to
and on that very moment he re- silencethevoiceofmanywhowished
solved to assemble the elders of the to innovate in religious matters, and
assembly, assoonas convenient after followtheirown views, insteadofthe
Buddha's funeral. He was, it ap- doctrines of Buddha. They wished
pears,acknowledgedbycommoncon- to shake off the yoke of authority,
sent the first of the disciples. He and arrange all things in their own
was entitled to that distinction by way.
the renown ofhis abilities beforehis Thesecondgeneralassemblyofthe
conversion, and by his great profi- Buddhist religiouswas heldonehun-
ciencyunderBuddha'steachingssub- dred years later at Wethalie, in the
sequently to that event. But a cir- tenth year ofthe reign of King Ka-
cumstancerelatedbyKathabaclearly lathoka, under the presidency of
indicates the intimate familiarity Ratha, who was assisted by seven
existing between the master andthe hundredreligious. Theobjectofthis
disciple, and the unbounded confi- assembly was to regulate several
dencetheformerplaced in thelatter. matters ofdiscipline. It is probable
During a walk, the two friends, if that a spirit of innovation had re-
such an expression be allowed, had appeared and begun to undermine
entered into a more than usual inti- the strictness of the disciplinary in-
mate communion of thoughts and stitutions, threatening to weaken the
f p e a e s l s i e n d gs i ; nto th t e he s p o e u r l so o n f of t t h h e e o ot n h e er, ha o d r t o i f cs th t e ha r t el k ig e i p o t us to b g o e d t y h , er an t d he d m ep e r m i b v e e r i s t
rather both souls were blended to- of that halo of sacredness that had
gether, and united so as to become hitherto rendered it an object of so
one in the bosom ofavirtuous, high, profoundandgeneralesteem,respect
refined, sublime, and philosophic and veneration. The council, more-
friendship. They madeanexchange over, revised the canon of sacred
oftheircloaks. Kathaba,by putting books, and purified it from all the

86 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
happenhereafter? These persons will soon havefollowers
who will embrace the profession of Eahans, and then
the true religion shall be totally subverted the excellent
:
law shall be in the hands of such persons like a heap of
unstrung flowers that are scattered by the wind. The
only remedy to such an impending misfortune is to as-
imperfections and spurious writings KingAthoka wasthen at the height
thathadbeenembodiedinit. of his power. His religious zealin-
Two hundred and eighteen years ducedhim to makeuseofallthevast
after Gaudania's death, King Dama- resources at his command to favour
thoka or Athokaascendedthe throne the development of the compara-
ofPahbotra,whichwasthecapitalofa tivelynewreligion. Duringthehold-
vastand powerfulempire. It was in ing of thecouncil, the religioustem-
the seventeenth year of that mon- pered, asit W'ere, their zeal, fervour,
arch's reign that the third and last devotion, and ardour for their reli-
generalassemblywasheld at Palibo- gious creed, in the middle of their
tra,underthe presidencyofMaugali- conferences. They resolved to pro-
pata. The last and final revision of pagate with unremitting zeal the
the sacred scriptures was made with tenetsoftheholy religion,andextend
the greatest care and labour. The it allover the world. The spirit of
pious Athoka lent to the decisions Gaudama seemed to have been in-
of the assembly the influence of the fusedintothesoulofeveryindividual
secularpower. The Pittagat, or the religious. Hisardent fervourglowed
collectionofthereligiousbooks,such in the soul of all, who from that
as it now exists, is supposed to be period had but one desire, that of
the work of that council. In the extending the boundaries of their
two following chapters, the subject spiritualempire.
of the councils shall receive the at- Thisiscertainlyone ofthoseextra-
tentionitdeserves. ordinary epochs, when the indolent
There is a most important fact to and apathetic mind of the Hindus,
be noticed here, which must be con- after centuries of a profound slum-
sidered as a most remarkable result bering, seems on asudden toawake,
of the third assembly. It forms the and, withan unexpected vigour and
grandest era in the history of Bud- youthful energy, bursting forth as a
dhism, and it iscarefullynoted down terrific hurricane, brings about the
byour Burmese author. I mean the mostastoundingrevolutions, or com-
extraordinary zealand fervourwhich motions,thatsweepawaywithirresis-
seemed at that time to have simul- tiblepowertheoldpoliticalandreligi-
taneously and powerfully acted for ous forms, to establish new ones on
the bringingabout ofthismightybut theruinsoftheformer. Thereligious
peaceful religious commotion, that zealthat seized on the Buddhists of
wastobe felt, not only inthe Indian those days,and impelled them with
Peninsula, but far Ijeyond the valley an unheard-of resolution to dissemi-
of Cashmere, the countryof Guzerat nate their doctrines, coupled with
in the west and north-west, beyond theastonishingsuccess that attended
thesnowyrangesof the Himalayain their preachings, forms one of the
the north, and the territories and most prominent periods in the reli-
kingdoms in an eastern direction. gioushistory ofthe world.

LEGEND OE THE BURMESE BUDDHA. 87
semble a council composed of all the true disciples, who,-
by their decisions, shall insure stability to religion, and
fix the meaning of every portion of the law, contained in
the Wini, the Thoots, andtheAbidama. I am, asit were,
bound to watch over the rehgion of Buddha because of
the peculiar predilection he has ever shown to me. On
one occasion I walked with Buddha the distance of three
gawots during that time he preached to me, and at the
;
end of the instruction we made an exchange of our
tsiwarans, and I put on his own. He said : ' Kathaba is
like the moon three times he has obtained the inherit-
:
ance of the law. His affectioia to my person, his zeal
for my religion, have never been equalled. After my de-
mise, it will behove him to stem the current of evil, to
humble the wicked, and condemn their false teachings as
subversive of the genuine doctrine. With such energetic
means, myreligion shall remain pure andundefiled,andits
tenets shall not be lost and drowned in the midst of the
ragingwaves of errors.' Therefore,"saidthegreat disciple,
" I will hold an assembly of all the disciples, for the pro-
motion and exaltation of the holy religion." This design
Kathaba kept perfectly secret,and made knownto no one.
At that time, four of the ablest Malla princes, having
washed their heads, and each put on a fine new dress,
tried to set fire to the funeral pile, made of sandal and
other odoriferous woods, and one hundred and twenty
cubits hig-h. Their efforts iDroving useless, all the other
princes joined them, in the hope that, by their united
exertions, they wouldbe able to set fire to the pile. Fans
made of palm-leaves were vigorously agitated over the
heap of coals bellows made of leather blew in the same
;
direction; but all the efforts were of no avail. The
princes, surprised and disheartened, consulted Anoorouda
as to the cause of such a disappointment. Anoorouda
said to them, that the Nats did not approve of their pro-
ceedings they wished that the great Kathaba should
;
arrive and veneratethecorpse, ere it be consumed by fire.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
gS
No fire could be lighted before thegreat Rahan had made
his appearance.
The people, hearing the answer of Anoorouda, won-
dered atthetranscendent merit of the great Kathaba, and
anxiously waited for his arrival. They said to each other,
" Who is this distinguished Rahan ? Ishe white orblack,
short or tall ? " They took perfumes, flowers, and flags,
and went out to meet him and honour him in a becoming-
manner.
When the great Kathaba arrived in the city of Koo-
theinaron, he without delay repaired to the place where
the funeral pile was erected. He adjusted his clothes in
the most becoming manner, and, with his hands joined to
the forehead, three times turned round the pile, saying at
each turn, "This is the place of the head; that is the
place of the feet." Standingthen on the spot oppositeto
the feet, he entered into the fourth state of dzan for a
while. His mind h—aving emerged therefrom, he made the
following prayer : " I wish to see the feet of Buddha,
whereupon are imprinted the marks that formerly prog-
nosticated his future glorious destiny. May the cloth and
cottonthey are wrappedwith be unloosened, andthe coffin,
as well as the pile, be laid open, and the sacred feetappear
out and extend so far as to lie on my head." He had
scarcely uttered his prayer, when the whole was suddenly
opened, and there came out the beautiful feet, like the
full moon emerging from the bosom of a dark cloud. The
whole assembly burst into loud applauses and continued
cheers onseeingthis matchless prodigy. Kathaba, stretch-
ing his two hands, tliat resembled two lilies just blooming,
held both feet firmly by tlie heels, placed them on his
head, and worshipped. All his disciples followed his
example, and worshipped. Perfumes and flowers were
profuselyoffered by the crowd. When this was done, the
feet slowly withdrew into their place, the pile and coffin
resumedtheir natural position. As the sun andthe moon
disappeared below the horizon, so the feet of Buddha

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA..
89
disappeared, buried as it were, in the folds of cloth and
cotton. The people, at this moment, wept and loudly
wailed their affection for Buddha was evinced on this
:
occasion more forcibly than when he entered the state of
Neibban,
The feet had hardly been concealed from the sight of
the people, when, without the interference of any one, fire
caught the pile, and soon set it in a blaze of flames. The
skin, the flesh, the muscles, the entrails, and liver of the
body were all consumed, without leaving any trace of
ashes and charcoal ; as butter or oil, pouredon a greatfire,
burn and are consumed without anything remaining. Of
the body all had disappeared except the relics. All the
pieces of cloth that served to wrap up the body, except
the outermost and innermost, were all consumed. The
relics of former Buddhas, whose lives were very long,
resembled a lump of gold. Our Buddha, whose life had
been comparativly of a short duration, had said whilst
yet alive " During my lifetime, religion has not been
:
sufficiently diffused those, therefore, who, after my Neib-
;
ban, shall obtain of my relics a small portion, be it but of
the size of a mustard-seed,and build adzedi to place them
in, and worship and make offerings to them, shall obtain
a place of happiness in one ofthe seats ofNats," Among
the relics were the four canine teeth, the two bones that
connect the shoulders with the neck-bone, and the frontal
bone. These are the seven great relics. They were in a
state of perfect preservation, not at all damaged by fire,
and are called Athambinana. Besides these relics there
were some others of a smaller diuaension, in sufficient
quantity to fill up seven tsarouts. Here is the size and
shape of those sacred remains the smallest were of the
:
size of amustard-seed, and resembled thebud ofthe Hing-
kow the middle ones equalled the size of a rice-grain,
;
divided into two parts, and looked like pearls the largest
;
were of the size of a pea, and appeared like gold.
When the pile was consumed by fire, water came down

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
90-
from the sky, asthick asthe arm, which soon extinguished
thefire. The Malla princes poured also upon it an im-
mense quantity of scented water. During all the w^hile
the pile was burning, streams of flames issued from the
leaves and branches of the trees, shining forth with un-
common brightness, without burning the trees insects of
;
every description were seen flying in swarms on those
trees, without receiving the least injury.
In the place where the corpse had been exposed during
seven days, the relics were deposited during the same
length oftime, and offerings ofperfumes and flowers were
incessantly made. Above them, a canopy bespangled
with gold and silver stars was raised, and bouquets of
flowers andperfumes were hangingtherefrom. From that
place tothe one where the ornaments were deposited, the
road was lined on both sides with fine cloth; the road
itself was covered with the finest mats. Above the road
was spread a splendid canopy bespangled with golden
stars and flowers. The interior of the building was richly
decorated perfumes and flowers were seen hanging from
;
the canopy. Around the building, masts were planted,
and adorned with the five sorts of flags. Plantain-trees
were planted on both sides of the road, and jars of cool
water were laid down at a very short distance one from
the other. From posts of well-polished wood were sus-
pended lamps to be lighted day and night. The box,
containing the relics, was placed on the back of a richly-
caparisoned elephant, and the precious remains were
honoured in every possibleway by offerings of flowers and
perfumes by dancing, singing, music, rejoicings, and loud
;
acclamations. The Malla princes, to insure the safety of
the relics, had a line of elephants drawn round the place,
then a second line of horses, then a third of chariots, then
a fourth of warriors. Such precautions were taken both
for insuring the safety of the relics, and allowing time to
everybody to come and do honour to them.

;
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
91
At that time the courtiers of King Adzatathat,* know-
ing well the tender affection their royal master bore to
Buddha's person, were reluctant to convey to him the sad
^ It is not easyto determine with His conversion probably took place
precision in what year occurred the after the death of Dewadat, four or
conversion of King Adzatathat to fiveyears subsequent to that event
Buddhism. Though his father Pim- but it appears to have been sincere
patharawasazealous Buddhistfrom and earnest. His lovefor Buddha's
the verybeginning of the preaching person wasso intense that it atoned
of Gaudama, his son seems to have fully for the harm which, under his
kept aloof from the religious move- name and protection, Dewadat had
ment that took placein theroyal city endeavoured to' inflict on his great
of Radzagio, within the precincts of relative.
the royal palace, and continued to Adzatathat reigned thirty-two
adhere to the tenets of the ancient years, that is to say, twenty-five
creed. His faith, however, in the yearsafterGaudama'sdeath. Under
hitherto national religion, that is to his reign, the first council was held
say, Brahminism, does not appearto with his consent, and a promise to
have been deeplyseated in his soul. make the decisions of the assembly
He was a shrewd, ambitious, and bereceived with respect and strictly
craftypolitician ; and from what we attended to. This is the first direct
knowof the beginning of his reign, interference of the secular power in
his political principles were of the mattersof apurely ecclesiastical na-
most elastic nature. Even after his ture. Adzatathat was, however, too
conversionto Buddhism, hedoes not prudent in his policy to persecute
appearto have scrupled in the least directlythe holders of anti-Buddhis-
to resort to the most questionable tic opinions, who as yet formed the
means for satisfying his ambition. great mass of the people. He zeal-
The disputes between the upholders ouslysupportedthenewcreedhehad
of thecontending systems had, as is adopted, but he left full liberty to
oftenthecase,shakenhisformercon- thefollowersofthepounhas. Bythe
victionswithoutimparting newones. adviceof Kathaba, Adzatathat fixed
Perhapsheremainedinthat ambigu- the beginningof the religiousera in
ous position for a political object. the year of Buddha's demise. It is
He was glad to place himself at the the one which is followed byallthe
head of the malcontents, who, on southern Buddhists. It was not the
account ofthe king's religious inno- necessityof correcting certain errors
vations, must have been numerous. in the calendar which induced the
Bethat asit may, we see the Crown king to adopt that measure, since a
Prince of Radzagio receiving with correction hadbeen madeahundred
open arms Dewadat, the enemy of and forty-eight years ago by King
Buddha, espousing his party, and Eetzanawiththeassistanceofacele-
looking uponhimas hisspiritualad- brated hermit. A religious motive
viser. This occurred about ten or alone induced the kingto obtemper
twelve years before Buddha's death. the solicitations of Kathaba on this
Withtheadviceofhis newfriend, he subject, and lay, as the point of de-
compassed and effected the destruc- parture for the reckoning of years,
tionof hisfather threeor four years the great event of the death of the
afterwards, and became king in the founderofreligion.
seventhyear before Phra's Neibban. Thetwonamesof Pimpatharaand

;
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
92
intelligence of his demise, for fear of causing in him too
great an affliction. They took every possible precaution,
and devised various means for preparing the king's mind
to bear with composure the loss he had sustained. As
soon as the monarch understood what the courtiers in-
tended to sav, he fainted three times in succession. Each
time steam baths and an abundant pouring of water over
the head restored him to consciousness. Whenhe became
sensible, he wailed andlamented for a long time. Recov-
ering from the shock of his deep affliction, he desired to
assuage the grief caused by Buddha's death by procuring
some of his relics. For that purpose a messenger was
despatched to the Malla princes with the following re-
quest " You are the descendants of the great Thamadat
:
I too, who rule over the Magatha country, boast of the
same noble origin. For this reason, I put forward my
claim for obtaining the possession of some of Buddha's
relics, which are now his representatives. I will give
directions for the erection of a beautiful and tall dzedi
wherein they shall be deposited. I and my people shall
have thus an object of worship." The princesofWethalie
and of the neighbouring states sent a similar request.
Those of Kapilawot aud Alekapa followed their example.
The kings of Rama and Pawa, the pounhas of Withadipa
also sent in their reclamations, with a threat of having
ofhisson Adzatathatareindissolubly archofBuddhism,andcountenancing
connected with the origin of Buddh- the decisions of the first council,
ismanditsspreadthroughtheMaga- whichsecuredunityamongthemem-
thacountry. To the first, Gaudama barsofthe assemblyat thevery time
owed much for the extraordinary that evil-minded individuals endea-
success thatattended his ]3reachings voured tosow theseedsofdissension
andtheconversionofremarkableper- among the religious, and upset the
sonages. InacountrylikeIndia,the fabric which Buddha's genius and
example of the king must have ex- zeal had just set up. Under the
ertedanextraordinary influenceover reign ofthose twosovereignsreligion
the courtiers and the wealthy and gainedafirmfootinginMagatha, and
powerful persons. The second ren- securedforitselfanascendancywhich
dered no less important services to it retainedwith various successes for
the cause of religion, by supporting many centuries,
openly thegreat Kathaba, the patii-

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
93
recourse to the force of arms, if their demands should be
disregarded. They soon followed their messengers at the
head of their troops.
The Malla princes, on receiving those messages, con-
sulted amongthemselves as to what was to bedone. They
agreed that, the relics of Buddha being the most valuable
possessions in the world, they would not part with them.
Many angry words were exchanged among contending
parties. Theywere almost ready to draw the sword when
a celebrated pounha, named Dauna, made his appearance.
He stood on an elevated spot, and making a sign with his
hand, began to speak in a language calculated to soothe
the irritation of the parties. Great w^as his influence over
all, since there was scarcely a man in the island of Dzam-
poudipa who did not acknowledge Dauna as his teacher.
"0 kings and j^i'iuces," said he, "hear one word that I
have to say to you. Our most excellent Buddha always
extolled the virtue of forbearance but you are ready to
;
fight for the possession of his relics. This is not good.
Let all of you be now of one mind, with cheerful disposi-
tions. I will divide the relics into eight equal portions.
Let every one be ever solicitous to multiply in all direc-
tions dzedis in honour of him, who was possessed of the
five visions, that many may feel affection for the most
excellent one." Daunawent onexplaining morefullythe
two stanzashe had recited, saying: " kings andprinces,
our most excellent Buddha, previous to his obtaining the
Buddahship, whilst he was even an animal, still more a
man and a Nat, practised the virtue of patience he
;
always recommended it in all his subsequent preachings.
How could you have recourse to open violence, to warlike
weapons, forhisrelics ? You arekings of eightcountries ;
come to a quiet and peaceable arrangement on this sub-
ject; speak to each other words of peace and good-will.
I will have the relics dividedinto eight equal parts. You
are all equally worthy to receive your share."
The kings, on hearing the words of Dauna, came to the

:
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
94
place where he stood, and entreated him to make eight
equal portions of the relics. Dauna assented to their
request. They went with him to the place of the relics.
The golden cofEn that contained them was opened, and
there appearedto their regards all the relics beautiful like
gold. The princes seeing them said :
"We
have seen the
most excellent Buddha gifted with the six glories, and all
the bodily qualifications of the most accompHshedperson
who could believe that these are the only things that
remain of him ? " They all wept and lamented. Whilst
they were overwhelmed with grief, Dauna abstracted one
of the canine teeth and concealed it in the folds of his
turban. All the relics were duly apportioned to all the
kings. AThagia, who had seen the doing of Dauna, took
adroitly the tooth, and without being perceived carried it
intothe Nats'seats, andplacedit inthe Dzoolamani dzedi.
When the partition was over, Dauna was surprised not to
find the tooth he had stolen : he did not, however, dareto
com]3laiu, as his pious fraud would have been discovered.
To console himself for such aloss, he asked for theposses-
sion of thegolden vessel wherein the relicshad been kept.
Hisdemandwas favourablyreceived, and the golden vessel
was given to him.
The Maurya princes, who ruled over the country of
Pipilawana, hearing what had been done by Adzatathat
and other kings, went also with a great retinue to the city
of Kootheinaron. The Malla princes informed them that
the relics had already been divided, and that there re-
mained nothing but the coals of the funeral pile. They
took them away, built a large pagoda over them, and
worshipped. The places where the relics were deposited
areRadzagio, Kootheinaron, Wethalie, Kapilawot, Allaka-
pata, Rama, Pawa, and Witadipakka.
King Adzatathat ordered a beautiful and well-levelled
road, eight oothabas broad, to be made from the city of
Kootheinaron tothatof Radzagio. The distauceistwenty-
five youdzanas. He wished to adorn it, in all its length,

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
95
in the same manner as the Malla princes had done the
road leading from the place where the cremation of the
corpse had taken place to that where the relics had been
deposited. At fixed and proper distances houses were
built for resting and spending the night. The king,
attended by a countless crowd of people, went to take
the relics and carry them into his country. During the
journey, singing, dancing, and playing of musical instru-
ments were uninterrupted. Offerings of perfumes and
flowers were incessantly made by the people. At certain
intervals they stopped during seven days, when fresh
honours were paidto therelics inthe midst of thegreatest
rejoicings. In this manner seven months and seven days
wereemployed in goingover the distance betweenthetwo
countries. At Radzagio the relics were deposited in a
place prepared for that purpose, and a dzedi was erected
over them. The seven other kings built also dzedis over
the relicsthey had obtained. Dauna built one, too, over
the golden vessel,and the Maurya princes erectedlikewise
one religious monument over the coals. Thus there were
at that time ten dzedis, situated respectively in Radzagio,
Kootheinaron,Wethalie, Kapilawot,Allakapata,Witadipa-
ka, Rama, Pawa, the Dauna village, and Papilawana. The
partition of the relics happened on the fifth of thewaxing
moonofNayon(June). Therewerealtogethereighttsarouts
of relics that is to say, a basketful. Each princehadone
;
tsarout ; that is to saj^, two pyis. The upper rightcanine
tooth wastakentotheNats'seats thelowerrighttoothwas
;
carried to the Gandala country ; the upper left tooth was
removed to Kalingga,and the lowerleft tooth to theNaga
seat. Theotherteethand hairs oftheheadandbodywere
distributed bytheNats in a great numberof otherworlds.
When the funeral ceremonies were completed, and the
distribution of the relics effectedin a manner satisfactory
to all parties, Kathaba, who was the acknowledged head
of the assembly, advised King Adzatathat to do away
with the Eetzana era, and establish a new one,that would

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
96
be called the era of religion, beginning with the year of
Buddha's Neibban, that is to say, on the year 148 of the
Eetzana era. The king joyfully assented to the pious
request of the Buddhist patriarch, and was exceedingly
rejoiced tohavethis opportunity of affording a freshtoken
of the great esteem he had for Buddha's person.
Many years afterwards, the great Kathaba entertained
some fear in his mind respecting the safety of the relics,
distributed over eight distinct places, viz., Kootheinaron,
Eadzagio, Kappila, Allakabat, Watadipaka, Rama, Pawa,
and Wethalie.^ He wished to have them all puttogether
in a safe and secure place, where they could be preserved
until better circumstances would afford an opportunity to
bring them forth, and expose them to the respect and
veneration of the true believers all overthe Dzampoudipa
5 We are without any direct in- sented to us as trembling for the
formation concerning the history of safetyoftherelics. Whatcouldhave
Buddhism during the twenty years causedthisgreatanxiety? Doubtless
that elapsedafter Gaudama's death. therewasastrong party, eitherwith-
Butwehaveallusionsmadeinseveral in or without the assembly, which
placeswhichclearly indicatethat the wasinimicaltotheworshippaidtothe
newreligionhadtostrugglewithmany remains of Buddha, and aimed at
difficulties beforeitcouldgain afirm procuring their totaldestruction. In
footingintheplaceslyingnorthofthe the relation of IIwen-Thsang the
Ganges. Though theyhad been the writer has met with a passage in
seatof Buddha'spreachings, though which mention is madeofa periodof
the people had been intimately ac- time when the pure doctrine alone
quainted with all his doings, it ap- washeld, and ofasubsequent period
pears that the pounhas contrived to when the worship of relics would
thwart to a great extent the results be prevailing. Itis not improbable
ofhislabours. At Kootheinaron, on thatin this passage allusion is made
the veryspot rendered illustrious by to the time when the relics were
hisdeath, \vchave seen an individual buried secretly, liy the care of Ka-
rejoicingat Buddha'sdemise,because thaba, in the neighbourhood of Rad-
he would be now at liberty to act zagio,andremainedconcealedduring
according to his wishes. He was twohundred years. Theconductof
notasolitaryinstanceofopen insub- Kathabain securing thesafetyofthe
ordination,since Kathaba felt that it relicsreveals an important fact, viz.,
wasnecessary, in orderto check the that there existed from the earliest
growing evil, to assemble a council daysofBuddhismagreatantipathy,
three monthsafter thedcatii of Gau- in a fraction of the community,
dama. Tiiisslcj)does not appearto against keepingand venerating Bud-
have produced all the good effects dha's remains. It created a schism
thatwereanticipated. The patriarch among the discipleswhichwas never
of the Buddliislic Church is repre- healedup, asthesequelwillshow..

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
97
island. For this purpose, in the year of rehgion 20, he
went to King Adzatathat and said to himthat precautions
were to be taken for securing the jjreservation of the
relics. The king asked him by what means all the relics
could be had from those who now possessed them. Ka-
thaba replied that he would know how to manage such a
delicate affair. He went to the seven kings, who gave to
him alltheprincipal relics, keepingbeside themselves only
what was strictly necessary to be deemed an object of
worship and goodwill towards Buddha's person. One
exception was made in favour of the relics deposited in
the village of Rama, because they were in future times to
be carried to Ceylon and placed in the great wihara or
pagoda. All the relics having been brought to Radzagio,
Kathaba took with him those pious articles, and went out
ofthe city. Hedirected his steps in a south-eastern direc-
tion, loaded with this precious burden, which he carried
all the way. Hav—ing reached a certain spot, he made the
following prayer: " May all the rocks and stones of this
place disappear,and therebe, inplacethereof, a fine sandy
soil may water never issue from this spot." Adzatathat
;
ordered the soil to be dug very deep. With the earth
bricks were made, and eight dzedis were built. This was
donefor theexpress puqjoseofpreventingpeople suspect-
ing the real object that both Kathaba and the king had
in view. The depth of the hole was eighty cubits. Its
bottom was lined with iron bars. To that bottom was
lowered a chapel monastery made of brass, similar in shape
and proportions to the great wihara of Ceylon. Six gold
boxes containing the precious relics were placed in this
chapel monastery. Each box was enclosed in one of
silver, the latter in one adorned with precious stones, and
so on, until eight boxes were placed one within the other.
There were also arranged 5 50 statues, representing Bud-
dha in 550 preceding existences described in the sacred
writings, the statues of the eighty great disciples, with
those of Thoodaudana and Maia. There also were ar-
VOL. II. G

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
98
ranged 500 lamps of gold and 500 lamps of silver, filled
with the most fragrant oil, with wicks made of the richest
cloth. The great Kathaba, ta—king a leaf of gold, wrote
upon it the following words : " In aftertimes a young
man, named Piadatha, shallascendthe throne, andbecome
a great and renowned monarch under the name of Athoka.
Through him the relics shall be spread all over the island
of Dzampoodipa." King Adzatathat made new offerings
of flowers and perfumes. All the doors of the monastery
were shut, and fastened with an iron bolt. Near the last
door he placed a large ruby, upon which the following
words were written " Let the poor king who shall find
:
this ruby present it to the relics." A Thagia ordered a
Nat to watch over the precious deposit. The Nat dis-
posed around it the most hideous and terrifying figures,
armed with swords. The whole was encompassed by six
walls made of stone and brick a large slab of stone
;
covered the upper part, and upon it he built a small
dzedi.
Five years afterwards, thatisto say, in the twenty-fifth
year of the religious era,^ King Adzatathat died and.
;
6 Inthe previous noteon Neibban, that mom — ent, the fifteen hundred
the writer, having forgotten to men- passions that is to say, all passions
tion the application which the Bur- —werequieted,extinguished,andfor
mese make of this term to three everputanendto.
distinct objects, supplies here the The second kind of Neibban hap-
omission, in the hope that what fol- pened near the town of Kootheina-
lows may enable the reader to come ron, when the five Khandas, or the
nearer to the true Buddhistic mean- constitutive parts of Gaudama's
ingofNeibban. being, were quieted, that is to say,
Thereare,saytheBuddhistdoctors, ceased to act, and were absolutely
threekindsofNeibbanrespectingthe destroyed.
—
jjerson ofGaudama the Neibban of The third kind will take place at
Kiletha, orpassions
;
the Neibban of theendoftheperiodoffive thousand
A'Aawrfa.v,orsupportsoftheexistence years, reckoning from the death of
of a living being; and the Neibban Gaudama. This is the period which
ofDatou, oroftherelics. he hasassignedtothedurationofhis
The first took place at the foot of religion. ThenalltherelicsofBuddha
the gniaong or bodi-tree, when Gau- that will be still existing will be nii-
damabecameBuddha. Then,tomake raculously congregated on the spot
use of the language of Buildhists at where stood the tree Bodi. After

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
99
likewise, all those that had been present on this occasion
disappeared one after the other from the scene of this
A
world. small dzediindicated the place where the sacred
relics had been religiously deposited. But in due course
of time, the place, being no longer heeded bythe people,
soon became overgrown with bushes, which screened from
sight the modest monument itself. The relics remained
buried in that manner in the bosom of the earth, until
after a long period of time there was to appear at last a
havingbeen thecentreof thedisplay could discoverthewaybywhich man
of several extraordinary wonders, can convert them to a useful and
theywill be consumed bya fire that beneficial result. He declared that
is to come out of them. They will all theeffortsofawisemanought to
disappearandvanish for ever, as the converge towards one point, that of
flamethat has consumed them. freeinghimself from allthe states of
The idea suggested to us by the existence. Thefourmeggasorways
application of the word Neibban to to perfection lead to that great re-
thesethreeobjects isthat of acessa- sult. Byscience, connected withthe
tion ofaction, cessation of existence, practiceof virtue, thewise man frees
and cessation ofbeing. Indeed, it is himself from all passions, which are
impossible not tosee in the meaning the realcauses which make a being
of this word the horrifying idea of moveinthecircleofexistences. When
absolute annihilation. The writer they are not subdued but extermi-
franklyavows that he has been, dur- nated, thereis no longer acausethat
ing manyyears, unwilling toadopta impels man into another existence.
conclusion which the obvious mean- Theendofabeinghascome. When
ing of thewords point out ina clear wespeak of the end of a being, we
manner. Hehoped thatadeeperin- understand its complete and entire
s w i o g u h l t d i l n e t a o d t h h i e m s t y o s a te c m on o c f lu B si u o d n dh m i o s r m e N de e s i t b r b u a c n ti . on, No o t r, hi i n n g o r t e h m e a r in t s er o m f s, him it . s
consonant with reason. But he has The materialistic principles of gen-
been completely disappointed in his uine Buddhism forbid us to think of
expectations. By what process of a soul or spiritual substance surviv-
arguinghas thefounderofBuddhism ing the destruction of the terrestrial
arrived to such a despairing termi- portion ofman's being. WhenGau-
nus? How hashe been ledintothat damaunfoldshispreceptsandmaxims
horrible abyss? How has he con- forguiding man in theacquisition of
trived to silence the voice of con- science and the destruction of his
science, and set aside the clearest passions, he elicits the admiration,
innate notions of the human mind? nay, the astonishment of the reader,
Gaudama took his departure from a at the sight of the profound know-
true principle, viz.: that there are ledgeof human nature whichhedis-
miseries in this world, attending the plays. But this feeling soon gives
conditionofall beingsmoving within placetoanotherofpity, sadness, and
thecircleofexistences. Butignorant horror, when one sees that he has
of the real cause that has imported been led to the brink ofNeibban.
miseries into this world, he never

loo LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
mighty ruler, full of zeal for the promotion of religion,
who would be worthy to render a becoming honour to the
relics, and to distribute them throughout the length and
breadth of the island of Dzampoodipa. This great event
shall be narrated in a following chapter.

loi
( )
CHAPTER
IV.
—
AfterBuddha'sdeath, zealofKathaba in upholdinggenuinedoctrines H — e
selectsfivehundredelders tobecomemembersofa co—uncilorassembly
Radzagioisfixeduponfortheholdingofth—ecouncil Herepairsthither
with aportion ofthe appointed members Be—haviour ofthe amiable
Anandap7-evioustohisdepar—tureforRadzagio KingAdzatathatsup-
ports Kathaba in h—is views The hallforholdingthe councilispre-
paredby his orders Anandais qu—alifiedina tiiiraculousmannerfor
sittingasa mejJiber o—fthe council Holding ofthe coun—ciltinderthe
preside7icyofKathaba Es—tablishmentofthereligioiisera
—
Destruction
ofIVethaliebyAdzatathat 77iesuccessorsofthatprince Inthedaysof
KingKalathauk
—
aasecondcouncilisheldatPatalipzitra,underthepre-
sidencyofRatha Causesthatprovokedtheholdingofasecondassembly.
Having completed the narrative of all that relates to the
relics, we havetotrace back our steps, and give an account
of the development and spread of Buddhism into various
countries.
After the cremation of Buddha's mortal remains and
the distribution of the relics, peaceably managed by the
Pounha Dauna, Kathaba, on account of the high esteem
—
Buddha ever had for him esteem which he had mani-
fested in a striking manner when he invested him with
—
his one robe considered himself as having been thereby
especially appointedto provideeffectualmeans for placing
thelaw on an unshaken foundation. As a monarchbefore
his death appoints his son to succeed him, to wield the
supreme power and keepit in hisfamily, in a like manner
Buddha had appointed his eldest spiritual son to take his
place. Being, therefore, the acknowledged head of the
assembly, he had but one object in view, the maintenance
of the doctrines and institutions of his great master iu
their original purity, and the establishment of religion on

I02 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
a firm basis. When on liis way from the town o£ Pawa
to that of Kootheinaron, to be present at the funeral of
Buddha, he had met with a Rahan, who had given him
particulars respecting the last moments anddeath of Gau-
dama, and at the same time had dared to express feelings
of satisfaction on that mournful occasion in the following
manner '' Now that our master has gone to Neibban, he
:
will be no longer amongst us, to tell us, ' You must do
this, you have to shun that such a regulation ought to
;
We
be observed; such a duty is to be performed.' shall
hear no longer the reproaches he was wont to address to
us. At present we are at liberty to do what we like, and
to follow our own inclinations." Such unbecoming, nay,
impious language, stung to the quick the ardent soul of
the venerable Kathaba. From that moment he was daily
engaged in revolving in his mind, and examining within
himself, what wouldbe the best course to be entered upon,
in order to keep intact the doctrines he had heard from
the mouth of Buddha himself, and establish upon a firm
basis the religious institutions he so much valued. " As
soon," said he within himself, "as the funeral of the most
excellent Phra shall have been performedwith a becoming
solemnity, I shall congregate together the most zealous
and learned members of the assembly, and, with their
united efforts and energy, I will oppose the spreading of
false doctrines, which obscure the true ones. I will put
down the newly-invented erroneous disciplinary regula-
tions, by setting in a strong light the genuine ones. To
prevent, in future, the re-occurrence of similar evils so
detrimental to religion, all the preacliings of Buddha as
well as the disciplinary rules shall be arranged under
several heads, and committed to writing. The books con-
taining the above shall be held up as sacred."^
1 Kathaba speaks of the Pitagat and permanency, and preventing, as
orcollection of thescriptures asof a far as human wisdom could reach,
compilation that was to be put in the introduction of new and hetero-
writing for better securing its fixity dox doctrines. I feel inclined to be-

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
103
Agreeably to the plau he had fixed upon twenty days
after Buddha'sdemise, thegreat Katliaba,profiting by the
circumstance that had brought together so many Rahans
from all partsto thetown of Kootheinaron, communicated
his views to all the Rahans congregated in that place.
Havingreceivedfrom all hisbrethren asuitable encourage-
ment, Kathaba selected from among them four hundred
and ninety-nine of the most learned. They were all Ra-
handas, that is to say, theyhad all reachedthe last degree
of perfection, with the exception of Ananda, who was but
a Thautapan, and, therefore, had only entered into the
current that was to drift him to perfection.
It maybe asked why Anandawas selected as a member
of the future council, since, in point of spiritual attain-
ments, he was very inferiorto all hisbrethren upon whom
Kathaba 's selection had fallen. Let it not be believed
that he owed this distinction to his royal extraction, or to
his beingffirst cousin toBuddha and thefriend ofKathaba,
ortothevenerableappearance whichgreyhairsimpartedto
his person. His brethrenwerefull oflove and esteemfor
him. They had the greatest regard for all that he said,
because, havingalwaysattendedonBuddha'spersonduring
lieve that this expression is put into of our era. He wentto that island
themouthof the patriarch, and that for the express purpose of makinga
in all likelihood he never uttered it. copy of the Pitagat, and bringing it
It is probable that, during the first overto his countrymen. Be that as
agesofBuddhism, thedoctrineswere it may, the question on this subject
not put in writing, but orally trans- isfarfrombeing settled. Itwellde-
mitted. For supporting this appa- serves the attention of the learned,
rently incredible assertion, we have A satisfactory solution may throw a
the testimony of the authors of the much wanted light upon the history
Cingalese collection, who distinctly of early Buddhism. When we con-
state that, during more than two sider that Maheinda, the son of the
hundred years after the introduction mighty and pious Athoka, was the
of the religion in Ceylon, tradition headof the mission, which, after the
wasthe onlyvehiclefor transmitting terminationofthethirdcouncil,went
the contents of the Pitagat. More- topreachreligion in Ceylon, it isim-
over, it is byno means certain that possiblenottosupposethathewould
theinhabitantsof theIrrawaddyval- have brought overwith him acopyof
ley possessed a copy of the sacred thecollectionofthesacredscriptures,
scriptures previous to the voyage of hadthat collection been put in writ-
Budhagosa from Thaton to Ceylon ing at the time that he left Patali-
inthe beginning of the fifth century putraonhis piouserrand.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
I04
twenty-five years, lived with him in thegreatest intimacy,
and followed him as the shadow does the body, he was
perfectly conversant with the doctrinesofGaudama, which
he had heard expounded on all occasions and to all sorts
of people. All the religious were unanimous in declaring
him worthy to be associated with those who were to com-
pose the synod. Kathaba was delighted at such an
opinion, which agreed so well with his own.
Kathaba examined afterwards what was the most be-
fitting place for holding the council. Having reviewed
successively the various cities situated in the neighbour-
hood of Kootheinaron, he was pleased with none of them.
Eadzagio appeared to him in every respect the best place
that could be selected. The city and its suburbs were
very populous the people lived in afiluentcircumstances
; ;
alms could easily be procured even for a large assembly
during any period of time; monasteries about the city
were both numerous and of great extent. All these
advantages combined together induced Kathaba to give
the preference to that city. To this his brethren unani-
mously assented.
When these preliminaries hadbeensettled, Kathaba, on
the fifth of the waxing moon of Nayon, spoke as follows
tothe members ofthe futurecouncil
:
" Brethren,you have
before you forty days to prepare yourselves, and dispose
everything to hold yourselves ready for beginning the
great and important affair for which we have to assemble
at Radzagio. Let none of you bring forward any pretext
for postponing his going to the place that has been fixed
upon, such as sickness, or the consideration of parents,
friends, relatives, or even teacher. Every one of us must
be prepared to forsake everything to promote the great
object we have in view, the exaltation of religion."
When he had spoken in this manner he took with him-
selftwohundredandfiftyreligious,andshapedhiscoursein
the direction of Radzagio. Some while afterwards Anoo-
rouda, attended by nearly a similar number of brethren.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
105
went to the same place by following another road. The
venerable pounha remained in Kootheinaron with seven
hundredbrethren. The other religious, not designated by
Kathaba, withdrew into various other localities.
Whilst these things were taking place, the ever kind-
hearted and affectionate Ananda availed himself of a por-
tion of the forty days allowed by Kathaba to proceed to
Eadzagio, to give full scope to the feelings of love he
entertained for the person of Buddha. He employed a
part of that time in revisiting the various places that had
been the favourite resorts of his beloved departed master,
the Dzetawon monastery in particular. Full of love for
the memory of Buddha, he was seen entering into the
monasteries where he was wont to serve him daily with
a most affectionate regard, his eyes bathed in tears, and
doing, out of respect for him, the same humble but devoted
services. He swept the room, made the bed, brought the
water in the same way as if Buddha had been present.
With a low tone of voice, often interrupted by sobs, he
washeardrepeating, withthe accentofadeep sadness,tem-
pered by love, "This is the place where the most excellent
Phra sat down ; this is the bed upon which he slept ; this
is the verandah through which he paced to and fro ; this
is the place where he bathed ; " and on each spot he stood
awhile and shed abundant tears. At such a sight the
people felt their love towards Buddha's person increasing
tenfold. They accompaniedhis lovingdisciple, joinedhim
in his pious offices, and with him wept as bitterly, in re-
membering the person of the great teacher, his manners
and his preachings, as they did when they heard of his
death. Having performed all these pious duties, Ananda
left that place, and hastened to the city of Badzagio.
When all the religious had congregated, the occupants
of the eighteen monasteries that were spreadin the neigh-
bourhood of Eadzagio had to leave them, and make them
over to the new-comers. All the five hundred religious
spent the festival day of the full moon of Watso together

:
io6 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
with the occupants of those places. After the perform-
ance of the usual devotions they were left alone in the
undisturbed possession of the above-named monasteries.
But the buildino's were found in such a bad order that
they required important and immediate repairs. More-
over, they were in a state of unbearable uncleanness, and
it was deemed necessary to have them well rubbed and
washed. The cause of this disordered state was this
whenthe occupants of those placesheard of the approach-
ing death of their great teacher, they had hastened to
Kootheinaron, and there was no one left to take care of
the dwellings and keep them in good order. To have the
evil remedied, Kathaba, accompanied by a large retinue of
his most remarkable brethren, went on the second day
after the full moon of Watso to the palace of King Adza-
tathat, who received him with every mark of respect, and
immediately inquired about the object of his visit. Ka-
thaba explained to the monarch the purpose of hiscoming
to Eadzagio with five hundred of the most distinguished
religious. "I desire," said he, "to confute error and to
proclaim truth. My greatest wish is to promote the
sacred cause of our holy religion. For that purpose I
have, with the concurrence of all my brethren, resolved
to hold a synod composed of the principal members of the
We
assembly. ask from you, King, the favour of caus-
ing the eighteen monasteries of Radzagio to be repaired
for our dwelling, and also to give orders for the erection
of a spacious hall, which shall bethe place of ourmeetings
for discussing various subjects relating to religion."
Adzatathatjoyfullyassentedtotheproposalanddemands
of the Buddhist patriarch. He gave full liberty for the
holding of the council, saying, " My power and that of
the law are now at your command." He gave immediate
orders for putting in perfect order the dwelling-place of
the Rahans. On the southern face of Mount Webhara
there was a cave which had been a favourite place of
resort with Buddha during the seasons that he spent at

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
107
lladzagio in tlie Weloowon or bamboo-grove monastery.
That spot was fixed upon as the fittest for the holding of
the assembly. Adzatathat summoned to his presence the
most skilful workmen, and commanded them to exert all
their skill and talents in erecting a hall worthy of the
assembly that was to meet within its precincts. The
ground was first encircled with a fence. A fine flight of
steps, made with the utmost care, led from the bottom of
the hill to the spot where was built the magnificent hall,
decorated with a profusion of the choicest ornaments, and
surpassing in beauty and elaborate work the statelydwell-
ings ofprinces. Fivehundred matsforthe accommodation
of the religious were disposed in the south of the hall.
The seat of the president was placed opposite, in the
northern part. In the centre, but facing the east, a seat
resembling a pulpit was raised ; upon it was laid a beau-
tiful fan, made of ivor5^ When the work was finished,
Adzatathat informed Kathaba that the work was com-
pleted, and the hall ready for the projected meetings.
It was on the full moonof the Wakhaong (August) that
the first conference was to take place and the council to
be opened. On the day previous some Eahans made a
remark on the circumstance of Ananda being allowed to
become a member of the council, though he was but a
Thautapan, and had still to ascend the three other steps
of Thakadagan, Anagan, and Rahanda before he became
an Arahat. This remark, made withverylittlemoderation,
greatly affected and grieved the tender heart of Ananda.
No time was to be lost ; he knew that on the following
day the council would be opened, and he could scarcely
hope to be tolerated as an exception in the midst of his
brethren. He withdrew to a cjuiot and retired place, and
resolved to do his utmost to obtain that which he felt he
was in need of. He began to meditate with much atten-
tion but the desired object of his wishes was as yet far
;
from him. He thought of Buddlia. Whilst he was con-
tinuing his mental labour until midnight, he heard avoice

;;
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
io8
tellinghimtoapply himselfto the labour of ahigherorder,
to Kamatan. Thiswas aflashof light thatilluminated his
mind. The exercise lasted until a little before daybreak.
At that time Anauda left the walking place, and went to
hisroom totake a little rest. He sat on his bed. Between
the shorttime that ittookto raise hisfeet from the ground
and lay the head over the pillow, Ananda was delivered
from thebands that keep a being inthe whirlpoolofexist-
ences, and he became a Rahanda.
On the fifth of the waxing moon of Wakhaong the 499
venerable members, attired intheircloaks and carryingthe
mendicants' pots, assembled in the hall at the entrance of
theWebharacave. Each member occupied his ownplace
Ananda's alone was without its occupant. On a sudden,
by the power of the virtue now inherent in his person,
Ananda appeared amonghis brethren. The appearanceof
his face resembled a ripe palm fruit. It was beautiful as
the moon at its full emerging from the bosom of a cloud
as a newly polished precious stone on a piece of fine cloth
;
as the water-lily bloomingin the rays of the morning sun.
It reflectedthe inwardperfection which had justbeen com-
municated to him, and exhibited it in unmistakable signs
to the assembled religious.
Every arrangement being completed, and the members
occupying in silence their respective seats, Kathaba three
times praised Buddha. He then asked the fathers of the
—
assembly which of the three parts the instructions, the
—
discipline, orthe metaphysics deserved thepriority inthe
discussions that were to begin. They answered that the
discipline, beingthe souland ornamentofreligion,deserved
the preference. He askedthem to appoint him whom they
thought the fittest to occupy the pulpit. They were
unanimous in selecting Oopali, though Ananda was worthy
of such a distinction. The reason of the selection is the
following On one occasion Buddha had openly declared
:
thatamong allthereligious,orthemembersoftheassembly,
Oopali was the most fervent in observing the regulations

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
109
of the Wini. Then Kathaba said, " Brethren, since you
have given the preference to the venerableOopali, let him
haveit." ThevenerableOopalisaidinhisturn, "Brethren,
hearkento mywords havingbeenselectedbytheassembly
:
to answer all the questions relating to the Wini, I accept
thehonourabletaskthus imposeduponme." When hehad
spokenherosefromhisplace, threw apart ofhiscloakupon
one shoulder, bowedto the members of the assembly, went
to the pulpit, sat down, and held the ivory fan in his
hand.
Kathaba, from his own seat,addressed Oopali, and said,
" Venerable Oopali, in what place has the most excellent
Phra enacted the commandment respectingthefirst of the
four sins, called Paradzika ? " Oopali answered, "In the
countryofWethalie." "To whomwasallusionmade when
this commandmentwaspublished ? " "Allusionwasmade
to Thoudein, the son of Tananda Pounha." "What was
the cause of such an enactment ? " " The sin of fornica-
tion he had committed." The president, addressing the
assembled fathers, said, " Brethren, you have all heard
what regards the circumstances connected with the first
Paradzika. Let this article be noted down, anditsadmis-
sion and sanction be proclaimed aloud." It was done so.
All the members accepted it. At that moment an earth-
quake was felt. Thesame methodwas observedasregards
thethreeotherParadzika. Theywereunanimouslyaccepted
by the members of the assembly. Oopali was successively
questioned by the president upon the other regulations of
the Wini, viz., the 13 Thiugaditheit, the 2 Donay-a-niga,
the 30 Niseggi Padzeit, the 92Padzeit, the4Walidathani,
the 75 Theikkabot, which are named Adikarana-thama
;
in all, 227 regulations. Moreover, there were added the
80 (Banawara) Khandaca and the 25 Parawira. These
several divisions form the collection called Wini Pitagat.
When thefinal sanction had been given to all those points
a mighty earthfjuake was felt a second time. The vener-
able Oopali laid down the ivory fan, rose up, came down

no LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
from the pulpit, reverentially saluted all thebrethren, and
returned to his own seat.
The president, addressingthecompany, said, " Brethren,
hearkento mywords. Ifitbeyourgoodpleasure, we shall
discuss at present the thoots or the instructions orally de-
Whom
livered unto us by our most excellent master.
shall we appoint to answer the questions I shall put him
on this subject ? " They unanimously elected Anauda,
who, having always and on all occasions accompanied
Buddha, was better acquainted with his preachings than
anyotherreligious. Thenthepresidentadded, '
'
Brethren,
if it be agreeable to you, I will duly question the vener-
able Ananda." The latter likewise said, "Brethren,
hearken to my words. Since it is acceptabletoyou, I will
answer all the questions on the thoots which our venerable
president shall put to me." Then he rose from his seat,
arranged his cloak on one of his shoulders, respectfully
bowed to the assembly, and, ascending the steps of the
pulpit, he sat down, and held in his hand the ivory fan.
Thepresident, addressingthe assembly,said, " Brethren,
in the thoots there are several parts or divisions. There
is the division called Thingiti, which has also subdivi-
"
sions. Which shall I fix upon to begin our session ?
They answered, "Let us begin with the Diga-thingiti,
which containsthh*ty-five thoots, and out of this the Silak-
handa, which includes tliirteen sermonsorthoots." It was
on the first, called Bhramadzala, that the questions were
put. The president put the following questions to the
venerable Ananda: " In what place was the Bhramadzala
thoot preached ? " lie answered, " In the iMingoou hall,
situated in the middle of a grove of mango-trees half-way
bgtween Rad/iagio and thevillage ofXalanda." "Towhom
was allusion made ? " " To Thouppya, a holder of false
doctrines, and to a young man named Bramada." •' For
what reason was such allusion made ? " " Because both
had been ungrateful to Buddha." Similar questionswere
put for each thoot of this division, and suitable answers

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
iii
were given in a like nifinner. The same mode of proceed-
ingwas observed for each sermon or thoot of the following-
divisions. When all the explanations had been given by
the speaker, all the assembled brethren, with a perfect
unanimity, assented to all that had been said.
When the work on the thoots was completed, the whole
collectionwascalled the Pitagat Thoots, Ananda rose from
the pulpit, placedthe ivory fanupon the table, respectfully
bowed to the assembly, and returned to his own place.
Thepresident, addressing again the assembly, requested
them to designate him who, in their opinion, appeared to
be best fitted for answering all questions on the third part
of the sacred scriptures, the Abidam^. Theyunanimously
selected the venerable Auooroudha. When the choice
had been fixed upon and agreed to, Anooroudha accepted
the honour conferredon him, rose from his seatand saluted
his brethren. He then gravely ascended the pulpit, T;at
down, and held the ivory fan in his hand.
The president questioned him on the seven divisions of
the Abidama, following the same order he had observed
previously in treating of the two first parts calledPitag;at.
The occujiant of the pulpit having returned due auswi^rs,
and the assembly having testified their approbation in a
unanimous manner, the council was brought to a close. It
had lasted seven months, from the full moon of Wakbaono-
to the full moon of Tabaonsr.^
2 The collection of the Buddhist those who have in their possession
scripturesisdivided intothreeparts, the Ceylonese collection, as there is
calledthethree Pitagats,orthethree no doubt that the work now under
baskets, respectivelynamed theWini consideration is an abridgmi'nt of a
Pitagat, the Thoots Pitagat, and the more voluminous compilation to be
Abidama Pitagat. The manuscript foundinCeylon,
thatthe writer has had for his use. Thedivisions of theWini are: Bi-
though correct in the main, is cer- koo Patiniouk, Bikoonee Patimouk,
tainly defective in the enumeration Bikoo Witin (probably Bikoo Win),
of the divisions and subdivisions of Bikooni Win, twelve Kandak.i, and
thethreegreat collections. Hewill, sixteenPariwara.
however, mention them, such as they The thoots are considered as the
are enumerate-i by the i5urmese instructions orally delivered 1y Ciau-
author ; the few errors that may be dama himself, either to his d'sciples
detected can easily be corrected by in private, or to the assembhd null-

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
112
Thefirst council iscalledPitzasatikaSangarana, because
it
wascomposedoffivehundredreligious. Itisalsonamed
Terika-sangarana, because it was composed of religious of
titudes, during the forty-fiveyears of divisionsof the Buddhisticscriptures
his public mission. In this collec- arementionedbythemembersofthe
tion the disciples have learned the first council as things already exist-
doctrinesofthemaster,and foundall ing and arranged with the same
the elements necessary to compose method as they have been disposed
all the treaties, which subsequently duringsucceedingages. Itiscertain
have formed the collections called that such divisions of Gaudama's
Wini Pitagat and Abidama Pitagat. doctrines did not then exist at that
No one could ever believe that the time. Areweto concludetherefrom
author of Buddhism could have that the fact of the holding of the
busiedhimself inwriting treatiseson first council is to be rejected as a
metaphysics, or minutely and elabo- mereinvention, because the mode of
rately publishing the regulations relating some particulars concerning
under which the body of his fol- that great assembly is liable to be
lowers, calledtheSanga, wereto live seriouslyobjectedto? It seemsthat
andspendtheirtime. Inhisinstruc- such a conclusion would be a too
tions Gaudama gave utterance to hastyone.
certainprinciples,which,beingappro- For establishing the fact of the
priiUedbyhisdisciplesandtheirsuc- holding of the first council, we have
ces.'iors, were enlarged, developed, theevidencesuppliedto usbyallthe
and reduced tothe shape of a trea- Buddhistic writings, found in the
tisey In fact, he sowed the seed variouscountries where thatreligion
which, being let into the soil of the has been established. Moreover,
mir/d of enthusiastic disciples, grew several monumentsofgreatantiquity
We
up and multiplied intothe volumin- allude to that first assembly.
ousabove-namedcollections. Genu- can scarcelyraise a doubt upon the
ine i^uddhism must be found in the existence of the fact. But how are
thoot.i of the oldest stamp. Any- we to account for the manner in
whereelse we meet with the Buddh- which mention is made of compila-
ismsuih asit has been developedby tions which undoubtedly were not
docto'sand commentators. existing at that time? The redac-
There are four collections of the tion of all the particulars connected
thoot>,, named Nidia Nike, Midzima with the first assembly must have
Nike,ThangouttaNike,and Engout- been madea considerabletime after
tara f|ike. They are likewise ar- theholding of the said assembly,at
ranged under fifteen heads, called: an epoch whenthe Buddhistic scrip-
Koudak^pata, Danimapata, Oodana, tures had already been arranged
Ithi, Wouthaka, Thouttanibat, Wi, under three distinct heads. The
Mama-v/outtoo, Pita-wouttoo, Tera- author, familiar with the division or
katta, Terikatta, Dzattakani, Piti- compilation into three parts, called
sambil.a, Apadana, Buddha-wattoo. Pitagats, has arranged his narration
The Abidammahassevendivisions, in such a way as to give it a sort
viz., L>ammathingakani, Wittin, Da- of agreement with a form which he
toogatta,Pouggala-pignia,Kathawat- thought must have been as familiar
too, Yi.maik, Patau. toothers as itwas to himself. It is
Theattentivereader cannot bebut probable that most of the points of
surpristtd to see howthe three great discussion,such as we find them in

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
113
the first order. The soulof Kathaba,at thehappy conchi-
sion of this important undertaking, overflowed with the
purest joy. He felt that with such a work the religious
institutions rested on a strong basis, and would last the
whole period of 5000 years assigned to the duration of
religion by Gaudama himself.
It was at the conclusion of the council that KingAdza-
tathat, with the concurrence ofthe Buddhistpatriarch, did
away with the Eetzana era, and substituted the religious
erabeginninginthe year 148ofthe said era
;
that istosay,
on the year of Gaudama's death, on a Monday,the first of
the waxing moon of Tabaong.
Here is inserted, as a genealogical link, the names of
the kings who reigned at Pataliputra, from Adzatathat
to Kalathoka, under whose reign the second council
was held.
Agreeably to the prediction of Gaudama respecting
the calamities that were to befall Wethalie on the third
year of the religious era, Adzatathat, having contrived to
sow, through the instrumentality of a famous pounha, the
seed of dissension among the princes of that city, flung
himself on a suddenwith a large force on thedevoted city,
possessed himself of it, and totally destroyed it. On his
return to his own territories, the conqueror carried away
the narrative, were actually brought once, and not givingan absolutecre-
forward before the assembly, but dit to all that is found in writings
ina shape more simpleand general, which do conveyto us many things
and less technical and positive, of great antiquity, but evidently
This is what can be said in the mixed with multifarious details of a
present imperfect knowledge of the comparatively modern origin. This
history of Buddhism, for extenu- last remark ought to beever present
ating the charge of wilful forgery, tothemindofhim who perusessome
which might be brought against the portions of the Pitagats. The huge
author of the redaction. On the mass of rubbish which constitutes
other hand, whilst prudent discre- the largest portion of the scriptures
tion commandsusnottobetoohasty istheproduction ofthe various Bud-
in passing a sweeping condemnation dhisticschools whichflourishedeight
upon the compilation, we must be and ten centuries after the first
very cautious in not admitting at council.
VOL. II. H

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
114
as captives three hundred of the princes and nobles of the
conquered state. His reign lasted altogether thirty-five
years. He died in the year 25 of the religious era. He
was slain bv his own son Oudaia-badda, who succeeded
him and reigned until the year 40. He was in his turn
murdered by his son Anoorouda, who alsofell after a short
reign by the hand of his son and successor, Manta. This
prince reigned until the year 49. He met with a similar
tragical end. HissonNagata-sakakilledhimandascended
the throne. He reigned until the year 53. Thepeople of
Pataliputra, justly shocked at the horrible and barbarous
murders which incessantly sullied the very steps of the
throne, revolted against the race of these bloody princes,
and put an end to the line of kings who are aptly called
the parricide kings.
Among the three hundred princes and nobles whom
Adzatathat had brought over from Wethalie, one of them
had a daughter remarkable for the attractions of her per-
son and the accomplishments of her mind. She was by
the order of the king raised to the position of a courtezan
in Radzagio. Whilst engaged in that course she had a
male child, whom, with unnatural feelings, she ordered to
be thrown during the night into the midst of bushes, out-
side the city. A Naga guardian of tlie place watched over
the infant and carefidly protected him. On the following
morning, the king, happening to pass by, heard the sound
thoo-thoo many times repeated. It was the Naga who
made this noise in order to attract his attention. The
king having sent one of his officers to the spot the sound
was coming from, was informed that an infant still alive
was lying there under the guard of a Naga. Moved with
compassion, he ordered the child to be forwarded to his
palace and had him carefully brought up. On account of
the sound thoo-thoo wliich had been heard, and of the
Naga that had been met on the spot, the child was named
Thoo-thoo-naga. He grew up andbecamean accomplished
prince. The people, who had rid themselves of the line

,
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
115
of parricide kings, unanimously proclaimed him king
in 63.
That monarch, not unmindful of his mother's origin, re-
established the city of Wethalie, and fixed in it the royal
residence. From that time Radzagio lost her rank of
royal city, which she neverafterrecovered. Hedied in 8
1
and was succeeded by his son Kalathoka, who, as we shall
see subsequently, had a long reign of twenty-eight years.
We must show now how there has ever been a regular
and uninterrupted succession of eminent doctors, who
have successively communicatedto each other the genuine
doctrine, from Buddhadown to thetime ofthe third coun-
cil, that is to say, during more than two hundred years.
The venerable Oopali had learned the Wini at the feet of
Buddha himself, and had forhis chief pupil the venerable
Dantaka, who in his turnbecametheteacher of the vene-
rable Thaunaka. The latter was the instructor of the
venerable Seiggiwa, who also brought up in the know-
ledge of the true doctrine the venerable and renowned
Mauggali-patta. Dantaka belonged, by birth, to the
pounha race of Wethalie. Having become a patzin, he
attained to so great a proficiency in the religious science,
that Oopali ajjpointed him the instructor of a thousand
religious in the three Pitagats. Thaunaka was the sou of
a rich merchant. He became a convertto Buddhism, and
entered as a religious at Radzagio. His remarkable men- y
tal attainments induced his superior to give him the
charge of initiating others into the knowledge of the
sacred doctrines. Seiggiwa was the son of a nobleman of
Pataliputra. On a certain day he went with many com-
panions into the monastery of Thaunaka, and found him
in a state of trance. The young visitor wondered atwhat
he saw. From admiration he passed to respect and love,
andwished tobecome adisciple underhim. He succeeded
so well in his studies that he merited to become the mas-
ter of the most celebrated of all, Mauggalipatta. Previous
to his present existence, the latter was in one of the seats

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
ii6
of Brahmas. He was incarnatedinthe womb ofa pounha
woman. When he was born, he grew up and showed a
decided inclination to become a Buddhist, and tread in
the footsteps of Gaudama. It was in 163 that the future
president of the third council became a patzin.
In the 20th year of the reign of Kalathoka, in the year
100, there happened a sort of schism amongst the Rahans
of Wethalie. Those ofthe Weitzidistrict,little regarding
the positive injunctions of the Wini, indulged in certain
practices openly at variance with them. This occasioned
strong remonstrance on the part of the Rahans living in
the western district, called Pawera. The dispute among
the religious was soon noised abroad and caused some
scandal. It was the following incident which revealed
all the peril.
The venerable Ratha was then living in the monastery,
situated in the Mahawon, in the district of Wethalie.
Chancing to travel through the Weitzi district, he heard
that on festival days the Rahans were wont to place near
the entrance of their monasteries certain vessels half full
of water, and advised the people to put therein, each of
them, a piece of silver, saying that the produce would be
employed in purchasing dresses and the other utensils re-
quired by the Rahans. They also allowed as lawful the
use of spirits, and were not very particular respecting the
observance of the law of celibacy. Ratha was greatly
scandalised at all that he saw. He boldly told the people
that it was not good to make offerings of money, because
it was unlawful for religious to possess any. He made
similar observations respecting the other trespassings.
On the following festival day no money was offered.
The Rahans were much incensedatsucha neglect. Ratha
said to the people : " Laymen, because of such irregulari-
ties, the beauty ofthe days of worship is fading, the glory
of religion is darkened. Buddha in his days forbade the
offering of money, the use of liquors, and several other
practices which are now introduced inthis place. Bythe

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
117
innovators I am held up as a reviler of the Rahaus, and
as one deficient in benevolence towards you. I, as well as
the Rahans of the royal race, attend only to the prescrip-
tions of the Wini, such as they have been laid down and
publishedby Buddha. The people repliedtohim: "Vene-
rable Ratha, you are a true Rahan, and you follow the
right way. Pray stay with us and be our teacher we
;
will abundantly supply you with the necessaries of life."
Ratha, going on his way, was always followed by the
people, who, in token of their respect and love, accom-
panied him to the Kootagara monastery, in tjie midst of
the forest of sala trees.
The guilty Rahaus, hearing of all that had been said
andfearingtheparamountinfluenceofthevenerableRatha
over the people, said to them : " We shall not join with
the Rahans of the royal race. We shall hold no inter-
course with them. We shall expel Ratha from this dis-
trict." Withthese dispositionsthey encouragedeach other
in the determination to offer a most decided opposition
and maintain their newly invented practices.
On his side, the venerable Ratha, anxious forthe safety
of the genuine practices,and zealous for the exaltation of
religion, hastened to Kothambi to warn the religious of
that and the neighbouring districts against the evil prac-
tices of the Weitzi Rahans. To those whom he could not
meet in person he sent letters and messengers to say to
them : " Brethren, before the evil-doers succeed in their
iniquitous efforts to subvert religion, and render doubtful
and uncertain the genuine regulations of the Wini, ere
they have time to set up false tenets, let us assemble, and
with our united efforts give strength and confidenceto the
good and righteous,andcrushthewickedandtheimpious."
At that time there lived on a mountain, in the Upper
Ganges,a celebrated religious, namedSamputa-kami. He
was 120 years old, and had been a disciple of Ananda.
To him the zealous Ratha applied in order to have the
questions at issue with the Weitzi Rahans finally settled.

ii8 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
He minutely ex]3laiued to him the ten pointsof discipline
on which theywereat variancewith the Wini. Samputa-
kami fully agreed with the proposal, and was of opinion
that there should be held a general assembly, in which the
points in dispute should be examined and the schism put
an end to.
Some religious, about sixty in number, appeared tohave
a leaning towards the schismatical party. They resolved
to gotoThaurya, where livedthe celebrated Eewati, whose
extraordinary wisdom equalled the quickness and flash of
the lightning. The venerable Eewati, hearing of their
wicked design, would not, in his abhorrence for their
opinions, meet them on any account. He left his own
place, and went from Thaurya to the town of Sankasa.
When he had heard that they were following him, and
were already close to the place he lived in, he removed to
Kaiinna-goutra,then to Oudampara,subsequently to Egga-
lamoura and to Tharaudzati.
At the same time, it happened that Ratha, with the
venerable Tsamputa, wished to go and have a meeting
with Rewati, inordertoplacehim onhisguardandtobring
him over to their party. They met him at Tharaudzati
in the evening, and during the whole night made him
acquainted with all the doings of the Weitzi Rahans, and
begged him to declare openly which of the two parties
was in the right. Rewati atonce pronounced in favour of
the Pawera Rahans, and condemned the opposite party on
each of the ten points in dispute, and looked upon them
as innovators and schismatics.
Duringr that time the schismatic Rahans were not idle.
They wished also to draw Rewati to their party. Having
ascertained that he lived in Tharaudzati, they went by
boat and ascended the river as far as that place. They
carried with them many presents suitable for religious.
Having landed, they took their quarters under a large
tree. Rewati, knowing their wicked intent, would not
receive their presents, nor hold communion witli them.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA. 119
Undismayed by this first check which they had received,
they tried to obtain access to the master by means of the
disciple. They offered him some presents, which in his
simplicity he accepted. Meanwhile they urged him to
prevail upon histeacherto givethema favourablehearing.
He only once made the attempt to introduce the subject
with the greatest caution. Kewati, however, was on his
guard he administered to his imprudent disciple such a
:
rebuke as to deter him from making any further attempt.
His name was Outtara. He and all the Rahans went to
Wethalie.
To calm the heat of discussion, and bring the question
at issue to a complete settlement, the Walikarama monas-
tery in Wethalie was selected as the fittest place forhold-
ing a general assembly, where both parties would attend,
and endeavour to come to a mutual understanding. Out
of an immense number of religious, 700, the most con-
spicuous for their learning were selected by Ratha and
Rewati to be members of the assembly. But to render
the discussion clearer and easier, it was agreed that each
of theten points should befirst discussedby eight Rahans,
four fromeach party. Rewati, Samputa,Ratha, and Thou-
mana representedthe western or orthodox party Sampu-
:
ta-kami, Thala, Koudyabantaka, and Wathakami acted for
the opposite party.
It was evident that in this disputethe question was not
aboutthePitagatitself; this wasadmitted by both parties.
The difficulty affected certain points of discipline, ten in
number, which were to be settled by the authority of the
KambawaandPatimauk. The eightdelegates havingmet
in a private hall of the monastery, Rewati was desired
to question thevenerable Samputa-kami on theten points
on which there was disagreement. He said : " Is it law-
ful to add to the food that is received some salt or other
condiments?" Samputa-kami answered : " It is not law-
ful." "In what place was that point settled?" "In
Wethalie, as being contrary to the spirit of the Wini."

I20 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
"What sin is entailed on him who does such a thing? "
" The sin of Patzeit." Questions of a similar import were
put as regards the drinking of milk in the afternoon, the
use of waters half-fermented, the drinking of spirits, the
receiving of gold and silver. Answers were given agree-
ably to the tenor of the Wini regulations.
When the eight delegates had come to a decision upon
the ten points of discipline, they went into the great hall
where the 700 Rahans were assembled. Ratha was the
president of the assembly. Samputa-kami was desired to
ascend the pulpit and hold the fan. The president said
to the assembled Rahans : " Brethren, ifit be pleasing to
you, I willinterrogate the venerable Samputa-kami on the
Wini, and on the ten points in discussion." He followed
the same order that had been observed in the first meet-
ing of the eight Rahans. The answers were unanimously
received and approved of by the whole assembly. Then
the president said "All discussion concerning the ten
:
points is now over let every one accept the decisions of
;
the assembly and act agreeably to them."
This second council is called Thattasakita, orthe assem-
bly of the 700 Rahans. It was held in 102, under the
reign of Kalathoka. That prince appearsto have favoured
the party of the Weitzi Rahans. The assembly lasted
eight months. The canon of scriptures was likewise
arrangedand determined as it had been done by Kathaba
in the first council.
Among the principal members of the assembly were
Samputa-kami, Thala, Koudzasambita, Rewati, Thauna,
and Samputa, who had been disciples of Ananda. Thou-
mana and Wauthabakami had been disciples of the vene-
rable Anoorouda.
Partly from tlu' countenance given by the king to the
condemned party, and partly from the obstinacy shown
by the easterners in resisting the decisions of the council,
the Buddhistic societywas divided into two great factions.
The latter, that is to say the Weitzi Rahans, established

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA. 121
the great school called the Maha Thingika. The Tera-
thaka was that of the orthodox ; it never changed in doc-
trine or in discipline. Until the third council, that is to
say, during the space of more than a century, eighteen
differentschoolsbranchedofF.=* Ofthese, seventeenoffered
3 The few and meagre particulars by the council. We may also infer
which we possess respecting the fromthisstateofthings,thatthedis-
causesthathaveoccasionedthehold- ciplinary regulations were far from
ing of thesecond council, disclose a being settled at that time. It re-
curiousstate of things asexisting in quired the experience of succeeding
the Buddhist community. The dis- generationstodetermineexactlywhat
ciplinary regulations appear to have wasbestfittedforpromotingthewell-
occupied a conspicuous part in the beingofthereligiousbody,andcaus-
discussions that took place during ing its members to live agreeablyto
the periodofthefirstcentury. Some thespiritwhich Gaudama desired to
of those regulations were of trifling infuse intothe soulsof hisfollowers.
importance. We wonder how the It cannot therefore be a matter of
religious could lay so much stress surprise toseethe assemblystriving,
uponsuchatrifleas this, " Is it law- in the midstof discussions, to elabo-
ful to put salt or other condiments ratethe framingof therulesdestined
intoarticlesof food, thatwouldhave to guide the religious in the details
beenofferedwithoutsuchrequisites? " of their daily duties. Under such
The activity displayed by both par- circumstances there could not but be
ties in the controversy indicates the agreatvarietyofopinions, supported
gradual working of opinions which withthatheatand ardourso peculiar
inthosepartshad beenalwaysinimi- toindividualswholiveestrangedfrom
caltogenuineBuddhism. In Weth- theworld. Moreover, theconflicting
alie and Thawattie, the holders of opinionsweremaintained bythevari-
false tenets had been at all times ous schools, which, from the early
bold and numerous. In the daysof periodof theexistenceof Buddhism,
Buddha, heretics were swarming in sprung upand divided themembers
those places. In the beginning of of the religious body. Circumstan-
thefifth centuryof our era, Fa-hian, tial details respecting the various
when he visited those places, says schools we allude to, would proveof
thathefoundthatreligionhadalmost the greatest advantage for elucidat-
disappeared, and that heretics were ing the state of the great religious
prevailing in every direction. We system under consideration, for en-
mustconcludefromthesetwocircum- ablingus to enterinto the historyof
stances that Buddhism never flour- its internal development, and wit-
ished inthoseplaces,or,atleast,that nessing the various incidents that
it was never the prevailing creed of have marked its progress through
themassofthepeople. ages, down to the period when it
The disputes that took place in gradually lost its footing in the In-
those days were not looked upon as dian Peninsula.
of serious moment, since we see Theeighteendifferentschoolswhich
severalreligiousofeminencesupport- have obtained celebrity throughout
ing the anti-orthodox party. King the Buddhistworld are mentioned in
Kalathoka himself was in favour of the Cingalese collection,and in that
thosewhoseopinionswerecondemned ofallthenorthern Buddhists, includ-

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
122
the sad spectacle of important changes in points of dis-
cipline and ofdoctrine. ButtheTerawadaneverchanged :
it retained both doctrine and discipline in their original
purity. All the different schools received their denomi-
nation from their respective founders.
ingthe Chinese. In the manuscript expounded here at great length and
which the writer possesses nothing withascrupulous correctness. Such
ismentionedrespecting theseschools not being the case, the author has
buttheirrespectivenames. Had the thought that it was useless to the
chiefopinionsheldout byeachschool reader to lay before him a dry and
beengivenout,theywould havebeen uninterestingarrayofnames.

CHAPTER
V.
—
Kalathoka isiticceeded by—his eldestson, Baddasena And finally by the
youngest, Pitzaniiika Thisprinc—e ishilledandsucceed—ed bya chiefof
7-obbe—rs, namedOuggasena-nanda KingTsa—nda-gutta Kin — gBanda-
sura M—iraculousdreamsofAtho—ka^smother KingAth
—
oka Hiscon-
version— Hiszealfor Buddhism Findingofthe relics Distributi—on
ofthem lliirdcouncilheld underthepresidencyofMauggalipata
P
—
reachingofreligioninvariousc—ountries,andparticularlyin Thaton
—
VoyageofBudhagosatoCeylon Establishmentofreligio7iinPagan
Variousparticulars relatingto theimportation ofthescriptures in
Burmah.
At theconclusion ofthe synod, Samputa-kamiand several
of the most distinguished members of the Buddhistic as-
sembly, astonished at the progress of schism and dissen-
sion which the united voices of seven hundred religious
had not been able entirely to root up, endeavoured to
divine, as far as human wisdom could reach, what would
be in after times the fate of religion. They foresaw that
one hundred and twenty years hence there would be at
Pataliputra a mighty ruler full of love for religion, and
zealous for its propagation, who would do much to pro-
mote its exaltation. But before the reign of that pious
monarch they saw distinctly that there would appear
many heretics, fond of their own will, coining doctrines
of their own invention, and that they would thereby
inflict the mostserious harm on religion. They had, how-
ever, the consolation to know that this was to come to
pass after their death. But who was the fortunate being
who was destined to check effectually the coming evil?
They saw him in one of the seats of Brahmas. His
name was Teissa. In due time he would come down to

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
124
the seat of man, operate his incarnation in the womb of a
pounha female, named Maugali, and would afterwards
become afamous religious under the name Mauggalipatta.
This vision filled their souls with the purest joy, which
was increased by the view of the expansion and develop-
ment which religion would receive through the zeal of
that great personage.
After a reign of twenty-eight years. King Kalathoka
died, leaving nine sons, the eldest of whom was named
Baddasena. They all reigned one after the other through
a period of thirty-three years. The last of them, Pitza-
muka, was the youngest. During his reign a gang of
robbers desolated the country of Magatha. On a certain
day a man named Ouggasena, having fallen in with that
gang,inquiredof them whatpursuit they followed in order
to obtain their livelihood. They plainly told him that
they knew nothing aboutthe tillage of the fields, andwere
unacquainted with the business of trade they had no
;
other way left for maintaining themselves but to seize by
force whatever they chanced to meet. Ouggasena, taken
up with the boldness of these desperadoes, offered to join
their company with his eight brothers. The offer was
gladly accepted. It happened afterwards that in one of
their depredatory expeditions their chief was slain. Oug-
gasena was appointed by common consent to take his
place. Being of a bold and lofty daring, he said to his
associates : "Friends, it does not suit brave and enterpris-
ing men as you are to confine your attacks to petty vil-
lages and small towns: you ought to aim higher." He
then represented to them in forcible language that King
Pitzamuka wasdeficient in courage, andneglected entirely
the duties ofa king. "The moment is favourable," added
he, "to attack Pataliputra itself." His opinion was uni-
versally accepted. The king, fonder of pleasure tlian of
business, offered little resistance. He was killed at the
taking of his capital, and Ouggasena sat on the throne,
under the name of Ouggasena-nanda.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
125
He was succeeded by his eight brothers. They reigued
successively during the short period of twenty-two years.
The last of them was called Dzananda. These princes
were not followers of Buddha, but they supported the
party of the pounhas, to which they adhered. Their
generosity towards thepounhas wasvery great. They fed
daily a great number of them in their own palace.
Amongthe pounhas who were maintained bythe king's
liberality, there was one named Dzanecka, who was much
versed in the science of astrology. Being once in the
country, he saw in himself certain signs indicating that
one day he would become a king. Having communicated
this intelligence to his mother, she wisely advised him to
ignore such dangerous signs, which would inevitably bring
the king's angerupon him, and expose him to great perils.
Dzanecka was wise enough to comply with his mother's
wishes.
On a certain day Dzanecka returned to Pataliputra,
from the country place where his mother lived. On his
arrival, he, in company with his brethren, went to the
palace to receive alms, that were to be distributed in the
king's presence in a large hall, fitted for that special
purpose. He occupiedtheforemostrank. Theking, who
sawhim,couldnothelpremarkingsomethingextraordinary
in his person. Suspicions arose in his bosom respecting
the fidelity of that pounha. He instantly felt angry with
him. Unable to control his passions, he ordered one of
his officers to turn him out of the palace without giving
him anything. The pounha had but to obey the unwel-
come summons. Stung to the quick by shame and rage,
he rose from his place. When he was just crossing the
threshold of the hall's entrance, he took off his caste's
string, and cut it in pieces he likewise broke his mendi-
;
cant's ]:)ot, and flung all against one post ofthe door ofthe
hall, uttering at the same time imprecations, and praying
that the king might never from that day enjoy rest. He
ran away as far as he could, and under a disguise he

126 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
eluded the pursuit of those that had been sent to arrest
him. He escaped into Tekkaso. There he plotted the
destruction of the king.
In one of his rambles through the country, Dzanecka
met by chancea child, whom he knew to belong toa royal
race. He at once adopted him, and brought him up with
the greatest careand attention. It wasnotlong, however,
ere he found out that the signs prognosticating promotion
to royalty were rather doubtful and somewhat insufficient.
He could not rely on him for the execution of the impor-
tant and long-cherished design he had in his heart. He
had now to look out for some other one, who could afford
him a greater subject for hope and confidence. Chance
soonservedhimadmirablywell, tothe utmostofhiswishes.
After the destruction of Wethalie by Adzatathat, the
princes that had escaped from the massacre had fled in an
eastern direction, and built a city called Maurya. New
misfortunes having befallen them, they were obliged to
search for safety in precipitate flight. One of the wives
of those princes, being in the family way, was led to the
city of Pouppaya. Having been delivered of a son, she
had the barbarity to order the little creature to be put
into a jar, which was cast in a neighbouring cow-pen.
The Natswatched overthe child, and thebull of the herd,
stationing itself near the infant, kept, with his horns and
feet, at a distance any animal that came near. The cow-
keeper, observing what was taking place, took the child
and gave it to liis wife Tsanda to bring him up as if he
were their own child. He was called from the name of
his adopted parents, Tsanda-gutta.
When the lad had come to the age tojDlay the cowherd,
he assumed among his fellow-herdsmen all the ways and
manners and deportment of a king. He appointed some
of them his ministers ; others were invested with other
mock dignities. He would sit on a tribunal, decide small
cases, and strictly enforce the execution of his sen-
tences.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
127
The Ponnha Dzanecka, who was livingiu the neighbour-
hood, hearing allthis, wished to seethe extraordinaryboy.
He recognised at a glance in the lad the sure signs fore-
shadowing his coming greatness. He purchased him for
the sum of onethousand pieces of silver, and brought him
up along with his other adopted sou. Each of the boys
had a splendid necklace of gold. On a certain day,
Dzanecka ordered Pouppata, for such was the name of the
first adopted son, to take a sword and go to Tsanda-gutta
whilst asleep, and take from him his necklace of gold,
without, however, cuttingthethread, or even unloosing it.
Pouppata, agreeably to his father's order, went near the
placewhere his brother wassleeping. He stood over him,
and examinedattentively by what means he couldexecute
his father's order. After many fruitless combinations,
finding it impossible to do so, he went back to his father
and related his disappointment. Dzanecka, without ad-
dressing him a word of blame, remained silent.
A
few days afterwards, Dzanecka called Tsanda-gutta,
and commissioned him to take a sword, and during his
brother's sleep to steal away from him his gold neck-
lace, carefullyavoiding either to cut the string or to untie
it. Tsanda-gutta went to the place where hisbrotherwas
sleeping. After a few moments of reflection, seeing but
one way to obey his father's order, he cut off at once his
brother's head, and brought entire the necklace of gold,
which he placed at his father's feet. The latter, without
giving a sign of approbation or displeasure, remained
silent.
Dzanecka gave all his treasuresto Tsanda-gutta. Hav-
ing pointed out tohim and minutely explained the course
he had to follow for obtaining the high station he was
destined to, the pounha repaired to some other place,
biddinghim remember himafterhebecame a king. With
the treasures leftat his disposal, Tsanda-gutta levied men,
and went on from success to success, until he possessed
himself of Pataliputra and killed Danauda. He received

;
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
128
the water of consecration, and began his reign in 163.
That monarch seems to have been accustomed to the use
of poisons. For it happened that, on a certain day, his
first queen, belonging tothe Maurya race, tasteda mouth-
ful of a dish prepared for the king. This caused her
death. At the time of that fatal occurrence she was far
advanced in pregnancy. The king, without a moment's
delay, ordered her belly to be opened the infant was
;
taken out and put in the belly of a goat freshly slain.
The child lived, and was called Bandasura.
Tsanda-gutta, after a reign oftwenty-fouryears, died in
187, and was succeededby his son Bandasura, only sixteen
years old. Both the father and the sou were supporters
of the pounhas, and fed daily an immense number of
them in their palace. Bandasura reigned twenty-seven
years, that is to say, until the year 214. He had alto-
gether loi sons. His first queen, called Damma, had
become the mother of two sons, called Atlioka and Teissa.
When she was pregnant of the first, she had five dreams :
First, she thought she was stretching her two feet, one
resting on the sun, and the other on the moon second,
;
it appeared to her that she was devouring the stars
third, she fancied she was eating the clouds fourth, she
;
imagined she was eating the worms' dunghills fifth and
;
finally, she imagined she was eating the leaves of all the
trees. According to the prediction ofthesoothsayers, the
five dreams meant that the son whom she had in her
womb would rule over the whole of the island of Tsam-
poudipa ; that he would destroy all his brothers, who
would unite to dispute the throne with him that he
;
would disperse all the heretics or upholders of false
tenets, who, like clouds, obscure the glory of religion
;
that he would possess all above the earth to the height
of one youdzana, and all below the earth to an equal
depth.
When Athoka was sixteen years old, his father sent
him to Outzeni to govern that city, and the territories

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
129
annexed to it. On his way to that city, Athoka had to
pass through Wedika, distant fifty youdzanas from Pata-
liputra, in an eastern direction. The town had been
founded by the princes of Kapilawot, when that city had
been almost destroyed in the days of Buddha. In that
place he married the daughter of a rich man, named
Dewa. After his arrival at Outzeni, Athoka's wife pre-
sented him first with a son, who was named Maheinda,
and subsequently with a daughter, called Seingamitta.
Athoka remained nine years at Outzeni. At the end of
that period, hearingthat his father la}^ dangerously ill, he
hastened to Pataliputra, to assist him and render all the
services dictated by filial love. On his return, having to
pass through Wedika, he left in that place his wife and
his two children. A little while after his arrival at his
father's capital, the king breathed his last, and Athoka
was proclaimed king.
The new monarch, however, found himself soon sur-
rounded by many enemies. With the exception ofTeissa,
who was born from the same mother, all his brothers
conspired against him. The oldest of all, named Thou-
mana, was the originator and leader of the rebellion.
After a protracted struggle, Athoka's good fortune pre-
vailed. His rebellious brother Thoumana was overcome
and made a prisoner soon after, he was put to death.
;
The same sad and cruel fate befel the other ninety-eight
brothers. But it took three years before Athoka could
free himself from all his enemies. On the fourth year
after his accession to the throne, thatis to say, in 218, he
received the royal consecration, and in honour of his
mother took the name of Dammathoka. He obtained a
universal sway all over Dzampoudipa.
Up to the period ofhis consecration, Athoka had always
favoured the pounhas. In imitation of his father's con-
duct, he fed daily an immense number of them in his
palace. They all dressed in white clothes. It was.only
after he had received the royal consecration that he be-
VOL. H. I

I30 LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
came a convert to Buddhism, through the instrumentality
of his own nephew, the Rahan Nigrauda. A few parti-
culars respecting this celebrated religious may not be
unacceptable to the reader.
After Thoumana's death, his wife Thoumana-dewi was
nearthe momentofher confinement. Under disguise, she
contrived to baffle the snares of her husband's enemies
and elude their pursuit. She went to the neighbour-
hood of the village of Dountsanka, a little distant from
Pataliputra in an eastern direction, and rested under a
banyan tree. A small shed was provided for her, and
the head man of the village, who looked upon her as his
daughter, supplied her with food. She was delivered of
a son, whom she named Nigrauda. When he was about
seven years old he was confided to the care of the vene-
rable Varuna, who instructed him in his monastery, and
taught him the Kamatan. He became a religious, and
was made a patzin. The monastery of the venerable
Varuna was not very distant from the southern gate of
the city.
On a certain day the young religious Nigrauda rose up
at an early hour, and having paid his respects to his great
instructor, put on his cloak, and, taking underhis arm the
mendicant's pot, left his monastery, entered the city by
the southern gate, and shaped his course towardsthe east-
ern one, with the intention of going to visit his mother.
At that very moment King Athoka was standing over the
lion's gate of his palace enjoying the cool of the morning
breeze. He saw the youngreligious passingwith a grave
and steady step. All was graceful and dignified in his
deportment. A placidjoy, a serene modesty, and amajes-
tic appearance beautified his countenance to such an
extent that, at the first look, the king felt an irresistible
affection for the young Samane. Without a moment's
delav he despatched an ofl^icer to call him. With a kind
and affectionate tone the king invited him to ascend the
steps of his palace, and insisted on serving him with his

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
131
meal. When the repast was over, Athoka said " Young
:
Samane, do you know well all the doctrines taught by
your instructor ? " "1 am somewhat acquainted with
them," replied Nigrauda modestly. " If"such be the case,
will you be pleased to explain them to me ? " He then
said inreply : "Hewho is diligent in practising the duties
that procure merits enjoys true happiness he shall be
;
exempt from death. He who neglects the duties that
procure merits is unhappy, and is in a state of death."
The king, delighted with the instruction delivered to him
by the young Samane, offered him several presents suit-
able to the religious profession. But Nigrauda would
not accept them, except in thename and for the benefit of
his instructor ; because it was he wlio had the charge of
teaching people to avoid evil, to do good, and to practise
the religious duties. As to him, he was but a disciple.
Athoka was greatly pleased with the modesty and disinte-
restedness of the young Samane.
On other occasions the king sent for Nigrauda, and
heard his instructions with such a good result that he
graduallybecame a perfect convert. By the advice of his
spiritual guide, Athoka made daily presents to a certain
number of religious of the Buddhistic persuasion. The
number of the religious who every day attended the court
to receive presents gradually swelled to the amount of
60,000. Nigrauda instructed his royal pupil on the three
Saranans and the five precepts. He infused into his soul
a tender love for Buddha and his religion. The great
change in the king's dispositions happened on the fourth
year after his coronation. Up to that time he had
favouredtheparty ofthe pounhas, as his father and grand-
father had done. He was in the habit of daily affording
food and maintenance to sixty thousand pounhas wearing
the white dress.
Not satisfied with the liberal offerings of every day,
the king said to the Rahans : "My intention is to build a
great number of dzedis in all the cities of Dzainpoudipa.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
132
But where are to be found the relics of the most excel-
lent Buddha, that they may be divided and enshrined in
the principal dzedis ? " By his order the relics were
searched for in every direction. The dzedis already built
in Wethalie, Kapilawot, Allakappa, Pawa, and Kouthei-
naron were all demolished. An exception was made in
favour of the dzedi in the village of Rama. The Nagas,
guardians of the place, would not allow that monument
to betouched. In vain did the workmen strivewith pick-
axes to demolish the dzedi. Their instruments broke in
pieces as soon as they came in contact with the building.
But in none of them could the precious deposit be found.
The kino- commanded that the demolished sacred monu-
ments should be rebuilt precisely in the same shape and
form as they stood previously. Athoka, disappointed but
undismayed by his want of success, directed his steps
towards Radzagio, and resolved not to relax in his exer-
tions until he had found the precious object of his eager
desires. Having arrived at that place,, he assembled all
the Rahansand people, andinquired iftherewas noperson
who could lead him in the way to discover the relics. In
thecrowdthere wasa Eahan onehundredand twentyyears
old,who said thatwhen he was a Samaue about seven years
old, his superior directed him totake some flowers and per-
fumes, and, leading him to a retired place, said to him,
" You see that dark bush in the middle of which there is
a small stone dzedi ; let us prostrate ourselves before it
and make our offering." When this was done he added
witha solemntone of voice, " Young Samane, observe well
this spot, and ever remember it." He said nothing more,
and we returned to our home. " This is doubtless," said
the king, "the very spot I am searching after, without
having ever been able hitherto to discover it." The king
and his people hastened to the indicated place. Great
offerings were made to the guardian Niit in order to pro-
pitiate liini. TheNat, assumingthe shapeofa young man,
removed all the obstacles that obstructed the way to the

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
133
place. When the king was near the first door, he dis-
covered the ruby whereupon was seen the above-related
inscription. On touching the bolt the door was suddenly-
opened, when, to the great surprise of all present, the
lamps that had been lighted two hundred and eighteen
years ago were found burning and full of oil ; the flowers,
withouttheleast sign ofwithering, were as fresh and beau-
tiful as those in the gardens ; the smell of the perfumes
seemed to be even more exquisite than that of new ones.
The king, taking the gold leaf, read the inscription con-
cerning him. He took all therelics, except a few that he
left therein, replaced and arranged everything as he had
found it. The finding of the relics happened in 218.^
1 Ithas been thought of someim- 8640on aSaturday,on thedayofthe
portance to mention in a particular newmoon of Tabaong(March), and
note all the principalepochs named fixedthebeginningof the new eraon
in the course of this work, and to the following day, that is to say,on
show how they stand relati\ely to aSunday, the first dayafterthe new
the Christian era. As a matter of moon ofthesame month. Thishap-
course, the starting-point for the pened in theyear691 B.C. This new
reckoningand computing of years is reckoningof yearslasted onlyahun-
theepochofGaudama'sdeath, which dredandforty-eight years, theepoch
is fixed by the southern Buddhists ofGaudama's Neibban, 543 B.C.
in the year 543 B.C. The exactness Thesecondera,themostcelebrated
of this epoch has been contested by of all, is the religious one. King
A. Cunningham, one of the greatest Adzatathat and the venerable Ka-
authorities in such matters. In his thaba, actuated by the desireof ren-
opinion, the epoch of Gaudama's dering ever memorable the death of
Neibban ought to be placed seventy the founder of their religion, and
yearslater. Butashis viewson this payingto him a homage that would
subject have not as yet been univer- be re-echoed by succeeding genera-
sally received by the learned in tions, cametotheresolution ofdoing
Europe, wewillremain satisfiedwith awaywith the Eetzana computation,
thehithertogenerallyaccepted data. and fixed a newreckoning of years,
The first era is thatof King Eet- from the annual revolution which
zana,thegrandfatherofGaudamaby witnessed that event, which, in the
his mother's side. It was made by opinion of Buddhists, is the greatest
thehelpandunder theguidanceof a of all. Intheyear 148, the firstday
famoushermit, named Deweela, who ofthe monthofTagoo(April), which
is mentionedas highlyversed in the fell on a .Sunday, was fixed as the
science of astronomy, such as it ex- beginning of the new computation,
istedin thosedays. Theking'sobject emphatically called the era of reli-
wastocorrectthe glaringerrors that gion, 543 B.C. It is adopted by all
had crept into the calendar. It is thesouthern Buddhists.
said that he did away with the era Inadditiontothisgeneralera,each

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
134
All that has been herein above related respecting the
partition of the relics by Dauna, &c., has been extracted
from the book called Nibana Thoot. But he who wishes
Buddhist nationhashad, foronerea- ally the Thaton era. It is made to
sonorforanother,particular periods, begin with the year of the arrival
fromwhich theyhave reckoned time of the two Buddhist missionaries,
andcomputed years. It is probable Thauna and Outtara, in the great
t c h es a s t it t a h t e ed re b f y orm th i e n e t r h r e or c s al i e n nd t a r r o , duc n e e d - g pl i a o c n e 23 o 7 f = Tha t t o o 3 n 0 , 6 i B n .C. the Th y i e r a i r ma of th r o el k i a -
into it owing to incorrect computa- was, atthat time, king of that coun-
tions, havegiven riseto severaleras, try. Thatperiodof yearshas lasted
which are generally known by the 1362 years. Itended in the year of
nameof the kingsunder whosereign religion 1599 = 1156 A.D. , when the
theyhave taken place, and by whose kingofPagan,Naurata-dzan,invaded
authority they have been intro- the country, possessed himself of
duced and brought into common Thaton, andcarriedawaycaptivethe
use. last king, Mein-hnit.
The Burmans have the era called It is perhaps as well to mention
Dandoratha. It was introduced by here an epoch which has been, at
Thamugdara, or, as spelt by others, all times, famous in the history of
Thamugdaritz, kingof Pronie, in the BuddhisminBurniah. Ialludetothe
year of religion 625 = to 81 a.d. voyage which a religious of Thaton,
T i h nf a o t rm m e o d na a r n c d h s is kil r l e e p d res in ent t e h d e as kn w o e w l - l n in am t . h e e d y B e u a d r d o h f ag r o e s li a g , io m n a 9 d 4 e 3 t = oC t e o yl 4 o 0 n 0
ledgeoftheastronomicalcalculations. A.D. The object of this voyage was
Themonthswere no longerinunison to procure a copy of the scriptures.
withthe seasons. What didtheroyal Hesucceededinhisundertaking. He
reformer of the calendar do to re- made use of the Burmese or rather
medy the evil? No other particular Talaing characters, in transcribing
ismentionedinthe manuscriptwhich the manuscripts, which were written
the writer has in his possession, ex- withthecharactersofMagatha. The
cept thatthe king didaway with622, Burmans lay much stress upon that
and began the reformed computation voyage, and always carefully note
with two,so that its beginning must down the year in which it tiok
be made to agree with the year place. In fact, it is to Buddhagosa
79 A.D. that the people living on the shores
Thateralastedonly562years. The oftheGulfofMartaban owe the pos-
reformeronthisoccasionwasPouppa- session of the Buddhist scriptures.
dzau, king of Pagan, who is repre- FromThaton, thecollection madeby
sented to us as well versed in the Buddhagosa was transferred to Pa-
scienceofastronomicalcompulations. gan, 656 years after it had been im-
Thismonarch imitated in thisreform ported from Ceylon.
the conduct of the king of Prome. Without the knowledge of those
He did away with 560 years, and variousepochs,itisdifficult tounder-
had his nt'W era to begin with two. stand with anything approaching to
Thishappenedin theyearofreligion clearness and exactness the datas
1182 = to639 A.D. Thisisthe com- that we find alluded to and men-
mon era used by the Burmeseup to tioned in the Burmese literary com-
thisday, and is known as the Pagan positions. Theforegoing particulars
or Pouppa-dzau era. appear to be sufficient for all prac-
We find also mentioned occasion- ticalpurposes.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA. 135
to know all the particulars concerning the places where
the relics have been deposited, &c., must have recourse to
the books called Data Win and Nalatadata Win.
On a certain day a likeness of Buddha was placed be-
fore the eyes of Athoka. The king was delighted with it.
He wished to multiply the number ofstatues, so that they
could be seen in every part of his dominions. He gave
orders forthe building of monasteries in the 84,000towns
of his immense dominions. This happened in 220 of the
religious era. It wasbut threeyears afterwards, that isto
say, in 223,thatthededication orconsecration ofthedzedis
took place, in which portions of the relics were to be en-
shrined. Throughout his realm the kingissued a procla-
mation inviting all the people to attend to the observance
ofthe eightprecepts. Theroyalmandate was dulyattended
to, and the religious festival celebrated with the greatest
solemnity. On that occasion the king made abundant
donations to the religious, and strove to display his zeal
for the promotion of religion.
Delighted with all that he had done, the king said to
the venerable Mauggalipata "I have endeavoured to
:
labour for the exaltation of religion by every meansin my
power. I have built religious monuments through the
length and breadth of my dominions I have made offer-
;
ings on the grandest scale. May I now consider myself
as entitledtothe inheritanceof religion? " Thevenerable
Mauggalipata replied "Greatprince,youhaveindeeddone
:
much towards the advancement of the good cause. But
something else more excellent still is to be performed that
you may acquire a right to the inheritance of religion."
" What is that ? " asked the king. " It is most perfect
and meritorious," replied Mauggalipata, " that you should
consecrate your son Maheinda and your daughter Singa-
meitta to the service of religion." Athoka immediately
asked his son, who was eighteen years old, whether he
would like to become a religious. Maheinda answered in
the affirmative. He was forthwith ordained Samane.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
136
Maiiggalipata acted on the occasion as president, and
Mahadewaua as master of the ceremonies. Singameitta
was similarly ordained. The president was Dammapata,
and the person acting in the ceremony was Oopali. This
happened in 223. Maheinda learned the Pitagat under
theimmediatesuperintendenceandtuitionofMauggalipata
himself. His proficiency both in the study of religious
science and in the practice of virtue was so great that his
teacherplaced him attheheadofathousandEahaus, whom
he was commissioned to instruct.
The great liberality of the king towards the Buddhists,
the efforts that he made for the promotion of the new
religion he had embraced, alarmed those who belonged to
the opposite party. The pounhas saw themselves without
support, and unable to provide for their maintenance.
They had recourse to the following expedient to secure
their livelihood, and also a well-concerted plan to weaken
their enemies. They all assumed theyellow dress, entered
into the Buddhistic monasteries, and affected to be con-
verts, without being so in reality. They retained their
own opinions,andeven as regardsregulations they refused
to comply with some ofthe ordinances of the Wini. Some
of them fed large fires ; others exposed themselves to
various degrees of excessive heat ; others affected the
mania of fixing their eyes upon the sun in the morning,
and following it in its course during the whole day.^
Many appeared to lay little stress on several portions of
the Pitao'at. As a matter of course, the true religious
2 From this passage we see that, exhibitions, farfrom being approved
in those days of remote antiquity, of and countenanced by the founder
thereexisted in the Indian Peninsula of Buddhism, were positively pro-
individualswho, led away by a fana- hibited. Though he aimed at sub-
ticism stillexisting in ourown days, duing passions,andelevatingthespi-
devoted themselves to rigorous and ritual principle above the material
extravagant penances,often inastate one, he recommended in thespiritual
of completenakedness. In thedays warfarea line of conduct more con-
of Alexander the Great, the same sonant with reason, and supplied his
fanatics were met with in the Pun- discipleswith weaponsof a farbetter
jaub. Such ridiculous andunnatural qualityand asuperior description.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
137
were much scandfilised at such a couduct, and refused to
hold communion with them on the days of worship. This
state of things, after having lasted seven years, produced
an irritation that could be no longer tolerated. Maugga-
lipata, disgusted at such a perturbation, left Maheinda at
the head of the community, and withdrew to the Ahan
Ginga mountain to enjoy some tranquillity.
King Athoka was informed of the prevailing disorder.
With the view of pacifying the inmates of the monas-
teries, he sent an officer of his household with stringent
orders to oblige thetwo parties to cometo an understand-
ing, to communicate with each other, and to worship in
common on the festival days. The officer went to one of
the monasteries, explained the royal order, and drew his
sword, threatening to cut off the head of the first Rahan
who would dare to offer opposition. One of the orthodox
party came forward, and having explained the true state
of things, concluded by firmly stating that he would not
hold communion withheretics. The officerin vain expos-
tulated, and entreated the religious not to be so tenacious
in his views, but rather to show a willingness to obey the
king's orders, for the sake of peace. The latter persisted
in hisrefusal. Theofficer, carried away bypassion, struck
offthe head ofthe refractory Rahan. An immenseuproar
followed this tragical occurrence. All hopes of bringing
about a pacification were then at an end. The officer
withdrew from the monastery, and related to the king all
the particulars as they had occurred.
Athoka bitterly deplored the nuirder that had been
committed on a saintly personage, and reproached the
officer with having outstepped the orders he had received.
His religions feelings were grievously hurt, and his con-
sciencegreatly alarmed. He sent forseveralreligious,and
consulted them as to whether he was responsible for the
murder committed by his officer. The spiritual advisers
did not agree in their decision. Some of them were of
opinion that the king was answerable for the doing of his

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
138
messenger others declared that the king, having given
;
no order to the effect of using violence, the officer alone
wasresponsible forthemurder. Such conflictingopinions
increased the king's perplexities, and threw him in a state
of great anxiety and uneasiness.
Some courtiers, grieved atthe sadness which overspread
their master's mind, advised him to sendforthe celebrated
Mauggalipata, and abide by the decision of that eminent
man, whoseknowledge was unsurpassed. The king gladly
accepted the proposal. A messenger with a great retinue
was at first sent tothe place ofMauggalipata. The king's
desires were respectfully explained. But the old ascetic
refused to quit his abode of peace. A second messenger
was despatched, but with no better success. At last a
third one was sent on the same errand, with several reli-
gious. The latter, who knew the great zeal of Mauggali-
pata for promoting the cause of religion, represented to
him the imminent dang-ers religion was threatened with,
and entreated him to come, and by his presence save it
from an approaching ruin. On hearingthis sad news the
old man no longer hesitated. He immediately left his
abode, went in the boat prepared for him, and gently
sailed down the mighty stream to Fataliputra. The news
of his coming down was spread in a moment. When the
boat was reported to be near the city, the king, with his
whole court, hastened to the banks of the Ganges. On
her nearing the bank, Athoka went knee-deep into the
stream, and helping the venerable Mauggalipata with his
royal hand out of the boat, led liirn into a garden, where
a suitable place had been prepared for his residence.
There he sat at his feet, and rendered to him the same
humble services which a disciple is wont to tender to his
teacher.
The king, anxious to alleviate his scruples and relieve
his much-troubled conscience, related the particulars of
the case of the Rahan's murder, and concluded by asking
whether he was to be considered as responsible for the

"
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
139
death of the religious. Mauggalipata said, " king, had
you, when you despatched the officer, the intention of
having any refractory Rahan put to death ? " " No," re-
plied the king. " Since you gave no such order to your
officer, and you had no intention that any disobedience to
your orders should be visited with capital punishment,
the murder of the religious can in no way be imputed
unto you,because intention isthethingthatmakes actions
good or bad, and entails merits or sin on the perpetrator.
Athoka recovered at once his peace and tranquillity of
mind. Meanwhile he entreated the venerable Mauggali-
pata to labour for the extinction of schism and the ex-
altation of religion.
Seven days afterthearrival of the greatreligious,^avast
hallwaserectedinthegrovewhereMauggalipatawas living.
At the end of it a fine pavilion made of cloth of various
and bright colourswas preparedfor the accommodation of
the monarch. Each religious had then to be examined
separately in the presence of Mauggalipata on the doc-
trines and practices he held as genuine and good. Those
whose doctrines and observances were found to be at
variancewith thePitagatwereexpelledfromthe assembly,
stripped of the canonical robe, and compelled to resume
the white dress, that is to say, the one befitting the
pounhas. The presence ofthe king silenced all murmurs,
and rendered any attempt at resistance impossible. In
thismanner the orthodox Rahanswere separated from the
heterodox ones.
To heal the wounds inflicted on religion by schism, to
restore purity of doctrine, and confirm the genuineness of
the canon of scriptures, such as had been done by Kathaba
in the first council, and by Ratha in the second one,
Mauggalipata. with the concurrence of the pious Damma-
thoka, resolved to holda third council. From the Rahans
then present at Palibotra he selected a thousand,and witli
them he regulated the Pitagat. The council was opened
in the year 235, and ended in 236 = to 307 B.C. It was

,
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
I40
presided over by Manggalipata, who was seventy-two
years old.'
At the conclusion of the council, the president, who
'' It is much to be regretted that thananyof thosewho preceded him
no details concerning that third as- orcameafterhim.
sembly of the Bud.dhists in Patali- The establishment of Buddhism in
putra could be found by the writer Ceylonis mentioned at great length
inthe manuscript he has inhis pos- in the writer's manuscript, but he
session. The cause that occasioned has thought it unnecessary to relate
the holding of the council was the allthathe has found onthis subject,
desire to establish a perfect unityin asbeingforeigntothepurposehehas
the practicesof discipline amongthe hadin view inthe publication of this
religious, and to come to an agree- book. In a foregoing note it has
ment on the subject of thegenuine- been stated how extraordinary is the
nessofthescriptures. factthat during morethan two hun-
Duringtheperiodof236years that dredyears Buddhismwaspropagated
elapsedfrom the death of Gaudama, inCeylonsolelybymeansoforaltradi-
Buddhism seems to have remained tionwithoutwriting. TheCingalese
confined within the limits of Maga- authors are so unanimous on this
tha, that is to say, north and south pointthat it cannotbedoubted. But
Behar. Its hold over the mind of inthe Burmese manuscriptwe have
the people within those limits ap- found stated, in unmistakable ex-
pears to have been very imperfect pressions, that the religious who as-
and uncertain, particularly in the sembled in the village of Malliya
parts north of the Ganges. It is wrote the Pitagat in Sanscrit, and
from the reign of King Athoka that with the Sanscrit characters. The
thepropagationofBuddhisminevery word made use of is Saiiskaraiii
direction dates. The uninterrupted which surely is designed to mean
successes which attended his arms Sanscrit. How can this be recon-
enabled him toaffordapowerfulsup- ciled with the undoubted fact that
port to the propagators of the new- all the southern Buddhists have the
religion in the remotest parts which scripturesinPaliandnot in Sanscrit,
they visited. But wehaveno reason whilstthenorthern nations that have
to suspect that he had recourse to embracedBuddhismpossessthescrip-
violence in order to gain proselytes. turesinSanscrit? Untilwecanobtain
No doubt he protected them, and further information on the subject,
supplied alltheir wants on a liberal I have no hesitation in stating that
scale. He does not appear to have the Burmans, ignorant of the exist-
extended farther the effects of the enceof tiietwo distinct languages—
countenancehe lent tothe heraldsof the Pali and the Sanscrit—are very
the new religion. He built monas- aptto mistake the oneforthe other,
teries and dzedis throughout the and that in their opinion what they
length and breadth of his immense call the language of Magatha, Pali,
dominions he erected stone pillars, andSanscritarcbutoneandthesame
which he ; covered with inscriptions language, to which differeiu names
commemorativeofhis pietyandzeal, have been given byancient authors.
a few of which exist up to this day. As the translator of a manuscript,
Athoka may be looked upon as a the writer was bound to render into
monarch who did more for the pro- English what he has found written
pagationofBuddhisminforeignparts in Burmese. Thisis thereason why

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA. 141
was acknowledged the head of the Buddhists, thought of
extending the sway of the new religion through the
whole of Dzampoudipa. Hitherto it had been con-
fined within the limits of Magatha. Now the time
had come to extend it far and wide among the nations
and tribes of the whole world. To carry out such
a bold and comprehensive plan, Mauggalipata made an
appeal to the ablest and most zealous members of the
council, and charged a certain number of them to go and
preach the true law in the countries beyond the boun-
daries of Magatha. The venerable Mitzaganti, with four
companions, was directed to proceed to the country of
Kashmera-gandara. Kewati was ordered to go to Ma-
hithakan-pantala. Gaunaka-damma Eeckita went to
Aparauta. Maha-damma Eeckita wassenttothe Mahrata
country. Damma Reckita received a mission to proceed
toYaunaka,whichisthecountryinhabitedbythe Pantsays.
The venerable Mitzi directed his steps, in company with
several brethren, towards some parts in the Himalayas.
Thauna and Outtara proceeded in a south-eastern direc-
tiontothe countryof Souwana-boumi. Finally Maheinda,
Ittia, Outtia, Thamala, and Baddathala went to establish
religion into the island of Tappapani (Cej-lon).*
Great success attended the preachings of the Buddhist
heralds. If credit can be given to all that is related in
the books on this subject, religion must have taken deep
root in the heart of the people dwelling in those distant
lands.
As regards Ceylon, there is an important fact to be
stated. It appears that until the year of religion 454,
the knowledge of the Pitagat was transmitted by means
of oral tradition. The heads of monasteries required from
he has, against his intimate convic- says the Burmese author, in former
tion, made useof theword Sanscrit, times,bydifferentnames—Audzadipa,
applied to the first compilation of Waradipa, Mautadipa, Singgadipa,
scriptures madein C'cylouunder the Sihala, and Tapjiapani. There isno
reignofKingWatakainani. doubt but the last name was cor-
* Theislandof Ceylon was called, ruptedbytheGreeksintoTapobrane.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
142
tlieir pupils to know the whole collection by heart. It is
probable that one portion of the scriptures waslearned by
onesection ofthe community, andanotherby another. In
this manner the whole Pitagat was knownin each monas-
tery, and could be rehearsed in full bythe inmates. This
state ofthingslastedtwo hundredyears. Thegreat incon-
venience necessarily attending it was soon felt so keenly
that some means had to be devised in order to render the
study of the sacred books surer and easier. In the reign
of King Watakamani five hundred religious assembled in
the village of Mallaya, and wrote the whole Pitagat in
Sanscrit, and with the Sanscrit characters. Under the
reign of thatmonarch agreat dearth prevailed all over the
island. Numerous Buddhist religious crossed over to the
continent, and established religion in many parts of the
southern portion of the peninsula. That prince also built
the famous Bayagiri monastery. With the Mahawihara
already existing, and the Dzetawon monastery subse-
quently erected, there sprung up three distinct schools.
The latter was erected in 8i i, in the time of King Ma-
thena of Ceylon. But the teaching of the Mahawihara
was the only one truly orthodox. After a protracted
existence, they wereall mergedin the Mahawihara school,
under the reign of Thiri Siuga-bodiparanna-niaba, in the
yearof the Pouppa-dzau era (Pagan era), 522 ofreligion,
;
=
1714 to 1 161 A.u.
The venerable Thauna and Outtara of the pounha race
came to the district of Thaton,^ which is called Souwana-
5 The Burmans have, from the natesuchplacesbythevulgarnames,
time oftheirconversiontoBuddhism, whilst in most of the public docu-
or at least from the period theybe- ments and in the court they have
came familiar with the scriptures, alwaysusedthescientificand uncom-
had the mania of giving Pali names mon names. Mencehasarisenacon-
to countries, large towns, and new fusion in theminds of the peopleto
placesthatweresettled bytheautho- such an extent that in many in-
rity of the rulers, in addition to the stances they believe that two names
ordinaryandcommonnames. What given to thesame placeindicate two
hasbeentheresultofsuchameasure? distincttownsandlocalities.
The peoplehave continued todesig- The position of Thaton is well

•
LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
14:
bonnii, in the country of Eainagnia, for the purpose of
establishing religion in thatdistant land, which lies south-
east of Mitzima. Thirimathauka was the king who at
that time reigned at Thaton. Previous to the arrival of
the Buddhist messengers of peace, the tow^n was desolated
by the ravages of Biloos, who, coming from the sea,
A
devoured all the newly-born infants. great consterna-
tion and panic had seized the inhabitants when they saw
known, and is between the mouths the Burmans were in a state ofbar-
of the Salween and the Tsitang barism. The pro.ximity of the sea
rivers. Its actual distance from the afforded them opportunities ofcom — -
seais about eight ornine miles. In ing in contact with other nations
thedaysofBuddhagosa,thatistosay, the Hindus in particular, who ap-
inthe beginning of the fifth century pear to have settled at Thaton in
of our era, it was a sea-port. The greatnumbers. TheRahanBuddha-
Burmese writers invariablycallTha- gosais saidtohave belonged to the
ton, not by the name of city, but pounharace,thoughhewasafervent
by that of country. They add the Buddhist.
epithet of Souwana-boumi, the land Thetown which wasthe capitalof
of gold. According to the same the territory called Henzawati can-
writers, Thaton was situated in the not, we believe, be the town which
stateorkingdomofRamagnia. From iscalledat present Pegu, but another
what is found mentioned about Ra- one, muchmoreancient, theruinsof
magnia, it appears that it comprised which are still visible close to the
t o h f re K e ou di t s h t e i i n n ct , p w a h rt i s ch or i d s is t tr h i e cts pr ; es th e a n t t eas T t h e e rn l si a d n e gu o a f g P e eg o u f . the Talaings is
Pouthein or Bassein, including the totally different from that of the
territory situated between the Irra- Burmans, but the characters for
waddyandthemountainsofArracan writing are somewhat the same. It
thatofHenthawati,betweentheIrra- ; is from them that the latter have
waddy and the Tsitang river and received their religion, the scrip-
that of Mouttama, or Mart ; aban, tures, and the characters used in
betweentheTsitangandtheSalween. writing.
It seems that the kingdom of Ra- Since thefinalconquestofPegu by
magnia extendedin the northas far Alaong-phra in the middleofthelast
as Akaouk-taong, south of Prome. century, and the extermination of a
Thelimitsthatareassignedmusthave great number of its inhabitants, the
undergone considerable changes, on remaining Peguans have gradually
account of the continual wars that amalgamated with the Burmans.
have raged in those parts, but they With their nationality they have
are those assigned byseveral native lost also their language to such an
authors. extent that it is now spoken only
Thepeojjlethat dweltin Ramagnia in a few isolated places. It is not
arecalled Moun. Theyare the Ta- unusual to meet with descendants of
laings or Peguans of modern times. Peguans whose aged parents still
They had attained a considerable speak their native language, whilst
degree of civilisation atatime when theyknow andspeakonly Burmese.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
144
the two strangers, clothed in yellow robes, setting their
feet upon the shore. They mistook them for monsters
of a new description, who were coming to increase their
misfortune. They ran to arms, and were preparing to
attackthetworeligious. Thelatter,perceivingthe danger
that threatened them, said with a meek tone of voice to
the infuriated mob, " Why do you attack us ? We are
not Biloos, nor are we come hither with any hostile inten-
tion. Know ye that we jDrofess a religion which forbids
us to take away intentionally the life of even the smallest
insect,torob, tocommitadultery, andto usespirituousand
intoxicatiug liquors. By our regulations we are allowed
to eat rice but once in a day." On hearing the explana-
tions given by the two strangers, the people of Thaton
were quieted. They received them with kindness, and
treated them with great respect. By the power inherent
in the two religious, the sea-Biloo was put to flight, and
was seen no longer. The king and the people, grateful
for the service they had received, and delighted with the
new doctrine preached to them, accepted joyfully the five
precepts, and promised to observe them. An immense
number of men and women were converted. Among the
new converts, a great many embraced the religious life.
King Thiri-mathauka was informed that, a little while
after Gaudama's death, a Rahan, named Gambawatti, had
brought thirty-three teeth of Buddha, and deposited them
in a dzedi upon the mount Inda-danoo, which lies north-
east of Thaton. Moreover, he had heard that after the
eighth season, Gaudama had gone to Mitila. Whilst he
dwelt into that place, it happened that a certain Rahan
came to remember of some of his relatives whom he had
known during a former existence. He saw them living
in Thaton. He then earnestly supplicated his great
master to condescend to go to that place and preach the
law to his relatives. Gaudama, complying with the
request, resorted thither through the air, attended by a
great retinue. He preached the law, and previous to his

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
145
departure, gave to the ruler of Thaton eight hairs of his
head. Relying on the accuracy of the information, Thiri-
raathanka felt a great desire to find out the precious
relics, in order to have them distributed in eleven towns
ofHenzawatti, in eleventowns of Kouthein, and in eleven
towns of Mouttama. Tliese three countries constitute
what is called Ramagnia. All happened agreeably to his
wishes. The relics were duly found on mount Inda-
danoo, in the verydzediin which they hadbeen enshrined,
and were distributed in the various towns, as above men-
tioned. It is probable that there occurred at Thaton the
same curious fact which we know to have taken place in
Ceylon, viz. : Religion waspropagated atfirstbythemeans
of oral tradition.
The first one who made an attempt to possess himself
of a copy of the sacred scriptures was Buddhagosa, a reli-
gious of Thaton, ofthepounha race. That man embarked
at Thaton, which was then on or near the sea. That
place is in the Ramagnia country, and is inhabited by a
people called Moun. He sailed to Ceylon in the year of
religion 943,^ under the reign of King Mahanama. He
resided three years on that island, wrote the Pitagat on
palm leaves with the Burmese characters which was
found written in the language and characters of Ceylon.
In another manuscript we read that he translated into
Pali the scriptures which were in the language of Ceylon.
Buddhagosa remained three years in Ceylon, in order to
complete the work he had undertaken. During his stay
in that island the people were so much pleased with him
that they made him many and costly presents on his
leaving their country. He brought over with him to
Souwana-boumi, which is in the Ramagnia country, a
complete collection of the scriptures.
In or about the year of the Pagan era 419,' the forty-
second, some say, the forty-fourth king of Pagan, named
6 = to400A.D. ' = to 1058 A.D.
VOL. II. K

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
146
Anaurata, having invaded the Ramagnia country, pos-
sessedhimselfof the Moiin'sterritoriesandentered trium-
phant into the venerable city of Thaton. He took away
from that place the collection of scriptures brought
over from Ceylon by Buddhagosa, as well as the most
learned amongthe Rahans. With the aid ofthese distin-
guished Rahans, religion was then firmly established in
Pagan. He became master of the whole of the Ramag-
nia country, which includes Henzawatti, Mouttama, and
Kouthein.
We
have alluded briefly to the reconciliation that has
taken place in Ceylon between the three great schools-
Two ofthem, the Bayagiri andthe Dzetawon, merged into
the great Mahawihara school, which had always held up
the orthodox doctrines. In the year that followed that
—
event that is to say, in the year of religion 1714 of the
—
Pagan's era 522^ many Rahans,natives ofThaton, Pagan
and otherplaces in Ramagnia, attended by a large retinue,
crossed over to Ceylon for the express purpose of wor-
shipping the relics and the Bodi tree, and making them-
selves perfectly acquainted with the genuine doctrine and
discipline. Asa matter of course, they joined the Maha-
wihara school. They remained on that island during
nearly one year. One of the party, named Tsapada, who
was but a young Samane, was raised to the dignity of
Patzin, according to the rules and regulations adopted
by the Mahawihara. The party, having performed their
devotions, and penetrated themselves with the spirit of
the community in which they had spent a year, returned
to their countries. The young religious, who had been
but recently ordained, applied to his superior and ob-
tained permission to remain behind in Ceylon for the
purpose of studying the Pitagat and mastering its con-
tents.
8 = to I161 A,D,

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
147
After ten years of unwearied application he went
back with four companions, named Maheinda, Thiwali,
Auanda, and Rahula, After their landing in the neigh-
bourhood of Cape Negrais, they spent a year in Kouthein,
and finally reached Pagan in the eighth year of the reign
of King Narapati-sisooofthe Pagan era 534 = to 11 73 a.d.
In this manner, by the exertions of those five religious,
the religion of Ceylon was firmly established and set up
in Pagan, In this manner the doctrines and institutions
preached and set up in Ceylon by Maheinda and his
companions were blended with the doctrines and institu-
tions which the venerable Thauna and Outtara had estab-
lished in Thaton. Both flourished in Pagan and were
much extended.^
The brilliant and glorious reign of Narapati-sisoo was
soon followed by a seriesof misfortunes, which contributed
to the weakening of his great empire, and finally brought
on its total overthrow. Pagan was taken by foreign in-
vaders. In the midst of such calamities three noblemen,
named Radzasingian, Asinkara, and Sihasoo, set them-
selves up as kings, the first in Miyntsain, the second in
Pekkara, and the third in Pinlay, in the year 662 = to
1 301 A.D. The King of Miyntsain, having treacherously
enticed Kiantza, the king of Pagan, to visit him in his
new capital, detained him under various pretexts, and
finally had him murdered. Thaunit, the son of Kiantza,
hearing of his father's detention, ascended the throne of
9 It is obvious from the testimony set up practices which were little, if
ofBurmesewriters thattheyacknow- at all, observed in Pagan at that
ledge the fact that the Scriptures time.
broughtfrom CeylonbyBuddhagosa, There wasnodoubt agreatrevival
and the institutions flourishing in ofBuddhism in Pagan, from thedays
Thaton, foundtheir wayto Paganin of King Naurata-dzau to those of
the reign of King Naurata-dzau. Narapati-sisoo. Most of the great
They likewise affirm that under the monumentswhich excitethe admira-
reign of Narapati-sisoo the religious tion of the travellerswho visit Pagan
whocame from Ceylon, imbued with wereraised during that period,
the spirit of the Mahawihara school,

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
148
Pagan, and reignedtwenty-twoyears. He was succeeded
by his brother Mou-hnit, who reigned forty-three years.
With him ended the line of Pagan kings in 730 = to
1369 A.D.
Sihasoo,the KingofPinlay, reigned in that placetwelve
years, and in 684 removed the seat of royalty to Panya.
In that place there were successively five kings, whose
aggregate number of years on the throne amounts to
fifteen.
One son of Sihasoo, named Athiukara-dzau-goun, estab-
lished royalty in Tsitkain in 684 = to 1323 A.D. Under
the reign of his son and successor, named Thirimega, a
canine tooth of Gaudama was brought to Tsitkain. The
king had the precious relic placed in a golden casket,
and enshrined in a turret of his palace. He daily wor-
shipped it.
Thirimega having died, his two sous Dzeta and Tissa
quarrelled about the crown. Neither of them ever had
the title of king both of them oppressed the country
;
during nine years. The son of Dzeta, named Budadasa,
became king, and reigned during twenty-nine years. It
was under the reign of that monarch that five venerable
religious, who were well versed in the science of the Pita-
gat, translated the whole compilation, which was in San-
scrit, into the language of Ceylon (Pali).^"
=
Tsitkain ceased to be a royal residence in 725 to 1364
A.D., and in the following year the city of Ava was
founded on the sixth of the waxing moon of Tabaong,
on a Tuesday at noon, under the constellation Pounna-
pha-shou.
On the following year, Mouhnit, king of Pagan, died at
the age of sixty-four, after a reign of forty-three years,
with whom ended the line of the Pagan monarchs. In the
great city of Ava religion greatly flourished, and in 1 134
1" It is prohablu thatour Burmese author makes herea mistake similar to
theonealluded toin aforegoing note.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
149
= to 1773 A.D., this book was composedly in the province
of Dybayen.
11 When the writer set at work to istences, slowly gravitating towards
publish the second edition of this that perfected state in which hewas
book he had at his disposal a Bur- to befittedfordischarging theduties
mesepalm-leaf manuscript, in which of adeliverer. He presents us with
he found a vast amount of informa- asketch of theorigin of the country
tionrespectingthehistoryofBuddha, of Kapilawot, and ofthe kings from
whichwaswantingin theworkcalled whom Gaudama's father descended.
Malla-linkara-wouttoo, the transla- Theabove particulars werenotto be
tionof which hasafforded matterfor found in the Malla-linkara. In all
thefirsteditionof thelegendofGau- that relates to the birth, boyhood,
dama. TheworkisnamedTathaga- &c.
,
of Gaudama, both compilations
tha-oudana, themeaningof which is, agree in the main. The variations
Praisesof him whohas come likeall arefewandunimportant. Theauthor
his predecessors. This is one of oftheTathagatha-oudanaisimmense-
Buddha's titles of honour. He is ly diffuse when he relates all that
sometimes called Bagawat, the bles- took place in Buddha's mind during
sed or benevolent ; Sugatha, he who the forty-nine days that he spent
has happily come ; Dzina, the con- around the tree Bodi. Besides the
queror. From what is statedat the important theoryof the twelve Nida-
end of the work, it appears that it nas, orcausesandeffects,hesupplies
wascomposedinthetownofDibayen, us witha complete exposition of the
sometimescalledTabayin, lyingwest whole Buiidhistic system of meta-
oftheriverMu, atadistanceofabout physics, ontology, geography, and
fifteen miles. Theplaceisat present cosmography, the various seats in
inaruinous condition. Though the which all rational beings are placed,
province continues to bear the name from the lowesthell tothelastorthe
of Tabayin, the residence of the highest of the immaterialseats. All
governor is in the townof Ye-ou, on these details are purposely omitted
therightbankoftheMu. bythecompilerof the Malla-linkara.
The compiler of the work was a Finally, the author supplies us with
Phongyie, who, according tohis own afew particulars respecting Buddha,
testimony, finished his task on the during the twenty first seasons or
thirty-eighthyearafterhehadbecome years ofhispublic life. Thestoryof
aPatzin,ninety-threeyears ago. He Dewadatispresentedatgreatlength.
was, therefore, at least fifty-eight Butwhatis more important, we pos-
years old, as he could not become a sessinthe compilationof theTatha-
Patzin before he had reached his gatha-oudanaaconciseaccountofthe
twentieth , year. The compilation three great assemblies or councils
contains636 pagesof ten lines each, held in Radzagio, Wethalie, and
iswritten on palm leaves,and forms Pataliputra, with the names of the
twohugevolumes. Wemaywellsay sovereigns who have ruledover Ma-
that the narration begins at the be- gathafrom Adzatathat, underwhose
ginning. The author informs us of reignGaudamadied, toAthoka, who
theorigin, not of Gaudania, since he promoted religion more than any of
has obtained the Buddhaship, but of his predecessors,andwhobyhisroyal
the being who was indeed hereafter influence supported the decisions of
tobecomea Buddha, but who hadto the last council. He likewise men-
move into the circle of countless ex- tionsthe namesofthereligious, who.

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA.
I50
For the purpose of creating and increasing feelings of
affection towards the most excellent Buddha,^^ who is
afterthethird council, werecommis- regardsthe drawingupofthesubject
sioned to go and preach religion in andthedispositionofits parts. Both
various countries out of Magatha. are made by Burmans. We do not
From this last expression we learn mean to say that the Burmans have
that Buddhism, until 236 after Gau- madeworksof an original character.
dama's death, had not extended its Theauthorshave extractedfrom va-
influence beyond the boundaries of rious parts of the scriptures all the
Magatha. Asamatterofcourse,our materials theywanted forcomposing
author dwells more particularly on aworkwhich might beconsideredas
the two missions that weresent, the the history of the founder of their
one to Ceylonandthe otherto Tha- religion.
ton. Heenablesus to followthe de- 12 The Burmese translator of the
velopment of Buddhism in Peguand Malla-linkara finishes his work by
Burmah, by informing us that King candidly stating the motives that
Naurata-dzauofPagan,afterthecon- have induced him to undertake it.
quest of Thaton, took the king pri- He desires to create, promote, and
soner, seized upon the collection of propagate, in the heart of future
the scriptures, and therewith carried generations,religioussentiments,and
to hiscapital all the best informed of feelingsof the tenderestaffection for
the Phongyies, in 1056 a.d. Our the person of Buddha and his doc-
author brings his narration to the trine, that is to say, the lawand the
time of the foundation of Ava, in assembly of the perfect. Such are
1365 A.D. the loftyobjects hehad in view when
In imitationof all other compilers, hebegantowrite. Hewasencouraged
our author ends his narrative with inhisdifficulttask bypurelyreligious
the following pious wishes. Asa fit considerations, viz., the promotion
rewardof thegood work that I have and triumph of Buddhism. For
happily brought to a close, I desire securing the attainment of what he
to become in some future existence considered tobeamostdesirableend,
a true Buddha, possessing all the hesummoned allhis abilities with a
sciencewhichwillenable me to know- most praiseworthyenergyand perse-
all beings, their state and condition, verance.
and all the relations subsisting be- With a somewhat different object
tweenthem, andlikewisetobegifted in view, the Burmese work has been
withatrue compassion forand bene- translatedintoa European language.
volencetowardsallbeings,whichwill Thetranslationhasbeenaccompanied
promptmeto labourfor theirdeliver- with notes intended to explain the
ance. I desire that during the exis- text, which would otherwise prove,
tences which are to precede the last in many parts, almost unintelligible
one, I may continually practise the to the generality of readers. The
ten greatand principalvirtues. May principlesof Buddhism, such asthey
myfather,mother,relatives,teachers, areheld and professed by Buddhists
and friends, have their share in this ingeneral, but in particular by those
mygoodwork inhabiting Hurniah, have received a
!
Though far more comprehensive certain degreeof attention, and have
than that of the author of Malla- beenexaminedascarefullyaspossible
linkara,thecompilationoftheTatha- from a Buddhistic point of view.
gatha-oudana is very inferior toit as Thatgreat religious system has been

LEGEND OF THE BURMESE BUDDHA. 151
greater than the three rationalbeings, towards his glorious
perfections, as well as the law and the assembly, I have,
to the best of my abilities, endeavoured to translate from
the Pali into Burmese the sacred book called Malla-
liukara-wouttoo, or history of the most excellent flower.
considered, as it is in itself, witliout studyofBuddhisminBurmah,where
any regard to its intrinsic merits or it hasbeenfor centuriesthe onlyre-
demerits. Tlienotesarenotdesigned ligiouscreed. Aportion oftheknow-
tobe anapologyor a confutation of ledgethusacquiredhasbeenembodied
Buddhism, but an exposition of its in the foregoing notes, with the in-
doctrines, such as theyare found in tentionof compressing withina nar-
the bestwritings and believed byits row compass the elementary prin-
votaries. When certain tenets or ciplesandgeneral notions of Buddh-
practices were to be accounted for, ism, affordingtherebyto thereaders,
recourse hasalways been hadto the whocannothaveaccesstothevolumi-
generalprinciplesofBuddhismandto nouswritingsof theFrenchandGer-
the notions certainly prevailing at man Orientalistsava?is, on the great
variousperiodsinBuddhistcountries. religioussystemofEasternAsia,com-
Itis needless to add that the notes, parativelyeasymeansto obtain some
having been hurriedlywritten in the information on a religion, which,
midst of almost uninterrupted and false as it is, deserves to be known
time-absorbingoccupations,aredesti- and understood, since in pointofan-
tute of pretension either to deep re- tiquity itissecond tonone exceptto
search orscientific merit. Informer Brahminism,andasregardsdiffusion
years, the writer bestowed a certain extends its swayover probably one-
amount of time and efforts on the fifthofthehumanrace.

t '53 )
AN ABSTRACT
OP
A FEW SMALL DZATS, AND OF TWO PRINCIPAL
ONES, CALLED
NEMl AND DZANECKA.
The writer has thought that it would not be without
interest to the reader to make a few remarks respecting
the five hundred and ten Dzats so famous amongst the
Burmese, and to give as a specimen of those compositions
the abbreviated translation of some of those fabulous
accounts. We will begin with a few of the small Dzats,
and end with the compendious summaries of two of the
great ones, known underthe namesofNemiand Dzanecka.
The Buddhists of these parts maintain that all the Dzats
contain a short and concise narrative of some of the
circumstances attending certain existences of Gaudama,
when he was born in the state of animal, man, prince,
nobleman, poor, rich, Nat, &c. The narrator is no other
than Gaudama himself, who is supposed to have conde-
scended to make his disciples and the crowds of hearers
acquainted with certain particulars relating to his person
whilst he was passing through the slow process of metem-
psychosis and gradually gravitating towards the perfec-
tion he had atlast reached. In fact, each of these pieces
is prefaced with these words : When the most excellent

:
154 AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
Buddlia was in such a monastery, surrounded with his
disciples, he spoke as follows, &c.
It is not improbablethat some of these stories may have
been told by Gaudama for the two following purposes
First, to impress his hearers with a profound respect for
his incompai'able wisdom, which enabled him to penetrate
into the deep recesses of the past, and to bring to light
some events hitherto buriedin its dark bosom. The second
and principal object he had in view was to give some
important lessons to his disciples, to correct some of their
defects, and stir up others to the practice of the highest
deeds which he had himself performed during former
existences. On his respect Gaudama followedthepractice
ofall Eastern sages, whohadrecoursetothe use ofparables,
similitudes,apologues,&c.,inordertoconvey, underagentle,
amiable, graceful, and interestingform, the most important
instructions, designed to enlighten the mind and correct
the heart.
The collection or compilation comprises most of those
fables that aretobe met with amongst mostof the Asiatic
nations,whence they have found their way to Europe, first
among the Greeks, and next the Western nations. The
writer has been not a little surprised to find in that collec-
tion a number of fables the very same as those so inimi-
tably narrated by the great French fabulist, the good La
Fontaine. This is another confirmation to the old adage,
There is nothing new under the sun.
These stories have certainly an Indian origin ; at least
the Burmans have received them, as almost all the things
that are connected with their religion, from that quarter.
Under despotic governments, the plain and naked truth
cannot show itself, or make its voice to be heard, without
exposing its friends to the most imminent dangers on
the part of those tyrants who practically maintain that
their will must ever stand abovetruth and reason. Stories
nicely told were the pleasing and innocent but necessary
dress which that sacred goddess was obliged to wear in

AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS. 155
order tomakeherpresence supportable to the despots, and
help her friends to find favour with those whose absolute
and uncontrollable sway made everybody bow the head in
their awful though detested presence.
Thefirstfive hundred storieshave, itseems, nohistorical
valuewhatever. They are mostofthem short andconcise.
But the last ten may very likely contain many facts or
allusionsto individuals and places that might afford a clue
to some parts of the history and geography of India in
days of a remote antiquity. A complete translation ofthe
ten Uzats might not be without interest, provided such a
work be accompanied with copious notes, made by a com-
petent person, well acquainted with the ancient history of
India.
All the stories end with a most important disclosure
made by Gaudama himself. The personage that has
played the most important and praiseworthy role is, as a
matter of course, our Buddha himself. Those who be-
friended him, assisted him, and rendered him any services,
are those whosubsequently became his favourite and most
distinguisheddisciples and hearers
;
whilstthose who acted
in any reprehensible manner, who opposed him and did
him harm, afterwards became the individuals who were in
his days heretics or holders of false doctrines, and in par-
ticular his arch enemy, the notoriously wicked Dewadat.
The compilation of all these stories is prefaced as fol-
—
lows In the country of Amarawadi lived a pounha
:
named Thoumeda. After the death of his father he
became the owner of a considerable estate. Having
enjoyed it during many years, he began to reflect on the
many and various accidents attending human life, and
came to the resolution of leaving the world. He therefore
distributed in alms allhis riches, and withdrew into soli-
tude, to lead an ascetic life. He soon reached a high
degree of perfection. At thattime Deipinkara, one in the
series of the twenty-eight Buddhas, came to that country,
attended by400,000 Kahans, tobeghisfood. Our llathee

156 AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
Thoiinieda, having nothing to offer to the great Buddha
and the assembly, came, threw himself at his feet, and
delivered himself up soul and body to his service. In
another compilationit is stated that Thoumeda had volun-
teeredhis services to level a portion of a roadthat Deipin-
kara was to follow. The work was finished, with the
exception of a small gap that was not yet filled, when
the Buddha made his appearance. The hermit, without a
moment's hesitation, flung himself on the ground, and
bridged the place with his own body.
It was at the sight of such a perfect abnegation of self
that Buddha gave to Thoumeda the assurance that one
day he would become a Buddha. On that occasion great
wonders took place.
From that time he began to practise with a fervent
earnestnessthe great virtues and perfectionsprescribedby
the law. The whole period of time that elapsed from the
time Gaudama was the pounha Thoumeda to the time he
—
became Prince Wethandara that is to say, reached that
existence which immediately preceded the last one, when
—
he became Buddha is of four thinscies and one hundred
thousand worlds or revolutions of nature. A detailed
account of the most meritorious and interesting" actions
performedbyhim during several existencesthatillustrated
that almost incalculable period is to be found in the great
dzedi of Ceylon.
The accounts must be short and concise, otherwise the
dzedi above referred to, how large soeverwe may suppose
it to have been, could never have held them.

( 157 )
THE FOX AND THE LION.
I. When the most excellent Bnddlia was in the Dzeta-
won monastery, surrounded by his disciples, desiring to
correct a religious who was in the habit of keeping bad
company, he narrated the following story At the time
:
that the Princes Bramanas reigned at Baranathee, Phra-
laong was then a lion, father to two little ones, one male
and the other female. The first was named Menandza.
The lion's household, when Menandza was grown up and
had married, was composed in all of five individuals.
Menandza, strong and bold, went out every day in quest
of prey for the support ofhis four relationsthat remained
in the den. One day, in the middle of one of his preda-
tory excursions, he happened to meet with a fox, which
was lying on his belly, in a most respectful posture. On
being asked by the proud lion, with a terrific voice,
heightened by a threatening glance, what he was doing,
the fox respectfully answered "I am humbly prostrated
:
here to do homage and pay my respects to your majesty."
"Well," said Menandza andhe took him aliveto his den.
;
As soon as the father saw the fox, he said to his son
:
"My son, the fox is ananimal full of cunning and deceit,
faithless, withouthonour, addictedto all wicked practices,
andalwaysengaged and embroiled in somebad affairs be
;
on your guard beware of such a companion, and forth-
;
with sendhimaway." Unheedinghisfather'swise advice,
Menandza persisted in his resolution, and kept his new
friend with him.
On a certain day the fox intimated to Menandza that
he longedto eatthe flesh of a young colt. "Where isthe

158 ^.V ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
place tliese animals are wont tograze ? " asked Menanclza.
" On the banks of the river of Baranathee," replied the
fox. Both started immediately for the indicated spot.
They saw there a great number of horses bathing in the
river. Menandza, in an instant, pounced upon a young
one, and carried it to his den. "It is not prudent," said
the old father, "to eat those animals which belong to the
king. One day he will cause you to be shot from a dis-
tance with arrows, and kill you. No lion that eats horse-
flesh has ever lived long. From this day cease to attack
those animals." Deaf to such wholesome warnings, Me-
nandza continued to carry destruction among the horses.
News was soon conveyedto the kingthat a lion and a fox
were making great havoc among his horses. He ordered
the animals to be kept within the town. The lion, how-
ever, contrived to seize some and carry them away.
Orders were given to keep them in anenclosure. Despite
this precaution, some horses disappeared. Enraged at
this, the king called a bowman and asked him whether he
could transfix a lion with his arrows. The bowman said
that he could do it. Hereupon, leaving the king, he went
and hid himself behind a post, waiting for the offender.
It was not long ere he made his appearance but the
;
cautious fox had remained somewhat to the rear, hidden
in a drain. In one start, the lion, with the quickness of
lightning, wason the wall, and straightway he went to the
stable. The bowman said within himself: "The lion's
movements are very quick I will wait until he come
;
back loaded with his prey." He had scarcely revolved
this thought in his mind, when the lion was already on
his way back carrying a horse. The bowman, all ready,
shot an arrow that transfixed the fierce animal. The lion
madea start,crying with a terrificvoice, "I am wounded."
The fox, hearing his friend's accents, and the sharp
whistling of the bow-string, knew at once what had hap-
penerl. He said to himself, shaking his head : "There is
no friendship, forsooth, with the dead my friend has
;

AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
159
fallen under the bowman's arrow ; my life is safe ; I will
go back to my former place."
The wounded lion, making a last effort, went back to
his den, and dropped dead at its entrance.
Menandza's relatives, perceiving the wound and the
blood gushing out of it, understood at once that he had
been shotthrough with an arrow, and that the fox was the
causeofhismiserable anduntimelyend. His mother gave
ventto her griefasfollows "Whoeverassociates with the
:
wicked shall not live long ; behold my Menandza is no
more, because he followed the fox's advice." The father,
in his turn, bewailed the loss of his son "He who goes
:
in company with the wicked sliall meet with some evil
fate ; witness my son, whom his desolate mother sees
weltering in the very blood she gave him.'' His sister
cried aloud " He who does not follow the advice of the
:
good shall repent ofit ; he is mad, and, like my brother,
shall come to an untimely and cruel end." Menandza's
wife exclaimed "Hewho belongs toasuperiorrank ought
:
to beware to associate with those of a rank inferior to his
own, otherwise he soon becomes as despicable as those he
associates with. He loses his position, and becomes the
laughing-stock of all."
Buddha concludedhis discourse with this reflection, that
no one ought to keep company with those that are wicked
and of an inferior position. The religiousprofited so well
by the lecture that he broke at once with his former
friends, andsoon reachedthe state ofThautapan. Thefox
has been since Dewadat, Menandza, the religious, the ob-
jectofthelectui'e, Menandza'ssister, Oopalawon hiswife,
;
Kema his mother, Yathaudara his father, Phralaong.
; ;
THE JACKAL AND THE HUNTER.
2. When the most excellent Phra was in the Weloo-
won monastery, alluding to Dewadat, whoaimed at harm-
ing him, he spoke as follows " At the time the Princes
:

i6o AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
Bramanas reigned at Baranathee, Phralaong was then a
jackal, presiding over 500 other jackals of his own tribe.
His dwelling-place was in a cemetery. One day it hap-
penedthat theinhabitants ofRadzagio madea great feast,
where everyone ate and drank as much as he liked. The
repast was nearly over when some one asked for a last
piece of meat, to give the finishing-stroke to his appetite.
He was told that not the smallest morsel remained. On
hearing thisunwelcome news, he rose up, laying hold of a
wooden club, and went straight to the cemetery. Then
stretching himself on the ground, he lay down as if dead.
Pbralaong. cautiously drawing near tothe pretended dead
body, smelt it from a becoming distance, and soon dis-
covered the snare laid for him. Coming up close to him,
he suddenly seized the club with his teeth, pullingit with
all his might. The young man did not let go his hold.
The animal, withdrawing, said to the hunter: "Young
man, I perceive now thatyou are not dead." The hunter,
goaded with shame and anger, rose up. and with more
energy than dexterity flunghisclub at the jackal but he
;
missed liim. " Go away," said he, " wretched beast you
;
may boast that you have escaped this time." " Yes,"
mildly replied the jackal ; " I have been saved from your
club but no one shall ever be able to preserve you from
;
the punishment in the eight great hells." Having thus
spoken, he soon disappeared. The young man, having
washed away in the ditch the dust that covered him,
walked back, (juite disappointed, into the town. The
hunter was the same that subsequently became Dewadat.
As to the jackal, he is the same that has since become
Buddha.
THE PIGEON AND THE HUNTER.
3. When Phra was in the Dzetawon monastery, desiring
to give instruction to the youngson of a nobleman, named
Ootara, he spokeasfollows. At the timethe Princes Bra-

AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS. i6i
manas reigned at Baranathee, Phralaong was a pigeon.
There was then a man in that country who was wont to
catch pigeons, bring them to his house, and carefully feed
them until they became fat, when he then sold them at
a high rate. Together with otherpigeons, Phralaongwas
caught and brought over to the house. But he would not
peck the grain that was spread before him. " Should I
eat," said he to himself, " I will soon get fat, and then be
sold like others." He soon became wretchedlythin. Sur-
prised at this, the hunter took the pigeon out of the cage,
placed it on the palm of his hand to examine it more
closely and find the cause of its great leanness. Phra-
laong, watching the opportunity of a favourable moment
when the attention of his guardian was called to some
other object, flew away to his own old place, leaving the
hunter quite vexed at and ashamed of his confiding sim-
plicity. The hunter is in these days Dewadat ; and the
pigeon is now Buddha himself.
Here is the abridgment of two stories, well known to
the readers of fables.
4. When Phralaong was a deer, he became inti-
mate friend with the bird khaoukshia and a turtle. On
a certain night it happened that a hunter having laid
down his net, the deer was caught. A tortoise that was
near to the place came and bit the net ; the deer then
soon made his escape from the dangerous position he was
in. Whilst this was going on the friendly khaoukshia,
perceiving the danger his friend was in, amused the
hunter by flying right and left close to him, to retard his
progress towards the place where the net was laid. Mad
at the escape of the deer, he seized the turtle and thrust
her into his bag. But the wily bird contrived by its
peckings to make a large hole in the bag, and the tortoise
too made her escape.
5. One day Phralaong, being then a husbandman,
observed once, to his great surprise, that a lion of an
uncommon size paid frequent visits to his rice field, and
VOL. II. L

i62 AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
ate and destroyed many of the young plants. On a cer-
tain occasion he examined closely the intruder, and per-
ceiving the extremities of his feet, he discovered that the
pretended lion was but a colt that had clothed himself in
a lion's skin.
When the most excellent Buddha was in the country
of Mitila, he went, attended by a great many Rahans, to
the monastery of Meggadawa, situated in the middle of a
beautiful grove of mango trees. He spoke as follows to
the assembly " Beloved Bickus, in former times I lived
:
in this very place where we are now congregated, and
was the ruler of the country of Mitila." He then re-
mained silent. Ananda respectfully entreated him to
condescend to narrate to them some of the principal
events that happened at that time, Buddha assented to
the request, and said : " Formerly there reigned at Mitila
a prince named Minggadewa. During 82,000 years he
remained a prince, and spent all his time in the enjoy-
ment of all sorts of pleasure ; he was crown prince of
that country during the same space of time, and reigned
as king during a similar period."
On a certain day the barber of the king having de-
tected a grey hair on the royal head, exhibited it to his
astonished regards. The king, struck at such a sight,
soon understood that this object was the forerunner of
death. He gave up the throne, and resolved to become a
Rahan. Having put into execution his resolve, he prac-
tised with the greatest zeal the highest virtues, and after
his death migrated to one of the fortunate seats of
Brahmas. The 82,000 princes who succeeded him fol-
lowed his footsteps, inherited his virtues, and after their
demise obtained a place in the same seat.
Prince Minggadewa, who had opened the way to such
a succession of pious monarchs, perceiving that his race

AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS. 163
was near being extinct, left the seat of Brahmas and took
flesh in the womb of the queen of the king who then
governed Mitila. On the tenth month the queen was
delivered of a son, who received the name of Nemi. The
pounhas who were invited to the palace to tell the horo-
scope of the royal child assured the king that this child
would follow the example of all his predecessors who
had left the throne and embraced the profession of
Rahans.
From his tender age the young ]3rince displayed the
most liberal and pious dispositions in making abundant
alms, and fervently observing all the religious practices.
All the inhabitants of that kingdom followed his exam-
ple, and when some one died, he migrated to one of the
Nats' seats. During those happy times, hell seemed to
have become quite unnecessary.
On a certain day Nemi appeared to be most anxious to
know which was the most excellent practice, the bestow-
ing of alms, or the observance ofthe precepts. The great
Thagia came down from his glorious seat, encompassed
withan incomparably shining brightness, and went tothe
place where the prince was busy revolving this thought
in his mind. The angelical visitor told him that the be-
stowing of alms could only procure an admittance into
the seats of Nats, but that a perfect compliance with
the ordinances of the law opened the way to the seats of
Brahmas. As soon as he had given his decision, he
returned to his blissful seat. On his arrival he found
crowds of Nats given up to rejoicings. The Thagia gave
them a detailed narrative of all that he had seen on earth
during his errand, and in particular eulogised at great
length the religious dispositions of Prince Nemi. Enrap-
tured with the heart-moving description they heard, all
the Nats at once exclaimed that they wished to see in
their seats so accomplished and virtuous a prince. The
Thagia commanded a young Nat, named Matali, to have
his carriage ready, depart for the countrv of Mitila, and

164 AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
bring to this fortunate seat the ruler of that country.
Matali, bowing before the Thagia, forthwith left the seat
of Nats in a magnificent chariot. It was then the day of
the full moon, when all the inhabitants of Mitila were
busily engaged in discharging their prescribed religious
duties. On a sudden there appeared, issuing from the
east, the magnificent and bright equipage of the Nat,
splendidly emerging from the bosom of clouds atthe same
timeas the moon in its full. Surprised at such an unex-
pected sight, all wondered, and believed that two moons
were miraculously rising on that occasion. They were
soon undeceived by the nearer approach of Matali's car-
riage. The messenger went to the king, and conveyed to
him the intelligence that the Nats were exceedingly
anxious to see him. Without a moment's hesitation the
king stepped into the carriage, and abandoned himself to
the guidance of his heavenly guide. " Two roads are now
opened before us," said Matali, "the one through the dis-
mal dungeons, where the wicked areconsigned to undergo
punishment for their offences, and the other through the
blissful seats, where the good are enjoying the rewards
allotted to them for their virtues. Which of the two do
you wish to follow ? " The prince said that he wished to
visit both places. Matali answered in a mild tone of
voice that his rec|iiest should be complied with.
The celestial guide directed his rapid course through
the regions of desolation, where dwells an eternal horror.
The first objecttheymet with was a broad and deep river,
filled with frightful whirl])ools, where the water seemed
as if boiling. It was glowing like a flame, and the whole
mass of water appeared like a lake of fire. The river is
called Wattooraiii. On the banks of that river stand the
infernal ministers, armed with all sorts of sharp-edged
instruments, cutting, wounding, ])iercing the unfortunate
wretches, who try to get out of that horrible and burning
water. They are forcibly pushed again into the same
place of torments, and tumble over pointed darts, whence

AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS. 165
they are taken np and roasted on living coals. Nothing
is heard but the liorrifying' howlings and yells of those
unfortunate beings, who are waiting withthe greatest im-
patience the moment of their deliverance. " What are
the crimes," asked the terrified prince, "that have com-
mitted the unfortunate inhabitants of this place to un-
dei-go such unheard-of sufferings ? " " They are," replied
Matali, "thepersecutorsoftheweak, the heartless oppres-
sors of the poor, &c., who are doomed to undergo such
punishments." Thence the guidedrove rapidly to another
place, where dogs, each with five hideous heads, famished
eagles, and devouring crows, fed with a ravenous hunger
on the bodies of unfortunate victims, the flesh of which is
incessantly reproduced to afford a continual prey to these
never-satiated ferocious animals. "These," said Matali,
" suffer forhaving done no good to their fellow-creatures,
for preventing others to do some, and for having borne
envy to their neighbours."
Here follows a long description of the other places of
hell, given to Nemi by his celestial guide. We omit it,
lest its tedious and revolting particulars tire and disgust
the reader. Sufiice it to mention that the torments of
Tantalus are described here with a horrifying correctness,
such as almost casts into the shade the description given
to us by the Latin poet.
Having ranged the various regions of hell, and heard
all the particulars given to him by Matali, Nemi was
suddenly brought over to the beautiful, smiling, and
blissful seats of the blessed. He soon descried at a dis-
tance the celebrated palace, made of diamonds, disposed
in an immense square of twelve youdzanas on each side,
and five stories high ; then the garden, the tank, and the
padetha tree. In that palace Biranee occupied a splendid
apartment she was then lying on a soft sofa, surrounded
;
by morethan a thousand beauties. " What good works."
asked Nemi, " has Biranee practised, to deserve such a
magnificent reward ? " Matali replied, •• Thisdaughter of

i66 AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
Nats was formerly a slave in the house of a poiinha.
She was always very attentive to all the duties of her
position, and at the same time regularly observed the pre-
cepts of the law. On a certain day her mistress, who
was wont to feed eight Eahans daily, fell into a fit of
anger, and said that she was unable to bear any longer
the fatigue attending the maintenance of these religious.
But the young slave, full of religious zeal, took upon her-
self the labour of feeding the Rahans. For this good and
meritorious work she is enjoying the happiness of her
present position."
Nerai was successively led into the various seats of the
inhabitants of those blissful regions, and his guide ex-
plained at great length the good works thathad procured
toeach of them the respective happy situation which they
enjoyed, and occasionally mentioned the period of time
they were allowedto dwell in those abodes of unparalleled
happiness. He was finally introduced to the presence of
the great Thagia, who is the chief of all Nats. Having
finished the survey of all the seats of Nats, Nemi was
brought back to the seat of men in his own capital by
the same celestial guide.
On his return Nemi saw himself surrounded by his
pious subjects, who eagerly inquired of him all the par-
ticulars respecting his journey. He minutely explained
to them all that he had seen both in the region of hell
and in those of Nats, and concluded by exhorting his
people to be liberal in bestowing alms, that they might
hereafter be admitted to share in the enjoyment of the
Nats' lia]ipiness.
Nemi, perceiving that Ins hairs were turning grey,
became still more zealous in the practice of alms-deeds,
and resolved to embrace the profession of Rahans. But
previous to his taking such a step he had his son
Kalaradzana appointed to succeed him. With that prince
terminated the longsuccession ofkings who in the decline
of their lives became Rahans.

AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS. 167
DZANECKA.
This is one of the best written Dzats possessed by the
Bin-mese. Thewriterhas translated it from beginning to
end but he will give here only an outline of its contents.
;
The narrator, as usual, is our Buddha himself, when he
was in the Weloowou monastery, surrounded by the mem-
bers of the assembly and a crowd of hearers.
In the country of Mitila there reigned a king named
Dzanecka, who had two sons called Arita Dzanecka and
Paula Dzanecka. After a long and prosperous reign he
passed to another existence. Arita Dzanecka, having
celebrated his father's obsequies and made the usual puri-
fications, ascended the throne. He confirmed hisyounger
brother in the situation of commander-in-chief, which he
had hitherto held.
On a certain day a vile courtier, by a false report,
awakened in the king's breast sentiments of jealousy and
suspicion against his brother's fidelity. The innocent
prince was cast into a dungeon but in the virtue of his
;
innocence he found means to make his escape, went to a
part ofthe countrywhere he hadpowerful supporters, and
soon found himself in a condition to bid defiance to his
brother. The king assembledhis troops a battle ensued,
;
in which the king was slain, and Paul Dzanecka ascended
the throne.
The queen, who was with child, on hearing the news of
such a disaster, wentto the treasury, took some ornaments
of the purest gold and the most valuable precious stones,
and placed the whole in a basket. She then spread out
rice so as to cover the treasure, and extended an old and
dirty cloth over the opening of the basket. Putting on
the dress of one of the meanest women, she went out of
the town, carryingthebasket over herhead. Sheleftthe
citythroughthesoutherngate andpassedintothecountry
without being noticed by the guards.

168 AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS,
Having gone to a certain distance from the place, the
queen did not know which way to direct her steps. She
sat in a dzeat during the heatof the day. Whilst in the
dzeat shethought ofthe country ofTsampa, wheresome of
her relativeslived, and resolved togothither. She began
to make inquiries at the people that were passing by
respecting the route she would have to follow.
During this time the attention of a Nat was suddenly
attracted by the inspiration of Phralaong, who was in the
queen's womb, tothe sad position his mother wasin. He,
leaving forthwith his blissful seat, assumedtheappearance
ofanoldman guiding a carriage alongthe road. Hecame
close to the dzeat and invited the queen to ascend his
carriage, assuring her that he would convey her safely to
Tsampa. The offer was accepted. As the queen was far
advancedwith child, she had some difficulty in gettinginto
the conveyance, when that portion of the earth which she
was standing upon suddenly swelled and rose to the level
of the carriage. The queen stepped into the chariot and
theydeparted. Duringthenighttheyarrivedatabeautiful
place close to the neighbourhood of Tsampa. The queen
alighted in a dzeat. Her celestial guide bade her to wait
until daybreak before she ventured into the city, and
returned to the seat of Tawadeintha.
During that very night a famous pounha, attended by
five hundred of his disci]Dles, had left the town at a late
hour, to take a walk by moonlight and enjoy the cool of
the night and a bath in the river. Pamaouka, for such is
the name of the pounha, came by chance to the very place
where the queen was seated. Hisdisciplescontinuedtheir
walk and went on the bank of the river. She appeared
full of youth and beauty. Butby the virtue ofPhralaong
the pounha knew that she was in the family way,and that
the child she bore was a Phralaong. Pamaouka alone ap-
proachedcloseto the queen and entreated her toentertain
no fear whatever ; that he looked upon her as his sister.
Tlip queen related to him all the particulars of her misfor-

AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS. 169
tune. The greatpounha, moved with compassion, resolved
to become her supporter and protector. Atthe sametime
he recommended her to say that he was her brother, and
when his disciples should comeback, to shed tearsintoken
ofthetenderemotionshefeltatmeeting withhim. Every-
thinghavingbeen arranged, Pamaouka called his disciples,
told them how happy he was at having found his sister,
from whom he had parted many years ago. Meanwhile he
dii'ected them to take her to his house, and recommended
her to the special care of his wife. As for him, he would
be back soon after having performed the usual ablutions.
The queen was welcomeinthe pounha's house, and treated
A
with the greatest care and tenderest affection. little
while after she was delivered of a beautiful child, re-
sembling a statue of gold. They gave him the name of
Dzanecka.
Having reached the years of boyhood, he was one day
playing with boysof his own age, when, byway ofteazing,
theycalled him the son of the widow. Thesekeen taunt-
ings made him urge his mother to reveal to hiin the name
ofhis father. It was then that he knew theauthor of his
birth. Pamaouka taught him all the sciences known in
those days, such as medicine, mathematics, &c. At the
age of sixteen years young Dzanecka had completed all
his studies.
Dzanecka resolved to devote himself to ti'ade, and
acquire thereby ample means to reconquer one day the
throne of his ancestors. With a part of the treasure his
mother had brought with her, he was in a position to fit
out a ship in company with several other merchants. He
resolved to sail fora place called Caumawatoura. He had
scarcely been at sea two days when a mighty storm came
on. The vessel, after having held out some time against
the roaring and raging billows, at last gave way, and was
broken in pieces. All the crew and passengers, amount-
ing to 700,miserably perished in the sea, without making
the least effort to save themselves. Our Phralaong, on

170 AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
the contrary, seizingthe extremity of a log of wood, swam
with all his strength, resolved to struggle to the last
against adversity. Mighty were his efforts for several
days. At last a daughter of Nats, whose duty it was to
watch over the sea, saw his generous and courageous
behaviour, took pity on him, and came to his assistance.
There followed a sort of dialogue between her and Dza-
necka. The latter displayed his undaunted courage and
firm purpose. The former admired the more his deter-
mined resolution. She resolved to save him from the
dangerous position. Taking him in her arms, she carried
him, according to his wishes, to the country of Mitila, in
the garden of mango-trees, and placed him on the very
table-stone where his ancestors were wont to enjoy them-
selves with a numerous retinue. Phralaong immediately
fell asleep. The daughter of Nats, having enjoined the
Nat, guardian of the place, to watch over the prince, re-
turned to her blissful seat.
On the very day that the vessel was wrecked the ruler
of Mitila died, leaving one daughter, named Thiwalee.
Previous to his giving up the ghost and ascending to the
seats of Nats, the king had ordered his ministers into his
presence, and enjoined on them to select for the husband
of his daughter a man remarkable for the beauty and
strength of his body, as well as by the acuteness and
penetration of his mind. He was to be able to bend and
unbend an enormous bow, a feat which the united efforts
of a thousand soldiers could scarcely achieve, and find the
place where he had concealed sixteen golden cups. On
the seventh day after his death, the ministers and pounhas
began to delibi*rate among themselves about the choice of
a match worthy of the princess. Several competitors
offered themselvesforthe hand of Thiwalee, butthey were
all rejected. At last, not knowing what to do, they re-
solved to leave to chance the solution of the difliculty.
They sent out a charmed chariot, convinced that by the
virtue inherent iu it they would find out the fortunate

AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
171
man whose destinies were to be united to those of the
princess. The chariot was sent out attended by soldiers,
musicians, pouuhas, and noblemen. It came straight for-
ward to the mango-trees garden, and stopped by the side
of the table-stone Phralaong was sleeping upon. The
pounhas, on inspecting thehands andfeet of the stranger,
saw unmistakable sio-ns foreshowine- his elevation to the
royal dignity. They awakened him by the sound of
musical instruments, saluted him king, and beggedofhim
to put on the royal dress, mount on the chariot, and pro-
ceed triumpliantly to the royal city. He entered the
palace through the eastern gate. Having been informed
of the king'slast intentions, he forthwithbent and unbent
the bow, found out the sixteen golden cups, and was duly
united to the beautiful and youthful Thiwalee. All the
people showed signs of the greatest rejoicings the rich
;
made him all sorts of offerings ; the pouuhas in white
costume, holding the sacred white shell, adorned with
flowers and filled with water, with their bodies bent for-
ward, poured respectfully the water, imploring blessings
on the new monarch.
When the rejoicings were over, the king rewarded the
pounha Pamaouka, who had been as a father to him dur-
ing his exile. He applied himself to do as much good as
he could in relieving the poor, and promoting the welfare
of all. He delighted in mentioning to his courtiers his
misfortune, and the great efforts he had made to extricate
himself from difficulties. He praised the reward which
attended generous efforts, and exhorted them never to
flinch under difficulties, but always to exhibit a strong
and unconquerable resolution under all trials, because it
must sooner or later be crowned with success.
During the 7000 years that he reigned over Mitila
with the queen Thiwalee, he faithfully practised the
observances of the law, governed justly, fed the Rahans
and Pitzega-buddhas, and gave abundantalms to the poor.
On the lOth month Thiwalee was delivered of a son,

172 AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
whom they called Digaout. On a certain day, the king,
having received from his gardener some mangoes full of
flavour and beauty, wished to go to the garden to see the
tree that yielded such delicious fruits. When he arrived
at the place, he saw two mango-trees, one with a luxuriant
foliao-e, but without fruits, the other loaded with fruits.
The monarch approached the tree, riding his elephant, and
plucked some mangoes, which he ate and found delicious.
Thence he proceeded further to inspect the other parts of
the extensive garden. The courtiers and the people that
followed plucked fruits from the same tree, and did it
with such eagerness that they left neitherfruits norleaves
on the tree.
On his return the king was surprised to see the fruitful
tree destitute of both leaves and fruits, whilst the barren
one had a beautiful appearance. The monarch, after a
lengthened dialogue with his courtiers, concluded as fol-
lows "The riches of this world are never without ene-
:
mies he whopossessesthemresemblesthefruitfulmango-
;
tree. We must look out for gfoods that excite neither
envy, jealousy, nor other passions. The Rahans and Pit-
zega-buddhasalonepossesssuch riches. I willtake alesson
from the barren mango-tree. That I maycutoffand eradi-
cate the troubles, vexations, and anxieties oflife, I will re-
nounce everything and embrace the profession of Rahan."
With this idea strongly impressed on his mind, Dza-
necka came back to his palace. Heforthwith sent for the
general of his troops, and directed him to place a strong
guard in front of his apartment, and allow no one forfour
consecutive inonths to come into his presence, not even
the queen, but only him who would bring his daily meal.
He gave orders to his ministers to judge with impartiality,
agreeably to the law. Having thus arranged everything,
he withdrew alone to the upper apartment of his palace.
Here follows a stanza in ])raise of the prince, who had
separated from his queen, concubines, and all the pleasures
and honours attending royalty.

:
AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS. 173
Dzanecka alone began to meditate on the happiness of
the life ofpounhas and Pitzega-buddhas ; he admiredtheir
poor diet, their zeal in practising the observances of the
law, theirearnest longings afterthehappiness ofNeibban,
their disengagement from the ties of passions, the state of
inward peace and fixity which their souls enjoyed. In
his enthusiasm he venerated them with a holy fervour,
called them his masters and preceptors, and exclaimed
"Who will teach me to imitate their lives, and help me
to become similar to them ? " In ten stanzas Dzanecka
reviews successively all that had belonged to him, his
capital with its stately edifices, fine gates, the three walls
and ditches, the beautiful and fertile country of Wintzea-
ritz, the palace with its lofty domes and massive towers,
the beautifully ornamented throne, the rich and magnifi-
centroyaldresses, theroyalgardenandtank,the elephants,
horses, and chariots, the soldiers, the pounhas, the princes,
his queen and concubines. He then concludes each stanza
with the following words "When shall I leave all these
:
things, become poor, put on the humble habit of IJahans,
and follow the same mode of a perfectly retired life ? "
With these and similar reflections Dzanecka endeavoured
to sunder one after the other many threads ofpassions, to
pull down successively the branches of the impure tree,
until he could give a final stroke to the roots.
At the conclusion of four months' retirement, Dzanecka
sent for a faithful servant, anddirected him toprocure for
him the various articles of the dress ofa Rahan. He had
his head and beard shaved put on the cherished habit,
;
and placing a staff in his hand walked out of his apart-
ments, and directed his course towards the gate, with
the dignified deportment of a Rahan of sixty years' pro-
fession.
Queen Thiwalee was tired of having been so long de-
prived ofher husband's company. She summoned seven
hundred of the handsomest damsels of the palace to go
with her to the king, and by the efforts of their united
charms entrap him in the net ofpassion and prevail upon

174 AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
him to come back to their society. When they ascended
the stair-case, they met with Dzanecka in his new attire.
None recognised him but all paid him due reverence as
;
some holy personage thathad come to give instructions to
the king. Having reached the apartment and seen the
royal dress set aside, and the beautiful and long black
hairs laid on one ofthe sofas, the queen and her attendants
soonunderstoodthesadandheart-rendingintimationwhich
these objectsweredesigned toconvey. Sheranin allhaste
with all her retinue down the stairs and overtook the new
Rahan at the moment he was crossing the outer gate of
the palace. Every means that could be devised to make
impression on the king's heart were resorted to by the
queen and the damsels, in order to prevail upon him to
forego his resolution. Tears, cries, wailings, striking of
the breast, display ofthemost gracefuland seducingforms,
supplications, entreaties, were all used in vain the new
;
Rahan, unmoved and firm, continued his course, protesting
that passions and concupiscence were dead in him, and
that what could be said or done to engage him to change
his resolution was in vain. During his progress towards
the solitude of Himawonta, he was comforted and en-
couraged by the advice and instruction of two Rathees,
who from their solitude flew through tJie air to witness
the beautiful struggle between passions and virtue, and
help him not to flinch before the repeated obstacles the
queen put in his way, to retard, impede, and prevent the
execution of his holy design. The names ofthese two in-
structors were Narada and Migalzein they were clothed
;
in the skinsofpanthers. They instructedhimintheduties
ofhisnew calling,and exhorted him toroot out of his heart
with perseverance all passions, and in particular concupi-
scence and pride.
Comfortedwith suchtimely instructions, the new Rahan
felt himself more than ever fixed in his resolution. On
his way to the solitude, Dzanecka arrived one evening at
the gates of a town called Daunu. He passed the night
under a tree, at a distance from the queen and the crowd

AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
175
that followed lier. On the morning he entered the town,
and went, as usual, along- the streets to beg his food. He
happened to stop for a while at the shop of a man that
was fabricating arrows. Dzanecka, seeing the workman
shutting one eye and looking with the other to see if the
shaft of the arrow was straight, asked him the reason of
his doing so, as he would see better with both eyes than
with one. The workman told him that it was not always
good that each object in this world should have a match.
" Should I," said he, " look on this shaft with both eyes,
my sight, distracted by several objects, could not jDerceive
the defects of the wood, &c., but by lookingon it with only
one eyethe leastirregularity is easilydetected. When we
have a work to perform, if there be two opposite wills in
us, it cannot be regularly made. You have put on the
habitof Rahan you haveapparentlyrenouncedtheworld
; ;
how is it that you are followed by such a large retinue of
women and other attendants ? It is impossible to attend
well to the duties of your profession, and at the sametime
keep such a company." This cutting remark made adeep
impression on Dzanecka. He had gone over a little dis-
tance, when he met a number of little girls playing to-
gether. One of them had a silver bangle on each hand,
with one of gold on the right hand. When she agitated
therighthand,thetwobangles hitting each otherproduced
a sound. Dzanecka, willing to try the wit of the little
creature, asked her the reason why the movement of one
hand produced a sound, whilst that of the other did not.
She replied, "My lefthand, that has but one bangle, isthe
image of the Eahans who ought to be alone. In this
world, when an object has its match, some collision and
noise inevitably result. How is it that you, who have put
on the habit of Rahan, allow yourself to be followed by
that woman who is still full of freshness and beauty ? Is
she your wife or sister? Should she be only your sister,
itis not goodthat she should be withyou. It is dangerous
for Rahans to keep the company of women."
This sharp lecture, from the mouth of a little girl, pro-

:
176 AN ABSTRACT OF A FEW SMALL DZATS.
duced a deepimpression on our Rahan. He left the city.
A large forest was in the vicinity he resolved to part
:
company with the queen at once. At the entrance he
stopped awhile, and paused for a moment. There, on a
sudden, stretchinghis arm, he broke the small branch of a
tree, and showing it to Thiwalee he said, " Princess, you
see this small branch it can never be reunited to the
;
stem it has been taken from. In like manner, it is im-
possible that I should ever go back with you." On hear-
ing the fatal words the queen fainted. All herattendants
crowded round her, to afford her some relief. Dzanecka
himself, in the tumult and confusion that was going on,
stole away with rapidity and disappeared in the forest.
The queen was then carried back to Daunu by her at-
tendants, whence they all returned to Mitila. Alone in
the solitude, Phralaong enjoyed the sweets of perfect con-
templation during a period of three thousandyears. Thi-
walee, on her part, resolved to renounce the world and
follow the example of her husband. She became a Ea-
haness, in one of the royalgardens, duringthe sameperiod
of years, and subsequently migrated to one of the seats of
Brahmas, called Brahma-parithitsa.
At the conclusion of the narrative Buddha added
" Mani-megala, the daughter of Nats, who saved me inthe
midst of the sea, is now my beloved fair disciple of the
left, Oopalawon. The little girl who gave me such a
wholesome instruction, at the gate of the town of Daunu,
is now Kema, my fair disciple of the right. The Rathee
Narada has since become my great disciple Thariputra,
whose wisdom is second only to my own. The other
Rathee Miga-dzein is now my disciple Maiikalan, whose
power for displaying wonders yields only to mine. The
arrow-maker has since become Ananda, my faithful and
dutiful attendant. Queen Thiwalee has become the Prin-
cess Yathaudara. As to Prince Dzanecka, he is now the
Phra who is before you and addressesyou, who is perfectly
acquainted with all the laws and principles, and who is
the teacher of men, Nats, and Brahmas."

^n
( )
REMARKS
ON
THE SITES AND NAMES OF THE PRINCIPAL
PLACES MENTIONED IN THE LEGEND.
The identification of the places mentioned in the course
of the Life of Gaudania is certainly a great desideratum.
This diificult and laborious task has been boldly under-
taken by several government servants of both services.
Great andimportant successes have attended their efforts.
One of the most successful among them has been Afajor-
General Cunningham, the archasological surveyor to the
government of India. The sphere of his laborious and
scientific researches has extended over north and south
Behar, the cradle of Buddhism, and some parts of the
Punjaub and Peshawar. Under his direction excavations
have been made, inscriptions found and deciphered, the
nature and dimensions of old ruined monuments correctly
ascertained. In his valuable reports maybe found impor-
tant elementsforreconstructingthe history and geography
of ancient India. He has been greatly assisted by the
history of the voyages of the Chinese pilgrim, Hwen
Thsang, who spent sixteen years in travelling throughout
India, and visiting all the places rendered famous by the
actions connected with the life of Buddha, and the spread
of his doctrines and institutions. The voyage began in
629 and ended in 645 of the Christian era. The itinerary
VOL. IL. M.

ON THE PRINCIPAL PLACES
78
1
begins with the starting of the traveller from a city on
thebanks ofthe Hoang-ho. Heshapedhis coursethrough
the centre of Tartary, entered by the northern extremity
of the plateau of Panin into what is called now Indepen-
dent Tartary, visited Samarcand, where there were no
Buddhists, but only fire worshippers. Thence he passed
over to Balk, where he found religion in a flourishing con-
dition. He ascended the mighty Hindu Kushmountains,
penetrated into Cabul and Peshawar, crossed the Indus at
Attock, and turning abruptly to the north, visited Oudi-
ana,wherehefounddzedisand monasteries onthe grandest
and most magnificent scale, and came b^ck to Attock, fol-
lowingthe westernbank of theIndus. Hethen proceeded
through the Punjaub to Mathura, and minutely examined
all the Buddhistic monuments to be found in the terri-
tories situated between the Ganges, the Gunduck, and
Nepaul. He went to Benares, Pataliputra, and all the
places in Magatha, or south Behar, where his religious
curiosity could be satisfied. Thence he shaped his course
in an eastern direction, and visited the whole of Bengal.
He passed to Orissa, visited many places in Central India
and a portion of the Upper Deccan. He went to Molwa
and Guzerat, returned to Magatha, and began his home-
ward voyage. He recrossedthe Indus at Attock, followed
up the valley of the Cabul river, and with unheard-of
difliculties and dangers passed over the Hindu Kush
range. His route across Chinese Tartary led him back
through Kashgar, Yarkand, and Khotan, to his native
place.
It is a matter of surprise to see how acute in his obser-
vations,correctinhisdescriptions,and exactinhismeasure-
ments, our pilgrim has been. With his book in hand, the
above-named eminent archgeologist was enabled, in many
instances, to identify at once mere mounds of ruins, and
satisfy himself tliat they were the remnants of the monu-
ments described by our pilgrim. When he entertained
.9,ny doubts in his mind, he had recourse to excavations.

MENTIONED IN THE LEGEND.
179
which, iu most instances, demonstrated the perfect accu-
racy of Hwen Thsang.
Nearly two hundred years previous to the voyage of
Hwen Thsang, another Chinese pilgrim named Fa-hian
had undertaken a similar journey. Impelled by a purely
religious zeal, he came to India for the sole purpose of
visiting the places rendered famous and venerable by the
birth, life, doings, and death of Foe, the same personage
who is known in these parts underthe name Buddha Gau-
dama. His object was also to make a complete collection
ofallthe religious booksacknowledgedas genuinein India,
and carry them with him to China. The errand of Hwen
Thsang had a similar object.
Our worthy traveller, according to his account, passed
through Southern Thibet, Little Tartary, and visited suc-
cessively Cabul, Cashmere, Candahar, and the Punjaub.
Following a nearly south-eastern direction, he reached
Mathura on the Upper Jumna, crossed the Ganges at
Kanouj, at the confluence of the Kali with that river, tra-
velled almost in an eastern direction through Oude, and
crossedthe Gogra nearthe Fyzabad. Keepingcloseto the
eastern bank of that stream, he struck in a slightly north-
ern direction, passing the Rapti south of Goruckpore, and
followed the same course, nearly to the western bank of
the Gunduck. From thence he shaped his course in a
south-easterly direction, parallel to the course of that
river, which he crossed a little higher up the place where
it empties into the Ganges. Following then a southern
direction, he crossed the Ganges near the place where the
city of Patna is now. From thence our pilgrim travelled
in a south-easterly direction, crossed successively the
Morhar and the Fulgo, examined all the places in the
neighbourhood, south and south-west of Behar, which are
so celebrated in Buddhistic annals. After having spent
three years iu India, busy in mastering the Pali language
and collecting copies of the religious works, he then
embarked on the Ganges. Near its mouth he went on

.
ON THE PRINCIPAL PLACES
i8o
board of a ship bound to Ceylon. After having visited
that celebrated island, Fa-bian sailed in the direction of
the Malayan Archipelago, called at Java, and safely arrived
at his country, after having performed one of the most
extraordinary and difficult journeys any man could have
undertaken in those ancient times. It was in the begin-
ning of the fifth century that this feat was performed in
the space of more than seven years. He spent threeyears
in India, and two at Ceylon.
The Chinese original of Fa-Hian has been translated
into French by A. Remusat. The English version from
the French is accompanied bythe annotations of Remusat
and those of other celebrated Orientalists. The book of
Hwen Thsang has been translated by M. Julien. For the
loan of these two works the writer is indebted to the ever-
obliging kindness of the worthy and learned Chief Com-
missioner of British Burma, Col. A. P. Phayre. From
these works we have extracted the above and following
particulars.
1 The name given by northern Buddhists to Buddha is
Thakiamuni, which means the religious of the Thakia
family, lie belonged to the Kshatria, or the warriors'
caste. The name Gaudama, according to the opinion of
the late E. Burnouf, is the name of the religious instructor
of his family, which members of families of that caste
often adopted. This instructor might have beenadescend-
ant of the celebrated philosopher Gotama, mentioned in
certain writings, but distinct from our Buddha.
2. Kapila, or Kapilawot, the birthplace of Buddha, was
situated on the left bank of the Gogra, straight north of
Benares.
It was a heap of ruins when Fa-Hian visited it, and the
country almost a desert. Some are of opinion that it was
situated near the mountains that separate Nepaul from
Goriickpore, on the river Kohini, a mountain stream, feeder
of the Rapti. I^iit this assertion has very few supporters,
and appeals imj)robable.

MENTIONED IN THE LEGEND. i8t
3. The river Anauma cannot be the Amanat in Behar,
south of Patna. It is probably one of the feeders of the
Gogra, and to be met with half-way between Kapila and
Radzagio, the site of which city, as will be subsequently
seen, lies close to modern Behar. The legend bears out
this supposition. Buddha travelled thirtyyoudzanasfrom
Kapila to the river Anauma, thence thirty to Radzagio.
The youdzana of those times in Magatha is supposed to
have been equal probably to seven miles.
4. Oorouwela was one of the mountains famous for the
number of the hermits that withdrew thither for the pur-
pose of meditation. It is not far from Gaya Buddha.
5. The river Neritzara, in Mongol, Nirandzara, is a con-
siderable stream flowing from the south-west. It unites
with the Monah and forms the Fulgo.
6. Baranathee is beyond doubt the famous city of Ben-
ares. The Burmans call it by name of Baranathee, or
rather Varanasi. The town is so namedfrom its situation
between the small river Vai'anaand the Asi, a mere brook.
ThesolitudeofMigadawon,whitherBuddhawenttopreach
the lawto the five Rahans that had served him during the
six years of mortification which he spent in the forest of
Oorouwela, lies in its vicinity. Benares is famous in the
Buddhistic annals, because in its neighbourhood the law
of the wheel, or rather the super-excellent law of the four
sublime truths, was announced for the first time. Miga-
dawon means the deer-forest. It lies three and a half
miles from Benares in a northern direction. It is said
that, after havino; travelled nine miles from the Bodi tree,
Buddha had to go over a distance of eighteen youdzanas
erehe reached Benares, makinga total of about 1 20 miles.
7. Radzagio, or Radzagihra, was the capital of Magatha
or South Behar. Its situation is well ascertained. Its
ruins have been minutely described by several travellers.
It was situated on the left bank of the same small river as
Behar, but a few miles south of that place. The moun-
tains or peaks surrounding that ancient city are full of

ON THE PRINCIPAL PLACES
182
caves, tenanted in former agesby Buddhist ascetics. The
mountain Gayathitha, where Buddha preached his famous
sermon, liesin the neighbourhood. Itis perhaps the same
as the Gridrakuta, or the Vulture's Peak.
8. The Buddhist annals often mention the country of
the middle or Mitzima-desa. It comprised the countries
of Mathura, Kosala, Kapila, Wethalee, and Magatha ; that
is to say, the provinces of Agra, Delhi, Oude, and South
Behar.
Magatha, south of the Ganges, had for capital at first
Radzagio, until Kalathoka, ahundredyearsafterthe death
of Gaudama, transferred the seat of his empire to Patali-
putra,or Palibothra. The celebratedWeloowon monastery
was situated in the neighbourhood of Radzagio, and was
offered to Buddha by King Pimpathara, the ruler of that
country.
9. Kosala is the same as the kingdom of Ayodya, now
called Oude. Thawattie, or Crawastu, was the capital of a
district of that country. It was situated nearly at the
same place where at present stands the modern town of
Fyzabad. According to the legend, the distance from
Radzagio to Thawattie is forty-five youdzanas of about
seven miles. Twelve hundred pacesfrom that city was to
bemet the renowned monasteryof Dzetawon, or the grove
of the victorious. Many ruins that have been visited and
examined leave no doubt regarding the certain position of
Thawattie.
10. Thing-ka-tha, or Tsam-pa-tha, lies in an eastern
direction between Mathura and Kanouj, near the site
occupied by the town of Ferruckabad. Captain A. Cun-
ningham has met withthe ruins of that place in the village
of Samkassa, on the left bank of the Kalinadi, twelve cos
from Feri'ukabad. According to a ])opular tradition, it
was destroyed in 1 183 by the King of Kanouj, at the
instigation of the Brahmins, who endeavoured by every
means in their power to sweep all the remnants of Bud-
ilhism from those parts of the peninsula. It was in that

.
MENTIONED IN THE LEGEND. 183
place that Buddha arrived on his return from the seats of
Nats, whither he hadgone to preach thelawtohis mother.
According to the legend, the distance from Thawattie to
Thing-ka-tha is thirty youdzanas in a westerly direction.
Fa-Hian says that he saw in one of the temples of that
place the ladder Buddha had used when he came down
from the seats of Nats.
11 The village of Patali is the very place where was
subsequently established the renowned city of Patalibo-
thra, capital of Magatha. The place had reached the
height of its glory when Megasthenes, the ambassador of
Seleucus, visitedit in the reign of Chandragupta. In the
time of Buddha it was but an insignificant place. There
was, however, a sort of fort to arrest the inroads of some
troublesome neighbours. Buddha,whenhepassed through
that place, predicted that it would become a flourishing-
town. The prediction began to have its accomplishment
one hundred years after his death, when King Kalathoka
left Radzagio, and removed the seat of his empire to Pali-
bothra, near the place where the modern city of Patna
stands.
12. The town of Wethalie is supposed to have stood
north of Patna on the Gunduck, not far from the place
where that river joins the Ganges. The large village of
Besarh, twenty miles north of Hajipur, occupies a portion
of the place on which stood Wethalie. In the seventh
century Buddhismwas thereonits decline; falsedoctrines,
as says oneof the Chinese pilgrims, were much prevailing.
Nothing wasto be seenatthat timebuta ruinedtown and
many monasteries, almost deserted, and also falling into
decay. Many signs of ancient ruins are also to be met
with between Besarh and Bakra theybelong tothe same
;
city, which was both populous and wealthy. Its circum-
ference was about twelve miles, includingthe two modern
places of Bakra andBesarh. Allthe mounds ofruinshave
been carefully searched anddescribed by A. Cunningham,
and the sites of ancient tanks exactlv laid down. There

•i84 ON THE PFilNCIPAL PLACES
is acurious episode in the legend connected with the naime^
of Wethalie. A courtesan, who, despiteher dishonourable
calling,occupied abrilliant position in the country, courted
the favour of feedino- Buddha with all his followers. The
latter accepted her invitation, and received a beautiful
grove, which she presented to him and to the assembly.
It does not appear that her avocation was looked upon as
a disgraceful one. It is probable that persons of this
description were as much for the intellectual as for the
sensual enjoyments of their visitors. There existed in
Greece and at Rome something similar to what is here
alluded to. According to Plutarch, Aspasia at Athens
was courted by Pericles on account of her high literary
attainments and political abilities. Socrates visited her
sometimes in company with his disciples. Visitors took
occasionally their wives to her place, for the purpose of
enjoying the charms of her highly refined and instructive
conversation. The same philosophical biographer does
not scruple to quote sometimes the sayings of the cele-
brated Roman courtesan, named Flora.
13. Nala or Nalanda was a Brahmin village about seven
miles north of Radzagio. It was the birthplace of the
great disciple Thariputra. It seems that there was there
a sort of Academia, whither the learned of Radzagio
resorted to discourse on moral and philosophical subjects.
The magnificent ruins, which subsist up to this day in
thatlocality, have been minutely examined,measured, and
described by several visitors. The great temple must, in
the opinion of A. Cunningham, have been built in the
sixth centuiy of our era.
14. Kootheinaron is the place in the neighbourhood of
which Buddha entered into the state of Neibban, or died.
Some anticpiarians, laying much stress on the name of a
village up to this daycalled Kushia, have placed the posi-
tion of Kootheinaron on the road between Betiah and
Goruckpore. On that 8])ot is to be seen a pyramidical-
looking moundofbricks,over which spreadsalarge banyan

MENTIONED IN THE LEGEND. 185
ti'ee. But, from the nan'ative ofthe legend, wemnat look
for the site of Kootheinaron nearerto the river Higniarati
or Gunduck, since the spot where Gandama died wasnear
to the city, and is described as surrounded on three sides
by the river. Kootheinaron was situated a little north or
north-westof Betiah,on ornearthebanks of the Gunduck.
There too ruins areto be seen, which doubtless will prove
to be those of Kootheinaron. The name may have sub-
sequently migrated to the locality above mentioned.
15. Papilawana, the capital of the Mauria princes, was
situated between the Rapti andthe Gunduck, nearly eastof
Goruckpore. Southofthatplace Fa-Hian visitedthedzedi
of the coals. The Mauria princes, agreeably to the text
of the legend,havingcome too late for sharinginthe parti-
tion of the relics, took with them the coals that remained
after the cremation of Buddha's remains, carried them
into their country,andbuilt a dzedi overthem. It was not
farfromthatplace that the Brahmin Dauna built another
dzedi over the vessel that had contained Buddha's relics.
16. The village of Rama is the same as the Ramaganio
of the Cingalese collection. The two Chinese pilgrims in
their relations call that place Lan-mo. Can itbe thatthe
modern Ramnagar is indicative ofthe ancient Ramaganio ?
At all events we would not be far from the truth if we
place it between the Gogra and the Rapti, but nearer to
the latter, almost due west of Goruckpore.
17. The Pawa town is supposed by A. Cunningham
to have occupied the same site as the large village of
Padarawana, twelve miles to the west of the river Gun-
duck, and forty miles north-north-east of Goruckpore. A
large mound of more than 200 feet in length by 1 20
in breadth exists in that locality. From the excavations
made on the place, it is supposed that there was a court-
yard, with cells for monks, on each side, the centre being,
as was often the case, occupied by a dzedi. Thepeople of
Pawaobtained one-eighth of the relics, after thecremation
of Buddha's remains, and built one dzedi over them.

186 ON THE PRINCIPAL PLACES
18. Kapilawot, or Kapilawastu, was situated between
Fyzabad and Goruckpore, but a little nearer to the latter
place. It was on or near the banks of the Gogra. The
small river Eohini formed the boundary between the ter-
ritory of Kapilawot and that of Kaulia.
19. Gaya and Buddha-Gaya are two distinct places.
The first is well known as the town ofGaya. The second
lies six miles southward, and is famous as the locality of
the Pipal or Bodi tree, underwhich Gaudama obtained the
Buddhahood. A tree of the same description is still to
be seen on the same spot. The present one was in full
vigfour in 1811, when Dr. Buchanan saw it. He describes
it as notbeing more than a hundred years old. A. Cun-
ningham says that it is now much decayed. One large
stem with three branches on the westward side are still
srreen but the other branches are barkless and rotten.
;
Hwen Tlisang, in his itinerary, speaks of an early renewal
of that tree by King Purna Varmma, after its destruction
by KingSasangka, who, with a true Brahminical and ini-
mical feeling, dug up the very ground on which it had
stood, and moistened the earth with sugar-cane juice, to
prevent its renewal. The same eminent archasologist
describes a massive brick temple, standing east of the
Bodi tree, and with great plausibility maintains that it is
the same which has been described by the above-named
Chinese pilgrim. As Fa-Hian is silent respecting that
temple, A. Cunningham concludes that it was erected dur-
ing the sixth century of the Christian era, when Bud-
dhism, under thefavourof King Amara-sinha andsome of
his successors, regained a vigorous ascendancy at least in
Magatha. Itis probable that all the teuiples, the ruins of
which have been examined at Hnddha-Gaya, Nalanda, and
Behar, havinga similarity in architectural plans and orna-
ments, were erected during the sixth and a part of the
seventh century of our era. The inference therefrom is
that Buddhism was flourishing in Magatha at that period.
Hwen Thsaug, who has visited and described those monu-

.
MENTIONED IN THE LEGEND. 187
merits in or about 625, speaks of them in the highest
terms. How longlasted the prosperous days ofBuddhism
in those parts ? It is difficult to state with any degree of
accuracy. But it seems probablethat it maintaineditself
in a satisfactory conditionuntilthe beginningofthetenth
century. It had then to give way before the irresistible
and triumphant ascendancy of Brahminism.
To the south-east of the great temple is a small tank
which is probably that ofthe Naga, who protected Buddha
during oneof the several stations that he made round the
Bodi tree.
20. Anawadat is the name of a lake famous in Bud-
dhist sacred history. Its etymological meaning is, agree-
ably to some savans, exempt of tumult, and, according to
others, not brightened. This last appellation is owing
probably to the high peaks that surround it and prevent
its being brightened by the rays of the sun. This is cer-
tainly the famous and extensive lake, which covers a por-
tion of the hig-h table-land of Pamir. It has been visited
and describedby LieutenantWood. What he states from
a careful observation on the spot agrees well with what
isfoundin the itineraries of the Chinese travellers. From
that high plateau which embosoms the lake Hows in an
eastern direction one of those small streams that formthe
river Ganges whilst, in an opposite direction, the Oxus,
;
issuing from the western slope, shapes its course nearly
towards the west.
21 Udiana is a country the position of which is fixed
on the banks of the Indus, between Cabul and Cashmere,
west of the latter country. Gandara is, it appears, the
country called Candahar by the Mussulmans, lying be-
tween the Swat and the Indus. The Burmese author
mentions always Kashmera along with Gandara. This
would indicate that the two places are in the vicinity of
each other, and that they formed primitively one and the
same state. Yaunaka is perhapsthe peninsulaof Guzerat.
But the writer entertains serious doubts on this subject.

i88 PLACES MENTIONED IN THE LEGEND.
It misfht be the countries situated west of the Hindu
Kush, that is to say,the ancientBactriana. The Burmese
author states tliat Yaunaka was inhabited by a people
called Pantsays. What people were they ? Isitan allu-
sion to the Greeks that had settled in Bactriana ? It is
not without interest to hear our Chinese traveller stating
that religion was flourishing in the above-mentioned
countries, whilst in the Punjaub he met with religious
with whom he declined holding intercourse, and of whom
he speaks in rather unfavourable terms. Hence we may
conclude that heretical opinions were then prevailing in
that country, and that doctrines at variance with those
of Buddha had already taken a deep root, and in their
growth almost choked genuine Buddhism, if it had ever
been the prevailing creed in the land of the five rivers.
22. On his way down the Ganges, our pilgrim does not
appear to have left his boat for any considerable time he
;
contents himself with mentioning a fact thatto some may
appear somewhat doubtful, viz., the flourishing condition
of the Buddhist religion as far as the neighbourhood of
the present metropolis of India. He speaks of tlie king-
dom of Champa. Campapuri, or Karnapura, was the
capital of that state. It was situated on the site of the
present Bhagulpore, or not far from it. Thence Fa-Hian
came to the state of Tamaralipti. The town which bore
that name is the modern Tumlook, on the right bank of
the Hoogly, not far from Calcutta. It was at that port
that he embarked on board of a ship bound to Ceylon.
Tamaralipti must have been a famous sea-port several
centuries before Fa-Hian 's days. We are informed that
Maheinda and his companions, who were appointed to
proceed to Ceylon to preach Buddhism to the people of
that island, embarked at the same place.

i89
( )
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN,
This is an abridgmeut of all the principles that constitute
the system of Buddhism. In the Legend of Buddha the
reader has become acquainted with the lifeof the founder
of Buddhism, the establishment of his religion, and the
promulgation of his chief doctrine. In the following
pages he will find compressed within narrow limits the
several observances to be attended to in order to reach
the goal of quiescence. As it is chiefly and principally
by the help of meditation and contemplation that such a
point can ever be attained, the readermust beprepared to
wade up to his very chin in the somewhat muddy waters
of metaphysics if he has a wish to penetrate into the very
sanctuary of Buddhism.
To encourage the reader, and console him in the midst
of his fatiguing journey through such dreary tracts, the
writer would remind him that he has first borne up the
fatigues of such a journey, and that, impelled by friendly
feelings, he has endeavoured to smooth the rugged path in
behalf of those that would follow liim on the same errand.
How far he has succeeded in his well-meant efTorts he
will not presume to state. But he will say this much,
that if his success be commensurate with his exertions he
may entertain a well-founded hope that he will not be
altogether disappointed in his anticipation, and feel some-
what confidentthat he hasafforded tothe uninitiated some
help to go over the difficult ground of metaphysics.

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
igo
Followinsr, in this instance, the line of conduct he has
adopted thi-ough the foregoing pages of this book, the
writer will allow the Buddhist author to speak for him-
self and explain his own views on the different subjects
under consideration. His sole aim will ever be to convey
as faithfully and as succinctly as possible the meaning of
the original he has under his eyes. The task, however
simple it may appear, is far from being an easy one, as
the Burmese are utterly incapable of fully understanding
the metaphysical portion of theirreligious system. Their
ignorance is calculated to render even more obscure what
is |?er se almost beyond the range of comprehension, be-
cause they must have frequently put an erroneous inter-
pretation on many Pali words, the meaning of which is
far from being accurately determined.
Our Buddhist doctor begins his work with enumerat-
ing the advantages to be derived from a serious and con-
stant application tothe earnest study of these seven ways.
"Such an exercise," says he, "has the virtue to free us
from all evils ; it expands the intelligence in the highest
degree, and leads straight to Neibban. Man, through it,
is delivered from all errors, is happy, and becomes during
his life an honour to the holy religion of Buddha."
The various subjects he intends to treat of in this work
are arranged under seven heads, which are laid down in
—
his own original way as follows : The observance of the
precepts and the practice of meditation are the twofold
foundation of the spiritual edifice. The consideration of
the nature and form of matter shall be the right foot of
the sage the investigation aboutthecausesand principles
;
of living beings shall be as his left foot ; the application
of the mind to find out the four high-roads to perfection,
and the obtaining the freedom from all passions, shall be
as his right and left hands and the possession of the
;
perfect science or knowledge shall be as liis head. The
happy man who shall have reached so far will be certain
to obtain the deliverance.

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
191
This summary is thus divided by our guide into seven
distinct parts, which will be condensed into six articles.
It is as well to add that this work, an abridged transla-
tion of which is now set before the reader, was composed
at firstinthe Siamese language at Bangkok, and has been
subsequently translated into Burmese. We find, there-
fore, that all the principles expounded throughout are
received as genuine on the banks of the Irrawaddy as well
as on those of the Meinam, and may be looked upon as a
faithful exposition of the highest tenets of Buddhism,
such as they are held in both countries. Thisobservation
confirms anotion whichhas beendenied bymany, viz., that
the chief doctrines of Buddhism are pretty nearly the
same in all the places where it has become the dominant
creed. The discrepancies to be met here and there relate
principally to practices and observances which present to
the eyes of the observer an infinite variety of hues and
forms. When Buddhism was established in several coun-
tries, it did not destroy many observances and practices
that were found deeply engrafted on the customs and
manners of the people ; it tolerated them, and made
with them a tacit compromise. As, for instance, the
worship ofNats existed among thetribes of the Irrawaddy
valleylongbefore theintroduction of Buddhism. Most of
the superstitious rites now prevailing in Burmah originate
fromthatbehef WiththeChinesetheworshipofancestors
.
continues to subsist side by side with Buddhism, though
the latter creed has nothing to do with it. In Nepaul
and at Ceylon, Hindu superstitions obtrude themselves on
the view of the observer to such an extent that it is not
easy to state which of the two creeds obtains the prefer-
ence.
ARTICLE
I.
OF THE PRECEPTS.
Our author, in a truly philosophical spirit, at first puts
.to himseK the three following questions.: What is the

:
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
192
origin of the law ? What is man, the subject of the law ?
What is the individual who isthepromulgator of the law ?
The three questions he answers in the following manner
ISt. All that exists is divided into two distinct parts, the
things which are liable to change and obey the principle
of mutability, such as matter, its modifications, and all
beings which have a cause ^ and those which are eternal
;
and immutable, that is to say, the precepts of the law and
Neibban. These have neither author nor cause they are
;
self-existing, eternal, and placed far beyond the reach of
1 Thedistinctionalluded toby our the true state and condition of all
author is a most important one. beings ; they proclaim the necessity
Whatdoes he mean when he states ofputting anendtosuchamiserable
that all things in this world obey state of things, and point out the
the principle of mutability, and are sure means of freeing oneself from
liableto perpetualchangesandmodi- the miseries attending existence.
fications, andthat theyhavea cause? These truths are eternal, insomuch
One would be tempted to believe that what they proclaim has ever
that the Buddhists admit of a first beentrue inallthe worlds that have
cause. Butsuch isnotthecase. To preceded the present one, since they
understand sucha language coming always resembleeach other, and will
from a Buddhist's mouth, we must everbe equallytrue during the end-
bear in mind the theory of the lessseriesof worlds that will follow.
twelve Nidanas,orcausesandeffects. In this sense the law, in the opinion
Each of the Nidanas isaneffectrela- of Buddhists, being the declaration
tivelytotheprecedingone,andacause of truth, or of what is, must be
to the following one. All existing eternal, as truth itself is everlasting.
beings are, relatively to each other, The state of Neibban, in contradis-
effects and causes. All undergo the tinction to that of existence such as
irresistible influence of mutability wecomprehend it, is likewiseathing
andchange. Thebeings that reside which never changes, since it is the
in the seats of Brahma are not be- end of changes. It remains always
yondthe reach of that influence, not the same ; itis theoppositeofexist-
even those who dwell in the four im- ence. What is then called here
materialseats. everlasting, or eternal, is, in the
Are there things which are fixedly opinion of Buddhists, but the things
and everlastingly the same, upon that are conceived as subsisting ab-
which no change, no vicissitude can stractively per se, and never affected
everact? There isthe law, there is by the great principle of mutability
the state of Neibban. The law is that pervadesallbeings. Tosumup
the expression of truth, which is thewhole in afewwords, thescience
reality, in contradistinction to the which points out the means of com-
unreality of the visible world. The ingoutofthewhirlpool ofexistences,
essenceof the law iscontainedinthe andthe being outofthat circle, such
four sublime truths, which are em- arethetwo things whichare always
phatically called the Law of the thesame, neverundergoanychange,,
Wheel, Theyare the declaration of andareeternal.

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
193
the influence that causes mutability. 2d. As to the pub-
lisher of the law, Buddha, he is a mere man, who during
myriads of centuries has accumulated merits on merits,
until he has obtained the Neibban of Kiletha, or the
deliverance from all passions. From that moment till his
death this eminent personage is constituted the master of
religion and the doctor of the law. Owing to his perfect
science he finds out and discovers all the precepts that
constitute the body of the law. Impelled by his match-
less benevolence towards all beings, he promulgates them
for the salvation of all. He is not the inventor of those
precepts ; he merely discovers them by the power of the
supreme intelligence, in the same manner as we perceive
clearly during the night, by the help of a light, objects
hithertowrappedin utter darkness. 3d. Man, who isto be
subjectedto the observance of the law, is distinguished by
thefollowingcharacteristics. Hepossessesmoreknowledge
than the animals and other beings, except the Nats and
Brahmas his intelligence andthoughtsreach fartherthan
;
thoseofotherbeings; he iscapableofreflecting,comparing,
drawinginferences, and observingfreelythe rules of life; -
despite the allurement of his passions, he can free himself
from the three great passions, concupiscence, anger, and
ignorance finally, he is a descendant fromthose Brahmas
;
who, in the beginning of this world, came from their seat,
2 Inthedefinition of man which is this sense, in their opinion, is as
given by the Buddhist author, we material as the eye, the ear, and the
find the words intelligence, capacity othei- senses. It is delightfulto the
for reflecting, comparing and draw- Cliristian readerto find in the midst
ing inferences, &c. He who is not ofa heapofrubbishand fablesafew
familiar with the revolting materia- fragmentsoftheprimitiverevelation,
list doctrinesof Buddhismwould be We see man coming from a noble
tempted to believe that they admit origin, appearing in this world with
of a soul or spiritual principle sub- the most glorious privileges, which
sistingin man. But such is not the he forfeits by eating the rice culled
case. Thefaculty for performing all Tsale, which produced on his being
the functions which we rightly at- the same destructive effects which
tribute to the soul resides in the the eating of the forbidden fruit
sixth sense, called mano, or the caused on our first parents in the
heart,ortheknowing principle. But gardenofEden.
VOL. II. N

194 T^HE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
lived on earth, and, by their eating the rice Tsale, lost all
theirglorious privileges,and became beings similartothose
who are known to us under the denomination of men.
The great end to be aimed at in the observance of the
precepts of the law and the exercise of meditation is the
obtaining of a state of complete indifference to all things.
The state of indifference alluded to does not consist in a
stupid carelessness about the things of this world. It is
the result of a knowledge acquired with much labour and
pain. The wise man who has possessed himself of such
science is no longer liable to the influence of that vulgar
illusion which makes people believe in the real existence
of thingsthat have no reality about them, but subsist only
on an ephemeral basis, which incessantly changes and
finally vanishes away. He sees things as they truly are.
He is full of contempt forthings which are at best a mere
illusion. This contempt generates a complete indifference
forallthat exists, evenforhisownbeing. Helongsforthe
moment when it shall be givento him to cast away his own
body, that he may no longer move withinthe circle of end-
less and miserable forms of existence. In this sense must
be understood the state of perfectquietism or indifference,
which is the last stage the wise man may reach by the
help of the science he possesses. The religious of the
Brahminical creed have professedthe same indifferencefor
all the accidents of life. Hence our Buddha, when he
became a perfected being, looked on the wicked Dewadat
with the same feelings as he did on the great Maia, his
mother. NumberlessEatheesoranchoriteshave everbeen
eulogised for having allowed themselves to be devoured by
ferocious beasts or bit by venomous snakes, rather than
offer the least resistance that could exhibit a sign of non-
indifference. Entire was their miconcorn towards their
very body, which they knew well is, as everything else, a
compound of the four elements, a mere illusion, totally
distinct from self.
Five commandments constitute the very basis where-

;
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
195
upon stand all morals, and areobligatory on all men with-
out exception. They includefive prohibitions. (It isnot
a little surprising that the five precepts obligatory on all
men are merely five prohibitions designed not to teach
men what they have to do, but warning them not to do
such thingsasareinterdicted tothem. This supposesthat
man is prone to do certain acts which are sinful. The
Buddhist law of the five precepts forbids him to yield to
such propensities, but it does not teach him particular
duties to perform. It does not elevate man above his
original level, but it aims at preventing him from falling
lower.) The five prohibitions are
:
Not to destroy the
life of any being ; not to steal ; not to commit adultery ;
not to tell lies; not to drink any intoxicating liquors or
beverages.
Our author seems to be a perfectmaster in casuistry, as
he shows the greatest nicety and exactness in explaining
all the requisite conditions that constitute a trespassing of
We
those precepts. will give here but a few samples of
his uncommon proficiencyin this science. As regards the
first prohibition, he says, five things are necessary to con-
stitute an offence against the first commandment, viz., a
being that has life, the intention and will of killing that
being, an act which is capable of inflicting death, and the
loss of life of that being consequent on the inflicting of
that action. Shouldbut one of these conditions be want-
ing, the sin could not be said to have taken place, and
therefore no complete trespassing of the first prohibition.
Again, asregards the second precept, five circumstances
or conditions arenecessaryto constitute atrespassing, viz.,
an object belonging to another person, who neither by
words nor signs showed any intention to part with it
the knowing that the owner intends to keep possession of
it; having the actual intention to take away secretly or
forcibly that object an effort to become possessed of the
;
thing by deceiving, injuring, or by mal-practices causing
the owner or keeper of the thing to fall asleep ; and,

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
196
finally, removing the thing from its place, however short
may bethe distance, should it be but that of the length of
a hair of the head.
For the infraction of the third precept the following
conditions are required the intention and will of sinning
:
with any person of another sex, which comes within the
denomination of Akamani-jathan, that is to say, persons
whom it is forbidden to touch ; acting up to that intention
and the consummating of such an act. Women that fall
under the above denomination are divided into twenty
classes. The eight first classes include those thatareunder
the guardianship of their parents or relatives the ninth
;
class comprises those affianced before they be of age the
;
tenth, those reserved for the king. Within the ten other
classes come all those who, owing to their having been
slaves, or from any other cause, have become concubinesto
their masters, or married their seducers, &c.
The fourth prohibition extends notonly to lies, but like-
wise to slander, coarse and abusive expressions, and vain
and useless words. The four following conditions con-
stitute a lie, viz., saying a thingthat is untrue ; the inten-
tion of saying such a thing making manifest such an
;
intention by saying the thing and some one's hearing
;
and clearly understandingthe thing thatis uttered. That
the sin of medisance may be said to exist, it is required
that the author of it should speak with the intention of
causing parties to hate each other or quarrel with each
other, and that the words spoken to that end should be
heard and understood by the parties alluded to.
Thefifthprecept forbidsthedrinkingof Sura and Meria,
that is to say, of distilled liquors and of intoxicatingjuices
extracted from fruits and flowers. 'Jliemereactofputting
the liquor in the mouth does not constitute a sin; the
swallowing of it is implied.
Besides these five generalprecepts, obligatory on all the
faithful without exception, there are three other precepts,
or rather counsels, that are strongly recommended to the

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
197
Upasakas, orpious laymen. They aredesigned asbarriers
against the great propensity inherent in nature which
causes men to exceedin all that is used, through the senses
of taste, hearing, seeing, smelling, and feeling. They are
so many means that help to obtain a sober moderation in
the daily use of the things of the world.
The first counsel regulates all that regards eating. It
forbids using any comestible from noon to daybreak of
thefollowing morning. The secondinterdictstheassisting
at plays, comedies, and the use of flowers and essences
with the intention of fondly handling and smelling them.
The third prescribes the form and size of beds, which
ought never to be more than one cubit high, plain and
without ornaments. The use of mattresses and pillows,
filled with cotton or other soft substances, is positively
prohibited. The very intention of lying upon these ener-
vating superfluities, and afortiori reclining on them, con-
stitutes the breaking of such a command.
These three latter precepts are to be observed chiefly in
the following days, on the 5th, 8th, 14th, and 15th of the
waxing moon, and on the 5th, 8th, and 14th of the
waning moon, as well as on the new moon. The pious
Upasakas sometimes observe them during the three con-
secutive months of the season of Lent.
In the opinion of our author those men and women are
deservingoftherespectable title of Upasakas whohave the
greatest respectforand entertain a pious affection towards
thethreepreciousthings,Buddha, thelaw,andtheassembly
of the perfect. They must everview them as the havenof
salvation and the securest asylums. ^I'hey must be ready
to sacrifice everything, theirvery life, for the sake of these
three perfect things. During their lifetime, underall cir-
cumstances, they must aim at following scrupulously the
instructions of Buddha, such as they are embodied in the
law and preached by the Rahans.
Five offences disqualify a man for the honourable title
of Upasaka, viz., the want of belief and confidence in the

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
198
three precious things, the non-observ^anceof the eight pre-
cepts, the believing in hicky and unlucky days,^orin good
andbad fortune,the beliefin omensand signs,and keeping
company with the impious, who have no faith in Buddha.
We now come to the rules which are prescribed to all
the Buddhist religious. They are 227 in number, and
are found in a book called Patimauk. This book is the
vcule mccum of all religious. They study it and often
learn it by heart. On certain days of each month the
reliofious assemble in the Thein. The Patimauk is then
read, explained, and commented upon by one of the elders
of the fraternity. It is an abridgment of the Wini, the
great book of discipline. It teaches the various rules
respecting the four articles offered by the faithful to the
religious ; that is to say, vestments, food, mats, and the
ino-redieuts formastication. These rules likewise regulate
all that relates to the mode of making prayers, devotions,
walking, sitting, reclining, travelling, &c. Everything is
described with a minute particularity.
Here, if any interest could be awakened, would be the
place to enter into the system of casuistry carried by
Buddhist religious to a point of nicety and refinement
3 Buddhists lay the greatest stress isitalonethatbringsinandregulates
on the belief in the three precious all the accidents which attend the
things. It is the foundation on life of man. .Such is indeed the
which rests the whole spiritual edi- theory of the true Buddhist. But
fice. But it is somewhat extraordi- how widely differs the practice from
nary to see that the superstition of the theory? He who has lived for
believing in luckyand unluckydays, some time in a Buddhist country,
in good and bad luck, is openly con- and made himself acquainted with
demned,and entailsuponhim who is the intimate habits of the people,
addicted to it the severest penalty. willsoon discover that superstitious
Though such childish beliefisso ex- ideas,and,asanecessaryconsequence,
ceedinglycommon in Burmah that it superstitiouspractices, arethespring
influences manin hisdailyandhourly and prime moverof allactions from
affairs, yet we mustadmit that it is morning to night. In this respect,
opposed to the tenets of strict Bud- Buddhist monks differ not from the
dhism. Therecannever beanygood laity nay, theyareoften seen as the
;
orbad luckintheopinion ofhimwho leaders of the people in the perfor-
has faith in the influence of merits mance of rites at variance with the
and demerits. There is no other tenets oftheircreed,
agent inthis world but that one ; it

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN. igg
tnily astonisliing. Suffice it to state that they have gone
over the boundless field of speculative conjectures respect-
ing all the possible ways of fulfilling or trespassing
the precepts and regulations that concern the body of
religious.
Every law and precept must have a sanction. This
essential requisite is not wanting in the Buddhist system.
Let us examine in what consists the reward attending a
regular and correct observance of the precepts, and what
is the punishment inflicted on the transgressors of these
ordinances. As usual, we will follow our author and
allow him to make known his own opinions on this im-
portant subject. It is often inquired of us, says he, why
some individuals live here during many years, whilst
others appear but for a short time on the scene of this
world. The reason of the difference in the respective
condition of these persons is obvious and evident. The
first,duringtheirformerexistence,havefaithfullyobserved
the first commandand refrained from killingbeings, hence
their long life the second, on the contrary, have been
;
guilty of some trespassings of this precept, and therefore
the influence of their former crimes causes the shortness
of their life. In a similar manner we account for all
the differences that exist in the conditions of all beings.
The observance or trespassing of one or several precepts
creates the positions of happiness and unhappiness, of
riches and poverty, of beauty and ugliness, that chequer
the lives and positions of mortals in this world.
In addition to the rewards bestowed immediately in
this world, there are the six seats of Nats, where all sorts
of recompenses are allotted, during immense periods, to
those who have correctly attended to the ordinances of
the law. There are likewise places of punishment in the
several hells, reserved to the transgressors of the precepts
The conditions of animal, Athoorikes and Preittas, are
other states of punishment.
A lengthened account of all that relates to the blissful

200 THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
reafions of Nats and the Moomv abodes of hell is found iu
one ofthegreat Dzats, oraccounts of the former existences
of Gaudama, given by himself to his disciples, when he
was a prince under the name of Nemi. The writer has
read and partly translated this work, which delightfully
reminded him of the fine episodes on similar subjects he
had read in the sixth book of the /Eneid. The wildest,
most fertile, and inventive imagination seems to have
exhausted its descriptive powers, on the one hand, in mul-
tiplying the pleasures enjoyed in the seats of Nats, and
beautifyingand adorningthosedelightful regions and, on
;
the other, in representing with a dark and bloody pencil
the frightfulpictureofthenumberless and horridtorments
of the regions of desolation, despair, and agony.
All thatis so abundantly related of the fortunate abodes
of Nats in their sacred writings supplies the Buddhist
religious with agreeable and inexhaustible topics of ser-
mons which they deliver to their hearers, to excite them
more effectually to bestow on them abundant alms. The
credulous hearers are always told that the most conspi-
cuous places in those regions are allotted to those who
have distinguished themselves by their great liberalities.
We think it idle and superfluous, uninteresting and
fatiguing to repeat those fabulous accounts of the seats
of Nats and abodes of hell, as given at great length by
Buddhist authors. The only particulars deserving to be
attended to are these : the reward is always proportionate
to the sum of merits, and punishment to that of demerit.
There isno eternity of reward or of punishment.'*
* Thisisaconsequenceoftheaxiom fluenceof hisgoodorbad deeds. It
established by our author, viz., that accompanieshim inallpositions,and
the principle of mutability pervades causes the vicissitudes that attend
all the beings which reside in the hisexistence. It works u])on him in
thirty-oneseats allottedto them. It hell, as well as on earth, anrl in the
cannot be supposed for a moment, seats of Nats and Brahmas. Fixity
according to Buddhists,that abeing, is to be found nowhere except in
whatever may be the amount of his goingout of the circleof existences,
merits and demerits, can ever be that istosay,in Ncibban. Wlieiiwe
placed williout the pale of the in- speak of existence in a Huddhistic.

1;
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBDAN. 20
This first article shall be concluded by an important
remarkbearing'uponthe system underconsideration. The
seats of happiness, as already mentioned, are divided into
two great classes the one including the superior, and the
;
other the inferior seats. The latter are the six seats of
Nats, andaretenantedbybeings asyetundertheinfluence
of concupiscence and other passions. Those who observe
the five general precepts have placed, and, as it were,
established themselves on the basis whereupon stands per-
fection, but not yet in perfection itself; they have just
crossed the threshold thereof. They are asyet imperfect
but they have prepared themselves for entering the way
that leads towards perfection that is to say, meditation,
;
or the science of Dzan. The very rewai'd enjoyed in those
seats is, therefore, as yet an imperfection. The superior
seats can only be reached by those who apply themselves
to mental exercises. These exercises are the real founda-
tion of the lofty structure of perfection and the high-road
to it.
sense, wemeanasfalcofbeinginany him maintaining with an admirable
conceivableformorsituationorplace. acuteness the existence of manyfun-
Fixity in the enjoymentof rewardor damental truths ; such, for instance,
inthe undergoingof punishmentisa as the reward of good actions and
contradiction with the first principle the punishment of bad ones. With
ofBuddhism. Theawarderofreward him thedoingofeviliseverattended
or punishment is the above-named with consequences fatal tothe perpe-
influence, which proceeds from the trator,whilsttheperformanceofgood
actions performed, and in its turn isalwaysaccompaniedwithbeneficial
allotsgoodorevilinexactproportion results. One would be inclined to
with thecausethat has createdit. believe that Gaudama has appro-
(laudama, having wilfully and un- priated to himself with a great tact
wilfully ignored a first cause from all the truths emanating from the
which allthe things that exist draw beliefinasupremebeing ; andwhilst
their beingand life, has been forced hehas, withabarefaced and impious
to allow to an imaginaiy agent the audacity,denied totheeternalauthor
very same attributes whicli belong of all things the very existence, he
exclusively to the supreme being. has been placed under the necessity
On therockof atheism he has made of accounting, in a most unlogical
a sad shipwreck. Apart from this manner, for the existence of this
capital error it is surprising to see world.

;
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN
202
AETICLE IL
OF MKDITATION AND ITS VARIOUS DEGREES.
This and the following articles contain subjects of so
abstruse and refined a nature, that it would require one to
possess the science of a Buddha to come to a right under-
standing of them. The difficultiesarising fromthis study
are due to the confused and very unsatisfactory ideas of
the Buddhist philosophers respectingthesoulandits spiri-
tuality, and perhaps to the inability ofthe writertounder-
stand the vague and undefined terms employed to convey
their ideas on these matters. The field ofBuddhist meta-
physics is, to a European, in a great measure a new one
the meaning of the terms is half-understood by the Bur-
mesetranslators definitionsofterms do not convey expla-
;
nations such as we anticipate, and ideas seem to run in a
new channel ; they assume, if we may say so, strange
forms divisions and subdivisions of the various topics
:
have no resemblance to what a European is used to in the
study of philosophy. The student feels himself ushered
into a new region lie is doomed to find his way by grop-
;
ing. Finally, the false position assumed by the Indian
philosophers, and thefalse conclusions they arrive at, con-
tribute to render more complicated the task of elucidating
this portion of the Buddhist system. That thedifficulties
may be somewhat lessened, andthepathway rendered less
rugged and a little smooth, the writerproposes toavoidas
much as it is in his power overcharging with Pali terms
the explanations he is about to afford, under the guidance
of the Buddhist author.
In the preceding article we have treated of meritorious
actions that are purely exterior, and briefly alluded to the
nature of the rewards bestowed on earth and in the six
seats of Nats upon those who have performed these good
actions. Now we leavebehindallthe exteriorgood deeds,
and turn the attention of our mind to something more

THE SEVEN WAYS \T0 NEIBBAN. 203
excellent, to those acts that are purely interior, and are
perfornied solely by the soul and the right exercise of its
faculties that is to say, by meditation and contemplation.
;
The root of all human miseries is ignorance. It is the
generating principle of concupiscence and other passions.
Itisthe dark but lofty barrierthat encircles all beings and
retains them within the vortex of endless existences ; it is
the cause of all existences, and of all those illusions to
which beings are miserably subjected ; it causesthose con-
tinual changes which take place in the production of all
beings. This great cause once found and proclaimed by
Buddha, it was necessary to procure a remedy to counter-
act the action of ignorance, and successfully oppose its
progress. Anotherantagonisticandoppositeprinciplehad
to be found, adecpiateto resistthe banefulagencyofigno-
rance and stem its sad and misfortune-creating influence.
That principle is science or knowledge. Ignorance is but
a negative agent : it is only the absence of science. Let
knowledge be, and ignorance shall vanish away inthe same
manneras darknessis noiselessly butirresistibly dissipated
by the presence of light.
All beings in this universe, says our author, are doomed
to be born and die. We quit this place to go and live in
another we die here tobe born elsewhere. We can never
;
be freed from pain, old age, and death. Whether welike
it or not, we must suflier and always suffer. Butwhy is it
so? Because we donot possessthe perfect science. Were
we blessed with it, we would infallibly look towards
Neibban, and then, escaping from the pursuit of pain and
miseries, we would infallibly obtain the deliverance from
those evils which now incessantly pressupon us. It rests
with us only to perfect our intelligence, so that we might
gradually attain to the perfect science, the source of all
good. But by what means is so desirable an end to be
obtained ? By the exercise of meditation, answers, with a
decidedtone, our philosopher. Tliis word implies, besides,
our intellectual operations of a superior order, such as

;
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
204
contemplation, visions, ecstasy, union, &c., which are the
more or less complete results of that intellectual exercise.
The act of meditating can take place but in the heart,
where resides the mano, or the faculty of knowing. Its
object can never be but the nam-damma, literally the
name ofthething
;
or,inotherterms,thethingsofapurely
intellectual nature. But it can by no means happen in
the seats of the other senses or organs, such as the eyes,
the ears, &c., which are only channels to communicate
impressions to the faculty of memo.
The constitutive parts of meditation are five in number.
Witteka, the action of raising the mind to an object
Witzara, the attentive consideration of that object ; Piti,
the bringing of the soul and body to a state of satisfac-
tion Suka, the pleasure enjoyed in the thingconsidered
; ;
Ekatta, the perseverance or stability of the mind in that
object. There is also Upekka, which implies agreater and
more intense degree of fixity of the mind, extending not
only to one object in particular, but to all things.
It may be called the absolute quietism of the soul, and
the net result of a complete course of general meditation
on the universality of things. It is the last and highest
point that can ever be reached.
To explain more fully the nature and definitions of the
two first parts, our philosopher has recourse to the follow-
ing comparison. Let us supposea man that has to cleanse
a rusty copper vessel. With one hand he grasps the
vessel, and with the other he rubs it up and down, right
and left. This is exactly what is done by the means of
Witteka and Witzara. The first gets hold of the object
of meditation, and the second causes the mind to pass
and repass over it, until it has perfectly seen it in all its
particulars.
The third stage in the exercise of meditation is that of
Piti, which consists in a sort of transitory delectation, ex-
perienci-d by him wlio has reached that third step of
mental labour. It produces on the whole frame the fol-

—
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN. 20?
—
lowing effects : It seems to him that is engaged in that
exercise that the hairs of his head stand on an end, so
strong is the sensation he then feels ; at other times it
produces in the soul sensations similar to that of the
lightning that rends the atmosphere. Sometimes it is
in a commotion resemblingthat ofmighty waves breaking
on the shore ; at other times the subject is, as it were,
carried through the air, or only raised above the ground,
and occasionallyitcauses a chillrunningthroughout allthe
limbs. Whenthese results havebeen, through persevering
efforts, repeatedly experienced with an ever-increasing
degree of intensity, the following effects are attained :
The body and the soul are completely restrained, sub-
dued, andcomposed they are almostbeyond the influence
;
of concupiscence. Both acquire a remarkable lightness, so
that the exercise of meditation offers no further trouble
or labour the natural repugnance or opposition to self-
;
recollection is done away with, then the exercise of medi-
tation becomes pleasing from the pleasurable state of the
soul and body, and finally both parts are in a true and
genuine condition, so that what there was previously in
them either vicious or opposedto truth disappears at once
and vanishes away. Such are the various effects experi-
enced by the soul that has reached the degree of Piti, or
mental satisfaction.
When the soul and body have thus been perfectly sub-
dued, and freed from all that could wrongly affect them,
the soul then reaches the state of Suka, that is to say, of
perfect and permanent pleasure and inward delight. The
effects or results thereof are called Samati, or peace or
quiescence of the soul. As a matter of course, that state
of inward peace has several degrees both as regards the
time it lasts and the intensity of the affection. It lasts
sometimes for a moment, or for aperiod of uncertain dura-
tion, as it happens when we reflect on some subject, or we
listen to a sermon. At othertimes its duration is longer
;
when, for instance, we are about to enter into contempla-

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
2o6
tion or ecstasy, and it lasts as long as we are in one o£
these states.
From Piti originates the Sanmti-tseit the idea or con-
,
sciousness of inward quiescence. It is the secondary
cause of the real joy and delight, and is followed by an
unshaken resolution to adhere to all the precepts of the
law. It produces in the soul a certain freshness, expan-
sion, and ravishment in the practice of virtue. Such a
A
state is illustrated by the following comparison. tra-
vellerhas to go over a very difficult road ; he is exposed to
an intense heat, and tormented with a burning thirst.
Let us imagine the intensity of his delight when he finds
himself on the brink of a rivulet of clear and cool water
;
such is precisely the state of the soul under the influence
of Piti. The state of Suka follows it very soon. It is
exemplified by the condition of the travellerwho has been
perfectly refreshed and relieved from thirst and fatigue,
and enjoys the delightful and pleasurable effects resulting
therefrom.
The last state or the crowning point to be arrived at
by the means of meditation is that of Upekka, or perfect
fixitv. whence originates an entire indifference to love or
hatred, pleasure or pain. Passions can no more affect the
soul in that happy condition. But in this, as well in the
preceding states, there are several degrees, according to
the various objects it refers to. In the Upekka, relating
to the five senses, man is no more affected by beautiful or
unseemly objects, by harsh or melodious sounds, &c. As
to what refers to creatures, man has neither love nor dis-
like for them. Man obtains the state of Upekka, relating
to scienceor knowledge, by examiningand considering all
things through the medium of the three great principles,
ancilsa, diika, anatta, that is to say, change, pain, and
illusion. Tliere is also the uirya upekka; as when a man,
after great strugglesand efforts to obtain acertain object,
sees that he cannot reach it, he becomes indifferent toit,
and without trouble or the least disquiet gives up the

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN. 207
undertaking. There aremanyother effects oftheUpekka
mentionedby ourauthor, the enumeration of which would
prove tedious. What has been just stated is sufficient to
afford a correct idea of the nature of the highest state of
meditation that the human mind can ever reach. The
last and most transcendent result of the condition of
Upekka is this : when an individual, by successful exer-
tions, has ascended tothe top ofthe spiritual ladder, there
is a certain virtue that attracts everything to him. He
becomes a centre to which all appear to converge. He is
like the central point of our planet, that ever remains dis-
tinctfromthe bodiesitincessantlydrawstoitself. Seated
inthe centreof the most complete quietism, the sage con-
templates, without the least effort, the unclouded truth
that indefinitely unfolds itself before him. Hence, as our
author observes, the sage that has reached the state of
Upekka hasno more to pass successivelythrough the four
preceding stages to be enabled to meditate ; that is to say,
he no more requires the help of thought, reflection, satis-
faction, and pleasure. He is in the middle of the cloud-
less atmosphere of truth which he enjoys, and therein
remains as unmoved as truth itself.
As stated in the previous article, the observance of the
precepts, or the performance of exterior good actions,
draws abundant rewards uponthose whofaithfully comply
with them. These rewards arebestowed either in the seat
of man or in the six abodes of Nats, which we will agree
to call the six inferior heavens, where concupiscence as
yet holds its empire.
The inward good deeds produced by the operation of
the intellectual faculties of the soul beino' of an incom-
parably greater value than the exti'rnal ones, the recom-
pense of the former is of a higher order than that of the
latter. Hence there are twenty superiorheavens reserved
to the sages that havemade progress in meditation.''' Tlir
s It will perhaps be of some interest to a few of our readers to men-

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NBIBBAN.
2o8
accounts of the Buddhists respecting the extent of these
seats, their respective distance in a perpendicular direc-
tion, the myriads of centuries to stay in each of them,
&c., are puerilities not worth attending to, and in no way
belono-ing to the genuine and original Buddhism. They
are the inventions in subsequent ages of individuals who
wished to emulate their neighbours and rivals, the Hni-
dus, at a time when the latter substituted the gross and
revolting idolatry of the Puranas for the purer doctrines
of the Vedas. But what is directlyto our purpose is the
distinction of these twenty seats into two classes. The
tionthenamesofthethirty-one seats formance of good and meritorious
inwhich Buddhists have located all e.xteriorworks.
beings. Letusbeginwiththelowest The three places above those of
step of that immense ladder. The Nats, called Brahma-parisitsa, Brah-
f p o u u n r is f h ir m st en s t t . eps a I r n e t t h h e em fou a r re sta t t o es b o e f m o a c h c - u p p a i r e a d u- b h y it t a h , e c M o a n h t a em - p B l r a a t h iv m e a s , w a h r o e
found living the unfortunate beings have reached the first step of Dzan,
who, pursuedby the inflexible law of ormeditation. The three following,
their demerits, are doomed to atone Pareitta-ba, Appa-ma-naba, Appa-
in different ways for the evil that sara, aretenantedbythe beings who
theyhave done. The lowest seat is have attained the second degree of
Nga-yai or hell. It is placed in the contemplation. The three next to
centreof our planet, and subdivided those just enumerated are: Paweit-
into eight principal quarters, the ta-sou-ba,.Appa-mana-sou-ba,Souba-
last of which is called Awidzi. The kannaka. They are the abodes of
secondstepof theladder is occupied thecontemplatives whohaveascend-
b ce y rt t a h i e n s m e o a n t s o t f er A s ni ca m l a l l e s d ; Pr t e h i e tt t a h s i ; rd an b d y e T d he to tw th o e t f h o i l r l d ow s i t n e g p o s f tep m s edit o a f tio t n h . e
the fourth by another kind of in- ladder, Wa-happala, .\-sou-gna-sat,
ferior beings named .\thourikes. are tenanted by the contemplatives
These four seats are tenanted by of the fourth tlegree; and the five
beings who undergo punishment for that follow, viz., Awiha, Atabpa,
the evil deeds they have per- .Sou-dasa, Sou-dasi, Agga-nita, are
formed. occupied by the contemplatives of
Thefifth seat is thatofManusa,or thefifth degree ; that istosay,bythe
men. The beings that occupyit are beingswhohaveenteredtheThoda,or
ina state inwhich theycan merit or current of perfection, and who have
demerit. It may becalled aposition qualifiedthemselvesforobtainingthe
ofprobation. stateofdeliverance, or Neibban.
Above the seat of man are the si.x .Abovethose seats wefindthe four
seats of Nats called Tsadoomaritz, and last abodes of .\rupa, without
Tawadeinlha, Yama, Toocita, Nini- form. They are called: Akasanit-
anarati,Pare-neimittawasawati. The za-yatana, Wigniana -witza-yatana,
denizens of those seats enjoy the .\keitsignia-yatana,Newa-thagnia-na-
rewardawarded to them forthe per- thagnia-yatana.

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN. 209
first comprises sixteen seats, nnder the designation of
Rwpa, or matter ; the second inchides four seats, called
Arn/pa, or immaterial abodes or conditions. Here are
located on a grand and immense scale, according to their
respective proficiency in science and meditation, the
beings that have striven to advance in knowledge by the
exertion of the mental faculties. The general appella-
tion given to each class bears a great meaning, and there-
fore deserves ex[3lanation. In the sixteen seats of Rupa
are placed the contemplatives who have as yet a body,
and have not been hitherto able to disengage themselves
from some affection to matter. The subjects of their
meditations are still the beings inhabiting this material
world, together with some of the Kathain, or coarser por-
tion of their being. But in the four seats called Arupa,
which terminate the series of Buddhist heavens, the con-
templatives are destitute of shape and body they are
;
almost brought to the condition of pure spirits. In their
sublimeandlofty flightin the regions of spiritualism, they
seem to have bid a last farewell to this world, and to be
no longer concerned with material things.
Let us glance rapidly over these various seats, and pay
a visit to the beings that have been rewarded with a place
in them, owing to their great proficiency in the mental
We
exercise of meditation. will begin with the lowest
We
seat, and from it successively ascend to the loftiest.
must bear in remembrance that there are, as above stated,
five degrees of meditation or five parts, viz., perception,
reflection, satisfaction, happiness, and fixity. He who
has been much exercised in the first degree shall inhabit
one of the three first seats of Rupa. Those who, leaving
aside the first degree, shall delightin the second and third,
shall inhabit, according to their respective progress, one
of the three following seats. Those whotake delight only
in the fourth degree, having no further aid of the three
first parts, perception, consideration, and satisfaction, shall
be located in the seventh, eighth, and ninth seats. When.
VOL. IK O.

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
2IO
the fifth degree of Dzan, or meditation, has been attained,
that is to say, when a privileged contemplative is able to
meditate and contemplate, without having recourse to the
representation and consideration of the object, without
allowing himself to be influenced by pleasures or joy,
then he has attainedtothe state of fixity and indifference
;
he occupies the tenth and eleventh seats. The five re-
maining seats bear the collective name of ThoodoAvata, or
abodes of the pure or perfect, that is to say, the dwelling-
place of those who have entered into the current of per-
fection. They are inhabited by the Kaliana Putadzans,
and the four sorts of contemplatives called Thautapan,
Thakadagan, Anagan, and Eahandas. The latter have
entered into the Tliocla, or current of perfection. The
Thautapans and Thakadagans are pure and exempt from
all influence of demerits ; the Anagans are delivered from
the five concupiscences. The Rahandas are enjoying a
perfect indifference for all. They are strangers to such
language asthis : I am great, I am greater, I am greatest.
Such terms of comparison are but mere illusions they are
;
deceitful sounds that confuse, distract, and bewilder the
ignorant.
Above the TlwodavMa seats are the four called Arupa,
or immaterial. The denizens of these places first i-ecog-
nise that the miseries attending man in this world have
their origin in the body. They then conceive the utmost
disgust and horror for it ; they long for the dissolution of
this agent to all wickedness. So great is their horror for
bodies and matter, that they nolongerselectthem for sub-
jects of meditation they endeavour to cross beyond the
•,
limits of materiality, and launch forth into the boundless
space, where this material world does not seem to reach-
The inhabitants of the first seat have assumed for their
subject of meditation the Akasa, the air, the fluid of the
atmosphere, or the space. Those of the second meditate
on the Winiana, or the spirit, or life of beings, taken in
an abstract sense ; those of the third contemplate the

;
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN
211
Ahintzi, or immensity those of the fourth, Ncvathagnia,
;
lose themselves in the infinity.
By whatmental process has the sage to pass in order to
reachthefirst degree of sublime contemplation ? He will
have to begin with the consideration of the form of some
material object, say one of the four elements. Let him
afterwards set aside those Kathain, or material portions of
the element brought under consideration, and occupy his
mind with the ether, or fluid, or space the former, that is
;
to say, the kathain, shall disappear to give place to some-
thing divested of all those coarser forms, and the mind
shall be fixed only on the akatha. The sage then shall
—
repeat ten hundred thousand times these words, The
space or air is infinite, until there will appear at last the
first tseit, or idea of arupa. In a similar manner, the tseit
akan, or the idea of conformity with purpose, disappears
then begins the science of upekka, or indifference, withits
four degrees ; theidea that then succeeds is precisely that
of akasa ananda, or infinite ether, or space. This unintel-
ligible mental process is explained by a comparison. If
they shut with a white cloth the openingof a window, the
persons inside the room, turning their eyes in the direc-
tion of the opening, see nothing but the white cloth.
Should the cloth be suddenly removed, they perceive no-
thingbut that portion of the spacecorresponding with the
extent of the window. The piece of cloth represents the
materialforms, that are the subjects of meditation, orcon-
templation, of those living in the seats of Ilupa ; the free
openingof the window exemplifiesthe subjects of contem-
plation reserved to the first class of arupa. Having
reached so far, the contemplative soon feels the utmost
disgust for all material forms, and is entirely delivered
from the three Thagnia, or false persuasions, supplied by
matter, by the action of the senses, and by the result of
meritsand demerits. He isdispleased with all the coarser
forms of beings. The action of the contemplative has its
sphere in the mano, or seat of knowledge. The ideas

212 THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
originating from the action of the senses have no share in
that purelyintellectual labour. In that state, the sagehas
fallen into a condition of so perfect abstraction, that all
the accidents on the part of the elements can produce
no effect over him. The action of the senses is com-
pletely suspended duringall thetime that the contempla-
tion lasts. In fact this is nothing else but thamabat, or
ecstasy.
The same course of meditation must be followed by the
sages inhabiting the other three seats only the object to
;
be contemplated will be different.
Having explained the important subject of meditation,
endeavoured to showthe different parts or degrees of that
intellectual exercise, and given a faint outline of the
recompenses bestowed on those that have distinguished
themselves by proficiency in that exercise, we have now
to follow our author, and, with him, make ourselves
acquainted with the principal subjects that attract the
attention of the contemplative.
ARTICLE
III.
OF THE NATURE OF BEINGS.
The Buddhist philosopher, in his earnest prosecution
after the antidote of ignorance, that is, science, rightly
states that all beings, and man, in particular, musteverbe
the firstandmost interesting subjectthe sage has to study.
The knowledge of man in particular constitutes a most
important portion of the science he must acquire, ere he
can become a perfect being, and be deemed worthy to be
admitted to the state of Neibban. In the very limited
sketch of this part of the work under consideration, the
attention of the reader will be directed on man as the most
interesting of all beings. With our Buddhist author,
therefore, he will take human beings as the subject of his

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
213
investigations. Provided withthephilosophicaldissecting
knife, he will anatomise all the component parts of that
extraordinary being, whose nature has ever presented an
insoluble problem to ancient sages. What is to be said
on this subject will be sufficient to convey a correct idea
ofthemodeofreasoningandarguingfollowed byBuddhist
philosophers, when they analyse other beings and select
them for the subjects of their meditations.
At the very beginning, our author proclaims this great
maxim All beings living in the three worlds, heaven,
:
earth, and hell, have in themselves but two things or
attributes, Eupa and JSfam, form and name. Accustomed
as we are to a language that expresses clear and distinct
notions, we would like to hear him say, in nature there
are but two things, matter and spirit. But such is not
the language of Buddhists, and I apprehend thatwere we
givinguptheirsomewhatextraordinary,and,tous, unusual
way of expressing their ideas, we could notcome to a cor-
rect knowledge ofthe notionsthey entertain respectingthe
nature of man. Letusallow our author to speak forhim-
self, and, as much as possible, express himself in his own
way. By ricpa, we understand form and matter ; that is
to say, all that is liable 2Jer se to be destroyed by the
agency of secondary causes. Mam, or nama, is the thing,
the nature of which is known to the mind by the instru-
mentality of mano, or the knowingprinciple. In the five
aggregatesconstituting man,viz., materiality or form, the
organs of sensation, of perception, of consciousness, and
those of intellect, there is nothing else to be found but
form andname. We areatoncebroughttothismaterialist
conclusion, that in man we can discover no other element
but that of form and that of name.
To convey a sort of explanation of this subject, our
author gives here a few notions respecting the six senses.
I say six senses, because with him, besides the five ordi-
nary senses, he mentions the mano, or the knowing prin-
ciple that resides in the heart, as one of the senses. The

214 THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
organsorfacultiesofseeing,hearing, feeling,tasting,smell-
ing, and knowing, he calls the inward senses. These same
organs, as they come in contact with exterior objects, are
called exterior senses. The faculty inherent in each of
the senses whereby is operated the action between the
organ and its object is designated by the appellation of
the life of the senses, as, for instance, the eye seeing, the
ear hearing, &c. In this treble mode of considering the
senses, what do we meet with but form and name, ideas
and matter ? Supposing the organ of seeingto exist, and
an object to be seen, there will necessarily result, as an
essential consequence, the perception or idea of such a
thing. Even as regards the onano, where there exists the
heart on one side, andtruth on the other, there will follow
immediately the idea or perception of truth.
This materialist doctrine, if the meaning of our author
be accurately understood, is further confirmed by the
method he proposes for carrying on the investigation re-
spectingthenature ofthings. He whodesires topenetrate
deeply into such a sublime science must have recourse to
the help of meditation. Having selected an object, he
considers it by the means of wifekka. He passes succes-
sively through the ideas and impressions he derives from
the contemplation of such an object. He then says to
himself the ideas obtained by means of witekka, or
:
thefirstdegreeofdzan,ormeditation, arenothingbutnam-
damma, since their nature is to offer themselves to the
armn, as the thought to its object. But whereis the seat
of that arovi? It resides in the substance of the heart,
which, in reality, affords asylum bothto it and to the nam-
daiiiiiia. It is nowhere else tobe found. But what is the
heart? Whence does it come ? By what is it formed ?
To these three questions we answer,thatthe heartis com-
posed of the four elements. It is but one and the same
thing with them. This startling doctrine is explicit, and
excludes at once the idea of a spiritual substance.
Our author has now reached the elements of the parts

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN. 2rj
constituting all that exists with a form. Heboldly asserts
that all thathas an existence is but an aggregate of earth,
water,fire, andair
;
alltheformsarebutmodifications and
combinations of the four elements. The bare enumeration
of this general principle is not sufficient to satisfy our
philosopher. He wishes to know and explain the reason
of everything. Here beginsananalysisentirely unknown
to ourchemists andphilosophers ofthewest. The body is
divided into thirty-two parts, which are often enumerated
in formulas of prayer by pious Buddhists. Each of these
thirty-two parts is subdivided into forty-four. The hair,
how slendersoever it appears, is submitted to thatminute
analysis. The result of this subtle division is to show
what is the proportion of each element that enters into
the formation of these atomical parts. We have not the
patience to write down these uninteresting details, nor do
we believe that the reader will be displeased if we spare
him the trouble of going over such worthless nomeu-
clature. There is another division of matter, or body,
into forty-two parts, called akan. This is based upon the
distinction of the four elements that enter unequally into
the formation of the body twenty parts belong to the
;
earth, twelve to water, sixto fire, and six to wind. Then
again the body is divided into sixty parts ; the division is
based upon the distinction of the ten constitutive parts
belonging to each of the senses, as it will be hereafter ex-
plained. The object which Buddhist philosophers have in
view in entering into so many divisions and subdivisions
of the forms of the body is to prove, in their opinion to
demonstration, that, by the nicestanalysis ofevery part of
the body, we find in the end nothing but the primary
elements that are called the supports of all that exist.
We have now to follow our author through a path more
difficult than the preceding one, and hear hira explain the
theory of ideas and their various modifications. These,
says he, are known, not by their forms, since they have
none, but only by their name. Through the practice of

—
:
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
2l6
reflection aucl meditation we become acquainted with
them. We call them m^upa damina, things without a
form or shape. They are designated under the name of
tseit and Uedatliit^ that is to say, ideas and the result of
ideas. Where are these ideas to be met ? Where have
they their seat ? In the six senses and nowhere else, is
the answer. Having already become acquainted with the
organs of the senses, it will be easy to find out the ideas
that are as the tenants of the senses.
All the tseits inhabiting the organs of sense are called
6 The number of tseitsor ideas is whosoar high intheregions of pure
one hundred and twenty, divided as spiritualism, leaving below them all
follows: the things that have a reference to
1. Thetseitsorideasof thebeings thisworld, suchasweseeit.
asyet undertheinfluenceofpassion
;
The Tsedathits, or results essen-
theyarenamed Kama-watsara-tseits. tiallyconnected withideas, are fifty-
2. The tseits or ideas peculiar to two in number. 'l"he seven enume-
beingswhohavenot as yet beenable rated at the end of this article are
to raise themselves entirely above contact, sensation, perception, incli-
materiality; they are called Rupa- nation, fixity, command over self,
watzara-tseits. andremembrance : theyare inherent
3. There arefour tseits peculiarto inall ideas. Six Tsedathits are con-
those beings, who, setting aside the nected with the act of perception,
coarser portionsofthis world,launch viz., thought, reflection, decision,
forth into abstract truth, and de- energy, pleasure, and liberty. Four-
light in the contemplation of the teen others are connected with the
highest, purest, and most boundless ideas of demerits, viz., impudence,
things themind mayimagine. They audacity in evil, unsteadiness, con-
are known as the ideas working on cupiscence, pride, boasting, grievous
what may be called immaterial, im- offence, envy, anxiety, want of re-
palpableobjects. spect, lowness of feelings, doubt or
The ideasof thefirst seriesbelong indecision, covetousness.
to allthe beings located in the four TheTsedathitsconnectedwithmer-
states of punishment, in the seat of itsare: affection for all thatrefersto
man, and in the six seats of Nats, religion, remembrance of all that is
that is to say, in the eleven seats good, shame ofallthatisbad,fearof
whereisthereign ofpassions. evil, exemption from concupiscence
Those of the second series belong andfromanger, serenity ofsoul, free-
to the beings located in the sixteen dom from evil inclinations and evil
seatsofthe Brahmas,including those thoughts, swiftness of the body and
whohave entered into the current of of themind, good habitsof the body
perfection,byfollowingthefourMeg- andofthesoul,uprightnessinthefeel-
gas,andenjoyingthe merits and re- ings and the thoughts, good words,
wards connecteil with the condition good actions, go(.d behaviour, com-
ofthe perfect. passi(jn joyattheprosperityofothers,
The ideas ('f the third series are wisdom, , or the acquirement of tiie
the happy lot ofthosesuperior beings knowledge oftruth by reflection.

;
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NBIBBAN.
217
loki tseit, that is to say, ideas of the world, because they
are to be met with in all the beings as yet subjected to
concupiscence. They are distinct from lokoudra tseits,
which belong properly to the beings free from passions,
and who have entered into the four megga, orways to per-
fection. The tseitsofthisworldare eighty-onein number,
classified as follows the percej)tion of each of the five
:
organs, and the perception of the respective faculties of
those organs. This gives ten tseits. There are three for
the sense of the heart, the perception of the substance of
the heart, of its faculty of knowing, andof theobject of its
knowledge.
Each of the six senses has ten constitutive forms or
parts, viz. : earth, water, fire,air, colour, odour, taste, fluid,
life, and the body attached primitively thereto. Now
there is an action from each of these forms upon the sub-
ject. Thence ten tseits to each of the six senses.
There are no words so ill defined and so ill understood
by our philosopher as the two words Tseit and Tsedathit.
The first in a moral sense means idea, thought, perception,
&c. ; in a physical sense it means that secondary cause
created by kan, producing the living being, the senses
wherein residethe moral tseit. Tsedathit, being the result
of ideas, must, of course, have likewise two meanings. In
the first place it will designate the impressions made upon
us by ideas; in the second, it will mean the secondary
cause or life in the body, or the modifications of the prin-
ciples of corporeal life.
This being premised, we may a little understand our
author when he says There are seven tsedathits existing
:
at the same time as the eighty-one above-mentioned tseits,
viz. : 'pasa tsedathit, socalled because itis the real effectof
the tsedathit to attain its object, and, as it were, to touch
it. We may call it the agreement between the idea and
its object. Wedanatsedathit, thefeelingoftheimpression
of an idea; thagnia tsedathit, the couiprehension of the
object ; dzetana tsedathit, the inclination for the object

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
2i8
eketa tsedathit, the fixity on the object; dzvwi-teindre
tsedathit, the observanceof whatrelatesto form andname ;
and mana sikaramana tsedathit, consciousness. It is evi-
dent, therefore, that the tsedathit is neither the idea nor
the object of theidea, but the resultfrom the idea thathas
come in contact with an object. These seven results are,
if we may say so, the third part of the idea. They do not
e-ive occasion to modifications of ideas. But those which
really give rise to the greatest variety of results are the
akuso tsedathit, or the results of evil thoughts and ideas,
and their opposite, or kuso tsedathit, or the consequence of
good and virtuous thoughts. Tomention here all thekuso
and akuso tsedathit would be but a dry exposition of the
nomenclature of the vices and virtues, such as is met with
in the catalogues of Buddhist moralists. They are all
enumerated in the preceding note.
ARTICLE
IV.
OF THE CAUSE OF THE FORM " AND OF THE NAME, OR OF
MATTER AND SPIRIT.
The duty of our intelligence is to investigate the cause
of all the modifications of forms and names. This being
effected, we are delivered from all doubts and disquietude.
* Havingin two previous notesex- 3. The form of the objects of the
plained what regards the ideas, and senses is Hkewise divided into five
the results from or the things con- parts, essentially connected with the
nected with ideas, we must come fiveabove-enumeratedsenses. 4. The
to the third great principle, viz., forms peculiar to the living beings
Rupa, or form, or matter, and state are the male and female sexes. 5.
further the curious divisions of our The forms of life taken abstractedly
Burmese metaphysicians. i. The are the life of the bodyand the life
form of all that is visibleis found in oflanguageorutteredwords. 6. The
thefour elements: earth, water, fire, f<jrms in which appearance exhibits
and air. 2. The form for comingin itself are swiftness, softness, and
contact are the fivesenses, the eyes, acting. 7. The forms of thesignsof
theear,thenose, thetongue, and the being are : the appearance of being,
body,or ratherthe skin of the body. on coming into being, the remaining

:
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN. !I9
When we perceive such a form, such an idea, &c., we are
able forthwith to account for its causes. In this studywe
must copythe conduct of the physician, who, when attend-
ing a patient, sits by his bedside, closely examines the
nature of the distemper and the causes that have given
rise to it, in order to find out counteracting agents or
remedies to check its progress at first, and gradually to
intobeing, the fulnessof thestate of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting,
being, andthedestruction ofbeing. feeling, of uniting one sex with the
ThelastgreatprincipleisNeibban, other, ofthinking, of enjoyingpeace,
that is to say, the exemption from ofbearing pain, of yieldingtoanger,
theaction ofthe influenceoriginating of enjoying pleasure, of remaining
from merits and demerits, from the indifferent, of using exertions, of
volitions of the mind, from the sea- being attentive, of adhering to true
sonsor time, and from nourishment, doctrine, of putting on sentiments of
which are the causes of mutability benevolence, of searching after wis-
itis theendofexistence. ; dom,of using meekness, of entering
As regards the state of man and the four ways of perfection, and of
that of other rational beings, there enjoyingthehappiness resulting from
areseveralnotionswhicharearranged following those ways. 7. The nine
in a curious manner under several Phola, or rewards resulting from
heads, which it is thought neces- walkinginthe pathofperfectionare:
sary to notice as briefly as possible. intensityofbenevolence, ofdiligence,
I. Thefive Khandas, or supports of of attention, of fixity of wisdom, of
man's being : materiality, sensation, shame of allthat is bad, of fear for
perception, mutability, and intellect allthatis bad, of diligence in avoid-
orthought. 2. TheinwardfiveAya- ing evil, and the fear of hardness in
tana,orseatsofthesensesof seeing, sin. 8. The Megga, or ways, are
of hearing, of smelling, of tasting, good doctrine, good thinking, good
andof feeling. 3. The outward five language, and good actions. What
Ayatana, or seats of what is per- follows is but a completive of the
ceivedby thesenses, viz., appearance above, viz., good conduct, good dili-
or form, sound, odour, taste, tangi- gence,goodattention,andgoodfixity.
bility, and idea. 4. ThetenDat, or 9. TheDza/i,ormeditation,havefive
constitutive parts of the five senses, parts, viz., thought of the object,
andofthe five results of the percep- reflection on the object, satisfaction
tion of the five senses, as above resulting therefrom, affectionate in-
enumerated. 5. The four Thitsa, or clination for the object, fixity in the
a t c r t o u t n t e c h n u s d p i i : n s g c t e h n e e c x e i t s r o t u r e t n h c p e as o ; s f io t n t h s h e , e t t h m r e i u s t c e h a r u i s e o e s f d ob u j l T e g h c e t e n . c w e ri i t n er se c t r t a i v n e g s be t f h o e re rea h d i e m r's su i c n h -
of all miseries; the truth of the a drynomenclature ; butno one can
Neibban of passions, or the destruc- understand thelanguageof Buddhist
tion ofpassions, thesummitofwhich metaphysicians, unless he has made
is Neibban, the truth of the Megga himself familiar with the terms they
orwaystoNeibban. 6. Thetwenty- use, and the arbitrary distinctions
two Indrav, or dispositions or capa- they haveadopted.
cities for acting, viz., the capacityof

220 THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
uproot it from the constitution. In the moral order, the
philosopher too has to examine the nature of all moral
distempers, ascertain the principles or causes they spring
from, and thereby become qualified to cure those dis-
orders.
The beings that inhabit the three worlds, says our
author, must have a cause. To say that they exist of
themselves and without a cause is an absurdity. The
very dissimilarity we observe among them indicates that
their mode of existence results from certain causes. We,
however, cannotagreewith our antagonists, the Brahmins,
who maintain that Maha Brahma is the cause of all that
exists. This being is not out of the circle of Rupa and
Nam he is himself a compound of Nam and Rupa, that
;
is to say, effect but not cause. Invain our opponents will
add that all that is distinct of Maha Brahma is subjected
to a cause, but that the Rupa and Nam, constituting his
essence, are without a cause. This is removing the diffi-
culty a little further, without advancing a step towardsits
solution our answer must ever be the same.
;
Before expounding the opinions of our philosopher on
this important subject, it is necessary to state the views
entertained by that class of philosophers whose doctrines
appear to have taken root in these parts. It is easy to
perceive that they are modifications of the opinion of the
Hindus on the same subject, and akin to that respecting
the Adi Buddha, or supreme Buddha.
Some doctors maintain that there is a first cause or
being that has made matter and spirit. Others, admitting
the eternal co-existence of matter and of the supreme
being, say that he is the remote cause of the organisation
of matter, as we at present see it. But all agree in this,
that no one can ever come to the knowledge of that first
cause, and it is impossible ever to have an idea of it.
Hence it is the height of folly and rash presumption to
attempt tocome tothe knowledgeof what isplaced beyond
the range of human investigation. It behoves us to apply

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN. 221
all the powers of the mindtodiscovertheimmediate cause
that certainl}" produces existence.
The sage, to be worthy of his sublime calling, must
remain satisfied with striving to find out that immediate
cause which brings into action the form and name, and
causes the ajDpearance of all those modifications which we
call beings or forms of existence. He ought to strive to
account forthe organisation of matter and all its modifica-
tions,by discoveringthe hidden spring thateffectuallysets
all in motion, in action, in combination of existences.
Now, our author puts this important question What
:
thing is to be considered as the mover of the forms and
ideas ? We know, says he, that the human body has its
beginning in the womb of the mother we areacquainted
;
with itsposition in thatfoetidand narrowprison
;
itsbeing
surrounded with nerves, veins, &c., having above it the
new elements, and under it the old ones. The manner in
which the body originates in the womb much resembles
the process by which worms and insects are formed in
rotten substances, and inputrid and stagnantwater. But
this is not accounting for the real cause of living bodies.
The real causes, according to some doctors, are five in
number, viz., ignorance, concupiscence, desire, kan (the
influence ofmerits anddemerits), and ahan(the aliments).
They concur together in the formation of the living body
in the following manner. Ignorance, concupiscence, and
desiregive asylum to the body, as the mother supplies the
infant with a refuge in her womb. Kan, like the father,
isthecauseproductive ofthe body. Ahan affordsnourish-
ment to the bod}^
The ideas are but the result of the formation of the
organs of senses. Let us suppose, for instance, the organ
of seeing. The Tscklw^o Wignian, that is to say, the life
of the eyes, or the ideas connected with the use of that
sense,presupposes two things, the organ and a form or an
object on which the organ acts. These existing, there
necessarily result the idea of vision, the perception, &c.,

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
222
in a word, all the ideas arising from the action of the eyes
upon various objects. The same mode of arguing is em-
ployed relatively to the other five senses.
Other philosophers argue in the following way. The
primary causes of all ideas andthoughts are disposedunder
two heads, that of ideas which have a fixed place, and that
of those that have no fixed place. Under the first head
are comprised the six Ayatana, or seats of senses, and the
six Arom, or the objects of senses. Thence flow all the
ideas and consequences that relate to merit and demerit.
Under the second head are placed the causes or agents
thatproduceideasandthoughts,theexerciseofthe intellect
holding the first rank. He who applies his mind to the
meditation of what is good, such as the commands and
other parts of the most excellent law, and labours to find
out that all that is in this world is subjected to change,
pain, and illusion, opens at once the door to the coming in
of the tseit,or ideas connected with merit. On the other
hand, the application of the mind to things bad and
erroneous, contrary to the prescriptions of the holy law,
generates the idea of demerit. Such are the causes of
the ideas and thoughts. As to the cause of form, they
assert that kan, tseit, fire, and ahan are the sole agents in
the formation of the living body. Kan, as the workman,
makes the body and sets in it all that relates to its good
and bad qualities. The tseit, seventy-five in number, are
also principlesofthe existenceof the body, ofwhich forty-
four are called Kamawatzara tseit; they relate to the
demerit and merit of those who are still under the in-
fluence of concupiscence fifteen rupa watzara tseit, relat-
;
ing to beings in the seats of rupa eight ariqm watzara
;
tseit,relatingtothose in theseats ofarupa; eightlokoudara
tseit, relating to the beings that have entered on the four
ways of perfection. The Taho-dat, or the element of fire,
contributes its share by the head and rays of light, and
ahan by supplying the required aliments.
Some other philosophers account for the causes of form

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN. 223
andideas followingthis courseofargument. Theformand
ideas that constitute all beings are liable to miseries, old
age, and death, because there is generation and death.
Generation exists because there are worlds, worlds exist
because there is desire, desire exists because there are
organs, organs existbecause there areformand name, form
and name exist because there are concepts, concepts exist
because there is merit and demerit, merit and demerit
exist becausethere is ignorance. The latteris,indeed, the
real cause of all forms and ideas. There is no doubt but
this latter opinion is the favourite one with our author.
It is based upon the theory of the twelve Nidauas, or
causes and effects, and appearsto be the orthodoxopinion,
and bears the stamp of great antiquity.
Having thus accounted inthe best way he could for the
existence of all that relates to the beings in the three
worlds, our authorfondly dwells onthe benefitsthataccrue
fromthe knowledge of causes. Itdissipates allthe doubts
that had previously darkened the mind it quiets all the
;
anxietiesoftheheart, and affordsperfectpeace. For want
of it, the impious fall from one error into another ; the
disciples of Buddha are chiefly perfectedby its help.
We read in the Buddhist scriptures that a Brahmin
went to consult Buddha on some points that much per-
plexed his mind. He said to him, " I am beset with
doubts respecting the past, the present, and the future.
Respecting the past, I ask myself. Have I passed
through former generations or not ? What was my con-
dition during those existences ? My answer is, I am
ignorant on all those points. What was my positionpre-
vious to those generations ? I know it not. As to the
present, is it true that I exist ? or is my existence but an
illusion ? Shall I have to be born again or not? What
are thoselivingbeings that surround me at present ? Are
they but so many illusions which deceive me by their
appearance of reality ? On these points I am sunk in
complete ignorance. The future is likewise full of doubts

224 T^HE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
and most pei-plexing uncertainties. Shall I have other
generations or not ? What shall be my condition during
these coming existences? A thick veil hides from my
eyes all that concerns my future destiny. What are the
means to clear up all those doubts that encompass me on
"
all sides ?
Buddha said to him, " Eeflect first on this main point,
that what we are wont to call self, or moi, is nothing but
—
name and form that is to say, a compound of the four
elements, which undergoes perpetual changes under the
action or influence of Kan. Having acquired the convic-
tion of the truth of this principle, it remains with you to
investigate carefully the causes which produce both name
and form. This simple examination will leadyou at once
to the perfect solution of all your doubts. Behold the
differencethat existsbetween the holders of false doctrines
and the true believers. The former, whom we may almost
call animals, never take the trouble to examine the nature
of beings or the causesof their existence. Theyare stub-
bornly attached to their false theories, and persist in say-
ing that what the ignorant, delivered up to illusion, are
used to call an animal, a king, a subject, a foot, and a
hand, &c., is really an animal, a king, a subject, a foot, and
a hand, &c. ; whilst all living beings and — their component
parts are nothing else but nameand form that is to say, a
compound made up of the four elements. Those impious
are delivered up to error ; hence it happens that they
follow all different ways. We reckon among them more
than sixty different sects, all at variance among them-
selves, but all uniting in a common obstinacy toreject the
true doctrine of J3uddha. Theyaredoomedto moveinces-
santly within the circle of endlessand wretchedexistences.
"How differentisthecondition ofthetrue believers, our
followers They know that the living beings inhabiting
!
the world have a beginning. But they are sensible of the
folly of attempting to reach this beginning or first cause.
This is above the capacity of the loftiest intelligence. It

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
225
is evident, for instance, that the seeds of plants and trees,
which are continually in a state of reproduction, have
a beginning
;
but whatthat beginningis, no onepresumes
to determine. So it is with man and all living beings.
They know well, too, that what is vulgarly called man,
woman, eyes, mouth, are all illusory distinctions, vanish-
ing away in the presence ofthe sage, who sees nothing in
all that but name and form, the production of Kan and
Wibek,that is tosay, of the firstand second causes. These
two things are not the man and the woman, &c., but they
are the efficient causes of both. What we say respecting
man and woman may be applied to animals and to all
other beings. They are all the productions or results of
Kan and Wibek, quite as distinct from these two agents
as effect is distinct from its cause. To explain this doc-
trine, Buddhists have recourse to the comparison of a
burning-glass. When there is such an instrument in one
hand, and the rays of the sun pass through it to the other,
fire isthen produced but fire is quitedistinct fromthetwo
;
causes that have concurred jointly in producing it. Our
disciples, too,are awarethatthefivekhandas,oraggregates
constituting a living being, succeed each other at each
generation, but in such a way that the second generation
partakes or retains nothing of the khandas of the first.
—
— But the causes producing them such as Kan and Wibek
never change they ever remainthe same. Let us sup-
;
pose lamps lighted up. If they burn always, it is owing
to the action of individuals that supply them with oil, and
light them as soon as they are extinguished. Such is the
condition of the khandas. Those which belouff to one
existence have no more in common with those of the
following one than the fire of the lamp just lighted anew
has with that of the fire of the lamp that has just died
away. As to the way beings are reproduced, we say tliat
when a man is dying, the last tscit having appeared and
soon disappeared, it is succeeded forthwith by the ^)r^//i
tseitorthetseitofthenew existence the interval between
;
VOL. 11. P

—
226 THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
both is so short that it can scarcely be appreciated. This
first tseit has nothing in common with the lastone. It is,
let it be well remembered, the production of kan, or of the
influence of merits and demerits, as well as the khandas
above alluded to.
This article is by far the most important of all. The
latter part, in particular, elucidates in a distinct manner
thegenuineopinions of Buddhism on points ofthe greatest
concern. We may sum up the whole as follows:
I. There is a first cause that hasacted inbringinginto
being all that exists ; but that first cause is unknown, nor
can we ever come to the knowledge of it.
2. The immediate causes of all the modifications of
beings, or states of being, are ignorance and kan.
3. All beings are but compounds of the four elements.
The intellectual o^aerations are carried on by the instru-
mentality of the heart, in the same manner as vision is
obtained by the means of the eye and of an object to act
upon.
4. Each succeeding existence is brought on and modi-
fied by the action of Kan, or the influence of merits and
demerits.
5. The component parts of a new being are in no way
connected with those of the previous being. This is the
key to the difficulty many persons find in accounting, in
A
a Buddhistic sense, for the processof metempsychosis.
new term ought to be coined to express that doctrine.
6. The question respecting Neibban may be theoreti-
cally resolved without difficulty, by a])])licatiou of the
principles contained in tbis and the preceding article.
There is no doubt that the solution forced upon the mind
from what has been above stated is that the end of the
perfected being is annihilation. Horrifying as this con-
clusion is, it is not, after all, worse than that which is the
terminus of the theories of some modern schools. What
an abyss is the poor human mind liable to fall into when
it ceases to be guided by Revelation !

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN. 227
ARTICLE
V.
OF THE TRUE MEGGAS OR WAYS TO PERFECTION.
The subject uuder consideration is a very important
one. It comprehends and comprises a summary of many
particulars ah-eady alludedto intheforegoing two articles.
The reader will findthe path he has to follow less rugged,
and the ground he will have to go over not so arid.
Our author seems to lay great stress on this special
point. The sage, says he, who is desirous to arrive at the
supreme perfection, must apply all thepowers ofhis mind
to discern the true ways from the false ones. Many are
deceived in the midst of their researches after wisdom.
The real criterion between the true and false ways is this :
when, in consideringan object, and making a philosophical
analysis of it, the sage finds it somehow connected with
concupiscence and other passions so far that he cannot,
as it were, dissolve it bythe appli — cation of the three prin-
ciples of aneitsa, duka, and anatta that is to say, change,
pain, and illusion, then he must conclude that he is out
of the right ways ; the high road to perfection is barred
before hiui. But on the contrary, whenever, by the appli-
ance of the three great principles, he sees that all the
objects brought under his consideration are nothing more
or less than the mere compound of the four elements,
divested of these illusory appearances which deceive so
many, then he may be certain that he is in the right
position, and is sure of making progress in the way to
perfection.
To facilitate the study of the Mcggas, Buddhists have
classified all real and imaginary beings under a certain
number of heads. The sage, to complete his laborious
task, has to examine separately each of thi>so subjects and
submit them to the following lengthened, difficult, and
complicated process. Hetakes up one subject, attentively

228 THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
considers its exterior and interior compound parts, its
connection and relation with other things, its tendency to
adhere to or part with surroundingobjects. Pursuing his
inquiries into the past, he endeavours to make himself
acquainted with the state and condition of that object
during several periods that have elapsed when his mind
;
is satisfied on this point he follows up in future the same
object, and calculates from the experience of the past what
change it may hereafter become subjected to. This study
enables him to perceive distinctly that it is subjected to
the three great laws of mutability, pain, and illusion.
This conviction once deeply seated in his soul, the sage
holds that object in supreme contempt far from having
;
any affection for or attachment to it, he feels an intense
disgust at it, and longs for the possession of Neibban,
which is the exemption from the influence of mutability,
pain, and illusion.
What we have now stated is tolerably clear and intel-
ligible but what follows is less evident. It partakes of
;
that obscurity and complication so peculiar to Buddhist
metaphysics. This state of things is created and main-
tained chiefly by a mania for divisions and subdivisions
that would have puzzled even the schoolmen of the middle
ages. We have to listen to what our author says respect-
ing the method to be observed in carrying on the great
examination of all subjects of investigation. If that
labour be patiently and perseveringly prosecuted until all
the objects of inquiry be exhausted, ample and magni-
ficent shall be the reward for such labours. The sage will
be in possession of the perfect science Neibban will
;
appear to him ; he will long for it, and unremittingly
shape his course in its direction : in a word, he shall have
reached the acme of perfection. Seated on that lofty
position, enjoying a perfect cahn in the bosom of absolute
quietism, the sage is beyond the reach of passions ; there
is no illusion for him he has cut the last thread of future
;
generations by the destruction of the influence of merits

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
229
and demerits ; he has obtained the deliverance from all
miseries he has reached the peaceful shores of Neibban.
;
But such a prize is not easily obtained ; it is to be pur-
chased only at the expense of an immense amount of
lasting and strenuous mental exertion.
The sage, agreeably to the old and always true saying,
Know
thyself, very properly begins his mightily difficult
task with the examination of the five aggregates consti-
tuting a living being, the organs of the six senses, and all
that relates to them. Then he applies himself to the
studies of the five Dzan, or the parts of meditation and
contemplation, and to all that is connected with the seats
of Rupa and Arupa. All the objects of examination
ranged on that scale are 600 in number. We shall
rapidly glance over this table, indicating but the heads of
the principal divisions.
We
ought not to forget that the five aggregate, or
khandas, constituting a living being, are form, sensation,
perception, consciousness, and intellect. Supposing that
we take the first of those attributes as subject of exami-
nation. We must represent it to the mind, carefuU}^
examine it in all its bearings and properties, respecting
the past, the present, and the future. We must proceed
on and bring it in contact with the three great principles
of aneitsa, duka, and anatta, and inquire whether form be
changeable or not, passive or impassive, transient or per-
We
manent. thereby acquire the knowledge of the fol-
lowinggreattruth ; viz.,form is essentially liabletochange,
pain, and illusion. The examination of each of the four
other attributes is proceeded on in a like manner, and a
similar result ensues.
The six organs of the senses come next under consi-
deration. These are the eyes, the ears, the nose, the
tongue, the body, or rather the skin that envelops it, and
the heart in a physical sense, and onano in a moral one.
Each of the six senses partakes of the eleven conditions
or attributes we are about to describe and each of these
;

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
230
eleven attributes being brought successively into relation
with each of the six senses, must be considered, as above
stated, under the treble relation to mutability, pain, and
illusion. This will supply the inquirer with a good
amount ofinformation. Butto shortenthis longenumera-
tion, we will mention now successively those eleven attri-
butes the senses may be affected by, and make the
application of all to one of the senses, the eye. The same
process may be easily repeated for each of the other
senses. Nothing is to be changed but the name of the
sense that has become the subject of examination.
1. Ayatana, the door,the opening of each ofthe senses.
Applied to the eye, it is the opening through which
exterior sensations are communicated to the heart by the
organ of seeing.
2. Arom, the object of each ofthe senses. With regard
to the eye, it is the appearance or form perceived by the
eye; with respect to the ear, it is the sound.
3. Wiiiian, the action of perceiving and knowing.
Applied to the eyes, it is theeye seeing and perceiving, or
the sight.
4. Pham, literallythe feeling or coming in contact with
objects, applied to each of the senses. With the eye,it is
the passive and active impression it derives from the
objects it considers, and which it conveys to the heart.
With the ear it is the impression it receives, and simi-
larly communicates to the heart.
5. JVedana, the sensation of pain or pleasure obtained
through the senses. With the eye it is the sensation
created by the sight of objects perceived by the eye, and
communicated to the heart.
6. Thaufjia, the idea or persuasion resulting from the
six senses, or, accordingto some doctors,the identity ofthe
appearance witli reality. Witli the eye, it is the convic-
tion we have that such an object, perceived by the eyes,is
round or square, &c., accordingtothe impressions received
by that organ.

.
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
231
7. Dzctuna, the inclination or rather adhesion to good
or bad,consequently totheimpressionsreceived from each
of the six senses.
8. Taltiia, concupiscence originating from the impres-
sions of agreeableness communicated by the six senses.
9. Witeha, the idea or representation of objects to the
mind througli the agency of the senses.
10. Witzara, the consideration of the objects offered to
the mind by the instrumentality of the senses.
11 Dat, the m.atter or elements of the six senses, or,
to speak the language of our author, that on which the
organs rest, that which supports them.
After the examination of the senses and of the eleven
subjects just related, we find the almost boundless field
of inquiry to expand in proportion as we appear to make
rapid progress. Then come successively for examina-
tion : I. The ten Kaaaings, or the ten parts or elements
to be found in each part of a living being, viz., earth,
water, fire, colour, odour, flavour, and grease, to which we
add the Dzhva or life, and that of the organ to which be-
longs the part under consideration. 2. The thirty-two
Akan, or thirty-two parts of the living body, of which
the first are the hairs, the beard, the nails, the teeth,
&c. 3. The twelve Ayatana, or seats of the six senses.
Each sense is double, as far as it is considered in a double
capacity, that of receiving and that of transmitting the
impressions. 4. The eighteen Dat, or matter of the six
senses. The organs afford six Dat ; the objects that act
upon the organs supply six other Dat ; and the last six
are afforded by the objects submitted to the action of the
senses. 5. The twenty-two indre, or facultiesorcapabili-
ties of the organs. Each organ has three. The eye, for
instance, is capable ofreceivingan impression andoftrans-
mitting it ; the eye really receives and transmits impres-
sions. The mano, or heart, being a double organ, has six
faculties three if it be considered physically, and three
;
if morally or intellectually. 6. The nine Bon, or seats

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
232
occupied by the Brahmas. 7. The five Rupa Bzan, or
degrees of contemplation proper to the Brahmaswho have
a form. 8. The four Mcgga, or ways that lead near to
Neibban. They are followed by the Brahmas occupying
the four superior seats of PMpa. 9. The Aricpa Dzan, or
contemplation proper to those who inhabit the four imma-
terial seats. 10. Thenineteeni)a,??i?««. This word means
what weknow ascertain bythe use of our mental faculties.
When the m.ano, by a right use of its three faculties, has
freed itself from the principle of illusion and error, then
there will be the sixteen virtues or good qualities, known
bythe nameof Phola and Megga. 11. Finally, thetwelve
Patau, or elements that are in the mano, which constitute
the memory, and enable man to remember, and silently
repeat the i7npressions transmitted by the senses.
Such is the immense extent of observations the sagehas
to range for obtaining the perfect science. This task is
truly an Herculean one very few can perform it.
;
Before coming to the last article, the writer will make
a remark tendingto show thatthere is more of the analytic
spirit in all what is told us by Buddhist philosophers re-
specting those abstruse subjects than one may be tempted
to orive them credit for. We have seen that the number
of precepts and counsels is almost countless, yet it is
agreed by all doctorsthat the five general precepts arethe
basis of all, and that he who observes them in all their
bearings is as much advanced in the path of righteousness
as can be expected. Again, Buddhists can never exhaust
the stores of all that they have to say about the mental
operations and meditation. Yet all is summed u]) in the
comparatively short doctrine of tseit and tscdathil. The
living beings are by them infinitely modified, yet after all
we find everything condensed in two words, Nama and
Kupa. The tlieory respectingthe generation ofbeings and
their mutual dependence upon each other is a boundless
field. We find, however, that, after all, lean, or the influ-
ence of merits and demerits, is the sole cause of and agent

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN. 233
in the existence and moditication of all beings. Mental
operations are mimbered by hundreds, but the six senses
are, after all, the foundation on whichthat enumeration is
raised. The general principles and primary ideas of all
these metaphysical theories doubtless belong to genuine
and early Buddhism. But such plain and elementary
principles having been got hold of by heads of philoso-
phical schools, and worked upon in their intellectual
laboratory, there have come out therefrom at various
periods those theories which have given to the doctrines
of Buddhism so many differenthues, and at the same time
contributed so much to puzzle and torment the European
student.
ARTICLE
VI.
OF THE PROGRESS IN PERFECT SCIENCE.
In the preceding article we have reviewed the whole
scale of beings, and analysed summarily some of them,
merely to show the way to the general analysis of all
others. The ultimate result of such an investigation is to
acquire the conviction that all beings are subjected to
mutability,pain, andillusion. Thisconviction, once seated
inthesoul,generatesagenerouscontemptforsuchmiserable
objects. In this article we must see by what means this
philosophical sentiment may be firmly rooted in the soul,
and man may finally entertain a thorough disgust for all
creatures, even for his own body. This loathsomeness for
all thatexistsis immediatelyfollowedupby an ardentdesire
of becoming free and disentan"-led from all the ties and
trammels that encompass other beings. When a man has
become familiar with such a conviction to the extent that
his thoughts, desires, and actions are entirely regulated by
its innuediate influence, he is free from the errors that
deceive almost all other beings he sees things as they are
;
in their nature, and appreciates them by their real value.

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
234
He estranofes himself from them. He is in mind in the
stateofNeibban, until death will complete'outwardly what
was already existing inwardly in his mind.
We are all aware, says our author, that the principle of
instability pervades all that exists in hell, on earth, and
in the superior seats. But this important science is with
many too superficially and but imperfectly understood.
Our great object is to root it deeply in our mind, so that
we might ever be preserved from those false impressions
which too often tempt us to believe that mutability and
changes are not affecting all beings. What are the
obstacles that oppose in us the progress to true science ?
There are three. The first is Santi, or duration of exist-
ence. We allow ourselves to be lulled into the opinion that
our life shall be much longer prolonged ; that we have as
yet many days, months, and years to spend in this world.
Thisgroundless supposition prevents us from attending to
the principle ofmutability. To counteract this dangerous
impression,letus examinehow all thingsare born onlysoon
todie, and thereforelet us have always deathpresenttoour
mind. Let us consider the short duration and vanity of
our being, then we will soon be convinced that the form
of the body is like the waves of the sea, that swell i'or a
moment and soon disappear ; that sensation is produced
likefrothfrom the dashingofthewaves thatthe Tliangia^
;
or persuasion we acquire, has no more stability or reality
than lightning; that t\\e Sanykara, or concept, or produc-
tion, is like the plantain-tree without strength, and that
the view of objects through our senses deserves no more
credit than the words of a quack. Let us reason in a
similar manner on the ephemeral existence of all the
beings that are in this world we will easily come to a
;
similarconclusion, that theyare the victims of mutability,
incessantly tossed abniit as a piece of wood by the billows
of the sea.
A second obstacle to our perceiving the great principle
thatpain is heavily weighingon all creatures is theiridbot,

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
235
or the four situations or positions wliich the body assumes,
viz., sitting,standing, lying, and wallviug. If a man enjoys
good health, he owes it chiefly to the change of situation.
Were he doomed to occupy always the same place, or
remain in the same situation, he would feel quite miser-
able.
Hemomentarilyrelieveshimselffromhistemporary
afflictions by a changeof situation. This reliefmakes him
forgetful of the great principleof duJca. Butin truth our
body is like apatientthat requires the constant attendance
of the physician. We must feed it, refresh it, wash it,
clothe it, &c., to save it from hunger, thirst, dirt, andcold.
What is all that but a sad and constant proof that we are
slaves to pain ? There is nothing but pain and affliction
in this wretched world. The same fate awaits all other
beings they are all in a state of endurance and suffering,
;
proclaiming aloud the irresistible action of duka.
A third obstacle to our being convinced that all is illu-
sion in this world is that false persuasion which makes us
to Bay, This is a foot, a hand, a woman, &c. ; whilst these
things have no reality, no consistence,but aremereshades,
ready at any momentto vanish and disappear. These and
like expressions being always used, impart at last a sortof
conviction that they are true ; but, after all, what are all
these thingsbuta compound of the four elements, or more
simply nama and rupa ?
In addition to this examination, the sage considers also
ourideasand the operations of ourmental faculties. Here
he sees these ideas appearing for a moment and then dis-
appearing he concludes that ideas are likewise subjected
;
tothe great law of mutability. He finds as much misery
in his own mind ashe hasmet with inthe exterior objects
;
all around his mind is only illusion. When he has reached
this point, he is delivered at once of the three Nime'd tliat
make one believe that there is something real in birth,
existence, and action. Thedestruction of all beings, ofall
things, is ever present to his mind. In such a state, the
sage is free from all erroneous doctrines ; he is disgusted

THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
236
with life ; the exercise of meditation is easy to him, and
almost uninterrupted. He is free from all passions.
Our author has another chapter devoted to the consi-
deration of the miseries attending all living beings. To
make us better informed on this subject, he desires the
sage to meditate upon the miseries attending birth, exist-
ence, old age, and death ; he wishes him to examine atten-
tively the condition of all creatures, that he might never
be seduced by the dazzling appearance that encompasses
them. He insists at great length upon the dangers sur-
roundingthe wise man, as yet compelledto remain incon-
tact with this material world. To make us better under-
stand this subject, he makes use of the following simili-
tude. A manworn out with fatigue enters a cave wherein
he longs to enjoy a refreshingrest. He is just lyingdown
in the hope of abandoning himself to the sweet delight of
undisturbed repose, when, on a sudden, he perceives close
by him an infuriated tiger. At that moment all idea of
rest, of sleep, of happiness, vanishes away he is taken up
;
solely with the imminent danger of his position. Such is
the position of the sage who, living among creatures, may
be tempted to allow himself to look on them with an
idea of enjoyment. But when he has come to that state,
to be disgusted with all the modifications matter is sub-
jected to, he is likened to the pure swan who never sets
his feet in lowand dirty places, but delights to rest on the
bosom of a beautiful lake, of limpid and clear water. Our
sage, who has in abhorrence all the filth of this miserable
He
world, is delighted only in the consideration of truth.
isdispleased withthe world and all things that are therein.
His mind is busily engaged in finding out the most effec-
tual means to break with this world, and rend asunder the
ties that retain him linked to it. He is like a fish caught
in the net, or a frog seized by a snake, or a man shut up
in a dungeon. All three strive, to their utmost, to escape
the danger that threatens them and regain their liberty.
Such is the condition of the perfect who has attentively

;
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
237
considered the many snares that are around them. He,
too, has but one object in view, that of freeing himself
from them and obtaining the deliverance.
The best and surest means to save himself from the
dangersattending existenceis aprofoundandunremitting
meditation on the three great principles aneitsa, duka,
:
and anatta. We will select among many reflections sup-
plied by our author, a few on each of these principles, to
convey to the reader some ideas respecting the subjects
that engross much of the attention of the Buddhist sage.
Most of these reflections are strikingly true, and could as
well find place in the mind of a Christian as in that of a
Buddhist.
Speaking of aneitsa, our author says : Let us reflect on
this, that there is nothing permanent or stable in this
world. We hold all things as a sortof borrowedproperty,
or on tenure we are by no means proprietors of what we
;
possess. We acquire goods but to lose them very soon.
All in nature is subjected to pain, old age, and death
everything comes to an end, either by virtue of its own
condition, or bythe agency of some external cause. Shall
we ever be able to find in this world anything stable ?
No weleave one place, but onlytogoand occupy another,
;
which, in its turn, is soon vacated. No one is able to
enumerate the countless changes that incessantly take
place. What existsto-daydisappearsto-morrow. In fact,
all nature is pervaded from beginning to end by the prin-
ciple of mutability, which incessantly works upon it.
On the miseries of this world our philosopher speaks as
follows: Pain is the essential appendage of this world.
Survey, if you can, the whole of this universe, and every-
where you will find a heavy load of pain and afflictions,
so harassing and oppressing that we can scarcely bear
them with a tolerable amount of patience, i^ook at birth,
examine existence duringitsduration,consider senses,the
organs of our life. In every direction our eyes will meet
with an accumulation of pain, sufferings, and miseries ; on

338 THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
everyside we are beset with dangers, difficulties, and cala-
mities nowhere lasting joy or permanent rest is to be
;
found. In vain we may go in quest of health and happi-
ness both are chimerical objects nowhere to be met with.
;
Everywhere we meet with afflictions.
In speaking of the anatta, or illusion in which we are
miserably rocked as long as we stay in this world, our
philosopheris equally eloquent. If we consider with some
attention this world, we will never be able to discover in
it anything else but name and form and, as a necessary
;
consequence, all that exists is but illusion. Here is the
mannerwe must carryon our reasoning. Thethingsthat
I see and know are not myself, nor from myself, nor to
myself. What seems to be myself is in reality neither
myself nor belongs to myself. What appears to me to be
another is neither myselfnorfrom myself. The organs of
senses, such as the eyes, the ears, &c., are neither myself
nor to myself. They are but illusions, or as nothing
relatively to me. The form is not a form ; the attributes
of alivingbeingarenot attributes beings are not beings.
;
All that is an aggregate of the four elements, and these
again are but form and name, and these two are but an
illusion, destitute of reality. In a being, then, there are
two attributes, form and sensation, that appear to have
some more consistency than other things. Yet they have
no reality their nature and condition is to be destitute of
;
all reality and stability.^ Penetrated with the truth of
8 In this latter part our author and treats our sensesin like manner,
clearly explains his opinion on this Theyaretheinstrumentsthat procure
world,thatistosay,onallthatexists. unto us a general illusion. But the
He states at first, in general terms, senses,whatarethey? Theyaredis-
that what we see and perceive by tinct from us. By a strict analysis
means of our senses, possesses no wefind them tobe but a compound
reality; it is a mere illusion. Our ofthefourelements,liableto dissolu-
ignorance of the real state of things tion and destruction. A living being
deceives us, by making us believein has certain attributes which are the
the reality of objects that have no- supports of his existence; but those
thing but an ephem'eraland illusory attributesare equally acompound of
existence. Heproceedsalittlefarther, the elements, subjected to the same

!
THE SEVEN WAYS TO NEIBBAN.
239
these and like considerations, the sage declares at once
that all things are neither himself nor belong to himself.
Nothing, therefore, appearsworthy his notice. He atonce
divorces himself from the world and all the things that
are therein. He would fain have nothing to do with it
;
he holds it in supreme contempt and utter disgust.
He who has reached this lofty point of sublime science
is at once secure from the snares of seduction and thepath
of error. He will escape from the whirlpool of human
miseries, and infallibly reach the state of Neibban. The
most perfect among the perfect are so much taken upon
with and deeply affected by the view of Neibban, that
they tend-in that direction without effort. Othei's, some-
what less advanced in the sublime science, discover, it is
true, the state of Neibban at a distance, but its sight is as
yetdimmedand somewhat obscured. They want asyet to
train up their mind to and perfect it in the exercise of
that meditation of which we have given an abbreviated
analysis.
modificationsof reproductionandde- powersofreasoning,tliereisnowon-
struction anddeprivedofconsistence. der that he looks upon Neibban, or
The attributes of the living beings annihilation, as the only end to be
beingdisposedof inthis manner, the arrivedat. Man in hisopinionbeing
being itself vanishes away. There butacompoundofthefourelements,
remainbutnameandform. But does which have no realexistence, cannot
what we call form possess a real be himself but an illusion without a
existence? Undoubtedly not. It is reality. Gracious Heavens ! whatan
a mere phantom, an illusion Our excessof mental aberration will man
author comes to the necessary and reach when he is left to himself, de-
final consequence that there is no prived of the light from above
world really existing. In fact, he Neverhas the writer witnessed such
denies the existence of matter and atotaleclipseofhuman intellect,
spirit. With such au abuse of the

( 241 )
NOTICE ON THE PHONGYIES, OR
BUDDHIST MONKS,
SOMETIMES CALLED TALAPOINS.'
In the foregoing pages we havefirst given a sketch of the
life of the founderof Buddhism, and in the accompanying
notes endeavoured to explain the more important parti-
culars respecting the extraordinary religious system he
has established. Subsequently, in the way to Neibban,
we have laid down, in as few words as possible, the great
metaphysical principles upon which is raised the great
structure of Buddhism, and pointed out the way leading
to the pretended perfection, or rather the end of perfec-
tion, Neibban. It seems to be necessary to devote a par-
ticular notice to the religious Order which forms the most
striking feature of that religion, which has extended its
sway over so many nations. The association of devotees
holds the first rank among the followers of Buddha ; it
comprises the elite of that immense body. The system of
1 The word Talapoin, imported slender wooden frame, which Tala-
into Europe by the writings of early poins carry with them on certain
Portuguese authors in the East In- occasionswhen theygo abroad,
dies, derives itsorigin probablyfrom In thecourseof this noticewe will
two Pali words, Tala-pat, meaning indiscriminately make use of the
theleafofthe palm-tree. Thesetwo wordsPhongyies,Talapoins,and Ra-
words, coupled together, areusedby bans to designate the Buddhis^
the Siamese to designate the large religious,
fan made of palm-leaves, set in a
VOL. XL Q

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
242
discipline to which the Buddhist religious are subjected,
is the highest practical illustration of the doctrines and
practices of Buddhism. We may see reflected in that
corporation the greatest results that the working of these
religious institutions can ever produce. All that Buddha,
in his efforts, has been able to devise as most fit to lead
man to the perfection, such as he understood it, will be
found in the constitutions of that order. It is a living
mirror in which we may contemplate the masterpiece
of his creation. The Buddhist religious constitute the
thanga, or assembly of the perfect, that is to say, of the
disciples who have left the world, conformed their life to
that of their teacher, and striven to acquire the science
that will qualify them for entering into the way leading
to perfection. They are the strict followers of Buddha,
who, like him, have renounced the world, to devote them-
selves to the two-fold object of mastering their passions
and acquiring the true wisdom which alone can lead to
the deliverance.
The best method for obtaining correct information re-
specting the Buddhist religious isnot, it seems, toconsider
their order from an abstract point of view, but rather in
connection with the religion it has sprung from, as afford-
ing a perfect exemplification of its highest practices,
maxims, and tendencies, as well as of the real nature and
true spirit of that creed.
Buddhismis evidently an off-shoot of Brahminism. We
find it replete with principles, practices, observances, and
dogmas belonging to the great Hindu system. Gaudama,
being himself a Hindu, reared in a Hindu society, trained
up in the Hindu schools of philosophy, could not but im-
bibe, to a great extent, the opinions and observances of his
contemporaries. He dissented from them, it is true, in
many important points, but in the generality of his teach-
ings he seems to have agreed with them. He found exist-
ing in his times a body of religious and philosophers,
whose mode of life was peculiar and quite distinct from

;
NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
243
that of the people. When he laid the plan for the reli-
gious institution he contemplated to establish, he found
around him most of the elements he required for that
work. He had but to improve on what he saw existing,
andmake his new orderagree with the religious tenets he
innovated.
In the hope of tracing up the ties of relationship that
must have existed between the religious of the Brahmi-
nical order, and those of the Buddhist one, the writer will
begin this notice with establishing a short parallel be-
tween the former, such as they are described in the Insti-
tutes of Menoo, and the institution of the latter, such as
it is explained in the Wini, or Book of discipline. After-
wards the nature of the Buddhist order and the object its
members have in view in embracing it will be examined
next to that, the constituent parts of that body and its
hierarchy shall receive a due share of attention. We will
describe at the same time the ceremonies observed on the
solemn occasion of admitting individuals into the religious
society, and expound briefly the rules that direct and
regulate the whole life of a professed member as long as
heremains in the brotherhood. It will not be foundamiss
to inquire into the cause and nature of the'great religious
influence undoubtedly possessed by the members of the
order, and examine the motives that induce the votaries
of Buddhism to show the greatest respect and give un-
feigned marks of the deepest veneration to the Talapoins
or Phongyies. This will be concluded with a shortaccount
of the low and degraded state into which the society has
fallen in these parts, particularly in what has reference to
knowledge and information.

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
244
ARTICLE
I.
A SHORT PARALLEL BETWEEN THE BRAHMINICAL AND THE
BUDDHISTIC RELIGIOUS ORDERS.
It has been stated, on apparently incontrovertible
grounds, in the foregoing pages, that Buddhism has ori-
ginated to a considerable extent from Brahminism. The
followingremarks will corroborate the statement, and give
an additional weight to the reasons already brought for-
ward. In fact, both systems have the same objects in
view, viz., the disentangling of the soul from passions and
the influence of the material world, and its perfect libera-
tion from metempsychosis and the action of matter. The
final end to be arrived at is, however, widely different.
The perfected Brahmin longs for his absorption in the
infinite being the perfect Buddhist thirsts aftei" a state
;
of complete isolation, which is nothing short of total
annihilation. But the means for obtaining the ardently
coveted perfection are in many respects the same. The
moral observances enforced by both creeds differ so little
from each other that they appear to be almost identical.
In both systems, moreover, we find a body of individuals
who aim at a complete and perfect observance of the
highest injunctions, striving to reach the very summit of
that perfection pointed out by the founders of their
respective institutions these are the Brahminical and
:
Buddhist religious. To glance over the regulations en-
joined on the Brahmins, suchas wefindthem in the Insti-
tutes of Menoo, and those prescribed by the Wini to the
Talapoins, cannot fail to be truly interesting. A sum-
mary comparison will enable the reader to perceive at
once how closely allied are the two creeds, and how great
is the resemblance between them both. He will see on
the clearest evidence that to Buddha is not to be ascribed
the merit of having originated so many fine moral pre-

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
245
cepts and admirable disciplinary regulations, but that he
found in his own country, in the schools where he studied
wisdom, already well-known, pure moralprecepts,actually
discussed, studied, and by many strictly observed, together
with the disciplinary regulations. He was brought up in
a society which beheld with astonishment and admiration
a body of religious men entirely devoted to the greatwork
of securing the triumph ofthe spiritual principle over the
material one, and endeavouring by dint of the greatest
and severest austerities, the most rigorous penances, and
the most entire renouncing of all this material world, to
break down the material barriers that had hitherto kept
the soul captive, and prevented her from taking her flight
into regions of blissful freedom and perfect quiescence.
There is, however, a remarkable difference between the
sacerdotal caste of Brahmins and the members of the
Buddhistmonkish institution. Theposition oftheformer
is hereditary ; he is rendered illustrious by his lineage and
descent. That of the second is personal, and ends with
him ; it is the result of his own free choice ; he derives all
the glory that shines round him from his virtuous life
and a strict adherence to the institutions of the Wini.
The Brahmin owes everything to religion and to birth.
The Buddhist religious is indebted for all that he is solely
to religion ; the monk's title to distinction is the holy
mode of the saintly life that he has embraced. Both are
the greatest and most distinguished in their respective
societies but meritandintrinsicworthalone elicit venera-
;
tion and respect in behalf of the humble religious, whilst
the casual birth of the Brahmin from individuals belong-
ing to the highest caste centres upon his person the reluc-
tant homage of men belonging to inferior castes, who, in
virtue of the prejudices in which they are reared, consider
themselves obliged to do homage to him. The person of
both is sacred and looked upon with awe and veneration,
but from somewhat opposite and different motives.
Notwithstanding these and many other differences and

246 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
discrepancies, it is not tlie less striking to find in the
Brahniinical body, such as it is constituted by the regula-
tions of the Vedas, the germ of all the principal obser-
vances enjoined on the Buddhist that leaves the world, to
follow the path leading to perfection.
The life of a Brahmin, not as it is now, but as it origin-
ally was, and now ought to be, if the regulations of the
Vedas had not been partly set aside, is one of laborious
study, austerity, self-denial, and retirement. The first
quarter of his life is spent in the capacity of student.
His great and sole object is the study of the Vedas, and
the mastering of their contents. Worldly studies are not
to be thought of. He is entirely under the control of his
preceptor, to whom he has to yield obedience, respect, and
service in all that relates to his daily wants. He must,
moreover, daily beg his food from door to door. The
Buddhist novice likewise withdraws from his family,
enters the monaster}^, lives under the discipline of the
head of the house, whom he obeys and serves in his
daily necessities, and devotes all his undivided atten-
tion to the study of religious books. He pays no regard
to worldly knowledge. He has likewise to go out
every morning to beg the food that he will use during
the day.
The second quarter of the Brahmin's life is thus em-
ployed. He marries and lives with his family, but he
must consider his chief employment to be the teaching of
the Vedas and a zealous discharge of the religious obser-
vances andofall thatrelates to public worship. He must
sedulously abstain from too sensual and worldly enjoy-
ments, even from music, dancing, and other amusements
calculated to lead to dissipation. The Buddhist monkish
institution being not hereditary, and its continuance and
development having not to depend upon generation, its
members are bound toa strict celibacy, and to an absolute
and entire abstinence from all sensual and worldly enjoy-
ments inconsistent with gravity, self-recollection, and self-

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 247
denial. Their chief occupation isteaching to children the
rudiments of reading and writing, that they might read
religious books, which are the only ones used in schools.
He must pay a strict regard to devotional practices, and
take carethat the religiousobservancesand ceremonies be
regularly attended to in his monastery.
The third quarter of his life is spent by the Brahmin in
solitude as an anchorite. He dwells in the forests, where
he must procure what is necessary for food and raiment.
The latter article is looked after when he thinks it to be
a requisite to cover his nakedness. With many of them
fanaticism has so far prevailed over reason and the sense
of decency that they live in a state of disgusting naked-
ness. The roots of plants, the fruits and leaves of wild
trees, will supply the needful for the support of nature.
That time too must be devoted to the infliction of the
severest penances and to the practice of the hardest deeds
of mortification. To the Buddhist monk solitude and
retirement must everbe dear. Asceticlifeis much recom-
mended, and praised as most excellent. It was formerly
much in use among religious Buddhists. In Burmah
several places are pointed out with respect as having been
sanctified by the residence of holy anchorites. Now in
our days a few zealots, to bear, as it were, witness to this
ancient observance, retire into solitude duringa portion of
the threemonths of Lent. The spirit of mortification and
self-renouncing is eminently Buddhist ; but from the very
days of Gaudama we remark a positive tendency on the
part of his religious to give up and renounce those un-
natural and ultra-rigorous penances regularly observed
by their brethren of the opposite creed. The principle is
cherishedby them,but themode ofcarryingit into practice
ismore mild, and more consonant with reason andmodesty.
The lastportion ofthe Brahmin's life is devoted likewise
to meditation and contemplation. He is nomore subjected
to the ordeal of rigorous penances nature has been sub-
;
dued passions silenced and destroyed the soul has
; ;

248 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
obtained the mastery over the body and the material
world. She is free from all the trammels and obstacles
•that impeded her contemplation of truth. She is ready
to quit this world, as the bird leaves the branch of the
tree when itpleases him. The Buddhist religious, having
likewise crushed his passions and disentangled his soul
fromaffectionto matter, delightsonly inthe contemplation
of truth. Asthe mighty whale sports in the bosomof the
boundless ocean, so the perfected Buddhist launches forth
into abstract and infinite truth, delights in it, completely
estranged from this world, which meditation has taught
him to consider as a mere illusion, as destitute of reality.
He is then ripe for the so ardently coveted state of
Neibban.
When Buddha originated the plan of a society of reli-
gious, and framed the regulations whereby it was to be
governed, he had but to look around him for patterns of a
religious life. The country where he had been born, the
society in which he had been brought up, swarmed with
religious followingthe different systemsof philosophy pre-
vailingin those days. He sawthem, conversed withthem,
and for some time lived in their company under the same
disciplinary institutions. He was, therefore, thoroughly
conversant with all that in his days constituted a religious
life.
Butthesameboldandenterprisingspirit which made
him dissent from hismasters andcontemporaries on many
importantquestionsofmoralsandmetaphysics,andinduced
him to improve, as he thought, and perfect theories in
speculative and practical philosophy, impelled him also to
do something similar respecting the disciplinary regula-
tions to which his religious were to be hereafter subjected.
We freely confess that on this latter point he was emi-
nently successful. The body of Buddhist religious is
infinitely superior in most respects to the other societies
of Indian religious. The regulations of the formerbreathe
a spirit of modesty, mildness, andunaffectation, which in a
strikino- manner contrasts with those disgusting exhibi-

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 249
tions of self-inflicted penances so fondly courted by Brah-
mins, where immodesty seems to dispute the palm with
cruelty. Buddha opened the door of his society to all
men without any distinction or exception, implicitly pull-
ing down the barriers raised by the prejudices of caste.
Did he in the beginning of his public career lay down the
plan of destroying all vestiges of caste, and proclaiming
the principle of equality amongst men ? It is, to say the
least, very doubtful. The equalising principle itself was
never distinctly mentioned in his discourses. But he had
sown all the elements constitutive of that principle in- his
instructions. Every memberput on the religious dress of
his own free choice, and set it aside at his pleasure ; no
hereditary right,therefore, could be thoughtof
;
the dying-
religious could bequeath to his brethren but the example
of his virtues. His complete separation from the world
had broken all the ties of relationship. The double vow
of strict poverty and of celibacy, cutting the root of cupi-
dity and sensual enjoyments, precluded him from aiming
at the influence and posver which is conferred by wealth
and rauk. With the Brahminical religious the case is the
very reverse. His sacerdotal caste, exclusive of his per-
sonal merits, confers on him an almost divine sacredness,
which is to be propagated by generation. Hemaypossess
riches and have a numerous posterity. He is, therefore,
almost irresistibly impelled to seize on a power which is
forced on him by the treble influence of birth, religion,
and wealth.
The subject of the comparisonbetweenthetwo societies
of religious might receive further developments, but what
has been briefly stated appears suflicient to bear out the
point it was intended to establish, viz., the close resem-
blance subsisting between the two religious orders in both
systems, and the necessary inference that the order of
Buddhist religious is an improvement on the orders of
religious subsisting in India in the days of Gaudama.
There is another characteristic of the religious order of

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
250
Buddhists which has favourably operatedinitsbehalf, and
powerfully contributedto maintainit forsomanycenturies
in so compact and solid a body that it seems to bid defi-
We
ance to the destructive action of revolutions. allude
to its regularly constituted hierarchy, which is as perfect
as it can be expected, particularly in Burmah and Siam.
The power and influence of him whom we may call the
general of the order in Burmah, and who is known under
the appellation of Tha-thana-paing, when, as was very
often the case, backed by the temporal power, was felt
throughout the whole country, and much contributed to
maintain good order and discipline in the great body of
religious. The action of the provincial or superior of the
religious houses of a province is more directly and imme-
diately felt by all the subordinates. It does not appear
that the religious of the Hindu schools, at least in our
days, possess such an advantage that they may well envy
their brethren of the Buddhist sect. The members of the
Brahminical body are not kept together by the power and
government of superiors, but by regulations that are so
deeply rooted and firmly seated in the mind of individuals
that they are faithfully observed. The superiority of
caste, connected too with a certain amount of spiritual
pride, has been hitherto sufficient to maintain that body
distinct and separate from all that is without itself. The
religious spirit that pervades that body in our days seems
to have abated from its originalfervour and energy. The
Brahmin has maintained with the utmost jealousy the
superiority that caste confers upon him, but appears not
to have been so particular in keeping up the genuine
spiritual supremacy, which a strict adherence to the pre-
scriptions of the Vedas must have ever firmly secured
to him.

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
251
ARTICLE
II.
NATURE OF THE RELIGIOUS ORDER OF PHONGYIES.
He who hasnot seriouslystudiedthereligious system of
Buddhism, nor acquired accurate notions of its doctrinal
principles, is scarcely capable of forming-a correct opinion
of the religious order of those austere recluses, whom
Europeans, with a mind biassed by educational influence,
denominate priests of Buddha. Were we to apply to the
membersof that order the notionsgenerally entertainedof
a priesthood, we would form a very erroneous conception
of the real character of their institution. For in every
religious system admitting of one or severalbeings supe-
rior to man. whose providentialaction influences his desti-
nies either in this or the next world,]oersons invested with
a sacerdotal character have always been considered as
mediators between men and the acknowledged deity,
offering to the supreme being on all public occasions the
prayers and sacrificesofthe people, and solicitingin return
his gracious protection. When in the early ages of the
world the sacerdotal dignity was coupled with the patri-
archal or regal ones, when in the succeeding ages there
existed a regular and distinctpriesthood, such assubsisted
under the Mosaic dispensation, or among the Greeks,
Romans, Gauls, &c., the priests were looked upon asdele-
gates of the people in all that related to national woi'ship,
carryingon in the name oftheDeitythe mysteriousinter-
course that links heaven to earth. Priesthood, therefore,
necessarily implies the belief in a being superior to man
and controlling his destinies. The moment sucli a belief
is disregarded, the very idea ofpriesthood vanishes. Bud-
dhism, such at least as it is found existing in Ceylon,
Burmah, Siani, and other places, is a purely atheistical
religious system, and presents the solitary instance, at
least as far as my information goes, of a religious creed,

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
252
admitted by various nations, the doctrines of which are
not based upon the notion of a supreme being controlling
more or less the affairs of this world. In support of an
assertion that may appear to many somewhat hazardous,
we will briefly lay down the leading tenets of the Bud-
dhistic doctrine.
According tothat system, matteris eternal. The exist-
enceofaworld, its duration, destruction, and reproduction,
all the various combinations and modifications matter is
liable to, arethe immediateresults ofthe actionofeternal
and self-existing laws. Through life man is subjected to
the continual but successive influences of his good and
bad deeds. This double influence always attends him
through his numberless existences, and inevitably awards
him happiness or misfortune, according as the respective
sum ofgood or evil predominates. Thereexists an eternal
law, which, when obliterated from the memory of men,
can be known again, and, as it were, recovered only and
thoroughly understood by the incomparable genius and
matchless wisdom of certain extraordinary personages,
called Buddhas, who appear successively and at intervals
during the various series or successions of worlds. These
Buddhasannouncethatlawto allthethen existing rational
beings. The great object of that doctrine is to point out
tothose beings the means of freeing themselves from the
influence of passions, and becoming abstracted from all
that exists. Being thereby delivered from the action of
good or evil influence, whichcauses mortals to turn inces-
santly in the whirlpool of never-ending existences, men
can obtain the state of Neibban, or rest, that is to say,
according to the popular opinion, a situation wherein the
soul, disentangled from all that exists, alone with herself,
indifferent to pain as well asto pleasure,folded, as it were,
upon herself, remains forever in an incomprehensible state
of complete abstractionand absolute rest. I say that such
is the popular opinion, fortunately unbiassed by scholastic
theories. But the opinionoftheBuddhistdoctors respect-

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
253
ing Neibban is that it means the negation of all states of
being; that is to say, a desolating and horrifyingannihila-
tion. A Buddha is a being who, during myriads of exist-
ences, slowly and gradually gravitates towards this centre
of an imaginary perfection by the practice of the highest
virtues. Havingattainedthereto, he becomes on a sudden
gifted with a boundless genius, wherewith he at once dis-
covers the wretched state of beings and the means of
delivering them from it. He thoroughly understands the
eternal law which alone can lead mortals in the right way,
and enable them to come out of the circle of existences,
wherein they have been unceasingly turning and moving
in a state of perpetual agitation, opposite to that of fixity
or rest. He preaches that law wherebyman is taught the
practice of those virtues which destroy gradually in him
all evil influences, together with every affection for all
that exists, and brings him at last to the end of existence,
the possession of Neibban. His task fulfilled, Buddha
dies, or rather, to usethe language of Buddhists, he enters
into the state Neibban. In that situation, which is truly
inex]3licable, he knows nothing of and enters no wise into
the affairs of this world. He is as if he was not or had
never been. He is indeed annihilated.
—
Buddhists venerate three precious things Buddha, his
—
law, and the assembly of the just or perfect in the same
sense as we venerate and admire what is morallygood and
beautiful, such as virtue considered abstractedly, and the
acts originating from it. The statues of the last Buddha
Gaudama are honoured by his followers, not with the idea
that certain powers or virtues are inherent in them, but
solely because they are the visible representations of
Buddha, who, according to ]>uddhists, desired that the
same honours should be paid to them as would be offered
to his person, were he yet living among them. This faint
outline of the Buddhistic creed is sufficient to bear out
the above assertion, that it is in no wise based on the
belief in a supreme being, but that it is strictly atheis-

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
254
tical, and therefore that no real priesthood can ever be
found existing under such a system. It may prove, too,
of some assistance for better understanding what is to be
said regarding the subjects of this notice.
The Talapoins are called by the Burmese Phongyies,
which term means great glory or Rahans, which means
:
perfect. They are known in Ceylon, Siam, Thibet, under
different names, conveying nearly the same meaning and
expressing either the nature or the object of their pro-
fession.
What induces a follower of Buddha to embrace the
Talapoinic state ? What is the object of his pursuit in
entering on such a peculiar and extraordinary course of
life ? The answer to these questions will supply us with
accurate notions of the real nature of this singular order
of devotees. A Buddhist on becoming a member of the
holy society proposes to keep the law of Buddha in a
more perfect manner than his other co-religionists. He
intends to observe not only its general ordinances obliga-
tory on every individual, but also its prescriptions of a
higher excellency, leading to an uncommon sanctity and
perfection, which can be the lot of but a comparatively
small number of fervent and resolute persons. He aims
at weakening within himself all the evil propensities that
giveorigin and streng-th to the principle of demerits. By
the practice and observance of the highest and sublimest
precepts and counsels of the law, he establishes, confirms,
and consolidates in his own soul the principle of merits,
which is to work upon him during the various existences
he has as yet to go through, and gradually lead him to
that perfection which will qualify him for and entitle him
to the state of Neibban, the object of the ardent desires
and earnest ])ursuit of every true and genuine disciple of
Buddha. 'J'he life of the last Ikiddha Gaudama, his doc-
trines as well as his examples, he proposes to copy with a
scrupulous fidelity and to follow with unremitting ardour.
Such is the great model that he proposes to himself for

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 255
imitation. Gaudama withdrew from the world, renounced
its seducing pleasures and dazzling vanities, curbed his
passions under the yoke of restraint, and strove to prac-
tise the highest virtues, particularly self-denial, in order
to arrive at a state of complete indifference to all that is
within or Avithout self •, which is, as it were, the threshold
of Neibbau.
The Talapoin, fixing his regards on that matchless pat-
tern of perfection, would fain reproduce, as far as it lies
in his power, all its features in his own person. Like
Buddha himself, he parts with his family, relatives, and
friends, and seeks for admission into the society of the
perfect he abandons and leaves his home, to enter into
;
the asylum of peace and retirement ; he forsakes the
riches of this world to practise the strictest poverty ; he
renounces the pleasures of this world, even the lawful
ones, to live according to the rules of the severest absti-
nence and purest chastity he exchanges his secular dress
;
for that of the new profession he enters on he gives up
;
his own will, and fetters his own liberty, to attend?
through every act and all the particulars of life, to the
reo-ulations ofthe brotherhood. He is aTalapoin for him-
self and for his own benefit, to acquire merits which he
shares with nobody else. On the occasion of certain offer-
ing's or alms being presented to him by some benevolent
admirers of his holy mode of life, he will repay his bene-
factors by repeating to them certain precepts, commands,
and points of the law but he is not bound by his profes-
•,
sional character to expound the law to the people. Sepa-
rated from the world by his dress and his peculiar way
of living, he remains a stranger to all that takes place
without the walls of his monastery. He is not charged
with the care of souls, and therefore never presumes to
rebuke any one that trespasses the law, or to censure the
conduct of the profligate.
The ceremonies of the Buddhistic worship are simple
and few. The Talapoin is not considered as a minister

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
256
whose presence is an essential requisite when they are to
beperformed. Pagodas are erected, statues of Buddha are
inaugurated, offerings of flowers, tapers, and small orna-
ments are made, particularly on the days of the new and
full moon, but on all those solemn occasions the interfer-
ence of the Phongyie is in no way considered asnecessary,
so that the whole worship exists independently of him.
He is not to be seen on the particular occasions of births
and marriages. He is, it is true, occasionally asked to
attend funerals but he then acts, not as a minister per-
;
forming a ceremony, but as a private person. He is pre-
sent for the sake of receiving alms that are profusely
bestowed upon him by the relatives of the defunct.
The Buddhists have three months of the year, from the
full moonof July to the full moon of October, particularly
devoted to a stricter observance of the practices and cere-
monies of the law. Crowds of people of both sexes resort
to the pagodas, and often spend wholenights in the build-
ings erected close to those places. The most fervent
among them fast and abstain from profane amusements
during that period they devote more time to the reading
;
of their sacredbooks and the repetition ofcertain formulas
calculated to remind them of certain important truths, or
intended to praise the last Buddha Gaudama and the law
he has published. Alms pour more abundantly into the
peaceable dwellings of the pious recluses. During all
the time the Talapoin quietly remains in his place, with-
out alteringhis modeoflife, ordeviating in the least from
his never-changing usages and ordinary habits. By the
rules of his profession he is directed to pay, during that
time, a particular regard to religious observances, to join
his brethren from time to time in the recital of certain
foriuulas, and in the reading of the book embodying the
regulations of the profession. He enjoys, as usual, the
good things which his liberal co-religionists take pleasure
in proffering to him. On two occasions the writer has
seen, and on many has heard of Talapoins withdrawing

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
257
during the three months of Lent to some lonely place,
living- alone in small huts, shunning the company of men,
and leading an eremitical life, to remain at liberty to
devote all their time to meditations on the most excellent
points of the law of Buddha, combating their passions,
and enjoying in that retired situation a foretaste of the
never-troubled rest of Neibban.
In many respects the Talapoinic institutions may be
likened to those of some religious orders that appeared
successively in almost every Christian countryprevious to
the era of the Reformation, and that are, up to this day,
to be met with amidst the Churches of the Latin and
Greek rites. Like the monk, theTalapoin bids afarewell
to the world, wears a particular dress, leads a life of com-
munity, abstracts himself from all that gives streng-th to
his passions, by embracing a state of voluntary poverty
and absolute renunciation of all sensual gratifications.
He aims at obtaiuing, by a stricter observance of the law's
most sublime precepts, an uncommon degree of sanctity
and perfection. All his time is regulated by the rules of
his profession, and devoted to repeating certain formulas
of prayers, reading the sacred scriptures,begging almsfor
his support, &c.
These features of exterior resemblance, common to in-
stitutions ofcreeds sooppositeto each other, have induced
several writers, little favourable to Christianity, to pro-
nounce without further inquiry that Catholicism has
borrowed from Buddhism many ceremonies, institutions,
and disciplinary regulations. Some of them havegone so
far as to pretend to find in it the very origin of Christi-
anity. They have, however, been ably confuted by Abel
Remusat, in his Memoir entitled " Chronological Re-
searches into the Lamaic Hierarchy of Thibet." Without
entertaining in the least the presumptuous idea of enter-
ing into a controversy entirely foreign to his purpose, the
writer will confine himself to making one or two remarks
calculated to show that the first conclusion is, to say the
VOL. II. K

258 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
leastofit,a premature one. When intwo religious creeds,
entirely opposed to each other in their ultimate object,
there are several minor objects equally set forth by both,
it will necessarily happen that, in many instances, means
nearly similar will be prescribed on both sides for effec-
tually obtaining them, independent of any previously con-
certed plan or imitation. The Christian system and the
Buddhistic one, though differing from each other in their
respective objects and ends, as much as truth from error,
have, it must be confessed, many striking features of an
astonishing resemblance. There are manymoral precepts
equally commanded and enforced in common by both
creeds. It will not be deemed rash to assert that most of
the moral truths prescribed by the Gospel are to be met
with in the Buddhistic scriptures. The essential, vital,
and ca]5ital discrepancy lies in the difference of the ends
to which the two creeds lead, but not in the variance of
the means they prescribeforthe attainment of them. The
Gospel tends to reunite man to his ]\Iaker, points out to
him the way he must followfor arriving at the possession
and enjoyment of Him who is the great principle and end
of all things, and teaches him, as a paramount duty, to
conform his will and inclinations to His commands.
Buddhism tends to abstract man from all that is without
self, and makes self his own and sole centre. It exhorts
him tothe practice of many eminent virtues, which are to
help him to rise to an imaginary perfection, the summit
of which is the incomprehensible state of Neibban. It is
the mildest expression which the writer can command
when he has to speak of so sad a subject, the final end of
a Buddhist. It would be more correct to say at once that
the pretended perfect being is led, by the principles of
his creed, into the dark and fathomless abyss of anni-
hilation.
If the end aimed at by the followers of Buddha is
widely different from that which the disciples of Christ
strive to obtain, the means prescribed for the attainment

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
259
of these two ends are, in uuuiy respects, very much simi-
lar to each other. Both creedsteach man to combat, con-
trol, and master the passions of his heart, to make reason
predominate over sense, mind over matter, to root up
from hisheart every affection for the things of this world,
and to practise the virtues required for the attainment of
these great objects. Is there anything surprising that
persons, having, in many respects, views nearly similar,
resort to means or expedients nearly alike for securing the
object of their pursuit, without having ever seen or con-
sulted each other? He who intends to practise absolute
poverty must of course abandon all his earthly property.
He who proposes renouncing theworld ought to withdraw
from it. He who will lead a contemplative life must
look out for a retired place, far from the gaze and agita-
tion of the world. To control passions, and particularly
the fiercest of all, the sensual appetite, it is required that
one should keep himself separate from all that is calcu-
lated to kindle its fires and feed its violence. Every pro-
fession has its distinctive marks and peculiar character-
istics. Hence peculiarityof dress, manners, and habits in
those who have adopted a mode of life differing from that
of the rest of the community. He who has boundhimself
to the daily recitation of certain prayers or devotional
formulas a certain number of times will have recourse to
some instrument, or devise some means for ascertaining
the number of times he has complied with his regulation
in this respect. He, too, who is eager to acquire self-
knowledge and to carry on a successful war wiiJi liimself
will apply to a guide to whom ho will lay open his whole
soul, and ask spiritual advice that will enable liim toover-
come the obstacles he meets on his way to perfection.
These and many other points are common to all those
that intend to observe not only the precepts but also the
mere counsels of theirrespectivecreeds. Causes beingthe
same, in many instances, in both systems, consequences
almost analogous must inevitably result therefrom, lie-

26o NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
ligious institutions always bear the stamp of the religious
ideas that have given rise to them. They, together with
their rules and regulations, are not the principle, but the
immediate consequence or offspring of religion, such as it
is understoodbythe people professing it. They exemplify
and illustrate religious notions already entertained, but
theynever create such as are notyet in existence. When
the learned shall have collected sufiScient materials for
giving an accurate history of the origin, progress, spread,
and dogmatical revolutions of Buddhism, it will not be
uninterestingtoinquire intothe causes that have operated
in communicating to two religious systems essentially
differing in their respective tendencies so man}- points
of resemblance. But that study is yet to be made. We
know very little on all those points. The best informed
are compelled to acknowledge that in the present state of
information we are still in the dark, the thickness of
which is occasionally relieved by a few transient and
uncertain glimpses which are insufficient to enlighten the
mind, and enable the searcher after truth to guide safely
his steps. In reading the particulars of the life of the
lastBuddha Gaudama, it isimpossible nottofeel reminded
of many circumstances relating to our Saviour's life, such
as it has been sketched out by the evangelists. The
origin of the close affinity between many doctrinal points
and maxims common both to Christianity and Buddhism
having been ascertained, it will not be difficult to find out
and explain how the votaries of both have come to adopt
so many practices, ceremonies, observances, and institu-
tions nearly similar.
Having endeavoured to explain the nature of the insti-
tution of the Talapoins, and the object aimed at by its
professed members, we will now proceed to examine its
systematical organisation, or sacred hierarchy.

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 261
ARTICLE
III.
HIERARCHY OF THE ORDER.
It is somewhat surprising to find in themiddle of half-
civilised nations, such asthe Burmese, Siamese, Cingalese,
andThibetans, a religious order, with a distinct and well-
marked hierarchy,constitutionsand regulations, providing
for the admission of members, determining their occupa-
tions, duties, obligations, and theirmode of life, and form-
ing, as it were,a compact,solid, and perfect body, that has
subsisted, almost withoutchange,during severalcenturies,
and survived the destructionof kingdoms, the fallofroyal
dynasties, and all the confusion and agitation produced
by political commotions and revolutions. It is in Thibet
that the order is found existingin the greatest perfection,
under the fostering care of the Grand Lama, or High
Priest, who combines in his own person the regal as well
as the sacerdotaldignity andpower. In the city of Lassa,
a pontifical court, an electivesacerdotalchief,andacollege
of superior Lamas impart to the order dignity, decency,
respectability, and stability, which insure its continued
existence, and more or less extend its influence over its
members living in distant countries. The period of the
introduction of Buddhism from India into Thibet is very
uncertain, if not quite unknown. Buddhist annals men-
tion that after the holding of the third council, 236 years
after Gaudama's death, some missionarieswere deputedby
the president of that assembly to go and preach religion
in some parts of the Himalayan range. We may suppose
that this had reference to the southern slopes of the
mountains. Be that as it may, it appears certain that the
establishment of a pontificalchief or sovereign, with royal
prerogatives, was set up by one of the grandsons of the
great Tartar warrior Gengis in orabout the middle of the
thirteenth century. In other countries, where the order

;
262 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
has no connection whatever \Yith tlie civil power, we can
scarcely expect to see it surrounded with an equal splen-
dour, or subsisting- in the same state of splendour and
regularity. Though this is the case in Burmah, it is im-
possible not to acknowledge the fact that the regulations
of the Wini are more carefullyattendedto inthiscountry
than in Thibet. The conduct of the monks hereisincom-
parably more regular. The publiccould notbear an open
dereliction of the duties imposed by the vows of poverty
and chastity. But,if credit be given to the narratives of
travellers, the Thibetan monks do not scruple to forsake
occasionally those duties, without appearing to fear the
rising of a popular cry of indignation, on account of their
misbehaviour in points considered of such vast import-
ance. Extraordinary, indeed, would be its vital energies,
were the remotest parts of this great and far-spread body
to receivethesame impulseandexhibitthesamesymptoms
of vitality as those nearest to the heart or principle of
life. Having never met with any detailed particulars
regarding the Thibetan monks, we must reuuiin satisfied
with layingbeforethe reader an account ofall that relates
to the constituent parts of the order, such as they are
found existing in Burmah and developed in the sacred
wi'itings.
The wliolc fraternity is composed, 1st, of young men
who have put on the Talapoinic dress without being con-
sidered professed members of the fraternity, or having
hitherto passed through a certain ordeal somewhat re-
sembling an ordinary
;
they are called Shi/ins; 2d, of
those wlio, having lived for a while in the community in a
probationary state, are admitted professed members with
theceremoniesusually observed on suchoccasions, whereby
thetitleand charactei'of Phongyie aresolemnlyconferred
they are denominated Patzins ; 3d. of flic heads of each
house or community, who have I he power to control all
the inmates of the house; 4th, of a provincial, whose
jurisdiction extends overall the communities spread in the

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 263
towns and villages of the province or district; 5tli, of a
superior general, residing' in the capital or its .suburbs,
called Tmia-dau, or great master, having the general
management and direction of all the affairs of the order
throughout the empire. He is emphatically called by the
name of Tha-thana-paing, which means that he has the
power over religion. Let us say something upon each of
these five degrees of the Buddhistic hierarchy.
It is an almost universal custom among the Burmese
and Siamese to cause boys who have attained the age of
puberty, or even before that time, to enter for a year or
two one of the many Talapoinic houses, to put on the
yellow dress, for the double purpose of learning to read
and write, and of acquiring merits for future existences.
Onthe occasion of the death of certain persons, it happens
sometimes that a member of the family will enter the
community for six months or a year. When a young lad
is to make his first entrance into a house of the order, he
is led thereto, riding on a richly caparisoned pony, or
sitting in a finepalanquin carried on the shoulders of four
or more men. He is allowed to use one or several gold
umbrellas, which are held opened over his head. During
the triumphal march he is preceded by a long line of men
and women,attired intheirrichestdresses,carryinga large
quantity of presents destined for the use of the inmates
of the Kiaong (such is the general name given to all the
houses of the brotherhood in Burmah) which the young
postulant is to reside in. In this stately order theproces-
sion, attended with a band playiug on various musical
instruments, moves on slowly and circuitously through
the principal streets of the town towards the monastery
that has been fixed upon. This display of an ostentatious
pomp is, on the part of the parents and relatives, an
honour paid to the postulant who generously consecrates
himself to so exalted a calling, and on the part of the
youth a last farewell to worldly vanities. He has no
sooner descended fromhis splendidconveyance andcrossed

264 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
the threshold of the kiaong than he is delivered by his
parents into the hands of the superior, and placed under
his care. His head is instantly shaved ; he is stripped of
his fine secular dress, and habitedin the plain and humble
yellow garb he must lay aside every sort of ornament,
;
and remain contented with the unassuming simplicity
becoming his new position. The kiaong is to become his
home, and its inmates are substituted in the room of his
father and mother, brothers and sisters.
The duty of theyoung shyin is to minister to the wants
of the eldersof the house, to bring and place before them
at fixed times the usual supply of water, the betel-box,
and the daily food to attend them on some pious errand
;
through the town or the country. A portion of his time
is devotedto acquiringthe art of readingand writing, and
occasionally the elements of arithmetic. There are five
general precepts obligatory on all men ; but the sliyin is
bound to the observance of five additional — ones, making
ten altogether, by which he is forbidden ist, to kill
animals 2d, to steal 3d, to give himself up to carnal
; ;
pleasures 4th, to tell lies 5th, to drink wine or other
; ;
intoxicating liquors 6th, to eat after mid-day 7th, to
; ;
dance, sing, or play on any musical instrument ; 8th, to
colour his face 9th, to stand on elevated places, not
;
proper for him lOth, to touch or handle gold or silver.^
;
1 In glancing over the latter part Hajipoor, undertook a long journey,
of Buddha's life, the reader hasseen as far as Kosambi, for the express
thatthe less important pointsof dis- purpose of warning the religious of
ciplinehave beenthesubject ofmuch that country against the dangerous
discussion in the earlydays of Bud- innovations which were introduced
dhism. Among those points of dis- by a considerable body of Rahans
pute and contention were the last belonging to the eastern districts of
fivearticlesaboveenumerated. The Wethalie.
second councilwasassembled forthe The journey was certainly a long
purpose of settling warm disputes one in a western direction. The
which distracted the Buddhist ruinsof the famous cityof Kosambi
Thanga, or Assembly, and caused havebeendiscoveredataplacecalled
great disturbances. I'he venerable Kosam, iliirtymilesaboveAllahabad,
Rasa, who lived in Wethalie, a city on theJumna. Theyarcmostexten-
situated on the Gunduck, north of sive, and at once indicatetheimport-

,
NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 265
The trespassing- of the five first precepts is visited with
expulsion from the kiaong but that of the five last may
;
be expiated by a proper penance.
The young shyins, as before observed, do not remain in
the kiaong beyond the period of one or two years they
;
generally leave it and return to a secular life. There are,
however, some of them, who, fond of the easy and quiet
life of Talapoins, or actuated by other motives, prefer
remaining longer in those places of retirement. They
betake themselves to the study of the duties, rules, and
obligations of the professed members of the society they
;
pay more attention to the reading of religious books, and
endeavour to obtain the required qualifications. Being
sufficiently instructed on all these points, and having
attained the age of twenty years, they are solemnly
admitted among the professed members of the brother-
hood under the name of Patzin. The interesting cere-
monies observed on the occasion will hereafter be fully
described. The state of Patzin is, therefore, properly
speaking, that of Phongyie, though that name is some-
times reserved for him who is the head of a monastery.
Every other step or promotion in the hierarchy is purely
honorary, in so far that it does not impose upon him who
ancethat placemust havehad in the remained abandoned until the days
days of its prosperity. A broken of theEmperor Akhbar, who builta
pillar, the polished shaft of which fort called Illahabas. The new city
must have measured 34 feet, is received thenameofAllahabad from
covered with inscriptions; it is one the Emperor Shah Jehan. The
of the most important Buddhist famous pillar called the Allahabad
relics. It is probably one of those Pillar bears three inscriptions. The
pillars erected by Athoka in every first is that of Asoka, 240 yearsB.C.
part of his extensive dominions. It recording hisedicts forthe propaga-
bears no inscription more ancient tionof Buddhism
;
thesecondisthat
thanthe second and thirdcenturyof of Samudra Gupta, in the second
the Christian era. A similar one century of our era, commemorative
c w i a t s y m e e r n ec t t i e o d ned at by Pra H y w a c g, n a T n hs a a n n c g ien a t s o is fh t i h s at ex o t f ens J i e v h e an d g o i m r i , ni m o e n n s ti ; o t n h i e ng thi h r i d s
being situated at the confluence of accession tothethrone. The lastra-
the Ganges and the Jumna, and setting up of thisfamous pillar took
finally destroyed by the gradual en- place in 1838.
croachmentsoftherivers. Theplace

-66 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
is so promoted any new duty or obligation different from
what is obligatory on every professed member but it
;
confers a power or jurisdiction for commanding, con-
trolling, and governing all the brethren under his care.
In virtue of such distinctions, a superior, how high soever
his rank may be, is bound to the observance of the same
rules, duties, and obligations as the last Patzin his sacred
;
character is not enlarged or altered ; he is only entrusted
with a certain amount of jurisdiction over some of his
brethren.
The Talapoin is bound to his community, so that in
every kiaong or house of the order there are ordinarily to
be met several Patzins and a good number of shyins.
Each kiaonghas a chief who presidesoverthe community,
under the appellation of Tsaya, or, as is more often the
case, under that of Phongyie. He is, in most instances,
the nominee of the individual who has built the monas-
tery, and who is vested with a kind of right of patronage
to appoint whom he likes to be the head of the house he
has erected. He who is the head of the house has power
over all the inmates, and every one acknowledges him as
his immediate superior. He has the management of all
the little affairs of the communitv, enforces the regular
observance of the rules and duties of the profession, cor-
rects abuses, rebukesthetrespassers, spurs the lazy,excites
the lukewarm, keeps peace and maintains good under-
standing amongst his subordinates. He receives, in his
official character, the pious visitors who resort to his
monastery, either for the sake of making voluntary offer-
ings in token of their respect for and admiration of his
eminent sanctity, or for conversing with him on some
religious subjects, which, let it be said quietly, out of
deference to human frailty, sometimes make room for
those of a worldly character. If the alms-givers oradvice-
seekers belong, as often happens, to the fair and devout
sex, they must remain at a distance of six or twelve
cubits, as the place may allow, from their pious adviser.

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 267
It is supposedthat a nearerproximity iniglit endang-er the
virtue ot" the holy rechise.
In every town a considerable number of kiaongs are
found, either in the suburbs or within tlie walls, in a
quarter reserved for the purpose. In every village the
kiaong is to be met with, as the parson'shouse in our vil-
lages of Europe. The poorestplace is not without a small
and oftenvery humblehouse for the Phongyie who resides
there, if not during the whole year, at least during the
rainy season. One or several dzedis, a sort of flagstaff
painted,and withsomeofitspartsgilt,bearingtheemblem
of the sacred bird henza, or Brahminical duck, at three-
fourths of its height, from which hang down gracefully
several streamers, amid a grove of fruit trees, indicate to
—
the traveller the habitation sometimes humble, some-
—
times stately with its superposed three roofs, where the
Eahans dwell. The kiaong is also a place where the
traveller is well received, and can stay for a day or two.
During-the dry season, when there are few boys remaining
with the Phongyies, it is a place much safer than the
dzeats. The inmates are generally very glad to receive
strangers, who by their conversation afford them some
moments ofpleasant diversion which relieve the habitual
monotony of their life. These various communities are
placed under the jurisdiction of a general su]ierior, or a
provincial named Tsaia-dau, or great master they form,
;
under his authority, a province of the order ; a division
much similartothat of several religious orders in Europe.
He enjoys a large share of public respect and veneration.
His kiaong outshines the others in splendour and deco-
rations. The first and wealthiest inhabitants ofthe place
are proud to call themselves his disciples and supporters,
and to supply him liberally with all that he may require.
His chief duty is to settle disputes that not unfrequently
arise between rival communities. The demon of discord
often haunts these abodes of peace and retirement. The
authority of the provincial interferes to put dnwn feuds

268 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
and contentions, which envy and jealousy, the two great
enemies of devotees, not unfrequently excite. When a
Talapoin is accused of incontinence or other serious in-
fringement of the vital rules of the profession, he is sum-
monedto the tribunal of the Tsaya-dau, who, assisted and
advised by some elders, examinesthe case andpronounces
the sentence. Superior intellectual attainments do not
appear to be the essential qualifications forobtainingthis
high dignity. The writer has met with two or three of
these dignitaries who, in his opinion, were vastly inferior
to many of their subordinates in talents and cax^acity.
They were old and good-natured men, who had spent
almost all their lives within the precincts of the monas-
tery. Their dress, manners, and habits were entirely
similar to those of their brethren of inferior grade.
In the capital, or its suburbs, of the kingdom of Ava,
where is the keystone of the Talapoinic fabric, the supei'-
latively great master resides. His jurisdiction extends
over all the fraternity within the realm of his Burmese
majesty. His position near the seat of government, and
his capacity of king's master or teacher, must have at all
times conferred upon him a verygreat degree of influence
over all his subordinates. He is honoured with the emi-
nent title of Tha-thana-painf/, meaning that he haspower
and control over all that appertains to religion. It does
not appear that peculiarly shining qualifications or high
attainments arerequired in him who is honouredwithsuch
a dignity. The mere accidental circumstance of having
been the king's instructor when he was as yet a youth is
a sufficient, nay, the only necessary recommendation for
the promotion to such a high position. Hence it gene-
rally happens that each king, at his accession to the
throne, confers the highest dignity of the order on his
favourite Phongyie. In that case the actual incumbent
has to resign theplace to his more influential brother,and
becomes an ordinary member of the fraternity, unless he
prefers leaving the society altogether, and re-entering the

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
269
lay condition. Great indeed is the respect paid by the
king to the head Phongyie. When on certain days of
worshijD he is invited to go to the palace and deliver some
instructions to his majesty, the proud monarch quits the
somewhat elevatedplace he occupies, and takes one almost
on a level with that of the courtiers, whilst the venerable
personagegoes to sit on the very same carpet just vacated
by the king. When he happensto go out and visit some
monasteries or places of worship, he is generally carried
on a gilt litter, in great state, attended bya large number
of his brethren and a considerable retinue of laymen.
Duringthepassage,marks ofthegreatestrespectaregiven
by the people. The monastery he lives in is on a scale of
splendour truly surprising. Its form and appearance are
similar to that of other religious houses, but in variety
and richness of decorations it surpasses them all. It is
entirely gilt both inside and out ; not only are the posts
covered with gold leaves, but often they are inlaid with
rubies, which I suppose are of the commonest description
and of little value.
To confer an additional sacredness to his person and
position, the Tha-thana-]3aing lives by himself, with but
one or two Phongyies, whom we may consider as his
secretaries or major-domos, w^ho remain in an apartment
near to the entrance, to receive visitors and usher them
into the presence of the great personage. Besides, there
are lay guardians who take good care that not the least
noise should ever disturb the silence of the place.
When tlie writer first visited that dignitary, he was
much amused, on his approach to the place, to meet with
those mute guardians, who by all sorts of signs and ges-
tures were endeavouring to make him understand that he
must walk slowly and noiselessly, and beware to speak
aloud. When admitted to the presence of the Tsaya-dau,
he was not a little surprised to find a man exceedingly
self-conceited, who thought that to liini alone belonged
the right of speaking. His language wasthat of a master

;
270 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
to whom BO one was expected to presume to offer the
least contradiction. He appeared quite offended whenhis
visitor was compelled to dissent from him on certain
points brought forward during the conversation. He was
then about fifty years old. He was, for a Burman, of a
tall stature, with regular and handsome features. The
face was a little emaciated, as becomes a monk. His
spiritual pride cast a darkish and unpleasant appearance
on his person. He spoke quickly and sententiously
appearing all the while scarcely to notice his interlocutor.
Admiration of self and vanity pierced through the thin
veil which his affected humility spread over his counte-
nance. The writer left him with an impression very dif-
ferent from that which a worthy English envoy, in the
end of the lastcentury, entertained ofa similarpersonage,
whose mild, benign, and pious exterior captivated him to
such an extent as to elicit from him a request to be re-
membered in his prayers.
In ourdays, the power of theTha-thana-paing is merely
nominal the effects of his jurisdiction are scarcely felt
;
beyond his own neighbourhood. Such, however, was not
the case in former times. Spiritual commissioners were
sent yearly by him, to examine into and repoi't on the
state of the communitiesthroughout the provinces. They
had to inquire particularly whether the rules were regu-
larly observed or not, whether the professed members
were really well qualified for their holy calling or not.
They were empowered to repress abuses, and whenever
some unworthy brother, or black .shcf/p, was found within
the enclosure of a monastery, he was forthwith degraded,
stripped of the yellow garb, and compelled to resume a
secular course of life. Unfortunately for the welfare of
the order, those salutary visits no mori" take place ; the
wholesome check is done away with. Left without a
superior control, the order has fallen into a low degree of
abjectnessand degradation. Thesituation of Talapoins is
often looked upon now as one fit for lazy, ignorant, and

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 271
idlepeople, who, beinganxious to live well and donothing,
put on the sacred dress for a certain time, until, tired of
the duties and obligations of their new profession, they
retire and betake themselvesanew to a secular life. This
practice, as far as my observation goes, is pretty general,
if not almost universal. There are, however, a few excep-
tions. Though labouring under many serious disadvan-
tages, the society continues to subsist with all its exterior
characteristics the various steps of its hierarchy are as
;
well marked and defined now as they were before under
more favourable circumstances. Its framework remains
entire, but the materials composing it are somewhat im-
perfect and unsound.
There is in that religious body a latent principle of
vitality, that keeps it up and communicates to it an
amount of strength and energy that have hitherto main-
tained it in the midst of wars, revolutions, and political
convulsions of all descriptions. Whether supported or
not by the rulingpower, it has remained always firm and
unchanged. It is impossible to account satisfactorily for
such a phenomenon, unless we find a clear and evident
cause of such an extraordinary vitality a cause indepen-
;
dent of ordinary occurrences, time, and circumstances ; a
cause deeply rooted in the very soul of the populations,
that exhibit before the observer this great and striking
religious feature. That cause appears to be the strong
religious sentiment, the firm faith that pervades tJie
masses of Buddhists. The laity admire and venerate the
religious, and voluntarily and cheerfully contribute to
their maintenance and welfare. From its ranks the reli-
gious body is constantly recruited. There is scarcely a
man that has not been a member of the fraternity for a
certain period of time.
Surely such a general and continued impulse could not
last long, unless it were maintained by a powerful reli-
gious conviction. The members of the order preserve, at
least exteriorly, the decorum of their profession. The

;
NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
272
rules and regulations are tolerably well observed ; the
grades of hierarchy are maintained with a scrupulous ex-
actitude. Thelife of the religious is one of restraint and
perpetual control. He is denied all sorts of pleasures and
diversions. How could such system of self-denial be ever
maintained, were it not for the belief which the Rahans
have in the merits that they amass, by following a course
of life which, after all, is repugnant to nature ? It cannot
be denied that human motives often influence both the
laity and the religious, but divested of faith and of the
sentiments inspired by even a false belief, their action
could notproduce, in a lasting andperseveringmanner,the
extraordinary and striking fact we witness in Buddhistic
countries.
ARTICLE
IV.
ORDINATION, OR CEREMONIES OBSERVED AT THE ADMISSION
INTO THE SOCIETY.
We will now explain rather minutely, and describe as
accurately as possible, the various ceremonies performed
on the occasion of the promotion of a shyin to the rank of
patzin, or professed member. It must be borne in mind
that this ordeal through which he has to pass, or ordina-
tion, as we may aptly perhaps term it, which he has to
receive, does not confer any peculiar character, or give
any special spiritual power to the admitted candidate
but it merely initiates him to a more perfect course of
life, and makes him the member of a society composed of
men aiming at a higher degree of sanctity or perfection.
The incumbent must be provided for the ceremony with a
dress such as is used in the community ; he must be
found exempt from certain moral and physical defects
that would render him unworthy of being admitted a
memberoftheorder
;
he mustpledge himselftoarigorous

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
273
observance of certain regulations which form the constitu-
tions of the society.
The place where the ceremony is to be performed is a
hall measuring at least twelve cubits in length, not in-
cluding the space occupied by the Rahaus whose presence
is required on the occasion. The assembly of Phongyies,
or Rahans, must include ten or twelve members at least
if the ceremony be performed in towns, and four or six if
it be in the country. He who presides over the ceremony
is called Upitze, meaning master or guide ; he has an
assistant, named Cambawa Tsaia, whose office it is to read
the sacred Cambawa, or book of ordination, to present the
candidate to the Upitze and his assembled brethren, toput
to him the requisite questions as prescribed by the ritual,
and to give him instructions on certain points, the igno-
rance of which would prove highly prejudicial to and
greatly offensive in a professed memberof the order. All
the regulations prescribed and the ceremonies observed
on the occasion are contained in a book written in Pali,
the sacred language. This book may be aptly termed the
ritual of the Buddhists. It is held in great respect, and
some copies written on sheets of ivory with gilt edges are
truly beautiful, and bespeak the high value Buddhists set
on the work. The copyists have retained the use of the
old square Pali letters, instead of employing the circular
Burmese chai-acters. All theordinances and prescriptions
in this book are supposed to have been promulgated and
sanctioned by no less an authority than (laudama himself,
the last Buddha and the acknowledged originator and
founder of the Talapoinic order. Hence the high respect
and profound veneration all Buddhists bear to its con-
tents. The candidate, previously to the beginning of the
ceremony, must be provided, as aforesaid, with his paffc,
or mendicant's pot, and a tsiwaran, the clerical dress or
monkish habit. The 'patta is an open-mouthed pot of a
ti'uncated spheroidal form, wherein each member of the
VOL. lU S

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
374
brotherhood must receive tbe alms which every morning
he goes to collect in the streets.
The tsiwaran or yellow^ garment, the only dress be-
cominga Rahan, is composed firstof apiece of cloth bound
to the loins with a leathern girdle, and falling down to
the feet second, of a cloak ofa rectangularform, covering
;
the shouldersand breast and reachingsomewhat below the
knee and, third, of another piece of cloth of the same
;
shape, which is folded many times and thrown over the
left shoulder, the two ends hanging down before and
behind. Another article always required for completing
the full dress of the Rahan istheawana, a sortof fan made
of palm leaves, set in light oval-shaped wooden frame,
with a serpentine handle, somewhat resemblingin appear-
ance the letter S.
The Burmesetranslator of the Pali text hasinterpolated
his work with many remarks tending to elucidate the
text, and to show the various motives and reasons that
have induced Gaudama todecree and publishas obligatory
the regulations laid down in the sacred Cambawa. It
must be borne in mind, too, that the omission of some
essential pai'ts of the ceremonies annuls defacto the ordi-
nation, whilst the non-compliance with others of minor
im])ortance, though not invalidating the act of admission
into the sacred family, entails sin upon all membersof the
brotherhood assembled r::>: ojicio for the ceremony. The
reader must be prepared to observe many points of close
resemblance between the ceremonies observed at the re-
ception of a monk, or the ordination of a priest, and those
performed in theseparts on the solemn occasion of admit-
•,ting a candidate to the dignity of Tatzin.
The preparations forthe solemnity beingcompleted, and
(the assembled fathers having occupied their respective
3 Among southern Buddhists, pre- tractedfrom the Jack-tree wood, by
ference isgiven to the j'ellow colour the jirocess of boiling, sujjplics the
i"orthe monk's hf^bjt. Thejqice ex- necessiiryingredientfqrdyeing.

:
NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
275
seats under the presidence ot" the Ijpitzc, tlic candidate is
introduced into their presence attended by the assistant
or reader of the Cambawa, and carryinj;- his patta and
yellow garments. He is enjoined to repeat distinctly
thrice the following- sentence to the Upitze, kneeling
down, and liis body bent forward, with liis joined hands
raised to the forehead : " Venerable President, I acknow-
ledge you to be my Upitze." These words having been
three times repeated, tlie assistant, addressing himself to
the candidate, says '' Dost thou acknowledge this to be
:
thy patta, and these thy sacred vestments ? " To which
he audibly answers, "Yes."
Upon this the translator remarks that, on a certain day,
a Rahan that had been ordained without being supplied
with either patta or tsiwaran went out quite naked, and
received in the palms of his joined hands the food offered
to him. So extraordinary, one would have said so unedi-
fying, a proceeding having been mentioned to G'audama,
he ordered that henceforward no Rahan should ever be
ordained unless he had been previously interrogated re-
garding the patta and the vestments. Any disobedience
to this injunction would entail sin on the assembled
fathers.
Tlie assistant having desired the candidate to withdraw
from the assembly to a distance of twelve cubits, and the
latter having ctnnplied with his re([uest, he turns towards
the assembled fathers and addresses them as follows
•'Venerable Upitze, and you brethren herein congregated,
listen to my words. The candidate who nt)w stands in a
humble posture before you solicits from the Upitze the
favour of being honoured with the dignity of patzin. If
it appears to you that everything is properly arranged and
dis]io.>ed for this ])urpose, T will duK- admonish him. O
candidate, be attentive unto my words, and l)eware lest
on this solemn occasion thou utterest an untruth or con-
cealest aught from our knowledge. Learn that there are
certain incapacities and defects wliich ]-ender a person

:
NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
276
unfit for admittance into onr order. Moreover, when
before this assembly thou shalt be interrogated respecting
such defects, thou art to answer truly, and declare what
incapacities thou niaye^t labour under. Now this is not
the time to remain silent and decline thy head ; every
member of the assembly has a right to interrogate thee
at his pleasure, and it is thy bounden duty to return an
answer to all his interrogations."
"Candidate, art thou att'ected with any of the following
complaints: the leprosy, or any such odious maladies?
Hast thou the scrofulaorother similar complaints ? Dost
thou suffer from asthma or coughs ? Art thou afflicted
with those complaints that arise from a corrupted blood ?
Art thou affected by madness or the other ills caused by
giants, witches, or evil spirits of the forests and moun-
tains ? " To each separate interrogation he answers
"From such complaints and bodily disorders I am free."
"Art thou a man?" "I am." "Art thou a true and
legitimate son ? " "I am." "Art thou involved in
debts?" "I am not." " The bounden man and underling
of some great man?" "No, I am not." "Have thy
parents given consent to thy ordination ? " "They have
"
given it." " Hastthou reached the age of twenty years ?
"I have attained it."^ "Are thy vestments and sacred
patta prepared ? " " They are." " Candidate, whatisthy
name ? " " My name is Wago," meaning, metaphorically,
a vile and unworthy being. " What is the name of thy
master ? " " His name is Upitze."
•* The writer does not think it tinnsonswho had not the consent of
worth repeating the reasonsthat in- the parents, and fixed twenty years
duced Gaudama to lay down those astheagerequisitein himwhowould
several regulations. They owe their offerhimselfforthe promotiontothe
origin to the fact that some indi- orderofPatzin. Noslave,nodebtor,
viduals contrived to be ordained could be ordained, becauseaman in
though labouring under physical de- sucha condition does not belong to
fects, and thereby became a sort of himself, and cannot dispose of his
standing disgraceto the society. It person, which to a certain extent is
wasat the request of his father that the property of his master and cre-
Buddhaforbade receivingto ordina- ditor.

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
277
The assistant, having finished the examination, turns
his face towards the assembled fathers, and thusproceeds
:
"Venerable Upitze, andye assembledbrethren, be pleased
to listen to my words. I have duly admonished this can-
didate, who seeks from you to be admitted into our order.
Does the present momentappear toyou a meet and proper
time that he should come forward ? If so, I shall order
him to come nearer," Then turning to the candidate,
he bids him come close to the assembly and ask their
consent to his ordination. The order is instantly com-
plied with by the candidate, who, having left behind him
the distance of twelve cubits that separated him from the
fathers, squatson his heels, the body bending forward and
the hands raised to his forehead, and says : " I beg,
fathers of this assembly, to be admitted to the profession
of Raban. Have pity on me take me from the state of
;
layman, which is one of sin and imperfection, and advance
me to that of Rahan, a state of virtue and perfection."
These words must be repeated three times.
The assistant then resumes his discourse as follows
:
" ye fathers here assembled, hear my words. This can-
didate, humbly prostrated before you, begs of the Upitze
to be admitted into our holy profession ; it seems that he
is free from all defects, corjDoral infirmities, as well as
mental incapacities, that would otherwise debar him from
entering our holy state he is likewise provided with the
;
patta and sacred vestments moreover, he has asked, in
;
the name of the Upitze, permission of the assembly to be
admitted among the Rahans. Now let theassembly com-
plete his ordination. To whomsoever this seems good, let
him keep silence : whosoever thinks otherwise, let him
declare that this candidate is unworthy ofbeingadmitted."
And these words he repeats three times. Afterwards he
proceeds : " Since, then, none of the fathers object, but all
are silent, it is a sign that the assembly has consented
;
so, therefore, beit done. Letthereforethiscandidate pass
out of the state of sin and imperfection into the perfect

278 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
state of Rahau, and thus, by the consent of the Upitze
and of all the fathers, let him be ordained."
And he further says "The fathers must note down
:
under what shade, on whatday, at whathour, and in what
season the ordination has been performed."
This being done, the reader of the sacred Cambawa
adds "Let the candidate attend to the following duties,
:
which it is incumbent on him to perform, and to thefaults
hereafter enumerated, which he must carefully avoid.
"I. It is the duty of each member of our brotherhood
to beg for his food with labour, and with the exertion of
the muscles of his feet and through the whole course of
;
his life he must gain his subsistence by the labour of his
feet. He is allowed to make use of all the things that
are offeredto him in particular,ortothe society in general,
that are usually presented in banquets, that are sent by
letter, and thatare given at the new and full moon andon
festivals. candidate, all these things you may use for
your food." To this he replies, "Sir, I understand what
you tell me."
The assistant resumes his instructions "2. It is a part
:
of the duty of a member of our society to wear, through
humility, yellow clothes, made of rags thrown about in
the streets or among the tombs. If, however, by his
talents and virtue one procures for himself many bene-
factors, he may receive from them for his habit th.e fol-
lowing articles, cotton and silk, or cloth of red^ and
yellow wool." The elect answers, "As I am instructed,
so I will do."
The instructor goes on : " 3. Every member of the
society must dwell in houses built under the shade of
lofty trees.* But if, owing to your proficiency and zeal in
5 It is probablethat theallusionto the canonical colour of the habit of
thered colour liasa Thibetan origin, all the monks among the southern
TheBuddhist monksof that country Buddhists.
haveadopted the red for their dress, " In this part of the regulations
in preferenceto the yellow, which is the elect is reminded of the primi-

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. i-n
the discbarge of yourduties, yon secure toyourself power-
ful supporters who are willing to build for you a better
habitation, you may dwell in it. The dwellings may be
made of bamboo, wood, and bricks, with roofs adoi»ned'
with turrets or spires of pyramidal or triangular form.'^
The elect answers: "I will duly attend to these in^
structions."
After the usual answer, the instructor proceeds: "4.
It is incumbent upon an elect to use, as medicine, the
urine of the cow, whereon lime and the juices of lemon or
other sour fruits have been poured. He may also avail
himself, as medicines, of articles thrown out of bazaars
and picked up in corners of streets. He may accept, for
medicinal purposes, nutmegs and cloves. The following
liveconditionof the membersof the of Buddha we have seen how that
society. In imitation of their bre- monarch was dispossessed of his
thren of the Brahminical persuasion, throne byone of his sons, and died
andalso for the purpose of livi.ig in while on his way to the capital of
seclusion, the Rahans, in the begin- Adzatathat
,
hisson-in-law. Theruins
ning, were satisfied withdwelling in of the renowned Dzetawon monas-
huts raised at the foot of some tall tery have been identified by means
tree. Assoon,however,asBuddhism of the information supplied by the
gained footing in various countries, writings of the Chinese pilgrims we
weseethatkings,nobles,andwealthy have often mentioned. The monas-
personsvied witheach otherinerect- tery was distant 1200 paces from
ing splendid houses for the use of the southern gate of the city. The
the monks. Gaudania himself was scarcelyless famousPouppayonmon-
presented by King Pimpathara at astery was erected to theeast of the
Radzagio with the splendid Weloo- Dzetawon. Moundsof ruinsin that
won monastery. In Thawattie the very same direction leave no doubt
rich man Anatapein offered him the that in their bosom the lastremains
famous Dzetawon monastery ; and ofthatcelebratedplaceareentombed.
the rich lady Withaka of the same It issaid that Gaudama, beingfifty-
country gave him, as a gift, the no fiveyearsold,begantoresideperma-
less splendid mansion named Poup- nentlyin monasteries built for him,
payon. and that he spent, out of the last
General A. Cunningham has dis- twenty-five seasons, nineteen in the
covered the ruinsof Thawattie, fifty- Dzetawon andsixin the Pouppayon.
eight miles northof Fyzabad, on the AccordingtoHwenThsang,theplace
Rapti,ina placecalled Sahet Mahet, occupied bythe Dzetawon monastery
situated between Akaona aud Bul- wasa square, having looo cubitson
rampur, five miles from the former each faceor side. Besidesthe mon-
and twelve from the latter. Itwas astery, there were two temples and
the capital of King Pathenadi, situ- twotankswithin theenclosure.
atedin north Kosala. IntheLegend

28o NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
—
articles may also be used medicinally butter, cream, and
honey."
Now the assistant instructs the new religious on the
four capital offences he mustcarefully avoid, under penalty
of forfeiting the dignity he has just attained to, and
solemnly warns him against committing one of them.
Those sins are fornication, theft, murder, and spiritual
pride. The committing of one of these sins by religious
after their ordination, in the days of Gaudama, induced
him to declare those excluded de facto from the society
who had been guilty of such offences and he enjoined
;
that the assistant should immediately after the ceremony
solemnly admonish the newly ordained Patzin carefully to
shun such odious offences.
The assistant, without delay, proceeds as follows "
:
elect, being now admitted into our society, it shall be
no longer lawful for you to indulge in carnal pleasures,
whether with yourself or animals. He who is guilty of
such sin can no longer be numbered among the perfect.
Sooner shall the severed head be joined again to the neck,
andlife be restored to the breathless body, than a Patzin
who has committed fornication recover his lost sanctity.
Beware, therefore, lest you pollute yourself with such a
crime.
"Again, it is unlawful and forbidden to an elect to take
things that belong to another, or even to covet them,
although their value sliould not exceed about six annas
(one-fourth of a tical). Whoever sins even to that small
amount is hereby deprived of his sacred character, and
can no more be restored to his pristine state than the
branch cut from the tree can retain its luxuriant foliage
and shoot forth buds. Beware of theft during the whole
of your mortal journey.
"Again, an elect can neverknowingly deprive anyliving
being of life, or wish the death of any one, how trouble-
some soever he may prove. Sooner shall the cleft rock
re-unite so as to make a whole, than he who kills any

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 281
being be readmitted into our society. Cautiously avoid
so heinous a crime.
"Again, no member of our brotherhood can ever arro-
gate to himself extraordinary gifts or supernatural per-
fections, or, through vainglory, give himself out as a holy
man such,forinstance,as towithdraw into solitary places,
;
and, on pretence of enjoying ecstasies like the Ariahs,
afterwards presume to teach others the way to uncommon
spiritual attainments. Sooner may the lofty palm-tree
that has been cut down become green again,than an elect
guilty of such pride be restored to his holy station. Take
care for yourself that you do not give way to such an
excess." Theelect repliesas before "AsI aminstructed,
:
so I will perform." Here ends the ceremony. The elect
joins the body of Rahans, and withdraws in their company
to his own kiaong.
It has alread\" been mentioned chat this ceremony or
ordination does not impart any spiritual characterinherent
in the person of the elect ; but it is a mere formality he
has to go through, to enter into the family of the perfect.
The admitted member is not linked indissolubly to his
new state ; he is at liberty to leave it when it pleases him,
and re-enter secular life. He may, moreover, if inclined,
apply for re-admission into the order, but he must go
through the same ceremonies that were observed on his
first ordination. Tt is not very common to meet among
the Burmese Kahaiis men who from their youth have per-
severed to an old age in their vocation. Those form the
rare exceptions. They are very much respected, and held
in high consideration during their lifetime, and the
greatest honours are lavished upon their mortal remains
after their demise. They are often designated by the
honourable denomination of "pure from their infancy."

282 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
ARTICLE V.
RULES OF THE OKDER.
The obligations inherent in the dignity of Patzin, and
the multifarious duties prescribed to the Buddhist monks,
are contained in a book called Patimauk, which is, pro-
perly speaking, the manual of the order, and the Vade
Mecum of every Talapoin, who is obliged to study it with
great care and attention. It is even ordered that on fes-
tival davs a certain number of recluses shall meet in a
particular place called Thein, to listen to the reading of
that book, or at least a part of it; that every brother
should have always present to his mind the rules and
regulations of his profession, and be prompted to a strict
observance of allthe points they enforce. This injunctiou
is a very proper one, since it is a fact confirmed by the
experience of ages that relaxation and dissipation find
their wayinall communities at the very moment the rules
are partially lost sight of. So attentive to this duty are
some Phongyies that theycan repeat by heart all the con-
We
tents of the Patimauk. have read the book with a
good deal of attention. Many wise and well-digested
rules are to be met with here and there, but they are
merged in a heap of minute, not to say ridiculous and
childish, details, not worth repeating. In order, however,
to give a correct and distinct outline of the mode of life,
manners, habits, and occupations of the Talapoins, we will
extract from it all thathas a])peared to be interesting and
calculated to attain tlie above purpose, leaving aside the
incongruous mass of useless rubbish.
Every member of the order, on his entering the profes-
sion, must renounce his own will and bend his neck under
the yoke of the rule. So anxious indeed has been the
framer of its statutes to leave no room orfield open to the

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 283
independent exertions of the mind, that every action of
the day, the manner of performing it,the time it ought to
last, the circumstances that must attend it, have all been
minutely regulated. From the moment a Rahan rises in
the morning to the moment heisto go to enjoy his natural
rest in the evening, his only duty is to obeyandfollow the
ever-subsisting will and commands of the founder of the
society. He advances in perfection proportionately to his
fervent compliance with the injunctions of, and to hiscon-
scientiously avoiding all that has been forbidden by, the
sagacious legislator. The trespassingof one article of the
rule constitutes a sin. The various sins a Rahan is liable
to commit are comprised under seven principal heads.
1st, the Paradzekas; 2d, the Thinga-de-ceits ; 3d, the
Patzei; 4th, the Toolladzi; 5th, the Duka; 6th, the
Dupaci and 7th, the Pati-de-kaui. These seven kinds of
;
sins are subdivided and multiplied to the number of 227,
which constitute the total amount of sins either of com-
mission or omission that a Phongyie may commit during
the time that he remains a member of the holy society.
The Paradzikas are four in number: fornication, theft,
killing, and vainglory in attributing to one's self high
attainments in perfection. A recluse, on the day of liis
admission, is, as before related, warned never to commit
these four sins, under the penalty of being excluded from
the society. They are irremissible in their nature. The
meaning of this is. He who has had the misfortune of
yielding to temptation, and committing one of these four
offences, is no longer to be considered as a member of the
Thanga, or of the assemblyof the perfect. He is defacto
excluded from the society. He may exteriorly continue
to be a member of the Thanga, but inwardly he really no
longer belongs to it. All other offences are subjected to
the law of confession, and can be expiated by virtue of the
penances imposed ui)on tlie delinquent after he has made
a public avowal of his sins.
The reader will no doubt be startled by the unexpected

284 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
information that the practiceof confession has beenestab-
lished among the Talapoins, and is up to this day
observed, though very imperfectly, by every fervent reli-
gious. Some zealous Patzins Avill resort to the practice
once, and sometimes twice a day. Here is what is pre-
scribed on this subject in the Wini, or book of scriptures,
which contains all that relates to the Phongyies, the Pati-
mauk being but a compendium of it: When a Rahan has
been guilty of a violation of his rule, he ought imme-
diately to go to his superior, and, kneeling before him,
confess his sin to him. Sometimes he will do this in the
Thein, the place where the brothers assemble occasionally
to speak on religious subjects or listen to the readiug of
the Patimauk in the presence of the assembly. He must
confess all his sins, such as they are, without attempting
to conceal those of a more revolting nature, or lessening
aggravating circumstances. A penance is then imposed,
consisting of certain pious formulas to be repeated a cer-
tain number of times during the night. A promise must
be made by the penitent to refrain in future from such
trespasses. This extraordinary practice is observed now,
one would say, pro forma. The penitent approaches his
superior, kneels down before him, and having his hands
raised to his forehead, says: "Venerable superior, I do
confess here all the sins that I may be guilty of, and beg
pardon for the same." He enters upon no detailed enu-
meration of his trespasses, nor does he specify anything
respecting their nature and the circumstances attending
them. The superior remains satisfied with telHng him :
"Well, take care lest you break the regulations of your
profession and henceforward endeavour to observe them
;
with fidelity." He dismisses him without inflicting any
penance on him. Thus an institution, so well calculated
to put a restraint and a check upon human passions, so
well fitted to prevent man from occasionally breaking
commands given to him, or at least from slipping into the
dangeroushabit of doing it, is now, by the want of fervour

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 285
and energy in the hands of that bod}', reduced to be no
more than an useless and ridiculous ceremony, a mere
shadow of what is actually prescribed by the Wini.
The punishments inflicted for tbe repeated transgres-
sions of one or several points of the rule are, generally
speaking, of a light nature, and seldom or nevercorporeal,
as flagellations, &c. The superior sometimes orders a
delinquent to walk through the courtyard during the
heat of the day for a certain time, to carryto a distance a
certain number of baskets-ful of sand, or a jug of water.
Meekness,being a virtue most becoming a recluse,forbids
the resort to penances of a more severe nature.
Humility, poverty, self-denial, and chastity are to him
who has received the order of Patzin cardinal and most
essential virtues, which he ought to practise on all occa-
sions. He must, in all his exterior deportment, give
unequivocal marks of his being always influenced by the
spirit they inspire. The framer of the rules and regula-
tions of the order seems to have had no other object in
view than that of leading his brethren by various ways
and means to the practice of these virtues, and inculcat-
ing on their minds the necessity of attending to the
observances prescribed for this purpose. It is from this
point we must view the statutes of the fraternity in order
to understand them well and rightly, and appreciate them
according to their worth and merit. We would indeed
form a very erroneous opinion of institutions of past ages
if we were to examine them, to praise or blame them,
without a due regard being paid to the spirit that guided
the legislator, and to the object he aimed at when he laid
them down. Our own ideas, customs, manners, and edu-
cation will often dispose us to disapprove at first of insti-
tutions made in former ages, amongst nations difi'ering
from us in all respects, under the pretext that they are
not such as we would have them to be now, making
unawares our own prejudices the standard whereby to
measure the merit or demerit of all that has been estab-

286 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
lished previously to our own times. The institutions of
the middle ages, a celebrated modern historian has said,
are intelligible to him that has entered into the spirit of
thosedays, and who thinks, feels, and believes as did the
people ofthose bygone centuries. This observation holds
goodto a certain extent, and, mutatismutandis, in respect
to Buddhistic institutions. The whole religious system
must be understood, the object which the founder of the
order had in view ought to be distinctly remarked and
always borne in mind, ere we presume to pronounce upon
the fitness or unfitness of the means he has employed for
obtaining it.
For humility's sake every Talapoin is bound to shave
every part of his body. In complying with this regula-
tion he must consider that t)ie hairs that are shaved off
are useless things, serving merely for the purposes of
vanity, and he ought to be as unconcerned about them as
a great mountain which has been cleared of the trees on
its summit. Iniluenced by the same spirit, the religious
.,
must always walk barefooted, excex)t in case ofhis labour-
ing under some infirmity, or for some other good reason
;
he is then allowed to use a certain kind of plain and
unornamented slipper, the shape, colour, and dimensions
of which are carefully prescribed by the rule. When the
Rahans travel from oue place to another, they are allowed
to carry with them the broad fan, made of palm-leaves,
and a common paper umbrella to protect their bare head
from the inclemeucy of the weather, or screen it from the
heat of the sun. Their dress, consisting, as above men-
tioned, of three parts, is as plain as possible. According
to the Patiiriauk, each separate part must be made of rags
picked up here and there, and sewed together by them-
selves. Tliis regulation, though disregarded by many, is
to a certain extentobservedby the greater number, but in
a manner rathercontrary to the spirit, if not to tlie letter,
of the rule. On their receiving from benefactors a piece
of silkorcotton, they cutit iutu several snuiU square parts,

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 2S7
which they afterwards contrive to have stitched in the
best way they can, so as to make their vestments accord-
ing- to the prescription of the statutes. The vestment
ought to be of one colour, yellow in those countries in
which Mahometanism doesnot prevail. Theyellow colour
is a mark of mourning, asthe black is amongst mostofthe
nations of Europe.
Seven articles are considered as essential to every mem-
ber of the holy family, viz., the kowot, thin-bain, dugout
(the three pieces constituting his vestment), a girdle, a
patta, a small hatchet, a needle, and a small apparatus for
straining the water he drinks. The entire number of
articles he is permitted to use and possess amounts to
sixty. They are all plain, common, almost valueless,
offering no incentive to cupidity and leaving him who
is only possessed of them in the humble state of strict
poverty.
The possession of temporal goods is strictly forbidden
to the Rahaus, as calculated to hinder them from medi-
tating upon the law and attending to the various duties
of the profession. Nothing indeed opposes a stronger
barrier to the attainment of the perfect abnegation of self
and a thorough contempt for material things, than the
possession of worldly property. Hence a true Rahan has
no object which he can, properly speaking, call his own.
The kiaong wherein he lives hasbeen built bybenefactors,
and is supplied by them with all that is necessary or
useful to him. Food and raiment are procured for him
without his having to feel concerned about them. The
pious liberality of his supporters assiduously provides for
his wants. But it is expected that he shall neverconcern
himselfwith worldly business or transactions, of whatever
nature they may be. He can neitherlabour, plant,traffic,
nor do anything with the intent of deriving profit there-
from. Agreeably to the maxim, " Sufficient to the day is
the evil thereof," the Rahan cannot make anv stores for
the time to come. He must trust in the never-failing

288 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
generosity and ever-watchful attention of his supporters
for his daily wants. Now, let it be said to the praise of
the Buddhists, that he is seldom disappointed in the
reliance he places on them.
That he may be more effectually debarred from a too
easy and frequent use of the things of first necessity, a
Talapoin is bound to go through a tedious ceremony,
called Akat, or presentation, before he can lawfully touch
anything. When he has occasion for food, drink, or any-
thing else, he turns to his disciples and tells them to do
what is lawful. Whereupon one of them, or several, as
circumstancesmayrequire, risesfromhis place, and,taking
the thing or things he wants with both liands, approaches
him respectfully, and presents to him the articles, saying.
This is lawful. Then the Rahan takes the things into his
own hands, and uses them orlays them by,as may suit his
convenience. Whenathingis presented,thedisciple must
be at a distance of some cubits, otherwise the recluse is
guilty of a sin ; and if whathe receivesis food,he commits
as many sins as he eats mouthfuls. Gold and silver being
the two greatest feeders of covetousness, the rule forbids
the Phongyies to touch them, and afortiori to have them.
Buton this point, however, human covetousness hasbroken
through the strong barriers the framer of the statutes has
wisely devised for effectually protecting recluses from its
dangerous allurement. Gold and silver are not indeed
touched by the pious devotees, but the precious and daz-
zling metals are conventionally handed to the disciples,
who put them into the box of the superior, who, whilst
bowing obsequiously to the letter of the rule, disregards
its spirit. Sometimes an innocent ri(se is resorted to by
a greedy religious for silencing the remorse of his con-
science he covers his hands with a handkerchief, and
;
without scruple receives the sum that is offered to him.
It would be unfair to pass a general and sweeping sen-
tence of condemnation for covetousness upon all the
members of the fraternity. There are some whose hands

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
289
have not been polluted by the handling of mone\', and
whose hearts have always been, we may say, strangers to
the cravings of the mi7-i sacra fames; but it cannot be
denied that many among them are insatiable in their lust
for riches, and not unfrequently ask for them.
No Rahan can ever ask for anything ; he is allowed to
receive what is spontaneously offered to him. In this
point too the spirit of the rule is frequently done away
with. The recluse will not ask an object he covets (I beg
hispardonformaking use of such aterm) in direct words
;
but by some indirect means or circuitous ways he will
givesignificantlytounderstand that thepossessionof such
an object is much needed by him, and that the offering of
it would be a source of great merits to the donor. Inthis
manner he moves the heartof his visitor, and soon kindles
in hisbreast a desire topresent the thing,almost as eager
as his own is to receive it.
Celibacy is strictly enjoined on every professed member
of the society. On the day of hisreception he is solemnly
warned by the instructor never to do anything contrary
to that most essential virtue. The founder of the order
and the framerof its statutes has entered, on this subject,
into the most minute details, and prescribed a multitude
of regulations tendingto fortify the Rahans inthe accom-
plishment of the solemn vow they have made, and to re-
move from them all occasionsof sin, even the most distant.
We must give him credit for an uncommon acquaintance
with the weakness of human nature, as well as with the
violence of the fiercest passion of the heart, since he has
laboured so much to strengthen and uphold the former,
and bridle the latter by every means his anxious mind
could devise. He was deeply read in the secrets of the
human heart, and knew well that the surest tactics for
carrying on successfully the warfare between the spirit
and the flesh consist in rather avoiding carefully the
encounter of the enemy, and skilfully manceuvring at a
distance from him, than in boldly encountering him in
VOL. 11, T

;;
290 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
the open field. Hence the repeated injunctions to shun
all the occasions of sin.
The Phongyies are forbidden to stay under the same
roof,
ortotravelinthesamecarriageandboat,withwomen
they cannot receive anything from their hands. To such
a height are precautions carried that the religious are not
permitted to touch the clothes of a woman, or caress a
female child, however young, or even handle a female
animal.'^
When visited in their dwellings by women, who resort
thither for the purpose of making offerings, orlistening to
therecital of a few passages of thesacred books,they must
remain at a great distance from them, and be surrounded
by some of their disciples. The Phongyies are to look
upon the old ones as mothers and upon the young as
sisters. The conversation must be as short as decency
allows, and no useless or lightexpressions be everuttered.
On the festival days, when crowds of people, men and
women, go to the kiaongs to hear the tara, or some parts
of the law repeated, the Rahans, arrayed in front of the
congregation, keep their fans before their faces all the
while, lest their eyes should meet with dangerous and
tempting objects. Much greater precautions are still
requiredin theirintercourse with the Rahanesses, asort of
female recluses, whose institute is greatly on its decline
in almost all parts of Burmah. For better securing the
observance of continence, a Phongyie never walks out of
his monastery, or enters a private dwelling, without being
attended by a few disciples. Popular opinion is inflexible
and inexorable on the pointofcelibacy, whichis considered
essential to every one that has a pretension to be called a
Rahan. The people can never be brought to look upon
7 Intreatingofthepreceptofnever herout. Butin case no other aid is
touching women, it is added in the near at hand, he may offer her his
Wini thatthis prohibition extends to habit, or a stick, to help her out
one'sown mother
;
andeven should butat thesametimeheistoimagine
it happen that she fall into a ditch, that he is onlypulling out a log of
herson, if aTalapoin, must notpull wood.

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
291
any person as a priest or minister of religion unless he
live in that state. Any infringement of this most essen-
tial regulation on the part of a Eahan is visited with an
immediate punishment. The peopleof the place assemble
at the kiaong of the offender, sometimes driving him out
with stones. He is stripped of his clothes ; and often
public punishment, even that of death, is inflicted upon
him by order of government. The poor wretch is looked
upon as an outcast, and the woman whom he has seduced
shares in his shame, confusion, and disgrace. Such an
extraordinary opinion, so deeply rooted in the mind of a
peoplerathernoted forthelicentiousness of their manners,
certainly deserves the attention of every diligent observer
of human nature. Whence has originated among cor-
rupted and half-civilised men such a high respect and
profound esteem for so exalted a virtue ? Why is its
rigorous practicedeemed essential tothose whoprofessedly
tend to an uncommon degreeof perfection ? Owingpartly
to the weight of public opinion, and partly to some other
reasons, the law of celibacy, externallyat least, is observed
with a great scrupulosity, and a breach of it is a rare
occurrence. As the rule, in this respect, binds the
Phongyie only as long as he remains in the profession, he
who feels his moral strength unable to cope successfully
with the stingofpassion prefers leavingthe fraternity and
returning to a secular life, when he can safely put an end,
by a lawful alliance, to the internal strife, rather than
expose himself to a transgression which is to entail upon
him consequences so disgraceful.
The sagacious legislator of the Buddhistic religious
order, pre-occupied with the idea of elevating the spiritual
principle above the material one, and securing to reason a
thorough control over bodily appetites, has prescribed
temperance as a fundamental virtue essential to every
Eahan. In common with all their fellow-religionists, the
Rahansarecommandedtoabstainfromtheuseofspirituous
liquors and ofintoxicatingsubstances. Sucha prohibition

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
292
is the wisest step that Gaudama could have adopted to
preserve his followers from the shameful vice of drunken-
ness. All uncivilised people make use of spirits for the
sole purpose of creatinginthemthe effectsofintoxication.
Were it not for such an excellentregulation,the members
of the Thanga would soon become, by their excesses, the
laughing-stock of the laity. The time allotted for taking
their meals extends from daybreak to the momentthe sun
has reached the middle of its course but as soon as the
;
luminous globe has passed the meridian, the use of food is
strictly interdicted. A stomach, more or less loaded with
nutritive substances taken in the evening, weighs down
the body, enervates the energies of the soul, clouds the
intellect, and renders a man rather unfit to devote himself
to the high exercises of study, meditation, and contempla-
tion, which ought to be the principal occupations of a fer-
vent Rahau. He is allowed to make two meals in the
forenoon, but it is expected that he will eat no more than
is required to support nature. He must always take his
meals in company with the members of his community.
To stitie the craving ofgluttony and eradicateimmoderate
desires, he ought to repeat frequently within himself the
following sentence " I eat this rice, not to please my
:
appetite, but to satisfy the wants of nature ;" just as he
says when he puts on the habit, " I dress myself, not for
the sake of vanity, but to cover my nakedness." Rice
and vegetables are, according to the statutes, the staple
food of the ]'hongyies the use of fish and meat is toler-
;
ated, and now it has become a dail}- prevailing custom
which has rendered the practice a lawful one. Strictly
speaking, a Talapoin must remain satisfied with rice and
various sorts of boiled vegetables which he has received
in his patta during his morning perambulations through
the streets of the place.
As it happened among the Romans that the law re-
pressing convivial sumptuousness and luxury proved an
ineffectual barrier against gluttony and other jmssions, so

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
293
amidst the Rahans the strict rej^ulations prescribing a
poor and nnsavoiiry diet have been obliged toyield before
the tendencies to satisfy the ever-increasing demands of
appetite. Most of the Phongyies give to dogs, or to the
boys who live in the monastery, the vulgarfood they have
begged in the streets, and feed on aliments of better
quality supplied to them regularly by some persons in
easy circumstances, who call themselves supporters of the
kiaong and of its inmates. The ordinary fare consists of
rice and several small dishes for seasoning the rice, in
which are some little pieces of flesh, dressed according to
the culinary abilities of the cooks of the country, which
are not certainly of the highest order. To tliis are added
some of the fruits of the season accompanied by sweet-
meats, which female devotees are wont everywhere so
carefully to prepare and so fondly to offer to those who
ai'e the objectsof their pious admirationand respect. The
aliments supplied to the humble recluses are of the best
description for the country they live in. One would say
that they live on the fat of the land. The most delicate
rice and the finest fruits invariably find their way to the
monasteries. But withal, the Phongyies are not to be
charged with the sin of intemperance or gluttony.
The quantity of food they may take is also an object of
regulation, as well as the very mode of taking, and even
of swallowing it. Each mouthful must be of a moderate
size a second ought not to becarried to the mouth before
;
the first has been completely disposed of by the masti-
catorj' process, and found its way down through the
oesophagus. The contrary would be cons-idered gluttony,
and an evident sign that the eater has something else in
view besides appeasing the mei'e wants of nature. It is
rather an amusinc^ sight togaze at the solemn indifference
of a Talapoin taking his meal. One would be tempted to
believe that he is reluctantlvsubmitting to the dire neces-
sity of ministering to the wants of a nature too low and
material. The rule forbids Talapoins to eat human flesh,

294 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
or thatofthe monkey, snake,elephant, tiger,lion, anddog.^
As a mitigation of the severity of the disciplinary regula-
tion prohibiting the recluses from taking any food from
twelve o'clock in the day until the next morning, the use
of certain beveragesis permitted duringthat time, such as
cocoa-nut water, the juice of the sugar-cane, and other
refreshinef draughts.
The rule being silent regarding the consumption of the
betel-leaf and other ingredients constituting the delicious
mouthful for masticatory purposes, the Talapoins avail
themselves largely of the liberty left to them on this sub-
ject. The quantity of betel and other accompanyingsub-
stances which they consume is truly enormous. These
ai'ticles hold a pre-eminent place amongst the objectsthat
are presented to the inmates of monasteries. The dark-
red substance adhering to the teeth and occasionally
accumulating at the corners of the mouth, the incessant
motion of the lower jaw, the stream of reddish spittle
issuing frequently from the lips of the Talapoins, are un-
questionable proofs of both their ardent fondness and
copious consumption of that harmless narcotic. Except
8 The Phongyies profess tohave a deed. But that was an affair for
tender compassion for the life of which tlie perpetrator of the deed
animals, and would not on any ac- was alone answerable, and which
count allow themselves to be sus- concernedhimalone." Tothisanswer,
pected of having contributed to the of arather elastic nature, the writer
killing of an animalfor the sake of jocosely replied that "if there was
feedingon his flesh. Thewriter has no eaterof meatthere would be no
often taken a pleasure in taunting killer of animals; and that, in his
them on this account when he hap- opinion,if sin there was, both hada
pened to see them eating pieces of share in it." Whereupon the yel-
boiled meat,byshowing to them that low-dressed interlocutors invariably
theirpracticewaslittlein accordance laughed, and feeling that theystood
with their theory. They always oninsecureground, adroitlychanged
answered that "they had not killed the subject of conversation. There
the animal, the flesh of which they is no doubt that the Phongyies be-
wareeating ; buthadmerelyreceived lieve that it is sinfulto kill animals,
a pieceof meat that had no life. As but at the same time they confess
to the man who had deprived the thatitisdifficult, nay, almost impos-
.'inimal of its life, he had certainly sible, to live in this world without
sinned, and would suffer for hismis- committing sucha trespass.

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 295
during tlie short moments allotted for taking meals, a
Eaban's mouth is always full of betel, and the masticating
or chewing process is incessantly going on.
A great modesty must distinguish a member of the
family of the perfect from a layman ; that virtue must
shine forth in his countenance, demeanour, gait, and con-
versation. Any sign on his face indicating the inward
action of anger or any other passion is found unbecom-
ing in a person whose composedness and serenity of soul
ought never to be disturbed by any inordinate affection.
He never speaks precipitately or loudly, lest it might be
inferred that passion rather than reason influences him.
Worldly or amusing topics of conversation are strictly
interdicted, either with his brethren or laymen. The rule
requires him to walk through the streets with affected
simplicity, avoiding hurry as well as slowness, keeping
his eye fixed on the ground in front, looking not further
than ten or fifteen cubits.
Curiosity tends to expand the soul on surrounding
objects; but a Rahan's principal aim being to attend
diligently to himself, to prefer the care of self before all
other cares, and to concern himself very little about all
that takes place without, he assiduously labours to keep
his soul free from vain inquiry, from eager desire of hear-
ing news, and from an idle or unnecessary interference in
things or matters strange to him. It seems that he has
the wise saying always present to his mind, "Where art
thou when thou art not present to thyself ? And when
thou hast run over all things, what profit will itbe to thee
if thou hast neglected thyself ? " During his perambula-
tions he never salutes or notices the persons he meets on
his way he is indifferent to the attentions and marks of
;
the highest veneration paid to him by the people; he
never returns thanks for offerings made to him, nor does
he repay with a single regard the kindness proffered to
hiui. Objects most calculated to awaken curiosity by
their novelty and interest ought to find him cold, indif-

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
296
ferent, and unconcerned. His self-collection accompanies
him everywhere, and disposes his sonl to an uninterrupted
meditation on some points of the law. It is a counsel of
the Wiui to observe particularly the four cleannesses, viz.,
great modestyin the streets and public places, the confes-
sion of all failings, the avoiding of all occasions of sins,
and the keeping oneself free from the seven kinds of sin.
Suchawiseinjunctioncan onlybeattended toandobserved
by keeping avigilant watch over the senses, which are the
We
very gates leading into the sanctuary of the soul.
could enter into fuller and more particular details regard-
ing the regulations of the Talapoinicorder, but they would
prove little interesting, and only corroborate what has
been previously stated,that every action of a brother, even
the most common, such as the mannerof sitting, risingup,
sleeping, eating, &c,, has become the object of the legisla-
tiveattention of the founderof the order. Nothingseems
to have escaped his clear foresight, and he has admirably
succeededin leavingno room for the exercise of individual
liberty. The rule is as a great moral beingwhose absolute
commands must be always obeyed. Every individual is
bound to lay aside his own self, and unconditionally follow
the impulse of his guiding influence.
ARTICLE
VI.
OCCUPATIONS OF THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
The whole life of a recluse being confined within a
narrow compass, we will have very little to say regarding
his daily occupations. As soon as a Talapoin has left at
an early hour the sleeping horizontal position, he rinses
his mouth, washes his face, and recites a few formulas of
prayers, which he lengthens or shortens according to his
devotion. He attires himself in his professional costume,
gets hold of his mendicant's pot, and sallies forth, in com-

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
297
pany with some brethren or disciples, in quest of his food.
He perambulates the streets in various directions, and,
without any solicitation on his part, receives the rice,
curry, vegetables, and fruits whichpious donors have been
preparingfrom twoto three o'clock in themorning, watch-
ing at the door of their houses the arrival of the yellow-
cladmonks. Havingreceived whatis considered sufficient
for the day, he returns to the monastery, and sets himself
to eat either what he has brought, or something more
delicate and better dressed which his supporter, if he has
any, has sent to him.
On the principal festivals, or on extraordinary occur-
rences, abundant almsarebrought to his domicile. Some-
timesheis calledby apiousdonor tocome andreceivethem
in the pagodas, or in large temporary sheds erected for the
purpose reserved for the occasion. They consist chiefly
of mattresses, pillows, betel-boxes, mats, tea-cups, and
various articles he is allowed to make use of. On these
occasions he repays his benefactors by repeating to them
the five greatprecepts, and some of the principal tenets of
the Buddhistic creed, and the chiefpoints of the law. He
enumerates at great length the numerous merits reserved
to alms-givers. On this point it must be confessed that
he is truly eloquent, and his language flowing and abun-
dant : his expressions ai'e ready athand andmostglowing,
calculated to please the ears of his hearers andwarm their
souls to make fresh efforts in procuring him more copious
alms. Occasionally he will recite long praises in honour
of Gaudama, the last Buddha, for having during his pre-
vious existence practised eminent virtues, and thereby
qualified himself for the high dignity of Phra. The ser-
mon goes on sometimes in Pali or sacred language, which
neither he nor his hearers can understand.
ThePhongyiesare sometimesrequested to visitthe sick,
not so much for the purpose of ministering to the spiritual
wants of the sufferer as for affording him some relief by
his presence. It is believed that the appearance of a holy

;
NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
298
personage may have some effect in freeing the diseased
from his distemper, and frightening the evil spirits that
may be the mischievous agentsinharmingpatients. The
visitor repeats over them some points of the Law that are
intended to act as antidotes against the agency of the
wicked one. Phongyies are very particular on the point
of etiquette. When one of them has to enter into upper-
storied houses, the yellow-habited religious, previous to
his venturing into the lower story, will make it sure that
there is no one, and particularly no woman, in the upper
apartments, as it would be highly unbecoming that any
man, and afortiori a woman, should have their feet above
his head. To avoid such an indecorous contingency, in
case the sick person lies in a room upstairs, the Phongyie
has recourse to an expedient few, I presume, would have
thought of. By his direction a ladderisbrought,the lower
part of which rests on the street, and the upper leans on
one of the upper windows up goes the pious visitor, who
;
by such a contrivance reconciles the observance of eti-
quette with the compliance to his duty. The writer con-
fesses that he was much amused the first time that he
witnessed such a feat performed at Penang by a Siamese
Phongyie. The little crowd, attracted by this novelty,
exhibited a curious mixture of feelings. Some laughed
many remained silent buttheir deportmentwas evidently
;
indicative of the respect and admiration that seemed to
them to inspire the scrupulously tender conscience of the
religious.
We mustallow that the Talapoius confer atruly invalu-
able benefit upon thepeople of thesecountries by keeping
up schools, where tiie boys resort for the purpose of learn-
ing to read, write, and acquire the rudimentsofarithmetic.
In this respect they are eminently useful, and the institu-
tion,though to a certain extentburthensome tothe people,
in this respect deserves well of the country. The many
abuses that at ])resent attend it are almost fully atoned
for by the great service its members gratuitously render

;
NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
299
to their countrymen. There are no other schools than
those under their manao-ement. 'Jhe tyraunical govern-
ments of Siam and Bnrmah do not take any steps to pro-
pagate instruction among their subjects, whom they look
upon as slaves, fit only for bodily labour. The houses of
Talapoins are so many little seats of elementary learning
and as they are very numerous throughout the country,
every facility is afforded to male children to learn to read
and write. The female children are excluded from par-
taking of this great boon by the strictness of the monastic
regulations. Itisagreatmisfortune,muchtobe lamented,
as one half of the population is thus doomed to live in
perpetual ignorance. Owing to the gratuitous education
given by the Buddhist monks, there are very few men
throughout the breadth and length of Burmah who are not
able to read andwrite. It is true thattoo often the know-
ledge thus acquired is very superficial and incomplete.
But as regards the other half of the population, it may be
stated that scarcely a woman among thousands can be
found capable of spelling one word.
The Talapoins being much addicted to sloth and indo-
lence, the schools are undoubtedly miseiably managed.
The boys are often left to themselves without regular con-
trol or discipline. When a boy enters the monastery as
student, his teacher places into his hands a ])iece ofblack-
ened board, whereupon are written the first letters of the
alphabet. The poor lad has to repeat over and over the
name of the letters, crying aloud with all the powers of
his lungs. He is left for several weeks at the same sub-
ject, until his instructor is satisfied that lie knows his
letters. In the next step the boy is directed to study the
symbols of the vowels which are to be joined with con-
sonants so as to form syllables and words. When this is
doneheis initiated into theartof unitingtogetherandarti-
culating properlythe several consonants with the symbolic
characters. He slowly shapes his course through the ap-
parently much-complicated system of all the combinations

;
300 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
of letters, so as to be able to spell correctly all the words
of the language. Owing to the lack of order and method
on the part of the teachers, boys spend a long time, some-
times one or two years, in mastering those difficulties,
which,if properly explained, would much shorten the time
usually devoted to such a study.
The Burmese alphabet, with the various combinations
of letters and symbols for making words, is based on a
most perfect and scientific methodical and simple process,
borrowed from the Sanscrit. The method is plain and
easy, as soon as it is understood. Any person that has
received some education, and whose mind is somewhat
developed, will be able, with the occasional assistance of
an intelligent master, to go all over the various combina-
tions in less than two months. The results derived from
the method adopted bythe Burmans are so great and com-
pletethat, afterhavinggoneoverthe generalalphabet with
attention, the beginner is able to read all the Burmese
words he may meet with. We do not mean, of course, to
say that he will be able to pronounce every word correctly.
This is another thing altogether. Butit is noless evident
that the system used by Burmese in the combinations of
letters leads to results infinitely more satisfactory than
those obtained through the system of elementary reading
and spelling used in Europe.
Unacquainted with the rules of grammar, the teachers
are incapable of imparting any sound knowledge of the
vernacular language to their numerous pu]iils. Hence
writing, as far as orthography goes, isextremelyimperfect
the spelling of words, having no fixed standard, varies to
an indefinite extent. As soon as the scholars have mas-
tered the difficulties of the longand complicated alphabet,
some portions of the sacred writings are put into their
hands for reading. The result is that the Burmese in
general acquire some knowledge, more or less extensive,
of their religious creed. Though none among them canbe
found who understands comprehensively the Buddhistic

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
301
system, yet mostof them are possessed of a certain amount
of more orless limited information concerningBuddha and
his law. In this respect they are perhaps ahead of many
nominal Christians in several countries of Europe, who
dwell in large manufacturing towns and remote country-
districts and belong to the lower classes, and who live
without even a slight acquaintance with the essential
tenets of the Christian creed.
In addition to the eminently useful task of teaching
youth, the Buddhistic recluse devotes occasionally some
portion of his time to the useful labour of copying manu-
scripts on palm-leaves, either for his personal use or to
increase the small library of his monastery. The work
is considered as a very excellent one, deserving of great
merits, and much recommendedbythe rules of the society.
It is a matter of regret that the native laziness of the
Phongyies, as well as their total want of order in acquir-
ingknowledge, tiiwart toa great extentthe practical work-
ing of the wise provisions made by the framer of the rules.
Were itnot for such causes, copies of all thebest and most
interesting works on the religious system of Buddhism
would be greatl}^ multiplied, and couldbe easily procured
;
whilst now they are exceedingly scarce and hardly to be
had at all. The few copies tobe had with much difficulty
are to be paid for very high. All the books are made of
palm-leaves. The leaves are about twenty inches in
length, and from three to four in breadth. On each face
of the leaf from seven to nine or ten lines are written.
A copyist uses a style of iron by way of pen. With the
sharp point he scratches the epidermis of the leaf to form
theletters. In orderto renderthe letters perfectly visible,
he rubs over the pagejust written with apiece of ragsome
petroleum, which, penetrating into the parts scratched by
the style, causes the letters to become quite distinct and
apparent.
The Talapoins spend the best part of the day sitting in
a cross-legged position, chewing betel and conversing with

302 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
the many idlers that are always to be found in great num-
bers about their dwellings. When tired of the vertical
position, they adopt the horizontal one, recliniiig the head
on pillows and gently submitting to the soporific influence
of good Morpheus. They have always in their hands a
string of beads, on which they are wont to repeat certain
devotional formulas. The most common is the following,
" Aneitsa, duka, anatta " meaning that everythinginthis
;
world is subjected to the law of change and mutability, to
thatofpain andsuffering, and tothatofentireand uninter-
rupted illusion. There is, indeed, an immense field opened
to a reflecting mind by these three very significative ex-
pressions forcarryingonserious andprolongedmeditation
;
but none of the Talapoins, at least of those I have been
acquainted with,are capable of understanding comprehen-
sively their meaning. They often repeat the forty great
subjects of meditation, and the rule enjoins them to be
zealously addicted to contemplation, which is pronounced
tobethe chief exercise of atrue followerof Buddha. But
how can there ever be expected from weak and ignorant
persons the habitual practice of so high an exercise, requir-
ing an intellectual vigour of the very first order ? They
must repeat on their beads at least a hundred and twenty
times a day the four following considerations on the four
thiuLis more immediately necessary to men, food, raiment,
habitation, and medicine " I eat this rice, not to please
:
my appetite, but to satisfy the wants of nature. I put on
this habit, not for the sake of vanity, but to cover my
nakedness. I live in this kiaong, not for vainglory, but
to be protected from the inclemency of the weather. I
drink this medicine merely to recover my health, that I
may with greater diligence attend to the duties of my
profession."

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
303
AKTICLE
VII.
—
RELIGIOUS INFLUENCE OF THE PHONGYIES RESPECT AND
VENERATION PAID TO THEM BY THE LAITY.
When we speak of the great influence possessed by the
religious order of Buddhist monks, we do not intend to
speak of political influence. It does not appear that in
Burmah they haveever aimed at any share in the manage-
ment or direction of the afi^airs of the country. Since the
accession of the house of Alomphra to the throne, that is
to say, during a period of above a hundred years, the his-
tory of Burmah has been tolerably well known. AVe do
not recollect having ever met with one instance when the
Phongyies, as a body, have interfered in the afltairs of the
State. They also seem to remain indiff^erent to family or
domestic affairs. The regulations they are subjected to,
and the object which they have in view in enteringthe re-
ligious profession, debar them from concerning themselves
in afltairs thatare foreigntotheir sacred calling. But in a
religious point of view alone, their influence is a mighty
one. Upon that very order hinges the whole fabric of
Buddhism. From it, as from a source, flows the life that
maintainsandinvigoratesreligiousbeliefin themassesthat
professthatcreed. We mayview themembersoftheorder
as religious, and as instructors of the people at large, and
principallyofyouth. Inthat double capacity they exercise
a great control and retain a strong hold over tlie mind of
the people.
There is in man a natural disposition and inclination to
admire individuals who, actuated by religious feelings, are
inducedtoleavetheworldandseparatefromsocietyinorder
to devotethemselvesmorefreely to the practice ofreligions
duties. The more society is corrupted,the more its mem-
bers value those persons who have the moral courage to

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
304
estrangethemselves from thecentreof vice, that theymay
preservethemselvesfrom contamination. Infact,religious
are esteemed in proportion to the extent of the contempt
they have forthis world. The Phongyies occupyprecisely
this position in the eyes of their co-religionists. Their
order stands in bold reliefover the society they belong to.
Their dress, their mode of life, their voluntary denial of
all gratification of sensual appetites, centre upon them
the admiring eyes of all. They are looked upon as the
imitators and followers of Buddha they hold ostensibly
;
before ordinary believers the pattern of that perfection
they have been taught so fondly to revere. The Phon-
gyies are as living mementoes, remindingthepeople of all
that is most sacred and perfect in practical religion. No
one will deny thatthe view of a body of religious existing
in a community, keeping an intercourse withits members,
must ever have a powerful tendency to foster religious
feelings in the mind of a half-civilised people as the
Burmese are. It is in this manner that the Phongyies
command the respect and veneration of the people, and
exercise a considerable amount of religious influence over
the masses.
Butinthecapacityofinstructorsofthepeople,themem-
bers of the order act as yet more directly and actively
upon the people. In Burmah there are no schools but
those kept by the religioiis. The monasteries are as so
many little seminaries where malechildrenreceive elemen-
tary instruction. Theknowledge thatis impartedtothem
by their masters is not secular, but purely religious. It
isa point upon which the undivided attention of a keen
observer must be centred in order to understand the full
meaning of the following remarks. We do not mean to
say that the instructor has always present to his mind, as
a professor,the directteaching of religioustenets but the
;
fact is that no information is conveyed to the pupils
except that which comes from religious books. No other
books are ever used in schools.

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
305
As soon as boys are able to read, religious books are put
intotheirhands. Duringall the timetheyremain at school
they go over books that have adirect reference to religion.
Without even being aware of it, they imbibe religious
notions, and become acquainted with some parts of the
religious creed, particularlywithwhatrelatesto Gaudama's
preceding and last existence. When they grow up to
manhood, if they happen to read, they have, as a general
practice, no other books but such as have a reference to
religion. When people assemble together, either in the
dzeats on the occasion of festival days, or at home on
other public occasions, particularly in the days following
the death of some relatives, one or several elders read
some passage of their scriptures, and thereby supply
topics for conversation of a religious turn. This state of
things originates almost entirely in the early education
received in the monasteries at the hands of their masters,
the Phongyies. It powerfully contributes to popularise
and foster religious notions, whilst it indirectly heightens
and brightens inthe eyes of the people theposition of the
religious.
Moreover, the early intercourse between the youth and
their masters tends to bring into closer contact and union
both the religious and the laity. It draws nearer the ties
that bind together these two fractions of the Buddhist
society. Therelationthusestablishedbetweenthe teachers
and the taught is further strengthened by the fact that
the greatest number ofthe male portion ofthe community
become affiliated, during a longer or shorter period,to the
society, and subjected to its rules and regulations ; they
are cast in the mould of religious, and retain during the
remainder of their life someof thefeaturesthat have been
at an early period stamped on their young minds. Their
memory remains loaded with all that they learned by
heart during the days they spent in the monasteries as
students or members of the society.
Though the Phongyies or Talapoins are not remarkable
VOL. II. U

3o6 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
for their zeal in delivering instructions or sermons to the
people, they discharge occasionally that duty on the eve
of and during festival days, and on all occasions when
considerable offerings are brought to them intheirmonas-
teries. Sometimes, too, theyarerequestedtogotocertain
places prepared for that purpose, to deliver instructions
and receive offerings tendered to them by some pious lay-
men. The preaching never consists in expounding the
text of the religious books, and developing certain points
of the law ; it is a mere rehearsal and repetition of the
precepts of the law or of regular formulas in praise of
Gaudama, and an enumeratiou of the merits to be gained
by those who bestow alms on them. These and similar
circumstances much contribute to keep up the position of
thereligious, and aidthem inretainingapowerful religious
We
hold over their respective communities. repeat it as
our deliberate opinion, that upon the religious association
under consideration principally rests, as on a strong basis,
the great fabric of Buddhism. Were such an institution
to give way and crumble to the dust, the vital energies of
that false creed would soon be weakened and completely
paralysed. Buddhism would yield before the first attack
that would be skilfully and vigorously directed against it.
In Burmah the Phongyiesare highly resyjected by every
member of the community. When they appear in public,
walking in the streets, they are the objects of the greatest
attention. The people withdraw before them to leave a
free passage. Women are seen squatting on both sides
of the way, through respect for thevenerated personages.
When visited in their dwellings, even by persons of the
highest rank, the etiquette is that every visitor should
prostrate himself three times before the—head of the
monastery, uttering the following formula "To the end
:
of obtaining the remission of all the faults I have com-
mitted thi'ough my senses, my speech, and my heart, I
make a first, second, an — d third prostration in honour of
the three preciousthings Phra, hislaw, and the assembly

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
307
of the perfect. Meanwhile, I earnestly wish to be pre-
served from the three calamities, the four statesofpunish-
ment, an—d the five enemies." To which the recluse
answers : " For his merit and reward, may he who makes
such prostrations be freed from the four states of punish-
ment, the three calamities, the five sorts of enemies, and
from all evil whatsoever. May he obtain the object ofall
his wishes, walk steadily in the path of perfection, enjoy
the advantages resulting therefrom, and finally obtain the
state of Neibban." On the visitor withdrawing from his
presence, thethreeprostrations must be repeated he then
;
stands up, falls back to a distance of ten feet, as it would
be highly unbecoming to turn the back suddenly on the
holy man, wheels round on the right, and goes out. This
usage is doubtless very ancient, and is at the same time
looked upon as a very important one. In the Life of
Gaudama we have seen it mentioned on all occasions
when visitors went to pay their respects to him. Princes
and nobles observed the ceremony with the utmost
punctuality.
The best proof of the high veneration the people enter-
tain for the Talapoins is the truly surprising liberality
with which they gladlyminister to all their wants. They
impose upon themselves great sacrifices, incur enormous
expenses, place themselves joyfully in narrow circum-
stances, that they might have the means to build monas-
teries with the best and most substantial materials, and
adorn them with all the luxury the country can afford-"
9 The writer, when he visited poorly dressed, but her mien and
Bhamo two years ago, had the op- countenance indicated that she had
portunity of witnessing a striking seen betterdays. Entering intocon-
illustration of the above assertion. vcrsation withher, thewriter learned
Livingin afineandsubstantialdzeat, from her that she was the widowof
in the vicinityof a large pagoda, he a wealthy man who had been the
remarkedanelderly Burmesewoman principalwriterofthegovernor. Her
coming every morning with some husband had spent twelve thousand
flowers, which she respectfully de- rupeesinbuildingthepagodain front
posited in front of a nichetenanted of us and the dzeat, and had just
by a huge marble idol. She was died when the work wascompleted,

3o8 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
Gold is often profusely used for gilding the posts, ceiling,
and other parts of the interior, as well as several trunks
or chests for storing up manuscripts. Two or three roofs
superposed upon each other (a privilege exclusively re-
served to royal palaces, pagodas, and kiaongs) indicate to
the strangerthatthe buildingisa monastery. Therecluse's
house is well supplied with the various articles of furni-
ture becoming the pious inmates. The individual who
builds at his own expense sucha house, assumes the much-
envied title of Kiaong-taga, or supporter of a monastery.
This title is for ever coupled with his name : it is used as
a mark of respect by all persons conversing with him, and
it appears in all papers or documents which he may have
to sigu. The best, finest, and most substantial articles, if
allowed by the regulations as fit for the use of the Tala-
poins, are generously and abundantly afforded by bene-
volentpersons. When the kingis religiously inclined, the
best and most costly presents he receives are deposited
in the monasteries, to adorn the place or hall where the
principal idol is.
Government does not interfere orgive any assistancein
building pagodas or kiaongs nor does it provide for the
;
support of the pious Rahans but the liberality of the
;
people amply suffices for all contingencies of the kind.
When amanhas madesomeprofit by trading, or any other
leaving to her and heronlydaughter actedverywellandfor thebest ; that
nothing but thehousetheynowdwelt she and her daughter, bytheir exer-
II. She was without any means of tions, would always be able to sup-
support. Havingbeenaskedwhether port themselvesin their humble and
she did not feel someregret that no- poorcondition.
thing had been left for her subsist- In many placesthe traveller's eyes
ence, and whether she did not think are attracted bythe sight of a lofty
her husband would have behaved and roomykiaong, adornedwith fine
better in bestowing one-half of his carvings. When he inquires about
money for religious jjurposes and theindividual whose pious liberality
keeping the other half for the main- nas erected that edifice, he is sur-
tenance of his family, the old lady prised and astonished to see him
gently smiled, and said, without livingin thepoorandwretched house
hesitation or showing the least sign which is pointed outto him.
of repining, that her husband bad

—
NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
309
way, he will almost infallibly bestow the best portion of
his lucre in building a kiaong, or feeding the inmates of
a religious housefor a few months, or in giving general
alms toallthereclusesofthetown. Such liberality, which
is by no means uncommon, has its root, we believe, in a
strong religious sentiment, and also in the insecurity
—
nay, the danger of holding property to a large amount.
When a Talapoin is addressed by a layman, the latter
assumes the title of disciple; and the former calls him
simply Taga, or supporter. Theattitude of the layman in
the presence of the Phongyie is indicative of the venera-
tion he entertains towards his person. He squatsdown,
and he never addresses the yellow-dressed individual
withoutjoining his hands in token ofrespect, and raising
them up with a little motion indicative of intended pros-
tration. As thereis in Burmah a court language,sothere
is a language, or rather a certain number of expressions,
reserved to designate things used by Talapoins, as well as
most of the actions they perform in common with other
men, such as eating, walking, sleeping, shaving, &c. The
very turn of the commonest sentence is indicative of re-
spect when speaking to a Eahan. He is called Phra, the
most honourable term the language can afford. His per-
son is sacred, and no one would dare to offer him the
least insult or violence. The influence of the Talapoin
upon the people is considerable, in proportion to the great
respect borne to his sacred character. So extraordinary
has it been on certain occasions, that Phongyies have been
seen rescuingforciblyfrom the hands of the police culprits
on their way to the place of execution. No resistance,
then, could be made by the policemen without exposing
themselves to the danger of committing a sacrilege, by
lifting their hands against them when such an occurrence
takes place. The liberated wretches are then forthwith
led to the next monastery. Their heads having been
shaved, they are attired in the yellow garb, and their
persons become at once sacred and inviolable.

3IO NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
The veneration paid to Talapoins during their lifetime
accompanies them after their death. Their state is con-
sidered as one of peculiar sanctity. It is supposed that
their very bodies too partake of the holiness inherent in
their sacred profession. Hence their mortal remains are
honoured to an extent scarcely to be imagined. As soon
as a distinguished member of the brotherhood has given
up the ghost, his body is opened, the viscera extracted
and buried in some decent place without any particular
ceremony, and the corpse embalmed in a very simple
manner by putting ashes, bran, and other desiccative sub-
stances into the abdominal cavity. It is then swathed
with bands of linen, wrapped round it many times, and a
thick coat of varnish laid upon the whole. On this fi'esh
varnish gold leaves are sometimes placed, so that the
whole body is gilded over from head to feet. When the
people arepoor and cannotafford to buy gold forthe above
purpose, a piece of yellow cloth is considered as the most
suitable substitute. The body, thus attired, is laid in a
very massive coffin, made, not with planks, but ofa single
piece of timber hollowed in the middle for receiving the
earthly frame of the deceased. A splendid cenotaph,
raised in the centre of a large building erected for the
purpose, is prepared to support a large chest wherein the
coffin is deposited. Thechestis often gilt inside and out,
and decorated with flowers made of different polished sub-
stances of various colours. Pictures, such as native artists
contrive to make, are disposed round the cenotaph. They
represent ordinarily religious subjects. In this stately
situation the body remains exposed for several days, nay
several mouths, until preparations are completed for the
grand day of the obsequies. During that period festivals
are often celebrated about it, bands of music play, and
people resort in crowds to the spot for the purpose of
making offerings to defray the expense to be incurred for
the funeral ceremony. When the appointed day for burn-
ing the corpse at last arrives, the whole population of

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
311
the town will be seen flocking in their finest dresses to
witness the display of fireworks which takes place on the
A
occasionofburningthe corpse. funeral pile ofa square
form is erected on the most elevated spot. Its height is
about fifteen feet, and it ends with a small room made for
receiving the cofiin. The corpse having been hoisted up
and laid in the place destined for its reception, fire is set
to the pile in a rather uncommon way. An immense
rocket,placed at a distance ofabout fortyyards, isdirected
towards the pile by means of a fixed rope guiding it
thereto. Sometimes the rocket is placed on a huge cart,
and pushed in thedirection ofthe pile. Inits erratic and
uncertain course it happens occasionally that it deviates
from its course, and plunges into the ranks of the crowd,
wounding and killingthose it meets. As soon as itcomes
in contact with the pile, the latter immediately takes fire
by means of combustibles heaped for that purpose, and
the whole is soon consumed. The few remaining pieces
of bones are religiouslycollected, and buriedinthe vicinity
of some pagoda. Here ends the profound veneration,
amounting almost to worship, which Buddhists pay to
their recluses during theirlife and after their demise.
Two chief motives induce the sectaries of Buddha to be
so liberal towards the Talapoins, and to pay them so high
a respect ; viz., the great merits and abundant rewards
they expect to derive from the plentiful alms they bestow
upon them, and the profound admiration they entertain
for their sacred character, austere manners, and purely
religious mode of life. The first motive originates from
interested views the second has its root in that regard
;
mennaturally have forpersonswhodistinguishthemselves
from others by a more absolute self-denial, a greater re-
straint and control of their passions, a renouncement of
permitted pleasures and sensual gratifications from reli-
gious motives. According to the fundamental dogma of
Buddhism, any offering made to, or indeed any action
done forthebenefit of, afellow-man is deservingofreward

:
'312 l^OTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
during future existences, such as digging a well, building
a resting-place, a bridge, &c, ; but far more abundant are
the merits resulting from presenting a Talapoin with
one or several articles necessary to his daily use, as they
increase proportionately to the dignity of the person to
whom the things are offered. We may judge from the
following instance ofthe plentiful harvest of merits which
a supporter of Phongyies is promised to reap hereafter
He who shall make an offering of a mendicant's pot or
Thabeit shall receive as his reward cups andother utensils
setwithjewels he shallbe exempted frommisfortunesand
;
calamities, disquietude and trouble ; he shall get without
labour all thatis necessary for his food, dress,andlodging
;
pleasure and happiness shall be his lot ; his soul shall be
in a state of steadiness and tranquillity, and his passion
for the sex shall be considerably weakened. The offering
of other objects secures to the donor wealth, dignity, high
rank, pleasure, and an admittance into the fortunate
countries or seats of the Nats, where all the things are to
be met with and enjoyed that are calculated to confer on
man the greatest sum of happiness. The people believe
unhesitatingly all that is said to them in this respect, and
they gladly strip themselves of many valuable things in
order to obtain and enjoy, during coming existences, the
riches and pleasures promised to them by their Rabans.
The insecurity of property under tyrannical rulers may
operate to a certain extent in determining people to part
with their riches, and consecrate them to religious pur-
poses, rather than see themselves violently deprived of
them by the odious rapacity of the vile instrumentsof the
avarice, tyranny, and cruelty of theirheartless princes and
governors.
It can scarcely be a matter of wonder that Buddhists
so much honour and respect a Talapoin, when we consider
that, in their opinion, he is a true followerof Buddha, who
strives to imitate his great prototype in the practice ofthe
highest virtues, particularly in his incomparable mortifica-

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
313
tion and self-denial, that he might secure the ascendancy
of the spiritual principle over the material one, weaken
passions which are the real causes of the disorder that
reigns in our soul, and finally disengage her from their
baneful influences, and from that of matter in general.
He isexceedingly reserved and abstemious regarding food,
the use of creatures, and the enjoyment of pleasures, in
order to secure to reason the noblest faculty of an intelli-
gentbeing, aperfect controloverthe senses. He isindeed
in the right way leadingto Neibban, the summitofperfec-
tion. In the opinion of a Buddhist, nobody can be com-
pared to a true and fervent Rahan in sterling worth and
merit. His moral dignity and elevation cast into the
shade the dazzling splendour that surrounds loyalty. He
is a pious recluse, a holy personage, a true member of
the holy Thauga, and deserving, therefore, of the highest
admiration and respect.
As a consequence of the profound veneration in which
Talapoins are publicly held, they are exempted from con-
tributing to public charges, tribute, corv4es, and military
service. It is an immense favour, particularlyamongthe
nations of Eastern Asia, where the rulers look upon their
subjects as mere slaves and tools undertheircommandfor
executing the absolute orders of their capricious fancy.
Under the present ruler of.Burmah, the fathers and
mothers of Phongyies are benefited by the fact of their
sons being in a monastery. They are exempted from pay-
ing taxes, and are treated with some attention by the
officials who wish to ingratiate themselves in the favour
of his most Buddhist majesty. They have often the
honorary affixes joined to their names.
In concluding this notice, we will briefly sketch the
actual situation of the Talapoinic order in those parts
where we have had the opportunity of observing it, and
will allude to the causes that have operated in seducing
it into vices, abuses,and imperfections which are lowering

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
314
it greatly in the opinion of all foreigners and of a few
well-informed natives.
Thefirstandprincipalcausethathas broughtthe Society
into disrepute and opened the door to numberless abuses
is the total absence of discernment in the selection of^the
individuals that seek for an admittance therein. Every
applicant is indiscriminately received as a member of the
brotherhood. Noprevious examination takesplace foras-
certaining the dispositions, capacity, and science of the
postulant. No inquiry isevermaderegardingthe motives
that may have induced him to forsake the world and take
so important a step. His vocation is exposed to no trial.
He has but to present himself and he is sure to be imme-
diately received, provided heconsentto conform exteriorly
to the usual practices of his brethren. No account is
taken of his formerconduct. The very fact of his apply-
ing to be admitted into the society of the perfect atones
amply for all past irregularities. The only respectability
inherent in the modern Talapoins is thatderived from the
sacredyellowdress he wears. It may aptlybesaid ofhim
that he is monk by the fact of his wearing the canonical
dress. The houses of the order are, in many instances,
filled with worthless individuals totally unfit for the pro-
fession, who have been induced by the basest motives to
enter into them, chiefly by laziness, idleness, and the hope
of spendinu^ quietly their time beyond the reach of want,
and withoutbeingobliged to workfortheirlivelihood. In
confirmation of this, I will mention the followinginstance.
During the second year of my stay in Burmah,I had with
me, in the capacity of servant, an old stupid native. On
a certainday he gravelytold me that he intended to leave
my service and become a Phongyie. I laughed at first at
what I considered to be very presumptuous and imperti-
nent language. The old mau, however, kept his word.
Having left my house a few days after our conversation
on the subject of his new vocation, I heard no more of
him till it happened a few months after that I methim in

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 315
a monastery, attired in the full dress of a Phongyie, and
so proud of his new position that he hardly condescended
to put himself on a footing of equality with his former
master.
Ignorance prevails to an extent scarcely to be imagined
among the generality of the Phongyies. I have met with
a great number of laymen who were incomparably better
informed, and far superior iu knowledge to them. Their
mind is of the narrowest compass. Though bound by
their profession to study with particular care the various
tenets of their creed andall thatrelatesto Buddhism, they
are sadly deficient in this respect. They have no ardour
for study. While they read some book, they doit without
attention or effort to make themselves fully acquainted
with the contents. There is no vigour in their intellect,
no comprehensiveness in their mind, no order or connec-
tioniu their ideas. Theirreadingis ofa desultorynature,
and the notions stored up in their memory are at once in-
coherent,imperfect, andtoo often verylimited. Theypos-
sess no general or correct views of Buddhism. I never
met with one who could embrace the whole system in his
mind and give a tolerably accurate account of it. The
only faculty that they cultivate with greatcare is memory.
It is surprising to hear them repeating by heart the con-
tents of a book they have studied. As the number of
books is very limited in countries where the art of print-
ing hasnot been introduced, the pupils of the monasteries
are compelled to commit to memory the greatest portion
of the books they study. He who has lived in Burmah
must have often heard, to his great surprise, laymen re-
peating, during sometimes a whole hour, formulasin Pali,
or religious stories in Burmese, whicli they had learned in
the school, or when they had put on the monkish habit.
Phongyies arefondof exhibiting their knowledge ofthe
Pali language, by repeating from memory, and without
stammering or stumbling, long formulas and sentences
;
but I have convinced myself that very few among them

3i6 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
understood even imperfectly a small part of what they
recited. Those who enjoy popularly a reputation for un-
common knowledge affect to speakverylittle, show agreat
reserve, despising as ignorant the person that approaches
their abodes orholdsconversation with them. But silence,
which in a learned man is a sign of modesty, is too often
with them a cloak to cover their ignorance, and a cunning
device for disguising pride under the garb of humility.
The latter virtue, though much recommended in theWini,
is not a favourite one with the Talapoins. It is indeed
impossible that they could ever understand or practise it,
since they are unacquainted with the two great ways that
lead to it, viz., a profound knowledge of God and a
thorough knowledge of self. Talapoins, who are distin-
guished among their brethren for their great austerity of
manners and more perfect observance of their regulations,
are the most unpleasing beings the writer has ever met
with.
They are cold, reserved, speaking with affected concise-
ness : their language is sententious, seasoned with an un-
common dose of pretension. Sentencesfalling from their
lips are half finished, and involved in a mysterious ob-
scurity, calculated to fill with awe and admiration their
numerous hearers a certain haughtinessand contempt of
;
others always shows itselfthroughtheiraffectedsimplicity
and humble deportment. Vanity and selfishness, latent
in their hearts, force themselves on the attention of an
acute observer. In their mannersthey areoccasionally so
affected by a ridiculous reserve that one mightbetempted
to think that theirbrain is notquite sound. Talapoins, in
general, entertain avery high ideaof theirownexcellence
;
and the great respect paid to them by the people contri-
butes not a little to foster it, and make them believe that
nobody on earth can ever be compared to them. To such
a height has their pride reachedthat they believe it would
be derogatory to their dignitytoreturncivility forcivility,
or thanks for the alms people bestow on them.

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
317
The most striking feature in the character of the Tala-
poins is their incomparable idleness. We may say that,
in this respect, they resemble their countrymen, who are
very prone to that vice. Two causes of a very different
nature seem, in our opinion, to act together on the people
of these countries to produce such a result. The first is a
physical one the heat of the climate, coupled with a per-
;
petual uniformity in the temperature, producing ageneral
relaxation in the whole system, which is never combated
or counteracted by an opposite action or influence. The
second cause is a moral one, the tyranny of the despotic
governments ruling over the populations of Eastern Asia.
Property is everywhere insecure. He who is suspected of
being rich is exposed to numberless vexations on the part
of the vile satellites of tyranny, who soon find out some
apparentpretextfor confiscating a part or the whole of his
property, or depriving him of life, should he dare to oifer
resistance. In such a state of things every oneis satisfied
with the things offirstnecessity. Want forms the strong-
est tie thatbindstogetherindividuals and races, and atthe
same time holds out the most powerful incentive to exer-
tion. The people of these parts have but few wants, and
therefore they lack inducement to labour for acquiring
anything beyond what is strictly necessary. Emulation,
ambition, the desire of growing rich, which are the main
springs that move man to exertion, disappear and leave
him in an abjectand servile indolence, whichsoon becomes
his habitual state, and the grave wherein is entombed all
his moral energy.
Like their countrymen, Phongyies are exposed to the
influence of the above causes, but their mode of life is a
third additional reason why they are more indolent than
others. They have not to trouble or exert themselves for
thearticlesrequiredfortheirsubsistenceand maintenance
;
these are abundantly supplied to them by their co-reli-
gionists. They are bound, it is true, to read, study, and
meditate but their ignorance and laziness incapacitate
;

3i8 NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
them for such intellectual exercises. They remain during
the best part of the day sitting in a cross-legged position,
or reclining, or sleeping, or at least attempting to do so.
They occasionally resumethe vertical position to get ridof
enmd, one of their deadliest enemies, and by repeated
stretchings of arms and legs, and successive yawnings, try
to free themselves from thatdomestic foe. The teaching
of their scholars occupies a few of them for a short time
in the morningandinthe evening. Theyareoftenrelieved
from their mortal ennui by visitors as idle as themselves,
who resortto theirdwellings to kill time in theircompany.
To keep up respectability before the public, the Rahans
assume an air of dignity and reserve. They avoid allthat
could lead them into dissipation. Exterior continence is
generally observed, and though there are occasional tres-
passes, it would be unfair to lay on them generally the
chargeofincontinence. Their lifeso farmay beconsidered
as exemplary. Though partly divested ofthat open-heart-
edness which is a peculiar characteristic of their country-
men, they are tolerably kind and affable with strangers.
They,however, cannot relinquish intheirconversationwith
themacertain airofsuperiority, inspiredbytheadmiration
of self and the high opinion they entertain of their exalted
profession and sacred character. They are unwilling to
see them sittingunceremoniously close to themselves and
;
when this cannot be avoided, they seek for an opportunity
of removing to another place a little more elevated than
that occupied by the visitor, as it would be highly unbe-
coming that laymen should ever presume to sit on a level
with a recluse. Such a step wouldimply a sort ofequality
betweenthem both, which is never to be dreamt of. Their
smooth and quiet countenance, their meek deportment,
are, as it were, slightly fretted with a certain roughness
and rudeness peculiar to individuals leading a retired life,
and estranging themselves, to a certain extent, from the
place of society.
In the foregoing pages we have endeavoured to give a

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS. 319
faithful account of the great religious order existing in
countries where genuine Buddhism isthe prevailingci'eed.
We have been obliged, for the sake of truth, to mention
many abuses that have slowlycrept into it ; but we never
entertained the slightest intention of casting a malignant
contempt or a sneering ridicule uponits members. Most
sincerely we pity those unfortunate victims of error and
superstition who are wasting their time and energies in
the fruitlessjDursuitofan imaginaryfelicity. Nolanguage
can adequately express the ardour and intensity of our
desires, sighs, and prayerstohasten the coming of the day
when the thick mistand dark cloud that encompass their
souls shall be dissipated, and the Sun of Eighteousness
shall shed into them his vivifying beams. However de-
plorable their intellectual blindness may be, we always
felt that they have a right to be fairly and impartially
dealt with. The religious order they belong to is, after
all, the greatest in its extent and diffusion, the most ex-
traordinary and perfect inits fabric and constituentparts,
and the wisest in its rules andprescriptions, that has ever
existed either inancient or modern times without thepale
of Christianity.

( 321 )
ADDENDA.
Many persons have often put to the writer the following
—
question : Is it credible that the founder of Buddhism
established from the beginningabodyof religious, with so
perfect an hierarchy and so complete an organisation as
to elicit the wonder and astonishment of all those who
contemplate it with a serious attention ? No doubt,
Buddhists attribute to Gaudama all the regulations con-
tained in the Patimauk, or the book of the enfranchise-
^iient; they maintain that the contents of Cambawa, or
book for the ordination of Patzins, have been arranged by
the same hand. But the absurdity of such an assertion
cannot fail tostrike the eyes of even a superficial observer.
These two books, with their elaborate divisions and sub-
divisions, musthavebeen gradually prepared andarranged
at an epoch when Buddhism had taken deep root and
spread its branches far and wide, and had become the
dominant religion in the countries where it is flourishing.
To confer splendour on the admittance of individuals into
the body of monks, the rules of the Cambawa were
enacted. To render the life of religious an object of
greater veneration in the eyes of the community, the
regulations of the Patimauk were devised, and were very
likely brought, by a slow process, to the state of com-
pleteness we see them at present.
Though Gaudama had nothing to do with the redaction
of the books under examination, he is, nevertheless, the
author of the principal and most important regulations.
VOL. II. X

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
322
It is in the Thoots or instructions he has delivered on
different occasions that we must search for discovering
the germ and origin of the principal points contained in
the Patimauk and the Cambawa. At the conclusion of
many of his instructionswe find some hearers believingin
him, and applying for admittance into the society of his
disciples. When he approved of their dispositions, the
applicants had but to renounce the ordinary pursuits of
life, exchange their dress for the oneregularly prescribed,
and engage to live in a state of strict chastity they then
:
became at once members of theThanga, without having to
gothroughaprescribedordeal. Faith in Buddhaontheone
hand, and on the other willingness to live in poverty and
chastity, werethe onlyrequisites for obtaining admittance
into the spii'itual family of Buddha. The applicants were
obliged to live in poverty, and depend for their food on
the alms they could procure by begging. Hence they
were called Bickus, or mendicants. Thev had to wear a
dress made with rags picked up in cemeteries and stitched
together. They placed themselves under the guidance of
Gaudama, and denied to themselves all sensual gratifi-
cations. Such were the first and principal obligations
imposed on the new converts who embraced a religious
life. The Bickunies, or women who had embraced the
holy profession, were gradually subjected to the same
regulations. The minor details of the rule were intro-
duced as consequences flowing from thegeneral principles.
This has been the work of time, and perhaps of one of
the councils.
It does not appear from the instructions of Gaudama
that the steps of the hierarchy were defined and fixed by
We
him, as they havesubsequently been. remark in the
assembly,theBickus, ormendicants,constitutingthegreat
mass of the religious, then the Thcra, or, as the Burmans
writeit, Mathera, theancients, or members ofthe assembly
distinguished by theirage and proficiency in learning and
virtue, and the Aryias, orthose who hadmade the greatest

NOTICE ON THE BUDDHIST MONKS.
323
progressin meditationand contemplation, and had entered
into the current of perfection.
It has been asked also whether those who had reached
—
one of the fourMeggas tha — t is to say, who had become a
Thautapan, aSakadagani,&c. werealwaysmembersofthe
Thanga, and could not live in the world. From the tenor
of certain passages in the life of Gaudama we see that
many pious laymen became Thautapan, Sakadagam, and
even Anagam ; that is to say, followed the three first
Meggas,though they continued to livein the world. The
father of Buddha, King Thoodaudana, the father of Eatha
and many others, reached one of tiie above-mentioned
states, though they continued to follow the oi'dinary pur-
suits oflife. Thisfact deserves attention,because it shows
that the institutions of Gaudama rested on a broad basis,
and that a life in the world was not an obstacle to follow-
ing the ways of perfection.

( 324 )
ON THE WOED "NAT."'
In a note on the Nats, the writer, having expressed the
opinion that the word "Nat," used by Burmans, was de-
rived from the Sanscrit term ISTath, which means lord,
Major Phayre gave it as his decided opinion that the
expression was a purely Burmese one, not at all derived
from the Sanscrit. Leaving aside the etymological ques-
tion, of which it may be said that adhiic suhjudicc lis est,
we are happy to communicate to the reader the followiog
reflections that have come from the jDen of that dis-
tinguished scholar, who is so intimately acquainted with
all that relates to Buddhism.
"The modern Burmans acknowledge the existence of
certain beings which, for want of a better term, we will
call 'almost spiritual beings.'' They apply to them the
name Nat. Now, according to Burmese notions,there are
two distinct bodies or systems of these creatures. The
one is a regularly constituted company, if I may say so,
of which Thagya j\[eng is the chief. Most undoubtedly
that body of ' Nat ' was unknown to the Burmans until
they became Buddhists. Those are the real Dewah or
Dewata.
" But the other set of Nats are the creatures of the
indigenous system, existing among all the wild tribes
bordering on Burmah. The acknowledgment of these

ON THE WORD NAT.
325
beings constitutes their only icorsJiijh On these grounds
I consider that the Burmese acknowledged and wor-
shipped such beings before they were converted to
Buddhism.
"Now, if they acknowledged such beings, they, no
doubt, had a name for them, similar in general import to
the 'fairy, elf,' and so on among the inhabitants of Britain
for beings of a quasi-spiritual nature, I may observe
there is a complete analogyin the state of Burmese belief
in the existence of such beings and that which prevailed
formerly in Europe, and some remnants of which may be
found even now existing among the uneducated. I mean
that before the Anglo-Saxon tribes were converted to
Christianity the belief in fairies and elfs was universal.
With Christianity came a belief in a different order of
spiritual beings, and with that a new name derived from
the Latin, angel. This is somewhat analogous to the
state of things among the Burmese before and after their
conversion to Buddhism.
"But to return to the Burmese. They, when they
received Buddhism, appear to have generally retained
their vernacular name for the beings called in PaliDewa.
Why this should be done is certainly not apparent. Why
have the English and all Teutonic nations retained the
ancient name Evil, and spirits, though they adopted with
Christianity a new term for good spirits generally ? I
allude to the term Devil, which, there is no doubt, is
philologically connected with that Pali word Dew-a or
Dcv-d,.
" Regarding the meaning of the word Nat in Pali, I
have no Pali dictionary, but I have the ordinary Oordoo
Dictionary, which includes all ordinary Sanscrit words. I
find there the Sanscrit word 'Nath,' and the meaning
rendered 'master, husband, lord.' There is nothing to
show that it refers to any supernatural being, but isonly a
term of respect. As such it might in Pali be made appli-
cable to Nats. In Burmese, the people who believe in

326 ON THE WORD NAT.
Nats seldom use that word, but some honorific phrase.
Some fishermen I knew quarrelled about their shares in a
pool of water. In the case they constantly referred to
the share of the 'Ashing-gyee,' whowas no other than the
presiding Nat of the said pool."
END OF VOL. II.
Printed by Ballantvne, Hanson <5r> Co.
Edinburgh cSr' London

Triibncr's Oriental Scries.
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO. Lli->
DRYDEN HOUSE, GERRARD STREET, LONDON, W.

— —
;
"A knowledge of the commonplace, at least, of Orientalliterature,
philosophy, and religion is as necessary to the general reader of the
present dayas an acquaintancewith the Latin and Greek classicswas
a generation orso ago. Immense strides have been made within the
present century in these branches of learning ; Sanskrit has been
brought within the range of accurate philology, and its invaluable
ancient literature thoroughly investigated the language and sacred
;
booksofthe Zoroastrians have beenlaid bare ; Egyptian, Assyrian,and
otherrecords of the remote past have beendeciphered, andagroupof
scholarsspeakof still morereconditeAccadianandHittitemonuments
but the results of all the scholarship that has been devoted tothese
subjectshave been almostinaccessibleto thepublicbecause they were
contained for themostpart in learned or expensiveworks, orscattered
throughoutthenumbers of scientific periodicals. Messrs. Trubner&
Co., in a spirit of enterprise which does them infinite credit, have
determined to supply the constantly-increasing want, and togive in a
popular, or, atleast, acomprehensiveform, all this mass of knowledge
to the world." Times.
The late Oiiental scholar, Mr. Romesh C. Dutt, C.I.E.,
says:
"I wish to say a word about this series, because I am in aspecial
degree indebted to it. Professor Max Miiller, who has, by his life-
long labours, done more than any living scholar to elucidate ancient
Hinduliterature and history, has now conceived the noble idea of en-
ablingEnglishreaderstogotothefountainsource,andconsultOriental
works in a series of faithful translations. More than thirtyvolumes,
translated from the Sanscrit, Chinese, Zend, Pahlair, Pali, Arabic, &c.,
have already been published, and more volumes are expected. I take
this opportunityto own my great indebtedness to thevolumesof this
series which relate to Indian History. I have freely quoted from
them—allowing myself the liberty of a verbal alteration here and
there; and I have seldom thought it necessary to consult these
original Sanscrit works which have been translated in this faithful
and valuable series."

Triibncr's Oriental Scries.
In Two Volumes,post8vo, cloth, pp. 426and 460, price 25s. net,
ALBERUNI'S INDIA.
An Account op the Religion, Philosophy, Literature,
Geography, Chronology, Astronomy, Customs,
Laws, and Astrology op India
about a.d. 1030.
An English Edition, with Notes and Indices.
By Dr. EDWARD C. SACHAU,
ProfessorintheRoyalUniversityofBerlin,andPrincipaloftlioSeminaryfor
OrientalLanguages
;
MemberoftheRoyalAcademyofBerlin,and
Correspoudino-MemberoftheIuii)erialAoiidemyofVienna
HonoraryMemberoftheAsiaticSocietyofGreatBritainandIreland,London,.
andoftheAmericanOrientalSociety,Cambridge,U.S.A.
EXTRACT FROM PREFACE.
Albertini, or, as his compatriots called him, Abft Railian, was born
A.D. 973, in the territory of modern Khiva, then called Khwarizm, or
Chorasmia in antiquity. Early distinguishing himself in scienceand
literature, he played a political part as councillorof therulingprince
ofhis native country ofthe Ma'miini family.
Intheopeningof his bookAlberflni givesan account of the circum-
stanceswhich suggested to him the idea ofwriting the 'IvdtKa. Once
the conversation with a friend of his, else unknown, ran on the then
existingliterature onthe historyof religion and philosophy, itsmerits
and demerits. When, in particular, the literature on the belief of the
Hindus came to be criticised, Alberunl maintained that all of it was
second-hand and thoroughly uncritical. To verify the matter, his
friend once more examinesthe books in question, which results in his
agreeing with our author, andhisasking him to fill up this gap in the
Arabic literature of the time. The book he has produced is not a
polemical one. Hewill notconvertthe Hindus, norlend adirect help
to missionary zealots. He will simply describe Hinduism, without
identifying himself with it. He takes care to inform the reader that
he is notresponsible for whatsoever repugnant detail he has to relate,
but the Hindus themselves. He gives a repertory of information on
Indian subjects, destined for the use of tliose wholived in peaceable
intercourse with them, and wished to have an insight intotheirmode
and world ofthought.
The author has nothing in common with llie Muhammadan Ghiizi
A2
3

TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
•who wanted to convert the Hindus or to kill them, and his book
scarcely reminds the reader of the incessant war between Islam and
India, duringwhich ithadbeen prepared,and bywhich the possibility
ofwriting suchabook had first been given. It is likea magic island
•ofquiet, impartial research inthe midst ofaworld ofclashing swords,
burningtowns, and plundered temples. The object which the author
had in view, and never for a moment lost sight of, was to afford the
necessaryinformation and trainingto "any one (in Islam) w/to wants to
.converse with the Hindus, and to discuss with them questions of religion,
.science, orliterature, onthevery basisoftheirowncivilisation."
In genei'al, it is the method of our author not to speak himself, but
to letthe Hindus speak, giving extensive quotations from theirclassi-
calauthors. He presentsapicture of Indian civilisationas paintedby
the Hindus themselves. Many chapters, not all, open with a short
characteristic introduction of a general nature. The body of most
chapters consistsofthree parts. The first is aprecis of the question,
as theauthorunderstands it.
The second part brings forward the doctrines of the Hindus, quota-
tions from Sanskrit books in the chapters on religion, philosophy,
astronomy, and astrology, and other kinds of information which had
been communicated to himby word of mouth, or things which he had
himself observed in the chapters on literature, historic chronology,
geography, law, manners, and customs. In the third parthe doesthe
same as Megasthenes had already done he tries to bring the some-
;
timesvery exotic subject nearer to the understanding of his readers
by comparing it with the theories of ancient Greece, and by other
comparisons. In the disposition of every single chapter, as wellas in
the sequence of the chapters, a perspicuous, well-considered plan is
apparent. There is no patchwork nor anything superfluous, and the
words fitto thesubjectas closeas possible.
He does not blindly accept thetraditions of formerages he wants
;
to understandand to criticise them. He wantsto siftthe wheatfrom
the chaff,and hewilldiscardeverythingthatmilitatesagainstthelaws
of nature and of reason.
He criticises manuscript tradition like a modern philologist. He
sometimes supposes the textto be corrupt, and inquiresintothe cause
ofthecorruption hediscusses variousreadings,andproposesemenda-
;
tions. He guessesatlacunar, criticises differenttranslations, andcom-
plains ofthecarelessnessandignoranceofthe copyists.
This valuable and interesting work has been outof printformany
years, and second-hand copies have been verydifficult to obtain even
at a high premium. At the urgent request of many scholars and
students both in England and India, the publishers have decided to
issuethe presentreprintatacheaper price than theoriginaledition.
4

— — —
TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
Post8vo, pp. viii. and 270, cloth, price 6s.
INDIAN POETRY:
Containing "The Indian Song of Songs."
From the Sanskrit of the "Gita Govinda" of Jayadeva; Two Books
from "The Iliad of India" (Mahabharata), "Proverbial Wisdom"
from the Shlokas ofthe Hitopadesa, andotherOriental Poems.
By Sir EDWIN ARNOLD, M.A., K.C.I.E., C.S.I., &c., &C.
CONTENTS.
The Indian Song of Songs
Introduction.
Hymn toVishnu
—
.
Sargathe First T — he Sports ofKrishna.
Sargathe Secon — d The Penitence of Krishna.
Sargathe Third KrishnaTroubled.
—
Sargathe Fourt
—
h KrishnaCheered.
Sargathe Fifth— The Longings of Krishna.
Sargathe Sixth Krishna made Bolder.
Sargathe Sevent — h—Krishna supposed False.
Sargathe Eighth
—
The Rebuking ofKrishna.
Sargathe Ninth The End of Krishna'sTrial.
SargatheTenth—Krishnain Paradise.
Sargathe Eleventh —The Union ofRadhaand Krishna.
Miscellaneous OrientalPoems
The Rajpoot Wife.
KingSaladin.
TheCaliph's Draught.
HindooFuneral Song.
Songofthe Serpent Charmers.
Song ofthe Flour-Mill.
Taza ba Taza.
The Mussulman Paradise.
Dedication ofa Poem fromthe Sanskrit
The Rajah's Ride.
Two Booksfrom "The Iliad of India."
The GreatJourney.
The Entry into Heaven.
The NightofSlaughter.
The MorningPrayer.
Proverbial Wisdomfrom the Shlokasofthe Hitopadesa.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
"In this nuw Vdluinc Sir Edwin Arnold does <rood si'rvicf iiy ilhistriitinsr,
throuuh tli(! nicdinni of liis ninsiciil Kii'^lisli iiiclodics, tlie power of Indian
poetrytostirKurop(!:iiicnKitions. 'Tlie Iniii:in S071L; of Sonus' is not nnknown
toscholars. SirKdwin Arnold will Iiave introihiced it :inioii<^ ]ioi)nlarEnglish
poems." Times.
"Complete unisteryof the P^nsflish laiiKuasje, coinl)ined nitli <;eunine poetic

— —
TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
fervour, has enabled the trinslator of 'Tlie IiKiian Sonw of Song-s' to spreaiV
before his readers a feast of dulcet sounds and lyricallanguage. Musicseems-
toflowfrom his penas naturallyas rainfromthecloiidorsong-fromthethroat
ofthethrufih."—MorningPost.
the "T a h ir e s p e o e e m m s a l b ad o e u n nd w s it w h ith the im s a p g i e c r y y o o d f ou E r a s st o e f rn th l e ux t u r r o i p o i u c s s, nes a s nd an t d he se v n e s r u s o e us h u a e s ss a r.
richnossandamelodysutlicienttocaptivatethesensesofthedullest." Standard.
Third Edition. Post 8vo, pp. viii.-464, cloth, price i6s.
THE SANKHYA APHORISMS OF KAPILA,
With Illustrative Extractsfromthe Commentaries.
Translated by J. R. BALLANTYNE, LL.D., late Principal of the-
Benares College.
Edited by FITZEDWARD HALL.
"Thework displays avast expenditure of labour and scholarship,forwhich
studentsof Hindoo yihilosophyhave everyreasontobegrateful toDr.Hallaud
thepublishers." CalcuttaReview,
Fourth Edition. Post 8vo, cloth, pp. xxiv.-3io, price i6s.
THE RELIGIONS OF INDIA.
By A. BARTH,
MemberoftheSoci^ttSAsiatiiiuoofParis.
Authorised translationby Rev. J. Wood, Edin.
India hasnot onlypreserved for us in herVedas the most ancient
and complete documents for the study of the old religious beliefs
founded on nature worship, -which, in an extremely remote past,-were
c th o e mm on o l n y t c o ou a n l t l r t y he wh b e r r a e nc t h h e e s se of be t l h i e ef I s, nd i o n -E sp u i r t o e pe of an m f a a n m y ily ch ; an sh g e es is b a o l t s h o
in form and fortune, continue to subsist up to the present time.
Whilst everywhere else they have been eitheras goodas extinguished
by monotheistic religionsof foreign origin, in some instances without
leaving behind them a single direct and authentic trace of their
presence, orabruptly cut short in theirevolution and forced to survive
-within the barriers, he — nceforth immovable, of a petty Church, as in
the case of Parseeism, in India alone they present up to this time,
as a rich and varied literature attests, a continuous, self-determined
development, in the course of which, instead of contracting, they
have continued to enlarge their borders. It is owing in a great
measuretothis extraordinary longevity that such an interest attaches
to the separate and independent study of the Hindu religions, irre-
spective altogether of the estimate we may form of theirdogmatic or
practical worth. Nowhere else do -we meet with circumstances, on.
the whole, so favourable for the study of the successive transforma-
tionsanddestiny, so to speak, ofapolytheistic idea ofthe universe.
6

—
IRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
Post 8vo, cloth, pp. cviii.-242 and viii.-37o. Two volumes, price 24s.
SI-YU-KI.
BUDDHIST RECORDS OF THE WESTERN WORLD.
Translated from the Chinese of HuiEN TsiANG (a.d. 629). By
SAMUEL BEAL, B.A.(Trin.Col., Camb.), R.N. (Retired Chaplain
and N.I.), Professor of Chinese, University College, London
RectorofWark, Northumberland, &c. ;
The progresswhich has been made in our knowledge of Northern
Buddhism during the last few years is due very considerably tothe
discovery of the Buddhist literature of China. This literature (now
well known to us through the cataloguesalready published) contains,
amongst other valuable works, the records of the travels of various
ChineseBuddhistpilgrimswhovisited Indiaduring theearlycenturies
ofourera. Theserecordsembody the testimonyof independent eye-
witnesses as to thefacts related in them, and having been faithfully
preservedand allotted aplacein the collection of the sacred book of
thecountry,theirevidence is entirelytrustworthy.
It would be impossible to mention seriatim the various points of
interest in these works, as they refer to the geography, history,
manners, andreligion of the people of India. The readerwho looks
into the pages of this book will findample material for study on all
these questions. But thereis one particular that gives a more than
usual interest to the records under notice, and that is the evident
sincerity and enthusiasm of the travellers themselves. Never did
more devoted pilgrims leave their native country to encounter the
perils of travelin foreign and distant lands neverdid disciples more
;
ardently desireto gazeon the sacred vestiges of their religion never
did men endure greater suiferings by desert, mountain, and se ; a than
these simple-minded,earnestBuddhistpriests. Andthatsuchcourage,
religiousdevotion,and powerofendurance should be exhibited bymen
so sluggish, as we think, in their verynature as the Chinese, this is
verysurprising,and mayperhapsarousesomeconsideration.
In TwoVolumes,post8vo, pp. xii.-336andX.-352,cloth, price 21s.
MEDIJEVAL RESEARCHES FROM EASTERN
ASIATIC SOURCES.
Fragments Towards the Knowledge of the Geography and
History op Central and Western Asia from the
Thirteenth to the Seventeenth Century.
By E. BRETSCHNEIDER, M.D.,
FormerlyPhysicianoftheKussianLegationatPckiu.
EXTRACT FROM PREFACE
The subjectsdealt with in the two volumes form a carefullyrevised
andimprovededitionofthreeessaysgatheredintoonecollection,viz.:
1. NotesonChinese MediaevalTravellerstothe West, 1875.
2. Notices of the Mediaeval Geographyand Historyof Central
andWestern Asia, 1876.
3. ChineseIntercoursewiththeCountriesofCentralandWestern
Asiaduringthe Fifteenth Century, 1877.
Sincethe first publication ofthese papers,largeadditionshavebeen
7

— —
TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
made to the stock of our knowledge regarding the regionsofCentral
Asiawhich, previously to theRussian occupation of these tracts, had
been inaccessible to scientific exploration. Thus new light hasbeen
thrown upon many interesting geographical questions suggested by
the narratives of mediaeval travellers, or hitherto based only upon
moremodernbutvagueand dubious Chineseaccounts.
To bring the new edition of those former researches up to the
present advanced state of knowledge on the subject, I had to study
a vast amount of literature, written for the greater part in Russian,
which has come to light, on Central Asia, and was obliged to read
through agreat number ofworks and papers, some of them published
in Russian Turkestan, and, therefore, difficult to obtain. In general,
all readingaccessible to me bearing onthe subject hasbeen made use
of for the elucidation of mediaevalgeographical questions arising out
of my researches.
Post8vo, pp. xii.-i64, cloth, price los. 6d.
THE HISTORY OF ESARHADDON
(Son of Sennacherib),
KING OF ASSYRIA, B.C. 681-668.
Translated fromtheCuneiformInscriptionsuponCylindersandTablets
in the British Museum Collection together with a Grammatical
;
Analysisof eachWord,Explanationsof theIdeographsbyExtracts
from the Bi-Lingual Syllabaries, and List of Eponyms, &c.
By E. a. WALLIS BUDGE, M.A., Litt.D., D.Lit.,
KeeperoftheEgyptianamiAssyrianAntiquitiesintlieBritisliMuseum.
"Studentsofscripturalarcliaeology willalsoappreciatethe 'Historyof Esar-
haddoii.'"—ru«f.v.
'•Thereismuchtoattractthescholarinthisvolume. Itdoes not pretend to
po]mlarise studies which are yet iu their infancy. Its primary object is to
translate, hut it docs not assuuie to he more than tentative, and it otfersboth
to ttio professed Assyriologist and to the ordinary nou-Assyriological Semitic
scholarthemeansofcontrollini; itsresults." Academy.
"Mr. Budofe's hook is, of course, mainly addressed to Assyrian scholars and
students. Theyarenot, itistobefeared,averynumerousclass. Butthemore
thanlis are due to him on that accoimt for thewayinwhichhe has acquitted
himselfinhislaborioustask." Tablet.
Post8vo, pp. xlviii.-398, cloth, price 12s.
THE ORDINANCES OF MANU.
Translated from theSanskrit, with an Introduction.
By thelate A. C. BURNELL, Ph.D., CLE.
Completed and Edited by E. W. HOPKINS, Ph.D.,
of ColumbiaCollege, N.Y.
of " r T el h i i g s io w n or it k i i s s f f u u l l l l o o f fi in n i t ] e ) r o e r s t t an ; c w c h . il I e t f i o s r a th y e re s a t t ud b e o n o t n o t f o s y o e c t io s l o og n y ot a a n b d le th a c w s o c r ie k n i c n e
soaccc!ssil)leaform,admirablyedittid,and (^omidctely translated."~,S'co«jf»iaft.
'Few men w(!re mon^ coiiipcteiit tliaii liuiMndl to sive ns a really good
translation of this well-known law book, first rt'iideicd into Knulish by Sir
WilliamJones. I'.iirnell was not onlyan independent Sanskrit scholar, butau
experienced lawyer, anil he joined to these two important iinalitlcations the
r n E a s n r g e l al i l s f h a t c . h u a l .t t . y c.o o u W f l e d be o i b i n e i j . r ; p ht u a b b t l l o i e s f h e t e e o l d ( v o ; e f x r p y r tl e g i s e n s it t h e r i f a s u n l s t l h a t o t o r i n o D : n r l . it l s H ef o t i p ti k b i y c n l s e B a u f r o r r n a e n h l a d l v . i " i t i — r j e F n . ' c j M h i a A v n e X t n
MULLKKintheAcademy.
8

TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
Third Edition. Post 8vo, cloth, pp. vi.-2i6, price6s.
THE BHAGAVAD GITA ; or, THE SACRED LAY.
A SANSKRIT PHILOSOPHICAL POEM.
Translated, with Notes,
By JOHN DAVIES, M.A. (Cantab.)
MemberoftheRoyalAsiaticSociety,oltheCambridgePhilological
Society,&c.,aiul(sometime)RectorofWalsoken,Norfolk.
I. Introduction.
II. Translation.
III. Appendix, (i) On the date at which the Bhagavad Gita
was probably written, and on the theory that it was
written under an influence derived from a knowledgeof
Christiandoctrines.
(ii) The traditional line of descent of the Lunar
Dynasty.
(iii) Collation of two MSS. with the Bonn edition of
the Bhagavad Gita, and the readings of other editions
andMSS.
Inpreparing this translation of the Bhagavad Gita, the author had
beforehim the Greek translation of Galanos, and the Italian version
of Stanislao Gatti, both supplied by Dr. Reinhold Rost. The author
also consulted the French version of Burnouf, the Latin version of
Lassen, and the English versions of Mr. Thomson and K. T. Telang.
ThenotesofLassen have givenvaluable aid, as well as a paper on the
Bhagavad Gita, read before the "AkademiederWeissenschaften" of
Berlin in 1826 by W. van Humboldt, which contained a scholarly
review of the doctrines contained in the poem. Theauthor has also
consulted a MS. copy of the Commentary on the Bhagavad Gitil,
written by ^ridhara, and, by the kindness of Dr. Rost, another com-
mentary, attributed to 6ankara, but written by Sankara Ananda
Saraswati (quot. atAnanda), and called Tfitparja Bodhini.
Second Edition. Post Svo, cloth, pp. viii.-i52, price6s.
HINDU PHILOSOPHY.
The SANKHYA KlRIKA of ISWARA KRISHNA.
An Exposition ofthe System of Kapila, withan Appendix on the
NvfiyaandVaiseshika Systems.
By JOHN DAVIES, M.A. (Cantab.)
MemberoftheRoyal AsiaticSociety,oftheCambridgePhilolosjical
Society,etc.,and(sometime)RectorofWalsoken,Norfolk.
9

—
TRUBNEK'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
EXTRACT FROM PREFACE.
I wish to present to my readers the philosopliy of Kapilaas it has
been set forth by his Indian exponent, Iswara Krishna. The system
of Kapila, called the Sankhya or Rationalistic, in its original form,
and in its theistic development by Patarijali, containsnearlyallthat
India has produced in the department of pure philosophy. Other
systems, though classed as philosophic, are mainly devoted to logic
and physical science, ortoan exposition of the Vedas.
The system of Kapila may be said to have only an historicalvalue,
but on this account alone it is interestingas achapterin the history
of the human mind. It is the earliest attempt on record togive an
.answer, from reason alone, to the mysterious questions which arise
in every thoughtful mind about the origin of the world, the nature
and relations of man, and his future destiny. It is interesting also
and instructive to note how often the human mind moves ina circle.
The latest German philosophy, the system of Schopenhauerand Von
Hartmann,ismainlyareproductionofthephilosophicsystemof Kapila
in its materialistic part, presented in a more elaborate form, but on
the same fundamental lines. In this respect the human intellect has
,
gone over the same ground that it occupied more thantwo thousand
years ago, but on a more important question it has taken a step in
retreat. Kapila recognised fully — the existence of a soul in — man,
forming indeed his proper nature the absolute ego of Fichte dis-
tinct from matterand immortal ; butourlatest philosophy, both here
and in Germany, can see in man only a highly developed physical
organisation. "All external things," says Kapila, "were formed that
the soul might know itself and be free." "The study of psychology
is vain," says Schopenhauer, "forthere isno Psyche."
Post 8vo, pp. 432, cloth, price i6s.
A CLASSICAL DICTIONARY OF HINDU
•
MYTHOLOGY AND RELIGION, GEOGRAPHY,
HISTORY, AND LITERATURE.
By JOHN DOWSON, M.R.A.S.,
Late ProfessorofHiiidustaiii, Stall'College.
"This notonlyformsaniudispeiisalile liookofn^ferencetostudentsof Indian
literature, Initisiilsoofurcatgeneral interest,asitskivesinaconciseand easily
accessibleformalltliatneedbeknownabouttliepersonagesofHindumythology
wliose names are sofamiliar,butofwhomsolittleisknownoutsidethelimited
circleofsavantK."—Timet.
t m o o " d s I e ( t ! r e a i s t s u e p n i s o ) p l a i s c e l d e i:j ; i h n a t n n g d e ai w w n e e w d n i h e t e e i d n on o s s n u l d c y e h t a ra d si c d i t b t j( b h ^ u a c t t ts t l a i h t r e t e l f e i t i r f w e r ;\ w o t a m ( n Ml t t s h f e a w i h g r i l e y n c e h a ra n \v l d i; e f m x u c a l e l y l y l h e i o n n p c e e a
ofMr. DowfioiiHwork." Satui-da>/Rerii-w.
10

TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
Revised Edition in TwoVolumes, post8vo, pp. XXX.-390;
xiv.-364,cloth, price 21s.
A HISTORY OF CIVILISATION IN ANCIENT
INDIA.
Based on Sanskrit Liteeatuee,
By ROMESH CHUNDER DUTT, CLE.
OftheIndianCivilService,andoftlieMiddleTemple,Barrister-at-Law,
MemberoftheRoy.ilAsiaticSocietyofGreatBritainandIreland,
andoftheAsiaticSocietyofBengal.
— — —
VOL. I. B.C. 2000 TO 320 ; VOL. II. B.C. 32O A.D. lOOO.
EXTRACT FROM PREFACE.
The method on which this work has been written is very simple.
My principal object has been to furnish the general reader with a
—
practical and handy work on the Ancient History of India not to
compose an elaborate work of discussions on IndianAntiquities. To
study clearness and conciseness on a subject like this was not, how-
ever, an easy task. Every chapter in the present work deals with
matters about which long researches have been made, and various
opinionshavebeen recorded. Itwould liaveaffordedsomesatisfaction
to me to have given the reader the histoiy ofevery controversy, the
account ofevery antiquarian discovery,and theprosand cons of every
opinion advanced. But I could not yield to this temptation without
increasing the work to three or four times its present humble size,
and thus sacrificing the very object with which it is written. To
carry outmy primary object I have avoided every needless discussion,
and I have tried to explain as clearly, concisely, and distinctly as I
wasable each succeeding phase of Hindu civilisation and Hindu life
in ancient times.
But, while conciseness has been the main object of the present
work, I have also endeavoured to tell my story so that it may leave
some distinct memories on my readers after they have closed the
work. For this reason, I have avoided details as faraspossible, and
tried to develop, fully and clearly, the leading facts and features of
each succeeding age. Repetition has not been avoided where such
repetition seemed necessary to impress on my readers the cardinal
—
facts thesalient features ofthe story of Hinducivilisation.
"Mr. Dntt lias attempted to popularise learned researches, and has under-
takenapitrioticwork,and inmanyresi)ects none could bebett(!r i>repared for
thetaskthanhe. ... As far as possible he allows the oriuinal texts to speak
for themselves; his hook is thus lilled with extracts selected and translated
w
w
i
h
t
i
h
ch
c.
w
ir
e
e;a a
l
n
wa
d
ys
th
f
e
in
e
d
xt
w
r
h
a
a
ct
t
s
i
a
s
r
n
e
ec
c
e
o
s
n
s
n
i
e
r
c
y
t
,
e
a
d
n
t
d
og
s
e
e
t
l
h
d
e
o
r
m
by
"w
a
ha
n
t
aly
is
se
s
s
up
a
e
n
r
d
fl
r
u
e
o
s
us
u
.
mes
H
i
e
n
haswrittenwithenlhnsiasui,inalanyuaye clear and correct,and without tliat
needlessdisi)layoferudition which tires more than it instructs. On thewhole
I In k d n i o an wo t f ho n u o gh w t o , rk <>r wh w i h i i -h ch eir is iUl m e o s re dii f e as b c e i t i t ia e t r in t i o i e r n ea t < e l r inL i ; n . t " o — t . h M e . s B p a i k r t i i t i. of in an J c i i e e c n u t e
Critique,Parii. (Translated.)
II

— —
TRUBNER'^ ORIENTAL SER/ES.
InOne Volume, post 8vo, cloth, pp. xvi.-224, price 7s. 6d.
LAYS OF ANCIENT INDIA.
Selections from Indian Poetry rendered into English Verse.
By ROMESH CHUNDER DUTT, CLE.
Barrister-at-Law,andoftheIndianCivilService
;
MemberoftheRoyal
AsiaticSociety,andoftheAsiaticSocietyofBengal.
Authorof "A History of Civilisation in Ancient India," &c.
EXTRACT FROM PREFACE.
The time has come for placing before English readers a carefully
prepared book of selections from the entire range of Ancient Indian
Poetry. Sucha bookofselections shouldconvey something not only
of the beiiuty of Indian poetry in general, but also of the distinctive
—
features of the poetryof each special period something of the fresh-
nessand simplicityoftheVedic Hymns,thesublimeand loftythought
of the Upanishads, the unsurpassed beauty of Buddhist precepts, and
theincomparablerichnessand imageryof thelaterorclassicalSanscrit
poetry. And it seems to me that such a book, comprisingspecimens
from the literature of successive periods, is likely to give the English
reader a general bird's-eye view of Indian poetry, Indian thought, and
Indian reliwion.
Revised EHtion. Po>t 8vo, pp. 276, i:lotii, piice 7s. 6d.
RELIGION IN CHINA.
By JOSEPH EDKINS, D.D., Peking.
Containing a Brief Account of the Three Religions of the Chinese,
with Observations on_ the Prospects of Christian Conversion
amongst that People.
"Dr. Edkinshasbeen most careful in notiny the varied and often complex
phasesofopinion,soastogiveauaccountofconsiderablevalueofthesubject."'
—Scotsman.
"As a missionary,it has been \r.irt of Dr. Kdkiiis'dutytostudytheexisting^
religions in CIiin;i, and his lon^- residence in tlie country h;is enabled him to
acquire au intimate knowloUye of them as they at present exist."—Saturday
Review.
"Dr. Eflkins' valuable work, of which this Is a second and revised edition,
has,fromthetimetliat itwas iiuldisbed,been tlic standardauthorityupon the
subjectofwhich ittreats." yoncnnforinixt.
"Dr.Kdkins . . . maynow lie fairly reuarde<l iis amonu' tlie first authoritlps
onChinesereligionand language." Dritiy/t Qiiarteiii/Ueru'w.
12

— —
TRUB.WER-S ORIENTAL SERIES.
NewandRevised Edition. Post 8vo, pp. xxiv.-42o, cloth, price i8s.
CHINESE BUDDHISM.
A VOLUME OF SKETCHES, HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL.
By J. EDKINS, D.D.
Authorof "China's Place in Philology," "Religion in China," &c., &c.
"It contains avast deal of important iulorniation on tlic suliject, such as is
onlytobegainedbylong-continuedstudyonthe»\)ot."~Athena>um.
"Uponthewhole,weknowof nowork comparable to it for the extentof its
oriijinal research, and the siiii)dicity with wliich this conqdicated system of
philosophy,religion,literature,andritualissetforth." BritishQuarterlyReview.
"The whole volume is replete with learning. ... It deserves most careful
study from all interested in the history of the religions of theworld, and ex-
pressly of those who arc concerned iu the propigation of Christianity. Dr.
Edkins 7ioticesintermsof just condemnation the ex:iggerated praise bestowecl,
uponBuddhismbyrecentEnglishwriters." Record.
Third Edition. Post 8vo, cloth, pp. xxiv.-268, price gs.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISHADS AND
ANCIENT INDIAN METAPHYSICS.
Asexhibited ina series ofArticles contributedtothe CalcuttaRevieio.
By ARCHIBALD EmVARD GOUGH, M.A., Lincoln College,
Oxford Principal of the Calcutta Madrasa,
;
EXTRACT FROM PREFACE.
Thoseinterestedin thegeneralhistoryofphilosophywillfind initan
accountofa very earlyattempt, on the partof thinkers of a rude age
and race, toforma cosmologicaltheory. Thereal movement ofphilo-
s d o e p g h r i e c eo t f ho i u n g te h r t es b t e m gi a n y s, st i i t ll i b s e tr e u x e p , ec n t o e t d i t n o I a n t d t i a a c , h b t u o t t i h n e I p o r n o i c a ed ; u b r u e t o s f o t m h e e
ancient Indian—cosmologists. The Upanishads are so many 'songs
before sunrise' spontaneo — us effusions of awakening reflection, half
poetical, half metaphysical that precede the conscious and methodi-
callabourof thelongsuccession of thinkerstoconstructa thoroughly
intelligible conception of the sum of things. Forthegeneral reader,
then,thesepages maysupplyin detail,and in thetermsofthe Sanskrit
texts themselves, a treatment of the topics slightly sketched in the
third chapterofArcher Butler's firstseries of'Lectureson the History
of AncientPhilosophy.' The Upanishads exhibitthe prehistoricview
of things ina naively poeticalexpression, and, atthesame time, in its
coarsest form. Any trajislationswill be found to include the wholeof
the MuTidaka, Katha, Svetfisvatara, and Mfuidukya Upanishads, the
greater part of the Taittiriya and Brihaciaronyaka, and portions of
the Chhandogya and Kena, together with extracts from theworks of
the Indianschoolmen.
13

—
TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
Third Edition. Post8vo, cloth, pp. xvi.-428, price i6s.
ESSAYS ONTHE SACRED LANGUAGE,WRITINGS,
AND RELIGION OF THE PARSIS.
By MAKTIN HAUG, Ph.D.,
LateoftheUniversitiesofTubiugen,Gottingen,andBonn
;
Superintendent
ofSanskritStudies,andProfessorofSanskritinthePoenaCollege.
Edited and Enlarged by De. E. W. WEST.
Towhich isaddeda Biographical Memoirofthelate Dr, Haug
byProf. E. P. EvANS.
I. Historyof the Researches into the SacredWritingsandReligion
oftheParsis, from the EarliestTimesdownto the Present.
II. Languages ofthe Parsi Scriptures.
III. TheZend-Avesta, or the Scripture oftheParsis.
IV. TheZoroastrianReligion, as toits OriginandDevelopment.
" 'Essays on the Sacred Langruagfe,Writing:s, and Religion of the Parsis,' liy
thelate Dr. Martin Haug-,edited byDr. E. W.West. The author intended,on
hisreturnfromIndia,toexpandthematerialscontainedinthisworkintoacom-
prehensiveaccountof theZoroastrianreligion, but thedesignwasfrustratedby
hisuntimelydeath. Wehave,however,inaconciseandreadableform,ahistory
of the researches into the sacredwritings and religion of the Parsis from the
—
earliesttimesdowntothepresent a dissertation on the languages of theParsi
Scriptures,atranslationof the Zend-Avesta,or theScriptureof theParsis,and
a dissertation on the Zoroastrian religion,with especial reference to itsorigin
anddevelopment." Times.
Post8vo, pp. viii. and 346, cloth, price los. 6d.
MANAVA-DHARMA-CASTRA:
THE CODE OF MANU.
Original Sanskrit Text, witic Critical Notes.
By J. JOLLY, Ph.D.,
ProfessorofSanskri o t f i L n a t w he in Un t i h v e er U s n i i t v y er o s f i W ty ur of zb Ca u l r c g ut ; ta l . ateTagoreProfessor
—
ThedateassignedbySirWilliamJonestothis Code thewell-known
Great Law Book of the Hindus — is 1250-500 B.C., although the rules
and precepts contained in it had probably existed as tradition for
countless ages before. There hasbeen no reliableeditionof theText
for Students for many years past, and it is believed, therefore, that
Prof. Jolly'swork will supplyawantlong felt.
14

—
TKUBNER'S ORIENTAL SEHIES.
Second Edition. Post 8vo, pp. xii.-5i2, cloth, price i6s.
FOLK-TALES OF KASHMIR
By the Rev. J. HINTON KNOWLES, F.R.G.S., M.R.A.S., &c.
(C.M.S.) Missionary to ihe Kashmirs.
EXTRACT FROM PREFACE.
Kashmir as a field of folk-lore literature is, perhaps, not surpassed
in fertility by any other country in the world ; andyet, while every
yearwitnesses the publication of books on the subject from Bengal,
Bombay, Madras, Porjab, and other parts, this field, ripe for the har-
vest, has remained almost ungleaned. No doubt its isolatedposition
and thedifficultyof its language have had something to dowith this
apparent neglect.
No apology will be needed for the presentationof this booktothe
public. The great interest andimportanceattachingtothe folk-tales
of any people ismanifest fromthe great attention devoted tothem by
manylearnedwritersand others. Concerningthe styleandmannerof
the book, however, I would ask my readers to be lenient with me. I
havesought notsomuchtopresentthesetalesin apurelyliteraryform
astogivethem inafairtranslation,andmostofthe workwas doneby
lamp-light'after an ordinary amount of missionary work during the
day. However, such as it is, I sincerely hope it will prove a real
contribution towards that increasing stockof folk-lorewhichis doing
so much to clearaway the clouds that envelop much of thepractices,
ideas, and beliefswhich make up the dailylife of the nativesof our
greatdependencies, control their feelings, and underlie manyof their
actions.
Post8vo, pp. ix.-28i, cloth, price los. 6d.
THE SARVA-DARSANA-SAMGRAHA
;
Or, review of THE DIFFERENT SYSTEMS OF HINDU
PHILOSOPHY.
By MADHAVA ACHARYA.
Translated by E. B. Cowell, M.A., Professor of Sanskrit in the
University ofCambridge, and A. E. GoUGH, M.A., Professor
of Philosophy in the Presidency College, Calcutta.
This work isan interestingspecimen of Hindu critical ability. The
author successively passes in review thesixteen philosophical systems
current in thefourteenth century in the South of India ; and hegives
whatappears to him to be theirmost iuiportanttenets.
wh " e T r h e e tl t i r e a r n e sl i i s it a io l n iv i i s ng tni tr s a t d w i o t r i t o l u i " v I t r l . i is ro f i a i i y n l i i l o i n i t n . -is A ed p t r li n e tr t i r i a c n t s e l d at s o o r j s ou w r i n th iu I l n u d d i i a n n ,
thousilit." Athentvuiii.
15

— —
TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
FiveVolumes, post8vo, cloth, price 21s. each.
ORIGINAL SANSKRIT TEXTS
Onthe Originand HistoryofthePtopUofIndia: TheirReligionand
Institutions.
Collected, Translated, and Illustrated.
By J. MUIR, C.I.E., D.C.L.. LL.D., Ph.D.
Third Edition, Re-written, and greatly Enlarged.
—
Vol. I. Mnhical ami LegendaryAccounts of the Origin of Caste,
withanInquiry intoits ExistenceintheVedicAge.
—
VoL II. Inquirywhetherthe HindusareofTrans-Himalayan Origin,
and akin to the Western Branchesof the Indo-European
Race.
—
Vol. III. TheVedas : Opinions of their Authors and of later Indian
Writers on their Origin, Inspiration, and Authority.
(Out ofprint.)
—
Vol. IV. Comparison of theVedic with the later representations of
theprincipalIndianDeities.
—
Vol.V. Contributionstoaknowledgeofthe Cosmogony,Mythology,
Religious Ideas, Life,and Manners of the Indians inthe
Vedic Age.
Post8vo, pp. xIiv-.-376,cloth, price 145.
METRICAL TRANSLATIONS FROM SANSKRIT
WRITERS.
Withan Introduction, many Prose Versions, and Parallel Passages
from Classical Authors.
By J. MUIR. CLE., D.C.L.. LL.D., Ph.D.
"... Anajreeableintroductionto Hindupoetry." Times.
ani ' l -. m.or.a A l T s o e l n n t m i f m i en w t h s i a c n h d m o . f i ' y t t h > e et l - e i g ke e n nd a a s r . y 11 lo li r r e i o l f l , n t st h r e at b i e o s n t u . l S i a k n e sk o r f it th w e ri r t e e l r i s g . i " ous
EdinburghDailyReview.
Post8vo,pp. IXV.-368, cloth, price 14s.
TIBETAN TALES DERIVED FROM INDIAN
SOURCES.
Translatedfrom the Tibetan of the Kah-Gyub.
Br F. ANTON VON SCHIEFNER.
Done into Engli.-h from the Geiman, with an Introduction,
By W. R. S. RALSTON, M.A.
"Mr.Ralston,whosenameissofamiliartoall lovers of Rnssianfolk-lore,has
suppliedsomeinterestingWestern analoijiesandparallels,drawn,for the most
16

— — — —
TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
part,fromSlavouicsources,totheEast*ru folk-tales,culled from theKahgynr,
oneofthedivisionsoftheTibetansacredbooks." Academy.
"Thetranslation
. . .
couldscarcelyhavefallenintobetterhands. AnIntro-
duction
. . .
givestheleadin'^factsinthelivesofthosescholarswhohavegiven
—theirattentiontogaining^aknowledg'eoftheTibetanliterature and langiiage."
CalcuttaReview.
"Ought to interest allwho carefortheEast,foramnsingstories,orforcom-
parativefolk-lore." PallMallGazette.
Post 8vo,pp. xvi.-224, cloth, price9s.
UDANAVARGA.
A Collection of Verses from the Btddhist Caxok.
CompUed bv DHARMATRATA.
Being the NORTHERN BUDDHIST ^'ERSION of
DHAMMAPADA.
Translated from theTibetan ofBkah-hgrur, with Notes, and
Extracts from the Commentary ofPradjnavarman,
Bt w. woodyille rockhill.
"Mr.Bockhill'spresentworkisthefirstfromwhich assistancewillbegained
foramoreaccurateunderstandingofthePalitest; itL?,infact,asyettheonly
term of comparison available to tus. The 'Udanavarga,'theThibetan version,
was originallydiscovered bythelateM. Schiefner,who published the Tibetan
text, and had intended adding a translation, an intention frustrated by his
death,but which has been carried out byMr.Bockhill. . . . 3Ir.Bockhillmay
be congratulated for having well accomplished a difficult task." .Saturday
Review.
Fifth Edition. Post 8vo, pp. XV.-250, cloth, price 7s. 6d.
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF RELIGION
TO THE SPREAD OF THE UNIVERSAL
RELIGIONS.
By C. p. TIELE,
DoctorofTheology,ProfessoroftheHistoryofEeligions
intheUniversityofLeyden.
Translatedfrom theDutch byJ. ESTLIX Caepesteb, M.A.
"Fewbooksofitssizecontainthe restilt ofso muchwideihinkins,ableand
laborious study, or enable the reader to stiin a better bird's-eye viewof the
Intestresultsofinvestigationsintothereligiotishistoryofnations. .\sProfesgot
Tiel—e modestly says, 'In this little book are outlines—pencilsketches,Imight
say nothingmore.' Buttherearesomemenwhosesketchesfromathumb-nail
areoffarmoreworththananenormouscanvascoveredwiththecrudepainting
of others, and it is e.Tsy to see that these p3gei^, full of information, these
sentences,cutandperhapsalsodry,shortandclear,condense thefruits of long
andthoroughresearch." Seottman,
17

TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
FourVolumes Ready. Volume V. in the Press. Post 8vo, cloth^
price los. 6d. each.
THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt
Doneinto Englishby
ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, M.A.,
AND
EDMOND WARNER, B.A.
February 25th ofthe presentyear(1910) isthe nine hundredth anni-
versary of the completion of the Shahnama. Its author, the Persian
poet Firdausi,spent overthirtylaboriousyears in itscomposition,only
to experience, when the task had been achieved, a heart-breakingdis-
appointment well worthy of inclusion in any record of the calamities-
of authors. His work has survived the test of time, and bygeneral
consent is accounted to be one of thefew great epics of the world.
Geographically and in some other respects it may be said to stand
half-way betweenthe Epics of Europeand those of India. In its own
land it has no peer, while in construction and subject-matter it is
unique. Other Epics centre round some heroic character or incident
to which all else is subservient. In the Sh.thnama there is no lack
either of heroes orof incidents, but its real hero is theancientPersian
people, and its theme their whole surviving legendary history from
the days of the First Man tothe death of thelast Shah in the middle
of the seventeenth century ofour Era. It is the glory of the Persian
race that theyalone among all nations possess such a record, based
as it is on their own traditions and set forth in the words of their
greatest poet. In another sense, too, the Shdhnama is unique. The
author of the othergreat Epicstell us little or nothing of their own
personalities or of their sources of information. Their works are
fairy palaces suspended in mid air; we see the result, but know not
• how it was achieved. The author of the Shahndma takes us into his
confidence from the first, so that in reading it we are let into the
secret of epic-making, and can apply the knowledge thus gained to
solve the problem of the construction of its great congeners. To the
student of comparative mythology and folk-lore, to the lover of
historic romance or romantic history, and toall that are fond of tales
of high achievements and the gests of heroes, the Shdhndma is a
storehouse of rich and abundant material. To set forth a complete
presentment ofit with the needful notes and elucidations isthe object
of the present—tran.slation, made from two of the best printed texts
of the original that of VuUers and Landauer, and that of Turner
Macan. '
Third Edition. Post8vo, cloth, pp. xxiv.-36o, price los. 6d.
THE HISTORY OF INDIAN LITERATURE.
By ALBRECHT WEBER.
Translated from the Second German Editicn by John Mann, M.A.,
and THjfcODORZachariae, Ph.D., with ihe sanction of theAuthor.
—
Dr. BUHLEB, Inspector of Schools in India, writes: "When I was
18

—
TRUBA'ERS ORIENTAL SERIES.
Professor of Oriental Languages in ElphinstoneCollege, I frequently
felt the want ofsucha worktowhich I could referthe students.'"
Professor Cowell, of Cambridge, writes :— "It will be especially
useful to the students in our Indian colleges and universities. I used
to long for such a book when I was teaching in Calcutta. Hindu
students are intensely interested in the history of Sanskrit literature,
andthisvolume will supplythem with all they wanton thesubject."
ProfessorWhitney,YaleCollege,Newhaven,Conn.,U.S.A.,writes:—
"I was one of the class to whom the work was originallygiven in the
form ofacademic lectures. At their first appearancetheywereby far
the most learned andable treatment of their subject; and with their
recentadditionstheystillmaintain decidedly thesamerank,"
"Is pcrliaps the most comprebensive and lucidsurveyof Sanskrit literature
extant. Tlie essays contained in the volume were originally delivered as
academiclectures,andatthetimeof tlieir first publicationwere acknoniedsed
tobebyfarthemostlearnedandabletreatmentofthesubject. Theyhavenow
been brought up to date by theaddition of all the most important results of
recentresearch." Times.
Second Edition. Post 8vo, pp. xxxii. and 330, cloth, price 7s. 6d.
MASNAVI MA'NAVI:
I
THE SPIRITUAL COUPLETS OF MAULANA JALALU-'D-DIN
MUHAMMAD
I RU'MI.
Translated and Abridged by E. H. WHINFIELD, M.A.,
LateofH.M.BengalCivilService.
EXTRACT FROM AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
This isthebook of the Masnavi. Itcontains the routs of the roots
of the roots of the P'aith.and treats of the mysteries of'•Union" and
"Certitude." Thus saith the feeble slave, in need of the mercy of
God, whose name be praised, Muhammad, son of Muhammad, son of
Husain, of Balkh, of whom may God accept it.—'- I have exerted
myself to enlarge this book of poetry in rhymed couplets, which con-
tains strange and rare narratives, beautiful sayings and recondite
i in ndi it c s at e i x o p n r s e ; ss a io p n a s t , h b f u o t rt h h a e vi d n ev g ou n t u , m a e n r d ou a s g a a p r p d l e i n cat f i o o r ns t . h " e p T io h u e s ; au s t h h o o r r t
goes on to state that he wrote his book at the instance of Shaikh
Hasan, son of Muhammad, "a Chief of the Gnostics [^Arifin) and a
leaderofright direction andof sure knowledge;" and concludes with
a prayer that it may prove '-a blessingto those whoare possessed of
insight, the godly, the spiritual, and the heavenly-minded, the men
of light who keep silenceand observe, who areabsent in spiritthough
present in the body, very kings though clothed in rags, true nobfes
amongthepeople, endued with virtues, thelights ofaruidance."
19

— —
r O
63 P> '"^
TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
Post 8vo, cloth, pp. xxxii. 336, price los. 6d.
THE QUATRAINS OF OMAR KHAYYAM.
The Persian Text with an English Verse Translation.
By E. H. WHINFIELD, M.A.,
LateoftheBeiiijalCivilService.
EXTRACT FROM THE INTRODUCTION.
Ghi;is uddin Abul Fath Omarbin Ibrahim al Khayy;im was a native
of Nishapur, one of the principal cities of Khonisan. According to
the Preface of the Calcutta MS., he died in 517 a.h., during the reign
of Sultan Sarjar. The date of his birth is nowhere mentioned, but
he was contemporary with Nizam ul Mulk, the celebrated Wazir of
the Seljuk kings. Alp Arslari and Malik Shah.
This edition contains the Persian text of 500 quatrainsbased on a
collationofeightauthorities,togetherwith English versetranslations.
Second Edition, Revised. Post Svo, cloth, pp. viii.-i24, price5s.
THE QUATRAINS OF OMAR KHAYYAM.
Translated into English verse,
By E. H. WHINFIELD, M.A.,
LateoftheBengalCivilService.
This edition contains 267 ofthebest quatrains in the largeredition,
carefully revised.
PostSvo, pp. vi.-368, cloth, price 14s.
MODERN INDIA AND THE INDIANS.
BEING A SERIES OF IMPRESSIONS, NOTES, AND ESSAYS.
By Sir MONIER WILLIAMS, D.C.L.,
Hon.LL.D.oftheUniversityofCalcutta, Hon.MemberoftheBombay
AsiaticSociety,BodenProfessorofSanskritintheUniversity
ofOxford.
Fifth Edition, revised and augmented by considerableAdditions,
with IllustrationsandaMap.
"la this volumevrehave the tlio\iuhtfnl impressionsofathoug-htfulmanon
s A o n me en o l f ii t i h h e te m n o ed st o i b m se p r o v r a t n a t nt m ( a [ n u , est t i r o a u v s el c l o i n m n ; ec a t n e i d on w s ith an ou e r nl I i n f d j i h a te n ne E d mp o i b r s e e . rv.an.t .
f pe o o r p m le m . o P r r e of o e f ss t o h r e M m o a u n ie n r er W s il a l n i d am c s us h t a o s ms br o o f u t g h h e t Q b u e e f e o n r ' e s t I h n e di p a u n bl s i u c bj i e n ct a s p t l h e a a n sa w n e t
everremembertohaveseeninanyonework. He not onlydeservesthe thanks
ofeveryEn<rlishmanforthis ablecontribution to the studyof ModernIndia—
a subject with which we should be specially familiar—but he deserves the
thanks of every Indian, Parsee or Hindu, Buddhist .and Moslem, for his clear
expositionoftheirmanners,theircreeds,andtheirnecessities." Times.
Post Svo, pp. xii.-72,cloth, price 5s.
THE SATAKAS OF BHARTRIHARI.
Translated from the Sanskrit
By the Rkv. B. HALE WORTHAM, M.R.A.S.,
KectorofE<;ge9tord.North Devon.
' "M A an ve y ry of in t t h e e re M st a i x ni i f m a s dd i i n t t i h o e n b t o o o T k ri h i a b v n e er a s B < i t b r l i i e c n a t l al ri S u e y rie a s n . d "— b S e af a i u fi t r y fa. o ! f / e R x e p o r U e w s . -
sion." St.Jo.meH Gazette.
20

XN^^