,
VOLUME I PART I
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY:. OF BURMA
~pigraphia Birmanica
BEING
LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS
OF BURMA
Edited by··
,..... .·.·r~..~., ~ .
TAW 8EIN KO, C.1E., 18.0.
Supc~intendcnt,Archaeological Survey, Burma Circle .
AND
CHA8. DUROI8ELLE
..' \ "
Asst. Arcliaeological Supdt. for Epigraphy, Burnla Circle
'~S'A COllEC1'10N
UNIVERSITY. OF HAWAU LIBRARY
I .
i .
RANGOON
'SUPERIl\'TENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING. BURM~
.'(Reprint 1972)

PREFACE
'I
T
had at first been intended.'to publish epigraphs found in Burma in'
the' Epigf'aphia Indica; several considerations' went against this'
course, th~, principal of which being the desirability of keeping together
'all the epigraphical documents found in this provi~e. These documents,
with very rare exceptions, bear on the politiCal, religious and cultural
development'of Burma as a whole, whatever the language in which they
are composed,' and will therefore present greater facility for research
and study in things Burmese, when' published together in a series of
volum~s, than if they \vere scattered among other epigraphs of totally
different character in the pages of another p~n1ication. This was' the
leading idea in the genesis of the Epigraphia BiNlUlnica.
The material is abundant, Burma being one of the richest countries
of Indo-Cbina in lithic and other inscriptions., There is already a
of
collection six large volumes, Elephant size, of inscriptions transcribed
in modern Burmese characters and there is sufficient material' for a
j
seventh
j
these do not incl~de,the Talaing and Pyu inscriptions. And
yet, all the Divisions of this pt'ovince 'have not as yet 'been thoroughly
explored-such as Tenasserim, Pegu, Irrawaddy aQd Arakan. A good
search in these Divisions would no doubt, bring to light a large number
of Burmese, Talaing, Pyu and Arakanese inscriptions, and no doubt a1.so
a certain number of Siamese ones. The three principal centres from
which the material now at our disposal has been obtained are Pagan"
Pegu and, Prome. There is no likelihood of Pagan yielding anything
much fqrther. Notwithstanding the good crop of Talaing inScriptions
found in Pegu, very many more will, I am certain, be yet discovered,
u the result of a more thorough search, for those we have already
were' found within a comparatively very restricted radius. Prome had,
up' to 'now, yielded the oldest inscriptions; two in P'-li, which contain'
only passage& from, the Scriptures the others in Pyu, a now extinct
j

( iv )
language. These latter are short, but important; and :yet they have
been all found, except one or.two. at the same spot: the Pyu
cemetery near the Payagyi pagoda; it is probable this cemetery has not
yielded all its funeral urns, and that further excavations will bring
more to light. The site of the ancient city of Prome, Sarekhettarl,
is very extensive and full of ,'uins, and there is, I think, no doubt that
a thorough exploration and systematical excavations would yield more of
these precious documents of a nation now long disappeared.
Besides their historical and religious interest, these epigraphs are of
great value for Indo-Chinese philology. Thanks to the splendid labours
of Mr. C. 0, Blagden, the result of which will be published in these'
pages, the old forms of M6n or Talaing, as preserved in the inscrip~
.tions ot' the IIth century, will now be available for further researches
in a family of languages which is spread over a vast area. The same
scholar's acumen has rescued/fl'dOl total oblivion a language dead since
• ""',,' r"
about six hundt'ed years and bUI'i~d, on the funet'al uI'ns of its speakers,
in the cemetery abovementioned;--'that is, the Pyu language. It is true
that, beyond somc d()l:l~l1S of words and the fact thjlt it belongs to the
Tibeto·Bul'man f~ily; yet little i~ 1(J1(lwnot' this idiom; this is due to
the small number and shortness of the inscl'iptions found up to the
present; but, as pointed out ahove, all the probabilities tend to show
that mOl'e will be fOI·thcomin~. The oldest BUI'mese inscripti9ns (IIth
century) show us the language in a stage of phonetic flux, during which
old forms were slo\vly giving way to new ones, and furnish us with a
number of words now forgotten for centuries.
The necessity fOl' such a publication and its usefulncss are self
evident, and scarcely require any comment. It will at last unlock for
us the treasures slowly accumulated by the genel'ations of three'nations.
It will constitute a store-house faI' the reconstitution, on a solid basis,
of the political history of this province,and for that of its religious
development; it will enable us to follow, almost step by step, the
evolution of the Burmese and Talaing languages, ,thl'ough their gradual
phonetic changes, up to the modern stage in which we now know
them; it will also, though perhaps' in a less satisfactory degree, help
in undel'standing better the evolution of the national institutions. and
national spirit. The publication of the EpigrajJhia Birmatlica we owe
to the enlightened solicitude of the Government of Burma for the

( v )
advancement of oriental studies in this province, for, it is scarcely
necessary to say, it could never have been brought about without their
help.
,This first part of the first volume contains the four faces of the
.l\lyazedi pillar found at Myinkaba neat' Pagan: Burmese, Pili, Talaing
and Pyu. The importance of this inscription-pillar 'Is made clear in the
introduction and need not be dwelt upon hel'e. It is this pillar which
gave to 1\11'. C. O. Blagden the key to the readin~ of old Talaing, and
enabled him to decipher what we know of Pyu. The second part, now
in the press, consists of eight Talaing epigraphs, among which is the
most interesting of eady M6n t'ecol'ds: the great inscription of the
Shwezig6n pagoda at Nyaung-U, near Pagan. It may be here mentioned
that extt'a copies of all the Talaing inscriptions of Mr. Blagden will
be struck off with consecutive pagination so as to form a handy volume
of these important records. The second "olume, also now in the press,
consists of the four hundt'ed plaques with Talaing legends, in illustra
tion of the last ten gt'eat .iataka-stories, which ornament the upper
terraces of the Ananda temple (1090 A.D.) at .pagan. The material for
the third volume is ready; it is made up of another long Talaing inscrip
tion, and of the inscl'iption in Talaing, Burmese and Pali engraved on
the great bell at the Shwczig6n pagoda at Nyaung-U. Other volumes
will follow in due course. Our, best thanks are due to Mr'. R. W. Bishop,
Superintendent, and Mr. R. Baillie, Deputy Superiritendent, Government
Printing, Burma" for the interest th~y take in 'i~ispublication and fOl'
theil' successful overcoming of many typographical difficulties.
CHAS. DUROISELLE,
Assistant Art.:haeologi<:al SIl/Jeri"tendetJt
MANDALAY, 21st Odober 1919. for Epigraphy, Btlrma.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
THE BURMESE FACE OF THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTION
AT PAGAN.
T
HE two Myazedi inscription stone pi\J~rs were discovered at Mjinkaba,
a small locality quite near to Pagan, in 1886-87, by Dr. E. Forchhammer,
then Professor of Pali at the Rangoon College and Government Archaeologist.
A. The better preserved pillar was found near the Myazedi pagoda, quite
close to it, on the north, in front of asmal1 ruined square temple, in which the
remnants of a seated Buddha may still be seen. It is in a good state of preser
vation and has been, some years ago, for gre;lter safety, removed to the Pagan
Museum, near the Anandatemple. It contains the same document composed in
four languages, one on each face: Pali, Burmese, Talaingand Pyu. It is from
Mr.
estampages and photographs of this pillar that C. O. Blagden gave us
his translation of the Talaing face and of the Pyu face,s and he designated it as
J
A, to distinguish it from the other pillar, estarnp<lges of which he received only
later, and which he called B. It is best to keep these designations in mind
in order to avoid confusion.
B. The other pillar, which contains replicas of the former's inscriptions, was
badly broken Forchhammer recovered two pieces of the 'l!,~'er half within the
j
precincts of the Kubyaukkyi temple, which adjoins the Myazedi on the west.
The third piece completing the upper part was discovered, in 19°4, in the
surrounding wall of the Myazedi platform while it was being repaired and into
which it had been immured. The lower half was found accidentally, deeply
buried in an erect position near a small, old brick building, close to the Myazedi,
on the east, and which is supposed to have been a Pi~akat·taik or library. All these
pieces were bamy weathered and a large proportion ofthe letters had disappeared,
what remains being, however, beautifully clear. The several portions, after
having thus been scattered for no doubt several centuries, were pieced up together
I "The TalaingInscription 01 the Myazcdi Pagodaat Pag3","in 101/1'tHzl Royal AsiaticSo~'t7 for
October 1909.pp. 117ff·
• " Preliminary Studyof the Fourth Text of the Myazedi Inscriptions," 1.R.AS.,April 1911,3650

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. I
and the pillar, thus restored, WilS erected on the platform of the Myazedi.. This
pillar is designated as B.
Decipherment.-The Burmese and Pali faces were first transcribed into
modern Burmese characters in 1892, after Forchhammer's death, in the first
volume of inscriptions] published in Burma, on pages 203 and 207 respectively.
But the estampages from which these transcriptions were made, and which were
found among Forchhammer's· papers, had been taken before disengaging the
lower portion of the pillar from the ground in which it had sunk, so that in both
these transcripts the last ten lines are missing. Mor~ver,in transcribing
the Burmese, the archaic spelling has been, to some extent, modernized,
and this cannot, therefore, be called an exact transcript. Mr. Blagden, in his
"Talaing Inscription of the l\1yazediPa~da at p'agan," has also ~iven a
transcript of the Burmese which includes the last ten lines, much more correct
than the other, and corrections to which he published in subsequent notes.' These
corrections being taken into consideration, it will be seen that his transcript and
mine agree almost completely, except in a. very few particulars which will be noted
intheir proper place. While making the transliteration into Roman characters, I
was at Pagan, and thus had the advantage of being able to examine pillar A itself
whenever some doubt arose; this·has enabled me to settle a few doubtful points.
I had besides at mydisposal a very good photograph of Ataken by Forchhammer;
this is much clearer than subsequent estampages and photographs, and shows
that the stone in some places has certainly deteriorated, this being due, no doubt,
to the numerous estampages which were taken of it subsequentl~' with the
attendant washing and beating with brushes.
A first translati"n of the Burmese face was made by Maung Tun Nycin, of
the Burma Secretariat, in 1899aj but this translation is rather defective, as a
comparison between it and mine will show. On the other hand, it will be seen,
on examination, how very closely Mr. Blagden's translation of the Talaing and
mine of the Burmese agree.
Chronological Importallce.-This in~criptiOl1 has been of the greatestvalue in
that it has helped to rectify the chronological errors of the Burmese chronicle
MahayllsQ7iJl'n (Qtf.))'P<hOC) and Sir Arthur Phayre in respect of four of the most
important r~igns of that period of Burmese history. We are told at the begin
ning that Sri TribhUln.nadityadhammaraj became king at Pagan after 1628
The Inscriptionsof Pagan,etc."
1 II
t ..A Further Noteon thl'! Inscriptionsof the ~yafediPagoda.Pagan," J.R.A.S.• July t9 1 b.
I '1 Inscriplilln~ofPagan, Pinya and Ava." Translation,with Notes, Rangoon. r899.

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS .3
years of the Buddha's religion had elapsed. This date Anno Buddhae is oneaf
the very most important as yet yielded by Burmese epigraphs, for it enables us to
fix with absolute certainty the accession to the throne of Kyanziltha, and thereby
also that of his successor, A.laungsithu; and of his two immediate predecessors,
Anorata and Sawlu. The Burmese reckon the ~ra'of Religion from 544 B.C. i
subtracting this from 1628 we obtain 1084 A.D. as the commencement of the
reign of Ky.anzittha, and this corresponds to th,eyear 446 Burmese Era, which is
reckoned from 638 A.D. The inscriptiOli tells us KyanZ:lttha reigned 28 years
which, added to 1084. give 1I 12 A,D. as the year of his death ~nd that of his
successor Alaungsithu's accession, or 474 Burmese Era. Sir Arthur Phayre who,
in compiling his Histor)' ofBurma, had to rely.almost entirely on the Mahay48a
7J.'£1I or Hma1z-Nan-Yti:Ja-:.vi1l, is entirely wrong in the dates he assigns to
Kyanzittha, his predecessors Anorata and Sawlu, and to Alaungsithu who
succeeded him. The following. are the dates given by Phayre for these four
reigns. p. 281 :-
Cornmentememoj Reign.
:-i;;IM d King. ·i------!--·------ Length of
Year of I. Burmese Reign.
f{eligion. A.D. Ern.
i.
.-. _.. --..--_.. -----_._,----j--------------
Anorata 101,)
Sawlu 1593 5
Kyallzillba 1057
Alaungsithu_ ... i lo.tl.-
)
i
75
This is in disaccord, not only witb the Myazedi In:5cription, and some earlier
inscriptions now ('0!k:,~L;! :.t Amar"r.":r~, blllalsG with the Jald-Boll-Yasa1JJi",
~! ~urlllese
one the most trustworthy sourcesfor thedates of history; the dates
givenabove, as based on the Myazedi inscription, agree singularly with the latter
,work. I\lr. Taw Sein Ko (Burmese Sketches, p.66) has already rectified the
dates in PllaFe's History for this period; I cannot do better than quote here his
own words: .. These latter ligures correspond 'in a remarkable degree with those
given in the Jalci-Bo1J-Ydsawt'll or the chronological tables based on the Royal
horos~opes. As the Burmans, in common with the Hindus, set a great store
by astrology and horoscopes, these tables appear to afford us trustworthy

4 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. t
chronological data. Relying on the Myazedi·inscription as well as these tables
and the other records, Phayre's dates may be revised as follows:-
Commencementof Reign.
Ler!gth of
Nameof King. I i Reign.
Yearof I Burmese
• Religion. I I A.D. I Era.
,
, -
I
...
Anorata 1588 I 1044 I 406 33
... I
Sawlu 1621 1077 439 7
...
Kyanzittha 1638 1084 446 28 ..
...
Alaungsithu 1656 • IIU 471 75
!
-----
These dates of 1\1r. Taw Sein Ko agree with those of the Jata-Bon-Y48t111Ji"
except for that of Kyanzittha's death, which it gives as I JI I. But this seeming
difference may perhaps amount to only a few days, according as the year is
recorded as expired or current. Such differ~ncescan be settled only when a
complete date, that is, the year, month and day, is given} The date 1084 for
the accession of Kyanzittha is contirmed by the Shwesandaw (Prome) Talaing
inscription which gives the date 1028 after the pari1Zirva1)a for this event. The
date 1630 Anno Buddhae given in the same document very probably refers to his
abhisella or coronation as the context itseli seems to show.1I
Kyan8ittha.-The checkered and romantic, but intensely human career of
Kyanzittha, would be too long to recount here. Suffice it to say that, with all
his defects and shortcoming::;, he impresses the reader who has carefully gone
through his life in the indigenous chronicles, as a high-spirited, strong, energetic
.and wise captain and ruler, with a heart full of human sympathy and love. He
was not of pure Burmese race, but of Indian descent by his mother, who was a
princess of Vesali or modern Besaf in Central Inciia i with one ortwo ~](ceptions,
Burmese histories agree on this pointi those which do not accept this-no aoiiQt.
from a motive of national pride-affirm the princess came from VesaIi in Arakan
and not from Vesali in. India i but practically the whole mass of written and oral
tradition goes against this latter assertion. This is, however, still a moot point,
which only further researches will enable us to settle. A doubtsubsists as to the
1 Cf. Articlo on"Dateofthe final fall of P:1&an It an the Annual Report of thl5 Department for the
yearending March 191;,p. 36.
, See ..DatesofKini Kyanzittba'sacc:esaion andcoronation," inthe aame Report, p. 19.

~ART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 5
legitimacy of his birth i on thewhole, howcv:~r, evidence goes to show that he was
not Anorata's SOil, but of the minister who WdS scnt to bring the princess from
India (orAi-akan) to Pagan. Thus, he was not, as a matter of fact, entitled to the
succession to the throne of Burma; but he was, after the death of:::>. son of
I.,
Anorata, unanimously chosen by the Burmese generals and high officials as the
most worthy and capable of holding firmly the reins of Government in his hands.
It is he who completed the famous Shwezigan pagoda at Nyaung-u, which had
been begun by Anorata, and who erected the magnificent Ananda temple in which
--is seen his likeness in stone executed by a contemporary sculptor, and that of
Nagayan, besides several other smaller ones.
The queen mentioned in this inscription was not his chief queen. He had
four principal queens, mentioned in the following order:
1. Abheyadana (::p:y,xX)'1oopr), the chief queen, who bore him a daughter,
known as Shwe-l:.ng-tbe (~1.33oJ.)e§.).
~. A prince5s irom Pegu. who had no children.
3· Kilindan (:JcO',;~~), t:1C daughter of the head ma.n of Thilhain (~:e§c.),
who likeWise bore him no childreli.
4. Sambhula (oo~iiooD), the niece of a monk, who bore him his only son,
prince Rajakumar, thefounder of this inscription.
His deep affection for Sambhiila, made so clearly evident in the inscription
was no doubt due to the fact that, before his accession to the throne, she had
devotedly ministered to him in ilis distress and exile at Kyaungbyu, where he had
-fled for his life. When he was recalled to Pagan, he left her under the care of
her uncle the monk, asking her, if the fruit of their union was a son, to come
back to him to the c!i.pital when times were better. Years rolled by, and when he
had been king already for some years, Sambhlila brought her boy to the palace.
~ie made her his fourth queen, with the title of V-Sauk-pan (@,C#O:):>o5u~,a).
U-Satd-pan m~ans an artificial fJowa. of gold .or silver, used as an ornament
It
for the hair, also a c.rest, an ,)rnament in general to adorn the hair. is this
Burl!'.~~e litle, which seems to have been given by some kings to the queen they
'n:Ned most, which is translated in the four faces or- the inscription by the Pali
equivalent, Va!a';lsalul (Skt. avajamsaka) her full title in PaJi, Triloka'llatamsiU,
j
meaning" the Ornament of theThree Worlds." Besides Sambhula, I have found
only two other queens bearing this tide: one was a queen of Sawlu, the prede
cessor of Kyanzittha i and the other, a queenof Narapatisithu.
Kyanzittha seems to have regretted the delay of Sambhiila in bringing him
his only son, for some time before his arrival he had made his grandchild, who

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL.t
succeeded him with the title .of .Alaungsithu, heir-apparent to the throne; such
a course, however, as well as the appOintment of his son to a distant province,
appearsto have been dictated by political expediency. He gave him the name of
RAjakumar, andsomeyeanlater, with thetitle ofJeyakhettarA, made himGovernor
of DhafifiavaU or Arakan and of the adjacent seven hill tracts. Nothing more is
heard of him either in epigraphs or histories.
The Alpha6,t and T"/J1tslite,.tdiOfl.-An examination of the Talaing and
Burmese faces of the Mycizedi pillar at once discloses the fact that the characters
used in both are practically identical i settingaside the two letters (0; ~, and 'i, ~)
which the Talaings invented to represent sounds in their language which no
Indian letters could do adequately, it is one and the same alphabet. The evident
deduc;:tion is that one of the two nations borrowed its alphabet from the other.
All evidence tends to show that the Burmese received their alphabet from the
M&ns about A.D. 1057.1 It is in that year that Anorata, king of Pagan,
.swooped down upon the deltaic provinces of Burma, that is, RAmaiHiadesa, the
Talaing country, and, after a siege of three months,' entered That&, the capital.
Both the Tawng and Burmese chronicles give as the reason of thisonslaughtthe
desire of king Anorata to transfer to. his capital the sets,of the t"ip#,,;/U and
their commentaries in the monasteries of the Talaing capital, .Butthe probability
is that the sack of That&n was only an after-thought and that his primary and
rea) motive in thus swooping suddenly on the Delta was purely political, and his
aim was the destruction of the strong and flourishing Indian settlements which
then dotted the Delta and which, in his estimation, were a growing danger to his
own power in Pagan. Oneol these and probably the oldest was C;rik~etra or Old
Prome (HmawzA), some six miles below the modern Prome i four others are
mentioned as having existed near where is now Rangoon: PokkharavaU, Triha
kumbha, Asitanjana and Rammanagara 3i from the conquest of Anorata on,.
nothing more is heard of these independent foreign settlements.
The result of the conquest of ThatOn was momentous for Pagan j
Anorata took Manuhi, the king of That&n, a captive to his capitai, andwith him,
1The Talaing history DIIQ".",.HI; (printed at Patlak), p.l2, gms Anno Buddhae 1600, that~
A.D. 10:;6. .
1I TheButme~echroniclesdo not mention th.; thestatemenbtui.s"found at p. IJof Dha"'IJI""t;-~~1I
"",,","una/llya tUIf • • • .luJi .ui; fjuJi SlUid1ul".",.""t; ""tJ,,",It la-w pirittl, ..The kine If
Arlmaddanapura(Paean) • • • havingcome, invettedcloselythecity ofSuddhammayatj (Thatan) f.
three month.." m Tabing,AritllanUnofw ArilJlG4l4alJa, is freqtleflt.
3 Vi" Fprchhammer, HDitI 'II' til, "nei,ltt G,oKra!hy 0/ Bur... I-rlu Slt.~l PqotJ.,
Rqooo, I'll; anda110the ~~cocq500SCXJSII(c".ycUJII k)'O'thaD kyaml), Vol. II, p•.1'1'. .

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 7
the most learned monks, the Pili scriptures and,the.r commentaries, and all the
fin~,
best artisans and ,artists he could and," adds the Talaing c.hronic1e, from
II
that time Pagan flourished exceedingly,'; Materially the conquerors, the
J
Burmese became, toa great extent, intellectually the conquered; such examples
.
,
are not rare in history. The form of Mahayanism then extant atPagan• gave
way to the HfnayAnism of That8n; magnificent temples were built under the
supervision of Indian and Talaing architects; it is only soon after 1057 that
inscriptions on stone and, votive tablets in Burmese, Taiaing and Pili make~h~r
appearanceat Pagan. It is from that time that writing was adapted to common
use by the adoption of a foreign alphabet to represent Burmese sounds i ifit is
consid~rcd that as pointed out above, the'Talaing and Burmese characters at
I
that time were identical, and that the greater antiquity ~f Talaing civilisation is
accepted on every hand,s I think the rational conclusion' is that the Burmese
borrow~d their alphabet from the Talamgs.4 Tliisdoes not certainly mean that
writing was unknown at the Burmese capital i it. can be easily proved that
Sanskrit works, Mahayanist, and probably also Sanskrit HitUl,anist and Brahma
nical works, were in use at Pagan before Ano~ata.lS But it is only ,after'the
conquest of Thaton that an alphabet is devised for ~ting the vulgar tongue. It
is noteworthy that no inscription whatsoever in Burmese or PAli has yet been
found at Pagan antedating Anorata; and this fact is the more remarkable
still, when the dry and, to stone and brick, undestructive climate of Central
Burma is taken into consideration, I think also there is strong internal evidence
in the earliest Burmese inscriptions themselves, of this adoption by the BUmiese.
at that time of an alphabet for writing their own language; I refer to the
I Ohammacetr,p. 12,i"fill'.
II See my paper on .;The Ari of Burmaand Tantric Buddhism," in larchlUolol"eal Sur'IJt'l pI iI,ilia
for 1915-'6,pp. 79-93-' '
S Cf. for instance, Bigandet, Lt~lta of GotlJma, Vol. II, p. 143; Forchhammer, D~f14 fit, 1"If '
Shwttlag~n Pagoda, and his Jardine Prize Essay, P.:uff I Parker's Bu"".a, mithJ"citd rl/,,,tnceUI
r,latioru 'With Chill". R;\"~,,nn. .~:., ';. ~R.~: J. Stuart, Burma throuJ(h tIlt Centuries, p. 30; the
Kalyani lns':;;ption, (}ipavamsa andMahlvadlSa; Lajooquilrc, ')o_in. Ia"ch~ologiqHeaM Si."" 41, '41 ;
I.a>;··~., ItldilCM Alt"thumskund" IV,Sol. '
" Againstthis isSometimes broughtthe statementof the Burmese Ihhtiybaw,"l that thetriJti~~J
were transcribed froO' the Talaing intotheBurmesecharacters; but'tbisnodoubtmust be u~as
meaning into the newly adopted alphabetI and as thcle two alphabets, for the writi
s
n
e
g
em
o
.
f Pili, were
identical inall theircharacters,thiscan havepresented no difficulty. Thereal meaninar to be that
'lewcopiesof theScriptureswere made for the use ofthe Burmese mona.
6 Vide01'''dcit in note (1)I lee allO L.Finot, "Un nouveau document sur Ie buddhisme bm\u..'
JourNal Atiatiqru, juitJeNlOl1t 1912, p. 139: ..on conclut trop viteduSanskrit au MahAyAna"I batnow
therecent discoveryofthe trantric·Buddhistfrescoes at Min-nan·thu near Pagan leaveslittleroom lordoubt
as to the existenceofcertain Mahaylniltworlu at Pagan.

8 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
extraordinarily numerous ways of spelling the same words, not only in different
epigraphs, but very often in the same document, and which seems to me to show
pretty clearly that, for neqrly a century, the Burmese were grappling with the
problem of exactly representing some sounds with the new tool. at their
disposal.'
The old Burmese alphabet as we find it in the l\1yazedi has become, through
a series of gradual and slow changes, the modern Burmese alphabet as used now.
There was alwaysa perceptible tendency to round off the more or less angular and
square letters into soft curves and circles or parts of circles; but for these general
changes and some others, few but more radical, as for instance. in the subscript
letters hand m. the old and the modern alphabets are practically identical.
The method of transliteration fOllowed here has already been explained in the
Jour1wl of the Burma Research Society for August 1916, p. 8.. As this young
Journal has not yet, however, a very wide circulation among oriental scholars,
this scheme of transliteration, since it will be used regularly in the Epi~rap";a
BiYmanica, is reproduced ht::re.
In transcribing an oriental language into Rolnan characters, two methods
naturally present themselves. The first, like the Hunterian sy~tem, is purely
phonetic, and endeavours to represent, as accurately as possible, the pronuncia
tion only of the language; the purpose of this method is to furnish a ready means
of transcribing, as they are spokell, ~eographical name~ and other common words
current in the country and in every day use even among- people not speaking the
language; it is also used with advantage in obtaining, without going the length
of mastering the native letters, a knowledge of the colloquial. It is a method of
practical utility well adapted to official and commercial requirements. The
second is what has been called the scientific method "; it does not in the least
<.
take into account the pronunciation, its aim being solely to reproduce, in Roman
characters, as faithfully as possible, the exact form of the language as it has
been fixe.d in writing; thus endeavouring to retain, in the foreign characters, the
older form of the language as preserved l)~, !t:;· aJp~"hpt :tno unaffected by its
pronunciation ,:,:hich is :t 1n '::j"':' subject to slow but none the less very rea~ change.
inscription~
Such a literal transliteration is "'ge.nerally adopted for transcription of
, The several \'arietie~ of IIlphabets in the Indt'-Chinese Peninlula were d~ivl'd from one or two·
archetypesfrom Southern India; andso fRr as epig{aphiealand hi~torical.evidence"available,these adop
tion_director indirect-ofa foreign alphabet IIppt'!U,in pointohime,tohave follGWedthe following orderI
Khmer, M&n, Burmese, Thai. Cr. also Lllnet de I.Rjonquiere, L,tlo",ai",tJJ'chlolt1gifJlilllu SitJm, p. 4r f.
For a reliable and slJCcinct survey of the progress.of epigraph)' in Indo-China generally, see L. Finoc .
Nottl d'Epirrapllie, XIV.,.XX, in B.E.F.E.O., Vol. XV, NO.2, pp.ll,l-r73. '

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 9
and for the purpose of philologicalcomparison. ..This is the method ,adopted In
the,following scheme of transliteration:-
I. CONSONANTS. '
The consonantal system is the same as in paIi. and the transcription J is that
used for that language in 'Europe, exceptfor one lettt:r:_
..
Gutterals .. , (Xl ka Q kha (') ga tX) gha c ila
Palatals , o ca CD cha OJ ja <tI jha efta
Cerebrals ~a 5 \h~ ~ 4a v 4ha CK)Qa
"
Dentals 00 ta co tha 3 da o dha + na
Labials, .oo o pa () pha ~ ba 00 bha . (,l rna
Semi-vowels 00 ya '1 ra co la Sla o wa
Sibilant 00 sa aspirate to ha
Anusvara ~rh unclassified a;, a
,oo
(a) In all consonants the vowel a is inherent. No a is inherent in tmJa"04"a.
This a is elided when a consonant is final, which is indicated in Burmese by a
curve stroke above it, thus, e.!., ,-,5 k, S n, 6 c. r:J3 t, B 1. etc. i S final in a
syllable is often superscript over the initial consonant of the following syllable.
thus o;);~oo= i:.cSorY.), santana " ~ooJ = (,)50ooJ, maftftila.
(6) Double e., ii, becomes e3, 'iii; these letters are used oniy in Pali words.
e§ (now pronounced i) is final in, pure Burmese words and is transliterated
by ii, for e§ at the end of words is not intended to represent a double 2
19e3,
but a single one i e.f., ~ra1i i oe§, ctJii.
J An ideal transli~ationwouldbeoneunitingboth methods.theliteral and thephnnetic, which could
be applied to all purposesboth practicalandscientific; thiswould not,ofcoune,beimpo"ible. Batto do
sofor Burme!le, for instance.in which lomeletters haveacquireda quitedifferent value from their original
one. in which each vowel has two or three sounds according to'thecombination in which it appeara,final
consonantsf~lyintefChangetheirclassesand medial vowelland nasalsareoftendroppedowinrtoa shift
ofaccent,sucha transliterationwould requirea diacriticalapparatusso complicatedasto bemorepa••ling
than useful Moreover I have remarked that. for purposes of comparison. the literal transliteration of
Burmese is in many calleS more useful than the rendering of the modern prolllinciation. Bat &I. InaU
suchcomparisons,we havetodealwithlivinglanguages,theactual pronunciati"n cannotaltogether be puc
aside, for itenablesustolaydown moreorless fiud rules01 phoneticequivalences; inthelecin:umltancea,
thebestway is,whenever necessary, to indicatethe pronunciationwithinbracketsafter the literaltranliltera
cion. This is what has generally been dCllein the few-unfortunately toofew-essays on Indo-Chinese
philology in which Burmeseentersasa term olcomparison.

10 EPIGRAPHIA !BIRMANICA' [ VOL••
(e) The •letter ' 0 ' J is transliferated by ar 'instead of ", because 'til'
represents the true value of '0 '; moreover a 'U would make some combina
tionsunpronounceable. But iri Pilli and Sanskrit words and in quotations
from these languages, the Continental·transliteration 1.1 is retained.
a
(tI) The letter a, is also included among the consonants; such,
0;),
it.fulfils .two functions i first, in inscriptions, it is used to denote the short
tone, which consists in the sudden occlusion_ of .the voice .affecting the
vowels pronounced in.this tone; this letter, with the, ,,;,.4mll (s:) is either
subscript or postscript, and in transcription is represented by an" inverted
e,~., a~, o:;;>~,
comma placed' after the word affected ; QO:);d;" maya'; ""in';
am'. The dot (.) now used for this tone is nothing but this ~ simplified
for ease and rapidity of writing. Then, is also used as a fulcrum to initial
3;)
vowels i this use is practically unknown in old epigraphs and becomes current
only very late in, such a position,this has nothing to do phoneticalty
j QQ
with the word itself, it is merely a support for the initial vowel, and has
therefore no value in the pronunciation or etymologically; hence, in trans
literation, this fulcrum is left unrepresented by any sign or symbol in so
j
doing, I am but following a usage already ~stablished, and which has the
advantage of presenting the word in its original and true form, and as it
is still found' in related dialect5 ; thus 39o, ,to sleep, is transcribed ip i 3SS,
im, etc., the ancient way of writing these words (without the fulcrum) being
~, ip i ~~, ;m. To transcribe 390 by (lip would giye th~ impression of a
diphthong which does not in r~ality exist i to transcribe it bya-;p would
an
bring in element a, which is phonetically, non-existent, and might be taken.
fo'r the common prefix ~.
Aledia' C01lSonfl11#..
The following, are the ~ymbols used to represent the medial consonants:-
-,
-
Symbol
Consonant.' i Transliteration:' Examples.
:\Iediah.
t ~_--C.-
..-.•'C--' "-.__
r~. Y
8
~
:)
kyi
r krA
'l u -. J __
o w ~$ kwan
o ~ ~ ~$
(]') ; mhan
" .' =
) This Jetter is pronounced 11 in sc..me l.oJo.d!a1ects;· lie Burm. •01, wei, far.

PART I] THl4: MYAZEbl. INSCRIPTloNS i l
These symbols are further combined one with another as follows:-
Medial Translitera·
Combinations. Examples.
COIBbinatlo.... lion,
.C'iJi
OJ and 0 aJ yw kywan
9 and 0 G rw ~ prwan
'I and <:0 G rh .is rhan
II. VOWELS.
Leaving aside, for a while, the consideration of the tones, we see that
the vowel system in Bttrmese is the same as in Poili;· the following vowels
have the same value as the Pali ones and can be transliterated in exactly
the same manner;-
Initial. Medial.
-------- - - - ._-- .,
3;) a tkiJ tJ + .J and a
~ j g) ( i ' i Q i .2 i
B14 2 a -i u oil G
G e ~§:>.o (I- e G-;) 0
- -_ .•.---_.---- _ .. -- - ",- '. - -- ._. ---,.,,'- --_.... _ .•. _-
The dash accompanying the symbols of the medial vowels indicates the position
of the consonants.
(4) The initial \'owel has no corresponding medial symbol because, as
a;l
has already been said; itl is inherent in all consonants.
(6) Besides the above, Burmese possesses two others that are foreign
to Pali: ~ and ~.~ is transliterated by ai, pronounced as' e in met," or
U
ai in the French "Iail it is in reality the same as .oS,y, and made its
"j
appearance regularly in inscriptions onlyin the 15th century, before which date all
the words now spelt with ~ were most often written with an -oS. The only real
difference between the two is t,onal, -oS belonging to the medial and ~ to
the heavy tone. ~ is merely a conventional sign made up of two vowels, u

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (vot. 'I··
I'
and J'i it is now pronounced 1/ 0 as in 1/ photo/' "bone," but its pronuncia
tion is affected by a following final 05, Il, or S, ., when it becomes the diphthong
ai. It is now impossible to ascertain its pronunciation eight hundred,yean
ago, date of the earliest inscriptions. as yet found. . Burmese words con
taining this symbol are, in related dialects, principally Lolo dialects and Maru,
pronounced with the following sounds: 0,", &, ii, ui and oi.We shall repre
.ent it in this scheme by u£, to be in conformity with the transcription ~f
it adopted already by Mr. Blagden in his literal transliteration of the TalainC
alphabet.
III. TONIS.
There are three tones in Burmese,· which affect all the vowelsi the short
or abrupt, which is but an occlusion of the voice the medial or long tone, and
j
the heavy or falling tone.
(I) The short tone is denoted by a dot (.) placed under the vowel
e
affected by it. The vowels ~ a, ~ i, 14, are naturally short, and as
such do not require the tonal sign the other vowels, not being naturally
j
short, require it when affected by this tone, thus;-~, ~, &§~, ~.
It has already .been stated that this dot (.) is but a modification of the
old r13 (') which was used to denote this, tone. In the transliteration of
tonal languages, numbers, indicating each tone, are now generally u$ed the
j
same system will be followed here, and the short tone designated by the
l
number I placed to the right of the word j e.g., 50? leI j ~, ;aJ' j ~, mol i
~,
;14%1.. .
(2) The medial tone, when affecting the vowels a, i, u, is denoted in 'the
transcription of Pali by a dash over these letters. so that a, i and u belong to this
tone and need no other 'diacritical sign or number to show this. The following,
as they stand, without ~ny special sign, belong to this tone- GI, 05 'Y. and ~.
ui, and no number will be used to indicate it. When e§J, 0, is affected by this
tone, a small curve stroke is placed on the top to the right of it, ~5i this
shallbe deno~ed by the number 2 placed after the word: ,""l,kho' j 5c.», mt1.
(3) The third or heavy tone is indicated by two dots (a) placed after the
vowel affected i'.g., ~Ja, ~a, +[I,!-I,~, it will be marked in transliteration
j
bythe number 3-0:):)1, /43 ; 8a,m~ i 50', f>#' i c£}a, chui ' .· This tone is inherent in
I Practically jOHI';if the very abrupt ,top of th~ VOICe in pronouncinr the final. c:iJ, 8, 00, 0
is reckoned.ali it shouldbe,asa tone; this lone hasand requires noparticular sign todenote it.

PART I] . Tl-lE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTtONS
.the vowels ~" 0, and ~, ai, so that the dots are not used with these two letters
andthis practice will be followed in transliterating.
(Sometimes, but very seldom, the heavy tone' is denoted, for the sake of
emphasis, after e@P and ~ which are them written o§x, tI, and ~" .,••)
The following table gives the vowels arrangedaccord~gto tones:-
,
. I
Short tone. Medial tone. Heayy to...~
1
~Il
to>l
-::> A -'i 11
-1 . -11
~}
rl
. 5} !
u ~} Q -t} al
-[ I -II
----·---\l-------r--------
!I 'C}
G-.
e1
G-
e
el
at
:.
--_._._---!
I
~~l :§~l
;
5 ot 0
I (;-T e-l .
G§:>,}
I .
I 8 (very rare)
'11 0
0-)'
! 1
_·._i -1-·_----I --1--------
.,1.
~ ! ~
I
!
.--<:0 Y
~I aJ
ail (very rare)
----1-
~ ll
ui ,
The tones also affect the short vowels a, i, U, when followed by final nasals,
the same signs being used. When the sign. of neither the short tone (.) nor

14 ' ltPtGRAPHIA BiRMANicA' ,t vot.. *
the hePy (.) are used the· WQrd nattually belongS to the meriiil.~, i of tlut
nualB, ~ and ~ take only S, is, after them, in modem Burrn~·i'.K'':-
Short tone. Medialtone.
IV.' MBUVIATIONS.
abbreviation~
A number of of .frequently rec-rtnng words are often used
j
most of these abbreviations do not admit of any practioal transliteration, so that
it is necessary to transliterate them acc~rding to theirfuUform:f~
.I
Abbreviation. Full form. 'Transliteratloa.
.1, 1n5 ,
nhuik
oOa ~I kan'
~ ~ 'kronl
tJ
OO~& laft' ICon'
§ ~ mcafl
,~ saft'
cf.J t~
ioqsS. 'oqoo8 , luld
neS sok
::t1QCX);)QS
~clJ¥> kywannup
,
nadmak
j 0,a nre'
4
as a verbal and genitive suffix is of very freque'.tUse i it'is a modification
of the old 'form Q:J5, e'. It is 'now pronounced i.j tts:fuD m~em form, selclom
used, is ~,~I, which is also pronounced i we .shall therefore transcribe'it
j
~i .
In the above scheme, I have purposely left out allcODsiderations of Burmese
a
phQnetic, which can belbetter treated i~ special ~per, though it ~ould baTe

THE MYAZEOIINSCRIPTIONS
PART I]
shown that such a scheme of literal'transliteration as the one explained above is
by far, in so..mucb as Burmese is concerned, better adaPted to ourpurpose than
any phonetic scheme could have been.1 It is a pleasant 'duty to acknowledge
here the help and suggestions so kindly given by Mr. Taw5ein Ko. .
PIIl'lolorietll hz/wIII.-Besides its importance for Burmese history, this
document is also full of interest to the philologist., It is among the oldest inscrip
tions as yet found "Titten in Burmese. It cOntains a f~ ~"'ords which,' t~h
current at' that time, have not yet been found in other inscriptio~ of the .a~
periodand after j for instance, O1i:>oS, ,...olz, for II village." now I', ';""4 j GOO:),''',
to take," now <Xi, yi -p, ,,110111, in front, before/, "91' 01, "INI. In it
II j 1/ nce-
also we find, for the first time, a medial I in words now long' written regu
larly with a medial r or , j and a form of ~e negative, S)~.;scarce even in the
dialects of the Burmese and Lolo groups of Tibeto-Burman languages, and of
which, only one other ~xample has up to now been found, in an inscription dated
a few years later than the Myazedi. The Myazedi showl us,though not so fully
as we shoulddesire, the language ina state oftransitionfrom older to newer form.,
and it is to be regretted, in this connection, that this epigraph is so short and its
vocabulary so restricted. It is to be hoped that other Burmese inscriptions of
the same period and containing words of the same archaic character •• those
found in the Myazedi pillar will yet be discovered.
In the notes after the translation I have endeavoured to ascertain, as rar as
possible, the' real older forms of some words or classes of words which are now
written and pronounced differently no previous study of some scope in this direc
j
tion is available, and it is attempted here for the first time jmoreover; as will
just now be explained, the necessary and indispensable material for such study,
so far as Burmese more particularly is concerned, is very meagre under these
j
circumstances, these no\es do not pretend to be final and definitive in their
conclusion on each and every point j i feel confident, however, that, in a few
cales, the conclusions arrived at wil1 need no modification when more ample
material to work upon will be at the disposal of scholars. To try and settle the
older forms of the language and their transition to the modem ones, there is
only one certain means: comparison with other related languages and dialects of
the Tibeto-Burman family. It is what I have done, and the necessity of doing
it will be sufficient excuse for the, in a few cases, rather'long array of barbarous
looking words. In drawing up these comparisons, I have availed myself of every
1 cr. Note I, p.9-

16 EPIGRAPHJA BIRMANICA [VOL, 1
vocabulary and word-list I could procure; and a list of which is given further on.
The L;'l"istit SurfJer oj India has proved invaluable; unfortunately, it does not
extend to most la~guages within the limits of Burma; the vocabularies of
languages spoken in Burma and on h~r frontiers on, the north and east and closely
related to Burmese are very/few and might, to use a hackneyed but expr~ssiye
phrase, be counted easily on the fingers of one hand. This has been a drawback,
for, except in the case of ·Maru, Lolo, and one or two others, I had to fall back
on languages and dialects more distant1Y~Jelated to Burmese, though these, as
will be seen, have proved very useful. Never did I feel so keenly the need of
such a work as a Linguistic Surv,yof Btwma somewhat on the plan of the
admirable Litzgu;st;c Survey of It,di., Mr. Morgan Webb, of the Burma Com
mission, was, a few years ago, deeply impressed with the necessity o( carrying out
such a work before many a dialect, almost on the eve of extinction,disappearec
completely under the pressure of more virile and numerous tribes.1 It b
earnestly to be hoped that the Government of this province may, in the near
future, see their way to bring to a successful issue this most important work,
which will be the connecting link between th~ labours of Grierson and Konow in
India al1(1' those, patiently prosecuted during'the past few years, of the Ecole
Franlfaise d'Extr~me-Orient in Indo-China. ,
To make the comparisons contained in'the following notes easier to follow,
the few rules given below will prove useful i further researches ml1 no 'doubt
bring forth more material in support of them; as well as new rules of phonetic
correspondence among the languages of the Tibeto-Burman family:
(I) The vowels tI, u, 0, a1l1,' are found constantly interchanged, as will appear
in the words given belo;'. ,The use, indifferently, of u and even in the same
0,
document, is frequent in the earlit:st Burmese inscriptions.
(2) Similarly the vowels i, e, a.
(3) The final ilasals are not constant, that is, they interchange their classes
in the different groups of the family: '
B
To bet Rurmese, cco,sa, /0;,3 (pronounced laoA )i Tavo-
... yan, laonB "
Blossom Burmese, ~~, p'llJa;'1 (pron.,,.,'n 1 ) i Tavoyan,
/tlJtmf.
Hawk Burmese, is, (pron. ,,,,,); Maru, tsum.
C'lt1an
. .t.
Room Burmese, 0;);;)$1, akhan'i Tibetan, Uti"',
) elllSU' of INlitl. 1911, Vol. IX-Burma, Pan I.

,PART I J THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS '7
To t1elay Burmese, @oi, kranl (pron. lyan1 ) j Tibetan, i.1a"~
To enter Burmese, oS, 'lIJan' (pron. • i,,) ; M£":-"S'",,, and
also 1IJtIw. in which the nasal is dropped (see the
4th rule).
To move from side
y,n
to side Burmese, 0'3&', .1,-",' (pron. 8 ) j Tibetan,)'Ills.
,To bedefective Burmese, cq\, sunl j Tibetan, hom; the intet
changeability of sand" is quite common.
(4) Final consonants which appear in one language disappear in another.
This is especially the case with Maru and Lola, which are closely related to
Burmese.
(a) Nasals:
Axe .f. Burmese, q:8+,tueltin (pron. pa';se;.) j Tavoyan,
pau $i.
...
Head Burmese, Gol~., ihola' (pron. 'gaDAS ); Maru, "..
khau (= Burm. (Js MumS); Lolo, Dleo (= Burm.
a" Mon~); Sifan, eo; Tibetan, mgo.
Cloud Burmese, aSS, tim (pron. ten); Lola, 'I, ii.
'Wing Burmese, co::>:>o, fon (pron. taon); Loto, tu, duo
To fly Burmese, <i, pyam (pron. pya-); Lola, ;.10.
...
A fly Burmese, 000, yan (pron. yin); Lola, yi, .1"-"';:
d. Sifan, rram, and Tibetan, sh,lJn-1IUI.
To spy Burmese, <;~~:, kltyoft' (pron. 'chaon'); Maru,
eha'ltJ.
Canal, river Burmese, G~:>Sr, khyoia8 (pron. chaon~) j Lola,'JIido
(= Burm. 18 chaon3 0'\<;;'1,0.). The old
,
Burmese was khlon. In the notes below, two
Tibetan words are given for comparison, Hun
and ehu; the latter, ehu, is given only as a
possible equivalent, though doubtful j the fanner
is more probable.
Finger Burmese, ooOSG'f:>6., lak khyon' (pron. let chao;,~ i
Lola, la eIIu.
(6) Other consonants:
To sleep Old Burmese, g:ro, ip; Lola, ;.
To sew Bu~ese, .5, }ltyup (pron. chok) j Maru, cltu.
3

18 EPIGRAPHIA B1RMANICA {VOL. I
Tostop up, plUg.} Burmese, ~, ,hul' (pron. sd a ); Maru, tnil i
up, cork. Tibetan, JU'.
...
To carry Burulesc, ~" flU" (pron. pd') i Maru, IJd.
Chatty ... Burmese, :il', UJ 1 (pron.d') i Maru, ad.
Reward Burmese, 01, chu i Tibetan, nlK.
tQ%.,
Bone Burmese, arut" (pron. •yol) i Tibetan, "",.
Bad, troublesome,
injurious ... Burmese, ~I, chuf'3 (pron. ,,6'); Tibetan, Jtsor.
To report, announce Burmese, §:>, ;,r4 (pron. n,4) i Tibetan,.,•.
To do, act ... Burmese, ~, Iru (pron. "") i Tibetan, sfyotJi
=
the old Burmese 11.' and pl•.·
To say, speak Burmese, ~, /1'0 (pron. #aw) i Tibetan, /wiN
...
Rope Burmese, @a, kru," (pron. leyd') i Tibet~ r~ytsd.
(5) Final consonants, when not dropped, are soft in one language, and hard
in the other:
Broad cloth Burmese, oomoocO, sllklelJlat i Tibetan,""K-/wl: cf.
Malayalam, shilkaillthu.
cm
To speak loudly,} Old Burmese, (stillused in GclnSc05), fuJle (pron.
scold. net) i Tibetan, Mg, talk.
Helmet Burmese, ~, mole wi, and OOCil:>05, lell" ItHJIei
Tibetan, rmog.
....
Below ... Old Burmese, §oS, ok i Tibetan, og.
To build ... Burmese, c;~cx5, chole {prone slid} i Tibetan, 6Ug.
Paper Burmese, 093[, cd-hl (pron. lei-kG) i Tibetan,
sUKgu, sog-gll: d. Mosso, ;""""'" and
Sifan, shu-guo
(6) Prefixed consonants are often dropped i examples will have been
remarked from the Tibetan equivalents given above. It would be interesting to
study the effects on the value, in Burmese, of the consonants remaining after the
prefixes have been drepped, as well as on the value of the medial or final vowels.
Here are a few more examples:
ron,
Cat Burmese, c@,c, kroft i Maru, r411ft.
Fowl Burmese, §m, krak; Maru, ~a'll1: here the initial k
is dropped as well as the final i the dropping of
the final is very frequent in Maru, and the
equivalence, aftJ = Burm. a, is regular.

THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS
PART 1]
Rat Burmese, @oS, krtllaR; Maru, "ad, which writtenin
Burmese would be r;p5. The equivalence, ",
D, 'Zl', is also frequent
River ... Burmese,§O,mrllC (pron.,,,rit,nowmyit)j Maru,,.,.1.
tn
(7) Initial ", 3, sn(~) and (English sound) are frequently found inter-
changed:
...
To die Old Burmese, cBaS, s£y (pron. syi); Mod. Burmese,
c.o:>, se (pron. the); Black Lolo, thyi i Limbu
(Nepal), sie j M . aru, shik i Lashi, sh£i and she;
Tibetan, sM . -pa j Kadu, he; PyO, IIi; Tavoyan,
nt.
he and
...
The number3 Old Burmese, ~, sum j Mod. Burm., ~" lums
(pron. ihonS ) j Maru, sam j Mosso, som j Pyo,
nos (= hom).
The number 8 .•• Old Burmese, <:0000, het; Mod. Burm., i 0, rh(,f&
(pron. shit); Maru, shl j Lashi, slut j Garo,
shet j Chinbbk, shit j Lolo (Kopu), hi-/~ j Lolo
(Ijell), he
j
Lola (Maseupu), hi
j
Kachin,
MQ-sat j Tamlu (Naga), set.
...
To have Old Burmese, d3, hi.~, he' ; Mod. Burm., §,
rhi (pron. sh£); Chin (Lai and Manjogi), di j
Tavoyatl, hi several Lolo dialects have in~
j
others hi.
'Is,
Non.-The c_ connection betweenan initial"h (or h,,) andthesoundsh, hasbeendwelt upon
inthe notesbelow(tineI. ocxx:6); the word for"gold" gives a further iIIullration, and no clotabt some
more.ClWllpieswillbefG8nd:
...
Ie",
Gold Old Burmese, ~, h'IIJay (pron. luve), ~,
(pron. h~), and !mcO,"hu,y (pron. shwe); these
i,
have become in medieval Burm., rh'ltli (pron.
din), and in Mod. Burmese, S' "h.e (pron.
J/nvl) j with the above compare Yawdin, rln" j
Kortse (Sifan), rArM) and Dzorgai (Sifan),
j
shruo, in which the initial sh is due probably to
an older h.
(8) trhe semi-vowels ", 'Y and , areinterchangreia,ble :
Water ... Old Burmese, E\o5, (pron. ".18); Mod. Borm.,
eM\. ,., (pron: ,fI) Black LoIo, 7~; Lolo
j

to EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. 1
(Adlipo), yii Maru, ri; ArakaJlese, "i; IOma
Lolo dialects have dyl.
To laugh Old Burmese, ~05, ,.iy (pron. rYfl); Mod. BurDl..
.'laS, ray (pron. yi);Maru. f-yi.,.i i Lasbi,yi;
Moseu, 'YJ'8.
i.·
White ••• Old Burmese,c2>1l, phIl:; Mod. Burm., IIwfI
(pron. Jltfil) i Tavoyan, I"lil; Lolo (\\to-ni),
Iy" i Maru, Lashiand Sz~ /1Jy1I iLo!o (ssn-
ch'uan), pltru i Kachin, FtnJI. .
...
River Old Burmese; &6, "ufJ& i Mod:; Burm., (98,. fIInU
(pron. "'y;f) i Maru, ril jTavoyan, ""it.
It is a pleasant duty to express here my thanks to Mr. Taw Sein Ko, (or bis
kindness in furnishing me with many examples from the Tavoyan dialect,·with
which he is thoroughly conversant, and of which, to my knowledge, no vocabulary
or word·list has eyer been made.
I.-PILLAR B,. AT THE MVAZKDI PAGODA, PAGAN.
As already said, the several pieces of this pillar, found at different places,
have been cemented together, strengthened ~ith a wooden frame and, the pillar
thus reconstituted, placed on tbeplatformof the Myazedi paioda. The stODe·
proper, on which are engraved the in,scriptions, measures from bottom to top
5 feet ~ inches, and the ornamental mouldi.ngs above, from the top of the stone to
tip offinial, 2 feet, making a total height ·of.7 feet 2 inches. The two broader
sides have a breadth of I foot 8i inches i the surface of these broader sides
actually covered with letters measures, in height; 4 feet 4ib inches and in
71
breadth I foot inches. The letters on this pillar are slightly Mgger than thOle
em the pillar (A) at the Pagan Museumi they have an average of i inch,
measuring the letters themselves, "'ithout "taking count of the Sublcript and
'I~perscript letters. The 8urmese inscription is on one of the broader sides. The
other two sides are.a little smaller in breadth, and narrow slightly from top to
I'ot
bottom, the stone measuring at the top I foot, and at the boUflm inches.
The Talaing and the P}'u inscr;ptions are engraved on the narrower faea.
The Bunnese (ace contains 34 lines and, except in two cas~s(a. far u
can be ascertained in itl present state), the o~sion of Qii)t6, 4,,11«, in, line
I, of ita before no;' in line 31 and the substitution of 00;), Ati, for ~coa&,

PART I] THE MYAZEOI INSCRIPTIONS 21
tanllJ. leh, in line 5, the wording IS identical with that of pillar A. The fol-
lowing is a list, given line by line for easy rderence, of the different readings
in the two pillars; These differences are touched upon the body of the
III
notes.
'l
Pagan Museum Reading. Lint.. Myinkaba Reading. Line.
-I 11--·--_---
It
I
~ Sri Ij
il
~u)" Sra ."
I
oS~ liy :3 Iry ~
I
eBB thiw .7 '~ thuiw ••• S
!
okx? pay i 000 pay S
I
oo"l~ch l:lmu leh 7 m:> k:i 5
:
0105 p,jy j I 9 ,uOO pay 6
I
I
0)<1) pay I' 10 q uo5 pay 7
I
0105 pay I I uOO pay 8
I
~05 SlY 14 ~c:O siy 10
~oo, Jlla\,,1 '5 Qo;),3S , maya' II
-£305 iiy I7 I ~ liy 13
;r"T":J'I()") rhllya 20 I ~~ rhuy '7
eSc thill" 21 (~O thuiw 17
I II
c;"iJO 'rhow 21 c;.~JO rwow. 17
JI I
000 Lhiw 27 ~o thuiw 23
i ...
I
•.),l.):Y.) iI1.1 ya .I, ! 27 i l,)UJJ3S maya' ~3
cB~ .J lhi", I 28 II ~S thuiw 23
c; ~JCJS rwoh
I
II ,·)~o !i C;~J rwo 26
I
~o th . u . iw I 32 000 thiw ~7
i I
c;02~~, SIC I 33 t;·j~rO sle' 29
-
§~1 prajM ,35 fr'iPa' pran-J'a 30
~ Icaka .>8 ::QO-r. acak 33
...
::Q~6~<X» Arimittiya 39 ~~6ffiJ5:1 Arimittirya 33

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
T,~I of II" B~rmes, File, Dfth, JJya$lJi P,;Il",. til Myinkaba (Plat, /, B)•
. .. Sra1" ~mo Buddhlya' [I] .. rhi skhah s!sw tac thon khrokryl
2. •. • • chly he . •.. '., . • n Iry bri ra ka I Iy Arimaddanapur
~_II
3. . • . . . : . . . . .'. . .. . . . . . . wanldityadhamQlarlj maft IU
- ~.' .
phlac e'
. . . . .'. ...
~. ; .•• ya tac yok au ka Trilokava\am
,.
..)". . · .
s~ .thuiw pay maya sa ka Rajakuma
6... ... '.' kyon sum rwoh pay, mayl,a
7· . .. [I]. . . . • . . . .••. ra ka • paymaJi tao
8. • . . . •. .', . . . . . su nhan' pay . • . . • . sa Raja-
kuma
90 • • . • • • . . tum. e' • thuiw man antiacnhac chay
10. •• ..••...• '. ... • • '. • e', sly'~Q. nAsuthow nhik e .
II. • r man su pay ahayi' '51 mimi
, 12. • . . . . • klafijo okmi t:& ka • rha~
13. . . . •. . . . . . . . . .':~ e' nha.p liysu rhow
I.... ' • iyrhuy purha Ita' .
J5. aphie' atie'
3 • •
yl . . plo' su teh.
I'. •
I,.
16. n sum. rwoh athui'· kyon fla ,khan lpiy su saii U ••
rhuy purh! aatui' kyoo . . Y ye' • ;thuiw rwo[w]' ','
18.• h man nhac,klui' ra ka kon lhen' teh k'on e ...
19. teh min' ruy' e'l s[arig]r[i] Mahather 'Isaligd •••
20. liputtatissatther • sangri Sume . . pa94it.' sangrl Babma
21. I • sangri Brahmadiw I sangr1 So.- sangrl SarighasenawarapaJ)f1,i
22. t • thuiw skhan t"i' am . . . . . h mail riy s'on e' •
23. thuiw bri ra ka thuiw Rajak . ; '.' .... ' ..• y ~yl' sI tbuiw rhuy
:e' '
24. purha th!pan! . . . . e' • . . • . so ko plo'
25. plo' brl ra k . iy kG purh! Iho. ., •........
26. Sakmunalon tac rwo • Rap~y t Henbuiw ta
I •
1 Tbe stone,has {§ instead of ~.
• Mr. Blagden sugg~ (A Furth", Not., etc., p. 198) that in the space aher B"tUh4ytI, there
l'!'
probablywuaaecond frio Butafterexaminingtheatonecarefullyand taking mauurements. I think
euch wasnot the case. Only the first stroke ofy. in ..BuddhAy.·'·is visible,and there appean to be
aboutthespacenecessaryto write thetwostrokes (~) after Bf4IldM'4, and <ithe first partof CiSl=>.
3 The j and postscript .' are somewdheaatrd".a...~• .
• Thisshouldbe at_....bIIt theltOne thui'J,wbetber this isoriginalorisduetoa defa:t
iftthestenecannotuailybeueert:ainecL . '
I Therighthalfoft baadisappeared.

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS
27. c rwoh • iy klon [sum] rwoh yo ruy' e' • thiw
I
s8. R~jakum.1 .•.• su pay may~' sA iy ka purh~i ~ riy
29. son roy' e' iy sIe' min' e' • iy n~ ambo'
30. k~ sarwwaflnutai\~, praflja ra ap" sO akron phlac ciy'
31. teh • non a na sa Ian gon • na mliy lafl gon
32. na achuy lali goti • sO tac tho langon • iy purhl I ill
I
33. Iho kha su kyon anhip acak teh mO m1;l ka i Arimittiry. pu
3.... -rha skhan a phO ra ciy •
0 II
H.-PILLAR A, AT THE PAGAN MUSEUM (P/M~1,A.).
The pillar in the Pagan Museum is somewhat smaller thanthe other. Its
total height is 4 feet 81 inches, the capital being I foot 2i inches. All. the faces
have the same dimensions; height 3 feet 6 inches; breadth I foot 2 inches.
The surface of the Burmese face actually covered with writing.is about, in height,
3 feet 3 inches and in breadth foot 1 inch. The'height of the letters, not
I
counting the superscript or subscript symbols, has an average of.f inch.
TIxt of the Burmese Face of the Myantii Pill" III tlte Pili"" Mraeu",.
.. • Srl • namo Buddhaya • purha skhan Sa5an~ anhac ta
2. c than khrok rya nhac chay het rihaclon
3. liy brI ra k.1 iy Arimaddanapur mai\ su prafi
II
4. nhik ~ • Sri Tribhuwan.1dityadhammaraj mali sarna
5. o·phlac e' • thiw Ulan e' pay mayata
6. c yak su ka Triloka\'a~amsakadevl
7. mafl e' n thiw pay' maya sa tamu leh R.1ja
•
8. kumar mai\ e' • thiw man k.1 kyon sum rwoh
rna
9. teh pay maya a piy e' thiw p.1y
II
J Sum (= three) is thereading in A,which seems necessary to the sense. Thf stthoenNe "ill•broken here,.
Immediatelyafter.ion(theleftloopof the IUbscript 101 which has beenbroken011), weNcutill·.
two by the break, the lower part·of which is clearlysubscript Iand theapWeitherIior/i; this would
givea word.slioriii, towhich, in thiscontext, Ican ucribe no litting·meanlng. Immediately after ·th'-
.there appears to be either yu or .,..,tu~pt(moreprobablytl\eformer),and above it,.parateclbytke
break,whatlook.liketheanusvir.(JIl). The letterto which yu is subscript, it is iJnpoaible to make
out. .Supposing this letter to have beens (f) thiswouldeivea reading: 'y"tit,whJch pertaapsmirht bea
variantof sum. I havenotbeenabletodecipher ttte.etwo word•.
9:)£ :J;)£;
. • ThestORehas for eitherthestonehubeeftdclmardhere, orthe.lapidaryh..forgeuen
toplace thelittleslanting .strdle within theletter, thus making itlook likea/. 8; but as,as • final, It is
naturallyshort and abruptin tone, thesubscript rJ3, a',thesign of the .hort tone, is not here necesaary.
Moreoyer, the lenso requires Q;)~, ••••

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL.
10. ya. sly 1 kha ra ka. • thiw pay maya taneha nhan' thi
JJ. w kyon sum rwoh su nhan' teh thiw pay maya
.. I~. sa a I sa Rlijakumar mafi so a man pi}' tum
13. e' thuiw man anhac nhac eMy het nhac man mii bri ru
I
14. y-a e' siy khamii nJ·su rhow nhik teh thtJiw Rajaku
S II
J5. mar mali su pay maya sa mimi kiew mllY so man
16: grl klanjo okmi ra ka, • rhuy atisu purh! skhali a
J7. chan phI ruy' e' nhap liy su rhow teh iysi'
18. min' e' • iy rhuy purha ka. na skhan aphie' a.ti'
.Ig. kyon pIa' su teh • kyon sum rwoh atui' kyo
4
~O. n na skhan ~iy su sari..,ka 'iya rh~ya purha aatui' kyo
21. n piy ye'.• ,thiw rhow teh ma~ qbaoklui' ra kakon
2~. Iheti' teh ko.n:Ihef( teh min' roy' e' s~ngii ..'
.23. m~3.ther • sangrl MuggaliputtatiSsatther_'.sangrlSu '.,
II
24. medha pa1)Qit • sa~gri Brahmapal • sangrl' Brahmadi
25. w • sangri Son sangri Sanghasenawiuapa\l4i
I
26. t • thuiw' skhan tui' amhok teh, man riy'son' e"
27.• thiw brl ra kathuiw Rajakumllr ma~ su pay niay.1 a' sa
28. thiw rhuy purha thapana ruy' e' iy rhuy ath~ mO so
2g.kii plo' e' .'plo' brl ra ka iy ka purha Ihot
.30. su rhow nhik teh. Sakmunalontac ,rwoh • Rapi
31. ytac rwoh • Helibuiw tae r~oh ~'iy ,kyon -
3 2• ,sum rwoh yo ruy' e' • thuiw Rajakumar mail s~ pay .
33. maya' sa iy ko purha ii riy son ruy' e' iysie'
34. min' e' iy n,. amho.'- kli sarwwafiflUtai'ia
u
J Theinicription writes this wurd !f, an unusual ~ayof placing the v;r4mllo; it should bewritten
r:Bc:IS as inline J4.
S The tru'e reading it QOO:>:Pa:):l1 Yid, NOtes. .
3 For .1'.~ ; the 71;rti",a has been omitted, a,' in line 20, which has ~~il(x, in9te&dClf
~iu5·, ' . , . -
. • Mr. B!agden, in
hl~
t'ranscript,
ha~
by
a'51ip'c~~,
but it is properly QCY.p$,
~he
Ioop,'at.the .
bottom leftof ysubscript iav~ry frequent. - .
~ The firstandsecond :xi~.apPear,tobe~,but'FoTchharri~er'sphotographand t~:sto~~'itleJf
,havea faint traceofthesmallcurved line within the~. (il which dOeSn'Otappear in latere&iarripageS:
e The slantingstrokein the centreof the letter t,lI h~ ftak~ofl or has'othen.iIe been'Ciamaged. flO
that it now looks like a tlll; butlhe oldest photogmph of this pillar in'ourpauesaion'dearlyshowsthe
traCesofthestroke. . ' . ,
1 Hereagainthetliruma has been fOTgolten'; this';' with thevirillllJ goes,witll'the preceding "ord;
,4'. .
read t..m:fOre QU>::>3S, ...

!ipivNfPhia BirmaniCif VOLUME I. PLATE L
~__.3!::Z:ZW::::::_uUJWlt:a:czu•.",44£ aUk
INSCRIPTIONS QF THE MYAZEOI I)AGODA,PAGAN
THI1 BURMESB TEXT
:\ B
2
2
4 -I
I,
h
X
X
10.
10
I2
-,
I
lot
!I'!
!(,
211_
1''':.
22-
2';
.!-I.
22-
':l!
2>-: 2-1
,0
21i
;2,
~S
J·l
,lli
.\.h
..
.)'~
-'-0.
.;.~
.. ,,-''''.....

r] THE .. MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS
PART
35. ~ prajlU ra am' sO akrori phlac ciy' J teh • na
36. nori , ita sf. 1af\gori • ria mliy laf'igon • na a[chu] I
37. y lafigon • sO tac tho laf\gon • iy purha
38. a. Iii lho kha sukyon anhip acaka' teh mO mu
39. ki Arimittiya purha skhati a phil ra ciy • • •
Tra#Jslatio".
Prosperity! Honour to .the Buddha I Ono thousand six hundred and
Sd
twenty-eight years of the Buddha's religion having elapsed, Tribbuwan
adityadhammaraj became king in this city of Arimaddanapur.. A J>eloved'
wife of that king was called Trilokava\amsak1-devl, and that belov~ wife
had a son 'named Rajakumar. The king p.ve that beloved wife three
villages of slaves. That beloved wife having died, the king gave her
I
ornaments' and the three villages of slaves to her son, named Rajakum1t'.
In the presence of the king who, having reigned twenty-eight years, had
become sick even unto death, the son of the beloved wife, .who was named
Rajakumar, calling to mind the favours of the king who had nurtur~ him,
made an image· of the .Buddha all in gold and, approaching unto his
presence, spoke thus:" I, your slave,? made this golden Buddha for' my
lord; the three villages of slaves which my lord gave me, I give to this golden
Buddha." In its presence' the king, being de1i~hted, said: Good, Good'u.
II
and, in the presence of the. Chief Monk, ~d of the ecclesiastical
1 8££, and not 805 as transcribed by Mr. BIaa'den J it mut haft been a slip. lot the I&Ib«:ript.lJO)
i, quite visible.
• The enu is sc:areefy visible in the plate.
, The virtl",,, herealso has been omitted,read Qad, a:K>a5.
4 3:>01cO , .pGy. or l};)tJcO " a;.y, modern ~cc05 ailhaYi is a pure BlU'I1Iese term and it ..
.
not derived from the tili ;iya. In this inscription it is uted adjcetively. but this Use does no more
obtain; this term is used now as an expression of endearment and corresponds to the Pili 6A.dJ,.
5 That is, as the Pili more explicitly states. to enioy the revenues accruing therefl'OIL
e Under this term must be included all her jewellery and trinkets and probably other propert7;
the Talainj{ has ItiryG. which in Burmese means: appendages, utensils. fllrniture; in fact, all that a
person does or may use.
1 Prope'Iy; •I.' A respectful form of the first personal pronoun used in 8ddressing superion.
8 ::J;lG8::6,.,ror. on behalf of," that is, that the king might share in the merit 01 the good workJ
this is more fully expressed in the Pali. bhdgam hltvG"n.
S That is, when he saw the golden image as it was brought in.
10 Lit. ..It will·be good." The king uses here the future, in reference to the prince', intenticle
of dedic:lting the three slave-communities· to the image. This is clear in the Pali: "1.Ullik.",mtJ
m,
r.iitinarit aha Nlltitam .ltanl' . • • • gdmattlJ'IIJo'" pi flO s.mi pubbe di,,"lIn til .h•• i",.".
1111 mlwilldassil dell/i.

16 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vot. I
dignitaries, Muggaliputtatissatther, Sumedha·Pa1}4it,· Brahl'1\'l>ll, Brahmadi",
Son and Sanghasena Varapa94it,· the king poured water.' This being done,
the son of the beloved wife enshrined the golden Buddha, lind made this shrine
with a golden spire. Having finished (it), when dedicating this shrine and
Buddha, he brought up (the folk ~f) Sak-munalon, One village, Raply, one
village, Henbuiw, one village, these three villages of slaves and he. the son of
the beloved wife, poured water for this shrine and Buddha, and thus said:
S
" Let this deed of mine be the cause of my obtaining Omniscienoe! After me,
(whosoever) whether (he be) my 'son, or grandson, or relative, or any other
person, if he oppresses the slaves I have offered to this Buddha, may he not
behold the Buddha Arimittiya I"
NOTES ON THE BURMESE FACE OF THE MVAZIDI INSCRIPTION.
Line 1.4~l', purh~, now written Oi'{'lt ()A.wtil but pronounced phciya '
) I
and sometimes still phra.' This is the well-known Burmese expression applied
I
to exalted personages; the Buddha is so called the king was addressed with
j
this word during the Burmese regime i the monks are still so styled when spoken
to i now-a-days, it is even used as an epithet when addressing Government
officials of a certain standing. The temples, pagodas and statues of the Buddha
are also called phaya. The form <lSl', as found in the present inscription,
appears to be the oldest i it is found subsequently written <?'lCO:> (JurflhlJ,),'
01-,\' (bhu,.ha), 'll' (phurhd), 'l'P (phurfJ) and finally c:1IffJ' (Mur"). But
this word is not, as might on the face of it be thought, Burmese in itsorigin; it is
found, under very slightly different forms, all over Indo-China, and even in Java.
Opinions still differ as to.ts derivation i some eminent authorities would derive it
from fuwa, a Sanskrit and P~li word meaning II excellent, nobl~, exalted It j this)
is the derivation' generally accepted. Some years ago Mr. Taw Sein Ko
(Burmes, Sie/clles, p. 30) suggested a derivation from the Chinese 'U-)4 (now
pronounced Fo-yelt). The form Foaya does not explain the r in the second
syllable of the Burmese word for there can be but little doubt, if at all, that
j
• Pa,qlt and varapa94it are properly descriptive honorific terms,equivalent to ..learned" and
CIvery learned."
I The pouring of water is the UIUal rite ofdediCAtion.
I 3:»~, ..to, for," that is, he poured ,*ater to COIIIIummate the oon.ecratlon of the image &lid
urine and in ratification of his dedication to them, for their service, of the three communities of
tlaves. The Talalng has the equivalent ewpression. Iu.
• Cl9ClO)-lhis is no doubt but another way of writing 'i1', the aspiration being postscript instead
ofsubsCript,andto berealtytransliterated,urltl.

"ART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIoNS
this letter ", though now it is pronounced y, was sounded according to its original
value in old Burmese, as .. comparison with the languages most closely related to
it-Tibetan, Lolo, Maru, etc.-abundantly shows; the full value of , is Itil1
fill".
retained in Arakanese, which is but Burme.'ic of an archaic type. The form
does not. seem to explain the Burmese medial vowel u in pu"hti; but this vowel
has been frequently developed in the fir~t syllable of dissyllabic words when that.
syllable begins with a labial, but is now practically never pronounced j examples
are numerous in Burmese. All evidence tends to show that the Sanskrit word
V(I"" is the original of this expres9ion, found under several forms as : po/ai, pho/IJ,
poula, purahd, phurd, phard,phr4,phraya,prah,pra~, 1Jara~, etc. This seems to
be settled by the Phimanakas Inscription, where the old Khmer text has 'D".~
iyvara, the modern Cambodian being pra~ Eisor, and fJra~ Mahabodhi.=
prll~ Mahabodhi.J
=
~, ry~, one hundred modt:rn "P,,.£1 (pronounced y4) this old form
j
does not appear to have survived much late'r than the 14th century, from
which period it is regularly replaced by the modern and shortened form. It was
no doubt pronounced as written; "yd, or, not improbdbly, with a short and some
what indistinct vowel sound between the" and the y, something between aand (,
Farms closely approaching the Burmese yyd. can be traceJ in some other more
or less closely allied dialects of the Tibeto·Burman family, b~aring in mind, for a
large number of these diillects extending over a vast territory, the equation 8
j-y, above all of the latt~rtwo, whose sounds are regularly found interchanged
in those dialects.
Old Kuki dialects :-Piiriim, ri·ya-h Hirai,.LarngAng, arja Rangkhol and
j j
Langrong, raja; Central Chin sub·grollp-Pankhu, raja different dialects
j
of Northern Chin sub-group-za, ja, _.fha, ya; Tibetan, b"gya, gya j Old
Burmese, 1'ya i Mod. Burmese, ra, pro yd.
I have found but· very few words with the combination ry they are:
j
~ 05, ryak, a day = mod. ,\05, rak, pro yet i "i~B, marya;", a kind of rice
=
grown on the banks of rivers and lakes mod. ~CI, tHuran' (pr. mllyin ).
'
Some others of these old forms will no doubt be yet discovered.
a:I':)(:1>, ch4y, a variant of mod. 'J:)<:E, clta)' j this kind of variants, that is, by
the insertion of a long ii, is pretty frequent; for instance, in Myazedi pillar A,
the word 01<:E, pay, dear, beloved = mod. :J;;)oooS, abhay, is regularly written
with medial long tI, except in lines 15 and 27, where it is dropped and the word
J See B.E.F.E.O., 1918, NO.9. p. 9I. 'journal Asil/tiqut, mai-juin 1914. p. 643; MiSli01l PtJoi"
Hi,toi"" p. 228, note 2,and 237, note I; R,fJue l"do.Chilloise, 15 f~vrier 1904.p. 138,note 2.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. [
written 000, pay but this latter 000 is constant in Myazedi pillar 8,
j
lines 5, 6, II. Other instances are: §::>c;~, khrM,se, lion; §::>S, m,.cJti,
horse i ~~, kywcin, slave; emS, chan, elephant i ooxl>; lay, field; for
§e~., (98:, C2Ji, a::S, and CXlOO, respectively. All these variants, which
may after al1 be phonetic representations, are found written indifferently in
one way or the other, often in the same inscription.
r;c:l:x:B, het . mod. jl~, rhac (pr. shU), the number 8. This is the only
inscription in which this word is found so written, and it is no doubt the old
Burmese form, which is also in pillar B, line 2, in which the final t has flaked off.
In other inscriptions it is found written <:Boo, yhat, <9b, yhac, ~b, sitae, cr:;jJ,
shyac, and 1\;), rnac, the last being the most common; all are pronounced slz!t,
except 'Boo, which now would be read shat but which probably was pronounced
something likeyhat at the beginning of the 13th century. It is probable the pro
nunciation in the 12th century was as itis spelledhere, that is het i but the Iz must
have been p~onounced very much as a palatal sibilant, the organs being almost in
the same position as when pronouncing the syllabl~ke, that is, the middle of the
top of the tongue against the palate, but the contact while pronouncing this old
Burmese It was not quite so hard as it is for ke; the breath, being then strongly
forced through, produces a kind of fricative very similar in sound to English slz or
French "chuintante," clz into which, as requiring less effort, it would naturally
glide. Whether or 1I0t it was really so-that it was seems to be corroborated by a
few other words, as will be seen lower down-these tWfJ words, he! and rhac, are
undoubtedly closely allied, though they present two distinct forms. In this con
nection, it is intewsting to notice that a large number of Tibeto-Burman
languages have forms repre!'entative of either the one or the other, while others
again have th(:-what I would call-medial or connecting form with initial slz. A
comparison of the materials on Tiheto-Burman languages now available, makes it
clear that the two {OlIllS (with initial h or 1') may roughly (and provisionally) be
divided into eastern and western with special rderence to Burma. The line, as
may well be undHstood, cannot he a sharp and fast onc; there is certainly over
lapping j but broadly, it may be stated that the forms with initial II art mostly
. found in the languages to the east j those containing an r in the languages to the
west, Burma being roughly the dividing line from south to north.
East: he', he, het, he'e, he-te, hei,. hi, hie, ho, ho, ih, hen, hOI1.
J-Vest: rhe, f(~, rai, pre bhre, ma-rit, garit, rid, pa-riet, riel-kat ka-riet,
arret, ki·rt:t, ka-ret, ka'rat, ali, ta-rik, ti-ret. It is interesting lo BOtt: that

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS
in Pyu this number is hra (rhA); but at the present stage of our knowledge of
Pyu, it would be unwise to'cla.s it as yet at aU in any group or sub·group.
The form with d is found in--Marui sn;;.Lashi, slut; Szi, shit; 6&ro,
shet; Chinp&k, dil.In.Tamlu (Niga) we find sit (the- equivalence of s
and" in nOta few "f.ibeto-Butrnan languages is ftequent).
Burmete, as we have seen, bad both forms. lUI (foUnd only.in thiIJ'insctip·
tion, on both pillars) and r"iJe (pr. 1'IIi1). ~ close c'oJ1nectiOtl t>etween the two
is shown by a few other words which have undergone the same change" the
1''',
older form being in h and the la~er in ·both being 4ater onfrequently,found' in
contemporaneous inscriptions. The most common is c:B, )ti, "to be. to have,"
which has become ~h rhi (pr. shi). Some dial~cts of the'Central Chin sub
group, such as the Lai and the BanjOgi, have th~ same verb slti; several Lolo
'dialects have retained tbe formhi', while others have II", which is also found iD
Burmese, Q~, h" and,·1;0006, he'. Mr. Taw Sein Ko informs me that in
Tavoyan this word is still pronounced Jri ~05, huiy, ~05, hway (pr. h11Je), ~,
j
huy (pr. hWI;), these forms representing a frequent iuS, rhuy (pr. sh7»e),
medieval ~, rhwi (pro shlld), and the modern :at, rh7lJe (pr. slu,/), meaning
gold." With this may 6e cOmpared the Korts~ (Sifan) rhuo and the Dzorgai
II
(Sifan) shruo, also the Yawdwin rll11Ji. Again, :J;l09$, ahi'J = mod. a;li~, arMn
(pr. ashetl1t), heat, velocity, power "; the Tavoyahs·pronounce this word asllin.
/I
Moreover, this word h,t seems to show that modern final c (b) in some
words stands Jor an older final. J; it is still, in fact, pronounced as a t. In
some other words it ,appears for ';a final .t (oS)j d. the Maru words SfI.t, a
tree, Burmese ooC, asak, ncw, Burmese 30>000, as~; jIIi,· to throw, to
$," j
shoot, Burmese pac i rit, a river, Burmese mrac, pronoun~ed _itand now my;t.
=
c;o::>:>$, /tm mod. exai, 17»an, to go beJond, pass, elapse. A comparison
of the Tibeto-Burman dialects establishes the equivalence among them of u, 0,
and W; two or threE: examples of such interchange are found in this very inscrip
tion and will be noticed intheir place. So, in the earlier inscnptions, the words
now since several centuries regularly written with w medial followed by a final
Consonant or a vowel. were written with 0 or u. Besides QCO~ = mod. 0Qi, this
inscription containsalso the following words:- ~Ji, kyon = mod.~, 1y7»tZn.
a slave; ~OO~, S01l = mod. QQ•• S7»a". to pour i lJ;lCiOOx.S, aI"~t = mod.
=
D;)~, ath7»at, also written a;lcgc&, .th11J4t, pinnacle, summit i c;cgno, /Mt mod.
~oS, Ih7»4t, to let go, hence to dedicate. The same seems to have obtained
also in Talaing about the 15th century in a few words at least.i for instance, the

t
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA VOL. I
word for son' is properly written ko., before and after the 15th
I 000",
century, but in some plaques of the latter date found at the Ajapala pagoda near
Pegu, this word is written ~~, kwa" even a form ~)., ;1IJlm, in which both
j
letters are retained is also found, with which may be compared the Burmese
~o~p~, kywon, slave, in an inscription dated 1190 A.D.
=
Line 3.-0305, liy mod. /e, a verbal suffix denoting indefinite past.
000,
'y
time; also euphonic. A number of words ending, as the above, in (ias) are
found so written in epigraphs extending over a period of about four centuries,
that is, up to the end of the ..6th century and perhaps evena little later. Besides
oBo5, liy, the other words with the same ending found in this inscription are:
605, piy, lines 9, = mod. pea, to give tr, line = oScO, siy, a
12, 20, 2 [ QOI, j 10
variant of the usual 03oS, siy, line 14 = mod.•:», se, to die ; ~oS, "i", lines 26, 33
= mod. ~'l, re, water, and 80S, ciy, lines 35,39 = mod. ee, heff~ a precative,
00,
often also used as a causal particle.
The final y (05) is not a con'ionant, hut the vowel c as in the French
etre, pretre" which, in the course of a few centuries, has changed into the more
/I
e
close as in French /I et6 ,. j the medial i (~ ) stands for the semi-vowel 'Y; so
that (he above words must have beell, at that time, pronounced: cf305, lye (lie) ;
8c:h,pye (pie) i ricO, sye (sie), etc.; the semi-vowel being droppedinthecourseof
e
time and the open becoming the close B. these words have become, as they now
GO,;e
are: GCXJ, Ie j (now QUI, pea ,\ith the heavy tone) j ~OO, se, etc. Areference
to other Tibeto-Burman languages shows that this must have been the case for
j
thesake of better comparison, Jhave, besides the words in the Myazediinscription,
added a few others having the same spelling; the list might have been somewhat
longer but for the fact that the word-listsin the several publications at my disposal
do not include ;\ large number of them. It must be remembered that in most of
these languages the interchange of the vowels a, " e, I, is frequent 'notonly among
the various languages, or dialects of one language, but even within one and the
same language i for instance, in Burmese to a large extent. Similarly the deve
loping of a final nasal (nasalized vowell and the dropping of it, as well as of final
consonants, such as k, d, I, is frequent and Burmese also offers nota few examples
of these. All o[ the dialects having the same form are not mentioned; they are
in some instances too numerous, and may be referred to in the works cited.
80S, pr:, (pr. Py,e). mod. pe3 (pr. pea), to give M~uu, py;t; Tibetan
GOI, j
(written), sbyin-pa Lokhe dialect of Tibetan (Darjeeling), ~;"; Lolo
j
(MiuiOft. d'O/1011',· Languages non Chi'10is, p. 19), bilu}, and ;0 Meu (eu

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 31
as in French peu, peut '). A large number of Tibeto-Burman dialects
I
have preserved (with or without prefixes or suffixes or the final nasal) the
forms pi, pe and hij d. Tibeto-Burman dialects: Sharpa, bin j Dajonkii,
phin j Himalayan dialects: Gurung, pi"" Pi11g0 j Bahri and Rang, hij Dhlmal,
pi-Ii Th:lmi, pi-yiJ,,! Yakha, pt' Khambu, pi-Ie-; Old Kuki dialeds:
j j j
Kolren, a-pl Kom, !la-pe; PiirOm, pe, etc.
j
..BOO, sZy, and ::800, siy (pr, sye), mod. Go.:>, Sl Cpr. the), to die j Black
Lolo, thye; Lolo (Naseupu), hS)'i; Lola (Tatseu),' sse-ldj Mosso, die-tii
Limbu (Nepal), sfl i Maru, shik i Lashi, shik, she; Katchui, sij Tibetan,
chi-pa, shi-pa.
~cb, d)' (pr. rye), mod. ~, re (pr. )'e), pronounced by the Arakanese
ri, water i Lolo (Ahi), dye, 1£ j Lolopo, vi-dye; Black Lola, ye j Lolo
(Achipo), )Iij Lolo (Iyen), yie j Mosso, g£e; Maru, r;iLolo (Kopu), ya.
Words from other inscriptions are:
(I) ~05, my (pr. "'11), mod. ~~, 11(:1 (pr. 111'), day (the word for sun, which
is the same, is devoid of the short tone, .:.;~, tle) j Eastern Dafla and Miri,
da-n)li i Bunan (Lahul), nyi-tsi; Lola dialects: Ijen, nie; Nee, nie-tze Noseu,
j
nie-li; A-chang, nt' j Maru, na; Lashi, nyi-k)'o; Szi, khu-lIyi; Pon, kha-ni.
In an inscription dated 1442 A.D., the word is found written c;~, nie.
ne
(2) ~05, niy (pr. nyd, mod. Gjt, (pr. ne), to dwell, stay i Maru and
Szi, 1la; Lashi, ny;.
@05, kr£y (pr. ky/: or ;)'(;), mod, G§', kre3 (pr. jye), copper i Kachin,
ma-g1'i, ma1yii Lola (Achipo), dyi j Lolopo, jei Lolo (Moseu), Hie pr'! j
Manl, kyik Lashi and Szi, kyi.
j
8th, IJdy (pr. myi), mod. a, mi, me, ame (pr. me, aml), mother;
GQ, 3''')I;Q,
Maru, mye i Lashi, myi i 1\losso, amye, ami. Mr. Taw Sein Ko tells me that
the Shan form is &S, mye, which corresponds- closely to 805, pro mye.
~'..:l5J y(y (pro rye), mod. 9~, ray (pro ye, now)'1), to laugh j Maru, 1'yi, ri i
Lashi, yi; Lola (Moseu), yie, jye je.
lt is not easy to determine the exact value of final 05, y, after the demonstra
tive $!)l (mod.), in line 3, deC, iy, and line 18, ~05, iy i the old pronunciation of
this can be just but a matter of speculation, there are too few other similar
110W
examples to form an opinion.
@, brf, a variant of ~, prti '100::1, ra ka, mod. '100::11, 1'a luiS (pr. yag48 ) ;
in modern Burmesf' this is used ~s a causal postposition, in the sense of owing
lC
to, because of," etc'i in this inscription it is used as a continuative affix

EPIGRAPHIA SIRMANICA [VOL. I
implying priority to some other state or action; ~:x)JScBcO@,\(x)j,JOt~ liy brfra k~,
" having elapsed ..."; line I0, ,)1.05("l(X»1~09OO),pffy maya sfy klta ra kti, /I his
beloved wife having died ... " j line 27, eBO~oo:>, tlli1lJ br! ra k4, H that being
=
finished ... " after that, then. Cf. also lines 16, 21, 29.
~~og.tl~, Arimaddanapur, one of.the many classical names of Pagan;
<R = Cl'l,P~1i pU"",a fortified city, stronghold.
~, su, mod. G;:X)~, so (pr. tltaw); it has been said on page 29 that "
the vowels 0" and 11 are used interchangeably j this holds good, not only in
related languages and dialects but also in the same language; in this inscription,
for instance, we have oq, SU, everywhere, except in lines 12, 15, 28, where the
same word is written O~), so, as now; again, Get> las, plo', line 29, and
=
&1, plu, line 17 mod. ~, to do, to make jline 3 2, ~OO), yo = mod. 0(,
=
yil i line 34, ~C9)35, amho' :J;)~, amhu.
Lin e 4.-i05, nhik, found thus written only in the Myazedi pillars, it is
a variant of i05, tlhuik (pr. nhaik), a locative postposition. Cf. further on,
:::o09aS,ati', for ~35, atui' j cBS, titi'lv, for roO, tltuiw, etc. i these variants
are pretty common in other inscriptions also.
=
:::0::>, a mod. 1):;)1, 43 , used now exclusively as the true dative postposition i
in the oldest epigraphs, however, it was also extensively used to express the
locative, either by itself or with another locative postposition, generall)' 1m, nhuik.
Such is the case in Tibetan, in which the dative suffix is often used to denote
the locative (L.S., III, Part I, p. 27). The Burmese postposition 4, d3 is found
,
in all Tibetan dialects under the form la, which in the west takes the form a
(d. L.S., III, Part J, p. 26). In this inscription this it is. used in both relations,
as a locative in lines 4 and 36 and as a dative in lines 9, 12, 20, etc.
~@::J:10pBc:qQ8'f5"
.§rI Tribhuwanadityadhamm:1.raj, this is the style of
King Kyanzittha.
=
Line 5'-&S, ph/ac mod. (9(>, phrac (pr. phyit), to be, to become. A
number of words with subscript co, I, are found in Burmese inscriptions from the
11th up to about the 15th century; the words in this inscription with subscript./;
besides ~Ol are-line 16, ffiGffi,::>, Ida'ilio j line 17, eBl, plu i line 19, ~&1ri3, plo', and
line 36, ~05, m/iy. I haveelsewhere (" Klanjo-kye8zuS in Jouy"aiojthe Burma
,"
Rtsearch Society, Vol. V, Part II, p. 99-) endeavoured toshow that it was more
than doubtful whether, in old Burmese (that is, of the 11th cen"tury and after),
this I had really the value of an I and was not rather a form of mediai:"r:,'(J, or
.1"'~' for in pronunciation the Burmese make no difference between these two

PART I] THE MYAZEOI INSCRIPTIONS 33
letters, and pronounce them both asy. I shall quote here the passagecOntaining
the examples: In form it (the subscript l) looks, it is true, like an I,ud is
/I
written exactly as in Talaing inscriptions in which it has really this vAlue, ftH.'
instance in the word G&:>S. cion, in the Ta1aing.faceoft~Myazedi. But suoh is
not itsvaluein old Burmese ep'igraphs, where it stands indifferently for a tI, y, or
a ~'" and shows incidentally that, even in the 12th century A;D., the r had
already lost its original pronunciation'and had softened into a" whilein Arakan it
has retained it up to the present. Even,the cursoryexamination ofa few Burmese
inscriptions clearly brings this fact into light, for the same words are often found
indifferently written with an r or" as the case may be, or with this supposed I
symbol, and sometimes both forms are found in the same epigraph. I shall
quote here only a few examples. ; The numbers within brackets show the dates of
the inscriptions:--G(§:>05, Mlrck (1197)j 0&:>05, klliok (138o); 'IS, My"n (I207) j
£8, khlaa,(1373) ~oo, kakhYi" (12°7); G&c:B, khte, (1229), themodemform
j
is ooGf9,&@ j~@;)S, kron (1229); (085:>8, klon (1'342) j ~,ph,-11 (u84) j £Il, pll/Q,
(Illgg); (¥, phrac (1284) &0, phltU (1112, 1299) G<XJ:>., kyon (1084) ~i,
j j j
k/1IJaJt (1395)'
The following'are, examples of the same words written both ways in the
,I
same inscription :-lee§, 11aii, (9~ fran (1197) ~, krtllam, the anusvara, in
j
Burmese, always stands for an n, so that the word is properly kr11Jan j ~cS, k/1JJan
(1373), this !interchange of anusvAra (=Burmese n) with;, is rather scarce, but
several other examples have been found.
" To the above may be added.......~@, man kr£,~, man Hi (nos); in an
inscription dated 1385 A.D., both forms follow each otherin the 'same line 0:>:>000:>:>
..• ~:>c~c:BSlOO~OO:lt)f1tii)'akll . .•. kyonpru ruy plu sa kOft ",hu . •. r the"
deed of merit performed by the devotee building a monastery.' The last, few
examples are particularly interesting, as they show both forms in the same'
document."
Researches subsequent to the article above quoted show, however, that,
notwithstanding the recurrence of the same words contemporaneously under two
forms, there can be no doubt that this subscript t was given its proper value and
that the Burmese of eight centuries ago wrote their language as they pronounce&
it, that is, phonetically. This curious recurrence of the same word, written some
times with an I and sometimes with an r or y, points to a stage in the language
during which this particular class of words was undergoing a phonetic change:.
which is reflected ill the epigraphs. It is, moreover, well known that thes~
5

34 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
letters, I, randy, are to a great extent Interchangeable even within the sam.e
language, as is evident in Burmese. For instance, whereas the Tavoyans have
preserved the I, the Arakanese pronounce the S(l.me word with an 1', but the
Burmese with a y. From what precedes it may be deduced that subscript I
represents, in Burmese, an earlier form of the words in which it occurs j and
that these words were, for a certain period, pronounced indifferently with an lor
with an I' probably already softening intoy, since we find them, during th,at period,
indifferently spelt with any of these three letters. An exhaustive comparison of
all the words in Burmese which now contain a medial r ory with related dialeots
would no doubt reveal, in many cases, those among them which could be traced
back to an earlier dialectical form with i. But this would be a task of some
magnitude. Meanwhile, the list of words given below, with medial I and found
in this inscription and some others, compared with their equivalents in 'other
Tibeto-Burman languages, may prove interesting, in so much that it shows that
many, if not all as yet, have also been found with a medial I in otherlanguages.
The lists of words at my disposal unfortunately often do not contain the words
I was comparing..
g,o, ph/ac i mod. §o, phrac (pr.phy£!) j no equivalent of this word
could be found.
GS1£, pio', and ~l, plu, mod. &, pru (pr. P'1tt), to do, make Tibetan,
j
spyod-ba i Chinb&k, py,·o.
£~, mfiy (pro mlye), mod. ~§I, mre s (pr. myt'), grandson, grandchild Lolo
j
dialects: Achipo, Ii 50 (50 = son = B.·sa3 ); Lolopo, Ii po (po == sign of the
masculine) Nalleupu, na sh: all these mean" grandson"; grand-daughter is :
j
me
Achipo, Iia j Lolopo, Ii 1110 (tHO = feminine, Burm. ma) j Pyu, pii, grandchild j
Tavoyan, m/e3
•
81 Gffi,J, k/aiijo (two other old forms are: t@ffi.ll. klaiijz"i, 1375 A.D., 23e§~,
klaiichu, 1194,\.0.), mod. c;;~a'il'l, kye'jii (pr.h'e s Sil s ), favour j the only equivalent
found is Kachin, kya1V ya i in related languages, the vowels 4, e, U,O, are often
i,
interchanged; also thl: consonants y. Z; for i~stance, in the Lolo dialects, SU,
so, se = B. s~, a son: " to take" is in Singpho, yii and jo one hundred," inthe
j "
w).
. Northern Chin sub-group, EIi,/Ii,)a (see line 2,
:l:)~83JS,aklon(1190' '342 A.D. in the Myazedi it is written c@:>c,kron),
j
mod. :l:)c;§JtJ, O§J~. akron3 kronl (pr.ajyaung'8,jyatmg1 cause, reason, because;
, ),
=
Tibetan, rgyu, rkyetl cause, on account of, bec:luse; Maru, yaung i Tavoyan,
aldo1lg.
~&l05, khtok, mod. ~05, khrok (pr. chauk), the number6; Sifan, kru, chro i

PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 35
Mosso, clroa; Lolo (Liso), khra71Jk, cha1J)k; Maru, dr;.uk i Lashi, cAui i Szi,
cleo; Kachin, k,.u; Ao (N~ga), trak i Khan (Naga), tarok i Kham, terU, laru;
Tengsa (Naga), the!oll; Siyin, 10k, luk j Tibetan,~ drug. -The equivalence of I
(c) and t (d) is common.
c25'o5, klok, mod. (;rq:)()5, kyok (pr. tjyau.t), stone, rock i L6lo, ka-ltI1lJ i P'on,
k'a/ok; Maru, lilUi"paii Lashi and Szi, lui i Tibetan, hr4g (rock) j Tavoyan,'
Aloi, klot.
tell, p"Iil, mod. ~, pltru (pr. pltyu), white i Lolo (Wo-ni),.pyu i Lola (Ssii-
ch'uan). phru; Kachin, pr4w, progn j P'on, a-pltyu i Mar~r Lashi and Szi,
pltyu i Tavoyan, ph/il.
ceB1B, khlon, mod. c;qpcs, khyon°(pr. chaong), a largebrook, rivulet, river; Sifan,
che-koltg
j
Sifan (peu), chautJg ('i Maru, hok-/a1lJ1tg, kiaung; Szi, Ua71Jng; Ahi
(Lola), " cho (Cf. B. c9C:~PC', proye chaOH/!) j Tavoyan, khlong i Tibetan, Hun, citII.
c~o, m/a&, mod. §5, mrac (pr. mrit, now 1'H)"t), a large river i Maru, 1';1;.
Tavoyan, ·mlit.
~05, k!wat, mod. ~oS, kywat (pr. !but), to be loosed or freed from. Cf.
Tibetan, glod-pa, to loose grol-ba, to become free Tavoyan, klftltJI.{pron. ilui).
j j
C;'{PC, kloil, mod. C~'CI, kyoil3 (pr. tjyao"f), a monastery i I have not found
this word in the vocabularies. Mr. Taw Sein Ko, however, tells me that it is still
pronounced klong in Tavoyan; and he givesthe Chinese kung (pro kiong in the
Amoy dialect) in Burmese Sketclles, p. 30.
0::0, 8', mod. ~,i. It will be remarked that the modern form is merely a
simplified way of writing the old one, and that itis really 8' with the short'tone,
but now pronounced" (short). The 35, postscript or subscript, 'was the sign of
the short abrupt tone i it was fully written for a ~ery long time and finally degener
ated into the easier and more quickly written dot (.). In modern and medievaJ
Burmese <ij is used solely as a genitive suffix and as a verbal suffix ofthe present
but used in recounting past events As a genitive it is used only in line 5 : C£OcK:
c~ol~), tlti71J man e' pay maya, "the king's beloved wife "; as a sign of the
genitive, ~, i, has become altogether formal, and is replaced, in familiar conver- .
sation, by the shortening, if long, of the vowel of the word preceding it. It is
interesting to notice that such was already the case at the beginning of the I ~th
century i except in line 5, in the phrase just quoted, this suffix is everywhereelse
replaced by the shortening of the vowcl preceding it by means of the short tone
sign rf:, actually written or even also left out and to be supplied in reading', for
instance, line 33, tX.xl,3S~, may" s4, "wife's son," but line 10, QCXX>O:)SOO), ttUly4
ta"clt4, properlyQc.maSc:D$ClD~,",-.ytl'la"d4. .'Asa verbal suffisshowing the past, it

'EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL."
is usedinlines5,7,9,13a,nd 26. Besides thetwo above uses,whichare still~nt,
oaS isused inthe Myazedi in a way that has now becomelongobsolete,that Ut,as a
slightly emphatic or asa particularizing particle after the connecting ~te&,
,rUJ j examples are found in lines I 4, ~'1~ru~a3S::&:bOCi+;)CXlGJl;)OjOOecc..oS, f1!IIJ;'l1l.
,1
br: ruy' siy Mamu nil
S11
rhow ,zAiktell, '"'andhav:ingreigned (28 Y~5) became
'~ck even unto death:'i 17, <jjp~:g~&{ru~alJS, 121#'ha s;haft acltaltpJ.
ru1' .,' ... , II and having made a statue of the Buddha •.. " j 22, a~'EBcaS,
et)E9'
min' ruyl e', and having said ... (= GC'X>05 of the MyuedI)'is used
II "j
in modern formal language in the same way. Up to now, the only other
inscription in which I have met this word thus used is dated 1194 A.D.
at
With c3S genitive, 'mod. (pr. i), may be compared the Tibetan kyi, gyi, ,
and the Chinese cld' (L.5., HI, Part I, p. 3, and Part III,p. 6: H. B. Hannah,
A Grammar of the Tt'be/all Language, p. 63)~ ,With 036 suffix of the past
time may be compared l in Lushei, Lai, Zahao, Anal, elc.; e in Sopvoma,
Kabul, Khnirao, and we in Angami (L.S.,' Ill, Part III, p. 7).
<£0, tM7IJ mod. ~, Ihui (pro. tho), that, the i a variant of ~, thu;"l11 i
1
both forms cl3b and ~S, the latter being the more common, are found pro
miscuously mixed in this inscription, both are ev'en found in line 27. Cf. also
eBo, !iw, and C¥>, tuiw (mod. ~, lui, to desire), in the same inscription
dated 1194
j
3;>:B 0, akl,'1v = modern ~0ii'tc, akyui8 ~1179. 1194 A.D.); a~s,
m;wran (1165 A.D.), ~S, muiran t1408 A.D.) =: mod. 'i~S = I, muran3 , a kind
of rice. The same variant with the short tone is J;,db5, ali' mod.~, luiJ for
,
=
which pillar 8 has roc;,c8::i:i, atie', and with this latter d. ~8n5, aphie', line 18
mod. :g~, aphui1 Similar forms are found in an inscription dated 1165 A.D.,
= • =
~cBS, Mew mod.~, kui r;;cf3£, t£ew'=mod.~, tw'1 5C8O, thte7IJ mod.~, thui
j j j
s.(til03:£, ;ys," I in line 1 7,is likewise a variant of~~£, iys£e', inline 33 = mod.
gJ!~, Is01
•
Inline 15, Geie, kisw, the body, hence 'self,' is themod. d{, ;ui(pr. ltJ),
wrongly spelt ~oo, ku£y, under the impressiOli it is derived from the P&li kaya.
Lola dialects have this word underslightly differentforms: go, ;'o,gu, ;o-po, ~.·po.
u105, pay, mod, tJ~:X)05, ;'May, thenewspelling for 3:)()05, aplJy (pr. a/I), dear,
my dear, used by a man addressing a woman. This is a pure Burm'ese wordand
is not, as some native scholars would·have, deriyed from the P~1i ;iya. Se1;
,under ~05, line 2.
Line 6.--ro:>, Aa ='mod. O'XU, 1t4'~ See undeu ~ below.
Line 7.-e:t:Y.t. tamu, mod. OC''i. tlJma, •one,' now growing o~oje~cent. roo
tlJ, is the number one; If, /'NU, in :il!w~ll'sll.olo di&!oo~s seems ~.c :::':., fin m'J.;al':",;:,::'

PART 1] THE MYAZEOI INSCRiPTIONS 37
Sf"',
numerative particle, placed practically after every numberi Kopu (Lolo), 14
ta mu; Naseupu (Lolo), ta mu, ta mo; Lolopo (L a o , la), I'. mo. coli is generally
followed by coe1t, IJ, representedinthisinscription GClOCI, f4h, whichisexplained
below. CX)~. is applied to persons only and isvery emphaticandparticularizing,
and may be translated" the one SOH," that is "the son." Pillar B, instead of
~co05, has CO), jQ =.mod. CXJ:)I, kll, which is a nominative suffix, emphatic and
particularizing; the translation of 8 thereforewould be the son"i theexpression
If
in A is more emphatic.
c.cocO, leh, mod. ooe§., taiia(pr., in formal discourse, a8 , in conversation JiS) :
and, also. I have shown already, with examples. the regularinterahange of
the vowels i, 6, /, in Burmese, which was already apparent in the old inscrip·
a,
tions~ and also that the true value of t"s, final is not that of a nasal, but of
e,
the vowel i (short or long) ,and pronounced i. or 4; this is made cJearbeyond
doubt by the evidence of the epigraphs. Whether, in some words, this Gnal e§
does really go back to an earlier fOfm with a final nasal, is beyond the scope of
these notes; my desire here is 6imply to point out that our oldest documents
show abunaantly this symbol to have had the value of ; and e in tbe 12th
century already.. This particle, Gvo<.f.;, is found indifferently written, l;CO, I., ,acoO,
006
lew, ItMi (= Ii), and GOO~, llii, properly 1,-; (pr. U or Ie). In ocoo5, uh, the
final h does not represent an aspiration, but is the old way of indicating the heavy
=
tone now shown by two dots (.). Cf. tcB, fZflJ.n mod. p, .'IIJ~,co s w ai., o , o " c:.B,1M=
mod. ::>:))1, ,~, son; ad, ",iyah = mod. g~I, maya', wife j ¥, = mod.
0081, "'mi', daughter; rt:JJ>, Ran = mod. U, nominativeemphatic particle. In
00:>1,
this very inscripti01l Gco05is found written coe§,line:}6, in the expression coe31501S,
lan,oia = mod. oot§tGO»&, Jali s kon 3 (pron. iii 11IIifI 8 and I. 1_ 8 ), which
I.'
d m " e ' a . ns literally: II and, as well" i OCX)05, tell = mod. COE§', (pr. tI',
Line 8.-c;iJ05, "fi111, mod. F,". (pr. yzttff), a village. In Tavoyan it is
pronounced 01, 'llJtf. tbis wort'is found iii this inscription only; that it is an
old form may be seen from the following in related l&ng\laiei :"":"Maru, 7IJaw j
Lasbi, WD i Szi, '1114; Tavoyan also, ~ j Chinbak, pi·"•• i .Burmese has
preserved the initial "; it seems to have lost it in a few words, for instance,
=
II bamboo" Burmese, 01" 71Jli'; Haka, "'lIIa; Ch~k, rtlO. The A is not
easy to explain, for Burmese contains no word. with a final aspiration, unlessit be
the sign oftbe heavy tone, as explained under GClO<i), su;ra. Pillar B has but
. once oDly, ., nDlJ, whicbfo,mis Dearer to the modem "....

EPIGRAP",IA BI'RMANJCA [VOL. t
Line g. 100<:0, "A, mod. ~, tlii' (pr. at or df~); it is used here-, as·in
modem Burmese, as a tenainaland emphaticputicle~ The remarks under
~, ~'tI, apply all.O to thil word, which it fOUftd also .wntteaeQ), II (1190
AoDo)~ «>e,'''' {pr. Jf) (II~ A.l>.); and -cc5 ".. (pro t.or tr), in numerous
;n,af!tdons.
. Lift e 10;--0, IN, mod. ~, .l.64i'l(pr. ..Uk- particIJ.lbowinl time DOt tong.
past, also euphogic.
sa
1.1n e .2.-0CX:)l~=, a ,.i the atone; where the 6rst em is, is.lightly
damaged i on dose inapection of the pillar, however, it iserideDtthattholapifla~'i'
ashe p.-oceeded, found out his.error, and scratched off the first Ol», the kIt
stroke of which is still visible;. the ~ 'following should haft thevirlma,iB,
which appears to have been forgotten, as it has been in f\ro or three otherplacu.
and
:rhe sentence is then perfflbt reads : c&olc.:6oa»~~ee§ia__;
to the son of the beloved wife, named. RljakumJr . . Cf~ line 17,
II ./1
where the 3Q is also without virama.
Line 13.--<i, td, the same as in mod. Burmese. Cf. the Ahi (Lolo)mo
with th.e same meaning, " to do, make."
Line .+4iB, an ~ for ~tB, ,...,', mod. Oi., ,..,,. (pr. "'), and
i,
generally written'in the abbreviated form a verbal connective particle, equal
in sense to the P.1Ii hla; for lltBoGS see under Qe9, p. 35.
~, ~Juun1l, a verbal suffix expressing the near future, may be translated:
"on the point of, about to"i it teems to have long faDen into disuse; the modem
equivalents are: Cl.1, /u, Cl.1", /11 fli', cqUClOOS,. III matat.
op, ,./to'61, mod. -1\, ,./W (pr. sltl'), before, in the presence of, near:
this wordappears again in lines 17, 21 and 30, an examination ofwhicb leaves no
doubt as to its meaning. I have found no equivalents in other languages.
Line IS.-SS, "'i.af, for sa, ",i",i, a pronoun = one'. self.
=
OC&, linD, modem ¥, j,,;y (pr. lid) j see under eSs, P.36. sa.
mod. ~, one's body," that is one's self. ,.
II .1lJ",
~,.IIY (pr. mffll), mod. Qit', to nourish, take care of, bring upj
e
medial II, before the vowel (00), has naturally changed to its semi-vowel. (6).
Lin e 16.~, ,ri, for @, j,r, mod.~, .,,. (pr. J""); l'! is • phonetic
spt:l1ing. '.
~), j""'jo, mod. ~, Rye',is' (pr. t;ye' 1'>; see under ~~, p. 32•
§aSS, ~.i, mod. ~, oj",;.
Line 17.-!bJ,Jl., mod. FL /," (pr.11 11); see uDder a/J, P.31•

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 39
,5, n"ap.
This word offers the only real difficulty in this inscription in
that no other word in the mQdern language can be traced back to it in the
sense it seems to have here, am; in that, up to the present, it has been found
only in this place, and there are. th~refore, no other passages containing it
from which, by cOlriparison, its exact meaning might be settled. The
Pali face reads here: upasaiJkamma rajanam, he (Rajakumara) having
II
approached the king . . . ," the corresponding passage in the Burmese
being: '&~9G51)oc;;oo<...-8. nltap liy St~ rltow tell'j if this is the exact
equivalent of the Pali phrase, then nita; must be taken as corresponding
to upasa;'!lamma and to mean: to approach " this is the opinion of
jl j
Mr. Taw Sein Ko, whom I approached on the subject it is also mine. In
j
this case, one should have expp.cted the locative particle joS (mod. ~~)
between GjJO and (#~tB as in lines 14 and 30 j the sense would then have
cBSas\:>&c005.
been much clearer. The same omission occurs in line 21, in
The Burmese literally means: "in the presence, whom he had approached,
he spoke thus (~eOdbSS~a3SJ."
~cOoSoS, iy si' see under cB8, line 5.
j
Lin e 18.-3;)'0833, a/hi,', mod. :);)~, flphu;l (pr.·apho l ) see under cBo,
j
line 5. ::gcB::B, ati', a variant of ·::g~aS, atu;', which is found in lines 19, 20.
:)';)~33 is formed from the plupl suffix d}3S (this is seen in line 26) by
means of the prefix ::g, and means • we/ the prince speaking of himself
IL,
in the plural. and is therefore lobe translated here by I.' In modern
I
ct:,
colloquial the plural suffix, tu£l, is often useo as the first personal
pronoun plural and is then pronounc~·d dijl, It is but an abbreviation of
~~&ft ("2Ih~). which is tlJe equivalent i)f the old Burmese ::gcBt&~J$.
Lin e 19.-G&>lo'3, plo', mod. ~, In'u i see under &,0, line S.
Lin e 20.-~OO.moo, a mistake for ~05Ja05. the virama having again been
forgotten: severa] instances of the engraver's lack of attention have already
been noticed.
]leO, rhuy, mod. 9il.' rhwe (pr. shwe). Many Tibeto-Burman languages
pronounce this word: 5h'IIJ£, sku;.
Lin e 2I.-Go:x£J, y6', a varianL 'of c£'; B has also cooo:J6 j this variant
is found only in the Myazedi pillars.
eBO~~CXlOS, thi1JJ rltO'llJ tell j the locative suffix j05 (mod. i05) is omitted
after rh01D lit. "in that presence," that is, in the Buddha-image's presence.
j

40 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 1
tCg)[3S, tIMe lei";'; Mr. Blagden -in his transliteration has ,a~toS,
nlrtle phlui' i pillar B' has ,oE§ l 03 very -clearly, which Mr. Blagden has
rightly noted as a correction. A carefulexaminationo£ the stone itself,
which is somewhat damaged at that place, made it clear it is really [fitoS•
This word means to be pleased, delighted"i the modem equivalent! are
II
,o~ or tOffi~, nhae khruile, nhac ,~ruik, ,cr:ooo~" ",hac tlloia8 , ~, nhflD
mrut"l, and t0O:>oS, tthac sail. The form t0E§t3S, which would now be written
t~, ,thac kruiJ , and approximates' to Jo@05, ,.hac irUfle, or t~~, ",1tae
kltruik, has not as yet been found but in this inscription. _
&tY:OCl;03:£, kon lhen,', mod. '"~te8~, kon3 limJ (pr. kaungS lU,I), it
. /I
will be good," this corresponds to the Pali sadltu! One would quite
naturally have expected xj~, siidhu, also here, for it is the usual exclamation
of approbation and applause in things religious, and other epigraphic
documents show that at the time the Myazedi' inscription was composed,
this word was already so used. But here the dying king expresses his
approbation of his son's intentt"on, that is, of dedicating the three slave
villages to the Buddha statue; hence', the future used in the exclamation.
This intention, though cle!lr enough in the. Burmese and Talaing, is made
much more so in the Plili by the use of the words cintitam aUana in line
19 and of the future demz' in line 22.
Line ~2,-(.<x.h~, thIn', is the result of the assimilation of a verbal
QCO,
euphonic suffix. and ofthe future suffix oo~, am' (= mod. ::J?, pro anI) i «co, Ie, is
a variant of c800 (g.T). line 3) j' oo~, by itself, is found in line 35, This
assimilation of the suffix 3'~ to a preceding. euphonic or causative suffix
+ =
ending in e is quite common: Qqj, khye ~, amJ qj~, khyiml i C;O,
pe + ~, amI = 89, pr·mJ (pronounced chU"s, len J ); the subscript !l as
well as the final gutteral nasal 0, is, show' clearly that GC9£ was written
according exactly to its pronunciationi in speaking, the co of certain words is
often slightly aspirated, for instance' in 00:>, "to come," and this colloquial
aspiration is actually shown in old manuscripts and not seldom'in letters
written by half-educated Burmese.
~~, sangr:;, for O:>~I; sankrr8 a high ecclesiastical dignitary. This is
,
no doubt an abbreviation of -:.oooJ@., sanghllk"z8 ~:> means "a member
j
of the sangha as well as the sangha col1ectively. The Talaings have
I'
also clipped this word to 000, SQ.n.
Lin e lI3.--Q<X)JO(X)Q, tfUJhll-ther = P~li 1tl1J1z1;Jhera, a chief monk.

THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS
PART 1] Afol
Lin e S 23 to 25.-The names of the six ecclesiastical dignitaries recorded
here appear in the Pali faceas MUKgal';utta;tJ,- Sumedho, B,ahiU1la,4Io, Bra/una
dno, Sono, and Saftjllaseno. As far as I am aware, the names of the five lastare
not found any more recorded in any Burmese document. The name of the first,
however, appears scratched on the back of smal1 votiv~ tablets found at
Wetkyi-in; Pagan, in the following short inscription: MUKgaliputtlkariye1l4
mapitam idam 6uddh",.;a';', This Buddha-image_has been made by the
I(
teacher Muggaliputta." It is not certain to what statue and temple this
refers.
Line 26.-~cQ, riy, mod. ~, rt (pr. '8), water j see under cJ3OO, p. 300
GO:)j~, SOl1, mod. C9~, swan, to pour.
Line '27-~~, maya a, for (')(x)j::£, maya,'.
Li ne 28.--3;)G(l)j::>5, athot, mod. llI;)'1l~, athwat, summit, pinnacle, spire.
It is also written ~a5, athwat.
=
Lin e 29,~, ktl modern 01, kil, from Pali guhii, a cave j this word
commonly denotes a temple, into which access can be had, in contradistinction .
to the solid dagobas or pagodas with a bell-shaped superstructure, such as the
Shwedag&n at Rangoon. This distinction is not generally observed in BUJ'ma
among Europeans, every religious edifice being called a pagoda.'
f
r;,c~pc15, thot, mod. ~, /h'tlJat, (/ to dedicate."
l/lpr;,cg)a5~xp,,:>o~05,in modern Burmese, would run : ~c&.CO)lXfflI~5li~"
Lines 30-3r.-The names of the three villages enumerated here-
:x>a::'t~COOJ$,Sakmunafofl, '1,,100, Rapaf, and cooi~8, Henbuiw-are now completely
forgotten; they do not appear in any of the lists of localities often given in chron
icles. I am inclinedtothink that they are not Burmese names, they do not look
as such; no reasonable sense can be extracted out of them, as can be done for
other Burmese place-names, almost without exception. The third only, ~~8,
has a faint and distant resemblance to a Burmese word and, according to phonetio
rules, might represent a modern ~~~oSa~i,~e5 or 51S~oSn~oS (pron. bd = Pali 6ala),
meaning a chid ?Ii, r"in(pr. shme), means" to .be hot," ~il, to " smart "
II Ilj
and also "the faculty of becoming invisible P; these yield no rational sense.
5l
c,
rltan (pr. shi,l), means a '. novice," and
Sl&toS
would be a "master of .
novices," but this expression, in this particular sense, is not Burmese. Enquiries
as to what these nameS might mean in Talaing have altogether failed to throw
any light on them to modern Talaing monks (the most educated persons in this
j
language) these words are a perfect blank.
6

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL.l
Lin e 3J.-GCOJ, yo, mod 01, yil, "to take," hence" to"bring." This was
really the old form of the word; compare the following :-Liso (Lol.;t)jru la;
,u ".1" ''''j
Ahi (L'0olo), jo j Singpho, y4, io j P'on, yo, 1'i A.ch'ng,
Maru, la1lJ i Lashi, law j Tibetan, /eyel-yon. The 14, an,d 14'111 after
some of the above words, is the ,verb "to come" = B. CO), III i ,.lIm= 'I to
take and come" = to bring. The old Burmese form has survived in the
exclamation, yo', take! ~ere, take it!
Lin e 34.-~:x8, amno', mod. :J:)i, ambu, act, deed.
~~tilOO, sar'ltl1f1annutll, a hybrid form from Sanskrit and Pili =" Sansk.,
slIrvII;ir.atll; Pali, slIhhllfr:iuda.
Lin e 35.--@i§'l, direct from the Sanskrit, prajtia.
rQt2, 11m', mod.~, tlml (pr. anI), the sign of the future tense. Cf. Lushei,"
iIIIK, also a future suffix.
8~, ciy', mod. ~, ce (pr. s/), a causal and precative suffix. Mr. Blagden
reads 805 instead of 8a3; this is a .lip, for the underscript lJ;) is quite clear
in the estampages.
Lin e 36.-ooe§<;olS, Ian go;" j see under ~, line 7, p. 37.
~o?,m/i'1, mod. (;;Sl, mre! (pr. m,l') see line 5, p. 34·
j
3;)~, aduy, mod. ~~, a&h1lJ, (pr. as~). .
rQOQ)
Lin e 38.-:-For read acak, the virama having been omitted.
3;)005,
s
~cx:o, mu /ea, mod. ~', mil ka , an emphatic conditional suffix.
Lin e 39.-lJ;)~~oo:>, arimittiyit = art"metleyya, the Buddha who is to
appear next in this cycle.
:J:)ll, II ,nil, mod. Qq', ma pnul ; Ii' = " to behold with reverence,"asa Buddha
or a sacred object. There is no mistaking thelJ;), which is quite clear in both
pillars. This line means: "Let him not behold Arimetteyya!" Besides the
Myazedi, it has been found only in one other epigraph dated 1238 A.D.andwhich
reads very clearlylJi,}1i'lBuSo.::l&o:a The inscriptions in which some such imprecation
occurs are fairly numerous. but the common negation, ma, is used throughout.
~'l805, II ,"flra ciy; the P~li has: "Metteyyadipadindassa dassanam
n'Adhigacchatu." The a therefore corresponds to ma, and is the negative
particle. But with it may be compared the Ahi (Lolo) negative II1 which" is
placed, as here, immediately before the verbi it appears to be special to the Ahi
and a few other dialects, most other Lolo dialects usirig for negation the particle
IlIa, which is also Burmese. The following are examples in Ahi:-Ko II neo,
I do not wish"; I'D" dID, I do not eat."
If II
1,S".1'"'0.• IgD90 pp.S09'lo,and pp. 56-7inthe Ahi text.

1:] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIQNS
PART
e~;ltlined,
·'fI,tlu of Burmes!. 1JJo"d, and compar,d ,,,it}, til, 1IIO"tI, o/tltll,,,
Tibeto-BuYma1J laneUtJgII.
(O.B. lItera word meanl OldBurmese; wordswithoutany Indicationa~modem Bllrmese-)
~, II (O.B.)-thenegative particle, equi- GtBJ¢, kloll (O.B.)-monastery,~. 35.
gg05,
valent to Q, ",a (modem Burmese), p. H1IItIt (O.B.)-to be freed rom, p.
cxl~·
m:JS:
I
aili'lD .(O.B.)-benefit, p. 3()· Rah (O.B.)""""1lominative emphatic
:J;,)Ggpo, d/on (O.B.)-cause, rt:ason, p. particle, p. 37.
34., 6 00:>, ktJ (O.B.)-nominative suffix, p. 36.
O':)~, akhln. -room, p. I . "i ka-~ cave P 41.
::r.-oSaS, "ti' (O.B.)-we, pp. 3 6 . 39· ! c;;",s,;C9:.t" jo~ ih,.' (O.B.)-it will
B:lcc8oS, tlti~' (O.B.)-we, p. 36. I be good, p. 40.
3;)~3S, atm' (O.B.)-w~,p. 39· . I ,.ci:o, kie1lJ (O.B.)-body, self, pp. 36,
:J.4(X)05, athot (O.B.}-pmnacle, summIt, 3 . .
8
1
pp. 29, 4 . . ,.r&, kfe'lfJ (O.B.)-body, self, p. 36.
B:lll. a phil lO.B.)-not to behold wIth ';'~J., kyon (O.B.)-slave, P.29.
I:>s'
:J'. r }g e ~a v S e , re a n p c h e. " . I p ( . O 4 . 2 B . .)-(o;, pp. 36, 39· ~05, k ,h y' ' l a fJ k a - " fo ( w O l . , B p . . )- 1 s 8 l . ave, p. 28.
3;)~,
am' (O.B.)-the sign.of future 'i, kran1.-to delay, p. 17.
tense, P' 42 • ch, kri, .(O.B.)-copper. p. 3 1•
~~:paS, amho' {O.B.)-act, de.ed, pp. ;..:>8, kron-eat, p. 18.
)2,42 • t. kyuJ'-rope, p. 18.
B:l~~rJ:)J, Arimitti)'~-t~e Buddha who . .,s, krwak-rat, p. 19.
IS to ap.r ear next In thiS cycle, p.•p. ;I, kha {O.B.)-a particle showing time
~~I, al'U'.-bone, p. 18. . not long past, p. 38.
B:lcB$, "h,n {O.B.)-heat, VelOCity, ;Iii, khamfl (O.B.)-a verbal suffix ex-
power, p. 29·. . . .pressing the nearfuture, p. 38.
~J, tJ lO.B.)-dattve postpOSitIOn, p. 32• c;ci,l05, H/ok (O.B.)-number6, P' 34.
~I, u,'-chatty, p. 18. a&lS, ih/oit (o.a.)-rivulet, a large
I'.
~O, ip (O.B.)-to sleep, p. ". brook, p. 35.
~oS3S, iY$;' (O.B.)-thus, p. 36. aolBs, khon'-head, p.
aOS, e' (O.B.)-genitive suffix, verbal ~lO, khyup-to sew, p'. 17.
suffix, p. 35· .~:>t., khyon'-canal, rIver 1 , '. p. 17.
§as,ok (O.B.)-below, p.18. . ChJj:>s" khyo;,a-to spy, p..
§05S, okmi (O.B.)-to call to mmd. §:x.c!, k.hrdnll (O.B.)-hon, p. 28.
to remember, p. 38. c05, nak (O.B.)-to speakloudly, scold,
B3e§~, Handa (O.B.)-favour, p. 34· p. 18.
teall, !lanjt' (O.B.)-favour, p. 34· @J, nrd-to report, to announce/ p. 18.
~alJ, kJanjo (O.B.)-favour, pp. .34, Offill, c~k-k1Z-paper, p. I~.
38. 8ch, cry (O.B.)-precanve partiole,
Q83J05, Rlole (O.B.)-stone, rock, p. 35. causal particle, p. 30.
----- ._-----_.- •... _ ..._--'-.. _- ._ ..--- .... - --_.-

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL•.•
~Il,phla ~O,
818,
c;y' (O.B.)-a causal and precative (O.B..).-. white,pp. 35..
II
suffix, p. 42. . q'P, Phuylf, (O.B.)-the Buddha, p. 26.
g~, c2tlan--:;.a hawk, p. 16,' I Q5\:>, phurlzlf, (O.B.)-the Buddha,'p.
00:>0, chan (O.B.)-elephant, p. 28. II 26. .
Q);)OO, &hay (O.B.)-number 10,p. 27. ~'l(m, 6"i yak4-a continuative affix im-
cq, clm~reward, p. 18. . plying priority to some other state or
I
~, cizek-to build, p. 18. j action, p. 3I• .. .
~, chus'1-to stop up, plug. up, cork, p. I~Sp, bhurluj (O.B.)-the Buddha, p.
18. . 26.
~I, chu,~-bad, troublesome, injurious, ~c, mlac(O.B..)-river, pp. 20,.. 35.
p. 18. : . &leO, ml,y(O.B.)-grandson, .grand-
ClOloiI tamu (O.B.)-one, p. 36.
I
child, pp. 34, 42•
GOOoS, teft (O.B.)-closing particle, em- IaB, mimi (O.B.)-one's self, P'38.
phatic'parti.ele, p. 37. Boo, miy.(0.B.) ·-moth~r, p. 31. .
~:>S, ton-wmg, p. 11. .BoooS, nuy"h (O.B.)-wlfe, p. 37.
CXlS, tim-cloud, p. 17. 1ao~s. miwra~..(O.B.)-a kind of rice, p.
cBO, tM'W (O.B.)-that, the, p. 36. 36.
~S, thft'll1 (O.B.)-that, the, p. 36. 'i(Y)), nw Rtf, (O.B.)-an emphatic condi·
~, thui7IJ (O.B.)-the, that, p. 36. tional suffix, p. 42.
io5, my (O.B.)-day, p. 31. 'i\y.S, muryan (O.B.)-a kind of rice
905, n1lJan (O.B.)-cow, p..17.. grown on the bank of rivers. and
,b~,£, ",nflc Mui' {O.B.)-to be I lakes, p. ~7. .
pleased, delig:hted, p. 40. . i 'i05, muy (O.B.)-nourish, take care of,
JB, una; tO.B.}-approach, p. 39. bring up, p. 38.
jm, nl,,·.(O.B.}-locative postposition, Ii, mu-to do, make, p; 38.
P' 32. . ww:>md}, mo£ tu,:"-'helmet, p••8.
Sl, plu (0.B.)-to do, make, pp. 3+, @t., mrac-river, p. 19.
I,.
38. @J6, mrtI,n (O.B.)-horse, p. ~7.
~&loS, 110' ~O.B.)-to, do, make, pp. 32, 008, yan-a fly, p.
34, 39. . ItBSl, yim'-to move from side to side, p.
u105, pay{O.B.)-dear, beloved, p. 36. 17·
8a5, piy (O.B.)-to give, p. 30. ' ,.oorh, y~'-a variant of ooS, p. 39.
tfB.,
Ittclu'n-axe, p. 17. \ yo (O.B.)-to take, to bring, pp.
GlXJ'J,
tf"1oo:J, purahtf, (O.B.)-the Buddha, p'. 32, 42.
26. : <95, yhac (O.B.)-number 8, p. 28.
'1"~, puyha (O.B.)-the Buddha, p. 26. j 0.305, yhat (O.B.)-number 8, p. 28.
~~, pu,'t-to carry, p. 18.! ~.' ry~ (O.B.)-one hundred, p. 27.
I
~, pyam-to fly, p. 17. ~05, r,y (O.B.)-water, pp. 19,30,.31,
§~:J, pYa{na (Sanskrit)-wisdom, p. 42. ,41. , .
~, pru-to do, act, p. 18. I ~05, "y (O.B.)-to laugh, pp. 20,
i
qy:>, fro-to say, speak, p. 18. : I• .
~~, f'DJa;,l-a blossom, p. 16. ! ~:.J,,;l' ruy' (O.B.)-a verbal connective
&8, p"'ac (O.B.)-to be, to become,: particle, p. 38.
pp. 32, 34. . j~, ,.huy {O.B.)-gold, pp. 19, 29·

PART I] THE .M'f.AZEDI INSCRtRTIONS
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
The Talaing Inscription of the Myazedi Pagoda at P~gan, i~ !f1n4"",,1 Roy,,'
Asiatic Socilty for October 1909, PP,;~;J[7;:~y c~ 0.181~g~~I).
Preliminary Study of the Fourth Text of theMYazedi;:In~qr,iptiQns"hR.A.S~,
April 1911, 36$" C. O. Blagde.n,·. .
A Further Note on the Inscriptions of the ¥<Y.ilZed~,y~g~da~,:p:agan,':.J~R?A;SoJ
..
\. - -;"
July 1910, C. O. B1agd~n.;
Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya and Ava: Translation, with Notes Rangoon.
c.
1899, Tun Nyein. . '.
Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States, Part I, Vol. I,. Rangool'l,
1900, J. George Scott.
Linguistic Survey of India, Vol. Ill, Parts I, II, III, Calcutta, 1.909,
G. A. Grierson.
Burmese Sketches, Rangoon, 1913, Taw Sein Ko.
Essai de dictionnaire Lolo-fran~ais, Leide, 1912, Alfred Lietard.
Notions de grammaire Lo·lo, Bulletin de /'Ecole F"a"fais, d'E~I"',,,,·
.o"inat, Vol. IX, 1909, pp. 'J8~S.ff, A. Liaard.

EP,(jRAPHIA BI~.A~ICA [VOL. J
Notel sur Jesdialectei Lo-Io, B~E.F.E.O.,·IX, 1.909, pp. ·549t~
'Lanaue& d. peUples noD chinoi•• Ja. Chine, II.. ~; p....,
Igu.
·Sprach~rgleichende·S~, mit besonderer Berlftsichtig.. clerildooliitae
siSchen·Sprachen, Leip.i" '1'870, Dr. Adol·f B~.
A Manual of tile Lawngwaw oi Maf'l1 Lan&tJ3Ie; Ra~,19 i I,..,. V•
.Clerk.
H. Kern's Verspreide GesehrifUm, Vol. VU:-" JDScriptieS vah· den ·Indiaohen
g35.
Archipel,"and Vol. HI,p.
Tibetan-English Dictionary, London, 1881, A. A.'Jaeehke~
Tlranltha~1 Geschichte des Buddhismus .iii '. htdi~,Sl Peteflburgi r869,
Antoo Schiefner.
Indisch~ Alterthumskunde, IV, Lassen.
. A Grammar of the Tibetan Language, H. 8. Ha'nriah.
.Domaine Archzologique du SUim, Lajonquiere.
'. Notes d'Epigraphie, B.E.F.$.Q., }{V,.L. Finat.
Un nouveau. document sur Ie buddhism birma·n "-Journal Asiatique
fI J
Juillet-aout Igl~, L. Finot.
Jardine Prize Essay, F'orchhammer.
Bigandet, Legend of ~otama.
Parker's Burma with special-reference to her relation with China, Rangoon,
r893'
The Talaing History Dhammacetl, Patlak.
~S006OJ6. Vol. IL
Forchhammer, Notes on the Ancient Geography~f BtJrma, I-The Shwe
dagan Pagoda, Rangoon, 19J1.
Burma Research Society's Journals from 19'10-1·9J7.

IJ THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS
PAH.T
Tr.",litwtdu", ~.t~ P"i Fac. of tit. M,aM4i, B Pi/lis,. tit M,id.1M
(Phul II, B).
Sri
I. I I buddhldikalb vatthuvararil nametvl puftftatb u.ta. yalb Jina • • •
. . . . '. . . . .. . .
~. kalb RljUum.iranlmadhayyena vakkhlmi sUJ)l .....•.
e. . . .
3. nibbanllokanathassa a~hayf5e1dhikega. Sle pana
+
vasllnam ehasate vi pare ~thl Arimadcla'~ ..•.. smi pure .lsi
101 I
S. mahabbalo raja Tibhuvanldicco udieca . . . . . . vansajo.
6.• tass' as' eka plyl deY! sA Tilokava . . . . • kl hitesl
,. kusall sabbakiecesu [pana] rajino. o' .. SS' as' ekosu·
8. to RAjakumaro nlma nlmato amaceo rajakieeesu
9. byavato satima vidu • 0 Ii adA glmattayam tassa de-
10. viya :10 mahtpati pasano' sabbada •. saparibhogena
II. bhuiljitum • 0 • aniccatAvasam tassA ga . lya pana deviya
12. rAjA RAjakumArassa ada gamattayarilpuna • 0 • aUhavlsati
13. vassani rajjam dhammena kAriya mAr~ti .. rogassavasam pa·
J 4. tte narldhipe •0 • saranto dhammadjusa . . hantam gu~ailca:
15. yam kl[r]etvl satthuno bimba sabbasovawayam subham • 0 • ga·
16. hetvi tam mahantena aakklrena sumlnaso upasankamma
17. rajlnaIb a.ha cintitam attano • 0 • bhlgalb katyin' ida&h satthu-
18. bimbatb sovCl\l\1&yam subhaIb akbirb vo varam pufUiaIb simi
19- tumhe 'numodatha • 0 • glmattayam pi vo simi pubbe dinna
~O. -n tu me aharb imass'eva munindassa demi taft e' anumodatha. 0
2I. • evads vutt~ mahfpilo rogen' Aturamlnaso sidhu sA • •
u. ti vatvana tu'thahattho pamodito • 0 • dayaparo Ma
23. -hlthero thero Muggaliputtako sumedhatUl Su
14' -medho ti laddhanlmo ca paQ4ito I 0 • Brahmapl-
15. -10 tathl Brahmadevo sampannasrtavl Sono bahu-
16. -ssuto Sanghasennavho varap&\l4ito • 0 • etesarb
27. pana bhikkhunam sammukhl so sumAnaso . " Jam pltesi katvi-
28. -na sakkhin tu vasudhataJam •0 • tate' •so tam mahamacco
29. bim . . . sova\ll}&yam . ubha' pati . . . . • . . . . . . . .
30. .. .........•...•.... mailgaJa . buddhapa-
31. timaya guhiya ca aleb' evarb paJ;lldhanarb
32. nibbinno bhavasalikate • 0 • karontena mayl etam
I _ bothOft pll1arlA &a4 B. • PorlUll,.,... • Therlfht·balIoft iadamapd. ••1Ubbata.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
.33. yam pufU\am samlcitarb hotu sabbafiiiatdlt;l&rii
3-f.. pativedh~ya paccayo '.0 • yattaka tu mayl
35. dasl gimattayanivlSino dinnl guhlya sova-
36. . patimlya mahesino •<> • putto me vi pa-
37. . . tto va afifio vi panaftltak~ yo koci
. 38. . . pasankappo naTO assaddhamlnaso • 0 • kare-
39. yy' upadduva~t~sam disanam so naridhalilo,Mittiyadi-
40. padindassa dassanam n' adhigacchatfi li • O'
T,.nsliteration Df the Palt' Face Df the M'''8tdi Pi/It,. A (M..s",,,,)
. (Plate II, A).
Sri
I. I I buddhadikam vatthuvaram namitvc1 1 puiinam katam yam Jinasa-.
2. sanasmilll anlirikam Rajakumaranamadheyyena 1I vakkha-.
3. mi sunatha m~ tam.' nibb~n~ lokanathassa aHhavr~.
3
4. s~dhike gate sah~sse pana vassc1naril chasate va pare ta
S. tha .' Arimaddarianamasmipure asi mahabhaloraja
6. Tibhuvanadicco udiccadicca~amsajo• tass' as' e-
7; -k~ piya devi sc1 Tilokavatamsikc1 t hi-
6
8. t~i kusala sabbakicce~u pana rajino Ita-
9. 5S' c1s' eko·suto Rajakumaro.nc1ma nama-.
10. to amacco rajakiccesu byavato satima
11.' vida.' ada gamattayam tassa ·deviya so ilia- .
I~. hlpati pasanno sabbada dasaparibhogena bhuiijirurb
13••' aniccatavasamtassagataya pana deviya ra-
14, ja•Rajakumlrassa ada g~mattayat puna I a~~havisa­
15, ti vassAni rajjarb dhammena kariya mira~antikarogassa
16. vasam pattenarldhipe .' saranto dhammar~jassamahanta:m gu-
17. Q.asaiicayam klretva satthul10 bimbam sabbasovaooa-
7
18. yam subham •• gahetva tam~ mahantena sakkArena sumlnaso
19- upasankamma iljimim l1ha cintitam attano .·;bhlgaril katva
2~. sO~3\lJ;\ayam ak~iin
en' idam sattbubimbam subham vo va-
TheCoIlowiqare thedifterent readings in B:- .
1 Namtirti; 1I Nlmadha)'yena; 3 Su9itha; .• a0 iI; ~ Piyl; • Rljl; 7 Bimba.
• TheIiin,4,very faint ontheatone,isinvisiblein theplate.
t The nicgahila (m> _ , i, .carcely visible on the eItaftlpage, but· is quite di~ On the
stone, t........·very 1UUoW. . .t glmaUilyatD.
. n..
~ ninahita• ao&Mea ~'~place.

INSCRIPTIONS OF TilE MYAZEDI PAGODA. PAGAN
THE PALl TEXT
A B
,
:
~,
, ,
{)
,-.
,
~;;
14
;f,'
I,'\
20
')-.'
4

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS
21. ram pui'ifiam simi tumhe 'nl1modatha .1 glrnattayarb pi YO
22. simi pubbe dinnan tu me aham ;mass' eva munindassa demi ta-
23. tl c' llnumodatha • evam vutte mahJp~lo roge-
J
240 n' llturamlnaso sidhu SldhQ ti vatv~na tut\hahattho
25. pamodito. daylparo Mahlthero thero Muggali-
26. puttako sumedhatta• Sumedho ti laddhanlmo ca pa\l<!ito
27. Brahmapalo tatha Brahmadevo sampannasllava Sono
28. bahussuto Samghasenavho' varapal}4ito etesam pa-
I J
29. Ila bhikkhQnam sammukhl so sumlnaso jalam patesi kahAna sa-
30. kkhin tu vasudhatalam • tato so tam mahlmacco blmbafh 'Ova-
J
31. \lJ;1ayam subham pati\\hlpiya klresi guhalh kaficanathOpika••
32. katvlna mangalam buddhapatimlya guhAya ca akll' evam pafl-
33. dhanam nibbinno bhavasankate karontena maya etaJh yam-pu-
I I
34. fii\aril* tam sam4eitam hotu sabbafti\utaiUJ)apativedha-' .
35. ya paccayo • yattakl tu mayl dl1sa glmat~yanivl.,
J
36.. sino dinna guhaya sovarw.apaumlya mahesi-
37. no. J putto me va paputto va aftft.o vi pana iU-
38. tako yo koci plpasamkappo naro assaddha-
39. mlnaso kareyy' upadduvam tesam daslnam so narldbamo
I I
40. Metteyyadipadindassa' dassanam n' athigacchatu •
41. tia 0 •
MYilzedi PII" (Musftlm) in Slaua FtWa
Sri
•. Buddhldikarb vatthuvararh namitvi
J
pufti\am katam yam inaslsanasmirb
anirikam RajakumAranama
dheyyena vakkhami sunatha me tarill
t. NibbAnl lokanlthassa atthavlsAdhike gate
sahasse pana vasslnam chasate v~ pare tathi•
.3, Arimaddananlmasmi pure asi mahabbalo
raja Tibhuvanldicco udiccAdiccavamsajo'
4. Tass' Is' ekA piyadevi sl Tilokava~rilsikA
hitesl kusala sabbakiccesu pana r!jina-
ThefoJlowini'atethedifterentreadinlPin B:-
J • 0 • I • Sumedhatti, I Sallghuennavho; • SabbaflllutaU9A*J - I. MitliyyJiJ
• n'adhipechatll.
• The !linahilAcannotbewen inthe plat..
7

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
5°
5. Tass' As' eko suto Rl.jakumlro nlma nlmato
amacco rAjakiccesu bylvato satiml vidol
6. Adl ~mattayatbtass! deviyi so mahipati
pasanno sabbadl disaparibhogena bhunjituriu
7. Aniccatlvasam tassi gatlya pana deviyl
rljl Rijakumlrassa adl gtmattaya punaa
8. A\\havisati vassini rajjam dhammenaklriya
mlranantikarogassa vasam patte narldhipe'
9. Saranto dhammarajassa mahantam gul)asancayam
klretva satthuno bimbam sabbasoval.l~ayam subham.
10. Gahetvl tam mahantena sakkarena sumanasol
upasankamma rAjanam aha cintitam attanol .
JI. Bhlgam katvan' idam satthubimbam sova1\l\).ayam subham
akisim vo varam pufu1am simi tumhe 'numodatha.
12. Gimattayam pi vo sami pubbe dinoan tu me aham
imass' eva munindassa demi taft c'lnumodathal
J3. Evam v\jtte mahlpilo rogen' lturamanaso
sidhu sldho ti vatd.na tu~*hahatthopamoditol
J4. DayAparo Mahathero thero Muggaliputtako
sumedhatta Sumedho ti laddhanamo capa\l4itol
IS. Brahmapalo tatha Brahmadevo sampannasila\'i
Sono bahussuto Samghasenavho varapal.14ito.
16. Etesam pana bhikklinam sarillnukhi so sumlnaso
ialam pitesi katvAna sakkhin tu vasudhltalarilU
17. T~to so tadJ mahlmacco bimbam sovaJ).1}ayam subham
)t.ltittMpiya karesi guham katlcanathiipikam,
IB./Kat~na mangalam buddhapatimiya guhlya ca
akls'evam paI)Idhanarh nibbinno bhavasankate.
19. Karontena mayi etarh yam pUi'inarh tam samlcitarh
hotusabbafinutana\l8pativedha)'a paccayou
20. Yattaka tu maya dasa gamattayanivasino
dinna guhaya sovaJ.1lJapatimaya mahesinol
21. Putto me vi paputto va ;1 nno vi pana natako
yo koci papasarhkappo naro assaddhamanaso.
~2. Kareyy' upadduvam tesarh dasallariJ so ~laradhamo
M·etteyyadipadindassa dassanam n' ithigacchaUi tin

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 5·
Trartslation of the P41£ Face.
I. Prosperity I Having bowed to the Buddha anc:t&\e other (two) Excellent
Objects, 1 shall relate the noble workof merit pe~, in the Conqueror's
dispensation, by Rajakumara. Hearken to me ! '
2. When one thousand six hundred and twenty-eight years had elapsed after
the Nirval}a of the Lord of the World,
3. Tibhuvanadicca,1 a powerful king and s~ion of the exalted solar race,
I
became king in the city caned Arimaddana.
4. He had a,beloved queen, Tilokava~ari1sika (by name), who was bene
3
volent and skilful in aU the affairs of the king.
5. She had a son, Rajakumara by name, a minister, zealous in (the manage-
ment of) the affairs of state, prudent and wise. . . '. '
6. The king, graciously disposed towardsthe queen, gave herthree,villages
for her to enjoy, for life, the revenues (accruing from) the slaves (thereof)~
7. Now, upon the death of the queen, the king again made those three
v,illages over to Rajakumara.
8. On the king, after having ruled nghteously for twenty-eight years, being
seized with amortal illness,
of
g. He (Rajakumlra), re~embering the numerous and great'favours the
righteous king, had a beautiful image of the Buddha made all in gold,
10. And, carrying it with great pomp, and'well pleased (with his meri
torious act), approached unto the presence of the king and told him of his
intention:
I r. "On your Majesty's behalf,· I have made this beautiful golden image of
the Master j deign, my lord, to rejoice in thisexcellent work of merit!
I Thisis King Kyanzittha'sstyle.; the full styleasgiven in the Hurmese and tbe TaLaing faces is fir'
TribhIol1'andtlit'8·DluJmmartij.
II Utlic~: thi,word i,frequentintheJ_tll••,whereitkmostlyappliedtoBrahmins,andmeans "north
western, northenl, ofnorthern origin," that is,from tlte northern region of India'to thenorth &ftCI west of
sense
the river Saralvati;but it meansalso"noble,exalted," and tJilis isthe that fits better here. 1'his
meaning isgiveninthe Jatalr4-~jJe4,a voluminousworkwritten byDhamrnapala,near Anllrldhain Ceylon,
thus, udit:co' tiargatitpatto. The Talaiogsand theBurmese,i"their translationsof Pali works,constantlY
translated udicca by ..exalted, noble," or,some similarexprestion, and never attach toit the meaningof
II northern It; .. eulted It istherefore nodoabt the tense .hi8h the authorof the insc:riptiOfl hadin mind.
TheBurmesekingJ. howeTef', traced their lineage to a branCh ofthe solar dynasty that came to Burma
from Indiainthehoc&rypast'a.sH
a TtJSJ'4$'lUithat is, tis,'II-&.
t BhIGa";'htfl4"., that is., sharing. with the king,the fruit Ot' rewardo( hi, good action. .hich isto
be received in afuture existenCe; cE.tattitit"diti.

EPIGRAPHfA BIRMAN-leA [VOL. I
12. "The three villages which you formerly gave me, I have dedicated. to .
this image at this also rejoice I
j /I
13. On tbis being said, the king, (though) his mind was troubled bj disease.
rejoiced and•.pleased and delighted,· eliotanned: Good! good!"
/I
14. The compassionate Chief Monk, the th..~ Muggaliputtaka,Samedha'tbe
wise, 50 called on account of his wisdom,' .
15. Brahmaplla, likewise Brahmadevathe virtuous, Sona, the learned and
eminent scholar called Sanghasena :
16. In the presence of these monks (the king), well pleased, poured the
libation on the ground, taking the earth to witness.
17. Then, the minister enshrined the beautiful golden image and built
(over it) a shrine surmounted by a golden spire.
18. Having performed the dedication ceremony lor the Buddha·image and
the shrine, he (Rljakumlra), weary of repeated birth, made the following
aspiration:
19. May this meritorious work, performed and accumulated by me, be the
(I
cause of my attaining Supreme Enlightenment!
20-22. Whosoever, be. he my son, or grandson, or Clny other relative,
with evil intent and unbelieving mind should oppress thoSe slaves, dwellers in the
three villages, whom I have dedicated to the shrine and the golden image of the
Great Sage, may this vile person be precluded from beholding Metteyya, the
Chief of men! "
8
CHAS. DUROISELLE.
I Here,bothstones read tut-I-ha-hattho; the last word being thltparticiplefrom ~rt, we ,hould haVe
expected 11,##110, which is, in fact, the reading mOlt generally milt with. The A""ilJuf"."tI<Ji,il~suri
(Hanthawaddy Press, Rangoon, 1915), p.660,gives,however.both reading-.
• Reading,with 8, suni,dlultttl. .
3 The pili face of the Myinkaba pillar has been reproduced by L. de Beyti' in his IeProme el
Samar.... Plate VIII, and a translation of it is riven in French, on pp. log.lO; bllt this translation is
defective.

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 53
THE M~N OR TALAING FACE OF THE MYAZEDI
INSCRIPTION AT PAGAN
T HE Man texts of this important quadrilingual record are of peculiar interest:
they were the first of the early M8n documents to be deciphered and their
interpretation ha~furnished the clue by which the other M&n inscriptionsofthesame
period are now being explained. As in the case .of the other .three languages
concerned. the :\18n version of this record exists' in two copies, on two separate
columns. In the one. which for convenience may' be styled A, the inscription
contains 33 lines and covers a space of about 2 feet 7. inches in height by I foot
Jt
inches in breadth. In the other. there are 46 lines, covering (when allowance
has been made for the first line, which is hroken off) about 5 feet J inch. by a
breadth which i:i ,"ariable ,1nd decreases downwards from about I r inches to about
9t
inches. not rflllllting the very short last line of all. In the A copy the text is
ill an excellent sl:lte ('If preservation. til£' stone hf'ing evidently of good quality and
having apparently b~en kept in a sht'lterpd position. In recent times a small part
of it, cO\'p.ring the ends of II. 26-.1°. hrls Aaked off and is apparently lost. This
would constitute a seri('lus blf~mish were it not for the fortunate circumstance that a
photograph still in existence was taken of an estampage made before· the damage
was done. The B copy has suffered more vicissitudes. Apparently the stone
on which it was engraved was not of the same quality as the other, and the letters,
though well formed, do not now appear as deep and distinct as those of the A text.
Worse th.an that. moreover, the stone is broken into several pieces, some of which
are lost altogether. Itl this way practically the whole of I. I as well as the ends
of 11. 2-15 and a few letters in many of the other lines have entirely disappeared.
It may be added that the normal height of the ordinary letters in A is about
1\ inch, and letter t is about. inch long. ,~'hile the normal interlinear space is
t
about inch. in B the size of the letters is much the same (if anything, very
.slightly larger), but the interlinear space is almost r inch.
Under these circumstances. the A text is manifestly the one to "hich one has
to turn for a general understanding of the whole of this record, while the B copy
can only be used to a limited extent to confirm or correct it, and that is what has
been done here. The text here printed is the A copy, variants in B being given in
the notes appended to it. As it happens, the A text was the first to come under

54 EPIGRAPHIA BJRMANICA [VOL. I
my notice. I published a very tentative decipherment of it in the Jourl1al oftit.
Royal Asiatt"c Soc£et)', 1909, pp. 1017-52, which I was able to correct in many
important particulars when in i6id., 1910, pp. 799-812, I issued a decipherment of
the 8 text. The text now printed represents a further amendment. Reconsidera
tion of the doubtful points and a comparison with otherearly Man inscriptions have
led me to modify some of my first tentative readings. I am also much indebted to
a review of my first paper by the late M. Huber in 8..E.F.E.O., XIII, 7, pp. 11-4,
for several valuable suggestions. The untimely deatbof that brilliant scholar has
been a serious loss to :\'13n studies. as well as to the many other branches of
Oriental research in which his extraordinarily \'ersatik mind excelled j and there is
no doubt that, had he survived, he would have made many other useful contri
butions to M8n t:pigraphy.
Of the many problems left unsolved by the first reading of this inscription,
very few no\\' remain at all doubtful. The word po,' \A 15) or po' (8 19) is still not
quite satisfactorily explained, inasmuch as it has not been found elsewhere or
correlated with a modern form. Rut the great crux was the word which I read,
somewhat doubtfully. tiear (A 18-21. B 24-i). Huber proposed to read it acar,
but in the absence of anyM8n palaeographic evidence for an initial {t so closely
resembling tt', I felt unable to adopt a suggestion which would otherwise be most
acceptable. (t occurred to me later that the Il1vsterious word might conceivably
be an abbreviation (or possibly a genuine ('olltr;lctioll) of tirla iittir. .. the lord
teacher." Both titlt;s are appropriate to ecclesiastic:-;, :I!l(! medieval Mon offers
somewhat of a parallel in the titl!'" tl"pleill, which prl:'~llm~hly stands for tila PUi1Z.
This explallation has now been conlirml".o hy Professor Duroiselle on the authority
of a learned M8n monk. Tht:: title is mit: <lppropriatl· to a high ecclesiastical
dignitary and ill my translation I have rendered it by .. Ihe Venerable."
From internal f.'videl1ct~ it seems cleal that the B tf~xt is nearer the original
draft than the A can claim to be ill at least Olli! important particular, viz. the name
of the third \'iliagl' dt:dicated by the prine!'" (A 26-7. IiJ5): a comparison with the
Burmese version establishes that iact beyond 11 doubt. The latter has He1Z6ui'ZV,
;t
and it may be inferred that the !',H)Il draft had Hmbu(l', which has been corrupted
in both copies, but much more seriously in A than in B But as a rule their
differences are mere variants of spelling, though ill A 28 (8,38) the 8 reading has
contributed to the rectification of the interpreta~i()11a~ well. A number.of points of
agreement between the M8nand Pali versions raise the probability dlat they were
composed by the same draftsman. But in general the Man agrees pretty closely
with the Burmese, on which it would seem to have been modelled.

t:Pi.QMpftia Birmitrlic.<t VOLUME I, PLATE TIl
~.~~--~-
INSCRIPTIONS OF THE MYAZEDI PAGODA, PAGAN
THE TALA-ING TEXT
A B
Z
?
4
'.
f)
,;
8
8
)0
10
12
IZ Lt
16
Lot
18
16
20
~~.~
22
:w
24
.-..V....).
26
.~4
28
~()
30
2b
32
.~t~ 34
<! 36
38
-to
41
-44

PART I] THE MYAZEDIINSCRIPTIONS 55
Text (Plate-Ill;.A).
J. • Arl I [n]amo B[u]ddh~ya •~ri •silskyek Buddhatirley
2. kuli Ar moy lJiim turow k[t]am bAr cwas~dii\cAin cnim .
3. tuy Qe[y Quri A]rimaddanapur wo'smiJiSri Tribhuwanidi-
I
4. tyadhanimaraj cla:s •gnakyek smit. gob~ moy Tri·
5. lokawa~arbsak!dewl J'imoi kon gnakyek go(t)-
•
6. hi Rljakumar imo' .. smin goi)h kil ~ik pi(twa]-
7. ft ku gnakyek gol)h "kal'gnakyek gotih cuti
8. a.r a·ut kir)'! gnakyek gol) ku Qik pi twafi g[o]I)'
I
9· smitl'tun kit· ku ko[n] gnakyek rna i[m]o' Rijaku~
m:ir gol) •.~ smin gol)hkminbar cwas diftc.1m ('~m tuy
10.
II. [ka]l smiJi gob [aney na(n)scuth kon gnakyet ma i.-
mo' Rija[k]urnargoi)' (rn]irnas gu~ rna solin ificim
12.
13. jirku kinrd]arh' kyek thar mayartli[~Joksmin mu~
J4. nas row wo' .kvek that \\
0'
ey dik pa ram
15. pi' ti[rJla 9ik [p Ji [tJ~'iin rna tirla kit ku'ey goi)h
7 t
16, ey Qik kit ku kyek wo' tirla anumodanii da"
17.• kal gol) smin s~ik gap puma[s) th[ilc Athic a smin [pa]
18. sadhukar kal goh[h] tirta poy mha[the]r tic!-
u JO b
19. rII Muggatiputtat[i]ssat[thJer I ticar Sumedhapa'J,Qit • ti-
[cA]r Brahma[p]al ticAr Brahmadiw • tic Son
20. II II aT
2 J. • ticAr'Sanghasenawarapav.Qit 18 • kinta tir[l]a
[t]a go~ smiJi cut ~ek nan ti blab got) kon gnakye-
22. M
23. k rna imo' R:ijakumir go~ ket kyek thar gQ,1)
U 15
24. (th]Apana kandaril guoh cI[o]ri [thJar [w]o' • kll b[u]sac kye-
25. k guoh wot kon gnakyek go~ ket Salklmuna-
11
26. lor moy twAi\ • Rapa[y] moy twail • ftabh gir-u-
17 18 18
27. [y)19 moy twaft. a-utlO<;Iik pi tWAn gob cut Qdcku
/0"'''.
1 a has'O0J". 1 a hasgol,Jh. I a hasK0IJ.1l. • 8 hasilil. • a has1"1)/.. • Bprobablyhad
7 B has ',il. which is probably corrP.Ct and mayhav(' been intended inA.
1 a has t a hasaiL 10 a has1'0/1•
•1 Other possiblereadings of this word (here and jl/frlJ)areWllr and perhaps li.4". aut ti~4"is
almOilcenainlyright.
10 a has o,._8".'~ B hu ·'Il1a(,,"a~lf!it. u a probably h;\dgCl~h. It a haSKO~lI.
" 1I B a h h a as sg a l n Jh i . mpossi I b ' le B re r a ig d h in tl g y . w ha h s ic 0 h t( m m. ay be 1 r 1 t:n B dc o n m ·d its H t , h g e ir s - t u o y ps. (but the H has a "i"a",•• which is
incompatiblewith the .). Theoriginal intention must havebeen to write H,duiy. TheA readinc repre-
sents afurther corruption ofthis presumedoriginal. 10 B nas Nt.

EPIGRAPHJA BIRMANICA
~8, kyekthar rna (th]Ipana hin gol) wo',rldhanl row wo'
I I
~9. I sinran e['] wo' or das,het ku gwo[') sarwwaft[u]ta
I
30, ,i\i9 Ikon eylal) cow ey' lab kulo
I II
3" ey lab I flab c·en lal) I yal pa upadrow ku Qi
3~,k rna ey kit ku kyek wo' yan flirfilt kye-
33" k tre[y] Mettey lal) or 4eh go'
I 01
Trans/a/;Im,
,~r~Pf"lty! Honour to Buddha! Prosperity! After the religion of the Lord
Buddha haft lov on for one thousand six hundred and twenty-eight years, (I. 3) in
this city of Ar;~ur King SrI Tribhuwanadityadhammarl1j was (king) ;one
i
qu~ of that kingwas na..ed'Trilokawa~arhsak~dewI; that queen's son was named
R~jal(Umjr. The king gave t~J'ee villagt's of slaves (I. 7) to the queen: When
the queel died, the king gave all th~ queen's goods,' together with the three
villages ofs)a\'es, to the queen's son, who wa! named Rijakumlr.
Alter the king had reigned (or twenty-eight Jears, (1. II) when the king was
sick 1\"eU-nigh unto death. the queen'!! son, who "A'as named Rajakumllr, remem
bering the favours wherewith the king had nourished' him made a golden Buddha
(lnd) went (and) offered' it to the king. (and) addressed (1.14) (him)thus: "This
golden Buddha. (have) I made to assist' my lord. The three villages Of slaveS
that my lord gave to me" I am giving to this Buddha: may my lord approve I"
Then the king) beif1g w~1J pleased. expressed approval, (saying), Well done I
II
Well dune),'. (I. 18) Then lin the ~nce of) our ford lithe Chief Monk, the
Venerable the senior monk Mugg:1bputlltis,&, the- Venerable the learned Sumedha,
the Venenble 8Tah~lap&1! t:be Ye"eT~(e Brahmadiw. the Venerable Son, (I. ::I 'J
(and) the Veaerabl£ the H'I)' learned Salighasena,'in the presence of tho!ie lords
the kng pourt'J Kater onto theground.
, In A ~ initiallookslike Itt. the top stroke havinc beenomitted.
'1. •
, 8 eta.pM,a betterreading, I 8 richtly has 8 h;\s,',
Or became." Thedateof his accession isapparentlythe date mentioned;
I II
·Or..Ofnament..~',
'Tobe'taken fipratively. ofcourse': "thefavours which the kinl,h~,bestowed upon'him."
• Forthe royal approval.not as a «ift to thekiilg.' .';Theword is used elsewhere apparentJy.in much the
sal1)eway. ' " '
• That is,asavotiveofferiniinconnexion with the king's sickness. Apparently thewordpo' (or Jr,
as theA text ~.it.thourh probably wron,ly) isa,prepoSition JOinrwith the'verb; but it haa not been
satisfactorily identifiedwith,amodernequivalent,
,uThePlSihasJd4ihll (repeated). Apparently the;d in our Y'III"sion it an'interjection emphuiailtfthe
.s.,', '
lliR,'Jappro•
11 Or"lonls":, itmayapplytoaU ~ecclesiastics.

PART i] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 57
After this, the queen's son, who was named -RljakumIr, took the golden
Buddha (I. 24) (and) enshrined it (and) made this golden-spired cave-pagoda.
When dedicatingthis Buddha (and) cave-pagoda, the queen'. son brought up (the
men of) Sakmunalon, one village, Raply, one village, Henbuiy,l ORe village, aU
those three village-comnumities of slaftS, (and) poured out water for (1. 18) the
golden Buddha that he (had) enshrined in this cave-pagoda, (and) prayed thus:
"May this act of mine be a cause for the attainment {by me} of elimiscieneeI
-Be
it ~y child, be it my grandchild, be it my kinsman, be it (any) other persoo, if
he do violence to tbeslaves (I. 32) whom I am giving to this Buddha, may he not
get sight of tbe exalted Buddha Mettey I"
GLOSSARY OP MON WORDS.
a-ut: all. kirya: property (or, perhaps, oma-
II
ajey: sick. mentlt-").
anumodanl: to approve. kil: to give.
i:a particle or interjection, probably ku: to, for, with.
emphatic. kuli: to go Qn (used with fi,.).
Ir: to go. A),o used asa sort of kulo: kinsman.
=
auxiliary,e.g.•tJi", euHa,.. keil: kilo
if'lcim: to nouri5h. ket: to bring.
imo'=: name,called. kon : child.
ut: a-ut. gnakyek: queen.
upadrow: violence, hurt. gap: used with. 1""'11I in the seme of
ey: I, my. happy."
II
e': = ey. gwo': attainment.
or: particle with an optative fcrce. guoh: cave-pagoda.
kandam: to make. guQ: favour.
kmin: to rule. - goh: = guoh.
kyek: any worshipful penon or object go': to get, to obtain, to attain to.
j = =
here a statue of Buddha." goI): (I) gol,h; (2) guoh.
II
.klam: a hundred. gol,h: that, the.
kal: time, when. colm: year.
kinta: in the presenceof. clon: spire of a pagoda.
kindam: = kandam. cwas: ten (used as-a multiplicand).
Bm""'•.
Seethe noteonthetext: the Barineseversion has
I
8

HPIGRAPHIABIRMANICA'
put
cut: to (and here to pOur "). pa: to do, to make.
U
cuti:, to die. pI': probably for10'.
c-en :.
other. pi: three.
cow: grandchild. pumas: see ,ap.
jirku: self. poy: we, our.
ftan: near. po': for, on behalf Of..
flab: he, they,person. . blab: used with p~in the sense 9£
lIirUc: sight, vision (verbal substantive thereafter."
"'e, /I
from to see"). busac: to dedicate.
II
= ,.
eJik: slave (also'with 'y I;" res- rna: relative particle.
"""11I""",
pectfuUy). mhlther: for chief monk.It
Ie
4uh: city. mimu: to remember.
eJek: water. munas: to address.
4ey: in. moy: one.
4eh: he. yal\: introductory particle.
ta: particle forming the plural. yal: if.
trey: exalted. ram: to assist.
twM: village. radhanl: to pray, to utter a vow.
ti: earth, ground. row: manner (as in ,.DfII 1IJD', thus II).
(f
ticlT: an ecclesiastical title (see Intro- Inim: a thousand.
duction). lab: (I) prohibitive negative j (2) when
tirla: lord. repeated after other words, either
(j
tirley: lord (probably for lirla t'Y, 'I my . . . . or."
lordII). ' 'wo': this.
=
tun: particle orauxiliary. scuti: cuti, with a Man verbal
tuy: particle or auxiliary forming the affix.
past tense. s4ik: to be pleased.
turow: six. smin: king.
tulwk: to present, to offer. sarwwaflutafiA\l: omniscience.
thar: gold, golden. sidhuklr: expression of approval.
thlpanl: to enshrine. sis: religion.
thic :. worthy. well done. sinran: act, deed.
da: particle, probably emphatic. han: to, onto.
das: to·be. hin ~= han, in the sense of for."
= II
da' : da. het: cause.
dillclm: eight. \>Ar: two.

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS S9
THE PYU FACE OF THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTION
AT PAGAN.
T 3.
HE fourth, or Pyu,1/ versionofthis record exists like the others intwo copies
/I
on two separate pillars. On the one it measures about 3 feet inches by
91
I foot I inch and contains 26 lines, on the other about 3 feet inches by I I to
12 inches, containing .9 lines. I have styled the former A and have adopted it as
the basis ofthetext heregiven. addingthe 8 variants in the appended notes. Both
texts are on the whole in a good state of preservation, though 8 shows a break
across its II. 6, i and is seriously defaced in 11. 24, 25. The alphabet in which the
record iswritten is an archaic form of script relatively to th~ date of the document,
and both it and the language oi this v~rsion were for many years somewhat of a
puzzle to archaeologists, though they recognized that the alphabet was of a
Southern Indian type. In form, howe\'er, it differ:; profoundly from the alphabet
of the three other versions, which is much nearer to the type of the modern
Burmese script.
In J.R.A.S.. 191 r, pp. 365-87, I attempted to throw some light on the matter
by means of a detailed comparison of this version ,,·ith the corresponding parts of
the Pali, Burmese, and l\I8n texts. It is not necessary to goover the same ground
again here: persons interested in the method pursued can refer to the article cited
above. Bliefly, it amounted to this. The letters were as far as possible identified
by their occurrence in proper names and loanwords and by their resemblance in
shape to corresponding letters in other forms of the Indian alphabet. As for the
words, whenever a word occurred repeatedly in varying contexts, there appeared
the possibility of determining its meaning, if it had in fact any definite meaning at
all. So far as it went, I think it may be claimed that this method was successful.
BlIt it has its obvious limitations. Some of the letters resemble one another so
closely that it is difficult to discriminatl.: fwtween them, and the conjunctletters offer
special difficulties of identification. ;\ number of words that recur several times
in our text appear to be mere particles, without any \"ery definite or .ascertainable
meaning. A great many others occur only once, or only in contexts which
do' not serve to identify them with certainty. This leaves a large residuum of
unknowns.
At this stage it is clear that comparison with further material should have
been the next step. Unfortunately very little is available. On the one hand. the

60 EPIGRAPHIA .BIRMANICA [VOL. I
remainingPyu materialis very scanty and most of it is either illegible orat present
practically unintelligible. The urn inscriptions discussed by me. in EfllrflphiQ
1,,11;&11, Vot XII, pp. I27-32,havethrown verylittle additionallight 00thisobscure
subject.· Consequentlythe Text andTranslationas printed here differ but slightly
from those givenin J.R.A.S., I.e., and both mUlt be regardedassomewhat tentative
and provisional.' On tire other hand, comparison with the'other laRguag~of the
Tibeto-Burmanfamity has not.yet been seriouslyattempted.-. For personalreasons'
I have beeriunable to undertakeit, but certainly much couldbedone in thatdirection
and it is to be hoped that it will eventually be taken'in hand .systematically, So
can
far as be judged from the existing materials, Pyu (as I have ventured to style
the language of this version} was a' somewhat distant cousin of Burmese, and a
al~ne
comparison with Burmese would not be productiveof very satisfactory results.
It will be'necessary to carry the matter further and study a number of the more or
lesscognate languages as welL Want ofleisure prevents me from undertakingsuch.
to
a serious task, which could only be recommended some one whohad much
patience and spare time, and who also had (or was ina'position to acquire)a.very
wide and intimate acquaintance with thisfamily of languages as a whole.
J,
Some of the peculiarities of pYll have been indicated ira R.A.S., I.e. .It
would appear that it had a wide range of tones/of'which the various, dots
(represented in the transcript by small circles) and their combinations used in the
'text seem to be the expression. It did not draw a very clear distinction between
long and short vowels: the only certain case of differentiation is the case of u .
and a. .It did not tolerate closed syllables or the gemination of consonants but
allowed a limited number of combinations of two consonants as initials,.the second.
member of such combinations being a s~mi-vowel or a liquid. ;.But even in such
casesit isnot quite certain that a short neutral vowel may not have been inserted
in between thetwo consonants, for the spellingoften uses conjuncts in combinations
. (such as ttl) where such a vowel must of necessity be introduced. It shares this .
peculiarity with the contemporary M~n usage, a usage that has survived in modern
M~n also.' Like most other Indo-Chinese languages, Pyu tended towards mono
syllabism'and generally abbreviated long Indian words by cutting off the end.. Its
syntax seems to have been substantially on the lines of the typical Tibeto-Burman
syntax, and such peculiarities as it exhibits may be due toforeign (probably.M~n)
influence: Its spelling is rather variable, but it has a distinct tendency to use the
. sonant letters as surds, a phenomenon which is susceptible of several alternative
explanations, none of which can be regarded at present as established with
certainty, though for my own part I incline to the view that it points to a phonetic

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 61
change in the language itself which took place after it had begun to be a written
language but before the date of our record.
The evidence at· present available seems to indicate that the nation which
spoke the language of ourtext was a forerunner ofthe Tibeto-Burman movement
into the southern parts of the Irrawaddy vaHey and had reached the neighbour
hood of Prome (where many of its records ;have been found) long before the
Burmese had come down from the North. 'the name " P,u" has merely been
attached to it as a convenient label, not intrinsicallyimprobable in viewof Burmese
traditional history, but by no means to be accepted as final. In the Prome region
it would appear that this nation acquired a v~neer of Indian civilization, almost
certainly through the intermediary of the M6n population of the Delta.' When
this process began, it is impossible to say. But the alphabet exhibits,archaic
peculiarities (such as the form of conjunct y) which in India,itself were becoming
obsolete in the 4th century A.D. One word in our inscription appears to be a
loanword from M&n, viz. tha, "gold" (Early M6n Illar, modem /"'111) : .they are
at ~ny rate identicaland are evidence of some contact between the' two races,
such as their geographical positions almost necessarily imply. The peculiar
letter that I represented by q is somewhat similar to the M&n ~ and Inay have
been derived from it. Both, however, look rather like modifications of ab oUhe
North Indian type. (In other respects the letters used in the record have been
transcribed in the way generally adopted for Pili and Sanskrit.)
So far as appears at present,the prospects of Pyu epigraphy are not very
promising, and unless much additional material is discovered in the future, it does
not seem likely that any great progress will ever be made in the study ·ofthis
obsolete language. Should, however, further exploration succeed in unearthing
fresh documents, the present record would acquire a new value, for it would bethe
only safe clue to the interpretation of such additional documents. In any event,
it has somewhat unexpectedly revealed the former existence of a nation and
language which have apparently been completely absorbed by the Burmese and
of which no modern representativ\:s in the direct line have as yet been discovered.
The mere fact that at the beginning of the 12th century the language was still
considered sufficientlyimportant towarrant its inclusiontogether with Burmese and
M&n in this record, is evidence that the nation which spoke it stilt maintained a
certain status in the Burmese empire, and had somewhat ofa separate existence
side by side with the other two races. .That in itself is a contribution to the
history of Burma which cannot be overlooked in assessing the importance of
our text.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[VOL•. 1
T,~t (PlaJ6.1V, A)
·.. ·' ••,sirh .'1 Dathagfda b~ d9~b!' bi§:pdti'sglJ'da,:b&·tva'P~fDC
~'. X}{·:lirau·~sni' bi§ h/~I'{had~ prh Rim~dhanab(fumi ~§
',Pya'tiO i'si ..
3. ·Sri:Tribhu\l"!-nadiOty~dh4inadja urni~!§. sf •ud~a 4&'. bAa 'uv:qa'.;ina.
4. yaa Tril~ga~dasagad~\ti~' ~ig' si'tiin'j ,I'(~hau ti sa I RajigUma' ~~
'tad!. '
S.siumi. ,.\Vi,tr~a"o hOI ,~i8.pa.· foi ; 4tiau bh maY.'bis· hi
1
6.mayai t·u tra\ tta. ofioa';bi§~par tlia~' \>3r"mayaiu sa."Rajaglimauva.
I
~:4hati~. IO;td~asnia;tpu;ithra'~18."uld~,.llbi§·;srja1;>ilhni.;'b1ia hi'-u,mtu'dy
8~, roil 4bau' bal:'m'aya,ujsai"R:ajagurri~bi§ isi'umiIt udio .
.9. biFmta'u"ilna'q~iutti4n l~c1a'ti!o: :trdt~d~o: ~i~'md~u b'aa'4aiU da.4hau Qai'
10:: ~Udh~u', ~ha,!'~({~ra'dil,nci',tha til16
'
~i~ se'kyaf, ,4hau'b-ii,~tidha
1.
bi§
tUl'
'ft.::'thmih lo~:"ya;na: bi~ 'tdi:to't,•ya:b<ii' '~Qdha: tha bAs raJ Sal~i§
J7
'12'J se':iiiabu:;1;>A:(uva p~iche"chon'y~hral oie ho:bi8paa
ij/inabih"iiya'b~:ihraflii! uva"pa: che 4hau'!o••tJaa td~i'~i§ iie111
11
'1\4'. palO da:;~ bif~nu hil; p.rac. ho:"'1 ha''pta":- II che) . l- .bi.l:'si •<lhau .u do I tra'I·,\)a I
5"<'inali~;ht: ::Mii~a{U:btitl:idisathe ,tt~tba."
i 2::J.iH:aacbA: ",'. SUrriedhabadio.
i6.·~(·'tra t;:~ai:' Vfal~maba ;(trai~'~a: Vra~t;'6'I.' tr.i.d;;a:'Sij'(,tfal bit
0
I,'f. "'Sag*si'v~rabadi()f4h<at:i'tra:' '~a:'sagha' tvo u'hnlJ di~ dp,td~I'
Ji8:'''ttPblF\Ji?';ctia ;toi:td:1Jh~Ha~ 1;)'jg'.:tka~ Trlaya:usaa Raja..
A" "l<l:'e ~. xc '{ e ~ p c n .s h t e op f ~ irs b t e o lo h r« h ; e <a' f 1 i ~ r , s ~ t . g f, r t o er llp :< , i l; r i es i e lr m e ti i l ,n e .' i : l \ 1 C ~ O h U\ a ' p ~ e li t o h ~ e i ' l l l ett r e ,a r rm. \I hieh occursin,otherPyuinteriptions.
y' ..
~~'~·d;.The~,symbol!i;M. DC;,.and XXJcpr~ent:a.nt:iellt .)ndi<l.1l ·1)umerill;l}mbols.for;1"000, 600,.and :liD,
r~pectively" .. ltjs p()s~ihl,e that hrti also j~ s.uchasymhol lor 8, bllt the presenceofthea1lJinra,..mark
inclipe,"ine'\o'tilti vie\('thiit iF.;,a genuine\pyu'nuineriil;,-,xpressed phonetiCa.lly: See E~pap.j.Indica,
yol;Xll.pr;,30.,
;:,~?,.B 9,!"i.lsthi:,:s~,lJP,;·'.r
'I .
P<'ssibly,tn ~(: rE;ad (a. , . _,
.:..."'.:1lim'notlurehf:lhe"fin'alvowel. 'file'S3I'1lc!"wo'rd\ojeeniS to.occur inoneof:theHmawza urn·imlcrq;.;
tionM01.;!see l..t", p. J,~9' . . . .'.'
'," B. has,TyjloJJat'adasagr1d.'I1i~ , It,WQuld,seem fr<,>m, i.ts shape ,lhafthe !,in this name, and in the
irik'ii'plion'gelieraily, lis notthe:;'-"'dinar~-one'out thJ.sO-Called Iingual'one; which 'co'mes further down in'the'
atpha~; , '. ,., , ..
, The rCilding 0 is cOnjeclural. LJein;:based n1erely011 the shape of the character.
5~;'Bhii{in'~itS'a.i'j,;';i'·:(, '.Th'is-\\o~d:; iilegiblt'iriA','i~'clea~i~8. Bwritftiiy has bJl,
·"10'
:1.1 ON"'iJ~:,th~.,~eading is ~oublful, buttheword must,fTlean twenty" (see I.e., p.IJO); '. .• .
if
I.- B ha.~ the,bigger.StOP io., prohably merely to fiU up .il bit or'pare space~'\tthe endof hs I. 7
i-t '13'liasiii.d Pbssibly~hisis'av'ariant'of thetu ~t'th~'begin'ning ofI. 18, :
~'~~P~jbiyto:bCi:re,ld!a: Oc'!
i
~
'
I.·l'!Th~.reading isdoubtful.: 'possiblyit:should betltha..
~ 1 W 6 · B B a h p a p s e B a i r l s dh c a e . i'have,.io,wh'ic ' h proba J b 7 ly B th o e m r i i t g s h b 't c r i, e . lldin~(in A al~o, thau ~. Kh B :th o e m l i a tl t . t ,. er'm~y have ',.i;.
'I;' A'appeanto.readplla. but the:initial,is,doubtful." B haspa.
•~ B omitsthis ~,... . .•~ A may have cho! here.. B has chilI.
"'B:~.iiJjj". ..' Bhaaj[ri~ru'b',idio$a~h":' .<... BhU'S.u"~~~i·.
t. B ri(htly hll5 Vrah."dil". But the, isdullbtful inbot.h tt:xts.

\'OlX!\1F. l. PLATL l\
.~., "~"-""!l:" J.n;·m~n(·c~
',:,~ ..60"a-.4
INSCRiPTIONS OF THE MYAZEDI PAGOD!\. PAGAN
THE PYU TEXT
B
z
·f
4
"
II
,)
~ 10
10 I':
'"
I" ',
2.:

THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS
PART I]
19, guma bi§ si um1 rna [I] J bi§ stabana' gudhaI ,tha bi§ se gq u stau
tha bi[!r
I'
20. tad~ I Qhau gC? u hlau bi§ sal (t)OlI I SamanalooIota Rabai 0 tAl
UJM- .
21. vua' 0 tJ. I' yei tral 0 hOI dt bi§ dt d~ • ya \>.il mayaa [u salJ'O
22, Rajaguma yei gC? 11 f?fidha uva tdp bi§ chai tad~. ya na big cliO cho
[I yap'
,23' rna gal pra but savenodene brene bi~ big pal che natSI ti° plat paJt •
24. ya tral tiO mtu kua dq gi sa' 4a gipli 4a gi sru. ~a mra ja htlu 4a ya
J&, It 11 IT
25. [J:JQdha]" uva gal hii: to: ma d!O I ga (hn)i JI chi ga bro pd~ rna tat
;101 bill M
26. ya bat Budha Ari Medeya cia bat d~ chig tiD tmii rna pal che chot .10
Tratf,slation.1I
, Prosperity 1 1628 years after theTathagata'sparim·r1Jij~a,· in this city called
,Arimaddanapur (I. 3) Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammar~ja so-called was 10rd,1S his
queen consort was called Trilokawa~amsak:idewIJ her son was called Rljakumlr.
(The king) gave her three villages of slaves. When the queen had died, (I. 6)
(he) gave the queen's goods (and) the thrl·e villages o( slaves to the queen's son
Rljakumlr.
When the king had reigned for twenty-eight years, (and) was sick nigh unto
• 8 has .; there is a blurin A. I • has st~"..
1 For BrUha. But a has I!tldho, 4 a rightly has~: A has ~ionly.
1 For tClt weshould perhaps read ,.":, which is quire distinct in a, where it is apparently preceded
byan il1lerted ma"
• a'hAl'SaMona!ol. The final vClwel i, more or less doubtful in both texts, a. it has a hook on tbe
top. theforce of which is oblc:ure.
, a bas ~ insteadof I, • Bhl\s 1hlli: (or, possibly, Ji'901).
• B has I instead of u, 10 There is II hlur herein A,but Bhas'u saa.
•• a inserts/tJI beforeI!ult•. tI Thereisa blur in A, but B isquiteclear,
.. Or pOisibly IIUI,
16 Thevowel i,doubtfltt: there i.an unexplained mark overthe letter.
11 For I/a (throughotlt this line) we might perhaps read la or I,.
'A In these places B inserts I. 17 a inserts I of, moreprobably, I here.
I' Thereisa blurinA,but aha.Qitdha. .. Verydoubtful reading.
10 8 hu a more,elaboratestop at theend,lOmelhing likethe punctuation mark.inI. I.
II This tran.lation istentative, beingtoa greatextentbasednot10 much on the obscureoriginal as on'
lhe more intelligible Burmese and Man versions. At the present stage of P)'1I.udie.no othercoune is
possible,butin the event of fresh materialbeing made anilable in the future the tr:aoslation will have to
belubmittedto acritical revision.
II That i.,"alter Buddha's death," But possibly the phrase means "after the establishment 01
Buddha', religion," which would be another way of indicating the same point of time and would agree
I'DOC'edosely with dle other ftl'sion•.
II The word here ~ed "IClTd" is +JI, but it is doubtful whether the phrase hasbeen rightly
apprehended.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA {VOL.
death, the queen's son named R~jakumAr, (I.9) being mindful of the benefits
wherewith the king had nourished him,1 caused this golden image in' the likeness
of the Buddha to be made, (and) brought this Buddha intt the (royal) presence
(and) spake thus :-" This golden Buddha whic~ I have made on my lord's behalf
(I. 12) f present to mylord. The three villages of slaves (~hat) my lord gave me
1give tothis sacred image of gold." Thereupon the king was delighted (and)
exclaimed,
/I
Well done! WeU'done!" .Then (in the presence of) mylord (I. 15) .
the Chief Monk, my lord the senior monk Muggaliputtatissa, my lord the learned
Sumedha, my lord BrahmapAI, my lord Brahmadiw, my lord Son, my lord the
very learned Sarighasena,· in the presence of these lords of the church the king
(I. 18) poured water (onto the ground).
That having been donf', the queen's son named RAjakumAr enshrined the
golden Buddha.(and) having made thegolden spireofthe cave-pagoda,pronounced
the dedication ofthis cave-pagoda (and) havingassembled (the men of) Sakmuna
Ion, one villap;e, Rap~y, onevillap;t, (and) Henbuiw, one village, these threevillages
of slaves, the queen's son fl, 22} Rajakum~r, having poured out water to this
cave-pagoda (and) Buddha, spake thus :-" May this that I an1 doingbe a cause
for giving me omniscience {and) wisdom! As for these slaves, be it my son, be it
my grandson, be it my kinsman, b~ it any other person, (I. :25)·if he shall do
violence to th'ose that I have dedicated to this Buddha, may he never be
permitted to approach the presence of the lord Buddha Ariya Mett,eya
!'JS
GLOSSARY.'
u: a particle used (I) to connect numerals with a noun, 2; (2) after words in the
genitive relation,' 4, 6~10, 18-21 ; (3) in.certain other combinations not falling
clearly ,under these heads, :3, 14, 17. (Cf, Early Burmese el, Burmese ai?)
udio : 8,
umi: name, called, named, ~-5, 8, 19. (Early Burmese mail.)
.uva: (I) a particle or postposition meaning Uto" (dative), 6, 12, 13, 22, 25 j
(2) in 5 it apparently means to her,"
II
1 Thetranslatiun of the whole phr:l5e i. based on the other venion..
.. In thecaseofthe,eand theother proper namesoccurring in the inscription I have used in the tranl
lation the forms found in theotherversion,. Forthe Pyu forms the text may be referred to. As to the
expression renderedby "mylord," st,the Glosury, s,V. tra~. hti,.
3 The translation ofII. 25. 26is based mainlyon theotherYel'lions.
• Thisglc:.aryismaiN,tentativeand provi,ional, for the reasonsltated in the Introduction. Where
nomeaningisattached to. word. it i,to beinferred that its !eRiehal not beendeter'mined. Theligures
indicatethe lines in text A where the word aPPears. The Indian order ofthealphabet haabeen followed.
batwithoutdiltiaetion betweenconjunetandprimaryletters.

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS
uvgl : possibly a word meaning' queen," perhaps to be split lip into u and
1/
Vel, 3-
0; a conjectural reading; the meaning II villflge" is cert~in, 5, 6, 12, ~Q,21.
~ya:: probably a verb meaning to cause" and forming a causative, or perhaps
II
.a particle, 10.
kiu: future time (?), 24.
ga: possibly a particle meaning" if," 25.
gAl: I, 23, 25.
gl: rpy, 24·.
gOdha: errorfor Biidlza (usually Qt2"lra), '9'
go: cave-pagoda, 19, 20, 22. (Sanskritillha.)
I'm: to exclaim (?), 14.
nOI: 25.
ja: 24. See m~a.
cha: to pour, 18..
chal; likeness (1), 10. (Early Burmese aena•.)
chi: violence (?), 25, d. Mi;' (eL Early Burmeseacak?)
chig: 2~. _.
che: probably a'particle. or a verbal auxiliary to the verb pal, J2, 13, ~3, ~6.
eel.
Early Burmese ely?)
chai: to pour out, d. cha, 22.
cho: possibly :-I variant of the following, 22.
chol: apparently a final particle, 12, 14,..26.
da(perhaps to·be read fa): (I) apparently m('ans II was," 3; (2) II be i~," or
either or," 24. (Cf..Early Burmese Ian il)
/I
dal (possibly to be read lal orI~l): 9-
<}hau :.a demonstrative; meaning that." orsimply used where we should use the
II
definite article the" in referring to something previously mentioned, or well
/I
known,S, 7-10, 17, 2Q; also by itself (substantively) in reference to per~olls,
points of time. and events, 4, 13, 14, .8. (Early Burmese tlzu;w, thiw.)
ta: one, 20, 21. (Early Burmese tac.)
tal: 25.
l' '0, '2.
tada: a verb or auxiliary indicating the past, 5. 18, (Probably the
. original meaning was to end," to finish.'"
l/ /I
t~'I: king, 7, 9, 13, 17·
tdi':
. to say, to speak, II.
tdO :.water, 18, 2'2.
,
9

EPIGRAPlnA BIRMANICA
tptl (or nfU ?): twenty,'.
tmO: presence (?), 26. (Cr. tltmilt: I I.)
tra: goods,'ornaments,-6. (Sanskrit dravya ?)..
tral: slave,S, 6, 12, 2I, 24.
\>£1:
tral a- title applied to ecclesiastics, lord, 14-1'. }(Possibly the first
element is the preceding word" slave" used as a deprecktory':pronounofthe
Ist person, or it might conceivably be the,same'as' the Burmese tard:
th~ ~&I.)
(" law," dhamma). For second 'element, see
trol : apparently this together with lOlmeans ,{ benefits," 9.
tva: ..
tv~:: to elapse, to pass, 2.
tvo: probably a particle indicating the plural, 17. (Cf. Early Burmese lui' ?)
tba:: apparently an auxiliary going with p::, 6.
tio: apparently a particle of relation, corresponding sometimes to our preposition
in," ~, 23, 24, 26. See mtu.
(I
tu: 18.
tut : to bring, 10.
tft (possibly to be read tkha): 10.
tq.(or to): (perhaps = tu) : 9.
tOI: a particle used after verbs, 5, I I, IS, (20), 25~ (tf. E:trly Burmese tum?)
tha: gold, golden, fa, II, 13, Ig. (Early.M~th"r.)
=
thada (probably tad,!,: I): z.
thmOI: presence (?), II. (Cf. Imit.)
di (probably = lad!) :,g,l4, 2I" 26.
di' :
I.
di: 26.
I • •
di~:, the phrase hflU dt'O d~appe,ars to mean inthe presence (of),"1,.
II
die,: 9, 21, 22, 25. The' word ,seeJ!ls to have several meanings: in 22 it
apparently means ",topray,"c1r atleast " to say 't; in21, after 6,1, it may
mean to assemble,'" "to bring together" ; but it also occurs before that
II
particle, and there and in 9 and 2 5 its sense has not been determined.
d9: apparently a,particle of relation, ,7, 17, 24. It seems to correspond
'roughlywith our, preposition ·'.in."
do: I•
•
dq': possibly a variant of dif: in 14 the'phrase fjhau u dtJl seems to mean
thereupon" i in 3 the sense is not so clear.
4f
na: mannerj the phrascya tla seems to.mean II thus," "as follows," 11,22.

PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS
nal (or 'Jut?) : 23. (Somewhere in the phrase beginning with this word the idea
of cause" must be expressed.)
II
pa (in A 14 perhaps pha): in )3-14 ~i~ ,.t'O JKI mnst mean "was pleased" i in 23
the sense is undetermined, see flat.
pal: to give, 5,6, I~, 13: perhaps alsoin 23, 26, though there the meaning is not
so certain. (Early Burmese pi)I.)
pd~: 25.
pdQ: possibly " to achieve" or to enter" (parinirfJi1na), or to be established"
II II
(of the Buddhist religion), I.
pra: to do, done, deed (?). 14. 23·
pri': city, 2. \ Early Burmese fran.)
pIal: 23. <Cf. na:.)
p!i: ~randchild, 24. (Early Burml~se mit)')
bradima: statue, image, 10. (Sanskrit prat;11tti..1
brene: wisdom, 23. (Sanskrit pra/lid.)
bro: meaning undetermined, but possibly the phrase which it begins contains the
idea of violence," " harm," 25.
I(
bo: image, representation, likeness (?), d. chat and Iwadima, 10. (el. Burmese ~ ?)
rna: apparently a particle, 9, 19, (20 n.), 23, 25, 26.
di
mtu: in 7 the phrase u mt" must mean nigh unto," in ~4 tiO mtu may mean
II
,. as for."
mtau: perhaps "to nourish." to foster." 9. (Or alternatively, the meaning
/I
ascribed to md~lu.)
md~u: to remember (or alternatively, the meaning suggested for the preceding), 9.
maya:: wife. consort, 3, 5,6,8, 18.21. (Early Burmese maya..) .
mra: the phrase mra /a hnu must mean .. any other person" or a stranger," or
/I
the like, 24.
mahathe (and mha!he): chief monk, 15. (Pali mahathero.)
mabn:: possibly either a title of respect (like "my lord ") or a deferential
equivalent for the Ist personal pronoun c:;ingular j unless it is to be split up
into ma and ~li:, 12, 13.
ya: a demonstrative. I( this "i also used where we should say II the," 2, 11-13,
2I, 22, 24, 26. (eL Early Burmese t"y, fy.)
raa sal: on behalf of, II.
rio (with pa): to be pleased, 13.
rOI : apparently a particle, perhaps meaning <I when," 8, 20 n.
sal: child, son, 4, 6,8,18,21,24 (but not in II). (Early Burmesesi1.)
sal: to pronounce, to declare (?), 20.

68 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
sgu: the meaning is undetermined but will depend on that of pdi, I.
sagha: church, Buddhi~thiera.rchy, 17. (Sanskrit-Pili samglla.)
stabana (in B st~ana): to enshrine, to set up (a sacred image), 19. (Sanskrit
!thapana.) . .
stau: spire of a pagoda, 19. (Sanskrit sUlfa.)
snis: year, 2,7. (Early Burmese "".hac.)
sris: to reign (?), 7.
2+ .
srus (reading not quite certain) : kinsman, relative,
savenodeile: omniscience, 23. (Sanskrit-Paoli sar'l1anulflnlI~a"',)
14
si: the root meaning is apparently to be," 2-5,8,. 14, 19 (though 10 it IS
(C
.difficult to see how that meaning can be appropriate).
se: to make, 10, 12, 19.
ha: good, well (?). 14.
has: 9.
hnu: 17, 2+ (See dt-o and mra.)
hili (?): violence (?), 25. tCf. Early Burmese anhtl?)
hnil: to be sick, 7. (CL Early Burmese nd?)
hra: sacred image (?), 13..
hra: eight, 2, j. (Early Burmese het.)
h!it: in 7 it seems to go with hni~, with what sense is not clear; in 25 it seems
to mean "to dedicate to," to make a gift to pious uses." (Cf. Early
Ie
Burmese lha ?)
hlau: dedication formula (?). 20. . (Cf. Early Burmese thot ?)
hi: to die, 5, 7. (Early Burmese si".)
hos: three, 5. 6, 12, :<'1. (Early Burmese sUlk)
Jo.: in II and 13 it seems to be a postposition, "in," on" (so t;lhau /0',
(C
" thereupon ") (d. Early Burmese rllO'Zi' ?) j in 9 the phrase (0: trot seems to
mean benefits."
II
ba: J.
ba:: 26 (possibly an optative negative, >tlllay not ").
baa: honorific particle or title, 1,3,5 ·18,21, (22 n.), ~6.
. bi: error for qi§, 19.
bi§ : particle preceding verbs, 1-14, 18-22. The doubled form in 23 is probably a
distinct word (perhaps meaning ,. for myself," d. Early Burmese mt'mif).
1;>i1& : to do (?), 23, 25. (Cf. Early Burmese ml1, amho'?)
NOTIl.-sirj,"prosperity" (Pali, or from Sanskrit sri). which does not form part of any Pyu
sentence, has notbeen includedin the Glossary, nor have the proper names.
C. O. BLAGDEN.

j'.,
I'
.!.
", .. "'j ,,': BmNG I
:. ,j .' ..:i.' ','
~
',.,' t. ,!.Ii.. -I "
,I.' ,i .
·LITmC AND'.OTHER.INSCRIPTIONS
,
, OF BURMA.
t·
i
'"
I,:"
i.
Edited by
,
,,.
CIL\S.DUROJSEl,J.B
s.niJ.
lIIprtatcll4eat. Arc!IatOl", BcII8 tbdI
'.
J: .
l.
j,. 1960
,
,
. j - ,I,: SUPERINTEND'EH'l'J GOVERNMENT PRINTING AND S1WnONERY.,mUON OF BURIt'
/.
I
'J \ .',.-- RANGOON
" "
'.

LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALEOF THE GOVERNldENTOil
THE UNION OF BURMA PUBLICAUONS
lNBUllMA
1. CITY BooK CLUB. 98, Pbayrc Street, Rangoon.
2. NEW LIGHT OP BURMA PIlESS•.58. Komin Kochin Road, Rangoon.
3. PRoPRlfTOR. THU-DHAMA-WADI PRESS. 55·56, Tsec Kai Mauns
Khine Street, Rangoon.. . ."
.... PROPRIETOR. BliIwA Niiws AGENCY, 135, Anawrahtl· Street.
Rangoon. .
S. MANAGER, BURMA~BooK· Co., 62~ Bair Street, Rangoon. .
6. BURMA EDUCATIONAL BooKSHOP, 551-3, MClCbantStreet. RaogooQ.
7. MANAGER, UNION ~BLISmNG HOUSE, 93, f' C" Block, ~yoko·
-Market, Rang()Oq..· . .
I'
8. SECRETARY PEOPLE'S UTEIlAruRE COMMITTEE AND HOUSE, .546,
Merchant Street, Rangoon..' 1... .. .;. . .
9. THE BURMA TRANSLATION SocIETY, Merchant Streei.·Rangoon.
10. MESSRS~ K. BIN Ho(m ct, SoNs, NyaungJebin, PegUDistriet
I .
:L~W Boo~
11. U Lv GAu,.GoVERNMENr AGENt',.34th Road. NY8Ung-
zindan Quarter, MaildaJa'y.: : ..
12.·UKYAW ZAN; 'nIB NAnoNAL Boo~DEJ'&tANJ>'S'TATIONI!1lYSuPP.LY
HOUSE~ North Godown. bgyo,.Mandalay!
·INlNDu
Hloo~s" t.tD.; N , o~ MadraS
1. MESSRS. Post Box 3tl, (lDdia).
2. MESSRS. ITHACKER; SPINK et 'CQ. ,(1933),'LTD.,,P.O. Box'No."$4,
l..EsplaDadc East. Calcutta (West BcngaJ)..
,. ,

'.
~-- --"
! RES:.:/\.r.CH (01-1 E-CT-:C-~~l
J
I ECl~t.
"Ve,! CC'"
""cr
--_.H_o-no-l-ul-u-- i· - l(' - " - .. - .. _.-
VOLUME I , '.' tiil
PART II
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF BURMA
Epigraphia Birmanica
BEING
LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS
OF BURMA
Edited by
eHAs. DUROISELLB
S~'erlnteD4e"t. Ar,lIalolog1~al Survey. Barma Circle
1960
SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING AND STATIONERY. UNION OF BURMl\
.RANGOON

,COlfT'i}iTS
,
".~ l'AUl!8
Mb
.
N INSC
'
!UP
.
TtO
'
N
.'
B
,:
'
.
"
-
•
.
_
"
"
,
•,.. ! ;. • i• :.. .... .,. • i
...
,69-168
',GeneralI"troductum. • i • ,I.,.'. :., , 69-:- 8-4
~
Th~M~h'Peopie
ahd TheirHistory 1"':'" 'l 69-71
EffectsofBurmeseRl/ I' " .. 71-72
HiStoricalPositi{)~ :)ftl.; ,". 'c ... 72-73
Mon Influenceon l'::'l.i::.m~l#t; ~ivilizatioD . '. . .' . "S 73
,The MOn InscriptionsofUpperand LO\oct Burma' . :~7 '7~75
. ,,s.:-
Linguistic,Impo~nceofthe Mbn rps~\ptiOn'. 9 75...;.. 76
."
The Indian Elemen~in the InscriptioP1 .:,'.' ~10-11 16-78
Alphabet, Spelling, and Transcription:' • • • ' .12-18 ,78- 82
BeginningsofMOn Epigraphica1 S~dy ,. ;,:. , . 19--20 ' 82- 83
AcknowledgmentofAssistance • • 21 83- 8-4
, I " , ' , ....
:S.etion I.-The,Early M6n lUeOtth • 8-4-168
i. ..' •
Introductory Obseroatiom' -.. ~,,',~ 8-4- 90
King Kyansittha inTraditional Legend~HistorY • 22-23 8-4- 85
King KyansitthainContemporary Records. • 24--27 85- 88
ChrotlOlogyofKing Kyansitthaand,ofHill Records • 28-30 88- 90
Tlu Imcriptions "". iii. 90-168
No. I.-The Great Shwezigon Inscriptil.n.Pagan ," 31-35 90-129
No. ,II.-Fragmentary Replica ofNo. I • 36-38 129-130
, No.' lIl.-The Myakan Inscription, Pagan • 39--41 131-143
No. IV.-T~eAlanpagan Inscription, Paga'l. • 42 143
No. ,V.-An Inscription in the Phayre Museum, , -43 143-147
Rangoon.
No. VI.-The Shwesandaw (i) Inscription, Prome. +4-47 147-152
No. Vll.-The Shwesandaw (ii) Inscription, Prome • 48--49 152-1S3-,
No. VIII.-The Shwesandaw(iii) Inscription, pfl_.•te SO-53 153-168
LIST OF PLATES
MON INSCRIPTIONS-
Plate ,V.-The Great Shwezigon Inscription(No. IrALItB lacing page 93
Plate Vl.- Do. do. " C.&;D 99
II
Plate' Vl1.- 'Do. do. E &''F "lOS
Plate VIIl.- Do. do. G 8tH "112
Plate lX.-The Myakan Inscription(No. III) A&B "13-4
Plate X.- Do. do. .. C 4 D. 138
tI
hate Xi-An Inscription inthe Phayre Museum(No. V) (Top Half) " 144
Plate Xl/.- ,Do. do. .'• (Bottom Half)" 145
Plate XIIl.-The Shwesandaw (i) Inscription(No. VI) (Top Half) " 149
Plate XIV.- Do. 'do.,.. 'BottomHalf)" 150
Plate XV.~The Shv.esandaw(iii) Inscription (No. VIII) \fop Half) " 157
Plate XV/.- Do.' do. .• (BottomHalf)" 162
ABBREVIATIONS
B.E.F.E.O. - Bulletin de l'Ecole Francaise J.R.A.S. ,:=Journal.of,the ~oyal Asiatic
d'Extreme Orient. .':.Society'of Great Britain
E.I. ...Epigraphia Indica. , andIreland~ ,
;-A.. S.
J'1' -= Indian Antiquary. J. Siam , .,.Journal ofthe Siam Society.
Early MOn." ,, '
Journal Asiatique. E.M. COl
0:2
. .S.B. a Journal ofthe AsiaticSociety M.M. _ Middle (or. medieval) MOn.
'J R B' ofBengal. L.M. 0:: Later M6n.
urma } Journal of the Burma' tr. ....translatiOn.
c=
esearchS. , Research Society., (1. e=note.
QU.B.C.P.9.-No. 2,Dir. ot A.S•• zG-z·6o..1snO .v. "

M('lN INSCRIPTIONS
PART II]
MCN INSCRIPTIONS,
GENERAL INTRODUCTION,-THE MON PEOPLE AND THEIR HISTORY.
1.1 The people who call themselves
II
M6n"and who are known to the
Burmese, and generally to Europeans, as Talaing," are probably the descend
II
ants of a race that settled in Burma earliest of all the races that now' inhabit
the province. They seem to have preserved no traditions of their migration into
the.country. At the present time they inhabit a small fringe of the coast-line
of Lower Burma on both sides of the mouth of the Salween River) from some
where in the neighbourhood of Pegu to a little to the south of the·town of Ye,
In the Census of 191I the persons returning themselves as M8n by race numbered
.320,629, of whom however only 179,443 claimed to be M8n in speech, . Of this
latter number I75,127 were returned as living in the Tenasserim division (139,97°
in the Amherst district, where they .considerably outnumber the Burmese
inhabitants, and 34,805 in the That8n district),. while in the Pegu division there
were only 1,960, and in the rest of the province the numbers are negligible.
Plainly the language is moribund outside of the Amherst and That8n districts,
but in these and particularly in the former it still retains considerable vitality;
though it is carryingon a very unequal contest with the much more important and
growing official vernacular of the .province, Burmese, However, as between
the Census of 1901 and that of 191 _, there has been a reviv~ amounting to
an increase of nearly 25,000 in the number of those who wish to be considered
Man in speech j so it would appear, either that the Man-speaking population
is actually augmenting now or;!hat there has been a recrudescence of national
1 Forcon\'enience ofreference thecommentary has been divided into numbered paragraphs and these
willaccordingly bereferredto bytheir Arabic numerals. But in thecaseofthe inscriptions,bothas regards
text,translation,and the notes thereoll respecth-ely, referencewill bemade by theserial (Roman) numberof
the inscription,theletterdenoting the face (orJragment)~ and the Arabic numberof the particular line,with
the addition (when necessary) of"tr," for translation" and"n," for" note,"
U
10

7° EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
self-consciousness in the race, leading it to insist more distinctly on its specific
differences. This bids fair to postpone indefinitely the.extinction of the language
in Burma, which at one time seemed to be inevitable and imminent.i
2. In a remote past, which we cannot precisely date, inasmuch as it precedes
local recorded history, the area occupied bythe Man people must have been very
much more extensive than at present. To the'northward their linguistic influenc~
seems to have penetrated as far as Prome, where a completely different peopleand
language were centred.lI To the southward the race seems to-have wandered
very far. There is some reason to believe that at a very'early period they settled
in J;..igor (on the isthmus leading to the Malay Peninsula)3 and as far south as the
j
oOlthern border of Johor (the most southern state in the Peninsula) there are
jungle tribes who to this day use a series of numerals (up to "seven") which are
substantially identical with the IIth century Man numerals! About the middle
of that century the Mon area was much reduced by Burmese conquests,
culminating in the totalannexation of the M8n country to the Burmese kingdom of
Pagan and the settlement of Tavoy and Southern Tenasserim by Burmese,
who thus cut off the IVI8n race from their connexion with the more -distant
south. To the-kingdom of Pagan they remained annexed (apart from occasional
revolts of local Burmese governors or casualTai-incursions) until A.D. 128I,6when
they again became at least partially independent under the rule·of an adventurer,
probably of Tai origin. He founded a dynasty which rapidly assimilated itself
to its M8n subjects and by degrees united the bulk of them into a kingdom
comprising the three provinces of Bassein, Pegu and Martaban, with its capital
eventually fixed at Pegu. This, the medieval M8n kingdom (as one may
conveniently style it), was -in the clerkly Pali terminology of the time called
1 Cf. Haswell, Grammatical Notes<tl1ld Vocabulary oj the Peguan Language (1874), pp. xii, xiii:
Thelanguage isgraduallygoingoutofuse, and the soonerit is supplanted by theBurmanthe better,yet I
It
think it will be a'long time before it ceases to be the language in common use in country villages in
the Amherst district, and near the sea coast of the Martaban district." Haswell was the first scholar
whoseriously studiedthe language,and it is rather surprisingthat he shouldhaveexpresseda desire for its
extinction: such an attitudeofdetachment towards thesubjectofone'slife'swork isdecidedlyunusual.
I J.R.A.S., 19II,p. 380•. Seealso Phayre, HistoryojBurma (1883), p. 19. .
• Bastian, Geschichte del' Indochitlesen (1866), p. 197, presumably basing the statement on native
traditional history, saysthat this happened in As&ka's time. This author's sources are of very varying
value,andofcoursethis particulardate, as adate, is absolutelyworthless. But the tradition mayrepresent
a real eventin somedistant past. • .
• Comparetheforms given in the Glossarywith the Penins~latforms in theComparative Vocabularyof
Skeat and Blagden's Pagan Races oj the Malay Peninsula (1906). It was the connexion with the
jungledialectsofthe Peninsula.which impelled meoriginallyto investigate Man.
, I follow the commonly received chronology as given in Phayre, of. ,;it., p. 6S. Itagrees with the
statementsof the M~n chronicles(e.g. p. 1H of the compositecollectionheaded by the Sudhammallatirdjdo
v,,,hla, Pak Lat, A.Bud. 2453).

'I
PAttT II] MON INSCRIPTIONS
Ramafinadesa;'J a,name coined from the ethnic appellation H'Rman," which is
II I,
.the medieval form of the,vord Mon"and appears constantly in inscriptions'
II
ofthe 15th century. The kingdom lasted till A.D. 1540, when it was conquered
by .a Burmese dynasty from Taungt\, which. soon annexed Upper' Burma as
well. ·,This event involved the final' extinction of Man political independence.
a. a
Save'for few'shortlived .revolts and other, mainly local,'episodes and for brief
and revolutionary,' interval in the 18th century, when a temporary Mon 'revival
threatened to turn the tables and 'subject Burma to Man rule, the Mans of
Burma now remained definitely subject to the Burmese until the wars of the
19th century' brought first one'great .section of them and soon afterwards
1I
the remainder under British rule.
S
'" 1 Probably pronouncedReman, i.e. with a short neutr~lvowel in the first syllableand the accenton the
final.syllable(as usual in Man words). SeeJ. Burma ReseaYchS••1914,·PP.59,60i 1915,p. 27.
Bythe annexation ofTenasserim in A.D. i826.
I
IBythe annexation of Pegu and the rest ofLower Burma, 185', .
.. CensusofIndia, 19II, Vol. IX, Burma. Part I.-Report, p;'208.
In 1893, Temple noted that "the Talainglanguage, tliough still spoken to a considerableextent, is
ft
ceasing.to be a literarymedillm very rapidlYiSO much so that it is already'extremely difficult to find an
educatedTalaingable to reade\'en modern documents in his native language" (l.A., 18931 p. 333 n.).

72 EPlGRAPHlA BIRMANICA [YOL. I
the circumstances. The two languages are fundamentally distinct and uncon
nected, and they contrast to a marked degree in phonetics, morphology, and
syntax. Apart from a certain amount of mutual borrowing of words it do~s not
seein that they have greatly modified each other, though it is possible that
a
Burmese influence has·been contributory cause in the M6n tendency towards
monosyllabism (which, however, is capable of another explanation) and thatcertain
conventionalities of Burmese orthography have been imitated in medieval and later
M8n.i A third consequence of Burmese rule was the emigration at various
.periods of considerable sections of.the M8npopulation to Siam, where their
II
descendants still flourish in large numbers and keep up their ancestral speech and
customs under the tolerant and sympathetic sway·of the Siamese Government.
HISTORICAL POSITION OF THEM6N INSCRIPTIONS.
4. The foregoing preliminary observations will have served to pave the
way towards a clear understanding. of the historical position of the Man
records that are contained in this collection. Some of them rank among the
oldest vernacularrecotds of Burma,!' .being approximately coeval with the earliest
of the Burmese ones. It is true that of the first period of M8n history, which
terminated in .the Burmese conquest of the I I th century, nothing apparently
remains in the way of inscriptions, though probably some may yet be discovered
when the work of excavation is systematically undertaken. But the second
period, the subjection to Pagan, and the third, the time of the medieval Mon
kingdom, are well·represented. They are not, however, illustrated quite in the
same way by their respective sets of records, for tbese do not run in precisely
parallel lines. The earlier ones, though in the M8n language·and found in various
1 On occasionswhere it may beconvenientto lise abbreviationsfor the three main phasesin the historic
evolutionofthe ~16nlangu:lge(ashereafterdescribed).thefollowingwillbe used:-E.M.=Early M6n; M.M.
=:Middle(or medievalf~16n; t.M.= Later 1\16n(includingthemodernform ofthelangmige).
, In some cases M6ns were also takenawayby the Siamese as prisoners during the wars.between
Bu~;na imd Siam. On the whole question of the immigration of the MOos into Siam; see J. Siam S.
1913.Yol. X, Part3- .
S In the large section of Indo·China in·which Indian civilization became dominant it is thegenera'
rulethat inscriptions.in ;tn Indianlanguage(mostlySanskrit, .sometimes Plili, in the extremesouthin a few
ca:s~s alsoTamil) precedeinscriptions in thelocalvernaculars. In Burmatheseearly Indianinscriptionsare,
however, scarcer than, for instance, in Champa and·Camboja. Two Pali inscriptions attributed on
palaeographicalgroundstothe6thcentury(orthereabouts) havebeenfoundat Prome(J.A••juillet·aout1912,
pp. 121-36;juillet·aoOt1913,PP.193-5). Theso-called Pyu inscriptions,in a vernacular of that neighbour
hood,seemto be somcwhat later,but some ofthcm appear.to beolder than any ofthe hitherto discovered
M&n records (E./., 1913,Vol. XII, pp. 127-32). It is highly probablethat in the early period the·ruling
and educated classes in the several countries of Indo-China were Indian settlers and their locally born
descendants, bywhomfrom variouscentres Indianculturewas.diliusedamongthe ruder native races.

PART ll] MON INSCR1PTIONS 73
parts of Burma, nearly all emanated from the Burmese headquarters at Pagan and
were in substance Burmese .records i they really throw more light on Burmese
than onMan conditions. The later ones, belonging to the medieval Man kingdom,
with its centre at.Peg~, were found inthe reallyM8n country of Lower Burma, the
oldRamaiinades~,andare purelyMon records.
M6N INFLUENCE ON BURl\fESECIVILlZATION.
5. This differen.ce should be borne in mind i but, on the other hand, it must
notbe forgotten that ina sense, apart from the linguistic one, even the Burmese
records were ~o very great extent, and probably more so in early times tha~ in
1:1.
later ones, a reflex and copy of Mon thought and life. The conquest of the old
M6n capita:l,of Sadhuim (in Burmese pronouncedThaton)was a critical moment in
Burmese history'in the same way that the Roman conquestof Greece was in the
history of'Rome. In each case the cO,!lquered nation'imparted to the conqueror
many things which he lacked and which he eagerly accepted. The Burmese took
.over from the Mans their form of .Buddhism with its Pali canon, their particular
variety of the Southern' Indian alphabet, and certain useful or ,ornamental arts
and crafts. Monks, scholars, and skilled artisans were imported in considerable
. numbers from the Mon country to the Burmesecapital and it is largely due to
1
j
the religious, scholarly and artistic impetus thus given that Burmese civilization, as
illustrated for example inthe temples and inscriptions of Pagan, took its particular
line and form. That is not to say that the Burmese prior to this period were a
mere race of savages, any more than were the Romans before they' fell under
glamour of Greek art and literature. But just as Rome became in a great measure
Hellenized, so the Burmese adopted much from the Mons, and a great deal of
what is now supposed to be distinctively and characteristically Burmese was in fact
derived by them from the Mans, who had themselves originally borrowed most of
it from India or Ceylon. For a brief period·' and under rather exceptional
conditions the Mon language seems to have become a favourite vehicle for
epigraphic records at Pagan, Prome, and elsewhere in Burma, SIde by side with
Burmese.s .
1 Burmesehistorygoes so faras to attribute theconquestc\:1ieflyto the desire ofthe Burmeseking for
the possession ofthe Buddhist s'acred books, though no doubt his.real objects were mainly politic~l. Fora
definitecase ofa M6n scholar beingimported bya Burmese king (thesamewho inspired most of our early
MOn inscriptions),seeJ. Burma N.S., 1912,pp.'246-8. That was inA.D. 1107.
I Andalso, at least in. one case,with the " Pyu ..of the PI'ollle region (J.R.A.S., 191J, pp. 3uS-S8).
In the same way Khmer (Cambojan) wasoccasionallyused, as late as the middleofthe.l4thcentury,atthe
Tai court of SUkhothai,where it was just.as much a foreign language as ·M6n was at Pagan (see finot,
NotlS d'Epigraphie ltldochilloise(1916), p.254).

74 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL.t
THE M6N INSCRIPTIONS OF UPPER AND LOWER BURMA.
6. This.use of Man was fostered by the patronage ofa Burmese kingwhose
reign covers the end of the 11th, and thebeginnirig of the J2th, century j and it is
to him and to the fortunate circumstance of his having been a great author or
inspirer of such records (which were largely panegyrics on himself) that we owe
nearly all the earliest" M8n inscriptions.yet,discovered. Apart from the;;' much
briefer documents engraved on small votive tablets and on glazed tiles illustrating
Buddhist legends,l these early records constitute'the whole ofthe material available
for the study of'the Man language of the I Ith and, 12th centuries. After. this'
period there is an almost blank interval of a1Jout three hundre4 years. ,It may b~ ,
that the use ofM8nfor epigraphic purposes in Upper Burma was dictated mainly.
by the fancy of an indiviqual monarch and practically ceased when that influence
was no longer operative. Or itmay be that as Burmese scholarship developed it ,
became more independent, a Burmese national reaction set in, andMon .ceased to '
be a fashionable literary medium at the Burmese capitaL At any rate, 'soon after:
the death of their chief royal patron, Man inscriptions apparently1Jecamescarce in ,
1.Ipper.Burma: there are only two, not very long or important specimens, in the
collection, one being a brief record of a donation by a,l.ater king and the other,
which is probably of Mon authorship, 'commemorating the foundation of a
provincial monastic building.
7. The next big group of inscriptions in the collection dates from' the 15th
century, the high-water mark of the medieval MOll kingdom, and especic~.1ly from
thetime of the great Mon king DharnmaceU.. As already stated, thes.edocilrnents
were found in the really M8n country of.Lower Burma. To that fact. partly on
account of the exceedingly rainy" lldimate of that region and partlyby reason of
II
the destructive wars which' have devastated it, we owe the unfortunate circum
stance that these medieval inscriptions are often less well preserved than the older
records that have been left undisturbed in the deserted metropoHs of Upper
Burma. Both sets are, for the most part, temple records, and the temples in both
cases were dedicated to the same faith.' But, as even the most recent experience
has again taught us, that fact is no safeguard intif!le of warj and there is reason
, ,
1 Someof the inscriptionson glazed tiles adorning the' Ananda pagoda at Pagan were discussed 'by
Huber inB.E.F.E.O., 19I1,tome xi, no. I,andthe wholeset is now beingedited by Profes50rC. Duroiselle.
These areofthe early period.. Someofthe medieval orlatc'rones (alsoon glazed tiles)havebeen dealt with
by myself (J.R.A.S., 1912, 'pp. 689-98, J. Burma R.S.,19IS, pp. 30, 31, 97, 98), and DuroiselJe
(Reports of th~Superillfwdent, Archaeological SlIrtrey, But'ma, 1914,1915).
a It is thus characterizedin the Kalyal}i inscription,whichdiscusses the poi~t in somedetail..

PART II] MON INSCRtPTIONS 75
to believe that in Lower Burma, as elsewhere, the destruction of .consecrated
buildings was often systematic and intentional.· Both the·early and the medieval
records are characterized by abundant ,expressions of religious·sentiment, and bot.h
were probably as'a rule, and perhaps.invariably,. draf~~d by· ecclesiastics. But
there is a marked difference between them. The earlier ones contain a much
larger element of royal panegyricand' also introduce, in 'some cases, many parti
culars about the stateofthe country and people. The picture is, no doubt, some
what idealized, but it is dra\vn with graphic, vivid touches. ~·'lndeed, one or'two of
these documents have some Claim to he considered as pieces of literature and not
merely as specimens of epigraphy, . The·medieval record~; bn the other hand,
as
restrict themselves more to specifically Buddhist matters (such the incidents of
Buddha's life; but'including also the local legends or ttadltions about theintroduc
tion of the faith into Lower Burma, etc,),'and tp the details of the pious donations
'or of the construction or restoration of the buildings with which the records are
connected, From the point of view of theircontents they are, therefore, perhaps
of somewhat less general interest than, the older documents;. but incidentally they
sometimes contain items of historical, chronological, or top6gr.ap~icalvalue. '
LINGUISTiC IMPORTANCE of THE, MOl'+"INScRiPTlm-lS;"
. .• L. - .
8. Owing to the fact that.the Mon language; especially'in its older forms, is
at present almost a sealed book to European scholars, the chiefpoint of interest in
this collection of records is the language in which they are writterl.· ,In that
respect their value is beyond price. Mon is a member of a fairly l~rge but much
broken down and scattered family of languages, which extends (in detached
fragments) from the extreme west of the Central Provinces iof' India through
is
Assam and Indo-China right down into the Malay Peninsula. The family ()f the
highest linguistic interest, being very peculiar and characteristic· in its structure,
and apparently constitutes a series of links in a brokeri chain that'-formerly
connected the still more extensive and importa~t Malayo-Ppiynesian (or Austrone
sian) family with its original Asiatic home. Further, be itr:emembered that of all
the languages of the scattered Austroasiatic family (asit has been',styled) only
one other besidesM6n, namely Khmer (or Cambojan), possesses literary records
going back beyond the, most recent times.] All the rest ar~ known only in their
Amiamese,thoughin some wayconnected,does not appear to be a genuirie- member of,the family;
, 1
and Cham, with its very mixed vocabulary,isclaimed by somescholarsf9r the·Malayo·Polynesian iamily,
~ndat any rate is not,in line with the rest of the"Austroasiatic languages but heads a little group of
Its own. '

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
.modern forms. \Vhen these facts are borne in mind, it will be realized how
important these Mon records are, especially the olderones. From them alone can
we form anything like an adequate picture of the language in its earlier phases,
when its strllcture was still relatively unimpaired and perspicuous: for here too, as
.is so often the case in the history of languages, t~e process of change, both
phonetic and morphological, has been mainly in the.direction of decay i, there has
been a progressive breaking down and obliteration of distinctive features.
9. The medieval records represent, of course, a transitional stage between the
early and the late,or modern, Man, but on the whole they may be said to
approximate more to the latter than to the former. That is; however, more
apparent than real, and is due in great part to the fact that the written language
(like our own) has lagged "behind the spoken one. Its orthography does not
constitute a simple, straightforward system, but an elab.orate tangle of .conventions,
complicated of course by the dialectic differentiation referred to in ~ 3.1 Some
of these conventions in attempting to link the present with the past have only
succeeded in falsifying both and producing spellings that never had·any phonetic
basis at all.2 The medieval records, standing asthey do between the early form of
the language and the modern form, often throw light on both, and with their help
the whole process of evolution of the Man language during more than eight
centuries can now be studied in detail. The fuller illustration of this subject must
be left to a later stage, and it,vill suffice to have drawn attention here to its great
importance from the point of view of linguistic study.
THE INDIAN ELEMENT IN THE INSCRIPTIONS.
10. One point worth noting, on account of the general interest attaching to it
and the historical conclusions to which it may lead, is the Indian element which is
such a marked feature in these records. Having regard to the fact that the Mons
1 Cf. J.A., mai-juin 1910,pp. 477-505, in which an attempt is made toexplain the phoneticsof the
modernstageof M6n in relation tothespelling.
s It is a fundamental defect of Schmidt's H Gn.indzi1ge einer Lautlehre del' Mon-Khmer-SprachenII
(Denksclzyiftell aey k. Akallemie der Wissensclzajten in Wien, phil.-hist. KI. (1905), BandLI) that it is
basedsolelyon the modernforms of theL'mguages with which it deals, though specimens ofearlyKhmer
wereavailablewhen itwaswritten. Someof itsconclusions will have to be revised by the helpof theearly
1\-160 records, as pointed out by me in J. Burma R.S., 1915, pp. 28-30. Schmidt's reliance on the
modernorthographyof 1\16nand Khmer(on1:lehalfofwhich he breaksa lance with Finot in the introductory
sectionofhis valuable dissertation) is fnr more extensive than the case warrants. The spelling of these
langunges has been modified from timeto time, so that it is no longer a safeguide to theoldsounds,and as
a clue to the historic development of their phonetics it is just about on a par with modern English
spelling.

PART Il] MON INSCRIPTIONS 77
at some very early period became acquainted with the form of Buddhism which
uses Pali as its sacred language,l it is not in the least surprising or remarkable
that several of the inscriptions contain at the beginning, or the end, or in the
middle, short Pali sentences testifying to the somewhat pedantic erudition of the
draftsmen. More important is the considerable number of Indian loanwords in the
Man text itself: for these form an integral pa.rt of the language and are not merely
tacked on like theP~li sentences. They are very common in the early inscrip
tions, and many of such loanword5 have survived through the medieval into the
modern form of Man. A remarkable proportion of these words is of Sanskrit
origin, not Pali. Sometimes we find mixed forms, partly Sanskrit and partly Pali,
and of course also forms that are taken straight from Pali. The Sanskrit forms
include some of the commonest religious terms, such as dharmma, sway (from
svarga), and the like. As to the reasonfor their presence in early Man, allowance
must be made for the fact that Brahmans, who are often mentioned in the inscrip
tions,9 played a great part at all the Indo-Chinese courts, from Burma to Champa.
Vestiges of Hinduism have been found in Lower Burma, though they are not so
common as in several other parts of Indo-China. But there is much reason to
beli~ve that some form of Buddhism using Sanskrit as its sacred language aha
existed there in former times/l ju~t as it did, for example, in Camboja. The fact
is not without some bearing on the much discussed question of the Sanskrit words
in Burmese: there seems to be no necessity for the assumption which has been
made thai they must have comethrough a Chinese channel, in view of the occur
rence of words of th~ same class in Man. The soundest inference seems to be
the one drawn byFinot (l.A., l.c.) that Sanskrit and Pali (and the several forms of
religion with which they are respectively associated) were more or less concurrent
influences in the Man country from an early period.'Whatever may have been
the channel or channels through which .he Sanskrit words came in, they ,are
present in such numbers that the strength of the influences that introduced them
must have been considerable and probably extended overa fairly long period.
I I. Other, more superficial, evidences of Indian influence are not wanting in
our records : in the earlier ones the proper names are Sanskrit, Pali, or mixed i and
. 1 Finot has shqwn <y.A., juillet-a01it 1912, pp. 121-36; juillet-aofit 1913, pp. 193-5) that the'
Vlbhanga and other religious texts in Piili were known at Prome about the 6th.century A.D. As Prome
ison the Irrawaddy,the prcsumptlonis that the Piilicanon was introducedthere by ,yay of the river route,
notbysome difficult -ovcrland track; and consequently that it ,vas known in the M6n rcgion round the
mouthsoftheriver beforeit I·cached Prome.
II E.g. No. I G 17, 18. 9 See'l.A., juillet-aout 1912, pp. 121~36.
f Mahayiinist Buddhism from about the 5th ccntury A.D. But the·same learned scholar points out
that the Hinayana"'ith a Sansl<rit canon also enjoyed a wide diffusioni~ the Far East.
II

EPlCiRAPHIA BJRMANICA [VOL. 1
this persists more or less in the medieval on~, though here a few other names
occur which appeal to be native... The kings, both Burmese and MOn, seem to
have indulg~d in Ii,double nomenclature: an elaborate Indian name, sometimes of
stupendous length, was used by them as their royal style, though they had shorter
native names as well, by \vhich (as a rule) they are known in ~he histories. In the
inscriptions the Indian style is given the preference, presumably because it sounded
grander and was the specifically royal name, the other:one being personal.
Certain conventional phrases based on Indian originals ar-e also sometimes used :.
for example, the people in general are styled the four caRtes," although there is
II
no real reason to believe tha~,'apart from the Brahmans, who were of foreign
'introduction, any r~al division into castes was recognized in Burma. .
ALPHABET) SPELLING, AND TRANSCRIPTION.
12. The alphabet ofthe inscriptions, like the generality of the so-called native
alphabets of Indo-China and Indonesia; is manifestly derived from some South
Indian type, akin to the old Telugu-Canarese. Its form in the early Man records
(asthe late Professor Kern pointed out to me) is very nearly identical with that of
contemporary Javanese inscriptions. It is evident that in the early centuries of
our era there was constant intercourse between Southern India and the Eastern
regions to which Indian civilization spread iUelf, and that the fashions in the
-former country were readily followed in the latter The identificat.ion of the
1
various symbols used in the.early M8ninscri:ptiolliiand thelr~ derivation from their
Indian prototypes;offernb':special difficulties; The .Mans discaTded -some of the
Iridian letters, as they had no use for them jothers theyused<onlyin words nf
Indian origin. But they also invented two new signs, both labial letters. The
first of these is really anew letter.and is found in the.ea,rlyitlScripti6nsl.whe~e..it
has the shape of a circle with a smaller one inscribed ird:he-c:entre pf it,.I()okit.lgi~
fact exactly like their combination z'm, exceptofcourse~tha:t .thk:latter"is'super-.
script whereas the new labial'q is on the line. This may have been:based on
some northern form of b, and finds its analogue in the so-called' Pyu scrip~.· :The
p,:'Z·.e.
sound denoted is in modern Man described assomething between band a 1J
Ijk~
deprived of sonority, and to me it sounds somewhat nasal and vaguely 'W.
-a
The other labial is simply derived from the comhinationmb,ihe b here being in
subscript form which has been slightly .modified in the modernlanguage,.where the
J Finot(J.A., I.e.) points out that the alphabet of the Prome Maunggun plates (now in the British
Museum and dating from about the 6th century) is practically identical with the Kadambaalphabet of
'North Kanara.

PART It] MON INSCRIPT10NS 79
combination, when initial, is treated as a genuine, letter (as it has now in fact
be~ome): It is extremely rare evenin modem Man, and of doubtful existence in
tbe earlier phases ofthe language, and I have adhered to the transcription mh.
13. The alphabet of early Man has becomein its tum, through the medieval
stage, the ancestor of the modern Man alphabet, which is substantially the same
as the modern Burmese one. In the early stage the letters, though already
showing a tendency to become circles, or parts of circles, or aggregates of such_
elements, are still very distinctive and include some complex and beautiful forms.
In the medieval perio'd the tendency is towards less distinctivelless: certain of the
letters and combinations of letters become very similar to one another, thereby
increasing the difficulty of deciphering blurred or otherwise damaged passage!.
As regards the size of the letters,.the descriptions of the several records should be
referred to. Speaking generally it may be said that in the early stage there is
much variability, the height of the typical letters varying from about an inch to
three~eighthsof an inch as between one inscription and another. The medieval
ones tend to a more generally uniform scale of about half an inch. These parti
culars refer, of course, to the generality of the letters, neglecting all such as by
. their special forms project above or below the general limits, and also excluding
superscript and subscript symbols from consideration.
14, As regards the use of the letters, it may be not~dthat when a word has
two medial consonants (without an interVeningvowel) the matter can be treated in
two ways: the first Gonsonant receives a virl1ma and the second then follows on
the'line ; or the second is written under the first, without any virama. The two
methods are used interchangeably,'but the second is preferred. The-letters rand
ti are sometimes superscript, the former very frequently, and are then to be read,
immediately before the letter over which they stand. Superscript letters and
many of the subscript ones affect special, modified forms. Initial vowers
have their own proper forms,l but may also he represented by the symbbl
~i.
for initial a with the appropriate auxiliary vowel symbol,. added to
tran~criptiok'
These several alternative methods are not differentiated in my
Apart from such formal varieties as these (and a few-others hereafter mentioned)
and from certain interchanges of'cognate vowels, early Man spelling'is relatively
regular and appears to be a genuine attempt, in the' main fairly successful, to
write phonetically. Its transcription therefore offers few difficulties. Medieval
spelling is less genuinely phonetic i it is partly more'or less under the influence of
the early spelling, partly an attempt to meet the phonetic changes that had taken
J Not,however,ciorthe diphthongs.

So EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. t
place in the meantime. In fact it is on the way to the complexities of the modern
system, and consequently the transcription is more remote from the phonetics in
the medieval records than in the early ones. It is, of course, impossible to repre
sent in a literal transcriptioll the modifications which the various sounds have
undergone in the course of the historic evolution of the language. An attempt
will, however, be made hereafter to trace the outlines of these changes.
15. The system of transcription here adopted for Man is as follows :-
Vowels and D£phthongs.
a a0 a i u fi e al 0 au
CO1Zsonants.
Ve1ars: k kh g gh Ii
Palatals: c ch J jh fi
Cerebrals: t th <t dh J}.
Denta1s: t th d dh n
Labia1s: p ph b bh m
Unclassed: y w r I
.§ s h
~
Q ill b
Excepting the addition of some extra letters, this scheme differs only in one
particular from the system of transliterating the Indian alphabet that has won the'
widest international consent. The letter w has been adopted instead of v, partly
because it is the modern representative in Man (as in almost all the languages of
Indo-China) of the Indian v, and chiefly because it is llsed in early Man to form
diphthongs and must therefore have had the value of 711 in that position at any rate,
as it most probably had in all others. In the Indian sentences that occur in the
inscriptions (but not in Indian loanwords and proper names found in a Mon
context) the letter v will be used,.in conformity with Indian spelling.]
16. Theoretically, the vowel a is, as in other Ind41n alphabets~ inherent in the
consonants in general, unless negatived expressly (in one of the ways indicated
in ~ 14)' It therefore represents no separate symbol save when initial of
a word or syllable. As a matter of fact the actual sound is not always a,
and even in the early period it is probable that in syllables preceding the final
one the inherent sound was really a short neutral vO\\'el (something like the a
a
in abide). The symbol stands for an inherent modified by the addition
{l
1 III uthcr respects, also,the usual Pali spelling will be follo\\\.d ill the Piili passages.

PART II] MDN INSCRIPTIONS
of the a1tZtsvara symbol in a syllable closed by a velar. This begins to occur
in the medieval records and the sound denoted is probably an open 0, much
like our English aw. The diphthongs a£ and au also do not occur in the early
stage of the language, though they are of course part 0"£ the Indian alphabet
and <ire used in medieval and later Mon. In early Man their place is taken
(in the words where they subsequently occur) by various diphthongs formed
with final y and w, respectively. The combination tt£, not entered in the
above scheme because symbolically merely made up of £ and tt, probably
lil<e
represented a neutral vowel (something the one in our words b£rd, cur) and is
very rare in early Man, the vowel in question being therein usually represented
by some other, almost at random and quite interchangeably (e.g., rt, £, tt, e, e£).
17. The cerebrals (except rj and occasionally ?Z)l and the letters s and I are
confined to "'ords of Indian origin (S to Sanskrit, I to Pali words). The letter
~ when subscript in Mon ,yords merely represents s, a usage to be paralleled in
Javanese, where conjunct s has a form derived from~. Modern M~n has
dropped s and ~ from its alphabet. The peculiar labial q has been explained in
§ 12. Theaposlrophe (') represents the symbol for initial a with the V£ra1Jl4
.over it and stands for the glottal check or abrupt ending of a vowel. This use is
peculiar and un-Indian, but in early Burmese the same device was adopted to
indicate the abrupt tone in words ending in a vowel. The letters m and !z
represent symbols (rtllusvara and ~Iisarga, respectively) which the Mans put after
the diphthongs, not among the consonants. They ·are properly speaking final
sounds and of course involve no inherent vmrel2 i but they are really consonants.
In early Mon 1n is merely shorthand for m (final of a ,Yord or syllable) and inter
changes freely with it. In medieval Mon liz is sometimes superfluously followed
by a final m, and has no force at all, apparently, in such cases. Later usage has
adopted it as an abbreviation for (') and even It, as well as for 1Il. Its use as a
vowel symbol has already been mentioned. In early Man !z interchanges with It
in certain words, and the latter is sometimes superfluously added to the former,
m
as m to in the medieval stage. There seems to be no difference in their sounds
as consonants, but in the later stages of the language they become definitely
separated and affect the preceding vowel differently. It will be understood that
these explanations are merely intended to make the system of transcription
adopted intelligible, and that other phonetic details will be considered separately.
1 Tlllrc is 50lllC I cason to believethat originillly ~l as well and also the aspirated son:mts (whkh oc\;ur
butrarely in :-'18n root~) wereforeign to thelanguage.
:I Naturally(') has noneeither.

EP1GRAPHIA BIRM-ANICA
18. A hyph~n is used,( 1).at the end:·of. a line· if a .word is .not completed
there, (2)·. to separate letters. which "'.ould othefWise·for~·. one or, other of"
~he abqvementioned digraphs (ai', au; ui', and. the aspirated consonants),
(3) between a consonant and a vowel to indicate that .th~ cpnsonan~ (with·.an'
unexpressed a or short neutral vowel) fOFms a syllable·andthe'wnttenvowel (which
a'
in the original is in its initial form or attached to an initial as.a fulcrum) begins
the next syllable. This d~vice is necessitated by the ·common habit of writing the
second of -such letters under the first as if there were no intervening short vowel.
When the two letters do not fall into one of the'above categorias, the'hyphen has
i161/I)-een :lnserted·, put it':will be.understood-that,.e.g., in such a combination as trj
a
(initIal) short.ne.utra~ vowelmust: b~ ~~ad after the t. Nor has the hyphen been
nz
use~~fter tn, for by definition the must close the syllable that 'precedes and
cartnot commence the one that follows. The double hyphen is used to separate
words which in the original are written in one. 'This is of decidedly rare occur
rence in Man inscriptions. Square brackets enclose letters or symbols which are
more or less broken or illegible but: capable of certain restoration. When there
is'any reasonable room for. doubt, .round,·brackets are used.,. The stops of the
'original'have been reproduced. Dots.indicate that something is missing which
Ihave been unable to restore. As far as possible the ,number of missing or qUIte
. .
unidentifiab~e letters ha$ beenindicated by allotting one dot to each with"another
dot if there is believed to have been'a vowel,'attached to it or in the absence
j
~ther
of arty indicatloIJs, two.dots for the space supposed. to be occupied by each
mi~singletter-group (akshara).
BE.GINNINGS OF MON EPIGRAPHICAL STUDY:
. 19. The first attempt to de~iplier'and -interpret the early Man inscriptions
1
was made in '1909; wren by the'help of thePiiliand B~rmese texts the Mantext
of the quadrilingual inscription of the Myaz~di pagoda of Pagan was published
(J.R.A.S., 1909, PP.'1017-S2):· The reading was tentative in I)lany respects and
'a comparison with some of the other early records caused it to be much amended
subsequently (£bt'd.,19l0, PP./97-812, 1912, PP., 486, 487). It was, there
.fore, the Myazedi inscription, the· only,considerable early Mon record hitherto
published, that laid the foundation ·of this course of research, by giving the clue to
thep.hone~ic
many of and morphological·factors that··characterizethe early..stage,
, Afe\v shortand not very importallt medieval orc~mparatively modern records had previouslybeen
interpreted: e.g..see I.A., 1893,pp.343.344(reviewedin J.R.A.S.,1912,pp.689-98). SeealsoJ.AS.B. i836,
t
Vol. V;p. 28.o,and Plate X (facing p.340),and ibid., 1838, Vbl.VII, Plate facing pp. 294and 295.
. .

PART tr] MON INSCRIPTlONS
of the langUage. This line of study.. has been cojltinued since then, in the
intervals ofother'work, and the results here published rept:.esent the fruit of several
years of intermittent.labour on the materials put at my disposal, and supersede
wh~t f·havealre.ady·publlshed on the subject..' .
. ' . 20. The difficulties were'manifold..' The i~k.impressiorissupplied'tome were
6ftenimperfectrepresentatioris of much weathered and' battered originals, which
of course I have never had an opportunity ofseeing. I deduce the imperfedions.
th~ir
of the-copies froin frequent.diversities. The early stage of the language .
was quite un.known to everybody: even an intimatt'? acquaintance with modem
M&n,.had I possessed' it, .would not have' made it':lt once intelligible. The
changes wrought by upwards of eight hun4red .yearsare often so radical that
it is very'difficult to recognize quite common words:' e.g., one may be excused
fot not seeing at a glance that jt'1ijU1i is the'same as -the modern dayut'{l, or that
kandar is the old formoI kalaw. . When- detected, such cases of correspondence'
had to be fur'ther confirmed and definitely established'by discovering the laws of
phonetic change which they exemplify. Unfortuna:,tely some of the old words
do no~:recurin the medieval records and 'ieein to have disappeared altogether
'from'the modern language. A great many of them. are,not to he found'in the
only existing vocabulary and have not been met with in such texts as I have
1
been able to read. It will therefore be understood thatin such case.s; unless the
meaning or reading'was sufficiently determined by the context,or by'a comparison
it
of several contexts, a considerable element of uncertp.inty remains.. is only too
nrs~attempt
probablethatstich cases are fairly ntImerous, bl,ltiri a imperfections
.of that kind are inevitable. To do full justice to these records ,would require in
the editor a number of qualifications' that are seldom found united j.amongst.
others,' a t.horough knowledge of Man, Sanskrit and, PaU, m1.icJt. experience in
Indian epigraphy, great familiarity with Buddhist thought'an.d.Jege~d,an·intimate
acquaintance with the local conditions of vari,?us'parts'of Bur~, tnuch leisure and
~good dealof patience; ....TO- t-hese, except the last two,.I.can lay no claim. But.
inview of the growing interest taken. iii' theMbnla~IDta~ by'sCholArs-in Bunna/
th~ def~cts t~e.present
I venture to hope that of work will eventually be amended
.by. their corrections; based' on' wider. sourc~s of<iil(orination than,J1ave, been
available to myself . ." ,
ACKNOWJ..~J)GM!'N"l'S tJ~; ..AlSIStANCE.
~
. • In ,the 'meantime it would not be'right to omit here the thanks which
are due to the numerous friends, critics; and correspondentswho have contributed
:~/liaswell,(;rammQticalNotesa,,~':y'o&~ul4,.ji'qfthfl PlEUan LanguaKe~ 2nded:, '1901~

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
to the production of the work. To Mrs. BOde. and Messrs. F. \V. Thomas,
L. Finot, and A. Cabaton, I am indebted for some assistance on individual p~ints
of reading er interpretation.1 Mr. Taw Sein Ko and Professor C. Duroiselle,
both in their official capacity as officers of the Archaeological Survey Department
and individually, have been of priceless help. \iVithout their aid and support, and
that of the department which they represent in Burma, this work could not have
been produced. To lVIr. R. Sewell, Sir Alfred Invin, and the lateM. Auguste
Barth I am much indebted for assistance towards' the understanding of the
chronological details contained in some of the records. In this connexion also
J.
the late Dr. F. Fleet's criticisms, even ,vhen I found ~yself unable to agree
with them, have served to draw my attention to points that required further
investigation or more precise treatment. But most of all, I am bound to single
out for special mention the assistance of my friend Mr. Robert Halliday, whose
unique mastery of the M8n language in its modern form, both written and spoken,
has been of invaluable he.lp at every stage.of my work. To all these fellow
workers I tender my hearty thanks.
SECTION I.-THE EARLY M6N RECORDS.
1 I mustalso put.onrecord my obligations to thewritingsof thai verydistinguished.scholar, Edouard
Huber,who included acdtical acquaintance with M6n in his extraordinarily long list of linguisticacquire
mentsand whose prematuredeathisan irreparablelossto Orientalstudies;

PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS
sent a minister to India some time after his accession to search for an eligible
princess as an addition to the royal household. The choice fell upon a daughter of
the king of Vesali, who on the journey to Burma became involved in an intrigue
with the minister and on her arrival in Burma was secluded in a remote
village, where she became the mother. of Kyansittha. Another version of the
story fathers him on a Naga. \Varned by an astrologer, the king (without
knowing the child's identity) makes repeated attempts to kill him, because he has
been Jed to fear his eventual rivalry and contingent succession to the throne.
These attempts all fail and ultimately, after hearing that the dreaded event
foreseen in the stars is not to take place till long after his own death, the king
appoints Kyansitthii, noW full-grown, to be one of his chief officers. In that
capacity he renders valiant and faithful service, until after the conquest of That8n
he is enthralled by the charms of a M6n princess whom he should have escorted to
the. king: he falls from grace and has to flee from the royal wrath, taking his love
with him. Thus, a second time, does the Tristan and Isolde motif occur in this
legend. After having passed through many perils and miraculous adventures,
Kyansitthii, after the death of Anawrahta and of his son and successor Sawlo,
returns to expel the usurper who had dethroned and killed the latter and so
j
succeeds to the throne of Burma.1 The story goes on, introducing the strange and
tragic episode of the Indianprince who came to Pagan as a suitor for the hand of
KyansitthA's daughter. But for our purposes it need not be pursued further.
Kt'ng Kyanst'ttho £n Contemporary Records.
24· Contrasted with the wildlegends that have gathered round his name, the
king'sown records arere1atively sober and matter of fact documents. As seen
through the veil of tradition, he is a fantastic h'ero of a fairy tale. In his own
inscriptions, with their strong ecclesiastical flavouring, he is presented as a gr~e
and religious, butquite human, monarch, takinga deep interest in the spiritualand
temporal welfare of his people, and actively contributing theretp by his piety and
good works. It is true that the records contain.legendary matter enough anclto
spare but it recedes (as legend usually does) into a still remoter past. And
j
though. his reign is highly idealized by his courtly draftsmen, and the records'teem
with superlatives, their atmosphere is quitedifferent from that which pervades the
I am indebtedto Professor C.Duroiselle for the legendaryaccountofwhich the above isthemerest
1
abstrac~: itwould beworth publishingin full in anotherplace. Bastian(Geschic/ztedeybldoc!lillcsm,pp.36,
4~-7)glveS,from Burmesesources,a somewhat similar story. ActualhistoricalinformationrelatingtoKyan
slttMseems tobevery scanty: Phjl.yre (History ofBurma, p.38)hascomparativelylittletosayabouthim.
12

86 £PIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
traditional story. The supernatural element (as judged by our standards) is not
indeed altogether excluded' even from the king'sactual reign: thus natural
phenomena are represented as being favourably affected by his benign influence
(I D 53-E i). But in the primitiveandOrientalconception ofkingship thatismere
common form, and it should not blind us to the actuality andi"ealisni which is in
faCt the background of these rather florid'documents. They. give us quite a vivid
representation of the life of the people of Burma at this period,.wherein the king
and his court; the monks, Brahmans, chiefs, 'and commonalty of divers degrees, all
appear in their turn. Onthe other hand the events recorded in them are relatively,
and disappointingly, few. , There are. some vague references to warfare, but no
definite accounts of actual campaigns. The building of tanks or reservoirs for
storing\\'ater for purposes of irrigation (Nos. III and IV), the repairing oIa,temple
(No. V), and the like, are sometimes made the occasions for the inscription of a
panegyric. But other records seem to have been madewithout any such particular
incentive,_merely for the glorification of the king. . Of events of wider historic
interest, the most notable are the mission to India with funds f('lr the rebuilding and
A
endowment of the Vajriisana at Bodh Gaya (VIII 4-8), being the earliest
instance, I believe, in which such an act is recorded of a Burmese' king and
j
Kyansittha's friendly intercourse with a Coli" prince Ub£d., 10-6), who may
.11
perhaps have been a member of the greatDravidian Chola dynasty.
25. The legend which forms the introduction and framework of several of
these records is of a typically Buddhist cOl!1plexion; relating as it does the succes
sive rebirths of the king and in one of these incargations embodying an alleged
prophecy by Buddha Sakyamuni as to the monarch's career. We have the story
in two versions. In the more extensive, but less detailed, recension, the prophecy
is preceded by brief statements about three of the king's still earlier existences.
In Buddha Kassapa's time he was a we'althy 'and pious man, apparently living at
Benares. r\ext, he was born in the family of the kings of Patna, and eventually
succeeded to that throne. And, thirdly, he was born in the royal house of the
Rama dynasty of Oudh and became king there. These preliminary particulars are
given in Nos. III-V.l They are followed by the incidents which are common ~o
,the two recensions (and are embodied, therefore, though witli varying elaboration,
in Nos. I, II, VI-VIII). In the time of Buddha Sakyamuni the future king was
a sage named BisnO. Of him Buddha prophesies'that in his next human incar~
K~etra, K~et,
nation he is to become thefounder of the city of Prome, (Sri SrT '
or Sislt). and in a subsequent rebirth (aftef an int~rvalofbliss in Brahmaloka) king
1The first halfof No. 1\'is lost, but,as the remainder :-igncs very closely with the corresponding
a
porlion of Nu. III it isa rcasonablc infcrencethat theinscriptionas wholebelongsto thisgroup.,

PART II] M6N INSCIUPTIONS 81
at Pagan (Pokam or Arimaddanapur). Eventually he is to be reborn in still
higher spheres and finally to be a Buddha and a saviour ofthe world.
26. The less extensive version (particularly as presented in Nos. I and II)
introduces much wealth of detail into the Bisnu episode, which is treated as the
most important stage in this preparatory course of evolution. In the setting of the
prophecy (according to this version) the chief dramatispersoJlfle besides Buddha
hitnself are Ananda, the great disciple, towhom in the first place the prophecy was
made, Gawampati,who has been styled the patron saint of the Mons,t and who
appears here as the patron saint of Pagan, Indra, the king of the devas (Mon
dewatau, Burmese nat), to whom the prophecy is repeated by Gawampati, and of
course the sageBisnu himself; to whom itis again communicated, twice over, first
by Gawampati and then by Indra. Minor personages, who are mentioned as
destined to assist in the foundation of Prome, etc., are Bissukarmma (Vigvakarman,
the celestial architect) and a Naga king named Katakarmma (or Katakarmma).
The story is .repeated with much tautology and almost ad nauseam, btit these
repetitions, though wearisome in themselves, have proved of great value from the
point of view of lexicography atld interpretation by reason of their occasional
.:variations in expression.,
27. In No. VIIl Bissukarmma and the Naga king join with Gawampati and
Indra in exhorting Bisnii to accept the great future. that is offered to him. This
is apparently a modiflcation·of the less extended version. The more extensive one,
as contained in Nos. III-V, merely gives the prophecy as delivered to Ananfta
(~'ithsome'e~bellishments in detail, which call often be paralleled almost verbatim
from other parts of No. l),but it stops therc.~ It mentions the other personages 111
the prophecyitselfi.but they are notintroduced as parties to the action. It seems
not impossible thatthe less t:xtensive, though more elaborate, recension represented
.by Nos. I, II, VI, VII (and probably VIII) is the earlier one. :In that case we
may. perhaps plausibly conjecture that the .further development of the story
took place at some time between the date of No. VI(A Bur'455,A.D. 1093-1094)
.and theprobable date of No. V (A. Bur. 46o, A.D. 1°98-1°99). In No: IX Kyan
sittha is.introducedas the.reigning monarch who takes part inthe great ceremonial
described in that record.· This inscription, which is devotedtodetails of ritual and
architecture, is in a'Class by itself, and has no reference to the royal legend. . Nor
.has the Myazedi inscription (Ep. Bitm.,.Pt.I), which records that near the close
1 This person.1lityis interwoven'with thelegendaryaccounts of the foundation of That&n,the historyof
which kingdom is putinto his mouth in the form ofa prophecyin a work that sometimes bears his namefor
a title: see the SttddltammavatIr4jtivatiua. Pak Lat, A. Bud. 2453, and Report ofthe SlIPerillteudtllt,
ArchaeologicalSurvey, 8m'lim, 1913, p. 33. .

88 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
of.the.king'slife, after a reign of 28 years, his sickness occasioned the votive
dedication by his son ~nd chief minister RRjakum~r ofa golden statue of Buddha.
This pious act was duly carried out with the king's personal approval j and the.
inscriptio~records the circumstances in a simpleand straightforward manner. The
.remaining inscriptions in·this section are apparently ·subsequent to· Kyansitth~ts
reign and have no concern with him. '
Chronology of Kz"ng Kyansittht1 and of his Records.
28. '. The period witll which w . e'are dea . ling here is really the dawn.of! . Burmese
history properly so-called; meaning thereby history supported·by contemporary
records and an ascertainable:chronology. Priorto the Burmeseconqu~stofThat&n
itmayfairly besaidt~atwe have notbing buta Illore or less doubtfultraditionj soon
eveA~ ~he
after that historical inscriptions begin, and from this time onwards they
are very numeroUs in Burma. By far the greater part'of them are in Burmese and
lie·outside my scope. . But the M6n rec~rds here published speak for themselves:
,they are manifestly genuine ~ontemporary documents. ,. That appears plainly"from
,the very nature 9f their co~tents: royal'panegyrics like these, elaborated in such
full detail and spread l>roadcast over the land with such frequent repetition of the
same theme, must obviously have been written during the reign and by the ordeI
of the monarch,whos.e praises they sing. ' Thefact is so self-evident that it would
be superfluous: to mention it had not some doubt been cast uponit Thedoubt did
notarise from any.intrinsic considerations, but merely froni a ·question, altogether
external, as to the origin and antiquity of the current reckoning of the Buddhistera.
,It was alleged that thatera was not used in Ceylon till some time late,in the Izth
century, and the inference.was drawn, that it musfhave-been invented in Ceylon
sOInewhereaboutthaf time, and could not therefore ·have been in use'in Burma in
I
the 11th.. Itnecessarily followed from·these premisses that the early .M~nrecords
.c9uld,rtot be genuinely contemporary, and must have been composed at'a time
·when.the king .they somewhat fursomelycelebrate had been·dead for nearly a
perh~ps
century or even longeri which,.in my judgment, is absurd, for the reasons
alreadystated.- As the whole basis of-the argument\vas a purely negative one,
vi2:. the non-existence,a~ this early .date of Sinhales~records embodying the current
Buddhist reckoning, the matter could not be satisfactorily pursued any further at
.the time. No conclusive reason was alleged forthe assumption that this mode of
, 1 J.R.A.S., 1909,pp.332,333.
~ The discussion onthesubjectmay be read in J;R.A.s., 1910, pp. 474""81, 850-60, 1911, PP. 209-17.
in
But so far as my own share in it is·conceriled~ itshouldbereadas amended bywhat isstatedhere and
lhe:accounlsofthe several inscriptionscontainedin thiscollection. See alsdJ.R.A.S" 1909.PP. 3~2-S6. .

PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 89
reckoning must have originated in Ceylon, and·at a date just prior to the first
surviving evidence of its existence in thatisland. And this last point, after having
been again asserted in J.R.A.S., 1912, p. 241, was eventually abandoned by its
author in J.R.A.s,; 19t2,.P. 1113, when it appeared that he had misunderstood
the import of the Sinhalese evidence. As against theconciete evidence of our
J .
Man records it is absolutely unarguable.
29. These records tell us that the king ,vhom they celebrate became king ot
Pagan after the lapse of 1,628years from the Parinirvat;1a (that is, the dea~~) of
S
Buddha i and after a reign of 28 years lay "sick nigh unto death," so that we
may fairly.assume that his demise followed very soon after. Here, then, we have
the use of some form of tire Buddhist era. But ofcourse this still leaves-open the
loophole: "What was the initial point of the reckoning?1I I admit at Once that
on the evidence here published a definite conclusion would be hard to come by.
But there·are at any rate the foll~wingindications..Our inscription No. VI "'as
composed by the king's orde~.(so it seems to say) in A. Bur. 455, that- is
A.D. 1093-1094,ifthe Burmese year15to betakenas an expired" year.. Inscrip
{I
tiori No. V contains a· date towards the end, in
an~nfortunately
obliteratedcontext,
which probably indicated the occasion of its composition: the date isA. Bur. 460,
i.e. A.D. 1098-1099.. Both ~ocuments relate the royallegend, the former in the
shorter, the latter in the more extended version. These dates therefore must fall
th~
within the period of years 1638-56 above.i'eferred.to. The.two dates are
consistentwith the ordinaryBuddhist reckoningand w·ould be incompatiblewith any
reckoning that did not place its initial point within a very few years of the usual
one. That is as near asn~e needgo on the evidence. contained in these records.
But it seemssufficienrtoshift the omes probandi onto the shoulders of anyone who
may choose to contend thatthe Buddhist reckoning therein mentioned refers back
to some other than the conventional starting point.·· Even if we take the result as
being merely.approximate, it gives us within·a possible margin of a few years the
date of Kyansitth~'s reig~. If we assume thatthe reckoning is from the conven
tional initial point, his accession must have taken place in A D. 1085-1086 if the
years are .taken as expired": and the phraseology used makes this the better
II
interpretation. If they are taken as current years, the date of his accession
II /I'
fell in A.D. 1084-1085. .
. J Geiger,in the Introduction to the l"rallslatioll oftlle·Malllit'a';1$(l by himselfand )1rs. Bode, remarks
(p. xxviii): " From themiddleof theeleventhcenturythe neweratookits·rise,being reckoned from theyear
He
544,and this is still in use," seems to prove it asfar back as A. Bud. 1590.
2 Or1,630years in some passages•.This last maybe a statement in round numbers, or m:lY possibly
referto thedateofhis;ll:tual anointment as.king. .

9° EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 1
30. Until recently this king's reign was given in the history books as
1
extending from A.D. 1057 to 108S, and the Man records will have borne their
share in correcting that erroneous chronology to some extent at least. It is no
part of my task to anticipate here the conclusions which may be drawn from the· .
Burmese inscriptions of this period. But it may be permissible to refer to. one
Burmese record in which Kyansittha.'s predecessorSawlu is associatedwith A. Bur.
4442 and another of Kyansittha.himself dated A. Bur. 4693: these two documents
confirm the general soundness ofthe rectified chronology.f
THE INSCRIPTIONS.
No. I.
THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA, PAGAN•
..Descriptive Account,
3I. This inscription is on the whole the most interesting and important of the
early Mon records. Its great length and the variety of matters with which it deals
make it a rich mine of linguistic material and it has often served to confirmwords
which were doubtful in some of the other records. The inscription is noticed (but
left undeciphered anduntranslated) in Inscrz'phons of Pagan, Pz'nya, and Ava
(both Text and Translation), where it figures as No. I (I)-(8). Some extracts
from it were given in J.R.A.S.,.I9IO, pp. 797-812, a few words in J.A., mai-j:uin
1910, pp. 499-5°3, and a few more together with another.extract in J~A., juillet
aout 1912,pp.128, 129, and it was referred to in the discussion mentioned in
§ 28 (note) and in the Reports oj the SuperZ:1zte1ldent, ArclzaeologZ:cal Sttrvey,
Burma, 1910, 1911. The inscription is engraved on two stone columns standing
within the precincts of the Shwezigon Pagoda at Pagan. Each column has four
faces, and their dimensions, as reported to me, are as follows :-Southern column:
height, 9 feet 4 inches j breadth of the two broader faces, 2feet 5 inches: of the
narrower faces, 2 feet 1i inches. Nortnern column: height, 8 feet 1inch jbreadth
J Phayre.. History ojBurma, p£,. 37'"9, 281 ; Cocks,Sltort History ojBtll'ma,PP. 22,%3.
2 J. BurmaR.S., 1913, Vol. Ill, pp.84-6. 3 Ibid., 1912, Vol. II, pp. 246-8.
1 Asregardsthe difficulty arisingfrom inscliptions which wouldapparentlymakeKyansitlha's accession
fall before A.D. 1085,it mustbc borne in mindthat accordingto the traditi()nal history he was (forsometime
beforc thc dcath of Sawlii) resident at avillagecalled Hti·hlaing(Thi-Ihuin or Dhi-luin) and styled himself
lordorkIngofthat placc,ittide which he seems to haveoftenusede\'cnafterhehad becomeking at Pagan.
lIenee the apparcntoverlapping ofthctwo reign,;ofSawlil and Kyan$itthii.

PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 91
of the two broader faces, 2 feet.2i inches: of the narrower faces, 2 feet Ii inches.
I have lettered the faces consecutively A-H. The first (or Southern) column
having been broken at one corner at the top, the ends ofthe first 15 lines in Face
C and the beginnings of the first 14 lines in Face D are lost, but can be replaced
in part by the aid of the context and of the replica of this record (No. II). The
text has been determined from four Sets of ink-impressions, together with photo
graphs oione of the sets, and checked with a set of ink-impressions of No. II, the
variants contained in the latter (so far as legible) being entered in the notes to the
text of No; I.
32. The space actufl.lly covered by the lettering of this inscription on its
severalfaces, as measured on the ink-impressions, is asfollows :-Southerncolumn:
Face A, 6 feet 10 inches by 2 feet 2 inches; B, 6 feet 10 inches by I foot lO·t
inches j C, 6 feet 10 inches by 2 feet 2 inches j D, 6 feet II inches by I foot Ioi
inches. Northerncolumn: E, 5feet 5 inchesby 2 feet 2 inches; F, 5feet 4iinches
4! !
by 2 feet; G, 5 feet inches by 2 feet 2 inches j H, 5 feet 5 inches by 2 feet
inch. On Faces E-H this record is followed by a much shorter one of later date,
which will be separately dealt with; and this in its turn, on Face F, by a Burmese
inscription transcribed and translated in Inscriptio11s of Pagan, Pillya, and A~la.
!
The letters of our inscription are ,yell cut and measure about inch in height,1
Letter t (which may be selected as a convenient one for purposes of comparison
between the different inscriptions) is about ~ inch long. The space between the
lines, in the absence of subscript and superscript letters, is about i inch.2 One
disconcerting feature of this inscription (which it shares to some extent with some
of the others, notably Nos. II and VI) is the fact that the surface ofthe stone seems
to have been somewhat)mperfectly prepared and is affected in a number of places
by flaws which were there before the record was cut. In such cases the engraver
has simply cut his lettering up to one edge of the flaw and, skipping over it, has
resumed his work just beyond the other edge. This results in irregular spacing,
.which when the part happens to be weathered or otherwise damaged by subsequent
vicissitudes often makes it very hard to restore the more or less illegible text,
particuiarly if the flaw extends to several consecutive lines, as is often the case.
One is apt to fail at firstto rec~gnizethe existence of such an original flaw, unless
it happens to occur in the middle of a common word whose identity is positively
] Hereandelsewhere Idonot take intoaccollnt the few letters which habitually project above or below
theusuallevel.
2 Itwillbe understood that there isa certain amountofvariability in these dimensions, partly perhaps
unintentional,partlycausedbythe desire oftheengraverto alhpt his lettersto the particular space available.
Thesameobsel\·.1tion applies to theother inscriptions.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL.,I
determined by the context. When these conditions are not present, restoration
becomes, more or less conjectural. The presence of original flaws. when material,
has been indicated in the notes accompanying the text.' Irregularity of spacing by
reason of the presence of subscript letters attached to the line next above is also a
common and more normal occurrence, and sometimes gives troublewhen the letters
are not quite clear.
33. In editing the text of this inscription a somewhat more liberaluse has been
made of square brackets than in the case of the other records. ' It must not, how
ever, be inferred that it is in a worse state of preservation than the rest. Precisely
the contrary is the case: apart from the loss of the portion already mentioned and
a certain amount of weathering and otherdamage it is in good condition. The
J
square brackets have been freely used, first in order to show (negatively) how well
preserved a great part of it is-there being quite a number of lines where 110t a
letter is bracketed-and secondly because, in view of the special lexicographical
importance of this record, it seemed desirable to indicate exactly which words are
absolutely_unmistakable as regards their spelling and which are not. '
34. The contents of this inscription are too miscellaneousto be summarized,
but have been described in general terms in H 25, 26. No special object or
occasion is, recorded as having given rise to the engravingof it, excepta desire to
inform the peopleat large of its contents: it is in fact a pure panegyric, a sort of
,royal advertisement. An accountof the generalframework of this record (and most
of the other inscriptions of King Kyansittha) has been given in H 25-7, but in
view of its great length it may he convenientto give here a sort ofTable of Contents
indicating the several sections into which it may be analysed:-
A I- 12'. Pali exordium, followed by a n£ssaya (Piili words explained by a
Man paraphrase) of the fact that Buddha Sakyamuni prophesied concerning King
Kyansittha.
A 12-54. The circumstances of the prophecy, made first to Ananda aJid
next to Gawampatij the latter informs Indra ofit.
A 54-F 19. After Buddha's death; Gawampati again goes to Indi-a and
expounds the prophecy in full detail.
F 19-28. lndra replies, accepting the duties imposed on him.
F 28--:-G 23. Gawampati goes to the sage Bisnu and communicates the
prophecy to him, exhorting him to act up to it.
G 23-39. Bisnu replies, accepting the position, and Gawampati leaves him.
G 39-H 17. Indragoes to Bismland after repeating the substance of the
prophc~y promises his aid and that of the Na:ga king.

No. I. VOL~ME 1, PLAT. V.
THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZI.GON PAGODA. PAGAN.
A B
z
~
4 4
6
8
H
10
19
12 12
'4
14
16
16
18
18
20
20
22
22
24
.24
26
26
28
28
30 3°
32
32
34
34
36
6
'3
3&
38
4°
42
44
46
48
5°
. 52
54

MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART 11]
H 18....;25. Bisnfi replies to Indra.·
Ii
25-43· Peroration: all men should know that the. king of whom this
prophecy was spoken is·the king now reigning.
35. The proper names contained in this inscription, so far as they are material
to the story, have been given in H 25, 26, ana further explanations will be
found in the notes appended to the translation. The dates contained in it have
been discussed in H 28, 29· 'they will be found in A I7 and 18, B 5~7, and
H 34and35. Further, inF I4·and 15 there is a statementto theeffectthat the city
of Prome shall have been in existence for r,200 years before (but it does not say
precisely how long before) King Kyansittha becomes king in" Tattades (apparently
the region in which Pagan is situated). There is no evidence as to the'date when
the inscription itself was engraved exceptthe general nature of its contents and the
tenour of its peroration j but see § 27. In the translation of this record the
order ofthe original has been followed as much a,s possible, sometimes even at the
expense of English idiom, with a view to retaining the balance and emphasis of the
.original and facilitating comparison between translation and text.
Text.
A
I. II [~ri] II na(mo B]u[ddha]ya unamo dhammaya II namo sa[n]gha[ya] I'
2. II angiraso Sakyamuni.1 sabbabhutanuka[m]pa[koJ II [sabJbasatt[u]t
[tamJo[Si}
.3. hOD raja~uppatti( In) desayi ti Sak[yamJuni [bhagJava .yan kEYJa[k
1 II
BJuddha ta-
4. [rJley Sakyamuni ki[IhJ viseso (l)h(a)w [ru]p wises tc{rlJe[yl (yo)
I I
an[gira]so
5. tarley rna nom ku yiryas jirku (mu)n .... (kim) v[iJseso (l)h(a)w rfip
I
6. wises tarley g(a)m yo sabbabhu[taJnukampako tarley [rna cha]n smin
I
7. [uJt sat gumlon sabbasa[ttut]tamo tarley [rna preJy nor ut s:t-
I
8. [t] ·gtimlon siho (tarJley rna row.kesarajadisin raja-uppattim
I I
9. yan kantar gna smi[n] Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja ma nom pu[n]
pra[j]na gar(go)-
10. en] trejas wier] yas pariwar ma kal~ sak nal~ c-an das pu(m)rey II sumoh
II. [go]1:1 desayi desesi cin kyak Buddha ta[rJley go[1:1J desana culoI)
I
1 The til is not in the original. 2 The til isverydoubtful.
13

94 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 1 .
tu~a[l)]
12. larkantar dirdas g[nJa srni[ilJ Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja
gumlon gun gol) .. .
13. mo' Qey kal yeo] rnakyak Buddha tarley gob culOQ tu-
14. bal:llar·kanfar dirdas gria srnin Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja gob
I
. no··
15. rn Qey moyleb kal kyak Buddha tarley taw QeyJeta-
16. wanamahawihar.lrna strak [tlu]il (mno)r dilaQ marrnar sas~ma kyak
.. Buddha ta- . . .' .
17. rley ,[nJor rna ky~k Buddha [ta]rley parini[rJbban i kuli lilim turow
18. klam p[i] cwa[sJ ~nam" <;ley dOrl ArimaddanapOr'yail kantar gna
srnin Sri Tri- .' ' .
19. [bhuwa]nadityadhammaraja gol:i kyak Buddha tarley flac (c)i(.) tartey
1
ktir
k-irn [k]al kyak Buddhatarley ktir k-im gOQ ci nor g[n]is pan'
20•. I I
2J. yirya~turow sak Qel:i tit cup Brahrnidok <,teQ'tin ar I
boy smarr 1 ci,yiryas gol:i Qel:i ar kirlol:i ut ti Qak (t)yall1
22. I
23. boy (gna)[n] ~i , ut dis pan kal:i rnoy lak~a koti cak(k]awal
S 4
24~ <,teb ar
I
blaQ gol) cjyiryas gol:i tun lo[p] rnukhawar kyak
25. Buddha tarley kurh tarle[y] Anan iHic as~ar gob lilor yil ki~
I
26. nta[l] ju[il] kyak Buddha tar[l]e[y] tOy [yJuk sum~up tey sma.;
I
27~ n r[0Jw WO' I rna tirla pa ki[r]-irn \I wo' ci , rnu het yO' sa-
k het kyak Buddha [tJarley gumlon sik-irn ci kahsak ro-
28. 8 I
29. wgob tarley Anan srnan da gol:i rna kyak BuddhataHey [gab]
I
30. [ku] tarley Anan row wo' Anan [rn]nor ci [r]isi rnoy rna i- .
I I
.3 Il1c{' BJisnu jnok'riddhi jnok anubhlhv , go' abhii'ia rn~un [k]o[rn]
L I I I
32. ku k[oJn eyGawarhpati ku smin I.n '. ku Bis5ukarmmadewaput , ku ..
I.
Kataka.;
33- rrnmanagaraja skandam <;Iuri moy imo'. SiS(I)t' ,.blab,gob risi Bisou .
I
g[o]l:i[I]
J Thereseemsto bean (lriginal'flawafter thestop;.and the reading isconceivably chior ci ra, but,
.probablyas in the text. . . .
~ Apparentlythereading istytit,thoughetymology seemsto require k),til•.
3 Thereisan original flaw justbeforethe y.
4 'fhereadingi!iverydoubtful,though the'last letterseems tobe it. .
6 There is an apparentlyoriginal flaw beforethe i. Theletters;and uare ofterlusedfor(or inter-
changeablywith)i and (respectively) in this and otherearly inscriptions, .
11
e The siis the verbal prefix (usuall.y written sorsa.butct n 6, E8, 23'4, H (6).
1Possiblyther~dingisSist't.

M<JN INSCRipTIONS 95
1>ARTll]
34.' seuti nor gob ' stin ar Brahmalok seuti nor 'Brahmalok gOI.l s[t]tuli
I I
, [da]- , " , , "
35. s Qey, Qun [A]rimaddanapur ei I s[d]un imo'gna srnin Sri Tribhu-
, 'wanaditya- ' " ,
36. dharnrna[r]ajal syuk sasana ey , row g[ ]Ir rna kyak Buddha tarley gab
0
kel , '
37. h[e]t k(i)r-irn gob ku tarley [Ana]n kat [gJo!) tarley Gawarh[pat]i
1 I
38. rmin abhipray kyak Buddha [t]arl[e]y I' ktir [lno]r kyak Buddha tarley
blab[ei] ,dna!) , , '
fJ
39. spa prakat abhipray kyak Buddha tarley gob t[u]n sman,row wo' i
tarla
40. [m]nor ei , risi rna imo' Bisnu go!) komkti ey Qik <;\el~ skandarh Qun
Sisit abhi- ' '
41. pray tarlagal~ ei emat=ta emat Gawampati row gob kurill risi BisnQ
I
go!) kurh da rna skandam ko-
- 42. mku kum • dnal~ go!) ei Gawampati bel) [a]r sum smiil Inbeb gal) row
wo' 'srnin de-
43; walaw yan abhipray kyak Buddha tarley ci beb dun na antol yan
I I
rna
flS}
44·,'irno' Bisnu rna jnok riddhi anubhaw [g]oQ 'Ikom ku ey eiQeb skandam
,
Q~
45· nSisitI Qey-_kal go!) ei ut c,le[y] sanranrisi'~Bis[n]u gob beb byapa-
46. [r] risi Bisnii gohc,leb sl<an[d]am<;lun'SiSitgoQ'blab seuti [nJorgob'
I I
Qey c,lUn A-" '
'47· rimaddanapur i Qel~ sdas gna smin Sri Tribhuwanadityadharnmaraja syuk
sasana kya- "
48. k Buddha tadey srnin dewataw \. <;ley kal sal1ran gna srnin Sri Tribhu-
I
wanadi- "
49· tyadharnmaraja go1.1 lab
I
c,ley saman pun lab
I
ku[rh]byapar kel ul'
ku ka-
So. I row gob kyak Buddha tarley kinkan ku tarley Gawalilpati [c,l]ey
I I
5 kal go/:i tadey Gawarilpati dun abhipray kyak Buddha [tJarley na
I.
anto-
52. I bla!) tadey ewindhyan toy tin ar Tawati'1 ut abhip[r]ay [kJyak
I I
" J Thet:eading may be kir-im, buta long vowel in an infix is quite abnormal (thesound rep,resemed
helllg prqb~blya short neutral vowel), and the mark in the i which would convert it into j is probably
merelyaccidental,andnotoriginal.

EPIGRAPHiA BIRMANICA [VOL•. t
t~rl[e]y
53' Buddhatarle[y] ei Gawampati guran kel smin In Itarley guran
I
54: kel srnin In bla~ tarle[y] cis tun ]etawanamahawihar ka phar
I 1
B
1. 10' nor go~ ci I kyakBuddha tarley-ar nirbban gey gun K[u]si-
nar [da] , ka pharD10['] nor kyak Buddha tarley nirbban '. tarley Ga-·
2.
3. wampatitu[nJ ti[n TJawat(i)n rnoy le~ tun da yan kantir gna smin
S I
Sr[i] -
4. Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja tarley ki[n]kal [b]oy bistar ku sml-
I
5. n In smin [d]ewataw kum rmin da , nor kyak Buddha tarley ar
I
ni[rJbba-
6. n\ kulirnoy Iii(i)m turow.klarn pi [ewJas enarn Iyan .isi rna imo' Bi-
4
7. snu go~ i sdas [g]l1a smin rnoy rna imo' Sri Tribhmvanadityadharnmaraja
·8. <:ley <:lUll Ari[rnJaddanapiir [yaJn sasaba kyak Buddhatarley ci gna
I I
9. srnin Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh rna syuk Iyan yas g[nJa
mul~~
10. srnin Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammarajagoi) ei ut jirnok Jambudip
I J. <:lei) sprakat I rn(i)r(gu)I.16 gna [sJmin. Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja
go[i)J.ci ro-
J
12. w bi[i)ey' ktim 'yan s(i)l(a)dharmrna8 durnhi[e ci gna smin Sri
Tribhuwanadi-
13. t[yJadharnrnaraja gOl,l seroi) ptaw ut dussi[l] ~a drnas 'rnarsa na 51[IJ
I
durhhi-
14. c rna ·dmas rnarrnal gol:t gna srnin Sri '[TJribhuwanadityadhammaraja
. , .
g~Th
15. splin duollut kayaduccarit wac(i)duecarit7 mal1oducca[rJit rna
16. Tribhuwan~ditya­
kal:t c-ab Ina s[iJl rna c-ab rna dmas gak gna smin Sri
dharnma-
17. raja gol:t skracduoll yan dewatft.w rna dun sum~up te[y]n~~
.18:·gumlon rna rap cir[cuJn dewataw lila tmuy na hajra, row [nJab pu(m)a
8
Sri
19. sanrail [kJum geb spasanrail gna smin Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja
1 Or inone word, kaphar, perhaps. 2 Seelast note. 3 Possibly Towati/i. 4 Possibly lnim.
6 The v~wels may possibly be i :lnd a re~pectively, and perhaps the t is doubled; butthis, though
normalafter rin Indianloanwords,isnot usual in nativewords.
6 Or in.two w"rds, sila dharmilla, or sil dharJ1lllla, but there is no virtimtJ visible.· The first vowel
may possibly be i, but i isnormal.
7 Conceivablywaciduccarit, butthe otheris more correct.
e Possiblypllpa orpuma.h, butthe text is probablyright: d. B41.

pART n] MON INSCRIPTIONS 97
'20. gob' ut [j]irnokr3.S'gna smin Sri Tribhuwanadityadhamm~raja g[oJb[cJi
!ZI. CyanJ ku[rh]lac rna dmas jir[IJa gob skab sak we! I yan sateru] rna
dmas grip
22. [sJumtum1gob ci:s[k]ab sak I <;feb sbistarrow rnahasamudra kuril ,
, [y]an purn(i)_J
23. c gna smin Sri Tribhuwanadityadharp.marajei gob ci pra~ [<;feb sJ<;fuk pHil
24. <Jun Ari[mJaddanapur gob [cJi kal satru bUrhruk gob <;feb sp[IJin
25. yan mnal.l kirkul[pJan ma taw <;fey Qun Arirnaddanapur mcr,[dJas jlu-
I
26. y [boy] sroaigan rna ar des e-an gob na yiryuk dirhatw(i)r
I S
27. gnasrnin Sr.Tribhuwanadityadharnmarajagob ei CprJas <;feb ta gol) sea-
J
28. s [t]i[n] <;fak <;feb slhin gey c;lull Arirnaddanapur to[n ,) yan rumba-
29. t nab [rnal~ak [n]or nab rumlos gUJ11lon na [punJ-ar
I 4
30~ [ti]r[t]uy Qa [rnoJytricit 5 ma drnas tey I gna smin 8d Tribhuwana-
31. d[i]tya[dh]ammara[ja] gob sjit duol I yan siritnornab rna aj[e]y
32. [pum]as gumlon na pun-ar tirtuy na karur;la ma dmas <;fak
I
33. sk[r]a[e dJuol , srnin dewataw yan gna sminSri Tribhuwanadi-
I
34. tyadha[m]rnaraja gob ci [nJa te[y] sturn skel'pu[n] (t)wan .ku rna
I 6
35·
[haJja[n] gurhlon na tey jwi skjl kr[iyJa glik.a[ntaJk ku [mJfiab
I
36. gurhl[on] ut rna[hJajan [cJi row kon rna tA[w p]<;fey eris a- ,
I
37. [rn]bo row gol:, gna sn-iin Sri Tribhuwanadityadhamrnaraja gob srnan
I
38. roe[y] na tirtuy ut rnnab rna (rng)ul) 7gurhl[0]n gna sroin Sri Tribhu-
I
wan[a}· '
39. dityadharnmaraja gob spa lu-i[n] [y]an mfiab rna [s]ak srnu(l:t) na ji·
I
40. rku na pan na pumas gna srniiiSri T[r]ibh~w~hadityadhammarajagob
spa (sumo)_8
41. [h], yan Qiksurhur [t)rus pu(rn)a9 saman gurhlon'ma 5ak tim [t]arla 1·
42• gna smin Sri T[r]ibhuwanadityadharnmarajagbD sguran kel tar[lJa [, y]an
43. tarley mahiifhe'r rnoy rna'no)n sil rna das sarathi dharmrna '
44· gol:t'ei , gn~ smin Sri Tribhuwanadityadharnrnaraja gob s[pa] su[t]u(rn)10
spa a-
45. car 4ey kanta tarley [m]aha[th]er Irnorn 5il rna das sarathi
I
J Or.sumtunl. 2 Possibly pum;-.
3 Conceivably wi". , .J Concei\'ably(but, ifso. incorrectly)pilll-tir.
6 Irregularspelling: d. G 41. 6 Conceivably h,ail. butsee D 49- '
7 Cf.B II., whereapparently thesubstantive delived from this adjective(?)occurs; unfortunarcly the
readingisdoubtfulinboth places.
8 Thereadingseems almostcertain. ~ Possiblyp"pa: seeB 18.
10 Thefinallettermay possiblybep.

t
98 EPIGRAPHfA BIRMANICA vOL
46. dharm[rn]a gOJ.l kum ,ko[mk]u tar[lJa ei ey seual:1 sasa[na] kya[k]
11
Buddha ta-
47. [rJle[yJ n[ow J gob ma gna smin SrI Trihhuwanadityadharnmaraja gob
s[gJab
48. [I] bna[bJ pa [dJumhie bnab pa d[uJrhhic I rO\\'goh rna gna smin Sri
Trihhu[waJnadityadha-
49. mmaraja gob s[diJndu hinton mahajan [gJUlilluil [u]t kukil yan
I
50. nal~ rna [k]?ap suril(u)r na kansap dUlilhi[c] gna sminSri Tribhuwana
2 I
ditya-
51. dharnrnaraja gob s(tu)Qen kel p[u]mas yan nab [m]a piha[r sum]ii-
I
52. rei gna s[mJiri [Sri] Tribhuwanadityadharn[m]araja goI~ s[·]or piha[r
d]um-
53. hi[e] yan tinlur [ti]nran [sJwar rna tmuy na thar [m]a cin[c]o[nJ. na
1
ra[tJ
54. [na] prajfia rna dma[s] t[e]y gna smiil SrI Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja
[g]ob
c
I. [s]jak pork k]d ku 3 (rnahajan gUmlOl1) .•....
[gna smiJ-.
2. n Sri Tribhu[w]anadityadham[rn]a[raja] (goQ) ..•..
·. . .
.
3. [w p]urnat gey Maha-A[wieW st)[r](ak) •" .. . . . .. . . . .....
. 4 ,
· . . . .
4. war yan sa[kJkar ut nab rna [t](awgey gun Arimaddanapur gOQ)
I r;
[gna smiJ-
5. n Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja go!) sdun . . . . . . . ......•.
(ro)-
• ••••• i
6. ''" gati di[nnal] thar rna n[i]n cinconku rat (gna) [srnin Sri Tribhmrana}
7. dityadharnrnaraja gob sci[nJl[oJ!) tumQaJ,l Ikon lwu[t sJm[inJ (gumlon
rna nom)
1 Thisstop is clearlysuperfluous and probably due to an error.
2 Orperhaps sutilur,whichseems to bethe more usual spelling.
3 Thest(1ne isbroken off hereand the wordsfollowing arc conjectural reHc,r'ltiOl1s. The sameapplies
tothe ends ofC 2-11.
4 Or possibly Awi.::i. Awic,or A-,,'ic. L.l\I. has A':.l'I'k. The next word is very doubtful.
b Thisrestoration isextremelydoubtful.

ip1lU. Birmanica No. I. VOLUME I, PLATE VI~
THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA, PAGAN.
C 0

PART.. II] MeN INSCRIPTIONS 99
8; tn,irmalrow minnalpkaw mlir rna norm] eirhay ro[w] (cirhay) [bJ-
I
9• ..ndar smin In ma imo' Alambusa gol~ ma stirwlli [nor dnll durh}
IQ.pol,lkon lwiit smill gurhloll rna gfii na rat rna kal,l mo[y praka}
It.,rmadindart(.Iun burhta[li] (rna) [stJI(u)n l tinY(i}P yari gna smill Sri
I
[T]r[ibhuwana}
~~. ditya.dhammaraja gal). s(dm)o[li <;l]ey sihasana rna ni[n kindam na]{
3
Ij; thar rna cincon ria rat s-anubhaw [cJ(i)r[h]ay [k]irmun '. kon [hrut smi)
5
'fL'li gutillon [m]a tIO,~ n[o]r eJuil [d]umpob [yari] <;liin Arima[ddalJapOr~.
J5: ma [n]om kya[k] §rl gob sp~ norm] ku ya(s) smiri dewa[ta]-
Ii I
:16!-'w I [<;l]e[yk]al [k]irmun gna smiil Sr[i] Tri[bh]uwanadityadham[m]araja
. [go!)] . •.... ' "
H. yan pnan [c]-a,ri rna jnok kurh ci yaEIJ gabbha tl[O]n )yan nimit ji-
18. mal). dumhicnak!?a[t du]mhic stlOrita gila smin Sri Tribhuwanaditya
dhamma..;"
~Ja Tribhuw~nadityadhrt[
'J9. 'raOa] gOQ gey kupcinleb g[ smili Sri mma]
I
20.. [r]aja[gJoQscl[iik 1 k!?Jel). pu(rh)rey [rno]y [m]a nom k[u] p(u)nras 9
8
.[ro]w
2r.k!?e!) [m]a das nor kirk[Ul] 10 mat bre[yJ scinlel). [cJ: [stJu(rh)[~JaJ~ n
ro[w t]ne-
22. [y]ma [tJaw kum smiri dewata,,' <;ley kal g[nJa smin SriTri[bh}m'a·
I I
23. na[dJity?-dhammaraja gol). sp~ kirmu[n mah]ajan [guril]lon ei sgni rna] ra
24-[tm)a ldlJ) m[oJy prakar ..)s[p]kanran [mJu(k)ut12 [s]u[kh]uy sirpu[i1]
25. rna kal). moy prakar [eiJ <;lel~ t[~Jel). strakgi[li]giii [yan] kr(a)_13
I
26. [yJa [ktoJr [m]a [a]di nor r[up] ci[ri] rOp[jad}i[s]in [rup] tro~ .
27;n [pJu[min rOp'n]ag rli[p s](u)[par 15 m]a kaQ [mo]y [prakJir ihJ~ [t]a
H
28. g[ JQ spkanran yan' [gJna ,s~inSrI Tri[bhJuwanadi[tJya[dhJamma-
0 I
. {r,}ama g[~JI:t .
1 Possiblystlvli. 11 Possiblyti.rwil.
3 tookslikesd~o;, butcanhardly be anythingbut sdmo'li.
" The ends of C 12-5 are restored from the replica (No. II).
5 Possibly ci,'uiy (\\'hich "auld be incorrect). .
e LOOksrather likeyarsooryalisa (words unknown tome), butprobablyyas is right.
7 II hass¢uk., ' '8 T.hetil isalmostcertain, but II appe:lrsto read pUI'ey.
t Thismightbeplillros (which would be incorrect); but II haspUllras.
10.1[ mayread kirkul:'the passageisdamaged. '. Il Thetit is almost certain. .
J2 ~~ookslike mUlitut, which isimpossible, but might benll/hkut,though t think thesuperscribed mark
,thatmightbetaken for nis accidental. .
13 Onewouldexpectkl'iyaorki,ya, but there is no traceofan i here. .
14 Thisreading i6confirmed by It, where the middleconsnn:tntiS,certainly m.
15 The readingisalmost certain. ' '

100 EPtGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL.
29. tnas tirtuy [s]irsu[k] u[t nJal:t [mJa [t]aw (ley Jamb[u]di[pj (SpU)_1
30. k [k]el nidhi pi [p]rakar (I naY' ru[p] ci ~¢.y (d)larh 3thar ro[,,' p]nan [m]a
31. (g)ir4 rgol:t [sc]inlol:t tU(Ih)bal~ & I smin dewaUiw I c;le[y kal] gna smin SrI
32• Tri[bh]u[w]a[na]dityadha[mm]araja gOQ skmun [I uJ~ [b}r[ow] gumlOll
~~j pu]n~[a]r
33. [eli s[tJarw] sil srl[o]s dhar[m]ma sn[om d[u)rhhi[e
s](ba)-S ' ,
34· [k]=f(i)[t]' han tarla slii c;lel) [sJ(d)a[s] row gO[l} lilt [m]ahajan [g]u[rh]-
35. Ion dus amb[o' a]mba lal~ dus [k]U(lh) [cimun8 y](o)w 9 1al) dues] i[mJa~
36. n [k]a[n]dar lal:t [du]s kalya~a[mJ(i)t sanay [rJu[~Jl[oJs Jal~ does] ran
10
sko-
37. ['J kurh [ku]m [cJ(i)U .c;l[eJl~ s[eJ(u)lo1:l tuqaQ.kel s~1[kJ sp(u)l'[l]uk19
12'
stni(c) ci-
38. r[-ab] (c;le1:l)H I [yJan [gnJa smi[n] Sri Tritihtnvanadityadha[rnm]araja
g[rnJon go(1:l)-
39. h u[tc;leyJ Ja[rn]budi[p fiJa!) guEmloIn seu[~]at [na t]r[e]jas lc;le~
40. [y] prasad rna sa[d]is [ro]w[Weja)'drttapr]asad Il1asga(p)15 ih(i)[n]16 ma
41. da[s] rnuku[tJ rat c;lun Ari[rnJaddana[pJo[r s](d)unI7 (r)i[n9]iikI8 pir[p]iti
kir[m]un '
42• ut b[rJow rna [taw] <;ley [9Jan Arimaddanapu[r go]l) c;lcl) t-eb
43. [sJnac.swas [s]alhpa[t] rup gna srnin [S]r[i] Tribhllwanadi[t]yadhamma
raja geb
44. [s](t)[a]w <;ley enis (rae c)[ro]k(p)[a](n pa)n y~Ul swas sa[m]pat[rnaJ ro- ,
19
45. [wJ w[o]' e[i dJlia[l) pap]u[n t]lar _(da)20 [go1:lma go']ge1:l [s]th[i]n
ro-
[k]~aQ
1 Theconceivablealternatives'are: for thepay.and for the ueitherior iti.
2 What 1have read I Ilalooksrather like sa. . 9 Thed isalmostcertain.
I Looks r~therlike,tir, butgil' isalmostcert!,-inlyright. '5 The~l is practicallycertain.
8 The reading is very doubtful here; for b there are possible_alternatives 111 Or C, or it may be an
m.
accidentalmark,orconc"alau; a dot overthe smaypeaccidental orstandfor In the last case the i
in thenextlinewouldhavetobe the initial ofthe following, notthe final of this.
7 Possiblythevowel is i. 8 Orin two words.cimUl1.
9 Conceivablythereading may be liaya~u, or (as the virama isnot certain)yowa.
10 Thelast-vowel mayconceivablybei. . 11 Apparentlyci;which is properlyspeltci.
a Thefirst vowel may conceivably(butimprobably, andcertainly wrongly) be Ii.
19 Thefirst vowel may perhaps beIi.which would be wrong.
11 There'seemsto bea trace ofan ehere. but therest isentirelyblurred; therestoration is pllrely con'
jecturalandverylikely quite wrO{1~. At theend thereisa mark which might be the trace ofa virama. in
which casetherestoration isof course untenable.though we might rcad¢eh or¢e(lll.
1'> Theviramaisnot clear. In Possibly llzii:. 17 The reading isalmost certain.
18 Almostcertain.though the initial mightconceivablybed.
n The four preceding wordsare r:lther damagedandthereading is doubtful; but itmakesgood sense
and is probably right. 20 What 1haveread damay be merelyastop.

MeN INSCRIPTIONS
PART II] 101
46. [w] go!:l ci ge!:l sgi[ngifi. aJr [I uJt [mahajanJ gurhlOli [cJi [st]aw
47. Qey dindu hi[ntoIn gna smin Sr[IJ Tri[bhJuwanadit[yJa[dhJam[m]ar[ajJa
•yan gna
48. smin Sri'Tri[hh]u[w]anadityadhammara[jJa [d]nah [sJ(d)ak nab [m]a
s[d]as sumo!). sturn-
49. [~]a!:l row dienila]1 thar tea) ma[ha]jan gurhlon Jan [QJuli A-
1 I
50. ri[mJaddanapur row [m]a ... ,
.2
tak (na) a[tnJa[k birsey p]an rgob
51. [d]a gna smin Sr[i] Tr[i]bhuwanadityadha[mm]a[rajaJ g[o]b [s]pa
(r)u(b)[iJn yan
4 I
52. k[o]~ smin gurnlon ci .. [saJrh[pat m]a [tinJt[enlgel) s[l]h[iJri de-
6
53. y gun Ari[mJaddanapur (yan) [gJu[rhJir [gJum[lo]n rna [IJm[0]-
I 6
54. [~J sil Qey [kaJI [satru] (burhr)u[k] gol). p[IJin[m]a sak
'1 8
D
I. n9 [bJihar kurhkurh I [nJaw[ir] gnas[m]in [SrI
J-
TJri[bhuwa
[nadityadhammaraja] go!:l' [Q]el). scow tun [Q]e[y biJhar (kurh ku]rn
2.
,3 go!:l sp(u)ng(u)k pu(m)pifi [5](i)1 19 yan ras
-.10 11 13 I
4, (twan gurhlo)n rna lin gna smin Sri Tribhuwa[nJadityadhamma-
14
5. [rajaJ (go!).) [s]tun ka[ndJam thi[cJ norturhlarwell [yJa[n gu]nA-
1 Conceivablytu or tna,butseeC r8.
II At thispointthere isa blurredspace (measuringabout three lettersof the original). It is possible
thatthere was heresomeshortword (such astJel,z),but more likelyitisan originnl flaw in the stone,which
appears to e.xtend through the next two lines (between tin.and diand c; andsati" respectively,though its
extension tothesecondlineis not certain,and ifthere was in C 50 a letter with a tail, such as thetJis{lell'
or a subscriptletter, the flaw neednot have beenan original one).
3 Lookslikeca. .
" Thedot inthebis probablyaccidental,theshape'oftheletter not beingquite circularenoughfor a q.
ConceIVably(butimprobably)the initialmight bed. '
. 0 Thisspaceis occupiedbya blurwhich'mayconceal someshort wordlikeku. Oritmightconceivably
have been na followed byan original flaw; orsomething else. '
8 A mark after 'Ya~lookinglikeastopthrowssomedoubt on thereadingbut mayhave been an original
flaw.
, 7 Thereiseither an original flaw between sa andtru, or(less probably) we must rcad some short word
likedabefore satru. ,
8 The first syllable is S(1 badly bhlrred as to be quite uncertain, but ef. D24 and E 35, Th~ Willk
taken for oil maybeaccidental. Conceivably (but improbably) we might read dinsteOld of r.
9 ~hestone i:;:broken off and the beginnings ofthelincs, down toD 14inclusive,are imperfect andthe
restorations conjectuml.
10 There is a mark here, which is probably an 1',and possibly we might restore the wordgttti,ir.
11 Thefirst vowel mayconceivably (but it,lcorrectly) be 11,thesecond may possiblybe 11.
m
12 The is doubtful, IS Possibly silo
14 Possiblyweshould restore twoiItJlin: ef. G 31,
14

IO~ ·EPIGRAPHIA BIRl\fANICA [VOL. t
[rimadda~aplur
6.' go!) sisubhi[kls[k]al)ts]a[k]u[p]adro[wlI 'ut ma(-)
7. (nus Irna t~)w[c;l]eY4n[n] Afimaddanapuf g[oblko[m] .
8. (kugna)1 sinh\ Srirribhc~anadityadhammara[j]a syas'[n]a.[r]iddhi
9•••. 4[e]1). sw[e]irakusalaka[r]mmapatha cas [sp]u[n]-
8 I
10. (c;luk] pu(m)pifi [kJusalakatiJmmapatha cas' yan rYa[n]u[s]
4
1.1. [gumJ1[o]n c;leyk~l g[n]a smin'Sri [TJribhuwanaditya-
I!.!. [dhammaJraja gob k[mJun c;leb sjnok [~Jiddhi row de[w]a
13.1taw] kum' [yJan c;l~n Arima~da[n]a[p]u!Jm]a-das.[tJir­
14. [t]a[w g]na [sJmin Sri [TJribhuwanadityadhammaraja gob
15... ci sg(u)[i]r tinhir~a.ratna t~e[y] yan gnasIlli-
6 6 I
16. n SriTribhuwa[nJadityadhammaraja go[b] spr[ath]a[n]a
17. [m]ie sabbafiutafian ut nabs ma taw <le[yJ
'1 I
18. [c;luJn Arimadda[nJapur gob kom ku gna sminSri Tri-
19. [bliu]wanadityadham~araja [srJjuft [th]i[e c;l]ey ra[tJna tre-
yl spa pujaw iey p[ureyJ srlos kyak
20.
21. Buddha tar[lJeysaddharmma [k]u{t]arley san[gh]a[gJum-
9
lon' [yJan nab rna i[e]y purey ratna t[rey]
22.
23. CmJa [kJujib saddharmma [moJy sift[k]o'k[u] dewata[w] g[Um]-IO
24. Ion ku[rh] ci,c;leb s[gJulan , dewat[a]w gum[lon cisJg[uJ-
25. man ku manus well dewat[a]w [g]umlon [eli s[koJ- .. .
[mJku manus [c;lJeb spa [s]anran gna sminSri Tri[bhuwaJna-
26;
27. di[t]yadhammaraja [glob ' c;leyk[aJl kirmu[nJgnasmin
28. S[r]ITribh[u]wa[n]adit[yJa.dha[m]maraja gob [yJan [c;lJuil Ari-
I
29. [m]addana[p]fir madas kantir kyak[sJr[i] e[r]ih[ay] g[o]b
30. [sr](b)in [pha]t [tJi[mn]a satru gum[l1on [eli saCk s]das kusiw
11 1
3i. (rail I) u[t].kir[kfilJ pa[o] rna t[aw c;le]y c;lfi[nJ A-
32. ri[m]adda[nJapfir go[b] stg[etJthee sdas u[paJs kyak Bu-
1. Another possiblerestoration is mahajan,though thereseemstobe scarcelyroom for,it,
S Conjecturalbut practicallycertain. . 8 Restorekutit or Iyaiz, perhaps.
4 Thetit isverydoubtful indeed.
6 Thereisa more orlessbl.urredspace here ofthesizeindicated,probablydue to a flaw which runs
aa•
throughseveralofthe precedinglines;or possiblythere may havebeensome shortword, suchas
.tl TheItseemsverydoubtful and is not strictlynecessary,though quite possible.
au.
7 Thereisa flaw here(which maybe original),inshapesomethinglike
B Beforemathere isanother flaw,andthespacingseemsto indicatethat it is original.
9 Herethere isa flaw, of thesize of about two lettersof the original. Itwasprobably an original
flaw, for it extendsto the nextline,occupyingthe spaceofaletter betweeni and e. Theonly alternative
istosupposethat a word containinga letterwith atail (ora subscriptletter) islostin DZI; butnoneis
needed,andtheonewhichwouldseem mostappropriate,vit. kom, doesnotfulfil theconditions.
10 Conceivably (but mostimprobably) giiti,-. 11 Cf. C51.

PARt II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 103
Sri
33. ddha ta[dey] ku [dhJar[m]ma[sJanfgh]a yan [gnJasmin [T]r[iJ-
I
34. bhu[w)anadi[ty]adhaminara[j]agob scuti nor dirdas goQ.
35..
sdunswas sam[pJa[tJdewata[wmJatlusma Un}ok ~[~}
36.Y riD·ut dirda.s [u]tsat ma,Ca]r [apay] pa·
37. [n ci) sy~(k .nJor apa[y pJan gob utl[o)k
1 I II
38. [g)urbo[n] komsku dewat[aw]':lla[tJinl(u)m [q.]ey
4
39. [s]ansar tlla dinars m]a[hasJamudra6[mJa [kJal). saCkc]i[n]ruk
8
40. (t]i[1]~roJk7 gol). (lJ sp4uk 4[e]y saddha[r]mma8 met [dm]a[s]
4i.[k~Jan j[u]m[no]k stulun [4Jey [cni)s nirhban [pJu(m)rey semi}
I
42~'n dewa[t]aw row gol).da kya[k] Buddha [t]a[rlJe(y mJa dma-
I
43. s [k](a)J!tu gOl). hyades gna smin Sri Tribhuwanaditya(~h]a[mm]a-
9
44. raja [IJmom pun gOQ [sJmin d[ewJa[taw] kum r(mJi[rlweJl
I I
45. [pihJar c-en gam [<;l]ey kat kir[mJun gna smin [Sr]i (TrJi-
I
46. bhu[w]a[n]adityad-hammaraja [go]~ ptis[t~Jan pkaw sac=chuguri1[lo]-
I
47. (n]sgl[o]n [ph]ar I[mJa[nu]s dmuk ma [s]j(i)n10 [nJa 5g[0]' pil[n] (1)11 g1i·
48. kkuJij spkan.ra[n] kri[y]a thaI glik k[oJser sea- .
49. sin cnak sutDwat rna ekat catwan ku sinl[emJ ta
I III
1 ut
50: gol). ci [sJt[g]in.[cJi[t thee rowi'1al). pju [kJu[rh] rut[uJ
I
51. cisak skuli kal'4ebkum kum (1)13 ut smi[nJ gum-
52. lonnorQ:Opkum kti"m sran..tllintumway jumwi
14
53.•,n[m]a [k]cib(moJy p[r]ak[aJr l'Ut ji[r]nok ras
54. [gJna [s]miil Sri [T]ribhuwa[n]a.dityadhamma~aja gol). ci klam ~a-
. .1 Hereeither 11; inserts a shortword, illegible butapparently ending in t orI!: .itmightbenuk, II to
takeout of."_ Or, more probably, the brokenletter is merelythe k.of syuiandthere W<l-S a bigoriginal
~~~~& . . .
11 Between 0 and k ther~ is an'originalfhiw; 11seemstoread .lok. .
SHere11may have insertedsomething,nowillegible; possiblykumanus. Or, .more probably, there
wasa verybigOriginal flaw.
4 Conceivably,butmostimprobably,thelAstvowel maybeii. 11seems to sUPPC)I'tthetext.
5 Here,asin thelastline,II has a blurredspaceof thesize:ofihree or:four letters ofthe original.
e Here theoriginal has what appears to bean original flaw shaped likean ,.. 11 appears to read
merelymakatz•.
7 Looksrathedike tuil~ok,but II has notrace ofany u..
.8 ,Here again 11 has a blurred space, of the size of some three or four letters of the original;
probably partofthesameoriginal flaw that al'pears toaffecttheprecedinglines. .
~ Possibly,butimprobably, kintu.
10 The'readingappears tobe\vithi,but 11 hasi.
11 Thisstop isdoubtful: itis toocloseto theg andrather too high up. II isb"dly damaged here,but
seemsto haveno traceofa stop,and none seems to beneeded. .
12 Theoirtima isdamagedand mightconceivably,though improbably,havebeenan allusvarfJ.
13'The stop isquitedear in 11. .
14 Theremaypossiblybean titbeforethe lIt,butthatwould bequite unusual InR.M. spelling, and as
II hasnothingof the sortthe mark is probablymerelyaccidental. .

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VPL. i
E
r c[w]a[s lJeb brey s[glur [u]t [k]u [kal s]r[o'] s<;l(u)k pi[ii]
I. I J I
[<;ley] ras [gn]asmi[il Sri Tribhuw]anad[ity]adha[mm]ara[j]a gob ci
2.
3. sm[i]il dewataw [sglo](il) [c](i)[il kl?Jeb [preil] (j)[lo]w [c]lik ba[b]e-
I
4. ' tyaill [kon s]miil[k]o[n iiJab [jnok gumlo]n [yail]
S
5. [k]ri[Ya puwin <;lel)] t-eb [cJi [thJar s[r]a[fl c]o[m I]yailmnab [gu]m-
6. [loil m]a [kJab r[b](i)[n timJail ci [<;lJe[l) toeJb [sJpa timail (p)irnik
4 Ii
7. [ktor ci]n s[il]i [<;leb t-eb ci skurnir k]u [cl]a[kJcom gna sm[iJn [Sri]
I
8. [Tribhuw]a[nJad[ityJa[dhJa[rnrnJa[ra]ja g[o]b [eiJ sisugib na~ gu[mJloil
9. (sa)[i1]6 (ar)[iJ(y) [dumpol) prJa[k]ar s[cJurob kel dharmrna rna [dJrnas
[pJk[aJw spa [rnJal na sil [mJa d[rn]as [rnJi[rrnJal sm[i]i1 de[w]a[tawJ
10. I
dap
trie[y k]a[l gn]a [smJin Sri lTr]i[bhuJwanadityadharnrnaraja gob di
I I.
L
ndubi]nton ma[haj]an [gJuml[oil] [y]a[ri binrJu anurnodana b[i]-
12. I
[3 n[ru tirhinJ kirsab bimu sadhu[kar rnJa [rn]ah[a]jan guml[o]n spa [ciJ
7
14. [row bJinru [bJre[y] jum[nok (JeyJ kal tir<;ley [b){i)r[tJam8 k[um]
15. [rnJaha[j]an gum[l]oil sgnisucar[it lJum[1}Jac rna [drnJa[s kr]iya
I
16. [d1lmhic] s[l]hiil <;ley sad[dhJar[rnrnJa I [yJa[ilJ nab rna [an diiat] gum-
[10]-
17. [i1 cJi [st](u)[n] glo[il dJna[tJ nab rna linlas [gurilloil] <;leb stir
9
18. (Mo)['] nab [rnJa j[rJa[y guml]oil skro[' well] nab rna a[n]
10 I
19. [yi]ryuk dirhat [g]uml[0]i1 snorn yiryu[k] d[i]r[h]at , [yJail flab
[rn]a [k]ab [jJikpta[m gu]mloil [c]i spupin (pu)[nd]uy juram [n]a sro-
20. 11
sro' yow [m]a [kJab [rnaJy pra[kJa[r] j[ap] j[a](p)13 sni nab ta
21. ' IS I
gob sisgib [ph]a[r nla rat yan bro[w pDu rna duCk] rna syo' tum1}a
22. I
23· [y] lami gum[lo]n ku[mJ na gir[go], [i1]us [rn]a [glo]n <;leb t-eb si-
1 Conceivably,but improbably,srJi1k. .
1I The readingisprobablyjtowasin E24, notglow,though thelatterisconceivable.
3 Thereare marks herewhich mightbetracesofastop (ora short particle>; butthis would makethe
spacingverycramped,andprobablythey are merelyaccidental.
4 Conceivably (butimprobably)rbin. Cf, C 5[, D 30. 6 Theinitial mayconceivablybe m ors.
6 Between saand it there isan original Rawshaped somethinglike rw.
7 A mark here,whichat first inclinedme toread spa,isalmostcertainlyaccidental.
8 Apparentlytheoriginalreads birtam,but the properspellingiscertainlybirtati1. ~ OrstUtz.
10 The reading is extremely doubtful, all the impressions being bad here and the stone apparently
damaged. The initial might be Ii orj,and the 5ubscriptjor II. That there isa subscript letter is shown
bythespacebetween yiand ryukin the.next line. .11 Conceivably (but improbably) prtndiiy.
19 The'Oirama is broken and might havebeen an allttS'IItira,butthe reading seemscertain.
13 The word looks like jam, but either the In is a mistake for p (lr the cross bar is accidental or
wasadded laterby some defacer.

Birmanica No. I. VOLUME I, PI.ATH VIL
THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZICON PAGODA, PAGAN.
E F
2
2
4
4
6
'6
8
8
10
10
12
12
14
.14
16
16
18
i8
20
22
.22 24
.24 26
28
.26
30
.28
32
30
34
·32
36
·34 38
.36
40
.38 42
-40
-42

PART- II] MON iNSC1UPTIONS 1°5
24, s[g]ib ' nab rna an d[i]k sglon dik 1- [n]ab rnaanjlo[w] e[i sg]lon [j]low
25. , yan dharmma tiltol [k](i)r[k]UI pan 'stge[t] thi[e] ut nab rna
I I
26. [t]aw ~ey ras g[n]a [s]m[i]n S[r]i Tri[bhu[wart[a]dityadharnrnaraja gob
skab
27. sakbhey skab [s]aJk] upadrow [u]t flab' [~]Un Ari[rn]addanapUr,
I
28. korn ku gna srnin Sr[i] Tribhuwanadityadhamrnaraja gob oi sjlin a-
29. yUk [y]an [guJrnir par.l(~[i]tgumlon [rn]a n~c tirtiiy rinti-
I
30. n dum[h]ic s[u]m[u]r [t]a gob [rn]a[drn]as rnatg[nJasrnin Sri T[rJibhu
wanaditya-
31. dharnrnara[j]a gob ~ar yan [mnJabrna [nJom kirk(ii)[P gU]rhlon [in]a
J
s[t]ri-
32. [wJi[1 gJna [smin] Sri Tribh[uJwana[dJityadhammaraja gob 1 yan [fi]ab
33. rwas [m]a [~oli] ma kab [mo]y.IIi(i)m ag[irl]on
I
[yJan ras jana[pJad
4 _
34. gna smin Sri Tribhuwa[naJdityadhammaraja glob mJa {n]ab surhur
6
'[gJu.rhlo-
35. [IiJ b(uru)[k]61att <;lun ra[sJ smiil [c)-ali [lJatt <;lett spa lukow[tJe-
36. [y t]u[yJ sj(i)n ker[k]u gna smih Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja
1 I
37. yan [goaJ smi[Ii SrJi T[r]i[bhu]wa[na]dityadha[mm]araja [goJl;1 st~a[l]
til-
38,_ [tol] smi[n pJora[n g]urh[lJo[n] nor mukha[wJar gna smin Sri
I
39. Tr[iJbhuwanadityadha[mm]araja [g]ob abhipr[ay] ma (kc)um8 ku
dharmma
40. [com mJa sm. [y]an fial;1 [mJa lp]a dilk mnal;1 [gumloIn ci staw
41. <;ley s[iJll yarn p]raj[nJa [mJa imo[' sJa[rJa[s]wa[ti] g[oJl;t staw <;le-
42. [y] -m[ukhJa[wJar[gn]a [sJmi[n Sri TribhuwJanadityadha[mm]ar[aJja
gob u· ' ,
43. [t ku k]all smin dewa[taw]I [q]ey Qii[n Ar]i[rnJaddanapiir rna
F
I. [lmom kyJa[k §ri crihaygoJl;1 Cyan ki] .... 9 [rn]a [c<;lJ(al;1) 10 [nor]
(d)[ilaJri [buJ(rh)[hokJ gOD g[n]a s[min SJr[i TriJbhu[w]a[nadityJa[dhJa
2.
1 Perhapski1'kM,as itshould be. 2 Very possibly kirkul. 3 Perhapslhim. ,
4 Possiblyjanapada, for the vir'iillla isnot certainly visible. However, the L~r. form is jallal;t Pl;id
in,the Man AkkllaravidlulIIa of the Abhidhiinappadipika (Pak Lat, A. Bud. 2453).
5 Perhaps$ltmiiy. 6 Possiblybuyii~. 7 Possibly sj'ill.
8 The first letter might be t; thesecond maybe m.
9 The illegible word appears to have two medial consonants and may end in1'; it looks rather like
!inti",which seemsunsuitable here. 10 Almostcertain. .

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. f
106'
3. [mm]a[raiJa [gott].sd[i]ndu lb~nton smi[n] 'de[w]ata[w row]gob{yo]
I
4. Cut] Q[e]y sanran1 gna smi[n Sri] Tribhuwa[naJdi[t]ya[dh]a[rilm]ar~~
5. ja gol.ldna(I:tJ spunyuk pumas ku[.il] ci [prJa[n]a[n.p~]a[n]a[n] ery],
6. pi[h]ar kel ku kurn or3·kum [mirn](a)s4 [I]albwitJ [sm]i[n del"
II I
7. [w]a[ta]w6 ta goa smin SrI Tribhuwa[n]adit[y]a[dh]a[mm]a[raj];i [gob]
8. k[om] ku pa[rJisat ku[rn] cr[o]b [ptaw jJti)[rban]8 [kaI] (~)[noJ- .
I
9. [r e]i r[ow] k~I [t]u[rnl]a[r k]um [kJum [p]a [sumohJ7 •[sniin] dewa[ta}
[w kum] kok Ka[tJaka[rmm]anaga[rajJa [ei ku~ gab ro]w[wo}
10.
['J [haJy smin nag(a) jumn[o]k [wJ(i)r (1)11 j[urn]o[ok r]id[dh]i
II. I 8 9 10
[anuJ-
bhaw [tiJrla drabya tirta[w kJya[k sriJ1d[n]a[lj st]u[nJlll t[umis]a[saJ-
12.
13. [u]a [kyak] Buddha tarle[y] c(i) [k]urn [p]a [bi](r)[boJy [p]iha[r
13 14
tarle]- .
14. [y G]awarhpa[tJi yan gun [SJi[sit goJb or tawl[n](irn)15 [bJa[fJ '
I
15. [klJarn [cJna[mJ blal;1 gob kat gna smin Sri Tribhuwanadi[tyJa[dh]a-
I
~~
. . -
,
,
16. [rajJas[p]a kirmuuQey Ta[tt]ades [utJras:g[n]a smij} [Sri]'
17. [TribhuJwa[n]a[dJityadham[mJaraja (QJeytum~in [lurh~Jii(b)'c[i] row
18. [IJu(m)[\>ar] ch[u] gurnlo~ mat[ink]um sp[u]nQuk [pu](rn)[p]ifi11
111
'ke[IJI' ", . '.' .
19. tar[l]e[y] 18 Gawam[pJati[gJab ku [s]min Inro[w] g[oJb [kal]
I
1 II hassillYaiz. II Conceivablykum.
a There isa faint mark herewhich mightbetaken fora stop. but is certainlynot one ~ it would make
I.hespacingtoo cramped; II (which.'Itowever. is by no means clearhere) has nothing. and a stop wouldbe
outof placesyntactically. . .
,I There isafaint markherewhich,maybethetraceofan e. makingthe word mimes. butitis probably
.accidental. Thespacingcan beaccounted for bythe longtail ofthe" inkumof F 5. . ,
6 Here begins a.Iong original flaw which extends to F II and has caused gaps in the spacing as
follows: F 7,betweenUl and'W; F 8,between kOn! and kll'; F9. between ,-0and w; F 16, betweenkum
and ko~; F n, between httand y . ' ,
6 L n o . okslikeji,lll'iII.butthestrokeinthei maybeaccidental.
7 which (asusual) isby nomeansclear, may perhaps have SUIIlO('. be
~ II has mig. In our text there isno virama visible. buta blur which may perhaps the remains of
one. Ofcourse eitherform is possible(cr.swarga'andsway); the modernlanguagewriteslIlik.
9 II hasjUlIlllok (both times iii thisline).
10 Thevowel is perhapsdoubtful in our text, but II has wiydistinctly.
11 AfterWtYour text hasa markwhichmay beastop. But II hasnothing here.
1Z II may have strill.
is
J3 A mark across thei probablyaccidentai. notintended for i.
14 There ii 110 Y.visible in our text. which is,blurred here, but II seem's to' have a trace of one',
and the word iselsewherespeli withone.
15 A mark here (resembling"witha viYiima) mustbeaccidental.
16 II seemsto Ilave spr'"({liJ. . 17 II seems to have.the ri,. 19. 1-1 rnay have tirley.

PART II] MCN INSCRIPTIONS 107
2~. [go]~ [s]min In ga~ row woo , [l~]ac [t]arlae[y Q](i)k (da)
J II
[m]a spa [p]ti[m]an Qey Tattades[go]~ [m]a [d]a[s] tir[t]aw [gn]a [smi}
21.
[n] Sri Tribhuwanadityadhamma[r]aja yan [s]a[t]r{u) [tinm]a [m]a
22. 3 I 4
. [stl](U)_6
23. il ey [k.]u[rh] da [m]aspd[p]w·duo[lJ [ya]n a(ta)s QU[ngol)J
I 5 7
2"4. [m]a [sg](u)[t]8 ar ey [k]um rna spa.[prakJa[t tun] r u[tQ]e[yJ
25. sanrailgna sm[in Sri T]ribhu[ ]:l[nad]i[tyadh]ammar[aJja [gJo~ ci e[yJ
W 9
26. kum da rna sbyaparu[t k]u ka[IJ [eJy ske[l]wa[r](wel)
I
27. [tJna[s mu]nmar gna smin Sr[i TriJbhu[wJa[nJa[d]it[yJadhammara]a llna
ta}
28. wQey dharmma gol) m[w go]~ gna [sJm[iJn l[nJ dun [b]lal) [t]a[rle)-
1 10
29. y [G]awampati cis tun [hJa[nmJa[nu]ssalok Earsum risiJ
I JJ
30. [mJa rimJo[' BiJsnu dumon tarl[eJy risi Bis[nu go~] QeEy a]
3 [s s]umlu[n tuyJ ga~ [row wo'J [beJ~ ci [s]k[ kom kuJ
I. I. 0'
32: [eJy ku [smiJn111 [In kJu [KJa[t]a[kJa[rmm]a[n]a[g]ara[jJa [ku BissukJa-
[rmmade]-
33.[wapurta
13
sJk~mda[m] <;Iu[n m]a [imo]' Si[sit]
I
[mnoJr{nJor [gal) Qe}
34.
[y T]a[tJtade[s Q]e[y Qu]n [ArJimadda[nJa[pii]r ta[rley sdas]
35. [gnJa [smin] Sri Tri[bh]u[w]a[n]a[d]it[y]adha[mm]a[r]a[jJa [bIJa[~l ci
[s]y(u)k [sasa}
14
36. [n]a [kyJak Bu[d]dha [t]arle[y] trow goJ~ [m]a16 [kJy[ak BuddhJa
I
[t]a[rle]-
37. y [bJy[a]de[s] ta[rley dnal) g[oJ~ cO) ey ac ha[n t]a[rle]-
16 I] 17
38. y tarle[y] du[n riJr-a[c ey] da lat. pa [cJit [c-Jarn yaJ-
I 18 I
39. [il] sanrail jurimok rna go[rJ tar[IJe[y s]pa c[i nomJ [ya]-
I
40. il pumic rna [tJarle[y] mic [ci] jnok dnal) na sda[s] kya[k cij
I
tar[lJey pa sarhbhar weI rut] sa[t gu]rillon Qe[l) scm}
41. I
J Ordil!; but II apparently hasthe i. 2 II apparentiy also hasda.
3.II may havea viriima here. 4 Conceivably,atrft.
6 II hasthestlquiteclear;butitsvowel may possiblybefl.
e LookslikeyUhJ probablybyaccident,asIIshows.
7 The bracketedwordsattheendsof F 23-5. 27~30. 33,35,and 37'9are confirmed byII.
S The vpwel maybeu. n (whichis not clearhere)probablyhas Ii.
s II seemsto havea viriima herp., 10·Here II insertsastop.
11 II hasno stop here. 12 Conceivablysmih.
13 A mistakeforwapltt,the·superscriptr havingbeen wronglyput for the virli1lla. See A32,
14 Conceivably,but improbably, syiik. lj II has mao
Ie II seemsto have firley. ·17 Conceivably, but improbably,ci.
18 Asmallflaw betweendiiand Ii isaooarentlv ori~inal,as there isan abnorQ1al spacethere.

108 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
42. [k s]umc;l(i)[n p]un [tJa[rlJey c[i] c;lerys[c;I](u)[k pi]fi ut pu[mi]-
J 9
43. [c] {m)un:3 san da I dnary (g]oQ rei] 4 tar[IJe[y] r[iJsi [jJum[nok] c;I[e]-
o
1. Y[d]i[rd]a[s p]i [pi] I[el~ tun] (ei) [t]a[rley easi]n [crJihay k[irmu}
2. [n] da [I t]arley [1]a[!.J kc;las m]le' [eriJha[y kJi[rm](u)[nJ5 g[o]ry
I
[mnJor [ei]
3. c;le[y] dirda[s pi pi] le[l) t]u[n t]a[rleyJ sdas [s]min [dh]ar[m]mara[jJa
I
ge~
4. [y kal tarley] 6 da[s smin dh]ar[mmJa[rajJa [go]!) [ci kyak §ri t](a)-'1
5. [rJle[y8 sjJ(nok) [phar] [c;leJy [sthJa[n] (ma) 9 [t]a[rl]e[y] (kuta)10 [ei
I
uJt [tiJ-
6. [nmJa sat[ru gumloil sak] sda[s t]u[taw tJarle[y scinl]o[!) t](u)[m~]a[!)]
1 JJ
7. r[ow] tile[y] c)[ey s]a[r]a[d]a [k]a[112 mJa [t]a[w c;ley kJa[lJkir[m](u)
I
[n tJa-
13
8. rIe[y c]i (yail) [swas sampJat [c;ley ti jnok wo], ci sad[isJ
14
9. [row] swas [sJa[m]pa[tswarmle]\:1[' yantrus]b[rowsumJwa[t] guml[o}
[n]ci s[jJli[ilJ a[yuk sk]aJ~ sak anje[y] (gwip)15 [we]l [mJaha[j]an gum
10. I
[Ion] ci s[k]a!) saCk bhey sk]a!)' [s]ak [upJad[row] [c;le]1) [sea18 hap]
I I. I
e(a)_17
12. r[n]a::r[h]a[p18 mJa [gJlo[n c;I]e!) [sJlh(i)[nI9 su]k I [c;le]y r[as tJar[lJey
[c](i) [bre]-
20
1 Possibly sum¢iil. 2 Conceivably, but improbably,s¢iik. :3 ConceivablyPU11, butcf. H 17.
4 Apparently there isan originalflalll here, of thesize ofa small letter.
5 Conceivably,but improbably,kinllun.
8 Apparentlythere isan original flaw here.ofthe sizeofa smallletter. 7 PossiblyU-.
8 Between rleandy there is a small original flaw.
9 Theletterisnotclear.it mightbepa orparit.butthesenseseemsto require rna.
10 The readingis very doubtful.but theconsonants mustbek or t, though the vowels may beu and a,
or uand:t, possibly.
11 The reading is certainly as given, unless the secondstroke of the it is accidental, but the proper
spelling is tuthbaf1. .
l~ Or in cne word,sizradahil. 13 Perhapski1'1llltfi, as II seemstohave.
11 There washerea word0: one syllable, ending (a?p:\r~lltly)in :i (or ';~1'). The first partlooks <1S:!it
might have beenya, l:aor/>,i, but isbroken and very dOUbtful.
15 Or6,,!jm? II distinctly has Lhe ';(1 andseems to have the finalp.
16 There isa markhere which might be taken for11supersc'ript r, but II has nothing of thesort.
17
II has d-.
18
The r is·superscript over the 11 and isdifficult to justify, either orthographicallyor morphologically.
unless due to the Y in the preceding word.with which thisrenlly forms·asort ofcompound.
]g Possibly slhiiJ. :lO Possiblyci.

JMON
PART II INSCRJPTIONS . 1°9
[y
13. sgJii[r] klarh [~]a[rl cw]as lei) tii[nj u[t] ra[s t](i)2 ["nnok fwo']
14. [k]u[m]st(i)t 3 [I pJuLndii]y [iuJra['llJ g[uJril[lo]:". ei spin [uJt [n]a
[dr]ap rgum]-
15. [loJn I rle[y rJa[s tJa[r]ley e[i utJ :';(11) [m]a miechad[rJi[s guJrh-
16. llo}1 ci [s]das sali1[ma]dris Cut] [uJt gumir gumloll [eli [s<;luJk
4 I
Ij. [pin na 511] ku [pJa[tipJa[t d]urhh[ic] I Cult [b]uli1[n]abgu[rhlJo[il mJa
[gr]a-
18. [nJ (b)[eJd6 lei c,IJe/:! t-e[b s]pu[n]9[ukJ pu(m)p[in1 8 ut dhar[m]ma
[b](u)[mn]ab [IJ ut -
7
19. [smin gumloJ1\ ei sp[-Jar dha[rmm]a w[eJII yail kirk[iil pan]'; ci Qeb
20. [t-e]I.1 s[p]unQlIk pu(rh)pin9 dha[rm]ma gel,1 t·eb kllrh ku[m] I L1[t) q[e1y
stha- ..-,
21. [n ci sabh]awt\\'os eirmat golf spr[aJka[t] I [tJarley risi
(yaJl) [5a]bhaw [t]\\"05. cir[mJa[t gn]a smin [dh]a(r)[mm]araja [mJa
22. 10
[n]om kyak
[§ri m]a d[mJa[s t]umball (sa) stl(ii)n I2 [go]b spra[kJat [ka]l gob
23. II
riCsJi
24. [ma imo'J Bi[s]nu g[oD n]a kirjeb [ci d]iin [kJe[t plei)ha[r] tarle-
13
25. [y Gawamp]a[t](i)therH th[ee]ta[rJley [m]nor ei qe[y T]atta[de}'
I
26. [5 c.ley] ~[11]r'1 ArifmJaddana[pl1]r ley kJum [d]a[mJa sda[s g]na [sJmin
. [m]oy .
27. [ma imoJ' Sri Tri[bhJuwanaditya[dhJa[mmJa[rJaja [lJ yaJ'. JlI[i1 tey fiJab
28. . rei] ey kum [k]um [mJa st~all sa[sJana kya[kJ Buddha [tJarIe'y
16
ma di-
1 There is all original flaw belween qli and r which affects the two following lines also (between du
andy, and ,leyand "is,respectively), But part of the wide spacing in k,ir is due to lhe subscript I of gloli
in G n. .
~ Conceivably.but improbably, ti. 3 Conceivablystit.
~ The'IIir,ilila here,probably owing to accidental damage, looks r;jther like a superscript r. Uut I
know ofno word uda,and the reading Itt seems fairly certain.
. Most probablyb(as in bajra, bihar). though conceivably it might be a very broad :~. The 1..\\1,
~m~~~ .'
6 The th isextremelydoubtful. 7 Conceivably, but impr~bably,the first \'uwel m:,y be Ii.
S Accidental damage h<1S made thislook likePUll. butcf. D 31. 9 Themis very doubtful.
10 1doubt if there isa stiper~cript r atall in this word, but it is usuallyspelt as a1>')ve, excc{-'l wllen
part ofthe king's riame. hi which case the form with dlwmmo IS used.
11 Looks like lla. or sa. Probablythe latter is right, though tht: point remainsdoubtful.
12 Conceivably, but improbably, st/1/1i. . 13 Conceivably, but very impr.Jbably,pilliir.
I, Conceivably,btlt very improbably,Ga:catilpatither.
L There are trace~ uf three leiters here: the first looks likep.or Ill, or perhaps s, thesecond seemsto
havebeen s,and the last wa3 t or possiblyk. Vowel marlts (ifany) art doubtf'll. Probablr the lost word,
or phrase, helped to define;: the lial, in th~ precedingline.
I:)

110 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. [
29. . . .] {ci] e[y kJurh ma [syuk] [mJaha[jJan gurhlOli ci [e]y s·or [m]a-
I
30. [il siP s]-[oJr p-ar dharmma brow'rna [p-Jar pun-[a]r surhur gol:t
I
3i. [ey s-Jo[!,] p-a[rp]un-ar tlu[rhhJic
I
d[ukJup ras [twan QuJn asurh-
32• [wat gurhlon mJa [liJfi ey k[urh dJa [mJa [s]tu[n]4 pa pra[k]at
I
[y]a[n]
33. [sil](a)dha[rrnm]a [du]mh[iJe ei e[y ku]rh [mJa[s-or] er[oJI~ p[ta]w
6 I
e[y] sda- •
34- [5 tuJrh[bJa[n asJa[bhJa [pn]an [mJa[hJa[j]an [gJuml[oJn [IJ'tar[leJy
[riJsi [gJab
35· [row gob blJaJ,1 tardeJy Gawa[rhJpa[tiJther kom ku tarley
36. [risi BisJnu jumnok [goJb 5c;l[ik mlik tJuy [uJt beyJades kyak
6 7
37. [BuJd[dhJatarley tarley Ga",ampat[i] gura[n keJI bla'~ Idnal:t maha
38. [j]an gum[IJon sgo' swar nirbban [ciJ tarIe[yJ ar gingifi
39. [dJa [mnJor [nJor gob [ei] smi[n In eJis [nJor [TJa[wJatin ar surh
1
40. [tJarle[yJ risi Bis[nuJ gal) roewJ wo['J tar[IeyJ risijumnok
I
41. ri[ddhJi an[ubhaJw [m]a [pJa me[trieiJt sm[oJb [hJa[nJ fiab rurhlos ku
fia!;l
42. [tJi[nmJa [weJ(r)[wJe[yJ8 gumlonl ta[rlJe[yJ ei ko[mJ ku [tJarle[y]
43. [G]awampa[tikuJ ey ku [BisJsukarmma ku Kataka[rm]managaraja
[5kJa[nJda[rh]
H
J. [<;lU]I; [Sisit I tarleJy [sJka[ndJa[m c;luft SiSltJ g[o]b [bllab 8c[uti]
[nor gob mnor c;ley T]a[ttJade[s c;ley c;lui1 AJri[mJa[ddJa-
2.
3. [nJa[puJr [5d]as [gn]a sm[iJi{mJa Limo]' [SriJ Tri[bhuw]a[na]d[i]t[y]a
[dhJa-
4. [mmJara[j]a syuk sa[sJa[n]a [kyJa[k BJuddha ta[rIeyJ [dh]a[nnm]a Ii-'
9 .10
5. [fici stJ(u)[nJll pa [prJa[k]a[t] dnab s[punc;luk]~ pu](rh)pifi]9 u[t s]a-
I
] Hereagain a similar amountofmatter has beeneffaced. Thelast symbollooks like t or ti,but is
quite uncertain. .
2 Thisword isconfirmed by II,as are also the bracketedreadingsatthebeginningsofG 31'5.
II II has<jun,. 4 II hassllin.
5 As in B 12,there is doubtas to the reading and transcription. Here II probablyhas siladharmma.
n
e Conceivably,butimprobably, s4uik. It hasstlik. 7 putsa stop here.
a Thedoubtful letter mightconceivably be d or n, and it isdoubtful whetherthere isa virama,and
whether the whole is one wordor two. Probably it correspondswith the L.M.'Wiwai, and the formation
is byreduplication together withtheinfix -ir-(assimilated astothe vowel by reason ofthevoweloftheroot).
Possibly, howe\'er, the first syl1ableisthePaliveran,andthesecondthet.M.wai. Butthis seemslesslikely.
9 II seemstohave something obliteratedhere, but it may only be an original flaw, with (perhaps) the
relativeparticle mao
]0 II has no stop here. 11 PerhapsstUll, but It seemsto havestun.
l~ Conceivably, butimprobl'lbly,spu/lI!Uk. 13 Thefit isdoubtful.

PART il] MON INSCRIPTIONS I I I
6. mali tartey [ei] [an]tul swa[r]wo[' e]y s[mi]n [In m]a [pk]a-
I
7. [~ r]ali [k]am baj[rJa n[om] I [b]oy s[m]arwei s[m]{n nag]a 1 [m]a
8. On]ok'ri[ddhi] a[nubh]a[w m]a nom kirwa[s] llii[mJ9 Ie[b tun]
·9. [g]ol) [nomJ we[1 ~ey di]s pa[nJ ei sm[i]1i loCk]a[pa}
I
10. I pa[nJ scr[oJI) ptaw pu[m]an I ut parisat kirknl pa[n]
.1. ko[m] ku [smJi~ [m]ata[\\'] <;ley stha[n mJa kal) [s]ak k[~iJ-3
[mJlI[n t]a[rl]e[y GJawam[pJa[t]ither erol) ptaw [ei s]ka[\:11 sak
12. W 4
3; bhe[y skJab sak duk [welJ ut tinma saterJ(U)6 tarl[e}
J I
14, [yJ ci [skJa\:1 salkJ upay [prJajna(nga)6 [mnoJr [ei tJarle[y <;leJy
I
15. kaltarley dasgna smiil Sri Tribhuwa[n]adO)tyadhamma[r]aja
7
16. gob [yJan paJ;lQit guml[ In sisaI11arttha biearaQ.ar a-
I 0 8
17. r[tJtha ma jmo' k(n)an 9 rna [r]jub s~uk pin pum(i)e 10 [mJun san wei I
18.. <ley kal g[o]J) ei yan risi julimok ma i[mJo' Bi-
19.snu [gJol) rm[i}l pi[h]a[r smi]n In blab' [m]nor ei dnab fi~e munmar
[sJasalla kyak Bud[dhJa tar[IJe[y]ll thee thee smin de[w]a[t]a-
20. I
tarley Gawampatither ei guran arttha g[ob k]u [ey]
2 I. WI I
[ku]m·ci gura[n]l11 e[y] we[l] row [m]a kum [t}el.\ fia[J:t] bar [pi]ha-
22. I
23. r row g[o]l) k[U](m)13 [mn]or [c]i dJial:t syuk sasana kyak B[u]ddha ta-
I
24. dey cigor ku bnab spa [wi]r 1~ lai:J a[rnb]a[y t]ar[Iey].ri-
I
Z5. si gal) row gob[k]u In blaJ:t s[<;l]ik gap pumas da [y]ail [b]ya-
,Iii
26. des rna kyak Buddha tarl[e]y by[ad]es kel k[u t](a)r[Ie]_18
27. yAnan go[J:t] lab Iyan sumrnan rna [t]arley Ga[w]am[p]a[ti srni]-
28. [c] pa lprJakat rna tun sma[ii] kyak Buddha tartey goJ:t lal)
17
29. kyak Buddha [t]arley [5]01) kel ku tarIe[y G]awampati
18
30. [b]Iab [o]r tar[l]e[y] Gawampati ti[n]" kiJikan [k]eI ku
I
1 11 has mig. 2 II has mi';;,. 3 Confirmed by ff•
• II has ma. ., Possi~ly. butimprobably,slltr/i.
S The h, ifthereis one.issuperscript .i Thei lookslikei.
8 The reading isquite certain,though the fillal,' isdifficult toaccount for etymologically.
9 Theletter subscript under k jo very uncertain: it might,conceh'ably, be 1'.'l,1n, oreven II, Leing
badly blurreu. '10 Conceiv:l1:,Jy, but improbably.pUlIlic.
11 II may possibly h;lVCtirJI'.l'.
13 Above the gu there "re m"rks in sen,ral of the ,est;,mp:'ges (and al~o in II) which might be
tallen for the triicesof ;\n aIIIIS1"lrtl. But thisseelils improbable. :lndthe marks}Ireperhaps accidental.
13
The tit seems somewhatclearer in 1I. and would appear to be required by thesyntax, balancing-
the RUtit in the preceding.c1ausc.
14 II seemstohavea stop here. ]; II has only~singlestop here;
16 11 may h:wefirleyhere, andso(conceivably, but improl:lably).may ourtexl.
17 Hma)' havetirley; . . '
III A S\I1;tll sp"ce herem.IY be tlue to :l.slight original A:l\v, or conceivably there mny have been :1
5top. BUl thisseemss lInntcesAry ;lI1d lin1ik~Iy, II having 110thinghfre.:

112 EPIGRAPHfA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
3 I. smi[n I]n gal) [IJab r ya[n] pihar [mla ta[rleyJ J Ga[wJaIhpa-
32. ti ku smin In cis ki'l[k]a[IJ ke[IJ ku [tJar[le'yJ ri-
33. [si Bi]snu gol)'lab.. ,2 [yJa[n pJihar ma [kJyak [BJuddha tarle-
34. [y g]al) ku tarie[y] Ana[n] sasa[n]a ey kul[iJ ar
35·[mJoy Illitil turo\r k[l]alh bar cwas di[ncJam cnaml ya[il]
36. ta[de]y risi [mJa i[m]o' Bisnu [go]!) sdassmin qe-,
37, [y QJu[I1J Ar[imJaddanapur s[d]un imo' g[nJa sm[il:l] S[r]i Tribhu
38. [\v]a[nJadityadha[m]maraja s)'uk [s]asana e[)~ m]a [ky]ak [Bu},
39· ddha tar[leJy, gab gob eli gn]asmin \va' Lkurii d]a[go]l) [gJum
I
40. irlal.! pal,l[qJi[tJ lab burimal) lal) nal,l jno[k gJUlnloli
'41. [IJab ut lo[k m]ahajan gumlo[n IJal:i Cut bnJal.!
0-
4 [rlgran cia ut b[nJab or gra[n] da'. g[nJa SOlin k[UJlh [dJa [goJb
2• \1"0' I
43· [IJab sandel.. gain da Ial) sande!) [gJaril da lal.! sandel.! gain da
/I 0 II c.../I ""
Trallslali(lll.
A
,Prosperity ~:I IIonour to Bltddh'l ~ Hollour to the Law ~ Honourto the Church!
'The brilliantSakyamuni, who has compassion upon all beings, the lion who is the
most exalted of all. beings, (I. 3) 4 thus shol\'cd forth the origin' of the king.
,Sakya11l;mi bltagaVri 6: the Lord 6 BuddhaSakyamllni; h'1h viseso,: of what
manner is,the distinctive shape of the Lord? aliglYllSO: (I.5) the Lord who has
7
brilliance of booy j mU1t • • • • (kiln) viseso: of \Y.hatmannet is the distinctive.
of
lo~es
shape the Lord?
8'
sabbabllfltiinukampako; the Lord who all beings
j
sabbasattuttamo: the Lord who is exalted beyond all beings; slho: theLord who
is like 'a ma'ned lion; rojti-ulpattim: (I. 9) the origin of King Sri Tribhuwana
dity'adhalnmaraja, who haspiety,9 \risdolll, courage,.glory, energy, renown (and).
J'II'hastil'leJI. , as ,2 II docs'no~ appearto ha"C';lslop here•.
3 Sanskrit. What follows,as far the middle of A3,isin Piili (d. VI 6-9). l"en comes;i nissaya
ofPiliwordsparaphrased in ~15il. ' 'J These referencesare(0tlie lines,of the text. .
, '6"TheblessedSakyamuni," or Sakyasage. Thesewordsbegin the ,lisstl}·o.
, II Etymologically tarley is "my lord." tarla (or tidal ey, being either a contraction or a mere
abbreviation thereof;butin'actual use itisthe otherwayabout. tarlabeing·gener.illylhe .mode ofaddress
(A ~7) equil'ale'nlto.our my lord," and tarley .the honorific,title us~d'wlu:in speOlkingof the person.
If
Therearemanyexceptions.however,e.g. F 34. . ': " ".. ,'.
7 The (maning;tndidel~tityof111ti11J (ifthat be the righl reading) atc not absolutely certain, but the
general selise,oftlte :\1'1I1phr,'seis determinedby itsPiiliequivalent. .' .
cr.
, d Thel11eaningofgam is undeterminedI probablyit isa p;aticle. D45.,1-1 43.
~'Or "religiousmcrit." :\Itermitively.il might be possible (following 1..:\1. lIsage) to take J1i'J11 pun ill
'the~cnse of" possc~scs,"thus eliminating"piety." Butl prefer lhe other rendcring-.

-
Epigrapfzia Birmanica No. I. VOLU;\IE I, PLATE VIII.
THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA, PAGAN.
G H
2
2
4
4-
6
6
8
~
10
10
12
12
14
14
16
16
18
18
20
20
22
22
24
24
26
26
28
28
30
3°
'32
32
34
34
36
36
38
38
40
4°
42
42

PART II] MeN INSCRIPTIONS I 13
pomp,] who is without a peer2; desay£ deses£: the Lord Buddha preached,
made manifest, (and) showed forth all the coming into being of King Sri Tribhu
.wanadityadhammaraja.3
Therefore, (I.13) at what time didthe Lord Buddha make manifest (and) show
forth the co:ning into being of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja? It was
once upon atill'~ ,,,hen the Lord Buddha was dwelling in the Jetawanamahawihar,4
that the Lord Buddha saw 5 that which was to come (to pass) thereafter 6 for
the advancement of the Lord Buddha's religion, (namely) the coming of King
Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja in the city of Arimaddanaput.7 when a thousand
six hundred and thirty years should have elapsed after the Lord Buddha's attaining
Parinirval).a.8 (And consequently) the Lord (1. 20) smiled.
\Vhen the Lord Buddha thus smiled, from his four eyeteeth rays ofsixcolours
issued forth (and) went up as far as Bra,hmalok 9; (while) down helow the rays
penetrated all earth, water, (and) air; (1. 23)across all the four quarters of more
10 11
thana thousand million1 universes'they ,vent; and then the rays entered the Lord
'.1
Buddha's mouth again. The Lord Anan/3 seeing this miracle, bowed down (and)
put on his head (1. 26) the sales ofthe Lord Buddha's feet, (and then) lifting his
joined hands questioned (him) thus: "What reason .·was there) that my lord
11
smiled thus? (For) without reaSon Buddhas do not smile;" Thus (I. 29) did the
Lord Anan ask.
] Or"(;llld) the fame of pomp," takillgj'aspariwi;r together.
2 Literally" who !:Lcksotherse.xalted eqilally'~ (possibly"who lacks superiors;Indequ;lls").
3 At this point the preliinin:uy part·or introduction ends, if we tnnsbte gnl! gO!1 by "th~refore."
It isconceivable;howeYer, th·atthewordsmightbetakentoI11C:ln "(and) his virtues" or."(:lIid) the benefits
(i.e. accruingfrom the king's accession)," and·in t['atcase"all,. ~or"1l1.i11Y")might go with it, though the
orderwould be·unusual. VI 5 rathersupportsthis interpretation,which L f:\\'oured by Duroiselle..
4 Thegreat]etawlIl:L mon~lstery.
" By virtue.ofthe supernatural power whichBuddhas have of seeing into the .future, etc, Cf. III
or
B3~4; and withthe whol~ paSS';ge down to I A37 (;IS well ;Is some subsequent p:lrtS the inscriptioli)
cf. III A J1-"-C 26and VI 9-end.
. 6 The·meaning o(mllOy. is inferred from the rass;lges wheri:' it occurs,especially F 8-9. Theolhers
(A 30,40,F33, G 2, 25,39; H 14, 23) are notsodefinite, ..
7 Pagan. . .
8 Ithas !Jrcnfound nrce.:s'lry to tr:}nspo:;e t!, o~dcl \crydrastic;:lIy :,JterJclo'll'all(lillalitiwiltar. In
the originallhe order of the clauses is: (I) ,"thaI I.,).!c:" shouldcometo P:IS; for theadvaJ)cement".(lit,
".increase"),elc., (2) If from the Lord Buddha's .Itt'lining·," etc" (3) "elapsed h)30 ye.Jrs," (4)"in the
city," etc.,.(5) the coming of King S.T. did the Lord Buddin see." Parinirvii.9a was' attained by
II
Buddha;It his death. . ~ Brahm:llo'·a, the higher hea\'CIlS•
.10 Themeaningofkil'lo(1 isnotabsolutelydetermined:forms with theinfix ~ir- :lre usu:illy substhntives.
11 The partly illegibleexpression in the text isconjecturally restored.
]2 I h:lYe t:lk('n lakfa :.lIld·kot; in their L.~I. values. If the Indian values be taken, the result isa
million millions.' 13 Ananda,a le;ldingdisciple of Buddha. .
]J 01' thep:tss:lgc IlPY me;lll that Ananda bowed down and"Iiftpd up the soles ofthe Lord Uuddha's
feel and bearini; lhem lip on his h.'.Ilds joilied tOg"t·ther," etc But d. III B21·J, VI 14·

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vOl..i
thu~:
Thereupon the Lord'Buddha spake (I. 30) to the Lord Anan Anan,
It
hereafter a sage named Bisnii,l great in supcrna~ural power, great·in glory,
possessing the five transcendental faculties, together with my son Gawampctti,
and King In,2 and Bissukarmmadewaput,3 and Katakarmmanagaraja, shall build
a city called Sisit.4 After that, the sage Bisnii, (1. 34) departingti from thence,
shall go up to Brahmalok (and) departing·from Brahmalok, shall come ..t.o
j
be in the city of Arimaddanapiir, (and) shall bear the name of King Sri
6
Tribhmyanadityadhammaraja, (and) shall· uphold my religion." Thus did the
7
Lord Buddha tell (1. 3j) the reason of that smile to the Lord Anan..
At that time the Lord Gawampati, hearing the explanation of the Lord
Buddha, did obeisance to the Lord Buddha i and.then, in order to elucidate the
Lord Buddha's statement, questioned (him) thus: My lord, (1. 40) did my lord
/I
truly say that hereafter a sage named Bisnu together with me should build the
8
city of SisIt ?'
Truly, Gawampati, thus(itis). The sage Bisnii shall build (it), together (t
II 9
4~) with thee.IO Therefore, Ga,vampati,gothou to King In, (and)speak thou thus:
'0 king of devils! .Receive with deference the saying of the Lord Btlddha: (to
11
wit, that) the sage named Bisnii, whois great in supernatural power (and) glory,
together with me shall build the City (1. 45) of SisIt. At that time, in all the (good)
works of the sage Bisnii do thou bestir thyself! After the sage Bisnii has builtthe
city.of Sisit, he shall depart from thence (and) in the city of Arimaddanapiir he
shall become King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (and) .shall uphold the
12
I Asto Bisnii andthe otherperson;lgesmentioned,see H lS·6.
:l Indra. The title slJIi,j is very elastic, being :lpplied to gods Ce.g~the sun god. L,~1. SIII;'-, tnal').
kings,proyincialgovernorsandeven subordinate officials, and in deferenti:L1address to private individuals,
Indra,ofcourse.as kingof thedevas hasa goodclahll toit. . 9 I.e.°pu.tra•.
·1 Prome : apparently we must take the name to be a vernacularized form of Sri Ksel,,,, which
occursin the parallel passage VI ao,while III C6 Ins the intermediateform ~ri Kut; .
I .
" Dy death and rebirth. . .
r. That is,comeintobeillg,existence,askingof Burma.
.. Or "uplift·": cr. A 26,037. Someofthe other inscriptions have stbal, e.g. III B29. ·In L.M.
usage.however,yui.fdt/ik often means"to revercllce." .
II Thesenseof lais undetemlined; I think it is prob.,Lly a p:;rliclewith interrogative (orce, like L.M.
lui.· Strange as it may seem, Gawampatiisapparentl}· made to <;lsl< lhc Buddha(not,as mighthave been
expected,whether theaskcr had corrcctly understood the Buddha's statelllent but) whcther the Buddha's
statement is true..Huw~ver, the other interprctation C" is it it fact that my lord said" •..) is also
possibleandmaybethe right oneafterall. . .
i Lit.••(It is) thesage Bi~nii whoshall"; theda 1IIQ servingto emphasi~e thesubject.
J() It would seem.th;;t kutll here docs dUI.'· for a person:Jl.pronoun. Cf;A49. B 5•.19,0 4-1,F 6, ro,
.13.1-122. . ....
II Conjectural: them;~ningof allt,ili~thisconnexion isundeten~lined. Cf. A5I. Duroiselfesuggests
tha.t it stands for to head here:. (u receIvethe messag~ofa supeflor<In one's head isofcourse a regular
Unental pllrdsc for Te~pcctful deCercm;c. . .I~ Cf. A36n.

MON INSCRIPTIONS liS
PART II]
religion of (I. 48) the Lord Buddha. 0 king of devas ~ In the time of the
(good) works of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. and in works of piety, do
thou bestir thyself at all times ~ ,"
(I. 50) Thus did the Lord Buddha instruct the Lord Gawarhpati. At that
time the Lord. Gawarilpati received the saying of the Lord Buddha with
deference,] and my lord,s having practised Dhyan,3 went up to Ta\ratiil4 (and)
;
the Lord Gawampati expounded all the saying of the Lord Buddha to King In.
My lord having expounded (it) tl. 5·4) to King Tn, my lord came dO\YI1 to the
Jetawanamahawihar. .Some considerable
B
time after this, the Lord Buddha went to Nirva~la in the city of Kusinar.6 Some
6
considerable time after the Lord Buddha (had achieved) Nirval.la,7 the Lord
Gawatnpati (I. 3) went up to Tawatin once more, (and) of the coming of King
Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja my lord informed King In in full detail :-
"a
king of devas, hear thou! \Vhen one thousand six hundred and thirty
years haveelapsed after the Lord Buddha'sgoingto NirvaJ,l::t, the sage named BisnfJ
(1. 7) shall become a king nc:medSri TribhmranaditYildhammaraja in the city of
Arimaddanapur; (and) KingSriTribhuwanadityadhammarajashalluphold the reli
8
gion ofthe Lord Buddha. The renown of (I. 10) King Sri Tribhuw<lnadityadliam
maraja shall become celebrated throughout the whole exp;U1se of Jambudip9; the
hardness of King SriTribhuwanadityadhammaraja (shall be) like iron.]O The true
principles of morality King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall maintain.
11 IS
Allvice, which is even as a stench, with true morality, which is even as a perfume,
] Cf. A 43n. ;l Gawarhpati.
9 TakingCWbl to represent I..M.S7uuin. Ifit represents 1..1'1. cuin, the meaning' would ~e " having
become perfect in" Dhyana (the latter being thehigh form of trance wh~reb)'supernatural powers are
acquired). I preferthe first interpretation. . .J Indra's heaven,Tiivatimsa.
6 Apparently a fairly longtimeis implied, butthe phrase isnot at all definite. CI. B2.
8.Kusinara.
7 Here Ilirbball is usedverbally,and possiblyit shouldbesimilarly rendered in the pre:cclingline, i.II,
IIwent to achieve Nirv3g3 in the city of K." But this seems improbable: see B5. The reference,of
Course, is to Buddha's death andin this usethe word isequivalentto thepari'lirbball of A 17.
8 Cf. A36 n.
9 Jamhudipa, the southern continent ofthe inhabited world, including (il/ter alia) India and Indo
China, but no doubt used here quite indefinitely.
10 Possiblythis sentence is to be taken as partofthe king's fame, i.e. that itshall be s3id of him that
he is as h3rd as iron. And perhaps it is tobe read closely with what follows,i.e. his hardnessconsists in
hispersiste.ncyin maintainingvirtue anti true religion; butthepoint doesnot seemquitecertain.
1] Reading siladhar/Uma, for which. however, I have found no authority. If we read sil (or sila)
dharmrna, the meaning would beIemorality(andi the Goorl I.:lW" (i.f. thetrue f:lith oi Buddha). Cf.G 3:\.
19 Or, perhaps, II establish,"or II pmctise,"..observe," P.tc.

116 EPJGRAPHIA BIRMANJCA [VOL. I
shall King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja (1. 15) utterly blotout. All sinin deed,
sin in word, (and) sin in thought, that are beyond cleansing,
I.
with pure morality,s
which is even as water, shall King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja wash away.
The devas who receive the joined hands of (I. (8) all men,3 who hold
II
celestial sceptres made of bajl'a} like th~ executors of thy (good) works they
4
shall execute the (good) works of King Sri Trihhuwanadityadhammaraja. The
whole realm of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja (I. 2I) shall be altogetherS
free from robbers, who are even as thorns, (and) free from a1l7 enemies, who are
even as a forest,s It shall be wide as the ocean also. The desires of King Sri
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall quickly be fulfilled.9 (1. 24) The city of Arimad
danapiir, when enemies afflict '(her), she shall suppress them. The men ofthe
10 11
four castes tha~ dwell in the city of Arimaddanapiir, who are (taken as) captives
1 Or"which nerd cleansing,"or"which areuncle:!n"? 9 Or"with virtue, which cleanses"P
~ The meaning is not absolutelycertain, but I take it to be that the devas reCf'ive the reverent suppli
cations of men: d. A?6 for an illustration of what is implied bysumbup tcy. Duroiselle prefersanother
interpretationofdun, viz."Thedevaswith"(lit."who hold their") "joined hands raised (in worship),"
takingfiaft gum/ali as referring tode'll.'ataw. .
4 Lit. If devas'staves." .seethe nexLnote.
6 The word may mean"thunderbolt," ••adamant," .1 diamondt or according to'Haswell(L.M.buit)
"emerald." It is the Sanskrit vajra. Possibly,however, the passageshouldbecollstrued thus: "devas
whoreceive the joined hands ofal) men" (oralternatively:lsin B18n.), ..(devas) who hold staves, devas
who are armed with the 'lJa.ira" ·(a kind of celestialsceptre). Theabsenceofdewat<i~vin thesecondof
theserelativeclauses makes this interpretation less probable, even iftnlliy can betaken to mean armed."
I.
Onthe other interpretation,tmiiy may meanthat thestaves orsceptIesare headed ortipped with bajra (in
oneorotheroUts possiblesenses).
6 The preciseforce ofwel isundetermined butitseenlstobea particlegivingeinphasis: d, D 5,25,44,
E 18, F 26,41, Gro, T9, H 7,9, [3,17.22• .
7 The meaning of sumtumis not absolutelydetermined: perhapsit isconnectedwith L.M. stuimand
weshould leave out aU" and insert.,thick"before"forest." Ifthe meaning is thick," we must read
II II
su,htum; if it is" all," probably weshould readsunltum.
S The preceding sentences have been rendered on the footing that. II realm" is the grammatical
subject. But this involves theposition of the objectbetween the subjectand the verb, which is not normal
and is not the case elsewhere with ka(l sak: see A 10, D6, E 2(r7, G to, II, H 12-4. On the other
hand, it seerils hardly consistent with these, passages to treat the "erb as intransitive and translate:
.s.T.,
..throughout the whole realm of King robbers ••... shall be'altogether absent, enemies •.••••
shallbelacking." Perhapstheorder isdetermined bythe presenceof the relativeclauses.
9 Or, perhaps, .. it (i.e. therealm)shall quickly fulfil the wishes of King S:r.": d. F 42. (But in
L.M. the verb appears to be intransitive.) One might also translate: "KingS:r. shall quicklyfulfil his
desirrs," f{r though the pronoun4eft(L.:\l. 4e') is not apparently used of royalty in L.M" it issometimes
applied to Kyansinha in these inscriptions(e.g. VI 29.:.)1).
10 Or " dan~age,""ravage." There issome doubt as to the preciseforce of lmnlrtik. Cf, C54. E 35.
It may be an adjectival (participial1 form, so that the literal rendrring would be " in times ofravaging
foes:' Seethe nextnote.
11 As to the pronoun,seethe last note butOnefor the reaSOn why I have 110t tr:l.nslated; I,he (i.e. the
k!ng) shall suppr.ess them." Itseems:obethe,~retica.llypossibleto interpretthe linein quiteanother way,
VIZ.II when ravaglllg fues destroy the cIty of A., runnmg on the next sentcpce,"the men," etc. Gut it is
rather unlikely that snch a cOlltingency would be admilled as even po;sible, ull1ess we assume that it
took placebeforethe king'saccession.

PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 117
downstream, (and) who go to other countries,S by (virtue of) the strength,power
J
(and)energy (1. 27) of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadha,mmaraja quickly shall they
return upstream, shall they take (their) pleasure in the city ofArimaddanapQragain.
liThe tears of those who are severed from alIa (their) trusty fri~nds,· by a
course (1. 30) of benefits, by loving kii1dness which is even as a hand, 'shall King
Sri Tribhu\V:anadityadhammaraja wipe away. The nasal mucus of all who are sick
at heart, by a course of benefi,ts, by compassion which is even as water, (1. 33)
shall (he) wash away. 0 king of devas! King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammarlija
with (his) right hand shall give boiled rice (and) bread to all the people, with (his)
left hand shall give ornaments6(and) wearing apparel to all men.s , All the people
(shall be) like a child7 that is in (its) mother's bosom. Thus shall King Sri
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja keep watch (1, 38) and ward with benefits.'
Sri
All men who are harsh,9 King Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall make
il
gentle.IO Menwho are not equalU(to therest) in body, in speech,ll (or) in spirit,
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammarajashall make (them) equaJ.19. (1. 41) Wicked
.male slaves, doers of all14 (sorts of) deeds that their masters know not of,
King Sri Tribhuwanadftyadhammaraja shall -report to their masters. A.Lord
Mahather,16 who possesses virtue, who is the charioteer of the Law, King Sri
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall make~·. . . . ,18 shall make (him) his spiritual
.teacher. (1. 45) In the presence of the.Lord Mahather, abounding in 17 virtue, who
is the'charioteerof the Law also, '.Together with my'lord will Icleansethe religion
of the Lord Buddha,' thus shall KingSriTribhuwanadityadhammaraja say. (1. 48)
,Do good! Do good1': thus shall King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja teach
all the people'at all times.
1 Conceivably, II downtheriver,which goes," 2 Or"districts."
9 Perhaps Itall" goeswith"those,"notwith cofriends,"
4 Theprecisemeaningof fumlos is undetermined,but cf.C36, G41. Itseemsto be related to s;,los
(C33,O:lo). .
Ii Perhapsnot necessarily"ornaments"but just"articles" (ofwearingapparel).
8 Inthegeneralsense, notnecessarilyexcludingwomenand children.
7 Or"children," though there isno plural pardclehere. 8 Thatis,with beneficial effect.
S Meaning notstrictlydetermined: cf. A II. 10 Meaningconjectural.
11 Ifthereadingisright, it wouldseemtobearthisinterpretation. Theideaseemstobethatthosewho
arebelowtheaveragestandardof thecommunityareto bebroughtup toit. Orperhapsthemeaning may
bethat men,whodo notagree (orarenot in harmonywith) their fellows,shall be madeto Ilgree: d. C 48.
III Lit. c'mouth": thethreefold division is thesameinprincipleasin B15.
19 Seelast notebut one.
14 I take."all " with"deedsI'ratherthanwithc'slaves"becauseofitsbeingimmediatelyfollowed by
therelativeclause. If> Aleading monk.
18 Possibly the doubtful. word is connecteC1 with stum, "the right (side)," and bears the figurative
meaning that theChief Monl~ is tobe theking'sright-handman,asitwere. Butthis seemsverydoubtful
andeventhereadingis not quitecertain. .
.17 Cf.C53-4. D44, F I. Thesenseisinferredfrom the context.
16

118 EPlGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL.-I
Those who intend evil, witl: good intent shall King Sri Tribhuwanaditya
II
dhammaraja sotten their hearts.' Those who speak evil. (1. 52) KingSri Tribhu
wanadityadhammaraja sh;:lllexhorttospeak good, The bar ofthe gatenf Heaven,
which ismade ofgold, which is adorned with gems, (1. 54) by wisdom, 'Vhichis even
as a hand, shall King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja
C
Sri
draw open for (allrnankindI?) . • .. .. . . . • • King Tribhuwanaditya
dhammaraja . . . . . . . . . . . •........• the fire in MahA-Awid!l ...•
• • • . . . . . (I. 4) ... The offerings· of all those that (dwell in the city of
Arimaddanapur?) King Sri Tribhu\vanadityadhammaraja shall sustain' ....•
• . . . . . . . . . . . . (like 1) the appearance of a'golden mirror that is set
with gems, King SrI T ibhuwanadityadhammaraja shall shine brightly
The maiden 'daughters (of many princes, having?) (I. 8) fragrance like the
1/
fragrance of jasmine flowers, (and) having splendour like (the splendour?) of the
spouse of King In, who is named Alambusa, (they) shaH attend (him). (From
II
seven cities 1) the maiden daughters of many princes, adorned with gemsof divers
7
kinds (I. I I) (and) holding8whiteumbrellas, shall cometo attend (him). King Sri
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall be seated on a throne made of gold' (and)
,adorned with gems, (imd) shall enjoy the splendour of royalty.· The maiden
daughters of many princes, coming from seven cities, the.city of Arimaddanapiir,
Nhich'is glorious, shall endow (them) with renown.10
{/O king of devas! (1~ 16) In the time of the reign of King Sri Tribhuwana
dityadhammaraja, ifanother great army should come,a good omen of victory,·an
11
auspicious constellation, shall comebeforell King SrI Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja.
1 The original hasthesameWordas in B40. whereitisrendered "spirit."
1I Conjectural restoration, asarethewordsin brackets with,queries'in the,following Iin~ CE. III'
C IfS'20, VI 3001. .
!l Or"Awic'" i.e. A'Uici,one,of the hothells. L.M., AU','!. 4 Or"festivals," or ..hospitality,"
5 Apparentlythesuggestion isthattheking istobeartheel!penses,butin themutilated .tate ofthe
contextthe meaning must remaindoubtful.
e
Or"who," Butin thatcasethereisananacoluthon, there oeingthennoprlncipal'verb. Thesame
istrueofthenexts~ntence.
, 7 Or ..countries," Perhaps one ought to prefix "the," as these seven localities seemto represent
cr.
lOmeconventionalgroup C14),but I amunabletoplacethem definitely.
8 Or ..shaded by.." 1 .. • '9 Or c,sovereignty"; lit. 'I reign."
10 This seems to be themeamng: ItIS more reasonable to assume that the metropolis conferssocial
distinction ont~ese provincialladiesthanthe converse. and,itwould 'berather abnormal to put theobject
betweenthesubJect and theverb~
11 Thatis "foreign" or ..hostile." ' .
Ii Conjectural: this isperhapstherootofkinta (L.M'l'ata). Cf.C49, F7.

PART II] M6N. INSCRIPTIONS 119
In time of war King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall ride upon a noble steed
that has swiftness even as (1. 21) the steeds that are of the breed of the.clouds,1
(and) shallfight (and) shall shine like the noonday sun.
9
" 0 king of devas! At the time when King SrLTribhuwanadityadhammaraja
shall bear sway, all the people shall be adorned with gems (1. 24) of divers kinds j
they shall go about, wearing diadems,S sukhuy (and) loincloths of divers
4 5
kinds. Ear-ornaments, for example in the shape of elephants, lions, tro1i pumt"fi}
Nagas, Garu<;las,7 of divers kinds, shall they wear. King Sri Tribhuwan.aditya
dhammaraja, (I. 29) for the sake of the advantage and· happiness of all that dwell
in Jambudip, shall .... treasure!) of three kinds, with images in a golden
8 9 10
reliquary, likp. a candle that glows; so shall (it) brightly shine.
11
"0 king of devas! At the time when King Sri (1. 32) Tribhuwanaditya
dhamuiaraja shall reign, all women shall be steadfast in virtue, shall trust in the
12
Law, shall be of good conduct, (and) shall (obediently) follow 13 their lords14,:
thus shall they be All the people, be it the faults 16 OP6 mother or father,
nephew or brother-in-Iaw,17 husband (1. 36) or wife, good friend or trusty 18
companion, or the faults Jf one another, they shall openly declare (them), shall
not conceal (them), (and) shall desire their purgation.19
] Evidently somekind ofsupernaturalhorse is referred toJ possibly thehorsesof thesungodarethe
starting point of the idea. It is not unlikely that in SudhaIII111avafirtijtivan1Sa, p. ]0, I. 13, wefind a
corruption ofthetermin the phrasekhypli rat Ill;gaku lila pyaiprai.
9 Conjectural: lit."thesun that stands II (i.e. straight overhead at noon); cf. L.M. tnai katau.
Cf. G 7.
3 Though theroyal word (mukut) is used, the reference is presumably merely to the turban or scarf
wound rouridthehead.
• An unidentifiedarticleofclothing.
6 Probablystandsfor thelongskirt,the principal garmentof bath sexes.
6 Unidentified.
7 Monstroussupernatural birds, thedeadlyenemiesofthe Ntigas.
8 The readingbeing doubtful, it is not clear whether the king is to discover the treasures or deposit
them. 9 Rl'adingdoubtful.
JD Or II an image." 11 Possibly" lamp."
12 Conjectural: d. D 20and B 29 n. 13 Reading and meaning doubtful.
11 Lit. "house lordes),"i.e.husbands. 16 Or "sins" or "offences."
IB Conceivabl)' the passage might referto offences committed against, or in.respect of,these various
relatives and friends. But this seems improbable, as there would be no particularpoint in the offender
reportinghimself,when itwasalways opentothe injured party tocomplain..The sense seems to be that
the duty of reporting'offences is paramount, even overriding the claimsoffamily and friendship,andthat
thisfactwasrecognized in practice.
17 Both wordsaou1;ltful. Ifcorrect,they may includethe othersex also.
18 CE. B 29.
19 Meaning liomewhal doubtful, but the word appears Lo be. the verbal nOUn formed from c-a~,
" clean," Clja~,"to clean."

EPIGRAPHIA -BIRMANICA (VOL, t
Sri
The brave. King Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (1. 39) .in the whole of.
(I
. Jambudip·all men shall glorify (him). In a pavilion thai is like·linto Weja
1 II
cro~nQf
yanta,S a pavilionthat shall be fit for delights, thatisthe jewelled the cityof
Arimaddanapiir, (he) shall enjoy the fulness of (his) reign." (I. 42) AUthe women
who dwdl in the city of Arimaddanapiir, (when)they see the grandeur (and) magni
.ficence of form·of King Sri Trl~huwanadityadhammaraja,(as) they stand by the
river shore,6 (or) on highways, (or) at crossroads,8 (they shall say): Such
I
grandeur (and) magnificence as (1. 45) this (is) because of doing pious deeds in the
past! ': thus shallthey ·beable to go about praising (himV
"All the people shall be steadfast .(1. 47) in the teaching of King Sri
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, in order
to attach (to himself) those that shall be like (him),i' shall shine like a golden
mirror in the·presence of all the people. The city of Arimaddanapiir, as if
9
fastened down with four stakes of .iron, so (1..5I ).shall King Sri Tribhuwana-
dityadhammaraja make(it) firm. All the princes,lo (with?) magni-
ficence, they shall delightin the city of Arirriaddanapiir. All monks, who abound
lJ
(1. 54)in virtue, (who ?) at the time when ravaging foes destroy (are?) without
19
1 The sense ofscumat natrejas is doubtful. Primarilyc111at means"true,"and cumat shouldmean
something like"to recognizeasthe truth": HaswelI'sL.M.cmat, todiscern," seemstobesomewhatin
U
pointhere. Perhapsthewholesentencemeans thatthe peopleunanimously recognii~ and dohomagetothe
king'sbravery. In that casethe first clause shouldbe read"That King S.T. isbrave," perhaps,though
theorderwould berather queer. It hasbeensuggestedthat theking isthesubjectand scumat meansthat
he istojudgethepeople: butthat also involve$.anabnormalorder.
;. 9 Thewordprasadseemsto be :Ipplicabletostructuresofseveral kinds,platforms,towers,palaces,etc.
I use.. pavilion" asa non-committal word.· . .
... -11 A nameofIndra'spalace. Curiously enough,in Burmeseitisapplied toa graduated rooE(Judson,
Burmes.-English DictiDnar'Y(1893),s,v.)..· . . ... .
4 That is,shall fully accomplish his reign and enjoY tothefull thesplendourofroyalty. Or,conceiv
ably, itmeans that heshallreceive," by theceremonyofanointment, "theplenitudeof royal·power and
Of
glory": d. IIICI[-4, VI 27"9... .
"More specifically the landing-place, quay, or ghaut, The same word, in the sense of"haven
landing.place," isapplied figuratively to NirviQ3 in D41. '
tI Inthetown, whereonestreetcrossesanother.
7 While the general sense is certain, there may be some doubt as to.the precJ~e·c:Onstruction. In·
particular, itmight bepossibleto take ma go' with ",ha~ precedes, meaning " on accountofformergood
deeds,which(th. king) urasableto .dD," or ..succeededin doing." Thenext fewwords mightperhapsbe
rendered alternatively: ,.thusshall theypraisehim (and)go theirways...··In.anycasetile reference is at·
any rate,int.r alia, to meritorious acts performed inpreviousincarnationsoftheking. .:. . .
8 Themeaning is not quite certain, and for sid it may be possibletoread sjak,"draw,attract."
Conceivablythe ideaisthat thekingendeavoursto induceother peopleingeneraltobecomelike himself or
be in spiritual harmony with himself; but I find some difficulty in getting that sense out ofthe words.
Cf.B 39n. . 9 Cf.C18.. . . .
10 Lit. "childrenofkings," or ..ofprinces." It mayrefertoawiderclassthantheactualroyallamily:
seeA 32 n. :. . . . .-
11 Thepreposition is doubtful, the epithet tinten undetermined,andfor Of magnificence" onemieht
",ubstitute II prosperity, succelS, welfare,affluence,"etc. 12 SeeB24n, ...

"ART .II) MON 'INSCRIPTIONS 121
D
monasteries also, by (virtue of) the energy· of King
o 0 0 o.• 0 0 0 0 ••••••I
to~he
Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, they shall return again monasteries.
(1. 3) (All ?) the (monks?) shall fulfil the precepts of morality. (All?) country
(districts and villages ?) which were ruined,.King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja
shall build up finer than ever before. The city of (I. 6) Arimaddanapiir shall have
plenty, shall be exempt from calamity. AU (men who dwell?) in the city of
.Arimaddanapilr, together with King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, shall shine
with supernatural power (I. 9) (too?): they shall avoid the ten ,,,ays of sinful
action, they shall fulfil the ten ways of meritorious action. All men, in thetime
when King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja is reigning, they shall be great in
supernafural power like devas also. The city of Arimaddanapiir, which is the
dwelling-place of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (1. IS) shall glow (and)
glitter with' the Precious Gems.!! King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall
. pray desiring omniscience...
" Allthose who dwell in (I. 18)the city of Arimaddanapur, together with King
Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, shall delight worthily in the Precious Gems,
3
shall worship, revere, (and) put their trust in, t the Lord (1. 2I) Buddha, the Good
Law, andall the lords ofthe Church. Those who revere the Precious Gems, whoare
zealousfor the Good Law, (in)one fellowship withall the devas shall they converse:
all the devas shall indeed converse (I. 25) with men; all the devas shall unite
6
exe~ute
together with men, theyshall .the (good) works of King Sri Tribhuwan
adityadhammaraja.6 Inthe'time of the reign of King SrI Tribhuwanadityadham-·
.
.maraja, the city of Arimaddanapiir, whichis thesource of honour (and) splendour,
(1. 30) shall be very firm: all (its) enemies shall fail to sha~e (it). All the four
7
practis~
castes that.dwell in the city of Arimaddanapiir shall righteousness, shall
be disciples of the Lord Buddha, the Law, and the Church. .
(When) King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall depart from that
Ii
(state of) existence, (1. 35) (he) shall enjoy great prosperity and magnificence (in
1'The beginningsof 0 I-S4arebrokenoff, andwhen possible conjecturally restored ; hence this ~ap.
Theideaisthat the monks havebeen forced bya raid or invasion to leave their monasteries.
II Thethreeelementsof theBuddhistTriad: Buddha,the Law,and the Church.
S It is notcertain that thie," good," '"worthy," retains anydefiniteforce in.this expression, which
maysimplymean totakepleasurein,"likeL.M.sjun stjuik,which mayperhapsbeacorruptionor slightly
t<
variant form of it (though itmust beremembered that stjuik byitself has thesamemeaning)•
• Cf.B29 n.,C33. 5 cr. 8 21 n.
e Theimport plainlyisthat the devasare to unite with men incarrying outtheking'spiousplans: cI.
B17-20, 7 Theexactforce ofphdI'is not determined, butcE. L> 47,E U, GIi.

F:PIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[VOL. I
the states) of deva (and) man,1 (and) in' his final existence (he) shall raise outof
the four Apay all those that are going (in) 9 the four Apay. All the world/
9
together with the devas, that a.re immersed in (I. 39) Sansar,6 which is even
° \I
7
as an ocean that is devoid of shelter (or) place of refuge, shall (he) lift into'
the Good Law, which is even as a great ship, (and) shall bring (them) to the
. haven of exalted NirvaI;la.8
" 0 king (1. 42) of devas! .Thus did the Lord Buddha, who is even as the
moon,9 prophesy (concerning) King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, abounding
inpiety. 0 king of devas ! Hearthoualso (I. 45) another saying10! Inthe timeof
the reign of ;King SriTribhuwanadityadhammaraja all (manner of).fungi, sprouts,!1
flowers, (and) fruits of trees, shall b~ very plentiful. Even poor people, who
la
had19 difficulty in getting food (and) clothes, shall wear golden ornaments (and)
14
handsome clothes, (and) shall enjoy (them) fittingly.15 Children who are learning
to eat· bread with their fingernails,16 (I. So) shall maintain a worthy spirit17 just
like older persons.. At all seasons, without (any intervening) lapse of time, both
they,18and all the princes from the cities 19 also, shall bring presents (and) gifts of
110
diverskinds~ Throughout the whole realm (1. 54) of King Sri Tribhuwanaditya
dhammaraja, rain shall fall
°E
.an hundred(and)twenty times.91 At all times rice (plants) shallbe full (in the ear).
(1. 2) In the realm of King Sri .Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, O· king of devas,.
lOr, possibly, ..shall enjoy prosperity(and) magnificenceas a'devaand as agreal man." But with
thiswhole passagegenerallycf, III C 20-1. V 43. VI 31:
2 Apaya.being four undesirable formsof being, viz. as an as,ira(a kind ofdemonor Titan),in hell.
asa preta (ghost),and asa beast. .9 Or"to." .J Ororworlds," or " people,"
o.
6 Ur"submerged," or"sinking.'"6 Samsara, thestateofcontinuoustransmigrationandrebirth.
1The rendering"shelter.0;0 ••• refuge" isconjectural. 8 0 r.,the exaltedhaven of N,"
.9 Except asa'continuation of the above marine simile, the appositeness of this comparison is not
obviousto me.
o ' •
. 10 As tokum,see A42 n.,as to'Wel, B21 n.,astogam, A6n. The general senseofPiMyis determined
by B5i. ·It also occurs in F 6, 13, H 19. 23, 31, 33, in some of whichcontexts it mayconvenientlybe
rendered by·tmessage," as it mightbehereals9.
U.Especiallyedible bamboo-shoots, no doubt. 12 ct. D 30 n•
. IS TherenderingisconJectural: possiblythemeaT!inl"{ is..few men shall haveany difficulty in'getting."
It turnsonthe meaningofdmukand the force of theprefix s- (ifit isa prefix in sjili)•
.H Lit." boiled rice," but often used tocover food generally. 15 The meaningor clla~ isdoubtful.
18 Thetranslation ISconjecturatandseemson the face ofit improbable. The doubtful w'ordsareckat
\nd sinI,m.
17 Thatis, goodnessof heartand a propermental attitude generally.
18 Presumably thisrefers to the inhabitants of Pagan'in general.
H Or" countries": the referenceis', nodoubt.to provincial governors, vassal princes, elc.
20 Ort,comebringing": the presentsarefor the king. 21 Thatis, in each yearor raInysealon.

PART II] MeN INSCRIPTIONS 123
there shall be plenty of elephants, horses, buffaloes, cattle, pigs, goats, (and) fowls.
All the children of priilces, the children of chiefs,l their playthings (shall be of)
gold (and) silver only. ,
AH men (1. 6) who (wish to) increase (the) security of their doors shaH
fl 2
make doors (of) Their roof-ridges shall (they) roof with bronze only.
:1 4
Sri ~riy
King Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall enrich them all. (I. 9) The Sail
of seven degrees shall shower down the Law, which is even asa,flower, shall '
6 8
make a fragrance1with virtue, which is even as a perfume. '0 king of devas !
, . . .
Every day when King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja gives instruction to all the
people,the sounds of approval,the (I. 13) sounds of praise, the sounds ofapplause,
which all the people shall make, (shall be) like the sound of 'a great rainstorm in
s
the middle of the night. 'All the people shall be adorned with good deeds the
j
lum~dc,9 who (lre even as ,the ornaments of righteousness, shall delig~t, in the
Good Law.10
All those who lacked relatives,1] (I. 17) shall ·have plenty of relatives, All
1/
those who werelazy, they shall be diligent.i2 .All those who were lean shall become
quite
13
fat. All thosewho lacked (1. 19)strength (and) vigour, shall have strength
(and) vigour. All those who excel in. ploughing (and) planting, shall fill (their)
barns (and) granaries with rice (and) millet of,divers, kinds. All their houses
14
shall be very 16 rich in gems. Even all poor old women, who sell pots (and) (I. 23)
potlids,18 by getting good prices (for their wares) they shall become rich. Those
who lacked slaves shall have plenty of slaves. Those who lacked cattle shall
have plenty of cattle. The families of the four castes shall observe the Law
1 Conceivably. Of thechildren oftheking,the children ofall thegreat men."
2 Themeaningseems'doubtful: literallythe wordsseem to mean ,I whoexceed ~ecurity."
:I Unidentified; presumablydoorsofsomeparticulartype; but there is some doubt both astoreading
and meaning. .
.. Or"brass": somemixed metal,whereincopper isan ingredient.
SAriya sam,rha, those members o'f theChurch who have entered upon the fourfold path of eight
degreesleading to Nirvlil)a; the degrees here are seven ber.auseassoon as theeighth station is reached
the perfectedsaint isabsorbed,in Nirval}aand nolongeravailableforearthlytasks. '
e Doubtful,possibly"maintain," or "establish," c£. scrol.tptii'W, B 13 n. But in SlId/lamma"Jafiriijii
.va,;ts",p. 43, I. 21-2, I find :sleppitakatpiglaaicrall pkau kusui~lJ. Cf. also IIIC 21-2.
'1 Lit. "shaHmakefragrant,"noobjectbeingexpressed. Conceivably thesubjectmay bethe"flower,"
butthen onewouldexpecttoseea relative Particleafter it. 8 Cf. III C22'~' VIII A 24-5.
~ Doubtfully identified with L.M.lamiit, "one ofa religiousorder inferiorto the monks, or priests'"
.(Haswell,s.v.). ' " .
10 Con.ceivably the renderingshouldbe: ..with the g.:;od deeds (appropriatetothe) lumqiic,which" (or
who") "arelikeornamentsofvirtue,and(they) shall delight,"etc. '
II
11 L.M.danat. Butthewordmightpossiblybeconnectedratherwith(giii)gliiit,and mean"ornaments."
, III Readingand meaning bothdoubtful. 13 Cr. B21 n.
H,Orgrainofsomeother kind, possibly" barley." 15 cr. 0 30 n.
16 Perhaps,.,Even poorold womenwhosellall(sortsof) pots (and) patlids" (or It cups," L.M. lami).

124 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
aright.· All those who (1. 26) dweIlin the realm of King Sri Tribhuwanaditya
dhammaraja shaIl be exempt from calamity, exempt from misfortune All those
of the city of Arimaddanapor, together with King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammarnja,
shall have length of life.
All monks (il.Od) scholars, who see the benefit (and) detriment (1. 30) of
<I
.good (imd) evil (respectively), shall 1 be even as the two eyes ·of King Sri
Tribhmyanadityadhammaraja.· ~Il men who are of (good) family shall attemf
King Sri Tribhu",ana~ityadhammaraja. Everyone that is brave, who.are more·
than one thousand in number. whether it be the realm (and) country (1.34) ;of
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja that. any ·evil men (shall have) ravaged,'
or the city (and) realm of some other king, they shall take (it) in hand and shall
9
offer it to King Sri Tribhmyanadityadhammaraja. (1. 37) King Srirribhuwan~
adityadhammaraja shall keep up the succession of all the kings of old. From
4
the mouth of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja only decrees·which are quite
. in agreement with the La,Y shall issue.8 All those who caused pain to (other)
6 7
people shall become steadfast (1. 41) in virtue. The wisdom called eloquence
Trib~uwanadityadhammaraja
shall dwell in the mouth of King Sri at all times.
o king of devas ~ ·In the city of Arimaddanapur,
F
abounding in glory' (and) splendour, a . . which is far removed from
.8
shall King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja teach.
•••••••••••• 9
<10 king of devas, thus (shall it be) (1. 4)·In order to lift·up thy heart in
10!
(the execution of) all the (good) works of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja,.
I am . . . . . . speaking to thee do thou remember, do not forget, 0 king
11 I' j
.of devas, in the presence of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja (1.8) and
IS
1 The text has the relative p~rticle ma, ..who," before"the predicate,butifthat is pressed·thereis no.
predicateatall•. Thesame appliesto the nextsentence. CE. C 90.
\l CE. 13 34 n••C54, .
.3 The precise meaning issomewhat doubtful,thoughthegeneral purport is plain.
4 Meaning. prcsumilbly.that he is tocarryon their time-honoured traditions. It might, however. be
po~ibleto interpret it as meaningthat the king would supporta1ltb.eancientfamilies of his vassal princes.
6 Conjectural rendering. 0 As-tothe second ilia,see E30n•
.7 Or"sorrow." Butthere issomedoubtastothe meaning generally. The"a1l" might gowith the
, ;'peopte."and the force ofpa dirk is notabsolutely determined. r
8 An illegibleword b~ginning with !oi. 9 The meaningtlilan bum"ok is undetermined.
10 Or·t mayit be." Butthe interpretation ofthe wholeofthis passageis rather doubtful. '
II Thesenseofprollan is undetermined; it may bean advl:yb,with some meaning like"urgentdo."
111 Cf.A 4z n,· lS Cf.C 18 n•.

PARTU] MON INSCRIPTIONS
the Assemhly,· do thou practise-loving kindness. In time to come .as in times
past, do thou the. same.
S
u 0 king ofdevas! .' (I. 10) Do thou call Katakarmmanagaraja, do thou speak
'thus:. '0 king of Nligas, great in·strength,· great in supernatural power (and)
glory, lord of the.treasures'of the abode of splendour! In order to establish
5
accorda~ce
anew the religion (I. 13)of the Lord Buddha, do thou act in with
the saying of the Lord Gawaibpati. The city of Sisitis to stand for a thousand
(and) two hundreCl years8; (and) after that, when King Sri Tribhuwanaditya
dhammaraja (I. 16) shall bear sway inTattades,7thou shalt cause the whole realm
of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja to be completely within-an enclosure of
well being,8 like rising saplings of trees! (I. 19) The Lord Gawampati spake
i"9
to King In in such wise.
_ Then didKing Inspeakthus: rr. • • • • •10 my lord, I(am he) {l. 21) thatshall
keep watch over Tattades, which is the abode of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadham
maraja. All enemies who shall come, I too shall drive themaway. If the fameof
the city be eclipsed,lJ I too shall make it bright again. In all (I. 25) the (good)
Sri
works of King Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, Itooshallbestirmyselfatall times.
Ishallindeed grant a boonfor the sake ~f the'advancement of King SriTribhu
III 13
wanadityadhammaraja, who is.steadfastinthe_Law."
When King In hadthus received(him), theLord(1.29) Gawampati came down
againtothe world of men, (and)went to the sage named Bisnu, (and) having set my
lord the sage Bisnu on a high seat, spake (to him) thus : Thou, in company with
II
(I. 32) me and King In,; and Katakarmmanagaraja, and Bissukarmmadewaput,
shalt build a city called Sisiti (and) thereafter, in Tattades,in the city' of
l' No doubt.atanyrateprimarily,theBuddhistmonkhood.
II Cf. B13n. For"dotho!!"onemight~perhaps,put" to."
9 Thatis."act in the futureasyoudidiii the past"; lndraisrepresented as having alwaysplayed
tbepart-ofguardianangel in human affairs,and isexhorted tocontinue doingsointhis particularcase.
-4 Or"energy"; but"strength"seems moreappropriate here.
6 Presumablythisreferstothe NAgasbeingthe guardiansofsubterranean treasures.
8 Or"let"(or"may") "thecity ofS.stand"(Or"Iast"),etc.
'7 Apparentlythisrepresents Upper Burma orat least the part thereof in which Paganstands.
8 Or"happiness."
9 Theprecise senseofthis sentenceis-doubtful. Perhaps it means"make the wholerealm ••.. to
develop to perfection in anenclosure," etc., "likethe sproutingshoots of trees," \Vhether thesimilehail
anyreference to the protectionof saplings by surroundingthemwith a sortofsmalltemporary fence, I am
notsure,but it seems-posiible, and the protection to be given by the Naga king to t~e young, growing
kingdom maybeconceivedto beanalogous. -
10-Themeaningofl~ticisundetermined.
11 Lit. "be. interrupted," or perhaps "be cut off." For"bright" we might put "manifest" or
"celebrated."which-would be more-literal.
111 Readingdoubtful,andas tothe meaning cf.B 21 n. 13 Lit. ((increase."
17

126 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
AdmaddanapOr, my lord shall be (I. 35) King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja;
1
and shall uphold 2 the religion,of the Lord Buddha. Thus did the Lord Buddha
prophesy (concerning)my lord. ' '
"Therefore do I ask of my lord) '(that) my iord receive'my petition (and) be
3
not of another 4mind. (1. 39) There is a greatwork which it is good. that my lord
should do. The desire that my lorddesires is great: in ordertobecomea Buddha;
let my lord prepare indeed.5 All beings.shal1 shelter (in the) (I. 42) shadeof the
merit6of my lord, they shall fulfil all the desires of the Church.7 Therefore, my
lord, great sage, in
G
thy third existence, my lord, (dothau)enjoy the splendour of royalty.8 My lord,
do not abhor the splendour of royalty. Hereafter, (I. 3) in thy third' existence, my'
lord shall become a king of the Law. 9 At 'the time, when my lord is a king of the
Law, the glory of my lord shall be very]O great. In the place which my lord
(shall face ?), all foes shall fail (t6 make a stand?).u My lord shall shine
brightly (1. 7) like the noonday sun in autumn.!2 Inthe time'of my lord's reign,
the grandeur, (and) magnificence ofthis great earth shal1 belike(I. 9)
.' .•••13 14 ]5
the grandeur (and) magnificence of heaven entirely.]6
" All men, women, (and) children shall have length.of life, shall be free from
18
sickness altogether. All the people shall be exempt from calamity,
17
exempt from misfortune. They shall ~at plenty of food, they shall enjoy happiness,
Inthe realm of my lord, rain (I. 13) shall fall an hundred (and) twenty times,19(and)
,all the sap of this great earth also shall comeforth, allbarns (and)granaries shallbe
I' Or"become." , 2 Cf.A36n.
3 Possibly, ..for the sakeof this do I makea,requestof my lordj mylord,receive my petition", (or
" request"). ,I Thatis,"adverse,""unfavourable,"
5 Cf. B2[ n.Apparently the general meaningofthepreceding is: ,/Youhavesetyourselfa lofty aim
(i.e. Buddhahood).and must make everyeffortto attain it," 6 Or"piety." '
7 There is somedoubt as to the meaning: //lUll usually means"from," or"by" (with theagent). It
,is conceivable that here (and in H 17) it represents mU':Ii, "the Sage," i.e. Buddha, in which case the
renderingwould be"thedesires ofthe Sage andthe Church," 8 Cf. C13n.
~ That is,a legitimateand orthodox Buddhistking. 10 Cl. 030n.
, 11 Both thebracketed verbs in thispassagear,e somewhat doubtful as regardstheir meaning, and even
the reading-of the first one is byno meanscertain.
J~ Or, perhaps," like th~' sun atthe season when it isin the'meridian." i.e•.. noon." It appears that
sal'adasometimes means"season" ingeneral. Cf. C22 n.
13 The illegibleword is probablyonly a particlenotaffecting thesense.
11 Or"prosperity(and)welfare."
15 Tl1at is,theearth: thephraseiscommon in L.M.
13 Apparently mle(, (lil<e lI/ule(1 in B 10) merelyaddsemphasis,
1, Heauin~and meaning- of g1t·jp are doubtful. 1~ Cf. B 2I n,H Cf. 054.

PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS
full of all (manner of) goods.1 In the realm of my lord all those who were heretical
shail become orthodox entirely. Allthe monks' shall be full of virtue and good
conduct.. All the Brahmans, who know the Vedas,they shall fulfil all the Brahman
law; All (1. 19) theprinces shall ~arry out the1aw altogether.3 The four castes
II
they shall fulfil their law also.4 In all places the essence ofthe preaching of truth
shall be(made) manifest•. 0 my lord sage, (1. 22) the essence of the preaching of
truth shall cometo be (made) manifestby a king of the Law, who is glorious, whQ is
even as the leader of a caravan."
6
Then the sage (1'. 24) named Bisnii zealously received the saying of the Lord
TheraGawampati, (and said): (Itis) well, my lord 1 Hereafter, in Tattades, inthe
II
city of Arimaddanapiir, (it is) I that shail become a king (1. 27) named Sri Tribhu-
wanadityadhammaraja. The feet (and) handsof those (who) I also
,6
will support. The'~eligion of the Lord Buddha, that ..../ I also shall uphold.8
All the people shall Iexhortto keep (the precepts of) virtue, exhort to carry out the
Law. Women who carry on evil conduct (1.3I) shall I exhort to carry on good
conduct. All chiefs of country \districts), villages, (and) small towns, that are
decayed,9 I also shall make famous. The true principles of morality I also shall
10
exhort(them) to maintain.ll I shall be (I. 34) the thief bull (of the herd), the
12
candle ofall the people1"
13
My lord the sage having spoken (1. 35) thus, the Lord Thera Gawarilpati and
my lord the great sage Bisnii \vere well pleased 14; andthe Lord Gawampati, having
expounded all the prophecy of the Lord Buddha, to the end that all mankind
might attain to the heaven of Nirva~a, my lord went his ways.
Thereafter, King In came down from Tawatiil, (and) went to (I. 40) my lord
the sage Bisnii, (and)spake thus: My lord sage,greatin supernatural power (and)
II
1 Cf.E 20. 2 Cf.A 3211. 3 Cf. B2,1 n.
4 That is,thelaw applicable tothem. Or perhapsthesentence might he construed: "theyshall fulfil
the law,theyalso."
5 The rendering offers difficulties. Lit. thesentenceapparentlymeans r,theessence," etc., "ofaIdng,"
etc., "shall come(and) be manifest." The meaning of tl/,hbah and sa (if rightly so read) could not be
definitelydetermined. Cf.G 34.
6 lIlegible: perhapswe maysupply"are weak,"or the like.
7 Illegible: perhaps"isdecayed," or the like. Cf. H 4-5. 8 Cf. A3('n.
9 Or"ruined," or perhaps merely Ieobscure." Apparently it must be con,trued grammatically with
"chiefs," though it really refers to theconditIonoftheirdistricts.
10 Or" moralityand theGood Law,"asinB12. 11 Cf. B 13.
cr.
12 As tothedoubtfulwordtlltiJban, G 23.
13 That is, the light of the world. But it isconceivablethat /JIldli may represent L.1\1. pil!"l;i, ill which
case the meaning would be"the chief bull of the pasture of all mankind."
lJ Or"the Lord T.G. was well pleased with my lord the greatsage B."

128 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 1
glory, who hast loving kindness equally towards all, both those that are tmsty
J I
and those tha~ are hostile! My lord, together'with the Lord (1. 43) Gawaihpati
J
and me, and Bissukarmma, and Katakarmmanigar3ja, shall build
H
the city of Sisit. My lord, after building the city of SisIt, shalldepart (1. 2) from
thence, (and) thereafter, in Tattades, in the.city of Arimaddanapur, shall-become
Sri
a king named Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (and) shall uphold the religion of
3
the Lord Buddha. The Law (whenit is)decayed,4 shalt (thou) make manifest."
In orderto carry out fully all the (good) works (1. 6).of my· lord,:up in Heaven am
1,8 King In, who wield the va;ra.7 Down below isS the Naga king, who is great
in supernatural power (and) glory, who has coils a thousand·fold. In the four
quarters the four kings guarding the worId shaU keep (their) watch. All the
9 10
assembly of the four castes (1. II)'together with the 'princes11 who dwell in the
place that cannot be shaken, by reason IBthat the Lord Thera Gawampati
maintains (it),shall be exempt from calamity, exempt fro sorrow altogether.It
13 lll
AU the enemies of my lord shall be lacking incunning devices.
Hereafter, my lord, in (1. IS) the time (when) my lord is King Sri Tribhu
,I
wanadityadhammaraja, all scholars shall consider (and) investigate matte~s that
15
are firm (and) secure,17 that are deep, (and) shall fulfil the desires of the
18
Church entirely." (1. 18) Then the great sage named Bisnu, having heard
18 19
the saying of King In, to the end that thereafter (he) might see the advance
mentso of the religion.of the LordBuddha,lll (said): Right well, 0 kingof devas t
II
The.Lord Thera Gawampati has expoundedthat matter to mellll; (1.22) and thou'
1 Or"dost exercize": itseemslikely that pa impliesmorethan a merely static conditionof mind.
S Cf.B29n. Itwould almostseem from this passagethat "umll1s means "friendly,"in which case
Jrlos(C33.D 20) would probablymean"shalllove." ". 3 Cf. A~6n. 4 Or"obscured."
5 Or ".famous."or simply"clear," i.e. he shall,expound and explain it. when it has ceasedtobe
properly'understood and exactlyfollowed. " ,
8 It seems not quite certain whether wo' goes with s'II1ar or with ey; the objection to the former
construction is thatthis'conversation is taking place on earth,and wo'seems.inappropriate•. Ifitcan be
taken·with ey.the meaning wouldbe"Ihere."1'.1•••I, whom you seehere at present." '
.7 Lit.the It oaj"aweapon": cf. B 18n. . S Asto thesupposedforceofwll,cE. B21 n.
, Mythical, nothuman,kings, knownasthefour maharajas. , .10 Cf.B 13n.
tt
Or II the king." 12 Orfol1owingthealternativetextof II, ..which the LordT.G. maintains."
18 Cf. B13n. 11 Cf.B21 n. 15 Or"shal1becompetentto investigate."
J~ So literally: presumably it heremeans ••important." , .
17 Reading andmeaningdoubtful: eitheritisanotheradjectivegoingwith jml1'J ..firm,"ora noun.
III CE. F43 n. I' Cf.B 21 n~ to cr. F 27 n.
ill Possiblythespeech beginsat milO,.: "Totheend that I may see hereafter the advancement,"etc.
112 Cc.nccivably thee thee. isused adverbially: ..JUghtweli, 0 king ofdevas.did theLordT.G.expound,"
etc. Butthisseemsless probable. ·thewordsare equivalent tothefilii slidhu. s.idhu; ef. G2Ssupra and
Myazedi 17. . '

PART II] M6N INSCRtPTIONS
too hast expounded (it). Even as yeo two say', so.too hereafter, in order
1
'to uphold' the religion- of the Lord Buddha, (it. were) good that thou put.
forth (thy) strength: be not negligent! My lord the sage, having spoken
"3
thus to King In, was well pleased in spirit.
The prophecy that the Lord Buddha prophesiedtothe Lord (1. 27) Anan, the
questionthatthe.Lord-Gawariipatidesiredtohaveexplained,whichheaskedthe Lord
. . .
B.uddha, (and whereof) the Lord Buddha gave the answer to the Lord Gawampati,
urging the Lord Gawampati to go up (and) inform (l. 31) King In (ofit), the saying
that theLord Gawampati (and) King In came down (and) told to my lord the sage
Sisnu, the saying that the Lord Buddha·(1. 34) spake to the Lord Anan (saying) :
When my religionshall have gone on for one thousand six hundred (and) twenty
'f
eight years, my lord the sage named Bisnu shaH become king in (I. 37) the city of
Arimaddanapur, (and) shall bear the name of King Sri Trlbhuwanadityadhamma.
raja, (and) shalluphold myreligion"-he ofwhom the Lord Buddhaspake, (verily)
4
this (present) king is he. Monks, .scholars, Brahmans, aU· chiefs, (I. 41) all the
world of mankind, may you.all understand,li may you all understand, (that) this
king is he. Doubt not! .Doubt not! Doubt not!
8
No. II.
A FRAGMENTARVREPLICA OF No. I.
Descriptive..Account.
.36. This record is apparently engraved on two stones; which are now in the
Pagan Museum and art:? numbered 4 and- 5 respectively in Section I of the
of
Catalogue (19°6). Their original location was about 50 feet east the Tharaba
(Sarabha) Gate, Pagan. .One set of ink-impressions, consisting of seven pieces,
wa~ supplied to me, together with photographs of the impressions. . Each of the
stones presumably has four inscribed faces, but of the first stone (No.5 in the
Catalogue) the impressions of only three faces.were sent from which it would
j
se~m·to follow that the first face ofthat stoneis illegible. Thestones areevideptly
remn~nts·of what were originally two columns: about·two-thirds of the original
record have been lost. altogether, and the remainder on these seven faces is much.
damaged and in a poor state of preservation. The dimensions of the stones and
f Cf. A42 n.,B:31 n. :a Cf. A36 n.
3 The general effectof this rather obscurepassage.seems to be an exhortation to Indra totakeactive
steps tocarryout the intentofthe two·messages, hisown andGawarilpati's. It is possiblethat the clause
attheendisalsotobe read as dependent un the principaldause : (and) be not negligent."
II
• Cf. A36n. . fi Cf. III D 14,V49'SI. .. e Astoga;;" cf. A 6 n,

13° EPIGRAPHiA BIR-MANICA [VOL. 1
other details given in the Cataloguear.e as follows :~NO.5, height 4 ft. 8 in. ;
breadth 2 ft. sin.; number oflines on the obverse face (which faGe this is, is not
clt~ar to me) 17,onthe remaining faces 26.. NO.4, height 3ft.; breadth2 ft. 9 in.';
number ~f lin~son the obverse face (unidentified) 24, on the remaining faces 57.
particula~s precis~Iy
These 'do not tally quite with those of the impressions, which
are somewhat unsatisfactory in some respects; but the point is not very material.
Thespace covered by lettering as,measured on,the impressionsis as follows:
Face A (no impression supplied); B, height I ft. JOt in., breadth 2 ft. tin. ;<:;,'
height 2 ft., breadth 2 ft.,3 in.; D, height I ft. 10 in., breadth 2 ft. j E, height 2 k
2! in., breadth 1ft. lot in. {avarying amount, some 6in., being .bro~enoff atthe
ends ofthe lines); F, height 1 ft. loin., breadth I ft. 2 in. tapering down to 5 in.
(the stone being apparently broken off a,t the beginnings of the lines); G,'height
2 ft. 7! in., breadth 2 ft. 6 iR i H, height 2 {t. 3-! in., breadth I ft lot in. Faces
A-D correspond \vith the stone numbered 5; E-H \vith the one numbered 4 in
the Catalogue. In a general way the .letters resemble those of No. L, They
measure about! in. in height, and lettert'about the same, to 1 in., in length. The
li~es;', s~bscript al~o
space betweenthe in the absence of and superscript letters, is
aboutthe same, though rather variable. ' .
37. The variants between thisin'scriptionand No. I (so far as they- could be
ascertained) havlng been' given in the' notes on the text of No. I, it will suffice to
give here a concordanc.e of the two texts, with an indication of the first and last
words discernible (though not necessarily completely legible) on each of the seven
faces or fragments of Np. II of which impressions are available :--- .
No. 11. , No. I.
Face A (no impression supplied).
..
B' 15 n.. (tirwz/: . . spkan) , , C 11-28
....
C " 16 11. (upas .'.. moy) o 32-53
D 'IS n. -(cna ..'. mal F 2-18.
E 18 11. (kum ... sdas) F 18-40
F 14 11. (and one quite illegible line)
(tarley r/elz t-e!z) ... G 6-20
n.
G' 21 (szl satru) G3o-H 13
n.
H IS (colt smin), H 19-37,
38. The only importance of this inscription lies in the fact that it has served
in certain cases to restore or confirmwords that were lost or doubtful in No.1.
These have been indicated in the notes on the text of the latter.

PART II] MtJN INSCIUPTIONS
No. III.
THE MVA&AN (OR MVAGAN) INSCRIPTION OF MVANPAGAN, PAGAN.
.Descrz'ptz"ve·Account.
39. This inscription (with the two following) was referred to in paras. 45-6
of the Report of the Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, Bu.rma, 1912.
It is on the bank. of the Myakan .lake at the. foot of the hill known as
Taywindaung and is engraved on the four faces of a stone column, the
dimensions of which (as communicated to me by Professor Duroiselle) are as
·follow·s :-height, 4 ft. I in~; breadth pf' the two broader faces, I ft. 8 in., of
the narrower faces,' ft. 4 in. Three sets of ink-impressions were sent to me,
together witl~ photographs of one of the sets. The space covered by the
lettering, as measured on the impressions, is as follows :-Face A, 3 ft. by I ft.
sl in.; H,.2 ft. I I in. by I ft. I in.; C, 3 ft..by I ft. 5-~ in.; D, I ft. 9 in. by I ft.
2 in. The letters resemblethose of the preceding inscriptions in theirgeneraltype
i
and character, but are smaller: they measure about in. in height, and letter
i
t about"! in. in length. The normal space between the lines is about in. The
inscription is a good deal damaged, and on the whole is in an indifferent state of
preservation. A large piece of the surface 'of Face A (affecting 11. 19-23) has
been destroyed, and the top and bottomof this face as well as some parts of Faces
Band C are so blurred as to be practically illegible.. The column has also been
broken off at one corner at the top, so that the ends of" 11. 1-5 of Face Band
the beginnings of, n. ~7 of Face C are lost. .But most of the missing text has
I
simil~r lin~s.
been restored by the help of inscriptions Nos. IV and V, which are on
40. The occasion for the making of No. III was the digging of a tank or
reservoir for the purpose of storing water for irrigation, by order of. King
Kyansittha. The name ,given by him to the tank is stated in 0 I I-2, but the
reading is not quite certain: The greater part ofthe inscription is, however, taken
up by a statement of the Kyansittha legend, in its more extensive form as outlined
in H 25, 27. The proper names of the pers~nsmentioned in it have b.een given in
~ 26.. The lengthened form of the' king's name in 0 6-8 should be noted~
Apartfrom the lexicographical material contained in this record and from its variant
version of the royal legend, the chietpoint of interest in it is its insistence on the
king's care for th~ temporal welfare ofhis people (C 27-06). It is ilOt, perhaps;
eitherlinreasonable oruncharitable to assume that considerations affecting the royal
revenue contributed in some degree to the stimulation of such laudable aims i but

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL., I,
there is no' r~ason to doub~ the genuine existence of the ethical and religious
motives to which the king ascribes his action.' Further, there is a brief. 'statement
of his' anointme~t (C I 1-4) a~d of the issue by him of a revis~ edition of the
Buddhist Scriptures(C 15). The inscription begins (A 1-6)andends (D 15;'7),With'
Pali passages, but the one atthebeginningis almostillegible. The dates mentioned
K~et)
are, first, the date of the foundation of Prome (here called Sri in the year of
Buddha's Nirva\1a (C 3-6), of course 'a purely legendary da~e and, secondly, the
j
Buddhist year 1630 with reference to the king (C g-u), as to which see§§28-9'
Of the date of the inscription itself there is no further evidence save what has been
indicated in § 27.
4t. No. IV represent,s a fragmentary'repetition of the text of,this record made
for use on another, similar,,occasion. The first part'of No. V also runs closely
parallel to' these two. The variants exhibited by No. IV and the first part of
No. V are given in the notes appended tothe text of No. Ill.
Text.
A
I. [a §ri II nanio] ta[ssa bha]ga[vat]o a[rahato sarilmasarhbuddha]-
2. [ssa 00 oJ uppatti(ril) ••.... '.. ',' . ~ •.. " .•..•..••.
3 (ta) ," "" ihar
eo •••
4. (di) '..•.• : ..........•.. " uppa(tti dhammar~jassa) ••••
.
"
5. . . . . . . sato . . . . .. k . • . d . sa(hi) . • ~ . -. . ~ • .
1,1 • • •
6. . . . . . '. . ~ .' . . . . . . . • . • . . . . . . . " pati (no it <;ley)
7. kal ayuk (w) (\>ar cwas inim cnaIl)] kyek Buddha ti-
8. dey Kasapa ktir das Qey 10k wo' blal)htirley
1
9. nisrey [Qu]n Barat}asi,(da gol)Sma) tirley taw han Isipata-
II
10. namigadawanamahawihar kal gol) tirla poy [gna smi]-
D 4
1I. n dha(r)mmaraja 6, wo' dasnal) su(ril)gil)h rna nom drap dificam [c]wa
t2. [s] koti girlon 8 blal:t'1 kul da[n] mail s(i)18pa pun karl) rno]-
13. y prakar 9 Qey sas kyek]O Buddha tirley Kassapago[l)]
11 11
14. taw hak bnat ay(u)k blal:t cuti'I3nor [gJo[l)]UtIun da[s]
12 II
1 Sic,for Kassa/a. II Or t,iuiz. About here Vbegins tobe legible./ .. 3 V hasgolzh.
~ V hasgolzh. 5 The,. isdoubtful both hereand in V. 6 V hasgirlun.
'1 V insertsn. 8·The vowelmaybei both hereand in V. 9 Vhas no stop here.
]0V probablyhas kyak. ]] V hasgol;th. ' 12 Orayuk.
lSVhas cuti. 14V hasgolzh.

PART II] MDN INSCRIPTIONS 133
15. han' [kir]k(u)1t smin <;Ie[y <;Iu]n '.plltaliputtana[g](i)[rr
.1
kal
16. gol)3p(n]a[n 1paraca~jurimok [moy] ge[I~] ktir das [upoan]
f
1
17. (gol) 5kuJm tirla6poy[gna smilldha(r)[mmJarajamaar das[smiJn[Pata]-
18. [liputtanag](i)[r7 go~8 kuya] .(i)r ,y(i)[ses] blab 9 p~l!k [uJt m~ha[ja]·
19. [n gumlu]n 10 blal;1(h) [kul dan man] s(i)ll1 pa pu[n] rna ka[bmoy]
[prakar p-ar das-rajadha](r)[mma 12 cas t](U)y·19 taw bak [bnat a]-
20. II
21. [yuk] blab n[cut]i [n]o[r gob If tlun da]s han kirk(u)115 smin Ra-
22. m [c;I(? [<;I](u)n 16 [AyodhJ(apurl 7. a) [kaJI go[b 18 kum] ci [pnan pJa[r]a-
23. cak ju[mnoJk [tlJUll ...19 [dJ(il}[n Ayodhapur weJl21 [pnan goI)]"
liD II
24. kum tirla [poy gna smill dha](r)[mmaraja ma das hanJ kirk(u)[125
23 1!4
sminJ
25. [Ram gob kuyaJ .(i)[r wJ(i)[ses blal;1 p~uk utmahajan gum]-
29 27
26. [loilJ kul [dan m]an s(i)[1 pa pun kat) moy prakar t](u)-
28 II ti
27. [y taw bak bmt ayuk] 30 bla[b cuti nor] gO[l;1 <;ley]
II 81
28. [kal kintir tirla poy kyek Sakyamuni~3 das risi BisnuJ
311
29. [rna nom riddh](yaoubhaw ma) [go' a](bhinan m~un:lS ~a taw hantul)
94 95 97 .
B
I.:lR [srefi] (ma imo' Kelasaparw,ra)-
2.
[ta3
' II
kal gob
to
kyek
41
Buddha til(rley Sakya).-
] Perhapskirl!lll.both hereand in V. ' .
II V hasPtifalipuUQ.llaga,'(the ,'owel of the last syllabIc is not certainineithertext).
3 V possiblyhasgo(zh ku';'. 4 V hastle(lh. 5 V hasgo!zh. S V hastirla'•
.. V hasPti!aliputtimagar (thou~hthe vowelofthelastsyllable is not quite certain ineithertext).
8 V hasgobh. 9 V inserts 1\ here. 10V possiblyhas.glln/luli. 11 V.has silt
II! V perhaps has rtijatllzamma. J3 V has tliy. 14 V hasgo~zh.
15 V probablyhaskirkul. 10 Or tlun. V has!/u;;.
J7 V apparentlyhas Ayudhyaplil' (which is followed by IIl. butthe spelling of the third syllableis
. doubtful1n bothtexts. Here in III a largepiece of the surface of thestone has perished, affecting the
middle portionsof A 19-23 (whichhave been restored I:!y thehelpof V 12-4),and fro(l1 the amount ofspace
avnilable here it would seem that theremay havebeena shortword (e.g.weI) after Ayoclhapul'.
18 V has[o(lh. IJ A word ofonesyllable, probablyendingin r or n. l.'O Orrjuiz.
21 Vomits weI. 22 V hasgO(lh. 23 Vomits kun,. 24 V perhaps hastarla.
2~, V probablyhasl.-id-,ll. . 23 V hasgo(dl. 2'; V insertsn. 2S V hasgun,lmi bla!a.
Z:l Or silo V perhapshas sil here. £0 Or tiyuk. Vprobably hasayllk. 31 V hasgollh.
32 Forfirla poy kyek, V apparently hasdirdasky{i~ Buddhatil-ley. ,3 V has SlJkyallll/lli II.
:H Insteadof I/OJlI V ha'i jl/of; 3'. V has ab!lt'ilti!z. 30 Or 1Il~lil/,as V seemsto have.
37 Orhallfli/.II!; V has. Thelast partof this line(in round hrackets) isquite illegible in III and has
beenrestored from \'. Thesameapplies totheendso( B 1-6.
3d The first iIle!~ible word isapparentlya mOliosyllolble; it <;eems toenJ in s and mayhegin with t or k.
III thelJextword it islil(elythat thevowelof the fir.st syllableis·i nnd the initialconSOnant may beh, Uut
itseems very uncertain.
3J Or K~ltisapll1.bblJla(or ·pabbatn): theword is'not ver~'legible in V.
o \' hasgO~lh• 41 V has k"a~.
IS

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
.[ VOL. I
. [ 'J
3. mut;l1 1 ..,. 1;1, . . .. (J.)1'(r1 m a-rII a-n-a)-
4. tasa[fia1;19 tir]l[ey fiac] risi (Bisnu rna sda)-
5. s smin dha(r)[mm]araja[c;ley c;luil]4.Ari[m]a[ddan]ap(ur rna)
6. [st1;>al] sa[sana tirley ci utirl]e[y] sc;li(k)
7. [gJap p[umas
6
tirley] kti[r k-im] ukal go[I)]
6
8. [nor gnis tirley pan yiryas pan] (rna j)i-
II
9. (rnok lah pan) t(al 7 rna nom) [sJe[k] t[uro,,,j .
8
10. [turow gal)]9 • c;leI) 10 [kum] (par) 11 [uJt (r)[I]am HI ca[kk]a[wa~­
l ~3 tuy u[yJir[yas 1;>aJr gob. c;lel)l;; dre[p] ti-
II, Ii
[n cup Brahm]aIok [mleb] yirya[sJ 1;>ar
12.. 16 II
13. (ci) [c;le]l) [drepcis cup] Aw(i)[c]imahanara
17
k [mJlel) 19 ro[w go]!) da ut yiryas
,14, 18 II liD
15, turow saCk gal) c;leJl) dre[p a]r p(i1)a-
21 22
16. (') [ut dis cas blal) tun I[o]p tu[n]
113 114 .] 26
17, [han mukh]a(p)at kyek!l7 Buddha [t]irley~8 k~·
26
18. 1gOQ
29
[t]irley Ananso Da[c] ginr[U]1i
31
[ky]e-
19. kas [Bu]ddha
93
[ti]rley
34
(rna sum)
36
a[sc]ar [m]a norm]
20. ku p[r]ati[ha]r r.1a ro[w] gol) 98 k[t]irascar [pa]
21.1i(Ii)[1i]or97 [kiriJil)
38
blal) a(,ti)[t
3U
kl;>]01'1 klo[Ii
40
sum]
22. [1;>ip41 tey mey mukh]a(p)at~ kye[k4~ Buddha ti]-
.23. [rl]e[ymJa row [dJinnal" [thar] blal)" sman het
II
1 V hasSaJ:yamulIi II. 1I The precedingwordsare practically illegiblein both texts.
,3 Orperhaps·ilillII. V has·,Li~lIf. Inthe Pilioriginalofthisloanword the j'swould bedoubled,
butthereisno traceofthat here. .
4 Orrid: the readingofboth texts isdoubtful. 5 V hasgap-pumas. e V hasgDM,.
7 V insertsI. Theprecedingwordsare verydoubtful inbothtexts, 8 V hassnk.
9 V hasgobh. . 10 V probablyhatrlelzh.
11 V seemstohavepar,butbothtextsareobscure here. IS Orperhapsdlam.
13 V has cdfaffllil. l' V hasgo!:zh. Iii V hasrle!ih. 16 V hasml,fa1l.
17 V isquiteillegiblehere,but probablyhasrle!zh; .
18 Thesecondvowel in thiswordshouldbei, butmightbereadi in both texts, 19 V has mlebh.
20 V hasgD!I1I. 21 V hnsgofzh. Ii Vprobablyhas;e!/h.
13 Thereadingofthisword isdoubtfulin both texts. . ~~ V.hasblabh.
15 Apparently this isthe rightreading: d.VIII A8.
Ie A reading millthomni isconceivable~ .a7 V has Itytilt. llII V insertsII here.
1I9 V hasge!zh. :lO V probablyhas .""llntla. S1 V has,u,..im. Sj V hasIIy4".
ss VomitsBuddha. 34 V insertsII; 96 The reading isverydoubtful in bothtexts.
3a V hasgofzh /I. 37 V leem~to have /innoP', andperhapsinlerts It" afterit.
S8 V probablyhalki,.ji/Jh : at any ratethe final letteris i,., .
119 Itisdo••btlul whetherthe,reading is u{orwhether there issome initialconsonant (and, ifto,which).
to Professor Duroisellesuggests HOff,answering to I••M. kluiw•••tobend the knee," but klo,; seems
.certainin III andatleast probablein V. .
" V has11l~"p. ·Ji See B 17 n. 48 V has It"till. H V hasdin~al,
.46 V probablyhatbla!lh.

Epigraphia Blrmanlca No. III. VOLUME I, PLATE IX.
THE MYAKAN INSCRIPTION OF MYANPAGAN, PAGAN.
A B
z
4
6
8
10
12
18
20
22
2&

PART It] l\i6N INSCRIPTIONS 135
24. kir-i[rn ky]e[k] Buddha tirley row'
J I WO,3
25. tirla akab saCk he]t ci kyek Buddha ti-
4 Ii
26. rI[ey] gum[l]un saCk] tirla grun [n] mu he[t] ,
8 '1 8
27. (man)
9
[t]irla'10 [gru]n
11
yeo nh]ay Anan]lI d[nab]13
'28. [ey nac ri]s[i] Bi[sn](u)U [rna jno]k riddh(i)16 rna sda[s]
29, s[rn]in dha(r)mmaraj(a) rna st[~]al sasan(a) e[y] da g[ob] 18
16 17
c
(rna ey grun 19. kyeklOBuddha tirley galJ ro)w (gol)21
I.
(blab" tirley kinkal krirn kintir smin dharrnmaraja ku)
2. 113 94
3. (tiTley Anan 25 row wo'
118
uhay Anan
l\7
qey) [c]nam rna
4. (ey snirbban gob is risi Bisnn 29 kukon) [ey] Ga[w]ampa[t]i 30 k[u] ,
5. (smin In31 ku Bissukarmma311 ku Katakarmma}[nagaraja]33 s[k]indam
,
. q(u)n 34 "
6. (moy rna imo') [Sri K~]e[t blabali scu'ti]
38
nor gob.aT s[-]a[r]
7. (das ~e)[y BrJahmalok n[kaIgoJb
38
Cut d]e[watawJ
311
8. [gumJI[un sniman] or cis dassmin dha(r)mmaraja [qJe[y ti jnok]
'0 'I 411
9. wo' • mu kal [ma q]eb " 5cis das'yo. nor [m]a'ey [sni]- ,
43 45
[rbban461n](i)[m tuJrow klam pi c[w]as [cnam] Qey kal g[o]b ge[h]
10. f7 48 49 50
1 V has ki,,·jlll. ~ V haskylik. ·3 V'inserts II.
4 V hasta,la. IVbeginsat thispoint with '4!a{I,andmustthereforehave'readti,la'lJr tarla'.
,~ V'haskytilr. 8 IV probablyhas larla,orti"la: V probably tarla'.
'1.V probablyhas k·jm,certainly notpun. . 8 IVand Vhave'mo'. ,
t The readingisdoubtful inallthetexts. Conceivably filada mightberead. ,10 V hastll,la.
JJ V hask·jm. a V has Antl1lda. ]9 V hasdna!t1l. 14 V hasBisnO.
16 In III no final i isvisible, bllt Vhas itclearly. IV)squite illegiblehere.
18 Possiblythere isa '/J;r,ima,andweshould read°raj. IVand Vare illegible here•.
n Or perhapssa}anti; but IV and V havesalana,, III V hasgo{lh; ]J V hltll !-im. !lO V hask..Ytik.
on
II V hasgobll. _Thewords in round brackets inC 1-7areadapted from IV,as III isbroken ~ere.
ti V has6la~hII. 23 V insertsIt/a here. 11·1 IV mayhavedl:arillmariij, VpossiblydJzamm,;;.rtij..
ill V hasA"anda, 28 For '-0'111'1110' Vhas "'1110'. !7 :v hasAntlllda. 28 V hasgoll.
" V insertsD. £0 V inserts !I. 3] V has[nilra Q. 91 V insertsII. '
S3 IV appears to nave Kafa~tll'm>nantigar4ja or°rtij(perhaps). V i"serts" after'the name.
9,1 Orperhaps4t..n both hereand in IV. V has (/lin:, !l5 IV and V insertII here.
84 IV and V have seuti, It is just possiblethatin lit weshouldalsoreadseflti: the text is badly
blurredhere. 3. V hastoM.. • -38 V hasgobh,
3:1,Thereis a Imall blurred space here.which at firlt led me to conjecture that it concealed some
short wordsuch as 10k; butas IVand Vhave nothing,it is probablynutrelyaccidentalorperhapsthe result
ofan originnl flaw.
40 IV hasI,,,;,lon. :1] IV probably has dhtlrmllfo,iij, V probablydhatnmariija, .:1 V hasti',
49 IV hasmo', II Vhastier-h. 4S V inserts ktil. 16 V has 71i,bball.
17 IV has 1M';',V IMm (orpouiblylhim). 48 IV (and probably VI inserts ii, 1~ V hasgolah.
&0 IV hast!etl, Vt!,M.. In HI thereis a small unexplained space after thi: word,as in C7,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
II.
sdas smin dhammaraja
1
[gey] 9(u)n
II
[Arima]dda[n]apiIr
3
hantu1' [pan
capra}
J2. sat Ii [rna gft]i'6[n]a s[n]i' 1 clac 8 d[n]e[n 9 1?ar cwas d]i[ncam] ha[ntu]l
ra[ta]-
13. [na]si[nghasana rna] ftin las rnatmo], [s]ak srim s[g]o' [muddh]abhi-
10
14. sek [n]a indrabhisek • sd(u)nn imo' gna smin Sri Tri[bhu]wa[nadi]-
IS. tyadhammaraja scua[l,l] tug(u)r13 sis(ii)1 I kindam [u]t [pi]tak trey
19 • ,t III III
16. [skink[a]1 bJ(u)[ru], [dh]a[rmm]a18 d[mlas pharh singir sk[u]tir ut
17 19 II
maha-
17. jan gurhlun
lID
[~na IhiJnmabay
29
staw 9
C
[Y uJposa[th]as(i)[1]113 ut
1l6
18. [kuJ kal n94 spu[k]
25
tinlfir tinra[nS7sJwar [rna tm](u)[y1l8 nJa [th]ar rna
19. yas rna iiin lak [nJa [r]a[t2a du]rhpo!)h 30. pi(r)kar31 bla!) splop
32
mahaja[n g]urhlun qe[y sw]a(rg)a [slu'no'J apa-
20. 33 34 II35 36
y pan s[c]u'rol;lh38 kul [pk]a[w dh]a[rmmJa [qey] kqip maha-
21. 37 39
40
[jJan [gu]rh{lu]n [kal] gna smin dharmmarajaU go!) [tos] dha-
22. II 49
23. [rmma ciJ y[a]n bi[nrJu' sadhu[kaJr [oa]!) gum[lun46 row] bi[nru]
,,43 44 45 47
24. brey rin-ut c[nJam kum 49 en] go!) [dJa min kyek B(u]-
18 60 51 59
I V hasdhaYlIlillardja. In IV the first partofthe word isblurred, butitprobably ends·"aj.
S InIV thevowel mayalsobeeithershortorlong; butV hast/l1ir. 3 V inserts II here.
,j V has antill. 5 IV and V have pmleaprtistid. (In IV the'lIirama is notclear.)
e IV hasgni. 7 V hasslii. 8 IV has elee, Veither elieor perhapselae.
~ IV appears to havediiu7,i ordi,ieli, V probablydlirlli. 10 IV hassek.
11 Conceivablysdiili. The vowel isdoubtfulin IV and Valso, though probably 1/.
12 IV probablyhas o"tij. V may have T"ibhu·. 13 Perhaps tugl;r, IV has tllgur,Vtugftr.
U Perhapssisul,as IVapparentlyhas. V has sis/H. 10 Vinserts t~al.
16 IV and Vinsert II aftertrey. 17 IVhas baruor perhaps buru,Vprobablyburu.
18 IV and Vinsert rna, which is needed here.
II V has whatlookslikesigir,butthere maybea superscripth,makingsihg£r. 20IV hasgllmloh.
21 Vhas lhi (or possibly Ihih=, with an ellacedjiupcrscriptIi overthe next word; butIcanseenotrace
.of it). ~J IV and V here insert II. 23 Perhaps,<sil. IV is doubtful, Vhas°lil.
21 IVomits II. ~:. Vappears tohave lIIasjak(orSl'a~; or lilapnk, orsapuk) lllpok.
2d IV probably has t£lIl%lr. '" IVand V havetillrah,which is the usual spelling.
28 IVappearsto havetmuy. In Vthe vowel isnotclear. 2J V has"atolltl. 00 IV has dumpob.
:1I IV and V havepraktir,the usualspelling.
j2 V here inserts somethingwhich looks likeIi.1/.0 silas ilia,.but being ncar the end of the line the
passageis not verylegible.. 3~ IV hasgumlon.
34 The reading isalmost certnin, though insomeof the impressions itlooks rather like swarda. IV
simply has swar, Vswarga. 36 V inserts mahere. llO IVand V have sluno'. 31 Vhere inserts 11.
at! IV has scUroil, V sCftroilh. 3J In V thep looksV'erylike Ill. ·10 IV hasgumloli.
41 IVapparently has dliormmartii (certainlydharmtllOor, Vprobablydlzallllllardja.
42 V has goll. 19 IV oinits-n.
H The yon looks like yuh,buttheextra mark is probablyaccidental: IV and V have yan, the usual
spelling. ·If. V has lIIahtijan insteadofria!!. 16 IV hasgllfnloJi.
41 Thereseemsto be no room herefor a final " but IV and V have binyu'. 4d Forri,l-utV hastam.
H Vapparently has kuri1,andperhapsomitsthe II. 60 Vhasgot/h.
ul V has lIlun. IV mUll or possibly mall. 59 Vhaskytik.

PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 137
25. [ddha] tirle[y byJades kintir g[n]a smin dha(r)[mm]ara[j]a ku
1 I 3
ti[rJley .
26. [Anan]C rowitl(i)n kyek [BuJddha [tirJley [bya]desgob 7
I I> II
27. [tlun] d~ u('mleb's [yJan g[nJa [smin dhaJ(r)[mmJaraja ma [go'
9
bya}
28. [des n]or kyek Buddha tidey mil. j[n]o[k me]tta [karu]-
29: Qiqey [s]a(rww)a[s]a[tt]a .. 1.10 [n dnab sJa(nvw)a[satta guril]lon
11
D
1. [sgo]' suk sey subhik [sk]al~ byil b(na) 13
2. jap jap sthan rna kab sak qek [rnJa kab
3. sak ti' bna rna [kJab sak t[wi]1 w[iJr [ti]-
R
4. da13 pay gna smiil dha(r)mrnara[j](a) tbi[nJ k[ul q]e-
11
5. [k ki]r k[uJl [kJumbar [pdaJs kul ti' bria
15 16 17
6. tw[iJll8 ",ir [k]a[lJ go[b d]a ma g[nJa smiri[SJr[i] T[rJi
D
·7. bhuwanadityadha[m]rnarajarajiidhirajapararniswa-
8. rabala[cJa[kkr]awar [pum]rey [mJa pa [yaJ11 ku [c
Jin [jmOJ-
19
9. [r] bintail 21 (m)a go['] bya[des] nor ky[eJk
20 22
10. Buddha [t]irley sa(rww)a:[nu 23 bodhiJsat I k(i)[rrl1
11. [k]urnbar 116 wo' blab 26 k[uJl irno' [MJah~ni-
1 V possibly hastarllY.
\! V inserts nhere. .3 IV probably hasdharllima1'oj, V perhaps,zlla1llIllar,ija.·
4 V has Allanda. ~ V has mUll,lV apparentlyalso. GV has kyo/;;. 7 Vhas go~it.
8 Atthispoint V diverges entirelyfrom III and IV. ~, IV probably hasdha1'lllIIuJrtij.
10 OrsarMa' orsabbao• .. IVappearsto havesa'''ID'lIIa' and after'satta it would seem (perhaps)to read
lIiitiy, which would form a compoundwith what precedes(asin III 0 13). Butthat cannot be thereading
of IU.Possiblyit has''lIIal(a),or'bal(a). , .
U Here also sarbba' or sabba' is possible,but IV probably has .sarw'lIIa' again, A compound word,
partSanskritand partPali, is notan uncommonphe·nomenonin these M&n texts..
J3 The reading·seems nearly certain. IV hasbaniaII,but thereisnoroom for that here.
13 IV has tj"/G',
14 Thereis possibly.a flirtillla here(makingo"tij),but not in IV,which appears to haveJllar/lllll<1Yiija.
16 IV possibly hask.ir here. Id IV has kllmbii1'. 17 IVhasMa'.
18 In IVthe'Voweloft~oil isquite clear. .
l~ IV may perhaps have Tribha'llla",'; Neither in III nor in IV is any '';)iriima visible over the l' of
°is'lllara\ but V 42 has <is'War. In III the cof'cakkrii' looks as if it had another csubscript under it;but
thisdoesnot appear in IVor V. IVprobably hassimply'cab-ii' (the .iiscertain); V4z °cakkrjjo.
be
ro There maybe a doubtastothe lengthof the vowel injill/iI',but that'appearsto the reading ofIV.
21 IV has bumtdli. .
mJ The actual reading appears to bepa,nocl'oss-bnrbeing visible, but that is certainlywrong-, and IV
has mao .
S3 Or sarbba'or ~'lJbbao. 1Vis also doubtful here.. Isee 110trace ofany doubling of the ,i.
St Both III and IVseem tohave kir. ~5 IV has klttitbjir,. ~<l IV has t/ly(ortuy) instead ofbla!J.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[VOL. I
I z. rbban [LJak Ch(u)[yJ 1 (Kh)i II (R)i[y 3 tnJas [na] 4 tirtu[y Ii u]-
13. t [mJanus(sa) 6 satta[niJkay (kiq)em 7 surh{n)en
14. gurh)oJi u[t] b[nJab sadh[uJjan gurhlun or gr(a)
II 8 9
15.i110 II 0 • [n]ama[dh]eyyavasen'_e[v]asilale-
16. kha 'ya[m]=uhama (ta)pi[t]a dhammarajen~ rna-
J1
17. hapufiamatiddhinaN ti
II 0 U (,0.
Translation.
A
Prosperity! Honour to the Blessed One, the Saint, the Truly Omniscient!
The origin (of the king oI the Law?). . . . . .... . . . . . . •
(I. 4) . . . . . . . . . . . the origin (ohhe king of the Law?) . . ..' . . . ; . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .-. ... . .. . . 13
,. .;
At (1. 7) the time ,,,hen life (lasted?)1l for twenty thousand years the Lord
Buddha Kassapa came into existence in this world and my lord'found a resting
place atthe city of Benares and then dwelt in the Isipatanamigadawanamahawihar.15
At that time our lord (I. II) this (present) king of the Law was a wealthy man
16
who had property amounting to eighty koti'sF He made offerings, observed (the
1 Or possibly eMa" whichseemsunlikely. 2Theinitialconsonantissomewhatdoubtful.
3 Theiniti:llconsonantmight possiblybeN or D. It isalsopossiblethatthese twosyllablesform one
\Vord; in fact until itisascertainedwhetherthispart ofthe propernameconsistsof Burmesewords,muchof
itmU!ltremain dubious. Itdoes not appear to be Man inanyease. IV hasa different naQle here.which
(afterMahaniYbban) apparentlyreadsd ••h•KiWk • (or°lo or°l). Icannotrestoreor'explainit.
4 IV probably has tft4S-lIa~ 6 IV probablyhastirt,!y. . e IV hasmanusor perhapsma/lUs.
7 IV seemstoreadkir!Imalso,butinbothtexts thc;reisasubscriptsign ratherlikeu,curvedtothelert,
quitedistinct in 111but bynomeanscertain inIV. "herethe markmaybemerely accidental. This mark
ishardtoexplain. Itmightbean irregularwayofwriting kir!uem, butit thereis sucha word I have not
succeededintracingitelsewhere. Oneistemptedtoread /dif.cem,which would make.tolerablesense, but I
find no lie written in this fashion. Conceivably the initial might be " but 1: seems more probable, and
possibly(butimprobably) one mightread; insteadofi. Theseuncertaintiesalsothrowdoubton theidentity
ofthenext word.
8 IV omits il. :I iVhasgumloti. 10 IV hasfya,i, the usual andcorrect spelling.
11 Orpossibly#halita. IVmayhaveoneorotherof thesereadings, or possiblythapitti. Itshould be
'hopie-;. . . . .
1:1 IVhas IIUlhOppullao, unlessthe extrastrokeisaccident31. The;'shouldbedoubled, but thereis no
traceofdoublingvisibleinour texts. ' .
a-i.
13 This Pali exordiumwas evidently on the linesoU A butsomewhat longer. Somuchofitis
illegible that it hasnotbeenconsideredpossibleto makea satisfactoryconjectural restoration.
It Thereisanillegible,vordhere, butthegeneralsenseisCtear, the reference beingtotheperiodin which
the normal duration of human life. according to Buddhist ideas, extended to the length mentioned. Cf.
J.R.A.S.•1914,p.678•
15 Thegreat monasteryofthe deer parkofIsipatana, near Benares. 1'; See I G 3tr.n.
1. In Indian rt.'Ckoninga koti istenmillions, but L.M.kuitisonlyahundredthousand. Thepointisnot
very material. p:lrticularlyas the valueof the unit is not speCified. 1imaginethat the kriY~ciP{J~(Jmaybe the
oneimplied.

Epigra"hia Birmanlca No. III. VOLUME I, PLATE X.
THE MYAKAN INSCRIPTION OF MYANPAGAN, PAGAN.
C 0
Z
2
4-
4
6 6
8 8
10
10
12
12
14
14
16
16
18
20
22
24
26
28

PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 139
precepts of) virtue,1 did pious deeds of dh'ers kinds under the dispensation of the
2
Lord Buddha Kassapa (1. 14)(and) havinglived totheterm of,his lif~ (he) departed
from thence (and) came into existence in a family of kings in the city of Patna.
3
At that time a great hostile army arose: that army our lord the king of the
Law, who had come to be King of Patna, defeated (signally,?) jandthen, a'fter
4
giving happiness to all the people, making offerings, observing (the precepts of)
virtue, doing pious deeds of divers (1. 20) kinds, (and) carryingout the ten duties of
. '
a king, and after living to the term of his life, (he) departed from thence (and) came
of
into existence in the family of King Ramain.the city Oude.
At that time, too, a great hostile army came to . '.' . ~ . the city of
.6
Oude. That army (1. 24) our lord the king of the Law, who was (then) of the
family of King Rama, defeated (signally?),6 and then, after giving happiness to
all the people, making offerings, observing (the precepts of) virtue, doing pious
deeds of divers kinds,(J. 27) (and) after having lived to the term of his life, (he)
departed from thence (and) in the time of the coming of our lord, the Buddha."
j
Sakyamuni he was the sage Bisnii,'who had supernatural power(and) glory, '
7 8 9
who possessed IO'the five transcendental faculties, \rho dweltupon'
a silver (mountain ?) named Kela~aparwwata. ,
11
At that time. the Lord Buddha, Sakyamut,li (directed his mind to?) the
lll, 19
perception of things unknown, (and) my lord saw the sage Bisnii, who ,was to
,I Thatis,he kepttheethicalcommandme'ntsof religion.
Slit."in the religion"(or "ordinance"). V has nostop before this clausebutit might perhaps be
read with whatfollows, i.e."(and) ha\'ing livedtothe term ofhis life'under the dispensationofthe Lord
Buddha Kassapa." etc.•though thisseemslesslikely.' . ., ' . '
~ Or..in the familyofthe king," i.e. thelocalroyalfamily, whichis what is meantin anycase. There
isnoplural particletosmili,but ~i&nwordsare intheir nature indeterminateasregards number•
•4 Thereadingis'doubtful and therenderingconjectural. ' ,
5 The doubtful word in the text maybea pr~position' lneaning,"to,"oralternativelya velb probably'
meaning"to attack,"orsomethingofthat kind. Either waythe generalsenseofthe passage is plain.
e See A18 n.
7 V, perhaIJs,..thecomingintoexistence of the Lord Buddha Sakyamuni."
8 Or"became," i.e."came intoexistenceas:' .
, V,has"whowasgreat in." 10 Or"acquired."
II Thereisanillegiblewordot:twohere, butthesense musthavebeenpretty muchasgh·en. The moun
tainreferred to is Kailasa.a more or'les, legendary peak in the Himalayas, also knownas Rajatadri,
" silvermountain." Thefact of Bisnii's residencethereis not mentionedin theother groupofinscriptiuns
c:oncernedwithhim,butfor Buddha'spropbecytoAnanda lee I A 15-37andVI g-end.
lI'I V has Saltyamuni. ,
Thewordsthus rendered arealmostillegibleand\'ery doubtful,.butthe general sensemustbesome-
thineofthe kind.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 1
become (1.5) a ·l~iilg of the La'" in the city of Arimaddanapur, (and) who would
J
uphold lily lord's religion: my lord was pleased (and) happy, (and) my lord smiled.
At that time (1. 8) from my lord's four eyeteeth four rays(whose size extended
to four tal's ?),2 (and) whioh each 3 had six colours, they 4(flew?) 6 throughout
(the expanseof?) & the universe. T,,:o of the rays went coursing (1. 12) rig~t 7 up
to Brahmalok, (the other) t,,·o rays went coursing right down to AWicimahanarak.8
Thus did all those six-coloured rays go coursing (and) (travelling?) (I. 16)to
9
all the ten cardinal points, and then entered the Lord Buddha's mouth again.
10 J1
At that time the Lord Anandal2 saw the laughter of (1. 19)the Lord Buddha
13
which (was accompanied by?) such awondrous miracle. (and he) marvelled (and)
U
zealously did obeisance.15 (with bended ?) IG knees (and) joined hands, (and) looking
upon the fael? of the Lord Buddha, which was like a golden mirror, (he) enquired
the reason (I. 24) of the Lord Buddha's smile in this wise:-
"Lord of heaven ~ \Vithout cause Buddhas do not laugh "'hat reason
17. 18:
(,,'as there) that 1~ my lord laughed "0 Ananda, (it was) because (I. 28) I
2O? JI
J Orpossibly"the," ·and soelsewhere where the phr<lseoccurs,e,g. B 29,C ff, There isno material
difference, itisonlya question· ofhow muchstress istobe laidon the fact that it is the actuallyreigning
monarch that is beingreferred to, In the absence of any demonstrative I prefer therendering with the
indefinitearticle. Contrast A tI, where the reference is definitelyemphasizedbya demonstrative,
2 The reading is doubtful and the translation somewhat conjectural. It may bedoubted whether it
does not involvea rather straineduse of therelative particle ma, The word rather doubtfully read tal has
been conjccturally identified with L.~'\. ta,"a measure oflength equal to seven cubits," the cubitbeing IS
inches,sothatthetawouldbe 3t yards. The weak pointofthe identification is that Burmesealso has the
\~ord: unless,therefore. Burmese ha!l borroweditfrom :vI5n,weare hardly entitledtoassume the identity
oftM with ta, e\'en supposingthe former to be the readingofour text. However, Ic<ln suggestnothing
better, It isto be supposed that the rays oflight are regarded as broadeningout to thissize when they
issued from Buddha's mouth: in length they were practicallywithoutlimit.
3 Thedistributiveseemstobe indicatedby thedoublingofthe numeral.
I The pleon~sticpronoun is intheoriginal. " Doubtful reading,
6 Thereissome slight doubt as to the· readingand the identity of the word, but I incline to the view
that itis tobe consideredthe same as L.N\. alu';,. The words in brackets are not intended to do more
than emphasizethesenseofcompleteness, 7 Iimagine this to be the emphaticforce oftheparticle mle!,.
S Thegreat hell AVici, the lowestoftheeight hot hells. ~ Readingsomewhat doubtful,hut probable,
10 No doubt the usual eight together with the zenith andnadir,
11 Though there may be some doubt as to the reading, there is none as to tht' meaning. cr, I A24,
VI I~ . .
12 HI and IV (so far as extant) use the abbreviated form A,/all, but \' consistently uses Allanaa,
Theseabbreviationsof proper names: and loanll'ords are characteristically Indo-Chinese. butat this early
period theyseem to h;J.\'e been somewhat irregularly nsed; they alternated with the full~r, Indian, forms.
13 In Y." smile," II The re<lding is donbtful and the rCI.dering conjectural,
H. The r,"iginal word appems to be a snbstanti\'e used adjectivally, as it were"obeisance ofzeal,"
that i,,"7.l";I!. ,,<;obeisance," but it is morecou.venient to render itbyan adl'C~rb. Cf. IG 24.
Ie The reading issomewhat doubtful, bnt the general sense i!l plain.
1; At.this point he~insthe extant portion of IV. t'ut.its vari:ll1ts seldom {lffectthe translation.
I~ Vseemsto h:lVe,.smile," as has I :\ 2R.
H Or"what (\\'35) the reason that," A slight doubt 3~ to the reading here·does not affect the sense.
20 Vhas"smiled."

MCN INSCRIPTIONS
PART II]
saw the sage Bisnu, who is great in supernatur~l power, who is to become a
king ofthe Law, who will uphold my religion: that (was)
C
why I laughed. The Lord Buddha having spoken thus, my lord related the
I "
origin of the kingohhe Law to (1. 3) the Lord Ananda in this wise :-
"0 Ananda, in the year when I shall achieve NirvaQ,a the sage Bisnu,
II
together with my son Gawarhpati, and King Indra,3 and Bissukarmma, and Kata
karmmanagaraja,4 shall build a city (1. 6) called Sri K~et,5 and after that (he)
6
shall depart from thence (and) shall go into existence in Brahmalok.
7
"Then all the devas shall invite (him) to go down (and) become a king of
the Law on this great earth.8 (1. 9) At what time shall he come down into
existence? A thousand six hundred (and) thirty years from my achievement of
NirvaQ,a, at that time shall he become king of the Law in the city of. Arimadda
napiir. Upan a pancapriisiida 9 (1. 12) adorned with twenty-eight royal chambers,
on a jewelled throne inlaid with stone of azure hue, (he) shall receive the anointing
lo
of the. head with Indra's anointment. (He) shall bear the name (of)
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. (He) shall .purify (and) make straight,
write down (and) establish all the Holy Scriptures. (1. 16) (He) shall proclaim
11 19
(and) voice 13 the Law, which14 isevenasa resounding drum. (He) shall arouse
15
all the people that are slumbering carelessly.ls (He) shall stand steadfast in the
17
observance of the commandments at all times.
I V h:'lS ..smiled." II Thisdate does not occurin thecorresponding passage I A 30-3.
3 IIIand IV use the usual abbreviated form In, V has1lldra. 4 IV has Kala·.
5 Anabbreviated form of Sri Kutra, the old name ofProme: foranother variantsee I A 33. VI;lo
hasthe full form. 6I.e. Bisnn. 7 Lit...to,be." 8 Merely the idiomatic M6n way ofsaying"on earth.'t
'9 Atemporary structure speciallybuilt for the ceremony of anointment and consisting ofa central
pavilion surrounded byfour others. The word(under the form panchapersada) is still used in Malay for
thepavilionconstTuctedtoserveas a placefor the ceremonialablutions performedaftera royal wedding.
10 I imaginethis doesnot denoteany additional ceremonybut rath'er. the supe.rnatural grace conferred
by the·solemn a~ointment: in thechronicle.') Indraisrepresented as taking partin the anointment of some
ofthekings.
11 That is to say.he 'is to issue a revised.edition 'of the Buddhist Canon. Cf. VIII A 3. Vadds
..(and)shall I1phold" totheotherverbs. . III Or j·impart." .
13 The mean:ngis notabsolutely certain. though the simile supports it. The idea is that the king
makes the Law vocal.causes it tobe heard.
14 This particle isin IV and V, though noUn 111. It seemsnece~sarytothesense.
15 The,precisemeaningis not determined.
16 Therearetwo words, identical in form in L.M.,one meaning"to sleep" and the other ••to delight
in." Ipreferthe Cormer: here, butconceivably one might interpret the 'passage as meaning ..who delight
incarelessness." Further,it is notabsolutelycertain that"carelessness'i is thecorrectequivalent of aMy.
17 Conceivably wemight read"to" instead of "heshall" and treatwhat follows as dependent upon
thepreceding sentence: no pronoun isexpressed. On the other hand IV and V inserta stop, which tends
rather againstsuch an interpretation.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. .I
1
"(He) shall open the bar of the gate of Heaven, which is made of gold
that shines, which is set with gems of seven kinds i and 2 shall bring (1. 20) all man
kind into Heaven. (He) shall empty the four Apay,3 (he) shall drop drown the
4
flower of the Law upon the heads of all mankind. \Vhen the king of the Law
shall preach the Law, the sounds of applause of all men (shall. be) like the sound
6
(1. 24) of a rainstorm (at) the end6of the year." Thus by the Lord Buddha was
foretold the origin of the king of the Law to the Lord Ananda.
As by the Lord Buddha was foretold, (so) (1. 27) has all c6me to pass.7
The king of the Law, who was foretold by the Lord Buddha, wh08 is great in love
(and) compassion towards all beings,-to the end that all beings
9
o
may obtain happiness, bliss, (and) plenty, (and) befree from famine of tillage,10-(in}
every place that lacks water, lacks (1. 3) arable land, lacks strenuous cultivation,ll
our lord the king of the Law dams the water, digs a tank, (and thus) creates
12
13
arable land (and) (I. 6) strenuous cultivation.
At the time when King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammarajarajadhirajaparamis
warabalacakkrawar,14 the exalted, who rides upon a male white elephant, who
6
was foretold by the Lord (1. 10) Buddha, the omniscient (one), the Bodhisatva/
had dug this tank, he gave (it) the name of Mahanirbban Lak Chuy Khi Riy/6
1 V perhaps hast.shall draw open." cr. I c I, -JI 30.
2 V perhapshascoand shall be(he) that shall," etc. 3 See I D 37n., VI 31.
4 Or perhaps II shall set," Cf. I E 9 n. 5 V has"all the people." 6 V has I' beginning."
7 Atthis point ends theagreement of V with III and IV. 8 Theantecedent isthe king.
9 The missing part probably meant"the host of" (in IV"the collection of"). Cf. D 13.
10 The renderingisnot quitecertain. 11 Therendering isconjectural.
12 The rendering is more or less conjectural. Ifthe word thin has been rightly understood, thetext
literally says.'dams(and)gives"(just as it says"digs (and) gives" in the next line). But possibly the
phrasemight betaken to mean"permanently secures,"i.e., ..secures a permanent supply" ofW:lter.
13 Renderingconjectural, as above.
14 Forthevariantsof this na.me, see note to D 8of the text. The additions, over and above the usual
nameof the king in C 14-5 a.ndin his inscriptions generally, mean ..supreme king of kings, overlord,
mighty universal monarch."
15 These descriptions must.I think,betaken as applicable to the king (in anticipation of hiseventual
achievementof Buddhahood), n9t to Buddha. Theascription or thequalities of a Buddha to a .reigning
sovereign iscommon in Buddhist countries. The ceremonial address ..Living Buddha" is used in the
M6n chronicles towards M6n kings, just as it was recently in ·China with reference to the Dowager
Empress. Cf.V 43.
16 Fo·· other possiblereadings of this name and for the name given to the tank celebrated in IV,see the
note to D !2 ofthe text.

PART II] MeN INSCRIPTIONS 143
(to be) for thebenefit of aU (1. 13) mankind, the congregation of beings, (and) all
May, all you. good t:nen understand.9
•••• '••" ••••• '•••••.•J.
This excellent inscription was erected by the greatly meritorious, wise and
s
powerful King ofthe Law.
No. IV.
AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT ALANPAGAN, PAGAN.
Descrz'pt£ve Account.
42. Likethe preceding, this inscription records the digging of a tank by order
of King Kyansittha, but evidently it was a different tank, for it bore a different
name (see III DI2 n.). In all other respects No. IV, so far as it is preserved, is
substantially a copy of No. IIIi and the variantsthat occur have been given in the
notes to the text of the latter. . One set of ink-impressions,· consisting of two
pieces, was supplied to me, together with a photograph of them. In any event
the first half of theoriginal record is missing and the remainder is a good deal
damaged in several places and is on the whole in an indifferent. state of preser
vation, pretty much like No. III. The space covered by lettering, as measured
on the impressions, is as follows:-Piece A, height 3 ft. 4 in;, breadth I ft. 7 in. i
B, height 2 ft. 4 in., breadth.I ft. I'! in. The letters resemble in shape and.size·
those of No. III, .and the line-spacing is similar. Piece A contains 3:A lines and
begins :- ' (being doubtless the last letter of tz'rla'or tarla') aka~ (= III B 25) j
and ends:-tz'rle); hyades (..:- III C 26). Piece B contains 22 lines and begins:
-go~ tlU1i (= III C 26-7)jand ends at the end of the record, corresponding
.with the.end of III D. This inscription has served to restore or confirm certain
words that were lost or doubtful in the preceding Olle.
No. V.
AN INSCRIPTION IN T~IEPHAYRE MUSEUM, RANGOON.
Descriptive Account.
43' This inscription is engraved on one face of a large stone (apparently a
slab), the lettering being enclosed within a bordering line whichat the top forms
a flat curve, like a Tudor arch without a point to it. The original location of this
I I am unabletosuggesta rendering for the.two words at the end of 0 [3 unless the first one can be
read ki1icem. in which case the phrase would perhapsmean winged birds." But even if this reading is
-to
permissible.which seemsmore than doubtful, there is Httle appositeness in this mention of birds afterand
apartfrom thewholecollection ofsentient creatures. 2 Cf. I H 4-[2, V 49-51.
3.For the renderingofthis last paragraph (which is in Pali) I am indebted to Professor C. Duroiselle.

144 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL•.. 1
record is unknown to me. Apparently'it originally contained about 55 lines,
possibly more i but of thefirst five (correspon~ing with III A I-g) hardly anything
is legible, and nothing after I. 55, which·may however have been the last line•.
The ends.of most of the lines are also seriously damaged. But a good part of
the lettering is in a pretty fair state of preservation, r~ther better than that of the
two preceding inscriptions. Two ink-impressions were supplied to me, together
with a photograph of.one of them. The space covered by lettering, as measured
on the impressions, is as follows :--:-height, 6ft: 2,in. i ·extreme breadth, 2 ft.
11 in. The letters resemble in shape those of No: III and are very' nearly. of
the same size i if anything, they are slightly smaller and perhaps a little more
delicately cut, but that may be due to the stone being of a different,~ind. The
normal line-spacing is the same asin No. III. Down to ut mle/z in 1. 42 (corre
II
sponding with III C 27), No. V is almost a copy 01 No. III,.but at that point it
entirely diverges from it. Accordingly it has not been .considered necessary to
give here the text or translation of 11. 1-4'1, as the variants occurring therein have
been entered in the notes appended to No. III. Subject to slight :variations,
the proper names also are identical with those ?onhlinedin the latter inscription.
No. V records the restoration by.King Kyansittha of a pagoda styled (appar-
e6tlyr:~KYAk seemsprobabl~'tha(·thisp~godawas
Talail. It somewhere in the.
Man country of Lower Burma, but int~e absence of information as to the placy
A·
where the inscription was found I am unable t9.sayanythtog positive about it.
or
date in II. 51-2 is probably either thedate of the co~m~nC:~ment compl~tion of
the work of restoration, or else it may be the date on whichth~order was issued
for the engraving of the inscription. . It appears to corresporid with Friday, 16th
.April 1098; the year number is· in figures and of the Burmese common era.
Another date in I. 54, which may be the actual date of the setting up of the
inscription, is unfortunately too much mutilated to admit of det~rmination. The
bearing of the former date has been pointed out in H27,'29. Apart fiom
these particulars and a.few new words; the chief importarice 01 this inscription
lies in thefact that it has'served in certain cases to restore or confirm words that
were lost or doubtful in No. III.
Text.
n.
(The text of 1-4 I is identical with that of III A I-C 26 save for the
variants given in the notes appended to the latter.)
42. go1;lh dun das utmlel;1 yail gna smin Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja
11
rajadhirajaparamiswar balacakkrawar pUrhrey [rna pa yan ku]
II

!pIpf'aphia Birmanica !IIo. V. VOLUME I, PLATE XI.
AN INSCRIPTION IN THE PHAYRE MUSEUM, RANGOON.
(TOP HALF)
2
2
4
4
6 6
S 8
JO JO.
J2 12
14
14
16 16
18
IX
20
20
22
22
24
24
26
26
28
28
30
30
32
32
34-
34

-~a.,,1tia Bi,manica No. V. VOLUME I, PLATE Xllr
AN INSCRIPTION IN THE PHAYRE MUSEUM, RANGOON.
(BOTTOM HALF)
3°
3°
32 32
34
34
36
36
38 38
4° 4°
42
42
44 44
4.6
46
48
48
5°
5°
52
52
54
~

PART II] M6N INSCRIPTIONS 145
43. cin buntAn sarwwai'iu bodhisatta rna crnat sdas kyak ina prak nuk ut
II
sakaJa satta gumiun • ina jnok rnetta karuQa [u]-
44, .t gey sakala satta gumiunut ku kaJ II rna tbalsasana.kyak Buddha tirley
rna prey ut nor srnin c-an rna •.. [u]-
D
45, t dis pan sak rirnban ka .sak srnis rnanorn prana.trejas pumrey mun
srnin c-an ka das bircas urna nom y[as] , , , .~ ... , .
46, ut sakaJa Jarnbudip D rna go' byades nor kyak Buddha tirley u ma das
tarla' gQn Arirnaddanapik, •..•• (ya)-
47. nceti Kyak J'al(a)n wo' • rna dam rlak dnal;1 na sdas narnadheyyas
gir(n)at (t)ilbok ut 10k,k(u rnahajan gum)-
-48. (lu)n boykal {rn)a 10' or tun nawakarrnma dak g(i)w 1 tumi rbin thic
jnok nor tIar .... bla[b or: busac] . .. . .
49, ut bna~ rIlahajan gumlun gumir bUril,na~ paJ.lgit •.••.• ~9 sadhujan
D
.gumlun or g~a[n] (da) uCwo' k](l,lmdas sm)i(n)ll
50. dharmmaraja rna go' byades nor ,kyak Buddha tarley rna sdas kyak
p
cmat ~.. - 41 .
!I' •• "••••
5I, nlaQ:pa,sandibh gam [da] •• gey ·kal sakaraja,
Ii
460 gob' han .•.....••
..
,."
,", ~ ',
52,;' ki[ntub]esakha II tney sukra[war] •has~a nak1jatra 4 nagi [tOlin] .•..•'.
~. e.•••••• ". ~ .•••• o' ••• ~ • -~ ••"•. _
"·~3. ~ ,-,., . ',' ".- ~ .; .', l.ek (wa' a) ~.
0'
• i..•••••••'-; •••••••••••
54; ',' .. , ., . . •••...•........ [uttara]bha,dra[pada nak1jatra] .....•
• ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• ';'C '.~.
5-5, '. , , , . , ... ~ ;..,..• , .. , , , '.' .• ,. , . , ..'.'... , , ...{sthapana] ... ~. ' ....~
• •• e.•••••••"•••.••••••••••• I ••'•• <II
Translafio;z.,
n.
(For the translation of 1~41 and the first five words of 1. 42, see III A 1
C 27, subject to the variants in the notes, ending at has all come to pass.")
II
] Orgiw. , . ,
~ Thereisa wordhere that looks like picha. ,y(oi"miO),butit comes just on a spot where two sheets
(in both impressions)arejoinedand Icannotbesureofit. " ,...
9 Ofthese wordskumi~ verydoubtful,buttherestseemprobablee~ough,though'iittieofthem islegible,
4 Probablyweshouldsupply heresomewordslike mti..'Pr~k nuk sakalalattagumlu-.'
Ii Theremaybea f/irama, possibly.

146 EPIGRAPHlA BlRMANlCA [VOL. I
King SrI Tribhuwanadityadhammarajarajadhirajaparainiswar,I the exalted
mighty univer5al monarch, who rides upon (I. 43) a white elephant, the omni
$cient (one), the Bodhisatva, who shaH verily become a Buddha that saves (and)
redeems all beings, who is great in love (and) compassion for all beings at all
times, who upholds the religion of the Lord Buddha, who is exalted above all
other kings that (dwell in?) all (1. 45) the four quarters without .•.•..
2. ,3
without exception, who has wisdom (and) splendour exceeding other kings
i
· ..•...•.... ,5 who has renOWll ....•... (throughout?) the whole
of Jambudip,6 who was foretold by the Lord Buddha, who is lord of the
city of Arimaddanapur '.' : (I. 47) this pagoda of Kyak Talari,7 which
was in ruins, in order that it might become a name of renown (and) a (place of
refuge ?) s. of all the world and all mankind 9 for a long time, (he) 10 caused
workmen to build (and) encase (it) afresh firmly and fairly, bigger than before
]I
. . , (and) had (it) dedicated . . . . . . . .12
(1. 49) Mayall you people in general, monks, Brahmins, scholars, ...•..
all good men, understand that this is indeed the king of the Law who was
• } ,13
foretold by the Lord Buddha, who is t6 become a true Buddha . • . . . . . . . .
• . . . . . . . . :u (I. 5') doubt (it) not!15_
c~mmon ~
In the time of (the year) 460 at the era, . . . ......•
16 (of the) month Besakha, the day (being a) Friday, Has~a17 (being)
the lunar mansion, at four natjz precisely,IS. .....
o· ••••••••••• 0 ••
1 See III D 8tr. n. With thewhole passage(toI. 46) d. III C 27-9. 0 6-10.
2 The four cardinalpoints ofthecompass,and the regionssituated in those several directions.
a Thesenseof rimbtfli is undetermined. 4 Thesenseof ka sak is notquitecertain.
S The meaningofka dasbirdlsisundetermined. GSee I B 10tr. n.
7 It was, appa{ently, a caitya(stiipa) called by that name. The word kyae is applied in L.M. to
Buddha,imagesof Buddha,Buddhistreligious edirices,particularlyofthis description,eminent personages,
and objectsofveneration in general. Itiseven used respectfullyin thesenseor"Sir" inconversation.
S. Themeaningand reading ofgirniit til~okare not quitecertain.
~ Thelast three wordsare notquitecertainbut seemalmosta necessary restorationof the more orless
obliterated text.
10 This resumes the subject,i.~. the king, whohas been describedwithso manyepithets in11.42-6.
II After repairing and strengthening what remained of the old structure, the king caused it to be
covered externally with an additional layer of fresh material. This was a frequent practice in Burma:
lIlany ofthe existing pagodas have grown bysuccessive acts ofencasing>to their presentsize from much
smaller nuclei. Ia The readingissomewhat doubtful here.
13 There isa partlyillegible word here, thesenseof which is undetermined.
II The illegiblephrase probably read much as in I.43: " that redeemsandsavesall mankind,"
I, cr. I H 43. .
16 The obliterated passage contained, illter alia, thestatement of thelunar date, which was probably
the 13thofthe waxing moon in the lunar month VaiSakha. 17 Properly Hasta.
18 One IIdrJl is :l4 minutes.. Apparently the statement in the text means96 minutesaftersunriseon the
day in question. As to the date,see §43.

PART III MeN INSCRIPTIONS 147
..• (1. 53) . . .. th· IS n.n"tmg1 .
.
. ... . . .'. .
~
(I. 54) •.. ' ' Uttarabhadrapada (being) the lunar man-
....................................... ..
sion,
-
. (I. . 5 . 5 . ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . .'. . . . . . . . . . . . Set up 2 • • • • •
No. VI.
AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGO'DA, PROME.
Descr£pt£ve Accotmt.
44. This inscription is only a fragment of what must have been originally a
very much longer record. It seemsnotimpossible that it represents the beginning
of the record of which No. VIII is a subsequent portion and it is almostcertain
j
that it was framed on the same lines as Ko. VII, for it agrees with the latter
almost verbaUm, so far as it extends and so far as No. VII can be read at all.
Unfortunately very little of No. VII is legible. What remains of No. VI
is engraved on one face of a large stone slab, which has apparently been
broken about the middle into two pieces. Ina good many places the
surface of the stone has also been seriously damaged, so·that many letters
are lost or quite illegible. But those that remainare clearly cutand well preserved
on the whole. Two ink-impressions were supplied to me, together with a photo
grar' of one of them. One of the two impressions has the two fragments
sepe..rate :.the space occupied upon them by the lettering is in the case of the
upper fragment 3 ft.. 7 in. .in height by about 2 ft. 8 in. in breadth, the actual
length'of the lines being variable to the extent of an inch or so. The lower
fragment, so far as occupied by lettering, is 2ft. 6 in. in height atld about 2 ft.
6 in. in breadth, the lines being here a trifle shorter than they are above.
In the other impression the t\VO fragments have been roughly pieced together,
with some allowance for what is missing between them, and the total height thus
arrived at is about 6 ft. 4 in., which is probably a fairly good approximation to
the dimensions of the origina1. The letters resemble in general style and shape
) Presumably the reference is to the inscription itself.
2, Probablythis refers tothe date on which the inscription was actuallyset up.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. (
those of the preceding inscriptions but are very much larger: they measureabout
1 in. in height, letter· t is about I in. long, and the normal interlinear space
It
is about in..
. 45. By the help of the other records it has been possible to restore a good
many of the missing portions of this fragmentary inscription. Its general purport
is to give the Kyansittha legend in the less extended version (see §§ 25, 26).
No specialreason is given for,the erection of the record save the king's own order
that this panegyric. should be engraved for general information (II. 4-5). The
inscription has been briefly referred toin illy second paper on the MyazediRecord
(J.R.A.S., 1910, pp. 797-812), and likewise in the Report ofthe Superintendent,
Archaeological Survey, Burma (191 I), pp. 19-20, where a translation of a small
part of it appears. It was also mentioned in the.-discussion summarized in § 28.
But owing to the imperfect stat~ of the only impression at that time available, the
date inU. 2-4 was wrongly read, a serious mistakebeing made in the year number,
which is in figures.! As to this there can, however, be no doubt whateven that
it isthe year 455 of the common Burmese -era, which therefore falls within the
period of Kyansittha's reign (§ 29). A further error was made in taking the
word Mrz'gasiras (I. 2) forthe name of a lunar month: it is practically certain
that it here stands for a year-name of the Burmese 12-year cycle. The date falls
within the waxing half of a month which is probably to be read Srtiwan (this
seemsto be at any rate a possible reading of the almost illegible corresponding
passage i!? No. VII),and there is no doubt as to the weekday and nak~atra.
It seems possible, though not absolutely certain, that the date when the king
gave the order for the engraving of _this record was June 3rd, A.D. 1°93, but the
precise day is not really very material from our present point of vie\v, for there
can be no serious-doubt that the inscription is genuine and contemporary.
.46. Apart from its date, No. VI adds little to the information given by the
previous documents, except its insistence (II. 23-5) on the king's pedigree, both
paternal and maternal:· Professor Duroiselle has. suggested that this is not
without significance 'in ~iew of the $loubts cast upon Kyansitth:i's paternity in
popula~ tradition (§ 23)' No. VIII (B' i6) also refers to .the king's descent,
though there the mention occurs in a pili passage. Paternal1y he claimed to be
cif the Solar race, thus asserting his legitimatedescentfrom the Burmese royalline,
which isthe point whereon the legendary stories throwsome doubt.\! For the rest,
No. VI presents parallels with the inscriptions already given. The proper names
i J.R.A.S.• 1910, pp. 853-6. Ii As tothis point, see §52 (and note).

Ifua Birmanica t\o. YI. VOLU~IE I, PLATE: XIII.
AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME.
(TOP HALF)
2 2
4 4
6 6
s
8
10
10
12
12
14
16
16
IS-

PART II) MeN INSCRIPTIONS
are the same as elsewhere ..(~ 26), subject to some slight differences in
spelling ~nd to the fact that Pagan is mentioned by its native name (Pokam) as
well as by its Pali title (Arimadda1tapur). The inscription. contains two.short
Pali passages (II. 1,6-9) and in 1. 22·the date A. Bud. 1630 (see H 28, 29).
47. The variants found in No. VII, so far as legible, have been given in the
notes appended to No. VI.
Te1't.
I. (I ~ri fl) [namoJ tq.ssa [bhJagavato arahato sammasambu[ddhassa]
2. (0 ~ey) kat saka[riijJ(a cnamp 455 II mrigasiras S •••••3[mi}
3. rmok· ki[ntu] (srawan tney s:ukrawar uttarapha[lg]u[\li na]-
6 I) 8 1
4. [k~atra kanya7J lagna usmindharmmaraj'a myil abhipray or (sui)
I 8·
5. [Iar girlJun gUQ.a jirku rna da(s na s-ormii.al) gumlun [gran]
9 10 11) IS 13
6. (DO u) [~ri 10 1 naJmo Buddha[yaJ u namo dhammaya • namo
7. [sang,haya]H no [II anJgiraso Sakyamu(\li)]6 sabbasaWinukampa-
8. [ko D]18 sabbasattuttarrio ]7 siho 18 n]9 rajuppattim SO desa[yiJa]
9. [ti]U0 unom ~ey moy [IJe[l) kalJsa kyak Buddha ta[rl]e-
10. [yJtaw ~e[yJ Jeta[wanaJmah[awihar IJ kyak [B]u[ddha] ta[rI]e
I I. Yktir k~jm I [kJal gol) nor gnis tarley93 yi[ryasJ
12. turow [sak ~eJb tit ar blal)~el) (tun' lop) 114
13. ~ey mukhawar tarley kum Ikill gol) t[arIey Ananda]
14. [ii.ac j ascar gol) yuk ku sumbup teysmafigru[n] ...
15.•.. kyak Buddha tarley gol)'~ I kal gol) kyak Buddha [tarle]
16. [y gal)] ku tarIey,Ananda row wo' IAnanda [mnor ci ri}
28 S1
1 Probablein VII. Ii VII may have 0g.oQ.
3 Artera shortillegibleword VII apparently has.II which is probably followed by the lunardate in a
ligure. But the passa~eis badly blurred.
4 Certain in VII. (; Probablein VII. G Or ·O,.io.
7 Certainin VII. . 8 Probablein VII, ,9 Certainin VII.
]0 Between(u and '!% there isan original flaw. Thereis no virtima over the?, in VI and it isdoubtful
in VII.
]] Possibly'onemight'read da sanordas da (or,improbably,das I).
19 After mnalz there isanoriginal flaw. 13 Certain in VII.
14 VII omitsthe wholeof1.6 and the fi(stword ofI. 7.
15 Or°ni11. VB apparently has°ni I. 16 VII has I.
17 Betweenhha and sa there is an original flaw. I~ VII mayhavesiho. 19 VII has I,
20 Thereis novirdma visible, 21 VII seemsto have°yi. 22 Certain in VII.
:l3 Betweeny andyithere isan original flaw. VII seemsto have tirley.
24 Doubtful,but probable, both in VI and VII. 'Cf.I A 2.J. 111 A 16.
2~ VII hascoh. 2e Certain in VII. 'JI Thereisan original flawhere.
20

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
17. si [rn]oy rna imo' Bi[s]nO rna go' abhina[1} m~](u)[n go]o 3[IJ
1 II
18. [kom] ku kon ey Gawam[p]ati I ku smin In I ku [Bi]ssu[karmma}
19. d[eJwarput I ku Ka\akaJr[mmanaga]raja~ I skindam qOn moy [rna]
[imo' SriJ K[~]etra blao ei risi Bisnii goO scu[ti norJ (dirda)-
20. I
21. (s)6 [go]O qeo stin das qey BrahmalokI kal sasana ey
[tlon cup] moy lnirn turow klam pi cwas cnam ci <teo scuti cis [no]-
22. I
23. [r] Brahmalok qeO stlOn das nor ti[l]tol wansa bar I amba [go]o [da]-
24. [s] nor [ad]iccawansa I ambo' goO [dasnoJr wai1sa (kum) ... 8 mata[wJ
25. p<tey '(b) . , .. d(fi)fi qe[l} sd]as smin dha(r)mmaraja qey qOn
7 8 I 9
Po[k]am...ma [iJ-
26. [mo]' Arimad[danapfir] ... ~ ..10 (m) 11 tarley arahan gumlunl ut [ku]
27. [pnJan [ca]tu(ranga) ., '•. (jifijun) paficaprasat I 4e[y] an(tU)1111 (si)-
28. has13 .... , . (na) [ratna] pUrhrey gumlunl sgo' [muddh]abhi-
,.14
[sek] .. ;
29. , , , .. , .. (as) tmo' I [qe~ syu]k [s]as[anaey I qeo] .
30.. .[sjak lupok ti~lUr tinran sJwarga rna tmfiy [na rat].
31. '., (ku) [sakalasaJ(twa gumlU1l) I [Qe~ slmlo]' ut Iap~y]
32. (pan I) [sdas smin] (dharmmaraja) , , •.. ' .16 (gum-
tun)
33, 34; (Illegible.)
Translation.
Prosperity! Honour to the Blessed One, the Saint, the Truly Omniscient I
In the time of the year 455 of the common era, (being a) Mrigasiras
(year), .... (on the .. , . th) of O. 3) the waxing (half) of the. month of
1 VII may have 011• a Or m~ill. II VII probablyhasgok.
4 The partsin squarebracketsin the first halfofthis line have. been restored from VII with the help
oftheoth!!!rinscriptions. It is here(and in thesecond halfof I. 20) thatthebreak in VI occur~(§ 44),
5 Itis verydoubtful whether dirdas should be supplied: on the one hand, VI has a lot of space to
spareatthe endof I. 20; on theother,theword is not in VII and thesparespace may be due merelyto the
presenceof the groupofsubscriptlettersin Ikindam fjitiz justabov.e. .
II Itis not clearwhetherwhat precedes isone wordor two: itlooks rather like.kumbtiy (or tumMy)
butthe last halfis verydoubtful. .Possiblyitrepresentsthe proper namebfthe family oftheking'smother,
inwhichcase Iam unr.ble to identify it, Ifitisa descriptive, Icannot-attacha me~ning to it.
7 The missing word may bemonosyllabicordissyl!abic. "hefinal seemstoben..
8 Or,possiblydun. 9 There.isperlialisan original flaw here.
10 There may b.ean original flaw here,so that it is impossible to sayexactly how much is missing.
. 11 This finalletter may possibly bep. Over the preceding unidentifiable consonant there is a mark
which maybe a superscript ". . 12 Oralltul, perhaps.
19 The restoration of si-atthe end of1.27 isconjectural,but probable: cf. IC 12, 111 C 13.
14 The misling words must hav.ebeensomething likemoiiiniakor rnacincoll.
1~ Probablyoneshould supplysomethinglikerna nuk prM sarW1vasatWQ. Cf. V 43.

Dflia Bi,.manica
No. VI. VOLUME I, PLATE XIV.
AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME.
(BOTTOM HALF)
If
20 20
22
22
~~
24
26.
26
28
28
3° 1
3°
.....
.>-
32

PART II] MCN INSCRIPTIONS
(Srawan ?), the day (being a) Friday, Uttaraphalguni (being) the lunar mansion,
(and) Virgo (being) on the eastern horizon, the king of the Law issued an
J II
order to write down the full number of his virtues so that all men might under
stand (them).a
Prosperity! Honour to Buddha! Honour to the Law! Honour (I. 7) to the
Church! The brilliant Sakyamul).i, who has compassion upon all beings,
40
the lion who is the most exalted of all beings, thus showed forth the origin of the
king.6
It was once upon a time when the Lord Buddha was dwelling in the
J
etawanamahawihar,6 (that) the Lord Buddha (I. II) smiled. At that time,
from my lord's eyeteeth rays of six colours issued forth (and) went .
and then they (entered?) my lord's mouth again. At that time the Lord Ananda,
(I. 14) seeing this miracle, raised and joined his hands,7 (and) asked (about) the
laughter. . . . . of the Lord Buddha.
Then HIe Lord Buddha spake to the Lord Ananda thus: Ananda, hereafter
II
a sage named Bisnu, possessing the five transcendental faculties, (1. (8) together
with my son Gawampati, and King In, and Bissukarmmadewaput, and Ka\a
K~etra
karmmanagaraja, shall build a city called Sri i and after that, the sage
Bisnu shall depart from that state of existence 8j he (1. 21) shaH go up into
existence in Brahmalok.
When my religion shall have attained one thousand six hundred and thirty
II
years, he shall depart from Brahmalok i he shaH come into existence (as the
scion) of two families: his father Shall be (1. 24) of the Solar line, his mother of a
..... family that dwells within (of) bamboo.9 He shall become
king of the Law in the city of Pokam, that is (otherwise) named Arimaddanapur
J Cf. I G 3tr. II., III All. 9 Therendering isinferredfrom thecontext.
S Thisrenderingconveysthesel')seand purportofthe original,butratherevades its difficulties. It is
not quite clear to me whether lila refers to gU!'(J or abhipray. If one should read san, presumably the
meaningwould be somewhat emphasized ("his excellent virtues"), but otherwisemuch thesame. It is
possibleto interpretg1t~laas"gooddeeds," rather than goodqualities" merely; butthatchangewould not
II
seriouslyaffectthesense•
., VII omitsthese ejaculations. " Cf. I A :l-3.
GSee I A 16tr.n.,and for the passagegl;nerally cf. I A 13-36, III B 2-( 26.
7 In respectful address, venerating Buddha. Cf. I A 26, III B21-22.
8 VII merely has ,(from thence,"and perhaps that isalso the reading of VI.
!l Itis unfortunatethatthe passage relatingtothe king's maternaldescentisblurred. "rom VIII B 16
itappears that·she was of the Vilva line, so named from a certain fruit of that name(L.M.bi. ,. Bengal
quince"). Thereference to bamboo" here isobscure, and even the rendering may be doubtful. Can
II
there have been someconfusion in the draftsman's mind hetween belu'lJa (the bi fruit) and 'IIe!lu, ve{...
..bamboo"P Itseemshardlylikely; but Ican offer no definiteexplanationof the passage.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
...... all the Saints together with alI(\. 27) the army, of the four arms/a
1
(the pillars?) of (his) pancaprasada! Upon a throne (adorned
••••3
withf) all (sorts of) noble gems, he shall receive the anointing of the head
• . . • . . • • • . ..• (a seat off) stone.6 He shall uphold my religion. He
8
..•..••.. ~ shall draw open the bar of the gate of Heaven, which
is made of gems (I. 31) (for?) all (manner of) beings. He shall
empty all the (four?) Apay.7 He shall be a king.(~f the Law, who shall redeem
and save all beings f)."
8
No. VII.
ANOTHER INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA,
PROME.
Descr£ptive Account.
48. This inscription is engraved on one side of a large stone slab. One
ink-impression of it was sent to me, but no photograph. The space formerly
occupied by lettering on the stone, as measured on the impression, is 5 ft.
I in. in .height by 3ft. I 1 in. in breadth j the letters are in shape like those of
the preceding records, their normal height is about ~ in., letter t is about! in.
broad, and the interlinear space is normally I in. The inscription is in a most
deplorable condition and would hardly be legible at all if it were not for the
h'elp afforded by No. VI and the other records. The first dozen lines or so
are more or less d.ecipherable with that help, but even these are badly weathered
and damaged, while below them the whole central part of the inscription 2.ppears
to haveflaked off and has perished irretrievably. (n this part only the beginnings
of some of the lines and the ends of a few are dimly discernible and towards the
bottom nothing.whatever can be read, except perhaps here and there an isolated
and doubtfully decipherable letter or two. \\That is legible of this record agrees
substantially with the text of No. VI so far as the latter extends; the few trifling
variants have been given in the notes appended to the latter text. Of the
1 Thatis, theBuddhist monks.
2 The readingisdoubtful bllt probahle; if correct.it referstothe traditional four divisions·ofan Indian
army(horse,foot,elephants,and chariots,asexemplifiedin theold form of chess,the original wargame).
9 Thegap here and in the preceding line makes it impossibleto Rive acontinuous rendering, but it
seems likely thatthe meaning ofthe passageis that the clergy,andthearmy are to bethesupportsof the
king'sthrone, figurativelyspeaking. ·1 SeeIII C II tr. n.
6 Owingto the laculza,itisnot clearwhether this refers to the samestoneas III C 13, but it seems
likely. Itwouldappearthatintheceremonyofanointment the king sat upon a specialston.e.
S See I A36tr. rio . 7 Cf. I D37,.11I.C20-1. .
8 Conjectural: cf.V 43· Thenfollowtwoquiteillegiblelines.

PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 153
remainder no continuous restoration can be attempted. Lines 1-13 cover the
n.
same ground as 1-30 of No. VI to the word lupok (inclusive). The legible
portions of the rest are as follows (doubtful parts.oeing in parentheses) :-
14. tin/urtinran swarga rna tmuy na(rat), the barof the gate of Heaven,
II
which is made of gems "j u(16)t mahajan gum/un, all the people" (or all
II tt
mank· In d") j .17. . . . I U t , It aII" j I 8 . . . ., (no)m, ". IS I"I ( or ttwlals").j 20.
(1' moy), II one"; 2I. (' q,ey q,un Arimaddanapiw), /I in the city. of Pagan"j 23.
(. n golz sa ...•), II that " j (end) ... Ii . • j 24, , . Cq,ey rajasthan),
in thepalace"; 25. (end) skalz sak upadrowI sgir (26) tt'nhz'r na Buddha
/I
(dharmma sangha), shall be free from calamity; shall shine with (the grace
/I
of) Buddha, the Law, and. the Church "; 27.. , (ratna trey), the
/I
Precious Gems "j ~8. (towards the end) nirhban , ..•... (enis) ...••..
• • I row golz (29) (kyak Buddha), II Nirval)a ..... haven . • . . ... Thus,
did the Lord Buddha" (presumably we should add prophesy," in which case
II
this would bethe end of the Buddha'sprophecy concerning the kingin this version,
corresponding generally with I A 36 and III C 24) j\ 29. (near the end) (ma
das smin dharmmaraja) ..••.•.•.•. , who is a,king ofthe Law "; 31•
tt
(end) •.. (didap) .•. , every"; 33.(end) .•..••• (gmnluM smt'n (tlun),
II
" all '.' •.. princes come." . Lines 34-8 arc altogether illegible.
49. Apart from a few words near the beginnirig which have helped to fill
up gaps in the text of No. VI, No. VII owing to its bad state of preservation has
been entirely useless for my purpose.
No. VIII.
A THIRD INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THESHWESANDAW PAGODA,
PROME,
DescriptifJe Aceou1zt.
50. Next to the great Shwezig8n inscription (No, I), this is perhaps the most
interesting of the early records and it is mucb to.be regretted that"· it has only
c0t:ne down to us in its present fragmentary and dilapidated· condition. An ink
impression of it was sent to me.·several years ago at the same timeac; one of
No. VI and before I had becomeacquaint~dwithNo. VII: consequently No. VIII
has been previously mentioned as the·secondof the Shwesandaw inscriptions and
is thus referred to in several Reports of the Superz'ntende1It, Archaeological
Survey, Burma (viz, 191 I, p. 20 j 1912, p. 15 j 1916, pp. 21-2), and in J.R.A.S.,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
154 [VOL. I
1910, pp. 796-812. 'The inscription is engraved on both sides ola large stone
slab, but the beginning is missing and must have been on some other stone
(conceivably it is No. VI) j and the end, if it is on our stone (which is doubtful) is
unfortunately quite illegible. It is not even absolutely certain which of the two
faces'precedes the other: the ends of both are more orless obliterated and there
fore their connexion if: by·no means clear.' However, I am disposed to think
that what I have caIled Face A precedes the other face. The former is the
better preserved, though much is lost, especially the beginnings of several ofthe
earlier lines. Face B is throughout in a deplorably b~d state and becomes
absolutely undecipherable to~ardsthe end. Two sets of ink-impressions of this
record were sent tome, together with photographs of one set: The lettering on
both faces is bordered as in No. V by a line, which in this case also fonns a flat
curve at the top of the inscription. The space covered by lettering on either
face is in height 4 ft. 1 in., in extreme breadth 4 ft. The letters do not differ in
shape materially from those of the preceding inscriptions, their nOTlJlal height is
! in., letter tis!in. to i in. in length, and the interlinear space is I in.
51. From what remains of this inscription it may be presumed that it belonged
to the group of records which represent the less extensive version of the
Kyansittha legend. Buddha's prophecy is mentioned in B 14, in B 22 Gawampati
is made to exhort Bisnu, while in B 24 Indra, accompanied by the celestial archi
tect and ·the Naga king, invites the sage to take up the burden of his glorious
destiny. In this detail the record differs from the preceding ones: nothing is said
elsewhere of Indra being accompanied on this occasion by these two minor
personages. But the chief interest of the inscription lies elsewhere, namely in
the enumeration of King KyansiUha's achievements as king at Pagan~ Herein
are to be specially noted the erection of a building, presumably of a· sacred
character (A 1-2), the revision of the Buddhist Canon (A 3), the mission to India
with funds for the restoration and endowment ofthe temple at Bodh Gaya (A 4-8:
and see ~ 24), liberality to the monks (A 8-9), relations with other princes and
in particular with a certain "Coli" prince (~ 24), whom the king claims to have
converted to BuddhIsm (A 10-4) and who in return appearS to have come to do
obeisance in great state, bringing (as it would seem) a ·number of magnificent
presents and one of his daughters for the king's acceptance (A 15-6). This episode
is'followed in the record by details of the offerings made by the people of Pagan
and itS neighbourhood on festive occasions of a religious character, and stress is lai'd
here (as in some of theotherinscriptions) onthe fact that the king himself delivered

PART II) MON INSCRIPTIONS
didactic addrt:sses to his subjectsjwho appreciated them highly (A 24-5': d. I E
10-4, III G22-4). The greaterp.art ofthe remainderofthe record appears to deal
with religious festivals, but much of it is unfortunately alm'ost illegible. In ,B 2-5
there is an interesting passage illustrating, as' it woul,d appear, the Buddhist
doctrineof kindness toanimals. Much of it is undecipherable, but it seem's that
certain birds were the objects ofthe Idng's special favour and enjoyed his protec
tion, while from B 8-9 it may be inferred that animals in general were secured
generous treatment and some pr.ovisio~ of food. A ,strong tinge of ethical and
religious sentiment pervades the in'scription, blendingcuriously'with the monarch's
laudation of himself and his performances.
52. In B 15---21 there is a set of Pali verses, in the reading and interpretation
of which ProFessor Duroiselle has been kino enough to .give me his valuable.
assistance. They amount to a brief-panegyric on the ~.ing an4 specially mention
his paternaland maternal descent (cf.VI2S-S and ~ 46).. In explanation ofthe
epithet of the king's mother, referring to her ancestry; Ouroiselle.sent me the
following abstract of the Burmese legend on the subject :_Cl King Anoratha was
not feeling satisfiedwith only the mother ot,Sawlu as his Chief Queen, so he sent
a minister to Vesali, the modern 8esarh in,India. Now the king of Vesali had
,seven daughteJ;s ; the eldest became a nun.. Oneday,sheplanted a b£lva tree; in
due course it bore fruits, one of which was as big as a Pegu jar. A. girl was born
from it, whom the nun made over to the king; the latter calledthe child Ruciya
pabh~vati. He gave her in marriage to the uparaja (whetherthe latter was his
brother or his son is not made c1ear).l From this union wasborn"a child who
was named Pancakalyal).i. It was Pancakalyal).i whom Anoratha'sminister asked
. ,
for ",(on his royal master's' behalf). The 'rest of. the story~in a slightly variant
version, has been briefly abstracted in ~ 23. It only remainsto'~e noted
that there are various little differences in detail between the:two, which"however
are not material to our purpose. Students ()f folklore .will,be familiar with the
theme ofthe birth of a child from a vegetable substance (a few instances of.which
have been collected inthe Notes to Winstedt and Blagden's Malay Reader(1917);
pp. 182-3).. It is a widespread legend and is probably of totemistic ,origin:
families took their names from particular plants, held them ,in reverence, and
imagined themselves to be-descended from them. ·It is, no doubt, possible that
the legend of this particlllarmiraculous birth was invented, as Duroiselle suggests,
by King Kyansittha himself in order that in spite of the doubts cast on his
I Apparently hewas alleged tobetheson: lee the Reportcited inthefol1owing note.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[VOL. I
paternity he might still be consideredas a man of no common birth. But to me
that sounds'a less pr~bable explanation. Dutoiselle adds that it is clear from his
stone portrait in the Ananda temple that he was not a pure Burman j and there
seems, therefore,no reason to doubt that he had. an Indian mother, whoever his
father may have been.1
53. It does not appear from what is left ofthis record whether it was made
to commemorate 'any special occasion or was merely a royal panegyric engtaved
for general information. Nor is there any precise evidence as to its date., The
proper names call for no particular remark. From the linguistic point of view
the record is not without·value, as it contributes a few interesting forms; but its
dilapidated condition has very seriously impaired,its utility in that respect. It
concludes the important group of inscriptions which embody the royal legend of
Kyansittha.
Text.
A
I. (smin) '[Sri] Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja gOQpa tuy da gol) rna
nin kindam Nirbbana(m)ulabajr(apa)r(yaqJahawihar)
9
2. • .••.•.••..•• ,' <;ley sthan Jayabhumi rna taw boy esan qun
Poka[m]=ma imo'[ArimadJda[napJur Igal) ci smin [c-anJ
3. [sak das smol)] (kum) [I blal)J gob yan pi\ak trey pi wo' O1a lin dindan
9
Ear gob IiiiJn [tJu[nJ pko(m
4
jumwim)5 [cuJal) tu[n]I (gol) ci)
4. [smin C'an sak das] s01ol) kum Iblab gol) yan kyak trey Sri Bajras (pi)
tr(u)k bla(11) p[lJifi [01Jan smin [c-anJ k ... ika gol) (I s01in)
6 S7 ••• 8
1 Thechronicles of Arakan, however,appear to prove that the Vesiili in question wasin that country,
notin India proper,,and thatif Kyansittha had Indian blood in hisveins he derived it indirectly, through
an Arakanese mother; and, further, that thescandal asto hisdoubtful legitimacy has no historical founda
tion (Report ofthe Superintendent. ArchaeologicalSurt'ey, Burma, 1918, paras.:W. 40).
2 Thelast partofthispropernameis very doubtful, ~viharbeingentirelyconjectural.
9 This phraseisconjecturally restored on thestrength ofthe other passages where it isclearly legible.
The only real doubt is as to the particle kllm, which may not be neededif the phrase occurs here for the
first time,
4 The final lettermightbep.
5 Verydoubtful,thoughitseemsa tenablereading.
6 Thereading isdoubtful, the word looks rather likebla!l,which can'hardlybe right here.
7 Lonkslike katlas. Cf•.V 45.
&Look!llike pafiM, thou~hthe first consonantmightbe m and the \lecondpossiblych.

'graphia Birmanic2. No. VIII. VOLUM~ 1, PLATE XV.
A THIRD INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME.
A
2 2
4
4
6
6
8
8
10
10
12 12
'4- 14
16
16
18
18
20
20
22
22
24
24 _
26
26
28
28
3G
30

PART II] l\HJN INSCRIPTIONS 157
5. [Sri TribhuwanadiJtyadhammaraja gOD ket ra[tnJa rna kab moy prakar
p(u)ndon kban (ar) or kindam [tJrey Sri Bajras b[l]ab [IJ ra[nJ ...
1
6. . .. (kir kumba)r (k)inda(p)3 t[i bn]a' I [k]i[nJdam [t]imbin or con
2 I I
pnan cQOW sak k(u)14 plit kil ph..[rn] klo' [twi]n tw[i]k j[iJnjeb [rinIeD]
I
khis (tun nor)5
7. (tlarSI gob ci) [smi]r'l C[-ailJ sa[k]das [sJmolf[kJum
I
blab gob yan maha
(w)a(tlh)u m1 smin Dharmmasok kindalil rna [t]inre[mJ dim rla[k
7
, taJ golf smih Sri- Tri[bh]u[wa'nadi]-
I
8. [tyadharnmaraja] gob t(ti)n kindalil tumit(u)n9 khis nor tlar Igob ci smin
8
c-an sak das smo!:t kmill bh:tlf [gobJ ut tarley sallgha llla taw <:ley (<:Iun
Ari)-
9. (maddanapurgo1.1)10[smiJn SriTribhuwanadityadhammaraja[gobJpureh
11
na paceey pOln prakar dida[pJ dlj' gal.! ci smir'l e-ail sak das S1110D
I
kUlil I [bJlal) (go)-
10. (h) 12 •••••••••••••• 13 [man] smiil gurill0il ran tlull ci s(b)ak 14
bn(a)t 15 tirwi[1 IJ ka[lJ gob [smJin Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja
rmin smiil Co[IJi <:lei) cup (P)o-
I J. (kam tiiy da)IS [I] gOD rna smiil bica'rana mey w[eJn nor [raJtna [pi] wo'
[ei] 800m c-§n mo)' [da] ilia sda[sJ kil si[rJs(u)k jl\limok [4e]y lo[~J
17
(para)- .
12. (lok)18 19 [nJirbban kusat[waJgutill0il eikal.lsa[k] Iyan ratna
pi wo' com rna das kill [goJb rna smin [so]1 gun B[uJddharat[nJal
dha[rJmmaratna I sa[ngha-\rat[nal (Qey)
1 Possibly (but in that case incorrectly)pando/i. ,
2 Merelyconjectural anci' quite probably wrong,though the finalconsonantseemsto be'certain. There
isa great difficultyabout resloring the effaced beginnings and ends of these lines because.in this part of
the inscription the bordering line is Iwtvisible,so that as it is a curvehere one cannot be sur~ how much
spaceis tobeallowed ror.
3 Conjectural, possiblybi1ldap; killd.:m seemsimprobable. <I Or (lesscorrectly) kitl.
!i These tw"wordsare somewhatconjecillral. . 6 Merdyconjectural.
.1 Or mahritlhiittt (perhaps\uitten mah<iahOfthu),whichseemsnbout,equallyprobable.
8 Conceh'ably t~n. The initi:llCOllionllllt is a),,;) damaged. 9 Almostcertainly tiln, not fun.
10 The precedingwords(in parentheses) are merelycunjectural.
11 Or pumu!l. There is a mark which may stand for the a1lusv,~rf.l or may be the result ofsubse-
quentdamage. 12 Merelyconjectural.
13 (cannot re:;tore the last of the~e missing words, the medial consonant appears to be a subscript
l- (ort), thefinal either ,.or '. The pass2gc probablyrefersto t1elegation~froll1 vassal 6.,. foreign princes.
14 Probable,though it might p05sibl,y be read siak.
15 I.uaks lilte b/'llt. probably on account ofsubsequent damage
16 Purelyconjectural. 17 Conceivably.but improbably, sir~!I{'. 18 Conjectural.
19 The missing words (of Iyhich the la~t flpp,-:ars toend in Ii or ':v)probablymennt something like
give."
U
21

, ,
158 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
13. (sla tha)r 1 [na](Qak)lI,Thingli]1 tuy [I]smin pundon ar kil kil smin ColiI
9
smin Coliku ut bal [Q]e[!)] rmi[n] gun Buddha[dh]ar[m]ma saCnJgha '
,[m]an smin [Sri Tribhuwa}. ", , ' ,
Ji
14. [nadityadhammarajapundon]go[!)c [I] Q[e]b dueu]lcwa[p m]ic[cha]-"
dris Qe!) cap boy samema]dri[s mJule!) I [Qe!)flJac. '.'. gO!)Qe!)
'sQi[k] gap.pu[mas] (I) . " . ..• '" ",'. ,. "
15. ; .•.. ~ .~ .. ~ ';'[bitan blJl~y[chu]kal[pJab[r]ik~a[m]at[mu]yna
, sattaratnat1ku ko[n] lw[otlQel)kum m6yma Quk [p]inkurO[p] ku '
, .,[k]irya [m]aka[l) moy] ',' ',", " ',' ,,', ,'. '., '.'.
16. [prakllr rna dindar ku t9uribJu[ril]tan [t]Qun [may]Or (r)inruli; mayOr '
. ,(m]afii[n] la[k] na sattaratllal tlu[lipa p]ujaw smii1 Sri[T]ri[bhu) "
, wanadit[y]adh~mmara[ja] I go!) [c]Hsmili c-ali] , ' ,
17; [sak das] g[o'sfiloI)k]umrulg[o!)]ya[n p]u[jaw] fia!) Qun[ii]aI~J ras
na!) gr[ip 8 g]ufhl(u)[n 9 boy sarnarttha] 10 flab ta [g]o!). kurh kum I '
nom [mJa [pu]jawlQ(l.l)nU [thaJr (tQuIi sra).:.Jt
18. [n bilan thar dinday thJar (na)[tinl]a[y th]arpnik [th]a[r aJs[th]ar[th]ar
[d]indap jnn thar sinlu[kJ ju[n] thar si(nd)i19 tharCchJuk [jn]u [th]ar '
rup [jadisiil tharchu k:-JIpabrik~a]'.... ',' ", ' '
19..;'•. [prasa](d I) [rlip ci]n rup[mn]ah [r]u[p] deW'atawrlipki[n]dok [m]a
kci!) rno[y] p[rJa[kJar ma [Qe]Q kindamnathar rna Qe!) cificonna
ratna dumpol:lI [gJIUIi [phaIr rna (nab) .•...'.. '
JI
!Zo; ••• (pa) [pujaw [ul gJo!) p[n]at\ dula[npk]aw tharkirIamli[rnimJ1•
• b[i]r[J;>]ar[1]nirn didap kal.didap:kintusa[kl sirgut [n]ln lu[l]goQ
[gli](~)..
" [tQun pkaw]tQun ',' ' ""',,. ' '
21. • (cas)15 [tap] (cir)18 c(u)p mursun [c]wa[slta[pkirIJam tapk[lam c]a[s]
, "moy tap ciglunphar weI [m]an fia[!)Jpa [p]iijaw [I kJa[1 g]o!) C[iJil
[jmiir]guml(u)n17 c[k]e[m] (kU)18 .... ;., " ,
prec~ding areconiectural~nd
1 Thethree words (except the letterr) very doubtful. '
~,Conjectural; butit,seemsprobabie, the final lookslike k(but might bet,or somethingelse).
11 Possiblyhangul. The form israther doubtful. ,.
• Thefinal seemscertain, but the rest might be read i!Q,fha,ta" orCD; and thereare other possibili-
ties., ' .
, ,6 Thelastfew leItersofthisillegible pnrt may be n bley,buteveri theseare doubtful.
II A small circleover lheit isa!\sumed to be not original; but if it is we must readsatta," ratna.
Thereappears to be nosuchCirc\e over theword in the nelt line.
'; Possiblydi,/run. ,Il Conceivably, but improbably,gruip. 9 Possiblygum/lin.
10 Ther isextremely doubtful. 11 Possiblyttl"n. ,.n. 1~ Purelyconjectural.
19 The middleconsonantsmaycon~eivably (though improbably) be nn or
14 Conceivablylirnim. ' 15 Verydoubtful.
III Verydoubtful. Theinitiallooksasifit might bech.
:17 Possiblygu';'!Uh. 18 Thek might bet. The next letterafter thissyllablelOOkslikeborp.

'MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART l[ ] 159
22.•'..•1 [pkaw] (dll) ..•.•.• , .• [IJS t]lun papujawsmiiI I kseh ~i
rin[I]e[1.11 ya]il ,row rup sa[tJwa guml(u)n Slab rupki[rid]o~dewataw
gurill{u)n lab [rnJanus.[gum]lun [ki]nda[mdon]
3 4. • •• .. ' ,
23, ... , " ... " [Qeb lop] 8 ri[nle]1:t jifijebpapujAw'smin I [tilgob}yan
.row jiiijeb ri[n]leb [mJa [d]as ja[p] c;!unjap ras ja[p] twaii'japnab
[grip] (gum)- . " .,
.24, (tun) [I Qeb] .. , [tlun rinleb jinj]el:t pa pujaw smin dida[pka]likal'
,7
smi[n di]nd(u)8 bi[nt]on mahajan guml(u)n {naYo kr[uJm dhar[mm]a
9
ei I yan [tJi[rhin k]~rsab mahaja}
.u
25. [n gumlun] ..•....•. , ... , ... pnan pkaw [binkaJ ci row
brey jumnok m;l gur [kJum [sak] sirgu[tJ nan I [y]an nab rna pujaw
ki(ry)a (thar) [srJ(an glun)18
12
.26. (phar. weI) [I jiiijeb rinleb bulab~Jat [rnJa [nom yumyum] ci[r]cas
14 15
bi[rbaJr cwa[s kirlamJ li[rnim 18.m]ajin=p(u)n17ku s[rnJin ci glu[n]
pharl Cyan m]anus lab sa[tJ18(c-an)
27. (lab rna Qeb)ID, ... , , .... [smin cut] Qakkil da[n' yumyum] didap
kal ci glun pharl kab may In(i)in ·kali bar In(i)m llO[sak]go' na
20
,(slros) 91.... ' .
28..•••. ~ .. . .•. ; .'J'J [go](I:t I yan) row pun-dan [rna] sOlin Epa
bus]ac kyak lal) kindamceti lab kindambihar lab 'kif kumbar lab til
a[ram lab] (Qeb)
93•••
< . ; ; , ..
29:' . , •. [utsa]kalasatwagu(mlu)"ll'orut[blab]no[rsans]ar
corm] I til gob jap c;I[uJn [nap ras jap[tJwa[ii jar] (iia\:igrip)1l5
. ...". . .
missin~~ord5 ~illle(l.
1 Lookslike ,"aii. ,!l TheI3st of these may beblab,or possibly
II'Conceivablyguml1i,i. ,I Looks rather·likedillon. butthe marks underneath may be'accidental.
5 The first of thesemi.sing syllab!es looks rather like rap. butthis is very doubtful and the rest is'
obscure. ' . ,
II Looks like ramUp orriMp.but probably top is right. 7 Possiblyonemight restor~lop here..
8 Perhapsdind".. ":J Perhapsgumliiit..· .
10 Doubtful,butI can suggest nosuitablealternative.
11 Theobscure passageprobablybeganwith mapitjetf1l. J:l Almostcertain. 19 Quite conjectural.
14 The two preceding wordsare not quitecer,tain.
15 Possiblysatwa(whichonewould cxpect); but thereSCems to be a f,ir,ima and perhapsthe marks
under the tare merely acCidental. .
III Conceh'ably lirJiim. I, PerhapsPUll, 1ij Orsat'IIJa.
1:1 Theprecedingwordsareverydoubtful. cO Perhaps(but improbably) iitim.
21 The1and the final s are particularly doubtful. ' .
29 Somewherenear the endof.thelastlinc one would e~pectgirlltli. or the like, but I cannot fill up
the blank. " ' 2ll Extremelydoubtful.
2. Doubtful: thespelling is unusual.and besidesthere is'a mark over thet" which maystand for the
altuSfllZf'a, butitmay on the otherhand bemerelyaccidental. '
liS Conjectural. '

160 EPIGRAPHIA BJ RMANICA [VOL. I
til
30. (gumluri) 9 (d)[on kraw [or incim
1 •••••••••••••. 3
ambo' amba' pal pun kil darn man silsak] (or ambay) 4 .
B
I. II (or kraw 6 mhajan) gu[mJlun [sgo'siJr[suk Qey 10k paralokJ (cir cup) 8
2. (nirbban) [or fiab kraw didap] kal(wo') [ja] .....>:. • .• (I) 9
7 8
d[nJab d[irhaJt [m]e[trici]t .
3. [iJ [gJu[mlun boyJ rae b9Y [tinro\vboy]ra[ja.sthan]ei
'.10
[sak gebJ d[ow] (nab) ~
11 •••••••• •
4 (Ci)19 sCi) .. [pafljalJ ci [g]e[/:J tlJ(u)n-~4 g[u]n taw han ginrop
13
(tad) .. [smiJn sum[p]o[t t]aw Ina] te[y] we(I kirlo')16 ..•.{tiJ
]6
S. ria 17 [goJb smiiJ kil . • . . • . . . . . (im)o' 18 kiflcem dharmma I ul gob
[kal nab gumluiJJ lo[p t]u[bJok [pk](aw dirkas)19 .....
,6.•.• (rmiri)'v[binru ph]am (s-ar) 91 .. (gob mirtppy.S3)kosbi[rba]r kos
92.
lciTir
(mirmo}) (b)lr(bar). . .[jJ(i)nie[y QJe[I;J 24 ar) .
7. [blab] (gob flab rna UiW)95 [kintasmiri kJa[l sm]ith-'~1~t qak k[1as] thar
I
J...
tuy [geb ar [k]o[m] k[uJ pkaw (thar a7 flciir~()h tuy)
C6 lI8 •••••
J Quiteconjectural,except for the'final letter, which !>eemsprettycertain.:
2 Thelastof the missingsyllableslookslike ka or tao
S The last ofthe missingsyllables may bena&.
4 Notcertain, but probable.
6The first two words are extremely doubtful,except thesecond r.
6 Very doubtful. 7 Extremelydoubtful. :,..
8The demonstrativeseems uncalled for and I doubt the reading, P05sib~yit 5hou~bego',
9.Possibly.we shouldreadjtip,butIcannotrestore the restoftIle passage.'-
10 Possibly·ihefirst of the missiilg words iskilicelll., '
II Very doubtful. . . lill Thevowel illvery douLtful.
13 The vowel isdoubtful. The next letterseemsto be h, but isalso extremelydoubtful.
J4,Ortlu/i. . '
15Very doubtful. The word lookslike tade/i, orkad"i. J6 Very doubtful.
17 The beginningofthis word (atthe end of the preced'jngline) isconjectural andseemsverydoubtful.
18 Possiblypo'. BUn/i/Q' seems more likely. -
t:l Verydoubttul.· 20 Doubtful.
21 Possiblyp.ri". •' 22 Very doubtful.
,23 Not qui!ecerlaili,.but prnbable. The same applies to the SUbsequent numerals. The short
illegiblewords following thesecondp<tirmustbe words ofdistance, presumably.
24 Conceivilblyprop. butd;'ep seems tight.
zs.The four preceding,wordsare more orlessconjectural. '.
2B.The missingwprdseemstoend in tit oriik~ Buteven the preceding word islather doubtful.
27 Ver)'.doubtful, 28 Thelast three words areextremely doubtful. .

J
PART II MeN INSCRIPTioNS'
8. (cac)li Y,;! .[tIJ(u)[nJ ... (rjap)2 [diJda[p tney smih myiJI
[a]bhipray .[ku] b(a)19 gtiml(u)h (t)i(rmaw)5 [sat..tiracchan](ci)
4 6
, , , , , , ,,'. " "
[ktJi[r~das]
9. (sa<;likpurnas) 7 ..•..... [k] (ell ut) [gol;t
•• : •••
srriih kJil (an~fiap Ski!) punci~idapttiey. (ma)imo['dharmma]
.
" , , , 9
,,~
10. • •.. (smin) 10. • •••.• ~ ..'.. .., . [pkaw dirkas]
. [uppa]l g'umlu[n ci Qel;t·pka\v sak piJr[yay'Unorantul pkaw] . .,
I J. [c)el;t] ; •....... ~ 1a(tnar)1a[dincarn] (tnarya 14
". (tnar)19 [<;I,el;t tun pkaw 1 (I) [u]~ (chu 15dufi)~ a [gurhlunJ (ci)J7 .
.1&
[<;Iel;tpkaw] ...' ..;•. ',' . '
J2•• ; ••••.••••• ; ••'~. '•• ;, ••• ; •••..• (nom) [kuJ (mirmal)
'. [sac=chu ta g~l.l nom].ku [0Jja ras [rnaJ mip=pa(r1O I) •
(ket ket) •..... ".
I 3.:: .' ':•.'" ,,' '.. , , , , .' ') ~ , ":,, .' ..' , , , " " ", , " . , " ,,' .' " , , , " , , .'"
;·.19[oja,~as
." .. ,; tJi j[n<?k' <;IeQ·ktiJr das. kal kintir(dirdas) [sminSri
....:,'fiibhuwanadi} ..•. . ....•.. ." . . '.' .
14; [tyidhimmarajamai~ kyakB~ddha tarley byades Iar] '(I) .• .20[smin]
.:'c-an [sak]das [~moJI) ..... [<;ley <;luil Pokani.,ma imo' Arima]-
21
ca
...1 The precedinglooks like· clik,whichseemsimpfobaiM.
t Quitedoubtful;,. . .aLooklilikebil, whichmay.be int~nde~i.. 4Perhapsg'lImliin•
.' 6,Very doubtfuL.!Theinitial may hek,thesupposed mmaybe~n:~ccjdenlalmark,and even ther
mighfqe d., .'. .'. : .'. . ,.
•8 'oci~btful; .and ih:()rrectiPerhaps only thebeginningci£'aword ..'
'? Thes~two wordsarevery,doubHul. . ' , " .." '., '. .
'SRiltherconjeCtural. The first twos)l1ablesmightbercacJdullionly there is110v.iri'imo;
'.,9Presumablydllarmmai~onlythefirstelen;ent'Qfs01netompii~ridword.. ..
10 Extremelydoubtful. ...' .11-Conceivablyp{rrtii~1,'.,.Otthe'114might heal'. .
12 Possiblythe hist ofthe missingwordslsdutnpo(. (~liiCh wo~fdhean unusualbulq\lile.possible
spelling). ': .'.' :,'. :. . "...... .
13 Thisword, though appareritiyoccurring thriceiiJ thisline, remains·somcwhat. doubtful.'
1"
14 vi~w ofd.iiicam, andthe pos~iblereading'?ltlJlpo(l;iiithislinc,onc istempted to assume here the
equivalentof., nine" (L.M.dacit), .Unfortunatl'ly theE.I'vf.fO~rn oLlhis ~unJeral does not appear in anyof
the preceding inscriptions, and the word here.is nototegible, 'Itmight conceivably be readcicltc,which
seemsan unlikelyf9rm.. . .. , .' . . .
15 Very doubtful. Possibly,though less probably,lla. " .'
. ~e Probably thisstands for c'lin..· n Verydoubtful. . _
l8Thelast lettl;r isnotquitecertain and therefore doubt:llso attachesto ~hc stop that is supposed to
~~ .. . . . .
J~ Inthemissing parta few lettersare more or less doubtfully'deCipherable, but as theydo not form
recognizable wordsonecannot be quitesureof them. .. ' . ..' ' .
£0 It is doubtCul.whetherthere isanYlhing here, even a.stop: the space might beaccounted for by the
tail of the.0 in oja,above. But possibly somesh,drt word.like rna shouldbe read. .
rna
. 21 Conceivablyone might read das,perhapsprec('(ll:dbya stop".

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA Il- VOL.
15. [ddanapur gob] (ni)d(an) fi(in)1 ..... [row \Va'il b[y.J~[kalO
O]M 2
dhal11l1larajeJtia I' [satthu]na [varabhupati] 1[yo .Sri Tribhuvana
J-
.'dityadham'mara
.16. [ja ti oama]ko • (v)e[!ubabba~l}aja3 m~ta I pita adiccavansajo I]
011
dvi(hivahse]hi[nubhiito I dhammaraja]· ~ ... (00.)6
17.••••.. [pufifiO danamhi balava]8.. • • . 7 (1)8 [ananta-
bhogasampu]1JJ;lO I [kotthagara anappako] D 0 If [tejaJsi . . . .
.' . ()9 . .
'. • • .eo·.,·. I ••••••
8....; .,.. [yaso samfiftamarajadhammesu appam]atto vica[kkh]al)o .
! I I
.[lIolcat]ursangahadhaOlOlehil[janam ranjati]IO .....(1) •
· . . u
,,';--
[~atallatlayamamako
19•••••.. :. (I) ri 0"] [deva]
·[I ptijasa~kara] .. .. t no sampuI)lfo raja-iddhihi IJ ..
I
. . .
. .
~O•• . [I] .. [J;lJ;laOla] .. . ~. ," . '. • • -[I].".. • • . '". ~ ..[naradhipo II
. . .'
o •.ArimaddanasanJkh[ate" Pokame nagaruttame IJ
-
.. .. . .. [I]
21.' ·.•.....; [.OIlJ .. • • • . '. • • • • . . [IJ.
[guJ}aOl"'attanol] ~' ..'.[na '. . [kulo] '. [I] . i ...
'" •. ,', •
.
~ " • .-". ••
[
•
.
0
. a] 1.2....":•..-•.._.•~.•'."',
(k)[indJ(am <;Iuri)i3 (blah ItirIey) [Gawampati
. 22•••••.••••• '.';"0
ga!:I kurisi Bisnii row WO'I ,ina Olankyak BuddhabyadestirleyJ
·.. . .. . u· . .' '.,
'.-
.23. (sOlin'dharOlmara)[ja go!:I cicrriatJ(da tirley sacca) [yo I] (mnor) 18
16
[kum cidnab tirleyJ (spa)17 [tirtiiy .sakal~ •satwa gum!un] (ar .'
nirbban)'1s ...; .. ; ..
J These two wordsseemsomewhatdoubtful.
. ~ Atthis point begins.a setof,Pa.li sloka verses' for the reading and interpretation 9f which (so far
as it isatall possible) I am very much indebted to Professor Duroisellt"•.'
3 Duroisellereads·be{ufJabbo:'.''.'aji'i.. J The next twosyllablesmightbe 11lahii.
5 Quite illegible, but insertedon theanalogy of theother verses where it occurs.
eThe precedingwords areso readby Duroiselle; personally 1am unable torecognizethem•.
7 Somewherein this obliterated passage Duroisellereadsthesyllableno.
B The stop isdoubtful;butseemstobe required, .'. ',' . .' .
\I Here too'astopseemstobe required,though noneisaCtu~llyvisible. The F.rstpartof the preceding
obliteratedpassagelookslike{u'i1!fUsa. . .
10 Duroiselleexplains thisas beingfor raiijeti... '. .
11 Svmewhere in the obliterated passage Duroiselle'reads'0 scutii. Icannot'findit in my impressions
anddo not know whether itcomes directlyafter raii,jatior in the next verse,
12 Endof the Paliverses. 13 Verydoubtful. 11 Perhaps we should.read sdas.
16 Verydoubtful. 16 Conjectural. 11 Almostcertain. 18 Very doubtful;

qrap1tia Birmanica No. VIII. VOLu:\lE I, PLATE XVI.
A THIRD INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME.
B
2
4
6
8
10
12
16
18
20
22
30

PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS
"24.. (ktir dharminaraja) .'•. (pi) [dirdas da I] [ti] •...
J
• . .. ~ .......• [kal gol) smin In I Bissukarmmadewaput I
Ka~akarmmanagaraja]s
25. (tun yuk) [surill;lup tey J (Inor) 3 (I) [kal gol) rIS) Bisnu]
(rmi)[n niman gol)bla1)] (I) ••...••.•.••••......•
•
26.. (I) [kal] (ma kyak)
.. . .. . . . .. . .
.
.
27•••••.••• , .• [lo'J.... (Nothing more is certainly decipherable
in this line.)
28. . • . • . . . • . . (ci) [smin] . . . . (The rest is quite uncertain.)
29,3°. (Nothing,legible j it is not clear howmanylinesthere were originally.)
Tra1tslation.,
A
,
..... King Sri Tribhuwan~ditya , d' hammar~jamade (and) then (he) built
5
the Nlrbbanamulabajraparya (?) (monastery ?)ll '; ..• '. ;; ; .." on the site
(named) Jayabh'uml; which is to the north-east of the city ,of'Pagan, that is
styled Arimaddanapur. :;Inthatrespect (too f)-no other king, (I. 3) is like (him).'
Thereafter; thethteehoIy:Pi~~kas,7which,had'bec6me" obscured; (he) proceeded
to'collect (and},pu~ify.8,'In)hatrespect, too; no otherking isjike{him). There
after, (for)the holytemple ofStiBa:jras,9 (ofHbr~e(?) ....' .. (?),JD (which had
1 Extremelydoubtful. Insteadofdharmmao jris possiblethat we,ought to readdas; the word left
blank may perhaps be10k,the last letteris probablya kinanycase.
,S Thesenames, which ateonly partlylegiblehere,,canbesafely restored by the help ofthe 'preceding
inscriptions; , ' "
9 Possibly weshouldrestore tarZ,y or kyii,ffollowed by,someshort'word. The appearance ofthetext
rather favours the latter suppositiof\; but it is not clearto methat this request to Bisnuwas made in the
presence ofBuddha,towhom theword kyak would bemosl appliC.'lble, thouRh it might.possibly betaken in
a moregeneralsense, '
, 4 In thislong obliterated passage only a few letters are doubtfully legible, making no recognizable
wordsand therefore quite uncertain. The'sameremarkappliesto II. 26-S,
bOr" K.S.T. did" (whatever was mentionedin the preceding, missing, portionof the text) ..(:llld)
thereupon built,"etc.
6 Or"temple"7 Seethe text and notethereon. 7 The Buddhist Cilnon.
8 Thatis, he caused to be made a revised edition, in view of omissions and corruptions that had
occurred in thetext, or of porIionshaving becomesoscarceas not to begenerally available. Probably the
former is meant,: cf. 111 CIS.
9 The Vajrasana, built on thetraditional sitewhere Buddhaattained enlightenment,atBodh Gaya.
10 The reading is doubtful here: seethe text.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. I
been) destroyed by other kings ....•....... (?),t King Sri Tribhuwana.·
dityadhammarajagot (together) jewels of divers kinds (and) sent (them in) a ship
with intent to buildup the holy (temple) of Sri Bajras, to buy (land?) (1. 6) ...
. . •. , (to diga tank ?),2 to irrigate (?)3 arable land, to make dams,4 in order to burn
tapers that should never be allowed to go out, to present drums, ....••.. /'
xylophones,S singing (and) dancing, finer (than before ?).7 . In that respect, too,
no otherking is like (him). Thereafter, the great buildings which King Dharm
~ri
masok built, which (were) old (and) in ruins, King Tribhu\\anadityadham
S
maraja proceeded to build anew, (making them) finer than before. In that
respect, too, no other king is like (him).
Thereafter, all the lords of the Church who dwelt in (the city (1. 9) of
Arimaddanapiir?) King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja presented with10 the
9
19
four necessaries on everyoccasion. In that respect, too,. no other king is like
11
(him). Thereafter, (many persons .•.. ?)13 from all the princes came into
14
his presence to attend (him).15 At that time King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja
16
hearcI that a Coli prince had arrived (at Pagan ?).17 Thereupon the king
bethought him that apart from the Three Gems there is no other single thing that
could give great happiness in (this) world {or in the worlds beyond (1. 12), or
confer ?)18 Nirv31.la upon all beings: the Three Gems alone can give it.
] The reading isdoubtful. 2 Conjectural.
S Doubtful; perhaps,though improbably,"to make."
4 Or·"embankments," surrounding the several fields. as in thecultivation of rice on irrigated land.
The evident intent· was tocreatea permanent enduwment of landed pruperty from the rents or profits of
whichcertain ofthe templeexpensesshould bedefrayed.
5 The senseof klo' is undetermined.' It may be thespecificname ofsome particulartypeof drum, or
ofsomeother kind ofmusical instrument
cOr ..dulcimers": see Haswell, s.\'. twili t'/.N/ill. But pussiblythe term' may have b(,en used
fon'nerly.for any tnusical instrumentof percussionof a moreorlessanalogous n~.tllre. ..
7 Conjectural, butprobable. .
Sprcbably the reference istothe great .t\soka and the Bodh Gaya temple. But itisarguable that
bla~ go!; indicates a transition to another subject matterand that the reference is to the legendary King
Ohammasoka ofThaton (cr. SuaharnruuvatiriiFl1Iatiua, pp. 13.48, iIo, seqq.). , Conjectural.
10 Meaningconjectural,inferred Irom tltecontext.
11 Shelter,robes,lood,and medicine, thefour requisites for a Buddhist monic
l2 Meaningconjectural.
.I!Conje.ctural: thereisa lacuna hert'. Perhap:; the referel1('e isto diplomatic missionsonly, but it may
includethecumingof privateadventurersallracteod by the~plendourof the king'scourt.
14 Eitherioreignor vassal princes,orboth. 15 Or"to follow in his train": d. I C 9, II.
Ie Or"the." There j<; nothing todetermine the identityof this prince, /lntl nothing but the resem.
blance of his·designalion toconnect him with the great contemporary Dravidian dynasty. of which he f)"ay
have been a member and which at 3. slightly earlier period appears to haveextended its warlike expedi·
tionstothe Further East,as recor(J~r1in the greatTalljoreinscription.
11 Conjecturlll. but probable, restoration.
Ifl Conjectural restoration.

MOO INSCRIPTIONS
PART II]
Tlien the king wrote of the grace of the Buddharatna, Dharmmaratna, (and)
Sangharatna1(upona leafofgoldwith vermilion ink ?),9the king sent it tothe Coli
prince. 'The Coli prince, with all his array, hearing ofthe grace of Buddha, the
Law, (and) the Churcn, from King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja's sending.
(word of it to him), he cast off his adhesion ~o false doctrine, (and) he adhered
straightway to t~e true doctrine i he saw ,3 he.was pleased (and) happy.
• . .'..••..• , • (1. IS) . ~ ' (of pearls ?), an awning 5 of pearls,
akalpavrkia tree adornedwith the seven (kindsof) jewels,7 togetherwitha virgin
6
daughter ofhis who was perfect in form and with ornaments of divers kinds, who
was shaded by a white umbrella, a peacock umbrella, a peacock
8 8 ••• ,. , .9
set with the seven (kinds .of) jewels, (he) came to,offer to King Sri Tribhuwana
dityadhammaraja. That, tOOl other kings (1.17) have not got thelike of.
Then \?)JO (there) made offerings ali the people of the city, of the country,
(and) of the jungle, according-to their several means also. (Some) there were
that offered 'golden umb,rellas, (silver umbrelias?), golden awnings(?), golden
dt'lldiiy 11 with golden tracery (?), golden fans, golden mats(?), golden sandals,
/9
golden greaves, golden golden paddles (?), golden statuesof lions,
kalpavrk~atrees, . . . . . . .(1. 19) (for the?) palace, statuesofelephants, statues
of men, statues ofgods, statues ofdemons, of diverskinds, which they made ofgold,
which they adorned with the seven (kinds qf) jewels, in great quantities which
(they brought?) (and) offered; ...'P altar candles, golden flOwers, by the
hundred, by the thousand, by the two thousand, (at) every time, every month,
withoutceasing ..'. ; . i14••••15 umbrellasof flowers, umbrellas ofcloth (?), ...
1 That is; the excellenceofthethree members of the Buddhist Triad, and the benefits to be derived
from'them. . . ,
2 Conjecturaland extremelydoubtful,though royal letters were sometimes writtenthus. Themodern'
wordfor"vermilion" isjan nu,and conceivablythere may be someconnexion between the last syllableof
thisandthe uncertain word in thetext. 3 Readingand meaningundetermined.
4 This missing part probably contained a statement that the prince came to the king bringing the
giftsenumerated in whatfollows 5 Somewhatdoubtful interpretation.
6 The earthly imageor counterpart ofa miraculous heavenly tree, bearing al1 manner.ofdesirable
.gifts. likeourChristmastrees. . '
7 There aretwo distinct categoriesofseven preciousthings. Presumablytheone here referred to is
the list comprising gold, silver. lapis lazuli, crystal, ruby, amber (or coral, diamond, or emerald). and
agate(?). (The interpretationsofthe Indian namesseemto differin differentauthorities.)
8 Probable,butnotquitecertain,interpretation.
9 The meaningofl'inrun (ordinru1i) is undetermined.
10 Thesenseoful is undetermined,it maybeanadverb. 11 Meaning undetermined.
Jll Themeaningofsindiisundetermined, nor is the readingquite certain, andthe interpretation ofthe
words to which querieshavebeenappended is alsosomewhatindoubt.
J3 Themeaningofulisundetermined. 14 Thesenseof"an isundetermined.
J5 The senseofu1is undetermined.

166 EPIGRAPI-!IA BIRMANICA [ VOL. I
"(L21) (ten-fold, even unto?) fifty-fold, an hundred-fold,anhundred~and-eleven;'
fold, in great quantities .. '•.. offered by them~, Atthat time all the full-grown
1
elephantspickedup flow~rs (and) came (and) offered (them ?)
lathe king. ' The horses danced; In the semblance of all (manner of) creatures,
~:>fall(sorts of) deinons andgods,all.the p~ople(made a ceremonial dance?)
II •'. •
,(1. 23) '. ~ .'.'.•."~hey,(entered?) dancing (and) singing, to do obeisance to s the
king 4in the fashion of singing (and) dancingof every city, every country
'0,' " '.
every~illage,
district, (and) of all the jungle folk, they (would enter?) (and) come
danc.ing (and) singing, to do obeisance6 to the king every time. ' When the king
n
instr~cted, all the people (by declaring the Law; the applause of all (I. 25) the
people (w'ho'offered ?) .'. • " _. candles,flowers, parched rice, (was)'like a great
"0
(shower of) rain thatfalls'withoutceasing .~ ... Those who offered (golden
8
andsilver?) ornaments (ingreat,quantities. ?),7sang (and) danced. released
0 .'••
living creatures,' by te~s", scores, 'hundreds, thousanos, which they presented as
i~
;pious£ifts(?) to the king great quantities. Whether men, or(other) creatures
O~ 27) (tha~ they offered ?), the king poured outwater (and) gave the
living offeringseverytim'eJingreat quantities, exceeding a thousand, exceeding two
thousand, not to be(numbered?),•.". . •. . . " .'. like the piousgiftsthat the king,
made; either.in consecrating Buddha-statues,8 orin building pagodas, or building
monasteries, oriliggingtanks, or,planting groves, (1. 29) (~e
0 •
, <lidthese things?) only in orderthatall beings mightescape out of Samara
9••• .10
0
that every city, every country district; every village; all the jungle folk
0 • 0 ; • 0 •
hereafter might feed mother (and) father, do meritorious deeds, give pious gifts,
keep the(ethi~al) commandments, (and) be not (neglectful ?) ...
0 •••
B
(that hereafter?) all (mankind?) might obtain happiness ,in this world (and)
10 the worlds beyond (untiL ,they arrived •.. in' NirvalJa t), that those
0,'
1 Thesense;}fweZis u~determined.
Ii Thedoublfurword lookslike don, which in L.M.denotesthe kind ofmediumswho are thechief
assistantsinthekalakdance(HalIiday, The Talaings, p.100)., Butthereading and interpretation are very
doubtful, though plainlysomesortofceremonialdance is referredto.
, '3 Or "tomakeofferingsto," as before.' f ThesenseofuZis·undetermined.
5,Or..to makeofferings." eThesenseofntin is undetermined;
7 The readingisdoubtful here, and thesenseofweZ undetermined.
8 Theword kjtiik isvery vague,butthisinterpretationseemsappropriatehere.
t Theconti~i1alround ofexistence,bybirthand rebirth;,
ill Thesenseoful is undetermined.

MeN
'PART 11] INSCRIPTIONS
h~reafter ~ ~
atall times should(obtainevery?) •. •. . ,. Because (of) the power
of loving kindness '. • . .. '.' (1. 3). ..• . • • all (birds?)on the high roads, in
the lanes,'·at the royal residence, (did) 'not flee, ' .... . , . (cages?)j they
J 2
came (and) alighted on the roof (of'. '. . . .?), the king stroked (them) with
.(his) hapd, , ..•... , (I.5) ••. , .. the king gave, .. , ..'. (the nameof?) Birds
of Dharma •... when all' the people entered presenting (waterlily?) flowers
3
•. " ..... , (hearing'?) the sound of drums (they went?) ., .... , (from) a
distante of oriekos, tw<? kos,4(one?) •.. , , (two?) . , •. , (they went-.running ?)
••. ,, , •.•.. , (I. 7) Then (they who were?) inthe presence ofthe king, when the
king had pouredout water (from) golden vessels; they went (and) ••• , •with (their
golden?) flowers.. , ... , .....•... '.. , came:' .....every day the king issued
an order to the whole .host (that), ~ .. , •• anim~ls,.: .••... (I. 9) (happy?)
....cometo be .......•. " .• the kinggaveordersto give boiled rice'every day;' .
called Dharma . , .. ; ;:•, , . :. ~ .......•.. ,. ~.6 waterlily flowers .......•
all (S'orts of}Iotus,lhey flowered (?) outaftime(?). From above, flowers', ...•. ,.
(I. II) .. , .. , .. , ,..(seven?) ." ..~. ,eight .. , .. " ..', ~' : ~ ;: ,:
they flowered (?), All (trees and bamboos?) ....•. flowered (?). ,.' •. ,: • , , .;.~
•.. ~ ..• , .', •. ,., . (had?) fragrance, fruits of trees had a pleasi~g(?) sap (and)
savour: ." ....•....... , ...••.... , ..(1. 13). , :., ,·the·
sap (and) savqur ofthe great earth aroseat the time of the coming (to be ?) of
6
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja,.foretold by the Lord Buddha,' No other
king is like (hini).• , ,., .inthe cityof Pagan, styled,(l. 15) Arimaddanapiir .', ...•
, .. in this wise:_
7 .. .
It was foretold by the King of the Law, the Teacher, that the noble king
named SriTribhuvanadityadhammaraja, ...,. . .
His mother (being)bo~n of the ViIva line, his Jather of the Sohu rac~,
issued from (these) two races, ,
(A great?) .... ~ , .... , a king of the Law,,:.. , .... (1. 17) ... , . pious
in alms-giving, powerful, •. , •.. possessed of immense wealth (and)
of storehouses not a few.
I Either the palaceorthecapitalgeneralty,
2 Thewholeofthispassage,and mostofFace6.,canonlybe partiallyread, App~rentlythereferen'ce
istokindnesstowardsanimals,especially birds.
3 Thesenseof ulis undetermined, 4 A meas~of length
6 Probably this passage of which the beginning is untortllnately illegible refers to the exceptional
naturalphenomenathatheralded the accession (orperhapsthebltth) of theking. ·That much seemsclear
from I. J3, butas so much ofit is illegible itisnot certainwhere the ~wparagraph should really be made
to begin.. a'Thatis,theearth. TheVie of theepithetisa M&n idiom.
7 The following paragraphisin Paliverse.· .

:DS 4~5
{3 <63 bG5
\)O~ . 1. 168 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANiGA [VOL. I
r~. ~.
In majesty ...•••........•. : glorious, in self-restraint (and) kingly
duties diligent (and) discerning, .
By (the practice of) the four laws (of popularity), he shall (always ?)
rejoice the people ••••.. (1. 19) ..,•.....•
OA ••••••••••••
devotedly attached to the Three Gems,'
••.• '" the gods .•. . . .. •. ••• sacrifices .•• •• •• .. full of royal
might o the king,
In the excellent city ofPagan, styled Arimaddana, .•.....•... : ...•
•• . • •._".•_.•.•"(1. 21) • ,. .' ." •••-•••••'-••.'•••• _~_. ~ _•.: .•" ••.•'.•••.
••_. '.': ' .. his-.o\vnvirtue •.••••,.•. '.' •.•.••••." .
.... .". .
. . . " I,
" ~ '~.' '.'
'
(built the 'city?) •.. (The Lord?) Gawampati spake to the sage
o. 00 •• 0 ••
Bisnu in this wise:-" What by the Lord Buddha was foretold, that my lord
(should become?) (I. 23) (a king '(&f the Law?), is true" my lord, (indeed f).
(Hereafter?) In orderthat,my lord (mayact?).(for) the benefit ofall (mannel',of)
beings (on their way to Nirv~Qa?) •.....' .. (my lord must become a king of
the Law .•.. in three ?) (stages of) existence."~ •.........••..
0 • '.' "0 ••
Then King In,~ BissukarmE1adewaput, (and)Ka~akarmmanagaraja (1. 25) lifted
up their joined hands (and made obeisance to?)•... Theil the sage Bisntl,
t
. .'h • .. h L d
hearmg t at inVitation,.6. .. ...l..••1.. , . . • •7. . . . ••.h• • • n. en t e or ..
.(Buddha?) ..•...•.•....•...•......•. (1.27) ..•..• "" "
0 ••••••
I"'.~ ~' king-•..•-.-•..
.••• •.•.•• .• ••••• I'•••••." ••••• t, ••••, ••• "'," ','". •.•
~ ' , ,-
J EndoftheFiliiverses.
S Somuch'ofthe text is illegible thatthe precise interpretation is verydoubtful. Ferhaplwe should
interpretthatin histhird earthlyexistencethesageistobea reigning monarch. Itisof course impossible
tosaypreciselywhereGawampati'sspeechends. '
9 Indra. Forthe othernames, see §§26.27.51.
t Itisnotclearto whomtheymade obeisance jonewouldassume itwasto thesage.butseethe'noteon
thetexL .
5 That is,the request made tohim thathe shouldundertnke the duties of royalty,and ultimatelyof
Buddhahood.
1
RESEARCH COLLECTIONS
Eost-West Center
l' Honolulu, Hawa;i -

·Volume II Part I
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF BURMA
Epigraphia Birmanica
BEING
LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS
OF BURMA
BDITBD BY
CHAS. DUROISELLE
SUPERINTENDENT, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY, BURMA CIRCLE
THE TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
TEXT
By CHAS. DUROISBLLE
RANGOON·
SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA
1961
Price K 4.60

.
. . .
- LIST OF AGENTS FOR THEcSALE OF THE ~.vERNMENTOF
THE UNION OF BURMA PUBLICATIONS
IN BURMA
, /
1. CITY BooK CLUB. 98, Phayre Street. R~oon. .
2. NEW.LIGHT OF BURMA PRESS. 58. Komin ~in Foad, Rangoon.
3: PROPRIETOR, THU-DuAMA-WADI PRE,ss, 55.56, Tsee Kai. Miullig
KhinerStreet, Rangoon.( .
... PRoPRIETQR. ,BURMA' NEW'S AGENCY. 135, Anawrahta Street.
Rangoon.
5. MANAGER. BURMA BOOK Co.,·62. Barr Street.~angOon. .
6. BURMA EDUCATIONAL BooKSHOP. 551-3. MerchantStreet. Rangoon.
7. MANAGER. lJNION P~BLlSHING ROUSE. 93. ·~C". Block. Bogyolce
Market.,Ralfg()OD. ,. . . .
8. SECRETARY PEOPLE'S' LITERAtuRE COMMITTEE AND HOUSE, 546.
. Merchant Street. Rangoon. .
9. THE BURMA TRANSLATION SociETY. Merchant'Street, Rangoon,
10. MESSRS. K. BIN HooN &.SoNS, Nyaunglebin, PeguDIstrict. .
11. U Lu GALE•.GOVERNMENT'LAW BooK AGENT, 34th Road, Nyaung·
." zindan Quarter, Mandalay. .. _
12.·U KYAW ZAN, THE NATIONAL.BooK DEPOTAND STATIONERY SUPPLY '
. ~OUSE, North Godown. Zegyo, Mandalay.
'IN INDIA
1. MESSRS. HIGGrNBOTH...MsLTD.• Post Box No. 3H. Madras (India).
2. MESSRS. THACKER. -SPINK & CO. (1933), LTD., P.O. Box No. 54.-'
-).. Esplanade East, Calcutta (West BengaQ..
'0

PREFACE
THE A.nanda temple at Pagan, the erection of which was completed in
1090,1 is not only probably the most graceful structure of its kind in Burma,
but for the profusion and, from the artistic· and philological standpoint, the
importance of its ornamentation, the most important monument in this Province.
In the interior, besides very numerous statues of the Buddha in several
attitudes, there is represented, in a long series of stone sculptures, the life of
the Master from his decision in the Tusita heaven to be reborn in the bosom
of Queen Maya 'to his parinirvana,lI On the exterior, the walls and terraces
are practically covered with glazed plaques. On one half of the basement
thesepfaques
represent the assault of Mara with his legions of dreadful
WarriorsontneBlessed One ~eated under the· Bodhi tree, and their ignominious
de-feat the other half representing the a:po~heosis of the Buddha after his
victory in a long procession of the hosts of the gods. All these contain a
short legend in old Talaing, But these scenes are not peculiar to the
A.nanda; four hundred years later, they similarly, in magnificent glazed plaques;
adorned the walls of the Shwegugyi and Ajapala pagodas at Pegu9; perhaps
the inspiration was derived from the A.nanda: The anterior existences of the
Buddha, that is, the' 547 jiitakas, adorn the first and second roofs and· the
three terraces above. These representations of the jatakas, one story to one
plaque, are' also not peculiar to the Ananda, for they are found on several
.other pagodas and temples at· Pagan as well as on some other monument! ill
Burma.4 The great feature, however, in this temple. is, that· the last ten
J
longer stories of the collection, from Miigapakkha ataka to Vessantara Jataka
(Nos, 538-547), are illustrated each in a series of plaques, the total number
aggregating to 389; these plaques occupy part of the second roof and the
three receding terraces above. it. This feature is, I think, unique, for, so' far
as I have been able to ascertain, on no other monument in the Buddh..i.si
~
.i's~
DUfoiselle's
'f
Stone Sculptures in the Ananda Temple at Pagan" in Al'c!l4lo1oricfli
SUI''''''
oj 1..J.ia, Annual Report for 1913-14, pp. 64-6S.
1I The!e sculptures are reproduced and described in the paper mentioned in above footnote.
SSee my An~:_.•! Report for 1914, pp. "~14 and Plate V,
4 Duroiselle's "Pictorial Representations of lit3kasin Burma," in A.S.r. for 1912-13, PP' 89ff.

( iv )
world are these ten stodes illustrated in so large a number of separate scenes ;
at the bottom of each plaque is a short legend in Talaing briefly indicative of
the episode above it. It is those legends which are deciphered and explained
in the present work.
Whenever the glaze or the plaque itself is not spoiled, the decipherment
of these· inscriptions' does not generally present any unusual difficulty unfor
j .
tunately, a pretty large number of plaques have been badly disfigured, thus
rendering sometimes the identification of the figures, sometimes the reading of
the legend and often both, difficult. The plaques around the two uppermost
terraces have particularly suffered. .This disfigurement.is due to the .frequent
use of whitewash and the method of its application i it is taken in buckets to
the top of the temple, and the buckets are tilted over; the liquid, flowing
dowr. on every· side, penetrates the shaliow recesses in which the plaques are
fitted and flows over the latter, filling in details which were formerly perfectly
distinct; the glaze often cracks and flakes off under the action of the lime,
thus obliterating letters or part·of them. Where this has not happened, the
layers of whitewash make the deciphering of a number of legends a task gf
no little difficulty sometimes. Several means have been resorted to--on the
advice of experts in Burma and India-in order to clean and restore these
plaques but none was· really successful, for most oftef' notwithstanding the
j
care taken, the glaze came off with the lime. To ask the trustees to desist
from whitewashing the building would be useless, for, in the eyes of the people,
the beau ideal of their monuments consists in their spotless whiteness. Steps
have been taken, however, to induce them to use a less primitive and harmful
method, so as to save these beautiful specimens of a now practically forgotten
art. The harm already done is but too apparent in the plates which form the
second part of this work a comparison between some of the old photographs
j
(now unfortunately unfit for reproduction, and the negatives of which have
now· also spoiled) and some of the new ones; evidences clearly how much
these plaques have deteriorated in the course o~ a·few years.
The total number of the jataka stories illustrated amounts· to 547 ; the
same number as in the Pali recension preserved in Ceylon and known to all
countries professing. Southern Buddhism; this shows. it .was· thisre··.,.,.,'c:;on
which was followed for the plaques on the Ananda.1 The· or~e.~ of the
1 The actual ;'\umber in the Singhalese, Talaing,BlJrmese and other editi~n5 is 547; but the
t,adltlonal number i. Sso. The terra·cotta plaques at the Petleik pagoda, Pagan:, illustrate 550
.Mtl... T'h. I.tt.rpr.u on these plaques is being written,

( v )
shorter stories up to No. 53i included strictly follows that Pali Jataka as
edited by Fausboll (Vols. I-V), although the names here and there may
slightly differ. But the traditional order of the Mahanip~ta or the collection
of the last ten long stories (Vol. VI of Fausboll) is not quite the same, as
shown below:-
Order on the Ananda. Traditional order.
I. Mugapakkha. I. Ibid.
2. Mahajanaka. J,2. Ibid.
3. S§.ma. 3. Ibid.
4. Nimi. 4. Ibid.
5. Maha-Ummagga. 5. Khal~~ahala.
6. KhaI)~ahala. 6. Bhuridatta.
7. Bhuridatta. 7. Mahanaradakassapa.
8. Maha"naradakassapa. 8. Vidhura.
9. Vidhura._ 9. ·Ma.ha-Ummagga.
10. Vessantara. 10. Ibid.
It is not clear why the traditional order of these ten jatakas has not been
followed; this is certainly not due to a difference of school, as might perhaps
at first be thought, because all the Talaing and Burmese editions have
always followed the traditional .order of the Singhalese collection. I ,think
it is to be attributed merely to a lack of strict' supervision on the part
of the Talaing monks in charge of this portion of the work; the more
so as the plaques of the stories are serially numbered in proper sequence l
and the order on the Anandadoes not, either, follow the traditional order
of the Ten. Paramita, or the Ten·Perfections illustrated by these jatakas.
There· are other evidences of a certain lack of attention which are in each
case noticed in the body of the work. For instance, a good number.of
plaques, though rightly numbered, have been put in the wrong place, thus
spoiling the regular order of the episodes in a story; I have placed most
of these in their proper sequence; others, again, are wrongly numbered
though in their right place, and'not a few bear the :,ame number.. In the
legends themselves. a few mistakes, due also to inattention, are found, as;
for instance,· the dropping of a final consonant.
The jataka stories embodying, as they do, their moral and ethical
teachings jn the form of charming tales and fables, were one of the mosl

( vi )
potent means for pressing the claims of 'Buddhism among the peoples ot 1ndo
China; they have left a deep impressio"l wherever the religion has become
~stablished. This is true of all the jatakas, but especially of the last ten long
ones; and the most prized and read among these ten are: Sarna, Mahajanaka,
Mahosadha (Maha-Ummagga) and Vessantara; they have been translated in
prose and verse, and turned into theatrical plays in the case of Vessantara.
This predilection explains the great prominence given to these ten stories in
the plaques of the Ananda, for, while the lesser jatakas have only one
plaque to each, these ten are illustrated by 389. In Burma, they form the
subject of a voluminous literature, both in Talaing and in Burmese.
In Talaing, the jataka literature may be classed under four principal
heads :-
.. Translations in verse; c:B05 (lik).
2. Nz'ssaya, or word for word translation; there are two kinds of
these, called ~o (nam) and §~ (traai), according as the
explanation of the text is longer or shorter.
3. Abridgements in prose of the texts (skem); there are two
recensions of these; in the one, there are embodied copious
extracts from the text, translated and explained nissaya fashion
j
the other is in pure Talaing.
4. Complete translations in prose without ·any abridgement (slapat).
Thousands of copies of the Ten Great ]atakas (Mahanipatai under the
above four divisions, are preserved in the monasteries of Lower Burma, clId
are a testimony to the great popularity of these tales. When, over a decade
ago, a list of Talaing works in monasteries was compiled on behalf of the
Educational Syndicate of Burma, 927 copies of the Ten Great ]atakas were
found in about thirty monasteries round about Moulmein; classified according
to the four divisions given above it is found that: 65 copies are in verse
0805); 46 are nz'ssay.as; 247, abridgements (skem), and s6g copies are
unabridged translations. Lists taken in other monasteries will probably yield
some similar result. These jatakas alone offer a splendid material for the
compilation of a Talaing dictionary and when to them is added the trans
j
lation of numerous Pali works, such as the Vinaya, the Dhammapada
Commentary, etc" etc., it will be seen what a rich mine there is for workers
in this comparatively new field of philology to draw from.
J
1 The author has coUected leveralthouaandl of new word. from these.Jitakas and a few other works.

( vii )
In deciphering the legends on these plaques I had at my disposal an
almost complete set of estampages taken many years ago these have been
j-
generally very useful, though a goo'd percentage of them were very difficult to
read, either owing to the bad state of the plaques themselves or to-in not a
few cases-the indifferent way in which they had been taken besides, I -had
j
a set of photographs, such.as they may be seen in the album of plate,s. I
had also the advantage, from time to time, of being on the spot and examining
the plaques themselves in doubtful cases. Notwithstanding all this, a _few
legends have presented difficulty in deciphering, as might well be expected, but
I hope they have been deciphered correctly. The translation presented but
few difficulties, for, besides the scenes on the plaques which, in many
cases, speak for themselves, I had naturally the Pali text to fall back
upon, as well as translations in modern Talaing and also those in Burmese of
these jatakas, which all helped me in fixing the meaning of old words long
fallen into disuse or whose' phonetic changes had made practically unrecog
nizable. However, several words still remain a crux, as will be seen in
Appendix _B. ,
It was my intention to include in Appendix C-I, only such words -and
forms as are not to be found in Haswe!l's Vocabulary i but on further consi
deration, on the advice of several friends, I have also included in it words
which are in Haswell's, so as to make this Appendix, so far as it goes,
complete in itself. In transcribing into modern Talaing characters a few old
words, sometimes a superscript letter has been placed before the one below it,
owing to difficulties in casting the types.
I beg to acknowledge here, with thankfulness, my indebtedness to Mr.
C. O. Blagden, whose ripe scholarship and ever-ready help have always been
placed at my disposal and also to Mr. R. Halliday, whose thorough,
j
knowledge of literary Talainghas beeu very helpful. My best thanks are also
due to Mr. R. W. Bishop, Superintendent, and Mr. R. Baillie, Deputy
Superintendent, Government Printing, Burma, for the interest they took in this
work and for the beautiful get-up of the volume.
CHAS. DUROISELLE,
s"p,ri"t",tlmt. ArchlJulllgic.1 S"r'lll1' Burm••

CONTENTS
.
... ... PMH~$
ABBREVIATIONS
•o.
.m..
n.
..
REMARK :. X1U
...
CORRECTIONS xv
I. Mugapakkha .lataka, Nos. 1- 37 I- 12
!. Mahajanaka 38- 82 ]2- a8
"
3· Sama 83-101 ~9- 34
OJ
4 Nimi 102--114 35- 38
"
5 Maha-Urnmagga JlS-209 38- 7 S
'! 1I
6. Kha~H;laha1a 210-218 76- 19
.. J' "
7. Bhuridatta . ., 2i9--239 80-88
.
8. Mahanaradakassapa
~. "
240- 241 88-89
9· Vidhura 'l4~-26S 89- ·99
J'
10. Vessantara 266-389 IOO-t.tl
"
ApPENDIX A.-List of the words in the Legends 143--135
ApPENDIX B.-Addition(1\ remarks on a few words 157-101
ApPENDIX C-l.-List of the modern Taltting words found i(1 the
explanations of the Legends 163~203
ApPENDIX C-2.-List of words under which grammatical explana
tions not in Has~'ell are given in Appendix C-l

ABBREVIATIONS
...
A.V., Akkharavidhana AbhidhanappadIpika iprinted at Patlak,
... ... Siam.
B. Burmese.
...
B.E.F.E.O.... Bulletin''de l'Ecole Franyalse d'Extreme-Orient.
Dhc. .. Dhammaceti Mahapi\aka,dhara iprinted at Patlak, Siam,
e.-t•
Dhd. A~~h. Dhammapada Atthakatha; Pali Texts and Singhalese
editions.
Dh. Dip., Dhm. Dip. ••• , Prakuih'DhaJIllnadipani:' 'Rangoon.
Gpi. .,. Slapat'Gacem pi roD au j manuscript.
Ja. I'. ,The Jataka, edited by Fausboll, Vot VI.
.tt
N.V.K. ... ,'f. Navakovida-vi~Jakathi j printed at Paklat.
M.T. Modem. Talaing~':' "
.ft •••
L.B.C. ~.. "Lik Bodhisa( Cah; printed at Patlak.
O. St., ••• O. Stevens' English-Talaing, Dictionary; Rangoon,
1896~
O.T Old Talaing.
... .to
Pali. '
P.T. Pili·Talaing Dictionaryi manuscript.
S.B. .'.' Skeri) jit"Bhnridat = -Bhnridattajitaka i manuscript.
S.C. Skerh Jit~andakumma = KhaJ;l.Qahalajataka·i manu·
script. '
=
5·1· Skerh Jat Mahijanak Mahajanakajataka; manuscript.
Skt." Sanskrit.
S.M. Skem Jat Ma,hQsadha ~ Maha-Ummaggajataka j manu-
script. .
S.N. Skerh 'jat Smiil Naaimi = Nimijataka; manuscript.
=
S.Nr. Skem jit Bruim Narada Mahiniradakassapajataka
j
, manuscript
S.S. Skeril jit SuvaJ;l.Qas::uj\ - Samajataka i manuscript.
•
S.T~ Skerh Jit Temi = Mugapakkhajataka manuscript.
j
Sudh. SudhammavaU Gavampati Rijidhirij; Paklat.
S.V. .. Skerh jit Vesal1taw "yessantarajataka; manuscript,
. =
S.Vidh. ... Skerh jitVidhiira VidhurapaJ;l.Qitajitaka manuscript.
j
U.O.K. ..• Uposakoyidakatha; printed at Paklat.

The nunlLer the left of each legend is the serial number of the .plaque
011
for easy cross-reference that on the right is the number on the plaque itself.
j
The numbers in smaller type5 after. the translation of each legend refer by
page and line to Volume VI of Fausboll's edition of the Ja-taka.

CORRECTIONS
Page.~ . Lilli.. FJY Rilld
12 '.f' 10 ... (hjs'djs~iples) (his}disciples .
'. 17, .... 36 - Part I,P.4 .•• Part I, po- S6
.. •••I
.0. .
.
IS. · ... '. '3'" ••• we ... Will .
19 2~.· ... :~~.' ~ ~~
. 21 .... 29 ,..Part lip. 2~ • P;ut II, p. 94'
t.. .
.... ..
,.go 27-' , Punttalul. P'uri?la.t~"· .' .'
.
...
·96.
· ...~.&.: 3° '. .... QOQ·:
29 ... 'dan4as dav.4as
102
••t .
...
9 ......••• 'Blr . BAr
'112
- ..... 0. -•.
i 14- ·10 • ..•• Skt.s .....: .Skt;s
....
'33 -•••. .q~' .... _<?:>05".
- . ". - . ·~.~._··.··.~aSu~os
,133 . 10 .•...•••. ~.
- .' .t.· ~'puref}
IS~ -7.·..• ·.pureh
oo
1~5 ~5:. .•••..c;cg05 .. ,.••'c.·~m
..e.......
.169' .~ ..... ~: ma~a.· ...!·~iIlilkes a
'.
,114 ...... 12< ••• 'lbS~ 01$ . ...~ ··.9c6D1$
.'
182 , ig" .. '.• ~oloob· •••. ·.~n'OCJ1ClC) ..
t.•.•.. t·.
'IS? 3 fm:1il ,from
·... 1 .'; •••: • .oo
'192 ~9 ;§.. - .~-'.
aa ••t
·.20/1 . • . •• . • . 3S ".': -.. cS . •••. . ~- ,~ " . ,.j, .
.••• . 9: .
. • 10 3 .- ····9

EPIGRAPHIA BI-RMANICA
TA~ING ~LAOvES;ON ANA~DA
THE'
I.......M KK A.~·JA A
0 GAP A H T A K
T HIS jlitaka has always"been.;~noW'ilit.l" Burma under the shorter and
. popular name of Temi;.~at(= Temiya·i~~ak~),afterthe name of the hero
in' the' story. The; first pJaquein 'the series' of '37 illustrating. it is the, 538th
on the Ananda temple, corresponding with the number given to this story in
Fausboll's ,edition of, th~ JAtaka'" (Vol.:VI), 'thu~ showing, that in' the
U
pittorial represen~tionsof' these old storlesthe.artists of the Ananda f~lIowed
strictly the, Si~gha1e5erecension a~:'col1ected and, arranged by the Buddha-
, ghosa school.
by
, Prince Temiya, actuated, the fear, of helt and on the 'advice of a,
goddess, pr~tends, to' be dumb, and a cripple j during si~teen years, 'many
devices are resorted to to try and ascertaiitwhether he is really so, but all
fail. At last, his father orders' him to, be buried 'he then moves and talks
j
fir~t'
for the time and discourses'on religious topics'to the astounded charioteer.
~orld,becomes
He leaves the an' ascetic, and is followed by his father.
r;'~S~Q~',"oo8-0?o,'
Inniman' Temi~53a .
~ndra invites,Temiya, (to 'be, reborn asa>man).....:.2. 9
, J:he kiilg of Benares',had n() childreit, Atthe inst!gation?f his people
\\rho :did not wish to see his line extinguished, he prays for a son." Car.id~de~i' ,
the ch . ief qu'e , en, a'Ia~y of emin , ent p . iety, pray'~ arde . ntly f'or, the bo ' o . n 6fa male'
child.' Indra's"seat in the Tavatimsa heaven' becomes hot;' and on a:scert~in:.
ing"the ca~se, ~t'on~e casts about'for a. 'suitable son'for her. The Bodhisatta,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vot, II
or future Buddha, after a reign of twenty years iil Benates, had_been, rchorr:
in hell. and '"from thence in the .Tavatirhsa heaven j Indra goes to him' and'
invites~
him. to be reborn a's a'man in the bosom of Cancladevi. He accepts'.
NiJl1 a n, {rom the Pali nz"manteti, is- still curregt!y used in modern '
literature; ch COG}" l~ m,a1'l~. PbciI44~'i3'i .!(6t.a srmilar2hange oJ n to 'I
cf. C\~05llmit== ~8ro, n'imit (P.~il1p·tta)" to create jro~3S, l;aui' = .
1
,,,~w, na r ui (and .;\Gqo3C,naro')1 Sudh. -22.8, S.B.S. 29, to cry, cr)"
out; ro8oS~d),' la m it ~d a h, S1 dh. 13.5 = $8oS~05" ~dm ii bdah, .to
1
create"make;,"G<'-~~B>'i;fmo'w, U;b.lt.iS~ TO == .yczG:l8 j na mow, 'A.V.
129; to indine to, .towards or"downtvards.
2.6~~~ '~oo8~~;?(f
l;='atis~ti: Temi~539
.
,.'.'
Conception"of:Temi);A;\.....~,.. 13.:·~
Piltis an,Ironi '. P. pa#stmdhf.
j. 'This plaqu~'is missing,'but from" the sequc'nceitno doubt repre:- '.
sented th.cbirth of Temiya, .C1;nd the legend was either ('parisut :TemtW(rl~
~o. 84.}..or "Ternitit i1crgar!·s (cf. No. 39).
4. "CXlE)~~9'o'
()g[;. 09GQ"J35
,pa: hin-let Temr·....S4.1
(His fathel') gives (him) the name pfTerniya-'3. 19 '
Pa~= the M6d. OJ P"" to do, make; in Old M8n of the. Pagan inscrip.,
tions,and in these Ananaaplaques, a fmal ~ (') is often superadded to some.
words, which ar.efound sometimes, with and,sometimes.without it i the fol~ow·
ing arcafe,w examples: himo',li},mu(modern); stii, sni';sacchu,
sacchu'j luno', Inn (modern); mO, mO'i.tirla, tida'; giii,~'gfii'j
gufii,guni'; kinta; kinta'(a'm'~o.,~'nibo';sno', st·u (modern).
The same expression is ,fouo:d~op two other plaques:p a .him 0' 1\1 a..hO[ .
e
(No. 119) and p aim o'\\r san t a'f (No. 268), . An Ii. is simiiarly
often superadded, which wil} be ~oticedin its pioper place. Him o~;a
name, is equivalent to the .modern .cB-r, himu '; other old·forms are i m 0;
and }'i In 0', with which compare -the modern q]L, ym u, U2l~:>, ym u ym a..

3
~~cS,FE~ ·9~~~~9.i
'5.
r{~~,raitk~m1~C~'.5~12
\VhenAheY',bring the' thieve.s.....;,)."~2:
As'Temiya was one mont~ old, and the king his fat'her was holding him
on his. lap, four f9bbers w~re brought in, ~.vhom the king condemned to
atrocious punishment. Temiyai caHsbuGk.:,t9mind his _sufferings in hell, and
P~5t e:-cpert~rice
perceiving, from his and the'verdict· of his father) that kingship
is i~separable fromomel dee'd'S"'Ie~dihgh) heH; he becomes alarmed and
bit~rly ~teps':~(
.regretsh!5 having'beE;nAJo(n on 'the a throne.
KaI, when,, .while" fr{)m'p.k(il-a~ RaIi~ toconv.ey, bring, carry, is a
varia~t of,' r,ail,.which)orms:the second part of.•1!>btilc, p k aIi, r-ail, which'
genera1ly tra~slates, in nissayl1>s,' thePali ':Jlzareti. It is also sometimes found
e
written, in modern Ilteraturci9c, .r 0,.: as at S.B. 17. 9, and in~qc02lS,
'left t fun, to convey an'~;c6rrtei".i.e. to bring, Dh. Dip., 23. 19, though
II
the proper forlD, ~c02lS, r'a~" t ltiti{= O.T.), is much-m~re frequent j 'Vide
A:V. 31, where ittranslates:the-g."]n'i'ta' and ablu;,ta " A~V.I21 ~ dlziirana j
Dh. Dip. 299. 2 :::: Dh.~Hh.,"'492,,· fiharati. , K u m1a c, thief; M.T. "~2oS,
kIim1a t, 'from 0?~, kla.t"to' steal~ ,, ,
.6.~ G3pmb GO~'~CXi8~~9~
'De:wataw' ,wet.Temi--543
Th~
goqd,ess·instructsTemiya:....:.4: 14
W~ile:h~~ w~iteumhrell~"
On the morrow,. was',lying:4nder 'a and thinking
gloomily over.the previous day's occurrence) the goddess residing, in the
way
umbrella, appears'to hiin'andshows him' the. to~scapehen: she'instructs
him to pretend to be deaf,,' dumb,~:arid a cripple; he would thus avoid
becoming king a.nd thereby, escape HiE; pos~ibHity, through' ha~sh sentences '
ofr~tu~ning hen. . so. '
passed on lawless pe'rsons,' to' He agrees to"do The
parents, for sixteen" years, subject hici t~ many tests 'in ohler to ascertain
so.
whether ,he'was really'. born" .Thi~:explains '.the 'following plaques.
=
. DewatIiw P. de'vatcz.W et;'"t,o i~struc(;Othe pl~que is a little spoiled
iQ .the middle :0£ the·inscription, so" that'it is 'not clear whether the verb

4 EPIGRAPHIA :B " I . RMANICA. [VOL,II
:. '.' .. ". . ."
should be read ret, det or wet; the ,finalt is however quite clear arid
the middle consonant looks like"ri but the formation of the letter is
defective, and on the whol~ 'iooksmore'li.ke a'. misformed 0 .(w),· which
.has been spoiled by whitewash.:W eY'" is lound under iliefonn wee on,
No.
plaque 23. Ret or d,et: has not yet been found anywhere' else either
in inscriptions Qr inoder!1literature.. .
.1. 8'l8oo!-;.~99
K~~a6
.. ••.544 •...
The trial with mi1k~.I-ao··
.Temiyais;from .time ,to time, '.kept ihe,wholeday Witl)out being' given
milk, to ,see' if ,he would cry,'and- ask for it; but/fitm in' his .resolution~ he .
neither moves'nor utters. a sound. .' ." . .' "
,are milk~: ~nd ~imtJm.ra. fi~al
Both words PaIi. kAirfl, trial; ais very
faini, and seems to have' been spoi.lt, by whitewash.
.
,
8.~o~a~~j9~
Piiwakhajjana1riJDaisan&-$45
The trial with cakea-S- 2oi00028.
9. &os ~ tD~1~'9c;
.Bil!at ku saechU-S4d.
They'try (TeDliya)with,friJi~5~ 28
M..T~ eecn; b,~\ta~. -lI.leasure;,t~m~e,
.' Bil}a.t =: take the measure
of; hence. to try, testjef. ~~. c~~.Jiat;to by t~tt in *b:i~It.th~ fiJ:st:
word is the Burmese- o51,tam'jalso ~. \ta.t. kIi.at,Dh. Dip. :19. It.'
"at
to measure, compute, estimate; eo5~, pruin; 'Dh. 'Dip. SO.r4, to
measure oneself With. vie, contend, ,in which the worcJ ~, .pruiil,is also a
loanwnrd from Burmese; 8)oS~05, 1;>a t b n:a t,A.V. 144,.47, to measiJre,
gauge, size up, in ali of which the original !)leaning'of .~, t> ~lt,is well
brought out. Sac ch u - 5ace htI, .fruit; Blagden tells me that sac

s
PART I} TALAtNG PLAQUES ON, THEANANDA
(fruit) is found in his Inscription No. IX see also plaque No. 330 the
j j
M.T. is sat, oocB.
o. ~CX)3:Y.)~oo8~~-~91.
I
Kilibhaq4akawimailsana-547
The trial with toys-6.3
KIII, for kill.
II. G:xY,)(h.8Q~.-:>yO
-Bhojanawima.1isana-s48
The trial with food-6. 6
,12_ This plaque is missing; in the regular order of the tests, it must
-have rtptesented the trial by fire.
13- SG>CYS O18C~~tio
.
Bibatlai cm~sso
'.
Theylry(Temiya)with elephants4'-.'18.
CJii, elephant, variant. tot c'j n. No number appears on this plaque
which .isHo. 550 in the:regu1arorderof the serif'S. .
14-. 8.aS·cq.§i~·:J30
ku
Bipat' Jrum-SSI
They try (Temiya) with ~snake~.26

£PIGR.j\PHIA :B1RM,ANICA:· /'"'OL'
L.'1 .-,.'1.r'1t.
5. o.:>G~8Q05;t-_ ~"J
I
.. ,- .,
,SamaJJaT.v.imansan9.-5:Jf!/III2
The test of the mime-I. 2
~(0~,'~J.1 92~~(8.~~~\,
16.;,
Bil>at ku an~k-553
They try (Temiya), with a Jword-7. 7
13.111:1.t: kUJ3n~.554
They try (Temiya) with ,Jonches-7. 19
13. 8$0'[C'11~}--,x~~:)
BiJ;>at (ku pharn}-'555
They try (Teluiya) with arums....;,7.z3
Th~ right-hand side,of the pla.que has been. :,ro!~en and lost and its
ptacefilleJ in with cement, half the legen,u ha~ng thus disappeared; in
the sequence of the tests, it represents that with drums, amI I have there
fore restored the word ,for drum; !> h"a. rh'=M.T. it recurs frequently, in
j:
the insc,riptions ?f King Kyan;ittha, at Pagan, which describe.;the ceremonies
at the building of his palace. '
19. 8@>oS CYi <,pS-~'~G
.
Bibat ku p~an-S56
. ...: '
They ttr ~Temiya) with lamps-7. 24
P Ii aIi has a varial'lt' pne~.

PART':J'] TALAiNG<PLt\QUES rON ~HE"'A~ANDA 1
,
'
2o{."~@05:~&i·<ri§6bS~ti.\~1
.Bi~af·ku·'faft~1~y::":'5.5~:t'
They.Jty (Temiy~)._~,tt~ITlP~~S~s-,8;~.
I
. i/.,..t '....,....-,.,.~.:'. ...J ••.;"..... :;•., .....,:.,~.,.,. "'''"
The 'modeni literary .f(t~m.,9f.·,:.t~l1g,1a·y:;,is<p:lq~~, t aiJklua i, and the
CX)S~?)" ~~i.: ,wi~h, ~lisioJ:l >~t.:.~} 'j~~.
colloq!1ial t anI .. Burrnesei,s,po9°O,
to" '" .,'
tanl'il
,21.,,,'8@)(Y$:cxto,qrO""'C;"50:
0
. BiQat kuba9ak':""'S58'
They try (Temiy?)'\vith ·filth~g. 6
, I '~
_ H a q a k, filth, foeces == colIoquialoSqJ~, hi.Q. ak, the literary form
bcing c§q:)()8, s ni~ ak = house~:wat~r,'.' that-is; 'Water-closet, a privy i but
(I
it means also, excrement, filth ivid~:A.V: ,39 '•.'.p, Ukkar4,: Dh. Dip. II4.
c6rr~sponain{p~~sageo(~the
IZ = =. P. uccdrtl, and the story in PaE (VI. 8.
6) a.s u c ijigu c c haka. IIi.the wo'rd ' h.1'9 a:k', the medial consonant.
appears to have been spoilt originally when fusing the glaze and later by
whitewash, so that I a~.,notquite sure'whether it '-is really a rJ, though thi£
letter is required here''on etymological' ground, the oldest documents' we
possess writing' always the word water," whic!! ·enters into this compound
II
~(1j ~ ak (colIq'. hiQak) with a if(pm, c;q;;.s, Qa k, Q. ek); as it$t~nds
now, however, tHe letter looks as Hit wcreru or.du" vlhich~fould give. us
har uk or had ti k; in which . r u.k m}ghtperhaps be compared with qt05,
9uk =!,I wet," which would scarcely convey the meaning intend'cd.Basii}g
myself" however,on th~ constant usage of old and modern documents, I
have adopted the reading if; hut the absence of long a after ¢ remains to
be explainedi. the word'should readh a 9ak j it is probable the long Ii has
been dropped through inadyertence i similar cases are not quite rare in these
plaques, and wiIfbe noticed in their; own places. Moreover, in. the series'of
in
the testss" this one comes exactly 'at the .p~a.ce, it'occupies' the Pali,
II
between Nos.S57 andSS9, thu£ leavin~. no~oiibt as to the sense of
haQ ak,

8 EPIGRAPHIA .BIR~ANIC.A [VOL. II
22. mooo8g05r-~~!
,lCapallawimaaiaua-S59'.
The test·""~&re-pans-S.18 .
, . ~ .~..". . . ..
sgo;>lSc:06-~Qo
23.csg:)85.
Abo'. ab&timweC--560
.him)~8.~4
(Temiya's)·mother and father come andremoristi'ate·(with .
Abo', mother~ is· confirmed bra number of plaques, see Index A;
sO also aba,father.The:Bunriese.a:ndTalaings, ~hen c.oupling nouns
or pronouns' denoting. one the. masculine..and the other the feminine, always
place the feminine first; this pra~ticeis,"1 think, IJ'etty general in'Indo-China
~nd se~ms M.T~ otl~,
to be due to the influence of PalL. Tlurl .. kl uIi,
but it ~ ~til1 in use in compound verbs,se~ note 'on r a Ii, . plaque NO.5.
Wec = .M.T.aoro, wet; see No. 6. .' .
24. :~')~8Q05~~Go
Ni~kawimalisana-56I
'. ..
The trial.with nautches~. 6
25. 0i8~ ~oo8-~.G!
Kumin':Temi~62
They~akeTemiya
.. 'king-IO. 16
thes~Ot~sts,·: ~
.' An 'spreadhlgoyer peri()d of sixteen years; having failed
toeljdt:Jro~ J:em1ya the l~st sign ofintelJigenceand to procure the le~st.
gl~Cl.il)·:.01 hopethat"~..\vas.not·auseless cripple, his father, at the instigation
.~t.:t~~~~:~(jpth.saYe~s';' 4.e'~~de{;}o>,1iay~:~im<:buried th~
in· ..commOn cemetery.. .
:¢a.nda.~eYi, fnghtenecr}Q(~~~j~hUd~i.;~ks·her husband·to .!Deike hiniking; he ..
.:re£uses:·;'··at:Jasti:;~after.'rrian}<i>ress..ing:~:entreati~5,' he consents:~hathe should
rule f~r sevendays: ".During."th~t·week,his .mother, who feels he is nota
sho~
cripple; begs of him.to himselfin his'true light; bOut Temiya,' horrified
by the fear of hell, remains steadfast in his. resolution, and she fails.·· .
. K u min, .accession .to the tlfrone', rule, to make (some one) king,'to
.enthrone. (vide plaques Nos. 206, ~17); if. k irmin '(plaque No.· 229),.

PART I] ,' :;'TALAINGPLAgUES U~ THE ANANDA 9'
kingship;an~ ~S, ~SqI9~t~lY.>"la,
royalty, the 'M.T. kIll in, 'in k in <fun
III
k4uiJibtaJi, U.O.K. ·39.5j~S~iS~:l8f 'km\n' kQ.·uiJibtaJi,S~M.10.
17 i ~S~$, kminn'an, U.O.K. 39· 13· ,
26.oo':>'lc8 ~lc GmO'S- ' ' :>li~
'SarathitluQ ket-s63'
The charioteer comes to take away (Temiya)--I1. 8
The supreme test, that of kingship" having failed, the royal charioteer
comes to e~ecute the klng's order,for'temiya's burial.
, ,
27." ,\~' oS05,ctO'J8-'~ G9
""Rin tit Temi-S64
(The charioteer) conveysaway T~miya--II. 17
~ut,after
R in, to lead, convey; the verb tit,' to 'go' another verb, has
sometimes the sense ,of ll.out, away.'"
oo':>cSodi 6$-~ ~
8. ooS, G
2
ti~56.5 "
Kat sCisban
on
(Temiya) descending to theground-u. 4-
, , ,
The charioteer 'leaveS the· ~city ,with 'the :cart ,conveying the prince i
, having decided on' a spot, he begins to dig a grave. Not having moved for
sixteen years, Temiya doubts whether, he has still the control of his limbs
and gets'down froln the chariot to ascerta~~~
Sci s " M.T. C§05, s 'c ih;' i;0605,s'? eh,and805, c ih,' Go05, c e h,
ant
to go down. H an, in, tOjat"onj ,a. van is hi n (vt'de Index A).
29. 'S@p5 'a~oo05-~ GG
. . . .
Bi~at dirhat~S66
,He'ti'ies his strength-I2; 6
Then, ~hinking the charioteer, in the execution of his orders, migh't use
violence against him, Temiya, to try his strength, seizes the hinder part of
a
the chariot, and lifts it up as toy.

10 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 11
=
Dir hat M.T. @~oS. dr ahat, and otlooo5, dar hat, S.J•. 67
j
the latter form is nearer the old onQ
~aS-~
3'0. oo'JeS ,"008 G1.
Kal Temi giii'-567
Temiya is being adorned-I2. 11
At that moment, Sakka's seat. becomes uncomfortable and, ascer
taining the cause of it, perceives that the prince desires to be adorned
j
he sends Vissakamma, the heavp.nly artist, to adorn him.
=
G fi P M.T.~, giii, to adorn for final a ('), see note on p a',
j
plaque 4.
3 ~'Je§ oo:>'lc8-~Go
I.
Smaii sarathi-s68'
He questions the charioteer-I2. 19
He asks him why he is in such a hurry to dig a grave and for whom
it is intended the charioteer at first. ·answers without looking up, but at last
j.
he re~ogniz~s. who.speaks to-.him, and is delighted.
3 o.J'J'ld5 ~ ~G
2• GO':>o- (!
Sarathi kiia £ow-·569
The charioteer invites (Temiya} to return (home)-r5. 18
K iia, besides the meaning given in Haswell's, means also to invite" ;
If
cf. Dh. Dip. 94~ 12-~01~ C§:1S ~~~l~ roJ OiIJ05 co~ cfi.-1l0the· king, desirous
of inviting the Buddha up t(3' the house"; there is a form a, fih a, which
points out to a form ~, sila, through ~. kiia, .3:t N,V.~. 4. 13-~~Soo:)
1#g-5 Cit~SOOOJ~~ 0.01 0005 31 e;o/c~ooE.OO()~lc ~0otLSG~J~ '9,oo.:r.d3otJ-"'" When a
monk is going to bu;ld a l.arge monastery with (the help of)' a layman for
himself to stay in, he must first invite. the c1ergyto come and show them
the .site. "

PART I) TAtAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA II
as
33.· 'P~j oSS c;sg'JsS.sg-~~
0
Raja pcan.hin abo' aba-570
The king (= Temiya) sends a message to his mother· and father~I9'·4
Pc an = M.T. «t~, ph yan, not now used by 'itself but frequent enough
in the· doublet· ~Sqj~; bk a n p hy a n. For the equation pean= 1lI~;
=
=
ph y an,. if.. pc u n qJti, phyu'n j p (p a) c ih <t>oS, 'p hYi h
(= GqJoo = ) jp (pa) c en = CqjC, . P = hyen j P (p a) ci n = qjlS, phyin i
paca p qjO, phyap i pac 0 t Gqj::>oo, = ph yo t, etc. j similarly, p (p = a)
.. +.
initial 0::>, s, become <J = , p h.y--:.. pas a w ' c;qpo, = phyow j pas~n
. qjl~; phY un j p a's ui n <i~, p h Yuinj pas ui k tfiloS, Ph Yuik. But
pean under the form ~()S, ba c a Ii, is.fO,und in literary.Talaing, see 5.1.
folio ke--a~~o~ ~.;,.- II headng the message" j L.B.C. 45. 2-o.;:J5g ~~oooS
'-" (the Buddha).having thus.left his message' (or instructions)."
'P(Jl~ ~~-;
34. (Y,)'JOO "l.:) .
Kal raja rna·.'it-571
When the king leaves the world~21. 8
Temiya's mind.was inclined towards the quiet. happy life of an a'scetic;
again, ·Sakka's seat. becomes hot,' and· having ascertained the cause, he
sends down Vissakamma, 'who builds a •hermitage and arranges everything
necessary for a hermit. Then the. prince exchanges his'royal clothes for' the
bark garments and black antelope-skin of the ascetic and enjoys the spirituai
bliss of the recluse's life.
;Yr,' without a (3;» used as a fulcrum, is found in two other plaques,
written i r (Nos. 11, 1J4) and again 'i r with the fulcrum {No. 327). This
verb, so far as I am 'aware, has fallen into oblivion a~d has no corresponding
form now j it means "to leave the world, to become a recluse or.mo,nk"
. . . . .
and answers to the Pa-li pabbajat£i the word for monk, gam·'1 (0£), which
we find in the inscriptions of the Jsthcentury is derived from this verb; the
older (11th celltury) for.m, g~ri1·Ir, has preserved the verb intact. The
modern form isgamhi (o~), often found written kha in hI (o§).

EP1GRAPfHA BIRMANICA [VOL. it
. ;. .
35.,qoo-:>e§ ,''Xl ~8-=> '1J
Gullfi ku smin-'572
He converses with the king (hisfather)-22. 24.11
The king has come to 'the hermitage with'~n immense retinue to see
his son in the ,plenitude of his' bodily strengt~, and they have a long conver
sation together. ,
G u 1 a ii, to converse: conversation ::: M.T. OOO:>~, 'ga Ian. ,
36~ g~3L ~0302~""""'=>1"
Dindu risi t\Va~573
Instructing the hermits (his disciples)":-29. 13
Temiya's father and mother~, their respective retinues ·and a' large con-,
~'itizensfollow pri~ce's i~ f~r.
course'of 'the ,example. , A va.st hermitage bu.ilt
them. The Bodhisatta, who knows'their'inmost thoughts, instructs, and,
admonishes them each' according to his needs,. ' " '
Dind u, to instruct. I ,do not know of any modern equivalent for this
word, unless it b~ d a I0' ,'(3GCQ?3S) j.' the interchange of d and I is very
frequent; above all when initial j'the equivalenc,e of ~"and 0 (and a) is also
= M.T.o~,,~
frequent.' Twas wal).' '
C1.l~?-~'l.9
37. 'Oa:>':lCt>°'i8
ku sm16--574' ,
, 'Tosdharmma
(Temiya) pncaches the Law.to the (three)' kings-29. 2I If
neighbQuringcountry:'(:~mes,to,i~vadeKasi
The king of a and 'rules in
Benares. But Temiya goes to' meet him;'sit.s in the air, and teaches him the
Law the invading king becomes ali ascetic:jcxactly the same thing' happens
j
to two other kings.,
D harm ma,' the Law, direct' from the Sanskrit.
I I.-MA Ii XJ ANAK A-J'!TAKA
The king of Mithila has, two sons j when~e dies, the, elder becomes
king and the younger viceroy. The' younger, brother, is then wrongfully

TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
PART I]
accused and suspected and thrown into 'jail he escapes, raises an army and
j
kills his brother in battle. The king's chief. queen, who is enceinte, flees
from Mithila she brings forth a son, who is brought up in ignorance of his
j
father. At last, learning who his father was, he'resolves to regain the king
dom and goes to sea as a merchant ,to make a certain amount of money to
help him in his design. The ship founders. A goddess carries him to his
father's kingdom,wher.e, after answering many riddles, he becomes king,
and marries his uncle's daughter. At last; he becomes an ascetic, and his
wife follows him on his way to the wilderness.
38. 0'\>,,8 (,)~co~-~ 1 ~
J
anak pa~isan-575
Janaka is conceived.
39. 0l\>d3 oSaSG~'J~ oq-~l G
Janak tit nor gar-576
]anaka comes but from the womb-33.
I I
=
Nor M.T. <\\Il, nO, .from gar, from the' Skt. garbha _ M.T. 00,
j
ga w, also written Go18, go w,. Dh. Dip. 57. 24, 62. 8.
40. C?!~ro8~,Oi OO005~~'1l
Janak win ku samwat-577"
Janakaplays with the children':-33. 13
\'IvT'1 n , to play':= M.T. GOS, weIi; sa ri1 wa t, child, a variant IS
s uri1 wa t _ M,T. <:oCX:8, sam at.
4 I. CJJo/.OO ~')e§ Gsg:>8S-~1.
0
Janak sman abo'-578
Janaka questions his mother-:-33' 18
Mahajanaka's playmates, when angry with him, used to
call him
II WI 'dow" S SOil " j he wants t 0 know whose son he I . S, and asks his mother.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. Ii
42. Ql~oS 'i~oB~ ~~')s5-~
'1(!
" Janak mun hin abo'-579
'J anaka informs his mother (he will gotrading)-34. 3
Mu n means:· to tell, inform, apprise, notify, ef. Nos. 90, i8S, 203,
213, 225; and muna s, Nos. 279, 283~ Hift, a variant of han,
II
in, at,
on, to."
43. §S-~oG
OJ')'"
KiJa bram-s86
When (the boat) founders-34. 19
The serial number on this plaque is a good example of the. carelessness
certai~
or oversights to be detected in a "number of legends in these plaques.
According to the events of the story. which. precede and· follow it, this
plaque' is .here in its' right' place i ,the copyist, however, .has inadvertently
.wri,tten .586 for 580.
=
44 N<;>. 5811 missing.!.
45. ~oo~oS-~OJ
(;3000-:>0
Dewataw·yok-S82
The goddess carries (Janaka) in lier arms-37. 14
Ma~imekhala, a goddess, has for dut.y to watch over the ocean and
rescue from .death all virtuous' shipwrecked persons. She sees' Mahajanaka
manfully swimming in the sea she comes and nftens with delight to his
j
reflections on .the virtue of energy. She then ~atties him in her arms to
Mithila, and lays him on a ceremonial stone in a mango grove. Meanwhile
his uncle the king had died, leaving rio male 11)sue, but only a daughter.
White casting about for a'successor, the 'royal chaplain, followed by the
grandees of the kingdom. and a vast army, comes, to the stone slab on
.which Mahajanaka is lying" asleep. After- several trials to test his mettle,
1 The plaque ~as found subsequently, spoiled. The original legend had disappeared, and one in
modern Burmese, King Janaka is swimming," has been substituted. .
CI

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES' 'ON tr·t-IE ..ANANDA
he ~xamines the marks on the soles of his feet and ascet:tain~ he is a
great man.
Yo k, to lift up, carry in ·the arms, is the modem ~a5, y uik, but
the old spelling is still occasionally found, for instance at" Dhc. 151. 26.
46. oo83~ Ql~cB..,.-.~o?
GQOO
J
Mey laksan anak-s83
The chaplain examines Janaka's marks-39. 30
~ e y, to.look = M:T. ~, mwai, "'hich is, now-a-days, not used by
itself, but after a few othe'r verbs of cognate meaning, e.g~, ~'2,it i mwa i j.
G~825~, itew m lak~~.wa.ij 98'2, d. Ii miV ai j ~~,. siti mwa i j
VQ?5'2, cam at m wa i, etc. .The P r a k uih D ham mad i pani uses
regularly the ·form Q,.ma i, 'which is nearer to the old form. As a verb
used by itself I have _found ~, mw ai,onlyonce, at A.V. 19, ~g~,
.
p wa m a mwai ..:::- P. apekkha. . La ksa 11, a mark, direct from Skt.
lakfan or lak~ana,.' it is f-ound written also: .1a k. y a11 . (co~~) . (pron.
/aksan), and lak~ani the P. form; lakkha\la (OOqjOOj), is also frequ~nt.
47.· ::r.>d3c;oo;;> @l\l~- ~09
Abhisekha Janak-S84'
The anointment (as king) of Janaka-40~ 6.
J
. The.chaplain, having recognized all the marks of greatness on anaka,
the latter is forthwith consecrated king.
A b his e k ha, for a bhis e k a j' the m9st common modern .form is
CGOOOO; pas e k, A.V. 21 j Sudh. 10. 22: ~SOc;loooS~G8Ii~-"Indra conse
crated the young man jOGoomoooo, pas ek pas a w, is another frequent
JI
expression, S.}. (A) 75: .~ ::33oS~ ~Sco8 '0"00000008 al-" having made him'
ki~g, consecrate him (as such)." 1 have "not yet met UGoo050000, pas e k
.p-Asaw, in the sense' of blessedness" as recorded in Haswell's.
II
48. '"C\)~ ql8-,o~
<ll\loS
Janak lop ~uil-S85
Janaka enters t~e (9apital) citY-40. 8

16 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[VOL. II
oBCSap~ C?ooro-~OG'
49.
CY.(
,Kit sthan ku' gahak-S86
(Janaka) assigns their places to the oHicials ofstate-:-40. 9
=
K iI M.T. ~, ku i w. S t h 3: ti, fromSkt. sthiina. G a h a k, ' p:'
'=
giihaka ",a police' officer," hut here it,is question of the officials" civil
and military, from the generalissimo' downwards, and it ,means, therefore,
,,
officials of state." A defect in the glaze of the plaque ,makes final k' of
, II
ha k in g a h ak appear like t in the photograph. There is' no doubt that
Ga ha k is meant here.
50. ClOiJ-:>oo §El'1oS-~o1.
Gnakyak or khut-s87 '. '
The queen sends (a' man) to call,(Janaka),' or
, The queen causes (Janaka) to be called-40.
I I
, The princess, daughter of'the late king, has been wooed by the highest
officials in: the kingdom; but owing to their fawning heh2viour and hurry,
she has rejected them all;, she now wants to see how Maha.janaka will
act,'"and sends for him. , ' '
,0r has three meanings: (i) to send, (ii) to cause to, make to, and
a
(iii) it is used' in ptecative sense. It is' curious that in',all these senses
it corresponds exactiy to the, Burmese word, c'e (Go) '\vhich denotes the
causative,the,O'ptative-precative. and which, when used' iridependently of
oth~r:~erb"'a:nd
any by itself,also means (/ to send." (i) The first meaning
plaque,~f"
is found :in' the legend on' the. present we .consider the
corresponding ,passage ' in the, Pali (Fausboll" VI. 40): ,rajadhita. .
purisam 'al)apesi,' ," gaccha, rajanam upasankamitva vadehi: Sivalidevi tam
pakkosati ti"-'('.the· princess ordered"a.'malr, Ga;' tell 'the king: Princess
1
SivaJi'summons you.'''' It is true that the short legends in' tbese plaques
tra~slatio~s c~rresponding
. are not of the passages in the Palistories but
are merely indicative and briefly explanatory of'the scenes represetlted
so
above them, that the legend under diSCUSSIon might, as well Qe
translated: "the qu~en causes (Janaka) to be summoned."· (Ii) The'second
meaning is found in plaque No.. 211,' in the Candakumara-jataka. s mi it
orb i car, "the king causes him (makes him) to investigate the cases."
He~e,
it is used as a kind of auxiliary verb, in the, same, sense and in the
same manner a£ cEo k uiw,' is' used' in ' the, modern language. This

PA~T I] ·TALAINGPLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 17
meaning I had deduced from some of the uses of thiS word in its present
form, G~JO, p ·'0w.(with prefix.p) j two Talaing monks, to whom 1 submitted
this inscription in Gandakum~ra, translated it .in Burmese, independently,
in exactly the same words: manS safi tara9 ktii chum8 phrat ce i"
H
(oSl:x>e§ OOqul~ o::z,§aSG()cij)~ftthe king causes (him) to decide cases"'j and
the Talaing version Df this jataka (Skem Carrdakum~,fo1. ktt) has:
c§~()§~~P~CStoS02:>oSB:>~6 1 '1, in which c:q, k ui w, as just pointed out,
has the meaning of the old 0 r. (iii) The third, or precative force, is found·
t.wice in tHe Talaing face of the Myazedi inscription pillar.l Line 29 reads.:
sinran e(' --: ey)wo' or das hetku gwoi sarwwanutana:Q.,
=
I( l~t (may 0 r) this deed of mine be the cause' (for me) to obtain·
omniscience"jin the corresponding·· passage of the Burmese face, line .3S~
for the Tal~ing 0 r da f;, fC let (it) be, may (it) be," we have phI a c
=
ciy teh (Modern Burmese phr'.ac ce tan) where ce,as explained
at. the begi1\ning, M\h\s note,·· has aprecative· senSe. Th~ modern
eql,livalent of sinran in the abovesentene-e, which hacl hot yet been
found when Mr. Blagden first' published the Talaingface of the Myazedi
inscription, has now been ascertained beyond. doubt. It is :x>'lS, .sar!j,'n,
with loss of the infix in, a frequent enough oc.currence j it is found a4:
5:B. IS: 00'10015, 'sarail pap j a deed of evil == ~So'8, s,ara m
II II
pap j S.B. 25: ~o::>'1So'8, Pwa sar a Ii pa p, g"pwa being a synonym.
of :x>'lS, sarail j at Dh.- Dip. 241. 3, ·we· find it followed· by three
synonymous words which practically explain it: .00'1
o,c8S
g ~ooSoo:>. It is
also found writtencar a il (°'10), the consonants sande being £requEmtly
interchanged, A.V. 96 under j'amma, II6 tinderdfghasuita" Dh. Dip. 37.6,
w, ..
()'1CQOO1~O, cara il d haw k usui an act of merit." In, line 33.of
U
the same inscription: ya il iiirnac .. k.yek . tre y Me.tt ey 1a Q 0 r
4e Q g o''-lC m·ay (= r) he ·not get sigbt of the blessed 'Buddha
0
Metteyya;11 .Here 1a Q is .an emphatic negative, still more intensified
in the modern.. reduplication colool,lalr l'a l;l. .. .. not at all (if. Burmese
oo:):~:):, ·la~ laS) 'j 0 r is agalu' rendered in the. Burmese' face, line· 39,
=
by 805, c iy (modern GO, C e), which is the precative, and the phrase,
Ia Q or9 e h go', let him (may he) not get," by the Burmese,
/I
a p h u ra elY,in··which a before phu is the ol~· Burmese negative,
long fallen into disuse, but still current .arnongsome· Lolo tribes.
lEpigrGphJ'a Bi"Jzallica, Vol. I.Part I,·p. 4.·
3

iipIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
'6r 'is'fourid ,in M:T.with 'the 'pre,fix'p, ph :(o,;'o){' an~ with the
to.s~nd,
,,meanings of (i) .;, despatch, order,!'.' (ii) , to cause ',to, 'incite 'to,
."..' :.... '. ~ '.'. \.. . .'.- ",i ' " .' .
,urgej 'the preca:tive ~ense seems to haVe fallen mtodisuse.A~V. 93,
OOQ ~H.:IJoe~oS:"- P.c"qaanajA.V.I30, OOQ(;'~~o~ P.niyojanaj U.O.K.
~~:'&600eX:CS~/I cau~e to',~ lus'~~' I73.2~'"
33.14, to lust;'ins.ite j Dhm. Dip.
,GOo06 00 ~":>OCD:>OO§ cxt&t~j§'l-":thedevas' causedth~ fish inadvertently to
enter thenetJl S~J. (A)..fol.'ka~ ~~;O~CO, :,i'"he 'sent, ~ man"jDh.Dip. ,96.
.; ,
,'6,:g&jOOOOj~~j~~$~Hhe: despatched,(somii~ne). to' enQuireUj ·Sudh. 21.' 19,
~&JoaiGCX?~:x>~)dl3;)~OOoS~S--:-': 'he 'caused the hunter to, go with' two warriora
to bring him/' ' ' ' " , ' ,
,Or corre$ponds in meaning with ,the Khmer 0y, with "which' it is
,;perhaps related;, J.: Guesdori, in, ,his" '., Dictionnaire ,camboi:Igien-frans:ais,"
'p. 76" defines:it: 0y-doDller,:acccirderj'pour,afin'de-:-iridique l'imperaiif,
11
,",,le' causatif,: 1'0ptatif.H ',Lower 'below,' h~' gives' the example': "oy" hail,
;fair.e,~pelpr"= to 'cause 'to, e1:tll, A~ui E.A"~Onio,.,II-Dh..tionnaiTe-'
, khmer·fran~,·Jl 't'~ -.17, ~ i"":'UuuDer;, .pour, 'afin$j a= signedudatifj
que ~ faire.' Indique Ie ~ausat~f) l~ mode,'impeVltif,le mode optatif." , '
5 G.~aS,09~"f9~~~-.;~oo,
I.,
,
'
Janak tinprasid~508
'JaIiaka(holdingthe~rinc~ss's',
handyascends the,palace-40.
2I
f~ -~, , abuildi~g'with
Tin' " ',M. tu:in.'f>.ra sa,d" superposed roofs j'
hence, a palace, from Skt~ pras4da.;the modem',form is @:>o:>jOO, pr ~ 5 at,
for softconsonants,are not 'suffer~~ as finals. ,'the pure~modern Talaing word
un
for pr.as:a d isqUo§aiC§,,'-fn krakat, very f.r:equent>in the literature~
wdtte~~ooie@,~oS;
It is found in tJi,eShweiigOn BelHnstrlptiontA.D.1557).
sni kanu,D kragat. " ",/,
2.crioro-Ql~aS~~~:>O(!
5 ,
,Kil Janak smaft-589
. . , ' .
,When Jal1~ka enqtiires-40. 2-3
enquir~s;'wh~ther
Mahajanaka' -the late ,king had left any -i'nstructions.
to
His instructions were~' the :kingdoni',should be given him who could 'we
, ,

tA~AtNG 'PLAQ~ES'ON ti-lE 'ANANDA
'S3~'c£$ '€l-:loS~~<;oo'J8--:l
(!O
c~iykinloJi~590
, Kil
h~s(g0Id)pln::to,thequeen-40.
, (Janaka) gives 30
'Cnaykintoliis an omcimentalpio,"to keep the hair or the headdress
in place; the Burmese version of, the. same stories wherein this word is
found render.sitby ~0il8 (chamkyali) and~:Gc9PS~S(ii3shyolikyali), both
of which, mean'an ornamentalhah·pin. Th~ 'modetn forms of the word are
~~~S,cnaai'knali; 5t-',,?;S, .co'aaj'ka nh ali; ~~tS, cna,a is
alihaii;~iS, ,tuaai k hIla li
'j
ap~c,s n a a i k,n ali j of-lio,s na a i
kh.nan j iI)W:hi~h,the:Jl1edial.i and. the '/ in c'n Q aikI n I 0 ilhave' been
,lost; theequivalence~of ~::lC' (oli) and' -8 (an) is,not infreqtient,cf.
a,
B;,COO::lc3;loo:>,ayon. ala, $.B.27.1; 'and 3;)~S3;)oo:>, a'y a Ii al more
,g
common(G2::lC I 0, S.J. (B) j6; and the moreconimon2S, gJ,a fi. In
0
the passages Where this .word is found it regularly translates the'Pali suei, a
, pin, a needle ; the passage iII Mahajanaka to' which the'present plaque refers ,
reads (Fausb~ll VI. 40. So): sisatosuvaJJ.I;l3sucimniharitva Sivalideviya"
II
hatthe ad~si," which the modern Talaing version translates very, closely:.
~l~loo,cq'Wo.l}¢ooS£oS~ccq~oo~~5 ~o'cfl~glS~'l.· c1t~az' kz"n!()n is alsofouridin
plaque"No.S2,I"of the V~sant.ara.jataka'j the· Pali(VI.' 5 I9.2s),bas::
'~,tassa,s~vaI;UJasQcirh '. datva," '''lie, gave', thehUlltera golden ,ornamental,
is
hairpip,"which 'put'in the modern \Tersion:'~~o,)jS<x>8~~elaoX>OS~~ulI At
A/v"9~, themeariing of5t-'~Sis given as"cUlamaJ}pi,a crest jewel,'
which is no doubtci,slip,j" the exact meaning as pin;'needle "is borne out
/I
()f.the~ord, ~),. OJ~,cn.~ ~hichby
bY'thefirsf'rnember .. ai, soaa i, "itself
,means>a'pin,3, needle; something'longused:'in, k~eping"something' in;-its
proper'place, such as for instance. a ~h~I,if·A.V. 194,rathagut#, and So,
a~i _ ~~'ioS~~, snani,m uh ri k wI =a linchpin j and in this senseis
~quivalenttotbe Burmese ('11lc (kyan) in the two expressions given above,
1
a!1d' which reappears in o:>~co~O'1Jc (kan lao1kyail), a bolt. Moreover, the
true Talaingexpression for a U crest, diadem "is ,~[" 1mu; A.V. 9 2,
clila = ~lQ305 COOl ~lO (;;0000:, a ca/a means-also a crest (O&l) tied
II i' II

EPIGRAPH1A .BIRMANICA, .
20 [VOL. il·
. - ." '". . .. , ' '. .
(placed) .on the.head/'::·P~.W~,·Schmidt in ..Ii~ ceBuch. des Rtg'lwan, der
.KOQigsgeschichte'u. (~oS CfOtloS"~@S dJ::~),tpage74; 'has quite mis..
understo'od the" word; '.'h~:.trarislat¢s linaIi .in snaa·iknaIi as' '''chair,''
. a. meaning,it .haS nOli 'this:~eans the rafters ..which .support' the planks
.of a floot.· . ."
. .
S4-S7=Plaques:S91~ ""·#inr.
. .' 58.' The inscription on this:'phique is completely" spoiJ~, only the first
u,~nd $~ '~s:wenas thenumber595~
letter the last being' visible, .
S9-~Sd3~~D:!'J~~,(!G
Smii tltUyjili-596,
l'h'e . k~g, goes out. to· his,pleasaunce-4-i_ . 7
1
=~.u.1ya~,,;;:~Jorm with~
. UyyIn' from the.,Skt.,w1yan, is also ..met
'69- ~oS.c;ooS §l~~:) 1
(!
.Janak ~ey truk-.597
jana,lta looks at. the mango (trees)-.44. 18
. . ..
,The king ~ing to the gate.of hispleasaunce looks, at two mango trees,
Qne of which is laden with sweetfruits t'he other bearing no fruit at 'all. He
J
plucks orie fruit and eats it, 'intending to eat more on his,retilrn. .But as 'he
passes into the garden, everybody in his retinue plucks' alld. eats f~its, aild:
those who do not get any strip off the leaves and break thehr~nches, leaving
the beautiful tree all broken. . , '
.
'. .
6I.Ot~d> ~jS § loS~~(!().
, - .': -
Jana~ file truk-.,S9~ .
Janaka se.es the mango (tree)~44..28,
~ -- . . . '. .
On hisreturn, Mahajanak~lpercei~es the mango tree all battered and
broken; on enquiry, he lean:ts'it'is 'on account of its fruit, .and, that the other
_J . Publish ' ed in . the Sit6uIIgsbericlt, . te, ' de . f K . ai . s; " Aluldem . ii . : do~ Wiss . ensc ' ha£te . ninWien; Ban ' deL . l;1906.

PART I] TALAING ,PLAQUES ON THEANANDA
. . . . ."
mak~9him'
tree: nearby, having no'fruit, has n«:>t beeninolested. ,.This ponder.
if This kingdom of mine;" muses he, rc isiike the fruitful 'tree; it invites ruin
and desolation; the ascetic life, on the othe,r hand, '~'is like the: barren tree,
nobody disturbs it; ..for the ascetic,possesl)es no ,riches r why should l' not be
like the barren tree'?".And he resolves then arid there to oecome' an
ascetic. 'This decision explain's the plaques whi~h follow.
~-Ac '::: M.T. 6;)05,,ft a t, 'to' see.'
62.'~S (l),~aS,d3$roi---:>ee'
Sodn )anak:kirikan,"-:S99'
~ing generali~simo):-45.7
Janaka.instructs (the
h~ ,inttmd~s ~f
As, living,the life ' a recluse' in his 'palace, 'he gives
instructions tothe·generalissiniothat none but two servants should be allowed ,
h~ generai~irl.chief. carryontheaff~irsof
to Seeh'iJn, and that the' should
sta~e in conjunction with the high officials. ' "
=
K in,kan~' ',to Instruct·, ,M.T., o60S" g a'~ an ;:,variants ,are ',kinkaI,
kInk aI, kin ka,n>
63.
'~5 '~~oS'ot~c13S~G00
SID,iil Janak: luno'-:600:
, ,
, King Janaka.1ivcsin retire~ent~52. 19'
~ ~LT.,
,L uil:0'; to be',retired, solitary, lonely; C.\Oll, IitUj for the final
, sS ('), see ndte on 'pa', plaque NO.4 "
64''18''8'i~oS ;d3&3cS~<i6o
,, 'Ran,birben:sikil-601 ",
They (the two -attendants) bring the almS-bo\Vl'(and) give it'
(to Mahajanaka)~S2.22'
onr~
's
Rail", see note ti, plaqueS. i kil, to' 'give;" 'it is,the verb"
0' 'U
ki~=M.T.d?o, kui,w,ci to give,J"wit,h prefixsi --:' M.T.::o, sa, and,s'"
ThIS prefix -is also found, in the N.rauhg-U Shwezig8n' Inscriptio~, i line 28,
I~ I~ '2~
" ,J
Edited' byC;.0. Blagden, Epigraphia Birmam'ca, Vol. Part p. 1/4"
_.' '. . . . .'

.EPIGRAPHIA BtRMANicK [VOL. it
.in th~worcl ·sik"ini, to smile," in the passage.: matirIa pa k i·r•
II
'im"wo'ciii mahet sak::het kyakbud,dha ,tarley guihlon
YOj
sikqIII ci k'aQsa k,which'hleans; II What is the reason that my lord
smiles'thus? \Vithout reason the lord Buddhas do not smi1~."..This,-prefix
a:>, '~,(a), is frequent in modern literary Talaing j the old formsi, however,
has not been lost, and it is still found written '~"si, but it is far less
frequent than sa (3).· Here' are a, few, examples I have gleaned in the
course of my reading it will be· remarkeq that, in each example, this
j
prefix denotes the future tense: S.M. I3;'~G'PoS Q&.:>~05§o.'loeBooglJ§:J;)jioS
~0o:t Goo:>$ ~~,oBJI'Q3;l~05 05;]tc&oocxic:B-1I.Site, my father is withchild, it is, now
, ten months, he has not yet' ,broqght forth, and I know not '(whetherJ he will
die " J S.M. 21, ~"2'E95~00J~£e§~'l-11Sire, only to-morrow shalF'we'answer'
,this the next·twQ., ~ampJ(S are··interestirlg,because, in the ~ame passage
'I j
in two differentIUQ:nVstrip.ts; one form is. written with~, si, in one, and
With oo.(S)in the·oth4:7 m~uscript S.M. (A) fol. gha, §05OO'loS3~Q06~4l
j.
OJOOQfio5eo901G5loo~03§~~~o!lGoooScPJ'l3SJ and S.M. (B) fol. Nha,~05oo~OS3~Q06
g c§.0j05~o5o::>O<!oG~ ~~803§ 3:>~oo G;:BoSar.)J'lOO_ll Sire, Ishal' takeaway the
thieves andda~t~ wh'o are in, prison in ch~ins and irons}' SiniilarlYI in the
following passage, S.M. (A) has the full prefix 073 ,and (B) the attenuated'
oo-~~i8~oS§~e3joS9~~0505~~ (02~)3g'100_11 Sire, ,if'we do get a big or
of
small (piece' the sand-rope), seeing it,· we shatl (be able to) twist (such
a, rope)." These last twoexamp1.es are sufficient to show that 03 and are'
00
the same' prefix" The following are examples of denoting the future,'
00.
picked out of a large number:. Dhm: Dip. 159. 16, ~O;?B •. 'CSO'l~'~pS'l-
to,.day • • . he witl enter parinirva\la," the corresponding passage in Pali
.'If
,(Dhp': Atth> 384) r.eads:,·ajj'~va . . :jar£nibbayissati; Sudh. 29, 9, ~1§ooae3l
qLl~o5eoool~~053:l~93$-1lin,this 'place~pr?phesied ... the Omniscient one
will' dwell'a tooth~relicof mine." Gpi. 9. ~2,oo8~c800:6crt)3:>~~05Goo05o,
~05~-III~t him first return t~-morrow, I w#l pluck all (his f~athers).1J
Ohm.' Dip. 27. 12 J - 3:>dJ05002~"OO~G~"'IIlOO'iSo.13;)Q?)§~~,\_1lthat'I wish to
devour you is not the fabt, I shatleat only rice and. meat.'i ,S.];
fo1. '·ki, ,·oo9S~~8:3:>~oS3CX(oSr;;oiC§&t-·.I'if my" mother does not' ,tell ,me
(about ,my ,father), I shall bite off, her nipple." Ohm. Dip. 18. IS,
~COo9~)~lmoa8or;;oo5e3I'18-11 having got the gold, I shall go on board
ship with the others, mother." S.]\. .6. 15,ol'1~§3:>w:>()~m~@SQo§lS9.1J .~~
~lSl'Q3:>§3:>~)fiO,GOOoSI18-11 Mother, if, you have (property with you) r'shall go

ON
TALAINGPLAQUES THE ANANOA
trading and" h~ving~:.gcit: plenty of,propertYl I shall go and take the
'kingdom;whichi~~y
father's portion.".;' .
.;{ But :d3' and 00 'do '-not alway~ denote the future, and in most passages
where they occur lheydo not se~m to add anything to the 'sense:~f the
verb;. at least,' ('have ,as .yet not been' able ~o' distinguish any o~her
connotation but ,that ,'of.the futu're i~a'good'many Cases, except perhaps
that, in a very 'f~w: pa~sagesl this p'refix . (probably from the old form, cq,
see plaque .NO~ 85), appears . to pOSsess a' causative force, or active
sense in that it seems to tU,rn neuter,verbs intoattive.. But' the examples I
'have as yet collected are perhaps too fe\v. to 'formulate a rule upon,. How;.'
e~er I 'give them here, hopil1g that .'Talaing' s'~holars,'just 09W unfortunately
so few, may 'add to them from, their own notes: . .
:,S~dh.. I4~'
10,
~oo8' O~o.G9o[§.5roo:>~§u 19~§ OOil~ G~~~G~ o:>c8~Goo:>S<oq'1ooa~
Q~oo8oooCo~ &o;>:>Sc~~G@o§ro:>9-" Atappa,became king near the; Asal;J.· forest.
Now, a'woman" having gota gadzl.,t put to sleep her child in it~ and covering
him: with ariother ,one,.::..ratl away" i. the meaning, of .09a5, tilt, :is,'to sleep,
'and o:J09~, sati k, here~ :put: to sleep. . . , .
aeJ
. .' S.B. 9•• 'Qoo:>~@'~§ "&IS 93ll§:>~,oS~lI ~93n~:>aoE9:~~co5§~a5oo~i&t .....the
correspondirig Piili (Fausb.VI.'167. II),9fwhich the Talaing, is an exact
transIatio~, reads; . Rajaclhitararil ". pii~adaJIi aropetva, alankatadlbbas~yane
nt£ajjiipesum, "the princess,w,as. taken upinto the palace and. made to lie
on',an o~namellted divin~ couch."., here,~05, stik, .answe,rs tathe ca~sal
'. nipaJi'iipesu'm. . . , ' . .
_ .,' .:8.J•. (A)'63" ~~50:3ocSoG~oo5o:Sdl'~vffic~cojo;)Qt,'S~oo~~( Q ( ueen Siv~li
wept, and,~eing un,a:ble to m~ke him go'hack"--the'Pali .here' has nz''lJatt~
...,.:.a~\isalverb;S;);'(8) in t~esame'passage reads,~~cy')G=S, kuiw !t rn iIi
,·kaJe)i,,':!n.Whi<.:h
~, •kt.ii.w~:
,is one of the regular causal'auxiliary vf.'.rbs.
····6S'.,.~S@l"ro; 'oo')oS~Go J
Smiil, Janak'kas-60z
Janaka shaves (his hair and beard)--S2., 23
Kas M.T. 00', k aI), to shave.
i.. ~ br~ad co:veri~g '~qmewhat co~cave.
1 gadU a made of leaves,. -.4thich protects the hend.
shoulders and back down to the knees. from sun or·ram .,the Bulftiese for thin· k't .d'.
.'i.au. .. . . , ..' . l~ , a u, pronounce

EPIGRAPHIA BIRM'ANICA [VOL. II
66. <?!~oo·90S G~,)~ ~~
GoC!
J.anak cis norsili~609
Janaka descends from (his)house-:-53. ·3'
=
C.i s M;T. Q~, c eh the form :8u5, .~ ih,intermediate between the
j
old Talaing cis and the modern.c e his, however, frequent enough, for
instance at· Sudh. 9. 9, 24. 12. j Dhc. IS3~ 4 j similarly, there is an inter·
mediate form, ~aS, phyih, atSudh. 21. 17, 24. I, which points to an old
formp hy is (=0805,. see note on pcan, plaque 33), the more common
modern form being GqjoS, phyeh.
67-70~ Four plaques are lTIISsmg here, that is, .up to .No. 607
included, since plaque 71 bears' wrongly 602 insteadof603~ The plaque
bearing No. 608 which, in the regular order of the episodes, comes lower
down; .has been so numbered by mistake, but it is in its right place on the
.lnanda.
7 ~8 <?!;>OO dq-GoJ
I. Q
SmUt Janak ma ir-602
Janaka leaves the world....;,S2!24·29
This plaque bears No.. 602 . like serial No. 65. For'r r,. see plaque
3+
72•. 2G01JeP- ~8~GOO
.Gnakyek ptiil-6IO .
The queens beat (th~irbreasts)-53' 9
a
The chief. queen, not having seen· the' king for long time, goes.
up to his room fotlowedby. the lesser queens; ,they meet him on the
stairs, .going down clad in the garb of .a recluse, but do not recognize
him. They soor1 perceive, however, that it was none but himself i" they
follow. and come up with him in the .palace Y'a~d j they dishevel their hair
..and bear their.breasts.

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON'THE:ANANDA.
The verb p tin is somewhat spoiled in the plaqqe the ~', though
j
visible, is very faint; but this word is very clear in the estampage. The
Pali here (VI. 53. 9) has the verb sQ1nsumbhati, to beat, 'which is no doubt
the meaning of pt iit i in the photograph, two quee!1S, representing as usual
a very large number; are shown dishevelling their hair and beating their
breasts. There is an adverb, cBS cBS; t iitt iil, used only in the expression
c8ScBSn~@§l05, to beat the breast" in sorrow, which is probably, 9.onnected
It
with the old 'Pt iit
j
cBS cBS seems to be imitative of the sound made when
striking the breast, perhapspt i fj also implies this idea. Perhaps'th~ word is
st i0; the ~etAning would be the same
j
but I think ~he letter is reany a p.
Gnakyek, a variant of gnakyakj if. a.T. Qak and 4ek;
wateripqaIi and pnefA, candle, lamp.
13. 2~p~rB ~(f)~ otCt-Goo
()
, Gnakyek tu~a\t 'matbr41I
The queen sho~s;·(Janakaj:the·:{towrl)ibtming-54'
10
queensfollowM~hljati~l{a by
Srvalideviandthe lesser step step, trying
tomal;te, him ,change his mind; ,the,queen triess~veral"expedientsfor this
purpose; but in vain~ ,Here she has .ordered'soni~;'old·houses to be: set' on"
fire, to make him believe Mithila is burning and thus induce him to retrace
his steps. ,
= =
Tubal;l M.r.~, t-hlah,'to show, ttir, 'to burn M.T.~, to,
with loss of the final conson()2nt;'and:411e lengthening:of fhe vowel by comp~n.
=
sation; cf. kwiI :~,~~iot !?kall1jr.;,= oo~, "ka,mi.,
There are two pla:CIues number~d ,6u:;the present..one,. and another
lower down.
74." Ql~~ "~oS c8-GoJ
!9,~k,~d~>ti--6!2
. J
anaka draws a line on the ground-56.
2
To prevent the queen from following him further, the king draws a line
across the road and threatens with dire punishment anyone who dares cross
it he then proceeds on his way. The queen, in her sorrow, rolls herself
j
on the ground and thus breaks the line," and the pursuit begins anew.
II
4

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
C r i.t,,to draw a,'line, is stitt in use: Dhm. Dip. 61. 21, ~ cc:o!6 QO~oS
~oS~q5_U like drawing aline in water with a stick"; S.J. (A) 66, ~o~hl~coiS
c:o~~o~oSa:i8'l~"the king drew a line across the road with his bamboo staff";
a form c!io, ca,.ic, is also found at A.V. 42-Udara Iiga == c~o~e~-(( a fold,
of the skin of the belly "i here it is a noun meaning a line, a fold i ct\oS is the
literaryword,i, the more common expression is :x)'l05, c'l05, sarak,carak.
The Talaing vetsion of the Mahajanaka-jataka, ms. (B), uses the word c905,
S.J. (B) 66, ¥dln~~G05§IIs:1~eOO900G(~cf3~2)Sc~5-1f with his staff, he drew a. line
on the ground of the main road." Both forms are used together in the sense
of a line, iMd: o>$ooo§Lc 2~ o4oSc'105~§~01l5~Q~~'1~~()I~-' and ,<2$) the
II
people, saYing .the queen has obliterated the king's line.' .. '"
Again 'another plaque,' the o~e bearing the legend, G{§05 0.+05 0~l$,
which comes further on, bears the.number 612.
7§. OlE 8Il t'),\6--;Goo,
Do
dhtdu Nirad-608 .
(J~w) recei~fJs the instrucuon of Ntrada"';"s6. 22
. NArad., a hermit, seeing the plight ofJanaka, and' wishing to strengthen,
his resolution, .comes through the sky and instructs him. .
16. OLE HAL Solo-Goe
lOu diDdu ggP-6a9
He receives the exhortation of Mip--Sg: I
Another' hermit, by name Migljina, likewise exhorts him.
The upper part of this plaque has disappeared; there remains oilly the
legend.
7i.. ~~~ GooaS Bl~G~o
Janak ketpCiin-6lo
:J
anaka take~the meat~63· 5
A dog runs away with a piece of meat ; coming near Mahlljanaka, he
drops it through fright, and the king ,picks it up for his meat
Pc un,' meat == M.T~ ~l$, ph yu nj see note on .pcan, No~ 33.

PART. I] tALAINGPLAQUES ON THE A~ANDA
78.. (l)~oS 'C\("oo')o 9lS-G::>o
Janak lukow peun-on
Janaka breaks the (pie~e of) meat (and puts it in his lmwl)-63. 5-6
Luk0 W: this, r think, means II to break~'; the Pali does not mention
this action, it says: Mamsakhandam adtJya punclzitfJjj patte kat'Da ••.paribhunji
(VI. 63. 5-6), He took the piece of meat, wiped it, put it in his alms
II
bowl .•• and .ate it." The modem word for to wipe is l).taS, i u it, the
II II
Khmer has c hut (Aymonit>r), and I know of no other word approaching the.
form Iuk 0 w, which' means to wipe. The photograph, however, is helpful
here. Mahajanaka is represented as breaking a long piece of meat and putting
it in his alms-bowl. There is'a,verb, aoS;Ka'., meaning tobreak, and Iuk0 W
is the same W9rd with the prefi~ I (u); this verbal prefix / is still common in
the modern language: cXSQl, Iagl m (= 0', g am), to go, walk, S.J. (B) 65,
.I§C041~ CX)ol:J;)~_ff then, having gone part of the way"; cgS, Ipik
(= oT, pik)t to halve, tear or cut open, S.B. 15. 27, .c&e&~~.S§-ff he
(the suparoa) pecked and tore open the naga's belly"; ~t Iapuik (=
~aS, Puik), to tear out, uproot, S.B. IS., 25, S.M. 8. 7; (O~oS, Ia buit (=
~oS, buii), to fling,- cast, S.B. 10. 22; qlm, Ipa k (605, pak), to open.
As far as I have been able to judge, ,this prefix adds nothing to the original
sense of the verb it is probably to be distinguished from the prefix Ia,
j (0,
which forms nouns from verbs, unless, indeed, these nouns iDeo' be used
again as verbs, for there is practi,:a1ly no difference made betw~en noun and
=
verb,' the same word. being used is one or the other. Lukow Ia k 0 w
=
= k0 w kaw (modern); the, equivalence of medial 0 and (J is very
common.
79.. G§OO,~~d3 Bl~~Gol
0
Trey Janak ca pcun-612
The Lord Janaka eats the meat-63 6
o
T r,ey = M.T. @, t,rait excel1ent, blessed. As a substantive _
=
if.
lord'; t rey salig ha, lo'rds of the Church" monks (Blagden).
II

28 ,EPiGRAPHIA BtRMANICA [VOL. n
80. qoo"e§ cq OOoo5-GOy
Gulan kit samwat--613
(Janaka) converses with the child-64. 18
a
On the road, they meei little girl playing; on one wnst she wears
only one bra'celet,and two'on the other; these'two, ,being together, jingle.
Janaka thinks there is there:a good lesson for Sivali, and hopes.the girl will
be.. clever enoughJo ,see it tOO. ,He: asks her" the !~son of thejingIingj
~h~ child.tens,hirn; an9~.~d~s thCit tp,~ ja.r is'o,wing to the sec(m~ brac~let1;
~n t~~,.otheLflrm,th.e~m~y': 9ne ;.brace.l~t;do~~ Jl0~j~r; 'i so/' says, she,:, ·'if
you 'desire t<;>' pebappy.liv.e.al?n~.~~~ The king:apd, queen.then ;ta~e,separate
r.qad~J:b~t to;.c;:~p,trol her,'gri~f, ~ga.in fOUO~Si
Jhe 1a.tter,.'Jl,na,1?ie.; ", him :?and
i:'
'enters' the town of Thun'awithhiim '
';: '~" '. ,'- ., ",' " ... I I :'~;," _.·~.1
~~oS,e3~S'::
81o" P?777G9'9.
.
,-\", "
Jutik file kam-4iI4:
Janaka, sees ",'die"':1rr(5'w":66. 5
• ->.. (
They c,?meup(ma)letcher, who-js making an, arrow.~traighti 1>Y Jqoking
alpng 'it witl1 one eye, clo~ing tiit!, ot~~r.. :"With.?:th~ ~ame·Antep.t,ioI1: :,as ~ith
-th~child,. Ja,naka asks him why ,~,e doe~.}h~t.,:'.!Tp~·oth~r:. answers ~ that
lpokingw,it,p.two eyes atan.;airr~w ~e~Uy', ~poil~> the straight:path()( th~ sight,
,and t~at: if~e, janaka,w'ants tq, be ~appy, he .s~o~ld.. liv~,aJQt:le..
K.am".,. M~T.~~arrow. '
Gl~oS ~C\'.-j5 l§8-~~9'
82..
,Janak lop grip~614
J
anaka enters the forest-68. 7
The queen still follows him; at last she swoons and he enters into a
l
forest near by, and cannot be' followed again. Sivali returns to the capital,
and there becomes a reclu,se in the mango-grove.
=
, Grip, forest =M.T. &8, g r ~ i Pi cl. c i p ~o, CUI p, t~ arrive,
=
and tin ~~, t u Ln, to go up.
, It will be remarked that this, and the prevIous' plaque are both num-
bered 614.

TALAING PLAQUES. ON THE ANANJA
III.-SAMA-J!'TAKA
This jataka is better known among the Burmese as S uva\\J}.a
shyam-j a t ;it will be remarked that they have preserved the Sanskrit
form 1 almost intact, the Piili being sam a i in thfi'-Ananda plaques, the
word is written syam, which is stHI nearer the Sanskrit (9yama); the
modern Talaings call it j a t ~ sam, following the Pali ,form.
"Twp persons, husbaJ?d and wife, become ascetics; she conceives a son
miracul.ously, ,."Whp j~caUed ,_Suval}J;lasama. _Both parents become
blind, .md, ,S a ma look~ after; them. " One day ,a king comes hunting and
shoots hi~ with an arrow.-The: king,attends regretfully upon the ,parents:;
S~m~.is ,miraculously healed and _both.his parents recover their sight. '
83. o~ro~ 0.1l<JO-GO:l
_Patisan Syim...,...6xs
" .,
<;y
GonceJ?tion of ama--,.73,..29
84.'oE\01oSo.:~PO"';';"'GoG
Parlsut Syim~6i'6:
Birth of <;yama-7+
,.I
Pari'sut, bringing 'forth, from Skt. pl'psUti.
8s",cicqc8oSD.]'J&- Go'l
Phutb sutik Syam-617
They (his parents) bathe and put <;yama to sleep-74. 4
Ph urh = M.T. q, p hu ril, to 'bathe (some one); this form is
of -
probably due to the'assimilation pa (p), which forms causal and
0,
1Burmese ~,_Sh"" almost always represents the Sanskrit '~'J•cJ.C9ffi'l • past"",

EPIGRAPHIA J3tRMANtCA [VOL. Ii
active verbs, with a following h: oO:i:;:: <l; so, oemS, pa hap = olS,
00,'
p hap, to feed; ha,p :;:: to eat o~, pah ua i :;:: tt, ph ua i, to
00;)8, j
mix'; ~, hua'j = to be mixed. S u ti k, to put to sleep j on the force of
preIix s(u), vide note on Siki I, No. 64. Whether the old prefixes si and
su are to be treated as being different, the.first denoting more particularly
the ' f~ture and the latter an active or causal sense, it is impossible to
determine now, ·for we have too few. examples of verbs with s u prefi?ted
in this sense; to decide such points many more Clear examples are
needed whereas the old prefix oS, s i, and its attenuated form oo,s,
j
are common .enough in the modern language. oq, s u, has not, so far as
I am aware, yet been found, except in its attenuated form, s. The
0:>,
lengthening of a .medial vowel, as i, in this word sutik, was common
enough: s kir, to dig, and ski r; gIik, a·loin-cloth, and gIik ;
ci it, an elephant, ~nd .c iii i Qii it~ a city, and Quit j .t iiy, the. sign
of' the past, and t uy j ph ii ri1 .in the 'present plaque and ph u m in
the next· (86).
86. 010!i' 'lS~~S- Cioo
Supar phum Syim-618
The suparnas bathe C;yima-74. 8
After his parents have bathed him, the supamas take him to their cave,
bathe him, take him to the top of a mountain and make on his forehead
the sectarial marks.' .
Supa r, from the Skt. suparrea = M.T. oooS~ sapaw•. S.B. 20;
A.V. 81 = gar"I". The word kin na r a, used in the Pili (VI. 74. 3)
instead of supa fJ~a (P. supatttza), has become inM.T. 00+0, k a naw.
87. Oil':lO 09~oooS ~oS-Go~
Syam titey ptit-6I9
C;yama leads (his parents) out (of their shelter)-75. 6
His parents take shelter from the rain among the roots of a tree, but a
snake liv.ing there in an ant-hill becomes angry and emits a poisonous

PART I) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
breath; both become blind. At last <;yama finds them he-holds a long
j
pole out to them, of which they seize the end, and he leads them out of
their shelter.
=
Tit ey M;T. 0000, t hat a i, more often written 300, da tai, which
means, to take along with one, by holding the hand, as for instance a child,
or an animal with a rope, or a blind man by holding the end of his stick
(as is the case in this plaque), etc. i ooro seems to be the colloquial, and
300 the literary, form. Here are a few examples: Dh. Dip. 94. 4
3~GOOoSGer.>,~~_11she took away her child, holding him by the hand "iDhc.
148. 15-e¥~a9~ 0 :)ro~CX!5 aqOl:>ooJ- like Indra leading his queen Sujata by
II
01 . ..
the hand," S.V. fol. lena, ~oo300Goo05~OJ;)~tll~~~lcxS~-"Maddi •..
taking her two children by the hand, ascended the cart."
=
Ptit, to cause to come out M.T.; for' the long medial i, see
sutlk, No. 8S.
88. CY,)~cO ;>qJ':>O 09~ ~~:>8S-G J~
Kit 8yim tin tmo'--623
As C;yAma goes up the mountain-7S_ 23
C;ylma goes, followed by a band of kinnarasj to gather fruit in the
mountain for his parents.
On the Ananda, this plaque is wro~gly placed, as well as wrongly
numbered 623i it should be numbered 620 according to the course of the
events· in the !Story; I have here placed it in its proper sequence.
89. 0-1]-:>0 8$~05 c;~'J8S sg~Ci'J
0
Syim pinrih abo' aba-62o
<;yama ministers to his parents-.75. 28
Coming back from the mountain, he makes it his duty tq wash their
feet, warm their cold limbs and give them the fruits he has. brought back.

EPIGRAPHIABIRMANICA· [VOL. iI.
Pinri h, to minister to,aHend on, take care of I know of no modem
j
form of this word it corresponds to the P.patz'jaggati.
j
90•. ~pS .'i~ G02,:>8 (§8-G J:>
Syim mUD slop grip-62I
<;y~ma informs (his parents) he is going to enter the forest-76. 5
He,informs his parents he is going into the forest to bathe and fetch
water.
S lop: the prefix here denotes.the future, the immediate future.
,$
91. cq)'JO l§8""';"GJJ
<;00':>8
Syam lop grip-6Z2
<;yama enters the forest-76. 6
He goes to the bathing place in the fore·st followed by two tame deer.
.·92. ro':laS. 011':>0. o:r
oo··
~paS- GJ9 '
Kit Syimt-uk ~ik-6Z4
As vyamais &a\ving water;';:"76. 22
;_.. '." .
Plaque 88, as has,been said,is",'Yrongly llumbered 623.'
offi
93. oo~ r§S O-1J~-.G ~
J
Kilsmi6 pan Syam-625
The king shooting c.;yama-76. ·24
King Piliyakkha is hunting while C;yama is drawing water, he shoots
j
him with a poisoned arrow which goes through his body.
P.aft = M.T. u$, p a 0, to shoot, with a bow.

PART I] TALAI~G PLAQU'ES ON THE ANANDA 33
I
. 94. ~8 qoo-:>e§· 01 011')0-GJ G
Smin gulaii kuSyam-626
The kin~ converses with C;yama-77. 14 ff
Piliyakkha runs·· to· C;yama, and a conversation follows; the king,
touched by 'the virtue and· meekness of C;yama and his devotion to his
parents, promises that after his death--for the boy's wound is deadly
h~ will himself look after his parents in·the·forest as if they were 'his own.
95. 8aoooS 00,0- (jJ '1
Pi!ayak yim~27
Piliyakkha weeps-82.25
appearanc~,
Then the usual signs of approaching dissolution make' their
and King Piliyakkha, thinking C;yama dead, weeps bitterly.
96. 8oo00d3qGl')8~G Jo·
. Pilayak pl,ljaw-628 .
Piliyakkhadoes homage (to C;yama)-84. 26
He offers flowers to the body,. sprinkles water on it, and goes, taking
with him the jar from which he had sprinkled the water.
Puj'aw, forpiijaw ~ M.T. ~, pujau, from the P. Pilja, an
offering, to offer. A small dot on p u appears to make the reading 'purh.
jaw, but.it is only a defect in the glaze.
97. CT.)')ro ~6 '18 qJlS ~pO-G J e
Kal smUl ran pyuD Syam-629
,When the king brings (the ·p:uents) and shows (them) C;yAma-go, 3
For rail, see No. 64, and also r ~,il, NO.5.. P Yuil, to show = M.T.
~l¢,' PnuIi j this word is found also in plaques 199'and 316.
s

34 EP,IGRAPHIA -BIRMANICA [VOL. II
q8. ~~'joS sg. C>-ipo OO'jO-G~o
Abo' aba Syam yam-630
The mother and father of C;yama weep-go.·5
99. ooac£qoo'j-G~o
0
Fa saccakirya-631
(They) ma.ke an act of asseveration-gI..
12
.
Then the mother, the father, and a goddess, each in turn make a
solemn act of. asseveration, so as to counteract the effects of the pois.on and
thus snatch <;yama from death.
IOO.CY,}~aS O1l'jO GooS-G~ J
KiilSyam kew-632
Then <;yama (rises) briJ!ht (again)--g2. 2S
T~e act' of asseveration produces (as it always does when truthfully
made) its effects, and <;yama rises fair and strong as before both parents
j
recover their sight. Everyone is happy, and the king, reverentially saluting
<;yarna, returns to Benares. .
K ew ::. M.T. ~OOO, kew, to be bright, clear,. beautiful; happy: it
answers here to the P. kalyr1rzadassana" in common pa~lance, they have
an ex-pression, 'ioS~oo8, rnu k kew, which means to have a bright, happy
It
face."
101" ~8 ~oa'jq Dq!'JO-G??
Smiillnor Syam-633
The king reverentially salutes Cyarna-g4. '7
=
Lno r M.T. c;~:)O, 1i10 w.

J
PART'I tALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 3S
'IV~....:.N!M
I : JAT AKA
a
Nimi is very holy king, ruling in Videha.' Sakka sends his charioteer,
Mltali,tofetch him and show him round all the heavenly mansi9n~,and the
hetls.' After' reaching a great old age; his barber shows him his first grey
hair:; then the -king renounces the world and becomes an. ascetic.
The PalL has the form Nemf once only, at- page 96. 24-, and has
regularly Ni",i: ~verywhere else. The Talaings and Burmese hav~.'~dopted
the form Neml/ - - - -
102, -103, -com~~pondingto,Nos. 634 and 635 and proba,blY. r-epre
senting the conception and birth of Nimi, are missing;
l04. (oQoS co~~- ~;>S--':G~ G
Mey Iaksan Nemi~636 -
(bo~ily)
(Tpe fortune-tellers) look-at Ninii's sigilS--g6. 20
-Ios.-m~ ~~S,~~-G~~
'KilNe,mi kmin-4l37
When Nfmii~ ruling--g6. 21
Nlmi's father J:lecames a hermit ~nhis mango-grove and makes!over the
oar~s,oQ the~ngdom' to his son, who becomes king.
106. .
~~C9be§ Q~a"';"'GyO
In smin Nemi-638
Indra·is questioned by Nimi-g8. 3
A. doubt arises -in Nhni's mind as to whether alms-giving or a retired
do~bt,'
,holy life is better. Sakka, wishing to .solve the comes -into the
presence of 'Nimi, and, on being questioned by him, answers that a sec1udoo
ascetic life is-bettet than alms-giving.
Sm~~I1i ~ ,M.T qp$~ ~m~ rl. hereus>~~d ir; a passive sense, if. No. 117§.
&

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. at
107. Q,:)ooc8 ~Q~ ~~8-G'?e
Mitali niman Nemi-63Q
Matali .invites Nimi (to get into the chariot)-lo3' 29
The' gods in the Tavatimsa heaven become desirous of beholding so
pious a king, and ask Sakka to bring .him t,o the heavenly abodes. ·Sakka.
sends his charioteer ,Matali to fetch him. Matali invites Nimi to' .come
into the heavenly chariot.
108.. Q':)ooc8 ~~ oo~'"'PS--:"G'90
Mitali smifi tanrow-640
Matali' asks which way (Nimi wishes to go)-.104. 19
Matali then asks the.king which road he desires to take first: tha~ of
the hells orthat of t.he'h.eavens? NilIli replies he will visit the hells first.
.
Tanrow = M.T; 004, tarau, a road, way; a variant is tin.fow;
another variant, c in row, .is found in Pagan .Talaing Inscriptions j
in
the equivalence, Talaing, of the palatals and dentals s~rd (aspirate and
unaspirate) .is very frequent; cf. flro9~, c Ia I;1 cara a i, 02:09~, t Ia Q.
cara a i, majesty;' glory, magnificence, pomp; beauty, grace, charm;
~~~S, ema a i c 01 in, ~~§.S, t maai j m In, a present, gift; ()~,
c a -a', oo~r,f.), t hil-a',and also 00, t a, to vomit j o~¥, c a it in, oo~S,
fa it in, locarty (on the shoulder); 0'i', cam Ia I;1, oo'i'i tam I a,l), free,
not enslaved j q, c u.i w, &, -d u iw, up to, until; ~,'j wi, ~, dw i, the
left (side)'j .. 0199,. jara'm, 3~S; da ram', and o:;pS, d ha ram, a granary.
1
09. '"~S 8~ ~'1oS-G'9:>
Nemi bir narak-64I
Nimilooks at hell-I05. 29
a'ir -= M.T. if, buiw.

PART.IJ TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 37
~~8 8~ 8o')~' 02~--G9J
110.
Nemi bir wiman swar--642
Nimi looks at the heavenly mansion (of the goddess Bira\li)-117. z
A defect in the glaze makes mi look like mi.
o~8qco')~ 'Xl ~$.-G 9?
I I I
Nimi gulaii ku In-643
Nimi converses with Indra-I~7. 30
The dot which appears to be'on the gu of g ula fi is only a defe~t in
the glaze of the plaque.
112. (0;>8 ~~L ~g-G99
Nemi dindu nal}.--644
Nimi instructs (his) people (ip the practice of the Law)-128. 30'
~ a 0, besides the meaning II he, she," given in Haswell's, also means,
first, a person, as in the expressions (9IGg-5, Ii a 0 j n0 k;
II
a great person,"
a chief; (91~S, iia O. g inail, "a person of courage," a warrior;. e31~lS,
iia0 Qu il," a person of the city," a citizen, etc.; second, the peop.le, as
in 0223', t I a.Ii a~, . the lord of the people," the king ; in the passage
II
corresponding to this plaque the Pali has malzajano (VI. 128. 27); third, 'it
is also used ·as an interrogative = Who? what? which? Sudh. 9. 13,
231~aS[§'g~1i'35-"Who is 'this little girl, sir?"; Sudh·. 28. 2, e3:3;>OJO o~ OJ5§
c.'{'l-II What were those sixteen wonders ?"; S.B. I2, 02~23I§G~"Who
are you, shi"; S.l. 5,-S.§"JQ3;)Q"[i>.....uWho is my father?"•
.I 13. ~8 Go05 d3'~:»8S-G9~
Nimi mey sinko'-645
Nimi' sees (his) grey hair-128·. 31
As with his father, so also with Nimi: his barber perceives the first
grey bair and shows it to him.

EPIGRAPHiA BIRMANICA
~S ~~S 81~-G9G
114. Q.
SmUt'Nemi 'I}1a ir-646
King Nirrii leaving the world-I29. 3
Then, .following his father's example, Nimi enters upon an ascetic life.
For [t.. s.ee No. 34. ,
V;-- MA H ii. - UMM A'-G GA - J A. T A K A
The ~ing of Videha has, four wise men, so self-styled j there appears
Mahosadha, the Bodhisatta, a fifth and real wise man. Then follows a bout
of wit bet'Neen Mahosadha and the four others, the latter never being, able
to give fheright answers to numerous problems and knotty questions,' the
.former invariably succeeding. The'four false wise men try in many ways to
undo Mahosadha, but he finally triumphs over them. .
This story, which is very popular, is not ,known among the Burmese by
the name of Maha-ummagga," but as Mahosadha-jat," after tbename
II H
~f the hero j the Talaings call it "jat-Mahos."
S.• o~o::>~,(')C;OO'JoS-G91
I I
Pa~isan Mahos-641
Conception of Mahosadha-330• 5
6.t
I I
6. ()~ 05.o~oo'JdS---G9
0
Parisut Mahos-648
Birth of Mahosadha-3311.1
7. m~cS g{~ oS~ d3S~05:-:-Gge
IIi
K~l In kit kin-uy~649
When Indra gives the medicinal herb ·(to Mahosadha)-331.
II
Sakka, desiring to make it known to' the world that' the Bod'hit?Ci.Ha was
a~d
born among men, came placed a medicinal herb.in the bahtg' ha.'11d;

PART I] TALAINGPLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 39
this medicine cured instantly all sorts of'diseasesi the child was therefore
called Mahosadha, ".He"oE·the: great medicine."
Kin-uy - M.T.- o~i, ga·u-~uai, and o~, ga-'uai, medicine.
1.8. 'OG9J'J~ 'c£cOcf3~~05-(t~::>
!
Mabos kil kin-uy-651
Manosadha gives the medicinetto his mother)-331. 16
This tt1aque is wrongly numbered 651, instead of 650.
:',1'19.'
0
oSGG,)3S QC;OO~-- G~
0
Fa himo'" Mahos~51.
The naming ofMahosadha~332.
1
120. QGOO'Jd) 0908· cB~oo'J-G ~l J
Mahos kil kiryi~52
Mahosadha· gives ornaments (to the thousand children)-332• 9
One thousand' boys are found to hav~ been born at the same time as
Mahosadha, and the father of the latter resolves they should be his son's'
attendants.. A· festival is celebrated for them, at which they are given
ornaments.
K iry a, from, the Pali kiriya, and kr.iya; ~ut i'.1 Talaing, as well as
in Burmese"this word has acquired the meaning of: articles of dress, orna
ments, utensils, tools.
! 2 I .. ,O<i;CO'Jc£ 8e§ 01 qod3-G:,)9
IVlahos Win ku puwak--:653'
I\.fahosadha playslVith(his) companions-332.
10
=" ct.
Pu wa k, 'a companion; a follower, attendant M.T. ~oo, b wa k;
Dhm. Dip..20. 12, ,~I &ot8o[§c6lJooGcx;5§~Q~OS~.-((hesubdued' the fierce
demon,_and the demonbecamehis attendant/' It is alsofound written 00005,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
=
b hawa k, at S.B.·18 o:>oo:S~a5, bhaw a k k nak, a follower, retinue,
and corresponds, in the Pali of the same story, to paY'£vtZY'a (Fausb. VI. 186.
10); cooo:S§', bhawak krau, is again found at S.B. 27. This word is
c/..
derived from the verb ~a5, ba k, to follow i also- M.T. ~~B, b0 k, a
follower.
I 22. ~316 ,"00-:>8 @8-G:>9
Dow lop jrap-654
(Mahosadha's companions). run to enter the rest-house-·332• 15
Mahosadha is now seven years of age.- While playing with his com
panions, an unseasonable rain~torm bursts forth; he, uncommonly strong, runs
and enters a rest-house; the other children follow him, tumbling and bruising
their limbs.
=
Dow, to run M.T. ~, dau; j rap .= M.T., a hall built on the
ct.
roadside for the convenience of travellers, a rest-house; the Burmese:
01'10, jarap.
ceq,-
I 23. oc;oo-:>03 d3cS G:> :>
-Mahos kit thar-655
Mahosadha gives the gold (to the carpenter to build a hall)-332.
22
Mahosadha, considering that his thousand companions, while at play,
suffered from the heat in summer and from the rains in the rainy season,
decides to build a hall; he tel1s the boys to bring.each a coin and, having
called a master carpenter. makes the money' over to him.
=
Thar, gold M.T. ooS, thaw.
124.0,"00,03 d3~.-l§8-G:> G
Mahos kindam jrap-656
Mahosadha builds the rest-house-333· 5 if
He is not pleased with the-carpenter's plan i so, he himself designs a
plan, in which were separate rooms for all sorts and conditions of people,
and superintends the construction of it.

PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ,ANANDA 41
=
a.
Kin da rh, to build M.T. 00;' kan h rho It means also to do,
l(
ma~e S.]., 84, ootQoga5'tl-" he- made, that is, picked up, a quarrel";
I, j
oo.t(9~uS, to make (write) a book.
I
25. QfOOO
.
~ C£~ ooC'':)~-G~'l
0
Mahos kindam kambir-6S7
-Mahosadha constructs a tank-333. 17
He finds the spl~ndid rest-house not quite complete yet,and has a tank,
with many bends and a hundred bathing-places constructed.
K a rh bar, -a tank = l\1.T. "2:), k ma. The dropping of final r, is
r
frequent; ar = ~=?, ajl;>a = CSll, I;> ajii. the vowel before it is short, it
is lengthened by compensation: skami r 'oo~, kami.
~
26• QSO)':)OO
8o':)~~G:>(')
Mahos ,biCir-6s8
~ahosadhadecidescases--~33. ~5
,Seated in tne rest-house, ~ahosadha used to decide the cases of all who
came to him.'
ar,
Bi,c to de,cide ca,ses, investigate; .investigation, case, from Pa-Ii
f);careti.
12'7. Qsoo':>OS011105 9L~-G :>,C!
'Mahos suruh' pcun-659
Mahosadha causes the (piece of) meat to fall-334. if
22
A ha":,k' carries off a 'piece of. meat Manosadha utters a powerful shout
j
which seems to go through and through the hawk which, in its fright, lets
6

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 'II '.
go the meatj Mahosadha follows its shadow as itis falling and receives ·it '
in his hand.
=
u
Suru h, to fall, or cause to falloff M.T. o:>~05, sar ih, to .fal~
off,drop down, as fruits or leaves: it is used colloquially :~3a5V~3S:i:>§"if'
o:>05cqoo§o:>§c6:f.}05Gooo~~JI I know not why, this year, all the fruits fall off
in my garden." .
128. 800q G;~':>8~GGo
Bicir jlow-660
of
T~ecase the cattle-33s.81f '
A man steals another's cattle they quarrel; both are. brought betore.·
j
Mahosadha. He asks each what he feeds the cattle on. On rice gruel,
U
kidney beans an,d sesame flour," says the thief. 1 could afford to feed':
U
them only 6n grass," says the real owner. Mahosadha has the cattle given
'panic seeds, the animals vomit. grass, arid the case is thus.decided
J low, cattle = M.T. ~, g1a.u.
8o~q o~-GCiO
129.
'..Bicar gantbi-66I
.The case of the necklace of thread-'-33S. 3,7if
A woman had tied together some.threads of different·colours .into a.
necklace. One day, she goes to bathe 'while she is· in the water" a young,
j
womanlooks at the necklace, asks permission to try, it on her neck, and runs'
away with it. .The other .follows in pursuit and overtakes her. They are
brought before Mahosad~a. He asks the' thief what she perfumes her.
necklace with. With a compound of all -scents," says she.. But the o,wner
U
says she is poor and uses only p£yangu flowers. The youIlg sage has the
n~cklace placed in a vessel of water an expert .in perfumes is. then called
j
inl~and asked for his .opi~ion~ This water .~mells of p£yang4," says he, and
U
this settles the case.'
Gant hi, Ior Pili gatz/hi.·

ifALAING-PLAQUES ON, THE: ANANDA
'ART If 43
I 3o. So')q, ~oo')cS- GGJ
Bicir' tol-662
The case of the' cotton thread-336. ff
2 I
,A woman watching cotton fields one day makes a ball of::fine ,thread.
'While going home she gets into the tank, by the rest·house 'tobathej
an~therwoman sees the ball and runs away' with it.Ma~osadha asks the
thief .what she has placed inside the ball to roll th~' thread on,' ,ii,A cotton
'seed, says the thief. The true owner replies she has' put in at"mharu seed.
II
Mahosadh.a'untwists the ball and produces the timbaru.seed. .. '
=
,.Tol, cotton M'.'T\..'~u ,
3 8o~q, {;rI.)':>~~:GG~
.I I.
Bicir kon~63
, The case'of'thechild-336. 3 11
I
A woman bathes her little son in the tank jshe .then places him on her
clothes and herself takes a bath.' ,An ogress:comes,', takes up the" child, and
on
flees. Mahoscl4ha draws aline on·'theground,: placesthtt child it, and
bids the ,two women 'pull, one'by th~ head, .th~other byth-e;f~e~ ~ayiltg
cry
,that' the child would b~ giverito who:'puUed"liardes~.'At,.the.first
of the' babyfits mother ,-lets go ,in 'anguisTi~:',TItespectatCmf'·agtee'w. ith the
sage that-she who cannot bear, to see the child: s~ffer-' is' 'the mother,' and'
her,son is giv~n back to her.
132. mx¢ Sooq, oS~q,--o.~G9'
Q
Kilbicar kindar-664
Deciding the case of,the wife-337. 16 If
A dwarf marries. One day, he an,d his wife set out on a jovmey to
visit her parents. They C9me to a shallow pond'j .thinking it very'deep, they:

EP~GRAPHIA BIRMANICA
44
are afraid to, cross. A poor man chancing th~t way tells.them he can cross
.it i he first takes the wife across, and, in·the middle of the pond, makes her
promise to be his' wife she accepts: The dwarf runs after them, and the
j
noise of the dispute attracts the attention of Mahosadha, who decides whose
wife.the woman is and hands her back to the husb~nd.
Kindar, ~ife j the modern form is 00000, ka Iaw.' I'have not yet m = et
with this word, anywhere but in A.V., where it occurs f~equently: p. 114
=
dara" 136 pajapati,. r56 = pt'ya" 171 ~ blzariya" 87 _ chara1Ji,. etc.
133. oc;oo':>oS 804)~ ~aS-(s(j~
'Maho$ bicir kwil-665
Mahosadha decides (the case of) the cart-338. ., I,
I
Sakka, the king of the gods, ~esirous of making patent to aU the
wisdom of the sage, driveS away,.the cart of a man. The' latter follows in
pursuit. Maho~adha, at certain signs,' recognizes Sakka, and easily decides'
the case as to who the.true owner is.
K wi I ='M.T. ~, k wi.
,134. o~mo~,:>-GGG
Da~9akapanhi-666
The riddle of'the pole-S39. f
'I I
The enemies of Mahosadha, hoping to lose him in the esteem of the
king, put their heads together and invent some puzzles which, they thought,
he could not solve. The first' was' that of the pole. They procured'an
acacia pole and had it finely smoothed by' a turner. They then sent word to
the villagers that, if they could not-make out the root from the top of the
pole, they would be heavily fined. They repaired to the sage., He tied a
string right in the middle of the pole an~, holding the string, softly set down
the pole on the surface of'the water; the root, being heavier, sank deeper
,than the top. Thus he solved the riddle.

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE· ANANDA 4S
·135. 8o~~ ~8-GG't
OO-:lcO
Kal bicar k9ip-667
Deciding the~ase' of the heads-339. 29 If
Next came. the case·of the. skulls. T~o skulls, that of a man and that
of a woman, were sent to, the· villagers, asking them to point out which
was which, under pen~lty'9f ,a fine. The sage solved the riddle by pointing
out that, whereas th~ sutures ina woman's head are crooked, those in a
man's are straight.
=
.K Qip,the head M.T. ~lo, k QUiP j with kQip the modern
literary form c§8, knip, maybe compared.
136. oo09o' ep-:'GGO
Ahipaiifl.a-668
The riddle of the snake-339. 34if
Two snakes were then., brought i they had to distinguish the male
from the female. The sage solved the problem.by pointing out that the
tail of the male snake is thick, that of the female thin, etc.
. Pa fifiat a, mistake for pan ha i the plaque shows no sign of the
subscript II.
137. Oiffiwo?J,:>-GG~
. Kukku~apafiha-669
The riddle oI the" cock-340~ if
1
wer~'
The villagers ordered'to ,send in a white bull with .horns on his
legs and a hump on his ~ead, which regularly gives out his voice three times.
Mahosadha showed this to be a cock, which has' horns on his feet, that is
the spurs" and a hump on his head, that is the crest, and he'gives voice
.three times a day.; .

EPIGRAPHIABIRMANICA [VOL. II
.138. ocSo~')-ct 1.0
Manipafiha-67o
•
·The riddle of the gem-340. 111
.The gem given by Sakka to King Kusa. was contorted in eight places'"
Its thread was' broken, and owing to these' contortions no one could 'take
o'ut the old thread and put in' a new, one•. The villagers were given the
task, of putting in a new thread. The ,sage smeared tne jewel with honey,
also one end of a' new' thread of wool which he inserted a little way into
the holei .he then placed the je~el" where there were ants.' The ants ate
the. old thread and pulled through the new'one.
139. 'QGCX)~ eO'>~ ~~G1.:>
Mahos· bicir usabha-67I
Mahosadha decides the case of the bull-340. 18 II
The royal bull having been'well f~d up, so that his belly swelled, was
smeared with turmeric. The villagers were sent this bull in calf and told, by
royal order, to deliver'him.. The sage instructs a' man. The latter goes to
.the palace' lamenting loudly. t!1nbeing asked by the· king i.he cause of. his,
in
laments,.he. answers that his'father is labour and cannot bring forth.. The
king perceives the cleverness of the- counter-riddle and"is pleased.'
§3~oe~-'-G'lJ
140.'
Odanapaiiha-672
The puzzle of the rice-'340• .3511
One day the villagers are asked to seqd to the' palace boiled rice cooked
under eight apparently impossible oonditions, such as: without rice, without
water, w;thout fire, etc. As usual, the' sage'solves the' puzzle most easily.
J For this translation, more in keeping with the text than that of the Cambridge translation of
the Jiitaka, see N. Peri's"Un contehindou au Japon," B.E.F.E.O•• Vcil XV, NO.3, page 5. footnote.
At the end of the same paper have been reproduced plaques'Nos. t34, the riddle of the pole; 136, the
riddle of the snake, and 138. the riddle of the gem.

PA-RT I] T'ALAING PLAQUE~ ON THE ANANDA 47
141.' 0 lC1CY.)o~"J- V1.
, Vilukapaiihi-673
The puzzle of the sand (rope)-341. ff
10
. ~~ ~
, The villagers were sent wo~d tha~ the rope of the king'sswing being
broken they must pro'cure a new" onc, made of sand. The sage ,ag~in got
the,villagers out of dif:Jiculty by a counter-request.' He sent a deputation to
.the king, to, ask him for'a small piece of thcC!ld sand rope, so that the new
one might, be made of the same size.
142. cx>oo~moeiP-,,,-, G19
Talakapaii~a-:-674
The' puzzle 'of the tank-"341;.22 tI
'. . ' . . .
the viJlag~rs are told the king desires they should- s'end him,a new tank
covered with,lilies.' . Mahosadha again thinks of a counter-q~ip. :He sends to
"the palace men soaking wet, with their bodies covered withrttud." On'being
asked what they want, .they'answer to the king that they had caught a tank
'iIi theforest, but when sh~' saw the,city sh~ was frightened and ran away;
they then ask for the ,~ld tan~ to help" t~em. bring in the, new one. '
'~a13ka, instead of' t a! 3k~: (Skt. t~t!aka).
, 1-43. ~OiI~o~"J~~'t,
.. \". ',."
, Uyyanapaiihi~75'
'p~fzzle'~~,jhe.p~tk-34~~
The 4 ff,'
.
~ . . ,,' . .
The villagers are requested to 'send:'theking anew park filled with,trees"
and flowers, the Qne he' had being old." ,T,his request is met, a:sabov~, by
a~other req,uest. ' ' ." ,"
UYY3 na, park : this is the full Pali form i there is an abbreviated
form, B~$, uY y·3n i there are found also two 'abbreviated,forms £ro~J

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
the Sanskrit udyiina- e~::>, ud y a, in the Bhuridatta-jiitaka, plaque No. 224,
and e~JS, u dy an, at S.B. _10 and S.M. 19.
144. ()§o:{9~~-G1G
Gadrabhaprasna-676
The question of the ass-342• 1if
Mahosadha is called to the palace to aSS-Jme office i he takes his father
with him.· Both arrange beforehand that, when in presence of the king, the
father, rising from his place, would ask the sage to take it: a serious
breach of etiquette on the part of a son. \Vhen they perceive what has
happened the four ministers laugh and call Mahosadha a fool i the king
expresses his discontent. The sage then asks whether the sire is always
greater than the son. So it is/'says the king i Mahosadha has then an
(I
ass brought in, and asks whether, in the event of the ass getting a mule
colt out of a thoroughbred mare of Sind, the colt would be more valuable,
or the ass? The answer is, the colt. The sage thereby shows that he,
through his wisdom, is greater than his father.
P r asna, from the Skt.prafna, the palatal sibilant being changed·
into the dental. .. There were both· the Pali and the·Sanskrit. forms for the
same word. There are examples of this dual borrowing in the literary
language.
145,. c;;oa')~cr;>~-G1.1
QC;;OO':)oS-
Mahosltior ·amba......677
Mahosadha salutes ·his father-342.25
When called to the palace, together with his father, to assume, office,
the sage salutes him, and instructs him to give up his seat to him in
the pI;esence of the king.
This plaque- should·come before the previous one, for those instructions
to'his father take place before they, go to the palace and therefore before
the episode of the ass depicted in plaque 144.
Am ba, father; there is also, a form, a b·a, more common.

PART lJ TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 49
-I 46. ~m05 c.>aBoo-G'10
Ket ma~ika-678
Taking the jewel.....344. 281/
In a crow's nest on a palm-tree on the shore of a lake, there was a
jewel. The'reflexion of the jewel was seen in the lake, and it was thought
the jewel was at the bottom. The lake was emptied of its water twice, but
the precious stone could not be obtained.' The sage is appealed to and
easily finds it.
147. moo~mo~")-G'1@
Kakandakapafiha-679
The case of the chameleon-345. 29if
The king went, riding on his elephant, with the sage to the park j a
chameleon, which was on the gate, came down and crouched before the king.
On enquiry, the sage explains it was paying its respects to the king j the
~ing, pleased, orders that a half-anna's worth of meat should be daily given
to it. On a fast day, the servant, unable to procure meat, tied the half
anna on the chameleon's neck, and it be~ame very proud of its wealth, so
that, when the king again passed that way, it took no notice of him. The
sage again explains to the astonished king.
I48. oS~m')coooiJoc;~J-Goo
Sirikalakal,1e;tipafih~680
The case of good and bad luck-347. -7 if
__ A man very uniucky (kalakaI)I)i) marries a very lucky (siri) girl, and
owing to the man's bad l_uck and dispositions the marriage is not consuni
mated. While on a journey he abandons her. The king meets her and she
becomes queen. The king, one day, refuses to believe that a ma~ could
7

EPiGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. II
abandon such a beauty one of the four ministers says he does not believe
j
any man could do so but the sage says he believes it; the two could not
j
mate, even as good luck and evil luck cannot meet together.
K aIa ka1) q. i, wrongly for kaI a kai} ~I.
149~ S~o~~-Go::>
Mia:gapafihi--68x
The question of the ram-349. 19ff
The king one day saw a ram and a- dog which had made. friends.' The
ram brought meat'for the dog from the kitchen, and the dog grassior the
ram from the stables. He puts this occurrence in the form of a question to
the four ministers and to the sage, saying: Two natural enemies have
fl
become so friendly as to be inseparable. What i~ the reason of it?
II
Naturally, the four ministers fail to answer, and the sage solves the question,
to the king's delight.
M i1) Qa, wrongly for me~Qa.
ISO. C(~o:>':)~ ()iJaS()~-G 0 J
lButon pal}9it pan-682
(He) instructs the four pandits-35S. 6ff
The four. ministers were nonplussed when the king" put to them the
question of the ram," and could find no solution. The sage has already
U
found it, and, full.of pity for the four pandits, ~hom the king had threatened
with banishment should they fail, he makes them sit below him in the attitude
.of pupils listening to their. teacher's. instructions, and teaches to each one
~tanza which, though coming very near the solution, yet does. not entirely
solve the questia.n,. and thus saves them from disgrace.
But0n, to instruct -: M.T. c;O?>:>S, bton there is also a variant, 8G&:>t
j j
binton.

TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
PART I]
?3~Glo.(;~,>-(it')~
J!51"
Suimandapafih0--683·
(The king putting to the five) the qU6§ti«i'n of the Rich
and the Wise~3S6. g
On the 111 of man da, the glaze has flaked off, .making, it appear as
mi.
152ca Qc;OOIJ:O Gcu...,a5· @6t-:J--Gog
Mabos soh prasni-684
Mahosadha answers the. question (of the Rich and t;he
- Wise)-3s6. 8 ff
The king having put to the five pandits the question of the Wise and
the Rich: which is the better?, the four ministers opine for the rich man;.
but the sage conclusively proves that the wise is the better·man. .The king
overwhelms him with gifts.
=
Soh, to answer, solve M.T. 0,:)05, 5 a h.
Ii 53. ,,)(;m:l5 ~')e§-G 0 :>
..ihiahos sman-685
Mahosadha asks (Amara w1).ether she is married, etc')-364.' IS
. .
The 'sage is now sixteen, and queen Udumbarawishes to look out for a
wife for him; but heprefer5 to g~ in search of one 'by himself. So he sets
out· disguised as a tailor. He meets Amara, the beautiful,.wise and lucky
daughter of a once rich family. ShewCls carrying rice-gruel to her father
working in his field. They both fall in Jove at sight. To'test: h.er wisdom, .
he re~olves to a!;k her questions by gestu'res. So· he clenches 'his fist,
meaning Have you a husband?" and in answer she spreads out her hand,
/I
mel.ning I HilaJi.ve no1/·
1I

"
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
154- (,)'"00':>05 0 oo,:>q---GoG
c'a_yagu-:-~86
Mahos ,.
,Mahosadha eats th~'rice-gniel-S6s. 11
Amara offers him some rice-gruel, which he' accepts. He then goes to
her' house by the way indicated by ·her.in a riddle.
S5. ~e§ ~OO-Go1
I (,)tOoo':>05
Mahos sjiii glik-687 '
, Mahosadha'stitches c1othes-366. 1 ff
He reaches the house and meets \vith Amar~'s mother. Knowing they'
were' poor,' he resolves to help them so, first, he mends for nothing their_
j
old clothes, then those of the villagers, and in one day makes one thousand
'.
cmnL , ' ' , ' '
=
S ji fi, to sew, stit(~h M.T. ~s, s j iIi, as,. j iii i if. §.O, jmi Ii, sewing,
stitchihg, coutzwe, and og:>~o, s'm a ,j m i J1; a tailor i s jiIi corresponds.to
the Pali sibbati. To mend is, properly, llrP or Gll:>3S, b1a' or, blo'. '
II II
J 56. G@Jo <f6 (,)G(J.)':>oS-Gon
Krow jmi Mahos-6S8
(Amara) washes Mahosadha's feet-366. 26
In'the evening, when Amara comes."back,'· she washes her parents' and
the sage's feet.
Krow, to wash.= M.T. @" krau. JUt1,}oot= M.T. ~S" juilij
see under plaque' No. 82.
157.. (,)tOOO?oS ~C\JcrS qC---Goe
Mahos let pun-689
Mahosadha sm{?ars the boiled rice (on Amara's head and bodY)~367. 8
'i·>_ ,:-
The sage stays a few days in the house to test Amara's' temper.. For
instance, he gives her rice to cook one part of it she boils, with the other
j

TALAIN<;i PLAQUES ON THE ANArjDA· 53
PART 1]
she makes· gruel, and with the thiro a cake. The sag.(:' finds them delicious,
but to test her, he makes a mixture of·the .three.and 'rubs it on her head
and body. She does not in the least get angry.
158. cB03 '1LS-G
QGOJ'):X) (!O
Mahos kil gnun-690
. Mahosadha gives (Amara) a loin-cloth-367. 13
After a few days, the sage gives Amara's parents the money he had
!?fought .with him and that which he had earned by stitching to Amara he
j.
gives a petticoat and tens her to follow him to town.,
Gnu n == M.T. ~~, g ni n,a woman's loin~cloth, a petticoat ;if.~l~,
km un, -:to· reign, a variant of ~S, .k min.
159. ~~·~~?8-G
(,,)1000:>05 (!O
Mahos mun' cow-69I
abo~t) (home)-367~
Mahosadha informs (that he is to return 16
The sage, !taving asked Amara to follow him, comforts her parentsahd
takes leave.
Cow,to return - M.T. ", ca u.
160. Q"CX),)oS 8@)oo-G(!J
Mcihos bibat"":692
~ests (A~ara'; ~h~stity)-.
Mahosadha 367. } 7 11 .
Arrived in town, in order to test' her virtue, he tells her to wait in :the
gate-keeper's house,. goes home and sends sbme ~f his men, with a thousand
coins, to tempt her; thric'e she refuses. 'Then he has ,her dragged before
hini clad'>in. his ceremonial dress/.and· she' does not recogriizehim. But
she still refuses. He is convi.nced of her cHastity.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
S4
i 6i., cc;oo':)oS 0 tJ6CO-G(!\'
Mabos pa maiigaia-693
Maho~adha marrieS-36S. 1
The next day Mahosadha brings the ~irl to the palace and marries her
amid great rejoicing.
Pama ng a Ia, to perform a religiou~ ceremony, especially the
ceremony of marriage j the expression is still used in common p&n1ance i the
Burmese have the same expression: 'Q~k'V:>fSlo::>e§ (marigala pm san), It is
the equivalent of the Pali 1114f1,galam karoN, to perform a ceremony, hold
a festival,' which is often used in the jataka in ~he sense of to man)'.
(6 PI
Q~t'O')05 cn~-G~9
X62 0)':)0
0
rvI.alhos taw man-694
'Mahosadha lives as a potter-36g, 27
The four ministers, wishing to undo the Bodhisatta, steal from the
king his golden slippers,. a gem from the crest,his robe and his necklace,
which they sent surreptitiously. to the sage's house. They are received hy
Amara" who carefully notes down the day on which, and the persons by
whom, they were brought. The ministers induce the king to put· on these
things and they cannot be found. They then accuse Mahosadha of theft.
The" latter comes to the palace to explain; the king refuses to see him,
The sage, afraid, consults with his.wife, escapes from the town and goes
to live at a potter's house.
=
Taw M.T. 06, t au, properly means: to dwelt, reside, live in or at,
to be (in a place), etc. ;y5Q~~&>9t'Poo-"the n~gas who dwell at th~ foot
of Mt. Sineru," 5:B. 7;' B~:x>£:>S[gCOO~~S_1la white bull (whose) horns
are on his feet," S.M. a2; cB~~lQOOQ;;p-1Iwhere are the flowers?" Dhd, 93.
These meanings are not entered iti Haswell's, who, moreover, on page 25,
gives it as a, euphonic affix"; placed after'another verb it shows that an
'I
a.:tion or state is going on, and the example" he gives-oosC7";~~~oo~o~'1'-;'
lite!aUy mei\ns: (th~ light) is or was shinjng~

TALAINGPLAQUES ON ·THE ANANDA
PART!] 55
1\1anJa potter; the modern form is CO~J~,
..
Ia man,by means of
prefix 1aim a n nowineans: to make pots. This legend might have been
translated: Mahos lives at a pottees~" The Skem here reads:. ~3;),;;)oooQj$
(l
_" he fled and waited upon a potter,i' that.is, took service at a potter's.
163". Goe Q~oo')o.?-G(!=>
Wen Mahos--695
(The courtiers) go about (looking for) Mahosadha-372. ff
I I
The deity "that resided in the royal umbrella, not hearing any' more the
voice of the sage, and finding out what had happened, resolves· to bring
him· back. She·puts riddles to the king, who asks his four ministers, but
they cannot solve them. The devatti then repeats the Firefly riddle, threat
ening the king with death if he does not solve it. The king, terrified, sends
four courtiers, with presents, to find out Mahosadha·and bring him back.
For VI efl, .Haswell gives one meaning only: to play. But it means
also: to go about, wander, roam.; to go to; to visit; :i:J~05(J.l:><;oS::ft:3;>~~e§ot:>
_" Pll go first to my house," .Sudh. 3. 18;·"t.lcr;oC~~" come and' visit.
us, it is not far." The plaque represents the· courtier who has found him,
after going about looking for him, and offering' him the king's presents.
Besides the· meanings above' given, wen has also the· following, not in
Haswell's:-(a) to avoid,. eschew i e3IQ~bSC;ai-u people (should) avoid him,"
Dhd. 239. 18; ·Q(1.)~OS~gqrn05-Hwho does not.eschew bad deeds," .Dhd.
54. 3; (b) in vain, to no purpose, for nothing i §Suc;CY.>~8~~o8e=:co>-'~ having
amassed property, shall.I give it for nothing to people 1", Gpi. 4.
1
=
With weIi to go about, roam, compare ~oS, geli.
164. ~lS (;;;.~q Q'J~-G
(!G
TluD nor man-696
Coming from the potter's-374. 9
The courtier explams his mission to Mahosadha, who accompanies him
to the town.
T 1u n, to come = M.T. CTilc, kIuil i there is a variant, C'2IlS, t1fiIi.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANIC,A [VOL, II
I 65. c; 00,:>05 03oG,:>e§-G@ 1..
Soh simman-697
(Mahosadha) anslVers the (king's) questions":"'374~ 19
The king receives him kindly and, to test his loyalty, puts him a
number of,questions i he then asks him to solve the four riddles put to him
by the goddess, having first got down from his throne and made the sage
take his place, as a mark of deep respect for his learning. The umbrella
goddess, delighted, gives the sage a casket full of toe seven precious things.
In the plaque, the casket is represented twice first, in the hands of the
j
goddess, as she is giving it, and then in the hands of Mahosadha.·
S immail, a question = M.T. 02::>S, s ani 02::>S ~~l. 000 V~L8o/5§-lfa
ill
question arose iri the naga-city," S.B I I. There are two variants:
su rh In a ii al}d sum aii.
a
166. g u~ ~l8 ~')e§-G @C)
flag pan tluiJ. sman-6g8
The four come to ask (questions to Mahosadha to entrap him)-378. 22 ff
The four ministers, vexed at the return to favour of Mahosadha, resolve
again to undo him. They go to his ho~s~ and ask him, To whom is it right
I(
to tell a secret?" He answered, One should tell his secre't to no one."
II
They return to.the king and denounte the sage as a traitor, telling what he
thinks about secrets. For not to tell a secret to the king is treason.
167. ~8 ~~e§ qoo~~G'@@
SmiiJ. smail rahas·-699
The king asks (Mah05adha concerning) secrets-379· 29.tf
The saae is called to the palace and, before the other four; is asked by
b .
the kina'to whom secrets should be told. Mahosadha maintains that to tell
b
a secret is bad i that none should be told until it is no more a secret. The
king is.displeased' at this answer, and the sage perceives that he has been

TALAING PLAQOES ON THE ANANDA 57
PART I]
entrapped by his enemies. ' He" becomes uneasy and resolves to know the
ministers' secrets that very day.
R a ha5, a secret; Pali rahassa.
168. Gg18 ~t;~?O 0$05-100
Dman kinrom danih-700
(Mah05adha) is under the trough-38 1. 23/1
I
The king, believing ,Mahosadha a traitor, becomes anxious.' He asks
the'four ministers what ought to qe done;' they answer he must be killed.
The king' gives them his own sword and bids them kill him at the door in
the morning. ' Every day, on'Jeaving the palace, these four were in the, habit
, of sitting on a trough- at the' palace gate and talking about their plans.
The sage gets under the trough, and, there learns of his projected murder, as
well as the several secrets of his'enemies. '
=
D moil, to dwell, remain M.T. is, d maft; kinr 0tn, ,under i .the
equivalent of this word, which would probably' be G§:>S,: I have not yet',
found in the liierarylanguage,; it is, al,so not,):~lIoquial. But modern Cam
== b~s
bodian has it: krom en (Ayinonier, Dictionnaire Franc;ais.Cambodien).
It is found, as k ar om' in' .the Khmer,' inscription ofVa,t ,Pra!). Keo, 3
128
A.D.l_dani h, a trough "7' M.T: JoS,,',doih, .a:nd, ~oS~ t ne h ; d nih
a
, is properly" dry measure, ,,' do1}. ii::;~kt. ,dro1Ji, which' means also a
~~oSiT.>&S,t
trough for feeding cattle.' The Skemhas. ,n.eh - am u in= ,a
'a
m ~~asure'"
trough; am uinand ui J) is a dry' and' also a trough;
the Pali in this passage h~s hhattamma1Ja and ,~..a?1tma!Za , (Vol. VI. 381. 23,
25)·
169. '{)~05 O1C~OG{J.)~-'l.
00
'Pal}~it su-er Mahos-,701
The'(four) pandits"look for Mcihosadha-';"3Ss. if
22
Early next morning, the four p~ndits, armed with swords and posted at
the gate, awaited,with expectancy the coming of the sage. But they did not
I G. Ceedl!s, Documents sur la dynastie de Sukhodaya, p.IB, H.E.F.E.O., Vol. XVII, NO.2.
8

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 11.
see him; for the queen had sent him word of, the others~ treachery, and
bade him corne well attended. So he did, and the· plan of his enemies
failed. The king received him well and was convinced he was no traitor.
Then the sage tells the king the secrets of the four ministers, which· he
had 'surprised under, the trough. The king, incensed, throws them in jail,
an~ orders them to be impaled outside the city. Mahosadha pleads for
them, and the king gives them to him as slaves; he immediately frees, them
and begs of the king to reinstate them in their positions. The king agrees.
, .
Su - e1': this reading is quite clear in the estampage ,and in the photo
graph;; the plaque itself, which,I have examined, leaves no doubt as to its·
being correct. 'Taking the scene depicted on the plaque .together with the
text, the meaning .of s u - er .is, I think,'clear, and' means: to look with
expectation. I have not 'found any corresponding form in the· modern
ew, '
aoae,
language. 'There is a word.,· sil which means : .to look, look at,
look for;, this may per/laps be the modern ,form (?), with the usual elision
of the vowel u and the .insertion of n to facilitate the pronunciation. ,But I
do not feel quite confident of this equivalence; ,for the .simple forms GQ~,~,
ile w, .ili, are also found. The Skem:, has the word 90,;rail, to look, c§~IC
~Sdl:r.>O;)~SIl:,x:)z§~()JOS~ e3&O~~~qcjcoS9_H the king gave his sword..to the
. pandit Senaka. In 'the,morning; all the four paridits were looking for him.1I The
scene depicted is when the plot' has .failed and Mahosadha has·entered the
. .
. king's room, which the four ministers also entered; unless we take it that
two scenes are represented-one which shows the 'ministers, waiting for·· the
sage at the gate: the swords which they are holding' seem to corroborate
this; the other, the sage in· conversation with the king. , In the next plaque,
without their weapons, they are ~ittingin the royal room, in humble posture,
'e':
~OO?: o~-1.oJ
170, QGOJ'7>::>S,
Mahos bulib fia~ pan-702
Mahosadha sets , free the four persons . -sSg . , 17 ff
The' scene depicts'the ministers being given'as slaves to the.sage, who
sets them free. '
B u1 a I) ~ M.T. ~oo~, baIa1;1, to set free, to let go,'

PART t] TALAING PLAQUES ON. THE ANANDA 59
171. (,)(;;00':>05 8G&':>c eBtU':>~'lo"
.Mabos pindon kiryi-703
Mahosadha sends presents (to the 101 kings)-390. 17 if
Now, Mcihosadha's power became paramount·and he practically governea
the kingdom.. To be ready for any eventuality, he. had the capital strongly
.fortified large water-tanks were built, and vast quantities of ,grains
j
gathered. Along the rampc..tts and between the watch-towers, he dug three
moats-a water-moat, a mud-moat and .a dry moat. He sent men with
valuable presents to the 101 kings at their capitals, bidding them take
service at their courts and rePl?rt regularly on their doings and plans.
Pin d 0 il, to send· = M.T. oooS, pal a il, after elision of the infix
-in
j
the letters I and!d (dh, t, th) are often used interchangeably
j
modern
Talaing offers many ;examplesof this j if. cocoS,. Ia Iam, .and C03S,
Ia d a, m, to quiet, appease. - Medial -nd- regularly becomes t.
.i 72. (,)(Ooo'JOS &i'JC oa,:>oo-l 0 c;
l\'!abos pindolitnak-7 4
0
. J. . .
.Mahosid~asends (his) parrot-390. 24/1
At that· time, Sailkhap~la,. king of Ekabala was assembling a large
army. Mahosadha's spy sent news, adding he could not find out the reas.on
of it. Then the sage sent a parrot to find out the truth and report .
Tila k, a parrot = M.T. OOG~o:S, taile k. For the change of· vowels
cj. k yak and ky ek, in Blagden's Talaing Inscriptions. The form tite k
occurs also 'a few plaques below (No. 181).
73. ~')oo '1c 8~c-'lo~
I
Tnik ran pinriil-7os
.
.
The parrot brings news
The parrot,_ having ascertained what was going on at Ekabala, flew to
all the capitals of India to listen to what was afoot he thus came to
j
Uttarapaiicala, the capital city of Ka~pilla, whose king was .Culani-

60 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 11
~rahmadatta. .Kevatta, the chaplain of·Cii!ani,- took the latter.into the park,
so thaf~nobody might hear their. conversation, and then prevailed upon him
to conquer all India with his mighty army. The parrot, which was perched
.on the tree above the king, heard the conversation, went back to Mahosadha
"and" feported to him' there was danger from .no· other king but CiiIani. In
the plaque, the parrot is s~en on th~ dght·shoulder of the sage..
R aIi, see note on r a Ii (plaque No~ 5). There is no virama on the' n
=
of faIi. Pin ri0, news M.T. ~S, parui0; this word bas another
meaning which has not been noted by Haswell;·· it may often be ~ranslated
by ::tbout, concerning.'.' Ex., ot0e3:l(')§lSad3GoooSo~cqoSeYtc&oo~OOlO~loo5g~­
It
"the wise, thus knowing about (that is, the evil consequences of) the sin of
sfe~ling another's wife··..• ," Dhd. 357. 8;'c~S3~a5oo~05dJ~og:lSogLm'2Soco:­
they conversed about suffering .and happiness," S'.B. 27; c§~~8 . . ..
II
olitt.<£l8028~d.looo~91~~_/lKing Nemi . . . discoursed to the peopl~ about
T~vatirhsa," s.N.
2. .
,
174.,
This plaque, No. 706 of tpe series, is missing.
Q"OO~ ~~ ~t~lol
175.
Maho smaii.smiit-707
Mahosadha is asked by the king' (how Mithila shall be delivered from
its enemies)-.396. 23
It is well he has fortified the capital, for'CiiIani, king of Paficala, has
conquered all India, added the armies 0.£ 10I kings to his own and is now
marching on Mithila. The sage is made aware of all this by his parrot
and his spies; he alone knows~ Vast quantities of food and water. ;are.
1
brought~into the city and .numerous warriors c"alled in. King Ciila1]i ~rrives.
He wants to poison the 101 kings, his vassals i but his plan is deieated by
Mahosadha. Then CiiIani prepares to storm the city. ".the four wiseacres
.hear the- noise, and are nonplussed,· for they..kriow nothing; King Ve~ha,·
too, raves with fright. He sends for the sage arid asks him how.· Mlthila
.can be' freed from hi,S enemy.:. Mahosadha encourages him and un;folds'
part of his plans...

pART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 61
The s in Ma hos has been omitted by inadvertence. As it runs, this
legend might be read Mahosadha questions the king"; but it is,the king
II
who asks the questions and not Mahosadha. The verb smafiis used
cI.No.
in a passive sense; 106.
76. QG~,;)oS 0005 <.9.>~8-'loo.
I
Mahos talpkiw~708
" Mahosadha is planting the flower-4ol·3if
. King Cii!anii had conquered all' the kingdoms of India, except that of
Mithila, where reigned King Vedeha. Kevatta, his'chaplain, knowing the wit
of Mahosadha would defeata:I1 their endeavours, 'tries to dissuade Cii!ani' from
attacking this small kingdom. But €'iilani does not listen and lays .siege to,
the capital. It was hoped to reduce it,by water·fanii~e, for it was thought
the city had its water-supply olltside i in reality, it was well stocked with
water. To discourage the enemy, Mahosadha procured bamboo poles sixty
cubits long, had them split in two, got the knots removed to'allow the flow
'of water,' had them joined again, covered,with leather and smeared with mud.
He sent for th~ soil and lily-seed which had been brought from the
Himalayas by. some, hermits; he planted the seed in the mud on the edge
of ci: tank, placed the bamboo'over the seed, and filled it with water: In
,one night, the seed grew up and flowered, rising a fathom above the top of.
the bamboo. 'The flower with this' extraordinarily long' stalk was sent to
Ciilani, who knew he could not reduce the city by cutting off the water.
T ali to plant =M.T. ~8, J Q iW; an old final , is, in the latter
language, 'either dropped or changed to finalwi if. gil; to be sick = M.T. 8,
gi; 'kintal, surface""':' M.T. ncc;), gati; .toI, cotto.It = M.T.c;cc:>8, to w;
baI, army = M.T. ~8,buiw. T a I translates the Pali Yopeli in the text
(p; 401. 6).
Pkaw,' aflow~r = M.T.~, p·kau>. ~c6, pkau-sau, wrongly
entered in 'Haswell as "a carver in 'r ' , wood," ;,llso:means /I flower"; it IS
~,@,
dften found in writings with the infix pkau·srau.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[VOL. II
177. Q~cy'),)JS 09 (;~')q '?lC-1.
0 (!
.!l:tci.hos ti'nor guil-709
Mahosadha leaves the citY-403. 3I .ff
Mahosadha, surrounded by one thousand warriors, his former playmates,
leaves the city to fight the (/ Battle of the Law" with KevaHa.
=
Ti, for tit, by inadvertence, to go out M.T. Nor, see. plaque 39.
1
78. Q~oo'JoS
0
G'->l:X(05-"-1.00
Mahos pa dhariimayut-7IO
Mahosadha fights the Battle of the- Law-404. 2/1
Many means were resorted to to subdue the city, but"In vain. At last,
.a:
KevaHa said,to Cu]ani, There is way: I shall invite Mahosadha to fight
C(
the Battle of-the Law; "it is .thus: the two sages of the two kings shall
meet at one pla.ce, and the one who salutes the other first shall be
vanquished.._I am the older, so Mahosadha will salute me, for he has never
heard of this b~ttle. And we shall thus conquer the-city." But Mahosadha
had. The sage was accordingly invited. Before leaving the city, as depicted"
on the preceding plaque, he'asks king Vedeba for the gem contorted in
eight places (see plaque 138) in order to conquer Kevattawith it. The
two wise men meet. _Mahosadha offers the' gem to "Kevatta, who takes it,
.but it slips from his hand, and in his greed he stoops down at the other's
feet to get it back. The sage presses him" down to prevent him rising,
saying: Do not, 0 teacher, make obeisance to me, for I am younger
(t
than you!"" Culani with his army, seeing what had happened, fled.
. D ha rh may ut, the HBattle of the Law," as explained above, is the PaIi
dhammayuddha. Owing to whitewash, the legend in the photograph is not
quite clear, but the plaque itself is quite.legible.
79. ~cy')083. ~l8 ~:>e§-1
I 00
Keva . tt.a tlun sman-7II
.
.
Kevatta 'comes and asks (for Mahosadha)-413. 13
Culani- had now been one year in his capital of Uttarapaficala. KevaHa,

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
his chaplain, cannot get over his ignominious defeat. He elaborates a plan
to entice the king of MithiJa and Mahosadha to.. Uttarapancala and do away
with them. This plan consisted in so praising the charms of Princess
PancalacaJ;l<ii, Ciilani's daughter, to the king of Mithila, that the latter would
be mad with desire i .Keva\ta then would go to Mithila and fix a day for
the king to'come ,and fetch the princess. TI~e plan is put into execution.
Kevatta arrives .at Mithila and sees the king, who falls in. his trap. The
king, glad of this apparent reconciliation between himself and Ciilani, desires
his wise man also to be reconciled to KevaHa, and sends' the latter to
Mahosadha for t~at· purpose: But Mahosadha deigns not to speak with
Kevatta, for he is sure he has c'ome' for some foul purpose;. so he closets
himself in his room and bids his men prevent Keva~ta approaching.
Kevatta comes and asks fQr. Mahosadha, but he is prevepted from' seeing'
him.
)80. ~S ~S at 'o~CX)')~-'toJ
Smiil mdac' ku Mahos";"7I2
•
70
The king is angry with Mahosadha-417.
Meanwhile, the king had asked his other four wise men what they
thought of Ciilani's offer of his daughter; they all answe.red he ought to
proceed to Uttarapancala. Mahosadha, after· Kevatta's departure, goes.to .
the palace i the king asks him also his opinion, and the .sage answers, in
strong language, that he.ought· not .to go. The king becomes very angry,
and Mahosadha, always prudent, takes his leave and returns ,home. ' .
M<;la c mea~s lito be angry," and is no doubt a form of 'i.~"pnat,
which appears also as OGar.>;)05, p aJ;l 0 t, ~and a form c)ar.>05,' pa J;la t, is quite '
regularly possiblej Halliday tells me' he, has.found the formgcr;,o?, ma J;lat j
t! and 1J'are phonetically, closely 'rela:t~d, . though I havfj: not met. with
any other example of their being'thus interchanged•.~ The plaque represents'
Mahosadha fleeing before the'king's anger, and' confirms. the meaning of
m<;la c as given above ;" it is confirmed alsQ indir,ectly by the next plaque,
for the instructions to the .parrot come, -in the text, immediately after the'
sage's departure from the king's presence. The three.estampages taken at
different times leaye no doubt as to the reading.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA. [VOL. II
1-81. o"oo':>oS oSa3~ 91'"~oS-'tO?
Mahos kinkan'ku tnek..i..713
Mahosadha instructs his parrot-418. "22
Mahosadha. resolves to find out the true meaning of KevaHa's mission.
So he instructs his parrot to go to Cfilani's palace,~ make friends with his
minah .bird which knows all his secrets, pump her out and come back and
report.
KiIikan, see plaque 62. Tit e k, see plaque 172.
182.~,:>OO (00':>0 ~;>,:>q oo':>c8m'J-l:)q
Tiiak cow nor salika-714
The parrot returns from th~ minah bird-425. I6..ff
The parrot goes as directed, makes love to the minah, and learns from
her that the real intention of Cfilani is to kill the king and. Mahosadha
j
then he leaves the minah, comes back and makes his report.
183. OGoo,)oS~~ ~ W'Jq-lo~
Mahos na s-ar-715
mUD
going~to'
Mahosadha tells (the king) that he is Uttarapancala)-426. 27
Mahosadha, having ascertained .the'true state of' affairs, goes to the
palace .and, knowing the king was bent upon going to Uttarapancala, the
capital -of Cfi}ani, to marry the latter's daughter, evolves a plan in his·mind,
~is
"by which' the king was to get heart's desire, c()me back to Mithila
.happily and' s.ee ~he disgrace of his enemies.' But he must go there first,
and he tells the king of his intention. Leave to go is graciously granted.
The last part of .the legentljn the photograph is difficult. to read
rightly,.some of th~ letters having been somewhat spoiled, and I.was able
to decipper it correctly only~on examining the plaque itself;
Mu n, to tell, inform, apprize, notify, see plaque 42. Na has not here
the meaning of by means of " given it in Haswell but it is equivalent
II j .

'PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ,ON' THE .ANANDA
to ~~,.t na h na, 'a conjunction meaning that" ;It is also equivalent to
It
the Pali atthant. atthtiya, for, for', the, purpose of; for the sake of,"
II
when before nouns, and to the PaH infinitive tum before verbs; the s in
=
s-ar (M.T. i3J, s-a) indicates the future (see plaque 64); na s -ar
aham
that (he) will go"; the Pali has here gacchtimi (= gacchissami)
II .
,
pure, HI will go beforehand," which the "Skem literalIy translates, ~CxS
3;)
~J~J" 'Or s-ar ~ay be' taken as a noun, going," and the legend be
'(l
translated: he tells (the king) for going," thafis, begs (the favour of) ,
U It
going." The following are examples of ~~used,before nouns:-3;oXo8-GOO§~
~ 8~uloS Ci0::r.;)J~lC ~QlJ[S1~--"the theta Assaji •entered the city of Rajagriha
for alms,'" Dhd. 226. ,21. - S§~~:3~§~QJSGCX)JS~_1t the ,mother, for the sak~'
of (her) son ... ,"Dhd. 18. 8. '
184. ~l~ o~~oS--loG
<;;00')8
- ' Lop qUD Pamcil-7I6
(Mahosadha) enters the city of Pancala-428.
I
Mahosadha, with a great army of artisans and labourers, sets forth on
his journey at every 'league he b.uilds: a village, and puts a courtier in charge
j
with instruction to have horses and elephants ready against the king's return,
to ,convey him speedily,to "Mithila. At 'the Ganges~ he-crosses over and,
I~nding,
from 'the place of '" measuring the distances ,says: This is half a
It.
league, here shall be built the great tunnel i i.n this spot' shall be a town for
'our king to· dwell in i and from this place to the palace, that ·is a mile; shall
be the small tunnel." All these 'were to be btliit for the safety of the king.
He thenentered the city. '
=
t~ M.T.~,
Lo p, enter Iup. 'The form lop is also very frequent
.=
in literary Talaing. ,p,arh c a I Uttarapancala.
18.S. qoo~e1 ~ ~S, ~O:>~----l01
'GuHiii ktismin Ciilani~7I7
(Maho~adha) converses with king CUlani-428. f
10
Mahosadha is weII received by Culanii they converse together i ' the
sage tells him of his intention to build a palace,for ~is king, to dwell 10, and
permission to do so is granted.
9

66 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[VOL. II
186. eB~ O1C)l~·-1.:>o
ObOO':)oS
Mahos kindam supan-7I8
Mahosadha fixes the stairs (firmlY)-428. 29
After his conversation with Cii!ani, Mahosadh~, bent upon the perfect
safety of his king, begins.to carry out his plans. Standing at the foot of the
stairs in Cii!ani's palace, he thought that the entrance to the little tunnel
should be there i he had obtained permission to do anything he wanted. He
"Nas afraid the stairs would come down while digging the tunnel. He told
Ciilani he had 'remarked a defect in the stairs, and, under pretence of
remedying it, takes the stairs down, builds a strong wooden platform where
the mouth of the passage was to be, and thereon fixes firmly,the stairs.
Kinda ril, properly lito build /I (see plaque 124), and here,by
extension, to repair, fix," etc. Supan = Pali so/tina, stairs, staircase,
II
ladder.
187. GooOO ~ fOsg,:)80 :§S-l:>@
Ket sni abo' smin-7Ig
(They) take the king's mother!s house-429. 16.1f
King COlani tells Mahosadha that he may build a palace for his king i~
the city i but the sage wishes to build it on the spot he had previously
chosen outside the city. H{)wever, he seems to acquiesce, but tells the king
that the owners of the houses he may choose to pull down will com'e and
make endless complaints j to allow him, therefore, to post. his own men at
proper spots so that no one should 'come into the 'presence of the king and
trouble him. Cii!ani agrees. He chooses first the house of the queen
mother, and sends his men there ordering them to take possession and do as
if ,they were about to puu it d9wn. The queen-mother is angered, but
IS prevented from complaining to the king i she gives a heavy bribe to be
left in peace, and her silence is thus secured, being afraid of the ridicule of
paying heavily to stay in her own house.

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
.I 88. ro(r:x~ ~ '000000-1 JC
Ket sid Kewat-72o
(Mahosadha) takes Keva11a's hou!?e-430' 15 if
Keva1ta is treated similarly to the queen, and has also to pay a
hundred thousand pieces.
I 89. (,,)'Ooo':>~ <08-2,:>8 ~ ~C-l J ::>
Mahos slop sid smin-72I
Mahosadha enters the king's house-430.
20
He thus makes a semblance of seizing many houses in all quarters of
the city, and receives a bribe at each, for the people th·ought all this was
taking place by royal order. Then he- returns to Cu!ani's palace.
=
S lop, to enter lop with prefix s (vide plaque 64).
190. QGoo,:>05 d3~ fJ(,,)':>C-1.J J
Mahos kir uman-722
Mahosadha digs the tunnel-431.
I
7If
Mahosadha tells the king that the citizens are ready enough to give up
their houses, but when they are·about to be demolished they are stricken
with griefi he does not want to be the cause of such legitimate grief. And
he goes on to say it would be better to build the· palace outside the city,
and that he has found a convenient spot. The king agrees. That no one
might see what was going on, he asks the king to forbid all citizens to go
near that spot, for, says he, there might be a quarrel i the king again agrees.
Then Mahosadha goes to the .chosen spot and sets about building the great
tUl?-nel for his king's flight. One entrance to the tunnel was on the Ganges i
on the other side of which he built a large.village, with elephants and horses
in readiness i the other entrance was in the city itself well dissimulated.

68 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANIC'A [VOL. U
==
K ir, to,dig' M.T. e:§l, kwuiw; some words with the infix 'W, which
properly 'forms nouns, are used as verbs j it must be ,remembered that, ,in
Man, the distinction. between noun and verb is,to a 'great extent, vague
and indefinite, the same word beirig either the one or the other. The old
r
word ki would regularly give a modern.form *d.l, ,kui w (if.'j in == M.T~
~'lS, j uin tin ...;. ~~, t uin, ' etc.), ,which, if extant, has not yet been
j,
found: Thereis, however; the form wi~h the infix 'lV, e:§G k wuiwj ,a spade
(Schmid;t 68. 8 i 72.3), also found written ca,; 'twuiw, ,which is -again, used
j
as a verb: ~oSC03;)JS~ 3:l:xXl::l9 cqd.>CO§~~I 41.S.,ao§ ~::l 0ltt:J~~ g~~m oo~l~l~
qjlS~05-Cl owing to having been seven days with but littie ,food, at that
moment, fierce gases arose within. her stomach -which dUK (tl1at is, cut,
slashed) her hearV" Dhd. 160.; 2; ~~lCQt&12oScal~OOd.l31.S. -,11 tore and.'dug out
both his eyes .and gave them in alrris," Dhd. 33.26: .e:§lmeans (1) to dig,
dig into, dig outi hence, (2) to stir, disturb, ana (3) to slash, cut i literally
=
to spade. Here are a few examples of nouns. in 'ZD, used. again.as
verbs: ~8Q66~l~~-' the treasure which is at'the rising ofthe sun (i.e. to
II II
the easti the. Pali being suriyuggamane nidM), S.l. i S~c}~LS-"as the sun
was rising," S.M. i from ~S, t uin, to rise;. ascend. oaLoo, t wut, weaving i
to weave, S.B.,irom ~, tut, ,to weave, N.V.K. Ii:. 7 i there, is also 'C1illoS,
a
t mu t, weaving, N.V.K. II. lb. GOllm~lo, sw'ek j wuiw, quarrel i to
quarrel, A.V. 60; from cooo05~o, sek j uiw.
Uman is the Paliummagga, a tunnel i ,there are ·two pther 'variants,
uman and u mman.
191.
ogcBa~RtCCYi
000':>05-1.)
~
Waddhaki jin dluil ku Mahas-723
The shipwrights make, over the ships to Mahosadha-432. 27
It will be remembered that, before setting out from Mithila, Mahosadha
gave orders for ships to be built. Three hundred shipwrights having
btlUtthree hundred ships and loaded them, brought them down and made
them .over to the sage.
Ma has ,is a mistake forM a h0 s.

TALAINGPLAQUES ON TH~ ANANDA
PART I)
== J
Waddha ki the Pali vaddnaki, carpenter. in, .to give, give
over, grant, confer = ~LT.· fl.t iuin; with: this word compare ~i,
phyuin, to hand. over, deliver - o~i; pa's:ui ri, ibid. The aspirate ~,
=
phy, is often the result of 0, P + 00" s,' e.l' qjO = , pIi yaw, to put down
0000, pas a W qJLo, p.hYuil, to give to drink 0Clio.; <joS; p hy uik, to
j =
render or make·happy o~05, pas u.j k.- Ct. plaque 33.··..
I 92.
Q,"oo,)~'8,"~,)c.,"08-1J9
Mahos pindoil wen-724
Maliosadha sends (the boa.ts) o'ut of the waY-432. 30
Then the sage, not wishing in any way to arouse suspicion, sends the
shipwrights to put the boats away in a secluded place.
, .
WeIi, to avoid, esfhew, keep ouf of the. way j see plaque 163.
193.. Q~<X),)~ olc~S-'lJ~'
wan
.Mahos smili-725
Mahosadha~t?esout,to, meet the king (V~deha)~433' 18
or
The new city for' the use his king, the big and the small tunnels and
everything else being ready;,Mahosadhagoes to meet King Vedeha. 'who has
arrived at the Ganges. .
W aIi, to go out to meet, the. fuller forms being. olcale, waildu6
n. 1
olo3lco21c, wail duIi· t 1u
I 94. ~c ~')~ QfGa:no~-1 JG
Smm smafi Mahos;;..;.726
The king (Vedeha) asks Mahosadha-442. gff
He ·takes King Vedehato the newly built city..' King Cfi}ani agrees to
giye his daughter. to Ved~hathis.very:~ayi but in reality he sends word to
CJJTay his 'niighty legions in order to.'surround- Vedeha and kill him.
14eanwhile, Mah,?sadha has tricked Cfilani's. ":lather, his consort,' son and

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. 11
daughter through the tunnel into a safe place. Vede'ha, impatient with the
apparent delay of the princess's arrival, looks out of a window, and is
terrified at the sight of Cii!ani's innumerable army surrounding the city. He
naturally thinks this is due to a lack of prudence on'the part of Mahosadha.
He first asks his four wise men how they could get him out of this dangeri
they are at a loss. Then, lamenting, he asks Mahosadha, who answers
there is nothing to fear.
195. qt?~ ~(.)8 "i r§c 98g.-1.J1.
Pub~r umail ku smiil Widil.!-727
He shows the tunnel to King Vedeha-433. 33 tf
Vedeha was comforted. Mahosadha ordered the door of the tunnel to
be thrown open, when its magnificence appeared in a blaze of light. The
king and the ministers enter the iunneI.
Pub a r, to show, exhibit puis a variant of the causal prefix p a, often
j
Vj. = ~q, GOO::lS~Il~G~~
written ba su sa, page 23), M.T. is babuiwj
~05~co052l01G0305o:>a:5~qote3g_11\,:hen the young princes who were clever in
wrestling came out and showed the king- a fight," Dhc. 150. 17 ~lG~o~~::l
j
§¥d.l'lI~lG~§'§~~05'lllc;~18OJaSe;;li~:o§lSo:}-" the Bodhisatta -having shown to
the people that the extremity (of the pole) which sank first (in the water)
was the root, and the one which sank after, the tip, ... ,"S.M. II;
~~88§cr~gG~OGcoa3~qe3g_"this brahmin to-day has sho,"n him (the snake)
to the people and made him dance," S.B. 19.
196. 0805 (Oto£t ~BC-1. J()
Tit nor ummail-728
(Vedeha) comes out from the tunnei-445. - ~
I
\Vhen, through the tunnel, the king and his ministers come to the place
where Ciijani's family are kept, the latter shriek in fear. Ciilani hears and is
puzzled, but keeps quiet for_fear of being laughed at at the very thought his
family were prisoners. Mahosadha sets Princess Paficalaca:t;l9i upon a heap of
treasure, sprinkles her according to the ceremonial of marriage and makes

TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
P-ART 1]
her over to the king as one of his queens. The place they were in was
near the Ganges. The ships are brought, and Vedeha, coming forth from the
tunnel, goes aboard ship taking his new queen,'with her mother and brother
and Cfilani's queen, as prisoners. Mahosadha remains behind to bring back
intact his master's army.
197. d3~m~ <Xl c§& 8805-1)0
Kinkan ku smiil Widih-728
(Mahosadha) instructs King Vedeha
As the king is going to embark, the sage instructs him, asking him to
treat properly his hostages.
This and, the preceding plaque again bear the same number.
198. qoo')t§ "1 4jlOO~-1 J @
Ian
Gu ku' Ciilani-729
(Mahosadha) converses with (king) Cfilani-451. 5.ff
In due course, Vedeha arrives at Mithila, his capital. The sage then
goes back to the tunnel, buries his sword in the sand 'at the door and enters
the city, where he. takes a much·needed rest. At dawn, Cfilani orders his
armies to approach the city and utters dreadful threats to awe Vedeha. But
Mahosadha sho!\'s himself, magnifice~tly adorned,-and, in conversation with
him, makes COlanI know that his plans have been foiled.
l)';)')q,-
I 99. qj l8 (;cnoS q01]'Jet3 '1 ~ 0
Pyup boy gnakyak ar-730
(Mahosadha) shows (efi!ani) the way (his) queen is gone-4s6. 17
Cfilani becomes furious, and _orders the sage lobe put to death
j
Mahosadha points out to him that any harm which befalls him will also
befall his wife, mother and son to the astonished king the sage reveals
j
that they are in the hands of Vedeha. Then in safety.on th~ upper
storey of the house, Mahosadha points.out, in a number of stanzas, the

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
way the beautiful queen is gone i thus while praising the beauty of tbe queen
and making the king long for her, preventing him effectually from ordering
any violence to be done to hirriself,'through fear of the possible revenge
which might be wreaked on his' wife.
P y uIi translates. the Pali (VI. 456. 17) iic£kkhana, from iic£kkhati, to
=
show Mod. T. ~lS, pfi uIi.
.Bo Y = M.T. ~, b wai; this word is used in many senses, to form
adverbs and adverbial expressions, and as a preposition with the meanings .of:
by, to, tow~rds, from, as, about; in .this plaque it is indicative of direction:
boyar, the way she went, and renders the Pali (VI. 456. 19)' z'to gatii it
l'
is also used in M.T. to form adverbs of direction: ~30:, against, ~05d3005ClO:>
~30:~:>-"throwing dust against the wind," .Dhd. 172. 27 i ~QGoo:>c;'F~­
straight or directly towards." The'·following are a few examples of its
Cl
uses: g~:>93e3:Qd3:);)'l-"people know' me as HN~rada/' S.l. 70 i ~~g8Cco8-.
II by us it was heard .. "," S.B. I i ~Gco:>CY.l~ola:>:>·q0e30--" by his common
appellation," Dhd. 29. 1i ~(J;;)cXl0-5-"of.one's own. accord," 'Dhd. 578. 20 i
~ooq:_lCin detail. in full, z'n extenso," S.B'. 24 i ~oq _'f righteously," Sudh. 7.
4 i ~e05, suitable, fit, proper" (from 605, "to follow"), A.V; :::: anukulya "
U
~~Ia5-u in circumference,"- Dhd. 60. 11, ind ~any others .not recorded in
Haswell. The forms e~, e~, ba bwai, b'abai, are also frequently.found i
ex., e~ Cl0j38_ lC in due course, in regular ~rder,'" Sudh.24. 25;,Ja. VI, 179.
6 = anupubbena i e~o8--U righteous! righteously," Dhd.236. 16. It is also
found reduplic~ted: ~~~0j38_Cf in due 'course."
2?O. ~oo$ ~~ ~G8-i?o
, '.Ciilani.bar umail-731. .
(King) Culani looks at the tunneI-459.. if
I
'.When Mahosadha having thus praised his queen to CUlani, the latt~r
longs for her and his children and thin~s:. (( The sage alone can give me
back wife and children," the sage tells' the king that his mother, wife and
son will .be given .back to him, the only condition ishi~ (Mahosad.ha's)
return. The king now wonders how it is that, the new city being closely
invested, his family' could have been taken away from his own palace' without

PART I) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 73
anybody having been aware of it. Mahosadha mentions the tunnels, and
shows them to him.
Bar, to look, look at = M.T. l!, b u i w.
201. S@)05 B~oo05 <Xl ~8-1~ J
Bi~at dirhat ku smin-732
(Mahosadha) measures strength with the king-460. ff
J0
Mahosadha shows the king the marvels of the tunnel, its one hundred
and one bed chambers, etc~ j there was 2. mechanism by which the door of
one being opene.d, an opened, or being closed, all- closed. Hailing visited the
tunnel, the king comes out, and immediately the sage-had all the doors
closed, shutting in all the -king's attendants. Then Mahosadha takes the
.......
sword he had the day before hidden in the sand at.the gate, leaps eighteen
cubits in the air and, seizing the king's arm: Whose, Sire, are all the
II
kingdoms of India?" "They are yours, my dear sirI . Do spare me I"
Then the sage comforts the king, and both strike up a sincere friendship.
Bit> a t, see plaque 9 i di r hat, see plaque 29.
~8 oi d3~oo')-1.~?
202.. qGl'J8
Smhi klarii 'pujaw kirya-733
The hundred kings offpr ornaments (to Mahosadha)-461. 17
Mahosadha opens the tunnel's door, and the one hundred and one kings
c0!I1e out. They address the sage: Wise sir, you have saved our life had
lC j
we' stayed in a little longer we would have d~ed." The .sage explains this
was not the first time, he had ,already done so when he had -all the
vessels in which was poisoned dfin'k broken, and by which COlan!, on the
advice of KevaHa, had tried to do away with them. COlan! begs pardon of
the kings, which they gladly grant, and they, full of gratitude, present, many
ornaments to the sage.
=
P ujaw, for pOjaw M.T. ~~" pOi au, to offer or present something
in token of homage or honour or worship j- Pali, pilja.
10

EPIGRAPHIA BIR-MANICA [VOL. II·
74
2°3. ~S q'i~ o(ooo')05-1?9
Smhi pumun Mahos~734
The king invites,Mahosadha (to stay at. his court)-461. 25
The king, desirous of keeping such an eminent man at' his· court,.offers
the sage much honour and wealth if he consents not to go back to. Vedeha.
Mahosadha thankfully declines. ,
P u mun, to invite; beg, entreat; I'am not sure of the:exact modem
Talaing for this word i but.,perhaps the wordoQS, ga'IIi'an, to invite; whicb
I have not yet found in the literature but which is colloquial, may be com
n~
,pared with it. There··is a word, mu met with several times in, these
inform~app'rize
.plaques with the meaning: to teU,. (see _plaque 42), which
means also to entreat" in plaque iU3,; .P urn uIi' is no doubt related,to it~
II
204. OGoo,:>oS ~o'J5 ~L~1.?'
Mahos cow C;iuii-735
Mahosadha.returns to the ci~y'(of Mit~i1a)-463. 11
·10
~end mother~
Mahosadha promises the king to back immediately his his
queen and his son,and returns· to Mithila.. with,great wealth. .
O~OO'X>S 8it~~. ~o')~'l.yG
205.
.Mahospindoii cO-736 .
-
Mahosadha sends.bac~ (Colan,l , 's famiIY)-:-465.· 4 tJ
He arrives at Mithila and is received 'amidst great rejoicings; then he
tells King Vedeha it .is t.ime to send back the three hostages. They are'
accordingly sent- back. .Culanlj learning of .the great .hospitality. and'honour
that had been shown. them, sends V~deha a rich present, and both kings
become'great (riends. ..
=
Co, for cow,to return M.T. (), c au.
Oia~ (OC1Y.)~ ~S 8C;3c£-'l~1.
, '206
. Kumin kon smiii Wideh~737
They enthrone the son of King.Vedeha-466. 19If
Pancalaca\lQi, the daughter of Colan!, was much loved of Kl.Dg Vedeha~
She bore him. a' son i in his tenth' year the king died. The sage, raising

PART I]. . TALAING PLAQUES ON THE .ANANDA ,75
over him a white umbrella, instals.the young prince on the throne, and be'gs
leave to'.visit the young king's gra:ndfather Culani. .
25. '
if.
Ku min, plaque
20.7. o~Sl,S ~~ Q~oo':)oS-1~o
.Paribbac smaii Mahos-738
A .female ascetic asks Mahosadha (by gestures, why he does not
become an ascetic)-467.
21
Culani receives him with great pomp, and the sage takes service under
him according to a former promise. The queen, ,however, disliked Mahosadha .
owing to his 4aving separated her from the king ten years before, and she
sets some of her ladies to watch him closely in order to catch hiin tripping
.and.lose him in the esteem of the king. . Now, 2 female·ascetic regularly
'took her: mbals at the palace; snehadnever seen 'Mahosadha, but h~d heard
of his wisdom he, likewise, had ,never,seen her" but knew she' came to the
j
,the·collrty~raof
,palace. One day thermet:in the palace. He saluted her.
'Then, to test his cleverness, she asked him,questionS' by signs: Does the
II
king treat yo~ well?" No, the king is very tight-fisted."· Then· she puts,
If
her .. hand to her head, showing the peculiar coiffure ,of ascetics, meaning
" If'you are displeased, why·do you not become· an 'ascetic? "-and' the
sage.answers by showing his stomach, meaning-" It is impossible, because
I' have many to suppor~.JJ , ',
Pari bbac = Pali paribb4j"'~4, a female ascetic.
208.oGt~,:)~ ~':)e1 o£\g')S-1.~·<!
Mahossriliii paribbac-739
Mahosadhaasks the femal~ascetic(to fi~d out the king's mind)-46g. 6 f1
The queen's ladies have seen the strange' conversation and, misinter-
preting it, report to-the king that,:Mahosadha and the ascetic are plotting to
,t~ke his life. The king·questions the ascetic, w40 explains the true meaning
of the signs, and Culani, delighted:, appoints Mahosad,ha generalissimo. Maho
,sadha, .. surprisedat the honour, reflects that kings o(tendo such things when
they intend slaying one i~l order to knowhow things stand, he pays hel
j SOl
a visit and' asks herlo find out)or hi,m the'king's'mind;· She does sowitl
of
great clevernes,s, and finds (lui,"that the king" is really very fond Mahosadha.
.
, '

t
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA VOL. tJ
209. ~: Q ~ 8o-:>E\ Q G~-:>q-'l.90
Sa~ rna kya bicar .rna Inor-740
The persons who have lost the case salute reverentially (Mahosadha)
Although this plaque bears the number 740, it is certainly in the wrong
place i it ought to have come after one of the numerous cases tried by
Mahosadha in the earlier part of this story. As, however, at the end of all
these cases, the two parties make obeisance to the sage, it is impossible to
say to which of these this plaque belongs.
K ya = M·,T" to lose; the if, subscript under I in 1Ii 0 r is invisible
in the photogr~ph,but quite legible on the· plaque.
VI.~ K Ii AND A H A. LA· J A T AKA.
• •
This story is popularly known in· Burma as Can da k u mara, from
the name of the' hero. Candakumara is the son of the king of Benares
and is viceroy. The brahmin Kha~c;lahala is the royal chaplain, he is also a
judge partial and corrupt. A suitor, dissatisfied with Kha~c;lahala's verdict,
complains to the viceroy Candakumaradecides . the case most cleverly
j ..
and to the satisfaction of the people, and the king appoints him judge.
The brahmin resolves to take revenge. on .Cahdakumara.· One morning, in
his sleep, the king·seesthesplendours of t.he heaven of the Thirty-three
Gods, and wishing.to go there, he asks. his chaplain the way thereto.
Kha~c;lahala answers the only .way was to sacrifice his q~e~ns and his
children. The foolish king orders the sacrifice. After many. touching scenes,
Sakka rescues Candakumara and the other innocent victims. .
210•.
PI01Q?Q oo-:>o8o-:)~-1.90
Candakurnar taw bicar-741
Candakumara is deciding the case-13I. 2I
·Khal}c;lahala, wicked cnaplain and false judge, having decided a case
wrongly, the wronged suitor complains to Candakumara the 1atter takes him
j
to the court, tries tnecase. and gives an equitable verdict, to the loud
applause of the people.

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
~S §~ 8o'J~~19J
211.
Smiil or bicir-742
The king causes him to try (cases) or
(The king appoints Candakumara as judge)-131. 27
Hearing the loud noise, the king enquires what it means, and learning
of his son's' success at law, gives him the office of judge and tells him that,
henceforth, he is to investigate all suits.
Or, for this' word see No. 50, in which the present plaque is discussed.
Bi car here is used as'a verb: to investigate cases, to judge.
'18 ~l8 0Mo:tQ'J~-.19~
212.
Ran Uun, Candakumir-743
They bring Candakumara (to the king)-134.
2'1
The king proclaims he has decided, in order to gain heaven, to sacrifice
his children and his wives. He then orders his .men to bring Candakumara
and his four brothers., They first bring "the prince to the king and then the
others, and make them sit together.
R aIi t IuIi, to bring; for this.word see under raIi in plaque 5. The
a
plaque shows the king in pavilion; the figure in the upper row, on the
right, near·the pavilion, is Candakumarai he is arguing'with the king i the
four others are his brothers.
13. 0MC1.{Q';)~'i~-'l99
2
Candakumir mun-744
Candakumara entreats (his. father)-138. 8 ff
Candakumai'a's sisters and the queens are also brought before the king.
The people immediately go. to the king's father and .mother, who come to
remonstra.te with their son, but in vain. Then Candakumara, understanding
.that he alone is the object of Kha\lQahala's hatred, and that all the others
have been dragged in merely to hide his' real purpose and not to rouse
suspicion, entreats his father.to ·spare their Jives.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANlCA
[VOL. 11
M un, to entreat, beg, supplicate, answers to the Pali yacati. (p.
138. if.
8); pumun, plaque 203. - Mun has already been'met with the
meaning-to inform, tell, apprize; see plaque 42. In the plaque, the figure
behind,Candakumara represents all the other persons. '.
214. OM~Q~q eBa3~-19~
Candakumar kin~an-745 .
Candakumara bids (his wives to implore t~e king)-142. 18 ff
The king,.deeply moved, renounces .his sacrifice and sets free all his
family. But Khal}~ahala, hearing of this, reproaches the king with his
weakness, and the poor victims are again captured the same thing happens
j
once again, and Candakumara, unable to. mollify the king, bids his wives to
implore'him in their turn.
K iitka n; to instruct, give directions, bid; see plaque 62. Oneonly of
the wives is represented in the' plaque, which is not numbered, probably by
inadvertence, for there is room enough to do so.
2
I.S.·G§18 @8 ooS-1.9G
Omon jrail yac-746
Candakumara is near the sacrificial pit~154. if
2I
All the supplications of the seve(al metpbers of his family could not,
owing to the wicked brahmin's influ~nce~ deter the king from his purpose.
The prince is taken to the sacrificial pit; all the victims. following. Canda,
his principal queen, was..by his side weepi~g. All the' preparations being
finished, the prince was brought .and' placed near the sacrificial pit with his
head bent forward. Khat;l~ahala raised the sword saying, "Now will [ cut
his neck!"
The inscription on the phot0graph is difficult to read, but it is quite
clear on the plaque and the~'esta,mpage. D m0 it = M.T. ~c, d mao, ~o
dwP.lI, remain in a place i J rail = M.T. ciG9C, jare il, prese!1ce, in the
presence of, near. The nimbus round the head of Candakumara indicates he'
is the future B~ha; between him and Khat;l~ahala is seen the sacrificial
fire"; the woman 6n the left is Queen- Canda,·Candakumara's chief queen.

PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 79
~g 8~ m~oo':)aS-191
216.
i'1ap,khil' Ka~4ahil-'147
The people rush at KhaI)gahala (to kill him)-155.'22
At that moment, Queen' Canda makes a,solemn act, of asseveration.
'Hearing it, Sakka comes down from, the heavens _brandishing a blazing mass
of iron,and frightens the king and his ministers, who immediately'set all ,the
victims free. The people rush at KhaJ;l4ahala with stones, sticks, etc., and
kill him. '
=-
1\1aQ, here = the people, see plaque 112. K h.it modem colloquial
~, k h:u iw, not in Haswell's, which mean's, to rush at, in anger: S~otlcc:oa5
3;>§SaOr~1the fellow (s) who rushed at me_~o strike me'is this fellow." ,I
,have not yet found this-word in literary Talaing. The figure seated on the
right is Candakumara between him and the others is the sacrificial fire.
j
217.OtB~ o~CY.(o'),q-'190
'Kumin, Candakumir-'748
, Enthroning Candakumara
Having killed Khal)Qahala the people made the king an outcast, and
forbade him ever to enter the city. All the requisites for coronation were
Candaku~nara
brought and was anointed king.Candakumara is seated under
the royal white umbrella.j in front is a brahmin pouring the lustral water
from a conch.
218. ()~ci(o':)q oS$' ~~~1.9(!
Candakumar tin swar-749
Gandakumara aSCends to,heaven-157. -i6
After a righteous' reign, Candakumara went to heaven
Tin, to ascend, see plaque 51 j Swar, see' plaque t 10.

80 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 11
VII.- BH 0 RID A T T A· JAT AKA.
The king of Benares, perceiving the growing might of his son, who is
the vi~eroy, banishes him. The prince becomes an ascetic he is seduced
j
by a Naga-woman and has two children by her, a boy and a girl. In course
of time he becomes king and his daughter is married to DhataraHha, the
king of the Nagas, to whom she bears four sons, one being Bhuridatta, the
future Buddha. Bhuridatta is caught.by a snake-charmer, who takes him
trom place to place making him dance before the people one of his
j
brothers arid his sister, the latter taking the form of a frog, go about looking
for him and at last rescue him after many incidents.
2
19. ocf3ooS O1l£\3C)'S-l~o
Patisan Bhiiridat-750
Conception of Bhuridatta-167. 30
=
Patisan; for patisa n patisandhi, conception.
Bq305 ~£\9q5-1'O
220.
Dirdas Bhiiridat-75I
Birth of Bhuridat-I67.. 30
=
Dirdas M.T. ooa\da da h, the being born, the entering into a new
state of existence, from the rootd'as (M.T. d.ah), to be, to become.
CX(8~~£\3o:S-.1nJ
221.
Kumin Bhiiridat-752
Enthroning Bhuridatta-y68. 17
When Bhuridatta attained the age of discretion, his father DhataraHha
gave him a kingdom his three brothers similarly each received one. The
j
plaque is· not numbered.
222. Plaque No. 753 is missing.

PAkT I] TALAING PLAQUES· ON THE ANANDA 81
')e
~23. Oll£\ 005 ~o.:>'): c4
0
g]~--'l ~9
Bhiiridat so~ summai'i In-754
Bhuridatta answers Indra's question
Bhiiridatta goes to the world of gods to wait upon Indra the latter was
j
propounding a question which no god could answer Bhuridatta alone can
j ,
answer it.
.S 01}., to answer, a- variant of soh (plaque 152).. S uril ma ii, a ques
_tion; variants are su m'anand S1 rhm a ii, from sman, to ask, question i
the M.T. sman is both a verb and a noun:,::g::>S~~~~ qlS~5§_"a question
arose in the Naga-city," S.B. 1I. I n, generally I n, the god Indra.
224.-0ll~305 08 0305 00$ :ef!~-1.~~
Bhuridat mail sil han udya-755
Bhuridatta observes the silas in the garden-I6g.
J J
Having seen· the splendours of the heaven of the god,s, Bhfiridatta, dis
gusted with his present existence as a naga, resolves,to gain heaven by·the
fulfilment of the'observances (sila) and by fast i he informs his parents of his
intention they agree, provided he practises hjs religious exercises within the
j
Naga realm, owing to the many dangers tonagas outside; he then keeps the
uposatha fast in the gardens.
S i I, the Buddhist precepts, Pali 'sf/a, M.T. d', s i. Han, in, -see
plaque ~8 u dya, garden, see plaque 143. Following strictly the text this
j .
plaque should have come after the next. Unnumbered. . .
'is
225. 01$ sg ~')~ oS09oS-"~G
man
Mun pin aba s-ar siI-7S6
(Bhurjdatta) asks his father leave to go and observe the silas-I69' 6
See the explanations under .No. 224, before which this plaque should
have come.
Aba, father, see Nos. 23, 33 S·a r, will go, see No. 183. M un pan
j
meani~g,
is a compound verb to beg leave'respectfully"; m un has been
/I
II

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 11
seen already, plaques 42, 213 i pan means "to ask leave or permission to
do something"i with this may ·be compared the Burmese oS, pan i pan
having exactly the same meaning, and the full expression, mun pan, to
the Burmese oS§:>', pan kras. Pan, which is still colloquial, is often
used in the expression pan a k ho'il, to ask leave (akh0 Ii) i cf Burmese
(3;)~QoS, a k hwail pan i we find also the expression ._(3;):>oSolS, a t pa n,at
=
A.V., p. 33- under ayacana = ~Q3;)JoSolS::QGQlc asking permission. This
plaque is not numbered.
2 26. ~£\oo:SC£a3~ 0'.{ c£~~-1.~1.
Bhfiridat kii1kan ku Idndar-757
Bhiiridatta instructs his wife-I.69' 15 If
But, as he is observing the fast, the Naga maidens attend upon him
with music and song, disturbing him i so he resolves to go elsewhere. In
the fear of his parents preventing him doing so, he tells them nothing j but
calling his wife, he gives her some instructions-" I will go to the world of
men," says he, there, on the bank of the ]umna, is a banyan tree and near
II
it an ant-hill i on the ant-hill shall I coil myself and observe the fast. When
the night is over, at dawn, send .your women with music, -to take me back
to the Naga world." Thus, every day at dawn, did the Naga maidens fetch
him from the, haunts;?f men, .for a long time. -
Kin ka0, see plaque 62. Kin dar, see plaque 132. Plaque unnum
bered.
~~3o-S qoo~ ~ q~:-1.~o
227.
Bhuridat guUifi ku burhnal}-758
BhOridatta converses with the brahmin-171. fI
I
At that time, near Benares, there lived a brahmin hunter. One day,
with his son Somaclatta he arrives near the ant-hill where Bhiiridatta observed
a
his fast. He kills deer, but as it is already evening, father and son go, up
in the banyan tree. Early next morning, the brahmin hears the Naga
maidens sing to the Naga prin~e who has assumed the human form. The
brahmin asks him who he is, and Bhuridatta tells him.

t?ART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
=
BurtJ nab, a brahmin M..T. 8i:, bam nab i there is also another
modern form, ~r~ bnal}, not in Haswell: <Xl:>co§ Go:>8ooffij~ 0C'Xt~IG~05~05'l­
at that time, the' Bodhisatta was reborn in an exalted brahmin family, Dhd.
(f
60. 27 j ~,@o88So8 ~6otlB"1-" the brahmin woman heard the Law and came
back (home)," Dhd. 95. 15. There is another old variant, b imnab,
plaques a75, 309., Plaque unnumbered.
0il~:;405GcO':)8 ~':)oc;o::>':)8-1~ ~
,228.
Bhuridat lop n~gabhow-759
Bhuridatta enters theNa~a world-172. 23
But Bhuridatta now reflects..,..." This brahmin, who looks cruel and fi~rce,
might betray me to a snake-charmer, and thus .prevent my observance of the
fast"; so he promises him great honour and wealth and induces him to
dwell in the Naga country, for, during his sojourn there, there would be no
danger' of his betraying him. The brahmin accepts, and Bhuridatta, taking'
father and son, enters into the Naga world.
Bh w, a d\velling; hence, region, world = M.T. ~J bh au, from Pali
0
bhavaTta, bhuvana" A.V~ 13, adhobhuvana = c(l8~:>o~u
Lop, to enter = M.T. 9 8, Iup. Plaque unnumbered.
cBcS c£~8~ ~ ~~g-l
229. Go
Kil kirmin ku bumnab.-760
(Bhuridatta) confers regal.glory on th~ brahmin-172. 24
In the Naga world; :Bhuridatta confers on tn.e brahmin and his son all
the enjoyment and splendour of a'regal state, so as to' keep them away
from the haunts of men. Meanwhile, he goes as usual to the ant·hill to
perform his religious exercises.
K i I, to'confer. see plaque 49. K ir min, royalty, regal state; here is
not to be ,taken in the strict sense of sovereignty," but in ,that of the
II
enjoyment, magnificence, 'splendour, wea.lth, etc., belonging to royalty, whether
earthly or divin~. The Pali has (172. 24) d£bbasampattim j the Burmese
version transla.tes this by ..oooe§~BS, nat cafit!cini= sampatti. The Talaing
version has: G~:>SoooStt~d.lq$OO)$ oxxxx»xi a0e:tt8~I-u the Bodhisatta conferred

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. It
upon the brahmin wealth and honour," in which, ~$OO)S OOo::Do05 is the
equivalent of sampatti. K ir min corresponds to the M.T. ~~, k min,
which means government,rule, regal state, sovereigntY"j also f'kingdom,
CI
, country." Cf. kzmdn, plaque 25. The inscription is somewhat spoiled j the
virama o_n the r aI?,d 1Z of~ k irmin is no,more visible, as well as the left
hand half of the l1i. Plaque unnumbered.
ot~305 09~,QaB ~ ~~:-1.
230. Go
Bhiiridat kit, ma9i,ku bumnal}-7~1
Bhuridatta gives the jewel to the brahmin-I·7S. 6I
, After a stay of a year in the Naga world, the brahmin gets tired, and
wants to go back to see his wife arid friends. Bhuridatta tries in vain to
keep him back. At last, so' that, through greed, the' brahmin may not
show his place of retirement on the ant-hill to a snake-charmer, he gives'
him a jewel which grants all one's wishes, and promises him more 'wealth
whenever he chooses to come and see him. 'The brahmin, however, desiring
to,become also ah ascetic, does not accept 'the gem. Plaque unnumbered.
23I.3:lcQO~oS 23':>S ~~:;m-"l G.J
Alambay fiae Bhiiridat-762
Alambayana sees Bhuridatta-184.
I .,..
Alambayana, a poor brahmin full of debts, runs away from Benares and
lives with an ascetic to whom he renders many little services. The ascetic,
well ,pleased, gives him spell which renders the: most ~eadly snakes
3·
inoffensive. Alambayanagoes on his way 'repeating the spell, and, thus
arrives on the bank of the Jumna. A thousand Naga youths who waited on
Bhuridatta had brought out from the Naga regions the magnificent gem
granting all desires, and had placed it on a mound of sand. As Alambayana
reaches this spot reciting his'spell, the Nagas run away terrified, forgetting
the gem, and he picks it up and goes on his way. He is met by the
.brahmin and his son who were ahunting. The brahmin' at ionce recognizes
the gem, and, in 'order to possess himself of it, .tries to convince the other
that it is very unlucky j but in vain. At last, he shows'to him Bhuridatta

TALAiNGPLAQUES ON THE' ANANDA
coiled'on his ant-hill. Bhiiridattasees Alambayana, now snake-charmer by
means orhis spell, and, resolves not to defend himself, whatever the latter
does to him. Alambayana seizes Bhiiridatta.' The brahmin hurrter asks
again for the gem, which Alambayana gives him, not knowing --its value.
But the gem falls down, and through the ground goes back to the Naga
world.
a
. A1 mbay, an abbreviation of .A.lamhayana; it is· now written ~c;O~"
a1a mbaa i, and means a snake-charmer"; the Burmese have also the
U
~,,?~05, &
same word, aIa mbay, with the same meaning.' a c, see plaque
6.. Plaque unnumbered.
232. 3;)o5o-:>oS GlcrS ~~305-1. G?
Alambiy jak Bhiirldat-763
Alambayanapulls Bhiiridatta_ (by the tail)-.18S. 3
Alambayana anoints 'himself with divine 'drugs, recites the spell, goes
up to Bhuridatta and pulls him by the tail he then opens his mouth, spits
j
into it a drug he has chewed, spreads hini on the ground and pounds him,
breaking his bones. Through all these sufferings ahiiridatta keeps his
temper. Alambayana puts him in a basket he has prepared, and goes
away.
J a k = M.T., to pull. The photograph shows Bhiiridatta coiled round
the ant-hill and the snake-charmer pulling him., ~Iaque unnumbered.
233.· ~a5o-:;oS 'l~oo:' ~E\305-~1. G9
Alambiy ralep Bh[fi]ridat-764
Alambayana makes Bhiiridatta dance-18s. 19 ff
'He goes into a village and calls out all those who wi!':h to see the
snake dance i he makes Bhiiridatta.,: do a variety of tricks. The future
Buddha thinks it would be better to please the crowd, so that Alambayana,
having'received plenty ofmoney, might be satisfied and let him go i arid he
he
does all is bidden. Plaque unnumbered. '
R aIeI), to ma,ke dance, as snakes, bears, marionnettes, etc'i the .M.T.
o~9, 81r,', ~¥lP~~o:>oS
is pa Ieh U.O.K. 42. referring to Bhiiridatta, says:
j

86 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[VOL. iI
cro::>()Ga::>9i8~:)O~LC91~1Ico2~("):GOO~~_IIand although he took him to and made
him dance in every town, he (Bhiiridatta) did not· speak in anger." R a Ie 1;1
is the causal of 1eD, M.T. Ga:l9, Ie h, to dance i compare with r in1el;l,
dancing, in Blagden's inscription~_. Plaque unnumbered.
234. ~cO(:)')oS qc ~lc 88 .~c-·1G~
Alambay rantlun cip smin-.7(,5
Alambayana cc.rrying (the snake) arrives (in) the kingCs presence)
-191 17 ff
But Alambayana is not satisfied with the money he has 'received in that
village, and, thinking what a fortune it is in~ his power to make, 'he goes
from village to village carrying Bhiiridatta in a bejewelled basket and,
reaching Benares, invites the king to come and see the snake play. Now,
when it was known in Bhiiridatta's family that he had disappeared, there·
was great anxiety and sorrow: His three brothers go in the world of
men ill different directions in search of. him, His elder brother, Sudassana,
in the garb of an ascetic arid accompanied by his young sister hiding in his.
hair in the form of ,a frog, comes to the ant-hill and, seeing traces of blood,
knows that his brother h~s been caught by a snake-charmer. He follows
Alambayana's. track, and arrives at B~nares at the moment when the
snake-charmer, in the midst of the spectators, a seat having been prepared
for the king, sends his message to the latter.' Alambayana calls out
Bhiiridatta who, on recognizing his brother in the crowd, goes up to-him,
places his head on his feet and weeps.
R aIi t1uil, see·plaque 5. Cip,to reach, arnve = M.T. ~o, c u'i p,
see plaque 82. Plaque unnumbered', ,.
23S.0il~305 SSJ5 <fib Q~~-1 GG
Bhiiridat niniit rup manis-766
Bhuridatta assumes the human form-196. 15
Alambayana thinks the snake has bitten the ascetic arid offers an antidote;
Sudassana answers he does not fear'snakes, and that he can set against this
one a small frog who can conquer him. The stake is five -thousand pieces.

TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
PART 1]
The challenge is accepted. Sudassana goes to the king to borrow the five
thousand, and the king comes to see the wonderful fight between a frog and
a snake. The frog thlOws out three drops. of fearful poison, which makes the
snake-charmer become a white leper, .and he sets the snake free. On this,
Bhiiridatta assumes the human form i so does his sister) and all three stand
near the king. .
Nimit, to create,. perhaps from the Pali nimminati through nimmt'ta
j
dieS,
but compare also M.T. Imit, with the same meaning (see also under
plaque I)i ~l§~'C\J:~S~o:loSoSbttOOIl3SSoo8oS~crS0009-. at that place, Indra
II
created a square flat stone of ten cubits," Sudh. I3. 5; ~18 cq 0aB~ <XiS ~ll3S$
C\JSoSC\J~_tl and from the time Indra created the c;ity of Suvat.ll;abhumi
" Ni mit is still used in M.T., in the compound ~Sro ~crS, ni mit
=
bda h. R up, form i image, statue M.T. Manis, man, Pali
manussa. Plaque unnumbered.
236. ~S 090 ~io05-1.G1
Smin tim Bhiiridat-767
The king recognizes Bhiiriclatta-I96. 19 ff
Sudassana then asks the king whether he knows them, and he says no.
Sudassana tells him they are the children of Samuddaja, his, own sister, who
was given in marriage to Dhatarattha,.the Naga king. The king· then
recognizes them, and kisses them weeping.
T itn, to know = M.T. In the plaque the upper part of the king's body
is broken offi the· posture of Sudassana ·shows he is being kissed by the
kingj Bhiiridatta is recognized by the cobra hood behind his head; .their
sister is not represented.-· Plaque unnumbered. .
237~ O?~o05~O')&. ~'Jb~0')~5-1.Go
Bh\1ridat cow nagabhow-768
.
Bhiiridatta returns to the Naga world-197. 8
. ..
All three stay some time with their uncle the king; as his mother longs
. to see Bhuridatta again, they beg leave to go back, and it being granted
Bhiiridatta goes back to the Nagaworld with his brothe~ and sister.
Cow, see plaque 159; bhow, see plaque z28. Plaque unnumbered.

88 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL.'11
238• ~~300.SS ~,)(,)G;:X>,)O-l G~
Bhuridat cip nagabhow-769
Bhfiridatta arrives in the Naga world-I97. 9
When Bhnridatta arrived in the Naga city, being tired and fain~ with his
month's residence in the snake-charrners basket, he took to a sickebed
j
an immense number of Nagas came to·visit him. .
239. ~8t005 c(oo~~ Oi
.8tc8
-1.1.o
Bhiiridat gulan ku risi-770
Bhfiridatta converses with the hermit-2J7. 22 f!
Bhfiridatta having recovered from his ilInessgoes to visit his grandfather,
who lives as an ascetic, in his hermitage, and has edifying conversations with
him. When he died, he went to heaven with a host 'of Nagas. Plaque
:unnumbered.
J
VI II.- MA HAN AR A D A K ASSA PA - ATi\ K A.
The king of Videha is much given to pleasure; he asks an ascetic the
various paths of moral duties; his daughter, a very virtuous princess, tries her
best to .make him abandon his heretical beliefs jthis end is at last effected
with the future Buddha's help, the Great Brahma Narada, disguised as an:
ascetic.
240~ ~oS' ~')~ qoo')t§ Oi ~S-11:>
.Risi Nar guliii ku smm-771
The hermit Naradaconverses with the king-242. 25.1f
The Great Brahma Narada, seeing the endeavours of the princess to
make her father abandon heretical views,· resolves to come down from his
heaven to help her convert the king to the trl;le path. He takes the guise
of an ascetic; the king, seeing him, comes down from his throne and makes
him obeisance. In the ensuing conversation, the king is converted.

PART I] , TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
241• ~69 ;>')~ 3'=>')q @[oa]<;OO,)OO-""11J
Risi Narar Bra(hma)lok-772
The,hermit Narada goes' (back) to the: Brahma world-255. 2'
Narada, having converted the king, goes back to the Brahma heaven.
.' ..: '. ' .
""B ralp k, for, brahrn a10kai'the meaning is" made, clear, by the
plaque j it represents the Great Brahma Narada going back to his heaven, on
a cloud j in all the Pagan plaques, deities going up or down from their heaven
are shown on a cloud which represents the air i below is the king and
ca,
behind him his daughter. The two letters h ma, have not been left out
by inadvertence, but because the inscription was too long for the plaque.,
The right comprehension of the,word was left. 'to'the pious reader who,
knowing well the stories (and all these stories are perfectly known), could not
fail to Identify at once the clipped word bra for ,b ra hma~ the last word
10k helping him in this. Moreover, the expression ,: brahmaloka" had
already, for 'several centuries, been thoroughly familiar to the Talaings.
Plaque unn~mbered. The,re are only two plaques" to illustrate this jatakaj
the reason no' doubt is that the story consists mostly' of conversations, and
contains very little'action.
I X. - V10 H U R A, PA ~ QI T A· J AT AKA.
The king reigning 'at,Indapatta,,the capital of the Kur'u kingdom, is a
great gambler at dicej,.:tqe future Buddha, the wiseVidhura, was his min
ister, who gave him advice and instructions in temporal and religious matters.
One" day, the, king, 'who' haa"gone info his garden 'to practise m'editition,
me't there Sakka, the king of the gods, VaruI).a, the Naga king: and SupaI).I).a,
the king of the Garu~as, come for the, same purpose. A discussion arises
among them as t~ which is the,mqst virtuous,; ,unable to,agree on this point,
they ask the opinion of Vidhura, who shows them that all four are equal in
virtue. .All go back home. The Naga queen, on hearing Vidhura's praise
from the king's lips, c.onceives. a' strong desire to have the wise man's heart
(for the'expression of this desire, she knows, is the only means by which,she
can manage to '~ave him brought before her, and thus enjoy' his pious
u

EPIGRAPHIA -BIRMANICA
90
discourses). But he cannot do thati he seeks his daughter' and tells her that
if her mother does-not getVidhura's heart, she will die. The daughter makes
it known that, 'whoever will bring the wise minister's heart, will become her
husband i PutJ.~aka, the Yakkha 'general, offers himself. Pur:U:1aka goes to'
Indapatta, defeats the king at dice and claims Vidhura as his pri~e. In many
ways does PUI}1}aka try' to kill,Vidhura, but in vain. At last, Vidhura asks
him what he wants, and,- on being told, the' wise man wins over PUJWaka
and goes' to 'the Naga world, where no harm is done him. All the plaques
in this story are unnumbered.
88Ci ~o:>:>g oq(,)~, ::§8-1'1?
242.
Widbir sop summin smin-773
Vidhura,ans~ers the question of the (four) kings-260. 21
The fouJ, kings, as told in the synopsis, call Vidhura and ask him which
~s the most-virtuous i h~ answers they are equal.
=
Wid hir Vidhura j 'for Sop and surti m,an, see plaque 223.
<i~aooooS ~')~-'l
243.::§S 'T.l 19
Smin ku Purl}ayak smin-774
The king and PUIJ.tJ.akathe,Yakkha ask .(Vidhura)~284. 16
PutJ.tJ.aka having volunteered to get the heart of Vidhura goes to Inda
patta,- and having defeated the king at dice, claim's the wise man. But the
king is displeased, because he does not like to part from him, and explains
that Vidhura is to him like ,life itself, and no:'slave.Pul}l)aka, to 'avoid con
troversy, decides that both should go to the court of justice where Vidhura
is deciding cases PUQl}aka asks 'him whether he is the king's kinsman or
j
slave. .
PurI}a = PUI}t;laka j it will be remarked the abbreviation is, not from
the, Plili 'Pufl~aka, but from the Sanskrit PUY1Jaka, Yak, a, yakkha.

l'ART I.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THEANANDA 9t'
244. d3Soo105, G~ CY.l ~-11:>
Kinkil dhar ku smiil-775
(Vidhura) explains the Law to- the king-286. 18 if
Vidhura answers that he is only the servant of the king the latter has
j
now to give him up to the Yakkha. Reflecting, ,however, that he would
probably never hear'anym,?rehis wise advices, the king asks Vidhurato.
explain to him the right mode of living for a hou'seholder. The sage
complies.
KiilkaI, to'instruct, to inform, to explain; there is a variant, kin kan,
at plaque 62. ' 0 har,the B~ddhist Moral Law, from the Sanskrit foim
dharma, M.T. 00, dhaw, from dhar i the Pali, form,dhamma, is found
on plaque 178 as dham ma i'and the Sanskrit d har mm a ,on plaque
37. 1n the photograpl~the person on the raised seat is Vidhura. '
245. ~8 ~~ 88q-l1
(J
5nim kilVVidhir-776
The king hands over Vidhura-28s. 3I
The king, 'saying If he be a slave, ,take him," hands Vidhura over-to
II
PU\l\laka.
c ooro-,
246• 88~ 'i GO-:>O qaB t 11
Widhir rail cow PUlJqayak-'777
Vidhura takes PU\lyaka the Yakkha an~ goes back (to his home)
-:-'288.29
Vidhur~
asks PU1}\laka to allow him, to go home for three days so that
,he may give instructions to his sons, .and offers him to lo4ge at his house
for that time i PU1}\laka accepts, and the wise inan, returning home, takes
him lVith him. '
Rail, to convey,' ~ring
j
see plaque 5· PUJ;,lJ}a, we have now the
Pali form.

EPIGRAI:'HIA BIRMANICA [vot. II
ro
247. 8B~q05 Q83°o '-tto
Widhir khut PU~l,1ayak-778
Vidhura (having) called PUI}Qa Yakkha (to his home settles him comfortably)
- 289' 18 If
Vidhura, having called .home the Yakkha, treats him most hospitably,
and gives him five hundred female attendants. In the photograph Vidhura
is seen on the right, and PUl}l}a Yakkha' on the left, on a higher seat, being
the guest i between them is a woman representing the five hundred
attendants.
K hut, . to call; to name; is still used in the literary language: Sudp.
45. 15, ~02l~Ol:>0i~~P~~'105a:}-(l lndra called (the bow) 'Rajadhanudharnma"'j
S.M.' 5, ~e:>eXloS oioo~ffi 00905 O~l~'lDQGCX):>OOg '105 co8 O2l ~'"F8-"owing to the
Bodhisatta grasping' and- bringing out (at his birth)' a medicine, he was
called Mahosadha." Another. frequent expression is :qoS~, k hut k hau,
a:
Dhd. 370. 7, Oiso8J :t;,~ Goo:>~Bi:211 8:JOO OiQ,'l ~oS~t:0802[<;;\-" she obtained and'
brought forth a son; they called him Udayakumara." With kha u in k hut
k ha u cf the Burmese GoT (k,ho~), to call.
248. (;oo')~ 'P~oo.J09-1'1
(!
.
'.
.Tos rajavasati--.-779
He expounds the rules for courtiers to obtain honours at the
court-292. If
10
He then assembles his family and delivers to them a ,religious discourse.
Afterwards he expounds to his kindred" to his friends and enemies, how to
obtain honours' at the court.
R a,javasa t i is explained in the Pali text (p. 292. 6) as: Yasapa
tildbhalui1'aflam.

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES, ON tHE ANANDA 93
249. 88q qco')~ ;>~?q-100
,Widhir guliii na s~ir-780
Vidhura tells (Pu\l~a the Yakkha) he is ready to go (with him)
-300. 20.11
Having thus admonished everybody, taken leave of the king and settled
his family affairs, Vidhura announces to the Yakkha he is now ready to
proceed with him whither he desires.
GuIaIi here means, « to tell, to announ~e." For the phrase nas·a r,
see plaque 183.
llElBc.xm' ~~ a;)'J~ 88~-'lOO
250.
PU!J.qayak rin,ir Widhir-78I
Pu~t;la tim Yakkha' carries'away Vidhura-302. 23
Pu~t;la the Yakkha mounts his horse who, like a' man, is endowed with
reason, and tells the Bodhisatta,'if he is not afraid, to seize the horse's tail.
Vidhura answers he knows no fear, and'cannot see' what harm could befall
him, since he has done nobody ,evil by,act,' word or thought. Having girt
his robe tightly round his loins, he 'grasps the tail with both hands and,
presses "his feet against the animal:s ,thighs. Put;l1;laka springs forth into the
sky, carrying away the sage.
Rin, see plaque 27. Ar, after another verb, often has the sense of
naway, off."
2 S'I~ 88q oo'J'8qco~-10J
Widhir tiw guliii~782
Vidhurais conversing (with the Yakkha)-306. 5 ff
This plaqu~is in the wrong place j it should come after No. 256. After
'having gone thro~gh,an the attempts, described in the' following plaques, of
Put;lt;laka to take, 'his" life, the 'sage asks himself what reason could the
Yakkha possibly hav~' to be, s<? intent on his destruction. On being asked,
the Yakkha answershewanls his heart, for it 'is the price of the Naga
maiden.

~piGRAPHIA BIRMANtcA [voL. It
25 2•. <tWX>~ ctcBS ':-'10 ?
PUI}I].ayak bUhic-783
PUJ}J}aka (tries to) frighten.(Vidhura)-305. 3
PUJ}J}aka carries the Bodhisatta on· the summit·of the Black Mountain,
and reflects that to get his heart and obtain the Naga princess, he must kill
him j but again he thinks it would be better, rather than kill him with his
He
own hands, to kill him by fright, -by showing him dreadful shapes.
a.
assumes the form of lion ready to devourhirnj but the sage shows not the
least sign of alarm.
Buhi c, to fear, to frighten = M;T.e~cooo, bah e kjif: ~o05, phe k~
2
53. <t~oo~ ~oS 88-10 9
PU~I]ayak pdasciil-784
PUJ}J}aka creates an elephant-_30$. :,
Then the Yakkha comes in the shape of ..a large furious elephant
threatening him with his tusks, but. Vidhura shows no fear..
=
P da 5, to cause to he or become, to make, create ~LT. ono5, ef, lio5,
-padah, badah,bdah.
2 54.Q8BOOOS 8@OO-10:)
PU~J}.ayakbi1?at~785
PUQ,J}aka tests (the steadfastness of Vidhura by means of -a .snake)
.-305, 9
PUJ}J}aka assumes the. appearance of an enormous snake, coils himself
round the sage, spreading his hood over him; but no sign of tremor does
Vidhura betray.
Bi~at, see plaque 9.

fAl\T I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 95
255. q~oooo fr;d) ~8-"loG
PU\l[l}]ayak pkak k4ip-786
PUJ;lJ;laka turns (Vidhura) upside down (and flings him into the sky)
-305. 27
P:mJ;laka tries several other means to kill Vidhura, but .he fails i he
resolvp.s then tv kill him wiih his own hands j 'he seizes him by the feet,
turns him head downwards and flings him in space.
Pka k, to turn over, upset, turn upside· down j with this. word may be
compared the M.T. ~O':)oS, OCXlOS, .' bat a k, gata k, . upside down, topsy-turvy,
and oo~ooaS, Ia kha t a k, having the same meaning. The gutturals and
)abials often interchange. Pka k kQip, to tum 'somebody or somet~ing
upside down, head dowrrwards j for k Qip see plaque'135.
_«£g3ooro
256. qqS rocg'"J-10 1
PU~!1~yak du~actmo-787
PU1}~aka whirls (Vidhura) round---305. 27
This plaque is to be read together with the preceding one, for both
represent the same occurrence: the~Yakkha whirling the sage round with his
head downwards. as he is about to fling him away. . .
DuQa c, to whirl, to, turn round. to spin i there is a coJioquial word,
CX)~oS, t ha qit, having the same meaning w.hich may be compared with
duQac,although,. regularly, we would expect t ha Qat.'
Tmo, to.turn round and .round;, qver and over, to twirl, whirl, spin =
M.T. egO and OOQO, t maw and',ta m~w~S.r (A) fo1. ki, ~93~ OO§Q01006 008
~05 ~e:>eo:>oS c;;oo:>O'.)Q03;)J~~lIJhe B,o({tti~~tt.a ~,in, appearance) like unto a
jewel, was rolling and whirling on·th.e:~aves $.']: {B) 66, ~~5 .... CCQ:>oS
"'j;'
c;;0':'''':)c7~o059 _'~ the queen .•. ; fell aOd',tpl1edoverand over." Cf. also
eGCX),
bat0, rutmd 'and round, over and over r '~co:)C:I(.<;Y.)',)! ,10f,)a't0, to turn ,round
and round, over and' over. The equiva.lenceo( c.~J' and' 0, ,is, not
unfrequent. .

96 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
257. 'l83°O00 02-:>t?§-'100
PUI1J:1ayak sman-788
PUl}\laka asks (Vidhura to teach him. the laws of good men)-309. 8.ff
While thus being held head downwards and whirled round' and on, the
point of being hurled into space, Vidhura reflects that there must be a
mistake somewhere, for what connexion is there between his heart::md the
maiden? 'And in fact, here it must be borne in mind that the Naga queen
had asked for his heart in the hope that he might be brought to her alive
and she might have the privllege of listening to his pious discourses.· To
gain time, he tells the' Yakkha to set him on his legs on the mountain, so
that he may expound to him the laws of good men. PUQ.\laka agrees, sets
him on his feet, and then asks him to tell him these good laws.
In the photograph, the upper '?Z alone is visible with, on the right hand,
a faint trace of the lower ~,. the glaze has flaked off in this place, but the
traces of the s\lbscript '?Z are clearly visible on the brick. Similarly, the
k,
virama on the which is quite distinct on the plaque, does not appear in
the photograph,
258. 88~ ~~ ~--10~
Widhir tos dhar-789
Vidhura preache~ the Law (to PU\l\laka)-309. 30
The Bodhisattathen preaches to the Yakkhci the four rules of good
men i the Yakkha is touched and.. repents, his murderous attempts for the
sake merely of a woman, and, resoh'es to lose her rather than h~rm the sage.
• =• 02, c,
Tos, to preach M.T. twaI;l the primary meanirigof this word
j
appears to be simply: to say, to speak,; and is frequent in this sense in
the literature. Tos dha r, M.T. egoS, twa1). d haw, means literally:
to speak the Law. Cj: the expressions: ~§c, twab pmiIl, "to say and
cause to hear" = to preach, A.V. 118,= desana,. o20~,twaQ. gao, a,
very frequent expression equivalent to the English that is, to wit" L'hd.
1/ j
373. 3, ~ooJO::>3;;ld3aSGooa ~3;;l§JG1'8I1Q020I~"1au (,)(jQq~o (XlJ03oo~:~-" in times pa$t,
between three kingdoms, to wit, the kingdom of Anga, the kingtlom uJ
Magadha and the kingdom of Kasi."

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 97
259. ,?ggooC'YS '18 88 ;>':)8-1<!o
PUJ::l~ayak ran cip nag-790
PUJ}.l}.aka conveys (Vidhura) to the Naga (countrY)-313' 22 if
Having made this praiseworthy resolution, the Yakkha offers Vidhura to
take him back to his home i but the sage requests to be taken to the Naga
country, and PUl}.l}.aka conveys him thither.
Rail, see plaque 5. C ip, to arrive = M.T. ~o, cui p, and both
together rail c ip = to carry or convey to. The personage on the left
of the photograph is the Naga king on his thronei on the right is Vidhura,
distinguished by a nimbus, and in the middle is the Yakkha.
260. c;oo')o5 'G~ ~ ~8 ;>')8-1<! 0
Tos dhar ku smiil nag-"791
(Vidhllra) preaches the Law to the Naga king-314· 30 if
PUl}.J}.aka having conveyed the sage to the serpent world, the latter has
a conversation with the Naga king during which he expounds to him edifying
maxims. On the Ananda, this plaque comes after the following one
(No. 261).
01-1.
~8 ~~ ~ro~8
26 I • ;>':)8 <!J
Smin nag rin lop sJii-792
The Naga king introduces (Vidhura) in his house-319. 4if
A long conversation takes place between"the king and the sage, a,nd the
latter preaches the Law to the king i the king, delighted, takes VidhUlla by
the hand and leads him into the Naga queen's presence.
Rio, see plaques 27, 250; Rio lop = to lead and enter, that is, to
introduce into.

98 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL; II
ooro
262. «e3 ''is 01~-1(!?
PU~Qayak rail tun-793
PUJ}.J}.aka carnes (Vidhura) back (to the" world of menr-323· 23·ff
The Bodhisatta preaches the Law to the Naga queen, whose desire"
to see the sage is gratified. The Naga princess becomes the wife of PUl}·
J}.aka. The latter, delighted at the turn of affairs, offers a magnificent jewel
to Vidhura, places him on his horse and, from the depths of the Naga
world, carries him up back to the haunts of men, in the capital of the
Kurus.
=
Tun'might appear from the context to M.T. ~, t uin, to go up,.
ascend and, prepositionally, up,' up to, and as a variant of tin (plaque 51)
j
so that r aIi tun would mean, to carry up, upwards. The Talaing version,
at this passage, reads: <taBoo ••• 3aSG~d3~cqu~020e3:>e38~$~loSc;~<fro'llro2¢&t$
ot0e3:>'lIl-{{ PUT)1;1aka • . . saddleq his horse (and said), O! sage, mount the
horse with me, I will convey, thee llP (to the world of men)" i in which
~l$, ~ould b~
pt uin, the causal of tun. ' But there is also a modern
word, 01$, tun, which is frequent with the meanings of-and, 'and then;
now ... ; again, back, in return i and.Is also used' as an emphatic suffix,
untranslatable in English, which lays particular stress on"the word or words
preceding it. fn this pL?que, tun has the meanings of again, back," and
H
ran tun means '. conveyed him again or back" i and this is no doubt
the right translation. I may notice heI:e another use ofihe modern ~$, very'
frequent in the literature i it is used as a verbal suffix to show~ that,
whatever the verb denotes, refers to another person or object: oo:>oogGoo:>$
~S§~~Goo:>8~:>~1J e3:otro~9OJ:>S~~f~ro~rrS.p8§G~S3S-H then, the prince followed"
(her) into the hut and asked, •Who ar.t thou?' (She answered) I am a
I
Nagi, Sir.'"
"263. 88q <Bas Q~05-1 @9
Widhir kit manik-794
Vidhura gives the je\vel (to the king)-327'
10
PUJ}.l}aka takes back the sage to Indapatta and set~ him down before the
door of the Hall of Truth, wherein the king, who had been warned In a

PART IJ TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 99
dream of the sage's return,-was awaiting him in great pomp. PUl1l1aka goes
back to. his celestial abode. Vidhura explains to the king -all that has
befallen him, and presents him with ~he gem given him by the Yakkha.
Manik, a gem, f~om Pali matJika.
~?~S ~8S-'l(! ~
264_
Cow snit-795
(Vidhura) re~urns home
,Vidhura then·· returns to his home. There are great rejoicings for one
month in the city. _At his death, the sage i$ reborn in heaven. The
mention· of his going_back home is not in the text nor in the Skem, but
must of course.be taken as a matter of course. .
.This inscription has suffered- from whitewash i the lower porti(Jn of the
C(0) has disappeared•. In the photograph, the subscript if, in· s I).i' is
almost invisible, but apparent· on the plaque. Siti', see plaque 274. The
woman following him is no doubt his wife.
d1
88~c;g18 09~
265. [a5}-"U!G
Widhir dmon hin sili('?)-796
Vidhtira is at h~me (receiving gifts)-328. 31 if
Then the Bodhisatta,·in his home, receives the visit of the queens, the
princes, .brahmins, merchants, etc., who bring him many gifts of food and
drink. At his d'eath, he was reborn in heaven.
Dmoo, see plaques 168, 215. H in, in, at, to i there.is a variant,
n
han (plaque 28). I had at first taken the character after the word s i to
be b ja, but a close examination of the plaque, which is somewhat spoiled
at that place, s~owed that the letter must have been a' (d.3), and that. we
have to read, as in the preceding plaque, s Iii'.

100 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
x. - VESSAN TAR A ~ JAT AKA.
This is the most popular jataka, not only in Burma, but in the East
generally. Prince Vessahtara is very liberal and much devoted to giving
alms and gifts. One day, he gives to four brahmans an elephant much
valued by the citizens owing to his magical powers. The citizens force
the king to ban:sh him he retires with his wife and his two children
j
to the Vindhya Moun,tains. The prince gives away in alms his wife and
children. They are at last, after many vicissitudes, happily reunited. All
the plaques of this story are unnumbered and, generally speaking, their
inscriptions have suffered more than those of the other jatakas and present,
consequently, more difficulties, and in some CilSes more incertitude, in
reading.
266. ()~oj~ bO:D~~-i~l
Pa~isan Wesantar-797,
Conception of Vessantara-484. 35
In times pas't, in the kingdom of Sivi, there was a king, Sivi by name,
who ruled in his capital of Jetuttara. To him was born a SOI1, whom he
called Sanjaya; sixty thousand devas were' conceived ;'1t the same time in
the families of sixty thousand courtiers. Queen Phusati, the mother, when
her time was near, desired to visit the city, and the king had everything
arranged for this visit. When Queen Phusati reached the middle of the
Vessa Street (the Merchants' Street), the pains of labour came over her. A
lying-in chamber was erected then and there, and therein the Bodhisatta
was born; on that account he was called Vessantara.
Ther in \V esantar is scarcely visible.'
267. ~'JS CX>~ ~ ~:0 31~-1~o
Ac thar na ski! dan-798
(Vessantara) asks for gold to give alms-48S. 14
As soon as he was born, Vessantara 'held out his hand to his mother,
saying, Mother, I wish to give alms. Have you anything?" Phusati
it
placed in his hand a purse containing one thousand coins to satisfy this first
craving 'for almsgiving.

PART I ] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA tOI
Ac, to ask = M.T. 3;),05, at. Nask iI, cf. No. 183 and see
plaque 64, where the prefix si =' s(a) is discussed. Dan, from the Pali'
dana, alms, almsgiving.
268. () ~GQ,,)aO '~oOJ~q-'l
@@
Pa imo' Wesantar-799
They give him the name Vessantara-48s. 17
Owing to his having been born in the Vessa Street, they giVe him the
name Vessantara. See explanations under No. 266.
I m0', a name j if. him 0', plaque 4 i Pa irri 0', to gIVe a name, to
name.
269. d3cS G3g")sS S~S~·-ooo
Kil abo' minmin-8oo
The father gives nurses to Vessantara-48s. ·25 ./I
The king carefully chose sixty-four nurses, all free from the defects of
ordinary nurses, for the care of the child. It must be remarked, for he plays
subsequently a· great role in the story, that a purely white elephant was
brought, on Vessantara's birthday,' into the royal stables by his. mother, who
came flying through the sky.
Min min, a nurse, an ayah (Anglo-Indian) i there are two' modern
forms, SS~ and d3~" miIIIin and IIIami 11, of which the second has lost
the infix -iu- altogether, and the first, the ,infixal nasalization i at A.V. 44,
==
SSS upamdtu, and at J21, Q8S :.- dhdtf. C/. S.T. folio kif, § BB~ _<;
o§~G8~~{Gc:db.:>ci.:J9-" the king caused sixty-four nurses to look after and
feed the Bodhisatta" i .S.V. folio ku, £qoS Q::I;ttSGco:>SQ:A)O c;co,~§ol~n BSSol
oi 90 ~G~5dl ~8CX)' G~lBO')aS9-" the king rejected (such nurses as had) the
defect of being too tall or too short, etc., and appointed two hundred and
forty nurses to take care of the Bodhisatta."· There are several other words
meaning It a nurse": B$, mini, S. Nr. I I, c;C'1.)'~I!l. • •• . 'ig Of dlBioXj-

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. tl
"(his) daughter thus said to (her) nurses" S:§, mit a h (colloquial) j
j
e~c§ and eo:>:§; bam auta h an~ bama ta h, mostly in compound forms j
=
A.V. 44, Sedxg,mibamatah upamatu; S.V. folio ku, S8te~c§,
mimin bamautahj ~oo:>, Qaigama, at Sudh. 14.17.. In this expres
sions, eo:>, and e~ mean to suckle an infant./I The photograph seems
()QJ II
to read II sinsin U j the estampages, however, though much' biurred at. that
place, have minmin" i the plaque itself leaves no doubt as .to the
II
correctness of the latter reading.
~8 d3ro cBW~
270. 05-000
Sinm kil'kiryi h-8ol
The king gives (Vessantara) an ornament-.485.)9
The king gets a necklace worth. a hundred thousand pieces of money
made, and gives' it to his son.
K iryah, this reading, perfectly clear, is also found on plaques 295 and
.." . I
387 j the virama over the h is quite'distinct, although, in the 'present plaque,
it has been somewhat spoiled by whitewash. I had. at first' bee'n.tempted to
read kiryapa as equivalent to k{ryaha, which would have made perfect sense,
for kt'ryaba would.have answered to the. modern word @oo:Je:>, kriYa b~i
which has, exactly' the same meaning as ki'r'Ia, so often found in old
.Talaing inscriptions j .@me:> is found at V.O.K. 33. 3, Dhc.88. 9, A.V. 43
= upakara?la, and 73, under kO?la. That k iryah has exactly the same
sense as ki ry a is clear. from the numerous plaques in which the form
k ir y a occurs with the same meaning; and k iryah is never found in the
Pagan Talaing Inscriptions edited .by Mr. Blagden. The final h has nothing
a
to do with a change in the pronunciation of in kir y ii; it is added (only
three or four times) when the' word kir y a ends the legend, and never in
the middle of it. This leads, me to suppose that this h is a device to fill
up, 00 the right hand, the space left blqok by the shortness'of the
inscription it is true we should rather expect the more common two dallrJas
j
(n)
j,
but the supposition is confirmed by mad di h, for mad dI, in
plaque 288, and a few pthtrs, the common reading being of- course madd i.

PART J] TA~AING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
·27I. .~ 09cS 31~ oSfJj'J-ooJ
Aja kil dan kirya-802
The wIse (in which Vessantara) gave;the ornaments (to his nurses)
-486.
I
The Bodhisatta.,was four or five years of age when he received this
necklace; be took it off.and gave it to his nurses. A second necklace was
made for him, which again 'he gave the nurses; and it went on like this nine
times.
=
Aja, way,· wise, representation, illustration, etc. as an adjective like.
j
It is still in common use., It is rather spoiled .and not quite clear on this
plaque, but it is' clearer in the next and perfectly clear in plaque 280.
272'. ~()nSc;o.:>~') 31~"":"'-()o?
Aja'passena dan-803
Representing (Vessantara) thinking of (more exacting) almsgiving'
-486. 5 fI
When he was eight years old, the child, seated on his couch, thinks that
the alms he has given up to then are of but little value, being all external
to .his own person, and with all his heart' he longs to give such things as
will require great stoicism on his part, such as his .eyes, his heart, his flesh,
etc.
a,
Pass.en lam not absolutely sure of this reading,. but it, may be
a
the right one, the more so as it agrees in sense with the text. P a'ssen
=
the modern'~~), bah snfl, . to think of, remember, long for, and answers
to the Pali (486. II), tass' evam sabhafJam sarasac£ttam dntcntassa .
It is true we should expect bassan a Instead of passen a, but the
labials, surd and sonant are often intercnanged, and sena may perhaps be
an older form of sna. I was first inclined to the reading pasasana
dan, he makes an offering to the religion" but this does fit neither the·
Ie j\
text nor the context, for sdsanadana means Ii giving up one's son to the
religion," that is, making ,him a novice j and this was,not the case, of
course~ with Vessantara. Perhaps have we to read, after all, paQ sasan a

1°4 EPIGRAPHIA BlRMANICA [VOL. II
=
dan he thinks of (more exacting) almsgiving to the religion," if the
II
dot on the pa1;1 after the first word is not merely, as it appears to be, a
defect in the glaze, like the other two in the middle of the inscription, right
under the prince's seat; in which case pa1). would be the modern bah.
GOo:)~.ll ~ al~-oo9
273. GOO
Wesantar may sili dan-804
Vessantara looks at the alms-halls-487. 5
When Vessantara was sixteen, his father, desiring to make him king,
chose the beautiful Maddi, the young man's first cousin, for his wife; after
his marriage, Vessantara, having been entrusted with the government of the
kingdom, gave abundant alms, six hundred thousand pieces of money every
day. After a time, he had ~ son, who was called ]ali, then a daughter
whom they named KaJ}.hajina. Six alms-booths had been built in the city,
and the Bodhisatta used to visit them every 'month mounted on his precious
white ~lephant.'
May, the same as me Yi the form mey is frequent in some modern
works i see No. 46.
~8S-oo~
274. O:>JlJCl
GO GO-:lb
Wesantar cow siti'-805
Vessantara returns home-487
Vessantara returns home after his monthly visit to the alms-halls.
27 5. 8S~: [Q~S BE-coG
BimnaJ) ac ciit......806
The brahmins ask for the elephant-488. 4
At that time, in the kingdom of Kalinga, there was a famine consequent
on a drought, and men had to rob to live. The people complained to the
king i the latter, by the strict observance of the precept and the fast days,

PART I J TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
endeavoured to bring on rain,. but did not succeed. He made known his
failure to the citizens, who told him-II Well, Sir, in this case, there is only
one thing to do King Vessantara, in the kingdom of Sivi, is greatly devoted
j
to alms-giving; he has a white elephant who, wherever he goes, causes the
rain to fall. Send brahmins, let them ask for that elephant and bring him
back." The king did so. The brahmins went to Jetuttara and, stationing
themselves near the alms-hall at the southern gate, asked for the elephant
as .Vessantara was passing.
B-i mn aD, a brahmin = M.T. e~:. bam naD there is a variant,
j
bumna4 at plaque 227.
J
276• GOO:>~~ 80S G;>,)~ 88-001.
Wesantar cis nor citi-807
Vessantara gets down from th_e elephant-488. 13
On hearing the request of the brahmins, Vessantara is delighted, accedes
to their re9uest and descends from the elephant.
Cis, see plaque 66.
.277. d30S ~'J \38 8~':)8-ooo
Kil ni ciil biotin-80S
(Vessantara) gives away the white elephant-488. 14
The king, having descended from the white elephant, gives him to thr.
brahmins. This inscription has suffered somewhat. The lower stroke of the n
of na has been spoiled and cannot be seen in the photograph. The more
common modern form of this word is 00', l}. a, but theforrn P, n 3) is also
found very frequently. The original meaning of rn:> is (, to take to, take
away, carry (away), to send i to lay or connect, as water pipes, the rails of
a railway, a telegraph line, etc.," as may be seen from the following
examples: 3roJSco8~C'DJo)r~CXjj39-"he took a gold tray to the Buddha and
offered it to him," Sudh. 32. 4; ~oo ooo.:d3§ c::JJ("4~C03 GOO9-" he sent .five
hundred coins to the house ~f his younger brother," Dhd.· 174. 26i at
A.V. ~1-2 we. have udahril'aka. "one who makes small canals for irrigating
=
rice-fields" t3~'Kf0J':(SO;JCCGnl8, and at p. 133, nettika = udahtira!:a
e3IQ~j <{S0/8oo Go16 i (1)):>r;§8 = literally to carry the head towards," that is,
I II
14

106 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
to face towards, §~ ~oS~~cooal#~19~§~oS~ 3;Jro)~~8q_il in whichever place is
the thera Assaji,. towards that place I face," Dhd. 229. 8 ao:>~I~= Ut•.
j
II to cause to go and arrive at," that is, to lead to, conyey to, take to j to
send·: QClP:>~18d.Z~glS-Uwhich leads to Nirv3:t;la,". Dhd. 9. 2. A very frequent
meaning derived from those given above is that of away," as in the
U
English expressions, to put away, give away, go away," etc.; this would
Ii
a . a,
give the meaning of n in k iI n "to give away," in the· present plaque.
=
Bin t a ii, white M.T..c9.l:l¢, b tail
j
the n over thet is doubtful,
though there seems to be traces of it on the plaque two variants of this
j
word are biiite it and burh ten.
278• c;ooo~q o9aS 31~-oo(!
Wesantar sik dan-809
Vessantara is pleased with his gift-488. 13
The reading sik is quite clear on the plaque, but it is evidently a mis
take for s c;li k, to be pleased, to delight in, which is in accord with the
context it translates the Pali ciigiidlzz'miinaso (488. IS). S ik (0300) in the
j
inodern language has only two meanings so far as I am aware: Ist,
II
Why?
For what reason? How? ",~~0303a5~.:J;l~~l89'Q~&CXl8~lc7S3;)J§'l-0", Rishi!
why would the whole country' be destroy,ed?", S.B. 2S. 2I j d3AIQ~3;)Q:>05­
=
"How do you say. ministers?", S.J. (B) 28, in which 038 , siggah
'
090001, sikgal;l, by assimilation. '2nd-the-secoridmeaning I have not. yet
found in books, but it is used colloquially;:::. to .. put into, cra!l1, stuff,
IC
compress," tlS3;J§o3a5~~@oS~_t1please put cotton into my mattress" ()~§
j
o03~o~lS~oo::;~)S-" if one· eats too much (crams food in) one gets sick."
Neither of these two meani.ngs: can fit the context.
279. roffi':> ~lc <t~oS-ooo
Katta tluil munas-8IO
The agent comes and informs (Vessa~tara of what is happening)
-491. 28
When the citizens of Jetuttara heard that.Vessantara had given a'Yay
the white elephant to foreign'brahmins, they became angry;· they went to

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THEANANDA 1°7
Vessantara's father arid told him his son had no right to give away'such a
precious·animal, the national property. They go on to say they. do not want
such a king and that he must leave the country and go into banishment in
the Vindhya Mountains. The weak-minded father, instead of endeavouring to
appease the citizens, in a moment of fright, gives way to them. He calls
an agent and sends him to' Vessamara j the agent goes to the king and
informs him of the state of things.
K.a tt a, Pali, a doer, one who does -or performs, an agent; this is the
word used in· the text~ M una5, to tell, inform j cf. mun, Nos. 42, 213,
munpan, No. 225, and pum un, No- 203.
280. ~ 8o'Jq (,,)oo'jGl~-ooo
-Aja bicar mahadan-8n
Showing (Vessantara) arranging for the great offering-494' 9
Vessantara does not, of course, recognize the people's right to circum
scribe his alms; however, he bows to the will of the people so far as he is
personally concerned. -He only asked to be granted one day's .delay in order
to b,e able to give the Great Offering, which consisted in.giving away seven
hundred each of everything, elephants, horses, chariots, virgins, slaves, etc.
a,
Aj see plaque 271. Bicar,-here II to arrange, prepare."
Q§ «"''j~-()~
281. ,"oOOcx>q, J
Wesamtar Maddi gulin-8I2
.Vessantara and MaddI converse-494. IO.ff
Vessantara then goes to Queen. Maddi's apartments and tells her the
turn affairs have taken. He breaks to her the news that ph the day aftt'r
the morrow he will start for the Vindhyas, and makes her understand it will
be be.tter for.him to go alone;. but MaddI, loving and dutiful, will not hear
of the proposal, and resolves to accompany him with the two children.

108 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 11
282. Cl 0 1Po? ~l8 GOOO-OO"
.Gnakyak. tluJi mey-8I3
Queen (Phusati) comes to see (Vessantara)--498•. 12
Queen Phusatr, Vessantara's mother, wants to know what Vessantara
intends doing, whether he will go in exile or 'not. She goes to see her son
who is in Maddi's apartments, and on nearing the door, hearing their
resolve, she is overcome with sorrow, bllt tries to console them.
!vley, see plaques 46,273.
283. 0083" O?-lC ~~05-009
Katta tluri munas-814
An official comes to inform (Vessantara that the Great Offering is ready)
-503. 28
284. GOoJ&qaSoS 31~ coq-o~J
'Wesantar kit dan thar-8IS
Vessantara gives gold· in alms-S04. i1
I
The Bodhisatta then goes into the city, where the offerings have been
prepared, and gives golden ornaments and utensils to all comers.
Thar, see,No. 123.
285.. 8xocYJq ~'Jq o:>~ :J.)~""";OCG
'Nissantar s-ar han amba-816
Vessantara goes to his father..':-505. 8
Evening fell even while· the Bodhisatta was giving alms; he then
returned to the palace, to see his f:itherand. mother, before. departing in
the morning.

pART I) TALAING PLAQUItS.ON THE .l\.NANDA
This inscription is.very much spoiled i fortunately three estampages of it
were taken at different times, -and they. show how rapidly in some cases these
plaques deteriorate i by their means, I have been able to reconstruct the
legend as above.
For s -a T, see plaques Nos. 18S.
286. (;oo.J~~ ~lb 038 sg-ool
W~santar Uuit sip aba-8I7
Vessantara comes and attends respectfully on his father-so5.
10
Having come in the presence of his parents, he comes ~o his father and
attends respectfully on him.
Sip, to attend respectfully on,· as a child·on his parents, a courtIer on
the king, etc. j it generally translates the Pali sevat£ j the M.T. is aSs ~8
sipglipi -A:V. 255, OCHoSO~O = sevana, "attending on."
287. 9lb oo~ c;eg'Ja)-ooo
TiuD han abo'-SIS
He comes to his mother-50S. 28
Having announced to his father his determination, in accordance with
the wishes of the people, to retire to the Vindhya Mountains, he turns and
comes to his mother, and begs her permission to leave the world.
288. qoo'Je§ ~ G§ oo-o::>@
Gulifi ku Maddi h-8I9
(The old king) converses with Maddi-s06. 16 if
His mother gives him leave to go, but. entreats him not to take Maddi
with him i Vessantara answers he does not in any way intend to make her
follow him, that she is perfectly free °to go or stay back. Then the king,
his father, in a long conversation with Maddi, trie~ to persuade her to remain
behind j but she refuses and decides to follow her husband.
For the h after Maddi, see plaque 270.

110 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
289. ((;oo:>~)~ Oioo r:f3oo-oJo
,(Wesanta}r kuta, tit-820
Vessantara turns to depart-Slo. 2I if
This is not actually expressed in the text; it probably refers to Ves
santara turning back after taking leave of his parents and leaving (oSOO) the
apartment. Only the r in We santar remains, the rest having been
broken off the rest of the inscription is quite clear.
j
= =
Kuta, [think, is the M.T. gata (kuta kata gata),
OCO,
to turn, turn round, turn to, turn back kuta tit, to turn round and go
j, 1/
out," that is, to take one's leave. This is confirmed by the plaque, which
reptesents Vessantara leaving the palace. is both colloquial and literary,
00:>
c.0JB::A)ffiQot:~oloQ801n(')ro~§Qc;oo')~'P~~oS~8~J-1Ithe Bodhisatta, having been
freed from his mother's bosom (= on' being born), turned his face due
north," Dhd. 62. II ~~d3::A)ffi 9GoloQ8~SSQg,oooli8o1 oSoo"iOO§tt._11the Bodhi
j 000
satta, sitting cross-legged in his mother's bosom, turned his face towards
the outside," Dhd. P2. 6.
.290. ~: 9.8 ~l8' ~aS-o J::>
.
Nab ran tluit kwil-82I
,
They bring a carriage-Slo.
22
A magnificent carriage drawn by four horses of Sindh IS brought round
at the gate of the palace.
K wiI, see variant k wi I, No. 133.
29I.Q~ Oi (;oo')S '?lOO ~')q-oJJ
Maddi ku kon 9uk tlar-822
Maddi, with the children, mounts (the carriage) before (Vessantara)
-510.
25
Then Maddi having made obeisance to her parents-in·law, and bidden
farewell to the ladies of the palace, goes before Vessantara and mounts first
the carriage.

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON 'THE ANANDA III
p uk - M.T. ~lo:S, 4 uik, to mount or ride a horse, to mount or
travel in a carriage. T Ia before (in time), first there_are two variants
f, j
in the Pagan Inscriptions, tllmlar and tUrhlar. In the 15th century,
on the glazed plaques of Pegu, we find this word as _tIii, in which the final
r, as well as the infix, have already been lost; the M.T. is at:>, kI a.
B:xD~~ r:BetS cr;;>,)~-oJ?
292.
Wissantar tit ar-823
Vessantara goes away (to the Vindhyas)-SIJ. 4
Then Vessantara takes his place in the carriage and sets out for .the
Vindhya Mountains. His mother, caused two carts, full of precious things.
to follow _the carriage;'"So that her son-might give alms on the way all
j
these, and even the ornaments he was wearing on his person, he distributed
on his way through the city.
293- (,')~ ~')~')~ QOO?GlS"",-,;oJ9
Man nanar mahajan-824
(?He addresses o! admonishes the crowd while going-.511. 14)
The estampages and the plaque leave no doubt as to the reading given
above j the place of the plaque between Nos. 292 and 294 leaves likewise
no doubt as to -the episode it refers to j it cCJrresponds to the Pali (511.
14), evam Mahasatte mahajane amantetv~ appamatta danddinz' punnani
II
karotha n t£ tesam ovadan ca dat'Da . .' I do not, however, exactly know
what the words man. nana r mean; but I think it probable the meaning
is as follows: Man, to give advice, to advise, from the Pali manteti
j
there is alre~dy a w<lrd man from the same Pali word in its sense of
to repeat sacred texts, to recite mantras, to consecrate by means of
II
mantras," etc. j nana r may possibly be an adverb fro~ the verb n 3,
to go (see plaque 277), meaning, II in going, .while going ,) j perhaps also,
but I doubt it on account of the firial r, it may be the Pali nana, various,
II
in many ways," etc.

112 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL 11
294.' sg S'"i-:>c ~cS @'~-(') J ~
Aba pindoti kwH 1?ar-825
(Vessantara's) mother sends (him) two carts (filJed with ornaments)
-511. 16
As, after admonishing the people, he was going on 11is W:J.y, his mother
sent him, for-distribution, two carts filled with ornaments and precious things.
Aba, this refers to Queen Ph usat i and therefore means 'I mother 11 j
up to this plaque,it has been found regularly with the meaning of "father" j
=
see plaques 23, 145. Bar, 2 (two) M.T. ro, ba.,
cEq
295. <ooo:>&q c8cS 0:)':> 05-0JG
Wesantar kil kirya h-826
Vessantara gives the ornaments-51I. 18.1f
Then Vessantara gave, not only all the ornaments contained in the two
carts, but even those he was wearing on his own person.
296. 80::0~~ c8a5 131~ qo:S-o J'l
Wissantar kit dan rat-827
Vessantara gives in alms ,the precious things-sII. 18 f1
This almsgiving refers to fhe precious things, seven kinds of them
(sattaratana), which were sent along with the ornaments.
Rat, precious thing, precious stone, jewel, from Pali ratana.
297. 8ooo~.)~ 8~ CI.(~ q/;-c»O
Wissantar bir tun ~UIl-828
Vessantara looks back at the city-SII
Having given awri.Y all that his mother had sent him, he ,vent on his
way Md left the city
j
he then became desirolls of heholding the city once
more, and he turned round to look upon it. The earth under his chariot, by

ON
PART I] TALAING PLAQUES THE ANANDA
a miracle, was clen asunder, and, revolving, brought the chariot round to
face the city; and there were earthquakes and other wonders.
Bi r, to look j a variant is bar (plaqu = e 200) j if. also the causal
puba r, plaque 195. Tun, back" again M.T. bi r tun, to look
back. See also plaque 262.
2g8. c;ooo~q ad30S O':l~-oJ e
Wesantar jilik tun-829
Vessantara drives on again-SI2. 2
Having looked at the city, he turns towards the sixty thousand courtiers
who were born on the same day as he, and towards the people, who had
so far accompanied him, and makes them turn back. Then, driving on
again, he says to Maddi, II See, Lady, if any mendicant is coming behind /I j
and he drives on again.-
J
ilik, to drive i there are two modern colloquial'forms of this word,
=
ooctj05 and, ~05, kal ui k and c a luik to drive. A very common word
is 0100, jaki ~mother is 00, caw, very common in the literature: Gctl~~oo
otIS~-(/a yOUII15 man came driv~ng a cart/' S.M. 9 <l801,1c~gooo't05@.B~
j
O1)'aS is§-(/ he (Indra) came on driving a cart in front of the rest
GOa.
S.J.
h'ouse wherein the queen was seated," 3 A.V. 130, niyamaka, a driver
= j =
e3fGo8'" i A.V. 184, Matalt', the deva who drives Indra's cart GOO,$c;oo
o:SQ08~~S' The Talaing version' in this J?lace has OIaSoO, j a k caw, to
drive. ~Goo:>&>o'... QloSoo:J;)J~')-(/ King Vessantara . . . drove on;"
299. oo,s ~§8' c;e-:>05 'P~'J-()~o
Vic drep boy riji-830
The mendicants run,towards the king-5I2. 8
Maddi sat down watching. Now, four brahmins had come too late to
be present at the last distribution of gifts they ascertaiued the direction'
j
the Bodhisatta had taken and followed' up. Maddi took them to the king,
who had remained in the chariot.
Yac, a Leggar, Pali yac.lka. Dre p, to run = M.T. For boy see
plaque 199.

E"PIGRAPHIA ,BIRMANICA [ VO,L.,II
300. c;o.OJ~~ C£cS slS,"c;gj8-0?O
Wesantar kit danksett-831
Vessantara gives the hors~s',in, almS-SI2.
10
,
On coming up, the brahmins ask Vessantara for th,e horses 'and 'he at
once gives them up'.
=
Kseh, a horse M.T. Q~oo,. khYeh (pron. cheh). I had at first
thought this was to be read k~ eQ, but ,this' word appears in three other
plaques round the base of the Ananda and.twice in the Shwezig8n inscription
(liries 128, 129), in which the reading" is 'clearly ksi moreover, for the
=
sound sh Skt. s, they use in Talaing the letter C!>. The group ks seems
to correspond in M.T. to~, kit)' (pron. ch, in church") ;. cf., for instance,
II
ooC9 (£Ell), kasu (ksu), M.T. ~[, khyu (pron. chu), to write; 0000
(83), kasau (k,sau) = M.T. ~, khyau, an oath, a curse; 0009 (ffi),
=
kas i (ksi) M.T.~, k hYI, to shake, quake, tremble. There is a
variant, ,k s e1).h ;' in the plaque, after kseQ, the~e appears to be a letter,
but so much damaged as tomak.e, it very -d,oubtful what it is, if it is a letter
at all.
301. 'lQS (.) ~ ~d5-'o\>J
Raman ma jak kwil-83Z
The red deer drawing the chariot- ' , j 12. J5
After the gift of the horses, the travellers were'stranded on the road ;
.{l.t that 'moment, four gods, seeing their plight, took the form of red deer
and drew the chariot.
=
Ra mail, a red deer M.T. QC, mail; with raman compare the
Burmese ~S, samail.
3 d3cSG1~ ~CS-o??
02•
K,il dan kwil-833.
He gives away the chariot--';'SJ2. 22
A while afterwards, a' brahmin comes up and asks'Vessantara fot,the'
gih of the chariot; this also he gives without hesitation. '

PART:I ] TALAlNG PLAQUES 'ON THE ANANDA 115
303. coooo~~ Goo'Jb (§8-o?9
Wesantar lop grip-834
V,essantara enters the forest-SI3
So soon as the chariot was given away,' the four deer disappeared, and
Vessantara and his wife Were obliged to go on foot; the former carried little
prince Jali and Maddi carried _Ka1,lhajina; and thus they entered the forest.
That they entered the forest is' not expressed in this connexion in the Pali.
Grip, forest, see plaque 82.
3°4. og'Je§ 08~co<:p8-o? ~
Smafi tinro\V-:-835
They ask the way-SI3.
I I
Whenever they met anyone, they asked the way to the Vindhya
Mountains all these travellers were much touched on beholding them, and
j
answered, "Long, still long is the way!"
Tinrow, road, way, a variant of tanrow (see plaque 108).
305. @OS d3ro OO.2>laC-O?G
~as kil sacchu'-836
They pluck and give fruits (to the children)-S13. 19
As they were thus going, the two children were clamouring for the'
beautiful fruits growing on the trees. By the power of the Bodhisatta, the
fruit-laden branches bowed down of their own accord within reach, and they
plucked the ripest and gave.them. to the children.
=
J.3 as, to pluck M.T. $05, bah. Sacc hu', a variant of sac c hH,
plaque 9.

116 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 11
306. 88 o.t0i8~-o?1.
Cip Suvannagiri-837
They arrive at the Suval}'Q.agiri Mountain-SI4.
I
S uvan na, for S uval}l}a.
307. ~~Q')'l~g-O?O
Kuntimaranadi-838
(They arrive at) the Kontimara River-514.
2
Leaving the Suva'Q.l}a Mount, which is five yojanas away from Jetuttara,
they arrive at the river Kontimara, which is five yojanas still further.
Kuntim ara, the Pali has KontimFira.
as
308. 3';)'1~8,\-o?(!
Cip Araiiiiagiri-839
They come to the Arafljara Mount-SI4. 3
309. 02'Je§ 88~g-090
Twan
bimnah-840
(They arrive at) the brahmin village-Sl4
Leaving the Araftjara Mount, another five leagues bring them to the
brahmin village of Dunnivi\\ha.
=
Twaft, village M.T. oa;,$ and CYzpS, twan and kwan. Bimnal),
=
a brahmin M.T. ~'i.:, bam nal); there is a variant, burh nal) (plaque
22j).

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
3 J o. o-:>C>tcv v8~-·09::>
Mitula nagir-84I
(They arrive at Vessantara's) uncle's citY-514~ 6
Ten leagues further, they arrive at the city of the Bodhisatta's uncle:
its distance from Jetuttara was thirty leaguesiyojanas).
Nagir, the Pali nagara, city = M.T. ,pf1O, naguiw, Dhd. 63.6.
3 (;~')SG8.oS ·@8-.09J
I I.
Dmon pr;1ey jrap-842
They stay in a rest-house (near the citY)-514. 16
They did tiot enter the city but entered and sat in a rest-house situated
outside the city. Maddi, the dutiful wife, wipes the dust from her husband's
feet and shampoos them.
Dmoil, see plaques 215, 265. P Q.ey, in = M.T. V, p Q.a i.
3I 2. This legend is practically illegible. The scene -represents Maddi
with her children, when, having shampooed Vessantara's feet, she stands
outside the rest-house, well within ~ s.ight of people, with the· intention of
announcing. Vessantara'~ arrival (Pali, VI 514. 17-18)•. There is a somewhat
spoiled, but still clear enough, df on the left hand, with,. before it, ~ome
traces of a letter which may have been ma j the n4me Ma J di in this
connexion is probable enough. The last letter on the right is s, with before'
it, and separated from it by two doubtful letters, what lookslike (?) sz.'n, mz'1z
or hz·t:.
3
I
3. o~ 7°o?e§-099
Maddi gulin-844
Maddi converses (with the women of Ceta)-S14. 19-25
The women going in and out of the city of Ceta, seeing the queen
outside the rest-house, come and surround her and ask her about herselfi

liS. EPIGRAPHIABIRMANICA [VOL.- II
Maddi tells them,: and the women··deplore· her fate. The 'Pali says nothing
about Mad_di telling the,womeJi :what 'nas happened. 'and the fatigue of the
journeY'- :It' is, however, ~ in th.e Burmese version (Hanthawaddy Press,
Rang~on, I9~3, the:Talai~g'
p. 64) version: merely says that the women
j
asked her about,herself, 'but her"answer 'is not recorded, though, of course,
~rO:>coo05E1~lqlcSo§lcod365QGoo,oOC§lI e3:loo~CYil5~,~e~S
it .must have been given: .
.~J~ o~cS~c:Gl8~,,~gG~¢O.q1: ¥9u-.1I the, women' of: the city who were going in
and coming out, seeing . the, queen, su~rourided' her and asked her about
herself, then they exclaimed eO, the tender lady!' etc.);" S.V. 23.
314- 2: 08-09 ~
00'j0
Na~taw mati-845
The); are keeping w;itch (on the king and queen)-SI7. 26
They then 'have abundant food brought, make the'rest-house comfortable
and; surrounq.ing it, keep ,vatch.. .This plaque should properly c01l1e:after the
next.
,The lower part of the right-hand half of the t (00) 'in taw is spoiled,
and at ~rstsightthe word looks.asif it wereGmO(ke w). An examination
of the plaque, shC1W~ that the glaze has slig~tly'JIeeIed 00.
=
Mail, U> keep, to watch M.T.
3J 5. 7oo~2§ 'Oi, ~8-()9 G
GuHiii ku smiii-846
(Vessantara) converses with the princes-.515. 5 /I
Then the people go'and inform the king, Vessantara's uncle, of their
arrival, and sixty.thousand princes come to see him,lamenting. To induce
him nol to proceed to' the Vindhyas.I ,they offer him the kingdom of Ceta
j
he refuses. ;This should have c<?mebefore the preceding plaque.'

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
to
3 I 6. ~o qj cBG;~~(")91.
Smin pyun tinro-847
The princes show' the way {to Vessantara)-s18'.
1
.They stay one day and one night·in the rest-house, and early in the
morning resume their journey the sixty' thousand ,.princes accompany them
j
for fifteen leagues then, at the entrance to the forest, they stand and care
j
fully point out his way to the Bodhisatta.
p yuti, to show, see plaque 97; Tin r0, for tinrow
j
the legend as
it is fills the plaque. and there is no room for the final W j seepJaques 3°4
and 108:
3I 7. 85 (")eQ'JG~-o9(")
Cip Gandhamadana-848
They arrive at the Gan~hamadana Mountain-SI9. 19
The princes,in order to prevent any danger from befalling the travellers,
order one, of their men, very skilful, in woodcraft, to foHow them and keep
a careful, watch they then go back. The royal exiles, continuing their
j
journey, arrive at Mount Gandhamadana.
3 8. O1G'P8 G~'J8S-o9~
I
Kurow tmo'-849
Turning his back on the (Gandhamadana) Mount-SI9. 20
Leaving the Gandhamadana behind, Vessantara goes on his way.
Kurow, ' turn the back on = M.T. ~~, kara u, which is used collo
quially in this sense: G~~OO4~cSo:d.Z:3;>-"do not be turning your back on
me." T m0',/ a rock,a rocky hill, mountain =, M.T. ~3S, t ma',

120 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. j[
319. i38 Goqcoo~-o~o
Cip Wepulapar-B50
They arrive at the Viputa Mountain-SI9.· 21
uo,
Par, a mountain, from the Sanskrit parvata,. the modern form,
paw, is very frequent in books after names of mountains.
3 ,"(),)cX~Q,)9.yB- ~:>
20. 0
Ketumaranadi--B51
(They rest near the) Ketum River--519.:.l1
Passing by the foot of the Vipula ~ount, they come to the banks of
the river Ketumati, where they rest and take a meal prepared by the
forester who accompanies them.
32 I. rBcS ~')05d3c;cb',)8",-o~ J
Kit cnayki.nlon-852
They give (their guide) a (golden) hairpin
In acknowledgment of the forc?ter's services they present him with a
golden hairpin.
For cnayk"inlon,. see plaque 53.
322. g85 G@0501Q-O~~
[G]ja' jreysum-853
Sitting under the banyan tree-SI9. 24
After his meal, Vessantara, full of peace, crosses the nver Ketumati
and seats under a banyan tree.
= =
Gja', to seat M.T. Jreysum, a banyan tree M.T. ~9, j ra i
s u ril, Sudh. 2. 2 I. The Bodhi tree under which Gautama attained Omni
science is called [§-a:o, jrai t haw, A.V. 28 = assattlta,. [}:JJetS, j raim ha
budh, A.V. z'b£d, and ~~0J8udi05, chu bodhi paluih, A.V. 167. In

'PART I j TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 121
'o~05means
the last expression, the circle in,the cei1tre of Jambudipa; around
the Bodhi tree, V.O.K., 45. 11, G~:l8ooo~051
.323. 88~?cl3o~-n~9
Cip Nilipar-854
Then he moves on and comes to the mount Nalika-s19. 26
4.
32 88 ~oc8$-o~:>
Cip'Mucalin-855
He arrives at the Mucalinda Lake-:-SI9. 26
325. 88 °9'105 [J;;)2B-o~ G
Cip caturas anca--856
He arrives at the square lake-SI9· 29
They passed along the bank of the Mucalinda Lake and) following the
course of the stream which flowed from the' mountain, they arrive at the
square lake.
Catura s, square, from the Pali catura$sa. Aiica,. a lake; I have
not found any modern equivalent.
3 26• 88 :J;>OOOG8cil-o:)1
Cip assamapit-8S7
He arrives at the hermitage-S2o.,
10
Now Indra, perceiving from his' heaven what was happening, called the
architect of the'gods, Viyvakarma, and told him to go to the Vindhyas, cmd
there build a hermitage in a pleasant spot. Viyvakarma builds two. retreats~
one for Vessantara and one for Maddi, and keeps there rea.dy all that is
necessary for hermits. He then writes an inscription: "This.is for him who
wishes to become a hermit" he drives away from the spot· all inhuman
j
, creatures and loud-voiced beasts and birds, and goes his way. The Bodhi.
a
satta, following' path, arrives at the herrriitage.

122 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 11
Assam apit, hermitage, from the Pali assamapada; M.T. (3';)~~oS,
a smapui t, A.V. 28.
3 27. ~') ,"cv')8 (;) 3Sq-o:) 0
Raja' lop' rna 'ir-858
'The king enters (the hermitage), becoming a hermit-s2o. .ff
11
On seeing the inscription, Vessantara understands that the hermitage has
been prepared by Indra; ,he goes in and dons the garb of a hermit which
was there ready.
'I r, to leave the world, see plague 34-
'"v'q oq
328. 090'5 ;>o;)')cO-.0 ~
@
Tit nor.parnasal-859
(Vessantara) goes out. from the herrriitage-S2o.
14
Then he goes out from the hermitage with the calm of a Pacceka
Buddha, and approaches his family. MaddY falls weeping at his feet.
Parn asa I, a hut made of leaves, a hermitage, from the Sanskrit
par1J(Jfola" in M.T. the form ()f~:>, from Pali pa1J1Jasala, is found, S.B. I. .
3 9. Q~ [§8-o
2 Gcv18 G0
Maddi lop grip-860
MaddI enters the .forest-S21,
I
Maddl, her emotion over, goes in her hermitage and assumes the ascetic
garb. She asks as a favour to go hersdf in search of fruit~ and root!), and
he asks her,. now they are ascetics, not to come to his hut unseasonably.
Now, by the .power of the Bodhisatta's compassion, aU the wild animals
within a large radius were full of compassion also and did no harm to
one another. Daily, at dawn, MaddY fetches. water, sweeps the hermitage
and, leaving the two children in the father's care, enters the forest in quest
of roots and fruits.

11
PART TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
330. o.JS~8S-oG
0 0
Ca sacchu'-86I
.They eat the fruits-52I. 4
In the evening, she returns, and, having bathed the children,' they all
four sit down and eat the fruits she has brought. .
33 I. Q~ ,,<:\')')8 oq~o:J'JoS-o GJ
Maddi lop parnasal-862 .
Maddi enters her hermitage-52I. 5
The meal over, the queen takes tbe two children, and retires to her hut.
Thus did they' live for seven months.
332• 88 e3:>S 'l'S~l[8J-oG?
Cimi iiiic Juc t1u[n]~863·
(Vessantara) looks expectantly and sees Jujaka coming-54I• 20
Now, in Kalinga, there lives a brahmin named Jujaka i heis.married to
a young.wife. She wants two slaves to do the rougher house-work. jcjaka
has heard of Vessantara and of his readiness to give, so he resolves to·go
to him and ask him for his two children. After many adventures, he comes
near the hermitage, but being afraid Maddi would prevent the gift of her
two children, he waits till she has gone to the forest for fruits. During the
night Maddi is visited by a dreadful premonitory'dream, and she runs to
the Bodhisatta's hut to tell him of it. At 9nce, he understands some one
is coming to ask for the children, and rejoices; but he does not tell her the
meaning of the dream i he consoles her, telling her not to believe in dreams.
Then, early in the morning, as usual, she makes over the children to Vessan
tara and goes into the forest. Jujaka comes up the footpath leading to the
hermitage, and the. Bodhisatta sits down, eagerly watching the way by

J24 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 11 .
which· he would come j and as he looks forward expectantly he sees Jujaka
commg.
=
C i mi, to look forward, .to look to expectantly M.T. CiS, camI j the
Talaing version, at this passage, has: ~~::>S~05 ::o~li8ffiil02:ozo$~c eIj,IQDtlS,,:
the Bodhisarta sat cross·legged on a fiat stone and looked forward to the
II
o
brahmin coming" j Sudh. 19. 25, ~lo>S O~lliQo$ e3,05 ~5§ a)~ dJl 02~-(/ the
.'people of the place, looking expectantly, saw the Blessed Buddha (standing)
on the summit of the bill." Ha~wen has the form a)~, 1a 111 i. J u c =
Jujaka. The plaque is somewhat spoiled, and the estampage a~d photograph
would have been of little avail without the plaque·itself j in ,ci mi, there are
only faint traces of tbe c and of the i. In t IuOJ only faint traces of IuIi
are still to be seen.
333- 018-0G9
(?l')c8.
.Jali wail-864
Jali goes to meet (Jujaka)-S42• 4
On seeing jujaka, Vessantara is delighted, for now he will be able to
give something to some one, which he has not done for sevenmonth·s he
j
calls out to him to approach; then he tells his little soh Jali to go and meet
him. The little prince obeys.
\V a 0, see plaque J93.
334- 9J3S .~')c8-. ~
o(i
Buhic Jali-865
(jujaka) frightens Jali-542. 6
to
As the boy approaches him, offering relieve' him of .his luggage,
jujaka think~, II This surely must be Vessantara's son j' from the very first
I must speak harsh words to him." So· he snaps his fingers, bawling out,
Get away! Get away! "
II
u
B hic, see plaque 252.

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
33 5. ~')cS CX(c'J~ O':(~-oG@
,J
ali kumar tun-866
Prince jali returns (near his father)-542. 7
jali returns to his father's side and, looking at the br~hmin, perceives in
him all the signs of a low, cruel man.
if.
Tun, .see plaque 262; here it is used as -a verb, to return j further
this sense in the expression 0CXlS 03::):>, patun pa a, an exchange of friendly
greetings = Pali patisanthtira,. this expression is found at Dhd. 63. 13 and
226. 27. The text has (542. 7) tigant'Dti,. having returned."
jl
336" qoo')e§ 01 ~S-o G.1.
- -GuHiii ku Juc-867
(Vessantara) conversing with jOjaka-S42. .If
I I
The brahmin then comes up to the Bodhisatta and the latter converses
J
with him he asks him on what business he is come and iijaka answers he
j
has come to ask for his two children. Vessantara agrees to give them, but
asks him to' wait for- Maddi, .so that she m~y see them once more this
j •
J
iijaka flatly refuses. Then Vessantara asks him, before taking the children
to his village, to show them to their grandfather at Jetuttara, but this
requ~st
again is declined, fC:r the brahmin is afraid of the old king's ire.
337. (j')05 o:>~ ~CX}J~g-()Go
Bat han tyol]-868
(The two children) hide in a clump (of biJshes)-545. 13
The two children, hearing the cruel words of the brahmin. flee and hide
m a clump of bushes.
.Bat, to hide; I have found yet no modern equivalent of this word
j
the sense of' to hide" is clear from the context and the scene depicted
II
on the plaque in the text,' it answers to the Pali lliliyati.H an, see
j

rtPIGRAPHIA BIRMAN-TeA [VOL. it
plaque 28. T y01:;1, a clump, of trees, 6f bushes, etc. j this word appears
again in plaque 356, where it is applied to a clump of flower bushes, t y0 1:;1
Pk a w. Of this also I have found no modern form equivalent.
338• 00005 ••• • -oG@
Samwat .. . - 869
The children .
This inscription is very badly weathered the first word seems to be
j
J"
sa til wat, children. The last letter is I, and that before it seems to be
the letter before the it is very indistinct; it may have been b, thus giving
us bat, as in the preceding plaque~
339.~l'Jc8 O1Q,)C\. d3~--o1o
Jali kumar tin-870
Prince jali comes up (from the square lake)-S46.
I I
From the clump of bushes they run to the square lake and, getting into
the water, they stand concealed with lily leaves over their heads. Jujaka,
not seeing them, gets into a temper, and accuses Vessantara of'_ having'
made them a sign to run away. Vessantara tells him he will fetch them
back i then, following their footprints, he comes to the square lake i he caIIs
out to JaIl, Come, my boy, come," and the prince, fearful of disobeying
If
his father, comes up from the lake.
Tin, to ascend, go up, come up j M.T. = ~~, t uin.
340. Ld3J~ G~,)~ oJ~')q-O'lo
[Ti]n nor karilbar-871
(Ka~ha) comes up from the lake-546.
21
He also calls out to little princess KaJ;lha, who likewise comes up from
her hiding place and, clasping her father's feet, weeps.
K ~
mua.
r, see plaque 125.

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE" ANANDA 127
341. cBcS sl~ ~CY.>,)~-o1J
KU dankon-872
(Vessantara) gives in alms his (own) children (to Jujaka)-S47. 12
. .
Vessantara explains to the cbildren that he gives them in order to obtain
the highest fulfilment of the Virtue of almsgiving, and so may, in a. next
existence, attair: Omniscience. He. then fixe~ a price on each j if Jali
wishes to .become free, he must pay one thousand '-pieces of gold as for
j
Kal].ha she will have to give a hundred slaves, male and female, a hundred
l He
horses, elephants, etc., and takes them back to the hermitage. takes a
water-pot, and, consecrating hi,s gift by pouring out the water, gives in alms
his children to the brahmin.
342• ~& oae§ q»~-O'l?
Juj kgaii juk-873
Jujaka bites off a creeper-S48. 3
100~ing
Having made his gift, Vessantara, joyful,. stands upon his
children meanwhile, Jujaka bites off a creeper to tie them With.
j
4
_ K afi, to bite, bite off j I have not found an equivalent· modern form j
4
in the plaque, Jujaka is depicted as biting off a creeper the is somewhat
j
spoiled, but the plaque shows traces of the lower stroke. J uk = M.T.
j
Haswell gives only the meaning of "rope," but Stevens, under Creepe'r,"
II
has: ~ql(]5,·<£105@8,tnam juk, jukgr uip j a rope isproperl, <£,05 Goo:>05,
. I
juk lot,. Sudh. 21. 16.
£\S
343. ~SG~ ~~-O'l.9
JUc dak rin ar-874
Jujaka binds and takes away (the children)-5.j.8. 4.
\"J'ith the creeper he has bitten off, .the brahmin binds, Jali's right hand
to J(flttha's left and, beating them with the ends of the deeper, takes them
away. The reading j u C l,vith long u, which is indistinct in this plaque and
the preceding one is quite clear in t~e estampages.
l

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL, I[
344.. oSSoo')c? GnloS-01.~
Kinkil dos~875
Vessantara sUbdues his anger-552• 21 ff
Blood runs down their bodies j in a rugged place the brahmin stumbies,
and the children slipping off their tiny hands from their bonds.run weeping
to their father j but' the brahmin follows up an~ drives them away.
Vessantara's heart is filled with sorrow, and he retires to his hut where he
weeps bitteriy. At the thought o( the unmerciful beatings they were
suffering, his anger rises, and he resolves to pursue the brahmin, kill him
and bring back the children. But he thin,ks better of it and does not do so.
a
KinkaI, variant of kinka n No. 62 i Nt. to instruct one's
J II
anger,)J that is, to reason it away, to master it, subdue it. ,D0 S := Pali
dosa.
345. Cj£!&> nhS-01. G
JiiJ dak-876
Jiija~a binds (again the ,children)-554. 5
Meanwl,tile the children,were being taken away by Jujaka. In a rough
place the i3kter again falls down, and the children' make another .bid for
. freedom. But the brahntin follows the~ in a vile temper and binds them up
agam.
~I)S 8t~a;>')~-o
346. 1'1
Jiic rin ir-877
Jujaka takes away (the. children again)-554' 8
And then he again takes them back with him~

TALAING PLAQUES ON THEANANDA
PART I]
34.7. oo'!1'Ja~acS05-o'l.
0
Ka~hajin jilit-878
Kal.1hajina looks back (at her father)-S54' 9
As they are bemg led away, Kal.1ha turns back,. looks at her father and
.laments pitifully.
=
J
iiit, to turn back, to look back M.T. ftcf.>,·g lit: I have not yet
found this word in the literature, but it is used colloquially in the expression·
.G~~05, ile w g lit == to look back the Pali has. n£vattitva olokelltf,
j
"turning back ~nd looking
1/
(at her father), and the Skem, p. IIS, (t:)(~P~~
OOCDcoc9co§_'l Ka\lh~jina turned back (OOCDCOC) and looked at the king."
348• '"oo:>~~ oo'JS-0'l(!
Wesantar yam-879
.Vessantara:weeps~5S4:
24
On hearing his daughter's lamentations, Vessantara's heart wells upv;ith
emotion and sorrow, and he weeps bitterly.
349. cBc9. alS ~u5-ooo
Kit dan buy-880
Vessantara gives • .' (?)-":'S54
I cannot make out the meaning of the word ··b Uy~ .. The'plaque has
.somewhat weathered in this place, and though,in it, the letter looks like a
h, it may. have been originally at,' ·if so, we should read : kiI dan t ii y,
t \i Y being the suffix of the past.tense, and translate.: "(Vessantara) after
he had·given in al~s (his childrenJ~'.~ The plaque represents him seated in
front of his hermitag¢'; .and this would tally with the text, which says that.
after his fit of weeping, he reasoned with himself that he should not give
way to this earthly affectIon,· but. should be calm, and sat still as usual. .
From',the episode of his ,,,·eeping. to that·of the appearance of the lions in .
Maddi's path, there is made mention of no gift. of his which could be
represented by the word biiy..

13° EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. II
350. (?I':)8d38 ooS-oo::>
Jadisiti dal-881
The lion bars (Maddi's path)-ss6. 30
'While being dragged away, the little princess continues her lamentations,
which move the hearts of the deities, who reflect that, if Maddi arrived at
the hermitage at the usual time, she would immediately go in search of
her children and thus get into great trouble. So, to keep her back until the
setting. of the sun, they instruct three of the gods to assume the form of a
lion, a' tiger and a leopard, and to obstruct her way till sunset. They do so.
Jadisili, lion = M.T. o,JB~c, j.adisuili; if. Cambodian, song
=
(Aymonier). Dal, to shut, obstruct, bar M.T.30, daw.
oa'e§
35 I. Q~ c;OO4~-OO J
Maddi sman kon-882
Maddi ·enquires about her children-s60. 30 if
Maddi, perceiving the wild beasts in her path, is terrified and dares not
proceed i she remembers the bad dream she has had (plaque 332), and
becomes convinced something. dreadful has happened.' At sunset, the gods
disappear and Maddi proceeds on her way to the hermitage•. She does
not perceive her children as usual, and comes up to Vessantara, who is
sitting in silence i she enquires of him about the children.
352. Q~ ~S ~@8-oo?
Maddi cip kren-883
MaddI comes up to the eugenia tree-s64· 5
To all her enquiries and lamentations, Vessantara does not answer, and
he keeps his ominous silence. Then, in the moonlight, she.seeks her
children in all the places where they used to play, and thus comes to the
cluster of eugenia trees, which was one of these.

J
pART I TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 131
353· Q~ ~8 §t8-o09
Maddi cup krun-884
Maddi arrives at the river~564. 9
Gup - CJ p, to arrive.
354. Q~ cB~ ~~')8S-oo ~
Maddi tin tmo'-885
Maddi ascends the hill-S64.
I I
She goes up the hill where the chi.dren used to eat fruit and pluck
flowers.
355. Q§ 8& 88 "83:-ooG
Maddi cip CHI ksel].-886
Maddi comes upon the (toy) elephants and horses-564. IS
In her ramblings she comes. upon the" children's toys.
356. Q~ 8& "01!'): ~18-oo1
Maddi cip tyol]. pkaw-887
Maddi arrives at the clump of flower·trees-s64. 25
She then comes to a clump of flowering plants and looks here and there
for her children.
T yoh, see plaque 337. P ka W, "sec plaqu~ 176•
357. Q~ 88 (Q8j-noo
Maddi cip aiica-888
Maddi comes to the lakes-s64. 29
She" comes to the lakes covered with lotuse.s ncar which the princ"e and
l
princess used to play.

132 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
Afi ca, a lake = Pali pokkhara1fii see plaque 32S. This plaque, on
the Ananda, is wrongly placed after the one which follows' (SS8).
358. OiG'P0 ,"0-:>05 "'pOl-:>-one
Kurow boy raja-889
(Maddi) goes back. to the king-s6s. 2
But she can see the children nowhere. She thelJ returns. to the
hermitage, wherein she finds Vessantara with his face cast down j she
a
addresses him; he does not answer. A second and third time, receiving
no answer, she wanders into the night.
K uro w, to return, go back, see plaque 318. Boy, to, towards, see
plaque 199. 'I he word raj a is not fully clear in the photograph, being
somewhat spoiled on the plaque itself, but a careful examination of the latter
a.
::;hows .it to he raj
359. Q~ ~o:S-o
(;00':)05 @0
'Maddi lot plit-890
Maddi falls and sIV00ns-s66. 8
Having come -back for the third time and still unable to obtain .any
information from Vessantara, the distracted'mother falls down upon the
.ground in a swoon.
Lot, to fall = M.T. PI it here means lito swoon II j theM.T. is
~l05, piu it, to become extinguished.
360• bOJ"c1S 't1::nJcO-o~o·
Yok rusal-89I.
(Vessanlara) raises (Maddi's head) and lays (it on his lap)
Vess.antara believes her dead he feels her heart and, perceiving she is
j
still alive, fetches a pitcher of water, raises her head, and lays it on his lap.
. Y 0 k, raise, lift up; .the more 111Odernforril is
0.105,
yuik, but the form
~OO?m, v0 k, is also found, for instance, at Dhc. 151. 26. R usaI, to lay,

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ,ON THE ANANDA
place; put; it is found also in Blagden's Pagan Inscriptions. There IS a
variant, 1usa1, also in the Pagan Inscriptions, and also, in the same
inscriptions, a form, s aI, to which answers the modern colloquial 0.::>:>, sa.
36 I. 8o..x>~~ .(X)~ ~p05-· 0 ~ J
Wissantar sal;1 c;lak--:S92
Vessantara pours water (on Maddi's face)-s66. 23
He pours water frolll the pitcher on her face, to make her regain her
conscIOusness.
=
Sa1), to pour M.T. ~oS, sui h, occasionally found written ~o.:>:>03,
soh i o"hd. 485. 5, ~g:>~ ~oS x~05 oSoSod105 cprqgoSG:~5 ~o -" only NirvaJ;la,
quenching the eleven fires (eleven passions), is exceedingly cool i in which
If'
=
~oS to pour and o~oS = to put out, extinguish. Another modern form
is Q)~oS, caruih, with infix r. In the Su-daung-uye Inscription, 15th
century, is foupd the form G@)05, sr 0 h, line 19-~GG3o.::>.pG~ o.::>~aS G~oS8:
@aSG~5:4d.l"iffi3QoSoaSrr GCO§JoS o~oS(Oot3SG~c:8Gcvo.:> ~oo~S G~~aS o.:>~co:> o.:>oS()~lCfoY
CJ'2aSHIOGoSGc;2Sm~ o'~cO-" with the great rain, that is, of the Law.of the
virtuous of the four continents, he poured down and extinguished the
fire that destroys the world, that is, all the passions in man."
Between this and next plaque comes No. 375, which has been misplaced
on the Ananda.
362• Q~ ~~G0~~1o/,)-O~?
Maddi anumodana-893
Maddi rejOices (at Vessantara having given away the children)
--567.
2:>'
He then sprinkles her face with water and she comes back to con
sciollsness; he explains he hrt~ given the children awa.y, and did not tell her
for fear of causing her pain, He consoles her, assuring her they would get
and
back the' children, alive well Maddi then rejoices in his gift

134 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
363. 8Q~: 00-l8--o~9
Bimnatt tluil-894
(Sakka, disguised as) a brahmin comes-568. 30
Now, Sakka, in his heaven, thought, "Vessantara has given his children
in alms yesterday i now, another low creature may come and ask him for his
wife, and he would be left helpless and destitute. I will take the form of a
brahmin and ask for Maddii he will thus attain the height of perfection i
having tlh~n made it a condition that she is not to be given to anyone
else, I will give her back." And so, at dawn, disguised as a brahmin,
Sakka comes to the hermitage. Most of the lower portion of the I in t IuIi
has disappeared.
364. rBcS 31S d3§q-o@,
Kil dan kindar-895
(Ve~santara) gives his-wife in aI111s-570. 4 f
Sakka asks for Maddi, and Vessantara, pouring water from a pitcher I1l
ratification of his gift, gives his wife to him.
Kin dar, see plaque 132.
365. i C nlS cBiq-O(!G
Duil dan kindar-896
{Sakka) receives the wife of Vessantara in aI111s-570' 4 J1
366. d3cS CY.(~ GJ§-O~ 1.
Kit tun Maddi-897
(Sakka) gives back Maddi-S72.
1
Vcssantara looks at his \vife's face to see how she takes his gift of heri
she is perfectly calm; Sakka then praises her and gives her back to the
Dodhisattao

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE- ANANDA 135
367. ~~ qa:ne§-O(!O
In gulafi-898
Indra converSes (with Vessantara)-S72. rff
A conversation then goes on between Sakka and the'Bodhisatta; the
former reveals. his identity and asks Vessantara to choose any eight boons,
and that he would grant them to him. Tlw latter asks them: the first and
most important for the story is, that his father may become reconciled, soon
recall him, and set him again on the throne.
368• ~~ ~o:>8 ::J:):>q-O(!(!
In cow ar~899
Indra goes back (to his heavcn)-S73. 18
Sakka assures him that they all will be soon reunited to his father and
goes back to his own place.
369. CfS 9'300 d3~ ~-(!OO
Juc stik hin chu-900
Jujaka sleeps on a tree-S73. 29
Maddi and Vessantara lived happily in the hermitage. Meanwhile,
Jujaka travelled with the children, over whom the gods watched carefully.
In the evening, when the sun went down, he used to tie up the children and
make them sleep on the ground himself, however, frightened of wild beasts,
j
would get up on a tree and sit in a fork of the branches.
q
370. 8 8aS ::§8[~? .. J~@oo
Cirmil smili (aba? . . ?):-90I
(Vessantara) looks out for (his father) the king--s82. 10
The gods, guiding Jujaka's footsteps, made him come to the capital,
Jetuttara, instead of to his own place in the kingdom of Kalinga, and

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
brought him into the palace' courtyard. The old king, Vessantara's father,
perceiyes the children and, has them brought to him. The young ]ali
J
explains how they came to be with ujaka. ' The grandfather pays the,
'brahmin the price set upon each child by Vessantara i jiijaka dies of an
indigestion.' The grandfather gathers a large army to accompany him to
the Vindhyas in order to bring back the Bodhisatta and Maddi. As they
near the Vindhyas, Vessantara hears the great noise made by, the large
army and, together with Maddi, ascends a hill and looks out.
C i r mil, to look towards, to, look forward to, is a variant of c imi
(plaque 332) j there remains only faint traces ~f the i over the m. The
last two words after 5 mIn are practically iilegible i the first, however, I
take to be 'aba, father, but this is only a conjecturei perhaps it is
=
am ba father.
371.~8 ~l8 8S-@.oJ
Smili tIuJi cip-go2
The ,k~~lg tVe~?ant3ra's father) arrives-s83. 15 ff
On beholding,th@,army,Vessantara,notknowing whose it might be,
becomes anxious ;'buf. Maddi convinces him it can only be his father's; 'then
h~ with"h~t
goes ba.ck and .si,ts before his' hut.:yessantara's father having
arrived, calls Queell.'Phusatian<;!·' explains that,if- they 'go all together"
Vessantara and .Milddi .migh(fec'eive a shock. "~ll,go first," s~ys he;
" wnen'.vou think ~,h:at,. after'a few moments, :,the first emotion has subsided,
follow up. "
The m, iT} ;:,~)niti' is 'J1!l,Jl1ore" yisiblea ,defect in th~ ·slaiein:the
middle of the'le'ttern makes"it:;lookJike"~',
".
. -.' .-'
372• ~8 O?-lt J3~ Gm:>~-@o?
Smii:t tluJi hin kon-903
The king comes up, to his son-s83. 25
The king mounts his elephant and comes up to his son.

IJ
pART TALAING PLA~UES ON THE ANANDA 137
373- ~oo:>~q ~aa')q ~-~o9
Wesantar hior aba-904
Vessantara salutes his father-s84.
I
374. Cl~?ro 0(,-18 8S-@o,
Gnakyak tlun cip-905
The queen (Phusati) arrives-s8s. 30
Touching greetings are exchanged; the old king tells them he has
brought with him the two-children, well and sound. And then Queen Phusati,
feeling the first emotion must by now be assuaged, comes to her son.
=
Gnakyak, queen M.T.; C/. the variant gnakyek, plaque 72.
375. ~5,005 ~cq8-~oG
Smin pat culun-906
The king (Vessantara) chafes (Maddi's) head-s66. 24
This plaque is altogether in the wrong place; it should come after
No. 36I. It refers to the episode when Maddi, after a fruitless search for
her children, falls in a swoon and Vessantara, placing her head on his lap,
pours water on her and chafes her face. .
=
Pat, to press with the hand; squeeze, shampoo, chafe M.T. CuI u Ii,
the head; the final 1i is somewhat spoiled, and could be taken for .an n.
Strange enough the Skem in this place, p. 64, has exactly the same words:
dJ80cD ~cq8 fil01J5-l the king chafed the head of the queen." This word is
(
found also under the form ooqc, c a IuIi. There is another literary form,
OJIlJ;, sam Iuil, with infix; c and s are often interchanged. With the
1Il
legend on this plaque compare Sudh. 13. 2I, ~oo931O'.tJS§ ::).")(;,ol::6 OJlllc-I< the
Blessed Buddha stroked (lit. pressed) his head with his right· hand."
18

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
376• 'P~').~?q, 2~-:)oS c!o1
Raja Inorgnakyak-907
-. '.
The king salutes the queen (his mother)~586. 5
When they see their mother approaching, Vessantara and Maddt salute
. her respectfully. On the plaque can be seen pretty clearly the traces of the
first two words. which are barely legible on the photograph..
377. "on~ ~lE 09S ,,~~85- ~oo
Kon tluJi hin abo'~go8
The children come to ·their mother-s86. ·8
The two children, perceiving their mother, come, running to her,
weepmg.
378• Q~ "i (;OO;~
(;CV?0'5-(!O(!
.
.
Maddi ku kon lot-gog
Maddi falls (on the ground) with her children-s86. 29
Sakka, from his heaven, perceives that ·the six royal personages have
fallen on the ground in a swoon and that there is no one to sprinkle water'
on them so he.causes a wonderful 'shower to fall, in which only \hose who
j
desired to be wet were wet.
379· c;o(X)~~
QOO?e3-(!OO
Wesantar gulafi-gIo,
Vessantara con\\~rses (with his father)-s87. 18 ff
The showE?r brings back the six royal persons to their senses. The sixty
thousand coudlers and the people approach, and the people call upon
Vessantara and MaddI to ascend the throne. again. Vessat;ltara addresses
his father, You and the people have banished me, who was ruling' right
II
eously." His father ..acknowledges his and his people's fault, and Vessantara
consents to become king again.

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON -THE ANANDA 139
380. c;o::o~q, .1n5 ~05-C!oo
Wesantar ~as gIik--9u
Vessantara changes his dress-s88. 7
Then, the sixty thousand courtiers born on the same day as himself
ask him to throw aside his ascetic garb. Vessantara enters the hut and
changes his dress.
=
J3as,-lochange M.T.; ~a1).
01,
381 . ~ca'J~ 0too-:>c5-C!oJ
Lilor pannasal-gI2
(Vessantara) salutes reverentially the hermitage-388.
10
Having ehanged his dress, he comes out of the hut and, remembering
he'
that, therein; had lived the ascetic life for nine months and attained to
the summit of perfection in-almsgiving, he salutes it reverentially, walking
thrice round-it with his right towards it, and falls prostrate before it.
382• 8GoooS .ooo~q-~O?
Bisek Wesantar-9I3
They consecrate Vessantara (king)-s88. 13
They jhen;pour over him t,he water of consecration and make him king.
Bise't<;-, coronation to consecrate king by pouring water on the head
= j
Pali abh£seka, M.T. oc#ooo5, pasek, sometimes found as o~05, pasuiki
also oc;o.:>OO 00.:>0, pasek pasaw.
383. 8~o:>aS Q~-eo9
Bisek Maddi-9I4
They consecrate Maddi (as queen)-s88. 23
Maddi also is bathed and adorned and anointed queen.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
384.. Q~ '{lnS86-(!0:l
Maddi 4uk ciJi-9IS
Maddi mounts her elephant-59!. 6
After the coronation, Maddimounts an elephant i Vessantara was on
another; in great ,pomp they leave the hermitage and proceed to the camp.
385. c8a5 'i;>::>q (§8-. -(!oG
Tit nor grip-9i6
They go out of the wilderness-592. 4
. The royal family, the courtiers and the army amused themselves with
sports in the wilderness for a month, after\yhich time they left it and went.
J
to the city of etuttara.
386. t;o~~q t;~16 @::>~::>[5J-::- ~01
Wesantar dmoil prasa[d]-9I7
.Vessantara dwells in his palace-592. 2}
They travelled the distance.of sixty leagues in two months. Vessantara
enters the capital, decorated in' his'honour, and .ascends his palace, where he
dwells ever happy till his death.
The story of Vessantara ~nds with this plaque. The three plaques
which follow have been put in the wrong p~ace on the Anandi.
387. eBc5 d3t1J::> a5---~oo
Kit kirya h-9I8
(Vessantara) gives ornaments
This plaque sh~uld have come among those illustrating the fir~t part of
. the·story.

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
388. ~a5'105 oS~'l&-(!O(!
Balrat kintaran-919
I have not been able to read this plaque at all, torn as it IS from its
context. According to the phonetic changes which have taken place from
the old to the modern language, the first word, ba Irat, might be now,
baw rat, or buiwrat j I cannot fix a meaning on any of these.
In the Pagan Talaing Inscriptions, there is a word, tinra 0, which means,
I think, "door," the' modern form being ooqc, tarail, also pronounced
ka rail j perhaps kin tara il means a door? Supposing this to be correct,
.ba Irat would: probably mean." to knock," and the legend would then be
read, "(Maddi) knocks at the door (of Vessantara's hut)," and would refer
to the episode when, after her dreadful dream, Maddi gets up and knocks
.at her husband's door t~ ask him the meani11g of her dream; but the modern
word for II to knock" is oqa5, roqa5', and ~q:JS, kha <;l a k, t ha <;l a k, and
a
ph a <\ k, and I do not spe the relation of ba Irat with these' forms. The
above is all conjecture.
389. "oo.J~~ cB~ •••• J
-(! 0
\Vesantar tin . . . . -920
Vessantara ascends .
This plaque is badly broken and one or two words are mlssmg j all the
personages have disappeared" except one, a man seated: this is probably
Vessantara. Perhaps this plaque was intended to illustrate the Bodhisatta
ascending his palace after his return from the Villdhyas, and in that case
should come before No. 386. The difficulty is that Vessantara-if it be he
-is represented seated.

.IJ. TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
PART
APPENDIX A
Alpluz6eticaJ L£sf of the words in the Legends oj the An'!'ftaa Plaques.
N.B.-Each word is given first in transliteration, and then 'in the Talaing
characters; the meaning follows the numbers indicate the plaques in which
j
the word is found; last follows the modern equivalent.. in native characters
and in transliteration. A point of interrogation' t?)indic'ates .that the word
has fallen into oblivion and has no modern equivalent,or, if any, I have not
been able to .trace it in the literature. \Vhen the old .form and the modern
=
form are exactly the same, the formula " M.T:" (is the same 'as modern
Talaing) is used.
Aja, ~, way, Wise, manner, representation, illustration, 271, 272, 280; =
M.T. This word, in the plaques, might be read' raj3 j . but in the
.first two instances he was only a small boy of five and eight years
of age, and not yetr3j a.
Aii ca, :3;)~, a lake, 325, 357; coo, Ia c a.
Anuino dan 3, :3;)~~Q'OP, to 'rejoice in, 362; pati,
Aba, '~, father, 2.1, 33, 98, 225, etc. (?).
j
A bo', ~:WJ36, mother, 23, 33, 4', etc. (?).
j
Abo' a ba, G~::>3Sr?, parents, 89,
A bhis e kh a, 3;)09~o:>o, consecrating as king by pouring, water, coronation,
to consecrate as king, 47 o~o;):J5j pas e k.
j
Am ba,~B, father, 145, 28j; fJide a ba.
=
Arafiiia, :3;)'la" 308 j this is probably an error for A.ra fi j a
Ar aii jara; Pdli. .
Alambay, :3;)d~::>05, a snake-charm~r, 231,232, 233, 2.34; a;;)co8~, alam
a
b ai; from pait', Alambayan·a.
Ass a m~ pit" U'oiOX)Q305. a hermitage, 326 ; 3;)~J~o5, asm3 puitj from
pau, assali1apada.
.Ahi, :3;)03, a snake, 136'; Fa./i.
30)~, at
A.c, to ask, to beg, 267,275; 30)::>05,
Ar, 3';;)~, to~o, 199,241,25°, etc.; i_.
3.;),

144 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. If
1m 0', ~~Qj3S, a name, 268 j cf. him 0' (plaque 4) j ~'i, imu; if. Senoi,
im0, i mii j Khmer, j h m0 h.
In, ~~, the god Indra, I, 106, I I 1, I I7, etc. j = M.T. and also d.3~, 'I n.
'I r, ::8~J to leave the world, to become a recluse or a monk, 327 (?).;. it
j
answers to the palt', pabbajati.
i n, ~I~' the god.!ndra, 223;' vide In.
i r, g)lq, 7 I, 114 j vide 'i r.
'i r, oS~, 34 j vide i rand 'i r.
Udya, e~:>, a garden, a pleasance, 224; e~)~, lidYan; from Sans/it,it
udyana. Cf. uyyan, uyyana.
=
U man, 8Gb, a tunnel, 195, 200; M.T
=
U III ail, tr.d3, )90 j u man.
=
U m III ari, e~&. 196; u In an.
U yyan, tP=iP~, a garden, pleasanc.~; 59; from Pli!t, uyyana. Cf. II dy a.
Uyyana, tPiP~, )43 = uYya
11.
Usa bhaj e~\)o:), a bull, 139; patio
o
dana, §:3~, cooked. rice, food,
140 j
patio
o r,' @q, to send, to c'ause to. make to, 50, : I I; G~!3S, P-'0w.
K a ka1). da k::1, c::).::~m, a chamr~leon, 147; Pritz'.
=
K iia, ~, to invite, 3:; M.T., which has also the form 69, il ha. The h
in nha rnav be due to the desire of preserving the notation of the
proper vowel sound, that is a and not ea,. there are numerous
examples of this use of h. :
Kat t a, rY-'83), one who docs or performs, an agent, 279, 283; pali.
K a pall a, 0:)0E8, fire·p~~n. 22 j patio
1, a1,'1.):):.::8, time, when, while, 5, 28, 5 2, etc.; /'ali, kala.
=
Ka1a,
m:;C0
00:;05, 43.
K as, 0:)::>03, to shave, 65 j OO~, kaQ.
Kin -uy, (E~aoS, medicine, I I7 118; n2l and ()~, g a· uuai and g a·
'uai.
Kinka11, oSaS}, to instruct, inform, ~xpla:n, (S I, 214, 226 j n()~, gagan.
Cj. ki 11 k = a n.
ef.
Kitikal, eB,hcS kin'.:an, 244; kinkal.
Kinkan, d:~(Y.)S == kinkan, 6:, '97.
!
IZ 1 ' n k a - I , C_Tc~~ ...m:;o:J s:: = l ,1 ' n . 1K an. 3'.14; c. k" 1 n1,< a- ..'
Kin ta, o3~, before, in front, 388; a variant of k ant a; no:», gata.
KindaliJ, r5~, to do. make. build, 124, 186;'T.>}. kanhariL

PART'U'] TALAING 'PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
K j nda f, ,Ee~, a wife, 132, 2,26, 364, 365i <-.ocvo, ka Iaw.
Kif, c:8q, to dig, 190i oal, oal~:k w'ui \\i;
nvuhv.
\vith infix w.
Kirmin, r£~8s, regal;state, "\hemagnificence and" enjoyment of such a
state, 229 i ~~, k min. .
K iry a, 03w, articles of dress, 'ornaments; I~O,' 171, 270, 27(, 387, etc.;
§o:p, kr iyya;
'ffOUl
palz,'; kiriya, kriy~:
KiI, 0905, to give, besto~, IS8; '229~ 230; 24:5, etc.; cY.Z, kutw.
Kinrom, cBG(i'S, under, 168; (?); this points toaform,.k rom, not met
with, but, c'ompare Khmer, k a rom',
K i Ia bha~ <;l aka, d3Xl'6:>~OJi,toy,' 10; ,Pali,for'Idla ••
K ,u,c:q, with, and; to, '9, ;13'; 16,'3S,37 40, etc. i ':::: ~tt:'
K ukku\a, O1ffiL~, a cock, 137; Pali. .
Kuta, CXl..cc, to tum, 'turn round, turh back, 289;. ncc, K'!-t a., The ISth
century Talaing is also
OCX)!I
a,
K u'hti rnar O1£QJq,the-iiverKontimara, 307·
Kum
fa c; o:i25, thief, .5; :cf.j~oo,·k.ti mIat.
K urn ar, cctQ'~, a prince, 335, 339!: e~G.; paN, kumara.
to
K umin, otS~, accession th,e' throne, a,nd as verb, to make, king,
enthronize, '25, 206, 217, 2~L'Cj. Idrmun and kirmin, ',and
n; ,
the modern ~~, krn'i
Kurow, 01~'t00' to tiirhthe back ~n; to'ret'urn',;go' back';318, 358; OJ~,
karau.
Ket, GOOOO, to take, 26, 77, 146, etc. = "M.T.
j
Kew, Gooo,bright, dear; be~utiful, happy,' Job; =' M,T.
!{ewat, Kewat.ta, GOOOOO, Goooffi,name of ape'rson,' 188; 179, paii,
Keva~\a.
Kon
.
, Goo:>,$50n,' child, 13 =1, 206, 29
.
1,3
.
41, etc.; = M,T.
Kam, 05, an arrow, 81; M.T. . .
K a rhb I r,CX)~'li,a tank, pond, I2S; 340 i C2', km a.
K~aii, C13E£, .to bite, bite off, 342 ; (?).
K Qip, ~o, the head, J,3~, 255 ~lO, k<;l uip.
j =
K mi 0, c:§~, to rule, rei~n, 10Si M.T.
=
K ru il, §}\ river, 353 M.T.
=
K r en, C;@c, the'eugenia tree, 352\ M.T.
to
Krow: G§JO, wash, 15~; §', krau.
K Ui'm,'~, one hundred, 202; :: M.T.
aa,
K wil,:'o§cO, cart, catriage, 133, 3°1; kwi.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. 11
Kw iI, ~05, a variant of kwii, 290, 294, 302.
K-se l,l, GOO', a horse, 3°0, 355 G~05, k h y e h.
j
K'-h iI, 90S, to rush at in anger, to assault, 216 ~, k h ui w•
..... j
~ hira, 8'1, milk, 7 j Pali. =
K h ut, ~05, to. call, to name, 50, 247 M.T.
j
Gja', a. 3S, to sit, 322; = M.T.
Gii i', ~35, to adorn, to be adorned, 30; ~, g:) i.
Gad r a b h a, 0130:>, a donkey, 144 Patio
j
G anthi, oc%., a knot here a necklace of threads,129 for PaU,-gat;lthi.
j j
G and ham a dan a, o&Q::>:3~, name of a mountain, 317; Patio
Gar, o~, the womb, ~9
j
00 and 1»010, g a wand goWi from Sanskrit,
garbha.
G a h a k, 00005, an official, an officer, 49 i pali, gahaka.
G ir i, 8~, a mountain, ~08 patio
j
Gu1aii, q"'::>e§, to converse, speak, talk, 35, 8o, 94, I I I, 185, etc.; the
modern 000::>$, g aIa n, is regularly used as a noun, meaning: worft,
speech, conversation.
Gna kyak, ;;;~J05, q~een, 50, 199, 282, 374, 376; = M.T.
G na k ye k, ~G"1l('" a variant of g naIt yak, 72:.
Gnu 11, ~l~, a woman's loincloth, 158 j §S, gn in.
Grip, @8, forest, wood, wilderness, 8'2, 90, 9
=
1, 303, etc:; ~8, g I'u i p.
G)ik, fio5, loincloth (in general), 155, 38o; M.T.
e a, 0, to -eat, 79. 154, 330 j = M.T.
eatu r a 5, 0Oi'1oS; having four side = s, square, 3~5 j pali, caturassa.
e i11, e~, elephant, 275, 276, etc.; M.T.
e iii, go, a variant of c i0, 13, 253.
eip, 88, to arrive, arrive at, come tv, 3°6,317, 319, 3~3, etc.; ~o, cuip-,
Cf. the variant cup.
Ci mi, ~~,. to look forward, to look to expectantly, 332 j o~, c'a m t.
Haswell has o:~, Iami.
Cir mII, 8q605, a variant of c j'In i, 37°,--
Cis, 80S, to descend, go down, 66, 276; BJ3 and Go05, c i hand c e h.
Cup, ~8, to arrive, 353; a variant of c i p, . q.v.
Cui u il, ~9S, the head, 375 j ocqc and '~'lLS, c aIu 0 and sam 1un.
Cow, GOJo, to return, go back, 32, 182, 2°4, 237, etc'i 6, ca u.
e nay k ill 1oil, ~Jo?d3~Gco:>8, an ornamental pin used to keep the hair or
headdress in place) 321 the modern forms are several: ~~~S
j

TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
PART 1]
ena aiknail, S;;~oo}8, c na a ik anhail, ~~:x>j,S, c na aisanhail,
oal?,)ic, ' t n a a ikh nail, ~~~8, sna a ik na n, ~~~j8, s na a i k
a
hanh ti.
enaykin10 il, ~,05rBS~c",S; a variant of last word, 53.
e
ri t, [j305, to draw a line; to draw a line by scratching, 74;' c~S and ('~05
car i c and car it; another modern word of the same meaning
is, :X>GJ05, cGj05, s a r a k, cara k, and I,he compound, ()~05 c905,
cariteara k.
C hU,l ~, a tree, a plant, 369
j
= M.T.
e
hu', ~sS, same as c h u, 3°5, 330.
J ak, 0,75, to pull, draw, 232, 3°1; == M.T.
Jana k, OI~05, King Mahajanaka, 38, 62, etc.
J ad isiil, 01,803&, lion, 350 odb~c, jadisuin. Cj. Cambodian, son.
j
J aII, OIx8, name of a prince, 333, etc.
J iIik, 6.c8rr5, to drive, :l9'"'8; ()~m, a:oqm, c a IIIik, ka III ik.
J iIit, (k8oS, to turn back and look, to look back, 347; the modern collo
quial, ~cf." g lit, is found in the expression c;~8~c5, ilewg1it,' to
look back.
<!,o,
Juc, the brahmin Jiijaka, 332, etc.
J ue, )l'o, Jujaka, 343·
J u j, )t'o" Jiijaka, 342, 345·
] uil, q,S, the feet, 156; I}S, j u1n.
J rail, @-&, presence, in the presence of, near, 215 j 0,~1&' jareil.
1
rap, @-6, a hall built on the roadside for the convenience of travellers,
=
a rest-house, 122, 124, 31 I j M.T.
J rUTh, @-i, a snake, 14 j = M.T.
J rey sum, G@-oScqS, a banyan tree j 322 j ~9, j ra is uril,
J low, G2':>o, cattle, 128 j ~, g Iau,
Nac, a:>o, to see, 61, 81, 231, 33J j e:p05; iiat.
Na tt, 23', a person, the people, 112, 166, 170, 209, etc. j = M.T.
I?
a k, ~::>aS, water, 92, 361 = M.T.
j
D uk
I
:f(05, to mount or ride a horse, etc., to go in a carriage, 291, '384:
. ~laS, 4 ui k.
=
I?
uil, '?tC, city, town, 48, 177, 204, 297; M.T.
Tailg 1a y, CXl~,oS, molasses, 20; 0',8 ot.~, tailk1a a i. Cf Burmese, cooro,
t a ill a i.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICt\ [VOL. II
Tanrow, cx:$G~, road; way, 108; cx:4, tarau; see variant tinrowi
there is a variant, cinrow, in the Pagan Talaing Inscriptions.
'TaI, <XlcO, to plant,., 176; ~o, t uiw.
TalAk a, <XlOO:)o~, tank, pond, 142; for pali. talaka.
Taw, <XlJO, to dwell, live (in or at), to be (in' a place), to be (doing some·
thing), 162, 210, 251, 3tA; 06, tau.
=
T i, c:B, ,the earth, ground, 28, 74, 177; M.T.,
=
Tit, cBoS, to. go out ; also: away, 'off; 27, 39, 59, etc.; M.T.
Tite y; 09~0005, to take along 'with one, by holding the hand, as a child, or
an animal with a ropel or a blind man by holding one end of his
stick, etc., S'7; :300 and c::oo, da t ai and t hat a i.
Tit, c805, a variant of tit, 385.
Tin, cBS, to ascend, go up, 51, 88, 218, etc.; ~S, t uin.
Tinrow, d3$GGpo, road, way,' 30:J; 316; oo~,- tara u. Cf. tan row.
=
Tim, cBS,' to know, recognize, 236;' ,M.T.
=
T u k, ~.n, to draw water, 92; M.T.
Tun, 01$, to return, giv;e bilck; return" come or go back to j back, again,
262, 297, 298, 335,,366; := ~~.T.
. T ur, ~~, to burn, be burning, 73 i Oil,',t 0.
-oa:,
T u1;>a~, ~', to show, 73; t h1;> a~.
Tol, c.ooJ05, cotton, 130; GooJO, tow., ,
oa,
To S, GOOJoS, to preach, 37, 248, 258,260i twa h.
Tna k, o;1':J5, a parrot, 172, 173, 182; a variant of tilek
T'lie k, G~n5, a parrot, 181;-oo~~n5, t aIie k.
. . .
T m 0, .GogJ, to turn round and round, 'over ,and over, .to twirl, whirl, spin,
256; ~o, t maw.
T m o',~~J3S, a .rock, rocky .hill, 88, 318, ,354;'0235, t,ma'•.
T y 0 I}, G01P', a ~lunip 'of tre~s', of bushe~, ,etc.; '·.~'337,.35Q;d?).
T r u k, §.n5, mango, 60, 61 S:J5,. k r uk. :' '
j
T rey, G@cR, excellent, ·l;>le~se~,)~i~~1. 79;. @,;·;t,r,ai.,
T(ar, C£~~,betore,':fir~t'::291;'~;. "kla-.· ,', ' .
Tluil" ottO, to come, 23, 26,164, 166, etc. j OJle and also Oilo, kiun
and tluri.
Twan, ~~e§, village, 3°9; ~,., Oi?JS, twa n, kwan.
T ~ a s, CJg)oS, a disciple, 36; ~', twal;l.
Thar, co~, gold, 123,267,284; coo, thaw.

PART i) TALAING PLAQUES ON THEANANDA 149
D a k. 3.15, to tie, bind, 343, 345 i = M.T.
D a 1} qaka, :3~O:>, stick = ,'pole, 134; Patio
o ani h, o~o5, properly a dry- measure a, trough shaped like a canoe,
j
ct.
as used in the East, 168 j io5 and G~o5, d nihand t neh.
tHe Pali,' dOJ;lL
Da I, oeO, to shut; ')bstruct, bar, 350 i :30, da w.
Dan, oli, alms: almsgiving, 267, 271, 272~ etc. i = M.T. j Pali, dana.
Din d u, 89b to instruct, 36, 75, 112 j OGoo:>35, da1 0'.
Dirda 5, B~ooS, the being born, the entering into a. new state of existence,
1I20 i .0:305, dada h.
D·jr hat, a~oooS, strength, 29,201; ~oooo, :3~OOOO, dra hat and· dar hat.
=
D u il, qS, to receive, 75, 365; M.T.
Du qa c, q~5, to whirl, turn round, spin, 256; ? ooQoS, t ha Qit.
Dewataw, GOocoJO, a god, 6, 45; Goo06, devatau pali, devat1.
j
Dow, ~lo, to run, flee,12!3 ~, dau.
j
D 0 5, G01oS, anger, 344i P4/i, dosa.·
D moil, G~lS, to dwell, rem = ain! 168, 215, 265. etc.; is, dln.i ri.
Drep, G@8, to run, ~99j M.T.
Dluil, flO, a boat, 191;
2lo,
glun.
o h a r, .o~, the Law, Buddhis~ Law, 244, 258, 260; oS,' d haw; Sanskrit,
dharma.
Dharm ma, o~e, same as d h a r, 37.
D h a rh may u t, Q~ 0100, the Battle of the Law; for full explanation see
under No. 178
j
PaH, dh
=
ammayuddha.
N a, ., with, by, 183, 249, 267 M.T.
j
°
N agi f, ~8~, a town, ,city, 31 j ~;)~, nag ui w; Pd/i,nag<:ra.
NadI, ~.8, river, 307, 320; Pil/i.
N a r a k, f"lnS, hell,; J09'; PaN" .narakaJ
~~Ai ~)i:(?waY'l 277 j,;"for full; explanations 'see unde1';·:this-inirhberi ; ;;'C/O)' and
. . v), a a. .
J;l and n
,N~,g~ ,:.,o,:a ,naga,.:serpent,. 259;'i260~· 261 'ii~51';ria kj.~Pdli,:·naga; .
N~ g a, •~~O, same as nag; 237, '238.
Naga b how, ~)O~CO;)O, the mansion or world of the· na'gas, 237, 238; .)()
a
,~, gabha u.
i1
N a!a ka,. ~;)~o:>, a ~autch, 24 Pilii.
j
Na f, ~;)~' the hermit Narada, 240, 241.
N a ra d, ~;)'15, the hermit Narada; 75·

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMAI\'ICA [VOL. II
NaIi, ~,08, the mountain Nlilika, 323.
==
Niman, ~GS, 'to invite, I, 107 j M.T.
Nj mit, ~805, to create, 235 i ~805, ~05, nimit,l mit.
Nor, G~'~, from, 39, 66, 164, 177, etc. i ~. nO.
Pa, 0, to do, make, 99, 119, 161, 178, 268; := M.T. C/. the variant pa'.
oc:om,
P ka k, £05, to turn over, upside down, upset, 255; ~oo(}5, bat ak,
ga tak.
P kaw, eB1S, flower, 176, 356i ~, Pka u. ~
Pea n, &l~, to send or leave a message or instructions, 33; ~DS and qj~,
ba can and phYani for the latter form see plaque No. 33.
Peun, &HS, meat, flesh, 77, 78, 79.127; qjlS,' phyun (see plaque No. 33).
Pati, oe§, to shoot with a bow, etc., 93 i oS, pan.
PaIi fi a, 08', question, riddle, problem, 136, wrongly written for 0e£',
= Gr.
pafi ha M.T. i pa:;, pafiha. prasna.
Paftha, 0t;9), vide pafifill, 134, I3j, 138, etc.
Pati h0, 0~E51', same as Pafi ha, 148.
Pa\isan, o~.:>.?S, concep~ion, 2, 38,83, 115; ~OJgJ pa\isandhi == Pd/i.
Pa1).Qit, 0~05, a pandit, a clever and wise man, a scholar, 169 Pali,
j
pa1).qita.
Pat, 005, = to press with the hand, to squeeze j to shampoo, chafe, 375;
M.T.
P t j0, &>8, to beat the breast, in SOfrow, etc., 72 connected with the
j
modern adverb 098090, t jotio.
Ptit, 805, to cause to come out, 87 &05, Ptit tit is a variant of tit
j j
(q.1J.)•
P da s, lJoS, to cause to be or become, to make, create, 253 ljoS, bda h.
j
Pan, oS, fOUf, 150, 166, 170 j - M.T.
Pannasal, 0io,):l05, 381; Pdli, paI}.I}.aSalai see parnasaI.
0'1,
PaT, mountain; used only after proper names of mountains; 319, 323 i
(.)0, Paw i from Sansllrt't, parvata.
Parna s a I, o~~o,),05, a hut made of leaves, a hermitage, 328, 33r, from
the Sa,ukr't/, parI).ac;:ala j the modern form, <J!:O:>, pannas a, is
from the PaIi, pa1;t1).asala.
Pari bbac, (.)~e'~. an ascetic, here = a female ascetic, 207, 208; ()~a:)oS,
o~~oS, pari bbat, pari b u it; pali, paribbajika.
P a. ris u t, uqo;c5, birth, the bringing forth, 84, 116; = M.T. j SatUkrit,
prasuti

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
Passena, OoSG:»~:>, to think of, remember, long for, 272; ~05~:>, bah
sna, but see note under plaque No. 272.
Pan, o1S, to ask leave, ask permission, beg', 225 i == M.T. Cf, Burmese,
oS, pan.
Pindon,8c;A'o, to send, 171, 172~ 192, 2°5,294; oooc, paUn.
Pinrin, 8~o, news, 173; o~o, paruin.
Pin r ih, 8S~05, to minister to, take care of, attend Oil, 89; l?) j corre-
sponds to Pdli, patijaggati.
PII aya.k, 8o::>~"" King Piliyakkha, 96.
P nay a k, 860005, z'bz'J., 95.
=
Pun, 'lS, rice, 157; M.T.
Pujaw, 'l"'.'o, to offer something as an homage, to do homage, 96, 202 j
~, Piij au.
. PU\lJ;layak, CfSBu:mS, the Yakkha'?uI)1).a, 246, 247, etc.; this form is from
the Pdlz". Cf p.llr1).a.
+
Pubar, q~q, to show, exhibit, 195; a causal: pu bar (q.v.); oti, ~ti,
pabuiw, babuiw.
Pumun, q'i~, to invite, to beg. entreat, 2°3: related to the colloquial
()(JS,' gam an.
ef.
Pu rJ;lH, qqao, PurI].a the Yakkha, 243; this is the Sanskrit form.
p UI)J;layak.
pUwak, 'looS, a companion, a follower, J21; ~et-. 000(;), b wa k, bhawak.
Piiwakha jj a, W0:;)~, cakes, 8; Piitz', piivakhajja. See Appendix B, No.8.
Paril cal, oo:>c:O, Uttarapancala,
J
84.
Pa', o3S, to do, make, 4 j a variant of p a.
PQey, ~V05, in, into; 31 J ;~, pQai.
Pnan, ~lS, lamp, candle, J9; == M.T.
Pyun, qjlo,' to show, 97,.3,6; 1[C, pIiuti.
Pras na, @~:>, a questio11, proplem. riddle, 144, 152 ; Sanskrit, prat;na.
C/ paIi ha.
Prasad, @:>:x»5, a building with superposed roofs, a palace, 51, 386:
@):;)')::>05, pr~ sat
j
Sanskrit. prasada.
PI it, §c5, to swoon, 359; the M.T. §Ici>, pi ui t = to become extin
guished.
==
Phum, <7S, to bathe, 86; M.T.
Ph ii ril, ~, 85; a variant of ph ll. m.
Pham, 6, a drum, 18; :::: M.T.

EPIGRAPHIA- BIRMANICA [VOL. II "
B a Ira t,.·~aS'105, 1\ 38B;·· See inqex'B; No.·S88l
Ii,
Bar, e1~, to look, 200; huiw; .see.variant,hir;
a
B t ,~l05, to ·hid~,.337; (?) jit answers .to' the PIi!i, niliyati.' The' Hok- .
i
kien dialect, for to· hide, conceal, has bat ; the, 'Amoydialect,
ba t'j,in" Annamese, .:m at. .
Bi car, Bo;:)~, to investigate, decide cases ia>~ase;:Cat law);; .toarrange t
129,' 128, 132, 210,''etc.;; pali, viC8reth'
Bintan, B&?t, white, 277'; 5J:>c, btan.
Bimnall, B~" a Lrahmin, 275, 3°9, 163;i'~~.iib'alTinab. Cfthe"V~f"jant
at·
buITJ rla l;l,and with'this the Burmese, t?SB:>:, puT,lI;l
Hir, gq, to look, 109, 297; ~, buiw. Cf. bar..
B irbe n"BqG~S"the begging-howl of a monk; 64;. ~co~8"ba beti'~
Bisek, B~:x>:.,s, to consecrate king by pouring water on 'the" head, 382,
383;' OG:X>:'J5, pas'ek.
Bibat, B@05, to try, test, 9,13, 160, 20~, 254j'6f)oS, bal;JaC'
Bu't0 rl i ' q:;COJ+; to'teach, instruct,:1So r G&>:>'S', b to'n.
B uIa0, ~o:"', to set free, let go, 170; e1.x" ba 1a 1}:- '
Buhi Ci' '~09o" ·to·'fe'art'to frighten, 252,' 334; .e1CO<XlOO, bahe k; and.GUnS' .'(a
contraction of 6QOOO'5), ph ek.
:B u'rnn aI:t,<~.j\'" 'a orahmin, .221,' '229': 230, ·it: variat)( of-h'i mitah i ei'~'
ba mila1).. Ct. Burmese, t?8fP=, P Ul}i} all.
BOy; .ert05; '(f) ;::see 'under 349~ Perhaps it is t ti Yi·~05e'
!Jy,
Boy, GeJcO, t6~. toward,s, fro'm, about, 199, .299;:358 j' ~, bita'i:
B h ti rid at, 0'il~::J05, the Bodhisattva Bhiiridatta, 219, etc;
°
Bh0 jana, GOOJOI-\\, food, 1I, ~oo:>ft.S,· bh0 jUi ri ;' PaN.
i
Bhow, GCO:lO, mansion, worl~, 228 ~r5, b'hau..
Bra m, §S, to capsize,as a boat) 43 i = M.T.
Bfa10k, @QOO:l-.,5, a contraction of brahmaloka, 24(.
M3,0; a padicle which may be translated' by"who, which, where" jsome
times, perhaps, also by a present participle; 34, 71, 73, 114, 30x,
etc. the modern is used also some\vhat differently. '
j
Man, Ob, to keep, watch, observe, 224, 225 j :: M.T.
Mangala, Q~O:>, a religious ceremor.y;marriage, 16i; =M.T.; pa!r.
Ma i}i, 'Jc8, a precious stone, jewel, 138, 230; .Pali.
Ma i} ika, Gcl3rr.>, same as mai}i, 146. Cj. 'mani k.
Mao, oS, to advise, give ad,'ice; see No. 293:
Iv! anik, Q~'~, same as rnaI,li
j{
a, 263
j ::
l\LT..

PART 1]- .TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 153
Man i5, o~oS, a man,' 235 j ~oS, mnih j from PaU, manussa.
May; QOO, to look, 273; see under mey.-
Ma ha, great, large, 280,293; 9', mh a, pronounced both mhaand
0(0),
mana. . . .
Mahajan, OOO)C»S, the people; 293 M.T.; paU, mahajana.
j -
Mahos, o~oo,pS,'the Bodhisattva Mahosadha, 115, etc.; now written:"-QQooJ
000 in full, and ~oS:X)o, Mhuh 5 adha.
Ma'tula, o:>~, uncle, 310; patio
a
Man, Q:>S, potter,-162, 164; .coo:>S, laman; Q:>S 15 now ~sed only as a·
=
verb to·make pots.
Miga~ Sol, name of. a hermit, Migajina, 76.
MiJ.lQa, 8~, a goat, 149, for PaU, meJ.lQa.
Minm in, 8$8S, a nurse, 269 88S and Q9S, mimin and ma min.
j
Mucalin, "ioo8S, the lake Mucalinda, 324.
=
Mun, ''is, to tell, inform, apprise, notify, 42, 90, 159, 183, 213 to
entreat, supplicate; (?); see co una 5, p U mu 0, munpan, pan.
Mun pail, 'f~ olS, to beg leave respectfully, ~25; mu
0
seems· to have
fallen into oblivion pan; (q.v.) is still used colloquially.
j
Muna~, 'i~oS, to· tell, inform, 279, 283 j (?) i see mun. .
Mey, GoG05, to 'look, 46, 60, 104, etc,; ~and ~, mai and mwaii the
latter form is more commonly used. See rnay.
MQac, ~5, to be angry; qf.M.T., oCO? 05, ma~at;vz'de plaque No. 180.
Ya c, 000, a sacrifice, 215 i 0005, 1'at; pali, yaja..
=
Yagu, CO,,?, rice-gruel, 154i M.T. i PIiN.
Yac, co:JS, a beggar, 299' j Palt~, ya~aka: this word 15 now used in its full
form, as in Burmese.--
00:>000,-
=
9
Yam, O:dl, to weep, cry; 9$, 8, 348 i M.T.
Y0 k, I;00:>'J5, to lift up, to c~rry in the arms, 45, 360 j ~~, coo:>r.rS, Yuik,
yo k the first form is ,the more common.
j
R aIi, ~&, to convey, carry, _~ring, 64, 173, 246, 259 i not now used by
itself, but in composition. See raIi.
Rail, 90, shed, booth, hut, abuilding of any sort, 388; a variant of
ruIi ~ and ~cJ rumand ruiIi.
j =
Rarit1ufl, _'1802[8, "to carry and come," to bring, 290 i M.T. Sr.e
plaque NO.5· . .
=
Ra t,~oo, precious stones, precious things, 296; M.T.; pau, ratana.
Ram ail, "-lQC, red deer, 30 I; Qt, ma fl..Cf Burmese, ::>:loS, S a III aIi.
20

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
R a Iel}, ,c.oof, to cause. to dance, 233; ~Goo05,.pa Ie h.
R aha 5, 90005, a secret, 167 i pati, rahassa.
Raja w a sati, lo'fO'>OOOd3, rules. for courtiers to obtain honours at court,
248 j Patio
Raj 3, 'fl0'>:>, king!. 33; 34, etc.; pati.
R ati, <;pc, to carry, convey, 5, avari?nt of rati. ,See ra tit1un.
R in, '\~, to lead away, take along . \~ith one, convey, 27, 250, 26., ~43,
' (?) .
346;' "
R is i, ~d3, a hermit, a ri~hi, 36; 239, etc. == M.T. Sa1ldrit, nil.
j j
R u P, lij8,forrn,appearance, 235 == M.T.; paU, rlipa.
j
R us 3 I, lijoo:>ci, .to lay, place, put, 360 j 0:>:>, S a,fJ£de plaque No. 360•
.La k sa n,ooffiS, marks, signs, 46, 104 oomooS, Ia k san, and ooCX1jS,
j
1a kya n (pronounced laksan).
L uIiow, oq~cl35, to be retired, solitary, lonely, 63; Citl, Inu.
Lu k0 W, 01<;00:>0, to break, 78; 000, kaw,
Let, GrooS, tosmear, 157; ::: M.T.
==
Lot, Goo:>oS, to fall, 359, 378; M.T.
Lop, woo:>5, to enter, 48, 82, 9t, 122, etc.; 9 5, Goo:>5, Iup, lop
j .
the first
form is the more common.
, ,
Loor, G~:>~, to salute respectfully, make obeisance, 101, 145, 373, etc.;
G~:>o, IIiaw.
Waddhaki, og08, a carpenter, 191; Palt'.
W?alij ole, to ·go out to meet, 193,333; now qsed only' the compounds,
10
having the same meaning, 01C3tC, olc3lcJtL&, wan dun, wariduil
t Iuri...
W aIuka, 010:;00, sand, 141; Pali, valuka.
Win,8a, to play, 40, 121 Goe, weIi.
j
Widih, Widi~, andWideh, 8~05, 89:, 8~05, King Vedeha, 197, 195,
. . 2 0 6 . · .
r, 89~, Vidhiira,'~42.
Wid hi the Bodhisattva 245, .etc.
8G~, Pci~i,
Wi rnati
5
a, trial, 7
j
vimarhsa.
Wi ma it 5ana, 8QoS~, trial, investigation, 8; paN, vimarilsana.
Wi man, 8Q:>~, mansion, 110; 8Q:'$, C§<d:lS, wi ni a il, I \Y i man i P41i,
vimana.
,Wissantar, 8a:x:>~9.1 King Vcssantara, 285, :Z92•
==
Wen, GOS, to go about,' wander, roam; to go to: to visit, 163, 192;
M.T. See under plaque No. 163.

PART I] TALAING PLA~UES ON THE ANANDA
,.., .
':
Vv e c, GOS, to admonish, instruct, 23 i ~ooS, wet
WepuIa, .G0"loo, the Vipula Mountain, '319.
Wesantar,' Wesarhtar, King Vessantara, 266, 281.
S (a), si, su, 00, 09, 9 j on these prefixes, which denote the future and
. the causal, see pl~ques Nos. 64 and 85.
Ski I, flj05, to give, will give, 267; OOl,Skuiw; Cf. sikiI.
Sail, OJc, a conch, I7i .still .used' in the compound, ooeIqOOC, ka l}usail,
conch paU, sailkha..
j
Sci5, ~05, to descend; go down, 28 j~05, G~oS, sci h, sce h. Vide cis.
Sac ca kir y a, ool3C£~OO), an act of asseveration, 99 j =. M;T. j Pau,
saccakiriya.
Sacc h u, ooe,!, a fruit;. 9; x05~, o.?£l,. sat c hu, sacc hu.
Sac c hu', OO£l3S, 305, 330; a variant ofsace hu.
S jiii, cge§,-to sew, stitch, 155; o§.8,a.~, s j iIi, j iIi.
S t ik, fijrh, tosleep,3lS9; fijaS, oSaS, 5 t ik, t ik
S t han, ffi:>~, a place, 49i CX)::>~, t han; Slmskr£t, sthana.
Sa rna j j a, OOQ~, a mime, 15; pali.,
Sarathi, oo:>9cB, a driver, coach!Dan, z6, 31; Pal,.
Salika, oo:>cBoo:>, the minah b~rd,"182; Pali.
S ik, 09"" an error for s q.ik, q:v.
S ikiI, oSd305, to give, 64; ~[, skuiw.
Sink0', oSGn5;)3S, a grey hair, J13;- cooSooaS, so k ka', in which sok _
hair, and ka' = Old Talaing siilk 0' (pr.efix s and infix in).
51 p,. 0.'30, ·to attend respectfully on, 286; ~8~.o, sip g1ip.
S im m a ii, d3~(,}::>e§, a .question, 165i :l6'S, 5 m~ n. Cf' the variant
surh man.
=
Sil, cBcO, sil, 225.
SII, .cB05, the Buddhist precepts, .224 i ~, si; pali, sIla.
S u•er, O1G~, to look, look at in expectation, 169 i ?
Sutik, cqd3m, to put to sleep, 8S; fij"" stik.
Supar, cqu~, the garula bird, ~6 i ::xJUO, 5a pawi Sandriil. suparl}a.
Sup a n, cqulS, stairs, ladder, 186i Pali, sopana~
~uruh,91l05, to fall, cause to fall,~27i 00%oS, s.aruih.
Su rf1 man, ~:.;J,.e§, a question, 223, 242 ; :l6::lS, s·ma n. Ct. the variant
mman.
5 i
Soh, Q~::l05, to answer, solve; 152, 165i rooS, sah.
Sol;1, QOOjJ, a variant of soh, 223, ~42.

,EPIGRAPHl~ BIRMANICA [VOL. II
ct..
,S·ar iP~, to go, will go~ abouttogo, i 83, 2.25, 249,'~85. plaque
J
No.' 64.
Sarh wat, 00005; a child, 40, 80, '338i_ .ooQ05, samat.
30
· Sab., 00', to potir, I i ~oS = , ~oo:w5,'suj h, s<>h.
·Snak,~,m, a sword, '16i M.T.
·SIii, ~) h()use, 66, ~187, 188, etc. i - ;M. T.
·SIii', .it 3S, a variant of s~i, 264, 274.
4fk,~(,5, pleasur~-i'n, inadv~r·
S to be pleased, take 278jwhere. it iS by
j
tence,. written s ik; = M.T~
cg'e3,'
,.,Sm an, to ask, to question, inquire, 31, 41,52, 106, etc; i ~,~,
sman.
SmiIi, ~8, king, prince; 35, '37,59, etc.r::;: M.T.
S yam, ~JO,-the Bodhisattva <;yama, 83 i:Sanskrit, <;yama..
S lop, G~J8, to enter, will enter, about to enter, 90, 189; ottO and G~JS,
slupand .slop. . .~
Swar, 029, heaven, II 0, 218 i. 020, swaw i Sanskrt't, svarga•.
Han, .oo~, in, at, on, to, ,28, 224, 285,287, 337. Cf hin•.
Ha
~
ak, OO\?n5, filth, faeces; 21. Cf. colloquial,
08~5, hi"Qaii,
and the
literary' form, 02..\?:>m, sIiiQak.'
Him 0', 08i#Q,:t.>, a name, 4, 119i 08'ii him u. Ct. variant i rri 0'.
08~, on,t~, C/o
Hin, in, at, 33,42,265,369,372,377. han.
~as, (§loS, to pluck, as flowers, fruits, 305
j
(§loS, 1;>a h.
.~ ar, e19, two, 294 j E>l, 1;> a.
~ aS, @1oS, to change, 380; (§l', 1;>a t;l.

PA.RT,IJ. TALAING PLAQUES ON THE .ANANDA -. 157
APPENDIX B.
Additional remarks on a few words.
JLwas but to be expected that, even with the help of the Jatakas in
Pali, Talaing arid Burmese, some words and· expressions in these plaques
would present some difficulty either in fixing their meaning or in tracing
their modern equivalents; these words have been, on the' whole, few. I sent
a list of theOJ' to my learned friends, the well-known Talaing scholars, Mr.
C. O. Bl~gden.and· Rev. R. Halliday, asking their opinions. Their learning
has proved very useful, aRd my thanks are due to them for their ever-ready
help.· A few of . their suggestions have been noted in the body of the
work and duli acknowledged. But others could. not be so included as the
book was in final proof and practically ready to be struck offj these are
given and discussed below. _
No.8 (p. 4)-Piiwakhajjanawimarisana; I had first ~ritten-_
thi~ pii w'ak h ajja na ,w iIIIari saIia j but, as Blagden makes me remark,-
na cannot here be taken as the Talaing preposition; the other two words
would have to change placesj .this is true, and the 'whole expression',must
therefore be written as a compound, in one word. But the form khajjana
exists neither in 'Pali nor -in Sanskrit. The n a between the two words
is probably an error of the scribe. The reader will have remarked' that
errors, due perhaps 'to inattention of the workmen in copyingj' have been
not~d place~.
in several Some examples of such errors occur in the'
Burmese face of the Myazed! inscription pillar.!
No. 21 (p. 7)-H a <;1 a k. , Blagden remarks :..:-i/Themodern form
sriidak may be 'popular etymology/It must be, if the I iih century
ha <;1ak is to be equated with the modern hi <;1a k, for there is no reason
to suppose that srii was pronounced like ha, ~rhi at that early date."
In this case, the difficulty is to find the modern equivalent of ha<;1ak, ,for
there can be no doubt as to its meaning, which is exactly that of the, -
a a
literary srii<;1 k and its corresponding colloquial hi <;1 k. .,

EPiGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. II
No. 36 (p. 12)-0indu. Blagden and Halliday confirm· the equation
=
din du daI0'; the change of medial nd to medial I is frequent and
regular, e.g., kandar = kaIa w; din diIi = d~Iirio
No. 78 (p. 27}":"Lukow.I take this word to mean· lito break" and
.refer it to the modern kawk Blagden says that .it seems to mean to
II
take," and refers to a wor,d I~k 0 w .in his inscription I E, line 35.1 But if
it means to take" then. the plaques repeat themselves, for the' previous
'.1
plaque, No. 77, reads: Janak k~~t pcun, Janaka takes (ket) the meat."
H
· So that it is ~lear that, in so far at' least. as this plaque is concerned,
lukow d~es not mean "to take'.' jas explained under .No. 78, .Janaka is
represented in the act of breaking' a Icing piece of meat and putting it in
his. almsbowl. I . am .not sure of the' exact meaning of Iuk win
0
inscription I E" 35; but the sense of the whole phrase, spa Iuk0 w
t'ey, is quite clear, and in this context means: to make subordinate,
II
bring into ~biection, subdue,confiscine, etc." j Iukow t ey is a compound
.s.
·a~,is .shown by the verb pa,' to do, to make," preceding it, and
II
verb
Iukow therefore is a used substantively,· as isso0ften the case in
Man.. It may be' cOlhpared .with another word of similar import,' skem,
which means to grasp, seize, clinch" i sk em' tai,::'" to clinch in the
.11
a
hand, grasp with the hand," and as noull grasping .with the hand,
II
a
· hence: power, control"; and plop skemt i= to· bring within one's
grasp, under one's control, to copfiscate; the underlying idea in Iuk
0 W
· t ey.' is probably somewhat, cognate in Stnse. The several modes of the
same action .are most often expressed by different words, and though in
's pa Iukow tt~y, 1uk0 w may mean "to take," we do not know to
which· mode of taking" it refer:;... But our plaque does not mean. Janaka
II II
takes' (Jukow) the meat;" for this' has been' said in the previous plaques:
.Janak .ket pcun. '
r
No. 89 (P.31)-Pin ih. The modern form of this word has not been
foun4 as yet. Halliday· propose's,. 5aIiruih (o:lC~oS);· but the reading of
the plaque is· clear, .the. first. letter is.P isaIir uih means generally: r'to
help, aid; give 'aid spiritually.and materi~lly,· and is from the Sanskrit
II
saJigraha. Pinrih rendersthePali patij ag gati in the f;orresponding'
=
passage to tend, minister to,· look after. As Blagden' remarks, pin rih
would regularly become, in modern· Talaing, .paruih or .baruih (CJ~oS,
.t.?~05) ; .but this word, if extant, has not )'et been found in this sense. I am
I Epil"DPhill Birmei'licD, Vol. I, Part II,'p. 105.

flART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 159
inclined to think pinrihand sali r uih are not connected. Blagden
refer~',to a word, pure1), found in his inscription No. VIII, line 9/ which
mean:s to give to, provide th}ngs to," in the pa.ssage, b1a b gob ut
.1
=
tarley sa Iig ha ... ~ miIi S.T.g b pure b napace ey pan
0
"Thereafter, all the lords of the Church . . . King Sri Tribhuvanaditya
dhammaraja presented with the four necessaries." Pure b would probably
become, in modern Talaing, pare h. Pinri hand pure h may perhaps'
be etymologically related.
No. 106 (p. 35)-ln sman Nemi. As it is Nemi who putscne
question one should have expected the words to be reversed and the
sentence to run: Nem isma n In. But there is another legend similarly
constructed at No. 175 '(po 60), M a h0 smafi s miIi, in which we should'
expect M a h0 and s mili to change places. This construction may be
explained in two ways. First, the verb sman may be taken as used in
a passive sense i or, if it be active, the word before it is its object, for it is
not an absolute rule for the object to come only after the verb; it is true
that, when it comes before, whether it be a single word or a whole sentence,
it is indicated by the-word g a h, which may have been left out in a pithy
legend which is merely ,indicative of the scene depicted above it. To the
people, who knew these stories perfectly, such a sentence presented no
difficulty of interpretation. Or then it may be, but Ida not think so, that
the scribe muddled these two sentences and put the cart before the horse.
,-
No. 169 (p. 57)-Su-e r. There is no doubt about the meaning of this
word as gathered from the interconnection of the scenes and from the story
itself. 1 have doubtfully suggested that its modern equivalent might
perhaps be s lie w (p., 58); Halliday and Blagden are also very doubtful
n.
about it; the difficulty, if it be slie w, is to explain the Regularly, this
word would become-in M.T. s-'ew (G~8).
a.
No. 272 (p. I03)-Passe n On further examination of the plaque,
the reading appears to me to be really passe \la. which'I think\ve must,
for the present, accept as the equivalent of the modern bah sna ; the
!Jcene on the plaque and the context require this word, or one with a
of
cognate meaning. I know no PaIr word with a meaning approaching that
of bah sna from which passena could be derived. Blagdenrefus to' a
note of Huber in B.E.F.E.O., 1913. NO.7, p. 12, III which, he deriies
1 Epigf'aphia l3irma"ica, Vol. I, PlIrt 11. ~~'t57~

160 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
bahsna- from Pa-li 'lIasan~ adding· that, .if such be the case, it seems
unlikely that the same.word would appear in the 11th century as 'passena- i
this is of .course not impossible. But 'it is remarkable that the T1alaings
should use the word va san a unchanged with its meaning of "an inclination
or liking. for something, produced by the .impression uncon~ciously' left on
the mind by good or· bad deeds performed in previous existences," and
should have·," Talainized I' it for its meaning of II thinking of, longing·'for."
This process is not impossible, but so far as I remember, I ha':e not come
across another example.
No. 298 (p. 113)-Jili k. The photograph seems to read jilirka,
\but this is due to a flake in the glaze. ..
No: 342 (p. 127)-'Kgaii. This in, M.T. would become kQan or
t ga n, forms which have. not been found. Halliday sends the following note
about juk lot (Sudh. 21. 16) quoted as example under this word:
"J
uk lot is commonly applied to drawn wire' i lot being a draw
I I
plate'i ju klotsna.m nieans a ! thong.' .In the passage you quote from
Sudh.2I..16, ,the ,word s na m is no doubt. understood, and there is
. .
particular referen~e to its \york of keeping the skin (snam) tight.",
No. 293 (p. (II)-N a nar•. This word, is· a real crux: I do not
understand it I transcribe here Mr. Halliday's note :-" This is a real
difficulty. I do not think that: nanar can be translated I going' j I)a
(sometimes na, especially in composition) means taking, bearing or con
I
veying in some fashion away from the speaker. Nor do I think that nan a
I
a,
fits very well jar' seems to be used in the inscriptions ,regularly for to
I
a a.
go.' But there is a n r also which I think often represents I} It is,
however, apparently also used in another than its verbal sense, as for instance
in the expression ha 11 na r. J This expression seems to' correspond' to the
.han nek of the Pagan inscriptions, which I take to refer to the deference
a
paid to the cult of the na-g aor dragon in house-building. N very
== a a a
probably I} as above defined and n r may be Blagden's n r of the
inscriptions. Man no doubt == manteti."
No. 325 (p. 121)-Anca. This, Blagden tells me, is certainly from
=
]a ca i cf. antiil modern Ia tit
No. 388(p. 14I)-Balrat kinta ran. The expression balrat here
is also a crux. All I hav'c said as to its meaning under this n~mber is
conjecture The difficulty arises from the fact that this plaque is not in its

TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
PART I] 161
proper place i one is not even sure if it belong to the story of Vessantara
rather than to another. Thi~ sequence of events being lost and there{ore
also the context, makes a crux of a word which, otherwise, might have
a
presented no greater difficulty in fixing its meaning than few others in
these plaque~. .1 had suggested also that ba Irat, read as two words,
might mean, to heap jewels or precious ;3tones {= rat.= ratana)"; ba I
II
lYith the meaning to heap has not y<:t been met with in old Mon
If II
documents j the modern word is ba w, but this form could be derived from
an old *ba r as weB as from baI. Kin tara il, I then suggested, might
mean "to bring before." All this was not very satisfactory i so far as I
remember; there is no episode in these Ten· Jatakas which .could be'
referred to a woman bringing .gelns before some building or other. More
over, besides' there being no indicatiOli of precious stones in the plaque, thl:
woman is depicted in the usual attitude of oriental salutation. I transcrib,~
the notes from MT: Blagden and Mr. Halliday i they both have given th,e
:5
same meaning to kint arail,- and I agree with them i but b a Irat
=
still doubtful. Blagdcn\\'rites:-' I take kin tara il as two words before
j
(in front of) the shed or hut. Rail seems to mean any sort of she~, big
or 'small: Kinta IS quite cOl1lmon for gat(J,lin front of~' -BaIra t
certainly might mean heaping gems,'. though I have not met b a1 in this
I
sense in the old inscriptions, but only in the. sense of baIa, army.' .In
I
view of my interpretation of. kin tara0, . I do not think it can mean (to
knock,' and 1 feel quite sure that tinrail, 'door,' does not come int-o
the question here at all." Halliday writes:-" I do not think' kintara0
can be identified with tarail (door), but I feel sure it is the same
. expression with variant spel1il~g as Blagden has in inscription No. IX G;
line 48.1 . I take kinta rail and k anta railto represent modern
m u k rail,' porch,' as in Haswell, but also •hall of audience, hall of
I
justice,' as in muk rail .s min. i take rail to be a variant of r uill!
and' r uiR, applied to a building of any kind almost (ruil pan na sa is
given as a translation of pamzasiilii). The clause in. ~he inscription is
=
clear: goQ rna d moil tau kant a rail when they stood (or
I
remained) at the portico (or the audience hall).' Ba Irat is another matter.
From your, description of the plaque it.seems to me that words describing
the woman's act of reverence are required here. As I was discllssing )'our
1 This inscription is in prool and will (orm Pad I of Vol. III of the Epigral'hia BirmaniCll:
~ With this if. Burmese, ruril, a shed, booth, gpdown, and rurilg, h&1I of justice.
21

EPJGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
phrase with the- uppaj;hiiai (upajjh~ya), there -was a man taking leave of
hiin. It was' the action of the woman in the plate. They describe it as
k a Ia' a ca. It might perhaps be ba Irat has some such significance. I
think it might be r~ad bawrat, but how to _give it the required meaning
I do not know. ~ a1 might be the Pali baH, as in ba w s mut, .to make
offerings to the spirits'; . rat might refer to the (three) gems."
The meaning. of kin tara Ii as given in these two notes seems to be
the most piCibable one. But ba Irat is still obscure.

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
APPENDIX C-I.
Below will be found all the modern Talaing words given in the explana·
tions of the plaques in illustrations of the Old Talaing words I have also
j
included the words contained in the sentences quoted from modern works.
In the following list, words marked with an asterisk (*) are new words and
are not in Haswell j those marked with a· dagger (t) have been given by
Haswell, but I have registered under them new meanings besides those given
by Haswell. Those that have not any mark are the same as in Haswell. I
have sometimes marked with the dagger such words as ~ppear in Haswell
under another forw., but whose meaning.is the same.
3;)§:>, a kr a, interval, space between,· between i ~~§" between. Cj.
Burmese, ~§:>t, a kra3
•.--
*
~b, AIig a, name of a country in India, the present districts of Monghyr
and Bhagalpur in N;orthern Bengal.
3;l9S, a k hiil, time. Cj. Burmese, ~qjS, a k h yin.
~~~lS; a k h·o il, permission, leave. Cf. B.j ~~9, a kh wa ill.
a,
~o:>, a c a teacher, a master. pa/t~ atariya.
'" 3;)Ch, aj a, manner, wise, way, illustration.
tr.d3oo, atik, past time,· in time past, of yore, formerly. PaU, atita, aWe.
Cf· Burmese, 3;)eB05, atit.
:r.lc8m~ci>, atikte', same as ~c8mu
~S, atuiil, according to j 3;)~BQ~oo:>J according to the usual way, to
custom, Dhd. 21. 9 j 3;)~S §n5Ch~, at one's wish or desire, at one's
leisure, S.J.· ~o. C/. Burm., 3;)~S:u
~88105J ad hip pay, meaning, sense. paN, adhippaya.
3;)Q~, a m a ai, the flesh of beasts, meat, game, venison, Dhd. 26. 16,
354. 15.. Cf. B., 3;lQ, a m ai.
'" ~~aO, am ui1;1, a dry measure equal to eleven dronas (vide ioS), A.V.
268 j a trough for feeding cattle, S.M. 37.
'" :J.;Jt, am hUJ a case in a court of law, A.V. 192 = yuuL C/. B., 3;)jil
'" :T.lGOO~S:T.lCQ:>, ay0 il aI a, appearance, likeness, S.B. 27.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
a
• :>.1ooS:>.1COJ, ay Ii aIa, appearance, likeness, Dhd. 148. 9, 4; L~SO:>Q::>.105S
3;)COJ~CY.lJS<i3005-l/like in appearance unto a god."
:>.1j\$, ar huin, the dawn, break of day. paN, arUI)a.
ct.
* ~co8~, a Ia mbaai,a snake-channer. pali,.alambayana, S. Vid. 20.
.,B., ~coij, a1a mbai.
t :>.1l.~, ,aIuril, whole, all, the whole, throughout, throughout the 'vhole. Cf.
B., :>.1c • q:, a I u ' mS.
*
:>.1~o5J a1uik, one's own accord, of one's own ....ccord; as according
as; owing to, Sudh. 27. 18, 34. 3; Dhd. 240. 16. Cf. B., a;i~05D
• :>.10, ~, awa i, age, any ti~eof life. pau, vaya.
lit (3;)0:>05:>, asarik3., doubt, incertitude, misgiving j also o:>o5JII P, Ii, asalika.
• :>.1X~\ asaw, wonderful, extraordinary, marvellous; a wondcrhll thing, a
. wonder, a marveli u::>.>0:>8, to wonder; uo:S~0:>8, to be wondering,
to'wonder, Sudh. 26. 5. Sir-to ac;:carya.
lit :>.10:>:,' Asa I}, name of a forest.
3;):>, a, to go; after another verb has often the meaning of becoming
... , turning (into) .. Ex., ':>.1:>, da h a, to becon· ~ i ~S:>.1J,
II
tliil a, to become lost; ffiJ~::>, ska' a, to turn grey (of 'he hair)j
C~H::T.>', Iriu a, to become 'empty.
:r.>Joo,;a t, to ask, beg.
::T.>,ooolS, at pan, to ask, beg, implore. Vide 01$11
lie
t
:>.1JooJ9, a hara, food j from Pali i Haswell has :>.1OOJ9, a hii r a.
• d.3S, 'I n, _the god Indra. Cf ~~IJ
3;>, 'a i, I.
~~75, 'ai- 9ik, I-slave," a respectful form- of the pronoun 1.
II
(;:>.lJS, '0 n, few, sman in quantity, little; to be few or have little, often
followed by ~ (with) c;:r.;)S~:r.>JooJ9-" having had (but) little food."
j
~oo, 'u it, to be exhausted, finished, expendedi hence: all, entire, whole i
used also as a sign of the plural. .
~05o.1, 'u it- suiro, all, entire, the whole. Vide ~.n The Burmese
atni,
us 5 U ril, with assimilation, = is a loanword Ironi the Talaing.
~, 'au, a respectful term of address Sir, 'Madam, your Majesty, etc.,
and is always placed last in the sentence.
t ~GO-), it e', there, yonder i this," in this sense it is placed after the
II
noun; you (polite and honorific) ~Q:i;)S~05 <:q~ Sic;05 ~9-" will
j
you please help me?", Dhd. 297· 13.
*
S:{~, imu, name; named.

PART I.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
,,~g, iwwa', this.
~03 i si, a hermit. Sanskrit, r~i. Vt"de ~cl311
II attoS, u~ the Buddhist fast day, the sabbath. pali,uposatha.
goa, upa ij, a devout Buddhist layman. pati, upasaka.
a800', upPa k 3j to take care of,- look'after. pati, upakara.
*
aQS, u m a it, a tunnel. pau, ummaitga.
coo'{'loo, e k a rat: a king. PiIH,- ekarc1ja._
eooco, usa b ha, a bull, patio
a,
k a fish•
00,
C/
.• gj, kfia, to invite. 8 11,. a very polite and reverential form of the
imperative; og~CO~~1I§oocoS 09SOi~8:T.>~m-1/ 0, Lord,' be pleased to
listen to my good deeds Dhd. 160. 28.
j"
t ~I, ~II;), ktuiw, to rise, arise, rise UP-j t~ awake someone, rouse; c:8~1
C;00'~9_11he did not rouse his son," S.B. Iz, equivalent t6 the Pali,
pabodheti~
t 9Jl6§, dJf, kt uiw da h, to happen, take place; to be born, be rehorn;
GOO'~§~d3l3~<tS9-/la daughter again was born," .S:B.-3i~l~~05-
if was reborn (as) a human being,".Sudh. 9. 5. .
a
• 00~8, kana w, kinnara, a kind 'of demi-god,. half-man half-bird;. there is
also a for~ (rare), 00;14, ka na r. pali, kinnara.
• oo~S§ooS, k an uilkragat, a building with superposed roofs and a finial, .
a palace, a' prasadai this.' word is.found in the ,Nyaung-U Bell~
inscription;' 16th century. The modern form is ~1G§oooo, q.v.
t oo~,ka nh a ril, to build; to do, to make; ooj@~oS, kan ha ril p rakuih, to
w,
make a book, write a book; oo}c;ogoS~l, ka nha rh 5Wekj wui
to piek up'a quarrel, to quarrel. .
=
• ma,' kami, roof, .covering; to roof, A.V. 263 chandana,.covering, root;
=
A.V. 94 chadita, covered, roofed.
00,%05, kam Iat, a thief.
• oo~, kar, .a period or revolution of the. world, a cycle, .,the world.
Sanskr£t, ka:lpaj this form, very rare, I found only.in' the Nyaung-U
am
Bell-inscription (16th centuty), and is, I inCliried,to thinkL!1ot
founded OIi false' etymology, out rather shows that final rwas'at
that time pronounced, or nearly pronounced, ,as .final~8;- aw = 'cOD' A
form oocO, kal, is sometimes found, 'A.V. 16. 56; the mode-m-form
is 008, ka.w, fromoocOD . .
t oo~, karau, afterwards j to turn one's back on, turn round; t~ turn the
l!i
back on in ·contempt. Vide l .

166 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL II
O:>~(l', karau c111;1, to turn the back. ' Vide ~(l:1I
ka law, a wae; I have as yet found this word only in A.V..
• 0:>000,
under: dara. gharaJ,li, jaya, jari, bhariya, etc. the'Old Talaing is
j
kindar.
t
OOGooS, kaIeii, to return; much used also as a verbal auxiliar)'
In
the
sense of: back, backwards, behind; back, again, anew, mreturn
j
§901~OOGooO~0-' and again, did he consider ... ," S.V., folio
II
ghau,' ,§~~~II 002G8i:lo8~ao8Goo8<BooGoo8Gou~§~9-"whosoeverdoes
not keep the La\v, the Law, in return, does not keep him," Dhmd.
~5w~~~aJ:X>Gro~oS~e:~ 90Go:>oS~:J5oS0a5aoJ~30:01JJ~ ~a5cB§~
172. 1 j II D
GOOGooS~lo3:'triOlOi~-tllike the dust which an irascible man, angry
with another, seizes and throws (in his face), it goes against the
.wind and comes back to himself," Dhd. 172. 26.
h,
• O:>Goo090, kaleIi 'd, to'look back, look backwards.
OOGoo5, ka10k, a demon, evil spirit.
00~a5, kaluik, to drive. Vide oct1a5u
II!
.. oo~c8o, kaluiw1iIi, afire-fly.
• 0005, kaI; vide under oo~." Ct.
0:>011
006, .kaw; vide under.OO~II
• oo:X>JO, ka sap, coin; money. PdN, kahapaJ,la ~B()'J:X>JO~Oi3;>~ciG'P:n-1I how
j
many coins will you give me, Sir?",Sudh. 3· 9.
0009, kasi, 'to shake,. tremble. Cj. ~II
000jl, kasu, to write, to paint. Cj. ~llH
OOJCQ, kaIa, time i when. Pdli,· ~()'J)oo, at that time j ~OOJoo§, at that
time; now, at that time.
Cl:l, ku, denotes the instrumental, with, by means ofi the dative, to. Cf
~1I
~~8, kusuiw, merit, meritorious act. Pritt', kusala.
t ~oooS, ket, to takei much used as an expletive implying that the action
expressed by the verb is done with reference to'the doer only, it is
therefore the opposite of ~~, q.v.
Goo"scro::>, ket J,la, to take away, carry away.
t
CfOO,S, k child; children, son; young of an animal the follower of a
0 0, j
craft or profession an inhabitant of G,o:>::>~~lS, lit. son of the
j j II
army" =:a soldier (;O?J~og~$, ht. "son of the village villager
j = Jl - j
~O?:)S~lO, son of the city" citizen i denotes anything small i
II
~O:>j.ttO, a small rest-house ~()'J)~~@05, small gravel.
j

TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
PART I]
=
* ~cy.)::>SG::Jo06, k 0 n de vata u, II son of the gods" a god; a literal trans
lation of the pali, devaputta.
Goo::>S§, k0 n brau, a female child, daughter.
*
~oo::>S@clj, k0 n brau s miiI; also Goo::>S c§ @, k0 n s miil bra u
(Haswell).
~oo::>SC§, k0 n -smiil, son of a king, prince.
* Goo::>~~'t.0, k n smiil bIaa i, a young prince.
0
~00~01, k0 rh -ku, together, together with j the abbreviated form is G010,
~<xpGII ,10000, k ril, by itself means: to gather together, collect"
0
assemble.
co01o, k 0 rhkU j see above.
~, kU im, and i also j with.
t ~tl~6, kuiw, to give i as a verbal auxiliary, to cause to i ~~::>, caused
(him) to = gC4. sent him i ~ ~lm~, Gaused (her) to mount the
carriage let, oo5§~i~9, and let it be so, S.B. 17 with to.
j j j
~');)::>, kuiw a, to cause to go, to send.
ICc
~:31~, kuiw dan, to give alms..
ICc
t ~l8, k Quip, the head: summit,' top i cfJl802, k Qui p t m a', the summit
of a mountain.
n,
dJlc, k Qui an umbrella.
*
dJlSc9;::>S, kQuin btail, the white umbrella, the ensign of royalty i hence
it denotes the king himself i ooo~~q§lB: tQa:lrqk~lc~::>S~:Ol?l8~oSd318~G~
cocoS-"if that drum was, sounded, all the 101 kings had to come and
bow their heads to him," Sudh. 21. I7 i it is then used as a numeral
suffix denoting kings as well as the countries over which they rule j
dJcCY.)~oSCl~l8~odJlS~::>S-"all the eight kings,'" Sudh. 38. 16i ~cCj9:
~~dJlS&:>::>SooaS CXf oloSClloS}~-" all the 101 countries were without
quarrels, they were at one" (= united, ¥~), Sudh. 40. 10.
I\< C'9.oS, knat, end, extremity i last, final j ~oSo::lo, knat b hawa, the last
existence, that is, the one'in which one attains nirvliJ;la, Dhd. 17. 16.
*
~oSc$, knat tau, last, final i at last,' at the end, in the end, in fine j
9
after, afterwards
j
000C'9.oSoo-"in (his) last existence," Dhd. 60. 23
j
C'9.oSoo02:r.,~~C7.iI5e§-" may, in the end, my lord become the Buddha!",
, S.M. 9. 6 OG~Sotl8~ crt,oSoo GGO::>::>CO-=flo1G3009IGSGOOS_1Igoing about,
j
em
came at last straight to the IV! country," Sudh. 29. 2. Cf §'00"
lie G§8, knip, the head i- also: division or part of ari army j ~lS()S~8-11an
army in its fourfold division: infantry, cavalry, elephants, chariot
eers," S.]. (A), folio ke. Also ~~8, N.V.K. 3. 8.

168 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vot. If
*
~~, kmin, to govern, rule j ~5::§S JO ~ooi-" the king having rulpd 28
years," Myazedi Inscription; government, rule; kingdom, cOI~ntrYj
~SGj:G~ooo:>:>o~9qic GJ.l,,!@oo<Xtg "in Hanthawaddy, the Man country,
in the city called Trihakumba (Rangoon)," Sudh. 34. 24.
*
~~ql5, kmin 9u0, government or rule of the city" j hence. sovereignty,
If
government; country, kingdom; ~S'?lc c13lc<5):>c-the kingdom, the
=
country, V.O.K. 39. 5, 7. Cf c13lc<5):>cl1 at S.B. I. 19 paN,
=
rajjarh . sovereignty, government; kingd~m, cOUl}try ~co05G,coOGc1
j
~Sqlc7~-" he, having given up the sovereignty, or government, or
kingdom/ S.B. ~4. 31 ; the corresponding Ptilt' (Jataka. VI. 197. I)
is: rajjam pahaya; ~Sqlc3;101900:> 9~_" the kingdom of Ayuthya"~
=
S.T. 5 royal state, royal power, etc.
~:>, ky a, the wind; gas.
*
01I:>01~:>05, kya j", mkat, a strong, fierce wind, or gas. Vt'de Ol~JoSlI
011°, kyak; a god a pagoda, a temple; a respectful term of address
j
used in speaking to a superior.
*
O1Jo@, kyak trai, the Blessed Buddha. Vide 011
=
*
@n-S, krik, the cptton tree pau, simbali.
lie @oo:>eJ, kriyaba, utensils, furniture, appendagesi articles of dresli or
ornaments.
*
co§aS, kreh, gravel.
=
~, kr au, vide O?~; § 0: o:>~~:, q.v.
*
~00, krauta i, after; after that, then. Cf ~05001l
*
@¥g, krau .w wa'; after this.
olC, kIail, to be angular; an angle,.a corner.
*
OleoS,kIa0 dhaw,. a straight angle," that is, a right angle; o~ot'So8,
I'
having four right angles, square i 02co;~~~oo05oSatcQ8--" a square, flat
stone of ten cubits on each side," Sudh 13. 5.
ot05, kIat, to steal. V£de rz0511
00
otsS, kl.a', a garden.
tot:>, kIa, before; as a verbal auxiliary, often means, more, again, and in
this sense corresponds to the Burmese suffix~:, fiB (pron. lika
the French on with a slight sound of the 'it) c§ GC()"t:>9~/l 0, king,
j
St3)' more (that is stay on), do not go just yet," S.B. 7. )o.
r12<J. kIi gwa', to get, Obtain.
CYtIC, kIu0, to come; often written ("iIC, 1u0.
t
t coi, kIe', to be lost to abandon a place to go to' another, to leave; cooi
j
OO)~_" having left Tavoy," Su~h. 35, )3 c;o~ 911§~-/( having left
j

PART I] 1:ALAING .PLAQUES' QN THEANANDA '16g
havingJeftfromtbere;'~':Slidh~
that place/' lit. ff :26: 20. As. a
verbal auxiliary, JTlakes ,a neuter verb activej'oo, gawa;' to be
'to ~aKe ie3c4ooS§
ashamed j OOGr1, ashamed, put to shame GooJS'
c§@ OOGOi'l_1I In lik~ manner, the 'princess put (the other offidals)
to shame," 5.]. (A), folio 1'e,:,it' is also ,much' used after' aCtive
or transitive verbs as an expletive; '~o05, to cau'se to be destroyed,
to rout f Qg 6Gom(Or1~1~Q:l-flhe routed M~ra's 'army," Dhd. 35· 15;
~J$, kw an;avillage; also 0ip$;· twan.
~, k wi, a chariot, carriage.
G03. kweh, truly, indeed; ,Haswell, by a slip, has entered it aSG"236',
k we'.
• nal$, kwuiIi, to rise, aris~,' ascend j 'rising,a going up, ascent; from ~~,'~
¥.'D. 'Cf ~l~n "
.. ~lS6j},.kwui n 'tita~ the nsingof ~hesun,'sunrise.
~l, ~l~, 'Itwui'w,. a. spade; th.e Old Talaing is.c:8~,',kir, to dig, and this
.would give.ainodern .form; ~, kui~,. ,which I have not found;
but, comp~re next word~. ','
ill ~lt ~l~" kwuiw, to dig, dig into, dig out; to.stir.J disturbi cut, slash,
tat'l/adel", in this last sense,corresponds. to Pali, Aantall'; ~05c;3;)J$
'~3;)JOO:l9oq05oo§~1I:i~oao§~JOlN.>;)05~~~etdjl~l8~qjl$(§05-Hhaving had
but' little food for seven,days, at that instant; fier~e gases. arose in
herst6mach' and stirred or di~turbed, or slashed; her heart, Dhd.
JJ ..
'160~ 2. The' derivation is the'same as ~lt a spade. Vide c9lD .
~S,. k\>ail, a boat, ship. .
.too,' khaca, ,to wait, upon ,respectfully, pay respect to~ attend upon jpay
courfto; Haswell's entry, to be a dependant," is,not quite to the
II
point. Cf. B ese,
llnn CO;):I .' ,
''Q~~ khaJ}a,' a short time, a moment;;)~§, at that moment; also found
, '. written 00', kanha, as at.Sudh. 17.'20, 22. 26. PaTi. See -i~OClCl
01, kh a, whEm:-Cf. Burmese, oln See';,19" '
• 01, kha,' if,indeed if; in this sense~ is sometimes followed by H', mgaI;t.
" (= maga};l); ol~£lc£>l§~oiSc);)oo:>~-" if compar~d ·with,the stars in'
the.sky ... ," Dhd~ 33. 26j§05~cqin;,lc§m~~oS§H'-" now,awoman,
if she wishes to become a man ..• ,"Dhd. 324. 15 i Q1oogoocO
~ij,--"'if he do,not ask pardon ; ~ . ," Dhd. 17. 30: '
.019, kh~ r a, when i if, indeed if; the "9 ,after is slightly ,emphatic; 019015..
.@3~nS~l3;))§-" when the;Blessed Buddha rose .and went •.• ,"
Sudh. ·13. 16;,

110 EPlGRAPHIA BIRMANICA l VOL. 11
qoS, khut, to call, to name.
*
q05~, k hut k ha u, to call,. name.
*
qoSco6, khut Ia w, to call, name; q05co~b ioid. Vt'de 008, 02L"
*
~,' khuiw, to rush at' in enger, to assazdt. The Old Talaing IS 805,
khiI.
~l;~:)SQoS, kha 9 0 il mat, the eye-ball; Haswell, OG~:>cQ0511
• i05, k h nik, powder, dust.
*
i05oS, k h ni k t i, dust.
t ~,kh mI, a Buddhist monk; often found writteno§, .g a in hi,' which is
- more in accordance with the Old Talaing gum-fr (11th cent.),
and the medieval, o~, gam .'i. (r5th, 16th cent.).
t :on
o,
kh yap, t? reflect,'cons!der; to intend, contrive; from a form, 0:>0;)0,
£EO, kasap, ksap. Cf. ?I, ~rr, ~II
~, k h yi, to tremble, shake; from a form, o:>~, ff1, ka si,ksi.
t ~Il, k hY0, to write, to paint; from a form, O:>Oll., £BIl, kas 0, ks n.
G~,khyeh, a'horse; from a form, G£B', ksel).
*
~~cS', khye h sind hau, athorough-bred horse of Sindh. . Vide, cI36n
,jil05, k h Yuit, to die. Cf 0~05, g a cuit, to kill, and o~[05, ga mcuit,
death. .
~S~ao, khy uink ha I)a,a moment, an instant; Hasw.= qaS~yn Vide
~cv.>11
oo:>S, g a ka n, .to instruct, give instructions, to direct. The Old Talaing is
d305~, c:8~ooS, kiilka n kinka n. Vide ~Oi,qjSII
* ooo$qjS, g a k an p hy an = J OOOSII
t
OGO:>o, g a k0 ril, .a collective body, community, company; an assemblage,
collection, mass. Vide under.GOOOCXfIl()c;ooOG~S,. g ak 0 rh 5'0'k, U ~
=
mass of hair" a chignon.
go
Ol;QC, gaileil, to from place to place, Itinerate, go about; ~~oS04~8
qjl~05co8e§oro1-11(the Buddha) having said, we shall' descend and
go about prophesying."
li, g ja', to sit.
*
~, g Ii i, adorned, decorate.d j to adorn; an ornament.
*
ClCO, gat a, to turn, turn round, 'turn towards ; the 9ld Talaing, is a.p:>j
k uta; I5th century inscriptions have ooon
*
ooo'fm, g a tCi muk, to turn the face towards;' as adverb, facing, towards,
in front; ()OO~n5 ~GOOGOS~IIl;~:)~b,J053;;lJ9-11turninghisface towards
the Himalayas, the Bodhisattva went on his way," 5.1.. 66 j O~~)

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 171
(. co:>) 'tm~~o5~~:>-1I turned his' face towards the north," S.},
40 j ooo~o§dj_" (with) face turned towards the king, in front of the
king, before the king'" Sudb. 28. 12.
t 00000, gata k, to turn over, upside down, upset Old Talaing, MrIJ,
j
p ka k. Cf Haswell, ooo:nG~, to tumble. Vt'de ~oomll
OGoo6, gate w, to cry aloud.
• OGoo6§" gat ewkraQ, to cry aloud, screech, scream.
a
• OG006oo0, .gate w y ID, to weep.
• ~~, gatuim, to beat, to strike (the breast)~
*
o~§ho5, gatuim s ruih, to beat the breast.
ga
• olJ., ci \1, a covering made of leaves to protect the head, shoulder
and baok, from sun' or rain it covers the head and back, falling
j
down to the hamstrings. Cf Burmese, oo~, kat0 (pron. kadu).
'. m~$, gama n, to invite.
• 00:>, gam a, to suckle. Cl eo:>, ~Go05, 00, .til
OQ, gamau, to suckle.
n~,g
• am·' i, a monk 'this is ,the medieval form, the old form = gum
j
ir, and the modern form, o§, gam hi, often found written ~, q.7J.
~le, gamluiti, many
j
from file, q.v., often used as a sign of the plur:al.
• n6, gaw, the womb j foetus, embryo. From the Sanskrit, garbha j ~lS
nS, heaviness of the ,womb,'" grossesse to be pregnant, G. pi. II.,
II j'
3. Sometimes written Go16. Cf. Haswell, 066, 206 Also found
11
writfeno'q, sometimes.
• n8~, ga-w- g nau; embryo, foetus {?lit ~08g_11 a woman who has an
j
embryo," 'a woman with child, A.V•.32 (apannasatta) o:>05ooo~~4~Q
j
a heing in (whose)'womb dwells a foetus," a woman with child,
_II
59
A.V. (kalala) here, n~, gar, is the old form found on the
j
Ananda plaques, but also found sometimes so written in manu
scripts.
t 005, §, g a h, t.hat; also a sign of. the accusative case before the verb
j
it is often eIlJ.phatic, laying a stress on the word or phrase which.
precedes it in its meaning of Hthat," it sometimes precedes the
j
noun instead of followiJ:}g it; §g§-that deed, S.l. (A), folio ku,·
=
h.ere, the first § = that, the second is emphatic indeed, or some·
such expression according to the context,; §Bo:>oo§-that buli, S.M.
,1':3 j first § == that, second § =accus-ative case. As an emphatic

tPIGRAPHIA ):JfRMANIC.X [VOL~ II
=
particle the Burmese, 0:>:>" k a~j' veri often it is'::Si'fupty in~cative
, of the subject~.and is equivalent toth~· nominative case. '
t ()~l, u ·~-t,·g,f.
ga· ui, medicinei,cf. Haswell, 'ui; in both cases, thea,
a,
u, and, therg, are 'us'edasfulcrum;" ":
·~o16, the~ ~orrect
goWj "see ciS, which' is spelling.
in
"~o18~, gow a u = oS~.'· '
t OJ,ga I), to say, speak ito mean.
~S, guiil,'to' take. ' ,
• ~S~S, g uiil nail, to bring, 'bring along with ·one. ,
,',Q01l8" g na ~yak, 'a- queen~
~,' g n,ati, the.womb, abdomen.C/" 08, aolet
a
~ gaS, gnak, the boo'd.oJ cobrajclspoon,a Jadle.,
·~S, g mail,' dari~g,'t>rave; 'the being brave, courage, gallantry.'
• E!05, g Iit, to ,hIm ba~kand lo=ok, to look back} in the expressic~)Oa~8f!05
'(g.'Z7.), the Old Talaing acl3oS, j Hit. '
<is. "
tC2jS, g Ion, a road j Haswell"
• ~2JS, g10 il, a palace, in the: Nyaimg-U Bell.;inscription, Ohc. 143· ~4; ,
144. 16. ~ ,
~C2JS~tS~" g10il jn!ok, a ~ain road.' .
t«ioS, g1 a k, to' P.ult' out, ,tear out from. C/. meani~g given by Haswell.'
, <is, g U.il,road~' Vide ~2)SII '.
EllS, g luiil, many, much ; to 'be many Of much:-· VfiJe o~lS. "
~LS~lS, g1uiil g Iuiil, .a reduplication of lllej much; many:' often abbre-
viated to,lllSS; gluiliil. '
t g,gwa'" to get; to.'obtain, ,to .have; as a verbal auxiliary it means,'
according to the context:p.ermission,' power, opportunity; with a
negative,oog,'c:Bg, ,'means: may not, shall np~,can not. It also,
:rneans: ·Pirst-toget(to)" come to, arrive; '~o~S~8Cicoo&)n~n§~J2$,
g@S~~~/lthey amved at the Vip~la mountain, and again going
,thence" came to the river Ketumati,'" S.V., folio ..Rhalz §03§~oo~
j
~~S08<Xl:>(')3,~)qS:)j~lo- those females, having 'arrived at seven
II
,', days (that is, after seven d·ws), were" according to the usual way,
obliged to go (to hell) to suffer for their sins," Dhd. 21. 9 (they
were pretas, whose "karma made them enjoy bliss for seven days
and torments for.seven'days in regular succession). Second-to take
with one,'take along with one; 'e;)e::>:X&o~3e3oo'l~$o\.~~s<"le"'~$

~PART 1] .T~LAINGPLAQUES ON .THE 'ANANDA' 173
co~~~u the Bodhisattva, being startled and .frightened, took
w~nt ~p
Queen Maddl with him and both the-mountain,'" S.V., folio
na[t. , Notethe'idi()lnatic·expressions;'~9 an~ ~iS'l= very well taU
right Iv.ery
goodl(~~O:»QOffiOI~_"
S.omadatta said, Very weill' ".
I
S,B. II.' . .
•. ~:.~i&t, g wa' ra, 'gwa'. dmaD' raj see under g,iIi ~ne.
t ~,.H, to' look, look· at, look fOf; Haswell's entry;"to seek, seek for~
only, used in see~ing lice," is too restrlcted.. Cf ~~s.
I "
.~~, ill mwai, to look. look at, look for j see~, QI
G~ooSi-- ilek, a tooth. . .
• G~6, ilew, same as, ~ +8~0c4$GQ60':'-lIanagtcame up to look for food,"
j
Sudh~ 34· 3~ .'
.• G~8f!.oS, oewgJit, to turn,·ro_undto look, to look back. ; Vide ~oSl,'
.- Gf(80, 0ew Ca, to search and eat," to look for food, .as animais.
II
a
• G~6!5~, 0ew mfik mw i, to lo~k; look at. Vide .!8~ •
ca, to eat.
. 0',.
t o~$, cailin,.lo carryon the shoulder; . Haswell, . ~~$~:,,-~_OldTalaing,
ciogio.
at,
t '0(,)05, ca in -to discern; to place, fix: mark, settle,determine;distin.
guish; to' examine, investigate. Also- foS.. .
m
• OQoSl, camat' wai, ·to examine, investigate.' .SeefoS~.·.
-\ ' . ,
• oS, cartlI, to look towoards,look forward to. '. Haswell, co!.
to
•.~ae3:>05., c: a m16i t, look towards and s~e;"
o8~S, a
• caiiiI r il=oSI .
.t.Otl, c'ainIaI;i, free, not in servitude,' to be'free. Cf. ~'l"
• ~'JO'S, carak, to scratch. draw a line; a mark or line so m~de. Cf.
ot905, colloquial = oo'l~ft Video~S, o~oS.· .
•.optS.: c,ar;aft, deed, acti 0'lSo8~8-a meritorious actiDhd. 37. 6. Viii,
.. oo'le, OO~II
. .
• O~6, .caric, a form of o~oS -(g.t'.), which,' up to' now; [ have· met with
. only in·A.V. .'
.• o~oS, carit, -to scratch, draw a' line a line or' mark so made,· a fold, as
j .
'., of the .skin. Vide 0905, o~6, 00'105, .
=
.c
• o~o00'looS, carit a ra k ctloSJ1
• oCXjS, calu0,' the head..· Cf ~eo,S,.ooilS•
• ocXlo5. caluik, to drive, a cart, etc.; the Old Talaing is &0805; j (Iikj
Also written ~051

174; EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VO'L. It
• ,tie; caw, to drive, a cart, etc.
~, cah, ten.
o-o9,c
am bat, to test,' try.
., ()3;)9Q, c a -a', to vomit, spit out. Vide' ct>,
003;):£0'
()~, ar~und,',
• cat, to bind, bind about, bind as the ribs, of a' cask; to
to
tie, bind, fetter; ~()j05?,ooq~G:405oo~9-1Icause'd, him be' bo'und
in irons for the,whole oLhis life/' 'G. pi. 6, ' Vi4, ~{lj0511
camguiIi, a felter. S~e o:d38u
ci klaQ" to be clear;' Clear, evident, manifest;,' clever; learned,
'wise; sharp, skilful.
t fl05, cut, to put in" put 'i~to; put '~n, as a glove or shoe qoSOl:;~, to put '
j
into chains, imprison, Phd. I~; ,qoS, 31S" to inflict' a punishrn'ent
(put a punishment 011):" 31S should, be written :300i as a verbal '
auxiliary,'implies: accid~nt, fault, carelessness, ,happened to" unfor
,turrately i 'oooooS~05j touched him accidentally, happened 'to touch
him,S.B. 10. 2 i ;, ~Bc:8oSqoS-1i the __tlaga -happened to _bite him,"
_S.B. 22. 13 ii~ this sens~ it is sometim~s n~duplicated, qoS ~OS, and
has the same. force as 01, olq05,q.v. ",
• qoqS, cuIuIi; thev ~ead~, ' V£de cG\ic" o:l2lCII
• ~(lSi ceo, t~ slant, incline, be on one side; todt:cline, as the sun, after
rioon'is past -and in the evening.'
6, ca u, to return. , " ,
t §~S, cuiw bdan, to be concealed, obscure, not clear, not apparent, not.
readily understood indistinctness, unclearness to screen',from view,
j 'j
if
shut outi Haswell under ~oo~u,
01, c aQ,theback.
ql
,t§, cQi w, to, up to, till
j
ofte~ followed by'~. Cf.
t i, cna, food; forms many compounds, as ~oo~9, cna~are1fl,c::xcre"
p
--'ment :: old food;''. A.V.39 {ukkara); '~05,-'-C!Ja mat" fu'e! = '
II
I~food of fire,"A.V. 37 tidhuma),etc.Haswell, has'only (lao, fO,
but O. St. has entered i by itself. '
• '.c a
~~, n a a i, a· linch-piI), peg, A.V ~ 30' (a~i).
• SI~CY.)jS, c na~ i ka nhail, an ornamental pin used to keep the bairor
headdress,in place j fof references'see under ~~~S./ Other forms
are Sl~~S, Sl~ooJc, 0jl~i5, ~~~SJJ
a
• ~~CI~S, C na ai k n 6 j see above..

PART IJ TALAING PLAQlJ.ES ON THEANANDA 175
• i~oojS, c'n aai sanh a Iii see above.
a
t <;i:>~cgr, c~ ~ ~ o~~0i3:'
. nth Q, to show, point out; Haswell,
,. ~~,' cma'ai, a present, gift, bribe, tribute j als6 -rt"I:=', OOQ~, CXI,bn
·~b~~, c
ma
ai ern in = ~~. V£deoo9bCh8~1I
• ~ro'lbi c IaQ cara a i, .majesty" glory,. magnificence i pomp i' beauty;
grace, shaml graceful deportmei1t. Ct. ~:0'l~u
j
t ~, cw'a', a part1portion i class,.category, kind.
t Q?, Cha, only i whatever, all i after a number == fold i ~oo~Q?c;'tlS-(/even
==
a hundred fold, a thousand fold," S.B.,.· Reduplicated, 0000 all,
everything'i ~ood.l§c;oo05'l-:-(/took all that was given," G. pi. 9.
t .:J1,c hUj ,~ood,' timber; a tree. ' .
• ~e:>aodioS,' ~ h n' b 0 dhi pal u ih, the sacredbariyan tree, the Bo tree
under which the Buddha attained'.'omniscience.' Vide o~~
*
,c008, che, ch,ew, to find, meet withi- 'alsod?, chuiw, as, Haswell.
C;ool
t
~n5~n5, ch uik bdak." Haswell has, to approach, to, draw near,'" but
II
, , I h,ave not yet, met this word with this meaning, except in a trans
lation of the gospels i though inc'olloquial it means, to take
II
refu.ge ,in," 'in the literature. it has always and onry tbemeaning:
to be clever; versed in i intelligeot, sharp, skilful.
~, 'c h uiw. same a,s Goon
OlO'S,' jak, 'to draw" puU, 'drag~ ,
• OJn508, jakc a. Wi ',to drive. ,,
t 'ChOi, jaku.' the ~ody,:self, person j ~o,~~-(/ one body," by oneself, alone,
, S.B. 2. '. ",,', '
• Ch~, jan, pe.ople,the'people, man, a person j Pali, jana.- Vide ~:>Ch~"
't 0l<;~8J' jan k,' great, large; to make big, enlarge" sweU out OlC;~~o:tet:~oo
0 j
<;~(')Z--II he said, I Swell out your body, spread your hood,''' S.B. 22.
,V£dec~8n ,
.'Olt/-,p05,j a mk at, 'rough, hard, violent,' severe from tt.p05, to be harsh,
j'
, rough" viole,ht, etc., with m infix.
OlG'le, jareIi, in the presellce of, near.
~ Olci9oS, .jare h, acl->ain,· an .iron chain;· fetters, handcuffs. Cf. O. St.,
.... ;;)G'loS, chain.
cl
01:>, ja, a net j net-work, lace j Burmese liP, j ha.
8.S, ji0, to sew, stitch. V£de ~S, iJCII
• 0180008, jaw Jaga w, a duct, a small canal which conveys spring or hill
water, into rice-fields. Also OlQooc;o18 and 0-:>0000.1 Haswell, t;0l)~:>8u

176, EPIGRAPHIA· BiRMANICA [VOL.n
t '5, j.uiIi, the leginclu'ding the foot the foot; base, bottO~i foot.
j
t lI-5, Ju1D, to·confer, grant,give~ Vide ~$u
G2'5,.. j n 0k, great,·.'big, ."large; a chief, head,. leaoerj~2'~:I$~a.~lnage'
~ , headman, A.V.8i(gamaje~~haka). V;deOlG~511
t" i Iiai, far~.. to 'be far, Ol~
. .
. 2'1, j nata, to·conquer, oyerccime.
t:lO, j ma,Pi every; .g-:l53;)i:l5eg,,...;.1fevery I and ,every he"· - .ani every.
. . body, Dhd. 55. 8•
* ~5, • jmii1~ sewing, stitching f~o~ asu
j
&-5, j rap, .a hall.on the, roadside .for.,the convenience _of.travellers, .a'
rest-house. Cf. Burmese, °95 (pron. 8a-yat), properly 0l901i
~, irai, the banyan tree, of which there are. ,several species.
=.
• (§..co8, j rai thaw, the ·golden banyan" theBo tree..,.•
.,'If
• -l§.~~5, jra i . m habu dh, "the· banyan of the ,Great. K!J,owledge"
=
(mahabodhi, or, perhaps,' mahabuddhi) the Bo tree;
* l§-~, jr ai s u rh == rta ..
~05, fia t, to see, perceive.. .
f e§, fii, ,a 5upplic,atory particle, ~fteri .to = be translated by If please" j in
conjunction with..~ (oq •• . ~) may, let .• .." .. It is also
If
used' as a sign of-the future; oco:>~9:.i':>o::l9'dl~-1/I will ',expound this
==.
statement"; eO'l'dl£§ Ptili, vittarissami, Dhd.'35.27; 3;)000583:1.
t§~11 I'll test ,my .mother/' 5.B.lo; 3:ldZo1$ ~" I .shall give
98..
alms," Dhd. I = Pili, dassimi.
t ~S, ii a 0,' as; so ·as . • • ,so that.. . , in order to . . .; in order
that •.. has often' the sense of the imperative; and may be
j .
translated by let (me, you, us),"or do ~ .. ," in which ~ase
U II
~S8~gg~oo91-1/
it is often followed by'l; so that his parents may
have faith," Dhd. 28. 27 j ·~Scf}$~l~ olh tTo):>9-u do (you) get up
and·sit down in the carriage." ~.J. 4; ~gc'i?)~<XlB~lC'}-Hyoung
man, do (you) come in," Dhd.·26. 26. Cf. the following "compound
·expressions :-ac4-·".. like the 'manner of" = . like, as S.B. 9; . as
~~cm'l-ulike the manner oP'- like, as A.y. 198 {under rocana)
(~:>O:>;)9 is Pali); ml, like, see 06'U as ~~8_H like the" manner.
=
of" like, as, as if, 5.8.'24; 5.S. 17..
. . . . . ).
t e3 I, fia ta, he~ she j often answers to the French; on j a person; the people j
e3'. ., ."p, e3:§ .-~". "Ge;p-who is ..• .? which or what is, are

TALAING ,PLAQUE? ON THEANANDA
PART I]
'.t. a'OeSoS~gGq<)~"'-"who is this little girl, Sir? It, Sudh.9. '13 j
b:>O§Gtir~_'1 ~ixteen
e3,.3';)oj8o' what, were those ,wonders?tI, SiJdh.
28. 2; a'~e3:9.,~§Gq;r-l/what are these, four ~Iasses :0£ persons?",
S;B.8; 023;1e3'§&'P-"Who are you?", S.B./12; e3'OO§G~-lIwho
are they?", S.B. 27.
a
• e3:g8,,. fia l}g m Ii; -',' a person ofcourage," a brave, a warnor.
• e3'qlb, fial} <;l un; /,a person oLthe city," citizen.
lit ~j' fi ha, to invite. -Vide §II
qo, <;lak,'water.
lit qocn,CoGo18
Qak ja
lag 0 w
=
0,90006/ q.1J.
j
q[8, <;I un, town, city; country, kingdom.
• qLb028, Qun's waw, the heavenly city or country, heaven,svarga.
t G~, <;Ie h, he, she, it. ,Not Gq3S, as, Haswell.
~l05, -Quik, to ride;- drive.
t Q'):>,I}a,to go, to send, a\vay, off; for full explanations and. meanings see
under plaque 277. Sometimes also written ~:>, na, in composition.
• ao,~8, t:la k niP, to face towards, see under plaque 277.
• C!O:>~l8, I}abc uip, t,o lead to, convey to, see under plaque 277.
cO, I}a', this.
cS, I}im, yet, still; a sign of th'e' future.·See G~Jb~ -on0 n.
• 0:>, t a, to vomit. Vt'de o:r->35, C03;)~1I
o:>CYS, t a k, to strike, beat oo0'SGoo$G8-l/to beat the drum and walk the
= j
gong" to .proclaim, by beat of drum and·gong, G. pi. 3.
*
ooo:S~<t.>, ta k suih,. to' beat one's breast, in. sorrow, wonder;.etc., Dhd.,
12.8.
ffi, '
tka', an island, contment.
• oo8~~; tankIaai, molasse:: treacle j, see next.
OObOO~, taill aa i, molasses, treacle; this word is'.colloquial; o:>c?i~,
literary. Cf Burmese, 06800, taiiIa i.
oo~$, tan in; see O~~II
t ooc~p, t al,1h a, passion, lust i Haswell, ooY:1l pau, tat;lha.
t ,a·
ooS, 'tan, to be valid, have validity; to dwell, abide, remain;' as verbal
auxiliary, it' expresses: propriety, suitability, fitness possible, may;
j
OO~~~lI ooSgo,9o;>,-is 'it proper to speak and to act (so)?, V.O.K.
44.8; Q02 00H9-it cannot be, it may not be: S.]. 4.· Cf. B., OO~II
~ 0')(,)8, 9S8,tamaW, tm'aw, rolling over 'and over, round and round.
~3

·EPIGRAPHI!\. 'BIRMANICA [VOL. 11
'",OOfi:, tam Ia~ j see ()filU'
! oo~b, ta mh a'aij see'~~il, also'GOGbn
n,a
lit co~b(})a$,' tam ha ai 'jami :,present, gift, offering; bribe, tribute.
~~9, t.a.!em, old, not new. ,',
,"bb\i' tarau, i<?urhey, way, road. ,
• ICO~';' t'a r ~tt, ' to expand, expound, glVe In details j 'to'scatter, spread j
,i ~ strew.
.*:
ooo9S, t asiit, 'fetters, manacles j Dhd. 64. 14-o.:>05~I coo9Sgoo 05§nGCBo~,0905
, 3;>:>-"beings with fetters'become.:freeP, .Vz'de, (i~~Su" '
lit
b:l~aS, tasuik, happinessi comfortable j luxuriant;' Haswell's entry"
II
the
pla~e or state of. happiness/'is not to the point.' '~~:~as-a
comfortable seati, G~ pi. 10.
e§, 0005, t a h, ,the breast~ udder. '
60, t a" sign of the plural. ' cj Burmese, ~, t uiI (pron. dol).
t rh;
cO, ta theheginning j ,near part, presence, at j the original amount of
.o~,
money, capital, stock intradejthe: profits accruing from it being
parai.j ~:ll~" the place of the ~egirining'!"source,'Dhd. 574~ 25 j
05@8, ,capital,', A.V. 153', (unde~ pdhhat'a)j, ,d.>~o5, capital,',stock' in
trade, ci,' pi. 3 j ~LSo~~l~I'OO3J$o~:i.l~~((the '~apital being large,' the
larg~j
profits are '(if) small" the 'profits are small,"G•.pi.' 13.
6; s~Urid
• C£SoSS" t i",' t i an adverb,' imitative of the' .made when striking
one's breast.
• .09S09So~@ho5, '~,i ii tiIi gat uim ' s i-uih,to bea:tone's brea'st 'in sorrow.
0905,' t ii, to go,out. After another verb often means away" out"off. '
l
d3; tim, to know.
• c8GoooS, tim ket, to know, perceive.
~co, tila, lord, master, seignezwj also cBco,cr , O'Jcoa
~O?~$, til a pu in, a lord 'of merit or glory,'; a monk. ,Yide,'crz.u
II
• I 01~, tun, again, back; in return j to return j now .•. " and now • j
it is also used as an emphatic particle, not· exactly translatable in
English, which lays a particular stress on theword,or words which
precede' it ~i2~~<:oo.:>:>ooooooqS-"now, the holy disciples, ',•... ',"
Dhd. 237. 16; ~~~Gfi~oq$-Iiand now, the king of Arimandana (for
Arirriaddana= Pagan) ..,., the reference is to King' Anorata, Dhc.
12. 26j ,~a5 6;):>~)oq$-" he uplifted religion again, that i~, he,
promoted the true religion," Dhc.;13; 3i ~oo:>cU "tlo5g~$_H~ow, ,at
that time ... ;ll Dhd. II7. 27, here it is emphatic,"6loS -:- -now:

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA f79
t ~5, t up, like, resemblingi, to be like, be similar, to resemble.
• '''ioo, tUy, the ancienfand medieval way of writing~; ~ (ai) is the
,oo,y.
modern symbol of
t ~, t ua i, the sign of the past tense;' it is also a connective particle,
connecting two sentences, a'nd 'is thus similar in use to the_Pali
gerundive tva" at the beginning' of a sentence, it means: then,
after this or that, lit. "this being. finished," and is,probably an
abbreviation for ~~, having finished"; it has sometimes,to be
II
translated as a conditional: c§a5cS~~9'~:J.)goooo:>~00~~9-~'if you
wish to know (the story) .in ,e~tenso, look up that. /commentary,"
Dhd. 235. 4. "The original meaning of the word is: to be finished,
be over, be elapsed, ,be past j 00:>00 Q~~oo-ih times past, Sudh.
10. 9; cooo§ ~oo:>oo Q~cooo-thethera, in times past, Dhd.=108.
13;~:i:::>Ol~OOQ~Goo§-the king Mahajanaka' of that time, lit. who
S.J.
is past, -8S; Q~Goo-formerly,of yore,' in olden times; 02oo~co8
Q~co05"2~oS~Loo~ootOflGo15-" 0, demon! because,' in' the past,: you
haye committed' evil deeds ... ,"Dhd. 27. '2I; the following
expression is much used at the end·.·of sections and.,chapters:
~o:>g'1~Hthis (BY so much (0:» is finished (oi)" = this section,
or chapter, is finished, finis. See '1"
GOO, t e', that.
O'J, t a i, the hand; finger.
ooOOi, ,ta i stu ril, the right hand.
• Goo:>c;~, toro, straight in front, straight ahead, right, opposite; also,OiililJ
with"which ,cj:Bu,rinese" Oii\ilIiQGO:>~'P~, iMd.
GOOO, to ril, tacook, to.-boil.~ ,
• ~! t a,u, ,t~: dwell, reside" Jive j", to b~, (in a place), remain; after anC?~her
. verb, it. is,not only euphonic, as says Haswell; ~ut it-shows also
that what isQexpressedby)he '.'erb ,is ,going on it is 'alway~ ~asy
j ,
~o .e~phonic
i\ldge frQ'I,11 tl.te, context whether ,it is merely or ,a'c,onti.
~t1~tive~uxilia~y,"thus: Gooooo does not 1l}ean ,only/~he calIed,~'"but
he was calling." ~8Qooll-c08 .'PoS-It the nagas who; ~weft at the
/I
f<;>,ot of Mpunt Sin,eru/~ S.B. 7;' ~oSeo:Soo~,~<XO~G'flS-.",this ' man is
on the palm tree," S.M. 18;" ~'ri~l05GC;P~fl illwhat;place' (where)
are the flowers?", Dhd. '93. 2'l~
t ~S, tuin, to ascend, go uP,;,u,sed as ~nexpletive itshows,tl)at whatt::ver
the verb denote~, refers to ,another, person or object; 06~~~S~~he
asked the woman.

180 EPIGRAPHIA alltMANICA [VOL. It
~, tilai, 'the sun j a day.
~, tIia m,a tree;, a plant.
:Ie_~oS, t na h,' other, different~
t ~~, ~aS~, t na h na, for;' for the purpose ofj, for the sake of;, to" in
order to ' "the infinitive.,
* ~~, tn aai, linch-pin.' ' Vide i~J ~~u
=
• ~~iS, tnaai khnail ~oojS, q.1J.
~, t nim, to sink, sink down. -'Haswell, 0008.
* ~~oS, t 1'1 eh, a trough, for animals to feed, in; in'the East, it is most
often made in the shape of a, boat; a grain measure; also written
~~oS~ Vt"de,ioSu
* ~~oS3;)~$, t neb am uiu, same as precedent. V';de 'tT.)~cnSa
*~lS,tnuil, sprout of 'a plant or tree;, top, ,summit, pinnacle, finial; also
~LS; C/. Haswel1~ oo~S; ,see next word:
*~lS§oo~,t nuilkra kat, ,a building ,with superposed roofs and a finial i
a palace; c§.'loS@::>oo:>oo'l05I1~lS§oo05~02-e-magnificenthouses, magni
=
ficent pavilio~s, decorated heavenly palaces, Dhd~II,. 30 Dil<l
269. 4; it is sometilrtes piecededby c§.i~~lS§oo05, Dhd. 204. 8; ,
the bell-inscription (16thcentJ at Nyaung';Uh~s'~",S@oc£a
t ~, t ma', a stone, rock; a rocky' hill.
*
~COI, t ma' 'IaI}, 'a,flat, 'stone;
• Ci~}$, t maai j min ;see~~~$,O:>9~, etc.
, :te' ~l05, t mut. weaving, from 0105, t ut, ,to weave. -Vide 02l05.
, 5, t ru h" a male, a man;,used as the~'-sjgn of themasculirie~
§, t rai excellent; blessed; lord.', '
J
02, O:>CO. t,la, tal~ai owner,.lord~master.,ViJeoeco.. OlcrtalcU~g, ' tida.
02::i:>, you, Sir.
~ 02e3',tla' iial};"the lord of the people" :::"a,king.:;
=
, • '2G31oo,tladosa, a lord,of anger an irasCible, choleric person.
II It'
• ~0e3:>; t.la panna, ria, mastero~ knowledge",==alearned man,scholar,
'pandit~' ' , ' ' , " - " , ' " '
~S, lin, 'd2S" '
t to err;misstheway,'-gei Jost, be lost> Haswellj'
~'~'t tIa.)~" free, .not in "bondage~,"Vide()'l'.:
~,~,~;),. fla~: cara'ai see, ~'()'l?>,: .,'
j
.o§, 008, t,~ I, ta\vIi tosurround, ,Dha· 2.24~,24- ,"
:,. ~~lS, t wI b,,"ui~, to surround; ,als()'cp,a~lS;~eqSD

PART IJ TALAING PLAQUE:S ON THEANANDA 181
*
02LoS, twut, weaving, to,weave. VUe' ~L~io
,*
~L~, t wuin, the going up, rising,rise,; from _~$" Vlde kwuin.
=
*
oal, t VIuiw ~l, q:v.
*oat,twuiw, giving;~from ~ ;c';also~lo
*~, twah, to say, speak preach'
j
* ~o" twahgab.,to'meanjto term. i call; be termed, ,be'called.
*~~S,
twa he pmiJi, to preach.
co§, t hap'a h, seven.
oc8/t haw, gold; golden. '"
*
cool, t h a. waai," to sit in a cross-legged posture, on the hams, in oriental
fashion statues of the Buddhaa.re so~ seated aiso= the Jap when
j j
seated irLoriental fashion ~co91 M~l8~~oo~S~')9-11 placing Ilis ,
j O:>Eb')
head on his wife's lap, he went to /sleep," Ohd. 298. 13; 'also'
written~~.,'co 9 10 " ,
*
co:r':'3S, th-a-a', tovomit. Vide o:::l~35, o~3Sn
*
~)S, t h- 'an,> a site, for,building.
the, a monk, of at "le~st ten years', standing, PaU, thera.
• GCO" =
* Gco8, the w GOOn
GOO, theai, angry; ,to = be angry j " anger..
~co~oS, Vide~oSn
theai' pnat GO>. ' ,)
t GooO, tho', to cast·away, forsake; give up, reject.
00=,.
~:, thbab.,'to show, '<poiri~out;
3m,
dak, to tie, bind."
a ka, a layman. Pali,~-dayaka;
3\'X)'),d
I "
t 30100, dakut, a piece"fragmenti 'part,\portion; ,half (of time or
distance);O:>~301oS,(Part or half, ofthe way"
G9oS, dg~t; to observe, todo, toper,form i, observarice, deed.
to
:3~$,daguin, observe thefaskd~Y(attaS), to observe the' Buddhist,
.virtues.
ooo,da cam, eight. '" . " " , .
oq$,dacun, ,~" stick,,3. staff to lean upon. Haswen~C)qh',',
:* :J~', da.c~ etc~.cf.
b.,' to opp-ose.go,:against, as the,!ind, the tide,
(>I.
,,6td~ ' ,'"
:Jam~, ~nxious.
, • ,daIiIia kaIIiIal-,to beatraid, be...
,."" oc4, "datuai, benefit, advantage, profit; end;'concJusiori; to doze, 'I)od~
*oc4§i:;~')8, datu aim r am w~ bepefit,' advantage, profit.
0

EPIGltAPHIA 'BiRMANICA
.o~, d a t ai, to take ~Iong with one, by, holding.:the- hand, as a child, or
a
the end ofthe stick of blind' mao, or the chain of a dog, etc. ' '
t 006, d a (au, to stand; an abode~ dwelling; 0006" todwell, S:a.l,'Sudh~
3."i I. ,See oou
t oooS, 0i, ' dad a h, being, the being born or reborn; 'state; circums'tance·
to be, tobecorrie.'
t o~r:rS, daduik, misery,stiffering iPoor, miserable.
o~oS, dam ruih, violent, harsh, wicked.
0li, ,da in Ia, a robber, dacoit i ' o~i1
'" oqer.>oo, :3Jloo,,:d a r ha t,strength. Cf. @oooo :::: @-O::OOIl
'a
t,ocx>:>o,' da Iail,' tray; on whicl~ offerings are placed for monks or the
;, Buddha.
t 38, da'w;' to shut; 'the centre, middle.
'3C;l1, 'D a waa i, ' the town Of Tavoy j also ~ritten (:00111
t
'ooS, da h, to,be, to become; , to berebornj' used as a,' verbal auxiliary
implies: feasibility, ,possibility, that can be done, of which there
is 'a 'possibility, may he' translated by Hcan"i~S0010181 ~s ceio
~could not drink water, could not eat rice, Dhd. 12. 9; in this
sense is equivalent t~ the Burmese, @8, phra c, when used as an
i'],
auxiliary. j and used at the beginning of a' sentence, 'or,
a =
phrase, gives it 'conditional'force if, if it be that, if it happens
or turns out that, it being. '.'. , He., according to the context;
~~~aiot05§~ooo:>,o~oo§@~o'911¥b)~:J;,r;;oooo§oo§ooo:>,8~r;;oo059w-eH ' told
other pers.ons it (a fish), was (worth) .,000 rupees and ,seven.
:aninas i if you take it,we shall take (only) seven rupees,'" Dhd.
173. 30; ()'Jg§j~'~:JS~O')o:>;or;;~02":"""if they sold that fish to, others
on~, :thoosand -rupees,!' Dhd; 174. 3. '
>I!': J~05(:d a11 l1'ini hi "tobecome a: ,ina~," to be born,reborn..
*
~~,dah mwai; "to be one with (~),lJ_to agree, tally; olS:goo§~401;;>ol
co§l~-«the girl's word, or statement, tallied with'Godapala's,"
S.M·9·'
,*~}D;:" daf}' yei i, to.'be>uhwell,'sick.
* ~~=>, a,
da h to become", """
t OI~, da Q~, ,a verba):alil(ai~try,; 'pJa~ed befo'rethe verb, implies, necessity,
. 'and' may ,be' translated by must,· but when placed after the verb,
it implies:' inadvertence, carelessness, fault, mistake, unexpectedn~ss,

Pt.RT t] TALAING PLAQPES ON THE ANANDA
accident, etc. i' 3;>:>Goo:3ICXi:>~~_" they went,and unexpectedly came
upon a lake," S.B'. 14i ,~:::u~8008~~'-' he caine (Ut. he found)
II
by' chance across a fig tree," S.M. 19; G:300600G~:)8ao:>oo§cq03:0l:>§9
-lithe devas, caused the'fish to enter the net inadvertently," Dhd.
173. 24. ,Vide fioSu
,31S,- d,a n, alms-giving. pali, dana.
*
6S,. d i p,'heavenly, celestial. pali, dibba.'
q()~05, d u caruit,- an evil deed, bad action. Pali, duccarita.
q$, duo, ,bamboo. ,
°
loS, du h, ~sin" evil,offence.
G3006, de va tau, a god,: a deva, devata.'
G:3oo,d e sa,a'place. 'Pali~
*
G3°09', desa 'r~ Q,country. Vide 'lID
G300~:>, G::3~:>,' des a na,' de sn a, religious discourse,preaching, sermon.
pali.
=
• G300~:)Oq, de sa na dh a r G::300p. Vide
080
Go,d e', younger brother or,sister.
~, d a u, to flee, run away; ~3;>:>, ibid. ,
,t~, d ui w, to, up ;to,, till ; qg, up to this, -this much; ot0e9:>oooS~g-
the wise, knowing this much' ... ,'" G. pi. 3.'
" II
t~oSJ. duih,.a point of the compass, region" place;. ,directioni a side; ~~oS
-one side, Dhd. 378; G05@)'~oS:--"eyes 'two sides';" both eyes,
'A.V.' 17 (andha) ;'t'J5~~oS.._,r1 face one side," one 'face, one side;
't05e'~oS-the two faces' or sides; A.V: 68 (under kuttaka, written-'
duis); ~:C)l&oS-both shoulders, Dhd. 17~ 21. pati', desa.
y
• ~oS068~:>, d uih smaw k a, the north.
=
t l', ~
dna i, place; office, place hence in some contexts inheritance;
j
it is also used in the sense of: whatever, whoever; ~1§05<t8"aoo8§~
:"'-'whatever you desire : ris:e, \vater, gold, silver, S.B. 14; ~'§05~ffil
~an that you wish, S.B. J5i see, ~oS~ n ~l~l ~8GoooS9-whatever'
they took, Dhd. 299. 4 ~l23.-whatever person, whoever, S.J.
j,
(A), folio ke.
=
*
~oS, dnih GO'iIoS, q..v.
i
tiS, d 0,: to remain, dwell, live; also used as an auxiliary denoting that
111
the,action is being done, is going on.
ct.
@e,d ra'0, a tusk i a horn. Haswell, @Su

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANIGA
[VOL. II
[30, drap, ,property,.wealth, substance. Sanskr#, dravya.
G§O, dr eP,to ~un.
* ~@8s, dre p da u,torun away, flee. See 1"11
Ggo, d10', to instruct, teach i :JI;COOI!
=,
c;2~<9.>;)S, d10' btori GgOn
~,d wi" the left sidei ~u
oijoo:>, dham mat a, the usual way," the usual order of things, custom,
usage,' habit i 'nature~ Pali.
t 08, d,h'aw, the Law, 'th~ Buddhist Law, doctrine, religion; written o~ in
old and medieval.-Talaing. Samkrit, dharma.'
08, dha w,to be straight, direct from' one .pointto_anotheri ' str~ight,
direct, right.
0105, ,dha t, ate1i~. PaU, dh:itti.
~, na,bY1 by 'means' of,with i ~~, t'bid.
t
~S, nail, to,,bring: is used also like the Burmese verbal particle ~, kh a'P,
that" is, -it implies that the action which the verb expresses'is
followed by going away from the place where' the action,has taken
place i it also, I think, refers to an action just past i it is also
sometimes merely expletive.
*
~GQ:>6, nam0 w, to bend, bend towar-ds, bend down, incline to in mind
j
also ~Q6, Got:>Su
* o\\GGf'sS, nar0', to cry, cry out. bawl, hO~'I, scream; also ~~sS, CO~3£11
~:>, n a, sometimes found so written instead of 00:>, q.v., mostly in com
position.
~8; nak, a serpent, the cobra j a'naga or drE.gOn, a species ofdemi-god.
. PaN, naga. ;.B~; a nagi or female naga..
• ~:>~, nag uiw, a town, cit)'. 'Pali, nagara.
~~S, Naaim i, King Nimi or Nemi. .
is, ni d hi, treasure, Pali. 'Wrongly given as ~oSby' Ha$Well.
~a1S, nihban, n'irva~a.
iQ$, ni man, tp invite.
III
1ft iSoS, nimit, to create, make. Cf Pa-li, nimitta. Vide d~oS.. Most often
used in the following couplet:
*
i8oS~J.>, nimit bda h; to create, make.
~ll, n u, from i than i ~Il§, from there, from that place, thence.
• GyJb, GC!O:>S, n() n, Q.0 il, a particle indicative of the future. Ct. Haswell
under
&C'IO::;;S!I

r \' 1 TALAING PLAQUES ON, THE ANA~DA
:it).J.\:..1 j. \' , • J
; E warn, to b;·, to have j also ,;,t. n tI riJ, mostly after prefixes ~ and Gil
t ()
pa, to. do, make: to cause, in this sense it, is widdy lIsed a~ a causal
prefix in the forms: pa, P, ba andb. It is all interrogiltive = why?
bow?; ()G800~05;)e3c~Gqv_tIhow arc the Pacct.'kabulldhas?", .:.], 40.
=
It is also a prohibitive do not, and. probably an abbreviation of
q}', lj,:ooO.:l3.>~~-do not ask!, S.J. (A), folio ke " o~05-don't forget,
G. pi. 7.
." (;O)J Pa k, to throw, fling (Wa.ter, dust, etc.). Cf. Burm., OO~II
r": ESE, p k an rail, to bear, carry, wear; to carry out, perform, fulfil; to
rule, govern ; ill word fur word tra!ls·latiuns, it very oftel) translates
Pali dhareti; G8C9cco5cooSxS G2'S ~J-" who wears the 32 great
characteristics," Dhd,30. 25; £)898co8qoel9~)-"fulfilled the two
gandhuras," L.B. 2. I; G£)C9CC\:)S~oS-·--carryioga spear.
* d, pka u, a flowl~ Haswell enters this word only as £Q,c(nS, garland,"
it
n.
but has the entry ch (colloquia To open, asa flo\ver, to blossom,
to flower; :;qGoch-a flowering tree, ~.V. 164 (phulla).
*
~o:, p k au sa u, a flower. Haswell's entry, ochc6, a carver-in wood,"
II
I have not met with, the usual expression is e3aJ05~1
* £@;\ r k au sr au =. last, with r infix. .
t 0;:;000/ Pa kam, to bring together, collect, gather, hoard, amass i gSO(;;OOO
coo~~oc~:(,m-~(having amassed property, shall I give it for nothing
to them?", G, pi. 14.
uc~8, p a it mi il, to hear, iisten to: Haswell,ocgSo .
t o~8, pa fifi a p, a l1'ame, appellation, term; to name, call, terin i to prepare;
palt', pannapeti.
lJe:P, p a fi fi a, wisdom, intelligence, knowledge. pati.
:)05, pat, to press with the hand, squeeze, Vide o:lCi 0105"
ata
(~~, oo:>~,
t pta n, p n, to build i to raise, exa-It'j to llIake firm, stable,
.unwavering; to restrain, control (of nie mind, feelings, etc~) i to
establish; to appoint to alJ office ;G~&;9J5Gi~cg8G()".)8::i:,;) oo:>~co8vtj)q~
"I will exalt you to the state of chief queen," Sudh. 2-l, 22; 1;?<'l)O
.' . . ~v,.~Sco6;j)1I§'~13oS9co~-" the q'leen; being unable to coo'trol
S.J.
her grid," 66.
t 8, pta ril, to begin, begin with i et cetera, ana' so forth, and the like.
V£de cOli
* 6\
ptaIll, to fulfil, practise.

186 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
t &05,.pti t, to take out, put out, put forth ;&05'80005-11 to put forth
11
strength," to endeavour, strive, A.V. 47 (ussuka) i&05015- to put
forth words," to utter, express, say, S.R 9, S.l7.
00300£, pat isan ti, conception, rebirth. PaU, patisandhi.
*
09~0(T.):>,'patun p,a-a, friendly greeting, exchange offrie'ndly greetings,
agreeable conversationi in translations, always reAders the Pali pat;
santhara i·~oC?:>So01S0:.r.;l:> O~o:l~:>G)-exchanged friendly greetings,
Dhd. 226.~j..
001, paturil, to let fall, drop, throw down.
od}05, patui'k, generally written 'ecl}05, q.'lJ.
t &l~, ocl}S, Pt uin, pat'uin, to raise up, put: up, tift up i to put up,"
It
present, offer, from an inferior to a superior; dlcoO':>oo~S<tS, let ye
II
cook and put up rice," S.M. 13i ~05~o, &lS~~-(1every'day, he
had to present (flowers) to the king," Dhd. 92.21.
o~,pa11, four•
• 0~~5, pan k1a0, having four angles, square.
• otoo:>, pan11a s a; tqe hut of a hermit, made of branches and, leaves, a
hermitage. PaN, paJ}l).asala.
• 0300,. pad a t a.u, to dwell, sojourn, live. Vide ooS and 0011
.o~c$., pap fi j a u,t09ffer,present, in a religious sense. Vt'de~ill
• oil, pa b u iw, generally written e~, q.7J.
* a
ogo:oo4,' pa .b wakk r,a u, to make a follower," that is, to become or
II
be, someone's follower, Dhd~ 28. Vide ~CJSoo411
[2.
OQ05,g05, pam at, pmat, fire, also C'X,!oS, ~:>oSll
*
goSSQ, sacred fire j .sacrificial fire, A.V. 36 (ahavaniya).
*
o~~alS, pa.ri ni bb an, parinirv31.la. Pali, parinibbana.
* o~, par a i, ,excellence profit, benefit, advantage before. a number =
j j
more than,over, above. From [9, to gain to be excellent, noble.
j
t
o~S, parui 0, tidings, news;, from this meaning it has also come to
,mean: what pertains to, what is connected with, and may be trans-'
py,
Jafed about, concerning, as regards" i ot.0e3:>coOO)9~~O~l81103cooooS
1/
o~cq05~05GDJ:>SOOhee3:oo8g~-" the wise, thus knowing about (that is,
the evil consequences of) the sin of stealing another's wife •.. ,"
Dhd. 357. 8 i o~SO>"1GCOHoSo8~co~~§~ooG),~~c§G)_1/ he told the
king, in detail, all, about his practising the s£las," S.B. 28.
Pa'l e h, to make dance, as marionettes, snakes, monkeys, etc.
pal ui t, to put out, extinguish. '

TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
PART I}.
O~, Pa lui m, to destroy.
• 0~05, p a luih, the circle around the Bo tree, in the centre of Jambu
dipa.
• 08, paw, a mountain j used only after the names of mountains. Sans~rit,
parvata.
too, pawa, a deed, act, action; work j vocatiolli from' o,by infix Uf· It
is often used followed by to form abstract nouns. Also ~II
f,,},
pas ek, to pour' water in the act of consecrating king, ,to anoint.
'" OGO:>aS,
,paU, abhiseka. Sometimes written o~cill
pas e k' pas a w, same as the ~eaning. gIVen by
• OGo:>ooo0:>8, OGO:>.,5j
Haswell,' "happiness," is wrong, I think.
'"
o~oo, pasu ik, same as
OGO:>OOIl
*
o~S, pas tiin, to make over, hand oVtr,deliver, c()mmit. Cf tfiS, q,~11
'" oo§, pas mi0, to make king,".. that i~, .tobecome.king to rule.
II j
t 'olb, pail, the mouth; word, statement, speech,discourse j e3:~~§oo~~61bQ
~~_: and each spoke only one word," Dhd.. 357. 7.
, II
*
olS, pan, to ask respectfully, to beg, entreat. . Cf Burmese, oS, pan.
*olS:r.>Golb, pan akhoil,'to beg leave, ask. permission.
t 01, paa i, to reject, put aside. Cj.Bur'mese, 005, pay' (pron. pe) j to
leave, go from, depart from;' Q1~1l§<tS~-"having again departed
from thence . . . ," Schmidt, 88. 2. . .
8~01oS, piQQa pat,food given in alms to monks. ''P,at£, piQQa pata.
ttS, p u il, cooked rice.
~S, pun, to rebel. Cf. Burmese, ~~II
• )1~, P0 g ui w, a person, individual. pau, .puggala.
~~, pfi j au, an offering, to the Buddha, the monks, or a temple; to
make such (in offering. paU, pOja.
to
Pek, be destro.yed, done for, ruined, routed. Cf,. Burmese, qjoS,
'" GOaS,
pyak (pron. pyet).
t
q~, pu i n, property, wealth, po~session i glory, dignity, in the expression
c:aco~S, 'I.v. Cf. the same meaning of the Burmese," CXi$., b hun'
(pron. phon8
),
in the expression, oq~rs:, b h u n9 kr i3
::
ceco~s,
both from the Pali punna, whose meaning, as is the case allo
with some other words, has been extended.
~soo:>~, p u in han, same as ~Sll
t u~, pa:k, to open; expound, explain.

188 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (L".V'O
fU
'
~ ,
\
.
'
t
t G£:>6, p.'ow, to send, despatch, order; to 'cause to, incite to, Ul'~~f i
.persuade, induce. For full explanations see under Old Talaing r,
G
plaque 50.. Ofteri also written <D~:>SIl
III c;.$,:>80~a5, p''0 \V bat u ik, to incite to, urge, persuade, induce.
• GJp8c6, P-'0 W.1a u, to incite, urge, persuade i to cause to.
~, p u iai, wei ~~(YS, we (respectful).
~, p ~ a i, in, at, into; co.nciently written, ~05, PQa y, and G~05, p ~ ey.
~83il, P9a i Itii, on, upon i ~ooO?·t
~oS, P 11 at, anger, angr.r: to be angry. Haswell, or.;::a:l;,oS:t Vt'dc Gro;
~l, p na 0, the shoulder.
t §a5, pmik, wish, desire i sen5C, meaning of a word or passage i Opm1l111~
view i §a5oo09ooo1cc;,-" this (is) the meaning of the third verse/'
Dhd. 355. 25·
t gjl~OS, pya1;1 duih, ttl foretell, declare.~~forehand. prophesy; a prophecy;
?OC9:>So:logo:lgf:j,gj: ~:YScc8oo0'ir'\0:>2ooo;)g~-'{1with such words did the
Omniscient Ol)e prophesy on the summit of Mount Hamsaglri,"
Sudh. 28. ~\1. Haswell," o'-'l:1!v5, revelation," Cf Sanskrit, vyadl~~
*
A;'o;)J05, p r a sat, a b~lilding with superposed roofs! a terraced tower.
palace. Sanskrit. prasada.
t 2~'· PIa n, to tUfO turn back, turn overj and j 0>~oo(')§Lt2~l;)~oSCG}O'S~§~80
J
~Gc1~9~~a:~_11 and the people, saying, the queen has obliterated
I
the king's line . . . ,'" S.]. 66 i . again anew. Cf. Burmese, roi,
J
lan, and @~,pfa n' (pren. ;Y41l).
t
~~ooo:,~ pIa n gat a 1;1, to turn round i to change, alter, change from bad
to worse, go wrongi . to {)ppose,' retaliate; to speak in -return, as
in conversation; (iooO 2Soo::>:~-/I he is subject to change (his mind,
dispositions, etc.),-" Dhd.40. 19.
~'tS, pie Ii, to destroy, ruin, blot out.
(t6. pIa Ii, to conveyor conduct, to take to (a person or ,a place);
005811-
to
<tl, pIa1;1, spread, spread out
~, pwa, same as 00, q.7}.
qS, Phun, a mattress._
*
qS~f p11 un 59 i, a mattress, S.V., folio khaln, Dhd. 30. 4
'" GOr>'S, ph e k, to fear. Vide (jG~r>'S, of which GOr>'S is a contracted form.
*
ph a u,with, together with. Cf. Haswell, ol11
-l()

PART! 1 ... TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
0, p ha ril, a d.rum.
c~:l8, ph. '0 w, same as ~&.H3, q.v.
~ <s~05, p h a· 'u it, "to cause to end, mal{e an end of/' to put an end to;
to end; to spend, waste, squalider i to be ended, spent; finished i
02~()~oSG')Xld.:b-:· in order to put an end to his doubts/' Sudh. 24.
19; eSc;} G()~oS ~ <A]loocqoSb-lllike the sun puttiilg anenQ to the
brightness of the' firefly," S.TvL 2GG;;>::l~~O:>CGC§~l5,,,~03cc1::ro::S6~,co
I J
the going: to look at dances, wasting (onc-ls) time/' Dhd. 238.
_II
~6.
*
% ph y; this combination is often the result of the assimilation of a
labial, ~, \\lth a following sibilant or palatal ~'. Cj. the words
0, :xJ
below.
*
qj~, phy a to instruct, give instructions, direct (how to -act. etc.); ~o
0,
or
send leave a message; it is used generally in the couplet, (,)CY.l~
q;~J from oc~: OM Talaing, ~~, pc an. In the fdlowing, it is used
alone: 9G~:lSo.;)oS @:lO<3~':> Gl;;~&Q())O:t911 OOO;)Sqj~§'~<d<TJ(:tt~_,i then.
CVI;,GC
the future Buddha went unto his father's presence' an:cl told him
according to his instructioliSr" S. Vidh.·292.
,.. qjO, phyap, to think, reflect, design, inter.d i from 0':)0.;)0, kasap j here
-the <! is the result of the assimilation of the guttural 0':) with the
sibiiant
00;: =
* qjB, phyap, to put' together, join, connect, unite, from oct); i>O to
adjoin, be adjoining.
• -qj:l"), ph yak, to break, tear; hencei it means: "to cause the day to
break," that is, to wait for the dawn or until dawn i Cl1i5~~:lrJ50;;)~SQ~
Q&05c-i the Buddha used to go back and -wait for the dawn, in the
'
Middle. Country (majjhlmadesa)," Sudh. 13. 10 j from ~~5 j . oo~
cak ==to tear, to rend; there is a colloquial expression, :r.>j1S00,
the day breaks./I
1/ =
as
• ~$, phyin, ~o-cook; from 08S; to be cooked.
• <fJ05, phYLh, "to ~aus'e to come down," to put down, throw down; form
=
()805: 805 to come down, ~escend.
qjlC, ph Y u n, to .cause to drink," give to drink i from o~S; o:tS, to
II
drink.
qjl~, phYun, flesh, meat; from &jlS (Old Talaing)•.
• l1Il~l§~, ph Yun g ru ih, the heart.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
19°
t GqjC, ph Ye il, to turn .aside,turn away j to set on one side, or obliquely,
to~lflnt, ~§(;qjC98
or on the slant,. something' towards -.uhe
j OOG05
looked obliquely, with only' one eye," S.J. 82 i from UGo8, G2C;
GOc: to be.slanting or oblique, incline or be 011 one side; may also
." be from ClGo8 see qjO := 00008, above.
j
*'~oS" P u~05 ~a5K
hy uik, to render or. make happy j from j see
*
l£1~, ph Yuin, to make over, hand over, deliverj from o~S (A. V. 134,
Ql1der 1ryasa).
eoS, ~ak, to' follow.
eo:>o,
b a k a p, to turn over, upsidt: down.
*
eo$, b a ca 11, to instruct, direct, commission j to send or leave a
tiS
message. Vide u
*
eoSoCY.lS; ba can g a ka11, same as ~iDSIl
~l8, b cui p,to cause to arrive, to conduct, convey to. Vide cr.>::>~O/l
~oooS, bata k, same as 00005; q.v.
*
§.,(oS, btui k, 'to incite, instigate,i\1duce to to urge, stimulate request
j j
to; .to attack; 'to fight, contend. Cj. Burmese, dioS, t uik.
*
§.,1'lSG~18, btu ikp • '0 W, same aS~loS, first meanmgs. Vide G£18,
G&::>811
G~JS,b ton, to teach,.instruct. Vtde <12:)11
t ~05,bd a h, to cause to be, to make, to create i. Haswell, U~II ~05, is more
common.
t~lS,. bduIi, to cause to receive, to hand, to pass; to give, bestow.
*eGooS, b'ape k, to cause to be destroyed, to ruin, destroy; to rout, put
to flight. Vide GUro"
*
e~, ba ba i, same as ~J q.v.
*
~q, ba bu iw, ~'tocause to icpk at," to show.
, ~~05, ba bnik, to trade. Vial §05a
*
e~, bahwa i, same as §, q.v.
*
~~GCS8, ba bwai ;I weIi,in due course, m regular course, In regular
order, successiv.ely. .Vide ~§~02clI
* bam a, to s~,ckle. Cj. OGJ, ~, e8"
t::G), 0:DG05,
* ~GJ03, bam a t a h, same as 0G)ft
*
0~G05, bame,y,/to suckle.
.*
e\:$, bam a u, to suckle.
'" 0803, ba rna uta h, to suckle.
0i~, bam naQ, a brahmin, probably from SanskYit, brahma1;la. Vide $2:11

PART I] TAL,AING, pr~AQUES ON THE ANANDA
* e~S,§lc, , ha wu iii, bwIJ iIi; to surround; c/. Haswell tn ~ ~LSII Ct·
Burmese,:~ci, wt:ii liS (pron. wai"1t ll ).
*
eGoom, ba hek"J~arj to fear j to frighten jOOGl':tS, OOG00 rrSli
'" e@05, ba ""a;t,a :measure j to measure. Cf. Haswell in G~Ja5 e~05, a
, ,'measure j '~i:iC§05, . .'~~c~e@05-" the great oce~n . . . which 15
measureless," S.J.(1\}, folio ku. Vt'de @0511 '
~g, Budd ha, the Buddha'i in some compounds, abbreviated ,to ~S,
budh;
* follower,::parti~anj-Jribe:clan;
Ge8, ba k, a companion, companions j
Ol~ c§lr,;l~ GeS8£:)B~oo§-" 'person~,
class, kind; some ,'who " were
followers of the heretics," Dhd. 159. 18;,~9H:§¥o~Ge89-'1(of) what
is termed I Buddha,' there are four classes," Dhd. 34." 12. Cj.~d3u
*
GeJSooo~aS, bo d h iyapa lui h, the spot around theBo tree;':Vide o~05u ,
t ~05, scale,standa~d;
bnat, measw:e, size, extent, quantity; the exact.
quantity j the derived meanings are: about (so much, sohig, etc.) ';
so (much, long,~tc.);.it is equivalent to the, Pali, matta and maltant,
at the end of ,compounds j o:;d.>~05@18o;?-" during the measure of
or
two or three days, to the extent of two three days" ;,' for two
or three days, Sudh. 4. 21; c8~05qSe3:-tIknowing the measure or
extent or'standard;' of others' virtues," Dhd. 59.7 j ~~ e3:~_tI the,
quantity of 1,000 persons," one t.housand persons; S.B. 16 j ~05o
~8g-"theext~nt or measure, of so much;",t~is much, so much,
about so much, Dhd. ,299.1 I,equivalent to Pali' ettdka (Dham
mapadaatthakatha, 293); ~'05§'-"the measure ofthat," rhat much,
so much, <1bbutso 'much," Dfld. 48. 5; ~1l~056~9-" more than (oi>[[)
the old measure," more than be..fore, much more, S.J. (A) 37. The
form ~05, ena t,is also found al Sudh. 28.1S. '
~laS, bn u h, a spear. G~paSli
~oS, bnik, Illerchal~dise, goods.
~:, h na 1), a brahmin. g:@,'a brahmini, brahmin woman. Cf'e~a
'" @oS, brav, rain; this is a 16th century form j the modern form is @II
t @[, br u, to make a noise, to sound; to resound, be sounded, etc.
~, brau, a woman.
*
lMe3''?l8, brau "fi a1) <;I uil, a woman of the city," a eitizeness.
/I
It §B8~, bra u mi min, a nurse. V£de 88~n
t2~, bIa a i, young; a young man. '

EPiGRAPHIA BIR1\tJANICA [VOL. II
t~l~S, blui k, to sink; to destroy i be destroyed.
t ';303, b\'S' ak, a follower, the follower of a person oi
infix. Haswell, ~oc5ll .
,if 't05:n,L bwa k ka r :l. ti, saine as ~05!1
t S, b IVa;i forfuH explanations see plaque J99. Ct. C'~, e~, §~II
*
~O:>"l!, bIVaita ra QI in c;dail, in fuB, £n extenso.
r.;r Bao:; hwaida cah., against (the wind, '.vuter, .etc.).
0# bo~m!,. b W :l ida ca h ky- 3., agCiin:ot the wind.
.... b.l. • _ ....
* ~ ~' { i = ' ~ :- ' " \ , ~ j;; 1 ~ -. _T'"vnl• u 1 U ·. . . \ ; ." h 'J ~ " . ' .... U \r ~ T~ ,~ 0 r ' .l } " 'O~~ 'l " : 1 " ~ : r : i " ' " t U :: _ t \ rl ~ t,~:..·~:!;,,:.)." t 'y r;~ ·, . ; ¥ .. ' \ ! . - 1 h .} etc.;.
0 :. ' " ~ v ~ : h w~. ". \ or 1 ... '1. ; . dj\ ! : ; ~ '4 t . , . ." .. !. n \i 1 o ' ) ;'( -., '..~. ( J 'i \ -, .... i ... ; ~ ; '~ .. ~ .. :O:-' t ". n ,' ' " ''!v:: " a l.;.~~~.i.",..~" .i..u _ st'? .. ii. _ t_"'7.~:;~~20Usl.•,·.,·~
~* ~~, b,v'ai b,-vail san:e as §il
it ??<DOZS, b wal ~ \vai 1wen, 52.me as tS;;;':;'2t:1
,\ ." "I ...
~~ ' , i ~ ~ , l . ( . n, 0wa1 ~'-, WUH:, i ~ n C~lfc,um.terence ; ~Jl\')rj-, a C..l!cumr~erence. C/
Eas'i':eH, x~a51 circumference.
a
,. ~i:, bw i mila IJ: outside, without (direction).
.. So;:.;oqoo, bwai aluik, accordingly, owing to, of one's own accord. V£de
..
-:-~cSOOIi
:00, bha va, a state' of existence, existence.
::0065, bhawa k, follower. Vide ~OOIi
~:>,
bha,
monastery. Pdlt', vihara.
.. ::6;. bha \I, existcnc,~, state of existence; dwelling, world. PaU, bhava.
t ma, first-a verbal assertive particle corresponding to the Burmese,
Q,
;)~i in this sense the sentence is generally ended by '1 or GGflc, two
emphatic assertive particles; bllt it is also often used by itself i
::.o5§~O:>:>Qt)(15co5--" thus (as shown ahove) the sub~commentaryexplains
{it)," Dhd·32. 2; ~5§3 .. , o~05~eo:c68:()§LSQ3~~058lloS§'1 II o:tooo. J oS
~~305CX!J5~Q02-" the Blessed Buddha ... with reference to the laymen
who observed the comm..,ndments and the sabbath, told the Bhiiri
datt~-jataka,1/ S.B. I j the first CJ before o~S = l/ who." ~'?lSoooo:xxJ.p
§ ~c;()"')CIl <XlJ8g()~lC GGs,'nog 8--" onl-y in the city of Saflkassa, do the
Blessed Buddhas come down froin Tavatill1S;1"t Dhd. 63. 6: ~~
0'33\,j§ol:1moo')§II~c.fC~r)C~::>S~$?JS~:~()CX)::>~-((in this fifth instruction;
he taught (this) orie statement," U.O.l(. 23. 9. In interrogative
. sentt:nces, the sentence ends with (;'P, the interrogative particle, and
::.02.
remains equivalent to the. Burmese, in its abbreviated form
Q
before the interrogative particles c;roJ and ~2:; that is, Q • " • c;'P
- Burmese, .... ~CO), .... oo~~r; \i~05et:05Q(;r::jo1'c;'P-"why are

PART:I.j •. ,TALAING PLAQUES' ON 'THEANA.NDA 193
you fleeing ?'1,·Sudh. 14. 14; ~~110£::QGotl9GGp~--.1Iwhere, Sir, do you
corne from?", SudhL9. 3. G, as anassertive~ is most often used with
.'I and Gbf'c, two emphatic assertive particles dosing'sentences, whIch'
ar~ Btirmese,CXl~1
the' equivalents of the and oooS; 50 that G. . . 9,
j~e3:>oS~ ci:d3o:Jro:>~GO§LC
GGfc= Burmese, ... o:JO'Je3:, ... o:JoooS
.G ....
GCOC~Gd2CXfoo9~oS§9-1t the kfng, ~eeing(this),. gave many gifts to
those four warrior5,"Sudh;23~ 4;' ~GGfoS~oS~9G~~::Q9-1'0, king,'
this little'girl was my,mother,". Sudh; 9~ 14( o8ooG3;)cQ£~iG~co:J:GGflC
-" people praise patience,"·U;O.K. 44., 6.; ~659::QGt1:otLCGGflc-" fO.r
this r:,eason I.had.tacome," ,Sudh. 9.6. Second-·it is a participial
par~icle i it forms participial noUriS;, GOO:; the p~rifying, purification
:;:: Palt', v'odanamj P.T.; GffioCf?llJ the being righteous, rigbt~ousness,
O. 'St. j GGoae&o05, the reviling, abusing, ·P.T. j G@& ~,- the.:making
known, informing~ P.T. j 01Gc:8oS,' at the time' of going out, when
~G3;)J; whiIe\going;~[a;,B ~§
he,or I went out; in the 'going, §G"tLc
-')1from Buddha's.arriving," Sudh. 19. 7. iris alsomuch used as.a
a,
'coQnective particle, and is nearly equivalent to relative: who,,which,
that ;:,oloSGOOGocY.3o::~o9oo~ao-," the relic'resting, inth,eMahiYariga1J.~
cetiya," Sudh.9. 4 ~&eO~O£~G~_·"~according.to' the.words which.
j
our lord (Gavampati) spoke/i Sudh.9' II; c:8~l§oSGo§--.-';'earthof
.the' place which the 'rhinoceros ate,'l1 that is,. earth from' the place
whet:e. the rhinoceros ate,' Sudh.'lo. 16; "B'G ooe§BI-.>~aperson
who fiats the debts of othersl"_ that- is, one who lives by borrowit),g,
A.V. 12i (adhamaI)1J.a) i GOJ:>S GOOOO Go8~~S711.the'deva who drives
Indra's chariot," A.V.184· (Matali);, :bJ~O~Gt3"tI-1lhaving reached
=
the age which is clever,' or, 'of cleverness the age of reason, Dhd.
I
,145. 17; . ooge?Loot?3:>aO G[§&c8GOJC?SG:DffiL~~S-",OmnisGience, which'
.grasps (everything) wit~outindistinctness( .... thoroughly),'" Dhd.
30. 24. From some of the above examples it will be' seen that '(,)
may also often be translated. by a present" participle. ~ From its
quasi-relative 'us,e, Gis also use<;Lto form adjectives; 'words s.uch as
'the following are often, met with in the, di~tionaries':-.-Q~0305, weti.
,G(§,excellent; ,G~l~,'~ina.nY j', GG~~\ great, large ; G~S, 'firm,'steady.'
rit a, 'father. , . . .
'., Q,
* (,),
ma, yo~, your" Sir; also': feliQw, chap-II; <i::QoQ.:-JtoSaoJG~_11 why, Sir,
II
do you steal my cattle?"; S.M. 4;' ot<im <i~~05§GG03 "t:nao)_'1 the
owner of the bullocks said, that fellow . has stolen away iny:
'I
'~5

194 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
02
buflocks/" S.M. 4 j ljQg_H this cattle of yours," S.M. 4 i 0llo:>og
you, fellow! this hen ..• ,". S.M. 8. Cj. SJ
•• .- • _it
t ij:, mg ab~ prCilperly: ·ma gab, if, used by·itself at the end of the
clause, and also in conjunction with o:'lQ or oo&}, 008 being place9 at
the beginning and ij: at the 'end of the clause (vz'de 008)i it means
=
also litera:tly; called,' named i hence to wit, namely i oqQ8005S1
:::o~-:':'Ct Sudhammavati, to wit: Sfldhuim (Thaton),". Sudh. ~2. 16i
~~oS G~qc 02lHI 01l8G~-1l why did. he receive the name, to wit,
Buddha?'", Dhd. 30. 7 it is also used emphatically, to lay a
_C j
stress on the preceding word; ~~.:PCX1lC§ 9:>l:;)Gol<XiQH'~l8 ~lc~~ ~(X):>
-" Si,r, will the Buddha Maha-Gotama come to our city?", .Sudh.
12. 25.
* S=g, mg a1;1 ww'a', .what ,is, termed •.. i what is calI~d, in regard
to "', is .of~en 'strongly emphatic and need. not be actually
trans!ated i t:r.lQ1Hgea:3~Gooot:r.l:>~olRUGoaottlooc;ooc2S~lc4°o:>S9-11 in regard
t8 :hell, if once one fall (into it), v~y difficult it is to get free
again," V.O.K. ,14. 12.
ijl§, mga1) g a h, 'same as Hlgw These.two expr.essions ar~ equivalent to
B
the Burmese, :cqo:>ffi<ml, hii saii ka . . ,
*
G~Q~OO, Ma j.j himaduih, Majjhirnadesa, or the Central Region, the
region in India where the Buddha's mission was accomplished.
GC, mao, to wait; to watch over, take ca're of; to observe.
GC, ma-il, the red deer. Cj; Burl?ese, o:>~c, sama0 jOld Talaing, l:;)QC,
ra mao.
Gcti":>, maIi bIaai, a young m~n. Vz'de li~
*
Q&~, mao ai,to watch over, take care of. Vide ~u
Kl
GC~, mao mwai, same as Gc~a
GOO, mat, the eye.
*
·GClT.)oo,maI)at, to be angry j see m9ac,plaque No. 180.
t Go2ol, matwah gab, -literally == "said," that is'. to say, to wit, as
follows; corr0iponds to the Burmese, ~OXX)eln CXjlG::mn ~1~Q:)Go.':l~@CX):> 0
0201 G:30ClffiG:>1l c:8GC\:?o.:>G:>, etc.-" the hosts of Mara are five-fold, as
follows: Mara the god, passions, etc."
*
G~81, rna. twah pgab, same as' ~020I; this expression is found in
inscriptions of the 15th and 16th centuries.
G~, m a n,M8n, the MeSll' or Talaings i ai~o found written 02 and GQJSII
G~, mara t -. GbfuO. == maharaja, great king. king, Y<lmr Majesty. Cf.
Haswell, 51:>0511
G

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 195
g9~, mas u'n, five..
* GCOOOl~, rnahajan, the people. "Pilli, mahajana.
G~, ma, Mara.
C,)~, mi, "to suckle. Vt'de eo~, G~oS, <$11
* G3, mi, a particle meaning: as to , as t9\'<. . it is as follows, with
regard 'to ... , as regards ... , comcerning •.. j this is probably
a 'loanword from the Burmese, ~::>j m ha, and is often found so'
written j l:r.lS91aS~::>-uas to the meaning it is as follows," Dhd. 10. 9 j
3;;lSglaSG:?>, Dhd, 302. 28 i ~e81aSolco::>gG::>-C1the meaning of this
stanza is as follows," S.l.· 15. It also shows a present contingency
with reference to the future, and is conditional and emphatic j it
corresponds to the Burmese, ~Soo::>:,~OO::>I,.1hyail ka3
,
m0 ka8j
~05~md3g)-C1 jf you wish to know," Sudh. 27. 8.
t 8, mi, motherj it is also used as a term of address to women:" madam,
ladies, miss:-
SS, m iil,. to hear.
SS, miil, harpoon. Cf. Burmese, ~:, Inhins.
n
t8£:>9~, micchadi h i, having false views, .heretieal, a heretic",
*
80S, mit, a friend. "Piilt', mittam.
*
SC§, mitah, a nurse.
*
S~, mini, a· nurse j a maid.
* Bas,
mimin, a nurse j an ayab.
*
ses~"'c§, miniin ba tilauta h, a nurse.
*
*8e~:>c§, mi bam a t a h, a nurse
SeGC§, mi ba mau tah, a .nurse.
t ~.,.S, muk, . the face; hence: .in froiit, before," at j .also, one side (of
a flat thing).. Cj. Pali, mukna.
*
'tooGoo8, muIt kew, to have a bright, pleasant, happy face.
ct.
'i~ol, m.ukkha wa; the face, countenance. Pali, mukha.
t
'laS, the end, of anything i nose; a\soGG;aSlI
a,
'i, m an interrogative, whatt, the sentence ending with G,?j ifI .
GG(a, wherefrom . • . lj ~ll . . . G9", in what place.:." • ?j erS
••• oc;p, how much .... ?,atso written G8 and ~8H
* eJ, ma i, to Jook, look at, behold i the more" common fot'mnow ia ~ j
it-is not generally used as a.verb by itself~ but as the second member
of compounds, after verbs of "looking, considering, thinking, watching,
taking care of,.etc.,""very much like the Burmese, ~,' kraiii.

,E,PIGRAPHIA, BIRMANICA', [voL-: Ii
*
Q, m aI, to',have, posskss; 'generally not' l!sed by itself, '~but,,' with, 'the'
negative or' = "2.(q:ZJ.); 7Ji'de ~II
_'
• (;>, rnai, one; the, comfllon form. is ~';' e38§t~tdi~~18GoSi;>"-I"Iike 'a man'
with ,(only) one eye," -Dhd,' 54.
2.",
GC, ~~a 0, a gong; cf.-Burmese, c;Q:lC, moo.
,,-tt:, m,iiaQ,. without, outside. ' ,
'§oS" mIi ih, a man, sometimes found written ~oS,' mnls. ' PaU, manuSSa.
*
~~O:>205,-mnih,kamlat, '~man-thiefi." a'thief.
,~L mnuril, v.:ho has" "{hich ~as, having;, anabbreviation'Qf G~~~tOOQ~, et
',cetera, and ,SD forth; and other ... ;'; 0ffil ~t05GqcB 'eO:> 085~--flowers,
fried grain (eo:» and other things proper (008'::: ooo8)fot oblation,
A.V.6 (aggha).
a
i', m n Q, thall, you. '
w,
-@G8, m ram a ,fragrance,; perfume.
*
@G8, 'm rama w~ benefit, profit, adyaritage j @GQ:l8~ V£de3~11
,* 'lS2, , m Ia k m'wa i, to 'look, lo~k at. Cf Haswell,' 'l~05I1' '
t ~,. mwai, t,o look, loo~ ~t j' one, I.' --See'u,Iider i;> j'on.!y, :alone;,Ge:>8°OOO2 Q
, ~~G~:lJ:>S':O§9-Honly the Bodhisattva could answer their questions,"
S.B. I I j' ooChrl12-he alone, S~B. 12jas for .. ~ j ~~§...;..as·' fo~
me, S.B. 12.
*
~, m \\'aI, ,to have, possess ; not used 'by' itself ,in this sense; but only In
,the negative: oo~, 02~1I ' V£de G, <:y"
~. ~p, mh a, 'same as third, 'q:D.
(,)j,
~pc§05, mhas mit, the grea.,t oce,an rthe sea.: pali, mahasamudda.
,*
005, 'yaw, if;' stands at the beginning: of the clause it'i~ 'often followed'
j
"by the 'slightly emphatic '''b "qp8~; and in 'this form," h~s been
registered by Haswell;' it, is.'often reinforced' by' the other condi
tional,8', which comes at {he end of the clailse, .thus· giving 008
.'.. R~·or ooo'i :. . g:j ili8jo:>5§---':very well, Ut.H.if it be ,like
that," equivalent to the' Palitenahi; Dhd.I60.· 23 j "this expres:
, sion 'is'very frequent; '.. ' ,' "
*ooo:OuoS, ya's sapat, fame, ,', renovtl,'honour, enjoyment, ,bliss. Probably
* from pau, yassa, patti:, '
'000, ya'm, 'if;'its uses'are like those of 0;>0,- so' that 'we' have OOO~, 000
: ~ .'. H', 000'\ ..• H'. ' '
00;' 'y to,
ai, illness, 'sickness- 'to be ill. Generally'prefixed names' of
j
as
,, 'sicknesses, oon~, !nflammalion ;- IXlqoS, a swelling, etc. :.

TALAING PLAQUES ON THEA.NANDA
'" ~'J§, fa i ~Puma h, grief i sorrow.
-t
GooJ05, yo k, to raise, lift up, promote, exalt the more common form i{)
j'
d?c£lt
t Goo:>C£~oT, oo:)~j~ooqSGooj,JSGoT-'f)1e
y 0 k dok, same as Goo:>o5; prOmoted
I
'dl
'- the Lord's religion," Dhc. 151. 26; the more common forht is' aS
qo5" " ,
r
too" y a Q, to shine, give light; to-morrow, at dawn; OOI§~O'()~~e3'~'$~
fl at dawn', all the- four pandits,", S.M. 3 0.' ,. .' , . . r
*
oog, yaQ, an emphatic closing particlei G~oS:r.;J~09ool-'she.'swooned, S.J.
a
15 ; C§~OO§~'lool-" our king has become _monk,ll S.J. (A) 61 ; it
is somewhat akin to q and GbpS (q.7!.), but is moreemphatic.
001000, ya Q gata, the morrow. Vide 000"
'd?o5 and ~a5qa5,'Yui k and y ui k d u ik, same as G005,"Gco?GoT, fJ~iJ.
<Jgl, Ymu, a name~
*
<Jgl<Jg:>, Ym u .yni a,: a name.
§, y ra u, any, whatev,er, who or what ... soever.
~, .y wa'·, yes j sign of the vocative .', O! as' used ~n addressing persons,
0, king, etc." , ' ,
_ II
t ~, ra, an assertive closing .particle; ,it often stands instead of the verb
to be"; ro§c§'l-,·I I_am the king "; q]~coOO§05gro~a5'l-1ISirs,
• II
, this jewel I'S' my (jewel)," Sudh. 19. 3; it is a sign of ,the 'impera
tive; it is al.so slightly emphatic, ,and is often used in the middle of
a sentence, laying a stress on whal precedes, but not closing the
s~nse of the whole sentence,as it does when used as an .assertive
closing particle j ~GOOJ~" ~oS'l05§ CXjlEl.o05~~§'lnooGo:l8 00:>-" my son
Bhuridatta gave' us this jewel, is it not? '!, S.B. 23 i' ~05Gq~eta3§C
OO)0'l§Gl"oo:>()'l@lQ3ffiQ~02[(;]"-·'II because he was born on the shore of
the .sea, they gave him the name ofSagara-.Brahmadatta," S.B. 4.,
the same slightly emphatic stress is found in such frequent expres-
sions as 0009, if j'ooi9,ifj - ~l'l, if 'wherij' ~oSGh if, indeed if,
j
although, etc.
t
9:0, rat; a precious thing, a precious stone, a jewel i as an adjective,
magnificent,splendid.
* q<J())J@05,' l~ aj a g r u i h, the city of Rajagaha (Pali) j from the Sanskrit,
Rajagrha.
'! ~d3, r is i,an anchorite. Sanskrit, r~i.

a98 EPIGRAPHIA aiR-MANICA [VOL. IJ
t 'Us, r uIi, shed, booth, any building j if. Burrn., ~, ru ril, shed, booth,
, godown j ~:, rum$, .' court-house.
• G')S, r eIi, to carry, convey j' wear.
• Gq~l5t reli 'tluil"tobring, lit. (ltD carry and come." .
G'['>,r0, the sign,of the indirect ,question, requiring'an answer..other than
II yes" or H no." Vide' 00;).
,t 'G'PS,' r 0 Ii, a sign of the future; it is used also in all the senses. of '1
, .(g.'D.), except, perhaps,.the last.· .
• 4, '\9,
ra u, way; manner, fashion, wise; in this manner, thm;; like, as;
'iC£cq&~-;like the earth,.Dhd. 54-.25 i 4oo:)o09~-like . Tavatirilsa,' .
Dhd. 16. 7i' at V.O.K. 35. 10, it translat~s the Pali, yatha.
a
~,.. r 0, to look, look at, behold.
.• 9c~, r a Ii m wai, to take care of j' to look, look at, behold;
t '1. 1, ra Q, the country; a country; kingdom. .
*
~S, ruiii =l1c1I
~~, ru ih, every;·~~c:O; £hz·d.
rooS~[,· Ia k plua i, ~itting with the fists, boxing.
cociiea:xl3, 1ak bat a k, upside down.
• co~$, Iak y an (pron. laksan), a mark* sign, characteristic. Sanskrit,
lak~ana.
*
cool, 1agam, to step,· go, walk.
C£, coo, I c a, Ia:ca, a lake.
coOi, £eR, la t Ui 1t u, above,over upon.
j
* o:>~, COOSi Ia d a ril, 1adam, to pacify, calm, quiet; subdue j. sooo,oo~cQ'I-:
.·q~l););)'~Q::>oSl);):>c:091~~~8'?LS~'otne day, the-districts rebelled i the·
minister went, pacified them and returned to the capi~al," Dhd..
:159· 5· .
*co$, fan, to go about, wander,' itmeratej '~COiQC9~ffhe caused the
= Ja
gong to goabout/' he proclaimed by beat,of gong, S.B. 10
VI, 167~ 23; 'bheriril' carapesi. .
cg, Ipa, do ,not,db~Jt joften abbreviate~ to un
co§, 1apa'h,a wave. . .
to
• <95, Ipa k, 'to divide lengthwise, halve;. to tear or cut open.
• cO~cf>, Ia pq,ik" to be torn out, uprootedito tear out, tear off, foot out.
"* oo~oS, Ia.b u it, to cast~throw, fling. ct. Haswell: I, a stone's throw."
• (x)Q$, Ia m a. n, .to· invite. ,cf. OQ$~
• coS05, c:§oS,.lami.t,' Imit, to create. Vide ~60SD

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 199
*
coSoogoS, Iami t b da h, to create; Vit/e ~S05~oSn
*
ooio, .Iam n a A, breadth, width; across, crosswise, athwart.
*
000005, Ia ya t, to touch; strike. .
co~3S, Ia r u i', to cry, screech, scream. Vide ,,~oS, "G,¥3Su
*
woo, COCO~, Ia Ia ril, IaIa m, to be appeased, soothed, quiet, settled j to
cease. Vide 0000
* coo, Ia w, to put, to place, keep, settle; it is not altogether, as Haswell
has it," a euphonic suffix"; it is vety often used as an auxiliary
after an active verb, though it is very difficult to make its exact
meaning perfectly understood; ).his will, however, become clear to
acquai~ted
persons with Burmese, when I say that it corresponds
exactly to the Burmese verb COJ', t ha9 when similarly used. It
,
seems to imply that the action expressed by the preceding verb has
been done, and that, in so far, it is settled i the following literal
translations may perhaps help in catching the idea: OO!COO, he
II
noted (in hi~ mind) and kept"; S8~OO_1lwe hear~ and kept" i
cg:>~ COO_IIhe asked (about something) ana kept" j 090 ~~~ O1.0&l
COO_II the good deeds which you have done and kept."
*
coo~, Ia w kuiw, let; ooo~j9-letit be I; coS~COOJ,6'>t:>-lethim first go
back to-morrow, G. pi. 9 ~05:nJ~~:illl¥~3;)u1o~§co8~9-having died,
j
let him be reborn in the four hells!, Dhd. 18. 2. Let alone, don't
mention j fBCl>8lBoSg coo~'l-Iet alone this continent of Jambudipa
(implying: not only in this continent of jambudipa, but even also
S.l.
, in the other three), 25.
*
co~3;,)8, Ia - 'eti, patience, long-suffering; OOQ3;;Jcoj" iMd. Khanti, P4/i.
'" COJO, I a p, gain, receipts; gift. pali, labha.
oo:>oOJOO), Ia p sak a, a present, gift. pali, labha, sakhara.
eSco', Ii ya Q, the morrow.
oqd.>, Iuka u, during.
6qo, I u p, to enter, go in. Cf. GCO:>OIl .
Ie, also, and. cr. Burmese, coe§., Ia (pron. ttl, and in colloquial,
GOO, fi9
te8 Vide Gooen
).
'" ecoc, Ieti, to be ~estroyed, lost; effaced.
ocoS~loS, Ieil bluik, to be destroyed, lost, obliterated.
1ft
GCOb, Iep, to be skilled in, know, understand j to·be ac~ustomed to.
*
GOO~, lew. also, andi &con

EPIGRAPHIA BJRMANICA
200
QOO3S, GOO, Ie', a stick, staff..
GOO:>, I0, to roll ove~ and over. ,
t G00:> 10ka, the world i' the peopJe i' pertaining ~o the worl~; worldly.',
iY.>,
patt".
a,
Goo:>CXlGoloo~, iok.a w0har a common or colloquial ex.pression, as used,
II<
by the pe?ple at large. PaN.
Goo,oS, lot" to fall down.
• Goo:>OOQO, to roll over and over, round and round. Vide oo~6, ~Oll
t Goo:>S, 10 n t~ 'go beyond i to' exceed i henc~: very, very much,
J '
extremely:" Cf. Burmese, ~S, I \V an; 1I tif' century Burmese also
wrote GCo:>~' ' ' , ,
t GOO'S, 1<>p, to enter, go in. ViJeoqau
CO:, Ia1;1,. flat.
t ~m,' lui k,. to come up, ris'e, arise, appear.
* ~~~L6, IUl'k 'k tuiw,' to come up, arise, appear, originate.
*
~a5c:6n,1 uik Iau, same as ~05a ' ,
~. 'IIii m, one thousand.
.
,t~l, •In u, to be lonely, solitary i to' have nothing, be empty-h" anded, be
empty'; be deprived of; be without i 0>01 Q~l::Q'~dJl8-1l a body'
becomelonery of its head," dep~iv~d of its head, A.V~ 57
(kabandha); 'oo~l-empty·handed, L~B.C. 28. i4; ~lS~8GOC205~,
'A05~l~:>'l-1l Tavatirhsa was'full, and hell became enipty," S.M.
2 j
G. pi. 4 has the couplet', ~loti$, with the same meanings.
dJv IiiuiW, soine. '
~, 1ma,' a htmter.
*~05,1 mit,," t6 create. Cf. ~8a5ft
*
~oS~oS, Imit bdah, to create. Cf. ~805~oS.
*,
~l, 1mu, a' crest, ,diadem.
,* ~~,6, 1mow, to incline, bend, stoop to incline' ~n mind, feel inclined to.
j
,, C/
~QQ:>8n
,t 01):, 00001, Iya 1:t, Ia ya1;1, light i ray j sunbeam i from OOI,tO shine. ,
,.. G~S, Iwe n,regular, successive, in succession i., order,' sequence, regular.
order. Cf. Haswell, Q~C, ~C~Cg
co
01, wa, time i one time, three times, etc.; Ofil 1,' many tiI?Jes, repeatedly.,
t 0105n105, wat gat, very difficult ; a quarrel i_to quarrel
j
'disput~ i 0000105'
01000700881-" picked up 'a quarr~ with the Buddha," Sudh. 66! 14.

PART 11 TALAING PLAQUES, ON THE ANANDA 101
*8008, w rsk aw; the fig tree; Cf Haswell, 811
G06, .W eil, tp play j to ga~ble.
* G08, we il, to avoid, eschew i hence: to exceptj,-~QgGOCl;~ g=t0~05-" the
.avoiding of eyil deeds," Dhd. 54. 3.
*
coe, we il, to go about, wander, roam i to ramble, go for a walkj to go
to j to visit ~C'1S::'QJGoSett~~meSot:>~1I I will first go home/'
j
Sudh. 3. 18 j otiSGOeC8~_'1 come and -visit us) it is not far/' S~B.
25·
*
GOe, weil, in vain, to no purpose, f(ifr. I)othingj §8Qc(Y.)~o:>8 ~~oee3'00j
_" having amassed property, shall I gi~~~it for nothing to them?",
G. pi. 14-
*
GOOo~O, Wesantaw, King Vessantara.
t Q05, w ui t, to forgelj to swoon.
t g,
wwa', thisj can often be translated by "'the"ijis often simply a sign
of the nominative case.
*
sa,. as;l verbal prefix, very often denotes, first, the future, for exam
0:>,
pIes see under plaques 64 and 85 jit seems to be an attenuation <of
the old prefix oS j s(a) is also used on the Ananda plaques and
Pagan inscriptions with a future Sel1Se, and is very' common ~n
C
the modern literary language; in \vhi<;b we find also the form ~,
si. Second-It has also sometimes a_ causal sense· (O.T. 9), for
instance, ,Ef305, "cause tosleep," to,:put asleep; ~,II to cause t6
know," to make known, tell, infomr: cg; Ie to _Cause to do or m~ke " j
OOGOOC, lito cause to return," -to sen'd .back,etc;Tlzt'rd-Very
often, it does not appear, from the cpntext, to 'have'anypart-icular
force or sense j Gro" ke ril, ,to hold, or'affi; tosa:Y,or CB=j .B05,·
Of,
to descend, or ~05 j8.S, to sew; or ~c d305, to sleep, or FfJ-iJ; a,,'
j
must, or ~I i uro, to press, squ~e.zej shampoo; oroa05,.also ~oloS,
etc. It is the context alone, -fherefore, which reveals. the future
, .. I
III
causal or mere accretion i in word. for word translations fro the
Pali, this prep", 0:>, 05, ismo$t frequently used, to rend.:r a Pali
future, and 9) often a causative verb. .Fourtlt-In many_
0:> (..:..
words, it is not a prefix, but- an integral part of the word} in which
cases the ~:J h~:), in. coIloq,uia1, become oo,h,or' been dropped'
-s.,
altogether: hous~ (collq. 08), with the further Ibss of Sli ~,to
26

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
take pleasure in, be happy, sle€p (collq. C§c); ~l, copper (collq.
C9l) j .~, a leaf (colIq.·cg)
.1
o:la5. sa k, to be without, be destitut"e of, almost always followed by oq
(with):: oooooq. ooffitu .
t ffiGCOS, S k aIen, to cause to return or go back.
*-tB, sk a', grey (of the hair) i used only in the compound; c~8ffi, grey hair.
t ~oo, ski t, to bite, will bite. .Cf Burmese, ~a5, k ui k (pron. kart).
t
~ffi::n, sketi to take, will take.
tt GfB, ske m, to grasp, take in the hand, clinch; colloqu£al, cooS, kern.
tt GfBOO, sk e m ta i, to grasp jgrasp, grip i power, influence, control·; ¥~
Goo:>~Oi0::>")JGffiOOc§O~oo§-"although the son had gone into the power
of death," Dhd. 12. 2.
tt cgtoo,·s gut, to be cQt, cu = .t off j to cease, come to an endj to be scarce j
what is cut, cut off an i.nte / rval to judge, sentence, condemn to,
j
pass a verdict.
tt cgl~02:loS, sgut .sw5.t, to be cutj to cut j be scarce; to decide or
settle a question, a doubt,- a· case at law.
CBI, sgab, to say.
t ooej, sagwa" to get, obtain. See under 21 Goa?)"
00&, sail, a monk j the monks as a body, the clergy; an abbreviation of
next.
*
oo~, sailg ha, the clergy. pali.
*
ooc~05, saIi r ui h, to help, aid, assist, as a king a subject; or a monk a
layman, in accepting an offering of food, etc., so that he (the layman)
may acquire merit thereby; c§ ... 35008~~li.lg~0I~-"the king,
saying, I will assisLthis brahmin,'" Dhd. 96. 13; Gcooo:>£l.~oo .••
I
i~~~M~gQoooSoo8~oS~G'{'_"the thera Sariputra (saying), what
I
person shall I assist to-day?' ", Dhd.96. 24. From the Sauskrt"t,
sangraha. Cf Burmese, oo~05, 5 a ng r ui h.
t Oi), sea, to eat, will eat.
t ~05, sci h, to. descend, go·down; .will desc~nd.
'. t G0i305, s c e h, same as ~05"
t
~c,sji il, to sew.
1 Under this letter, 00. words which, in Haswell, do !Tot appea<·wich the prefix 00, b~t under
thesimpl•.(orm only, are marked with.a dagger (t); lho5e that are.not registered at all are marked
(.)~
as before with an asterisk and those that appear in Haswell w.ith the prefix, or under which
I have registerlld new meanings, afe marked with two daggers.

TALAING PLAQUE5'6N TH~ INANDA
PART I] , 203
0003, 5 a t, 'a fruit i to bear fruit.
0000; sat,' a living being. Pilli, satta.
*
ooooa=t, sat chu, a fruit;alsb, 00.2l1, sacchu.
tt ffi~, ,s tan, to dwell,.abide, remain i 'to be worth, to' cost j a, worm,'
ca
terpilIar.
fij05, s t ik, to lie d~wn,sJeep put to sleep.
j
tEL 01,
stu ril, the,right" as opposed' to the left j sometimes also,. tu rho
*
~loS, stu it, very, very much, exceeding,exceedingly. '
~" 5 d aI}, mmit, obliged to j' will have to.
tOOi!l, 5 add ha, faith j' kindly feeling i to have faith j to have a kindly
feeling, Piil:'.
oo$cm$, ,'s ant h ah; form, the huma,n fonn, body, person.' Piil£, sal)~hana.
,t'~,s pa, to,do, make j will doi cause to do.
*
oou&, sap a w', a garuq,a. Sanskrit, suparJ,la; Old Talaing, 's upa r.
tt 00(00100, sap 0 t, ' to pie~s gently \vith the hand i to preSSj squeeze j'
, ,shampoo,·ma~sage. Vid, o05n
t 00~05, sap u ik" to 'pdtl~ out, tear out i will pull out.
* 008'~oS, sapparuih, a: good, virtuous man. Piilt', sappurisa.
*
oo(§oS,. 5 apruih UStll century) , X8~oSu '
*
OJOOC, sabh a il,a ~estival i cj. Burmese,. ooOOCN
*
ooOOCGC§, sabhanIeh, a~autch.
oo!:i?, sam b h A, consort, husband or wife.
to.
tt ooQoS'lco, sam a h rat h a,. to be able. be.capable o{,competent to
(I
Catl." ,Sanskrit, samartha. I have not yet met with the meaning
given by Has\vell, "to consult together, to'reason together." "
*
OOG:, 00$'; samaQ, 6 m aQ; like, the same,as, as if;"
* ~'2l8, sam Iii n,highj something hi~h i - ~Ld}$c.v0ir:o~lc~cp~0~(»0'.1988~,8­
some 'went up on something high and threw .themselves,down ('n
, If
harpoons and swords," Dhc. 150. 23 i ~l§~g23I·3;)J~8 02°°etlc~-
, ifthence, the' Buddha arriv~d at abigh hill,"Sudh. 47.19.
* oj~lc, ~ C~C,
sam I uil, the head. Vide «to;cu
*
ooq,s'a r, medicine; physician, V£de o.::CH
... oo:.'l05" sara k, to scratch, asa nlatch j to scra.tcit, \yith ~ style, stick, etc.,
to 'draw a line. Has\vell" 0905. Cf. 4>90511
*
00,5, 5,21 ran, a deed, act, ,,",ark. Vide °9°, o:i'FSa, the Old, Talaing is
an.
sinr

.EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. J1
'*
(,\')96015, sa r ait pap, an evil deed, an act of demerit. Vide oo"flSuloll
paN, papa, evil, ba'd.
'" 00;pG, s ara m, same as 00'1611
tt :xl'PSo1S, sa r ~ 111 pa p, same as 00'}co18.
*
')29~, saraai, a soldier, warrior, A.V. 192 .(yodha);:xl9~~, a warrior
fighting from a chariot, A.V. 194 (rathanika). Cf. Burmese, ot'\,
surai.
'i 8.)%:.», saruih. to fall, fall off, fall down, as fruits or leaves from trees.
:):)8, saw, low; to be low, not high.
or. OJo, sa w, medicine, drug i physician, doctor; a;)O:>Dq, II a master of
a
medicine," physician, A.V. 106 (tikicdiaka); :xl8cal~, an old (C?Il)
physician, Dhd.I72. 6; G':'i:)~co8, to practise as' a doctor; to
doctor; to physic, Dhd. 172. 7.
TT eg, xeS, ',sa h,to untie; to ans\ver.
~l,)O, sa h a a i, a companion, friend. palt', sahaya.
gp, s· a, to go; will go.
tt ~:, s· ~ Q,~o be clear, be clean; to cleanse; to purify.
*
:xl:>, S a, to 'lay, put, place;
tt:xl5, sak, colour; form, appearance; kind, category.
0:"5§, sak gah, "thatkincl," like that, thus.
005;;, sa k \" W a', II this kind," like this, thus.
~ cS~, sik, why? for what reason ?how? what? g~neraIIy ,followed by
0, ~ or 0:;, ::8.)50~ fd;,-OS§ (;bp-howdoing (= hO\v) did we get
this (king)?, S.]. 6:.
... oS,~, sik, to stufl, cram, compress, make compact. Ct. Burmese, 035,
sip (pron. the)k).
* +
:£fI:, si g ga Q, wk,t do you say?' how do you say ?oS05 0:, with
assimilation
*
09~, 5 i ndh a u, belonging to Sind, of Sind j a horse of Sindh i these horses
"'ere very lJluch prized in ancient India. paU, sindhava; C;;~oS&,
a horse of Sindh,
II< 058~8, sip g1ip, to attend respectfully OIl.
*
oS, si, a pret'ix denoting the future ; see under
0.):\
'" o:t~l05, 5 u j ja t, a jataka story;, an assimilation of oq05Olo05 _ palt',
suttC1-! discourse, and jataka.
*oq05o,~05, sut jat, see last.

PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
*
r.6.Jc, sen, true; to be true, Dhd. 362. 10, L.B. 28. 14.
G0.:>5, so k, the· hair of the head.
'" Gco500, sok ska', grey hair;. G0.:>5OO1
* d?oS ;
co.:>:>o5, soh, to pour; .the more commOil form is . 15th century·
~@:>o5,
.inscriptions .have s r a h, and the modern· colloquial IS very
0%05,
near it: car uih, both with r infix. .
tt ~a5, suik, happiness, well-being; to be easy, happy, comfortable 8050.:>
j
oo~~05~o5~05 02oS-;-rca friend who is the same in happiness, the
same in trouble," a friend in need,. a friend indeed. Cf.Haswell
under ~m. Vide tfimllo:>~a5, is the same word with.o:> (Old Talaing
probably 8q or d.3q), prefix; o:~m =. Pali,sukha.
* d?c, sui il, to build; also with r infix, ·I~hc ;. also. written G§'c,··Dhc.
149· 13·
*
~S, sui n, the pandit Senaka. . .
tt
~, sui m, with; ,often joined to a verb by \), when it forms adverbs
. which may often be translated by while ~ .. , tout en . .. ," ~
II
~ ~Q~ooCXjl O'~L05oc~n"oot-:-(l the king even (Gooo) while sitting on the
elephant's back .•• ," 5.).' 37•
.d?,
sui In, all, whole.
*
~oS, suih, to pour. Vide Go.:>,oSu. .
*
~o5, sui h, the chest, breast. .Haswell, E§toS, s r u i h, with r infix.
*~o5o~05, sui h pal u it, to extinguish, put out by pouring water j. this
expression is· often used metaphorically.
~, s Ii i, house'j coiloquial, J.311
*
q{O'/SLc§cy.Joo, Sil i t n uil k ra kat, a house with superposed roofs sur-
mounted by a spire, palace also the harem, seraglio. The
j
Shwezigon Bell-inscription (16th cent.) reads: q'to:>~c~o051
... c§.o:>cO, s ni cat, a place of confinement, jail ;collq. J.30Xtlj see OXtlu
tt ~((5, s n i 9a k, water-closet, privy; foeces, excrement collq. J3:t5!,.
j
tt ".;., sn i, to "look, look at; look for j to look askance, sideways j colIq. S I
n i j the form o-~ is also found. Vide G~O, G~O!I
* ::f._Q," 5 n i m a i,. to look, look at. V£de ~II
* ~j~, sit i m w a i, same as ~~. Vide ~II .
* cORo, snew, saf!le as it j collg. c~811 "
*
=9, s na, .the French-horn; a squirreL
.~ ~@051 sna k ri k, cotton. V£dt @05'!

. . .
206 EPIGRAPHIA . ·BIR . MAN·leA [VOL. II
'.'
"
~:>, s na, the small square piece of 'leatheror'mat which the monks used
to carry' with them to sit upon, a seat.
* +
~J, Sn a, ~he p~efixoo ~:>, more commonly written ClO:> (q.v.)..
..~5, sn ak,.· a sword:
~@, .'s n a m,a yeat'; S?~.
.* ~:::>,
s
na
a i;alinchpin
V£de~~, ~~ft
*
'~~oo?c,sn aai kanhait;. ~:::>.~&, ~~;;>jS, ~~~&, for allthes(' 5ee S?~
00*&
lil Oli\~~(.,-8~~, 5 nfta i m,ub ri k wi, "the lillchpiI) at the end of the axle
ofa cart," simply, a linchpin. .
OJoS, O)J.)r:!>, sma t, sam a t, small, young; a child.
'Oi05@, sma t brau, a young woman, a girl:
,*
Oi05, sma h, to·b.e, the same, be equal to, be the 'same as.
~5, s m ~ w; 'under..
~~J,
s 01 awky'a,'the north.
*'~')i
SIna,a craftsman, a .worker'in, on'e skilful in any craft or art i not
al~i1~~'
used:: but. placed before the word descriptive of the craft;
aho \ytitt~m.<iJ. ,Ct Burmese, OOG)~, sit m a3
•
* ~J~S, fm in,' a
sma one skilful' if)' stitching," tailor.
(t
~J~, ~omethfng),
S111 an;. to ask (about. enquire; a question, enqUIry.
a~J~:l6l~, ~.mali s III Uk, sa~e as'~J$u .
t ~a5, sm) k;::.t9.wish" d~sire; calloquiat,S75, 01 ik.
~aS2,
S.mj·k'gwa;,"-/llo desire to obtain," to wish, desire; also tlsc·d for
the infinitive: to, in order 'to; colloquiat, 805g, 01 ikg wct'.
* ~05.s in i t;, to dedicate j to stroke, touch."
~, s mi Ii,a kirig; prince; governor.
c§3SS, s~li it '.In, "King tndra," the god Indra.
III
§8,sr a Ii, sho,re, bank.' Also ooe and ffiel
§S, 5 r a 'n, silveri' money. .-»$».
§oS, 5 r i f{ a rnillOl:el'os. ~05u .' ,
*
~§j05, S fO h, to paUL Vide ~~J05, ~iu
§tuS,.s l~ U i h, the chest: breast. ,~:.f.,J'.
+,~, . s Ii 11, to delight in, be· happy; sleep;,collq, #u
~l&,' 5 Iun, high,exaited; to be.high i OlLcmJ, to·raise.
)~ ~:, 'slal;i, to make" free, cause 'to be free," to free;, be free, vacant,
.11
to
uno'ccupied; bring forth j to be born.

PART I,] TALAINGPLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
• otlo6~, s IaQ ga w g na u, to bring forth. ,
OlloS, S wa t, 'smail; to be small. Cf. ::l3oSu ,
026, g \V a w, Indra's heaven, Tavatirhsa. Skt. svarga.
=
'" c02rii~L8, swek j ~ uiw, 'quarrel j to quarrel ; G~oS1}6 with
10
infix.
co, -hat' negative particle, no, not: - 0i?/1
oooS, _hat, a cubit, J 8 inche.s.
"'~, h mai (properly --h a in ai), -there ~sno, there is not i ha + m aI,
q:v. oo~ is also met with; see~a
-00::>, h 5, sign of the direct question, requiring a (; yes" or- a - If no" for
answer.-
!J 09:(8; hi Qak, see, cfi and it~5d _,
• o9'i, him u, named~caned i to name, call; Goo'~§~QcB'iBffi'P§_ua dclUghter
called Uttara," Dhd. 296. 10; qL8~Qo9~8~1"';"'''a city named' Mithiia."
tt cooS, heil, an emphatic _-particle laying stress, on the word, or clause,
preceding it j rocJnS, even J, I myself. - _ - -_
tt ~oS, h u it, 'cause, reason i because ; matteri' Circiimstances jresult =
fruit, benefit; old and medIeval language, - GooOO, paN, hetu j ~~oo
. ;. Gbp-for what reason'; why? ~OSg~for this reason ()~OS~
j
-with reference to.
, -
• ~S, h u in, often abbreviated to S, 1l,' this word denotes the accusative
case, or object. It is frequently used in word for word translations
from- the Pali, being placed before the Talaing word-which translates
a J}alia.cc~sative. But it is used also in current 'Talaing, where it
denotes the 'object, esp~cial1y when it comes before the verb, being
similar in this to §j d}S~G::>05o(BLaSog::>OS~" the minister who decided
=
cases" the judge, 'S.}. (a). folio kha i Q~lC~ol J.}~ClCO::>~:PQ::>aS§~
88~-" the king, repeatedly hearing the statement of the minister,"
.SJ.
(a), folioka.
~, h u irri, to speak, say;
~()f, hu j ni g aQ, to -say..
~~, h uim .j uim, to say, speak, tell.
~, hwa', negative particle, no, not.
,00,
ha.
tteOS, ~a t, a ffiPasure to. measure ; try. test.
j
*
e05~05, ~a t bnat, measure, extent, dimension; to measure.
*
1>:002)05. ~at k nat, to measure, estimate. compute ialso (y~cO~JoS"
*
@05@S, ~at pruin, to 'measure, measure strength. with, vie
t e¥, ~ a n, to braid.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
el, Qa, tWO. .
@, Qai, one anna, one-sixteenth of a rupee. Cf. Burmese, l>, pa i.
* a
~05, Q k, to hoe to spin, asa top to· peck, as a bird. Cf Burmese,
j j
col05, po k.
tt ~~, Qui n, though, although it begins the clause ; often ~ is used in
'j
¥S . .
. conjunction with it .~II
j
~05, .~ uihi cool, cold to ·be cool, .cold.
j
tt S, Q 3, you (disrespectful) j it i fellow; scm, b a l,la', this ,fellow.
~, ~·ai, an elder sister.
t ~a i. gam~, a nurse. Vz'de
SOQ), OQ::>_.

TALA.ING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
PART IJ
APPENDIX C~~.
Under the words which follow, is, in the vocabulary, given grammatical
information for the most part not in Haswell's Grammatical Notes." The
(f
words are artanged alphabetically for easy reference.
0';;):>, used as a verbal auxiliary. jS, verbal auxiliary..
iiGOO, adverb, pronoun. +5, verbal auxiliary.
{!J, a poljte form of the imperative. GtJ6, future.
ooG006, verbal auxiliary. o (o), causal verbal auxiliary i inter
Gooo5, exptetive. rogative; prohibitory.
cfl. verbal auxiliary. o%S, preposition. '
~lSO):>S, as a numernl suffix. . 00, R, abstract nouns.
C'Q), verbal auxiliary. .~, forms adverbs.
G~~, verbal auxmary. assertive particle; participial parti
0,
01, ~1'1, conjunction. . cle i quasi-relative particle; forms
§, demonstrative pronouni accusative adjectiveSt
case before the verb i an emphatic pronoun; YOU;' Sir. '
Q,
article; .nominative case. BI, conjunction'; to wit; ~rnphatic.
g,
v~rbal auxiliarY"- BIB, conjunction; .elllphatic.
«zoo,
verbal auxiliary. BI§, same.'as Higil
~, numeral suffix. 0~01, a~verb.
t¥,
used as an imperative. 0028 1 (15th century) ~ 00200
fl3I, .as an interrogative. explanatory-particle. .
Q),
CI:lJ,verbal auxiliary. 1.), verbal auxiliary. .
~i,empha:tic particle. '~, verbal auxiliary; adie~tive; adverb.
a =
~,the past tense; cQnnective 9~ ..::.
0'11.
Pali, t va; a'conjunctic;mi-condi- 006, 0069, 008 •.. HI, conjunction.
tional. - 00', emphatic terminal particle.
.06, verbal auxiliary. 'I, 'assertive particle; imperative i
_~t, verbal a4xiliary. ~lightly emphatic in the middle of
~~, infinitive. a sentence, and after conjunctions
" verbal auxiliary•. and adverbs. -
3', verbal auxiliary i first, before the G~ =''11
verb; second, after the verb. 4, adjective; adverb.

~IO EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. II
=
coS, verbal auxiliary. ~
0:>11
ceo, c;co6, conjunction, adverb. ~, forms adverbs.
S, article, the"i nominative case. c.,X>c, emphatic after a noun or a
II
~, verbal prefix, future i causative; clause.
without special force. ~~, $, accusative.
cErn, what? why? how?

~)J\ftr l] TALAING PLAQUES ON, THE ANA~DA
5 E W a ril, to b" to have j also ~L n II l11, mostly after prefixes ::>.:) and Gil
i (.) Pa, to do, make; to cause, in this sense it is widdy lIsed as a causal
=
prefix in the forms: pa, P, ba and b. It is all interrogiitive why?
bow? i OG8°oqoSJ8C~G'fl-1( how arc the PaccekabudJhas?" 40.
I .:.].
It is also a prohibitive = do not, and probably an abbreviation of
C\!, ~:ooO.:l3J~9-do not ask! S.J. (A), folio ke i o~oS-don't forget)
J'
G. pi. 7.
L'iJ~J Pa k, to throw, fling (water, dust, etc.). Cf. Burm.,
•i< 00511
r':S,~S, p k an rail, to bear, carry, wear; t.o carry out, perform, fulfil; to
rule, govern in word fur word tram·lations, it very often translates
j
Pali dharetii Gc9.JcGjccoo coc.rSxS c~3 ~J-" who ""cars the 32 great
characteristics/' Ohd.30. 25; c£>C9cco8q O~l9~J-" fulfilled the t\'{o
gandhuras," L.B. 2. I; Gc£>c9cco8~O'S··-·carryinga spear.
* d, pka u, a flOlVlT~.. Haswell enters this word only as
II
£<M(,;)JS, garland,'1
b~t has the entry cf., (colloquiaII, To open, as a flower, to blossom,
to flower; oqQod.>-a flowering tree, ~.V. 164 (pltulla).
*
~~, p ka usa u, a flower. Haswell's entry, od.>c6, a carver"in wood,"
II
I have not met' with, the usual expression is e3ljroScB1
* =
&;@;\ pk a u s r au last, with r infix.
t OGOOO, Pa k 0 ril, to bring together, collect, gather, hoard, amass j 88o~ooo
coo~~oce3:(m-~( having amassed property, shall I g~ve it for nothing
to them?", G. pi. 14.
OC~C, pan mi il, to hear, iisten to: 1'laswell,08~8u
t oe::fS, pa fii\ a p, a name, appellation, term j to name, call, term i to prepare j
Fali, pannapeti.
1J8), pa fi fi fl, wisdom, intelligence, knowledge. patio
000, pa tj to press with the hand, squeeze, Vide o:)~()loSu
t hlJ~, 000$, pta n, pa'ta n to build; to raise, exalt'; to make firm, stable,
J
unwavering; to restr:tin, control (of Hie mind, feelings, etc~); to
establish; to appoint to all office ;O~&l01J30i:;~8Go'.lC:1'j ooo~co80?::Dq­
., I will exalt you to the state of chief queen," Sudh. 2·l· 22; :;/(1'(jO
. . . ~~,9J$co8~)l§.~~()'S9oo:1_flthe q1leeo, being unable to con'trol
her grief,"S.]. 66.
t &, pta ril, to begin, begin with; et cetera, antI' so forth, and 'the like.
Vide cOli
*
8.)1 ptatil, to fulfil, practise.

EPiGRAPH!}\. BIRMANfCA [VOL. II
t ~lC>'SJ b1uik, 10 sink i to destroy; be destroyed.
t tC'5; b \'1,' ak, a follower, the follower of a, person oi runk. from ,~asJ by tV
ii1hx. HasweH, ~0c511
'
-!r ,?05m,L bwa k ka r~ 1I, same as ~0511
t ~, bIV a i j forfuH (~xplanations see plaque 199. C/. e;,~, e~, ~~II
*
~O'.)~p, b waitaraQ, in detail. in full, £1t extenSD.
•~ ~ao:; b wai eLl ca 0" against (the winci, <",ater, etc.).
, , L····· - ' . "
'1C >t3NC'tJ', J ry:\1 d ac a!). ({y a, againSt tne wma.
* ; ( t } . , . , } .' " .: ! : q ~~ .. ~ ~ 1 l",: -, , H ....~ " 1 ' 1 · U ~, ~1 , .) , . ; . ~ ', 0\' t \: , . ~ ... . . . ( l ., } .... . C . ~ " · , " ,~ ' , d ., . t . " .. ( . ] .. ~ . ~ . I \,' ~ .H ~~ ...... t ' . : ; ' " ~: .. 1 . , ;.)..l t ..~ r;"""~,.."..; ¥ " ' > ~ \ : "' ... J e .. t . c .. \ ."t+
:::~ ~ V: V ~'*' ."("\'or . ' . 1 l : l d~ '1 t 1 ... ~..~. " H " ) H . ' .. ; .. r ... o .. , -. " .. " J 'n .. -r-FiU.~"C"''0' t t· n " t " 1l , & . > , <~". , :. . :. . r . :"'."; . 1 . ,l-}~-St';,' I ',' ' , il ~ s.:.-~!_~;&.,".....)..OU.S ~ lY·
"I< ~!Z;,7\t, h .... '\V /w ' .Oo ': 4. bW,~!l, i ' '... : .oL " ... " .~ " , e . ~ _ < . : ...... ~ . i . :
...·b ,. .
ic. '-,~.?,~C'2c,' wa I :JwaI I" wen, 5c~me as C\='":~';;c~VI
* ~i!(J5. h w'ai bwuik, in circumference; ~_,tl)), a circumierer.ce.Cf
.iU.. •
Ea5weH; O'J~m, circlJmrerence.
~ ~tt:. bw aim ita l:t, outside, without (direction),
w
... S;J;,:cq05, b ai a lui k, aceordingly, owing to, of one's own accord. Vide,
::;~OE:oSlI
, \ a
:no, bha va, state'of existence, existence.
X'o05, ~ha wa k, follower. Vide ~05lJ
~:>, b ha, monastery. Pdlt, vihara.
't 05; bh a ~,existcnc,!, state ofexistence; dwelling, ,'torld. Pali, bhava.
t ma, first-a verbal assertive' particle corresponding to the Burmese.
0,
~JtS; in Ihis sense the,sentence is generally ended by CJ or ~~c, two
emphatic assertive particles; bllt it,is also often used by itself;'
::o5§~CY.l:>(Joa5co5--" sub~commentary
thus (as shown above) the explains
{it)," Dhd.32. 2; o::1l0§ ... ()~oS~8o:c68:o~lSG3~~~8tl05§'jlloqOOOlJ05
~~()05C'X1J0§G02-" the Blessed Buddha ... with reference to the laymen
who observed the comtn<.l1dments' and the sabbath, told the Bhuri
datt~·jataka." S.B. I j the first G before o~S = 1/ who." V'(lSo.:)05:xo.y:)
§ ~~(:OCII <X1J8§o~lS G(;~ojInogo--" on~y in the city (If Saflkass3, do the
Blessed Buddhas come down .froln Tavatilhs::l," Dhd. 63. 6; .y~'
oeiJlol§olamco)gu 0~(;gJG~:>S 143?:>Sqa; ~OCO)S-" in t.!tis fifth instruction;
he taught, (this) OIie statement/'V.O.K. 23. 9. In interrogative
, senttnces, the sentence ends with c;~, the interrogative particle, and
remains equivalent to the Burmese, ~e. in its abbreviated form
Q
before the interrogative particles c;roJ and .y2:; that is~ c;e;p
Q •••
= Burmese, ... ~CO), ••• ~~~t; ~~05~:ooQc;r981c;'P-"why are

VOLUME II PART II
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF BURMA
Epigraphia Birmanica
BEING
LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS
OF BURMA
Edited by
CHAS. DUROISELLE
Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, Burma Circle
The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda Plates
By CHAS. DUROISELLE
(REPRINT-1962)
1962
SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING ANil STATIONERY, RANGOON

LIST OF AGENTS FROM WHOM GOVERNMENT OF BURMA
PUBLICATIONS ARE AVAILABLE
IN BURMA
1. CITY BOOK CLUB, 98, l'hayre Street, Rangoon. . .
2. PRoPlllBi'OR, Ttru~DHAMA-WADI PRESS, 55-56, Tees Kai Maung Khine Street,·
Rangoon. .
3. PROPRIETOR, BURMA NEWS AoENCY, 135, Anawrahta Street; Rangoon.
+ S.P.C.K. (BllllMA) LTD., 54,9, Merchant Street, Rangoon.
5. MANAOBR, UNION, PuBullHING Hou8E, 94, " C " Block, Bogyolte Market,
· Rqoon.
6: THB SBCBBTARY, PEOPLll'S L1TBRATU1W CoMMI'l'TEE AND HOUSE, 54&, Merchant
· Sm:et, Rangoon¥· · ·
7. THE BWIMA 'I'nANBLATlON SOCIETY, 520, Merchant Street, lungoori.
8. Mlrs&Rs. K. B1N HooN & SoNs, Nyaunglcbin, Pesu District.
9. U Lu GALI!, GOVERNMENT LAw·BooK AGENT, 34th Road, Nyaung-..:indan
Quarter. Mandalay.
IO. Tim NATiONAL BooK DEPOT AND STATIONERY Surl'LY HoUSE,"North Godown,
Zegyo,. Mandalay. .
11. KNOwt.:Bl>GB BooK HOUSE, 130, Bogyoke Street, Rangoon.
u . AvA Hoou, 23a, Sule fagoda Road, Rangoon.
13. S. K. Dn, Boox:.St'.PPLil!R & NEws AoENTS (In Strand Hotel), 92, ·strand
ROid, Rangoon;
14. AGAWALL BoolCBHOP, Lanmadaw, Myitkyina.
15. SaWBOu DAUNG SroRES, BooK SELLERS & STATIONERS, No. 267, South Bogyoke
Road, MO,UJmein. .
16. U AuNo Tm, Youm STATIONERY STORES, Muin Road,"I'baton.
17. U MAUNG GYI, :AUNG BROTHER BOOK STALL, Minrnu ROl!d, Moriywa.
r8. SHW,cB. RINTHA STORl!S, Bogyoke Road, Lashio, .N.S.S.
19. L. ~ARUA; PROPRIET<?R, NATIONAL StoRES, No. 16-17, Zegyl'ung Rorod,
..B IMem; . . . ·
20. DAW AYE Kv1, No. 4a-44 (in Bazaar) Book Stall, M11ungmya. . ,.
21. l>oBAMA U TlwN, PRoJ>JWttOR, DoBAMA BooK STALL, No. 6, llogyokc Street,
Henzada.
22. SMAllT AND MoormRDm.i, No. au, Sule Pagoda RoaJ, Rangoon.
23; DAW KYI KYI S1NT, S1'A1l0NBRY MART, Bo Aung Road (E-Road), ), Pyinrnana.
24- ZWB LITEIWft'BO}Vl!ll. No.195 (B-1), 33rd Street, Rnngoon. , , ·
25. 8. B. BoWER, NJ!\Yll BURMA Boo& STALL, 28-27; l\fcrch:mt Strc1.;t, Ba~in.
IN INDIA
1. -MES8ll8. HIGGINBOTHAM&LTD., Post Bo:s: No. 311, Madras (India).
2. MBSQS.· 'l)IACIOIR SPINK & Co. (1933) LTD., Post Box No. 54-3; faplam1de,
East Calcutta (West :een,.J).

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF BURMA
Epigraphia Birmanica
BEING
LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS
OF BURMA
Edited by
CHAS. DUROISELLE
Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, Burma Circle
The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda Plates
By CHAS. DUROISELLE
(REPRINT-1962)
1962
SUPE1UNTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRIN11NC ·. AND STATIONERY, RANGOON
rice-K 4·60]

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA

PREFACE
FOR greater ease of reference and study, these plates have been published in
a separate volume ; this plan was preferable to that of having them inter
spersed in the text, where it would have' been impossible, in most cases, to
make them face the legends referring to them. Fronting each plate are
short explanations, the first part of which is merely indicative of the episodes
illustrated in the photographs ; then follows a brief description, or rather
indication, of the pe;sonages or objects i~ the photographs whenever necessary,
for many of these scenes are quite clear by themselves. These ·explanations
and those in Part I are complementary to .C!.ne another.
Neither in Part I nor here have I touched on the technique of these
plaques ; this subject will be discussed, together with the history of fhe intro
duction of glaze into Burma, in the preface to the "Terra-cotta Plaques on
the Petleik Pagoda, Pagan," which illustrate the /550 Jatakas, and tlie · letter
press of which is now in hand. I woul~, here merely observe that even .a
cursory examination of all the sculptures and ylaques of the Ananda reveals
the fact that they all have been done by Indian artists, mostly Indians from
the south : the cast of countenance, th~ dresses-especially of gods, kings
and queens-the headdresses, ornaments, ~tc., etc., as well as the fechnique,
are Indian. The epigraphs of that perigd nU.ke it clear that Indians were
then numerous at Pagan. Evidences are not 'tacking, however,· to show that
these artists, especially in so far as the casf of the scenes was concerned,
were guided and supervised by Talaings, no doubt monks : the clearest of
these evidences consists of the short legends in Talaing at the bottom of the
plaques. So that, in these plaques we behold coJ'Rbined the cultura1 influence
of two distinct nations at the Burmese cc1;pit?i}; nations whose civilization was
much older than that of the Burmese, ane · to· whom the latter almost entirely
owe their culture.1
CHAS. DUROISELLE.
MANDALAY, 16t~ 1flllllar, 1921,
1 In this connection, see my paper, "Pirtorial Represf'ntations of J:itakas in Burma," in Arclu,.o,
/oe,·cal Sur.,,•:, of India, A1mual Report for 191~-13, pp. 87-89.

l ND EX
TO
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA, VOLUME II, PART II. •
l llustratio,u,
NO,or HO. OJ
PLATS PIGUl'K Pt.ATI ,,oval
MIIGAPAX.ICHA \TIMI A) jATAKA, MuoAPUt1tH1-co11td.
Nos, 1-37
Wlien the, king leaves the
I nd1 a invites - (to be re-born worlc\ 8 34
as a man) .l, He ·c<1flverses with the king
Conception of - 2 (his falher) 9 35
(His father) gives (him) the The hermit lnstruclS his dis
name of:_ . ~ ciples 9 36
When they bring the thieves 5 - preaches the law to the
The goddess instructs - 6 (three) kings 9 37
Th~ trial with milk 7
The trial with cakes 8 Mt.HAJt.Nt.K.\ JJ.TAKA,Nos. 38-S:i
They try - \Vith fruits 9 ·- is conceivl:'d 9 38
The&rial with toys 3 IO - comes out from the womb IO 39
The trial with food 1 11 - playa with the children 10· 40
They try - with an elephant 3 13 - queationa his mother 10 41
They try - with snakes •3 14 -· ,nfor mi his mother (he will
The test of the mime · •S go trading) . 10 41
They try - ,vith a sword 4 16 When the boat founders II 43
They try - with conches 4 t7 Manimekhala, the goddess,
They try - with drums 4 18 listens to - 1 l 44
They try - with lamps 5 19 The goddess carrie~ - in her
They try - with molasses § ao atms ll
The chaplain e,i:amines
They try - w;th fiith 5 21 Janaka's marks II
The test with fire•p11ns 5 u The anointment {al king) of - ll
(Tcmiya'aJ· mother and father - ent"S the (capital) city u
come and remonstrate (with
him) 6 - assicn• thl'ir places to the
officials of· state 49
The trial with nautches 6
The queen sends (a man) to
Accession of - 6
call - or Tl,e queen causes
The ch,arioteer comet to take -to be called JI 50
a'l!l'ay- 6 16
- (h(lldini the prince••'s
(The charioteer) conveys - 7 'J7 hand) ascends the palace 13
- descending on to the ,a When - enquires ll
Jround 7 ..... gives hie (gold) pin to the
He tries hi• 5trength 7 19 quei,n 13 5S
- is being adorned 7 30 Tl1e l<inK goeli out to hia
He que,tions the chariotter 8 )[ pluuunce . •• 59
1'h11 charioteor invites - to - looks at the mango (trees) 14 60
ea
reu,nhom«: I 32 - seel the n,11010 (tree, 14
...
The Icing - sends a meua11 King - inatr11ct1 (tht gen•
to hi, mother and fGMltr , 8 n 1ralinimo) ee

ii INDEX
MARl.JAlfAU.--COlttd. NtNl-ttOntd,
Kins - livea in retirement Indra is questioned by - •• 1o6
They (the ~wo :attendant!!) Miitali invitts - (to get Into
bring the almsbowl (and) the chariot) . 24 107
give it (to-) 15 64 Miitali asks which way
- •haves (his hair and beard) rs 63 ( - ••is hes to go) :14 108
- descends from his house I 5 66 - looks at hell ,4 109
King - leaving the world 16 71 - looks at the heavenly
The queens beat (their mansion 25 110
breaats) 16 72 - converses with Indra 25 Ill
The queen flhows - the ( town) - instructs (his) people (in
burning 16 73 t.~e practice of the law)
- drsws a line on the g-round 16 74 - sees (his) ji!rey hair
- receivea the in3truction of King - leaving the world
Nara& 17 7S
- P..lces the: rntat I 7 71 Mu1!•U111u.0GA (M.t.HOSADHA)
)AT.AU, Nos. n5-2e,9
-. brcak;i toe (Piece of) meat
·:n ' - ~ b d l e P ss " e (S d i - t e in a h . t is i t b h o e w m i) eat t , 7 , 7 n 8 C B o ir n t c h e o pt f io - n of -
0 t!inVt!:ge · wrd the child ,a so When Indra l!'ives the
medicinal herb (to -) a6 117
- st~!' th. a row 18 Br
- gives the medicine (to his
- ;>nte,s •i,&H >tcst 18 8•
mother) 27 118
SA?>lk j!..TaRJ., Nc,~.s - 10, The naming of - •7 119
Conception of- - give~ ornaments (lo the
Birt' f- thousand children) 3'} uo
- plays with (his) compan
The · (his parer.ts} bathe and
put - to sJ.,ep 19 85 ions :17 UI
(Mahosadha's comi)anions)
The 1upar~ batne-- 19 86
run to enter the rest-house 28 IH
- leads (his parer.ta) o I (of
- gives the gold (to a
thei shelter) J9 87 carpenter to build a hall) t8 123
At - goes up he mountain ;10 88 - builds (plans 3nd super.
- n1i. l,tcrs to hii, parents 20 89 intends the building of)
- inform, (his p~rent) ne the rest-house 28 . 1•4
la going to enter he for.:st ~ 90 - constructs a tank . 28 115
- ent.ers the forest lO QI - decides cases 19 126
A4 - is drawing water n 91 - causes the (piece of) meat
The.king shooting - H 93 to fall
Th~ king converses with - 1: 94 The case of t'ie cattle
Plliyakkha weeps ~I 95 The case of the ttecklace (If
Piliyakkha does ltomage thread -a9 129
(to-) The case of the cotton thread 30 130
When the king brings (the The case of the child 30 131
parents) and shows (them) - Decidirig the case of Che wife 30 13,
The moth,r and father of - ·- decides (the case of) the
weep 12 gS cart 30 133
(They) make an act of The ricdle of the poJe l' 154
aueveration u ~·, Deciding the case of the head :-i 135
Than - (rises) bright (again) 13 l<lC The riddle of the snaJl;9 31 136
Tht king reverentially salutes - '3 101 The riddle of the cock 31 13'7'
N11111 J1TA&.t, No3. 1oa-u4 The r;ddle ol tr;:, gern 3a t3£
(Th• fortune tellers) look at - decides the n,e·of the bull sa 139
Nim1'1 (bodily) lit(nt The puule of tne rice 32 ...0
_Whoa - ii rull11r The puaa!e of the 5&11d (rope) 31 141

INDKX Iii
.....
.....
IIC• Of
,u.n n1u••
MAH1•U ll Mt.OG4-t:ont,I. MABA UJJIIAOOA-contd.
The puazle of the tank 33 142 Kevatta comes and asks
The puzzie of the park 33 q3 (for. . -) 179
The question of the ass 33 144 The king ia·angry with - 180
- salutes hii father 33 145 - instructs his parrot r81
Taking th.e jewel 34 146 The parrot returns from the
The case of the chameleon 34 I.17 minah bird 18t
The case of good and bad - tells (the king) that he is
luck 34 148 going (to Uttarapaiicala) . 43 183
The question of the rnm 34 ·149 - enters the city of Paiicala 43 184
(He) instructs the four pandits 35 150 - converses with Kin!f Ciilan[ 43 185
(The king putting to the five) - fixes stairs (firmly) 43 186
the quedlon of the rich and (They) take the king's
the wise mother's house 44 187
- answers the question (of --takes Keva~~a's house 44 181
the rich and the wise) - enters the king's house ,44 189
- aaks (Amara whether she - digs the tunnel .... CC}O
is married, etc.) 35 153
The shipwrights make over
- eats the rice-gruel 36 154 the ships to - . . 191
- stitches clothes 36 155 - sends (the boats) out of
Amara washes Mahosadha's the way
feet 36 156 - goes out to meet the
- smears the boiled rice (on king (Vedeha)
Amara's head and body) 36 157 The king (Vedeha) asks -
- "ives (Amara) a loin-cloth 37 ,58 (He) shows the tunnel to King
- informs (that he ia about) Vedeha
to return (home) 37 159 (Vcdeha\ comes out from the
- tests (Amara's chastity) 37 160 tunnel
- marries 37 l61 - instructs King Vedeha
- lives as a potter 38 J6'J - converses with (King)
(The courtiera) go abc,ut Ciilani
(looking for) - shows (Ciilani) the way
Coming from the potters (l>is) queen is gone 47 '"
- answers the (king's) ques (King) Ciilani looks at the
tions tun11el 47
The four come to ask (ques
- measures strength with the
tions to-to entrap him) 39 166
king 47 IOl
The king asks - concerning
The hundred kings offer
secrets 39 167
ornaments (to-) 47 IOI
- is under the trough 39 168
The ki:11!" invites -(to stay at
The (four) pandits look for - 39 169
his court)
- sets free the four persons 40 170
- returns to the city (of
- sends presents (to the 101 Mithila)
kings) 40 171
- sends back (C.'s family)
- sends the parrot 40 171
Accession 0£ the son of King
The parrot brings news 40 173 Vedeha IOO
- it asked by the king (how A female ascetic asks ·-(by
Mithili shall be delivered gestures, why he does not
from it• enemies) 41 175 become an ascetic) . 40 107
- ia pla~ting the Aower 41 176 - asks the fem11le ascetic (to
- leaves the city 41 177 find out the king's mind) • 49 101
- lights tfre Battle or the The persona who have lost th,
Law 41 171 case aalate - rtvercntially

iv
UCO!)(
.....
:co. c--
,,...,. 1Jot'J1a P.L.A,1 fl.,a,
KNAfl)AHAlA (C.~NnAICUMJlilA) VIDHURA-ccmta,
J
,\'tAkA, Nos. :ito-'J18
The king and Pui:i11aka the
- 1s deciding 1he case 49 910 Vakkha ask - . S7
The king causes him Io try The kini hands ova-- 58
(case9J ( I'he king appoints
- a judge) so UI - explains the Law to the
They bring - lto the king) so 211 king !,8 245
- takes Fur;n;iayakkha and
- entreats (his lather) 50 213 goe• back (to his home) 58
- bids lhi1 wives to implore
- (having) called Fui.11;iayak·
the king) · . 50 214 kha (to · his home, kttlea
- i1 near the sacrificial pit 51 215 him comfortably) 247
The people rush at Kha9~a- He expounrls the JUie& for
hala (to kill him) . . 51 courtiers to obtain honoura
Accession of - 5l at the court 59
- -ascends to heaven . s• - tells lPu1,11,1ayRkkha) he is
ready to go (with him) S9·
BHfl:llDATTA J.iTAU Nos. n9--s39 ....:. Pu1,1,ayakkha carries
Conception of - 1 219 BWJY - · 5~
- is c;onversing (..-i1h the
Birth of - 2:10 Yakkha) . 59
Ac~asion of - 721 Pu1,11,1aka (tries tQ) ;righten - 60
- answers Indra'• question . u3
Pu9gaka creates an el~phant 60
- asks his father's lea11e to
Pug1,1aka tests (the steadfast·
observe the Jilas SJ ness of - by mean~ of a
- observe, the silos in the snake) 60 154
garden 53 Pui;i,;iaka turns - upside
- instructs his wife 53 down (:ind flin1s him into
- converses with the brahman 53 the sky) 60
- enters the naga·world 54 Pug1,1aka whirls - round 61
- confers regal glory on the Punn;ika a,ks l- to teach
brahm~n 54 219 him the laws of good men) 61 257
-• gives the jewel . to the - preaches the law (to
brahman 54 Pu99aka)
Alambayana see1 - . S4 Pug,;iaka conveys - to the
Alambiyana pulls - (by the Niga (country) 61 e59
tail) . . 55 - preach~s the law to the
Alambliyaha makes - dance 55 Naga king . 61 a6o
Alambiyaoa carrying (the The Naga king introduces -
1nake) · arrives (in) the in his home
king•• lpresence)" . 55 234 Pn\19aka. carries - up (to the
- aasumes human form 55 135 world of men) . .
The king rer-:g .. ,zes - 56 236 - gives the jewel (to the king)
- ~~urna to the niga·world ~ 137 - returns home
- -cc a m rr w ive n a e aat tbe niga-wodd · 56 ·238 - is at home (receiving gifts)
with the hermit 56 239
V1JISA1fT&aA Ji T U.A, Nos. 266-)89
alAIIA"ilADAIUSSAP& jiTA~A,
Conception of -
l'tO&, :.140-141
The bermit - converHS with - ask1 fo~ aold to give alms
the-king 57 140 1"'hey pe him th, name -
The hermit - goes (back) to 'The father &ivea nurses to -
the Brahma world . 57 The kinl givu - an orna•
ment 170
V, l>H UIIA J AT A&A, Noa. 141-165 The wile (in which -) rave
- answer1 the q"ution of the tk ornament, (to hil
•••
(four) kiop 57 n.mea) 171
••

INDEX
..... ... ..
V ISSA•T• u-totettl, n.ATa ,,.,. .. VasSA11TAR&-c01ttd. ,w.n n••u
Representing - thinking of They pluck and ii•e the
(more exacting) alm,- fruits (to the children)
65 7S 305
giYing 17a
They arrive at the Suvaiwa•
- looks at the alm1•halls 65 273 giri Mountain • .
73 3()C
- returns home 65 •74 (They arrive at) tho Konti·
The brahmans ask for the mara River . . 7J 307
elephant 65 a75 They come to the Arat.jara
- gets down from the cle,. Mount . , 74 3o8
phant 66 a;6 (They come to) the bra.hman
- gives away the 'll'hite ele vii~ e
phdnt 66 277 (Thl'y arrive at Ve!!sa_ntara's)
- is pleased with his gift 66 278 unc:e's city . . ,
The agent comes and informs They stay :n arest•houte (near
(- of what is happening) , 66 179 the city) . . . 7~ 311
Showing - arranging for tlie Maudi stands outside the
Gr'!'at Offering rt~t-house 75 311
- and Maddi converae Maddi c1.nverses (with the
Queen ( Phusati) come! to see woman of Ceta) 75 313
An official comes to inform They ~re keeping watch (on
(-that the Great Offering the king and queen) 75 314
is ready) 67 283 - convertes with ,he princes 75 315
- gives gold in alms 68 284 The pnnces show the way
- goes to see his Cather 68 285 (to-) 15 316
- comes and attends respect· They arrive at the Gandha•
fully on his father 68 •86 m.idana Mountain 75 317
He comes to his mother 68 287 Turning hi, back on the
(The old king) converses with Gandhamadana Mountain 76 318
Maddi 69 288 They arrive at the Vipula
- turns to depart 6p 2'9 Mountain . . . 76 319
(They rest near the) Ketu
They bring a carriage 69 290
m.lti RiYer 76 JIO
Maddi, with the children,
They give (their guide) a
mounts (the caniage)
(golden) hairpin 76 3ar
before -
- goes away (to the Vin• Sitting under the banyan tree 76 3e1
dhyu) . They arrive at the Nali
He addresses (or admonishes) Mountain 76 313
the crowd while going 70 293 - arrives at the Mucalinda
(Vessantara 's) mother sends Lake 17 324
(him) two c:nts (filled - arrives at the square lake 77 3,5
with ornaments) 70 294 - arrives at the hermitage 17 3'>6
- gives the ornaments 70 295 The king enters (the hermit•
- g!ves in alms the precious aieJ, becoming a hermit 77 3:17
thing• . . . 71 •96 - comes out from the hermit·
- looks back at the city 71 197 age 77 311
- drives on again 71 198 Maddi enters the forest 77 339
They eat the fruita ,. 330
The mendicants run towards
the king Maddi enter, her hermitage 78 331
- look, expectantly and acea
- givea the horaes in aim,
Jujaka comin1 • . ,. 331
The red deer drawing the Jili 10a to meet (Jiljatc.) 78 333
cl1111 iot 7• 301
(Jlljaka) frirhte111 JIii 71 334
He gin• away the chariot 71 30a
Prince Jlli returns (near hi,
- enters the forest 7a 303 fethor) 78 335
"'•Y
They ask the 73 304 - oonvmlns with.JUjaka 7~ Uo

'¥1 INDEX
wo. o,
rLATI rtaua,
V asSANTA..,~-eonU, Vns11-,;T11rv.-eor,td,
(The twa children) hide in a - pours water (on M:tddi'1
clump (of bushel) 19 337 face)
The children (are concealed Maddi rejoice& (~t-having
in the square lake) 79 338 given :lway the children) .
Prince Jili comes up (from {Sakk:,, disguised as) a brah.•
the square lake) 79 339 man cornea
Kat;1hi comes op from the lake 79 340 - gives his wire (in alms)
- gives in alms his own (Sakka) receivt's the wife
children (to Jiij-alca) 79 (of-) in alms
J iifaka bites· off a creeper So (Sakka) gives back Madel{ . .
Jojaka binds and takes away Indra convcr,c,s (with-)
( lhe children) 8o 34.~ Indra goes b4ck- (to hi1
- subdues his iangcr So 344 heaven)
Jujaka bir.d1 (again the Jujaka sleeps on a tree
children) 8o 345 - looks out for hit (father)
Jiiiaka takes away (the the king
37°
childrao again) flo 346 The king (Vr.ssantara's
I<ar;ihaJi!lii looks bac;k ,·at her f tther) arrives - 8~ 37,
father) Ro 347 The king comes up to his son 85 37J
- wee?!I 81 348 - salutes his fathP.r 85 373
- T g ~~ iv li e on s . , -b , a , r ~ {H~ddi's parh) s 81 , 3 35 ~ < 9 ) T T h h e e q k u i e n e g n ( - Ph c u h s a a f t e i) s a r M ri a v d e d s i 's 8:; 374
Mii:t!di enquire& about her head 85 375
children 81 351 The king salutes his mother 85 376
Maddi cornea up to the The children come to their
cugenia trees 351 motlier 85 ':1.71
Maddi falls {on the ground)
l\liddi arrives at the river· . 353 wilh hrc-r children . 86 378
Maddi ascends the hill 354 - converses (with his father) 86 379
Ma<ldi cornea upon the (toy) - changes his dress . f,.6 380
elcph:-r11ts :ind horse:. 355 - salute~ reverentially the
M.,ddt a.rriv£s ar. th@ clump of hermitage 38r
flower·! rct"S . . 356 They consecrate - (king) 38a
Maddi comts to the l:i.ke 357 Th q e u y e en co ) nsecrate Maddt (as
(}\hddi) goe.,, back lo the
Maddi mounts her elephant •
king 358 They go out of the wilderness
Mwddi fa.1111 nnd swoons 359 - dwells in his palace
- raises (M:i.ddl's he:-,d/ :lnd - givesornamcnts
lays (ii on hi& -lap) - ascends

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
VOL. II-PART II
TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
Lut of Piales
I. M«gapakkha Jitaka, Nos. I- 37 I-IX
2. Mahljanaka " " 38- 82 IX-~VIII
3. Sima ,, ,, 83-101 XVIII-XXIII
4- Nimi •• " 101-114 :XXIII-:XXVI
,,
5. Mahl-Ummagga ,", 115-209 ... XXVl-XLIX
6. Kba9(1abila ".. 110-218 XLIX-LJ
7• Bhoridatta ZJ9-239 LII-LVI
"
,.
8. Mahlnllradakassapa 240-241 LVII
"
9. Vidhura 242-265 LVII-LXIII
JI "
1 o. Vessantara " :• 266-389 LXIII-LXXXVII

EPIGRAPHJA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
1. We are in the Tavatiri1sa heaven; in the middle, on the seat, is the
Bodhisattva, the future Temiya; on his right, Sakka, begging of him to be
reborn as a man in the bosom of queen Candadevi. On his left, kneeling in
the attitude of adoration, is a deva ; he represents the hosts of Tavatimsa ;
in the Pagan plaques, one or two devas generally stand for the throngs of
·the gods.
2. Queen Candadevi is lying on a couch on her right side ; the small
figure near the couch is the ·Bodhisattva who, having acceded to Sakka's
prayer, comes down from the Tavatirhsa to incarnate himself.
3. This plaque 1s m1ssmg.
4. The king gives the baby a name. Sitting on the throne is the· king,
holding the Bodhisattva on his lap; on the left are brahmans, who were
called in to .·read the different marks on the child's body. The young prince
is named T emiya.
5. The king is on his throne, with Temiya, one month old, on his
lap. Four thieves are brought in and condemned to dreadful punishments.
The person nearest to the throne, in the lower row, is the officer who
brought them in.

11.J
PART TALAING· PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATK I.-
l._:_Indra invites Temiya (to be re-born as a 2.-Conception of Temiya.
· man).
4.-(His father) gives (him) the name of 5.-When they bring the thieves.
Temiya.

4 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
6. On the couch, the Bodhisattva is thinking deeply ; the sentences
inflicted by his fat.her startle him, for when he himself is king, similar
sentences will open to him the gates of hell ; over him is spread the ·white
umbreUa, symbol of royalty. The goddess, whose care is to watch over the
umbrella, appears to him, half her body only being visi~le, and gives him
advice as to how to avoid becoming king. The lotus bud symbolizes divine
birth. Near the couch are two perfume vases.
·7. The goddess has advised him to simulate deafness, and to make it
appear he is a cripple. A long series of tests follow, through_ aU which he
remains impassible. This is the test of the milk. It will be seen this plaque
has been repaired by very unskilful hands. Temiya is lying down; his head
and shoulders ~n the lap of a nurse who is trying to· make him drink. At
his feet, another woman urges him to take nourishment
8. They now try to rouse him from his wathy with tempting cakes;
but in vain. Same position; the child is alone ; the cakes cannot be seen.
9 the sight of luscious fruits may perhaps make him move and ask
for them ; but this test is also unsuccessful. Same position. Near the cot,
four women present Temiya with different kinds of fruits. The plaque is
badly spoiled.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE II.
6.-The goddess instructs Temiya. 7.-The trial with milk.
8.-The trial with cakes.
9.-They try (Temiya) with fruits.

6 EPIGRAPHIA BlRMANlCA ( VOL. Il
. 10. They now try to move him with beautiful toys, hut with the same
result, Temiya is lying as in the foregoing plaques. Four nurses try to
tempt him out of his resolve -with toys.
1 t. They then try to tempt him with dainty food, but he does not so
much as look at it. The plaque has been spoiled by whitewash. The
Bodhisa'ttva appears to be· lying down quite alone. The dainty food, "which
originally must have been seen rrear the couch, cannot now be made out.
12. This plaque 1s missing.
13. He is six years old ; at this age, children are afraid of furious
eleph~nts; they test him with one well trained. On the right sits the king in
an attitude _of discouragement at the failure of the trial ; sitting placid and
unmoved before him is Temiya; close to the latter the ·elephant is striking
the ground. Temiya's companions are seen running away panic•stricken.
i 4. They then try to frighten him out of his composure with . snakes,
but in vain. On the _r ight, the Bodhisattva seated ; the head of the snake
with mouth wide open can be seen above l1im, while a coil_ passes under his
left arm and across his lap. On the left, his companions are seen fleeing.

PART II.J TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (PLATE II I.
10.-The trial with toys. 11.-The trial with food.
13.-They try (Temiya) with an elephant. 14.-They try (Temiya) with snakes.

8 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
15. They thought that dancing would elicit from him some glimpse of
interest, and they test him with mimes. On the right, the king, and Temiya
in front of him, are seated; in front of Temiya, a dancer.· The Bodhisattva's
companio~here two represent the whole five hundred-are enjoying them•
selves looking on.
16. He goes on steadfastly simulating helplessness ; swords will
perhaps make him give up the pretence, and dreadful men menace him
with gleaming swords. The king and Temiya are seated as before ; the
latter appears quite unmoved, while a man, on the left, is brandi,h,ing a
sword over him as if to cut off his head.
1 7. Perhaps a sudden noice will startle him into speaking ; so, when
he is ten years old, they try him with conches to make sure whether he is
deaf. Temiya is on his couch; near it, three persons are seen blowing.
conches.
18. Then they try him with drums with the same intention, but in
vam. The faces of two drums may be seen in the foreground near the
couch.

PART fl.) iALAIN'G PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. l"LA1'£ l V.
15.-The test of the mime. 16.-They try (Temiya) with a sword.
17.-They try (Temiya) with conches. 18.-They try (Temiya) with drums.

.
10 EPIGRAPHIA BIR,MANICA ( VOL. 11
19, To see whether he does move· when alone at night an~ in dark
ness, they hide lamps in jars which they take out suddenly, watching him.
Two nurses are seen holding lamps near the bed,
to. This does not succeed ; they now try him with molasses ; they
besmear him and place him in a spot alive with flies. He remains undis
turbed on his couch. T~e two dots, one over his wrist and the other
over his leg, are not defects in the glaze ; they very _probably represent
flies.
21, He is now fourteen; they want to see if filth will move him.
They leave him several days without bathing him, bedaubed with his own
filth, On the couch, the 8Qdhisattva ; near by, two nurse~ watching him.
22. Now they test him by placing fire m pans under his bed. He
remains unmoved. Under the bed, a fire-pan.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE .ANANDA. [PLATE V.
19.-They try (Tcmiya) with lamps. 20.-They try (Temiya) with molasses.
21.-They try (Temiya) with filth. 22.-The test with fire-pans.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ( VOL. II
23. His parents' hearts are full of sorrow; they feel sure he is not a
cripple. So many tests having failed, they come and remonstrate with him
on . his attitude, imploring him to put an end to. it. On the J~ft;, t"ht: king f
on the right, the queen.
24~ They-·then try-him. with btautifut nautch-d.ana~rs. Temiya·· always
op his )>eel.; on the right; -a' girl dancing:· j near the bed· ··twb· men·. play'i'ng,
one th.e fl.ute, and the ·other the drum.
25. As another test, Temiya is made king for a period of seven days.
He is placed on an elephant and led in great pomp round the city. On the
'left~ a. ito'use·; in: front o'f'i,t·, .'the elephant. _O n ·· the elephant, fo frentc; -<the
mahout'; in.-the mioale, Temiya, and behind him the white umbrella-bearer.
:a6. Temiya gives· no sign of intelligence. The king orders his removal
to . the cemetery._ _On the · Jeft, the charioteer, wh~ has come to take t~e
young prince, carries him away in his arms;. behind him,- the <fueen,
lamenting and beating her breast.

PART 11.J TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA.
23.-(Temiya's) mother an.d father come and 24.-The tnial with nautches.
remonstrate (with him).
25.-Accession of T~miya. 26._:_The charioteer comes to take away
(Temiya).

....
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. It
~7. Outside the palace, the charioteer places Temiya on a chariot and
conveys him to the cemetery for burial. One of the horses can be seen ;
the other, alongside of him, being invisible ·On the chariot, in front, the
charioteer, and behind him T emiya.
28. The charioteer has gone to dig a grave near by. Temiya, having
been s.till for so long, wonders if he has any strength left ; to ascertain, he
gets down from the chariot. He is in the act of descending; his left leg is
already outside, his foot resting on a stone. In front,. a horse, quite
diminutive.
29. When on the ground, he tries his . strength; to do so, he sei%es
the chariot by its hinder part and lifts it up as if it were ·a toy. The horse
may be seen under the chariot.
30. At ·the orders of Sakka, Vissakarrima, the celestial architect and
artist, adorns the Bodhisattva. On the . left, standing, Vissakamma; he is
arranging Temiya's turban.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Pr.ATE VIL
.•• -._.,,r ,~ •"!. ( ' ..~ --··.~ ·,
27.- (The charioteer) conveys Temiya. 28.- (Temiya) descending .on Lo the ground.
29.-He tries his strength. 30.-Temi ·a 1s being adorned.

16 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. U
31. When adorned in a regal manner, Temiya goes up to. the char·
ioteer, who is digging the grave that was to receiYe him. On the left, under
a tree; the charioteer, digging,;. near him, Temiya .puts him so.me queiJtions.
32. Delight of the charioteer on seeing the prince we11 and strong; he
is kneeling before him, inviting him to return home.
33. Temiya wants to leave the world; he does not ·go back to the
palace ; but wishing to see his parents, he sends the charioteer to them with
a-message. The charioteer receives the message kneeli~g.
34. The charioteer having gone, Sakka builds a hermitage near by;
Temiya puts on the ascetic garb, and goes to the hermitage. His ~air is
now arranged into two knots, looking like horns ; this is the distinctive
coiffure of hermits. On the pole he carries, at the front end, a gourd for
water, encased in wicker work ; at the other is what appears to be a large
fruit.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE VIII.
31.-He questions the charioteer. 32.-The charioteer invite~ (Temiya) to
return home.
33.-The king (Temiya) sends a message 34.-When. the king leaves the world.
to his mother and father.

18 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
35. Then the king comes to see him, followed by the queen. The
ascetic Temiya is seated. in his small leaf-hut. The king is in front of him,
seated on his roya] seat; this is against the text which partic~larly mentio!"s
that he · refused. to sit on anything, and sat on· the groµnd. The queen is
behind him. The king draws the queen~s attention to the leaves which will
henceforth form . part of the food of T emiya ; he takes them and hands them
over to the queen and the palace Jadies (who are not seen) to examine them.
These are the leaves ~oth · are holding over their heads. The king, queen,
and a vast retinue become all ascetics.
36. Henceforth he goes the round instructing his disciples, travelling
through the air. He is seen poised in the air which is represented by the
scrolls under him ; in the hut, one of his disciples tµ1der instruction,
37. The city is practically empty, the citizen~ having become ascetics.
Three kings, in succession, come ts, conquer it. .But Temiya converts them.
He is sitting in the air, represented thiS' time as a thr«;efold jagged cloud,
and not on leaves, as might be thought. Below him the three converted
kings.
38. MahAjanaka descends from heaven to enter his mother's bosom.
Compare plaque No. 2.

11.J
PART TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE IX •.
35.-He converses with the king (his father). 36.-The hermit instructs his disciples.
37.-(Temiya) preaches the law tQ,the 38.-J~tka is ,onceived.
· (three) kings.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
20 [ VOL. II
39· Birth of Mahijanaka; he is seen on the couch near his mother, in
exactly the same position_a s she. Near the heel. one of the lady attendants.
40. ·Before,· bis birth, his father tl\e,- ~ had b~en killed in battle ; the
at
mother had,· ·fled ·and been received the house of · a brahman... In his
games with other children, owing tt>-™5 abnormal sttength, he handles them
rather roughly at.· times, and in revenge they call him " the widow's son."
on
Jariaka ia the right, handling roughly one of the boys, who is seen falling
down; immediately behind him, another boy, lifting his index upwards, i1
calling him '' widpw's son" ; note his sharp Indian ieatures. The last boy,
on the left, is evidently begging not to be treated like the other.
41. the expresston "widow's son'' puzzles him. He wants to knof/1
who his father was. He asks his· mother, and she telJs him. On the left is
the mother; in front of her, Janaka N?spectfully sitting in the oriental
fashion.
4~. He then makes up tiis mind to regain his father's· kingdom; for
this he must have a large sum of money; to get it he resolves to go
trading to foreign parts, and he comes and informs her of his intention.
The mother is on the left.

PART JI.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (PLATE X.
39.-J anaka comes out from the womb. 40.-Janaka plays with the childreµ.
41.-Janaka questions his mother. i2.-Ja naka informs his mother (he will g<>
trading).

22 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (. VOL. II
43. He embarks for Suvatu)abhumi. On the ~venth. day the ship
founders in mid-ocean. The ship must have been a large one, for the text
says that it carried seven caravans with their beasts; in the plaque it looks
like a small river craft, such as are still seen, and· called da"ncny. Janaka is
standing, preparing to take the jump which will carry him far beyond the
monsters which are hastening to the ship. Five of these monsters are seen
with wrecked passengers in their jaws ; three on Janaka's left, one on his
right, and one in the foreground in the left corner.
44. The devas have appointed the fairy Maipmekhala to watch over the
ocean and rescue virtuous .. perso~s from drowning. She sees Janaka swim•
ming in the sea; she enters into a conversation with him ; he expatiates on
the benefits of manly efforts. The head of Janaka is broken oft; MaJ>ime
khal~ is following him in the air.
45. At last she asks htm where he desires to go; he tells her. She
takes him in her arms and carries him to Mithilii The scroll represents
the air through which they are flying. Three sea-monsters ate devouring
shipwrecked persons.
46. She lays him down on the ceremonial stone slab in the mango
t'Yrove near Mithila. The, ·royal chaplain is examining the marks on the soles
b .
of the Bodhisattva's feet.

PART II.] TALAINC PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XI.
43.-When (the boat) founders. 44.-Manimekhala, the goddess, listens to
Janaka.
45.-The ~oddress carries (Janaka) in her arms. 46.-The chaplain examines Janaka's marks.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
47. The marks on his person being those of a great nian, they at once
make him king. Janaka is seated on the stone slab. The royal chapliin
and ~nc;,tber brahman are holding conches containing the consecrated water,
48. Then, with. great pomp, they convey him to the-J>alace; A chatf«>t
an<l pair'; in frontf the charioteer, and bebil)d, Janalai.
49. Arrived at the palace, he assigns their respective places to~t he
generai and th~ officers of state, and then mounts·- the daisr He is on the
dais;;· before:liim a.re the ministers of state.
50. The daughter of the defuncf·king is curious to see how Janaka will
behave on seeing her, and she sends a servani · to call him. The servant,
crouching, is delivering his message to Janaka.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XII.
47.-The anointment (as king) of Janaka. 48.-Janaka .enters the (capital) city.
50.-The queen sends ( a man) to call
49.-(Janaka) assigns their places to the (Janaka), or The queen causes (Ja:naka) to
officials of state. be called.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. Ir
51. Janaka, to assert his authority, makes no hurry to answer the
summons, although called three times.· At last he goes to meet the
princess quite leisurely. Struck by his dignified deportment, ·she hastens
towards him, giving him her hand to lean on, and he goes into the palace
with her. The princess stands within a door, holding out· her hand, which
Janaka · takes. He is ascending a diminutive stairs.
52. He then sits himself and enquires of the ministers what instructions
have been left by the late king. Above Janak.a is the w·hite umbrella· in
front of him, the ministers.
53. The late king had given orders that, whosoever could tell the head
of the square bed (on which Janaka is seated) from the foot, WllS to be
given the kingdom. On being asked the question, he employs a ruse. He
hands over his ornamental hairpin to the princess, knowing well that, vut of
respect, she would not place it at the foot of the bed. She deposits it, of
course, at the head, and Janaka is able to answer the question. The
princess, standing, is receiving the gold pin.
54-57. These plaques are m1ssmg.
58. This plaque is badly spoiled; th_e legend has flake~ off; it is not
easy to de'Gide which _scene it is intended. t-0 ·represent, as, between the last
and tHe ·~·one folto{ving, there are several· scenes in wh~ch· he is seated. But
is
it. pfob~-bl3; that in, whidi the garo ..e _~er ~d~g_s ,him ;beautif4L frair;,. Only.
r • ;, J ,j '$ •,t won,,t•
·t,he tirst . two letters,--ud, remain, being probably the b~ginning 'of the
udyan, garden.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANOA. [PLATE XIII.
51.-Janaka (holding the princess's hand) 52.-When Janaka enquires.
ascends the palace.
53.-(Janaka) gives his (gold) pin to the
qncen. 58.-

t
EPIGRAPHJA BIRMANICA VOL. H
59. On seemg the products of the garden, Janaka wishes to see it, and
he sets out on the royal elephant. Janaka is in the middle; in front, the
mahout; behind, the umbrella-bearer.
60. Janaka i:; looking at the two mango trees al the gate of the
garden. In his right hand he is holding the fruit he has plucked. The
artist, hard pres;:;ed for room, has suppressed the mahout.
61. Th · king having eaten the fruit, his retinue eat all that remains,
breaking tl1e branches ; on his return he beholds the battered tree. In front
of the elephant an official, kneeling, explains what has happened ; the upper
part of fhe bo<ly is broken off from the waist. The umbrella-bearer also is
badly spoiled. '1 he king is raising his· hands in surprise.
6:2. He has resolved to become a recluse in the palace. He is
instructing the general-in-chief, kneeling before him, as to how the affairs of
the kingdom should be carried on.

P RT 11.l TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XIV.
59.-The king goes out to his pleasaunce. 60.-Janaka looks at the mango (trees).
61.-Janaka sees the mango (tree). 62.-King Janaka instructs (the generalissimo).

-.
30 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. U
63. He then Jives as a monk at the top of the palace. Nobody is to
see him, except two servants, one to bring water and the other to bring
food. Janaka has done away with his regal ornaments. The two · servants
are before him. The first, with his left hand, presents him the toothbrush,
holding a vase with water in the right. The other is holding some food.
64. After four months he reflects that the proper place tor an ascetic
is, not a palace, but the wilderness. So he resolves upon leaving the;
palace, and bids the two servants bring him y~llow' robes and . an ~\ms~owl.
In the casket held by the first servant are the robes. The other is holding
the bowl.
65. He has sent for a barber to cut his hair attd beard; Janaka ls
holding his hair to facilitate the operation,
.. 66. Having dohned his robes, he slin_gs his almsbo~J°qh_\ 12lie "shouldet,
takes his staff and goes down. .Queen S1vali and t~e ''tes~:er ~ queens·
are just going to see him, not having 'met· him, for (ou,r months. ·'fhey meet
'·,new
him as he is coming down but fail' to recognize ·: him i~· -his garb.
Queen Sivali and- a lesser queen are saluting the royal m~nk. . , · · .,
67- 70. These ··p!aquts are missing.

PART II.] TALAINC PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (PLATE XV
63.-King Ja naka lives in retirement. 64.-They (the two attendants) bring the
almsbowl (and) give it ·(to Mahajanaka).
)
.J
J
.J
...
J
j
j
.... ,i
65.-Janaka shaves (his hair and beard). 66.-Ja naka descends from his house.

32 EPIGRAPHIA BlRMANICA [ VOL. II
71. Janaka passes the queen and continues on his way down. He 1s
repr~sented getting o~t of the p<!.Iace.
72. Queen Sivali, on entering his room, immediately finds out her
mistake, and she follows him, accompanied by the lesser queens. J anaka, in
front, is pursuing his way. The queen and the others-one standing for the
whole of them-are unloosing their hair and beating their breasts in sorrow.
73. In vain does the queen beg of him to abandon his purpose. As
an expedient, she gets some houses to be burnt to make him believe the
capital is in flames. On the right Janaka, som.ewhat annoyed, raises up his
hands; the queen shows him Lhe conflagration behind. The queen's face is
broken off. The upper part of Janaka's body, which . was also broken, has
been restored very unskilfully.
7+ To prevent them following on, he draws with his staff a line on
the ground, which nobody must pass. Sivali throws herself down and rolls
on the ground. The line is obliterated and the pursuit continues. The
queen's face and breasts are broken; Janaka is going on his way after
drawing the line.

l'ART II.] TALAINQ fl.AQUES. ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XVI.
71.-King Janaka leaving the world. 72.-The queens beat (their breasts).
73.-The queen shows (Janaka) the (town)
74.-Janaka draws a line on the ground.
burni~g.

EPIGRAPHIA ai-RMANICA
34 [ VOL. II
75. The hermit N~rada, seeing the plight of Janaka, wishes to help
him. He comes through the air and strengthens Janaka's resolve in a f~w
stanzas. On the left, _Narada on a cloud. His peculiar headdress shqws he
is an ascetic ; the king,· being a monk, has his head shaved.
76. Of this plaque the legend only remains.
77. A dog, through fright, drops a piece of meat he has stolen. Janaka
is picking it up for his meal ; behind him, queen Sivali.
78. Janaka is putting the dog's leavings in his almsbowl. Slva)i raises
her right hand in disgust· at the thought of _his eating it.
J
79. anaka is eating the meat; Sivali expresses her disgust in words
and the king rebukes her. It will be noticed how beautifully the two faces
are modelled-and how thoroµghly Indian.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE AN.ANDA. [PLATE XVI I.
75.-(Ja naka) receives the in,.struction 77.-Janaka takes the meat.
of Narada.
78.-Janaka breaks the (piece of) meat (and 79.-The blessed Janaka eats the meat.
puts it in his bowl).

EPIG.RAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. l1
So. Further on, a little girl makes it clear by means of those on her
arms that one bangle -~ant1,0,t jingle; . but twd_ always jingle and jar, on
acco~nt of being ·in c~iac~}" 'therefore; says.i,she, it i~ bet~·er 'to ··\ive· alone~
But this lesson again is lost on ·the queen. On the left, sitting, the child-,
her· ·1~ft forearm and right )iand have been ·' test-ored.
Sr. They meet with a fletcher. He looks at an arrow with one e-Je
closed i Janaka asks him 'why he does so ; he is answered it. . is' because,
when looking _with both_e yei at an arrow to see if it ·i s straight, one spoils
the straight path of vision ; ·so also when a monk d'rags after him a female.
The queen understands; but still follows on.
·82. She cannot persuade him to turn back. Near a great fores~ she
swoons, and the Bodhisattva escapes tn the· forest_. Stvali returns to the
capital and becomes a recluse.
83. Sama comes down from his heavenly mansion to enter his
mother's womb.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XVII{.
80.-(Janaka) converses with the child. 81.-Janaka secs the arrow.
82.-Ja naka enters the forest. 83.-Conception of Syii.ma.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
84. Sama is born; he was conceived miraculously, both his parents
being anchorites in the wilderness. The father is seated at the foot of the
bed. Above is the roof of the small leaf-hut.
85. The parents bathe the infant, lay it down on a small bed in the
hut and go in the forest to collect fruits as usual.
86. On a mountain there lived kinnaris or nymphs ; when the
parents are gone, they come, take the child to their cave, bathe and
adorn him with flowers, and put him back in his parents' hut. All the heads
are broken. The ltinnari, that is, the female, is on the right, holding
Sama ; the kin.n.ara, her husband, on the left, is holding what appears to
be a lotus bud with a long stalk.
87. Sama is now sixteen. One day his parents go out for fruits; they
are caught in a shower and take refuge among the roots of a large tree;
a snake dwelling there puffs out his breath ; they become blind. The boy,
anxious, goes in search of them, and, having found them, gives them the
end of a long pole ; he, holding the other end, brings them home. On the
ri"ht is the tree, which seems to be a cactus.

PART II. J TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. f PLAH: XIX.
84.-Birth of Syama~ 85.-They (his parents) bathe and put Syama
to sleep.
87.-Sya.ma leads (his parents) out ( of their
86.-The suparr:ias bathe Sy:ima.
shelter).

EPlGRAPHIA · BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
88. Thenceforth Sama looks after his parents, doing all what is neces•
sary for them. During the day he _goe~ . to the mouotain with a band of
nfmphs ' to gather fruits. Above 0the .Uit~a,-~s, some rocks, intende4 ~ tq
indicate the mountaip. ·
89. The two blind parents are seated in the hut ; Sima . miniaten to
them: after his excursion in the mountain, ~e b~i!:lgs back fruits for them,
,90. One day, havtng brought back fruits, he informs his parents that he
intends going to the forest to bathe and bring.;_back_ water.
91. Sama is beloved by alJ · the beasts of the forest ; some deer
generally follow him wherever he goes. He is seen here leaving his
parents and entering the forest-indicated by one tree-followed by the
deer.

PART II.] TALAING Pl.AQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XX.
88.-As Syiima goes up the mountain.. 89.-Syama minister!'- to his parents.
·, !i,\t;L._.u . ·
~
'J: ...
90.-Syama informs (his parents) he is 91.-'S)ii.ma enters the forest.
going to enter the forest.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. JI
92. After bathing, he takes water in his pot, which he places on the
back of a deer, and starts on his way home,
93. himself carrying a pot of water. At that time, Piliyakkha, king
of Benares and very fond of hunting, arrives near the hermitage. He has
remarked the footprints of many deer; he lies in ambush. The king sees
Sima, and is astonished at his appearance i is he a man? is he a fairy?
Anyway, he does not want to go back without bringing proof of his having
been in those mysterious regions of the Himilayas; so he resolves to wound
what he takes to be a wonderful creature, so that he may take him alive.
The king is shooting an arrow a.t Sima.
94. The arrow enters the right side and goes out at the left. Sima,
recovering consciousness, wonders who may have shot him, since he cannot
think of any persona\ enemy. The water-pot is near Sima, and at his
feet stands Piliyakkha. The feathered end of the arrow is seen jutting out
from the 11ft side; this is wrong, since the arrow went in at the right side.
95. S~ma perceives the king at his feet, and asks him why he shot
him. A long conversation ensues. Piliyakkha understands now the enormity
of his act. He promises to a goddess, who, unseen, whispers in his ear,
that he will renounce his kingdom al\d devote his life· to looking after his
blind parents. Then speech fails Sama and he becomes rigid. The king,
thinking him dead, weeps bitterly.

PART I I.J TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XX(.
92.-As Syama is drawing water. 93.-The king shooting Syiima.
94.-The. king converses with Syam!. 95.-Piliyakkha weeps.

44 EPJGRAPHIA BIRMA.NlCA [ VOL. II
96. Thinking Sa.ma to be dead, Piliyakkha does homage to him, by
offerings. of flowers and sprinkling of water. The king is holding flowers in
both his hands.
97. He then picks up_ the jar of water and goes to the hermitage> and>
after some desultory conversation, informs the parents of their boy's fate.
They with difficulty control their sorrow, and the king takes them to the
spot where Sama is lying. The Bodhisattva is now lying in the parinirvll;la
attitude; his parents are behind the king. The object seen under the king's
right hand is the water-jar, mostly broken. The arrow is no more there.
98. Bis father places his boy's head on his lap, caressing him with
his left hand ; his right is on his breast to expres.s bis sorrow. The mother
is al the feet, her right hand on her head in her despair. The king js
l~eeling 1 ear the boy.
;.,9· Th~n the mother, the father, and tlie g 1ddess ho, a while before,
:~j)Oke to 1lie ki11g, make each in t11m a solemn cict of asseveration, testifying
to the virtues of Sama. And Sama gives signs of life. On the left is
Sama's mother; and front of her, her husband ; near the father is the
111
king, and behind the latter, the goddess.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXII.
%.-Piliyakkha does homag-e (to Syama). 97.-When the king brings (the parents)
and shows (them) Sy.ima.
98.-The mother and father of Syama "·eep. 99.- ( They) make an act of asseveration:

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 11
oo. Sama, through the power of the a5severation, is completely
1
healed, and well and bright again. He is seated in tht! middle near the king,
who is on his left; his father and mother are on his right. The goddess
has departed.
1 o 1. The king is released of his promise to look after the two blind
persons. Sama preaches the Law unto him, and the king, reverentially
saluting him, returns to Benares. The Bodhisattva, seated, is receiving the
king's salutation.
102 and 103-the Conception and the Birth of Nimi-are missing.
104. Nimi having been born, the soothsayers come to examine the
111arks on hi_s body. They tell the king that the child shall be the last of
'his long line. On that account, the king calls him " Nimi.~' The plaque is
spoiled. On -the right, seated on a high seat, is the king holding nis child.
The two personages on the left ate soothsayers.
105. All ·the kings of this dynasty qad,_o n seeing their .first g~ey hair,
become hermits. One day his harhe.r show-ed Nimi's father. hi~ firsf grey
ha)r.' Then· .the kirig, becoming a hermit, made ..· o:ver (he kingdom . to his
s~n'. Nimi -is seiited under the white umbrella i three brahmans bring the
cQronatiQ.1;i w~ter in conches.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXIII.
100.-Tben Syama (rises) bright (again). 101.-The king reverentially salutes Syiima.
104.-(The fortune-tellers) look at Nimi's 105.~When Nimi is ruling.
(bodilr) signs.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ( ~OL. It
106. Sakka, coming down from the Tlvatirhsa heaven, stands in mid
air and answers Ni mi's queries; the latter wanted ta know which was bettet:
almsgiving or the holy life of the recluse ? Sakka opines ·for the latter.
107. Sakka goes back to Tavatimsa, and the gods ask him where he
has been to, He sings the praises of Nimi. The gods become anxious to
behold so holy a king, and Sc1kka sends Mata!i, his charioteer, in ·his own
car to fetch king Nimi to Tavatirilsa. Mltali, seated on the heavenly car,
iravites Nimi to take a trip to heaven.
r 08. ~s they are about to start, Mltali, who dfives, turns round and
asks the king which he should like to visit first: the hells or Tlvatithsa?
And Nimi, knowing well he would go to heaven in any case, chooses to
visit hell first.
109. Matali takes him to the several hells and explains to him the
'torments suffered in each and the sins which send men there. Mttali, ha1f
turneci towards the king, answers his questions about the hells. On the
Iefr. an inhabitant of hell is being thrashed by a guardian of those dreadful
abodes.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXIV.
106.-Indra is questioned by Nimi. 107.-Matal,i invites Nimi (to get into the
chariot).
108.-Matali asks which way (Nimi wishes 109.-Nimi looks at hell.
to go).

50 EPIGRAPH IA BI RM ANICA [ VOL. 11
110. Having gone round the hells, Mitali drives towards heaven ; as
they approach, the king beholds, in the ~ir, the heavenly mansion of the
goddess Bira\li, who is attired with great magnificen~e. She had been a
slave, and· this was the reward of her entertaining hospitably a guest. Biranr
is seated in her five•roof mansion. These elegant structures with many
receding roofs are still exactly the same now.
111. Many other mansions, each more beautiful than the last, are
visited. At last they arrive at the Sudhamma Hall, which is the place of
assemblage of the gods. The gods receive him magnificently; he takes his
place near Sakka, and they converse together. Nimi is on the left, in regal
attire ; inasmuch as he is the Bodhisattva he is greater than Sakka,
t 1 2. Nimi at last takes his ltave, and Matali brings him back to his
capital. The. king, preaching the Law to his people and instructing them,
tells them bf the horrors of hell and of the bliss of heaven.
I I 3. Then, after a long time, the barber plucks Nimi's first white hair ;
he is kneeling, showing the king the harbinger of old age.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES 'ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXV.
i
110.-Nimi looks at the heavenly mansion. 111.-Nimi converses with Indra.
112.-Nimi instructs (his) people (in the practice (113.-Nimi sees (his)' grey hair.
of the Law).

EPiGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. tl
114. Following the example of all his ancestors, Nimi now leaves the
world. The scene no doubt represents. king N\mi, on the rjght, speaking in
1
the mango grove to his son, who is to_. succeed him, and to his barber, by
whose instrumentality the king is about to enter the path of perfection. (In
ancient India, the post of barber to the king was a high one.)
115. King Vedeha reigns in Mithila ; at his court are four . wise men,
wise only in their own estimation. The king has a dream to the effect that
a fifth one-a wonderfully wise man, this one-is about to appear. He
enquires where he is, and is told he is just about to be born. On that very
day the Bodhisattva, coming down from the T~vatimsa heaven, is conceived
in the womb of Sumanidevl the wife of a rich man. One thousand other
1
gods were also reborn on the same day ; they were- to be throughout his
playfellows and companions.
116. the birth t>f Mahosadha. His mother is iying on her bed. On
the left, near the bed, two female attendants ; in front of them is a brasier
with fire, according to the custom, still obtaining in Burma and some ·other
parts ef lndo-China, of drying the humours of the mother by exposing her
to fire for some days. On the right, the midwife is holding up the child.
117. As he was being born, Sakka, to show to the worid that the child
was a great and uncommon one, places in his ha.nd a wonderful medicinal
herb.· The child is held by the nurse. An awkward attempt at restoring
Sakka's left band has been made.

PART II.J TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXVI.
114.-King Nimi leaving the world. 115.-Conception of Mahosadha.
116.-Birth of M.ahosadha. 117.-When Indra gives the medicinal herb
(to Mahosadha).

54 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. n'
118. The mother, perceiving the medicine in the child's hand, enquires
about it ; the baby tells her, and advises her to give it to aU who suffer
from any sickness. His father had suffered from headache for years. He
uses the medicine and his pains disappear. A nurse is holding the babe,
who is giving his mother the medicine ; the father, on the left, is holding it
in his hand, about to use it.
119. On his naming day the child is given the name of Mahosadha,
because he was born with a powerful medicine in his hand. The father is
holding his son ; in front, two brahman soothsayers.
120. It is discovered that one thousand boys were born on the same
day as Mahosadha ; the father sends, i11 his son's name, a nurse and
ornaments to each, and has them brought daily to attend upon his son. On
the left, the father ; facing him, Mahosadha ; on the right, one of the
thousand children with his nurse behind.
1 ~ 1. The sage is now seven years. His games with his companions
were often spoiled by rain, sometimes by elephants and other animals. Two
children are frightened by an elephant ; a little fellow has fallen down, half
his f ;ice is seen between the animal's legs.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXVII.
118.-Mahosadha gives the medicine ( to his 119.-The naming of Mahosadha.
mother).
120.-Mahosadha gives ornaments (to the 121.-Mahosadha plays with (his)
thousand children). companions.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANlCA [ VOL. 11
122. One day the boys are caught in an unseasonable rainstorm;
Mahosadha, who was strong and power£ ul, escaped it by running int_? a rest·
house ; but his companions, in their hurry, fell one over the other, bruising
their limbs. The Bodhisattva is in the rest-house, the boys are runnin~ into
shelter.
123. Mahosadha reflects that, had they a large hall to play in, their.
games would not be disturbed in so many ways. So he resolves to build
one; be tells the boys to bring each a piece of money. He calls a master
carpenter, hands over the money to him and asks him to build a hall. On
the left, kneeling, the master-carpenter receiving the thou~nd pieces From
Mahosadha ; behind, the latter's companions.
124. The carpenter has not grasped Mahosadha's idea ; so the latter
draws out the plan, and the carpenter, astonished and delighted, works under
his orders. ft was a beautiful structure, containing a place for travellers, one
for the poor, one for Buddhist monks,· one for brahmans, etc., etc.
125. But this is not yet enough ; a tank is necessary ; he caJls an
architect and gets him to build a tank with a thousand bends and one
hundred bathing places. The Bodhisattva and the architect are discussing
the plan ; behind the architect, either a workman or one of Mahosadha's
companions. The zigzag figure represents the tank.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXVIIJ,
122.-(Mahosadha's companions) run to 123.-Mahosadha gives the gold (to a
enter the rest-house. carpenter to build a hall).
124.-Mahosadha builds (plans and superin 125.-Mahosadha constructs a tank.
tends the building of) the rest-house.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
J 26. His fame begins to spread far and wide. People come to him
from everywhere to submit their disputes to him, and they abide by his
decisions. Mahosadha is seaied. in the ha11 ; near by are three litigants,
127. Mahosadha is now eight yean of age. The king sends messen·
an
gers round to try and get news of the wise man who was born eight
years ago. One of them sees the magnificent hall, tank, etc., and hears of
the wisdom of Mahosadha He reports to the king, who desires to call the
boy to the court. His four wise men, however, dissuade him from doing so:
everybody can build a hall or a tank ; no, the king should not call him
without further tests. Then follows a series of tests or cases for examina
tion, represented in the following plaques. In each case, the jealous four
wise men put off his being called to the palace. A hawk carries off a piece
of meat: Mahosadha sees it and follows by treading on the hawk's shadow.
Then he gives a great shout, the hawk lets the meat fall and the boy
catches it up. Jn the left-hand corner, on the top, the hawk; Mahosadha is
catching up the meat ; behind him, his companions; in front, one of the big
people clapping hands.
128. Mahosadha is deciding the cattle theft ; he is in the hall i outside
the two disputants with their cattle.
All the tl!lta which fonow are shortly described in the explanations of the corresponding Talainr
illlCriptlons, to which the reader may refer.
129. Mahosadha u ravels the case of tJ,e thread necklace. Below him,
the two womr ·,ho claim each to be the owner; near them, the vase of
water by means of which the case was decided.

II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXIX.
PART
126.-Mahosadha decides cases. 127.-Mahosa<lha causes the (piece of) meat
to fa ii.
128.-The case of the cattle. 129.-The case 9f the necklace of thread.

6o EPJGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. JI
130. Mahosadha decides the case of the ball of thread . . On the left,
the two women who have come to have their dispute settled. One of
Mahosadha's companions is untwisting the thread ball held by one of the
women, to discover what kind of seed has been placed instde it.
131. The Indian Solomons Mahosadha, in the same manner as
Solomon, decides which is the true mother of a child. The two women
holding the child, are explaining their case to the Bodhisattva.
132. Mahosadha is deciding whose wife-the dwarf's or the poor
man's-is the woman. Below, on the left, the woman; the man in front of
her is probably her husband, the other being the poor man.
&33. The Bodhisattva decides the case of the cart against Sakka, who
has stolen it in order to make manifest his~Mahosadha's-wisdom. Sakka
is still on the cart, besi4e which the true owner, standing, explains his case.

PART 11. TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXX.
130.-The case of the cotton thrca.d. 131.-The case of the child.
133.-Mahosadha decides (the case of)
132.-Deci<ling the case of the wife.
the cart.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ( VOL. II
134. There now follows a series of riddles by means of which Maho·
sadha's enemies hope to undo him. Most of these riddles are put to the
villagers, knowing they would go straight to the wise boy. This is the
riddle of the stick. Mahosadha is holding the string, one end of which is
tied round the middle of the stick ; below is the basin of water which helped
to solve the riddle. A villager is looking on.
135. A villager is holding a skull in each hand. Which is the
woman's, which is the man's ? The sutures in the skull answer the puzzle:
a man's are straight; a woman's crooked.
136. A villager has brought two snakes : which is the male ? which i,
the female ? Their tails will solve the problem. The male's tail is thick ;
the female's is thin.
137. The riddle of the wonderful bull with horns on his legs and a
hump on his head, which crows thrice a day. Mahosadha easily demon
strates that it is a cock, and gets a cock sent to the king, who is lost in
admiration. One of the villagers is holding the cock.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. I PLATE XXXI.
134.-The riddle of the pole. 13-.-Deciding- the case of the head.
1 "6.-The riddle of the snake. 137.-The riddle of the cock.

EPIGRAPHIA. BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
138. The riddle of the contorted gem. Two villagers are holding it ;
at each of its ends is seen the new thread which Mahosadha ingeniously
got inserted by ants lured with honey.
139. Mahosadha solves the puzzle of the "bull in calf,'' which the
villagers are to_ deliver. A vilJager is sent to the king with the information
that his father is in labour and cannot be ,delivered. The king understands
this counter-riddle and is delighted.
140. The villagers are asked to cook a pot of rice under conditions
apparently impossible; but the Bodhisattva easily sotves this very clever
riddle. A villager is cooking the rice.
141. The villagers must, under heavy penalty if they fail, make a rope
of sand. Mahosadha tells them to go to the king and ask him a piece of
his old sand-rope as a model. The lotuses in this and the two previous
plaques ate devices to fill up empty spaces.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXXI I.
138.-The riddle of the gem. 139.-Mahosadha decides the case of the bull.
140.-The puzzle of the rice 141.-The puzzle of the sand (rope).

66 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANlCA [ VOL. it
J 42. The king orders the vinagers to catch, in the forest, a new tank
covered with lilies. Mahosadha answers the riddle with a counter one. The
villagers, under his instructions, are preparing to deliver the counter-puzzle in
the palace ; they are holding staves, ropes and clods ; they are to tell the
king the new tank, frightened, has got loose and run away. They are
holding the clods in their right hands.
143. Again, the king wants a new park with trees, etc. Mahosadha
counter-puzzled the king in the same manner as in the tank-riddle. The
villagers are holding ropes to tie the park.
144. The king, delighted with Mahosadha's wit and wisdom in his
solutions of the riddles, at last summons him to the palace to assume office.
There will now be bouts f wit between the four jealous o-called wise men
and Maho-adha, in which the will always be he losers. }- e himself origi
nates the question of th ~- ; he ha sat in hi father's place, which wa a
gross breach of etiquet e. l~ut lie is great r than his father and proves Lhe
offspring of an as may be ctt r than the ass himself. The ass, very badly
modelled, is seen between the king and the sage.
145. Mahosadha salutes his father and instructs him how to act before
the king, so that he may bring about the question of the ass.1
l This plaque should come before the pttvious one.

P~RT 11.J TALAING PLAQUES. ON ·THE ANANDA. [PLAT£ XXXIII.
142.-The puzzle of the tank. 143.-The puzzle of the park.
-~
-
... ·-- .- ::..,......,.,.. ~-
. ,
~.rt21 :V-*1.$l?;
.~ .,(iv
·~ J:. ~ .· ... : . ,~f: ·~.
··.r-;· .· . l., ,·
144.- The question of the ass. 145.- :'i.fahosadha salutes his father.

68 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[ VOi •• ~l
146. The finding of _the mysterio1:1s jewel, which was thought to be in
the lake. The four wise men cannot get at it, but Mahosadha experiences
no difficulty. He is holding the jewel, which he has rescued from the
palm-~ee by the. lake in lµJ h~d.
1
1-47. The sage is explaining to the king the reason of the chameleon's
strange behaviour. The chameleon is on the top of the gateway, behind
~hhosadha. The king is on his elephant,
148. Mahosadha, standing before the king's chariot, explains how
naturally it came to pass that the unlucky man (who is hiding behind him)
could not possess the lucky. , girl, whc;, his be~ome queell, and is seated
behind Vedeha.
149. The king, on the dais, is explaining to Mahosadha, and the four
wiseacres behind him, that he ·has seen a ram and a dog who had struck up
• a great friendship, aod asks them the cause of it.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXXIV.
146.-Taking the jewel. 147.- The case of the chameleon.
148.-The case of good and bad luck. 149.-The question of the ram.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[ VOL. JI
150. The four wise men are very much puzzled by that question of the
ram ; they had been threatened with banishment if they did not answer.
Mahosadha calls them, makes them sit before him like pupils, and teaches to
each an answer. But the perfectly right one he keeps for himself.
I 51. The king wants to know which is better : ric,hes or wisdom ?
Whenever Mahosadha and the four wise men are represented together, the
former always sits first in the first row below.
152. The four opme that wealth is better, but the sage proves with
irrefutable arguments that wisdom is preferable, and the king agrees with
hiIIl,
153. , On the right, Mahosadha by clenching his fist asks Amara, his
future wife, whether she is married ; the girl opens her hand, meaning : No.
Her left hand is steadying the pot of rice on her head.

PART II.] T ALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANAND A. I PLATE XXXV.
150.-(He) instructs the four pandits. 151.-('l'he king putting to the five) the
question of the rich and the wise.
152.- Mahosadha an wer the question ( of 15.1.-~lahosadh::i ,sb (Amar~ whether
the rich and the wise). she is maTried. etc.).

EPIG RAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, d
154. M ahosadha was disguised as a tailor, so that the wife he was
looking for should take him on his own merits and not on account of his
position. Havipg understood she was free, he made up his mind to marry
her, for she was very clever, but he would first test her, They have a con.
versation ·sparkling with wit and wisdom. Then she offers him some of. the
gruel she-was taking to· her father. He accepts. The small table on which·
he is eating is one of the details which. show the lack of thought sometimes
manifested by the artists; it was not, ·and is not, the custom· for men in the
field• to eat on such tables. They afe ..o n palm or cocoanut leans.
155. He asks her the way to her horn~; she tells him. Amarl's
mother is on the left ; he is mending the villagers' old clothes, and makes
in one day one thousand rupees, which he intends giving her.
1 S6. Am arl comes back from the fields in the evening and, according
to custom·, she washes her parents' feet; then those of the Bodhisattva.
She is holding a vase fuU of water, preparing to pour it on his feet.
ts,. He is testing he, temper, submission and patience, by daubing het
hair and body wi.th the food she· has prepared for him.

PART 11.J TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXXVI.
154.-Mahosadha eats the rice-gruel. 155.-Mahosadha stitches clothes.
156.- (Amara) washes Mahosadha's feet. 157.-Mahosadha smears the boiled rice (on
Amara's head an.d body).

74 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ( VOL. II
158. He has made up his mind to take her to wife; he gives the
thousand rupees to the parents. To Amari, be presen~ a loin-cloth ~nd
asks her to follow him to town.
159. Having settled everything, Mahosadha takes leave of the girl's
parents. He is on the right, with his hands uplifted in the oriental salute i
the father is in the middle, the mother on the left.
16o. Amari knows him only in the disguise of a tailor. He wishes to
test her chastity ; he puts on his court costume, has her dragged by force
before him and tempts her. But she steadfastly refuses. The girl is in
front of him i behind her, one of the men who dragged her iq.
161. The morrow he manics i it was a great gala day at' the palace
and in the city. Numerous presents were sent to them. Amara is seating
behind the Bodhisattva; on the left, a female servant brings in presents in a
{probably lacquered) vase.

PART II. l TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXXVII ..
-158.-Mahosadha gives (Amara) a loin-cloth. 159.-Mahosadha informs (that he is about)
to return (home).
160.-Mahosadha tests (Amara's chastity). 161.-Mahosadha marries.

, EPIGRAPHiA BIRMANiCA
[ VOL. 11
162. Mahosadha is hiding at the potter's, whither he has been obliged
to Oee, owing to the false charges brought against him by the four wiseacres,
his enemies. Mahosadha is on the right, in the act of moulding a pot.
163. The godciesi of the white umbrella, by asking difficu1t rid<iles td
the king, and threatening something dreadful if they were not answered
induces the king to recall M ahosadha. The king sends four courtiers, with
many presents, in different directions, to look for him. One. of the courtiers
has found him, and is offering him the king's presents.
16+ The courtier explains his mission; immediately the sage inounts
the cbariot and repairs to the palace at full speed. The king, on his throne
and delighted, receivt:s him. Explanations follow,. and Mahosadha proves to
the king he has been calumniated.
165. Mahosadha agrees to answer the goddess's riddles ; as he thus
becomes the teacher, the king places him on his throne, as is meet, and
himself sits below. Mahosadha solves the riddles. The goddess, half of
whose body appears on the white umbrella, offers the sage a casket full of
heavenly flowers and· perfumes. Mahosadha is holding the casket.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXXVIII.
162.-Mahosadha lives as a potter. 163.-(The courtiers) go about (looking for)
Mahosadha.
164.-Coming from the potter's. 165.-(Mahosadha) answers the (king's)
questions.

78 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ( VOL. II
166. His four enemies are vexed at his return. To entrap him they
go to see him and ask him : "To whom is it right to tell a secret?" "To
no one/' answers Mahosadha.
167. The four go to t~e king and repeat to him what has ·passed,
adding that surely the sage is a traitor, since he holds that not even the
king is to be told secrets. The king calls him and asks him to explain
before the four wise men ; he is displeased with his answer that a secret
should not be reported until it is no more a secret. Mahosadha knows he
has been trapped. Meanwhile, the king gives his sword to the four, ordering
them to kill him at the door in the morning.
168. Mahosadha, anxious, resolves to discover the secrets of his four
enemies. Every day they used to sit on a trough at the palace door, and
discuss their plans. The sage hides himself under the trough, and there
learns his intended murder and all the secrets of his enemies.
i69. in the morning, the four, armed with swords, are waiting for him
at the door; but he comes with a strong retinue, and their plan fails. He
is telling the king his enemies' secrets. The king, furious, wants to impale
them.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XXXIX.
166.-The four come to ask ( questions to 167.-The king asks (Mahosadha) concerning
Mahosadha to entrap him). secret:,. ·
168.-(Mahosadha) is under the trough. 169.-The (four) pandits look for Mahosadha.

So EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
170. But Mahosadha pleads _for them and gets them reinstated in their
respective positions. The sage, rehabititateq, is honoure<l by being m~de tQ
3jt on a seat as high as __ tbat. of the king.
171. Mahosadha's power is now paramount; he practically governs the
country. To be ready for any eventuality, he strongly fortifies the capitat
Then he sends men with presents to the 101 kings of India, bidding them to
take service at their courts and report on their plans and doings. He is
giving his instructions to his men, who are ~olding the presents.
172. Mahosadha had a very clever and wise parrot. He receives news
that SaJikhaplla, king of Ekabala, is assembling a large army; wherefore it is
not known. He sends his parrot to ascertain, and tells him to go all round
India for news. The parrot is on his right hand. The men are those who
brought the news from Ekabala.
, 73. The parrot goes and ascertains what is going on at Ekabala;
then he goes the round of the capitals in India. Thus he arrives at Uttara·
pai'iclila; there, the king, COlani-Brahmadatta, and his chaplain Kevatta are
planning the conquest of India. The parrot hears everything, comes back to
Mithit~, and, perching himself on the sage's shoulder, tells him all the news.
174. This plaque 1s missing.

PART II.] T ALAING. PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA . (PLATE XL.
170.- Mahosadha sets free the four persons. 171.- .Mahosadha sends presents (to the
101 kings).
172.- Mahosadha sends the .parrot. 173.- T;he parrot brings news.

EPIGRAPHIA BlRMANICA [ VOL. 11
1 75 . King Ve deha, a ware that his capital is being invested by C O\ani' s
vast army, is greatly troubled. The four cannot advise him ; so he calls
~ahosadh~ and asks hi10 how Mithila is to pe rid ()f so powerful an e~emy.
176. Ciilanl, thinking the city has no water, wants to cut its supply
from ~utside. To discour~ge him, the sage plants lilies at the top of
bamboo poles sixty cubits long; these poles' are camouflaged, and in the
morning sent to CulanI, who wonders, ahd knows he cannot . get the city
through thirst. On the left, a man, in a tank, is holding one of the bamboo
poles, the lily has blossomed at the upper extremity ; near the tc\nk, Maho~
sadh~ is issuing instructions ; behind him, two attendants,
177. Keva\ta, COlanI's chaplain, is well aware of Mahosadha's incom·
parable wit ; he tells his master all his efforts to take Mithill will be foiled;
but he proposes a stratagem. He, Keva\ta, will fight the " Battle of the
Law" with Mahosadha, who is young still and does not know one or two
things. Mahosadha is asked to come over to Culanl's camp to fight the
Battle of the · Law. He is coming out of Mithila in his car, .precede<l- by
warriors carrying axes and shields. · ·
1 7$.. The Ba~le of the Law consists in this, that he who first-willingly
or unwillingly-bows before the other, has lost the battle. By a stratagem
the sage makes Kevatta bow first, and presses him fo the ground. On the
terms agreed to; Culanr bas lost the battle, and, terrified, . flees . with his
vassals and army ~o Pai\clla.

TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XLI.
PART II. J
175.-Mahosadha is. asked by the king (how 176.-Mahosadha is planting the flower.
Mithila shall be delivered from its enemies).
177.-Mahosadha leaves the cit. 178.-:Mahose.dha fights the Battle of the Law.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANJCA [ VOL. II
179. One year has passed. Kevat~'s pride rankles at his affront at
the hands of Mahosadha. He plans to lure him and King Vedeha to Pafi
cala, and. there destroy them. He goes to Mithill, sees Vedeha. and
praises COlanJ's daughter's beauty. Vedeha agrees to go and fetch her
as his queen. Delighted, he sends Keva\~ to the sage so that the two
may be reconciled; but Mahosadha, shut up in his room, giyes order to
refuse him entrance. Mahosadha is on his bed ; on the left, Kevatta
coming in, is refused admittance by an attendant.
1 So. The four advise the king to go to Pai'iclla.; his marriage with the
princess will cement a lasting peace. He summons Mahosadha and asks him
his opinion. The sage strongly advises him not to go. The king becomes
angry ; Mahosadha, prudent, takes his leave and retunu home.
181. Mahosadba desires to know the true nature of Keva\ta's mission.
He sends his parrot to Pafklla, with orders to make friends with Ciilani's
minah bird, which knows all his secrets, and come back. The parrot is on
Mahosadha's lap; two attendants.
182. The parrot makes love to the minab; from her he learns that if
the sage and the king go to Paficala, they will be murdered. The parror
comes back to tell Mahosadha; the bird is alighting on the latter's
shoulder; four attendants.

PART 11.] TALAINC PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. l L TE XLII.
179- Keva\ta eomes and a~ks (for 180.- Thc king is ang,y with Maho~ dha.
- Mahosadha).
181.-Mahosadha instruct.5 his parrot. 182.- The parrot returns from the minah
bird.

86 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. ii
183. Mahosadha, knowing that King Vedeha is determined to go to
Pancala, evolves a whole plan by which not only shall Vedeha get the
Pancala princess, but also see the discomfiture of his enemy ·Culanl; he is
asking leave to proceed before the king ; in front of the king., Mahosadha
with, btbind him, three attendants.
184. He goes ahead of the king in order to arrange everything on the
way against the rapid and safe return of the king. He has reached Pafi·
cala, and is being received.
185. COlanl dissembles and receives Mahosadha well. They converse
together. The sage asks permission-in pursuance of his. plan-to build a
palace for King Vedeha. Permission is granted. Mahosadha, distinguishable
by his headdress, is near COlani's left hand; three attendants.
186. He hegins to work for the safety of Vedeha. He is making
tunnels ; he thinks the entrance to t.he small tunnel should be at the foot of
the stairs. He tells Culani his stairs ate bad, and, under the pretext of
repairing them, builds under them a strdng wooden platform ; under this will
be the entrance to the tunnel, invisible. On the left, the palate ; on the
right of the palace, the stairs. Behind Mahosadha .a master~carpenter to
whom he is explaining things.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (PLATE XLIII.
183.-Mahosadha tells (the king) that he 184.-(Mahosadha) enters the city of
is going (to Uttarapaficiila). Pancii.Ja.
,)
.)
.),
.J
185.-(Mahosadha) converses with king 186.-Mahosadha fixes stairs (firmly).
Culani.

88 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
187. He wants to build the palace not within the city, but outside, so
• that all his plans may come off to a nicety; but he must rouse r,o suspi
cion; so he asks the king permission to pull down the houses which may be
in the way ; he asks also to be allowed to prevent the owners to come and
annoy the king with complaints. All is granted. He seizes first the queen•
mother's dwelling. She complains i nobody listens. She goes to the sage
who is a little way off; he will not speak to her; a bystander offers his
services for the explanations. She has to pay a heavy bribe for her house
not to be pulled down. Near the tree, Mahosadha ; on the left, the queen•
mother; between them, the negotiator. The house behind the queen.
188. Then it is the turn of Kevatta's house, who, too, has to pay a
heavy bribe to preserve his home. On the left, Kevatta's house ; near it, a
woman offering the money in a casket ; the sage is lifting the cover and
looking at it; behind him, an attendant. In this way, from all parts of the
city, he gets an enormous sum of money, which will be useful in carrying
out his plans. And nobody dares complain.
189. He repairs to CO.l,mi's palace, and explains to him that the people
arc so very sorry to lose their homes that it will be impossible to build the
palace in the city, and therefore asks permission to build it outside. Permis•
sion is granted. On the left. CulanI; in front of him, Mahosadha, who
holds som~thing in each hand, which it is not easy to make out; the text,
moreover,. gives no hint as to what these things are.
190. He has already chosen the site outside the city ; by royal orders
-on a hint from the 1age-no citizen is allowed to go and see what is
goinc on. Then he begins to build a great tunnel which will be used for
the flight of Vedeha, one entrance of which was on the Ganges.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XLIV.
187,-(They) take the king's mother's house. 188.-(Mahos&dha) takes Kevatia's house.
189.-Mahosadha enteu the king's house. 190.-Mahosadha digs the tunnel.

90 EPiGR.APHI'A BIRMANICA [ VOL, U
191. Before leav~~ Mithila, Mahosadha had ordered three hundred ships
t~. b..e built ;.-~,~h~.s'$>wri~:bts -~re delivering-Jhe craft~, .one of wqic'1. is, ~epr~ ..
s~ted! to tlie sage.
a~~ all ~
.i92. But, - ~o.sts, su~picions mu~t ·: not_- be aroused.;. h~ is. givip,~
minute instructiogs ..' "to the shipwrights.where Jo ·hicle the ships' in-" a seclude~
but handy place.
193. Everything has now been completed against the flight and safe
return of the king of Mithila: the palace, the tunnels big and smal1 etc•
1
King Vedeha is nearing Pai\cala, and Mahosadha goes to meet him. In
front is Mahosadha ; on the elephan~ Vedeha. The mahout has been left outi
,!:"9~ V;d~h~ taJc#s -poss~ssion of thj ®~ pa!ac~.. By.. a .trick,. Maho!~c.f!ia:
;;-p~~e
1
h~ :~ u~ .~~I's.~~niot_her-,~l ii~~uee~~·s1l a~d;,~aught~. ~~to. a _s~fe
thfouglt_ the. JunneJ. Vedehi waits for.. t~ .pnnces·s atl{l, • 1mpahent,- loolc~'4it
. the· wind,ow. '·Jt~ · s ees the -~osts of C'u\ani's :_;lliy, ~ be"co~es f~ightened -~l
the · rJ} cap ~~~
asks, four:. wiseacres ~advice; :·t~.ey g~ve.' none, . T}ieh~ 'fl~\s~
. Mahosadlia, who- answers there is n... ~ o tfiing . to:I _f ~• r. _j \1~• hQsadha j s t: • h ~ . .... fitst;:.
of the two below ; the others are the · wise men. ·

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XLV.
191.- The ship, right make over the ships 192.- Mahosadha se~ds (the boats) out of
to Maho adha. the way.
193.-Mahosadha goes out to meet the king 194.- The king (\ edeha) ask Maho adha.
(Vedeha).

92 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. ii
195- To convince the king, he sho\Vs him and the ministers the means
of escape: the great tunnel with all its magnificence. First Mahosadha,
then Vedeha, and last a minister.
196. They come to the place where Co)anra family are kept·; when
they see Vedeha they shriek in fear. CO]anl hears the shriek, is puzzled,
hut keeps his own counsel in very shame. Mahosadha then and there
marries the Pai\eala princess to Vedeha. Then they leave the tunnel by
the entrance near the Gang~.· They are gett ing out : first the king, then
Mahosadha, and last a minister.
197. The ships are_ ready neat the entrance i Vedeha and COlam s
family embark. Mahosadha,. standing on the shore, gives final advice to
Vedeha; himself must stay behind to bring safely the king's army back to
Mithill. In the boat, from the left: Cu\anl's· consort, Vedeha, the Paftcal.,
princess, and her brother. There should be five persons, for the queen
mother also went, but she is not mentioned in the text, 11 being an old
woman," and so only -four are represented.
1g8. Vedeha starts for Mithilll. At dawn COlanl utters dreadful threats
to awe Vedeha. But Mahosadha calmly. shows himself to him and, in the
course of the conversation which ensues, tells him that his-COlanl's-plans
have all been foiled. Colan! is on the elephant

.PARl II.) T ALAI NG PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA . (PLATE A~VI.
195.-(He) shows the tunnel to Icing Vedeha. 196.- (Vedeha) comes out from the tunnel.
i97.-(Mahosadha) instructs king Vedeha. 198.-(Mahosadha) converses with (king)
Culani.

94 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANJCA [ VOL. ir
199·~- Culani orders the slaughter o{ Mahosad~l but. . the latter informs
him that ..h .is family. ,vi)) ·b·e made to ."suffer for· any harm done to him, ·for
they are in Vedeha's hands; fa~ away. Ciilant is dumbfciunded,;:· M; hosadha
' shows him .t_he way the beautiful quee~ is gone~ ~nd in"· so doing rev~als the
existence of the t-urinel.
200. The sage assures -the king that no harm will befall his family if
he, Mahosadha, returns safely to Mithila. He then shows the tunnel to
Culani; from the left: Ciilani, recognizable by his headdress, Mahosadha,
one of the vassal kings, a warrior with mac~ and shield.
201. As they come out, Mahosadha quickly seizes a sword he has
hidden in the sand the day before, leaps eighteen cubits in the air, seizes
the king, brandishes his sword and asks-" Who is the master of all the
k·ingdoms of 'Jndia_ji1 ~ 1 ::V.ou, Sir," S<\YS, ~~e J ing_: J An?.. th~ _two _~tti~e-_yp
a sh1cere friendship. _On the fright, the tunnel·do~f ;,. the sage··is holding .the
king's left hand. . Golanr has suddenly : grown a beard; he is without it in
the other plaques;
irn ..
The .sage opens the door of the tunnel, which he had closed
1
and• ,th~ IPI vassal ~ings, who had aCGompanied him, -come 9Ut~ and thatjk
him ·for ~aving :-their lives. He answers he saved them once already whe~
Cii\ani --wanted .to poison them. They- forgjv.e . Ciilani and ·.offer presents to
Mahosadha. Four -of ·the 'kings are -holding presents in their hands.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (PLATE XLV(I.
199.-(Mahosadha) shows (Cii~ani.) the way
(his) queen is gone .. 200.- (King) CiilanI looks at the tunnel.
201'.-.'.(Mahosadha) measures strength
202.-The hundred king·s offer ornaments
with the king.
( to Mahosadha).

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. I(
203. CO\anI desires to retain the services of so eminent a man. and
offei:s him honours and wealth; but Mahosadha declines. Colanl on his
throne; an aitend~nt offers presents to the sage in a casket.
~04. Mabosad.ha takes leave of. COlanl, who bids him an affectionate
farewell. On the left, the white umbrella; two attendants holding presents,
which seem to be pieces of fine cloth. The king is embracing Mahosadha.
He is again given a beard in this plaque.
205. He arrives at Mithill, where he is received amid great rejoicings.
He sends back to Cillanl his mother, wife and son. The two queens are
below and the son near them. In front are presents in. caskets.
1io6. The daughter of Colanl bears Vedeha a son; when he is ten years
go
V edeha dies~ Mahosadha makes him king, and then asks him leave to·
an'd visit COlanf. The young prince is under the white umbrella; a brahman
is holding a conch full of the coronation water; on the right, Mahosadha.

PART II.] TALAING PL.,.QUES ON THE ANANDA. [ PLA.T E XL V 111.
203.--The king invites Mahosadha 204.-Mahosadha returns to the cih'
(to stay at hi:, court). (of Mithila). · ·
205.- Mahosaclha sends hack ( C's family). 206.-Accession of the son of king Vedeha.

98 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 11
207. Ciilanl receives him with great honours. The queen, however,
dislik~~ him, and . sets her ladies to watch. him in the -hope of g~tting him
trapped.· · A female ascetic regularly takes her meals· .a t the palace. One
his
day she meets Mahosadha and, to test cleverness, she asks him by
gestures whether he is not going to become an ascetic ? She places her
hand on her head, showing him the peculiar co~ of ascetics. He
answers by placing his hand on his stomach, meaning : "No·: because I
have a large family to support.'' Mahosadha. on the right, has also a hand
on h_is. head;. this is a mistake, but h~s been made probably for the sake of
sy~_ritetry.
208. The queen's ladies have seen all this, and report to the king that
Mahosadha is plotting against his life with an ascetic. The king calls him ;
explanations take place. The king offers him the post of generalissimo.
The sage thinks it is a trap; he brings some presents to the ascetic and
asks her to ascertain the king's intentions. He learns that the king is
indeed very fond of him. On the right, the ascetic ; Mahosadha is
giving her presents.
209. Persons who have .lost in a case 1 decided by Mahosadha salute
him respectfully; on the right; ·two losers; Mahosadha with, behind him, two
of his companions.
210. Candakumara is judging impartially the case which the -high
judge Kha'1~ahala has wilfully decided wrongly. The prince in the court of
justice; before him, the two suitors.
1 See nplaution of the Talaing legetld.

PARTII.I TALAINC PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XLIX
207.-A female ascetic asks Mahosadha ' 208.-Mahosadha asks the female asc~tic
(by gestures, why he does not become (to find out the king's mind).
an ascetic).
209.-The persons who have lost the 210.-Candakumara is deciding the case.
case salute (Mahosadha) reverentially.

JOO EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. If
211. The king learns of his son's success at law, and appoints him
chief judge. Kha.r;i(lahlla, deeply offended, swears he will be revenged.
Prince Candakumlra, in the. hall of justice, is dispensing justice. In front of
him, four 1uitor1.
212. The occasion for KhaJJ.4ahala's revenge comes quickly. The king
sees in a dream the Tlvatirhsa heaven, and wishes to go there. ~hal)4ahila
tells him the only way to go to heaven is by sacrifice: he must immolate
his queens and his children. The king makes known the sacrifice to the
citizens by proclamation. He first calls Candakumara and his four brothers
to make known to them his will. The king on his throne; Candakumara,
the first in the top row, is arguing with his father.
213. Then CandakumJra's sisters and the queens are brought in. the
prince understands that he alone is the object of Kha\lqahala's hatred. He
is entreating the king to spare the others' lives, but in vain. Behind the
prince, one of his brothers.
214. Candakumlra, failing to mollify his father, sends his wives to gd
and implore him. The wives are represented by one only, on the left.

PART 11.J TALAING PLAQUES ON )THE ANAN.OA. [PLATE L.
211.-The king causes him to try (cases)
(The king appoints Candakumara a judge). 212.- They bring Candakuma ra ( to the king).
213.-Candakum~ra entreats (his father). 214.-Can<lakumara bids (his wives to
implore the king).

102 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANlCA [ VOL, II
215. All supplications are unavailing ; owing to Khal)4ahA1a's influence
Candakumlira_ is taken to. the sacrificial pjt .~tl1 the oth'er victims.' He, !.s
placed near the pit, his head-~~ erit forward; Khai;tQaha1~ -r~ises the sword to
strike; . behind the brahman 1s·· Candakum~ra1s wife. Before the .brahman,
. .. ..
~
the sacrificial fire.
i
216. But at that momeht, the prihc~~s wife makes a soiemn act ·oi
asseveration. Immediately, Sakka comes down from heaven, brandishing a
blazing mass of iron. The king flees; the victims are set free, · and the
people kill Kha1.1c;lah1la. Candakumara is seated; before him the sacrificial
fire is still burning. Khal)Qahala has been thrown on the ground and the
people are killing him with sticks.
~ t;. the old king is banished, ·and Candakumara made king in his
stead. He is seated under the white umbrella ; a brahman is about to pour
the coronation water from a conch; on the left, two more brahmans.
2 18. After a good reign and a pious life Candakumara ascends to
heaven.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (PLATE LI.
21S.-Candakumara is near the sacrificial pit.
216.- The people rush at Khat)rJahala (to
kill him).
217.-Accession of Candakumara. 218.- Candakumiira a cend5 to heaven.

EPIGRAPH IA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
219. A prince of Benares is banished to the jungle. He meets with a
1cing
Nigl, ·or· snake fairy ; he has two childreri. After a time he becomes
and his daughter is married to the king o{ the Nigas. The Bodhisitfy~ is
coming down from heaven to be conceived· in the womb of the N~a king's
queen.
220. The Bodhisattva is born. The midwife is holding the child. Near
the bed are two fire-pans (see No. 116).
221. At the age of discretion, BhOridatta reeeives a kingdom from his
father Dhatarattha. He is being anointed king; on the left, a brabman
with the coronation water in a conch 1 ; on the right, a woman holding a
small vase with perfumes,
2112. This plaque is missing.
2 23. Bhoridatta used to go to the T~vatirflsa heaven to wait upon
Sakka. One day a difficult question arose which none of the gods could
answer. But the Bodhisattva answered it. He is on the right, on a high
seat, because he alone could answer, and was therefore considered as the
master. Sakka, standing in the air-represented by scrolls at his feet-is
offering him divine flowers and fruits, which ·he is holding in his hands.
Below, two gods listening to the Bodhisattva. His name before was II Datta";
but on this occasion, on account of his great wisdom, be is given the name
of " Bhilridatta " by Sakka. The naga-head over the Bodhisattva indicates
he is a naga.
J No oil was used in the ancient coronation ceremoniet In Burma.

PART II.] TALAINC PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. I PLATE. LII.
219.-Conception. of Bhuridatta. 220.-Birth of Bhuridatta.
221.-Accession of Bhuridatta. 223.~Bhiirid~tta ar:iswers Indra's question.

EPIGRAPHlA BIRM-ANJCA
[ VOL. 11
u4. Having seen the glories of Tavafimsa, Bhuridatta is disgusted with
his birth as a naga, anJ resolves to gain heaven by the observance of fast
and· of the _precepts (stlas). _ He is asking from his father permission to
observe the silas. The king and the queen are seated, he is standing in
front of them. Th~ 1nake over the head of ~ figure always shows that
figure is a nlga.1
iu5. They allow him to practise the sllas in the garden. But young
~gls attend on him, playing inst~ments and dancing; and thi~ dist~rbs
him.,. A na.gI is playing On an: instrument; a'oother is dancing; a. defect in
the ttaze,, 1~ver ~her right shoulder, m~ke$ it ·appear. as if.'-~he had tw<J heads,
2!36. Bhnri<latta wants to get rid of the female attendants. He resolves
to go to the world of men, on an ant•hill, near the river Jumna. He does
not tell his parents of his intentions ; but he instructs his wife to send the
attendants every day a,t dawn to ~ccompany him ba~k to the Niga world,
'J.'J7. A brahman hunter from Benares arrives with his son near the
spot where Bhuridatta is keepi.ng the silas. He hears the niga maidens sing
and dance ; he goes to .see ; the maidens flee. The Bodhisattva, who has
assumed a divine form, is Jeff alone. To avoid telling a lie, he tells the
brahman he s a naga. Bhilridatta seated r:iear a tree; the brabman and his
son Somadatta.
' The respec:tin potition of these two plaqGeS is ~ OIi the Anand&.

PART Il.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE Lill.
'?24.-(Bhiiridatta) asks his father leave to 225.-Bhiiridatta observes the silas ,in the
observe the s,tas. garden.
'226.-Bhuridatta instructs his wife. 227.-Bhuridatta con.verses with the brahm,m.

108 EPIGRAPHIA BJRMANICA [ VOL. fl
228. However, to prevent the hunter, who has not a prepossess1ng
appearance, from doing him any harm, as, for instance,. selling . him to-a
snak~-charmer, he invites them to come to the Ntga ·world. The Bodhisattva
is leading them to his abode.
229. To induce them to remain m the Niga world, he confers upon
them regal splendours and overwhelms them with good things. Bhoridatta,
standing, is conversing with the two brahmans.
~30. Bharidatta goes regularly to the Jumna to observe the sI1as.
After a time, the hunter gets tired and wants to go back. BhOridatta
offers him an all-wish-granting gem. The brahman, who wants to become
an ascetic, refuses it. Now, Alamb~yana, another brahman, knows a spell
powerful against snakes. Reciting the spell, he comes to the spot where
Bhuridatta is; all the n~gas flee in terror, and leave behind the gem they
had brought with them.
2:3 r, The hunter, in exchange for the gem, pomts out· the Bod.hisattva
to the snake-charmer. Bhuridatta, in snake-form, is coiled on the· ant-hill;
the·· snake-charmer and, behind him, the h·unter.

PART II,] TALAING PLAQU~S ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LIV.
228.-Bhiiridatta enters the naga world. 229.-(Bhiiridatta) confers regal glory on
the Brahman.
230.-Bhiiridatta gives the jewel to the 231.-Alambayana sees Bhiirii.datta.
br~hman.

ire, EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
-232. The Bodhisattva makes up his mind to suffer patiently, without
any resistance, whatever happens. Alamblyana recites the spell. puDs
BhOridatta by the tail, spreads him on t~e gr-0und· and breaks his bones.
t3.;3- !,h~n ·.··~he-_1,uts--.him in a bas~et,. ~d goes from plac~. . f~ p~ce,
making Bhoridatta dance and 'play tricks< He thus_m akes a goo.d,:deal ·of
money. On the left) viTiagers 'looking ··on~ . The -Bodhisattva is dancing. :, o·n
his head, the crest. which is supposed to contain the jewel i the jewel on a
snake's head is a superstition common to many nations.
234. Alamblyana wants more money, and goes to t3enares to show his
snake to the king. Meanwhile, Bhiiridatta's family have become aware of
his disappearance. · One of his brothers, in the guise of an ascetic, goes in
search of him, with his sister, in the form of a small frog, in his hair.
They arrive at the palace as Bhoridatta is dancing; on recognizing his
brother, he places his head at his feet and weeps. On the left, the king ; ·
in the middle. Bhilridatta's brother, near whose left foot is the n~'s head;
on the right, Alamblyana.
235. The Bodhiiattva's brother challenges Aiamblyana to daie mak~
his
snake fight the small frog. The fight takes place; the small frog drops
a violent poison; Alamblyana becomes a leper; Bhuridatta is free and
assumes the human form. On the left, the king; the figure on the right is
probably Bhtlridatta, and that in the middle his brother.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LV.
i
232.-Alambayana pulls Bhiiridatta (by 233.-Atambayana makes Bhiiridatta dance.
the tails).
234.-Alambayana carrying (the snalce) 235.-Bbiir,idatta assumes human form.
arrives (in) the king's _(presence).

112 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
236. The king is the brother of Bhuridatta's mother. After some
explanations, the king recognizes them. The upper part of the king's body
bas broken, off, and an attempt at restoration been made. Bhuridatta is bent
forward on his lap ; the king has his left arm round his neck. Behind, the
Bodhisattva's brother. Their sister has been left out for Jack of room. The
lotus above the Bodhisattva has flaked off.
~37. Then, afte~ some time, Bhilridatta (on the leh), his brother and
his sister, return to the Nlga world.
238. Arrived at the Nlga world, Bhuridatta, tired and sick, takes to hi1
bed ; nlgas come to visit him.
239- When he is well again, he goes to visit his grandfather the king,
who now lives the ascetic life; his brothers and parents follow afterwards.
On the left, the king-ascetic; in 'front of him, Bhilridatta, with another
naga behind.

PART Tl.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATF. LVI.
236.-The king recognizes Bhiiridatta. 237,_.Bhiir,idatia returns to the naga world.
238.-Bhuridatta arrives at the naga world. 239.-Bhiiridatta converses with the hermit.

EPIGRAPHIA BlRMANICA [ VOL, II
40. The king of Videha is an heretic ; his daughter tries to make him
2
giYe. up his false beliefs. The hermit Nirada, who is the Bodhisattva, comes
through the air to help l)er. .On the left, the throne and white. umbrella;
the king is kneeling oh . the ground and listens to Ntrada's teaching ; tho
legs of N..-ac:la are hidden by a cloud, for he stands in the aif, -
j41. H~ving converted the king, Narac!a g~s up to the B~hm~
world. Bebi~d the king is his <!aughter
1
!I.JI, Four friendly kings assemble to observe the sabbath ; among
them are Dbanafljaya, king of the Kurus, a great gambler, and Varuiµ,
king of the Nagas. The wise Vidhura, the Bodhisattva, is the minister of
Dhanafijaya. Those four kings have a discussion as to who is the most
virtuous. They cannot agree. Vidhura is called and answers their question :
they are all four virttious alike. On the ri~ht, Vidhura.
!143· The queen of Varu\l,a is encuiit,; she wants to eat Vidhura's
heart; if she does not get it, she will die. Varu\lll does not know what to
do; but his daughter makes it known she :wilt be the wife of any one who
brings· it. Pul)\l,aka, a Yakkha chi~f, hears of it; he_p lays . with Ohanailjaya
a game at dice, of which Vidhur.a is the stake, and he wins. The king
is sorry. " He is only a slave," says Pul}J}aka. -" If he says so, I may
give him up," says the king. They go and ask Vidhura what he is.
Vidhura is ·kneeling i Put;11)aka is on the left, the king in -the middle.

PART II.] TALAINC PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LVII.
240.-The hermit Narada converses with 241.-The hermit Narada goes (back) to
the king. the Brahma world.
242.-Vidhura answers the question of the 243.-The king and Pury~1aka the Yakkha
(four) kings. ask (Vidhura).

EPJGRAPHiA BIRMJ\NICA
[ VOL. II
244. Vidhura answers he is no kinsman, but a slave, being minister to
the king. The king, angry, makes him over to Puwaka, and goes away.
On the left, the king, recognizable by his headdress ; in the middle, the
yakkha PwwaJca; on the high seat (he was in the hall of justice), the
Bodhisattva.
245. But before he is taken away, the king desires to hear him preach
for the last time. Vidhura, on the seat, is explaining the Law to the king
and queen.
246. Vidhura wants to wind up his affairs, and asks Pu:,waka to take
him away only after three days. Puiwaka agrees, and the Bodhisattva invit~s
him to come and st~y in his house. The house on the left, on the right
Puvvaka.
247. Vidhura having invited Puiw,aka makes him comfortable in his
house, and gives him five hundred female attendants. Puwaka is now the
guest of Vidhura, so that the latter sits on the lower seat ; in the middle, a
female attendant.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LVIII.
244.-The king hands over Vidhura. 245.- (Vidhura) explains the Law to the king.
246.-Vidhura takes Pur:i'.layakkha 247.-Vidhura (having) called Pul)l).ayakkha
and goes back (to his home). (to his home, settles him comfortably).

i 18 EPlGRAPHIA BlRMANICA [ VOL. U
248. He then instructs his family in the Law. Afterwards he explains
to the courtiers how to obtain honours at the cou~. Two courtiers listening
in front of him.
~49. · Having thus settled his affairs and taken leave of the king
Vi dhura informs the yakkha he is ready to go with him.
~50. PUJ;i~ka is eager to get the heart of Vidhura in order to win the
hand of the fair Naga maiden. He mounts his horse, which is endowed
with reason and can fly ; he bids Vidhura to take hold of his tail, and,
springing up in the air, takes his flight over the HimAlayas. Under the
horse are represented the peaks of the Himalayas.
251. Vidhura, in the course of a conversation on the Himalayan peaks,
tells Pu:tu,taka there must be a mistake in all this, that he must have
misinterpreted what is really needed by the Naga king and his daughter.1
1 This plaque on the Ananda is in the wrong place; see the text, No. 251.

PART 11.] TALAINC PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LIX.
248.-He expounds the rules for courtiers to 249.-Vidhttra tells (Pui:ir:iayakkha) he is
obtain honours at the court. ready to go (with him).
250.-Pu"Myakkha carries away Vidhura. 251.-Vidhura is conversing ( with the Yakkha).

120 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
252. But Pu~nµka reflects that, instead of kiJling him with his own
hands, it would be preferable to make him die of fright. It is what he sets
about to do. First, he assumes the form of a huge lion ready tQ._-cjevolJr
hi,n ; ~t Vidhura remains unmoved.
253. He then takes the shape of a furious elephant, ready to gore him
with his tusks i but Vidbura is not frightened.
254. He next assumes the appearance of an enormous snake, and coils
himself round him ; but in vain.
255. Fright is of no avail; so he determines to kill him with his own
hands. He seizes him by the feet and holds him head downwards. Pm;uµka
is in the air, represented by scrolls ; under them, the Himalayan peaks.

PART II.} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLJ.T£ l.X •
252.-Purgiaka (tries to) frighten Vidhura. 253.-Pu1;u.1aka creates an elephant.
"f
~:54.-Pm:11:i aka tests ( the steadfastness 255.-Pur:i,:,aka turns (Vidhttra) upside down
Vidhura by means of a snake).
(and flings him into the sky).

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[ VOL. II
256. He then whirls him about and throws him into space. No! 25i
(g.11.) should come after this plaque.
257. All is in vain; he cannot kill him, either by fright or by violence.
He sets him on his feet, and ~s~s him to expouncl tqe L~w to him,
258. And Vidhura, nothing loath, unfolds unto him the four rules of a
good man. Pui;tl}aka repents and resolves to set him free. The yakkha is
listening, kneeling.
I
259. Vidhura requests the yakkha to take him to the N~ga world, and
this Pu~aka does at once. On the seat, Varui:ia, the Naga king, then
nu:r;u,:iaka~ and on the right Vidhura. A long conversation ensues, in which
everything becomes clear.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. LPLATE LXI.
256.--Pur.ir.i.aka whirls (Vidhura) round. 257.-Pur.iI;Jaka asks (Vidhura to teach him
the laws of good men).
258.-Vidhura preaches the law (to Pur.ir.iaka). 259.-Puz:iz:iaka conveys (Vidhura) to the
Naga (country).

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
16o. The N1ga king is delighted and Vidhura preaches the Law to him.
The Bodhisattva is on the seat; the king before him and, behind, the court.
161. 'the king, impressed by Vidhura's wisdom, takes him by the hand
and conducts ~ into his apartments to present him to the Nlga queen ,
Vimaa. The queen is seated on a dais•
.26.1. The Bodhisattva preaches the Law also to Queen Vimall, who bows
down to him reverentially. PUJ}\laka and the Nlga princess are married ;
Puvi,aka, grateful, gives a magnificent jewel to Vidhura, takes him back to
the capital of the Kurus, and sets him down at the door of the hall of
truth. On the right, the hall ; Vidhura in the act of entering ; Pu\lPka is
going back to his own abode.
263. Vidhura is received with great pomp by the king, the court and
the citizens. The Bodhisattva is offering the king the jewel given him by
the yakkha.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXII.
260.-(Vidhura) preaches the Law to the 261.:--The Naga king introduces (Vidhura)
Naga king. · in his house.
252.-Pul')Qaka carries (Vidhura) up (to the 263.-Vidhura zjves the jewel (to the king).
world of men).

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. Ii
~64. After this great reception, the sage go~s home. He is followed
by some one, probably his wife.
265. Then the queens, the princes and the people bring him abundance
of food and drink. At his death he is reborn in heaven.
266. King Sanjaya reigns at Jetuttara, the capital of the kingdom of
Sivi. His chief queen's name is Phusati. Phusati, in her former existence
in Tavatimsa, had been given, on her death-bed, ten boons by Sakka. Sakka
perceives that nine of the boons have been granted; there remains the last:
that of a good son. He asks the Bodhisattva, then in the Tavatimsa, to be
reborn in her womb; he acquiesces and is conceived.
267. As the queen one day was crossing the Merchants' quarter, she felt
her time had come; a lying-in chamber was hastily improvised, and there
the Bodhisattva was born. As soon as he was born,. he put out his hand;
asking: 11 Mother, is there anything for me to give in alms?" She placed
in his hand a purse of a thousand coins. The mother is on the bed; near it
the usual pan of fire. It will be seen the scene is not faithful to the text,
the queen should be placing the purse in his ha~d ; instead, it is handed
over by a palace lady. The child is on the right, standing, and can be
made out by the small t~p-knot on his head, which is worn by most
children in Burma.

PART 11.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (PLATE LXIII.
264.-(Vidhura) returns home. 265.-Vidhura is at home (receiving gifts).
266.-Conception · of Vessantara. 267.-(Vessantara) asks for gold to give alms.

128 EPJGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
268. On his naming day,. they give him the name of Vc ssantara,
because he was born while crossinr (tara) the Merchants' (vessa) quarter.
On the dais,. the king holding the baby, and near him, the queen. On the
left, two brahman soothsayers.
26g. The king gives him sixty-four nunes, whom he chooses ,rith die
greatest care. Two nurses; the king holding the child.
270. King Safijaya has a necklace made worth a lakh and gives it to
his son. The king, on the left, is giving the necklace to Vessa:nta ra, who is
on the lap of the queen.
271. The boy-he is five-always ready to make gifts, gives the neck
lace to his nurses ; the boy is on his mother's lap.

f
PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. PLATE LXIV.
268.-They give him the name Vessantara. 269.-The father gives nnrses to Vessantara.
270.-The king gives (Ve.ssantara) an 271.-The wise (in which Vessantara) gave
ornament. the ornaments (to his nurses).

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 11
272. Thus he gave away nine necklaces. Then, when eight years of
age, seated on his bed, he reflects al) these gifts are of no great value i he
should like to give bis own ftesh, heart, etc.
273. At sixteen, he is married to the beautiful Maddi, and entrusted
with- the . government of the kingdom. He has two children : a son, called
Jali, and a daughter namerl Kanhajina. Halls to give alms are built in the
city ; he visits theln every month on the white elephant. This elephant had
been born on the same day as himself, and was endowed with magical
powers, such as lo cause rain, etc. On the left, an alms-hall
274- He is now returning home from one of his monthly VJSlts. In
the previous plaque there is no mahout, but an umbrella-~er, on the
elephant; in this plaque it is just the reverse.
275. There is no rain in the country of Kaliiaga, and the king sends
J
br:ihman mendicants to etuttara to beg the white elephant-who can cause
rain-from Vessantara. The brahmans, on a small eminence, ask Vessantara
for the white elephant, as he is passing by.

P~RT II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXV.
272.-Representing -(Vessantara) thinking of 273.-Vessantara looks at the alms-halls.
(more exacting) almsgiving.
274.-Ve-santara returns home. 275.-The brahmans ask for the elephant.

132 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. Ii
276. Vcssantara, overjoyed at the requtst, imrnediate)y gets down from
the white elephant. A ladder against the side of the elephant; in front,
kneeling, one of the brahmans.
277. He gives the white elephant to the brahmans, one of whom is
represented on the ieft. Vessantara hol'ds the elephant's trunk with his left
hand, and, from a vase in his right hand, pours water on the ground, in
ratification of his gift.
278. The brahmans then get up on the back of the elephant, and
Vessantara, rejoiced at his mu"'i.ficeht gift, assists at their departure.
279. But the people ~l Jetuttara have heard of the gift, and are
furious. They go to K iog S~i\ja ya and tell him he- must banish his son
to the Vindhya Mountain:,. The weak-minded kini agrees, and he sends an
agent to apprize Vessantara t,f the turn of affairs. Th~ agent, kneeling,
informs Vessantara.

PART 11.] T ALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA . [PLATE LXVI.
276.- Vessantara gets down from the elephant. 277.-(Vessantara) gives away the white
elephant.
278.-Vessa.ntara is pleased wi,h his gift. 279.-The agent comes and informs
(Vessantara of what is happening).

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
28o. Vessantara bows to the will of the people ; but before going into
exile, he wishes to give alms on a very large scale. He is arranging with
two officials the details of the great offering.
28 1. He goes to his wife Maddi and breaks to her the news. He
cbdeavours to persuade her not to accompany him, but to stay back ; but
s e refuses to be left behind. Maddi is on the left.
282. His mother, Queen Phusatl, anxious, goes to her son's apart
ments; arrived at the door she hears their discussion and learns their
resolves ; she then enters and consoles them. On the left, Queen Phusatl
near the door.
283. Meanwhile, the preparations for the great offering have been going
on, and officials come to tell him everything is ready.

PART II.] TALAINC P..LAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXVII.
280.-Showing ( essantara) arranging for 281.-Vessantara and Maddi converse.
the great offering._
282.-Queen -(Phusatl) comes to see 283.-An official comes to inform ( essantara
(Vessantara). that the Great Offering is ready).

EPJGRAPHIA BlRMANICA [ VOL. II
284. On hearing this, Vessantara goes into the city on an elephant and
~ives gifts of gold. A.n official is in the act of giving gold to a poor man,
285. When everything is over, Vessantara, accompanied by his wife and
children, goes to visit his father. Vessantara, then J~li, his son, and near
the boy Maddi carrying Ka1.1hajina on her _hip.
286. Ves~antara and Maddi respectfully take leave of King Safijaya,
.after informing him of ·their resolve to go to the Vindhyas ·wi'th their .two
children.
287. On leaving the king, they go to Queen Phusati to take leave;
she tries to keep back Maddi and the children, but in vain.

!'ART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXV1II.
284.- ·essantara gives gold in .alms. 285.-\'essantara goes to see his father.
286.- Vessantara comes and attends respect 28i.-He comes to his mother.
fully on his father.

'
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, II
288. Now, King Sat'\jaya tries also to keep back Maddi and the
children, but is no more successful than his wife. The children are between
Sai'ijaya and Maddi; Vessantar~ is Qn tl-\e right.
289. The entreaties of both Safijaya and Phusatr having been in vain,
Ve~santara turns to depart. The female behind the Bodhis~ttva is probably
Maddi taking final leave of Sanjaya.
290, A splendid carriage, drawn by four horses, is brought round the
palace-gate. Below, on th tight, the carriage ; one horse only is visible ;
behind the carriage,~·Sanjaya and PhusatI ; above, from the l~ft. Vess~ntara,
MaddI, Jali and Kal)hajina.
291. Then Maddi, bidaing adieu to her parents-in-law, mounts first the
carriage with the two children, On he dais, near the carriage, Vessantara ;
in front of him, his father, then PbusatI.

PART II.] TALAINC PLAQ~ES ON THE ANAN A f PLATF. LXIX.
288.-(The old king) converses with • Iaddi. 289.-Ye antara turns to depart.
290.-They bring a carriage. 291.-Maddi, with the children, mounts (the
carriage) before (Vessantara).

EPIGRAPHlA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
292. Vessantara starts on his journey to the Vindhya Mountains. He
is in front, carrying J~li ; Maddi holds her little daughter ; seated below
are Vessantara's parents.
293. Vessantara exhorts the people to be steadfast in alms-giving and
good works. The man on the left represents the people.
~9+ As he is going on his way, thoughtful Phusatl sends him twd
carts laden with precious things for distribution. Part of the two carts are
seen laden with ornaments and precious things. The head of Jlli, on
Vessa.ntara's lap, is broken off.
295. Forthwith the Bodhisattva distributes the ornaments.

PART IL] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXX.
292.- essantara goes away ( o the 293.-He addresses (or admonishes) the
Vindhyas). crowd while going.
295.-Vessantara gives the ornaments.
294.- (\ essantara' ) mother sends (him)
t\\'O cart (filled with ornaments).

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. Ii
296. Then, all the ornaments being given he goes on with the
distribution of the precious things.
297. Having nothing more to give, he proceeds on and gets out of the
city ; but he desires to see it once more. The ground under the carriage
turns round to allow him to do so. On the left, the city. The makara
ornamenting the fore-part of the carriage may be seen frequently, slightly
stylized, at the extremity of cart-poles even now.
29~. Having feasted I i5 eyes, he drives on again towards the Vindhyas ;
he asks Maddi to see wbelher me11dicants are coming from behind. Vessan
tara is turned towards Maddi, making his request ; behind, two mendicants,
kneeling.
299. Maddi calls the beggars, who come running.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXXI.
296.- essantara gives in alms the precious 297.-Vessantara looks back at the city.
things.
298.-\ essantara drives on again. 299.-The mendicants run towards the king.

EPIGRAPHIA BIR.MANICA [ VOL, II
300. On coming up with the carriage, the beggars ask for the four
horses, and the Bodhisattva immediately gives them. The beggars are now
before the carriage ; the horses are unyoked.
301. The exiles were now stranded on the road ; but four gods trans
form themselves into red deer and draw the carriage. As usual, on] y one
of the deer is visible.
302. But now, another brahman beggar comes along begging for the
carriage, which is immediately made over to him. The deer have dis•
appf»ared ; Vessantara, holding a vase in his right hand, is pouring water to
ratify his gift.
303. And now they have to go on foot, Vessantara carrying J~ti and
Maddi carrying Ka~ha jina, on their hips, in the typical oriental fashion.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXXI I.
300.- Vessantara gives the horses in alms. 301.-The red deer drawing the chariot.
302.- He gives a way the ,ha riot. 303.-Vessan.tara enters the fore~.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
304- But they do not know the way ; so they stop every traveller they
meet and ask the way to the Vindhyas.
305. The children are longing for the fruits they see on the trees ; the
branches bend down of their own accord. Ve ssantara is plucking fruits.
3o6. In due course, they arrive at the Suva1:1"9agiri or Golden Mountain,
The mountain is represented on the left.
307. And going on their way, thev reach the river called Kontimara.
The banks of the rivtr are represented by the two curved lines on the left.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXXIII.
304.-They ask the way. 305.-They pluck and give the fruits (to the
children).
306.-They arrive at the Suvar.it;iagin 307.- (They arrive at) the Kontimiira River.
Mountain.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 11
308. They walk five league• more and come to the Araftjara Mountain.
The mountain is pictured on the left.
309. Five leagues bring them to the brahmin village of Dunnivinha, dn
the left.
310. Ten leagues further still, they reach Vessantara's uncle', oaty.
31 1. They do not enter the city, but stop at a rest-house outside it.
The dutiful Maddi wipes the dust from her husband's feel.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXXIV·
308.-They come to the Arailjara Mount.
309.-(They come to) the brahmin village.
310.-(They arrive at Ye amara' ) uncle's 311.-They stay in a rest-house
city. (near the city).

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
3 r 2. Maddi, intending to make the arrival of Vessantara known, stands
outside the rest-house.
313. The women of Ceta-Vessantara;s uncle's city-flock round her.
Maddi tells them of the fatigue of the journey. In front of Maddi, one of
the women, and behind her Vessantara and the children.
+
31 His relations come to see him ; he declines entering the city i
they then bring everything necessary to make the exiles comfortable, and
surrounding the rest-house keep watch over it. On the left is one of the
relations with a sword.
315. His uncle and the princes ai'e conversing with them; they try to
induce· him not to proceed, but in vain. On the left, Vessantara's uncle.
316. One day and one night they stayed ; early in the morning they
start again ; the princes accompany them and, at the entrance to the forest,
show them the way. On the left, a prince indicating the way with his
index.
317. So that no harm tnay befall the exiles, the pnnces send atong
~ith them a skilful woodman; in due course they arrive at the Gandhamadana
Mountain, which is seen on the left.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUESION THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXXV.
313.-Maddi converses {with the woman
312.-Maddi stands outside the rest-house. of Ceta).
31-1-.- They are keeping watch (on the 315.-( e antara) converses with
king and queen). the princes.
316.-The princes show the way (to 317.- They arrive at the Gandhamadana.
Vessanta ra). :\fountain.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
318. Then, turning his back on the Gandhamadana Mountain, he goes
on his way ; the mountain is now on the right.
319. And they arrive at the Vipula Mountain. The plaque is badly
spoiled; n_either the mountain on the left nor the children can be seen.
320, Going on, they come to the Ketumatr River, and there rest and
take a meal prepared by the forester. Vessantara on the right; in front of
him the forester, behind whom Ma ddI can be discerned with, near her, a
child. Below them, above the legend, the band with wavy lines is the river.
321. In acknowledgment of his services, they give, after their meal, a
gold hairpin to the woodman. The woodman is on the left, just at the bend
of the river.
32 2. Then they cross the river Ketumatl, and rest peacefully under a
banyan tree. They are holding the children, who are rather indistinct.
323. After their rest under the tree, they proceed on their journey and
come to the Nalika Mountain--which is seen on the left.

PART TI.l TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXXVJ.
319.-They arrive at the Vipula
318.-Turning his hack on the
Mountain.
Gandhamii.dana Mountain.
320.-(They rest near the) Ketumati 321.-They give (their guide) a (golden)
River. hairpin.
322.-Sitting under the banyan tree. 323 -They arrive at the Xali Mountain.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vor .. u
324. And then~e moving onwards, they come to the Mucalinda Lake,
The lake, with five lotuses, is on ihe left.
3~5. Then, passing through a thick forest, they arrive at a square
lake-on the left as usu~I.
326. Sakka perceives they have arrived ; he sends the heavenly archi·
tect to ·build two hermitages: one for Vessantara, one for Maddi; one
hermitage on the left.
327. He enters his hermitage and dons the ascetic garb. He is in th~
act of entering.
328. Then he comes forth, and Maddi, set:ing him thus, falls at his
feet, sobbing. The two hermitages ; behind Maddi, her two children.
329- Maddi also assumes the ascetic garb. He asks her not to vas1t
him unseasonably. Every day she performs all necessary duties, sweeping.
bringing water, etc., and then goes into the forest for fruits and roots. Owing
to the Bodhisattva's divine compassion, the wild animals within a large radius
become meek and do no harm to one another.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [ PLATE LXXVII.
325.- He arrives at the square lake.
324.-He arrives at the Mucalinda Lake.
326.-He arrives at the hermitage.
327.~ The king enters ( the hermitage),
becoming a hermit.
328.- ( Vusantar,1) come..; out from the
329 -Maddi enters the forest.
hermitage.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA L VOL. It
~30. On her return she bathes the children; and all four sit down
together and partake of the fruits she has brought back.
331. The meal over, Maddi enters her hermitage with the two children.
And this went on for several months. Maddi is on the left.
332. In Kalinga, there was an old, deformed, and cruel brahman called
Jojaka. He wants two slaves for his wife. Having heard of Vessantara's
generosity, he repairs to the Vindhyas to ask him for his two childrc:n. On
that account, Maddi has had a dreadful dream ; tlle tells it to her husband,
who guesses what is about to happen. And he sits down, eagerly awa1tmg
the coming of J~jaka. Jiijaka is on the left, carryin , his luggage; between
them, ~he children.
333. Vessantara is delighted in that he will now be able to make a
heroical gift; he calls out to the brahman to approach, and bids Jali to go
and meet him. ·on the left, Jiijaka, carrying his umbrella in his right and a
staff in his left hand ; in the middle, J~li.
334. As }Ali approaches, the horrible brahman frightens him by snap~
ping his fingers and shouting-" Get away I" Jujaka on the left very badly
1
spoiled.
335. J1Ji flees back to his father and, examining the brahman, finds
1n
him all the signs of a cruel, vile man.

(PLATK LXXVIII.
TALAINC PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA.
PART 11.
331 -Maddi enters her hermitage.
330.-They eat the fruits.
332.-
333.-Jiili goes to meet (Ji1jakn).
335.-Pi,nce fiili retum5 (near his
334.-(Jiija ·a} frightens Jiili,
·father).

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
336. Vessantara asks Jujaka what he has conie for: Jojaka tells him,
.and the Bodhisattva agrees to give his children, but asks the brahman to wait
for Maddi's return. Jujaka refuses: he is afraid of a mother's love. On
the left, Jujaka.
337. On hearing the brahman's refusal, the children, terrified, run and
hide in a clump of bushes. On the right, Vessantara ; then Jujaka, holding
his luggage at the end of a stick-this, according to the text ; but here it
is an umbrella. The children, under the bush on the left, are not visible,
the plaque being spoiled.
338. But even then the chi,dren did not feel secure and they ran to
the square lake before-mentioned, entered it and hid themselves under lotus
leaves. They can dimly be made out in the lake on the left-hand top
comer.
339. The brahman, not seeing the children, accuses Vessantara of con•
niving with them. The Bodhisattva gets up and looks for them; he calls
Jali, who comes, seizes his right foot and weeps. Jujaka, behind Vessan
tara, holding an umbrella. The lotus leaf at the top of the lake indicates
where the girl-is still hidden.
340. Then he also calls out to Kai;ihajina, and she comes, embraces
his left foot and cries. According to the text, the children should be holding
each one of his feet.
341, He explains to them he is giving them away for the attainment
.of Omniscience, and they submit cheerfully. He then makes them over to
Jujaka. The Bodhisattva, on the righ , is holding a vase, from which he
pours water in ratification of his gift.

PART II ] TALA ING PLAQUES ON THE ANA NDA. (PLATE LXXIX.
336.-(Vessantara) conversing with Jujaka. 337.- (The two children) hide in a clump
(of bushes).
338.-The children (are concealed in the 339.- Prince Jilli comes up (from the
square lake). square lake).
340.-(Kai;ihi) comes up from the lake. 341.-(V.oessantara) gives in alms his own
children (to Ju_' aka).

160 EPIGRAPHlA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
342. The vile JOjaka bites off a creeper to tie the children with. He
is biting the creeper, holding it in his left hand.
343. With one end of the creeper he ties Jali's right hand to the girl's
left, beats them with the other end ancl _takes them away. The plaque is
badly spoiled, and only Vessantara can be seen.
344. The brahman stumbles and falls; the children slip away back to
their father, sobbing. Jujaka again .comes to drive them away. Vessantara
is filled lrith violent i:age and. sorrow. He wants to kill the brahman, but
he masters 'his anger and remains catm.
345. Again the brahma.n binds theln and takes them away; again he
stumbles and they escape ; but he runs after them in a ... dreadful temper and
binds them for the third time. The children <ra·n be seen ·in the middle.
34,6. And then again beating them, Jnjaka takes them away.
34 7. An<;i as. they go, they tum b~ck aqd look pitifully at their father.

P ART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [ p LA TE LXXX.
342.-Jujaka bites off a creeper. J43 - J ii jaka hinds antl takes away
( the c!-t ildrcn).
344.-\"essantara subdues his anger. 3-15.- r•jaka binds (again the children).
346.- Jujaka takes away (1he children 347.- Ka".lh:ijinii looks back (at h<'.'r Ea1her).
again).

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANlCA [ VOL. II
348. Hearing the lamentations of his little daughter, Vessantara's heart
swellg within him, and, unable to restrain his emotion, he weeps bitterly.
349. See explanation of the inscription under same number.
350. The gods reflect that, if Maddi returns early as usual, she will go
after the children and get into dire trouble. They commission three of their
number to assume the forms of a lion, a tiger, and a leopard, and bar her
way until the sun sets. Maddi is on the left; she is, after her return, telling
her husband how wild beasts barred her way ; the diminutive and spoiled lion
between them is therefore only lsymuolical.
351. She remembers her bad dream and enquires about the children;
Vessantara, to all her entreaties and her tears, keeps an ominous silence.
352. Trembling with apprehension. she goes in search of her children ;
she comes to a clump of eugenia. lrees where they used to play ; but they
are not there. The clump is on the left. Strictly speaking, Vessantara
ought not to have been represented in this scene and the five next.
353. Then she goes to the nver bank, but m vam. The nver is
indicated by two lines on the left.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANOA. [PLATE LXXXl.
349.-Vessantara gives . .. ?
348.- Vessantara weeps.
350.- The lion bar.; (Maddi's path).
351.-Maddi enquires about her
children.
352.- Maddi comes up to the eugenia 3SJ.- !\Iaddi arrives at the river.
trees.

t
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA VOL. II
354. She ascends the hill, where her little ones used to pluck flowers ;
but she does not see them. The rocks on the left represent the hill.
355. In her wanderings, she comes upon the toy oxen, elephants and
horses, the delight of her children ; but she does not see them. On the left,
from the top: the elephant, the horse, the ox. Her dress is indicated
merely by a line just above her ankles.
356. She then enters a clump of Bowering plants and makes a search
for them ; but they are not there.
357. At the lakes also she does not find them. The lakes are repre
sented by the square on the left.
358. Her search has been fruitless. She goes back to the hermitage,
and finds Vessantara dejected. She asks him again about the children, but
he keeps silent, and she again wanders back into the night.
359. Another fruitless search; she comes back again and, unable to
obtain one word from Vessantara, falls at his feet in a swoon .
•

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXXXll.
354.-Maddi ascends the hill.
355.-MaddI comes upon the (toy)
elephants and horses.
r 6.- Maddi arrives at the clump of
flower-trees. 357.- Maddi. ~~mes to the· 1ake.
358.- (Mad<lT) goes b.;.ck to the king. 359.- Mad.di falls and swoons.

166 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, It
360. He believes her to be dead ; he feels her heart, and perceives
she is alive; he fetches a pitcher of water and places her head on his lap,
He is holding the pitcher in his right hand. Maddi, whose head is broken
off, is in a strangeLy contorted position : this is due to lack of room, for
the hermitage has been made too large.
361. To revive her, he pours water on her face, which lies on his lap.
The pitcher in his right hand has broken off.1
362. Then he explains to her the high ideal which has induced him to
give away the children; he consoles her, assuring her they will come back.
And Maddi rejoices in her husband's heroic gift.
363. Now Sakka reflects that another low beggar may come and ask
for Madclf. To prevent that, he resolves to ask for her himself and then
give her back ; he would thus make Vessantara attain the very summit of
perfection. To that end, he comes to the hermitage disguised as a
brahman,
364: And he asks for Maddi; Vessantara gives her away, and pours
water in ratification of his gift. Maddi, to help her husband in his high
resolve, calmly submits.
365. And Sakka accepts her as a gift. He 1s on the left.
I See No, 375.

PART II.] T ALAI NG PLAQUES ON THE ANAND A. PLATE LXXXIII.
361.-Vessan.tara pours water lon
360.-(Vessantara) raises (Maddi's head) Maddi's face).
and lays (it on his lap).
363.-(Sakka, disguised as) a brahman
.362.-MaddI rejoiCJes (at Vessantara
comes.
haying given away the children).
364.-l Ve~~antara) gives his wife 365.-(Sakka) recei\'e~ the wife (of
l in alms). Vessantara) in alms.

168 EPIGRAPHJA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II
366. Sakka praises her fine resolution and gives her hack to Vessantara.
367. Then Sakka discloses his identity, and asks Vessantara to choose
eight boons. The Bodhisattva 'chooses; among these boons is the following:
that his father may recall him soon and set him on the throne, and Sakka
answers this will soon come to pass; he i~ now in mid-air, on a cloud.
368. Then Sakka goes back to the Tavatirhsa heaven; he 1s in the
act of flying. The scrolls above his left foot represent the sky.
369. Meanwhile, Jujaka is dragging the children away to his village;
every evening, afraid of wild beasts he himself sleeps on a tree, but he ties
up the children at the foot of the tree ; the gods, however, watch over
them. Jujaka on the tree; the boy has his right hand, and the girl her
left, tied with a creeper at the trunk.
370. The gods make Jujaka go the wrong way and bring him to the
children's grandfather's palace. They are redeemed and the brahman di~s of
indigestion. King Safijaya, with a large army, goes to fetch back his son
Vessanta.ra. V essantara and Maddi hear the mighty tramp and go up a
hilt and look out expectantly. They a~e on the hill, and Vessantara waves
to his father, who is approaching on an elephant.
37 1. King Safijaya arrives at the hermitage.

PART II.] T ALAI NG PLAQUES ON THE ANAND A. PLATE LXXXIV.
366.-(Sakka) gives back 11acidL
367.- Indra con.verses (with Vessantara).
"68.-Incira goe back (to hi heaven
369.-J i i jaka leep on a tree.
370.-( \ e santara) look out for hi 371.-The king (\·e~-antara' father}
(father) the king. arrives.

EPIGRAPHIA BlRMANICA [ VOL. ll
372. Sanjaya dismounts and comec; up to his son. · Maddi is on the
left, Safijaya in the middle.
373. Vessantara then respectfully salutes his father, who is on the left.
37 4. Phusati, who has remained a while behind, for fear that the sight
of her and of the two· children at once might give the: exiles a shock. now
comes up to the, he;mitage. She is on th,c left, standing ; Sanjaya 1s · near
her, with yessantara at his side; the othe.r- figure is Maddi'.
375. Vessantara, having poured water on Maddi, chafes her head. See
explanation in text under same number.
376. And Vessantara reverentiqlly salutes h;s mother ; th7y are in
each other'.s· arms; between the tree and the hermitage, Maddi; Sanjaya
in the loft-hand top corner.
377. Ja.li and Ka1)hajina, who have .followed at a . short dist~.nce their
grandmother, perceiving Maddi, run into her arms. The two c&ildren and
Maddi on the lower plan; above, from left, Phusatl, Safijaya, Vessantara.

PART II.] TALAIN'C PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. Pi.ATE LXXXV.
372.-The king comes up to his son. 373.-Vessantara salute-s his father.
375.- The king ( essantara) chafes
3i4.~ The queen (PhusatJ) arrives.
(maddi's, head.
376.- The king salute,; hi5 mother. 377.-Thf children come to their mother.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. fl
378. On seeing her children, Maddi, overcome with happiness, falls in a
swoon and the children also.
379. Vessantara and his parents follow suit. But Sakka comes,
sprinkles water on them, and brings them back to consciousness. And then
they all sit down and engage in happy converse.
38o. Now ali the courtiers come up to wish Vessanta.ra, and ask mm
to hange his dress. One courtier is offering regal vestments.
381. Vessantara, having changed his dress, salutes, with Maddi, the
hermitage; for here he has lived the holy life for nine months; and here
he has attained the highest summit of perfection in alms-giving.
382. Then the consecration water is poured over him, and he is made
1<111g. Tht: scene probably represents Vessantara, just before or just after
his com,ecralion, in converse with his father. The object in the centre ts
not a lotus, as at first sight appears, but a lacquered stand on which IS
placed what looks like a regal headdress, a crown.
383. Similarly, :Maddi 1s constc:rated queen; she 1s now m converse
with her husband.

PART II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXXXVL
378.-Maddi falls (on the ground) with 379.-Vessantara converses (with his
her children. father).
381.- (Vessantara) salutes reverentially
the hermitage.
380.-Vessantara changes his dre s.
J-82.-Tliey consecrate Vessantara (king). 383.-They consecrate Maddi (as q_ueen)-

174 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 11
384. After her coronation, Maddi mounts an elephant; an official is
following behind. The absence of the mahout and umbrella-bearer is
remarkable. The upper portion of the plaque is broken off.
385. And now they leave the Vindhyas, where they have experienced
so many deep emotions.
J
386. At last they arrive at etuttara, the capital ; and after the
rejo1cmgs are all over, Vessantara, with his beautiful and devoted queen,
lives happy in his palace ever afterwards.
387. Vessantara is giving ornaments. See explanation in text under this
number.
388. See explanations m text.
389- See explanations in text.

PART 11.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE LXXXVII.
385.-They go out of the wilderness.
384.-Maddi mounts her elephant.
387.-(Vessantara) gives orn.aments.
386.-Vessantara dwells m his palace.
Vessantara ascends.

•.
VOLUME Ill. PART .I
~.•.
Archaeological Survey of Burma: ·
.,.,
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
I3EING
LlTHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS
OF BURMA
EDITED BY
CHAS·. DUROISELLE
SOPBRINTBNDENT, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY, BQRJ!l'IA CIRCL.li
oo'=i ~~')~- e{4cbll
0,§
!foS.<'.( .••.•• !. !:J. R: :. ............. ,.
et~ .... L~.:: .. L9..:.;.-.~ .... ·
NATIONAL LIBRARY
A
MON INSCRIPTIONS Nos. lX-Xl
BY
C. O. BLAGDEN
RANGOON
SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA
1923

'"'~: ' .. iHi""' / " :t '"°: ~ • f><"' ,.'·:." '"
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
MON INSCRIPTIONS.
No. IX.
AN INSCRIPTION FOUND NEAR THE THARABA GATE, PAGAN,
Descriptive Account.
54. This inscription has been noticed in Reports of the Sujer£ntenaent,
Archaeologfral Surve_y, Burma, (1912) pp. 14, 15 and (~916) PP· ~~, ~s,
but no portion of it has hitherto been published. The stones on which it is
engrave4 are preserved in the Pagan Museum, and in the Catalogue of 1906
are
they numbered I, 2, 6, 7, 8 and 9· They consist of two large four·sided
columns and fragments of, apparently, three others. The dimensions of the
stones, as given in the Catalogue, are as follows :-No. 1 : height, 7 feet;
breadth, 3 feet. No. height 7 feet 9 inches; hreae1tb, 3 feet. No. 6 :
2 :
1
height, 2 feet ; breadth, I foot 9. inches. No. 7 : height, 2 feet 3 inches ;
breadth, 2 feet 6 'inches. No. 8: height, 2. feet 5 inches ; breadth, ~ feet 9
inches. No. 9 : height, 2 feet 9 inches·; breadth, 2 feet 5 inches. I have
given letters to the se~0~ral fa~es':1i~<of the stones and fragments containing
legible parts of the inscription. So far as regards Faces A-H (oorre·
sponding to N os. I and 2 above), there is no difficulty about the order. But
the remaining portions, Faces J-S, arOi hard to arrange, and some doubt
remains in my mind as to whether the order I have put them in is the
right one. Prpfessor Duroiselle informs me that my Faces J-M (=== Pagan
Museum Nos. zand 6) are parts ·of one column, Nt 0 (== P. . M. No. . 8) part
of anpther, and P-S ( = P.M. No. 9) part of a third. Assuming that that
is .so~j t~e inscripti.on must originally.·· have comprised at least six columns,
of which/ ~11~ first, preceding Faces•••· A--D, is entirely lost. This conclusion
seems una:vo}qable, inasmuch as Fac'e A is plainly not the beginning of the
record. I~: .. fhet.g.~~~ ~he·,.o:r,igi!f~l must have extended to over 1,000 I~nes, of

EPIGRAPHIA··BIRMANICA PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS 3
which less than half h'ave been preserved. But even the remnants that we authority on Indian chronology (to whose help in this matter J am very much
ha·v~ got make this inscription by far the longest Of ~he Early M8n records. indebted); and he informs me that,;, within the period covered by Kyansittha's
55. The space actually covered by lettering, as measured . ~m the ink· reign, the end of the year I I 01 A.D. and the early part of 1102 best fit
impressions, is as follows:-· Face A, 6 feet 1 inch by I foot. :8 inches; B, the particulars given.1 But in some cases there are difficulties, and until we
•
5 feet 1 o inches by 2 feet 2 inches;. C, 5 feet I o i~ches by i. foot 8 ~nches ; are in, possession of more precise infoirnation as to the method of working0. • r
D, 5 feet 6 inches by 2 feet 2 inches; ·E, 6 feet l mch by l· foot.~fAches; the Burmese calendar at this period, some doubt must remain on the subject.
F, 6 feet 2 inches by 2 feet 1 inch; G, 6 feet 2 inches by I foot 5 inches; It is to be hoped that the point may eventually be settled by a comparison of
H, 6 feet 1 inch by s feet 2 inches; J, 4 feet by t foot 3t inches; K, 2 the dates of the early Burmese records. A good deal turns on this question
feet 3 inches by 1 foot 3 inches ; L, 3 feet I o i.nches by. 1 foot 4 inches ; of the date of our inscription. It has been suggested, with much probability,
M, 1 foot 9 inches by 1 foot 2-I inches; N, I foot 101- mches by 1 foot that the palace built on this occasion was erected for the special purpose of
3 inches; 0, 1 foot 4t inches by 1 foot 3 inches; P, I foot 5 inches by 1 Kyansittha's royal anointment (abhi~eka); and it is a fact that the buildings
4t
foot 21' inches; Q, 1 foot inches by 2 feet 4 inches; R, I foot It 'inches described in the record are such as would be appropriate to an occasion
by I foot 3 inches ; S, l foot 1 o inches by 2 feet 4 inches. The letters of that kind. Thiy apparently constitut~d what was technically termed a
resemble in their general type those of the preceding inscriptions. Their " fivefold pavilion " (pancaprasdt/a), and included amongst their subsidiary
i t
height varies slightly, between and inch,. in the several faces, letter t is structures an~. " ablution pavilion,n which in itself seerns to point, to some such
about ! inch long, and the interlinear space is g~nerally between t inch and purpose.. On the other hand, in the portions of the record .th~t have been
1. inch. The inscription is, .<on the· whole; in a bad state of preservation. preserved, there is no definite statement that such was their purpoa.e, nor is
Though a good deal of wh~t remains is quite legible, a considerable part is the ceremony of a11ointment mentioned at all. If the date. above suggested
exfrem~Iy difficult to read and would have been practically undecipherable but is correct, it seems difficult to connect this palace with Kyansittha's anoint·
for one of the characteristic peculiarities of this record, namely its many ment, for it appears rather improbable that such an important ceremony would
repetitions ... The fa~~ is th.at, in spite of its great length, this inscription is be postponed for so many years after his accessien to the throne. ..This
1,Iii)
of a disappointingly··'1'monotonous character. The same formulae occur again seems the less likely when we compare III C 12 .. 14 {inclu,ding the variants
and again wit:h wearisome iteration. But this has made it possible in many in IV and V) and VI 28, which passages refer expreflsJy to the royal
cases to. read with .virtual certainty many obliterated passages, which it would anointment It is true that they speak of it in the (qture, a.s,part 9f Buddha's
otherwise have been quite impossible to reconstruct. The text has been alleged prophecy about the king. But that is, after aU, merely a matter of
determined from thr~e sets of ink;.impresSlions and f set of photograph'.s of form, and it seems probable that the .e vent had actuatly happened before
one of them·~ these inscriptions were set. up. In that case it must have occurred before
56. The red'mtd is concerned with 'the elaborate ceremonial attending the June 3rd, A.D. 1093 (~ 45)1 the probable date of No. V:I, which is the
hui14!ng ofa great palace. at Pagan,.ti' Buddhist monks and Brahmans, besides earliest of Kyansittha's dated records.
a variety Gf crfficials, chiefs, and other persons, took part in the proceedings) 57. It is hardly possible to give,. within a reason~b.ty .~nnai1 compass, any
and a good deal of ritual was involved in them. The Brahmans were summary of the ceremonies performed i11 conl}exfo~. :wiFh the building of this
constantly etlgaged in bringing water of lustration in vessels of gold, silver, palace. For aU details the translation can be c9~~lted .. The great day was
· brass, ari,d e~rt~enware. The monks held a service of blessing and protection. that. of the royal procession described in. F 13 seq(l., when the king, naq1ed
The :Vhole: aff~~t'· ~w~~ spread over many days of several months, and
. precise .times wheµ ... the '.varfous actions took place are generally . 1 Th~ equivalent_ dtttes, .given .in the notes to the'~tanslation are au based on this assu~ption~
h-.~ ~.···." ~et e.~~,t;J$':.
indicated. : Unfortunately no year date is to be found in the fragments that t T h h a e n y k s f? ...•. v. T -.·, .··-.e h .·.·· a ··.b.•e v . i .. ·· n ·. .. ·.... g ·..k. i·.. tn· adkly~.n w _ .· s ·o o r k· m e·d u cOhU . tt. r f o .o u t b m le . e in .b y t h ¥ e .·r oc m .S& a ···_ t · t ·w e ·- r .·. eU a , . n • d g w iv n e o n .m m I. e r n t u h s e :.t b .h en e e r.. e fi t of'illf vmeryy.. g s r p at e ' c f. i u al l
remain. 1 submitted detai:Ls. 'of the dates to ·Mr. Robert Sewell, a great knowledgie: of t~e sub3ect. For details, see particula~ B J 1, C 17, u, 29, D 42, E u, F r, 12
13, 35, G 9, x5, H Ii L 4,. 9. 1

n·
. EPIGRAPHIA.BlRMANlCA (VOL. III PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS 5
4
of the B~rmese ones; and it is clear that, though members of a conquered
~g, wit~.
only in this passage (F 28, 41, 44), appeared a large retinue to
race, they had a recognized status and were by no means merely hewers of
honour the work with his presence. H ere,~!the i1arrative .. i~)tivid. and contrasts
st.ereotype~ ~:erernonial wood and drawers of w~~.er. This is the first occasion, too, on which we
with the somewhat monotonous repetition of·. that
find them specifically mentioned in this collection of records by their ancient
constitutes the bulk of the record. The fragmentary face$ N,; It and S. enter
ethnic name, Rmen, from which the modern form~· Mon is (through· the
·tlinto details of the decorative architecture of some portions 9£ the palace,
·1 ~f medieval Rman) quite regularly derived. Here also, for the first time, occurs
· ·a subject . 6f considerable interest, though the. meanings s6me: of the words
the ethnic name of the Burmese, under the form Jl;finnii (B 42, D 2.tt-, H 12).
used are still doubtfl:!-1. Indeed, the whole inscription teems with technical
Whether this is a faithful representation of the name by which the Burmese
terms of which l am as yet unable to determine the precise sense. I have
received much valuable assistance~·in this m;:ttter from Mr. Robert Halliday called themselves at this time, or whether the word, occurring as it does in
a M&n text, has been modified in any degree by M8n linguistic influences,
and Professor Cnarles Duroiselle, but in spite of their kind help, and after
is a matter which I must leave to be dealt with by those who .. may hereafter
many revisions and much labour devoted to the study of this difficult record,
study the Early Burmese inscriptions.1
I must regretfully admit that many. of its problems still remain unsolved.
Their solution demands a mote intimate acquaintance w.i!th the details ©f
Indian. ritual and architecture than J. can hope to acquire, and I can only
suggest that ·a compar~tive study of these highly technical matters may Text.
p~rhaps inthe future throw further light upon the doubtful points.
58. Although th~ inscription contributes a fair amount of fresh lexico· A
graphical 1paterial, <yet owingAo its ~any repetitions the new words contained I• • • " • • • • • • .. • • • • .. • • . . . .. . .. .... . . .. ,. .. . ....
in it are less .. ~umerous than might have been expected from its great length,
for
an~, the . reasons· already stated, many of them are not yet capable of 2. • •• " ~ • • .. • • • { t tney blab han) s • • ~ .. • . • .. • .. • (pa bra.t cindran
exac-determination. ... I fear that to the ordinary ·. rea~er. this record will seem mol)) 4
of C()mpara~iv~lyJittle i~terest, and -L must confess that I have sometimes 3. (jlow) 5 [lu'Qac ku kon brat t\>ow] ...... (sal diilkar) s ........... .
fek that,. it· did pot repay .. the amount of. work necessarily involved in the 4. ....... [Inor ku pk·a.w thar] pneil (duleil sam~huc dulen pun khal
editing of it. But :in a collection of this kind ()nemust take the rough with maj . .
the smoqth ; , and there· is always a possibility that ev,en a somewhat add 5. [crok ku pnen] gol:i [ma lnor] (tuy n) ~[piryam] (gol;l kum) [tirla' poy
document,. lik~ tpis ene; may eventually turn out to col}tain material that is
mhaj- ·
· val~able frotn ~~f! '.poiryt of. yieWo, tho,uglr ~ot c>l?"'.i~usly .. ~?. at first sight.
6. [ther Arahan ket ku tirley sangha dur~po~] .. • . • [sal S~Jl (kupa)·
. _59·, ()~~ or ~wo ~~tters ari~ing. i.ncident:ally · Nia}' .F 'haps with advantage 7. (r 7 han) [sthan ma skir] 8 srun jifijun jirkoy [~a]r jifijun •:,Ls [jifijuit
pe s111gl~d out for spec~al mention here. The g~ea.t importance attached to a]-
the B!ahm~~s, aµd· th? sypcretisr:i w~ic:h is involved by their co-operating in 8. (tas] singhasin ku jifljun prasat (pan] ku jifijun pra[sat bi}
. har~O?Y_.':~1~~· Buddp1st .m~~ks m the ceteinonies here described, may· be 9. rlup ku jifijun jun dal ku jijap 9 jinjun atas [muk gob. ut]
co?s1d?red.~ vro~~~r_-oL n~t1_ce, though the. ph~nomencm is. in. no way singular,
b1mg m fact:~~~,~r~J~~15:t1cally normal~in Siam and Camboja to this day. It . 1 Cf~ Report of t1ze Superintendent, A.f'ckc#ologica.l Sn.Y'VS'h But'ma, (t9~0) para. 36.
~ee~s g~oba,~l~ ,~~'~t. . ).~~:e: Brahmans. ~~re. Vaishnava CA. 2. tr.) and it would ~ ' V T e h r e y re d m ou a b y t f b u e l. tr . a T ce h s e o f f i rs a t l l i e n t e t e a r b m ov a e y t b h e is t o h n e e . e . nd of pUt (in one rubbing there $eetn to be trace'
appea:r-.t~at.s~aj~ ··~of.the~- came from , the ·J.\18h countrf" ( H 12 ). It is, at of l an? i). .AJter han ~os.si~ly we might $Uppty nar r Sf· B 34, C 3x, E 41, .J to.
any r~te,: q~1te oert~1·n:)=~a~ .Mon n~tables took. a fair share in the ~ransac- 4 C.::on~ectural. restoration, inferred. from. the .wo:rds. leg1b1e in. the next line. .•
con.n~5~~~ tf1e~kiii4;li];~>,of ~42, at~ngside 6 Con1ectural~ restoration. 6 Extremely doubtful. '1 Very doubt!ul : see A 29 · inf'l'fk.
tions witfi· the· palace {B 14 G 23) 8 Perhaps skir~ 9 Conceivably jirj.ip.
1
-"' ,,·., i'~·\:;. .; .~~'.:·:,:.:;:·.:··"·:--'; ~
• .-. i.><~;;.:.,~ ~ ·<"' ., - ·;:~!'
''.,°';~,;~ '.' f.'..·
~ '), ,.: ~~;~ '"

6 EPIGRAPHIA ·BfRMANlCA ( VQL. Ill PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 7
1 o. [rnnah.] (ma kel) sal sla ( darka)s 1 gol:i girluk utpharh [klo' i11ura i} 27. [d]i[nkar snal] kla(rh dificam gl]i[k] (key,u) 1 [klarh din.cam kw]ir [klarh
~u. (')[sen sgac si]ngir [pgoh. 2 kaka 3 tapiw ku utJ ~ •• ~ •• ~ · · • dificam J (n ho)·
•
• . . . c-en 28. [y tlaii mi]r[mo]k [m]uk [dirlec. jnok] gol) [kindarh dirmon kyek mo] ..
12. (da we)l ,11. pli[t tiley go]dhuli Iagna u [burtmah.};·~sa:ftkran) 4 [ta gob 29. [y ma nom ku a]s (ma nin kindarh thic ma ft.in gufii] 2 (kupar) 3
ma dindi] .. [ku glik]
13. [n lwar . tik pham kinta 11 burhnaJb hura to' at [tuk. q.ek] {ma) 5 30. [bmnten] (n ma pdar) 4 [ku tgon burhten u gob ma fiin sal ku]
spaqo- (asthar 5 ta)006
14. [t parit n qe]b ra[ti tlun gek gol:i tfiy] ..... 6 [qekJ k[l]as [th]ar 31. [sar 7 antUl a]s [.gob ma] ni[n dumon 8 rup kyek thar moy n nip]
k[la} 32. [tirle]y [Gawam]pa[ti moy n ku sla pat wi]ne[y sut] abhi(dharnma 9
15. [s J s[re] fi [kl]as [s luy] ta gol:i [4 -el.1] ren lar (jap sthan) • . . . p)i ..
[11 m]angal . 33 ........ (11) cip pi pahir gi[rluk 10 pharh sgac sii1gir pgol) 11 kaka)
16. [han] prasa[t jnok 11 k]u pra[sat cind]row 8 [pan 11 ku prasat b1rlu]· (ha)·
17. p [ku ji]fijun ju[n 'd]al tiiy Jl qek k[las ti) pa[n lnim ku kinlo'] 34. (n) kyek [thar t]irley Gawa[rt1]pa[ti] u [ku ut tirley sangha pan lni]-
18. [san dificam gob qef.t] r[e]n la[r] ha[n tlinntn t]i[rley san]gha pan 35. [m] kla[m dificam ma] ti[t]la[' po]y [rohather A]ra[han] da[s pirdhan]
[h~i]- ~
(n) [sa}· .. ·
19. [m da ma spaqo]t parit [rum]na[s gob. ku ut raja]sth[an 11 yan 36, [mbe]n jey Sabhaf1 II Sambefl ka[f1sasfi]r II Sambefl raja[stlr] U [ku u] ..
tirle} 37. [t sambei1 griH 11] sa(mbe]n [lef1 kalan yan] saf1 11 [p]aJ;.l~it (su1h tum)
20. [y sailgha] (sum tum) [dincam tirfa' poy sanghatther] {ma clas) 38. [ut pcley] rurhf1ii[s] cut pkuw thar sirwin p[n]e[f1] dulef1 lf1o[r)
maJ · ·· · ·
· [pardhan ·
9 39. [ac sara:tiasi]l ku [p ]arit [mangal] n p[ 9]e[y rurh]nas wur ut pa[n]
21. [spaqot] pari[t nunn]as [kom ku gumir pan ln]im [gol:i] .[i] .. [I] 40. [tlan 11] kal [goti ti]r1a' po(y mha]ther Arn(han] taw bo[y]
22. dirmon tfrley' [sarigha] ma_. pi(r)dhan di[nc]a[m gol). ii] dinka[r snal 41. tlan pirlit ku[ta 13 boy t1]an (mi]rmo(k ra]p [k]inlo' [san da]-
11
difica} 42. (kkhinawat) 14 [ku cJek k]las [th]ar sreii [slr1y ti ma ~Je~ ren [lar] 15
23, .. [tn] glik k(~fi) dificam kwir di[ncam ·u 9.ek kla]s kla[ffi
U lO fL 43. [kin ]ta [tirla] p[oy m]ha[ther]r Araha[n a blab goI:i tir]la[' poy mha] ..
di!lcamJ ( n) 11 [ki} . 44. (the] r Ara[h ]an ki[l sar]al}.asi(l bla l:i ut g]urhir [pan hiim k1an1]
24. [nl]o[' san] k[laril dificam] ge[l:i l reil lar (ban) [sthan dirmo ]ti [tirley 11
45. [dificam] d[m]oir [taw p4ey ru1i1ilas ku tirla poy] mhather [Ara}
· sa]~ ·. . . .· . . .· .· •...... ·. .. · , 46. [han ma. das p]ir(dhan pa~ot p]arit [mai1g]al [n p)acJot par(it] (ma.) ..
25. ngha ·~~~[rh dincam ~u ti]rla['poy mhathe]r [Ara~a~ ma spac;lot]
47. (ilgal gob bla )[lJ. n c] i[p=piryam durhhic pi pahir m~tm nac.l)i (b )(ir}
26. pari[f pgey" ll nan stnan '~irmoft t]irle[y saft~na .kfa.m dificam gol:i] (tarn) 16
• • • • • •
ss, l See the note on this word in A ~3 s14pra. 2. Perhaps Kdi.
I a T V h e e r r y e . . d m o , u ay b tf b u e l . ~m r sup . e rscri . p . . t . o . ve .... r . . t ll . e n s e x P t o l s e s tt i e b r l y ( w p. h .o i l c ;i h • . i t C s~ f l . f A is 3 d 3 o , u F b tful). G C . 4 f. , A H 3 4 3, 6 , F K 3 5 6 , . G 5, s The reading is doubtful.. Perhaps the same word is to be read in A 6-7 supn:i, where it is still
more problematical.
·.·······~.
K 6 • 4 & V Th e ·· e ry . f i d n o al q b le t ·.· : . t •·. r t , e . l · r , .. . ··· s :. e C .. e m f.E s . · t 2 o 7 , . h J e · n 2.·~ . · 9. P oss . i . b ly . o D n P e e m rh i a g p h s t n re a s ~ t ore y . a . 1 i. script 4 t I J,, f r m ig u h c t h l y a s re i a n d , A t r h i e m a su d b a s a c n r a ip p t u d r, is M i y n r u a :e d f i o rm 3. so C m o e n w ce h i a v t a b l l i y k , e it1 th 5 & te a m d o o r f tt m t.i a im p p t t i i f a ie r d o 'v n a e r i m et i y g h o t f r s e u a b d ..
pundar, but I prefer the former. 0 Somewhat doubtful1 but probable.
7 The last Iet~~t, ~~·e~~ f~irly certain. I doubt if we ca11 restore. ma skil, which would fit the
context but does. not se~lll>to. be supported by the. in~-iropressions, B The ta might be ma, etc. 7 The vowel is doubtful, it might be i.
a Here, and elsew~e~~.) ·~'1;~r~ }~adoubt as to whether tf1is word is- spelt with a .d.. Cf. B 8, 23, 8 Possibly dilmoh, a bad 9 Elnrred, but probable.
F 39 io 9 , n T P n o h s d e ~ : ~ ( b r i n ly i s a k d f d a o i . u f f b e O t r f e u r n l t . th Q . e B o 1 u s it t u e : B i F ci s f ) . c r ~ : i n p t 2 1 . ~ 3 l , , ~ t C t 3 e 5 r , 2 t 7 4 n , 6 i , g 3 h 4 H t , c D 3 o 4 n . 2 c 3 e , iv E a · p 3 l . 0 y ... · , b .. ·. e F y 2 . 3r B 2 u 6 t , G pr o 2 b 5 a , b . l H y t 1 h 3 e , J te x 3 t . is right. 1 1 1 5 0 2 O P P o e r r s h s l i i a b i p r l . s y g g T i r r h i l . i e il ~ l . seems pretty 1 c 3 e r C ta f i . n. I G N o 5. t hing else is vis 1 H i 1 b l C T e. o h n e c e re iv a a d b in ly g p i - s o f v t. e ry S e d e o u A b tf H ul . n.
n This stop doubtful : it m;i,ght. really .. b~ $Orne short .." lord, such. a.s b. 16 In this whole line the lower pnrtions of the letters are cut off. But the restorations, though to
some extent conjectural, seem pretty certain ; for m~un one may have to read nz1ft·n.
4~;

PART l l MON INSCRIPTIONS
8 EPlGRAPHIA B·lRMANICA [VOL. Ill
15. [s turow ma] (c1ngin) 1 [klas sluy klas] (ti ta gob. sum ku) ·~lik
11 i
ku[ chom bum]te-
B
16. [fr 11] b[I]ab [gol:i lwar \lii]r (ma) [gufii ku glik burnt~ir pumd]ar k(u
I. • • • • . • . •' .. • • • . .. . t<;lon burhten n]
17. [ut lw]ar [~ar g61:i 4el:i Iusal klas thar srefi n] k[l]as
• . • • • • •. O'" •
2. • .• • ~ .. . • "' • • . ". ·., fial:i) . [cin} :: :, '. . . ;~" ·
i!t •
18. [gin go~ ttly n ~I~~J ft.i a ~ol;} lklarh b~r owas n ut k]Ias [ta] go}J.
• • 0 • • • • • •
3· ... . . .• . . .. . . . . . . . [ rjel;] lu[l,ac''ltaj
b •.••
tl]an [mirm.o]- ~, .. . . . _ 19. [pkaw] (b)[ra](c kmo".V sla caqdfi da 4 tik {lham kinta trj [gq,~b ma
4. [k muk tirqey . han] f"Qan] . • ·• r 5 [u muk tirqey han tl}an bumna.Q. hura to' ar] . . ,.. .
11
f p ir Ii} · . . . ... .· . . . . . 20. [tuk qek] . • . . ,, ·( p·huml [ji~.j~~ jirkoy jifiju]fl [yf!s jhiju]fr [atas] ...
5. [t n muk tir]ge[y han tlan c]i[ii k~nt.~}(han)' [t1 prasat 1nok]. n[t] $ 21. [ku ut] (ku) [jifijun c:en](•)5 [kt11 ~tl (~u) [ki~y~ sum tum n blabJ
6. [m~mn] ha[n gol) tun p-hurh: ku] q~~kla[s th]ar sr[en] (p•hum bla~) gol;. yan jifijun ji ..
[sal] di[n]kar . ~ .. •' . 22. [rkoyJ ( •)" [jifijm1 yas jifij.nft.·
7. [cut] p[k]a[w thar sitwin pnen duleN n [gol) ma burh]nab [hura saf?a ·lD.OY]
sni' lnor u} ·. · . . · · 23. [han kir](r)[ya] •. ·• . [erasat
11
8. '[t sthan m~un han golf n bl]ab [gol}.] ·ha[n ti prasit eindtaw pan] ku · pan] . . .
[ti' mu} (p~n) h~n jiftju~ inu~ \s,~ngbi$iq haJ~w
24. [han u prasat birlup moy Ja .. moy
9. (k juft dal] ut sthan [ m~un ban gol}. u pRhiim ku 9ek klas th]ar srefi ··· 25~ [n o jinjun muk] (.cirmuk) [moy ban u jinjun jun d~l rnoy] ban (n) ·
[p-hum]
1 26. [jinjun muk] t[ir]Qe[y han tlan] (mirmok moy) [h!in n jiijjun mu} :·
10• • (da bla)l). 6 [sa]l [di]n[kar· cut pkaw · th]ar s[i]r[win pnen dulen] 11 27. [k £.ir<;ley ban tl]an pirl[it] ( moy ban) [u j4fijq.~ muk tir<J·~~J
bumnal) hura sa[m a sni'] 28. [ba!lJ tlaii [c]i[* kint~]' [moy han] (~ u.t cleq) 1 [tl~ Jnirmo~. '.(.leti
1 i, [t]u:n [l]nor [ ut sth Ja[ n m~un] ( da goh. we I) n [ cip }Jar mirmok reil la]-
· kintu karti]- 29. fr rnoi ban 11 ut cl]e[c tla.R] • . • • • • .ll.ii,) u
12. [k tney ca119.raw]ar 11 [samben gri sambeb:len kalan yan] s(a)ii1 (1 8 ut ale]- . ·
- b.umnab hju[ra) 30. . [c tl]ail pirl[it ut cl~c tlan dn] k[inta t;le'l) ref:i ra:r mirmoy h]a[n
9
13. sa[1n]a' [sfii' s]u[m] tu[rh II ku · · mfrmoy] 9 ,, · · · · ·,
[sluk sirpun s]u[khu]! [ci} . •· . . .. · 31 • [han ·· a· ut ea$ ~foij · p ~ ... · b r~)t ci[ ndr~m.. ltt\l~o ku
> ·. . ·
14. [ndro]w [snk.huy u]l[iir] glik ku[chom bumte]n u b[l]aJ:r [g]ol:i (rme)n 10 kon }jrit]
· kQarh lt}a[r cwaJ. ..
l AU very cfoubtful :readinga. ) . . • ,,/ . ) •. · ... · ..· i .. . ·
2 Somewh~e· in ~lHs ille~ible p~ssage there~ must, I think, have been another md tfrr/dy It.a.,,.,
.unless B 5 covers tw? out of five places. referred to. ·
s. The last pal!t>"'bf this dt.Jabtful pa5sage looks like n l'hir, though the vowel is not certain· and
conceivably .the b ·might he w. ··
4 This seems probable/: 5 Very doubtful. Alternatively it might be ti nilel;. •
.. ~.Very doubtful. l[TI'light be mle!i ~ or the supposed da might· be merely an accidental mark.
:' 7'J.-ooks. like sun, but· the mark below may be accidental.
. s There seems to be only a. single stop here.
thin~
,9 Though these letters are illegible, 1. the reading is practically certain.
certain.

•
'
•
1) MON INSCRIPTIONS
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. Ill PART
10
32 : (t9ow)1, ...... 2 [qe]k [kl]as [thar srefi qek kinlo]' sail [ma cut c
ku tarn] · . 4 d ] 1 · 1:
SS· (sno' jiljup s 11) [sa]l [dink]ar [pkaw] thar [sumbhuc u en pnen (khal ma) [c roJ k [Im pneft 1 11 cut kil c;lek klas thar srefi] (sal di) ..
duleit [ Q.]el) [r Je· 2. (ilkar) 2 [cut pk]aw [thar sirwi]n [pneft dulen] ........... .
3 • (it lar }6 · [ t uy bl]ab [n ban nar q]e[l:i pa brat cindran m] ol:i a
4 • • • •
Ol]ow [l]u[~ac ku] 3 .. [ci]p=[piryam] du[mhic] pi [pahir m~un naqi] ........... (bum ..
. [kon brat t9ow pQ.ey gob pun 6 khal ma crok k]u p[n]eft [sambhuc 1 naQ.) [hura]
35
du]l[eil] gel) ·. . . 4. sa[m]a [to' p-hum jinjuft jirkoy jifijuft] (yas ku) [ut kirya pra]·
6 . .......... a [ Q.ek klas th Jar sre[fi tiiy sa]l d1[nkar] c[u t pkaw thar 5. [sat Im] ji[fiju]il su[rh tum c·efl] ................. (p·hurh tuy)
3
sirwin] . _ '[ . _ [ut] (bla)l}.
............. s [go]b. [ma burim]ab h[u]ra [lno]r nar c1 p p1ryam 6. In[o r Im] pk[aw thar pne]ti [dule]n .. ~ . .. . . .. . . 4 [cas dump0Jt1
37
aumhi]c ti(k) . . . {ha]-
lO
s8~ . . . . • . . . u [tney J go[ dhuli li lagna burhnaQ. hura sama ·w, to'] 7. [n] (gol:t mle}:l n blal:i gol:i samben) 6 ................. s (ket) [qek parit
Jn
p[-hu]m 13 [j]i[nju [jirkoy] . ,., kla}
. [jinjun yas -jiflju]n [a]ta[s cut k]1l [q~~k .~ldas thar sren] ....._ ... 8. s [th]ar [ma c;lel:i] (ren lar) 7 r ... ,, .......... [b. 8 Q.el~] (tlui.t rum·
39 •
Oi]-
40 . [q ek kinlo' sail ma cut tarh sno' 1]1[l]lp 11 b] lab. go[b \1.el:i P'"hum] bas ban) 9
9. njuil j[i]r[ko]y [jifijuft yas blal) qelJ] ru[mba.s] (ut) [jinjun kirya surh]
41 .••·• • • • . • • • · • • • • • • . e • • • • " !4 [J'ifiJ'u]n [ki]rrya [surh turh c} en [da] ta 1 o. [t]um mlel:i 11 bla~ go[l:i bumnab hura sama to'] (p·hurh kirrya) I() [gob
[go }b ut [mlel:i J [blal).] ..... .. ku qe}
11
. . .. • • . • • • (go h . ) [ 3 .. m ,.,. 3 e h . mirma jifijel:t r](m)[efi] j [in je] l:t II. k k[las thar srefi antiil 11 jifijuft jirkoy] (goh.. blal).) 12 [n cip=p ]i[rya}
[ti]rc(u)l 1 5 n [jin]jel:i (man) 12. [m durh]hi[c u](ssajoga)/3 ......... ~4 11 (go~ ma) [burhnal). hura]
.... ............ .
43· • olO • • • • • • • (sama to' p .. hu)-16
,
13. (m) [kil durhpo]l) [li](cut tuy blal:i 16 n) .... [jifijun jirkoy jifijun]
•. ._••••••• ooe
-.dr 4. ·. (gob ut] • 14. [yas jifijun atas ta go}:l] (b) ..... (n) ....... (mey)·., ... ., ......
:0111• ...... , .......... . 9 · • • • • ., • • .. • .. • .. • • • .. .. •
15., •••• ,. 11 (gob) [mlel)] n [bl]al) [gol:i y]ari. [jifijuft stixh t]urh 11 (ku)
• ~ • 0 • a • '• e • • • 11J1 • •
[kirya] ...... 18
• • • •-' • .. " " • • • "" Cl! If ., • .. 0 ... •
:/:· ,t ••~·. .. • • • [Q .ek ·. kinlo}
46. t' s
.
1a i
.
l
.
m
.
a
.
c
.
u t
.
t
.
a
.
r n silo' jiljip] ..... ~ ••• ~ • · . · .. · · · · - • • .: · ..
pun.
I With this restoration cf. B 35. The last wotd in the preceding line must have been puii or
•. 2 Conjecturally restored; but the 1' seems pretty certain ..
a Probably the first part of the missing passage read sambhuc dulelii.
as cu · 2 s 4 s f : .. . • · 9 0 1 T , 1 ' o 1 1 T h n 1 ' : 1 1 j e h ~ ) e e ~ p ~ ~ ~ : e ~ . e 1 t ' r ~ } ~ u ~ s ; ~ r ' t s t t a i a ' l ~ 1 p e ~ ~ y t . · r t , e e h w s t s a t a ~ o v s '! r e r e " a ~ b e t b h m i u e p o c e s r n . n o t . b b . w F a ,b b r e l i 1 . t y o t n e m i n . 5 n . c h C l P e u · o e r d n . e r e j h e d t a c o p t s . u t o s h r m a e o l e n e r e n w e s d m o t o r i o d r g f a h t l B i t i o k r n e t e h . s k e t e o t ~ . b e e g n i 8 n r s r n e O O i n n . r r g , s p p u o O e i f r z r h . t a h s p e o s m , l ~ i J n i . l e ; < s 1 r : - ~ p n h O ~ e r r e r s b v u r e o m r • b k ' f e lh n ( u s c u o . c f f h . \ w s u it p h p o G · 8 j I s e e T T T y h h h t { h e e e c a f t l f . f a i i r s r s A s s a t t t n o 3 g o o f 6 h f f ) a t . h t t h c e h e a e B m m u m e m i t s i s i s n s i t s s h n i e ! i e g x t n g t g . w r e w o s T r w o t d h r o s d d e r s d o m s l e a a s ( s b y t l e o n i b o o n o e f k g t s t u a h a t l p e . i p k c e e m o a n i r '1 s t : i s 1 n t - i o o n u m g a , b 1 t e i w o o n r o s a rd b t 5 o r s h f e A a y w i t l i . h a m e s h o · ~ s t p r I t i e f r t . o l c e b e i a t r s t b a a l w i m y n a b . g s e o i 7 i t f ) h i , V e a u e p n r l p a l y e a t s t r e s d e r o n , u w t b l e y w t f e u a b l r . e e m g i a n t y o s
9 Possibly <1tre;_ rri:iglii!: resto~e pnen duleii. . . ... . . . • assume cas duirapol,i after the supposed sangha.
io The word fi~ise~µis ~easonably certain~ What foU~ws looks rather hke pa II m one or two _of 9 Very doubtful, especially the han. 10 Fairly certain.
the impressions. One:'t:nig\lt conjecture pham 11 ; or, ~i.~ematively, pan. 11 Or antul. 12 Very dau:btfol. ra Doubtful. But cf. C 17, E 15t ] 31.
plit l s l h o 1£ u . l t d h e p e c o re n s j t e o c r t e u d r '' a h l e r r e e ' s t. 't , o ra B .t g io t n ~ W p e a . n s p i a s c e aC a c v C a e i p l t a ed b l i e n s t e h e e m f s a s t t o .l i , n p e e , r i a t th w e o r u ld sm s a e l e l m f or l ik t e h ly e t tw ha o t w p o ah rd i. s Y . 1 1 4 6 L V o e o ry k s d a o s u b i t f f u i l t . m A ig n h d t b o e f c a o n u g r i s ir e , t b f u ~ t t is n ig v h e t r y b d e o u tu b y tf . u l. 15 Or, perhaps,p-Jtu-~
Probably, however, plit is right. .·· rn Or godhuli. Is Or P·hum. 11 Looks like to'. At any rate the final seems pretty certain. 18 Possibly ha-.
14 Thelast word maylre!:.;r.tt or ku. 15 Or~ perhaps, tit'cal.

EPIGRAPHIA .BIRMANICA [VOL. III·
io. (nY prasat [ta gob ku dJ. n. 1 [si] • .. [ku kirya sum tum c .. en]
e •
(d) .. ' .. [k].[r] 3
17 .....( k) [ut mlel} 11] (m~un) [mirmok kintu] (magha' ussajoga snisca.) ..
18. [r] (go~) [burhnal) hu]ra [to' p-hum 6 jinj:in jirkoy jifijuft yas]
J9. [jifijui atas ta gob n ku] .•.... [lal:i] 6 (p-hum) [ku <;lek k1as thar]
20. sr.efi (tiiy 1 blab pa pujaw) 8 [pkaw thar] p[ne]ii £duleti blab gob] ..
2J.'(kic) ta(m) 9 Qifijuft ta gol:i] (c-en) 4 {mle\l] n (m~un) [mirmok kintu
· .·: .. . phalla} . .
22tlgun] t[ney a4ittawa]r [cip] P.i[ryam dum]hi[G pi] pa[ha]r [m~tm nacjI
ge]b
10
23. (~r.) [tuk Q.ek] (pa) ..... (ti 11) ., , • (sirtefl) (t).(k).(t) .•. (11) 11
[klas tha} ·
24. [r sren sluy] (n han pen) [klas ta gob 9eb] (ren lar ku pkaw
{brae)
· 25. (kmow sla caQ.ufi da) 19 [u] (gol:i ma) [<;le}). lusal antill 3 lwar] (ma
1 1
slom na) 14
26. . (ku) [glik burhte]ti [pudar 16 ku tQ.on bumteti bumnal)] (ma) (dindin
lwar ta] ,
27~ [go}:l sluk sukhfiy cindrow] (n kden bnas) 16 [ar] (kinta) [n blah.] (goh.)
28 ••..• [go]o· [bumn]al). . ~ . ~ 11 [ar kinta u] (gol) ma) gel} [ar tu]k
[Q .]e[k]
~· qek go}). [tlun] 18 cip [tuy 19 . blal:i u 4elf] r[e n lar] m[l]el1 (11 han turo ]-
30. w [m]i(rmok] kint[u] pha[llagun] t[n]e[y] ca[ndraw Jar [bar nagi tmin
ha~]
: i Looks like au.man or dupah. I cannot explain it. The next word looks a& if it might have
been. sinta o~ #'J!rl!f'1',, or something like that, also unintelligible.
~ Looks ::iomething like aa'k.
' Q>nqeJvably ilankar or dihkar. . 4 Very doubtful. Or p...Mm.
e. Looks like rap 1'U1f1laft,; hut either or both of the 1''s might be a "d, the p might l:ie m or s, and
the)n i'.~1d.oubtful. The lab. seems pretty certain~ The next WQtd is · also very doubtful~
· 'l':Ot t:u}'rc ·.. ... . . ·.. . . . s. Or Jifljiw.
·'t ......... ~t:f~l, except the t~ which is· practically certain.
~lL .. ··.. 1;1~~~~g ~word lQoks like diia.s.
is
• 11_ Alt .. t. · ' exceedingly doubtfult including the stop. But sirteiz at least prob~
>•·M ··.···"' •"• ... · . 1 s · T c h i: ~ B ? r . 9 .... , .. · i , , ~~ < ): . $ .. : · : ~ ~ s a ; k , J tn 7 a , k K 1 1. 1 4 C , f L . ' C .24 . 42. ia Or antzd.
u Both .w ords a:q,~.~ful, tlJough slom seems probable. After iL there i:> a little spare 1:pace and
7
there ma~ lie a ttte;ltt;: of,~ short letter, which could only reprosent na.
15 C<:>n:ceivably, btl't,)m~·rol>ably, punda1'.
ltt Ver~ doubtful. ~Tlle first word might conceivably be go ii,. But cf. E i, 33. F 48.
•· f:T 1'h~1 mi~s,ing word da~ nc:i.t se~m to be hitni. is Or tlz1.~. lt Or tuy.

~LUME
Epigraphia Birmanica No. IX. AN INSCRIPTION FOUNd,N£lTHARABA GATE, PAGAN. Ill,
L
\0 Cfl I 0 c:-1 . ·-;t :, 00 0 • c:-1 ~ \0
..... c:-1 c:-1 C-1 c:-1 C") C") C") C")
• .. • • •
,

Epig·raphia Birmanica No. IX.
AN INSCRIPTION FOUND{ NE·IARABA GATE, PAGAN. Arr,
VOLUME PLATE II.
-
• • 00
• • •

•·
PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS. 13
"
31. (nar) [<l]el:i pa bra[t cindran mol).] jlow [l]u[bac] k[u. kon brat. t\l~l-
32. w sal diilkar cut pkaw thar pned dulen sarhbhuc 1 duleti u golf
33. [ma ·s]ambeil gr[i] samben l[e]n [k]ala[n yaJfl s sail [bumn]al;l· [hu]r;t
· sa[ma] . .
< .
34. [to'] sluk s[i]rpuil s[u ] kh[u]y cin( d)row 3 ~n[khu]y u[Ia] r [na kuJ gl[ik]'
35. ku[ch]om bumten go(b. ma arJ lnor na[r tuy u ut] di[s cas]
11
36. [go]l:i 'gel) [p]a bra[t] ci[ndran] Iu[~]ac k~ [k]o[n] bra[t] t[b]o[w] .•
( rurhlal).) 4
37. [pka]w thar pn[a]n dulen [sambhuc dulen] gek '[ldas th]ar srefi (.le-
38. [k k]inlo' sail ma cu[t=t]arh sno' ji[l]j[1]p [ta go]]) cJ[eQ. re]n [sura}
39. [p tiiy] blal) n cip={p]i[ryam] dum[hi]c [~]a[r] n[a4i ~Jar pat tmi(n
gol:i]
40. bu[mn]a~ [h]ura to' [cu]t [p]ka[w thar] si[r]win pneif dulen [k]et 4e·
41. k klas that sre[fi] gek kinlo1 [s]aft [m]a t~u[t] ta[tit ~ilo]' Oi}
42. [l]jip [g]olJ [s]an [rumbas Inor] ut dis cas t[uy] Dla[Q. u s]ir[te}
43. (n) ti tak t[n]ak [m]le[l:i h]an piryam go}.1 kuth qe[l;l] P:~is]gi[nhalJ.~
TI
44. (d nal) sal) 6 binc[al] ji[n]ju[n t]a golJ [m]l[e]l:i ~· [c]u;th ,p~Jry[i]m
dumhic [ mJ o ..
45. (y pahir mo)y 7 [nag]i tmi~ gel) khal sin[d]ra[' ji]fijun ta gob
46. (tuy) c;lel:i ....... [r1 han p]i[ryam] it[u]mh[Uc [go]l;l. [k~Jm 4-el:i ket
D
.
'.
:2 ••
t, • flt 'It .- • 11 .: "" ........ ·• •••
3. . . ( qek k1as thar srefi) . .
l Possibly sumb!mc. _
2 Looks rather like yuii, but the extra stroke is J?robabl.)(ac~4en:Uil•
a It .iis v~ry ~oubtful whether there is any trace. of a(nere, · Per~t;ps cinrow i$ the more prob~
able readmg m this passage. ·· ···· .•<< ·· ··
d ••
J E:x:~eedingly doubtful, though the .,, seems fairly c~rt~iri~ . . · ·t i Possibly gi.ndal.
G ~he restoration is :'o1!1ewhat conjectural, th?t1~~':Jty~~ems to be suppE>rted by one of tbe
impressions. ln any case 1t 1s probable, and the i seems pre;tty certain. 1
7 Fairly certain, owing to the context. ... . . . .. .. . ...... . ·
s There may be traces of another illegible line above this one.

•
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. III PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS
4· (1) .. • (n gol) ma bumnab hura ket ~ek klas thar srefi 20. [s sli.iy klarh dificam klas ti klam dificam u] (han) [pen klas ta,
•
gek kinlo' sail) 1 gol:i <;leb] (crok pkaw b)[r](ac)
S.· (ma . . c . u t t . ar . n . s . n• . o ' . la . . J · 1 ·1 . J ·. l . p . ) . [d . e . h . ] . .............. • .......... . 2 i. (km ow sla caqu)[fi] ( da) 1 [my] 11 [gol:i ma] c;l[ eb kJ e[t klas thar klas
,. srefi] (gob) [gel) lusal]
6. . • . ,.. . . . . l!I • • ~ I'll • ill s•t11!Jllll'>Oflt&O•Ol!WOl!Oe 22. (hantul lwar pan 2 ma) [ <;lel:i gun.Ji (ku gl]i[k burhten ma Q.e~ pudar
ku t]Q[0n b]u[rhteil gol:i ma bum} ·
•·••&•.•&'1191!99
7. . . ~ . (n a~I} • _. ~ • • . · {pa!).Q.it n) • • . ,, • 23. [nal:i ma dindin lwar ta gQJ}. slok sukhi.iy cindrow ut] (kum u yan)
[klas sluy klas ti ta gol:i]
8. ,, .• 4 • • • • 111, 9 eo • • • ( ci) [ 9el:i] • [i] .... 24. (fial:i) .•. (ginlas s ku mirma ma rap sinran) 4 [ta golf] (ku 5 ma)
It • • • • 6 "
• .. Cl • • • • .. • "' ... • • .. • flt .. ~ • • " l!l • [ cingin] ( dakep) 6 nab ma [ cingi]n ta
9·. [ket] (sla) (ku) 25. (gob sluk glik sirpon) [kuchom burhteti juk sok bumten] (gol:i ma)
11
[jiljup] [burhnal:i hura] .. . . .7
IO .• ...... (burhnab ci) . . . ......... .. . . . . . ' (phl) 26. (ma) ....................... ,. . . • .. . ......... (a
"' • .• .. • If 8 • .ei f 0 • • • II bat ar) [kinta] (n gol) ma ar)
u. (n) ......................... (tily) [blal:t gel~] 27. [tuk] ge[k] (1r Q.ek golJ tlUn) [cip tiiy n c}eb] lo[p reti Iar 'jinren]
(sthan ma si)- ·
.. " • 8 • "' • .. .. "' " • • ..
[br]
I 2. • • • • • • , • 9 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • .. • • • .. .. • .. • • 2 8. (sfil) 8 ••• , ............. [u han piryam dum]hic gal) [kurh]
. • (ket ku) . . • • . ·· .. . . • • . ( ut) • .. .. • . .. . . 9 skil ·
1 3. . • • .. .. ~· • • . . . .. .. • • .. • • .. (s irsul) • • • • • . • • .. .. • . [ <;lel:i sil 29. (bal)[i] (Indra ku) [ut dewataw] (gurh)l(u)in10 [ci] cJel) [kindam]
_ mlel) han· pfry~m~ dumhi}
11 t[u]y [kil] (bali mlel:i yiya') t(ii)-11
14. [~] •.......... --(c"eft) 4 ....................... (gurhir ma) 30. y (reh) 6 [buddharup] Jma nom) 6 [Q.ey cJun Arimaddanapur wo' ci]
[spaQ.ot parit] (wUr) [ut] (pa)- .
. (n) •••• (lab) . i(t) 12 [lal:i]
15. (n) [tlan] (ku) (s](inghasin reil pgey gob mlel)) 6 [n] .•..• 8 [mirmok=
31. [pnen] (bunka) [sambhuc 18 k](l)(o'] (twin) tney [gof)] k[um] 4elJ. pa
kintu phal](l)a[gun tiley] (su) ..
p(µjaw jap ut] {mlel:t blal)) [goh.]
16. (krawar 7 gob Q.el)) (ket Q.ek klas thar srefi] (ta gol)) [<;le(t] (lop 11 14
32. (dan nidhi kil) ............ (cu\ pi sthan mlel;l) [11 cip=piryam
rum bas ban) fiin}
durhhic pan naQ.i tmin] (da) s q[el:i]
I 7. Oun jirkoy jifijun yas ;ifijun atas sin] ghasin [ku ut jifijun] (surh tum
33. (pis) 6 [jiljup 16 ku sarbbagan 18 marrnal ta gob mleQ. n han turow
c•e)n
na<;li tmin gol:i Q.eQ. plo}
18 .. (mlel).) [n tney gol:i kum c]ip=[piryam durhhi]c,, \>ar [pah]ar b[lal}.
9-]e[Ll ar] (tuk Q.ek) 8 (sirsu)- l Cf. B 19, C 24, G 28, J 7, R 14, L 24.
•••
s The word pan is particularly doubtful.
19. (l)~ .... ,..<at!har10 sut ma) ... (u blal). ket) 11 [klas] thar, [dificam s The vowel of the· second syllable might be
klas sren d1ficam kla} . . 4 PGssibly simhaf;. ; cf. F z3, 24, H 44·
5 Perhaps kum. 8 Very doubtful.
1 C E o v n e 1 : e y c t t h u i ~ n a g l a r f e t s e to r r ~ h t i 1 ~ o r w i , i , is d e m pe e n r d el ~ y n g c onjectura c l o ~ r e r s ~ t c o t r n a e t s i s o n, though probable enough. '1 Possibly 1ia[L or pan, preferably the former.
: on the of the r7ading jz"ljip, which is not quite s Extremely doubtful : ma si.. in the last line might be pa.fft.pi.
certai 5 n . A ll ve . r y do L u o b o t k fu s l h : k r e e 1 t i a s p < o Je r y w m as ig . ht con 4 c e C iv o a n b c l e y i v b a e b ly m a c l m i e m h e ( y a , s m m leh . J m 2 i 9 g ) h , t b u be t p b r l o ah b . a bly not. 1 9 0 T T h h e e l s a e s c t o n p d a r u t o i f s th v e e ry m i d s o si u n b g t fu p l a . ssage looks rathet l l l i k A e ll j a v ya er . y d B o n u t b t 1 fu o l a e n x m ce a p k t e t h n e o t t h . ing of it.
6 Probably the word . for '( nine" is contained in this mi35ing passage. · · 12 LooJt like ngit or j ..£ t. . . . : lS Or "'possibly sumbhuc.
7
Doubtful. .. ..·· . · .·.. . . • . . a Doubtful: tu.k mi.O"ht be ket and dek is very uncertain 14 All very doubtful, except perhaps the last wortl; cut might be ut# and the rest is quite
9 Very doubtful. The word might be sisut~ o~ something eise. ' · • uncertain. 15 Perhaps jiljup.
10 Or a~tar, or ateara? 11 All very doµbtful. HI Perhaps, though improbably, sarw~0, or even salrwb0 •

r •
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. III PART 1] McJN INSCRIPTIONS 17
34. [p jiljup ku] (bdi') 1 [sarbbagan marm]al ta goh [m]lef.i [u] ha[n
i 4. (go}!l ar tuk c]ek) . . . . . • . . .. . . . . . . (snal) [ji}
moy pahir tmin] (gol)) [c Jeh.]
5. (iijun ta gol).] (9e1J.) .......................... .
35. [crok tcJon binten b]ar .[u ban] jifi[ju]n [jirkoy ~ar tQoft hinten mo}
11 6. [gel). p.~ brat cindran lu~a.c ku kon brat tl}o ]-
36. [y ban jifiju]ti ya[s 11 tqo]ti [binteti moy] ha[n jifijun atas] (11 goh. 7. [w sal dinkar pkaw thar pnen dulen sarhbhuc dule}
ma) [bum}
8. [ n] • . . . .. • . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • . . (tuy b lal;t) . • . .. • " • • ..
Iii ,,
37. [naQ. hura ket <Jek klas thar srefi Im c;Iek kinlo' san ma cut tarh
sno' jil} , 1
9. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .. [tltift] ( cip) [tUy 11] • • • • • • • • • • •••
38. [jup 8 gob ma paqot san rumbas tuy r gol:i ma girkar ku jiljup] 4
P 10• •••••••• (11 gol:t ma) [burlma}J. hura to'] (ket) [<Jek klas tha]-
(ku Iwis) ••
u. [r srefi Q.ek] (kinlo' saft ma fiin cut tarn) 9 [silo']
39 ......... [srun jifijun jirkJ oy [ku sru]n [jifijun yas ku srun jifijun
12. [jilji]p [gol:i ma pacJot san rumbas tuy p ... hum ut]
atas]
13 ........ (snal) [jinjuti ta gob. mleb blal) go}). sal]
11
40. [si](tighasin) [<Je]IJ gir[kar ku sla jilju]p (ku lwis tily) [gob] ma [tm1
14. [diilkar] (lnor) [pkaw thar sirwin pnen duleti cip pirya]-
11
ket] . . . . , .. . . .
15. [m ussajogga candrawar] ..................... ( Q.eh) 8
4i. ..... (ta)· [go}) tun] g[irkar •] ..... (girkar) 5 [jiljup] (ku lwis)
$ 16. (pis tmo' snal) [jinjun ta gol:i jap ut mleb. han]
11
[ta gol) ml]el:i [u sno•] ..
17. [piryam go)} kum u] ( criift)" ........... (jinjun) ... .
42 •..•.......• 6 [D9]ala 7 [ci <;i]e]J. [plo]p l[ax ut jijap tlan mlel)
•• 18. [ut pan tlan 11] (tlan) .......••. [ut jifijun] .... .
u cas mirmok=kfotu phal](l)a-
19. . . . . . • . . • . [jifi jun] . . . • . • . . • . . . . . • . . . (k) [j iiijuti pra] ..
43• [gun tney sniscarwar 8 cup piryam durhhic moy pahar turow naQ.i]
20. [sat birlip 6 a utJ (jifijuft 6 go]J.) [Q.e}J.] .. (fi). [tfiy blal).]
(brisa) 9 [l]f:l(g,na) · · ··· · ·
21. [u han pirpifi kantu 7 phalagun tney brahaspati}
44. (go]J._n1a) [tirfa.poy mhather Arahan ku ut trey] (saftgha) •....•
22. (war moy) [nagi] t(m]i[n] ge[Q. surap thar <J]el). la[k pa}
45. . • . .. . (r) • . .. • s . . [ ut] .. • .. ''fr . . • . .. . .. .. . • . . • . .. . . 2 2 3 4. . . [ p . a h • i ~ • ] • ( 8 p i [ ) h a [ n n aq ji i f i j p u ] n l[ o y p a s j if 11 i ju tn n e ) y . ~ g . o} . ). . 9 k u ( r 11 h ] h a ( n b ) a r ( ) p iryam goQ.]
•. Iii • • ._ il • • .. • • • 25. [kum p·hihn thiwas jifijun jirkoy j]ifijuft (yas ji}
26. [njun atas ku ut jifij]un [sum tum c-en] (da) n [gol]. ma bum}
E !i.7. [nal:;t] (sankran) 10 (to'] (u) 11 [gu]fii lwa[r] pudar ku [t4]on [bu]-
28. [nteft n hantUl] lwar ta gol:1 qeb. lusal klas thar
r. •.• , [n cip=piryam] (durhhic) • . • . [pahir] (pi) [na~i] (tmin) 29. [ srefi u klas sluy] 12 ma f'ia}J. [c ingin] go}J. [pi cw ]as pi da ~
• • • • It- • 30. lburhnaQ. ma dindi]n [lwar ta gol;L slok sukb)uy cindro. .
(b kden bnas ar. kinta tik pharh klo')
2.. • •••• lQ 31. [w] ...•.. 13 [ku glik kuchom burhten u iuk sok]
3.• • • ' ~ • " • ' (k) . • • • •" ~ " • • • .. " ~ (jifijmi fl) ,.
. . II • • • jj • t 0 • •
. l Or tlun. s Except for the i, ma flit: is doubtful ; but the rest is nearly certain.
1 y~'.~Y cfoubt.ful,·except the b, which seems fairly certain. 5 3 P P e e r r h h a a p p s s d b e f k rl . u p. 4 6 D Pe o r u h b a t p fu s l . c ru T i h i. e re may be a ta between it and gofi.
2 As;:fo t~~.··p~eceding. line,. see note. s Perhaps jup. 7 Perhaps kintu. But there is no clear trace of nn i. . . .
4. Perhaps• }~1.;i~~p .. . •. ·.· · . 5 Very douhtful. B The last part of the missing passage Io oks like pat, or. pdat: The first letter ii: the line t s
6 The last Iette(pf;Jhe missing· passage seems to be l, 7 Looks like Pa?Jefala or ma1JrJ,ala. illegible, and. this throws some doubt on the end of the. ptecedmg lme also. Cf. E 47 1.njra.
. s Perhaps siiz"~ .· ... • , ; 9 Presumably we must restore yas or at.as.
9 Thi; ~ee111.s t~ ~.~ th~.r~~ding, "th?ugh of course in a barely legible passage it is difficult to be 10 Doubtful. But cf. A 12, J 2, 9.
sure that it 1s n?t me~a.. c· . : 2 .· 7 , ;. ' · .· ... ·.··· · · . 11 There seems to be a stop here, though none is needed. 12 Perhaps sluy.
.10. Very·· dou.Jit.ful•': ··CK. E. :33. IS Looks like 11 tjel;i na, which I cannot fit into the context satisfactorily, though I have
attempted to translate it on the assumption that the stop is misplaced.
3

18 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. III
32. [burhteft blal) gol)J.hura [bumnab] (dak~an 1 phlac 1 me)[khal~]
,. 33· (bn]as k[d]en g [ti]k ar pharh (kinta goQ. ma] ar tuk 4e. .
34. [k n' kindrow] (ma) [a]r [tuk gek go]b [ban ji}
11
35. [fijun ta gob] cJel:i[h pa bra]t [cindr]an [pi cw]as d[urhpol)}
.56. (h] d~rmon] n (s]a[l di]nka[r pi cw]as [durh]poh [4ek kla}
11
37. s k[Iarh] pa[n] cwas di[fic]a[mJ u pkaw [thar] pi cwas d[umpol:i]·
38. [h •] p[n]e[n] dul[e]n 'pi cwa[s dum]pobh sam[bhu]c (dulen]
11
39. [p]i [cwJas [durh]pol)h ge[k kinl]o' [san ma cut]=tarn
11
40. [silo' jilji]p g[o]b. [pi cwas d]mil[p]ol;ih da [11 hanJ
41. [na]r d[inkar snal p]k[aw] thar p[n]en dulen (p]un [khal ma]
42. [crok] ku p[neil a ut ta] g[o]I; cJebh r[e]ft surap
43· [Iar tnyJ blab qe[k ma] <;le[bh ar tu]k (gol:ih]
11·
44. [tlun] ci(p t]u[y u] cip=[p ]ir[yam godh] ul(i] Ia[gna] gotl [q eb}
45. [h] p. . hfim thiwas: jifijun j[i]rko[y jifijun ya[s ji]-
11] 11
46. iijun a[tas] ku u[t ji]fijuti s[um] 4 tu[m] c-eii wu[r u}
11
47. t pa[nJ t[l]a[n] mieb [11] ha[n p]ir[y]a[m] "gob ku[m Jak] (mat)6
48 .• • · ~. • ........... (hanp)UJ(ryam gol;l }\u)[rh] •• , .6
F
. . • .. . . . • . . . .. k 1 [t]iley sukrawar
go[lj ·k um moy]
2. (n~gi] (mi~a 8 lagna} • . • . • .. -~ , ....... (sni ra]jasthan gol;l II
mi[m]o[y] 9 han go}). · .
3.· Qe~ [~uip tinlaJ,i tha:r ,tinlab srefi 'tinlal:i $l]uy n [ u]t cas han gol:i
row golJ- ·
+· 10 t]inla~ ti]nlal~t gel~
(h) [.tiJqla[b thar sre(fi sluy p( tirhpi) 11 purhpi tuip
u tney gol) kum gel) kh[a]l · ·
5· [iiiijun ji]rkofrl. jinjun yas jifljun · atas · blal;i goI:i gel) khal ut
11
Uinjun sritti ·t uµi] • ·
·~ight
tl be ,,, or something else. The -t may· be y.
perha:ps be .w. . , . . .... . . ·.. · · . ·
"'H'!i#·.. ·u:t1e11·•1111cs:v,
. .•. . ··. 4 Possibly, but improbably, st"im. .
initial is not, p, -though a cross-bar· is certainly visible. But
z2-3 supra. .. . · . ·
.. ~--··-v ..... ,. .. ., ccrgjfctui~al r g e f l it t o h r e a ti . o to n p . s .o f letters .a rid' · . · s · uperscript s ·· ytn • bol; remain ' but their .
Pt"la•""'H the end of
: 9 l-'A~C~1hh.t ,,.~, ,.,.,,,.v.

I
.ui..• -t:l!ik. ""4&£2£!2255!£2£& axea. ~K&~ I
Epzgraphia Birmanzca No. IX.:, VOLUME III, PLATE Ill.
• •
AN INSCRIPTION FOUND NEAR THiABA GATE, PAGAN •
• •
• • •

•
PART I] MtJN INSCRIPTIONS 19
6. [c·e]n mleh " han pi[ryam go:Q.] kum qel} giw tarn jifijun jirkoy
jifijun [yas jifijun]
7. [at] as qeb sa1 tin[l]ab thar tinlab srefi tinla}:l s[luy] ut jifiju[ti] ta
11
gol:i pumpi ta"
8. p ~el;l sal s[m]ol:). jirnok ku ki[ntal] jiiijun ta g[o]l:l n [4]eh [grw] ku
glik ma ~lel) ··
jJey[yale]kh~
9. [sal gol). mleb. u [t]ol ma qeQ. pur jifi[j]uil ta goQ.
sumwat kuma- •
lo. [ri) kon [b]um[n]ab. kon kii(u)m l (ma t)len a goh [ma kindam] klam
dificarn tno[l) ·t ( fi )y a da goQ.
n. [ma] burimab [h Jura pa<J[ot] san [rumbas tfiy bl]al:i [gJol;l [ma] <;le}:l
pur jifijur1 ta gol) [mle]l:i
12. (tn]e[y] gob kum pi nat}r tmin minalagna [ge~ y]uk [pt]aw lar
jifijun jirkoy ~a~
13. r jifijun yas jinjun a[t]as singha[s]in han ti~gfir sru.n <Jel). kum k[u]m
II tiJ.e ..
r 4. y (go ]cy. kum cip moy pahar tu row na~i tirla" l[m]om pun yan cin
11
no ..
I 5· r (d)il}.Qar 4 jinren Jetawan gol) [lop ptaw] Cin (han k)inta ra[n]
kinl(u)fl 5 Puka•
·
r6. m p(q]ey kumben (ma sar) 6 [go]I:i yati fi.a [l war ku lw]ar (ya)n
11 7
golJ (l]op [t]aw boy
17. [k]ro[w] ciil yan boy oiti ki[nta goQ.J yai ciil bintan [ma yimo']
11
Erawan(a) ..
18. mahawijeyyabajrabhu[m ma ~nk pin.ku ut] ki[ryaJ j[ma](p) [ma tmuy
na] thar [rma}
19. s [ma fi]i[n] Iak na [rat ma] kaQ. [m]oy [p]ra[ka.r] gol; ma (ta)[w 8
]Jar lum ]pek go.. . . . ,
zo. [h y]ail k[~Jeb. yAn (ma] ~[u]k pin [k]u [k]irya {r]in[gal;l th]ar [ma
ya]s [ma] fiin [Iak na ra}
21. [t ma kab moy prakar] (goh ma} 9 [taw cuh~ti] n ut sambeil gri
sambeil left
22. [kalan yan sail ma tlun kom ku] tir.la[' ~poy gna smi]n [dhammaraja
gob. lal:i] fial).
1 Possibly knum. ' Possibly /a ind klelt. a Possibly tu_y.
4.. Conceivably 'rlflr!<ir. s Possfbly kin1fl:h.
t1 Very do11btful, . 1 Presumably right, though it· 1ooks like wo:g11.n.
s Looks like <warliw. ' J,.ook's like 1eo1nt.

4 J __ Mitl&!l:UU£1UIAUL.L,L!UctllS.d.,.,Ah.L.:W.W .., ,.J ),.,.,.;.· ... i. f.,. .F .. t- i
•
EPIGRAPHJA BIRMANICA
(VOL. III MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART I] 21
23. [ma rap s]inran 1 (ta) 2 goQ. laQ. [sluk sirpun 8 sukhuy] cindrow sukhiiy
36. durhhic l}ar [pah]ir has[ta] 1 na(k~atra me]thuna Iag['11)a crun jifijui
• . ular glik ku-
jirkoy }ifiju·
24~ (chom juk sok] bi(n]t[en ut mle]Q. [u] bla}:i (go}.i iial) ma rap si]nran t 3·7. it [yas] jifijuft atas ha[n~tarh] dir[k]as j[i]njun [ta] gob qeQ. piir
11
(ta) 4 gob (sambe} .
ku glik
z 5. i1 [gri samben left kalan y] aft saft [trap] (d )(urhsao 5 kla pnafi bumnab. 38. bi[nt]en blal) [g]oh jifijun jun dal [jifijun] prasat j[no] k j[i]fijun pra-
11
hura fiaQ. ma]
39· '[sat cind]row pa[n] jifijo[ft prasat b] ir[l]up ku u[h] s jifijun sum tum
26. Ie[p kindam sni' to,] s[l]ok [sirpu]ft 6 [sukhu]y ci[ndrow sukbiiy ula]r , gel) gi·
(wak) 1
· 40. w ku glik binteft gel). [c]ut [paficarat tuy cJe]~ [c]ut pun ku ~ek tol:t·
27. [ut kiryaJ 8 na ku (glik] 9 bi[nt]e[n] ku(chom binten juk sok binteli 41. h [curhhal bl]aQ. [u qeQ. cru ln 3 [ut] m1eQ. [11 kal cr]un [ra]ja[s]tha[n]
cut]
11 gol) [ya]ii t[u] rh ..
28. [pk]aw .t~ar~ sirwift p[n]e[il dulen 11 lfl)or [ac] war [nor tirla poy gna] 42. [way] ju[rh]win [ma] (ad)[i] (nor) 4 [thar srefi bley] (kba)l saM:ara[t
s[m]1[n Sri]
ma] kah. (mo}·
!l9~ Tri[bhu]wanaditya[d hammaraja] I[ morn] pun bi(r)[boy] 10 sa(lar) :n blaQ. 43. [y pr]aka! [ci] <Jeh. [tlun] (tway)6 (ku) [gna
11 ••• ; ••••• , •••••
[go]Q. [burimab.] hu ..
smin Sri Tribhu}
30. ra (fi]ab. [ma] lep k[indam sni'] to[' ar pa] p(ujaw nar ro]w ney 44. wanadityadhamma[raja] ........... [ra]ja[sthan] J[eyabhiim
n •
[tum]Ia(r=) ku 12
han ji](fiju)·6
11
3 I. cutk~i(I] Q.e[k kl]as [thar srefi blal) go}:i bum ]na[l). hu ]ta fia}.l (ma] lep 45. (n .) • • • .. .. ~
II • • • • • .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • • • • • •
l"'
32~ ndarh ~s~i' sum tu[rh J tlun [sl~n [aut gek p] ari[t] klas thar sre[fi hJ an 46. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . (t] . . . . . . .. . .
srun
.. . . . . . . . (hantu)·
33. [ta] go'.tr [blal:1 nJ cut paficarat (jap ut) [srun ta goh ku] pun dek 47~ [1 lw]ar [ta go}:lh] gel) lusa:[l] klas thar sre[fiJ kla[s] sluy klas t[i]
[to ](ll)- · ·
1
~~ha(l~
34. h 1sen gumn ''. n . b l la a Q 1 . 4 (go]Q. g[ir)luk 13 ut !'Jharh [klo'] (m)urJi [ta]pi[w] 48. ci[ngin] b[n]as k[da]n 8 . cjel) ren [su]ra[p] lar [tay n cu]p pi[ryam
dumhic] ....... .
15 s[g~c]
35. (th)':r !mhasar] s[ingir pg]oQh 16 ka(k]a(r=)u[t] ba[l;;:lab]al.i
.
h1 [tr]a[k] n [cu]p p1ryam
a
l Perhaps sindraiz.
t s L O o r o , k p s e l r i h k a e p s ti , , s b ir u p t u t n h . e supposed i' is Lradly sh~ped and may be due t o acct · d enta1 d amage. 1. [khal ma norh] 9 ku [pn]eil cu[t] k[i]l ge[k] klas [thar sreii]
:,. Here .t here is no trace of any £, but the t is blurred. 2. [sal dink]ar cut pkaw thar sirwift [pne]n [dulen] n (gol;i)
7 C L o o n o c I e ~ s i ~ r a ~ b t l h y e , r b 1 .1 · u k t e le w s a s k p a r m o . . b ab C l o y n ' c r e u iv th a s b a ly c • the initial might b 6 e 0 t lh r .. si • r B p u u - t n · c . f. G ~ 3. [ma bumnal:i hura fi]ah.. ma lep kindarh (sn]i' to' [lii]or [n]ar 11 [lnor
8 Possibly, but 1mprobably, kirya-:. 9 Perha l'k,, 5. nar]
10 The r is very doubtful. 11 L k psi.kg "
1B It i · s excee d m · g I Y doubtful whether there is an r at all Th o b o ! ~~ s ~ l v e e r . s atap • l Perhaps (but improbably) hastii.
o as r b m e a in y g st m an e d an t f o f r o r t it t , u m m w l a h a k e r i t . n h g e ~ kum, But if the true read' m • g f o l . 1 : 5 ;w ; ~ u o m ;s 1 ~ b ly thm th k e . i t k m m u a s y t b be e a r c e c g id a e r n d t e a d l 2 4 T Pr h o e b a r b e l a e d , i n th g o a u p g p h e a n r o s t c to e rt b ai e n . u h 1 C w f. . h I i c C h : c t6 a . n , only be a. sli 5 p N fo e r a r u ly t. certain., 3 Coriceivably Cf'in.
1 14 5 L It o o is k s n o h .t k e c e h rt a a r i n ( or even ~a la ?) ~ s , h . o uld be joined to what t. girl'lik. a 6 L V o e o ry k s d a o u l b i t t f tl u e l . like gon, but probably kdan is right. No 1 P d o i s s s i v b i l s y i b o le n , e th sh e o u st l o d n r e e s b t e o i r n e g m a a p p t a ia re [t n . t11
16 Might be p-cl;.h. Cf• . A •. t < f • · " ~ ., 3 :'· 1 .· . : . G . . . .5. • broken off here. Cf. C 27, E ~, 33.
9 In the preceding line we must assume Jiiil.

. EPIGRAPHIA BlRMANICk (VOL. III
. [tuy blab cip=p]iryam [godhul]i lag[n]a [tik pham klo' piw singir
4
pgoh.]
I
5. [kaka](r= )[n 9 gob: ma burimal:i hu)ra [td ar p .. hfim jinjun jirko]y
[jinju}
6. [n yas jifijuft atas] jinjuti prasa[t p-hfim j]ifi[ju]n [p]rasat
7. [bi]rI[up ku tit jifiju]ft su[m] tu[m] mlel) p .. hfi[m] tiiy blal:i sal
11
"di[nk] ar [Cu}·
8. [t pka,v·thar surn]bhu[c dule]n pneft du[l]e[n] lno[r u]t [j]ap ji[nju}·
9. In ta] gol:i [rnlel:i II tn]ey [sni]scar a \>ar cirwek [pi] pahir [blal)
surn]be·
IO. il ka[n]sa(sfir4 sum]beft (ra)[jirsil]r6 s(mnb)en (ripu)(saddano)6
[sumb]e[n m~.a](ch.att)i 7
i i.'(sumben prajfial~'itbJ~ar ku bumn]al:i hu[ra to' rumb]as [ku] <;lek (pa}-
12. (rit kJas] that (srefi] bla[l:i <;ie]b · kir sr(u)11 8 [ma] st[uip 9 n]idhi' pa[n]
13. [han pan dis jifijunJ ya[s gob] p[Q]ey tro[ri] s1(U.)y 10 [pan ~~o]·
14. [h 4e1J cut tharJ s[~]e[n ut] ra[t ma] kal) (91o]y [p]rakar (go}
15. [h ma giwku gli~~' binte]n n [dp=pi]ryam du[mhic p]i (pah]ar [mo}
16. [y nagi] (karka~,~ t~agB~Jn.,Iut sumb]e[ngri} su[mbe]n [l]en [kalan
:<~/1· :;.:.}~ ~:·: ·:··>•:~.,:·1
•·· .Yan}·," ... ..
•··· . ...•.. . .·· ·. ..•
.. 17. (s~n buT~~~:~uraJ01:tun 11 s]a[n rltm~a~ku] qek pari[t kla}
. r8. [s. t~at .sr~n ~~.r~.gob] {ma) 14 [ti]p [n}i[dh]i [pan gob ut pan]
19 ...•. 10 frait)(tiley ma] cr[u)n [rajasthan Pukam go}) kum] (a da)--
(11
16
2o4.[p tney stl mirmol lab] (dap) (tney sil cirwekJ
21. [la}.1tirla poy mha]ther [A] ra[han ku t]i[rley sangh a sum]
22 •. (turh lop)du](m taw}17 ha~. [pc;I]ey. Qetawan nor] sar [tn]e ..
2,3~ [y .m~. Io'.p ~.~~\111 ~c:ll:>:h) 18 ko[n fi~h. jnok rmen ku] ko ..
2 . . 4 . . t ~ . l , i l~ ~ · C ••• l ': j " l ; f l : ·· i · J ''•; ~ : . ., o ·:k > · •·] ; :< > :I t '; ; ~ : ~ < • ;. :i~' ~ · :..:~ ..· • • ~. .. . . • . 19 ( pat..A d .t 't t o J s ~1 o k ]
25. [sukhu)y [~t-~9t9'!:.wfilt ~t,J~i~ya na ku glik '0 binJen ~ucho)-
<·< > ,
· . •· .. ·... .• >•<".fi :T
l. Possi~ly :.f·o(... Cf.. a"n,. 3 < 3 .," F is<,. H•: •4 6. ·• ·
~ There seems to be a \l'et:y dis~inct ,.. SQperscr w .lpt ovet the sto.p. B.ttt
··A :1 ~' 33, Ii' }Si•:· .... ··.· . • ~ •. Cpnce~vably ~ni~~ar~. . . . . . .··. . . .. f Or
5 The ]~~ti~l. mig}ifp~ ~ or ga.. 'the, .middl!iLt is doubtful. The last. syllabte may be sur,.
8 .' J;h:}•niigh;t .b e < m . ·• The, » · miftif t he .•. 4. · .. ... ·. · . .. .. . . 7 . ·P ossibty mhiisaf#i or m..fuaatti ..
• sqr sriiri;. •> , s Cone,€livably, but improhably, stUip. 10 :rerhaps .rh(:.1"•
...' ,"J,l•••The:. fi.tst•~.~~etJ1s. P!~~~Y. certa~n.· , · li. Perhaps. tun.
~~h•Perh~p~ tu~·· r; : . . :. ···.· ·.· •. ·. .. ·•. • . 14.~he read;gg, ma. is nearly certain.
• =
ll:f•: Probably '.we ~houl~ t~store dis, . or pos~1bly #iin.
xa. Fail'ly certai~F~oth h~t<e a~d ~t the end of t~~ preceding line. 17 Almost certain.
lS The final h i,s ·aQU~~fu1;:~f,b~t ~lit!~e is ~0111~tliing there~.. << . .. . . . .
par~ ;~~h.~.·;W~~~~~~~~~~;·;~~,...g~obabit ~t}ltlic ~me. l~oks lik~.
.·.······•· .... 'l9. The.first ofr an. It t'ja/nt1 or
"h~qm,;wh~c;b .. see~ .1;mp~c;>~1'1~~e:: ..< F!'~~ · · ·· · · •+ .. /.·:.•· ... ·.~ · ··•i . • ,. .••: .<·. . ·.·. ........ · ............ Pediafl. . fl(~. .
,,. .. _,. :Z·~ :"·:~~~~:::.:.:~, , ·.·.:;:;··Y:'.;.
'?f,~ \;.);::·~·,
'
1,,;;<'h ·; I,",',':~
. " •. :~s;: ;, ~ .'· : •+ ; ,, c , j·:. . ;·
:;:~;~,;<' ·~:,~ ~
~:~~:,;;~~;;1;1: ·:~~J ;•·':.'~)t"'"'."., .::,,.·;

' jl . .
11 .· .
_E pigraphia Birmanica No. IX. AN INSCRIPTION FOUND NEAi'ITHARABA GATE, PAGAN. VOLUJ\IE III, PLATE IV.
• \0 00 .q- 00 •. 0
('l I .N ("')"

•
PART. I] McJN INSCRIPTIONS . 23
26. [m bi]nte.[n j]u[k sok binten] (11 ka)[fii' 1 lw]ar [ku glik ']
27. [binten pudar ku tgo] n [binten hantul 9 (lwar ta gob rusal) ~
11 ]
. 28. [klas thar srefi ku klas slfty ti ma ilal,i] ( cingin) 5 [u hai1 pen kla}
29. [s ta go!) qel) crok pkaw brae] (kmow) [sla] (cagufi da) 8 [11 olab] .
(golJ) 1
30. ti[k pharh ki]n[ta 11]. go[l:i ma kon iial:i jnok ta go!) ku paiJ.~it]
3 r. [yan s] an [to' ar tuk qek. <Jek] (gob tlun cip tuy) 8 <;lel:i]
11 [
32. [ren Iar· Q.ek klas thar sreft sliiy ti qek ki]uI[o' sail ma cu]•
33. [t ta:rh J s[n]o[' jiljup} <;leb. ~en [Iar han sni' ma spagot pa J-
34· (rit ~golf tuy blal} cip=pfryam sgal tney tirla poy mha]-
11
35· [ther Arahan ku tirley saflgha ma spaqot par] i[t ta gol:i]
36. [lop dmoii ban .s ni' ma spaqot parit ta gol:i u gob ina]
37. [kon ft.Jab. j[n]ok [ta]. gob ke[t <;lek klas thar srefi slu}
38. y ti ge(k k]i[ nlo'] san [ma cut tarn ·silo' jiljup gol:i]
39• pir[guin9 kiJ] ja[p tfty blab go]~ [ma p]aQ[4it yan] San
II
ac
40. '[to' cut pkaw] tha[r] sir[win pn]en dulen !nor pa-
4r. r[i]t l[nor tiiy b]lal). golJ [ma tirla po]y [mhath]e[r Arahan]
42. [ku trey sangha ta]· gol~ .Pa~o[t] pa[rit bl]al:i [pago]t pari-
11
43· [t tf1]y hlal). gol~ ma tirla [poy mha]ther Arahan [ku ti]-
44· [r]ley sangha [rna] pa<Jo[t] pari[t ta gob kurh ket ku <J]e-
45· (k par]it kinlo' [s]an [ma] nom (kuJ tarn sno' ji[l]jup u
46. gol; ma lop rumba[s drac rin:?ac wur] (ut pan) [tlan ra}
47· jasthan gol) mlel;r go}} ma.ji[t tun nor go]IJ ·u [g]ol:i
II
48. [ma] {d)[mon ta]w [kanfa nl.n ~0· go}:i ma kilJ 4.e[k parit] (ku) 11
·H
1. .. • • . • (ren) 12 (lar brat cindran han jiiijun jirkoy jifijun yas jinjun
atas]
2 [singhasin ban jifijun prasat birlup 11 han jifljun jun dal] (~1) [haaJ
0
(jifijun pra) ..
l Possibly kuni'.. . The usual. form . is plii; Cf, A t'9i B . ' £6~ I) 221E 27~ . J4.
g Perhaps glik. . . .· .. /.~ Or hantul;
4 Or possibly lusal. The exact words in this restated passage are a little. doubtful, but some·
, thing of the kind must be supplied. . .· . . 5 Or,.·.Jess probably, ren lar; the passage is blurre~.
g The ea is doubtful. The next letter may be 4·'· Gf, B 19, C 24, D ~o, J 7' K r4, L 24.
7 Conceivably tfel;t... · s This restoration is practically certain.
(! The mark taken for u may be. accidental. 1o Possibly f'un,,
11 Very doubtfUI. The next letters look rather like sa la. H Alm~st certain ..

\
•
J
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. III PART I .MDN INSCRIPTIONS
3 . (sat pan 11 ut) O]ap ta (gal~) [sal diftkar] (cut pkaw) 1 [thar pnen 18 .. k[et t](n)[ak thar] (moy) 1 [tak a juk srefi] d(u)rh(pob. a tuy) [golJ. ma
1 burhnab. hura] (to' pa).. •
dulen sambhuc]
g
. [dulen 11] cJ.e~ [re]n [lar tj.ek klas thar sreft gek kinlo' san ma] c[ut 19. (got) 3 •• (c)'' [tuy cut kil 4ek kias thar srefi tuy blab. gob ma
4
samben pra}
tarn] .
5 . [sno',jiljup) (golf) 1 [tuy blal) n ci]p==p[iryam durhhic] (moy) 1 [pahir 20. (jfia)[ . l a . n k . a . r 5 . b . a . le . y 5 mlel) u baley6 tuy blal}. Q.e.b.] (pat) [tnak thar]
mo]y [nagi tmi] .. .. .,
6. [n gol:i ma bumn]aQ. hu[ra flab. ma: lep kind]afti [sfti' to' ket c;lek klas 2 I. [ktac sumol:i bintil gob. i1 qel;t ktac sumol:i tiiy go}J ma samben
prajfialanka}
thar srefi] · ,
7. [gek k]inl[o' s]aft [ma] q[eb.. reft Iar] (ti go!) ma gel;) 8 [san rumbas 22. [r ke]t [t]i[nlalf thar ma] (tie~) [lu}~>ac ku] . [i] .... (s1a bil
f ••
j]a[p ut ku j]i[fijun] . baket) 7 [tol ma sumwa}
· s. [ta go]J. 11] b[l]al;t [goQ. ma c\eb. l]n[or pk]a(w thar s]i[rwift pneti dulen 23. [t] ku[mar-i kon] b(umnab] (kon kfium) . . . . • . . . . . ..... ~ •
jap ut] ( mlel:J_ 11) [ha} • • 8 (tuy) [bla}:i samben prajfia}· ·
9. [n] til[ey] adi[ttawar gob. kum c]i(p=piryam] d(urhh]i(c moy pahi]r 4 24. [Ian ]kar [c rok] • .. . • .. . . • . . • • . . . . . . .. . . . • . • • . • • • • •
(t>ar) is (nagi tmin] ......... (na) ... , •.. (tuy) . . . . . . . . .
10• [go]l:i li>.[or] [n]a[r 11 ban. nek pa bra]t [cindran] (boy 6 d)(irmoli sal 25. blal:i g[ol:i] ••...•.•..••....• ..
diilkar] (surap) 1 [pka} . . • . • . . • (kwir tar 9 buwut mo )· 10
................. .
11• w [th]ar [pne]n [dulen samhhua dulen 11 goh. ma sambeil gri 8 sambeii 26. [y] .• "' .... ,, ................ . ,
len] {kalan ·yan) 9 • • • • . . . . • .. .. . . .. (s) .•••.
12. [s]an [b]u[rimal_l] hu[ra mirma10 ma lep k]i[ndam sni'] (rmefi) 11 ma 27. . . . . • .. . ............ " •• -· ....
0 ... ' ................ .
[l~p kindam sni' slok12 sirpun 18 • . . . . . . [srun jifijun] (jirko )-
] .
•3· [sukhuy cindrow sukhuy:4 ular] (na) 1 k[u gl]ik [kuchom burhte]n [juk 28. [y trfisn] (gol:i ma) ............................. (kwir
sok burhten] .( n) tar buwut) ...•
4. [g]ol]. [ma bumn]al). hura fia}J. [ma lep kindam sni'] c(ut kil 4ak klas 29 .. [y ~el.i] (ac) [h](an) ..... ..
1 • • • • t • • • ' • • ., • • 4 " • •
thar srefi tiiy bla]J.] ............ (ket kwir)
5. [gol;l ma ~eQ. l]n[o]r [nek mleb.] [han pi]r[y]a[m go]b. [kurh 4el.l cut] 30. (tar buwut) .•.•. ~ •.... ,, . . . • . • • • . . . . [jinjuti yas 11]
1 11
. . . . , . . . [bintil han] dak 11 (Iar) [tuy] blab 19
16. [sth]a[n ma s]k[ir srun 15 jifija]n [ji]r[koy \>ar jifijun yas jifijun atas 31. [samben] (left kalan ku) [burhna~ hura] s[u]m tum [k]e[t qek klas
siilgnasin ku] · thar sren <Jek ki}
17. [s]tha[n ma skir sruti 16 jifiju]n [ut m]u[k pan tlan mle]ti [bla];l go})
11
l Almost certain. ~ Cf. . 1 C So. t Fairly certain.
samben . pra] (jfia )[lankar 17 ) 4 The first part of this word looks S-Omething like a (or ri~, or sa); the final might be n or w, I
have not succeeded in identifying it.
6 Practically certain. a Possibly bule.y.
l Almost certain. s Perhaps sumbhuc. 7 This passage is very doubtful i b4ket,, a mere conjecture. looks more lik6 ma lut, but I do not
s These four'words are very doubtful. The first might be ta or wu11, the third possibly blaft,. see how to construe the latter here. .
ii Possibly' pahar. 5 Conceivably, but improbably, pan. s Cf. F 10. But the words in that passage do not seem· to correspond ex:actly with the few traces
6 Possjply. . ,.tnPY. 7 Quite cloubt£ul, though the r seems certain. of letters that can be made out in the pre&ent indeeipherable passage. Here a large piece <>f the
s' Possi),'.!,Jy._'grf,~ · 9 This restoration is almost certain: surface of the stone has flaked off, leaving big gaps in this and the next seven lines. :"
1 n 0 P P o e s rh si a b p l s y s m lu a k rm . a. 1 1 1 s V Pe e r r h y a p pr s o b si a t- b p l u e. n . but h o a s C o b n e c e e n i v a a d b d ly e d w ' o ir n , t b h o e t h a n h a e l r o e g y a n o d f b H el o 3 w 8 . . The word. kwir is quite 10 il P le e g r i h b a le p s h e ba re .-. and in H ~s, 291
1 u 5 P B o o s t s h ib h l e y r e s r a u n n d . at the beginni i n s g P o o f£ ss th ib e ly li n s e r t i h n e . spelling m 1 a 1 y P b r e a c s t ii i .6 c h a U ll y y , t c h e o r u ta g i h n . it $eems improbable. may ll b e T a h c e c i i d n e i n ti t a a l l . looks like au or ru, .and the k has a mark under it 1 . 1 C B o u n t j e th ct i u s ra a l. n d the supposed u.
4

1··
'f.·,\,'
"!
{
Epig__rap_hia Birmanica No. IX ..
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. HI AN INSCRIPTOIN FOUND NEAR THE THARABA GAT
32. [nio' saft ma cut ·tarn silo' j]i[ljip s]an [rumbas ki]l [ban sthan ma
skir 1 srun 9]
33. [jifijuft jirkoy triis] gol:i [tuy] b[l]al:i go(b. ma samben] pra[jfiafankar
11
samben] (a)-3
34. . • . . (ra) [ c 4 t]r[ap 6 bissukar pa pJ i[ rdhan n go}:i] ma kala[n siy 6
k]ir [srun ji]fijun (ji]-
35. [rrko] y [tru]s go!). [ mle ]l:i (11 han sthan ma <;le JlJ. [s kir sru]n [j]i[fi ..
j]u[n j]i[rk]oy br[ow]
36. [go}J. burlm]ab [hura] t[ o] ' san [rumbas tii]y [blab. go}:i ma k] ala[ri
k] e[ft go ]I:t ki[r mle~.] u
37. [han sthan srun jifijun yas burimal). hu]r[a] pa[<;lo]t sa[n rumb]as
11
(tuy kalan J sa
11
7
38. [ket kwir t]a(r buwut m)[oy kir bl]alJ [11 <;le:Q. t-eti kir ducam kil]
(cas 'bar Ia- 8
)
39. (cut go)[.b. pan ban 11] (ma) [kir ducam k~l] (moy Iacut' go]J. moy)
[ban 11]
40. r[ow ma ki]r [ducam] ki[l han] sru[n jifijun jirkoy triis gob. . n
row] gol;l
41. [kurh] c;le[b. kir ducam ki]l ha[n StUQ jifijuft jirkoy brow II ban
sru] n ji[fijuft]
Jn
42. [yas .n ban] s[ruft jifi ju ata[s u] si[ftghasin] u ban srun jifijun
J-
[at]as dir[la
43· [c cirmuk kal go]Q. [ku]{rh) u[t j]a[p] tla[n b]u[rhnal)] hura to'
11
pago[t] sa-
44· [n rumbas tuy] [go]b. (ma samben k]ala[n yan sad t]rap [du]rh ..
11
[sac] ma rap [ sinran] 10
45· . ." . . . . . . . . . ., . . . . . . • . .. . [ ge] l.l [t~ ]e[l;l · kum ~urh wu]r 11
[u t jap] mu[k J pa[n ] tlaft 1
. • . . . . . . . . (tik) [pharh klo ]'
• • • • • • • 0 • • • • • • • • • • •
sgac [ singir pgol). 2
1]
. • • • • • • . . . • . [b. ban tney go ]b.
• • • • 0 • • • • • • • • • 11
k[urh rnoy] pa[hir ~a}
! Possibly skir;. . s Possihly sriin.
u,
9 Looks. rather like gu, or rii.
4 The unidentified symbols look rather like n!ea, or • • llhi.
5 Lo?ks rather like tra pham. e Or siy.
T Almost .c ertain. . 8 Or li·. 9 Or lieut.
1o ·Perhaps #ndran. ''· ~1 Conceivably 10ur., u. Possibly p-ob,.

MON INSCRIPTIONS
,,PART l]
[ • . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4s~ r] (naqi) . . . · ..
lflo e • o • • • e • • • • ..,
(i) . .. .. 1
1 et e • e • • 0 • • .. • • ..
J
I
I. • '• • • • " • • • • "" • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • • '
2. [k s tiley] (buddhawar) 4 [b_urhnal) sankran] (slok sirpun) 5
• (sukhuy cindrow) [na] (ku) [glik) (kuchom binten ju)·
3
. _(k) [sok binten] (• gufii) [lwar ku] (glik binten 11) .
4
5. [pudar ku tgoil bin ten hantul 6] (lwar ta goli 4el:l ru ). .
11
6. [sal klas thar s]re[fi sluJ] (ti ma fia}:i ciil~) ..
7• (n) [u han pen] klas [ta. gol:i gel)] (crok pkaw brae)
8. (kmow sla' ca)[c;l](ufi. da) 1 [u cip=piry~m dumhic] (tik ar)
9· [pharh kinta] (n) [goQ. ma burhnal) sankr~n to' ar tuk ge]·
10. [k 11 cJek go]~ tl[un cip tuy] blab [u h~n] (na)[r] gel).
11. [pa brat 8 cindran mol:i jlow] lu~ac [ku kon] bra·
1~.:[t tI?ow pgey gob pun kh]al (ma] c[rok ku] p[nen]
13. (sal] (ditikar cut) [pkaw thar sambhuc duleti] pne[n dule] ..
14. [n] (go}). ma) (bumnal:i hura to' ar ln]o[r na 9 a cut] ki-
15. [l qek] k[las thar srefi tiiy blab han] ( muk) [si}
1
16. [nghas]i[n ku ut muk pan tl]an [sal] di[tikar] (cut) (pka] ..
17. [w thar 11 sarhbhuc dulen pneti duleti 11] (gol:i ma) [bumna~] (to)-
18. [' ar lnor jap ut mlel) n lnor tuy blal:i] (gol:i ma)
19. (bumnal) hura) [to' ket] c.lek [klas thar srefi slu} 10
20. [y ti n qek kinlo]' sa[ti ma cut tarn sno' jil}
21. Oip] (n) [gol) ma ge]I:i [t .. e]I:i [san rumbas han] (ti ma) [k1r]
~?2. [srun jifijin muk singhasin] (u) [ku srun jinjin mukJ
~.There are only traces of the tops of a few superscript letters to indicate that there was a
line here.
2 Nothing legible; it may even be doubted whether there was a line here at all.
s Probably the final of cfrw'1k.
4 Almost certain. Between bu and ddka the spacing is unu~ually wide owing to a fiSSlJ;re in the
stone which s~ems to be an original flaw and also affects ta some extent the following lines down to
1. 7·
5 Conjectural restoration based on parallel passages such as B 13 G 24, etc.. This applies to
11
the ends of all the lines down to I, 10. 6 Or hantul.
7 Cf. B 19, C 24, D 20, G 29, K r4, L ~4·
8 Between bYii and t the spacing is unusually wide owing to an original flaw which also affects
the next few lines, especially I. 14 (between go(l and ma).1 1. 15 (e l'l1d if), l. 16 (nghii and tin), and
J, 17 (r and 11). ·
~ Or nar. ·in either case presumably an error for n4r,. ii Ot' il1'·.

.§..plgraphia Blrmanlca No. IX . VOLUME III, PLATE Vi.
ni
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA . [VOL. AN INSCRIPTION FOUND NEAR THE THARABA GATE, PAGAN.
23. (wfir ut) [ean tlan mlel:i n cip=piryam dumhic] (m~u)[n nagi]
"' 2 4. ( moy) [pat tm in] ( messa} 1 [Iagna Q.el:i kir ut srunJ
25. (ta gol:i) [mlel) han piryam gob kurh] ..•. [srun jifiju}
11
26. [ii atas prasat jnok] (pan) [gob ci Q.el:i kir mlel:i] (11)
27. [han piryam gol:i kurh ut jifijun cmeil 2 (pan) [tlan]
]
28. (gob ci) [9el:i. yuk mlel:i tiley gob lmrh pi pahir]
11
29. (~ar) 8 (nagi ctnen s]i[ti]gha [l]ag[na Q.el) yuk jifiju]ft [a}
30. [tas dinkow ta. go]l:i m[leQ. dificam cirwek]
11
3 Y. [kintu phal](l)[agun ussajo]g[ga sukrawar] .... ~ •
,, . 4
32. • . . . • ". • . . • . • .. . • . . .. .. •. . . . • . . • . . ... • • • . • "
K
. I.
( ut pan tlan) 6 ( mleQ. 11 <;le}.l]
3.
". • • • • • • • 4' • • • • • • • •
4. . . . (a cip=piryam) (dumhic m~fin 6 na<l.iy 7 tmin]
5. . . . .. . . .. . . . [Iagna qe].1 tik ut pharn kld] .
6. . . . . (sgac) · (sitigir pgol?. kaka](r= )[ mura tapiw i}
7. (sen ku ut) [bil=labaf;t ·h ]i [tdi.k gob ma 4e](b. yu)--
8.< (k) ........ (blay) 8 [ku] (tin} [kir mlel). tney gol).]
. 11
9~ (kum) [bmnnalJ sankran to' slok] su[khuy cindro ]~
io. [w na ku glik9 ku[chorn binteii j]u[k sok bi}
]
u, [ten n gufii' lwar ku g]l[ik binten o pudar ku]
12. [tqo]n [binten 11 hantUl lwar ta go]Q. ru[sal kla}
13. [s thar srefi klas ·sluy ti 10 ma n]ab. ci[ngin 11 ha]-
14. [n pen] k[las ta goJb. l9eb. crok pkaw] (brae •)
15. (kmow 12 sla· ca~fifi da) 18 cip.,.piryam dumhic] (}Ja:r pahir)
[11
l Rather doubtful; . in one inl(..impression it looks somewhat like lmabha.
2 Perhaps. an error ·for c-eJi.
a Doubtful. So far as the 'fuere reading goes it might be nmrn, possibly.
4 Only tl'<tces of the tops oLlettersare visible, nothing legible.
5 Conjectural restoration; but there seems to be a. trace of tla1i.,
e_or m~un. ·.·. ·... . . . .. . . .·. .. . . . 1 Or nacjiy.
s Very dQubtfuVthough ·the.l andy seem·certain.. 9 Or gli?.
10 A tl1ark here reseillb1inE{ a single stop is probably accidental •
. n There W.a.y have been a dou}Jle stop. here. ·
lZ Looks like kmaw. 'BuftM ifillal may be c and the vowel o~
18 Ct. B r9, C 24, D,~ ' o . , (T 29, J 7, L 21h
,, ' "'" : "'' "'~

MCN INSCRIPTIONS
PART I]
1.6. [mo]y [na]q[iy 1 tuik 2 pharh kinta n gob. ma burhnal).] (sankra)-
17. 11 [to' a]r [t]u[k] Q.e[k] (ma) [sp-hum s jifijun] (atas) 4 [5i]~
18. [ngha]sin k[u jifijun] (muk pan tlan ku) 5 Qifijun] ...•.
L
L [hu]ra [t]o' [ket] Qe[k ~las th:ar sr]e[fi 11 cip~piryam] _
2. [dumhic godhuli] lagna gol;t [ma 4e]l:i [t·eb. p}(hu)[m dirlec] (ju)•.
Uun
3. (n dal) [ku til1r]art dal gob. tuy bl]ab. [go!). maf (Q.eh.)
4. [ar In.or ku pµen du]leti j[ap] u[t mle!J han] (cas)
11
5. [pi rnirmok kin tu' cey ttiey buddhawar cip=pirr a}
6. [m durhhic moy J pahir [m~un nagi tmin <;l]et;i. -[yuk]
JI)
7. [tinrail ·j t1il dal prap mle n (han) [pi cirwek kintu']
8. [cey ttiey cand]rawar cip;;pi[ryam. dufohic moy] (nagi)
9. (tmin) 6 [mesa lagna golJ ma Q.]e.b. [puc jinjun] .(ir).> •
(ti) [pan han golJ. mle]Q. [ms.Un 7 cirwek kintu' ce}
10• •• 11
11. [y ttiey buddhawar methuna lagnfl Q.eb] (yuk prasat) . .;
12 ••••. Jsiixghasin kg trin ji]ti [m.uk wfir utJ (pan tlan)
13. (mlel;t) [n. han tiley buddhaw~r go}) kum cjp=piryam dumhicJ
J
14. [pi pahir blab. (kanya) 8 [lagna gob. :ma d.el)] (yuk) . . • . . .
15. •·~ . ~ .• .; ..[ i].· ..... [ut] (pan tlati mleh m~un9 cirwe)•
11.
16. (k} [kintu'J (c ey ttiey buddhawar gob.. kurh) . . ~ . . .• • . . • • • ·
17. (bricika io lagna) [got). ma .kir srun jifi jui:t J • . . • . ,.• • • .. • . •
18 .. ·.~· ... [skir sopan] . . ....•.. [is] ..... ~··· ...· . .. . .
19. • . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . .•. ~ ..: .• ~. . :. {bttmnal). sankran)
20. (td slok sukhay· cindrow na ku glik kuchotn. burh};.J1
·~J. (ten juk sok burhteti n gufii' Iwar ku glik biimte}~
Zl. (n .pudar ku tQ.oft burhten) [hantul· Iwar gol:i Q.ely rusal]
23. {klas thar} 12 [ sre.n] (klas sluy ti ma nab: cingin n han)
Or niirf,iy; 2 There seems to be a 1t here, unless it is an accidental mark.
s Or sp~ln-tm. . . ·~ Conjectural,. th<)ugh there are traces of what seems to be an ini~ial a.
5 The preceding words seem. ahnost certain~ . . ' ·
6 C?njecttiral. It might conceivably be cmen. .· .· . . . 7 Or. m~un.
8 Doubtful, but I do not see what else it can stand for. It should be katrytf.
is
9 Illegible, but there only rooril for. a short word and no other seems appropriate here.
io Very. doubtfal. . · · · · .. · ·· · . •
ll This line .a nd the next are conjecturally restore~ from .• the few fraces of
the restoration bein~ based' on t~e analo~y·, ?f other pas·sa~7.s, such as B 13, G 24,
12 . ·Conjectural• .• rest~r~ti:?n~ but quite ce.rtajn. ·.. ·· The ·h~IDimings of the li11eS,f rom ::i.n.,, .. .::11rcP.r- l~·~~w·:at·e.
broken· ~ff, and most Q~ vt§~t.remains is· bluire4 a,nd:almriet m.egible.· ·. .

30 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. III
J
24. (pen klas ta golJ. gel)) [ crok ku pkaw (brae kmow)
~25· (sla cagufi da) 1 [n cip=piryam durhhic] ....... .
26.
e .. e' • e fl 0.- 1.t 0 e ft : .. • lit II 0 • t • t • • • 9 • 1' t Ill> , t 8 9 • 9 • cp II 0
• • •••••• fl • • • • .. " • • • • .. • .:• • • • Q
• • • •' • • 0 .. 0 .• .• .• .• .• .• .• .• ."' .• .• .• .• .• .• .• .• .•
...... ,,... . .......... ..
M
1. • ••••••. [dulen pneil] ( duleft) .....•..••9 ·
2. • •• (tuy) [blab 11 cip=piryam durhhic] (han) .......
3. [. . burimal:i hura to]' ke[t gek kl as] tha[r srefi ge ]-
4. [k kinlo' sail ma cut t]am [silo]' Oiljip go]l). [ma geb]
J-
5. . ......... [sopan ta gol). tfiy blal). gol; ma] I[fto
11
6. [r J (pkaw thar pneil) 8 dul]eil [b ]lal:i [gol) ussajoga sukra wa}
[
7. [r] . . . . . .. . . [gol:i tik ut pham kl]o' [goo]
8. . . . . . . . . . • • . (g()}:l) [ma y] uk j [i]n[j]u[ft sopa]n [ku]
9 .............. [pan tl]aft m[I]el). n [h]an cas [ba]r [ci] ..
10. [rwek kintu'] (cey) 4 , [tiley] (buddha)[w]ar5 [han nar] qeh [pa bra}
J
1 r. [t] ( cindran mol;l. jlow) [lu~ac ku koli br]a[t] t[l)] o[w
12. (pqey gol) pun khal ma crok) [ku pn]eiu [s]a[l di}
13. [nkar] (1nor ku pkaw thar pneft) 6 [dul]en n [gob. ma] (burhnal;l.)
N
L m (u k . ) . 1 . [ c . in ] '. . 1 0 . ( s 8 til) 9 • t • • • ., • • • " •. • • ,, «, ' • "' • • "•' .. . • •
..
2 ••• [y] j[a]p [ut t]arh [han] .[l] ...•..•.... '• ......... , ... .
I Cf. B 19, c -i4, D 20, G 29, J 7, K 14.
t In one of tlie ink-impressions there are perhaps traces of a line above this one. The stone
. having been broken off on the l~ft side (and as regards U. I..;.4- on the right also) the amount of loss
has been roughly estimated and the beginnings of the lines restored when it seemed possible.
s Merely conjectural. 4 The month is quite conjectural.
6 Possibly cana1 7UWar. The last syllable ·should be wur, but does not seem to be.
8 The words in paret;1the,ses in the first part of this and the last two tines are quite conjectural,
being restored on th~ a~~logy: of other passages in the inscription.
7 The vowel is dou1Jtful and the t might be k, so the word might be mat.
s This short word looks like das, but even the final letter is not absolutely certain.
9 The t seems fairly :a!"ttain, the 12 .probaible, then, con'les a vowel which must be e cir
I cannot fit they here into any 15ropabte .co1'.ltex~. .. 10 The ends ·(i)f II. t-3 are.
'/"':"

1!,,:pig-rap!tia Birma11ica No. IX. VOLUME III, PLATE VIL
(') •
AN INSCRIPTION FOUND NEAR THE THARABA GATE, PAGAN.
PART l]
3. (cre)n 1 go[l:i] ci fii[n lak] 2
••••••••••••••••••
4-- [s si]nghasin [ma tmfiy na thar yimas] (ma fiin lak na rat) 1 ~
5. ·[ma ka4 moy] pra[kar] u [hart turhwin] (tirtaw)5 [singhasin] (nom) 6
6. [rup: .ffal). ma7 rinlel;i rup] fia[Jt ma tik pham rup na'.}:i ma:] ' .••• " ••
. .
. . .
7. dinko[w p] an go[l;i] ru[p jadisin pa~ 11 han tumwinJ {tirtaw) 8 [ha}
8. [n p]an [t]lati [da] go}) rup Qa]d~~iil pan [ut=ta gol:i] (ci tmuy na thar
y1.). . 9 ' •i~*<·. .. ;, •' . ''' '
"!)'.?.
9. mas [corn n ·yati dinday th]ar [u *tip . al,,:thari:~ir"'lurhp·~~f (pa tu) ..
10
10. [taw h]antul [kqi]p c[i]n ma [tmuy<aaut~.ar1Lhantiil] {byal goJ:i ma)·
0 u. [kar to ]ri[n t har ban ]tu[l makar tod1i t~ar go:J:i] . • . . . .
12.· (no )[m kJ u (lwa)r p[k]aw sac [bJ~ : i:i;~[Iiantul sac dirkas
bi ) . ' " ' ···~ . ' "
. p ' .· .'··:-•· ... :. .
13. [thar ~a]r [ma] gun, [bley ut t>ar lumpeliJircley h~n]
14. [gol).~p·kaw dir~as jnok moy] • . ·~········. ·,,,,, · ··
15 ... ~ :: . ~; •. ...•.... ·.~(gol:il:.e: . ~·
. . . . . .
2 •• .,,,·.J·.•, .• • ·~. •.•
41 t: • 9
· 3. . . . • . . (' tinran) [u t]
z

No. IX. VOLUME III, PLATE VIII.
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA AN INSCRIPTION FOUND NEAR THE THARABA GATE, PAGAN.
[VOL. III
8 ..•... (r) .. (mlel}.) [han pi cirwek' kintu] ........1 [tney]
11
• 9. . .. (war) hl>i pahir m~un naQ.i] .•.•. 2 [Iagna piryam goQ.]
11
(kurh)
. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I O• • .. ..
, .~.
[ut] . [r]. ·
. .. . . . . . . . . . . . .
II• • .. •. .. ,
• • • •. 0 • • •
p
.
I. • • • • . ~ ••-:.~••'f'"••····· ••
2. ~-· • • • • . • • • . • • ,(k 13 tiley sukrawar pi na}
3. [c\i] •.•....... ·. . ,. .... [pqey go~] .....
4. ............... ;. . [Q.eQ. pa brat .. ·cindran mob. jlow]
5. [luQac ku kon brat t}Jow pQ.ey go}). pfi·n kbalJ. ..
6~ [ma crok ku pnen] ........ [sal qink~r lno1r ku pk~hv]
7. [thar pnen dulen sarhbhuc: duleti Q.e:Q cut gek kfaj-
8. [s thar srefl.] (n go}). ma) [bt!,rilnal). hura. to' J~or nar n]
9. [Inor rn:y] (bla}:i r~n)4 [~il'.~1al) thar ma ~-eQ. sisip kyek sri" di}
I o~ . • . . . . • . (singhasin) 4 · [gol:i gel) pa brat cindran lu}Jac ku]
(kon brat) [tlJow pQ.ey go}:l 4eb .s~l dinkar] . . . . • • .
II.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I. • • • • • • • * • • • •
'
. . . .
2 •••
•

••
J] MCN INSCRIPTIONS
PART 33
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.. ,• (ut
. ~
mlel) jap ut] . . . . . . [jap ut] . . . . . .......
• • • • e •
5· . . • . qel) sal dinkar
fl • • • • • <II • • • • • • • • .. • • .. • • • • • • • [
qel)] . ~ . . . · • . . . . . . . . . . . ( qek klas thar srefi) . . . . .
6. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (lnor) · . . . . . . . . [tuy bla}f cip~
11
piryam godhuli lagna] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . .. .
. . . . . . .
""
7. ......... · · .. · ........ (ket) [clek klas thar sren sluy ti]
• • • • • • • • 0 • • • • • • • • • • •• •. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • ..
8. . . . . . . . . (burhnab hura fial;t) [ma lep kindarh sni' to' lnor pkaw
thar sirwin pnen dulen surhbhuc dulen] . . ....... .
9. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(k) [ku ut jap prasat mlel:i u
dumpo}:i mirmok kintu'] . . . . . . . . . . . .
t • • •••••
I 0. . . • . . . . • . • • • . .. • . • • . • • • . , • . • • • • • .. . • • • • .. • • •
. . . . . . . • . . . • . • . . . . . • . • . . • [q el;i] (yuk jifi jmi brow)
11 .•.
11 • • • • • • • .. •. • • • • • • • • • • • • • 0 " • • • • • • • .. • • • 0 ·• 6 •
• • • • • • • • • • • • • 0 • • • • • • • 0 • • • • • • • • • • •
1
R
J . . . . . • .
1. [y ma fiin lak
• • • • •· • • e o • •
2. [mhakar th]ar l)ar lu[rhpek 11 ma] (quk pin) 2 ••••••••••••••
3. .... [~ar ma tmuy na th]ar [yimas] (ma rap 9 ,pa pujaw) ....•.
4. [thar n h] an [tinJey han hantiil] c[le J c [torin] (go!)) . . . .
5. [kyak] sri [moy ma tmuy] na [th]ar [y}i[mas ma] gfii [ku rat purh}
6. re[y] u [~ar] Iu[m]pek[hantUl k](cl)i[p j]ifiju[il] tor[in] (go}) rup)
7. de[wa]put thar [~Jar [rria pa sadhuka]r [ku pkaw jurhwan thar] (han)
8.. [p~ey to]ri[n gob. ma nom ku bley] tu[Iay tinlabJ (brat)
4
9. thar [11 h]antUl cloft tori[n got). tar cinrob. thar] (mimoy 11)
1 Only doubtful traces of tops of letters are visible.
2 Conjectural, though ef.u seems fairly certain.
s Perhaps .rup, 4 Conceivably mirmoy.
5

Ejig-rapkia Birmanica No• IX. VoLUME I II, PLATE IX.
AN INSCRIPTibN FOUND NEAR THE THARABA GATE, PAGAN .
34 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA . (VOL. III
.,10 .... [thar yimas ma nom ku] d[inday thar rup byal thar] (°ba)
.II. [r] (pa) 1 [tutaw ~a]r Iu[ rhpek hantul byal gob rup mhakar]
12 •. [thar }tar hantU]l [mhakar thar 'bar gob rup 'bip thar Jtar] 2
13. [ma gun ku t]ar sla ma [tmuy11 na thar yimas hantiil] (dirpol).)
14. [mh]a[kar th]ar [l~ar gol:i tar cinro]l:i tha[r l;>ar ma nom cloft]
15 ..( torin)l[tirc\ey han] (gol).) [pkaw dirrkas] (thar) .....8
4
Q
s 6
I.
···············~·········,,·
. • . ., . . . , • . • . . 41 . 0 . • . • . .. . • . • . • . • . • . . • . • . • • • • • • • • • • • . . . 8
a ..•
. . . . . . . . • . . . . . . [ clec] (d itiftal) . . [ clec] . . . . • . • .
3· . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . fhantul 4 makar
·
IO
gob. jinjuil torin] (siiighasin dhar) (hantul4 jifiju]-
4. [ft] (torin gol:i) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (gob u) [tumwin tirtaw]
.•.. ~ (sitighasin go})) [rup fiab. ma rinleb.]
5. (rup fial;l ma tik pharh) [rup jadisin] . . . . . . . . (na:Q. ma) [rinlelJ.
go~] ( c) .... [l;>ar] (lurhpek ku clon) [hantul] ( c ) ... ~ ...
6. [gob. hantul] : . . . [gob] . . . . [uppa1] . • . . [uppal l;>ar lurhpek
2
golJ. klo' qey] . . . . . . . . . . . .
7· . . . . . . . . . . ... [l]ar Iurhpek] (dirkas) ... (ut kwik)
.(n) [ut] (kwi)·
flt • • • • • • " • • • • • • • • • • • .. • 4
,8. (k) . . . . . . "(ft si). . . . . . . . . . · . . . . . . . . . . ....•..( n)
[hantul] (slar pi) ..... [ut "Qar lurhpek jadisin]
·9. . . . . . . . . (ci) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [jadisin brow] (ma ' 6
cuhen) [~ar lumpek] ...( k) [dirlac ut ta goo.]
ci qeb] ......[ r] .................. .
10, [
s
clec di]. . . . . [dee] . . . . [jap dinkow] 8
• ! • • • • [
I I, . •
"" • e • • • -
. . . . . . . ( dirlac) [~ar lumpek ti] . . .
IO
l Looks like paf=, with the r superscript over the t following, but l suspect that the supposed
r is merely an accidental disfigurement. Cf. N 9.
£ Possibly tm.uy, though I can see no trace of the extra stroke.
S Only the top portions of the letters are visible in this line. 12
4 Or hantul, and so elsewhere in this fragment, which is in such a poor state of preservation
that it is impossible to be sure of minute details like this.
14

-
MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART I] 35
12 .•••••.•
• • • 4 • • •
(ma cuhen) [~ar luri1pek] ..
13 •..
• • • tl • • • 0 • • • • • .. ... • • • • .. • • • • • • • ·~·
. . . . . . ~ . . . . . . . [pan dinkow] . . . . .. . .
~ •,
14. . . . · · · . . . .. . . . . . . (go~)
, . ( tati1) . . ( clec) . . . . . ( n tarh) [ clec diini.al] (tarn clec) ·
Trans /at-ion.
A
• .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (after sunset ?)1 (made,
••••
in honour of Naraya)J.a,2 a decoration of plantains (such as is termed) "ox
nose"?) 3 adorned~ with young plantains (and) sugarcane ...... (spread
mats 7) . . . . . . . (1. 4) . . . made offerings of 5 golden flowers, altar candles,
altar oblations,6 boiled rice in cup"shaped vessels 7 'Yith eandles stuck in it,
-
and thereupon (they) worshipped.8
At that time, tooJ our lord the Chief Monk (I. 6) Arahan 9 brought seven
lords of the Church 10 spread (leaves around on?) 11 the places
••••••••
(appointed) for the digging of the holes (for)_ the. pillars of the two sides, the
1 The time is somewhat doubtful~ the reading being uncertain.
2 The suggested reading niir is conjectural and it is not certain that it stands for Naraya 9 a,
i'.e. Vishnu. But cf. the references in the note on the text and compare them, as well as B 37, C 35,
F 30, G 3, H to, J 14, fv1 to, and P 8, with the parallel passages with nek in H 10, 15.
9 The term "ox nose" is at present applied . to a kind of streamer hanging down from a pole.
The whole of this passage in parentheses has been conjecturally restored on the analogy of parallel
passages. The sense of the word cindrcm is not absolutely determined, but it must have been some
decorative arrangement. Itci relation to the L.M. brat ch.eran, a small sweet kind of plantain, is not
clearly made out.
4 I assume that lu,~ac is the L.M. la.bat, not laqak. If it were the latter, we might translate
"hung with" instead ·of "adorned with.'' As either version would fit into the context, it is impossible
to determine definitely which is the right one.
5 Literally, "worshipped with,'' but the word is also used directly in the sense of "offer." Cf.
E 14, H S.
ll These oblations probably consisted of food stuffs. The altar was probably a small portable
wooden one. _
-7 This descriptive phra~,e represents the term pun khal. The vessels are small, sometimes cut out
of wood, sometimes made of leave~. Cf. B 35, C 1, E 41, G 1, J u, M u, P 5.
8 Alternatively this phrase (from "and'» might perhaps be rendered ''which they offered,," but
that seems somewhat superfluous and pointless.
9 A Chief Monk is mentioned in Myazedi 18 and in 1 A 43 seqq& The one spoken of here, whose
name was Arahan, is known from other sources. It would seem that in VI 26 the word arahan.
cannot be a proper name, being qualified by the word gumlun, 10 Buddhist monks.
11 It is doubtful whether the word sla here means " leaves" or is to be taken with scil to mean
simply "spread/, because the next word kupar is uncertain, both in meaning and readiag i cf. ·A 10 1 i9.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. Ill PART I] MCN INSCRIPTIONS 57
yas pillars, the atas pillars (of?) the si1ighasin,1 and the pillars of the four great ·pavilion, and the four cbzdrow 1 pavilions, and the ablution pavilion, and
pavilions, and the pillars of the ablution pavilion, and the /u1i dal 2 pillars, the futi dat 2 pillars. vVater (in} four thousand earthenware vessels and ei~ht
and all the atas pillars of the front.:J All (1. w) the men (who gave the conch (1. I 8) shells they arranged at the dwellings of the four thousand lords
lotus leaves for them to?) spread, sounded all the drums .. . of the Church 3 - who were to recite the par£tta 4 outside and throughout the
.
• • • • • , 4 blew . • . . . . .. . . . . . .. . e • • • ,5 and all • . • palace ; (and as for all?) the eight lo~ds of the Church, our lords the- monks
•..•.•.... other (l. 12) ........ a of the Church (who were to be?) the le.aders (l. 2 I) in reciting the pari'tta
At sunset, godhuli (being) lagna,7 the sa1ikrii.n Brahrnans,8 who carried outside, together with the four thousand monks, • • : ••. 5 the dwellings of the
litters, beat the foremost 9 drum. The Brahman astrologers 10 went (and) -eight leading lords of the Church, eight mats/~ eight (figured?) 7 cloths, (and)
drew water for the reciting of the paritta.11 Having brought the water, they eight spades; water (in) a hundred and eight vessels (and) (1. 24) a hundred and
arranged the water (in) 12 vessels of gold, vessels (1. 15) of silver (and) vessels eight conch shells, they arranged (at?) the dwelling places of a hundred and
of copper (at each place where?) the blessing 13 (was to be given?) : at the eight lords of the Church, with ~:mr lord the Chief Monk Arahan, who were
to recite the part'tta within, at the dv~·elling places of those hundred and eight
l This passage teems with the kind of technical terms which constitute one of the groat difficulties
of the inscription. The distinction between yas and atas has not been determined. Perhaps it is one lords of the Church (l. 27) (they arranged) a hundred and eight mats,8
of position merely, the one word meaning ''back" ·and the other "front." It is a curious coincidence a hundred and eight (figured·?) 8 cloths, (and) a hundred and eight spades.
(if it is one) that these words also mean ''renown" and ''fame" (I F 23 ; I A 101 B 9, C 15; V 45, 47),
which meanings seem inappropriate here. The sihglzasin was probably the throne room and I imagine Towards the east side of the front 9 of the great hall, (they) made a
that in that case it may perhaps be regarded as forming part of thu "great pavilion" (prr1sii.t sanctuary ,10 furnished with seats,11 which (they) made fittingly, which (they)
jnok) mentioned in A 16 and elsewhere. It does not seem certain that the ytis ancl at:as pillars here
referred to are confined to those of the silighiisin, but it seems probable. Cf. B z4, D 15, 17, 40, F 131 decorated (round about?) 12 with white (1. 30) clotl1 (and which they shaded?) 13
H 2, 16, 42,-] 15, 22. with white umbre1las.u Then (they) spread .... 15 rugs on the top of the
2 I am disposed to identify dal with L.M. dow and interpret it as meaning "central," but this
is quite uncertain at present. The force of jmi is not clear. Cf. A .t7, B 9, 25, F 38, H 2, L 3, 7, seats.16 Then (they) set (thereon) a golden statue of Buddha, a statue of the
Conceivably, the whole phrase means "central," so here (and elsewhr€e) the "central pillar," and in
·L 3, 7, the "central hall" and '' central door." But it is difficult to make tha.t meaning fit B 9, 1 The word cindrow (ot perhaps ci'nrow) is used in this inscription in two distinct sets of contexts.
where juiz clal follows muk. Here and in B 8, 23, and F 39 it applies to the four pavilions which were apparently at the four
3 Conceivably we ·might translate ''of that .face." Cf. the use d muk in A 281 B 3-5, 8, ~4-27, sides of the "great pavilion." In B 13, C 27, 34, D 23) E 30, F 23, 26, G 25, H 13, J 3, K 91 and
H i7, 45, J 15, i6, ~u, K 18, L 12, N 1. L ·20, it is app1ied to an article of dress. It is not clear whether the sense is identical, related, or
4 Here follow a number of unexplained words doubtless having reference to various musical quite different. In the second use L.M. has carau., but the meaning has not been determined
instruments and the sounds produced by them. Cf. A 33, F 34, G 4, H 46, K 5, and VIII A 6 tr. n. (Dhammaceti, p. 88, I. 22). In this use it may refer to the material of the article of dress or to its
In 111 C J6 I conjectural.'ly rendered siligir by ''resounding/' form or its ornamentation.
5 Here ag·ain. musical instruments appear to be mentioned: cf. the passages cited in the preceding 2 Cf. A 9 n. s Cf. A 6 n. ·! Cf. A I4 n.
note. The word tapi'lV may perhrtps mean ·~trumpet" or "clarionet." But in that case piw in G 4 5 The illegible word is presumably the predicate · here, e.r. ''(they) provided the dwellings
must be something else. , " • , (with) eight mats," etc. .
6 As to rwel~ see l B 21 tr. n. 6 The word snat defining the mats here (and in. A ':17 and E 4t) is presumably a derivative
7 The term lagna generally means the position at the eastern horizon of some constellation of siil, ''to spread," and probably identical with L.M. sna, "the leather used by Buddhist priests
mentioned, usually in this inscription one of the zodiacal signs. It does not appear, however, that to kneel upon,'' though there is nothing here to indicate that leather is the material of our mats.
gcdhuli is a constellation, but ra~her a mist or haze which at certain times of day (varying with the In L.M. dakaw s1Hi is a general term for '~mats.''
seasons) arises from the earth. In this case the evening is definitely indicated. 7 The reading and meaning are doubtful, but in the. KalyalJ.i inscription the word k~il occurs in
8 The reading sali.frtrn, though doubtful here, seems to be supported by E 27, J z, 9, I<: 9, and this or a. similar sense (either "painting" or "embroidering)"." For "cloths" one might perhaps say
L 19. Possibly it stands for Sanskrit samlmintt', and these particular Brahma.ns were specialists in "garments." S As in A 2i, 23.
calculating the times of the entry of the sun into the several signs of the zodiac. It seems to be a 9 Or, possibly, "at the ea~tern corner of the face." The word for ''hall'' here is dirl1, ;
curious refinement in view of the mention of astrol9gers in the very ne-xt sentence. whether it is to be identified with the great "pavilion" (priisat) seems doubtful.
9 Or ''the· drum" (or ~drums" P) "in front"; unless this is a technical term for some special kind 10 Or'' sacred dwelling"'' or ''dwelling of Buddha."
of drum or for one that served some special purpose in this ritual. Cf. B 19, E 33, G s.o, j 9, K l6. ll Or ''a seat."
10 Literally it would be u astrologer Brahmans," i.e. the Brahmans who specialised in that science, 12 Cf. A 6 11, My · rendering is based on the idea that ·the . doubtful word kupar may be
the study of which was probably confined to Brahmans. Our idiom prefers the other order. identical with L.M. gapaw. Ha.swell has gapa'l.f.1 lir, "to. go a.round." . .
11 A Buddhist ritual formula or order of service invoking protection, Cf. A 39 n. is There is no qne5tion as to the general sense here,; but some doubt about the precise rea.dmg.
12 In this frequently recurring phrase there is JJo preposition expressed defining the relation between 14 Or " a whi.te umbrella," the number being left undetermined. ·
the water and the vessels. It is, of course, obvious- but the idiom is curious. · lB Cf. A 39 n. ~5 The meaning of the doubtfully read tauw is' undetermined. 16 Or H seat/' as before.j

\
EPIGRA.PHIA BIRMANICA
(VOL. IU
MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART I] 39
Lord Gawampati, with books of the Vinaya, Sutta, (and) Abhidhamma 1
• •
(and) without, with our lord the Chief Monk Arahan, who was the leader in
(l..-33) . . . . . .
reciting the par£tta of blessing. Having recited the parz.tta of'.. blessing,,. at
At three pahz"r 11 (they) sounded the drums ............ 8 (and)
the auspicious time of three pah i"r, five n«t;li,1 .. (at) night ....•..
blew . . . . . 9 (in honour of?) the golden Buddha, the Lord Gawarhpati and
all the four thousand one hundred and eight lords of the Church of whom our
lord the Chief Monk Arahan was the leader. The (1. 36) sambe.n jey sabhan,
sambe1,i karisasar, sambe1i riij'asur, with all the samben gri, samben left, kalan B
yaii sa1i,4 (and) a11- the scholars, within (and) \Vithout, offered .... 5 golden
flowers (and) altar candles, (and) reverently (1. 39) asked for the saraft.as:ila 6 • • • • " 0 0 0 • • • • tl • • • • • • 0 0 • • • • 0 • " • • • • • • • • • • • • •
and the part"tta of blessing,7 within (and) without around all the four sides. Then . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. the ground of the front of the
At that time our lord the Chief Monk Arahan stood 8 at the western side middle of the eastern side, (1. 4) the front of the middle of the . . . . . . . . 2
facing towards the eastern side (and) holding a right. . voluted 9 conch shell side, the front of the middle of the western side, the front of the middle of the
(I. 42 ), together with water (in) ·vessels of gold, silver, copper, (and) earthen .. side of the front gable-end, {on?) the ground of tbe great pavilion : all these
five spots 3 they proceedtd to bathe 4 with water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver ...
ware, which they arranged in front of our lord the Chief Monk Arahan.
Then our lord the Chief Monk Arahan gave the sara?zaszlti and all the (Having bathed them?) (they) spread mats, (and) (1. 7) offered .•.• 6 golden
four thousand one hundred and eight monks (L 45) remained standing 10 within flowers (and) a1tar candles. Then the Brahman astrologers expert 6 in house
building worshipped (at) all the five places. Thereafter, on the ground of
l The three main divisions of tJ1e Buddhist Canon. The second half of the third name is not the four ct'ndrow 7 pavilions and the ground of the front of the jun dal,8
distinctly legible but can be safely inferred from the contex:t.
2 It would seem that theoretically the pahir or pahar consisted of 7j niirfi, each nacji being all those five places, (they) bathed with water (in) vessels of gold (and)
24 minutes of mean time, so that the pahir was exactly three hours by the clock (a water clock in sllver. (Having?) bathed (them), (l. rn) (they) spread mats, (and) offered
former .days). Probably, however, the count began in practice at actual sunrise and sunset, and
·three pahir,1 indicated by three strokes on a special gong, meant that the time was just nine hours •••• 9 golden flowers (and) altar candles. The Brahman astrologers expert 10
later, round about 3 p.rn. or 3 a.m. (as here) but varying of course slightly according to the season. in house .. building proceeded to worship (at) all those five places (also ?).11
a Cf. A 11 n. and the passages there cited. .
4 These are all titles of officials or functionaries. The titles sambe1l, and kalan also appear in On the second of the 'vaxing (half) of the month of Kartik, the day
old Burmese inscriptions, the former in the form sambya1i. It is probable that the kalan ya11. saii (being) Monday,12 the sambeii gri',13 saniben ten, halan yan san,1' (and)
performed duties which brought them into specially close relations with the monkhood (sa1z, sangha).
The word jey is probably the Pali jeyya, ''elder, senior, master," and sabha11 means "festival," gri
may be the Burmese for "great," kansasur and riif asur are plainly of Indian derivation and I Cf. A 33 n. The proceedings narrated in A 33-47 occupied two hours, roughly 3 to 5 a.m.
probably merely honorific titles. Cf. B i2, C 7, 33, Fat, ~4, as, G 9·u, 16, 31, 39, H u, 17, 19,. u, 2 Reading and meaning doubtful: see note cm the tei;:t. I imagine the reference must be to the
23, 31, :l31 44. back of the building, which in that case was probably the southern enc.i of it.
, 5 The word rendered "offered,, might. be rendered ''set." Cf. B 7, xo, 32, 36, 39, 40, 46, etc. 8 Owing to the fact that most of J. i::t and the first hnlf of 1. 3 cannot be deciphered, it is'n ot
1 he meaning of sirwiiz has not been determined. In this inscription it only occurs as part of this certain whether these five places are all mentioned in the text as we now have it: perhaps the first of
formula (cf. B 7, xo, 36, C 2, 40, E 14, F 28, G 2, 40, H 8). Probably it is an epithet of the golden them has been lost. I do not profess to understand exactly what they all represent, but have
flowers. In that case it might be connected either with L.M. sri'n, in the sense of "slender, delicate,'' endeavoured to trnnslate literally. Cf. B 26 seqq. .
L.M. dawuili; ''coiled, made into a circular ornament,'' or perhaps with L.M. swih, ''to wave 4 By "bathe," here and elsewhere) is no doubt me<1.nt a ceremonial lustration.
°
ceremonially . over an object which is to be blessed." If the last meaning is the right one, perhaps Cf. A 38 n.
we must take the word with pnen, translating "waved altar candles/' 8 I presume this is the meaning; not " ,and) the e"perts.u Cf. the variant formula in F 25-26,
6 The saratta is the formula of adherence to the Buddha, the Law and the Church. 30, 31-31, G 3, H 6, 12, t4, and also C 4, to, 12, 33.
7 Cf. A 15, 46. ~t is possible tha.t the reference is to some part of the Mangalasutta, which was 7 Cf. A 16 n. s Cf. A 9 n. 9 Cf. A 38 n. 10 Cf. B 7 n.
used as a Paritta. , 11 The reading is doubtful and the precise force of wel (if it is to be read here) is not absolutely
8 It does not seem certain that taw here means u t~ stand." It might simply mean "stayed, determined. See I B 21 tr. n. and cf. III A 23, VIII A 21, 26, B 4, IX A 12.
remained." So too in A 45 infra. · rn If the year in which these events happened is A.O. noi, the particulars of this date do not fit.
9 That is, twisted in the opposite direction from the normal. Such shells, being very rare, were It appears that Karttika. as a mean lunar month, was intercalated in that year and the second
1
regarded as particularly precious and· lucky, and were accordingly used at the anointment (abhi!eka) waxing of the intercalated Karttika was a Thursday, that of the true Karttika a Saturday.
of kings in Indiaq 13 The same as gri in A 37, the two forms being used iDterchangeably in this inscription {there may
10 Cf. the last note but on~. sometimes be a doubt as to which reading is the true one). Cf. C. 33, F 2rt '25, G 16., H II. -
14 See A 37 n.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART Ij
a11 the Brahman astrologers (I. .I 3) expert in house-building, with the (in) one place (L 25) the pillars of the front of the (audience hall?) 1 (in)
3
Brahmans who were to carry the litters, wore loincloths, sukhfty cindrow, one place, the jun d.1/ 9 (in) one place, the pillars of the front of
sukhuy itlar,. (and) kucJwm skirts of white (colour).1 Then {there 'vere) the middle of the side (in) one place, the pillars of the front
a hundred and twenty-six M8ns,2 who carried 3 the vessels of copper (and)
of the middle of the western side (in one place?), the pillars of the front
vessels (of earthenware, with ?) white kuclzom skirts; (I. 16) then (follovved)
!1: of the middle 28) of the front gable-end (in) one place.
two litters, (which were?) adorned with white cloth 5 (and) shaded with
(All the clec' of?) the ea::,tem side they J.rranged (in) one place, all the
white ull'!.brellas. (On) both 6 the litters they laid 1 the vessels of gold (and)
clec of the . . . .. .. arr,mged (in) one place, all the clec of the
silver, the vessels of copper which they had carried, (and) the vessels (of
western side, (and) ail clec of tht; side of the front gable-end, they
earthenware?), a hundred and twenty.8 All those vessels they adorned with
arranged, each (in)
(l. 19) flowers of the brcic kmow (and) f~aves of the ca(ltin,'J (and they)
(At) all these places they nm.de a decoration of plantains6
beat the foremost 10 drum. - ·
adorned 7 with young \1. 32) (and) sugarcane, (and set?) water (in)
Then the Brahman astrologers werit (and) drew water ..· . (and bathed?)
i1 vessels of gold (and) \vater (in) conch shells wherein (they) put
the side piilars, .the yas pillars, the atas 12 pillars, and all the other pillars,
cleaned rice ( anr1 3 (and) spread mats, ~with) golden flowers, a] tar
together with all the-appurtenances.13 Then (they arranged) the side pillars,
oblati• ons, 9 1\: m d · ) . Havin2 .. " ,., (arran£ . Z .., ed them?), they made, in
(I. 22) the yas pillars, the atas pillars, and the other twelve pillars (together ho nou r Of Na-ray·1 '" n '. ' , 1 , 6 a de , c oration o . f plantains (called) " . o x . no . s e,'' 6 adorne . d 7
in) one place, the . . . . appurtenances 14 of the great pavilicm (in) one
with (1. ) young planta1ns. (and) sugarcane, (and) w1thm it (set) boiled
35
place, (those of) the four ci'ndrow 15 pavilions (in four?) places, (those of)
rice in cup-shaped n with candles stuck in it, (and} altar obla-
the ablution pavilion (in) one place, the pillars of the front of the singhitsin 12
tions (and) they ...... , ... (brought?) water (in) vessels of gold
A r6 1 n T . h a e n w d o I r d C s i 1 n 2 4 i t t r a . l i~ n s . (a I l t l w re o fe u r l r d i n ? g - - Pp to e a a r rt t i h c a le t s T . o .~ f u c c h o or s n t u i m nd e i ) c a h te a s v e a no lo t n b g e en fl ow st i r n ic g t ly lo i d n e c t l e o r t m h in s e u d c . h C a f s . ( c a a n n d d ) , l es 8 ? 1• l ) v . e; , T h s e p n re a th d e m B a ra ts h , m a (a n n d a ) s t o r f o f l e o r g ed er s .. w . o . r . s . h 1 i 0 . pp g e o d ld e N n a r f a lo y w al e l r a s . tt (a A n t d t a h l e ta 1 r 1
was used by princes and high officials in state ceremonials. The word 1tli7r probably represents Pali
u{tim, "n~ble, excell:nt,:' (us~d ·of fine cloth~s). It seems probable, though not absniutely certain, auspicious time ....... (L 38) ......... ·. . . .. ,12 godkuli (being)
t~at the epithet "white applies to all the articles of dress specified.
~ The r~ading h~re is not .absolutely certain, but M6ns are represented in this inscription as l This interpretation seems probable, if the reading can be relied on. Cf· H 43·
playm? a .fairly pr.omment part m the ceremonial. The present instance is the en.rlicst mention of 9ad~;,.,. ~assage.
them in this collection of records. Cf. B 42, G 23, H I!J, : CTfh. A is doubtful but seems highly probable. Cf. B 3 seqq., a fairly parallel
• 3 ~he rea~ing is supported by the occurrence of the same word two Jines lower down. It means Here, as e th r e e r e, 1 1,' ., have m· erely' attempted n literal trans 1 a t1·1 0~, ~v1·t h ou t h avi · n g a very clear tdea. of
m p~rt T 1c h u e l a w r, ? rr ' d t~ is c ~ a ! r 1e r y s a o m n e t h a e ~ sh th o e u ld o e n r e .» for " skirt" in the preceding ·! l O in r e , . pe T rh h a e p s p , r < i • m w a e ry nr i m ng e . a " n ing ' what 4 I ) A a rt c s le c o f w t a h s e a b p u p i a ld re in i; g tl s y a a .r n e d ad e d n i o t t i e m d i b p y la c t e h d e ~ • n '. ,e . v fr e o ra n l t te <": e .f m ~ ic b a u i . l t d er in m g s . and f~rm1 . ~g a covered, tw~-
seem: to· be c!oth, . ::ind the htt~rs appear to ha.ve been covered with white cloth or drapery. · roofed or three-roofed, :irched entranre to the buzklmg. It differed from a po~ttco m that the latter .1s
The reading seems to be, literally, ''all .the two litters/' Perhaps this menns u all over the two" enerally placed at the centre <if the while a clec occupied (somet1me!:l) almost the entire
8 7 O Ii: r ! s · " n s o et t . ~ q , uite ,;ertain '!';hether ·~ f?ll·stop should not be put after ''silver" and a comma. (inste • a d .f h r o o w n e t ~ a ; a r e , . the 1 -f r o e w fe e r v e e n r c , e t h s e e y em s s e e t m o hr i : n t.o s o a m e n u c m a..: b ;c e s r t o o f h t a H v s e t . m b c e t en p o~ v t ~ 1 r o y n s nu o m r e r s o e u ct ~ i , o ns e .g o . f I a l . l b c u . i ld 1 m .2' g, w h e e a r c e h ,
of a full stop) after twenty. Also it is doufutful whether instead of "the vessels t t H crowned with multiple superimpo.,r:d roofs. Ct also IX R 41 S 2, 14• •
we s 0 h o T u h ld i • s . n p o h t · r . s ~ i s m e p ~ ly c · c u s r a s y a " l t s h o o m ~e G ve s 2 s 9 e , I s J ( w 7 e a r n e d ) a K h 1 u 4 n , · d a · r n e d d p a r n o d b a t b w ly en C ty / 2 ' 4, r D ea d 2 i 0 n g a n · t d a r i . • n s • : t ~ e q • : a • d i • n o a f w ll t e i' n t . h · e Y s e 5 e T C h f e A il le '2 g . i n b le W;'.lrd (or probably t\VO words) wuuhl ap 7 p e C a f r . t A o b 3 e n t . he same as . i n B 4· . .
: c e a n :e :: s e t 0 h ~ e P e 1 , r ; e g a ~ d ~ ~ : n ~ g , ,a i n s ~ . h n ~ ; ~ o h r ! e ~ r . ~ o ~ r : r l e d s d s e ~ d ~ o ~ u ~ ~ b l t i f b u y l . . e k a m \ ~ V o h w e , th o e r r wh br e i t i h c er s t w an e ds sh o fo u r l d u r p e l a r d i. nt k a m in o H r , (w po h s i s c i h b ly is in e l t s h e e .. w of h i g te r a a h i I n u s ; s m k o e f d i r n i r c c ic e li e n ) a e n d :m d 1 d 0 t h d t r h o it i w b n b s k l i d t g o h - u a rn b t s t 11 t o h ( n L e . t M ~ h h e . e n d in 1 s 1 t. .j e ( i o p rp ) r r i c n s t h a i e t t i l . o li n A ' c ' n o d o n ~ t b t h a b i e i n i r e d g vi r e a w w ss a i . t s " e r t h : w a S t u i t t h t h s e o g m r s a h e i e n o ll s f r t o e h f s e t e r p d i l c a o e c n e ( s a t h w l a ~ t y e e r i r e s
goes with the somewhat doubtful oud _ r da at the end of the phrase is the particle da or the latter word is men tinned 5eem favour that interpret1t1on. See particularly ~ 33, 3~,h 3~, 4o,. 4I f
the leaves were used. <lecorativelca. un o .ma e huphthe name of some unidentified P. lnnt of which
y, are points w 1c have not yet bee d t • l · f 'I In the last three it would appe:tr that fl!mr (presumably mixed with water) was stirred wit eaves o
Conceivably km.ow goes with sla · d-"' • "b n c ermmel sat1s acton y.
. 10 Or" the drum" (or" drums ~~P)u~;. mefanm~ Cfunches of cadr1.1i leaves." Cf. J{ ie;: n. this grass for ceremonial purposes.
l 11 f . S 0 e . r e , t p h e e r h p a r p . e s c , e d " i w n . g h · e n r o e t w e. i th to b . athe. m 'J ront. I · 1 · 2 i - C C ,, f f • . . A A A I 8 r 6 3 n 1 · 1 n . • 18 Or, perh:tps, r: ornaments/' 1 1 9 1 2 C O It ~ f is ' A 'a d o n 4 ~ " b n t 0 f i£ u l th w e h p e r t e h c e i r s , e a t f i t m er e 1 i ' s ti n m o e t , m " e w n e ti o s n h e o d u : . l d t h g e o r IO e o a C n d f i . n w g A i t h o 3 f 8 ' t ' h ( n a e . n n d e ) x t b e fe a w t t w h o e r d f s o r 1 . e 5 m d o o s u t b ~f r u u l m . , 11
or with "at the stroke of four paM/f, at sunset." See the note on the text.
6

J MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART I 43
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III
~ (brought ?) the paritta 51 water _( in) vessels of gold, which they
• 1
latna,2 the expert 1 -Brahman astrologers bathed 8 the side pillars, the yas t
(arranged?) . . • . . ~ . . . • . . . . .. . . They came and sprinkled
pillars, (and) the atas pillars/ applying 5 water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver
on?) (l. 9) the side pillars . (and) yas s pillars; and then they sprinkled all
•..•.. (an~) water (in) conch shells wherein (they) put' cleaned rice (and)
. the pillars (and) appurtena~ces.4 After that, the expert Brahman astrologers
dttbbii grass.«~ After that, they bathed ........ (1. 41) . . . . .. (and) all
(bathed the appurtenances?) with water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver on
the rest of the pillars (and) appurtenances.7
th~ top 6 of the side pillars.
Then • . . . . . . (there was?) Burmese singing, M8n singing,8 tzrcul (?) 9 At the auspicious (1. 1 2) time of (dawn, on Tuesday, thereupon the .
singing, . . singing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . expert?) 6 Brahman astrologers (bathed?) 7 (the several objects above men ..
• . . ... .... ,.. . . (1. 44) . . . . . . all . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. • . . . . . . • tioned) seven times ....... the side pillars; the yas pillars, the atas
. .. . . . . . ...................... ~ .. . water (in) conch shells p111ars,8 .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • (l. I 5) . . . . . . After that, all
wherein (they) put cleaned rice (and) dubbii grass .•....... ~ ..... , the pillars (with ?) the appurtenances (in?) the pavilions, and .....
. . . , and all the oth'er appurtenances . . . . . . . . . all together.
• • • • I II C
On the (fifth?) waxing of the month of. ( Magha, at dawn, on . Satur ..
day?) 9 (l. 18) the Brahman astrologers bathed the side pillars, the yas
c
pillars, (and) the atas pillars, and .................... having
(bathed them?) 10 with water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver, (they) offered
(boiled rice in cup;.shaped vessels with ?) 10 candles stuck in it, offered u golden flowers {and) altar candles. After that, (they) (l. 21) ......... all
water (in) vessels of gold (and) si1ver, (spread mats?)/a offered ..... 13 golden the other bases of the pillars.
On the (fifth?) waxing of the month of Phallagun, the day (being)
flowers, altar candles, (and altar oblations?) u .......... .
{1. 3) At the auspicious time of three pahir, five ntttff 1 5 .......... . Sunday, at the auspicious time of three pahar, five na#,11 they (went and?)
• • • . . the expert 1 (Brahman?) astrologers bathed 16 the side pillars, the drew water • .. . . . . . . . . . . .. • . . (the ground ?) . . • . . .. . • • • •
(yas ?) 4 pillars (together with ?) all the appurtenances 7 of the pavilions,1,. (fixed peg$ ?),12 vessels of gold, (1. 24) silver, (and) copper.. (In- the mouths
and all the other pillars ..................... (Having bathed them?) of) is the vessds they (arranged flowers of the brae ktnow and leaves of
all, (1.. 6) (they) offered 14 golden flowers (and) altar candles •..•....... the caef,un ?).14 (Then?) they laid 15 (the vessels) on the top of the litters
. (at?) all the seventeen places.18 (Then the samheii ?) ••
l Cf. A 36. Here the text is hardly legible and the rest of the official titles cannot be
l Cf. A i~ n. 2 Cf. B 7 n. s Cf. B 6 n. 4 Cf. A 8 11• deciphered with certainty. .2 Holy water: cf. A 14. n.
5 Ot."(and) offered/" or '((and) set.!' But 1 incline to the view that the text describes the a Cf A 8 n. 4 Cf. B 21 n. 5· Or, possibly. simply ''on."
process of ceremonial lustration with water in vessels and shells, or a. shell. 6 It •is not certain that the doubtfully read ussli,joga means "dawn" (cf. C r.7, E 15, J 31, M 6);
6 Cf. B 33 n. 7 Cf. B 2I n. the word taken to mean '' Tuesday" is also doubtful ; the word rendered 1:, expert n is fairly certain.
8 Instead of "singing,, we might say ''songs," '' (then there were) Burmese songs a etc The Cf. B 7 n. 7 Nearly certain. a Cf. A 8 n.
re~din_? ;men, '' M~1n,'' t~ou.gh not· qui~e ·clear in the te:ict, is ma.de practically certain 'by th~ word 9 The reading is doubtful. The date may be Tuesday, 'l5th January, A,D. no:z. The word
mirma, Burmese. This is the first tune the latter are specifically mentio'l~d in these records Cf. rendered "dawn n is doubtful. . 10 F . a . i r I , Y certam . .
-D 24 and. H 12. • 11 u. A 33 n, The form pahar. is really a better spelling than pahir. fhe hour here would
9 'File. meaning of tircul (or tircal) has not been determined.. In Report of the Superintendent, apparently be about: 4-44 p.m. The fifth waxing of Phalguna, however, began about M3 p.m. _on
lwc~aeol'°gical Su1'vBy, Bufma, (19i?) para. 36, Professor. Duroiselle suggests Chulya (Chola, Cola), Sunday, ~3rd J:februmy 1102, and strictly speaking, as. a calendar date, would be ·con~ected with
. but in tbat, case one would expect ciraul (see also §§ ·24 51, and VIII A ro). · the following Monday, as the rule is that the day takes its number from the lunar day .Ctithi) current
. .l O · Th . e . ·. v · i; o · r d £ o r " . b 01 • 1 e d . n · e e n must: . h ave occurred ' a t the end of the preceding line The rest is at sunrise. . .
not very leg1ble,. though ma.de fairly certain by what follows. • 12 Very doubtful. The preceding word, which apparently reads sirteli, may have some m~anmg
~~. ~r '.'set" (cf. A 38 n.); or ''.gave.'' or "applied,'' if it was a case of lustration. like ''straight, level, even, tight."
. . 1 . 5 C Co f n • · ] A . ec t 3 u 3 . t a · n ll . y · re . stored. • · 1 1 8 8 C C f f . • B A · 4 3 8 n . n • -14 Cf ' A ' , t . n.. r 1 n 4 V Fr e o r m y p t r h o e b a a b n l a e l . o tT C y f . o D f th 2 e 0 , p G a ss 2 a 8 g , e J s 7 c , it K e d I i 3 n , t L h e 1 a l 3 a . st note, 1 . t . i s probable that they stuck flc;>wers
n-Or "pavilion," the number being indeterminate. But probably all are included here.: and leaves into the moou ths of these vessels. Cf, B 19. n. . 15 Cf • B 17 n.
18 Cf. B U•3I. . ~

MON INSCRIPTIONS 45
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL .. Itl PART I] I'
44
9
worshipped 1 (at) all the ten points. Then (they) levelled (1. 43) the
(which were covered with?) 1 white cloth (and) shaded with white umbrellas. 4
ground (and) fixed the pegs.3 At that time, too, they pounded einhal {in
The Brahmans who carried the litters (L 27) wore sukhuy c£ndrow 2 (and
er<ler to spread ?) 5 the b£iical6 of the pillars.
carried javelins 3 and?) went (in front ?). After that, ........ ~ • the
At the auspicious time of (one paMr, one?) 7 nat#, precisely, they
4 Brahmcins went in front. (Then?) they 5 went (and) drew water ;
••••• the . . . · . . . . 8 of the pillars (I. 46) and they . . ... , . . At
and when the water had arrived, they arranged it.6 ~h·a~ ~u·s~icious ~rought
time, too, they
On the sixth (I. 30) waxing of the month of Phallagun~ the day (being)
Monday, (at) two narj,'i 7 precisely, they made (in honour of· Naraya\la ?) 8
a decoration of plantains (called) "ox nose" adorned 9 with young plantains
D
(and) sugarcane,,_ spread mats, (and) offered 10 go19.en flowers, altar candles
{and) altar oblations.11 Then (1. 33) the samben grz, samben ten, kalan yan • • • tl • • 11' • .. • • • • • • • 41 •
san,11 (and) the expert 13 Bra-hman astrologers, wore loincloths, sukhuy dndrow, fl •••• ..... (water (in) ves.sels of gold (and) silver?)
(and) sukhuy uliir, with kuchom 14 skirts of white~ Then they went (and) ..... (l. 4) ....... (Then the Brahman astroI ..
~~e~s·
worshipped (Naraya\).a ?).15 (At) all the ten points 16 (1. 36) they made brought water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver (and) water (in) conch
decorations of plantains adorned with young plantains (and)· sugarcane (and sh . e lls wherein (they) put cleaned rice (an . d . ) . d .u b . b . a . g . ra ss . ? . ) . . 9 They .
presented ?) 17 golden flowers, altar candles, (and) altar oblations.11 Water . . •'
*
(in) vessels of gold (and) silver, {and) water in conch shells wherein (they) . . . (1. 7) • . • . • . • • • ( " na • t e f i? • ) •••.....• (scholars?).
put cleaned rice (and) dubbii grass,18 they arranged in readiness.19 . , . . . . they . . . . ·
At the auspicious time of two ndrf/i, two pat,20 precisely, (L 40) the • . . , • . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . brought • . . (leaves
Brahman astrologers offered 21 22 golden fl.o\ivers (and) altar candles, ~~d'?) -aiibb~ g;ass ....•. ; ..•...... (1. w) : ....... .
• • • •
brought water (in) vessels of gold. (and) silver (and) water (in) conch shells (the Brahmans ?) ............. r • • • 1 • .. - •
wherein (they) put cleaned rice (and) dubba ,grass, {and) sprinkled (and) . . • . . Then they • .. . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . • . . •
. .. • . . • . ·. (brought?) . , ...•......... • (L 13)
I Fairly certain. 2 Cf. A 1:6 n.~ B 14 n.
· · · · · ·. . . .. . . (writing?) .- ·. ........... they wrote.
a The ren?erin?' is co?jectural. 1:here is no word for ''carried,'' so far as I :can see. I assume
that the re~dmg ~s kden. bna~. as m E 2 ~~ 3~ bn~s kdef?, F 48 bnas kdaJi), which may be ••. At 0 .the. ~~s~i~ious ti~e • . . . . . . . . • . (other ?) . . . · • . · • • • •.
connected w.1th L.l\I. bnuh. ka~ian!. (and kan!ian ).' '.a kmd of spear'' (probably a " forked spear,.''
I suppose with more than one pomt), Possibly it might mean that '~ the javelin men went in front" . . • . (monks who were to ?) recite the par#ta 10 (around ?) all (the
parti~ularly if one read go1i, "brave," instead of kdeii. But I do not favour this interpretation ~r f • o ur ?) sides (and the singhasz · n ,11 arr · a nged w · i t h " m 1 · t . ? ) . r n 0 . n tl 1 e • • •.• th 18
readmg.
da~
4 The word =de' .f' ining the particular kind of Brahmans here referred to is illegible. waxing of the month of Phallagun, the . (being Friday (1. 16) they_?)
5 Probably people/' not the Brahmans who carried the litters, though it may have been. brought water (in) the vessels of gold. (and) silver, the.y (1~nte~ed and sprmR
6 Presumably m some definite place or places.
kled on ?) the side pillars, the yas pillars,. (and) the at as pillars (of ?) the
7 This would apparently be ab?ut 6·32 .a.m. on. Itfonday, 24th February, or alternatively about
7~4 p.m. At the former hour the sixth waxmg (wh1ch began 6 hours .~2 minutes after mean sunrise)
was not current, at the latter it was. See A 33 n. - . 1 Or 'r reverently sprinkled,n taking lnor as used by .way of auxiliary. The meaning of the
8 Cf. A· 2 n. 9 Cf. A 3 n. 10 Or "set"; cf. A 38 n. l1 Cf. A 4 n. word san before rumbas, "to spririkle/1 has not been determmed, however.
12 Cf. A 31 n. 13 Cf. B 7 n. 14 Cf. A 16 n., B 14 n.
: 6 Cf. A ~ _n. Here the reading is quite certain and only the interpretation is in doubt. It is 2 a D 'fh ou e b r tf e u a l d : i ng s e i e s C ce r 2 t 3 a in n . here, and the sen~·e nearly ce~tai . n .
i p n o t s d e s r 1 p b r le e t h a t t h i ~ o t n na w 1 i : l , l w n h o e t n fit u . s t e h d e a c f a t s e e r s Jn . o . o f r , na " r t o c o w m o i r n s g h ip a , f " t e i r s t m he e re p l , r y · e po a s n i ti' a o u n x · i h li a a 1 r . . y , u· v to e ; r .: b n , ,, B •m u t 1i 1 t o h n e o n u , r . ·o t h f, a " t 4 5 P R e e r a h d a i p n s g g d i o n u d b a t l f . u l. The meaning . has not b G ee M n e d a e n t i e n r g m u in n e d d e . t ermi . n ed.. 7 Nearly certain.
an sue a case occurred only four Imes back. On the whol~ I incline to the Vishnu interpretation
s The sense of khal sindra' is undetermined. Cf. F • 4, 5·
16 U;;ually the reference ~s to eight points of the compass together with the zenith and nadir
1 9 Up to here a.11 is more or less conjectural Cf. B 3:21 33·
perh~f s C i f t . ~ _ a n ~ 3 b e n . taken here in a less precise sense. 1 l 7 9 D O o r u " b a tf r u r l a n re g a e d d i n n g e a a r n d b y m ." e aning. 10 Cf. A 14 n. 11 Cf. A. 8 n.
90 A pat IS one-fourth of a narj.i i.e. six minutes. - lS Or, perhaps, " kept wa.tch within it."
21 Or "set>> - : cf. A , '} ., 8 n. 1 22 Cf · . A· 38 n. la Presumably .the "ninth/' Friday, 28th February, A.D,. 1102. ·

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOLe Hi
MON INSCRIPTIONS 47
PART I]
singhiis1·n, and all the other pillars. That day too, at an auspicious time
At the ausp1c1ous time of four na(ti, precisely/ they (pounded?) the
aft.er two pahar, they went (and drew water ?) . . • • ~ (writing ?) (L 19) perfume~. nar;lz~
dubha grass with · all manner of fragrant At six precis;1y,
. • . . . . • (silk mat which ?) 1 •. • • • • • (Then they brought ?) eight they put in (1. 34) the dubbli grass (and?) ....... 2 all the fragrant
yessels of gold, eight vessels of silver, a hundred and eight vessels of copper, umbrell~s
perfumes. At one pahi'r, precisely, they stuck up two white for s
{and) a hundred and eig~t vessels of earthenware. (In?) the mouths ·of these
the pillars of the two sides, one \v_hite umbreUa for 9 the yas pillars, (and)
vessels they (stuck flowers of the brae kmow (and) leaves of the catfi"Zn ?).1
one white umbrella for 3 the atas 4 pillars. (Then?) the Brahman (1. 37)
T~en they brought the vessels of gold (and) vessels of silver, (and) they
astrologers brought water (in) veiisels of ·gold (and) silver, and water (in)
laid (them) (1. 22) (upon four litters,8 which ?) they adorned with white cloth
conch shells ·wherein (they) put cle;.med rice (and) dubba grass.5 Then (they)
(and) which they shaded with white umbrellas. Then the Brahmans who
carried the litters, all wore sukhiiy · cindrow.4 The ve~sels of copper 1 (and) recited 6 (and) sprinkled: Then (they stirred?) 7 ·with dubba grass (e!nd
"
rice meal?) 8 the holes (for) the side pillars, and the
vessels of earthenware, (they ?) ...... ,, • ; . 6 {to) the Burmese who (bore 0 • : • • • • • • • •
holes (for) the yas pillars, and the holes (for) the at as pillars (L 40) (of ?)
swords 6 an~ who?) c~rrie~ .........7 • Those who carried {them) (l. 25)
the singhiisz'n/ they (stirred?) with leaves of dubbti grass (and rice meal?).
(wore?) .white kuchom \skirts?) (and) wlilte hair bands.
Then they proceeded to bring ..• " . · . · .. ~ . (and) proceeded to
Then the Brahman astrologers (who?) ...... ~ . ., .... ~ •....
(stir?). . . . • . .......... (stirred?) the dubba grass (and rice meal
........ (went?) in front. (Then they went ?) (and) drew water. (The
together?). Rice (grains) . . . . , . . ~ they put
water having?) arrived, they went in (and) arranged (it) in front of (the . 0 • • • • • • •
in at all the sides.9
place where they were to write ?) 9 (1. 28) • . . . • • • • . • . At that
· The tenth waxing of the month of Phallagun, (1. 43) the day (being)
auspicious time, too, (all-?) .........1 0 (they?) were to give (as) offerings
Saturday, at the auspicious time of one pahar, six· narf,i, (Taurus ? being)
(to Indra and 11 all?) ~he gods, they made, and gave (as) offerings ..... .
lagna, 10 (thereupon) our lord the Chief Monk Arahan and all the exalted
11 the statues of Buddha (that 'are?) jn this city of Pagan, (both?)
••••••••
..... (and?) .... (with) {I. 3 I) candles, (fried grain ?),12 oblations,19 (and (ones 11 of" the Church ?) . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
. . . . . . all . . . . . . . . . . ·
musical ins.truments ?),14 that day, too, they worshipped all.16 (Then?) (they)
(gave offermgs of treasure ?) 16 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • (and set them in 1 Cf. A 33 n. As" two pahar" was mentioned in D 18, we must, I suppose, assum~ that the
times now specified are after sunset. 2 Reading and meaning doubtful, perhaps " applied."
the ?) three places. · s Or ''on." ·i Cf. A 8 n. 5 Cf. B 33 n.
6 I.e. some form of dtual. The sprinkling was,.· of courf;e, part of the ritual used in consecrating
1 Very doubtful: Possibly the meaning of sut here is Sutta. But even the reading is doubtful. the building operations. Cf. C 4z n.
9 Cf. B r9 n.> C 25 n. E Cf. B l'l n. · ·l Cf. A 16 n. 7 Rendering doubtful. 1 assume that girkcw is the L.M. dakuiiv, thu.~tti'lv, but am not certain of it.
5 1:he mea~ing of ginlas (or ginlus) has not been determined and there is a short word missing s Not quite certain, but assumed to be L.M. 'Zvuih, usually appHed to broken rice steeped in
before tt. .: water for milling or pounding, and to the batter or flour~like product. A sort of rice porridge, in
" 6 T~e, meaning ~s very doub_tf~il, but seems n:ore Iike!y if it is possible to read sindra1i. For fact. The Malay Upong tawar, a mixt1.1re of fine rice flour and water used in magical. lustration
. sword Haswell gives L.M. s1an, In Myazed1 :a9, sinraii tneans ''act deed". which seems ceremonies for averting evil influences and sprinkling on objet:ts to be consecrated, is closely analogous.
mappropriat~ Cou~d cf.
here.· rap sinrah possibly mean '' had charge of the work;" P F 23, 24, H 44, It. is applied by means of a bundle of leaves. . .
7 Meanmg and reading of dakep are doubtful : in L.l\I. the word means "tongs" 9 There are so many lacunae and duubi;ful passages in the above accou'rit that· the details of the
8 Cf. B 14 n.. · , • procedure are by no means clear. Provisionally I am disposed to think that it all refers to the places
9 Or, perhaps, "in front of the three places " ; cf• . D 12. where the holes for receiving the bases of the ,,.arious pillars \Vere sunk. Into these holes the different
•• 1 ~ ~robably the missing word refers to some kind of ~fferings to be used in the worship of these substances, perfumes, etc., were probably put and stirred with bundles of dubbii grass (the tice
dm~;t1es." . . . ,, . n The reading is doubtful here: see the text. porridge being added while this was being done). . ·
O.r pareh e. d .r ice, a recognised form of·. i:.l'ering L M· . baka s Cf A 4· n 10 Presumably Saturday, 1st March I ioa. The lunar date, "tenth waxing," ended about !0"45 a.m.
HV.. e rr d.O : u btful, . t ho · u . g h . ' b oth klo' a ' nd t . w . in ;a.!-re uzeJ d •els•ew here" in t 1 h . is c• onnexion• . It might that morning. If,. as is to be supposed, the time mentioned is 5 hours 2+ minutes after observed
that the ritual of offering was acc0mpan1.ed by instrumental music • mean sunrise, that would make it about n .. n a.m. mean time. Aries was lagna (i.e. on the eastern horizon)
~: ~~, peclhap~, ''they worshippc? everywhere/' or "they perfo~med aU the rites of worship/' till u-45 a,m., when Taurus became lagna. It is possible that we ought to read mesa, '"Aries/' not
obb1•: ctt.~ sf.i . e or er 1s pecu1tar) the obJect preceding the verb. But as 110 sub·ect is exp tr~ :se:r:e.~dm.t~! brisa, ''Taurus," but the latter seems to be indicated by. the blurred and broken letters on the
edxpreSss'elld bhy ;wo words (perha.ps to be. rendered ''offerings and trelasure ") ink-impressions. ·
e JUS 1 e • ti , t e .,acuna throw$ doubt on the rendering. · " ll Probably merely honorific for monks in general, not necessarily some that were m9re exalted
than their fellows.

EPIGRAJ?HIA BIRMANICA (VOL. III MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART I] 49
E . . . . . . on
the yas pillars. That day, too, (.at
I
At the (auspicious?) time of . . . . . pahir, (three?) na{l,i two ?) pahir, (three ?) narJ,i, (they) put in 2 the (yas ?) 3 pillars. ·(AU) that
(precisely.?) (carried javelins went m front (and) . time, (1. 25) too, (they). bathed .. ·. ... • 4 the side pillars, the yas pillars,
• .. • • • • * • •
beat drums?) 1 ........... the atas 5 pillars, and all the other pillars. Then the (sankran ?) a Brahmans
. pillArs. . ...... (1. 4) (went (and) drew water?) ... . decorated litters (and) shaded (them) with white umbrellas. (1. 28) Upon the
...... (the snal 2 ?) of the pillars, (they) ......... . litters they laid 1 vessels of gold (and) silver, (and) vessels of copper which
• . They made a decoration of plantains adorned with they carried, thirty-three (of them ).8 The Brahmans who carried the litters
young plantains (and) sugarcane,3 (I. 7) spread mats, (and offered) golden wore (their?) 9 sukhay c£ndrow,1° (L 31) together with white kuchom 11 skirts
.
(and) white hair bands. -
flowers, altar candles, (and) altar oblations,4
• • • • • • • • • • .. • • • •••••
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (when the vvater ?) 5 had (arrived ?), .... Then the (dak~an ?) Brahman astrologers 12 • • • • • (girdles (?) 13 and
javelins 14 and) went (and) beat the foremost 15 drum, arid then went (and) drew
. . . . • . . . . (1. I o) . . . . . . . . . (Then ?) the Brahman astrologers
water. (1. 34) (After they had?) 16 gone (and) drawn the water, they made,
(brought?) water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver, (and) water (in conch
shells wherein (they) put ~leaned?) rice (and) dubba grass.0 Then (thev)
for 17 the pillars, decorations of plantains 18 (making) thirty-seven booths,19 spread
thirty-seven mats, (and offered) water (l. 37) (in) a hundred and forty-eight
recited 1 (and) . sprinkled, and bathed all (1. 13) • : ....... (the sna/?)
vessels, thirty-seven golden flowers, thirty-seven altar candles, thirty-seven altar
of ·the pillars. · Thereafter, (they) spread mats (and offered?) . . . . .. a···
golden flowers (and) altar candles. oblations,20 (and) water (in) the thirty-seven conch shells wherein (they)
At the time of (dawn?) 9 (on) Monday 10 put cleaned (1. 40) rice (and) du6ba grass 91 ; to N~rayal.}.a 92 (they offered)
••••••••••••••
. . . (they (1. 16) pounded with stones?) il all (the sniil?) of the pillars.11
At that time, :oo, (they erected ?)13 (the pillars at 1 Cf. A 8 n.
• • • • • . • • • • . . • • • ?)1a a Presumably into the holes made to receive their bases.
all the four sides. (The) . : : . . (s1de ?) ............ ' . . all the t1 Or atas ? There is a lacuna here.
pillars . . . . . . . (l. I 9) . . . . .. . . . . the .. pillars . . . . ·. . . . . -. . the 4 The meaning of thiwas has ·not been determined: the word occurs again, in a similar context,
in, E 45. One view is that it means "(and) swept," L.M. twah, but this would normally correspond
pillars of the ablution pavilion 14 : all (those pillars?) they • . . . . ...• with an E.M. form in ~as, not ·as. Perhaps it denotes some part of a pillar.
At full moon of the month of Phalagun, the day (being) Thursday 5 Cf. A 8 n. 6 Cf. A 12 n. 1 Cf. B 17 n.
s I think the translation is right, but it does not s~m clear whether there were thirty-three vessels
(1. 2 2), {at one?) ntirf,i precisely ,15 they prepared 16 gold, they applied 17 (it?) in all, or thirty-three of each, sort, or merely thirty-three copper ones; the number of the gold and
silver ones being"'left t,_o the imagination, Further, it might be possible t:o render the passage: "Upon
pa . ssa 1 g C es f . c E it ed 27 in n . IX H e A r e, l o to n o . , no . w ord for "carried " is lec 0 :rible. As to klo' 1 cf • VI II A. 6 n. an d t h e t t h h e ir t l y i ~ tt t e hr r e s e t h ( e in y l n a u id m b th e e r) . v " e ss I e f l s w e o f a g ss o u ld m e ( a t n h d a ) t s t i h lv e e s r. t op T a h f e t e v r e s s ' s !' e e l n s i o s f w c r o on p g p J e r o w ne h i m ch i g ( h th t e w y i ) t h c a l r e r s i s e d h e w si e t r a e ·
• 2 T~e me~ning of snal here and !n E 13 1 16, has not been determined. One would suppose that tion adopt the version given in the translation. 9 See the note on the text.
1t w~s something Hiat was ir spread ' (sal) over the surface of the pillars, perhaps a coati °t;f' lO Cf. A t6 n. nnd I C 24 tr. n. 11 ·cf. B 14 n. ·
cover 6 in C g o o n f j e s c o t m ur e a l s , o r b t. u t prol3'.1 3 . b C le. f ,. . a A s 3 a n s . imihr formula · i i s C u f ~ e A d ; 1 e p n ~ atedly elsewhere H 0 th o r India 1 . 9 ." Th In e r t e h a is d i p n l g a c a e n t d h e m w ea o n r i d n g fo r o f ' 'a d s a t , r h o a l n o g a e r r e ' ' d fo o r u b o t n fu ce l : pr p e o c s e s d ib e l s y th " e o f w o th rd e ' f ·r o i r g h '' t B ," r a o h r m ' a 'o n f ," S c o o u n t t h r e a r r n y
Brahmans b · t • h · . . • owever, e
,, . . ,, rmg wa er m t e very next 1me, so 1t m:l.y be something else (or some person) th t to. the usual -0rder observed in the inscription. .
am:ed. . 6 Cf. B 33 n. 7 Cf. C 42 n., D 38 n. a 13 The reading and meaning of the word left out before ''girdles" being doubtful, some doubt is
latte 1 r 9 1 ( C A O E f s r . + , . . r C p e . n e g . r ) 1 a h . 2 r a d p n s B s . • u t . h t '' e p t h o o e m u n 1 r d e tt e a e d d d JO . m t w . h T g o e h r . i ' i d s s s , t o a w c l n s f o e . o u s l A n d o o f . t ~ .., b s e t b h e n 3 e y . r o d s n . t T d : M d h l e a d 1" r o c \ u V h b . i o , f t r . d b s u t f o o t n r d e " et o e a f n i f l t s e e r r a e e r d d e " i la h ~ c t e o k r e in t · i g h s ~ a c d o ' I m f f p e o re s n it t i o o n n e o . f the a n s l o o s m o t " e t 1 h g t 1 h 1 r i i o r C n w d g f l . n e l C i " k o e n ( 2 m 7 " t e h w n h e e . h r l a a e la t t g ) e i r a r . t t w T a i l h t l h . e ,. l I a f o r s n r t t h ' O p ' e w a r r o v t " r e t e o r h s . f " i e o i t n d . m ru a i m d g o h p ' t ' te ( p d o o r s s i " i s b d ly r ri u g b m h e t s , t ' h ' t P e h ) e L " . i M m n i . s f s r i k o n h n g a t . l " a w , o " C r t d f o . p A l r e o a I b n 3 a b n o ly . n , 1 m 1 e a a n n d t
12 Or, perhaps, ''the snal of all thr:l piJlnrs," 13 The reading is doubtful 14 Cf A 8 16 The meaning of kindrow is not quite certain, fa1t I connect the word with krow1 ''behind,
, 7 , O h n o 1 ~ · 5 u . r T s h _ e , 5 _ 6 , , m m p o ~ m i · . m n e t u n s t t e s of a f , t t h e . r e m fu e ll a n m s o u o n n r i · s o e f , 1 P . . e h . a lg 1 . - u 5 n 6 a p o .m cc . ur I r t e d c ou o l n d \ n V · n e t d n b e e s d c a o y n ' ne S c th te d · ~ w 1, a i r th c h T · I h I u • 0 r 2 s , d a a • t • aft~~ 1 " 7 ( T F h a 1 t 7 ) i , s J a n I d p r k e r s a u w m 3 e ~ p r ' o 'i b n a b h ly on ' o 'h u e r r o e f a / f ' te n r o " t ( t V ha II t I t h A e p 30 il , l a B rs 1 w 1 e 2 re ) , necessarily to be housed ·in ~he
mornm n g a t f f. o i llowmg fu t ll o m 6 o - o n n . a .m. Presumably the day was Thursday, 6th March 1 at 6 .. 1 l a.m., thy e booth 19 s ; L t. i h te o r u a g ll h y , , f ' o ' r d w a e u i g li h n t g s I ~ " k no I w s , u p th p e o ): s ' e m s a m y a l h l a d v e e c o b r e a e t n iv . e she . ds are l i S n d C ic f. a t A ed . 3 n T . he word is used h , e re
. 1 1 1 6 P O r r e s " u m m a • a d b · l e y r b e • y a d c y o • " a tin . B g u t t h e ·c f p •C ill a 3 rs 9 w n i . t h I i t. t ·a,' B ~ e u t t h t i ' h s e ' ' l a g c o u 1 n d a > ' l e t a o v e b s e t g h o e l d m e le a a n f i n f g o r s o c m o e a w ti h n ~ t t u h n e ! r i t ll a a i rs ~ like a w s C o f r . t A of 4 n u n m . eral coefficient 2 f 1 o l · l C o f w . in B g . a 3 f 3 t e n r . brat cind'l'an. Cf. H 2 a 1 0 C n f. . . A ~ n.
7

•
MON INSCRlPTIONS
PART I]
50 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, HI
(it on) a hundred and eight spools.1 Th~n the Brahman-astrologers recited s
niats, 1 golden flowers, altar candles, (and) boiled rice m cup ·shaped . vessels
(and) sprinkled, and after thC!t they bound up the pillars ..
with candles stuck in it.2
That day, too, at three nctrli precisely, Pisces (being) lagna,3 they set
j\.11 these they arranged (and) placed (1. 43) .-in readiness 3 (and) when
; up the pillars of the two sides (l. I 3 ), the yas pillars, (and) the atas pillars
the water which they had gone to draw, had arrived, at the time (when)
(of?) the si"ngh.asin,4 (vertically in their holes ?).5 That day, too at one
godhuli (was) lagna,4 they bathed ........ 5 the side pillars, the yas 1
pahar,6 six nd(lf, the lord abounding in piety 7 rode on an elephant. From
pillars, the atas 6 (1. 46) pillars, and all the other pillars around all the four 8 in front of the J e tawan 9 (he) made the elephant ~nter in front of the
• • • • • •
sides~ At that time, too, (they) applied . . . . . . 7
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 10 of Pagan (1. 16) within the (lower?) ~1 walls. The palanquin
..........
. . . . . (At that time, too, ?) . , ........ . men with the (riding?) litters entered behind the riding elephants~11 (Alongside
of?) the leading elephant, (went) a white. elephant named Erawan(a) ..
mahawijeyyabajrabhum, which was completely arrayed with all (sorts ·of)
p ornaments made of shining gold (1. 1g) sef with gems of divers kinds, on
both· sides, (and) a riding horse completely arrayed with ornaments (and)
trappings of shining gold, set with gems of divers kinds (appertaining
•.••..... (On the . . . waning?), the day (being) Friday, too, at
one narf,i, (Pisces being lagna ?) 8 the palace. (In) thereto?).13 All the samben gri, samben tent (1. 22) (and) kalanyan san,16 both
• . • • • • • • • • • • • •••
those who canie with our lord the king of the Law,15 and those who bore
each place (J. 3) they buried gold leaf, silver leaf, (and) copper leaf. (In)
all the ten places they thus buried gold leaf, silver leaf (and) copper leaf, 1 Or, conceivably, "(of) io8 strands,'' which practicaUy comes to the same thing. For "whera. .
all three in each case.9 That day, too, they . ··. . . . . 10 the side pi1lars, the with they bound up'' one might perhaps say "which they wound round/' if the thread is conceived as
apart from and used to bind the cloth. ' 2 Cf. C 42 n., D 38 n.
yas pillars, (and) the atas 6 pillars. Then they . . . . .. 11 all the other (I. 6) s Cf. F 2 n. ''Three nar!i" would be a.bout 6~59 a.m. 4 Cf. A 8 n. '
pillars. At that time, too, they wrapped the bases of the side pillars, the 5 The meaning of han tiiz.gur has not been absolutely determined; I assume tiiigt&'t· to be .con~
nected with the ittgur (or tu.gur) of l H C 15 and L.M. 4agu, 0 straight." a Cf. A 3l n.
yas pillars, (and) the at as pillars; they spread gold leaf, silver leaf, (and) 7 That is, the king: he has the same title in I D 44; and cf. also I A 9. We may assume
copper leaf (on them). (On) all those pillars they spread (them in) three that this was a. courtly formula, like "our most religious and gracious king/' "his gracious Majesty/'
and the like. .
layers equalling in extent the whole bottom 12 of the pillart?. They wrapped a The meaning of di1trJar (dr ri'l-<fiir ?) has. not been determined. It seems barely possible that it
(the bases of the pillarsY with cloth whereon they (1. 9) wrote a "writing may be the L.M. kana., ka7Ja, ~,shed,)) '' pavilion," but I am not prepared to accept this identification
without further evidence.
of success." rn The thread wherewith they bound up the pillars, tender · n No doubt a building, and probably a monastery, named after the historical one where Buddha
maide11s, young damsels,14 daughters of Brahmans, had spun {it and) made sometimes resided: cf. I A 15. It is mentioned again in IX G 22.
10 The meaning of 1'a1~ kinliui has not been determined. It may refer to some building (a.s, appar"
1 Cf. A 22 n. 2 Cf. A 5 n. s Cf. C 39 n., E 22 n. ently, does the word raJi in G 48), perhaps a reception hall, and that seems to be the more likely
4 Cf. A u n. . 6 Cf. E 25 n. a Cf. A 8 n. interpretation. On the other hand we may be tempted to compare the raiz tlitli of VIII A 10 (where
• • 7 Cf. E 22 n. lf the doubtful. reading mat is right, lak may mean "(they) inlaid jewels." But it appears to mean "came/' though the passage is unfortunately preceded by a lacuna) and of IX A
1~}s n?t clear that the word here 1s not the same as the one at the end of E 22, which does not 14 (where it certainly means "brought"): cf. L.M. 1'ah klun, ''to go out to meet,n ran 'kluh nan,
seem to be mat. ''to bring.n fo that case jt might possibly mean t~at the king rode his elephant in front of the
8 On. Friday, 7th March I ioz, which was the· second waning of Phalgttna Pisces (mina) was concourse of the people of Pagan who had come to attend him. But in that ·case one ·would have
lag11-f1 till 7·6 a.m. "One nlirfi" after observed (or true) sunrise would be 6-u' a.m. Cf. A u n., expected a word for "people."
33 n~ · 11 The reading is doubtful but probable.
' ~ I take this to be the force ·Of the doubled pumpi, if that is the true reading. 120r "elephant/' there being no plural particle, so that it may refer exclusively to the elephant
10 T.he sense of khiil has not been determined : cf. C .4 5 n,, E 5. on which the king rode.· But then, why style him ''the leading elephant" immediately afterwards, if
11 . Cf~ the last note. there were no other riding elephants? Possibly kinta may mean merely that alongside the king'$
19 In I 4 25 kinfal (L.M. gataj is applied to the soles of the feet. Whether it here means the riding elephant, (C which 'led the procession," came .. the white elephant and the caparisoned horse.
und~~ ~urface of the ?ase of each pill~r or .includes· the whole surface of such base, I am not quite sure. JS I take cuha1i to be the L.M. cheh, Perhaps, however~ we should translate: ''With the leading
. ~he text has Jeyyalekha, of which this seems to be a possible meaning. (Another is "record of elephant • .•..•.•• : • went alongside." It seems highly probable that the white elephant and the
victory. ) I presume that sqme auspicious formula is indicatea horse were in fact led alongside of the leading elephant, the one on the right and the C>ther on the
~4 _Perhaps one should add "of high degree/' in order t~ bring in the associations of the word left. 14 Cf• . A 37 n. 15 Cf! I G 3•
iunwr1.

I
t
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA VOL. IU PART I) M6N INSCRIPTIONS 53
swords,1 all wore loincloths, sukhuy dndrow, suk!n:zy utar, kuchom skirts, (and) At the auspicious time of two jahz"r, Hasta (being) the lunar mansion
white hair bands.9 Then those who bore swords/ the samben (1. 25) (grt, samben (and) Gemini (being) lagna,1 (they) built up the side pillars, (1. 37) the yas
!en, kalan yan san, trap dumsac, kla pnaii.,8 _(and) the . Brahma:n astrologers, pillars, (and) the atas pillars.2 On . the lotus bases of those pillars they
who were versed in houseMbuildrng,4 wore loincloths, sukki"ty cindrow (and) wound white cloth. Then, th~ jun dazs pillars, the pillars of the great
sukhuy ulti.r, (adorned ?) 5 with all (sorts of) ornaments, together with white pavilion, the pillars of the four cindrow 4 pavilions, the pillars of the ablution
skirts, white kuchom, (and) white hair bands. (They) offered (L 28) ..... . pavilion,6 and all the pi11ars, they bound up (l. 40) with white cloth, (and)
6 golden flowers (and) altar :andles, (they) made obeisance 7 (and) as~ed a having put the five ·(sorts of) gems and· put boiled rice with fresh milk,6
••
boon 8 from our lord King SrI Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, abounding in they built them all up. At the time of the building of the palace,1 gifts
piety,9 10 Then the Brahman astrologers who were versed (and) presents, (for example of?) 8 gold, silver, pearls, (coral ?),9 the seven
•••••••••••
in house-building wenf (and) worshipped Narayaoa 11 in the ancient manner,1g {sorts of) jewels,1° of divers (1. 43) kinds, they came (and prese;ited ?) 11
and (l. 31) offered 6 water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver. Then the • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • e • (to ?) King Sri Tri-
Brahman astrologers who were versed in house-building all came (and) (made bhuwanadityadhammaraja .. . .. . . • . . • . . . . ~ . . . . . the palace of
lustrations ?),18 putting the pari"tta 14 water (from) vessels of gold (and) silver Jeyabhum.u On (the pillars ?) ..•.., .••. · ....... • · ..••• •
in the holes,15 and put five (sorts of) gems (in each of?) 16 the holes, 1. 46) .-..4••··········
• • • • • • • « • • • .. • • (
together with boiled rice (and) fresh (1. 34) milk.17 Then (they) sounded all (upon ?) the litters they laid 18 vessels of gold (and) silver, vessels of copper,
the drums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . blew .. vessels of earthenware (which they 7) carried, (and) the javelins u they
. . . ,18 (and) all th~ host shouted.19 arranged in readiness.15 At the auspicious time . • • . . • . . . . . .
l Doubtful interpretation. Cf. D 24. n.
11 It seems possible that "white" may apply to all these <l;tticles of apparel; as to which, cf. B
14 n. .
a It is possible that t1'iip goes with san; and if san stands for ''clergy/' trap may mean er of the 0
Lord,', i.e. {{of.. Bu?dha.'' Alt~rnatively, frap tlumsac may mean ''the chiefs of the dumsac." But
as the sense of dumsac (or rumsac) has not been determined, the point remains in doubt. Cf. H 34 (offered .. boiled . rice) in cnp .. shaped ve.ssels together with candles,16 offered 11
44, The next two words, literally "tigers of the army/' presumably denote military officers. '
4 Cf. B 7 n. water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver, spread mats, (and) offered . . . . 17
5 The reading and menning are almost certain, and they make good sense. Cf_ G ::5•
6 Cf. A 38 n. ·
I thm • 7 k ~ r 1t , m p u er s h t a b p e s , m ." f w er o re rs ? h i t p h p a e t d t . h " e t B w u o t a f : r e o t t n o i b ts e c ta lo k s e e n j t u o x g t e a t p h o e s r i t a io n n d w lno it 1 h ' t h h . e er e n m e~ e t r e w ly o r i d n d ( i " c a at s e k s e d t h n e ) On l t h C at f . d A a y 1 2 ( c n f . . , 3 F 3 ·1 n . n .) T M he i t t h i u m n e a w w a a s s a p l p a a g . - . n re a n t f l r y o m si x, i t h -1 ou 6 r s a .m af . t e t r o t ru _ e M o . s u p n .m ris ., e , b ~ i. t e . th ab e o l u u t n a I r I • m 47 a n a si . o m .n .
respectful manner and attitude accompanying the making of a request to a royal personag (na.hatra) Hasta was no longer current, having ended at 3-30 p.m. on the precedmg after.noon: T?ts
a Qr h " . . h . " . . - e. ·is one of the several cases in these dates which seem to thro~ ~ome doubt on the correct 1dentificat1on
, pe: aps,, perm1ss1on, aut ority. It would depend on the meaning of the words left
untr~~:l l ~ h t ~ ed , r e i a n d f i . n ra g . and meanm . ff of . . bi . . rboy salar ar 9 e C d f o . u b F t fu 1 l 4 . n. I t has been suggested that they mean of th 2 e C y f e . a r A o s r t n h . e applicability of a t h C e f . r e A c ko g n n in . g employed., J C f C . f. E A n 16 n . n. . 6 Cf. A 8.
t~at the kmg was ask~d as. to where they should place" the offerings mentioned in the preceedian l a Cf. F 34 n. But the reading here supports the translation given and is rather against the
lme. Uthe. true teadmg 1s satap (not salar), presumably the meaning is that the king was alternative suggested in the note. . .
and, tr~ly P!ous (cf. L.M. satap, '"upright, righteous") and we might render the phrase ff in a:co l, 7 Or:' "while the palace was being huilt." I take cruit to be (at any rate pr1mar1ly) a verb,
a • nce li w l· i T t . h a k r i ' i n g g h te t h o . e u sn re e a ss d . . i ' n ' g tumla . _ to be for . t . u mla i 1 .1 ' , . C .· t f. h is A · . s 2 e e n m • s to be the meaning un > l ess it can r be · t houg 8 h C f a . s I su C c h 2 6 i . t m L ay it e a ra ls l o ly p t e h r e h a w p o s rd b s e .s c e a e p m a . b t l o e m of e a b n e i · n " g b e u g se in d n " i a n s g a · w v i e t r h b / a ' l .. . a n n o d u n t . h e C u f s . a G ge r i 9 s . parallel to
mterpreted by "as before.'' ' that. of the L.M. ma patam, ma ptam. . . _ . _ . .
• 18 T~e force. of s~n is undetermined: et C 42 n. The word is generally accom anied b rumbas, t Doubtful reading and meaning, but. cf. L.M. gwa, ilwa, and perhaps Pah. pata!am, from which
rumbas,. to sprinkle, but that does not suffice to decide its meaning . H Cf PA. y the M8n forms may have been derived. ·
. 15 ... ··· N · o · d o ~ bt t .· h ~· h o I e s ma d e . to receive the b · a ses of · t · he pi · llars. • I · imagine t • h at 1 th 4 e n ~aatnedr C w a 7 ; 10 Cf. Ill C lg,. VUI A 15 tr. n.
P.oured or sprinkled into these holes, and to. make th.at clearer I have put ci.from ,, vessel f g Id·. d 11 The reading is not quite certain, but nearly so. . _ . ..
stlver. is Th . . . . . s o o .an 12 Cf. VIII A 2, rn Cf. B 17 n. , H Cf. IX C 27 n. 15 Cf. C 30 n.
- .... e reading is not quite, but nearly certain ·
~~ Perhaps the boiled ri:e was boi]ed in the fresh milk.. But cf. F 4 r n. · ' . ·· • rn Cf. A 4 n. It would appear ·from that passage (and others there cited) that the candles ~ w od _e e r d e
. Cf. A n n. To this must be added that gumriii means .. ~to make·· a . · " d h-· - stuck in .t he vessels (probci,bly in the rice which. they contained). Here the words <t offered
' . ' a g rea t . soun d • " 19. . Rat h er doubtful, · -but one . doe · s not , see what e . lse it· c n a o n is e m , ea a n n . C m f. a K s 11r, , rice n are conjecturally inserted from the preceding line, which· is plissing• l'7 Cf. A 38 n.
1

t
EPIGRAPHIA BIR-MANICA VOL~ Hi
54 MON INSCRIPTIONS 55
PART I)
golden flowers (and) altar candles. Then the Brahman astrologers who were
sunset of the day . that (they) entered (and). dwelt there; children 1 of
versed in house .. building worshipped Naraya!).a.1 When (they) had worshipped
M8n chiefs and children of . . . . . . chiefs . . . ' . . . (and)
Narayai.ia, (l. 4) at the time (when) godhuii (was) lagna2 (they) beat drums
the scholars wore (1. 25) s21;khily dndrow 2 adorned 3 (with) all (sorts of)
.... , . . . . (and) blew ........3 Then the Brahman astrologers
ornaments together with white skirts, vjhite ltuchom/ (and) white_ h~ir ban~s.
went (and) bathed the side pillars, the yas pillars, the atas pillars,4 the pillars 1
(They) decorated litters with white cloth (and) shaded (them) · w1t:1 white
of the pavilions, bathed 5 the pillars of the ablution pavilion, (1. 7) and all the umbrellas. Upon {the litters they laid?) 5 (1. 28) vessels of gold (and) silver _and
pillars together. Having bathed (them), (they) spread mats, offered 6 golden sels of copper (and) earthenware which they (carried ?).6 In ·the mouths
v;sth~se
flowers, altar oblations/ (and) altar candles, (and) worshipped 8 (at) all the vessels they stuck flowers of the brae kmow (and) leaves of the
~aduii.1
pillars. . Then they beat the foremost 8 drum.. Then the children of the
On Saturday the second waning, after three Pt;-hir, 9 the sumben (1. 1 o) ch.iefs \vith the scholars (l. 31) (and) yan san,1° went (and) drew water.
9
kansasur~ sumben rajirsftr, sumben ri'pusaddano, sumben _n zkachatt£, sumben Whe~ the water {had arrived ),11 they arranged water (in) vessels of gold,
prajnalankar,1° and the Brahman astrologers, spri11kled with paritla 11 water silver, copper (and) earthenware, (and) water (in)" conch s~ells wherein (they)
(frorn) vessels of gold (and) silver, and then they dug holes wherein to bury put cleaned rice (and} dubba grass,12 tl:ey arranged (1t) at the houses ~3
four treasures (I. 13) at the four sides of the yas pillars: within four copper where the (l. 34) par-itta 14 was to be recited.. .
-chests they put gold, silver, (and) all (sorts of} jewels of divers kinds, which At the time of midnight, our lord the Chief Monk Arahan, with th~ lords
(they) wrapped up with white cloth. At the auspicious time of three paliarJ of the -Church who were to recite the part"tta, entered (and) ~welt m the
one (1. 16) nar!i, (Cancer ?) being lagna,19 all the sumben grz, sumbe?i !en, houses where the jaritta was to be recited. Then (I. 37) the children of the
kalan yan san,18 (and) the Brahman astrologers, proceedeq to sprinkle 14 with chiefs rn brought water (in) the vessels of gold, silver, copperJ (and). earthen·
paritta 15 water (from) vessels of gold (and) silver, and then buried the four ware, (and) water {in) the conch shells w~erein (they) put cleaned nee (and)
treasures (at) all four (1. 19) (sides ?).16 /ubba grass~ (and) reverently presented (1t to) each (of them). Then the
Also, (on?) the days when the palace of Pagan was being built,17 scholars and ·yan san rn (1. 4o) offered .•.. 17 golden flowers (and) altar candles,
both (on) every holy 18 day of the waxing and (on) every holy day of , (and) reverently asked for 18 the par£tta. When. (they) had reverent1~9 (asked
the waning (moon), our lord the Chief Monk Arahan 19 with all the lords for it), then our lord the Chief Monk Arahan with t?e exalted (o~es) of the
of the Church (1. 22) ,entered (and) dwelt inside the Jetawan.2 ° From Church recited the pari'tta. \Vhen (they) had recited the paritt~, (1. 43)
·then our lord the Chief Monk Arahan, with the exalted (ones) of the
l Cf. A 2 n. !3_ Cf. A i·2 n. 3 Cf. -A to n., It n. ·i Cf. A 8 n. Church who had also recited the pari"tta, br01.~ght par#ta water (in) conch
5 Cf. B 4 n. It is not clear whether the preceding word should be plural, and it seems possible
to take the two together in the sense of ''the bathing pavilion/' -But this does not ·seem to ·be shells with 20 cleaned rice (and) ditbba grass. (1. 46) Then (they) entered
mentior1ed else·where and appears to be a less probable rendering. cr A 38 n. 7 Cf. A 4 n.
8 Or "worshipped all the pillars." They may have made obeisance to the pillars after their mean 1 l P e r a e d s i u n m g a m bl e y n s o o f n M s a o n f r c a h c i e e fs ( no o t r m n e o r t e a l b y l e t s h e a ir r e s o m ns e ) a . n . t. I m B m u ed t i t a h te e l y p h a ra ft s e e r w m a i r g d h s t ? b n e e i w n o t ~ e 1 r l p d r e e te x d p e t c o t
ceremonial Iustration and consecration, as mentioned above.
Marc _ h 9 C 1 f 1 . 0 2 A ~ w 33 a s n t . h e T t h ? ~ 1 s r d w o w u a l m ~ n b g e , t n h in e e s e h c o o u n r d s h a a f v t i e n r g a e c n tu de a d l s a u t n r r i - s 1 e 3 , p p . r m es . u t m he a b p ly re . vi · d B u u s t d S ay a . . t urday, Sth Burm s e s C e L to B b . e I 4 m n e . n tioned, but the r s e a C d f i . n g F ( 2 w 6 h . ich is not clea .. r) does . 4 n C ot f . se B e m .r4 to ~· admit of this.
lG Some .of these titles are doubtfully read: see the· text and notes thereon, and cf. · A 37. n. 5 The reading -though not quite dear, must represent sornethmg of tlus kmd. Cf. B 17 n.
n Cf. A 14 n. _ e Probable a; being supported by parallel passages : cf. B 15, i 8, .E 29· F,, 4SC.
1 1 l6 9 2 G C Co f f. . n 1 A ~ e c r t 3 2 u 7 r a n n 1 . . l , y , A re s 3 t 3 o r n e . d o T n h . e tl :e la g an na al ? is g H y d o C o u f f b . t F c f u l 1 4 l 3 y 2 . r n e I . a n d . b oth places 1 t 5 h . e c f w .~ o ~ r A d 1 ( 4 d is n ) . · refei:s primarily 1 9 7 1 C C A f f • • re G B s to I 2 r 9 4 a 1 t n n io . .· n suppor - ted . :iy 1 s s 0 e v O O er r r a l ' " ' t t p h h a e e ra d y ll r a e o n l r o p s " a a s n s ( o a s g r c e h ' s ' o d . 1 r a u r - s m " s ? . " 1 1" ? )' } B C · u " f · t m B t . ;: f • f 3 ' r " A o 3 n t n 3 . · 7 n. f. A h 13 h n _ . ;
, '1s Or "house". but in view of G 36 I think the plural must be intended, thoug t ere is no
to the four quarters, the four prmc1pal pomts 9£ the compass (or rather of the heavens).
moon 1 l 7 8 , e C ! ig h f, h a t F t h . t 4 w s, 1 a . t r ~ u e n H g u e , r p e a o n s t d t h d e h n a e w w d o a rd m y s o C , o '? o U n f " . i ! t w s h e i e c m h s t h to er e b e a r u e s e f d o u d r i s i t n in c a t ly lu . a n s a r a m v o e n rb t . h ; the eigh · t h waxing, full plura 1 1 l 5 8 p C O a f r r • t i " • G c l m e 2 a 4 h d . e e n r e . o . b ' , e isance (and) .1 a 6 s k C e f d • , G " . . a 3 s 1 ~ n . h~\'.'e r~ _ n d7 · red i · t 1 1 7 4 a , t C C f f F • . A A 2 s • 3 1 8 4 T n n h . e y - w o uld • Qf course,
:o
19 Cf. A 6 n. Cf. J;I' 1,s. n, make the usual obeisance to such a. high eccles1ast1~al digmta~y. H
· 19 Cf. D 4 4 n. - io Literally, '' whtch were with.

•
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA PART I] MCN INSCRIPTIONS 57
(an.cl) sprinkled (and) scattered (it broadcast?) 1 around {all tiie four?) gri, samben len, (kalan yan san ?), " the Burmese 1 Brahman astrolog~rs
of the pala,ce. Then they went out from thence. Then they stopped versed in house~building, (and the M8n ones?) versed in house-building, wore
front of the hall.2 Then they gave paritta water (to?) . . .... loincloths, (l. 13) sukhuy ct'ndrow, (and) sukhi1y ular, with white kuchom8
skirts (and) white hair bands. Then the Brahman astrologers versed in
house-building offered 4 water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver, and then they
H
worshipped the N agas. At that time, too, they put . . . . .. , •... sand
•... ~· .. (arranged ?) a decoration of plantains 3 for 4 the side on (1. i6) the· places where {they) were to dig the holes for the pillars of
the yas pillars (and). the atas pillars (of?)· the s£nghast'n,6 fQr the two sides, the yas pillars (and) the atas· pBlars (of?) the sz*1ighasz'n 5
plllars of the ablution pavilion, for the ju·n dat pillars,6 (and) for and the places where (they) were to dig the holes for the pi11ars (on} all
pillars of the four pavilions} At?) each of (these?) (they) spread mats'" the faces of the four sides. ·Then the sambPii praj!lii.lankiir 6 brought (a?) 7
(offered?) 8 golden (flowers ?),9 altar candles, (and). altar (1. 4) oblations.10 gold peg (fixed with seven?) 8 sllver cords. Then the Brahman astrologers,
They arranged water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver, (and) (water) (in) (the?) (having recited (1. 19) ...... ?),9 offered 4 water (in) vessels of gold (and)
conch shells wherein (they) put c1eaned rice (and) dubba grass.11 At the silver, and then the samben pra/iialankar (leant on ?)10 (the peg?) and having
auspicious time of (one?) pcih£r, one niitfi, precisely, then the Brahman (leant on it?) they (pressed ?) 11 the gold peg ... " .. ~ ...•. (and)
astrologers, who were versed in house-building brought water (in) vessels Qf (patted?) 19 the sand smooth.18
1
gold (and) silver (L 7) (an.cl) water (in)' conch shells, which they arranged When they had (patted it?) smooth, then the samben prafr'talan/car (1. 22)
(on the ·ground. Then they ?) 19 sprinkled 18 all the pill~rs. After that, they brought gold leaf which (they?) adorned with ..•....... (leaves of the
, offered .... 14 golden flowers (and) ~Itar candles (everywhere ?).16 red bz'l, and?) 14 thread which (tender maidens ?}~15 young darnsels,16 daughters
On that Sunday, too, at the auspicious time of one pahir, (two ?)16 na4i, of Brahmans (had spun ?) 17 Then the
precisely, (l. ro) (they) worshipped Narayal}a.17 To the Nagas 18 (they) samben prajnalankar stuck .. . . (with?)
mad~ a decoration of plantains (for?) 19 a dwelling place, spread mats,. (and •••..•· • . • (1. 2,5). Then • . . . . .......... .
set ·in readiness?) 20 golden flowers (and) altar oblations.21 Then ... the sam-ben
t Cf. A 37 n. The reading here is supported by other passages and is almost certain.
2 Alternatively, ''the Brahman astrologers, the Burmt'se who (wei:e) versed in house-building, (and
1 The meaning of ·rin~ac is undetermined• . As regards the procedure,- it seems likely that they
the MSns P) who (were) versed," etc. But on the whole it seems more likely that the vcrsirn in the
sprinkled the water and scattered the grains of rice,
translation is right and that a di-stinction is being drawn between Brahmans of the Burmese part cf
2 Probably of the monastery, as l presume it to be, where they lodged on these occasions : ef,
the country. and Brahmans of the Men portion.
G !!2. 9 Cf. A 3 n.
4. That is, '' in honour of." Or it may be, '' at " or ''on," and so in the rest of this passage. s Cf. B 14 ·n. ·~ Cf, A 38 n. 5 Cf. A 8 n. 6 Cf. A. 37 n.
7 The numeral is not quite certain, nor is it dear whether the \vorcl tak that immediately follows
5 Cf. A 8 n. n C f. A 9 n~ . is to be taken to mean " fixed with/' or possibly as a mere ·numeral auxiliary, in which case one
7 Cf. A 8. Presumably these are the four cindrow pavilions of A 1.6, set at the four sides ofthe would simply say '' with/'
principal or great pavilion. 8 Cf. A 38 n. 8 The word ''seven" is not quite cert;:dn. · !l Reading doubtful.
9 The words in parentheses in the preceding passage are nearly certain. 10 I have assumed a connexion with L.M. phalai' (d. tl.acun balai), which is by no means certain.
10 Cf. A. 4 n. 11 Cf. B 33 n. It has been suggested that the right meaning here is ''pulled.". All this also refers to the recurrence
12 Or, perhaps, re which they arranged around. Then they." 19 Cf. C 4~ n. of the word in this !::ame !ir.e.
~~· As regards ·the omitted. word, cf. A 38 n. The word for "offered,,. here is a different one,
15 Or, perhaps, 11 they all offered • • •• golden flowers (and:· altar candles.~' "pul 1 l 1 e d D o o u u t b . t ' f ' ul reading and meaning.. It has been suggested that the word means · H pulled up" or
IB The reading is doubtful. The date was .presumably the fourth waning of Phalguna, 9th · 19 It has been suggested that the phrase means that they" polished (the peg) smooth with .sand.''
March 1 r.02. 11 Cf. A 2 n. But in that case one \\'Ould expect a preposition for "with." The word is repeated in this line.
18 The interpretation is not quite certain. Possibly the reference is to the cosmic dragon discussed 13 Or "level," and so below.
in Halliday, The Tal()ings, 1pp. 25-27, But there is some appositeness in propitiating the Na.gas, as 14 Very doubtful. If rightly read, it is presumed that bil represents the bilva or 'Vilva, L.M. bi,
guardians of the realms below ground, when one is a.bout to invade their domain by digging holes. ''Bengal quince." THe epi~lu:t ''red" is also doubtful. ·
19 The reading is doubtful, perhaps it should be mny, ''one," in which case the word! 15 Doubtful, but it occurs in the parallel pas~age, F ro. 16. Cf. F ro n,
'' dwelling place " would perhaps· be toned down to the mere value of a numeral auxiliary. Cf. E 36 n~ · 17 Cf. F · 10, from which the words ''had spun," here iUegible, · have been supplied. From this
20 Cf. C 38 n. Here .the alternative meaning '' set near by " seems rather more likely. point on there is a big gap affecting the text down to I. 31.
Sil Cf. .f.. 4 n. ! .• 8

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. m PART J J MON 1-NSCRIPTIONS 59
....... . ...... . excavated at the holes for the female side pillars, at the holes for the yas
. (a .. . , s . p . ad . e . w . it . h . a . t u . r . n e . d . h . a n . d . l e . ? ) . 1 . .. . . . . . . . . . . ~ . ...... , " . .. " . _the holes pillars (and) at the holes for the atas pillars (of the?) sz'nghast'n,1 (and)•at
... the holes for the atas pillars of the audience (L 43) hall.9
f . o . r t . h . e . m . a l . e . 2 ( . I . . ! . 28 . ) .. ( s . i d . e ? . ) . p . il l . a r . s . . Then . (a • sp • a • de 0 11 w • it • h • • a • t • ur • ne • d • (and) A s t pr t i ? n a k t l ed ti . 1 . ! 1 . e, T~ to e o n , ( th at e ) s a a l m l b t e ~ n e (a si n d d e s ? , ) t l h ea e l an ~ r y a a hm n a n s an a st { r a o n l d o ge th rs e ? r ) e c t i r t a e p d
handle?), they (asked of?)~ . . . . • . • . . • . . • . . . . . . . .. . ... dumsac' who bore swords 5 they 6
_ • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
. • .. • {brought a spade with a turned handle?) . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
also around all the fronts of the four sides (1. 46) . . . . • . . . . . . . .
. . . . . the yas pillars.4 When (they had built them up ?),8 (1. ,31) the (beat?) drums . . . . . . . . . . . . blew . . ....... .
samhen (len and kalan 5 and?) aU the Brahman astrologers brought, water 1 On that day, too, at one pahir, two (nttrf,i ?) 8
• . • • • ••••
(in) vessels of gold (and) silver, (and) water in conch shells wherein (they)
• • ~ • t • • • • • • " .. • • •
put cleaned rice (and) dubba grass6 (and) sprinkled 1 on the places where
1
(they) were to dig the holes for the male 8 side pillars.
Then the samben p,-ajnalaltkar, sambe.n (1. 34) . . . . . . . 9 (and the J
>
chief?) 10 architectsj took the lead.11 Next, the kalan sly dug the holes for
9
the male side pillars. When the Brahman astrologers had sprinkled 12 on the • 0 • • • • • • • 0 • • 111 .. • $ • • • " • • 11 • 11 a e·e • • • , • e e • • • • •
the day (b_eing} (Wednesday ?),10 the sankrii.n n Brahmans (wore loincloths
places where they were to dig the holes for. the female side pillars, the
(1. 3) (and) sukhuy cindrow ?) together with (white kuchom ?) 19 skirts (and)
piUa~s.
kalan ken dug. (I. 37) At the places for the holes of the yas the
white hair bands. (They) (decorated?) litters with {white cloth and?) shaded
Brahman astrologers recited 18 (and) sprinkled,19 and the kalan sii brought a
(them) with white umbrellas. Upon (the litters they?) laid 18 (1. 6) vessels
spade with a turned handle 14 (and) dug.15 They dug (and) excavated,l*
of gold~ silver, copper (and earthenware, which they carried?). In the
(giving twelve strokes?) 17 (at) the four places (which they?) dug (and)·
mouths of these vessels they (stuck flowers of the brae £mow (and) leaves
excavated, (giving one stroke at each place ?).1~ (1. 40) As they dug (and)
of the carf,iln ?).14 At the auspicious time (they went {and) beat?) (l. 9) the
excavated at the holes for the male side pillars, so also they dug (and)"
foremost drum.15
1 See the note on . the text. L.M. bu.t means '4 to turn with a. lathe." Conceivably ta.¥ huwut Then the sankran Brahmans went (and) drew water, (and) when the
might mean· ''a drill," but in view of H 38 I think. it is more likely to describe the kind of digging water had arrived, they made in honour of NarayaJJ.a 16 a decoration of plaP.'"
instrument or spade (kwiv) employed on this occasion.
2 In the Lokasitltlhi, quoted in Haniday, The Talain.gs, pp. i.i, 25, the principal posts <if a tains (called) " ox nose '' 17 adorned with young plantains (1. 12) (and) sugar·
house are named "king post," ''queen post," "minister post/, etc. Jn Burmese treatises on cane (and) within it (set) boiled rfoe in cup .. shaped vessels 18 with candles
atchitecture these wooden pillars are. distinguished as ''male,, and ''female 0 timbers, the latter being
· stuck in it, spread mats, (and) offered 19 golden flowers, altar oblations,18 (and)
somewhat larger at the bottom than at the. top, whereas the former are of uniform thickness through "
out, not tapering like the others. Probably this is also the distinction referred to here. altar candles. (Then ?) the Brahman astrologers went (and) worshipped
: C D f o . u B bt f 3 u 3 l n r . e ading. 7 4 · C C f f • . . C A 4 8 ~ n n . . 8 5 C D f o . u H bt fu 27 l i n e . a ding, bu 9 t S cf e . e A th e 3 7 n o n t . e · on the text. Narayaf:.la. Having offered 19 (I. 1 5) water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver,
, . 10 Cf. F as n. The present passage seems to support the second alternative suggested in' that (they) spread mats (and) offered 19 golden flowers, altar oblations, (and) altar
note. . .. . . n Cf. A 2.0. 19 Cf. C 4~ n.
f 1 r . ' m t o e . l e a m l • r 1 o ·1 e . l w 1 1 y l · S 6 5 a i · . s n t o s u I C L I · n t t m n h f 1 p • . . y e M r e t i m · i H s r h . • m . a m . 1 ' , l d s a c e . 1 , r a r u a a w e y c 9 r u n a u i , h x s l o i m . w 1 l o ; · . y m 1 t 1 e ' h e ~ t . ' a a e a t m a r r o p d y t e p · a n h d , p d s : . h s a g e s h 1 ' e t a a o g · n r f r ~ w , o e o t n s h e . t r e P h e v . t< ~ c r m t e > h e h o r . T g o ' " n e m h r u v i t t s ~ e g e a h o a n h t e 1 • n n • i t s e s h o r n 1 e s e e . ' c o e ' . a c t e m m h d o o s a . s e o m n · e v n f j s u . r g e c d s a r . n e r o e t i c a a h s u n t { t d i e d b c a o d r n e t h n n . e r o y . a i . i d m t n s u o m g · p p q - t r . " r o o u / o · 1 r e i o b e t x t e a t h e · h c b t . e a e g h l c e r v . a e , r a , r n e w t e t e a a a i o 1 d d i r t 7 n r . . i t d " n . d h T g o h , e i N i n e s " n p t o r a i m o n r d t d d e i i u g a c o H H c g u n u i i l i b n n n a 4 C t g r g 0 r~ r l f / ' ' 1 y 0 k k i i 5 s f H l b 0 r ~ t , u n . h t o e 2 t ' h ~ ' t o t l C . " w . o ' . q o n h u o p ~ 1 a g r ' a l t d v i i e • d r v e , c e " o e w / i r f t ' r e . t h t w a . w . a b i · . t c • o m h n e • h r i . e c d h u d a s thro " 1 1 u i 6 1 4 9 0 2 s g O C h C S e T C o e f f r h f t . . u e , . e t A A v · A B t r h t e e h r e a 8 3 1 i y 1 s 7 d 7 n n 6 i l o p i n n . n k t n a . . g e e ~ , s , l s v F o i a s , n B g n e 2 '' t o 5 t 1 h H h h 4 t e n e a q . C v . i n t u r e e . f i . x o t b t e B . . e . T e C . h n 1 ', e e e 9 r r • t e a n w i s " . n t o , o r r b d e u s d t 1 7 o s 5 5 s i n n e D C C e O . f o f t p h . . J r u a e ' b A A r ' l t e a · t f l h n n u 2 I e t a l I n 8 h l , i d e o n n n r s g t u . e n e y , s m . r p B o r f 0 a e c 2 t p ( c a 5 a o o t r t i m n a o ' . l n ' p l d . e a r l n u i C p m e a d f. s s s " D b a P g y ) e 2 s ' 4 m ' i a n a n r n . k f d r s 1 a o 8 1 a n C r C o C t. e f f " f f . . . C f i A a A n C . i t r 4 f e l u 3 t . y 1 r 3 r A n o c 1 n . e g 1 . r . 1 a t 3 t a i i o n n n . .
m. H .3 9, an.d .. I ·a~ not qui.t e s..u .r e. wh.a t 1.t re. a.l ly mea. ns. . A. re we to suppose "t hat th ere were t h ree 16 Cf,. A 2 n, 17 Gf. A 3 n, 18 Cf. A 4 n. 19 Cf. A l8 B.
{>ersops, each of ~hom. dehvered a stroke ~f th~ $pade at each ,of four different pl~es.P Or that
twelve persons dehvered,. .each of them, one stroke ~t each of the different places p

60 EPIGRAPHIA BIRM.ANICA (VOL. HI PART I) MCN INSCRIPTIONS 6t
candles at (the front?) of ·the sing !zttsz°n 1 and all the faces of the four . • . . . . • . . . . . • . At the auspicious time of five narJi, 1 precisely J •
si~es.2 (Then?) the Brahmans (L I 8) ail went (and) worshipped.3 When .. (being) tagna,2 they beat all the drums •. ~. .... (1. 6) •. "· .
(they) had worshipped, (the Brahman astrologers?) brought water {in) vessels . • . , blew . • • . . . • . .. . . . . . . . ...•3 (and?) the whole host
of gold, silver, copper, (and) earthenware, (:tnd) water (in) conch shells shouted.4 Then they (set up?} ~ •........... (and rose and dug ?).5
wherein (they) put cleaned rice (and) dttbba grass.4 (L 21) Then they . That day, (1. g) (too?), the saiikran 6 Brahmans wore suk.huy ci'ndrow,
sprinkled 5 on (the ground _where they were to?) dig 6 the holes for the together with \vhite kuchor141 skirts, (and) white hair bands. {They) decorated
pillars _of the. front of the s£nghtts£n and the holes for the pillars of the litters with wpite cloth, (and) shaded (them) with (1. I 2) white umbrellas.
faces (around all?) 7 the four sides. Upon the .litters (they) laid 8 vessels of gold (and) silver, (and) vessels of
At the auspicious time of (five?) narfi,8 (l. 24) (one ?) pat,9 precisely, copper" (and) earthenware, which they carried, (and) in the mouths of the
(Aries being?) 10 lagn.:t,11 they dug all these holes. At that time, too, .... , vessels they stuck flowers of the hriJ..c _(l. 15) kmow (and) leaves of the carf,un.9
the holes for the four atas pillars of the great pavilion/2 they dug. (l. 27) At the .auspicious time of (two pahir ?), one narfi, (they) beat the
At that time, too, they set up all the (other?) 18 pillars of the (four?) 14 sides. foremost 10 drum. · Then the (sankran ?) 11 Brahmans went (and) drew water
That day, too, at three pah'ir, (t,vo ?) 15 ndcf/i ....... /6 Leo (being) lagna, (wherewith to ?)19 bathe the (atas ?)13 pillars of the singhasi"n 1~ (1. 18) and the
they set up the atas pillars (I. 30) of the corners. pillars (of the faces of the four sides and?) !l the pillars • . . . . . . • • ..•
(On) the eighth waning· of the month of Phalagun, at dawn 17 (on)
F. r1 ' d a y ,. 13 • . .. .• . f) . • • l'I • • • • • • ~ .,. ' 9 • • '0 • "· ll ~ ~ e • e • • • • -·
L
The (Brahman) 15 astrologers brought water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver.
K
f ~ ou .• r 1· s '· i d • e s • ? ) 0 ,rn .. 'y··~ t h ~. ey • (1. 3 0 ) • .. . . . . . . . . . ., . • ,,, . . · . · .• . ·. . ( . a ll . d A al a t t l a t r h h c a e l a l n 1 a d 6 u l s e ( p 1 s . i c e i 3 o v ) u e s r a y n w t d i h m e t e r h e e .1 ( 9 w j u h n e n) d a g l o d d h o u or l , z 1 7 ( a w n a d s ) th la e g n n a th ,6 e y t h w ey en t b a (a th n e d d ) o th ff e e re f d u n 1~
On the thirteenth waxing of the month of Cey, the day (being)
l Cf. A 8 n.
2 The word rendered "front" is the same as th~:u \Vhich have translated by "faces n viz muk Wedne~day, at the auspicious (1 .. 6) time of one pakir,20 five nii:rf,i, precise~y,
l w ' I t o e r r d a 11 a Y ls , o , f o a. c ( ~ ' c e. u . " r s i . i n . p A r e 9 s , um 28 ~ ~ . i B t to 3 ... ; m ;, e 8 a , n · ~. a + -2 s :; i . , d e H o r 1 7 fa , 9 r 4 i . . ~ d , e J o 2 f 2 a , L bu H 12 d , i n a g n . d f . p a r c o in b g a b . l i y n N a n 1 y , d I i r a e , c m ti o n n o . • t q T ui h te e1 they set up the Jun dat door .. • .. • • . .21 On the third wani,ng of the
clear as to what drfferencc, if any, there is between it and tla1i.
3 Or, perhaps, ''the Brahmans went (and) worshipped everywhere," i.e. at each of the places l Cf. A 3 3 n. li Cf .. B 38 n. a Cf. A I I n.
above referred to. Cf. D 31 n., B 8 n., L 4 n. 4 Cf. F 35 1_1. • 5 There are two or three doubtful words here.
: Cf. ~ 33 n. . . . • . . ° Cf. C 4~ n. .· 8 Cf. A 12 n. 7 Cf. A t6 n., B 14 n. 8 Cf. B 17 n.
. In view of what follows, tlus seems to be the right rendering, but one would have expected dir 9 Cf. B 19. n. There 3eems to be a stop here between brae and kmow. Unless that is a mere
(as m H 16, 17, 3::a, 35, etc.) rather than k"fr. · . error, it is an indication that the two words cannot be taken closely together. .
7 Or'' at all." The reading is not qaite certain. 10 Or" the drum" (or'' drums'' P) 1')n front." Cf ,' A 13 n. 11 Almost certain.
8 Cf. A 33 n. $ Cf C 12 Almost certain: at any rate there is no doubt as to the general sense.
10 T · h e reading is not certain, it might be "' Taurus." u Cf. • B 3 3 9 g n ... ,. . IS Nearly certain. 14 Cf. A 8 n.
. .1 2" Th .... ~:ea d ,! ' ng "f o ~:r " · ts not qui · te · · certai · n . Assum · m g i · t to be right, one might n c . o nceivably take it 15 The word for " Brahman " must have ended the preceding line. . . .
~tt~ pav1hon. ·· But it seems clear that there was but one H great pavilion 11 flanked by four sub• 16 The same word (dirlec) occurs in A 18 1 while H 42 has the va.riant spelltng dirlac. The
s1d1ary ones : cf. A r6 n. ' meaning 0 hall" is not absolutely certain.. . . · ,.,
· ra This rendering assumes that the cmen of. the text is an error for c-en. 1f it is not, I do 11C1t 17 Cf. A 9 n. Perhaps, ·therefore, we should translate,·" the central hall and the central door.
know ic r w. · . · T h h a. e t . t w he o r w d or c .d m e m n . ea o n c s c . u rs here a H g a D in o u i b n t f q u u i i r t e e a d a i nO dli " :f) •f eren. t connexi 1 o 5 n o , a r, n d p er p h e a r p h s a 1 p " s f i i v n e . . , a , different 1 1 9 8 C O f r . , A pe r 4 h a n p . s , ''and they all ..... candles!' Cf. D 3 t n., H 8 n., J 18 n. .
sense. . . 17 Cf. c t2 n .. ro The thirteenth waxing of Caitra, as .a menn tithi, expired 1.6 hours and 30 minutes after mean
18 · This would. presumably be ·FridC).y, r4th March t ro~.. But the eighth waning of Philguna. ended sunrise on Wednesday, 2nd April n<n. The time given here is 5 hours, presumably after true
~· ho ~ u u r s D a o n u d b tf 1 u 2 l m re m ad i 1 :t n e g s , after 1llean sunrise (i.e. abo · ut 8• · l 2 a.m.} on the p · r eceding day: • sunri ! s 1 e , T i h .e e . m 10 e - a 4 n 9 i n a g . m o . f , p w ra h p ic h i s fi u ts n d i e n t e c r o m rr i e n c e t d ly . . Pe r h aps l . t means " . . a n 1 • t s I> 1 a c e . •• •

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. IJI MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART I)
month of .Cey, the day (peing) Monday, at the auspicious time of one (na{li, .•. the Brahman astrologers brought water (in) vessels of gold (at;,d)
(l.•9) precisely?), Aries (being) lagna,1 they (chiselled ?/z the ••••. 3 pillars silver, (and) water (in) conch shells wherein (they) put cleaned rice (and)
•.. • (at all?) the four places~ dubba grass.1 Then they . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a the steps.3 Then
(On the) fifth waning of the month of Cey, the day (being} Wednesday, (tlrey} offered (l.. 6) (golden flowers and?) 4 altar~ (candles ?) ° and at dawn 8
1
(and) Gemini (being) lagn,;, 4 they (set up the?) ...... (pavilion?) (1. 12) (on) Friday .. . . . . . . • • . . . . . . . . . beat all the drums 7
••••••
ft
• . . . . singhas£n 5 with the trin fin muk a around all (the four sides?). • . • . . . . . . • . , .. . Next (they) set up the pHlars of the steps and
On that Wednesday, too, at an auspicious time after three paltir, (Virgo (1 9) . . .. . . . . . . (at the ?) four sides .
s •
being?) tagna,7 they . (set up?) ............. -(I. 15) ............... . .' On. ~h·e twelfth waning of the ~onth of (Cey ?) ,8 the day_ (being
(at?} all (the four sides?). (On that fifth waning of?) the month (of Cey, too, Wednesday ?),9 they made in honour of Naraya"Q.a 10 a decoration of plantains
the day (being) Wednesday?), ...................... , {Scorpio being (called "ox nose''?) 11 adorned ,,·ith young plantains (and) sugarcane, (1. 12)
lagna ?),8 (they) dug the holes for the ......... pillars .... (1. 18) ...... . (and) (within it {set) hoi1ed rice in cup .. shaped vessels with ?) candles (stuck
(to dig the steps ?) 9 (the sankran in it?), spread mats, (and offered 12 golden flowers, and?) altar (candles?).
• • • • • • • • .. • • • • • .. • • • • • • • • • • • lQ
Brahmans wore. sukh:uy ci'ndrow together with white kuchom 11 skirts (1. 21) Then (the Brahman astrologers ?)13
{and) white hair bands. (They) decorated litters with white cloth (an.cl)
shaded (them) with white umbrellas ?).1~ Upon the litters they laid 13 (vessels N
of gold?) (and) silver, (and) . {vessels of copper (and) earthenware, :which
(the front of the gable-end?) . • • . . • . . . . • • . •
they carried. In (1. 24) the mouths of these vessels they?) stuck flowers (of
, .. ·. .... all the bases (on?) . . • . . . . •
t~e . b . ra e kmow {and) leaves of the. carjuff, ?) .. H At the auspicious time .•.• (1. 3 ) . . . . . • . . • se t 14 . . . . • . . . · . · · . .. . . · · · •
•. . ~ . . . '.'. • • • 1 , ' _ ...• (of?) the singlulsfn,15 which was made of shining gold, (which was
... '
set with gems?) 16 of divers kinds. Around the • .•...1 7 of the_ sHighasin
(there were?) (1. 6) figures of men who danced: figur~s of men who beat
M
. . . drums, (and) figures of men who .... 't •••••••• , (at) the four corners,
,. .. altar (oblations, 15 and altar) 18 candles . • . . . ...... four figures of lions. Around the . . .. .17 of the four sides, four figures
At the auspicious time .. • • . .. . . .. .. . . . • ., .... : (l. 3)
1 Cf. B 33 n.
• ·. 1 The. third waning was c~rrent fo:r some hours after sunrise on Monday, 7Lh April :uoz. The were 2 t o P r b e e s u e m re a c b t l e y d . the Hlegible pa<ss1ge stated th:!t sprinkled 8 t h C e f . ~ ; L r o 1 un 8 d . wher:e these structures
time he!e ts presumably ·24 mmutes after observed sunrise, i.e. 6-n: a.m. The sign mentioned was
lag . n: T ti h ll e a b fi o ft u h t 6 w ·1 a 4 ni . n a, g m . w a . s . I c i u M rr e e a n n t i n f g o r n o a t b q o u u i t t e h c a e lf r ta t i h n e . day a , P f e ro rh m a p d s a w w e n , s h o o n u l W d e su d p n p es ly d a " y s . i d Q e th '2 A . h p e r r i e l . , \e 4 C C o f. n c je ct 1 u ~. ra lly restored on 1 t C h f e . a V 11 l a l l l n g A y o 6 f t u r t . h n e . r passagc~s. L s ° i C T o h n e j e m ct o u n r t a h l ly is re q s u t i o t r e e d c . o njectural.
M1thUI?a was lagna from 9~6 to 1 t-6 a.m. on that day. o Cf. A 8 n. 9 Or · perhaps " Monday.,, . 1 Cf. A 2 n. .
6 The me~nin~ of th!s expression. is ,undetermined. It has been suggested to me that the first 11 Cf.' A 3 n. 'This and the next few passages in parentheses with question marks a.re conjectural
word may. b. e.1.de.nt1cal with L.M. truin, ' to. wander about/, and.. the second with I.. M ·u · · "f t,, restorations, but fairly certain ones. . 12 Cf. A. 4 n. . . . .
so that th · ·· Id b h' 1· · · • 1 in, oo , . 1s The word ''astrologers/~ if it occurred at all, would be m the next lme, which is m1ssmg.
•·. . ; meaning wou. e somet. mg ike nthe ambulatories of the four sides/' something like
cloister~. or covered. walks, in fact~ · · 14 Or ''inlaid/' perhaps with jeweJs. Cf. E 22 n .• 47 n.
wo:~ . 1 1 : ' ~ s ~ : ~ ~ f ~ ' ~ t e i ~ 1 . : T 1e h g e iv s 7 ig n n is n ~ af m t e e d r w 2. . a .4 s 7 , l a a g_ n 1 d ~a ( f i r t o m m a a y b b o e u t p 3 r . e . 6 s u t m o e 5 d - ) 6 . b p e .m fo . re 3 .. u p.m., when the first ~#i 1 1 7 5 C T f h . e A w o 8 r d 11 • tuinwiit appe B a rs C t o o n j m ec e t a u n rn ' l ' s r o e m st e o t r h at i i n o g n , w b h u ic t h f . a s i t r m ly r o c u e n r d ta s i .' n ' . In I F .I7 I hav? rende · r~d
'Ii}~, :~1era1: ,pre~edmg it (in the variant spelling tumwin) by ''enclosure." The r:admg of the n~xt word 1s not quite certa1~,
. phrases m pare11theses2, though queried, are reasonably certain. The
zod1,~cal s1~n. n.alll);.~ lag~a fr~m day~ and if it .is rightl)' read tfrtti'ZIJ {as in S 4), I am not qu1te sure what tt means h7re. Gene~;I~y ~;
was <:bout 7"'6 to about 9·6 p.m. that
l-O Or·. sfa1rs. B·ut the meaning 1s not quite certain. appears to mean u dwelling· place, abode." as in l D 13, F I 21 21. Here, perhaps, 1t means sit:·
. · a ·. · T C h f. e A p r l e '2 c e n d . i ng . l eng .. t . hy R . p C a f s . s a A g e 1 6 • n,, B q th n . .;. · f ·. • · { In p o s s o si m bl e y w an a y e n or ta b o l t a h t e u r r , e, w f e r ie m z u e, s t o , r I th s e u p l p ik o e s ) e 1 o n i m w a h g i i c n h e th th e a re t w ro e. u r? n d t he th e fi g s u i ~ n e g s h i m is e in n t: _ o t n he e r d e m _w a t s h e s o f~ m . e no t v h .: ~ _ n 1~ g g
parCL .. 11 71 p ... a ss · ag . e s · , · l · S ·· C · f. . · B .· x .. 7 m n . . p · aren e:ses 15 airl u y C c f e rt B ai n, being supported by many 1ine, probably in relief rather than in the round. But as it ts not quit~ certain whether singhasin.
iri Cf, A 4 n.· i~ T'b - . ·. ed' .. • . . • 19 n. . means ''throne room" or "throne/' it is difficult to form a clea.r conception of what the arrangement
· ·e :P t~~·< 1.~* words m parenthe&e$ are reJtored. from parallel pasaages. was really like. .

f
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. III PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS .
of lions, all (made of pure 1 shining gold?) (1. 9) Golden d£nday,9 gol~en
p
figures of !Jya!9 (on) both sides (stood?) 4 above an elephant's head 6 which
was made of gold. Above (the b'YliJ ?) (were) archway nzakaras 6 of gold, .......... ..
'
above the archway makaras,., of gold . . . . . . .. . . . . . " .. . · · · · · (1. I 2) . . . the day (being) Friday, at three nar;li,1 11. 3) ••••..••
with (bulbs ?),1 flowers, (and) fruit . . . . .8 Above the fruit (and?) water· within it • . . • .- • . . . . . . . . . . .. . . they made a decoration of
lilies, two golden (figures of geese ?),9 holding pearls, (on) both sides; in the plantains (called) "ox nose," 2 adorned with young plantains (and) sugarcane,
middle a great waterlily :flower . . . ~ . . . . • . . . (I. I 5) · · · · · · · · • (and) within it (set) boiled rice in cup-shaped vessels s (I. 6) with candles
stuck in it, ••........ spread mats, (and) offered s golden flowers, altar
.-o•••••o•••"' •OOe••••••tll10
candles, (and) ~ltar oblations,8 (and) they offered 4 water (in) vessels of gold
and silver. (Then?) the Brahman ·astrologers worshipped Naraya\}a,6 (I. 9)
0
(and) having worshipped, (arranged?) 6 gold leaf, which they (fitted together
. . . . . . . . • • • · . . . all Then they . info?),1 a kyek sri 8 ••••• , •••.••••• (the singhast'n ?),9 they made a
. • .• • . .o I. .• . • .• • '.• . . (I. 3) . . . decoration of plantains adorned with (young plantains and?) sugarcane, (and)
..
within it they spread mats . . . ·. . . . . • . • ·
all (the four?) doors, they built up. . . . . . . . . . . ....
. . . . . . . . . -. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (and then ?) 10 they
(spread mats?) {and) they (offered 11 golden (1. 6) flowers?) altar (oblations 19
Q
and?) altar candles. Then the- Brahman astrologers (who were versed in?)
house-building 18 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• . • • -. • • • • • ·• ·• ·• • • • • •• ·• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • ' •· ..
• • • • 0 • • • • • • • • •
On the. third waning of the month of ........ ,14 the day (1. 9) . . . . . . • . . (water in vessels
(being) ·• • . . . . . . at three pahi'r, five _nar#,15 16 (being)
, •••••••• of gold and silver?) 10 . . • . . • . . . . . • . (1. 3)·
la-gna17 at that time (too?) . ; ..... ,. . . .............. .
. • . • • they . . . . alL They •....•.
all . . . .
t JO O o • • O 'f> 9 11 • • 'O lit • 0 ollP & 9 e • • • e • • • . . . . . . . . all, (at) each ..
each . . . • . • . . . . . . .. • • • . ·. • . . -. . • . . . . . . . . . . . they
spread mats, they . . • • . . • . • . • • . . . • • . . . . . . . . (water in vessels
1 Cf. I E 5, 7. In I E 40 and VIII A 1'2, 29, the word appears to mean '' only!'
2 Meaning undetermined: cf. VIII A 18. It seems to hav~ been some ornamental fe11ture of the of gold and silver?) . . . . • (1. 6) . . • • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (wor
architecture here. Perhaps the phrase .should be rendered: "the dindii.y (were of), gold."
shipped?) .••..•. -. . . . . . At the time (when) godhuli (was) !agna,11
s Meaning undetermined. Perhaps. from Sanskrit vyiila, which means ''snake, beast of prey,
tiger, hunting leopard, vicious elephant/-'1 etc., . . . . . . . _. . • • . . . • . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . • . (brought?)
4 ·Reading and meaning are not quite certain. If correctly read, it is the same phrase that has
water (in) vessels of gold, silver, copper, (and) earthenware •..••••.•.
bee'n. copjecturally rendered ''to make a stand " in I G 6.
6 .. Or "the head of an elephant": it is not clear whether a whole elephant or only the head of . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . (the Brah1nan astrologers ?) who were versed m
l'Yne Wa~' parttay~d here.
'e :1'h'e .r nakaril, a mythical marine monster, is a common theme of architectural decoration, often 1 Cf. A 33 n, . 2 Cf. A 3 n. a A 4 n.
in big~a;r ~la~ofate forms, and. particularly over. arched openings, such as_ doors. Something of the 4 This is a different word from the preceding ''offered." Cf; A 38 n•
sc#fseem~{t-0 be .indicated here. . 7 Both reading and meaning are somewhat doubtful. 5 Cf. A .2 n, ( - 6 Doubtful read;ng.
·....• Ca Possi?ltth~ doubtful word here is the name of the Ci bilva" or ,, vilva" (d. H 22 n.), with 7 The meaning of sisip has not been. definitely determined.
Vtittich.1:'-fe:ns'ittha ha1c}1·throug~ his ~other, an ancestral connexion (cf. VIII B 16) that may help to a This was apparently some ornamental architectural··. feature, the precise nature of which. I have
ac~p~n~ f:or its·ap:pearance ':here. . ' ' . ' . not been able to ascertain. Generally the word means "gloi-y;' and it may here refer to something
· ' ::9: Of "teal duckS~71 There i$ not much doubt as to the reading, cf. the very similar passage, like a halo. Cf. R 5. . 9 Cf .. A 8 n. . . . . ··
10 This fragment is in a particularly bad state of preservation and all the pas·sages in paren.theses
t A h e 3 8 p a n s .: s iages bi pare 1 i ~ : ith f? e f : r s e .A s ; > · a 1 c c n o ~ tTi . p an .,_ i ed . b , y·queries is a r C e f. s o B m e 7 w n h . a t doubtf 1 u 4 l . P ossibly A~aqha. w in i s t c h r ip q t u io es n t . i o ' n marks are more or less .d oubtful 1 , 1 t h C o f u . g A h 1 s 2 u p n p . o rted by the analogy of other parts · o f the
A 33 m l«;Pomi:bly Scorpfo. 17 Cf. A 12 n. 9

f
66 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA PART I J Ml>N INSCRIPTIONS
[VOL. llI
house-building,1 offered ......9 golden flowers, altar candles, (and) altar makaras, two golden scrolls forming the apex (I. 15) (of an arch ?).1 In
the middle (a golden?) waterlily flower ........... .
oblations 5 (I. 9) . . • . . .. . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . .. . .
• • • • • • • • • • •
and all the pavilions.
(On) the seventh waxing of the month of • s
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
up th • e , ' female pillars ?) 4 ···• .. -·0•'J'····· . . . . . they (set
•
• • • 0 • • • • • p, • • • • • • • 0 , • • • • • 0 • • 0
0 flJ••••O•oet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... a c/ec (of
mirrors?) 9 a clec . (l. 3) ..........•..•
• • • • • •
. . . . . above the makaras3 (\vere) the pillars of the arch 4 (of the singha·
sin 5 right?) above the pillars of the arch . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...
R· ;
Around the . . ......... 6 (of the singhiisz'n?) (were) figures of men
set 6 . . . - . . . . ... - .... II • • 0 o 6 • • • • • • • * • • • . . . . . . . golden who danced, (figures of men who beat drums ?),1 figures of lions . . . . . •
makaras 8 (on) both sides, which (were completely ?) 7 • ,, • .. • .. ••• . ........... the (men who?) danced ........ (on) both (sides of the"
. · .... (1. 3) two . . • . .. . . made of shining gold, (which held (and) apex?) 8 ; above the . . .. . . . . . . . . . (1. 6) ; above the . . . . . . . lotus
offered?) 7 of gold .. (and) lotus ...... 9 (on) both sides ...... .1° in ..
• • • • • • • • • • •
In the middle, above the arched clec,8 ....... a kyuk St'i e made of . ....... (on) both sides . . . (waterlilies ?) ...... .
shining gold (and) adorned with noble gems. (1. 6) (On) both sides, above (all) 11 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • all . . . . . . . .
the capitals 10 of the archway pillars, two golden (figures?) of devas in the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . , . . • . .. . . above (the
act of blessing,11 with golden flowers (in) bouquets within the arch, together three?) 12 •••• (on) both sides, a lion (1. 9) . . . . . . ....... .
with hanging 19 pearls,. (and) golden (plantain?) 1 leaves. (1. 9) Above the . . . . . . . . . an (attendant?) 18 lioness (on) both sides . . . . . the hall,14 all
a~ex of the ~rch (was) a golden scrol1,l3 of shining gold, together these they ., . . . •............... a clec (and)
•••
with golden dinday.1 ' (Two ?) ~5 golden figures of byal a (stood on?) 16 both a . . .. .. . clec (at) each corner . • . . .. . • . . • • . . . . . . . .
sides. Above the byat (were) hvo golden figures of (1. I 2) maltaras; above '· '4 1
1 The reading is quite conjectural. Assuming it to be right, I do not take this torin ,to be the
the two golden makaras, two golden figures of geese 17 holding stalks 18 (and) main primary arch of the structure termed clec here described, but the arched apex or finial of the
leaves made of shining gold ; above (the trunks?) 19 of the two golden decorative scherne grouped over it.
i As to clec, cf. b 28. H the next word is correctly read, it may refer to the method of orna·
mentation by inlaying small pieces of mirtor glass. ·
l Cf. B 7 n. 3 Cf. N 11. 4 Or, perhaps, "porch."' & Cf. A 8 n.
9 As regards the omitted word, cf. A 38 n. The word fot " offered'' here is a different one. 6 Cf. N 5 n. The reading seems to be pretty certain here. .
' Cf. A 4 n. 4 Cf. H 28 n. 7 Cf. N 6, which supports the doubtfully read passage here.
5 · Cf• . N S n. . 6 Cf. N I I n. But here the word is spelt mhtikar. a The tran51ation " apex n may not be applicable here. The word cloh. ·is applied to pagoda spires,
.. 7 .· ~01.ibtf o.1 reading,. . 8 Cf. B 28 n. ~ Cf.. p 9 n. and the like, and here it is not quite clear what we have to deal with. Cf. R r4.
10 " Literally"'' heads/' though there is some slight doubt as to the reading. 9 Possibly lotus buds and lotus flowers, or some particular species of lotus. The word seems,
11 Or '' approving.', however. to be specially applied to the blue lotus, though also to other waterlilies.
{ Jj' :he !Uea:iJ~~ is doubtful. Possibly it means." pearl tracery/' or the like. I imagine a connexion 10 The meaning of klo' here is not certain. A possible connexion with L.M. kla' suggests itself;
w v i m tli L.M• . talai, to droop, as the branch of a tree;' but perhaps we should compare the tin lay of but that means 11 garden,',. and unless figuratively applied to this floral decoration it seems out of place
A rs~.
here.
, ;'.,.,,~~- 'T1fie: .J>t'eci:.e mea~ing of tar ~inrof:i is doubtful. It appears to have been some ornamental 11 Here there appears to be a word, kwik, which may mean ''ponds" and seems to occur again
~fe~~u~; p~ac~d high up .m t~e decorative scheme here described~ If mimoy (or mfrmoy) is to be read after the next "all.'' It gives rise to the same sort of difficulty of interpretation as the word /do',
afteT .1t, it. would .. seem to imply something like '1 in each case,u as if this decorative scheme were above, and the reading is doubtfol. . . . . .
.,r e·· peatgedi· m several parts af the building. lB Doubtful reading. The next word seems to. be slar, .of whtch 1 cannot g1ve the .~eamng.. .
~: ~ 9 n~ , .· . 15 Doubtful reading, though nearly certain. is Cf. F. 21 n. Here we have cuheii> a variant spelling of the word I rendered appertammg
, . ~· .. Io P· . . ·. . ·· ': 11 Ct N u n. 18 Doubtful meaning thereto 11 or, alternatively,'' alongside." · 14Cf, A 28, H 4a, L ~·
l.0: '£he reading JS not qUitt · CWrtil.iitij •

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. lit
68
.... .... hall (on) both sides . . . . . . . . . . (l. u) · ·
.•' .. . . . ' . . . .. . ' . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . .. "' . . . . .. . . .. ., . • • (a • p • p u • r • t e t ·
nant ?) 1 (on) both sides . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . · · · · · · · · · · · · . . .
four corners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . •
• • • .. • • "' • • • • -. ' ·- • • • It \i ... •
.........•...... ~ (the base?) .. clec . . . ............. .
(the base?) of the clec of mirrors, the base of the clec
No. X.
THE SHORTER INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA, PAGAN.
Descrtptt"ve Account.
60. This is an inscription of four lines written immediately below the
bottom·· lines of Faces E-H of No. I, in that order. Just below it, again,
· on Face F, is a short Burmese record which has already been published in
lnscriptz''ons of Pagan, Plnya, and Ava, where it has been dealt with under
No. I (1)-(8). The lines of No. X are of the same length as those which
precede them, and. the letters are of much the same type but not so regu·
Iarly formed and in some cases slightly larger. The spelling of some of the
words is incorrect and 11. and 3 are in part badly preserved and of doubt ..
2
ful interpretation. In fact, like many short inscriptions, this record presents
some serious difficulties, quite out of proportion to its length. It registers a
royal donation, probab1y of lands, to the pagoda. Possibly 11. 2 and 3 may
conbain some of the ·proper names of the lands so granted; but on the other
hand, some of the words used seem to be descrtptive, and it is doubtful
whether the symbols that have been taken to be numerals are rightly so
interpreted. Further, the reading Jeyabhum in 1. 2 is not quite certain,
Assuming it. to be correct, it seems reasonable to suppose its identity with
the 'Jayabkum.i of VIII A 2, which is there located to the North .. East of
Pa,g~!l; and the Jeyahham of IX F 44.
·· ::'"··61. !his brief record naturally tells us little that is new. It is chiefly
in:~c~s~i~~ ~s evid~nce that the impulse which caused so many M8n inscrip ..
~tion~il~.:."~,eset up in the reign. of Kyansittha did to some slight extent
: ·~:~J:~·ive;.~~~m; ~~t· it is impo$sib1e to say for how long, for the royal donor
>.
,Iqng .. ~rr TtibHuwanadityapawaradhammaraja (in this record apparently spelt
9f,dftipd0 cannot be identified. This royal name was borne by at least
)
l Aga:i.n th~ same:~word,. as in the precedins note.
'''.:-:· .. :··; ·, ./

x.
VoLui.\rn III. PLAn:
.E pigraphia Birnzanica
PART I} MON INSCRIPTIONS
~
E-4 four kings of Pagan, viz. Alaungsithu (A.O. II 12-60), . Narapatisithu
<
(1167-1204), Nandaungmya (1204-27), and Uzana (1243-8). The Burme8e
Qz
inscription engraved immediately below No. X is dated in the year 611 of
;::>
0 the common Burmese Era (A.D. I 249-50), and its style of writing is
~ les~
z ~ decidedly different from (and in my judgment, archaic than) the style of
1-j CIJ
~. 0 t;:d Nos. I and X, which latter have much more in common. No. X, therefore,
1-4 p
z0 ' E 1 - 1 4 < must faU somewhere between 11I2 and I 248, and probably nearer the earlier
~
" ~ ""' ~ than the later date.
C)
- z00 Text.
z 1. (u o 11 smii1] S[r]i Tr[i]bhuwanaditya[p]awara[dh]amma[r]aja n 1 ti (m)a1
<
k(e)l [d]an (1) 3 kti gy[e]k 4
2. [J]eya{bh)u(m) 5 ti ma rhak gu 6 pok (ta)w 1 1000 1 ti [ta]k {sn)iy 8
3. (70) 1 ti (m)ri (6)000 1 [ti] .... (ra) •. (da}n (5)00 1 a(gh)a
(p)awa 9
·
4. ( ..) 10 smin (m)a 11 prey ma ·,.cut 4ek u o • ~ 11 c...
Translation.
King Sri Tribhuwanadityapawaradhammaraja, the lands which (he) gave is
z as a (pious) donation to the pagoda 13 of Jeyabhurh, 14 lands which ... , .•.
0 •••• , 15 1000 16 ; lands (for) building (houses ?),17 (70 ?) ; mri18 lands,
0
N ~ """" l Or 0 riija I.
ts: 2 No crossbar visible: looks like pa. The next symbol i~ blurred and has a mark above it:
::i:: perhaps we should i"ead parna kal instead of ma kel.
CIJ s There ought not to be a stop here, and it is doubtful whether in fact there is one.
. ~ 4 Misspelling for kye.e. 5 Conceivably jeyacu•
::i:: z
6 Perhaps a misspelling for ku, or else it forms a word with the next syllable.
E-4
~< 1 Conceivabh' waw. .
o0 a A blur below the s (which letter is itself not quite certain) is my only justification for assuming
< the former presence of a subscript n.
~ 0 z ~ ~ 9 These two words are very doubtful. The gh might be a y and the p an m. Either way, I ca.n
0 ~< make little or no sense out of them.
z E-i~
e: 10 There is a space here, but it is uncertain whether anything was ever engraved on it.
~0 0 l1 No crossbar visible: looks like pa.
U< 12 The reading is doubtful. Alternatively, ''gave arable lands," but in any case the syntax is
z00 ~ peculiar and was perhaps influenced by Burmese. Normally the object does not co~e between
"""' subject and verb in Early Man. lB Or ''Buddha." . ·1 :1- Doubtful reading.
~ 15 I can make no sense of the omitted words: rhah presents an unusual . combination of letters •.
~ Mr. Halliday suggests that it may be for cak, ''to break up,,; pqk might mean "to open" ; taw is a·
E-4
doubtful reading. . . .. . . .
~
0 16 All the supposed numerals. are more or lel=>s doubtful. ·Assuming them to be nghtly read, ;1t is
::i:: to be .supposed that . they .refer to the areas of the lands according to some upderstood unit of
00
measurement. ·
~ i7 Conjectural reading. Perhaps tak is an error for dak which really means ''to build}' Cf~
::i:: 1
the converse case of gyek in I. x. · Ja Meaning undetermined.
E-4

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL .. HI M6N INSCRIPTIONS.
PART I]
(6000 ?) ; lands . . . (pious donation ?),1 (500 ~) ; . . . . . . . 9 Th~ unduly pressed. Apart from its bad preservation, which throws considerable
e:talted king bowed 3 down (and) poured out water. doubt on a good deal of its contents and particularly on the reading of the
proper names in it, this record does not offer many difficulties; .but on .the
No. XI. other hand it contributes very little in the 'YY of new lex1cograph1cal
material.
AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT KVAUK SE:.
Text.
Descriptiv ~ Account ..
1. u o n wo' ey mahathe[r]
6!.2. This inscription covers a surface of 3 feet 9 inches in height by
2. Ion [k]a1 ey tlfin dmon (han)
foot 5 inches in breadth, as measured on the ink .. impression. It is in a bad
1 3. Klok Sa yon wo(') ey
state of preservation, the stone on which it is engraved having evidently
4. [mun]as [m]ahather [B]ukam e[y] mu-·
weathered considerably, and the last few lines are practically illegible. The J
5. nas smin (g) o[h "' ma ey croft
letters are of much the same type as those of the other inscriptions in this 6. [b]a(d)dha[si]m [wo' tinluy jra](')· 1
l It
Section, but are rather variable in size, ranging between inch and inch
7. [ku ey] (ma) 2 [klofi] (ku kyek) 8
in height. Letter t is 1 inch to xt inch long, and the normal interlinear 8 .. [wo' pinjan Maha](de)[w] ( r mba 9~)-
space is about the same, save that after I. 20 there is a space of nearly 9. h [mbo' cJeh l](wa') 4 [cleh
1 1 1] ••
2 inches and after I. 21 less than an inch.. The text has been determined 10. [mbo'J (Na) [Lwoy] 1 (Ya Wan kon)
from three ink-impressions. u. [Na Mrik 1J (Na Ga)[n 6 Da 1] (goh da) [e}
.
63. It records the foundation of a baddhasint.a at Kyauk Se, in the 12. [y cu]t (kel] ( 1) 7 (ku kyek] ( ..) 8
inscription called Klok Sa, which spelling affords some indication as to the
13. (ma) 9 klofi tin[lu]y jra[']ku(') e-
contemporary pronunciation of that· place·name. The baddhasima in question 14. y t[i] b[n]a' [in]aha(da)n (7 bnan kar) 10
was set up by the Chief Monk of the locality with the assistance of c~rtain 15. (ma] (k)on (sambeft dalen k]e·
other persons specified in the record, whom he apparently dedicated to that
16. 1 ku e[y] (go)h ci ey
service. Further, a grant of land made by some local official or officials to
17. kel [ku ky ]ek k( u )m rasi
the founder was by him transferred to his foundation. The Chief Monk 18. [pu]in go[h] (jen pujaw) 11 (m) 11
• •
records these facts in this inscription, the legible portion of which apparently 13
• • .. . • .. . [ carit] ku sa(kala)
19
ends with the usual wish that the merit accruing from the deed may enure 20. (satwa 1~ gurh )l(ui)n da (u o 11
• • )
to the benefit of all sentient beings. ~ J. • • . . • . • . • .. • . • (k) [t] . . . . .
64. So far as it can be deciphered, this insctiption contains no date, but . . . . . . . . .. . . .. (n) ...... ..
22 ••
by virtue of some of its spellings it may be inferred that it is later than those
which precede it in this Section 5 : such a form as jra' ku reminds one more 1 The ' 1 • s very doubtful, but c f · I · x3. , £ 4 P O o r s s p i e b r ly h a p p a s . la', or possibly even mbl .. .
or i5th' century orthography than of the II th century form jirku. But in a Or ku. kyiik, but cf. 1. 12. . . ch~racte; h fr is a monos llabic name, or merely the first
n I am not cert:::l.in whether the illegible e d. · .· :ometimes occurs and it seems
other words the spelling is still quite archaic ; and the point must not be half of t11e o of the initial word of the ~ex.t lme. uc 1 a ' iv1s1~n name should be omitted. .
probable here, though on the other hand it is odd the person s ow .
l Very doubtful reading. 6 The G might be K, and the a, u.
!ii The meaning of the omitted words is undetermined. Perhaps pawa (if rightly so read) means 'i There should be no stop here, but ther t e h . seem h s r e to • b p e e r o h n a e p . s merely a sfop.
"deed." 3 The word mii is defined in Haswell's vocabulary as " to kneel, with the head bowed down .. '' s It is doubtful whether there was any mg e ' 10 Very doubtful reading.
' As a libation, calling the earth to witness the grant. !J Possibly pa. . . b bl Hl Very doubtful.
~ But apparently it wai $et up before the fall of. the Pagan kingdom (circa 1300 A.D.); see It. 4, 5. 11 Very doubtful reading, though J m seems pro a e. 14 Purely conjectural,
13 Probable.

r
M6N INSCRIPTIONS 73
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA PART l)
(VOL. III
to me, I also give to the temple. (May ? ) the accumulation. of merit,
T ranslatt'on.
(offering {and) worshipping ?) 1 (conduct?) for {all {I. ~fo)
...........
" I, 2 the Chief Monk .. Ion/' when I came to dwell at a Klok Sa,4 I beings ?) •1 • • • ,. .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
(l. 4) informed the Chief Monk of Pagan, I informed the king there,6 that
I was building a baddhasz1M.a. · These (are the persons) w·ho together with 6 ~
POSTSCRIPT TO SECTION l.
. myself w·orked (for this temple?) 1 (I.. 8) the junior monk l\fah~dew,8 his
:
father, his mother,. his (grai:dfather ?),9 ( •• ?) the mother of Na Lwoy, 65. The above rect:>rd concludes the list of those which can with
Ya Wan, son 10 of Na Mrik, Na . Gan 11 D a : these I (L t 2) dedicate to the certainty be classed as Early Mon inscriptions in the prese~t collection.
temple, who worked together with 11 myself.. The great (donation?) of ( 7 The M8n text of the M yazedi inscription, which really belongs to the same
measures of ?) 19 arable land, which the kon samben dalen 14 gave (1. 16) category, has been dealt with in Ep. B£rm., Vol. I, Part I, pp. 53-8, but
should be read in connexion with the inscriptions of this Section. In point
l My rendering hardly gives the force of "Ztio', which seems to g<) with ey, "'I/' making somethin·g
like "I here." It seems a curious construction, a.nd possibly one could interpret it to mean: ''This of date it comes between N os. IX and X above. The numerous but very
(is) J, the Chief Monk," who is recording these matters, But d. 1. 3, where this would hardly fit in. short inscriptions of the Ananda pagoda plaques ( ibt'd., Vol. II) aJso fall into
2 Presumably this is part of the Chief Monk's name or possibly the name of his former place of
the Early M8n period; and there are a few M8n inscriptions in Siam, as yet
residence.
s The preposition is very doubtfully legible, but seems to bt~ required here. unpublished, which seem to belong to the same or (in one case at least) an
4 I take the syllable yon which here follows to be a variant spelling <>f the particle yan, not as
part of the name of the locality. If it were the latter, it would be possible to take wo' with it and even earlier epoch.
not with ey, and the objection to the alternative rendering in no~f? t abtwc woutd be removed.
5 Presumably this is the force of the (doubtfully read) gtJh. If it were permissible to neglect the 1 The reading is very doubtful here, but I think "offering,, is fa.irly certain ; very likely what l
stop after it, we might omit ''there" and proceed : '' and then I built an (or ., this 0 ) "baddhasTma." have rendered "worshipping n really also refers to the offering, that ia to the creation and endowment
If wo' "(this)" is construed with baddhas'ima, we should then have to proceed: (' (The persons) oi. the .foundation recorded in this inscription. .
who,'' etc., "(for this temple P) (were) (l~ 8),'1 etc. I Doubtful reading. See § 63 ad fin.
d One of the chief difficulties in this inscription is the sense to be attached to the word tin.lity,
which also occurs in I. 13. It might perhaps mean "on behalf of." I have been unable, as yet, to
trace it elsewhere. If it were possible to find some other meaning for it which would enable '1.vo' to be
construed with baddhasim (as "this baiUhasima "), it~ would be more consistent with the stopping,
which is, however, somewhat erratic anyhow. If we rea<l pa instead of ma in J. 1 we must translate :
1
"(that I) caused to work (for this temple?)," etc. It also depends on the meaning of tfoliiy whether
such a rendering is at all possible. On the whole, ma seems the more probable reading.
7 The word kyek (cf. 11. 13, 17) means any worshipful thing or person, very often ~'Buddha.'';
here presumably it refers to the oacldha:iima.
s This name, like most of the proper names in the inscription, is rather doubtful : in all these
cases the text should be referred to. The word rendered ''junior monk" is pifl,jah (L.M. payyaiz),
plainly identical with the :Burmese patican : ( o~St), which . J ttdson in his dictionary refers to pafica
anga, on account of the live qualifications of a monk there enumerated. The E.M. spelling is peculiar.
9 Doubtful t'eading and meaning. If one read mbe', it might perhaps mean " elder sister.''
10 Or "child," the sex not being indicated.. 11 As to this name, see the note on the text.
12 See~ note t5 above. If we read pa instead of ma, the meaning would be u to work/, instead
of "whVoe rwyo rked." ·
1a doubtful reading and meaning. I conjecture that kar (if rightly so read) is a unit of
meas:utement, probably referable to the amount of land that could be sown with a. certain quantity of
gr:aim,,. or wQrked by one man, and I suppose the word to be connec~ed with Sanskrit kanua. This is
in s.Ome degree con1irmed by the Akkharavidhana of the M8n Abht"d!tiinappadipit·ii in its explanation
of the PaU karisafit. as ''one bnan, a piece of land suitable to be sown with four amba.r)as."
14 I do not kntiw whether kon· is to be taken as "son," "child/, or ''children," nf the samberi
dalefl. or as making the latter .pair of words (which apparently are an official title) into a plural. I
1
am inclined to ,.prefe~ the,)as~ ~Jternative.. For the title, cf. IX A 35-37 ; dal1n is presumably the
word for an altar, often ~ pqr,~;i.h'l~ oµe", elsewhere duleft, M.M. dalin, but whether the lelz of IX A G..B.C.P.0.-No. ts, S.A,S., 16 •. .,1913-500.
i~ a shortened f(?rm Gf ·tne sanwi;~on:t~ I cannot. say. .

·voLUME UI PART II
• . f
jjl.
Archaeological Survey of Burma
EPIGRAPH IA BIRMAN I CA
BEING
LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS
OF BURMA
$~ =:l.)')lQ')6~~~i£!1
.
.·
~q ...... !.~t:t. . ~ ............... .
I u ~JO· 'S."~·
Gt2 ......... ~-·'-·············-··•·••••
B"DITBD BY
:• NATIONAL LIBRARY
CHAS .. : DUROISBLLE
SIJPBRIN11BNDBNT, .A.ROH~~9:J..9GlCAJ.. SURVBY, BURMA CllROLB
A
MON INSCRIPXLONS
• ', 'J ' '; ;,<.'>II' i ~
Section II-The Mediaeval Mon ·Records
. No. Xii' .
THE INSCRIPTIONS OF THE KALYl.l';:lfS!Ml., PEGU
BY
C. O.BLAGDBN
RANGOON
SUPBRINTBNDBNT, GOVT. PRINTING A.ND STATIONBRef. BURMA
1928
!'
•
•

•
•
• •
CONTENTS
...
DESCRIPTIVE ACCOUNT ... •• •
... ...
TBXT
...
TRANSLATIO!t ••• .. 1og-116
' •
•
•
•
• " •
'
• •

•
.
•
.
•
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
.. •
•
• '
' '
• •
'

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY· OF BURMA
•
"'·
•
EPIGRAPHI BIRM IC
BEING
LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS
OF BURMA
EDITBD BY
CHAS. DUROISELLE
SUPERINTENDENT, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY, BURMA
~f ;:l:lo:e0§~~c£11
~q ..... J.!-:t~.~ .............. ,
VOL. II-PART II
Gt~ .... J.f':L: ..\ Q. .: ,E..~
NATJONAL LIBRAR
THE TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA
PLATES
•
By CHAS. DUROISELLE
RANGOON
SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING AND STATIONERY, BURMA
1924
•
•
I
•
•
'
• •

•
•
•
IN DEX
TO
EPIGRAPHIA BiRMANICA, VOLUME II, PART II.
IJ/ustrations.
NO, or NO, 01
PLATE FlGURE PLATI FlOUlU
M't:i"GAPAKKHA (T.EllUYA) ]ATAKA, MDGAPAKKHA-contd.
Nos. 1-37
When the king leaves the
Indra invites - (to be re-born world 8 34
as a man) I I He converses with the king
Conception of - l 2 (his father) . · . . . 9 35
(His father) gives (him) the The hermit instructs his dis-
name of- . I 4 ciples ' 9 36
When they bring the thieves 5 -·· preaches the law to the
The goddess instructs - 6 (three) kings 9 37
The trial with milk 7
The trial with cakes 8 MAHAJAN AKA J.ATAKA, Nos. 38-82
They try - with fruits 9 - is conceived 9
The trial with toys 3 IO - comes out from the womb IO
The trial with food 3 II . - plays with the children 10
They try - with an elephant 3 13 - questions his mother 10
They try - with snakes 3 14 - informs his mother (he will
The test of the mime 4 15 go trading) . 10 4~
They try - with a sword 4 16 When the boat founders II 43
They try - with conches 4 17 Manimekhala, the goddess,
They try - with drums 4 18 listens to - 44
They try - with lamps 5 19 The goddess carries - in her
They try - with molasses s ao arms 11
They try - with filth s 2J Th J e a nak c a h 's a p m la a i r n k s examines II
The test with fire-pans 5 u The anointment (as king) of· 12
(Temiya's) mother and father
- enters the (capital) city u
come and remonstrate (with
him) 6 - assigns their places to the
officials of state 49
.. The trial with nautches 6
The queen sends (a man) to
Accession of - 6
call - or The queen causes
The charioteer comes to take - to be called 50
• away- 6 a6
- (holding the princes~'s
(The charioteer) conveys - · 7 '27 hand) ascends the palace 13
- descending on to the When - enquires I3
ground 7 - gives his (gold) pin to the
He tries his strength 7 queen 53
- is being adorned 7 The king goes out to his
He questions the chariot~r 8 pleasaunce . 59
The charioteer invites - to ..;... (ooks at the mango (trees) 60
return home 8 - sees the mango (tree) 61
The king - sends a message Killg - instructs (the gen. .
. to his mother and father 8 33 eralissimo) 14 61
•
..
•
• •
• •

INDEX iii
•
No.or NO• <ff
MAHA·U MMAGGA'-contd, l'LATB Jl'IGURE MAHA VMMAGGA-contd. PLATll ll'lOURB
The puzzle of the tank 33 142 Keva.tta comes and asks
(for·->
The puzzle of the park 33 143 "4-~ 179
The question of the ass 33 1.44 The king is angry with - 4s 180
- salutes his father 33 145 - instructs his parrot 42 I8t
Taking the jewel 34 146 The parrot returns from the
The. case of the chameleon 34 q7 minah bird
The case of good and bad - tells (the king) that he is
luck 34 148 going (to Uttara.paiicala) . 43 183
The question of the ram 34 149 - enters the city of Pancala. 4.'~ 1.84
(He) instructs the four pandits 35 150 - converses with King Ciilani 43 185
(The king putting to the five) - ·fixes stairs (fi.rmly) 43 186
the quei:.t1on of the rich and (They) take the king's
the wise 35 151 mother's house 44 187
. - answers. the question (of - takes Kevatta's house 44 188
the rich and the wise) 35 152 - enters the king's house 44' 189
- asks (Amara whether she - digs the tunnel 44 190
is married, etc.) 35 153
The shipwrights make over
....:... eats the rice-gruel 36 154 the ships to - . . .. .
- stitches clothes 36 155 - sends (the boats) out of
Amara washes Mahosadha's the way • • 45 192
feet 36 156 - goes out to meet the
- smears the boiled rice (on king (Vedeha) 45 ·~3
Amara's head and body) 36 157 The king (Vedeha) asks - 45 19~.
- gives (Amara) a loin-cloth 37 158 (He) shows the tunnel to King
- informs (that ,he is about) Vedeha . . • 46 195
to return (home) . . 37 159 . (V edeha) comes out from the
- tests (Amara's chastity) 37 160 tunMl 46 196
- marries 37 t61 ;._instructs King Vedeha 46 197
- lives as a potter 38 x6s - converses with (King)
(The courtiers) go about CUlani 46 198
{looking for) 38 I63 - shows ( Ciila.ni) the way
Coming from the potters 38 164 (his) queen is gone 47 199
- answers the (king's) ques· (King) Ctilani looks at the
tions 38 165 tunnel 47 :ioo
The four ceme to ask (que-s-
- measures strength with the
tions to-to entrap him) . • 39 166
king 47 ~OI
The king asks - concerning
The hundre'3, kings offer
secrets 39 167
ornaments (to-)
- is under the trough 39 i68
The king invites - (to stay at
·The (four) pandits look for- 39 t69
his court) . . •
- sets free the four persons 40 170
- returns to the city (of
- sends presents (to the 101 Mithilii)
• - kings) 40 171
- sends back (C.'s family)
~ sends the parrot 40 172
Accession of the son of King
The parrot brings news 40 173
Vedeha
- is asked by the king (how
A female ascetic asks ~- (by
Mithila shall be delivered
gestures, why he does not
from its enemies) 4r 175_
become an ascetic) .
. - is planting the fi{,lwer 41 176
- asks the female ascetic (to
- leaves the city 4r 177 find out the king's mind) • 49 ao8
- fights the Battle of the The persons who have lost the
Law 41 178 case salute - reverentially 49 ~09
•

('
iv IM DEX INDEX v
• •
r •
JfO. or 110.0•
K11A,PAHALA {CANDAKUMARA) fl,ATB runru VIDHURA-contd, Pt.AT& v ESSA NT ARA-contd. ·n.ua v BSSANTARA-contd.. HATll TIGUKI:
jAT - AK is A c , t N ec o i s d . i n 2 g 1 0 t - h 2 e 1 c 8 a se 49 AIO Th Y e a k k i k n h g a a an s d k - Pu;11~ . 1 aka the . 57 ~43 Re (J p l1 re o s re e ntin e g x a - ctin t g h ) i nkin a g lm o s. f . Th f e ru y i ts p l ( u to c k th e a c n h d il d g re i n v ) e the 73 " 305
The king causes him to try The king hands over.- 58 244 giving They arrive at the Suvanna. .
(cases) (The king appoints - looks at the alms-halls giri Mountain • • ' . 73 306
- explains the Law to the
- a judge) . . 50 2II king, 58 - returns home (They arrive at) the Konti·
They bring - (to the king) 50 211 - takes Puit;iayakkha and The brahmans ask for the mara River • . 73 307
- entreats (his father) 50 213 goes back (to his home) 58 elephant They come to the Aranjara
- bids (his wives to implore - (having) called Pur;.r;.ayak - gets down. from the ele Mount 74 308
the king) . · . . 50 2i4 kha (to his home, settles phant (They corn~ to) the brahman
- is near the sacrificial pit 51 215 him comfortably) . 247 - gives away the white ele village 74 309
The people rush at Kha9da· He expounds the rules for phant (They arrive at V essantara's )
hala (to kill him) . · . 51 courtiers to obtain honours - is pleased with his gift uncle's city • . .• 74 310
Accession of ': SI at the court 59 The agent comes and informs They stay in a rest-house (near
_...ascends to heaven . 51 · - tells (Pm;,11;,iayakkha) he is (-of what is happening) • 179 the city) ., 74 3u
ready to go (with him) 59 Showing - arranging for the Ma:ddi stands outside the
BauRIDATTA JA.TAK.A, Nos. ~n9-239 - Pu1,;u;,iayakkha carries Great Offering . • rest-house 75 3UI
Conception of - away- 59 - and Maddi converse Madd i con verses (with the
A B c ir c t e h s s o i f o n - of - P - u Y li i , s l a it k a c k k o h a n a ( v ) t e r i r e s s i . n t g o ) ( f w rig it h h t en t h _; e _ 6 5 0 9 A Qu n ( e - e o n t f h ( fi P a c t h i a u l t s h c a e o t i G m ) c e re o s a m t t o e O s f t i o n fe f s o r e i r n m e g Th w t e h y o e m a k r a i e n n g o k f a e n e C p ~ d t i q n a u ) g e e w n a ) t ch (on 7 7 5 5 3 31 1 3 4
- answers Indra.'s question • PuQli,laka. creates an elephant 60 is ready) · I 67 --converses with the princes 75 315
- asks hiS father's leave to PuitQaka tests (the steadfast- - gives gold in alms 68 The princes show the way
observe the silas 53 ness of - by means of a - goes to see his father 68 (to-) 75 316
- observes the silas in the snake) 60 They arrive at the Gandha
- g i a n r s d tr e u n c ts his wife ·. 5 s3 3 PU · d li, o lli w ,13 n . ka ( an t d u r f n lin s gs - him u ps in id to e - fu c l o ly m e o s n a h n is d f a a t t t h e e n r d s respect· 68 Tu m rn ad in a g n a h M is o u b n a ta c i k n on the 75 3t7
....... converses with the brahman 53 the sky) '6o He comes to his mother 68 Gandhamadana Mountain 76 318
- enters the naga 4 world 54 Puli,19aka whirls - round 6I (T M he a o d l d d i king) . conver • s es with . 69 They arrive at the Vipula
- confers regal glory on the Puit9aka asks (- to teach Mountain 76 3I9
brahman 54 him the laws of good men) 61 - turns to depart 69 (They rest near the) Ketu•
-~gives the jewel · to the - preaches the law (to They bring a. carriage 69 mati River 76 3~0
brahman 54 PuJi,19aka} 61 Maddi, with the children, They give (their guide) a
Alambayana sees ..... . 54 Puitr;.aka conveys - to the mounts (the carriage) (golden) hairpin 76 321
A.lambayana pulls -(by the Miga (country) 6t 159 before- Sitting under the banyan tree 76 3s2
tail) • . . 55 - preaches the law to the - goes away (to the Vin. . They arrive at the Na.Ii
Alambayana makes - dance SS Naga king. 260 dhyas) . 70 Mountain 76 3'3
Al s a n m a b k a e y ) an a a r r . i v c e a s r ryi ( n in g ) ( t t h h e e Th i e n . N hi a s g h a o . m ki e n g introau . ces - . 961 He th a e d c d r r o e w ss d e s w ( h o il r e a g d o m in o g n ishes) 70 293 - L a a rr k i e v es at the M ucalinda 17 324
king's (presence) . 55 234 Puit9aka carries - up (to the (Vessantara's) mother sends - arrives at the square lake 71 325
·-assumes human form 55 ~35 ' world of men) . . . w (h it i h m o ) rna tw m o e nt c s) a .rts (filled - arrives at the hermitage 77 3~6
The king recognizes ~ 56 236 - gives the jewel (to the king) The king enters (the hermit
- gives the ornaments
- returns to the naga-world 56 ~37 - returns home - gives in alms the precious age), becoming a hermit • 71 327
- arrives at the naga-world 56 238 - is at home (receiving gifts) things 7I - comes out from the hermit·
- converses with the hermit 56 239 • - looks back at the city 71 age 77 328
VBSSANTARA ]ATAKA,Nos. 266-389 - drives on again 71 Maddi enters the forest 71 32~
MAlti.NlRADAKASSAPA ]ATAKA, They eat the fruits 78 330
N as. 240-241 Conception of - The mendicants run towards Maddi enters her hermitage 78 331
The hermit - converses with ~asks for gold to give alms • the king 299
- looks expectantly and sees
the king · • 57 They give him the name - • - gives the horses in alms • 300 Jujaka coming • • 78 33a
Th th e e h e B r r m ah it m - a w go o e rl s d (b . a ck) to . 57 T T h h m e e e f n k a t t i h n e g r g g i i v v e e . s s n - urs a e . n s . , t o o r n - a• . Th c e h ar r i e o d t deer dra " w ' . i ng the 7i J (J a u li j a g k o a e ) s f t r o i g m ht e e e n t s Q J i a i l j i a ka) 7 7 8 8 3 3 3 3 3 4
V1l>RuRA]ATAKA, Nos. 2412-265 The wise (in which-) gave He gives away the chariot 7'1 Prince Jali returns (near his
- answers the question of the the ornaments (to his - enters the forest • 73 father) 78 33S
(four) kings 57 . nurses) They ask the way 73 - conversing with Jujaka 79 335
r
•

(' .
•
·vi IND!X
• •
•
NO, OP Ko. or
PLAT& JtOUR"& PLAT& FIG111UI:
VBSSANTAitA~contd. VESS ANT ARA-contd.
(The;.two children) hide in a - pours wa.ter (on Maddi's
clump (of bushe'I) 79 337 .face)
The children ( aTe con~ealed Maddi rejoices (at - having •
in the square lake). 79 33S given away the children) .
Prince jali comes up .(from (Sakka., disguised as) a brah:.. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
the square lake) 79 339 man comes
Ka~ha comes up from the lake ·79 340 - gives his wife. (in alm~)
...-gives . in alms his own (Sakka) receives the wife
children (to ]ujaka) 79 341 (of --) in alms
Jujaka bites off a creeper So 342 (Sakka) give3 back Maddi
Jajaka binds and takes away Indra converses (with-)
(the children) 80 343 Indra goe$ · back (to his
A
- subQa.tes his anger So 344 heaven) MON INSCRIPTIONS.
JGjaka binds (again the Jujaka sleeps on a tree
children) So 345 - looks out for his (father)
Jujaka takes away (the - the king SECTION 11.-THE MEDIEVAL M<JN RECORDS.
children again) . So 346 The king (Ve .ssanta:ra's
Ka9bajina looks bo.c:k (at her father) arrives . 37I
father) So 347 The king comes up to his son 372 No. XU.
- weeps 81 348 . - salutes his father
373
-:-gives.... ? 81 349 The queen (Phusati) arrives 374 THE INSCRIPTIONS OF THE KALV!.~lStMl., PEGU.
The lion bars (Maddi's path) 81 350 The .k ing - chafes Maddi's
Maddi enqujres about her head . . . 375
children 81 351 The king salutes his mother 376 Descriptive Account.
Maddi comes up to the The children come to their
eugenia trees 81 352 mother 66. These inscriptions, originally engraved on ten upright stones, which
Maddi falis (on the ground)
Maddi arrives at.the river 81 353 with her children . · . 86 are now repr~sented by many more or less disconnected fragments, consist
Maddi ascends the hill 82 354 -conver~es (with his father) 86
of two main parts : a: Pali text and a Mon version of the same followed by
Maddi comes upon the (toy} - changes his dress . 86
elephants and horses . 355 - salutes reverentially the certain supplementary mattet also in M8n. Only the M8n portions are dealt
Mad di arrives at the clump of hermitage •
flower-trees : . 8~ 356 They consecrate~ (king) with here. The Pali text, with a tran~lation and s9me notes, as well as an
Mad di comes. to the lake 82 357 They consecrate Maddi (as Introduction, was published in 1893 by Mr. Taw Sein Ko in the lndlan
queen).
{ Maddi) goes back to. the Antiquary (Vol. XXI I) ; and in the following years he appended thereto
Maddi mounts her elephant •
king
. 358 They go out of the wilderness some valuable additional notes, under the title Some Remarks on the Kalyd'ffi
Mad di falls and swoons 359 - dwells in his palace
lnscripti'ons (ihid., Vols. XXI II and XXIV). Both publications were also
- raises (Maddi's herld' and - givesornaments
lays (it on his lap) · ' - ascends issued in separate form, the second. one ,, being further supplemented by
a transcript in the Burmese character of the actual Pali text, as it survives
in a fragmentary state on the stones. For the text, as originally published,
was. based on two palm-leaf manuscripts, not . on the stones themselves, the
learnea editor not having been able to use these owing to lac..~ of time·
Mr. , Taw Sein Ko's labours ha~e very greatly facilitated my task, and I
have not hesitated to .borrow freely from him when the necessity arose. I
•
make this summary acknowledgment here, to. cover all my indebtedness in
this respect, rather than fill up space unnecessarily by repeating it in
connection with every individual case. His treatment of the whol.e subject
.
• •
• . .
\ • • •
.I
• -·

' •
• EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA • [ voL .. 11 • PART II] • MON INSCRIPTIONS 3
al§o dispenses me from much that I might otherwise have had to say her'e Third stone, obverse (N.) Sixth stone, reverse (S.), Face F, from
and that too is a just cause for gratitude on my part. I must add tha ·about 1. 42.
•
1
without his translation of the consecutive Pali text before me I could n° Seventh stone, obverse (N.), Face G.
in the absence of other assistance, have produced an intelligible version <: Seventh stone, reverse (S.), Face H, to
the M&n frag!llents at all, so far as the first six faces of the record ar 1. 8.
conc~rned. Third stone, reverse (S.) . Seventh stone, reverse (S.), Face H,
67. The Pali text occupi~s thr.ee out of the ten stones on which th4 from 1. 8.
J.
whole record is engraved ; the remaining seven contain the M8n version an( Eighth stone, ·obverse (N.), Face
supplementary matter. Speaking of the stones, Mr. Taw Sein Ko, in hi~ The end of the Pali text almost coincides with the bottom of the obverse
J
Introduction to the Pali text, states that "when whole, their average dirnen· face of Stone 8 (Face of the M8n version). Thus the latter version takes
sions were about 7 feet high, 4 feet 2 inches wide, and 1 foot 3 inche~ up 50 per cent. more space than the corresponding Pali, which is on the
thick," and that there were " 70 lines -of text to each face, and thre_e letteri whole decidedly more. concise. The supplementary matter, which has no
to an ,inch." This, however, seems. to be merely an approximate stat~ment counterpart in the Pali, is distributed as follows:-
for the number of lines varies on the different faces. All the stones ha'li'~ Eighth stone, reverse (S.), Face K.
been broken into many fragments, of which about half seem to be lost.. J Ninth stone, obverse (N.), Face L.
- has been my duty to piece together the M8n portion that is still availabl• Ninth stone, r_everse (S.), Face M.
on thirty-three fragments. This was no easy task, and without the help o Tenth stone, obverse {N.), Face N.
Mr. Taw Sein Ko's , translation of the Pali text, it would, at the time whei The final end of the record occupied some lines on the reverse of the tenth
I took it in hand, have been (for me at any rate) a perfectly impossible one stone, but the upper part of the stone has disappeared, as has also
The general correspondence of the two texts may be indicated thus :- happened in other cases.
68. In every case the bottom portions of the several stones, being still
Pali Text. Mon Text. fixed . in the ground in their proper relative positions, served as definite
datum points, to which the separated fragments had to be adjusted. As a
First stone; obverse (North) Fourth stQne, obverse (North), Face A ..
First stone, reverse (South) Fourth stone, reverse (South), Face B. ·rule the text has been determined from two sets of ink-impressions and
Fifth stone, obverse (N.), Face C, to photographs of one of these sets. In one case [H (a)] a missing fragment
I. 48. of stone .is represented only by an old ink-impressjon found in the office of
the Archaeological Survey Department. In two· other instances [A (b) and
Second stone, obverse (N.) Fifth stone, obverse (N.),· Face C, from
L (b)] similar old ink-impressions have preserved for us more of the original
1. 49.
t~xt than can now be seen on the stones themselves. These ink-impressions,
Fifth stone, reverse (S.), -Face D.
made many years ago, had been produced as negatives by inking the face of
Sixth . stone, obverse (N.), Face E, to
the stones, and consequently had to be .d eciphered and photographed by
1. 38. A~
transmitted light. the· paper was very brittle, and in fact already broken
Second stone, reverse ( S.) Sixth stone, obverse (N.), Face E, froltl in some places, this coe.ld only be done after· they had been carefully restored
1. 38~
at the British Museum; but by· these means ·a considerable part of the text
Sixth stone, reverse · (S. ), Face F, to has been preserved which would otherwise have been altogether lost. I am
· about 1. 42, much indebted to Mr. Taw Sein Ko and his successor in officeJ Professor
• •
..
•
•.
• •

r EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vo PART II) MON INSCRIPTIONS s
•
i l !
C~ Duroiselle, for information given by them which has greatly assiste inch in height. Letter t is inch to inch long. The interlinear space
-i
in determining the order of the severed fragments of this record. Owi is about inch. The spelling is very irregular and shows the characteristics
their help, always readily given, and to the existence of. a parallel of a stage of transition. Thus one gets doublets such as S£nghuir and
version of the greater part of the M6n text, I succeeded in distributi Si'nghui'w. It is evident that final r and l were no longer sounded. Some•
times, as in the above case, r is written where l would have been etymo·
the fragments satisfactorily among the several faces to which they orif
belonged. It has, therefore, been ·possible to take these original fac logically correct ; sometimes, as in the name of the month mruz'Hasui"l, the
reverse happens ; but often w replaces both letters, as it normally does in
units, denoting them by capital letters of the alphabet, and to indica
Later M8n. In fact the spelling of Medieval M8n is about as chaotic as
small .letters the actual fragments now existing. I have noted the pn
English spelling was in the Elizabethan age. But even from its very
of gaps occurring between the fragments, and also the size 'of sucb
irregularities we derive valuable information as to the changes which had
when it could be determined with a reasonable approximation to ace
occurred and were proceeding in the pronunciation of the language, as the
But in many cases nothing like an accurate indication could be giv
1
above cases clearly illustrate. Similarly, it is evident that by this time the
only a comparison with the Pali text and its translation could enable c
inherent a in many closed final syllables had acquired the sound of an open
estimate, and that. not very closely, the amount of matter that hac
variety of o (something like English aw in "law," or perhaps o in ''not").
lost. Having regard to the fragmentary state of the stones, which are
This is proved by such spellings as gah (E.M. go~, gobh, goh), while in a
sorts. of irregular shapes and sizes, I have not thought it worth wl
few cases we see that usage was still fluctuating and the sound is represented
give here a full statement of their several dimensions. It suffices to sa·
~ occasionally by the anusvii.ra, even in syllables where the final consonant is
the length of the lines, actually occupied by lettering, as measured
not a velar (e.g. N 13-15, dakar, cwar, dandar). Again such alternative
ink-impressions of .. the few bottom portions of stones where some lin
forms as tradah and tadah indicate that the old infix ·t'r· was obsolescent
completely preserved, varies between 3 feet (M) and 3 feet 4-i inche~
in the 15th century : in the modern form of the language it survives in
intermediate cases being 3 feet 3 inches (K) and 3 feet 3i inches (
J). extremely few words, whereas in our Early Mon inscriptions it is common
and
enough. But I hope to deal with these matters more fully after the other
69. The principal inscription was engraved in or after the year f
15th century inscriptions have been edited, rather than base any final
=
the Bu~mese Common Era { 1479M80 A~D.), the latest date mentior conclusions on the evidence of a single record, even though it be as long as
it, and is therefore one of the later 15th century records.· I have ta
the present o~~·
here, out of its chronological order, for reasons of practical convenienc1
70. The surviving fragments of the M8n text of this record seldom
is so long that it seemed best to give it priority of place, as othen
would perhaps have been necessary to split up the text of it betwee constitute a continuous and intelligible narrative for more than a few con
parts of the Ept"graph£a B-irmanz"ca, with much resulting inconvenie secutive lines. While for the most part resisting the temptation to restore in
1
the reader.· Further, as the Pali text served in some measure to chec the text by conjectures of my own the parts that are lost, save where such
mea~ings of many of the words ii: the M8n version, there seemed tc ~estoration was practically certain, and the fact has been duly. noted, I have
felt bound to do something to render the English translation readable.
special reason for dealing with it before proceeding to the other Mc:
M,8n records, in which some of these words might be expected to Accordingly, in Faces A-F, I have used Mr. Taw Sein Ko's English
translation of the Pali text as a sort of mortar to cement together the £rag·
As regar.ds. :he general character of these records, their script, sp
and pecuhantxes of language, I may refer to what I-fas been said in ments of the M8n stqpes, without doing violence to the one or to the other
5.' 7, 9, 11, 13, 14, 16, and 17, reserving more detailed comment more than the circumstances necessitated. Certain trifling verbal alterations
later occasion. In the Kalyal}i inscriptions, the letters, which (as corn have been made in the Pali portions, in order to adapt them to the t~rmiao·
with the Early M8n script) have a very modern appearance, measure logy which I had adopted in translating the M8n. The p.ortions of t~t
•
•
•

6 EPIGRAPHIA BlRMANICA (VOL. PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS
•
introduced from the Pali have, in the translation, been put within sq1 Consequently ·the eviden~e of these manuscript copies was at once see;. to
("·
brackets, in order to distinguish them from the surviving M6n fragme be of very great value, and it has been considered imperative to print the
This ..p rocess of dovetailing had, . how~ver, its limitations. The M8n tex continuous text of the manuscripts at the foot· of the corresponding -
by no means a close rendering of the Pali (or vt"ce versa). On the contr fragmentary Text of the stones and to· rewrite the translation of Faces G-N
it is often more like an expanded paraphrase. In a good many cases I 1 accordingly. The introductory portion of the manuscript text, giving merely
found it impossible to fit the M8n fragments into the framework of the a very brief abstract of the main contents of the first part of the record
version and have been compelled to present them in my translation in t and adding nothing thereto, has not been reproduced, nor has the conclusion,
fragmentary state and relegate the more or less corresponding passage which deals with a number of simiis unconnected with our subject. I have
Mr. Taw Sein Ko's version of the Pali into footnotes, where they will s1 not attempted anything like a. critical edition of the manuscript text, a task
as a commentary to make the general course of the mutilated M8n which would have been beyond my power, especially as only two mcinuscripts
more intelligible than it would otherwise have ·been. All this has invo are available: my purpose has been merely to use them as secondary
an immense amount .of trouble, and I have often had occasion to ana evidence complementary to the Text of the stones themselves. The
matize with heart~felt sincerity the vandals, whoever they were, who discovery of this new material has, of course, inevitably caused some delay
their worst in breaking up this record. in the publication of our record, but has enabled me to produce a much
more satisfactory treatment of it than would otherwise have been possible.
71. The Text was already set up in print, the Translation based upo
and its Pali counterpart (so far as the latter extended) was complet, 72. The principal inscription, besides being very long, is also to a large
manuscript, and a Descriptive Account had also been prepared, when
extent h_ighly technical in character, being mainly concerned with minute
important discovery was made which threw a flood of light on Faces C details of Buddhist ritual, which (it is to be feared) will be of no very great
N, inclusive. My friend Mr. Robert Halliday, to whose continual assist~ interest to the general reader and are already on record in the Pali text
in the interpretation of the M8n inscriptions I am so deeply indeb
and its translation. The chief importance of the M8n version is linguistic;
happened to read some portions of the Text over with a Mon monk, U Tl it illustrates in considerable detail an interesting stage in the evolution of the
wuntha by name, who preseritly identified them with the contents of a pa language, more or less intermediate between the Early M8n of Kyansittha's
leaf manuscript which he had forrnerly read. This manuscript, which w~ inscriptions and the language of the present day. Still it may be convenient
work on simiis, was found shortly afterwards in the Kahnyaw monaster~ to mention here, very briefly, that its main purport is to relate the
Kahnyaw village, Bilugyun, and another copy was discovered in the Berr reintroduction, by the pious and learned King Dhammaceti of Pegu,-in these
Free Library, Rangoon. Mr. Halliday was good enough to have the : inscriptions always referred to by his other · name, Ramadhipati,-of a
manuscript (which I have called A) copied and personally to collate wit
canonically valid monastic succession from Ceylon, where he held that such
the text of the second one (B). It turned out ·that the manuscripts inclu a succession had been preserved, while in Lower Burma the monastic order
that portion of our record which began at the end of Face F and contin •had long been split up into schism atical sects. The technical validity of
beyond Face N to the conclusion of the whole record. A comparison , such succession depends not merely on the ordination in due form of
the surviving portions of the fragmentary stone text showed that the mci
all concerned in handing it down by successive. ordinations, but also on the
. script copies, though by no means .exact verbatim ones,-inasmuch as
previous proper consecration of the places where the ordinations are carried
~*
spelling been modernized and there are a great number of mi
out. This condition. involves many refinements, discussed at some length
interpolations,, omissions, and alterations-are nevertheless substantially 1 in our record, into which I need not enter here. Suffice it to say that
copies' of the stone original, made at a time when the latter had not b
when an adequate number of validly ordained. monks had become available, ·
bro~en · in pieces and was still m a relatively good state of preservati
King Dhammaceti caused them to consecrate in due form a dma, or
"
,.
r •

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ V( PART lI} MON INSCR!PTIONS
•
ordipation site, at Pegu, to which he gave the name of Kaly§.:Q.Isi
A 16-20. Decline and fall of That8n; and introduction of purjfi~d
remembrance of the· fact that the monks whom he had sent to (
Buddhism into Upper Burma.
r h~d received their reordination in a simtt on the Kalyal}i River ii
A 20-B 31. Origin and consequences of the schismatical divisions
island. Subsequently a large number of ecclesiastics of the M8n ki
of the Order in Burma, with special reference to the M8n country.
on
submitted, their own motion, t6 reordination at. the hands of the
B 32-D 5 r. King Dhammaceti's considerations as to the pre
who had been reordained in Ceylon, thus healing the existing s1
requisites for the healing of the schisms .( viz: can~nically_ valid re.ordination,
and reuniting the Order on the basis of a canonically valid succession.
involving duly consecrated simas or ordmatton s1tes) with a review of the
king also, with the approbation of the Order, issued a set of rules to
1
Sinhalese reformations.
that, for the future, ·ordination should only be performed on suitable p(
and that monks who did not conform to the canonical rules should lea· D 52-E 39. King Dhammaceti requests a group of monks to
Order and become laymen. The principal ·inscription closes with a p: proceed to Ceylon for reordination. Arrangeme.nts for the journey ; and
of some length wherein it is pointed out that in this course of conduc1 departure of the monks in two ships.
Dhammaceti was but following the great examples set by Buddhist mo: E 39-F 21. Arrival of the ships in Ceylon ; reception by the king
of olden time.
of Ceylon, reordination of the rnonks, and departure of one party of them,
who returned in safety to Rangoon.
73. It would, seem that in the reformations of Buddhism the civil
frequently took a very leading part, and that the problem of the re: F 21-42. Shipwreck of the other party of monks and ultimate
between Church and State, never entirely settled in Medieval and IV return of some of them.
Europe, was solved ambulando in Buddhist Asia, whenever there w F 42-55. King Dhammaceti's reception of the first party of monks.
·orthodox monarch with power to carry out his ideas. It will be remern Missing portion and G 1-12. Preparations for the ~o?secration of t~e
however, that in. Dhammaceti's case, there were special circumstances. Kalyaz)isima. D hammacetI's considerations as to the cond1tions for the vahd
had been a monk himself, and his romantic history, including the cele consecration of slmiis.
incident of his escape from Ava with the Mein princess whose daugh G 12-35.. Details of th~ actual consecration itself.
subsequently married and whom he succeeded on the throne of the ss-
G H 41 and part of the missing portion. Reordination of many
kingdom, is too well known to require repetition here. It is no w
monks by the monks reordained in Ceylon.
therefore, that when he was king his influence over the ecclesiastical J
Part of the missing portion and 1-26. Dhammaceti's message as
of his realm was very strong, though it must be noted that our insc
to the qualifications of future candidates for ordination. Depri;ation. of
throughout represents him as making suggestions, rather than issuing
monks who would not conform. Number of the monks reordatned and
Instructions, to the Order. If we take this as a fair statement c
novices newly ordained.
s,it~ation,
it represents a nicely poised balance of power, avoiding e J
~6-44. Conclusion: a review of former reformations and an
a.stical autocracy .on the one hand and Erastian absolutism of th<:
•aspiration that in after times all impurities in religion might be cast out by
authority on the other.
future kings and monks.
~4·
.The general headings of the chief contents briefly referred to 75 . As indicated above, the story of the ecclesia~tical missi~n to ~eyl~n
~:r~ =~
d1stnbt}ted in the principal inscription as follows • efaced by· a good deal of historical matter relatmg to earh er period. s.. . 10
lS pr . . . . d . C t · .
f Fr . om . f t . h e . m . i ssing . beginning of the record to A I 5 • K" t ng A th e I o ng hi" • ~ tory of ·Buddhism ' and part . i cularly to it T s , v 1c1ss1tu · es . 1 n · ey ·' o : n { . .
f!! Qrniation_ o. the Buddhist Order ; and the mission of SoJµ and Utt and its introduction and development m Burma. h.e . prec~se pos1t1on o
~uv,P.\l~bhum1.
SuvaJJ.Qabhiimi is not beyond doubt, but its early m1ss1onanes, So>p. and
•
•
• •

l
• lo EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VO PART II MON INSCRIPTIONS
•
r have long been claimed by Burma as the founders of their brar. 76. In the notes appended to my translation of the principal inscription
Utt
a,; a, . . d . h I
the Church; and though the tale has been embelhshe wit many ~ge I have drawn attention to any substantial differences between the Mon and
accretions in the course_ of ages, it can hardly on that account be d1sri PAli texts that I have noticed ; and in such cases ~I have also endeavoured
as being. altogether devoid of foundation. Evid~nce is gradually ~ccu.mu to see to what extent either of them was in agreement with the fragmentary
from ~various different quarters which tends to ~h~w that Indian. 1~fl Pali text of the first three stones. But I have not attempted a thorough-_
made itself felt in Indo-China from about the begmmng of the ChristJa1 going collation of this latter text with ·that of Mr. Taw Sein Ko, as (apart
or possibly even two or three centuries before that date ; . and t~ere : from my want of qualifications· for such a task) it did not appear to come
to be nothing ante~edently improbable in the · story. of a Buddhist m within the scope of my work as editor of the M8n fragments. It would
being sent there at a relatively early period, though it may well be haza seem desirable that some Pali scholar should eventually undertake it.
at present to attempt to fix that date exactly. Subsequent!y the eccl
77. The entirely new matter contained _on Faces K-N requires special
tical relations of Burma were mainly with Ceylon and particulars are
mention. These faces contain fragments of three inscriptions which may be
of several cases of monks from the former country visiting the latter, <:
described as appendices to the principal inscription and are so closely
some instances being ordained there. It is an interesting example <
. connected with it that they are most conveniently included under the same
solidarity of the Buddhist world of those days that one of the Ceylon. I general heading. The distribution of this supplementary matter on the last
who, in his turn, went to Burma and settled there, subseque~tly satlc
four stones has already been indicated in § 67. The fortunate discovery of
Malayadipa and for a time became the spiritual preceptor of the king o
the manuscript copies mentioned in § 7 1 has revealed its full purport, the
country. This is reported to have happened towards the end o~ the
beginning (and a good deal more) of each appendix having been lost on the
century, and probably M alayadipa represents the hist.oric state of SrI V
stones themselves. The first one relates that after the consecration of the
centring . at Palembang in Southern S1unatra, which is known to
KaJyaJ.}.isima and (according to the manuscripts) beginning with the year
1
flourished as a Buddhist kingdom from the time of the Chinese p:
838 of the Common Era (1476~7 A.D.), a number of other simiis were
I Tsing (who_ visited it late in the 7th century) down to well in the
consecrated by the monks who had been reordained in Ceylon. This
century. It is unfortunate that the M8n text f~ils us here, for we shoul1
inscription then resolves itself into a long list of such simtis, distributed over
to k.now the vernacular equivalent for " Malayadipa." But perhaps we
various towns and villages of the M5n kingdom ; and, subject to the loss of
legitimately infer it from the er Glass Palace. Chronicle,'1 which is in a few lines on the top of Face L (which are, howev~r, preserved in the
based on our record and gives it as '' Mallayu island " (p. 145). Ou
manuscripts), it continued in this strain till it came to an end on the 19th
contains M8n forms of other geographical names. Thus " Ramafifia(
line of that face. Though in the main a mere catalogue, it has a certain
the Pali name for the M8n kingdom of Lower Burma at that peri1
topographical interest ; and possibly local enquiry may enable some of these
regularly rendered by <r this M8n (nnan) country of ours," which incide
sacred sites to be identified even now."
fur~ishes.
us with an acceptable etymological basis for the Pali
, 78. The second appendix (Face M) describes the ceremonial that took
Similarly, where the Pali has "Kambo}a," the M8n has (( Krom.n
place (according to the manuscripts in the year 839 of th,e Common Era,
Kroms are mentioned on pp. 22, 45, of the composite volume Sudlza
1477-8 A.D.) in connection with the planting of a Bodhi tree and the
vafirofiivamsa (Pak Lat, A. Budh. 2453). The second 9£ these pas
enshrining of a relic and certain sacred statues in a cet£ya in the immediate
speaks of an army of them as coming from Chieng Mai, so that they
vicinity of the Kalyap.Isima. It seems probable' that the B?dh_i tree ~a~ been
probably Laos or Shans rather than Cambojans. But• the point is do
and has been learnedly discussed by Profes~or G. H. Luce in the Jo raised from seed brought back from Ceylon by the eccles1ast1cal m1ss1on, as
ef the.Burma Research Soc£ety, Vol. XII, Part I, pp. 39-45. mentioned in the principal inscription (Face F 51 .. 2). As regards the relic,
which is termed "relic of the exalted Buddha," I am not quite clear
,,
'
•
• • • •

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
'PART ll) MON INSCRIPTIONS 13
in my mind as to what it really was. The Pali version of the
1476 A.D. This unfortunate error led Mr. Swamikannu Pillai to cont'3.dict
inscription (third stone, obverse) speaks of "an image of the HolJ
the distinct statement of our record (both Pali and M8n) that the month of
Relic" ; but the cprresponding M8n passage (I.e., supra) says A~ac\ha was intercalated in the year in which date No. 4 falls, as was in fact
about it, and it looks as if some words had been accidentally omitt<:
the case. I have endeavoured in the notes to the Translation to give the
On Face M we repeatedly find the words dhiit patt'miirup, whic
equivalents of the leading dates of the record. But ~nothing very material
mean either "relic consisting of an image" ('i.e. of the above mention
from the historical point of view turns on any of its verifiable dates, as they
Tooth, of Ceylon), or er relic and image." As our text in M 19, 23i merely record the precise times of inoidents in the sending of the ecclesias·
separates the two words by a double stop and in M 22 by the e~ tical mission to Ceylon (January, 1476), its adventures there in the spring and
kwom ku; "together with," I have treated them in my. translation
summer of that year, and the events that subsequently occurred, particularly
separate objects. Probably_ the "image" was the replica of the Ho]
the consecration of the Kalyai;i.isima (November, of the same year).
in any case; the relic may have been some object closely associa1
81. The most important date in the whole record is, perhaps, the one
Bu_ddha. It is interesting to note that the festival given in conned
the 9eremonial enshrining of these objects included dancing, sword p which states that 2002 years of the Buddhist Era had elapsed when
the like, and subsequently the sacred objects received the solemn Dhammaceti ruled at Pegu (B 32 ; and in the Pali, first stone, reverse), the
that is usual on occasions of royal anointment (M 31-2). This ir Pali also adding that it was the year 820 of the Burmese Era (1458-9 A.D.).
ends with 1. 39 of Face M. This does not agree with the reckoning in Phayre's History of Burma, which
on p. 84 gives 1460 A.O. and on p. 290 the Burmese year 822 as the date
79. The third appendix (Face N) records in considerable· de
of DhammacetI's accession to the throne, while the M8n chronicles give
elaborate arrangements made (according to the manuscripts in the )
other, divergent, dates. On this point the contemporary evidence of our
of the Common Era, 1479-80 A.D.) in connection with the ordin
record must be preferred. But as to the earlier dates that it contains, one
monks of six hundred and one sama?teras (deacons or novices), c cannot be sure that its authority for them is anything better than tradition
J
those mentioned at 2 5 in the principal inscription. They were div and it seems hardly worth while to discuss them here. The _one already
six companies, each of which was put in charge of a prince or ot
referred to. in § 75 in relati9n to the voyage of a Ceylon monk to Malaya·
personage, who marshalled them; and they went in procession, ir dip~ wit~
is connected in the Pali text (first stone, obverse) an event that
order, to the place of ordination. The end of the record, as show
fixes it in the reign of King Narapatijayasura, t'.e., accord1~g to Phayre
/
manuscript copies, ran over into the upper part of the reverse face
(op. cit., p. 289), A.O. 1167-1204 (cf. A 37-42); and the date given for
10, but is not represented in the surviving fragments, as the uppe the· establishment of Pali· Buddhism at Pagan consequent on the Burmese
that stone (as well as of several others) is lost.
conquest of That8n is the now generally accepted one, A.D~ 1057 (A 19,
80. Seventeen of the leading verifiable dates in the principal it and Pali first stone, obverse). But Phayre (op. clt., pp. 22, 3 7, 281)
have been calculated by Mr. Swamikan~u Pillai, the learned a \ gives dates for the accession and death of the conqueror Anawrahta w~ich
"Indian Chronology" and "Indian Ephemeris," and a list of them are evidently ·derived from a different line of tradition and . are c~rtamly
on p. 58 of the Report Of the Superi'ntendent, Archaeologt"ca~ wrong. The date given in our record is at any rate com~atibl~ .with the
But'ma ( 192.a ), while some explanatory statements are given on ] information .hitherto made available from the 1 Ith century mscnptlons, and
the same Report. Owing to an unfortunate inadvert~nce, Nos. 1 J may ·be regarded ~ a good provisional approximation, until more precise
and 6 of the list have been attributed to the wrong A.O. years, evidence is produced.
therefore quite incorrect. No. 1 is of the Burmese year 837 (1475 8 2. In my translation I have "generally given the proper names of
a:nd Nos. 3-6 are of the year 838 (1476-7 A.o.), and all frv persens in the form which they bear in the Pali text. Where t,heJ\1~µ Jorm
•
• • •

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III .. PART II} MCN INSCRIPTIONS
diffets, it can be found in the Mon text. I must here agam record my ' 3· • • . • . • • . •
e • * G a • • • .. e a .- • II o • • • 0 It • 0 0 e • • • • • "• 6- Jh •
grateful acknowledgments for the invaluable assistance of my friend • • • • • • . • • • • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • . . • • • • . • • • • . [ c ]w[ o
Mr. Robert Halliday in providing me with the meanings of many M8n sun gab nu mwoy crawek kitu [m]ak 1 cuiw ku cuip bape[n]
words that were not to be found in Haswell' s Vocabulary and were not (ki tu) 1
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • · •
sufficiently determined by their context.1 In a few cases wpere some doubt
4· . . • . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . • • •
remained in my mind as to whether my own rendering of. an ambiguous
. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . ...••.......••.•••• [Moggal]·
passage or Mr. Halli.day's alternative v.ersion was the right one, I have
i[putt]atissamahathe g 1 bicarana mwoy tuy 1 pqay k~ anaga[t] .•
ventured to put one of the two into the translation while relegating the
other to a footnote, in the hope that future research may decide which,
if either, is correct. The meanings of a certain number of words still remain 5... • • • • • . . • • . • .. . • . • . • • . . • •
undetermined, and on these I trust that we may get further light some day . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • • • • . (na)
as research in Man texts, ancient and modern, goes on and develops. [pq]ay than paccantarab ta gah . . . . . . . 8 tila puiy
Mahindathe [ga] h t • ( w) .. ~ . • • . • . . . . • . •
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6 .. .. ..
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Text. ' ....•..•...... dah
;•
tau ral). rman ra 1 1 pqay kala (tu)J' tila puiy tipuin the l}a ma
A twah bgal} So[i;.iathe Uttarathe]' ................... .
(Fragments a and b.) 1 7. • .. .. . .. . .. .• .• . • . • . • . • . • . • . •. • . • . • . •. .• .• .• .tl' .• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • J • p •
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... • • • . • • • • [b~ya Jy 15
I, • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ' . . . . . . . . . kyak Kelasapow ' [mwo]y lapak gah tau latu tmo[' 1 mwo
.. lap[ak] ................. .
.
[Moggaliput]ta[ti]ssama[ha]the a [twah t]u(y) 4 •• . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 ... • • .. .. • • . • . • .. . . • . . .. . • • • • • . • . . . . • . . • gah I bet
..
"' ' .. fial). • • .. • • • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • • . (i) . ruih kwon
. . . . . . . • . <I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . smin ma dah • • . . . . . . .8 1 rakuih brau ma tau pQ.ay maha. .
2. • '• ,. .. sami[t] tuin tlun tuy (I) ......... .
• • • • 1t •
• • • • • 1(11 •
· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · . . . . . . . . . . . . kuim
• .. .. • .. • • • • . . .. . . • . . • • . . . . • . • • • • • • • . [kwo ]n
J g. "
. lo . w . 1 . r . a u . t . il . a . p u . [ i . y . . m . a h . a . t h .. e . Y . a . s . a . 1 . • . • . • · . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • • . • . • . • smin mwoy ktuiw dah rakuih [brau] . . • . . . . . . . ... smin gab
... ' tuy l kwom ku pariwa masun klarh gah tuin tlun nu mahami[t] 7
I M . . r · Halliday's own . Dicf 1 onary, i · s sue d a f ter my translation of the text (as originally drafted) ra t kha ga[h] ... ~ . . . .......
~adh
been done, has been .of great help to me in rewriting the second part of the translation in the
hg t of the new M.S. material•
l Conjecturally restored.
s .The beginning of the inscription, amounting to about ten Jines is lost Th t f
h f It · d · · · · , • e wo ragments l The first two syllables have been restored.
ere 0 owm?'. 0 n?t J~m .ex~ctly at any point and both margins are missjng. Accordingly, the dots t Here there are some. letters looking like a. repetition of ta gah (or per:haps tawah PJ followed
are only an indefinite 1nd1cation that something is lost both at the begi'n · d ds f ·h 1·
d · h ~ · 1 · d b . .· ' nmgs an en o t e ines by something else, possibly merely I i.
;n m t e b _die h et':een. the two . fragments, where they form two incomplete portions of a line 4 Restored with the help of the Pali version •
g . o r e a s g m on e n t t o . th ts e t e o n d t. e o f r t i h g e h t p i _ e a c n e d . b · e gins at I. I, continuing to I. 30. Fragment a begins at 1 • 8 and li Conjecturally restored, following the Pili.
9 e The first part of the missing passage looks something like suit or /uih.
The first three syllables have been. . restored from the P . i .. li ver!fiou. 4 Or ku ? J Error for mahbamit•
I
'
•
• • • •

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. Ill PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS
•
. o 10. • ••••••••••••••••• gah da(h ja:]d[isui]n l}a. 1 ma gap 1 6. . ............. ma da[k]o' ta[y)an 1 a (t]a(nah) [ku]im [lo]({ 1)
gwow sphek gmak ma gluin nu ...' . . . . .......... gamluin [y]ay (dwi kya)m 1 to' ga[h] ...................... .
. to' gah (pa) tuy bak bdau kle' ra.kuih ta gah ra I kha gah ...... [l]or 1 het bhay [k ]anwor ba(y] uiw ma jno[k ma k]tuiw
J
rakuih . . . . . . ..•• dab kuim [law I . • • • • . • • • • ...
I I • • • . • . . . • . . . • . . • • • (ha) mik kuiw rakuih • • . • • .1 gah 17. .. . . . . . . . . . gab tuim 8 [lo] r t [tha]n ral}. [gun] rman gah t ma
(9u]in [Quin a ku]' dar[h]a[t] gah da(h] uiw ra 1 ......... ..
go' plan (b)w(a)y (k)r(au). gah l uit janok ............ ..' gah
............................ [uiw da] ci ' gam[-]r tu[y]
tila puiy [ti]puin the ba cut far puman pumwoy · tuy ku mlnih
1
ma nisray t[au] ra}J. rman t ma (tau) 6 (t]au [pqay than] ral)
[gamluif1Ji . . . ..•..
r[m]an ga(h]
1 •• ,. • • • • .......
I g. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • [k] u[i]w dhar Brahma[jil]asut ( tuy) 1 18. . . . . . . . .. • (h) 1 ha [sam]ah ratha [tuy] r (sasana) [ma guin]
[la]juli saQ.ik kuiw fial;l gamlui[n] tuy t pa[n] {ln)i{m) •• ., ....... c;luin (a. k]u darhat [glah dab a ra t6
........................ .
• • . • [ sarat;i ]asila. 8 ra 1 pga[y J k[al]a gab 1. manih turau cwoh lnim ............... {Suriyakµma) 7 [ma du]n yamu smin Manohor
J • . . . . .. • .
gab [• go' grail ket 4 ma pkan ra[n t]au Qm1 [Su]dhui[m gab t sasana] ............ .
..
13. . ..- . . . . . • .. [lni]m masun klarh tit pa gam-[r ra] 1 (pa} [(]am
•
n(u)6 gah (h]en sam~t kwon flak t(u)y8 ma (dah), ........ . 19.. • .•••• [kylk 8 tr]ay (ma pa] par(i]nibban t dab lnim t[urau klalh
. . . . . . . . . • . . (tha)n rab. rman gah 1 het [ma] ha mik kuiw cn]a[m (1) (sasana ma ta)n c:lun rman da[h] li1im (pi)• ......... .
ka(nd}o(k) k(l]a barhu(m 8 rap) (gah] J a ................ . ............ ., •• "' ,. ....... ., .... * [kyak tr]ay ma pa parinibbln
dab lf1im [turau k]larl1 mwoy cnam 1 p~ay sa(kk]arat 10 ..... " ..
14. \ . . .....•.••• kcJuip rakuih jaku jadisuin (gah 9 da)}:l kfon] tuy
fiab. la( w tl u) n 10 tau la tu (kg uip) .. . . . . . • • .. . • .. .. • .. • .. .. ..
.•• (h) 1 atuin ru[p] gah kuim 1 la[tii k]4uip [t]mo' (Tui)k Ga[lA] 20. • ........ [t]wah bga)). c;lun Arimaddanapur ra 1 1 [nor] {cnam11 sa:sana.
(1 jaweh) 11 ma) (cuip] gun Pukam gah 1 da(h] ...................... ..
••••••••••
kha gah s[mJ in Sirisa[n ghab ]odhi. .
• • " • • • . • .. " • " .. I
15. . .......•. (h) nwo[m t]au t 1 pa taro nu ti[la] puiy [};>~ ma Parakkamabahu 1 ma caab sasana . ,. .....
tlu]n p[t]an [sasa]na [pqay tha]n [cJu]n rman (gah), ............ ..
• · • • • • .. • • • .. • • • .. : (1) guiw tau p4a[y] c.lui1 rman l( ukau l Looks like tahi'i.tt, btit I think it nm~t be the of L.M. ka74n, Aan4Hi l'f to dispute. . "
t Very doubtful, the 4, the 1 be f) 1nd the y \which might be J).,
ka ma lo'] san hen ra 1 kha kala ma jlin • .. .. .. .. • .. • .. .. .. "' Before the d. there may But re 1 p rtsflr.tl the L.M. 701 jt kh,y&•
1
"plague, pestilence.'~
1 The itlegible part ends} apparently, in h and looks rather like toh (which would probably be ! Error for k1'im.
a" error for to'). But it may be some other word. \ • The u is not .d ear.
9 The last syllable has been restored. i" 0 Very doubtful t the initial i1 lw but there ma.v be something subscript, and tb& vowtl
8 The -first two syllables have been restored. is quite uncertain.
' Probably the first of the lost words would be dhar. & The first letter of this missing passBge appears to be d or a.
6 There is no ii visible. '1 Traces of the last two syUa.bles are visible : the rest ha.a been restored from the Pill.
e There seems to be a 'trace of a u.
8 Restor~d ..
1 Very doubtful, though the first letter must be d or a. "' 9 Very doubtful. Hut in•vie·w of the trad1tion.i:tl a• embodied in the P4l'i venfon, tb4t
9 1 T H h e e re . f in t. a h l ~ r m e i m g . h a t y b b e e p a . st T o h p, e t n h e e x r t e w b o e r i d n g is a a ls s o m d al o l u & bt p f a u c l e • available. e ti s m ta e b l w is o h u m ld e n b t e o f 1 3 B 81 u l d y d e h a i r s s m a f in te r t h t e h e M C & o n u ncil which A s p e p n a t r e o n u t t l y t h t e h e m P it i J l s i lo d n o ar o le a $ no a t n d gi v 1 e 3 6 t 4 h e y e f a i rs ~ -a f m .ter n · . t he
l 1 The 1n1t1al might be .J., and there is m> u visible. JO Httt appear to have follt>Md the Pili hdln1 419.
11 Very doubtful. ll Very eloubtful.
ta
•
•
•

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL,. Ill PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 19
•
~ 1. • • • • • • • • kala gah 1 mahathe Uttara[juiw 1 aca. 1 sm ]i[n Puklm ' 26. . •. [MahindaJ th[e ] 1 ma tlmi ptan sasana pgay [t)ko['] Singhuiw
e s·a 51 l]anwor ( c )e( ti) 3 • • • .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • .. • .. • • .. • • . .. .. . . .. ti[la p] u[iy to T .. . . . .. .. . .. .. . .. · · · · · · · · · · .. • •
.• (tko)[' Sin]ghuiw gab. tuy 1 kwom [ku sail g]am[lu]in cui[h i ....... [Sm;1a]th[e]1 Uttarathe ma a ptan sasan[a pgay]
Jk
<;lo [k~an p ]<;lay . • • • •• Suwa'Q.llahhum kuim ci ga~ tuy 1 ............ ..
27. • ..... [kwan 9 n]al}. Chapa\o ga[h] t mh*tthe Uttaraj(uiw) gah .... .
22. • • • • • •••. puiy 4 kwan rman f twati mahathe Ar[iyawamsa' 1
........... [kyak] p[oay] tk[oJ (Sii1ghuiw)8
maha]the [A]ri[yawamsa] tun ga.h 1 ........................ . J• ..................... ..
. . . . . . . . • • • . . .. [mah a] the Kraban 6 dam(y ]on [tu] n gah • • .. . . . • . • • .. . . • . [kuim t dapuin kwon fiaJ:t Chapat(o ]
(gah kha) [t]ala puiy ma[hathe] ........ .
1 twal;l maha[the Pra]Q.ada[ s] 1 • ..
28.. .. • • .. • • (h) J fia[n ku k]aio jnat (pu}i(y san dah uiw da ci t)
23. . ..•.••• lokijjhan t [tila] puiy t(au) Sudhuim (1) ......... " [natipalibodha r1 sdah] . . .. . .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. • .. .. .. .. .. .....
8 [t]i[la puiy a] twah tnarh jray ... " •.• ,. ............. . ......... ,., .. .. • .. .. ' drasok cuit sda[h] tau ku ey c;li[k t]un
••
............... {tu)y 1 cau piJt.gap~t p4ay qun (Sudhuim ey qik sd i .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . "
J
kuim 1 tradah [t]ila puiy tu[y] t [y ]ab ....... 29. .. .. .. .. [S]inghuiw ra t [dal puin gah kat [b ]atwon [uit] tuy (t) ......
.. • • .. .. .. .. • • tu y }1 e { n} .. ... .. • • • .. .. .. .. " • .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ • .. •
24 . . . . . . • .. [fi]aQ. 9un S[ udhui]m ma I banik pqay (thin]
... (mahithe Chapato) • nab gal:l 1 1 ma ha.the Chapato gah 1 klla
(Magadha) 9 i .. (t) • • .. ma i [fi]at tuy . .. • • .. . .. . • ..
•••• tu[y] .............. .
• • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • .. .. • • • • .. • • • .. .. • t (n]ab ma [tim]
tradah tila (puiy] (ma) 10 [go]' lok[Ijjha]n rwon 1 (na)11 gati ...... 50.. • ..... y 1 mahathe Siwm kwon nal:i Ta.mat(itthI) 1 .......... ..
[maha]the Tam(a)li[nda]8
................................. ..
!a 5. . • . • . . [ sama] JJ.I mwoy kwan [n]a~ twan C ha[pat] ( pQay rab • . . . . . . • . . . .. .. .. .. . . .. • (Kanc!pura 9 mway t) [maha]the
Kusim)li ga[h] I [b]ak a (t]ila puiy (th)e • ·. ................. " .. .. Ra.hula (kwon) .. .. .. .. .. .. • .. .. .. .. .
• • • • • • . . • • .. • .. [Singhuiw 13 gah 1] sari gamluin ma tau 3 x.. • .. .. .. • . y 1 ti[la pam ]ray masun c:lok [k]l;lan [tuy c]au tlu[n cuip]
pclay tko' Singhuiw sman cat l}at m[ wJ ay .. .. • .. <Jun Kusim ra 1 ui(t) .. .. .. .. • .. .. • .. .. • • .. • .. • .. ....... .
1 The last syllable 0£ the name and also the word ac4 are Ulegibte, but the rator:1tion &1
supported by the Pali.
9 The stop and the s are not quite certain. 32. • ......... (ta)g(u)in Puka[m c]n~m gah 1 [ha] ga[tAp tuy t mwo]y
8 Only the s is preserved : the rest has been restcred from the Pili. wah taguin pgay wiha (ta)
" 15 A It l t m ho a u y g h b e i t s u o p c p c o u s r e s d t t w h i a c t e th in is t w hi o s r d l in w e a , s th pr e e c l e a d s e t d s b yl y la b ti l l e a : . of thi8 name is doubtful. Uut it it . .. .. . . .. . .. .. . . . .. .. . .. . i . o .. . . . . .. . . .. .. . . . . . .. . . .. .. . . . . . .. .... . . .... .. . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .
1upported by the Pali.
e Or conceivably •ouiz. The Pili form is KappunganagaYa. in the MS. But this doe' not .. • • • .. • .. • • .. • .. • .. • .. • • .. .. ~ • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • * •
to be the reading of the inscription itself, which has bb for pp and n• vi!ib!e u. So .'- 1 Both these conjectural restorations are ba1,ed on the Pali and are practically certain~
Kraban is right after all.
s Conjeci:urally restored. the 1'peUing here should be kwt>n.
7 Possibly we should supply .ri to end the name, a:s in the Pili form in the inscription itelf 8 Conjecturally restored. The initial letter is doubtful.
(The MS. has 0si, apparently.) "
6 Hardly legible, but supported by the Pili.
8 The first part of the undeciphered passage looks rather like yoft 10&. a Conjecturatly restored. The last of the mi1Sing words apparently ended in d er o..
9 Very doubtful, but supported by the Pali. • 1 Restored with the heltJ of the Pili version.
10 The ma is by no means clear: so far as appearances go:t it might be :1a or 1 1• 8 Or 0mtl'.. The last syltable is restored~
ll Very doubtful. 9 Conjecturally restored on the basis of the Pili, and extremely doubtful ~cept the cl (which is
1111 Conjecturally restored on the basis of the Pili version, bnt very doubtlnJ. oortain}.
1& Only the last three letters are visible, but the restoration is a safe one.,, lD Or possibly ka.. Presumably this is the first part of the natne of this wi/r.4ra."
.
\
•

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[ VOL- tU
• PART U} MON INSCRIPTIONS ,t I
. . t ~ . la . p . u i . y ] . . to . ' . (Puka)m 1 r . a . 1 . m •· a . h . a t . he . .. ·u tta .. ra . j [ . u . i . ]w [tun Ier 1 kiA 39 .... . b . h . . a l . ] . . Q . ay a .. . . b . r . a u .. . . . . • . .. .. .. . • . .. . . .. . • . . . . . .. . . • . . [ .. . m . . . a h . . a . . jt . . h . e . . . . R . . a . . [h . . u . l . a . .. . f ia]t . •[ . k . ] . e . t
..
... . .
.. ....
.
34 ................ (to)1 [ra i yo]' tila ta' [1 akha1 tuy] a[cA 40 .• . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . chi claw (tau kuim ' ch]I
......
puiy ma a] • (i) ..... .
dar [ha man t]uy t ti(la) 1
. . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .... • ••••iii!!• ••••••••••••• 111
.. ..
35. . . . . . . . .. . . ..• (tila s pn)iy mahathe [arhan] (l)a 1 ma) . . . . . .. .. . . . • .. • . • . • . .. . l . lt . i • . . .. • • .. . .. k n[ •] §. tuy [1 Ra.hula the
. h i . [ m . u ] SoJJathe Utta[rathe] 4 •• 4]ok k[l})an a (cuip)1 ""' .. • .. • * • • • • • • • • .. • ...
• • • f
.. • • *
• ""' O! •
36• . . . ... . m-ati 6 ma da[h] a[d hi]pat 4~ .. [y p]aben [t]uy t R~hu]la. .
• • . d a • • . [ h J ' . l I . ] . ' u . • [ i • w • 6 • . d • . a • . . . c . . i . . 1 . p .. u .. . iy .. ' ] . . h . . a . . . m • . . i k . . " . h .. . [ . u . y . ] . ' .... . . . . . . . " . . . . .. . . . ~ .. [ th ]e pa (gihi] . b h . o . ( w) ..
•· .. .. kha gab Siwi[l]i[mah~th e] t
S7o: · • · '\ · .. • · · · · · • · .. · .. · · .. [ sa]k karat [5]43 8 • [h]en • Tam[u ] l(i)ndama[hathe} 1. .
s[asana nu S]i[n]ghu[i]r t ma "" ..
. . " "
.
• • • • . Ill.! • . • •. • . • . •. • . • . • . • . • . • . • . . . . . . . . .. ' .111 • • .. .. .. • • • • • ... • • 411 • _. • ,,. • •
~ 44· .. .. h tipuin [S]i[wili·
the t ku Tamuli]nda[th]e s .....
~
38. • • · • • · · · • •• · ....... (tila) [pu]iy to) [fi]ab mas(u]n
.
hwey] r(aw)et\ 10 ma(r) 11 * ••••• " ......... * ••• ,, • ,, .
gal) t]un 1 ma pa fiati(sangaha)9 ........... ..
l Conj'ecturally restored, with the help of the Pali version.
s Or, less ~obahly, 1 leha. I. . . . . .
. a Conjecturally restored. Restored.
6 Apparently the first syllable of this word has been lost. Or.e is tf!'mpted by the PlU v~nion to sda]nd(o]1 [batwon .san] .. .. .. ... '111 ...
restor: bam-alz, but ~his w~uld be an unusual spelling for '' Burmese,u L.M. bamd,
Looks more like utp. 1 A pretty certain restoration .. .. ..
9 a C T o h n e je fi c r t s u t r n al u l m y e r r e a s l t o is r ed q . u ite obliterllted. I follow the Pali.. "" .. .. • .. ....
~C!
The t't.i may. be"1'au and the 1on may be Zfi/,. Poulbly the two 1yUabhs (if tbi fttst ii ""*)
forrn two words.
· 11 Doubtfql, ·'bu~. pt~. l Restored .. t The u is doubtful.. Tu
s Conjecturally restored t ~s te b1 tra~le on the ink·impr..-:· PIH kn
lliI.tuaiigaham.
•
•

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. lU PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS
(Fragment c.)l
54- • . • .. • • .. • .. • • • .. • [ka]m saran tanoh ra t ey ler spa ket [kJ am
47. saran tano(hl ra gal) tu[y 1 pa t]am [nu gab tila pui]y
Siw[ilithe] 1
.... ... ·' .............. . . ..... .. • .. • .. .. • • • .. • • ... • .. .. • • • • .. • .. .. • • • .. • ....
. . . . ~' •· ·• •· 55. • ••.•••••••••• sail to' dah pan buk ra 1 tila sail to['] tuy I
[ma d]ah tnow [sasana ma tui]n [nu] Su[dhuim] ler mwoy bu[k]
.•..••••••.••.• ~ ................. (k)w{on) ..... .
.. .. .. • .. .. • ••• Ill • ., .................... .
. . . • . .. . jm . a . p daka . u . p . a] : . l . a . (t . h ) . in . . a m . f1 t . . . . . . ... . . ..................... . 56. atu{in) ........ [t]now ma tuin nii Sudhuim gah J tila to' tnow
. . . . .. .. fial) ma cuip kl§ da[h) uiw ci (1) arhe' sa bamA to' gal) 1 [ti]la.
.. [to, fiati pi buk tno] w fiab. ma cau nu Singhu[iw] • • .. .. • • .. . .
. . . . . . . . . . . ..
49· · • · · · .. · • · · · · . . .. .. . . . . ( ti) Ja to~ gah dok • .. • • t tau 1 ..
da[ka] to[' tak pa](t) ........... ,. ............. ,.
. . . . . . . . . . . o.~ • . ;i!ll> ..... "' 1'i B
• • • e 0 • • • • • • • • ._ IO· # ~
5°· · · · ~ · · · : · · · · • . . • . .. .. .. [ti]la puiy SiwHithe 1 do{k)
(fragments a and b. . )•
. [T . ] a . m . [ u . ] . h . n .. d . a t . h e . . t u . n . 1 . y ,. o . ' . [t]ila ...... 1 . pa[ccay) ., .••• ,. ., ...... . . . . . . . . .....
.. ..... (mahlthe) 1 (p}[tl krom] ,.
51 • • • da • b • . • s . o . ' • • i .. na • h .. .. S . i . w • il . i . th • e • • g a • ( l) • . .. .. ra w u i ] h a w k w a [ m o b ] ' ~ [T tw ] a a f , . m 1 [u t ] i l l a [i n g d a a b th eJ ; 1. .. . .. . .. . .... . . . . ... . . . . . . . .
. .t . . . . . . . ... 1 ..
.
. . . . • • • • •••• - • • « • .. ..
.....
5 2 • • • d • r a • t u • y • m • r • a m • a • r • [ • s ) • sa • n • a • [ • m • a • s • d a h h a ] g ( o e > y )" p a [l a] w r ac ( i c w u i i f t i ) a ~ t .. sc . » .. .. 1 . .. b . e . t . Jt. .. ....... . . "" . . . . . . ,.. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . [ . n . .. . t . a . n . . a . ] . . . . a .... . m . . . ( . . h . .. u . . ) . ' .. . a . . . [m . . . ] . r . .a . . . . j . a . m . . . . n . ( .. o . k . . ] . . . . -· . .. . . . . . . . . .
. .. . . . . . . . . . .. . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . .
53· · .. · · · · · · · · • · .. .. . . [Ta ]m[ u] lindathe t ra tila 3. . ...................... [n] tu[y m]a da[h] bwok mahathe p~A [krom]
~sabhau)
[ey] gab. ma [l] 8 fiaQ. (tu]y (ma tau tau)' (pday dando']·
(batwon) a .............. .. ..... .
. . . . . . . ········~··~- .. • .. • • • • • • '* • • .. • • • ,. • • • • • • • " • • • • •
,..,
4. • ................... • bwok san ma[ha.)the p~a krom nab (ma)
I This fragment follows on pretty closely after the r d' .
preserved, the amount missing at the be ~ i in n n es in of ; ece tng p;ece... The itft. ~ ·h · a e n n d mugin being" • • .. .. . • .. .. .. .. • .. • .. .. .. • • [p~a. krom fial).) (gal)) .. .. .. .. (kr)
calculated; but the dots at the ends of the gsa.. t he first hnme. bnu has appro:dmatel1.
1 Th" i s m1 . ss1 • ng pi . e ce l . o oks like pa tau. •e oniy a roug estimate • .. (ma) lo' a .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. ,.. ... .. .. .. .. . .. ,. .. ,. • • .. ..
a Restored.
4 This might be read yro. or yn1iu. I Restnred.
5 Restored; the i is certain and the cu probable t There are about a dozen lines missing between this and the preceding piece. F't'agmaut a is to
8 This looks as if it might be sanii. • the left and runs from l. t to 1. 27. Fragment b begins at t. 4 and continues to I. 40., The g.ap
'1 Very doubtful. At first I was inclined to read . tf; . ( • between the two fragments ha.:1 been approximat.:•ly measured ; hut ats both margins are ·lost, the
s:mar~ i~
repeated and ca,reful examination of the hoto ra h wnh .the senie of '' agroe '1), but afttr amount missing at the be~inninga and ends .of lines, resp.ectively, could not be estimated, and th•
not ten. able. A lftither conceivable readingp i• -~ f ~ ~~dh mk(h·tmp)resinon. 1 I conc:lud•d that this wu dots in those positions merely indicate that an indefinite number of lett&rs hu been to.,
. · "' ,, •. ,. "a", w o ave 1e ar:nt."
8 Con1ectu.rally restored. I Practically certain,. though only the last syUable is pr-rved.
• Conceivably cim6u,.
•

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMA.NIGA [VOL. III • ~ART Il] MON INSCRIPTIONS
J
" 5. .. . " ........... [ m gal). tun I bwok sail krorn fia~ ma gaQ. 1 pat 14. . • • .. .. .. . •. [k]uim t ha go' [hu] y kam 1 sara11 kwom ku ran sko['
he(t] ............... ~ (t]uy 1 [ma] d[ah] bwok maha[the h]en [d]ah uiw da ci l d~h uir nana[nika]ya (hen ra 1) uit pga[y]
p~a] krom ga[h] . . . . . . • . . . .. • . • • . • . .. •
nika[ya] tila puiy .. • • . • .. •
6, ..•••. ~ ...... [bwok] 9 sati tray arhan gamluin ma tau p4ay ralt
15. . ........... (m ]a dah tau b[y ]a(t] ta (pJ atibala ma st[lu) n 1 cat \>at
rman kuim Jer 1 bwo[k] (sail) 9 [krom ga] !) tuy 1 rman gamluizi to'
k .... [ka]m sar[e]n 3 ma gal) gah ha mwoy [hen ra 1] tila to'
[g]a(l). ci) a ! [I kb Ja gah pgay gun ... ·~,. ............ ..
tuy t ma dah bwok bwok ga[h] . .. .....
7. • .......... [Singhui]r Ier mwo[y J bwok 1 dah a };la bwok ra 1 t
pc;lay gun Ma[ttma] tun gah 1 bwok sati krom [le]r [mwoy 16. . ...... [byatta pati]bala 4 ra ga\1 tuy 1 tila puiy to' gab paa •••
b]w[o]k 1.bwok s[an] . ~ ............. ,. ............. .. ....• [ma samut] sim ma kuiw upasa[mpada r pa]a (kam··
tanah h]en (ra) [1] c akha [gah) tila p[u iy] •......
8. .. : ·. · ....... bwok 1 bwok sail Singhuir tu[y] ma dah [t]nor 17 ...................... [h] t al[um] ga[m]asim tu[y] ma cuin dah
S1w1[hthe Ie]r mwoy bwok 1 1 fi(am 4 san) [Singhuir tu]y ma dah t[au] .................... go' sodhana [t]uy [ayam]
bwok . _. • • . . • . • . . .. . . . ·. . • • . • pqay [t]mo' ni[mit] gah ku(i]m so[dhana] ....... · .•
1
9. . . : ........ ~ .. l(e)r 6 1 cui[r] yat ma hap pun 1 kha fia}J ma x8. • .................... [k]am ma pa tarh ku upasampadakam
mm_an tana tun 1 {p\lay) [sni than nab. ha go]' hap 1 cau [h~p] ga[h] . (to)' languiw tu? (gah t ma)
& • • • .. • • • • .. • • • • •
(wiha}6 [kuim] 1 [tila p]uiy [to' gah] ....... . [sodhana] alum g~ma:{im] hen ma daQ. 1 (ket) ma x ........ ..
10. • ........ ,. • • bwok . san Singhuir tuy ma dah tnor t[ w Jab 19~ ....................... [h gama] kuim is lar laksan ma (thuik) 8
113aha[th]e [Tamal]in[da ler] mwoy bwo[k fiam bwo]k sail aca ..................... thuik dah wis[u] m[g]ama kuim Ior
1
am[at p]rer 7 cuir [ma gab J . . . . . . . . . • . . . . t laksan ma if1ah gah (ha] go1 cat }Ja[t] ........ .
Il. • • p i • ; l • a ~ • ] ...... Buddhawari1samaha[the] ma gab gah 1 aca gna[k ~ ] u y i a p k ) 20• • ................. •1 bway ma ji[p) kli[p] 8 tuy 1 fiam .•.•
Mat[tma] a tko' Siilghuir tuy I kaleil (cau 8 tluii ................. [ni]sray ke[t tu]y [t p~lay] kh~na ma pa kam
[g u Jn Ma[ttma J (yra) 9 ler [fi]al:i ma a cuip {ra) ...... .
ma [s]amut sim [gah] yam than ma dalf c[u]i[t] .......... .
1
12 (k~m]m
·• • • • : • • • • • . saran ku .f lab 1 [p Jaa 10 kamm saran tanah
~eq 1 ~bwok] bla puty ga[h· Ier S~Jnghuir [mwoy b]w(ok] 11 bwok 21.. • _ _ • . .. • • .. .. . . • .. . . .. (k) ·· mafl larh ma da}:l cuit gah 1 trawuiw
................... (da)h wi[surhgama hei1] gal;i tuy • pqay
tila pui[y] Mahasa[ m]i[ mahathe] 11 • ·• , • .. • •
1 than ma ha mwa[y ku] wi[su]rhga1!}alakkhafoa] ......... .
1 3· · ·. · · · · . . . [m~w[ o] y bwok het gah. ra pgay qun Mattma
11
gab J (bwok] san [krom] mwoy bwok I bwo[k Sili]ghuir [masJ un 22• • ................. [so] dhana ket tuy ' samut . .. • . . . .. . ..
bw_ok .1 turau bwok dah ( uit) i2 ••••••• . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . .. h kui[m ler r kam ma pa t]arh ku
! • upasam[padakam gah paa] hen ra n tila p[uiy] ......... .
wron~ly,. oa.
Or possibly, but
Restored, but practically certain.
. e 4 O ~o r n c l e a i r v .. a bl . y ~a" ~· ma ' .1.:.1. n1:,:.11 _".1'-'i. ~e a.ext word i• s extremely doubtful. 9 Very doubtful. s l C Pr o a n c c t e i i c v a a l b ly ly c e lr r a t m ai m n, , t t h h o o u u g g h h t I h e c a l n u s i e s e Q n f o p e a c 1 t 1 t u li s a !u r tir s a h a s p ym e b o o w l: m g to defic1 . e ncy t . n . m terltn . _,.ar &pace.
~o.~c~::~~u.l6re.t'~ mo.rfl~. clo:~'~. s Error for saran.
; th.et.· ·... usuaJ spelli.ng .(L.M. brew, "silk hUiiJ. • The first four syllahl~: have been .restored.
, ow10egy ; .o a aw, whether cau (or any th d) .
10 9 L T~ o i o s k s m li a k y e b m e a r e i i i, l . d which b " c lt a n I d h o ar d n f o v t s b e e e m ho w t t h a. t cou I~ c e o r m w e o_ m r. he is r e h . ere at a.11. o 1;1 C B o e n tw je e c e t n u ra id lt a th n e d o m n ly t h c e e r r e t a s i e n e m th s i ? t g o b be e i n a g sm th a e l l i : o r T ig h in e a l i n f i l t a ia w l . might be t. °'r th.
11 Th I f . ·. . ~ ., niectur e a a l n l • y 1 Here there ls something that might be k or ka.
e aat our syllables have been restored, 11 Or 11iwP •uw .
• Looks like jim
•

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[VOL. III .. •PART U} MON INSCRIPTIONS
• • • 0: • • • •••• -•••• y srm[asarhka]rado[sa1 ma] da[h] ..... 31 •• ···········•·••t••······················"·
• • . • • • .. , • " • • • • • • .. • . • .. • • • • • • • • ( m ma dak) rwon • • ......................... (nwom) •••••••• [go]'
• p~ay baddha[ sim ku gamasi]m [gah ler 1] • • • • • • ..
[ . s .ag . ] u . t . k . l e . ' 1 so[dhana] .. • .. • • • • .. • • • • • • • • • • • .....
a4. ~ ..••••.• {simasarh )karadosa s ha dab 1 pqay .......... .
..................... [ cuip 4 tuy] a[kha] ma dak bad- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
dhasim r pqa[y] ga[m Jasi[m g]ah 1 (gamasim) 15 • • • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • • .. .. .. • .. • • . [pa parinibb] an 1 (gab) . • • • • . • • [ • ~] a 0
. .......... 6
~s. [wu]du[i]h [gah 1] rukkhasakha(disambandba) 1 l[n]im . }}a . cn[am k]u[li] (lwon) •••.•.••••••••.••••••
. . . . . . . .
g • a . m • as • im . . [m .. a . d • ah . • d • a] . ta . u . b . a . [d . d ; h . a . si . ]m .. m .. a . s . d . ak k (w e[ w t o') k ]w .. o . [ . m . .. k . ] u .. . . .. .. . .. ' .. . .. . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
..
J J . • • . .. • .. •
:S6. • • • . • • . • . . • . • . • . (') [ 1 ma sodhana gamasi[m . .. .. . .. .. • • • (bedagama) 1 [t]akka bya[karar:ia-chanda-s]attha
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • . . . . . . . . [gamaJ sim [ma dab] datau alank[ara] 8
.. " .. • • • .. " .• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • .. ••
baddhasi[m m]a- sda[k] w[w]o[' k]uim r sodhana [t] ....... . . ..... ... .
..,
~
27. · · · · • · · . . . . . . • ........... [ u]pasam[pa] da(kam) .. .. .. .. 34.. • .........
9 ........................... .
... _· . ~ .....~ ................. [tun gah] ya(m] .. .. • • • • • • • .. • .. . . .. .. • . • . . [bhas]a [ma ka mwoy] (ma)'
~
. n a . [ d . l l . a ] . k [ . k h . a J . } . . a . J . a ] . ta ssa[rala]kkha[Qa] ga[h] (dah) ......... • {Q . .o k . . pe . i'1 . t . a u . . k w . o . m ] {ku) ••••••••••••••••••••••••
28. • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ . . . . . .. . . .. ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
, ...
[ . a . n ] . v . a [ . q ~ . h . a m . a s . a . m ] . . r a . n . u d . a s . a . h a . m . 1 .. [ . a n . u . p a . f i . c a . h . a m [ ] t u . y . ] ma . ( d .. a - h) . [ . b . a b . w . o . y . 6 . d h.a . r ] . 7 . • . • . • . • .• . • . . . ~ • . . . • . . . . . . ( . M . u] . t . t i ~"- [m . a . m a . ~ . 4 a . l ] . ' . . ( g . a . h ) .
.•
.
•
..
•
.
•
.
•
.
• .•
.
•
.
•
.
•
.
• .•
.
4t
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
· k u · · n · a [ · d i · ]l · a . kk . h . a~ . a . . [1 · J . ] . at . as . [s . a • ra . la k [ k ja h t a a J s J s .a a ] ] r s a • . t u • [ y • ] • (1 . • h a . • . ) • .. • [ m • w • o • y ] • . . . . .. . [t ' i . l . a . . f . i ]a ... b . . . R . a [ . m . a d . h . i p . a t . i ] . 8 . .. . . . . . . . . . . . ..... ' .....
. . . . . . . . . . . .. ....................... .
,.
30 •. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . .. . . . . ... . . . . .... . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . ...
• · · • · · • · · • · · · . · . . . . . . . . . . . . . [hen] ra [ tila to' . . .. .. .. .. . . .. .. • • • . • • • • (cuin skuim] (tau) [k]w[om]
11
. la . ]n gu . i w tun gab • (sodhana) e • • • • • • • • • • • • • (ku) sa[mp]atti ma(s]u[n] . r ...... 9 ••••••••••••••••
'~.
1 After the k there seems to be • · t1
erro~ for "ka•. an origma 1 aw; or el$e we must read oka°, which would be an
: Written in abbreviated_ form, a~ if it were n"Ywo, with superscript n , l The first three syllables have been restored.
The first three syllables have been restored • I Restored with the help of the Pili venuon.
4 Possibly cuit. ~ V d b f f s Possibly alamnkaYa., Alternatively this might be written aUnkafa, but 1 do not know whether
e Th · fi . ery ou t u • I') the onu8"1Jiira symbol (if prese.t at all) is intended to indicate a modified sound of the vowel.
'T e. rst syllable has been restored. .
The last four syllables have been· restored. 4 Or 1?
8 The last three syllables have been restored. 5 Or 0marl/ola 1 if the supposed virama is an accidental mp.rk.
a Restored. .. . a Or ;ai-woy, possibly.
1 The next word seems to begin with bo (perhaps bodhi f) or bwo (perhaps bway).
a The lut two ayltablo1 have been restored.. 9 Possibly Jmua or tt-aa.,,.h T
•
•

:EPJGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. tu~ ;ART II} MON INSCRIPTIONS
..
·····••,••.•···-················ . . . . . . 45· . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .
Ji J ....
. . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . ~ • . • . • . • . •.• . ,, , . , . • •. . . • . [ . s a . m . p . a ]t[t]i [p [n]w[ om .. • . . . . .. . . . • . . . . . . . . . .. . (sim ma) [1 ya]m trawuir
. . . . . .. . . . . . ·.. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . • .. .. • • • • • • • * ... than tuy 1 gamabhojaka ma k[e ]t ................... ..
..
. . . . . . . . . . . ·-· ............ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
..
J
.
~ .•
.
•
.
• .·. .·
.
•
.
• • .·
.
•
.
·
.
· .·
.
· .• .··
.
·
.
·
.
•
.
•
.
· .
.
•
.
.
.
.
.
. .
.
.
.
. .
.
.
.
.
.
.,
.
w
.
in
.
[a
.
y
. . . • . • • .. . • . . . . . .. . . . • . .. .. • (gah) [kui)m akhwon adan
.. .... .. laceh lan[gu] iw 1 ga[h t] smi[k kuiw] fia~ {c)-(ati) ..... ..
. . . . • . . . . • . . • . • . .. . • . , • . . • . . . • . . . . • . . . • . ' . . • • ' . . . • . . • . . • . . . : t . . • . . . • . • . • • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .• . . . . . . . . . . ' . . [ . r .. ] . . . . . .. .. 47. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . ( w . ) . . k . u . i[ w . . t . a . ] . n [ . o ] . h . . g . a . h . . c h . a . . < . Je h .
. . - .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. 9. • . • . ~. . -·. • . . 1 . 1 • . • . m . a . . e a . . tw . a . n . t a . m . i . m . a . [ . g ]o1 [bak] 9 ket akhwon a[ dan) 8 • • • .. • •
'
41. • . . . . . . . . . . • . • . • . . . • . . . . . .. . ( F . . r . . a g ~. m . . e . . n . t . . . c . . . ) . 1 . . . . ,,. . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ ., . • • • .. 1111 • .. . . • . • . t w . a . h . t . u y . . m . a . f . i [ . a , b . . . ] . • . • . • . . . . . . (w . ) . • . ( .. r ) . . s[ . t] a . [ w ' ] . u i . [ w .. ] . . ( r . a . ' . m . a ) .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. [r] . . . . . . . . . . . . [y] ket akhwon gah kuim lor 1 p<;la y [ w] isumgamakhet tu(y] 1 ma
. . "' . . . .. -. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. cuin skuim (tau) .. . .. . • • .. .......................... .
. . . . . . . . ,• . . . . . . . . .. • . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49· . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . .
....
~1~ ·k~ · (ieh). ·., · · · · · · · ·. · · · .- · · · · · (bac)arana 9 ma gluin .. lo ra 6 1 than laceh [ya]m ma dal]. cui[t gah) (1) [ke]t ke[t tu]y
. . . . . . . . . • . • . • . ~ . ... • . • • • 9 • • • • • • . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . yata 6 [g]am-i to['] 1 smik kanam sim ra i akh[a ma m] ik kanath
ga(h) • . . • . • . . . . . .. . . .. • .. . • . .. . • • • . •
43.
,50. . . . • . • . • .. . • . .. • . . . . . . • • . • . • • ...
'111' • • • • • • • • • • • •
. c-an \Viiduih • rukkhasakhadisambandha ga[h. sag]ut kle['] tuy
[h]en '"uduih than £Ia]ceh ma mik samut s1m ga[h t)ui[w]
• • .• • • • • • • 4 1
44~ n[i]mi[t ra] 1 kha • .. . • . .. . .. • . ....... .
51,. • • •· • • • • • .. • • • .. .. • .. • • • .. .. • • • • .. • • • .. • • • • • • dr[ ep] a
ga[h 1] sjuin na stim ra da[hJ ma r ta[m]e[n saJJ.tha]n [ma, c ... ]a.(n]
a nu saJt[than ma pa] ta[m] ku [p]i t(l]an pan tlan [ga]h 'Quin
1
l This frag.ment f ~llows on . tt ha mw[o]y ku[im] • p4ay .................. .
:~is impossi~le n~:~;; c~f~e:t tn:
to ealculate. exact1;r;h: the p_re:eding piece. Both margins being lost
ines, respectively, but a comparison with A (c).ma~ er~ ~1ssrng at thi beginnings and ends of l Possibly laitpttiw. •
very ia n T e h ar is to d o t u he b tf m ul a rgin a ·· · · . . . · es it c ea . r that th ~ e ~· ends of 11 • 5 3 an d · 54 come ~ Or qat P But this would mean "to measure, to estimate the amount of.u
bu t .I see no trace of re th a e in :·. g · receives some s u p port f r · o m the · P ali version. Th al B Conjeciurally restored. .
s . ,. e usu . spelling is bi. .. ' V e:ry doubtful.
Probable, 'though not quite certain, a P°'5ibly lor, but I 5ee no olrlma.
4 Error lor tratiah. t Perhaps ,111.tl. ButJd. D~47, 48, G •9-
•

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III PART II] MDN INSCRIPTIONS
•
,.. 52. . . . . • . . . . . . • . . . • . . . . . . . . . • . . .. . • [t]au t 3. ............................... [mwoy] •.
~uin ha go['] da\mt nimit ma gluin kuim i tarau dare[p] ga[b] ••........•. [ratha J sammadharapawecchana 1 gab 11 p~wa
J
sw[a] na sti[m] ra [y Jo[w dab ma • mik pa ra ~ sii1gha(t]aka· bray ma [gu]'il ................................. .
J
saJJ.than (t )u[y (gab) • • . • .. . • • • . •
4 ......... (sammadharapawecchana8 gah • p]u[wa] b[ray ma gil gab
53· • · · · . · . . . • . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . • • • . (•) [pan] tlan
jamlin kui[ m lor] n[im Ji[ t] pan kuim da~ut sm[tk 1 pa ra] ler] (n) •••••••••••• n n (lw](on ka) 4 lapak kitu tu[y] 11
1 1
b[r] ay ra gu [ m]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
saJJ.than masun [t]lan ma • ni[mi]t ma[s]un [d]aput smik pa ra
1
[t]amen tame[n s]a~than [ma glui]n ma 1 nimit [ma] (pa tarn ku)
ni[mit] ...••...• Ji
5.. [bray gu k]u[im lar] u [pi p ttiey mwoy le[h] bray [gu kuim lar u]
('ba ~a tney) 6 mwoy [l]eh [bray] gfi [k]uim lar ruih s tadap
11
54· • · · • · · · · • · · · • • · . . . . . • . . . • . . [n ]alt swa na stim
t~rau. darep [s]~[~ g]ah kuim tameil sal}than ler ha mwoy r ( tney) 7 .. • • • • .. • • • • • .. • • • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • • • • •
a
m[~J1[t] ma glu1[n] ler sda~ut ma phuiw [m]a daput nimit ma 6. . (h sama]wu(t]thi [gah] n pc;1a[y] pan ki[tu ma tadak k]u wassa[kala
O 1
glutil gab ha mwoy ra 51 gab] ....... (t)u(n) 8 [p<;l]ay than ma dab [ c ]n[i]h kuim lar •
th~[n] ma [h]a se[nJ ......................... .
7., (la t]uy • twak [tlo], 9 a krun ga[h] ra n kha gah sapui[n] gam·i
c (brau] ...... [m mwo]y la[p]uh 9a la[pu]h [k]uim [l]ar [y]ar
ra s(t]qek ma gab (•) ............................ .
. .. [sama} 10
(Fragments a and b.) 8
8.. [ w] u[\],h[i gab] pi sak dah uir da ci tt p\}ay kala samawutthi tuy •
1. • •••• ~· • ~ ••••• ~ ••••••••••••• [lapak]1° lapak kitu bra[y] ma gii [m]w[o ]y le[h] ga[h 11] yarau
ma Cs~k ·w~') ~ ~ : : .. [pgay] (pan kitu ma tadak ku wassakala gab) 11
• • • • · • • • -· · · • • • • • • • • (n) pha[hj
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • .. • • • .a 9. (sapuin gam .. r br]au ma twak clo[' a gah] ra t<;}ek ma 1 kru[n g]ah
2. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • ma [mahana]d[r] hen ra p4ay k[a]la (s]amawutthi tuy • cab
1
i]m[a~ ia~[ak ki]~u· ·h;[ft ·. j
• • • • • • • • • • • • • (n) [i]m[ap ]. • ca(h tti]ey [bray] (ma ga mwoy leh gab 11 yarau pQay pan) 11
mw[ oy leh bray gu] s • • • • • • • .. • • • • . . . . . . ... . . . . . . .
l Substituting 11 for '11'.11 this is also the reading of the Fili original on the stone, but the MS. from
1 Looks like smit. · which Mr. Taw Sein Ko's first transcript was made seems to have had sa.mmadhtirapaccheda(11asena).
para~ I ra H p e h r . e there is a decorative mark, like a four-petal w l ~ e s d flower appare~tly i . ~d1 . ~ating c f Conjecturally restored.
It seems probable, therefore, that there nothi , the end a a The first five syllables have been restored.
margin, bet:ween the double marginal tines, some letters have b ng. mor~ m this. hne. In the bottom • Very doubtful, though the vowel after lw is certainly either a or '·
have anythmg to do with our text I can l k k e:n inscribed, which do not seem to s ConjecturR11y restored, but practically certain, from the Pali version.
9 F r . a gment ·1" i • s to the right a • n d begin o s n a Y t 1 m . a I , e c o o n u ti t n u u in s ala dhammd • . . f Pe.rhaps wrongly written ruif.
thh~
runs from I. 3 to l 41. .t\bout ten lines appear to be lost b t g to end of this piece. Fragment t:t 7 Conjecturally restored. But. there may have been another tar!ap in front of it.
4 Conjecturally restored. e w~en t ts""and the preceding piece..
I Very doubtful, except4'the u.
15. The number of dots at the beginnings and ends of th r t The initial does not seem to be k, as in L.M. klo', nor yet 6, as in It. 9, 10,infra.
the cm:umstances permitted there be. 1 . e mes has been estimated in so far a•
6 Tit I . , mg on y one margm preserved .... 10 Restored.
e ast three words have been conjecturally .r estored. • 11 Both these portions have been restored. The second one is practically certain, but the first is
con1ectural.
•

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III ~ • PA.RT II] MCN INSCRIPTIONS
33
o. [kitu] wa{ ss ]aka.la gah ' sapuin dapuin brau ma twak clo' gah ra yar 18. c;lak nwom u pgay ka dubbutthi kuim lar • p\lay heman[ta] •• •. •
1 11
,. [tg]e[k ma] gab r krun gah ma ma[jjh]imanadi ra ' pgay k§ .............. (kuim) lar c;la[k 1 h]a mwoy ga[h j]a[tas]sara
1.
J
samawutthi tuy masun ma[s]u[ n tney (bray ma gii mwoy leh gah (ler) 2 h] a s[e J n ku ja( tassara] 3
·, [ • • • • • • • •
gab • sapujn) 1
19. y tun pc;lay ka ma dah sa[m]awutthi gah pc;lay [p]an ki[tu] (ma
t t:
11. [dip]u[i]n br[au ma] twak clo' gah ra yar [t]g[ek] ma gal) ' krun tadak ku wassaka)la 4 gah 1 cJa[k 1 h]a mwoy 11 [p]c}ay ma dab
ga[h] ~a kru[n sam]at ra yarau pcJay krun [mwo]y tun gab • atiwutthi gah Q.ak nwom ga(h) .....•........
1 1
pQ.ay ka ma dah [ sama]wutthi ga(h sapuin dipuin brau 1Ua twak 20.. • than puiy rman wwo' tun gah 1 dab tau atiwutthi •. (hen) 1 (ma
clo') 2
twah) .••• (ta)dah [tha]n puiy rman tuy ma [dah] atiwutthi
12. [g]ah [tg]ek t (kha kala] ma da[h] dubbutthi tun gab ha tc;lek t da[m ]li ro n na galan aca attha[katha] 5 • • • • • • • • • •
dubbu[ tthi] gah ha sen [kJ u 3 bnat [ dah u] ir da ci 1 gah krur1 21., ta[d]ah [w]assakala tuy ma dah pan kitu kuim .•.. (11) [twah] lar
ma phah sak ga[h] ler ha ..................... . pq[ay attha]katha ra pQ.ay [th]a[n p]uiy rman wo' tun gah •
1 1
wassaka1a gah turau (k]itu .......... .
13. gah • pQ.ay kala ma dah samawutthi gah • sapuin tipuin brau ma 11
[twa]k clo' gah ha [t]c;le[k] pc;lay kala ma dah atiwutthi tu[y 22. w[o]' ma nw[om] ku ati[w]utth[i] gah tim ke[t] •••••• (m gah)
J 1
ha [s]ei1 bwoy ra[-]it bra[y] ma gluin ma • masun masun
ma] t c;lek t ati[ wutthi] 4 • • • • • • • • .. • , • • • • • 1i
(tn]e[y bray ma] gu [mw]oy leh gab he[n] •. '· •••••••
14. ga[h •] dah nadi ra ha [g]ap _gor sgab. n sabhau jatassara ma gab,
[g]ah 6 • (Q_e)h dah ket alu1r Q.e[h] r ma mi[k k]uir 6 fia}.l mwoy 23 .. atthakatha gal} Ji [ u]ir da ci J r pan [p]an [t]ney [bray sgii mwoy 8 leh] ..
kuim lar [~, p [pi] tne[y bray sgii mwo[y leh kuim lar • l>a l}a
mwoy ha go['] kanam bda[h] •.... ·.. . • . .. . .......
tn] ey bray [sgii mwoy Ieh] •... (bra]- 5
·15. pen tau ~ laca ma phah sak ga[h] he[n r j]atassara ma ga(b) .... 24. y sgii kuim lar laksan atiwutthi ra gah (heft) 7 (pp) ay 7
1 • • • • • •
..•.....•.· . [ra]7 mwoy pqay [k]ala ma dab sa[m]awutthi (ma yalia)h 7 cuip [a ra t p] 9ay than puiy rman wo' tun gah 1
gah 1 pqay pan kitu wassa[k~la] 8 • • • • • • • • • .... [jui} 9 p\lay [k]ala la[chJor gah 1 pa[n pan] t[ney] (bray) 8 .....
16. n tay kuim lar r qak nwo[m] ma gab r Q.eh [a] cuip ja[tassara] s ... 25. • [pi] pi tney [b]ra[y] ma gii mw[o]y leh le[r nwom r]9 l>a ~a t[n]ey
bray ma gu mw(oy] leh ler nwom tadap tada[p tn]ey bray [ma
..•...... (kui)m ra • jatassara gab ku qeh go1 ra n sama• 1·
wutthi gah [p]i sak (h)e(n) 8 [mahajata}s gfi ler nwom] r [lachor] (lachor)10
••••••
26. l[uk]au cah tney [k]ui[m] lar sak ku [sgut] (hen) - yam lyal). tney
17. ssara majjhi[m]ajatassara [kh]u[d]dakajatassara pi sak d(ah) ... 1
t 1 i
fii kuim mik pak ha go' r. uit [j]ano[k] akal) gab (ma) [dlu snim]
.......... [jata]ssara mwoy tun gah pgay kala ma dah
r
uit ga[h] • • • .. • . • • .. .11
samawutthi gab tna[h] . . .. . . • • . .. . • . • . • . .. • .
l This passage has been conjecturally restored but seem$ fairly ctr~ain .. 1 i l F L a o i o r k ly s c r e a r t t h a ~ m r , l i t k h e o u f/ g ii. h t. ,. 1 t may be hen . r the e be . i ng qui . te certai • n . 3 Restored.
1 This passage has been conjecturally restored. 4 This restoration is quite conjectural, but the last word is almost certain. 5 Restored.
s Looks like ta; and if so written, it is merely an error for ki& .. 6 These two words have been restored, but are practically certain.
4 The fast two syllables Ina.Ye been restored. 7 The parts in parentheses are very doubtful. The last one might be read byay ma tanah.
Ii Looks rather 1.ike w~h, b~t in any ca~e it must be meant for gah._ i;; 8 Restored, but fairly cer~in. After this word one would expect ma gU rnwoy l1h l1r wwom,
11 Looks rather hke mit fair,. huJ: ~ertain}y meant for nlik kuiir. but there does not seem to be room for all this•
., Perhaps this is the last syllable of jatassara. 9 Restored, but fairly certain.
I. Conf,eoturaUy J.'~tored1 but practic.r.lly certain. 10 Quite conjectural, though there seems to be a trace of the fi~st Jette~. . .
• Conjoetgrall1 re•tor~d. Porhapa we should r•tore~lt /th 11 The first part of the portion represented by dots looks as 1£ we might con1ecture ettheY mat
ray or pa tam. Anyhow,, the t seems fairly certain.
3
•

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VC)L. IU fAR.T II} MON INSCRIPTIONS
34
~ 27. jawar tuy bray ma gu Ier mrom r[au] ga(h het} 1 3 5. g[ oJ r sta wuir na ma ket .. .. • . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. .. .
1
· t than pui[yJ nnan wo' gah ,1 tadah ma n(\\·o}m ku [gamakhet] (wo' gah lay 1 tuy ma smik kuir) 9 ........... .
gah [gap gor stim J ket ra sa(k gah pqay than) 1
1 1 ••••••~•·••·••••••••*-•••••••w••
.. gh t. .,
28. [p]uiy rman wo' ga[h] yarau pQay nadi jamno[k] (mwoy)' [k]uim
3 6. k u sm1n a
t
a wuir .. .. ,. • .. .. • .. .. • .. • • .. . • .. • • • • • . . • • •
lar r [y ]arau pQay j[a]tassara ja(mnok] mwoy kui(m [• na [tuy ma dah pqay] (nimit wo1 gah • het ma mik kuir) 3 ••••
praka bray ma gu p<;l]ay [ka]la [ samaw ]u~thi [gab liui]n [bray] ( m \ \'O}') s ., ., . • .. ~ .. * .. • .. • .. • .. .. .. .. • • • •
11
. . . . . . 3 7" h ler ha {s ) e( n) " .. .. • . .. . • .. . • " • . . . . .. . . . . • . . . . • • •
...... (m)' [dab baddhasim] . . .. .. [pa<Jwot simasammutikam]
29. (la)8 snom ma gal;~ p\fay nadI jamn[o]k mapha(h
jatassa]ra jamnok ma pha[h s]a[k gab 1 pa
ka[m=ma pa tarn ku] upa[s]a(m)[mpadakam nab] (pa) ~ ~ 38. gab [ha go'] . . . .. . . .. . . . .. • .. . . . .. . . .. . .. .
* " " "
[sa]- 4 {laceh) [ma dab p4ay nimit wo' gah • yam]
30. [gut crawat wJ iney tam[·al;] pqay ( cuit tila fiab} ~ [Rlmadhi]pa(ti]
ra [r] kha gah rau wo' gasap [ cuit tkuiJr6 da(h 39. n(r)m 5 ,dab • .. .. • . . .. • . • ., ..
* ., • • .. ,. • • • .. • .. .. • • .. • • • ..
Ramadhi]pati tun r [pcJay kala rna] ............... .. . ..... ,. . {tanah sgab. ler qeh ha dah] (baddhasim sga.Q.) 6 Ver
qe hl .. .. . . . . . . . .. . ,. . . .. . .. .. . .
~ ~
, , ,
~
.
~
·31. languiw gah yarau pc;lay gamak het .. . .. .. .. .. .. • .. • .. .. ~ .. .
t
[ra] pgay ga[makhe]t ga'[h ya]m (prJay] nimi[t 40~ tt da[h} . . . ,. • .. . .. .. . .... ~ .... ~ .. .. ... ., ... "". .. . .. .. • .. . . . • ..
1 1
~[ket tuy r yam gam-i tuy ma tau pqay nimit] 1 • • " • • ., • .. • • 10l {kuim •] (yam naQ.) [ma tan pqa]y [nhnit gah l]
\kuir) ... {nq)' ... ,. ................................... .
32. gam·i tuy ma tau manah,. ni[m]i[t] (gah) a ........ ,, ........ ..
(hatthapal;) 9 t ha g[o' kuir nai1 chaf-110 t ha go' kuir ptit kle~
m~ilal:i gamakhet tuy samut] . . . . . ... "" ... 41. (ga) • .. • • • • .. • .. • • • . • • . • .. . .. • • .. .. . .. • • • . • • ~ • ~ .. .
1 * .. [ra 1J sima[aamnru~ikath ga\ll (wct,gga)' [dah uir
33· m(uit) 11 sak ga[h m]a parisawi[patti] 19 ~ ......... # ...
1 ............... ., ...... .. da ci 1] (b ~voy) .. • ., ~ • . • • .. .. .. • • • • • • . . .. • • • ., • . • • •
· _<mu . h et ma dah) 13 [parisawipatti] (ro gal,l 11 yarau p<;iay
[•
14
,g amas1m mwoy tuy ma] (twah) ................ ~ •
34• [tl gah ~e~t] (t)uir 16 nimi[t] . . . . . .. • . . . .. • • . ,, • • • • . (h) ,. . ~ . . . . ~ ~ . [sfmawipatti gah] luim ~ tun (l
p9ay mm1t gah 1 gamasi[m] mwoy [tanah nu gamosin1] tila)
I , 16 · ~. " • " " * "
.. \wo sgaQ.) .................. {gap) n
43· .
···"'········~-.····
1 · Puret y .·conjectural. • .. . . . . . . .. . • . . . [ma] . w .. • .. , ,. .. • .. .. .. (plQf cuit) [tuy
:a A J~i,rly certain restoration. I 1] kha tuy [mal {spa simasa.mmutikaih) 9 .... ,, .. .. .. .. • .. .. • .. •
:Eor PO$s~bly ~~· 4 Reatored, but practically certain 'c
rror for. ktuir. Th . .,. ctnjecturalty re-ttored.
8 If t ..· d. . . .···a· . . . . 7 e 1 a st syl 1a ble i~ r~stored, but certain
~~ ore ~ ~H\ .ve~y c1oubtful. . . '
9 Resto.red •. The. last syllable is certain
w Pos;;ibly chaw. . • l Very doubthd. • i, Tmt lut thr.o wotdl are V•ll' doubthtl.
accid 1 e 1 n P ta r l o . ba . bl . y this .. stands either for · s a.mut or nlmit pre f erably tho former,. the i beinf in that caa $ Very doubtful.. « Ponibly ma..
. l II ~ S . C 1n)~ o t n . o c ·.~ e ~ i d v .·.. a . . b .. ly . . k .. u • i . r~ i 1 a. 4 R V ~ e c t r h y , :d r o u ~o b , t u { b u i l h . d ~ ' 1 1 1 " C Vf o ) n ry je c d t o u u ra b l t l f y u l r ee:t~ t ' I l T B O h e t f ' e o n r l e i u m t t h f e w e o e rd tw , o a ll l e b tt i e tt r s t ta th ~ & re I t s e tw em ., s s t r o l . b W 4 e Y p . N , a . ) i I i d G a O u n \ j tt e f c u t l. ~ )t -~ a Or '«laggu J
..

37
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL., 11 MON INSCRiPTIONS
PART II)
44· • • • • • • • ... • • • ... • • • .. •· .......... "* .. ..
D
........... •. .. • •. • . • . . .. .. • (kuir) .. • (kuim) • .. .. • (upati) .. .. •
(yAm) •••• • • • • • .. • • • .. • • • • .. • " " • • • • " ,. • " • .. (Fragments a and h.) 1
. . . . . I. • . . . . . . . . . - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . • .. • • • • • .. • .. • [r • k • u • ir · • t • a .n • a • b • m • a • 1 .. d .. ah • .. w ll/f- is .. u . m • g • lm • . ] . 1 • * • • .. . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . { kl) . . . . .. •••.•.• •· ••••••. ·• •
. . . . . . . .• ' ' ..
.. ..
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.. .. .. .. .. .. ............. ................ .
,
(Fragment c. •) 'Sl .· .. ." . .. . .. .. . . · ... . · . .. . .. (~pasampadakam) • .. .. • ,. • • • • • • • • • • •
·•
~
46. • • . • .. . . • . • . . . ....... . . . . • . . . . . [ . u . p . as . a . m . p . a . d . ak . a . m ]8 ma fiab pa {p]q[ay: ._ •••• °W' it .. . . . . . . . . .......................
4 .. .. .. ..
. . . . * ....... .
47. • ............ [gamakhe]t da c•an ma tau wnduih qe[h] ........ , . . . . . t . • . . 4 . ! . t • • • • • !I!' ( .- g t a f b • -, l e • r • p • a • b w ,.- o l'fllr y t ' t '* p a • ri .r, sa • w A i )[ • p 11 a t t I t f i] * ... , .......
. . . . . . ......... .. . .
-:
48. • ........... {hatthap]al) gah p .. or ku{ir pa] tuy ' samut u[il1 .. .. • ... • • • • .. • • • • • • • • .. • • .I- •
(~) ·[~~ ~]~itn. ~k~i~.
[s] . . . . .. . • . . • • . . . . .. • .. tau kwoml {ku) · · • · : · · · : · • • •
~ ~
·.. : .............. (wis)u(m)£gam]akh[et ma cum sku]1[m tau]
49. •· •.•• [rukkhasakha]d[isam]bandha 6 {m]a nwom gah 1 ma da[h] kw[om] ku ga[ma]·
sanka(rar)u gab kuim nda baddhasim ku ga[masim] ....... .
. . . . . . . ' 6 . . . . . . . . 1 . S· {lakkhai:ia}' •.••••••..••. ' • • • • • • • {kui)m [llaw • pQ.ay
.... ... ma
d·d~l· krkh~ ·k~ij~
mahaja[tassara] tuy a [cmp] • ... " · · · ·
50. . .••.••.••• (slma)[wi]pat[ti 1 gah t sim]lsa[mmu]ti[k]am ga[h] ............. ., . (tuy ma a] c[utp samu a L
' luim ma gab. rwon. simasammuti{k]am •••1 '{h]et 1uim [•] • (u)
. . . . . . . . . . . 11 . . . . . [Ia]w • ...
.. ..
. .. . .. .. • • • .. .. . .. . .. .. (y) kath to['] gah tun m~ '
6 ·pd~U:l.
" · ba[ddhasJim ma (lu)i(m a)(t}uiil • • • · • • • • • • • • • • • •
· l Or •gamo P
9 This. fragment follows on pretty closely after the preceding piece : it is even p.o.nibte that they • : .. .. .. .. • .. {pqay wisuth )[g]a[makhet ma c~k c4ai) nil gama. .
overlap, though I think not.
2 The first three syllables have been restored. There is no final m vb.ible. lakkh] a(J}.a) 6
4 There is no means of placing this small fragment exactly, both margins being gone and there
• . \......,. this and the preceding piece. Fragment • (on the
being no ,c lear junction with the preceding piece. Accordingly the dots are quite indefinite and l About a doten Unes are mt:S:Stng ~-.ween
indicate merely that there is something missing both at the beginnin~ and ends of the lines .. left) runs from 1.. 4 to th~ end, b-from 1 • 1 • to 1:!4 • iaJly at the beginnings of the Unu~ there being
s The first four syllables have been conjecturally restored, but seem fairly certain. i The number of dots is roughly estimat~, espec
o Or possibly taizkabhu : either way it is an error for sankarabhu.
no margin preserved there.
7 The first two syllables have been conjecturally restored and are doubtful : pouibly it lhoald be 1 Very doubtful; possibly boln:ru>y or t ,,,,_,,,.
/ori1a'PJipatti. 4 Conjecturally r.estored, but fairly certain. .
a The omitted word looks li,ke gas, which may be an error for ph. 5 Con.ceivably 0lakkht1K l •
•

EPI'GRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. . U~ • PART u) MCN INSCRIPTIONS 39
'1· •••••..- : ~ ................ • p9a[y] ja[t]assa[r]a samat 15. {ttiJ1 .. • . . . . . • . .. . . .. . . . .. . . . . .9 fiaQ. lana(h) ra , [ jh]a
1
[m]a ha [mw]o[y ku jatassar]al.akkha[JJ.a] ............... .. fa .. i[t] tuy ma dun ket ganap ti[l]a puiy {m]aha[the]ra ga(mluiiJ.::a
. . . . . . . . . . • . . . [hen dab uiw r het praka ma phah] tuy} 3 ............. [tila fia~] Ra[m]a[dh]ipa[ti g]ah k~a[p] ra a
8. (s ak gah) 1 • • ~ • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • (gab) ku[im ler] t bwo{y sasan~
p]arisawipa[tti gah luif!! a kuim 11] (rau) ga[h] . . . . . • • • .. .. .. •
26.. .. ............................... [mas]u(n] lnim cnam inah gab
, ........... [bicaJrana {mwo]y [gah r ma] (tadak tau ku) ....•
• pC;lay kala Iamah [g]ah sasana k[ya]k t[r]ay dah U>a lnim 4
1
9· · · • · · · · · · .. · • · . • :.. . . . . . lparis ]awipat(t]i s [ma nwom] tu]rau cwo[h pan cnam k]uim (•) ... i(k) 6 kuim (ha) 8 ga-
g~[h tim] ket [r]~. r kh[a tila ii]ab. Ram[adh]ipati Im] .......
1 )l
...•.••..•. [simawipatt]i .[parisawipatti r ma tadak t]au k(u) 17.. (t!.p) 1 ....... ~ •• ~ ........... [uiw) (ra) ci t s[asana] tuy ma
nam
[upasaJ- cap tau kwom (ku u]pa[s]ampada gah ~ [pJa 8 ma [sl]a,p [t]an
tau cuiw cui[p] . . . . {ra-it) 9 tk)'Ha masu[m 10 lni}m [c]na[m}
10~ [mpa'Cla]' .••...•. • ....•. ;; ....· {t) [ey g]ah ' s[a]k
ga[h] ro ~ tadah [s]a-
[w w ]o' ma [t]am·al;i kweh ra r pc;Iay tha[n pui]y {rman] wo> , tila
• • ·. ·. · · · •. ~ . • (gam-i r) [ma dab] t[ipitakadhar r ma dah 18~ [sana] 11 • ., • • • • •••••• [t]c;li[k) lnen ma phah sa[k] wwo' gab 1
byat~a pat]ibala ga 5 · puiy {ti]m [t]au fku]im f'ia[n sasana t]u[y ma s]ac'"al:t rna sak
1 1
11 • • • : • • •. • • · • ·• ·• • • • • • • • . • .. • • [than rman] wo' ci t [k]u (ku) [tc.Hk 11 l]net\ r ma ha [mwo]y ku asa(m)nka 18 {gab r puiy ha
ti[Ia pu1]y ga[t)acariyCJ.J gamlui11 ( ci t]am[-]ab. 8 [t]au kwom ... w]ipara.
·,. • •..• • • [ey sap-or t]ila pu[iyJ to[' kuiw bicarana]
i9. • .. . .. . . . .. . .. . .. . . [pcJa]y sasana ky[a]k tray hen sot'] • dab
12 • • • • • • · ~ • · .·~ .• .-. ;. • ~ ·: ..••••.• (saman pubbapara tuy r)1 pui{y ma] ha sjuil [squik] p[g]ay kyak t[r]a[y] hen s[o]' r [dah
,[ey sap-.or kmw t]tla .[puMy to' phyui]h sa[g]ut era[ wat] s ....... pu]i[y ma ha r]au gau p~ay kyak [tray he)n s[o}
1 · ~ • · [s]1[m] wwo['] fii r: 1 r[au w]w[o]' tila [fia7;1 Ram]a[dh]ipa(ti] 20. ['] 1 " •••••••••• [sak] 14 ku tqik lnen i ma [hJa mw[ o] y ku
3· · ·. .· .. · · : ..: · · · : : . ·.. :" · · · · . . . ._ . [gamluin k]uiw sa[gut asa[m]nka ma [cuin] dah tau bija sasana ga[h] t pui[y m]a sgo[']
' r C ra ' w •. a tj· ] . •w .. may. tan . g u . .·s • .. 1 , .m . . ;. . · w.· : wo ····' ra. . 1.i kha ' g· a[h f 1 l.a · p u1 · y g . ] a1J-a- (b) ..... (t) [r]an [tuiw u t]uy • upa[sam]pada[kam] tuy f s] (ma) 11
' ~~riya · · · · · .. [b1catana mw]oy r [p]a{li r w]i[nay r] kwom
[ku] aM · dge ..
J 4~ [ttbakatha] 10 • . [ ~ _] [.] •
··
p
"
a
.
t t
1
i \f
.
i
~
e
.
. [
.
n
·.•~.
w
· .
o
..
] m
·: •
g
•
a h
•
r
•
t
•
t
•
l
•
a
~•
pu
•.
i y
• •
t o
•
['
•
]
•
g a:
s
r
1
;i
m
ac
a
a r
w
iy
i
a
pa
[g
th
am l
I
u
p
i
]
n
a
J
r i[
.
s]
.
a
.
w
.
i
"
- l R
tf
e
t
s
h
to
e
r e
a
d
b
.
o ve rc;:1ding is. righ
t
t,
T
t
h
h
e
e
l
h
a s
m
t w
us
o
t
r d
b e
o f
s u
t
p
h
e
e
r s
m
cr
is
ip
si
t
n
o
g
v e
p
r
a s
t
s
h
a
e
g e
t.
was probably tila.
,1 Conjecturally restored on the basis of the Pili text. The English translation of the Pili
• .,, " ,. . • (tu)y • . [kutw tj:adah sirtra[wipa#i ma] n[w]om
pati§aw1pa.;. vers\on gives :ao4-7, but this is due: to ·a v::i.riant MS. reading: the inscription itself has catusatfhiidiJt..m.
The missing word looks a little like or hahik.
1 Conjecturally restored. ~ G Possibly ta. .
~ & t 1 b ;h e ~ ~ 1i . r d ~t o t tw s o m · s a y y U 1 a 1 b 1 l e e r s e ly h a .r v e e p r b e e s e e n n t r s e m st a o l r l e d ci . r c t e · s . p ut i • n t~ ~~ up superfluous space. word 1 a i s P P r r u i e r g s e h u l t y m l y a c b o r l n e y a j e d f c o . t r u r T a l l a ; t i. w hether it is admissible will depend in part on whether the preceding
c . l o .. t s . . t . o · ~ fi h n e r u e p I s S p s a o c 1 e 1 , 1 e a t n hi d n g t h a e f te n r e x th t i n s , : . e p e m rh ay ap h s W .. e h s h d o u h l . d re . a? g ... a e !z s . \ Qr O ed r . there may have been two t Or p0$$ibly la-it: t11f wacrd is conjecturally testored.
•·The original appears. to. have tap-ap ave. a ., making gah. 21> Error for masun.
1 Very doubtful. • · u Restored. lJ Hardly legible, but practically certain.
' The last three syllables are restored. s The last syliab!~ is resfored .. lS PO$&ibly dsaizka,,
IO Restored, H Restored. 15 Or .iui'UI? But it looks more like tui'W.
lt Orb• r
r •

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[VOL. IU .. PART II) MON INSCRIPTIONS
21. [t] 1 • : : : -~ ·~ ~ ••· • • • n(an) lam-ow ga[h] 1 ma sgo' ta[l]ut ptuin 27. . ....... r kuiw [t]ila pui[y} dma[n] ·ra ' (t]ila puiy mah~the '
t[uy] a ma [sgo' tan t]au c[u]iw [c]uip ku ra[ .. ]it 9 [ka]la masun ~ Mahatissa wo' gab het duh ma da[h] 1 kulasamsattha • i ....
lnim cn[am] . . . . ' [• ra.; wo' 6 ti]la. fial:i k[~ap tuy he]il ' ga- . . . . .. . .. . . . . 11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
...
~2. 6 (tu)n (nor) 7 [c]nam tila pui[y] kya[k] tray ma
• • • • • • ,. ••• 1
pa par[inibb]an gab 1 [Jt]a klarh pi [c]wot 8 turau cnam kuli lwon 28.. • ........ nu [Maha]wihara 9 ui[r q] pa tarh nu gab kuim nda 11
Mahaw(I)hara[wasibhikkhus]angha 2 ler [p]a u[i]w [karh] tanah
a (tuy) .•.. [tila pui]y [Mog]galipu[t]tat[iss]ama[ha]-
h[e]n -. A[bhayagiriwiharawasibhikkhusangha] 4
23. [the] 9 [ti]la puiy Mahamahindathe [ku]iw clo' [ptan ........... ..
•••••••• 11
s]asana [p]gay tko' Singhuir " nu pa tarh tila puiy Ma[ha]ma ...
hinda[th]e .......•...... · [tko] ' lo [Singhu]ir gah • lu- 29. . ... ~ .. .. (ha) [g]o' buy karh [k]wom [k]u [ran' s]ka' he[il] ra
24. [kau] 11 (218 cnam) 19 ,tnor dhammawa.di tu[y] ma twa[h] pgal} 1 [t]now bhikkhu sa[it] \la coh ga[h r] Mahaw(i)harawa[si]bhi-
1 . . . . . . . . .
[M]ahawi[h]~ra[wasin]i[kaya] tuy 11 ma sak tu 18 t<;lik lilen [g]ah .[k ' kh ' u] 8 .. .. ~ • • • • • • • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • • •
[he ]it • ma dget t[I] . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . • . • . .. . .. [ tko]' 14.
Singhu[ir • kha] (ma)
30. .. . . . .. • .. . .. kuim ra ' sa[n tuy] ma tau pgay tko' ~inghuir
25. . • •... (h) [r s]rn(i)n 15 WatagamaIJi [A]bhaya '[j]na~ plan• sm[rn] ga[h] Mahawiharawa[s]rn[i]kaya lew (m]woy ............ ..
kla[n D]a[liy]a la_ tu[y] • go' plan krami[n] qun Anuradha[p]u tuy r .. . . . . . .. .. . .. . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . .
.
[k
.
]u
.
iw
. -
k
.
a
.
.n a
.
m
.
A[bhayagiriwihara] 17
................. .. 31• • .... [Abhayag]irhviha[ra]' ma dah gah • pi [klam mas]un co[h] ·
~6. da[p]ah cnam ga[h ku]li8 lwo[n) a tuy hen r smin m[woy] . • • •
· ••• " ..• tau ku smin ma lw[o]n [t]uy pc.lay [k]a[la ma] srnin .. .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
kya [kl]an da[pah tu]y 11 ma dau a bdab. drnarh18 jaren tila [p ]ui[y] ... ~
. lu t . a u . 1 . 9 .[ c . a h pan cnam] 00 • • • • • • • • • • • • .. . . . . .. . . . .. - . 32. • ............. m • pqay ~k]ala g~[h] he[ n]. • s1:1i~ ga[h] kanarh
. Je[t]awanaw[i]hara [t]uy [s]J[un] sc.l1[k] pqay t1[tth1] .•. • · • • •
J ·· Restored. . . . . . .. 1 . . . . .. .. . .. . . . . . .. . . . . .
: Possibly, though improbably, ra•ui"t.
Looks lik': "!asu':, but the extra stroke is probably accidental. SS~ ., .................... (cu)[in]1° dah tau [p]apami[tt]a r ma pa
4 Looks as 1£ 1t might have been rwon or hen. da[t]au p[g]ay wiha Dakkhi['.Q.]ar!m [t]uy • plop low ~c.lay
&. Or wwo' P •
preced 8 i • n I g a l ~ m e u . nable to complete the word of w.hich the first syllable occurs at the end of the . [J . ]e . [ . ta . w .. an . a . w ihara] 11 ....... • • • • • • • • • • · • • • • • • • • • ' • •
7 ex~ept
hVery doubtful, the last letter. But I think the r.eading is right tho gh
E • M ., t e usual M.M. being nu. . , u the form is
8
9 F R o e r s to cw re o d h , either in error or through assimilation with the t foll ow · i ng. l Looks like lat.
1l Restored: ~: Or ~erhaps tka'' 1 Or 0 -wi°.. • h ) · 'd tal
18 Error for ku. 14 Con1ecturally restored from the Pili. s Or possibly 0'Wi"O, if the extra stroke (which is certainly t .ere is ace~ ~n •.
15 Or smin. Or perhaps tka'. 4 Restore U d k e w ith the exception of the first letter, on the basJs of the Pall version.
l8 Th' 5 Looks dUtf,, but can hardly be anything but 1"ali.
~ is n d ap pears to be the reading here In the version based o p pa - ~1 • . ~Ss.. 6 Or 0-wi•
DUhiya, a possible reading of the M6n text is Daadhi' a Thn t?e name is spelt firs~-three syllabi~
correspondmg passage. , j-1 • e ab 1nscnpt1on has lost the '1 The are restored from the Pali.
17 Restored, except the first ·letter, a Conceivably J&ali.
U Error for Zukau. 18 For dman • t Not quite clear, but practically certain.
20 Restored orf the basis of the Pili version. 10 The first two letters are oConjecturally restored.
11 Restored on the basi• of the Pili version •
•

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA l'ART II) MON INSCRIPTIONS 43
• . • • . . . . .... [hhikkhu 1 'San tuy m]a tau pc;Iay Mahawihara . . . ' .
• '• • • • • • •. • • • • • • • • • • • ! • • • • ' ~·
kuim l[or l) kwom ku bhikkhµ [sail] tuy tna tau p4a[y Abhaya- (ku) 1 [p]at[i]pat pa[tipat]
t1
giriwih ara] s • • • .. • • • • • .• • • .• -. .. • • .. • • • • .. • • • • • • • . . . . . ·. . •.. . . . . . . . . .. "" . . . .. .. . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. ~ • • .. • • . • . . . . J[ejta:wa[naw]i[h]arawasinika[ya ma] gal.i 43 ..
- .
n . i k . a . y a . . [m . ] w . o . y . g . a . h . k . tu . iw .. . d a . h . t . u n . • . . ·r a . u . g . a . [h . · . ~ ] . e ( . n ) . . . . . . . • . . . • . • . • ma [t]qik [l}nen • (ml .. .. . . • •
• .. . . . . . . . . [turau kla]th 2 cn[am fiifia kui]m nda .t· bhi[kkhu . . . . . . . . . .
sail] (pi dab) 9 [t]au p[9ay tko' Singhuir gab] s Ma[h]awiharawa[si] (le) (1 dab] ma ha rau (gau) . · .....
. . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . •' . . . . . . . . -· . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• • • • • 8 • . 45 .. ' . . . .
37· · • ............ [nikaya a l]er mwoy 1 [dah] ni[kaya] {MahakassapaJthe 2 ma pa dr~{tau] ........ · .. .
• · . . . . . . . . . . . . [nik]aya pi [g]ah 4 1 (m) .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. " . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
(Fragment c.) 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ·- . .
•.....•.•..•.. [ku]i{m nda .i Mahaw]i[hara]wa[s]i
[M·oggalip]u[t]ta[tissamahathe] 4
.
• .·
.
• .
.
.
.
.
..
•
. .
. .
.
•
.
. ..
.
.
.
. ..... ~ . , ... {ni]kaya l;>a (t)
47. . ....................
• •
[l
•
{]
•
u[
•
im
• •
. n
•
]
•
da r [yata}5 gam-[i
...
• . • • • • ~. •,' . •' ... '". ,· • • !, '. • ' • 0 • • • p~pa]bhikkhu ma dah adhammawadi gamluin (ha) • • . . . ..
. . . . . . . . . . .
··:
39· · • · · • · · · •..•.... [ma ha 6 sen k]u [p]at[i]pa[t] ~ . . -
s. . .................
. . . . . . .- . ' ma. cwin (nikaya) ma dah nikaya [pi g]ah ler
ba(puin) 4
. . . . . . . ey spa nikaya mwoy tu[y] 1 yam yata gam ... i ma [dahl .....-
. . . . . .. ... ·-·
-~ . •'"• •'• ~·
4o. · · · · · . . . . . . . . ,. . . m ku j al a n [ma] . . . ~ . . . . . • 49 •. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... [h] k~ap tuy r papabhikkhu gamluin
tuy ma dah adhammawad(i) 6 gah [pr)am k[l]e' pa uit yam
. 1 1
. · . · .· . · . · . . · . . · . . . · . · · · . • . . _ · . . · . · - · · . · . • ,,. . ; . . . • . • : - . . .~ .. • . . • '•· s a . s . an . a . . [ . m a] ( t) 50. . [ fi . ah . . . m . a . ] . . . . . . . . . . . . . [c . a] . -a . l:r . . [s a · s ] · a n · a · [ · r a 1] r [p]a 7 tarn nii [smi]il 8
.
. . . . . . . . . . ga[h mJa ca-ab sa[s]ana kuhn nda 11 [p9lay [tka' Si]nghu[i]r ga[h
. . . . . . . . . - sasan}a tuy ma cap (t] ..... • ... • ..
. . . .
• • • • 'I -,~"~ ,.. ., .............. ·. . . . . . . . F · 1 t • th h the first letter is doubtful. -2 The first ~two syllables are restored. ·
. !Tah1! yf cer aint, f ·1olouwgs· closely after. the preced.ing piece. It is even possible that they ·overlap,
l Restored. ·'I!\ t 0 t ~ h h e " t . ~ e xt · e 1s n t r t a h g a m " t t h e 1 n . 4 o 6 ~ . a m a a ~ y i n . b e h a a s c o b n e t e in n u a p ti r o e n se r o v f . e e s J d t . . i 4 m 5 ~ F . t e o d r B , u th t e i . t · s a • IS m · . 1 e m r p e o a ss s 1 o ' b n l · e th to e b n e u · m s u b r e e r o o f f th do i ' s t s b . · e . a c t a u th se e
2 Restored on the basis .o f the. Pali versioh~ b in e ginnm p g i s e c a e n . dn . e1 e n de s r \h.e lines . . could . not be .. . . . . a nd the dots bere given me.r . e ly indicate
8 Restored. . . tbnt an indefinite amount is missing there. ·.. . . . _ . .
5 The original looks like ta h' h b . . 4 .·.Looks like. Wah. 4 The parts in brackets are testored on the basis of the. Palt versmn,
6 The . p arts . i • n br · a ckets a. . r e ' r w e st 1 o c re · d m f u r s o t m e t h w e ro P n i g li . . . 5 O O r r o p a o i s o s , ibly yati or 1 i g L in o a o l k ly s , l t i h k e e s m to a n , e b u be t i t n h g a t b r i o s k p e r n o b o a ff b l J y U S a t c c b i .e d l e o n w t a t l. h . e t. But 8 se C ~ lr t h s e m i t\ ~ e . x t l . i ne,
6
•

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. IIt • PART 11) MON INSCRIPTIONS 45
sl• • • • • • • [c]uiw CUip. [ku la]ma[h] ra II II sak gah bet da[h] UiW da 7. • • • • .. • . • .. . • . • . [ku 1 kwon gra[ku] tuy [ma nwo ]m '{pu~mi{k]
ci n puiy spa [aya]cana ku tila pui[y t]ipuin the(ra) •••.•••• upasam[p]ada p<;lay [jJareil puiy {g]ah ~ p[uiy] ... "· .......... .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
... .. .. ,.
52. • •. ~ . . • [sa]sana nu 1 tka' Si[n]ghuir te' tuy 11 puiy skuiw cau 8. • .............. (kwa)n 1 wo' gah ri [m]a sak ku asan[kJa gah
ptan sasana pc;lay [th]an c;lun pu[iy rman] wwo' (ra) ~ gab. tuy tila [dah] tu[y • c]uiw cu[i]p [k]u ra[-it 1 kala] .............•
fial) Ramadhi[pati]8 • . • ~ • • • • • • • . . . .. . .. . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .
9. .. ................ [p]u[i]y sgo' dun [c]a kwe[t 8 r]a ~ h[et] tuy
E [m]a go' a cu[ip t]ka[' Sin]ghuir t[un] . . . . . . .•..•..•..
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.. .. .. ... .. ..
(Fragments a and !; •) 4
to.. • ............. [ky]ak [t]ray [m]a pa tarh .. ku Ratana[cet]i [u' t]a
1. • • . . • . . • . . •. . • . . • . . • . . • . . • . . • . . • . . • . . • . . [ . . s g . . o ' . . ] . . ( f . . ia . t . . . n a . . . . m . . a t . . ) . . u . . [ . . sg . . o . ' . ] . . ( . . p u . . j a . . u . . ) . . • . • . • . .. . ., g . a . h . . l . [e , r . . p ] .. u [ . i] y . . s g . o .. ' . li n ... [w . o . r . p . u j . a u . . r a . i . . p . h . ] u -. i 5 . [k]usu[iw] ....••
g II. ., .. .. . . • • . •••. m [t]au kwo[m k]u dhar tw[ on] i [h]e[t] da[h
2 • • • • • • • • • • • [ceti] u Silace[t]i 11 Kalyal}.iceti 11 ta' gah [!er ,, tila u]i[w] da [ci] t puiy [k]uiw wui[w) ku maharaj sa[n ra 11 r]au gah
ey] ta' sgo['] . . . . . . . . . . ... ~ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. ti[la] • ... : • .. .. .. . .. . • .. . . • . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .
.. . . . . . . . . .. ..
.• 12. .. ....... " • .. .. r[e]n ti[l]a [pu]i[y] thera Qa cwo[h l}a t]u[y] (he)n
3· · · . d a · h · . [ · . t] · a . u · . · k . u · . · t . [i : l . ] · a . · . p u · . i [ [ . y sa . k t a ] . ' ] . g a . . [ h . ] . (1 . 1 . j a . ) w . o . r . ku . s . [ u . ] iw . . m . a . g . l u . i n . . s g . o . ' . . t . [s ] ~ s . [ w . ]a .. fk .. . m . ) a .. . s [ . p u . ] j . a u . . d h "' a . [ t . g . ] n . [ i . h . k . y a . k . t . r ] . a y . ga[h t]q.o[n]5 ••
... 13.. .. • _ .......... [l]a mwoy [m]a [cu]t [latn thu]pika [tc;l]o[n gah ler]
4. . . : .. : .. (tila) e puiy ta' ra ' rau gah tila nab pa ayacana [k]u nu[h] s[r]an klarh pan cwo[h r p]aben rnwo[y sw] ......... .
tila pmy thera to['] .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . ...
,
14.. • .................. (kh)i(guiw) 1 nan [m]wo{y th]ar [p]i c[wph •]
5. . ........... (wa) tuy ma pa kabut ma [s]-a [d]u[n ket] . s[ri]i dh[at m)wf oy th]ar pi cwoh [p]i [r] pan tha[r ~a] klam pi
u •, p . a . sa . [m . ] . p a . d a . . m . a . c . u i .. n .. d . a b . . [t ] . a u . . b i . j a . s . a . [s . ]a . n a . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. r.a n . 15. . • d a • k • e r . • L p • k .. [a . u . th [ a ta r ] ] • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ . l . [e . r] . . m . w o . y • (s]n[i]
6. . ..... •. ...•. [S]iligh[u]ir (ma) i upasam[p]ada tuy ma [tau] dh[at paccer] 8 l[e]r m[woy] • swa[k m]a pujau S[i]ripada 1 [r] bodhi
~:ay
santhan puiy [!]er ' [ma] sak ku (ii.saiJkli.)' ••.••.••• • ga[m]luin ma pa [tam k]u .... (kh) .. • • • . • . . . .. • . ..•
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
~
l Usually spelt nu~ out .there seems to b . I Very doubtful.
i Conceivably th' · · h · b · · e no second. stroke.. . t Under the initial a (represented by the hyphen) there is a mark resembling a subscript n.
is m1g t e a badly sha d • l . .
: The last two syllables are restored. pe sing e stop, but I think it. is ra. which is. probably accidental.
About half a dozen lines a . .. b a Looks nther like kreh.
ff'<
is to the right and be ins . ppear to e. lost between this and the precedin • • There seems to be no reason for a stop here.
almos 5 t ille .. gible • . g . at 1. i, . fragment a begins -.at line 15 , both cont • in g u e p ie to ce I . . 2 F 7 r , a g w m hi e c n h t i 6 s 6 Error for phui-w.
The number of dots at the ends o£ 11 . . . : e The. Pali seems to differ here.
8 Conjecturally rest~red. • i-m6 16 merely estimated. 7 Very doubtful, and the second l looks like i.
tPerhaps pt1jjh1r. 9 One or both of these i'1 may be i .
•

#
EPIGRAPHIA BI~MANJCA [VOL. III • ?ART II) MON INSCRIPTIONS 47
in~ [Ratanace]t[i] ta gah [l]e[rJ ........ [j~qi]n[ok m]as[u]n [c]w[oh 25. (t) 1 [m]w[oy h]r[er sne]ti tn(e}k a[pr]ak \la [b]rer la[m]cak 1 li.m·
1 1
p]n[an] ma ha go' (c,)u(t) 1 [th]ar Jer masun cwoh • yat l[wak]ia ek 'ba b[r]er snen tne[k lam·]e[k mwoy ~ brer sak thar mwoy}8
m t
da[ca]mm (cwoh masun)8 brer baket 1am(-)e(k] ma . . . . . . . . . . ...
••••
17. pflary tka' Singhui[r gab r y~t] ...•.• ,. ..•.. ~ .•• (h t)au 1 26. ~y 11] ( m) .. [a] . [a] (ka) . (r ](i) [ap Jrak (mw ]oy (• yat a]prak by au
[kambar b]aket mwofr b k]ambar [s]ak thar mw[o]y ~ kambar gamhih ~a cwo[h] ,. [kaduiw das.ok bal {klam) . . . . . . [h pre]n
a[pra]k pi 1 tal;>ay (t)wo(r) . . . . . . . . . ..... tu[y h]en 11 lik tanal). thar [ya] ............... .
4
18. k~uim m[w}o[y] ri pandi [t]wo[r] k~(u)iw (pi 1.) [t]aqa[y twor say] .. 7. .
.... ,, k[l]e(p) 0 lay ~uiw ja[m]nok ba cw9h ~ pa<;lak tma' [p ]an 2 • . . •. It. • . • . • .. • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • .·- • . • . • . • . • . • . • . •. •. •. .• .• ·.•
1 [pagak] (pan)[gan] 6 a[prak turau] 7 •••••• . [i] . [au} ......•. . .. . . . . . . .. . .
•9· tuy he[n 8 lik t]u[y mJa pfon [ti]la p(uiy ta'] fia[l} Si~ghui]r [gamluifr]
•••• 1 rau wo' tila fia]J. [pr]e[tJJ ra 1 ~· [tiJla [flab Ramadhipati] (Fragment c.) 6
bwoy [m]a r[e]h se san •.•. ~
! • • •. . . . . . . . . . . . . . • (pujau) ~ ~
20. datau p<;lay tlrn' Sin[gh]uir 1 pujasak[k]a[r]a s[w]a[k m]a p[ujau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . '1 . . •. . • . . • . . • . 8 • •
dh]a[t gnih ma ey kui](w bak) 9 wo' tu[n l}e[r 1.} k[uJiw go['] pujau •· •·
[dh]at gnih h~n [fii 1] thera (~a cwoh ]Ja rv.a,_ ey ~ui)· 9 29. . . • .. . . . . . . . . . (k]w[ om kJu c;l[ikl (e y} . . . . .......••
. . . . . . . ..... (gah) r~ kuiw] . . . . . . . .. . ..••••
21. (w] ~ wo' tun [l]er kuiw tgo]' fiat dhat g11i[h 1 kuiw go]' [1in]w[or . . . . . . . . . . . .
dh~t] gnih kwom fii i ra,.;it ma go['J linw0r c1hat _gnih tuy . . • • . -
30. ..... ·. ..... [m] li[nwor t)u(y] (gah) [1 p]c\[ay KalyfUJ.igan] !Ua
~2. rna }Pa datau [p}<~ay ·Maha[wih]ara tu[y PJa ruy] ca.h [k]e[t] ~. [m]a kya(k tray] lal;>[ o] h [jaku] . . . . . . . . . . · ..........•
1 10.
[sJa[k ku t<j.ik l]ne[n] ~a[h 11 pqa]y uda[k]u[kkhe.p]as(i)m 11 tuyma 31. • • . . . . . . . gah 1. smin Singhuir [kuiw r)u[y c]ah t[uyt p]qay
[c ]iren [le]r [p~ay Kalyai.i1ga1iJ .... [tila] ~ " [jaren tila pu ]i[y sail] ta['] . . . . . • . . . . · . . . . .. . . . . . . • ..
· l!lJ. [puiy t]a' go' du[n} ke[t ranJ upasampada fi.i ·1 rau wo[' til].G\ fial;l 3 2. • . . • • . . • • (ka )bu fii i rau wo' ~a[l]._ t]u[y] ·~ [ ti]la fla[l) pre]1Y
l?reili li[k ~wak ma sku]iw ba[~ kus]an [ta' g]arntu[i]n ra [1 11] [li]k tanal:i [thar ma kuiw bak ku smin Singhuir] . .. . . ... ~ ••
&W<llt pa,rqil [!na skuiw bak ku sm~n] • ~. ......• (fluh} s
24. [s]ra.n ~a Ekl]arh [1 lac]in rn<lt [tnar1ik. p]a~ [ 1 1?uhl sr~q pan klarh 33 . . • . . . . . (a]prak Qa c(woh };a t kle]p la[y l;mi]w [sak)u[iJp t>a
p[l] cwoh. 1 ap~n. la[e;]in [t]ur[Jml i1uh · J~.]r-9.n [tura.u klarh p]i c[w]o[h ];la r] (p)(ret7 gam]h[ih pan c]w[oh panf ...... ~ .
Qwo[h] [b]r~[r ~h]rn t~n.[l]~k .[s}G\k [p~n •J hr~[rJ ~(pa) ....•. .. . . .
1.
1 Ork.
l Very d.oubtfol : the Fili does not agr:ee here. i .Looks "like lapcdli, which would be impossible. . · . . , .·
2 The. anus'llara is dol.lbtful and the final may be t. s There should be a stop here, but eone is visJb.le anq ther7 ~s ·no roo~ fl)r one~
8 Con1e7turally restored. 4 . Or pan di p 4 Only the· tops of a few of the letters in this lme are d~c1p~ef able.
11 Conceivably klem. · " 5 This fragment foilowseon pretty closely after the preced1~g pie~e~ . . . . • .
a 6 A Po b s b s r i e b v ly 1 • a p t e a d g a h n n . e o , r t h m · e • a n • g b a e n · 1 , . n g .. ~ . . . uperscrip . t . o . ve i r T . t h h . e e .. h P . il' 1. . d: 1 'f f.e rs'· · h . . ere. of thi 6 s B fra o g th tn e m .r a it r , g i i n t s i s b n ei o m t. g p o lo s s s t i , b . l a e n t d o t e h s e t r im e a b t e e i n h g 0W n ; o m o t t 1 h ~ e h r I . S c . e r n t l a 1 ~ $ n S . l m n? d , 1 a c t a . t i t o ~ n e s . b a ~ s gi n . : t J o \ ) . < tl l » D . g e S ex .a - n a c e J t p e o n s d 1t s 1 o O n f
respectively~·. t? pos~t1o~s t~de:finite,,
9 Conje~turally restored. · · .lQ:. LoW;;, Hk . id. Jines, Accordingly the number. of. .dots. th°,se. is .quite . and they
11 Conceivably ~._m.. · · ·· · e ·· · · h;we been put in tl)erely to mark that something .Is m1ss~ng, na,t to 1ncl.r~te. Jits amo.~nt, \ ·
7 Conceivably'~mret.. ·
•

MON INSCRIPTIONS
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. III " • PART U] 49
" 34. • .•••.... [kuiw] dan tuy h[e]n uit ti[Ia p]ui[y thera \>a. 4~· . . [tila] sail [ta'] ma [ c]uip tla gab [pti]m sm(i)n 1 (S}i[n•
l qun
ghuir t]uaii ket kar(i) 8 ma tim tarau ma (s)-a [b]acu[i]p
c]wo[h }ta] • [kwom] ku [t]wal:i [}ta] cwo[h }ta] wo' [tun] ..... 4
Anur[adhapu] . . . . . . . . . ...
35. . ... ~ . . . . [ma skui]w [ku s]an [nab S]i[ngh]uir [g]a[m]Iuin r 45. • • . . [ceti} 1 Mari[cawa]Hi[c]e[ti] 15 • Dakkhinasakha • Lohapra.sAt 1
ta' gah ra t k[~]an Ramadutan tuy [ma] ..•.....•....••
[paran] ma kuiw bak [ku smin S]i[n]ghui[r I]i[k tan]al:i [th]ar ma
1
• ... [Wailigam • gah] {tun) Ier t[l]a k~an [ha 1 c]uip gah a[mat
kuiw bak [ku s]m[in Singhuid': ......... .
*
Go]ru[c]i (dah pun ku) smin 9 Sitighui[r t]uy . ~ ..•.•..••
36. . ...... [kanwor bay]u[i]w (da) 1 dah ma het tu[y m]a ti[la t]a'
1
skuiw blal;i nu ta[do]k [het] ma skuiw [g]o' paccay pan [gah] ....
t
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 .. • .. .. • • • .• • • • • • • • . . . .. . . . • . • • • . [Smghuir] • • • • •
............... (sapu)[n] sala[n p]nan da[m]la sa[k] •••••••
37 ........ [cah mwoy ma pa t]am [ku Mo]gga[l]ana[th]e [ga]h t .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . .
kwom ku twal} cah mwoy gah [p]ren kuiw qok k}tan Ra[mad]u- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
,. ·• ..
[tan] . . . . • . . . . . ... ·. .. ..
• .. . . • • • .. • • .. . .. • . • • • .. • • • .. [ durl]sa[t] da[h) • • • [i]
......... ................. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38. .... · .. (ga) [k}tan] C[itr]ad[uta]n ma qok ra ... r[au g]ah tila ta'
,
qok k];,an tuy hen kl>an Ramadutan [g]ah ~ sakkarat [837] ....
1
.. . . . . . . . . . (Fragment d.) 10
~ .
39• • • • ~ • • (~ak)I cah [.Qa] c[r]awe[kl tnay Can gah ma t(i)t a IlU paft 49. • • • • {n] (t) 11 dacam orawek] .. • • • .. • • . . . . . . ., . . . . . . . .
Yon ' k1tu phallagum 8 crawek tnay sok gab [h]e[n] ... . . . . . . . . ( . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4o. · · ;_: · · .[phall~g].uin [g~li h]en r [s]mi[n] Singh[ui]r [kuiw] cu[i]h . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . •· •. . . .. . . . . . . . . . .,. . . . . . . . . . . . .
'"an d~n talun _ttla pu1y san ta' tuy ~ lik tanah [th]ar t•l - h
R[- dh. "] . a na
ama ipat1 . . . . . . . ~ I •
50. y tila fiat, Ramadhi[pati ma k]u[iw bak] 1 Ramad[u]tan ma n-a ga(h)
41. · · · · · [n sablu kwom] ku cagan ku t[il]a puiy ta' ra 1 (pa pati) ... • • •. •. •. . • •. .• •. •. .• .• .11' .• .• .• .• ... .• .• . . . • . • • . • . . • . • • ( . s m . 1• . n• ) . 1 1 . . • • . • . • . • . • .
santha[ra] ku tila puiy ta' [t]uy [hen daman] da[t]au ........... .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .... . . . . . . . . . . .
.. ..
. . . . .
42. . ...... (a)[tui]n [li]k swak tila puiy sa[n to]' fiah S.. h ..
t[i]l · ,., h [k] · . mg u1r tuy
a na · ma mw ba[k] ga[h ler Citradutan] ............ . . . . l Or possibly smin.
T ].....___ ___.,.. • This L.M. spelling is exceptional here. t Or kari.
43. . .... [at]uin ga[n]ap. cuit [t]ila. cin batan ma dah cuit hen [ ] 4 The reading looks like 11,ti., but this may be an error for J"..a., or the letter may have received
spa [b ]a[k r Ja gal) tuy [kui]w patifian 4 • • • • • ." • .. . . . . p UJ y subsequent damage..
. IS The Pali MS. has •tJi,.. tor "ta", but the actual inscription has lo~t this part of the text.
~ Alt but the last two leU.\W!ts a.re restored from the Pili.
~l. M C . o nceivab ~ l i y n raJ or possibly we should run da a o n ~ ~~ . ~ . : :ah; " , 'i Almost certainly not t11-, though it looks rather like it.
the forms this inscription also) are tradah but though datlah is the L.M. form
Restored in accordance with the p-1· t • Cf. A 23, etc., C 21, etc. 8 The Pali MS. has Gara•i, but the inscription has lost this part of the text.
a p h - . . . . . a 1 ext. • Or 1min. lO This fragment follows on pretty closely after the preceding ~iece.
'T~r e a n p e s x t t i w t, o b rd u t. JS p r p o r b o a b b ab ly ly t h t e u y e 1 x tra mark is not original • l 11 l T Pe h r e h a m p u s n i b n e s r t e o a f d d o o f t s n h 1 u w b e e s e h n o u e l s d ti m re a a t d ed n . l. ll The m is the only certain , letter•
.f.

EPI(}RAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. . Ill PART tt] MON INSCRIPTIONS 51
~ ~ 1. [t~' t.]uy ,• [k]uiw pn~il (kuiw d]amafr datau pi7J.4apat ku tila puiy ta' 58. (h] .......... {g)o' 1 (bhikkhu) [sail ~a cwoh pan] (•) ...... ·~
' rn I ~ll Rama[d11]tan [l]er l (pren) l ... " • " .. " ,. ......... [\\') • {n ku tila puiy Saddhammakittimahathe} 1t (1 Wanaratanamahathe 1
Panca)[pariweµwasi]mangalamahA[the ~ Siha]rA[jayuwarajaca]riya
• • • • •••••··~~···••••t••••.,.•••*•·•1\11!•**-•
(ku sail fig.J} Singhuir) [ler] (Ramadutan) [n]~(a ku san) [nalj] [the]9 ta' gah ra • • rau gah ciren [phaii t]wan tu[y ruy]
52. [Singhu]ir [gamlu]j[n rci r] 1 [atuin m]a dal:i ganap tila c[iJti bat[ln 59. [cab] (bhikkhu san) ............ (t) [cab mwoy crawek} (kitu}* [asat1
·- heii pui]y sga pa[k] ta gal:i (t]u[y tila s]an [ta' kuiw patifian] .. .. .. tnay] bu[ddhawa] .................................. ., ........ .
. . -. ·. ... ·. . [tila pu~y sail ta]' [ma cui]p tlr:i td ' ma I [tuyl ku[i]w n[ilman [phyu]i[h s]an [Sin]gh{u}ir {~a cwoh pan ma
t
Ariuradhapfi gab • cuip tlun tuy 1 uit (t]ila [sail ta' ma] skuiw] u{pasa]mpada e gab • [p-o ]r k[ui]w ku[iw l upasa[mpada}
53. [tlu]n ·[k~an 'Qa co' w]o' 1 cuip [kwo]m [m]woy [h]~[n uit] ra. [c}i s (ku)
puiy [g]ap gor [sta~ab. dhat gnih ra gal) tuy t tney aduit m \\fO 1
F
craw]e[k dutiy a asat 4 gah h]en • pok dhat gnih tuy s ti(l]t3.
puiy [sail] ta' 'fta co'
{Fragments a and /J.} 1
54. [k]w[om ku] .Ramadutan • C[itr]adutan [ra tila puiy ta1 go{']
1 ]
linwo1 [g]o['l yuiw [dhat] gnih tuy he[n tui]a lik [gakan tila
1
.. • .. • ......... ,. ....... [mwoy mwoy] ..... " .. .. • • • .. ...... .
Ramadhipati ma gakan n-a 5 gah smift] Singhuir bah [t]u{y]
1 •
• dhat gni[h] cut Iar pqay sn[i] dha- ····~·••>11•••••*········· .. ···~········
55·. [t] thar [tila flab ma kuiw n·a] 6 tuy [r cro]k ( p)dor' tqon ha[tan • ~. .. .. .. .. . . .. ,. • .. .. .. . .. .. .. . • • • .. .. .. .. .. .. • . • .. .. .~ [gal;t.J ku [,tila
p]aben thar • (p)a[g]ak8 r (c)wi [sablu thp.r] da.[~ut] Jar ga[t]a puiy ta' gamluin 1 tila ey ta'] (sail} {gamluin gab] .
[dh]a[tgnih] tuy r (taQa}:i] kui[w] ti(Ia puiy Qa co' thera 'Q]ri [cVt·oh'
Q]a kwom ku [R]amadutan Citradutan lana(h) 10 ra 1 [gata] 3. .. ..... ,. .. .. .. .. .. .. ........... ,. . . .. . .. • . .. .. . . .. . .. J[uim • din
56. n(ii ga)h • atuiil ga{ka]n [lik tila nal:i Ramadhipa]ti [ma d]al.1 [cu)i[t tuy ma gall] yam11 (ra) [ey] ......... " .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .1 (khl)
i •
g]a.h [h]en [• puiy spa] ba[k] gab [tuy i smi]o Singhuir [p]·o[r [tila ey ta' ma] . .. .. . .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. . .. ,. ...
amat fial:i S]in[gh]uir [t]a' tuy [pq]ay r KalyaJtigail [th]ln
4. • .. .. • .. .. .. • .. .. • • • • .. • .. " .. • • .. .. .. .. .. ., .. • " .( ey cl.ik milk
cn~h 21 kyak tray ma la[Q]o[h] jaku gah [h]en • [k]ui[w]
kuiw d[t.n] ku tila ey (to') . . . .. ............. '[smii Si6gbuir
57. [dak -· ph]a[ti r] · kanam prasat ...... ,. ......... ., ~ ..
k]uiw [yamu] . . . . . .. . . .. .. . .. . . . .. . . .. . ., .
galau far ra] [p]·or iila [puiy Wi]da[gamathe] (tuy ra) [bhikkhu]
t
5. (yamu ma gab. Strisanghabodhislmi gab) 11 [kuiw kn] tila {pui]y
(sail ta' ma) [c-al)] {ma) [cak cgati a] {uii ayai:-n mat)
1
[pa]ru[pawada t~y ma] tl[u]il fau no 19 tnor sao ma pa [M]oggaUanath[e] • yamu ma [ga~ Kittistrimegha]sa.{mi] gab kuiw
1
p[ c;l]ay Ma[h]aw[1]ha[ra gab] ru[y ea]- ku ti[la] (puiy Kumarakassapathe •) u
1 c;>nl:f .,,. a1,1d e ~r~ certa,in. s ~rror for nn1Jo,. ......._ ···~ -1 Concehrably vo11 • 1 The PMi apparently hu DhotlH'tfflf',.
norm:l.There seems to .be a virama. If it is an accidental mark, read duti;uzt which would bt< more s This {not SiJw{WFiija'* a in the Englilh version of the Pili) is eortainly right.
.J Very doubtful. h might be tlutiya. possibly. 5 Or astJt ?
4 The actual reading .appears to be asiik- which must be an error. e Perhaps u:pasamn,paila.
6 ~ooks ratEer like nwa. · a Or na? 7 Pos$ibly hd 7 About ten lines appear to oo lost between this and lhe preceding piece. Fragment ff is, to the
, l 8 l ... P ~o o : s ~ s s ~ 1 'b bl l Y y, b b a u . d t a k ; i . t r . i p!ro . b . ~~ly., CWlf 9 ih . f >er · h · a · p $, co · h~ · lo Or ·· lanat p o r. B ut cf. D ·. ~S ' p "A"l\~" ' . . .. r , i, right a a n T d h e b e n g u in m s b a e t r 1 o . f 1 d 2 o , t c s o n a t t i n t u h i e n g b e t g o i n t n h i e n g e s n d a n o d ( e th n i d 1 s p o i ! e c J e in ; e s fr a is g m m e e n r t e ly a g e o st e i s m d a o te w d n . to· 1. u ..
Hl There may possibly· be an "' superscript over the following lettef m k" But t Or perhaps i. to Tb& first of the Ulegible words may .be iel.
E.Ms ~P.fimr:i,f • ~i,~~e~ Yf~Y.~ 'ht lielUPi here is unusual foJ! · ~ lil~i~l'°n. ~ ms nA~. ll The part1 in parentheses ai tho beginnings of It. S-•3 and ends of I. 5:s'.i J.•111
f'fitOrtd by moa111 qf the Pili vtnio n.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. UI PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 53
6. (yamu ma gal). Parakkamabahusami gah ·kuiw ku tila puiy) [~]a'.Qas~· I 4. .. .. . • .. • . .. .. • • .. • • • • • . • . . . . . . . (t ila) 1 [puiy] tb[ era cah
[gara]the n ya[mu ma gab] B[uddhaghosasami gab kuiw ku mwoy ma qok k'ban Citradut~n] 1 [linwor Siripa.da
• • • • • • • • • •
Buddhawamsatbe yamu ma gab S]i[haladipa](wisuddhasami gab ma tau pqay kcJip tmo' Samantakuta 1 tuy a] (cau) • (1) ••••
11
kuiw) [cJuA Jayawac}gha}
7. (ku Nandathe n yamu ma gal} Gul).aratanadharasami gah kuiw ku) 15 .. (nanaguir)4 .......... ~ ••• ~ ••••• ~ • (• ma) (cui]h tlun
[Ra]hu[lathe yamu ma gab Jinala]tikarasa[mi gah kuiw ku [ onih Wa lligam] .. . .. • . • . • • .. • .. .. • • • . • • • . • • • . • . • ..
11
Sumangalathe yamu ma gab Ratana.]malis[ami gah] {kuiw ku) • • • • .. .. ,, • • . . [ c au tluii] • • • • • . • • . • • • [ba eaw ek] ( kitu
11
gah) .......... .
8. (Dhammarakkhitathe yamu ma gal). Saddhammatejasami gah kuiw
11
16. • • • • .. • • .. • • • .. . • .. • . • . • • . • • • • . . .. • . • • • [gab tila
ku Ciila)[sumaiigalathe o yamu ma ga}J Dhamm]ara[masami gah
fi.al:;t RAmadhipati duti ket paruiti tila] (puiy thera) [cah mwoy]
kuiw ku Kassapathe n yamu ma gali Bh,tiwanekabahusami] (gah
(ma) [ qok kban Ramadutan] ...................... .
kuiw ku)
• *' • • • • • • • • • • ••
9. (Mal}.isarathe •) . • . . . . . . . • . . • . • . • . •. • • . .. • • • [kbaii 17. .. .. • ,. ... .. .. .. . • . . • . . . . . .. . .. • . . . . . . . . . . . . [e y ma
· Ramadut]a[n tuy hen ·n kuiw yamu thera cah mwoy] (ma <;lok) p .. or gal) tuy n] tila pui[y ta'' a cuip tka' Singhuir] (tuy) .....
[k~an Ci tradutan tun yamu ma gal;t] (Tilcrkagurusami gah) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • .
10. (kuiw· ku Mahasiwalithe n ya~u ma gal} Siri)[wanaratanasami gah .. .. .. -
kuiw ku Sariputtathe ri yamu ·ma gal;l Matigalasami 1 gah kuiw ku 18. • .. • .. .. .. • .. . .. . . • . • . . . . . • • . . . • . . . . • . . • (t) • • •
Sumanathe n yamu ma] gal:i KalyaJJ.[itissa](sami gah kuiw) [wan dun taluti tila puiy ta' ma 11 ha gap gor • jaku ey] .••••
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.. .. •. " ..
11. (ku Culakassapathe • yamu ma gal} . Candanagirisami gah) [kuiw ku . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.. ..
Culanandathe u yamu ma gal;i Siridantadhatusami gab kuiw ku .,.
19. • . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. . . • . . ... • • .. .. . . . • . . . . .. • . • • [pujau cetl
SoJJ.utta]ra[the n yamu ma gal). Wanawasitissa s gah kuiw ku]
dbat sok]' kyak tra[y gamyon tuy] (• kha) [ey] .......... .
(G ur:ia~agarathe 11 yamu) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
•. ... •. ... •. .. •. • •. •. •. 4. • • •. .• •. •. •. • ..
12. (ma gab .Ratanalatikarasami gah kuiw) [ku. Jawanapafiilathe • yamu .. .. .. ..
ma gal). Mahadewasami gah kuiw ku Culasiwalithe 3 11 yamu ma .. .. • . . . .. • . . . .. .. . . . .. • . . • • . . . . . . . . . . • [ma cui h
20. "
gal;i] Udu[mb]aragirisarni gab kuiw [ku Dh]arnmaraja[kathe' • cuip] <;lun [Dgun gah " tila puiy thera cah m'woy ler pQay] (Q.uti.
yamu]
Dgun kuiw a dmati) .... (kla) ••••••....•.•••.•••••
13. (ma gal). Gulabhayatissasami gab kuiw) [ku Candanasarathe 11] (sak)
:,J w • .. • • ,.. .. • .. • • • • • • • • • • • .. •
[~ah . s~in Singhuir galan] 6 (ptim ku) 8 [tila puiy] (tuy hen...a.}•- .. " ., .. • .. .. .. .. .. . .. . • . . • . .. . . . • . . • • • • . .• . . • . . [ n tu} y
21.
[ttla pmy thera cab mwoy n kwom ku Ramadutan] . . · • [phyu}ih [tila puiy ta' nu} (k'ban) •••••.•• [k~an] ..••••
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.. ..
1 The Pili appears to have llo.ngalath1nisimi. . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I The Pali appears. to have Vt t'/fi.a'Da"'sitissaslimi". ..,
a The Pili appears to have Cufasivilithe'l'a on the stone.
t The Pili app·ears to have Dhammarajakath1ra on the stone t Conjecturally restored. .,rl
6 Conceivably pliin. • 1 The original may ban 0 for •tt-o• by a mistake of the engraver'•• .
~Very· ·doubtful, 1 Perhaps 0ju•. 4 Conjecturally restored. 6 Conceivably UI ''"''
4: Perhaps #Wok,.
r

u ,. ...... .,,
54 EPI6RAPHIA BUlMANICA [VOL. nr " PA·RT H]
.. .. . .. . . . . . • 4¥ • . . . . .. . . . . . ' . . . . . . . . . . .
(tila) [ey] (ta') .• [dhat gnih kya.k tray]
. . .
.., 31. • .••....• (smin) (tmin paruin tuy 11) 1
. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .
[kuiw tlun] <jl II'] ..
. .. . . . . . . . . . . . .
[kwom .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
lpi,1 (tamay) [ey skuiwJ (naa) ..
. . . . . . . . . . . . ~· .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
...
~ .
. . . (kuiw
• • ~ • 11' • • • • • • • • .. • ._ 33·
(tuy kya tath)(rat ktuiw tuy} .. " . . . ku tila puiy)
. .. . .... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (cnih
. . 34· . . . . . • ' . .
,. Nawuta) ~ (t ila, puiy)
. (cau} . . . . . . . . ..
l . . . . . . . . . .
35· •.. "
[kitu bas·ak] Epan) [bTa!mak]
(Fragment c.), s
. . . . . . " . . . . . . .. . " . '! . . . . . . " . . . . " . . (cuip) 36. • • 4t • • .. [tila
.
puiy]
. . . . . . . . . • • 4 • • • • • • • • • • •
.. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . •· . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . ( . c r . u . n ) . ' . . . . . . . •" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [til~ puiy] . .. . .
[kitu jib mwoy bramok tnay l .. • .
. . .
J
.Q) • flkallen cau • a • \k . o ' ( ] s , m ( i. S n i ) n 6 g h [S ui i r n ) g h . u i . r} . ( . m . a ) . . [ k . u . iw . . ( . t l . u i . t . . g a . h . ra 38. . .. . . . . . . . . [ . •' . k itu . j . ib . p . a . n . h r . 'a . m .ak .
. tnay sok) (gab) .:,
.
.. . . . . . _. . . . . • . • . . . . .( g .· o .- ' . f i . at . ) . • . . · ~ • (w .. i h . a r . . g . a . h . ) . --· 39· . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .
....
1 Only the lops 'of a few letters are visible . . . . . ... . . . [lhvom k.u} .. . . . . . . .
'~This fragme.rit seems to . f~llow on pre~ty closely after the" last iece . . . . . . . . . . . . . .....
exceedingly bad state af preservation that very little of it can be made o . p ' but is in such an
11 The number of dots at the be~innin s a d d . . ut, . .....
is m.issing could n~t h~~ d~t~ibed',': :: · ' g" 'l en. !!i. Qf Imes 1~, qqite .. i~finit~: the a.m-9tilllt that "
4 Very d'dubttu1, ei~epe' the, er.
5 Conjecturally· restored. l All the preceding words are ve·ry d0:µbtful •.

MON INSCRIPTIONS 57
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA · (VOL. IU • •PART II]
4~ [h]en [t]i[la nal}. tuin tlun] ra ~ [• tila puiy] ta' tuy [ma tuin tlun k~~]
•.4 1. • • . • . . . ' :. ~ . : . . . . : . : . : . . . . . . . .. . ( . t i . la . p . u . iy . . M . . an . g . al a . t . he . . m w . o . y . t . u n . . g a . b . ) 1 . •.• . ma cu[ip] c[n]ih 1 [Mahabu]ddharu[p] gah • tila [pui]y ta' d[u]i'
. . . . 1 .
. . d[man] lanah t[uy] • t[il]a nab Ramadh[i]pati gah t[n]a[y] s[ok
1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . dacam crawek kitu asut]
~. . . q . . . ~ . 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ' ~· .. . . " . '' . .. ~. 1 . . ...
. . . . . . . 50. [g]ah • [cuip sni daman] tila fial} pga[y Pugo ra •] • [ti]la fiab
cui[p Pugo tu]y ca[h c]ra[w]ek tna[y] ad[u]i[t gah] h[en • kui]w
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .• . . . . . . . . . preft phyer [dlun] kanqo' [bwoy] ma dal} ra}.1 san kwo[m] ku twin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . [twuik ma gluin] ( 1) 13 [p·or smin tila gamluin] (tu)• 3
51. (y • kuiw) [cuih] (wan) •. (n) 4 [tila p]ui[y t]a' ra t [t]ila puiy tai
cui[p] sn[i ti]la fial) tuy he[ft] kha ga[h] tila [p]u[iy ta1 (ptit)6
1 ]
(Fragment d.) 51
ra(n) [c]an[qan] tuy [ma] (tuit buin) • [dh]at gnih kyak tray
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [k]ui[m l]ar • t[n]a[n jray bodhi • sla jray bodhi • ma jra]·
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
- .. 52. [y bodhi ma gap] go[r stuiw kuim lar • tila puiy] ta' juin [kuiw ku
• . • • . ·. . . • • • . . • • . . . (tuy • tila fiaQ Ramadhipa ti cuip) • ti1a iiab lanah ra sl]a pa[t k]at[hvat] tu[y ma huim akruim] smin
1
• . •.. . .(D . g . u n) • • • . • ..• . . • • • . . • . . . ~ ..•.•....•... Sirisangha[bodhi] Para[k]kamabahu ma caal;l s[asana • sm]i[n
Wi]jaya[bahu ma caalf sasana smiii Parakkamabahu]
1
45· • . • • . . "" . • . . . . . . . • . . . . . .• . . . .. . . • . . . . ~ . . . . . .
53. . [ma ca]a}J [sasana] (1 ma) [fia}:i] (kanam) lar [na woha n]al). [Sin
· :' ·. • · · · • · · · · • • . . . . [k9an] k worn [ku Rama]dutan tu[y]
ghuir] (ma) [tila puiy] (ta') [fial) Singhuir kui]w ba[k] ga[h] l[er •]
• ma cau tlun nu Singbuir (m)a 8 tau pqay than Dgun ·gab kuiw
1
J ti[l]a pu[i]y ta[' k]uiw k11 [t]i[l]a fia[l:i ra 1 r I]ik [pat] .. . . .....
da[n ban pil}.Qapat lana[h ra n] • • • • • • (yat) 4 Uiciwa]-
. cuin [ dah] • . • .. ( suirn gakan) . . • .7 tila puiy sail Sin J·
[
46. (ra) ••• : • . . . . . • . . ...•. [sana] {hap) [Qa Qa] ..' ••.. ; .
54. [nghuir] (gam)l(uin) {1 kwom ku smin S]in[ghu]i[r ma h]i[mu]
(ku) [tda pmy ta' r pa] patisan[th]ara tuy • kuiw [p]and(a)il
[ta~]~u n·a [th]an dman ~ila [p]uiy ta' ra kha [g]ah ti[l]a fial}. Bhuwanekababu gab ler t ti[la pu]iy [ta]' [ku]iw ku tila fia[l;t ra 1
11
rau gah tila] (fial) kwom) [ku ti}la puiy [ta'] (pa) [patisanthira
[kmw pa sabh]ail [c]a(nak) [pi] tna[y] (tuy tnay) [si bapen ki]·
1
tuy hen] (1) •••••• [tila puiy thera ea]·
47. [tu] (~su: t.nay)6 [br]a(u)b(bh)ati gah he[n] (tuin pa pujau gal}.c;lin)4
_ 1
[tarn Jon ceti d?Jat..., sw[ok . kyak tray ra n] tnay sok mwoy 55· [h mwoy ku]i[m] ta[n]ah tanah h[e)n p·or smin tala gamluin tu[y 1]
11
c[r]awek [gab • ti]la na}:i· [km]w baca sail Dg[un gam]Iuin ra 11 , na jnor na pha[m k]l[ o ]' [t]w[i]n t[ wui]k 8 ma glui[n g]ah 1 ti[Ia fiab]
[ku t] .•. ;. ••....... [tila fiaQ] . .. • .. • . .. . .. . . • . • . • • • • .. .. . .. • [t]ila puiy [t]a' t[uy '
-
48. (pre~ tuy • kuiw). [kuiw] clan ra • [1! tnay aduit pi cr~wek gab] t]ila fial; (ma kuiw) ...... ,. ...... .: .................9
1
(bwoy) ~ma ~m]h [s]e. [r]au [g]au (hei11 8 dluil) ca[h] mwo[y] dlun
ga[~] tila [n]a]} [k]mw [pr]en pb[y]er ' sw.a[k] ma sapc;lok tila .... l Possibly cnuih. s Possibly " OT ra i •
B Very doubtful. There ttems to be a l put at the end of the line to fill in a small spa.re space,
p[u]1y thera cah mw[oy ra • i](tnay) [can] (yaQ lanu gah) 4 Very doubtful, perhaps ptuin or btuin, but the initial looks rather like e,,
Ii Doubtful reading.
~ Very doubtful. 2 This fragment follows pretty closely after the preceding. 6 Final t and n are doubtful. Perhaps we should read buim.: see the translation and notes.
Or Pa. 4 Very doubtful. 5 Conjecturally restored. 7 Looks like cycn. e Or possibly t'J»ik.,
a The stop i1 doubtful and the preceding word might be ken. t Here follows the version from the manuscripts mentioned in·§ 71 ..
•

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. JU • ~ART U] M6N INSCRIP1'IONS
• MAN:usCRIPT COJ?Y OF TEX'F EXtRACTED JR!OM THE SLA PAT WAN $Iir. 0
Ii Itna gah tale. i'la·li Ramidhippati khyap kasap rau wwa' ra " upasampada ma s-a-0 gab tna puiai . . . . . . . . . . . . . • .
thera cah mwai gwa? du6 ra6 ra • pqai than puiai wwa, gah simma ma s·ali ha dab uiw da d u I. • • • . • • • • • • IP ..
pa ia6 tifa puiai sat\ ta.' wwa' ma sgo' pa I uposatha pawara~akam 2 ma pa tam a upasampadakam . . . . . . . . . . . . ....
ro 4 11 puiai glaai dnaai m\Yai gamakhet ma sma6 mwai man t1 pand:ausim 5 mwai ma s·ati puiai . .. . . . . . . . . . . .
s ta a m ku iw up a a s t a il m a p t a a d ' a 7 k w am wa ' ro m il as •• r s a m u i t w tu w a a i ' 9 er t g il a a n pu tl: i J a a i t . a iia ' l) w w ld a 1 ' ya m p a .. t s u g a o l ' h u e p 6 o s n at h p a q a p i a w ju a . r i a ll . 9 f a r k li a .6 m a m a g li p a a i . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... l . ..
gamakhet mwai ma dadak tau am.at mwai ma hima Narasamsura io gah n dadah ma smin . .
sm11k mwai gah tim ket tuai pd.ai than ma nan tau ku1 kla.' sat amat Narasamsura 10 gah tna i\atl 2 ..
111 . .
kuiw ta\1, Aa{l 11 tati jaatl Jabti tua.i kuiw 12 khanham rup samit sim ra tr yam twuiw gamakhet gah .. . .. .
'II cha ma dalt amat Narasamsura 10 gah huit ha mik kuiw dab samkara kom ku gamakhet da s•ait
ma tau wut duih _4eh gah •' kha karon a pha-uit tuai w ruih chu ruih dun ma tau bwai smaw • ma (m ma) nwo[m] (gah ra) [ti]m ma 11 {sim)
slep pa kuiw samkara gah le bJ.l tall jaaJ.l janati kle' tuai " knan chu knan dun ma tau bwai latft
ma slep pa kuiw samkara gah le kuiw kut dan jaa{l jaia)J Ide' pha-uit hela ra II pqai than tuai ma
khanham rup ma smit sim gah tun lew 1 pcf.ai run k.uim law 1 pd,ai than mana}t ruil ma thuik dah 3· • • . . . . • • • . • ............. 111'.•#••··· ..
pc;Jai tma' nimit kuim law 1 maiia)J tma" nimit kuim law 11 kuiw na)J ta}) jaa{l jana{l kle' caruih qak ...........................................
karon u law ja lagow ra 11 manat1 gah than buiil duiw 4 duih .. tuai 1 pkuim Jaw tar.an ra 1 paluit
than samit sim gah tun lew 11 wihara tila puiai the cah inwai ma sgo~ klun dman kuim law t (ti)m ma n sim [t]arem [g]ah ler lapok ha [tui]n 11 s[im tJami (ler)
bhattasala kuim law n waccakuti 13 kuim law 1 than ma hum dak kuim law " kanharil law tuai hen si
niman 14 well d uil talul\ phyeh the 15 cah mwai kuiw dman pd.a i. than gah ra 11 pc:Jai khan ham gab rau • • * • • .. • ,. • ... • • • • "" 'Ill •
wwa' tila iiap khyap tun 11 uit tila puiai cah mwai kom ku cah mwai 16 kwap cah mwai wwa' gah
kuiw du\\ kuiw dun 16 ra6 upasarnpada s~a{l gal} ra ,. tuai puiai ma spa 17 sim lamuin IS tun • jilal} law .................................. 11!' ........
................................... , •.. u sim [t]B:m[i IeJr
huit smik dah ruih s·asna 11' bwai. duih anagat puiai smik s-ati janal} sun hi n upasampada ma s-al} heil
kuiw dah kuim rai II ayam mat g:araba parupawada 20 yaw ra snom 21 ma 11 sail ma phah sak gah ma gap gor sda[k n] ha ti[m m]a u [l]ap[o]k l~[r] ha gap [gor
11 puiai ha mik kuiw lup pqai kam wwa' swa' 11 cha sail ma ha mwai kuiw garaha barupawada caati
hel\ pUiai mik kuiw lop kam swa' H rau gah khyap tuai hen cam pa.t mwai ra. II kha ma cam pat s]la.(pok 11 sim) [tami] ler (ha ga)-
mwai gab pnow thera cah mwai gah 1 pqai thera mwai gah duh an 1na jnok klaJ;,l ha mwai o nd -5- (p gor sdak)'.. • .. .. . .. . .. . . . .. .. .. .. .. · · · · ..... · " ........ ..
ma loa tuai kla ha dd. upasarnpada gah 1 garaha. iiall parupawada iia{l ma cuin dah milu22.gah
ta~ah rnnum kuim Ia:v 11 puiai 23 tila puiai samat tun Jew duh chanda s-aii gab hai mwai ra n ayam . . . . .. .. • . .. .. .. • . . . .. . ( mi)k dak sim ta1ni gah n tadah sim
mat garaha parupawada iia.{l tadah mnum kuim Jaw II tim wat tuai tila puiai thera mwai mnum tarem ma mvom gah ra [ha] tim ma ma. la[pok sim tarem} .. .. ..
24 11
kuiw gahara gab kuim law • twal) tila gah mwai kuim law 11 tila puiai smat s-an 4 ma nwam kuiw
...... ft.an ma lapo-
garaha kuim law 11 sa6 tarau wwa' wen kle' tuai 11 thera 1e cah 1 tila puiai smat ma dah twah tila
~wai
thera gah __ lew trau 1 cha sa6 t6 wwa' gah upasampada. Iew s-a}t garaha parupawada iia}.l ha
ra " rau 25 gab tila 98 fiaJ;i Ramadhippati phyeh law sannithan ra n akha ma nan ku kila ma samit I Nearly thirty lines appear to be lost between this and the last piece.. See the manuscript
s!m tu~ ~ah tila _puiai Gu9arakkh1:thar~thera 27 mwai gah yai a gall tuai 1 tila puiai kom ku twab version.
tlia .P~t~~ Sathap_al~ 28 ga.h cau _dmd w1ha tila puiai tarem ra If tala puiai Sirisaiighabodhisami mwai s. Conjecturally restored.
K1~t1s1r1megha:a_m~ P~rakkamabahusami
11 n;wa1 11 mwai 11 Buddhaghosasarni 2.t mwai tt Jinitaa\karasimi i;o
m ne w ~ a ~ 1 b a S • h a u n T s ~ h a h e m a n i . a 9 r m 4 a ' k a k h m h s i a w m b a ~ i 1 3 t 1 1 w a ti ~ m l . a w ~ p a i 1 u l a i J a S i a j d am dh n a o m k m l a e t h 9 e ja 11 s am tw i a s t 2 i m ti w la a i p 1 u S ia a i dd S h ir a i m sa m ng a h ra a m bh a o s d am hi i s S a l m i m w m a w i a 1 i ' C l iw tn a a l k a h w y a p p a l ; u a i . t n t h yr a a n .u m p a q a s i a t m h i i t n s i m m w a g .i a h g a r b a s ' m a ik c i 1 1 a m n 1 :a t s ~ 1 k m .u i t w a .m s: s ~ m r i n t • g a p h q a '· t r t Q h u a ~ n w w g a a . . $ h ~ ~ l u ~ m i t l a a} r J e . m .R r im a a h d a h i m pp w a a t 1 !
~ pu a 1 ~ a1 ~ o . ~asam15ah !ll~ puiai Kittisirimeghasami gah 1 tila puiai Dhamm,awilasa twa}.1 Bud .. ma i shh tami na~ smit gab ma dah ra • pqai thin gah aim tuem ra nwam ma • ajjhattam9adou. i
te]asagu gab tlla pu 1 1 a1 D pu h 1a a 1 m U ma tt s a a r r a a • t i t l w a a . } p .t u i J a a i n n ,a a f { a l 6k l4 as a w m w i a 3 ' 5 h 1 e t 6 l l i a m pu nu ia ·m i U t t a t u am p a c: . J a t i t t w h a a }. n 1 w S i a h d a d h m a a m c m ro a i • qmbhedadosa kluA cuip ra. dah uiw da ci tt sim tmi ma 'amhit gah ma • ma ha dah sita.h ra tt rau
g,.h. heA dahB ulw d.a. cl it pqai than ma smik smit tarn~ gah tt pwa.. ma laphok g~p~ ga'¥w spa k~l
1 4 7 A A o Y m on i . t s. 5 2 B A b p a a n w d i h i 0 u • sim , , for baddhasim. 6 a B A s p k t u a i m 'W . . t d u h a i i p p n a t s i i m (G t a x m ) i k h m y a a . .p s m tu it n g n a s h 1 c m bh a a u s d p a a h w a r e m l\ a s w la a p ' h r o a k u s w hn w a m a k h g y aQ ap . w tu w .a a t . ' h t e u A .n u l e r w au _ s " j w ui w 6 a s t p tl a a s n a a ? \ l n R d a n m & a i
1
~
J ° S
e8
A
T
B F
h
o s r
e
w a u N n
t
c
w
. a c
o
a r k a
p
i s i
r
t u -
e
r t
c
h a
e
i . ;
d
, -
ing ~ords must
1 l
,
s : 1
b
t
e
B B a·
d u
o o -
,.
i
e
m m m i i
t
" t t
o .
s '
.
s
.
n
.
. t
a
t a a ·
c
k .
o
n
p
a
y
h
i
·
s
•
t 's error. • 1
1
1 1 5
2 9
B A
A B
s o
o h
a m
m a
p
s
a i
i
t .
t
s
k s
.
. u im 1 • k t
k
i
'
h m
µ
a
a
9
9
q m
q
a
a
b
s
s a
i
i
m
m s 4 i m
ta
ta
t
r
e
t e
m
a s . n r e m
l
m
m
nu g
n
m a
u
h
m
d
•
n m
d
a
n
a a
i
. i
a
l
i
m a p
m
a u h i
a
a k
h
s
a
h
s
t n u
im
i t n a :r
t
r e
a
a (
r
2
e
)
m
n m 5
m
i m m
n
a
~
t
~
a n . w m
g
a i
a
.l
h
h m 6 :aa g s
h
d a
a
. h a k
(3
ra
)
g . a
ti
t b 1
m
Ji l l e
m
w m
~
a s
. s
d
.
•
i
a
m
' k s
'
i 6
t
m
a
g
r :
w
;
t
i
a a
l
. " r
g
e r m
a
a
? ,
•
.
g
l
a d
a
h
p
n
u
! r a
i
a
t
l
2 2 a : 1 8 i· E B B B r rR n l o a a w ri m a af u m op h ~ . f . aara f: i a. 2 2 J 5 0 A ;a - . h 2 n 2 . 6 2 a B E F o r . t r r o z o r a l . · a f m or n u sa • n : . ~ Bo , o~ GutJ.aratan':'ldha 2 2 r 3 0 a i F A h e o Y r b a a . p v r - : a . B / ; r , i . f ' o o • r a tt!UJharathe. h I l a a a p p u u tu i i k k in l n e " w si s m h g n a t p a ta m . g m i a i l w e l w e w f a h p s a u d ik g a k a( ( s 4 S ) ) h p a l g s g i a m w w a ' t s a d d m n a i k a a le r i w a k u h g a w a \\ w p t{ a a g ' u a g m w a ll t s a d r la e a w m k p l * q * h a a d i n a t a t i a t m i h a m m ~a a a . t h h a l i , a ,1 p g m u a i t, k t l a a .r J t e e · m • w . p h rs a • . t n g th n a i p n m - g i m a ' w t a
2 o • o ' ~rig. as yosa • " rig. has osami. Sl For Ratan:amlili°
a For t-•Ja. as For S{Jdd,,ha1'1J;.mdrama0 , 84 For Bhawcmdabahu 0.. aa Fo'I' Jinoiankd>ra\ l For akhd. SI In the Pili ajjh1Ti#t(;.l*:t111iad.osa. s A omits4h ~· ll ~,,~to i~
• Orig. htJ,6 1mi11tJa.siW.. ti A mn.nM. B adds y~ after 11R.h,, 8 & ~

60 EPIGRAPHlA BIRMANICA [VOL. IU' PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 61
.6; [k] : : ; : . • :' : : ~' ~ ~ : : : : : : : . • • .
I I. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • ·•. • •
• ~ ••' • • • • • • . . • • . . . • • • uiw [h]en " pQa[y W]ima[tiwi] .............. [t]t[i] heft [d]ah tau u rau ga[h h]et
nodani tu[n gab 11] rau [w]o' gal:i tun n [t]ada[h kh]a)J.Qasim gab [l]ar pc;la[y l Wimatiw[i]noda[n]i dah ui[ w da] c[i 1] p[q]ay
i
[t]are[m ma nwo]m [trawuir kha\).gasi]m tarem 11 [11] ma sa[s]am[mut sim tami lamah gab got kanan] 1
. . . . . .
1· • • • • •I • • • . • • • • . • • • • • • . • • • • • . . • • • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
J 12. • ·• ..
. • . • • . • . . • . . . . . . • il kui[ w da[h] kuim u yam [p9]ay
. .. . • • • • • . . ..•• [m ra y ]ar [sno] m tun ma ma lapo[k]
parikkhepa wiharasim ga[h] kui[mf lar ma[n]al}. pa[ri]kkhepa [wi] 11
11 ha tuin ma gall ci (n]w[o]m [tun na] u rau ga[h l]ar .. c[uit t]u[y]
ha[ras]im [y ]amm [than] mwa[y] sa[bu]it 11
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . pa[r)i[kam] t[uy, ma l]apo[k 1 sim g]ah 11 [rau]
8. .
• . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• • • • • •· · • ••.•••• (11) gah 11 tipuin masun tu[r]au [kwo]m .. .. • • * • • • • ....
1
ku ka[m]rna[wat] sgo' da[t]au by[i] a [tu]y s[go' lapo]k ma (11) ............... [s]pa pQay s[i}m gah ler [m]asun masun [hat]
[pqay than rna d]atau [g]ah ra ~ caturah gah u [kJanan a na gapuiw ra tr manal). [thJ an ma [spa
9· . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . sim gah 8 tun] le[r 11 w] u[dJu[ih h]e-
l • a p · [o • ] • k 6 . • . sim • • w • o . ' . g • a[ • h • 11 • m m a g t o un '] d n a a t a a u 11 [ [ l p ] ] a Q tf a i y ( 4 t h t ] a a [ [ n n g i s i 1 m a ra t ] a r ( ] m e[ ) m a , i . s (b) • • • • " • • • • " . • • • " • • • • • . . . . . . . . .. . .. . , ... •· .
• • ·.. .. • • .. • • • • .. • .. . (nu) {gab] t(i]la [fiaQ.] niman ran tila
g]ah ku1m lar ma da(-} · 11
10. (h)· • .. • • . • • • • • • • • . . puiy sail cah pan gah tuy 1 kui[w l]a[p]o[k] sim (ra • n akh}a [ma
• 0 e 0 • • • ., • • • • I. • • • • • • • • lapok] ga[h] 1 j[m]a[p jmapl
• · • • · • • • •· . • • • • • • . sim [tarem] ma nw[o]m n trawuiw . . . . .
kha[\].]ga[sim] tarem [t]rawuiw IUabasim tar[em gab ma ha Sen 15. • • • .. • . • • . • . • • • • • .. . • .. • • • . • • • .. • • ..
II I
,if! • •
ku anga SO'] II rau [gah] ••••••••••. (h) tuy u kammawa[t] ler dapo[h] co' lor tuy •
1 There is a space here, probably due to an original flaw. mwoy m[w]o[y] c[w]o' mwoy mwo[y leh 1 clapoh le]h [paqwot] (tu)·
9 T~e ra seems to be written twice, but the first one may have been written over an original
law and imperfectly erased.
, s Conceivably .n-a, but the traces of what might perhaps be a subscript a (represented b the l The 'it is between the two marginal lines.
h.yph~6n) are very shght.. . 4 Between Pt! and y there is an original flaw. 6 Or '!a 1 1 Looks like la.pot.
z
There are two or1gmal flaws here : one just before the p and the other betwe n d ,/ 3 There appears to be .a large original flaw between the and the h.
spa~e
7 Between e and ,,- there is a blurred probably due to an original flaw. e o an •
m ma ik I . a d p a m k ' ( s 6 i ) m k 1 h a ta m gw i a g ' ah k u I i · I m · d a u d s a 1 · h m · si t m am t i a r m em a s · m da n . k u m g a g b a b Je w ra fi h a a A t s im da k m a m 1 a 1 m h . a a I a ·g p w u i . k ' s k n . n • · • t arem • · l • e w fia • A
w m w a a s ' d. g a a k J; i ga t h u n I e t w d f a i a d • . a .& h s d k a h k a p m d a .a s h im a g t w a. a re ' m k u 4- 1 . m • t a · d • a d h a h m u a i h w a s b i t m ::A t p a q r a e i m w i m pa n t u t m iw ' in t o a dh a a . m - 2 m t m un h1 11 _ ? s ~ n t n a 3 t a r m au i ha se6 kuiw aiga sw:a.' • rau wwa' ·the Jnuiw gall uiw 1!f pllin the ttuiw ma gat'l ga.h
" kb . a - m . a b a. f ~m · h .e ( 7 ) A .& kui• ~ dah ku1• m• 11 yam pqai parikk. hepa wiharasim 5 w u a 1 h w k 1 u m im a l a a s 1m · tarem lew rau 111.a yu{u)tti he6 dah tau rau gab ga~ law pqai wimatiwinodanil dah uiw da ci •
par1kkhepa. w1haras1mB " yam than mwai dabuit gab kuim Jaw • ta - t - gb . • w '' mnal} p4ai ma sa.mit sim ta.mi lmuh wv.a/ ii.'3.h ~ gwa' kanha6 pha·uit tuai • jmap }map kanhat gah
p h a-m . t t ua1 . . I ] • m a - p ] . ma - p kanha(8)A 7 gah tila puin 5 tarau kom· · k m a k a m . a n - at 3aii ga.h kanh a 6 sgo' lapuik a mhi u sim tare(12)m yaw sanwam tun mha ma l:apuik h.a tuin ma. gal} ci nwath
t u - a.1 · " sgo ' I a p · u i ' k m h a - " pqa · 1 . than ma datau gab yaw ra sim" ta · u a · mm - awat . • s go' datau b y i - a - tan ha • rau gab law cuit tuai parikam ma tapuik gab nt.u wwa' tila fi~ Ramadhippa.U ma
a. i:iu1 ' k . · h a tum . rn. ~a. h gah snu(g)m tan ha n pqai tawd ara ma r l e ap m u 1 n 'k w a . m • ma • ' s1m h tarem ga h ma kuiw cire6 • yam bnat thin ma (13) spa pqai sim ga.h le s s hat catturah gab n ka~6i a na
m a n t . l u ! t h h a - " n s m n · m · a • h t a- a ( r · i e o m ) . s •u g n a h ta k r u e r . m m . J m a .• w n u 11 m m a ta . w da u h iw a6 k . C . h , ) . a a n. A ro a 6 s im ci· " t paw . a ma ti s . m 1 . • - m ~ d w a w da a h - g . k a . h ac • 1 . " . t i a g s w 1 • m a • , t d a a r t e a . w . u L a g . a k p b u a iw 5 m B a ra l a • p 4 u i g k a ta g . a b (1 4 jm ) a n p ~ g jm ah a p til k a. a n fia h ,t a l i n h i e m A a .n ti la r . at p .a u i s a a i A t a t ' a g ' a 1 . 1 j a e ' a c h w a p ' a 6 n p g q a a b i k l a d n u h i a l :6 la g p a u ( ik tS ) .s h im t u r a a i • tt
. I . B om1' ts su. n. . A om · i ts dak si"m • "t s a E re m " t.awu · 1 w mahas1m tare.. " . " ; " . ga h kammawat 7. cwa' law tuai • mwa.i mwai cwa, mwal mwai leh 1 Ieb phaqot tua.i hell • klo' i kanhaA
, Err.or for gah, w~ich should pr~cede the stop. rror for 'Wtmati'W-t'nodanf.
4 6 O H n ':r g e . w ha e s s w h a o h u i l i d .~ a i 0 n • s ert mn 6 u m A t i a n w s u e i r " t w s g k a h h a n k tJ Z a a s i" " m p a ta ri re k m kh e1p aparipti~tuim. 7 B tttn. 1 4 5 A A T h k c e i i i r m l e a a . i t s i a • c w o i n n s o i d d a e n ra f. b le omissicm in th s I e B A M S g c S i a tm . n . h n er M e. .
\

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. Ul A PART II} MON INSCRIPTIONS 63
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
416. (y) " . • • . • • • • • • • . • . . . • . • • • • • • .. 21. •
• • • • • • • • .. • • •. •" • •.. • • .. .., • • • • .. 1(1"
••••.•••••• [pathrama] 1 _ gah u [c]uiw c[uip kJana[n r]a-[it] . ........ tma' [d]wor pan ga[h] 11 phuiw t[uy] ma (pa) [tma']
a[n]or patbama 1 [gah] lapok tuy [hen] clo' kanan ra-[it ma nimit [d]acam ga[h) u rnik [kui]w nwom ta[me]n nu sa[n]tha[n pan
11 11
dah cnor duti]ya (te') 9 {tun] tlan tuy n] (dwor) [dwor gab] (p)a[gan) 1 (t)i(t)
17. • ••••.•.••..•••••.••.•••..•.•..•••••••.• 22. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
•••.•••.•• [k]anan ma dah [t]am en[ or du]tiya gah ra n nu . . . [j]uk tu[y J n cruih tma' (k)uiw 2 c[r Jui[h tma'] gah 11
kanan tarh crior dutiya ga[h] lapo[k] tuy [hen clo' a] lapok [r]nti calo[' a] t[u]y n atuin a ju[k] ma cui[h gah he]n u [carit 4
,11 11
[kanan] (tarn) • . calo' a pqay ti] ( da 11) 5 carit ea-
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18. • (lo') • • . . • . • . • . . . . • • . • . • • • . • . . . • . . . • • • • • . •
•.
• .. . . (abwoy) a (anu]lum [lapQ]k tuin a~ jma[p jmap] kanan . . . smik kuiw simamagga 11 calah ta[b ]al) ga[h 6 j]ano[k. mw ]o[y
cuip [kanat] u [nu k]anati [k]anat a[bwo]y [patilum jrn]a[p jmap cg]a n la[yo ]h mway cga [n] karo[ii] ca[l]o' [a ti ra u u kha] ma
kanan Iapok] c[uih] •. ka[ron a ti g]ah
11
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
"
• • ....... [l]apok tuy ra 11 n ma [I]ap[o]k sim wo' [gab] 11 tney .. ma(r1]a1) nimi[t] gab kuim 11 kuiw pqay nimi[t t]uy ma sdah
sni[sy]or dapa[h 5 br]amAk kitu m[r]i[kkasui]w 6 [gab h]en [11 ma s[im t]am[i] ga[h] kuim n ca[al}.) janal:t Ide' [t]u[y] 11 ga[r]en
lapok tuy n 4] (tanp.m) 7 [k]aron la[r jar] lagar tuy 11 ·
~o. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .• . . . . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . ·-,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ . . . . . .
'
• • • • • • •• n n kha ma sa[m~mut ga[h n] rau [wo]' cire[nJ .tuy . (ga)h ler n gafii na [thor) na [ka-u]y ba[kJe[tJ ta' gah t[u]y n na
11
ma samut 11 yam bnat than [ma s]pa sim gab n (sa)[tim 1 tuy y[a]t bake[t] bata[ti g]ah 11 (pfi 8 g)a[fii lar] (ra 11 n) 9 [het t]uy ma
h]en da[kau ler pan duih] ... rui[h se k]yak u [j]ma·
11
1 wo~?, l The initial of this word might be b or p.
• The .th P ~ i · n . this has. a peculiar shape much like the th in the Myazedi inscription (see E ~ • 2 Conceivably tui'lu. 3 There was probably an odginal flaw between a and i.
Bi.rm., voJ. t, i, plate m, facing P· 55). As it is there used in the word thar. I do not thi · k 't
a tlz, although m pathama it ought (etymologically) to be one. , n I is 4° There was probably an original flaw between c and r.
: Conceivably, ?ut improbably, wo'. s Conjecturally restored. Conceivably, but improbably, instead of da 11 one might read ii.
Wh~t looks l~ke an anusviira above the a is probably a subsequent disfigurement. 6 There was probably a small original flaw here.
1 5 T Po h s i · s s ib w ly o rd d a s p e a e l m z · s very doubtful; even the t might £ : b o e · r a . m k. r ui 'k O • s 7 V Pe e r r h y a p d s o u th b e tf u tw l: o th s e tr o t ke m s i g u h n t d e b r e t k h , e th p e a n re m a i c g c h id t e b n e ta l r , a n ti d n d w t e h e s h m ou l p d o s r s e i a b d ly p p a . . .
9 Very doubtful.
:~~~·~.;:ir~~6g~~,n= ::::a~'ta.ft": {~~hp~!~~m;u~;~ ~:w. cut kkna6 11a~lt cnow ?atham~. gab ; ma rau wwa' acire6 pa tuai samit n yam bnat tban ma spa sim gah samtim tua.i heA dakau 1 pan duih
u troa:. nimit ? ma tuiw 11 ak.ha ma tuiw 1 ('1 x) tma' dow pan gih 11 phuiw tuai pa ma tma.' nimit dacam
j d n d m u i a l t ~ i J k p y a y c .n a e k h h a e g n . a 4 h k h ; b t ; 1 a n l 6 a m . p l a u t p u ( i 1 r k a , 8 1 i ) i t k u I b I a w c i c e u a h h i i p e a n k n ( l u u u 1 l 7 i u i k ) m fo c ' k u la a a i n : l o h a c k a p u n u i t p i u k m i n a k k a n a m : d a i a i . · 6 h m t : t - a t ~ a m m J . m c . n k c - o a n p w o w h t k ; : ~ . n l ; a 1 a • n y ~ a " e ~ ' o c t t . r m e ' ~ p c " r n a k o n a w " a n ! , a l n d t a n u 1 ~ : b 1 w y m k a a a a i ~ " a r p i a t l a e u t i t l a u w I m m ~ w p a o c ' k n j m o g m w a a p b 4 a t g l j - \ u ~ q ~ ' i 6 k , , 1 w . 1 m t ! " 1 t a ' m i a . k i . c a µ k ' k i u u p i ~ t 'i u w '{ g a a i s 1 h i m h n h w e m e 6 a ( h m t r a t u m k ta a m e m g t a g e r a i a c l m i a l r n u u " ( i 2 h c f 2 i a a a ) n l } a c j u . a h f l k l i o t t ? ' h t u a p n p a d u a i . J a s c J i a ru t n g i 1 t a h h r h a a 4 n 1 t 1 m p e j a a t a l r n q ' ~ k i k k h l u a µ i A 6 l w w c a g a c i a ( r z u h sd s i h ) . d a t b o o f w ' t a t m y u g a a a h a ' i h g h m p e a A w h h a a y q i r a u a s m t 6 q l a c t m i a t A w l o f a i k ' l i t a a f r c l c i t a n s u r a i t k u c i a a 6 . a ~ i t 9 g u ' m a lA b a a
{ m l9 a ) la la p p u .a ik ik tu tw a a i . i u r a 4 t " A a m i a. a d fi u la i p t u 8 i:k m \ a si m m a k w g w it a u ' g ah· k n k t~a . ~ 1 . ~ a n .n : a a w d g a a p h a ~ u 1t ~ s ~ - m •t a i. k h e g d i t • u s m -hn r e g kk a a h s u d i a w h h m el a l : \ t t a i u r . a ( i f 4 f ) ~ n h i a p li n t t a g a k h a r k o u n i m a . t u i g k a u i i i w r u p i d h . a c i h n u i m ru it i h m d a u n s a k d a a m h at s im ha n t 7 ~ m m i a g s a p h a k J) u .u i i m w sa ea il . k a a ~ ra j k a a i m ta a ~ s ,i ~ m Ie 1 m tu a i a d i ah •
mre a.su1w, e ma sam1t s1m ('zo) " kha ma samit gah karo6 kanham law ka.ro6 law ja lagaw tuai u cut ba.peli law qak ra 11 rau gah pa tuai heii tma'' nimit
al
T
A
h
ka
f
n h
It
a n.
• . •
2 o
ri
·
g . baa tat1
·
, ,a.
(05) gah lew gfii na. thaw na ga-uai phket ta' gab tuai n na yat bket btan gab pii gfii law ra • huit
' No: i~ :m~;ords (to ra " inclusive) oeeur only in B. l A apparently has dak,.
e . 1 6 A ,;a.. a A 1dd1 I n, ~ The three preceding words are clearly superfluous8
' A &ru#, a A khruin. e.For ct1'1'i'I.
I

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. III " ~PART II J MON INSCRIPTIONS
,.. a6. p •1"1 • • •'fi' •.. • • • .• • • • • • • • • • . •. • • • • • • • • • • 30. [w] 1 (man) 1 mway buin fikan • tuy 1 [yam p]q[ay] .••••••• ~ •
( . ) . ma pen tau na (g)ara(y) 1 na pna[il na y]at p[l]a[~] da~or ... [g]ah tun [Ie]r n [g]am-I c-aii [t]uy phek l[w]op nwomm .. tau
11
sna da[Jtu]t Iar [m ail]al;t nim[i]t tu[y] tuy hen [k]u1w t[1]la pc;la[y] th[a]n ma ranu[k] danqa[n 8 g]al} tu[y 11 k]ui[w' dan]a[y]
11 11
(cat 6 Jtat) [may tau ra n tu]y hen mn[ih]
[puiy ta' skay ni]n:ri[t ra uit tma]' daca-
11 11
31. (ma) 1 dr[e]p to[k] kui[m] lor mnih ma gok k~[eh kui]m lar • kuiw
1
[ m ] I • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • . • • • • • • • d[r]ep bui[k] krau gab ku nab ma mati mwoy [te]' tun 11 [d]apuin
. ma s[k]ay [sk]ay tla ga[h tuy 11 tila p]uiy ta' lw[op p]c;la[y ru]n taya 6 pgay gamakhet 1 [w]o' [ler ha] mway [ra a] da[pui]n c-til
dw[or] s[i]m [t]e' _a u kajo['] pangal:i 4 [h]atthapal) tuy 11 [ti]la ma slop [p]rJay ga·
[pui]y [to'] d[ma]n 6 [t]au ra _11 11 111 32. makhet wo' ler ha mwoy ra u p(u)iy cJi(k] man mwoy [b]uin fika[n 8
s]an ra n rau gah [fi]al} ma [p]la[n] tlu(ti] gal:i gah cui{p) 9 tuy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .
~s. [h)en [ma] kuiw t[ilja pui[y] t[a' s]am[mu]t (sim rWOO) [kha
ff I II
ma[il]al} gamakhet [g]ah mni[h to ]k ku[i]m Iar fiat). ma gok cin
11 tila] p[uiy to]' ma [p]aiJ[wo]-
kuim lar nal:i ma qok k[~]e[h kuim 'lar] 8 [d]atau ca[l]o' [a]
11
33· [t] kammawaca [tu]n [l]e[r] n [h]et [ma m]i[k k]u[iw] akkharawisuddhi
(pa·)[uit tuy] jnor
11 da[h g]ah n naQ lta he[n] ma kuiw paqwo[t m]wa[y m]way w'-
1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (p)antjuk 10 dapa[h w]a [tuy] hefn] si[m gah dah] ma [sathmut tuy
[ti] 11 da(p )uiw 7 a[k]ra a[k]ra ga[h cut a] tuy 11 yata 8 gam·i c-ati ra gal)] tu[y 1 pham k]I[o' twin twuik 11 '* dapuiw]
ma t[w]ak tar[au h]et ma ha m[ik k]uiw [l]w[op] p<Ja[y taw]ui[w 34. [k]ar[h]a a kanu sail ta gah [pi] leh hen ma kuiw tuik 1 [p]i leh
gamakhet] gab u [kui]- [h]e[n] ma kuiw ho dra 11 11 sim [ma] sarhmut [t]uy wo1 gab 1
[t]ila puiy to' ma a t[k]o' 1~ Singh[ui]r [ma ~ket upasampada 13
pgay udakuk]kh[epas]i[m a ma nab cir]e. .
1 The g looks like w, and the y might be h.
I Conjecturally restored.
s There seems to have been ·an original flaw between the t and the '. l Conjecturally restored. i Error for ldl..an,.
4 As this .4 is in the full form, it is probably not to be read tl. 3 Written aanrfan> but certainly meant for dantlan. 4 Looks like btiw.
5 The anusvtira is a little doubtful, but it is needed here. 5 This word seems to have been subsequently altered by some intentional disfigurement.
e There is a· small space here with ·faint marks on it which might be the remains of nu or na, 8 Presumably an error for yata. 7 Between Ith and' t there is an original ffaw.
but are probably merely accidental. s Error for knan> as in 1. 30.
7 The doubtful letter may be b or .e ven w. 9 Looks like cuf.m 1 but the mark in it i" probably accldcnta.J,.
a· Cf. B 49, D 47, 48. 10 Conceivably, thou'{h improbably the initial may be b. n The u is doubtful.
1
li The original appears to have ttoJ. IS Co,nceivabiy •sairmp•.
ma reh seh kyak 11, jma(26)p jmap tma' nimit gah kuim 1 na kquil\ jnow dhup sl\au nu6 klah tarau huit ha mik kuiw top pcJai tawuiw gamakhet gah (30) bwai ma buin 1cfian tuai yam pc:lai
bapen tau na garai na pnan 11 na yat plali l skaw sna daput law mnal} nimit tuai he6 • kuiw tila tawuiw gamakhet gah tun lew gamr s--i6 phek nwam tau pqai than ranuk datan gall tuai ,, kuiw
ta' skai nimit ra • uit jmap tma' 8 pi 2 lapuh til::t ta.' skai tuai bcuip tma' (~7) ma skai kla te' tuai gliai dnaai cam pat mwai tau ra mnih {31) ma drep tuik kuim law " mnih ma cluik ci6 khyeh kuim
11 ti!a ta' }op a pqai tawuiw dow sim te' 11 gaja' pafaQ hattapaQ tuai tila daman tau ra II kha gaa Jaw • kuiw drep bak krau gal} ku tfa}) ma ma6: mwai te' tun 1t gamt ta.ya p4a.i gamakhet wwa1 ha
l a m e t w u a in q s r u g a i a k k m c d a i a 6 k r h i k 6 e u t i a m m t u a la a k w i a I r I f o f p n f h i a a l Q a m w · m k t a u a a , q u i u g i s k a a ( h : k a h 9 m y )n i e l a h { d l a k p a ( u z im 8 iw ) J m a aw k n r a a l II i a d g k a a r t m a a u a c k u h C t e a t l a o ' g tu a a i h j i l ' i 1 t 1 m t y n u a i a h t i a t j g n u a o ik m w h k r i a u m s i - m a 3 A l a t m w an a 1 1 k tw n b a o a t k n l m k m i w i a a a n i p h s r a a a n q o " r ( a 3 g 3 a • ) m t r i a k s u a -a m a g \ m a m h a w a n a a l t o lt p g p a p h l c . l J n a i t g a a g n b a , ( l ~ g e 2 w a ) h m a '* k c h u h e i u t t i : l t $ t w u s w a m i a " i b k l e e d k w u 1 i : h w a m a a k m k k w h u a a i i w r a r w t a il i a s J u t t d a p d ' u h i s i a a i m d a d i h i t k : f r l o a m 6 b a u A p k i a m h la w e l a \ tf i i • a b m u t i a n a 1
kuiw phaqot mwai mwai 1 phaqot 7 wa tuai hell • sim gah ma samit tuai ra ga,tJ tuai • pham s
l A Za'h. klew twiA twuik dapuiw (34) karl katlu sail ta) gah 3 leh 'he6 ma kuiw tuik 11 pi leh heA ma kuiw
t 8 pi might be read gapl; but the text on the stones shows that 8 must be read, though ;1 ho dra • shn ma samit tuai gah " ti1a ta' ma a taka' Silghuiw • me duA .upasampada p4a;i
remains unexplained. ,
s Error for ray. .t l Error for cuip. t A om.lts tt huif,.
5
.
'

•
MON INSCRIPTIONS
EPlGR.APHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. \11
5. n p~ay K9.lya\liga[n g]ah ma sarhmut bet dab uiw da ci
3 11 11 H
[K~l]yaJJ.isi[m] fia~ kui[~] _[yam]~ ta~
gflb [t]uy n tima lar n n.?a
nfi ti[l]a sail da [t]a' · wo[' ma cu1p . tlun) n[ u tk]o[ Sm]gh[u]ir (Fragments a and 6.)
[kuim] ra [tla ha] (g)ata(p) 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36. sa(rh)m[u]t s[i]m wo' [kuim l]er I tilfl. puiy sati to' [t]u[y 11 m]a cum I. . . . . ' . .
• • {r~u) wo' tila [nab]
da[h] tau ga:Q.[i g]a:Q.acariya n lail(n)uiw ga[h 11 h]e[t ma sgik ··············-·,·-···
....
mlik 2 s]asa[na ·s]an da[h uiw] <la [ci] 11 upa[sampada tuy ma dget
1
tau pqay puiy gah ma dah tau]
11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37. [a]s [ p t a u u n [ ] i k y y a 1 w 1 g [ o a m ' h 3 a 11 d d ] h ] u u a [ i t l i g r a k a p e il t 4 g u [ u p w p a o s a a ] s r m a r h p h e a m f d t p a a r a d n a u ] 11 r 11 a tk p o q fi ' a i y Si [ j [ r a n a r g u e h il u g i a r t h il a g g a ] [ h a p l : u i 1 1 ] ] i [ y t k u u y t iw a' u ~- .. • • • • • • • . . . . . ( a . ] c .. a .. . ri y . a . . . .. n . ( . ii ) . . . ,• . " . ' · . - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
11
ma gluin 5 ku Ieh hen tlun ptim tau tila fi]al:i [Ramadhipati ra] 6
11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
l The g looks something like b, and the p like m. . . . . ... .... . ."'
~ Conceivably $t/uik mluik, but no u's are 'visible. . . . ..•. . . [r . m . ] . l .1 . p q . a . y . u . d a . k . u [ . k ] . k . h e . (p .a s . i m . ) . . . ..
s Or go' P
4 Looks like tet but must be m~ant for ket. • ••
5 The g looks lik~ m, but in view .of the context tb.~re can be little doubt that gluin is right.
e. Th~ ra is in the m~rgin, betvveen th.e doubl~ Iha~~~ •
1 About twenty lines appear to be lost bet~e~n this. and tqe pr~c~dfng piece.. The dots at the
ends o..f . the lines are roughly estimated. Fragment a goes down to I. 18. Fragment b begins at the
udaktlkkhepasim ma flall 1 cire<35)a\ pqai Kalya9iga6 gab ma samit huit uiw d;i ci 11 Kalyatiisim beginning of J, 16. See the manuscript version. · ·
gall tuai tila fiall kuiw Jaw ymq r~ " n'fi tpa pa taiii tila ~aA ta' ww~' ma. cuip klua\ nd taka'
Sia\ghuiw ·k uim ra 1 kla ha gatap (36). samit sim wwa' kuim Jew tila saA ta' ma cuin ·dab tau ga9i 2 .
ga~acariya a I6uiw gab 11 huit ma squik nlluik sasna san dah uiw da ci • upasampada ma daget tau
puiai 4 pui:J.i gwa' gah dah tau (37) asanka 5 gah ha gap gaw heA ra 11 pqai jaren tila ta' ma dui tna t~' _w ;va' ma ·· cau, n?. Sit\ghuhv t~'. wwa' t~n lent. ~a qui~ caq caq l 9ith ,,. &:Jah piw das rci• 111 .Pa
rat upasampada nu taka' Si!ighuiw gah !I kuiw puiai gwa' dun upasampada fii ra 11 rau gah ga.lt uppa1haa1 Jew ha gwa ~Um tf ma dab UlW pa fiat\ pu.iat spa tUal tila pu~i 'a6 ta' WW<\i ma dab
tuai n ma gluia\ ~u leh pel\ klu6 pa tim 'taia fia!) Ramadhippati 6 ra Jl tila fial} lew rau wwa' huim tncr;v u~asam~a~a. fial\ Siligh~iw ma th,uik dab upajhaai fiaQ gab puiai ma ~8'<>' ket ra~ tial ma
pla.n ku .tila ta' tun " dnaai tila ma nwam tau saddha ma mik dui'i 1.Jpasampada jarea\ tila ta' ma sga ku1w upa1haa1 iial} gamlut.6. ma sgo duA tnow upasampada rut~ Siilghuiw WW-ii' ro • rau ga~ tna
duta upasarnpada iia1) Siilghuiw gah duA kuim ra 11 fial) ma ha mwa.i Im saddha ha mik duJ\ fiati khyap tuai p .. ow kuiw a l'ii sman glaai danaai mwa:i ta " kha gah tr!A. pulai P:ar~kamablbqs!mi
upasarnpada fia:ti Singhuiw dama6 · kuim ra 11 nal) ma mik sgo' du6 upasampada tnow fia{l Si6ghuiw gah rau ~a' kluil pa tim tila fia.{l • tna sd rnwai gah ymu tila Mhasuwa42,palobhana ·.Jab· i y,;tAah •
gab ma • lap~ dd gall tuai · 11 ha. gwa' si dadaw 7 1J1 tila ta' ma ha mik tnow upasampada fial.t tTia ma pra1 gab mha na},l ma du6 upasampada na~ tnow Si6ghuiw he6 " ptiguiw ma cuiri. dab tau'
Sidighuiw gah duA heil ra gal) tuai 11 ai qik hwn' gwa' ran skuit 11 adhipaai sla pat winai ma cuin latji .k_ukkuccaka sikkh.igima 1 arailaka appic;ha • 1antu~ha • sallo • dhutaflgara hell ga~ twd •
~h ~au ma Plik kyak trai gah heA tila. ai ta' khyap ket kuiw bui n ra " upasampada ma cap tau P~. tp.n ~I~ _fi~O 'h~ ph trla ffa{l p·P\V ku~w i niman rJµl tih~ gab ra 1 lchi tila p.qiai ma ldu6
kuiw fila ai ta' asaJ\ka a dah tau P.d.ai cuit ma o " tlla ta' pd ket tnow 10 upasampada fia)) SiJ\ghuiw c~!I> f~r~l\ Pl~ fi3,~ ~~~ tt (I·J t) tau wwa1 ttl.a jalt JW4n ra 1 tJla ai, ma i taka7 SiAghuiw ma
ra. 11 " upasampada ma cap tau kuiw 1.1 tila ai t~' s-alt tau heA dah ma o tt asanka12 ha mwai ra dah du~ *p-~a,.rppaQ;i ~~It " mfl pq~i sirit ~iW, a~ m~ if·qj ~a ci guiin 11 iia.b gab ma pa
pcJai 1;:uit mha " trla ta' dmal\ kuim ra " rau gah tila fia:P Ramadhippati huim plan rn ku tila sail ta' up,p~jh~l:l~ ' f1tb fith ma pa (a) a~a'.riy~ 1f na ti1f. m' pufa ;1.puamp4.da ~ Siighuiw gab
gamlu.ii\ ra 11 gata nd gah rau wwa' tila fia{l Ramadhippati khya.p t un 11 tfla sail ta' ma dah • l~muh mw~j ci J:aq fO • ra.u gah til~ fi~ ~fQan ra • rau wwa' tt1a sah plan. tun •
g~~a~ariya Ji\uiw nwam pa.mi~ mi~ _gwa' upasampada flaJ;i Singhuiw gall yahh " sabhau H sla p~t kl,1 t~~ ~a¥ puiai ma ~µ6. l·H~a~~mp~d~ (lae SiAgb~i(3)w mh.i t pciai udakukkhepuim mal
'WJna1 ma. gaQ tun .Jew pubbaJa ku1m Jew 11 upasampa.da 15 kuim lew " uppajhaai heii ma dab tnam 1 ~Q C~fr~ l;,iw E'WTi R.~~ntbJJ"'l!ta.sszv:'11 i;imnok '* gah h~~ " gu.4~ ;u • 0 tila pui.ai Wap\\arakkha;
'
1 Orig. inserts pjai here. 2 A Q'a11hi. s A ganef acarih<t. l Pr9babl~ er;?r fQr c~ath, ?t wq.h.
7 ~. J E ' i h :rc is :> r ~ h fo o r u l c d b l b ~ da 1 / ( l 1 l . a l. · 6 ~ O A ri 1 g a . n k h a a . s sasair,ka. 6 9 A Er r m or h a f . o r Rilm(#hippati • dJ1lut 2 : T ng h ~ e d h e a q r u o 1 v a a p le P n _ p ip c i l n io t s h a e n t P u ~ U h h o ~ e s x a t ll f e o k r h t l h l e a j B / a I s s * t i ? e g k ~ iu f c r . o c m .d , o h ~ si r U e ' I i J . W ~ . d ki ~ lm u o t a 6 ~ j c a v t a to , p in a ct fl u 6 .s a l l v o ~ : it . T ,s ' f . W4 .,; $ ' 1
1 JO a B A · b o a m la it i s i. tno · w, I 14 l F A Q r i fu ;p . aiia · h • saMau A hs ymu 1 H I ,; O .vh ri g s . ta 1 h 1 a .. s atada. ~ f O n r 1 f g ~ . i h t a ~ s ~ ' m { i ' m f . j 3f!,.:tan~~~!!j~tjtr,::~!!"~~:ftfn; ..1 : · A nk e ltm . ol: . ·
1 6 Ori~. h,4' ufa111mpa44.
r
.
'

"PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 69
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 111
68 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ma cau nii [Si]nghu[i]r ler [1 ti]la [fi.]al;t [k]ui[w n]iman plop p4*y
4· • • . •. • . • . • . • . . . . . . • '0 • • • • tila puiy Ra(hulabhaddhathe) 1 . . . . . K . al y . a . v . . is [ . im . . ra . i. t . i] I . a . p . [u . iy . S . u . ]w . a . l} . J} . a( . so . b h . a . na .m . a h . a . th e.) . 1 .• .• ••••
. . . . . . . . . . u . p . a [ . j ] . jh ay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11. h r[au] wwo' [tila] fial) huim [pl]an ku san [ma] cau ntl Singhuir
1 • · • • •.., • • . . . . . [gamlui]it ra r [ti]la puiy sari gamluixi w[oJ' gah ' nw •••••••
5· . •••• • •. • • •. •. • • • . • • • "' • • . • • • • . • • ••
~ ~. ~ ·~
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
. • . ~ • : •• (p . la . n ) . k . [ u . ] . t . il a . n . a . b . . l l. t . ~l . a [ . f i . ]a . b. .r . m . ii l . . • . • •. . . . . . . . • •••••
. . .
u. [kfia k]u[i]w upasampada ra kha gah rau ww[o' tiJla puiy srui.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ll
Singhuir [to]' gamluin huim plan tun tila • • • • • • • • • • • • ..
' 6 . . . .• . · . du . n . . [u . pa sa . ]m . [ . p a . ] d . a . S . [ . in . gh . ] ~ u . [ i . ] ' r . g . a . [h . . g 0 . ] l • . u i • . n • . s • . a n • . • . • • • • • • • • • • • • . . . . . . . .. . . . -. . . . . .. . . . . 1 . . .. . .... • ~ • (a•) I
. . . . . . . ~. . 13. [ ci] are[ ft] tuy tila puiy to' fia~ tko' Singhuir ma [ku]iw upasa[mpada
........ . . . . . . . . . . ••• ~ • • • • • • • • • • • . . • . . • [r] . k u . . p u . ] i . y . [ . g . ab . ] . r mahar[a](j) 8 ... . • . • . . • . • . • . . . . . • . • . • .. . . • • .. • .. .. • .. • •
7. • . ' .
~ . ~ . s . a . sa . n a . . tu . y 1 . t [ . i l . a . p . u iy . ]. k . a . jo . ' 9 . . ( k)wom . 8 . . . . ... • • 14. fial;t tko' Singhuir [t]uy ma sk[u]iw upasampada ku puiy gah [r]
-
8. ·· u ~ . • (1) • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • (tu)y 4 kuiw la[n . ]g . a . t . p u . i y . . [s . a d . . g ] . a m . l . u i . n . m . a . t . [a . u . p . < j . ]a . y . [ . tk . o ' . ] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
akhwoii ku, tila ijal) ra 1 1 akha ma sarhmut (sim)' ••••..
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . I •" 15. [ya]t ba[tan tl]a tu[y] t kuiw tau pqay gihilinga. r kha ma tau pcJay
gi[hil]in[ga gah tu]n ler • • • • .. • • • • • • •
9. fia h. S • t . u :. g h u [ . 1 r ] • • • • • • • • • • • • • • (fi)ah. ma lwon tuy ,,ga[h] I
tluii cuip t[il]a [iia]b ra .I t . il . a . f i . al :i • • • . • . • • . • . •. • . • . . • . • .• . • . • . • • •
1 Restored on the basis of the Pili version •
• • • • • • • • • • • 0 .i Conjectural restoration. .
1 Restored from the Pali version. a Or possibly the final may be t, a.c; in L. M.
s There is a small circle over the o, but I can_not imagine what function an anu$Vtira could
perform there. Probably it is an error of the engra.ver's.
s The initial of the next word was apparently either u or n.
ta(to)' ma cau n'fl SiAghuiw lew tUa fiaQ kuiw nima.n plop pqai K.aly.!l}Tsim ra. • tfla the Suw.a~\l&"'
4 Conjectural restoration. sobha~a ma spa upajhaai ga.h lew tila :fiab kuiw niman rai pqai Kalyi\lisim ra • kha gat11)b
rau wwa' tfla fiat1 huim plan ku saA m:i cau nfi !5iA~hui:w ga.rnluiA ra " ti1a sai gamlui.6 wwa"
sa6gharaja jnok te' hell ma pa (4) uppajhaai 111 tila puiai Rahulathe ma dab saiagharaja lmuh ma pa gab nwam pamik kuiw ma mik duA upasampada tnow flaO, Siiighuiw galJ ci • tila ai ta) (H)
cariya • was l ai nd II ma duA upasampada fial.i Siit,{huiw gah " dah pa coh tarau wah ra 3 • rau gah kfia kuiw upasarnpada gwa• ra 11 kba gnh tnu wwa' tila puiai sa6 S16ghuiw gamlui6 huim plan
tila puiai sah (5) plan 4 " ku tIIa fiaJ;,i tila iial) miia lahuim tila tuai mip cuit pflmah san dah tuai tila tun *' tna na(l p..ow kuiw a duA ra6 upasnmpada ila9 Singhuiw ra gatt tuai tr puiai i du6
fiab kUiW nirtlan tila puiai ra I saa\ tt\' ma nwam 5 kuiW Saddhama}a H pamik 6 (6) upasampada fia{l raAI ra n t1 na6 a(13)ci :treA tila ta' natl taka, Sif&shuiw ma kuiw upasampada. ltu puiai
Sitcrhuiw gluiia san uiw da ci 11 tila ai mik kuiw upajhaai tuai mik kuiw fiaJ;,i gwa' dull upasampada gab n ·mahiraj i kum ku kuiw tila. sf!il ta' ga.mtm6 paA mhi4 ~i " kiia tila tai (t4} fiaQ taka'
sui; 7 11 tila ai mwai kuiw s datuai mramo(7)w sasna ra " tila ai gaja' kom 9 fii n rau gah gall Sill,ghuiw ma skuiw upasampada ku puiai gah salt wwa.> ti'la ta' pa. huim " kila puiai sa.6 gamluii
tuai tila fia\l niman ra n tila puiai tun Jew n gabut sasna ro6 ci 11~ puiai gaj a' san ra gall (8) tuai ma tau pqai taka' Siiighuiw "11a kuiw upa.s.ampada Jcu ffaQ. ma kln4 nft jam6oa1 mhi ku. A~ ma
kuiw akhoA ku tila fia.\l ra tt akha ma smut sim gah tuai 11 tila puiai ga~li ga~acariyya gamlui6 pa sik wwa' tuai ma kuiw ro6 • pasak ro tt kuiw ( J 5) yit btaA kla tuai k:uiw tau: pqa.i g:t'bibh.a1;1
mnum p'a:mik duia upasampada (9) fialJ S16~huiw ma huim kuim law 11 ku tila fiaJ.i ma Ion tuai gab 10 kli n s kha ma tau pqai gihiliA gah tun lew tt ai gihi ta gatt tuai pa waclb heda 4 painiJc Aal>
• k!u6 cuip tila na:ti ra " tila fialJ kom ku kuiw tila sa6 ta' garnluiia ceh a Kalyanisim ra II tila sat
1 A gah 2 A omits nil. s A gah. 4 B palan. l A omits ,-an.
Ii A mn~m. 6 For 11 pamik A has pami. 7 A soh. 8 For kui'l1J A has hen !uim. 8 A omits •·
9 A adds ku. IO A 1'4,
I

~ ~ PART II J M6N INSCRIPTIONS
EPIGRAPHI.A: BIRMANICA [VOL. 111
23~ da[IJ. p]a (bacibheda) 1 [s]ak gah tuy ti[l]a puiy [t]o' kuiw sanEg]a
l i
16. . [tun u pa I s je a [ [ r m ] p { ] 1 a 1} d i a • m a • • [ g] • a l • ; t ~ [ m . a • r · . [ c h ]a a d ] aQ se n k le t ' g s i a h b il h in a ( u g aJ t uy [ma] duti . p[ . l] a . n . n. g . a m . . -i . p . u i . [y . t . ]u . y . n . k . u i . w . [ s . a r . ] a . ( : . Q . . a g . a m . a . n . a ) . 8 .. .. ....... .
. . . . . .
,• ·"'I ...
• • • • • • • • • • • •. • • • • • • • • 0 • • • • • • 24: r tila puiy [t]or ma] kuiw up]asa[mp]ada kuiw puiy rwon a s rau
• (u]•
17; pasampad II a rwmi [1 r] • . '-. (t)[i](la ey to') 9 mik upasampada g . a . h . ti . [ l] . a . p . u i . y . t . [o . ]' . m . a . c . a . u . n f . i . S . it i . g h . u . ir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. ~ •••••
ra mi[k} . • •••• · •.•••••.•.••
. .• . . (t ) . [ i . ]( . la . ) . . [e . y . t o . '] . . . . . . . . . . . ..•. [sa]- a 25 .. fiaQ. gam[l]uin kuim [h]et saddha gab. t[u]y 1 puiy m[ik] duft upasam·
. ·• pada t[n]or fial). Siiighuir ra ci 1 atui[ti] acinna .............. .
18. ma:Q . . i . t . u y . . • . p uiy ma sgo' [k]uiw u[pasa]m[pada] •• ~ ••••• . . . . . •••• ·• ........................... [Sin]- 4
. . . . . . . . . . . • . • . • . • . • . • . . 1 . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • 26. [gh]ui[r g]amlui[ti] kw<>[m k]u tila puiy to' sa[n] ga[mluiti] sama[h]S
- . saman tuy hen 1 1 pa tarn nu ttiay can dacit bra[mok] 6 • • • ....
19. {o' [s]addha gab tu[y] (•) sduti ket [u]pasampada ra •· p~ay [k]a ma . • . . • • • • . • • . • .. • .. • . • • .. • • .. .. • • • • • • • • • [ka]-•
{ . t . ra . k ) . 8 . • . • •. •. • . • . . • .. ... .. . . . . . • . • • . •. •. . • . • • . • . .• .• .. .. . . . .. . . .. ·• 27. [j]o' dmati [t]uy r atuin acinna fial:i [S]i[ii]ghuir gamluin ma pa gah
h[ eft] l tiJa pUi[y] to' pa tUJ I [pa t]am nfi ti(la) .... • • • • ., • •
20. k rwon ~ upasampaG.a . tami wwo' gah 1 puiy ha go' ba[k] sga . b . . t . u y . " . • • • • • • • • • .. • .. • • • .. .. • ........... [Suwa\11}.a] ..
.(t ).u . ... .. .. .. . . . . . .. .. . . . • .. • . • . • .• . • . • . • . • . • .• . • . · .• .· .• • • • • • 28. s[o]bhanamahathe 1 damli tuy 1 uit ti[l]a puiy [to]' ma cau nn
Siftghuir gamluin ma pa tam tu 8 tila puiy S[irisJan(ghabodhi-
1
21. [d]un [ujpasampada ta[m]i ra [c]i r atuiti .w a[hj tarn! !two' ra smik sami) 9 • • • • • • • .. • • • • • " • • • • ... • • • • • • • • • • • [ upa}- lO
kuiw ruih cuih c,uip (bnat) . . . . • . . . . . • . • • . • . • . • • .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 This (or possibly pa bacci°) appears to be the reading.
.. ..
' - ' .-~ . ) " ~ ' , ' ' , " J • ' ,.,, 2 There is excessive space here, probably due to an original flaw.
22. sail [fi]ab tko' [Sin]ghuir [t]o' huirh plan [klu puiy hi[y 11 11] uit puiy a Ccmj~cturally restored by comparison with the Pali version.
4 Conjecturally restored.
f . ta . l) . . '[ g . ]am . l . ui . n . m . a . . ( d . ) . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . . . • . • . • • • • • • • • • • . 5 The final looks like t.
•' e Restored. The month was Margasir~a.
7 Restored, so far as the part of the name at the end of the lut tine is concerned from the
1
1 These words are the beginning of fragment h, which overlaps fragment a here. Pili version. The first l1alf of the o must have been written at the end of I. 27.
!a Conjecturally restored. a Very doubtful, except the '>'. 8 Error for ku.
It Restored on the basis of the passage in the Piili version corresponding with F 5. The Pili
does not actually give the name here. 10 Restored.
ra II ffia ktiiw pa wacibheda 1 gwa' (16) tun Jew II huit S·a6 ha $( 6 sahhau ma. du6 upasam•
p tu & a d i a ff m iii ga k lj u iw m h ~ a ( 1' c ] a ) O p .a a ' s 1 a mp k : le id ' a gi r h o i 6 li 6 1 g 1 a la t m ua u i h k ti u l i a w a p i a t 2 a s ' a m m~ ik a 9i du 6 k la u p p a q s a a i m d p a a d d a a h g s a ~ ll m m r a a 9 i • ga 11 h m ta i u k p p u q~ 1 i a1 . g t i u h a i 1 ~ i k 6 u g~ tw g a s ~ a . 1 t a tu ~a a g i a 1 m 1 a p n u a i a s ~ 1 k (2 k 3 h ) a p da a l d l a p k a u w a p c m ~b a ~ t 1e tu da a t .2 b s a a d k a h g a g h a t m ua h i i 1 s 1 a t m il m a a t 9 a i ' k ku u i w p u s i 6 ai a tu p a la i n h e 11 l g \ a (~ n 4 i ) i
. ~ P a u f . t i ii t t m ila a f sg r o a ' ~ k a u h iw t na u pa II s a t m au p ad p a q ai r o6 g ah " i li p A u g i a a . i fu g a ih i. i gw ra a ' s g al g l am tu h a i i m da a d m ah i k 4 ku sa iw (1 8 ti ) m m m 11 a 5 9 i ti k la t a t a' t u p a a i t g i a la ~ t t a il ' a /r t :a a ' . s m ku a iw d a u !1 p a g s a a 9 m a p ca a r d i a y a k u ga m pu lu i i a A i r r o a 6 u 1 w 1 w ra a u ' : g g af a } h t t u f n ia n t a u ' it m p a u i c a a i u ( a n 5 u ) S fi in a~ g h g u a ir m g lu a. i m l\ lu s i a 6 d r d a h a 11 J d e a h h l
~~cibheda e_ wwa' tun Jew lamah gab tila {19) ta' saddha dah tuai dutJ upasampada ra n • pqai
i:ala gah krau amit pawa aca pajh~ai twa}J ganaJ;,l ma byi plut gah cuit gata)J plan a tuai w tua1 n ~u-1a1 ma .m 1k spa upa$amp_:ida tnow na{l Si6ghuiw ra ci • atuiA aci~9a na,tl Siiighuiw gamlub\
~ t ~ ~ ~ i t 2 i p i 1 l ~ . ' a i i ) s a w d II m l a i p h ~ p u . a i t d u a a a p r i e a m m t s n a a a m m t m e p ' ~ i t a k k e a , ' _ , u k p i m u u t i a w i 7 a m j m p i m a a r a a s w r b u a a c i c ( i h i ~ b it o h g ) e a a k d f h u a r . m i o i 8 l i l a s w a II p k a u u h i p a g a i a t s a h h a m a m r i o p m lA a r i a d k " a 1 1 k r a u t s a u i m w m i i g k d a a w h k b w u t i i a l w i1 l , ' a t p i r l t u u a a i i h a ' t i a ( c ' 2 u h ~ s i ) a w a d f g ia c d w } u h J a i a p ' t k b g b a a a n ' k h a t S g d i a a a 6 Q y h g u h t k t u u t i i a a w g i i a l . I U ) u I . d g K l a ~ O a c ~ m t i u t . p 2 u m ~ k r a u a a t ~ n ~ _ t m s o i p J n k a a a g S i d t ~ a a u a f k i l ) m r r t a e a S , ~ : " k t a i g r a s ~ a m h u l u u _ J 1 r l w g w J l ~ ~ g h g a a 1l t m h tl s a l m u . h i e . t A t k ~ a ' . n 11 p g ; a a a l { u l k u ~ : r i a a p .u . a n g s s a a r m b a t u b p h a i g e d a t 6 a i h l t a g i t l a i a l b f . a i a p { s s l u m a i 6 a a R l h m a t m s a a m ' a ~ d a p a n h a u i p t t u u n p a a f a . i \ i t i h S u g e 1 6 a p 6 ( a ( : 1 2 i 1 7 6 t n a ) ) j f m g a t h ' b u n a d i f w t t a a m t m i g t a a a l t m J p A t u l u i u l a a i . l i ' i
hiifm pfaf1 ku ptiiai ra 1.i Uit p1iiai 6all gamJuiii ma a dua\ Upasampada wwa' gab II puiai 9 datau tnahasam18 Dhatnmak1tt1 gah ro6 n upaJh~a1 ku tila the SuwaQ\la(28)sobhanamahathe damhlk4 tuai
n uit tila ta.' ma cau nu Siilghuiw gamITJi6 u pa tam ku tila puiai Sirisa6ghahodhisimi ph alhiai
1 A wabheda, B wilclbh1da,. 2 A inserts gamb1. s A wwa'.
4 A bd~h. , • • 5 a omits tim '· 6 Oritf. has waci0 • i A gihilinggal;., B gahf."0 2 Orig. has 11Jaci"1). s A mah4chapi. • B tnam'hii,.
7 B omits t1 kuim. 8 B wacibheda, A wacibhedabheda. 9 A ptjai.
r
I

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III 1 PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 73
,..29. sampada [tan]ay [t]aitay gah tila [fi]al) [Rama]dhipati kajo' 35· gotl [k]uiw da[n n]i n [pasada] r cuit' [1e]w kuiw pu[iy] g(.o']
1 • 1
dman 1 r dan pun <Jak a.hara paccay r sablu sla [1] ••••••••• ga[t)u[i]w b[d]ah fl.i n rau [gJah 11 [ti]Ia fial) [gar]ail pti[m sail
Ii' ' g]amluin (•) • • ~ •• ~ • ~ • • • • ., • • ... ~ • • • • • • • •· • •· • ;' ~
• • • • • • • • •••• '• ••••••, • • • • • .. • ..... 9' • • .....
30. c[akh]i ka[yat] tu[y] r ma man cut lik [c]aq[won g]ah lew tila naQ.
36. s[u]im kuiw aram par[i]wa ' [kw]om [k]u amacca [s]enapa[t]i gamluin
. pr . en . . la w . . r . la . [- . i] . t .la - . i [ . t) . m .a . . p a . .ti . p a . [ s . a m . p . a da] •••••••••••• hen cui[h a] tuy • lah da[k]ar [sw]ak san Q[a] klam ~urau [cw]oh
\
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • * • • • • •
31. law 1 tila [fi]al:i prefl law • kba tnay ma sa[w a g]ah • Is]min ti[la
37. kha ga[b] tila [s]an, \la klam [tu]rau [c]woh gab r cu[ip] tluli tuy
. ca . k h . ] . i . ka . y . a[ . t] .I . p . n a . ft c . [g . ]a . u . p . [r . e] . ft . la . [w . ] .. t . u y . .t . ti l . a . f . ia b . . • . • • • • • [pa] upuh ra r ra-it ti[l]a puiy tot ma pa upuh tuy gah t\
~ ~ [piIJ.qapat] • • . • • • .. • . . .. .. .. . . .. . • .. • • • • • • • (ma kalt
3~. [a]ca guin r ma dun upasa[m]pada tuy ga[h] (11) [<lab \>]a klarh (pan mwo)· 8
cw]oh sun ra n [n] kha ga[b] t[i)la [fi]ab. kuiw garan ptim ••
38. y [p]raka 1 qa[k] ya[maka P] ta[r)uip tila puiy [t]o' tuy [h)en ~ • tila
• • • • • .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 0 •.• puiy mwoy mwoy hen r yat s ................... .
33. ' [h]e(ti r] tila puiy t[o'] ma dun [up]asampada tami [gab] ~ ba • • . • • • (l}un pana )· 8
kla[m] P<l:n c[w]oh [s]u[n 11] t[il]a puiy t[o)' ma cau nu Singhuir 39. [k] sat n [m]e[k] su[t] ,. r p[n]ik cakkho 11 tqo[n] 11 paben ' [p ]aq§.k •
(l)e(r) ................................... .
.
d a
.
k
.
o r
.
m. o
.
r n
.
r
. .
[k
.
u ]
.
iw
.
d
.
a
.
n
.
k
.
u i
.
w
.
tila [puiy] ............... .
n
34- w pa upu[h p] gay [K]alyaJJ.isim fii v ~ [r ]a-it tila pu[iy to]' ma [pa 40. gah a [tila] puiy Suwa[lJ.JJ.]as[o]bhanamahathe ma pa upajjhay ga[h]
. up . u . ]h . . tu . y [g . ab . ] . a. c . la . n . pi . [J . J:9 . )a . p . at . [l . er . . k . ]u i . w • . . • • • • • . • • • . n . k . u . iw . . [y . ] a . m . u . . Ka . 1y . a ~ . 1 [ . t i]ssarnah~[the] ................ .
,•
-
1 Abbreviated, as if nlma, with superscript n. l Only the second half of the o appears in this line : the first part must have ended the
11 Or lew, if the e was a.t the end of I. 30, as seems probable from the MS. . text. preceding one.
i I think the reading given is right, though there seems to be no need for the stop. The Pili
has tJittatff, ea pasadstum.
g Conjecturally restored •
..
gw'
alhiai ma awariya l tuai u ma. kuiw upa(29}sampada ra 11 tataai t~iiai tila fial} Ramadhippa.ti gaja' puiai gwa> kuiw diin fii n dayadhamma ma gap gaw skuiw dan kubb • kuiw puiai (35) kuiw
dmail n din pu6 clan ehara bcai pan 11 jablu sla d.ak yamakala gah le ti'la :fi.a}.l p-ow kuiw taruip dan fii n pasada cuit le kuiw puiai gwa' kaluiw badah iU n rau gah tila iiali gara6 pa tim sat
tau sail ta' ra " (30) cakhi dayah ma cut lik cad.on payam gah le tila fiah pre.6 law la·it l·it ma gamluiA tuai he;:A n tAai sr bap1.A gitu mrekkasuiw gah prnh heA dl,a ffali (36) sui.m a.rom pariwara
pa upasampada tuai gah II huit mik kuiw sadhuka gah pham k1o' (3I) le ti}a fia{l prea\ law 11 subh amat se9apati gamluiil ht A ceh a tuai n la.ti skaw swak sa6 2 kJa.m 6o ma.sun pal upuh pqai
khi tl'5ai ma saw a gah 11 smiA tala cakhi dayah pnaA sc:Jau prell law tuai i tila ii,all tuin Kalya~isim gah tuai tila fiall dmaA tau ra 11 (37) khi gab tl1a sd pa klarit 60 gab. cuip klui
klu.6 cluil ra n kha ma quik 5 tnai gah n iia,ti ma pa tim tala guin ma pa (32} aca guin tuai pa upuh ra pqai la-it tila ma pa upuh tuai gah n pi94apat lnu p il}4apat tiaai kwai
111
ma duii upasarnpada tuai gah n dah 245 ra 11 kha gah tila fial} kuiw garaA ptim tila ta' yuih tpan ea~ ahara ma ka. rnlv(38)ai praka qak yamaki taruip ti1a ta> heA ra n tna sai mwai
g p a a m da lu i t i a l r n ~ 1 i ga " h t6 111 a i ~4 s 5 i b " a p ti e l i a t g a i ' t u m m a r e c k a k u a su n i u w S t i 6 6 a g i h a u d iw ui t2 le w w w 1 a 5 . (3 n 3 )' u i h t G 6 t il 11 a t p il a a k ta la ' m m , 6 a 0 d 11 u 6 w w up a a ' sa m m ik m m w ha a a i i g s a u h t 11 p y n a ik t s s a c ~ a a k t k h h a o p p II ~ k p q a u tA t au b ab n en s a.b ph lu a c:J k a p k o m d ak p a a w .ta m su o i m m b k i u iw ga p d u a i n w k u u t p il u a n ta p ' a t n a a ( I 3 f 9 a ) k k h l i s n a a t
kui(34)w upuh pclai Kalya9isim fii 11 la•it tila ta' ma pa upuh tuai gah " dan pi9c:Japat le kuiw " ganap tila ta' fiat,\ gamlui(40)6 gah tila the Suwa\)9aSobhanamahithe ma pa upajhia.l gab kuiw ymu
l 8rror for pa O.cariya,,
t A omits eduit, l Error for ma sap•.
"
'
!

t
EPfGRAPHiA BIRMANICA VOL. Ii_I i PARt II J MON INSCRIPTIONS
• 41. ['] mail dmMt tau tp]Qay sim gah dam[l]i hen ra t[w]ab tila puiy
1 11 3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . m{r]a [yar]au [ka] ka[lw]on
aca guin \Ja klam pa[n] cwoh sun ga[h l]e[w • ·d]u[n] (a) .••• 1
m[w ]oy gab (g]atbah to' tuy s(gyon) 1
11 • • • • • • • • • •••••
. (t ) . a . u . [ u . p . a s . a m . . p a . d . a . h e . ] n . 1 . ra a aca gui[n] •.••••••••.••• + . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
[t] ea [dhar 9 gat]e[r] (• ma ea) a slor
la(b)w[or] • (bdah)' ea twar ka(n] • ~ .......· •• : ••••••
J
5. • .............. [ga]rhah (p)ab 1 (n) bl[ay l}a(m)l(a.y) • Q.ik
(Fragment t;t.) 8 smin ska' smin u fial}. ma su[il cJa w[eJn [kh] ....•• ,,
. . . . . . . . . . . .
6. • . .. • . • • • . . [jare]it fii [kha garb}ah t[uy] ma tlun m[it]3
I. . • . • • . • • • .. • • . • • • . • • • • • 11
ta'
• [upasampada] (gah) ...•...••••. ". 4 pa gam-I ku tila pu[i]y tun ler kuiw ........... ..
L
2. . . [s]pa sor tu[y] 7. . ....•.. [sa]ra:t,;l(aga)ma[IJ.]a 9 ~ sikkha[p]ada dab. ral} tu[y h]en
ie
smay ea [y ]ay fi.al}. ••••• Hla puiy ta' [k]uiw pa gam-[IJ iii (r) ................. .
J There tnay have been an original flaw here,
2 AbbreviatedJ with superscript n, as if hti.e. 8.. [patimokkhasam wara]sila [I]n[ d]ri[yasarh ]warasila ajiwa·
s About twenty Jines appear to be lost between this and the preceding piece. But see the JB 1 1
manuscript version• [par]isuddhis[i)la paccayasannissitasi[l]a ga[hl le[r]
1 1
4 Both margins being .lost, and there being in this case no other indications as to the amount . . .
missing at the· beginnings and elfds of lines, respectively, the number of dots is quite indefinite and
merely denotes that something is missing, without indicating the amount.
l Very doubtful, except the initial letter, though I think gy is all right. The vowel must be
either e or o ; the final is quite conjectural.
Kalya~ttissaniahathera 11 pa Hun nti gah kuim ra. n smi6 ta.la cakhi d~yah ma klo(4r).' rna6 dmaA that t 2 h e T h pr e o n a u nu n s c 1 i . a 1 t ti i r o a n is o f s u th p e er f w lu o o rd u s, h a b d u t a p it p r ~ o e x e i m m s a t t o e d b e to th w e h r a e, t i n t o is d o n u a b w t a ih s a L . v M ow . el C m f. o I d . i u fi 1 e , r i · n in f d ra ic ., a t n in , g
g r s k p a ~ - h q a . ti a a h 6 i m g k m s t a i a i m a i b n w . n . w m d w t a u w a a m a m a i f ' l i i a a g l t J a h a r u e h a 6 R k s a 1 r 1 a l m l a k n . s a u 1 a w d 1 d h w t t d a w ip a l h a ' a p a l a ) t w i t m l i t w a i s a l a a 5 ' p r f s n i t m a i a i m l k 6 ) a d k 4 a s u u c • t a i 6 a i w 6 l a g u 6 ~ p g i s p a a n a a s t 6 a a 1 m 2 k 4 t g a 5 p a t a a ' i g b d k a g a a h a 1 1 7 m le l u w e l k u i u t i d i i d w u t l i u f l J 6 a t k u a r a a s t a i t a k 1 6 h 1 u 1 s e a A p t u a m a i ' s t r w a a g p m a a q i m d p a u l a t i u i i d j t n i a A a a m r ' a h m n c e 1 a 6 o 1 a t k u m g r t a a t h a h m a a a r I n i i t o a u f n m i a a g i h a u a r i a g n t d a u a I d ~ t I h a i a 2 7 . • 4 6 ~ T V T A V h f h e e t e E e r q y ! • b r b d d n m m d o b i u c a g b b o y h t t m f t f u b u e p l e l s , , o p s e p p s i e e t i o r b h r h r h l e y a a r ~ p p , b e s s e o o m f r r o t a , p r o f e a t . . r r n h m d a T a p t h h s e e e a w s J . s t i o h m p o s u a l a y d r b e b e e n o t r . t e a q d u i s t t e 4 c . erfaiii eith~. But the PaU tuppdrts th~
wwa' 11 pftguiw ma gamhi gah s fiat fia}.1 · sjuil sc:Juik gab he6 tila ta' gamhi iii n pftguiw ma ·nwam
Wa~ pfi~tii~ ~ah ~amJn.t awai reading palj.
g p k a e u r 6 . u S 1 ~ A a ' k p f c i a g rm u1 w ~ II p h u a 1 t r a 1 u u 1 • g 6 m a ~ a p m sd t a ~ t a1 m ~ k a u n 11 . p k d f w i a g m a u i } w k a o s k m a k a k a g d c a a f. h y o a . k h lp 1 a 1 t a y k b u a i r I w I a u p g fi a g p m u u i g h w u i iw m fii a m kh n w a w a a i t m fi f a ia Q tw . a fi l a l m t g b a a a n h k a a \l k a q m t u a i i u k k 10 s R E e rr s o to r r e fo d r w m it i h k . t he help of the Pili version. 9 Or stira!fagamtt.tra.
~u6 ~.P.~s.am~~da. ~ til~ t~
tu? .. sku1w .upasampada sbtn sl'iam he6 lapa kuiw upasainpada fii pa
tl~ tua~ pqa~ s1~. 11
.puia1. camat pqai Bago wwa' hell n cire6 buin kfi.an tuai 11 parikkhara payya6 ...
pu1a1 sku1w dan tua1 pma1 sdu6 upasampada 11 pa tau '.l ya6ah ha se6 tun 11 s6am s6am skuiw ket " kanham pkau gamat galat ea law pun (3) mra• yrau ki 1 kalon mwai gab kharah ta> klon lamuin
!1P~~ampada""
" ~ , u t 1 n i . p a 1 s 1 ai d l a ~ b a, r u d a p a a b y l) a t w w m a 'Q a s d d j a u a h k 6 u . u m t p a h a ' a s g a ~ m 11 ~ p m a ( d 2 i ) a m g ~p a a a h f s k ia a } u w .1 i m s f i m a p t u a l i ia m 1 i 0 a s e p a d a u y 6 r a a i j ( a J ii d aJ a 1 .1 n ) , l u e h w p e a f J s l p a 11 a m u p k i a u t. d i w t a il a g p a a s h a f i 6 i k u u i g m a 11 i n s k l p l u o a i 6 · t h lf O t i u a t n a t e g ra a a m s g l r : a & ii b ' m s k 6 a aJ u .o p n i a i m j k u r i a a il y p a g h n a h i h 6 a s e m a a e k t p g u h i a A a h q o b o ( a 4 g d ) a t a m h e h a i e d a m h a m a w r k e l g k o a n t e k r w a a m a g h a i s h h lo w t 11 i la l g a a p a m o i w h ta i ' b m f d a a a p h d a a 2 e b a k s u t i i o k w w g m k a a h H n e ti l j l \ a a r u e t 6 a c ' e j h a I a k p u b a a f d ! l il a a w h tt
,ma1 ea sata fiab Jew lpa ku1w pa m n stmk 12 ea bacam rn khyo: ea jri16 gni6 l4 jui6 yat sJak 15ea niba jare6 fii t1 yam gamhi ma nhau ra.u ka (5) karhah ma ga~ blaai lamlaai n 4ik smiA a ska' smii tt
1 4 niErik~n. te~t fiah ma suit ea wet1 khat Jan li 11 Ula ai ta' lpa law ja.reil fti 11 yam gami ma nwam kuiw sa.ddha ma
h e , r e • i . r c .o o b. ~ ~ .. a't' .( w bo it th h · t h h e e r e and o f in th t e h e s t n o ~ n x e t f l r i a n g e) m e sh n o t u s l e d e m be s a to ta in u d . icate that the Ms • text ;s corrupt kat baton kweb kweh gah he6 11 tlla ai ta' law (6) jareil fH " kha karha.h ma klun smik pa gamhi
. 9 I! A ~h k ~ :_1s: ' ~ v • rd enily a no.te that has g:o B t A i n ko t m o 1~ . k t s h . e text, but it serve o s t B o t s l h a o . w wh . e re F.ace H enqed. s j· a ar r e a 6 ~ a t g i a la m a a n i a t s a i l k k tt h m a p J a ew da k t u f# i w da Q q e r h a lt p h t a u t a o i n h l d ik t t i u la a i t a k ' u ~ k w u l p w h a p q a o t g a a m trh h a i w f ii d a ., h s t a u m ai m k a u ,i iw m n q u e m h b a a :y to ul n f t ( t f ta )
1 H 9 5 I A A A .. o · s s c k m U u i • . i t s t · • pa t · a u . . • 1 1 .. 8 0 · A A . . d sp a a h c t a a ti . m · . a . . · 1 1 1 8 4 A A A . o i f n . o m s n e i · t r s j t . u s ~ t i p n m a a h · • ( k P . u ) i • f w u i p n a . iii • . s s q a i u m m ik m w p a a a r f a i s c i o l k h a u i s w \I m i i l k n o d p d ri u y c ll a u s l u a t m p f a i w i s a a k m ra la s p i a la d f i a i 11 t u .I' n a , j s l l i e a w w a p p I a a a t r k i p s s a a u n t d i m d p h a a ~ r k i n s a u t e d c I n I i h l p i s a t i e a l c a m & p y a c a u s n a i n p n m i k & a n s e i t t w t a S a k U h e 8 t b . g a k ft l u g E a a S r ) b a , p th f i e . t a i w i m k u o ph k i E h k fl h it k b a f u : • l
A omits. a A omits,

EPIGRAPH IA BIRMANICA .. (VOL. III
PART 11) MON INSCRIPTIONS 77
9· . .•.•.... y ' p[k]at sa[ma~]I [gah] tla iii [11] sla pat khudda
r- sikkha [l]er pka[t] sama:1;1i [gah tla] fii de 1 • •.•..•.•..••..••. (hen) 1 u[i]t pga(y] jan{ok ra}Q. [~u]ti
1 1 •••••••••••
[rman] w[o]' 1 ti[la ii]al:i kuiw •••••••••••••••••••••
10~ : •• ~ .' ~ ~ • (iii 1 ~) 1 sama[l).]i (ta' gah) 8 [<;lok] pen tau [k]u kwat
sa . k . g .a h . . tu y c ii [til]a pui[y] ta1 pti[m] ................. . I 5· • • • • . . . . . . . • . • . • . . . . . . • . . [ d . r a . p . ] ( . g . a s . a p . . s p . a . ) 1 . [ . ta . g e . t ] .
.
u. . ...... : [k]yak tray ma da(l:i cui)t' gah hen • ti[la p]ui[y] ta'
pa iii 11 [p]a~i[p]at" tuy ma ha ga[p ~o]r ku (winey) 8 ....... .
(Fragment b.) s
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12 ••••••• (dah) nananikaya [tuy] 1 ma l(am)ii 7 [la]me(k) 8 tau . i6. ..
kwam 9 [k]u ta[Q.uik] laflen ma pha[h sa]k w[o' ma] • [e]1a • .•••••.••••••.••.•• \• ••..••. (drap] (gasap) [tuy
~l (ma) tage[t] • ; h .......... (ra 1) gam-[i lan]guiw (gab)
. . .
[I] • • • • • • . • . . • • • . . • .. • • • . . • • • . • • • • • • •
. . • • • (sail ma) [t]au [pQ]ay t[k]o['] Si[n]ghu[ir tuy ·'I ma] dak
sagn[a] 11 ma kab swok ga[h hen] 151 r [tila] (ey ta') •••••.• . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
• • • • • • • fJ • •
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • . . .. • • • • • • [ma 1] tila fial) [kuliw
1 Or,, less probably, do. But I cannot r~stor~, the rest of it. tau p(lay gi[hi]bhaw . uit (ra 1 • a]ra gam .. i languiw tuy [ma]
• Only the i is quite certain. a Fairly certain.
cw(u)in 8 (pa) 4 [puin antima](watthu) 6
4 Very doubtful, though I think it is right. . . . . . . . .................. .
15 The original may have ba0 , which would be an error. 6 Only· the i is certain.
'1 Very doubtful. 8 Or lamet P
9 On the principles of transcription indicated in § r7 supra, this might have been rendered t In this line, after the -first word, only the top portions .of the letters are clearly visible and there
, lwamm. But it is dear . from the more usual spelling in ·this record (kwom), as well as from the
is some doubt, therefore, as to the reading. Cf. the next line.
E.M. kom and L.M, kom, kom, that the anusviira is here·used as a modifier of the inherent vowel (as
2 This fragment follows on pretty closely after the preceding one, but it is impossible to join them
explained in § 16, supra), and consequently the transcription kwam is to be preferred. It appears from
exactly.
this and some other instances that this use of the anusvara is not confined to syHables closed by
s The u is rather curiously formed and may be merely an accidental stroke.
velar 1 s 1 . E C rr f o . r I . fo 4 r 1 s sa u n p g ra li , . n. 1 1 9 0 P A o b s b s r i e b v ly ia o te . d as in H 4x. the r 4 i g C h o t n l c e e t i t v e a r b h ly e re b . a . It is often hard to distinguish p and b in this inscription ; but the former is
5 Restored on the basis of the spelling in the next line.
adhip?(9)ai 11 l pkat samma~i ta' kla ni sla pat khuddasikkha II pa kat sammani ta' kla ~H 11
p de a s n a !l l a e w ·a . p k a u t 1 .2 w ~ _ l l l s e ~ a ~ m m ku a! i l " 1 : s ta a ' m m g a a ~ h i p g c: a J.e h n p ( q 10 e ) n i k ii l a 11 fi s i a n m ma pa ~ c i c aw ta e ' kk g h a. a h n a qu m ik a s p p cA a p ta ra u b h k o u k k e w a at p h s c a a k i d tT a ia n . a f a ia i . \l c am ku i l w >a t p m tu w a a i i ( r 1 a 4 . ) t l h ra o \ ga n m u h i i t m p a c: Ja p i a j t a a m .la n o d k r ap ra l k t as q1 a 1 p A sr m o a ' n ~ ta w u w q a i ' k 11 tr t u il h a q II i .a k l) b m ra a u k g u la iw u p a r t. g fa l a t a a/ i
gab tua1 " . sa6 ta' pa tim puiai n puiai du6 upasampada ra 11 uit tila sa6 gamlui6 gab tila i'iaQ kuiw garaA pa tim ra t1 tila puiai ta' ra si I slalt kle' (15) drnp kasap spa daget.gamhi
g tu ~ n h . lew pat1pat ma gap p at g i a ~ w at tau ku winaya s sikkhapuit (1 i) kyak trai ma dab cuit ra sdah mha pa ra w tila puiai ta' pa ha dab ma • suim drap kasap hi;.A pa gihibhau u sik
t~ _la h _ e P ta ~ t ~ i a la t.a.' 'Pa ni." ma ha gap gaw ku winai kyak trai ma ha da:ti cuit ga,h tila gab tfla fia.Q kuiw Jan huim ku ga.mhi gamlu1A ra 11 gamhi lAuiw slalt kle' (16) drap kasap tuai
nan~mkaya _ra f it m . a 11 l m ~m a u a l 1 ? n l m t e u k a 1 4 . t P a d u . a k i om pa d k e u s a t a. r q a o t k i , b m 1 a e n n w m w a a' p h g ah ab s a t k il \ a r w g a a ' m m lu a i 6 g w h a u ' i t d m ab a r ( o 1 6 2 ) 11 d n ah d g 11 ih m ib a h a d .u a g r e a t 1 g 1 a a m ra h i g r a a m " h i g m am 1 h s i w 1 u 6 i u n i w b a s p l u al i t n d n r n a t p ir na k w as a a t p th u h a m a d a e . a h . na s b u im tha p k a u } i J w k d u r .a f p ia ~ k g a a s m ap lu i h .6 e i g a p h a ( k 1 l 7 e ) '
Wf a ?a m ~ a e : s · ~ a 1 3) g ata mt tna s;a\ t.a' ~amlt~iA sa · d ~a d . ha gall tuai duA upasampada fiati Si6ghuiw ra ci 11 mha 11 tila 2 nalt kuiw tau pqai gihibha.u pha·uit ra 11 ara gamhi lAuiw ma swuin bap1nn antimawatthu.
iiail. sail r;na tau pqa1 S16ghmw n da.h l'.iaa kall sok gah he A tila ta' pa bak kom fii " gah ha canah thapal,t ku fia.lt • s gara.ha patiipawada fia)J. ma nwam lau gam hi ma dab si~ gah Jew
mwai nikaai heA ku1w dah fii 11 nikaai tnah tnah Jpa kuiw dab fii 11 rau gah cha mwai sarakattika
1 A inserts Y"· :a A aphaf. s A 1ini'y11. ' A lamnu lm1tt. I A t>parently error for sim.
SI The MSS. here insert ta'.
s For the passage from here to sim, inclusive, A has only garaha partpa,1ztJ4 "·
j

EPlGll./\PHIA BIRMA~ICA ( vpL. IU PART II) MCN INSCRIPTIONS
~ 1.8. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . '. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ . .
. • • • • .. • • • • • • • • • . • • • • ·• • . . • • [u]it rft t 1 · gam·[i] • • • • • . • • . . • • • m ~ aca [g]uin [dac]am klam 1 [sail]
J
· la[ng]ui[w gah 1, ma cwui]n r (ba) 9 [pui]n antima[w.atthu ma] cuip samat mwoy lak pan lnim [~]a kla[m turau [cwoh] sun [1 1 uit
ra-it [~ah ha] se[n] 3 (ayami 4 ga[raha parupawada] 6 a]ca gu_in dac[a]m kla[~] wwo[' kuim 1.] kha ma dun [u]-
1 L) ••••••
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . 24. [pa~ampada} 1 • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . •. . . . . . . . . . . . .
19. ";.. ~ • .••.•.•... (k)w[o]m pha[la] suim sablu [bi gapui]w 1 [l;>]un
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • . • • • • • . ler ti[l]a fial). bak kuiw pana[k sa]t 1· me 2 sut 1. t\lo[n 1] (p )abeii. 3 r pni[k] tila nal:i kuiw
tau pc;lay gihi[bhaw uit ra g]a.n;i[·i t]uy ma [pa sar] ma pa
1 1 1. dan ui[t r a]ra tila [to]' tu[y ma] gap ·
.
. h . ura . . . , . m . . a . k ~ . i i . e . a '. j0 . 1 1 . g . n . i[ . n . j_ o . n . y . a t . ] -· • . • . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .
20. .. - .. ~ k[r]au [t]un [s)a . ma[l}.i] to' tuy m . a : lagna[t] 4 khudda·
•••.• : • • . • • • • • • • • •• ." • • • • g[i)hibh[aw ui]t ra rau • •••• • !
1
sikkha patimok tu[y] tila. fiaQ. [n1a trniJw dan parikkhar~ ma
[ww]o' [t]a.9uik fa[ne]ti [sas]ana ma k(tui]w [dab· ga,h] tila [fi]al). 1. 1
1.
kuiw dun upasa(rh)mpada ler [tu]rau 6
[Ra]ma[dhi]pa[t]i ca[al). k]le' pa uit tu[y] .• .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2 I. -. • • • • • ~ • • • • • • • · • • • . • .• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
•• • • ~. •, ~/~. ~ • '! . .~ • . ••• ! .~ I t! ·1 a s P.Ul.Y sap . ] to [ ' ga l )ll I m • i l . •. • . • [r]ma[n] wwo' [ma d]u[n upasamp:a]da Si~[ghuir gah] 1
[t]uy 111a. cµip cl.al} J[au gJa[mawJ~~[i a.r]ai}aw~[~l~ ~ ma ;dma[ii dah [m]woy lak masun lnim turau kla1n turau cwoh turau [ra 1 1]
1 ·1
t]a.µ pc;lq.y [th]a11 ~un rm0r[p] w~{Q]' g~h t .~ nH! sal~ pu[ wa ma caal)] sa[s]ana [s ]a[k wwo' tuy 11]
22. (kkaraf 838) 7 ••••••••• _. • • • • • • • .. • • • • • • • • • • ~ • • • ']. 7. • . . • . . . • . • . . • . . . • . . • . . • . . • . . . • . . . . • • • • •
.•••• ~ •..••••.•••••• [dun] t1[un) 8 u[pasampada] 9 fiah
• • . [k}yak tra[y sa:n d]ah uiw [·da ci] sasana tuy ma tau tau
1
S[qn~bupr ·gaq 1 ctiiw cuip] sakkarat [841 s]ak [kuiw] sg[uJ~ dun p~ay quii. rman wo' ler ma sak ku t~uik lne[n] 1 ma [s]ak ku
1 1
tl[u]fl8 tau hen ra .r kha gah tila [puiy] · ·
asa11ka gab k[u]iw da[h] tuy
1 Here the u is not quite certain, though the trace of it, if it is that, is in the usual position.
2 Error for pa. Copceiv~bly jt may be a much damaged pa. . . , 1 Restored. 2 H 39 has mek.
4 a F A o r s !I 0 l m al i l c t ir o .c n l e e m ov ig ~r ·h t t h r e e a s d n 0 i p us i t 1 b , ey 0 b a i 1 s , u 0 b t s i, e q o u r e n 0 h t i d . isf P ig e u rh re a m ps e n i t t . is an error for ayilnz. B 5 O H r e r b e a 0 a P smal! superfluous space has been fille 4 d ~r in ro r w i f t o h r f 1 o a u n r g s a m t. all circles.
5 Or 0rup0 The end of the word has be_ef!. con~ecturally restorec1 on the ~naJogy qf E 57.
•
6 Restored. 7 Conjecturally restored on the basis of. the Pali version. '
8 There is no u visible. 9 A small circle over the nip is probably a subsequent disfigurement.
sa6 ta' ma. tau pd.ai than 4ui'i man ma dun upasampada, gah ~ ya(-23~m aca guiri dacam klam u !i~lt
g k ? 1 ~ b J a u 1 ? a a . 1 . h . c 1 : w 1 . a t i a i b h m g ~ h t l a a a a l b u u p b ~ a . . ~ a ? h g r ' h k a k a u ~ h p u 1 k n s t ~ b ~ u e t w h b f i w l a i a ~ ; . t d a u r ~ t , a a , u . p . I µ h J p r I f - . i h u a p a a . u 1 a q 1 . t t ) y a r w ~ a a r g m y a ! ~ ~ a a g h p ~ f m ! h · a 1 ~ a g t w e p h t w a a a m t d g i g h . a h u a a r i i ( a m k 1 h s m 8 i § a J l a l m a m i u l a p p ~ e i h a a t l \ r 1 r p s 1 u a a a p a g t w ~ s h a a w m a m $ a m n i d h g t a a a c a j ) h m p k n a f a a u i i j a i t ~ i w u : h w r i i u a o w l a r i ~ m a i u a d i g p 1 w 1 a a h s b h a m w g h a u a g J i h s p a ~ k ~ h w p h k b w y ~ t t u a g p i f : l l u a t a a h e i h a n t f a i f a j ( i ~ u J 1 u a n ; i i p 9 t ~ ) 1 i 1 R ~ k g a a m l u . m w o ~ i . w a a i w n ~ d t s h t t t i i i j h m a l ! a 1 p u l 1 i p 6 b ~ p f a t m d i y a l i . a ! a a a l i h . t c c ; t b l ( a u q : : , d : a i J i i e . : ~ p 2 k k ~ ) m s s p k ta f m w h b i r ~ ~ u a a a t k p d u a d i m m k a le s l w s a w a i u a k m . t p i k a 1 h t 1 k a . a m 4 t t k l 4 i w c p l i i a a 4 a i w l t i i . a ~ l m f i . 1 r ' . i 1 i i a i u b m k l a t a k p b l .. a e e 2 t m l A 6 a . y a 5 a ' a g u t p . 1 1 i k a n s t u h u i i 1 i i k i a i w t s t i u ~ l t n i a a m e c t a la t f y i i n p a l g a a l a u m \ m in p m i a 'i t a _ a i a d l l l a a p t k a c n µ i k u a ~ a i > u w m p h k y m k w d u l a a a i a d t m n m a t n r a p a w u . p 1 a w h l r i p a u i a t , k q . l ' k { a 11 ( \ h k 2 i a h a 5 s r r a u ) t a a a i t w m m r m t u . i l a ~ i a a s w u ~ ~ d t k b u a w l u i ~ ' a u i w w l , l . u b a n · ' ( i a ( t d ~ t 4 g g u P u ) a ) ~ n p p i p a u D s s : i J w g µ a a a p m a m n w a m p t w s > a a a u ~ s w m d n a i a a k p p ' u a t t a n a d t q o w ' a a a m i m l ~ } J g a a a e I Q a w l 1~ h , k . ~ \ a ~ a l 1 ' t t • s 1 '
Ja6a? ~le ph~·mt tm:u " u1t sa~ gamhtiiJ ma tau pd.ai than qd ra}J. ma~ wwa' gah 4'.uiw pa Qik~y~ upas~mpada Siilghuiw gah 11 dah mwai Iak masun !Aim tarati klam tarau cob ta.ra..µ .11 pawa. ma .. c~iJ.;~
sisaa sak wwa' tila fiali Ramcidhippati ma pa gah 'l huit ma sjuft sq1.1il< sijsn~ {27) ,;ltyak trai .(~.h
mwa1 u1t ra " (21) tila saA ta' g~mluil\. ma cuin dah tau g~mawasi aran~w~si 01:;:1. dm~iJ than quii r~h
man WWa' gab II ntl Sa(22)kkarat 838 It gitu. mrekkasuiW 9 mak ibi Carl II tiJa• pui~i ta' ma duft kluil uiw dah ci • sasa\la ma fau pqai ciu~ miJl wwa' l~w ma ~~k kuiw tac!nik l(le~ m~ SflkJmi:w as;;Aki
upaltlmpada natl Si6ghuiw duiw cuip sakka.rat 841 sak • kuiw sgut du6 klu6 tau h~4 ra " ~bi~g.ah t.ila
:O rig. has 1"0' ih.1Jr>?P.~11J~t1•~ ~ J;l'q~ 11J:ic~.Ji4°, ··• · 1 • O Jr r r i o g r , f h o a r s n p l a m .n a a . a i.

,.· PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 8
1
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. Ill
So
..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33· • • • • . . · : (t)N~ c[uih 1 r ~uy] (r,) 8 m~ dah tau -[t]ac;luik fanen ga[e]
~8. ~ s[min g]ah nat tau kmm .- (wi) ' mwoy tuy sasana kyak tray
·• [fii] lor cuit [tuy] ma [pa rwon pc;lay kala ma lwon t[u]y
1 1 1]
[K]assapa ma [s]-al) gab 1 smin gab ha go' pa tuy 1 pa ga(ti)m &
te' [gah] 1 smin tuy ma nwom tau ku puin [h]an ma jnok clal}
ma cuip ra-[it 1 ma sg]i[k mlil· 1 · . . . . . . .. 34· [t]u l y ;m i s n m i c n a s g u a in h t d a m u a y il a s t s a a u p a (i t k di h p a p4 g , a ay b b c o ;lu d t h i i s s w at o r [ p T ]u a iy [w ] d a a t s [ i e n ] s m k i' u .n [ i] I m n , ,
29. [k] • • • • • • . • • • • . . • • • • • • • • • . • • • •
da[s]ok ·yas[s]apat dip gab kle' ior kuiw t[u]y ,, bet tuy [ma]
• [Asoka]dhammarat 9 [k]uim [lo]r t r [pgay] tka' Singhuir [t]un 1
smi[n] mw[o]y tuy ma hlmu Sirisanghabodhi-Parakkamabahu 9 [ma] 35· mi[k] kuiw [s]asana kyak tray Kassapa (ma) 7 c-al) gah t cui[h] tlun
sjun sguik pc;lay sasana kyak [tray san] (gah kuim) 4 tha[n m]nihsalok Wwa' tu[y 1] (ma) 8 ket [w]e[h J]amba . tuy I
kwon [d]ewatau Matali gah r kuiw pa r(fi)p" cluiw klin da[my]oil
30. • • • • • • • • . . • • • • • • • • • • [k]yak tra[y] san [k]uim la[n
mw~y] .
s]m[i]n Para[kk)amabahu ma sju[n) sc;lui[k] pc;lay [s]asana [k]yak
tray san kui[ w] 6 lar [u]it smin ta ga[h g]amluin kuim r fia[t] 36. tuy i. datay ket cluiw kliti [g]ab tuy r cuih bahek [s]min Ussinnara
1
ke[t] ta[c;l]u[ik) lanen ·[ma] ktuiw dah gab J • kha smin Ussinnara [t]uy (ma) 10 dun sajuin pc;lay ma
sac~al) sa[s]ana tuy . ga[h] r smin In danc;lo' 11 batwo[n s]miil
31. • • . • • • • • • • • • .. • • . • • • • • • • n (a) ma sak ku ta[ c;l]u[i]k
Ussmna-
6
(l]anen hen [1] bet ma mi[k kui]w sa[s]ana kyak tray tan [t]au
37· ra tu~. smin In ma tui[n p]lan a c;lun swa[r] Tawatin • rau [gah]
[I]ukau [k]a ma lo' gah ,. [ caa]Q [t]au sa[s]ana tuy pc;lay [k]ala p; 1
1 t
smin tamla tamla ma pa tath ku smin A[sok]adha( rh )mmara[t] ta
ma [l]won
gah • pc;lay ma caab [sasan]a gah a pa tau kabut hen •· • bodhi·
32. • • • • • • • • • • • • •••. [mah]a[the] Ana[n ·g]ah (g)a(g)en 1
1
sat
[bhaw t]uy r dah smin mwo[y] ma himu Us innara r pkati [r]an tau
[k]ramin [p ]c;lay [ c;l]un B[a]ranasi i kha gah sa[s]ana tila puiy · l Or h P · s Conceivably cuit.
a Either this or the preceding stop is superfluous, and probably this one is accidental or an error.
kyak tray Kassapa ·
The spelling tuy may also be a slip. ·
4 Or wi P Is it an error for ni P
I Conceivably stjuik mlui-. At the end a small superfluous space is filled in with four small 5 The t may be .h, and the i may be i. Over the g there is a mark resembling a superscript n
circles, as in 1. ~s. t~o
At the end of the line there are dots (like a visarga) to fill up space. •
s Restored with the help of the Pali version.
~ The occurre~ce here of this E.M. ~pelling is curious. Is it a conscious (or subconscious)
s Probably not Siri0 (as it seems to be in H 128).
archaism, a mere shp, or. due to the s that immediately follows P Anyhow, it is an irregularity even
4i The last two words are somewhat doubtful, but I think they are right. amongst the general inconsistencies of this record in the matter of spelling. '
6 Error for kuim. 7 Or ·pa, or sa-P s Or pap
e The original may have mit, in error. 7 Conceivably ganen. 9 Conceivably 'l'Up. 10 Or pap
11 Written with the full form of <J., subscript, but the proper spelling should be dand,l.
gab dab· tuai II CUiW CUip 5 h\im Snam heil kuiw gwa' tan tau (28) fii 11 Jaw CUit tuai ma pa roil II
pqai kala ma Ion tuai te' gah n · smiil mnum puin ban ma. jnok klati ma cuip la-it pd.::i..i ma sd.uik Mahakasapa tasui(33)t 1 ceh a dah tau taquik 1'1en gah fiat tau kuim " wi mwai tuai. sasna kyik.
rnlui(29)k pqai sasna kyak trai san • gah kuim law 11 l ma himu Asokadhammarat kuim Jaw 11 pqai trai Mahiikasapa ma s-al) gah sm iii gah hwa' gwa' pa tuai pa gati (34) tuai 'smi6 gab damata tau "
!aka' Siil~huiw tun 11 sm16 mwai ma himu Siris:6,:;habodhi-Parakkamabahu 11 ma· sd.uik mluik pd.ai kha gah Bodhisat puiai dah smii In u puin casui6 tau yassapat dip pqai d,u6 swaw Tawattl\ kuim 11
sasna kyak trai San I' gah kuim Jaw II smin Pijayabahfi 2 ma sjuD squik pqai Sasna (30) kyak trai dasuik yassapat dip gah kle' law kuiw tuai 11 huit (35) kuiw sasna kyak trai Mahakasapa ma s·alt
sa.n kuim law 11 smi6 Parakkamabahu ma sju6 squik pqai sasna kyak trai san gah kuim Jaw 11 uit gah 11 ceh klu6 than mnih lui~ wwa' tuai 11 pa Iweh lama mwai tuai 11 kon dewatau M atali }1 kuiw
smi6 ta' gamlui6 kuim. fiat ket squik Inen ma katuiw badah pqai sasn! kyak trai tuai n (31) na ma pa rup kluiw damyui6 mwai (36) tuai datai ket .kluiw kli6 mwai foai 11 ceh bahek smil\ Usinri~ra:
sak kuiw squik 16:6 hell huit a ma mik kyak trai tun tau lukau kala ma· la' gah ma caalJ tau gah ra 11 khi smilfl Usinnara ma du6 sjui6 ma s-ati sasna tuai gah 11 smi6 In dalO' baton srnil
sisna tuai beta II pqai kala Ion tuai II tila (32) mahathe Anan gahen tau bhau samsra 4 dah smift Usinna(37)ra gab tuai 11 smii In tun plan a swaw Tawatii ra " rau gah smi6 tamli tamla ·ma pi
mwai ma himu Usinnara 11 pka6 ra6 kmin qu6 Barannasi 11 kha gab sasna tna puin kyak trai
to 1 A tasuii.
l The words gah kuim law seem have been cancelled in the MS. 6
9 For Wijaya.bahu. 8 A omits. 4 A omits bhau sams14,
1

(
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. Ill PART 11) MON INSCRIPTIONS
38. puiy ma dab In tun ler 1 \min casuin tau yatsa[p]at dip pcl.ay Q.un 44· [k]ya[k tra~ ma] strak tlu~ [p]ga[y k]a an~gat ga[h] 'l[e]r r [p<l]g.y
swa[r Ta]wa[t]i[n k]uim 1 pa tau kabut pQ.ay ma sacaab sasa[na] [s]a[san_]a [t]~y ma sgo c·ab. ' pQ.ay sa[s]ana ma sgo' jnok mar
hen 1 t sak gah [het d]ah uiw da ci J tila fiab Ra mad hi pa[ ti] tu- gah 1 tlla pmy to' pa kabut kwom fii n1
39· [n] ler atuiti taget sapparuih ma phah sak ta [g]ah [tg]et [b]ak
1 1
kwom [tuy] (pa) 1 pu~a ma caal:i [sa]sana sak wo' ma pa rwo[n] •
K
rau gah het. [d]ah ui[w d]a ci pQ.ay ka [a]nagat pcl.a[y] Q.uti
1
40. [Harh]sawati tun gah 1 smiil gamluin tuy ma [n]w[o]m tau k[u] (Fragment a.)
saddha ma sktuiw dab pab[wo]y 9 [k]rau 9 ga[h taqui[k l)aiien
sasana ma k[t]uiw dah [g]ah ra [y]ar fiat . ma ga 1 b ] 1 fian sasa[n]a 1. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . .
ma sac[-]al} [h]eil pa wipa[r]a
1 ....... 4':. ••••• ..,.
41. kw[o]m fii [t]ila puiy ara[h]an ma pa ta[rh] ku Moggaliputtatissa· ~. sail [ta' ma dun] (ket upasampada) ..... . . . . . .
1 .1 . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
mahathe Majjhan[t]ikathe ta gah gamluin tu(n] l[er r] fial; ma
1 1 ...
dah t ka[t]a ' kicca tuy ra [d]ah uiw da ci 1 [c]asu[i]n ket r 4 3. . (kwom) ku ga[makhet da c-an ma tau wfi]du[ih Qeh] ga[h ,
[phala]sama- rukkhad](isambandha) .......... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42. pattisu[kh]a dman go' tau [k]uim • [h]et tuy ma smik kuiw sasana •· ..,. .-
.• : • : • [tun IJe[r gam]akhe[t tuy ma tau p<;lay] c[ru] ih [t]m ,
jno[kJ mar ga[h] 1 da[sok ph]alasamapatt[isukha] 5 gah t [k]arau m[mJ1t [ma strJa(k 1 1 dah baddhasim) . • • . .. .. . . • - . . . . . . a
kle' tuy p[<;l]ay sasana ma 6
i '
1
43. [sg]o' jnok mar ga[h] he[n t] 1 pa tau [k)abut 8 [t]u[y] [sak] 9 ga[h] This is the end of the main inscription, so far as preserved and the •
1 1 no more. B ut t h e P- a 1 · i has another short paragraph. • manuscript v•rs i · o n gi · v es
h[e]t da[h] uiw da ci ti[l]a p[u]iy ga[m-i] sapparui[h] gamluin
1 ~ In this line only three or four undecipherable characters have be
tuy 1 ma w.vom tau ku sad'dha p<;lay [s]asana t h e f • i rst o f t h e f ragmen • t ary appendi . c es fo · llow · ing on the Kai y a - 1;11 - m . scr • ip e n tt • o p n r es p e r r o v p ed e • H A ere b ega . n • s
l Conceivably ma or 1 1. 2 For babwoy. b n e ot g h • m in n g . m t g o ; c a o n r d re s a p s o b n o d t h w i m th a r t · g h i e n m s o in f t t h h i e s P pi i e l c i e ve a r r s e io n m , iss it i ng . 15 . a 1 · n m d p o i s t s 1 c " b a i n e n o t o t b s e a y . h ' ow • m uc r. . h i • s s 1o s t t h e a r t e t h 1 e s
s Looks like. trau. 4 This stop se~ms to be superfluous. the number of letters lost at the beginnings and ends of . fitted m with fragment o,
small 6
6
c T
A
i h r
p
c e l
p
e
a
m s
r
. a
en
i
t
s
ly
f o
fi
ll
r
o
st
w e
w
d
r i
b
tt
y
e n
t h
°
e
k h
f
l
i
i
rs
a
t
n d
ha l
t
f
h e
o
n
f
c
th
h
e
a n
o
g e
o
d
f t
t
h
o
e
0
s
k
g
h
o
a
, t
b
h
y
a t
· ca
b
n
e
c
g
e
in
ll
s
i ng
th e
t h
n
e
e
d
x t
by
li n
m
e ;
e a
t
n
h
s
e n
o f
c
f
o
o
m
u
e
r
v
th
e
e
rs
r
1
e
· o
f
n
o
J
r e,
n o
m .
w
d 1 .
m
ca
a
t
d
e
e
m
a
e
v
r
a
:e
i . l
ly
ab
.. t
l
h
e,
a
w
t
i
a
ll
n
. h o
in
w
d
e
e
v
fi
e
n
r
i t
s
e
e r
a
v
m
e
o
to
u n
s
t
h o
1•
w 5 a m p·
•
i p s s
1
r
•
o m
m
x
e
g 1 .
s
m m
• a
a
r
t e
e
1 t y
h a
o
1
w
s
s
o
e h a
u
p t
n
o t
a
s h
s
t
.
t e
c
1
. e
o a
r
n m
t a
5 •
J
o
' n
u
a
n T
b
t
J
h
e
w e
.
as m .
T
a
h
n
e
u s
d
c
o
ri
t
p
s,
t ·
two stnall circles to till in the remaining space.
7 8 ~ . L L L o o o o o o k k k s s s l r ~ i a k t l e h it e t k l r e i b l l u i i k k t, e e b s h u ( e i t t t , , t h b b e u u t t e i x I s t r t c a h e i r n m t k a a i n r h k l 1 y " h i s m 1 p e i a r s o n r b t i a g f b h o l r t y . s a ii c .k c . idental. m ku a iw s g_ s o a ' , d 1 d ~ ha a ~ . t . a ~ ' '..t t J u a1• n s I a I - s p n q a - a m i s a a s s n g a o ' ( j 4 n 4 o ) k k m ya ow k t g r a ai h m " a t il k a r s a a k .6 n l" t . '' : a t l a ' 1 ' pa k~ a I g a a b a u n t a - k g o at m g fU a . h u Jew " p " . . . . . a1 • " sa . . . , . . an4 _
nil cnam .tlla. ~um ~yak trai Sakyamfipi ma pa padnibban ah kha ma .. . •
11 ~a ~a
. ga.h • hu1t sm1k kutw sasna kyak trai saah law cuit tuai u !ra pug . . . dah ll\1m 09h cniJh
gwa' dull 1lpasampadabhau s-ah gah " til~ fiat- Ramadhippat1' P o ut1ilw ma. n.wahm ~u saddh~ ma mik
tatb ~u smiil Asokadhammarat gah pqai gabut caal;t sasna pa tau gabut hen Bodhisat (38) puiai ma A d - . . . .. w 1 a pu1a1 t . e 22 ra k • -
dah In-tun n lew • puin casuin ya.ssapat dip pqai 4un swaw Tawatiit kuim 11 pa tau gabut pqai ea upasampa a nu taka, Sin.shmw 11 jarem ma puiai ta> ma a d 6 ' urw a du.6
gah smik kuiw fiaQ gwa' du6 ket upasampada. law cuit tuai " tiah u updas_;mpada nfl taka> Si6ghuiw
s t p n P m s k M u a a a h u \ ~ m a l p A a a l i t p j t s a a c h a a d p s s a a h r d a a a a a ' n e u s m d l t n t 6 i l t n i h h i a k a s u a s ( a 1 u l a 4 1 t w t n m s t k 2 h n n a h s ) e a a a d p a a p a k a t k h h a t g s a t e · a ' c a i a t g i s i h l u l h g ; u a l i I h k w n a I s 11 H a h h p s k h d k e a a q g l u a a k a l a g d h i r i m t a a m g p k u h b l a a a d u a w h i i a k p l l A w a a h l a h i e g i u ' t p a w b U u k i n a t i t a a n u W r r a ' a k a a d g l u i t e a a ( k a d w 4 h t p u o a 1 g 1 q m ) u a a k 1 c 1 p i , h i u w k i c t u i ! o s f ! m a s i I m a a d a i q ) i s a t J u q n i 1 f 1 1 i l i 1 u a c k a i m h 6 i p m I u a S l I a 1 e 1 ( i a a w i 4 t t d i l t l i 0 a a i l s ( ) s l a 4 t h m a a a m 3 s H a ' i ) k f n k a i r a a g a a s h l n : g a k t c a i a s a m m o u n a a ' R i 4 a J l w w . : u j m a i n i a k k m i s s o t a \ i t i a a c a u k m s c s d p i t n w n a t m h u a : a a M i n o t p d u d w j s l p a n a a I a S I a h i i o h k g t g k k i r a g a g w u a h t a m h a u w h m d P ( o h a 3 a w s u h ' e 9 m h r g i i ) a m g g i n s u i m a a l a a i 1 l 1 w b p l i a e p p g y p w u a a d a p a d m t w r a a a t r u a a s l o i c t u t t u i h f a u i i l i i l s i u a k i s l 6 r I 1 t I 1 a a g t p u m m c a h r d a h n b e n n a s g a g u u g u g l l a a l i t m a m e t l h I a 6 i I t t . m g t t b s s a i a m m a a - l u a , a m n i ' t k w k d s p . a p h a q w k k m d u a a h a u a i s 1 1 a a ~ ' 1 . · • t h i w m ~ k · I t d m o m a g t n b a h . a ' m w w a • m s t m 1 a a u . i 1 ' m s . a a - k i a p g - g a u n d a a 1 a t . . s u a m t h ; m k n a ' . n a g i l a ( u t m a g a 4 · p w h J t a m > a . b m a a u t l " s ' e u a w a n k 1 w c 1 m . u a p a g q p i t h l t w a a a e a a l m w d m d J • . a g u s a e i a n u f k k l S . m ' i l p l h i k e i o l a q e k h ' a o s k e t u h a t a h h u : a t l t e s : h a u i l i i g t i a w m a a g i m h h p a t e m m a a a a m w • \ ' a a t a k a a i « r : k d . h r u u a h a a e d k h a n . b t a m k . . a a b t h i . i u u ' • t ~ a ( i . a a · w ~ K d · k d 1 h . . ' i a a . s n d r t k 1 · a o a . a ) m p u i m . u J b 1 a • g b m . . a t a a c 1 t 1 ' 1 t n h • s a n a • d t . i I u : m t u h u • r n m m u a a 1 . n . c i i k t a s . a a m k 1 , r m l u m a h u a . f 1 a w i a u . , ~ a P d h . t . ~ c . 1 • a s . d f a • 1 s u . u t a a a m r ~ m i p h . a e p m a a m ~ . • · q t g ·· s . a . b a . ' t a a a . : a a ) ! m i • m n d n a m · w · i h · d a t r . p m l · · i i e w h a p a m i g d a d • l p t ! . ' a a ; a a m .t h h U m t r ; t g . o a l i u • ! a a a ( l " . a . d 3 i . b n i ) l a k p 1 a 1 ~ k , i N I . w k 1 e o a ~ a m ( w w \ k i u l ,1 J t ' : I • l f a l . g . d o . . • s . m r . , a i a u ( f g k , # , ~ m h , k • _ i a a , ) \ t ~
1 A a 1ah. · 2 A # !' inserts aah. s For MuggaW. 4 A ,awti. 5 A 1m11t. 1 A i n1en, mr1. ll B inserts kulft1. 3 A omttt.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. III PART II] . MON INSCRIPTIONS 85
...•.. (lar) 1 [simamagga hen] 4. kha [ma lapo ]k tu[n l]er [r yam .. . . . . . . . . (h) 1 pal}.qit [jamnok mway mway tila ftab.
ti ma tau pqay] cr{uih nimit] . . • . • . . . . . . . .. kuiw] .• _. (a) [kwom sim]-(tuy) •••..•••••
1
6. •. • . . (jmap) s [jmap s kanan gah ma kuiw lapok] (byi) 4 [a pa) ·
• ............ [sim k]ya[k maha]bu[ddharu]p [• sim pan]
uit [kha] ma [samit tun ler] (yam) 4
11 11 • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • (aben) 1 sim] (kari ' sim) • • • • • • • • • . ••••••
[•
7. • • . . . . • • . . (') tuy . . . 6 [ma dak nvon 11 "] pqa[y sim
gamluin] ga[h K]aly~[JJ.isim mway hen] (ma) ·. ....•. . ,. • . • . . . . .• . . . . . . [• ~]i[m] ma[h bap] . u n . ., [sim . k a' . k l . u iw •]
[i) •. ..
8. c • ]a . w • e { . k • t . n a . y . s . o k [ si p m ay ] am K ] a [l ( ] y y a a l [ ] l . ) ) . 4 i 11° 11 kitu mru]i[kkasuil cah \>~ 1.6. . . . . . . . . 1 • • • . . . . . . . .. . -
•••••••••••••
·········*·········•••••Cl,.,,,*••····
••...•...•.. (ma cau nu) 4 [Singhuir kuim] (r: ma) 4 [sam]i[t
9·
sim ~a 1 pc;lay maharam 11 u kitu mru]i[kkasuill . ·. . . . . • • • •
••..•.••.... (kha kla tit) 4 Ttila puiy to' ma cau nu Singhuir
10.
(Fragment b.) 1
kuirri ma samit sim] . (ut) 6 [mla] (skar) 7
•••••••
I I. • • .. . . . . • (upasamp)a[da Si]nghuir (kuim ma) [sami]t sim [pan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....
duih] j[on kyak] (mah tau 8 n u) ••••••••••• .
( r sim) [b]a(r)a[b. sim mba] . [i]
••••••... [Si~gh]uir 9 p·o[r ti]la [puiy aca sail to'] (ma) [dun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
'
payail Singhuir to'] . . . . . . . . . . • .
.
1 Or llf. I Conjecturally restored. . . . . . . .
I Looks like jm4w. 4- Very doubtful. 18. .. . ...........• (ta)rwo(t)8 J sim
fian •---
5 It looks rather like h1iJ 1 or k•n i. 6 The final may have been h. ·mba · [sim] p[n]a(n)
7 Or skan. Perhaps these three words are the proper name of the slma. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8 Or mah thau P This presumably refers to the great pagoda. at Pegu. 9 Restored.
•
caclalt kle' tuai 11 karo6 ti tuai " canah tha~al,l. (5) law simmhamagga he6 11 kha ma lapuik tun Jew J Ver:y doubtful. The same remark applies to many of the names. of sfmib in the long list
11 1 yam ti ma tau pqai sruih nimit. kuim law 11 yam ma tau m6a)J kuim law 11 yam jali6 5 a h atth • jnok which follows below.
S bat ka9a6 pqai ti 11 na gapuir tuai II (6) jmap jmap ka~ai\ gah ma kuiw lapuik byi pha•uit It ' Probably very little is lost between this fragment and the preceding one, but they cannot be
kha ma samit tun lew n yam gamakhet sdah dakau sim ma dah tami 11 fiatr ma 2 karo6 law pcf.ai ti fitted together exactly.
tuai gab 11 kuiw fia~ datau wut duih kuiw. ma6 mwai calo(7)' tuai hen ma dak s ro6 11 pnow sim B Or (ta)t'woh P Perhaps we should read wa for ta, as the MS. text does.
gamlui6 gah Kalya~i mwai ·hel6 ma dab kla ra 11 sakkaraja n gitu mrekkasuiw 8 mamak t6ai aduit
" tila sat ta' ma cau nil Si6ghuiw he6 ma smit. (8) sim Kalya~isim 11 gitu mrekkasuiw 12 cwek Uiai
suik payam yaJ.i 16u gah tila puiai ta' ma cau 4 nu Si6~huiw kuim ma samit sim kyak l6im 11 payam
tiai ce6 gah tila puiai ta' (9) ma cau nil Si6ghuiw kuim 11 ma samit 2 pqai 111aharam 11 gitu samit ga(13)h pa~4it jamnok I mwai mwai tala fia~ kuiw bak a kom .. 11 sim tila 2 puiai ta, ma samit
mrekkasuiw 13 cwek tilai s6.isaw fila ta' ma cau nu Siilghuiw kuim 11 ma samit sim 5 bha mru " gitu gah tun 11 sim kyak kuiw sim ma tam s " sim ma ro6 4 lhok 11 sim caluik 6 ci6 n sim gamalaA " (r4)
phawraguin 13 cwek tilai (ro) kta ha katau ti'Ia puiai ta' ma cau ntl Si6ghuiw ma samit siiil 6 mft siih kyak mahabuddharup n sim pail apuiw 11 sim kari 11 sim tam pha 11 sim kyak ma tam jow ei 11 aim
m)a skaw II gitu cai- 5 mak t6ai 4 tila puiai ta' ma cau nu Si6ghuiw kt1im kom ku tila puiai ta' sa6 ma6 mra u sim iuai itaai 11 sim muh 7 kla but 11 sim sama gasft • sjm jip braai 11 sim muh ya tala
Bago ma du6 .(u) upasampada Si6ghuiw kuim ma samit sim 4 duih juiia kyak .tnuh tau nfi ma pa (15) 11 sim muh bapu6 " sim ka' kluiw n sim jaJa:ai thaw 11 sim 1a6 paqoA 11 sim jrai sapoai 11 sim
ti.m sakkarat ~38n gab tila fiaQ. Ram-adhippati n paramamahadhammarajadhirat 11 p·ow tila puiai ta' amat sut 11 sim smi.6 U Kwew .-" sim ban gam u sim pra6 sa n sim ma sra ma lei o slm jip dwo6 "
ma cau nft _(rs) Si6ghuiw " p-ow tila puiai sail ta' ma duil payd Siiaf;lhuiw ta' gah tuai 11 suim kuiw sim run wuin (17) sim bara{l 11 sim ma muin n sim kama amat • sim 06 bra sri 11 sim kon
~uin danall he6 ma kuiw samit sim · jmap jmap 7 qua\ jmap jmap s ralt rali mafiadesa wwa' 11 kha ma blaai n sim paA tarau 8 l>a ., sim pam Ja6 " sim malt mra II sim (18) wa rot • sim ma• . fia6 " sim pa6
l A omits fi:om here to samit tun lew, inclusive. 2 A inserts a426. dabok 9 II Sim Wiha taw tl sim ma bat M Sim min talom 10 II Sim briU gala tl siJ.il Jea\ slop I 5jsiJ lei
• 1 '1 5 - A A O d ri i a g n h . s e . h r t a s s b 0 a m . a/hl1.0 (for 0maha.0 ) and omits 0ja0 • ' 4 6 8 O O A r r i ig o g · m . . h i h t a s a . s s C s l u . im. 4 ' l 1 B B A m p m a a u , , k . r r . j o it k a . m - a _ jnok. 2 5 8 O B A r i c k g a r . a lh i u n u . s i e n r . t s nab. c s a a B F F o o d r r a s t a im l m Jl o m j i o . a w t a A m ·h B a s h p a t s a m . 1 1 0 t 1 j m w O it o r t u a t . m a l . o '.

MON INSCRIPTIONS
l>ART II]
EPtGRAPHIA BlRMAN'ICA ( VQL. ill
86
24. ku[i]w. c[lik 1 1] sim (dani) [ii] si[m] sarui[m] s[im] sat da~oil]
1
gan
19. • [ • t ]a • g • u i • . w . . . [ t . la . ] . . . 1 , . , s . . [i . m . . . f ( . i • ] . s . i . m . . ) . m . . b . a . . . . s a . 1 [' si]m . [ . I J . o . n • . • . . s] i . m . sim . m . b . a . . . . a . y . • . s i . [ m . . j ] . r a . ( y) ia mba (p)ii • [s . i m . ] . . p a . ( g . ) . a 8 . • . s . [ i . m . ] .
.-
. . . . . . . . . ..
25. [sim] (p) ati 4 sangan 1 1 sim ban tu 1 • pgay (Bhimap )ura 1 1 s[im
2 o. (pan) pan i (si]m ca[ga]n 1 • sim (bha) a ba[k]e[t] • [s]i[m mba a] mahasami Pago • s]i[m mahasami Singhuiw •] ••..
[ 1 s]i[m mba l]u[it •] •. . . . . . . . . . . •••••••••
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
..
. . .
.• 26. [sim l)]uip ' si[m d]uiw da[n]r [!!] sim [tw]an (dhatek) 8 • s[im ro]w
6
2 1. [k]agak 1 sim mba lau {ban) 4 1 sim ar(h )a[n 1 s1m a]poin s[irh t]r[it] sa 1 sim jray (t)aya .t si[m] (c)I[uin]9 1 ·sim gatal). 10 pa[n] .......
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(mba) 6 sam [. sim] .. ... ..
. . .. . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . .. . 27. [tar]h[im , sim] (k)are[h] 11 s[im] tar ka[la'Q J sim mbo' u] gwot
[si]m [mbo' rat] 1 si[m twan bl]a[y t sim m] •..••.....•
22. [s]im [tha]n 7 k(wa)h 8 [• si]m [mb]o' yage' (1 s]im .. 9 (mba g)ram 1
[ . s ] . i [ . m . ] . g a . t u . i m . . 1 . s [ . i] m . . ( a . ) . 1 0 . • . • • . 28. [kru]n ph(an nan}11 [1 s]im dala[m] (t)as[ay] 19 '[s]im ga[t]ui[m] pham
1 sim jray p~a 1 [sim tika 1 sim kho 1] si[m] dran thar [• sim] •
~s. [sim ac;l](wo)n 1 sim [a]jan 1 [s]im j[ray r]a(t) n 1 sim [m]ba {cau) 19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.. 14
• s1m k . y . ak . 1 9 . r . h . u . ~ . s i . m . . pa . [t i] ap . u . (h . sim) 29 .. [ray singa' ii] si[m pan lay r1 sim] (du)n 14 jala 1 [sim] (wan 15 na)y 16 1
,. [sim] (truk 17 kanlaw) [1 sim mah] ta jn(u) 1 sim [a] ........ .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ·- . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . ..
I •.
J Perhaps sam. s Possibly cariJH, or taban. S Possibly a P I Or clit P s Or jrah P s Looks like pagnti, perhaps an error for panga 1
• · 4 Possibly tan. 5 Possibly t-rat. · 6 Possibly mla P 4 Or 'Wan P , 5 Perhaps to be read sanda n. s Or ta l
7 Or Iha.,, P a Possibly lemah or kuh P 7 This might be read Bhim Pu (or Bii. P) ra. 8 Or gatek, or ball•t P t Or khluiR.1
9 Perhaps a, making. am6a. Or else bha or Mu 1 10 Or batal;i P l1 Or tareh P l:i Or pham janan 1 or phom .n•n f
IO Or .dP 11 Or ,-d,i P 19 Very doubtful. l! Or kasay P 14 Conceivably wun~ 15 Or p!J.n P 16 Or jay P
18 Under the final k (which has the virama) there appears to be another e. I take this to be a 17 It is uncertain whether the initial and final consonants of this word are i <>r # 1 and tbe vowel
later disfigurement. If It is the engraver's own correction, we must read :karhu for rhu. u or a.
U OraputP . .
sim maii glon n sim kyak tnmlon " sim (!a4) kuiw ktik u sim dhani l .i sim ea muiw n sim skaA not! t "
i t S a j j ; n l f - I ' c t a b l i t f " i k a t n k • f w . I u I " e i g ~ i t s s t ) ' i i ( f m m I i I U ' s l H s ) k . d i h m i a y U t s ~ a m i m k m m a I I a k s t w t S h a a a l e y i i s b w 6 \ u I i I k f s 1 1 k 1 1 a f i S i m n s s K W u i i m m h O g t h o k m ( a n " ~ w 1 1 1 a l ) s s i t I i m I l h m k o . u s a n i i q m b k m I a h t o k a II k s l i i y s 1 m y m 1 a im a k s g i d a m e b h t S ' a a a n Q n g e m II l u 5 l a s i II w i q j m l u u s a k i 6 u m k b 4 l h I b a t u I m I ' a s 2 n i s a m m i m I 1 l b I 1 a a m s s f k g i i l o m m h r ' a a I I 6 n m n a S a a r i m m h d b n u a ' r i n s a s w l ( i h a m ~ f 1 o 1 J ) I I I I g s p i s s t a m i a i a m t m l r u u \ i a a m w s 4 i p r a a o a I I I i I n i s • S w s 1 W i i 1 m m a s i a s m i c 1 m a 1 I a I d w g . s s a a a i i k m m m n r c i f k I I a I b n k s a s a m i b i a m m 1 a a i 1 s s t l t p > a i a i . a m u r w m h n ip u k m m 1 h 1 a 1 1 l a a a s t s h l a i } g u m b a . t 1 h s a 1 1 a n 1 a k a m s i i a y i . i r a 1 n d h 1 . S k u s i m ( i ! n i : r w 1 m o g a !) ' h a ) d i u u j s r a i h a m w c n i h lo i a t u 4 m n p a n a s 11 n - i i l m s s p s i i s i m ; m i a m a r l 11 a b m tw n t a s a u i a m m h s n 1 a 1 r ' r r o p g a a s t a a t i a m i . i t i 11 n e a 1 k 1 s s b i i 1 s a m m 1 1 1 i n m s s w h t i w b m b n a a u i a l n n i r t t c a t A u b n k n i t a n a s s m p a a r q 1 a i 1 a a 1 n 1 n . s i f i l s n m s h s B i i i m s m h t i ( i m 2 j m j m r 7 i a a ) ~ o m f p h j Q a a t k s a m r a s y a r q t h a u m t II i u A m n n s • h s 1 a 1 n i 11 s m s 1 i 1 m s l h a i i m k g t s h i R a p m l n u r a h n i m 7 6 a p a : q m h h k o 5 a e a a 6 s n 1 p r 1 a t h d m u s e r i " a i h m ( . 2 P s 6 f 1 a g m " 1 ) g a s t s s o m i i i a m m m ~ a "
m 11 b s ~ i r m v jr k a h i o r t ak " a s i Ii m < s ~ im lt ya ·m k a m c a a u t al 11 e w s im 11 k s y im ak j r k a a i n m a w 9 a " i s n i m si :rh p ai k l y a a p k u h p ra " h si 1 m 1 ( 2 l 3 a ) lo m si m io a u 4 s o i n m . n p a s i b m a b a e6 ja n • y j m r a a a i h b a 6 p a h m y u a a 6 s im ( 11 2 9 s ) j b in r n a a 6 i t a 11 s i s 6 11 i g m s a i s m u pa i k 11 l h s o ( i 2 m 8 n ) p s k i a r m u 6 A d I a r p a a h i n a 11 i t l h si a ~ m w a~ d u u n n s s i i j m m al a m d . a a , l a a m i m m a i l w t a s a s a n a a 11 t i a s a i n m i n si p m s a i l m u g i t k a t q r u u u i k 6 m M lt p tl u h u h a iw m B : i f u t r s s si i i m m m
nm ..
1 Or hl•m? s A khl11n talai. 1 Written dhanim. li1 B nwon. a Error for
s B tam. e Or mom? 4 Written danim~ s B l:haluin. e B J:arim.
.
8 A j'faai -ra.t. 9 B k.ane. 'I Orig. inserts another rim. s A muh. 9 A p!uulo••

. MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART II]
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. Ill
88
35. m twan akhwon ' [sim bal]a " si[m d]ar[o]n [s]a si[m m]an[ga]
r 30 • tago[n] 1 sim basah a 11 pQ~Y Sren sim t[ w] a[n smin] ( cun suin 1 s sim [s]im [k]run 1 era 1 sim camb(u)in t [sim duiw 1 k h]aweit :a 1 p<;lay 1
drat) [' s]i[m] (h)an • sim parhak (ga) • • • . • • • . •••••••
1 .,. . . . . . .. . . . " . . . . [Yat Khret 1 M]ah Smift 1 s[im] . . . • . . • • • . • • • • . .
• • • • • • • • ! ·• • • • • • .
• [n] gai 8 r sim jra[y -cab] • s[i]m kya[k] ta[lu! • sim ray k?an ' • sim 36. sum·, -sim ta[r] skem t [s]im pan 1 sim tko' ifii t -sim jray na(g)uir'
31 c [s]im dapuin b[r]au • ' pQ.ay (Tar) 4 [sim] kyak Rajadhira[t]
1
amat W]i[jayasiha s]i[m lagw]or .glu s1[m mba] sam1il • ••••
. . . . . . . . . . . 1 . . . . . . . . . . .. . 1 . . [sim] kyak (thon ' sim) •.... -...•.
.
37. r • [s]im [kyak] gatui[w] sim damra' • si[m] amat jray [n] p<;lay [J]ray
J
32. [t]ama[t th]ana ' sim bah [t]al[un ' sim] croh sim [gaQ.uy 1 r] si[m sim kamluiit (tla) 15 [s]i[m] jip sa[y • s]im tar sanati p<;lay Klon
1 I II
b]a(nqa)[n 1 sim] (saggakam) 1 [sim] la(t) • [si]m mbuiil afii • sim Pal[a]y s[irn 6 s)mi[ft] . . . . . . .. -. .
saguim • s[im] . . . . . . . . . . ...· ... (si)- 8
38. m pQ.ay [krun] 1 smin [Si]nghuiw kuim sim kya[k] (m)ah[e]cararil 8
1 •
33. [m s]r[o'] khyuit s[i]m [mah] lwan ' sim ma[h] chu k(w)e[t]1 pQ.a[y] Lanka krun 7 (T)a[ wal).]tJa 9 sim kruti 7 brat sim kruti 7 kawa
i 1 i
pgay [Dguil si]m (mah damru) 8 sim ma[h] du[n] • [s]im rak 9 sim krun ·kamer pQ.ay Sa . r. (si)- 10
· , I! t 1 • 11
1 s[i]m duiw canlan· « [s]i[m] pubba .. ~ . . . ..•. 39. m [ta c]an(a)ti 11 1 s[im] gnin (la)n twan [srni]n [S]udasuim r sim adin
a[dait] 1 sim bale[n r sim] kyak brau n pc;lay Da(m)k[a]k sim amlt
[ok s]im sapa sim mba
34. w ., sim du[i]w panah sirri · goh dha[m]maram ~ [s]im [tak] ·(nail) 10 1 11
t
[a sim l]ambat ' sirn [apa 11 gay r s]im [k]ya[k] (gnak) 11 1 sim nelu 40. [Buddhawa 1 sim] Iaten 11 pQ.ay Da[l]a sirn [ky]ak [gn]i ., [s]i[m]
Ian • sim da[n luJ.. • . . • . • • . . • • . . . . . • (si)-18 kutti kwon (p)ra[k 19 1 si]m (k)a[ban] 18 1 [si]m mba dui[n t] sim
phyen r sim .twan b[r]ak t sim [j]atiam 1 sim bran bra(u) 14 1 sim
1 Very doubtful, p~rhaps .a. proper name. 1 Or tan P
9 This transcription treats ·a subscribed mark as accidentaJ. If it is to be taken into account, l Or trun? i Possibly Yak (or. Lak P) and Khrek.
the transcription would be ga ani~ ~ 4 Or khan P. a Or buir, wuir, or dhuir P 4 The initial may be k, the final may be n.
· 5 Or gaef ay P 6 Conjecturally restored. o Or kla, or klam P 6 Originally sih, corrected to sim.
'1 Or kmetP 8 Or damra P 7 Or kran P 8 Or pa0 P
11 Or ,,at P 20 0 r nun P 9 Or Thd:', or Ka-a P 10 Conjecturally restored.
11 Or sapa P 11 Or tnat P And perhaps the vowel may be u. 11 Or canan P · lS Or brak P
19 Conjecturally restored. 1a Or tqbiiit ·P 14 Or bra?
pH taboil 11 si(35)m twan akhlon · 11 sim phala n sim darhol\ sa 11 siril mah n sim kru6 era 11 sim
, muh ka 1 gnu 11 sim asek 11 sim gala d.u6 2 11 sim muh iia t 11 sim gaya:A (30) ea clot 11 sim pcJai Sre6 damyuili 11. sim duiw kaweA 11 pqai Lakhlek l n siril muh smi-' 11 sim badow 2 glam 11 sim jrai ( 3 6)
'tun W sim twan khllnS suin II sim dhrat II si.ril ha!\ II sim parak gata II sim tapuin pi bafla .. ll. sim sum II sim thaw skem II sim pan 3 ,, sim kko' iill: II sim jrai naguiw II sim tamuin brau ff pqai Taw 4
ba}aai Cah II sim pa(31)6 g-ai 11 siril. jrai cah 11 sim kyak ta}uai l! Sim raai kha6 II sim amat ff 11 sim kyak Rajadhirat 11 sim kyak thon 11 sim wiha smit. tha(37)w " sim kyak gatuiw o sim damra'
Wijayasiha 11 sim gagow glu6 11 sim ma sami6 11 sim ma dyo6 11 sim jrai lhol\ " sim (3~) ta.ma 11 sim amat ,jrai 11 pqai Jrai sim gamlui6 roo 11 slm jip sai n sim ta sanhal\ n pqai Klon Phalaai u
tan 4. "· sim hail tam 5 tu~ " siril cron 11 sim gaquai 6 11 sim baran 11 sim saggadaai 7 11 shn lat s " sirit shn smita Si6ghqjw 11 si(38)m pcJai kru6 smi6 s Sil\ghuiw kuim u sim kyak pahecaram n pqai La6ka
muai aiii n sim. saguim. \1 sim dhammadu 11 sim kama ma soai a si(33)m sro' khyuit 11 sim muh kru6 Kawanna 11 sim kral\ brap n sim kra6 kawa 11 sim krul"i f3 kamew 11 pqai kru6 Samrim 1 .,
lwan u sim muh chu kneh 11 pcfai 9 Lagun tun n sim muh ba pru n sim muh dun n sim rak 11 sim si(39)m ta ca9a6 It sim gniii Y!n twan smi6 smin Suddasuim 8 II sim adin . adal'\ II sim baJe6 II sim
duiw calan '·' sim pubbaram .n siril kyak ma sam kyo(34)w 11 sim duiw inah " sim .Pugoh dl]ammari kyak brau " pcJai Damkak 9 · u sim amat ot u sim sapa 11 sim ma {40) Buddhawa • sim Iate6 ,.
•. • 'sidi thak nail 10 II ·SimJamak n sim aba gai II sim kya.k gnuk " sim nelu lhan ft sim daA Iuin II 1im pqai Data 11 sim kyak gniA 11 sim kutti twan 11 abrak 11 sim kaba6 lO n sim ma dui6 11 sim
JI 1 » 4 '1 A A A A g n t a R u u g . n . g n . a , ddai. g o 8 A B A t t l u a a n n w . . a k. e a 9 B B A g c s a u im t n ja . . i. 1 7 4 B O B r L T S a h a k a h m w th r . f e , k p . ossibly. s 5 2 A B A p S o a u m d d o i d t w s a . . s im. 1 a n > B A A D M kr a n l m n . k . d q.;.
10 A kaii Hn.

Ei?IGRAPHIA BIRMANICA .(VOL. iii
i>ART 11] MON INSCRIPtIONS
4 . 1• [t]aba [pr]e 1 sim [s]ar(wa)y 1 1 sim ap~a ~an 1. sim aQat r s1m
[g]ayail [tak 9 sim ama]t [tarn mrek • s1m l)ana[n ' s1m \>]a(k) ' • • • • • • • .., e • • • • • ·a • • e e • • • • •
1 .........• ·. .•.. (•) sim ca[tta] "1 \miti [jnok t sim] ca[tta] 1
[sren ' s]im dan(c;l)ay 5 6
• \>u[ili. c;lwot] . • • . . • • . . • • • • • . • . • • · • .. ,•
L 5·• • • • • e • • • • • • • • • • • • • • . . . . " .. ' . . . . . . . . . . . .
(m sa) 9 [;• sim k]r[u]fl [man] ·1 sim [hati) a
(Fragments a and b.) ( o t) • w a [ o • ]n e 4 a 1 • s • i m I o ky • [ e a k • ] - 5 9 • ~ . . . . . . . . . . •; . . . . . . ..
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 6. . . . .. . . . . . . . .
I. • - .. • • • 4 • • • • • • • • • • • & • • . • • • •. ,, • • • • • • .. • • • 'ii! • • •
. (mat) . (i) .. . .......••... (pc;lay) 8 [Mram 7 sim ja]mha(m) 8 [( sim cama']
7 sim, [pan glak) si[m] ~ . . . . ..•.•
11
2. . . . . .. . . . ' . . . . . . . ... . . . 7. • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .... (ka)na sja 9 sim (ja).(u) ....
. . [kyak \>ay J ~ twan 1 s1m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (gmi cah 11) 10 sirn [dan]i
11
• • • i • • (pajau) [1] sim kyak bi taga ·J sim sm(ift) 1~ ...•
3· . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8. (Koliya) 1 {sim] ............. [smi]ti l(oka]. [r] ..1 5 [11 sim ]On
. . . . . . . .. [si]m [khwa]y jnek 9 r sim khway <Jwo[t] kyak] . ~ .... r [1 sun clap 14 chu 16 sim t]ar ma[ti 1 o 16 p4ay
.. , . . . '.. . . .. 18 •
"' Candapuri 17 1 si]m . o • ·• • • .. . .. . .
1 Or scirwuy., or sat'uy ? si Or tak?
3 Or mnt P 4 Or qat, or qdk ~ 1 Or cakka 1
0 Or donday, or dana')' P 2 Very doubtful. s Or han, or pan ?
e This appears to have been the last line on this face in its original state. See the manuscript 4 This may be an error for ~won'. 5 Conjecturally restored.
.version, which says so. . . tl Conjecturally, restored, and extremely doubtful. 7 Or M1'im P
a Or jamha P : f
7 This fragmentary face is made, up of two pieces, (a) to the le~t, .11. 7-18, (b) to the right, 11. 1:1S.
From 1. 8 to t. 16 they practically joined, hardly anything being missing between them, at the time 9 The preceding syllables are presumably part of some place-name.
when the oldest extant estampage of (b) was taken. But since then the lower portion of (b) at tht;! 10 The preceding is written in small compressed characters and the reading is Very doubtful.
line of junction seems to have broken off. Besides this, there is a good deal of illegibility along the The last part may be caleti 1. For gmi we might read smin (with the n superscript over the c).
line where the pieces should meet. . The amount . missing • be!wee.n the end of Face K and what 11 Or pa/a P U Conjecturally restored.
remains of Face L can only be estimated from the manuscript version. IS Looks like Zokatra. 14 Or tliip P
8 Possibly mah. 9 Error for jnok. 16 Looks like r;hwa.
16 A small mark here may be a para.graph mark. It seems to be like the cypher o.
17 Or 0pun ?· 1s Or e.
phye6 " sim twan brak 1 " sim jatJap " shn brail bra 11 .sim (41) ta~9: bre 11 s1m sarai 11 sim
a:pha s pd " sim awat 11 sim gaya6 kak " sim amat tam mrek 11 s1m 1ilaw 11 sim. pak sren
s s t p " " p i a h c i m : r s J n · ( a a i s 3 i u m u ) a i k L m m y l s d l h i a a a u m k · n p t i P i a q ~ l i a f a k p · a J i h 1 l h • 1 : w " a a t B a k m p s : l a d a i o a s m . i a k ' i i l m t j p r p 1 r 1 K a a o p , n i k , d l s l o c . i a n m a 1 s i 1 l m i · h m s s u a t ( i i h i 2 m m l t a k ) \ u n « y k i a k m a n i y k w w u t a r a 1 k a a a 0 l s i a a i s n m i m m • • q a i n p o h n s a a t i 1 1 l i m ; 1 l l " t m \ k · s m > m y i a a m a : a w n p k h a · k a d i " y m g 5 a r a a a • s k l m i u \ m I t I l m p a c s a s a ! m p i i a , m a ~ 1 k " i k l ; y s D s d a h m i u k m a l i w e w n 6 a t k ~ 1 u · . . a , i n 9 i m P i " " l a 1 u I 1 I s s \ ~ 1 > k i s m m u . a . i s i m n p i m k s " I m I y s a m ~ 1 s s i k 6 a u : i r n n il n l s o m k k i k p i u y 1 ~ i a i t a i w i k d l . y ( a a k e L i M w l ! a \ o l 1 a r " ) n y < i y a . J 1 m a p ~ a 8 a • a 1 i " " 1 2 1 t l s g k p p s n i i a a l q m m a s n i a i u i h i m t i p j ( n 6 1 a 1 8 a u t k ) i a s h l n w i m K m d a d g y o ( h a l a S l a g a k i . ) y 6 a u s a m a n a I a m 9 n 1 i 1 c s l a 1 a b 1 s s q i a i k . s r m n u i h h 1 . 1 r i a h l k n h j s 1 r 1 a j i h a a o m a i n p s 1 m 1 i r m " a k k s '9 i y i r l l . m a u J a j a a w t d k a \ m r i m a h s k m u u a m a r i h a u n s i u 6 n i 11 m d a 1 h 1 l s 1 1 o 4 a i k I m s u s a 1 i i 1 n m p m g 2 h m n 1 5 1 r h t i o a a i o s l n 1 i a 1 l i i \ i m s z ( g a i t 6 " t m w a : ) ( 6 n 7 s u o i ) i n l b p m A > q m K a n a ( j j : e a 4 o o i s u ) r n 6 i a S m 1 a 1 n o a k g j s m y s u a k i m m a i y r m 1 k i 1 a i m 6 c k s m a 1 i 7 1 m t g n a t s k a a h m s y t j i p o a i a m s i u p m k g i i u i a a k i b j w w 1 a m 1 j i n m a s t o 1 1 A 1 i 1 a h m k g · s s a c i i a m 1 m m e 1 b h a • s i 1 h b 1 s d J s a a m n a m s s l S i e a a . i m c i i w l l k a • t h • t a t c w s e a h a i j s a u m a p m i . 6 m u h 1 k 1 i 1 . 1 1 a k 1 a k 7 1 w y s s q t i i , i a a m o m k h " a t
l A prdk. s A apa. s B Luin. m.
7 4 A B l m u u in li . . a 5 A A m ba a n p . a . 9 6 B B Z D a a n f . ) tf,a Phla. . 1 1 1 B A o in m s i e t r s t . s n here. 4 2 B T h f i a s m s u ee n m a. s to be an error for si 5 A Jamha'.
IO A kyii. 11 Error. for sim P II A nii.k. ta A kl1tl. 6 Te be read tanl. 1 Error for sim.
a A omits 1 •· 9 A. Koli1a1J.

PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 93
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. Ill
14. (•) [sim p ]a[ti ja] . . (m lwan) 1 [.1 sim mbo' bui]ti [sim mr]i(k ta sum
m~a] [~ si~ 11
9 . [mb [• o ' s ] i m • ] • m .. b 1 a ( [ m m b b a u k i ) y ] g ( ( 1 th s a i w m 1 s1m) \ab . a • t) [p b1w] s 4 m 1 i Jn s . u n W [ [ i d s a u k k a ] a b m h m ut a ] [ ~ ) ) 1 · 1 s · 1 : m · l . a · g • ] a · n · 4 · p h . [ . en . . ,1 . s . 1 m [r ] ] ( . t . )a 0' • 6 (u g ) a . 6 . 1 ~ - 0 [ a 1 be 1 t p 8 c ;l J a [ s y i m )s m .. ah ] (sren)
sim ea[u kamfian 11 ~ sim garok ga J , . . .
a·
6 15. [nJ (ji) .... (Gawampati) . . . . [1 sim] j[on] kya[k blan
••• (kana) [1 sim] (la)mba [pham ., sim tar] (kwan) [ • sim] (mba)
10 [lau] [si]m (t]wan [bar]7 ma(h) 8 o 9 p.c;lay Sa]t( o)n 10 sim [jo}n nak]_ (~ t). [pcl~_Yl {~at L~mluim 9 si_m) [pan tara]ti sabl[u 10 ·1] si[m
1 [11 1
kya(k] sa(w)a • si[m pan s]a(w)a [1 sim cac;lok] 11 mahasa]m1 [Smghm}w ,, [s1m] gaya[il ta]m[h]a[k ·1 ~ 11 1] (sim) li
•••••• , •
1 1. [kyak] (t) ....... [• sim] (lo)w [kyak a] .... [1 sim ~w]an sagr~ i6. ..... ~ . ·.· ~· ; ...... [Singha](nika)[y r J 13 :1 pc;lay C]a(rot) u
nafla[b 1 sim jon kyak celasa] t s[im twa]n [mbu]iy [ de]wi .r [sim r~ :lffi] (JOll) 5 _[k~ak gau;-l :I Sim] (~lo')_~B [dtOW 17 1] Sim mrafl [juifl •
twan adan 1~ t;l.wot]
l
s(im) 18
·. ..
~
•
Q1
j
pqay J r a s1m cadun 19 saman
«<
s1m twan cala]( dhi) 2 0
••••••••.•• (tow) [1· sim kya]k banfa(jI) [r sim] (kyak) [sura
12 na]n s[im kyak] ... [in] (ln)a[il 14 ~ sim pa]n ablfi ' [• sim] 1 7· • . • • . . • • . • • . . .- . . . . . . [• s]i[m] c[ ela S]adhuim
(p )are 1 ( fl 16 g)a[k ., sim kyak gapat 16 r si]m ~[i] . . . . s1m [than smin] (gra sfan 21 ';f sim) 92 [tka'] ( caren) ras , si[m fii da]6
ca[n sarun ~' sim taban] 25 jno[k ,, sim k]ray ss ba
1l
. [sim as]a[m cal]an [ • sim crep ,, sim d]anla[y. smin) ( ~ sim dun 17
13 1
Tuik) [Gala a smim] 18 •••••• (bra sa)[man 19 r1 sim twa]n [smiil 1 The w may be m, and the n may be r. I PQssibly k1'uiz..
Bruim 1] si[m mah] cammha 20 [1 sim jak ri] :1 sim, quil [lw] •. 8 The h might bet. 4 Or lawan?
6 . Or k~' ? . 8 Or gam P
7 Here there is a mark, much like the one in l. 8, supra. 8 Looks like pdly.
l The first part of the missing portion looks like l. 9 Very doubtful. 10 Or sabla p ·
~ Very doubtful, particularly as to the vowel.
11 The mark here somewhat resembles the numeral. figure 3 of that period. ·
I The si is certain, all the rest is more or less doubtful. 4 Or piw P
lll Conjecturaliy. restored.
s 5 O Th r e c re a k, i s c a a n k m a, a o rk r c u a n k d a e , r a n t d he m m fii in w P hi ch I take 6 t o O b r e k u ac n c ? id ental, thou 7 g h O r i t b a ra ri t h P e r . resembles l!l Here there is a mark· rather like the one in 1. IS supra.
14 Or Caroh, or Ca not P Or Cane Cah P
subscript h. 15 If rightly read} this is written in abbreviated form, like the hen of N 4. It looks rath · rlt i
1 9 0 H Fa e i r r e ly t h c e e r r e ta i s n e . e ms to be an illegible mar 1 k 1 O so r m k e h th ae in f~ g k P a.s in 1. 8, supra. HI Or hhadan P 16 o r tk o ' p · 17 Or dron P . er t e o.
18 Here there is a mark like the one in I. I 5 supra:
patib 1 l lB e s C T w h o it e n h je s t c h u t e p u e . r v a r o s ll w c y r e ip l r e t e s . m to . a r I e r f k d i . : i n i t : e r t p o l 'e b t e e d c ? a n s s id n e r 1 e l 4 o d o O k ac s r c • i l d • ik e s e n j t a a a n l , ? v w i r e a n m za u , s t w re h a ic d h p w a o re u . l d I h o h w a e v v e e r t . a b k e e n in c i o t m to - 2 1 1 9 O O r r s c l a u d i i t p ? P Or cau dip? · . s H o V C e o r n y j e d ct o u u r b a t l f ly u l, r e p s e to rh re a d p . s ga.
represent iz., as m the abbreviation. of hen (e.g~, N 4). 2!l Or cagd ?· !4 Or sarafz l
16 Very doubtful. There is a mark before the word, but this can only be accidental as there is 95 Or taban ? 26 Or tray P
no occasion for a stop there. The.g might be ~' the pii might be ha, and the .t might be w r.
17 Very doubtful. 18 Error" for sim? 19 Looks like sumfi,ft.
20 The anusvlira is quite clear, but perhaps we should write cam mha. Or the h might be a b.
s s i i :rh ~ mail ~ c a am bh m u h m a 1 s u i ~ s im jak ~o 2h ri 11 sim k : q u u ~ il a L s w a~ a e n t (14) siril pail jar am lwan 11 sim mho' 13 b 1 · 6 k a~
ta6 mail u pqai Candapuri " siril juin kyak (9) mho' imakl It-siril ma' 2 bak 11 sim abak " sim smiii mruit 11 kyak. cra6. 11 4 '' sim muh sre6 11 sir.ii Jagan phen " sii:
Wisukamma 11 sim ma muiaiS dhat 11 si:rh jip huiw 11 siril'daka bhut u si:rh cau kamilon 11 sim ma g~~ " ~~at ~a(t 5)6 N 1 m ;" si:r_n_ Gawa:n~a~l s.adh Ulm II sim juiA kyak bala6 5 nak II pqai Mat Lam~ .
garot gapuiw n siril mak (10) karan 11 si:rh 4 lam~ pham 11 siril taw kun 11 sim ma: lau 11 sim twan u1~ ." s1m _paA t~ra~ _sablu 11 s1m m.ahasam1 .~1il~huiw _u sim ~ayaa\ ..t amlak 11 sim pqai Gra:6 11 sim
bam6ah n pqai Sa.tuiit n siril juili kyak saw 11 sim pail thaw 11 siril ca.qok 5 11 si:ril juiii (u) kyak ta mrf 9 l (1 d 6 ) · S J 16 - gh · a .mka • a 1 . 6 11 ~ d11' 7 pqa1 - Carat s1 • m 106 ky . . a k gam-1 B 11 sun t . a ka' drui.6 11 sim mra A J • U I ': 6 11
" sim juifl kyak Asali sim twan sagro6 6 ilal;l 11 siril juifi kyak celasa 11 ,siril muiai 7 dewi " sim twan 11 p .a1 raa1 11 s1m cau. •Pt samail 10 n s1m twan calagan n 2 11 12 pqai Mattama 11 sim tal . 6
dadan qot" sim kyak.gabassa (12) tuifl n sim kJrak dhandhaji n siril kyak su nen nsbn kyak Ii l6e6 men ( 17 ) 11 s1 · m • ce1 a S a. dh u1· m· 11 s1 • m · t h.a.. n sm1· .u 11. pi:a t. n .t ail n sim taka' caia 11 sim iii dai\ ca6 11 saa tn\ua n
\, sim pa6 ablu 11 sim barok s 11 sim kyak gahat 11 siril bi khat~ 9 n (13) sim asam 10 cala.611 " sirh.
crep n sim dataai ir.1 smi6 n sim qu.6 Tuik ·Gala 11 sim twan sabra samait n siril twan smiil .8ruim n 1 Or cammba. 1 B juk. 1 Or mbo'.
4 A asagot, or asagok, 6 A bran. 6 B Singhaniraai.
e 5 l A A B i c k m a h 4 a y o k a t a k . , . 1 : 0 B a W B B r a k it i n w t h e a n d n m m s a a ( r o m o r . n a . r A hc im ha . s ? ). m in. l g l 7 · a A a · p c m l u a u i n a i. . i . 1 s 9 J B A O ri b b g a a , r l c h o i n a s . i . . s . m in. 1 7 0 A A o s m a.m its ii n ,z 9 11. 1 B 1 B A g k o w .m an b h c i. i ilair4 1 9 2 A A ~o o m m it it s s 3 a ' .1 ' 1 • 1~

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. lL
94 PART II) MON INSCRIPTIONS
95
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. (m •) [sim
J 8. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .
kyak mrah 11 sim] ( dana) . . . (a) [si]m [sangha ja]dap[pa • s1m • • • • • • . • . • . • . 4 • . • . • . . • . • . • . . . . . . . . . .
mah a]n~[w " s1m trui]n [n 9 1 ] [s]i[m trer] A sim 9 [saddha gab] le • [ . r n) s[go)' li[nwor] ey . . [ . p . - a)· · · • · • . . . . . (ku)
1
M 5 · [ rey] • • • • -• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • ( tila fiaQ.) 1 [ Rama.
dhi]pati k~[ap t]u[y] . . . . . . . • . . . .. . . . . . . • . . . .. . .•
(Fragments a, b and c.)
... [he]n [u t]ila [fi]al:i [Ramadhipati p·or)
11
1. • • • • •. • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • . • .• . • .• . • .• .Cll .• .• • 6 )~~~ ~i[i]~ ~~[~J B~[n~ R·a~]
\k · .'. : : : .". ·. ' .' .'. · .' .' .' .. : : :
~ .... [tuy] (k)[ui]w [lar]8 . . ·
. . . . . ( cetr) [ra] ja [Mindhat ma cuin dah tau jamnok)
2. • • • • • . .. • • • • • • • • .. • • • • • • • • • • • • . • .. • • • • 11 • • • •
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p[g]a .. s
..
3
............... [Kaly]aJJ.i[cetI] (gab,) 4 [tuy n] 7. [y] [n d]ah tau
• • • • • • • ! • • • •••••••••••••••••••
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . jamno[k p4Jay kwo[n t]ila [fial}] .............. [klon] •.
3. .
4
(tha)n ma st[ui]w [bo]dhi tha[n tuy] ma st[uiw bodhi] w[o]-
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 0 • • • • • • •
......... l[or] (ma) 5 [u uit k]u sail ga[mlu]in 8. (') s. . • . .. . . . . • ••.... ['] klo[n t]uy 11 [t]lan ma
l Here there is a mark which might possibly represent the numeral 4 (or 6). stuiw [b ]odhi [gah dak tu]y 11 c;l.[ eh ta' J (1) • • • . . • • • (g]an[i
s There does not seem to have been another complete line below this one, so we. must suppose galau lar ra than ma dak] 4 c(e tl] t[ un l]er (bwo )-
11 11 (11] • • 6
that this record ended early in the next line, although there are a few traces of appat:.ently unconnected 6
letters that are barely visible under this part of the line. See the manuscript version. · g. (y) •••••••••••••••••••••••• (y) [11] kha [ma] cuip
a Above . this line theye are illegible traces· of another one. Here begins the se.cond of the
ara [ma sdal,mt] dla[m dha]t [gab d]ak ba[tu]y dla[m] dha[t]
fragmentary appendices. Apart ·from the evidence of the manuscript version, it is impossible to say 11
how much of the beginning is lost: as there is apparently no lettenng on the bottom part of the tuy 11 • • • • (anka)de [ra 11 k~u teh] c[ut thar] s[r]an gan{i
J
preceding face, the maximum loss may be roughly assessed at 25 lines. Face M has been pieced galau] lo[r ra rau ga-h
11
together out of three fragments : (a) to the right, from l. t to I. '20, (b) to ·the left, from I. 5 to 1. 39
and (c) to the right, from I. 18 to 1. 39 (~bich is the end of this face). The fragments do not fit 1 Conjecturally restored.
precisely and there is a considerable gap in the middle, where they should have met. 2 The~e seem to be two dots Qike a visarga) here, merely to fill up spare space.
:~ Very doubtful. 5 Very doubtful. Perhaps tau. B Con1ecturally restored. , 4 Looks like oak.
5 Possibly we should read 11 ha mwo-.
11 sim tabaA jnok 11 sim kraai pa sren 11 sa plat\ '' sim cau han ruim da.myal u sim raai ja(18)m n 6 Conjecturally restored.
sim kyak mrah 11 sim dana waai 11 sim sangharaja 2 damya s n sim muh anan 11 sim truin 11 4 " ~
sim trew 11 sim muh hot 11 sim karum 5 n sim jayagiri 11 sim ple 11 sim pla lat ,, sim su n ..
nfl snam tila 6 puin kyak trai Sakyamu;i,i ma pa pariniban gah II pa lnim 20 sniim kali Ion a tuai hen II 16ow ai. par:i tau ~etil wwa' ra 11 uit san gamluiil mnum (4) ku saddha gah lew sgo' lnow ai
pqai sakkarat 11 838 II gitu mrekkasuiw 8 mamak tnai acmit gah II Samit sim Kalya~i tuai hen It babwai pa(5)ra1 ceu. bodh1 . wwa' hen 11 rau gah tala iia\,l Ramadhippati khyap tuai hen 11 pqai sakkaraja
lwen tala ta' ma nwam pamik smik gwa' dun upasampada nal;l Siiighuiw gab II dun a tau 7 babwai 8 839 11 pa tam nu g1tu bhat hen " tala fiati Ramadhippati 11 pNow amat mwai ma himu Kraai
})veil hen ra n kha gab ma rau wwa.' tila iial;l Ramadhippati-sr1paramamaharajadhirat 11 khyap ra 11 ta KamaA 9 ma cuin dah tau jamnok a pcfai (6) kon tala iia"ti Baoa Ram tuai " kuiw klon bak ·than ma
tila pufai ta' wwa' ma klo' taka' Singhuiw gah 11· pc!ai Kalya~i hen buit dun upasampada dah uiw stan 4 .ceti ra n ~aja Min 5 ma cuin dah tau jamnok 6 pcf{7)ai kon tala 'ftab Ban.a U u Lak Woai
d11 ci 11 ~im tala 10 puiai fa' ma samit n kuim lew Kalya~isim gall (M 1) tuai 11 Ii kuiw law Y,mu ta. 11 ma cum dah tau 1amnok mwai pqai kon tala iiali Baiia · Barow 11 kuiw klon than ma sakuiw 7 bod hi
P<l<!-i ]Aren 19 Kalya~isim 'wwa' gah 11 ceti mwai, ma tup 14 tau rau KalyaJ?iceti pd.ai taka' Singhuiw It t4an ~a skuiw 8 bodhi wwa(S)' tun Jew 11 babwai lwe6 hen qeh ta' klon tuai dalan 9 ma stuiw bodhi
tij.' gab 11 puiai kbanham pa tup ku (2) Kalya~iceti tuai gap gaw kuiw law ymu Kalya~icetiJ5 " 9,a~ tua1 " ~eh ta' l~k ~aw ~~gadu~w ra 11 ~iii la~au l~w ra 11 than ma sdak IO ceti tun lew " babw(g)a.i
tnam bodhf mw.ai skµiw tuir lB ,tuai Kalya~ibodhi ga}J. tuai II pufai skui<;v law ymu 11 sak gab ra. puiai lwe~ ~eh ta dak tum. a tua1 '.L kha ma cuip ara ma dak glam, dhat gah ., dak pa tuai glam dhit
sgo' ciren (3) law mha 11 uit salt gamluiit ma klun pa kam saraii 17 pqai sim wwa' kuim lew 11 sgo1 tu;i.~ lak law a6gadu1w ra u kasu teh cut 1aw thaw san gni lalau l~w ra 11 rau gab kanham tuai
1 A dapya. 2 B inserts 11. s A dam,yu. 4 A omits 4 n.
6 B ka' ruai. 6 A ti. 7 A dan at. a B balma. 1 A inserts ta'. 2 B Gaman.
9 A apparently has 0paramamahfidhammaratrajadhi1'at. a A inserts 11. 4 A skan.
io A tla. 11 A smit. 12 B inserts ma. 6 Soi;iething seems to be o,mitted before Raja (Afara) and has certainly been omitte.d afteir Min
l4 A tU4i. jft A omits Ka~y81J.f,lt'I. 16 A omits. 6 . A msetts ''• 't Error for .s atui111. a Error for stuiw ·
9 A dtan.. 10 A sdah. · •

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vo.L. 111 PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 97
Ill
. . . . . . . . • {g]ah hen [11 dor] (gab) 16. (stuiw) 1 [ho] dhi (te)' 9 ler [11 kan]am l~r [aram kana n sala 9 Iar]' pc;lar
10 [k~n~tii]'' 'cth~n. chin);
' • • [jn]o[k mway 11] w[U]du[i]h Qe(h) ..••• [• [m]ana[}J.] n kwak lar 5 j . • • • • • • • .. [11 gafii .gal]au [lar ra 11
sa]n (tu)y [kwom ku g]arhah [t]ruh b[rau] bet mik .. tha]n [tuy tila fia}J. R amadhipa]-
I I. . • . . . . . . : . . • · ...... (calo)' a wudui[h pa]·uit n b[woy 17. [ti n kwom] ku amat dakui[p p]nan 11 {a]rath [pariwa gamluin ma
m]ana[b gati. g)ah [grop ku ni]ba [pa-uit] (n) [bwoy pc;lay gel:ti sala sdma]n 11 [swa]k ma spa sa[bhan m] 6 • • • • • • .. • ( dhat) [kyak
lar • yat k]amb(u) [pa·uit] 11 rau gah pr(e11) · tr]ay [gah ler] kana[m lar] (ta)m(nak) 'l ..... ..
u. . . . . . . . . . . . • • . . . . . . . m(a) da[\m]t kyak dhat [g]ah [it 18. (y) 8 •••• [rau] gah [k]anarh [t]uy h[e]n u [tnai] ti[ti tnay b ]uddha-
kanarh IS dlarh \>a th]ap 11 dlarh tuy ma ci[c]won ma (na}:i. pa gap) [w a gab 11] dhat [patimarup] . . • . . . • . . . . . 9 [kui m ler 1
[gwo]r sdal) cui[t g]ab [kan]am [tu]y 11 [m]luiw tuy [ma] fia}J. (bat) cireii. ptuy 10 low ku s]( m)i(n 11 • • • • (t) . . [a]- 11
na (kwo)· 6 19. ma[t da)kuip pnan gamlui[n]" atuin aci 13 ar[en] (fia~ ma) s(t)awa[k u
3. (w) •...•..• ~ •.... (s)luy ma [ci]cwon [to]' g.ah tui(m)7 lar [•] wan] phyuih dhat II pati[mariip] (11 bodhi gab II huim) 16 [lor)16 (kuiw
1
. (an muy)s to[' gab] tui(m) 1 (l]ar (kwak) .... (r) ra •ma· a·mat dakuip pna)n 16 ta ga[h] ..... .
11 l ••
(na}J.) dlam [~a thap gah] tun [ler 11 uit jmap] (dayon) 9 20. (hen) 17 11 [y ]al:i lanfi tnay brapba[ti gah he]n 11 t[ila] fi.al). Ramadhi
4. . . . . . . . . . [w] • . . . : .. . [g ]afii [g] alau 10 lar ra n rau nay ma pati kwo[m k]u 18 •••••••••••••• (n n jak Ion) 19 ••••••
1
lwon [tuy J kuim [11 na mluiw ma fi]aQ. bat na (kwow) 11 •• ( ci)· .. (tuy n cui)h dmaw 110 tau p4ay ta[m]n(ak) 11
[cwon gah n}wfidui[h] (he)il ma gluin ku thap [kwak cal]o'
1 Conjecturally restored. i Or wo' P
15 ....... [wiidui]h diam gah tun c;lak nu~ gara[y] mway tha[p n] s Looks like sal. 4 Looks like larau.
11
5 There is something under the v that looks like a g, but is probably accidental, or may represent
pnaft [k]amak pnan dan(lan) {mway thap u] dhup [mway] tha[p
an l belonging to the next line.
11 rau gah g]afii lo[r uit ra n than ma} 6 Perhaps mi. 7 Or tamnuk P a Or p?
9 The last of the iIJegible words might be stuiw. 10 Or btuy P
1 Or kanhain, or kanclam ? 2 Or chan ? 11 Very doubtful : it rnig~t be stuiw.
a Looks like gah or gapar. lSI Conjecturally r~tored.
4 Probably right, though it looks rather like ra l laga'. lS The original may (wrongly) have acim. 14 Or skawak P
5 Or kanham, or kandath P 6 Or two• P 15 All these words are very doubtful. 18 Or lon P
7 Probably an error for kuim. 8 Or an may ? . 17 Conjectural. 18 Looks like tu. l!t Or lot> P
9 Very doubtful: the middle consonant might be k or l, and th~ final might be w, e.g. dako-w. 2d Error for dman. St Or tamnuk P
10 Looks like walau. 11 Or twow P ·
..
h sa e 6 6 1 k 1 o p m 4 ai k u tn a k n b a c r e h ti a h (1 0 t ) r u g h a h . b h ra e u 6 1 h 1 e C il lo w r ni g k a h k u k iw ha g n w h ~ a ' m d t m ha a ~ A c g h a a { 6 l t j u n a o i k I I m k w an ai h a 1 r 1 il w ta u n t hi d n u i ( h I I) c Je c h a lo g ) ab a s I m I a s w k u a g i i w ft t i h 1 a J b p a o la d 11 u h i p l n t a e a w ~ ' le d r w h a a t k I a I b ii a t h n m a h w n a m ai t l J t a h a w ap n a a s u l} a d m R h u a k p m a n a m a d w h I i I a p i s p f t a a h ( a 2 1 . p 7 J ) a t r w i a u " p q g k a a i M h m n i g h k n } u . i l l a I a I m w k a w t u a i d t k a k r l a u a w ip • • m p t n h u a i k n n a II m it p a a m r ( a u 1 m 6 a ) j
wut duih pha-uit 1 bwai mnaJ;l 2 gah n bak grop yat oiba pha-uit bwai pqai s.ala. yat kamu pha-uit 11 pariwa 4 gamlui6 ma dmail · 11 swak ma spa sabhaA ma sa1om dhat kyak trai gah 5 le 11 kanham law
rau gab pren tuai hen 11 dow dnaai (12) mas thaput dhat kyak gab 11 kha gah khanharil glam dhat tamnak jnok· mw(18)ai ra 11 rau gah khanham tuai he!\ tbi tiil tbi buddhawa gah dhat
pa thap " glam 4 .tuai ma cicon ma 5 na}) gap gaw sQ.a}) cuit gah ka.nham tuai n mluiw jaman fiali pattimarup 6 bodhi ma skuiw7 kuiril lew 11 cire.6 pa tuai law ku smiA. wan mata.6 8 a( 19)mat dakuip
g b l a a t m n a d t h o a (1 t 3) ~ w a · t; t n a a p c g ic a o h n t k u u n i m Jew l aw u u 11 i t p i k m a a u p m d a a y c u i i c n o n g ( t a q ' ) w ga i h n a k u y ir a il t l t a u w ai i n n k g w ni a k l a g la n u i l l a aw w 6 r a r a 11 r 1? au m il n a a \l i p pn n a in n g t a a m ' lu g i a t h i a t t u u a i6 i a ( c 2 i 0 r ) e lt h e m n a 1 s 1 t • a y w a! a l t w 16 e u ll t p 6 h a y i e h 5 c g lh a a h t p h a el t l t im ta a l r a u p f ia b \ o l d R hi a m ga a h d h 1 i 1 p h p u at i i m n la k w o m k u k u d a a k r u U ip .
ma lon7 tmii. kuiril n na. mluiw ma nali bat 11a tow ma dcon gab wut duih hen ma gluin 11 kuiw
a
thap kwak calo' ra 11 11 s (15) wut duib glaril gah tun 11 qak nun garai mwai thap 11 pna6 kmak 1 Error for 1atuiw. I B salalz.
8 A omits all from " to 11, inclusive. 4 written parimwa (tor parfwcl');
l B uit. il A lo.mnalJ. 5 A omits. 5 A omits. 6 B paflmarup.
4 B khncam. & A mi·. 6 B inserts .t uai. 7 B sakuiw. Apparently the tight reading should be stuiw.
"I A klun. 8 A CJmits 11. ~ B jataw.
7

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA PART U] MON INSCRIPTIO·NS 99
21. (ma: kanaxh) 1 (lor gab ra} n rau ga[h tHa fial:i lwon l cf uillir tuy hen] 11 26. . (kuiw) 1 'man mway dhat tuy 11 tila ia}:l] tui~n tlm\· ra n mwi)a.y· caw.ek
tti[t kwon t}ru[h] ti[ia nal:il 51 Eti]ay sok gah 11 (11 akha gah}9 tila iial:i cuih a cui(p},, than [t]am·
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • .. • • •
.. [to'] gam[lu]in n [k]wom ku [smin] ~wa)· 8 n(a)k 4 (te'} is [t]un 11. aca sa~
{n jatan)4 [ama]t (sena]pa[ti] gam[l]uin ga[ln 11 .n],a ca1hary ky]ak 27. [n ma]sun cwoh ga[h ni]1man [t]u[y} 11 pha.,p baEe]a [tlll]y he[n 11
sr[I] ·sabhan cana{k) ma jno(k) . . • . . . . . . . . .. . d]ayyadhar 6 [ma] gap (gor skuiw daa) 7 ler skuiw dan ra n yat
.. (dhat) [kwom ku pat]i[mar]u[p jray bodhi} ra sana (ba)p 8 (~a}9 n mrek u sa[t n t]i- 10
• (n), .... -· [dhat] pa(t}i[marup bodhi n ma cuip] (te') 5 [tuyl gah 28 .. [la. fl]al:i [kui]W .d[an] tuy [sabeanl ma pa; [t}arh [kJu ~kanch]in
23 11 11 11 II U
dhatt patimarup] .. \. ............... ( dba)[t kyak] kray 6 [g]ah [le)r 11 ~9 [k ]uiw wei1 [a 13 tau ra 11 tnay] ceil tii thlen 11 tila fia}.l
gah tuin far ra [b]o[dh]i7 [Rama]dhi[p ]ati kwom ku ka~lo ti]na~
11 11
24 • (lew p~ay} s d[l]am [maJ s.[tu]i[w bodh}i [gah 11 a da\mt] 10r ra n rau 29. [t] (ararh). [pariwa] gamluin tui[n a bway] dlarh [dhat] ra 11 (khi
[gah da~ut lo]r [dhat bodhil . : .. (hen u sabhan}9 [t]uy [ma] pa g)a[h dal;mt gatuiw 14 l]wi mwa(m) 1 tuty ' tgo]n [b]ataft
' ••••
tarn ku (k)an[ chi]n 10 [n sama} leln gala ler cr(a)k 16 bdar far [tuy] da[l;l]u[t l]ar [dha]t [pJati[ma]·
11
25. (1 fial)) [ma weft] gdan [sna]k 11 ·£nalil ma. we[n saj_an] (sare) 11
l Very doubtful.
[HH>'rl [ii~ ma tuik le]' [ma rap mw]a(y ga) . . .•••
11 11 ~ Conjectural : it might equally well be Pr!ay kola gah.
(we)n 151 ra ' kuir weti tuy {h]en u [t]naii sa[r al tuy n [t]ila fial;l s Or cuiw?
4 Or tamnuk P
pren [larl
6 Or wo' P
e There seems to be an original flaw of the size of two letters (or ielft' dots) after tla:yra.
1 Or kanlam ·p- 7 Very deubdul' ift:rdJeeEI, except the 'ltl and the #..
9 Conjecturally restored. s Cf. F 46.
s Possibly ga-. 9 Looks like tau (or ta P).
4 Very· doubtful, perhaps jataw. 10 Two dots, like a visarga, here merely fill in spare space.
5'0r wo' P 11 Looks like tanchiiz..
a For tray. 19 There seems to be an original ffaw, of fhe sizie of a letter-,. Just 5efore R'l:f,iw~
7 Here, by anticipation, follows the vowel symbol a, which is perhaps repeated at the ~eginning is The a is almost certain : in any case the a symbol is certain and there ii ncr room for ·much
of the next tine and there to be read as following the consonant bef.ore which it is pta:ced, e1tller as e ·
more.
or as a p a V r e t r o y f d o o . ub , t ful. 14 There appears to be an original flaw before the u. No • is vi9i:bfe 1 and t:Jrte reading Is
doubtful but supported by the next line.
9 Doubtful, except the last letter. 15 The final might be p or w.
ID Looks like tanchin. 18 The anuS'lJiira is very doubtful.
11 Very doubtful: possibly sane or dan1. ..
12 Looks like ban or than.
padw~~al gamluiil jak tan ceh a tuai 11 ceh damali tau pqai tamnak (21) ma kha~am gah ra 11 rau tial.l ma tuik le' ma rap lak b~n pr.en kuiw wen tuai he6 t6ai saw a tuai u tala 1 iia}.l pre~. law (~6.l
&ah fa1a f)aJJ .cuih tuai n uit kon truh tala ii.all gamlui.6 n kon brau tala fla'{l ta' gamluiil 11 kom ku kuiw mail mwai dhat tuai u ta.la iia)J. 2 tuin kluil ra 11 mwai c;:awek t6ai s.uik gall u yatl. 16u tala
sJhiil" wa(2'2ln ;atai\ ainat segapati. gamluiil ga,h n na caraai kyak sri sabhan sanak jnok kfaQ he·ti; 1t fial,.l cen a cuip than tamnak te' tun u aca sa(27)n 50 gab niman tuai If phap o~c~ tuai heA 11 Elaya
wiil ahyeh 9a ~hat kom ku kuiw pattimarup jrai bodhi ra (23) 11 akha dhat pattima ma cuip te' tu<!i dbamma lew gap g~w skttiw dan Jew kuiw dan ra 11 yat sna pat tau mrek sat ta(28)Ja iial} kuiw din
g~.h !! dhat pattimarup gan pcl,ai than salaw dhat kyak trai' gah 2 tui.,, Jaw ra n bodhi (24J sat s le pqa:i tuai sabhan ma ptam kuiw t~hiii i:uiw well tau ra ua tilai cen iii heft tala iia:.Q. Ramadhippati ko,dl
• glam ma sakuiw 4 bodht gab a thaput Jaw ra m aII rau gah thaput raw dhat bodhi tuai M Saohd m~ pa ku ka}Q dfia(29)t aram pariwara 4 gamluin tuin a pqa\' g;Ja:r.iJ. dhat ra IJ kha gah t:ilal>,Uf g:~tlJ.iW )wf rti&nt.
tam kuiw tacbiil Sama Jeh It gala (~5) iialt 6 lwen damafl snak II 6 fiaQ ma wed sjan saneW lhow II
l A inserts tuin.
l ·Written parlpara, o:r parihr»a~ 2 A inserts n. s A omits pren to ftali, inclusive.
8 This word is corrupt: 4 Eri:or for sa/ltdSD~. 8 A inserts 5. ·
B Orig. hi.$ Ila. · t. A tnl'Jerts '"' • Written pa1'fwilra.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. III
JOO PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS I Of
. [rup] 1 la[t]fi gat[uiw] gab [ra u] saha[ssadh]a[ra] da[~]ut [lat]i.i dha[t] 1 - a
30 34. hen [11] phyui[h d]a\mt lor [dhat] pati[marup 11] p4a[y dlathm} dhil
tuy u bam(nali da)cam 8 (gah 1) 8 rap ket kanu [s]an ga(p)ar' stum
[ra 11] da[but] dha[t] tu[y he]n u wfiduih [dhat p]atimar[u]p gah ,
ma tmuy [t]au na thar ma tmu[y t]au na [sra]~
11 ru[p a]ggasawa[ka] Q[a • m]ah[as]awa-
31. [n n) 6 ma t[mu]y {tau na] ra(t] ga[h u r]au nay [ma] caro[h] smi[n ma
35. [ka) daca[m] cwoh • rup 9 [arhan br]au [ma go' ~t]adagga ca(h pi ,
dun abhi]sek .(rau 8 gah) [kui]m ra u [caro]h. cut p<l.ay sahas·
sadha[ra t]uy 11 (pa) 1 ab~i[s]e[k] tu.8 dhat u [pa} ru]p [u]pal;l [tr]u[h mal go' [etadagga] cab mwoy • r[ilp] 1 u[p)aQ.
brau ma go' etadagga cah [u riip] 8 mi [k]y[a]k'
32. [timarup gah] ra n rau (gah pa tuy hen] 11 aca sa[n dacam kuiw
paqwat ~ gatha .....• 10 mano 11-u[dana t]uy ma gal) anekajati 36. (tr]ay u rup mba kya~ tray 11 uit [k]u rup klam [cab] dacam (te') 15
[s]am[s]ararh kuim ler u ga[tha ma] cuin dah tau (ba) .. 11 [ t ]uy · a , ma [ sw ]on [lar] na s[l]ak ma lak lar na th[ o ]r ga[h] 11 re6
lor wuduih tuy he·
. (cl) 19~uda[na t]uy [ma]· gal} yada [have patubhavanti. dhamrna 1t] t
33
. (g)ah u (ku ]i[m] (lar n) kuiw (paqwat}16 [t]uy (hen} 11 [11 kui]w tuik 37. i1 a [p]nail c;[c;lau 11] can 6 pu[j]au tuy n drat [p]ujau mramar [ma] jar
phath 1 kuiw ho dra ra 11 rau ga[h pa t]uy u [u d]ab. la[k mi]n [ra tuy] he[il] na trn[ o ]' [l]ali ma .j[nok] san [g]ah " dar lar pan
11
ta[r]aii tuy n ma kuiw da[k] suiw quit [ra] dak ·
11
l Conjecturally restored.
I The bracketted portion is conjecturally restored. 38. sui[w] quit tuy [h]en n khfip cal[o)' [pan] masun ta[p8 ran] bodhi tu[n
I Very doubtf ut.
. le]r (n tu]i[w] akha la[k] min gah hen [ph]yuih lar~ pcjay kto6
4 Possibly wrongly spelt gabat'. 11
I Conjecturally restored. . [t]uy
8 Looks like ru, but probably the u. mark is accidental and the au symbol obliterated.
! Perhaps written. ha.
I Error for ku. l The ·e is at the .e nd of the preceding line.
9 Or ptU/ut P B Or .,,ap P ·
10 · The last two letters look like dah. 8 Or rup P
nom, nwom.
11 Extremely doubtful. It might be via or. ma 4 Here there· are two· dots, like a. 'IJisarga, which merely fill up spare space.
11 Very doubtful. r> Or wo' P
18 Very doubtful. e Presumably an error for can. There is a mark over the c which does not look as if it were a
14 Very doubtful. possibly ba. trace of an anusvdra.
111 Fairly certain. 7 .Looks rather like cah.
~a Very doubtful. B Or thap P
thaw tuai • kclui6 bta6 Jew srak bdaw law tua! ·" tha\>ut la.w dhat pattimha(3o)rup Jatuiw gah " dr~ ra n rau gah pa tu.ai " da9 lak r:nin (~4) he~ p_hyeh tha}>ut law dhlt pattlm.irup " pelai glaria
aahassadhira thal>ut lat6 dhat tuai 11 bamna)J dacam gah rap ket knu san gapaw n satum 11 ma dhat ra 11 thaput tua1 h.e6 wut du1h dhat patt1marup gah ." rup aggasawaka }>a n rup mahasiwa.
tmuai tau na thaw 11 ma tmuai tau na sra(3t)n 11 ma tmuai tau na rat gah u ran nai caruih smi6
ma du6 abhlseka ru gab da. kuim ra,,. caruih cut pqai sahassadhara tuai 11 pa abhiseka k~ dhat { b 3 ra 5 u )k ' a r n S a o ~ I a r ' up e a k s ~ r t a a n g . g b a r a 1 u 0 m 1 a 1 ~ r g up w _ a m ' i e k k a y t a a k g g ( a 36 } 1 3 t r • a i r u 11 p . ru up p a m 9 a t r k u y h a m k a t r g a w i a " ' . u e i k t a r t u a p g g k a l a u m c 11 ah ru p d a u c p ar a b • .
pa(32)ttimarup gah ra. 11 rau gab pa tuai he6 11 aca sal\ da.kuip phl'qot gatha ma dah mano-udan ww'!1'. mwa1 .mwa1 m~ son ~a slak " ma let Jaw na thaw gah n rd law wut duili tuai 'he(37)6 ,
tUai ma gall anekajati sa.msaram 1 kuim lew 2 n gatha ma cuin dah tau (33) udan ma gall yadi pna6 cqau call pa pdJa~ tuat drat pa ~u mramow jow ra " pa tuai he6 tma' lab ma jnok kl-tl
have patibhantu dhamm~ gab kuim law 11 phuiw kuiw phaqot tuai heil u kuhy tuik pham kuiw ho sari gab n ~aw law paA taraii glam tuai ma kuiw dak suiw tuin ra n dak (38) suiw tuin cluit tua.1
d~up calo' pa6 masun thap ra n bodhi tun Jew 11 tuik akhi lak min gah he6 " phyeh law pcld
team ,a,.in.
1 A
ll·A la1t1.
1 Or~. has gal}.

l!PlGRAPHiA BIRMANlCA [ :voL. rn ~.A·RT U J MON INSCRIPTl'ONS ·hl3
" ?
39· I 11 ~tuiw lar r.a 11 kha fgah] d[ut t];g:on "j:m{oJr 11 (c }a[o] pnan cqau tu[y
• na] <j.ak {m]ra[m]ar ,ina ja:r carot 1 cat [ra] ·u tuy tambrot 8 [b ]uin
[lar] ra • 11 11 a 8 . [w~)si ga[h] saftghara[ja] . •. . . ... . . . .
I. • II . .. . ..
J Error for ca?'oh. •
n
s t'lhis seet113 to •be what ·is intended, fhough the subscript r is more like subscript in "Shape.
Cf. SCnmidt, E.ti}iiwan (Vienna, i:g:o6D, p. 140 ~<C X .4)., tamf'.ot b1en. l
B Between the bordering 1limes..at the f©o.t -.of tmis Face· !here :are letters, apparently forming words
but not connected wi~h the text "of jthe inscription and not in. M-6n. I read tentatively : " •••• lat;tqa 2. [la] 11 mahasami Saddhammapajjota [11] [mahasami) . . . . . . . . .. .
. traya •••• yirakabbamasmim kui ma" and there are two o; three traces of single letters besides.
• 4 • ,_,.. • • • • • • • • • • • •
. . . . . ~ . f mahasa]- 8
3. mi Pi[y]ada~[s]i mahasami Sasanapaj[jo]ta mahas[ami]
katuif2 tua.i (39) tuiw law ra II khi ga.h CUt tqui6 jnOW can pnan sq.au tuai II qak mramow caw 11
caruih cut ra 11 pqai kmat buia\ la.w ra tma' chaiha tua.i ra 11
sakkarit 839 cuiw euip .sakkaTat ·s4r 11 tafa, na;h. Ramad·hippati 11 kuiw ·gard pa tim dnaal
simma9i nwa.m pamik upasampada gah 11 atuin kattiika puai ma ptim law tila puiai ta•
ma gap gaw skat. gab tila ta' 11 ph·ow kuiw kat tuai ptim puiai cf.ik .i ii n puiai sakuiw
s g i a m r m d a p p i a ta ti ' m du Ja li w u .r p a ·· a;s 11 a .,m 11 p 1 a da k ha p q m ai a - K eu a. i 1 p y a s 9 a i kk r a a r u a t 2 g ab d ac g a a m ll k t la u :r a iJ i . 1 p 1 an ta .l c a oh b .l r l a g R a a h m a s d a h m ip m p a a ~ t i i 4. [h] a[c]a [guin mas]un (oph) tu[y] h[e]ti s 11 pga[y t]n~y buddhawa ma
gamlui6 ·· atui6 kwat :ga·p gaw skat 11 pa ta.m khuddasikkha paitimuk gah kat tuai " satta da[h] tin bapeti ·pha[llag]u[i]n g[ah) (n) • • • • • •• ,. ,. •
gam'lui6 klul\ 'Pa tim ta.la nati II Ramadhippati ra II kha gah ta.la nalt kuiw kok ran samma~i4
taJ .1lruiw .ipba(lot :ita u t~la f1'3f pa.A •·mHli samm.atii ·ta' · gah ma. pha4ot itua.i '" yam cha fiall ma phaqot • • • • • • • .• • ·.• • • • • • "• • .• • • • • • 4 • • • • • • • .• • • .. •
dab Jtweh · ra 11 gab tarau klam mwai ma sgo' i• pcf.ai Kalya~Isim damaii ma gap .. gaw ku samma~i
tarau kla.ri:a mwai ma dmaia gah u rut\ tarau kuiw khanham tuai 11 sala phaqan law ra 11 swak aca guin 5. s[e]na[pati 4 11 g]amlui[ti] tuy u kuiw gatal;t l(i}n 15 uit ra 11 samal).i 6
506 11 ma skuiw upasampada ku samma~i tarau klam mwai gab 11 kanham law daman tuai u salaw
l j t a a u .t m n a l n a J i e w k w d p I i a t : f k a S a i W w K & B a k l u y fl a i a t t s > ; r . i a i g s a im 1 m 1 l n u Je i 7 w i a p c k m i u a a i i w . t m a c m a u i n i l w a g . k a b h u d i a i k l m u l i a a w n w t t u a ja i .l k 9 a i k J i a l a w fa l\ } J d R a q a s ,a m a w m a d d a h k k i a p a ~ p w a a . I t I u i s r m t a J a a r w a d y m " a a w t n u C t U s u iW d im u b i . u h l a l r ~ a K m J a a l w y p a a 9 j r a I i s w n i i m a k klam (g . ) a[h]7 . . p . -a . [p . 8 . k u . i] . w . [ . s ] •. m . i il . . B r . a . S .. am . . . . [ . p e . n . ] . 9 . ~ • .• • . • . • ••• . . .
ra " ma sasabhari samma\'i ta~u ·coh ·11 n1a sduit upasampada gah kuiw sala ''law B janik phaqan •.
kuiw lal'a law skaw :sna batuai ~a " rau gah ciren tua.i heii aca guin So ma skuiw upasampada ku I Above this line there are a few undecipherable letters of another one. Judgfag by the manu~
Jimma\)i 6.01'9 ga:h lew k,uiw nii:ma\n 10 ra 11 yam tila ta' ma cau nfi Singhuiw gah 17 n mahasami script version, about a dozen lines are lost between this and the end .o f the precred.ing piece. The
Saddhamma 1 11 11 Dhammakitti n 1 11 mahasami Tilokagaru mwai 11 mahasami Parikkamabihu I ·• dots represent a rough estimate of the portions missing to the right.
Mata'galathe 12 1 u mahasami Buddhaghosa 1 11 mahasami Gu9ara.ta;iadhara. mwai " ma.Msatrii Nera~ z Conjecturally restoied. a W.ritten in abbreviated form, :as if Mu.
taipala6kara 1 11 n mahasami Taratanamau .1 11 11 mahasami Saddhammateja x 11 u IJhamma:ramasami ~ The e must have been at the end of I. 4. 5 Or lin ?
in" Mahadewathe-1llCulabhayatissathe11111 N'a9apa9qitamahathe t 11 n Wijayabahupaiicapariwena e Or .stimatii ? 7 Looks like wah. Either w.ay the ..anusva-r.a is .sup.erflu.ous.
mahithe 1 11 11 Sirilaakagufawutti 1 n 11 Siritdkabuddhalo ls 11 a.paii iia~ cau nu Siilghuiw 17 " tila a. Looks like p-a'IJJ. o Or J?ew, Of l.(etJ? ·
p~iai ta, .ac.i .san Rago ·ttH~ -11 .s:naha&iali. Udo:1t11na1'a l.4 -tt ·ma:hisimi .15 Sril'imarajaguro 16 11 . ma:Misami
BuddhadiwakaraI7 11 mahasami Rata9agiti ~is mahasami Saddhainmarajaguru 11 mahasami Saddham. .
madhara 11 mahasimi Suwa~papaduma 11 mahasami Tipitakadhara 11 19 mahasami Anumadassi 11 itlapuiai ta' " flaQ Bagol tt araiia(N I)wasi gab tun II sa~gharaja Sam~a!la II mahasami Lamufijusa 9
mahisam.i Dhammarajika 11 mahisami Sijman~pasadika 20 11· mahasilni-Saddhan:im.aw~jaya u apa,R IS ·11 11. Winayapajjota s 11 mabasami Saddhammawijayase~apati ~ u mahasamt Passam 11 mahasatrii Siwali 11
miha:sami (2) La 0 mahasami Saddhammapajjota II ma:basami S'ilapajjeta II mahasami Saadhamma
! wilasa II mahathe lJttamha " mahasami Saddhammasiri II mahasami Dhammadassi II mahasa(3)mi
"·. A A A.,•. :s 89 . r 4 r . ~ i . i ~s .1t. s 4 a . B O A r i s s g a k k i a n k w a a r . l . a h .j a s 11 . • sanima":tf. l P g i a y n aa a a p .s a si n 11 ca m h a h d a a s c a a m m i 5 n S r a a s u an : g m a p h a j n jo im ta a n 11 7 m 1 a aw ha s ( a 4 m ) i a c A a n g g r u ii h n m 5 h 0 a tu 11 ai m h a e b n a s • a m p i q a G i u ~ th as i a b g u ar d a d h .1 a 1 w ~ a e a m b a u d in a h t5
'!J· A oimts ·•· 8 For stiZa law, A has salaw. tbi sr ha.pen phawraguin u sammat1i gamluili ta' gah n paap a kuiw smin tala pa tam 9 kuiw am at (5)
s .~ 6J[. ·. . 10 B nimantau. se~ap,ati gamluin tuai 11 kU:iw gatal} liia uit ra 11 samma~i klam gah paap io kuiw. ~in Bxa .Saa I:;>ej u
11 A .omits &. 1a Orig. 'has °da.
i 1 s 6 F ·~ o r 0 s 8 0l '1 o f ih w i< e . must p • r . . ·. ~umah . l y . , .. r . ' ~ ad 0tlu • 1. 1 1& 4 A A S D r u a d ri u i m m n m i a a 0 r , a . . o 1 O O r r i i g g , . B 0s a 'f b m a i . . 2 A 0ii . . f . a 0 • a e A A .. b 0p u a i j t o . ._ ~. 7 4 B In n t i h m e a o n r t i a g i . t . « ya0 seems to h a a l A 'e . .f ; ,- b i> ee 'W n ·, £ ancelled.
1T A 04ita0 • is B inserts maha 11. 9 For pa tam, B bas .ttl~ 'l:O ::Orig~ has p•ow. n A Sa.n pit
19 B inserts mahfisii.mi Ra u. ~> Orig. inserts " betweea Sd and m«n.

1
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III PART U] MON INSCRIPTIONS
104
6. [11 sama\}I] k[l]am gab II p•ap kuiw [s]mift wa'A [C]akkawAde pren ra 11. [wih]ara [g]alf ra n [u] aca sa[ft] masun cwoh ler u niman plop 'fan
.11 .11 . sa . m . a Q . i . k . l a . m . . g a . [ . h .11 ].1 . p . . . a p . . [ k . ]u . iw . . s . m . ln ••••••••• . . . . . pqa[y th]an [d]aman [l]ati 1 puiy [ta g]a(h) • . . • • . • . • • •.
. . . . . • • • a • • • • • • • • • • •
1 ~. (w) 51 iial;t weil (p)r[o]ti 8 ra [n] n kha gah sm(i)n 4 ta, tuy ma pren
7. (t) preil ra [n u s]amaJJ.I k[larh m]woy gah 11 p-ap [k]ui[w1 s]mi[ill · phyer sama[:Q.i] ta gah [ . 11] jak cuih [al nil (pa) .
. wan A[y] Garn Bin pr[ e]li ra parikkhara] 8 . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . '. . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 . (1 1 . . . . . . . . . • . • ,, • • • • • • ~. ·•
•·
13. (n) 15 ma [t]wak ga(t]a n fial) [ma] y[o]k [d]akar 8 mwam ma twak
8. [klam mwoy] (cwar 4 pabeti turau [k]larh inwoy • tqon turau klam 7
•) ga[t]a 11 krau [dak]ar [gah fi]al} ma yok (1) tqo[n 11] (pa) .
~woy 11 dact.m turau klam. mw[ o ]y 11 pn[ik] (c • ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14. gah [ft]aQ. ma yok [satig]a [c]war 1r [n] krau [g]ah ciil klam sa[m]aJJ,I
9. [ph]ala suim b[i] gapuiw [pan]ak [s]at QUn jan n me[k] su[t] n turau
[k]lam ma (Q.o]k gab ma t[l]un (ra] pqay klam 8 [gah] kui[m]
l
k[l]am [mwoy] n rui[hl, ku[iw] kui[w] s[minp (ta gah) ...••.•
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • ! • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • ..
[da]· 9
10. hen g [t]tia[y 'si] ba[pe]fi kitu [ph]arlaguin tf1a[y brabb]ati [y]al) 15. [nda]r [kluiti] krau kluin 10 gah [ft]ab ma (dandar] kamho[k] thar 11 [11]
! . . . . .
lan(ii) 6 ga[b he]n 7 ti[l]a naQ. 8 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • ••••••• uit [s]ama[i:ii] klarh wo' kuim 11 [slok] 12 tam·in [thuparam] 1
. . . . -. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
• • • • • •. • • • • • 41 • • • • • • • • '. • • • • • •• . .
l ConJecturally restored, but practically certain.
1 Presumably error for tila;
I Looks like tuiw. s Orn? 8 Or broti P
9 The final syllable is conjecturally restored.
f Or smin P .5 Orj, or w P
4 Or C'War (as in I. i4, infra) P ~ There seems to be no justification for the anusvara, .
5 Or smin P
e Or lonu P · 7 This stop is clearly superfluous and may be merely a.n accidental mark.
' 8 7 T L h oo e k n s e l x i t k e w g o a rd t t h e a n s . the vowel 1 or. o and may have been lop (or l'Wop). over 1 t 0 a h W e L o f r o o it l k t lo e s w n l i i k n in e g t g a la . b m br . e viated form, as if nklui; or th 1 e 9 1 C s O u o r p n e j t e r a s c r c t u d ? r p a t l l n y r m es a to y r e b d e . · regarded as written
JS Looks like ma slak corrected into slok •
•
l_S The last syllable is .c onjecturally r~stored.
pre6 ra 11 sammatii klam paap 1 kuiw smi6 2 Sam Trays preli ra (6) 11 samrna~i klam paap 4 . kuiw
smij Cakkawade pre.6 ra. 11 samma~i klam paap ';\: kuiw smiil wail Cau Nftrasiil 5 pre6 ra 11 samma9i
klam paap e kuiw Cau Mharha(7)t 7 preil ra 11 samma9i klam mwai gah paap 4 kuiw smiil wail A6
Gail Bin 8 pre6 ra " parikkh.ara swak ma skuiw samma~i 6or gah tun Jew sna (8) 6ot swaw II babel\
601 kqujf.I 601 II •dacun 60I 11 9 pnik cakkho 601 dakaw 1110.r.il 60I II kwo:dJ. (9) pa.Ja SUiril. bi gapuiw II a dmafl smaw kyaKalya9i(It)wiha gah tuai II aca sa6 50 Je nimat'l plop ra than dmaft tila ta' rah
panak 10 sat l>un janll mhaai sut tarau kl am inwai n ·ruih kuiw smi6 ~a' gab 12 ma prd ran rau gah · tuai n kuiw danpiQqapat ra 11 sabhaii sanak le pren kui(12)w iia}.l we6 grui6 ra 11 khi gah smi6
·tala iiatl cire.6 tuai (10) he6 n t6ai si bape~ phawraguin thi S yati 16u he~ "· tla bQ Ion ceh a tuai ta' ma preft phyi samma9r'l ta' gah jak ceh a nu Bago ra 11 kha ma jak ceh gah mha smift Bra
Sat :pep ma Jak gata II lme(13)6. ma twak gah fial;l ma yuik aakaw mom i gata II krau gah k4ui6
1 A·p·D'IJJ, . 1a A omits smin. babe6 dacun n krau gab ua~ ma yok tWUiW pa.la II krau ( t4) gah nab tna yuik sl\a SW8W n krau
I··· A St! T114tJi. 4 Orig. hasp-ow. gah ci6 klam samma\U klam ma quik klu6 ra 11 pqai klam gah tun n oalt Illa dalaw gapew a; s gata
15 A NtJrasi. d Orig. omits. " krau gah b\l ma da(l5}law kquia\ tt krau gah iia\l ma khalaw khamok thaw " uit simma9i klam
7 B MhdrllJ~ 8 A Bgin. ·
u 9 A A . jt o 1 m . its " lfllacun 601 ". 1 1 1 0 O O r r i i g g . . r h e a p s e a p t a s n t i a la ' i g . oh 9 1 Orig. has sa0 • a Orig. omits.

m6 EPIGRAPHIA BIR MANI CA .[ voi. . 1it 1
PART n 'MON lNSCR1If?TIONS t1@7
16. [basa] gah ma [j]akhan jakban [akr]a a{k]ra ·g ah [h]en [ma] ( cutr
t" 11 21. h[e]n 1 11 [s]amma'J}.[i] klam mw10y smiil 9 Ay (Ga!m [Biin ma t>re[n]
a ra rt 11 sama~l {klam smin] Sa·m [Tra]y s ma '[p]re[ti] (gah) 8
gah twik tlun [tun- rJameil m~ twa[k g]ab (tup ra n) 9
11 11 1 ••••••
.
.. • • • • .. - • • • • • •' ti • • • •. • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
• •••••••••••.•.~ ...... fl ••
~
~~. sama11ti turau {kl]aJn '[m]w[o]y [ma gat]a.!l; lift tuy [g]ah {11] :smin• [t]o'
17. [n] 4 gab [s]awan 11 11 [s]amaJJi klam sm1[n S]am {K]r[ay 5 ma] pr[en tufyl ma {dun. ..d un] sajuiti i[s]ama,1 {tal gah (n} •••••••••••
gah] Ion a tu[y heii s]arhma[lJ.]i klarh [s]min (Cakkawade ma preti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
gah 11 twak tlun tun u rameft ma twak) 6 .
23. [c]w[o'] ra u {kJuiw [b)aca [ph]a[p] .ra n 11 a{khal· igah aca sa[ilJ masun
t'8. [g]ah tu[p]7 ra 11 [t]am-in gab thiiparam ku[i]m 11 samal}i k[I]arh srmn ... · cwoh ga{h n par]i{bhok pui1 tanay ·tri]y hen [t]ila [naif:i~ . ·. . . . . .
Cakkawa[d]e ma [pr]en gah iwon a tuy he[ti] (n sama:tiI klam Cau
Nwarasin ma pren gah u twak tlun) 8
24. sirn ·4 ,ga'[h] ra n n ti1a flab l[ e]r [ s]ui(m k]uiw a ram 1[ip]'ariwa hen n
19. tun [11 r]amen ma twak gah tu[p ra n] tam-in:::[g]ah 9 sa[wa]n n 11 [l]wop tau pgay samut [sim] 4 ra u [n] kh[a] gah [s]ama~ IklaihJ .
{s']amal)i klari1 [Cau] N(wa)rasi[n]10 ma [p]reil [g]ahlon [a] (tuy hen
11 samaJ.li kla·rh) 11 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 25. [nj tu1n rame{n] he[n kwo]k 5 pt[u]iri tu[y] kiw 6 tila to' :[ga;~.1-(i:? 7 :a
11
20. ma preft gah t[w]ak [t]lun tun n ramen ma tw~[k] ga[h tu]p ra u 1 gam-(i) 7 [t]uy [he]n (t)ui(n) 8 ara '.[d]ama[n] gafh] kmw eu1:h
tarn-in ga[h s]awan ku[i]m n 11 sarhma[~]i [k]Iam C[au] . . . . . clm[an] .. . • • • • • .. . • . .... J [ u sa~i .·k ·l am · smm -· 8 a -1 ,- s
...
.. -: · · .. · • .. · • . • • .( ma . p . re . n . , ga h o i n - a · tu y) l 1 26. {ml Kray ma pren 10 [gah1 u tuiaj{r ]amen ra[m]en tw[ o]k 11 [pt]uin tuty]
1 Very doubtful. 1 . " [ . k ] . u · . iw . . ti ~ . l a . t . o ' g . 3 am . - .( . i? . ·. 19 . r . a u . u . n a na:{y] wo' hen t a • .. .. • • ·.. •
2 Or Kray f Apparently the latter ·is the reading in 11. 17, 26, infra. .. .. •,
s Conjecturally restored.
4 Or nda, or ·ndi r 'l 'Dhe ..e :must have ·been :at the end ·ef the last .ti.ne.
5 Or Tray P .J O.r s·min :?
6 Conjecturally restored, only the first letter of the first word being traceable. 3 Confec.ttn:a-lly ,,r.estored.
7 Looks like tum. "' Or 18im P
a Conjecturally restored. .fl Gr ~(improbably) ,twolt r
!1 The n is superscript, and may be regarded either as over the g or the m. In the fatter case s Et.nor £.or :&u:iw.
·dds iis ju'at an abbreviation 'like the one of hen in I. 4, supra. 7 Or g,am.£ P
10 Looks like Nwara 0 or Nfwa.0 though presumably these would be merely variant ~pellings of a Or kui.w P But ,this ,seems unlil§ely.
Nara0 • , 9 Ce:njec.turally .restored. . ,
•
. 1I Conjecturally restored. 10 There is am 011iginal flaw between the J1' and the 1 •
1J .EriCOr £er kwok.
ui Or q(im.prebablyi) gam-i,
(
~wa' k~irli slo~ tha~in
n thuparam cam-ati ra n kwiil kwuik ma ptam bat sreai (t6) basa ma tt
..J akhan 1akhan a.kra akra .hen 11 !11a cut a ra u ~amma~i klam smin Sam Kraal ma prel1 gab ma ·thamH'1 .gaih s·aw·an kqim 11 sa.\c smi~ gah '• (21) simma:'\i ikl·aril..,.smiil .A G~6. Bill _tna pr.en twak kl~l\
.klu~ krau gah ra 11 lme~ ma. twak tup ra 11 tamui l (17) gah sadhan ~ 11 sarrima~i klam srn.in Sam tun n famefl ma twak 'tuai l f'Q 11 thambil\ sawan ku1im u iif~lil. g!ah. (~2? s,~:mman.1 .60.1 ·ma gatall ,J,i,6
' Kraa1 ~a pren gab. Ion a tuat n samma~i klam smin Cakkawade ma pren gah ma klun ra. lme·n wai ·gah II 'Smiil ta' mtiuil sjr-Jil simma~i' ta' iga.h ,a; ·FetiJ fa::w pqai ibhan ~ma~ samma~i .6.01. ,,g;ah (llSi)
s m m m ~ a 1 n t p w g r a e a k n h _ g ( " 1 a .8 b s ) _ a . g m ~ a a m b w a a ~ : k u 1 _ p · k k l t l u u a n p m . ( r C 1 a 9 a ) .1 u 1. t t M u a n m h i a _ n " r a _ t t I u m p (2 e a 0 6 r ) a m m m a a k , . u ; t p i w r m e a i . l k • t . w g s a a a h k k s t k m u l a u . i i r n i s , t r g u n a n h 1 1 l a 11 t m h s a a e m m n· i m n m a 1a g ti a i i h w .l d a s a k a m w g a ,a n C h a s J u : a -u ~ p N ~1 5 1 J r r a n r i ~ a w i n 4 1 s p ' a 3 q . m a t i t m ( k a 2 t n t 4 i' i W ) k s ~ l i a m c m g K . s a p m l h y @ in a p 9 2 i f B Q ra r a Q u C ·. S a t a a n g l a a D h na e J I t I ; l l a ! l r c e la a s p u '5 r 8 i , 1 e m · . .n 6 : 5 l g & ~ a u 1 i h p w h ( 1 :: p a p a 5 1 a ) r , t a t p r u i r i i a n Q p ; } a l i . i . \ m r l £ ii e k w i l a . p r k a l l o i 8 ! k 1 e b f p 6 l : t a l u U ~ m ' p U 8 , . t t . u 1 a a u U 1 . ~ u t q , a a k l ~ ~ u 1 ~ J w I J P m ~ ~ Q : 1 l . a a ~ J < t " a l ~ i~ g a l a p m g t ~ h o 1 ~ p
11 ra n Pmni :t•' ,tutti ara dmalt g~b 11.wiw a cknafJ plan ra 11 sammafi klam smi~ S..:.a(1a6)m:9 ~~~ai ma
• 1 O A ri s g m . i h n a . s sakuiw (not sak 'kuiw)~ 5 2 '· O A r i s g m . a h n a . s t I u t n s . h 0:uld be sawiin. pre6 gail tuin Jame6 Jame6 lk:ok pa 1tnln it-uai " kuiw tila ta' gambi 'fa " na na1 si,ls. ww.a 9-~16 lme6
1 For tup. i:t Orig. . bs si ;,,.

PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS
108 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III
'
27. [n] n(l)man 1 p[tuin · t]uy [k]uiw ti[l]a to' gam·i uit [ra] • gam-1 tuy Translatz"on.1
111
[he]il • tuin ar[a] ar(a) ga[h _k]uiw cuih dman ra rau [ga]h ..
11 •
-[J:3.everence .t o the . Blessed One, t~e Holy One, the Fully Enlightened
.. • • • • • • • • .. • • • ''1! • • •, • • • • • • • • •
One l May the excellent Religion of the Conqueror flourish ·and prosper
s8. [ma dah] sa[jtiin s]m(i)n 9 Bra Sarh [I)}e(n) 8 -gab pabwoy rwen [hen]
·11 and may reverence be paid to Buddha !
nab. \la [~a] k[wok] p[t]ui[n] tu[y k]uiw t[i]Ja puiy [to' kuiw
I II 11] The purification of , the Religion of the Conqueror was- effected by
u.' . . . . . . .• . . . . . . . 6
Ramadhipati, . king of the Mon country. An account of this event will be
l The usual and correct spelling is ninzan. ! Or .smi~ P related. During the reign of Ramadhipafiraja, king of the Mon· c~untry,
s n this is rightly. read, it is written in abbrevi~ted form, as if nr!e. like_ h1n in various places the Religion of the Conqueror became purified.
.P•m.
(e.g., I. 4, supra). Otherwise we· must read l}e or
Two hundred and eighteeij years had passed away since the attfinment
4 Probably the lost word is upasampada.
6 The inscription continued onto the other side of the stone the bottom of which. is, however, of Parinirva:Qa by the Fully Enlightened One, the Sage of the Sakyas,
by is
blank. Judging the manuscript version, there were about 12 or lines on the upper part, which
when Dhammasokaraja was inaugurated as king. In the fourth year 2 after
is lost.
this event, owing to Nigrodhasamal}era, the king had great faith in the religion
of Buddh.a; and the gifts and honours to the monks greatly increased,
ma twak tar au gata 11 he(~7)ii niman pa tuin tuai kuiw tila ta' gamhi kle' pha·uit ra 11 gamhi tuai
atuill ara ara dnaai jaku kuiw ceh dmaii ra 11 rau gah preil tuai hell 11 pqai samma~i klam (28) ma while those to the heretics diminished. The heretics, for the sake of gifts
sdah sjuin smiil Bra . San :pet gah n . babwai lwen he6 pa pa kok pa tuin tuai 11 kuiw tila ta' kuiw and honours, embraced the ascetic life among certain monks, received the
upasampada kha ma kuiw upasampada _?ah 11 up~jhaai mwai " iia-ll m~ ph~qot kam~awat. 11 sim•
matii mwai tlla ta' pa pa ma rap kammawat ma sku1w upasampada " kha tiia1 bapei'l a tua1 gah 1 upasampadii ordination, and promulgated their own heresies, such as the
smiii tala jakhi kayah pham klo' pnaii sqau pren law tuai tila nap tuin klul\ ra n tila ta' ma skuiw Sassata heresy. Some took orders _themselves, assumed the guise of monks,
upasampada tun t1 pa tam nu saw l tiiai bapeii gitu phawraguin tilai ~· 5 gah 11 duiw pan cawek s and taught their own heretical doctrines. All these heretics mi_xed promis·
phawraguin tnai can.4 gah heii ma tuai 11 phyam tnai katau heil ma tuai hen 11 rau gah samma~i 601
kuiw dun upasampada tuai kuiw niman aca san . pan kuiw twah dhaw ,patimok ku iialt ma dut. cuotisly with, and resided amo~g, the monks, who performed uposatha and
upasampada tami ta' gah " ma pa pujau aca san pan 6 ma 6 desa patimuk 7 ku flal} ma du6 such other ecclesiastical ceremonies. Owing, to this circumstance, the Sangha
upasampada tami gab mha 11 ku iial.l mwai mwai yat yat sna bat pan 4 tau 11 sat t>a pa 11 kquiil 11
mrek pa pa cob pasa n, gitu phawraguin 5 cwek tilai 3 kuiw yatl lnu s gah n tala iialt Ramadhippati considered that the parisa was corrupt, and. would not perform uposatha.
ceh a tuai 11 uit aca san 50 kom ku 9 i'ial} ma duil upasampada tami tarau klam mwai gab 11 Therefore, for seven years, the performance of this ecclesiastical ceremony
na bhojuin ma ka mwai praka kuim law 11 na ca9a. ma ka mwai praka kuim law 11 taruih tuai hefJ had ceased in the Asokarama monastery.
ku aca san mwai mwai heA yat sa9a bat pa pa tau 11 dakaw mom mwai mwai mrek khamih pa t>a
pasa " mrek kala 10 pan pan pa.sa 11 sat .basi hiim lnim 11 kwom pala sablu suim bi gapuiw pun
panak 11 sat tnhaai sut mwai mwai deyadhamma ma phah sak wwa' tala iiaQ kuiw dan ra 11 ku natl l Owing to the fragmentary condition of the M&n text, t?is translation has, for the sake of
601 ma duta upasampada tami tun gah 11 par~i nii athaparikhara ma lon tuai ma kuiw dan lew 11 intelligibility,- been based on Mr. Ta'Y Sein Ko's version of the Pali wherever,. the. M~n text makes
s m aA re g 5 g 0 a la p a p l a a il p a p p h a y s a a u n ' 1 s a a t r a ba s n i p ra a u n _ p g a a n h kl p a a m la n m a p h k y u a i u w d a a c n a p sa la ii n 5 11 0 ra t u u a g i ab he il k u 1 i 1 w di d t an fia 7J t , ua m i a 1 1 d t 1 il u a \ • • F de ro fa m ul t t . h e W e h n e d r e o f bo F t a h c e t e F x t a s s a i r m e il a a v r a u il s a e b l h e a , s a b n e y e n d i m ff a e d re e n o c f e s t h w e o r M th 8 y n o M f S n . o t c ic o e p i a e r s e m m en en ti t o io n n e e d d in in § t § h 7 e 1 n 1 o 7 te -9 s. •
Upasampada 601 gah 12 tui6. quifl gah bapen gab If bwai Jamel\ kuiw twak tat 18 a tuai II tala natl For the same reason it has been found necessary in this inscription to place the numbers of the 1 lines
Ramadhippati pa aruim uih tamuih cujt tuai kuiw palan phyau ~a than dama6 tala puiai ·ta' ra "
in accordance with the portions of the M6n text that have been preserved, not where~,it might ~be
pwa u sak wwa' tala nali Ramadhippati ma pa gah 11 huit ma sjun squik sasna san ro6 n iiall: ma presumed that a particular line originally commenced. The parts taken over from the Pali a!'ld Mtin
4un \lpasampada gab bwai ma. buin kiian mik kuiw dah tuai pawa sak WWa' ma pa ron II II bwai MS, texts have been enclosed in square brackets-; and so fat as they lie outside the scope of the M6n
kra.u tun lew yam bnat ayuk tila ila}J Ramadhippati 11> mnum gah 11 ruih ruih samma~i ta' ma smik fragments that have been preserved on the stones, they are not divided into numbered lines. and can
duil upasampada gab 11 rau nai wwa' he6 pre6 tuai tla fiall Ramadhippati ma. tuiw 16 a upasampada therefore be easily distinguished from the portions representing. the· actual fragments remaining on the
:ra .11 rau 17 gah huit dab uiw d.a ci 11 smili ma quik pe6 tau kom saddbi kom ku pail.a ma pkd rai stones themselves. Words conjecturally restored, or added in compliance with English idiom, or for
kamin qulA Haisawati babwai krau tun lew II kuiw dahat ku sasna kom iii II atuiil sak puiai the sake of intelligibility, have. been put in parentheses. A m.ark of interrogation is ad_ded where the
baciteil wwa, hen pa bak ii " tma' sattama tuai ra u. restoration may be regarded as doubtful.
I A sak. - , i.a Orig. has tuai. 9 A catho~. 4 A 2. i According to the .traditional reckoning, this date will be 3ia B.c., but there is some reason tQ
s· A 4. .• . e A pa. 7 B patimukkha. • a A. has lna.h. believe that the. usual reckoning antedates Buddha's death ,by about 64 years1 so, for 312, we should
1 H 4 9 I O B A r i o o g m m . i h i t t s a s s a i l i J l u !w . a f . r 1 o ";. m · . h er 1 e I 0 ! t F o O o t r r h i g e g . . a n l h e a a x . s t R u . p a m as . a 4° m , patla ga 1 1 8 1 h , _ F O i o n r r i c g l ~ . u u s i h iv w a e , s . pandar.. I 1 S 7 F A o r h u ti ii t : . probably say about 2 58 B. c. "

EPlGRAPHIA BlRMANICA [VOL. IH PART U] MtlN INSCRIPTIONS
r On account of these circumstances, King Dhammasoka became desirous
\ bh-idas, and conven:€d the Third Council, whieh sat for nine months]l (R , );
3
of purifying the religion by removing the impurity, heresy, and corruption
from the first (day of the) waning of the month of Magha untH the fuU
that had arisen in it, and secured the co-operation of Moggaliputtatissa ..
J:l!toon (day of the month of Karttika).2 [At the conclusion: of this Council,]
mahathera. Having acquired, by study, the knowledge that the· Fully
(l 4) Moggaliputtatiissamahathera reflected 8 that in the future [the refigion
Enlightened One was a VibhajjavadI, and that those who professed the
would be, established ifl neigh bourr,ng foreign countries, and sent sue h Th eras
doctrines of the Sassata and other schools were heretics, the king
as Majjhantikathera with the injunction: "Do you establish the religion] (1. 5)
convE>ked an ·assembly of all the monks. Those who held similar doctrines
' in those neighbouring foreign countries.'' [Of these Theras, he sent] aur lord'
were commanded to form themselves into groups, and each group was
Mahindathera [to establish the religion in the island of Tambapat;:Q:i,' and
· dismissed, one by one. There were six millions of monks professing the
So:i:iathera and Uttarathera . to estahlish the religion inJ (t 6) the Man
religion, who, if asked what the belief of the Fully Enlightened One was,
country ,6 [which was also called Suva:i;i.IJ.ahhumi.]
would say that he was a Vibhajjavadi, while the sinful, heretical monks, who
At the time when our lords the two monkst namely So:gathera and;
declared· that. the Fully Enlightened One professed the doctrines of the
Uttarathera '(arrived ?),6 [a king called Sirimasoka ruled over the cuuntry
Sassata amd other schools, numbered sixty thousand. The king directed all
of Suva:Q::rµbhumi. His capital was situated to] {I. 7) the north ... west of the
the sixty thousand sinful. monks to leave the order; and saying : "Now .t hat Kelasapow pagoda.7 ,·One half 8 of .it was on a hiU,9 one half 10 '[was: built on
tbte. pa:rfsii· has been purified, let the Sangha perform uposatha," retur.ned
a , f>laia. This town is called, to this day, Golamattikana;gara,} (1. 8)
11
ta the city.,
because fit contains many mud ·and-wattle houses rescembLing those, of the
TherefoJTe, M oggalipttttatissamaaathe.na werformed · uposatka in the Gola people.12
Asokarama momastery in the company of all the si~ miUi0$ls of monks. This The town was situated on the. sea-shore; and] an ogress who lived in
}a.eing <tom.eltHled, he promulgated, in an. eulairged and ex')?anded form but an , the sea [was _i n the habit of) coming up [arrd devouring] every c'hiM of the
the lillles, imd.icated by the Blessed One, the tlieatis(e a€ 11ed . Kathavatthu), oJ king that was [born: in the king's palace. On the very night of the arrival of
w.mich a summary had been expounded by the Blessed. One.] tQe t:wo Theras,} (I. 9) a child oi the king was born (and} the 0gres~, sayinglSJ
l In t.h~ M&n tlliis iS: a,pparently expre$seczl in days, of which th:ere must have' beeD fwo Jfun'd'rr:ill
A OMll sixt:y~~· t; the· only thing legible being (at the beginning of I. 3)' ''five" 'P:re-eeded' by the Farm
of ~tea,,, usedi as a multip;lieand. The Pali d©es not give the number of daiys•
2 Conjecturally restored. This passage is not in, the Pali.
Moggaliputtatissamahatheta having preached, 1 (like as the venerable
an a The Pali has; '"foresaw.'' . 4 Ceylon.
Mahakassapathera selected five hundred monks, in whom passfota·S were 6 So far as can be conjectured from the fragmentary remains of the M&n text, it probably
extinct and who had attained to the posse·ssion C>f the ~ abkzni'Pis and: the expressed itself in this way : " in Suvaytytab humi, which is the Man country/''
• 6 For all the preceding, the Pali merely has "at that time.'' , ..
four paplsambkidas, and convened the First Co?ncif, which sat for seven
7 Pali, Keliisabhapabbatacetiya. Explained as being near BiJlin in the Shw@gyin District
months,} (1. ·2'} aud Hke as our lo.rd th© Mahathera Yasa [selected 700 monks 8 In the Pali, " the ea.stern half. u •
9 literally, '~rock.'' But the word is used elsewhere in both senses. ·
in whom aU passions were extinct and who had ~ttained to the possessio·n l(f In the Pa.Ii, rt the western half/'
Qf. the six abl:innas and the four pat£sambMdas, and convened the Second p-i·n Explained. as being Taikkulii (Ayetth.ema) in the Sbw~gyin District. Here, most cm:iously, the
m Co a .· u h n a ci t l h .·· e . ' · ra w } h s ie e h le c s t a 1 t . , o f o o o r . m ei o g n h k t s , m i o n n w th h s o '· m · ev a e ll n pa s s o s io d n id s ~ w h e e r e ( M ex og ti g n a c 1 t i p a u n tt d af is w s- h a- o · k m r a a a n 1 u u s ~ t c o e ' r x . i t p g t a c l t } o e , n x. t t ' a ' i T o n r s h t e r ( a o m M n s & l t a n h t s e 1 . o w s n ~ t o . o a n s e ) c e a d a m i t e e M d ' & t h b n e y r , e s M a e f n r t t e . e r n T c c a e a w , ll e v S d i e z . i . , n i . t : K T tj o u u . n i k ( T S ia u e t i e a k . .1 P ' G la a t T l e i h i i I s , y . m d L a o n e 1 s 5 m ., n a e . o n t d a h a i h , S p J p t S l e u l a t i t t r t : i . C ii l n e 'f 1 w t . h a i e # n · ; ·
had attained to the possession of the six abhi'.nnas. and the· fout pa:§istim- Vol. XXII of the lndia1i · Anttquary. Cf. I. x4, infra.
_ 12 ,. Probably· the M&n · order differed somewhlil:fl,, , but ·-1,ie · onty" legible w0rds atre, c,, trh"e Fea50J!'a~ nren/'
corres~ond P'eGP'J~
w.hieh seems to ta the "'hes:ause" in. th.ei .Pali. The G:oJa; (er GanGi1a) we e the· of
~emsal. The~r th~ appellath~n: ~11;: 11
. ,.I' lr.as.tern ma.me has· become MB:n and Burmese far foreigners Prem·
1 Th~ Pili merely has '' ei!Ublequontly/' th• W~t4. ~• ln the J>ili" '' ~nQwing-.'~ ·

IU EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS
·a.- I
[tb-at child had been born in] the king's [palace], came up out of the sea
palm leaves figures of the creatures with ?] heads ·of ogres (and) bodies ~f
together. with a retinue of five hundred.1 When 9
.•· •••••• lions [created by the supernatural power of the Tberas ?] and put them on
(L 10) having (made?) . . . . . . . . . . . were two lions, which were (their heads ?), [and also placed a stone engrave~]· in accordance with those
calcu1ated to inspire terror and were more . numerous than . . . all
(same) shapes upon the top .of the hill of Tuik Gala 2
1 . • • • • • • • •••••
the . . . . . chased away the ogres. Then 8 the ogres • . . ...
• ...•. '"· ......... (1. r5) remains (until now).
• • • . . • . . • • • • . . . . • . . . . • . • (1. -II) (not.?) .desiring to allow the
From the time that 9 our two lords' came (and) established the religion
J
ogres t.o return again (later. on ?) , 4 . throughout the extent of the [country in the M8n country . . . . . • . . . . . . . ·• . it shone 5 in the M8n country
our lords the two Th eras set guards ; and to all the people, [who had
for a very long while. (When) a long time 6 (1. 16)
assembled together], (th~y) (1. 12) preached the law of the Brahmajala- (thereupon ?) parties disputed (and) went apart • ( • ?) • ,7 • p • e • s ti • le • n • c · e • s 8 • • • • • ·• • • • •.•• '•
sutta, and delighted them all.6 Four (thousand ?) •..............
. . . . . . •..• (and) because of a great calamity of famine which a]so
the sara'r}asila.8 At that time sixty thousand people attained ·to the·
arose, . . . , •........... (1. I 7) also, the M8n country diminished 9
comprehension of [the Law] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (1. 1 j) thousand in power. Owing to [these -calamities,] the monks settled 10 in the M8n
five hundred came out (and) became monks. Thenceforward, in the M8n
country, (or) who lived in the Mon country, (1. r8) were ·Unable ..•....•
country all young children,1 that were (born?) [on the anniversary day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 11 and t h e re i· 1 g1 . on d" 1 mm .• 1 s h e d m . power.
that event, were named Sol'.)..uttara.] In order to prevent the savage 8 demons, (During the time when?} Suriyakunia, who bore the name of King
(servants) (of Varm;ta ?),9 (from seizing) them, (1. 14) men had to inscribe [on Manohor, ruled the city of SudhuimJ 12 the religion 18
•• _. • • •. • • • • •••
(1. 19) [This happened] a thousand and six hundred years from the attainrpent
of Parinirva:Q.a by the exalted Buddha 14 (and) when the religion (had been)
l I.e. other ogres, as in the Pali, :which proceeds: ''with the object of devouring it."
! Literally, "at that time.,, The Pali goes on: .''the people saw t~.~ ogress, they were stricken
with terror and raised a loud cry. The two Theras, perceiving that flfo ogress and her attendants l Lit. "rock "
bad assumed the exceedingly frightful appearance of lions, each with one head and two bodies, 2 Cf. I. 7- The Pali merely says " on the top of a hill to the l'iorth .. east of the town," and adds
created (by means of their supernatural power) monsters of similar appearance, but twice the number ,, This stone,, (literally, however, Cl figure, shape," p ali rupam) "may be seen to this day." This last
of those accompanying the ogress, and these monsters chased the ogres and obstructed their ftirther sentence is perhaps represented by the lacuna in the Men ending with "remains." .But the M6n
progress. When the ogres saw twice their own number of monsters created . by the supernatural
seems to have something more, the first (and only) word ·Of which is unidentified, unless it corresponds
power of the two Therns, they cried out: 'Now we shall become their prey; and, being stricken
with L.M. lweh and represents the above mentioned rupam.
with terror, fled towards the sea." It does not seem likely that the·M6n text had room for all this
. S Lit. " beginning from." ,
and I can only give the fragments of it without attempt at restoration.
s Or "when,'' lit. ''at that time." The Pali merely has: "In order to prevent the return of the 4 I.e. the. two Theras. 5 I.e. flourished.
6 Presumably we must supply something like " had elapsed." The Pali equivalent for this whole
· ogres, the Theras established a cordon of guards around the country> and preached the Brahmaj§la. .
passage is: "Since its introduction, the religion flourished·. for a long time in the M6n co.untry. In
sutta to the people,• who had assembled together."
course of time, however,· the power of the M8n country declined, because civil dissensions arose,1' etc.
4- The reading and meaning are doubtful.
5 These last four words have no equivalent in the Pali. 7 I.e. split up. But :.the" Pali says : ''and the extensive country was broken up into separate
s In the lacuna we must supply something like "t?ok refuge in." The Pali gives this passage principalities, and because the people suffere~ .from famine and pestilence, and be~ause, to ~he detri
somewhat differently: "At the conclusion of the sermon, 60,000 people attained to the comprehension ment of the propagation of the excellent rehgton, the country was conquered by the armies of the
of the Truth; 3,500 men and 1,500 women renounced the world, and the rest were established in the . seven kings."
'three Refuges.' and the silas,>' adding,·'' Thus the religion was established in this MBn country by 8 Doubtful reading and meaning.
the two Theras .in the 'l36th year that had elapsed since the attainment of parinirvii:J}a by the Fully 9 Lit. '' went soft."
Enlightened One.',, This addition has no equivalent in the M&n text. (The date, according to the 10 Or " sheltered." The Pali seems to have no equivalent for this clause.
traditional reckoning, would be 308 B.c.,. but probably this is about 64. years too early.) 11 The Pali here has : ''were unable to devote themselves, in peace and comfort, to the· acquisition
7 The Pali has "princes." The M8n has a lacuna after "born"· in which this may have. been of scriptural knowledge, or to the observance of the precepts; and the religion also declined." There
expr~ssed ·somehow.·. . · is not room for all this in the M6n.
·· · 8 Lit. "because not· desiring to let the tiger demons." n1 'i/.1. Thaten.
9 This rendering (which is not paralleled in the Pali)' is somewhat uncertain. It is also not quite ia The Pali merely has: ''During the reign of Manohari, who was also known by his princely
certain whether the fragments supplied from the Pali text in the passage immediately following were
name of Siiriyakumara, the power of the kingdom became very weak."
all contained hi .t he M6n original. H 1056·7 A,D. .
8

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS
fStablished (in) the Mon country a thousand (three hundred and sixty-four ~
(At dawn?) 1 our lord would go (and) sweep the Bodhi tree .•.•..
years?) 1 ~ A thousand six hundred and one years from
• • • • • • • • • • • ... , .....• (and) having (swept it?), would return (and) go on his
the attainment of Parinirval}.a by the exalted Buddha, in the year [419] 2 of
alms-pilgrimage in the city of Sudhuim. (Such) being our lord's natute,•
.the Common Era, (King Anuruddha established the religion in Pukatn,3
(one) morning; [while he was sweeping 3 the Mahabodhi tree, certain] (I. 24)
which ?) 4 (l. 20) is called the city of Arimaddanapur.·
tnen of the city of Sudhuim, who were going to trade in the country of
Froni (the year when the religion ?) reached the city of Puk§.m, it was 6
(Magadha ?),4 ..•..•. having s~en (him), [on their ireturn, related what
.• ~ ................ · ....•.... (the year) 532.6 At that
they had seen to the people of Sudhuim.J (Thus) people knew the fa~t that
time King Sirisanghabodhi-Parakkamabahu purified the religion ......•.
our lord indeed possessed lokz"yajjhiina. • . • • • . . . •.1 1
· .•.• (1. 21) (at) that time, the Mahathera Uttarajiva, the teacher of the
king- of Pukam, in order to go and venerate the pagodas [of Ceylon], said, • • • • • • • • • • • • ••••• , ••••• ~6 (l. 25) a siimarzeyca, a stln of
''. . • . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . (the island of ?) Ceylon,'' and together people 1 of the village of Cha""Pat (in the district of Bassein ?) 8 followed bur
with many monks went (and) embarked on a ship at [Bassein.7 Who was lord (the Thera, who, embarking on a ship, sailed to the island of?) 9 Ceylon.
,this Mahathera Uttara.jiva ?] (1. 22) Our (lord ?) .(was) a Mon, a disciple of Al1 the monks who lived in the island of Ceylon greeted (him) with particular
enquiries.10 [As they were well disposed towards him, they said: " We are
the Mahathera Ariyavarhsa. The Mahathera Ariyavari1sa, in his turn, [was a
the spiritual successors of] (1. 26) 'Mahindathera, who ca1ne (and) estabHshed
disciple of Mahakalathera] (who was called the .Mahathera of Kraban
the religio11 in the · island of Ceylon . . ~ .•. (you), our lords, [are the
Damyon ?).8 The Mahathera of Krabail Damyon, in his turn, (was) a
disciple of the Mahathera Pra~adassi,9 .[who was endowed with] (I. 23)
./oldyajjhiina.10 Our lord dwelt at Sudhuirn ..
1 Or perhaps, "every morning." But either way, a monosyllabic illegible word aJtE!r the
supposed yal:z ya/:z remains untranslated. The Pali of this passage reads: '' B,eing thus gifted, h.'e
1 The passage in parentheses has been added conjecturally by subtracting 236 (cf. note on line u, would, every morning, proceed to Ma.gadha and sweep the courtyard of the MaMbodhi tree in
sup1'a), from J.600, there being no equivalent in the Paff for this whole sentence. UruveJa, return to. Su.dhammapura, and go on his almswpilgrimage.11 Presumably th.e missing
passage in the M6n version contained some of these particulars.
I 1057-8 ·A.D. Cf. the note on the text.
2 This inadequately represents tradah, lit. "being,'' which may include "state, c0nditi0n/' '"etc.,
8 Pagan. anGl also have the sense of "fact." If the latter be its meaning here, it may be dependent on ',the
4 There seems to be no room for the 'whole of the Pali passage, which reads : " King Anuruddha verb iiat and tlie passage may mean that the traders '' witnessed the fact" of bis miraculous
Ari~addanapura,
the lord of took a· community of monks together with the Tipitaka and established performance.
the religion in Arimaddanapura, otherwise called Pugama." s The Pali, as above, adds "the courtyard of." It also speaks of the men who witnessed the
• ·6 It is not quite clear whether the Pali, from here on, agrees exactly with the M6n. It has : miraele as "traders, who lived in U ruve!a, and were on their way to Magadha from Sudhamma.p.ura."
"One hundred and seven years after this event, or in the year 526 of the Common Era [= 1164-5 There is here a difference between the two versions which I am unable to reconcile, the ·Man
1
A.b.J, King Sirisaiighabodhi-Parakkamabahu purified the religion in Lankadipa (i,e. Ceylon). Six distinctly saying that they were nal;i r/,t-tti Sudhuim, "men of Sudhuim.u
years after the latter event, or in the year 532 of the Common Era, Uttarajivamahathera," etc. • 4 Or "of the Ma.habodhi," the reading being very doubtful. ··
It seems difficult to find room for all this amongst the fragments of the M8n text. 5 The two words at the end of the line have seen left untranslated, as in the absence of the
'6 1170•1 A.D. context it is impossible to determine the sense borne here by gCbti, a word of various shades of
7 The Pali makes him "set out for Kusimanagara, saying to himself! 'I shall embark in a. ship meaning .(lit. "gq,ing "),
a The Pali here has: ''On arrival at Kusimanagara, Uttarajlvamahathera embarked in a ship,
with: a great m~ny monks."' This will not fit into the M8n text, which makes reference to Ceylon.
accompanied by many Qth~r monks ancl by a samat;.era, whose age was fully twenty years .. Who was
Kus1managara 1s the literary 1iame for Bassein (in M. M8n Kusir.n); cf. A 31.
this san;ts1fera? Why, was he called Ghapatasamatjera? " There .is not room for all this in the M8n
8 The clause in parentheses is a conjectural restoration. 1 take damyon (which means ''black,
dark 0 ) to be part of this place~name, though the Pali has no equivalent for it, Cf. the note on the versi 7 o n /. . e . "natives of" Ch . apat. It may . b e that the siimat].iYa was h . i mse . l f born there \ a lso.
text.
s., Doubtful ; cf. the note on the text. The Pali has : " His parents were natives of Kusimaranha
9 Cf. the note on the text. The Pali adds : ''who lived at Sudhammanagara./' i.e. That8n. while he. himself was a pupil of Uttarajivamahathera. _He was called Chapatasamaitera · becau~e his
10 The Pali adds "~nd tibhii'tna ,, and mentions these qualifications after stating his place of parents were natives of a village called Chapata in Kusimarattha/'
reisidencee 9 Conjeiztu.raUy remtored with·. the help of the Pali.
10 Tne Fili ha1 i "a~rd1cilr:him 1 ' ''•'~:JJttadjtvamahlth•ta) 1 ' a m11~ re~eption/J

J MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART II
116 EPIGRAPHIA BlRMANICA [VOL. Ill
the Mahathera Tamalinda,1 (the son of the Raja of Kamboja,1 the Maha.tiieFa
;piritual successors of] S01;;i.athera (and) Uttarathera, who went (and) estab
Ananda, a native of] Kancipura,3 (and) the Mahathera Ra.hula, [a native of
.l ished the religion in , Suva1:11:iabhiimi.'' 1 Having spoken, (thus), (they con
Ceylon, to accompany him]' . . . . ......•.•. (1. 31) The five
ferred the upasampada ordination on] (the "sama?Z.era ?) (t 27) Chapato.9
The Mahathera Utt~rajiva, (having venerated?) the pagodas ~n .the island
e
.
x
.
a l
.
te
.
d
.
.l ords, h
.
a
.
v i
.
n g
. .
e m
.
b
.
a
.
rk
.
e d
.. .
o n
.
a sh
.
ip
.
,
.
a
.
r r
.
iv
.
e d
. .
a t
. .
th
.
e
.
c
.
it y
. .
o f
.
.K u
.
s
.
im
.
. 1
.
5
.
A
.
l l
.
of Ceylon, [made preparations to return to PukamJ. _(Then) the monk • • . . • • . . . .•.....•........•.• ~ ••. (I. 32) Not having
Ghapato 8 [thought thus?]: "(When?) our lord the Mahathera Uttarajiva been in time to observe [the vassa] (at) Pukam that year, (they) observed
(returns home, if I were to return home with him,?) (1. 28) by reason of being one vassa in a monastery ~ . • . [at Kusim. The site and walls of the
~ery
near my brothers (and) relatives, there would be 'impediments caused by monastery, where they spent ·the 11assa, may be seen to this day, on the
relatives ' . . . . . • . . . . • . . . , . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . .4 there south side of Kusim. At the conclusion of the observance of the fJassa, the
would be happiness of mind for me, on the other hand.is I should'' ....• Mahathera Chapato celebrated· the paviirava, and, ~ccompanied by the four
• • • . . . . . . . • . • . . . . (1. 29)' Ceylon. Theras, set out for] 6 (1. 33) (Pukam ?) •
This monk, having completed all his studies 6
••••••••••••••••
Now the Mahathera Uttarajiva [had died a few days] before our lords
. . . . . ~- . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . · people called (him the Mahathera
[arrived. On reaching Pukam, the Maha.thera Chapa~o heard that his own
Chapato ?).7 The Mahathera Chapa~o, when 8
• • • • • • •••••••••••
teacher, the Mahathera Uttarajiva, was dead, and repaired to his tomb and
. . . . . • . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . [After reflecting thus, he
performed such acts as that of making obeisance and asking the forgiveness
appointed] (l. 30) the Mahathera Sivili, a native of Tamal(itthi ?) 9 ••••••• •
of the deceased. He then took counsel with the four Th eras, addressing
them th.us].7 (I. 34) "0 my lords, when our teacher who (is departed?) ...
i. The Pili adds: ''Let us all, therefore, perform together the ceremonies incumbent· upon the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . '. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Order." There does not seem to be room for aU this in the M8n.
9 The M&n appears to .call· him, literally, "the son of people of Chapat o," here. . • • . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . (l. 35) (our lords,
s Here the MBn clearly has "the monk, son of people of Chapa!o." This is curious, as in 1. ~s, the two·?) M~hathera Arahans named Sol}.athera (and) Uttarathera. [How
the place is spelt Chapat.
ever our teacher, the Mahathera Uttarajiva, who was a native of the M8n
'
the s 4 t u T d h y e o P f a t l h i e h a T s i p : it " ak ' a I t s o h g o e u t l h d e r n o w t i th b . e i t a s b l c e o m to m e e n n j t o ar y i e t s h . at I p t e a i c s e , .. p a e n r d h ap q s u , i et a , d . w vi h s i a c b h l e, a r t e h e c r o e n fo d r u e c , i ve th t a o t country, was formerly the sole head of t ,.. he Churc. h: but] (1. 36) no . w that (the
I-should, with the permission of the Mahathera, remain in Ceylon} and return home only after I have
mastered the Tipitaka tog~ther with its commentaries.' Accordingly, Chapata asked permission from
Uttarajivamahathera and remained behind ;:il Ceylon. Uttarajivamahathera, accompanied by a large I Or "Timulinda/J . The M6n spelling of this name varies.
company of.monks, embarked in a ship,. and returned ~o Kusimanagara. Thence he. proceeded to 2 Not preserved in the M8n ; perhaps Camboja or more probably the Shan and Lao States.
Puga ma,, (i.e. Pagan), "and took up his residence there," It is quite impossible to find room for
Cf. § 75·
all this in the Man. . • "' s Doubtful ; . the Pali has Kaiicipura on the stone, though the. M.S. has Ki:iicipura. The M6n
6 If this is the force of tun. spelling Kanci0 (for Kaflci0 is irregular, but Mbn spelling often disregards the Indian rules of sandhi.
)
6 The Pali has: ''Meanwhile, the monk, Chapata, by dint of hard study, had acquired a know The place is Conjeveram.
ledge of the Tipitaka together with its commentaries;· and, as he had completed his tenth year in • The Pali proceeds; ''and, embarking in a· ship, returned to his native country. These five
orders, he acquir~d the designation of Thera. Being now desiro.us of returning to Pugama, he Mahatheras were. well versed in the Tipiiaka, and were learned and able; and, among them, Rahula
reflected thus : 'If I were to return home alone, and if, in the event of the death of Uttarajivamaha thera was the'"ablest and. the most .I.earned. On the arrival of these five· Mahatheras at Kusima
thera:, I did not wish to associate with the monks of Pugama in the performance of ecclesiastical cere. . aagara, the time for journeying on to Pugama was unseasonable, because of .the approaching 'llassa.
monies, how ~ould I, in. the absence of a pantfavaggagatza, perform such .functions separately P It is, and they accordingly,· observed their vassa at Kusimariagara.''
perhaps, proper, therefore, that I should return home in. the company of. four other monks, who are fi Ba 1 s sein. · ·
well versed in. the Tipitaka.' " There is. not room for .. all this in the M8n. . 6 It may be doubted 'Yhether ·all the above was .in the M6n.
7 Conjecturally restored. 1 The PaH proceeds: ''.As the Mahatheras of Ceylon associated with our teacher, the venerable
8 Perhaps one ·could conjecturally add : ''the -time came for him to return," etc. But' it is UttarajivamahatheraJ in the performan'Ce of e'cclesia~tical ceremonies, it is proper t.hat we should now
impossible to be sure how much of the long P~Ii passage iabove cited had its counterpart . in the perform such filnctions after associating ourselv~s With the monks of Pugama, who are the spiritual,
M8n text. uccessors of Sot;iathera and Ottarathera."
9 Probably Tamluk in BengaJ. The reading is doubtful in the M8n but supported by the Pali.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III PART II J MON INSCRIPTIONS
Brirmese- monks ?) l have become supreme, -we do not wish to associate 2 [with (1. 41) Rahulathera [went to the Mon country] 1 and. embarking on a . sh l i ?J p , ,
them in the performance of ecclesiastical ceremonies.'' Thus, through pride, (reached ?) [Malayadipa.9 Now the king of Malayadipa 9 was desirous ()f
·
the Ma.hatbera Chapato declined to associate with the monks of Pukam in
learning the Vinaya, and Rahulathera taught him the Khuddasikkha tog.ether
tb~ performance of ecclesiastical ce:r;emonies, and he performed such func ..
. with its· commentary, and instructed him in the meaning of the text of the
tion$ separately~
:whole of the Vinaya; The king was pleased with the Thera and pre$enfed.
It should be borne in mind that in the year] (I. 37) 543 of the Common
him with] (l. 42) an alms-bowl [filled with many kinds of gems].8 Rahulathera
Era,8 [and the 124th year 8 that had elapsed since the introduction of the (accepted the gif tJ 3 became a layman, [and married.
religion into .Pukam in the Burmese country from Sudhuim in the Mon
Subsequently, of these four Mahatheras, Chapato died, and the surviving
country,] 4 the religion from Ceylon [was - established at Pukam. At that
three Mah,atheras, namely, Sivilimahathera, Tamulindamahathera/ and
time a king, called Narapatijayasfira,5 was ruling in Pukam. He conceived a to
Anandamahathera, continued maintain the religion in splendour at Pukam.
feeling of great esteem ~nd reverence· for the five Mahatheras, and, after
One day, the king of Pukam, having conceived a feeling of esteem, and
having had a bridge of boats constructed on the great river ErawatI,
reverence for the three Mahatheras,, presented them with three elephants].
requ~sted them to confer. the upasampada ordination on the many monks
(1. 43) Then Sivilirnahathera and Tamulindamahathera [liberated their two
who desired to receive it. In consequence of this,] (L 38) our lords, these
. elephants in a forest. But Anandathera, saying to himself: " I shall make
five, (gradually increased ?) 6 (in) [influence and their following grew in
a present of my elephant to my relatives living in Kaficipura," proceeded ~o
numbers.
Kusim and shipped it off]. (Then ?) (I. 44) the monks SiviJithera and
One day, the king ordered festivals to be held in honour of the occasion
Tamulindathera [said: "Why have you caused pain to an animal by making
of his giving a great offering to the five . Mahatheras. On .that occasion]
~ present of it to your ;relatives? Your action is improper." Anandathera
El.
39) the Mahathera Ra.hula saw a [beautiful] dancing-girl, [and the loss of
replied : " Why, reverend. sirs, have you spoken to m~ in this manner?]
5
his ·delight - in asceticism became burdensome to him. He longed to be a
. (Buddha ?) 8 (1. 45) spoke thus: 'To .do [kindness to] rela!jves [is a sacred
to
layman, and made preparations carry out his object. The Mahathera
duty.' " The two Mahath.eras continued: " Ananda, you. are indeed he~d­
Chapato and the three other Mahatheras repeatedly expounded religious
strong. If, brother, you will not accept] (I. 46) advice and admonition 7 [from
;<iiscourses to him, and, in a body, entreated him to turn away from the
elders like us, do you -perform your ecclesiastical ceremonie~ separately, an<}
course he had resolved to take. But] 7 (though they endeavoured to?) (1. 40)
we shall perform ours in like manner." Thenceforward, the two Mahath~i:as]
prevent (him), they were not able to prevent (him). (Our?) lords, [therefore,
(Sivilithera and?) (1. 47) Tamulindathera 8 performed ,[their ecclesiastical cere
said : " Brother, we have expounded to you vari<;>us religious ,9isoourses by
monies separate!y and Ananqathera performed his likewise.
way of admonition, and yet we have riot been able to turn you .away from
your object. Such being the case, do you forbear to become a layman here,
e 1 It seems doubtful whether the n-ii tuy of the text is a remnant ef this cla~$e. .
b:ut go to the M6n country and/ there embark for Malayadipa,8 where you 2 It is regrettable that the M8n equivalent for this place#na,me (J?robably $Quthern Sunrntr:~) ha~
~ay <!'arry out your wish." Being repeatedly urged to adopt this course,] riot been preserved. See § 75.
a It is doubtful whether our text had the equivalent of these words.
4 I ha,ve followed the more usual spelling Qf the. M;Bn version. The English translation of the Pali
I· f'oubtful: s~t;· the note on the text. 2 Conjec;tura!~Cl. s n8r-2 A.n.
M$. has Sivali0 Tamalinda0 but I opserve that,the Pali tJ:~mcript from the actual stone gives SiviJit:f.
4•· tt se~ms more than doubtful whether the M8n version had this sentenj:e. .At. aoy. rat.,,, if it b The Piili , proceeds:. "W , hat 1 Rev~r{:lnd sirs, has not the Blessed One declared that kindness to
occurrecil, it must have been. after, not before, the next one. .
cme'~ relatives," eta. 1 6 It may be that .Anandathera is the subject of the following verb.
5 According to Phayre (History of Burma, pp. 50~ 281) Narabadisi'thu (or Nara.baditsitsithu)
· ,7 It is riot clear whether this CQrrespends with the s111all M8ri fragment, which seems to mea·n
reigned from u67 to 1204 A.n. . . . e Doubtful; see the note on the text.
''to instruct thoroughly.'' Fol' one thing, it-is difficult to see how the preceding space can have. be~n
· 7 The Pali proceeds: ''tbe :reli~ious discourses expoundecJ by the four. Mah~theras, by way of "filled in. But l ea.nnot fit the words in elsewhere. ·
admonitio11, were of no avail in turning his mind, They, therefore/' etc.
s It is by no means .certain that this. name has been fitted in here correctly. ' The Pali version
· a It. is regrettable that th~. M8n e~uiva·J~µt for this. plac~M1~me (probq,l;>Jy Sqµtl)ern Sumatra) ,hM
does not repeat the n.ames in thi~coimeotion, and the M8n is represented by ·two words, with a
not been· preserved. See § 75.
conjectural rest9ratioa between them. '

,120 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ V~L. Ill PART II] MCN INSCRIPTIONS
In course of time, Tamu1indathera, for the benefit of his pupils, who ·~ (it is) thus (that) my lord speaks, (the nature?) 1 of men who are steadfa'St
!JI 1
were learned, wise, and able, said to]. \1. 48) 1 all the laymen, nobles (and) in .the doctrine (and teaching ?) . . • . . • . . . . • . . _. • . • . • . . . . • . . •
chiefs, [and other classes, that came to his presence :] . . . . . • • • . .. .. •.• • . • • . • • . . • . . . . . . . . . [Do you perform]3 (l. 54) (your) eccle·
• • • • · · · • · · • • • • • . . . • . . • • • {l. 49) the monks . . . . . . • • • . siastical ceremonies separately, and I shall perform (my) ecclesiastical cere·
are ••..•... ~ • laymen •.. ·. . . . ...•..•.... 51 (l. 50) our lord ' monies separately," (he) said. Thenceforward_ our lord Sivilithera {and our
Sivilithera ....... 8 Tamulindathera: "0 my lord, (the. acquisition of?) lord Tamulindathera) 4 [performed their ecclesiastical ceremonies separately.
the requisites [by means of vacivznnatti was censured by the Ble_ssed One : . At that period there were in Pukam four distinct communities,] (l. 55)
why have you procured the four requisites by means of vacivi?iiiatti? Your the monks formed four sects, (namely) the monks who were of the religious
action is improper]. (1. 5 I} . . . . . . . . . . . . ...... " 4 So spake Sivili- succession (of those) that came up from Sudhuim (were) one sect, (the
thera. Thus [replied] Tamulindathera: [ '' My lord, the acquisition of others being) [the disciples of Sivilimahathera, the 'disciples of Tamulinda
requisites by means of vacivz°'1iiiatt£ was censured by the Blessed One when mahathera, (and) the disciples of Anandamahathera (respectively). Of these
such property was for oneself; but, my lord, I] (I. 52) did not practise. communities] \1. 56) 6 the successors (of those) who came up from Sudhuim,
was
vaci'lJt·nnatti [for myself;] it for the sake of the benefit (and) advance ~eing of the succession of those who {had) arrived first, were called arhe' sa e
ment6 of religion (that I determined?) 6 ••••••••••••••••••••••• by the Burmese, (while) the monks of the three sects of the succession of
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • . " [S' i v1 ·1 ·i t he ra agam. sa1" d to T amulinda .. those who had returned from Ceylon 7 [were called the Sihala fraternity and
·thera :] '' (So it is thus that my lord?) 1 (1. 53) Tamulindathera speaks ! As also the Pacchima fraternity, because of their later arrival.
Two of these three Mahatheras, namely Sivilimahathera and Tamulinda. .
mahatbera, passed away according to their deeds after maintaining the religion
l I have not been Ahle to fit in the doubtfully read word kwon in .t his line. Perhaps it is part,, of
the expression n pupils." in splendour to the end of their lives; and Anandathera, after spending fifty·
2 1 have been unable· to· fit the fragments of this line into a continuous context, owing to .the four rainy seasons in maintaining the religion in splendour in Pukam, also
uncertainty of the sense of dok • '" .... t and. tak pa(t). The Pali version gives the following:
"' 0 layinen, t~e monks a.re learned, wise, and able; but, because of the1r not being supplied with the passed away according to his deeds in the year 607 of the Common Era.a
four requisites, they are unable to devote themselves to the acquisition of scriptural knowledge, or to A sama,,.era called Sariputfa, who was a native of Padippajeyya village,
9
the observance of the precepts. Laymen, it is our desire, therefore, that these monks should be
furnished with the four requisites. Should you undertake to do this, the monks would certainly be in the province of Dala, went to Pukam and received the ujasampadii ordina
enabled to devote themselves to the acquisition of scriptural knowledge, or to the observance of the tion at. the hands of Anandathera. He studied both the Dhamma and the
precepts.' The. Thera thus procured the four requisites by means of vac'ivifi:natti:' This word means
'' verbal suggestion •• , Vinaya. together with their commentaries. Being thus well-versed in the
a The Pali has: "Then Sivalimahathera said to Tamalindathera." I doubt if the , M6n Dhamma and the Vinaya, the fame of the learning, wisdom, and ability of the
represents this; it depends on the meaning of the doubtful word do(k).
4 I cannot fit'in the M&n from wih<i to so'. It seems to have no equivalent in the Pali, and the
sense is not dear. Wihci means "_monastery," twalJ., "pupils," "disciples," tila (presumably here in "' e
the genitive)) ''of my lord," da(l, perhaps "should,., or '' must," so', probably "indeed," ''certainly/'
but I can find no suitable meaning for kamba (which may mean "tank," or ''twin," L.M. kamti) I. Doubtful reading.
and another word is missing. ' ~ Doubtful reading and meaning. Another possibility is "-who have learnt," "who have studied.''
o Literally,·'' increase." If it were. possible to read samaratha it might mean "agreeing," ''concurring."
8 Th~ Pali, after "but, my lord," proceeds: ''the four requisites procured by me by means of s Restored from the earlier passage in the Pali version of the speech.:
vacivi~natti were not for myself. I thought that if my pupils, who are learned, wise and able, 4 Conjecturally restored to fit the context.
· obtained the foul' requisites, and devoted themselves to the acquisition of scriptural knowledge, and to 5 I cannot fit in the douhtful atuin at the beginning of the line.
the observance of the precepts, the interests ·of the religion would be promoted ; .and · therefore 8 The Pali equivalent for. these two Burmese wotds is purima. Evidently the meaning in both
1 procured for them the four requisites by means of vacivini.atti." · · languages must oe "prior, earlier.'' In•,this place the Pali stone introduces the M8n gtOss arlu sti
7 Doubtfully restored. The Pali has the speech thus: " Brother Tamulinda, is this your explana• 1'11mi to' ga!J, ''the B.urmese called (them). arhe' sa." >See l.c., Plate .I, I, 73,
tion P Do you perform your ecclesiastical ceremonies separately, . and L.shall perform mine likewise. . 7 This is the end of the legible part of Face A of the ~8n version; what follows is merely
Brother Tamulinda, association in. the performance of ecclesiastical ceremonies is agreeable only when adapted from the· Pali, till we reach the beginning of the top fragment of Face B.
the parties taking part in the performance are of the same m1nd .and opinions and are amenable to 8 1245-6 A,D. .
the advice ·and admonition, of e;ich. other." It is clear that the .M 6n order is d.ifferent. 9 Stated to .b e n1ar Rangoon. ,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. ltI PA.RT II j M6N INSCRIPTIONS
. mfmk Sariputta sp!ead abroad. The king of Pukam heard about his fame, the Kambojapal)avihara,1 because of its vicinity to the Kamboja market .
and reflecting, "If the monk Sariputta is learned, well .. informed, a seeker of The Mahathera living in the monastery was, in like manner, called the
knowledge, wise, and able, and if the members of his ,. body are perfect , Pathama-Kambojapa:Q.aviharathera.9 S_ubsequently, the designation Pathama!O
I shall do him honour by appomtmg him to be my preceptor," serit Kambojapa\l,aviharathera was changed to]
messenge·rs to institute enqumes. The messengers sent by the king
accordingly proceeded to enquire whether the members of the body of the
B
monk Sariputta were perfect. In the course of their enquiry, they found
that one of the big toes of the monk was too short, and reported the result
(Mahathera of?) the Krom market.3
of their investigation to the king. The king,_ thinking inwardly, "The monk • • • . • . . . •. . . . . • . . . ~ . (1. 2) . .. . .. . •.
is not perfect in all the members of his body,'' presented hirµ with a great
4 (I. 3) who were the fraternity
••••••••••••••• • • • • • • •
many offerings, conferred on him the title of Dhammavilasathera, and
of the Mahathera of the Krom market 5 [At that period, because
., • • • • •
dismissed him with the injunction : "Do you maintain the religion in splendour
this Mahathera of the Krom_ market· was the oldest and most celebrated
in the Mon councry ."
mem her of the Ariyarahantasanghapakkha in Dala, the whole of th,at fraternity
Dhamtnavilasathera proceeded to the Mon country, and taught the
was designated] (1. 4) "the fraternity of the M ahMhera of the Krom market."
Dhamma and the Vinaya to a great many monks in Dala. The people of
[In after times, the designation] re (fraternity of the Mahathera ?) of the Krom
the Mon country called, at the time, the fraternity of these monks at Dala
market" [fell into disuse, and the fraternity was called " the fraternity of the
the (( Sihalapakkhabh,jkkhusali.gha," 1 and designated as the " Ariyarahanta ..
Krom market." 6 However, the latter term, ((fraternity of the Krom
pakkhabhikkhusangha " the fraternity of monks who were already in the market," itself fell into disuse and people] (l. 5) called [it ((the Krom
country and were the ecclesiastical successors of Sb:i:iamahathera and
:liraternity. "] 7
U ttaramaha thera. 9
There was a learned M ahathera, belonging to the Ariyarahantapakkha
I I.e. the monastery of the Kamboja market. The gloss here (i.e., Plate U, J. 9) is wihri p~a.
bhikkusaftgha, who lived in a monastery situated near the mouth of a river in
krom 'J!m.qn tQ' g<J!}, ''the M6ns called it the monastery of the Krom mark~t;" . ·. ··
the Lakkhiyapura a province called the Bakasa, because of its teemfog with · 2 l.e. Superior of the monastery of the Kamboja market, The gloss here ( l.c., Pl~te ll.r 1. 9) is
fish, which served · as food for ·paddy birds. 4 Near the. mona.stery was a math1 [for mahathe] wihri p~a krom rman to' gah., ''the M&ns ca.llecl hitn the l\iahiither~ of the
mo·uast~ry 9f the Krom m~!tket."
·· m·arket, and not very far from the latter was a settlement where. a great a The P~H equiva.le,nt is Kamooja,pai:i.arrrn.hath~r~, and the words in parentheses ar~ practic;aJJy,
·number of Kamboja 6 prisoners of war were located. · On accou'nt of this fact, ce:rtai.n. There is here (l.c., Plate II, I. 10) a JllQss of which l)nly the worps maht.ithe Na, '' M~h.i·
them of the ••..• market," are preserved. ·
the market ·was called the Kamboja market,6 and the monastery was called 4 I carinot fit in the words · of J, ~ (s~e the te"t). Their mea.ning is ol:>scure (e:J1:cept jqm,nok•
" gr.~at ") a,nd they seem to have• n9 equival!;l'nts i11 the P&li, whi~h proceeds: "A piol.ls nobl~man,
I Here the Pali stone (l.c., Plate II, 1. 6) had another M8n gl,oss of whfoh only the words 'l"man (:alled Sidj9-y~vaqc].hana, who was living at Pala,, buHt a moni:i,::;tery ne~r a great lake ;,i.nd invited the
to' ga'IJ,, "the M8ns called/' have been preserved. . K~ml:>0j~g~9amahathe;ra to occupy it." "
~ .Mere the )? ~:li st9:P.e. has another Me>n gl0$1l, not very legible on the plate (l.c., Plate II, 1. 6)
which may .. perhaps be re-ad 'bwok san tray arhan . rman to, gah, ''the M8n$ <;alieP. (th~m) the 0 This paJ't does not seem to be represented, in the Pali. ·It is·. evidently c:i reference to the monks
qf the mon~~tery of which this Mahather~ becall,'1~ the hea,d, . Tht= ,Pali equivalent of their d~sign~ ..
fraternity of t~e . noble arah~ns." · This reading is supported by an ink-impre$sicm of the stone. tiPn, ~hich appear$ again in tne ne'tt line, is I\.amboj:'ipa9@.JllFthiitherasanghap~kha,. A gloss thei,-e
Cf. B 6 n~
(l.c., Plate Il, 1. u) re~ds bwok san mahath1 ••••. to' gab, "(the M6ns) called (it) the .frij.ternity Qf ·
a Stated to be identical with Lekk'aik near. Twant@ i.n the Hanthawaddy District.
the Mahathef~ (Qf the Krom .mar~et).'' .. . . . .
pan, 4 k . r H u e iz r . ~ g a th h e p a : n P . ~ H g a s j; t m o i n ir e . h -r a m s a n a . t n o o ' ~ h g e a r l ;,, M '' 6 th n e g M lo 8 ss n s ( c l, a c l . l , . P th l i a s t e r iv 1 e 1 r , - m I. o u 7) t h w P h a ic n h G m a a p y u i p iV er ' haps be read bwok G s T an h e p ~ P a .a J k i r e o q m !: liY (r a m l,m an t ) · is to ' K g a a m b bo , j " ~ p (t a h 9 e a s M an 8 g n h s ~ ) p c a a k l ~ le h d i j i , t th A e fr g a lo t ~ e i r i n i h ty e re o f ( t l h ,c e ,, K P r l o q r . Q t~ l H l)C , J ,, l1 Ck et 1 .~ ,3 ' ). l J ! t e ad .i s ~
m P e a a r , t .n 5 s I T , h S p e h p a . M n 3 8 9 n Q -4 l' e 5 q , L u a i a v n o a d ; l e § n b § t! u 7 t a 5 s , a , s w ~ u il p t l p r a sh . t o h r i t s l y p o ap ip p t e a s r e , e i s J K . ro B m u . rm It a ~a R s e $ b e e a e r n c h s up SC p J o c s i< e Jt d y t ( h 1 a 9 t 2 2 K ) a , mb V o o j l. ~ X h~l I ' I e , i p , r o c b o a n b t l a e i , n e ~ d h · Q i u n g h t h · n e o w t o q n u cl i te f o\ c e '· r ~ ta a i n lo , n th g a .t t · i m pa e r ." t of .~he M8n eUJ.uivalent for the phra~.~ "ff) fl!.fter fimes "
G Here the Pali stone has anotner M8n gloss (l.c., Plate II, 1. 8) reading Pfa krom rmt;ifl. tq' if.ah., 1· The Pali equivalent is Kambojasanghapakkha. Here the gloss is bwok san k1'om Yman to' &al;;
fC the M&ns called it the Krom market." 1 ' the M6ns called it the Krom fraternity" (l.c., Plate 11, I. 13),

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VO~. Ill
MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART II]
Because peo.ple called [the .Ariy_~rahanta fraternity in Dala,] which was
0 ff\
. the fraternity of the Mahathera of the Krom market, "the Krom stituted) one fraternity ; the members of 1 the fraternity styled "teachers of the
fraternity," . . . . . . (1. 6) all the . Ariyarahanta fraternity 1 which was in minister of the silk cloth screen '' 2 • •. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
the M8n country also having . been called "the Krom fraternity," all the (the fraternity?) (I. 11) caUed (after ?) Buddhavamsamahathera ; (h~ was) the
M8n so styled it.9 teacher of the queen in Mattma (and) went to the island of Ceylon; and on
his return to the city of Mattma, (whatever ?) 8 persons came (to him, he
At that time, in the city (of Dala, there existed the Ariyarahanta
would not perform his?) (L 12) ecclesiastical ceremonies with them (but)
fraternity and?) (I. 7) the Ceylon fraternity: two fraternities had been formed.8 1
performed (his) ecclesiastical ceremonies separately. The fraternity of these
In the city of Mattma/' again (t~ere were) the Krom fraternity, (which was)
clergy (of} Ceylon (constituted) one frat~rnity. The fraternity of our lord
one fraternity, (and the Ceylon ?) 6 fraternities, (which were five?) 5 (1. 8)
Mahasamimahathera 4 (constituted) (I. 13) one
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
fraternities. The Ceylon fraternity which was m succession to Sivilithera
fraternity.
_(was) one (such) fraternity; the members of 6 the Ceylon clergy who were
.
of the fraternity of . . . . . . . . . . . . •...... 7 (I. 9) screened (them Therefore in the city of Mattma there were one fraternity of the Krom
clergy (and) five Ceylon fraternities, (making) six fraternities (in all?) ......
selves with a?) cloth to eat (their) rice. When people invited (thern to a?)
•.•• (I. 14) (and} as (they) were unable to. join with .one another in ecclesi
shed, they were not able to eat in the house, (but) returned to eat (in the)
astical ceremonies:, various sects arose into existence. In all these . sects of
monastery.8 Our lords, these (monks), ....· . (l. 10) the Ceylon fraternity
who were successors of the pupils of the Mahathera Tamalinda 9 (con· clergy . . . . . . . . . . (1. 15) there were none· ·• . . . . . 6 that were ..· wise
(and) qualified to come (and) investigate (and} ascertain. (matters concerning?)
ecclesiastical' ceremonies. The clergy 15 of these various fraternities . . . .
••. (1. 16) would say [" We, indeed, are wise and ?] 1 qualified," and these
1 The M6n calls it bwok san tray a,-han, from which it appears that tray. corresponds to ariya clergy would perform . (.ceremonies such as ?) consecrating a sz"ma 8 (or)
in value.
I Apparently this is ,.the meaning, though it is expressed in a roundabout way. The Pali merely conferring the upasamjada ordination, performing .~such) ceremonies
says, "the same designation was thenceforward applied to that fraternity in the whole of the Mon
~separately .9
country."
s The· words in parentheses :are a purely conjectural restoration. .There is nothing in the Pali to At that time [some] clergy, [who, wishing to consecrate a sima on a
correspond with this passage.
4..: Martaban, Pali Muttima. gama1'Jietta of whatever size, (and) having placed boundary marks] (I. J: 7) .all
& The queried. words in parentheses are conjectural restorations. In this whole. passage the M6n
'fersion seems to be more discursive than the Pali, which has the following: ''There were in M utti
managara, the· Kambojasalighapakkha, the SihaJasaiighapakkha, whose members were the successors
of Sivilimahithera, the SiliaJasanghapakkha, whose members were the successors of Tamulinda-· 1 The meaning of nam jg doubtful: cf. I. 8, supra, and I. 20, infra.
mahathera, the SihaJasaiJ.ghapakkha, whose members were the successors of .A.nandama.hathera, the a J'he meanin.g is not quite certain, and it is not clear whether these were the successors of
•
Siha}asaitghapakkha, whose members were the successors of Buddhavamsamahathera, the preceptor Anandathera (following the order of the Pali), or of Buddha.vamsamahathera, next mentioned.
of the queen, who went to Ceylon and received his upasampadii· ordination there, and who, on his a This is doubtful owing to the uncertain reading a.nd meaning of the word yra, which I tenta·
return, performed. his ecclesiastical ceremonies separately in M uttimanagara, and the SihaJasangha. . tively associate with L.M, ')Wau, "any/1 The doubt extends to the next restoration in parentheses,
pakkha, whose members were the successors of Ma.hasamimah~thera, otherwise called Mahanaga though this receives· support from the Pali. If we read ey (for )Ira) the phrase might fl\ean : "we
mahathera, who visited Ceylon and received his upasampada ordination there, and who, on his return who have arrived." . • • • • But I do not see how this fits .in.
to. Muttimanagara, performed his ecclesiastical ceremonies separately." The corresponding Man 4 Who· also received his orders in Ceylon ~·· see the mite to I. 7, ·supra.
passage ends· in I. 13. 5 Here the Pali has " who were well-versed in the Tipitaka..''
t'I The meaning of nam (if that is the right reading) is doubtful:_ cf. n. 10, 20, infra. 6 The Pali speaks-of them as Mahatheras.
1 Presumably we should restore "Sivilithera '' here, but possibly '<Anandathera," whose name is 7 Restored with the help of the Pali. . ...
lost in the lacunce. a I have followed the English version of the Pali in the speUing of this word; but the dictiona:ries
8 The precise· meaning of this passage is not certain1 as some of the words are doubtful and have slmci and this also appears on the stones of the Pali text~ As this discrepancy was not noticed
there is nothing in the Pali to correspond with it. Pre.sumably "not able " means " not allowed bf until the present translation had already been sef up intype, it has not seemed worth. while to:alter
their rules.'' · the spelling here and in the numerous other places where the word occurs. The M.M. form is sim.
9 So-spelt here. 9 Possibly the last . clause should read " (and) would perform other (su~h) ceremonies/'· The
Pili has neither, but says ''in a manner that appeared< fitting to them.''

•
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA f PARf tl) MON INSCRIPtlONS
VOL. 111
•
r· • . '..(I. 22) having been able to purify, (they would) consecrate ...•
rbund the gamasz'mtJJ purified._ [it by inducting within the hatthD,pasa the
J . . . . . . . also, and perform ceremonies such as the ujasampadii. ordination.1
monks] if 1 within those boundary stones ; [but they would not effect purifica·
[There were some] clergy [who, holding· the opinion that] (1. 23) there
tion. [through the acts of inducting within the hatthajasa the monks living
would be the flaw of confusion of simas 9 [if two baddhasimas were]
outside the boundary, of receiving the declarations of assent of such of them
(connected?) [with each other by the branches of trees, etc., but] 8 in the
as were absent, and of excluding such of them as merited exclusion. In
case of a baddhast'ma apd a gamasima, [or two giimasz'ma.s,] ...•...•••.
such a s£ma] (1. 18) ceremonies such as the upasampadii ordination [would be
(I. 24) there would be no (such) flaw of confusion of st'mtts, in . . ...... .
petformed.2
....•. ~ .. at the time for the :constructing of a; baddha~ima upon the
There were] some [clergy] again who purified all round the giimasz"mfi,
gamasima . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . , . . . . • . . . . . . • .....
who had to induct (P) 3 [within the hatthapiisaJ etc., the monks residing round
. • . • . . . . • • . . . . (I. 25) around it, the (connecting branches of) trees,
that giimakhetta, inside or ·outside the boundary.4 Therefore, whenever· a sbn"tt
etc., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...... get together with the
was to be consecrated, they thought that it would be difficult to purify the
.gamasi'mtZ which. was (to be) the site of the baddhasima that (they were) to
whole of the gamasimii] 6 ••••• (I. 19) a gama (also ?), the (proper ?)
construct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ . . . . (I. 26) who purified
characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . was properly a vz·sum·
the gamasimii . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ·. purified the
gama. Those characteristics they did nqt investigate (and) ascertain . . • . •
gamasima which was (to be) the site of the baddhasima that (they'-were) to
... (I. 20) in a very subtle way.6 Members7 (of the clergy ?)
construct, .: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (In such
• . . . . . . . . . having dep~nded on 8 ·At the
· • .. • • • • • • • • •
a sima] (I. 27) the upasampada ordination [would be performed.
moment of ~erforming the ceremony of· consecrating the si"m~, if (a piece of)
There were some clergy,] again, [who .would not ascertain in every way]
land that suited (them) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . : . . . . . . . . . . . (l. 2 1)
\'Vnether the characteristics 4 of a river or the characteristics of a lake {were
measurement 9 that suited ·{them), boundaries ............ .
vlsumgam~, .present ?) [(as) mentioned in the jll/i and the at/hakatha.s,5 and who, without
... (they would) say (it was?) a and on land which was devoid
ascertaining well the interpretation of the words mentioned in the a#haka
of the characteristics of a vz'sumgtima . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
thas,] (1. 28) (which are ?) anvarfr!hamasam anudasaham anupancaham,6 [would
in this excessively rainy region, the MBn country, perform the ujasamjada
1 l take ayam here to be the same as L.M~ yam.
51 lt seems to me very doubtful whether there is room in our text for all the contents of the
above paragraph, l The corresponding Pali passage has: "They would then consecrate .the simii after effecting
a. The reading and meaning are very doubtful here.
purification through the acts of inducting within the hatthapasa, etc., the monks residing on the
4 The Pali has : '' There were some monks whO deelared : ' If it is desired to consecrate a sima giitnakhetta, but without effecting purification in regard to the whole of the giimasfrnii. In such a
on .a ga~akhet.ta~ such consecra~ion should be carried ~ut after effecting purification through the acts • stmd the upasampadii ordination would be performed.,,
of 1~ductmg within the hatthapasa, etc,, the monks residing round that gamakhetta, who are inside Cir 2 The Pali has '' mutual confusion."
outside the boundary.' '' s The Pali proceeds: "there would be no such confusion if a baddhasimii'and a gdmasima, or two
6 It is doubtful whether all the a~ove can have been represented in our text. The Pali proceeds: gamttsimds; were connected with each other by the branches of trees, etc., would, whenever there was
" and would n?t asc~rtain the tru.e n~ture of t~e characteristics of a visumgdma. They, however, a Jimii to be consecrated on a giim.akhetta perform the ci:msecr~tion without cutting off the branches
assumed that 1£. a piece of land with its boundaries defined was granted 'by,~ king, that land was a of trees, etc., which connected that giim 1 akhetta with the others arou.nd it, but after effecting
visumgama; and they would ask the ruling authorities to define the boundaries of a piece of land purification through the acts of inducting within' the hatthapasa, etc., the monks residing on that
~
which they had chosen and whose area ·would be .sufficient for the consecration of a sima or of :g~m_akhetta." lt does not appear that our text fits precisely· ·into t'his, though the general purport is
piece of land of larger area.'' I find it difficult to fit the fragments of our te1't into this. , similar.
6. Owing to the less of the context, the meaning is in doub~ .. 4 That is, as laid down by Buddhist rule for the special purpose in question; In order to. . fit in
7 As to the sense of nim, d. I. 8 1 10, su~ra. the fragments of our text, I have had to m~ke small verbal, modifications in· the English .vert'ion of
8 It is doubtful whether this .is the sense of msray ket. In lll A 9 nisrey .seems to mean "to die Pali in this paragraph. · '
find a. resting place.'' 5 The canonical scriptures and the commentaries on them.
.. 9 ':!'he original· includes the exprez~i~n n.ian Zam, which .. is defined 21 u a mt)asur~ equal to 1tven e" Every fortnight, every ten dilJi, every five aa.y1.''
cu.abhs~~» but hgW man1 of thoH ttnit1 "air• flferml to i1 d.QLt·bduJ.

128· EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III PART II] ~ MON INSCRIPTIONS
orl:lination in an udakukkhepas,ima consecrated on a river or] (1. 29) lake • deep faith in the religion of the Teacher, and the following thoughts arose iti
devoid of the characteristics of a river or (the characteristics of) of a lake. his niind: "The upasampada ordination is dependent on that of pab/Jaja, and
. ·~ -. . • . . . • . • : • . . . . . • . . . . . . . • (1. 30) . . . . . . . . 1 the basis ·of the religion itself is the upasampada ordination, which in order
Some clergy, again, (purified ?) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. ~ to be appropriate, inviolable, and valid must] (L 37) be possessed of five
. . . • . • . . . . . . .- . . . . . . . (l. 3 I} (were ?) . . . . . . . . .. able to characteristics, 1 [namely, st"maSampattt', part.'sasampatti,. vatthusampatU, iiatti·
cµt away, purified • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...........••.... sampattt', and anusa11anasampatti. Of these ·characteristics there exist means·
...... 2 of attesting the validity of 11atthusampatt£ and natt£sam/att£,_ owing respec·
[When] (1. 32 )- two thousand (and) two years had elapsed (since the_ tively to the ability of a candidate for the pure form of the upasampada
_Fully Enlightened One] achieved Parinirval,la,8 [there reigned in Harhsawati] 4 ordination to fulfil the condition of l he former, and to the accessibility of
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................. .... .... qualified iicart'yas, who could recite the kammavaca with correct intotiation."J1
.. - -
• . • .....• (1. 33) (Veda script~res ?),1 the sciences of logic, grammar, • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • . . • • • (1. · 38) there are three characteristics
. . . . . .~ • . ~ . •· . • . . · . · • • • . . . . . . . . • . ·. . . . . (The king, in re·
(and) prosody; rhetoric . . .· . . . . . . . . •.........•. · ... • . . . •
. . • . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (1. 34) more than one language, perfect, peatedly investigating and considering the ruling of] (1. 39) the Vinaya
together (with ?) ......••... ~ ..••.. ~ ..... (1. 35) the province [as regards the consecration of a s·lmtt which would be in conformity
of Muttima according to the Law ........................ . with the intention of the ~lessed One; as interpreted by the authors of
• . • • • . . . . . . . . . . (L 36) His Majesty Ramadhipati" [had exceedingly atlhakathas, fikas and paAara?;Zas, consulted· both the spirit an~ the letter of
the following works, controlling the atfhakatha by means of the pa/£, the fika
by means of the atthakatha, and th~ pakara1Ja by one another, and at the
l It is not clear whether our text contained anything represented by. these dots. The first words_
same time collating what· was gone. before with what came after:-.t he
legible in 1. 30 are merely two particles. . . ·
2 The Pali corresponding with. this paragraph has: "There were some monks who, whenever they .. Vinayapali, the Vinaya~thakatha, the Vinayatika called Saratthadipa!)i, the
. ''bed to consecrate a sima on a giimakhetta, would cut off the bran,ches of trees, etc., that connected
WlS • , • h' h Vinayatika called Vimativinodal,li, the Vinaya~Ika written by Vajirabuddhithera,
it with other gamakhettas, and carry out their object .through the ac:s of mductmg w.1t. m t e
hatthapasa the monks residing inside or outside the boundary of that gamakhetta, of recelVlng . the the Matikat~hakatha called KankhavitaraJ.1.i together with its trka; the Vinaya-~
d larations of assent of such of them as were absent, and of excluding such of them as merited vinicchayapakaral}.a together with its tz1'a, the Vinayasailgahapakara9a, the
~n
e:lusion. But whenever there was an upasampada ordination to be performed such a simii., the
Simalatikarapakaral)a, and the Simalailkarasangaha.8
ceremony would be performed without cutting off the branches of trees, etc., which co.nnected that
amakhetta with others." It is more than doubt£ ul whether our text had room for all this. To the king, who] (1. 42) repeatedly [investigated and] considered [this
g '9 The Pali also has '"the 82oth year of the Common Era/1 which may or may not have been in qu~stion, the ruling of the Vinaya appeared to be thus:-'' Jf it is desired to
our text. This corresponds to 1458-9 A. o. ·
4 The Pali here proceeds, in a somewhat different order: '' Rimadhipati, who. assumi~g the title consecrate a si"ma on a s~lected ·site, whether it be a paiui/zgama}hetta or a
•
.of Siripavaramahadhammarajadhiraja, ruled justly and righte~usly and a~orded protection~. to t~e •
people of the M8n country, which comprised the three provinces. of Kus1mamai;i.qala, J:Iamsavatl-
. Muttimamandala.. He was the lord of a white el~phant, whose colour was hke that of
mart d. al a, and . · • • . . · ·· d h
the white esculent water-lily, or of the ;asminum rnultijforum, o~ of the .autumnal moon, an e :was 1• The original word is stAmpatti, which may be taken in the sense of ''condition, excellence,
replete with faith and many other qualities. He was well acquainted with the languages of various attainment."
countries, and with many manual arts, such as masonry and ca:pentry. He was, 1:1oreover, learned I It seems very doubtful whether ou~ text had room for aU the for~going. The Pili
and well read, and was . versed in the Tipita.ka and the sciences of takka, byakara'!la, chanda, proceeds : " B.ut by what criterion can l ascertain the non-existence of simdsampatti and parisasam• ·
. alankat'a~ astrology medicine, and arithmetic, pf;!rtaining to the Vedasa.11 (This last word seems .. to be pattiP" In this English version of the Pili there is an accidental omission of any reference
1 to the validity of anusd.vanasamjatti; but the Pali original. adds it to the other. two whose validity
for "Vedas.") ~ .· · . .
5 So literally, but it is ·apparently sometimes extended to the. Buddhist Canon (wh1ch_ 1~, however, could be ascertained. Possibly. our text put this part about "the three characteristics" after .t he
aeparately mentioned in the Pali and proba~ly was in our" te~t). ~he trans~~tor of the Pah takes the other.
expression as qualifying these sciences, as it were ''the Ved1c sciences of, etc. Our text has the a The above passage in the Pili corresponds to a12_ indefinite number of lines in our text, of which.
Pali terms, slightly varied in order. those whereof any traces remain have been.' numbered 40 and 41 in the text; but as there ie nothing
ttfLnslatable left in them, these numbers do not appear in the translation.
e The Pali here has "the .k ing.',
9

•
EPlGRAPH[A aIRMANICA [VOL. lli ~ART U]
1Jisumg.amt,1kh,ettaJ 1 • • • ~ • • • .- • • -. • • • • . • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • " up many boundary marks, (and one) desires to make a triangular figure 1
• • • • • (1. 43) men (and) women, the fact that . . . . . ....... . . ....•.....•..•..... ~ •........•.... (1. 53) (of) four
· • . . • . (1. 44) and the fact that it i~ a site (obstructing?) 9 sides, set up four boundary marks. Should (one) desire to make a
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
~ . .. :figure of five .sides, set up fiv~ boundary marks. lf {pne,d d~~ir#s t~ f.Pak.~
(l ... 45} (a slma ?), if there are boundaries of the sites, (and) a village headman a num~rous circumferences Qf figure{)," ................ bounda:r:y ma.r,k;$
who (tCJ.k~s ?) . • . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .......... • . (I. 46) (such as ?) 8 ~ borindC1ry ·rna.rks . . .; ·~ . • . ~ • . • . . . . • • • •., . ·'·
• • • • • •
also the ;,evenues of some portion, desire to giv € to (other pensons ?) • -~ • . • ~ (1. 54) (should) the circumference 2 of the · fig;ur~ net be
'!_ •• ••••••
• • · • · · ~ · · · ~ · • · · · · · · · · · · • . (I. 47} give the oth~:r (such that ?) it is easy to apprehend the course ~f tqe, poµpdary of the ·#m(i,1
(that?) he may erijoy a new village whereof he may colle:ct 2 the revenues (even) if one ~hoiild set up many boqndary marks, there wo':1ld be tf9
• • · · · · • . . · . . . . . · . . . . . . . . . . . . (I. 48) having ,( d~scoursed ci-Ovantage in s.ettir:i.g up those ma.ny boundary mark.s.'
-what they ?) . • . . ~ . . • . . . . . . , (to define who shall get ?) 4 the
[''Th~ conn~ctiqg branc}les of tre~s., etc., which are either wit4itt ~r
revenues. In a visumgama~hetta, co~plete . . . . • . . . . . . • . . . ..
.. ·-. . . · . . . (I. 49) having taken the piece of land, if it suited them, (and ?) withoµt th~ pounda;ry, should .be '·Cl;lt ~own, and tl:J..e ,ext~mt ~f ·th~ ~·mlii •p)~{y
defiRed.. Of all the monks residing w.itllin or :Whho~t the hpq.~l)dary of th.at
the monks 5 (should ?) desire to :make a _s'ima, at the time when it was
g.ttmakh~tta, those who are worthr of ·the priv"ileg·~ §hould b- ind,uc~d- w~lf.~i,
desired to make (it) ......•...........••....... (1. 50.)
the hfl;tthaJast1, and the «1ecJarat·iQ~~' of -~ss~ijt .Qf ·th~stt who .p.r~ q:~~t
other .....• around. Having cut away the connecting branches ·of trees,
,sheuld be. -received, the r~mammg mPn~s bt;iflg ekplm:le~ _foom ~
etp., (and} having planted (bou·ndary) marks around the pieceof land where
g~~akhetta. _};)~
For the purpose of guiding "travelling monks, guards sh9l;1ld
(they} desired to consccra te the sima, (when ?) . • . . • . . _. . . . . . . • . •
S;tationed. all rouJ.li.d t\h ~ ;gama/e.k-etta ; and, in o~~~ t~ n0tify th~ fa$·f :puiblicly,
•. ;. . ; •.. • •.•....... • • {L 51) if (the way the boundary ?) :runs
is gH$cult to apprehend,· thoqgh the circumferenee of the figure should not ;fi~s ~n~ st-r~a.:mer.s should be planted at YM·i0ai$ plaice~ ; a.µd the l:lOQ1J.}q~ri@~
should be proclaimed thre€ time~ by the ~otippfog of ·d.mmsj conc}l,.s~llis,
rrin' oth:erwise than, for example, a figure of three sides (or) four sides,
and other nltlSiGa4 instf\!1Il1~tlts~ Eventtla1ly, tb~ slm-a .sQ.-oQj«l .h~ ~O:Q.fieyC:,ritt~4
m . • • • . . .• . . . . • . • . • . . . . . . • . . . . {L 52) if the
course of the boundary lS easy to apprehend: even t110ugh one cannot set ·b~ h4ving ithf! /4q,mrnavaca read with ;proper in<tonat,j<m. Th~ _G~·~~~rat~n '9fJ
l It is difficult ·t'o fit. the fragments of our text into the Pali, which . proceeds thus: "whose boun:.
da.ries have been defined for the purpose pf collecting rev~nue, and which possesse~ the followin,g 1 l am not .sure that I have rendered this rather obscure passage correctly. The corresponding
characte'ristics, namely, that it is inaccessibleto men and women; that it is favourable to the exercise Pali proceeds~ much lllore concisely: "H, how~ver, it is desired to consecrate akhua4aklisima, whose
Qf the four if'i')lapath-as; that it is Mt· a place subject to ·neise; and that tj1e usufructuary 'tig'ht • ,. f<>rm is triangu'lar and wl10se extent is easy to apprehend, three boundary mar~s sijot,d~ b~ ,pJfJ.ced.
exercised in respect of'it_iscapable ofsupporting·Jife;-the bran.ches·of trees,_·etc~, connecting_that "Sl,lt if the form of the sima to be cons~crated. is square or rechu1gular, four bqµnd~rr 11~ark~ would
· paka#gamakhetta or visumgilmakhetta with other gamakhettas should be cut down ; and a number of $Ufflce j ~md if the form is a poJy~on., the. number Of bo~nd,ary. marks. shoµ}d; b~ '~n proportj9n." l.;
boundary marks. should be :Placed around _t he site selected fo~ the ~onsecrati9n. of the sima, should have taken tamen in these.nse of ·"boundary, circumference'"· (f£.M~ tumwin _IF 17 tumwin lX N 5)
1 1
such sirn.a ·be a rnahii.sima, whd'se exterit is difficult to · apprehend and _· whose form is not well not as connecteg with L.M. tmen, either iD the sense of -''different ''or '"r1 variet;y."' The 'Jatter
defined/' Ourtext, while retaining some of these particulars, seems to .expand others and introduce ineaning. w.ould make · ap intelligible · trailslatio9, but .. 1 do not· s~ 'h(HV. it· would be . consistent witn ··
fresh -matter. . . the• Pa'H version', · · .·. .
· .. !! 'Rea;ding ·and meaning doubtful. i Here again the. word tameh comes in. r am disposed .. to . *iP~ th~t wha~ .· l }l~ve 1',p~rir~~ ~­
.·s :Meaning· doV:btfu1. ,, puQ1e.f9ul3. circumfer~µ~es ,of'' ·~lllP¥ _re a!Jy be ,ne~nt ~o f~9Yte}'" '1:.P9!f~~pal/' thpu,gh .J .go ~~~ 'e@.}l1>,'
4 ·Mea~in,g 4ou.btful owing to absence oLthe conteit. . . . . .. _ . . ··•··· way. to getting. ~hat sense out of the words as they s~and.~ A'\f!ptl:i.er ~J.Jgg'~~t~~ r~n.d~JJn¥1 .tAl<mg tffn,Ht,y -
5 ~l nave •n:glectedJhe. do'ubtful word yata, as its -meaning- is undetermined._ .. If'it is to be read in the s~nse'of ,, different/' is:,'' If it js desired ,tQ PJ.<J:k.e *4,i~~rcrpt ng·u.~s 9J ·ma~y (sip~~)/' i~,ui this
Yfiti ("ascetic, monk"), it adds nothinj to the translation, being Jl'lerely a s_ynonym ofKMJi·i.• . "B\1t cf. seems mar~ remot~ fl'.Pm the J>aU venion~ .. · .... _·.· . _· . . _ __ . .. . .· . ·_ .
{ l i l · , - i ~g • , where th~ reaaitig . _ is certainly )'~ta. Anothc;?~ Vi4o}W is th . at y,ata mean: ' 1 ·, "~ny (monk•).'' Cf:. ~ ~udiflil. &fJQ ,m-eH·ing iio~bt~wl: The ~t. w9,r~ ·_ ~· \l~~a\)J~ • ·~'w:mb•r •
• The f~11men~1. of FAce B .e nd hore, with • •p aYagraph mark• ·

131 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. 111 PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS
---'-·--:;-:::,,~_..-....... -''"~·· season (in which) rain falls once (in) each half of tile<'l'.9~.nth [during the
four months connected with the time of Vassa] (I. 9) the uader . robe of a
c
nun who crosses (a stream) 1 is wetted, that strea'm is a mahanadt~ If during
an equable rainy season (in which) [rain falls once] every ten days1 [during'
[a s£m(J,, which is attended by such ceremonies] (1.. 1) as aforesaid,1 [is
the four] (1. w) months of the time of Vassa the· under' robe of a nun'w~o
inviolaple and valid; and the upasampada ordination 'and other cere
crosses (a stream) 1 is wetted, as (one' might) say,' that stream is a m~}•
monies performed in such a sima are likewise inviolable and valid.
7ht'manadt.4 If during an equable rainy season (in which) [rain falls once)
" The characteristic of an equable rainy season is, that during -the four
every five days, [the under robe] (l. 11) of a nun who crosses a stream 1 is
months of its continuance] (1. 2) {rain falls ?) once (in) each half of a wetted, that stream is a small stream.6
month-1
• • • • · ••• • · • • • • • • ...... • • • • • • • • • ••••• " If, again, in any stream, during an equable rainy season, [the under
• • (1. 3) one . . . . . . 8 sammadharttpavecchana, the fact that rain robe of a nun who crosses] (the stream) 1 (I. 12) is wetted, but during a
(falls ?) .•.• · . . · · · · · · · . • · · · · · · · • · · · · · · • · • (1. 4) deficient rainy season (it) is not wetted, inasmuch as a deficient rainy season
sammatlharapavecchana, the fact that rain falls . . . . . . . .. -. . . .
is no criterion, [it should not be declared that] such a stream as aforesaid
•••.• (If after the lapse of?) half a month rain falls, [it is the charac
[is] not [a nad1,] (1. 13) (and if) during an equable rainy ~eason, the under
teristic of a deficient rainy season, and if] (1. 5) rain falls [once every four a
robe of nun who crosses.· (the stream) 1 is not wetted, but during an
days,] ·or rain falls once every . three days, or rain falls once [every two
excessive rainy season (it) is wetted, [inasmuch as] an excessive [rainy
days, or rain falls] every [day, it is the characteristic of an excessive rainy
season is no criterion,] it is not proper to declare [such a stream] (1. 14) to
season. be a nadt.
" If the season is(?)] (1. 6) an equable rainy season (and) during the four
"The nature of a jatassara 6 is (that) it arises spontaneously: it cannot
months connected with 4 the time of Vassa, ....... (whether) in a place -~nyone
be made by digging (it), [but] (1. 15) is filled [with water that flows
that is a landing-place {or) a p1ace that is not, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . from all round it.] Su~···c:t-lake as .aforesaid (is) called a fiitassara. [If in]
(I. 7) (in) crossing a stream at that time the under robe of a nun should be
a [reservoir of such descdption,] during an equable_ rainy season, during the
wetted, as (one might) say 5 [to the extent of] one finger (breadth) or two
four months of Vassa, (l. r6) there is water [sufficient for tbe purpose of
finger (breadths),. [such a stream acquires the status of a nadi.] Now,
drinki'ng or washing] feet (and) hands, it attains to {the status of) -a
equable (1. 8) rainy seasons (are) of three kinds' : if during an equable rainy jatassara.7 It can be called a jatas sara. An
• • • • • • • • • • . • • • •
equable rainy season (is) of three kinds . . . • . . . . . . • . . . • . . . . .
·I rt is of course impossible to be· quite sure that these two words are rightly fitted in here. , mahajatassara, (1. 17) ma1Jhimajiitassara, (and), Ahudda!ajiitassara, (are?) three
•
9 The English version of the Pali, which is based on a variant' reading here (see 1. 3 of our text) .,..
after '' continuance ,, proceeds :-0 an uninterrupted shower falls once every half month, or every fifth
da.y; that of a deficient rainy season is, that a shower falls after the lapse o~ a half month; and
that of an excessive rainy season is, that. the intervening period between pne shower and another is l The p ali here adds " at any place."
' te§~ than five'days, that is to say, rain falls every fourth, third, or second day, or every day (without I A big stream. .
interruption)." Our text expands somewhat. After ''every half month,, the original Pali text on
a Th·ese four words are merely an idiom and might. have becm left ulltranslated.,
the stone adds '' or every tenth da.y." For "the lapse of a. half month" we mustunderstand "an
4 A stream' of medium size. . .
interval of more than half a month."
a· 1 can make nothing of the fragmentary ·1 -atha; sammildhfir8.pavecchana means, apparently, 5 In the Pali, khu.dll.akan.adf. It is curious that here the Pili word is. not given in our text,
much the same as ''an uninterrupted shower." which translates it into its M8n equivalent~ .
' Or, simply, "of," like the use of L.M. dadak tau. a That is, " a lake.,,
5 These four words are merely an idiom and might have been left untranslated. 1 After this point our text parts company with the Pali. which says nothing here about th•
s The Pali, which otherwise. agrees faidy closely in this passage., does not appear to contain this t.hreo kinds of jU.ta.sorQ4 (big, medium and small),, or of equable rainy seasons.
aeittence.

EPIGRAPHIA ~·1R.MANICA (VOL. 1U M6N INSCRIPtIONS
[If] t
,t.:t,.l.,,t...m.t:.1S ., .·""• .,, •.•"• • ,~ ~• •... e •••••••••••••• •· • • • • • • • • i a jd. aS.._ day ?)/ that is calJed the characteristic of an excessive rainy. sea,~on. " « •
S!fl,r$,. in an equable rainy season, (t 18) contains witter [sufficient} for [these ••••••• 9 is reached.
purposesr,] (futlli) d'l:iring a defi.eient rainy season, (or) in winter [or summer,] "Now in this M5n c.ountry of ours (it) sometimes (happetls tha~J, (taio.t
H1ere is rt©.t ~Sl!l.ffid~nt] watte·r, it is (nevertheless} a jatassara. (But it- is) falls once?) s every four day.s., or (1. 25) rain. falls once every three d~y.s, or
rirot a fit~ssara: .• . . . . ~ . . . (if) (L r9) during an equable rainy season, in rain falls o·nce every two days, or rain falls every day. Sometimes (L 26~
the four m:iil>:t1ths (€011neeted with the time of V assa ?) there is no water, during ten days, toot, without interruption, if the ray~ of the s.unr wish to
wm1&
dtiting- an excessive rainy season there is water (in it) penetrate sQmewhat,, (they) are quit~ unable (to do so),4 throughout the
whole expa11se of the sky all is dark (and) -dull 5 {L 27,).,
• • • • • • • • • • •
(1. 20) " Now this M 8n country of ours is an excessively (ainy one, [but pouring forth, rain falls. Inasmuch as it is thus, it is .f itting ·~ o not~ thq:t
lioW · can ~rleJ (declare that B: the nature?) s of this M8n country of ours is this Mon c0untry of ours is characterized' hy an exce.ssive rainy s~ason.
. chre:fil-caHy it an excessively rainy one ? According to the statement of the Thus, in (I. 28) this Mon country of ours, either in ·(the cas~ of} a large
teae·nefs (ih) the Atthakathas . . ... , ..... · ..........•..•. , .• nadi,6 or in (the case of) a large jatassara,6 as defined by 7 the rainfall in an
!in·
(J:. the exteht {)~ of the Vassa· season is· four months ........ ~ (thus, equable rainy season, though the rain (L 29).may be ............. 8
it is ?) sfated ih the Attna&athas: But in this Mon country of ours the if in such a large nadi as aforesaid (or) such a large jiitassara as afor~s~id>
Vassa seasor1 (is) six montns . , ..... (How can orie ?) 8 ·(I. 22) know an udakukkliepa is made, persons (may validly perform?} 9 such ceremonies a,s
(U1ad)6 ' i't fs excessively rainy ...... (ot?) tt not? (I. 23) Inasmuch as the the upasamjadii ordination."
A~ta·altathas say [that the characteristic of an equable rainy season is] that
rain falls, at the very utmost, once every five days, (it follows that if) rain
Sil!i·ouM fall dnce evety four d'ays; or rain should:·· faU once every three days, I This restoration, though supported by the ~ali, seerns rather doubtful, as th&re is; pethattiS.
hardly .room for it. · , ·
or rafo sh··oUftl fall once every two days, or· (rain ?) (J. 24) should fall (every 2 I can make nothing of the.::Qoubtful words here.
a This restoration is conj~t'ural, and it is doubtful whether there is room JleP· it·;· but- ~f? seems to
be, requii;ed. bY, the comtextand by the Pali, which ha::S ; " ht this. eeuntry. of FUmaili~adesa., some.:
~imes once every fourth, third, or second day, or every; day (without interrnpti1Gn), sometimes eti'ce
every seventh or tenth day, the ray5' of the sun are, invisible, arid .the sky becon1es eloudy anlit
murky~: and a continuous shower of rain falls. Therefore it is est01blished beyoncf. doubt that ~h.~
1 Ttle P~li here proceeds : ''If a lake, wniCh. satisfies such a condition when the. rainy season ralny season of Ramannadesa is an excessive one/'. It shou·ld be EOted that our .text is. Jlh e*pande~
i&: an equablft Qne, does not c~mtai1n· water sufficient for the purpose of drinking or ablution when Hit!. pa~aphrase, but says nothing a1>0ut '' every seventh (day),"
rainy seasonis a deficient one, or during winter er summer, it sbould not be declared· that such ~
4- That is, " when there is no sunshine at all."
l il a l;, k a e n d t o q e U s a n b o te t · a o c nt q : u ~ ir a e t l i a le k . e s ta C t ile u e s s o h f o a b ji e U e a 1n s t s ~ a l r n a ~ w .. a .. te I~ r , st d :H u 'f r i1c in ie g n t t h fa e t - f t o h u e r - . p ~ u o r n p t o h s s e o o f f d a r i r n ~ k i i n b y g s e o a r s o a n b . l w ut .h io ic n ,h , • caus 5 e T th h e e - ra w i o n r f d a s ll t f o o l f l l o o w w i ng ( ja i w n ar t , h e w h in ic k h ·i m I p h re a s v si e o 0 r < e n a d r e e r ed d o ' u 'p b o tf u u r l i , n · g l! iu f t o r m th a " y )• ihclude '" cfoudsJ• which
but. satisfies· this condition when the· rainy season is an excessive one, such. a lake does not acquire ~ & Here our text uses the Pali technical terms for "sfream " at1d ~1 lake/' .r eape·ctiv~ty.
the status of a jatassara.'' . · . · .
1 Litera.lfy, "'by the kind of." The reference is to 'l'le tests mentioned tri ii. 5-g, 1!)-tS, tl:iough
1 The Pali has : ''but how could one know that its· rainy season is an excessive one P .That the in the. fragments of our text the11e is· no specific definition o(a niahajij,ta~sara preserved.
rainy season comprises four. months. is thus declared )n the. Mtlil&katltas 1 ~~· yasmfi M· _'liassiinassa. Perhap~, ''defld~nt,
catlsu mihesu.' .lfot in this country of Ramaflfiadesa the rainy season comprises si« mon~h·S•" 8 in that season " P ·.. . . . . ·. . • . . , . . . . ...
. .s Doubtful readingJ_ ·•A<J perhaps. th._ 40i"lb1tf~ li{qrc}; Gt~ali~· .hei:e means: 41 the . fiaet. ~t-ba·t) " not state 9 d C a c b i o n v je e d , u i r n a l t l) h T is r e c s e . > to u · n re tr q y . o T f h .R e a P m a a l f i i fi c a d d r e r s ~ a s , p o d n u di ri n n g g to d t i h e i f s o t w ir h o ~ J o e n t p }l a s s sa o g f, e a h r : i ;1 ,s e q : u a " b F l o e t" ra ,i ~ t} h . e y r s ~ e a ~ s S o Q n J S 1 ; ,
. "(~hat} the nat~·re ~()f).'' : . . .. · when rain falls ih tfie _manner. described, the .uncfer<robe~ ·Of; a nu,:i crgss;ng a· strea.tn. Of. St,lCJi
' 91'.. " ~niJy;,11 "- ind~ed "P . . description, at any pla:ee, i's wet~ect O.n suer a mahanaaf ~n. utlak~kkliepasima n;i~y be. COO!:l~~r.~~e'.Q.;
5 Or ''state,· naturel' ·.literally "being.•' . . .. . ~~d the .. upasampada ~rdination .·.performed .. in if wU} ·•• be . valid; .· and i"violab.le, .I f, dµ,rin$' th~ · ~Q:U.~
B· I. am doubtfuLwhether I have rightly added. these. words· to our.·. fragmes&aliy text:• .·. 'Jlhe P ilf mon.ths··· of an ~quable. tab~ season,. wheri, rain ... iall's ~s ·4e13crib~q above, a .taJ<e .. of su~h cfe~~~ipdt1n
do.~s not .. help, . fqr i~. mel'ely ~·l{~ : ''· B~~us.e i~ is s~id. th~t the . c)$act~~istie ef. a»: equalHe rainy conta.ins water sufficient . for 'tile purpose· of cfrint<fog or ablution : on s.ucb a n:aMjata$§af~. ~~.
~asoh is, that rain falls every fifth da)!,_me,thi~.kll tha~ the chara$;te.tli.f.l.tic Qf aq ~xc~,·~e i;aJf.l3i $e~cli0.l.l; . uclakukkhefJasimfi may be. consecrated ; :and the upasampad,a ordination perfoiti:n~cl .Jn-i~ wijl ~e valid
is, that rain falls every fourth, third, or sebond day, or· every day~"' · · · and inviolable/' · · ·

Mt>N INSCRIPTIONS
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. III PART U]
;;. . . . . . . . . . . . 1s a haddhasima . . . . reciting the service of the c;on~e·
..•...... (l. 30) the ruling of the Vinaya was clear in {the mind of
Hit Majesty ?} 1 RAmidhipati.1 Then the following considerations occurred to oration of a, sima ~ . . . . . .. . • . • . . . . . . . . . (1. 38) cannot •
• • • • . . (part ?) which is within that boundary, if . . . . . • . . . . .
His Majesty Rimadhipati :-" At the time that [it is desired to consecrate
a sima] (1. 31) some [clergy], if upon a gama1'hetta . . . . • . . ~ .••...• • • • • • • • • • • • • . . • • • • (1. 39) ,( still?) is . . . . ·
it cannot be said to be another (piece of land, it cannot
.• within the gamal,hetta, if within the boundaries also (they?) have (kept
watch ?),8 if (there are) monks who live within the boundaries ....•...• be said to be a · haddhast'mii ?) .. . • . . . . . . .
J . . . . • (1. 40) to be . . • . . . . . . • .
• • • • and (1. 32) monks who live outside the boundaries ......•.•.•
th~ If the persons who dwell within the boundary 1 ~
...... (a.nd they) have not caused {them) to be brought (down into ?)8 • • • • • • • •
~
hatthajilsa .. ; (and) have not expelled (them) out of the gama1'hetta; (and · · · · · · · · · · • • · · · · • · · · · · · · · . • . (1. 4 t) inasmuch as the
consecration of the ·s t'ma is "lJagga 9 (the upasamjadi
they) consecrate ................. (l. 33) if •••••••• so, (there • • • • • • • • • • • •
is) /1rrisav2"jatti-. • . • . • . . . • . • . . . . . (why is it said that there ordination and other ceremonies performed in such a simci] (I. 42) are void
[by reason of] si~mavipattz'.9 [There are also] (some) clergy, [who ask the
is?) 9 farlsavipatti? 6
ruling authorities to define the boundaries.· of some place selected by them,
'' If 6 in a gttmasima • . • . . • . . • . . • . . ..... (l. 34) planted
but which does not possess the characteristics of a gama. Considering that
boundary marks ...........••. within those boundaries, a gamasi"ma
such a place is a visumgamakhetta,] ( 1. 43) when they have decided on it•
other than the .....• gamasimii ••.•............ (it is?) (1. 5)
3
and the time has come for the consecration of a s£ma, (they do so ?) (by
proper (to define by getting t) .•.......•. that gamali.ketta (the line
inducting within the hatthapasa only the monks residing on the whole of the
; which it is desired ? ) 7 • .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • (L 36) to the
pa£a#gamal,hetta.] . . . . ~ . . . ·. · . · · · · . · (1. 44) · · · · · · · · · · · ·
king, ( d~fine ?) •.•. · . • . .. . • . . which is within (those boundaries ;
5 (J. 45) making (it) separate, to be a visumgama •..
•• • •••••••••••
because one desires to il).7 (1. 37). (not?) ••••
.- • • • ; . . . . . . · . . ~ . . . .. . . . • . . . . . . . . [The consecration of the s£md by
these clergy is void 9y-i1eason of parisavipatt£. Therefore, because of sz·ma
I Conjecturally restored. · . _/ ---- 'lJtj;atti',] (1. 46) the upasampadd ordination which they perform in [such a simd
i !his sentence does not seem to .be literally represented in ftie Pili, which proceeds: ''The
following thoughts arose in the mind of Ramadhipati, to whotll/the valid manner in which a simtJ
is invalid.6 ·There are also other clergy, who, wishing to consecrate a
should be con~ec~ated had a,ppeared as described above:-' There are some Theras who, wishing to simd on a gamakhetta, do not cut down the branches of trees, etc., connect-
consecrate. a. sim_a ?n a gamakhetta, carr~ out their object by inducting within the hatthapasa the
·ing that gamakhetta with] (I. 47) the other gamakhettas which are around it,
m.on~s residing 1ns1~e the boundary, b1,1t without effecting purification through the acts of inducting
wnhin the hatthapasa, etc., all the monks residing on that gamakhetta. The consecration of such a
1im4 by the Theras is jnvalid by reason of parlsavipatti.' "
a Doubtful reading and meaning. I The Pali has : · '' If all the monks residing on that very gdmasima., who are ·.deserving of the
• •
4 Conjecturally restored- privilege, are riot inducted within the hatthapisa ;. if the declarations of assent of those who are
• 5 O~ing to th~ fr~gmentary· state of our text, 1 have not been able to piece it together with the entitled to send them ,are not received; if those who deserve exclusion are not excluded; and if only
Pih version, of which it seems to be an expanded paraphra!!e. The same applies to much of what the· ~.onks residing ·within the boundary are inducted within the hatthap4sa f the consecration of the
follows. .rim4 (attended by such ceremonies). is violable and not in accordance with tbe law."
b The Pili· proceeds : ·' ' · u , in order to alienate the· reve~ue of a selected place, whose boundaries s This word, which appears in· the Pili as 'UaggQm, seems to mean something like " void.'1
have been d~fined .. for t~e purpose of collecting revenue and. which is .situated on a pakafigdmo,khitt<J, s Th~t is, •1 by reason .of the invalidity of its consecration." ·
the· bound~pes ~re again defined. a~d the place itself is given away by the ruling authorities : such a •The reading is doubtful. The Pili has: "they select a site on it, and consecrate a slma by
place acquires the status of a •rmumgdmakhetta. The consecration of a batldhasimii is consummated inducting,'' etc. ·
at the c~nclus!~n of .t .he recitation of the kammavaca, and not merely by the proclamati~n of its 5 In. this line there are only some doubtfully read and i'olated words, such as '' cause..''· '' also," ,
boun?ar1es. 1 herefore t~e ~and re{erred to above,. which is situated inside the boundary, doe• not "revenue "(P), ,,. if,1' which l have been unable to" fit i~to any framework. Much the same ap;plies
acqu1r~ the status of a vss~,,.g4ma, b_ecause. of its perpetually forming a part .and parcel of the to the next line. The Pili proceeds as shown in the text. ·
1imassmi; nor does .the s1ma .. bec~me a. lxuldht11imil, because the· lands both inside and outside the 6 The Pili has ; "the up111amjaJ.d ordination atid other ceremoni•i performed, in such a stml. are
boundary, .c onstitute but one tii#tnimil.,u ' , invalid.''
1 Meaning do11btf uL ·

EPlGR.APHtA BIRMANlCA f fr!
VOL.
(b~t, carry out their object after effeeting purification through the aGt of]
(I. 48) inducting [within] the ltatthapasa ·[the moHks residing on ~hat
D
gamakketta. By reason of parfsavi'jattt';J the eonsecration [of tl:iec sima by
these monks is invalid.· As] (l, 4~) there is mutual confusion 1 [betw@en two [''There ave also some clergy, who,. desiring t(;) eonseorate a sime on a.
batlanasi·mas] because of their being connectea by the bran~hes of trees, etc., gomakketta cut cdiown, the branches of tre€s, etc., d~1mecting that gamakhetta
1,
[so there is mutual confusion 1 between] a: haddhas1'mii and a giimas£ma,· with others, artd: carry out their object by inducting· within the hatthap&.sd,
for between two gamasi'.mas, because of their being c.onneeted by the etc., all the monks residing inside 0r . Q•U.tsi1~e the bounda11y of that giima• ·
branches of trees, etc. By reasafi of] (1. 50) (sz'mavipattt'?)/ the consecration khet,a. But whanevef}l1 {l. 2} the upasampada ordination [and oth<n cerem0nies
of the simii is void, {and) because the consec~ation of the simii is void, s ai:e: perfo:nhed .in such a st'ma, the connecting bratt.ches of tr<tes, ettt.; of tna:t
fthe upasampad'a ordination performed then~in is invalid ?).4 gamasfmii are not cut down. The upasampada ondiFla,tion arid! otliH:~t ,
. ["There are other c_lergy, who perform the upasampadii ordinati0,Jil and earemorlies. of thes.e dergy are, therefore, void] (1. 3') by Feas0m @f°p~risavi:. .
etlier "ceremonies in ai1 udakuk&hepast'ma e0nsecrated on rivers and lakes than paitt', [caused through Ule confusion 'of boundaries} of such h(J/cldhas£ma and
are devoid of their respec:tive characteristics (judged by the cond~tioa·s gamasima. If, on the other hand,. these clergy tperform the upasampadii
prevailing} in _the exceedingly rainy region of the Mon country. By reason atdinatfon and other ceremonies io: a valid baddhasima, or on a Jakafigama
of st'm~vtpatt£, the upasamparla ordination and other ceremonies performed by kh.etla] (l. 4) which possesses [the characts.ris.tfos Qf a tiima, 0~ en J a
J
these clergy are void. As to . this exceedingly rainy region of the MBA: 'Disumgamakhetta, wliich possess~s· (I. 5), [tine ch~racteristics of] a gama,.
eountry : during the four mo11ths of an equable rainy season, when ra:in falls bQ:i; on a mahiinadi possessing the characteristics. of a nadi,] or. Gm a
. in the manner indicatea above, the un.der robe of a mm crossing a riv·er, a.t. mahajatassara 9 which attains to {the characteristics of a j~tassara,] or [on a
any place:;·.. rbay not get wet (provided that the prevailing · conditions are .ramudda,] which attains to the characteristics ()f a samudda, [they
normai); euti owing hi> .excess,ive rainfall .in 'this. country, tbe,under robe will may constitute a Chapt~r;JB . . . • . . ~ . . . . . . . {l. 6} those ceren;i,onies,
get wet. Judging, therefore, by the wetting of tfie ,(Under rebe, when the ia· a htiJadkasi'ma Jt.-hith (is void according to?) . . . • . . . . on a
rainy season is, as stated before, an equable one, h9*-c~n it be correct to 1Jlsumgiimakhetta which is devoid . of 4 the characteristies 0£ a gama .
say that such a river acquires the status of a nadi-·f Again, during the four , • • • .• • • . • • . • • . . (1. 7} on a smath javassara, tmat ha:s not the chai:a.eter·
mcrnths of an equable rainy season, when ra:in falls in the manner indicated lstics of a jiitassara . · .............. by reason of (such ?J circum-
above, a lake may not contain water sufficient for the purpose of Eh-inking or-· stances~. as afo.resaid . . . ~ • . . . . . . . . . . .- . .. . . . . . . (L 8 Y ar@ vo:icl1 · E Hil:
ablutio11 (provided that the prevailing conditions are normal); but owing to account of parisavt"pattt'.'' (Thus ~) 6
• • • • • • • • • • • • • •• • • • •
~xcessive, rainfall in this country, during th~ four months of the rainy
•
seas©PI, H will contain water suffi.cierit for the purpose of drinking or ablution.
J u dging1i therefore, by the .s uffidency of 'water Jn such a ,l ake for the putpose 1 No entirewordis legible in 1• . t 0£ thi$ Face,,thvllgh on~ n;ia.y. conj 1 11ctu.re k.le', which probably
form~q gart of the exp.re13sion "cut cl.own,;' s,upra.
of drinking or ablution, when the i:ainy seas.on is, as . stated befor@" an 2 The Pa t l o i omits the maha.
eql]able on~·~ ho'\V can it· be ce>trect :to say that su~n a lak~ acqmreis the a Owing: differences ic syntactical order, I have. n.Qt atteit1pted tQ! fit the fragm:etit~ of our text,
that . follow·• on· here,:· into, t.he .f ramework .of the .. PaliJ which proc.eeds: .. '' but the · functiq,i:ls performed~
~t.~t~&·, QL a Jatassaia ?], by thm ire void by reasorr cif parisa1Jipatti,_ c~u~e.d through their having been ordp.ined in a. sim~
whose consecration was. irlvaiid 'for the teasons tndi~at_ect ah.C>_ve, -0r <>.n a; vt~umgtirm.q,kh~tta. ~haE. 4P.~•
r The Eng~ish version of the' Rili says tl jun~tion, 1 ' but the word saitkarahhu app~ars t() imply t n e o r t i . s . t p i b c s s s e o s f s a t h n e t J c d h f, a o ra r c o te n r i a s ti k c h s u d o d f a ~ k · a g j a il m ta a s ·. s a o r r a . o t n h ·. a f t d i o h e u s d n d o ~ t k . a p n os a ~ d e i s s th th a ~ t q d h o ar e a s b t t ~ 1 r 0 : . i t ~ p t . i o c .s $ s e o 11 f ; ; c:l t .· h . z e ' a .. t a c ~ h $ ~ , : a r r a : . a . : ~ H - .
"confusion." . The curious wo~d ndi seems to be a. particle. Cf; D 28, 36, 38, 47,, 50. · 4 Literally, "separated from•'' · ... ··. · · · · · ·· ··
2 The Pali proceeds ; '' t.he upasampada ordination and other ceremonie~ performed insuch a & The Paii heite is somewhat more concise, and li:ls: '' THen King R~madn}pafi 15ecame aware of
#mii are void." the existence of simfivipatti and jJ<Jrisavipatti pi, the upa$ampadfi. ordinati?n c:lnd other ceremont~s In
a End of the fragments of Face C. j Cc:mjecturaHy restoredwiththe help of .the PaH; Rimafifiadesa, and thought thus :-" ·

11
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III .
MCN INSCRIPTIONS
l>ART U]
cdhsidered ..•.... , (which were connected with?) . : ..... .
monks in general (having?) . . . . . . . . . . . . ... gave (?) the nature of
.. (1. 9) came to know of (the st"mavipat# and?) J'art'savipatti which existed.
the s£ma'Di'patti which existed (and) the parisavipatti· . • . . . . . . . . • . . •
Then His Majesty Riimiidhijati"· {thought thus?):-" The st"miivi"patti" (and)
(1. 5) ~ ...... ., .1 In the end, when he had received the decision of our
1
;an:sav1jatti which are connected with the upasampadd ordination 1
• • • • • lords the Mahatheras 9 His Majesty Ramadhipati considered :
•••••••
• . ..•.... , • . • . . (L 1 o) (to?) me, appear clearly thus. . In this Mon
"The religion (of the exalted Buddha should last?) (l. 16) five thousand
country of ours (clergy ?) . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ . . . . (monks ? ) who are
years, these say. At the present time the religion of the exalted Buddha
well versed in the Tipitaka, who are learned (and) able. . . . . . .. . • . . . .
has (lasted) two thousand (and) sixty-four~ years . . . . . . . ·. . . . . . . . .
• . • • . . • • . . . (1. 11) in this Mon country, to ou~ lords the leading
4 (I. 17) the religion, which is bound up with the
• • • • • • • • • . • • • · • • ••
monks•· jn general (it) appears • . . . ••....•.••.. I should urge
upasampadd ordination, how can 5 it last until (the end?) of the period of
our 1o rds to consider • . . • . • . . . . . • . . . . • . • . . . . . . . . (I. 1 2) five thousand years ? The state 6 of the religion . . . . . . . . . • (1. 1 8)
having compared the older (and) the subsequent,8 I should urge our lords to
(being) impure (and) corrupt, as aforesaid, (and) we being aware (of it) 7 (if?)
1a y d own a ru 1m • g . ....•....•..•.. t h 1 ' s s1 . m a - . "
we do not exert ourselves so as to purify the religion from all impurity (and)
Thus His Majesty Ramadhipati ' . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . • . . • • corruption, (and) all manner of doubt,8 (1. 19) (we shall ?) assuredly (be wanting
• (1. 13) all give a ruling (based on the) Vinaya (as ·to the) erection 6 in devotion?) to the religion of the exalted Buddha, we shall assuredly
of this S'ttmi. Then our lords the leading monks . . . . . . . . . considered be wanting in affection to the exalted Buddha, we shall assuredly be \Vanting
the Pali Vinaya together with (its Atthakatnas ?) 6 • • • • • • • • • • • • • in r~verence to the exalted Buddha . • • . . . . . . • . . . . . . . .. . .. . . .
(1. 14) the simavipatU (and) /ar£sa'lJtpatt£ which existed, our lords the leading
....
l l do not know the meaning of the. word lanah near the beginning of 1. 15. The word also
1 Here the "Pili .has : ''The simavipatti and parisavipatti of the upasampada ordination and occurs in E 55, FAS, ·49, .5~, where it does not seem to add anything substantial to the sense of the
other ceremonies appear to me in the manner indicated above. Now thetJt are in Ramaiifiadesa ·and context. /,. . .
Harlisavatinagara many monks who are well versed in the Tipitaka, lear~<:J.-"and able, and I am not a The Pali merely has: "The king said to himse1£: 'The excellent compilers of affhakathcl$
sure whether the simfivipatti and parisavipatti of the upasampl),aiJ or.dination and other ceremonies have declared that the religion of Buddha will. last 5000 years; .but alas,' " etc.
appear to them in the. same manner. lt is, perhaps, advisable that I should_ ask all of them . to a This agrees with the actual Pali rec1.ding on the stone itself, but the M?· fol!pwed by Mr. Taw
investigate the subject by the light of the interpretation, literal or otherwise, of the Vinayapitaka Sein Ko makes it 2047 ... Evidently the scribe was puzzled by the date, which cannot refer back to
together with its atihakathiis and ffkar, to· compare and collate the aUhakathiis with the pafi texts, the time of Buddha's death but must run from the moment (traditionally 45 years earlier) . when he
the f1Nd with the afthakathiis and what follows with. what is gone before, and to give an authoritative received full enlightenment under the Bodhi tree an<l yields the date .1475·6. A.D. (= 837 of the
ruling, based on the Vinaya, as to the valid manner of consecrating a sima." lt does not seem Common ·Era of Burma; cf. E 38). Making this alteration, the Pali proceeds: " only 2064 years
possible that our text can have contained all this. have now passed away since the Enligh~ened O~e attained Bud~haho~d, ~nd the religion has ~eco~e
s The original has ga,acariya which must haye the same sense as "L.M. aca guin, explained by impure, tainted with heresy and corruption, and the upasampada ordmat1on has also become mvahd.
•
Haswell as '' a head priest of a district, a. bishop." · This being the case, how can the religion last till the end of 5000 years ?. "
a The reading is somewhat doubtful but is supported by the Pali. 4 1 cannot translate the doubtfully read words at the end of this line•
- 4 Presumably one must_ supply "thought." or the like, The Pali merely proceeds; "All the 6 The word actually intended is not quite certain : cf. the text· and note.
monks who were well versed in the Tipitaka were accordingly asked to give an authoritative ruling, S Or ' "the fact" P . .
· b re a q s u e e d s t o n of t K he in g V i R na a y m a a , d . a h s ip t a o t i, t h a e ll v t a h li e d m m o a n n k n s e r w o h f o c w o e n r s e e c w ra e t l i l ng v e a r se si d m i a n . t T he h e T n, i p i i n t a c k o a m p in li v a e n s c t e i g w at i e th d · . t t h he e "if, 7 b e I in h g a v a e ~ a tr r a e n , s o la f te th d e i c n o r th ru is p t w s a t y a te in o o f r t d h e e r . r t e o l i k gi e o e ~ p , t w h e e - d s o e q n u o e t n c e e x e o r f t t o h u .e. r se o l r v ig e i s n ,' a ' l e : t c w •. h a T t h 1 e s P m a .e li a n h t a 1 s s : ,
subject by the light of the i~terpretation, literal or otherwise, of the Vinayapi1aka~ together with its ''The king again reflected thus: ' Being aware of the impurity, heresy, and corruption, that have
ciffhakathtis and -~ikcis, and through repeated comparison and ~ollation perceived the existence of arisen in th~ religion, methinks that, in order to ensure t~e continuan·ce of the religion to the end of
simavt.patti and ftJrisavipatti, and. -communicated to the king the. result of their epquiry as to the the period of 5000 years, it is essential that it should be purified by resuscitating the pure form of
manner prescribed' in the Vinaya." - · the upasampadii. ordination. However,, .jf l do not exert myself,, and remain indifferent~ I shall be
guilty of not having intense love for, or faith in, the Blessed Fully Enlightened One, and of being
5 I am not sure that this is the sense of tangl. Perhaps it means a •1 straight" (?r u direct")
devoid of respect and reverence for him. It is, therefore, I think, expedient that the purification of
ruling (as to this simi).
the!religion should be effected by me.• ,,
• Conjecturally restored.
s That is,&as to its!validity. in all essentials.

EPtGRAPIUA DIRMANICA ~ f VOL. IU PART U] M~ON· INSCRIPTIONS
•
0
• • • • • • • • • (1. 20) (If)) we cci.n . . . . • -int•roduce (?) 1 (an4) .platlt .••. (1. 25) King VatagamaJ:!i 1 Abbaya having conquered, in Ms tum,9 the
p.n upasarnjada orclination (which .is free ?) fr<Dm impurity, cormptio·n and all Klan king, Dal 1iya, 8 (ancl) having again ~ acquired the sovereignty of the
m.amH:~r ·of dol;lbt, (and) which is the seed of religioa, 9 city of Anuradhapura,4 founded the Abhay~gitivibara (monastery} .. _• .....
• • • • • • • • • • • •
.....•.. (1. 2'1) the shoot/3 w·hich (we) can· cause to sproqt up, which c~q . • •. .• • • • • • • • • • ~ • • • • • • • • •. • • • • • • • • 5 (1. 26) had been with the
last until th~ encl of the period of five thousand years." 4 king at the time when the king was defeated hy seven. Kfans . and ran away
Thus 5 did His Majesty reflect . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (L u~ (and) had to dwell with our lord (the said monk) for [fourteen years] ... ~
·
''When two hundred (aRd) thirty-six ,yea-rs 6 had elapsed after the y:ea.r that ..... (the king) (1. 27) caused our lord ~the rnorikj to dwell (in the said
our lord .the e·xaltecl Buddha. achiev-ed parz"nt'rvti'f}a, •••. our lord Moggali monastery). Our lord this M ahathera, M ahatissa, by reason of the off enc~ of
puttatissam·anathera {commissioned ?) {L 23) our lord Ma"111amahindat'he'ra {and} associating with lay people , .. . • . · . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -~ . . . .
caused him to cross over (and) establish the religion in the island :of Ceylon. [ha:d been expelled] (1. 28) fram the Mahavi1biara. Thencefarward,6 11\}e frater•
From the time that our lord Mahamahindathera {established the religion in?) nity of monks resident' in the Mahavihlira performed (thei·r 0 eccles.ias6cal'
the island of Ceylon, (during 21$ years ?)1 ·{I. 24) the ort1hodox.- succession, ceremonies separately (and the fraternity of i:nonks resident in the Abhayagir:i~
that is to say the fraternity of the residents of the Ma.rh~vihara {monastery), vihara likewise performed tlileir cere1;nonies separately ? ) ••._ ·-~··.. • . • (L 2g)
which was free fro/m impurity (and) corruption, which practised they- were unable to associate (in such) ceremonies with ·each other• . ,· T:h-6
. . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . • . . the island of Ceylon.:8 When 9 • • • • • • • • snc·eesrsion of the twenty monks, · the monks resident in the Mahavihara .8 , •
(1. ·30) t'h·e cl'€f gy
• 'o • • • • • • • • • • • '• .• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
who were in the island 0·£ Ceylon, the .fraternity of the residents in t"hl~
l There are doubts 'about the reading and meaning here. The passage is not closely paralleled Mahavihata, ·one {fraternity ?) . . . . . . . . . . .. ~ . . ~ . . . . . .
in the. Pali, which proceeds thus ; ''How shal11 first can into existence the pure form of the
upa-sampada or:di
t
n
o
p ,bion; and esta·bUsh ·,~t ifl this /.country.of Ramaiil'Iiadesa P There are 1men !having (1. 31). ''Three hundred (and) fifty~seven yea:rs bav~ng efapsed [sincej th;e
fakh, belengin.g gooa families, -a:nel aes~rous of reeeivi~g such upasampadii ordination. U, at ,my coming into ·existenc~ of the Abhayagirivihara,. a king (called Mahasena rnfod
instance, they 'receive it, the religion will become purified through the existe'.i'Ce of a. pure form ef :b'.he twenty~seven
upasampoila ordination.'' _ · . ·~· ·. over the island 'oLteylon for years.] ..•..... (1. 3'2) At
·at
. 2 I have not attempted to tra11slate the doubtfully -read dget the end of this line. · It maw
mean 11 to observe, to practise, to do/' according to context. -
a l omit the doubtfut nan which precedes ·lam .. ow.
4. In spite· of the lacunce, the general sense of the passage is plain, viz.,, that ·valid upas.11mpada i In the Pali, "Vaitagama\li."
o·rdination is .a condition precedent to pure religion: the forme-r is the seed, the latter ~he plan1t which 9. Not in t}le .p ali.
· ia. 'tf> ·· eri dur e for ages. s The Pali has : "Dadhiya, king of the-DamiJas,'~ i.e.,•Tamils. Our text may ·}iave "D~ddhiY"»·''
6 N ormall!f, being ex:pressecl by _r.tiu wo', this must ·~efer to what ·foJiows; the f>aij a-lso :has : /\;1ppareritly "Klan '7 m&an-$ "'rarni1."
''The following were the thoughts that a:r.ose in t,he mind of King Ramadhipati, ,who considered about ~.·The Pali has : "attained to kingship in Lankadfpa.''
the condition of the religion :-''. . ' • • § in this lacuna we ,must probably supply. something l'ke "there was .'a 'tinonk n~m~fl Mahatis·
6 Traditionally corresponding to 308 :B~C.'; li>ut. see· the note near the beginning of ithis !!rans· sa.thera, who." 'I'he Pali has : '' After fou-ndiflg the A!l:rl1ayagirivihara •mon$S'fery., th~ k}ng w~
· lation •.. aef:.emecl by a confe~eraey. of seven Damija princes,. a·nd w~a obliged. to fly ·the· e-OU·{:ltry and, l"~main i~
as
1 'f:rac:1itio~ally corresponding to 90 B.C.; but see above. The figure, lost in our text, has bidi?f for fourteen years. (On his resto:ratiou). he h1v~ted. 'a thwa Ql:a:He<!l Mah>&tis!!~• . who had ·aff9fdec;l
p(!ef} f,esto.1:ed f·J.lQm .t!he Pali, w"hidh in this passage is faidy· closely ·parallel, viz~ ,, It is .saidthat in him assistance d'l:lring hjs eKile, and p:resenteci the monastery tp hil'l'l.,,
the :~36,th yeat that ha,c!l .elaipsed $ince the attai.am,nt. of ptJ,~i1iirva'Y)a b'i the Fully ~n'1ightened Qae, ·. 6 ·Fornda, cf. C'.49. . . · _· . . . . . . • .···· ... ·. . ·.··
· Maharnahinda~h1era, :who was ~ent by Moggaliputta~issamahathera,. went to Tambapa~~idipa and . 7 'Phe ·Pali' merely -say~: ., IT'henceforwat°'dthe -mpnks ·were ~Hvide.cl. into 't'.wo·sects, na1nely: that
estab~ished -tbe :religi©n~ ])evanampiyadssa~ k~ng '<!f. Siha!adipa, :eencei¥ed a feeling of ·esteem and of. the residents of tae Ma:Mvihfuo:a ~and ~that pf 1the resiarents •10f dre :A:bhayagirivihara." ·.... _•·. .... · ...•. ·
reveren.ce for the. :-th1Ya, aneil founded tne. Mahav;ibara monaste,ry. Duriag the -perfod of ·2<118 yea'fs BifossH'Jliy one might tttanslate: '•·the 1twerity su~ces&"iQns of, monks." .. I a~ on~~ s~r~·9f,lh~·
t-1'lat elapsed si:floe 1the ;foundati.On .of -~he. :Mahaviha·ra the religion ·r.emained ·pure, and ·the111e was onl!}' pteoi:se meaning Of tb~ :phrase (which d~es mo-t tl)e(::Uf ~~ i!b\e !fla11Jn either •Of 1;h&.;e ~~$,~S~:~ -~Q~ J\;re
<>neAraterniit.y _namely that of the ,,:esidents·of the Mahaviihara." .. · . . word . tnow. ·refers .. to. the transmission of ecelesiaati~al . ,sh:~lis in a. paRic:~-le.r lin~ oef ·t;UQpe$sipii!,:
7
tl .P:rest:tmably, following the Pili~ :We. -must suppose that the -lacuna precedi:ng ·thes~ 'worcle. P'°ssiMy,. howe,vet,· 'Eoh is werelly an ei:t~ fo:r· co', and we shoula t~anslate~ '' .. he ~wo ,~u®ea;sjo~s of
contained. a statem~nt that the Mahavihai:B. fraternity was the ouly o~e ,;tn ~h'e isfana. mon.~/'. . i.:1.i_ 't:hc M·ah:~vihira ~nd_ ~b~~giriy,J_h:i"Ot.>·.ect;J, r~pectivoly~ Tbt• -Wf!>~ld ~gfe~ l)'l~~b
& Or< 11 Theri,n · ·· · · beUor w1~b the Pili veri1on, · · ·

•
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. Ill PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS
that time that king founded the Jetavanavihara; (he) was fond of a heretic 1 ''In the 1472nd year that had elapsed since the establishment of the ~
• • • • • • • • • • • • • ••••••••\ )\ ••••••• 9 [who] (1. 33) was an asso religion in the island of -Ceylon, the I 708th year that had elapsed since the
ciate of wicked people and dwelt in the Dakkhixiarama monastery. (The king) attainment of ParinirvaJJ.a by. the Master, and the eighteenth year sine~ the
caused him. to enter into [the Jetavanavihara] . • . . . . [Thenceforward, inauguration of J 1 (1. 41) King Sirisanghabodhi .. Parakkamabahu [as ruler of .the
the monks of the Jetavanavihara monastery detached themselves from] (1. 34) island of Ceylon, that king, by se(!ing the monks who, th~ugh professing the
the monks who dwelt in the Mahavihara and also from the monks ·who religion, did not conform to the rules of the order and followed evil] (l. 42)
dwelt in [the Abnayagirivihara] . . . . . . . . . . . .....•..... [and practices/a [became aware of the existence of the impurity, heresy. and
thus] (1. 35) arose this one fraternity called the fraternity of the residents of the corruption that had arisen 'in the religion, and he thought thus :-·' If such
J e tavanavihara. . Thus . . . ..... -~ . . ........ (1. 36) [six hundred] an one as I, knowing the existence of] (l. 43) the impurity, (heresy, and]
years [had not yet 1 elapsed since the establishment of the religion ·in the corruption 8 [that have aris~~ in the religion, do not exert myself and remain
island. of Ceylon, when] (there were three?) communities of monks in the indifferent in the matter of effecting its purification, it will be said of me
island of Ceylon : the residents of the Mahavihara. . . . . . . . . . . . ....• that] (1. 44) (I) do not reverence (the Buddha?)' . . . . . . .. . . . . [It is,
•••••••• ~ •••••••••••••••••• 4 (l. 37) one fraternity, was the perhaps expedient that I should afford support to the Mahavihara fraternity,
fraternity . . • . . .. . . . . • • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . the three fraternities who are orthodox, whose. . conduct is in conformity with the rules of the
. • . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Among Order, and whose superior is] (1. 45) Mahakassapathera, who dwells [in
these fraternities,] (I. 38) the residents of ·the Mahavihara [were extremely U dumbaragiri ; and that, as Asoka, king qf righteousness, with the assistance
pure and orthodox ; but the remaining] two fraternities [were neither pure of (L 46) Moggaliputtatissamahathera, afforded support to the great fraternity
nor orthodox] 5 • • • • • • • • ~ • • • . • • • • • .. • • • • • • • • (1. 39) who were of exceedingly pure and orthodox_ monks who declared that the Fully
deficient in moral conduct .....................~ •...••.•
Enlightened One was a Vibhajjavadi, and effected the purification of the
who practised. •. . • . • . . • • • . .. . . . . • • · . . . • . • . . • • . · . • • . • . religion by commanding the expulsion from the Order· of the 60,000 impure
••. (1. 40) 1 •••••••••••••••••••••••• [q,,wing to this circum . and sinful monks ~ho declared that the Fully Enlightened One professed the
stance,] the religion [became impure and tainted with heresy and corruption ..
doctrines of the Sassata and other schools, even so should I purify the
religion by commanding the expulsion from the Order of] (1. 47) all the
1 Or •t. heretics.~' impure monks who are unorthodox/> [who do not conform to the rules of the
la It appears from the Pali that the latter part of this laeuna must have contained something Order and are followers of evil p~_actices]8 •...•...•.•••.•• (L 48)
like ''a monk named Tissathera, who.u The Pali further characterizes him as a. inan "of an
intriguing ·and licentious character, b".lt for whom he (i.1. the king) conceived a feeling of esteem (of) the -three fraternities I should make one fraternity, (and) any -monks.'
. . . . .
and reverence,', ,. who are • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • .. ,.. \
s I have followed the wording of the English translation of the Pali. Our text here has the word •
ftifta, "a very little" (to which the Pali kiftci apparently corresponds). Perhaps it means that the 600 1 It may be doubted whether there was room in our text for all the foregoing chronological
years had all but elapsed. As Mr. Taw Sein Ko pointed out in a footnote to his translation, these details. The date is l 164-5 A.D.
600 y 4 e H ar e s r e e 1 la n p o s ed d o tw ub o t , y e o a u r r s t b e e x f t o re e n t u h m e e t r e a r t m ed in a t t h io e n o o t f h e t r h e t w r o e ig f n ra t o e f r n th it e ie s k 1 i n w g it m h, e n p ti e o r n h e a d p s in , s 1 o . m 31 e , f s u u r p th 'l' e a r , dupp 9 a f O ip u a r. t t t i e y x o t . has the word pafipat twice, presumably in correspondence with the Pali· apafipatti•
description of them •. This is ·not in the Pali. 8 Our text has the words as adjectives, no doubt qualifying sasana, "religion."
5 The Pali proceeds: ''In course of time, however, in. the island of Ceylon, the number of the ·4 -The Pali, after "that,,, proceeds: ~'my love for, or faith in, the Fully Enlightened O'he, and
orthodox monks gradually decreased, and their sect became weak, while the unorthodox monks my respect and reverence ~or him, are not intense." Very likely our text had the substance of all
continually received fresh accession of strength owing to increased numbers. These heretical setts this. ,
did not conform to the rules of the Order,, and were followers of evil practices." ·Probably these 5 The Pali has: "the large number of impure, unorthodox1 and sinful monks;, etc. As to .1 11ta
last few words are represented by the beginning of 1. 39 of our text. (or yati ?), cf. B 49 n. -·
e I am not sure of the sense of ku jala. It might mean "with thorns,'• a figurative way of e The Pali continues : '' and by com~tituting the fraternity of the residents of the Mah!v:ihlra the
expressing the evils that had grown up n the Church •. But this does not seem quite satisfactory, only sect (in my kingdom).',
'hough the reading appears to be certain. 1 Here_ yata occurs again.
10

• " ['Tihe kfog}1 (1. 49) having (thus ?) reflected, entirely expdled all the
upasampadd ordination the seed of the religion, as it were; plant ie, an'd:
. impure monks that were unorthodox ; any that . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
aa:us:e itt to, sprout fort1h' by aonferr:ing such ordination on: 1tren of good1 famUy•
•' ·· · · . · . .. . . .. . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . • . . (L 50) puri fied1 the
in this Mon country, who have faith and· are desirous of ·faking' orders, the
religion. From the. time that these kings 1 purified the religion, the religion
r.eligion will become pure and last till the end of 5000 years. R.everend·
ifo the· island of Ceylon was bound up with . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sirs, by your going ·to -the island of Ceylon, much' merit and1 great adVartl-.;
• ., . . • . . • . . . . . . . . . . • . (h 51 y until' the present time.
eages will accrue to you. Reverend Sirs, on your arrival ~n the isfand' of!
" Since 8 (that) is so, we shall make· a requesf to our lords the monks G.eylonJ] 1
• • . • • ~· • • . . . • . . • . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . • • . . . . . . (L 5·2) the
religion from the island of Ceylon. We will' cause them to return (and)
E
e'sfa1blish the religion in this M8n country of ours,'' His Majesty Ramadhi·
pati said (and) 4 • • • • • ~ • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •. • "·eyou} wiH be aole+ (fo, see with your e)lles ?)~ (you)' will' be able (fo
[Accotdingly King Ramadhipati invited the twenty~two Theras, headed venerate ?) . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . • • • . . • . • • • • • . •
by Moggalana, and addressed them thus : " Reverend Sirs, the upasamjadii . . . . . (l. 2) the . . . . . . . ceti, the Silac~ti, the Ka:lyalj.icet~ etc. ~y
ordjnation of the monks ··of the M8n country now appears .to us to be lords will_ he a bfo fo . . . . • . . . . . . . . • . • • . • •
invalid. Therefore, how c·an the religion, which is based on such invalid (1. 3) Thus a flood of mucli merit wiff lje aBle to accrue to our
otdinatfon, last to the end of 5000 years? Reverend Sirs, from the lbr1ds~. . . . . . · . . . . · . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . .
establishment of the religion in the island _of Ceylon up to the present day, . . .... •' .. (L 4) our (lords ?)'." Thus dld His Majesty maKe a request fo
there has been existing in that island an exceedingly pure sect of monks, our lords the· 'Pheras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [T'i:f tlii~ the Theras replied1
:
wlio are tHe spiritual successors of the residents 'of the Mahavihara '" Maharaja, your excellent request iS indeedv in conformity with the law,
monastery. If, Reverend Sirs, you go" to the island of Ceylon, and, after Becauser it is actuated oy a desire to promote tlie foterestS of the rellgiOnJ21
'
selecting out of the fraternity, whose members are the spiritual successors of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ('When we?) (l. 5)" have taken steps a fo go~
tHe monR:s of the Mahavihara, a Chapter who are pure and free from (and) receive the upasamjada ordination, which is the seed of religion ....
censure and reproach, receive at thefr hands the upasamjadii ordination in . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (in the island of ?) (1. 63 Ceylt!>h, (wtt~n· th'e ?)
the. udakukkhepasima consecrated on the Kalya:g.i River, where the Fully upasampada' crdinatfon wliich is in our. station/ {ls o
1'
ne?): that. is free from,,,
Enlightened One enjoyed a bath ; and if you make this , form of the
enter l ed T h in e t o P b a y li th pr e o c m ee o d n s k .: s . "a In c te a d ft er a c ti c m or e d s i , n g w l i y t , h p a u v ri i f e i w ed t t o h e p u r r e i l f i y g i i n o g n , th a e. n r d e li c g a i? u n s , ed V a ij ay co a v b e a n h a u n r t a · j a t o a b nd e • • haVE! 1 ! ; . b I e t e n se - r e e m p s r ~ e m se b n r t e e d t ' h i a rr n • o u do r u t b e t x fu t, l p w ar h t e ic th u e la r rl t y h e a s w h th ol e e s o < f u l: t i h st e a n a ce b ' ' o o v f e so p m as e s · a g o e f · · i t f ' f o a m pp e t a h r e s P lb a w l e l - v r e d rs o i w bn n . ca I n t'
woaUl>s·eerfi that· the M6h te'Xt arranged· th~ orde-r differendy; The P.l:UI H'owever_ now· proceed:~, witli
Fara.k~amabahuraja caused (similar)· covenants.to be made. From that time up tb the present day,
some differ-erice' in detail: "'an opportunity willl lJe affbrded' fo· you, of1 adoring' a:hd~ rn'l:f:ldhg offerings
there has been existing in the island of Ceylon ~ sect of monks who are. the spiritual successcfrs of the
to the Holy Tooth Relic, to the Bodhi trees, headed by the one"' wHich was the" SoiltHern· brahth (of
ft"~terrtity11 of the l.V{,apavihara,· the ex:ceedingly pure and., orthodox sect) whose members conformed in a
the tree at Buddha Gaya), to the Ratanacetiya and other s"krine-9) a'nd' to tlle"Ge'tiya'; of' tlie Holy
proper manner to the rules of the Order.~'
Foot-print of the, Blessed One on the top of t,he SamantakutaJ Hilk Therefore~. Reverefid., Sirs-, your
2 Ot " this king~ "
s Trh:~ Rali has,: '' 1,, (Ramadhipati) sha11 1, therefore, invite in a respectful manner learned' and g
o.
r
f
e
g
a
p
t
i J
a
1
c
g
e u
to
m u
th
la
e
t i
.
o
i s
n
l
,
a
o
n
f
d
,, m
of
e r
C
it
e y
w
l
i
o
ll
n /
i
'
n orease• .
,,
Fo.r·" the reasons stated· above,;,, li beseech• of. you.1 the favottri
qµalified, mqnlts·. ta, :receive the, extremely pure form' of the upasam~ada:. ordination, in the i~land ~f
Ceylon and to. establish it in this country of Raamniiadesa. By mducmg men of good family, who· ti It is' doub.tful1 whether. 'our text, co.nfuin ed. the preceding;1 as·· it, appears, to.· be' duplicate'6, fufth:'a:r
hiwe,.f;·ith}smd are deslirous ofi, taking\ or·ders,· to receivedt,, and by thus calling into existetrce· the pure on .• The Pali. proceeds: '' th6 visit to. the, island of Geylen: .wHl increase: ouri g.ifeS:t' aecuQ'lulatio:tF d
form of the upasampada ordination, the religion will become purified and free from• impurity, and will" merit." ' , 3 Literally, "done deeds."
) o a f ~ t1 t . h t i 0 s. , tlfe. end: of· the'' petted:. of,. 5000 · yearsl' It would, seem that.· our, text did. .. ,n ot, contain thei whole as tl 4 ie T P h ~ a I t i is s , a 1 t J h .i e h a s n t a a tu h s a s o f s a o n m a a on n k y . di B ff u e t r e I n t a m m .· e n a o n t i n c g l s e ; a , r an a d s t t h o e t P he al i p · .r v e e c P is s e io , n s . e o n m se it • s r o f a , ll s o th n i t s h .. u p m ;d S h sa e g r e e ; , 1
~ End of the. legible!part of FaceJD. It also seems possible to translate:- "when :the upasampad"a ordination, in cmrselves" (Qr 0 Jn~ our
minds") "is free from doubt." ·

PART U] MCN INSCRIPTIONS
148 EPIGRAPH IA BIRMANICA [VOL. 111
·r gold, (weighing) 1 thirty ·(phalas)1; a reliquary of gold (weighing) 1 thirty:
(doubt il) • • • . . . . • • . • . •.•..••.•.•... _. .•.•..• (we three (jhalas) 9 total two hundred (and) three daker of gold; golden flowers
;
shall be able to confer it?) (1. 7) upon persons of (good) family who have
•••.•••••••••••• (1. t5) a .....••. •. ••••..•.•• , (and)
the desire (to receive) the upasampadti ordination at our hands.1 We .... a glittering·8 reliquary. For the purpose of offering to the Holy Foot;.
. . . . "" . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . · . . • . . . . ·. . (I. 8) these print, the Bodhi trees, ,beginning with •..•..••..••...••.•.•
(persons?), which 1s free from doubt, until the e_nd of the period (of 5000 . . . tl. 16) the Ratanaceti, etc., fifty, large gilt waxen candles ; fifty
years?) . . . • . . . . . • . . . . . . . • . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . (1. 9) we shall ungilded candles, eight(y-five ?) dyed cloths, ' . • . . . . • . . . . • . . •
be able to receive the doctrines, by reason of being able to visit the island of . . .
Ceylon • . • . . . . . • . • . . . . . . . -. . . (1. 1 o) we shall be able to venerate [For presenting to the Mahatheras] 5 (1. 17) in the island of Ceylon, cloth
(and) make -offerings to the holy. sites, such as the Ratanaceti, the merit . . ,
. . . • • . • . . . . . . . • . one red kambar 6 one golden ·coloured kambar;
;
••••••••••••••••.•..•.•._ • ••.•.•••••••.•.• (1. 11) in· tnree motley kamhars ; . . .•. (cotton ?) taqay" . . . . . . . . • . • . . . . . .
?J
asmuch C\S (Your Majesty's request is indeed in accordance with the law,
....• (I. 18) one bluish 8 •••••••• (three?) fleecy cotton pandi 9;
it is fitting 9 (that) we gr-ant a fayour to Your Majesty." Thus (our) lords
..... say 9 cotton taqay 9 ~ twenty big boxes of twilled
•••••. • • • • • • •
{the Th eras spake ?) . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . • . . . . . . . · . . . • .. . . .
work; 10 four stone pitchers; six earthenwaren,-pitchers of motley ·colour; ....
• • (I. r 2) our lords the twenty-two Theras. 8 For the purpose of offering to the . . . . . . ...
.
Tooth Relic of the exalted Buddha, an umbrella' ..•.............
. • _ • . • • • • • • . • . • . • • • • • (1. 13) a . . . . .. . . . to put on the .
top 'of the "peak ·of the umbrella, (of the) value of a hundred (and) forty 6 of
J
silver, a [stone 8 alms-bowl, [embellished with sapphires of great value and
1 Our text leaves rr weighing n and "phalas" to be understood, giving merely the numbers.
having for its cover a pyramidal covering made of gold weighing 50 pkalas ; SI The Pali proceeds: "and constructed in the shape. of a cetiya; a relic-receptacle made of
an alms-bowl, with stand and cover complete, made of gold weighing 60 crystal ; a relic•receptacle embellished with pieces of glass resembling masdragalla gems; and golden
flowers." The order of our text differs somewhat.
jhalas; a golden vase weighing 30 phalas; a dodecagonal] (1. 14) b~teJ .. box 7 of
s I am not sure of the, meaning of paccer (here assm;ned to be L.M. bcl), but the ~eference
seems to be to the last of the reliquaries mentioned in the Pali version.
and
4 The Pali has: •'For the purpose of offering to the Ratanacetiya other shrines, ,to the
1 Literally, ''in our presence." ,
Holy Foot-print, and to the twenty-two Bodhi trees, the following articles were prepared : ..:..85 canopies
~ I am not sure that this is the force of san here. The. sentence might be taken to mean "we
of various colours; 50 large gilt waxen candles,; and the same number of small gilt waxen candles."
do indeed grant," etc., which is closer to the Pali: '' 'We, therefore, grant you th~. favour, and will
v~it the island of Ceylon.' Saying thus, the Theras gave a promise." "' 5 The Pali proceeds: "of the island of Ceylon the following articles were prepared :-40 boxes
containing cotton cloth of delicate texture : 20 silk and cotton upper robes of various colours, nameJy
s I bHe not attempted to. translate ren at the beginning of this line, as it may only be the last red, yellow, motley, and white." 1
syllable of some word unknown. It might mean "arranged, marshalled/' perhaps. The Pali differs • •
considerably here: . '.• On receiving the reply of the Th eras, the king directed the preparation of the 6 This is the Pali kambalam, meaning eilher "a blanket" or " a woollen garment," in this case
probably the latter. But it does not agree with the Pali; which speaks only of cottons and silks.
following articles to serve as offerings to the Holy Tooth Relic-:-a stone alms·bowl, embellished," etc.,
omitting. all reference to the umbrella. 7 The meaning of this word is undetermined, but it presumably refers to some kind of· garment.
4_ Or "umbtellas"? Probably not: cf. I. 55, infra. s Or " dark blue,, P The meaning has not been strictly determined. ·
5 No unit of value is mentioned, but I presume that w_hat is understood· is identical with the 9 The meanings of these wo_rds have not been determined.
~hala of the Pil_i version, which is really a unit of weight and would therefore· be the_ sa~~ fo~ silver io L.M. iaai is the name of a. species of reed with which such boxes are made. It. appears from
as for gold.- The M&n equivalent is ilakey (L 14), L.M. dakew~ defined by Haswell as a t1cal, _a the Pali that in this case they were betel·bo:x:es; it hasr '' 20 betel-:boxes of motley colour, manu
weight a little less than half an ounce, the hundredth part of a viss, a rupee." _ It might be possible factured in Harib hu6ja; .f our stone pitchers ; eight painted· pitchers, manufactured in _C inadesa ; aQd
to
render the words in the text. by "the value of the silver (being) 140," but I do not think that can 20 fans manufactured in• Clnadesa/' But for. the ''eight'' ,the real reading of the stone itself (and of
be Intended. one MS.) is "six,''- a's in our text.
. 8 It is doubtful whether our text had. this, or many of the details that follow, though -the total 'in 11 The. reading and -meaning of pang4n are doubtful; but cf, L.M. pan4n, Burmf.'se pu!ean, -which
I. 14 shows that the same objects are enumerated in both versions • denote earthenware dishes, bowls, etc.
., I do not k~ow .. the meatdiig of n8n.

...,
~ .. • • . .. . il€. 119~ a letter addressed to our lords r(the clergy) ·of Ceylon four-..(pieces 0£) ·khre tiin lak sa.P silk·; (of) apfi.1 • silk, (:I. 25)
fo ,gen~r.al . . . . . . . . thus rlid tHis Majesty prepare : "4His rMaj·es·~y one;· (of) variegated "·parrot's wing" 2 silk, two;' (of) black lam..:ek1 silk, •two;
tRimadhipp.ti, with gr,~at :venetation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1 (1. ~o) ·dwelling (of) ''parrot's wing" lam-ek 1 silk, one ; (of) gold-coloured silk, ·one ;. ( cf} red
·
jp ·,the ,islatid pf Ceylon, ,fhese offering-s for the ,,purpose 10£ offei;ing 1to ·'.the .Jam·ek ·silk . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . (one ~) 9 1{1. ~~i6) ( ofO • • • • • • • • • • • •
Toot~ .Reli~, which I (have) .caused '(to ibe sent?), 1let them ;be offered -to . . '" . . ... one ; twenty variegated fin~ byau 4 cloths·; two
1
(hum1redo?)
the T.ooth Relic. <fhes:e 9 {twenty.;two ?) ifheras {whom . :J ~have caused ?~ woollen coverlets 6 ••••••• were prepared. A letter •(on a) .gold tah1et 8
,(I. ? 1) to ,go, let them v:iew_ the '.tooth 1Relic, let them adore the Too~h
.
. .
Relic also. After adoring the Tooth Relic, [and making offerings to (L 2 7) . • . . • . . . •
it, the :twenty .. two Theras and th~ir disciples will proceed] (I. .,2121) to (l. 28) '"(make offerings to?) ...
elect Jfrom .among ithe fraternicyJ ;whiGh dwells in the Mahavihira 3 [a .. · . · . · · . · (I. 29) together with "my servants 1
Chapter of monks] who are free from jmpurity (and.) ·corruption,4 (and) :in cause 8
••
A ••••••.••••••••••
an udakuld~h14past"mii arranged on the Kalya:oi R\ver' 5 . • • • • • • • (1. 23) .(1. 30) having worshipped 9 • • • • • • ••• on the Kalyai;ii River,
let our (lords ?) ~the .said Theras) be allowed to recei;ve the Uijasampada where the exalted Buddha bathed 10 ·(I: 31) the
• • • • • • • • • • • • •
1
ordination." 6 Thus ~did His Majesty Jlrepaxe .a letter to ,be sent to the
clergy in. general.
l The meanings of these words. are undetermined. It would appear that the Pali here gives its
For a present to· be given to the king, [Bhuvanekabahu, king of Ceylon,1 ,account in a different. order; beginning with the pieces of Ohina, cloth, which it ·specifies, ·and going on
1
two sapphire] (rings,8 of the value of) (1. 24) two hundred (phalas) 9 of silver, to the silk cloth, which it does not. Our text does just the Fevers.e. But in neither do the it~ms
specified amount to the total given in the Pali. Further, there are discrepancies of ·reading in the
four ruby rings,8 (of the) value of four hundred (and) thirty (jhalas) 9 of silver, 1Nali text of the 'stone itself as compared with the version on which the English translation is baseCI,,
total, ~six ,rings, 1af .the Yalue of six hundred (and) thirty (phalas)'9 of silver ; '.the former having vakkhapiHhahatthapadaJhfinesu 'and ·f'attava~~am maHham . ekam ghana~Ciina•
paffaiica, while the latter has givakkhakafinitambapadafManesu and rattavatJ.'t)a-vayimapUrpphi·
1·kamekam pelava-Cinapaffanca. The English version reacis : ''four piece~ of variegated China cloth,
iOf 1 great 1v:al~~' for ,making long mantles, which wo.uld eover the ;wearer from head rto ·foot; three
pieces of thick, embroidered, China cloth, of whit.e and dark .. blue or i~Sh .colour; ,,tw,o pfoces ,of plain,
lhick, China cloth, of whife and dark blue or ash colour; one piece of plain, white, thick, China cloth ;
1 We must, presurnably, sqpply ·either ''Gfor) it:he clergy," 'Or "(for) the 'holy sites/' in the latter
·~wo pieces of r~en, thiek.,-embroidered;China ·cloth; rone1pieae of plain, green, thia~, OlHna ·cleth; ~two
case substituti~g "situat.ed" f.or '' dwelling." · T.he Pali, £,or .this passa;ge, has: "' .Ramadhipati, the
pieces of plain, black, China cloth; one piece of ,Yellow;, thick, embroidered China.,,cloth; ,one pi~e,e .:of
Lord of Rama~iiadesa and ,.of the White .Elephant, .sent respectful greietings ·to Their ·Rev,erenaes the
retl, thin embroidered, China cloth, of delicate texture; one piece of thin, embroidered, China cloth,
Mahather.as of the island of C~ylon, and thus addressed .them by letter: 'ReV:erend Sirs, 1for1the 1
of delicate texture, and of white and .dark blue, or ash colour ; in all 20 pieces of China cloth ; the
purpose of adoring the Holy Tooth and other relics, I have sent monks with offerings. V.ouchsafe
same number of variegated silk cloths called pavitti, and :aoo mats wrapped up in leather cases.''
to · affora them assis~ance in maki~g such offerings.' '' · 2 That is; "green." Apparently in L.M. this became s1zen ne.k, and, <coUoquially. . >Sniek (as in
·s The corresponding Pali has: ''With the twenty•two Theras an,d ',their disciples, ·l "hfl.ve sent
• HasweH). .
Citradfita and Ramadftta together .with .their aUendants. Vouchsafo, Ven.erable Ones, to .afford them " s Doubtful, but indicated by they at the beginning .of l. ~6. It is not.clear ,whether .an item has
'!Uch assistance as thf11 may require in seeing and adoring the Holy To.oth Relic, and maki~ not been altogether lost in the lacuna that follows.
offerings to it. :Alter seeing and adoring the Holy Tooth _Relic, and m-a.king .offerings to it;' ,etc. 4 Meaning undetermined.
·s The Pali 'has: ''who are the spiritual successors of the residents of the :Mah~vihiira monas~ery." 5 Or '' blankets." Bu.t the Pali sa,ys ''mats/'
'- The Pali has: '' free from censure an.d reproach •. u I! .J~he Pali prQceeds: ''The letter addressed to Bhiivanek-abahu, iking 10£ ;Ct;ylon, ·was rn import
5 The Pali adds: "where the Blessed· One had enjoyed a bath.'' ,.similar to th.at add1'essed to the :Mahatneras of C~,~don, and "was iinseribea-on 'a tablet ·of .:gold·"
rtM~h'e Wali a~ti!n "'May it please :the Venerable Ones to afford them assistance also Jn this Our text, however, not content with this summary statement, apparently gave the .contents i•of ~the
-matter,~' ··entling, •'"qy'hus was prepared· a letter addressed to the 'Mahatheras of the. island of Ceylon~" letter in some detail. in 11. 27-32, infra, Unfort,un'fl,tely the grea:te.r part is 'lost.
7 ~here·Wa-s.i?rob1i0ly ·tto·room 'in our ~ext for ·these:four. words. · 7 The reference .is Jo -Ramadilta and.Citraduta (in ithe M8n te-~t 0dutan) iwhoseinames iileetn~to be
re lfhe 'Pali '~has: "$"'"sapphires)" and two '' rubies," without any reference to "' rings,," but our text dimly discernible in this line, and who were sent along with the m,onks. See note on· 1. ~o, :'J.ujir:&.
is explicit on. that point. B Or, ''give/'?
i.JJ See 1t he ~n·ote 1on I. ·•~, '$UjJ~a. T'he tPJili "has •the word ·here 'also, 'but it do~s not ,giv~ the total 9 the :Tooth R.efa:: see ;J. 121, $~pra,.
'fahu~ of the jewellery, while our text does. JO Cf. note on t :lg, supra.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III PART II] MCN INSCRIPTIONS
king of Ceylon having caused to be selected 1 • • • . ••.••••...•••.... [while the remaining eleven Theras, headed 'by
in the presence 9 of our lords the clergy ••••. Mahasivalithera, together with their disciples,] {l. 38) 1 embarked on the ship -
(1. 32) • • • • . . • . ,, a of Citradutan .
., · Having said thus,4 His Majesty prepared a letter (on a) gold tablet to Our lords having thus embarked, the ship of Ramadutan, (in the year)
be given to the king of CeJlon •..•.... [Havil).g thus prepared every· 837 1 of the Common Era, [left the mouth of the Yoga 9 River on Sunday,
·
thing that was necessary, the king presented the twenty-two Theras with the . the eleventh day of the waning half 1 0£. the month of Magha4 and went out
1
following articles 5 :-·twenty-two carpets made of Burma wool i] (1. 33) twenty~ to sea. The ship, in which Citradutan embarked, however,] (1. 39) left the
two variegated [leather rugs ;] twenty-two vari.egated boxes of twilled work 8 mouth of the Yon s on Monday, the twelfth day of the wani11g (half) of the
(with) covers ; fortysfour [boxes of] fine cotton cloth 1 [for making the tz"civara month (of Magha ?).6 On Friday, the eighth day of the waning (half)of the
robes ; and many other articles required for food and for medicinal purposes m·onth of Phalguna,6 (it) [reached, through skilful navigation, the port of
on the voyage. The twenty-t_wo monks, who were the disciples of the .Kalambu. When] (he) [heard the news (of the arrival of the ship), on the
Theras, were each] (1. 34) presented with [a piece of cloth called ka#putta,. new-moon uposatha day of the month of] (1. 40) Phalguna 7 the king of Ceylon
and a thick, embroidered, carpet· manufactured in Burma.] sent down (people) to welcome our lords the monks 8 (and) His Majesty
;
All the twenty-two Theras together with these twenty-two disciples [were Ramadhipati's letter (on) a gold tablet (having been read aloud?) .....
consigned to the care of the two emissaries, Citradutan and Ramadutan into . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [The king, having exchanged the
1
whose hands were· likewise delivered the above-mentioned offerings intended compliments of friendship and civility with the Theras ar:id Citradutan,9 arose
for the Holy Relics, the letter and presents] (1. 35) to. be given to the clergy from his seat, and with his own hands offered] (1. 41) betel together with
of Ceylon, the presents to be given to the king of Ceylon, (and) the letter catriphor 11 to our lords, (and) having given a friendly welcome 11 to our lords,
(on} a gold tablet to be given to the king of Ceylon. [Two hundred _jhalas8 (appointed for them?) a dwelling-place, 12 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
of gold were given to the emissaries] (1. 36) in case scarcity of food should
occur, so that our lords (the monks) 9 should be secured from distress ,and l l can make nothing of the syllable ta with which this. line begins.
should be enabled to obtain the four requisites .... ; . . . . . . . . . . . .. 2 1475-6 A,D. _
s Yoga, the form given in the Pali text, is evidently based on the Man Yon; the reference is
•••••• (1. 37) The eleven [Theras,] ·headed by Moggalanathera, together
perhaps to the Bassein River.
with '(the_ir) eleven disciples were arranged. to embark on Ramadutin's ship; .4 Sunday, 21st January 1476 (old style).
5 Monday, a2nd January 1476.
e Fdday, 16th February t476.
'1 Friday, 23rd February I476.
1 Cf. 11. n, 2~, supra, where, however, the selection of the ordination Chapter is left to the monks 8. The Pali has; ''the eleven Theras and Citraddta," proceeding, " He was exceedingly. delighted
themaelvesf Our text may· mean merely that the king is to allow the monks to make the selection. • • when he had heard the letter read out, which was inscribed .on a tablet of gold, . ..and brought by
s Cf. 1, 7, supra, and note. as to the meaning. The reference is to the ordination of the monks Citrad6ta, and which was sent by ·R amadhipatimaharaja, who was replete with faith and many other
by the Ceylon 'Clergy. good qualities and who, being a descendant of the Lords of White Elephants, was himself Lord of a
a The meaning of the doubtfully read kabu is undetermined. White Elephant, which was possessed of all the characteristics (of such animals), and whose colour
4 The real meaning is that the king caused a letter ''to 'this effect " to be prepared. was very much whiter than that of a conch~shell, the jasminum m·ulti'fl.orum, the white lily, or the
· 5 Our text may have. expressed the foregoing somewhat more briefly, and it also gives the items autumnal moon/' It may be doubted whether all this was contained in our text.
in a different order, ln the Pali the '' 44 boxes of fine cotton cloth for making ticlvafa robes" are 9 Very possibly this clause did not' occur here in our text as a similar statement is contained in
mentioned first. · the next line.
6 These were betel·boxes: see note on I. 18, supra~ 10 1 assume that this is the meaning of aotJ?ln, as the Pali sa.ys ''with camphor.'' But it ls not
'I This rendering is rather conjectural, so far as the M&n words are concerned, but is supported the usual L.M. word and I have found no other authority for it. ·
by th1 Pili. 11 I take this to be the meaning of the doubtfully read pa·· patisanthlJra of our text.. The Pali has
8 See I. 14 n., supf'tJ, not got an equivalent in this place,.but expressed the same idea in I. 40, supra. Cf. F. ,4~, 54. ·
9 The Pili text does not appear to contain the words '' and their disciples " of the English 1s. The Pili has: "He likewise had arrangements made for the entertainment of the Theras and
version, Citradita."

E'.; P.. IG• . RAPHI!. A-. r"B' -IR' M: A' N. . ICA~ f
VOL •..
,yit
PART Il
1
'EOn 'the follo,ving day] '{l. 42) ·citradutan [delivered to the Mabatheras of ship, the younger brother of the king of Ceylon had proceede:d by ship., to
('I
Ceylon the presents sent by Ramadhipatimaharaja] (and) 1 the :letter ·which ' the same village, accompanied by many other ships conveying armed cmen
His Majesty had given (him) for our lords the clergy of Ceyloru [and the in order to fight the rebel minister. 'The latter was stricken with ·11error, and,
:Mahatheras;] (L43) sa¥ing : ''According ._to the desire of the Lord ·:of the .being unable to defend himself, fled the village and sought refuge in a forest.
1
W.hite Elephant, that (which) pteases his heart ·will we do;" gave a :promise, The village having 1faJlen °into his ·hands,] (the ·younger brother of ··the king
1
[mhe eleven Theras, who em banked on the same ship as .Citradutan, of?) 1 (1. 4 7) ,Ceylon [took up his residence there.] . . . . . . .•.
;perceiviqg the non-arrival .of their brethren who embarked in the same ship ..... rebels/1 (and) an army (of?) robbers ...........· ...... ·.
·as Ramadutan, ireflected : "With the permission of the king of Ceylon, we [Owing .to.·this circumstance, the :king's brother ;withheld permission from ,the
s·hall 'remain in the island .of Ceylon, awaiting the arrival of these Theras.''] a Theras and Ramadutan who were desiFous 0£ going 1 to Jayava~ghananagara.
1
(So) (I. 44) these monks, who had arrived first, informed the king of Ceylon However, on ithe 1 Second 1,day df the iwaning 1half of the] (1. 48} [month ofJ
(of their desire) and got a guide who knew the way (by) which (they) could :r~urasat, [in the year 1 838 3 df :the· Common Era, pe!imission was obtained and
,g0 to Anuradhapura . . . . . . . . . ·. . . . (There they visited and adored ?) a fhe Theras ·and Ramadutan left Valligama. After \passing five days on ·the
(l. 45) the .....•. ceti, the Maricavatticetr, the Dakkhinasakha, and the journey, they ,arrived at ~ayava9cl.hananagara <on the] (l. 49) eighth [day] {0£
Lo ha prasat.4 the). waning (half ·of that month.) 4
Ramadutan's ship [missed the route to Anuradhapura, and .meeting with [When Bhiivanekabahu, king ·of rceylon, heard about the arrival "Of ·fhe
adverse .winds, perfor.med a difficult voyage, and .it was :not till Sunda~, the 1'heras and 1Ramadutan, he directed ·that a welcome he accorded 1-to them.
~minth day rof the .waxing half of the month of :Caitra,5 1that .she reached] (L46) ·After he had heard read out the letter inscribed on a tablet of gold] (I. 50)
'Mallig~ma.6 'Befoli'e the ship had arrived there, the :minister 1Gorud 1~had which His Majesty Ramadhipati had sent and Ramadutan had conveyed, [he
rebelled?) 1 against the king of Ceylon. [At .tihe time .cif the atri~ar of the was delighted, and, in the manner indiCated .'ah0ve, exchanged with the
Theras and Ramadutan the compliments of friendship and civility,J (1. 51) ,and
·caused a .dwelling-place {and1) iood 5 .to ~be arranged for .our Jord·s (the monks),
l I have not, translated the doubtfully read word at the beginn;ing of the ·lin'e• H 'it is atuin, it
means "in accordance with," and perhaps one woulp have to presume that something like ''the and 'for 'Rarnadutan (he arranged?) 6 • • ., • • • • • • • • • • ·-[On ~the following
message " stood before it. ,day J Ra.m~_dutan conveyed to the· cler;gy ,oJ (i. ,52) ·Ceylon Ithe Jett.er and
2 It may be doubted whether our text contained all the foregoing. The Pali now proceeds :
''They accordingly asked permission from the king, and remained there awaiting the arrival of the
Theras _who embarked in the same ship as Ramadiita"; and does not say anything about the visit
to Anuradhapura until after relating the arrival of the belated vessel, when ·it speaks of what they had 1 Conjecturally restored to preserve the continuity of the narrative. The 'Pali has : _" the king>s
seen there and of their return.
brother."
·a •c:JonjeeturaUy restored, to make the passage· intelligible. '2 The me~ning of salan ·is not quite certain. 1'be ),(Pali 'here 'has:"' The ·solaiers of the rebel
·li The English version 0f the Pali has: '''visited Anuradhapura and adored ·the Ratanacretiya, • • minister remainea in hiding at various pla'Ces between Valligama ''and Jayavaqqhananagara, and were
-,Maricivatticetiya, Tihuparamacetiya, ·i\bhayagiricetiya}Silacetiya, Jetavanacetiya, and the Manabodhi a source df danger to the people who passed that way.'" ,~
'tree, which ·was the southern branch (df the tree at Buddha 1Gaya), iand saw ,the L.ohapisada.'' :But on s Saturday,"Sth June 1476. This (as appears from 1. 53, infra) was the '.first o'f the two months
the stone 'itself otily 'the name-· of the 1\bhayagiri •is -distinctly legible,. the stone being fragmentar-y ,in which in a year of intercalation would bear the name A,aqha. The usual L.M. name for A~a/,ha in
:this place. ft then 'proceeds; ~'They likewise, to the extent of their ability, remo-ved grass, creepers, an ordinary ,year is Dagu'in or Vhaguin, and it correspontl·s with (he tBurmese Waso~
and shrubbery found growing in the 1courtyards of 'the vatious cdtiyas, and e}eaned their walls. ~fteT
'fulfilling such ·re1igi:ou:s duties as were .-performed subsequent to ·making offerings, they teturned 4 Friday. . 14th June 1476.
and arrived at jayavaqqhananagara." The DaUhinasiikha of our text means the Bodhi tree which 5 The text has pirp/apat, which implies f~od received in the w~y of alms by a Buddhist monk.
This would· not aRf>ly to the layman Ramadutan. It may, therefore, be cortjecturetl that a s~par:ate
"\'\'!ls. '1?1he soufherri ·bra.uu:~b of 'the one at ~Buddha Gaya.
clause, referring to the arrangements made for him/followed and has been lost. But tha:t is not quite
rebel 16 5 l e - S d 'F u h a n e g d a a i P y n a , s l t i 3 1t r h a d e 8 M d 1k s i a : n r ' c g ' h ~ 'N n 1 o 4 w 7 'F 6 h . ' a e t ' 'n t i V in a is ll t i ie g r a 's m n a ' am re e s , i d ·h e o d w · e a v e 'S r, i n 'fS h a l ,, l o e s s t e . on m i t n h is e t e r r s , t on c 1e a ll d e t d ;s e · M G , a r ;a av n i d , w pr h o o b a h b a l d y p c 1 e 1 rt r a (b in b , a y a a s ft t e h a e d P a a p li e t d v e a a , l s 1 w #v i a th s a b n o a t i h ih i t i o n g -a e m th e a r 8 'i J n i. ii t 1 h e w h w i o ch rd · s t h ' e t he E r n fi g .n li a s m h v R et u ts m io a n il . • u : 6 re a n s d s e a r s, e a if lO p t i ' ' J t . o iJ o .a 1 p 1i a ~ t t d er n a ll } y c ' " ~ '
"and had. arrangements made for their entertainment. "
•the M&n version fhas 1it ·correctly.
7 ThO"ugh the reading is not quite clear, this rendering is almost certainly right. 6 Very doubtful ; see the last note.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[VOL. III
PART lI] McJN INSCRIPTIONS 157
presents sent by the king who was the Lord of Harhsavatinagara] (for the •
clergy of Ceylon ?).2 Saying, "·According to the wish of the Lord of the • exhibited . (them) to the two parties ,.of monks/ the twenty-two Theras,
Wh_ite Elephant, will we do," the clergy gave a promise. together with Ramadutan (and) Citradutan ,. . . . . . . . . . . . .2
[After a month had elapsed from that date,] our lords t4e clergy who Saying,8 (1. 56) "Hereafter, according to the message (in) the letter of
had aJ;"rived first, and had gone to Anuradhapura,9 arrived.8 [The King of His Majes~y Ramadliipati, that (which) pleases his heart, will we do," the
Ceylon now] said 4 All the clergy who (1. 53) came (in) ships, these two king of Ceylon gave orders to the Sinhalese ministers, and on the KalyaQ.i
: "
partjes,5 (having now) come together, (it is) fitting that we should exhibit the River, in the bathing-place (where) the exalted Buddha had bathed, (he)
Tooth Relic," ,and on Sunday, the first (day of the) waning (half) of the caused (1. 57) a raft 4 to be built (and) a tower to be made 6 •••••••
second (month of) A~a~ha 6 (he) disclosed 7 the Tooth Relic, and exhibited ; ~ . . . . . (and) decorated.
(it) to our lords, the two parties of clergy, (1. 54) together with Ramadutan (He) requested our lord Vidagamathera to 6 select monks who were pure
(and) Citradutan. Our lords having been enabled to worship th~ Tooth Relic and free from any degree of 7 blame (or) reproach and who caµie of the
(and) enabled to. put (it) on their heads, the king of Ceylon, calling to mind succession of the clergy that- dwelt in: the MahavihAra; [and he accordingly
the tenour· of 8 the letter which His Majesty Ramadhipati had sent (to him), selected a Chapter of] (1. 58) twenty~four monks [such as] our lords
put the Tooth Relic in the reliquary (I. 55) of gold which His Majesty had Saddhammakittimahathera,8 [Vanaratanamahathera,] Paficaparivel}.avasimangala
sent, and set up over it the white umbrella.9 The golden alms-bowl, the mahathera, (and) Siharajayuvarajacariyathera.9 Having thus arranged the
vase, (and) the golden betel-box 10 (he) set up facing 11 the Tooth Relic (and) raft 10 (and) selected (1. 59) (the clergy ?)11 (on the) eleventh
• ., • • • ••• 1 •••
1 This refers to Ramadutan's party and Citradutan's party, not to the Sinhalese clergy and the
M&n clergy.
1 These words are doubtfully read, in I. 51 ; owing to the. difference between M&n and English 2 The meaning of lanah (which appears, to be the actual ·reading) is undetermined. If it were
syntax, the order of the tran~lation has had to depart considerably from that of the text. lanat, that would mean "to practise," which does not seem to fit in· here. Cf. D 15, F 45, 49, :;2.
i In the Pali he're follows the passage given in. l, 45 n., supra. s This word does not actually occur till the next line. Here the .Pali has: "'Reverend Sirs, and,
Citradtta and Ramadlta, may it please you to let me· know the purport of the letter of the Lord of
3 At Jayavac:JQ.hananagara, as stated at the end of the Pali passage referred to in the preceding
the White Elephant?' asked the king of Ceylon, who saying to himself: 'Whatsoever may be the
note. It is evident from a comparison· of the dates in II. 51 and 53 that the interval could not have
purport of the letter of the Lord of the White Elephant, I shall act accordingly,' issued commands to
amounted to a month and did not exceed three weeks and a day at most.
the Ceylon ministers," etc_. This is curious, as he had heard both letters already {II. 40, 49, supra),
· 4 There is nothing in the M8n to correspond with these words till we get to I 53, but they have 4 Or, "a bridge of boats,'' as the English version of the Pali expresses it. It may be possible to
been introduced here, partly from the Pali, in order t? present the narrative in an order intelligible to
construe our text, ''the king of Ceylon gave orders to the Sinhalese ministers to cause a raft to· be
the English reader. The Pali has ''thought,, instead of "said.''
built (and) a tower to be made,'' etc., ''on the Kalya"i River,'" etc., which makes no substantial
5 Or, " who came in these two ships." difference in the sense. ·
6 Sunday, 7th July· 1476. 6 The Pali has; "A tower and a canopy of cloth were erectect on the bridge, and various 'kinds
7 Lit. "opened.n The f'ali, after giving the date; has: ''and the day on which vassa residence of hanging awnings were likewise put up."
was entered upon, he had the whole of the tower containing the receptacle of the Holy Tooth· Relic • • 6 Or, literally, "having requested Vidagamathera, selected," etc. But this must really mean
decorated, had a canopy of cloth put up, and had an offering made of scents, lights, incense, and that the actual selection was done by Vidagamathera, not by the king personally, otherwise there is·
flowers. The Mahatheras of Ceylon' were set apart on one side, while the twenty.two Theras and no sense in the request. Cf. note 4, supra, for a somewhat similar case.
their disciples, who had come by the two ships, ·together with Citradiita and Ramadiita, were 7 The meaning of ayilm mat is given as "measure, s.uitable quantity; just as, while." The first
invited to be present. .T he Holy Tooth Relic, contained in a golden receptacle, ·was _brought out in word appears to be the Pali ayilmo, ''length," -the second perhaps matta, "quantity," or else
order that the twenty-two Theras and Citraduta and Ramadilta might see and adore it, and make mattam, though· the spelling of .the word rather supports Schmidt's derivation from· mfitika (Buch aes
offerings to it." Rajawan, p. 29). But the Pali here ~as garahaparapavadamattavfrahitam ga'IJ.am.
8 Lit. '~in· accordance with." s .The Pali has Dhamma0 • ·
9 No doubt the one mentioned in 1. u, supra, which the corresponding Pili passage did not 9 Here the Pili reading on the stone is as tt.bove, but _the English version wrongly has
men~ion. Here, however, it has : ''and had a ~white umb.rella placed over it." Slho{araja0 • ·
, 10 This box was mentioned, under a different name, in 1. r4, silp1'a. The reading is doubtful in 10 The usual meaning of twan is ''village,') but the. AkkharavidMna of the Man Abhidhanap·
both places. palfpika gives it as one of the equivalents of the Pali kullo, ''raft." Our Pali te;xt has nava~
''in sanghafam. It must have been a sort of pontoon.
11 Or, front of."
11 Doubtful reading. . The Pili has; · " Having thus had a bridge of boats constructed and. a
Chapter of monks elected."

•
EPIGRAPHIA BIRM:hNlCA PAR'D It]~
(day of the} waning {half) of, the· month of A~a4ha,. the clay {:being a)2
Wednesday -1 ~ [the king] caused the twenty-four Sinhalese
• • • • • • .. • • • • •
F
clergy who were to- confer the upa-sampada ordinatjon to be invited to
descend (to the raft), (and) requested them to have the: upasampada ordin"'
each of them [with the following articles :-three yellow robe·s ; a curtain a:nd
ation conferred 2 [upon· the forty-four -Mon monks. In conformity with the
a canopy manufactured in the country of Gocarati ; a leather mat painted in
custom followed by the Sinhalese Mahatheras of old, whenever monks from
variegated c~Iours ; a fart shaped like a palmyra fan but made of ivory
·foreign countries were _ordained, the forty-four M8n monks. were· first
carved by a skilful turner; and a betel-liox. Then- the king of Ceylbn] (l: 2·)
established in the condition of laymen, and then admitted to the Order as
saidi to our lords (the monks) : "My lords, (members of tlhe Order?} [you
samarteras through the act of Vanaratanamahathera, who presented them_ with will refurn to Jambudipa and maintain the religion in splendour in Hamsavati•
y:ellow robes,. and accepted their profession of faith in the Three Refuges. pura.1 If, Reverend Sirs, I present you with any other gifts, no reput'atiot1
On the night qf \Vednesday, five Theras, namely, ~oggalanathera,
would accrue to me, because such gifts are subject to speedy decay and]
Kumarakassapathera, Mahasivalithera, · Sariputtathera, and NaQasagarathera (I: 3) perish.9 (lf ?) I (confer upon you ?) the· gifts that are called titles .•
were ordained in the presence of the Chapter of the twenty-four monks,
........ (they will fast during the time that?) my lords (shal'l live·?y ...
Dhammakittimahathera and Paftcaparivei:iavasimatigalathera being, respectively; . . . . . . (Therefore) (L 4 )· I desire to confer (these) giffa upon· my lbrds."
the upajihiiya and ticar:i'ya. - On the night of Thursday, the 12th,~ ten (So saying,] the king of' Ceylon conferred tides [on the eleve:n Theras who
Theras, namely, Sumanathera, Kassapathera, · N andathera, Rahulathera, emb_arked in the same ship as Ramadutan, namely,] (1. 5) to our•· lord
Buddhavamsathera, Sumangalathera, Khujjanandathera, Sol).uttarathera, MogaJlananathera (lie) gave' f:tlie title of Sirisanghabodhisami,J 8 to [our]
Gul}.asagarathera, and Dhammarakkhitathera were or'dained, Vanaratana· lord [Kumarakassapathera] (he) gave the title of Kittisirimeghasa:mi,1 (a. 6)
upaf
mahathera and Pafi.capariveoavasimangalathera being respectively the [to our lord] :&aJ.lasagarathera [he gave t:he title of Farafoltamabahusami,] tlo
ihay"a and ticarija. ln the course of the day on Friday, the 13th,4 sev.en. Buddhavarhsathera (he)' ga.ve the title of Buddhaghosasami, [to Nandathera
Theras; namely, Eulasumangalathera, Javanapafi.fiathera, __ Culakassapathera:, hei gavel the title of Sihaladipa[visuddhasami,J (1. 7) to Rahulath,era
Cfilasivalithera, M'al).isarathera., Dhammarajikathera, and Candanasarathera· [he': gave the title of' Gul}aratanadharas·ami,]: to1 Suman~alathera ~he} ga:tvie
were ordained,. Vanaratanamahathera and Paficaparive}J.avasimangalathera the title of Jinalankarasami; [to Bhammarakkhita,thera' he ga1ve Ji tl1e title
being respectively the 'upajjhaya and ticart"ya. On Saturday, the 14tli',5 of:. Ratanam.alisami, (1. 8) [to Ciila] sumailgalathera [he gave the title· . of
the twenty-two young monks, who were the disciples of the Theras,, werie. SaddhammatejasamiJ to Kassapathera (·he} gave the t\itle ~ 0£ Dhammarama:.
ordained, Pancaparive:i;i.avasimangalathera and Siharajayuvar:ajacariyathera 6 sami, (and) [to Ma\Q.isarathera He' gave] the title of Bhuvanek~bahusamii
being respectively the upafjh«y,a and acarzya. • • (l~ 991 Having (given these titles to the eleven Theras who had embarked
When the twenty-two Theras of the Mon country liad been ordained~ on ?}4 (I. 9) Ramadutan's ship, (he) also gave· titles to· the" ele~en: Theras
the king' of Ceylon invited them to a meal,, at the end of whic.h he (who had emibarketl on ?) 6 Citradutan' s .ship. [:I'o Mah'Eisivalithera he gave]
presentedj
l Peg_u. .
mo'1k l s W ·i h e e d a n d e e sd d a y b , y 1 7 L t > h . h J a u i l :n y m 1 a f 4 k o 7 r i 6 t t t y . i - m f T a ou h h ~ a e th e P ra a , l i o p n r o W ce e e d d n s: e s ' d 't a h y e / ' k e i t n c g ., i ' n 'a v n ite d d . h t a h d e th tw em en t c y o - _ f n o d u u r o te o d r · d t a o i " n t i h ng e Reve 2 r e T n h d e S P ir a s l , i t h h a is s is '' d d i o s n s e o , l u s t u i e o h n ' / t ' i tf a o n s d w i o u u o l c d e e l d a s s : t th ' r ' - T o h u e gh re o f u o t r y e ~ , ur I s l h if a e l t l i m n e o . w "" confer titles on· you. If,
bridge' of boats, ·and had the monks of Ramafiii.adesa ordained by them."
'3 This, and the other passages in square brackets_ down tn J, 13, infra, represent lhcunat iri .our
2" End. o.f F::?ce: E •. text which it has been possible. to restore with practical certainty by the. aid of tlfe· Pa'Il' ver2ion~
· a 'f.hursday, v8th July 1476• .
though the Pali order ~s different and the wording is much more concise.
4 Friday, 19th July 1476. 4- Conjecturally restored on the analogy ori· the wordiOg of. the next sentence.,
5 Saturday,. 2oth· July' 147~ s Conje~turally-estoredAJ;o·fit.' ~he. ..c ontext., ·
! According to the reading on the $tone.. The English version has SihaJ~i;&j,af. ...... . '~ . ' . ' ' '*' ' ..,,, ' ., ' > ,.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. Ut PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS lOI
160
r
" the exalted Jiving 1 Buddha [with ·a large bell made of brass,, weighing 3,000
the title of [Tilokagurusami], (I. 10) to Sariputtathera (he) gave .[the
tolas.] 1 When I ............• " 8 [Agreeably with this thought, he
title of Siri]vanaratanasami, to Sumanathera (he) gave the title of
wrote a letter, saying: "As I am] 4 (1. ~o) going to the town of Rangoon,
Mangalasami,1 [to Ciilakassapathera he gave] the title of KalyaJJ.itissa·
of
(let?) our Jords the eleven Theras (go and stay a while ?) in the town
[sami], (1. u) to Culanandathera {he) gave [the title of Candanagirisami], to
Rangoon.'' [And after makfo.g arrangements for their entertainment, he]
Sonuttarathera (he) gave the title of Siridantadhatusami, to [Gm;i.asagara
the~a] (he) gave the title of Vanavasitissa,2 (1. 12) to Javanapafifiathera [he (I. 21) caused our lords to be diSembarked from [their sea-going] vessel [and
gave the title of Ratanalalikarasami], to Cutasivalithera s (he) gave the title conveyed tO the town ·of . Rangoon in river] boats.
of Mahadevasami, to Dhammarajathera 4 (he) gave the title of Udumbaragiri [Meanwhile the eleven Th.eras, who embarked in the same ship as
sami, (and) (1. 13) to Candanasarathera [he gave] the title (of Ciilabhaya- Citradutan, missed the appointed time favourable for returning to the M6n
tissasami]. country, because the king of Ceylon had said to them:] (l. 22) '' My (lords?),
The king of Ceylon having . thus addressed 011r lords/ our lords the [it is my desire to send an emissary to Ramadhipatimaharaja, th~ Lord of
~ ~ill
eleven Theras together with Ramadutan [left Jayavac;lc;lhananagara and returned the White Elephant,] (I. 23) with presents ••.... (which ?) send,5
to Valligama.] (1. 14) Our lords the eleven Theras who had embarked [including a religious gift in the shape of an image of the Holy Tooth
on Citradutan's ship • ~ . . . . . . having adored the Holy F oot~print, which Relic, embellished with· a topaz and a diamond, valued at a hundred pkalas,
is on the top of the Sarnantakuta hill,6 [returned to] the city of Jayava<l<;lha .. which were constantly worn by my father, Parakkamabahumaharaja. When
"'the vessel, now being fitted out for my emissary, is ready, an opportunity
nagara.
will be afforded to her of sailing in the company of . your ship. .May it
[The eleven Theras,] (l. 15) who had come down to the port· of
please your Reverences to postpone your departure till then I " The eleven
Valligama, [embarked on Wednesday, the second day of the waxing half of
Theras and Citraduta.n, therefore, waited for the e~issary of the king of
the month of Bhadrapada,1 and] returning h.ome, arrived [at the mouth .of the
Ceylon and anchored their ship at the port of Kalambu. · Meanwhile] (1. 24)
Yoga Rivers on Thursday;] the sepond (day) of the waning (half) of (that?)
a violent wind, [called paradha,] arose [and sank in the sea the large
month . . . . • • . • [When] (1. 16) His Majesty Ramadhipati received the
tidings that our lords the eleven Theras who had embarked in Rarnadutan's
ship .[had arrived at the mouth of the Yoga River,]8 '(l. 17) (he) said: I Explained in the Pali as hair relics of Buddha ''obtained during his life-time/' in accordance
" [Consideri~g that] (it. was) I who urged [these Th eras to visit Ceylon,] wi~h the well·known traditional story which localized the home of the two merchants Tapusa and
Bhaltika in Lower Burma and the enshrining of the hair relics in the Shwed~g6n Pagoda, Rangoon.
{and that) OU~ lords did go to Ceylon [and that they are the inaugurators of The Pili here mentions the intended date of the presentation of the bell, viz. the full .. moon day of
the upasampadii ordination,] tL i 8) it (would) not (be) proper [to send any of Asvayuja (Thursday, 3rd October 1476). See 1. 47, infra.
2 There seems to be s~me doubt as to what this weight amountf;d to. Taw Sein Ko in his additional
my officials] to meet (and) welcome our lords. [It would, indeed, be appto- ~ * notes (Some Remarks on the Kalyii'l/-1 Inscriptions, I.A., Vol. XXIV, p. 332y"says Ho,c>oo viss, which
priate that] I [should] myself [welcome them on my return from the town of seems unduly large. According to Childers (s.v. tula, in his Pali Dictionary) tM tola contained 100
ph~las. We know from E 14, supra, that a phala (in the Pali version of our inscription) was equiv.a.
Rangoon,] 9 (1. 19) after having presented the cetiya of th~ Hair Relics of lent to a tical (daker, L.M. dakew) of which there are 100 .to the viss. Therefore, according to this
reckoning, the bell weighed 3,000 viss. The point cannot be settled by actual weighing, as the bell was
removed by Philip de Brito and lost at sea (I.A., l.c.).
1 The Pali bas·Mangalatherasami. s Probably our text differed 'somewhat in order from the Pali and the sentence went on : '' have
2 The Pali adds sami. presented the bell," etc.
a The PalL(on the stone) has 0sivili0 ; in the English version, "sivali-o,.. 4 The Pali has: "visiting the town of Rangoon, may it please the Venerable One~ to remain in
4 The Pali (on the stone) has 0raialJa0 ; in the English version, 0riijika0 • that town ! " Our text is in bad preservation here, but from the little that remains it is clear that
{The· Pali has. no equivalent for the foregoing clause. the sense intended is much the same. ··
6 Literally ''stone,,, or " rock." In actual fact it is a high mountain. 5 This clause does .. no.t fit into the framework of the Pali text, which has ''with presents
'1 Wednesday, :nst August 1476. . including,". etc.,. but that is probably only due to a slight difference of order. in. our text.. It • i1,
e See E · 38 n. The. date is Thursday, 5th September 1476. · however, very doubtful how much of the following details were represented in our te~t.
9 In the Pili called Tigumpanagara. The M&n equivalent (I. 20, inft'a) is i-ufl: Dgun.
II

•
MON lNSCRlf'TlONS
EPIGRAPHEA JB:IRMANICA fl
VOL. II!
•
s·ea:·going vessel, in which passengers had already embarked. When the (,having heard the tidings?), caused {them) to COIDe I • • • • • •• • •• • • ~ 9
. . . . . • (I. 32) . . ·. . . . . .. . . . • . . . ..· • . . . . . , . . . .. . .
king of Ceylon r~ceived the intelligence that Citradutan's ship had found~ret:l .
[Owing to this circumstance, they J (I. 33) (gave our lords?) [fooq, clothing,
imr the ,sea, he said thus to the Theras and Citradutan : '' If you have mo
and a residenc,e, and treated them with much reverence.. Citradutan was
ship, you might embark -in the same ship as my emiss?ry, and] (I. 25)
likewise provided with clothing, food, and lodging. The intendants of the
{return hqme" ?). [Accordingly, -the Theras and Citradutan, together with
port then said : " Reverend Sirs, when o.tJr ships start frorn this] (L 34) (p.Qrt
hi,s.: .a ttendants, embarked in the same ship as the emissary 0£ the king of in
of Navuta ?),9 [may it please] (our lords?) (to. embark in them order fo, be
Ceylon and left the port of K alambu.
Sailing out to mid-ocean, the ship co·ntinued her courseJ (L ~6) (and once'. more near the Lord of the. White Elephant t '' Accordingly, the four
Theras, namely, Tilokaguruthera, Ratanalankarathera, Mahadevathe.. -aj and
re.ached?) 1 [the· Strait of Silla, which lies between the island of Ceylon and·
CUlabhayatiss.athera, and their four disciple.s resided with them. The :remaining
Jamlmdipa.9 After three nights had elapsed since the ship left the port of
seven Theras, however, saying: '' We shall embarki together with the seven
I&a1amhu, she was wrecked by a violent storm, and, immersed in sea-water,.
monks, in a ship at Komalapattana," went and resided at ~hat po.rt.
she remained fast between the jutting peaks of rocks. All the passengers,
r.ea1izing their inability to extricate the ship from amidst the rocks, collected On Wednesday,] (1. 35) (the fourth?) (day of the) ·waxing (ha1f of thef
all the timber and bamboos that happened to he in h~r, and,] (1. 27) (con· month of Vaisakha, [in the year 839 3 of the Common Era, the tliuee Theras,
st~ucting ?) [a raft of them-, and embarking on it.1 crossed to the coast of namely, Tilokaguruthera, Ratanalcaikarathera, and Mahadevathera embarkea
_ Jambudipa, w~ich was close by. in the ship belonging to M~limmarakaya1 while Culabhayatissathera emhatk'.ed
in the ship belonging to Pacculiya, and they left Navutapa~tana. Of taese
·Having lost the presents] (l. 28) . which the king of Ceylon had given
Th€ras,J (1. 36) our lords, [the three yvho embarked iD the sam~ ship, reached
(him), a ·[the emissary of the king of >Ceylon returned to the island of Cey!on.
the :&:nouth of the river, which has its source in UH~ Nagarasi • M<>.tmtain, , o:n:
The. 1'heras and Citradtitan, however, travelled on root to Nagapattana,4 and
Friday, the twelfth day of the waning half of the month ©f Vaisa.kha,1$ and)
there vi$ited the site of the Padarikarama) (I. 29) (monastery?) . . . . . . . . . .
ta11d:} \were. enabled to See ?} 5 • • • • • • [ a~d worshipped the image of {1. 57) our Jords [arrived at Kusimanagara 8 , on} the first· (day o,.fi the) waJt~B
(half} 0£ the month 0t Jye$tha, the day (be,jng) [Tuesday.7 CaJabbayatissa"'l
Buddha in a cave constructed by command of the Maharaja of Cinadesa
th€:J4'·~,. howev~r,~ reached ,the .m outh of the river, whie.h has its sour:ee; ia til:\:e:
on the spot, on the sea. . shore, where] {I. 30) the Tooth Relic of the exalted
Nagara&i Mountain, on Saturday, the thirteenth day of tne waning half of the
Bu<lciha was deposited 6 ·[in the. c9urse o.f its transit to the island of Ceylon
in charge of Dat)c;lakumara and Hemamala, who were husband and wife. tti.0;ath of Vai,~akha,9 and arrived at Kusimana,gara on} (t 3:8} the foul!th (day·
T.hence they travelled on to the port of Navutapattana. At this par~ resideel of the} waxing (half) of. the month of Jy ,e~t~a, th$' day {bei11g) Friday~ 10
Mallrnmarakaya· and Pacculiya,1 two intendants of the port, who, annualiy
•
sent two ships for trading, purpo~es (to the Mon country). In doing so,
I I am not sure that I have fitted these words into their pr~er place. Thex have no precise
they sent presents for Ramadhipatimaharaja, and] (1. 31) (the king ?) .... equivalent i'n the Pal'i, which, aftet ''and/' proceeds: 0 thus, because of their havthg achanged with
him:, the compliments of friendship and civility, they conceived reelings of great respect and. honour
for him. Owing,u etc. .
1 The Pali has "through." ~ The mainland. of India. 2 This appears to. be ehe speUingJn our te·:x:t, i).ut it is a doubtfttt reading anyhow.
t1 These wo·rds are not in the Pali. 4 Negapatam. S' 'fhe Pali versi~, gives fuil particul1ars of t ° h e date", which waS' Wednesday~ i6fh April 1477.
5 These words are. not represented in the· Pali, w~ich has : '' 111onastery, and there visited,'-"· etc. !l Negrais. Friday~ 9th May 1477. ,
e I am not s.ute that the doubtfuUy read P<!ok can bear tbrs meaning (which I have taken over 6 Bassein.· . . · 7 Tuesday,. 13th M1ay t417•
flrm the Pali version). N·onnalfy the word means "to foad,'' and would apply rather to the act of a From this point there· is a considerable divergence between the· English version of tti·e- PIU and
putting the relic on the ship that was to take it to Ceylon.. The whole af this passage (ll. ;26-43) is the actual record on the stone itself, the former omitting everything from « reac'hei ''to '"four
almost entirely obliterated ln 'i>'Uf text. mcrnks/' I have end~avoured t() fill thii5 lacuna from th,e trans~ripl of If. 63M04 of the J:\taviffcf Faee
· ~ These ate, appalentlfJ the tiatnes 011 th«i $ten~; bQt Mllimparakly' and Paeca.Jiya, u in of the 1esond Btone. · ··
*b• BngUah veraitra. ~ latMrdA1, ~oah· M•r t~~b lt: lfrtd~, 10th Mat ~+rf'~

•
•
164 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 111 PART 11] M6N ·INSCRIPTIONS
~
.[ Thence, these four monks arrived at Harhsavatinagara 1 on Tuesday J the • Rangoon, (and) gave gifts by way of alms food 1 • • • • • • • titfffJartt
thirteenth day of the waxmg half of the month of A.~ac;lha.] 9 (l. 39) ..•..• (cloths ?) . . • ~ . . . . . . . . . . (1. 46) two mats 9 each . . . • . . . to
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . s our lords, and having given (them) a friendly welcome,8 (he) had our lords
. '• ' •" :,
sent on (their) way to their dwelling-place. Then His Majesty had [grand] 4
[Of the seven. Th eras, who,] (1. 40) together with [the seven monks,
festivals held for three days, and on the holy day of the full moon of the
'went and resided at Komalapa~tana,] (1. 41) (our lord Matigalathera alone?)
[accompanied by his own attendant monk, as well. as by those of Vanaratana month (l. 47) (of Asvayuja ?), the day (being) Thursday,6 (he) (went up to
thera, and Siridantadhatuthera·, embarked fn a ship commanded by Binda and present 8 the bell?) (at) the foot of the cetiya of th~ Hair Relics of the
left Komalapa~tana on Wednesday, the new·moon day' of the month of exalted Buddha. On Friday, the 1st of the waning (half of the month),7 His
Bhadrapada, in the year 841 of the Common Era.' They reached the mouth Majesty feasted all the clergy of Rangoon. To 8 •••••••••••••••
of the river, which has its source in the Nagarasi Mountain, on Friday, the ~is Majesty, (1. 48) (having made arrangements, caused?) gifts to be given.
first day ()£ the waxing half of the month of Karttika,6 and, touching at On Sunday, the 3rd of the waning (half of the mon,~h),9 His Majesty, by way
of showing reverence and veneration, had eleven boats prepared (and)
Kusimanagara on Monday, the eleventh,' eventually arrived at Hamsavatinagara
decorated jn order to convey our lords the eleven Theras.10 On Monday,
on Friday, the fourteenth day of the waning half of the month of Karttika.7
The re~aining six Theras and the four y_oung monks had died, as they were (early in the morning,?) (1. 49) His Majesty embarked 11 ; our lords (also)
unable to obviate the consequences of demerit and the course of the law of embarked,11 (but) on reaching the landing-place of the Mahabu~hariipa 12 our
mortality, to which all living beings are subject. Alas ! " Whatever is lords stopped 19 (there). His Majesty Ramadhipati, on Friday, the eighth (day
material is supject to change and dissolution." of the) waning (half) of the month of A§vayuja,1' (1. 50) rea~hed His Majesty's
On Thursday, the eighth day of the wax.ing half of the month of Asvayuja,~ abode at Pegu. His Majesty having arrived at Pegu, on the tenth (day) of
in the year 838 of the Common Era, Ramadhipatimaliaraja, with the object
of presenting a great bell to the. cet£ya .o f the Hair Relics, 9 embarked on a 1 The Pali has : "and served. them with various. kinds of delicious food. He likewise piesented
each of them with two .c ouples of cloths for their ticl'Va'l'a robes." The meaning of lanah has. not
barge surmounted by a golden spire, and, escorted by a . number of boats,
been determined: cf. · D 15,. E 55, F 49,. 52.
headed by golden. boats, such as the 'indatJimana proceeded to the city of 9 Meaning doubtful. Cf. H 39 n.
1
s Cf. E 41,· F 54-
Rangoon. On Tuesday, the thirteenth day of the waxing half of the month
4 So in the Pali. The precjse sense of canak has not been determined, and even the reading i~
of Asvayuja,J 20·(when ?) (1. 44) (His Majesty Ramadhipati arrived at Rangoon?), not quite certain. It may be connected with the cnak of I D 49. The L.M. satJak, sanak, snak is
used in the sense of ''wedding." Cf. M 2a.
[he invited the eleven Theras who] (1. 45) had [embarked in the same] ship
6 The month is not named b~t mtist be. A~vayuja. The date is T)lursday, 3rd Octob~r 1476.
a& Ramadutan and had returned from Cey Ion and were in the town of 6 The Pali has: cc th~. great bell was conveyed to the quadrangle of the cltiya of the Hair Relics
in order that it might be presented to it."
7 Friday, 4th October 1476.
1 Pegu. a The Pali has : "and the king. commanded that largess be given to paupers, way•farers, and
i Tuesday, 24th June '1477 · This date is anomalous: one would expect Tuesday to be· the 14th beggars."
day of the waxing half of this month, not the 13th (which would normally be Monday). Probably 9 Sunday, 6th October 1476.
the weekday is right in this .. case. The Pali- text, right or wrong, is however supported by the stone. 10 The Pali has: ''eleven boats were adorned in a reverent manner, and ministers were sent to
s As this line is entirely illegible, it is impossible to fit it into the framework of the Pali, which, escort the Theras. Having thus made preparations for escorting the Theras, Ramidhipatirija left
however, <runs on. as shown. The same applies tO 11. 42, 43, of which the nuil)erals ,have, therefore, Tigumpanagara on the morning of Monday, the fourth day, and, 1'eaching in due course Hamsa
been omitted. vatinagara on Friday the eighth day, entered the bejewelled palace, which was his ho~e." The Monda,y
4 Wednesday, tSth September 1479. is the 7th. October· 1476. ~ ·
5 Friday, 15th October 1479. 11 .The text has tuin tlun. Perhaps this means "came up (stream),,, i.1., up the Pegu River.
8 Monday, ~sth October 1479. I!a Explained as the Kyaikpun pagoda near Pegu, or (more probably) the colossal recumbent
7 Friday, 1sth November 1479. image of Buddha between the Kalya9fsimi and the Mahiceti at Pegu.
e Or Asvina, L.M. wah. The date is Thursday, 26th September 1476 18 The meaning of lanah is undetermined. Cf. D 15, E 55; F 45, 52.
9 The Sh wedag&n · pagoda. , 10 Tuesday, Ist October i476, ~' Friday, nth October 1476.

u]
EPIGRAPH:rA BlRMAN'lCA f PART MON INSCRIPTIONS
VOL. Ul
leading chiefs, with flags, (and) with rnany drums 1 .(and) xylophones,~ His
111,e waning (half of the monU1), the day {being) Sunday,1 had fer,ry-boats u
Majesty . . • . . . . . , . . • • . . . .. ..... our lords. His Maj€sty (gave?)~
< ·p > r r e de p r a e& re , d a { ft a \ n l'l d n ) b e d r ec o o f r l a e t a e d d i n a g s 'c w h a ie s f s m { o 1 s . t 5 f 1 i ) t tin to g , g w o i th d o m w a n n y (a n x d y ) l op w h e o lc n o e m s, e 8 ( ( a a n n d d ) ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ .. . . .. .• .. .. •. . .
fe&cl(!)tt .t?) 01tU lords. · fThen His Majesty Ramadhipati reflected in this wise: " The eleV1'€n
Theras have received th.e pure up.asampada ordination; but as in this land .of
' . ·When our lol-as had arrived at His Majesty's abode, our 1ords
ours ther.e ~s no pure st'ma, 4 how can these Theras perform the ceremonies Qf
'(onpa:cked and pr.odwced ?) 4 the sandal wood {pow<ler which had surrounded ?) 5
'the TG'o1th Relic of the exalted Buddha, branches of the Bodhi ficus the upc0satka, the pavara'l}a, the .ujasampada, .a nd so on? (L.et) 'US .seek a
wer~ . gamakhetta that can be guarded {and) ·caus.e these Theras to consecrate
teaves df the Bodhi ficus, '(and) seeds of the (I. 52) Bodhi ficus which
,fit . for. planting~ (and) our lords. presented (them) to . His Majesty'16; (thereon) a pure baddhasi'ma. Then these Theras will be able to perform dre
a ~r~attse 7 ,rela~1ng how King Sirisanghabodhi-Parakkamabahu purified the ceremonies of ~posatM, paviiraiµl., upasa.mj>ada, and so .on.''
reltg1on, .mow Kmg Vijayabahu purified the religion, {and) how King Parakka~ His Majesty ,6 having thus reflected, went (and) investig~ted a gamakhet·ta
which was on the edge of the for.est and belonged~ to a mip.ister named
mab.lhu (t '$3) purified the religion, which (treatise) had been composed in
NarasilraJ (and) having taken note of the results· of (his) enquiries, upon a
the language of the people of Ceylon (and) which our lords (the clergy) o"f
1Ceyl~~ ~ad given· (them), ~o~r lords (also) I'res.ented ~o· His Majesty ; site which. was near the orchard 8 of the minister Narasiira His Maj~sty
a wntmg • . . . . . . . contammg . . . . . . (with mstructwns ?) . . . . . .. caused a .c learing to be made and a design to be prepared fol' cQnsecca.~m:g
Ottir lotrds • the clergy of Ceylon (1. 54) with the king Of Ceyl1on, named a si?nii. As regards the boundaries of the gamakketta with (the land ·of} the
Bblvalilekabahu, . ~ur lords {also) presented to His Majesty. His Majesty minister Narasfira, inasmuch as it was not desired that there sh~uld ·he
and 0ur lords ha,;v~ng thµs ex.changed friendly gmetings, 9 our confusion with any other gamakhettas that· surmunded it, when {they) . h&a
• • ,,,. • • • • • •
·lords the eleven Theras (1. 55) severally, (the king). q,rdered a number of trenched (it) around completely, (they} had. to dear away the ro(l>bs of tre:es
l _Sunday, 13th Octoper 1476~. . . . ·
·'S. Presumably ~ani,o' is the L.M. khaaui'; but the identification is not absolutely certain. J The precise meaning of Ho' has not been determined. It ·is ekher a specific ,d:esign~l:ion p,f
some particular kind of drum (pham) or else the name of some other musical instrument used in
s Perhaps. spec:1fically xylo~hones, as describe~ by Haswell, s.v. twin twuikJ J3ut it m~y here
een;junctiQn with arums. Cf. G 33, and VIII A6, IX A iO, iF j4, G 4 H 46, K ;.
represent musical mstruments m general ; · the Pali has : ''gongs· and many other kinds of musical n., 1
2 Or ''musical instruments/' in general. Cf. I. 50 supra~
Instruments."
. • 'The re~ding is doubtful here. a 1 am unable to restore the rest of this 1ine. Here ends Face F, so far as it is decipherable
from ,the ink-!impr:.essi@ns available; and here foUows the modernized cQpy of the text coiltainecl :in .t:he
• ''5 ·The reading is dou~tful. The Pali has : :'a casket ·containing the sandalwood powder, ,with M.SS. ,rpentioned in § 71 on which the rest of the tra~lation is based, in so far as the 'text QP th:e
which the Holy ,Tooth Rehc was besmeared, an image of the Holy Tooth Relic; some bi::anches stones themselves is deficient. ·
· le;iv~, and se~ds of the Bodhi tre~ "; etc. It looks as if our tegt nad inadv.ertently omitted som: 4 The P·ali, instead -0£ the p'reced ing clause, has ; 'f In this city nf Harilsa.vati ther..e tme& 1)-t
portion of this list of things. Poss'ibly instead of buiti we s'hould read buim., ''image" (Pali oimbam) · e~ist any pure baddhasima, nor any mahfinadi possessing the characteristics- of a nadi, npr iln¥
and presume that after the doubtfully read tuit the .words dhiit gnih kyak tray have been omitted. ' mahllJatassara possessing the characteristics of a jatassara, nor any gamakhetta whose purification
6 The meaning of lanah is undetermined. Cf. D 15, E 55, F 45, 49. can easily be dieoted ." .
., 1 am· not sure of the precise meaning of katiwat. It may possibly have some relation to the 5 The Pali has : " Ramadhipatiraja accordingly sent his a~ten(,iants. ito search for a . Qama.k.hett~
llatik~vattii~am which the Pali has in the next clause (a clause which is, however,, either fra:~mentary answering the description. During the course of their search, the king's attendants found on lthe
OJ orrutted in o~r text), But the sense ''a book of covenants" hardly fits fohere, skitits. of 1a forest to the wes·t of a great cstiya, called Mwdhava, a giJmakh~ttfl. ·fll:elang~•ng to dt'
1B .T~t:! ~~li. has.: .,, a treatise setting forth the covenants entered· 'into, at the solicitation of ·the said minister Narasfua, which was small and could easily be guarded; and they reported accordingly to
ki~s; by the c~e.rgy for the observance oI the. Order; ·a letter sent by the ·Sinhalese Theras and .a the king. Ramadhipatiraja personaqy inspected the sit~, .and consider~d that it was a gamak.hetta
J:>op"k .r~corQ.irig .the ·coven~nts ent~red 'into by them l .·a book . of qathas written. by Vanaratanamaba which could easily be ~uarded and was a.n· appropriate spot· for the ~onsecration of a sima. The
thera; and a letter fro111 Bhiivanekababu, king of Ceylon;" tt does not appear clearly from the ground of a selected place on that land was cleared ()t jungl~, the site of tbe proposed sima .wgs
marked out, and a house was 'built in the middle of that sjte. The in.side and. oqtshle of that
fr~gm,.,n~ of~.µrt~~tJ. how. much of. all· thi.s. was represented in it; but certainly not .the whole. · For
house, as well as the site of the proposed simii and a selected place outside iha.t site, ·were $1nea~ed
"mstructions ., w~ should perh'aps read « 1rifortnation.''
'9 Ct• . E 41, F 46. Th-e 'Pali has; ''''RarnadhipatimaMraja .accorded 'a gracious greetin,g· to the o w p "i e th n . i n c g ow s" # w du it r h rg . d o . o T 'r h s e w n e a r e fe c n o c n i s n t g r u w ct a e s d / e ' rec F t o ed r M en u c d lo h s a i v n a g , t o h r e S w hw ho e l e M a p w la c I e f aw on , c i f t . s K fo n ur . sides, and ,, four
e fl l a e g v s e n a T n h d e r s a t s re , a a m n e d r s co f m ly m ing an , - de a l n l d hi w s. i t m h in ' i th st e e rs s o t u o n d e i s n c g o rt o f ea -g c o h n g d s £ t a h n e d m m 't a o ny hi ,s o t m b o et n as k t i e n r d y s w o! i th .J n m J.J a Si n ca y l ,,, ga r r a d · e O n r . , " ac T co h r i d s i 1 n is g 'll t o o t , 't h h o e w e o v r e d r in , a s r p y e " c U m i·e o d d e h r i n th m e e P a a n l i i n g -v er o s f i o · n t ~ h e words, "areca-nut '' (or ~.'~~tel•ri1Jt·"'')
tl ~trumen ts ."

, EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL. Ifl PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS
~
(" these six clergy were excluded. Ten Theras and six junior monks who were
(and) the roots of bamboos 1 (on the ground) below which would be apt to
their disciples, these sixteen only (were admitted as) having an u.pasamjada
cause confusion, and also to lop, cut (and) entirely clear away branches of
ordination that was pure and being themselves free from censure or reproach.
trees (and} branches of bamboos above which would be apt to cause ·such
Thus did His Majesty Ramadhipati decree.
confusion. On the site where (they) made a design for consecrating the
When it was nea{ the time foi:-the consecration of the st'ma, our lord
sima, within the building and also on the land outside the b~ilding which
Gm;1aratanadharathera 1 said that he was sick and together with his disciple
was fitting, within the boundary stones and also outside the boundary stones,
Sathapala returned {and) dwelt in his former monastery. Our lords Siri
a general clearance_ had to be made (and) water poured into the trench,9 !a
sanghabodhis~mi, Kittisirimeghasami, Parakkamabahusami, Buddhaghosasami,
making a wet ditch. Outside, the land being enclosed on the four quarters, .
Jinalankarasami, Ratanamalisami, Saddhammatejasami, Sudhammaramasami,.
(they) put doors. On the west of the site where the simii. was to be con
and Bhiivanekabahusami, nine senior monks, and our lord Sirisati.ghabodhi. .
secrated (they) made a monastery for the eleven Theras to come (and) dwell
sami's disciple Saitgharakkhita, our lord Kittisirimeghasami's disciple Dhamma
in, a· ref~ctory, privy, · and a place for bathing. Then (they) invited the
vilasa, our lord Buddhaghosasami's disciple Uttara, our lord Jinalaitkarasami's
eleven Theras (and) brought (them) .to dwell on the site.
, disciple Uttama, and our lord Saddhammatejasami's disciple Dhammasara,
During the~e preparations His Maje.sty again reflected, in this wise:
these fourteen monks, dwelt in the monastery which was built on the west of
" All. these eleven Theras together with (their) eleven disciples have been
caused to receive the pure upasampadti qrdination, (~nd) when we have the site where the simti was to be· consecrated.
At the tim ~ when the st'ma was to be consecrated, His Majesty
made a permanent 3 sima, purifying it because (we) wish it to be !the root of
reflected in this wise : " If at any place where it is· desired to consecrate a
religion, we . desire that for the future it shall be perfectly pure and that it
an
s£mti ancient S'imti does not el:CiSt at that place, the new simti (which) they
shall make a pure upasampada ordination. But in so far as there exists
(among these clergy) any occasion of censure o~ reproach, we as'suredly do consecrate comes into existence ; but if at that place there exists an ancient
st'md, then by reason of the occurrence of the faults of overlapping and con
not ·desire that such a monk should be allowed to enter into these
junction the new s£ma which is consecrated does not thus come into exist
ecclesiastical ceremonies. Certainly we desire that only such clergy as are
ence.a That being so, on a place where it is d~sired to consecrate a new
clearly free from censure or reproach should be allowed to enter into these
(one), it is proper first to perform the _act of desecration: 4 (then) the new
ceremonies.''• Having reflected thus, (he) made ertquiries, an.d upon enquiry
st'mti which is consecrated will certainly come into existence." 6 Having thus
ascertained that among the eleven Theras there was in one Thera a small
reflected, His Majesty Ramadhipati] '·
fa~lt, clearly not a. great one, (dating) froJ.n before his reception of the
u;asampadti ordination, but still there were in him grounds of censure and
reproach of a trivial nature, while among· the junior monks, though there l l have followed the spelling of these proper names as given in the Pali version.
' 9 B has Rafapilla. This disciple's· name is not given in the Pali version.
were no other intentional sins, yet there was some degree of censure and a The word snah has been taken as equivalent to L.M. in uh.
reproach. {Accordingly) the one Th era who was involved in censure, and 4 That is with a vi~w to putting an end to any possibly existing ancient sima.'
also his disciple, and four other junior monks who were involved m censure, - 6 The Pali here proceeds as follows : · " The king accordingly had preparations made for perform
ing the ceremony of desecrating the (existing) sima in accordance with the procedure expressly laid
down in the. aUhokatha., 'Monks, an avippavilsasimil may thus be desecrated by means of the
1 " Trees and ~atnboos " is a stock term for jungle vegetation fo general. t•'<-i'Uat'a..1 There are c;ertain conditions to be observed by a JPonk desecrating a simil. The following
jl The Pili, which differs somewha{'in its order from .the above, states that ''a small trench, are the. co~ditions. Standing on a · khaf).t/.asimii. 1 a mohdsimii.,. called a'Oippavasasima, should not .be
about a span . in depth· and the same in width, was dug." desecrated; and similarly, standing on a mahasim.a, called· a1Jippa11~saslmi11 a khat)r/.asimil should not
a OrJ. following the B reading, "and now when we have made a sima." be desecrared. It is only when standing on a khaf;t/asimii that another kha11-if.asima may be
4 The Pili, though agreeing jn substance with the foregoing, differs in so~e details particularly desecrated ; and the same· rule a. pplies mutatis mutandis to the· other class of simii. A simiJ. is
in the conclusion. "because the inclusion of monks who are not free from censure :nd reproach, desecrated for two reasons, namely, (i) in order to make a mahiltimii. of one which is originally a
though they may have received the . pure form of the 11-pasampada ordination, in the Chapter khudtlakasimii, with a view that its· area may b.e extended; (ii) in order to make a khudtlakasim'4 of
consecrating a simi, would in after tim~s afford matter fo~ ob jectron to the enemiea of the religion..' one which is originally a mahO.Simii, with a view that sites for monasteries may be granted tq others.'•

I
EPIGRAPHIA 13IRMANICA [VOL. Ul MON INSCRlPTIONS i;i
!'I
"But in the Vimativinodani {it) is stated thus: 1 'When (1, 7) it ,·happens
•
that the existence of an ancient kha1J,rj,as-ima (or) the boundaries of an
0 ancient kha1fqasima, [(or) the existence of an ancient mahasi"mfi {or) the
boundaries of an ancient mahfisima, are not known,] ff both within the limits
reflected [a.gain, in ,this wi"se: " The conditions of the act of desecrating a of th~ ?Jihiirasimii and outside the limits of ·the ?Jt'harasi·ma, a· site of a
s£ma are exceedingly difficult to fulfil. If (one) knows (thaLit is) the site of stone's throw [is entirely marked out into plots, each of the size of a bedstead,
the ex'istence of an ancient kha1)rJ,as£ma {or) the site] {I. 2) of the existence and at all the plots] (I. 8) five {or) ·six monks with the kammatJifoa, having gone
[of an ancient. mahtist'mfi, the ancient] st'ma [being known, the desecration of (and) stationed themselves in a continuous series, perform (the act of) des 1 e,craticm,
that ancient st'mti is effected {and) the new sz'mfi which is to be m.ade can fif there shoulcl. be an· ancient simti] on the s;te where (they were) ;stationeid,
be made.] 1 (l. 3) 1f {one) [does not] know (that it fa) ~Tthe site of the -( t 9) would [not :that ancient sz'mi be effectually desecrated ?] fo the matter
existence of an ancient kha1J,rjtisz"ma (or) the site of the existence of an of the desecration of this s·imfi, (it is) the ability to be ·stationed upon tihe
ancient mahasima,] the desecration of the ancient s'imfi is not effected {and) site of the ancient simfi that constitutes [the essential requirement: th 1 e fact
the new dmfi [cannot be made.1 If (one) is aware of the site of an ancient :of knowing of the existence of an anciei1t khafi-cfasfm_.a (or)] (1. IO) an ancient
kkaftrfasi"ma (or) the site o1 an ancient mahasz"mfiJ it is right to desecrate :mtehdsima, (or knowing) the boundaries of such ancient kha'J-rfasima. (ior) '9.11.'cient
(it)] (l. 4) (and) right to make a new si'mii.; (but) if (one) is not aware (of rmahtisima, is surely not the essential requirement. [In so far as some Th:er:as
it), it is neither right to perform desecration nor yet is it right (1. 5) to make ·:state (the case)] thus, '[the statement ,of those Theras isj (1. H) is right.'~
a new sfma. [Thus is it stated in the Atthakatha : ' On a site wherej it is
desired to make a ne'w s£ma, if the fact of the existence of an ancient sima l The Pali proceeds : "There a.re some Theras, ·wbe, in the case of such viharasimiLs,, weul-G
convene a Chapter of five .or six monks, would station them in a continuous row of places, which .are
is unknown, .[it is impossible] to perform the desecration of (such) ancient
eac"h abou.t the size of a bedstead, and whose distances are determined by the falJ, a:U round, of
s£ma so as effectually to· desecrate (L 6) (it} {and it is impossible .effectually. 'Stones thrown, .frrist from the ex:Wemity ef the roih0.1 1asimii,, aru:l 'then tow.a:rds the inside and oa,tside of
stma.'P its limits, and would successively' desecrate an avippavfisasimi and a samanasamvasakasima. If ejther
to make a new
a kha?;;/.asima or a mahasima exists on that vihara, the monks, standing, as they do,in the midst of
the sinilis, w.Guld, from a maiicaWiana, oertain~y desec;rat~that s.imfi, and :the gamasimci would r..emrun,.
In· this ,matter, it is not -essential to know the sima .Qr its extent. But· it is necessary· for the iecjters
of the kammavac?i to say~ 'We shall desecrate the inside of a simri.,' (and. to act accordingly). It is
I Or, following B, ''come into existence." ,. 'Stated in the attfiaka.thd that those who are aware df the existence of a 'khatJ,t/asimll, bu1t net o.f that
''If,
s In place of the foregoing passage the Pali has: at the place of de$eoratfon, the existel\'ee t>P an avippavilsasima, are qualifi~d to effect both ae·seeratiion and consecr.ation, iancl -.that thus.
of both kha'IJ.{lasimii and mahiisi'mii, called avippavasasima, is known, a simii may be desecrated or although the extent of a mahasima is unknown, desecration may he effected. On . the authority of
consecrated. If, however, the existence of a kha1pJasimii is known, but not that of a mahasima, called tbis statement,. they say. that at any s·e*lected spdt 1on the r<emaining gamasima, 'it is.·appropriat~ to
avippavasasima; a .Sima may be de.seora.ted or consecrated. lf, on the other hand, the 1existence of a :qcmsecrate th~ .two kinds of si1nas an!il to iperEprm .ithe up"tJ'SampacUt pr-Oin~tirm ciin~ su~h 'othtr
mahasima, called avippavasasima, is known, but. not that of a khatJ.ef.asima, i.t is only by s.t~nding on ,'If ' ·ceremonies. This dictum appears to be correct;· but it should be accepted after due ·enquiry.''
such places as the premises of .a cetiya, a ...b odhi tree, or an uposatha haH, which are undoubtedly out~ 2 The Pali proceeds: " The interpretation of these Theras~ therefore appear to be correct. 'With
1
side (the limits of a.a avippavasa~im,ii.), that a sima may be desecrated ; but by no means ;ea.11 ·it be , regard 1. however, to the desecration of .~ sima with an ordinary, but not a great, amount of~ exertion,
consecrated, If, however, a simtl is c0nsecl'\ated, there will be a junction of s.imas, and a viharasimil by those, to whom the performance of the ceremony i'S difficult becaus~ of their not knowing the
will ~ -tr,~'ns{ormea into an avih~rasimii. Therefore, the ceremony of desecration sh.ouid not be per. . · existeqce of an ancient simd or its extent, it is said in the at~ha~atM • 'If 'both classes of sima. are
fermetiJ. U 1he 'f:xistence of b.oth kinds of #mas is u,nkn.own, Reither de5ecratioro nor consecration not known, 'the sima should not be desecrated or consect-ated.' Thi!! dictum does nt>t, however,
be
should effected. .... A simi .i s invalidate.d · by meaas of the . kammavaca, o:r :through. the decleasi:on :of tne~n to infficate that, ·although the existence ·of the si7n6 to be desec·rated m'ay not. be known, H
the .religfon, ,or ~ea:use th:ose, wao do not know a $.ima, :are incom[!>etent te recite the kamm:avaci. great exertion is put forth that slmii win :not be desecrated, U, ~t. a· p1ace where a new· 'Simi is
Therefore, clleseot:.~.ion smo.µld nothe effected. Because it is said that it is only when (the different 'd·e~ired to ;he consectated, the existence o'f an ancient sitn'i; or its e·xtent, is unknown ; if, at s~lecte:d
·classes of simas) are welhknown;, ,that desecratiC»n or consecrati~n may be effected, monl<s d:esidng t6 spots within and without the places suitable for the fixing 6£ the boundary-in.arks of the ·ne\\f din~ to
.desecrate a s/.mil,, and who are aware of either the existence of an ATtcient simii {)f ~ts .extent, m:ay, 'by be conS'ectatetlJ a'l'lOtmetits of spaceJ each meas·ufing ibouCfour or live cubits in length, are tna:rked
s.tationing there ·cdu·Jiy qualHietli ftlionks, dese.crate an ancient sima or consecrate. a new on.a. T:be but in tows or groups; "'and, if duly qualified monks ~tation themS'elv~s in t!h'e ~it 'Continuous 1'()'\\;S.
J,nterpre.taden ,ap.peal"s to be tba.t, 'if the e~tent of an ancient simfi is unknown_, that sima oan~n:(l)l;b,e of the allotments of space, and effect the desecration of the .rima, how can there be no desee·ravian
•ciesecrate<;l., ·09r Cal} a n'w· fJne :" ,eM~l\'3te1;i/' of the existing ancient simli. at that place, and how can only the .•g ama-s~ 1ll>'e net.,,leit,,~ ,.~

\
\
I
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA f
VOL. Ill PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS
. " ,,·Inasmuch as it is thus stated in the Vimatinodanr, if in consecrating
• [(On) Sunday, the· eighth of the waxing (half) of the month of Marga:·
this new slmii (one) is able to mark out (the .site) [entirely] into plots [and
sir~a the consecration of the si'mii was performed.] 1 1. 20) At the time when
J ( (
desecrate every one ·of such plots, 1. 12) . would the desecration [of an the consecration was to be performed, the following were the arrangements
ancient s£mti,] if one existed, fail to be effected?" Having thus decided, [His
made for the consecration :-
Majesty Ramadhipati had arrangements made for] the ceremony of desecration
The extent of the site, where the st"ma was to be made, having been
in the [following] manner :-
marked, (at) the corners (facing) the four quarters [four 1 boundary stones
[The extent of the land which was] (1. 13) to be made the inside of were planted. When] (1. 2 t) these four middle stones [were planted,] it being
the· s£mii was marked out with lime into quadrangular plots, each of five
an advantage to ·· have eight boundary stones with a view to making (the
cubits (square), and outside the land where the sz"mii was to be made,
plan) other than a four-sided figure, the middle of each (side) [was made] to
around 1 ~ (1. 14) Then . His Majesty
••••••••••••••••••••••• bulge somewhat (outwards) [and stones were planted (there also). Bringing]
invited our lords the fourteen monks and caused (them) to effect the ~ese­ a
(I. 22) rope, (they) ran it round from stone to stone, 9 and along the course
cration of a sima. At the time of the desecration (ceremony), for each of
of the rope a line was drawn on the ground. The line [having been] drawn,
[the plots, our lords took their seat within the plot] (l. 15) and (read) the
[outside the line] (I. 23) in order to make manifest the limit of the site of the
iammaviicti at seven spots, 'at each spot once. Having recited (it) seven sima, a trench was made in the ground, of the breadth of one. span (and)
times, [(they) passed on to another plot. In this wise, from the initial plot
the depth of one span. When the trench was made in the ground, [all trees,
of] (L 16) the first [row] up to the final plot of the first row was desecrated bamboo's, grass (and) rubbish which would cause confusion of S'lrnas to arise,]
and then (they) passed on to the final plot of the second row. [From the
(1. 24) both outside the boundary-marks and inside the boundar,y-marks where
end of the second row (they) went on with the desecration till (they) arrived
the new s£mii was to be, (they) cleared away altogether, and (they) made the
at] (1. 17) the initial plot of the second row.9 From the initial plot of the trench into a wet ditch,4 (filling it with water. When this had ~een done,
second row, after desecrating (it), (they) passed on (and) desecrated. the
the boundary stones] (L 25) were adorned with gold and vermi"lion,6 and were
initial plot [of the third row. In this manner, from the initial plot (they)]
wrapped up (and) decorated with red (and) white cloth. In order to show
( 1. 8) proceeded in a forward order (and) desecrated each plot up to the
1
desecratin~
.end (and) from the end plot (they) came down in reverse order
I Sunday, 24th November 1476. It would seem from the Pali that this first day was taken up with
each plot until [{they) reached the initial plot. When all the plots
the demarcation of the site, the actual ceremony of consecration only beginning on the following day.
had been exhausted, the simii] (l. 19) was (completely) desecrated. (As 'Fhe Pali passage corresponding with our text has:. ''On the 8th day, Ramadhipatiraja, i,n order to
have the ceremony of consecrating a simi performed, Visited the place in the morning and had the
for) the desecration of this sima, (it was .on) Saturday, the seventh (day of
preliminary arrangements carried out in the following manr1er ;-On the outside of the site selected for
the} waxing (half) of the month of , Marga~ir~a a that (its) desecration was consecrating the sima, and facing the four qQ.arters, four boundary;.marks were fixed; in order to
t.. bring into prominence the advantage derived from fixing the boundary-marks ~n a form other than
concluded.
that of a four-sided figure, each of the additional four boundary•marks was placed at the end of a
line drawn from the middle of the line joining each of the two corners facing the four quarters.'1
This explains our text, which is somewhat obscurely, worded.
I About half a line is missing here on the stone and also i~ the MSS. The Pali su~plies the s The MSS. have "eight." It may be that there ts a lacuna after " four quarters u and that a
lacuna 1 '' On the inside of the places, suitable for fixing the boundary•marks of the new. simi to be short passage stating that four stones were planted (at ·the corners) preceded the statement that
consecrated· allotments of space of five cubits each in leogth and the same in breadth were marked eight_ were planted in all. At any rate the MS. ·text cannot be right as it stands, and .t he emendation
out and ailotments of similar dimensions were ma'J'ked ouf also on the outside; and by i t m a e l~ a i n z ~ ed of a js supported by the Pali version.
lin: drawn with liiye or chalk, rectangular spaces in rows were marked out." (I have the a Or '' from the face of one stone to the face of the next/' the word rendered "face '' being
missing words.) literally ''chest, breast." Cf. ·K 4.
2 The Pali proceeds : ''When the number of rectangular spaces had been exhausted, the 4 This_rendering is somewhat conjectural as the reading and meaning of the words g-a1'1'1. tanam
ceremony of desecrating a ·umd was . concluded." It says nothing about· a third row of such (~r kanam, which would, however, be an. unusual spelling for kanam) are doubtful. The Pali has :
spaces. "The small trench was smeared with· mud, and some water was placed in it."
a Saturday, 23rd November 1476 .. 5 Literally, " red drug_,,

•
EPIGRAPHIA BiRMANICA
PART II} MON !NSCRIPTFONS
•
honour to Buddha, {at) every [boundary stone, umbrellas, streame ' rs, ta~ers, l
(some) secret place, a strict search was ordered to be macde. ( Tmis) hav.ing
vases] (l. 26) full of decorations of plantain leaf,9 candles,9 cloths, .......4
'been done, the men (l. 31) who ran on foot (and) the men who were mounted
(and) mats were set outside the boundary-marks.
on horses (would) cause (them) to run away (and would) ,follow1 after (them)
(This) having been done, (the king) caused our lords to prnclaim 6 the
(and then) say to the persons who kept watch, " There are no monks within
!ai
bou.ndary-marks. [Our lords proclaimed] all the eight stones [three ·times 8
this gamakhetta, (and) there are no other monks who would enter into (1. 32)
until they arrived at the slone] (I. 27) which they had first pr.oclaimed 7 and
this gamakhetta. We are keeping a a very sec.ure watch.'' When the men
then. our lords entered into the building in the middle of the si"ma, took their
1eturned saying this, their arrival caused· our lords to consecrate the simii.'
seat· on the hatthapasa and remained (there).
When our lords recited' (I. 33) the kammavticii, in order to secure literal
[Then,8 along the trench of the gamakhetta,] (1. 28) outside the gama
exactness, two (of them} recited (it) each time,15 (and) when the full seven"·
khetta., men on foot, men mounted on elephants, and men mounted on horses
times had been completed, and (it) was stated that the S'imti had been
took up their stations going all around, flags, [banners (and) pennants were
consecrated, drums,8 xylophones/ c1arions, (l. 34) trumpets, and conch-shells
set up (and) arranged, drums, conc.h-shells, and] (1. 29) clarions were
were ordered to be sounded thrice, (and) thrice were shouts ordered to be
distributed 9 at intervals ; in order to prevent other monks, 10 who <might be)
raised. Inasmuch as this sz"ma that had been · (thus) consecrated was
walking on tlie roads, from entering within the limits of -the gamakhetta,
consecrated by our lords \:\-·h~ went to the· island of Ceylon and received the
( 1. 30) a secure watch was ordered to be kept ; and in case q,tber monks,,,
upasam;ada ordination in an udakukkhepast·ma arranged (1. 35) on the Kalyav.t.
afraid to enter within [the limits of) the ·[gtimakhetta,} should be remaining in
River, (it) was called the Kalyaoisima; His Majesty gave (it) the name. . 8
After the ·arrival of these monks from the island of Ceylon and before
1 I have followed the L.M. Dictionary explanation of dhup snau, ''packet of tapErs/' -But the (1. 36) the consecration of this s'itna, some of our lords of th~ c1e~gy who
P~li here has '' lamps, incense,» and it seems at least possible that our MS. text meant " ince11se.,
tapers.'' were leading, members (of the Order), owing to their great devotion to the
2: The Pali bas : cs water-pots, whose mouths were covered a.nd adorned with white water-lily religion (said)! "That the upasampadif ordination which is observed amongst
flower!!! .."
3 Or "lamps." ~ us should be subject to doubt, (is), not (a) proper (state of things.). Let us
4 The meaning of plat is undetermined. It may go wjth ')'at and in that case be the specific receive the upasampada ordination at the hands of.9 our fords who have
1
name of some particqlar kind of cloth.
o The meaning of skaJ1 has been inferred from the Pali, which says : '' The preliminary an:ange
ments connected with the consecration of the simil having thus been carried out, the nine Theras anP.
nursu~"
the five young monks we.re invited~ and the eight boundary-marks, commencing with the one in the. , • l I have taken buik to he a variant spelling· of bak,. "to follow, I am not $Utlie that my1
Eastern quarter, were successively proclaimed." . . ver~ion ~f this whole passage represents the real construction, which may be that the men on ~atrol
6 The MS. text is cprrupt here, but the Pali version justifies the above rendering. It has: ''The "were o~dered to run after'' (and drive away) any vagrant monks. It depenas on the sense assigned
procfamation was continued till the first boundary~mark,. which had previously been pro.claimed, wa~ to kuiw.
reached~ In .this manner the boundary•rna,rks were proclaimed three times.'' · ~ I take the taya Cilf the text to·. be merelx an error for yata. (as to· which .c f. 1. 2.9 ~,, sup:ra). '
., Th.~re is no~hing in the Pali to corresponQ with what follqws (to the end of the P,aragraph), and. s Or, '' we kept~" , ·
consequently there is nothing in it to throw li¥ht 011 the word panrJ:aJ;. It has l:)een suggested thqt it 4 L,i teral·l y, "Thus s·a ying the' me· n w·h o ret·u rned arri•v ed , wh · o '' •( or '' wh 'i:c h .'." ') ' . ''' cau·s '. "..' d, , ,• e tc•
mean$ ''apart" (cf. 1",...M. s{lal;.) and, we should. then take it to mean tha.t the monks took theit' seat But the passage might be rendered alternhtively, ''when the men returning and saymg thus arrived,
3, lll.CliSUred .d fotance apart. our lords were caused to consecrate the sima." This nndering, howevei:, takes no account of tile ma.
s The Pali is S,Ome,what c;lifferent; ''On the following mQrning, flags and streamers were planted The general; sense is determined by the Pali: 1': It was only when the absence,~£. other m~nks w o a; n ::
at various places around the gamakhetta belonging to the minister Naras-ura;. drums, conch-.sheUs, a.nci that g~1rnakhettd.. had been reported, that the ka111:ma11acii. _relating to the consee~atton. of a sim.a
other musica,l . instrum~nts were sounded ; and the guards, mounted m.en, an_d swif~ m<:;ss,e.ng~rs, who read !leven times with proper intonation, and that the ceremony of consecration wp concltJEi'@..
h.ad been stationed forl/lthe purpose of stopping the progress of tr<:i.ve.llimg mon}<s., and. of CRi111sln~ Throughout .t his whole. passage the. Pali. is much tbe more concise .v ersion.
other \nonks r,esiding'on that g~makhetta to be sp~edily excludecl from it, ·were sen,t QUl t.o l>,atrol aU 6' Ap_parently together, simultaneously. The PaU onsits tOis- detail. .
rou l n l tJ d C T i f t h - • . o " B ug A " h ' g s f t h n to o ,, th P 0 e ! il 4 i d 7 a . h t t a e 4 s , 8 s , • • ~ a s e n o d J u , : n ! W ~ d J e a 4 i .s , l u ' p ln l r / r a 1 d 1 1 o & n , . n ot think "'t 4 ~ !;ta mad@, $0 beat that. ~~n~e~ B 7 e . T C A ' h f s . e t F o P a 5 k l 0 lo i > , o n ., m . e ,: t i s t ~ s s F . " 5 H 5 i s n . • • " • • _ name.u
t Literally.,~ in the J»re&em;e1 oM'.
" 'lfi-·
I \ .

PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 177
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. Ill
Th~n
thus, commanded that a search (and) enquiry (should) be made. ·
received 1 the upasampada ordination from the island of Ceylon." 9 Having
our lord Parakkamabahusamithera 1 came (and) thus addressed His Majesty:
spoken in this wise, many a time, (they) came (and) petitioned His Majesty
" (There is) a monk named the lord Suva:r,u;,iasobhai;ia,1 a worthy monk, one
Rama.dhipati.a ·
who received the upasampadii. ordination of the succession of Ceylon, a man
[His Majesty on his part spoke thus to our lords : "In the case of
who is modest, remorseful, an observer of the precepts, a dweller in the
monks who possess faith desiring to receive the upasampadii. ordination at the
forest, with few desires, easily satisfied, eradicating his sins, an observer of
hands of the monks "Yho received the upasampadti ordination of the
the dhutangas." (Thus) saying, (he) informed His Majesty.
Sinhalese, let them receive it ! Let those who have not faith (and) do not
-Then His Majesty gave orders to go (and) ·invite that monk, (and)
desire to receive the itpasampadii. ordination of the Sinhalese remain (as they
when our lord came into the presence of. His Majesty]
are)! To those who wish to receive the 1tpasampadti of the Sinhalese
succession I cannot say 'Do not receive (it)!' (and so) forbid -(them);
(and) to monks who do not desire the upasampadii. of t~e Sinhalese H
succession I cannot say 'Receive (it}!' (and) vielently use them. Let my
thus did His Majesty [enquire (of him): ''When my lord went to the island
lords carefully consider the intention of the Vinaya, which is the will of the
of Ceylon and received 'the upasampadii. ordination, in what si·ma did my lord
exalted Buddha.· If the upasampadii attaching to my lords' appears doubtful
receive it, how numero~us was the Chapter (that ordained you), who acted as
to (your) minds, let my lords receive the upasampadii. of the Sinhalese. If
upajjhiiya, who acted _as] (l.2) acan'ya? Since [your reception of the
the u.pasampadii attaching to my lords is pure (and) is not doubtful in (your)
u;asampada of the Sinhalese, how many years (have) now (elapsed)?"
minds, let my lords remain (as you are)." Thus did His Majesty Ramadhi·
Thus did His Majesty ask, (and) the Thera on his part replied in this wise
· pati reply to the lords of. the clergy.
to His Majesty: " We re~~ved the upasampadii. ordination of the Sinhalese]
Then His Majesty Ramadhipati reflected in this wise :-" Some of the
(1. 3) in the udakukft-h~sima [which they arranged in the great Kalambu
clergy who are leading men ,s ay (they) have the desire of obtaining the
jatassara, fhe Chapter (numbered) thirty-one 9 our lord Vanaratana s that
upasampada ordination of the Sinhalese. (But there is) a condition in the '
great ' sangharaja,' acted as] (I. 4) upajjhaya, ou ) r lord Rahulabhadda,8 [who is
book of Vinaya stating that h()th for the pabbaffii. and the u;asampada
now sangharii.ja, acted as acariya . . Since I received the upasampada ordin
the (office of) upafjhaya is the basis. 4 Now inasmuch as our lords who
have returned from Ceylon have not yet completed ten years (since~ their ation of the Sinhalese, twenty-six years have (elapsed).', Thus did our lord
reply] (1. 5) to His Majesty. His Majesty, on hearing [our lord's saying, was
ordination), (theyY are not yet qualified to be upaf.jhaya. That being the
exceedingly glad anti His Majesty invited our lord (in this wise) : " Inasmuch
case, how can we proceed, so that these monks may obtain the ·u pasampada
as (there ar~)] (1. 6) very many [monks, who possess pure faith and desire]
ordination of the Sinhalese succession, to get (some one) who is fit to be "-'l. .
to receive the Sinhalese upasamjada ordination, [I do desire to make my lord
their upa1/haya and make him their upaJ.jhii.ya, so that they may receive
· the upajjhii.'Ya and enable them to' receive the upasampada ordination. It is
this upasamjada ordination of the Sinhalese?" His Majesty, having reflected
for my lord alone to work for 6 the benefit (and) advancement of] (l. 7) the
l Literally, perbaps," ce.ceived (and) brought."
2 The Pali gives the above speech, slightly expanded, as the address. made by the monks to the 1 I have followed the Pali version in the spelling of thes~ names.
king, adding at the end of it: "and thus shall our ordination become pure." It says nothing about ia _The Pali has: '' and at the hands of a Chapter composed of innumerable monks."
•'many a time." s I follow the Pali in the spelling of. these names. ·
a Here ends Face G. ' 'The Pali has: ''the ex·Mahasa~gharaja." This is implied in our Ms': text.
4 The Pali proceeds: ''and i't is decreed by the Blessed One that such an office should be 5 The literal meaning of the MS. text, which is probably corrupt (as the two MSS. differ) would
conferred only' on qualified monks, who, by reason of their having been t_en years in orders, have seem to be (in B):. ''My lord alone causes" (or "will cause") "the benefit," etc. It seems ~ossible,
acquired the stafos of a Thera.. But these·· Theras received .their upasampadii. ordination this year however, that mwai here represents E.M. me-y (not moy), in which case the sense would be; "Let
only; and not one of them, therefore, is qualified for the office of _upajjhaya. Whence, can we get .. my lord look'' (or, ''see,,) ''to the benefit;' etc. The A· reading is .c ertain1y wrong,
such· an upajjha.ya P ," etc.
12

•
EPIGRAPHIA B:XRMAl~HCA [VOL. 'IU :P AR 'if l.t] MON l!NSCRIPTIQNS
reiigion. [Pray,] my lord, be seated .together with (~hem)! " 1 [Thus saying, • When 1the clergy] Cl. 14) of the island of Ceylan were about ·to corifer the
His Majesty invited (1him ). Our _lord on his part, ~aying, " It· is ·indeed a
U,flasampada .ordination upon us, {they ·said): 'The practice of us, .the :clergy
i:eligious act, certainly we will take our seat (and perform it),"] 2 (1. 8) ·gave
·who dwell in the island (of Ceylon, ·is this), [When we, Jhe .clergy who
~his) .consent to His Majesty. -
dwell in the island of Ceylon, confer the i!rpasampada ordihatian on persons
At the time when the s£ma had been consecrated,8 our lords the leading who come from afar, (we) confer (it} after ·dealing ·with ·them :in this wise.
monks, who desired to receive the . upasam,jada ordination (I. 9). of the
.(You ask),' How?'.] (1..15.) First (we) l[give] ,(them) white 'robes and establism
Sinhalese [and] had [spoken to] His [M·ajesty (to that effect)] ;previously,
them .in the condition of laymen; and then. -when theJ :are established i·n ,the
appFoached His ·Majesty. His Majesty, [together with all the monks, went
condition ef laymen, [(we) cause them to make the cenfession saying,· 'I am
down to the KalyaI)isima,J (a.nd) (1. IO) His Majesty caused [the monks] who
a layman,' making a confession of their.,desire.] (1. 16),(This is :done for} ne
had returned from Ceylon to be invited to enter into the Kalya\).isima. [His
.other reason )(than that) the essence of ·the recepfom 0£ the upasamjadii
Majesty (also) caused] our lord SuvaI)\J.a[sobhana, who was to act as
ordination (is) the separation from the condition of laymen ~by first being
upajjhiiya, to be invited (and) brought into the Kalya1;1.isima. 4 Then] (l. I 1)
made .a _sama?Jera. '(and then) in the condition .of sa~a·',iera :having the] (l. . ,17.~
in this wise did His Majesty on his part speak to · the clergy who had upasampadii ordination conferred. :fN owj 1rny lords :~ay] !YOU desire -~to
returned from Ceylon:. '' Our :lords, all these monks, [are qesirous of receiving
receive.) the .upasampada _erdination. .[If] your :deshre [is :genuine, ~you~ will
the upasampadii ordination of the succession of the .S inhalese. May.. my
first be establis.hed in the condition of laymen and ·then :attain tlile~ _:eaciles·il·
lords J(L 12) vouchsafe to confer the upasampadii ordination (upon them) 1 '' astical state .of] (l. .'18} siima11eras, (so· that) we may :be, able · to, :·.confer the
Then the clergy from Ceylon answered in this wise : '' [Your] Majesty u.pasa,mJadii oidination (Qpon you). [Your statement, 'We are· Jayrnen,' is· an
[having :exhorted (us) to go (and) receive the upasampadii. · ordination· of the
announcement that in making your present professi:on :y.ou{are:)J (1. 19) ,sinoer~,
Sinbalese, we went (and) recei:v.ed it. As regards] (1. 13} the procedure
so that you may obtain the ujasampadii ordination.
according to which the clergy of the island of Ceylon conferred the
"'In time to come [(it may happen that by reason of your) colleagues,
upasampadii ordination upon us, 0. ·king [and all the clergy, ·pray listen 1
teachers, ,upajjhiiyas, (0r) disciples finding fault with ·(you, you) may 'Change
1
(your) minds (and say), 'We will follow {our) original upasamjadii ordin
d~lig l ht T e h d, e . an k d in g in 's v i . t s e p d e ec th h e is th e n r o a t to g i a v s e s n u m in e t t h h e e - o P ff a i l c i e , w of h ic u h p a m jjh er d e y l a y s in ta t r e e s s pe th c a t t o f h e th e " w m a on s k · s e x d t e re s m iri e n l g y ation,] (1. .20) .we will not follow this new upasamJ.ada ~ardin~tion ! ' ,[(But} w·e
to receive the upasampadtl ordination." do not wish to let (you) reckon by (your} 'Old seniority. If you are. sincere,
:a The Pili has the Th era's speech differently, thus: · '' Mahar~ja, the th1ras of old, in wh•m in] (f. 21) receiving the new upasamjadii otdination, .[we wish (you) to make.
human passion was extinct, disregarded their own interest in effecting the purification of th7 teligion
in, foreign couritri.es. Ma.haraja, ·l will follow in the footsteps .o f these holy men, and even hke them, profession (that you)] will reckon according to ·:the new senionity iuntil the end
1
will purify the religion/) . . . - ! • . • ~[of your days.t11 Thus did the] (I. 22) clergy df the :is,land of Ceyldn reply
·s The Pali proceeds; ''the monks.1 who had .faith, and were learned and able, and who,, being
to us.; and all of us, who [went to receive the ujasampada otdinatfon, said
aware of the impurity of their previous upasampada ordination, were desirous of receiving the form of
eL
ordination that had been handed down through a succession of the ordained monks 'Of Ceylon, that we were established in the condition of faymen a:nd] 23,) had 'to: make
re~uest; ~aving kin~, sai~
approached .the king and renewed their · fortner approached . the they :
a profession· as aforesaid. Then our lords 1gave (us.) monastic robes again,
'.Mahbaga:, 'no.w that a sima has been consecrated m a valid manner} and that a mr:znathera,. who as
qualified for the office of U:PaJ'.jhilya,· has been· appointed~ w~ are prepared to receive th~ Smhalese (and) when we had become ecolesiastics-, made .u s p1m£ess )the {three) ··refuges
form of the upasampada ordination.' On the morning of Monday, the g;h da~ ~Hhe waxing ~8:,t~ o! [(and) the (ten) precepts,. and so madeu~ siima?J0:ras, ~and finaHy)}'.('l. -~4)
the month of Margasit~'a (c MondayJ. 25th November 14 76) the kmg v1s1ted the Kalya91s1ma
accompanied by the le~ding monks. The nine theras, togethe 1 r with the five young monks~ and our lords conferred the upasamp.adii ordina~ion upon us.'' Thus· .(sa,jid:~ .. our
Suva~9as0bhaQathera, 1 who .. was qualified .for the office of upajjhdya; wf:re invited ·and seated m the lords, who· ·had 'returned from Ceylon.
Kalyafisima ". . . . . .. . . . . .
Sinh 4 a l T es h e e fo P r a m li o p f r o ·t c h e e e d ' s u ; p as " a S m e p t a t d i i n J. g a a r s d i i d n e a t~ t o h n e , l t e h a e d i k n i g n g m a o p n P k ,r s o , ac w h' h e o d w th e e r e · t hl d 'f e ·a s s i ro w u l ~ ie o h f a r c e l ce V ~ J v S ! l n f . e g d H tt r h e . _ . 1 'Fhe Pali version of the above ~passage is in 'stibst'ance··siniif~r, though_ ;sonl'e:det~ils: uiff~: 1'Bttif .
i!lland of C~ylgn; am.l haviag ~ppn~~~htd gbtm! 1aia tc;dh~m tlni:~.t° -IC~ fot ·. wh'ait :f oUo\Vs · tlie 1 Pali m"ereJy ,·nas.: · '' It .w as ·.only •when ,w e·· had·· confa(QTed .. ourS'efve's·it~ .. the 'clistdrtt'
of t1*· •tlffih'l.i!!rertw of·. Geyl'on~ :t hat 'they· 'cori·ferred · t'h'e"ttfrail'.8~*f~l· ardih~tfutP <1rr lilf'j
,

•
PART ll) MON INSCRIPTIONS 181
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ('VOL. III
'} ·~
'' sadhu H] after each conferment !of the upa~samJada ordination, · (I. 31) "His
[Then our lords who were the leading monks spoke in this wise:] (1. 25).
Majesty provided [ drumsJ1 At the time when the sun was going to set,
" All [of us], inasmuch as we have professed our faith, we desire to rec~ive,
·having arranged for leading nobles (and) scribes (to remain in attendance at
the upasampada ordination of the succession of the Sinhalese, [we will act] 1
the ordination), (and) for lamps, His Majesty [went up to the city. When
in · accordance with the custom [of the Sinhalese." Thus said our lord.s.
the five days were completed,] (the number of) 8 (1, 32) leading monks who
The clergy who had returned from] (l. 26) Ceylon and all the other clergy
had received the itpasampada ordination was two hundred (and) forty-five.
being (thus) in agreement, from Monday, the ninth of the waxing (half) [of
Then His Majesty sent word 9 [to all these lords: "This Sunday, (being) the
Marga§ir§a,51 during five days, His Majesty Ramadhipati] (1. 27) remained
holy day of the full moon of the month of Marga§ir~a,] (l. 33) may our lords
seated 9 (and) our lords acted in accordance with the custom carried out by
who have received the new upasampadd ordination, (numbering) two hundred
the Sinhalese, beginning with [our] lord [the Mahasam(Dhammakitti. The
(and) forty-five, and our lords who have returned from Ceylon, [(numbering)
ford Thera SuvaI}I)a](l. 28)sobhanamahathera having been established as the
fifteen, two hundred (and) sixty in all, be pleased] (1. 34) to perform uposatha
perm.anent u/afjhaya, all the rheras who had returned from Ceylon, begin
in the Kalyal}.isima ! After our lords have performed uposatha, tet [us
,ning with Sirisail[ghabodhisami,4 acted in turn as acariy as in the confer
present] gifts by way ·of alms, [let us] (l. 35) present [ charitab]e offerings
ment of the upa](l. Jg)sampada ordination.
that are fit to be presented as gifts,] and (so) enable us to arouse feelings
During the day His Majesty Ramadhipati remained seated 1 (there),
of pious satisfaction (in our own) mind I " In this wise did His Majesty
(and>' [His Majesty continually caused] gifts of boiled rice, water, food,
send word to the clergy, [and early on the holy day of the full ~oon of the
necessaries, betel-leaves (and) [jlamaka 1 water to be provided for the clergy.]
month of Marga§irs.a His Majesty,] (I. 36) together with a retinue (and) with
(I. 30) His Majesty also appointed scribes who sh5>Uld write down (and) keep
all the ministers (and) generals/ hav~ng gone down (to the Kalyit)isima),as
a register of particulars ; 7 (and for the purpose of eliciting the acclamation
spread mats for th·e two hundred (and) sixty clergy [who were to perform
uposatha in the Kalyaoisima, and His Majesty remained (there).] (I. 37) Then,
when the two hundred (and) sixty clergy had arrived, (they) · performed
l The Pali has ; '' Then the large number of leading monks said ; ·' Reverend Sirs, since you
uposatha. At the conclusion of our lords' performance of· the uposatha, a
yourselves received the pure form of the up~sampada ordination only aft.er co?formin~ to the c~sto~
of the mahdthe'l'as of Ceylon, even in this wise, do we, who are replete with faith, desire to receive at. [breakfast and fore-noon] meal [ (with) cakes, preserved fruit, (and) food of
Therefore 1 we are prepared to receive the pure form of the upasampadfi. ordination after conforming divers] (1. 38) kinds, (together with) yamaka 6 water, were served to our lords.
ourselves to. the custom of the mahatheras of Ceylon.' "
11 See l. s, supra., note. · The Pali introduces the date in ·the next paragraph. • (TQ) each of the clergy [two sets of] cloths [(and) mats, a box for areca·
' That is, ''was present." Not in the Pali. nut~ and a bottle of lime,] areca-nut (1. 39) [slicers,} a napkin, a paper fan,
4 The Pali does not specify who·. began, but merely says '' with the nine Theras who had returned
from Ceylon as a.cariyas, the kammavdcil being read by two of these Theras in turn.11 I"
•
I Cf. 1.. 27, supra.
6 [ · follow the form used· in I. 38, infra. The MS. version here uses the fuller form yiimaki.la, but l As to the word klo', cf. F 55 n. The Pili has "drums, conch-shells, and other musical
instruments were sounded."
I suspect that the .scribe is responsible for the alteration. The L.M. form is ydma and it seems not
unlikely that the scribe wrote kala in the sense of '' time" (to go with the gah that follows it). The si I follow the .Pali here, as the MS. text seems to be corrupt. (For tim tala I should prefer to
read tlla). The Pali specifies the five days as being ''from the 9th to the 13th.''
original form is PalC}'iimakalikam, explained by Childers. as" said to. mean drink~bles t~ken by pr~ests
, 8 fter midday." Halliday ex:plains yiima as n a sweet. dunk made with any sourish fruit such as hme, s The Pali fixes the date of the king's invitation being· given to the monks as '' Saturday, the
tamadnd, etc., and plenty of sugar." . . 14th" (whieh was Saturday, 3oth November 1476).
7 The word ca,'Won (L. M. ea,o n} is explained as meaning, litera1Jy., " a footstep," tha.~ ·being the 4 This is the original sense of senapati. But it may well be 'that at Pegu in the ISth century (as
method of measuring one's shadow in order to determine the time of day on which s9me specially in modern Siam) the word was differently applied and denoted civil officials, such as. ministers~
important occurrence takes place. This method is apparently used by .the monks to settle ,such 5 The Pali (which has· the words in parentheses) proceeds • "and, having ordered the provh1ion of
questions as relative seniority of ordination, in cases . where both were or~ained on the s.ame day and seats and of water for \\'ashing the feet, awaited the arrival of the newly ordained Theras and the
the matter resolves itself into one of ·hours or even mmutes.· Here the scnbes were to make an exact fifteen conductors of. the upasampaila. ordination cere.mony."
record of the proceedings of each ordination in turn, accordingly. !he Pali, however, merel~ sa!s !?at e Cf. b9,, supn1, n.
th•y ''were appointed to note the number of monks that bad received the upasampada, ord1nat1on.

EPI-ORAFH!:A iI·RM~NiCA t VOt.. Ut .. PrAR;r .I l,]
"an umbrella, an ahns-bow.:1, a: wate,r vesse11 (and} a hemmed: mat,1 were for ordination ar:e satisfact0.ry, a1)d then ordain :them. M;en, who are: branded,
•
given .. as q#ering:s to1 oµr lords. men who are. notorious as thievres (or) robbers/ men who are n@t perfect in
'tll~n,,in comp.liasppe. with the wash of all the clergy,] (l, 40).the:lord their limbs, men maimed (in) foet (or) maimed (tin) hand, _dwar;fed (or) of
Xh.~ra Suyan.:Qa$obhanama.batheria, who had acted as upajjhaya, was :given small s~atrire, (or) having crooked limbs/~ if people se~ such a man (they}
,the. name of 1'~lfal)~ti~a,mahather3. [Fr~om this. time forward 9 leading nobles ·would imitate, laugh at~ (.and) mock, not neverenc·e, (him). Do npt permit
{"9.ml}1 sc;rib~~ wen.~ (and)] (L,4 I) kept, watch .permanently in the sitn:ti.. T.he ,such persons to. be ordained I When (any) disciple~ ~esir.e to receive the
4i§cip}esd>f ot,tr. 1Gfds the two. hundred (and) forty-fiv:e. leading monks also u/a'Sampada ordination, do, not confer it prLvily: fir:st inform us· (so that· the
1
1wmt {apdrreceiv:ed the ordinatio.n ; [and. oth.er] leading dergy, [who! were of .case can be) examined in the sz'ma, here in .Pegu~ When definite arrange·
g.p9,c;l faith· (a;nd~. desiredi to: receive the up.a-sampadii or,dinatfon,.Jikew,ise went ments. have been made, we· will present t,he monac;tic: requisites; and, will
{and}xec.e:iV!ed. (it)~8 Then His- MajesJy Ramarlhipati4 sent wox-0 to all the su,pport the ordination. But if (you} ds;> net act thus, but confer the upa
clergy, a.nd .throughout 'the whole extent of this M8n country His Maiesty sampada ordi_nation privily, the mother (and) father of those who receive]
op;used the.m to make agreement~: (and) make appointments in this wise:
" W,hat is past, let. it pe done with ! (But) as for; other monks in the future,
after t\11:€5e; let all clergy who ordain them hereafter see that the candidates J
· such upasampada ordination, [as well as (their) relatives, and likewise their.
I· There are several doubtful' words in the above list of offerings. The Pili has; " The follo'Wling
. lay supporters, will be visited by us with royal penalties.
ar~icles -were then presented; to ·e aob. of the: Theras :-two couple$ of cotion cli:>this of : delicate te~ture
fol: making ticfvaya robes; a betel box with cover areca•nuts, nut-crackers, etc.;, a palmyra fan; an _ " Clergy 8 in gen·eral, (and) clergy who are your own d.isdple.s, (that)]
7 1
umbrella made of the leaf of the wild date-palm (phamix sylvestris); and an alms-bowl with cover (L 2) have been practising medicine and making a.living by tending people's
Md· start;:i." I haN'.~-rendered sa-,li; as in F· 46, b~ ''mats," L.M. snii, but conceivably it may. be the
SJ:?ecif1c name of the cloth.: cf. J 24,. where the MS. reading is sna, and M av. ·I have no a.utl\01ity for diseases, [suffer ,(them) not to do (so)! (Such as) practise astrology (and)
••sets" except the· Pili version, unless tau stands for it. The word ''box'' is· supported by the Pali make a living by observing people's nativities, suffer (them) not to do (so} !
(d~ J' 24), but I' have no othet: authority for it. The MS• text has k~om, evidently an error fbr
iwofls : cf.. .the reading o.n the stone (and also the MS~ itself) in the· paraitel passage J z4; a.nd cf. (Such as} m,ake a living by . . . . . . . . . . . 4 ( ot) by embroidering 6 tqe
N 8, 13. The rendering "arecn.•nuts;' though supported by the. Pali, is merely conjectural, being borders of women's skirts (or) the borders of robes, (or) by ......~ •
b:ased on.the assumption that the MS. palil (for phala, as in J 24):is here a substitute for the M&n ! ••
8 (or) ·making ornamental designs,7 (or) carving the handles of knives
s.11:t., .g,merioally ·"fruit;' but sp,ecifioally, "areca-nut.~' The expression "'hemmed" (mat), which does ••
not occur in the Pali version, is not quite certain. Cf. M 29, N 13. ·(f.nd)) (1. 3) cleavers, (and) [following] one (9r other), of sµch o~c:upatiori~
s The Pili has : ''Thenceforward, the king permanently stationed, in the neighbourhood M the
K,.Lyip~simj;, nc;>b}es and learned. men for the. p,urpose. of serving foo.d .a.nd furnishing the ''requisites'
to the ten Theras, headed by Kalya~itissamahathera, who, together with the five young monks, l The Pali adds: ''or escaped prisoners, or offenders ag~~nst. the. Government, or old a.nd
conducted the upasampada ordination ceremony, as well as to the lea~ing monks who had received , •• Elecrepit, or stricken with severe illness/' etc.
their upasampada ordination in the Kalya~isima,and to the numerous monks who presented them 9 The Pali adds: "or are, in short, persons whose presence vitiates the parisa."
selves for ordination. There were likewise stationed numerous scribes charged with the duty of a The Pali giyes a Jong list of various occupations (not always qµite the same as those in our
recording the number ~f monks ordained; and musicians to sound the drum, conch·snelll and other text) and reserves to the end the injunction against -a1Jowing offenders to live amongst the well
instruments· for th~. purpose of ~icit!ng the acclamation of· siitlhu at the· conclusion of each reading of behaved monks. It begins : "There are sinful monks who practise medicine; and o.thers, who devote
the leamma'Dil.cil relating to the uposanipadfi ordination, The ten Theras who conducted the ord1nation their time to the arfof numbers, carpentry, or the manufacture of ivory articles, or who declare the
. cere$ony{the tw() hundred, and forty-five monks who had receiVied such" ordination, and the numerous happy or unhappy lot of governors, nobles, and .t he common people.,, by examining their horosco~~
monks who were their disciples, conferred, day after day, with0ut interruption, the Sin~,alese foflm of or by reading the omeris and dreams that may have ,happened to them." .. .
the·,upasamp..ada o:r:f!lination on other leading monks; who cam·e and expres~ed a desire to, receive· it.'' " The. meaning of stuik and baciim (A dacam) has not been determined, . 5 Or, ''painting."
s Here; according:t() the MS. versia.n, ended Face H. _ · 6 The meaning of nibii has not been determined, thoug~ it appear.s Trom M u thatJt. wa~-~91'1~
•,TheJ~ili has; "Rimidhip.atiraja, of his own acco.rd and. with the approbation of the whole .kind of material suitable.for covering the outside of the ga# there described.. I.n thls p1act?ithe MS.
,Order~ despatched tbe,.foUowing message to all the monks residing iri the .M&n country,: ~ V.enera\:)fe text"inserts yiit before it, whicli lo.oks as if the copyist took niba to be the name of som.~· k~qd. Qf
Ones, there may be men, who, though wis1hipg to, receive the P,abbaj'/tJ. ordinatio~, are br11nded . ~loth. The word lak ·can . mean '' to paint, smear, overlay." · · .
criminals,' " etc, 1 The meaning of gamar has not beeri determined ,; pk<1u. literally;; 1'1-e~u' "~p)Yerl~

.
~
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 'PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS
[VOL. IU
ecclesiastical offences, and the sama11eras] 'should [also be caused to commit
live as laymen do [all the time-my lords, do not suffer monks who exercise
to memory the· paccavdkhana concerning the use of the four requisites.]
such _callings to dwell among you !' Monks who acquire material wealth,] 1
(I. 4) ' make a· living, by (the recitation of] the Dhamma with a loud voice, (I. 10) \Vhen the sama11eras have become fully qualified in (all) such learn·
ing,. our lords ~hould inform [us, (and) we (shall),_ support their ttpasampada.
(or) by . • . . . • . . . . . . . . . . .. 1 (or) acquiring (spindles of] cotton
ordination. May all the clergy on their part] (1. n) carry on [a C<?urse of
thread,3 [(or) by going down (into the fields) (and) acquiring paddy (and)
conduct ~onformable to the Vinaya and Sikkhapada] of the exalted Buddha
rice, (or) going to the edge of the forest (and) getting pepper,4 do · not
and pleasing (to him)! [Do not follow] a courS,e of conduct that is not in
harbour monks of that sort among you ! If monks associate with] (1. 5)
conformity with the Vinaya [of the exalted Buddha a9d is not pleasing (to
laymen (that are) gameste~s, dis~olute youths, servants of the king, com
panions of the king, men who spend their lives in drinking (and) playing him), my lords 1
[dice 5 ,-my lords, do not harbour (them) among ''In the past, in this M8n country, all the clergy, by reason of] (I. 12).
· • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
you L the existence of various sects, were in. a state of confusion, together with.·
" If monks are possessed of sincere faith and truly study (religion), impurity (and) corruption, as aforesaid. [From henceforward all the clergyJ
, (then), my lords, harbour (them)] (1. 6) among (you) t· When laymen come having professed true faith, have received the ujasamjada ordination of the
Sinhalese: (therefore) in conformity with the practice] (1. 13) of the clergy,
to (you), my lords, desiring to become monks, cause [them to learn to
wrhe, and when (they) have recited the alphabet, make them learn] (1. 7) who dwell in the island of Ceylon, in. wearing (their) robes and shaving
(their) hair, let my lords [follow (them in those matters also) I Let there be
the confession of faith in the Three Refuges, and the (ten) prece.pts.' When
(they) have become qualified, let my lords permit (them) to become monks. a single sect 1 Let not divers sects arise ! "
[" Sttma'l!eras who have attained the age of twenty (and) are desirous of Having caused a message in these terms to be drawn up,] (1. 14) His ·
receiving the upasampada ordination should first be thoroughly instructed in Majesty caused [investigation (and) search to be made] throughout the whole
the principles of the four parisuddh1:si/as, namely] (l. 8) the pat£mok!lhasam· extent of this Mon country [regarding monks who were possessed of go9ds,
varasila, £ndri1asamvaraslla, aj1vapar£suddhz"sila, and j<tccayasanni'sst.'tasila~ paddy (and) rice, male slaves, female slaves, cattle (or) buffaloes, (and) His
(1. 9) the sama?Jeras should first be taught [the book of the Patimokka from Majesty caused word to be sent (to them in this wise):-
beginning to end together with (its) meaning and interpretation,] the "My lords, give up (and) surrender] (1. 15) (your) goods, (if you] would
sa1Ha1Jeras should first · be taught the book of the Khuddasikka, [the observe (the conduct of)- [monks. If my lords fail to do (so), (then) with
sama1}6ras should first be caused to commit to memory the discourse &f (your) goods follow the life of laymen l •' Such was the message His
Majesty sent round to all the monks.
l The MS. reading pairaya ha m1 is corrupt, as is also the corresponding phatn1yilpaw in c er I. t a 1 i 9 ~ •• So.me monks surrendered (and) gave up] (l. 16) (their) goods and
infr•. In both places it should probably be amended into pa kriya pa..w; but it is not quite
whether this means "acquire material wealth" or ''practise unbecoming professions." observed [the (rule of) monks. Some monks did not surrender (their) goods,
i The meanin~ of slor l11bwor, and als~ the reading of this last, are doubtful. (but) with (their) goods had to abandon (the Order and enter) the lay state.
s The Pili has:. "There are monks who visit cotton fields and preach the Dhamma with long
In the case of monks who had committed grave offences · that were of
intQnf'tion, and trade in the cotton which they happen to receive as offerings." •
4 The meaning of tuin here .has not been determined, and the reading is. probably corrupt. ·The public notoriety,] (1. 17)* His Majesty made (them) all live in the lay state.
Pili has; "There are monks who visit fields of hill·ri?e, rice, barley, etc., and preach the Dhamma
field~ As for some monks who had ·committed grave offences [that were ·not of
an_d trade in 'the grain which they happen to receive·as offerings. There are monks who visit ·
of capsicum and preach t}le Dhamma, and trade in tlJe capsicum which they happen to .receive as P..~9li'6 notoriety, His Majesty expelled monks who were to that extent opep
offerings. There are monks who trade in many other. ways.u
to censure and reproach and made them liv·e as laymen,] (I. 18) all (of them).
- 5 The word lhat by itself should mean "cowries ''; ''dice" is khat pal). The meaningof l11n li
has not been determined; kin means "to go from place to t>lace." " Some monks who ·had committed serious offences that did not reach the
8 The Pali proceeds: "and eventup.lly,, Venerable Ones, confer the pabbajjd ordination on them.'' extreme point, [but were unable to put away] such degre~ of ·censure and
Our· text uses the word gam-1, '' monk,'J but clearly the noviciate is h.ere meant.

EPIGR.Ar>HIA BlR.MANICA
repr:da:eh as there was; [such ~onks: as· ~fonesaid] (L I 9) 1Hs Majesty, .e~pelled umbrella 1 ; an alms .. bowl 9 ; {and~ .a £an.8 In the case of the .. clergy P.n: whom
(andl made (them) all live as laymen.l Monks who\ practised medicine, wh(;) iti was .fitting Gto. ·confer .titles:, hlis Majesty in every ·case. confer.red' title$.~
practised astr.olowr, who'. made a living by emhroider:ing 1 the bordera of (I. 25J S-ahsequently Hi~ Maje-sty presented the (monastic} requisites :t9 the
·s'kir:ts\ (or) the borders :of nobes, [(or) by . . . . . • . . . . . . . • (or) . . • . ~iimaf}t4tras: who_. bad studie.d the Khudd.asikkha (and) the Patimc;>kkh~; and
.•..•....•.• /' acquir.ed; materfal wealth,4 the:se .monks who live~l sjnfol macle:. (.them~· reoeiv:e the upasam/a-da ordination, (U> th:e number .. of} si~
lives His Ma:jesty made to live 1n] (I. 20) the lay state, all of them. {hundred and one. The full total of the clergy dwelling within the b.ounds
Thus did His.· Majesty Ramadhipati entirely purge (C;l.nd) expe.l the o.f] '(1}. 2.6.} this, M3n [.countr1y1] who received the Ceylon upasamjxadii or1dination
impurity (;and) corruption ofi r-eligion that had arisen, and [caused all the was fifteen thousand, ~frx Iiundred (and) six.ty·si:&.
clergy who were in this M8n. country to form one single sect.] (I. ~ 1) All The matter of the purification; of the religion having been, thus a-cep~­
.the clergy, who dwelt in villages (or) i~ the forest, who live.d within this plished, [Hi~t Majesty Ramadhipati,. because he delighted] eKceedingly [in, the
J
M:8n country, from the (1. 22} year 838 of the Common Era, [the ninth of the religion (1. 27) of the exalted Buddha, ( expres.sed the hop.e) : " Now, that
W~Xiing (half) of the month of Margasirsa, the day (being) a Monday, .o ur the· r;eligion which is in this Man country has been freed from· impun1:ty
lor;ds] c:ame (and) received the upasampadti ordination of the Sinhalese until (and) corruption and freed from doub't, may [it be· able to endure for1 five
the year 84;1, of the Gommon Era, without intermission they kept .on. coming thousand years! "] (I. 28) (Thus) did (he} set his mind (and) do.'
(and) receiving (it). In: former times there was a king who, was possessed of :great, wealth
At that tirne our lor.ds [the clergy dwelling in the M8n country who (and) supreme majesty, who delighted [in the religion~ of the exalted. Buddha
received this ujasampadii ordination; amounted] (L 23) to eight hundred e~ceedingly, by name] (L 29) Asokadhammaraja.6 In the island of. Ceylon,
Ie.ading monks, {and} f·ourteen. thousand two hundred (and) siity .. five young agp.in, there was a king named S.iri•sanghaborlhi-Parakkamabahu, who also
monks.5 When all these eight hundred Iea<ling monks [had] received: the delig~ted exceedingly in the religion of the exalted Buddha,8 [(and) a king
(l. 2,4) uj~s,ampa.dii ordingtion; [His Majesty presented each of them with Vijayabahu who also delighted in the religion] (L 30) of the exalted Buddha
[two1 sets: of robe cloths 6 for making tt'c7tvara robes.; J a box~ for areca-nut.s, exceedingly,. (and) a king- Parakkamahahu who also delighted exceedingly
with betel-leaves (and) a bottle of lime; areca-nut slicers ; a napkin; an in the religion ·of the exalted Buddha. All these kings saw the impu.rity
(.and) corruption which [had). arisen [in the religJon of the exalted Buddha,
.,and] (J. 3.1) because (the.y) desir;~d to enable the religion of the exalted
l The Pali equivalent of this passage is : "Some of the monks, owing to their being i.mhued • 0
.·Buddha to endure for a long time free from impurity (and} corruption, (they)
:with faith, gave up all s.uch posse8sions and conformed themselves to such conduct as was •in
accordance with the precepts; while. other Theras did. not endeavour to giv.e up all their possessions, .purified the religion ..
and they 'left the Order. There were some monks who had flagrantly committed parajika offences :
these were requested to become laymen. There were others, whose commission of .parajika, offences ••
had not been proved, but whose reproachable and ·cehsurable conduct was difficult to l:>e justified: I The P~ll adds: "made of the leaves of the wild ~ate .. palm (P,ht»nix sylvestris)/'
,these were asked to become laymen." Both texts use the term antimavatthu for this class of ·9 'The Pali adds: 1' with a stand and cover/' ·
off~ces. s The Pali has: u a palmyra fan."
i. Or, '4 painting": d. l. lit supra, and note. · ' It does not .seem quite certain that this is the right rendering. Conceivably the words of the
St Tlie meaning of. tuik baca»i and nlM is undetermin·ed. As to these· words and lU, see Ii 2,. t~t;;might meano: " SQ did he set his heart. that it should. do~", The· sentence, is· really the equivalent
S!#/M'O,,.' n, of the Pali rru1-nasi nidhayiikasi, rendered above by "expressed a hope~' it\ order to introduce ·the
4. The .. te"t i11 co.rrupt and the meaning doubtful: cf. 1. 3, supra, n. .·P~Jag~.
5,. That is, "minoi ·clergy." The Pali here adds: ''and the total number of both classes· of '· · 5 The Pali adds that he "became ·agitated in mind at the sight of the< impuriitfos tha:ti bd
mon~s · was fifteen . thousand and sixty-five/~ , arisen" in religion..;: and continues: ''he solicited the assistance ·of M:oggalip,uttatissathera, and1'eftectec:1
6 The mea,nfog of ,taf: a.nd tau is not strictly de.termined. The position of the latter suggests the, p~rificatio.n of. the. religion by expelling 6Q,ooq sinful. monks fr.orn the 0.rder."
that it is used. merely as a numeral auxiliary. The former is evidently an error,.fqr bap (cf. F 46; H 38). . 6 The Pali adds it ''Seeing the impurities of the religion., agitation arose in Ms, mind and,, he
'l'he Pili sp·eaks· of ''cotton' 'Cloths o·f delicate tissue/' See the variant r:eading in H. 31. expelled numerous ·sinful monks. who held ·.heretical· doc,trines.;. ·he. . effected. p.uri fic~tio.n, ~3 ~p;ria,;g the
'1 .Cf. H ·· 39, s,up'fa, n. single orthodox sect, whos~. melUb~ru'lere. th~ sgirituals1lcteSJOJB. of .the r~~4.e.nts~-pf,~he Mib'.~vHtiJ.a.,"

"
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
(VOL. lit
MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART 11]
In· time past [the Lord] (I. 32) Mahithera Ananda, changing (from one)
state of being (to another), became a king named Usinnara, ·holding sway in • • puttatissamahathera 1 (and) Majjhantikathera, though they were men who had
the city of Benares. At that time the religion of the exalted Buddha performed their (last) deeds (and) had ther~fore attained to the enjoyment of
Kassapa (1. 33) had [declined,] but though that king saw that (it) was pha/asamiipattzsukha 1 (and) (1. 42) . (were able) to remain (thus) permanently,
impure (and) corrupt, that king did not take action by di~igently securing (yet) because (they) desired to further the advancement of the religion,
the purification of the religion of the exalted Buddha Kassapa; (1. 34) that {they) turned their backs upon the bliss of phalasamiipattisukha,9 (and) in
king -remained (iridifferent? ).1 At that time our Bodliisattva was King the cause of (1. 43) the advancement of the religion, (they) exerted them
lndra. -Though in the enjoJ.ment of celestial bliss in the heayenly city of selves. Inasmuch as (that) is so, ,may our lords,, all the virtuous monks,
Tivatimsa, (he) forsook the delights of celestial bliss because (1. 35) (he) who are possessed of faith in the religion of (1. 44) the exalted Buddha,
desired to effect the purification of the religion of the exalted Buddha (and) who 8 shall come in.Juture time, may our lords also exert themselves
K~ssapa, (and) came down to this world of men. Assuming the guise of a in the purification of the religion (and) in the advancement of the religion l 4 ·
hunter, (he) caused the de'lJa Matali to take the shape of a black wild dog,1
(1. 36) and, leading this wild dog,9 (he) came down (and) terrified King
Ussinara. Then King Ussinara gave a pledge for the purification of the
religion, and King Indra instru9ted King Ussinara, (1. 37) and King Indra
ascended again to the heavenly city of Tavatimsa. -.
[Two 5 thousand (and) twenty years after the year when the Lord of
Thus 5 did the kings of old, beginning with King Asokadhammaraja
Merit, the exalted Buddha Sakyamuni, achieved par£nir'l)ii1Ja, having deter·
exert themselves in the purification of the religion ; (and) our (I. 38) Bodhi-
mined to effect a purification [of the religion of the exalted Buddha, as
, sattva, who (at that time) was Indra, although in enjoyment of celestial bliss
regards the persons who were possessed of faith (and) ~esirous of obtaining
in the heavenly city of Tavatimsa, (also) exerted himself in the purification
the pure state of the upasampadii ordination, His Majesty Ramadhipati
of the religion. Therefore' His Majesty Ramadhipati, in his turn, (1. 39)
urged 22 Theras to go (and) receive (and) bring the upasampadii 'orders
also observing (and) following after the practice of the pious ones afore
from the island of Ceylon, (and) determined that people should be able "'to
mentioned, thus did the deeds that he did in effecting the purification of the
obtain the upasampada ordination from the clergy who had gone (and)
religion. Inasmuch as (that) is so, in time to come, in the city of (l. )
40 received it from the island of Ceylon; (and) in order that those who received
Hamsawatl, may all the kings that ·are possessed of faith who shall arise1
•the upa1ampada ordination might be able to perform (ecclesiastical) cere
into being hereafter, on seeing the impurity (and) corruption of religion that
monies such as the ujosatha (and) pafltira'J}ii,]
may ar.ise, also diligently exert t~emselves so as to effect the purification of
••
the religion I (1. 41) Our lords the Arhats too, beginning with. Moggali·
l Not mentioned in the Pali. .
~, Literally, "the happiness of the fruition of attainment," i.e., of. spiritual peace.
s The ''who" refers to the monks (of Hamsayatipura, as the Pali adds).
that 1 o f T h th is e i M s S a . c i o s n c j o e r c r t u u p r t a ~ l rendering based on the Pali, as th~ reading of the stone is doubtful and 4 Here ends Face J, which is the last face. of the main inscription. The Pali version adds the
following, which has no equivalent in the M&n text: ''If this is done, the beings who are immersed
ia Or "wolf." . But the Pali has u dog." The Man expression rendered ''wild dog" applies in in the whirlpool of the three forms 6f existence, will be enabled to cross (to ·the other shore), or to
particular to· the jackal. · ·
free themselves from the conditions of sin and suffering, or to attain the pure and excellent and
· 1 This passage, down to " Therefore" (not inclusive), has no equivalent in the PilL · supreme Buddhahood, which is embellished· with the attributes of the wise and is the fruition of
4 The Pali proce~ds; "King .Ramadhipati, the Lord of the MOn country, following respectfully in supreme exertion." In this passage there is a difference between the MS. version of th,e Pali text
the footsteps o~ the v1~tuous, · pur1.fi~d ~he . religion. with a view that it might laot till the end of 5,ooo and the actual ~eadi~g on· the stone~ the former being ·adhibodhi'-budhala{itam lafitam and .the latter
yea~s. F~r h~v1~g punfi~d reh~10~
the tn the manner described above, I, Ramadhipati, have acquired 11mot1 1>i6u4ho laft,'te lofitum.
to
merat, which is mexhaust1ble as N1rvapa, the state of purity and quiescence." s Here begins the first of the appendices the principal inscription, as prese~yed. in the MS.
text.

••
•
.
''.l~O EPIGRAPHiA BIRMANICA [VGL. HI P.ART ··H] MON I:WSCRI:Ptrlt:>NS 1"91 ,.. •
('
rm:nith of Margasir~a, [the day (being) Saturday;1 the ·clergy who had i:teturned
•
·from Ceylon consecrated the Bha Mr~ 9 sima. On the thirteenth ;of 1th'e
K
l
waning (half) of the month of Phalguna, . . . • · (I. 1 o) . . . . . . . . . . .
[seeing that the ancieQt st'mas, which had been· consecrated 1 in times .past, • ,• •.•• s our lords who had returned .from ·ceylon consecrated the Muh •
were .not (valid) st'mas, His Majesty Rimadhipati urged] (1. 2) the clergy who Mla Skar sima. [On the fifth :of the wa:xing ~half) of the month of ·Caitva,
had receivedthe[Sinhalese] .ordination [to consecrate these sz'mas. (In the ·case the day (being} Wednesday,6 our lords who had returned .from Ceyton,
of) ,a}l the sz'mas which were (to oe) consecrated, (where) there was (already) together with our lords the clergy of Pegu who had received] (1. II) the .
a gamakhetta, (in) the new si'ma] (L3) together with :'other gamakhettas Sinhalese (form of the) upasampada ordination consecrated s£mas at the
surrounding it, connections of branches of trees and the like,!'a [both on the four quarters of the foot of the Mah 'Lau pagoda.8
ground and in the air, were c1eared away, the ground was trenched, (and) ·fBeginning .with ·the year 838 ,of the Gcmmori Era, His 'Mafe1sty
within the gama that was· to be the site 3 of the new sinia,] (1. 4) a eama· Ramadhip·ati-paramamahadhammar3Jjadhiraja urged our lords who had retutne'd
khetta was established within the ambit 4 of the boundary stones where the from]'(L ,12) Ceylon 1(and) urged .our lords the teachers of the Uid:eriwho,
haddlzasima was to be. [Then with respect Lo .the gamakhettas outside also, had received· the Sinhalese (form of) ordination,7 [together with the various
the existing connections of branches of trees and the like were cleared away, Chapters,8 to consecrate s£mtts (in) every town (and) every district .. of the
(and) the ground was trench~d, to indicate] (t 5) the limits of the s£ma. . M8n country. At the time of the consecrations] (1. I 3) His .Ma}esty cau,sed
At the time of the desecration (ceremony), [both] !(on) the land that was some great scholar to attend also in every case.9
within the ambit 4 of the boundary :marks '[and that which was outside The sz'mas [that .our lords consecrated were· the Kyak Kuiw10 si'ma,. the
·
(them) ;plots of 5 -cubits in length (and) 5, cubits in width (were marked Ma Tam 11 s£ma, the Ma Ron_ Lhok 1 " siniii, the C~lhuin Ci'f1l9 sima, ·the
1
out} :on the giound with lime .and] (1. 6) each plot was desecrated,
going evenly 'ONer ;them ;alL . At the time of the consecration, [(on) Hte l Saturday,, 14th December t4'76.
gizm~kh-e.tta that was to be the .she 6 of the ·new sima, they .. t'renched the 9 ''Monastery of the Stockade.»
·
s The ·reading is doubtful on the stone and corrupt in the MSS. It· may perhaps mean to
,- ground (and) caused persons to ;be placed around (it and) patrol (it);] ~l. 1) , indicate the time of day or else ''when they first went ·out.'' The date appeans to be .Wednesday,
and so {they) established (the new sinzii). r:atfi March .1477.
4 The reading is qoubtful. The word muh means "nose, point, cape, fringe";· !:ska~ 1(L.M. sika•)
'. Among all ·the st'mas the KalyaQisima (was) the one that [was ·made may mean '' mat, sugar, glue."
- ' l
first. {It was in) the year (838) 6 of the Common Era~ (on) the 1'.eighth"of • •5 Wednesday, 19th March t417·
e The biggest pagoda at Pegu.
the waxing (half) of the mont~ Qf Marga.SiT~a, the day (being;) Sunday:, 7 1 ·The phrase here used is dun :Pa1an ·S inghuir, ·which .might also ,mean "who recei\fed , the
that · the clergy who had returned from Ceylon consecrated] (1. 8) the Ceyion monks." ·
••
•. a Presumably the various local groups (sanghas).
KalyaQi slma. On the twelfth of the waning (half) of t4e month of Marga
9 The ·phrase might mean that the king caused every great scholar to attend. -
sir~a, the day (being) Friday} (at} the time of:dawn, [our fords who had io Thi's may. mean "Buddha gives." But the wbrd ku,-iw inay ailso be merely the ,conjunction
returned from Ceylon consecrated the sima of the· Thousand· Buddhas. In "and" linking· the name of this sima to . that of ·the ne:xt one. The matter is complicated (by-'a
difference of reading between the two MSS •. in what immediately Mlows. .
the afternoon 9ur lorusl (1. 9) who had returned from Ceylon consecrated 11 The word ma· (on the stone mba) literally means ''father'' and is part of the name of some of
two s.imas in the .l\Iaharama. [On the thirteenth o.f the waning (half)] oLthe the simds, while some others a:re called mbo\ «1 mother." It is m:>t ·clear what distinction, if 1n1y,
may
these two terms '.be ·s u'pposed to import, but the second one commonly refers to the 0prindpal
part of ·anything, or something that is large or . full-grown, · . The word tam m~ns "beginning,. ·
l Taking the smik of· the MSS. to be an error for' smit. principal!' MS. B here has a variant reading which would seetµ to'mean that 'iit was the,'rBud\iha·
!a Ct B ~s,.so,.C 49, and (farthis,passage generally) G 8 $eqq. #mcl that was consecrated first/' or as the ·principaJ one, but this is probably eorrupti · · -
·s Taking toe dakau of the )MSS. to be art error. fordatau. • 12 B has rok,•''to repay''; lhok is unexplained. . '
4 Cf. G 22 as to the word .cruih, ·literally.'' chest." is If calhuin is for caluin, this would me~u'r"'el:~phant tethering·p,ost/~ The alteJ'ndtiY:e ·c d<luik
Ii Rea:dirrg datau for the :,tdkau of th'e MSS., as in 1. 3 1 ·supra. e .O mitted fn 1the MSS. means .·"to sha·ke'I''
7 Sunday, t4th November x476. But see G 19 n; s Friday; 13th December z+tf;,
..
•
'

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. III
PART II) MON INSCRIPTIONS
Gamalali sima,] (1. 14) the s£ma of the Mahabuddharupa,1 the Pan Aben 1
Taloxh 1 si"ma, the Brau Gala 1 sima,_ the Len s Slop si"ma, the Sen Ja 4 si"ma,]
st"ma, the Kari s simii, the [Tam Pha] 4 sz'mii, the Kyak Ma Tam Jow 5 sima,
Gan
(1. 19) the Mba Sa 6 sz"ma, the Lon 6 sima, the Taguiw Tia 7 simii, the
the Mail .. Mra 8 si"ma, the Nuai Naai 7 si'ma, the Muh Kla But 8 .si'ma, the
[~al). Slan Taluai] 8 s£mii, [the Wa J;:>ak 9 sima, the _Ma Na sima, the Tayu
Sama Gasfi 9 st'ma, the Jip Braai st"ma, the Muh Ya Tala 1 si·ma,], (I .. 15)
•
the Mah Bapun 11 si'ma, the Ka' Kluiw 19 sima, [the J a laai Thaw st'ma, the Taswok 10 si"ma, the Bhalirh Abal} simii, the Ma Ban simii, the] (I. 20) Pail
is
Pan 11 [st"ma,] the Cagan 12 si"rna, the Bha 18 Baket 14 sima, the Mba [Asu] 15
Lan Pa4on 14 si~ma, the Jrai Sapoai 15 sima, the Amat Sut 16 si"ma, the st'ma of
si"ma, the Mba Luit 16 sima, [the Sneft Juk 17 sz'ma, the Khan Mrah 18 sima,
P.rince U kwew, the Han Garn 17 st'mii, the Prati Sa 18 si"mii, the Ma Sra Ma
the Sran ·v•-.ra 19 si'n·ta, the Naai Saai 20 simii, the Kyak 511 Kwew sima, the]
Len 19 simii, the Jip Dwoti sz'ma, the Run Wuin ao sima,] (I. 17) the Barab
(1. 21) Kac;lak 519 [s£ma,] the Mba Lau Ban 29 sima, the· Arhan 14 s£ma, the
sima, the Mba 21 [Muin] sima, [the Kama Amat 22 si'ma, the On· Bra Sr~ 28
sima, the Kon Blaai 24 sz'ma, the Pan Tarau ?a 25 st'ma, the Pam Lan 98 Apoft si"rna, the Trit s5 Mba Sam sz"ma, the [Dan] sima, [the Kyak Thaw !18
~an si"ma, the Kyak Tail pun 97 szmii, the Mo' 28 Aduiw Si°'Ytii., the Wa Swa 29 st"ma,
s·i"ma, the .· Man Mra 7 sima, (I. 18) the Tarwot 28 si"ma, the Mba 29 sima,
1a
the Baba Jnok so simii,] (I. 22) the Than Kwah 91 sima, the Mbo' s9 Yage'
the Pnan80 [Dabok] sima, [the Wiha Taw81 si"ma, the Ma Bat89.st'ma, the. Min
sima, the [Bhu] Mba Gram 89 sz"ma, the Gatuim 84 simii, the [A4ani] si'ma, [the
1 Cf. F 49·
9 P4n 1 ''mouth." The next word is a doubtful reading; the MS. apuiw suggests an original i Or Talo' ; min, '' to gather in the arms.''
ap1w both unexplained.
1 s "Indian Woman." But brciu is also the name of the cocoanu~ palm and its fruit.
8 "Jungle Guide/' Cf. E 44. . s Cf. 1. 15, supra, n.; slop may mean '' to enter." ·
' As to tom, see note on last line ; pha may mean ".mountain•jack" or " side." 4 Sen, ''to be withered; to be true " ; jii, ''fishing net, lattice."
6 Tam jow (for which A has ptam jwow) may perhaps mean ''bead of the creek." 6 Possibly Sam, but the M SS. have sa.
8 Man, "to wait for, to watch"; mr4, ''to prosper, to gain!' 6 Perhaps "Most Valiant."
7 8 ' C 'D f. iv I. er 1 s 0 , p s r u a p w r n a s , . ') n . (but B has muk, '~face"); kla means ''tiger," and -but, ~1 to ~rin~.u . possi 7 b l P y e r t h la ap s ( fo c r f . ta L l . a M , . " lo ga rd g , u " i w e , t c. d ) a g o u r iw k , l a " , st " u t m ig p e , r , /' ( als T o h e " t M hu ? n S d . er h " a ) v e o r k J t a a ' > g a " w g , a rd tr e g n i , n " g e o r r " ; k l a a n m d ,
9 If gas4 ea~ be taken to stand for k.ssC, the name 1would mean something hke expert 1n " hundred." ··
writing (painting, etc.)." 8 Gab., "person "; slan, ''to be dazed" (variant khlan, "to glow, to shine") ; taluai, "the
10 Ya is the "wax of the dammer-bee"; tala means "lord." Otaheite gooseberry." .
1 1 1 2 P B e a r p h u a n p . s (a '' l D so o l g a ' p s e N n) e c i k s ." th e B n u a t m i e n o J f 3 a 6 · tr ' e 'd e, o E g r " yt h i - s 1 -i c n l a u i' i w n di ( c n a o . t kluiw); a · nd ka' may mean ''an 10 9 u W H a, a i " r y p l M ain a g " go (o t. r " , perhaps, '' pap er kite"). 11 "Crossroads,, (where /our roads meet).
i1otated piece of ground." • 12 Perhaps Caran or Caban. 19 Or A. . .
18 " Golden Bud." . 14 tf Red." 16 Asura, a fallen angel or Titan.
14 Lan apparently means "to melt.'~ . • 16 MSS. Thuik. '
16 ., The Banyan Tree of the Nest." ~17 Sn en, "wing" ; juk, er cord" (variant jut, "bone").
lei Amat is "minister'' and Sut may be a proper name (but it also means ''silk" and "sutra!' 18 Mrah "to spread abroad; tE> praise ; to be merry."
On the stone I. 16 is entirely lost; it must have begun .a bout here. 19 Sran,' "dry land, shore bank"; wa, "plain."
l7 Hil.n, "company"; gam, '' to ste s p a . , , , •• ·~ 20 Naai, ''lord, master "; 1aa1·, "bee:l~
18 Prati., ''to send; bank, slope"; "to spread; to be light; borax; company, following.,, 21 · K'Yak, " Buddha, pagoda, worshipful object." .
19 Cf. I. 13, supra, n.; sra, ''to be sore u; len, "to carry on the hip; to nourish; to be 29 "Crow." 2S er Adhering Arrow."
destroyed.'.' 24 "Arhat" (if the reading is right; but the h is doubtful).
so Run, 11 to be intractable'~ ; wuiH, '' joists." ll5 MSS. Krih. 28 "Golden Buddha" (or pagoda, etc.),
51~ Cf. 1. 13, supra, n. 99 "The Minister's Tank.'' 97 Tan i. ''to pull" (variant tam, "beginning, capital," etc.); tJ,un, ''city, country, kingdom."
'I5S This ·may be the proper name of a person. I• ''Son," ,usually applied to a young man. 28 Cf. 13, supra,, n. 29 ''Plain of Waterlilies."
"Junction of Two Roads." 96 Ldn 1 "to put, to wager.u ~o "Great Monastery."
S7 Cf. I. 15 1 supra, n, , s1 Than, ''to set upright; a jail"; for kwah the MSS. have !ntuh, "turtle,,, which may possibly
•. Or, perhaps, wa 1"Wt# (wa, ,, an open plain 11 ). be· right.
• Cf. I. 13, supra, n. It is difficult to see how the usual meaning of ftin, "as," can be
89 Cf. 1. 13, supra, n. . .· . , " . . ,, .
appropriate here. , • ss Bhu is a doubtfu). reading; .for mba, cf. 1. 13, sup,,,a, n.; gram, to put up a barrier (also, 1n
!O ''Candle,, (or ''lamp"). For dabok) B has do blok. . . ... combination, '·'to be waste, to be desolate").
s1 Wi'hcJ, ••monastery" ; tt1w, ·" handleJ ·stalk, side.11 BI B11t means •c adhesivene~s; likeness." at "To beat.u
.
• .

•
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANlCA [VOL. III PART II] MCN INSCRIPTIONS
•
Mbo' Khot 1 sz'ma, the Kyak Ma Talew sz°'mti, the Jrai Mwai.2 sz·ma, the -· Dani1 s£ma, the Twan Dhatek 8 st'ma, the Row Sa a sima, the Jray Taya • si·ma,
Kyak ·:prah 3 st'ma,] (1. 23) the AC!. won simii, the Ajan sz"ma, the J r ay Rat 4 the Cluin sfmii,5 the Gata!} Pan 6 st"ma, _[the Kyak Raai Man 1 s£ma, the
sima, the Mba Cau6 st'J-nii, the Kyak . Rhu 6 st"mii,' the Pan Apuh 7 sz'ma, Tamrot szma, the ·Wan Tuin 8 sima, the] (1. 27) Tarhim 9 [sima,] the Kareh :1.o
the [Lalom] 8 st'mii, [the Pa 9 Baben slmii, the Man Glon 10 sima, the Kyak sima, the Tar Kalal) 11 s£ma, the. Mbo' U Qwot 12 S'z°ma, the Mb o' Rat stmlt,
Tamlon sz'ma, the] (L 24) Kuiw Clik 11 [sz'mt_i,] the Dani 12 sz'mii, the Saq~im 19 the· Twan Blay 18 s£ma, the -[Moh Pun] 14 sima, [the Phaqoit 15 s£ma, the Ma
sima, the Sat Da(t.oti 14 s1nztt, the Mba [Gljay 15 sima, the ]ray Mba · Pu 16 Ya Bna 16 sz·ma, the Jinai s£ma, the Pan] (l. 28) Krttil Phan Nan 17 s£ma, the
s£ma, the Paglia 17 simii, the [Tan Sran] 18 sima, [the Ma Serh 19 szina, the Dalarh Tasay 18 sz"mii, the Gatuim Pharh l!J sima, the Jr ay P~a '0 sima, the
Rammapu~a 2 simii, the Tamuh 21 Tab~ai sima,] (l. 25) the Pan Sanqan 92 Tika ~1 simti, the Kho sima, the Drail Thar 21 simii, the [Ma Mail Sa)"
(}
s'lma, the Ban Tu 29 sima. st'mii, [the simii a4 to the West of the town of Muh BI, the Maha Man]
At Bhimapura, the si'mti of the leading monks of Pegu, the simii of the (1. 29) Ray Sitiga' 25 sima the Pan Lay 26 sima, the Dun J a la 27 sima, the
1
leading ·monks of Ceylon, [the Alba Saraai24 slma, the Buit Kam~25 sima, the Wan Nay 28 simii, the Truk Kanlaw 29 sima, the Mah Ta Jnu sima, the (Asek]
Jin Jam 26 sz"ma, the Lagan Phen 97 s{ma,] (1. 26) the ~uip 28 st"ma, the Duiw si·ma, [the Gala J?un 80 sz'ma, the Muh ~at 81 si"ma, the Gayan] (I. 30) Tac\on8~
sima, the Basah sz'ma. ·
l A measure of four dronas.
51 "One Banyan Tree." l Dui'I», ''hill"; and cf. I. ia4, supra, n.
51 Twan, ''village." Dhatek may be L.M. gt.1tek, " saw, club, mallet." It appea1;s that there are
3 "To be quick,; to fall."
two villages thus named.
4 Or rak, "a cabin." (Jray is "banyan tree,,).
6 'Grandchild; to return" (but the reading is not certain). s '' Light Basket" (L.M. rau, ''a kind of basket made of open work; a. football made of rittan
6 Possibly for sa, '' to measure." wicker-work").
'1 Cf. I. 14, supra, n~ 4 Possibly Thaya.
8 Perhaps L.M. lalam, ''peace, r~st/' 0 Perhaps L.M. caluin, "to put on; the post to which an elephant is tied" (cf. 1. 13~ supra, n.).
9 ''.To be in company with; a. species of dove." But the reading is in doubt. The variant khtuin means " pond, lake; to go beyond."
10 Man, ''to wait for, to watch over ; red deer" ; glon, "to pass through; a crest, tuft.'' 6 Gata!}, ''to turn round or over; to turn back ; to burst ; thunder " ; pan, ''four ; to shoot}1 ;
u '' Give pigs." 7 ~' M8n mustard plant (or radi$h)."
19 Perhaps L.M. eln.1 gni, ''cushion, pillow; the Queen Lagerstroemia," or dnf, "a husband's · 8 Wan, ''to cease; enclosure; pool" ; tuin, "to ascend, to increase."
sister.'' · 1 9 Perhaps KJrhim. 10 Perhaps Tareh. 11 ''Whip, goad."
19 "Mud" (or "to help"). 19 <:Pwot is L.M. (lat, ''small." For rnbo' cf. ·1. 13, supra, n. IS" Young Men's ViUage.'J
. 14 Perhaps L.M. khatJon, " brinjal " (sat, ''fruit"). 14 ''Fringe of the Town" (unless moh in the MS. represents an original mbo')•
15 Doubtful reading (L.M. glad"i means " to seek"), • l~ 11 To be weary." HJ Ya, "wax of the dammer-bee "; bna, "ricefield."
rn. Pa may mean "dove" or ''to wind around with cord or cloth." 17 Pan kru'n, "mouth of stream (or creek)." The rest is a doubtful teac:ling, an4. might be read
17 For Panga, probably L .. M. jaiiJi, ''the wild nutmeg.h pham nen or ·Pham janan• . PMn means "a raft'' or "a beam fixed along the aide Qf a boat u·;
18 Tan, "to be stable; to be cheap; an interval"; sran, H silver, money/' •• pham) "a drum " ; nan, ,, to bring"; nen, "a fin."
19 "Siamese, Shan." •.. 16 Perhaps Kasay. Either way the meaning may be "fringe, border."
20 This is plainly a place-name, but not being preceded by the word for ''in" or "at'' it leaves 19 "Beat Drum." . 20 '' Banyan Tree of the Ma~ket."
us doubtful . whether the particular simfi was situated at this place or merely named after it. It is not 21 ''Commentary" (on the Buddhist Scriptures). 2'1 ''Golden ftQrQ (or ·Peilc),"
stated where t.he numerous simar specified in 11. 13..,..25 were located, but it may be presumed that they 28 As to man, cf. 1. 23, supra 1 n, ; sa, ''to spread; to be light ; borax; a following_, a follower.'~
were in,-the .neighbourhood of Pegu, the capital. of the kingdom •. From I. as onwards other towns are 9 ' Or "simas," for it is not clear whether this may not be inten.d~d to focaliz6 the names ~hat
expressly mentioned. , . follow.
21 " Broom.'' 95 Mq.ha~ .'' great.'i It seems not impossible that man here may represent man.gala, '' ble$sing"
ill Cf. I. I4; supra, n. B.ut the.true reading here may be wa1h ''a species of mint." (but cf; 1. 23, supra, n.). Ray may mean "mustard, radish " (cf ! 1. . 26, supra, n.). .
28 Ban may mean •r to embrace," and tu, n a snail" (but the latter is a doubtful reading). 28 Fan; ''to lift ·up"; L.M. laai, "to be~ome loos~1 to be dissolved; line, streak; t\ger grass~u _
14 Sariiai, ''soldier ; wild beast." _ 27 ''Thorny bamboo.'' as W<;n, ''dressed l~terite"; L.M. naai, ''various; here and there."
115 Buit, ''diamond ; · Veda; to throw; to swoop ,; ; kamfi, '' tank.'' • 29 Or Kru~ Kanhliw (C\s the MS, text seems to hnply). The first ward means " Chin~e; rnan~o.n
118 Jifi, ., to sew.'' ao.,,.. Gala, '' India11 "; V,,un, ''city, country."
11 The first:word may be L.M. laggan "love/' it Muh, " nois•, p9int; end of cape" ,; liat, ''to •~e.''
M ''.Teat ... Duck,O 1 P Taqoil may bo identi@al with the DaqoA of l. ~4• supr(J.,
•
•

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. '111 PART II) MCN INSCRIPTIONS
At Syriam, the Twan Smiil Cun Suin sima,1 the Drat 9 sima, the Han a Gnak 1 simii, th~ Nelu Lail si"mii, the Dail Lu[in]' s:ma, [the Pan 8 T~bon
•
sima, the Parhak [Gata] 4 sima, [the Tapuin Pi Bafia~ slma, the Balaai Cah s sima; the] (I. 35) Twan Akhwon 4 [sima,] the Bala sima, the Daron Sa s£ma,
simii, the Pan] (1. 31) Gai 7 simii, the Jray Cab 8 sima, the Kyak Taluy the Manga sima, the Kruti 15 Cra s£mii, the· Cambuin 8 si"mii, the Duiw 1
.. · 9
st'mii, the Ray 1 ° Khan sima, the sz'ma of the Minister Vijayasiha, the Lagwor Khawen s£mii.
Glu 11 s£mii, the Mba Samin 13 slmii, [the Ma Dyon 18 simii, the Jrai Lhon 14 s£mii, At Yat Khret 8 Mah Smin, the [Badow Glarh] 9 sima, [the Jrai] (1. 36)
Sum 10 [sima,] the Tar Skem 11 simii, the Pan s£ma the Tko' 1~ lfii Sima;--.. the
the] (1. 32) Tam at Thana15 [sbnii,] the Hail,16 Talun sima, the· Cron 17 s£mii, the i1a 1
Ga<tuy 18 sima, the BanQ.an 19 s£mii, the Saggaka1n 20 s£ma, the Lat 21 s£mii Jray Naguir u si"ma., the Qapuin Brau 15 simii. ·
Kam~ At Tar,16 the .Kyak Rajadhirat sz'ma, the Kyak Thon sz'mii, the [Wiha
the Mbuiil Afii simii, the Saguim sz simii, the [Dhammadu] simii, [the
Ma Soai 28 st'ma, the] (I. 33) Sro' Khyuit 114 [sima,] the Mah Lwan 25 si'ma, Smin Thar] 17 sima, (I. 37) the Kyak Gatuiw 18 si'mii, the Damra' s£ma, the
Amat Jray 19 s£ma.
the Mah Chu Kwet 116 sima.
At Rangoon,. the Mah Damru 7 sima, the Mah Dun 28 s£ma, the Rak 9 At Jray, the Kamluin Tia 1110 sz'mii, the Jip Say s£ma, the Tar Sanan 11
£ 9
sima.
st'ma, the Duiw Canlan so s£mii, .the Pubba[ram] 31 simii, [the Kyak Ma Sam
Kyow 81 sima,] (1. 34) th~ Duiw Panah 89 sima, the Goh Dhammaram sima, At Klon Palay, the sima of the King 82 [of Ceyloni] (I. 38) also [the si;,,a]
S:l
the Tak Nan 85 'sima., the Lam bat 86 sima, the Apa Gay sz'ma, the Kyak m the King 29 of Ceylon's creek, the Kyak Mahecaram 28 sima.
At Lanka Krun 2 T awai;i.r_ia,35 the Krun 26 Brat 27 sima, the Krun 26 Kawa 18
'
simii, the .. Kruti Kamer s£mii.
1 " Village of Prince Cun (variant .Khun) Suin..'' 2 ''To scatter, to sow."
8 '' To save." But possibly the true reading is Tan (cf. ~· ~1, supra, n.) or Tba!i (cf. 1• .~ 2, . At Sa[m]r[im,99 the] (I. 39) Ta Canan 2 • [sima,] the Gnin 81 Lan 89 Twan
sup1'a. n.). Smin Sudasuim 88 si'ma, the A_din Adan simii, the Baleii 84 sima, · the Kyak
4 Gata, ''the under part of anything." 6 "The Three Monks of the Prince" (P).
8 ''Ten springs (or fountains).'" Brau 85 simii.
7 .Pan, •'mouth"; gaf, "mortar,' pounder;. cucumber."
° 8 ''Ten Banyan Trees." 9 •• Otaheite Gooseberry." 1 Gnak means "to sink deep in the mire." But the reading is doubtful.
1 Cf. Raai (J. 29, supra, and note). Perhaps Khan should be Khan. 2 Ddn, "to jump"; luin," to tread upon." s "Mouth.u
11 ~'Dark Grotto (or Cave, or Ravine)." 19 Samin may mean ''turban."
4 Akhwon, ''tax, revenue." As to twan, cf. l. 26, supra, n.
18 Possibly for dayuin, "post." 14 Jrai, "banyan tree" ; lhon, ''to sail."
5 Krun, " stream, creek.n 6 Per.haps Cambiii. 1 " Hill.'1
16 Perhaps ''Touch the Lute." (But thana, L.M. tha11-a 11 may also mean ''wall plate"). 8 This place-name is doubtful: see the text. 9 Glam, '' chamber.11
18 Cf. J. 30, supra, n. 17 Perhaps "Built/' 18 Possibly Gaqay. JO "F'ic us I n di' ca.' ' 11 T.a r, ' ' staI k, h andle u ; skem, ''to grasp.n
n A do11btful reading: L.M. barJan, ''kernel of nut.'' The variant baran of the MSS. means 19 Pan, ''to ask leave respectfully; (in certain combinations) an expert in art or craft.0
qspotted~ • · ~ '' lsland.n
ilO Perhaps "Heavenly Delight." 21 ''Fresh/' , 14 ''Banyan Tree of the Town" (but the reading is .doubtful).
i e? i Perhaps ''Warm" or " Warmth." 15 "Nun.'' . 16 This place•name is doubtful: see the text.
Kama, ''tank." ' Sl:l "Dead Rice (in the fields)." 17 " Monastery of the Golden Prince." 18 '' Seat; board.,,
515 Mah is the same as muh (cf. I. 10, supra, n.); lwan may possibly be connected with L.M. • • 19 "Minister of the Banyan Tree."
iaUJ'1n, '' Martab an camphor wood'? (but can hardly be· the same w1Jrd). Cf. also L 13-14. 20 Kamluin, '' we!P'; tla, "lord, master,, (but this word may perhaps be read kla~ " tiger,'' or
28 'Probably L.M. ch.u "!?wit," wood apple." klam, '' hundred ")
If Perhaps L.,M. damru, •1 a sound" ; but the reading. is not quite certain. 21 Perhaps0L.M. sndn, ''star.''
18 "Bamboo Cape," or ''Fringe of Bamboos." 22 Or ••Prince." 18 Or '' Pahecararil.,,
· 19 Or ·Rat (whic::h may mean " floor beam; precious gem; to reap "). a4 ''Stream, Creek/' 11 Perhaps Thawa99a,. or 1'iwa99a.
8
8
0
~
P
Sc
e
l
r
m
h
,
a
'
p
'e
s
u
"
n
S
u
a
c
n
h
d
"
a
;
lw
k
o
y
o
ow
d
,
H
''
i
t
l
o
l. "
p eep."
8
sa
l "
''
A
Ja
n
c
c
k
ie
fr
n
u
t
i t
( o
H
r
H
E
I.
a
'
s
'
tern) Park (or Monastery)."
1
a
1
s
8
_
"
P
B
os
a
si
t
b
;
l y
s h
K
or
r
t
a f
p
l.
r op
\
." 1
t
9
1 "
O
P
r
l a
S
n
a
t
m
ai
r
n
i.
, banana 0"
H "Cave of one who delights in the Law" (or "of the Park (or Monastery) of the Law "). SO Ta, "palmyra palm; a measure of le~gth (= 7 cubits); to beckon to stop" J aan&n, 41burning,.
86 Tak, "to strike" ; nan, ''to bring" (the variant nun mearts "water pot." (but. the reading is doubtful). 81 " Side."
88 L.M. lamat, " one of a religious order inferior to the monks (a pet!\{)n .who separates himself ., Si This is a doubtful r!ading, but the MS. variant yiin. 4'• vehicle/' seems out of place here.
from family life and pledges himself to keep the eight precepts)." This. identification is not quite
ss ''Village of Prince Sudasuifn.'' u ''To go astray.''
certain : cf. the form lum~iic in I E 15, which throws some doubt on it. perhaps~ But medieval M6n 86 Cf. I. 18, supra, n. % ·
spelling is very irregular an~ a confusion between .b and 6 (after m) seems possible.
•

• •
•
EPIGRAPHlA BIRMANICA Ut PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS
[ V,QL.
•
At Darnkak, the Amat Ok 1 simii, the Sapa s s£ma, the Mba (1. 40) ~z"ma, the Kyak Tala Lok 1 s£ma,] (I. 2) the Kyak ~ay 9 Twan (sz"ma],' the
Buddhawa ·9 sima, the Laten ' s£mii. [~ak Len] 4 sima, [the Smiti Lok Wan 5 s£ma, total six~
At Dala, the Kyak Gni 5 st'mii, the.Kufti6Kwon Prak 7 simii, the Kabail At Bassein, the Kyak 6 sfma, the Kyak Ga 7 sim.a,8 the Duiw '.&i 9 Kan
st"ma, the Mba Duin 8 st"mii., the Phy en· 9 sz'mii, the Twan Brak 10 si'ffla, the sz'ma, the· Kut Lyen Nan 10 sz'ma,] (I. 3) the Great Khway sima, the Small
J,anam st'mii, the Bran Bratf11 si'mi) the (1. 41) Taha Pre szma, the Sarway 19 Khway sima, [the Kyak Tma' Jt s£mii, the Kama ~uip 19 szma, the Kyak
'~ima, the Apha Pail -si'ma> the A\>at s£ma, the Gay an 18 Tak 14 simii, the Kalay 19 s£ma, the Muh Dhau Chan Lha·14 si·ma, the Muh Dhau Gnin Sarnuin 15
Amat 16 Tam Mrek 16 sima, the Laiian 17 sz"mii~ tbe ~ak Sren 18 s·lma, the sz'ma,] (I. 4) the Great. Gatta 16 ~uin 7 s£ma, the Small Catta.I~,, J?uin 17 sima,
l
Danc\ay 19 sz"ma,80 [the Tamya. Sa 18 sz'mii, the Ka Praft Draai 19 simii, the Man Gan Konaguirh so
.
[At Lhuiil/11 the PAti as Lhuin tai sfma, the Pan 22 Mapha 29 st'"ma. si'ma, the Mail Ceh Da Khwan 91 simii,'1 fA the Pan Jakwam] (i.· 5) Sij. 28 ·· simii,
At Dhanu Plu,94 two s-imas 20 at Moriya, the Amat Phak26 shna; in the the Krun Man 4 si'ma, the Han 25 Twon 26 si'ma, the Kyak [Gatorh] s£ma, (the
: ia
place where His. Majesty dwells, one s£ma,27 the Kyak SminJ
l Perhaps "Lord of the World."
· 2 Perhaps L.M. qai, ''a leguminous plant (pea, bean, etc.)"; the variant readings mah, muh,
L mean " nose, cape, fringe."
a Twan, "straight"; the variant t~an means "dried preserves."
4 As to ~ak, cf. K 41 n.; Zen means "to perish, dissolution." The variant readings are bcin,
Mat [Pi 98 sima., two in all.99 '' to warm' oneself ; to give birth " ; Zan, '' to melt." · •
At Klon, one sima, the 80 Ramlaai Kyak sima; the Smin :N'i Daw Da 5 Lok and wan may be proper names, or possibly L.M. luik, "world>,; wan, ''to cease (of
a1 rain); enclosure, fence; pool."
6 ''Buddha/'. etc. The varian~ kyli means "wind."
1 A.mat, "minister"; ok may be .a 'proper name (or possibly L.M. d-k, ''parent n). 7 Ga, "a cJog put upon the necks of criminals ; a lineal· measure."
la Sapii, "the skate (fish); to be dim-sighted; (and in combination) arm, breast.1' 8 The MS. reading is smin, which I have assumed to be an error for sim, translating accordingly.
a " Wednesday." 4 11 Sinew; muscle." Otherwise this and the preceding simii would be combined into one and· the total number of simiis at
& "Rat; mouse." 6 Probably Pali kuiJ, ''hut, cell." Bassein would be ~4, and not 25 as stated at the end of 1. 5, infra.
7 Perhaps L.M. pr4k, Cf spotted, variegated." 9 Duiw, ~'hill " ; ni, '" a little (in quantity)."~
8 ·" Hei:on, st'Otk." 9 ''To turn aside.'' N~~ IO · K ut, "to cut off"; nan., ''a bamboo frame over a c . o oking place" (the variant nak , means a
10 " Village of the Water-Dipper. . " 11 Or Bt'a.
19 Or Saray. IS ~'Wood-oil Tree." 11 " Stone~ rock, mountain."
U. Or Tak. · 15 Cf. I~ 39, supra, n. 12 '' Teal Duck Tank." .
18 M:rek, (t red pepper." As to tam, cf• . ]. 13, supra, n. • ia The variant klai means '' a. roc>'t resembling a yam." ·'
17 Perhaps cf. L.M. lnu lnan, ''lonely." 14 Chan, " to love '' ; l ha,. '' si leaf."
18 Per,haps L. M. bak "to pass over" (bu't it' may be ~iik, ''to hoe; to spin (as a top); to 15 Gnin, •f shadow ; jungle; . the loins, the waist."
peck," or ~at, "to measu 1 re; to bedelicate.'1 Sre'lt means •ito wither; a swinging cradle/' •• •• 16 Or Cakka.
19 Or Danday, or Danay. 20 Here ends. Face K. 1'.7 lJui;,,, "a pickle condiment; a large species of deer."
.I ll Or Lui!\ (which may mean u bulb" bu-t is here a p1a1»name). IS Tamya, '' urine'' ; as to sa, cf. K 16 n~
H Cf. K 14 n. 28 Or Mapa. l9. Ka,.'' fish; short prop"; pran., "to send; bank, slope'' ; draai, 0 the' porcine deer."
1 ' Or Da:~4a. · Phlft, Bo As to nian, cf. K 23 n. ; gait, ''to· be caught (of falling objects); an ape; the seau; .
8& Presumably the .two ·next foUowin.g are meant~ Konagui.rii is the Buddha Ko~agamana.
.· sa Presumably this· Jast is a proper name~ et. I.· 40, ·supra, n. 21 As to man, cf. K 23 · n.; ceh, "to descend."
rr The MSS. have smin m'tD~i, ''one prince," which 1 have taken to be an errql' for sim mwal. a2 As in I. 2, supra, l have taken smi;,. to be an error for .sim here· also.
98 ·" Prince. with Three Eyes/' BB Pan., "mouth"; as· to sa, cf. K 16 n. ·
19 I have t•ken this as referrin.g back to the two siniii.s menti<med after Dhanu Plu. at Perhaps '.' Potter's Creek" (but the MSS~ have the variant ·han, which (in coinbiriati-Oii) .m~·ans
wor s d o s T s h im e w m o w rd d m o w cc a u i r s e a e t m :a s U ) t o a s b e t h u e n n $i e m c a e . s s s a m til e y n ti r O e : p n e ed a t .. e d d o h i e n r e f , a c a t m t t o , t i a t · l i s u n p o • t t o d e s a ix r . wh B y u t t h p e e p rh r a ~ p d s i n f & o ' r "ru 9 b 5 b ·, c i s T h o / ' save >1 (but . • the. word may_ perhaps be - han, r, stocks (for b<Sat•building)'; gribaty;"' or jan,
Ramlaai we 1houtd read Ramlak (''the simiJ o\7erlooking the pagoda~').. "m~uth." '"
a1 NI, u to be even, to agree" ; daw1 '~to shut" ; ia, " to be shallow/' si.s Possibly for .kwo11 1 L.M. k<m, ''child."
•

~00 . EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 111 PART II] ·MON INSCRIPTIONS ~01
•
Bahasa 1 st"mii, the Kawah Glau 9 sima, the Ganati I;>un 1 st'ma, the Jammuna 4 the Garok Ga[puiw] 1 simii, the (Mak] (1. 10) • • kana 2 st"ma, the Lamba
simii, 25.] • Pham s si'mii., the Tar Kwan 4 s£ma, the Mba Lau 11 simii, the Twan Bar 6
Glak
· (1. 6) At Mram,5 the Jamharh :Sima, the Cama' sima, the Pan 8 Mah slmii.
simii, the [Jrai Talaai]7 s-imii, [the Lan sima, the] (1. 7) ........ s At Saton.,7 the Jon Kyak 8 Sawa szmii, the P~n 9 Saw a st'ma, the Caqok 10
[sinza,] the [Japuiw] si·ma, [the Baleii 9 simii, the Kyak Ka,nhiti 10 simii; si"mii, the [Juiti] (1. u) Kyak 8 T ..... 11 si"mii, the Low 12 Kyak [Asal,l]
created by laymen subs.equently :] 11 ••••.••••• , 12 the Dani 18 Pajau H st"ma; si'ma, the Twan Sagra 18 Nana·b. sima, the Jon Kyak 8 Celasa S'ima, the Twan
the K yak Bi 15 Taga st"mii, the Smin [Teja] 16 s1'ma, [.J. Mbuiy Dewi14 simti, ~e Twan Adan D.wot 15 sima, the [Kyak Gahassa] ·Ja
At] (1. 8} Koliya, the [Jon Kyak}17 Smiil Lokatra18 s1·ma, the Jon Kyak1 7 (l. 12) Tow 17 simii, the Kyak Bantaji s£mii, the Kyak Sura Nan sima, the
Lnan
[Mah Sga]r sZ:ma, the Dap Chu 19 st"mii, the Tar 20 Mail 21 si'ma. Kyak Lin 18 simii, the Pan Ablu sima, the Faren Gak 19 sima, the Kyak
At Candapuri, the O o ft Kyak) t7 (1. 9) Mbo' .... 92 Mbak simii, the (iapat so sima, the Bi 21 [K_hata] sima, (1. 13) the Asam 92 Calan sima, the Cre.P
Mba Abat sa S'imii, the s£mii of Prince Visukamma,24 the Mba Mbuiy 96 .Thaw s£mii,_ the Danlay Smiil 23 st'ma, the sima H o_f the town of Tuik Gala,96 the
simii, th~ Qi]p Biw sz'mii, the Daka Bhut ~6 simii, th~ Cau Kamfian sz"ma, [Twan Sa]bra Samaii st'mii, 26 the Twan Smiil Bruhn 27 s£ma~ the Mati
of
Cammha28 sima, the Jak Ri 29 s£ma, the sz"ma 114 the town of ~w[an], (1. 14)
1 Probably for L. M. bhtlsa, '' a system of religion ; language ; a mode of practice."
111 Glau,-'' ox, cow.'' 8 l/un, "town, country." l Garok~ ''hollow between hills, pass,,; gapuiw, ''lime, chalk."
4 Or , Jarndna. Perhaps this represents the name of the Jumna River (which is, however, s The first letter in this line looks more ljke i than anything else.
Ya,rnuna in Sanskrit and Pali). 8 ''Hunter of the Drum" (unless the second word is his name).
5 This is all that is clear on the stone, but the name may be Mrim, or perhaps Samrim (the . 4 Or possibly Kun (which means ''hill,,). As to tar, cf. I. 8, sup'>'a, n.; kwan might be a
MSS. have ·Sam rim). In K 38 there is mention of a place yvith a somewhat similar (or the same) variant spelling for kwon, '' child," or twiin, '·'village," or else some unidentified word.
name. · 6 "Arrow" or possibly ''Lao," the name of a Tai race in Northern Siam.
6 Pan, '' mouth," and perhaps kha.l!k, ~' valley, bay ,, (gldk, '' to take out with the hand/' does 8 Or Bari.
not seem appropriate). 7 Presumably Sittang. 8 Cf. I. 8, supra._, n. 9 '' Mouth."
7 '' Drooping Banyan Tree.,, 10 Possibly L.M. khatjok, ''the four-toothed porcupine." It is just possible that that is also the
8 It is not certain whether there should be here a place•name or the name of a simii. The actual reading.
reading on the stone is fragmentary and rather doubtful,· but what there is of it cannot well be 11 The MS. variant Ta cannot fill the whole of the blurred space here.
reconciled. with the MS. text. 19 Doubtful reading. The MSS. have juin, which presupposes an original jon, but I cannot see it.
9 ''To go astray." . 10 " Bell." Asalt was the name of an early M&n king.
11 This reads rather like an interpolation. Anyway, the total 7 given in the next line does not IS Twan, ''village" ; sagra, " sugar.''
square with the items mentioned, and there is something on the stone here which does not tally with 14 · Cf. 1. 9, supra, n. Dewi (Sanskrit and Pali devl, " goddess, queen ") may be used as a proper
the MS. text. • · niame here. .
19 For the uriintelligible passage here, see the text. 15 A possible reading is Bhadan. J;>wot means ''small."
18 Cf. K 24 n. 14 Perhaps cf. L.M. p&jau, bjau, "to offer;" 16 This MS. reading does not appear to be consistent with the corresponding (but indecipherable)
15 " Small Bottle,'' or "Bengal Quince." 113 '' King of Majesty (or Splendour)." •• •• marks on the stone. ·
1 7 ''Foot of Buddha (or pagoda, etc.).'' • l7 ''Cotton." But the reading is doubtful. If the word. is ton, it may mean "castor-oil plant; a
18 The reading is doubtful. It might be Lok Tra (perhaps a. proper na.me of a prince, · smin). circumstance" .. or may be the L.M. tuin, "'a measure of distance (~wo and a third miles); pos~; a
The MS. reading is Lok Phraai. kind of basket.''
19 c:i Wooden Fence.'' 18 Very doubtful reading. See the text for a possible variant.
20 Or possibly Tan, as to which cf. K ~4 n. Tar, L.M. taw, "stalk; handle; side." 19 Very doubtful : see the text.
51 1 CL K l!8 n. But L. M. taw mhan means "penholder." 518 Or Gahat. Sl Cf. I. 17, supra, n.
lii There seems to be an illegible letter ·here. H Perhaps L.M. asilm (~r arham), . " enclosure in which a Buddhist temple stands." The hext
98 Perhaps Abak. The. MS. text seems to have got the name. of this, or the preceding, sim4 word may cqnceivaoly be read cal4~, '' pinnacle."
twice over, with variatfons. BS Smfn, " king, prince, governor." 24 Or "sim8.s."
114 Visvakarman, .the celestial architect. 95 Cf. A 7 14. .
1
. S!6 Mbuiy ma.y mean 11 lady."· The next word is doubtfully read but may• . be the name of BaU 28 The stone wrong.ly has smim (for sim) here. Tf»iin means ''village."
Thau_, the mother-in-law and immediate predecessor of Dhammaceti. • . She King Brahma's Villa9e." as Or Cam Mha; or the h might be read as a b.
II 0 Temple Founder" ; aaH_, ••lay (benefactor)" ; .bhut, " temple co;taining images/' 18 'Ja.k, "to drag"; ri, "pestle J axle." The MS. variant juk means '' cord."
..
• •

•
'.EPIGRAPHIA l3IRMANICA
MON INSCRIPTIONS
PART 11]
'0
•
the Pan Ja[ra]m Lwan 1 .szma, the Mbo' Buin a sima, the Mrik Tasum the Kyak Mrah 1 szmli, the Dana [Waai] 9 sima, the Sangha Jidappa1
s£ma, [the Kyak Goh Cran Krun] Ahet 8 [sima], the Mah Sreil 4 s£ma, the • s£ma> the Mah 4 Anaw s£ma, the Truin sima, 4; the Trer st:ma, the
Lagan ° 1 Phen s£mii, the Ta' 6 Ga 7 st"mii.
. [Muh' Hot] sima,5 [the Karum 6 sima, the Jayagiri 7 simtl, the Ple simtJ)
At [Yan] (1. 15) Jim,8 the Gawampati [Sadhuim s?ima],9 the Jon the Pla 8 Lat sz·ma) the Su 9 s£ma.] 10
Kyak 10 Blan Nak u si'mii.
At Moulmein, the Pan Tarati Sablu 12 sima, the sz"ma of the leading
monks of Ceylon, the Gayan Tamhak 13 s£ma, 3, the st'ma 14 (at Gran, the
Smin] {I. 16) Singhanikay 15 [sima,]
2. I!).
At Carot> the J o il K yak Gam-i 16 st'mii, the Klo' Drow 17 sima, the Mran
J u iti 18 sz"ma, 3. · [Two n thousand and twenty years having elapsed after the year when
At Jra, the Cadim 19 Sama.ft sima, the Twan Ca1adhi 20 simii, [2. . the Lord of Merit, the exalted Buddha Sakyamuni, achieved parinz'rva~za, in
At Martaban, the· Tala 21 Nati Men simci,] (I. 17) the Cel.i Sadhuim ia9 the year 838 of the Common Era, on the eight4 of the waxing (half) of the
s£maJ the Than Smin Gra Slati 23 s£ma, the Tka' Caren 24 sima., the N'i Dan month of Marga§ir~a, the <lay (being) Sunday, the Kalya.Q.isima was conse ..
Can Sarun !a 5 simii, the Great Taban 26 s£mii, the Kray 27 Ba [Sren Sa Plan] 38 crated 12 ; and in due order the clergy who were desircms of receiving the
si·ma, [the Cau Han Ruim 29 Damya so s£ma, the Raai 81 Ja]m [sz"ma,] (L 18) upasampada ordination of the Sinhalese went (and) receiyed (it) successively.
... At that time His Majesty Ramadhipati-sriparamamaharajadhirat reflected in
this wise:
1 ''Mouth of the granary of Lwan."
2 Perhaps L.M. buiti, ''elephant grass; to surround." "Inasmuch as these our lords who crossed over to the island of Ceylon
s Pagoda of the Cave of the. Bank of the Abet Stream." received the upasampada ordination on the Kalyal)I (river), the slma that]
4 Cf. K 41 n.
5 Perhaps L.M. laggan, ''love." Cf. K 25.
6 Or Ka'. 1 Or Garn.
· a Or Nim.
9 ''The sima of Gawampati ·of That6n/'
ID Cf. 1. 8, supra, n. 11 Nak, '' Naga." M
1 9 '' Mouth of the Betel-leaf Gate}'
IS Or possibly Tamilak, in which case the two words would mean '' Crooked Wood...oil Tree."
14 Or ''simas." [our lords consecrated has likewise been styled the Ka.lyaQisim~] and gi1en
15 "Prince of the Ceylon sect," or '' Royal si'ma of the Ceylon sect." , {(that) name; {so;) in front of this Kalya~sima, it is fitting that we should
18 Cf. 1. s, supra, n. r gam-J means "monk." '
17 Klo', " garden'~ (or the possible reading tko', •1 island"). Drow . tnay be read Dron. Both build . a cetzya like unto the· Kalyai)i-cetiya,s 18 of the island of Ceylon and]
these variants are supp,orted by the MS. text. . (1. 2) call it the K~1yal)i·cetiya and [give it (that) name. We will (also)
18 :fuin, ''foot" (but our text usually spells jon). •• ~· • •
19 Or Cadip ; or the. Ca may be Gau.
20 The final vowel· may be a ; and it i's possible that the ah may be meant for a g.
~~ '' Lord, master." 22. That6n. l "Famed, approved, praised." :a Waai, "manure.''
s Sangha, ''monastic community." The. next word i~ unexplaine~ and rather doubtful. . The
!&s Than, ''place"; smin, ''king,' prince." The rest may be proper names, but slan means "to. be
MSS. get over the difficulty by reading s.angh.arfij(t, et?· >t'his would refer to some head ofthe Order.
dazed." The variant reading slun means "high, exalted."
2! Or Cagai.I.. Tko' ''means island." The MS. reading can means "fowl." . But· 1 cannot see it on the stone, though the final stroke ef the ,gh is .c urved sa as to resemble r ·
effo 1 r 5 t ' £ ' i ; i · ~ s a "e ru v n e , n " ; t t o o a st g e r p e ·. e o " v ; e r d " c c & tn (b , u '' t t o th e le p a o p s " si ; b l c e ii n r e m ad a i y n g l: > s e a c r o a n n n e m c e te a d n s w . i ,, t h d e L ed .lV ;" l ) . . gacan, ''to p~t forth some 4 w 1 '' '1 N at o . se; cape; fringe." 5 Here ends our rubbing of Face t. · e Variant Kd.' Ruai.
· £6 Or Tabail. 27 Or Tray. 7 "Victory Hill!' a .. , A large kind of horse·fly.11 9 '''to measure.''.
28 Plan may mean "to melt," but also ''couch, throne." · i.o "Here ends the first of the appendices.
2~. Cau, ''grandchild; to return'~; hait, "company"; ruim "'to help." • 11 Here 'begins the second appendix. in . the MS.· text.
ao Ot Dapya, which seems improbable. 1 111 S It u n s d ee a m y, s · 2 d 4 o th u b ~ tf u o l v e w m h b ~ ~ t r h er q 7 th 6 i . s s C h f o . u G ld 1 b 9 e n p • l ural. The MS. text of' this _pa.slag:~, as shown by a
SI ~'Mustard plant; radi&h/'
comparison. with the stone fragment that follows, is not free from corruption. ·
•

I
• • •
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
(VOL. III
PART H) MON INSCRIPTIONS
•
have a "Bodhi tree planted and call it the KalyaIJi Bodhi and give it (that)
(it), [in the middle of the place] (1. 12) where the holy relic was to be s.et,
name. If we can· thus arrange (matters),] (I. 3) all the clergy [who come to
(they) constructed· a two-fold 1 chamber, and decorated the c~amber with .~
perform their functions (and) ceremonies in this st"-ma will be able to venerate
fitting. workmanship as seemed good (to them). (With) jasmine flowers
(and) adore this cetz'ya; and all the clergy who are possessed] (1. 4) of faith
which they fashioned with cotton,2 [(they) decorated (it); (with)] (1. I 3)
will be able to venerate (and) adore [this 1 Bodhi (tree).]"
copper 8 [flowers] ~(they) also decorated (it); yak's tail fans {they) likewise
(1. 5) His Majesty Ramadhipati having reflected [in this wise, in the
hung [up as ornaments]. Outs.ide the two-fold 1 chamber, all the pillars
year 839 of the Common Era, beginning with the mgnth of Bhadrapa?a,] 8
[were wrapped in o+oth (and thus)] (1. I 4) adorned; and in , the former
His Majesty Ramadhipati ordered [a minister named Kraai Kaman,1 who was .
fashion 4 (with) jasmine flowers which they fashioned with cotton 6 (they)
chief among] (1. 6) the children of His Highness 4 Bafia Ram, [to have a .
y,' · decorated (them) all round, hanging (the flowers) around in many rows.
site prepared for the establish,nent of] the cet£ya, (and) [~a]ja Mindhat, who
(I. 15) Around the chamber (were) watering pots, one row; hanging lamps 6
was chief among [the children of His Highness 4 Bafia U, (and) Lak Vv oai,
(and) lamps 6 set around,7 one row; (and) tapers,8 one row; thus (did they)
who] (1. 7) was chief among the children of His Highness' [Bafia Barow,] to
adorn (it) all.
have a site prepared for planting the Bodhi (tree).
(At) the place where (1. 16) (they) were to plant the Bod~i, (tree), (they)
(1. 8) Having [in due course] prepared the sit~ where the Bodhi (tree)
constructed a pavilion -(and) hung (it) 9 inside (and) outside, {and) hung up
was to be planted and having constructed the tlan 5 where the Bodhi (tree)
[strings 10 of yak's tail fans,] (by way of) adorning it~ (At) the place where
was to be planted, they [plastered (it with) cement (and)] decorated (it).
His Majesty Ramadhipati (1. 1.7) . together with the ministers (and) chiefs of
The site where the cetiya was to be built [they] likewise [in due course
the army, (and} all the retinue were to be, in order to hold the festival [of
built up.] (1. 9) When the time arrived for setting up the relic chamber, ·
the dressing] u ·of the relic of the exalted Buddha, (they) constructed [a
(they) constructed the relic chamber and [plastered] (it with) cement, hewed
great] pavilion.
(and) carved (it), applied gold (and} silver, (and) decorated (it). [Having]
thus [made (it), upon the site of the cetiya,] (1. 10) in the . middle (they)
made a great building in tiers. Around itJ for the clergy together with the l I imagine the chamber had a double layer of walls, inner and outer.
2 There are two words here as to wbich there is some doubt, and which recur in I. 14, infra.
laity, men and women, [to be, (they) made steps] (I. II) going all around The first one seems to be bat, of which the only recorded meanings are "adhesiveness " and "like
(it). T~e outside of the gat£ 6 (they) covered all over with nibi.i1 through ness." I have taken it to mean "imitated." The other word is !' doubtful reading. I have taken it .
;
to be twow, 'L.M. tow, "cotton.n But if it is to be read kwo:w, it might possibly be L.M: kaw,
out the inside of the' gati"6 (they) hung white cloth. [Having] thus prepared e
er glue," and the phrase might mean "stuck on with glue." It has also been suggested that it may
• . . h . l . . ,, d '' h
be L.M. kwuiw, in the sense of '' ch1sel," thoug tts usua meaning 1s spa e or some sue
digging implement. ·
1 The MS. text here inserts "cetiya (and)}' whic~ seems otiose but may nevertheless be right.· •• •• · s The reading is almost certain and before it there .is a trace of the word pkau, ''flower.'' The
s The sixth month of the lunar year, which in this particular year ran from Saturday, 9th latter is supported by the MSS., which however omit the word for ''copper."
August, to Su_nday, 7th September, 1477· 4 Presumably this means with the same scheme of decoration as described in 1. a, supra; but it
s Or Gamail. might· perhaps mean in antique fashion.
4 The same term is used as that which I have elsewhere rendered by ''His Majesty.u · 5 Cf. 1. 12, supra, n.
. Apparently it could bf.' used of other princes (unless these were all deceased. kiHg~). e Thd word also means ''candles, tapers."
6 This word usually. means rt side;' which does not seem very much m pomt here. The MS. 7 Doubtful. reading and meaning : possibly we might take it for a v~riant of L.M. dalan, and
copyists seem to have thought so too and substituted a word meaning 0 altar," which is Jnconsistent translate "altar ·candles."
with. the reading on· the stone. 8 This word also means ''presents for the monks, arranged in the form of a cone or pyram~d.u
. e This ·word (which has a variety of meanings connected with the idea of '' going,") seems to 9 Presumably with cloth, as in l. 11, supra. . ·
· denote here some kind of. gangway or passage. Perhaps it was a kind of grand stand· for the 10 \Reading juk ·~ the first letter s'eems to be j on the stone, and the MS. muk supplies ~he rest ,of
accommodation of the public at the ceremony that was to take place~ • the word~ · • . . · .
7 Precise meaning unknown;. it may be some kind of ~lot h. Thii seems to· have been the 11 This does not seem a.. very appropriate meaning, but ls the only one recorded for the salom of
copyist's view as he inserts yat before it. C,f. J :;a n. the MS. text. One wo4ld have expected some word meaning ''to enshrine/' and the word may be
· an error for salaw.
Ill{, ...
..
•
·•

I
• 11
• . ·•
• .
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. 111 · •PART °XIJ MON INSCRIPTIONS
(1. -i 8) (When they had) thus constructed (the necessary buildings), to give a display, (and) the sun had declined) His Majesty having arranged
{then) on Wednesday, the day preceding the holy day,1 the relic/~ image,
(for men) (1. 26) to guard the relic, His Majesty returned home~1
[and t~e _Bodhi (tree) that was to be planted,] were placed (and) arranged
(On) the first of. the waning (half of the month), the day (being) Friday.
for ~11 the [Wan Jatail ?J 8 princes, (1. 19) ministers (and) chiefs of the army, at that., time, 2 His Majesty . came down 9 "(and) arrived at the pla.ce of the
according to their order of ·walking · in procession (in) conveying the relic, pavilion 4 ,again. Having invited (1. 27) the} fifty teachers of the Order, (he)
i.mage, (and) Bodhi (tree); (and) the chiefs of the army were informed. provided (t~em) with food (and) gave is {them) sue~ gifts as (were) fitting to
(1. 20) E~rly in the morning of Thursday,4 His Majesty Ramadhjpati be given as charitable efferings : {to each. one) t\.yo cloth mats,6 red pepper,
[together with all his retinue] s_et. out (and) came down 5 and occupied the (and) areca-nuts.7 His (1. 28) ·Majesty, having given {these as) giftsJ caused~
pavilion (L z 1) which had been built. His Majesty having thus come·· down, 5 -the festival, which included 8 dancing girls, to proceed. In the afternoon, His
all the sons of Bis Majesty '(and) all [the daughters of His Majesty,] . Majesty Ramadhipati, together with (his) family (and) kiµsfolk (and) (L 29)
together with ~11 the Wan (1. 22) Jatail 6 princes,· ministers, (and) generals,7 with all (his) retinue, went up to the relic chamber. Then (having) ~et up a
the glory (and) splendour of a great festival, 8 [came down 5 (and) conveyed] stand 9 (and) cushion hemmed I with gold,] 10 and having set a white umbrella
the ;relic together with the image (and) the Bodhi ficus. over it, (they) 11 installed the relic (and) image (I. 30) upon the stand.9 The
[(At)the time] (L .2 3) of the arrival of th.e relic, image, (and) Bodhi
''ablution of a thousand streams " was performed over the relic ; the eight
(tree), the relic (and} image were set up [at the place (where)] the relic of Brabmans, holding right·volufed 12 conch .. shells adorned with gold) adorned
the exalted Buddha [was to be put;] (and) the Bodhi (tree) (L 24) was with silver, (1. 31) and adorned with gems, as though pouring the ablution on
placed [in] the chamber where the Bodhi (tree) was to be set. When (they) a king receiving the royal .. anointment,1 8 similarly poured ablution in the
[haq] thus placed the relic (and) the ·Bodhi tree, there was a festival, . ceremony of " a thousand streams," and performed the royal anointment 18 on
including 9 dancing girls, Indian 10 dancers, (1. 25) J.Ilen making a display with the relic (and) (1. 32) image.
shields (and) daggers, men doing sword play ,11 men fencing 12 (with) staves,
When this had been done, eight teachers of the Order had to recite the
wielding 13 \who) gave a display. (When they) had been made
••••••• , solemn verse [being] .the mental ejaculation called q,nekajati_ samsaram and.
, l One of the four holy days of the lun(!r month. It appears from J. 26, infra, that the particular
holy day of which this was the eve was the full-moon day, which latter fell on a Thursday. As no
month is mentioned, one cannot be quite certain of the date; but the first month that fulfils the. I Literally, "went up." Cf. the use .of_ the correlative cuih, "to come _,down,"' in ll. 20, 2r, 26,
· c:pnditions is Margasir~a, and probably this Wednesday was Wednesday, 19th November 1477. 2 These words are doubtful, but the alternative '"early in the morning" given in the MS. text
z Cf. § 78, . seems to be inconsistent wi~h the few traces of letters visible on the stone.· The date was probably
s Here in the MS. text are two words which probably ought to be read wan jatan (or jata'W) 1 F'iday, :ust NQvember 1477. Cf. 1. t8, supra, n. ·
and presumably denote some rank or office; cf. 11. 21·2~, inf1'a. I have taken these two words as s Cf. 1.- ~I, sup1'a, n. 4 The one mentioned in 11. '11, ~o) supra.
qualifying smiii. .. 4 Probably Thumlay, 2oth November 1477. Cf. I. 18, suJwa, n. 5 It is not clear why th!s word should be in the· form sk.uiw (which usually gives a future or._
o I.e. left the town and went to the place where aU these preparations had been maqe. •• • • potential shade of meaning) instead of the ordinary kuiw. ]t may be simply an error of the drafts- ""-·
.6 Doubtful reading. Cf. I. 18, supra, 'r1.· · 7 Cf. l. 19, supra, and H 36 n. man or the engraver; the MS. text has altered it to kuiw•
s Cf. F 46 n. The meaning of klalJ. is "distinct." It presumably merely qualifies fnok. 6 Or "cioths (and) mats,'' or "robes (and) mats." Cf. F 46, H 38, J 24, N (in the conclusion,
9 Literally, "which began with." . after 1. 28). ·
10 L.M. gala, primarily the people of the part of Bengal known. as Gaur (Sanskrit Gau(,a, .Pali 7 The objects .mentioned are probably t9 be regarded as- the grammatical objects of the verb
Gola, cf. A 8 n.,), but nowadays defined as '' qi. native of any country west of Burma." The Burmese _ "having given,, in the following line, but in order to keep as fat as possible to the original order~
eq~ivalent · kulii : seems to be derived from the MBn form of· the word. I have split tip the· phtase ·
11 The meaning is doubtful. It seems possible that the first word, doubtfully read sare, is derived ~ Ct I,. 24, ~upra, n. 9 Or " couch, seat, bqard.';
·from the Burmese word for. "soldier" (cf. LM. sariiai pnan, ''soldier"); the second one means ''to io Cf. H 39 n., N r3. Perhaps it was a hemmed mat of cloth of gold.
move lengthwise,, to throw (as a spear}." The two together may be. descriptive of some kind of 11 No subject is 'mentioned. It may conceivably have been the king him$elf, the pets~~ last
mentioned. · · ·
military display· or evolution. · · 12 Literally, ''striking;(
is The meaning depends on what follows and th~re is here a laaun!. If th• MS. text can be 1i:9. Cf. ~X A 41 n, ~he term there is .Pali, while here the same thing is exptessed J:n. MS"ri words.
. trPsted. we must substitute ''wrestling" for "wieldii:1.g/> but unfortunately it is elea.r that this text Sanskrit abhiJeka! literall'y "SJ?rinkling.u It might .be better to render it )~l' ''royal lu,str~tion/'
. omit• p{lrt of 'the original,, a;nd it may have introduced •traneous matter • but the ceremony corresponda with the anointment practised at the a'1ron~tion of ~urop~n l•Jilf" .
..
• • •

•
•
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA MON INSCRIPTIONS
•
the solemn verse being the verbal 1 (I. 33) ejaculation called yadii have [(From) 1 the year. 839 to the year 841 2 of the Common Era·; His
patubhavanti dhammii.2 Having had (these) recited, (the king) 3 caused the Majesty Ramadhipati sent word to the dwelling-places 9 of siimarieras desirous
drums to be beaten (and) shouts to be raised (by the assembled multitude). of th.e ujasampadti ordination, (as follows): '' In accordance with the
When this had been done, at the time when Pisces was lagna 4 (1. 34) ordinance 4 which we communicated to our lords as to the proper course of
(they) 6 ins'talled the relic (and) image in the relic chamber. Having installed instruetion, let (our) lords promote (such) studies and report to us: (then) we
the relic, all around the relic (and) image, statues of the two Chief Disciples 6 will cause the stimaneras to receive the upasampadii ordination in the
(and) the (1. 35) eighty Great Disciples, statues of ~hirteen female Arhats Kalya~I(sima)." Thus ~aying, His Majesty Ramadhipati sent word.
who had attained pre-eminence, statues of eleven male devotees who had When the year 841 of the Common Era 'arrived, the sama'Jferas having
attained pr~·eminence, statues of ten female devotees who had attained pre studied in accordance with what it was proper that· they should studyJ
eminence, a statue of the mother of the exalted (I. 36) Buddha, a statue of including 6 the Khuddhasikkba (artd) the Patimokkh~, the whole company s
the father of the exalted Buddha, in all one hundred (and) eighteen statues, came (and) informed His Majesty Ramadhipati. Then His Majesty caused
which were cast in brass and· overlaid with gold, were arranged all around. the siima'l'feras to be called together· (and) made (them) recite i (and) when
(1. 37) Having ceremonially burnt 7 candles, (they) ceremonially scattered 8 His Majesty had heard the siima1Jeras recite, there being six hundred. (and)
9 perfumes; and when (that) had been (done), (they) closed the one 7 who were able to recite correctly, (he) caused six b~IJs. to be built
••••
mouth of the doorway 10 with a very big flat stone, which (they) overlaid .within the KalyaQisima (as) lodgings. suitable for the six hundred (and) one
(with) bri~ks. Having overla1d (it with) (1. 38) bricks, (they) roofed (it siima?Jeras to lodge in, (and) had (them) hung (with) awnings. f Of the 5 0 s
with) a five-fold vault. As for the Bodhi (tree), (they). planted (it) at the leading monks. who, were to confer the upasampada ordination on the si~
time when Pisces (was) lagna 11 (they) put (it) down in the hole and (I. 39) hundred (and) one sama1Jtferas, (he) had lodgings built and curtains hung,
;
planted -.(it). · while within the Kalyai:iisima (he) had curtains ~et all around (and) m.ats
Then (they) set up umbrellas (and) streamers,111 burnt candles, poured spread throughout, and around the· Kalya1)isima, for all the people who were
libations with . . • . . . .. .18 perfumed water, (and)_ set small pagodas around.14 to be there (he) had pavilions 9 built, cloth hung, curtains set all around, (and)
mats spread throughout. ·
to
In. the pavilion where His Majesty was stay together with his retinue
: . to~ celebrate the festival of the 601 stimaneras who were to receive the
1 Very doubtful reading; the MS. text omits it altogether. •
s These two Pali phrases are the beginnings of solemn utterances attributed to Buddha himslif
immediately after his attaiqment of supreme wisdom. (Cf. Dhammapada~ XI (Jaravagga)) and l Here begins the third appendi,x in the MS. text.
Commentary; Vinayapifaka/ Mahfivagga, I, t.) 2 1477-78 to 1479-80 A.D.
s Though there is no subiect expressed, the verb kuiwt "caused," implies one, and presumably •• .. a s Literally, "places."
it would be the king, as he promoted the whole affair. 4, Cf. the passage between our Faces H and J, J 1, 5-10.
4 That is, tangential with the eastern horizon. Cf. IX A 1~ tr. n. s· Litera.Uy, "beginning with."
5 Cf. 1. ~g, supra, n. . 6 Sariputta and MogalI~na. 6 The reading satta seems to be corrupt. In the E.M. inscriptions it occurs. (~ 43, 44) in, the
7 Or, literally, u burnt (and). offered." 8 Or ''scattered (and) offered." sense of<' creatures, sent1ent beings," but. in M.M. this would be archaic, proba,bly, ai;id it does not
!t The meaning of jar (or majar) is undet&rmined. It might possibly be "liquid," but this-would . seem to fit the context ve~y welJ. It would be possible to read sat= ta', but that gives a aimi.Jar sense.
be inappropriate,. because superfluous, in the context of J. 39, infnJ. I have a!?sumed that it stands for sattha (Pali sattho, ''troop ") which I have not, however, found
10 The entrance to the reliJ: chamber. I take this to have been at the top, not at the side, and recorded as a M On word. ..
that the flat stone was laid on the top of it, and over it a five-layered vaulting of brickwork. 7 Cf. J 25, of which this· whole appendix is in effeet an e;xpansion (§. 79).
1 l 1 l 9 9 , T C C h f f . . e 1 1 . f . o 3 3 r 3 7 e , g , o s s i u u n p p g ' r l a 'a n , , o n u n . n . s may be in the singular. ..., whic 8 h 9 I M w ~ S d r o . d A n a o p t w p k r e o n a n o r g w s l y t b t ~ h a e o s w m 5 e . e i a t n s i n o g r i o g f i n da to s ii. a m , con It f u s s e io e n m s b e n t o w t e ~ im n po S s a s n ib s l k e r . i t t h a 1 a t s 1 t 1 M an s i a i , ~ .r a ~ a h ~ e r r m r ~ a ~ r f f f g ~ e r / ! t m a i n m d
14 L. M. tamrtlt ben are small pagodas built on the base of a large one. Here ends Face M, ar~v;a, '' pleas~re garden, {fark," Pali aramo, especially (in the latter lang~i:\g;~). a,, q, plaee for
concluding .the second appendix~ rtl1g1ou1 gatherings, and even a moH.slery.. Cf. L i3,
14
•

!
•
• • •
•
2•1 0 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. tll • · • P_.\RT ff] MCN INSCRIPTIONS
•
upasampadii ordination, (he) had curtains (and) awnings hung (and) mats monk Saddhammavilasa ; the Mahathera Uttamha ; the leading monk
spread. Having made these preparations, (he) caused the 50 leading monks Saddhammasiri; the leading monk Dhammadassi; the leading] (1. 3) monk
who were to confer the ujasampada ordination on the 601 siimaneras to be Piyadassi; the leading monk Sasanapajjota ; the leading moni{ [Atigu1irnha ;
m • v1 • ted: the number of t . h ese mon~s who had come hack from- • Ceylo J n was the leading monk Gul)asagara : . . . . . . . .. . . • . ,1 total eighteen.
I 7, (na1:1ely) the leading mo~k Saddhamma, I ; Dhammakitti, 1 ; the leading Having thus invited] (1. 4) fifty teachers of the Order, on Wednesday,
monk T~lokagaru,_ I ; the leadmg monk Parakkamabahu, 1 ; Mangalathera, 1 ; which was the day preceding the full-moon (day) of Phalguna,2 [(the king)
~e _Ieadmg monk Buddhaghosa, I ; the leading monk ~U:Q.arataJ;l.adhara, J ; the entrusted all . the sa~a1J-eras to the charge of leading nobles a including
leadmg monk Neratal)alailkara, 1 ; the. leading monk Taratanarnali 1 • the ministers (and)) (1. 5) generals,4 (and) caused (them) all to change (their)
Saddhamm~teja, Mahadeva~her~,
leading mo?k 1 ; Dhammaramasami, 1 ; . 1 ; status.6 One. hundred sama"!eras (he) entrusted- to Prince Bra Sam ~en 8
Culabhayatissathera, 1 ; Na:r;i.apal)qitamahathera, .I ; Vijayabahupaficaparivena [to prepare; one hundred siima?peras (he) entrusted to Prince Sarh Tray 7 to
mahathera, .r ; Sirilailkagu:Q.avutti, 1 ; Sirilankabuddhathera 1 : total of those who prepare;] (1. 6) one hundred sama'Jlferas (he) entrusted to Prince Waft 8
returned .from Ceylon, 1 7. Then. our lords the leading clergy of Pegu : Cakkawade to prc::_pare ; one· hundred sama'l}eras (he) entrusted to Prince
the . leadmg monk U dummara a; the leading monk Sriramarajaguru ; the [Wail 8 Cau Niirasiti 9 to prepare; one hundred sama1Jeras (he) entrusted to
leadm~ monk Buddhadivakara a ; the leading monk Rata~agiri; the leading Cau Mharhat] 10 (1. 7) to prepare; one hundred (and) one sii.maneras (he}
monk Saddhamrnarajaguru; the ieading monk Saddhamrnadhara; the leading entrusted to Prince Wan 8 Ay Gam Bin to prepare. ·
monk SuvaI).IJapaduma; the leading monk Tipitakadhara 4 the leading monk The requisites [to be given to the 601 sama'Jlferas (namely) six} (I. 8)
;
Anumadassi; the leading monk Dhammarajika ; the leading monk Samanta hundred (and) one sets (of monastic robes,] six hundred (and) one alms·
pasadika ; the leading monk Saddhammavijaya; total 15 5 of our lords of bowfs, six hundred .(and) one umbrellas, six hundred (and) one staves, [60 r
Pegu. Then again the forest] paper] fans, [601 hemmed mats,] 11 (1. 9) six hundred (and) one boxes for
areca-nuts 12 together with bottles of lime, areca-nut slicers, knives, spoons,
(and) napkins, (were) counted out (and) given to these leading nobles [who .
N
were preparing {the siima?Jeras).
His Majesty having made these arrangements,] (1. IO) (on) the holy day
dwellers 6 the Sangharaja 7 [Samma:t;ta ; the leading monk Lamufijusa s;
:
of the full moon of the month of Phalguna, the day (being) .,Thursday/3
Vinayapajjota; the leading monk SaddhammavijayaseJ;l.apati; the leading
early in the morning, His Majesty [came· down and went to stay to the
monk Passarh ; the leading monk Sivali; the leading monk] (I. 2) La 9 tlte •
;
leading monk Saddhammapajjota; the leading monk [Silapajjota; the leading
I l do not know the sense of buin (variant buit) lgan. Unless it represents the name of· an
• • individual monk, there is one name missing in this third list.
1 • The MS. text has 'jbuddhalo, which I take to be a copyist's error for 0 buddhathe. For variant 2 Wednesday, ~3rd February 1480.
(and m some cases more correct) forms of some of these names, cf. F 5-13t 34-41, and the section s Cf. H 31. 4 Cf. H 36,
between F and G. 5 That is, into the full monastic condition.
2 Or Dudummara. 6 There is some doubt ~a.s to the reading of this name (cf. the texts) but the probability seems to
· a Or Buddhaditakara. be that it was /)en, which one· copyist fir~t misread J?ej and another further transformed into 1/qt.
4 Here MS. B inserts ''the leading monk Ra," which can hardly be his whole name, unless it 7 In 11. 17-26 1 infra, the form appears to be Kray.
is a M6n name (not Pali like tbe others). s This seems to be a title. Cf. M u-22. .
Ii. There are actually only 12 names (besides the one given in the last note), so the copyists have 9 There is some doubt as to the true reading of this name : cf. H. 18, 19, infra, and the. note on
evidently dropped some. . the text.
6 Monks leading a secluded life in the forest. Cf; J 21, 10 This evidently rep~esents Mahiirat (=· Mahiiraja). MS. B has MMraj. but that cannot have
7 Chief of the Order in a country, or some part of it. Cf. H 3, 4 (MS. t!xt and tr.)• • been the _reading on tfie stone, where the final letter is t notj.
8 Or Larriu~jasa. • 11 Or 'c cushions·." 12 On this, and the whole passage, cf. H 38-3!), suPt11 n,
1
9 This name is also a suspiciously ·short one. IS Thursday. 24th February 1480•
•

.
..
• "
J. •
• •
t ('!)
E:PIGRAPHIA BiRMANICA VOL •. Jh • • tiART It J MON INSCRIPTIONS
nort'h~ard of the KalyaQi] (1. 11) monastery, invited the fifty teachers of the arranged by Gau Nwarasin 1 [having] passed by ,9 [the hundred samaf_terasl
•
·Order to enter into their lodgings, [gave them alms-food, and arranged a arranged by [Cau Mharat] 9 (1. 20) came along in their turn. The order of
grand festival with] (l. 12) men sporting (and) competing. (their) going (was) similar; (their) turbans (w.ere) also variegated in colour.4
Then the leading nobles, who had arranged the samatferas set out from The hundred sama?Jeras arranged by Cau [Mharat having passed by,] (L 21)
1
San
IPegu. When they :set 'out, Prince Bra pej1 led the way. The order] the hundred (and) one sama1!:rwas arrange~ by Prince Ay Garn Bin came along
_( 1. i3) of their marching 51 (was thus) : men carrying the h~mmed mats a in their turn. The order of (their) going (was) similar; '[(their) turban.s
led the way; after the mats (came) men carrying. the umbrellas, .[alms (were • ) . also variegate • d in .colour. 4 Thus] (l. 22) did the six hundred (and)
bowls, (and) staves ; after them, men bearing the areca-nut boxes 4 after] one sama?Jeras change .their status 5 (and) ·the leading nobl~s who accepted
;
(1. J4) them, men carrying the monastic robes. Then came a hundred the charge of those sama7Jeras [went (and) arranged (them) in the lodgings
~'~~. ~ith mount~. r~d.·, of those 601 sama~eras,] (1. 23) (and) caused (them) to be p~ovided with
ele.·p . h. an. ts . a hundred sama'>Jer. a. s d on t. hem .. Among the h. und. ·
, [men weanng caps 5 led the way, after them (came) men] (1. 15) wearmg food.
1"'-in,6 (and) after the klu1:n 6 (came) men wearing gilt hats. All these Then, when the fifty teachers of the Order had partaken of the day's
· ..
hundred sama!Jtferas also wore [plain] peaked turbans. (Musical instruments, . boiled rice~~ His Majesty [invited (them) to enter into] (1. 24) the sima; and
· irtduding 7 the bat, sreai' (and)] (l. 16) basa,8 were severally disposed at His Majesty, together with (his) retinue, also entered into the consecrated
intervals in the procession. sima.7 Then the hundred sama1Jeras [arranged by Prince Bra San J?et] 8
·
The hundred samatJperas. arranged by Prince Sam Tray 9 [came next; the (L 25) were called up in (their) order and were made monks. Having
order of (their) going, (was) similar; (their) turbans (were)] (I. 17) variegated become monks, (they) were sent off to lodge again in their several lodgin,gs1
in colour.10 The hundred sii'l'Hatfferas arranged by Prince Sam Kray 9 having [(and) the hundred sama~ieras] arranged [by Prince Sam J (t. 26) Kray were
passed by, the hundred sama1J-eras arranged by Prince [Cakkawade came called up in successive order and made monks. In this way, [in accordance
·along in their turn.. The order ·of (their) going] (1. 18) (was) similar; (their) with the order of their going in procession, (they)] (1. 27) were invited to
turbans were peaked likewise. The hundred samatJperas arranged by Prince come up and our lords were all made monks. When they had .becom~
Cakkawide having passed by, [the hundred samatferas arranged; by Gau monks, (they) were sent to lodge in their several lodgings. Thus [was it
Ntirasin 11 came along] (L i9) in their turn. The order of (their) going (was) arranged. Among the hundred sama?_teras] (1. 28) who were. under the charge
"Simila·t; (their) turbans (were) variegated in colour.10 The hundred samaneras of Prince Bra Sam D~il, in regular order two by two were called up and
to
•o ur lords {the ordaining monks) were caused confer [the upasampada 9
•
l As to the correct form of this name, cf. t. 5, sup,-a, n. .. .. •
9 The text has gata, ''in front," here, apparently; but the MSS. may be right in reading it as 1 Cf. note on l. 19 of the text.
gah, and I have left it untranslated. • • 2 The MS. omits the preceding clause and its text is corrupt hert:h as it is in the middle of 1. 18,
s Cf. 1. 8, supra, n, supra, where the text of the stone serves as a check on it. But from. the general similarity of all
4 Cf. H. 38-39, supra, n. .. these descriptions it is easy to restore the true reading.
5 L.M. khapeai is defined as a er fez," and was therefore a somewhat tall cap. 9 Cf. 1. 6, supra, n. 4 Cf. 1. 17, supra, n.
6 The meaning of kluin has not been determined, but presumably it was some kind of head gear. 5 . Cf. I. 5, supra, n.
• Th'e •copyists of the MSS. have arbitrarily altet:ed. it into kttuin, ''umbrellas." 6 That is, the day's meal, taken just before mid-day, as distinguished from breakfast.
7 Literally, _.. beginning with." 7 I am not sure that this is the meaning, as it involves an abnormal order of the words. But
8 Biit (Sanskrit 'VO.dya) is any musical instrument a:nd .. the word may be used here merely as a '' into the consecration of the sima" . does not make good sense : the business .i n h;;i.nd was not the
generic of the neoct two ; sreai is a wind instrument, the " k~n " or Lao organ, a kind of Pan pipes, consecration of the. sima, which had already been done, but the ordination of these .novii:es int~ fu1Iy
and. basil either goes with it adding nothing to it, or is some other undetermined kind of musfoal ordained monks.
instrument. · El Cf. t. 5, supra, n.
9 The correct form seems to be Kray, as in U. 17, ~'6• • .. g )'he first lett~r of this· word is the last thing legible en. the estampage from the s~one, and the
10 D1oubtful meaning, based 'on the sense ·of L.M. "dawiin. end of Face N must have been a few words further on. What follows is ;pres~r,v1:1d only in· the MSS.
11 Cf,; note on 1. 19 of the text. and must have been inscribed on the reverse of the same stone, the top part Gf which is now lost,, ·
..
, •

,.
.. _ .
..
• .
•
•
.· fl EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. If.I • •. P-ART n] MON .INSCRIPTIONS
•
ordination (upon them). At the time of the conferring of the upasanzpada
fruits.1 -Having thus been presented with gifts, the 50 teachers of the Order
ordination, (there was) one upa;j'haya, a person who recited the kammavaca,
were dismissed home. When the 50 teachers of the Order had been thus
(and for) each sama1Jera (there were) two_ monks, holding the kammavaca, to
dismissed home, all the 601, persons who had received the _upasampada
confer (on him) the upasampada ordination.
ordination, according to ................. ,9 were made to depart
When the day closed, . His Majesty, having arranged (for the presence
in due order, and His Majesty having regarded them with gladness caused
of) leading nobles, scribesJ drums, (and) lights,1 returned home. Our lords, _
o! them to return to their dwelling-places.
who were to confer the upasampada ordination, did s_o _Jrom t?e afternoeon
- . iuch deeds· as these did His Majesty Ramadhipati do, because he took
the full"moon day of the month of Phalguna, the ~lay (~emg) Thursday,
great delight in religion ; desiring that those who .r eceived the upasampada
until the fourth of the waning (half) of Pha1guna, the day (being) Monday 8 i
ordination should be firm (and) steadfast, did (he) do such deeds as these.
it was noontide when they had finished.
Hereafter, also, for the term of life of His Majesty Ramadhipati, (for) every
When the 601 sama'J!.eras had thus been made to receive the itpasam
samanera who shall desire to receive the upasampadii ordination His Majesty ·
padii. ordination, four teachers of the Order were invited to preach the
Ramidhipati will make preparation in ·, like manner to have:- the u pasampada
doctrine of the' Patimokkha to the persons who had received the · new
ordination conferred. Inasmuch as that is so, may the princes who are
.. upasampada ordination. There were offered to the four teachers of the ?f
replete with faith and . with wisdom, who shaH wield th: . sovereignty _the
Order, who preached the Patimokkha to the persons who had received the
city of Hatisawati hereafter, also .. impart strength to religion ! Accordmg as
new upasampada ordination, to each of them four. cloth mats,. two barrels 4 of
we arranged this, (so may they) follow after !] 8
areca-nuts, (and) two viss of red pepper.
On the fifth of the waning (h9-1f) of the month of Phalguna, the day
Postscr£pt as to the dates £n the preced£ng tra?tslation.
(being) Tuesday,6 early in the morning, His Majesty Ramadhipati came
83. Excepting the anomalous case noted at F 38, the verifiable dates in
down and all the 50 teachers of the Order together with the six hundred
the inscriptions of ·the Kalyal}.isima, when collated together, fall into a~
~and} one persons w.ho had received the new ujasampada ordination were
consi~tent scheme or series running from January 1476 to the end of;..-
entertained 6 with viands of divers kind and food of various sorts, each of the
February 1480. When rendered into dates of the Julfan {or Old Style)
teachers of the .O rder (being give,n also) two cloth mats, one hemmed mat,
calendar by the methods explained in Irwin's The B unnese Calendar (London,
two viss of black pepper, four viss of Indian pepper, a thousand basi fruits,1
1901 ), this. scheme involves the following elements :·.-- ·
a box for areca-nuts and betel,8 together with a bottle of lime, areca~nut
,, (i) The first day of the waxing half of the month of Caitra (i.e. the
slicers, (and). a napkin, the aforesaid pious gifts being presented as offerings•
first day of the lunar year) fell iU the years 1476-79 on the following
by His Majesty. To the 601 persons who had received the new upasampada
• dates: (a) Saturday, 24th _February 1476, (b) Saturday, 15th March
ordination, besides the ''eight requisites" which had ·already been bestowed, •
1477, (c) Wednesday, 4th March 1478, (d) Sunday, 21st February 1479.4
were also given two viss each of Indian pepper (and) four hundred basi ·
1 Perhaps some.sort of areca-nuts.
s I do not understand tJuin gah bapeii.
1 Cf. H .30-31 and n. a End of the seventh .s tone of the ·M 8n text, as stated in the MSS., and of the 1 last of the
2 Thursday,: 24th February 1480. appendices~ · I\ ~ · · · ,
a Monday, 28th February 1480. · . _ . . . ·.. . . · .
4 As the Burmese calendar reckons the commencement of the year (with a view to Kiviitg the
4 Or "tubes/' Or else some high numeral (100 or 1000) has been omitted by the copyists and the year iis serial number) purely by solar reckoning, the initial dates of Caitra, together . with · a
word ktjuin is used in the sense of "umbrella/' which seems less likely here.
variable number of other dates in that month and sometimes even in the next month, fall into the
5 Tuesday, 29th February 1480. ,, • . . close of the preceding year of the Common Era ; in these cases they fell . in the years 837 to 840.
6 Literally, "pour out," but I suspect taruip, ''to feed, was the ongmal re!dmg. • Hence Sbnday, the ninth of J:he waxing half of Caitra, 837 (E 45), fell on Sunday, 3rd March 1476;
7 Perhaps some sort 'of arecaMnuts. •
and Wednesday, the fifth of the waxing half of Caitra, 838 (K 10), fell on Wednesday, t9th March
8 Cf. H 38-39, sup.-a, ·n,
1477•
•·

,.
.. .
...
. .
.
.
..
.
.
"
. EPIGRAPHIA l31RMANICA •[VOL.· IW·' •
. ·.
(ii) The year 838 was reckoned as .a wa-gyi-tat y~ar, i.e . . not only
was the tpont.b of A~aqha intercalated (~s appears from a comparison of· the
dates in E 48, 53, and subsequent dates of the same year)· but Jye$\ha was
given an extra day, making it a month. of 30 days, instead of it~ normal 29.
' · (iii} The year 841 w~s reckoned as a :Wa-nge~tat year, l.e. A~~<;lha was
intercalated but Jy e~tha had only 29 days. ·
The intervening years were, of course, ordinafi' y.ears, withou~ any
intercalation ~t all. ·Now ·it is to .be .o'h>served that the ·above · elements of
. the calendar exemplify bo~h under: (ii) and (iii) distinct breaches of the rule·
stated in para. 04, p. 13, of Irwin's work.· But in para. 65 of the same pa,ge
he notes that the actual practice of the calendars frequent! y differed from··.
that rule in the period 1738-19?0 .A.D.; and it is evident fr~m ou~ record
that the same was the case. in the last quarter of the 15 th century.
•
•
•
..
I
l:
•
"'.

VOLUME IV
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
BEING
LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS
OF BURMA
EDITED BIT
U MYA
SUPERINTENDENT, ARCHAEOLOGICALStJRVB?.
MdN
INSCRIPTION^;
Section II The Mediaeval jM*?-$i(tor&. -'
xmxvm ' ,' - ' "
S.
BY
BLAGOEN
O.
,

CONTENTS.
MON INSCRIPTIONS
8488
No. XIIL AN INSCRIPTION OF THE AJAP&LA PAGODA,
PEGU,
8990
No. XIV, AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEGUGYI PAGODA,
PEGU.
9194
No. XV. AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEDAGON PAGODA,
RANGOON.
9596
No. XVL AN INSCRIPTION OF THE YATHEMYO MONASTERY,
PEGU.
9798
No. XVIL AN INSCRIPTION OF THE KvAK PAN PAGODA,
PEGU.
No. XVIIL AN INSCRIPTION OF THE GAUNGZEOYUN
PAGODA, PEGU.
POSTSCRIPT ...

BIRMANICA
EPIGRAPHIA
MON INSCRIPTIONS.
No. XIII.
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE AJAPALA PAGODA, PEGU.
Dcscripth r A ccoimt.
stone O ) - " T t : . h T e hi pa s rt r s ec o o c r c d up i i s ed en b g y rav t e he d l o e n tte t ri w n o g h f e ac r e e s tr ( a p n r s e c s r u i m b a ed b B l b y ei o n f g t o he n s F a a m c e e "
A 4 ft. in height by 3 ft. 9 in. in breadth and on Face 3 ft. 2 in. by
3 ft 6 in The letters are about \ in. high, letter / is about f in.' long,
and'the interlinear space is about 1 in. Though a good deal weathered as
are many of the other stone inscriptions of Lower Burma-, this one is still
for the most part legible.
85 Like the two following inscriptions, it is connected with a sacred
Buddha
erected in conmicntoralicm of episodes in the life of
building
before or after his attainment of supreme enlightenment
shortly
In this case the events are those which occurred under an Indian
Ficn* Indha] known as the Ajapala, or goatherds' fig-
fig-tree (or banyan,
in the immediate neighbour hood of the Bodhi tree under which the
t s r u ee p , reme enlightenment was attained. Hefore going to sit under the Bodhi
where he received
the Bodhisattva rested uiuli-r the Ajupala fig-tree,
tree, m
from the maiden Sujata an offering of rice cooked milk (A I-;/).
The next seven weeks, beginning with the one during which he became a
Buddha under the Bodhi tree, are especially celebrated. After his atta m in e -
ment of Budclhahood he spent another week gazing steadfastly at
a
Bodhi tree and satisfied the cluvas of his Buddhahood by performing
miracle; during the third wr-ck he walked up and down a cloistered
w in al t k h " e w ne h x i t ch re t c h o e rd y , pr N e o p . ar X e I d V. for T h h i e m. fou T r h t e h se wee i k nci w d a e s nts spe a n r t e m co a mmem h o ou r s a e te o d t
* Numbering of the pftraRRitfw in Hii* iwt l waittnued from Part U of Volume HI.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. iv
2
A
gems", also prepared by the devas and mentioned on Face of the
present record, 1. 24, from which he then returned to the Ajapala fig-tree
to spend the fifth week (A 23-4). During this week he was visited by a
Brahman, to whose question as to what really constituted a Brahman he
replied by laying stress on ethical qualifications, not on caste and birth
(A 25-6). Another event in this week was the recognition by the evil
Mara of his failure in his conflict with Buddha and the fruitless
spirit
efforts of Mara's three daughters, the personifications of the passions, to
tempt the enlightened one (A 26-35). The sixth week was spent under a
Mucalinda tree (Barringtonia acutanguld), where a Naga king, also named
Mucalinda, sheltered him from the rain with his hood ; and the seventh
under a Rajayatana tree (believed to be Biichanania latifolia) where he
was visited by two travelling merchants, Tapussa and Bhallika, to whom he
gave eight hairs from his head, which according to the traditions of Burma
are now enshrined in the Shwedagon Pagoda at Rangoon. This episode,
A
as well as much of the preceding, is related on Face of No. XV, but
unfortunately that part of the record is in a very damaged condition.
After these seven celebrated weeks, Buddha returned again to the Ajapala
fig-tree and there reflected as to whether he should preach the Law, and,
if so, to whom. This is related in our present record, and when he had
decided the matter in his mind he left the Ajapala fig-tree to go to the,
region of Benares (B 121).
86, The last four lines of our record tell of the building of the
Ajapala pagoda at Pegu in imitation of the one that had been erected long
before on the site of the Ajapala fig-tree. It is unfortunate that a good
deal is missing in the text here. In the last line there is a date, but the
year number is not quite certain. If the text as here printed represents
the true reading of the year, the date fell into the summer of 1480 A.D.
As however both the year and the week-day are in doubt, it is not
possible to check it
87* For the episodes in the life of Buddha that have been briefly
noted in 85, reference can be made to various translations from Buddhist
works, among which the following have been consulted
:
T. W. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Birth Stories, Vol. I, London, 1880
{especially the revised edition by Mrs, Rhys Davids, London, n. d.) based
OB the Nidanakatha,

' M6N INSCRIPTIONS 3
,
PART IJ
T.W.
The Mahavagga of the Vinaya Pitaka, translated by Rhys
and H. Oldenberg, in Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XIII,
Davids
E H 'firewster, The Life of Gotama the Buddha, London, 1926.
The Samyutta Nikaya of the Sutta Pitaka, Book IV, Marasamyuttam,
translated by Mr, Rhys Davids in The Book of Kindred Sayings, London,
1917 (Part I, Sagatha-Vagga, p. 153-9).
The Life or Legend of Gaudama, Vol. I, 3rd ed.,
P. Bigandet,
L0nd n
named
in my notes I have given mainly references from the last
connected with Burma.
work as it is particularly
s vs.
=1
'.-i-fi
m
the readmg
comparison of the two has been of some assistance
doubtful words in both.
1
Text.
A
cna]m pa
1. II II Bodhisa[t pui]y lu[kau t]u[rau
pda[y Uruwela tuy] II [net ma cwin br]apui[n r
ma dah rah gah II dhar
ja[m]nok
1 Above the continuous text and separated from it by empt^y
a o ^ f r i e C t p s l 3 i t f c h T a i h r e d of I l c i A n 1 o 1 e m . ) 5 . p 1 2 le a I x X t n I d h l I e a 2 t s t D e o r t f h 3 o e 9 t , c h c v e J u a - r r t 1 i r e 7 a i x , n n t t g 1 a 8 r s h . e e a f r a d e I r i n n p a g r t s o h d b e t u a h l k b e a l h s y a w t r o r t a r e w c p d o a re J n p s y l e a # a n i c t e s s \ f i o . t H n J h M l W e j< m }h d p U r H ob 'g ably ^, ft , ^ af h o t < e e L x ^ p 2 r ). ess M e d uc i h n
* There is no room for the words, so it is assumed
figures. As to the date, see the note on the text.
' Possibly katu.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
4 [VOL. iv
3. masun praka [tuy II tr]adah [ma sgo' dah kyak] (cmat) 1 [ga]h
ph[yuih lar cuit ra II pday tnay] si [brapen] (gah) [yah lanu]
ga[h kl]on Ibuit k[u] j[r]aku
2 ....
4. [t]uy II pra[p a] ja[ren jray sjum Aja[p]ala [tuy II] (tuy)
.... (wen) . . . ' [pindapat g]ah II ..... (tuy II) [gata ket
bwai . . n] 4 duih brama[k dand]ay -
5. [ke]t mam Q]ray tu[y] II [B]odhisa[t dma]n [t]au ra [II pday
prayam gah II Sujata t]u[y ma] c(u)i[n dah tau kwon] (samneh) 5
[Senanl gah] kha [ma dah] samat Iwuit [te]-
6. [' gah] II [a pday t]narh [jray sum] Ajapa[la tuy II kha ey dik
ma go' gayon tuy ma] no[m jati] ........ [II pday patisan-
dhi ey] ku[i]p [t]la ga[h] II kwon [tr]uh
7. mwa[y II ey go1 ma II braman dak] ta[h hen ey sbali] (tla) [ey
......
ni gah tuy II pa lar patthana] (tuy) [II atuin patthana
4eh ma pa gah] dok pen uiw [t]uy II he-
8. [t] ma [sbal]i~ dewa[t]au [jray sum Ajapala gah II] bra[m]an
[dak tah gah d.eh tw]am phyu[i]n lar [ra II dik brau Punna
tuy ma] cu[in dah t]au [mbo]' ta[h deh gah] II [d]e[h] ca[ka
tu]-
9. y [k]u[iw tit a] nah [t]ah da[rnafi ma sbali dewa]tau [ra II kha
gah Punna tit a tuy II] fi[at ket Bodhisat ma gata ket bwoy
duih6 bramak] ma dan[d]a[y dman tnam jra]-
10. [y] s[u]m II no Qraku iya h ma dre]p i[it a gah] II [uit kuiw
janok] tnam [chu ma] da[h s]a[k thar uit gah deh fiat ket tuy
II na^jraku hen dewatau ma sdu]h [bali]
probable reading.
f Or suihm. ^
* w
fof it fint rd is meant f r *****
* Looks. Eke ban or pan.
* The
reading is aeariy certain.
l^ooks like

MON INSCRIPTIONS
ARr
j-j
11. [bakar p]ui[y rw]o[n sdah II deh k]sap [tuy deh] cau [a II
atuin1 tr]ada[h] de[h ma fiat gah deh huim ku Sujata ra] II
kh[a gah] Suja[ta sdik ml(u)ik mi]p cui[t
12. ma[h san t]u[y II th]ah th[or ma nwom] bnat [nuh mwoy lak
kasap gah II cut brapen braman.2 uit suim tuy II na thah]
th[or m]wa[y] (ra) [c-at\ grop
braman3
gah t]uy
na
13. [ya]t ma g[wu c-]ah gah [gwi tuy II na kriya thar uit suim gah
gni gnat ket t]u[y II thah thor suim braman gah II kdip gah
yuiw ke]t [t]u[y II na a]n[u]bho[w ma j]n["o]-
14. [k] tiah ga[h] II [k]w[om k]u [dik brau Punna gah tit a ra II
kha gah nit jamnay hen na ly]ah [jrak]fl Bodhisat ma krajo 1
[dman tau gah II] u[it k]u[i]' jan[ok tnarii cliu ma dah sa>
15. [k] thor gah [4eh n]a[t ket t]u[y H samtim dewatau jray sum
hen lar] c[uit tuy II suim kuiw ma kuiw braman4 hen jo' jo]'
ma
[a t]u[y II [thah] tho[r cut]
16. p[r]aman gah phy[uih n]u latu [k4ip tu]y [II yat kambu ma gwl]
p[raman gah sah kle' tuy II thai? thor ma grop gah pok
..... .....
tuy II na pad]ak [thor] , [r]
a
17. la[r] na dak mramar gah 4eh] ra[p ket t]uy II [prap]
Bodhisat 'tuy deh dmin tau II p4ay kala gah II praben
Ghatlkara Mahabruim ma kuiw] (d).
18. (n) . [n* a] ra II B[odhisat] (ha) [fiat] prafben-gah t]uy II_
stum gah r]a(lah) [tuy d]un [k]e[t d>[k ra II kha gah Su]fata
prap a tuy II thah thor tuy] (ma pe)- -
a
19. (n t)au na pran,a[n] tab g>h II
tay Bojrisat? ra II [kh> ga[h rau wo^, deh]
ey dewa[tau patthana tuy ma ey rada>
1 Looks like atuiw*
9 Perhaps pramati,
8 For kuiw.
4 Perhaps pramau,
6 Possibly danan or dandan. Cf. VIII A 3,
6 For Bodhisat,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
[VOL. iv
20. [ni mik tarii] j[on tila ey gah II dok pen ku ey tuy] ra [II] rau
pa[tthan> cui[t] ey di[k ma] d[ok pen] (gah) [hen II patthan>
cui[t tila ey ler kuiw dok]
nwom
21. [pen ni gah tuy II thah thor t]uy [ma n]uh [mway lak]
ka[s]a[p gah] . . [k ku br] . . (y) [t]u[y II Sujata twak c]au [a
ra II kha gah Bodhisat twak cuij-
22. [h a] pday [cran kru]n Neranjara tu[y II pday cni]h Su[patittha
gah pa pa]r[ibho]k [praman gah ra] II II pda[y] than ja[r]e[n
bodhi gah II lukau ba coh d]ac[am tna]-
23. [y pan saftaha gah II k]ya[k] t[r]ay dm[a]n [t]u[y hen II p[day
tnay] ca[h] pi [bramak k]i[t]u [jih] gah [II y]ah [l]an[tt h]e[n
ky>[k tray daloh1 ktuiw a] II
24. [nu ratan]aghara [tuy II a dman tau] (a)sma[r tnarh [jray
s]um[m] Aja[pala tuy] lu[k]au da[pah tnay] ga[h II bic]a[rari]a
ket [dhar c]as[uin ket] dra[sok phalasamapat]
25. [tuy] k[yak tr>y d[mam]2 tau [II] II [pday kala gah] ba[mnah
m]wa[y ma himu] (Hunhukajati 3 gah) [prap] tlun [sma]n
sram[an ku ky]ak [tr]ay [t]u[y II kyak tray le]-
26. [r sah kui]w Jsrama]n [ku deh ra] II [II] p[d]ai [k]a[l]a k[yak 4
ma dman
tray pdai phar Ajap]a[la] ga[h kuim] II s[min Ma]
pr[ap a ti]u[n-jaren 5 ky]ak [tray t]u[y] (II) 6 tuy ma
ui]-
27- ma
[t] cu[it phy]u[i]h sa[ntiithan] tradah k[yak tray ma] dah
ky[ak cmat II tradah p]u[gg]u[i]w [ma c-ah cmat gah deh]
h[uim tuy II deh] b[uiw a nor jray Ajapala II bwoy duih]
For d&tok?
For dmdn.
Fw
Huhunkaj&tt.
Few: ky&
n of tlun appears to be superscript over the j ofjaren
^ it eeems difficult to fit this sense

MON INSCRIPTIONS
LRT j 7
28. b[ramak] (gah) [twak a tuy II pday dor t]arau [jnok deh kajo' 1
tuy II carit cah tar]au ga[h] de[h] cari[t ket tuy deh dawin]
(den) [dmarir tau II kh> [gah]
29. [tradok cuit deh that Iwon san tuy II tan tuy ma deh] . . . . [d]
3
. . . [lor] p[ci>i kana(t) [de]h [k]u[im ler l]a(luy) [c(u)it
kuim] (deh) [ha tim ra II kha]
30. [Ma ma laluy cuit gah II smin] I[n go]J [lapah ket tuy II smin
In (h)uim ku Pancasl]kha [inah gali II kha gah kw(a)n br]au
Ma [pi tuy ma himu] (II) [Tanhft II A]ra[tl]
31. [II Raga II gah fiat ket s]m[in mba deh tuy ma den] d[m]a[n
tau gah II cuih tlun] 4 [ku m]ba d[e]h [t]u[y
U
prftp] a [jaren kyak tray] . . . (ra) [II] rup
32. [brau samat Hvut p]i [klaiii mwai wa] II [r]up brau Iwut ma ha
go]' [kwfin pi klath mwoy wa II rup brau ma go' kwa]n rnwa[y
pi klarii m]w[oy w]a [II rup] b[rau ma go' kwan ba pi klarh
mwo]y
33. [wa II rup brau ma dah tacjiay nah pi klarh mwoy wa II rup
brau ma jnok ni pi klath mw]oy [wa II rau wo' turau he]n
[b]rau pi pi [klarh deh to'] (nimit bdah) 5 [tuy II deh]
34. [to' prap a jare(n-)kyak* tray] (tuy deh to)' 7 hui[m juim] (tau)
[ku kyak tray deh to' ha go' akhwon deh to' tuy] (deh to')
[kaleh can]
35. [jaren mba deh to' ra II II]
1 Between kajo* and tuy there is either an original flaw in the stone or some small word (such as
has been effaced,
)
8 For dmdn.
* 1 T C h o e n r c e eiv a a r b e ly tw k o ana w k o . rds here that have not been identified, Each seems \ to ,begi . n and, en.d*
''These two words seem almost certain reading though the second one might be bat,
6 It is very doubtful whether there is any superscript it here at all.
7 Conjectural restoration.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
&
[VOL. iv
B
............
1. [II II] kh[a] ti[l]a p[uiy kyak tray] [chu
Rajayatana dapah may t]u[y gah II tit tlun no(r-)Rajayatana
tuy kaleh]
2. p[l]an [a] pda[y than jray su(m)m Ajapala II] (casuin ket) 1 [phala-
samapati kyak tray dman2 tau ra II pday kala tuy ma dman
pday than gah]
3. [g]asa[p cuit] mwam3 ma can that ktuiw dah ku kyak tray ra II
dh[ar tuy ma ey kuli go' gran ke]t 2 (wo') 4 [gah II sjoh ler sjoh
san II II]
4. sQ(u)in na nah s]fia[t san] II s[j]ui[n na nah s]gra[n ket san II]
(niy tdim) 6 [san II at]u[i]n dhar ma [ey go' gran ket] (wo') 4 [ey
ma twah ku nah c-an] II [nah ha gran] t[i]-
5. [m] ra sdah [m> II [lam-]on la[m]-a[t] j[r]a[k]u [ey hen ma sdah
uiw so]' II atu[i]n [dh]ar ma [ey go]' gra[n ket wo' gah] II [ey
(h)enj spa ke[w srajuin t]adui-
6. [n II s-a]y [puray spujau saka t]uy II [sdmln ket ra II ku nah
c-ajn [ta ey ha mik tw]ah ra gah tuy II [cju[it mw]ay [m]way
tuy] ma spa ( anr kabut) [pday ma stwah] dhar [ku]
gah] k[tu]iw [dah] ku kyak tra[y ra II kh> ga(sah) 8
[Sahampat! Maha]brui[m tim ke]t [gasap] cui[t kyak tram9 t]uy
II grakwom bruim grakwom ma
dewa[t]au
| The reading is-not quite certain, but cf. A 24
**era is an original fla w which
-*
Mentified, ' - ccear * e w t taa f l r r ' ea r ding in is > do s ub t tful because the words have not been
*" inlght *"* be read
.
possible toread ara

MON INSCRIPTIONS
9
j]
8. [t]au tau p[day cah hum] cak[k]awa [gah trawl] ba[wuih ket tuy
II palp 1 a ja[ren kyak] tray ra [II] kha ga[h k]ban mway duih
pan[dah ti] yok ket samima ta-
9. [y] H[no]r [kyak] tram1 tu[y II het tuy ma] (sgo') 3 [kuiw twah
dhaw ku sat gamlui]u ga[h II] at4 wuiw ku k[y]ak tray ra II
[ky]ak tra[y t]un ler
10. [k]uiw wui[w ku S]ahumpa[ti Mahabruim tuy hen II]
* [tna]y ga[h II pday than tr]awl w[u] Ma[ha]bodh[i g]ah
guimr> II kyak tray gange[n p]i[n]da[p]a[t]
11. tuy II d[man t]au pcla[y th]a[n gah] ra II [pday payam saga]
(tnay) [cah pan bramjak [kitu a(sa)t gah II gasap rau wok] 6
k[t]ui[w] dah ku [k]yftk tray ra II isi A[l]ara
....
12. [K>la[ma] gali II [ma salali tu]bah [k]u[iw dhaw] (lo)
[samapat 7 dapah] (ku cy dah) 8 u[iw] da ci II [upak]a jnok [ku
ey san II ku i]si A[l]fira Kala-
13. [ma] hen [ey ma #>p gw[or stwah dhjar [twa 9 ra rau gah] (ksap
tuy) [II kha guh] (tradah isi) 10 [Ajara] , . . ." p[day dapah thay
ma Iwon t]u[y nui khy(u)it a II] ma a
lf
14. k[t]uiw dah] p[c)ay aki]cca[fiaptaii>bhu[m gah tim] (ket) [tuy
II isi] AQani] (Kalama) [ha mway ra ci II is]i U[d>ka kwon
[Ram] tu[n ler II het ttty ma]
For samip,
This seems the most likely reading. At ftrsl I wan inclined to read pvr wa.
There is no vinlnia visible on the /.
For kuim.
For wo\
7 This looks like loki'yasamaptit, which suema improbable as hkkntarasatnfipat would be more
ble.
8 Restored, but supported to sonic extent by traces of letters.
fl I take this to be an error for tltl.
10 Almost certain,
11 Possibly wo\
** For tlkivcafiM , in Pali spelling.
2

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
10 [VOL. iv
15. [deh salah tabah kuiw dhar] newa[sananasanayatanasamapat dah ui1
da ci II] (jnok tau) [upaka] ku [ey] . . . . 2 [ku isi Udaka hen
ma
ey ga]-
16. [p gwor stwah dhar tla 3 ra gah tuy II gasap cuit kyak tray ktuiw
dah tun II] (kha gah) [tradah isi] Udaka ma khyuit [traday]
ba[tam gah ma a ktuiw] (dah)
17. [pday newasaiianasanayatana]bhum [gah] (tim) [ket tuy II
isi]
{Udaka ha) [mway ra ci II tipuin paccawar 4 to'] ma klo[n
b]ui[t] . . [ku ey] (kha)
18. [ma pa dukkaracariyat gah l]er II [u]paka jnok ku ey sa]n da[h]
ui[w da ci II ku tipuin paccaw]ar [to ; hen] ey ma [gap gw]or
s[twah dhar tla 5 rwo]-
..................
19. [n] [' ci II] tipui[n paccawor] (to'
tau) 6 [pday than tuy deh] to7 [ma] dmag8 ro [g]ah tu[y II kyak
tray ksap bkarana] (mwa)-
20. (y tuy) 9 [II fradah tila puin paccawor to'] (ma pa datau) 10 [pday
dun Baranasl pdjay gr[ip Isipa[t]ana ga[h tim ket] tuy [II ey
s-a] (dun Bara)-
21. (nasl ni) [g]ah [tuy] II [pd]ay [tnay si] brape[n kitu asat gah hen
II kyak tray tit] a [nor] (smar 11 tnam) [jray su(m)m] Aja[p]a[la ra
........
II] (II)
22. pray sum A]japa[la tuy] ma cui[n dah tau] (than) [paribhok kyak
tray gah smin ma nwom ku puin tamla] (ma sjun) [sduik pday
sasana] (ma pa) [tarn ku]
For uiw.
Ixx&s like fctfti and is perhaps for kuhn
Or kla.
F O o r r J p W& a . ncawar (Sanskrit pancavargya}. The Pali form is pancavaggiya.
Very doubtW, especially the second wo * r * d, which might perhaps be read mu rau.
Mo WeVer> C0nceivable tte letter ad ma is really the final which would turn to
fo'
8 For dm&&.
* ct vm A
. ^
* and the
This supposed reading wodd be aa error for mar ; but both words are doubtful.

MQN
INSCRIPTIONS
11
p j]
23. (smin) [Asokadhammarat ta gah II dak lo]r [cetl mway Japalaceti-
(ya) 1 tuy rna tlun tau pujau saka II II pday than puiy R&ma-
nadesa]
2 3 4
24 [l(e)r II ptup] (ca) [kuiw Ajapalace te' gah tuy atuin
duih tlafi] (ca) , . (than) [te' hen II tila nah tila cin
baton]
25 ma [himu Maharaja] , . . . (tuai) 5 [II pdai sakkarat
84(2) kilu asfit masun crawek] (tnay) [lak min] (gah)
[II] (ma kuiw kanarh lor) [Ajapalacetl] (wo') ......
Translation.
A,
Our Bodhisaltva, having for six years practised asceticism in Uruvela, 7
:ause of 8 following the proper middle way, the principles of (2) wisdom,
sntion and meditation had grown great (in him). In the night of the
th ?) 9 of the waxing (half) of the month of Vaisakha he beheld five
at (3) dreams and made up his mind that he was to achieve (true ?)
xldhahood. On the full moon festival day, early in the morning, after
sading to himself, 10 (4) he approached the Ajapala fig-tree (and having?)
11 towards the
alms, (having ?) , facing . . ,
stern quarter (and) resting (5) under the fig-tree, our Bodhisattva
nained (there).
At that time Sujfita, who was the daughter of the (rich man ?) Senanf, 1*
lile she was still a maiden, (6) having gone to the Ajapala fig-tree, had
I For Ajaf>Xla.
Doubtful.
For Ajapalacetl.
This might be wo\
Very doubtful.
Mostly a conjectural restoration, but the traces of letters still legible make it probable.
7 Cf. Bigandet, I 72-6, Uruvcja was a forest country,
8 The original seems ambiguous : cither "in order to follow " or "because he followed" (in the latter
3e giving the reason why he attained the higher faculties mentioned immediately afterwards). Bat for
5 first sense one would expect scwiii (cf. 11. 7, 8 infra).
9 This, though illegible, must be the right reading. Cf, Bigandet, I 79-81.
10 Or "to his purson," Bigandet, I 81, has "washed his hands and face, puton his dress,"
II See the note on the text.
11 This was the name both of Sujfttfi's father and of the village where they livedJ
cries, p. 184). But Bigandet, I 77> has it, spelt in the Burmese fashion, under the form

BIRMANICA [VOL. iv
EPIGRAPHIA
12
^
^ sai H d, "WWhheenn Il hnaavvee g8ot a a hu m s a b l a e nd cn o u f (suitable ?) fam r i i l c y e , c ( o a o n k d ed if) m in m m^y
first^ confinemen't I gVet (7 " ) ) , made
d
t0 * make 'an ofeing" to the deva of the
whom
a (and) sent Pay*' a female slave
foster-mother, (9) to go out and clear
to the deva - h Pu -
* saw the Bhodhisattva, who was facing towards the eastern
She saw that a radiance was
resting under the fig-(10)tree.
ug to his body and that the whole mass of the tree was of a golden
our
colou? 'Surely the deva in his own person is going to acc m ept (11)
home accordance
offerfng, it seems," she reflected, and returned ; and,
with what she had seen, she spoke to Sujata.
a go T ld h e e n n d S i u s j h at o a f w t a h s e v v e a r l y ue gl o a f d te a n nd th h o a u p s p a y nd (i k n a h s e a r f ) q h u e i a t r e t. full (12 w ) ith Sh t e he fi n ll e e e d
milk covered the rice milk with another golden dish and (13) wrapped
them in a clean white cloth, decked herself with all her golden orn m aments
and carrying on her head the golden dishes with the rice milk, great
s P p u l n e n n a d . our Th (1 e 4 n ) f of rom bea af u a t r y , , wi s t h h e t w h e e n r t ad o i u a t nce to o g f et t h h e e r b w o i d t y h of th t e he fe B m o a d l h e isa sl t a v ve a
who"was sitting (there), she.saw the whole mass of the tree was of (15) a
golden colour and thinking (that she) was beholding the deva of the fig-
tree, she went, bowing low, to give (him) the rice milk. The golden dish
wherein she had put (16) the rice milk she took down from her head,
unwrapped the white cloth wherewith (she had) wrapped the (dish of) rice
milk, took off the golden dish which covered (it), (and) . f . r . om . 6 . a .. g . olden
.......... with scented water s*16
water vessel (17)
approached the presence of the Bodhisattva and (there) she remained.
This is in accordance with BuddhistBirth Stories, I.e., and Bigandet, I 79, 80, though in neither
case are we told exactly how the rice came in.
1 Literally " in accordance with the prayer."
1 Bigaadet, I 80, calls her "Sounama",
* Sanskrit kanapaya, Pali hthspaya,a small coin of varying value, according as it is of gold, silver
"
or copper, but apparently usually the latter. Bigandet (I 82) has 100,000 pieces of silver."
1 * B O i r ga " n w d i e t t h , ." I.e., Ow ha i s ng " s t h o e th f e or l t a h c w u it n h a p in ut th o i n s l h i e n r e f i i t n i e s st no dr t es c s l . e " ar how the words rap kct in the next one
thonld be taaaslated; they niay mean "hold" or "use". Bigandet, I.e., has "offered him in a gold basin
scoited-water towash bis hands."

MON INSCRIPTIONS
13
PART
At that moment the ahnsbowl, that the Mahabrahma Ghatikara1 had
(18) (disappeared Tf and the Bodhisattva, not seeing that
presented,
almsbowl, (stretched out his ?)" right hand and took the water. Then
Sujata approached and set the golden dish that was (full ?) (19) of rice
milk on the palm of the Bodhisuttva's hand. Then she spake thus :
"0 my lord deva, the prayer that I prayed (20) at my lord's feet has
been fulfilled for me as the prayer oi my heart was fulfilled, so also may
;
the prayer of my lord's heart be (21) fulfilled !," (she) said ; and, having
(offered ?) 3 the golden dish which was of the value of ten thousand kasftp>
walked home*
Sujata
Then the Bodhisattva walked down (22) to the bank of the river
Neranjara and at the bathing place (named) Supatittha he partook of the
rice milk. On the ground in Ircmt of the Boclhi (tree) for twenty-eight
days, (23) four weeks, the exalted Buddha remained; and on the thirteenth
day of the waxing (half) of the month of Jyustha, early in the morning
the exalted Buddha, went away (24) from the house of gems 4 and went to
stay under the Ajapflla fig-tree ; for seven clays, meditating on the Law
and enjoying the bliss of die attainment of fruition, 5 (25) the exalted
Buddha remained (there). At that time a Brahman named HuhunfcajatI
approached (and) asked a question of the exalted Buddha; and the
exalted Buddha (26) gave him the answer to his question/
Also during the time that the exalted Buddha was staying by the side
of the Ajapftla (tree)/' King Mara approached the presence of the exalted
Buddha, and ...... (being at) his wits' (27) end, he concluded that
1 The name mcumi "tmtlvr", Acconliu^ to Ititfawtct, I.e., the ahnsbowl that disappeared was of-
earthenware.
* I follow IKuaiKlcl in n-ftirU tu lluw two word*, but the second one is supported to some extentfoy :
the text,
8 Wgandd, I.c, has "makittj; tlum the ifrinK of the gold cup, worth 100,000pieces of iflw ? wtth
the same dismlcrestethict* ;M it she iul uivcn over only the dry leaf of a tree, she withdrew and returnee
to he < r T h h o i m s e w w a i * th U 1 K 1 ? he f a o r u t rt o h vvr o i f lu t w i h n t : j; se w v i e t n h \ j v o i v x , - " k* that bcjjsm when the Bodhisattva tookto seat under me.
Bodhi tree, Cf, higandci, 1 UK).
6 That i8> of the attainment of the several kiwia of Bpiritual insight that a Buddha has. Cf.
z ^,
6 In Higanclct \\ 10U tliin incitlcut is mentioned after the a
,
ppearance 01
Ma_ra11 >^
i a n n t d erp t r h e e ted Hn a i s hm " m o i f i u s l c u a i l t l ^ e l d jly Mi t n l u i at ^ i o k h i i i l . iuu T " h , e nut M^t u iiiv t a h f e iga ma o n f 's th n e am V e i ; nay B a u p d ii d a h k a a gho (I sa 1} a t d e d* -|Ml t o
ditthamangalika IK, Max MulliT, Sacred Uut*k of the East, Vol. XHJ, p. 79U -
7 With the remainder of Face A of thi iwwarlption Bigandet 1 1024 can be compared, ^

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
14 [VOL. iv
the exalted Buddha was a true Buddha, " a pure, true man ", he said.
He looked away from the Ajapala fig-tree (and) having walked towards
(28) the eastern quarter, sat down in the middle of the high road, (where)
he drew sixteen lines (and then) remained anxious and dazed. At that
time (29) his distress of mind was very great, ..... (having remained
?)'
......... , in (the end P) 1 he lost consciousness, he knew no more.
When (30) Mara had lost consciousness, King Indra lifted him up and
King Indra informed Pancaslkha of this. 2
At that moment the three daughters of Mara, named Tanha, Arati and
(31) Raga, seeing their royal father was in a dazed state, came down
.....
(and), having . .' to their father, approached the presence of the
exalted Buddha ............ Forms of (32) young maidens, three
hundred at one time, forms of girls that had not borne a child, three
hundred at one time, forms of women who had borne one child, three
hundred at one time, forms of women who had borne two children,
three hundred at one (33) time, forms of women of middling age, three
hundred at one time, (and) forms of somewhat older' women, three
hundred at one time, in these six ways, (as) threo hundred women at a
time, did they create, 6 and, (34) approaching the presence of the exalted
Buddha, addressed the exalted Buddha. (But) they had no chance (of
and
success) (35) they returned to their father.
B
After our lord the exalted Buddha (had remained under the
?)"
Kajayatana tree for seven days, 7 (he) came away from the Rajayatana tree
and returned (2) again to the place of the Ajapala fig tree, (where) the
exalted Buddha remained (enjoying ?)' the fruition of attainment8 During
tne fame when he was
staying at that place (3) a very anxious thought
e',
is some doubt as to the meaning here owing to the lacuna and the reading kanal is not quite
'o'a w
wo . rds in the text have not been identiifeied com frt") would bo app c r r o i p l ria - te here. The two illegibl . e
JUtawa,,Hg or Uffl8rn>
*
" a * th * * e C " o s n e , j n e s c e t t h u e o r r f a * e ll " i y s t r n e o s o t s o f r a e b d m st ^ a^t ^ S t d ou L te ! r t e h n e c . e " b t a a di k t n8 * u s o e f m n t s * h e e t b h * u e t t s , t at h w n e hi c c o * l n i , s n t i r t s f u . c d t o i I u f o b n t i f n s u s l e t , e e m a n d s im o r i f a l t b h i e d s r a u h s s t e r w d a e in a e r s d e . a a d ve b r a b t ,

MON INSCRIPTIONS
15
pART j]
"
occurred to the exalted Buddha : This Law, which I have succeeded in
to understand is deep, very deep, (4) very hard for men to
getting very hard for men to understand, very ........l If I preach
perceive,
to other people in accordance with this Law which I have succeeded in
understanding they will not understand (it) (5) and I myself 2 shall surely
be tired out. In accordance with this Law which I have succeeded in
understanding, I will ...........' (6) worship (and) make offerings
and I will continually keep (it). To other people I do not want to preach
said. (Thus), one by one, thoughts, of how to exert himself
(it)," (he)
but little* in preaching the Law to (7) others, occurred to the exalted
Buddha.
Then the Mahabrahma Sahampati, having become aware of the
thoughts of the exalted Buddha, assembled a retinue of the company of
Brahmas and the company of dovas who (8) dwell in a hundred thousand
universes and approached the presence of the exalted Buddha. Then,
bending one knee to the ground and lifting up his joined hands, (9) (he)
revered the exalted Buddha and asked as a boon from the exalted Buddha
that he would preach the Law io all beings.* The exalted Buddha, on his
........
part, (10) granted the boon to the Mahabrahma Sahampati
on the kind around the Mahabodhi tree the exalted Buddha
that' day,
wandered for alms, (11) and then remained on that land.
At the hour of midnight, (on) the fourteenth of the waxing (half) of
the month of AsJUjha, this thought occurred to the exalted Buddha:
"Inasmuch as the hermit Ajara (12) Kalama, who taught (and) expounded
me the law of the seven stages of ...... attainment, 7 was of very
(to ?)
service to me, to the hermit Alara Kalama (13) it is fitting that
great
I should preach the Law iirst," thus he (resolved?). Then, having
had died seven
become aware of the fact that the hermit Ajara . . . '.
1 Reading doubtful and meaning undetermined,
d P e e l r i h g a h ' p t s S ( c i w nl e "m s L h or o S ul " " d s o et r f ea m d t y h M e he r a e f r n c t t -A o o " f n" p , n tl w w l b t u a H t c u I e h . ii b C l f e . * a M v I e f s D c t d 1 o . 9 * . ** A , I s f w w i b t e te 3 r h t e a a t . d a d i e t . h n e i o t n t m ( b a i e n g s n h t t M ea t d b o e of
w
be
o
i
u
n
l
g
d
5 s T TT
b
h
e
( hh t e ee h
"
e ll r
I
ii e M tt a
t
ee a d rr
h
aa h
i
i ll
n
n a
k
g ss b ee r
I
n nn a o ss
w
t h ee
i
m
l
b aa
l
a e
"
nn l
,,
t S nn n *
c
aa l
(
i
c
nn M a
..
i
,,
U n tt t
b
e oo t
u
t
t
t bb c l ee ) e
t
r
lt
t "
i
a
a
a i bb s n ii
s
k ,
w
e oo
a
d t rr
n
h de e
s
e t r rr h e
U
e t
s
1 h
*
* e aai x s
p
a
r
o l h
o
m t ee
b
e e
a
d m
b
i
l
d i
e
g o B
.
u h u b t d t d g h a e a s t t f ( o o h r i t m h ) a e
g
to bo p o r n
m
eac , b I * A *<** a ^* s*
that Huddha would preach the Law, .
8 Owing to the lauuua it is not clear whether it should be |(day(| or oays
' That is the first seven of the ecstatic states enumerated under the head of

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
16 [VOL. iv
"
days before and gone (14) into existence in the region of nothingness ", l
(he said), " Inasmuch as the hermit Alara Kalama is no more, (and) seeing
that the hermit Udaka, son of Rama, (15) taught (and) expounded the law
of the attainment of
"
neither consciousness nor unconsciousness
"2
(and)
was of (great) service to me, , . . to the hermit Udaka it is fitting (16)
that I should preach the Law first." (Thus) saying, (this) resolve of the
exalted Buddha arose (in his mind). (Then ?) having become aware of the
fact that the hermit Udaka had died in the middle of that night and gone
"
into existence (17) in the region of neither consciousness nor uncon-
"
sciousness," 3 (he said), Inasmuch as the hermit Udaka is no more, and '
the five monks, who ministered ... to me (when ?) (18) (I was) practising
asceticism, were of very great service to me, to (these) five monks it is
fitting that I should preach the Law first" (19) "In
what place do the five monks dwell ? " (he) said and the exalted Buddha
;
reflected . . (20) Having become aware of the fact that the five monks
had made their dwelling-place in the country of Benares in the forest of
Isipatana, "I wiU go (to the country of Benares?)/' (21) (he) said; and
on the festival . day of the full moon of Asadha, the exalted Buddha went
away from (beneath ?) the Ajapala fig-tree
(The place of?) (22) the Ajapala fig-tree having been a place of
sustenance of4 the exalted Buddha, the kings of old who were possessed
of, piety, who took delight in the religion, beginning with (23) King
Asokadhamimfcja, having built a caitya, the Ajapalacaitya, came (there
and) worshipped (and) made offerings. In our country of Ramannadesa
. .-. . . (24) . . . (also?), saying "Imitate yonder Ajapalacaitya/' in
accordance with the orientation of (the) sides ( O f) that (place ?),
His Majesty, the Lord of the White Elephant * (25)
' Common : ' who TOS named Maharaja . . , . , in the year 842 of the
Era, the fifth of the waning (half) of the month Asadha, (a ...
day flr. Pisces being lagna] (built?) 8 this Ajapalacaitya ' .
third of the-Arfipabratoaloka regions. This assumes an emendation of the reading in the
* the
eighth stage ofsamapatti.
* 4 T O h r e si f m o p u l r y t , h " of a f p e l e ac A e rf u i s p e a d b b ra y hmaloka regions -
STSILKssra;- -rs-
i
[TMivtaBgeuiU to the eastern horizon.
Very doubtful,see the note on the text.

MON INSCRIPTIONS
17
PART j]
No. XIV,
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEGUGYI PAGODA, PEGU.
Account
Descriptive
89. This is a mere fragment containing only the last 13 lines of a
record, and most of them in an imperfect condition. It measures 1 ft.
8 in. in height by 2 ft* in breadth. The letters and the interlinear space
are of the same dimensions as in No, XIII.
90. So far as it is preserved, this record is concerned with the events
which happened in the second and third of the seven weeks that began
when Buddha took his seat under the Bodhi tree, For these, reference
may be made to the account contained in Bigandet, I, pp. 99-100. Put
shortly, after leaving his majestic seat under the tree of enlightenment,
Buddha stood gazing at it steadfastly without winking an eye, and in deep
meditation, which caused the devas to think that he regretted having left
it and that he had not yet attained Buddhahood.1 At the end of those
seven days, in order to remove their doubts, he raised himself
miraculously into the air and performed miracles which convinced them
that he was really a Buddha (cf. 11. 1-6 of the inscription). Having come
down to earth again he proceeded to spend the following week, the third
of the great seven weeks, vStill in deep meditation, walking up and down
the " cloistered walk " or ambulatory which the devas had prepared for
him, and it is especially this that the inscription is intended to
commemorate (cf. 11 8-13).
Text.
1 (kyak tray) [gah II lukau dapah tnai] (nda)*
[mat ma ha go']
2 [lafcay] (gaMh) 8 [II het] . . . , *
[kyak]
1 The Nidanakatha has a slightly different version, viz. that the doubts in the minds of the deva*
arose while Buddha was still under the Bodhi tree, from which they inferred that ' there xrai.be
something more Siddhattha has to do, for he still lingers seated there." (Buddhist Birth S^ m *****
s t r o e h v o i u t s r g e 1 a h d n T s i e h l t d i i i t s m t e i a r i o a y s n t , e s d b , p h e . ap m 2 I e e 0 d 0 r ) t e . h a l i s y nk P i , a f re i d h t s a o u w w m m e e a a r v g b e e l e r y d , n< t r f h t a a i h s a ( h t a e I s s re i a a t . l n s i o s T ol h i d i n e e de r X n s I t u v i I b e c s r a c s C l r i i o 4 p w n 9 t i , t t d h h D a i n t n 2 h 8 t , e ( he * 3 m 6 ] , o o * n d 3 * e e 8 , , r i n n 4 * 7 o , p u a 3 5 r r > 0 t ) i r 4 c e l a c e n or d d d a a s b a h o n o ^ u d l * d m p * o e B r ! I M h g * ap a K s i * H t * t W o
same shape.
s The reading is doubtful. The initial letter, which is blunted, looks like a dh.
3

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
18 [ VOL . iv
..........................
1
3. (tray) (sa)nd[e]h
de[w]atau gampQuin t[o]' [ktuiw dah]
............................
4.
(sa)nd(e)h
......
[de]wa[tau to' gah]
.............................
5 tu(y) II ta[b]al>
kuiw patpha kuiw] (dewa)tau ga-
8 ..............................
6. (mluin)
[' tuy]
II kyak [tray cuih] tl[u]n
.........................
?
[nka] (ra kuim) [ma
datau g]ah II [bramak] a paluit[t II no(r)]
8. [pjaluit [a] brama[k] , II [lukau d]a[p]ah tnai [kyak] tray
ca[n]kram [t]au ra II p4a[y than cankram]
9. ga[h] smin tamla [m]a sadha ma pa tarn ku smin
A[s]pka[dhammarat] ga[h II cankram k]wom
10. [ku] e[e]tt ba [r]a-i[t] cankram gah II [k]u[iw] kanam lam3 cuiw
ku lamah nw[a]m tau II p[d]ay than puiy
11. [Raman3ad[e]sa"wo' [g>h II [ptujp ca [ku th]an [te ( ] tuy II [tui]n
duih
. [t]lan [b]na[t] p[r]abat
12. . . (') . . A] * n [tila g^ tih c iA j^^,, n
k[w]on [trah] m[way ma h]im[u Ba> -j -j
...
13. (na) 6 [n ma k(a)ndam] e (law) [ceti ba kwam ku
ratenacankram wo' II
II]
1
ConlecbpaByrestored.
flatf
*
e
S
0 w
,
. w
S
as
K t
in
i
t
S
en
S
de
^
d
f
, a
K S
s i
4
n
T ^
t
-
1
^
3
?
w
?
h
i
e
b
r
.
e
a i v
K
e
i
" f
s ^
-
T
S 8a
'
h T>
I
n
'
o
S
t 11
"
* sa
m
fo
i
r M
&e
* A *'
n
-
Q
(
t
pr
W
o
n
n
g
ou
O
n
f
ce
ei
d
th
lo
e
>
r
]'
l
w
a *
hic
w
h
and 8
i
U
n
SP
o
e
u
c
r
t
may
.
of the.first *sUaMft roay possibly be

MON INSCRIPTIONS
19
PART
i]
Translation.
....... the exalted Buddha, during the seven days (when he)
could1 not (2) ... blink (with) his eyes ; because ...... the exalted
Buddha ...... doubts arose in the minds of the devas (4) .....
(3)
... the doubts of the devas .... (5) ......... and the exalted
...........
Buddha showed forth miracles to the devas, (6) and
the exalted Buddha came down (7) ...........* (from) the east
going to the west, from (8) the west going to the east, during seven days
the exalted Buddha kept walking to and fro, 3
In the place where he had walked (9) the kings of old who had
faith, beginning with Asokadhammaraja, caused to be built an ambulatory
together (10) with two caityas at the ends of the ambulatory ; (they) stand
even until now.
In this our country (11) of Ramafinadesa, in imitation of that
place, in accordance with the orientation of the sides and the dimensions
(12) (of that place ?), His Majesty the Lord of the White Elephant,
......
ordered a son (of his) who was named (Bana ?) (13) to erect
two caityas together with this precious ambulatory.
"
1 This is the literal rendering but the sense is did",
1 In the absence of a context it is not possible to make sure of the seme of ma datau gak * . it may
mean "where (he) was". If we may conjecture that nka is a remnant of bodhipallanka the
the Bodhi tree (as the superscript n in 1. 2 may also be), the words could mean where (he) had
The ambulatory ran from the Bodhi seat to the place where he had stood gazing at it
Stories^ new and revised edition, p. 201.)
* With the first part of this inscription compare XV 5-#.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
20
[VOL. iv
No. XV.
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEDAGON PAGODA, RANGOON.
Account,
Descriptive
91. This inscription is engraved on two faces of a stone slab. On
the obverse one (Face A) the space originally occupied by lettering appears
to have been 5 ft. 3 in. (or more) in height by 4 ft. in breadth. On the
reverse (Face B) it is 5 ft. 8 in. by 4 ft. The letters are about $ in.
high, letter t is about f in. long and the interlinear space is about |
in. but becomes less in the lower part of the obverse. This face must have
contained at least 56 lines, but it is in such a bad state that no ' consecu-
tive transcript or translation can be made of it as it stands. Enough of it
has been preserved to make it plain that, after a reference to his meeting
the early Buddha Dipankara in a former life, it deals briefly with the
events in Gautama Buddha's career during the momentous seven weeks
and especially, at greater length, with the story of the brothers Tapussa
and Bhaffika and their meeting with him, mentioned in 85. The reverse,
though a good deal weathered and otherwise damaged, especially in the
first twelve lines, is in a much better condition. But there also there are
many 'gaps, which interrupt the continuity of the narrative and obscure its
meaning.
92. After repeated and intermittent study, spread over a number of
yeare, it appeared to me that I had done all that I could do in the way
of deciphering and interpreting this record. But in October 1932 Professor
Fe Maung Tin was good enough to send me an with
of a Pah text " enti m tled Nafetadhatuvamsa, which at ext t r h a a c t t, moment tran I sla c t o i u o l n d ,
taken UP with other d*ies. In the
attention to further evidence caPable of
inSCription and ^entually sent a
tranSlation ' a translati n <* the long
als his own and
^ transcript
eSe record * <* the
n
ffeeww u lin l es J o f T t , he reve 6 rse. As ne h ' e While the Pali extract illustrates
proposed to publish all this

MON INSCRIPTIONS
21
PART j]
we both considered that it would bo better to collaborate, rather
material,
than work apart. For all this assistance I am much indebted, for without
it I should not have been able to produce the present text and translation,
which, though still inevitably far from perfect, arc much better than ray
former drafts. Where I have cither adopted Professor Pe Maung Tin's
or modified them, the fact is indicated by his initials in the notes
readings
on the text. In some cases I did not venture to adopt them because the
words were not legible in the ink-impressions which I had.
93. In view of Professor Pe Msumg Tin's intention to publish all the
relevant material above mentioned and having regard to the condition of
the obverse face of the M6n record, it does not seem necessary to say
much more about its presumable contents in this place. Besides the
sources mentioned in H7 reference may be made to the brief account of
Tapussa and Bhallika in the Slapat Rajftwan (edited and translated by
Father W. Schmidt in Sitztmgsbcrichk der Kais. Akademie der Wissen-
schaften in Wian, philosopMseli-historiselic Klassc, Band CLI (1906) pp. 63
seqq. and 77-8, and again by K. Halliday in theJournal ofthe Burma Research
Society (1923) Vol. XIII, pt. I, pp. 40-3), and a summary mention in
G. H. Hough, Translation of an inscription on the great bell of Rangoon
fin Asiatic Researches (1828) Vol. XVI, pp. 273, 282-3). Bigandet's
account (in his work mentioned in 87, Vol. I, pp. 10810) is somewhat
more detailed.
94. The story told on the reverse differs from these narratives by
bringing in the Ceylon king and the two monks who play a prominent
part in it. But from the historical point of view the second half of this
face is the more interesting one and may be compared with a number
^of,
passages in the above-mentioned historical work which tell of the repairs
and improvements made at the Shwedagon pagoda by successive
'
sovereigns.
The inscription itself is not dated, but as the concluding lines
Dh
detailed account of what was done in this respect by King
royal mother-in-law and by Dhammacett himself, it may
r- *
surmised that the record was made in his time. There if,
date, in 1. 26 of Face B, connected with the celebrated
Rarnarajadhirat, who reigned in the first half of the

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
22 [VOL iv
Text.
A
1, ............. [gah pa panidhajn 1 [pday] [tarn jon kyak] 1
1 .....2
[tray] [Dipankuiw-tuy]
2 ......... . ..... (bapen bwoy ramen)1 [tuy II] (II dhar
bodhisambhar) 1 [ma a cuip] ..... (ma Iwon) .....
3. . * . . . fpday smar tnam jray bodhi)1 ............... .
.... (ku pradhan jnah gah) 1 [krajo 7 dman tuy II buiw
[dewaputta
Ma]1
, . (h sjuin ra)
.....
4.. ....... .......... [ma twah] (bgalj) 3 [sabbafiutafian ma
gni tau na] (trawah) 4 [ma twah] (bgati) B [grakwom gun ma] (sak)
* . * .
5 ...... (tradah) 1 [kyak] {ra II go' tradah) 1 [kyak tuy II] (ptjay
jaren bodhipallan) 1 [gah II] [casuin wimuttisukha] 1 [tuy II] (na
thawhay mwoy)6 lu[kau dapah tnay II] (ka) 8 ......
6 ..... [kyak tray ha go' ktuiw] (nu pallan) 1 ....... [ma lep
i>a kuiw tradah kyak gah] (snom) 1 [ni]m ra gah [tu]y [II sandeh'
ktuiw .....
dah]
......
7 (ma randuk ku dacam ........
tnay) (kyak tray) . .
[tuy het ma] [plen kle' sandeh7 dewatau] 1 ta ga[h] II ka[lafi tuin
. bwoy iamh]a(y) .....
8......
(Pfc We') 1 [sandeh 7 dewatau] (ta' gah tuy II nu pallan) 1
V ' Y " ........... C JI cuih dah dman t]u[y II lukau
<iapah] ttay [na m>{t) .....
1 PJ,T. -
* Pertiaps anOTQF foar tradah

MON
INSCRIPTIONS
PART ,] 23
9 [pallan] 1 [ku jray bodhi] (ra II) 1 ...,".
$
[pday cankram] [ku paluit gah II] lukau
s
[dapah] (tnay)
10. [bwoy paluit cankram] (gah) 1
(gah) [II kyak tray wicarana]
11 (pan) [sattahaj tuy (pday)
(jaren bodhi) (tnarh jray sum)1 [Ajapala] ra II
[pdjay tnaih (j)r(ay)
12 (dah)
ma
[Mucaiin* tau bwoy dui(h)]
13
(tuy) [drain tau ra] II ga[ta nu
.....
gah]
14
[tuy casuin ket] [wimuttisukha]1 [tuy dmln tau ra II]
1 dah ...
[go tradah] (kyak)
IS 1 ha
[ni IIJ (kyak tray go')
[klon buit ku jraku] (II ha) [ahara] hen ra
II na jha[na] .....*
16 (dman tau) [ra II pday ra-uit triay] . , . ,
1
(paniik ca) (kyak tray) .
ka) [gah smin In]
17. (t tuy) (tuy) [gah II] (rau ma kuiw ku)
.... ..........
(kyak tray) (tuy II)
[kwom ku] ...
18 [smin In] (tun ra) [II kyak tray]
,
Bhallika
II]
1 P.M.T.
'
Conjectnrally restored,
Possibly Mucalind. There appear! to be a virama here, Bat the
4 P.M.T, read* jhanattukha.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
24 [VOL. r
19 [AsitanjananaguirJ
(mahasamut
1 ....
(tuy II)
20. (nisray) 2 [tau ku cran krunj
21. (bwoy t) (ket) [smar kya] (deh)
22 II
kwon
(II ey
23
24 (jak tau kwi kuim)
25
;
....
(tuy II) (jraku)
26. (gah II)
chu 3
(tnarii Ra)
27
.... ....
. (gah II ey) (rwon II) [dan pitidapat]
28
. . (deh ta' gah)
29.
. . (dak) . . . (tuy II kusuiw)
.H
30.
mw
( y) [kyak tray] ....
31.
(cu)
* * [ku kyak tray] '.'.'.'.'.*.
1 P.M.T.
* Very doubtful.
1 Ti|h% read this is presumably the first syllable of BAj*y*t**.

MON INSCRIPTIONS
25
PART j]
32 [magga1 II pnor fialjt"] (ma <1 cuip} 1 w
to . . .
r
33 (dewa mantissa)1 [deb ta (gangen tlun tuy II pday
]
kala lakthak kyak tray) 1 * [tuy II kwon]
(dakuip)
34 [II ma kuhv dfm pindapat] [ku kyak trayj 1
. , . (II pnor) . .
Weh)
35. . . (tuy IIV [deh ta' pnlp a jaren ky<lk tray]
[tila ey kyak].
36. [tray] 1 [gah kuiw puiy cjik goff (kuiw ahara Ma fii) 1
.'..'., [deh ta']
37. ... (dewa mantissa) 1 [gangen tlun tuy] (II p4ay kala) 1 P^k tyJ
[II kwon]
(tuy) [II lukau cnam] (ma gluin) 1
38. (4eh ta' gah) [II ku bhikku san] 1 [kuiw dan tau tuy II] (kit nfl
Bodhisat 1
puiy)
1
[go' yamti] (Pokkharawati) . .
39. [deh ta ktuiw dah kwon samneh ma dah dakuip batoik'nwray ra
(deh ta' fiah fca) 1 [ma tau
II] . . (gah)
pday] .... [II pday] (kala ma dah rah gah II) 1
40. [kwom ku kwon bani8 masun klam] (dok kbaft
..........
[mhasamut tuy II] (a cuip) 1
masun) 4 (klam tuy cut bapen drap) 4 [wan pa taa faamk tuy
deh
ta']
1 P.M.T.
2 Or wo'.
s For banik,
* Very doubtful
4

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
26
[VOL w
41. (gangen tau) 1 [hen II rau wwo'] (hen) 3 [patthanft cleh ta' ma
pa
1 ...................
tuy] (gah II) (pday) (batwon
deh ta' rwon II) 1 [kha gah Taphussa Bhallika] (fiah ba) 1
42. (ko ku de1 min ket galan 3 dewatau ma huim II) 1 [mip cuit pumah
............
tuy II] (nQ yan deh ta') 1 [lo' san jq
(thaboh jamkah kuim lar II thaboh)1
. .
...........
43 [klen brawut] 4 [kuim lar II] [cut lar tuy] 1 ....
........ (M& tray) 1 ......... [kyak tray II] (het' 8
hitasukha) 1 [ma sdah ku puiy dik] (ta') 1
^- ..........
[tlla ey dun ket dan puiy dik ni II rau gah deh
ta' huim] (ku kyak tray ra II) 1 (kyak tray tun ler) [II gasap ma
rau w(w)o' ktuiw dah ra II babeii Ghatikara Mahabrui]-
45. ( m ma kuiw dan ku ey pday) [cran krun Anoma gah ler II] ...
. (ey dun praman) 1 (Sujata) 8 .............. [II kyak
tray tamla tun ler II pday gata tay hen] (ma dun)1
46. (ket pindapat) 1 [nah ma kuiw dan ka7 mwoy] . . 8 (II yarau pday
watthu mwoy)' .............. d
(pip apat Tapussa
tfnalhka) [ma kuiw dan wo'] ro II rau [gah gasap cuit kyak]
47. [tray, ktuiw dah ra II kha gah smin Catumahftrtt] (pan tim) 10 [ket]
{gasap cuit] 1 (kyak tray tuy II) ............ [ ku kyak
tray ra II kyak tray tun ler II] (het skuiw)
48. (badah ^phuiw ma jnok) 1 [ku smin Catumaharat pan tuy II] (uit) 1
Ipaben pan gah] (dun ket tuy) 1 .................
[bdah paben mwoy ra II pday paben kyak]
1 P.M.T.
1
Possiblyg&h.
is
P.MT
* *+
tutored. ' whlch seems to ma^e better sense.

MQN INSCRIPTIONS
,ART 27
49. [tray gah II deh ta' fiah fcl ko ku de' cut ket] (thaboh jarnkah) 1
............ (II pday kala) 1 [kyak tray] .....
50, [gah tun Icr II dak] , [deh ta' kct nan kuiw ku kyak tray] . . .
.....................
- (deh ta') (tun II kha gah) 1
(kyak tray)
51. [dando'
balwon dhar ku
cjch
ta1
]
52. (gah ran) 1 [wwo1 dch la' nah ba] (gali kyak tray) 1
B
............... 1 ma
1 (I) cleLhT ta['] [spa pujau tajw[ak
H
g]a(h) [II klift tfih l]:t(d)a|'h] duh" ta' [ma het mbay] (. . .)'
[srni]ti [nfik uiwoy m;i liimjii Jayasena [m]a tau [tau p]da[y
bhammdhani"
2 ....... ((]cl. la'} [n]ah ba ma hot mba[y t]uy II (k)e[t) phy[ih 8
na lar pday thajn jaku (c,I)c(h)" [ta'] (tuy ma tau pQ)j(au ra) [II
.......... ..........
II pday] k[ala krau] (paya)m
3 (g)a[h] II [mi]k [kan](h)am l cetl [tuy II dlam
ia
dhat lo]r [kuiw kau(h)am lu II Buddhapat]i[ma ler kuiw kan](h)am
(tuy II ualatacilult gah cut11 pclay) [tnen Buddhapatima ra II
pday] . , (dha)-
1 P.M.T,
3 There appear to have been about half-a-dozen more lines, now illegible,
3 Or k.
4 Looks like $cy (which is impossible here),
5 The first letter looks like pa or ma, the second like / or H.
8 The dh is perhaps for 1, Sec the note on the text.
7
Conjecturally restored (of, 1. 5J
8 T Ei h t e he c r o a n t te t m h p is or p a o r i y nt sp o e r ll b i e n t g w i e s en #/i t y h / e // < f b a u n t d n t o he n //, is th vi e s r i e bl i e s h a er b e l , ur which in the latter case may &ean
s o u ri b g s i c n 1 r 0 a i l p T t f h l h e aw. ( c o o r n I c f t o e n n m o c p t e o i r a v a a n r b y l o y ri s i g p t i e n l m a l i l i g n f h g l t aw i b , s , e t v h a a e r r d i e ab f l i o s e r , a me b l d u a t c l u i n i k a e n o a t f h 4 e t 1 h o e cc B s u i e r z t r e e w n o e c f e e n t s wo o t f h o e t r he t th o w r t o ee r t d a o k i ( s n * ha ) t r h * a i * * s . ana w n^ *
word there is a small flaw. - . .
11 The three preceding words are due to P.M.T,

' EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
28 [ VOL R
4. (t swo)k k[y>k [tray s]min mi[k' go]' [cut k]w[om tuy II
smin]
(pa) s [sajuin Cfllapindapat](ikatissathe kuiw ket rah) 8 [dhat
swok ra II Cfllapindapat](ikatissathe)' 1
6
(ma)
5. [himu Si]wa[th]e 6 [kuiw a cuih k]e[t dh]a[t swok smin nak
Jayasena ma a lax pday bhflmindhara na](gabhow ra II) 7 ....
. . [Siwathe gah] cu[ih a cuip smin nak] (ra) [II smin nak] . .
6. . [ma sket] dh[at] tuy II [dh]a[t sjuim [kr]o[t] sm[in nak hit lar 8
tuy II dhat ha bwoy ku cy II ifla ey" fiat] (ra II tila ey ket)
[k]e[t ra] II [i]ha[h] smin nak [gah II]
7. [t] ket. patina[n k]u [s]min nak (pi 10 Icli) 11 [tuy la II na idhi gah]
dha[t swok gah ket ket tuy II kuiw ku smiii Kakawannatissa13
ra] II s[min Kakawannatissa] 13 t[un Icr II] '.'
8- [gah] t[uy II l]atu k4ip Buddhapa[t]imft [gah lar t]u[y] II
. -. [Bud]dhapa[tim]a gah [th]a[pana lar pd]ay [dljarfi [tuy II] (kuiw)
................
[II II Tapussa Bliallika n]ah b[a ko
- , t]u [de' wo]1 [tun] ..................
w
9. Cau] p[day] w[ih]a Jeta[wan gah II nit up>h [gamluin kui]m II
pa[bwoy rameh hen] (I) kya[k tray dafcut] ......... ...
(tuy II) [pnor ii>h [ma a saranagamana gall p]day [than] ----
';-Locfa like mit. ^
^f f 34 T 1 ** Seems lo be ****** b *h
1??ielast wordmay be nan], -v
*
Conjectnrafly restored.
*
Possibly Sfieathe.
.y ** int^cted it as "reflect"I.
oft*
^
u O O o r ab f t e ft ? a See"ttteJT - r;,*??n * th T e 5 te * x . t ' J Ce h a a n> d r f i * vw r " t ' y bu r t ea t d hat he m n, a y wh b i e ch dll se w to ,e s d ub p s o e / q s u i e b n k t . damage.
^
' which is iu s shap,, in the second occurrenceMof
Mon inscriptions the letters k, t, Ih, y, I and ft
otherwiae

MON INSCRIPTIONS 29
T
PART IJ
10 [ma dabut lar] rwon II [krau] wvv[o]' kha kyak tra[y ma tau
pclay Rajagruih II] de(h la'] (fiah fca plan a) 1 [mwoy] (tnay ra
[tjun II [tuy pnlp a jarcn k]ya[k tray linwor tuy pday] (than)
......... s
(ka)-
11 j[o']
d[m]a[n:< tau] ra [II k]yak [t]ra[y t]wa[h dhar ku deh ta' ra
II Tapussu] gait go' [sotapatiphuiw' ra II] (turn lamih)'
dman tau ra II Bhallika gah pa gam-l t]u[y] (pa
[u]p[asaka
...........
mar) [\vi]p[assana] (luy II go?
12. [ra tuy II BhallikuthcF gul ^ , [ya A m s ] t u tan [ j t a t n la a j na g g a m h r [ t r u a y I I I I T P > 4 p a u y s[ ce s t a i
tun gah] II rplan i
dlAt s^k kyak tmy ma dch ta' thftpeoft] - - - -
Co
1
Tambag'Jutta1"
13. (pen wat) [pMpat t]uy II dm[4n] yl[m] b ^ na[t ayuk
[c]o[ti] a n[a] gu[h] a ktuiw dah pc]ay dun
[ [d p l a i j a ] t au sw [ o t k > ] u r (t a ,'}' I a I L k n r l a ? u ] w ( w m o a ' t [ i t ) n m o> pa [ [ n ra * y ] ( (w ^ at) tan)
dh]at [swok]
M
ma ha go]
[p]Qjau [h]c[n] ra [II II na[h
I P.M.T.
3 ConjectufiiUy
3 Looks like dwdw,
4 * T P. h M e .T f . i ' r a st r i ea l d o i o n k g s l l i u k i e n / I . tim I ih ow i e b t y he no ph me to an I s .M c . l i e . ar on m>
6 P.M.T. U hud rend Jto-iT). &.,
7 The last word is very doubtful, but cf. the preceding
8 The Bh resembles an A. *
w
8 O
Th
r
is
til
s
a
ee
(
m
P
s
.M
t
.
o
TJ
be the actual reading, though
. t..he Tr mrinfiighati be ^ both tare and in fl*^
II V C e on r j y ec d t o u u r b a t U f y ul res T t h or e ed f . inal letter looks like m and the ww y * 4/ * * is uncertain*
Very doubtful. It may be merely a damaged space.
M
Possibly #1/1. . .
w Very doubtful. One would expect 4n&y let, *

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
30 [VOL. iv
15. [linwor pujau gah] kuim nda1 II [pday] tha[n cjeti ga[h] II m a
kambat han
[pa t]am [ku tn]am [chu juk gruip l]a ga[h] (klut
tuin tuy II dah) 2 [gruip gah] (baclan) 3 uiw tuy II nah ha tim
dnay w]a[y hen ra II II nor cnam tila 4 puiy kya]k tra[y]
16. [ma pa parinibba]n [gah] II ba [k]la[m pi cwoh tnrau cnam gah
kuli Iwon] a t[u]y II [t]lla 5 puiy [n]ra[han] b[a ma himu
Sonathe Uttarathe gah tlun ptan sa]san[a pday cl[u]n S[uwann]a-
bhum ma
[ra] II kh[a s]a[sana tan] tuy II gam-[l]
17. [truh] II gam-[l bran II sama]ni [tr]u[h] II [saman]l br[au] II
kha [ma nwom6 tuy gah II] kha [gah] smin Si[rl]ma[soka gah
II gah] ku ti[la 7 puiy ba] (ra II t)o' 8 [tila 5 cy] II dha[m]ma[rat]
II sa[ngha]rat ga[h puiy dik go'] li[wwo]r" pujau
18. {ra II [Buddhar]atana m[w]o[y gah puiy dik] mik l[iriwor pfl[j]au
ha go'J (') [II] dh[at] kya[k] tray [tuy puiy clik] ma [sgo 1 ]
phyui[h cuit Bu]d[dh]ara[t puiy dik ma sgo' linwor pu]jau [ey]
gah] II ti[la ey]
19. [ta' ren ku puiy dik ni II rau gah] sm[in pa ayac]ana [ku tila
puiy ra II II kha ga]h tila pui[y mahathe ba gah II ce[ll dh[at]
s[w]o[k] kya[k t]ra[y] II m[in T]ap[ussa] II [BhalUka II ma
thapan> lar p[day latu kdi] 11-
20. [p tmo' Tambagutta 12 II dasuiw gruip ma grop badan lar tuy ma]
fial? ha ti[m dnay gah II tabah] k[u]iw ku [smin- Si>[i m asoka] 18
ra II [kha gah smin- Siri]m[asokaJ 3 II kuiw [n]ah tah [kle 1 cajafo
]anah] (kle') [dasuiw gruip tuy] II [ce]-
* 1 T Se h e e X la I s V t w 1 d n r . d ( i a s n v d ar cf y . d 1. ou 2 b 1 t , fu i l n . fra) ^
^^^
1 Perhaps ma. U f' l 2 '
* Or
fe7a.
*An
original 3? has been corrected to m
Ori3?a,
rw t
f r t ^ oe i ^ ^oductory Winterjection y* (cf. XII A 34, SO.)
r eA
il is a disfigurement, not the S>Wbol for .
*
Cf. I. 12 n.
** *****
(if there is one) is superscript over the following Wtar. &r may be sirf
.

MQN INSCRIPTIONS 31
pART
j-j
21. [tl kui]m [lar II pmsfil 1 ma dah] 2 (g)[uim] 3 cel[iyaghara kuim lar]
II k[u]iw kanaih1 [tuy] (pa)'"' [tau puj>u ra [II II pa tarn] 8 nu
gab [kuim] mia7 II [nil ku nah ma i]au pda[y] than [r]ah
[rma]n [\vwo' gali] II [pabwoy* ramjen he[n] (ma) 9 tlun [tau
pujau hen ra II]
22. krau [wwo'] s[m]in ma [n]\v[oni tau ku s]addha ma [pa t]l[la] rah
[rman la gali II c]dlyaghara w[wo' ladah] thawara la[r cujit
[t]uy II [ce]llyaglani gall c]aclah k[l]e[' tuy II ma dak grop
10
grop] janwofjk] (tlan cell)
23. [wwo' bwoy ram[cn t[uy] II ce[tj w[wo' dah m]aha[c]e[t]I [rwon
II II II] II [Ilia puiy cell dha]t [swok Icyak tray] u m(in)
Ta[pu]s[s> Bha[ilika] ma [liifipana lar pday] la[t]u kd[ui]p tma['
k>
Tambagutta 1- xvwo' II pday
24. [la tila n]ah [lain" cin baiaft ma hi]mu Dhamma[trailo]kyana[th>-
r[ajadhi]ra[l nisi pa suiin j?ah II prasat 14 ma dah cetiyaghara gah
cadah klc' tuy II (ma dak)1" .... Q>nwot 16 [r]w[on] II [kha
rna dak] gah da[h 40] ha[t]
ma
25. [sal]un [ra krau] w[<>' p]da[y kala tila fiah Sutasomarajadhirat
pa smin gal,] II kuiw dak Ihom janok 17 platftun II] da[k l]h[om
|
j]ano[k" tuy"hen II yok] . . (c)a[lM II yok t]d[on II] (dlah)
I For
'
?h/t letter to te dcfiuitdy ; the tat might be .. Possibly the word is a
kuim, Cf. 1. 24. ^-
4 There is little or no indication of a subscript letter here, but cfc i.
5 The supposed pa very much resembles II.
6 Or #ata (P.M.T.) But there seem to be traces of an
7 Cf. XIV 1 n.
8 Possibly babwoy.
9 Looks like pa, or conceivably II (IMMT.)
10 Doubtful. The tot letter may be *.
II Possibly kdip.
18 Cf. I 12 n,
13 Perhaps /z7a.
14 Cf. 1. 21.
15 P.M.T.
16 Forjanwok*
17 Probably the word is spelt without w in thesetwo cases.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
32 [VOL. jv
26. [lar b]w[oy p]da[y] II dlah [th]ar ga[h l]ar ma[nah II kuiw lah
bapen] (calan) [uit II krau wo'] pcla[y k]ala [tlla nah Ra]ma-
ra[j]adhira[t ma pa smin gah II pclay] sak[karat 798 II gah II
fila puly] c[eti dhat s]w[ok]
27. [wo* cha] pnah [gandi]n [ma g]tu[iw 1 a cuip latu] ga[h II lak2 a
tu]y II [ti]la 3 [n]ah kwo[rn] ku [gnakyfik Narajadewl] II p[-or
sm]in Samm Mlam [tu]y [II t]ah sa[mah] .(i) 4 (p).(n)
[t]u[y] ma ku[iw] dak [p]la[n] II
28. (I) da[k plan tuy t]u[y h]e[n II k]ui[w lak an]ka[de II kha gah]
ceti [gah] swat [s]an [g]ah [t]u[y nu tarii pajr]ah [jnok he]n ma
kui[w] da[k lho]m [plan m]way (tuy r> ra) [tun II] c[e]tl ma dak
lho]m [pl]an ga[h le]r [h]a ga-
e
29. ta[p tuy] II [tola n]ah Rama[raj>dh[irat (a) [d]n[n] d[ewat]au
[hen II krau wo' pd]ay [ka]la t[lla 7 n]ah Ba[na Barwor ma
h]irnu [Jaya]d[dls]araj[adhirat 8 ma pa smin gah II tlla 7 nah]
'kwom ku
[g]nakya[k] Ra(y) [ler II]
3(X [salMah watthu ma] g[lui]n [tuy ku]i[w dak lhom] II [mi 4k tlla 10
u
fi [g]nakya[t Wlharade]w[l] 12 II [kwom ku sm]in bui[w
Yogarat ptit daxhat hen II_ uit som" dik ska'] aram [pariw> [m]a
. n[w]o[m hen] II jak l-i[t" tuy] (maf [da]-
1 For kiuiw, probably. But the reading is not quite certain
* Looks like tat.
s Or ttia.
would expect #, and the letter under the i looks like a /, but the next one has a rtrdma
6 6 Tbe u is very,doubtful. Probably the word intended is thap
Possibly can.
7 Or fila.
8 Or -ddisa-
^this^loots Bfee kwom but seems to be really Ihom.
n
*
For&satyl&,
For Wt-
*
Looks Efceyam.
*
Or *-**.
to
is what is meant,- though the letter looks a little like sa ; but it has a stroke

MON
INSCRIPTIONS
WRT 33
31. [k] II [ma dak gah l]er [ha g]atap [tuy II tila njah [Jayaddisara]ja-
[dhirjat 1 [gah a chin dewutuu II] k[r]au [wwo]' pday [k>la [tijla 2
Bana Ken Dan ma
[nah hijmti Dhamma[tr]ai[lokya]n[atharaja-
ma
dhirat pa smin] (gaV
32. ,[h mi ak tala n]ah nia [h]i[nni g]naky[fik] Wih[ar]ade[w]i ma da[k
ma ma
t]uy t[u]y II [kha t]uy ga[h tala n]ah Ba[na Ke]n [Dau
ma
him]n [Dliannnatrai]lo[kya]na[lha gah ma] ku[iw lak
ank]ad[c] II ma [yok calan II II] (ma)
33. [yok tdon] II [krau] \v[\vo' pday k>[la t]l[la n]ah [S]r[l]
Tribhuwa[nJUlityapra\varad I an i n )alrai]lo[kyanitha 8 Mah]a[dham-
ma]raj[adlurajaclcwl II kwom k]u [k]w[o]n t[lla 4 n]ah ma
[himu] Ka[ni]a(lh[ipati]' vSripa[niniamahadhammara]-
34. [jadhirat ma pa sntin j;ali II vv]atth[u ma g]lui[n] l[e]r [kle] f [II
* nit suim k]\v[om ku] tlar[hat bui]w [pna]n [hen] II tila 6 nah ba
mi ku kwou a clmnn] (tnm) 7 [jon dhat swok t]u[y II] ma ku[i]w
[bar jrah II jrahj nia sjofh san Icr]
35. [kuiw] (bar bapen}' [II Juiw ma slu gah l]er k[u]i[w khay
satjah [sainah II ti buwar" nia bar gah] (ma) [II tma' Iwan kalo1
kale'] (gah IJ bar ren) d(\in) [tui]n tu[y] (ra) II ma[n]ai? [deh
ma kuiw dak iuin l-ii]i[t !l II pday kala gah] (ma)
n
36. [II pajrah mwayj (lliap 111 uisi) dak du[n cejll [gah II p]day [b>n
[pajr]ah jlato gait] II rc|n Isir tdon tma' ma l]S[k na thar II
akrjl [tdon] (kuiui k)ui(wf jon pa[jrah ceti gah II lah bapen]
t[m<(f [!>!/!I Ljon| pajra[h gah] (ma) [II dak tui>
For -rajadhmlt.
Or tila.
B'or Tribhnwa.
Or tila.
Possibly -/xx/7.
Or tila.
The reading, though not certain, seems very probable.
Possibly bawwttr,
Or l-it ; but the it seems pretty definite,
11 1 11 0 TT P hh o ii s ss s ,, ibl oo y rr t pp a ee w r . r . bbaaptt bb****> aaeennnn ttuu bbee tthhee reaaii^ of the text but no such words are rec / or w de W d }-
d i i - ction T ar h y i . s P s . e M e . m T s . t h o as b a e i^g t c t Kt<* a c c l tu M a / l /, rc w a i d n h c m h , m t a ho y -. h gh ave ow b i e n e g n t t o he th w e o c r o d nd i it n i t o e n nd o e f d the .ton, as shwa * fl*
either word mi^hl be either AV///W or
5

EPIGRAPHIA B1RMANICA
-34 [VOL. iv
37. n (batan 1 gnin) 2 t]u[y II] ma [ren calo]' [s]ri[ij c[dau jon] ma
[tmu]y tau [na tma1 II p]da[y lat]u [c]ciltiyangaii(l) 4 ma twah
& [ma nah padaksuin* gah lor II uit
g]ah [pan](nasa) wuduih]
(tdon II) 7 [lah bap]en [tma' lah pa-nit]
38. [II pday ra-uit 8 paimasa gah tun ler II] (cl)a[k a kamban ma cum
dah tau all]wa[t 9 ma nah kan(h)arfi 10 lur nip pkau dakah II]
(p) ......n [pday ra-uit dacuit] 12 (mway lhap) [ra] (tun) [gah
II kuiw k]an(d)am 10 [cal(w)o' jrap] (tamliw) 13 [wuduih]
39. [pa-uit hen II dacuih g]ah panna[sa dak taluih mway thap ra
tun] (II) [dacuih gah mway tliay 1'1 ra tun II kuiw dak ca]l[o'
kamban wu]du[ih pa-uit II pday kamban gah t]nn [ler kuiw
tuiw bapen] (tnam) 15
40/ [brau pa-uit] II [m]afiah [k]am[b]a[n gah kuiw] (bar) 16 [sajtah
[samah ti gah pa-uit II II II II]
1 Doubtful/ The initial may be p. The final might bt; #, but not if the ni'xt word is fttin; and itis
tob$ noted that i 1, 27 this word is spelt
2 Bcmfcttul bnt probable.
4 This sppem tobe the actual reading, though one world expect cctTyafi&iya*
d * & Tt ^ ^r o e ne ap a p k e s a k r a s ra t , o be a flaw between t>att and m&tt, which arc eptwalc<l by a bhirrcd space ofthe
* Qrs
daksvin, according to modern M6n vsage,
7
Extjremeiy doubtful.
"*
Possibly ra-itt
*
Mm Q w K- o a d Uwiit. I take this (whether a compound or two words) to represent the Sanskrit (and Pali)
afl, of earth", etc., and w}a> "enclosure, wall",
1 u 1 As lotiiereading,cf. 1. 8 n.
w . ith& P e os l s a i s b t ly lin f e r . nnasfi (as P.M.T.\ the matter being complicated bv the Haw referred to in connection
19 Fordacuih.
for *, The t is doubtfol aad the Im may be luiw t It is also possible that the final w may be an error
** Or possibly fhah ; in either case an error for ilutp.
c^iain, thoygh the final letter is illegible
"
doubtful.

MON
INSCRIPTIONS
PART j] 35
A
Translation.
..... having made a resolution1 at the feet of the exalted Buddha
Dipankara (2) 8 having been fulfilled in due order, the
conditions of supreme enlightenment to attain 3 (very ?)....
(3) .... beneath the Boclhi fig-tree with the intention of victory,
remained sitting. The host of the deva Mara (undertook ?} (4)
.... to wit, omniscience that is adorned with the (state?) 4 of an
assemblage of virtues (without ?) (5) (the status ?) of a
Buddha. Having attained Buddhahood, (he) enjoyed the bliss of emancipa-
tion, (seated crosslegged ?) f> by the Bodhi throne6 for seven days
(6) . . . . r the exalted Buddha had not been able to rise (from the
throne saying that 8 which usually confer Buddhahood
?)
(were ?) not yet (present ?), doubts arose , . . . (7) . . . . (for full eight 10
days ?)..,. (the exalted Buddha ?).... ip order to dispel the doubts
of the devas, floated up to the sky . . . . (8) . . . (having dispelled?) the.
doubts of the devas, (from the throne?) 11 ...... descended and remained
for seven days (with eyes ?) w (9) .... the throne and the Bodhi
upon an ambulatory .... to the west for (seven ?) days
fig-tree
.... (10) to the west of the ambulatory 13 the exalted
Buddha meditated , . , . (11) . . . (for) four weeks (in?)
(near the Boclhi tree ?) . . the Ajapala fig-tree. ( B M y
the (Ajapala) fig-tree (12) (was)
I Namely to become a lli'ddha.
* The qualities essential to perfection must be understood here,
8 Supply something like "the status of a Buddha".
4 Reading tradah ; tmwah would moan 4ia saying",
6 6 T T h h e e r a e u a t d h i o n r g iti i e s s do di u f b f t e f r ul a , s to whether at this moment Buddha was still on u.,ie throne m ' uddbist Birife
Stories, p. 200; or had already descended from it (Bigandet, I 99). See 1. 6 and also $ vu, noce.
7 Perhaps supply " seeing that M .
8 Supply " the qualities", or the like,
9 In the minds of the devas. Cf. XIV 3-8.
1 II 0 T H h e i r s e a p p r p o e b a a r b s ly to fo b l e lo t w h e e d r a ead t i l n a g t . eme O nt ne of wo th u e ld di e r x ec p t e i c o t n " a s n e d ve d n is ' t '. ance Budana ww . Q^^st, leu
fathoms. (Bigandet l.c.t
18 Probably supply " not blinking". Cf, XIV 2-3*
13 This refers to the " house of gems " 4 of the fourth week,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
36 VOL n
[ .
Mucalinda (tree ?) which was towards .... (13) (he)
remained. After that ... (14) (he) enjoyed the bliss
of emancipation and remained (there) obtained the status of a
Buddha (15) (the exalted Buddha was not able)
to attend to his personal needs, (did not ?) food. With1 mystic
....
contemplation (16) (remained ?)
At the end of the (forty-nine ?) days'"' (desire to eat ?)
(the exalted Buddha?) . . At that time King Inclra (17)
(to give to?) the exalted Buddha . . . (the exalted Buddha?)
together with .... (18) King Indra. The exalted
Buddha Taphussa (and) Bhallika . . (19) . . . the city of
Asitanjana 3 (having crossed ?)* the ocean .... (20) ....
(rested ?) on the bank of the river 8 (21) towards the
south (they ?) (in ?) (22) (my children ?) 8
....
(24) (pulled the carts ?).... (25) . . . (having ?) (self) . . ,
...
(26) that the (Rajayatana ?) 7 tree . . . (27)
(that?) (I ?) gift of alms . . . (28) (they?)
(29) (having ?) (water ?), merit (30)
(one ?).... the exalted Buddha ... (31) to the exalted
Buddha ....
(32) (path ?), among those (who were on the way
to attain ?) (33) . . . they, (having passed through the
states of devas and men, in the time of the exalted Buddha
?)
sons (of a leading merchant ?) 8 . , . (34) .... (to) give a gift of alms to
the exalted Buddha
( among ?) (they ?)
...
(35) . . (having?) they approached near to the exalted Buddha
" M
' ; y. lord the exalted (36) Buddha grant that we may give
(tfaee thy) food first !"
....
they . . . (37) . . . having passed through (the vStates of devas
and
men?), in the time of the exalted Buddha
(having
1 P.M.T. inserts " the bliss of".
1 * O W r he " r o e f t t h h e e b d r a o y t " her ( s viz dw : e t l h t e . 49th).
4
Conjectural.
* The
Nerafijara, according to the Burmese version, cf XIII A 22 W
^^llETSSl^otf the ^lolghts OT speech f the ; rth !. ^ h h*d in e <* toeir
should mSTo BU ff ;tw br lhere d ' who SI their carts in order that they
'
Conjectnral. Cf.XIII B 1
*
Conjectural,

WON
INSCRIPTIONS
PARTI] 37
....
been?) . chiklren for (many?) years (38) (they?) had been
to monks of the Order. (Before our Bodhisattva
giving gifts ?)
.... had the name (of Pokkharavati ?)' . . (39) they came into existence
as the sons of a rich man who was a leading merchant (the two
of them) who remained in ..... At (the fitting time ?), (40) together with
five hundred merchants, 2 (having gone on board ship and crossed?) the
ocean, (they arrived ?) (having fully loaded five hundred carts 3
with goods they ?) became merchants, (and) they (41) (roamed about ?).
Having thus made (their) prayer, in (instructed 4 them?). At
that time Taphussa (and) Bhallika, the two, (42) the elder and the younger
brother, heard (the words ?) which the deva spoke, and being glad at
...
heart, (from their cart they ?)* very (long ?) dry rice cakes
and .... cakes (43) butter rolls also (they) laid out
. . (the exalted Buddha ?) " exalted Buddha, that we may (obtain
happiness ?) (44) may my lord accept our gift" Thus did they
the exalted Buddha And there arose in the mind of the
speak (to ?).
exalted Buddha this thought : " The almsbowl that the Mahabrahma
Ghatikara (45) (gave me on ?) the bank of the river Anoma
(wherein I received the milk rice of Sujata ?) 6 None of the
Buddhas of old received on their hands (46) the alms of those who gave
On what7 the alms that Tapussa (and)
(them) gifts . . thing
Bhallika give me ?" Such was the thought (47) that arose in the mind
of the exalted Buddha. At that moment the four Catumaharaja kings,
Buddha
(being aware of ?) the thought (of the exalted ?)
to the exalted Buddha. And the exalted Buddha, in order to confer
(48) great merit on the four Catumaharaja kings, (accepted all ?) the
four almsbowls (and) made them into one almsbowL to
1 Apparently another name fur the Asttanjana of 1. 19.
'
* L
A
i
c
t
c
er
e
a
d
l
i
ly
ng
'*s
t
o
o
us
th
o
e
f
-
t
s
r
t
a
o
d
r
e
y
".
there were five h.mdred carts, but the
read.mg noff t*hi^e tteaxtt is e < xt * re * jn * el ? y
*
doubtf 4 ul A . s appears from the following line it was the earth spirit (referred to in -L 22 i wfao instructed
them.
6 6 T Pr h e e su l m a a s b t ly wo " r d d esc to end v e e d ry '\ d b o u u t bt t f h u e l tex T t he is i v l e l s e s g e i l bl s e r h e e f r e e r , red to were no g available. i 3311
7 This is rather a rendering of the alternative reading w$ rau. f*? f '^^g>\ At
r th e e ad l i o n n g g of ga t p he th t a e t xt, fo t l h l e ow m s e o a n n e in m g us w t oi su Id pp p l r y o " ba s b h l a y ll b I e re " c w e h iv e e ne ", ver tor
9 The guardians of the four quarters of the world.

BIRMANICA
EPIGRAPHIA [VOL. iv
3g
this almsbowl of the exalted Buddha (40) the . tw . o .. of .. t . he . m, the elder
and the younger brother, put the dry rice cakes at the tlme
the exalted Buddha .... (50) .... water . . . they brought (and) gave
to the exalted Buddha (them. Then the exalted Buddha?)
(51) expounded the Law to them (52) thus did the two
of them (speak: "Exalted Buddha "?)
B
..... (that) they might worship (them while) travelling. 1 At that time,
(perceiving wh t o hat d ? w ) e 2 lt th i e n y th w e er B e hu n m e i g n li d g h e a nt r , a ( a Na k g i a ng wor o l f d t ?) h 5 e .. Na . g . as . , .. n . ame (2 d )
Jayasena,
..... because the two men had been negligent, took (the hair relics
and) carried (them) down to their 4 own country (and worshipped them ?).
At a later time ..... (time ?) ...... (3) ......' desiring to build
a caitya (and) having had a relic chamber made and also having had an
image of Buddha made, placed the frontlet on the forehead of the image
of Buddha ....... (4) the king, wishing also to place the hair relics of
the exalted Buddha, made the Thera Culapindapatikatissa responsible for
.........
procuring 6 the hair relics, (The Thera) Culapindapatikatissa
. / (5) named Sivathera (and) caused (him) to go down (and) get the hair
relics that the Naga king Jayasena had gone (and) placed in the Bhumin-
dhara (Naga world ?) 8 , . . . this Sivathera went down to the Naga king. The
.king ........... (6) to get the relics, 9 the Naga king, having
1 Themeaning is not quite certain. But the Burmese inscription explains that Tapussa and Bhallik.
enshrined six of the eight hairs given them by Buddha but kept the other two for private veneration
These were the ones stolen by the Naga king. The others are referred to in 1. 12.
1 Conjecturatty supplied.
* The words in parenthesis are conjectural but fairly certain. The Pali Nalatadbatiivamsa vsvs the
expression (in the form bk&midhara) in the sense of the Nagas supporting or bearing ip the earth. Before
I saw this text I took it for a mis-spelling oi-bhTunintara, in the sense of "the interior of the earth".
which would be equally appropriate.
4 That is, the Nagas* country. But the reading of this passage is not quite certain.
* Somewhere in the preceding passage must have come the king's name (see 1. 7j, and description,
The Bunnese inscription locates him in Ceylon.
The reading is not quite certain. -Literally "cause to bring."
* Here there must have been a statement that the monk mentioned in the next line was a pupil of
CSIafa^JajJatikatissa, and perhaps that the latter summoned him, as in the Burmese version
8Cf.1.
1.
9 Prcba&y these words were preceded by some statement that the Naga king was aware of the
monk's purpose in visiting him. .' - -

MON
INSCRIPTIONS
39
PART t]
"
swallowed the relics (and) the reliquary, (said) The relics are not with
me. (If) my l rcl secs ( tllcm > l eO mv l rd ^ke (them) "/ Thus the Naga
king spake '* (?) having obtained permission 3 from the
Naga king (three times4 and) having by magic power taken the hair relics,
gave (them) to King Kakavannatissa. And King Kakavannatissa, having . .
(8) (and) having put (them) on the head of the image of
Buddha, (and) having enshrined the image of Buddha in a relic chamber,
(caused ?)
The two (brothers) Tapussa (and) Bhallika, the elder and the younger
brother, B (9) dwelt in the Jetavana monastery (and)
the exalted Buddha set all the (lay) disciples in (their due) order,
. . among those who went for refuge11 in (that ?) place '
(10) (he) set. After that, when the exalted Buddha dwelt at Rajagriha,
these (two again ?) went one (day ? and) having approached the presence
of the exalted Buddha (and) made reverence, in (that place ?) . -.
. . . (11) sat clown (and) remained (seated). The exalted Buddha preached
the Law to them. Tapussa attained the fruit of conversion, 8 (he entered
But
the number of ?)' the lay disciples (and) remained (in that status).
Bhallika having become a monk and developed spiritual insight, (attained ?)
was named Bhallikathera. Tapussa, on the other
(12)
hand, having returned again to the town of Asltanjana, in the caitya where
they had enshrined the hair relics ... on the top of the Tambagutta hill
fulfilled (13) (his religious) duties, and after dwelling (there) for
the term of his life passed away from there and came into existence in
the heavenly city. - , ,,
(As for) the caitya of the hair relics, those who were aware of the
benefits" (of its observance ?f continually venerated (and),worshipped it
LiteraUy "my Lord sec" (or "look"), "my lord take", both verbs being in the imperative.
Here the monk Sivathura must have been mentioned or referred to again.
T O F h r r e o " m N c a o t l n h s a e e t n a t d B h u ", a r t m " u e v p s a r e m o s m a i ve s r h e s e i " r . o e n sp it ea i k s s p o l f ai a n t t h h r a i t ce t r h e e pe p a r t e e c d ed f in o g ml. g f aorpt ^ r ^ conta ^ ine t d aa ssttaatieemmeent thatit was
Buddh I a n w t h he o t w e a ch s ni d c w a e l ll B i u n d g dh i i n st th s e en J s e e t , av *. a * n . a i m n o B n u a d s d t h e a r , y t a h t e th L i a s w tim a e n . d toe ^^f ^ ^ ^tdisciptes.
7 8 T F h r e om w t o h r e d B c u o r n m t e a s in e s v a er m si e o t n ap i h t o a r p i p c e a a l rs r t e h f a e t re t n h c e e t t w o o e b n r t o e t r h i e n r g s into tfce sireau* ., Buddhist pafc of
9 Very doubtful.
10 See the note on the text.
11 That is, primarily, " spiritual benefits",
151 Very doubtful,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
40 [VOL. iv
Later on, the succession of those, who were aware of the benefits1 of the
hair relics (14) of the exalted Buddha, having been broken, and because
in this M6n country the religion had not been (firmly) established, people
knew not (the caitya of ?) the hair relics and they could not venerate (and)
worship (it). Because they could not (15) venerate (and) worship (it), on
the land of the caitya such things as trees, jungle creepers, grass and
rubbish had sprung up, (and had become ?)' a forest (concealing it ?) 2 ,
people were not aware of its site. From the year of the exalted Buddha's
{16} achieving parinirvana two hundred and thirty-six years had elapsed,
(when) our lords the two arhats named Sonathera and Uttarathera came
Suwannabhum.3 When
(and) established the religion in the country of the
religion had been established (and) when there were monks, (17) nuns, male
novices, and female novices, then King Sirlmasoka said to the two arhats,
" O my lords, the gem of the Law and the gem of the Order are we able
to venerate (and) worship, (18) (but) the gem of the Buddha, (though) we
desire to venerate (and) worship (it), we cannot.4 A relic of the exalted
Buddha, that we may set our minds (at rest upon), a gem of the Buddha
that we can, venerate, worship (and) adore, let my lords provide for us ! ".
Thus did the king make (his) petition to our lords. Then our lords the
two Mahatheras showed to King Sirlmasoka the caitya of the hair relics of
the exalted Buddha that Tapussa and Bhallika had enshrined5 on the top
(20) of the Tambagutta 8 hill, which the forest bushes7 had covered (and)
concealed, and people did not know (its) site. Then King Sirlmasoka had
the forest bushes7 cleared away (21) and also caused the caitya and the
prOs&da (which was also ?) 8 the cetlyaghara to be built up and offered9
(them). From that time also all the people who dwelt in this M6n
country in due course10 kept coming and worshipping
(it).
1 That is,primarily,"spiritualbenefits".
1 Very doubtful.
3 Suvannabhumi is here identified with Lower Burma. The name has also been claimed by other
parts of Indo-China.
4 Or,possibly, " have not (got)". Here follows in the text an illegible word of one syllable which
may either have added to the sense or been a mere particle.
* Or"set up", the object then being the caitva
Cf. 1. 12 n.
7 Or, " bushes (and) forest".
' The
8 Or reading is doubtful, especially as regards "also". For the rest, cf' 1' 24
"worshipped".
w
That is, at the appropriate seasons.

MON INSCRIPTIONS
41
PART j]
Later on the kings that possessed faith who were lords of the
(22)
M6n country, determining that this cetfyaghara should be permanent, the
having been severed asunder, 1 encased and enlarged (the sides
uttyaghara
of the caitya Tf (23) successively and this caitya became a great caitya.
This venerable caitya 3 of the hair relics of the exalted Buddha enshrined4
by Tapussa (and) Bhallika on the top of the Tambagutta 5 hill, at the time
when His Majcsiy the Lord of the White Elephant, named,
(24)
Dhammatrailokyanatharajadhirat, was king, the prUsUda which was the
having been severed asunder, 6 was encased (and) enlarged'
cettyaghara,
him and) when encased was 40 cubits (25) high. Thereafter, at
(by
the time when His Majesty Sutasomarajadhirat was king, (he) caused it
to be encased (and) enlarged again, and when it had been encased
(and) enlarged (he) erected . . * the spire (and) set up the umbrella (and)
putting a layer of copper (26) within (and) putting a layer of gold
outside (he) had the whole of the spire fully overlaid. Thereafter, at the
time when His Majesty Ramarajadhirat was king, in the year/798 of the
Common Era," this venerable caitya 1" of the hair relics, (27) (so far as) all
11
that had been raised from the shoulder of the bell upwards (is concerned)
ordered
having collapsed, His Majesty together with (his) queen NarajadevI
Prince Samm Mlftm to level ....... and have (it) built up again (28).
When had been bnili up again (they) 'had it plastered, Then, saving
(it) had
that the caitya was very" small, from the large plinth (upwards they)
it rebuilt (and) encased once more. The rebuilding (and) encasmg of toe
had not been completed (29) when" His Majesty Ramarajadhtrat
caitya
& , r . wh T e h t e he M r D t M he i d s o d . o t ub n l . f. c , U 1 m , t ( h if e i w t o i r s d that) * w * as Pr a i c m c a i r d i e l n y ta m l ea or ns an ' i ' nt ^ er f na V l ^ pa ' rt ^ of the scheme
the caitya. The phrase recurs hi 1. 24.
3 Doubtful reading.
3 Literally "our lord this caitya".
4 Cf. 1. 19 n.
* Cf. I. 12 n. -
'' ?o preserve the order of the original these verbs have been turned into the passive.
8 Here there is a small illegible word.
9 A.D. 1436-7.
JJ^^
Sis'seems to be the meaning, though it might
up as far as the shoulder of the bell." In view of B. 25-6, this_mierpr
able. By u bell" is meant the bell-shaped body of the pagoda.
18 Or too."
M The word gatop means " to be in time,1'

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
42 VOL
[ Jv
departed to the city of the devas. Thereafter, at the time when His
Majesty Bafia Barwor, styled- Jayaddisarajadhirat was king, His
Majesty
together with (his) queen Ray, (30) having given many offerings, had
(it)
built up (and) encased. His Majesty's mother, the Queen Viharadevl
together with Yogarat, the commander-in-chief of the army, exerted them-
selves : all the slaves, followers (and) retainers that there were (they) led
forth to build (31) but the building had not been completed when1 His
Majesty Jayaddisarajadhirat departed to the city of the devas. Thereafter
at the time when His Majesty Baiia Ken Dau, styled Dhammatrailokyana-
tharajadhirat, was king, what His Majesty's mother named Queen Vihara-
devl had built was finished. When it had been finished His Majesty Bana
Ken Dau r styled Dhammatrailokyanatha, had it plastered, erected the spire
(and) (33) set up the umbrella. Thereafter, at the time when Her
Majesty
Sri
Tribhuwanadityapravaradhammatrailokyanatha
Mahadhammarajadhiraja-
devi together with her son named Ramadhipati Sri Paramamahadham-
mara(34)jadhirat s were rulers, (they made) many offerings together with all
the forces of their army. Their Majesties, mother and son, having gone
to dwell at the foot of the hair relics, had the hollows (of the ground)
filled up, hollows that were very deep (35) (they) caused to be
entirely
filled up, high mounds (they) caused to be dug (and) levelled, (on) the
earth which was filled in (they) piled up blocks of laterite stone and out-
side (it) they had it all faced. Then (36) (on) the first 3 plinth supporting
the caitya, on the upper of the
plinth, (they) arranged stone
umbreUas overlaid with gold, and between the umbrellas (they) had the
foot of the plinth of the caitya paved throughout with flat stones, (and)
w h W h av a i i t n n g is g ( t o l e n a r ) n m t t e e h d r e ns a fo m o P a t a 5 d n e o n f a o s t f h a is st p o f l n o i e r n , t ' p h eo ( b p a u n l i d l e t ) t ( o o 3 n 7) go t u h p e r 6 o t u t h n o e d p , be o l f ( l a / n t d h ) ( e th c o e e u y l t ) l s y i a a d r e n r g a a n ( n g t a e h ? d e
1 See I. 29a.
*
several storeys leading *
adorned with {precious) stones.

MON
INSCRIPTIONS
PART i] 43
umbrellas ?, they) laid down flat stones throughout ; (38) at the end of
the pannasa (they) built a wall, with an earthwork, whereon (they) made
lotus patterns at the end of (one ?) lower level (they) had perma-
nent zayats 1 built all around. (39) On that level (they) built the pannasa
(apart ?)* on one level, (and) on the next (lower they) had a wall built all
around it. Within the wall (they) had (40) coconut palms planted
throughout. Outside the wall (they) had the ground levelled throughout
1 "Rest houses." The word ma.v be in the singular,
1 Doubtful

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
44 [ VOL . IV
No. XVI.
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE YATHEMYO MONASTERY, PEGU.
Account.
Descriptive
95. This inscription is engraved on one face of a stone of which
about a fifth has been broken off and was not available. The dimensions
of the inscribed area are as follows : height, 2 ft 1-J- in., breadth, 3 ft. 5
in. The letters are | in. high and letter t is - in. long. The inter-
linear space is about i in. Except in places where it has been damaged
the writing is clear.
96. The inscription commemorates the founding by King Dhammaceti
of a large monastery, the Maharamavihara. It is noticeable that the first
date given (in 1. 1) is 819 of the Common Era (=A.D. 1457-8), a year
earlier than the first date referring to this king in the Kalyani inscriptions.
This was, apparently, the time when a beginning was made with the
erection of the monastery, the dimensions of which are given in some
detail,
though -unfortunately a good deal of this description is lost. In 4he year
823 most of the work had been completed and on the 10th of the waxing
half of Vai&kha in 824, after all was ready, the monks were invited to
enter into occupation, to the number of 17,174 all told. The remainder
of the record
gives particulars of the king's bounty towards the monks,
whom he provided with large quantities of necessaries, the details of which
are of some interest Some of these agree with similar gifts mentioned
in various parts of the Kalyani inscriptions to which reference is made in
the notes on II. 20, 21.
- - -. Text.
1 '...."
V
. . . [pajrinibban gah [2001] cnam kuli' loin] tuy hen H

MON
INSCRIPTIONS
45
pART j]
1 .............................
2. (mmarajadhirat)
. . suim bed ma Ihin tau pday sabguiw sa[sana kyak] 8 tray I ma
pkan ran tau kramin brabwey 3 dhar gah I ma ...........
[Maharama]wiha[r]
.
......................................
3 (ma)
[kar gah I ma] kuiw yok dayon Ma[haramawihar] I pa tarn nu
[gah k]uim ra I (ka na'1 kuim) lar I ka [1-it Iwan kuim] (lar I)
b[woy rameri] . .
4 .................................... h na
ha[t p]akati ma twah bgah hat basa[y I ja]H[n 38] hat I janok
.......
34 hat I salun 33 hat I [tmit] (muk) pan tal[uih]
5 ................................... [32J hat
I jalin 38 hat II wiha tawi clat Jetawa[n] 26 ga[h] l[e]r suim ku
m ........ canor hen I wiha [mway mway gah jalin 32]
........................... ll
6. (hat)'
[no ? wi]ha [j]nok I bwoy duih esan gah I clat cankram bwoy 8
I [jalin 64 ha]t I jano[k] . . [hat I salun ] . . [hat I ba tahri]-
.............................
7. (
hy
mwoy I cell ler mwoy II clat upuh gah I jalin 38 hat I fta
(1)9 [h]at I sa[lun 23] ha[t I] cetl (ta') cfin jon cetl
................................... Qnojk
g
bw[o]y dui[h] smar kya manah kamba[n wiha g]ah I [k] . ...
(1) . V . [ca mwoy 30 manlam] caturah [I layoh I] (8) [hatj l
dapah taluih I ui[t] . . .
........... (bvrolf ramen
' ' klon k tau tuy Vl Y[4]ay sakka[r>i '[823 gah] mi ka ta[bui>
ka[mbftn] (le)r [tuy] uit I ma pa [tarii ku]
1 Conjecturally restored. C/. XVII 2.
1 Error for ky&k*
8 Error for brabwoy.
4 Possibly r&, or cha,
5 Poesibly 33.
6 Conjectuxally restored.
r For nor.
9 Error for mwoy,
9 Coajecturally restored,
10 Conjectural restored,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
46 [VOL. iv
....................................
10 n I ta
gah tuy uit hen ra II [a]kha ka wiha ma tu[y gah] I acl aren
ma sbala[h wiha gah s]min dhar [tala cin]
11. (batan) 1 .............................. w[ih>r2
[gah] I [k]uiw [n]ah tah samah saman tuy I run jamlin ma
gluin [ku] cnor [nan]' gah kanarh [tuy] I swa[k aca] san jamnok
I
.....................................
12
y I
tade' I bwoy atmi[i]k atan gah salarh kana(m)m lor na bata[n]
4
tanay I kwa[k] l[o]r [na] janik I da(pah) [thap I]
....................................
13 [sa]n
samat to' gamluin [tu]n ler I kutti mway la[k masun l]nim
dapah klam pan cwoh paray gah I ma pa tarn [ku] da[ka]r dnl
I4
-
..............................
(I pday) [sa]-
kkarat 824 kitu basak [cah] bramak ga[h I ti]la nali smin dhar
ti[la] cin batan het [ma sa]d[dha] pda[y] ra[t p]i
15.......................... n ......
(P) . (k)
. . Maharamawihar tuy I san ma dah gamawa[s]i aranawasi
ma nwom
I bnat galuin dlam I kuttl ta gah I ku[i]w wa[n
p]lop [daman]
16 ...... ..... (kuttl ta) 6 [gah] ra II lukau dacam tne[y] (he)n
I na pi ; ndapatapaccay ma nom tau ku rah ma pray ma twah
pgah I kha[d]aniya bhojaniya ga[h ta]ruip tau [ku] (kala) ....
17 ..........
" ' ' [mway mway tne]y hen watthu ba (Inim)
. . ;klam masun basa I dacam tnay hen watthu [mway] lak
Ld>pah Inim d[aca]m [c]woh pi basa I watthu ma n[wo]m bnat
ga-
1
Coojectuiallyrestored.
* There is no virllma visible
1 Orsan.
but Ae additional 8trokes
*
Coajectanffly restwed.
If so, it mu8t have been ba or *

MON
INSCRIPTIONS
PART i] 47
18. (luin) 1 [wo'] ma pru pren [pindapatapaccay] I gilanapaccay [ta]
gah I ra-it ma phap dacam tnay tn[y gah] I tila nah smin
[dh]ar tala [ci]n ba[t]an [gah] I day[y]adhar lak[khan]ada[n]awat-
[thu]
19. [ma pa] tarn [tnay] .... [dacam ma twah pga]h bray j[mu g]ah
I bgu tau ku [t]ila san to' ga[m]luin tun II pday [san] m[w]ay
lak dapah l[n]im klam [dapah c]woh pan gah I [ca s s]an
3
jamnok (I) ta(day)
20
.....4
[Inim dapah klam ba cwoh] gah I [suim] suim ku kraya
cllarh [k]wo[rn] ku [p]ari[k]khara dacam I sanga gah ya[t sn]a
bap [l]nim [dapah] klam [ba cw]oh mre[k gamih] pan Inim
masun
[k]lam pi [basa]
21. (I) [mrck gala ba lak pan] Inim turaii klam [b]a cwoh [bjasa I
[a]parii* ba ra ba [l]ak daci[t] Inim klam ba cwoh pi [b]asa I
[sat basiw daci]t klam pa[n] cwoh dacam kdon I [kwom pha]-
22. (la suim bl gapuiw panak sat) 6 [bun sablu] me[k sut] I parafn
ka sui]m camb[a]y I ban ra [sui]m panga[n] cwa I [kamm]all I
[bu]n kneh brakuih I (mamar jragan) 7 k(w)uiw . [r] . . . (n) .
[r] . (ta)ray rt I b[u]n ksa (I) na (tarn) 9
23. mye[k] (c)e(n) I [klen ka-uy I klen lanau] I tlak pamat I basay
pamat I juk st[e]n I sakep dun I dako' sa[t I] tamah I parehr
......
[ I nun] (d) . . . [suim jon] I nun sw(ufi) [k I pajye
I (t)am~ot
1 Conjectural, but cf. 1. 15, supra.
* For aca.
3 The (/ is shaped rather Hkc the numeral 3.
4 Looks like thantf but the /// might be k, t, or / and the n might be r.
' E^epfthe last two words which are practically certain, this is conje^teralry restored _ from the
paralle 7 l V p e a r s y sa d g o e u s bt r f e u f l er r r e e a d d t i o ng in ; t t h h e e f n i o r t st es wo to rd 11. is 20 q , ui 2 t 1 e o u f nc t e h r e ta t i r n a , ns e l x at c i e o p n t . the imtial letter, andfa V*
0116
'A conceivable reading is ftmta f* **
1-Wfl, some sort of knife, and the latter r<M (-rai) "mustard
*'flower bud ", which does not seem appropriate.
9 Or hath,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
48 VOL
[ iv
24. (bwoy) 1 [ma do]k pen san
hen I tila tin ba[t]an ma clren kuiw dan I manah nu
[gah] I
ma
san [s]ama[t] nwo[m bnat] mwa[y l]ak [masun lni]m [kl]am
masun cwoh- pan 2 ta
25. [gah tun] (ler) [parikkhara] (dacam I) 3 [ma pa tarn k]u da[ka>
dnl [l]er I [mw]ay lak masun Inim pan klam masun cwoh
[p]an gah I [m]rek mway lak masun l[nim dapah] kla[rh pi
cwo]h
sun4
26. ba[sa I sat Inim] pa[n klam dapah cwoh] pi kdon II II a[pa]n
san pa-uit mwa[y] lak dapah Inim klam dapah cwo[h pa]n I
a[pan] mr[ek] ba [l]ak da[pah] ln[im dapah] kla[m]
27. pan [cwoh turau] basa [II apan sat ba Inim] pa[n kl]am [ba]
cwo[h] m[wa]y kdon I [sak w]o' hen' smin .dha[r ti]la cin
ba[tan] tam[o' sabbanutanan tuy Ion watthu dayyadhar] ma
[twah]
28. [pgah bray jmu gah] (I) [bgu tau ku san ta'] gamluin hen [ra II]
Translation,
B n udjJdih!a '' ha , d "*''*'''' 2 01 years havin elaPsed (after the exalted
achieved) Parinirvana, in 819 of the Common Era6 His
ajesty the King of the Law
(Ramadhipati -SrLipIaramamahadha(2)-
mmarajadhirat) <u
d w t e i l . e . g W h . s t,s m: ca ' us \ ing the religion of the t e o x g a e l t t h e e d r B w u i d th dha the to Ve s d hi a n s e , , w w h h o o
n
sovereignty i accordance with the Law, who the
'
M _: a n haram of a f v - , i t , h h e ar , M a a , h , a ( r 3) a ' m . a . vi . hara to be set up. f t K n o e Fr . om . . th . e , nc w e h f , o o rwa c r a d u , se ( d a . t) t t h h e e
1
Coajecturally restored.
I
?e
? seems to be superscript over the *
Practically certain.
* For masitn.
B 1457-8 AD.
^^^^^^
^
xn B M " * 6arlier than the e r a e r s l t ies h t as dat b e ea re n fer o r o i n n j S ec t t o un h d t l a y
(cf t

MON
INSCRIPTIONS 49
PART l]
{ime ( O f) .....l and at the end ...... , 3 in due order ... (4) ...
..... with pakati 3 cubits, that is to say iron cubits, 4 (in) length 38
cubits, (in) size" 34 cubits, (in) height 33 cubits, (the) . . . . e (of the)
was four tnlitih 7 .... (5) .......... 328 cubits, (in) length
(sides' ?)
The viharas surrounding 9 the central hall of the Jetavana
38 cubits.
(were) 26, together with ...... row w (s) ; each vihara was 32 (cubits)
............ talwh (?) From the great vihara, towards
long (6)
the Nortli East, an ambulatory hall, (in) length 64 cubits, (in) size" . . .
cubits, in height . . cubits, two /a/w/// 13 (7) ......... a Bodhi tree, a
caitya also. The uposatha" hall (was) (in) length 38 cubits, (in) size 14 19
cubits (in) height 23 cubits. The caitya(s), (from ?) the spire (to ?) the foot
.............. .... towards the South
of the caitya(s) (8) great
outside the wall of the vihara, a ---- (tank ?)" 30 maiilam" square, (in)
........ success^
depth 8 cubits, seven to/if//!," all ... (9) - - - (in)
h m a o v a i t ng a g n o d ne wa o ll n w w o a r s ki q n u g i , t " e i f n in 8 i 2 s 3 h " e ' d. of B t e h g e in C n o in m g mo w n ith Er ( a 10) all . t . h . e . w . or . k . on . t t h h e e
were all finished. When the work20 on the vihara was finished,
arrange . m . ents for the ceremonial opening of the vihara (were mad . e .. by .. ?) .
31
the King of the Law, the Lord of the (White) Elephant, 111)
^,
detent. Perhaps it is an e.or for
"
closely resembles the Burmese word for iron". , -
& ' T Pr h e e su m m e a a b n l i y ng thi o s f m M e l ans ha " s wi n d ot th b , ee b n rea de d t t e h r " m . ined. Possibly it ' may . be - from M ... <ito come &&>* &&
r 11 e . fe 6, r ' 8 8 t , o T T h i h s n e e o f m r e a s r . t e e h c a i o d I n n i t d g n i g s n ju u , d t i m * t f b i l , n t e e g r ul " o t l i u s a t t . c o n e o , c t on . q n i u d e i o c t t e ', i c t i e s r w t n i a e t i a h n r . l S * an I c t s e k r m r t i a a t y itn a b ; n e d * 3 ^ P . ali t * ala, m * s t p ^ an b , e ^ P ^4 t of ^ measu i r * em * ent * . ** Ci .
Or " dependent on",
10 Sec note 7 supra*
11 See note a supra.
13 See note 7 supra.
13 A Buddhist religious service.
11 See note fl wpra.
JA Assuming laca, with a flaw between I and c.
10 One mafilaih**7 cubits.
-
al Conjecturally restored,
7

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
50 VOL
[ . IV
..... the vihara having caused it to be cleared and levelled
, ; evenly
(and) made long sheds in many rows near to it 1 for the leading teachers
of the Order, (12)
................2
in the customary manner
draped * (them) with embroidered canopies/ (and) hung (them) with
............
the minor
curtains, sevenfold, (13) (for) clergy also,
fifteen thousand seven hundred and forty cells, and more, beginning with
mats, pillows, (14) ........... (in) 824 of the Common Era, the
tenth of the waxing (half) of the month of Vaisakha, His Majesty the
King of the Law, the Lord of the White Elephant, because (he was)
faithful to the Three Gems (15) .............. having (completed)
the Maharamavihara, caused the clergy who dwelt in villages and in the
forest, in accordance with the number of the rooms (and) cells (available),
...........
to be inducted into (their) dwellings (16) (the cells?).
During eight days with food requisites that were of excellent flavoujr, that
is to say, hard foods (and) soft foods, (he) fed (them) at (the proper) times5
.....
- (17) . . every day offerings (amounting to) two (thousand) 6
. . , hundred7 and five viss, 8 (in) eight clays offerings (amounting to)
seventeen thousand eighty-three viss, 8 offerings to (18) this (amount?)
were prepared, food requisites (and) medical requisites. At the end of
this entertaining for eight days, His Majesty the King of the Law, Lord
of the White Elephant, (made) donations of auspicious offerings (19)
beginning with . . . . . the eight days, (he) poured clown, as it were, a
heavy rain upon the lords of the clergy. Among the seventeen thousand
seven hundred and
seventy-four clergy, (for) the leading teachers (among)
the clergy, ..... . 10 (20) . . . , ltt a thousand seven hundred and twenty,
together with all the furnishings of the rooms and the eight
^
* * l T i h t e era J m l e ly a T , ni u n d g re o s f se ? t d ad f " e . > * a is und * e " t ' e ' rm " in m e d d. e thC 10ng Sheds in vcr >' ma v row* for', etc.
7^",g !Sn*
qD
^^ to
Vffl e ^ 18; is probabb the ttol&y of
carving
**"'' ***"" (Pronounc </),
"tracery, oniaiiicnlalioii, floral design,
bll C aatt tthhoossee ttiimmeess" re
Practically certain restoration.
* Either a hundred or two or three hundred
* I F t ai i r s ly di c ff e i r c t u a l i t n t r o es r t e o c r o a n t c i i o l n e . th ^ ese tw ^ o figures
',?.** Ph * P <* "middle", andrtp* "Intennedhto",
ino higher cl<5T IS limdentlh(i<i- " Indicate, some degree of nmk amongst

MON
INSCRIPTIONS
JT i] 51
ottrtenanccs, a thousand seven luindrcd and twenty robes and cloth
1 four thousand five hundred and three viss of black pepper, (21)
its,
enty-four thousand six hundred and twenty viss of Indian pepper; total
the two items, twenty-nine thousand one hundred and twenty:three
is nine hundred and foriy-ci^hl barrels of basiw areca-nuts, 2 boxes for
;
sea-nuts, 8 (22) together with bottles of lime, areca-nut slicers, knives for
;tel leaf, napkins,1 ;' with slings , , . / and bowls/ woollen
Dth, 8 knives and styles (for writing) books, . , 10
3) eye medicine, 11 medicinal oil, sesamum oil, lanterns, fire steels, 1*
retched cords,1'1 bamboo longs, areca-nut cases, 14 brooms, baskets, , . .
." waterpots with stands,1" drinking pots, 17 portable stoves, . . .
. , 1B (24) (for ?) \ . very complete. 10 The Lord of the
/hite Elephant arranged to give gifts, besides these, (to) the minor
1 Or "clothes tantli mats". Of, XII F 46, H 38, M 27 and N (conclusion, after 1, 28). It is to be
Dted however that the Pali version of the first two passages speaks only of " cloths for tictoara robes",
otmats at all, See XII H 39, trans, it,
v Cf, XII N (conclusion after I 28), The word sat also means fruit in general but the meaning is
detained by tin; 948 barrels here, added to the 1473 in 1. 26, making the total of 2421 barrels of areca-
uts i 8 n T I he 27. rendering is doubtful, as II depends entirely on the Pali version ofXII H 38. See XII H 39
rans. n. and the passages there cited.
vith * 4 a T Oa h s r p e o u u s m t en " o s . n e- kB B o 1 f ut c M l * o t t i h h t e s f r " e . hi is C i f * . a n X o w I t o I r c d H lea 3 p r a 9 t , : of J f i a , r 24 a , t " i b N ot m t 9 a l y e a " nd m o e f i a ts n w c h o i " n c a c h lu p f s r a i e o r s n a e * n af t m t " i er gh a I t . nd 2 c 8 o *U ncei m v a a y bly be be ^ a a va v r e i s a s n e t l
orm, In that case the sense might be " water vessels with spouts/" simply.
K Or " straps " fur carrying the vessels, The meaning of ban ra is unknown,
8 7 L O i r te " ra b l l l a y nk " e p t l s a - tes or (o " r wo d o is l h l e e s n , o g r ar o m th e o n r ts c - r ; ock P e a r l y i ) k f a or mb b a r l o i t y h a (o h r as cur t r h y e ) " l . atter sense, Sanskrit i an w d n P r zi o i
fanbala all three meanings. The form *awfar in XII E 17 comes from one of the woon
and is represented by the modern kmaw (-towd), which means <mat, carpet, blanket,
ganncnt".
O T r he "k r n e i m v a e i s n , de st r yl o o f s, th b i o s ok l s in " o , is for the most part doubtful : tom-, ",,spad.e or s ^ ho M v A eli .a*nndA b&u*& m k *a s J s y
whichma y m , a knife for splitting bamboo (modern *b*-*, eem reasonably probable,
of ,,,y,* b a Httle doubtful, but it probably represents the rfoAr Burmese
with l! t f h P e r m e e s a um n a i b n l g y g f i l v i e nt n. and steel are meant, though the actual word i.s i.ron .
J3 Perhaps for hanging clothes on.
14 Vessels made from a joint of bamboo, like quivers,
15 A word qualifying " waterpots " is illegible,
18 Literally, " feet",
17 The word or words after " drinking pots " are illegible,
18 The meaning of tam-Qt is undetermined.
19 Or u sufficient .

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
52 [VOL, IV
clergy, who numbered fifteen thousand (four ?) 1 hundred and fifty-four, (25)
as well, (namely) the eight appurtenances, beginning with fifteen thousand
four hundred and fifty-four mats and pillows, fifteen thousand seven
hundred and thirty-five viss of red pepper, (26) (and) one thousand four
hundred and seventy-three barrels of areca-nuts. The total of all the
clergy was seventeen thousand one hundred and seventy-four. The total
of red pepper was twenty-seven thousand seven hundred and (27) forty-
six viss; 2 the total of areca-nuts was two thousand four hundred
and twenty-one barrels. Thus did the King of the Law, the
Lord of the White Elephant, having . .* omniscience, (give) offerings of
meritorious gifts, as it were (28) a heavy ruin, (which) he poured down
upon all the lords of the clergy.
"
1 The wordpan "four" seems to have been wrongly omitted before klath hundred". This appears
to follow from the number of mats and pillows in 1, 25 taken in connection with the number (1720) of
the leading clergy in 1. 19 and the full totals (17,174) in 11. 19 and 26, which leaves 15,454 for the minor
clergy.
* It is impossible to reconcile this number with the numbers given in 11. 21 and 25.
3 Themeaning of tamo1 is undetermined, It can hardly be /;?/<?' *krook, stone ".

MON
INSCRIPTIONS
PART i] 53
No. XVII.
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE KYAK PAN PAGODA, PEGU.
Descriptive Account.
97. This inscription is engraved on one face of a stone which appears
to have been broken into three pieces. The two upper fragments adjoin
pretty closely and form a continuous text, though at the junction it is
often blurred, apart from the fact that the whole document is much
weathered and to a great extent illegible. The lower fragment is detached
and it has not been possible to fit it with certainty on to the upper parts.
The height of the inscribed area, therefore, cannot be stated exactly, but
it appears to have been a little over 3 ft. ; the breadth is 3 ft. 3 in. The
letters are f in', high, and letter t from i in. to | in. long. The
interlinear space varies from f in. near the top of the inscription to 1 in.
near the bottom.
98. This record commemorates the setting up by King Dhammacetl in
the last quarter of the year 837 (the first quarter of A.D. 1476) of four
great statues of Buddha and his three immediate predecessors on a
common base, whence this monument derives its name which means "the
Four Buddhas ". Unfortunately the inscription is in such a bad state of
preservation that only a relatively small part of the text could be deciphered
and translated. Some portions run parallel with passages in XII M, and
a comparison of the two records has thrown light here and there on what
would otherwise have been treated as practically illegible or at any rate so
dubious that nothing could safely be said about it.
Text.
1. II namo Buddh[aya] II n[or c]nam tuy [til*
P^,.^<"*
S he a n [ ] kya I mun p i da m y a s p a a k[k p a a r r a i t nir 8 b 3 b 7 a]n g g a a h h 2 I 019 til [ a] cna f m t* kuU s I m o m n a dh t a u r y
Ramadhipati Sripaj-

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
54 [VOL. iv
2. [rama]ma[h]adha[m]ma[raja]dhirat I ma [cuin dah tau tila cin
batan I ma pkan ran tau pitakat pi suim bed I ma Ihin tau
ma
pday rna pa puin sasana] kya[k tray pkan ran tau kramin
prabjwoy dhar [gah I kha gah gasa]-
3. p cuit [ma] ran wo' [ktuiw dah ra I pday] (kala) [puiy wo* gah
I kyak tray Kakkusan] (ma nwom bnat salun pan) [cwoh hat
ma nwom
pakati ler mwoy I kyak tray Konaguim bnat salun]
pi [cwo]-
4. [h hat pakati ler mwoy I kyak tray Kassapa] (ma nwom bnat
salun ba cwoh hat pakati ler mwoy I) [kyak tray Gotama ma
nwom] (bnat salun cwoh dacam) [hat pakati ler] mwoy I
5. tila puiy kyak tray pan wo' dah [tuy ra] (I uit tila puiy) [kyak
tray pan wo'] (tuy) [ma nwom bnat salun tuy] (ma gah II pan)
[cwoh hat] (I pi cwoh hat I) [ba cwoh hat]
6. [I cah dacam hat I ma gah wo' gah I bnat] .......1 [tuy
ma .... ..........
nah] [bnat] . . . [tila puiy] (te 1 gah)
.........
(dah uiw da ci) [bnat yam wo]-
7. ' ra [nah ma] sbat gah I [bat ha go' bnat tuy] ..........
.....................
(kniw dah) . (kui) . (dah)
[uiw da ci I patimarup pan wo'] (tu)-
8. y I [ma] ey ska[nam] w[o' gah I . . .' gah ey . . . . (tila puiy)
[kyak tray] ........... [ wo '] ra I [bnat janok] (thawhay) 2
.......
. . [yam bnat] (da)-
9. [ca]m cwoh [hat salun ma] (dah) [dman] (thawhay' tuy) . . (dah)
[pi cwoh pi hat ku mwoy] (pat 8 pakati) [gah hen I] ey s[kanarh
fii I patima](ghara ku) ...... [patimarup pan]
10. ma sdman ma nwam
I bnat [mway mway tlari klam klara hat]
& akati ) ......... (ma nwam bnat salun) ..........
[ey skanarh fii II II ran gah ksap] (tuy hen) [II pday
'
sakkaraj II 837 II kitu]
"^
*XZZ- t S-ZZS*JS{ * "f'i
ta
I
Very doubtful reading. Presumably the word represents asubdivision of the cubit,

MON
INSCRIPTIONS
,ART
j]
55
11. mak mway [crawek tnay brab(b)ati] (lak krakat hen II) ... (Iwon
tuy II) [H kitu cay cah ba bramok tnay]
(buddhawa II lak bruih I ma yok ton) [pati]-
1 kuim
12. [m]aghara (nda) [II II] (gata . . II)
(bwoy ramen) . . .
ma 2
. . [hen ra II II akha] (ma cuip ara sdabut) . .
13. (t) 3 gah [II pclay dwor]
....
(ler) II (dlam) . . (ti) . . (Ilk lar
ankade bwoy) [kwo]-
14. [m ku] (garhah) [trull brau] (het mik kuiw go' dman gah tuy)
(wQduih) [pa-uit] (I bway manah gah grop)
. . .' (pa-uit I bwoy) [pday sala kambu pa-uit I rau gah pren]
....
(tuy hen) (dlarii)
15. dh[at dwor gah] (gah)
. . . (ma cicwon kuim lar) (gah kuim lar)
. . (kuim lar)
16. [n] bu[ddharup pan duih] (ler rau gah kuim gani gaiau) ....
(dlam gah) . . . . (lar ra) [ma
cicwon] (gah)
kamak
17. (wQduih dlarii gah tun dak nun garay) [mwoy thap pnan
.
mway thap I pnan dalah mwoy thap] (gah) [gani
galau lar] (ra II pa-uit)
18. . [II kwom ku amat dakuip pnan] (aram pariwa gamluin) [ma
sadman II swak ma pa sabhaii]"
. . . (mwoy)
19
(dlam dhat)
kwom
20. II ku]
[ti
1 Spelt mfa (Cf. XIV 1).
2 Probably for sdabut.
-
..
-*
that is missing,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
56 VOL
[ . Iv
21. (brau) [tiia nah]
22. . . (gamluin) ,
23. (n sabhan tuy)
24. . (a bway dhat ra)
25. (y tau)
26. [truh ma go' etadagga] (cah mway II rup upah brau ma go')
1
[etadagga]
27
(clabut laif
28
29 (rup mba) [kyak tray] . . . (jrup
klam cah dacam te' wo')
[rup Mahabisnu II rup]
(II) [rup] (dewatau)
31
(tuy II) . [i] . [i]
32> (tuy II) (gab hen II tuin rup)
33. . , . (kuim) [lar II rup dapuin the brau ma tlun pday]
....... ..............
watthu [kuim lar II kuiw
kanam calo' lar pa-uit hen H pday pajrah kyak pan duih tun]
(ler II pday) .-..."........ ........
^
lower S ^Mg ^ -^ ?i T t 7 He r i d e e ?f, ^ , I6g m i Ja b y le \ Part ^ ^ f ^ the u - pper ^ fraSm * ent ' of > *c H i e n r s e cri t p h t e io l n eg e i n b d l s e . part of the
margin, indiCate tholr l10sUi011 with referonce to lhe rigW'
' ' 1 s o . i f m 2 i X 6 la U r itnsSc eevveennnn ,P,OS8l 1 ble that th ' e S > m ' e t r o o v e t e l W r y l ?a P f i i" t * o a " p Ih ' e t W he es l t f i e n a n u 8 t ' m o c f T n h t r i o a s n i k a s i l n s n g o ot 1 ' , - C -P 2 l P 9 e 1 a 16 r t 8 -- he io O c n o l n i t n f i e li s n e ua 2 t 8 i '3 o 3 n i o n f

5*
MON INSCRIPTIONS
,
RT IJ
.....
* 35 c > r [ tlIiift I II I II r S un n n b rr u uu i pp w d M ee a wwaat k aa y uu a] trr II uh p b d r a a y u [ g pa a j m r l a u h i ] n ( m II a ) tau tau p [ d W a ft y
cah Inim cakkawa II ma titan] (pa pujau)
(ma tlun pa pujau) [kyak tray]
........
' ' '
kuiw
37 ..... CM teh] .......... . . . . [ra] . I . u . i[ . t ....
...............
r Lla;'cut thar sran]
dayon]
Translation.
Hcnou, to Buddto l ^
-^^.ftt.
J Lord of Merit, te King of the L ^ aw
ie year 837 of the Common Era 's ^es wb ^ o ^rf^
w
&I
dhipati Pa(2)ramamahadhammarJ,Jad^tar^^ gf
Elephant, who support m s er t i h t e on . ou * s " servic^e to rft ^ fo ^ o o ^ f t^he e t xa o l e ted
in rendering *
d B e u l d i d gh h t a s , who wields svray in >cco f MdfC' ^ i n th ^ is tume?) of ours, a
thought' (3) of this sort arose tm l | ^T^ forty stmdard
(statue of) the exalted Buddha ^JTS KonSga mana measurmg
cubits in height, one of m the "^ e^ted^ Buddha Kas^apa
standard cubits ^.f 1 ^d one of the edited
thirty (4) '.
measuring twenty standard cubrts ^b J 'te - ^ * ^* ^^ four [s ou es r
Buddha Gotama measuring Bu e d ig d h h t a e s en a ;) (statues o c f u ) b*,
o l f o ) ds
our
th
l
e
ord
e
s
xa
t
l
h
te
e
d
e
B
x
u
al
d
t
d
e
h
d
as, measurmg 1a
hg ^J
m
c
e
ub
a
i
s ^
t
u
s,
re
t
^ m
hi
e
r
n
t
t
y
.....
twenty cubits (and) (6) eighteen cub*,^or
the measurement . urement ,) - thi time (?}, not
-
measure
:.-.
been
oi--
be
?)
these IOUA
^
Buddhas
lords 'the exalted
read***.
1C .XUM9. It wodd be possible
8

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
Sg [ VOL Iv
size of the seat J) 1 . . . . measurement ... (9) eighty cubits, in height to
be (a seat P) 1 . . . thirty-three standard cubits and one $at (?) 2 , I will make,
a statue (hall and?) ..... (where) the four statues (10) are to be'
measuring on each side one hundred standard cubits ...... measuring
in height ...... I shall make 1"
Having thus reflected, in the year 837 of the Common Era, (11) the
first (day) of the waning of the month of Magha, the day (being)
Thursday, 3 (Cancer being lagna ?), .... (was finished ?) ....... ( on j
the twelfth (day) of the waxing of the month of Caitra, the day (being)
(Wednesday, Taurus being lagna ?), (they) set up the posts of the statue
................
(12) hall) (?). (In front of ?).... (also ?)
(successively?) 4 ....... When the time came to set up 5 ...... (13)
. . in the middle - ........ (chamber ?) ..... smeared plaster on
. . > together (14) with the laity, men and women, for them to be, (he)
........
said, . . . (all around ?). Outside (they) covered . . . ,
throughout inside (they) hung white (cloth) throughout. Having thus
; ......
prepared it, the central (15) relic (chamber ?) ..........
which (they) also decorated .... also .... also ..... (16) the four
Buddha statues (they) thus adorned also ..... (the chamber ......
?)
. . adorned ..... (17). . around the chamber too (with) watering pots,
one row, hanging lamps, one row, altar candles, one row, ..... (they)
........
adorned. Throughout (18) . . together with the ministers
(and) chiefs of the army (and all the retinue ?), to be, in order to hold a
festival ......... ... ...... .......
(one) (having ?) . . . (19)
. (relic chamber?) . . . (20) . together with ....'. (21) (daughter of?)
.......
His ......
Majesty (22} . . (all ?) (23) (having held the
festival ?)...... (24) . . (went to the relic ?)..., (25) ..... (26)
(eleven statues of) 6 male (devotees) 6 who had attained pre-eminence, (ten) 6
statues of female devotees who had attained pre-eminence ....... (27)
7 ..... ...... .....
up?) (28) (29) (a statue of the
1 S^ee thenote on the text.
oat th * e seco ^ pd n o o n t e e s o e a em t s o th ^ e xt m . ore It is n ^ ot clear which of the dimensions in this line applies to the height
likely.
iXaSaST **C<** P * Thursday utl> January 1476 and the next one with Wednes-
day4
*
5S
O
e
r
e
tt
t
i
h
n
e
a
no
r
t
o
e
w
o
"
n
,
t
o
h
r
e
*
t
i
e
n
xt,
due order",
* Coajecturally restored, Mowing XII M 35
7 See thenote oa the textt

MON
>ART INSCRIPTIONS
i] 59
aiher of ?) the exalted Buddha . . (these hundred and eighteen statues
?)
. - - (30) a statue of Mahabisnu, a statue statues
of devas ?) (31) (having ?) (32) ......
^having ?) (in accordance with the shapes P} 1 . . . (33) ,
also statues of senior nuns who came
?), (34) offerings
[?) also, caused to be made and set all around. On the plinth of the
:our-sided Buddha (statues) also, on (35) came, statues
}f the vanquished army of Mara, on the plinth above, in accord-
ance with the many shapes of male and female devas that dwell in
:en thousand universes, who came (to do reverence ?) . . (36)
fifty ; statues of monks (and) nuns, (statues of devas ?), statues of pretas,
statues of Mara's army, statues of male and female devas (who came to do
reverence to ?) the exalted Buddha ...... (37) .... engraved and
:arved all the pillars .... applied gold and silver*
1 Doubtful reading and meaning. But cf. 1, 35.
2 Cf. XII M 9.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
60 VOL
[ IV
No. XVIII.
AN iNscRiFnoN OF GAUNGZEGYUN PAGODA, PEGU.
4k
Descriptive Account.
99. This inscription is on two faces and a detached fragment of stone.
The parts occupied by the lettering here transcribed are on Face A, 1 ft
10 in. in height, 1 ft. 4| in. in breadth, on Face B, 1 ft. 9 in. in
height,
1 ft 4J in. in breadth, and on the fragment C 2\ in. in height by 9 n
i !
in breadth. The letters and interlinear spaces are nearly of the same
dimensions as in No. XIII. The inscription contains imprecations on
persons who are not true to the faith, and blessings on those that are. It
seems to be only the remnant of a more extensive record, and owing to
the bad state of preservation of some parts of it, it has not been possible
to make a complete translation of the portion that is available.
Text.
.....
. [kuiw] dah mran sapa
kuiw barah
bara[h]
. . . [nar]ak jamnok dacam kuiw cin
(tau la)
' [tun] II kuiw ktuiw dah pruit mwai
jaku mwai wa
sr[ot]
M
.............
* [n] II yam p[u]n mwai ma II dak
mwai tandat1 lainlan la ....
.....
5
feo'] lop ka' II Uafc nu gah tun II ktuiw dah mnih II . .
6- . . [afi g]aw 500 leh II kamlau nu gaw 500 leh II damlu nu
ga[w 500]
1 Eyrorfor fin**, if the Word means "drop '.

MON INSCRIPTIONS 61
PART
j]
7. [leh] II [t]amnim nu gaw 500 [l]eh II ktuiw dah sat sat
1
[tamnim]
8. [nu gaw] 500 le[h] kuiw de[h] ktuiw dah II mnih ma ha cmat
sa-
9. [ca gamluin puiai ma huim] w[o]' ku[i]w dah [pugui]w wa[hj
hen ra II II
10. mwai la[ka t]ui[n l]ahuim pui[y] ma gah wo' [p]abwai 3 dhaw yaw
puguiw mwai pna
11. bak cmat II pdai lok wo1 II ma sak [k]u antaraai kuiw dah II
ma
12. sak ku tad[ok] kuiw dah II mnih dewatau le(w kuiw) [s]d[uik]II
13. yat [sapat] pdai lok bwai ma gluin hen kui[w go]' dun ca II
14. [ayuk] lew kuiw dlin II khyuit [a] nu wo' tun II pdai dun swa-
15. w [kui]w go' a dah II kuiw go' ca tau yat sapat dip II
bhawa ma ktuiw dah ma sa[k] ku tadok kuiw dah I
16. [jma]p
tuinradhan[a]
ma radana kui[w dok] pen [k]uiw pu[gui]w gap]
17. [parit t]amUL
)
18. (hen) [ra] II
B
1. (bra)ma[k t]nai [palu]i[t] .
' W
2 '//.... [kui] .... (H) [Pi - '
. . '. '.
...........
(gata ka) ; ---- [mha] II
.............. [mwai laka] sc[u]t[i]
3 (II)
.............
'
(ga) [kuiw] (la)
f Probably forgah.
8 Qr babivcii,

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA
62
[VOL> Iv
4. [aga] II [pawa ma
ha]
5 [II ma] sda[h] (ler sat)
II
6
[mw]ai la[ka]
(II) (skandam] . . .
7 [II] (manah nu) [pawa nah
tamla tamla] (ta) . .
8- (pa het) (wo') . . . [uiw] II [jnok k]uiw
da[rhat] II
9
- (tla a) II (tla) anin
sguin jak (la) . .
10 - - (go') [pa tuai] II ga[h] lew palan
[k]ui[w dra]-
II. (p nah) II (H) fiaA
w]o' mwai laka ra(p)
12
II [kuiw]
....
(wo)' II [saca]
13. (wo)' [he]n (k)uiw [d](ah) [pna]
14. .... [kujw (tit) II [dok dlun], (II)
II (grah kuiw) ....
15.
[br]
II
16, 17.
(Illegible).
1 For ttefinal fetter,cf. the note gn A 7,

MON
PART INSCRIPTIONS 63
i]
1. ... (ta)ndan tha(mbat) nah Jamm(u)di[t] kuiw ar . . . .
2 [iw] . . [n] II sam(-a)r p(d)ai mhai akah (tau)
Translation.
may (he) have smallpox (resulting in) blindness, may (he be
dispersed ?) (2) (in) the eight great hells may (he) be cooked
(3) again ; may (he) become a preta for one existe d nc e e w ,
sucking (4) if one grain of boiled rice, one drop of water,
. (m . a . y ( h 5) e) ( b m e ay co i m t e no a t h ?) um be an ab b l e e in t g o , e . nt . er . ( ( 6 h ) is) . . th f r r o o a m t bi A rf n h d 5 t 0 h 0 er t e i a m f e t s e , r d a u ga m i b n
from birth 500 times, blind from birth 500 (7) times, leprous from birth
500 times, (may he) become leprous creatures (8) from birth 500 times,
may he become A man who is not true to the faith, (9) may all this
!
that we have said befall that person !
we
(10) On the other hand, in accordance with this saying that utter,
b if e a f p r e ee rso f n ro f m oll c o a w l s ami t t r y u , ly ( a 1 c 2 c ) or m d a i y ng (h t e o ) t b h e e l f a r w e , e f (1 r 1 o ) m i s n uf t f h e i r s in w g o , r m ld ay ma (h y e) (h b e e )
much
pleasing to men and devas also, <13) may (he) be able Jo enj w o h y en
h di a e p s pi ( n a e n s d s ) i g n oes th h e en w c o e r , ld ( 1 1 , 5 ( ) 14 m ) a m y a ( y he ( ) hi b s) e l a i b f l e e al t s o o g ( o be) in l t o o n ^ g, ex ( i a s n t d ence m h t e h ) e
heavenly land (and) may (he) be able to enjoy celestial bhs " s; * ( * 16 * ) ^may
every form of being (into) which (he) comes be free
accordance with the paritta (17) prayers that (the men of) old prayed
may be fulfilled for that person I
(it)
i Or "enjoy happiness in many wcrid," But in view of what fdlow* this
se^ als *****
interpretation.
8 Or u the ancient paritta prayets-that (men) pray.

EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA #
64 [VOL.
B
sunrise (and sun)set 1 (2) in the future (?)....
(3) once again will die (4) deeds that are
not (5) who shall be (creatures ?) (6)
once again shall make . . (7) (besides ?) the deeds of
the men of olden times ... (8) (because ?) (this) . . . great in
strength (9) violent (persons ?) shall seize (and drag
away?) ... (10) having been able to do .... also restore
(his ?) (11) property in accordance with this saying, once again
...........
. . . (12) (this) (this) (13) (faith ?)
(14) .... may ... (go out ?), travel by boat (may the
planets ?).... (15-17)
C
may (the offerings of ?) the people of Jambudvlpa (2)
in the heavens ......
Postscript.
100. In concluding this series of inscriptions, I desire to express rny
obligations for help given me by the authorities who commissioned me to
undertake the work, by their officials, and by a number of friends already
mentioned in 21, to whom must now be added Dr. C. A. F. Rhys
Davids, my two former pupils, Professors G. H. Luce and Pe Mating Tin,
and my colleague, Dr. J. A. Stewart. But especially I would stress again
the great debt I owe to the ever-willing assistance of Dr. Robert Halliday,
whose death is a great loss to Burma, to Mon scholarship, and to all who
knew him.
1 Or "east (and) west."
SLAJ5., 142-1934-350.

PLATE I.
MON INSCRIPTIONS
No. XIII.
AN INSCRIPTION OF!THE AJAPALA PAGODA, PEGU.
A
2
2
4
4
6 6
8
10
10
12
12
14
14
16
16
18
18
20
20
22
22
24
24
26
26
28
30 28
32 30
34
32
34

PLATE II.
MON INSCRIPTIONS
No. XIII.
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE AJAPALA PAGODA, PEGU.
B
2
2
4
4
6
6
8
8
10
10
. 12
12
14
14
16
16
18
18
20
20
22
22
24
24

~ PLATE III.
MON INSCRIPTIONS )
No. XIV.
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEGUGYI PAGODA, PEGU.
2
2
4
4
6
6
8
8
10
10
12
12

AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEDAGON PAGODA, RANGOON.
A
(UPPER HALF).
2
2
4
4
6
6
8 8
10 10
12 12
14 14
16 16
18
18
20
20
22
22
24
24
26
26

INSC~~PTIONS
PLATE V.
MON
No. XV.
AN ... JN.Si:.R.I~PTION OF THE-&HWEDAGGN· -PAGO-BA, RANGOON.
A
(LOWER HALF).
28
28 30
30 32
32 34
36
34
38
36
40
38
40 42
44
42
46
44
48
46
so
48
52
50
52

PLATE VI.
MON INSC IPTIONS
No. XV.
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEDAGON PAGODA, RANGOON.
B
(UPPER HA,LF).
2
2
4
4
6
6
8
8
10
10
12
12
14
14
16
16
18
18
20
20
22
22

PLATE VII.
MON INSCRIPTIONS
No. XV.
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SH\VEDAGON PAGODA, RAKGOON.
B
24
24
26
26
28
28
30
30
32
32
34
34
36
36
38
38
40
40

PLATE VIII.
MON INSCRIPTIONS
No. XVI.
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE YATHEMYO MONASTERY, PEGU.
2
2
4
4
6
6
8
8
.. /
10
.. .. ·. I . ··,· 10
. .
.
:· ..
. .
12
... · ... 12
14
14
16
16
18
18
20
20
22
22
24
24
26
26
28
28

PJ,.A'~~E IX.
I .
MON INSCRIPTIONS
No. XVII.
AN INSCHIPTION OF THE KYAK PAN PAGODA, PEGU.
(UPPER HALF).
2
2
4
4
6
6
.8
8
10
10
12
12
14
14
16
16
18
18

x.
PLATE
MON INSCRIPTIONS
No. XVII.
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE KYAK PAN PAGODA, PEGU.
(LOWER HALF).
18
18
20
20
22
22
24
26
28
30
32
34 34
36
36
,. ~"1
"'1ll:i.:w.~:.p~~~:::..-.:~~....-~...:::;::~:.i=~.:.:..:.:~~:oi::..::..c.:::..1. ~:::.:;.;~:r.v..c;.:...o...;~.:..;.;i;~.lli:..:.!.~....:;.;......::;~a:..:;;.;:~:,-,,.,_,:·.:"";'·~·":.,..~ :::,,,,..:~~1i}._.:Z.\:-;<:.· ~~k,;~~;·:;: i.:/~~,. -~
... ......

PLATE XI.
MON INSCRIPTIONS
No. XVIII.
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE GAUNGZEGYUN PAGODA, PEGU.
A. B
2
2
4
4
6
6
8
8
10
10
12
12
14
14
16
16
18
1
2
r -
j__ _