DOING BUSINESS FOR THE LORD: LENDING ON INTEREST AND WRITTEN
LOAN CONTRACTS IN THE M~ZASARVASTIVADA-VINAYA
The Mfilasarvdstivada-vinaya,a Buddhist monastic code. contains a wealth of little-studied ma-
terial bearing on the institutional, economic and legal history of monastic Buddhism in India. It ap-
pears, moreover, to have close links with classical dharmaidsrra or Indian legal literature. The rules
it contains in regard to lending on interest and written loan contracts, for example, are remarkably
close to those found in the Yajiiavalkyasrn,rti. The account of the promulgation of these rules is also
of interest. It suggests how monks understood the long-term concerns of donors, and how they
justified their financial activities in terms of the religious needs of those donors. The presence of
such rules in a Buddhist monastic code, finally, presupposes the existence of permanent, well-orga-
nized, and fully institutionalized monasteries which can be approximately dated in the archeological
record.
Ir IS PROBABLY FAIR TO SAY that there has been very monasteries in "ruins," as "landscape decorations and
little discussion in Western scholarship about how In- garden ornaments." "That," Levi says, "is because the
dian Buddhist monasteries paid their bills. It is pos- ruins of monasteries speak more clearly than the real
sible, of course, that this is in part because money and inhabited place^."^
monks have had, to be sure, an unhappy history in the However this be eventually settled, it appears that this
West-at least as that history has often been written- reticence or romanticism has worked less forcefully in
and the topic may, therefore, be considered somehow regard to the study of China. Why this was so is again
unedifying.' It may also be true, as Peter Levi's "Study uncertain, but one effect of it is not: much that a student
of Monks and Monasteries" suggests, that we like our of Indian monastic Buddhism might find surprising in
the MUlasarvEstivEda-vinaya,for example, will be old
hat to economic and legal historians of China. A partic-
I would like to thank my colleagues Richard Lariviere. Janice ularly good instance of this sort of thing occurs in the
Leoshko, and Jonathan Silk, for having read a draft of this pa- Civara-vastu of the hliilasarvdstivdda-vinayawhere we
per, and for allowing me to benefit from their criticism and find the following passage: tatra bhagavan bhik?.cn
good sense. drnantrayare srna, bhEjayata yiiyam bhiksava upanan-
'
For two important positions on monks and monasticism in dasya bhik~orr nytapc[ri~kiirami ti. bhik~ubhihs amgha-
Western scholarship see L. W. Barnard, "Two Eighteenth rnadhye avatalya vikriya bhiijirarn. On one level the
Century Views of Monasticism: Joseph Bingham and Edward meaning of this passage is straightforward: "In this case
Gibbon," in Monastic Studies: The Continuity of Tradition, the Blessed One said to the monks: 'You, monks, must
ed. J .Loades (Bangor, 1990). 283-91. Gibbon's overwhelm-
ingly negative view has been, of course, by far the most influ-
-- -
ential. However, as a first rate example of what more recent ments in South Asia. See H. Stietencron, "Orthodox Attitudes
scholarship has been able to do on the question of monks and towards Temple Service and Image Worship in Ancient In-
money. see L. K. Little, Religious Poverty and the Profit dia," Central Asiatic Journal 21 (1971) : 126-38, and G. W.
Economy in Medieval Europe (Ithaca, 1978). There has been, Spencer, "Temple Money-lending and Livestock Redistribu-
as well, a promising start made towards determining indige- tion in Early Tanjore," The Indian Econornic and Social His-
nous South Asian attitudes towards monastic wealth (see S. tory Review 5.3 (1968): 277-93, for two interesting examples.
Kemper, "Wealth and Reformation in Sinhalese Buddhist Mo- P. Levi, The Frontiers of Paradise: A Study of Monks and
nasticism" in Ethics, Wealth, and Salvation: A Study in Bud- Monasteries (London, 1987), 29ff.; for a more scholarly study
dhist Social Ethics. ed. R. F. Sirernore and D. K. Swearer of the theme see M. Aston. "English Ruins and English His-
[Columbia, S.C., 19901, 152-69), and towards acknowledging tory: The Dissolution and the Sense of the Past," Journal of
the significance of economic concerns in religious develop- the Warburg and Courtlzuld Institutes 36 (1973): 23 1-55.

528 Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
divide the estate of the dead monk Upananda!' The "in the midst of the community" of a dead monk's pos-
monks, having brought it and having sold it in the midst sessions, and-although it cannot establish that this
of the community, divided (the proceed^)."^ It looks was actually practiced in India-it does confirm that
here like there was a kind of 'public' sale or auction of MBlasarviistivadin vinaya masters thought it should, or
the belongings of a dead monk that was held by the hoped it would.
monks, and that what was realized from this sale was Such confirmation from an extant Sanskrit text is, of
then distributed to the monks in attendance. course, welcome, but perhaps a more important point is
Although there is, in fact, a second reference to that without the work of sinologists the significance of
"selling" the goods of a deceased monk in this same the Civara-vastu passage might very easily be missed.
passage, this procedure, seen through the eyes of an In- Scholars working on China have in fact very often
dianist, will almost certainly appear unusual. But read- been the first to introduce and make available impor-
ers of J.Gernet's remarkable Les Aspects e'conomiques tant Indian material bearing on the institutional and
du bouddhisme dans la socie'te' chinoise du ve au xe si2- economic history of Buddhism, but this material rarely,
cle will already be familiar with it. In discussing the or never, makes it into Indian studies. References to
"partage entre les moines des vCtements du dCfunt" Gernet's Les Aspects e'conomiques du bouddhisme, for
Gernet said-almost forty years ago-that "les docu- example, are extremely rare in works on Indian cul-
ments de Touen-houang nous montrent les religieux tural and economic history. D. D. Kosambi long ago
d'une m2me paroisse . . . rCunis pour la vente aux referred to Gernet when he raised the "fundamental
enchkres des vCtements et des pieces de tissu. Les question" of the extent to which Buddhist monks and
benCfices sont ensuite partages entre les moines . . . "4 monasteries in India participated directly in trade.
Professor Gernet, who for good reason paid less at- "The documentary evidence" for such participation,
tention to the Vinaya of the MfilasarvBstivBdins, seems Kosambi said, "exists at the other end of the Buddhist
to have thought that "il n'est pas question cependant world, in Chinese records and translations," of the sort
dans les Vinaya de la vente des v&tements des moines presented by Gernet.' But few have followed this up.
morts," and that "seul le Vinaya des MahBsBmghika AndrC Bareau, too, relied heavily on Gernet in a short
fait une allusion, fort discrbte, B ce mode de part- piece he published on certain forms of monastic en-
age . . . ," although he himself then quotes short pas- dowments in India and China.* Apart from these papers
sages from both the Vinaya of the Sarvastiviidins and I know of little else.9
"la MBtrkB [des MiilasarviistivBdin]" which refer to the There are of course problems in using Chinese sources
sale of monastic robes,5 and Lien-sheng Yang had al- in studying India. No one, I think, would accept without
ready some years before noted that "a [MiilasarvBstivB- serious qualifications, for example, Kosambi's assertion
din] vinaya text translated in the early T'ang period, that "not only the art but the organization and economic
however, indicates that in India sale by auction was management of Chinese Buddhist monasteries, especially
used to dispose of such personal belongings" of de- the cave-monasteries . . . were initially copied from In-
ceased monks.6 Yang's assertion seems now, in part at dian models, so that their records can be utilized for our
least, to be confirmed by the passage from the Civara- purpose," that is to say, to study directly Indian monas-
vastu cited above: that passage does not actually con- teries.1° The use of Chinese translations of Indian texts is
tain a word for 'auction', but clearly refers to the sale sometimes less problematic, but here too there are still
serious difficulties. The process of translation often con-
' ceals, for example, the Indian vocabulary, and this is
Dutt, Gilgit Manuscripts, iii.2: 1 19.13.
J. Gernet, Les Aspects Pconomiques du bouddhisme dans
'
la sociCtC chinoise du ve au xe siecle (Paris, 19561, 82. D. D. Kosambi, "Dhenukakata," Journal of the Asiatic
Gernet, Les Aspects Pconomiques du bouddhisme, 83, 84. Society of Bombay 30.2 (1955): 50-71; esp. pp. 52-53.
L.-S. Yang, "Buddhist Monasteries and Four Money- A. Bareau, "Indian and Ancient Chinese Buddhism: Insti-
Raising Institutions in Chinese History," Harvard Journal of tutions Analogous to the Jisa." Comparative Studies in Society
Asiatic Studies 13 (1950): 174-91; esp. p. 182. The text in and History 3 (1961 ): 443-5 1.
question is Taishb 1452, the reconstructed title of which is For some idea of sinological work on the economic and
given in P. Demieville, H. Durt and A. Seidel, RPpertoire du institutional aspects of Buddhism, see the equally rich book of
canon bouddhique sino-japonais, 2nd ed. (Paris-Tokyo, 19781, Stanley Weinstein, Buddhism Under the T'ang (Cambridge,
as "[MDlasarvdstivdda]niddnamdtrkd?"s;ee below pp. 542-43 19871, and the sources cited there.
and n. 60. Yang's paper is reprinted in L.-S. Yang, Studies in 'O Kosambi, Jourr~alo f the Asiatic Society of Bombay 30.2
Chinese Institutional History (Cambridge, 19611, 198-215. (1955): 53.

SCHOPEND:o ing Business for the Lord 529
often especially the case with realia or financial matters. houses with six or seven upper chambers @~ra).A'~s
The sinologists, too, who present such Indian texts are, the Licchavis of Vaiiali built their houses, so too did
justifiably, often unable to recognize their broader Indian they build vihdrus with six or seven upper chambers.
significance. Here I would like to deal with just one ex- As a consequence, because of their great height, having
ample which might illustrate at least some of these points. been built and built, they fell apart.I3 When that oc-
In his survey of what the Chinese translations of the curred the donors thought: "If even the vihdras of those
various vinayas have to say in regard to monks partici- who are still living, abiding, continuing and alive fall
pating in "commerce" or trade or business, Professor thus into ruin, how will it be for the vihdras of those
Gernet partly paraphrases and partly translates a text who are dead? We should give a perpetuity (aksaya) to
from the Vinaya-vibhariga of the Miilasarviistivada- the monastic conimunity for building purposes."
vinaya which-unless I am very much mistaken-is of Having thought thus, and taking a perpetuity, they
unique importance." It is important first for what it can went to the monks. Having arrived they said this to
tell us about the kinds of legal and economic ideas that them: "Noble Ones, please accept these perpetuities for
were developed by at least some Indian vinaya writers; building purposes!"
it is important for what it can contribute to our under- The monks said: "Gentlemen, since the Blessed One
standing of the laws of contract and debt in early and has promulgated a rule of training in this regard, we do
classical India, and because it provides another good not accept them."
example of Buddhist vinaya interacting with Indian The monks reported this matter to the Blessed One.
law; it is also important for what it can contribute to The Blessed One said: "For the sake of the com-
the discussion concerning the uses of writing and writ- munity a perpetuity for building purposes is to be ac-
ten documents and legal instruments in India. cepted. Moreover, (155a) a vihdra for a community of
A Sanskrit text for this passage has not yet-as far monks should be made with three upper chambers. A
as I know-come to light. But in addition to the Chi- retreat house (var:aka) for a community of nuns should
nese version presented by Gernet, the text is also avail- be made with two upper chambers."
able in a Tibetan translation. This Tibetan translation The monks, having heard the Blessed One, having
has at least one advantage over the Chinese text: it is accepted the peipetuity, put it into the community's
often, though not always, easier to see the Sanskrit that depository (ko~thikda)nd left it there.
underlies a Tibetan translation, and therefore to get at The donors came along and said: "Noble Ones, why
the original Indian vocabulary. Since the text has not is there no building being done on the vihdra?"
yet been fully translated, I first give a complete transla- "There is no money (kdrg7pana)."
tion. This will be followed by an attempt to establish "But did we not give you perpetuities?"
the technical Indian vocabulary that the Tibetan ap- The monks said: "Did you think we would consume
pears to be translating, and then further discussion the perpetuities? They remain in the community's
directed toward situating this piece of vinaya in the depository ."
larger context of similar discussions in Indian dhar- "But of course, Noble Ones, they would not be
mas'astra, with some reference to actual legal records perpetuities if they could be exhausted, but why do
presented in Indian inscriptions. In the end, too, there you think we did not keep them in our own houses?I4
will have to be some attempt made to get at the reli- Why do you not have them lent out on interest
gious and institutional needs which might lie behind (prayojayati)?"
our text and the legal instruments it is concerned with.
l2 Most of the Sanskrit equivalents inserted into the transla-
Vinaya-vibhariga tion will be discussed below.
(Derge, 'dul ha, Cha 154b.3-155b.2) l3 yangs pa can gyi li istsha bi rnams kyi khang pa ji lta ba de
bzhin du gtsug lag khang dug kyang drug rtseg dung bdun rtseg
The Buddha, the Blessed One, was staying in VaiSSli, tu byed pas de dug mtho ches pas brtsigs shing brtsigs shing rdib
in the hall of the lofty pavilion on the bank of the mon- nus. . . . I am not quite sure how to take the reduplicative con-
key's pool. At that time the Licchavis of VaiSali built struction brtsigs shing brtsigs shing. I cite the Tibetan here and
in ns. 14 and 15, where I am not sure of my translation.
l4 'phags pa dug de lta nu mi zad par mi 'gyur gyi 'di [tar
zad par 'gyur te ci bdag cag gi sdurn pa nu gnus ma mchis
" Gernet, Les Aspects Pconomiques du bouddhisme, 156. snyam 'am.

530 Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
The monks said: "Since the Blessed One has promul- rtseg. Rtseg almost certainly translates Sanskrit pura
gated a rule of training in this regard we do not have here, as it does in the ~ayandsana-vastus everal times.I6
them lent on interest." But the exact nature of a pura is not clear: Edgerton
The monks reported the matter to the Blessed One. defines it as an "upper chamber" (BHSD, 3472). In Ger-
The Blessed One said: "For the sake of the commu- net, however, where the beginning of the text seems to
nity a perpetuity for building purposes is to be lent on be omitted, the rule corresponding to "a vihdra for a
interest." community of monks should be made with three upper
Devout brahmins and householders having in the chambers, etc." is rendered as "le vihiira des bhiksu
same way given perpetuities for the sake of the Buddha sera reconstruit avec trois Ctages," which would seem
and the Dharma and the Community, the Blessed One to suggest that I-ching understood the term to refer to
said: "Perpetuities for the sake of the Buddha and the additional "stories" or "floors" of a building. Unfortu-
Dharma and the Community are to be lent on interest. nately, yet another reference to a pura suggests that it
What is generated from that, with that accrued revenue was something that monks fell off of. The Po~adha-
(siddha),worship is to be performed to the Buddha and vastu, in referring to the construction of "halls for reli-
the Dharma and the Community." gious exertion" (prahdna-idld), says: te tatra nu ydpa-
The monks placed the perpetuities among those same yanti. bhagavdn aha. uparighdd dvitiyah piirah [but
donors. But when they came due that caused disputes ms: puram] kartavyah. nu drohati. bhagavcin dha.
among them. "Noble Ones," they said, "How is it that sopdnanl kartavyam. prapatitam bhavati. bhagavdn
disputes have arisen from our own wealth?" dha. vedikd parik.yeptavyd: "The monks had no room
The monks reported the matter to the Blessed One. there (in the hall). The Blessed One said: 'A second up-
The Blessed One said: "Perpetuities should not be per chamber (or story) is to be built above'. They could
placed among them." not get up to it. The Blessed One said: 'A staircase is to
The monks placed them among wealthy persons. But be made'. They fell off it. The Blessed One said: 'It
when they came due, relying on those possessed of should be enclosed with a railing."'17 Here, of course,
power, those wealthy persons did not repay them. neither 'upper chamber' nor 'story' does very well. Fi-
When, by virtue of their high status, they did not repay nally it is worth noting that the rule given in our text
them15 the Blessed One said: "They should not be concerning the number of pura for vihdras of monks
placed among them." and nuns does not correspond to that given elsewhere in
The monks (155b) placed them among poor people. the same Vinaya. In a passage in the ~ayandsana-vastu
But they were unable to pay them back as well. already referred to which recounts the origin of the vi-
The Blessed One said: "Taking a pledge (adhi/ hdra the Buddha is made to say: bhik~iindmp aiicapurd
bandhaka) of twice the value (dviguna),and writing out vihdrdh kartavydh . . . bhiks2nindy tu tripurd vihdrdh
a contract (likhira) which has a seal and is witnessed kartavydh: "for monks vihdras are to be made with five
(sciksimat), the perpetuity is to be placed. In the con- upper chambers . . . but for nuns vihdras are to be made
tract the year, the month, the day, the name of the Elder with three upper chamber^."'^
of the Community (samgha-srhavira), the Provost of Our Tibetan text says that when monks first started
the monastery (upadhivcirika),the borrower, the prop- accepting perpetuities they simply put them in the com-
erty, and the interest (vyddhi) should be recorded. munity's mdzod, and this is the second architectural
When the perpetuity is to be placed that pledge of twice term requiring comment. Chandra's Tibetan-Sanskrit
the value is also to be placed with a devout lay-brother Dictionary (1992) gives koSa as the most commonly
who has undertaken the five rules of training. attested equivalent for mdzod, but a reference in a
context much closer to ours than any Chandra cites
suggests something more specific. The passage in ques-
tion is another piece of the Miilasarvdstivdda-vinaya,
The vocabulary of our passage is not always trans- which is of interest for the history of Indian law, since
parent and requires some discussion. We might start it refers to a written will. In stipulating what should be
with two architectural terms. The Tibetan text says the done with the various sorts of things which make up an
Licchavis built both houses and vihdras of six or seven
l6 Gnoli, Sayandsana- and Adhikarana-vastus, 11.2-.5 =
l5 de dug gis phyug pa dug la byin nus / de dug la 'das pa Tog, 'dul ha, Ga 260a.3.
nu mrhu dang ldan pa la rten cing mi ster ba dang / bla'i l7 Dutt, Gilgit Manuscripts, iii.4:77.1.
gndi mthus mi srer nus. . . "Gnoli, ~ayancisuna-a nd Adhikaraca-vasrus, 11.2.

SCHOPEND:o ing Business for the Lord 531
estate inherited by the monastic community, the text yam. Here Dutt emends against both the manuscript
says that "books containing the word of the Buddha"- and the Tibetan only to produce a text whose sense is
unlike "books containing the treatises of outsiders" not immediately clear. The manuscript has, of course,
(bahih-Sastra-pustakd) which are to be sold-are, in tac ciiturdiiiiya bhik~usamghdyas ddharanam ko~thi-
Dutt's edition, caturdiiaya bhik~usamghdyad hdrana- kayam prak~eptavyah," that is to be placed in the de-
ko~thikdydmp rak~e~tavydhT.'h~is , as it stands, might pository as common property for the monastic commu-
be translated as, "are to be deposited in the place for nity from the four quarter^."^' The Tibetan corresponds
storing (sacred books) for the community of monks exactly to the manuscript reading and is virtually the
from the four quarters." But Dutt almost certainly has same here as in the passage dealing with books: de ni
only reproduced a mistake in the manuscript and phyogs bzhi'i dge slong gi dge 'dun gyi ched du spyir
thereby created a 'ghost word'-dharana-koghikd- nldzod du gzhag par bya'o.
which quickly found its way into Edgerton's dictionary It would appear, then, that the term dhdrana-kosthikd
(s.v. ko~fhika)w,hose definition, "a place for storing is not yet attested-certainly not in the vinaya passage
and keeping (sacred books)," I have used in the preced- Edgerton cites for it-and is, rather, a ghost word
ing translation. What is, however, almost certainly the based on an unnoticed scribal error. For our more im-
intended form is first of all clear from the Tibetan mediate purposes, however, it can now be said that the
translation of this passage: phyogs bzhi'i dge slong gi term mdzod, which occurs in our text from the Vinaya-
dge 'dun gyi ched du spyir mdzod du gzhug par by~'o.~O vibhariga as the word for the place or thing in which
The important word here is spyi, a well attested equiva- the perpetuities were initially deposited, is, elsewhere
lent for which is scldharana, "in common," and the Ti- in the same Vinaya, used to translate the Sanskrit ko-
betan is easily rendered as: "to be placed in the sfhika, and that a ko~fhikain a Buddhist monastery was
depository as common property for the monastic com- a place, probably a room, in which not only books, but
munity from the four quarters." Oddly enough, further legal documents and money, as well, were kept. Inci-
confirmation that dhdrana is a scribal error for sadha- dentally this may give us some indirect indication of
rana- is found almost immediately in the same vinaya both the value and rarity of books at the time these
passage. texts were written-they certainly did not circulate!
After stipulating what should be done with the two When we move from architectural terms to the legal
sorts of books the passage moves on to discuss two vocabulary of our text, we move as well to a somewhat
sorts of what the Sanskrit text calls patra-lekhya, different set of problems and, significantly, to a differ-
which were also included in the estate. The Sanskrit ent class of literature. For the architectural terms in our
term would mean something like "written document," Tibetan text we had at least established Sanskrit equiv-
but both the Tibetan translation and the context indi- alents or other vinaya texts in Sanskrit which would
cate that the term refers to some kind of written lien or allow us to establish such equivalents. For the legal vo-
contract of debt. The Tibetan renders it by chugs rgya, cabulary there is often neither. Several of the technical
a term not found in the standard dictionaries, but cited terms that occur in our text are not listed in Chandra's
in the Bod rgya tshig mdzod chen mo (p. 779') as "ar- Tibetan-Sanskrit Dictionary, for example; and most of
chaic" (rnying) and defined there as bu lon bda' ba'i those that are-and for which there are, therefore, at
dpang rgya, "a witnessed marker that calls in a debt," least attested Sanskrit equivalents-are cited from pas-
and in Roerich's Tibetsko. . . Slovar' (3.70) as a sages in which those terms are not used with the tech-
"promissory note." The context too points in this direc- nical meanings that they appear to have in our text.
tion when it indicates that there are two kinds of patra- Moreover, I know of only a single Buddhist text which
lekhya, one that can be realized or liquidated quickly deals with some of the same matter as our Vinaya pas-
(patra-lekhyam yacchighram Sakyate sadhayitum) and sage and it is itself not free of problems. If, then, the
one that cannot. The former are to be called in immedi- vocabulary of our passage was peculiar to known Bud-
ately and what is realized is to be divided among the dhist literature, the situation would be decidedly grim.
monks. In regard to one that cannot be realized quickly But-unless I am much mistaken-this vocabulary is
the text says-again in Dutt's edition-tac caturdiiaya by no means Buddhist, and is, in fact, widely attested
bhiksusamghaya dharana / kosthikayam prak~eptav- and fully discussed in Sanskrit legal literature. This
l9 Dutt, Gilgit Manuscripts, iii.2:143.6 2' R. Vira and L. Chandra, Gilgit Buddhist Manuscripts
20 Tog, 'dul ba, Ga 149a.5. (Facsimile Edition), part 6 (New Delhi, 1974), fol. 861.5.

532 Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
dharmas'dstra literature will, I think, allow us to recon- Buddhist site at Kanheri which refer to ak~aya-nivi~.~~
struct much-though not all-of the Sanskrit vocabu- But yet another of the earliest inscriptional references
lary which underlies our Tibetan text, and the partial to this sort of endowment comes from Kusan Mathura,
Buddhist parallel will allow us to confirm-at least in and there the endowment was intended to feed a hun-
part-these reconstructions. The linkage of our text dred brdhmanas and the destitute.24 In fact, references
with Hindu legal literature, moreover, may also tell us to aksaya-nivis continue to occur through the Gupta
something important about both the nature and history period and beyond in both Hindu and Jain inscriptions,
of the Miilasarvclstivada-vinaya,if not about Buddhist as well as B~ddhist.~~
vinaya as a whole. That the type of donation called an aksaya-nivi in in-
Having said this much it must be immediately noted scriptions is the same type of donation that our Vinaya
that the first term we might deal with is not, as such, at- text calls an aksaya will, I think, be clear from even a
tested in dharmas'dstra. The term is that which I have single well-preserved example of such an inscription.
translated as "perpetuity." Gernet translates the Chinese This example is a fifth-century Buddhist record from
corresponding to this as "des biens inepuisables," but is Saiici written in good Sanskrit, and it details, in fact,
not able to cite a Sanskrit equivalent. In our Tibetan several separate ei~dowments:~~
text, however, the Sanskrit original is virtually certain.
The Tibetan term is mi zad pa. This is a well-known and Success. The wife of the lay-brother (updsaka) Sana-
widely attested translation of Sanskrit aksaya, "exempt siddha, the lay-sister (updsika) Harisvamini has, after
from decay," "undecaying," hence "permanent." The designating her mother and father beneficiaries (mdtd-
problem, of course, is that ak~ayais in both form and piraram uddiiya), given twelve dindras as a permanent
function an adjective and yet was almost certainly being endowment (akjaya-nivi) to the Noble Community of
used in the Sanskrit underlying our Tibetan as a substan- Monks from the Four Directions in the Illustrious Ma-
tive-it referred to a 'thing'. What that 'thing' was, more- htivihtira of Kakanadabota [i.e., SBfici]. With the inter-
over, is unusually clear from our text itself. It was, first est (vyddhi) that is produced from these dindras one
of all, a kind of donation that the donors expected to
continue to work long after they themselves were dead;
(1977): 75-89; cf. I). C. Sircar, Successors of the Satavaha-
it was the gift of, apparently, a certain sum of money,
nus in Lower Deccan (Calcutta, 1939), 228-30.
but that sum was not itself-as the donor's remarks in
our text make clear-ever to be spent. It was to be lent 23 J. Burgess, Report on the Elura Cave Temples and the
Brahmanical and Jaina Caves in Western India (London,
out on interest and the interest alone was to be used for
1883), 74-89, nos. 5, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21, 22, 26, 28.
specific purposes. It was, in short, a conditioned endow-
ment the principal of which must remain intact and was, 24 S. Konow, "Mathura Brahmi Inscription of the Year 28,"
Epigraphia lndica 21 (1931-32): 55-61.
therefore, "permanent." Sanskrit lexicography, more-
over, knows a word for exactly the kind of donation our 25 There are considerably more inscriptional references to
akjaya-nivis than are cited or signalled in J. D. M. Derrett,
text presents, and it is a term which is too close to ak-
saya to be unrelated. That term is aksaya-nivi and there "The Development of the Concept of Property in India c. A.D.
800-1800," Zeitschrift fiir vergleichende Rechtswissenschafr
are a number of interesting things about it.
64 (1962): 46 n. 117, 68-72 [= Derrett, Essays in Classical
A number of our Sanskrit dictionaries, Monier-
and Modern Hindu Law (Leiden, 1977), 2: 39 n.117, 61-65]
Williams and Apte, for example. are able to cite only
or Derrett, "Nivi," Vishveshvaranand Indological Journal
a single source for the term-which they define as "a
12.1-2 (1974): 89-95. In the first of these papers especially,
permanent endowmentn-namely, Buddhist inscrip-
Derrett might leave the impression that inscriptional refer-
tions. And, while it is true that inscriptional evidence
ences to aksaya-nivis are largely Gupta and later, but this, of
for aksaya-nivi or variants of it is-as Derrett says-
course, is definitely not the case. To the secondary sources he
"rich," in fact far richer than he himself indicated, it is
gives, at least the following should be added: R. G. Basak,
by no means exclusively Buddhist. One of the earliest
"The Words nivi and vinita used in Indian Epigraphs," The In-
occurrences of the term does indeed come from a Bud-
dian Antiqua0 48 (1919): 13-15; M. Njammasch, "Akhaya-
dhist record from Alluru in Andhra which has been
nivi-Schenkungen an Kloster und Tempe1 im Dekhan unter
dated to the end of the first century c.E., or to the sec-
den SatavBhanas," Acta Orientalia (Hungaricae) 24.2 (1971):
ond century;22a nd there are, for example, as many as
203-15.
nine inscriptions from the Satavahana period from the
26 The translation that follows is made from the edition of
the inscription in J. F. Fleet, Inscriptions of the Early Gupta
22 S. Sankaranarayanan, "A Brahmi Inscription from Al- Kings and Their Successors, Corpus Inscriptionium Indi-
luru," Sri Venkateswara University Oriental Journal 20.1-2 carum, vol. 111 (Calcutta, 1888), 260-62, no. 62.

SCHOPEND:o ing Business for the Lord 533
monk who has entered into the community is to be fed Hindu and Jain communities or establishments all, in
every day. Moreover, three dinaras were given to the actual practice, benefited from such endowments. Such
House of the Precious One (ratna-gyha). With the inter- endowments were, it seems, important legal instru-
est (vrddhi) from those three dinaras three lamps are to ments used in widely separated geographical areas-
be lighted every day for the Blessed One, the Buddha, from Andhra to Mathurs to Kanheri-over a very long
who is in the House of the Precious Moreover, period of time. In light of its widespread use in actual
one dinara was given to the Seat of the Four Buddhas. practice, it is curious-Derrett says it is "odd," "puz-
With the interest from that a lamp is to be lighted every zling" and "enlighteningu-that there are no references
day for the Blessed One, the Buddha, who is on the Seat to this legal device "in the fundamental materials of
of the Four ~uddhasT.~hu~s was this permanent en- the dharmai~istra."D~e~rrett draws from this situation
dowment (aksaya-nivi) created with a document in a "lesson" which applies as well to Buddhist vinaya
stone to last as long as the moon and sun (acandrarkka- where it has so often been assumed that "the Vinaya
Sila-lekhya) by the lady, the wife of Sanasiddha, the Pitaka. . . enters at so great length into all details of
lay-sister Harisvamini. the daily life of the recluses," and that if something
The year 131 -the month ASvayuj-day 5. was not mentioned in the vinaya it was of no impor-
tance or did not occur. He says:
What we see here in this fifth-century record of an
actual transaction is straightforward, is typical of both ". . . it struck me as odd that a word which plays so
earlier and later inscriptional records recording ak~aya- important a role in the legal practice of ancient and me-
nivis, and records what is obviously the same sort of diaeval India [i.e., nivi] should not appear, in its legal
donation that our Vinaya text describes. Sums of sense, in the fundamental materials of the dharmas'cis-
money are given to the monastic community, but the rra. There is a lesson to be learnt from this . . . viz. that
sums themselves are not to be spent. They are to re- the Sastra, though strong on the jurisprudence of the an-
main intact and be used as permanent sources for gen- cient pre-Islamic legal system, did not aim to be com-
erating spendable income in the form of interest. prehensive when it came to its incidents. This instance
Though this particular record does not explicitly say is worth pondering over. The more we discover about
so, such sums could only generate interest if they were the utility of the Sdstra in practice in ancient times the
lent out or invested. more puzzling it remains that technical terms which had
We gather, then, from inscriptional evidence that en- great currency should be missing from the literature.
dowments of the kind described in our text were in ac-
tual practice called ak~aya-nivia,ksaya-nivi-dharmena, He ends by adding:
etc.; that-beginning at least in the firstlsecond centu-
ries c.E.-such endowments or donations were, in ac- "The absence of the term from the abundant and ver-
tual practice, frequently made; and that Buddhist, satile dhanna.kistra literature in these technical senses
is most enlightening on the nature of that ~rfstra."~~
27 The term ratna-gyha-the referent of which is not entirely The "absence" in the dharmajastra that Derrett re-
clear-also occurs in another fifth-century inscription from
fers to may now, however, have to be seen in yet an-
SaRci (Fleet, lnsriptions of the Early Gupta Kings, 29-34,
other light, because even if we bracket, for the
no. 5), and, in what may be a considerably earlier inscription
moment, the seemingly obvious identity between the
from Mathura, see H. Luders, Bharhut Inscriptions, Corpus
inscriptional ak~aya-nivaind the aksaya of our Vinaya
Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. 11, part 11, rev. E. Waldschmidt
text, there is at least one other certain reference to an
and M.A. Mehendale (Ootacamund, 1963), 12-14.
aksaya-nivi in the MiilasarvristivBda-vinaya, and this
28 It is likely that the reference here is to a spot or seat that same Vinaya also gives other evidence of monastic
local tradition said had been used by a series of former Bud-
property or wealth intended for loan. The reference
dhas and by kikyamuni as well. References to such spots are
occurs in the Sanskr~tte xt of the Civara-vastu recov-
very frequent in the Chinese pilgrims' accounts of early medi-
ered from Gilgit, and forms a part of a passage dealing
eval India, but very rare in inscriptions. Presumably there was
on a spot of this sort at SBfici what we call an "image," but the
inscription itself calls "The Buddha." On the concept lying
behind such language see G. Schopen, "The Buddha as an 29 Derrett, Vishveshvczranand Indological Journal 12.1-2
Owner of Property and Permanent Resident in Medieval In- (1974): 89-90.
dian Monasteries," Journal of Indian Philosophy 18 (1990): 30 Derrett, Vishveshvczranand Indological Journal 12.1-2
181-217. (1974): 89-90, 95.

534 Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
with the monks' obligation to attend to, and perform amples of such compounds: kalpa for kalpdnta, "the
acts of worship for the benefit of, a sick and dying fel- end of a kalpa"; chada for dantacchada, "lip"; s'dkya
low monk. The text lists a series of possible ways to for Sakya-bhik~u," a Buddhist monk"; aksa for aksa-
fund these activities-donors might be solicited, but if mala, "a rosary"; bhadra for bhadrasana, "a particular
that does not work then what belongs to the Commu- posture of meditation"; and kriyd for kriyapdda, "the
nity (sdmghika) might be used. If that also does not third division of a suit at law," etc. In all but one of
work, the text says, "That which belongs to the perma- these cases the first element of a two part compound
nent endowment for the Buddha is to be given" (bud- has come to be used by itself with the same meaning
dhdksaya-nivi-santakam dey~m).~' that was originally expressed by the whole compound.
Though welcome, there are two unfortunate things Gonda suggests that this is the more common pattern
about this explicit reference to an aksaya-nivi. One is of such abbreviated compounds, "that the omission of
that this passage does not appear in the Tibetan trans- the former member probably is less common than that
lation of the Civara-vastu and therefore does not give of the latter." He also noted that in such compounds,
us an established Tibetan equivalent for the term. The "an adjective is, as a consequence of abbreviation,
other is that it gives us no information about this sometimes used as a substantive: Sveta- for Svetaccha-
aksaya-nivi, apart from the fact that such endowments tra- 'a white sun-shade."' Finally, he suggested that
were known. But this, in itself, may allow one further such abbreviation "is also in Sanskrit less rare than
observation. This passage not only suggests that ak- those scholars who do not mention it at all seem to
saya-nivi were known to the compilers of the Miilasar- assume."32
vastivada-vinaya, but that they were so well known Given what little that can be ascertained, it does not
that no description or explanation of them was felt nec- seem unreasonable to suggest that aksaya in our Vi-
essary. Moreover, the Civara-vastu passage also seems naya text is yet another example of such an abbrevi-
to indicate that the compilers of this vinaya knew of ated nominal compound: aksaya is the first part of an
"permanent endowments" that were set up for more attested two part compound; the first element of that
than one purpose-otherwise the qualification "for the compound is used by itself with the same meaning that
Buddha" would appear to have been unnecessary. the compound itself has-both are used to refer to ex-
All of what we have seen so far would seem to show actly the same sort of financial instrument; aksaya is-
that the compilers of the Miilasarvnstiviida-vinayarec- like Sveta-clearly an adjective, but, like Sveta as an
ognized a category of donations meant for loan; that abbreviated compound, is just as clearly used as a sub-
they were familiar with endowments, the principal of stantive in our text. This explanation may be as good
which was to be lent out at interest, which they called as we can get without further data. But even if only
aksayas; and that, in fact, they-unlike the authors of tentatively accepted, this explanation has at least some
the dharmas'dstra-both knew and, at least on one oc- further implications.
casion, used the term aksaya-nivi. But this last espe- Any attempt to explain the sorts of linguistic
cially leaves us with the question of why, when they changes that produce things like abbreviation must, of
referred to a financial instrument which clearly corre- course, skate very near speculation. Gonda, however,
sponds to what epigraphical sources called an aksaya- suggests that
nivi, they did not use this term, even though it must
have been known in their circle. The question, in other Whenever [he speakers of a language need an expres-
words, is what is the relationship between aksaya used sion which contains more information and applies to
as a substantive and the compound aksaya-nivi? The fewer objects than any simple words in their language,
answer-or an answer-may turn on how common they are compelled to use several words or,-if the
such endowments were, and may lead us to conclude structure of their language allows it-to form a com-
that aksaya by itself is, paradoxically, a particular kind pound. If however the longer expression becomes in
of Sanskrit compound. general, or within a definite group of speakers, more
Some years ago J. Gonda, to whom we owe so many
close studies bearing on issues of Sanskrit syntax, pub-
lished a paper on what he called "abbreviated nominal
compounds." In his usual style he gives copious ex- 32 J. Gonda, "Abbreviated and Inverted Nominal Com-
pounds in Sanskrit," in Pratiddnam: Indian, Iranian and Indo-
European Studies Presented to Franciscus Bernardus Jacobus
Kuiper on His Sixtieth Birthday, ed. J. C. Heesterman et al.
''
Dutt, Gilgit Manuscripts, iii.2:125.3. (The Hague, 1968), 221 -46.

SCHOPEND:o ing Business for the Lord 535
frequently used than is necessary or convenient they are Tibetan, of course, does not normally have this mean-
often abbreviated . . . ing but here the underlying Sanskrit cannot easily be
doubted. Several equivalents are attested and they are
He then cites from English the use of the word "bulb" all forms from pradyuj: ~rayuktap, rayukti, pray~ga.~~
for what was originally called the "electric light Monier-Williams gives, as the technical meaning for
prahuj in dharmas'iistra literature, "to lend (for use or
If we were to grant that something like this process interest)"; for prayukta, "lent (on interest)." The glos-
worked on the compound aksaya-nivi, then this in turn sary in DharmakoSa 1.3 has the following: prayukta,
would imply that among Buddhist groups the "longer "invested (sum)," prayoga, "lending money at inter-
expression" became "more frequently used than is nec- est," prayojya "money lent at interest; investment,"
essary or convenient" and therefore could be-though etc. Kangle's glossary to the Arthas'dstra also gives
it was not always-abbreviated. This would account prayogiz as "giving a loan," prayojaka as "a lender of
for the fact that both ak~aya-nivia nd ak~ayac ould money." Our Vinaya text is, therefore, not using Bud-
continue to be used, but suggests as well that this par- dhist vocabulary here, but a vocabulary well estab-
ticular form of endowment-as inscriptions prove- lished and current in dharmas'dstra and other Sanskrit
was particularly well known among Buddhists, and, texts dealing with legal and financial matters. Both the
while not exclusive to them, may have been considered equivalence rub tu sbyor bar = pradyuj and the sense
as largely theirs. If, moreover, the aksaya-nivi retained "lend on interest" are, moreover, confirmed by the one
a Buddhist smell this may account for the fact that "or- Buddhist partial parallel that has already been referred
thodox" dharmas'dstra authors were reluctant to deal to: Gunaprabha uses a form of pradyuj several times in
with it.34 the sense of "to lend" in his Vinaya-siitra, and this is
Though much here remains uncertain, two related most often rendered into Tibetan by rub tu sbyor ba.36
things do not. It is, I hope, already clear that the study But here too, the parallel between dharmas'dstra and
of dharmaidstra might profitably be expanded to in- Buddhist vinaya goes beyond items of vocabulary.
clude Buddhist vinaya, and that the study of Buddhist The compiler of our Vinaya text represents his monks
vinaya must most assuredly include the study of dhar- as being aware of "rules of training" that would make
maidstra. One might even begin to suspect that much lending on interest inadmissible. The declaration he at-
that is found in Buddhist vinaya-sleeping on low tributes to the Buddha also does not negate the general
beds, not evading tolls, etc.-is there because similar principle involved, but rather allows for specific pur-
concerns are addressed in dharmas'dstra. But apart poses to which the inadmissibility does not apply. First,
from this question, which cannot be pursued here, it such activity is not only allowed, but to be pursued-
will hopefully become clear from what follows that vi- the Tibetan is translating a future passive participle-
naya and dharmairistra often speak the same language. for building purposes for the benefit of the community.
Fortunately, most of the legal vocabulary of our Vi- Then admissibility is extended to any purpose which is
naya text is far less complicated, and for some of it we for the benefit of the Buddha, the Dharma and the Com-
have at least one Buddhist work extant in both Sanskrit munity. Here our Tibetan text allows us to correct an
and Tibetan that will provide attested equivalents and, observation made by Gernet in regard to the Chinese
as already noted, confirm what can be reconstructed text. The latter has a passage corresponding to the Ti-
from Hindu dharmas'iistra. Our text, for example, has betan I translate above as: "The Blessed One said: 'Per-
the Buddha himself declare that "for the sake of the petuities for the sake of the Buddha and the Dharma
community a perpetuity for building purposes is to be and the Community are to be lent on interest. What is
lent on interest" (dge 'dun gyi phyir mkhar len gyi rgyu generated from that, with that accrued revenue (sid-
mi zad pa rub tu sbyor bar bya'o). The Tibetan I have dha), worship is to be performed to the Buddha and the
translated as "lent on interest" is rub tu sbyor ba. The Dharma and the Community."' But Gernet excludes it
from his text and puts it in a footnote saying, "il y a ici
deux phrases qui constituent sans doute une note."37
33 Gonda, in Pratiddnam, 223-24.
34 Although it seems to have no connection with endow- 35 Chandra, Tibetan-Sanskrit Dictionary, 1752.
ments, it is worth noting that the term aksayya does occur in 36 Gunaprabha and his Vinaya-sutra will be treated below in
dharmaSiistra in connection with interest, as at Niirada 1.94, some detail.
but as Lariviere notes, even this is not common (R. W. Lari- 37 Gernet, Les Aspects e'conomiques du bouddhisme, 156,
viere, The NGradasmyti [Philadelphia, 19891, 2:60). n. 2.

536 Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
Our Tibetan text, however, indicates that it is an inte- gets to its final instructions in regard to making a loan
gral and important part of the text: it explicitly and it says first that one should take "a pledge of twice the
categorically extends the admissibility of lending on in- value" of the loan. The Tibetan is gta' nyi ri and at
terest to purposes beyond building activities that will least the first element of this expression, gta', is cited
benefit the community, and allows it for what we might in the standard dictionaries in the meaning "pawn" or
call, categorically, 'religious purposes'. Significantly, "pledge," and it occurs a couple of times in this sense
we find in Manu, for example, the same kind of dispen- in the Tibetan documents "concerning Chinese Turke-
sation and extension expressed in simpler, if rather cu- stan" treated long ago by Thomas. In one of the latter
rious, terms. we find exactly the same expression that occurs in our
Manu X.117 is a good example of the 'one must not, vinaya text, gta' nyi ri, but Thomas in his glossary que-
but. . . ' pattern of promulgation typical of both dhar- ries his own translation, "of twice the value."40 It is, in
maidstra and Buddhist vinaya. It starts by declaring fact, almost certainly correct. Gernet translates the cor-
absolutely that "a brdhmana and even a ksatriya responding Chinese as "gages qui aient deux fois la
should not, indeed, lend on interest" (vyddhim naiva valeur du pr&t," and the Bod rgya tshig mdzod chen mo
prayojayet). Our vinaya text, as noted above, presented (p. 101) defines gta' nyis ri ba as bu lon gyi dmigs rten
Buddhist monks as knowing that their 'rules of train- rin thang ldab ri ba. Here, then, there is little doubt
ing' placed the same restrictions on them. But, again about the meaning of the Tibetan. But without a San-
like the vinaya text, Manu too-though in somewhat skrit equivalent and some reference to dharmaidstra
different terms-then lifts the restriction in regard to much might be missed.
loans made for a certain and essentially similar pur- Once again, neither gta' nor nyi ri occur in Chandra's
pose: "But, however, he may on his own accord place Dictionary, nor are Sanskrit equivalents easily avail-
sums at low interest with a vile man for religious pur- able in known Buddhist Sanskrit sources. We do know
poses" (kdmam tu khalu dharmartham dadyat papiyase now, however, that our Vinaya text shares several lexi-
'lpik~m)H.e~r~e we appear to have not only another cal items, not with Buddhist texts, but with Indian
instance of shared vocabulary (prayojayet),but an in- dharmaidstra sources, so that we might expect that the
stance of parallel provisions for parallel purposes ("re- same might hold in this case as well. And our expecta-
ligious purposes"). And there are further examples of tions appear to be justified. If we consider our text an
both. Indian text dealing with legal matters and laws of con-
As in the case of Tibetan rub tu sbyor ba where the tract then our sought-for equivalents can hardly be in
technical meaning "lend on interest" is not easily avail- doubt: Tibetan gta', which means "pawn" or "pledge,"
able in Tibetan itself, so too in the case of what I have is likely to be a translation of one or another of two
translated as "accrued revenue." The Tibetan is grub pa Sanskrit terms. In his study of the "law of debt" in an-
and the standard dictionaries give little or no indication cient India H. Chatterjee says, "to convey the sense of
that this term can carry such a meaning. But a well- pledge, two terms are used in the dharmaidstra-one is
attested Sanskrit equivalent for grub pa in other con- ddhi and the other is bandhaka." He goes on to note
texts is siddha, and siddha occurs several times in, for that "it may be supposed that the use of the word
example, the Arthaidstra in exactly this meaning.39 bandhaka is of late origin," and that "it appears that the
Although, as we will see, the route to the technical exact difference between the two words might have
meanings of the Tibetan terms in our passage, or even been lost long before the period of the digest writer^."^'
to their Sanskrit equivalents, is not always the same or Such considerations would suggest that the Sanskrit
so straightforward, it invariably seems to involve going original of our Vinaya text probably read either ddhi or
to dharmaidstra. When, for example, our Vinaya text bandhaka, although we cannot be absolutely certain
which of these two actually occurred. In Gunaprabha's
text, in fact, gta' is twice used to render bandhaka.
Gunaprabha, however, is also relatively "late," so again
38 See, however, R. S. Sharma, "Usury in Early Mediaeval
India (A.D. 400-1200)," Comparative Studies in Society and
History 8 (1965-66): 56ff.; esp. p. 58, for example, who un- 40 F. W. Thomas, Tibetan Literary Texts and Documents
derstands the passage differently: ". . . the brahmana or the Concerning Chinese Turkestan, part 3 (London, 1955), 136,
ksatriya should not take interest even in times of distress, but 134, and the references cited there.
should pay interest to people of mean avocations (papiyase) 41 H. Chatterjee, The Law of Debt in Ancient India (Cal-
out of legal necessity." cutta, 1971), 21 Iff.; see also L. Sternbach, Juridical Studies in
39 Arthafcistra 2.6.13, 15. Ancient Indian Law (Delhi, 1965), 1:109ff.

SCHOPEND:oing Business for the Lord 537
we cannot be certain that this was also the term that oc- prabha, again, nyi ri translates dviguna-almost ex-
curred in our Vibhariga passage. But as in the case of actly as we would expect.
pradyuj, here too it is not just a single vocabulary item After 'taking the pledge' our text refers to "writing
that is shared or similar between our text and dhar- out a contract which has a seal and is witnessed." The
mas'astra, but an entire procedure. Brhaspati X.5, for Tibetan here is dpang po dung bcas pa'i dam rgya'i
example, stipulates-like the Buddha of our Vinaya glegs bu bris te and is not entirely clear to me. I-ching
text-that one should make a loan after having taken a may also have had some trouble with his text at this
pledge or deposit of full value (paripiirnam gyhitvd- point as well. In Gernet, at least, what appears to be the
dhim bandhakam va . . .). He also says-and, again, as corresponding clause is rendered simply as ". . . qu'on
we will see he is not alone-to get it in writing. But be- Ccrive un contrat. De plus, on Ctablira des cautions
fore we move to that point we still have to account for (pao-tcheng). . . ." We might begin with what is clear.
our Tibetan nyi ri. Its significance too is clarified by Glegs bu, the term I translate by "contract," is once
dharmas'dstra. again not listed in Chandra's dictionary, but a passage
Chatterjee, for example, indicates that the general in the Civara-vastu that we have already referred to
understanding of a pledge of "full value" was that it provides use with an attested Sanskrit equivalent. Our
was "sufficient to meet the capital with interest."42 Our term, in fact, occurs four times in this one passage:
text, however, stipulates that the pledge be "of twice glegs bu la bris te = patrdbhilekhyam kytvd; glegs bu
the value." In spite of appearance to the contrary, these la bris nus = patrdbhilikhitam krtvd; glegs bu la ma
two positions are almost certainly the same, their iden- bris ba = apatrdbhilikhitam; and glegs bu la bris pa =
tity turning on a "general rule" of dharmaSiistra in p~trdbhilikhitamS.~in~ce 'bri ba, bris ba is the usual
regard to the allowable amount of interest that can be Tibetan word for "to write," or likhati, glegs bu,
charged on a loan. This rule may not only explain how strictly speaking, is here translating patra (pattra),
these two positions are essentially the same, it also "document," and patrdbhilikhita, as a noun, would
almost certainly provides us with the Sanskrit term mean "written document." Context alone would deter-
that was translated by nyi ri. In dharmas'dstra this mine that in these Civara-vastu passages it means
rule is known as the rule of dvaigunya or "doubling." "will," whereas in our passage what was very likely
Arthas'dstra 3.11.6, for example, clearly recognizes this the same form almost certainly means "contract."
principle when it says that even in cases where a debt is This time when we look to dharmaidstra for clarifi-
long outstanding the debtor still only pays double the cation it proves to be-at least on one level-less use-
principal (. . . miilya-dvigunam dadydt). Manu VIII.151 ful. This in large part may only be a reflection of the
is even more explicit when it says that interest from fact that the use of writing and the place of written
loans of money should, when taken at one time, not documents in the dharmas'astra has yet to be as sys-
exceed double the amount of the loan (kusida-vyddhir tematically studied as many other topics, and the vo-
dvaigunyam ndtyeti sakydahyta). This principle-that cabulary of both is, as a consequence, not yet fully
"at one investment the interest and capital taken to- fixed.45 What can be surmised at the moment is this:
gether should not be more than twice the capitaln-is the terms abhilikhita and abhilekhya-both in the
widely attested, even if, in time, a number of ways of sense of "a documentn-occur in dharmas'dstra, but
getting around it were developed.43 For our purposes, very rarely; patra in the senses of "written document,"
however, we need only note two things. First, although "letter," "paper," "a leaf for writing on," etc., occurs
our Vinaya text does not explicitly refer to the rule of more commonly; but dharmaiastra appears to over-
dvaigunya, the instructions put in the mouth of the whelmingly prefer likhita or lekhya when referring to
Buddha implicitly acknowledge it. To take a pledge of documents. It should be noted, however, that though it
twice the value of the loan is to take a pledge of the might prefer a slightly different expression, dhar-
value of the loan plus the value of the maximum mas'dstra-like Buddhist vinaya-uses the same terms
interest allowed by dharmas'dstra rule: no more, no to refer to a wide range of what we would consider
less. Secondly, if one were to translate Tibetan nyi ri
into Sanskrit one could easily go with miilya-dviguna
(Arthas'dstra) or simply dvaigunya (Manu). In Guna- 44 Dutt, Gilgit Manuscripts, iii.2:140.16, 20; 141.1 = Tog,
'dul ba, Ga 147b.6, 7; 148a.1, 2.
45 Much of the material for such a study has, however,
already been gathered and is conveniently available in Joshi,
42 Chatterjee, The Law of Debt, 226. DharmakoSa, i.1:348-80. The following observations are
43 Chatterjee, The Law of Debt, 48ff. based on it.

538 Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
different kinds of documents: likhita and lekhya are that we have. Obviously the precise meaning of the
used indiscriminately to designate mortgages, deeds, Tibetan expression in our Vibhariga passage has yet to
contracts and bills-of-sale. Here too, the partial parallel be determined, though its general sense of "seal" is
in Gunaprabha is much less useful: the Sanskrit text- relatively certain. The problem for us, however, is
which appears to be faulty at this point-has dropya that whereas all meanings adduced for dam rgya
patre, "having recorded in a document," and this is would make it a noun, in our Vinaya text it appears to
translated into Tibetan by dpang rgyar bris nus so, be by position and function an adjective-the construc-
"having written in a sealed bond." It would appear that tion remains, for me at least, obscure. It may be, of
Gunaprabha's text was not using the same vocabulary course, that the Tibetan dpang po dang bcas pa'i dam
as our Vibhariga passage. But lest it be lost sight of, rgya'i glegs bu is translating some sort of possessive
the most general point that needs to be noted here- compound.
though we will come back to it-is this: although the The significance of all this is that there is almost cer-
reference to written contracts in our Vinaya text may- tainly lurking behind the Tibetan some form of mudrd
as a piece of vinaya-appear unusual, even odd, when or mudrita and that we may have in our passage, there-
seen in light of dharmaidstra of a certain period it fore, a rare reference to the use of a kind of 'object'
looks quite normal. Normal, too, it seems, is at least which frequently is found at Buddhist monastic sites in
one of the two further qualifications of the "contract" India. Monastic seals-more commonly sealings-
found in our text. have been recovered from a wide variety of monastic
The Tibetan expression I have rendered into English as sites, VaiSHli, KasiI, KauSHmbi, NBlandI, etc., some-
"is witnessed" is dpang po dang bcas pa and-although times in considerable numbers.48 Since they almost al-
absent from Chandra-there can, again, be little doubt ways bear the name of a monastery, they could be, and
about the Sanskrit underlying it: dpang or dpang po is a have been, used to identify the site from which they
common translation for sdksin, "witness," and dang bcas come. But there is a problem here recognized long ago
pa-like can-is a good translation for the Sanskrit suffix by Vogel.
-mat, "having," "possessing." Although Gunaprabha is Cunningham early on had identified KasiH with
here again of little use, having-as we will see- KusinIrI, the site of the Buddha's death. When Vogel
constructed his text differently, still sdksimat, "having a actually excavated KasiI he recovered a number of
witness," "witnessed," or "attested," is itself widely at- sealings, typical of which is one bearing the legend
tested in dharmaidstra in connection with documents. Mahdparinirvdne cdturdiio bhiksu-sarighah, "The com-
YdjAavalkya says that'for any contract entered into by munity of monks from the four directions at (the site) of
mutual consent there should be "a witnessed document" the Mahdparinirvdna." Vogel assessed this new evi-
(lekhyam. .. sdk~irnat)N.~d~rada 1.1 15 says of docu- dence in the following way:
ments (lekhya)that they can be both "witnessed and un-
witnessed" (asdksimat sdksimac ca), etc. But if we are on As long as the use of these documents [i.e., the seal-
firm ground here we are less so in regard to the second ex- ings] has not been ascertained it is impossible to decide
pression applied to "contracts" in our Vinaya text, and whether their evidence tends to prove or to disprove Cun-
that is unfortunate. ningham's theory. If they belong to the spot where they
What I have translated as "has a seal" is dam rgya in
Tibetan. Jaschke says that dam rgya = dam ka. which
he defines as "a seal, stamp." The Bod rgya tshig 48 For a sampling of such seals and sealings see B. Ch.
Chhabra, "Intwa Clay Sealing," Epigraphia Indica 28 (1949-
mdzod chen mo (p. 1244) defines dam rgya first as thel
rrse, a variant of thel se, which also means "a seal, 50): 174-75; V. A. Smith, "VaiS2li: Seals of the Gupta
stamp." It then says it is "old" for dpang rgya (which Period," Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain
Thomas takes to mean "witness signature"), "attesta- and Ireland (1905): 152; J. Ph. Vogel, "Seals of the Buddhist
tion seal," khrims rgya, "legal seal," and dam tshig gi Monasteries in Ancient India," Journal of the Ceylon Branch
phyag rgya, "a seal of promise." Thomas, finally, takes of the Royal Asiatic Society, n.s.. 1 (1950): 27-32; G. R.
it as "a signed bond,"47 and in Gunaprabha dpang rgya Sharma, "Excavations at Kaus'smbi, 1949-1955," Annual Bib-
can only be translating patra if-and this is far from liography of Indian Archaeology 16 (Leyden, 1958): xliv-xlv;
certain-it is translating a text similar to the Sanskrit D. Schlingloff, "Stamp Seal of a Buddhist Monastery," The
Journal of the Numismatic Society of India 3 1 (19 69): 69-70;
H. Sastri, Nalanda and Its Epigraphical Material (Delhi,
46 For a fuller citation of the passage see below, p. 540. 1942), 36ff.; D.C. Sircar, "Inscribed Clay Seal from Raktam-
47 Thomas, Tibetan Literary Texts and Documents, 3:143. rittika," Epigraphia Indica 37 (1967): 25-28; etc.

SCHOPEND:oing Business for the Lord 539
were found-and the variety of their dates and unifor- fuller than our Vinaya passage. Y~jiiavalkya(II:5.86-
mity of their legends seem to point to that conclusion- 89) says:
they would vindicate Cunningham's identification. If, on
For whatever business (artha)is freely and mutually
the other hand, they were attached to letters and par-
agreed upon, a witnessed document should be made
cels-and this seems to be the most likely use they were
(lekhyam vd sdk~imatk rIr3;am). The creditor
put to-they would place beyond doubt that the Convent
(dhanika) should be put first.
of the Great Decease is to be sought e~sewhere.~~
Formulated in this way it is not difficult to see how
cavations at Kasia," ARASl 1910-11 (Calcutta, 1914), 72. In
our Vinaya passage may bear on the issue. If-as
the second of the reports cited Vogel surmised that "such
seems likely-our passage is referring to the use of
figures possibly are meant to represent the corporeal relics of
such sealings on written contracts for loans made from
some Buddhist saint" (p. 59, n.1). There is, however, a pas-
permanent endowments held by a monastic commu-
sage in the Ksudraka-vastu of the Mfilasarvcistivcida-vinaya
nity, and if, therefore, such sealings were used for this
which makes this unlikely. Vogel knew this passage, but, pre-
purpose and not for "letters and parcels," then'-since
sumably, only from the truncated summary in Csoma or Feer.
we know that such documents were placed in the mon-
In the latter it appears as: "Un membre de l'ordre religieux
asteries "depositoryw-our passage would support the
doit avoir sur son sceau ou cachet un cercle avec deux daims
view that such sealings "belong to the spot where they
se faisant vis-a-vis et au-dessous le nom du fondateur du Vi-
were found." Moreover, if our passage is referring to
hBra" (L. Feer, Analyse du kandjour [Lyon, 18811, 191). The
the use of sealings of this sort-and again this seems
Tibetan text itself says, however: bcom ldan 'das kyis bka'st-
likely-then those sealings in turn could have con-
sal pa / rgya ni gnyis te / dge 'dun gyi dung / gang zag gi'o /
siderable evidential value for the use of the legal in-
de la dge 'dun gyi ni dbus su 'khor lo bris nu / glo gnyis su ri
struments described in our text: if they were used to
dugs / 'og tu gtsug lag khang gi bdag po'i ming bri bar bya'o
'seal' loan contracts, then their presence at Buddhist
/gang zag gi ni rus pa'i keng rus sam / mgo 'i thod pa bri bar
sites will allow us to date the use of such contracts in
bya'o (Tog, 'dul ba, Ta 1 lb.4): "The Blessed One said: "There
actual practice, at least at certain sites, and they will
are two kinds of seals: (seals) of a Community, and (seals) of
provide at least some indication of the frequency of
individual monks. In regard to them, that of a Community is
their use, at least at certain times. They could, in short,
to have a wheel engraved in the middle with a deer on both
be extremely valuable.50
sides; below it the name of the *VihBrasvamin. That of an in-
In regard to what was to be included in such written
dividual monk is to have a skeleton or a skull engraved on it."
contracts of loan, Buddhist vinaya and Hindu dhar-
Vogel identified a considerable number of the seals he found
rnas'astra, beginning with Yajriavalkya, are again in
at KasiB with the first type mentioned in this passage, but be-
close basic agreement, although Yajriavalkya is already
cause he had access only to an incomplete summary of the
passage he was unable to recognize seals of the second type
49 J. Ph. Vogel, "Some Seals from Kasia," Journal of the for what they were: those seals or sealings bearing skeletons
Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland (1907): or skulls almost certainly had nothing to do with "the corpo-
366. real relics of some Buddhist saint," but were rather simply
In the case of Kasia there is, of course, other material that seals of individual monks. It is worth noting too that the asso-
confirms the identity of the site-see F. E. Pargiter, "The Ka- ciation between things connected with the individual and skel-
sia Copper-plate," Annual Report of the Archaeological Sur- etons and skulls is also found elsewhere in this Vinaya. In
vey of India [= ARASI] for 1910-11 (Calcutta, 1914), 73-77, a well-known passage which describes what paintings are
esp. p. 77, n.lO. One further point in regard to at least some of allowed in a vihdra, the text says, in Lalou's translation, "dans
these sealings can I think also be quickly clarified, and such a les [individual] cellules, un squelette, des os et un crlne" are
clarification will establish an even more specific linkage be- to be painted (M. Lalou, "Notes sur le decoration des monas-
tween what has been found at some Buddhist sites and the teres bouddhiques," Revue des arts asiatiques 5.3 [1930]:
MulasarvdstivrIda-vinaya.Vogel found at Kasia a number of 183-85). Certain individual cells at some Buddhist monastic
sealings which he described as showing a "skeleton seated in sites have been identified as "meditation caves" because
meditation" or a "skeleton standing. On both sides a bird they have skeletons and skulls painted on their walls (cf.
perched on a skull." Sastri, in later work at the site, also found L . Feugere, "A Meditation Cave in Kyzil," in South Asian Ar-
such sealings. See J. Ph. Vogel, "Excavations at Kasia," chaeology 1985, ed. K. Frifelt and P. Sorensn [London, 19891,
ARASI 1905-06 (Calcutta, 1909), 85; Vogel, "Excavations at 380-86). Obviously, these vinaya passages render such iden-
Kasia," ARASI 1906-07 (Calcutta, 1909), 66; H. Sastri, "Ex- tifications doubtful.

540 Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
With the year, the month, the fortnight, the day, place possible to interpret it in a similar way-there are sev-
of residence, caste and gotra, eral things that appear to make such an interpretation
With the name of a fellow student, his own, and his difficult.
father's it is marked (cihnita). First, the verb used in the Tibetan to express the
When the business (artha)is concluded the debtor action undertaken in regard to the lay-brother-sbyin
(min) should enter his name with his own hand ba-cannot mean "recevoir de." It is, in fact, the same
(Adding) "what is written above concerning this matter verb our passage uses more than a half a dozen times to
is approved by me, the son of so-and-so." express the "giving" or "placing" of the loan, e.g., bcom
And the witnesses, in their own hand and with their ldan 'das kyis bka' stsal pa / de dug la sbyin par mi
father's name first, bya'o: "The Blessed One said: (perpetuities) should not
Should write: "In this matter I, named so-and-so, am a be placed among them." That it could mean anything
witness". . . else in this one instance, after being consistently used in
all the previous instances, seems very unlikely.
Then a number of other details and conditions of valid- The careful characterization in our passage of the
ity follow, but what is cited above is surely enough to kind of lay-brother involved must also be considered.
establish the fundamental similarity between the con- That lay-brother is not just any lay-brother, but is ex-
tract described in our Vinaya passage and the contract plicitly said to be "a devout lay-brother who has under-
described by Ydjfiavalkya. The differences, in so far as taken the five rules of training" (dge bsnyen dad pa can
they exist, reflect, in part, the concern of Yajriavalkya bslab pa'i gzhi lnga bzung ba), and elsewhere in our Vi-
with greater detail and technicality, and, in part, the naya this kind of characterization marks a particularly
fact that our Vinaya passage is describing a contract of trustworthy individual. In a passage in the Vinaya-
loan not between individuals, but between an individ- vibhariga which comes only a few folios before our
ual and an institution. As a consequence, it is not the text, for example, it is said that when vihdras were built
creditor's name, for example, that should be registered, in "border regions" (mtha' 'khob) monks frequently
but the names of two representatives of the institu- abandoned them in times of trouble. As a consequence
tion-the Elder of the Community and the Provost of they were also frequently looted. In response to this
the monastery-that is making the loan.51 situation the Buddha is made to say: "The treasure and
But one final textual problem remains. The final sen- gold belonging to the Community or the stiipa (dge
tence of our passage in its Chinese version reads, as 'dun bye [rd. gyi] 'am mchod rten gyi dbyig dung gser)
Gernet has translated it: "MCme s'il s'agit d'un upIsaka should be hidden. Only then should you leave." But the
croyant, d'un homme qui a requ les cinq instructions, il monks did not know who should do the hiding. Then,
faut egalement recevoir de lui des gages." Gernet sees the text says:
here "un sentiment trbs net" on the part of the redactor
that business is business ("les affaires sont les The Blessed One said: "It should be hidden by an
affaires"), and that even a devout lay-brother must give attendant of the vihdra (kun dga' ra ba pa) or a lay-
a pledge when borrowing from the community.52 The brother."
Tibetan text reads gang la sbyin par bya ba dge bsnyen But then those that hide it stole it themselves.
dad pa can bslab pa'i gzhi lnga bzung ba la yang gta' Then the Blessed One said: "It should be hidden by a
nyi ri kho nus sbyin par bya'o, and-while it is not im- devout lay-brother (dge bsnyen dadpa can)."53
From this and similar passages it would appear that
j1Karunatilaka has noted what he calls an "obvious gap in
"devout"-as opposed to ordinary-lay-brothers were
the information found in the law-books": "The law-books of
considered worthy of trust, especially in regard to mat-
the early medieval times and the preceding period contain
ters involving valuable property. The chances seem
various laws pertaining to money-lending and interest pay-
very good that our text should be taken as supplying
ments between individuals but they pay little or no attention at
another instance of the same sort of thing.
all to similar transactions between individuals and institu-
Finally, "pledgesn-at least according to dharmas'as-
tions. . . ," P. V. B. Karunatilaka, "Hindu Temples in Bihar
tra-were, or came to be, fairly complex affairs. Two
and Orissa: Some Aspects of the Management of Their Mone-
basic kinds were referred to: gopya, or "pledges for cus-
tary Endowments in Early Medieval Times," The Sri Lanka
tody," and bhogya "usufructuary pledges." The first was
Journal of Humanities 13.1-2 (1987): 154.
52 Gernet, Les aspects t!conomiques du bouddhisme, 156,
n. 3. 53 Derge, 'dul ba, Cha 149b. Iff

SCHOPENDo: ing Business for the Lord 541
to be kept, the second was to be used, that is to say, to tion to no more than 100, it is obvious that he had to
generate profit. Pledges could be anything from a copper make some austere choices. He would have been able,
pan or cloth to female slaves, or fields, gardens, cows or presumably, to include only what would have been
camels. There were other refinements and complexities considered-or what he considered-essential to an
as How much of this was known to the redactor understanding of the whole. His choices, therefore, can
of our Vinaya is, of course, impossible to say. Our pas- be revealing and at times-at least to some-may ap-
sage says nothing that would indicate his awareness. It pear surprising. Professor Schmithausen, for example,
is, however, safe to assume that, even before the stage of in his fascinating paper on the "sentience of plants,"
complexity had been reached that we see in some dhar- has several times referred to a text in the Vinaya-
rnas'iistra, the taking of pledges would have created vibhariga of the Miilasarviistiviidins which describes a
some awkward problems for monastic communities. monastic ritual that must be performed before cutting
And it is, again, reasonable to assume that such monastic down a tree.56 The ritual contains several significant
communities would have solved such problems by one elements which also form a part of the funeral ritual
of their favorite devices-recourse to lay middle-men. for dead monks, but the text looks like a minor appen-
This, I think, is what our text is saying. dix of no great importance. Gunaprabha, however, in-
cludes an almost complete description of the ritual in
his epit~me.~It ' is much the same for our rules.
Although our text, where it is now found, may also
Having come this far, all that remains is the hard
look like an appendix, and although it appears to have
part. We must at least try to determine several interre-
no known parallels in other vinayas, the continuing
lated things. We must make some attempt to determine
importance of at least the subject that it treats for the
how important the perpetuities or permanent endow-
MiilasarvHstiviidin order would appear to be indicated by
ments mentioned in our text were, and what-if any-
further history our text or similar vinaya rulings on
written contracts had. We must make some attempt to
determine what the religious and institutional situations on Monastic Funerals in the Miilasarvasrivada-vinaya,"Jour-
were that stimulated Miilasarviistiviidin vinaya masters nal of Indian Philosophy 22 (1994): 63-64 and ns. 63-64.
to create or borrow these legal instruments. And we When I wrote this paper I was unaware of the fact that an edi-
must make some attempt to place our Vinaya text in the tion of the whole of the Sanskrit text of the Siitra had been
still uncertain history of dharmas'iistra. In none of these published. P. V. Bapat and V. V. Gokhale had said in their
endeavors can we expect complete success. introduction to their edition of the first chapter of both the
It of course goes without saying that we have at our Vinaya-slirra and its auto-commentary that they had seen and
disposal almost no means of determining what was and used an edition of the Siirra by R. Sankrityayana. But they
what was not particularly important in the enormous also said that it was only "provisionally printed . . . not for-
Miilasarviistivdda-vinaya. But there is at least one mally published." I therefore assumed, wrongly, that it was
rough indicator of what in this Vinaya was thought im- never made available. Mr. Jonathan Silk-already known for
portant in the early medieval period: we are able to his keen bibliographic nose-was kind enough not only to
determine what Gunaprabha, who has been dated to point out to me that it had indeed been published (as no. 74 of
a period between the fifth and seventh centuries, and the Singhi Jain ~BstraS iksBpifha, Singhi Jain Series!), but also
who may have been from Mathura, chose to include in to send me a copy. I would like to thank him very much. Un-
his Vinaya-siitra. Gunaprabha's Vinaya-siitra appears fortunately, Bapat and Gokhale may have understated the case
to have been the most authoritative epitome or sum- when they referred to this edition as "very unsatisfactory." It
mary of the Miilasarvdstivdda-vinaya and Bu-ston, at does, however, make it possible to improve on some points in
least, cites it as a model of the type of treatise that con- my treatment of the Tibetan translation of the Siirra in the
denses "excessively large (portions of) ~cripture."~~a bove paper, but that will have to wait.
Since, in fact, Gunaprabha has reduced or condensed 56 L. Schmithausen, The Problem of the Sentience of Plants
what takes up more than 4000 folios in the Derge edi- in Earliest Buddhism (Tokyo, 1991), 74. The text occurs at
Derge, 'dul ba, Cha 279b.3-280b.7.
57 Vinaya-siitra (Sankrityayana ed.) 38.11ff.; 'dul ba'i mdo,
54 Sternbach, Juridical Studies, 1:l 1lff. Derge, bsran 'gyur, Wu 30a.4ff.; note in particular: tridan&kam
55 For the sources on the life and date of Gunaprabha, and bhd~ana-dak~inadeSancfmkytvd, translated-oddly enough-
for work on his Vinaya-slirra and its auto-commentary, see by rgyun chugs gsum pa gdon pa dung sbyin pa bshad pa byas
G. Schopen, "Ritual Rights and Bones of Contention: More nus.

542 Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
what we find in Gunaprabha's Siitra. But there is also atra granthah, "the text here is the Po~adha-vastu( Sii.
something of a surprise here. As our discussion of the 646). Citations of this sort-because they can consider-
vocabulary of our Vibhariga passage undoubtedly indi- ably reduce the range-are, of course, more suited to
cated, Gunaprabha does, indeed, include lending on in- our needs. But even some of these more specific refer-
terest and written contracts in his Sntra. And they are ences can be problematic. Several times, for example,
presented-as one would expect-in very much the same Gunaprabha cites material under a rubric referring to a
terms as in our canonical text: Gunaprabha, like all good or the "introduction": iti niddnam (Su. 327), "the
epitomizers, appears to be neither creative nor original. Nidiina says," or atra granthah nidiindt (Sii. 384),
The surprise, however, is that although Gunaprabha "here is the text from the Nidiina," or nidiine yad uktam
presents in his Siitra what can, in part, easily be taken as (Sn. 422), "what was said in the Niddna." In cases such
a condensation of our text, he himself in his auto- as these it is not always clear whether the reference is
commentary-the Svavydkhyiinabhidhdna-vinaya-siitra- to a part of a work or a work entitled Niddna. The ma-
vytti-actually cites another source when he comments terial Gunaprabha cites in commenting on lending on
on that material, and he gives there a frame story that interest and written contracts is, in fact, also cited un-
would seem to indicate that our material was, indeed, der such a rubric.
found, as well, in a second source. In his auto-commentary Gunaprabha introduces the
There is much to be learned both about and from passage of most direct interest to us with the following
Gunaprabha's Siitra and Vytti, but to date it has re- phrase: 'dir gzhung ni ma mo las 'di Ira ste. The trans-
ceived very little attention. In the Vytti, for example, lation of this seems straight-forward: "here the text is
Gunaprabha frequently cites or quotes his authorities from the Mdtykii, namely. . . ." There is, as well, at least
and therefore gives us some indication of where he got one similar reference in the first chapter of the Vytti, the
his material. Most commonly, however, his references only part of the Sanskrit text of the Commentary which
are given under a general rubric like tathd ca granthah, has been published so far: mdtykdyiim atra granthah
"and thus is the text,"58 or ity atra granthah, "it is said (Sn. 165), "the text here is found in the Mdtyka." Al-
in this case in the text" (Sii. 177, 181, 183, etc.), or though the Tibetan translation of this second reference
grantho 'tra, "the text here is" (Sn. 193). In these gen- differs slightly from that of the first-'dir ma mo'i
eral references "the text" appears to refer to the canoni- gzhung las-there can be very little doubt that both are
cal Vinaya. In fact sometimes he uses the phrase vinaye referring to the same work. The problem, of course, is
uktam, "it is said in the Vinaya" (Su. 82). Such refer- that we do not-at least I do not-actually know what
ences can sometimes be particularly frustrating since, work this is. The Tibetan tradition does not appear to
though commenting on his summary of one section of preserve a canonical vinaya text with this title; the Chi-
the Vinaya, he sometimes quotes from a completely nese canon has one text-TaishG 1441-whose recon-
different section. At one place in the Vytti dealing with structed title is Sarvdstiviidavinaya-mdtykd, but this
the Pravrajya-vastu, for example, he quotes a passage reconstruction is marked as doubtful by the HGbGgirin
under the rubric ity atra granthah which does indeed catalog; equally doubtful apparently are the titles of
come from the canonical Vinaya, but not from the two other texts-TaishG 1452 and 1463-which are
Pravrajya-vastu; it comes instead from the Civara- given as "[Miilasarvdstiviida]nidiinamiitykd?a"nd "Vi-
vast^.^^ Sometimes, happily, he is more specific. Occa- nayamatykd?"60 Fortunately, this does not have to be
sionally, he says something like vibharigiid etud Saya- sorted out here. For our purposes we need only note
ndsana-s'iksiipaddt, "this is from the Vibhariga, from that Gunaprabha cites technical material bearing on
the rules of training in regard to beds and seats" (Su. lending on interest and written contracts which is, in
389), or grantho 'tra bhik~univibharige" here is the text the main, quite close to that found in our text in the
in the Bhiksunivibhariga" (Sn. 591), or po~adha-vastu Vinaya-vibhariga, but he cites at least a part of it from
a different, second source. Any doubt that he got this
material from-or at least knew as well-a source
All the examples that follow are cited from the edition of
different from our Vinaya-vibhariga passage is quickly
the Sanskrit text of the first chapter of the Siitra and its
dissipated by looking at what he actually said.
commentary found in P. V. Bapat and V. V. Gokhale,
The Sntra itself gives the first indication that
eds., Vinaya-siitra and Auto-commentary on the Same (Patna,
Gunaprabha is not necessarily dependent on our Vi-
1982); references are to the Siitra-numbers inserted into the
text.
59 Sii. 506 is citing the text of the Civara-vastu now found 60 Demitville, Durt and Seidel, Rkpertoire du canon boud-
at Dutt, Gilgit Manuscripts, iii.2:131.13-15. dhique sino-japonais, 123, 124, 125.

SCHOPEND:o ing Business for the Lord 543
bhariga passage for his material. In speaking about a The Blessed One said: 'I authorize that chattels for
certain kind of chattel (upakarana) Gunaprabha says: the maintenance of a srupa should be accepted by a
monastery's attendant (kun dga' ra ba = ciramika) or a
It should be lent on interest for the sake of the (three) lay-brother (upasaka). Having accepted them, they
Jewel(s). should be used to generate interest (bskyedpar bya sre).
When there is a monastery attendant or lay-brother he As much profit as is produced in that case should be
should be used. used for worship of the srapa."
(It should be loaned) after taking a pledge of twice In regard to the words "a pledge of twice the value
the value (of the loan and) after recording in a docu- should be taken" (gta' nyis rir blang bar bya'o), so that
ment the witness, the year, the month, the day, the El- there should be no loss, this-by its force-should be
der of the Community, the Provost of the monastery, considered as "a means which avoids a default" ('di
the borrower, the capital, and the chattel. spang ha mi skyed pa'i yan lag ces bya ha shugs kyis
rrogs par bya).
It might be asked how, after having accepted it, the
prayurijita ratnarrham /
chattel is to be lent on interest (sbyar bar bya). For that
drcimikopdsakayoh sattve niyogera /
reason it is said: After having written with a witnessed
bandhakam dvigunam cidaya sdksi-samvatsara-
seal the witness, the year, the month, the day, the Elder
mdsa-divasa-samghasthaviro(?)vdrika [rdtopadhi-
of the Community, the Provost of the monastery, the
vdrikal-gyhiry-dhana-lcibhdanropya patre /
borrower, the property, and the interest (dpang po dang
lo dang zla ha dang nyi ma dang dge 'dun gyi gnas
kun dga' ra ha pa 'am dg[e] bsnyen dug yod nu bsko
brtan dang dge skos dang len pa po dang rdzas dang
bas dkon mchog gi don du bskyed par bya'o /
skyed rnams dpang rgyar bris nus so), e t ~ . ~ ~
gta' nyi rir blang par bya'o / dpang po dang / lo
dang / zla ba dang / nyi ma dang / dge 'dun gyi gnas
The Tibetan text of Gunaprabha's commentary is
brran dang / dge skos dang / [en pa po dang / rdzas
here-as it frequently is elsewhere-difficult, and I am
dang bskyed rnams dpang rgyar bris nus so /61
not sure that I have always correctly understood it. It
is, moreover, not entirely clear where the boundaries of
It is, of course, immediately obvious that what Guna-
his quotation or paraphrase of the MatrkrT are. Given
prabha says about taking a "pledge" and the contents
this, the following appear to be firm. Gunaprabha knew
of the contract are very close-though not fully identi-
where in the Vibhariga the topics of lending on interest
cal-to what our Vibhariga passage says. But what
and written contracts occurred since in his Siitra he
precedes this is not. The references to the monastery
treats these topics under the nineteenth nihsargika-
attendant and lay-brother must, at least, come from
pdtayantika offence, and this is precisely where they
what Gunaprabha calls in his auto-commentary the
are treated in our Vibhariga. But he also knew another
Mdtrkd. The auto-commentary says, in fact:
passage-this one in the Mdtykd-which dealt at least
with lending on interest. The Matrka passage dealt
Here the text is from the Matykd, namely: "When, af-
with chattels, not perpetuities; it also had the Buddha
ter having had both a srupa of the Blessed One and a
authorize lending activities undertaken by a monas-
domed chamber (grsang khang byur bu)62 made, the
tery's attendant or a lay-brother-it did not authorize
merchants of VaiSali consigned chattels (yo byad) to
monks to do so. For lending on interest Gunaprabha
the monks for the maintenance (zhig ral du mi 'gyur ha)
chose to follow the Miitrka text, and this is explicitly
of srapas and domed chambers, the monks, being scru-
confirmed in his auto-commentary. In regard to written
pulous, did not accept them.
contracts it would appear either that he reverted to our
The monks reported the matter to the Blessed One.
Vibhariga text, or that the Mfitrkd text had itself almost
the same material as our text in the Vibhariga. There
are, for example, some differences in what our Vi-
bhariga text indicates should be included in the con-
61 Vinaya-surra (Sankrityayana ed.) 33.12-14; 'dul ba'i
tract, and what is indicated in Gunaprabha. It is,
mdo, Derge, bstan 'gyur, Wu 26.b5.
however, difficult to know what-or how much-to
62 I am not at all sure what gtsang khang byur bu means.
gtsang khang in dri grsang khang seems to translate ku~ia;nd
byur bu is usually said to mean "heaped, a heaped measure of
corn or meal," or "full, brim-full." 63 Derge, bsran 'gyur, Zhu 165b.1 -4.

544 Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
make of this. There are also a number of textual prob- What information we have suggests that VikramaSila
lems in all the sources which have to be worked out. was founded either in the eighth or ninth century, and
But even if our discussion leaves a number of points probably destroyed in the twelfth,65 so our copy of the
and problems hanging, it does allow some observations Vinaya-siitra can be assigned to somewhere during this
on the importance of lending on interest and written period.
contracts of debt in, at least, MiilasarvBstivBdin vinaya We can, in sum, track our Miilasarvastivadin rules
literature. The canonical Vinaya of the MiilasarviistivB- starting from the Vinaya-vibhariga in-as we shall see-
dins had at least two texts or sets of rules concerning about the first century C.E. They also occurred, with at
lending on interest, and both were associated with the least a different frame-story, in a text called the MEtykd.
need to maintain durable architectural forms and fi- They were known and repeated by Gunaprabha who
nance ritual. There were as well-probably-two sets lived, perhaps, at MathurB sometime between the fifth
of rules regarding written contracts of debt. Both lend- and seventh century. And Gunaprabha's summary was it-
ing on interest and contracts of debt continued, more- self known and copied sometime after the ninth century
over, to be of interest to MiilasarvBstivadin vinaya at the VikramaSila monastery. Though such a trail is not
masters, at least up until the 7th century-though he much, it is far more than we usually have, and it testifies
was working with severe space limitations, Gunapra- to the continuing currency of our rules through both time
bha chose to include a fairly detailed discussion of and space.
both in his Vinaya-siitra. It will have been noticed that
Gunaprabha does not specifically mention aksayas or The redactor of our Vinaya-vibhariga text appears to
ak~aya-nivisW. e might surmise that lending on interest have thought, or to have wanted others to think, that the
might have at first been particularly associated with Buddhist monastic community began to accept endow-
such endowments, but by his time had come to be asso- ments, to lend on interest, and to use written contracts, not
ciated with all sorts of chattels or property. This, in on its own initiative, but in response to the concerns of lay
turn, might explain his preference for the Mdtykd. We donors about what would happen, after they were dead, to
simply do not know. It is also notable that both the establishments they had founded and were themselves
Gunaprabha's presentation and apparent preference for able to maintain while they were alive. Confronted with
the Matyka appear to shift the financial activities in- the visible deterioration of their vihdras in their life time,
volved away from monks and-if possible-into the lay donors are made to say-in effect-'if this happens
hands of lay monastic functionaries. The reasons for while we are still alive, it obviously will occur even more
such a shift, or any historical situation it may reflect, so when we are dead.' It is this concern that-according
remain, however, undetermined. to our text-gives immediate rise to the resolve on the
Although questions of this sort must for now remain part of lay donors to provide the monastic community
open, Gunaprabha's Vinaya-sitra may still allow us in a with permanent or perpetual endowments, and to insure,
general way, at least, to extend the history of interest in- in effect, that their vihdras remain inhabitable. For the re-
or at least knowledge of-MiilasarvBstivadin monastic dactor of our text all else-lending on interest, written
rules governing lending on interest and written contracts contracts of debt-follows directly from this concern and
of debt. These rules, as indeed the Sanskrit text of the forms an integral and necessary part of the monastic com-
Vinaya-siitra that has come down to us, were, to judge by munities response to it. Our text, however, is not the only
the colophon of the text, known at the VikramaSila text in the Miilasarvdstivdda-vinaya where such concerns
monastery in Eastern India. Although the colophon as it are voiced. Nor are they only about maintenance-they
is printed is difficult to make sense of, one important are, as well, inextricably about merit. A glance at two re-
statement seems clear. That colophon says in part: lated texts from the ~a~andsana-vasmtuu st here suffice:
they are in fact sufficient to establish something of the
~ak~abhiksu-~harmakirrrinrlsatmarthe likhitam range of ideas connected with our Vibhariga text.
rima ad-vikramafildm [sic] GSritya phdlgunamdse64 The first passage we might look at forms a part of a
larger discussion about various rights and obligations
Copied by the SZkyabhiksu Dharmakirti, for the in regard to vihdras. It starts rather abruptly with what
benefit of living beings, when residing at VikrarnaSila, appears to be a reference to what the Buddha had
in the month of PhZlguna.
65 See S. L. Huntington, The "Pdla-Sena"S chools of Sculp-
ture (Leiden, 1984), 125-26 and ns. 120-25, and the sources
64 Vinaya-sBtra (Sankrityayana ed.) 124.3. cited there.

SCHOPEND:o ing Business for the Lord 545
already said on some other occasion; and the passage is obligatory activity was a "public" ritual which took
more narrative than formally promulgatory: place on a recurring basis-it is otherwise hard to ac-
count for the narrative facts that it was "heard" by a
It had been said by the Blessed One; "The reward householder on a random visit. The redactor also indi-
should be assigned in the name of the dead donors" cates that this recurring public ritual was performed by
(abhyatitakdlagardncfm ddnaparindm ndmnrl dak~ind the Elder of the Community (samgha-sthavira), and in-
dde~tavydi ti) volved the recitation of verses.
The Elder of the Community recites the verse for the We have, in fact, a fairly good idea of what-
sake of deceased donors. narratively-"assigning the reward" was: it was a ritu-
And a certain householder had come to a vihrlra. He alized recitation of a verse or verses which formally
heard the assigning of the reward. He approached the designated the beneficiaries of the merit produced from
Elder and said: "Noble One, if I have a vihrlra built will a specific donation or gift. Such designation could be
you assign a reward in my name also?" made to both the dead-as in our passage from the
The Elder said: "Have one built! I will duly make the ~ayandsana-vastu-or the living. In the Bhaisajya-
assignment." vastu, for example, at the end of a meal given by brah-
When that householder had had a vihdra built he had mins and householders, the Buddha himself "assigns
not given anything to it. It remained thus empty. When the reward" to their deceased kin who had become
that householder saw that, he went to the first vihrlra "hungry ghosts" (preta).
and said to the Elder: "Noble One, my vihdra remains
empty. Not a single monk lives there." Then the Blessed One, with a voice having five qual-
The Elder of the Community said: "Sir, it should be ities, commenced to assign the reward to the name of
made productive (utsvedya, snum pas so)." those hungry ghosts (tesam ndmnd daksindm ddestum
The householder said: "But Noble One, it has been pravyrrah):
built on sterile saline soil (bsare jamgale kdrirah). How
"The merit from this gift, may that
is it to be made productive?"
go to the hungry ghosts! (ito ddndd dhi yat punyam tat
"Householder, I did not mean it in that sense (ndham
pretdn upagacchatu)
erar samdhdya karhaydmi). But rather that there is no
acquisition (labha) there." May they quickly rise from the dreadful world of
The householder said: "Noble One, whoever hungry ghosts!"68
now lives in my vihdra, to him I present cloth"
(patendcchddaydmi).66 In the Sarighabheda-vastu, on the other hand, we find
at the end of the account of the gift of the Nyagrodha
This is an interesting fragment for a number of rea-
Park:
sons-it uses, for example, a term to describe the "dead"
donors, abhyatitakdlagata, which also occurs in inscrip- . . . ~uddhodanat ook up a golden water pot and pre-
tion~.~B'ut for our immediate purposes it is important
sented the Nyagrodha Park to the Blessed One, and the
above all for what it can contribute to our understanding
Blessed One, with a voice having five qualities, as-
of how monks understood, or expressed, the concerns of signed the reward (bhagavard . . . dak~indrl di~td):
lay donors.
The text is-as is the Sanskrit Miilasarvcistivdda- "The merit from this gift (ito ddndd dhi yat punyam),
vinaya as a whole-clipped and elliptical. It is, as al- may that go to the S2kyas! May they always attain the
ready noted, a narrative text, not a promulgatory one. station @ads) desired or wished!"69
What it assumes is as revealing as what it says. It starts
by explicitly stating that the Buddha had ruled that
"the reward should be assigned in the name of the dead
donors" of a vihdra. This clearly is obligatory for the 68 Dutt, Gilgit Manuscripts, iii. 1: 220.20.
monastic community. The narrative then seems to sug- 69 Gnoli, Sarighabheda-vastu, i:199:25. For additional refer-
ences to daksindm ddii- in the M~lasarvdstivrlda-vinayaand
gest that the redactor of the text assumed that this
elsewhere see G. Schopen, "On Avoiding Ghosts and Social
Censure: Monastic Funerals in the Mblasarvdstivrlda-vinaya,"
66 Gnoli, Sayandsana- and Adhikarana-vastus, 37.6-19 = Journal of Indian Philosophy 20 (1992): 12; 30, n. 43;
Tog, 'dul ba, Ga 286a.6-b.5. Schopen, "The Ritual Obligations and Donor Roles of Monks
67 E.g., H. Liiders, Mathurd Inscriptions, ed. K. L. Janert in the PBli Vinaya," Journal of the Pali Text Society 16
(Gottingen, 1961), no. 44, and 81 n. 1. (1992): 101-2.

546 Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
Whereas, in the first case, the assignment is explicitly to envision between monastery and donor, some strik-
to deceased kin, in the second it is to all members of ing parallels with what is known about the relationships
the lineage, and this could have included both living between donor and monastery in medieval Europe. But
and dead. In any case, it is virtually certain that a these cannot here be pursued.71 What we can do here is
reader of the Malasarvdstivdda-vinaya would have to note that the concern of the lay donors in our Vinaya-
seen in the ~ayandsana-vastua reference to a perfor- vibhariga passage, the concern that gives rise to the use
mance very much of this sort. of endowments, lending on interest and written con-
It was a ritual performance for the sake of dead do- tracts of debt, is-when seen in the light of the Sayand-
nors which the Sayandsana passage narratively isolates sana passages-almost certainly not about maintenance
as the motive behind its householder's construction of a only. It is as much about merit. Our endowments, and
vihara-this is what he hopes to gain: a, presumably, the legal instruments required to make them work, be-
recurring or on-going assignment of merit in his name gin, in fact, to appear as devices intended to insure not
after his death. But the point of the text is, of course, just the perpetual inhabitability of the vihdra, but an
that the construction of a vihdra is not in itself equally perpetual, a permanent source of on-going merit
sufficient to achieve this. To achieve the intended goal for its donor that would continue long after he or she
requires in addition that the vihdra be in use and inhab- were dead. Maintenance and merit are in fact closely
ited, and continue to be so. It requires, in short, the and causally linked: without maintenance there will not
presence of an Elder who will continue to perform the be continuing use; without continuing use there will not
assignment. This, in turn, requires further donation. be for the donor the "merit resulting from use." Without
The requirements, however, do not fall only on the do- provisions for the maintenance of the vihdra and its res-
nor. While he must further endow the monastery, the idents there will be no officiating Elder; without an
monks are obligated to perform the assignment. The officiating Elder the assignment of merit to the donor
monks, as well, have a further obligation, which is will not continue after his death. Both our Vibhariga
only implied here but explicitly stated in another pas- text and the first passage from the Sayandsana explic-
sage in the same vastu. itly identify the interests or anxieties of lay donors con-
The second passage makes it clear that if donors cerning what will occur after they are dead as the
have obligations, so too do the monks: religious problem that endowments and "acquisitions"
are meant to solve. Endowments were obviously seen
The devout had had many vihdras built, but very few by the monks-perhaps also by lay donors-as a
monks entered into the retreat in ~rxvasti.T hose vihd- permanent solution to the problem. They are, after
ras stood empty. For the donors there was no merit re-
sulting from use (ddnapatindm paribhogdnvayam
Here it will be sufficient to cite-as one of many possible
punyam nu bhavari, . . . longs spyod las byung ba'i bsod
examples-Lawrence's remarks given under the heading,
nams med cing). And ne'er-do-wells began to inhabit
"The Religious Motives for Endowment": "The merit that ac-
them.
crued to an individual [monk] through prayer and good works
The Blessed One said: All vihdras must be allotted,
could be applied to other people, and not only to living
two, three or four to each one individually, depending
people, but also to the dead. This concept played a crucial role
on how many there are. All must be used (same pari-
in Medieval religious practice. To found and endow a commu-
bhokra~~ah).~~
nity of monks was to ensure for the donor an unceasing fund
of intercession and sacrifice which would avail him and his
Here the rule is presented as firm: no presumably in-
relatives both in life and after death" (C. H. Lawrence, Medi-
habitable vihdra is to be allowed to stand empty. All
eval Monasticism: Forms of Religious Life in Western Europe
must be used. In fact, the text here, in regard to vihd-
in the Middle Ages, 2nd ed. [London and New York, 19891,
ras, refers to a specific category of merit: "merit result-
69; see also the very rich study of M. McLaughlin, Consorting
ing from use." Since a vihara must be used to generate
with Saints: Prayer for the Dead in Early Medieval France
such merit, it would seem to follow that continuous use
[Ithaca, N.Y., 19941). For what appears to be a much later
would generate continuous merit.
(16th cent.?) Indian legal instrument intended in part to assure
There are, in both these passages from the Sayand-
the post-mortem well-being of an individual, see J. D. M.
sana-vastu, in the web of mutual obligations they seem
Derrett, "KutB: A Class of Land-Tenures in South India,"
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 21
O' Gnoli, ~a~andsanaan-d Adhikarana-vastus, 35.1 = Tog, (1958): 61-81 [= Essays in Classical and Modern Hindu Law
'dul ba, Ga 284b.4. (Leiden, 1976), I:280-3021.

SCHOPEND:o ing Business for the Lord 547
all, called "perpetuities," or "permanent endowments." lections of rules that were composed to govern condi-
They were intended to insure not long term, but per- tions that did not exist. Here of course we can only offer
petual benefits to lay donors by insuring a permanent a sketch of the conflicting data.
source of merit. fitienne Lamotte-without necessarily wanting to
follow out the implications of what he said-noted
some years ago that
There is, of course, at least some appreciable irony
[i]f remarkable similarities can be discerned in the
in the fact that a monastic community whose official
outlines of the latter [i.e., the various vinayas]-and we
doctrine declared that 'all things are impermanent' was
are thinking particularly of the PBli, MahiSB[sa]ka and
devising or adopting legal and economic instruments
Dharmagupta Vinayas-this fact can be explained by a
explicitly intended to insure permanent benefits to lay
parallel development. The Buddhist communities did
donors. But endowments and lending on interest were
not live in complete isolation but were interested in the
not-at least as far as they are presented in the vi-
work carried out by their neighbors. It is therefore not
naya-intended only to meet the religious needs of the
surprising that they worked with the same methods and
more prominent supporters of the monastic commu-
followed practically the same plan. If nothing is more
nity. They were intended as well to meet certain insti-
like one Buddhist vihdra than another Buddhist vihara,
tutional needs, institutional needs which, indeed, might
it is normal that the various known vinayas should re-
be approximately dated.
veal the close link which connected them.72
It is, I think, fairly obvious that the problem for our
Vibhariga text, and for the ~ayandsanap assages, was
Lamotte's last sentence would seem to suggest that the
not getting vihdras built or funding their initial con-
various vinayas are alike because they all reflect the ex-
struction. The existence of permanent, durable vihdras
istence of a uniform, standardized and well-organized
is, in fact, taken very much for granted. Our texts too
vihdra. In fact, all our vinayas as we have them appear
take it for granted that these durable vihdras were
to presuppose such a uniform and developed monastery:
already both architecturally and institutionally well
they speak, for example, about doors and keysT3 and
organized. They assume that such vihdras were al-
elaborate divisions of about bathroom^'^ and
ready considerably beyond mere shelters and were
slaves or permanent labor forces,76a bout the acquisition
already, for example, multi-storied, were already- -p ro-
vided with separate "depositories" (kosthikd). They take
for granted that Buddhist monasteries were, signifi- 72 6t. Lamotte, History of Indian Buddhism: From the Ori-
cantly, already sufficiently well organized to administer gins to the aka Era, tr. S. Webb-Boin (Louvain-la-neuve,
the kinds of endowments they are recommending. They 1988), 179.
already know a community with a recognized adminis- 73 It will perhaps be sufficient, even representative, to cite
trative and ritual division of labor. They know both the here examples from the Pali Vinaya, which is still commonly
office of Elder and of Provost. They presuppose an es- held to be the "oldest" of the Vinayas, and from the Miilasar-
tablished ritual of "assigning the reward" to dead do- vrlstivrlda-vinaya, which is still commonly held to be the most
nors performed by the Elder. They presuppose that both recent (cf. 0.v. Hiniiber, "The Arising of an Offence, apatti-
Elder and Provost were already legally recognized rep- samuqhdna: A Note on the Structure and History of the
resentatives who could enter into binding contracts on TheravBda-Vinaya," Journal of the Pali Text Society 16
behalf of the community. In short, our texts-like all of [19921: 68 n. 13): PBli Vinaya ii 148.7ff (on doors and the
the vinayas as we know them-presuppose a stage of three kinds of keys); Dutt, Gilgit Manuscripts, iii.4:80.15 (ref-
development of the vihdra as both an architectural form erence to hiding the key to the "hall for religious exertion").
and an institution that should be at least partially visible 74 See, for convenience, the P2li material discussed in
in the archaeological record. But here we butt directly M. Njammasch. "Hierarchische Strukturen in den buddhisti-
up against an increasingly awkward problem: the stage schen Klostern Indiens in der ersten Halfte des ersten Jahr-
of architectural and institutional development of the tausends unserer Zeitrechnung: Untersuchungen zur Genesis
Buddhist monastery reflected in the vinayas as we have des indischen Feudalismus," Ethnographische-archaologische
them can be detected in the archaeological record only Zeitschrift 11 (1970): 515-39, esp. pp. 529ff.
at a period which is far later than that to which the 75 Pali Vinaya 119.19ff.; Dutt, Gilgit Manuscripts, iii.4:79.3.
composition of the vinayas is assigned by most schol- 76 Perhaps the most striking example here is the story of the
ars. This is a large problem and-as already noted-an monk Pilindavaccha, which occurs in two separate places in
awkward one: it seems to present us with enormous col- the PZli Vinaya (i:206.34ff. and iii:248.11ff.). Bimbisara gave

548 Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
of land, ownership rights, share-~ropping?s~o cial obli- Bodhgaya, RBjaglha, and Kasia, which were some of
gation~an~d~ t he problems of inheritan~eT.~h~es e are the earliest to be occupied by the Buddhists, no re-
the concerns of a landed institution with durable goods mains of any of these structures [i.e., those mentioned
and well-organized durable domiciles-the kind of insti- in the vinaya] have been found which can be referred
tution for which maintenance could have been an im- to pre-Mauryan times."80 He was, however, so sure that
portant concern, and which could have administered such structures simply must have existed that he then
permanent monetary endowments. But there is virtually goes to some trouble to account for their absence, and
no evidence in the archaeological record for this kind of his account will have a familiar ring to those who
monastic institution until very late, and it is beginning while away their time reading Indian art history: it is
to appear that both the degree and the rate of growth of the old perishable materials argument. This argument
Indian Buddhist monasticism has been grossly exagger- says that no trace of such structures survive because
ated. The history of the physical monastery, at least, they were made of perishable materials and, while es-
points very much in this direction. sentially the same argument has been used in regard to
We know, for example, in at least some important Buddhist cult images, in neither case does it appear to
areas, when the standard vihdra started to emerge- be overwhelmingly convincing. When, in fact, the
and it is not much before the beginning of the Common perishable material hypothesis is applied to Buddhist
Era. Sir John Marshall, among others, has noted "the cult images the evidence frequently appears to interfere
fact that even on such important sites as SBrnBth, with the argument,81 and much the same thing appears
to happen when it is applied to monastic architecture.
It should be noted without fudging that the evidence
for early vihnras is limited, but this itself may be signifi-
five hundred monastery attendants (drdmika)to the monk Pi-
cant. This observation holds especially for structural
lindavaccha and, the text says, "a distinct village established
sites, very few of which have been fully excavated. But
itself. They called it 'The Village of the Monastery Attendants'
one of the best preserved examples of an early vihdra oc-
and they also called it 'Pilinda Village"' (. . . pdTiyekko gdmo
curs at Taxila. It is a "range" of irregularly sized rooms
nivisi. drdmika-gdmako 'ti pi nam dhamsu pilindagdmako 'ti
strung out in a line west of the main stiipa. This type of
pi nam dhamsu-the translation is from I. B Horner, The Book
vihdra is, according to Marshall, characterized by its
of the Discipline, vol. IV [London, 19511, 282). Note that Ja-
"haphazard methods of planning and its lack of security
worski calls this story a "legende locale" and says it "n'a pas
and privacy for its inmates."82 It is, significantly, un-
d'equivalent en chinois," J. Jaworski, "Le section des remedes
walled and unprotected. This sorry little structure was
dans le vinaya des mahiSBsaka et dans le vinaya pali," Rocznik
very near the prosperous and already architecturally
Orjentalistyczny 5 (1927): 100 n. 14; for the MiilasarvBstivZ-
sophisticated settlement of Sirkap, and is not later than
din version of the story, see G. Schopen, "The Monastic Own-
the first century C.E. Equally unimpressive, though better
ership of Servants or Slaves: Local and Legal Factors in the
preserved, are the early excavations in western India.
Redactional History of Two Vinayas," Journal of the Interna-
Bhaja, "probably one of the oldest Buddhist religious
tional Association of Buddhist Studies 17 (1994).
centers in the Deccan," although it continued to be added
77 P2li Vinaya i 250.14: "Now at that time seeds belonging to until the first century c.E., is, for example, character-
to an Order were sown on ground belonging to an individual,
ized by an almost complete lack of order or standardiza-
and seeds belonging to an individual were sown on ground be-
tion, which suggests its makers had little experience in
longing to an Order. They told this matter to the Lord. He
planning a community whether in wood or stone-no two
said: 'When, monks, seeds belonging to an Order are sown on
ground belonging to an individual, having given back a por-
tion, (the rest) may be made use of. When seeds belonging to J. Marshall et al., The Monuments of Sdiichi (Delhi,
an individual are sown on ground belonging to an Order, hav- 1940), 1:63; cf. J. Marshall, Taxila: An Illustrated Account of
ing given back a portion, (the rest) may be made use of"-so Archaeological Excavations (Cambridge, 1951), 1:274, where
Horner, The Book of the Discipline, iv 347. he says, for example, "At the Dharmar2jikB at Taxila . . . there
78 See Schopen, Journal of the Pali Text Socier): 16 (1992): is not a vestige of any residential quarters which can be as-
87-107. signed to a date much earlier than the beginning of the Chris-
79 The inheritance of lay estates: PBli Vinaya ii 169.24; tian Era."
Dutt, Gilgit Manuscripts, iii.2: 139.6-143.14; inheritance of a Cf. G. Schopen, "On Monks, Nuns and 'Vulgar' Practices:
dead monks property: PBli Vinaya i 304ff.; Dutt, Gilgit Manu- The Introduction of the Image Cult into Indian Buddhism,"
scripts, iii.2:I 13ff. (cf. Schopen, Journal of Indian Philosophy Artibus Asiae 49.1-2 (1988-89), 165-66.
20 [1992]: 3ff.). Marshall, Taxila, 1:320.

SCHOPEND:o ing Business for the Lord 549
caves or viharas are organized the same way.83L ikewise, produced by ruling powers.85 In other words, enduring
the monastic complex at Junnar-Tuljalena in its early monumental architecture in perishable materials was
phases shows the same lack of order. Until about the be- available, but apparently out of reach of Buddhist mo-
ginning of the Common Era it is little more than a string nastic communitie~.~~
of irregularly shaped and placed single cells, not really Though, again, the evidence is far from full there is
very far removed from natural caves.84 It could, of other data pointing to the lack of early permanent Bud-
course, be argued that some of what we see at Junnar and dhist dwellings. The evidence, for example, in the
Bhaja can be explained by lack of experience with work- main body of ASoka's inscriptions for vihdras is very
ing in live rock, but this can hardly account for the lack thin. In the controversial eighth Rock Edict As'oka uses
of planning, nor can accumulated experience in cutting the term vihdra, in fact, in a decidedly curious way-if
rock alone account for the fact that organized, planned the term had then any Buddhist sense. He there con-
vihdras approaching the standardized vihdra begin to trasts his "tours for dharma," dhamma-yatta, with the
appear at both sites at almost exactly the same time that activity of earlier kings which he calls "tours for
the same organized plan begins to appear at a large num- pleasure," vihiira-yatta, where vihdra is used in the
ber of other sites. Planned and ordered space implies a sense of "diversion, enjoyment," et~.I~n 'h is so-called
planned, ordered and settled community-the kind of "Schism Edict," he does not again refer to vihdras
community that could have composed our vinayas in the when he talks about the expulsion of troublesome
full and final forms in which we have them and could monks, but to andvdsa and by implication to dvdsa. Al-
have used and administered "permanent endowments." though much discussed, the facts remain that dvdsa lit-
But what needs to be noted above all else is this: the erally means only an 'inhabited' or 'inhabitable' place,
earliest extant remains of monastic residential architec- that ASoka himself does not use the term vihdra, and
ture, like the earliest cult images in stone, show again a that dvdsa does not certainly refer to an architectural
tradition still struggling, in this case toward order, still form.88E qually curious and still difficult to understand
lacking a sense of functional organization and struc- are As'oka's directions as to what should be done with
tured use of space. Such a tradition-again like that this edict. Aioka says, in Hultzsch's translation:
which produced the early extant cult images-does not
suggest a long period of development or directed ex- Thus this edict must be submitted [vimnapayitaviye-
perimentation in wood or other perishable materials Bloch, probably more correctly: "I1 faut faire con-
preceding it. Moreover, even if, against the evidence,
we grant earlier viharas in perishable materials, the im-
plications of this may have been overlooked: such viha-
"For the sake of convenience, see B. Kumar, The Archae-
ology of Pataliputra and Nalanda (Delhi, 1987), 164ff., and
ras by definition could not have been durable or in any
the sources cited there.
signiJicant sense permanent. They would suggest a
poor and probably little organized-both socially and 86 Though it would lead too far afield to pursue it here, it
is-I think-safe to say that a careful study of extant, as op-
economically-community, a community that had little
posed to conjectured, early stlipas would arrive at the same
access to, or ability to exploit, any economic surplus.
point. Those stlipas which have some chance of being really
This seems especially so in light of the fact that we
early, and in regard to which we have some actual knowledge,
have traces of substantial works in such perishable ma-
are all very small, unimpressive affairs. This is the case with
terials, which have some chance of being Mauryan-
the stlipas at Bairat (R. B. D. R. Sahni, Archaeological Re-
the cyclopean city-wall of Rsjagrha and the curious
mains and Excavations ar Bairat [Jaipur, 19371, 28ff.; S. Pig-
elliptical structures there; the "stupendous timber pali-
gott, "The Earliest Buddhist Shrines," Antiquiry 17 [1943]: 1-
sade" at PZtaliputra and the massive teak wood plat-
lo), at Lauriya-Nandangayh (J. E. van Lohuizen-De Leeuw,
forms there; or the hypostyle hall found at Kumhrar-
"South-East Asian Architecture and the Stiipa of Nandan-
but none of these are Buddhist, all appear to have been
gayh," Artibus Asiae 19 [1956]: 282ff. and fig. 2), at Junnar-
Tuljalena (Nagaraju, Buddhist Architecture of Western India,
83 See S. Nagaraju, Buddhist Architecture of Western India 133-34), etc.
(c. 250 KC.-c. A.D. 300) (Delhi, 1981), 113-30, and the 87 E. Hultzsch, Inscriptions of Asoka, Corpus Inscriptionum
ground plans given in figs. 23-25. Indicarum, vol. I (Oxford, 1925), 14, 36, 60, etc. J. Bloch, Les
84 Nagaraju, Buddhist Architecture of Western India, 133- Inscriptions d'Asoka (Paris, 1950), 11 1.
40, and plans in fig. 27. Nagaraju says, ". . . here are the ear- "For a recent discussion see K. R. Norman, "ASoka's
liest Buddhist excavations among the inland group of caves in 'Schism' Edict," Bukkydgaku seminSi 46 (1987): 1-33, esp.
Western Deccan." pp. 9-10, 25-26 and ns. 4, 19.

550 Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
naitre . . . a] both to the Samgha of monks and to the have been a poor and unimpressive complex; many of
Samgha of nuns. the small sriipas, revetments, enclosing walls, and small
Thus speaks DevBnBmpriya: monastic cells appear to have been crudely made of
Let one copy of the (edict) remain with you [i.e., the ad- "rubble." These contrast with the main stiipa and its
ministrative officials-mahamdta-?] deposited in (your) chatra, which, however, are clearly later-the nun do-
office [samsalana]; and deposit ye another copy of the nors of the latter may in fact be linked with SBAci. What
very (edict) with the lay worshippers.89 has been taken to be the main monastic complex-on
the walls of which the ASokan record occurs-as well
Here again, where one might expect a reference to as most of the residential cells, are little more than
monasteries, there is none. There is no indication that a natural caves or rock shelters with slight improvements.
"copy" of this edict was deposited in the "office" of the To judge by the primitive rock art in some of them,
group it most concerned-no indication that there was these were probably old, abandoned cave-dwellings.92
such an "office" where they were located. Likewise, in This-rather than a romantic vision of NZlanda-
the even more difficult Rummindei Pillar inscription, appears to be what a Buddhist "monastery" looked like
ASoka seems to imply-especially as Hultzsch under- 'as late as' the time of ASoka.
stands the text-that he was the first to mark the spot Even considerably after ASoka, however, there are
of Buddha's birth: "(He) . . . caused a stone pillar to be no references to vihdras. In none of the hundreds of
set up, (in order to show) that the Blessed One was donative records from Bharhut, SZAci and Pauni does
born here." But contrary to what we might have ex- the term occur. The scores of monk and nun donors at
pected, if there had been a permanent community at the these sites never identify themselves as from or resi-
site, he then extends his largesse not to a monastery dents of any vihdra, but rather-exactly like lay do-
there, but to the village of Lummini itself: "(He) made nors-by their natal or residential villages.93 Even
the village of Lummini free of taxes, and paying (only) more curious is the fact that the only expression even
an eighth share (of the produce)."90 vaguely like vihdra that occurs at early SIAci is not
The only possible reference in the ASokan material to even a Buddhist word, but rather a common upanisadic
a vihdra is problematic. It may occur in the "cover term.
letter" attached to the recently discovered version of On several of the gateways of the rail surrounding
Minor Rock Edict I found at Panguraria in Madhya the main stiipa at SaAci, variant versions of the follow-
Pradesh. Sircar translates the lines in question: "The ing imprecation occurs:
king named Priyadariin [speaks] to KumZra ~amva
from [his] march [of pilgrimage] to the U(O?)punitha- He shall have the fate of the perpetrators of five sins
vihLra in MZnema-desa (. . . mdnema-des[e] [u]punitha- (pamc-dnamtarya), who dismantles, or causes to be
vihdra- [ya]tdy[e]).9' As the bristle of brackets shows,
the readings are uncertain; the published facsimiles are
extremely difficult to read; this statement has no paral- 92 For the site see B. K. Thapar, ed., Indian Archaeology
1975-76: A Review (New Delhi, 1979), 28-30, and pls.
lels in the fifteen or so other versions of this edict-it
xxxix-xli; H. Sarkar, "A Post-Asokan Inscription from Pan-
is, in short, profoundly problematic. But whether or not
goraria in the Vindhyan Range," in Sri Dinesacandrika:
the term vihnra occurs in the inscription, or whether the
Studies in Indology, Shri D. C. Sircar Festschrift, ed. B. N.
possible vihdra mentioned can be identified with the
Mukherjee et al. (Delhi, 1983), 403-5, and pls. 73-75. (This
site at which the record was recovered, that site itself is
contains a note on the site by K. D. Banerjee and an edition of
of interest. It represents, at least a part of it, the remains
the later "chatra inscriptionn-the latter is also treated in S. S.
of another Mauryan monastic site, and although it has
Iyer, "Panguraria Brahmi Inscription," Epigraphia Indica 40
so far only been partially published it appears, again, to
(1973, but 19861: 119-20 and pl.).
93 See, for example, all the inscriptions listed under "Dona-
89 Hultzsch, Inscriptions of Asoka, 163: Bloch, Les Inscrip- tions by Inhabitants of Certain Places" in Liiders, Bharhut In-
tions d'Asoka, 152-53; cf. Norman, Bukky6jiaku semind 46 scriptions, AS-54. Note what might be traces of the same sort
(1987): 101-2. of situation, of "monks" living in villages, in what are consid-
90 Hultzsch, Inscriptions of Asoka, 164; Bloch, Les Inscrip- ered the oldest parts of the Pali Canon; e.g., Suttanipdta
tions d'Asoka, 157. 971: . . . yatacdri gdme, which K. R. Norman translates
91 D. C. Sircar, ASokan Studies (Calcutta, 1979), 94-103. " . . . living in a restrained way in a village" (K. R. Norman,
esp. pp. 101-2; Sircar, "Panguaria Inscription of Asoka," Epi- The Rhinoceros Horn and Other Early Buddhist Poems [Lon-
graphia Indica 39 (1971, but 1981): 1-8. don and Boston, 19851, 157).

SCHOPEND:o ing Business for the Lord 55 1
dismantled, the stone work from this Kakanava [i.e., the monks "building a fire to smoke out those who take too
old name for S%iici],o r causes it to be transferred to an- long in the latrine,"96 or stipulating, for another example,
other church . . . 94 that "when seeds belonging to an individual are sown on
ground belonging to an Order, having given back a por-
The phrase here translated by Majumdar "to another tion, (the rest) may be made use of" by the
church" is anam.. . dcariya-kulam. The use of "an- But if, then, the early Buddhist monastic communi-
other" clearly implies that Kakanava or SaAci-the ties which are visible in the archeological record ap-
whole complex-was thought of as belonging to the pear to have been utterly incapable of compiling our
same category. It was not called a monastery or vihara, vinayas, and completely unsuited to administering
then, but a "church" or, more accurately, "a house of elaborate endowments, the question still remains as to
the teacher." But although it occurs at least 500 years when they did achieve a level of material and institu-
later in a sectional colophon to the MahBvamsa, the tional development which would have allowed both-
term dcarya-kula has a much closer and more signifi- when, in fact, did it become true that "nothing is more
cant context. It is in fact an established usage in the like one Buddhist vihdra than another Buddhist vi-
Upanisads. Chdndogya 2.23.1 says, for example: hdra." A reasonably clear and closely approximate an-
swer to this question has, oddly enough, been available
There are three branches of duty. Sacrifice, study of for some time.
the Vedas, alms-giving-that is the first. Austerity, Marshall, again, noted some time ago that the vihdra
indeed, is the second. A student of sacred knowledge Lamotte seems to have had in mind, the ordered "quad-
dwelling in the house of a teacher, settling himself rangular, high-walled monastery or vihdra . . . seems to
permanently in the house of a teacher, is the third have made its first appearance in the sarighdrarnas of
(brahmacdryricdrya-kula-vdsiti-tiyo 'tyantam ritmdnam the northwest during the first century A.D., and thence
dcriryakule 'vas~ida~an).~~ to have found its way southward and eastward to the
rest of India." He also said: ". . . before the close of the
All of this would seem to suggest the need for a con- first century the old type of sarighdrarna, with its hap-
siderable review of our notions of the degree of devel- hazard methods of planning and its lack of security and
opment of pre-Kusan Buddhist monasticism. But that, I privacy for its inmates had disappeared. . . the living
submit, is exactly what we might have expected to quarters of the monks . . . are now securely enclosed in
emerge when Buddhist institutional history was treated a walled-in quadrangle. . . ."98 The standardized, or-
with the same methods and criteria of evidence that per- dered vihdra, then, began to appear almost everywhere
tain to every other kind of history, and when all types of in the archaeological record just before and just after
sources were taken into account, without privileging the the beginning of the Common Era. It was then, too,
literary or canonical. Happily, however, such a review is that Buddhist monastic communities appear to have
not here our responsibility. Here we had only to make a had access to the economic resources that would have
case-however sketchy-for the unlikelihood that mo- allowed them for the first time to build on a wide scale
nastic communities like those at early Taxila or Bhaja or in durable materials like stone and baked-brick.
Junnar or Panguraria could have compiled the monastic Marshall explained the observable change in type
codes that we have, or could have even conceived of and construction of the vihara by saying, in part, that
permanent endowments for purposes of maintenance,
let alone written contracts of debt. It seems to me, in
fact, very unlikely that monastic communities housed in
poorly made and disorganized, impermanent structures, 96 See C. Hallisey, "Apropos the PBli Vinaya as a Historical
Document: A Reply to Gregory Schopen," Journal of the Pali
or in open, crudely cut caves or abandoned rock-shelters,
Text Society 15 (1991): 207.
could have had either the need or the means to redact
elaborate codes containing rules against, for example, 97 See n. 77 above.
98 Marshall, Taxila, 1:233; 320; cf. Marshall et al., The
Monuments of Sdtichi, 1:63-64: "As a fact, it was not until the
Kushan period that the self-contained monastery, which we
94 Marshall et al., The Monuments of Sdtichi, 1: no. 404; cf. are wont particularly to associate with the Buddhist sari-
298. ghdrdma, made its appearance in the Northwest of India, and
95 S. Radhakrishnan, The Principal Upani~ads(London, not until the early Gupta Age that it found its way into Hin-
1953), 374; R. E. Hume, The Thirteen Principal Upanishads, dustan and Central India"-the last part of which is in need of
2nd rev. ed. (Oxford, 1931), 200-201. revision.

552 Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
the wide acceptance of the standard form "was proba- dowments to maintain them. Such endowments pre-
bly due in large measure to the changing character of suppose a justifiable expectation that what they were
the [Buddhist] church, which was everywhere tending intended to support would endure. Moreover, as has al-
to substitute regular, settled monasticism for the wan- ready been noted, such endowments also presuppose an
dering life, and to relax its rules pertaining to strict as- equally permanent and ordered institutional structure
ceticism and the possession of property."99 The precise that could administer them. Our text, then, was almost
wording here might need some readjustment, but not, certainly not written until both things were in place,
probably, the basic point. What, however, Marshall did and the archeological record would seem to suggest that
not say needs to be stated: the development of the stan- this could not have been the case much before the be-
dard vihara, the emergence of this form is clearly visi- ginning of the Common Era. But if it is unlikely that
ble in the archeological record beginning around the our Vibhariga text could have been written much before
Common Era, but that form-and all that it implies-is the Common Era, it is also unlikely that it was written
the type of vihdra which our vinayas, as we have them, much after the second century, when we know that such
are intended to govern. Unless one wants to assume perpetual endowments were already in use. Their effec-
that rules are written to govern behavior that does not tive use would seem to require rules governing both
occur, or that elaborate procedures are developed to them and written or legal contracts of the sort found so
meet needs that do not exist, then one is forced to con- far in the Vinaya only in our text.
clude that our vinayas could not have been compiled in A date in the first or second century of the Common
the form that we know them until after the beginning Era for our Vibhariga text would seem to fit well with,
of the Common Era. It is, for example, hardly likely and in fact confirm-or be confirmed by-what has
that a monastic code like the Pali Vinaya, which con- been said about written contracts in Hindu dharmaias-
tains rules in regard to planting seeds in land owned by tra. Manu, for example, is generally assigned a date
the Community, could have been compiled before the "between 200 B.C.a nd A.D. 100,"Io2 and while it knows
Community owned land, and the first actual evidence of written contracts and deeds (VIII. 168; 255), they re-
for this too comes from the first century C.E.IOO It is, ceive little attention. Yrijiiavalkya, on the other hand,
again, hardly likely that the rules in the Pali Vinaya which is assigned to the first or second century, "gives
which have the Buddha say, "Monks, I allow them preference to documentary evidence" and-as we have
[i.e., vihdras] to be enclosed in three kinds of walls seen-"gives very detailed rules about the drawing up
(pakdra): walls of burnt brick (iffhaka-pdkara), walls of legal documents."103 Though it would be easy here
of stone (sila-), walls of wood (dahu-),"Io1 could have to over-extended what little evidence there is, it does
been redacted before such walls were known, and they seem that YrTjiiavalkya has a more developed-cer-
were not, until the beginning of the Common Era. tainly a more detailed-treatment of written con-
Considerations of this sort, and determining the tracts,Io4 and it is at least possible to suggest that our
period at which durable ordered viharas were first built, Vibhariga text falls somewhere between Manu and
allows us more specifically to determine the period be- Ya~iiavalkya,b ut how close to the latter is not clear.
fore which it is very unlikely that our Vibhariga text on Yajiiavalkya may, in fact, also be the first dharmaias-
perpetuities could have been written. Though ironic, it tra to explicitly refer to Buddhist monks.Io5
is almost certainly true that only the emergence of du-
rable architecture could have created the idea and need
of perpetual maintenance. Buildings in flimsy or perish- Io2 J. D. M. Derrett, Dharmahistra and Juridical Literature,
A History of Indian Literature, ed. J. Gonda, part of vol. IV
able materials would have had a life-expectancy con-
(Wiesbaden, 1973), 31.
siderably short of perpetual, and could hardly have
given rise to the notion or felt need for perpetual en- '03 R. Lingat, The Classical Law of India, tr. J. D. M. Der-
rett (Berkeley, 1973), 99-100.
Io4 There is at least one significant difference. Yijjtiavalkya
99 Marshall, Taxila, 1:324. (11.5.96-97) gives detailed procedures for recording partial
loo See the Alluru inscription cited above in n. 22 and the repayments and for-when the debt is repaid-nullifying the
well known Mathura Lion Capital Inscription (S. Konow, written contract or writing a "receipt" (cf. Chatterjee, The Law
Kharoshrhi Inscriptions, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, of Debt in Ancient India, 345-48). But our Vinaya passage
vol. 2, pt. 1 [Calcutta: 19291, 48-49) for two of the earliest knows nothing of this.
inscriptional references to donation of land to Buddhist Io5 But see J. Filliozat, "La valeur des connaissances grkco-
communities. romaines sur l'lnde," Journal des savants, avril-juin (1981):
lo' Pali Vinaya ii 121.2. 11 3 n. 32.

SCHOPEND:o ing Business for the Lord 553
One sometimes has the impression in reading works formalizing of the economy in the areas in which it op-
on dharmafdstra that it is assumed that developments erated, and would have required first such things as
occurred within a closed system of ideas, or between written contracts.
texts, without reference to what occurred or was occur- But having said this much, it must be said as well
ring in the world. The change from Manu to YdjEa- that the chronological boundaries suggested above are,
valkya in regard to written contracts, for example, is of course, not firm enough on either side to rule out the
often presented as if it were only a further refinement distinct possibilities that our Vibhariga text and Ydj-
or sophistication in legal technique or theory which had iiavalkya are, rather, close contemporaries, or even that
no connection with changes in the social or economic the Vibhariga text is later than, and dependent on Ydj-
world that that technique or theory was intended to fiavalkya in its rules for written contracts. Against this
govern. But it is possible, if not altogether more rea- possibility is only the noticeable-though not great-
sonable, to assume that changes in a legal system are differences in the degree of their detail. But if the Vi-
responding to changes in the social or economic sys- bhariga text is later, it probably cannot be much later,
tems to which they are connected. Seen from this since-as already noted-Buddhist monastic commu-
angle-the angle I have here taken in regard to the nities were already dealing with perpetual endowments
vinaya-what may well lie between Manu and Ydj- in the first or second century. Moreover, the Vinaya
fiavalkya is not merely our Vibhanga text, but, more text explicitly and directly links the use of written con-
importantly, the emergence in India of a new type tracts with such endowments, and these, at least, could
of social institution with considerable economic clout: not have been derived from Ydjiiavalkya since he
the fully institutionalized, permanently housed, landed knows nothing of them. These and other possibilities
monastery. It is perhaps too easy to forget how remark- must remain unsure.Io8 What is less unsure, however, is
able and-in significant ways-unprecedented such an that what Yajfiavalkya says, for example, in regard to
institution was in the social history of early India. Its written contracts, or, indeed, what dharmafdstra says
cumulative impact must have been felt in many areas, in regard to a whole host of topics, may now have to be
and it is not unlikely that fully institutionalized Bud- seen in light of similar discussions in Buddhist vinaya,
dhist monasticism in India-like its counterpart in and certainly Buddhist vinaya-especially, it seems,
early medieval Europe-produced or stimulated the de- the Miilasarvdstivdda-vinaya-can no longer be stud-
velopment of a whole range of bureaucratic and legal ied in isolation from dharmaidstra. Finally, it is be-
devices.lo6 A good case could be made, for example, coming ever clearer that the Miilasarviistivdda-vinaya
for suggesting that the concept of the juristic personal- may have particularly close ties to brahmanical con-
ity arose first in India in regard to the Buddhist sarigha cerns, and this, in turn, may again suggest that it was
and stiipa, not in regard to the Hindu "Idol."107 It is redacted by a community deeply embedded in the
also likely that such an institution would have provided larger Indian, brahmanical world. It may in fact turn
a strong impulse towards the depersonalization and out to be the mainstream Indian vinaya. Time will tell.
lo' See, for example, J. A. Raftis, "Western Monasticism '08 A large part of the problem has, of course, to do with
and Economic Organization," Comparative Studies in Society what Lariviere has so gracefully called the "chronological
and History 3 (1961): 452-69; K. J. Conant, "Observations on house of cards" that has been built up for dharmaidstra (La-
the Practical Talents and Technology of the Medieval Bene- riviere, Narada, 2:xix ff.). Dates for Ydjtiavalkya in particular
dictines," in Cluniac Monasticism in the Central Middle Ages, have varied widely-it has been assigned to the 4th or even
ed. N. Hunt (London, 1971): 77-84; etc. 6th century C.E. (Lingat, The Classical Law of India, 99-100).
Io7 See G. Schopen, "Burial 'Ad Sanctos' and the Physical Should such later dates turn out to be correct, then Ydjtia-
Presence of the Buddha in Early Indian Buddhism: A Study in valkya would be considerably later than our Vinaya text.
the Archaeology of Religions," Religion 17 (1987): 206-9;
Schopen, Journal of Indian Philosophy 18 (1990): 197-200.

Journal of the American Oriental Society 114.4 (1994)
REFERENCES
The Tog Palace Manuscript of the Tibetan Kanjur [= Tog] , The Gilgit Manuscripts of the ~ayancisanavastua nd
(Leh, 1975-80). the Adhikaranavastu (Rome, 1978).
P. V. Bapat and V. V. Gokhale, Vinaya-siitra and Auto- L. S. Joshi, DharmakoSa: Vyavahcirakcinda (Poona, 1937-41).
Commentary on the Same (Patna, 1982). R. P. Kangle, The Kaufiliya ArthaScistra, parts 1-111, 2nd ed.
A. W. Barber, The Tibetan Tripitah, Taipei Edition [= Derge] (repr. Delhi, 1986).
(Taipei, 1991). R. W. Lariviere, The Nciradasmrti (Philadelphia, 1989).
L. Chandra, Tibetan-Sanskrit Dictionary (New Delhi, 1959- V.N . Mandlik, ~cinava-~harma-~cis(tBraombay, 1886; repr.
1961; rep. Kyoto, 1971). 1992).
N. Dutt, Gilgit Manuscripts, vol. 111, parts 1-4 (Srinagar and H. Oldenberg, The Vinaya Pifakam (London, 1879-85).
Calcutta, 1947-50). G. N.Roerich, TH~~TCKO-pycc~o-~H~~cHnRoBCaKpHb Rc caH-
T. Ganapati Sastri, The Ycijiiavalkyasmrti (Trivandrum, 1921- CKPHTCKHMH napannenmu (Moscow, 1983-87).
22; repr. 1982). R. Sankrityayana, Vinayasiitra of Bhadanta Gunaprabha (Bom-
R. Gnoli, The Gilgit Manuscripts of the Sarighabhedavastu bay, 1981).
(Rome, 1977-78). Y. Zhang, Bod rgya tshig mdzod chen mo (Peking, 1985).