m

LIBRARY
UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA
SAN OIEGO
PRIZE PUBLICATION FUND.
Founded by the generosity of
H.H. THE RAJA OF COCHIN, K.C.S.I.,
THE MAHARAJA GAJAPATI RAO. C.I.E.,
THE RAJA OF PARLAKIMEDI,
and other Chiefs and Gentlemen of Southern India.

DAVID
A.

2 O
/
PRIZE PUBLICATION FUND
VOL. II
THE
PALI LITERATURE OF
BURMA
BY
MABEL HAYNES BODE
Pn.D.
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE
ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY
AND SOLD AT
22 ALBEMABLE STREET
1909

ABBREVIATIONS
BEFEO. Bulletin de I'Ecole Franfaise d'ExtrSme Orient. Hanoi.
1901, etc.
GV. Gandhavamsa(JPTS.). 1886. Index, 1896.
JPTS. Journalofthe Pali Text Society. London. 1882, etc.
JRAS. Journalofthe RoyalAsiatic Society. London. 1834,etc.
P.TH. Pitakatthamain. Rangoon. 1906.
P.T.S. Pali Text Society.
SVD. Sasanavamsadlpa. Colombo. 1881.

BIBLIOGKAPfllCAL NOTES
Students may consult with advantage
I. The whole ofthe Pali Text Society's publications (for the older Pali
literature). Frowde. London, 1882, etc.
II. Translations ofthe same which haveappearedin various languages
(see theusefulbibliography ofworks on Buddhism, by Mr.A. J.Edmunds,
in theJournal ofthe Pali Text Society, 1902).
Particularly interesting for comparison of Burmese versions with
Pali arethe translations of Jatakas from the Burmese, by Mr. R. F.
St. Andrew St. John, in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,
years 1892, 1893, 1894, 1896. [Of. the Jataka, translated from the
Pali by various hands under the editorship of E. B. Cowell. 6 vols.
Cambridge, 1895, etc.]
III. Bibliographies and Cataloguesasfollows :
1. Bibliographies.
(a) General. Scherman (Professor L.). Oriental Bibliography.
(Quarterly.) Berlin, London, Paris, and New York.
(b) Indo-China. Cordier (Henri). Essai d'une bibliographfa des
ouvrages relatifs a la presqu'Ue indo-chinoise. Premiere partie
Birmanie et Assam. ToungPao, serie II, vol. vi.
(c) Burma. Ireland (Alleyne). The Province of Burma, a report
preparedfor the University of Chicago (with extensive bibliography).
Houghton, Mifflin, & Co. Boston and New York, 1906.
2. Catalogues.
(a) The catalogues ofPali and Burmese MSS. and printed books in
the Oriental Department ofthe British Museum.
(b) Thesamein the India Office Library.
(c) The alphabetical listofmanuscripts and books in the Bernard
Free Library at Rangoon, by C. Duroiselle. This collection offers
an excellent field for research, being under the care of Professor
Duroiselle, who, in his large and intimate knowledge of Burmese
literature, stands alone among Palists.
(d) Catalogues of Pali and Burmese MSS. in the Bibliotheque
Nationale, Paris.
IV. Finally, afew examples may be given from the mass of Pali and
Burmese books in the British Museum. They consist chiefly of editions
of celebrated Pali works, commentariesby Burmese authors, anthologies,
and translations into the vernacular. The descriptions are borrowedfrom
Dr. Barnett's catalogue.
Canonical Works. Suttapitaka (entire). Edited by Ko Aung Min
Hsaya and others. 1904.

Vlll BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
Cariyapitaka, with Bxirmese exegetical commentary. Mandalay,
1899.
Milindapaiihavatthu. Burmese translation from the Milinda.
Rangoon, 1882.
Abhidhamma. Abhidhammatthasangaha, of Anuruddha, followed
by Surnangalasami's Ttka-Kyaw or Abhidhammattha-vibhavani in
elucidation thereof, and copious Burmese commentary. Rangoon,
1898.
Manimedhajotaka Kyan. A Burmese treatise on Buddhist
psychology, based on the Abhidhammatthasangaha, and illustrated
from Pali texts. Maulmein, 1882.
Sankhepavyakarana. Burmese epitome of Abhidhamma doctrine
as codified in the Abhidhammatthasaugaha, illustrated from Pali
texts. Rangoon, 1899.
Paramatthamedhani Kyan. Treatise on the four conditions of the
absolute. Illustrated from Pali Texts. Rangoon, 1895.
Grammar. Maharupasiddhi,with Burmese interpretation. Rangoon,
1906.
Nvadi-Moggallana. Pali treatise on Grammar, by Sangharakkhita,
based on the Grammar of Moggallana, with Burmese nissaya.
Rangoon, 1900.
Alankara-nissaya. Being the Subodhalamkara of Sangharakkhita
in Pali, with commentary. Rangoon, 1889.
Dhatvatthudipaka. Treatise in Pali verse on the significations of
Pali roots, by Aggadhammalamkara, with Burmese commentary.
Rangoon, 1899.
Law. Navadhammasattha,byHsin-pyu-mya-shin,kingofToungoo.
A Pali digest of nine law-books. Law of Inheritance. Edited with
Burmese translation. Akyab, 1894.
Veda. Makaranda-bedin-let-yo-Tika, commentary on the
Makaranda-bedin, handbook of astrology. Mandalay, 1905.

INTRODUCTION
THE Pali literature of Burma owes its existence to the Pali
literature of India. It is many years since the latter was
first explored by the great scholars and pioneers Fausboll,
Lassen, Rhys Davids, Trenckner, Childers, Oldenberg whose
reward has been a gain to Oriental learning vast enough to
content even them. With time a part of the material
discovered has been brought within the reach of students
by critical editing. Buddhistic literature is immense in
quantity and bewildering in varied interest, and it was never
more difficult than now to avoid being too much of the
But the student of Buddhism who limits himself
specialist.
to one language or looks for solution of all questions in one
literature risks slipping into an orthodoxy of his own.
A
sounder principle has long guided Buddhist studies ;
modern research has gone forth, like Asoka's missionaries,
to Further India, China, Japan, Tibet, Siam, and French
Indo-China, armed with patience as they were with conviction,
as resolutely determined to learn as they were to teach.
There is need nowadays to seek further in Burma, or rather,
need to be better acquainted with what has already been
found there. Among the countries in which the ideas and
traditions of Buddhism are inseparably bound up with the
Pali canon Burma possesses a special interest which we hardly
feel in the case of Ceylon, for Burma shows how the leaven
of Indian thought worked in a race and idiom having none
of the close relationship with India which we recognize in
We
all that is most characteristic of the literature of Ceylon.
may say that the essentially Indian genius, the psychological
subtleties, and high thoughts of Buddhism have forced the
Burmese language to grow, deepen, and expand continually.
When Burmese was at last raised (in or about the fourteenth
century) to the level of a literary language, it was by the
addition of a great body of Indian words necessary to express
ideas beyond the scope of that picturesque vernacular. Being

X INTRODUCTION
an agglutinative language, Burmese lacks the force, terseness,
and delicacy that Pali owes to its nominal and verbal inflections
and its power of forming elaborate compounds. Thus before
the translating period, authors of Burmese race had studied
Pali and learned to use it; ever since the twelfth century it
has been a tradition of Burmese scholars to produce literary
work in Pali, and it is with this work only that we are now
concerned.
A survey of the Pali literature of Burma is not quite a new
undertaking. In the year 1879 a report on the subject was
drawn up for the Government of India by Dr. Emil Forch-
hammer, Professor of Pali at Rangoon, who had begun a
thorough search for manuscripts in monasteries and private
collections, and whose premature death cruelly cut short a work
full of promise. This and other reports of Forchhammer, on
the archaeological remains of Arakan and Burma, are Govern-
ment publications; and his studies of Buddhist law (published
by Sir John Jardine with his own valuable Notes, 1882-3, and
in the Jardine Prize Essay) are now extremely rare books, and
the stores of knowledge they contain are not available at every
moment. And we ought also to profit by the labours of that
brilliant and far-seeing scholar Minayeff, to whom we owe
the discovery and publication (to mention only one work) of
the Gandhavamsa (' Book History'), written in Burma, a short
but interesting account of the earlier Pali literature of Ceylon
and Burma. The Gandhavamsa is unfortunately very sparing
of details, and gives us little information as to the period of
the works it enumerates, but its help is most useful in settling
some questions of authorship and place. Minayeff, who used
this book for his Noitvelles Recherches sur le Bouddhimie,
does not offer any conclusion as to its date, but from com-
parison with the Sasanavamsa and a still more modern Burmese
work, the Pitakatthamainl (1906), it appears to be a seven-
teenth century production.
For both the early and modern periods (from the twelfth to
1 I have to thank ProfessorBarnettforbringing to mynoticethis useful
Burmese bibliography ofBuddhist works.

INTRODUCTION XI
the nineteenth centuries) we find great help in the Sasana-
vamsa,1 which, happily,observes the good traditions of Burmese
chronicles and cares for chronology. 2 It enables us at least
to sketch in outline a connected story, while but for this record
we could only enumerate works of doubtful date and mention
auth'ors without knowing what period in the growth of their
country and Order had brought them forth. The Sasanavamsa,
though a very mine of interest as compared with the arid little
Gandhavamsa, has its limitations. It is confused, rambling,
and prejudiced. The author, a high ecclesiastic of Min-don-
min's reign, belonged by all his convictions and traditions to
the Sihalasangha, an important school or sect having, as the
name shows, a close connexion with the fraternity in Ceylon.
As for the other communities, whose spiritual forefathers
refused to look on the Mahavihara, that famous monastery of
the old commentators, as the very centre and hearth of
orthodoxy, they interest him only moderately. He will some-
times dismiss one of their authors with the driest, curtest
mention of the man and his book, while he will delight us
with details and anecdotes of more orthodox writers. It
would be interesting to have the picture filled in for us by
a biographer influenced by the old Taking tradition, the
tradition, that is, of Lower Burma. For this school, known as
the Mrammasahgha (fraternity of Burma), maintained that
there was no need to have recourse to Ceylon for teachers in
the unbroken 'line of descent ' from the ancient missionaries.
This question, almost impossible to settle with certainty, after
the vicissitudes that the Buddhist Samgha had seen in both
countries, divided the Order in Burma with a sharp line of
1 This text (edited for the Pali Text Society in 1897 by the present
writer) has supplied much material for the following chapters. Other
sources have been used to verify or correct where it has been possible.
The whole of the Sasanavamsa's literary information, as far as itconcerns
Burma, is given in thecourse ofthe present work.
2 I have thought it best to adopt throughout thisessay the chronology
of my two principal Burmese authorities, Panuasami and the author of
the Pitakatthamaiu. But I mustremind the readerthat their (traditional)
starting-point, the Nirvanaofthe Buddha, is no longer placed byscholars
at 544 B.C. but some sixty years later. See article by Dr. Fleet, JRAS.,
April, 1909, The Origin ofthe Buddhavarsha.

XI INTRODUCTION
1
partisanship. Therefore we must beware of considering the
Sasanavamsa a complete record of monastic work. Nevertheless
the author's own point of view is instructive, and we have no
right to say that he does not try to be impartial. And if we
follow only his guidance in our choice of the books to explore
we must arrive at some knowledge of what is, after all, of the
most interest in such researches we can see the intellectual
;
development of Burma through Buddhism and the adaptation
of the non-Indian mind to Indian culture, with the conception
of science and the standard of literary art evolved in that
adapting process.
We
cannot, of course, do justice to these questions in a short
sketch. The effect of Indian Buddhism on Burmese life and
We
literature has many manifestations. can instance some
as widely apart as codified law and religious art. In the
remote past we find both Brahmanic and Buddhistic sources of
Burmese written law. And the religious art of the country
is by no means without its problems (for example, the extent
of Mahayiina or 'Northern' influence), which those who are
masters of this subject are gradually solving for us.1 So the
subject spreads in its fascinating complexity, if we will let it,
far beyond our simpler theme but it must suffice for this
;
essay to follow (if with less serene confidence) the way marked
out by the devout and simple scholars of Burma, who have
left us a literature derived entirely from the Pali canon and
representing almost invariably the Hinayana 2 traditions of
Buddhist belief.
Beginning with the study of the language consecrated in
Ceylon as the instrument of the highest teaching, then com-
menting and composing in Pali and at last interpreting that
teaching in their native tongue, the Burmese monks have left
us a complete revelation of their mind. Neither the sculpture,
painting, legends, plays, customs, nor law-codes of the Burmese,
1 See p. vii.
2 This Buddhist phrase, 'the lesser vehicle,' may be employed as
aconvenientterm for the tradition as observed in the southern countries
early won to Buddhism,atradition more soberin its legend and somewhat
more austere and practical in its morality than the Mahayana (or school
ofthe 'greatervehicle
').

INTRODUCTION XI11
significant as they are, could serve to show us what their
religious literature alone unfolds their manner of grappling
with an abstract subject.
Buddhism, as any other Indian system would have done,
gave them a large opportunity. They did their best with it.
But' Buddhist theories demanded an effort of abstraction
doubly severe for learners whose first lesson in philosophy
was learned with those theories.1 In India, where certain
of the Upanisads belonged to a yet earlier phase of thought
than the doctrines of Gotama, men's minds were prepared for
A
Buddhist conceptions. philosophical language was already
formed in which the teacher or the disputant could lead his
hearers step by step in an idiom they knew to conclusions
not unfamiliar to their minds. But in Burma the grammar
of the Buddhist texts first had to be studied, and when the
great legend of the Founder was learned and the code of
the Order had grown familiar, there was still a new world
to conquer, a new science to master. After the Sutta and
Vinaya there was the Abhidhamma to interpret. Here perhaps
we shall find the Pali compositions of Burmese authors less
interesting than their translations into Burmese.
The Sanskrit commentaries composed in India on Buddhist
texts are enlightening in proportion as the student is familiar
with all Indian philosophies and can point out parallels and
contrasts ; the Pali commentaries of Burma naturally only lead
us back to the Sinhalese and Indian models they faithfully
copy. When we leave Pali and come toBurmese interpretations
of Abhidhamma texts we feel that we follow our commentators
in a (to us) somewhat dark adventure; but yet the effort of
these authors in their own vernacular is interesting as an
effort to do more than recite the consecrated words of their
ancient masters. Here is the key to the sense really given
by the Burmese to Indian abstractions, the key not to be
found where they use the exotic and traditional Pali form.
1 A friend has suggested to meacomparison between these studies in
Burma and tiie gradual mastery by Bede and Alfred and their followers
in Englandofthe philosophy of Paul andJohn. It was not until Wyclifs
time, sixcenturies after Bede,that these abstractquestions werediscussed
in English.

XIV INTRODUCTION
By it we have access to some curious treasure, rewarding
the search of the scholar familiar with the Burmese tongue,
provided he be a Palist and (be it said without impiety)
endowed with two of the Buddhist ' perfections ' the power
to spend himself and be very patient. Knowledge of the
Pali commentaries of Burma is the natural beginning of this
attractive enterprise, but by no means the end.
The commentaries, though the most important part, are not
the whole of the Pali literature. The technicalities of Indian
grammar have attracted Burmese authors from an early period.
The work of the famous Kaccayana is all but canonical among
them, and the procession of his followers and commentators
stretches through eight centuries of literary history. The
qualities of mind innate in the quick-witted Burmese race
were lent to the service of the Word so religiously respected.
The Pali scriptures had not been a hundred years in Upper
Burma before a grammar the Saddanlti was composed in
Pali that called forth the wondering admiration of the scholars
of Ceylon, though Ceylon was certainly the forerunner and
model of Burma in exegesis.
Again, the practical side of monastic life was a subject well
We
within the scope of the Palists of Burma. have very
numerous examples of work in this field, from the time of
their first controversy on Ordination in Narapati's reign
(A.D. 1167-1204) till the present day.
In the secular domain the Pali language has been employed
(as we should expect) where solemnity was called for or the
sense of an antique tradition was needed to support authority;
for instance, some important law-codes exist, and others
probably existed, in Pali versions. Pali is also the language
chosen for the collections of maxims known as the ' Nlti'
literature, and for various chronicles (we can instance the
Rajavamsa, Sasanavamsa, and Gandhavamsa).
Finally we come to the very limited province of Pali verse
in Burma. Here and there among our authors we catch
a glimpse of scholars who have a touch of the poet in them
and some of the poet's ambition. We do not know that they
ever approached the favourite theme of the poets of all ages.

INTRODUCTION XV
If they did, the chronicles have passed it over in silence.
A
love story sometimes forms part of an edifying narrative
from Pali sources ; but the love lyric is the undisputed realm
of the poets of the vernacular. Jatakas and other moral
legends were the material usually chosen for the Palist to
work upon. Sometimes the beauties of a city or the glory
of the reigning king were extolled with all the author's
resources of prosody and imagery. But scholarship in Burma
has not produced poets worthy to rank with those of Ceylon.
The following pages are but a sketch, and perhaps a sketch
without colour. Our purpose is not to describe again the
outward aspect of the temple, the monastery, and the village,
very vividly presented to Western readers by learned and
sympathetic writers from Bishop Bigandet onwards. So
many Europeans have come under the charm of Burma of
the Burmese people, their life and religion that there is no
need to do more than recall to readers the namesof thewritersl
who have made that charm a familiar thing to us. We have
chosen for our study the less well-known subject of the Pali
books of Burma. The authors were the ancestors and masters
of the monks of to-day, through whom we know those old-time
scholars and can still see, as it were, a far-off picture of their
lives, their schools, and their work.
1 See the Bibliographies, p. vii.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
CHAPTER
I
THE CLASSICAL PALI LITERATURE ARRIVAL OF THE PALI
TRIPITAKA IN BURMA
Burma, under which name we may conveniently, if not quite
accurately, include Pegu, Arakan, and Martaban, has been the
home of Buddhism for many centuries. No Buddhist country
has kept the antique faith more sheltered from change. Yet
eventhechroniclesof monasteries and such strictly ecclesiastical
works as the Siisanavamsal cannot unfold their quiet tale
without a necessary mention of rivalries and wars between
these neighbouring states, when the balance went down first
on the side of Burma, then of Pegu, when Mongol armies
marched on the Burmese capital, or the Burmese king marched
into Siam. Rulers changed and the fortunes of the Fraternity
with them, but the doctrine and the tradition suffered hardly
any alteration, and the countries of Further India developed an
intellectual life which was before all the product of Buddhist
ideas and the work of Buddhist monks. For Burma the first
language of abstract thought was an Indian language the
;
rational and moral force which, for a large body of the
Burmese people, broke down the thraldom of ancient super-
stitions, was inspired by India. By the predominance of
Buddhist influence in Burmese culture Burmese studies belong
rightfully to the great field of Indianism.
We
must, though the subject has already been fully and
admirably treated by others, remind the reader here of the
form in which the Buddhist doctrine, enshrined in a canon
of scripture, was conveyed to Further India.
The language was Pali, the literary dialect closely allied to
Sanskrit. PaliisusuallycalledbytheBurmesethemayadhabhasa
1 See Introduction.

2 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
(idiom of Magadha) l or mulab/idsd ('the original language'),2
but this identification of Pali with the spoken dialect of
Magadha is now known to be incorrect. It seems needless
to add any remarks about the Pali literature, since its capacities
have been described and, better still, proved by the authors of
scholarly and beautiful translations which everyone nowadays
has an opportunity of reading. 3 But a few words on the
classical books may be in place.
The
Tripitaka.
The Tripitaka (Pali, Tipitaka), to use the now familiar
Buddhist name for the three great groups of canonical texts,
the Vinaya, Sutta, and Abhidhamma pitahas (' baskets '), is
known in Burma in the Pali recension consecrated in Ceylon.
The Abhidhamma and Sutta Pitakas.
For some remarks on the last of the three collections, the
Abhidhamma, the reader is referred to Chapter IVof this essay.
As to the Suttapitaka, the first thing we observe on looking
into characteristic collections of Pali - Burmese MSS. and
books is that of the great Nikuyas claiming to be the word
of the Buddha (the Ariguttara, Majjhima, Dlgha, Samyutta,
and Khuddaka) the Dlghanikaya is the best known, the most
studied, the most frequently to be found.4 On the reason
for this preference we can onlyrisk a guess. The Dlghanikilya,
though containing the long (dlgha) discourses, is the smallest
of the collections and hence the easiest to study. It is
a principle of the Burmese to avoid all unnecessary pains
1 Theancientkingdom ofMagadha was the region now called Bihar.
2 The latelamented Professor Pischel (in a valuable paper on fragments
ofthe Buddhist canon found in Chinese Turkestan)speaksofthe tradition
thattheMagadhiwas the language ofthe first age oftheworld and spoken
d by em th P e al B i ud id d e h n a ti s fi : zie ' r E te s . is D t a b s e s gre a i b f e l r ich de d r as P s al m i a ka n no s n pa S te p r ur d e i n e e M i a n g e a s dh al i te m r i e t n
Magadhlkanons aufweist is langst erkannt worden' (R. Pischel, Sitzungs-
berichte der konigl. preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften, Mai, 1904,
p. 807). See also Oldenberg's edition oftheVinayapitakam,Introduction,
and the Preface to Professor E. Miiller's Pali Grammar.
3 See Bibliography.
4 This is confirmed by information Mr. Shwe Zan Aung has kindly
sent me.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 3
and trouble. Without any disrespect to Burmese Buddhists,
it is natural to suppose that they have chosen the shortest
task, especially when we remember that the Dighanikaya
contains suttas of great importance.1 For example, we find
there the Brahmajala Suttanta, dealing with the Sixty- two
Wrtmg Views the Samannaphala, on the Fruits of the Ascetic
;
Life ; the Mahilsatipatthana, on Self-mastery; and, chief of all,
the Mahaparinibbana Suttanta, on the Buddha's last discourses
and death, that is, on the supreme moment in the history of
the Order, since it was then that the Buddhist samgha became
the guardian of the departed Master's teaching. On the
whole the essential doctrines, as the Burmese Buddhist
conceives them, are to be found in this collection and the
commentaries.
The Khuddakanikaya calls for a word of notice here. This
collection contains among other texts the Dhammapada, the
Suttanipata, and the immortal Jataka book, which, as might
be expected from its character, has become part of the popular
as well as the scholarly literature of Burma. Very nearly
connected with it is the Paritta, a good example of ancient
wisdom and piety crystallized into a talisman.
Mahdparittam.
The Paritta or Mahaparitta, a small collection of texts
gathered from the Suttapitaka, is, to this day, more widely
known by the Burmese laity of all classes than any other
Pali book. The Paritta, learned by heart and recited on
appropriate occasions, is to conjure various evils physical and
moral. It has naturally come to have the usual value of
charms and exorcisms, a value hardly religious in the Buddhist
sense of the word. But some of the miscellaneous extracts
that make up the collection are of a purely religious and
ethical tone. The best example of these is the famous
1 The Dighanikaya was chosen by Professor Rhys Davids for his
selectionoftypical suttas translated under the title Dialogues of Buddha.
Thesuttas instancedabove have also been translated elsewhere. Seethe
useful bibliography by Mr. Albert J. Edmunds, Journal of the Pali Text
Society, 1902-3.

4 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
Marigalasuttal of the Suttaniputa, verses in praise of the holy
life, uttered by a devata (local divinity), who came to pay
homage to the Buddha in the grove of Jetavana.
The use of the Paritta is said to have had the Buddha's
sanction.2 There is an example of this practice (by acknow-
ledged saints) in the well-known legend of Sona and Uttara,
Asoka's missionaries to Lower Burma. Their first act on
arriving was to vanquish the demon (yakkhinl) who spread
terror in the land by devouring at their birth all boys born
in the king's palace. The victory of the holy men was
We
accomplished by the Paritta.3 find another illustration
in an interesting little incident related of Jetavana, a Burmese
monk and famous teacher of the sixteenth century. When
Jetavana believed himself at the point of death he thought
of one whom he considered fit to be his successor. At that
moment the monk on whom his thoughts were fixed dreamed
a strange dream of a dead man, which, on waking, he related
A
to the novice lying near him. paritta was then pronounced
by one of the monks to avert any evil foreshadowed by the
dream.4
In the days of Anorata,5 the first notable king in authentic
Burmese history (who reigned in the eleventh century), we
hear of the Paritta turned to a dangerous use. Corrupt and
cynical monks proclaimed it an easy means of disembarrassing
man's guilty conscience from all wrongdoing even to matricide.
But Burmese Buddhism has, on the whole, kept exorcism
within the bounds of a superstition, contrary no doubt to the
true doctrine, but not grossly transgressing the ethical code
of the religion.
Burmese tradition adds to the fifteen ancient texts of the
Khuddakanikaya6 four other works the Milindapanha,7 the
1 See Fausboll'.s edition of the Suttanipata, p. 45 (P.T.S. edition, 1884 ;
Glossary, 1894), and translation, SEE., vol. x, pt. ii.
2 See Milindapanha (ed. Trenckner), pp. 150 ff., and Rhys Davids'
translation (Questions of King Milinda), SEE., xxxv, pp. 213ft'.
3 See Sas., p. 38. * Sas., p. 101. See below, p. 12.
6 Khuddakapatha, Dhammapada, Udana, Itivuttaka, Suttanipata,
Vimanavatthu, Petavatthu, Theragatha, Therlgatha, Jataka, Mahaniddesa,
Patisambhidarnagga, Apadana, Buddhavamsa, Cariyapitaka.
7 See above.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 5
Suttasahgaha,1 the Petakopadesa,2 and the Netti or Netti-
pakarana. 2 This last is studied in Burma for its analysis
and explanation of passages from the sacred writings, with
which, as the learned editor has said, ' the author possessed
a great familiarity.'
We now turn to the Vinaya Pitaka.
The Vinaya, as known in Burma, is the monastic code
handed down by the Theravadin sect in Ceylon, that is, the
sect professing the doctrine (vdda) of the theras or ancients.
The name was assumed by the strictest sect at the time of
the celebrated schisms beginning, according to tradition, in
the second century after the Buddha's death. The influence
of Ceylon on Burma has been, as we shall see, paramount
in questions of monastic discipline, and the code drawn up
by the ancient Sinhalese theras has been carefully preserved
by the Burmese fraternity in the letter and the spirit ever
since its arrival in Burma in the eleventh century. A great
deal of Vinaya literature, mostly explanatory and sometimes
controversial, has grown up round the code from the time of
the early commentators to the present day. The important
works by Sinhalese authors on this subject formed the base
of Burmese studies, and on the other hand orthodoxy in Ceylon
has often been reinforced at a later period byteachers and texts
from Burma.
The complete Yinaya is rather voluminous,3 but an epitome
of the Discipline in the form of two short metrical texts, the
1 Seethe Pitakatthamain, pp. 12, 13. The Suttasangaha was written at
Anuradhapurain Ceylon by a therawhose name is notrecorded.
2 In Buddhist tradition the Petakopadesa and Nettipakarana are
both ascribed to Mahakaccayana, the disciple of the Buddha. The
Gandhavamsa (p. 66) and Pitakatthamain (p. 13) speak of Kaccayana,
authorof the Netti, aschaplain to Candapajjota of Ujjenl in the Avanti
country(see Introduction to the late ProfessorHardy'sIntroductiontothe
N w e a t s ti t , ha p t . t i h x e , w n o o r te k; wa al s so co p m p p . o v s i e ii d a at nd an xi e x a ). rly P d r a o t f e e , s p s e or rh H a a p r s dy a ' b s ou c t on t c h l e us fi i r o s n t
century of our era, and put into its present form by the commentator
Dhammapala, and that the author's name may have been Kaccayaua,
considered by posterity to have been Mahakaccayana, the disciple of the
Buddha. 'H>3 is, however, altogether different from the grammarian
Kaccayaua, wholikewisewas regarded as identical with Mahakaccayana'
(Netti, Introd., p. xxxii). On Candapajjotasee Vinaya, i, 276 ff.
3 It hasbeen criticallyedited byH. Oldenberginfive volumes(1879-83).

6 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
Mulasikkha and Khuddasikkha, was composed at an early
period,1 and these with the Dvematika, consisting of the
Bhikkhupatimokkha and Bhikkhunlpatimokkha (the ancient
resume of the code for monks and nuns respectively) and
the Kankhavitaranl (commentary on the Patimokkha), were
recognized as sufficient Vinaya knowledge for those who could
not study more.2 In modern times the above are called the
'Four Smaller Vinayas', and are studied by those who have
not time for the complete Vinaya.3
In Burmese Pali collections we find no less frequently than
the Paritta of the laity the Kammavaca of the Mendicant
Order. These texts have a purely ecclesiastical use, though
it would be a mistake to call them 'ritual'. The first work
of the first Buddhist mission to Burma was undoubtedly to
receive into the Samgha believers wishing to renounce the
world. For those, before they entered on further studies,
a knowledge of the sacred word in Pali would probably begin
with the formal and rigid language of the Kammavaca,
and this association lends a touch of interest to some
extremely wearisome matter. First, the formulas of the
pabbajja (renunciation) and upasampada (ordination) must
have become familiar. Then the ordinary course of monastic
life included various ceremonies, each of which had its
prescribed form for the presiding theras. The bhikkhus
taking part were silent, unless dissenting from what was
proposed, but in cases where they had offended, acknowledged
transgression of the rules aloud.
The Kammavaca cannot, of course, be called literature, but
it must be noticed as a text representing the immovable
tradition of old days in Burma. The ceremonies of admission
to the Samha and so forth have continued to modern
1 They were written in Ceylon. See Wickrernasinghe, Catalogue of
SinhaleseMSS. in theBritish Museum, Introduction.
rec 2 en P t r l o y fe r s e s - o e r di B te a d rn i e n t B t u h r a m s a p ( o b i y nt H e s d ay o a ut UA to Py m e e ) a t s ha D t ve th m e at c i o k m a pi c l o a n t t i a o i n ns mo t s h t e
BhikkhuandBhikkhunlpatimokkha,theKammakammaviuicchaya,extracts
from the Parivara and other Vinaya texts, and a Patimokkhuddesa,
Burmese notes on the Patimokkha.
3 I owe this information to Mr. Shwe Zan Aung's kindness.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 7
times, accompanied by the ancient formulas; and in the
history of the Order we find that some lively movements
in literature and one most important mission to Ceylon were
due to ceremonial questions, particularly the question of
consecrating boundaries (slmd).1 For this last was a formality
on which the validity of ordination and thence the ' legitimate
descent' of teachers depended, and such consecration has always
been considered in Burma of great importance to religion and
the religious reputation of a region or community.
In all these texts we find the same conventional character
and monotonous repetition. 2 Even the MSS. in which the
Kammavacas are handed down suit the texts. The thick,
square lettering, pompous and decorative, the shining lacquer,
and heavily gilded, silvered, or ivory-plated leaves, bear a like-
ness to church-property wherever found. Yet we should not
forget that they are the texts of a religion that has known
neither altar nor sacrifice, and if in Burma the system has
developed clerics and a hierarchy, it has never had a privileged
priesthood.
The Vinaya has led to mention of
The Commentaries. The Burmese tradition as to the great
commentators follows the Sinhalese,which places Buddhaghosa,
Dhammapala, Buddhadatta, Nanagambhlra, Kassapa, and
Ananda in the fourth, fifth, and sixth centuries A.D.S The
earliest atthakathas (commentaries) and tlkas (sub-commentaries
or glosses) on the three pitakaa are associated with these names.
Equally famous and authoritative is the compendium of
doctrine known as the Yisuddhimagga ('Path of Purity') by
Buddhaghosa. As for the familiar story of Buddhaghosa's
career,4 the Burmese adhere closely to the Sinhalese version,
but though the scene of this almost incredibly prolific
1 The boundaries in question mark the enclosure within which
ceremonies such as ordination canbe properlyperformed. Theobservance
of these bounds is very strict, and a ceremony carried out in a place
unfitted forconsecration is not valid.
2 'As in law-booksall the worldover,' says ProfessorRhys Davids, who
has, in his wideexperience, plumbed thedepths ofVinayaandlaw both.
3 Sas., pp. 33, 34 ; Pitakatthamain, pp. 21ff.
4 See the article on Buddhaghosa by T. Foulkes, Lid. Ant., vol. xix,
pp. 105-22.

8 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
writer's great commenting feats is always considered to be
Ceylon, he has been gravely claimed by the Talaings as a native
of Thaton.1
Dhammapala2 wrote at Kaficipura (Conjeveram) in the
Dekkhan, the region with which, according to their ancient
records, the Talaings kept up active communication. Know-
ledge of Buddhist texts in Lower Burma was derived,
Forchhammer thinks, from Dhammapala's country. 3 We do
not know of any works written in the Talaing country itself
during the fifth, sixth, and seventh centuries, a period of great
literary activity in Ceylon and South India.
Most of the well-known tlkas were written in Ceylon, 4 and
works such as the commentary on the Nettipakarana and
another entitled Saccasankhepa ('Compendium of the Truth').5
Better known, perhaps, than any other in Burma is the twelfth
century compendium of the Abhidhamma known as the
Abhidhammatthasangaha, also of Sinhalese origin. These
old exegetical books, which we shall find again and again in
our progress through Burmese literature, must be known at
least by name before we can discuss the work of the scholars
of Burma.
Some obscurity hangs over the beginnings of Buddhist
culture in Further India. According to a well-established
tradition Indian Buddhism moved from the south coast that
is, from the region called in the ancient chronicles Suvanna-
bhumi northwards, while some archaeological and linguistic
evidence allowsus to suppose that it also found its way through
the mountain passes of the North.6 But it was certainly not
1 Modern Burmese scholars have abandoned this belief. See Foulkes'
'Buddhaghosa' (Ind. Ant., vol. xix, pp. 113, 114).
2 3 G F a o n r d c h h a h v a a m m m s e a r , , p J p a . rd 6 i 0 n , e 69 Pr ; iz F e o E r s c s h a h y, am p m . e 2 r 7 , . List, pp. vi, vii.
4 Sas., p. 33. Vide Minayeff, Rech'erches, pp. 273, 274. The tlkas are
sometimes mentioned in Burmese lists under collective titles. The most
important tikas ofDhammapala are known as the Linatthappakasani (see
GV., pp. 60, 69). Pitakatthamain, pp. 32, 33.
5 Forchhammer, Essay, p. 25. See also SVD. (Sasanavamsadlpa),
verses 1194and 1220.
No 6 . S 3, ee p. T 4 a 45 w ) S ; ei a n lso Ko ' , Pr ' e T l h i e mi O n r a i r g y in St o u f d t y he of B t u h r e me P s 0 eR U ace D ' a ( u B n ud g d I h n i s s c m r , ip v t o i l o . n i, '
(Ind. Ant., vol. xxii, p. 7) ; Phayre, HistoryofBurma, pp. 3, 4, 14 ; R. C.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 9
in the upper valley of the Irrawaddy that the Pali literature
of Burma had its origin. This gift the Burmese owe to their
more advanced neighbours, the Talaings of Ramaiiiiadesa, now
called Lower Burma.
The origin and history of the Mon or Talaing people, who
were to be (unwillingly as it happened) the messengers of the
purer Buddhism, need not be discussed here.1 The point from
which we start is their acceptance of Buddhist teaching from
India and the rise of a body of learned monks in Ramanna who
preserved the ancient Doctrine and Discipline and conveyed
them to Upper Burma, where both had long been forgotten.
We
say forgotten, for Burmese authors will not admit that
they were new-comers.2 But the tradition that no less than
three out of the nine missions sent out by Asoka went to Upper
Burma in the third century B.C.8 looks like a piece of the
Temple, 'Notes on Antiquities in Ramannadesa' (Ind. Ant., voL xxii,
pp.37 ff.) ; A. Griinwedel, BuddhistischeKunstinIndien,pp. 132, 136, 138.
1 For views of different authorities on this subject see Reports on the
CensusofSurma, 1891 (Eales) and 1901 (Lowin). The Talaingchronicles
and inscriptions are rich in material for study, material which we are
less and less likely to unearth as time goes on, forthis ancient language
is fast disappearing from Burma, and students of it are unfortunately
very few.
2 Itis certain that the accounts of Burmese chroniclers do not support
Forchhammer's belief that there was no Burmese civilization to speak of
till the Talaings conquered the upper country. Neither Taw Sein Ko
(Ind. Ant., xxiii, p. 258) nor Phayre (History of Surma, p. 3) take this
view. I have not yet discovered Forchhammer's reason for concluding
that there was so great a difference between the two countries, though
the southern provinces were more easily accessible from Indiathan Upper
Burma.
3 The well-known names of the regions visited by the missions are
carefully displaced by the Burmese, to cover regions in Further India.
See Sasanavamsa, Introduction, pp. 3 ff, and note by Dr. Burgess,
'Fabricated Geography' (Ind.Ant.,1901,vol.xxx,p. 387). Asanexample
of the sources from which we mayhope to add much to our knowledge
see the Maunggun Gold Plates, by Tun Nyein, an account of two gold
platesfound in a brick in the year 1897 atthevillage ofMaunggun in the
Promedistrict. The inscriptions on the platesconsistofquotations from
the Buddhist scriptures. 'They are in the Pali language, and are written
in characterswhich it is believed were in vogue in the first century A.D.,
when the kingdom of Prome (Sirikhettara) was in the zenith of its power.
The alphabet corresponds to a large extent with that used in the
inscriptions of Pagan in the fourth and fifth centuries, and several of
the letters also resemble those of the South Indian class of alphabets'
(Epigraphia Indica, vol. v, p. 101). The two plates are now in the
British Museum.

10 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
national pride that is so inventive in these matters, and can
V
only be quoted as an 'uncorroborated legend
We
must seek a safe starting-point for our history of the
Pali literature, and we find it in the eleventh century A.D. At
that time the Pali scriptures were introduced to Upper Burma
by Talaing teachers. The existence of a strong Buddhist
community in the maritime provinces (Ramafinadesa) long
before this date is very probable. It has been supposed that
Indian colonies were already flourishing in Talaing territory,
from Chittagong to the Straits (Forchhammer), at the time of
the Asokan mission. If so, the early missionaries brought the
teaching of Gotama to a country where Indian religion and
customs had already made a home, and whether they were
opposed or not2 they could be understood and in time the
;
doctrine of the Buddha prevailed.
There is no elaborated ancient Pali chronicle for Further
India to be compared with the Mahavamsa and Dlpavamsa of
Ceylon, 3 but there are allusions in these works which throw
some light on the religious history of Pegu and Arakan. The
Burmese chronicles are of more recent date, and help must be
sought from monuments which do not always yield up their
secret readily. But we may safely say that events in India
and Ceylon greatly affected religion in the maritime provinces
(Ramannadesa). Refugees from the countries where Buddhism
was persecuted or declining, as in India after the eighth
century, without doubt strengthened the Buddhist element in
1 Forbes, Legendary History of Burma and Arakan, p. 10. The
researches of Forchhammer and otherscholars who havefollowed him in
t
L
h
o
i
w
s
is
sub
i
j
n
ec
t
t
he
si
I
n
m
c
p
e
er
1
i
8
a
9
l
0 h
Ga
a
z
v
e
e
tte
b
e
e
r
en
of
s
I
u
n
m
d
m
ia
e
.
d u
H
p
e
la
s
t
a
e
y
l
s
y
:
(1
"
9A08)
cl
b
o
y
se
Mr
s
.
tu
C
d
.
y
C
o
.
f
the inscriptions and native histories has revealed the fact that as the
religion, letters, and civilisation of Upper Burma were influenced by
Magadha, Nepal, Tibet, and China, so those of the Talaings of Lower
Burma were affected by Ceylon, South India, and Cambodia" (Article
1Burma ', in vol. i, p. 28, Imperial Gazetteer of India, Provincial Series,
Calcutta, 1908).
2 'Accordingto the Talaing legend the Buddhist missionaries on their
arrival met with great opposition from the local teachers probably
Brahmins* being denounced and reviled by them as heretics.' Forbes,
Legendary History, p. 10.
* See on these chronicles Dr. Wilhelm Qeiger, The Dlpavamsa and
Mahavamsa (translated by Ethel Coomaraswamy), Colombo, 1908.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 11
the Talaing country.1 Captain Forbes, who follows the Talaing
record, says of the early days following the Indian mission :
'Graduallythe newdoctrines gained ground, pagodas arose, and
the faith of Buddha or Gaudama established itself in Thatone,
to flourish amid all vicissitudes for over two thousand years
to the present day, on the spot where the great Thagya pagoda
lifts itsworn and ancient head, probablythe oldest architectural
monument of Buddhism in Burma.' 2
When a religious reform in the eleventh century drew
Ceylon and Burma together Anorata,3 king of Burma, fresh
from vigorous measures against heresy in his own country,
agreed with Vijayabahu, king of Ceylon, on the Pali texts
which were to be accepted as representing the true teaching
of the Buddha. Afterwards, in the reign of Parakramabahu I,
a council was held (A.D. 1165) in Ceylon to revise this agree-
ment and settle all such questions. 4
We shall see that from the eleventh century onwards new
recruits press into Pali scholarship. And whence? Not only
from the Talaing country but from Upper Burma, an advance
which was directly due to the action of the strenuous Burmese
king. The reforms with which Anorata's name is associated
were greatly needed,5 and had important results.
1 Sir R.C.Temple pointed out some years ago that 'Suvarnadvipa' was
the 'headquarters of Buddhism in the East' in the tenth century. He
gives a reference to a passage in Sarat Chandra Das' Indian Pandits in
the Land of Snow, where we find mention of an Indian 'Northern'
Buddhist's visit to Chandrakirtti, head of the Order at Suvarnadvipa.
The visitor was Dipankara Srijiiana Atira (Ind. Ant., vol. xxii, p. 358).
2 Forbes, LegendaryHistory,p. 10.
3 The Anawrataof Forbes' History. 'The date of the commencement
ofhis reignisuncertain,as thechroniclesdifferfromeachother'(Legendary
History, p. 221 ; Phayre, History ofBurma,p. 22). Cf. Duroiselle,Bulletin
de VEcoleFranqaise d'Extreme Orient, tome v, p. 150.
4 Kern, Manual of Indian Buddhism, p. 132 (Grundriss der Indo-
Arischen Philologie und Alterthumskunde, vol. iii, pt. viii). The Sasana-
vamsa (p. 61) says : 'Jinacakke ekasatthadhlke paiicasate sahasse ca
sampattekaliyuge ekasattatadhike tisate sampatte Anuruddharaja rajjam
papuni.' Anuruddha became king in the year 1571 of religion (lit. of
the Buddha cycle) and the year 371 of the kaliyuga (the common era,
beginning 638 A.D.).
8 See Sas., p. 56. The Sasanavamsa agrees in certain details with the
Burmese chronicles from which Forbes drew his account, which is as
follows : 'It would be difficult todecide what the system of religion that
at this time prevailed in Burma can be termed. It was certainly not

12 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
A religion1 which a Buddhist from the South would have
scorned to call ' religion ' completely possessed the region over
which Anorata ruled, and the Burmese king himself, with
A
mistaken piety, supported it in default of a better. com-
munity numbering many thousands of monks with their
disciples flourished on the popularity of their debased doctrine,
teaching the laity that the worst crimes need bring no retri-
bution if the guilty man recited (or engaged some one to recite)
an appropriate parittct. 2 The tyranny of these monks went so
far as to exact from parents the handing over of either sons or
daughters ' to the teacher' before giving them in marriage. 3
But in course of time a Buddhist from the South was in
Anorata's counsels, and a sweeping change was brought about.
Arahanta, a Talaing monk from Thaton (the Sudhammapura
of the Palichronicles), became the king's preceptor and adviser,
and used all his great influence to break up the supposed order
of Samanas (ascetics). In spite of the credulity of the people
he succeeded, for he had convinced the king. But even when
Brahmanism. The native records state that King Sawlahan built five
hollow temples. In each temple was placed an image resembling neither
nat nor para. To these, morning and evening, food and spirits were
offered, and so they were worshipped and propitiated. The priests or
teachers of this religion are called the thirty great Arees and their
disciples. Their doctrines are represented as a complete subversion of
all moral law. They taught, it is said, whosoever shall commit murder
he isfreed fromhis sins by repeating a prayer or invocation ; whosoever
shall killhis parents, by repeatinga prayerhe isfreed from the punish-
mentdue to thefivegreatest sins. These teachers also were addicted to
the practice of gross immorality.' (Forbes, Legendary History, p. 22 ;
see 1 a A lso fo P r h m ay o r f e N , a H g i a s - t w o o r r y sh o i f p, Bu a r c m c a o , rd p i . ng 33 t . o ) Burmese histories, had already
prevailed for some five centuries in Pagan before Anorata's accession,
while 'Buddhism itselfhad been corrupted by the Tantric system, which
i B s ud a dh m i ix s t m ur ap e pa o r f en m t a l g y ic p , er w c i o t l c a h t c e r d af i t n , to an B d ur S m i a va t - h w r o o r u s g h h ip B ; en a g n a d l, t A hi s s sa T m a , nt a r n i d c
Manipur, and allied itselfwith the northern school prevailing at Pagan'
(Taw Sein Ko, 'Introduction ofBuddhism into Burma' : Buddhism,vol. i,
No. 4, p. 589). Thestatements ofthe Burmese histories are a help, but
thechronology needscareful
sifting.
2 Seeabove.
3 The Sasanavamsagives no furtherexplanation. The mention ofsons
as well as daughters prevents ourconcludingthe custom mentioned to be
that prevailing in Cambodia, where marriageable virgins were yielded
up to a bonze before the marriage ceremony (see article by P. Pelliot,
d Me'moiressurles Coutumesdu Cambodge' : Bulletin deI'Ecole Franfaise
1Extreme
Orient,
tome
ii, p. 153).

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 13
the communities were dissolved and the ' false Samanas' !
reduced to the state of 'ownerless dogs', confusion, heresy,
and ignorance still reigned in the land, and Arahanta pointed
earnestly to the only means of putting religion beyond all
danger.
The true doctrine must beobtainedandguarded (hepreached)
with the sacred texts. They were not to be had in Burma, but
existed in abundance at Sudhammapura, besides relics of the
Buddha. Anorata was full of faith, and he was not a man to
believe passively. He sent an embassy to the Talaing king
reigning at Thaton, Manohari, to ask, as a believer having the
right to ask, for relics and copies of the scriptures.
But Manohari was, or chose to appear, too strict a Buddhist
to allow holy relics and texts to go to a country with the
indifferent religious reputation that disgraced Burma. He
refused Anorata's request, and refused in wounding and
contemptuous terms.2 The King of Burma, outraged and
furious, descended the Irrawaddy with his armies and laid
siege to Sudhammapura. In the year 1058 the Talaing capital
fell before the besiegers. Spoils and prisoners, among whom
were Manohari and a number of learned monks, were carried
offto Pagan. Anorata's end was gained and the Pali Tipitaka
came to Burma.
1 Pali, Samanakuttaka. - Sas., Introduction, p. 18.

CHAPTER
II
THE RISE OF PALI SCHOLARSHIP IN UPPER BURMA THE
SADDANITI CHAPATAANDTHE S!HALASANGHA LEARNING
AT PAGAN (ARIMADDANA) IN THE TWELFTH, THIRTEENTH,
AND FOURTEENTH CENTURIES
Though the Burmese began their literary history by
borrowing from their conquered neighbours, the Talaings
and not before the eleventh century the growth of Pali
scholarship among them was so rapid that the epoch following
close on this tardy beginning is considered one of the best
that Burma has seen. The works then produced supplied the
material or afforded the favourite models for much of the
Pali-Burmese literature of later times.
The causes of this speedy maturity are easy to trace.
Ramanna was conquered. Relics, books, and teachers had
been forcibly carried to Burma. Instead of suffering by
transplation the religion of the Buddha seems to have
flourished more vigorously in its new centre. The Burmese
king had conveyed thewhole state and dignityof the conquered
Sudhammapura to his own capital, and even his captive
Manohari helped to add to the religious splendour of Pagan.1
About Manohari a curious little legend is related,2 perhaps
to show that his religion needed purifying, notwithstanding
that he had scorned the Burmese as heretics. It is said that
he possessed a magical power by which fire issued from his
mouth when he spoke. Thus, whenever he came to pay
a vassal's duty to Anorata, the flames burst forth, to the
great terror of his liege, who anxiously applied a religious
cure to the dreadful prodigy. Food was taken from a holy
shrine, and after due homage it was given to Manohari to
1 Called Arimaddana in the Pali chronicles. A temple exists at Myin
Pagan, 2 miles south of Pagan, built by Manohari (or Manuha) in
1059 A.D. See Taw Sein Koin Archaeological Surveyof Burma (quoted in
Bulletinde VEcole Franfaise, tome iii, p. 677).
2 Sas., p. 64.

THE PALI LITERATUBE OF BURMA 15
eat. The flames appeared no more. Manohari, filled with
awe at the loss of his magical attribute, sold one of his royal
gems and devoted the price to two great images of the Buddha,
which are said to exist to the present day.1
Anorata, mindful of Arahanta's counsels, was, above all,
eager to enrich his city with the sacred texts. Those brought
from Thaton had been stored in a splendid pavilion 2 and placed
at the disposal of the Sangha for study. Not content with
his large spoils, the king sent to Ceylon for more copies of
the Tipifaka, which Arahanta afterwards examined and
compared with the Thaton collection.3 So the ground was
prepared for the harvest that soon followed. Anorata did
not live to see the firstfruits of his husbandry,4 but, if we
can accept the date of the Pitakatthamain, the first essay of
a Burmese author in Pali scholarship was made in the
year 1064 A.D., during the reign of Kyansittha, a son of
Anorata.5
Kyansittha was the founder of the celebrated Kanda6 or
Ananda temple and vihara (monastery) at Pagan. The legend
goes that the temple was designed from a vision of the
Xandamula cave in the Himalaya granted to the king by
eight saints of that region, who journeyed through the air
daily to receive Kyansittha's hospitality. These miraculous
visits are of smaller interest to us than another, less sensational
tradition of the holy place. At this monasteryDhammasenapati
1 Sas., p. 64.
2 Pali, Ratanamaye pdsdde (Sas., p. 63). The libraries of the ancient
monasteries weremostlybuildings apart.
3 Sas., p. 64. The Sinhalese chronicles say that a common canon for
Burma and Ceylon was arranged by Anorata and Vijayabahu the Great
(seeappendix to Mr. NevilPsmanuscriptcatalogue of his collection, made
in Ceylon and now at the British Museum).
4 M. Duroiselle mentions inscriptions which establish 1059 A.D. as the
year of Anorata's death (' Notes sur la Geographic apocryphe de la
Birmanie' : Bulletinde I'EcoleFran$aise, tome v, p. 150).
5 Some religious foundationsofKyansitthaaredated1059A.D. (Bulletin,
tome iii, p. 676). His Pali name is Chattaguhinda (Sas., p. 75 ; Forbes,
L Pi e t g a e k n a d t a t r h y amr H i i n st , or p y . , 6 p 8 . ). 23 M. ; P Du h r a o y i r s e e , lle His ex t p o r r e y ss o e f s B s u o r m m e a d , ou p b p t . a 3 s 9, to 28 t 1 he ;
exactnessofPhayre'sdatesfortheeleventhand twelfth centuries.
6 Described in Sir Henry Yule'sMission to the CourtofAva, p. 36, and
Craufurd'sJournalofan Embassy to the CourtofAva, p. 114.

16 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
wrote the Karikii, a grammatical work, in Pali.1 This modest
little metrical treatise has lived bravely through some eight
centuries and was last republished a few years ago.
Dhammasenapati composed two other works, the Etimasami-
dlpanl (or Etimasamidipikii) and the Manohara.2 Beyond
the bare mention of these last two titles, and the statement
that the author wrote the KiTrikii at the request of the
monk NanagambhTra, the Gandhavamsa leaves us without
information. Sfanagambhlra of Pagan is perhaps the thera
mentioned in the Pitakatthamain as the author of the religious
work
Tathagatuppatti.
During the reigns of Anorata's immediate successors learning
took firm root at Pagan, and in the year 1154 the monk
Aggavamsa completed the Saddanlti, a grammar of the
Tipitaka, described as 'the most comprehensive in existence'.3
It established the reputation of Burmese scholarship in that
age and the fame of the author to the present day, for the
Saddanlti is still republished in Burma as a classic. It consists
of aphorisms on Pali grammar divided into twenty-five
paricchedas or sections. It is very interesting to see that in
the second part ofthework,theDhatumala ('Garlandof Roots'),
the grammarian gives the Sanskritequivalentsof the Pali forms.
Aggavamsawastutorto King Narapatisithu (A.D. 1167-1202),
a powerful and peaceable monarch, whose reign was the most
prosperous epoch in the history of the kingdom of Pagan.4
According to the Gandhavamsa, Aggavamsa was of Jambudipa
1 GV., pp. 63, 73. Dhammasenapati is called an acariya (teacher) in
Gandhavamsa, but in Forchhammer's List the author of Karika and
Karikatlka is put down as a Burmese nobleman of Pagan bearing the
honorary title of Dhammasenapati. It is likely that he was known as
a man of rank and importance before he entered the Order, and perhaps
he threw himself into serious studies while still a layman. We shall find
such cases later.
The Gandhavamsa (pp. 64, 73) is myonlyauthorityhere. The curious
title EtimasamidlpanI appears to have no meaning whatever and may be
wrongly copied (perhapsfor Ehimayasamdipam).
3 C. Duroiselle, Bulletin, tome v, p. 147, note. The Sasanavamsa
mentions another learned monk of Pagan, sometimes called Aggapandita
and sometimes Aggavamsa, with whom our author might be confused.
Aggapandita, who livedinthethirteenth century, wrote the Lokuppattipa-
kasan! (see Pitakatthamain, pp. 60, 66).
4 Forbes, Legendary History, p. 24.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 17
(strictly meaning India, but with Burmese writers often
Burma).1 Forchhammer mentions him among the famous
residents in the retired monastery on the northern plateau
above Pagan, 'the cradle of Pali-Burmese literature.'2
The Saddaniti was the first return gift of Burma to Ceylon.
A
few years after its completion the thera (' elder ') Uttarajiva
left Pagan and crossed the sea to visit the celebrated Maha-
vihara,3 taking with him a copy of the Saddaniti, which was
received with enthusiastic admiration, and declared superior
to any work of the kind written by Sinhalese scholars.
Uttarajiva was accompanied byhis pupil the novice Chapata, 4
whose name was destined to eclipse, for a time at least, even
that of Aggavamsa. He received ordination from the Sangha
in Ceylon, and lived in its midst for some years, ardently
studying the doctrine as handed down in the Mahavihara,
and, we may suppose, mastering many ancient texts of high
authority which had not yet found their way to Burma. His
talents and forcible personality were just the other elements
needed to make his stay in the sacred island important for the
literary history of Burma.
The works usually ascribed to Saddhammajotipala, otherwise
Chapata, represent the second stage in the monastic scholarship
of his time and country.
The Suttaniddesa or Kaccayanasuttaniddesa is a grammatical
treatise explaining the ' sutras ' (aphorisms) of the Indian
grammarian Kaccayana.5 Forchhammer6 mentions the Sutta-
niddesa as a work, originally ascribed to Kaccayana, introduced
1 GV., pp. 67, 72; see also SVD, verse 1238 ; Fausboll, Cat. Ind. MSS.,
p. 49.
2 Forchhammer, Report (Pagan), p. 2.
3 Thisfamousand ancientmonasteryissaid to havebeenfounded bythe
King ofCeylon, Devanampiya-Tissa, forthe thera Mahinda, ASoka'sson.
4 Or Chapada,so called afterthe village where hewas born, near Bassein
(Pali, Kusimanagara). In religion his name was Saddhammajotipala
(Sas., p. 74).
con 8 s F ul o t r F K au a s c b c o a l y l' a s na Cat s a ee lo t g h u e eo e f di M t a i n on da o l f a E y . M S S e S n . ar i t n , t P h a e ri I s n , di 1 a 87 Of 1 fi ; ce fo L r ib M ra S r S y . ,
Spu.r 4 m 5 a -8 an;d cf C . ey F l o o r n ch s h e a e mm B e ri r t , is L h is M t u , s p e p u . m xx, Ca x t x a i. logu F e or of ed S i a ti n o s n k s ri p t ro a d n u d ce P d al in i
Printed Books, 1892-1906.
6 Jardine Prize Essay, p. 34.

18 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
by Chapata into Burma. The Sasanavamsa, Gandhavamsa, and
Sasanavamsadlpa give Chapata as the author, and say that
he wrote at Arimaddana (Pagan).1 The Gandhavamsa adds
that he composed the Suttaniddesa ' at the request of ' his
Dhammacari.
pupil
His other well - known work is the Sankhepavannana.
According to Forchhammer's sources - Chapata introduced
the Sankhepavannana from Ceylon and transcribed it from
the Sinhalese into the Burmese - Talaiiig alphabet, but the
Sasanavamsa, Sasanavamsadlpa, and Gandhavamsa state that
he composed it. According to the Gandhavamsa it was the
only one of his eight works that was written in Ceylon. As
to the basis of this work, it appears, from the title given in
the MSS., to be a commentaryon the Abhidhammatthasangaha,
then recently written by a Sinhalese thera, Anuruddha. In
arrangement the Sankhepavannana follows the Abhidhamma-
tthasangaha, being divided into nineparicchedas?
The Slmalankara or Slmalahkaratlka,a treatise on boundaries
and sites for religious ceremonies, is a commentary on a work
by the Sinhalese thera Vacissara.4 Another work on monastic
topics is the Vinayasamutthanadlpanl, written, as the favourite
formula has it, 'at the request of' Chapata's preceptor. 5 The
Vinayagulhatthadlpanl, again, is an explanation of difficult
passages in the Vinayapitaka.6 The JNamacaradlpani ('on
ethics,' according to Forchhammer, but classed by the Pitaka-
tthamain as 'Abhidhamma') may be of Chapata's composition.
It was, at all events, introduced by him into Burma."
The Gandhisara or Ganthisara8 is evidently an anthology
or manual for study condensed from important texts. The
1 Sas., p. 74 ; GV., pp. 64, 74 ; Sasanavamsadlpa, verses 1247-8 ;
cf. Pitakatthamain, p. 66.
2 Jardine Prize Essay, p. 35.
Cat 3 . Ol M d a e n n d be . rg M , S P S a . l , i M JP S T S S . ., in 1 t 8 h 9 e 6, In p d . ia 39. Offic T e, he JPT P S i . t , ak 1 a 88 t 2 t , ha p. ma 8 i 5 n ; m Fa e u n s t b i o o l n l s ,
Sankhepavannana under the heading Abhidhamma (P.TH., p. 50).
4 Pitakatthamain, pp. 43, 49 ; GV., p. 62 ; SVD., verses 12, 13.
5 GV., pp. 64, 74.
6 P.TH., p. 44.
7 Forchhammer, Essay, p. 35 ; P.TH., p. 45.
8 Gandhisarain the Gandhavamsa, p. 74.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 19
remaining works ascribed to Chapata, the Miltikatthadipani
and Patthanagananaya, treat of Abhidharama subjects. 1
It would be rash to say, without careful comparison of the
literature of the two countries, that, even at that early period,
the Burmese Sangha showed a keener interest in the Abhi-
dhamma than the Sinhalese, but this was certainly the case
later.2 The school or sect founded by Chapata and known as
the Sihalasarigha (or Ceylon sangha) of Burma was probably
absorbed in monastic questions. For Chapata had returned to
Pagan, a missionary of Sinhalese orthodoxy. Deeply imbued
with the belief that the Mahavihara alone had kept the
legitimate 'line of descent '3 unbroken from teacher to teacher,
and that valid ordination could only be received in Ceylon, he
wished to confer the upasampadd on the Pagan brethren who,
never having visited the sacred precincts, were still outside the
pale. To fulfil all conditions required by the Vinaya he
brought with him four companions4 qualified like himself.
The little group was to be the nucleus of the new Order in
Burma, the rightful heirs of the one tradition.
Butthis claim was stoutly opposed in some of the monasteries
of Pagan. Thetraditions of the South country and of Anorata's
great Talaing teacher were still flourishing. Arahanta, it
was claimed, had been in the 'direct line' from the ancient
missionaries JSona and Uttara ; his disciples had been qualified
to receive and hand on the upasampadd, and the Mahavihara
itself could confer no better title. The older community there-
fore declined to be drawn into Chapata's fold, and he, having
the then reigning king on his side, was powerful enough to
make them appear the seceders, while his followers refused all
1 The Pitakatthamaiu (p. 37) mentions another, the Visuddhimagga-
ganthi, on difficultpassages in Buddhaghosa's Visuddhimagga.
* An observation to this effect is made byMr. Nevill, whose information
was supplied, forthe most part,by Sinhalese monkswell versedinthePali
literature oftheircountry.
tea 3 c T he h r is a l n i d ne d i i s re e c s t t o a r bli c s h h o e s d en by by the the lea n r o n v i i n c g e of t ' h r e igh t t eac d h o e c r tri m n u e s',t fr be om du t l h y e
ordainedandhhaselfapupil of another such, ; and so on in direct ascent
to one ofthe disciples ofthe Buddha.
4 Rahula, Ananda, Slvali, and Tamalinda (Sas., p. 65). Five was the
smallest number of which a Chapter (for acts of the Sangha) could
consist, according to the Vinaya.

20 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
association with them in ceremonies.1 But King Narapati-
sithu was a Buddhist of the old magnificent school, and
though he believed devoutly in Mahavihara orthodoxy, he
neither persecuted nor neglected the communities that denied
it. The ruins of old Pagan still witness to his bounty towards
the different Sanghas,2 of which the Arahanta sect (called, to
distinguish it from Chapata's Ceylon school, the Mramma or
Burma Sangha) was the most important. Names of gram-
marians follow close on one another at this period. Schisms
had indeed arisen, but the time had not yet come for works
ofpolemik, and the good monks of Pagan were busy enriching
the new store of learning in the country. In the work
of Saddhammasiri, the author of the grammatical treatise
Saddatthabhedacinta,3 we catch a glimpse of a culture that
recalls Aggavamsa. Saddhammasiri's grammar is based partly
on Kaccayana's Pali aphorisms and partly on Sanskrit
authorities. The Sasanavamsa tells us that Saddhammasiri
also translated the Brihaja (?) into the Burmese language.4
He was probably among the first to use Burmese as a literary
instrument.5 If the work mentioned is the astrological
Brlhajjataka 6 it could not have put a great strain on the
resources of the Burmese idiom (even before the immense
body of Pali words added later had come to the aid of the
vernacular), so the feat was not a surprising one. But the
thera's knowledge of Sanskrit is an interesting point. It is
1 See the Kalyani inscriptions (edited by Taw Sein Ko), Ind. Ant.,
vols. xxii and xxiii.
2 'Fraternitiesfrom Ceylon,from the conquered Hamsavati,from Siam,
Camboja, and probably Nepal and China, sojourned in Pagan.' Forch-
hammer, Report (Pagan), p. 2.
3 GV., pp. 62, 72 ; Fausboll, Cat. Mand. MSS., pp. 47, 48 ; Forch-'
hammer, List, p. xix.
4 Sas.,p. 75 : 'Soyeva theraBrihajam namaVedasattham pi maramma-
bhasayaparivattesi.' Cf. Pitakatthamain, p. 68.
5 M. Duroiselle mentions inscriptions in Burmese of the tenth and
eleventh centuries, containing words of Sanskrit derivation, and he
expresses the belief that Sanskrit was known in Burma before Pali,
which, so shortly after its importation from Thaton (at the epoch of
the inscriptions), ' n'etait connu que de 1'elite des moines ' (Bulletin,
tome
v, p. 154).
6 Of Varaha-Mihira ; see Weber, Indische Literaturgeschichte, 2nd ed.,
pp. 277, 278.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 21
curious, too, to find him busied with one of the Brahmanic
works known as ' Vedas' in Burma.1
Another grammatical work of some importance is the
commentary generally known as Nyasa, but sometimes as
MukhamattadlpanI, on the Kaccayanayoga. The author was
Vimalabuddhi,2 who is claimed by the Sasanavamsa as a thera
of Pagan, but is said by some authorities to be of Ceylon.
A
tika or gloss on the Nyasa was written by Vimalabuddhi,3
to whom an Abhidhammatthasangahatlka is also ascribed.4
The Nyasa was glossed by another commentator in the
reign of Narapatisithu. The scholiast this time was a man
of high rank who addressed himself to the task for love of
one of the king's daughters. At least, the story, as related
by the Sasanavamsa, is that Narapati, knowing this nobleman
to be violently in love with one of the princesses, promised
him her hand on condition that he should produce a work of
profound learning. 5 He undertook a scholium on the Nyasa.
The Sasanavamsa does not make it clear whether he was an
official at the Court first and entered the Order on purpose
to write his book, or whether he was already of the Order
when he fell in love. We are only told that when he ' returned
to the lay life ' the king conferred on him the title rdjjuggahd-
macca. The Burmese title by which his work is sometimes
mentioned is Thanbyin.6
A treatise entitled Lokuppatti by Aggapandita ~ was written
at Pagan. The author was a native of Burma. He was
1 For this term applied to the miscellaneous learning of Brahman
immigrants to Burma, see below, Chapter IV.
2 Called Maha-Vimalabuddhi to distinguish him from a later writer
( M S a a n s. d , . p M . SS 75 ., ; p P p . . TH 47 . , , 48 p. ). 63 ; Forchhammer, List, p. xxiii ; Fausboll, Cat.
3 GV, pp. 63, 73. * See SVD., verse 1223.
5 It seems that the king's request was not out ofthe way, forthe noble-
man was a learned grammarian according to the SVD., verse 1240, where
it is said that the Nyasappadlpatlka was written ' ekena amaccena
saddatthanayaununa'. Cf. P.TH., p. 64. There is a tlka called Nyasa-
ppadlpa (incomplete) at the India Office. The author's name is missing.
See Fausboll, Cat. Mand. MSS., p. 48.
wa 6 s S a as t . i , tl p e . g 7 i 5 ve ; n Fo to rc r b e h v a e m n m u e e r o , ff L i i c s e t r , s, p. ne x a xi r i l i y . co T r h r a es n p b o y n i d n in ( g ra t j o ju t g h g e a t h h a u m g a y c i ca o ) f
modern times. See InscriptionsofPagan,Pinya, andAva, p. 128, note.
7 GV, pp. 64, 67 ; Sas., p. 74 ; P.TH., p. 60.

22 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
apparently one of the few Palists of his time who was not
chiefly devoted to the study of the language.
The Gandhavamsa mentions a grammar, Lingatthavivarana
by Subhiitacandana, who was followed by Nanasilgara Avith
Lingatthavivaranappakasaka and Uttama with Lingatthaviva-
A
ranatlka. These three doctors were all of Pagan.1
Lingatthavivaranavinicchaya, 2 by an author whose name is
not mentioned, isapparentlybased on Subhiltacandana's treatise,
or explains difficult passages in it. Uttama, the author of the
Lingatthavivaranatlku, 3 also wrote a scholium on Balavatilra,
the well-known grammar by Vacissara of Ceylon."1
Another of the Pagan grammarians, whose work has been
studied for centuries and republished in recent times, was
Dhammadassi, a novice (samanera) in the Order5 when he
composed his well-known treatise Vacavacaka or Vaccavacaka.
A
commentary on it was written by Saddhammanandi.6
From the Saddatthabhedacinta of Saddhammasiri sprang
a number of commentaries of which the best known is the
Mahatika7 by the thera Abhaya of Pagan. Abhaya's name
reappears as the author of the Sambandhacintatika,8 a com-
mentary on the Sambandhacinta of Sangharakkhita.9
Forchhammer places both Saddhammasiri and Abhaya in the
1 GV., pp. 63, 67, 72, 73. The P.TH., p. 72, ascribes Lingatthavivarana
and the tlka to Saddhammakitti ofSagaing.
3 GV., pp. 65, 75.
;i GV., pp.63, 67 ; Forchhammer, Report (Pagan), p. 2 ; Forchhammer,
Lis 4 t, D p h . ar x n xi m i a i k ; it P t . i TH i . n , F p o . r 7 c 0 h . hammer's List Vacissara in India OfficeMS.,
etc. See Cat. Mand. MSS., p. 46. ;
5 Sas., p. 75.
6 See Fausboll, Cat. Mand. MSS., p. 50, for commentary and tikas on
Vaccavacaka. They are entitled Vaccavacakavannana, Vaccavacakatlka,
and Vaccavacakadipani. Saddhammanandi is the onlyauthormentioned.
In Forchhammer's List (p. xxii) these works appear without names of
a at ut P h a o g rs an ; b cf y .P a . t T h H e . r , a, p. 'n 7 a 1, m a e cc u o n r k d n i o n w g n t , o ' w a h n i d ch th t e he tl V k a a cc b a y va S c a a d k d a ha w m a m s an wr a i n t d t i e . n
Th 7 e G c V o . m , me pp n . ta 6 r 3, y i 7 n 3 t ; he Fo M r a c n h d h a a l m a m y er C , oll R e e c p t o i r o t n ( a P t ag t a h n e ), In p d . ia 2 O ; ff L i i c s e t, is p. cal x l i e x. d
Sad
8
d
F
a
a
t
u
t
s
h
b
a
o
b
l
h
l
e
,
da
C
c
a
i
t
n
.
ta
M
d
a
i
n
p
d
an
.
l;
MS
v.
S.
F
,
aus
p
b
.
ol
5
l
0
,
;
Cat
F
.
o
M
r
a
c
n
h
d
h
.
am
M
m
S
e
S
r
.
,
, p
L
.
is
5
t
1
,
).
p. xxi ;
P.TH., pp. 69, 71.
9 TheSambandhacinta,on syntactical relation, is probablyofthetwelfth
century. Theauthor wasa scholarofCeylon, betterknown by hisfamous
Subodhalamkara, on the art ofpoetry, and the Vuttodaya, on prosody.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 23
fourteenth century.1 Unfortunately the Sasanavamsa and
Gandhavamsa, usually careful to give us the birthplace or
residence of our authors, rarely give us their exact date.
Without a close comparison of the texts one with another,
or a minute study of the chronicles of monasteries, we must
be -content with conjectures as to the order in which the
scholars of Pagan should appear in literary history. But we
may perhaps venture to place most of those just mentioned
in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Before passing on
to the later period of Pali literature at Pagan it will be well
to look for a moment at the state of the Burmese Sangha, or
rather Sanghas.
Narapati's impartial benevolence had secured a peaceful life
and means of study for all those who sought them, but it
could not prevent discord between the communities; and
when Chapata died, his school the Slhalasangha split into
four factions, each following one of the four theras who had
come with Chapata from Ceylon.
The dissensions (for they can hardly be called schisms in the
usual sense of the word) that arose within the Slhalasangha,
once stronger and more united than the other sects in Pagan,
were not, it seems, caused by questions of dogma. At all
events, the Sasanavamsa tells us only of the personal reasons
for which Rahula separated himself first from his colleagues
and they in their turn parted company.
Rahula's defection was the gravest matter. The story is that
he fell desperately in love with an actress at one of the festivals
given by King Narapati. His brother-theras entreated and
reasoned with him in vain. Finally, they prayed him to
leave the country, and spare his community the scandal of
his 'return to the lower life'. He then took ship and went
to 'Malayadlpa ', 2 and in that country became preceptor to
1 Forchhammer, JardinePrize Essay, p. 36.
2 Sas., p. 66. The reading chosen by Miuayeffin his transcript of the
text, and, after some hesitation, by the present writer in editing the
Sasanavamsa, was 'Mallarudlpa'. The MS. corrects to Malayadlpa. The
episode is in',eresting. The reading Malaya is confirmed by the Kalyani
inscriptions. See Taw Sein Ko, 'Remarks on the Kalyani Inscriptions,'
Ind. Ant., xxiv, p. 301. The ancient Malayades"a (an Indian colony) was
in the Malay Peninsula (v. Fournereau, LeSlam ancien, p. 52).

24 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
the king, who wished to be instructed in the Yinaya. The
end of Rahula's story is curious. Under him the king studied
the Khuddasikkha l and the tlka on the same afterwards, with
;
the largess that his grateful pupil bestowed on him, the thera
abandoned the Order and lived as a layman.
This little history is no doubt told for edification more
than for its human interest, like the story of Ananda, whose
transgression, less dramatic than Rahula's, was also against
monastic discipline. Narapati had presented the three theras,
Slvali, Tamalinda, and Ananda, each with an elephant.
Ananda, wishing to give his to his relations in Kaiicipura,
was preparing to ship it from Bassein (Kusimanagara), when
the others remonstrated with him, pointing out that they, in
a spirit more becoming to followers of the Buddha, had turned
their elephants loose in the forest. Ananda argued that
kindness to kinsfolk was also preached by the Master. Neither
side would be persuaded, and Ananda was cut off from the
community.
SlvaliandTamalindaafterwardsdisagreed on anotherquestion
of conduct. Tamalinda had recommended his disciples to the
pious laity for gifts and other marks of consideration, an action
of which the Buddha had strongly disapproved.2 After some
useless admonishing, Slvali refused to have any further inter-
course with Tamalinda, and formed a sect of his own. This
very simple account of the origin of the four factions in the
Slhalasangha is not quite satisfying, but as an example of
monastic traditions in Burma it has a certain interest. Besides,
even such fragments of the personal historyof theras sometimes
give us a glimpse into the course of studies and scholarship in
their day.
In the meantime, as our list of authors shows, literary work
went on at Pagan. After Narapati, the next keen patron of
A
1 compendium of the Vinaya written in Ceylon, edited by Professor
E. Miiller (JPTS., 1883). Tlkas on this text were composed by Revata
and Saiigharakkhita, both ofCeylon (vide P.TH., p. 48).
2 Sas., p. 67. It is here called by a technical name, vacivinnatti. For
pronouncements in the Vinaya on this subject, see Vinaya, v, p. 125
(Oldenberg's edition), and compare iii, pp. 227, 256, etc.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 25
learning was Kyocva or Kya-swa.1 The works produced under
his auspices were chiefly grammatical, but the Abhidham-
matthasarigaha was also one of the principal subjects of study. 2
We
should expect to hear that the students of Pali grammar
were chiefly monks, eager not only to understand the ancient
texts thoroughly, but to master the classic language, in order
to compose in it themselves. But grammatical knowledge was
We
by no means limited to the monasteries. have already
heard of the learning of Narapati's minister. In the time of
Kyocva, too, there were grammarians at the king's court.3
Indeed, Kyocva is said to have insisted on general diligence
around him, while he himself set the example by writing the
Saddabindu and Paramatthabindu, both grammatical works.4
A
little work on Pali cases, entitled Yibhattyattha, is ascribed
to his daughter. 5
The Mukhamattasara,6 another grammatical work of this
epoch, was written by Siigara, called Gunasagara in the
Gandhavamsa,7 which states that Sagara wrote a tlka on his
own work, at the request of the Sangharaja (Head of the
whole Order), who was King Kyocva's preceptor.
1 Kyaswa succeeded Jeyyasinkha A.D. 1227 (Phayre), or A.D. 1234
(Barnett). Pagan is described in a florid thirteenth-century poem, the
Manavulu-Sandesaya, written in Ceylon, ed. L. D. Barnett (JRAS.,
April, 1905, p. 265).
- For an example of studies, see the pathetic little story of the
monk Disapamokkha. who pursued knowledge so fervently in his old
age (beginning with Kaccayana and the Abhidhammatthasangaha) that
in time he astonished the chief theras byhis learning, and was chosen by
the Kingto be his acariya (Sas., p. 77).
3 Pali grammar was a popular study at that time eveu amongwomen
andyoung girls. A quaint and interesting passage in the Sasanavamsa,
d r e e s p c r r o i d b u e c s e h d o b w y b M u i s n y ay m e o f t f he in rs th of e f R a e m c i h l e i r e c s he i * n ( A S r a i s. m , a p d . da 78 na; R ( e P c a h g e a r n c ) hes s , na p t . c 6 h 9 e ) d ,
time to learn.
4 Saddabindu is ascribed to Kyaswa, and dated 1234 in the Pitakat-
thamain, pp. 45, 70. See also G V., pp. 64, 73 ; ASas., p. 76. Saddabindu
has been ascribed to Kyocva's preceptor. commentary entitled
Linatthavisodhan! was written by Nanavilasa of Pagan (Nevill). The
tlka on Saddabindu, called Saddabinduvinicchaya, in the India Office, is
by Sirisaddhammakittimahaphussadeva (vide Fausbb'll, Cat. Mand. MSS.,
p. 50). A tlka u on Paramatthabindu was written at Pagan by the thera
Mahakassapa ( itakatthamain, p. 51).
5 Sas.,p. 77(seePreface to Subhuti's editionoftheAbhidhanappadlpika,
2nd ed., Colombo, 1883). 6 Sas., p. 76 ; GV., pp. 63, 67, 73.
7 Gunasara in Forchhammer's List, p. xxiii.

26 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
A
Vibhatyattha was written, probably at Pagan, by the
thera Saddhammafiiina early in the fourteenth century.1 Sadd-
hammafmna was the author of a more important work on
metrics, the Chandosaratthavikasim 2 (or Vuttodayapancika,
being a commentary onVuttodaya)
,
3 and the Chapaccayadlpani,
also on prosody.4 Saddhammanana was not only a Palist, but
a Sanskrit scholar, and translated the Sanskrit grammar
Kiitantra (Kalapa) into Pali.5
The Gandhatthi, by Mangala, is a grammatical work,
probably of the fourteenth century, and written at Pagan. At
a somewhat later period, but also atPagan,Sirisaddhammavilasa
composed a Kaccayana tika, entitled Saddhammanasinl.6
So far, the production of learned works in the communities
of Burma seems to have gone on steadily, in spite of sectarian
differences, which, after all, would affect grammarians less
than experts in the Vinaya. But a change had come over
the fortunes of the Order in the thirteenth century. The
Pagan dynasty fell in 12777 under the assaults of Mongol
invadersfromthenorth,whilenearlyatthesametimeasuccessful
revolt in the south completed the overthrow of the Burmese
power. Shim rulers established their capital at Myinzaing
(Khandhapura in Pali), and the glory of Pagan, where the
very temples had been torn down to fortify the city against
the enemy, was never restored.
The Sasanavamsa tells us that many monks settled at
Myinzaing, but no books were written there.
2 1 F F o o r r c c h h h h a a m m m m e e r r , , R E e s p sa o y r , t p ( . Pa 3 g 6 an ; ), Fa p u . s 2 bo ; ll E , ss C a a y t , . p. Ma 36 nd ; . Fa M u S s S b . o , ll, p. C 5 a 0 t . .Mand.
MS 3 S. V , ut p t p o . d 5 a 1 y , a, 52 a ; F t o we r l c f h t h h a - m ce m n e t r u , ry Li w st o , r p k . x b xi y ii S ; an P g i h t a a r k a a k t k t h h i a t m a a , in, wr p i . tt 7 e 4 n . in
Ceylon ; publishedby Fryerin JAS. Bengal, 1877.
4 Forchhammer, Essay, p. 36.
5 For remarks on the Katantra of Sarvavarman and the connection
between this system and that of Kaccayana, see Weber, Indische
Literaturgeschichte, 2nd ed., p. 243, and Kuhn.
6 Forchhammer, Report (Pagan), p. 2, and List, p. xx. The MS. of
Sirisaddhammavilasa's work in the Mandalay collection is called Kacca-
yanasara Tika (Fausboll, Cat. Mand. MSS., p. 48). The Kaccayanasara
was composed in the Talaing country (see below, pp. 36, 37).
53, 7 5 F 4 or ; b C e o s l , o L n e el ge B n u d r a n r e y y' H s is t t r o a r n y s , la p t . io 2 n 5 sf ; r P o h m ay R r a e j , av H a i m s s t a o , ry JA o S f . B B u e r n m ga a l , , p v p ol . . 5 i 1 v , ,
pp. 400ff.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 27
In 1312 a Shan king Slhasfira founded Panya (Pali, Vijaya-
pura), where, with a new era of peace and safety for the Order,
came a revival of literary activity. In Slhasiira's reign
Sirimahgala or Sirisumangala, one of the most diligent of his
fraternity, busied himself with commentaries explaining the
grammatical construction of the Samantapasadika (Buddha-
ghosa's commentary on the Vinaya) and the Abhidhamma
commentaries, also ascribed to Buddhaghosa, Atthasalini, and
Sammohavinodanl.1 This is a good example of reviving
monastic industry in that day. And it is quite curious to see
in the new court and under the new dynasty a return to the
traditions of Narapati and Kyaswa. An important officer of
state (a caturahgabalamacca, to give him his Pali title) under
King Kittisihasura - wrote a samvannana (commentary) on
Moggallana's well-known Pali dictionary, the Abhidhanappa-
dlpikil. 3 The same official wrote tlkas on the Koladdhaja at
the request of the thera Pasadika, and on the Dandlppa-
karana.4
Another essay on Pali grammar, written at Panya under
Kittisihasura's patronage, was the much-studied Saddasarattha-
jalinl (or Jalinl) of Nagita, otherwise Khantakakhipa, a monk
of Sagu.5
A
tlka on the Vuttodaya of Sarigharakkhita 6 was written
(at Pagan according to Forchhammer,7 at Panya according to
the Gandhavamsa 8 ) by Navavimalabuddhi, otherwise Culla-
1 P.TH., p. 40.
2 Came to the throne A.D. 1351 (Kyoaswa IV in Phayre's History of
Burma, pp. 60, 282) ; Sas., p. 88.
:t See Fausboll, Cat. Hand. MSS., pp. 46, 51.
* GV., pp. 63, 73 ; Sas.,p. 88. Thetitles last mentioned do not suggest
grammaror Buddhistdoctrine, but other branches of learning astrology
and poetics. (See Appendix.)
8 The quaint nickname Khantakakhipa camefrom a little adventureof
Nagita's boyhood, when he was not more serious than most boys. He
was so unwilling tobetaken to the monastery, and resisted so obstinately,
that hisfatherlostpatience with him, and threw him bodily intoa thorny
bush. See Sas., p. 88 ; GV., p. 74 ; SVD., verse 1249 ; Forchhammer,
List, p. xx. There is a commentary on this work at the India Office
entitled Saramanjusa. Oldenberg, Pali MSS. in the India Office Library^
p. 102.
Sas., pp. 34, 75.
~ Report (Pagan), p. 2 ; List, p. xxiii.
8 GV., p. 67 ; the Pitakatthamain (p. 74) saysat Pagan.

28 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
Vimalabuddhi, author of a work called Abhidhammapannara-
satthana,1 explaining some passages of the Abhidhamraa. In
theGandhavamsaaVuttodaya tikaisascribedtoaYepullabuddhi
of Pagan, who appears again2 as the author of (ft) a tika on
SaddasaratthajalinI ; (b) a Paramatthamaii jfisit (metaphysical);
(c) a tika on the Abhidhammatthasangaha, called Dasaganthi-
vannana (or Dasagandhivannana) ; and (d) a tika on Vidadhi-
mukharaandana.3
Another treatise, the Atthabyakkhyiina (exegetical or
grammatical), is mentioned as the work of a Culla-Vajirabuddhi
on one page of the Gandhavamsa, and put down to Culla-
Vimalabuddhi in another. Now among the Sinhalese authors
enumerated in the Sasanavamsa4 we find a Nava-Vimalabuddhi,
author of an early tika on the Abhidhammatthasangaha and
a Cujabuddha, author of the Atthabyakkhyana, whereas the
only work allowed by the Sasanavamsa to the Burmese Culla-
Vimalabuddhi is the Vuttodaya-tlka, and to Vepulla the
V
acanattha oti.5
j
Possibly the confusion in the Gandhavamsa arises from the
author's ignoring the Sinhalese thera Vimalabuddhi (carefully
mentioned by the Sasanavamsa in a passage referring also
to Vimalabuddhi of Pagan). The name is absent from the
Gandhavamsa list of theras of Ceylon, 6 while the three, Nava-
Vajirabuddhi, Vepullabuddhi, and Nava-Vimalabuddhi, are all
put down as Jambudlplka (i.e. belonging to Burma) and their
work as composed at Pagan, except in the case of Nava-
Vimalabuddhi, who wrote, according to this account, at
Panya.
These small bibliographical puzzles, which we are not willing
1 GV., pp. 64, 74, not mentioned in the Sasanavamsa
2 Thereisanalternativereading,Vimalabuddhi,buttheeditor(Miriayeff),
followingno doubt the best MSS., has preferred Vepulla in these passages
ofthe Gandhavamsa.
3 Apparently the Vidagdhamukhamandana (on riddles) of Dharmadasa
(see Appendix).
4 Sas., p. 34.
8 Sas.,'p. 75; the Vacanatthajotika, gloss on Vuttodaya, ascribed to
Vepullabuddhi, is probably a fourteenth-century work Forchhammer,
Ess 8 ay G , V. p , . p 3 . 6 6 ; 7. Fausboll, Cat. Hand. MSS.. p. 51.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 29
to leave unsolved but must waste much time in solving, result
sometimes from the choice of well-known or well-sounding
Pali names by theras of different epochs and their pupils,
commentators and copyists, sometimes from the renaming of
distinguished teachers by their royal admirers. It would be
well to have all such details exact, but when dealing with this
early period of Pali-Burmese literature it is difficult to avoid
confusing Burmese with Sinhalese authors.
The Saddavutti, or Saddavuttipakasaka, by Saddhammapala,
a grammatical treatise, probably belongs to the fourteenth
century.1 If so, it was written when the great importance
of Pagan as a religious centre had declined, though the author
is mentioned by Forchhammer as one of those who worked
in the famous retreat of the ' Maramma ' Fraternity near
the old capital. Here also the tika on the Saddavutti was
composed by Sariputta (also called Sariputtara). 2 The Sasana-
vamsa3 calls the author of Saddavutti, Saddhammaguru,
and states that he wrote at Panya in the Gandhavamsa,4
;
however, Saddhammaguru is among the acariyas who wrote
at Pagan.
The Niruttisaramanjusa, a tika on the Nirutti,5 ascribed to
Kaccayana, is by a Saddhammaguru,6 perhaps the author of
the Saddavutti.
A
grammatical workentitledSainbandhamalinI was, according
to the Pitakatthamain,7 composed at Pagan. Neither the date
nor the author's name is given.
Our list of grammarians does not end even here. But those
to be mentioned later belong to the new period beginning with
the foundation of Ava (Pali, Ratanapura) by the Burmese
a 2 1 Sa F F d o o d r r a c v c u h h t h h t a a i m m v m m i e e v r r a , , ra E n R s a e s p a a o y r r , e t p m . ( e P 3 n a 6 t ga i ; n o ) P n , . e T d p H . . i , n 2 ; p G . V Li 7 . s 1 t . ( , pp p . . 6 s 5 i , x. 75), A wi la t t h e o r ut tik n a am ar e i s d
ofauthors. The tika in the India Office collection is byJagara. Fausboll,
Cat. Mand.MSS.', p. 50.
3 Sas.,p. 90.
4 GV., p. 67.
5 Also called the Niruttipitaka, a grammatical treatise. See SVD.,
verses 1233, 1234.
6 Fausboll, Cat. Mand. MSS., p.49.
7 Pitakatthamain, p. 73.

30 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
prince Sativa or Thado-min-bya in the year 1364, after the
fall of the Shan rulers of Panyli and Sagaing.1
As the delta region had not been without a literary history
after the Burmese conquest in the eleventh century, we must
now turn back to earlier times, before following the progress
of learning in both Lower and Upper Burma from the fifteenth
century onwards.
1 Phayre, HistoryofBurma, pp. 63, 64 ; 2nd. Ant., xxii, p. 8.

CHAPTER
III
BUDDHISM AND PALI LITERATURE IN MARTABAN (MUTTIMA)
AND AT PEGU CITY (HAMSAVATI) FROM THE TWELFTH
.
TO THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY DHAMMACETI AND THE
KALYANI INSCRIPTIONS LITERATURE IN UPPER BURMA
FROM THE FOUNDATION OF AVA (RATANAPURA) TO THE
END OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY
1. Pegu (Ramannailefsa).
Buddhist learning in Ramannadesa, the Talaing country,
may have been greatly impoverished by the carrying away
of texts and scholars from Sudhammapura at the time of
Anorata's successful raid, but we do not positively know that
it was so. Indeed, a country so easy of access from India,
Ceylon, and Indo-China must have continued to receive new
contributions to its intellectual store the northern rulers,
;
professing Buddhism themselves, could have no motive for
discouraging students or pilgrims from abroad, and it is not
likely that the Order suffered in any way from the Burmese
power established in the south after the fall of Thaton.
However, the first literary personage of Ramanna that we
meet in the Sasanavamsa is Sariputta, afterwards named
Dhammavilasa, a twelfth century author.1 Sariputta was born
at Padlpajeyya, near Dala (opposite Rangoon), and entered
the Order late in life. He was still a novice (samanera)
when he went to Pagan2 in the reign of Narapati-si-thu and
received the upaisampadA ordination from the thera Ananda,
one of the four who had accompanied Chapata returning from
Ceylon. Being thus inducted into the Sihalasangha, Sariputta
could claim to be in the direct ' line of descent to use the
',
ecclesiastical phrase, from the ancient teachers of the Maha-
vihara. He became one of the leaders of the sect.
1 See SirJohn Jardine's Notes on Buddhist Law, iv Preface to Forch-
;
hammer's translation ofthe Wagaru Dkammat/iat, p. 5 ; Forchhammer,
Essay, pp. 29, 35.
- Sas., p. 41.

32 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
It is said that the king heard of the aged monk's learning
and holiness and thought of appointing him royal preceptor,
but before summoning Siiriputta he sent some court officials
to find out what manner of man he was. When they returned
and described him as extremely old and feeble (some say, with
a slight deformity as well), Narapati was unwilling to put on
him the labour and fatigue of being the king's dcariya, and
contented himself with honouring the thera in other ways.
Sariputta was afterwards sent to his native country to
'purify religion ' there, which (in the Sasanavansa) means
that he was to represent the Slhajasarigha in the south.
This was duly done by Sariputta, who settled at Dala and
handed on the Mahavihara tradition to his pupils. The
establishment of the Ceylon school in the Talaing country is
said to date from that time. It is interesting to remember in
this connection that, according to the Mahiivamsa, an earlier
generation of scholars in Raman fia had supplied teachers to
the Sinhalese fraternity, when theras of Sariputta's country
were called upon, in Vijayabahu's reign (A.D. 10711123), to
come over to Ceylon and restore learning there.1 Sariputta
probably lived till the year 1246. It is difficult to distinguish
his religious works (if he composed any) from those of the
other Sariputtas of that epoch. 2 His most interesting work,
from the historical point of view, was neither in grammar,
Vinaya, nor Abhidhamma, and is not mentioned in the Sasana-
vamsa or in the Gandhavamsa. Sariputta, or Dhammavilasa
(to call him by the name conferred on him as a title of honour
by Narapati), is known to be the author of one of the earliest
law codes of Burma.3
1 Kern, Man. Ind. Buddh., p. 132, note (referenceto Mahav., Ix, 5).
viii 2 . Se T e w S o as. S , ar p i . pu 3 t 3 ta ; s G a V r . e , m p e p n . ti 6 o 1, ne 6 d 6, in 67 t , h 7 e 1 G;a F n o d r h c a h v h a a m m s m a er l , ist Li o s f t, do p c p t . or v s ,
of Ceylon, one among those of Burma. Tikas on theAnguttaranikaya,
Majjhimanikaya, the Saratthadipanl, and a tlka on it were written in
Ceylon by a Sariputta of the reign of Parakramabahu I (A.D. 1153-84),
a contemporary therefore ofSariputta ofDala.
3 Taw Sein Ko says : 'The dates ofbirth and death of Dhammavilasa
as well as ofthe completion ofhis Dhammathat are unknown. Even the
Sasanalamkara, compiled aslateas 1832 A.D. by the learned monk Maung
Daung sa d6, Archbishop of King Bodop'aya at Amarapura, is silent on
these points' (Ind. Ant., xxiv, p. 302).

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 33
Dhammavilasa's code stands at the beginning of a series
of Pali and Burmese Buddhist law texts, which are of the
greatest interest as disclosing, to quote Forchhammer's words,
'the practical effect of a religious system upon the social
and political growth of the Talaings and Burmans.' 1 The
question of the remote origin of these codes is a fascinating
and difficult one.
Whether the Brahmanic (caste and sacerdotal) element
was eliminated from them by later Buddhist lawgivers, or
whether they, with all their essential Buddhistic features, go
back to 'the law of Manu as it existed in India prior to the
ascendancy of Brahmanism ', cannot be decided without
a complete knowledge of the oldest law-codes of India. And
for our present purpose it must be enough (however unsatis-
factory an ' enough') to say that the Talaing monk Sariputta
or Dhammavilasa was the author of the oldest dhammasattha
known by name to future generations in Burma.
The Dhammavilasa Dhammathat2 was the basis of later
codes, Pali and Burmese, which took this title and the
;
Talaing influence,3 to be recognized by the presence of a
Hindu element, is visible in the Pali codes till the eighteenth
century.
While Dhammavilasa and his pupils were establishing the
'succession of theras ' at Dala, a like movement took place
in Martaban (Muttima). The opposition between the Sihala-
samgha and the other sects, which had been manifested so
keenly at Pagan, was thus continued in the south. The
queen's two preceptors, Buddhavamsa and Mahanaga, had
1 See the JardinePrizeEssay(Forchhammer) and translations of legal
texts, accompanied byvaluable introductory remarks andnotespublished
in SirJohn Jardine's Notes onBuddhistLaw, Eangoon, 1882-3.
2 Forchhammer did not succeed in finding the original Pali Dhamma-
vilasa Dhammathat. He mentions a commentary composed about
1656 A.D., and a Burmese version by Nandamala, made at Amarapura
in1768. Essay, p. 29 ; see alsoNotesonBuddhistLaw, partiv ; Prefaceto
translation oftheWagarudhammathaton marriageand divorce, p. 3.
3 AnotherexampleistheWagarudhammathat,an important codedrawn
up in Talaing by Wagaru, kingof Martabaii (A.D. 1281-1306). The Pali
translation was made at the end of the fifteenth century. See Noteson
Buddhist Law, vol. iii, p. xi.

34 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
visited Ceylon, had gone through a course of instruction, and
received re-ordination at the Mahavihiira.1 On their return
to Martaban they separated themselves from the other com-
munities, and a Ceylon sect was formed.
Afterwards, for many generations, a scholarly rivalry existed
between Pegu and Burma, of which we shall hear something
in the later history of their literature. Possibly Talaing
authors may have been drawn together then by a bond of
nationality stronger than the ties of sect, but the Sasanavamsa
makes the distinction chiefly between the Slhalasamgha theras
and the members of the Arahantagana, whose 'direct descent '
was denied by those of the Mahavihiira tradition.
Our Pali chronicle says little about Martaban and nothing
about Wagaru, who, however, reigned wisely for twenty-two
We
years. can only suppose that he did not protect the
A
Slhalasamgha with any particular zeal. historian of the
Talaing country and the old tradition could fill the gap and
give us more details of the progress of learning in the south.
But we know that the well-being of the Order depended on the
state of the country, and it is probable that the Sasanavamsa
leaves out very little that is of importance in the list, though
a singularly short one, of works written in Rama fina during
the two centuries between Dhammavilasa's long life and the
revival of religion connected with the name of Dhammaceti
in the fifteenth century. The Shans, whose growing power
in Burma had broken down the old Pagan dynasty, were not
disposed to leave Martaban and Pegu in peace. 2 The Zimme
Shans had also pushed westward. Changes of rulers and the
skirmishing warfare around the unstable thrones of the small
southern kingdoms must have deprived the monasteries of
much valuable patronage, even if the monks were left un-
disturbed. For nearly every mention of important literary
work in chronicles like the Sa"sanavamsa is accompanied by
mention of some royal or wealthy patron. And this need
not surprise us or force us to conclude that the Order was
1 Sas., p. 42.
2 See Forbes, LegendaryHistory, pp. 26, 27 ; Phayre, History ofBurma,
pp. 65 ff.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 35
at any time in slavish dependence on royalty and riches.
Literary work required a more spacious, convenient vihara
than was needed for the simple round of the mendicant's
ordinary life, besides a whole library of sacred texts. To
supply all these and other necessaries of scholarship was
a highly meritorious act, and rich laymen were as eager to
acquire merit in such ways as the monks were content to
accept their gifts. But, still, there were times when, as the
chronicles say, ' religion was dimmed.'
The briefer a literary history is, the more we need to be
clear as to the chronology of the works chosen to illustrate it.
But often this is only placing together fragments by guess-
work. "We are glad to meet any evidence of the state of
scholarship at a given period, such as the Talaing inscriptions
found by Forchhammer near the Kumaraceti pagoda in Pegu.
Forchhammer observed that these inscriptions (which record
the contributions of pious people to the rebuilding of the
cetiya and a vihara) are in more ancient lettering than those
of the Kelasa pagoda in the same region. These latter can
be dated with certainty as fifteenth-century, and Forchhammer
believed the older writing to belong to the beginning of the
fourteenth century, 'when with the rise of Wagaru, King of
Martaban, a new impulse had been given to native learning, and
Buddhism again had attained to exclusive predominance on the
shores of the Gulf of Martaban.' l
A. south-country author who doubtless belongs to the
fourteenth century is Medhamkara, who wrote the well-known
Lokadlpasiira. The Sasanavamsa tells us that he was the
preceptor of Queen Bhadda, the mother of Setibhinda, the king
reigning at Muttimanagara (Martaban).2 Medhamkara had
gone through a course of study in Ceylon, and lived afterwards
1 Forchhammer, Noteson theEarlyHistory, etc.,ii, p. 8. Forchhammer
mentions elsewhere an important sect founded in the south by Buddha-
vamsa (afterwardsknown, forthe confusion offuture Burmese chroniclers,
as Culla-Buddhaghosa). He also had sojourned in Ceylon and held
Sinhalese views of orthodoxy. Jardine Prize Essay, pp. 64, 65.
2 Sas., p. 42. Setibhinda, or Binga-u, began to reign A.D. 1348, and
assumed the title Hsin-hpyu-shin (possessor of a white elephant). He
made Martabanhis
capital.

36 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
at Martaban.1 The Lokadlpasiira is described by Olden berg as
'acollectionofchapters on different subjects,arranged according
to a cosmological scheme '. The chapters deal with different
stages of existence in hell, in the animal kingdom, among the
pretas (ghosts), and so forth, and the subjects are illustrated by
legends.
Hamsavatl (Pegu city), the capital of the kingdom of Pegu
from the middle of the fourteenth century, also had its learned
theras; the Apheggusiira, written at Hamsiivati by a scholar
whose name is not mentioned in the Sasanavamsa, deals with
Abhidhamma 2
topics.
Some important grammatical work was also done in the
south and at the ill-fated Thaton by the thera Mahayasa
of that Neither the thera nor his books are mentioned
city.
in the Sasanavamsa, though the Kaccayanabheda and Kacca-
yanasara not only became standard texts for commentators and
students in Burma, but have since been better known in Ceylon
than works of Burmese grammarians usually are.
The Kaccayanabheda, also called the Kaccayanabhedadlpika,
deals with the grammatical terminology of Kaccayana the
;
Kaccayanasara, as the title shows, is a resume of or textbook on
the teaching of that great grammatical authority.
A
tlka on Kaccayanasara was written byMahayasa himself 3
;
Oj/ 1 ice F , aus p. bol 1 l 2 , 6. Cat. Th M e and G . an M d S h S a . v , am p s . a 42 ca ; lls Ol t d h e e nbe a r u g t , ho P r ali of MS L S ok . ad a i t pa I s i a i r d a i , a
Nava-Medhamkara (Medhamkara, the younger). The Medhamkara who
appears in the list of the theras who worked at Pagan is probably not
thesame.
an 2 d S A e p e he Sa g s g . u , s p a . r 4 a 8 di ; p a a l m s p o a F t o h r o ch a h re am m m e e n r t , io L n i e s d t . ,p. T xv h i e ii, Ga w n he d r h e av A a p m h s e a gg i u s p s a il t e h n o t
about this work. In Nevill's MS. Catalogue, Apheggusaradlpaiil is
described as an anutlkd dealing with matter in the Abhidhammattha
vibhavam. Cf. Fausboll, Cat. Mand. MSS., p. 39, where the author
proposes to give the subtleand profound sdra (essence) of 'all the books '.
The Apheggusaradipam, according to the Mandalay MS., was composed
at Hamsavatl by the dcariya of Queen Sivall. He was Mahasuvannadlpa,
the son ofParakkamabahalaraja.
3 For Kaccayanabheda and Kaccayanasara see SVD., verse 1250 ; GV.,
p R . as 7 a 4 o ; f F T o h r a c to h n h e a . mme T r h , e Li n s a t, me pp. Ma x h x ay a a n s d a i x s xi g , iv w e h n er b e y t N h e e vi a l u l th o o n r S i i s nh c a a l l e l s ed e
p w a . u a t s h 7 o 4 t , r h i e t D y a h . u a th m o I m r n a . n Fa a u n s d bo a ll ; 's th C e at P a i l t o a g k ue a , tt p h . am 47 a , in th ( e p. n 6 a 9 m ) e sa is ys R t a h s a s t a ; Ma i h n ay G a V s ., a

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 37
another by Saddhammavilasa of Pagan,1 whose tlka on Kacca-
yanasara is known as the Sammohavinasinl. Yasa's later
commentators were scholars of Burma. Among them we shall
find the well-known names of Ariyalamkara and Tipitaka-
lamkara of Ava.2
As to the date of Kaccayanasara, we maysaythat it probably
was not written before the thirteenth century, as it contains
quotations from the twelfth century treatises Balavatara,
Rupasiddhi, Culanirutti, and Sambandhacinta.3 On the other
hand, it was known not only in Pegu but in Upper Burma
by the middle of the fifteenth century, as we know from the
fact that a copy was presented to a monastery at Pagan in
1442.*
Probably Mahayasa belongs to the reign of Hsin-hpyu-shin
(Pali: Setibhinda), who established his capital at Pegu in 1370.
Hsin-hpyu-shin finished his reign in comparative calm,5 and
was, after his manner, religious. There was even a temporary
peace between Pegu and Burma, but when Setibhinda died his
successors plunged into war, and a state of things grievously
unfriendly to scholarship began again. But in the fifteenth
century came a great revival of religion under Dhammaceti,
King of Pegu, who reigned 822-53 B.E. (A.D. 1460-9 1). 6
Dhammaceti's reign was doubly memorable. He was famous
far beyond the limits of his own country for his statesmanship
and magnificence, and renowned in the whole Buddhist world
for his piety. The story of his elevation to the throne gives
us the impression of a very unusual personality. He was not
1 Forchhammer, Report, Pagan, p. 2.
- Ariyalamkara'stlka on Kaccayanabheda is entitled Saratthavikasinl.
4 3 W Se r e it A t p e p n e i n n di C x ey t l o on th ; is se c e ha a p b t o e v r e . , p. 22.
5 Forbes, Legendary History, p. 27 ; Phayre, HistoryofBurma, p. 67.
6 Phayre,HistoryofBurma,p. 290. Forbesremarks(LegendaryHistory,
. 31) that the various copies of the Talaing histories differ as to the
ates of the several monarchs reigning in Pegu 'between 710 and 900or
A.D. 1370-1538'. The Burmese era quoted here is the Kaliyuga (as the
word is usually employed in the Sasanavamsa), reckoning from 638 A.D.
(See Forbes, LegendaryHistory,p. 14.) Thedategiven intheSasanavamsa
for Dhammaceti's accession is A.B. 2002, which corresponds to A.D. 1458.
I must correct here a blunder in my edition, where 202 (dvisate) should
be 2002 (dvisahasse). (Sas., p. 43.)

38 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA.
of the blood royal, and came first from Burma as a simple
monk, one of two who had aided the flight of a Peguan princess
from the Burmese Court. This princess, married against her
will to the King of Ava, was afterwards the famous Queen
Shin-sau-bu. When she assumed the sovereignty in Pegu
(1453 A.D.) the sometime monk Dhammaceti, who had so
devotedly befriended her, became her chief minister and later
her son-in-law and successor.1 Dhammaceti was not only a
protector of the Order he had quitted, but a reformer in the
orthodox sense. Something of the ecclesiastic reappears in
the monarch's attachment to the Sihalasamgha, an attachment
to which the celebrated Kalyani inscriptions bear witness.
These inscriptions, found in a suburb of Pegu city, were
carved on stone tablets by order of Dhammaceti, and are a
very interesting chapter in the Pali records of Buddhism.
They relate how the king determined to give the Order in
Rama nila a duly consecrated place for ceremonies, and how,
after earnest study of authoritative texts, he sent a mission
to Ceylon with this object. The monks sent by him received
the upasampada ordination afresh from the Mahavihiira
fraternity within consecrated boundaries on the Kalyani River,
near Colombo, and on their return consecrated the enclosure
in Pegu, henceforth known as the Kalyimislma.2 Within these
boundaries the upasampadd could be conferred as from the
direct spiritual successors of Mahinda, the great missionary to
Ceylon, and thus the link was restored in the 'succession of
teachers' broken (said the Sihalasamgha doctors) in Ramanna.
1 2 S S e e e e P T h a a w yr S e e , i H n is K t o o ' r s y P o r f e B l u i r m m i a n , ar p y . 8 S 4 tu ; d F y or o b f es t , he Le K g a e l n y d a a n r i y I H n i s s c t r o i r p y t , io p n . s 32 o . f
Dhammaceti, 1476 A.D. 'Theceremonial [forconsecration of a simd] has
been interpreted in variouswaysby thecommentaries and scholia on the
Mahavagga,such asthe Vinayatthakatha,Saratthadlpani,VimativinodanI,
Vinayatlka by Vajirabuddhi thera, Kankhavitarani, Vinayavinicchaya-
pakarana, Vinayasamgahapakarana, and the Slmalamkarasamgaha ; and
the object ofthe Kalyani Inscriptionsis to give an authoritativeruling on
these varied opinionsand toprescribe aceremonial for the consecration of
a stmawhich shall be in accordance with what is laid down by Gautama
Buddha, and which at thesame time shall notmaterially conflict with the
interpretations of the commentators' (Ind. Ant., xxii, p. 11). The simd
i t s he de a s p c p r r i o b p e r d ia i t n e th K i a s m a m rt a i v cl a e c a a s a a re bo c u h n a d n a t r ed y a f s or t m h e e d c b on y se pi c t r s at f i i n ll g ed ce w r i e t m h o w n a y t . er ;

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 39
We must not forget how vital this matter appeared to Burmese
Buddhists. The Order, in so far as such questions had gained
importance for it, was somewhat less of a free fraternity and
more of a 'church ', and the point of view taken by the monks
was an ecclesiastical one. The part taken by the king is
worlhy of notice.
In the case of the Kalyanislma Dhammaceti used his royal
authority to support his own deep conviction, and, as often
happened in its history, the orthodox Sangha had the temporal
power to some extent at its service. Not that the Sangha in
Burma has ever claimed authority over consciences (i.e. the
right to persecute). It has been as all other truly free associa-
tions, and, with time, has known divisions and developed
factions, and a sect has sometimes had powerful supporters
who were not content to stop short at a moral ascendancy over
man. The perfect tolerance inculcated by the religion was
hard for some of these strenuous minds to accept, and even
Dhammaceti, though he was far indeed from being a despot in
religion, was anxious to establish orthodoxy in his kingdom.
The Kalyani inscriptions show us to what degree a religious
superiority over the rest of the community was claimed by
those who had received the Ceylon ordination and were called
the Sihajasamgha.
An interesting literary point is the mention of the standard
authorities on Vinaya subjects at the time,1 and details as to
the instruction required for novices and monks. These treatises
are mostly of Sinhalese authorship.
Besides those of an older period we hear of the well-known
Vajlrabuddhitlka (sometimes called the Vinayagandhi or
Vinayaganthi), a tlka or explanation of difficult passages in
1 e.g. the Saratthadipani mostly by Sariputta of Ceylon (Sas., p. 33 ;
Fausboll, Cat. Mand. MSS., p. 12), theVimativinodanl by Kassapa, of the
Tamil country [Damilarattha] (Sas., p. 33 ; Cat. Mand. MSS., p. 13), the
b t V p. h y i e n 7 B ) a V u . y i d a n d T a h t h a y i e k d a a a s S t b a l t y m i a g n V a a o a l h f j a a i C m r e k b a y a y b l r u a o S d n a d p r h ( a i S i k p a a u s ( . r t S , a a t s a p n . . a , o 3 f p o . 3 f C 3 ; e C 3 y G h l V ; a o . p G n , a V t . p ( . a S , a 5 s w p 9 . . a , ; 6 s 0 p C . ) a a , t 3 . t r 3 h M e e s ; a u V n C l i a d t n t . . a of y M M a S a t v S n h i . e d n , . i T c a p M c . l S h a S 1 a i 8 . y n ) , a g ,
thera'sstudies inCeylon. Two Vinayatreatises(the Patimokkhavisodham
and Simabandhani tlka) maybelong to this period, but neither datesnor
authorsare mentioned. SeeP.TH., p. 44.

40 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
the Vinaya commentaries. The author, Mahavajirabuddhi of
Ceylon, was a contemporary of Dhammaceti, to whom he sent
a copy of his work.
2. Buddhist Literature in Panya (Vijayapura}, Ava (Ratana-
pura), Taungu (Jeyyavaddhana), and Laos. Ariyavamsa.
Grammar, Poetry, and Abhidhamrna in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries.
We must now follow the rather faint track of Burmese
literary history from the time of the revolt and separation of
the Southern provinces.
The chronicles of Burma tell us of a continual struggle
between different dynasties and the hostile races they repre-
sented Burmese, Talaing, and Shan. The Shims, forced
southward and westward bythe Mongol armiesof Kublai Khan,
had become a powerful element in Burma in the thirteenth
century.1 They had penetrated to the south, and the Talaing
population had accepted in Wagaru a ruler who was probably
of half-Shan extraction. In Burma the King of Pagan
(Kyaswa) was deposed in 1298 by the three Shan governors
whose territories surrounded his diminished and enfeebled
kingdom. The three, being brothers, held together and founded
the dynasty that reigned at Myinzaing (Khandhapura),2 Panya
(Vijayapura), and Sagaing (Jeyyapura) till the prince Thado-
minbya, who was believed to be of Burmese royal race, made
himself master of Upper Burma and founded Ava in 1364.3
Ava (Ratanapura), though not always of great importance as
a capital, remained a religious and literary centre for many
generations of authors. It is not necessary for our present
purpose to look further into the records of war, revolts, counter-
revolts, marriages, and murders of those times, except when
such events are connected with religious history and, by a rare
chance, the name of a saintly celebrity or the title of a book
2 1 F Sa o s r . b , es p , . L 8 e 1 g . end ' a T r h y e Hi t s h t r o e r e y, b p r . ot 2 h 8 er ; s, Ph h a a y v r i e n , g Hi de s p t o o s r e y d' of K B it u t r i m t a a , ra p. in 52. the
year664 ofthe Kaliyuga,set uptheirrule in Khandhapura.'
3 Phayre, HistoryofBurma, p. 62. Sas.,p. 90, 'in the year 722 of the
Kaliyuga.'

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 41
can be rescued from the tangle. The city of Rataiiapura did
not entirely supersede Pagan, Panya, and Sagaing in religious
importance. From all we can learn about the place and date
of the Pali works possible to place between the founding of
Ava and the middle of the sixteenth century, it seems that
scholars were always to be found busy in the monasteries
near the chief cities. However turbulent the times may have
been, the reigning families protected the Order and loaded it
with bounty. Their example was followed by men and women
of rank and wealth.1
The Siisanavamsagives us a glimpseintothelife ofa monastic
scholar of those days in the story of Ariyavamsa, a celebrated
teacher and author of the fifteenth century.2 Ariyavamsa, who
was of Pagan and a member of the Chapata sect, settled in
Ava in the reign of Narapati (1442-68). 3 Before he became
famous he went to Sagaing to study grammar with the learned
thera known as Ye-din ('the water-carrier'). The chronicler
tells us how Ye-din came by his name. Either to restrain
his own inclination for talk or because he found the brethren
too talkative, he was in the habit of keeping his mouth filled
with water when others were present. When the young monk
from Pagan first arrived at his monastery there seemed little
hope that the silent Water-carrier would discourse to him
on grammar. But Ariyavamsa was not to be discouraged.
He came daily to the vihdra, performing all the services of
a disciple for Ye-din, till the latter broke his silence to ask
the reason of the thera's visit. Ariyavamsa craved leave to
study with the famous acnriya, since, though he had studied
many texts, he had not grasped their meaning, and, till then,
upndesa (exposition) of other masters had not helped him.
Ye-din was touched and consented to give some of his time to
the
inquirer,
and thenexplainedthe AbhidhammatthavibhavanI4
1 See the veryinteresting collection, Inscriptions ofPagan, Pinya, and
Ava, edited by Taw Sein Ko and translated by Tun Nyein ofthe Burma
S o e f c 1 r 4 et 4 a 2 ri A a .D t . ; i R s a v n e g r o y on va , lu 1 a 8 b 9 l 9 e . fo T r h t e he li c st hr o o f n w o o l r o k g s y m o e f n w t o i r o k n s ed th i a n t a w n e in c s o c u r l i d pt r i i o o n t
otherwisedate. See Appendix to this chapter.
2 Sas., pp. 95 ft'. 3 Phayre, History ofBurma, p. 285.
4 Commentary on the Abhidhammatthasangaha.

42 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
to him with 'various methods of exposition'. Ariyavamsa was
soon able to tell his preceptor that, thanks to his teaching,
his pupil had grasped all the knowledge he had missed till
then. The acariya then charged him to do his part in helping
others by writing a commentary on the text he felt best fitted
to expound. Ariyavamsa chose the AbhidhammatthavibhavanI,
and composed a commentary on it entitled Manisaramaiijusa.
While writing it he submitted it, chapter by chapter, to the
criticism ofhis fellow-monks,readingitaloudto themastheysat
assembled on uposatha days inthe courtyardof the Puiifiacetiya.
A
very charming little anecdote is told of his readiness to
accept correction. On one occasion a monk seated in the
assembly twice uttered a loud sound of disapproval during
the reading. Ariyavamsa noted the passages that had called
forth these protests, and also found out where the objector
lived. Returned to his own vihara he carefully reviewed his
work and found two things to correct a fault of composition
(repeating the same explanation twice) and a fault of grammar
(a mistake in the gender of a word). He corrected them,
sent for the other monk, and mildly asked him what fault he
found with the work that had cost the writer the intense labour
of long days and nights to compose. The other replied bluntly
that there was little fault to find ; the book was perfect as to its
wordsand sense, but he had observed two faults, an unnecessary
repetition and a wrong gender, and he would not let them pass
without protest. And Ariyavamsa rejoiced in his heart and
took off his garment of fine cloth and gave it to the other,
saying, ' With this do I pay reverence to thy knowledge.'
Few as the words are, there shines through them the scholar's
clear and simple soul.
Ariyavamsa lived and wrote for some time at Sagaing, but
taught afterwardsatAva, where the king was sometimesamong
his hearers. One of his most important laterworks wasanother
Abhidhamma studyentitled Manidlpa,a tlka on theAtthasiilinl1
1 Commentary on the Dhammasangan! ofthe Abhidhammapitaka. See
F Ca o t r . c M h a ha n m d m . e M r S , S. Li , st p , . p 3 . 4. xvii P i . ; TH G . V. (p , . p 4 p 0 . ) 6 g 5 i , ve 6 s 7, 14 75 42 ; A. S D a . s. a , s p. th 9 e 8; dat F e au o s f bo t l h l, e
Manidlpa.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 43
of Buddhaghosa. He also composed a grammatical treatise, the
Gandhabharana,1 and a study of the Jataka, Jatakavisodhana.
These works were composed, according to the old scholarly
tradition, in Pali but Ariyavamsa was a teacher not content
;
to write only for the learned. He stands out in the Sasana-
vamsa's record of literary theras as the first name connected
with a metaphysical work in the vernacular. He composed an
atthayojana or interpretation in Burmese of a commentarycalled
the Anutlkiion theAbhidhamma.2 The Gandhavamsa attributes
another work entitled Mahanissara 3 to Ariyavamsa, but there
is no mention of it in the Sasanavamsa.
Ariyavamsa may have been still living when a new writer
came to Ava whose talents gained him the favour of the king. 4
This was Sllavamsa, of Taung-dwin-gyl, who had already com-
posed a poetical version of the Sumedhakatha,5 a poem entitled
Buddhalamkara, and another, apparently on his native city,
dignified by its Pali name Pabbatabbhantara. Sllavamsa was
thirty years of age when he came to the capital. The king,
after the manner of royal patrons of religion, established him
in a vihara where other honoured teachers had lived before
him, and there he lectured on the sacred texts. He, like
Ariyavamsa, laboured to spread religious learning by inter-
A
preting Pali texts in the vernacular. Burmese atthayojana
of the Nettipakarana,6 and another edifying work, the Para-
yanavatthu, prove that he was not merely a poet, though the
author of the Sasanavamsa seems rather inclined to reproach
him for his attachment to verse.
1 The Gandhabharana (otherwise Ganthabharana or Gandabharana) was
studied and glossed by well-known Burmese scholars of the sixteenth and
seventeenth century, andre-editedamongstandard works recently.
2 The work generally known as the Amitlka was written by Dhamma-
pala to supplement the original tika (of Ananda) on the Abhidhamma.
SeetheSasanavamsa'slistofcommentariescomposedinCeylon(Sas.,p.
33).
3 I am not sure that this word should not be Mahanissaya (chief
c at o t m h m a e yo n j t a a n r a y , o o f r w g h l i o c s h s m i e n nt B i u o r n me h s a e s ) b ; ee t n he m w a o d r e k ab w o o v u e l . d probably be the
4 Dutiya-min-khaung or Sirisudhammarajadhipati, who began to reign
A.D. 1470. Sas., p. 98, 'the year 842 ofthe Kaliyuga.' Phayre, History
ofBurma, p. 285.
5 The story of the ascetic Sumedha forms part of the Introduction
(Nidana) to theJatakacommentary. SeeFausboll'sedition oftheJataka,
vol. i, pp. 2-28. 6 See pp. 5, 8.

44 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
Another poet of Ava, Ratthasara,1 born in 1468, composed
metrical versions of the Bhuridattajittaka, 2 Hatthipiilajataka, 3
and Samvara jataka, 4 besides a number of other poems. He
may have been a good verse-maker and the tone of his poems
religious, but he comes under the same mild censure as his
brother-poet. In fact, the old-time chroniclers (pordnd) exclude
these two from the succession of theras precisely because they
not only wrote verses but recited them, and instructed their
pupils in the same art of recitation. The Sasanavamsa gravely
explains that this is a question of discipline too large to be
treated in the chronicle, and we are referred to a modern
Vinaya treatise, the TJposathavinicchaya, for details. The
composing and reciting of poems was apparentlya transgression
of the religious rule (*fkk/i6pada) concerning singing and
dancing. Taking part in or looking on at such performances
is forbidden to monks (sanumd) and all those under temporary
vows (uposatliika), who have undertaken a stricter self-denial
than the ordinary layman.5
Sllavamsa and Ratthasiira were probably not the only poets
of the monasteries in those days, but unfortunately such
authors are far less likely to find mention, at least in religious
chronicles, than the grammarians and expounders of Vinaya
and Abhidhamma.
The Kayaviratigatha mentioned in the Gandhavamsa,6 but
not in the Sasanavamsa, perhaps belongs to this epoch. It is
described as abeautifulPalipoemof 274verses on the subjection
of sensuality. 7
1 Sas., p. 99, 'in theyear830 ofthe Kaliyuga.'
2 Jataka, No. 543. See Fausboll's edition of the Jataka with its com-
mentary, vol. vi, pp. 157-219.
3 Jataka, No. 509. Fausboll, iv, pp. 473-91.
4 Jataka, No. 462. Fausboll, iv, pp. 130-6.
of 5 co T n h d e uc B t u , d w d h h e i r s e t a l s ai t t h y e a O r r e d o e n r ly ob b s o e u rv n e d s t t o en o . bse A rv l e ay fi m v a e n f m un a d y am b e i n n t d a h l im r s u e l l es f
to keep eight of the ten on the Uposatha days (occurring four times
a month). See Kern, Man. Ind. Buddh., p. 70 ; Childers' Dictionary of
the Pali Language (articles 'Sllam' and ' Uposatho').
7 8 A GV. t , lka pp. on 65, it 7 i 5 s . ascribed to a monk of Pakudhanagara (Pegu city?).
See the British Museum Catalogue ofPali MSS. and Mr. Nevill's note on
the copy in his collection.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 45
Till the beginning of the sixteenth century religion seems to
have been respected in the Burmese kingdoms notwithstanding
their chronic state of disturbance and change. But when the
Shan chief of Monyin, after years of raiding and plundering,
overthrew theKing of Aval and placedhisownson Thohanbwa
on {he throne, even the Buddhist Order was cruelly persecuted.
To Thohanbwa any community of monks meant a body of
unmarried, disciplined men, far more dangerous to a despotic
and hated government than fathers of families, and he
deliberately set about exterminating the hapless mendicants.
In the massacres that followed pagodas and monasteries went
up in flames and precious libraries were destroyed. 2 But
even in the terror and desolation around him the thera
Saddhammakitti, a pupil of Ariyavamsa, was faithful to the
cause of scholarship. He believed, as Arahanta had believed
and preached to the Burmese conqueror of Pegu centuries
before, that the fate of religion was bound up with the right
understanding of the sacred texts, and that this must rest on
a right knowledge of their language. And he did the best
he could for the faith in those calamitous days by compiling
the famous vocabulary Ekakkharakosa.3
Saddhammakitti died at Taungu (Ketumatl), then the capital
of an independent kingdom4 and a refuge for great numbers
of the Burmese who had fled from the cruel tyranny of
Thohanbwa. The King of Taungu, Mahasirijeyyasura, 5
protected religion and built cetiyas and vihdras.6 Thus, in
Taungu, where the Order was safe and in peace, not, as in
Ava, barely surviving a relentless persecution, it was possible
to discuss points of discipline. And a controversy arose on
the use of fermented drinks. Intoxicants are forbidden to the
1 Maharajadhipati (1501-26). Phayre, HistoryofBurma, pp. 87,92, 93.
2 Sas.,pp. 76,100. The Sasanavamsa givesthedate ofthese direevents
as 'theyear887 ofthe Kaliyuga' (=A.D. 1525).
3 The Ekakkharakosa isnotmentioned in the Gandhavanisa. (In the
Mandalay collection at the India Office there is a work entitled
Sirivicittalamkara by a Saddhammakitti, but whether by the author of
the Ekakkharakosa I cannot say. See Fausboll, Cat. Mand. MSS., p. 52.)
4 Phayre, history ofBurma, pp. 90ff.
s Cametothe throne in 1485 and reignedforty-fiveyears.
8 Sas., p. 80.

46 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
Order, but the commentaries on the Vinaya (for example, the
Kankhavitaram of Buddhaghosa) left it doubtful whether
the juice of the palm and cocoanut trees could lawfully be
drunk by the religious or not. Some maintained that such
juices were lawful if drunk as they flowed from the tree,
others denied it, as some commentaries spoke of the ' elements
of intoxication' latent in the seed, and the dispute continued
till the thera Mahaparakkama, 'seated in the midst,' settled
the question. According to his judgment, which was accepted
by the disputants, the juices in question might be drunk, but
only fresh from the tree. Mahaparakkama afterwards treated
the whole subject in awork entitled Suravinicchayal (Decisions
concerning Intoxicants).
It would seem that religion was not long or greatly in
danger at Panya, as the Sasanavamsa assures us that many
authors wrote there.2 Only two names are given, however
Saddhammaguru, the author of Saddavutti, and Vijitavi,
celebrated for two grammatical treatises, a Kaccayanavannana,
or commentary on the Sandhikappa (section treating of
euphonic combination of letters) of Kaccayana's grammar,3
and the Vacakopadesa, still recognized by Burmese scholars.
The Vacakopadesa ' treats the grammatical categories from
a logical point of view' (Oldenberg). These familiar names
are missing from the Gandhavamsa. The MS. of a tlka on
Vacakopadesa in the India Office 4 gives the date of this
treatise as A.D. 1606. In 1530 began a more auspicious
A
epoch for the Order. warlike and able ruler, Ta-bin-
shwe-hti, succeeded Mahasirijeyyasfira as King of Taungu.5
Ta-bin-shwe-hti conquered Pegu, where he not only pro-
tected religion but added to his own glory by his magnificent
foundations. In his reign a revolution overthrew the Shan
i Sas., p. 81. 2 Sas., p. 90.
pad 3 e F s a a us i b s ol m l e , nt C i at o . ne M d an wi d t . ho M u S t S. t , he p. au 4 t 5 ho ; r' S s VD n . a , m v e er i s n e F 1 o 2 r 42 c . hha T m h m e er V ' a s ca Li k s o t - ,
p. xxii.
4 Oldenberg, PaliMSS. in the India Office Library, p. 104. The com-
mentary on Vacakopadesa, by another Vijitavi, was written at Sagaing.
The twoworksand the authorare mentioned P.TH., p. 71.
6 1530 A.D., Phayre, History ofBurma, p. 93.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 47
prince reigning at Ava, who had cruelly persecuted the
monks, and before many years the Shan rule succumbed
before Bayin Naung. Ava was taken by the Burmese under
this famous soldier's command in 1555.
Bayin Naung,1 one of the most striking figures in the
history of Burma, the sometime general and vice-regent of
Ta-bin-shwe-hti and successor to the throne, united Burma
and Pegu into one empire and carried his conquests into the
Northern Shan States, Laos and Siam. He was a zealous
Buddhist, zealous, indeed, to intolerance, and forced an outward
profession of Buddhism on all his subjects, native or foreign. 2
Nevertheless, all we hear of him in the Sasanavamsa is that
in 1578 'the Lord of many white elephants', 3 then at the
height of his power but near his end, appointed his son regent
of Laos and sent the thera Saddhammacakkasami with him to
A
* purify religion ' in the conquered province. few names
of scholarly monks and their works are associated with Laos
in this period. Nanavilasa wrote the Sankhyapakasaka,4 and
Sirimangala a tika on that work and the commentary
Mangaladlpanl. A thera whose name is not mentioned wrote
the Uppatasanti.5
At HamsavatI some work was done in the way of com-
menting on the Abhidhamma. The thera Saddhammalamkara
wrote the Patthanasaradipanl, and Mahanama a tika entitled
Madhusaratthadlpan!.6 These works are mentioned without
any date in the Sasanavamsa, which by the way, differing
from the Pitakatthamain, gives Ananda as the author of the
1 The 'Branginoco' ofthe Portuguese. We have not only Oriental but
European testimony to the magnificence ofhis reign.
2 See Phayre, History ofBurma, pp. 108ff.
3 Sas., p. 51.
4 5 N A an w a o v r i k la c s o a n w s r u o lt t e e d th b e y S M a i n n k a h y y e a f p f a a k n a d sa m k e a nt a i t o A n y e u d dd in ha h , is P. Re T c H h . e , rc p h . es 6 . 1. As
Dr. Barnetthaspointed outto me, from thistitle (Sanskrit : Utptitasanti)
the workwould appearto treat of rites orcharms foravertingevil omens
orpubliccalamities. For santi,inthesenseofexpiatoryrite,seeSadvims'a-
brahmana (Prap. v), edited by H. F. Eelsingh, Leiden, 1908, cf.p. 51below
and Appendix.
Hp 6 ye S , as R ., an p g . o 4 o 8 n, ; 1 P 9 . 0 T 8 H ) ., th p e p. aut 4 h 0 o , r' 4 s 1. nam In e a t p h p e ea la r t s es a t s e M d a i h t a io n n au ( d b a y . Hsaya U

48 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
last-named, a tlka on the Abhidhamma. The Pitakatthamain
places both in the reign of Bayin Naung.
The Order never again suffered from a ruler in Burma as
in the evil days under Thohanbwa. From the 'time when
the Shan rule was finally demolished by Burmese kings, more
favourable days began for religion. The seventeenth century
saw some further changes, which we shall note as we proceed ;
a religious literature in the vernacular, in the Burmese
language itself, grew up round the older texts, but the
earlier traditions of Pali scholarship always found faithful
followers.

CHAPTER IV
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY PEGU AND UPPER BURMA
THE SCHOLARS or AVA AND SAGAING TIPITAKALAMKARA,
ARIYALAMKARA, AND OTHERS
By the year 1617 Burma and Pegu, welded into one empire
by Bayin Naung's conquests, had already been separated once
and forced into a second union by the conqueror's grandson
Mahadhammaraja.1
Pegu city (HamsavatI), as in Bayin Naung's time, was the
capital, and we can understand the Burmese king's popularity
in the south when we learn (but not from the Sasanavamsa)
that he had succeeded in breaking up the audacious rule
of the Portuguese adventurer Philip de Brito, whose govern-
ment of Pegu had been carried on with the methods of
a brutal buccaneer. De Brito, with wanton disrespect for
the country's religion, had destroyed pagodas, and we cannot
We
suppose that he spared monasteries or libraries. do not
know if even the Buddhist monks interceded for him when
he was vanquished by their champion, taken prisoner, and
condemned to an agonizing death.
There is no record in the Sasanavamsa of Pali works
produced in this reign. The doings, literary or otherwise,
of the Sangha of Pegu are probably not well known to the
author of our Burmese chronicle. Perhaps, too, he is influenced
by a certain rivalry in scholarship which made the Talaing
monks unwilling to believe in the learning of Burma, while
those of the upper country were equally sure of their own
2
superiority.
It is almost touching to read in the Sasanavamsa the reason
(as it first appeared to the good monks of the south) why the
kings of Bayin Naung's dynasty preferred Pegu as the royal
residence, even after union with Burma : ' As for the monks
in Burma, there are none expert in the sacred texts and
learned in the Vedasatthas. Therefore, hearing this, the
1 Phayre, History ofBurma, p. 128. 2 Sas., p. 106.

50 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
King1 sent a message to the thera dwelling at the Four-
storied Vihara,2 saying : " Send hither to Ramaiiua some
Mendicants, from thirty to forty years of age, expert in the
sacred texts and learned in the Vedasatthas." So the thera
sent Tipitakalamkara, Tilokalamkara, and TisasanJilamkara,
with thirty Bhikkhus. When they arrived at Pegu the King
built a vihara for them on the Eastern side of the Modho
cetiya, and gave it to them. And on Upomtha days he
summoned those monks of Ramanna who were expert in the
sacred texts and learned in the Vedasatthas, and commanded
them to hold a discussion with the three theras. And the
monks of Ramaniia said : " Formerly, indeed, we thought there
were no monks in Burma expert in the sacred texts and
learned in the Yedasatthas. But lo these Burmese monks
!
are exceedingly expert and learned." It seems to have been
a triumph for Burma.
An interesting point in the little story is the mention of the
Vedasastras side by side with the Buddhist sacred texts. It
is clear, from the list of works given to the libraries of Burmese
monasteries3 and from various allusions in the Pali literature,
that Brahmanic works were studied in the viharas, and we
knowthat some were translated into Burmese. But this branch
of learning was considered inferior. There is a mention in
the Sasanavamsa of two monks living in the reign of Maha-
dhammaraja* who gained the king's favour by their aptitude
for state affairs. They were vedasattliakovida too expert in
the Vedasatthas and therefore, no doubt, acute and useful
advisers but the Order disapproved of them. They are
;
pariyattipatipattisu mandd weak in the sacred doctrine and
practice. They journey to Pegu and disappear at once from
our sight. They have no place in the ' succession of theras '.
But the Vedasattha experts were probably innocent enough
of any religious interest in the hymns and sacrifices of the
Brahmanic cult, and they were certainly not Vedic scholars
1 Ukkamsika, otherwise Thadodhammaraja, succeeded Mahadhamma-
raj
2
aA 16
r
2
o
9
ya
A
l
.D
f
.
oundation at Sagaing on the Irrawaddy.
3 See Appendix. * Came to the throne A.D. 1606.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 51
in the Indian pandit's sense of the words ; for the Yedas of
the Burmese, as Forchhaimner explains, are a collection of
Brahmanic textson astrology, medicine,and 'science' generally,
such as the Suryasiddhanta (astronomy), Laghugraha (astro-
logy), Dravyaguna (medicine), besides Tantrasastras (manuals
of magic) and Kamasastras (manuals treating of love). 1 Some
of these, especially the last, cannot by the greatest stretch of
liberality be fitted into any scheme of monastic learning; and,
indeed, we do not hear that the Buddhist monks ever made
use of them or the Brahmanic texts composed for the practice
of magic. That, in all its branches, was the province of the
professional Brahmans, of whom there were always some, said
to be experts in the Atharvaveda, in the service of the king. 2
But there are works reckoned as Yedasatthas in which the
monks found food for study, and 'Veda' subjects which they
themselves delighted to handle, either in Pali or the vernacular.
For a king's acariya must be able to discourse on ethics and
polity, pronounce moral maxims, and give advice. The Rajanlti,
Lokaniti, and Dhammanlti represent this sort of literature3
modelled on Sanskrit originals. The wise fablesof the Sanskrit
Hitopadesa have also found favour with Buddhists. Again,
certain Sanskrit grammatical works became famous in Further
India, and lexicons such as the Amarakosa. "We have seen how
stoutly the theras grappled with Pali grammar, and we can
imagine the sober joy with which a copy of the Amarakosa4
would be welcomed in a vihdra library.
1 SeeJardine's Noteson Buddhist Law,pt.iv,Introduction by E. Forch-
hammer, p. 17. Also Forchhammer, Report (1879-80), pp. 6 ff.
2 Forinstance, when Anoratawasbaffledin hisattempt to take Thaton,
the charm which rendered the city impregnable was found out by the
king'sattendant Brahmans.
3 See James Gray, Ancient Proverbs and Maxims : The Nlti Literature
ofSurma, pp. 119, 141, and R. C. Temple, Journal of the Asiatic Society
of Bengal, vol. xlvii (1898), pp. 239 ff.
4 On thefamousdictionaryof Amarasimha see Zachariae, Die indischen
Worterbucher. 'Amara,' says Zachariae, 'war ohne Zweifel ein Buddhist,'
though this can be inferred onlyfrom his dedication and his placingof
the names ofFuddhas before the Brahmanic divinities, andnot from any
specially Buddhistic matter in the rest of the work, v. Die indischen
Wwterbiicher, Grundrins, Band i, Heft iiis, p. 18. The Pitakatthamain
(p. 73) iscautiouson thesubject, and only states that the Amarakosa was
composed at Benares byAmarasimha.

52 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
We
shall have to return presently to the question of the
Brahmaiiic element in Buddhist Law.1 As for other Brahmanic
contributions to the literature of Burma, they were naturally
accepted by the fathers of Burmese scholarship, as there
could be no reason for cultivating Buddhist medicine or
Buddhist arithmetic. As far as we know at present the
fathers were sage enough not to study the gems of Sanskrit
poetry.
Let us now glance at certain features in the seventeenth
century literature, features which may be traced clearly
enough for our purpose in a brief notice of the best-known
authors.
First, we find that many of the distinguished teachers
of that time wrote in both Pali and Burmese. Some, for
instance, Varabhisamghanatha, author of the Manikundala-
vatthu, and one of his contemporaries, author of the Satta-
rajadhammavatthu, wrote their edifying tales only in the
vernacular, or at least produced nothing noteworthy in Pali.2
Secondly, the devotion of the Burmese scholars to the study
of Pali grammar, style, and prosody bore fruit in works of
which the Rajindarajabhidheyyadrpanl is an instance. It
would not be quite fair to call any thera a court poet, but on
certain occasions theras composed Pali verses adorned with
the traditional compliment and eulogy of royal patrons. Thus,
when Ukkamsika was consecrated and took the title Sirisu-
dhammarajamahadhipati, the thera Ratanakara wrote the
Rajindarajabhidheyyadipanl (on the naming of kings) to
commemorate the ceremony.3
Mahadhammaraja and Ukkamsika were both generous to
the Order, and mention of monasteries founded by them occurs
often in the religious history of the seventeenth century.
Some of these foundations were associated with well-known
1 Vide J. Jardine and Forchhammer, Notes on Buddhist Law also
;
Introductory Remarks, Notes, pt. iii, p. ix, for the supposed prevalence of
Sanskritlearning in the courts ofthe early kings ofPronieand Pagan.
a Sas., p. 105. Theseauthors belong to the time of Mahadhammaraja,
1606-29.
3 Sas., p. 102 ; P.TH., p. 58. Ratanakarawasacquainted withSanskrit
rhetoricand
poetics.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 53
and venerable names, such as Tipitakalanikara, Ariyalamkara,
his pupil Ariyalamkara the younger, and Aggadhammalamkara,
who were among the deepest students of their time. The
Sasanavamsa mentions Tipitakalamkara and the elder Ariya-
lamkara together as equally great examples of learning.
Tipitakalamkara was a man of wide erudition, says the
chronicle, but Ariyalamkara excelled in dliatiipaccayavibliaga,
in other words, was an accomplished grammarian.1
Tipitakalamkara was born in 1578 A.D., and went, while
still a boy, to Prome. He entered the Order at the age of
thirteen, and his literary career soon began. He studied with
passionate zeal, and we next hear that the fifteen-year-old
novice has composed in Pali a poetical version of the Vessanta-
rajataka, 2 that the Burmese love most to hear, the tale of
the Bodhisat's last birth as a man and his supreme acts of
merit.
Tipitakalamkara received the upasampadd ordination in his
twentieth year. His studious life underwent a great change
when Prome, then an almost independent State, fell into the
hands of Surakitti,3 King of Burma. Tipitakalamkara was
invited or compelled to come to the capital, and on the banks
of the Irrawaddy near Ava the king built a vihara for him.
Afterwards, weary perhaps of royal vilidran, Tipitakalamkara
withdrew to the Tiriyapabbata to live in the quiet of the
forest. However, in 1602 we again hear that he is in residence
in a monastery built by the king, 4 and is famed far and wide
for his learning and piety.
While living at the Four-storied Vihara built by Surakitti,
Tipitakalamkara, given up to Abhidhamma studies, wrote
a commentary on the introductory verses of the Atthasalinl.
Later, at the request of Nyaung Ram Min, he composed
a lighter work, the Yasavaddhanavatthu. When in retreat
in the quiet of the Tiriyapabbata he had some occasion to
1 Sas., p. 106.
2 Sas., p. 105 ; see Fausboll's edition of theJataka, vol. vi, pp. 479ff.
3 Eldest son ofBayin Naung.
4 Nyaung Ram Min (1599-1605), son ofBayin Naung. Phayre, Histoiy
ofBurma, p. 286 ; Pitakatthamain, p. 42.

54 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
take up Vinaya questions, and the result was the Vinayalam-
karatlka, one of those numerous works composed by theras
of high authority to keep the old traditional 'discipline ' pure.
The list of Tipitakalamkara's works shows varied learning,
but he is remembered chiefly as an Abhidhamma scholar and
a saint. He was a chosen adviser of Ukkamsika, and one
of his works is called ' Responses' to the king's questions.1
The theras of Sagaing at this period seem to have taken
the lead in Abhidhamma studies. One of these, the thera
Tilokaguru, toiled for many years at tlkas and supplementary
tikas (anutlka) on various texts. After dealing very thoroughly
with the Dhatukatha2 he composed a tlkii on the Yamaka.
But his great feat was a tika on the Patthana, the most
important book of the Abhidhammapitaka.3
Tilokagaruis butone example. The Sagaingmonasteriesalso
produced anumberof Burmese nissayas (interpretationsor para-
phrases) on Abhidhamma texts during the seventeenth century.
But it is not easy to distribute these works aright among
their several authors, whose Pali names are but an indifferent
help to accuracy. There were at least four Ariyalamkaras
noted for scholarship. The monkmentioned in the Sasanavamsa
as the second Ariyalamkara (pupil of the great thera who
was ' equal to Tipitakalamkara ') is probably the scholar of
whom Oldenberg remarks that the Burmese are indebted to
him for the version of a great number of Pali works. Those
ascribed to this Ariyalamkara are : (1) Interpretations of
the AtthasalinI of Buddhaghosa, the Sankhepavannanii of
Saddhammajotipala,4 the AbhidhammatthavibhavanI of Suman-
1 See Bulletin, tome v, p. 167.
2 See the Pitakatthamain, p. 41.
3 The most important, that is, ifwe placeourselvesat the pointofview
ofthe BurmeseAbhidhammastudents ofthatday. Mrs. Rhys Davids, to
whose rare ability and patience we owe a scholarly edition of a part of
thistext, remarks, 'the aim of the work seems tohave been morea series
ofexercises in alogicofterms and relationsthananyattemptto enunciate
metaphysical propositions ' (see Introduction to the Dukapatthana,
edited for the Pali Text Society by Caroline F. Rhys Davids, pp. x-xiv).
The Patthana is also called the Mahapakarana (Great Treatise). It
consists of twenty-four sections, and in manuscript amounts to over a
thousand leaves. See Forchhammer's List, p. xv.
4 See above, p. 18, Chap. II.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 55
A
gala, 1 and the Vibhanga of the Abhidhammapitaka.2 (2)
Pali tlka on the Kaccayanabheda, entitled Saratthavikasinl.
(3) Ariyalarpkara was careful to add a Burmese version to
whatwe shouldnowadayscall his revised edition of Kaccayana's
grammar.
'This work was done mostly in the Dakkhinavana vihdra,
or Monastery of the Southern Grove, near the Rajamanicula
cetiya at Sagaing. Ukkamsika had built four monasteries,
one on each side of his famous pagoda,3 and presented them
to theras learned in the sacred texts. Another grammarian
in residence on the west side produced an edition of the
Nyasa, 4 'adorned' (as the Pali phrase goes), and set forth
with various methods of explanation. 5
The Nyasa was taken up again in the reign of Sirinanda-
dhammaraja - Pavaradhipatiraja (A.D. 1648) by the king's
preceptor, Dathanaga of Sagaing. His commentary is entitled
Niruttisaramafi usa.6
j
We
here come acrossa mentionof Pagan, once theflourishing
centre of grammatical studies. The thera Jambudhaja (or
Jambudlpadhaja, as the king named him) was one whom
Ukkamsika had delighted to honour. He was of Pagan, and
was first brought to the king's notice by Tipitakalamkara."
The works ascribed to him are Samvannananayadipanl, Nirutti-
samgraha (grammar), and Sarvajiianyayadlpanl (grammar and
philology). 8 Jambudhaja, author of the little grammatical
1 See Oldenberg's Catalogue ofPaliMSS. at the India Office, pp. 81, 82,
84, 85, 88-90, 123, 124. Sumangalais alsoknown as Sumangalasami and
his workas the Tlka-kyaw.
2 TheVibhanga is second in order of the seven Abhidhamma books.
Mrs. Rhys Davids points out that it maybe considered a sequel of the
Dhammasangam, and was probably used, like the latter, as a manual for
study. Forotherremarks on these studies see the valuable introduction
to the Pali Text Society's edition of the Vibhanga (ed. C. A. F. Rhys
Davids), 1904.
3 The Kaung-mhu-daw pagoda, 5 milesfrom Sagaing.
a 4 * ne S S a e e r e e ly a p b . s o i I m v l i e l l , , a p r . S t V 2 i D 1 t . . le , ( v N e i r r s u e tt 1 5 i 2 m S 4 a a 1 n s. j ; , us p P a p i ) . t , a 1 k 0 m a 6 e t , n t t h 1 i a 1 m o 0 a n ; i e n d P , i i t p n . ak 6 t a 5 h t . e th G a A m a a n w i d n o h , r a k p v . a w 1 m i 2 s t 4 h a .
(pp. 60 and 70), is atlka on the Cullanirutti ofKaccayana.
7 Sas., pp. 115, 116.
8 These worksare mentioned by Nevill, who saw them in Ceylon. He
datesthem 1652 A.D.

56 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA.
treatise called RfipabhedapakasanI, is probably this same
JambudIpadhaj a
.
l
The Abhidhamma seems to have had less attraction for him
than for most of his noted contemporaries, and he devoted
himself to the Vinaya, of which he translated text and com-
mentary into Burmese. But Maniratana, a writer of the same
period, is an example of a life spent in interpreting the
abstruser side of sacred learning to those who were only
capable of reading the vernacular. The Sasanavamsa mentions
translations by him of the following works the AtthasalinI
and SammohavinodanI (Buddhaghosa's commentaries on the
Dhammasangani and the Vibhahga) and the Kankhavitaranl
(Buddhaghosa's commentary on the Patimokkha of theVinaya)
;
this last seems to have been Maniratana's only departure from
metaphysical studies. Then, turning to the later exponents of
the Abhidhamma, he translated the tlkas Abhidhammattha-
vibhavanl and Sankhepavannana into Burmese.
Another thera, Saradassi, of the same place (Nayyinyua,
in the Ava district), was the author of some works equally
characteristic of the time. His Gfilhatthadlpani (explaining
difficult passages in the seven books of the Abhidhamma) 2
and the Visuddhimaggaganthipadattha, a book of the same
nature on Buddhaghosa's Visuddhimagga, are in Pali. He
also translated the Nettipakarana into Burmese, not to shirk
his part in opening up the Pali texts to readers without
learning. If he is a little less shadowy to us than some of
his fellow-authors it is because, with all his grasp of abstruse
questions, he had, for a time at least, leanings that greatly
displeased the stricter brethren. He lived in the village itself,
and indulged in luxuries such as a head-covering and a fan.
But we are told that he afterwards renouncedall those practices
'contrary to the discipline ' and went into retreat in the forest.
The middle and latter part of the seventeenth century were
not peaceful times for Burma. The country was harassed by
Chinese raiders, rumours and evil omens troubled the people,
1 Fausboll, Cat. Mand. MSS., p. 50.
2 Sas., p. 116 ; see Forchhammer's List, p. xxvi, and Fausboll, Cat.
Mand. MSS., p. 35 ; Pitakatthamain, pp. 39, 40.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 57
the tutelary devata of the towns were said to be departing,
and ' religion was dimmed '. Great efforts were made to
conjure these and other ills by the practice of religion ;
the local gods were conciliated with offerings, and 'merit ',
in the Buddhist sense, was acquired by new religious founda-
tions. When Mahapavaradhammarajalokadhipati came to the
throne in 1651 he built some monasteries, according to the
custom of his predecessors, and presented them to distinguished
theras. The most eminent among these was the Aggadhamma-
lamkara, already mentioned, who translated several Pali texts
into the vernacular.
He first paid the usual homage to Kaccayana, but by writing
a Burmese translation instead of a Pali commentary after-
;
wards he translated the Abhidhammatthasangaha, and then,
as if continually seeking heavier and heavier tasks, the patient
scholar toiled through translations of the Matika (of the
DhammasanganI), the Dhatukatha, the Yamaka, and the
Patthana.1 The last task alone would have served a less
diligent man for a lifetime, but Aggadhammalamkara probably
had earnest students to" satisfy. There is no doubt about his
real devotion to his subject.
This prodigious worker was not entirely given up to the
sacred texts. Circumstances made him a court historian. He
came of a family of officials, and no doubt was better fitted
than most Palists of his day to carry out certain royal com-
missions. The last of his works that we find mentioned in
the Sasanavamsa is a Rajavamsasankhepa, a summary of the
official Rajavamsa, or a short chronicle of the kings. This
he undertook at the request of his protector, Mahapavara-
dhammarajalokadhipati.2
Under the auspices of the next king, Naravara,3 the thera
Tejodipa, disciple of Tilokaguru, composed a tlka on the
Paritta.4 It is the only literary event noticed by the Sasana-
V */ /
vamsa in this reign, which, in fact, only lasted a few months.
Under Naravara's successor Siripavaramahadhammaraja 5 a
thera named Devacakkobhasa conies upon the scene, whose
3 1 S M a a s h . a , s p i . h 1 a 1 s 1 u . radham . maraja. 2 4 S S a a s s . . , , p p . . 1 11 1 5 2 . ; Pitakat 5 th A a . m D a . i 1 n 6 , 72 p . . 220.

58 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
influence with the king was evidently great, for the usual
reason he was learned in the Vedasatthas. The usual
mild reproach follows he was 'weak' in the knowledge of
the sacred texts.1 Nevertheless, his system of Abhidhamma
teaching was recommended to the Order by the king. Deva-
cakkobhasa made his pupils study and recite the Patthana (we
suppose in Pali). Not only the monks of Burma but those of
Pegu were made to study the Patthana. By the king's order
great religious festivals were held, and the people were called
upon to honour the Order in every way.
We have now reached the year 1698, and can pause to glance
at those features of the Pali-Burmese literature which have
come into clear relief during the seventeenth century.
Our attention is arrested by a new tendency. The zeal for
Pali grammar seems to be fainter than in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries ; a more abstract study, the Abhidhamma,
is occupying the learned among the monks, or at least those
of whom we hear, those whom we may call the official scholars,
the theras who have the title rajaguru (king's preceptor) and
work in monasteries endowed by the kings. We do not know
much of the lives of these teachers, but their choice of subjects
throws a certain light on what was demanded of them, even
by the less learned among their students, or, at least, what
they, the most influential scholars of their time, insisted that
their students should attempt. We have seen how the several
books of the Abhidhamma were interpreted and paraphrased
in Burmese during the seventeenth century, and we cannot
doubt that the disciples living near their venerable masters in
the monasteries by the Irrawaddy persevered in studying the
third Pitaka. And that tradition of the seventeenth century
has come down to later generations, as the most casual survey
of modern Burmese literature will show.
Everyone who has seen a collection of Buddhist manuscripts
from Burma must have noticed the numerous copies of
1 Sas., p. 117. The Sasanavamsa tells us by the way that the well-
known Burmese method of preparing and decorating palm-leaf MSS. was
firstput into practice in this reign. See Symes, Account of an Embassy to
thekingdom ofAva, p. 339.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 59
Abhidhamma texts with vernacular interpretations. The
descriptions we read of Burmese life and character might
lead us to expect a preference for something less arid, more
picturesque, more human, more adapted to the native genius.
But there is not really an anomaly here. In this particular
case'the Burmese remember what was said in old days about
the Buddhacacanam, the word of the Buddha.
The classic fifth century commentaries, for instance the
AtthasalinI,1 make an interesting distinction between the three
great divisions of the Buddhavacanam the Vinaya, Sutta, and
Abhidhamma. The Vinaya, they say, contains the teaching of
rules of conduct, prohibitions, and prescriptions (dnddesand),
the Sutta that of the current practice or experience of men
(vohdradesana], the Abhidhamma that of the highest or
absolute truth (paramatthadesana).
Let us see how these three collections have fared in Burmese
Buddhism.
The Pali Vinaya took root quickly and profoundly in
Burma. All students of the subject are agreed on the
constancy with which later Vinaya literature reflects the
ancient form and spirit. Buddhism has a lengthy and minute
code for the Mendicant Order. That code has been prodigiously
commented and glossed in the course of centuries, but the
novice learns the discipline from his preceptor in the monastery
by example and habit, rather than from books,andbyeveryday
practice the observance of the rules becomes second nature
without much mental effort. Of course, some book-study is
required, but the essential knowledge is easy for the young
monk to master even in Pali. And then there is that old and
kindly institution ' The Smaller Vinayas V containing the
essential precepts and formulas of the Discipline.
Controversial works have been written from time to time on
matters of discipline, but to know them is not a fundamental
part of Vinaya study. Occasionally disputes on questions of
discipline arose in the Burmese Sangha at times when the word
1 & AtthasalinI, E. Miiller's edition (Pali Text Society), p. 21.
2 Seeabove, p. 6, Chap. I.

60 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
of the Buddha was, it seems, not very well known to most of
the monks ; and we read that the king intervened in such
cases to command research in the ancient texts, or appoint
teachers whose decision was to be final. The king's privilege,
however, was particular ; the attitude of the Burmese laity in
general towards the Order and its discipline has been one of
unquestioning reverence. The Vinaya itself, being a code
of prohibitions concerning the monastic life, has not of course
had a great influence on culture. Not that it has remained
altogether without its bearing on the lay life, for there is
a Vinaya element in the Burmese law codes. This we might
expect, as religion and law are inseparable in Oriental polity.
But when we look for the influence of Pali literature on
Burmese culture it is in the Sutta that we find it.
Through the immense variety of discourses, verses, and
legends that make up the Sutta pitaka the path of the saint
is traced for us in every stage, from the first moment of
religious effort to the summit of achievement arahatship.
And the Sutta pitaka has abundance of human nature in it.
So in widening and widening circles it has sent a moral
impulse through the life of the whole Burmese people. To
give two instances : the Parittal is a common treasury of good
words to ward off the evils of everyday life and keep the great
maxims of religion in memory, and the Jataka has found its
way everywhere, from law codes and chronicles to popular
plays. The Burmese child grows up steeped in beliefs,
practices, and notions of ' merit ' and 'demerit' drawn from
the Sutta. He has nothing new to learn about this part of
his faith when he forsakes the world and enters on the monastic
life. What the earnest novice from generation to generation
has set himself to study in the calm of the vihara is the para-
matthadhamma, 'the highest ' of the Master's teaching, the
Abhidhamma.
If the Burmese student is cheerfully at home in the Sutta
he approaches the Abhidhamma with awed respect, like his
brother Buddhist in Siam and Cambodia. The Buddhist of
1 See above, p. 3, Chap. I.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 61
Indo-China is by no means enamoured, as the Indian Buddhists
were, of speculation for its own sake. He reads in Buddha-
ghosa that there is an exalted religious joy to be found in only
considering the vastness of the Patthana. The mind of the
believer, launched upon that ocean, may allow itself to be
rocked to a contemplative calm. The virtue of this passive
reception of the buddhavacana can never have been doubted in
ease-loving Burma. The Burmese 'Abhidhammika' Buddhists
had little in common with the keen disputants of the north
who thought in Sanskrit, and from whom sprang the great
champions of the Mahayana system Asvaghosa, Asanga, and
Santideva.
The greater number of Burmese students of metaphysics
have depended from early times on compendiums and manuals.
The most successful of these, after the canonical Dhamma-
sanganl,1 has been the twelfth-century textbook Abhidham-
matthasangaha.2 This little treatise is a summary of Buddhist
theories on mental processes, on existence and annihilation. It
is a mass of technical terms needing an extensive commentary.
Commentators, of course, were forthcoming. The Sinhalese
theras Vimalabuddhi and Sumangala both composed tlkas, and
the second, the AbhidhammatthavibhavanT, is part of the usual
course of (Abhidhamma) study in Burma.3 Two ancient and
authoritative treatises from Ceylon, the Abhidhammavatara4
by Buddhadatta and the Saccasamkhepa5 by Culladhammapiila,
were studied more in the early period of Burmese scholarship
than in later times.
Probably no Pali work on the Abhidhamma has been more
often translated and paraphrased than the Abhidhammattha-
sangaha, of which the Pitakatthamain alone mentions twenty-
three different Burmese nissayas. All the most noted theras
1 Edited iu JPTS., 1884, with introduction by Rhys Davids. See
Fau 2 sb E o d l i l t , ed Ca b t y . M E. an M d ii . ll M er S , S. t , ran p s p , . b 38 y , C 4 . 6, A. 48 F. ; F R o h r y c s h D h a a v m i m d e s r . , List, p.xvii.
3 See Fausboll, Cat. Mand. MSS., pp. 38, 48 ; Forchhammer, List,
p. xvii ; Gandhavanisa, pp. 62, 72.
4 SeeFausboll,Cat.Mand. MSS.,pp.35,37
;
Forchhammer,List,p. xvii
;
GV. 5 , Se p e p. F 5 a 9 u , sb 6 o 2 l , l, 69 Ca ; t. Sa M s. a , nd p. . 3 M 4 S . S., pp. 35-7 ; Forchhammer,List, p. xvii ;
GV., pp. 60, 70 ; Sas., p. 34.

62 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA.
of the seventeenth century took it in hand, and it has been
, A
carefully edited by modern h*ai/ds. close analysis of the
principal translations of this single little text would be an
explanation, incomplete of course, but very interesting and
instructive, of the true Burmese view of Abhidhamma theories,
such as we find in the DhammasanganI, also a manual,1 and
we must not forget that these theories are as much a part
of the Buddhism of Burma as the human and touching spirit
of the Sutta.
Some curious elements have straggled in under the accom-
modating title Paramattha, and sometimes in research we may
think we have come on a metaphysical dissertation and find
a guide to Buddhist cosmogony.2 Such productions, however,
are not characteristic enough of the Pali literature to need
more than a mention.3
To return to the seventeenth century. We have seen that
some of the most eminent scholars spent their time making
Burmese versions of Pali texts. Either there was a much
wider public, as we should now say, for religious works at
that period than in earlier times, or Pali scholarship was at
a low ebb in the Order. There is some ground for this last
supposition. Burma had been in an almost continual state of
change and disturbance since the Shan element had become first
troublesome and then powerful and Lower Burma, annexed,
;
separated, and annexed again, suffered no less.
It would be interesting to know something about the
numerical strength of the Order at different times during that
period. It probably diminished greatly when even monasteries
1 See the learned introduction of Mrs. Rhys Davids to hertranslation
ofthe DhammasanganI.
2 An example is the Pali-Burmese Paramatthamanjusa, described by
M. 1'Abbe" Chevrillon in the list of Burmese MSS. in the Bibliotheque
Rationale, Paris.
3 I do not mean to imply that these matters are included in Abhi-
dhammaliterature without an antique and scriptural warrant for their
presence. Mrs. Rhys Davids has pointed out that the last book of the
Vibhanga, 'suggesting by its fine title, the Heart of the Dhamma, more
than it contains, gives a number of summaries and a good deal of
affirmation, much of it mythological, about the conditions oflife in this
and other spheres in human beings and other beings'(Introduction to
the Vibhanga, ed. C. A. F. Rhys Davids, p. six).

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 63
were insecure, and the young men of the population were more
likely to be fighting than forsaking the world.1 Those were
not times for study to prosper. And, as the Sasanavamsa says,
' religion was dimmed' from time to time. But the Burmese
kings were sufficiently good Buddhists to build viharas and
enco'urage learning, and the great theras were indefatigable
workers. It is told of Tipitakalamkara that he once said in
jest to Aggadhammalamkara, ' When I am dead you will be
the only learned man left in the world.' And perhaps the
scholarly tradition did at one time seem likely to perish out
of Burma. But there were always workers to keep it alive,
some of whom we shall only find in the local chronicles
(thamain) of temples and viharan, and in the eighteenth
century, when another national crisis had come and passed,
a literary revival began under Alaungpaya and his descendants .
1 In Ukkamsika's reign a very curious situation was brought about.
The king, who had fled from the capital in consequence of a conspiracy
headedbyoneofhissons,tookrefuge in amonastery,where the Bhikkhus
formed themselves into an armed guard to protecthim. See Sas., p. 108.

CHAPTER V
PALI LITERATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY THE
PARUPANA - EKAMSIKA CONTROVERSY FOUNDATION OF
AMARAPURA BODOPAYA'S EULOGIST THE RAJADHI-
RAJAVILASINI THE JATAKA IN BURMA
As the eighteenth century opens, the religious life of the
country seems to have passed under a cloud, and we may be
fairly certain that there was no intellectual advance in the
Order. Perhaps there was even some reaction, ifwe can judge
from the uninteresting controversy that drags through nearly
a hundred years in the chronicle.1
Even without studying in detail the literature of the time,
we notice the absence of work such as Tipitakalamkiira, Ariyii-
lamkara, and Aggadhammalamkara had produced in Upper
Burma. In Ramanna the Order lacked support. Since the
removal of the capital to Ava in 1634 the south had gradually
sunk into misery and ruin.2 Towards the middle of the
century, as we shall see, a revolt against Burma was successful
for a time, but the final result was that a later conqueror,
Alaungpaya, broke down the Talaing nationality completely
and finally. Thus, though Alaungpaya was really a better
Buddhist than his milder predecessors, the fortune of war
went against scholarship in the ancient home of Buddhism
from the end of the seventeenth century till the time when
the Burmese conqueror's power was firmly established.
And at the moment when, leaving the seventeenth century,
we have our next glimpse of literary history, there was not
only a state of gloom and listlessness in Pegu but in Burma
also. The country was no longer ruled by kings of the
energetic and aggressive type, 3 who were usually active bene-
factors of religion and therefore of Pali literature.
1 See Sas., pp. 118ff., and Introduction, p. 37.
2 See Phayre, HistoryofBurma, pp. 141, 142.
3 Phayre says of this period, 'Though the monarchy suffered no great
disaster its powers gradually declined.' The raids of the Chinesein the
previous century had been followed by an invasion from Manipur, and
some territory in the northwas lost(Phayre,HistoryofBurma,pp. 140 ff.).

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 65
If we turn to the Sasanavamsa, we come straightway upon
a picture already familiar. The long, inglorious reign of
Hsin-hpyu-shin! (in Pali, Setibhinda) has begun ; the inner
history of the Order seems to be quietly repeating itself. In
a monastery at Ava, built by a high military official, the
learned monk Ukkamsamala is finishing the second of his
treatises Vannabodhana and Likhananaya2 (dealing, as the
titles show, with the Pali language). The chronicle says of
him that he was versed in the texts, the commentaries, the
tlkas, and the 'other books' (gandhantara), by which is meant
works not strictly doctrinal but necessary to a complete
Buddhist education.3
Ukkamsamala, fortunately for him, was peacefully occupied
with words and not with practices, but we cannot separate
the history of Pali literature in the eighteenth century from
a controversy which went on, with only a few intervals of
forced truce, for nearly a century between the sects known
as the Parupanas and Ekamsikas. Their differences were
on matters of monastic discipline, but certainly affected
studies.
The Sasanavamsa, in which we find a fairly full account,4
tells us that a monk named Gunabhilamkara in or about the
year 1698 A.D. introduced, and the followers who gathered
round him quickly adopted, the custom of wearing the
mendicant's upper robe over one shoulder only, leaving the
other bare. But, according to the rules for dress laid down
in the Pali Vinaya, both shoulders should be draped, except
when the right was uncovered as a mark of respect in
addressing a superior; and here at once was a doubtful and
ostentatious change which put the simpler, old-school
Parupanas (or 'clothed' sect as they were named) up in
arms. This was not all. The Ekamsika ('one-shoulder')
party carried fans when making their begging-rounds in the
1 A.D. 17 = 14-33 (Phayre, History of Burma, p. 286). In Sas., 1074
Kaliyuga ( 1"12 A.D.).
2 Sas., p. 120.
3 e.g., the Pitakatthamain (p. 52) gives under the heading gandhantara
the Mahavamsa, Dipavamsa, and their tlkas.
4 Sas., pp.'ll7ff.

66 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
villages. These and one or two other innovations, which
may seem to outsiders a small matter, roused very strong
feeling in the Order.
Grunabhilamkara and his following were not considered
strong in the sacred texts, and their opponents of the strict
school defied them to bring forward a canonical text, com-
mentary, or tlka that authorized their practices. Here was
their difficulty, and the Sasanavamsa assures us that they
were put to the miserable expedient of producing a work
forged for them by a 'lay disciple of immoral life who had
V
quitted the Order They maintained that they held the
views of the orthodox thera Saddhammacari of Ceylon.
The severe language of the Sasanavamsa would lead us to
think that some moral laxity, unworthy of true ' sons of the
Sakya 2 went with these affectations of dress and habits
',
in the new party. At all events, the question whether any
given monk was a Parupana or Ekamsika was, for long years,
the one by which his fellow-monks would judge him. It is
interesting to see the part played by the temporal power
in all this. The hierarchy of the Buddhist Church was not so
firmly established that the Sangharaja or Supreme Head could
impose his will on the fraternity without the king's support,
and we shall see that when the struggle became very acute
the sect that was losing ground usually tried to bring the
matter directly before the king.
In 1733 Maharajadhipati came to the throne.3 He was
an ineffectual king and, as events showed, a very poor arbiter
in religious matters. The Sasanavamsa records only one of
his acts with approval this was the appointing of the thera
;
Nanavara as his acariya (tutor or, more exactly, spiritual
adviser). .Nanavara was originally of Pagan. When he
came to the capital he threw himself zealously into the work
of teaching, and the first of his works mentioned in the
chronicle4 was composed for the benefit of his many hearers.
2 1 A Sas. s , to p. ck 11 p 9 h . rase of the ancient Vinaya, where unseemly conduct of
monksand novices is described as asakyaputtiya.
3 Phayre, History ofBurma, p. 140. Sas., 1095 K.Y.
4 Sas., p. 121.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 67
Mindfulof theirdifficultiesin the studyoftheAbhidharamattha-
sangaha, probably then, as later, the text most in use, he
prepared a ganthipadattha or gloss on the difficult words in
that famous work. Nanavara then glossed the ancient com-
mentary AtthasalinI (of Buddha ghosa) in the same way. He
alsocomposedaworkentitled Suravinicchaya,aname
suggesting
Vinaya rather than Abhidhamma,1and anotherwork forYinaya
students entitled Patimokkhalekhana.2 Afterwards, at the
king's request, as we are told, the acariya continued the work
his predecessors had begun in the seventeenth century, and
translated the Adhidhanappadlpika 3 into the vernacular.
His contemporary Saradassi, also of Pagan, is mentioned
as the author of a Dhatukathayojana, 4 either a grammatical
commentary or a translation of the Dhatukatha of the
Abhidhainmapitaka.
Nanavara's next work, the Rajadhirajanamattappakasini,
seems to have been written not so much to instruct the
unlearned as to please a royal patron. Its subject, ' the
naming of kings,' with the reigning king's name as an
example, was not important to the students in the monasteries.
The purpose of the book was served, so far as we can see,
when it had shown Nanavara's scholarship and interested
Maharajadhipati himself. There is a sort of unconscious
irony in the thera's essay when we see, as the gentle monk
did not see, the approaching fate of the 'Lord of Kings ', and
know how ill he succeeded not only as king but as supporter
A
of the faith. ruler of quite different mettle was needed
even to deal with the affairs of the Sangha now in a state
of acute disaccord. Maharajadhipati made mistake upon
mistake. When his tutor Nanavara, who held to the Parupana
practice, and the thera Pasamsa, of the Ekamsika sect, were
1 See above, p. 46, and Sas., p. 81. The title is perplexing here, as it
recalls Mahaparakkama's Decisions concerning Intoxicants, written at
Taungu in the sixteenth century.
2 P.TH., p. 43. The Patimokkha, it will be remembered, is the funda-
mental code of rules, the whole duty of the monastic life, in a concise
form. The ceremonyoftheuposat/tadaysisasolemn undertaking of this
rule oflifeby theassembled Sangha.
3 See Oldenberg,PaliMSS. in theIndia Office Library, p. 105.
4 P.TH., p. 41.

68 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
engaged in vigorous controversy, the king set an incompetent
monk, a favourite of his own, over both the learned doctors.
This monk is described as ignorant and incapable, ' knowing
only enough to turn a plough's head to the east or the west,'
yet the king, as the chronicle says, ' not knowing that this
man was thus and so,' trusted him to regulate all matters of
religion. The favourite proved unable to judge which of the
two opposed views was false and which was true. 'He was,'
says the chronicler, growing more and more indignant,
'like a buffalo, who knows no difference between the music
of a celestial lute played by a Gandharva* and the striking
of a bamboo stick by a village lad.' The situation was
beyond Maharajadhipati's own powers of arbitrating. He
wished for peace, and sought for a compromise which might
perchance last during his own lifetime. A royal decree was
therefore issued, the substance of which was that every bhikk/iu
was to observe whatever practices he wished. Only one result
could be expected. As the chronicler drily observes, ' their
dispute did not subside then.'
But this was a time for graver preoccupations. The old
discontent and hatred of Burma, that had been seething in
Pegu for many years, had gradually mounted to the point of
rebellion, while the Burmese were harassed by Manipuri
invaders. In 1740 a king was elected in Pegu and the revolt
became serious.2 Prome was taken by the Talaings, and
though their first king abdicated, another, Binya Dala, a brave
soldier and able leader, was solemnly consecrated at Pegu city
(Hanssavatl) in 1746.
From this time till the end of the eventful campaign that
A
followed there is no literary history to record. life-and-
death struggle had begun between Talaing and Burman, and
for some time the Order disappears from view in the people.
At first the Talaings were successful, and the Burmese lost
1 The Gandharvas (Pali, Gandhabba) are demigods attendant on
Dhatarattha, one of the four 'guardian gods' of the earth. The ex-
pression 'playing a lute near a buffalo' is quoted among the 'Burmese
Proverbs,aphorisms,and quaintsayings' inJudson&Stevenson'sexcellent
Burmese Dictionary, Appendix, p. 3.
a See Phayre, History ofBurma, pp. 142ff.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 69
their capital and their king. But the fall of Ava in 1752 was
a turning-point. With the first attempt to exact general
submission to the new rulers and payment of taxes there arose
an obscure captain determined to resist, a man with indomitable
faith in himself and his countrymen. This man was the future
king of Burma, Alaungpaya.
Our subject does not lead us far into the history of the
national hero and his astonishing success, from the moment
he collected his first little army till the day when, anointed
king of Burma, he triumphantly gave his southern capital the
name Rangoon (in commemoration of the war). Here we
may be permitted to follow the Sasanavamsa, which sums
up Alaungpaya's campaigns and victories in a few words of
homely imagery : 'he drove the armies of the King of Pegu
forth from Burma as one might a famished bird from a field
of grain.' l
For our chronicler the great feature of Alaungpaya's reign
was the religious revival. Monks and laymen rejoiced in
peace and safety under a king who was popularly believed to
be the Bodhisat.2 Alaungpaya was active in pious works, and
determined that all his family, ministers, and nobles should
follow his example. Great companies of the brethren were
invited to the palace every upozatha day, and the members of
the royal householdhadeven opportunities forstudy. Whether
zealous ornot for Pali learning, theyprobablyfounditexpedient
to be studious.3
In this prosperous state of religion the Parupana-Ekamsika
controversy revived, and the Ekamsika school now had a good
chance of making their practice prevail in the whole com-
munity. For the king's acnriya, Atula Yasadhamma, whose
influence with Alaungpaya was great, was opposed to the
stricter sect. The Sasanavamsa assures us that Alaungpaya
wished to go into the question thoroughly for himself, but,
being too much absorbed in state affairs, he put off hearing
1 Sas=., p. 193 ; these events came about in the year 1113 of the Kali-
yug
-
a A(
fu
1
t
7
ur
5
e
1
B
A
u
.D
d
.
d
)
h
a
a
n
.
d the twoyears following.
3 Alaungpaya is remembered in the secular chronicles as a patron of
literature. See J. Gray'sDynastyofAlaungprii, p. 13.

70 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
the two parties till graver matters were dispatched. In the
meantime he decreed that the whole Order should follow the
ruling of his own acariya.
This command put the Parupanas in a difficulty. They
must either renounce what they held to be the only practice
warranted by the scriptures or resist the king's authority.
Most of them submitted, but a few stood firm. The most
notable of the resisters was the thera Munindaghosa of Pagan,1
who not only continued to observe the stricter rule but had
a large following.
He is said to have declared in a full assembly of senior
brethren that he was willing to die rather than forsake the
precepts of his master. Alaungpaya was too much the Oriental
despot to bear insubordination even from a mahathera, and
Munindaghosa was banished, as far as possible, from the
region where his influence was felt. Quite undaunted he
continued his teaching, and again a group of followers gathered
round him. But in his banishment he was ready to turn from
controversy and instruct his pupils in more abstract matters,
for it was at this time that he translated the Abhidhammattha-
sarigaha into Burmese. He seems to have gone on for awhile
unmolested, but was afterwards summoned to Alaungpayii's
presence to answer for his defiance, a summons which he
obeyed with a full expectation of receiving the death sentence.
So sure was he of the fate awaiting him that he put off his
monastic habit before the encounter, with the magnanimous
wish to lighten, in some sense, the guilt of the man who
would shed his blood. The courageous monk's life was spared,
but what happened to him we do not know. All that the
chronicle adds to this strange incident is the fact that when
Alaungpaya left for his last campaign in Siam Munindaghosa
was in prison.
Alaungpaya never found the leisure from state affairs that
would allow him to master Vinaya questions. Disease was
already undermining his wonderful vigour when he reached
his forty-sixth year, and his unsuccessful attempt to conquer
Siam in 1760 was the last undertaking of his life. When the
1 Sas.,p. 125.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 71
Burmese army returned from the expedition they bore with
them the dead body of their hero.
Alaungpaya was succeeded byhis eldest son, Siripavaramaha-
dhammaraja,1 who rebuilt Sagaing2 (Pali, Jeyyapura), while
the old capital, Ava, was occupied by a rebel force. During
this king's short reign an attempt was made by the Parupana
sect to convince the king that right was on their side. They
had hoped much from the fact that Nana, or Nanalamkara,
the royal preceptor, 3 was a Parupana. But the astute Atula4
was still leading the Ekamsika party, and his counter-tactics
were successful enough to prevent unsettled points of discipline
from being discussed before the king.
In the meantime Nana, who seems to have had little taste
for controversy, won a reputation for profound knowledge. We
are told, as a testimony to his untiring diligence, that he was
capable of mastering or teaching nine or ten chapters 5 of Pali
in a day. He had been a passionate student from his youth
up. In the first year of his monastic life he composed
a grammatical work called the Padavibhaga. It was followed
by a series of commentaries, in Burmese, on the Nyasa6 and
two Abhidhamma texts, the Yamaka and Mahapatthana (or
Patthana).
In 1763 Naung-doa-gyi died andwas succeededby hisbrother,
who is usually known as Hsin-hpyu-shin (Pali, Setibhinda). 7
His accession gave promise of better times; among other
1 Naung-doa-gyl, 1760-3. Phayre,HistoryofBurma,p. 184. (Sas.,the
year 1122 K.Y.)
2 Sas., p. 127.
3 The king had brought this learned thera from Taungdwin to the
capital (Sas., p. 127).
4 Atula had been appointed Head of the Order by Alaungpaya. See
' A Preliminary Study ofthe Po US Daung Inscription', byTawSein Ko
(Ind. Ant., vol. xxii, p. 8).
5 6 L S i e t e er a a b l o l v y e , , b p h p d .' na 2 v 0, ar 2 a 1. section forrecitation ; see Sas., p. 127.
7 Sas., p. 128 ; Kaliyuga 1125 (the date is given incorrectly in the
p H r i i s n t t o e r d y o t f ex B t u k r a m l a i , yu p g . e 1 p 8 a 6. ncav S a e s e sa a d ls h o ik T e a d w vis S a e t i e n s K a o h , as ' s A es P a r m e p l a i t m t i e n ) a ; ry Ph S a t y u r d e y ,
o P f o th U e o P D o au U n o g D in a s u cr n i g pti I o n n s , cr e i n p g t r io a n v ' ed (I i n n d. ac A a nt v . e , n v e o a l r . x P x r i o i, me p , p. is 1 in ff t '. e ). rest T i h n e g
as commemorating the consolidation of the Burmese power in Further
Indiaat thisperiod.

72 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
auspicious changes for the Order was the rebuilding of Ava
(Ratanapura), which was reoccupied as the capital in 1766.
The Sasanavamsa passes over this reign very briefly, and
we must look to other sources for mention of the literary
work done. The king's tutor, Jambudlpa-Anantadhaja, is
merely named, and we may guess from this that he was either
of the Ekarpsika sect or took no interest in establishing the
Parupana practices. He was the author of a grammatical
commentary (composed in 1768) on the Vinayavinicchaya.1
Either Setibhinda or his dcariya (the wording of the chronicle
leaves it in doubt which of the two) did nevertheless take
strong measures against some doctrinal heresy which began
to spread in Burma about this time. The heretics were
summoned before the head of the Sangha and ' made to
accept ' the true doctrine how, we are not told.2
Hsin-hpyu-shin is said to have been a generous patron of
literature, and, though a good Buddhist, he showed a certain
enthusiasm for Brahmanic learning and had a number of
Sanskrit works translated into Burmese. The list of these
books, according to Forchhammer, begins with Vopadeva's
Sanskrit Grammar,3 and contains, besides, works on astrology,
palmistry, medicine, and erotics.4
In 1776 Mahadhammarajadhiraja (otherwise Sing-gu-sa), 5
the nineteen-year-old son of Hsin-hpyu-shin, succeeded and
reigned for a few years. He had but little time or peace
for religious works, but it happened that, coming under the
influence of Nandamala, a monk of great learning and
authority on monastic questions, he became deeply interested
in the Parupana-Ekamsika dispute. The chronicle tells us
that the young king dreamed a strange dream. The great
1 There is, I believe, a MS. ofthis work in the Neville Collection at the
British Museum. The Vinayavinicchaya was by Buddhadatta of Ceylon.
Sas., p. 33 ; P.TH., p. 43 ; GV., p. 59.
2 Sas., p. 128.
Ind
3
i
T
sc
h
h
e
e L
M
i
u
t
g
e
d
ra
h
t
a
u
b
rg
o
e
d
s
h
c
a
hi
,
ck
w
t
r
e
i
,
tt
2
e
n
n
d
i
e
n
d.,
th
p
e
.
t
2
h
4
i
3
r
.
teenth century; see A. Weber,
4 See Forchhammer in Jardine's Noteson Buddhist Law, part iv, Intro-
a du n c d to N r lt y i R L e i m t a e r r k at s u , re pp o . f i B x, ur x m iv a, ; a p l p s . o 6 J. an G d ra 1 y 3 , 4. Dynasty of Alaungpra, p. 24,
8 Phayre, History ofBurma, p. 209.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 73
god Sakra, clothed in white and adorned with white blossoms,
came to him and told him how, on the bank of the ' Nammada
River in the Aparanta Country V the sacred footprints of the
Buddha were concealed by the wild growth of the jungle,
'root bound up with root, trunk with trunk, and leaf with leaf.'
Former kings in their ignorance had left the place overgrown
and neglected, but on him whom the god had enlightened
fell the duty of clearing it. The dream was explained to
the king by a monk, who no doubt told him of Nandamala,
the eminent teacher. The king at once sent for Nandamala
and thenceforth kept the thera near him. Nandamala seized
the opportunity of explaining the Parupana Ekamsika contro-
versy, and convinced Mahadhammarajadhirajii that only the
Parupanas had the authority of the sacred texts on their
side. The king summoned both parties to hold a debate before
him, in which the Ekamsikas were hopelessly defeated, and
a royal decree was issued imposing the Parupana discipline
on the whole Order. Nandamala was appointed Supreme
Head.2 It was probably at this time that he wrote the
"
Sasanasuddhidlpika (expounding the purity of religion ", or
"
reform
religious ").
When a young man, shortly after his ordination, he had
translated some ancient and authoritative Pali works, the
Vinayavinicchaya, 3 Suttasangaha, 4 and Mahavaggatthakatha,5
into Burmese. Nandamiila's name is not associated with any
work on the Abhidhamma. Perhaps his preference for Yinaya
1 See C. Duroiselle's Notes sur la geographic apocryphe de la Birmanie
apropos de la Legende de Pilrna, BEFEO., tome v, pp. 146ff. A cetiya
had been built in the seventeenth century to mark the place of these
footprints, first rediscovered by the saintly acariya of Salvan-min-tara
(1629-48).
2 His official name thenceforth was Xarindabhidhajamahadhamma-
rajadhirajaguru.
3 Seeabove, p. 38.
4 See Oldenberg, Pali MSS. in the India Office Library, p. 80. The
Suttasangaha is an anthology from the Suttas, Vimanavatthus (legends of
the celestial abodes), etc.
5 Probably Buddhaghosa's commentary on the Mahavagga section of
the Dighanikaya. The text of the Mahavagga had been interpreted by
T A h ri e ya M l a a h m a k v a a r g a g ; a se m e en Ol t d i e o n n b e e d rg m , a P y a , li ho M w S e S v . er i , n b t e he t I h n e di s a ec O t f i f o i n ce o L f ib t r h a e ry V , i p n . a 6 y 9 a .
called by that name.

74 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
studiesl influenced his pupils, and had the effect of bringing
under discussion questions which had been less prominent
We
in the last reign. might suppose, too, that his authority
would have sufficed for a settlement of the Parupana-Ekamsika
dispute, but this,aswe shall see, was yet to be delayed awhile.
We can now go on to the reign of the famous Bodopaya,2
concerning ourselves chiefly, as the Sasanavamsa does, with
its religious events, and passing over its sinister beginning,
in the midst of conspiracy and murder. Alaungpaya's fifth son
was soon established firmly on the throne. The opening years
of his reign showed the peculiarities that were to distinguish
it to the end reckless shedding of blood and lavish building
of pagodas. His benefactions to the Order those of the royal
family and nobles are recorded in the chronicle as coming
from him were enormous. The chronicler writing in the
nineteenth century and the learned Nana, who held the post
of Supreme Head of the Order in Bodopaya's own time, both
paint the king in colours through which we can see but
a dim outline of the truth. Bodopaya's personality has not
lacked describers, and surely has never had one more indulgent
than the good Sangharaja, to whom was given the task of com-
memoratingtheking'sabhiseka (consecration,literallyanointing)
in his new capital, Amarapura.3 Nana, or Niinabhivamsa, had
only been ordained seven years when he was summoned to live
near the king and officiate as rajaguru. Naturally he soon
had a royal commission to fulfil, and his learning was brought
to bear on the subject of the consecration ceremony. He
translated a treatise on the subject, theRajabhisekagandha, into
Burmese.4 He was probably not the author of the original
work, but revised it after consulting ancient authorities.
1 The Pitakatthamain (p. 4f3) mentions a commentary on the Vinaya-
sarigaha written by the acariya ofKing Sin-gu at Ratanapura(Ava). The
Viuayasangaha was one ofthe famous treatises consulted by Dhammaceti,
seeabove, p. 38, and ofSas., pp. 33, 43.
2 Bodopaya came to the throne in 1782: Phayre, History of Burma,
p. 209; Sas., p. 130 (1143 Kaliyuga).
3 Amarapura, about 6 miles from Ava, was occupied as the capital in
17 4 83 Sa ( s P . h , a p y . re 1 , 31 H . ist N o a ry na of i B s u s r a m id a, to p. ha 2 v 1 e 1 ; 'p S u a r s i . f , ie p d . ' 1 t 32 h ) e . Rajabhisekagandha.
The Pali word used (parisodhetva] applied to a text means correcting and
clearingaway interpolations.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 75
The thera then received the sonorous name Nanabhisasana-
dhajamahadhammarajaguru as a further token of the royal
favour.
In a few years he became the leading personage in the
Burmese fraternity. Bodopaya bestowed monasteries, built by
different members of his family, upon several theras renowned
for learning, gave to four aged and eminent theras the title
sangharaja (sometimes translated ' bishop '), and afterwards
appointed four others with the same title to help them in their
charge. Nanabhivamsa was then placed at the head of all,
and entrusted with the reforming (or, to use the chronicler's
expression, the 'purifying') of the religious world. .This was
a decisive moment for the controversy that had so long divided
the Order. As we have seen in other reigns, the views of
the king's chief acariya were most important in those vexed
questions which were usually settled by the king, and which,
under a ruler of Bodopaya's temperament, would certainly be
settled without much discussion. And now the Ekamsikas
saw that they had not much to hope from their old leader
Atula. He had been passed over by Bodopaya after holding
the post of king's acariya since the reign of Alaungpaya. But
before Nana arrived at the height of his honours and dignities
Atula made another determined attempt to win the king over.
He wrote a memoir to show that the practices of the Ekamsika
sect had been taught by no less an authority than the great
Moggallana,1 who, he maintained, had composed a text called
the Cu laganthipada. How might all this be known, Atula's
opponents inquired. It was explained, he replied, in a text
known as the Pitakattayalakkhanagandha, brought to Burma
from Ceylon by Buddhaghosa. But the Parupana theras had
only waited long enough to let their adversary involve himself
thus far to this point, and in a few words they denounced
the fraud to the assembly. The text on which the Ekamsikas
depended, said they, was a treatise called Vinayaganthipada, 2
1 The Arahat Moggallana, one of the Buddha's chief disciples; see
Sas., p. 136.
2 There is aVinayaganthipadainForchhammer's List,p. v. Theauthor
given is the Sinhalese priest Joti.

76 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
of the twelfthcentury, written in Ceylon bya thera Moggallana
living in the reign of Parakkamabahu,1 therefore centuries
later than the time of Buddhaghosa, not to speak of the ancient
days of the Arahat Moggallana.
The story of the debate is brief, except in the description
of the dramatic moment when the feeble fraud was brought
home to Atula. He was, says the chronicler, like a wild
animal caught in the hunter's trap. But the Parupanas
pressed him with more questions: was the Culaganthipada
mentioned in the three great Vinaya tlkas (the Vajirabuddhi-
tlka, the SaratthadlpanT, and the VimativinodanT) ? 2 The
unwary Atula replied that it was. How conies it then, said
his opponents, that in your Culaganthipada we find the
words 'thus says the Yajirabuddhitlkti, the SaratthadlpanI,
thus says the VimativinodanI'? Another pitiable defeat for
the champion of the Ekamsikas. As the Piirupanas said, the
text he had chosen as his refuge had proved to be a peril,
and the quaint story of the singer Patali is told to illustrate
the case.3
This was the end of the Parupana-Ekamsika controversy.
The partisans of the Culaganthipada might perhaps have made
another stand, but Bodopaya was in no mind for long debates.
He promptly issued a decree that the Parupana practices were
to be considered orthodox and observed by the whole Order
;
and he was
obeyed.
1 The Parakkamabahu mentioned is probably the Samghabodhi-Para-
kramabahu, 1153-84, who summoned a council at Anuradhapura see
Kern, Man. Ind. liuddh., p. 132. ;
pp. 2 F 2 o 8, r 2 t 9 h . ese T t h h e ree Sar w a o t r t k h s ad s l e p e am Sa , s. a , c p c p o . rd 3 i 3 n , g 34 to ; S G i V n . h , al p e p s . e 60 a , n 6 d 1 B;u P r . m T e H s . e ,
tradition, was written by Sariputta at the request of Parakkamabahu.
Vajirabuddhi and Kassapa, the authorofVimativinodanI, also represent
Ceylon tradition, sogreatly venerated in Burma.
a Patali (Natapatali), excited by drink after a successful performance,
was swept away by the current of the Ganges while attempting to cross.
His wife, certainly with unusual presence of mind, cried out to him from
the river-bank to teach her a song before he should perish, as she must
needs earn her own living thenceforth. The luckless actor, whose lute, as
it filled with water, was rapidly weighing him down, had only time for
a few words oflament thatwhich was the refuge ofthe sickand afflicted,
the waterofGaiiga, must, alas ! be his death. (The story of Patali occurs
in the commentary on the Jataka. See Fausboll's edition of the Jataka,
vol. iii, p. 507.)

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 77
Bodopaya hadagoodshare ofhisfather'senergy,butacruelty
and inhumanity, on which all accounts agree,1 outweighed in
him the qualities that make a leader of men. His belief in
his own greatness amounted almost to mania, yet he could not
inspire others with that belief as Alaungpaya had done. His
attempts at foreign conquest and schemes for religious monu-
ments, such as the world had never seen, failed, partly from the
deep hostility and discontent his cruelty had aroused among
A
his subjects. few complacent scholars covered his name
with eulogies during his lifetime, but the Order, as a body,
refused to recognize his claim to be the future Buddha, and
in this was consistent with the old tradition of monastic
independence.
The story of Bodopaya's unfortunate campaign in Siam in
the years 1785 and 1786 does not much concern us. An
interval of peace followed. Towards the end of the eighteenth
century the oppressions of the government brought about
a revolt in Arakan, and this led indirectly to the King of
Burma's first relations with British India, the Burmese general
having pursued the leaders of the rebellion into British terri-
tory. 2 One result of the Arakan rebellion was the awakening
of a new ambition in Bodopaya, namely, to annex that part of
Eastern Bengal which had once belonged to Arakan.3 He
needed a pretext to send secret envoys to some of the native
princes of India, and in his character of patron of literature he
was able to make his negotiations with these possible allies
appear to be missions to procure Sanskrit books.
Literature, at all events, gained by these schemes, for a con-
siderable number of Sanskrit works were brought to the capital
and some were translated.4
In the latter part of Bodopaya's reign there was active inter-
course between the Sanghas of Ceylon and Burma. Probably
no ecclesiastic in Ceylon was more respected by the strictly
1 Phayre, HistoryofBurma, pp. 230, 231. 2 Phayre, pp. 220ff.
3 The King of Arakan extended his territory to Dacca about 1620,
'profiting by the confusion which then existed in the Mogul Empire.'
Phayre, History ofBurma, p. 177.
4 Phayre, History ofBurma, p. 224.

78 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
orthodox Sinhalese monks than Nanabhivamsa, the Sangharaja
of Burma. He is said to have been a ' great benefactor' to the
group known as the 'Amarapura sect ' or school, and the
Amarapura school did in fact convey to Ceylon a number of
Pali texts either of Burmese authorship,or better known to the
Burmese fraternity than to the Sinhalese.1 A large number
of these imported treatises deal with Abhidhamma subjects.
Nanabhivamsa himself was very active in Vinaya teaching.
He lived in turn at each of the several monasteries bestowed
on him by the king, directing the studies of the Order in
'the two Vibhangas ' (the Bhikkhu- and Bhikkhunlvibhanga,
sections of the ancient Vinaya text treating in detail the code
for monks and nuns).2 He was the author of several works,
in some of which we see the teacher and guardian of the
doctrine, in others the royal preceptor, whose duties included
writing edifying books at the king's request. Examples of
Nana's more strictly religious works are (1) a tlka entitled
Petalamkitra3 on the Nettipakarana* and
(2)
a tlka entitled
Sadhujjanavilasini 5 on the Dlghanikaya. At the request of
the king he undertook a Burmese translation of the Pali
commentary on the Jiitaka (the Jatakatthakatha). He is also
the author of some short Pali works of the Jataka type,
narratives containing religious and moral teaching, the
Catusamaneravatthu, the Rajoviidavatthu, the Chaddantanaga-
rajuppattikatha, and the Tigumbhathomana.6 Last on the list
comes the RajadhirajavilasinI, which deserves a few words of
description. In the case of this particular work the king
himself supplied the subject and some of the materials, and
1 Thisis the case with many ofthe texts found in Ceylon and described
by Mr. Nevill with the aid ofSinhalese scholars.
2 Nana himself gave the example of the stricter rule of life. The
Sasanavamsa tells us that he continually observed at least one of the
thirteen rules (technicallycalled dhutanga) particular to the more ascetic
among the recluses.
3 8 6 S S L a i a t s s . . . , , ' p p P . . ra 1 1 i 3 3 s 4 4 e ; ; o P P f . . T T E t H T h . . e , , p p T . . i 3 3 g 6 3 u . . mbha' (Sas., 4 p. Se 1 e 35 a ). bove T , he pp. T 5 i , k 8 u . mbha or
Tigumbha cetiya is the great Shwe Dagon Pagoda in Rangoon. See
Forchhammer, Notes on the Early History and Geography of British
Surma, part i, p. 17.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 79
the royal command to put these into becoming shape was con-
veyed by an important official to the Sangharaja's monastery.
The Brethren, as the rule or etiquette of the Order demanded,
laid the charge on their Principal, who forthwith carried it out.
How far Bodopaya's eulogists flattered him is a question for
impartial chroniclers of events to answer. In literary history
theRajadhirajavilasinI is precious as a specimen of the 'elegant
scholarship ' of the time. This curious little Pali work, written,
as explained above, on the occasion of Bodopaya's consecration,
is in prose, the prose of the school that had forgotten Buddha-
ghosa's lessons, or was determined to better them. It staggers
under a weight of adjectives that seem meant to bewilder the
reader with the display of the author's resources as each
sentence brings its load along. An Indian model has been
copied, and copied faithfully, except that there is little of the
true Indian fantasy in all the decoration, while allusions to
Buddhist legends are brought in with a curious sober care-
fulness, as precedents might be cited in a legal document.
Royal heroes of old days are called in as examples ; Mahii-
sammata, the first king and the ancestor of the Sakya race,
comes first, and after him a series of dim, mythical figures,
whose presence in the prologue is the indispensable compliment
to the rdjadhiraja enthroned in Amarapura. With Asoka
begin historical allusions, and then come quotations from the
Suttas, from the commentaries, from the tlkas, from the Maha-
vamsa, from the Rajasikkhapada,1 even a definition from the
Saddanlti,2 to bring forward all that traditional learning might
have to say on the anointing (abhiseka) ceremony and its
sacramental virtue. Launched upon this theme the author
finds occasion to speak of everything that could shed glory on
the ' righteous king ' as a benefactor of his people and of
religion. Ancient maxims are cited from Jatakas (for example,
the Sankicca and Tesakuna Jatakas, in which the hero of the
story, the future Buddha, discourses on the duties of kings).
In the matter of religion Bodopaya's achievements are all
1 Obviouslya well-known manual ofthe duties ofkings.
2 Seeabove, pp. 16, 17.

80 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
recorded : he had settled the Parupana-Ekamsika dispute,
instituted reforms in all parts of his dominions,1 he had received
and returned a mission to Ceylon, he had brought images of
the Buddha from conquered Arakan to his capital and received
others from China, he had built cetii/as and celebrated great
festivals of adoration. He had, indeed, done .everything that
befitted a monarch who aspired to be the Asoka or the Duttha-
gamini of Burma.
To this man, of allmen,thesymbolsof powerandthe external
show of magnificence were important, and it so happened that
he had acquired an auspicious possession that exalted his
more than normal self-satisfaction beyond measure. This was
a white elephant, captured in the forests of Pegu, named
Nibbanapaccaya, and conveyed afterwards with great pomp to
the capital, where, if we judge from the Rajadhirajavilasinl,
it was the real hero of the abhiseka festival.
Bodopaya's eulogist, obliged to say at least as much about
the elephant as about the king, attacks the task with courage.
He brings forward the traditional elephant lore embodied in
the Hatthisutta2 to show that every kingly quality and
auspicious mark was possessed by Nibbanapaccaya. Perhaps
we have no right to judge it all from our own point of view,
but as we read we cannot but picture Nanabhivamsa, after the
sumptuous festival, sighing over his weary task.
For us the interest of the RajadhirajavilasinI is rather in
the literary references than the matter or style, which are both
tiresome. The author is very careful to show that he has not
neglected secular any more than religious authorities on his
subject. He draws from the literature of various periods and
We
from many branches of learning. pass from the ancient
suttas to the fifth-century commentaries and to the later tikas,
from these to twelfth- century grammar, from the famous
Elephant-book to the royal chronicle of Ceylon, from the
Jataka glossary, Jatakabhidhana, to Sanskrit etymology and
1 The ' five regions ' RamaniJa, Kasmira, Yonaka, Yavana, and
Rakkhanga are mentioned.
2 Lit. elephant-suttas (aphorisms), a well-known manual for elephant-
trainers.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 81
Brahmanic astrology and chiromancy.1 But the author's
favourite source is the Pali Jataka itself. His work is adorned
with verses and passages of the commentary on certain tales
of this famous collection. In the tales selected the hero is
almost invariably a righteous king or-an elephant perfect in
all points; among them the Allnacitta,2 the Silavanaga, 3 and
Vessantara4 Jatakas occur most frequently. The Tesakuna-
jiitaka,
5 the Dummedha,6 Culapaduma,7 andUmmagga8 Jatakas
also provide illustrations.
In this respect the Rajadhirajavilasinl is a typical piece
of Burmese literature, and charms us, in the end, for all its
tediousness. For the Jatakas are a possession common to the
religious community and the lay-world, the learned and the
unlettered. From the days when they were rudely pictured
on Taruk-pye-min's temple walls at Pagan9 to the date of the
latest editions we find in the British Government's Official List
of Publications, the Jatakas have been a Bible to the Burmese.
This comparison applies most aptly to the Jatakas of the
iMahanipata or Great Section (the last) of the Jataka book, con-
taining the longest narratives of the Bodhisat, and relating his
deeds and golden sayings in his later existences either as a man
or a god. 10 Their art is the old art of the Oriental tale-teller,
with its mingling of unbridled fantasy and minute realism ;
their wisdom is the wisdom of old proverbs and maxims of
the Indian people ; their lesson the praise of the Teacher, the
supremely gifted among men, the Bodhisat, playing many
1 The Sanskrit Brihajjataka and Samudrikalaksana are quoted.
' See Jataka, Fausboll's edition, vol. i, pp. 21ff!
3 Jataka (Nidana, p. 45), vol. i, p. 319.
* Jataka, vol. vi, p. 479.
5 Jataka, vol. v, p. 109. In this charming tale the king's duties are
expoundedto him by the three birds he hasadopted as his children.
6 Jataka, vol. i, p. 444.
7 Jataka, vol. ii, p. 115.
8 Jataka, vol. vi, p. 329.
9 1248-79 A.D. See A. Griinwedel, Buddhistische Studien. Veroffent-
lichungen aus dem konigl. Museum fur Viilkerkunde, 1897, Band v,
pp. 128-31.
10 Inpassing we may mention the titlesmostfamiliartoevery Burmese
Buddhist from hischildhoodonward theTemi,theJanaka,Suvannasama,
Nimi, Mahosadha, Bhuridatta, Candakumara, Narada, Vidhura, and
Vessantara Jatakas.

82 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
parts. The author of the RajadhirajavilasinI might be thought
(by Bodopaya) to be pointing to the virtues of the king who
founded Amarapura, but Nanabhivamsa knew that his readers
would see in all a homage to the Lord Buddha. What these
edifying legends are to the Burmese to-day they were when
Nanabhivamsa wrote, and to many generations before his. To
understand the literature, ' serious' or popular, of Burma we
cannot know the Pali Jataka too well.

CHAPTER VI
THE PALI LAW-TEXTS OF BURMA PALI LITERATURE IN
THE NINETEENTH CENTURY MIN-DON-MIN AND THE
FIFTH COUNCIL THE ERA OF THE PRINTING-PRESS
CONCLUSION
Alaungpaya's conquest of the Talaings had been more than
a feat of arras and establishing of military supremacy. He had
set himself to crush the Talaing language and nationality.
If the consequent inequality in culture between Upper and
Lower Burma was, after all, less than we should expect,1
the reason is to be sought in the past religious history of
both provinces. The equalizing and unifying element in the
states so often at war or in rivalry was, and had always
been, the Buddhist religion and the Pali language. The
kings who had ruled over the widest territory Anorata,
Dhammaceti, Bayin Naung, Ukkamsika, Alaungpaya, Hsin-
hpyu-shin, Bodopaya each in his turn and in his own way,
had lent his power to the service of religion and encouraged
scholarship. And even in the worst times of disorder and
change there had been centres of learning where the Order
could be comparatively at peace; there were always remote
or protected monasteries here and there where old texts could
be copied and new commentaries and treatises composed. The
stream of learning flowed wherever a channel offered itself,
and, whether in the north or the south, was often reinforced
from
Ceylon.
We have seen how the vigour and influence of the school
named, after the place of its origin, the Slhalasangha, continued
in Burma from generation to generation. On the other hand,
the abundant vitality of the schools of Further India at the
time of the eighteenth-century revival reacted on Ceylon,
where the Burmese school known as the Amarapura sect
1 It must beadmitted that thelast Census ReportjudgesUpperBurma
decidedly superior to Lower Burma in the matter of 'literacy', and
mentions the UpperBurman pongyl for his 'share in the labours of the
past' (E. Lowin. Report on the CensusofBurma, 1901, p. 65).

84 THE PALI LITERATUBE OF BURMA
introduced a number of texts either new to the Sinhalese
brethren or long fallen out of mind.
The intimate connexion, religious and literary, between
Ceylon and Burma from the eleventh century onwards needs
no further illustration. Though the Buddhists of Indo-China
have attempted to appropriate Buddhaghosa, they have always,
in all their literary chronicles, done ample and painstaking
justice to Sinhalese scholarship and honoured Sinhalese names.
Sinhalese influence is seen at its strongest in the earlierperiods.
When we come to the end of the eighteenth century we find
that a branch of Pali literature has developed in Burma owing
nothing or very little to Ceylon and bearing deep traces of
We
a purely Indian origin. come, that is, to the period of
redaction of Pali Dhammasatthas (Sanskrit dharmasastra] or
law-codes, of which somewere firstdrawnupafterAlaungpayii's
conquest of Pegu and during the reorganization of the greatly
extended kingdom of Burma. Others, as we shall see, were
more ancient and had been the patrimony of the Takings.
These ancient codes of Burma, and, with certain differences,
the Pali law-texts of later times, are based on Hindu
d/tarmasdstras, Manu,1 and others. This has become clear
from the researches of various scholars whose opinions are
given bySir JohnJardine, formerlychiefJudicialCommissioner
for Burma, in his Notes on Buddhist Law, where he adds much
preciousmaterialfrom his own stores of learning and experience
of Indian and Burmese law.2
His collaborator, Dr. Forchhammer, came to the conclusion
that the Talaing States became political dependencies of
powerful Hindu colonies existing in Pegu before the eleventh
We
century, and adopted Hindu codes from them.3 cannot
venture here to do more than record the Burmese tradition.
1 See TheLaws of Manu, translation by G. Biihler with introduction,
SEE., vol. xxv, and J. Jolly, Rechtund Sitte, Grundriss, ii, 8.
2 The Burmese 'Dhammathats' are the base of Buddhist law as now-
administered in Burma. 'The Pali scholar,' says Sir John Jardine,
4ought to have preceded the judge.' SirJohn Jardine himself called the
Pali scholarto the judge'said, mostfortunately for thoseinterested in the
Pali literature.
3 JardinePrizeEssay, pp. 38, 62, 63.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 85
The vexed question of ancient origins is a subject for a more
elaborate study and more competent treatment than is possible
in the present essay. We will now touch very briefly on the
main points in the history of the Pali law-texts of Burma, as
traced by the two learned authors mentioned.
We
have already spoken 1 of the ancient Dhammavilasa com-
piled in Pali by the Talaing monk Sariputta of Patlppajeyya
near Dala2 about the year 1174 A.D., when Narapati-si-thu
reigned at Pagan.
We
come next to the Wagaru Dhammasattha,3 compiled by
the king of that name reigning at Martaban in 1280. It is
typical and important. Forchhammer in his learned study of
this text makes a careful comparison between the Wagaru and
the Hindu Manu and other ancient codes, chiefly Yajiiavalkya 4
and Narada.5 The comparison brings out clearly the pervading
Indian element in the code at the same time the translator
;
finds material for some very interesting observations on the
radical difference between the Buddhistic law, of which this
is the first noteworthy document, and the Brahmanic law, from
which the Talaing code takes its form and most of its pro-
visions. This difference is in the spirit. TheVedic, sacerdotal
element has vanished from the Wagaru. For instance,
sacraments (such as marriage), the efficacy of sacrifice, the
possibility of expiation by penance, are all an essential part of
Brahmanic law. But the Buddhist lawgivers ignored the
sacramental view of marriage, and based their theory of
punishment on the doctrine of karma, which, as will be
remembered, takes the past and future existences of the indi-
vidual into account. With this doctrine in mind they thought
out a system of legislation to defend the social order without
inflicting what must be, according to their theory, unjustified,
1 Seeabove, p. 33.
2 Opposite Rangoon. See J. Jardine's Notes on Buddhist Law, pt. iv,
Introductory PrefacebyE. Forchhammer, p.5 ; and Notes, pt.vii, Preface
byJ. Jardine, p. 1.
3 Translated by E. Forchhammer as part ofthe Jardine Prize Essay in
18 4 85 A. ; R W a e n b g e o r o , n, In G di o s v c e h r e n L m i e te n r t at P u r r i g n e t sc i h n i g ch P t r e e , ss 2 . nd ed., pp. 267, 299.
8 A. Weber, op. cit, p. 296.

86 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
useless, illogical penalties. Their system is described as a civil
code punishing every crime or offence with fines, demanding
' compensation which is proportionate to the amount of damage
occasioned by one person to another '. 'Morally no punish-
ment can be inflicted,' says Forchhammer, ' because in the
Buddhist's belief every deed will with unerring certainty
bring its own definite reward or punishment, which cannot be
increased or diminished by the appreciation or condemnation of
other beings.' 1 Forchhammer's study of the Wagaru led him
to believe that the Taking law-code, Indian in origin, reflects
the social and religious conditions of ancient India during
the supremacy of Buddhism,2 and can claim to belong to
a Buddhist Manava school earlier than the well-known Brah-
manic recension of Manu.3 The translator of the Wagaru,
unhappily, did not live to follow up the researches he had
begun, and by which he might have found a firm foundation
We
for this theory. It remains an interesting conjecture.
must leave it for the present where he left it, to trace the
stages of development through which the Pali and Burmese
Dhammasatthas passed, from the predominance of the Hindu
Institutes preserved by the Talaings to the victory of the
Buddhist tradition embodied in the later codes, where the
Vinaya- and Suttapitakas are the authority and the Jataka
and
supplies precedents examples.
The Wagaru was translated into Pali in the sixteenth
century by a Talaing jurist with the auspicious name of
Buddhaghosa.4 'With him,' Forchhammer says, 'begins the
authenticated history of Burmese Dhammathats.' Buddha-
ghosa's Manusara is a Pali translation of the Wagaru
Dhammasattha, till then only known in the Talaing language. 5
In the seventeenth century another code, the Manu-Yin,6was
1 SeeJardine PrizeEssay, pp. 61, 62.
2 Fora description ofthese conditions see Rhys Davids'Buddhist India
('Story ofthe Nations' series), 1903.
3 SeeJardine Prize Essay, p. 38.
4 Needless to say, the Buddhaghosa of commentary fame profits by the
coincidence. TheTalaingtradition makes the indefatigablesagethebearer
ofHindu law-books to Ramanha in the fifth century (Notes, pt. iii, p. x).
8 See NotesonBuddhist Law, pt. viii, p. 2.
6 Manoo Reng. See Notes on Buddhist Law, Introd. Remarks, p. xii.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 87
compiled in verse. It is in substance the Wagaru Dhamma-
sattha, but contains additional matter from the hpyatton
or ' decisions ', that is, Burmese ancient customary law, purely
Buddhistic and founded chiefly on certain Jiitakas.1 A seven-
teenth-century version of the Dhammavilasa Dhammasattha,
dated 16502 and drawn up by a second Dhammavilasa, is also
called a Manu Dhammasattha very characteristic of the later
;
period is the introduction of a Buddhist element, absent
in the Talaing original, for instance, quotations from the
Dhammapada.
The next stage in the history of the law-texts is one of
marked changeand development. Alaungpaya had provedhim-
self a pitiless destroyer, but he proposed to build up a sound
administration for his new kingdom. Some law-codes were
compiled at his command, a Manu-Yin in 1756, the important
Manu-Kyay in 1758-60,3 and a third, the Darajjavitaranl.
TheManu-Kyayexistsonlyinthe Burmese version,4 but belongs
to Pali literature by the fact that it is largely grounded on
canonical Pali texts, namely, Jatakas (the Mahosadha and
Vidhura and other extracts from the Suttapitaka), the Milinda-
paiiha, the Samantapasadika (Buddhaghosa's commentary on
the Vinaya), the Kankhavitaram (commentary on the Pati-
mokkha), the Visuddhimagga, and the Saratthadlpanltlka. 5
By the time Burmese law is crystallized into this famous code
and the hardly less famous Manuvannana,6 we can see how
1 TheVidhuraand MahosadhaJatakasareexamples of Jatakas dearto
the Buddhist lawgiver. See, for the Burmese version of the famous
Vidhura Jataka, the translation by Mr. R. F. St. Andrew St. John iii
JRAS., 1896.
2 Notes, pt. iv, p. 5, and pt. vii, p. 2.
3 See Notes on Buddhist Law, pt. iv, Introd. Preface, p. 4. Theauthor
was Bhumrnajeyya Mahasiri Uttamajeyya. Sir John Jardine points out
resemblances between thelaw ofmarriageanddivorce in the Manu-Kyay
and the Hindu code, Vyavaharamayukha, in force in theDekkhan (Notes,
pt. iv, p. 10).
4 Published at Moulmein and translated into English byDr. Richardson
in 1847.
5 Tlka on theVinaya, by Sariputtara, written in thereign ofNarapati-
si-thu. P.TL., p. 38 ; Forchhammer, List, p. iv. See also Notes, pt. iii,
Introd. Remarks, p. 12, and pt. iv, Introd. Preface, pp. 4and 5.
8 The Manuvannana Dhammasattha was published in 1898 by Colonel
HoraceBrown. See Noteson BuddhistLaw, pt. ii, p. 1.

88 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
the spirit of Buddhist ethics has permeated the Dhammasatthas
and supplied the place of those religious sanctions which we
can hardly imagine absent from an Indian legal text. The
Manu-Kyay professes a respect for learning; only such men,
it says, should be made judges who are acquainted with the
Pitakas and the Vedas.1
Hsin-hpyu-shin followed the example of his father, and by
his order several law-books were written between 1766 and
1774 among these were the Manusara-shwe-myin, the
;
Manuvannanii,2 and the Vinicchayapakiisanl. The author,
Vanna-kyaw-din, was a pupil of the Sangharaja Jambudipa-
Anantadhaja. He is said to have been still a member of the
Order when he wrote the first-named work. A poetical version
of the Manu-Yin mentionedabove, known as the Manuyinlanka,
is ascribed to him. The aid of theras learned in the Tripitaka
was thought necessary by this time, and we are told that the
monks Tejosara, Chandapauna, and Toungdwin Kyaw assisted
the council of jurists calledtogetheratAva by Hsin-hpyu-shin.3
An example of a modern law-text is the Mohavicchedan!,4
written in the year 1832 by Rajabala-kyaw-din. It is com-
posed in Pali verses (gatha). Forchhammer has an interesting
note on this work, in which he says: ' It differs in one
important point from all other Burmese law-books. Manu
the Rishi [i.e. sage] has entirely disappeared. Riijabala-kyaw-
din, aware probably of the incongruity of placing Manu in
the Buddhist pantheon, as had been done by the jurists of the
Alompraic period, and not finding any reference in the
Buddhist scriptures that could support Manu in the dignity
1 2 N T o h t e e r s e , p is t. a iv r , at I h n e t r ro s d i . gn P i r f e i f c a a c n e t , d p i . f 7 fe ; re o n n ce th b e et V w e e d e as n , t s h e e e B a u b r o m ve e , se pp a . n 5 d 0, Pa 5 l 1 i .
versions ofthe Manuvannana. In the former there are frequent allusions
to the Vyakaranas and other works translated by the king's command
from the Sanskrit (on astrology, palmistry, medicine, and erotics). These
references are absent from the Pali version, which, composed by a monk,
shows the influence ofthe author's monastic traditions.
3 At this council was prepared the Lankasara (the collective name by
which theManuvannanaand Manusara are known). SeeNotes onBuddhist
Law, pt. iv, Introd. Preface, p. 5.
4 See Notes on Buddhist Law, pt. vi, p. 1. Note by Forchhammerand
translation by Maung Theka Phyoo of the Law of Inheritance according
to the Mohavicchedan! Dhammathat.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 89
of a lawgiver to a Buddhist community, broke with the past
traditional history of the law-books of his country ; he says in
the introduction that, obedient to the request of his king, he
proceeds to unfold the law, as it was preached by the all-wise
Buddha in his great compassion for the ignorance of men and
recorded originally in the Magadha language, the first of all
languages, the mother of all other tongues (mulabhdsa) . . .
The text of the MohavicchedanI is the somewhat rearranged
but otherwise identical material of the Manu Dhammathats.'
Pali has never become to any great degree the language of
things secular ; its destiny seems to be to return to the service
of religion. In the legal texts we notice the use of the Pali
language (1) to preserve a Hindu tradition derived from the
Talaings, (2) to consecrate Burmese customary law which
could, we may suppose, be codified equally well in the Burmese
idiom. The classic literary language, naturally chosen in such
cases as the attribute of awe and majesty befitting the written
code, is here also the reminder of the debt that Burmese custom
and law owe to Buddhism. An excellent example of Buddhist
influence is the change in the wife's legal position. But the
Pali law-texts are full of other interesting matter. The few
above mentioned could not be left out of an account, however
summary, of the Pali books of the Burmese. The place due
to them has of necessity been curtailed in this sketch. In
leaving them, however, to pass on to the religious literature
of the nineteenth century the writer dares to hope that this
branch of Oriental history and its problems will attract
scholars again as they fortunately did some years ago, with the
results only too briefly indicated above.
We must now return to the history of monastic scholarship
in Burma.
Bodopaya died in 1819. He was succeeded by his grandson
Hpa-gyl-doa.1 'He commenced his reign well/ says Phayre.2
'He remitted some taxes for three years, and in a speech to his
courtiers promised to rule justly and to follow the precepts
1 Sivitribhavanadityapavarapanditamahadhammaraja, Sas., p. 142.
2 HistoryofBurma, p. i32.

90 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
of religion.' The Sasanavamsa is at pains to show that he
consulted learned monks and ministers on various questions
concerning the king's duty to the fraternity, the perpetuity
of grants of land for religious pvirposes, and so forth. These
discussions led to much research in ancient texts. On one
of those occasions a minister, who was an authority on the
Vinaya, laid down the principle that lands granted by kings
in former times, for the building of celiyas and cihuras, should
be perpetually reserved to the Order. He fearlessly sought
a precedent as far back as the time of the Buddha Sujiita, and
the king was entirely satisfied.1
Hpa-gyl-doawas a respecterof tradition. Under his auspices
the modern Rajavamsa (chronicle of the kings) was compiled
at Pagan.2 His preceptor Paiiiiaslha3 was appointed Supreme
Head of the Order. There is no mention in the Sasanavamsa
of any books written by him.
Hpa-gyl-doa'stime, eitheras a patron of the Orderoras ' lord
of kings', was very short. In 1824 war was formally declared
by the British Government against Burma, and two years
of desperate fighting followed. The death of his general
Mahabandula broke the Burmese king's courage. The queen
and other partisans of war had perhaps inspired him till
then with some hopes of victory, but the British occupation
of Rangoon, Pegu City, and Arakan dealt these hopes
a mortal blow. In 1826 the Burmese submitted, and the
treaty of Yandabo was signed.
Hpa-gyl-doa sawhis kingdom reduced and hispower crippled.
Something in this man failed then, where his forerunners
Alaungpaya and Bodopaya would have risen up in another
effort. He sank into listless melancholy and inefficiency, and
in 1837 was deposed byhis younger brother Tharawadi-min.4
Tharawadi-min, who died insane, showed in his earlier days
1 Sas., p. 145.
'2 In 1830. It wasprinted in the reign ofMin-don-min. See E. Huber,
BEFEO., tome iv, pp. 494 seq.
3 Of Salin - myo, afterwards Munindabhisirisaddhammadhajamaha -
dhammarajiidhirajaguru.
4 Siripavaradityalokadhipati, 1837. Phayre, History ofBurma, p. 287 ;
Sas., p. 146.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 91
great respect for the Order. His first preceptor, Suriyavamsa,
was proclaimed Supreme Head by a royal decree. When this
thera died he received, the Sasanavamsa tells us, extraordinary
funeral honours. His pupil Neyyadhamma was then appointed
Sangharaja it was he who received at Amarapura an
;
important Sinhalese mission, including the learned Paiinatissa
and some others. Neyyadhamma's pupils were numerous, and
he was an enthusiastic teacher. As the chronicler says, 1 'in
order that religion might long endure and that his hearers
might easily arrive at full comprehension, he, with the aid
of various books, revised the text of the Saddhammapajotika",
commentary on the Mahiiniddesa, and made a translation
thereof into Burmese.'2
The Sasanavamsa does not mention any other scholars of
this reign.
Tharawadi-min's son and successor, Pagan - min,3 only
appears in the Sasanavamsa to mark the date of some eminent
scholars of the time, among whom Neyyadhammabhivamsa is
mentioned as the author of a Burmese translation of the
SaddhammavilasinI,4 the commentary on Patisambhidamagga
(of the Khuddakanikaya). Neyyadhammabhivamsa's chief
pupil, Pannasami, a young monk of five years' standing, began
his scholarly career at this time. His work as a chronicler
(he was the author of the Sasanavamsa) is of special interest
for us. His first essay was a translation into Burmese of
a commentary on difficult passages (Ganthipadatthavannana")
of the venerable grammatical work Saddatthabhedacinta.5 Ten
years later, after much labour and comparison of texts, he
produced a revised edition of the commentary on the Abhi-
dhanappadlpika 6 and translated it into Burmese.
1 Sas., p. 148.
2 The commentary on the Mahaniddesa (the eleventh book of the
Khuddakanikaya) was composed in Ceylon by Upasena. Sas., p. 33 ;
GV., p. 70.
:i Siripavaradityavijayanantayasamahadhanimarajadhiraja, 1846, Sas.,
p. 148. He isdescribed briefly butso drastically by Y"ule, in the Mission
to the CourtofAva, that wecau hardly be surprised at the silence of the
Sasanavamsa.
4 By Mahanama ofCeylon. Sas., p. 33.
5 Seeabove, pp. 20, 22. 6 Seeabove, p. 27.

92 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
Paniiasami succeeded his master as Sangharaja in the
following reign. It is rather curious that not a single Pali
composition is mentioned by him as belonging to this decade.
His colleagues were nevertheless very active, especially in
translating from the Pali. The Anguttara-, Samyutta-, and
Dighanikayas were translated with their commentaries. The
authors of these translations were respectively Paiinajota-
bhidhaja, Manijotasaddhammalamkara, and Medhabhivamsa.1
We now come to the closing scene of the old Order in
Burma. The last of the pious and zealous Burmese kings,
perhaps the most sincere of all and the most single-minded
in his support of religion, came to the throne. This was
Min-ddn-min, whose reign, lasting from 1852 to 1877, was
a period of peace, good government, and general content, while
religion, we are told, was practised with a new enthusiasm not
only in the monasteries but in every rank of the laity. The
king's command and example, as of old, were all-powerful
;
andMin-don-min wasnotlike Bodopaya. Histutorand eulogist,
the author of the Sasanavamsa, says less of cetiyas and
monasteries presented to the Sangha than of the vigour with
which religious studies were carried on and the precepts of
the Buddha observed.
These were golden days, if they are rightly reflected in
the verses quoted by Paniiasami from his own poem, the
Nagarajuppattikatha,2 written to commemorate the founding
of the new capital Mandalay (Pali: Ratanapunna). 3 Paniia-
sami's Nagarajuppatti has rather more artistic pretensions than
the Rajadhirajavilasinl, being composed in couplets (slokas)
throughout, whereas Nanabhivamsa ventures into verse at the
beginning and end of his work merely to give a few specimens
of metres. The tone of the two works, however, is the same
conventional eulogy, with quotations from the Jataka and
references to legendary and historic kings, Mahiisudassana,
Mandhatu, Asoka. Needless to say, this was an auspicious
time for scholarship. Pannasami, himself a prolific writer,
1 Sas., p. 148. 2 Sas., pp. 149, 153.
3 Founded in 1857.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 93
mentions the work of some of his contemporaries.1 The
Sarigharaja Xeyyadhamma composed ' at the king's request '
a work entitled Surajamaggadlpanl. Meanwhile the old tradi-
tional learning was not neglected. The Sangharaja had been
expounding the commentary on the Majjhimanikaya to his
pupils. Under his direction a Burmese translation of the
commentary was prepared, embodying his interpretation of
the text.
The original text of the Jataka tales was also translated at
this time by the thera Medhabhivamsa.
Finally, we have a list of Pannasami's own works with their
dedications. ' At the request of the Queen-Consort' he com-
posed two works entitled Sllakatha and Upayakatha, evidently
of an ethical character. At the request of the king's tutor
(a layman) he then wrote the Akkharavisodhanl, a treatise
on Pali orthography, and the Apattivinicchaya, on morality.
Pannasami's own preceptor, the Sangharaja, urged him, he
tells us, to compose the Nagarajuppattikatha above mentioned,
the Voharatthabheda and Vivadavinicchaya dealing with
monastic discipline. For the edification of certain ministers,
the lekhakamacca and drocanalekhakdmacca,2 he wrote the
Rajasevakadlpanl (on serving the king). Another work, the
Xirayakathadlpaka,3 was undertaken to please another high
official. A distinguished layman requested him to write on
the uposatha rules, and the monk composed the Uposatha-
vinicchaya. Lastly, at the request of 'many of his hearers',
he wrote a Pali commentary on the first Pali work that had
brought honour to Burmese scholarship, the Saddanlti.
Thus the nineteenth century is linked with the twelfth, the
history of Pali literature in Burma repeats itself. Perhaps
the desire of these modern theras was before all to revive the
ancient tradition as faithfully as possible. That certainly was
Min-don-min's own ambition, and when he had gained for
himself the title ' Convener of the Fifth Council' he treasured
it thenceforth beyond all others.
1 Sas., p. 514.
2 Secretariesand officialschargedwithdraftingand issuingroyaldecrees.
3 Edifyingstories ofpunishments in hell

94 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
In 1868-71 l a great assembly of learned monks and teachers
was summoned together at the capital, where,the kingpresiding,
theyread or recited the sacred texts to restore the best readings.
By the royal order a complete text of the Tripitaka was then
engravedonstone tablets and placedin shrines. This traditional
act dulyrecorded, we come to another of an importance perhaps
little suspected by Min-don-min's counsellors the inauguration
of the first printing-press in Upper Burma.
In 1885 Miii-ddn-min's successor lost his throne and the
British Army occupied Mandalay. The palace and even the
monastery libraries paid their tribute to the conquerors, who,
fortunately, were careful (like Anorata) to bear their treasure
to safe places, house it with honour, and keep it within thereach
of inquiring scholars.
Of the changes brought about in Burma by the annexation
we have no occasion to speak here. They affected the
Buddhist religion and the Order very little. The author of
A People at School* points out that the monks of Burma
have ceased of late years to exert that direct influence in
the affairs of the community which they are known to have
used for good while Buddhist kings ruled, and that they
have withdrawn more strictly into the cloistered religious life.
But their spiritual authority with the people is by no means
lessened, and of their literary activity we have abundant
evidence in the multitude of modern Pali and Burmese works
now printed in Burma. The elaborate official lists of publica-
tions in Burma issued by the Indian Government are also
instructive and interesting from this point of view.
We
cannot conclude our brief survey without a glance at this
latest period, the era of the printing-press.
We must begin with Lower Burma, where, in consequence of
the British occupation, printing was introduced earlier than in
Mandalay. Here we find works by modern Burmese authors
and reprints of ancient classics published in increasing numbers
from 1870 onwards.
S U e p e pe F r ie B ld u i r n m g a Ha G l a l z , et A tee P r e , op vo l l e . a i t , p S . ch 6 o 6 ol ; , B p u p d . d 2 h 5 i 5 s , m 2 , 57 1 . 905, p. 425.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 95
There is little to be said about these works. "We notice
a number of new editions of short texts that have become
household words with the such as the Paritta l and the
laity,
famous Mangalasutta,1 Burmese translations of these and
popular works such as the Lokamti, Namakara, and Ratana-
panjara, the last two of which are devotional poems.2
Thenwecome tovocabularies, worksofgrammar and rhetoric,
amongwhichshouldbenoticedtheKavyasaratthasangaha(1872),
by a learned and prolific author, Chakkindabhisiri, and the
Alahkaranissaya, of the Yaw-mya-sa Atwin-wun (written in
1880). This latter is an example of that care to preserve
the old traditions of scholarship which we have already noticed,
and which is still characteristic of the Burmese Palists. The
Alankaranissaya is an edition of Sarigharakkhita's Subodha-
larikara,3 with a commentary.
In 1882 appeared the Lokaniti of Chakkindabhisiri, an
ethical poem in Pali, published with a Burmese version.
A
characteristic little work of the same date is the TTpasaka-
vinicchaya, a collection of Pali quotations on the religious
duties of laymen. The collection was translated and com-
mented in Burmese by a monk of Prome, Panfmramsi. A
work bearing the Pali title Kammavinicchaya, but written in
Burmese, may be mentioned here, as, fortunately for us, it has
been studied and expounded in English by a Burmese scholar,
Shwe Zan Aung.4 The author's name is Sagaravamsabhidhaja.
Modern works dealingwiththat standardworkof
metaphysic,
the Abhidhammatthasahgaha, are very numerous. To take an
example, a summary of this important text, with commentary
U
by Tin, was published at Maulmein in 1883 under the
title Sarupatthadlpan! the Abhidhammatthasangahaparitta, by
;
MaungTun Aung,in1897 theAbhidhammatthasangahaganthi-
U ; U
thit in 1898 (by Tissa and Janinda) and several issues of
;
the text itself at various times.
1 Seeabove, pp. 3, 4.
2 These poems reappear in several modern collections, such as the
Hyauksaungtwe, Hsaysaungtwe, etc.
J On rhetoric (v. JPTS., 1882, p. 55).
4 Buddhism, October, 1905, vol. ii, No. 1, pp. 58 ff.

96 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
Jagarabhidhaja is a modern author who has written both
grammatical and religious treatises. His works include the
Dhammapana-shu -bwe (moral and philosophical stanzas in
Pali with Burmese interpretation, published in 1894), the
Upasakovada (edifying discourses to the laity, 1894), the
Ovadakatha, the Navaniyamadlpam (254 aphorisms on Pali
grammar), and the SaddamedhanI (an essay on various terms
of Pali grammar). The same author edited later (1903) the
Parajika and Piicittiya sections of the Vinaya, with Burmese
interpretation. It is interesting to see that Jagarabhidhaja
edited a passage from the Sanskrit Lalitavistara called the
Kamadinakatha.
A
rather curious specimen of a modern work in another
branch of Pali-Burmese literature is the Atthasalinlganthi
(or Atthasaliniganthi-thit), published in Rangoon in 1900.
This work, described as ' Notes on difficult points in Buddhist
philosophy', is briefly analyzed as follows for the guidance
of readers : 'A book of expositions on various subjects, namely,
on the grammatical construction of the Tipitaka or the
Buddhist scriptures; on the account of Kathiivatthu or book
of controverted points ; on the thirty events which always
take place on the conception of an embryo Buddha ; on the
threefold divisions of the religion; on the six kinds of divine
effulgence ; on the relative heights of the Bodhi-tree and
Buddha's throne ; on the thirty-two signs manifested on the
birth of embryo Buddha and on the promulgation of his law
;
on the solicitation of a divine communication of the hermit
Sumedha at the hands of Dipankara Buddha regarding his
future Buddhahood ; on the principal causes of existence ; on
the derivation of the names of Sariputtara and Moggallana ; on
the four kinds of lions on the six Paniiattis or manifestations
; ;
on the ten Paramis or virtues on the Catuparisuddhisllam or
;
four precepts of purity ; on the four castes of the Brahmins ;
on the attributes of Buddhist Trinity; on the list of Rahans
whoconvenedthe Buddhistcouncils onthe lawof abstruseness
; ;
on the numerousness of existences on the three kinds of
;
Pahanas or getting rid of one's lust ; on evil acts ; on the
three methods of teaching Buddhist scriptures; on the four

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 97
kinds of Acinteyya or incomprehensibles; on the names of
thePancavaggi or the first five disciplesof Buddha'
;
andother
matters.
Treatises on nirvana, arahatship, and the practice of medi-
tation in its various stages leading to these ends, are numerous,
for example: (1) theVisuddhimaggadlpanl-kyan (on the nature
of religious meditation and methods of practising it, e.g. the
Samathakammatthana, Bhavanakammatthana, and Vipassana-
kammatthana. 1900) ; (2) the Asankhatadhammapakasanl-kyan,
by U Pyin-nya-thika. 1899, on the nature of nirvana and the
upavamdmtssati form of meditation leading thereto ; (3) Sati
we-bon-la-shu-bwe, which explains the three kinds of death
kkanikamarana or the 'momentary death which consists in
',
the continual wearing away of the body and soul, aamutimnrana
or ' so-called death ', the visible death to which all beings are
and the aamucchedamarana or ' cessation of existence
subject, ',
said of the death of Buddhas, Pacceka-Buddhas, and arahats.
We
turn back with relief to the less perplexing points
treated by the authors who confine themselves to Vinaya and
grammar. The learned Visuddhacara is an example. Among
his works are the Kaccayanavannanacakka-kyan, a treatise
under six heads upon the introductory stanzas to Kaccayana's
grammar (published in 1896) ; the Dhatvatthasangaha, an
alphabetical digest of Pali roots and their meanings, in verse,
with a Burmese translation ; the Chandomanjari, a Pali treatise
on metre, followed by a nissaya in Burmese (1897) ; and,
departing to another subject, the Visumgamaslmavinicchaya,
a treatise on the determination of village boundaries (1899).
Scholarship in the twentieth century followed the lines
first traced as long ago as the twelfth century in Burma.
Let us take as an example a learned monk of the most recent
times, the venerable Ledi Hsaya-daw, and observe the subjects
treated by him in various works published in Rangoon in 1905
and 1906. The list of the Ledi Hsaya-daw's works is long :
Niruttidlpanl (a Pali grammar, and afterwards a Burmese
nissaya on the same work), NibbanadlpanI (a discourse on
nirvana), Rupadlpanl (a treatise on Form), Bodhipakkhiya-
dipanl, AnapanadlpanI, and Ovada (the Way to Arahatship,

98 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
treatise on Meditation, and Book of Instruction), Paraml-
dlpanl (onVirtue), Saddasankhepa (a manual of Pali grammar),
PabbcTjaniyakarnmavaca (Pali stanzas for recitation as charms),
DhammadlpanI (exposition of the Law), Maggangadlpani (the
'Eightfold Path'explained),Paticcasamuppadadlpanl (reflections
on the causes of transmigration), Paramatthasankhepa (manual
of Abhidhamma), Saccatthadlpam (the Four Sublime Truths
explained), Vijjamaggadipanl, Lakkhanadlpani (the Way to
Enlightenment, the Three Characteristics), AharadipanT, Sila-
vinicchaya (on Food and the Precepts of Morality), Anatta-
dlpanl (on Mutability), DanadlpanI (on Charity), and Dhamma-
desana
(religious teaching).
These works represent fairly well the fields where Pali
flourishes to-day dissertations on points of doctrine, homilies
and exhortations, verses which may be called either charms or
prayers, decisions on points of discipline, manualsof metaphysic,
treatises on Pali grammar. To abundance of new works of this
kind modern scholars now add a pious and most useful contri-
bution, careful editions of the Tipitaka texts and commentaries.
A
group ofwritingsveryinsignificant in size, but interesting,
or rather curious, from the mere fact of the Pali language
being found in such a connexion, is the class of little works
headed 'science' in the Pali-Burmese lists. The sciences in
question are chiefly astrology and cosmography,1 but medical
treatises occur here and there. And this reminds us again of
a field in Burma which merits diligent exploration. While the
Paliliteraturerepresentsvastly morethan anyothertheinfluence
of India on Further India, we should not pass over the fact
that a store of Sanskrit learning by no means negligible has
existed from time immemorial in that outlying country. This
store wasalwaysheld strictly inBrahmanic keeping. The kings
of Burma were generally not only the nominal but real and
energetic patrons of learning, and the Brahmans, at all times
counsellors and soothsayers in the royal palaces, had an indirect
influence on culture. Forchhammer encountered an extreme
1 Examples are the Itthipurisa-arigavijja-pakinnaka-kyan, a handbook
ofdivination on theformation of the handsand other parts of the body,
and a tlka on the Makarandaveda, a handbook ofastrology.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 99
reserve in the Hindu guardians of Brahmanic lore which baffled
even his determination and patience as an inquirer. But his
conclusion was that ' there exists a real Sanskrit literature
in Burma written on paper like in India, with Nagari and
Bengali characters. These records are in the hands of the
descendants of Hindu colonists, who at different periods, some
even before the spread of Buddhism in Burma, settled in this
country'. He adds : ' Burma deserves to be drawn within
the circle of those countries where researches of Sanskrit
records ought to be made.' l And an eminent epigraphist has
said very lately, ' we are beginning to obtain valuable records
in Burma.'2 Ancient links connect India with Burma; we
can only hope to restore them gradually, and there are many
questions which, with all its wealth of legend and chronicle,
the Pali literature does not answer fully. 3
The great historical service of the Pali literature is to show
the peculiarly Buddhistic character of Burmese civilization.
History in the modern and critical sense we cannot demand
of it any more than we demand philology or biology treated
We
with European methods. need not consider here the
possibility of adapting the Pali language to modern know-
ledge or critical discussion. The true Pali literature is tradi-
We
tional. may read now, as in old days, of differences
of doctrine or opposed schools in the Southern Buddhist
community.4 But these seem, from our far-off point of
observation, to be a hardly perceptible eddy here and there in
the calm, main stream of Buddhist belief, as we see it in the
1 Forchhammer, Report on Literary Work, 1879-80, p. 13.
9- J. F. Fleet in Indian Epigraphy, p. 63 : The Imperial Gazetteer of
India: The Indian Empire
;
Oxford, 1907.
3 To take one instance the chronicles hand on an ancient tradition
:
thataroyal Ksatriya tribe came from India at a very early period and
founded an Indian dynasty in Upper Burma. European scholars
cautiously admit that there was an Indian immigration bythe northern
route, but at what date and for what reason we do not know. See
Phayre, History of Burma, p. 3. Phayre points out that in Lassen's
opinion the legend of an Indian dynastyis notquitewithout foundation.
SeeForchhammer,'On theancientMahamuniPagoda inArakan' : Report
on Arakan, p. 1.
4 Differences in the sects are 'largely academic '. See Burma, vol. i,
p. 41 : Imperial GazetteerofIndia, Provincial Series, Calcutta, 1908.

100 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
religious and scholarly literature of Burma. Having followed
that stream back to its mediaeval sources, and yet further to
its remote Indian origin, we cannot but feel impressed by the
continuity of its progress, the force of its unbroken tradition.
Buddhism in Burma has suffered nothing parallel to the
Mohammedan invasion of India, but the history of Further
India has been tempestuous enough. When we follow in the
chronicles the struggle of those neighbour states, we must
needs wonder at the Law that never failed, in the end, to
dominate barbarism, to make customs milder and laws more
just, to do away with barriers by raising men above them.
Of that ' Righteous Law ' as a social and intellectual influence
the Pali literature is an almost complete embodiment. Thus,
to use the ancient metaphor, India conquered Burma. Of all
the conquests in history none has been more enduring or more
beneficent.

APPENDIX TO CHAPTER III
AN INSCRIPTION OF A.D. 1442
The inscription mentioned on p. 50 is among those collected
by Forchhammer at Pagan.1 It is dated B.E. 804 (1442 A.D.),
and commemorates the bestowal of various on the Order
gifts
by the Governor of Taungdwin and his wife. Together with
a monastery, garden, paddy-lands, and slaves, the pious donors
offered a collection of texts, of which a list is given. The
following list, copied from the inscription, is extremely
interesting for more than one reason. Besides helping to
fix the chronology of many Pali works and giving some
indication of their importance, it gives us another clue well
worth following up. "We notice here a number of titles of
Sanskrit works, sometimes greatly disguised in the Burmese
transcription, but still recognizable. These will aid us to form
some notion of the point reached by the Sanskrit scholars
in Burma in the fifteenth century. We are not obliged to
believe that each monastery contained students of Sanskrit,
but we have at least some ground for supposing that certain
famous works on grammar, prosody, medicine, and so forth
were treasured in Upper Burma.
The discovery that the ' Vedas' found in Burmese, Talaing,
and Siamese versions *do not contain a trace of Vedic texts '
inclined Forchhammer2 to some scepticism as to the contents
of palm-leaf MSS. bearing the titles of famous old treatises
(e.g. the Susruta). I think, however, that he is speaking
of MSS. of a later date. I do not see any reason to doubt
that the gift recorded in the Pagan inscription was a collection
really containing the works mentioned and not their titles only.
References to Forchhammer's List indicate that MS. copies
1 Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya, and Ava. Deciphered from the ink
impressions found among Forchhammer's papers. Printed at Rangoon,
1902. Translated with notes by Tun Nyein, Government Printing Press,
Rangoon, 1899. The inscription containing the list is mentioned by
M. 2 P R e e l p l o io r t t, in 18 ar 7 t 9 i - c 8 l 0 e , ' p D . eu 11 x . itineVaires: , BEFEO., vol. v, p. 183.

102 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
of the works in question are in the Bernard Free Library at
Rangoon. A few notes are added, but there is obviously room
for many more suggestions and conjectures.
List copiedfrom the Inscription.
1. Parajikakanda.1 23. Dhatukatha.
2. Pacittiya. 24. Puggalapannatti.
3. Bhikkhumvibhanga. 25. Kathavatthu.
4. Vinayamahavagga. 26. Mulayamaka.
5. Vinayaculavagga. 27. Indriyayamaka.
6. Vinayaparivara. 28. Tikapatthana.
7. Parajikakanda-atthakatha. 29. Dukatikapatthana.
8. Pacittiyadi-atthakatha. 30. Dukapatthana.
9. Parajikakanda-tika. 31. Atthasalim-atthakatha.
10. Terasakanda-tika. 32. Sammohavinodani-
11. Vinayasangraha-atthakatha atthakatha.
(the greater). 33. Pancapakarana-atthakutlia.
12. Vinayasangraha-atthakatha 34. Abhidhamma-anutlka.'
(the less). 35. Abhidhammatthasangaha
13. Kankhavitaram-atthakatha. atthakatha.
14. Khuddasikkha-tika (ancient). 36. Abhidhanamatthasangaha
15. Khuddasikkha-tTka (new). tika.
16. Kankha-tika (new). 37. Abhidhammatthavibhavani
17. Vinayaganthipada. tika.
18. Vinaya-uttarasincaya 38. Silakkhandha.6
atthakatha.2 39. Mahavagga.5
19. Vinayasincaya-tika (later). 40. Patheyya.5
20. Vinayakandhaniddesa. 41. Silakkhandha-atthakatha.
21. Dhammasangam.8 42. Mahavagga-atthakatha.
22. Vibhanga. 43. Patheyya-atthakatha.
1 Nos. 1-20 are works belonging to or commenting on the Vinaya.
(Edited by Hermann Oldenberg. Vinayapitakam, 5 vols., 1879, etc.
Khuddasikkha and Mulasikkha. Seeedition ofE. Miiller, JPTS., 1883.)
2 Sictextofinscription. Readsancaya, anthology orcollection.
3 Abhidhamma (Nos. 21-37). See Dhammasangaul, ed. E. Miiller, Pali
T P D u e h g x a g t t a u l S k a o a c p t i a h e n a t n y , a , tt 1 e i 8 d , . 85 e E d ; . d V m i R u b i n h c a h d n a g r a d G , oo M e o n d r e . r r i C a s a t , r n o e l , P i T n S e P . T , F S . . 1 , R 8 h 83 y 1 s 8 ; 92 D D a u v k i ( a d w p s i , a th t P t T h S c a . o n , m a m 19 . a 0 ) n 4 d ; ;
e T d i . ka A p r a n t o t l h d an T a a , ylo ed r . ,P C T a S r . ol , i 1 n 8 e 94 F - . 7, Rh 2 y v s ols D . a ; vi A d t s t , ha P s T a S l . i , m ( 19 c 0 o 6 mm ; . K o a n th D a h v a at m t m h a u - ,
sangani), ed. E. MUller, PTS., 1897.
4 ByDhammapalaofCeylon. Sas., p. 33.
6 See Dlghanikaya(Nos. 38-46), ed. Rhys Davidsand Estlin Carpenter,
PTS., 1889, etc., 3 vols.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 103
44. Silakkhandha-tika. 66. Ekadukatika-anguttara.3
45. Mahavagga-tlka. 67. Catukanipata-anguttara.
46. Patheyya-tlka. 68. Pancanipata-anguttara.
47. Mulapannasa.1 69. Cha-sattanipata-anguttara.
48. Mulapannasa-atthakatha. 70. Attha-navanipata-anguttara.
49: Mulapannasa-tika. 71. Dasa-ekadasanipata-anguttara
50. Majjhimapannasa.1 72. Ekanipata-anguttara- attha-
51. Majjhimapannasa-attha- katha.
katha. 73. Dukatikacatukanipata-
52. Majjhimapannasa-tika. anguttara-atthakatha.
53. Uparipannasa. 74. Pancadi-anguttara-atthakatha
54. Uparipannasa-atthakatha. 75. Anguttara-tika [1].
55. Uparipannasa-tika. 76. Anguttara-tlka [2].
56. Sagathavaggasamyutta.3 77. Khuddakapatha text and
57. Sagathavaggasarayutta- atthakatha.4
atthakatha. 78. Dhammapada text and
58. Sagathavaggasamyutta-tlka. atthakatha.
59. Nidanavaggasamyutta. 79. Udana text and atthakatha.
60. Nidanavaggasamyutta- 80. Itivuttaka text and attha-
atthakatha. katha.
61. Khandhavaggasamyutta. 81. Suttanipata text and attha-
62. Khandhavaggasamyutta-tika. katha.
63. Salayatanavaggasamyutta. 82. Vimanavatthu text and
64. Salayatanavapgasamyutta- atthakatha.
atthakatha. 83. Petavatthu text and attha-
65. Mahavaggasamyutta. katha.
1 See Majjhimanikaya (Nos. 47-55), ed.V. Trenckner (vol.i) and Robert
Chalmers (vols. ii and iii), PTS., 1888-1902.
2 See Samyuttanikaya (Nos. 56-65), ed. Leon Feer. 5 vols. VoL vi
indices. By Mrs. Rhys Davids. PTS., 1884-98.
3 See Anguttaranikaya (Nos. 66-76), ed. R. Morris (vols. i and ii) and
Edmund Hardy (vols. iii-v),PTS., 1885-1900.
4SeeKhuddakanikayaandcommentaries(Nos.77-110); Khuddakapatha,
e 1 d 8 . 55 R. ; C 2 . n C d hi e l d d . e , rs 1 , 90 J 0 R ) AS ; . B , u 1 d 8 d 7 h 0 a;va D m h s a a mm a a n p d ad C a a , riy e a d p . it V a . ka F , au e s d b . ol R l . (1 M s o t rr e i d s . , ,
PTS., 1882; Udana, ed. Paul St'einthal, PTS., 1885; Itivuttaka, ed.
E. Windisch, PTS., 1889 ; Suttanipata, ed. V. Fausboll, PTS., 1884 ;
Vimanavatthu, ed. E. K. Gooneratne, PTS., 1886 ; Vimanavatthu-
atthakatha, ed. E. Hardy, PTS., 1901 Petavatthu, ed. J. P. Minayeff,
PTS., 1889- Petavatthu-atthakatha, e ; d. E. Hardy, PTS., 1894; The
Theragatha and Therlgatha, ed. H. Oldenberg & R. Pischel, PTS., 1883 ;
Therlgatha-atthakatha, ed. E. Miiller, PTS.,1893 ; Jatakaand atthakatha,
ed. V. Fausboll, 7 vols. Other texts are in course of publication by the
Pali Text Society.

104 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
84. Thera(gatha) text and attha- 100. Jataka-tlka.
D
katha. 101. umajataka-atthakatha
.
85. Then(gatha) text and attha- 102. Apadana.
katha. 103. Apadana-atthakatha.
86. Pathacariya.1 104. Patisambhidamagga.4
87. Ekanipatajataka-atthakatha. 105. Patisambhidamagga-
88. Dukanipatajataka-attha- atthakatha.
katha. 106. Patisambhidarnagga-
89. Tikanipatajataka-atthakatha. ganthipada.
90. Catuka-panca-chanipata 107. Visuddhimagga-atthakatha.
jataka-atthakatha. 108. Visuddhimagga-tlka.
91. Satta-attha-navanipatajataka 109. Buddhavamsa-atthakatha.
atthakatha. 110. Cariyapitaka-atthakatha.
92. Dasa-ekadasanipatajataka 111. Namarupa-tika (new).5
atthakatha. 112. Paramatthavinicchaya
93. Dvadasa-terasa-pakinnaka- (new). 8
riipatajataka-atthakatha. 113. MohavicchedanT.
94. Visati jataka-atthakatha. 114. Lokapannatti.7
95. Jatattaki-sotattaki-nidana 115. Mohanayana.
atthakatha.2 116. Lokuppatti.
96. Culaniddesa.3 117. Ai'unavati.
97. Culaniddesa-a^thakatha. 118. Chagatidipanl.8
98. Mahaniddesa. 119. SahassaramsimalinT.9
99. Mahaniddesa.1 120. Dasavatthu.9
2 1 A Tex So t t o at f t C h a a r k i l y , a w p r i i t t a t k e a n ( i ?) u . Ceylon, is mentioned in the Pitakatthamain,
p. 58.
3 Mahaniddesa, a part of the Khuddakanikiiya, 'beingan exposition by
Sariputta of sixteen suttas which compose the fourth book or Atthaka-
vagga of the Suttanipata' (see Catalogue of Pali-Burmese MSS. in the
BritishMuseum}. TheCulan" is the second part ofthe Niddeaa.
4 Ed. Arnold Taylor, PT S. (1905-1907).
* Namarupapariccheda[ppakarana] is ' a treatise belonging to the
literature on the Abhidhamma, being an exposition of the Buddhistic
philosophical term " Namarupam", or Name and Form, by Anuruddha-
cariya' (B.M. Pali and Burmese Catalogue). The terms'new' (ormodern)
and 'old ' (ancient) are translated here from Burmese thitand houng.
6 OntheAbhidhamma. Thiswork(byAnuruddha) is in Forchhammer's
List, p. xviii.
7 By SaddhammaghosaofThaton.
8 By Saddhammaghosa ofThaton. See Forchhammer, List, p. xxvi.
9 Sahassaramsl, mentioned in P.TH., p. 55, is a tlka on the Mahabodhi-
vamsa, ItwaswrittenatPaganinthereignofNarapati,A.D. 1174(B.E. 536).
Dasavatthu, Sahassavatthu, and Slhalavatthu were composed in Ceylon.
The authors are unknown to the P.TH. (p. 57). On Petakopadesa see
Dissertation, by RudolfFuchs, Berlin, 1908.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA. 105
121. Sahassavatthu.1 141. Rupasiddhi-atthakatha.6
122. Slhalavatthu.1 142. Rupasiddhi-tika.
123. Petakopadesa. 143. Balavatara.7
124. Tathagatuppatti.2 144. Vuttimoggallana.8
125. Dhammacakka 145. Pancika-Moggallana.
[? pavattanasutta]. 146. Paiicika-Moggallana-tika.
126. Dhammacakka-tikii. 147. Karika.9
127. Dathadhatuvamsa.' 148. Karika-tika.
128. Dathadhatuvamsa tlka. 149. Lingatthavivarana.10
129. Culavamsa.3 150. Lingatthavivarana-tika.
130. Dipavamsa.3 151. M^ukhatnattasara.11
131. Thupavamsa.8 152. Mukhamattasaratlka
.
132. Anagatavamsa.3 153. Mahagana.
133. Bodhivamsa.' 154. Culagana.
134. Mahavamsa.* 155. Abhidhaaa.12
135. Mahavamsa-tika.3 156. Abhidhana-tika.
136. Dhammadana [?in text 157. Saddamti.13
dhammandan].4 158. Culanirutti.1'
137. Mahakaccayana. 159. Culasandhivisodhana.
138. Nyasa.5 160. Saddatthabhedacinta
.
15
139. Than-byin-tlka.s 161. Saddatthabhedacinta-tlka.
140. Mahathera-tlka. 162. Padasodhana."
1 See note 9 on preceding page.
2 By Nanagambhira(?). Forchhammer, Lust, p. xxv ; P.TH., p. 60.
3 Written in Ceylon. P.TH., pp. 53, 55-7.
4 Probably dealing with the dhammaddndnisamsa, the advantage or
merit ofpreachingthe law to others.
5 Seeabove, p. 21.
6 Rupasiddhi, the well-known Pali grammar composed in Ceylon by
Dipankara, otherwise Buddhapiya.
A 7 By Dhammakitti or Saddhammakitti. Forchhammer, List, p. xxiiL
Pali grammaroftheKaccayanaschool.
8 TheMoggallanavyakaranaisaccompaniedwiththevuttiorexplanation.
See Devamitta's edition, Colombo, 1890.
9 Seeabove, p. 16.
10 See above, p. 22.
11 Seeabove, p. 25.
12 Abhidhana, the Abhidhanappadlpika of Moggallana, about 1153 A.D.,
*the only dictionary of synonyms in the Pali language' (Subhuti).
The text was edited in 1883 by the thera Subhuti and a complete index
(Abhidhanappadlpakasuci) in 1893.
13 Seeabcve, pp. 16, 17.
14 ,Culanirutti, agrammarofthe Kaccayana school.
15 See above, pp. 20, 22.
16 Padasadhana(?). The Padasadhana is a Pali grammar composed in
Ceylon.

106 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
163 Sambandhacinta-tika.1 179. Kaccayanasara.10
164 Rupavatara.2 180. Balappabodhana.11
165 Saddavatara. 181. Atthasalini.
166 Saddhammadipaka. 182. Atthasalini-nissaya.
167 Sotamalini.9 183. Kaccayana-nissaya.
168 Sambandhamalini.4 184. Rupasiddhi-nissaya.
169 Padavahamahacakka 185. Jataka-nissaya.
[Padavatara?]. 186. Jatakaganthi.
170 Nvadi [Moggallana].5 187. Dhammapadaganthi-nissaya.
171 Kataca [Krt-cakra?]. 188. Kammavaca.12
172. Mahaka [kappa or 189. Dhammasatta.13
kaccayana?]. 190. Kalapapancika [panjika].14
173. Balattajana[Balavatarana?] 191. Kalapapancika-tlka.
174. Suttavali.6 192. Kalapasuttapratinnasaku
175. Akkharasammohacchedam.7 [? patinnapaka] tika.
176. Cetiddhinemiparigatha 193. Prindo-tlka.15
194. Rattamala.16
[sic] [?].
177. Samasataddhitadipan!.8 195. Rattamala-tika.
178. Bijakkhyam.9 196. Roganidana.17
I Seeabove, p. 22, and P.TH., p. 67. 2 A treatiseon inflection (?).
3 Sotabbamalim (?). Thework ofthatnameisa collection of edifying
tales.
A
4 treatise on syntactical relation (?).
5 Nvadi Moggallana, atreatise on gender by Sarigharakkbita based on
Moggallana. =
6 Suttavali Sutras ofKaccayana.
7 On analysisofwords orcorrectdivision ofsyllables.
8 On compoundsand suffixes. a Bijakkhyam, on algebra(?).
"> See above, pp. 36, 37.
II Written atVijayapura(Panya), authornotknown. P.TH., p. 72.
12 Seeabove,pp.6,7. 13 L)harmac.astra(Lawcode). Seeabove,pp.33,84.
14 Commentary on the Katantra grammar (see above, p. 26) ; Forch-
hammer, Report, 1879-80, p. 12 ('The Katantra seems to have been the
most influential of these latergrammars [not belonging to the Paninean
system], having served as a model for the standard Pali grammar of
Kacchayanaand forthenativegrammarsoftheTibetansand Dravidians
') ;
A. A. Macdonell, article Sanskrit Literature in the Imperial Gazetteer of
g I e n s d c i hi a ch ( t T e h , e 2 I n n d d e i d a ., n p E p. mp 2 i 4 r 3 e , , 33 v 6 ol. ; a i l i, so p. t 2 h 5 e 1 t ) ex ; t s K ee at a a l n so tr W a e o b f e S r a , r I v n a d v . ar Li m t a e n ra w t i u t r h -
the commentary of Durgasimha, ed. J. Eggeling, Bibl. Indica, vol. Ixxxi.
18 Probably Vrnda, the medical treatise by the author of that name.
See Jolly, Medicin, pp. 4 and 6 (Grundriss, iii,10).
16 Perhaps Ratnamala. Possibly the famous dictionary Abhidhana-
ratnamala, of Halayudha, about the middle of the tenth century. See
Zachariae, Die Indischen Worterbiicher (Grundriss, i, 33), p. 5, and
Ludwig Heller's Halayudha's Kavirahasya (Gb'ttingen, 1894).
17 Medicine, possibly the Madhavanidana or a work based on that
Hauptwerk. See Jolly, Medicin, p. 7.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 107
197. Dabraguna.1 214. Sarasangaha.10
198. Dabraguna-tika. 215. Sarapinda.
199. Cbandoviciti.2 216. Patipattisangaha.
M
200. Candaprutti [Candra- 217. Sulacharaka.11
vrtti"]. 218. Palatakka [balatarka?,logic
2*01. Candrapancikara3 for beginners?].
[panjika]. 219. Trakkabhasa12[Tarkabbasa]
202. Kamandakl.* 220. Saddakarika.
203. Dhammapaniiapakarana. 221. Kasikapruttipalini.13
204. Mahosatthi [Mabosadba?]. 5 222. Saddhammadlpaka.
205. Subodhalamkara.8 223. Satyatatvavabodha [?].
206. Subodhalamkara-tika. 224. Balappabodhana-
207. Tanogabuddhi [?]. pruttikarana.
208. Tandi [Dandin?J. 7 225. Atthabyakhyam. u
209. Tandi-tika. 226. Cujaniruttimanjusa.14
210. Cankadasa.8 227. Manjusatikabyakhyam.1*
211. Ariyasaccavatara. 228. Anutlkabyakhyam.
212. Vicitragandha. 229. Pakinnakanikaya.
213. Saddhammupaya.9 230. Catthapayoga [?].
1 Dravyagunasamgraba (pharmacology). See Jolly, Medicin, p. 6 ;
Forchbammer, List, p. xxxv.
2 Explanation ofmetres.
3 On the Candra grammar and its relation to the Pali grammar of
o M n og T g h al e l A a i n n a dr se a e S a c r h t o i o c l les of b S y an 0 s . kr F i r t au G k r e a , m J m P a T r S i . a , ns 1 , 90 M 2 a - n 3 ga ; lo al r s e o , A 1 . 87 C 5 . . Burnell,
4 For Kamandakl's Nltisara (elements of Polity) see the edition of
S. Venkatarama Sastry, Madras, 1895, and studies by Carlo Formichi,
Oiornale deltaSocietd Asiatica, Florence, 1887.
8 SeetheMaha-ummaggaJataka
(in
whichMahosadhaistheBodhisatta).
Fausboll, Jataka, vol. vi, pp. 329-478.
6 Subodhalamkara on rhetoric was composed in Ceylon by Sangha-
rakkhita. P.TH., p. 75. See edition of G. E. Fryer (under title Pali
Studies, 1875).
7 Thework inscribed is probably Dandin's Kavyada^a.
8 Evidently Cangadasa, author of the Cangakarika, aphorisms on
grammar (Katantra school). See edition of Jagannadhasvamiy, Vizaga-
patam, 1896.
9 Saddhammopayanaby Ananda, ed. Richard Morris, JPTS., 1887.
10 Sarasangaha, 'a compilation of important points in Buddhism' (so
described in the British Museum Catalogue ofPali MSS.).
11 Presumably an abridged version of the famous medical work Caraka-
samhita. See Jolly, Medicin, p. 11.
la A The Tarkabhasa, on logic,ofKe9avami9ra (?).
13 commentary on the Kayikavrtti of Jayaditya and Vamana, on
Panini (?). SeeZweiKapitel der Kufika iibersetztund init einerEinleitung
verschen, von Bruno Liebich, Breslau, 1892.
14 Grammatical commentariesorglosses.

108 THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA
231. Matthapayoga[?]. 251. Pindo nissaya.
232. Rogayatra [on medicine?]. 252. Kalapanissaya.
233. Rogayatra-tlka. 253. Roganidanabyakhyam.
234. Satthekavipasvaprakasa[?]. 254. Dabbragana tika.
235. Rajamattanta.1 255. Amarakosa.
236. Parasava.2 256. Dandl-tika.
237. Koladdhaja.8 257. Dandl-tika.
238. Brihajjataka. 4 258. Dandl-tika.
239. Brihajjataka-tika. 259. Koladhvaja-tika.
240. Dathadhatuvanisaandtika.* 260. Alamkara.
241. Patigaviveka-tika[?]. 261. Alamkara-tika.
242. Alamkara tika [on Subodha- 262. Bhesajjamanjusa.9
lamkara?]. 263. Yuddhajeyya [Yuddha-
243. Calindapaucika [com- dhyaya?].
mentary on C ?]. 264. Yatanaprabha-tika
244. Vedavidhinimittanirutti- [Ratana ?]. 18
vannana.8 265. Viragdha.11
245. Niruttibyakhyam. 266. Viragdha-tika.
246. Yuttodaya.7 267. Culamanisara.
247. Vuttodaya-tlka. 268. Rajamattanta-tika. 12
248. Milindapanha [in text 269. Mrtyuvancana
Malinapanna]. 270. Mahakalacakka
249. Saratthasangaha.8 271. Mahakalacakka works?].
250. Amarakosanissaya. tika
1 Cf. Forchhammer, List, pp. xxxvii and xxxviii, Rajamattam and
Rajamattanissayo. Probably the(astrological) Rajatnartanda.
2 Laghuparagaryam (on astrology) (?).
3 This may be the Goladhyaya of the astronomical treatise Siddhanta
Oiromani, byBhaskaracarya, A.D. 1114. SeeMacdonell,SanskritLiterature,
p. 435 ; other referencessee Duff, ChronologyofIndia, p. 139.
4 The Brijjataka of Varahamihira, a well-known work on astrology.
See above, p. 108. Cf. Forchhammer, List, p. xxxvii.
5 P.TH., p. 55. 6 An exposition ofrulesofdivination (?).
7 The Vuttodaya, a standard Pali work on prosody, was written in
Ceylon in the twelfth centuryby Sangharakkhita. See edition of Major
Fryer, JASB., 1877. See in Mr. Tha Do Oung's Pali grammar (published
1902) the section on metrics.
8 A medical workso called was written by Buddhadasa, kingofCeylon,
in thefourth century (Jolly, Medicin, p. 15).
9 On medicine.
10 A medical work called Ratnaprabha is mentioned by R. Hoernle in
JRAS., 1906, p. 289 (Studiesin Ancient Indian = Medicine).
11 Probablyacopyist'smistake forVidagdha( Vidagdhamukhamandana
on riddles), by Dharmadasa. See above, p. 28.
12 Cf. Forchhammer, List, pp. xxxv ff., section v, the medical, astro-
nomical, astrological works, etc. ; and Report, 1879-80, pp. 10ff.

THE PALI LITERATURE OF BURMA 109
272. Paraviveka [commentary on 284. Shyaramitikabya [?].
Parahita ?]. 285. Yuttisangaha.
273. Kaccayana-rupavatara. 286. Yuttisangaba-tlka.
274. Pumbharasari [or "karasari 287. Sarasangaba-nissaya.
in text][?]. 288 Rogayatra-nissaya.
275. Taktavatara[Tattvavatara?] 289 Roganidana-nissaya.
276. Taktavatara-tlka. 290 Saddatthabhedacintanissaya.
277. Nyayabindu.1 291 Paranissaya.
278. Nyayabindu-tika. 292. Sbyaramitikabyanissaya[?].
279. Hetubindu.2 293. Bribajjataka-nissaya.
280. Hetubindu-tika. 294. Rattamala.
281. Rikkaniyayatra [?]. 295. Narayuttisangaha.
282. Rikkaniyayatra-tika.
283. Barittaratakara[Vrttaratna-
kara
?].
1 The ancient collection of Sutras on logic called Nyayabindu. See
Peterson'sprefacetohiseditionofDharmottara'sNyayabindutlka,Calcutta^
1889 (BibliothecaIndica).
2 On
logic(?).
3 The Vrittaratnakara (on metres), by Kedara Bhatta.

INDEX
A Anorata, 4, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
A A A A A b J b b b > h h h 4 6 h 7 h i 4 7 i i 1 i a , . d d d , d y h h h 4 h a 7 a a a 7 a 3 m m m , ( , m m m m g m 5 a a a r 7 3 a - - p a 8 , , p a a m , m i n n 5 a i 1 t u n 4 x r 0 a , t a , i 4 k l r a 5 a k 1 a 6 n n 8 , a s . , ) , , a , 2 6 t 5 , 1 . 4 ' 8 t 2 9 3 , 8 h , 2 , , . a 5 2 n 2 9 8 1 7 a , , 0 , , 2 3 6 . 5 2 0 2 4 , , 8 , . 3 6 5 6 2 5 , , , 4 6 5 2 7 8 , , , A A A A a A n n n u n n u u u g u 5 u d u l t r r 1 t r r h o l u a l u u s a k d n d k s d d m . a d ) h a d d m , h a 2 h h a a p , 3 a a c ( . u ( 6 o a 8 r s n ( ( r 3 a u n r t i . . p , a h y A j p e a a r 2 b l 5 ) , a , e h , ) n m i , 5 . 1 e s d 4 e 0 n 1 . h 1 e 4 t 8 , a a . A n m r 7 n . m y 6 o a r 5 n ) . a . c , t o a 1 . m . s m e e e nt A a b r h y i , -
Abhidhamma (tika), 48. Anutikabyakhyam, 107.
Abhidhammatthasangaha,18,25,57,61,
67, 95. Apadana, 4.
Abhidhammatthasangaha-atthakatha, Apadana atthakatha, 104.
102. Apattivinicchaya, 93.
A A A b b b h h h ( i i i d d d d a h h s h a a a a m m g m m a m m a n a a t t t t h t t t i h h h v a a a a s s s n a a a n n n n a g g n g a a a a h h ) h a a , a g p t a a 2 i n 8 r k t . i a h t , i t - a t , 2 h 1 i 9 , t 5. , 10 9 2 5 ; . A A A A p p p r h h h a e e e h g a g g g n g g u t u u s a s p a a a r ( r t t a a h h , d a er l , 3 a p 6 ) 3 a . , 6 m, 1 n 2 . , 36 2 1 . 3 n , . 1 2 5 . , 19, 45.
A A b b h h 5 i 6 i , d d h h 6 a a 1 m m m m ; a a t t v i t a k h a t a , a v r 1 i a 0 b , 2 h . a 6 v 1 a . ni, 41, 42, 54, A A A r r r i e a y e h a a ( l n a a t r m i a ) k g , a a r 1 n a 2 a( ( ( s n o e . f ct 5 ) A , v o a n 2 ) 0 p , . a 3 1 n 4 1 d . ). Ariyalam-
ab d h h i a d m h m a a m ) m , ik 6 a 1. (studying the Abhi- k 64 a , ra 73 (t n h . e 5 y . ounger), 37, 53, 54, 55,
a A A A A b g b b g h g h h g i a i i a s p d d d e a h h k h n a a a a d n n m i a ( a m t p co a p a ( n , a l s p d a e p i 1 c m a 6 p r d k , a i l a t k p 2 i r a i 1 o a k , . n a , ) ) , 27 5 7 , 7 t 4 , i , 6 k 7 6 a . 7 3 , 9 , . 1 6 0 4 5 . . A A d A A r r r r s i o u i a w y c n y n i a a a a t k s n v v h h a i a a a c t t m t c i l i a s s a e , s v a k u a D h 1 i t ( h a 0 n a t k 4 a g r h a . m e a m r r , m a a o a c ) y 1 , c P a 0 a l a 7 4 k . 1 d , a e ( s c o 4 r a f 2 e f n , e ic i s i 4 ) - a 3 , l K , y 9 4 a c 3 5 . h n . a , rg 9 e 7 d .
Aggavamsa (grammarian), 16.
AharadipanI, 98. Asoka, 4, 9, 10, 17.
Ain n. dr 3 a . school (of grammarians), 107 A A t t h t a h r a v b a y v a e k d h a y , am 51 , . 107.
Akkharasammohacchedani, 106. Attha-Navanipata-Anguttara, 103.
AkkharavisodhanT, 93. AtthasalinI, 27, 53, 54, 56, 59, 67, 106.
Alamkara, see Subodhalamkara. Atthasalini-atthakatha, 102.
Ala 8 u 3. ngpaya, 64, 69, 70, 71 arid n. 4, A At t t t h h a a s s a a l l i i n n i i - g n a i n s t s h a i y - a t , hit 1 , 06. 96.
A Al l m o a m c p i r t a t , aj s a e t e a A k l a, au 8 n 1 g . paya. A at t t t h h a a y s o a j l a i n m a -t ( i i k n a t , er s p e r e et M a a ti n o i n d ) l , p 4 a 3 . .
AmarakoSa, 51, 108. Atula Yasadhamma,69, 71, 75, 76.
AmarakoSanissaya, 108.
Amarapura (sect), 78, 83. B
Amarasimha, 51 n. 4.
dnadesana (prohibitions), 59. Balappabodhana, 106.
Anagatavamsa, 105. Balappabodhanapruttikarana, 107.
A
A
n
n
a
a
n
n
d
d
a
a
o
(
f
co
H
m
a
m
m
e
s
n
a
t
v
a
a
t
t
or
l
)
,
,
4
7
7
,
.
43.
B
B
a
a
l
l
a
a
v
t
a
t
t
aj
a
j
r
a
a
n
,
a
2
(
2
B
,
a
3
l
7
a
,
va
1
t
0
a
5
r
.
an'a), 106.
Anandaofthe Sihajasangha, 19, 24, 31. Barittaratakara (Vrttaratnakara?), 109.
Ananda temple, seeNanda. Bayin Naung, 47, 49.
Anapanadiptni, 97. Bhadda (queen), 35.
Anattadlpam, 98. Bhaskaracarya, 108 n. 3.
Anawrata, seeAnorata. Bhesajjamanjusa, 108.
Aiiguttaranikaya, 2, 32 n. 2, 92. BhikkhunTpatimokkha, 6.
Anguttara-tika, 32 n. 2, 103. Bhikkhunivibhanga, 78, 102.

INDEX
Bbikkhupatimokkha, 6. Chandosaratthavikasim, 26.
Bhikkhuvibhanga, 78. Chandoviciti, 107.
Bhuramajeyya (jurist), 87. Chandrakirtti, 11 n. 1.
Bhuridattajataka, 81 n. 10 ; metrical Chapaccayadipani, 26.
version, 44. Chapata (Chapada), otherwise Sad-
Bijakkhyam, 106. dhammajotipala, 17, 18, 19, 23, 31,
Binga-u, steHsin-hpyu-shin. 39 note, 41, 54.
Binya Dala (kingofPegu), 68. Cha-sattanipata-anguttara, 103.
Bodhipakkhiyadlpani, 97. Chattaguhiuda ( = Kyansittha, q.v.).
BodGpaya, 74, 75, 76, 77, 83, 89. Chronicles, x, 10, 40; royal, 57, 90.
Brahmajiilasuttanta, 3. Commentators (thegreat), 7.
Brahmanic texts, 51, 52, 98ff. Cujagana, 105.
Brahmans, 51, 98. Cujaganthipada, 75, 76.
Branginoco, seeBavinNaunir. Cujamanisara, 108.
Bhhaja (- Brihajjataka), 20. Cujaniddesa, atthakatha, 104.
Brihajjataka, 20, 81 n. 1, 108. Cujanirutti (Culla ), 37, 55 n. 6, 105.
Brihajjataka-nissaya, 109. Cujaniruttimanjusa, 107.
Brihajjittaka-tika, 108. Cujasandhivisodhana, 105.
Buddhadasa (king), 108 11. 8. Cujavamsa, 105.
Buddhadatta (commentator), 7, 39 note, Cuilabuddhaghosa (Buddhavamsa), 35
61, 72 n.l. n. 1.
Buddhaghosa (commentator), 7, 27, 46, Cullavimalabuddhi, seeVimalabuddhi.
56, 67, 84, 86 n. 1.
Buddhaghosa (Takingjurist), 86. D
Buddbalamkara, 43.
Buddhapiya, 105 n. 6. Dabbragana, Dabraguna, "tika(Dravya-
buddhavacanam(thewordoftbeBuddha), guna, q.v.), 107, 108.
59. Dakkhinavanavihara, 55.
Buddhavamsa (tbera), 33, 35 n.1. Danadipam, 98.
Buddhavamsa-atthakatha, 104. Dandin, 107 n. 7.
Dandlppakarana, tikaon, 27.
Dandi-tika, 108.
Darajjavitarani, 87.
Calindapaficika, 108. Dasa-ekadasanipata-aiiguttara, 103.
Candapajjota, 5 n.2. Dasa-ekadasanipata-jataka-atthakatha,
Candaprutti(Candr.ivrtti), 107. 104.
Candrapancikara(panjika), 107. Dasaganthivannana (Dasagandhi-
Cangakarika, 107 note. vannana), 28.
Cankadasa (Cangadasa), 107 andn. 8. Dasavatthu, 104n. 9.
Caraka-samhita, 107 n. 11. Dathadhatuvamsa, tika, 105, 108.
Cariya Pitaka, 4, 104. Dathanaga, 55.
Cariya-Pitaka-atthakatha, 104. Devacakkobhasa (thera), 57, 58.
C Ca a t t u t k h a a n p i a p y u o t g a a -A (' u rj g , ut 10 t 7 a . ra, 103. D D e h v a a m n m a a mp c i a y k a k t a is ( s p a av ( a k t i t n a g n ) a , su 1 t 7. ta), 105.
Catuka-pafica-cbanipata-j ataka-attba- Dhammacakkatika, 105.
katha, 104. Dhammacari, 18.
catnrangabalamacca (officer of state), Dhammaceti (king), 37, 38, 39.
27. Dhammadana, 105.
Catusamaneravatthu, 78. Dhammadassi, 22.
Cetiddhinemiparigatha(?), 106. Dhammadesana
,
98.
Ceylon, literary and religious relations Dhammadlpani, 98.
with, 2, 5, 8, 11, 17, 18, 22, 29, 31, Dhammakitti, 22, 105 n. 7.
32, 34, 38, 39, 66, 76, 78, 80, 83, Dhammaniti, 51.
84, and Appendix; missions to, 7 ; Dhammapada, 3, 4, 87.
Sangha, see blhalasangha. Dhammapada, atthakatha, 103.
Chaddantanagarajuppattikatha, 78. Dhammapadaganthi-nissaya, 106.
Chagatidlpam, 104. Dhammapala(commentator),5n.2,7,8,
Chakkindabhisiri, 95. 43, 102 n. 4.
Chaudapanna, 88. Dhammapala(Culla ), 61.
Chandomanjari, 97. Dhammapana-shu-bwe, 96.

INDEX 113
Dhammapanna pakarana, 107. Gojadhyaya (of Siddhanta^iromani), 108
Dhammasangani, 55n. 2,56,57,61,62, n. 3.
102. Gulhatthadipani, 56.
Dhammasatta, 106. Gunabhilamkara, 65, 66.
dhammasattha (Skt. dharmagastra], 33, Gunasagara, 25.
84ff.
Dhammasenapati, 15, 16.
D D D h h h a a a j m m n m m m a a a v v v i i i l l l a a a s s s a a a , d ( 8 S h 5 a a , r m i m p 8 a u 7 t . t t h a a ) t , , 31 3 , 2, 32 3 , 3. 34. H H H a a a t t l t t a h h y i i u s p d u a t h l t a a a , j , a 1 t 8 0 a 0 6 k . a no ( t m e e . tricalversion), 44.
D D h h a a t r a m r a a d t a th s a a , , 6 2 8 8, n. 10 1 8 . n. 11. H Hi e t t o u p b a i d n e d s u a, t 5 T 1 k . a, 109.
d D D D h h h h d a o a a t f t t t u u u u s p k p k m a a e a a c e t t l c c h h a h a a a ) y , , a ( y o v 5 f 5 o i 4 3 j b t , . a h h n a e 5 a 7 g , S , a a 6 d 1 ( 7 0 d a . 2 a n . m al t y i s ) i , s 1 o 6 f . parts h h h H p s o p y a u a 6 a y 2 n - t d . g g - y t ( ( l o B B - n u u d r r ( o m m B a e . u s r ( e = 1 m ) 8 . 1 ) P ( 9 a a l ( n A i ' c . : d i D e e . c n d ) i t c , s ) a i , r 8 o i 9 n 1 y , s 0 a ' 4 ) 9 ) , , 0 n . t . 8 e 7 a 5 . . cher,
D D D h l i a g p B t h u a v d a n d a n k h t i a i t k r s h a a t a y , s s a , ^ a , 1 n 3 0 g , 5 2 a 7 b ; n 8 . a , p , r 6 9 e . 2 9 f . 7 e . rre S d ee b a y lso B p u . rm 1 e 0 s 2 e . H H s s i a ( 1 n k y 7 i - - 6 n h s 3 g p a , y A u . u n D - a g . t s - ) h , t i w P n 7 e e 1 , g , u 9 ( ) 8 5 B , 8 . i . ng 3 a 7 - ; u), 65 3 ; 5 n ( . kin 2 g, ;
DipankaraSrijnanaAtira, 11. Hyauk-saung-twe, 95.
Dipankara (Buddha), 96.
Dipavam " sa, 10; (and tika), 65 n. 1,
105.
Disapamokkha, 25. Indriyayamaka, 102.
Dravyaguna, 51 ; samgraha, 107 n. 1. Itivuttaka, 4, 103 ; (atthakatha), 103.
SeeDabbragana, Dabraguna.
Dukanipatajataka-atthakatha, 104.
D D u u k k a a t p i a k t a t c h a a t n u a k , an 1 i 0 p 2 a . ta-anguttara-attha- J Ja a g g a a r r a a bh (t i h d e h r a a j ) a , , 29 9 . 6.
Duk k a a t th i a k , ap 1 a 0 t 3 t . hana, 102. J J a a l m in b i u , dh se a e j S a ad ( d J a a s m a b r u at d t T h p a a j d a h l a i j n a i ) . , 55.
D D u u m t a i j v a a t - a m k i a n - - a k t h t a h u a n k g a , th 4 a 3 , . 104. j J a a m m l b u u d d i l p p i a k - a Ana ( n b t e a l d o h n a gi j n a g (ac t a o riy I a) n , di 7 a 2. or
Dvadasa-terasa-pakinnakanipata-jataka- Burma), 28.
Dv a e t m t a h t a i k k at a ha, (c 1 o 0 m 4 p . ilation of Vinaya J J a a t t a a k k a a , bh 3 i , da 4 n , a 6 , 0, 80 7 . 8ff., 92, 93.
teits), 6. Jataka-ganthi, 106.
E Jataka-nissaya, 106.
Jatakatika, 104.
Ekadukatika-anguttara, 103. Jatakavisodhana, 43.
Ekakkharakosa, 45. Jatattaki-sotattaki-nidana-atthakatha,
Ekamsika (name of a sect), 65, 66, 68, 104.
71, 72, 73, 74, 75. Jayaditya, 107n. 13.
Ekanipata-afiguttara-atthakatha, 103. Jetavana (thera), 4.
Ekanipata-jataka-atthakatha, 104. Jeyyasinkha(king), 25.
Etimasamidipani or Etimasamidlpika Joti (thera), ofCeylon, 75 n. 2.
(EhimayasamdipamP), 16.
G
Kaccayana, disciple of the Buddha,
Gandhabharana, Ganthabharana,Ganda- 5 note ;grammarian,x,17,20,29,36,
bharana,43. 97
;
authoroftheNetti, 5n. 2
;
55.
gandhantara(booksotherthandoctrinal), Kaccayanabheda (Kaccayanabheda-
65. dipi'ka), 36.
Gandhatthi, 26. Kaccayanabheda-tika (Saratthavikasini),
Gandhavamsa, -n,pastim. 55.
GandhisaraorGanthisara, 18. Kaccayana-nissaya, 106.
ffanfhipadatt/ta (gloss), 67. Kaccayana(pakarana), 25u. 2.

114 INDEX
Kauciiyaua-rupavattira, 109. Likhananaya, 65,
Kaccayanasara, 26 n. 6, 36, 37, 106. Llnatthappakasani (tlkas by Dharania-
Kaccayanasaratlka, 36; and see Sam- pala), 8 n. 4.
mohaviniisini. Liuatthavisodham, 25.
Kaccayanavannana, 46, 97. Lingatthavivarana, 22, 105.
Kaccayanayoga, 21. Lingatthavivaranappakasaka, 22.
Kalapa, seeKatantra. Lingatthavivaranatika, 22, 105.
KalapuuMam 108. Lingatthavivaranavinicchaya, 22.
Kalapapaficika(pafijika) tika, 106. Lokadipasai'a, 35,36.
Kalapasuttapratifmsaku (?"patifinapaka) Lokamti, 51 ; ofChakkindabhisiri, 95.
tlkii, 106. Lokapanfiatti, 104.
Kalyaiiiinscriptions, 23, 38, 39. Lokuppatti, 104.
Kamadinakatha, 96. Lokuppattipakafam, 16.
Kamandakl, 107.
KamaSastra, 51. M
Kammakammaviuicchaya, C.
Kammavaca, 6, 7, 38n. 2, 106. Madhavanidaua, 106 note.
Kamraavinicchaya, 95. Madhusaratthadlpani, 47.
Kan a k t h t a h v a i k t a a t r h a a n , i, 1 ' 02 38 ; t n i . ka 2, (n 4 e 6 w , ), 5 1 6 0 , 2. 87 ; Mag 1 a , d 2 h . abha.ua (the idiom of Magadha),
Karika, 16, 105. Maggangadipanl, 98.
Karikatlka, 16, 105. Mahabodhivamsa, 104 n. 9.
Kasikapruttipaliui (Kac,ikavrtti), 107. Mahadhammaraja (grandson of Bayin
Kasmira, 80note. Naung), 49, 52.
Kassapa(commentator), 7; (of Damila- Mahadhammarajadhiraja (Sing-gu-sa.
rattha), 39 note; (of Ceylon), 76 1776), 72, 73, 74.
Kat n. ac 2 a ; (Kr ( t o - f ca P k a r g a a ) n , ), 10 2 6. 5 u. 4. M M a a h h a a g k a a na ( , "ka 10 p 5 p . aor"kaccftyana?), 106.
KStantra, 26, 106u. 14, 107. Mahakaccayana, seeKaccayana.
Kathavatthu, 96, 102. Mahakalacakka (tlka), 108.
Kaung-hmu-dawpagoda(Rajamanicuhi), Mahakassapa, seeKassapa.
55 n. 3. Mahiiuaga (thera), 33.
Kavyasaratthasaiigaha, 95. Mahaniddesa, 4, 91 ; "atthakatha, 104.
Kayaviratigatha, 44. Mahanissara (nissaya?), 43.
Ke^avamicjra, 107 n. 12. Mahapakarana (= Patthana), 54 n. 3.
Khandhavaggasamyutta, t!ka, 103. Mahaparakkama (thera), 46 ; 67 n. 1.
Khantakakhipa, seeNiigita. Mahaparinibbana Suttanta, 3.
Khuddakanikaya, 2, 3, 4. Mahaparittam, seeParitta.
Khuddakapatha, 4 ; "atthakathii, 103. Mahapavaradhammarajalokadhipati(A.u.
Khuddasikkha,6, 24 ; -tika,24 ; ancient 1651), 57.
andnew, 102. Maharajadhipati (A.D. 1733),66,67, 68.
Kittislhasura (king), 27. Maharupasiddhi, see Kupasiddhi.
Kittitara, 40n. 2. Mahasammata (king), 79.
Koladdhaja, 108 ; -tika, 27, 108. Mahasatipatthana suttanta, 3.
KublaiKhan, 40. Mahasirijeyyasura (king,atTaungu),45,
Kumaracetipagoda, 35. 46.
Kyansittha (king), 15. Mahasuvannadipa (son of Parakkama-
KyaswaorKyocva (king), 25, 27, 40. bahalaraja), 36 n. 2.
Kyaswa IV, seeKittislhasura. Mahathera-tlka, 105.
Mahatlka, on Saddatthabhedacinta, 22.
Mahavagga(oftheVinaya), 38n. 2
;
73
n. 5.
Laghugraha, 51. Mahavaggasamyutta,103.
Laghupara(;aryam, 108 n. 2. Mahavaggatth'akatha,73,102 ; tika,103.
Lakkhanadipani, 98. Mahavamsa, 10, 32, 65n. 3, 79; t:ka,
Lalita>"istara, 96. 105.
Law,customary(oftheBurmese),87,89. Mahavihara, vii, 17, 19, 20, 31, 32, 34.
Law codes, Pali, Hindu, 32, 33, 84ff. Mahayana, 61.
Ledi Hsaya-daw, 97. Mahayasa (Eassa, of Thaton), 36 n. 3,
leJthakamaeta (secretary), 93. 37.

INDEX 115
Mahinda (them), 17n. 3, 38. Namakara, 95.
Mahosadhajittaka, 87. Xamarupam(name andform), 104 n. 5 ;
Mahosatthi (Mahosadha?), 107. -paricchedappakarana, 104n.5 ; -tika
M Ma a j j j j h h i i m m ' a a p n a ik n a n y a a s , a 2, at 9 t 3 ha ; ka t t i h k a a, t 3 ik 2 a, n. 10 2 3 . . N _ an (n a e b w n ) i , v 1 a 0 m 4 s . a (Nana), acariya, 74, 75,
Malayadesa,'23. . 78, 80ff."
Malayadipa, 23. Xanagambhira (commentator), 7, 105
Majiavulu-Sandesaya, 25 n. 1. _ n. 2; (of Pagan), 16.
Maiigala, grammarian, 26. Nanalamkara,71.
Mangaladipani, 47. Nanasagara, 22.
Mangalasutta, 4, 95. Xanavara,66.
Manidipa, 42. ^anavilasa, 47.
Manijotasaddhammalamkara, 92. Xanavilasa (ofPagan), 25.
Manikundalavatthu, 52. Xandamala, 33 n. 2, 72, 73.
Maniratana (thera), 56. XT arada, 85.
Manisaramanjusa, 42. Xarapati(kingatAva), 41.
Manjusatikabyakhyam, 107. Xarapatisithu (king), 16, 20, 21, 23, 31.
Manohara, 16. Xaravara (Mahasihasura dhammaraja),
Manohari (king), 13, 14, 15. ^57.
Manooreng, seeManuyin. Xarayuttisangaha, 109.
Manu, 33, 88 ; (Dhammasattha), 84 ff. XavaniyamadlpauT, 96.
Manukyay, 87, 88. Xavavimalabuddhi, seeVimalabuddhi.
Manusara, 86. Xettipakarana, 5, 8, 43, 56, 78.
Manusara-shwe-myiu, 88. Xeyyadhamma, 91.
Mauuvannana, 87, 88. 5ieyyadhammabhivainsa, 91.
-Manuyin','86, 87. XibbanadTpani, 97.
Manuyinlaiika, 88. Xidanavaggasamyutta, atthakatha, 103.
Matikatthndipam, 19. Xirayakathadipaka, 93.
Matthapayoga(r), 108. Xiruttibyakhyam, 108.
M M a a u u n n g gT D u au n n A g un sa g, do 9 , 5. 32 n. 3. X X i i r r u u t t t t i i d p i i p t a a n k i a , ( 9 N 7 i . rutti), 29.
Maunggun, 9. Xiruttisaramanjusa, 29, 55.
M M e e d d h h a a b m h k i a v r a a ms ( a X , av 9 a 2 ) . , 93 3 . 5, 36 n. 1. X X y v a a s d a i , ( 2 M 1 o , gg 5 a 5 l , la 7 n 1 a , ), 10 1 5 0 . 6.
M M M i o i l g n i g - n a d d l o a l n p a - a n M n a i h , n a , , 27 9 4 , 2 , f 8 7 f 7 5 . , n 1 . 08 1 . , 76, 105, 106 X X X y y y a a a s s u a a n p p g p p a a R d d i i a p p m a a t , M i i k 2 n a 1 , , n. 2 5 1 3 5 . . .
Mo n h . an 5 a . yana, 104. Xyayabindu, tika, 109.
Mohavicchedam,88,104; (Dhanimathat),
88n. 4.
M6n (Taking), 9. Ovada, 97.
Mrammasamgha,vii, 20, 29. Ovadakatha, 96.
Mritvuvancana, 108.
Mugdhabodha, 72 u. 3.
Mukhamattadipam, seeNyasa.
Muk 1 h 05 a . mattasara, 25, 105 ; tikaon, 25, P Pa a c b i b t a ti j y a a n , iy 96 a , ka 1 m 0 m 2 a ; va a c d a i , -a 9 t 8 t . hakatha,102.
mulabhdsa ('the originallanguage'), 2, Padasodhana (sadhana?), 105.
89. Padavahamahacakka(Padavatara?),106.
Mulapannasa, atthakatha, tika, 103. Padavibhaga, 71.
Mulasikkba, 6. Pakinnakanikaya, 107.
Mulayamaka, 102. Palata'kka (Balatarka?), 107.
Munindiigbosa (thera), 70. Pali: grammar, a popular study, 25 ;
revivalofstudy, 27 ; language, 1 ; in
N Burma, v, ix, 20 ; literature, 1, 2, 3,
19, 23 ; studies, 6,24, 25.
Nagarajuppattikatha, 92. Pali-Burmese MSS., 2 ; collections, 6 ;
Nagita (thera), 27. literature, beginnings of, 14, 17 ;
Xiimacaradipanl, 18. earlyperiod, 29 ; laterfeatures, 58.

INDEX
Pancadi-anguttara-atthakatha , 103. Po Uo Duuug (iucriptiou), 8 u. 6, 71
Pancanipata-auguttara, 103. notes 4 and 7.
Pancapakarana-atthakatha, 102. Prindo-tika, 106.
Pancika-moggallana, tika, 105. Puggalapannatti, 102.
Panineansystem, 106 n. 14. Pumbhasari, 109.
Panuajotabhidhaja, 92. Punnacetiya, 42.
Panfiaramsi, 95.
Pannasami, vii, 91 ff. R
P P a a f r i a f j ia i t k i a s , sa 9 , 6 9 . 1. Rah 24 u . la (of the Sihajasangha), 19, 23,
p P P P P P a a a a a a r r r t r r r a a a h a a a m i e m m k k a i a a k r h t k t t a a i t a t t g m m k h h h h a a a a a e a b n b d b s m d a e a i t a a h s n h n , t u a d u j r m , u u u l , I t a s , 7 h , t a t 6 , t 1 , i t h 1 k 5 a i a e , 2 9 i n k a . 8 3 a d c o 2 t h n ; . h n i , a o n 6 t , g 2 2 e 5 s . n t c . i 1 o k n 2 a a . c , n e d r 1 n 0 2 i 2 . n . g R R R l R R l l a l t a a a a a j V j j j j j a j a a a a a b m a b m d d a a m h a h h l t a i i i n a t t r s r i - a t a a e c k n j a j k u a i y m a a l v s a , g n i a s w a a l a - 1 a n m ( y d 0 s a d c o i i 8 e t h , n n t t a i i , n a , y , . 1 p a 8 0 ) p 1 7 7 8 8 , . a 4 . 9 k . 5 n a f 5 . f s . . i 9 , . n 9 i 2 , . 67.
P P P a a a r r r a a a m m m a a i t t d t t i h h p a a a v s m i a , n n i k 9 c 8 h c . e h p a a ya , 9 ( 8 n . ew), 104. R R R a a a j j j a a a n s m i e a t v t i a t , k a a n 5 d 1 t l . a p , an 1 i 0 , 8; 93. -tikii, 108.
P P P a a a r r r a a a n s v i a i s v v s a e a , k y a a , 1 , 08 1 1 . 0 0 9 9 . . R R R a a a j j ^ a a a s v v i a a k m m k s s h a a a s , p a a n 5 d 7 k a , h , e 9 p 0 7 a . 9 , . 57.
P Pa a r r i a t y t a a n , a 3 v , at 4 t , hu 6, , 6 4 0 3 , . 95. r R a a j j j i i n i d g a g r a a h j am a a b c h c i a d , hey P y a a l d i Tpa t n i i t , le 52 g . iven to
p P a a r r p i i r y t a a t c t a t t - i i t c i p e k a ) a , t , i 5 p 5 0 a 7 . t . ti (sacred doctrine and l I l t a a r j t e o a v v u e i a n i k u d a e a r v a o a , f t f t i 5 h c 2 u e . r , , 7 2 8 1 . .
Parupana (name of a sect), 65, 66, 67, Ratanapanjara, 95.
Pas 7 a 0, di 7 k 1 a , ( 7 t 2 h , er 7 a 3 ) , , 2 7 7 4 . , 75. R R a at t n n a a p m r a a l b a ha ( , Ab 1 h 0 i 8 dh n a . na 10. ), sesRattamfilil.
P P a a t s a a l m i s ( a N , at 6 a 8 p . atali), 76 and n. 3. R Ra a t t t t h a a m s a a l r a a , , 1 4 0 4 6 . , 109 ; tika, 106.
P P a a t t h h a e c y a y r a i , ya, " 1 a 0 t 4 t . hakatha, 102 ; "tika, R R i e k va k t a a n , iya 24 y . atra, tika, 109.
103. Rogauidana, 106.
PaticcasamuppadadlpauT, 98. Roganidana-byakhyam, 108.
Patigaviveka-tika, 108. Roganidana-nissaya, 109.
P Pa a t t i i m m o o k k k k h h a a l , ek 6, ha 5 n 6 a , , 6 6 7 7. n. 2. Rog 1 a 0 y 8. atra, 108 ; -nissaya, 109 ; -tika,
Patimokkhavisodham, 39 note. Rupabhedapakiisani, 56.
P Pa a t t i i p m a o t k t k i h s u an d g d a e h s a a , , 1 6 0 . 7. R Ru u p p a a s d i T d p d a h n i i , , 3 9 7 7 . .
P Pa a t t 1 t i 0 h s 4 a a n ; m a b , h g i a 5 d n 4 t a h m n i a . p g a 3 g d , a a , 5 , 7 4 , 1 , 0 6 9 4 1 1 . , ; 7 " 1 a . tthakatha, R R u up p 1 i a 0 i s 6 v i ; a d t d a h - r t i a l - , k a a t j 1 t ' 0 h l 6 a O . k S a . tha, 105 ; -nissaya,
Patthanagananaya, 19.
Patthanasaradipam, 47. S
Patthana-tika, 54.
Petakopadesa, 5, 104 n. 9, 105. Saccasankhepa, 61.
Petalamkara, 78. Saccatthadipani, 98.
Petavatthu, 4; "atthakatha, 103. Saddakarika, 107.
PhilipdeBrifo, 49" SaddamedhanT, 96.
Pindonissaya, 108. SeePrindo. Saddaniti, x, 16, 17, 79, 93.
pitakas (' baskets,' i.e. divisions of Saddasankhepa, 98.
scripture), 2, 7,88. SaddasaratthajalinI,27 ;commentaryon,
Pitakatthamain, 54n. 2. 27 n. 5: tikaon, 28.
Poems (recitationof,againstthereligious Saddatthabh'edacinta, 20, 22, 91, 105;
rule), 44. -dipani,22 ; -nissaya, 109 ; .tika, 105.
poratid (old-timechroniclers), 44. Saddavatara, 106.

INDEX 117
Sad t d ik a a vu o t n t , i 2 ( 9 Sa ; dd l a a v t u er tt t i i p k a a ka o s n a , ka 2 ) 9 , n 2 . 9, 2. 46 ; S S a a r r i a p t u t t h t a a vi ( k o a f sh C n e , yl 3 o 7 n) n , . 2 3 , 2 5 a 5. nd n. 2, 39
Saddavuttivivarana, 29n. 2. note, 76 n. 2.
Saddhammacakkasami (thera), 47. Sariputta(Dbammavilasa), 31, 32, 85.
Saddhamraacari, 66. Sariputta(Sariputtara), authorof Sadda-
Saddhammadlpaka, 106, 107. vuttitika, 29.
Saddhammaghosa (ofThaton), 104notes Sarupatthadipam, 95.
7 and8. SarvajnanyayadTpani, 55.
Saddhammaguru, seeSaddhammapala. ^arvavarman, 26, 106n. 4.
Saddhammaiotipala,seeChapata. Sasanalamkara, 32n. 3.
Saddhammakitti, seeDhammakitti. Sasanasuddbidipika, 73.
Saddhammalamkara (ofHamsavati),47. Sasanavamsa, rii,passim.
Saddhammanandi, 22. Sativa, seeThado-min-hya.
Saddhammapaiotika
,
91. Sati-we-bon-la-shu-bwe, 97.
Saddhammapala(grammarian), 29. Satta-attha - navanipata-jataka-attha-
Saddhammasiri (grammarian), 20, 22. katha) 104.
Saddhammavilasa(ofPagan), 37. Sattarajadhammavatthu, 52.
Saddhammavilasini, 91. Satthekavipasvaprakasa, 108.
Saddhammupaya (Saddharamopayana), Satyatatvavabodha(?), 107.
107. Sawlahan (king), 11 n. 5.
Sadhujjanavilasini, 78. Setibhinda, seeHsin-hpyu-shin.
Sagara, seeGunasagara. Shin-sau-bu (queen), 38.
Sagarabhivamsadhaja, 95. Shwe Dagonpagoda, 78n. 6.
Sag t a i t k h a a , v 1 a 0 g 3 g . asamyutta, atthakatha, S Si h h y a a j r a a s m a i n t g i h k a a , by vi a i, (?) 19 , , "n 2 i 3 s , sa 3 ya 1 , ff 1 . 0 , 9 3 . 8.
Sahassaramsl, 104n. 9. Slhajavatthu, 104note, 105.
Sahassaramsimalini, 104. Silakatha, 93.
S S a a h k a r s a s , av 73 a . tthu ' , 104 n. 9, 105. Sll 1 a 0 k 3 k . handha, atthakatha, 102 ; tika,
Salayatanavaggasamyutta, "atthakatha , Silavamsa, 43, 44.
ios. Silavanagajataka, 81.
Salvan-min-tara (king, 1629), 73 n. 1. Sllavinicchaya, 98.
Samannaphalasuttanta, 3. Simabandhanitika, 39.
Samantapasadika, 27, 87. SimalamkaraorSimalamkaratika, 18.
Samasataddhitadipani, 106. Slnialamkarapakarana, 39 note.
Sambandhacinta,22,37 ; -tika,22, 106. Simalamkarasamgaha,38 n. 2.
Sambandhamalini, 29, 106. Sirimangala (thera), 27, 47.
Sammohavinasini, 37. Sirinandadhammaraja-Pavaradhipati-
Sammohavinodam,27 ; -atthakatha,102. raja, 55.
Samudrikalaksana, 81 n. i. Siripavaramahadhammaraja,57; Xaung-
Samvannananayadipanl, 55. doa-gyi(A.D. 1760), 71.
Samvarajataka (metricalversion), 44. Sirisaddhammakittimahaphussadtjva,25 .
Samyuttanikaya, 2, 92 ; seealso 103. Sirisudhammarajadhipati, see Dutiya-
Sandbikappa (ofKaccayana), 46. min-khaung.
Sangbarakkhita,22,24, 26,27, 106 n. o, Sirisudhammarajamahadhipati, 52.
108. Sirisumangala, see Sirimangala.
Sankhepavannana, 18, 54, 56. Sirivicittalamkara, 45n. 3.
Sankhyapakasaka, tika, 47. Sivali (thera), 19, 24.
Sankiccajataka, 79. Sivall (queen), 36 n. 2.
Sanskrit, 1, 16, 26; literature, 51, 52, Sona (thera, missionary), 4, 19.
98, 101 ; Buddhist works in, 61, 96 ; Sotamalini (sotabbamalinl?), 106.
workstranslatedintoBurmese,72, 77. SotatthakI, 104.
s'anti (expiatoryrite), 47n. 5. Subhutacandana, 22.
Saradassi, 56. Subodhalamkara, 22, 108; nissaya,95 ;
Saramanjusa, 27. tika, 107, 108.
Sarapinda, ^07. Sujata(Buddha), 90.
Sarasangaha, 107; -nissaya, 109. Sulacharaka, 107.
Saratthadipani, 32n. 2,38, 39 note, 76, Sumangala (ofCeylon),61; (Sumangala-
87 ; tika, 32 n. 2. sami), 54.
Siratthasangaha, 108. Sumedha, 96.

118 INDEX
Sumedhakatha (poeticalversion), 43. Tiriyapabbnta, 53.
Surajamaggadipani, 93. Toungdwin Kyaw, 88.
Surakitti (king), 53. Trakkabhasa (Tarkabhasa), 107.
liuravinicchaya (concerning intoxicants), Tripitaka, seeTipitaka.
46.
U
Suravinicchaya (ofNanavara), 67. U
Suriyavamsa, 91. Janinda, 95.
U
Suryasiddhanta, 51. Pyin-nya-thika, 97.
Sut s t u a t n t i a d u d i e dd s e a s , a. 17, 18. See Kacciiyana- U U T T i i s n s , a, 95 9 . 5.
Suttanipata, 3, 4 ; "atthakatha, 103. Udana, 4 ; atthakatha, 103.
Suttapitaka, 2, 59, 60, 62. Ukkamsamala, 65.
Suttasangaha, 5, 73. Ukkamsika (king), 50, 52, 54, 55, 63
Suttavali (Kaccayana ?), 106. note, 83.
Uparipannasa, atthakatha, tika, 103.
Upiisakavinicchaya, 95.
Upasakovada, 96.
Ta-bin-sh\ve-hti (king), 46, 47. Upasena (ofCeylon), 91 n. 2.
Taktiivatara (Tattvavatara), tika, 109. Upayakatha, 93.
Takingauthors, 31, 34 ; chronicles, 9 ; Uposathavinicchaya, 44, 93.
influence, 33, in law codes, 33, 86 ; irposathika (undertemporary vows), 44.
inscriptions, 35 ; people, 9, 10, 26, Uppatasanti, 47.
64, 68 ; scholars, 49 ; states, 84 ; Uttama, 22.
teachers of Buddhism, 10, 12, 19. Uttara(thera, missionary), 4, 19.
Tamalinda (thera), 19, 24. Uttarajlva, 17.
Tandi (Dandin?), tlka, 107.
Tanogabuddhi, 107.
Tantrasastra, 51. Vacakopadesa, tika, 46.
Taruk-pye-min, 81. Vacanatthajotika (Vacanat'thajoti), 28.
Tathagatuppatti, 16, 105. VacavacakaorVaccavacaka, 22.
Tejodipa (thera), 57. Vaccavacakadlpam, 22.
Tejosara, 88. VaccavacakatTka, 22.
Terasakanda-tlka, 102. Vaccavacakavannana, 22.
T T h es a a d k o u d n h a am j m a a ta r k a a j , a, 79. see Ukkanisika. V va a c c i i v s i s i a tn r a a tt ( i the ( r r a e ) c , o 1 m 8 me ; n ( d g a r t a i m o m n ar of ia a n) m , o 2 n 2 k .
Thado-min-bya, founderofAva, 30, 40. byanotherforalms, etc.), 24.
Thagya (pagoda), 11. Vajirabuddhi, 38 n. 2 ; Malia", 40 ;
thamain (Burmese), record, 63. tika, 39, 76.
thanbyin(Burmesetitle, revenue officer), Vajirabuddhi (ofCeylon), 76 n. 2.
21 note. SeeNyasa. Vamana, 107 n. 13.
Than-byin-tika, 105. Vannabodhana, 65.
Tharawadi-min (1837A.D.), 90, 91. Vanna-kyaw-din, 88.
Theragatha, 4 ; atthakatha, 104. Varabhisamghanatha, 52.
Theravadin, 5. Varaha-Mihira, 20.
Therigatha, 4; "atthakatha, 104. Vedas,works known under thisname in
thit (Burmese) (new), 104n. 5. Burma, 21 ; of the Burmese, 51, 88,
Thohanbwa, 45, 48. 101 ; 88.
thugyl (Burmese title, revenue officer), vedasattha (Vedic treatises), 20, 49, 50,
21 n. 6. 58.
Thupavamsa, 105. Vedavidhinimittaniruttivannana, 108.
Tigumbhathomana, 78. Yepullabuddhi, 28.
Tika-Kyaw, see Abhidhammatthavibha- Vernacular, beginning of metaphysical
vanl. literature in, 43 ; growth of religious
Tikanipatajataka-atthakatha, 104. literature in, 48 ; translations into,
Tikapatthana, 102. 56, 57, 92 ; Abhidhammain, 59.
Tilokaguru, 54, 57. Vessantarajataka, 81.
Tilokalamkara, 50. Vibhanga, 55, 56, 62n. 3, 102.
Tipitaka, grammarofthe, 16. Vibhatyattha, ascribed to Kyocva's
Tipitakalamkara (of Ava), 37, 49, 53, daughter,25 ;bySaddhammanana,26.
54, 55, 63, 64. Vidadhimukhamandana, tikaon, 28.

INDEX 119
Yidagdhamukhamandana, we Vidadhi- Yisatijataka-atthakatha, 104.
mukhamandana . Yisuddhacara, 97.
Yidhurajataka, 87. Yisuddhimagga, 7, 56, 87 ; -atthakatha,
Yijayabahu (king), 11, 15, 32. 104 ; -tika, 104.
Vrjitavi, 46 ; ofSagaing, 46n. 4. Yisuddhimaggadipanl-kyan, 97.
Yijjamaggadipanl, 98. Visuddhimaggaganthi, 19.
Yimalabuddhi, authorofXyasat'ika, 21, Yisuddhimaggaganthipadattha, 56.
61 ; (Nava, Culla"), 27, 28. Yisumgamasimavinicchaya, 97.
Vimanavatthu, 4 ; "atthakatha, 103. Yivadavinicchava, 93.
Yimativinodani, 38n. 2, 39note, 76and voharadesana (teaching concerning the
n. 2. currentpractice ofmen), 59.
Vinaya (monastic code), 19, 24 and Yoharatthabheda, 93.
notes 1 and2, 39andnote, 44,46,56, Yopadeva(grammarian), 72.
5 F 9 o , ur 65 S , mal 6 l 7, er 7 V 3 in a a n y d as n , . 6 5 , , 5 7 9 8 . , 96, 97 ; V Yu r t n t d i a m , og 1 g 0 a 6 ll n. an 1 a 5 , . 105.
Vinayaculavagga, 102. Yuttodaya, 22, 26, 27, 108 ; tika on,
Yinayaganthi (gandhi), 39. 28 ; glosson (Vacanatthajotika), 28.
Vinayaganthipada, 75, 102. Yuttodayapaficika (see Chandosarattha-
Yinayagulhatthadipani, 18. vikasinl), 26.
Vinayakandhaniddesa, 102. vyakarana (exposition), 88.
Yinayalamkara-tika, 54. Yyavaharamayukha, 87 n. 3.
Yinaya-mahavagga, 102.
Yinaya-parivara, 102.
Vinayapitaka, 2, 5, 27.
Vinayasamutthanadipani, 18. Wagaru(king), 34, 35, 40, 85 ; dham-
Vinayasangaha (pakarana), 38 n. 2, 39 mathat,33n. 3, 85ff.
note, 74 n.1.
Vinayasangraha-atthakatha (greater,
less), 102,
Vinayasificaya-tika(later), 102. Yajnavalkya, 85.
Vinaya-tTka, 38 note ; -tikas (thegreat), Yamaka, 54, 57, 71.
76. Yasa, see Mahayasa.
Vinayatthakatha, 38 n. 2. Yasavaddhanavatthu, 53.
Yinaya-uttarasincaya-atthakatha,102. Yatanaprabha-tika (Ratana ?), 108.
Vinayavinicchaya (pakarana), 38 n. 2, Yaw-mya-saAtwin-wun, 95.
72, 73. Ye-din,acariya, 41.
Yinicchayapakasani, 88. Yuddhajeyya (Yuddhadhyaya) , 108.
Viragdha" (Yidagdha?), 108 ; tika, 108. Yuttisanga'ha, tika, 109.
STEPHEN AUSTIN AND SONS, LTD., PRINTERS, HERTFORD.

119120
UniversityofCalifornia
SOUTHERNREGIONALLIBRARYFACILITY
405HilgardAvenue,LosAngeles, CA90024-1388
Returnthismaterialtothelibrary
fromwhichit wasborrowed.
I

DCSOUTHERNREGIONALLIBRARYFACILITY
A 000 709 268 7