'flMjti m Z j - " p
" vS&,
' s| ,fv,Vi»' o ; v l i I ,. , $j JM t
V4|
2
P\ - C>M0^
oo
/* . ’ W
T\ *
•'■■ . ' z
T H E .TATAR A
»>
OR
STORIES OF THE BUDDHA’S FORMER BIRTHS
/
m * %
*
* ' j**'
, ' * •*
J*

' Go^ \
| ( f ) | , (AT .
\-& n. unh.to>/x /
('AMR RIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,
('■
E. CLAY", Manager.
?iontioii: FETTER LANE, E.C.
®la»B0to: SO. WELLINGTON STREET.
rfiSj I iffife
&SV J*t pw»
ILnpuri: E. A. KROCKHAU8.
®rbj poll,: I.L P. PUTNAM’S SONS.
Bombln nub iTfllruila: MACMILLAN ANJ) Co,, Hx>.
[dU Riyhlr. rrtrrvtiU.]

I p 5- &
<&: T H E J A T A K A
OR
STORIES OF THE BUDDHA’S
FORMER BIRTHS.
TRANSLATED FROM THE PALI BY VARIOUS HANDS
UNDER THE EDITORSHIP OF
PROFESSOR E. B. COWELL.
*
VOL. VI.
Y ,
'ii .1 . : <1. ,. u.. . IV- ] ' A,
.1
~ ' 1JTV OF CAMBRIDGE
HaNUJUIITj •
J ’.D.,
CtH THE 1V&R8E OiUMMAtt SCHOOL
CAMP ,
A'1’ ' 'ttm
. JRIDGE:
. ; ; IVEltSlTY PRESS
•
> g°7
, * ' * .•\ * • ' • ** s * * j f*
'> • •- •
^ • f ,
* . ■ . j, » , _ i • ■ \

I S ) ' SL
t
'^ ifth A O ur fcbU O A T M K
SIMLA.
^
’
£
(fambribge:
HUNTED BY J«fr\ Cl AY, M.A.
AT Tiff 1»M . Y PREP
t-. ujj
, C #a S
'/>• •* ■’ 1 *
r M
w *- *
H u t „
f ^
H <
%•*»
1 {*“

, - * o * 1 . /
Jv - t
_ e — (S I.
PREFACE.
When I returned to Cambridge in 1002, Professor Cowell asked
me to revise with him the translation of this volume. We accord­
ingly went through the first three stories, before his death took
place: his manuscripts were then handed over to me, and 1 have
supplied what lie left undone. The translation was completed down
to page 338, excepting no. 541 and a few small gaps elsewhere; my
and
portion of the work therefore consists of no. fi ll page 338 to the
end, together with the shorter omissions which are indicated each in
its place, being altogether about half the book, I have also revised
that pai l of Professor Cowell’s translation which we were unable to
do together. I have not felt at liberty to make any alterations in
his text, excepting. very rarely, where there was some obvious
mistake or oversight. These are all indicated in the notes; and any
additions of my own to that part have been enclosed in square
brackets.
Since the proportion of verse is very large in this book, and the
verse is often obscure, scholars must, be prepared to find a certain
number of difficulties which I have been unable to solve. The
remarks on the text accordingly are more numerous than usual: the
doubtful points are .indicated in the notes.
I have to thank Mr H, T. Francis for help kindly given in manv
places.
I have a peculiar satisfaction in completing this labour, because
in 1888 I first suggested the work to Professor Cowell. I had
originally intended to carry it through myself; but circumstances
modified this plan to the great advantage of the work.
w. ii. n. .
house
September 1907.

/'S*-'
liW )
'S L
*
ERRATA.
p. 1, 1. 4. Read Jetavana.
p. 13,1. 5 from bottom. Pend transcendent.
p. 75, 1. 2. Ptad Belli.
,, 1. 27. Pend Cnnda’s.
p. n;i, 1. 35. Add not,-: Compare the trick of Brer Babbit and the
briar patch.
p. 120, 1. 12. Read Sunakkhatta.
p. 191, 1. 23. Pend Kiinpurusa.
p. ICO, last line. Read maihsarh.
p. 101, 1. 12. Pend Golakfda.
p. 167, footnotes 1". Read ,Sinhalese/or Burmese. (So also pp. 181J,
2131, 218*, 2191, 231148, 286, 243>, 2492, 251*, 280a, 283a,
285-, 287 a.)
VOL. IV.
p. 804, 1 12 f. Omit those mid read : in the company of the
li. Birth, of the M. Birth, of the C. Birth, of the A. liirth, and of
the H. Birth: these were called the late coiners. Compare vi
p. 30 (p. 17 of the iranrlation)
\

L
• *SL
®
CONTENTS.
TAGE
538. MUGA-PAKKHA-JATAKA........................................................|
A prince pretends to lie dumb end incapable. Various means
are taken to try to break through his reserve, but fail for sixteen
years. At last, as he is about to be buried, he opens his mouth and
discourses on religion to the charioteer. Ho thou becomes an ascetic,
and is followed by his father.
539- MAHAJANAKA-JATAKA.....................................................................| 9
A prince suspected bj’ his brother, without reason, rebels against
him and kills him. the king's consort, being with child, flees from
the oity; her son is brought up without knowledge of his father,
but when he learns the truth, goes to sea on a merchant venture.
He is wrecked, and a goddess brings him to hie father’s kingdom,
where after answering some difficult questions, he marries the
daughter of the usurper. By and by, he.becomes an ascetic, and is
followed by his wife. ,
540. SAM A-JATAKA...............................................................................3*3
A hunter's son marries a hunter’s daughter, and both become
ascetics. The wife becomes preguant without human intercourse,
and bedi - a son. Xbe parents are both blinded by a snake, and the
son attends upon them. A king, coming out to hunt, sees the lad
and shoots him with an arrow ; but on leurning his dutiful affection
he,-repents, and attends upon tile parents himself. The boy is
miraculously cured and the parents recover their sight.
54 B. N 1M I-JA TA K A ........................................................ . . 5:3
A king, on the appearance of his first grey hair, becomes an
ascetic. Sakka explains to him that holy life is better than giving
alius. Sakka's charioteer takes him all round the heavens aud the
hells, and finally brings him to fhikka.
542. THE KHAiNOAHALA-JATAKA........................................................68
A king misled by a false judge decrees that all bis family shall be
put to death in order that he may go to heaven. Alter various
fluatur '.ion 11 Sakka comes to the rescuo and saves them.

' e°t&x
\)lj
tk J 'S L
----vui
Contents.
PAGE
543. ....................................................................................................................
An ascetic is seduced by a Niiga-woman. Afterwards he becomes
a king. Scenes in the Naga country are described. He has four
sons, one of whom becomes an ascetic. The feud between the Nagas
and the Garulas. A magic spell, and the adventures of the prince
in snake form.
544. MAH ANAR ADAKASSAl'A-JATAKA................................................114
A king questions an ascetic as to the various moral duties. He is
himself devoted to pleasure, but his daughter is virtuous and tries to
deliver him from heretical beliefs, which is finally effected by the
help of tho Buddha.
545. VIDIlUltAPA.V l.iITA-J ATAKA.......................................................120'
Four kings, including Sakka, dispute ns to which is the most
virtuous and they ask a solution from a wise man who decides that
they aie all equal. The wife of the N;iga king is so enchanted at what
she hear- that she desires the wise man’s heart. The king promises
his daughter’s hand to a Yakkha if he will bring the heart. The
Yakkha visits the court where the wise man is, defeats the king at
dice, and claims the wise man. Tho wise man asks for three days’
delay to exhort his family. The Yakkha tries to kill him, but fails.
Tho wise man asks him what he wants, and he tells him. The wise
man then wins over the Yakkha and goes to the Naga king where no
harm ooiues to him.
546. TilK MAHA-UMMAGIUA-JATAK A ...............................................150
A story "f four prefeuded wise men and one real wise man, of
numerous problems which tho four failed to solve and the one
• iii Old id mini; tiHemi In of the four to destroy the one and of
hi 1 fine I triumph, including war.;, battles, siege:, and the description
of a v.' iideiful lunin.'l full of machinery.
547- V1SJSS ANTAlf A-JATAKA.......................................................................240
A pi inee d; voted t" gi- mg rifle falls into disrepute through giving
ft magical elephant. He is banished with his family into tho forest
where he gives away everything he has loft, including his two
children. Ultimately the children are set frei and all ends well.

| | | ' <SL
BOOK XXIL MAHANIPATA.
No. 538.
MOGA-PAKKFIA JATAKA1.
[1] “Shew no intelligence,” etc. This story the Master told atJatavana con-
oeriling the great renunciation. Olio day the Brethren seated in the Hall of
Truth were discussing the praises of the Messed One’s great renunojation. When
the Master came and inquired of the Brethren what was the topic which they
were discussing as they sat there, on hearing what it was, he said, “ No, Brethren,
this my renunciation of the world, after leaving 1113’ kingdom, was not wonderful,
when I had fully exercised the perfections j i'- c,- before, even when my wisdom
was still immature, and while 1 was still attaining the perfections, 1 left 1m
kingdom and renounced the world.” And at their request he told them a story
of the past.
Once upon a time a king Kasiraja ruled justly in Benares. He had
sixteen thousand wives, hut not one among them conceived either son or
daughter. The citizens assembled as in the Kusa Jataka-’, saying, “Our
king has no son to keep up his line”; and they begged the king to prey
for a son. The king commanded his sixteen thousand wives to pray for
sons; hut though they worshipped the moon aiul the other deities and
prayed, I,hey obtained none. Now his chief queen Oand/klovi, the daughter
of the king of the Maddas, was devoted to good works, and he asked hei
also to pray for a son. So on the day of the full moon who took upon
herself the I'posatha vows, mid while lying on o. little hail, as she r< Heeled
on her virtuous life, she made an Act of Truth in these terms, “ If 1 have
never broken the commandments, by the truth of this m\ protestation
[2] may a son be. borne to mo.” Through the power of her piety, Saklea’s
dwelling became hot. Sakka, having considered and ascertained the cause,
said, ‘ Candftdevi asks for a son, I will give her one. ; so, as he looked tor
a suitable son, lie saw the Bodhisatta. Now the Bodliisatta, altei having
reigned twenty years in Benares, had been reborn in the Usuada hell
1 The story of the deaf cripple.
- No. 531, trauiil. v. p. 111.
1
.. VI. I

I B ' §L
2
The Jdtaka. Booh XXII.
where lie had suffered for eighty thousand years, and had then been horn
in the world of the thirty-three gods, and after having stayed there us
allotted period, he had passed away therefrom and was desirous of going to
the world of the higher gods. Sakka went up to him and said, “ brienc , i
you are bom in the world of men you will fully exercise the perfections
and the mass of mankind will be advantaged; now this chief queen o
Kosiraja, Canda, is praying for a son, do you be bom in her womb.” He
consented, and came attended by live hundred deities, and was himself
conceived in her womb, while the other deities were conceived in the
wombs of the wives of the Icing’s ministers. The queen’s womb seemed to
be full of diamond; when she became aware of it, she told it to the king,
who caused every care to be taken for the safety of the unborn child; am
at last she brought forth a son endued with auspicious marks. On the
same day five hundred young nobles were born in the ministers’ houses.
At that moment the king was seated on his royal dais, surrounded by his
ministers, when it was announced, “ A son is born to thee, O king , at
hearing it, paternal affection arose, and piercing through bis skm reached
to the marrow in his bones; joy sprang up within him and his heart
became refreshed. He asked his ministers, “ Are you glad at the birth of
my son?” “What art thou saying, Sire?” they answered, “we were
before helpless, now wo have a help, we have obtained a lord.” The king
gave orders to his chief general, “A retinue must be prepared for my son,
find out how many young nobles have been born to-day in the ministers
houses.” He saw the five hundred and went and told it to the king. The
kin;; sent princely dresses of honour for the live hundred young nobles, and
lie also sent live hundred nurses. He gave moreover sixty-four nurses foi
the liodhi atta, all free from the faults of being too tall, Ac., [•’■] with their
breasts not hauging down, and full of sweet milk. If a child drinks milk,
sitting on the hip of a nurse who is too tall, its neck will become too long ,
if it sits on the hip of one too short, its shoulder-bone will be compressed ,
if the nurse lie too thin, the babe’s thighs will ache; if too stout, the babe
will become bow-legged’; the body8 of a very dark nurse is too cold, of one
very white, is too hot; the children who drink the milk of a nurse with
hanging breasts, have the ends of their noses flattened; some nurses lmVo
their milk sour, others have it bitter, Ac. Therefore, avoiding nil these
faults, h- provided sixty-four nurses all possessed of sweet milk and with­
out any of ftyM feulte} and after paying the UudhiMtta great honour, he
also gave the queen a boon. She accepted it and kept it in her mind. On
the day of naming the child they paid great honour to t he brahmans wlm
tin different m u-ks, and inquired if there was any dungm threatening.
They, beholding the excellence of bis marlm. 1 I l;"h “<> i;lI% ih<' prince
■ in iviiDtlnu i-iiikUiik, 'll" null'-

f ( f ' (CT
, iVo. 538. 3
.^yy
possesses every mark of future good fortune, lie is ablo to rule not one
continent only but all the four,—there is no danger visible.” The king,
being pleased, when he fixed the boy’s name, gave him the name Tcmiya-
lunnaro, since it had rained all over the kingdom of KasI on the day of his
birth ami he had been born wet.
When he was one month old, they adorned him and brought him to
the king, and the king having looked at his dear child, embraced him and
placed him on his hip and sat playing with him. Now at that time four
robbers were brought before him; one of them lio sentenced to receive a
thousand strokes from whips barbed with thorns, another to be imprisoned
in chains, a third to bo smitten with a spear, the fourth to bo impaled.
The Bodhisatta, on hearing his father’s words, was terrified and thought to
himself, “ Ah ! my father through his being a king, iS 1,rooming guilty of a
grievous action which brings men to hell.’ 'flic next day they laid him on
a sumptuous bed under a white umbrella, and ho woke after a short sleep
and opening his eyes beheld the. white umbrella and the royal pomp, and
his fear increased all the more; [4] and as he pondered “from whence
have 1 come into this palace?” by his recollection of his former births, lie
remembered that he had once come from the world of the gods and that
after that lm had suffered in hell, and that then he had been a king in that
very city. While he pondered to himself, “1 was a king for twenty years
and then \ suffered eighty thousand years in the Usaada hell, and now
again I am born in this house of robbers, and my father, when four robber*
were, brought before him, uttered such a cruel speech as must lead to hell ;
if I become a king I. shall be born again in hell and suffer great pain
there,” he became greatly alarmed, his golden body became pale and faded
like a lotus crushed by the hand, and he lay thinking how he could escape
from that house of robbers. Then a goddess who dwelt in the umbrella,
ami who in a certain previous birth had been his mother, comforted him,
•‘Fear not, my child Temiya ; if you really desire to escape, then pretend
t,, be a cripple, although not. really one; though not deaf, protend to bo
deaf, and, though not dumb, pretend to bo dumb. Putting on these
characteristics, shew no signs of intelligence.” Ho she uttered the first
stanza,
“Show no intelligence, my child, bo as a M m dl men’* eyes
Content to be the scorn of all, thus Almlt thou gain «d bad the rme.
lining comforted by her words lm uttered the second stanzu.
v t*
-SiJOi S i ’S s
..... „ I* pmettad thor three clmmdemtio. 1U tag. in order tied.
hie. *» height lore hie .... l.ue l.oly, M *« ^ "" "
1 1 1-n mt uiian cvviiig for their milk, but tin-
brought near him; the children began uyi &

|H| <SL
4 ' lrlie Jtitaka. Book XX1T.
Bodhisatta, being afraid of liell, reflected that to die of thirst would be
better than to reign, and did not cry. The nurses told this [5] to Queen
Ganda and she told it to the king; he sent for some brahmans skilled in
signs and omens and consulted them. They replied, “ Sire, you must give
the prince his milk after the proper time has passed ; he will then cry and
seize the breast eagerly and drink of his own accord.” So they gave him
his milk after letting the proper time pass by, and sometimes they let it
pass by for once, and sometimes they did not give it to him all through
the day. But he, stung by fear of hell, even though thirsty, would not
cry for milk. Then the mother or the nurses gave him milk, though ho
did not cry for it, saying, “The boy is famished.” The other children
cried when they did not get theii milk, but he neither cried nor slept nor
doubled up his hands nor feet, nor would he hear a sound. Then his
nurses reflected, “ The hands and feet of cripples are not like his, the
formation of the jaws of the dumb is not like his, the structure of the
ears of the deaf is not like bis; there must be some reason for all this,
let us examine into it”; so they determined to try him with milk, and so
for one whole day they gave him no milk; but, though parched, be uttered
no sound for milk. Then his mother said, “ My boy is famished, give him
milk,” and she made them give him milk. Thus giving him milk at
intervals they spent a year in trying him, but they did not discover his
weak point. Then saying, “The other children are fond of cakes and
dainties, we will try him with them”; they set the five hundred children
near him and brought various dainties and placed them close by him, and,
telling them to take what they liked, they hid themselves. The other
children quarrelled and struck one another and seized the cakes and ate
them, but the Bodhhntta said to himself, “O Temiya, eat the cakes and
dainties if you wish for lu ll,” and so in bis fear of bell he would not look
at them. Thus even though they tried him with cakes and dainties lor a
whole year they discovered not his weak point. Then they said, “Children
are fond of different kinds of fruit,” and they brought all sorts of fruit and
tried him; [6] the other children fought for them and ate them, but ho
would not look at thorn, and thus for a whole year they tried him with
various kinds'of fruit. Then they said, “Other children are fond of play­
things” ; so they set golden and other figures of elephants, Are., near him;
the rest of the children seized them as if they were spoil, but the Bod-
hisatta would not look at them, and thus fora whole year they tried him
with playthings. Then they said, “There is a special food for children four
years old, we will try him with that”; so they brought all sorts of food;
the other children broke them in pieces and ale them; but the BodhisnMa
said to himself, “() Temiya, there is no counting of the past births vvheu
you did hot obtain food, and for fear ot hell h< did not look at thorn:
until ul last, his mother, wii.h hot lioart well nigh rent, ked him with her

<
sl
No. 538. 5
own hand'. Then they said, “ Children five years old are afraid of the
tire, we will try him with that”; so, having had a large house made with
many doors, and having covered it over with palmleaves, they set him In
the middle surrounded by the other children and set tire to it. The others
ran away shrieking, but the Bodhisatta said to himself that it was better
than the torture in hell, and remained motionless as if perfectly apathetic,
and when the fire came near him they took him away. Then they said,
“Children six years old are afraid of a wild elephant”; so they had a well-
trained elephant taught, and, when they had seated the Bodhisatta with
the other children in the palace-court, they lot it loose. On it came
trumpeting and striking the ground with its trunk and spreading terror;
the other children fled in all directions in fear for their lives, hut the
Bodhisatta, being afraid of hell, sat where he was, and the well-trained
animal took him and lifted him up and down, and went away without
hurting him. When he was seven years old, as he was sitting surrounded
by his companions, they let loose some serpents with their teeth extracted
and their mouths bound; the other children ran away shrieking, but the
Bodhisatta, remembering the fear of hell, remained motionless, saying, “It
is hotter to perish by tho mouth of a tierce serpent”; then the serpents
enveloped his whole body and they spread their hoods on his head, but
still he remained motionless. Thus though they tried him again and
again, they still could, not discov er his weak point. [7 ] Then they said,
“Boys are fond of social gatherings”; so, having set him in the palace
court with the five hundred hoys, the) caused an assembly of mimes to
be gathered together; the other hoys, seeing the mimes, shouted ‘bravo
and laughed loudly, but tho Bodhisatta, saying to himself that if lie were
born in hell there would never be a moment's laughter or joy, remained
motionless as he pondered on hell, and never looked at the dancing. Thus
trying him again and again they discovered no weak point in him. Then
they said, “ We will try him with tho sword’ ; so they placed him with the
other hoys in the palace-court, and while they wore playing, a man rushed
upon them, brandishing a sword like crystal and shouting and jumping,
saying, “Where is this dcvil’s-child of the King of Kiisi ? I will cut off
his head.” The others fled, shrieking in terror at the sight of him, but
the Bodhisatta, having pondered on the fear of hell, sat as if unconscious.
The man, although he rubbed the sword on his head and threatened to cut
it off, could not frighten him and at last wont away. Thus though they
tried him again and again, they could not discover his weak point. V\ hen
he was ten years old, in order to try whether he was really deaf, they
hum; a curtain round a bed and made holes i" the foui sides and placed
couch blowers underneath it without letting him see them. All at onco
they blow the eonolis. -there was one burst of sound; but the ministers,
1 I. have followed 13 d here.

111
/j^>—-A\
<SL
The Jo lain. Boole XXII.
'
though they stood at the four sides and watched by the holes in the
curtain, could not through a whole day detect in him .111} confusio 1
thought or any disturbance of hand or foot, or even a single start. >-0
after a year had past, they tried him for another year with drums; wit
(•veil thus, though they tried him again and again, they could not discover
his weak point. Then they said, “We will try him with a lamp”; so in
the night-time in order to see whether he moved hand or foot in the
darkness, they lighted some lamps in jars, and having extinguished all
the other lamps, they put these down for a while in the darkness, and
then suddenly lifting the lamps in the jars, created all at once a blaze, and
watched bis behaviour; but thought they thus tried him again and again
for a whole year, they never saw him start even once. [8] Then they
said, “We will try him with molasses”; so they smeared all his body with
molasses and laid him in a place infested with flies and stirred the flies up;
Mies,, covered his whole body and hit it as if they were piercing it with
needles, but be remained motionless as if periodly apathetic; thus they
tried him for a. year, but they discovered no weak point in him. Then
when lie was fourteen years old, they said, “This youth now he is grown
up loves what i., clean and abhors what is-unclean,—we will try him with
what is unclean”; so from that time they did not let him bathe or rinse
his mouth or perform any bodily ablutions, until he was reduced to a
miserable plight, and lie looked like a released prisoner. As lie lay,
covered with flies, the people came round and reviled him, saying, “0
Tonriyn, you gf?wn up now, who is to wait on you? are you not
atthamed 1 why are ypU lying there ? rise up and cleanse yourself.” But
he, remembering tlm torments of the hell Gutha, lay quietly in his squalor;
and though they tried him again and again for a year, they discovered no
w ak point in him. Then they put pans of fire in the bed under him,
saying, “ When he is distressed by the heat, he will perhaps be uuable to
bear the pain and will shew some signs of writhing”; boils seemed to
break out m, bis body, but the Bodhisatta resigned himself, saying, “The
file of I he hell Avici flames up a hundred leagues,—this heat is a hundred,
„ dhou and times preferable to that,” so be remained motionless. Then
Id-., parents, with br< ' king hearts, made the men come back, and took bun
out of the fire, and implored him, saying, M0 prince Temiya, we know that
1 him art no! in any way crippled by birth, for cripples have not such feet,
fU(;e, ,,r ears a- tl.ou hast; wo gained thee us our child allot many prayers,
d„ not. now destroy us, but deliver us from the blame of all the kings of
.lambudipa”; (pit, though thus entreated by them, lie lav still motionless,
as if h0 heard them not. Then his parents went a wav weeping: [9| and
nmetimcK Id- father m ids mother came buck done, ami implored him;
Haul 1 lim they tried him again and again for a whole year, but they dm- ^
.. ........... weak point in him. Then when h. w.m sixtec: years old they

—-A \
f ( f ) | . (CT
No. 538. 7 °
considered, “ Whether it be a cripple or deaf and dumb, still there aro
none, who when they are grown up, do not delight in what is enjoyable
and dislike what is disagreeable; this is all natural in the proper time like
the opening of flowers. We will have dramas acted before him and will
thus try him.” So they summoned some women full of all graces, and as
beautiful as the daughters of the gods, and they promised that whichever
of them could make the prince laugh, or could entangle him in sinful
thoughts should become his principal queen. Then they had the prince
bathed in perfumed water and adorned like a son of the gods, and laid on
a royal bed prepared in a suite of royal chambers like the dwellings of the
gods, and having filled his inner chamber with a mingled fragrance of
perfumed wreaths, wreaths of flowers, iuccnse, unguents, spirituous liquor,
and the like, they retired, Meanwhile the women surrounded him and
tried hard to delight him with dancing and singing and all sorts of
pleasant words; but he looked at them in his perfect wisdom and stopped
his inhalations and exhalations in fear lest they should touch his body,
so that his body beoamo quite rigid. They, being unable to touch him,
said to his parents, “ Ilis body is all rigid, he is not a man, but must be
a goblin.” Thus his parents, though they tried him again and again,
discovered no weak point in him. Thus, though they tried him for
sixteen years with the sixteen great tests and many smaller oiioh, they
wore not able to detect a weak point in him. Then the king, being full
of vexation, summoned the fortune-tellers and said, “When the prince
was born ye said that he lias fortunate and auspicious marks, lie has no
threatening obstacle; but lie is born a cripple and deal and dumb; your
words do not answer to the facts.” “ Great king,” they replied, “nothing
is unseen by your teachers, but we knew how grieved you would be it
wo told you that the child of so many royal prayers [10] would be all
Ill-luck; so wo did not utter it.” “What must be done now?" “O
king, if tin's prince remains in this house, three dangers are threatened,
viz. to vour life or your royal power, or the queen; therefore it will bo
best to have some unlucky horses yoked to an unlucky chariot, and,
placing him therein, to convey him by the western gate and bury him
in the charnel-ground1.” The king assented, being frightened at the
threatened dangers. When the queen CamUdevi heard the news she
came to the king, “My lord, you gave mo a boon and [ have kept it
unclaimed, give it to me now.” “Take it, 0 queen.” “Give the kingdom
to my son.” “ 1 cannot, 0 queen; thy son is all Ill-luck, j .Ihon d you
will not give it for his life, give it to him for si an j< ms. umiu ,
0 queen.” “ Then give it to him for six years,- for five, four, three, two,
one yen, Give it to him for seven months, for six live, tour, three, two
months, one month, for half a month.” “ I cannot, 0 queen. «n gnt
1 Cf. Vol- 1-, trausl., p. '■JUS.

' e<W\
III; <
sl
.
The Jcitaka. Book XXII.
it. to him for seven days.” “Well,” said the king, “take your boon/’ >So she
had her son adorned, and, the city being gaily decorated, a proclamation was
made to the beat of a drum, “This is the reign of prince Temiya,’ and lie
was seated upon an elephant and led triumphantly rightwise round the city,
with a white umbrella held over his head. When he returned, and was
laid on his royal bed she implored him all the night, “ 0 my child, prince
Temiya, on thy account for sixteen years I have wept and taken no sleep:
and my eyes are parched up, and iny heart is pierced with sorrow; T know
that thou art not really a cripple or deaf and dumb,—do not make me
utterly destitute.” In this manner she implored him day after day for
five days. On the sixth day the king summoned the charioteer Sunanda
and said to him, “To-morrow morning early yoke some ill-omened horses
to an ill-omened chariot, and having set the prince in it, take him out by
the western gate and dig a hole with four sides in the charnel-ground;
throw him into it, and break his head with the back of the spade and
kill him, then scatter dust over him and make a heap of earth above,
(_IJ ] and after bathing yourself come hither.” That sixth night the queen
implored the prince, “O my child, the King of Kasi has given orders that
r oil are to be buried to-morrow in the charnel-ground,—to-morrow you
will certainly die, my son.” When the JJodhisatta heard this, he thought
to himself, “0 Temiya, your sixteen years’ labour has reached its end,”
and lie was glad; but his mother’s heart was as it were cleft in twain.
Still lie would not speak to her lost his desire should not attain its end.
*\t the end of that night, in the early morning, Sunanda the charioteer
yoked the chariot and made it stand at the gate, and .entering the royal
bedchamber lie said, “0 queen, be not angry, it is the king’s command.”
So saying, as the queen lay embracing her son be pushed her away witli
the back of hi- hand, and lifted up the prince like a bundle of flowers
and name down from the palace. The queen was left: in the chamber
smiting her breast aud lamenting with a loud cry. Then the Bodhisatta
looked at her and considered, “If J do not speak she will die of a broken
heart,” but though he desired to speak, he reflected, “ If 1 speak, my
elForts for sixteen years will be rendered fruitless; but if I do not
speak, 1 shall be the saving1 of myself and my parents.” Then the
charioteer lifted him into the chariot and saying, “I will drive the
chariot to the western gate,” lie drove it to the eastern gate, and the
wheel struck against the threshold The Bodhisattn, hearing the sound,
said, “ .My desire bus atlaiued its end,” and he became still more glad at
heart. When the < hariot had gone out of the city, it went u space of
three leagues by the power of the gods, and there the end of a forest
1 | I’rof. Cowell irunslutoH as follows: ‘J ..hull be the death of my father and mother
a '.dII an "f myself,' addin*.' a no to: ■■ 1 have doubtfully Inundated jiurcnyi, ns il it won
Ihe opposite of till pi mold {,,yor fivA* rtrui."]

'
e°kX\
k v
f ( f ) | -
No. 538. 9
appealed to the charioteer as if it were a charnel-ground; so thinking it
to be a suitable place, lie turned the chariot out of the road, and stopping
it by the roadside he alighted and took off all the Bodhisatta’s ornaments
and made them into a bundle and laid them down, and then taking a
spade began to dig a hole. Then the Bodhisatta thought, “This is my
time for effort; for sixteen years I have never moved hands nor feet,
arc they in my power or not?” So lie rose and rubbed his right hand
with his left, and his left hand with his right, [12] and his feet with both
his hands, and resolved to alight from the chariot. When his foot came
down, the earth rose up like a leather bag tilled with air and touched the
hinder end of the chariot; when he had alighted, and had walked back
wards and forwards several times, he felt that lie had strength to go a
hundred leagues in this manner in one day. Then he reflected, “If the
charioteer were to set against me, should ! have the power to contend
with him?” So he seized hold of the hinder end of the chariot and
lifted it up as if it were a toy-cart for children, and said to himself that
he had power to contend with him ; and as he perceived it. a desire arose
to adorn himself. At that moment Sakka’s palace became hot. Sakka,
having perceived the reason, said, “Prince Temiya’s desire has attained
its end, he desires to be adorned, what has he to do with human adorn­
ment?’ and he commanded Vissakamma to take heavenly decorations
and to go and adorn the son of the King of Kasi. So he went and
wrapt the prince with ten thousand pieces of cloth and adorned him
like Sakka with heavenly and human ornaments. The prince, decked
with all the bravery of the King of the gods, went up to the hole us the
charioteer was digging, and standing at the edge, uttered the third stanzi :
“Wliy in such haste, 0 charioteer? and wherefore do
you
dig that pit I
Answer my question truthfully,—what do you want to do with it?”
The charioteer went on digging the hole without looking up and spoke
tin fourth stanza:
‘Our king lias found hi.-- only sou crippled and dumb,— m idiot quite;
And I am sent to dig this hole and bury him far out. of sight.”
The Bodhisatta replied :
“1 am not deaf nor dumb, my friend, no cripple, not e'un lame cm 1 ;
If in this wood you bury me, you will incur groat guilt thereby.
[13] Behold these arms and lugs of mine, and hear my voice and what I .-ay,
[f in this wood you bury me. you will incur great guilt to-day.”
Then the charioteer said, “Who is this? It is only since I came hen
that he has become as ho describes himself.' >So he lofi oil digging (he
hole and looked up; and beholding his glorious beauty and not knowing
whether lie was a god or a man, lie spoke this stanza :
“A heavenly minstrel or a god, or art thou Sakka loid of all .
Who art, thou, pray; whose sou art thou? what, shall we name thee when wo
call!’’

111
.. ..
(SI.
xjjTwjjMo .
The Jut aka. Book XX.II.
Thou the Bodhisatta spoke, revealing himself and declaring the law,
“No heavenly minstrel nor a god, nor Sakku, lord of all, am I 1;
1 am the King of Ktisl’s son whom you would bury ruthlessly.
I am the son of that same king under whose sway you serve and thrive,—
You will incur great guilt to-day if here you bury me alive.
If ’noath a tree I sit and rest while it its shade and shelter lends®,
I would not break a single branch,- only the sinner harms liis friends.
The sheltering tree—it is the king—; I am the branch that tree has spread;
And you the traveller, charioteer, who sits and rests beneath its shade;
If in this wood you bury me, great guilt will fall upon your head.”
I ll] But though the Bodhisatta said this, the man did not believe
him. "Then the Bodhisatta resolved to convince him, and he made the
woods resound with his own voice and the applause of the gods, as he
commenced these ten gatlias in honour of friends
‘ Be who is faithful to his friends limy wander far and wide,—
Many will gladly wait on hint, bis food shall be supplied.
Whatever lands be wanders through, in city or in town,
He who is faithful to his friends finds honour and renown.
No rubbers dare to injure him, no warriors him despise;
who
lie is faithful to his friends escapes all enemies.
no
Welcomed by all he home returns,- carats corrode his breast,
lfo who is faithful to his friends is of all kin the host.
lie honotirs and is honoured too,—respect he takes and gives'
He who is faithful to his friends full mood from all receives.
He is by others honoured who to them due honour pays,
lie who is faithful to his friends wins himself fume and praise.
hike fire he blazon brightly forth, and sheds a light divine,
lie win is faithful to his friends will with fresh splendour shine.
Hi i.xon surely multiply, his seod unfailing grows,
lie who is faithful to his friends reaps surely all he sows.
If from a mountain-top he falls or from a tree or grot,
Ho who is faithful to hie friends finds a sure resting spot.
The banyan tree defies the wind, girt with its branches rooted round,
He who is faithful to his friends doth all tiro rage of foes confound.”
[15] Even though he thus discoursed, Sunanda did not recognise him
ami asked who he was; but as ho approached the chariot, oven before ho
huw the chariot ami the ornaments which flu- priuos wore, he recognised
J,im as lm looked ai him, and falling at his feet and folding his hands
spoke this atan/,a :
“(.‘"luo, 1 will take thoe back, 0 prince, to thine own proper home;
Sit on the throne and act the king,- -why in this forest roam!”
1 i’etavuUhu, p. 01.
,J Ml. ;H0 (p. lHu of the translation), IVuivaUhu, p- Hit
Sm foi l in the Jmirii. l anfu/a, , 1871 Will. |>. 2Is.

ID ! • . <SL
iYo. 538. 11
Tlio Groat Being replied :
“ I do not want that throne or wealth, I want not friends nor kin,
Since ’tis by evil acts alone that J that throne could win.”
The charioteer spoke :
“A brimful cup of welcome, prince, will be prepared for thoe;
And thy two parents in their joy great gifts will give to me.
The royal wives, the princes all, Vesiyas and brahmans both,
Great presents in their full content will give me, nothing loth.
Those who ride elephants and cars, foot-soldiers, royal guards,
When thou returncst home again, will give me sure .rewards.
.The country folk aud city folk will gather joyously,
And when they see their prince returned will presents give to mo.”
[10] The Great Being spoke:
“By parents 1 was loft forlorn, by city and by town,
The princes left me to my fate,—I have no home my own.
My mother gave me leave to go, my father me forsook,
Here in this forest-wild alone the ascetic’s vow 1 took.”
As the Great Being called to mind his own virtues, delight arose in
his mind and in his ecstasy he uttered a hymn of triumph :
“Even to those who hurry not, th’ heart’s longing wins success;
Know, charioteer, that I t.o-diy have g.ainod ripe holiness1.
Even by those who hurry not, tho highest end is won;
Crowned with ripe holiness I go, perfect and fearing none."
The charioteer replied;
“Thy words, my lord, are pleasant words, open thy speech and clear;
Why wast thou dumb, when thou didst see father aud mother near I”
The Great Being spoke;
“ No cripple I for lack of joints, nor deaf for lack of ears,
t am not dumb for want of tongue as plainly now appears.
In an old birth 1 played the king, as l rcraemlier woll,
But when 1 foil from that estate I found myself in lioll.
Sonic twenty years of luxury I passed upon that throne,
But eighty thousand years in hell did for that, guilt atone.
11 7] My former taste of royalty tilled all my heart with lcar;
Thence was 1 dumb, although 1 saw father and mother near.
Mv father took mo on his lap, but midst his fondling play,
I heard the stern command- he gave, ‘At once this miscreant slay,
Saw him in sunder, - go, that wretch impale without delay.’
Henrin" such threats well might 1 try crippled and dumb to be,
Ami wallow helplessly in filth, an idiot willingly.
Knowing that life is short at best ami filled with miseries,
Who gainst another for its sake would let Ins anger rise/
Who on another for in sake would let Ins
Through want of power to grasp the truth and blindness t. the light
1 Si'i Vol. i. p. '30.
Thu four liium of triumph ato hove rupenta .

111
' e0|^ \
■ §L
— 12
The Jataka. Book XXII.
[Ifej Then Sunauda reflected, “This prince, abandoning all his royal
pomp as if it were carrion, lias entered into the wood, unwavering'in his
resolve to become an ascetic,—what have I to do with this miserable life?
1 too will become an ascetic with him”; so he spoke this stanza:
“ T too would choose thJ ascetic’s life with thee;
Call me, 0 prince,—for I as thou would be.”
When thus requested, the Great Being reflected, “Jf I at once admit him
to the ascetic life, my father and mother will not Como here and thus they
will suffer loss, and the horses and chariot and ornaments will perish, and
hlamc will accrue to me, for men will say, ‘ He is a goblin,—has he devoured
the charioteer? bo wishing to save himself from blame and to provide
for his parents’ welfare, lie entrusted the horses and chariot and ornaments
to him and spoke this stanza :
“Kastorc the chariot first, thou’rt not a free man now;
1 irst pay thy debts, they say,—then take the ascetic’s vow.”
flic charioteer thought to himself, “ If I went to the city and he meanwhile
departed elsewhere his father and mother on hearing my news of him
would come back with me to see him; and if they found him not they
would punish me; so I will tell him the circumstances in which 1 find
myself and will get his promise to remain here”; so he spoke two stanzas:
“■Since I have done thy bidding, prince, I pray,
Do thou be pleased to do what 1 shall say.
■Stay till I fetch the king,—stay here of grace,
He will he joyful when he sees thy face.”
[19] The Great Being replied :
“Well, be it as thou sayest, charioteer;
l too would gladly see my father here.
Go arid salute my kindred nil, and take
A special message for my parents’ sake.”
The man took the commands :
He clasped his feet and, all due honours paid,
Started to journey as his Master bade.
At that moment Candadevi opened her lattice and, as she wondered
whether there wore any tidings of her son and looked on the road by
which the charioteer would return, she saw him coming alone and burst
info lamentation.
The Master has thus described it:
“Seeing the empty car and lonely charioteer,
The mother's eyes were filled with tears, her breast, with four:
1 The charioteer comes back, --my son is slain ;
Vender he lies, earth mixed with earth again.
Our bitterest foe* may well rejoice, alack
Seeing his murderer cane '.h i* i

t(t)| • <SL
, No. 538. 13
Dumb, crippled,—say, could he not give one cry,
As on the ground he struggled helplessly?
Could not his hands and feet force thee away,
Though dumb and maimed, while on the ground he lay?”’
[20] The charioteer spoke:
“ Promise me pardon, lady, for my word,
And I will tell thee all I saw and heard.”
The queen answered:
“ Pardon I promise you for every word; ,
Tell me in full whate’er you saw or heard.”
Then the charioteer spoke :
“ No cripple he, he is not deaf,—his utterance clear and free;
Ho played fictitious parts at home, through dread of royalty.
In an old birth lie played the king as lie remembers well.
But when he fell from that estate he found himself in hell.
Some twenty years of luxury he passed upon that throne,
But eighty thousand years in hell did for that guilt atono.
Ilis former taste of royalty filled all his heart with fear;
Hence was he dumb although he saw father and mother near.
Perfectly sound in all his limbs, faultlessly tall and broad,«
His utterance clear, his wits midiinmed, he treads salvation’s road.
Tf yon, desire to see your son, then come at once with me,
You shall behold prince Temiya, perfectly calm and free.”
[21] But when the prince had sent the charioteer away, he desired to
take the ascetic vow Knowing his desire, Haklea sent Vissakamma, sn\ ing,
“ Prince Temiya wishes to take the ascetic vow, go and make a lint of
leaves for him and the requisite articles for an ascetic.’ He hastened
accordingly, and in a grove of trees three leagues in extent he built a
hermitage furnished with an apartment for the night and another for the
day, a tank-, a pit, and fruit-trees, and lie prepared all the requisites for nil
ascetic and then returned to Ills own place. When the Hodliisatta saw ii.
In knew that it was Sakka's gift; so lie entered into the but and took oil
his clothes and put on the red bark garments, both the upper ami under,
anil threw the black antelope-skin on one shoulder, and tied up his malted
hair, and, having taken a carrying pole on his shoulder and a walking stall'
in his hand, he went out of the hut. Then he walked repeatedly up and
down, displaying the full dress of an ascetic, and having shouted triumph­
antly’”0 the bliss, 0 the bliss,” returned to the hut; and sitting down m,
the ragged mat1 he entered upon the five transcended faculties. Then
going out at evening and gathering some leaves from a k a ra te near by,
he staked them in a vessel supplied by Hakka in wafer wehouf salt or
> KatthaUhawU [in iv. 58-' atlharo is a ‘rug,’ ^ITWT |.
Ctvnhinm pnruijlorum■

' c°i^X
14
The Jatcika, Book X X TI.
•1
buttermilk or spice, ate them as if they were ambrosia, and then, as lie
aDcl
pondered on the four perfect states, lie resolved to take up his abode
there.
Meanwhile the King of KasI, having heard Sunanda’s words, sum­
moned his chief general and ordered him to make preparation for the
journey, saying :
“ The horses to the chariots yoke,—bind girths on elephants and come ;
Sound conch and tabour far and wide, and wake the loud-voiced kettledrum.
Let the hoarse tomtom till the air, let rattling drums raise echoes sweet,—
Bid all this city follow me,—I go my son once more to greet.
Lot palace-ladies, every prince, ve.-.iyas and brahmans every one,
All have their chariot-horses yoked,—I go to welcome back my son.
Let elephant-riders, royal guards, horsemen and footmen every one,
Lot all alike prepare, to go, I g<f to welcome back my son.
Let country folk and city folk gather in Crowds in every street,
Let all alike prepare to go, I go once more my son to greet.”
[22J The charioteers thus ordered yoked the horses, and having brought
the chariots to the palace-gates informed the king.
The Master has thus described it:
"Sindh hor-.es of the noblest breed stood harnessed at the palace gates;
Tin! charioteers the tidin bring, ‘The train, my lord, thy presence waits.’”
The king spoke:
‘“ Leave all the clumsy horses out, no weaklings in our cavalcade,’ ■
(They told the charioteer, ‘ lie sure not to bring horses of that kind,’)
Such were the royal orders given, and such the charioteers obeyed."
The king, when he went to his son, assembled the four castes, the
eighteen guilds, and his whole army, and three days wen spent iu (he
assembling of the host. On the fourth day, having taken all that was to
he takon in tin- procession, he proceeded to the hermitage and there was
greeted by his son and gave him (he due greeting in return.
The Master has thus described it1:
“ Ifis royal eharjot then prepared, the king without delay
Got in, and cried out to hi.-, wives -• Come with me all may!’
With yaks tail fan and turban crest, and royal white sunshade,
He mounted in the royal ear 21, with finest, gold arrayed.
Then did the king set forth at once, his charioteer benidfl,
And tpiiokly came where Temiya all tranquil did abide.
[iW| When Temiya beheld him cort'io all brilliant and ablazn,
Surrounded by attendant band-, of warriors, thus ho say
1 [Tliu' passage, down to the und of p. -if, win- omitted by I'eol. Cowolf. J
s npiidhivnthum: Nabob m » i v i ■minim •\nujhantu. iuu lut/n pc"./,- putUt-mt
mull' ' II nbIn rhnlinrailuUhiillii l"""’ ■'•jiihil.iulluiiihiiiiil'iili <iniihtilb" ti.

f( II - (flT
No. 5.38. 15r J i j
‘ Father, l hope ’tis well with thee, thou hast good news to tell,
"• I hope that all the royal queens, my mothers, 'too, are well?’
‘ Yes, it is well with me, my son, I have good news to tell,
And all the royal queens indeed, thy mothers, all are well.’
11 hope thou drinkest no strong drink, all spirit dost eschew,
To righteous deeds and almsgiving thy mind is ever true?’
‘Oh yes, strong drink 1 nover touch, all spirit I eschew,
To righteous deeds and almsgiving my mind is over true.’
1 The horses and the elephants 1 hope are well and strong,
No painful bodily disease, no weakness, nothing wrong?’
‘Oh yes, the elephants are well, the horses well' and strong,
No painful bodily disease, no weakness, nothing wrong.’
‘The frontiers, as the central part, all populous, at peace,
The treasures and the treasuries quite full—say, what of these?
Now welcome to thee, royal Sir, 0 welcome now to thee!
Let them set out a couch, that here seated the king may he.’”
The king, out of respect for the Great Being, would not sit upon the
couch '.
[24] The Great Being said, “ If he does not sit on his royal seat, let a
couch of leaves bo spread for him,” so he spoke a stanza :
“ Bo seated on this Led of leaves spread for thee as is meet,
■ ' They will take water from this spot and duly wash thy feet.”
The king in his respect would not accept even the seat of leaves but sat
on the ground. Then the Bodhisatta entered the hut of leaves, and, taking
out a kara leaf", and inviting the king, he spoke a stanza :
“No salt have 1, this leaf alone is what 1 live upon, 0 king;
Thou art come here a guest of mine,—be pleased to accept the fare 1 bring.”
The king replied :
“No loaves for me, that’s not my fare; give mo a bowl of pure hill mo,
Cooked with a subtil flavouring of meats to make the pottage nice.”
At that moment the queen CandadevI, surrounded by the royal ladies,
came up, and after clasping her dear son’s feet and saluting him, sol on
one side with her eyes full of tears. The king said to her, Lady,
what thy son’s food is,” and put some of the leaves into her hand and also
gave a little to the other ladies, who took it, saying, “O my lord, dost thou
indeed eat such food ? thou ondurest great hardship,” and sat down. Then
the king said, “0 my son, this appears wonderful to me,'' and he spoke a
stanza:
“Most .strange indeed it seems to me that thou thus left alone
Li vest on such mean food and yet thy colour is not gone.” 1
1 Them words, printed in the Connu. on p. 2B, should he put in the U 'A. Bead :
piilltivilre mi a/’.ltd); and so on p. '2-1'.
A leaf of the troo Cn lithium purrijhirinn.
* Cf. mjini, in. 20".

, /jPy-—A \
< f | | (s i .
1G
The Jdtaka. Book XXIT.
[25] The prince thus replied :
“ Upon this bed of leaves strewn here I lie indeed alone,—
A pleasant bed it is and so my colour is not gone;
Girt with their swords no cruel guards stand sternly looking on,—
A pleasant bed it is and so my colour is not gone ;
Over the past I do not mourn nor for the future weep,—
1 meet the present as it comes, and so my colour keep.
Mourning about the hopeless past or some uncertain future need,—
This dries a young man’s vigour up as when you cut a fresh green reed.”
Tho king thought to himself, “ I will inaugurate him us king and carry
him away with me”; so he spoke these stanzas inviting him to share the
kingdom :
“ My elephants, my chariots, horsemen, and infantry,
And all my pleasant palaces, dear son, I give to thee.
My queen's apartments too I give, with all their pomp and pride,
Thou shalt be solo king over us,—there shall be none beside.
Fair women skilled in dance and song and trained for every mood
Shall lap thy soul in ease and joy, why linger in this wood f
The daughters of thy foes -hall conic proud but to wait on thee ;
When they have borne thee sons, then go an anchoret to be.
Come, O mv first-born and my heir, in the first glory of thine age.
Enjoy thy kingdom to the full,—what dost thou in this hermitage (
The B.odhisatta spoke :
. “No, let the young man leave the world and fly its vanities,
The ascetic’s life best suits the young,—thus counsel all the wise.
fiffV| No, let the young man leave the world, a hermit and alono ;
I will embrace the hermit’s life, I need no pomp nor throne.
1 watch the boy, with childish lips; he ‘father,’ ‘mother, cries,
Himself begets a son, and then he too grows old mid dies.
So the young daughter in her flower grows blithe and fair to see,
lint she soon fades cut down by death like the green bamboo tree.
Mon, women all, however young, soon perish,—who in sooth
Would put his trust in mortal life, cheated by fancied youth ?
As night by night gives plaeo to dawn life still contracts its span ;
hike tisli in water which (hies up,—what means the youth of man?
This world of ours is smitten sore, is ever watched by one,
Tlnii puss and pass with purpose fell,--why talk of crown or throne
‘Who sorely smites this world of ours! who watches grimly ly¥
And who thus pass with purpose foil? Toll me the mystery.
'Tis death who smites this world, old ago who watches id our gate,
And ’tis tho nights which pass and win their purpose soon or Into;
As when the lady at her loom sits weaving all tho day,
Her 1 ask grows ever less and less,-- so waste our lives away.
As speeds 1 he hurrying river's course, on with no backward (low,
,Sn in its course the lit*1 of men doth ever forward go;
And as the river swoops away trees from its hunks upturn,
So arc wo men by ago and (Tenth in headlong nun l*' ino.

—AX
i l l • <SL
No. 538 17
■ .
[27] The king, as he. listened to the Great Being's discourse, became dis­
gusted at a life spent in a house, and longed to leave the world; and he
exclaimed, “ T will not go back to the city, I will become an ascotic here;
if my son will go to the city I will give him the white umbrella,”— so to
try him he once more invited him to take his kingdom :
“ My elephants, my chariots, horsemen, and infantry,
And all my pleasant palaces, dear son, I give to thee.
My queen’s apartments too I give, with all their pomp and pride,
Thou shalt be sole king over us, —there shalloe none beside.
Fair women skilled in dance and song and trained fob every mood
Shall lap thy soul in ease and joy, why linger in this wood?
The daughters of thy foes shall come proud hut to wait on thoe ;
When they have borne thee sons, then go an anchoret to he.
My treasures and my treasuries, footmen and cavalry,
And all my pleasant palaces, dear son, I give to thee.
M ith troops of slaves to wait on thee, and queons to he embraced,
Enjoy thy throne, all health to thoe, why linger in this waste ? ”
But the Great Being replied by shewing how little he wanted a kingdom.
“ Why seek for wealth,—it will not last ; why woo a with, sho soon will die ;
Why think of youth, ’twill soon be past; and threatening age stands ever nigh.
M hat are the joys that life can bring? beauty, sport, wealth, or royal fare ?
M hat is a wife or child to me ? I am set free from every snare.
I h;s thing I know,— where’er T go, Fate watching never slmnboreth ;
Of what avail is wealth or joy to one who feels the grasp of death V
[28] Do vvhat thou bast to do to-day, who can ensure the morrow s sun ?
Death is the Master-general who gives his guarantee to none.
Thieves ever watch to steal our wealth,—I am set free from every chain ;
do back and take thy crown away; what want I with a king’s domain ?”
The Great Being’s discourse with its application came to an end, and
when they heard it not only the king and the queen Cauda but the sixteen
thousand royal wives all desired to embrace the ascetic life. The king
ordered a proclamation tb be made in the city by beat of drum, that all
who wished to become ascetics with his son should do so; |29] lie
caused the doors of las treasuries to bo thrown open, and lm had an
inscription written on a golden plate, and fixed on a grent bamboo as a
pillar, that his treasure-jars would lie exposed in certain places and that nil
who pleased might take of them. The citizens also left their houses with
the doors; oj>en as if it were an open market, and flocked round the king.
The king and the multitude took the ascetic vow together befpra the Great
Being. An hermitage erected by Sakka extended for three h agues. Urn
Great Being went through the huts made of branches and lemes, and lie
appointed those in the centre for the women as they were naturally timid,
while those on the outside were iot the men. All of them on the fast-day
1 Four lines arc here repeated from Vol. iv. trans). p. 81, lb G 1 *■
,. vi, 2

111
/? m m m
(SI.
§ § |^ 8 The Jataha. Booh XXII.
' •
stood on the ground, and gathered and ate the fruits of the trees which
Vissakamma had created, and followed the rules of the ascetic liie* Ihe
Great Being, knowing the mind of every one, whether he indulged thoughts
of lust or malevolence or cruelty, sat down in the air and taught the law to
each, and as they listened they speedily developed the Faculties and the
Attainments.
A neighbouring king, hearing that Ivasiraju had become an ascetic,
resolved to establish his rule in Benares, so he entered the city, and
seeing it all adorned he went up into the palace, and, beholding the seven
kinds of precious stones there, he thought to himself that some kind of
danger must gather round all this wealth ; so lie sent for some drunken
revellers and asked them by which gate the king had gone out. They told
him “by the eastern gate”; so he went out himself by that gate and pro­
ceeded along the bank of the river. The Great Being knew of his coming,
arid buving gone to meet him, sat in the air and taught the law. 't hen
the invader took the ascetic vow with all his company;' and the same
thing happened also to .another king. In this way three kingdoms were
abundoned ; the elephants and horses were left to roam wild in the woods,
the chariots dropped to pieces in the woods, and the money in the treasuries,
being counted as mere sand, was scattered about in the hermitage. All
the residents there attained to the eight Ecstatic Meditations ; and at the
end of their lives became destined for the world of Brahma. Yea the very
animals, as the elephants and horses, having their minds calmed by the
sight of the sages, were eventually reborn in the six heavens of the gods.
The Master, having brought his lesson to an end, said, “ Not now only but
f< vmerly also did 1 leave a kingdom and become an ascetic.” Then lie identified
the liirt.b ‘the goddess in the umbrella \vm.; Eppalavanua, [30] the charioteer
was Silriputto, the father and mother were the royal family, the court was the
Buddha’s congregation, and the wise Miigapakkha was myself1.”
After they had come to the island of Ceylon, Elder Khuddakatisin,
a native of Mahgana, Elder Mahavariisaka, Elder Phussadeva, who dwelt
ot Kutiikamlhakara'J, Elder Maharakkbits, a native of Uparimundnka
main, Elder Muhfttiasn, a native of Bhaggari, Elder Mahftsivu, a native
of Vaiimttapabhh&ra, Elder Mahitrualiyiuleva, a native of Kujavela,- all
these elders am called tin late comers in the assembly of the Kuddftlaka
birth1, the Mugapakkliu birth1, the Ayoghara birth1', and the Hatthipfllft
birth0. Moreover Elder Mahanftga, a native of Maddha, and Elder MaU-
1 A later addition here describes how certain priests wore Inter than the others in
adopting the anodic life, in this birth, cf. Jut. iv. 490.
- Bee Bum. WO. 3 No. 70, i. p. Oil.
4 No. «18. vi. p. 1. f No. 610, iv. p. HOt. " No. 500, iv. p. 29B.

id l §
l
ATt>.
539. 19
yamakadeya, remarked on tlie day of pariuibbiina, “Sir, the assembly of
the Mtfgapakklm birth is to-day extinct.” “ Wherefore 1 ” “ X was then
passionately addicted to spirituous drink, and when T could not bring those
with me who used to drink liquor with me I was the last of all to give up
the world and become an ascetic. ’
No. 539.
MAHAJANAKA-JATAKA.
“ Who art thou, striving” etc. This story the Master, while dwolling at
Jetavana, told concerning the great Renunciation. One day the Brethren sat m
the Hall of Truth discussing the Tath&gata’s great Renunciation. The Ms :
came and found that this was their subject; so he said “ This is not the first
time that the Tathivgata performed the groat Renunciation,—ho performe 1 it
also formerly.” And herewith lie told a story of the past.
Once upon a time there was a king named Mahfijanaka reigning in
Mithilii in the kingdom of Vide ha.. He had two sons, Aritthajanaka and
Polajanaka; the elder he made viceroy and the younger commander-in­
chief. Afterwards, when Mahajanaka died, Aritthajanaka, having become
king, gave the viceroyalty to his brother. One day a slave went to the
king and told him that the viceroy was desirous to kill him. The king,
afte°r repeatedly hearing the same story, became suspicious, and had
Polajanaka thrown into chains and imprisoned with a guard in a certain
house not far from the palace. The prince made a solemn asseveration,
“If I am my brother’s enemy, let not my chains be unloosed nor the door
become opened; but otherwise, may my chains be unloosed and (lie door
become opened," and thereupon [31] the chains broke into pieces and the
door flew open, lie went out and, going to a frontier village, took tip
his abode there, M>d the inhabitants, having recognised him, waited 11)1011
him- and tin* king was unable to have him arrested. T11 course of time
he became master of the frontier district, and, having now a large folio*
,ng he said to himself, “If I was not my brother’s enemy l efure, I am
i* M 1™ « - » -» .” »»• hc « “» VHhia with a U,-g, l„»t. ,.„l
in tile outskirts of Ike city. Thu nliah.»te ln»rd tlm Fru.oo
1 , l them icined him with their elephants
Poluianaka was come, and most, of them join t
' , , : i,,,!,itaiits of other towns also gathered
and other riding animals, and ^ „ , wa„ no, yJ v „n„mv
W.lh them. So he sent a messag . the roya] umbrella up to
before but I am indeed your enemy J ^ ^ bath farewell to
mo or give? battle,w As the king wettt • k ) >

m m m / n
I I I .. % L
The Jat aha. Booh XXII.
his principal queeu. “ Lady,” lie said, “ victory and defeat in a battle
cannot be foretold,—if any fatal accident befalls me, do you carefully
preserve the child in your womb”: so saying he departed; and the soldiers
of Polajanaka ere long took his life in battle. The news of the king s
death caused a universal confusion in the whole city. The queen, having
learned that be was dead, quickly put her gold and choicest treasures into
a basket and spread a cloth on the top and strewed some husked rice over
that; and having put on some soiled clothes and disfigured her person, she
set the basket on her head and went out at an unusual time of the day,
and no one recognised her. She went out by the northern gate; but she
did not know the way, as she had never gone anywhere before and was
unable to fix the points of the compass; so since she had only heard that
there was such a city as Kajacampa, she sat down and kept asking
whother there were any people going to Kajacampa city. Now it was
no common child in her womb, but it was the Great Being re-born, after
he had accomplished the Perfections, and all Sakka’s world shook with
his majesty. Sakha considered what the cause could be, and bo reflected
that a being of great merit must have been conceived in her womb, and
that be must go and see it; so he created a covered carriage and prepared
a bed in it and stood at the door of the house where she was sitting, as if
he were ail old man driving the carriage, and he asked if any one wanted
to go to Kajacampii. “I want to go there, father.” [32] “Then mount
up into this carriage, lady, and take your seat.” “ Father, I am far gone
with child, and I cannot climb up; I will follow' behind, but give me
room for this my basket.” “What are you talking about, mother1? there
is no one who knows how to drive a carriage like me; fear not, but climb
up and sit down." By his divine power he caused the earth to rise as
she was climbing up, and made it touch the hinder end of the carriage.
She climbed up and lay down in the bed. and she knew that it must be
a god. As soon as she lay down on the divine bed she fell asleep. Sakka
at the end of thirty leagues came to a river, and he woke her, saying,
“ Mother, get down and bathe in the river; at the head of the bed there
is a cloak, put it on; and in the carriage there is a cake to eat, eat it.”
She did so and lay down again and at evening time, when she reached
Campa, and saw the gate, the.watch-tower and the walls, she asked what
city it was. He replied, “Campa city, mother.” “What sayest thou,
father? Is it not sixty leagues from our city to Campa?” “ It is so,
I Hu
mother, but know the straight road.’ then made her alight at the
southern gate; “Moiher, my village lies further on,-do you enter the
city,” so saving Sakka went on, and vanishing, departed to his own place.
The queen sat down in a certain hall. At that time a certain Brahmin,
a reciter of hymns, who dwelt at Campa, was going with his five hundred
disciples to bathe, and us he looked be saw her sitting there so fair and

'
G°^ \
1 )1
?( . <SL
\%>— -y~
. *&<$ -n .
iVo. 539. 21
comelv, and, by the power of the being in her womb, immediately as he
saw her he conceived an affection for her as for a youngest sister, and
making his pupils stay outside he went alone into the hall and asked her, ,
“Sister, in what village dost thou dwell 1” “I am the chief queen of
King Arittliajanaka in Mithila,” she said. “ Why art thou come here 1 ”
“ The king has been killed by Polajanaka, and I in fear have come here
to save my unborn child.” “Is there any kinsman of thine in this city 1 ”
“There is none, father.” “Do not be anxious; I am a Northern Brahmin
qf a great family, a teacher famed far and wide, I will watch over you as
•if ' • " were iny sister,-—call me your brother and clasp my feet and make
. ■ ud taiiientfiDon.” [33] She made a great wailing and fell at his feet
am: ,h me): ei 'doled with the other. His pupils came running up and
ask. d .on ■, i i It all meant. “This is my youngest sister, who was born
at such a time when I was away.” “0 teacher, do not grieve, now that
you have ski h-r at last.” He caused a grand covered carriage to be
brought and made her sit down in it and sent her to his own house,
bidding them tell his wife that it was his sister and that she was to do
everything that was necessary. His Brahmin wife gave her a hot water
bath and prepared a bed for her and made her lie down. The Brahmin
batlu d and cnnie home ; and at the time of the meal he bade them call his
sister and ate with her, and watched over hen* in the house. Soon after she
brought forth a son, and they called him after his grandfather’s name
Prim i Miibajanaka. As he grew up and played with the lads,—when
they used to provoke him with their own pure Khattiya birth, he would
strike them roughly from his own superior strength and stoutness of heart.
When they made a loud outcry and were asked who had struck them, they
would reply “The widow’s son.” The prince reflected “They always call
me tla widow’s son,—I will ask my mother about it”; so one day he asked
her, “ M<>iher, whose son am I?” She deceived him, saying that the
Brahmin was hi;-: father. When he beat them another day and they called
him the vi«low’s son, lie replied that the Brahmin was his father; and
when they i<ti> • cd “What is the Brahmin to you 1 ” he pondered, “ These
lad: say to nit ' What is the Brahmin to you?’ My mother will not
explain the nub ter to me. she will not tell me the truth for her own
honours sake, - come, J will make her tell it to me.” So when he was
sucking her milk la bit her breast and said to her, “Tell me who my father
is,—if you do not tell me 1 will cut your breast off.” She, being unable
tn deceive him, - , “ M.y child, you are (he sou of King Arittliajanaka of
Mithila . tliy !: •},. v was killed by Polajanaka, and I came to this city in
my oi re ti r 1 > ami the Brahmin has treated me as his sister and
t1 ken ...i Prom that time he was no longer angry when he was
‘lb i v i ;>ml before he was sixteen years old lie had learned
; .< and all the sciences; £84] a..,', by the time he was sixteen,

111
(/nsi.
22
The Jdtaka. Booh XXII.
he had become very handsome in his person. Then he thought to himself,
“ I will seize the kingdom that belonged to my father ’; so ho asked his
mother “ Have you any money in hand 1 If not, I will carry on trade and
make money and seize my father’s kingdom.” “Son, I did not come
empty-handed, I have a store of pearls and jewels and diamonds sufficient
for gaining the kingdom—take them and seize the throne; do not carry
on trade.” “Mother,” he said, “give that wealth to me, but I will only
take half of it, and I will go to Suvannabhumi and get great riches there,
and will then seize the kingdom.” He made her bring him the half, and
having got together his stock-in-trade he put it on board a ship with" lUg
merchants bound for Suvannabhumi, and bade his mother farewell, *ell.i«
her that he was sailing for that country. “My son,” she said, “the sea
has few chances of success and many dangers,—-do not go,—you have
ample money for seizing the kingdom.” But he told his mother that he
would go, -so he bade her adieu and embarked on board. That Very day
a disease broke out in Polajanaka’s body and he could not rise from his
bod. There were seven caravans with their beasts' embarked on board ;
in seven days the ship made seven hundred leagues, but having gone too
violently in its course it could not hold out:—its planks gave way, the
, water rose higher and higher, the ship began to sink in the middle of the
ocean while the crew wept and lamented and invoked their different gods.
But the Great Being never wept nor lamented nor invoked any deities, but.
knowing that the vessel was doomed he rubbed some sugar and ghee, and,
having eaten his belly-full, he smeared his two clean garments with oil and
put them tightly round him and stood leaning against the mast. When
the vessel sank the mast stood upright. The crowd on board benimo food
for the fishes and tortoises, and the water all round assumed :1m a.lour of
blood ; tout the Great Being, standing on the mast, having determined the
direction in which Mithila lay, flew up from the top of the mast, and by
his strength passing beyond the fishes and tortoises fell at the distance of
HO cubits from the ship. That very day Polajanaka died. After that
the Great Being crossed through the jewel-coloured waves, making his way
like a mass of gold, [35] he passed a week as if it had b on a day, and
when he saw the shore again he washed his mouth with salt water- and
kept the fast. Now at that time a daughter of the gods nam ul Manimekhala
hud been appointed guardian of the sea by the four guardians of the world.
They said to her, “Those beings who possess such virtu as reverence tor
tlc.il mothers and the like do not deserve to fall into ftc -hmk rat
for such”; but for those seven days she had not look.,! at the sea, fir
they say that her memory bad become bewildered in her enjoy.non. of ! >
> 1 would read .lattojnmuhaiatUiani (of. Text, iii. 2SS, 18). I tc t -wiC would
Liiriiu 700 lour,” i.c. 360 men (?).
J Heading lonodukem' ns Dr Fuunbml proposes.

111
■ (SI.
No. 539. 23
divine happiness, and others even say that she had gone to be present at
a divine assembly; at last however she had looked, saying to herself, “This
is the seventh day that I have not looked at the sea,—who is making his
way yonder?” As she saw the Great Being she thought to herself, “If
Prince Mahajanaka had perished in the sea I should [not] have kept* my
entry into the divine assembly !”.so assuming an adorned form she stood
in tire air not far from the Bodhisatta and uttered the first stanza, as she
thus tested his powers :
“ Who art thou, striving manfully here in mid-ocean far from land?
Who is the friend thou trustest in, to lend to thee a helping hand?”
The Bodhisatta replied, “This is my seventh day here in the ocean, I have
not seen a second living being beside myself,—who can it be that speaks
to me?” so, looking into the air, he uttered the second stanza:
“ Knowing my duty in the world, to strive, 0 goddess, while I can,
Here in mid-ocean far from land I do my utmost like a man.”
Desirous to hear sound doctrine, she uttered to him the third stanza:
“Here in this deep and boundless waste Where shore is none to meet the eye,
Thy utmost strivings are in vain,—here in mid-ocean thou must die.”
The Bodhisatta replied, “Why dost thou speak thus? if I perish while
I make my best efforts, 1 shall at all events escape from blame,” and he
spoke a stanza : [36]
“He who does all a man can do is free from guilt towards his kin,
The lord of heaven acquits him too and lie feels no remorse within.”
Then the goddess spoke a stanza :
“What use in strivings such as these, where barren toil is all the gain.
Where there is no reward to win, and only death for all thy pain?”
Then the Bodhisatta uttered those stanzas to shew to her her want
of discernment:
“He who thinks there is nought to win and will not battle while he may,—
Be his the blame whate’er'the loss,—’twaa his faint heart that lost the day.
Men in this world devise their plans, and do their business as seems best,—
The plans may prosper or may fail,—the unknown future shows the rest.
Seest thou not, goddess, here to-day 'tis our own actions which decide;
Drowned are the others,—I am saved, and thou art standing by my side.
So l will ever do my best to fight through ocean to the shore;
While strength holds out 1 still will strive, nor yield till 1 can strive no more.”
[37] The goddess, on hearing his stout words, uttered a stanza of praise :
“Thou who thus bravely tightest on amidst this fierce unbounded son
Nor shvinkeet from the appointed task, striving whore duty ealloth ' hoe.
Go where thy heart would have thee go, nor let nor tnulumce shall there >e. 1
1 [Prof. Cowell adds on the margin of his text: “na, or is it a question ]

I® <SL
The Jutaka. Book XXII.
> ■ ^
Then she asked him whither she should carry him, and on his answering
“to the city of Mithila,” she threw him up like a garland and seizing him
in both arms and making him lie on her bosom, she took him as if lie was
her dear child and sprang up in the air. For seven days the Bodhisatta
slept, his body wet with the salt spray and thrilled with the heavenly
contact. Then she brought him to Mithila and laid him on his right side
on the ceremonial stone in a mango grove, and, leaving him in the care of
the goddesses of the garden, departed to her own abode. Now Polajanaka
had no son: he had left only one daughter, wise and learned, named
Sivalidevl. They had asked him on his death-bed, “O king, to whom shall
we give the kingdom when thou art become a god?” and he had said,
“Give it to him who can please the princess, my daughter Sivali, or who
knows which is the head of the square bed, or who can striug the bow
which requires the strength of a thousand men, or who can draw out the
sixteen great treasures.” “ 0 king, tell us the list of the treasures.”
Then the king repeated it:
“The treasure of the rising sun, the treasure at his setting seen,
The treasure outside, that within, and that not outside nor within, [38]
At th’ mounting, at the dismounting, wlJ-pillars four, the yojana round,
'the end of th1 teeth, the end of th’ tail, the kcbuka, th’ ends of the trees,—
J he sixteen precious treasures these, and these remain, where these are found,
1 he bow that tusks a thousand men, the bod, the lady’s heart to please.”
4he king, besides these treasures, repeated also a list of others. After
his death the ministers performed his obsequies, and on the seventh day
they assembled and deliberated: “ I lie king said that we were to give the
kingdom to him who is able to please Lis daughter, but who will be able
to please her?” They said, “The general is a favourite,” so they sent
u command to him. He at once came to the royal gate and signified to
the priucess that he was standing there. She, knowing why he had come,
and. intending to try whether he had the wisdom to bear the royal umbrella,
gave command that he should corue. On hearing the command and being
desirous to please her, he ran up quickly from the foot of the staircase and
stood by her. Then to try him, she said, “Run quickly on the level
ground. He sprang forward, think!tig that he was pleasing the princess.
Sim said to him, “ Come hither.” He came up with all speed. She saw
his want of wisdom and said, “ Conte and rub my feet.” In order to please
her, he sat down and rubbed her feet. Then she struck him on the breast
with her foot and made him full on his back, and she made a sign to her
female attendants, “ Beat ^liis blind and senseless fool and seize him by
the throat anti thrust him out”; and they did so. “ Well, general?”
they said; he replied, “ Ho not mention it, she is not- a human
being.” Then the treasurer went, but f-be put him also in the same wav
to shame. So too the cashier, the keeper of the umbrella, the sword-

25
N° - 93
'SL
iUm)'/ ' "
bearer: she put them all to shame. Then the multitude deliberated and
said, “ No one can please the princess: give her to him who is able to
string the bow which requires the strength of a thousand men.” But no
one could string it. Then they said, “Give her to him who knows which
is the head of the square bed.” But no one knew it. “ Then give her to
him who is able to draw out the sixteen great treasures.” But no one
could draw them out. [39] Then they consulted together, “ The kingdom
cannot be preserved without a king; what is to be done?” Then the
family priest said to them, “ Be not anxious ; we must send out the festive
carriage, the king who is obtained by the festal carriage will be able to
rule over all I ndia.” So they agreed, and having decorated the city and
yoked four lotus-coloured horses to the festive chariot and spread a coverlet
over them and fixed the five ensigns of royalty, they surrounded them with
an army of four hosts. Now musical instruments are sounded in front of
a chariot which contains a rider, but behind one which contains none; so
the family priest, having bid them sound the musical instruments behind,
and having sprinkled the strap of the car and the goad with a golden ewer,
bade the chariot proceed to him who has merit sufficient to rule the kingdom.
The car went solemnly round the palace and proceeded up the kettle drum
road. The general and the other officers of state each thought that the car
was coming up to him, but it passed by the houses of them all, and having
gone solemnly round the city it went out by the eastern gate and passed
onwards to the park. When they saw it going along so quickly, they
thought to stop it: but when the family priest said, “Stop it not; let it go
a hundred leagues if it pleases,” the. car entered the park and went
solemnly round the ceremonial stone and stopped as ready to be mounted.
The family priest beheld the Bodhisatta lying there and addressed the
ministers, “Sirs, I see someone lying on the stone; we know not whether
he lias wisdom worthy of the white umbrella or not; if he is a being of
holy merit he will not look at us, but if lie is a creature of ill omen he will
start up in alarm and look at us trembling; sound forthwith all the musical
instruments. Forthwith they sounded the hundreds of instruments,— it
was like the noise of the sea. The Great Being awoke at the noise, and
having uncovered his head and looked round, beheld the great multitude ;
and having perceived that it must be the white umbrella which had come
to him lie again wrapped his head and turned round and lay on his loft
side. The family priest uncovered his feet and, beholding the marks, said,
“ Not to mention one continent, he is able to rule all the four,” so he bade
them sound the musical instruments again.
[4UJ The Bodhisatta uncovered his face, and having turned round lay
on his right side and looked at the crowd. The family priest, having
comforted the people, folded his hands and bent down and said, “Rise, my
lord, the kingdom belongs to tliee." “Where is the king.' ho replied.
150S0

111
(si,
26
The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
r - - ~T
“He is dead.” “Has lie left no son or brother?” “None, my lord.”
“ Well, I will take the kingdom so he rose and sat down cross-legged on
the stone slab. Then they anointed him there and then; and he was
called King Mahajanaka. He then mounted the chariot, and, having entered
the city with royal magnificence, went up to the palace and mounted the
dais, having arranged the different positions for the general and the other
officers. Now the princess, wishing to prove him by his first behaviour,
sent a man to him, saying, “ Go to the king and tell him, ‘the princess
Sivali summons thee, go quickly to her’.” The wise king as if he did not
hear his words, went on with his description of the palace,—“ Thus and
thus will it be well." Being unable to attract his attention he went away
and told the princess, “ Lady, the king heard thy words but he only keeps
on describing the palace and utterly disregards thee.” She said to herself,
“He must be a man of a lofty soul,”'and sent a second and even a third
messenger. The king at last ascended the palace walking at his own
pleasure at his usual pace yawning like a lion. As he drew near, the
princess could not stand still before his majestic bearing; and coming up
she gave him her hand to lean on. He caught hold of her hand and
ascended the dais, and having seated himself on the royal couch beneath
the white umbrella, he inquired of the ministers, “When the king died,
did lie leave any instructions with you ? ” Then they told him that the
kingdom was to be given to him who could please the princess Sivali.
“The princess Sivali gave me her hand to lean on as I came near: l have
therefore succeeded in pleasing her; tell me something else.” “He said
that the kingdom was to be given to him who could decide which was the
head of the square bed.’ The king replied, “This is hard to tell, but it
can be known by a contrivance,” so he took out a golden needle from his
head and gave it into the princess’ hand, saying, “ Put this in its place.”
111] She took it and put it in the head of the bed. Thus they also say in
the proverb ‘Shegave him a sword1 *.’ By that indication he knew which
was the head, and, as if he had not heard it before, he asked what they
were saying, and when they repeated it, he replied, “ It is not a wonderful
thing for one to know which is the head ”; and so saying, he asked if
there were any other test. “Hire, he commanded us to give the kingdom
ti, him who could string the how which required the strength of a thousand
men." When they had brought it at his order, he strung it while sittiug on
;ho bad as if it were only a woman’s bow for carding cotton3, “Tell me
something else,” he su'd. “ Jle commanded us to give the kingdom to him
who could draw out the sixteen great treasures.” “ Is there a list?” and
1 So ill the Ksthtt8ontHagfl.ru, g 72, 47,54, the snako-moiden gives the hero a sword #
and horse,
See Grierson's Bihar Peaeant Life, pp. ('-l, OB.
*

'
I I G(WI\ ' %L
No. 539. 27
they repeated the before-mentioned list. As he listened the meaning
became clear to him like the moon in the sky. “ There is not time to-day,
we will take the treasure to-morrow.” The next day ho assembled the
ministers and asked them, “ Did your king feed pacceka-buddhas ? ” When
they answered in the affirmative, he thought to himself, “‘The sun’ cannot
be this sun, but pacceka-buddhas are called suns from their likeness thereto;
the treasure must be where he used to go and meet them.” Then he asked
them, “ When the pacceka-buddhas came, where did he use to go and meet
them?” They told him of such and such a place; so he bade them dig
that spot and draw out the treasure from thence, and they did so. “When
he followed them as they departed, where did ho stand as he bade them
farewell?” They told him, and he bade them draw but the treasure from
thence, aiid they did so.. The great multitude uttered thousands of shouts
and expressed their joy and gladness of heart, saying, “ When they heard
before of the rising of the sun, they used to wander about, digging in the
direction of the actual sunrise, and when they heard of his setting, they
used to go digging in the direction of the actual sunset, but here are the
real riches, here is the true marvel.” When they said, “ The treasure
within ” he drew out the treasure of the threshold within the great gate of
the palace; “ The treasure outside,”—lie drew out the treasure of the
threshold outside; “Neither within nor without,”—he drew out the
treasure from below the threshold; [42] “ At the mounting,”—he drew
out the treasure from the place where they planted the golden ladder for
mounting the royal state elephant; “ At the dismounting,”—he drew out
the treasure from the place where they dismounted from the royal elephant's
shoulders; “The four great sdtf-pillars,”—there were four great feet, made
of soi-wood, of the royal couch where the courtiers made their prostrations
on the ground, and from under them he brought out four jars full of
treasure ; “A yojaria round,”—now a yojaua is the yoke of a chariot, so
he dug round tin' royal couch for the length of a yoke and brought out jars
of treasure from thence; “The treasure at the end of the teeth,”—in
the place where the royal elephant stood, lie brought out two treasures
from the spot in front of ‘his two tusks’; “ At the end of his tail,”—at
the place where the royal horse stood, he brought out jars from the place
opposite his tail; “In the kvbuka”; now water is called kebuka; so he
had the water of the royal lake drawn otf and there revealed a treasure',
“The treasure at the ends of the trees,”—he drew out the jars of treasure
buried within the circle of shade thrown at midday under the great »ll-
1 warden. Having thus brought out the sixteen treasures,
“was anything more, and they answered “No.” The
’ghted. The king said, “I will throw this wealth in
; so he had live halls for alms erected in the middle
.,e four gates, and made a great distribution. Then he

11—-A1\ <SL
The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
,
sent for his mother and the Brahmin from Kalacampa, ami paid them
great honour.
In the early days of his reign, King Mahajanaka, the son of Arittha-
janaka, ruled over all the kingdoms of Vidcha. “The king, they say,
is wise, we will see him,” so the whole city was in a stir to see him, and
they came from different parts with presents; they prepared a great festival
in the city, covered the walls of the palace with plastered impressions of
their hands', hung perfumes and flower-wreaths, darkened the air as they
threw fried grain, flowers, perfumes and incense, and got ready all sorts of
food to eat and drink. In order to present offerings to the king they
gathered round and stood, bringing food hard and soft, and all kinds of
drinks and fruits [43], while the crowd of the king’s ministers sat on one
side, ou another a host of brahmins, on another the wealthy merchants
and the like, on another the most beautiful dancing-girls; brahmin pane­
gyrists, skilled in festive songs, sang their cheerful odes with loud voices,
hundreds of musical instruments were played, the king’s palace was filled
with one vast sound as if it were in the centre of the Yugandhara ocean2;—
• very place which he looked upon trembled. The Bodhisatta as he sat
under the white umbrella, beheld the great pomp of glory like Sakka’s
magnificence, and he remembered his own struggles in the great ocean;
“ Courage is the right thing to put forth,—if I had not shewn courage in
the great ocean, should I ever have attained this glory?” and joy arose
in his mind as he remembered it, and he burst into a triumphant utter­
ance1. [44] He after that fulfilled the ten royal duties and ruled
righteously and waited on the pacceka-buddhas. In course of time Queen
Slvali brought forth a son endowed with all auspicious marks and they
called his name Dighavn-kumura. When lie grew up his father made
him viceroy. One day when various sorts of fruits and flowers were
brought to the king by the gardener, he was pleased when he saw them,
and shewed him honour, and told him to adorn the garden and he would
pay it a visit. The gardener carried out these instructions aud told the
king, and lie, seated on a royal elephant and surrounded by his retinue,
entered at the garden-gate. Now near it stood two bright green mango
trees, the one without fruit, the other full of very sweet fruit. As the king
had not eaten of the fruit no one ventured to gather any, and the king, as
ho rode on his elephant, gathered a fruit and ate it. The moment the
mango touched the end of his tongue, a divine flavour seemed to arise and
he thought to himself, “When i return I will eat several more”; but
when once it was known that the king had eaten of the
\
1 Jiatthatthamd'ihi, of. pistspafioangnla JIarMic. 08, 18, and
This is one of the sens between the soven concentric eire'
Hmdy, p. 12.
1 The six stanzas which follow in Hie Tali were translated in

t(S j <SL
Wo. 539. •■ 29
tree, everybody from the viceroy to the elephant-keepers gathered and ate
some, and those who did not take the fruit broke the boughs with sticks
and stripped off the leaves till that tree stood all broken and battered,
while the other one stood as beautiful as a mountain of gems. As the
king came out of the garden, he saw it and asked his ministers about it.
“ The crowd saw that your majesty had eaten the first fruit and they have
plundered it,” they replied. “ But this other tree has not lost a leaf or a
colour.” “ It has not lost them because it had no fruit.” The king was
greatly moved, “ This tree [45] keeps its bright green because it has no
fruit, while its fellow is broken and battered because of its fruit. This
kingdom is like the fruitful tree, but the ascetic life is like the barren
tree; it is the possessor of property who has fears, not he who is without
anything of his own. Far from being like the fruitful tree I will be like
the barren one,—leaving all my glory behind, I will give up the world
and become an ascetic.” Having made this firm resolution, he entered the
city, and standing at the door of the palace, sent for his commander-in-chief,
and said to him, “ O general, from this day forth let none see my face
except one servant to bring my food and another to give me water for my
mouth and a toothbrush, and do you take my old chief judges and with
their help govern my kingdom: I will henceforth live the life of a
Buddhist priest on the top of the palace.” So saying he went up to the
top of the palace alone, and lived as a Buddhist priest. As time passed on
the people assembled in the courtyard, and when they saw not the
Bodhisatta they said, “ He is not like our old king,” and theyr repeated
two stanzas:
“ Our king, the lord of all the earth, is changed from what ho was of old,
He heeds no joyous song to-day nor cares the dancers to behold;
The deer, the garden, and the swans fail to attract his absent eye,—
Silent he sits as stricken dumb and lets the cares of state pass by.”
They asked the butler and the attendant, “ Does the king ever talk to
you? “Never, they replied. Then they related how the king, with
his mind plunged in abstraction, and detached from all desires, had re-
tncnAcn .1 his old friends the pacceka-buddhas, and saying to himself,
“Who will show roe tin lwelling-plaoe of those beings free from all
attachments and possessed of virtues?” had uttered aloud his intense
feelings in three stanzas:
“ Hid from all sight, intent on Miss, freed from all bonds and mortal fears,
In whose fair gaidon, old and young, together dwell those heavenly seers?
[46] They liave left all desires behind,—those happy glorious saints I bless,
s midst, i:. world by passion tost they roam at peace and passionless.
They have, all bur-4 llm n:t of death, and the deceiver’s outspread snare,...
■ i from all ties, they roam at will,—0 who will guide me whore 1
arc ? ”

8
' G°I^X
I I I , <L
^ '^ 3 0 '
The Jat aka. Book XXII.
Four months passed as he thus led an ascetic’s life on the palace, and
at lost his mind turned intently towards giving up the world: his own
home seemed like one of the hells between the sets of worlds1, arid the
three modes of existence2 presented themselves to him as all on lire. In
this frame of mind he burst into a description of Mithila, as he thought,
“When will the time come that I shall be able to leave this Mithila,
adorned and decked out like Sakka’s palace, and go to Himavat and there
put on the ascetic’s dress 1 ”
“When3 shall I leave this Mithila, spacious and splendid though it be,
By architects with rule and lino laid out in order fhir to see,
With walls and gates and battlements,—traversed by streets on every sido,
With horses, cows, and chariots thronged, [47] with tanks and gardens
beautified,
Videha’s far-famed capital, gay with its knights and warrior swarms,
Clad in their robes of tiger-skins, with banners spread and Hashing arms,
Its brahmins dressed in Kfeyi cloth, perfumed with sandal, decked with
gems,—
Its palaces and all their queens with robes of state and diadems !
When shall I leave them and go forth, the ascetic’s lonely bliss to win,—
Carrying my rags and water-pot,—when will that happy life begin ?
When shall I wander through the woods, eating their hospitable fruit,
Tuning my heart in solitude as one might tune a seven-stringed lute4,
Cutting my spirit free from hope of present or of future gain,
As the cobbler4 when he shapes his shoe cuts off rough ends and leaves it
plain 0.”
[52] Now he had been born at a time when men lived to the age of
10.000 years; so after reigning 7,000 years he became an ascetic while
3.000 years still remained of his life: and when he had embraced the
ascetic life, be still dwelt in a house four months from the day of his
seeing the mango tree; but thinking to himself that an ascetic’s house
would be better than the palace, lie secretly instructed his attendant to
have some yellow robes and an earthen vessel brought to him from the
market. He then sent for a barber and made him cut his hair and beard;
he put on one yellow robe as Llio under dress, another as the upper, and
the third he wrapped over his shoulder, aud, having put his vessel in a
bag, he hung it on his shoulder; then, taking his walking-stick, he walked
several times backwards and forwards on the top-story with the triumphant
step of a pacceka-buddha. That day he continued to dwell there, but tlm
next day at sunrise be began to go down. The queen Sivali sent for
seven
hundred favourite concubines, and said to them, “ It is a long time,
1 See Hardy, Budhism, p. 27.
- Sc. the Kamaloka, the Kupabrahmaloka, and the ArfipubinhiMulokii
3 A long description, full of repetitions, is hero Much condensed.
4 See MahSvaffga, v 1. lfi.
4 The use of the word rathak&ra might suggest 1 wooden .'lions,' but those were
forbidden by Buddha, sec Mahnvagga, v. 6.
Of. Vol. iv. p. 1/2 (text). .

‘ G°Kf*X
539- . " 3iiS L
x iW J No-
four full months, since we last beheld the king, we shall see him to-day, do
you all adorn yourselves and put forth your graces and blandishments and
try to entangle him in the snares of passion.” Attended by them all
arrayed and adorned, she ascended the palace to see the king; [53] but
although she met him coming down, she knew him not, and thinking that
it was a pacceka-buddha come to instruct the king she made a salutation
and stood on one side; and the Bodhisatta came down from the palace.
But the queen, after she had ascended the palace, and beheld the king’s
locks, of the colour of bees, lying on the royal bed, and the articles of his
toilet lying on the royal bed, exclaimed, “That was no pacceka-buddha, it
must have been our own dear lord, we will implore him to come back”;
so having gone down from the top-story and reached the palace yard, she
and all the attendant queens unloosed their hair and let it fall on their
backs and smote their breasts with their hands, aud followed the king,
wailing plaintively, “Why dost thou do this thing, () great king 1 ” The
whole city was disturbed, and all the people followed the king weeping,
“ Our king, they say, has become an ascetic, how shall we ever find such
a just ruler again 1 ”
Then the Master, as he described the women’s weeping, and how the
king left them all and went on, uttered these stanzas :
“ There stood the seven hundred queens, stretching their arms in pleading woe,
Arrayed in all their ornaments,—‘Great king, why dost thou leave us so?’
• But leaving those seven hundred queens, fair, tender, gracious,— the great king
Followed the guidance of his vow, with stern resolve unfaltering.
' Leaving the inaugurating cup1, the old sign of royal pomp and state,
Me takc3 his earthen pot to-day, a new career to inaugurate.”
[54] The weeping Sivali, finding herself unable to stop the king, as a
fresh resource sent for the commander-in-chief and bade him kindle a fire
before the king among the old houses and ruins which lay in the direction
where he was going, and to heap up grass and leaves and make a great
smoke in different places. He did so. Then she went to the king and,
falling at his feet, told him in two stanzas that Mithila was in flames.
“ Terrible are the raging fires, the stores and treasures burn,
The silver, gold, gems, shells, and jicarls, are all consumed in turn ;
Rich garments, ivory, copper, skins,—all meet one ruthless fate;
Turn back, 0 king, and save thy wealth before it be too late.”
Tho Bodhisatta replied, “ What sayest tlmu, O queen 1 the possessions
of those who have can be burned, but I have nothing;
"We who have nothing of our own may live without a care or sigh;
Mithil&’fc palaces may burn, but naught ol mine is burned thereby2."
1 For the golden jars used at a Icing’s inauguration see Biitrmy. u. IS, Katlmsarits.
xv. 77.
2 These lines soem proverbial in various shapes, cf. Dhaintaapada, 200; Mah.ibh.
xn. 0917, C29, 6641.

(((&)}) (&T
The Jatahci. Booh XXII.
J
[55] So saying he went out by the northern gate, and his queens also
went out. The queen Slvall bade them shew him how the villages were
being destroyed and the land wasted" so they pointed out to him how
armed men were running about and plundering in different directions,
while others, daubed with red lac, were being carried as wounded or dead
on boards. The people shouted, “ O king, while you guard the kingdom,
they spoil and kill your subjects.” Then the queen repeated a stanza,
imploring the king to return :
“ Wild foresters lay waste the land,—return, and save us all ;
Let not thy kingdom, left by thee, in hopeless ruin fall.”
The king reflected, “No robbers can rise up to spoil the kingdom
while I am ruling,—this must be Slvalidevi’s invention, so he repeated
these stanzas as not understanding her:
“ Wo who have nothing of our own may live without a care or sigh,
The kingdom may lie desolate, but naught of mine is harmed thereby.
We who have nothing of our own may live without a care or sigh,—
Feasting on joy in perfect bliss like an Abhassara deity1.”
Even after he had thus spoken the people still followed. Then he said
to himself, “They do not wish to return,—I will make them go back”;
so when he had gone about half a mile lie turned back, aud standing
in the high road, he asked his ministers, “Whose kingdom is this!”
[56] “Thine, 0 king.” “Then punish whosoever passes over this line,”
so saving he drew a line across with his staff-. No one was able to violate
that line; and the people, standing behind that line, made loud lamenta­
tion. The queen also being unable to cross that line, and beholding the
king going on with his back turned towards her, could not restrain her
grief, and beat her breast, aud, falling across, forced her way over the
line. The people cried, “The line-guardians have broken the line,” and
they followed where the queen led. The Great Being went towards the
Northern Himavat. The queen also went with him, taking all the army
and the animals for riding. The king, being unable to stop the multitude,
journeyed on for sixty leagues. Now at that time an ascetic, named
Narada. dwelt in the Golden Cave in Himavat who possessed the five
supernatural faculties; after passing seven days in an ecstasy, he had
risen from his trance and was shouting triumphantly, “0 the bliss, 0 the
bliss! ” aud while gazing with his divine eve to see if there was anyone
in India who was seeking for this bliss, he beheld Mahajanaka the
potential Buddha. He thought, “The king has made the great renuncia­
tion, but he cannot turn the people back who follow headed by the queen
tSfvali,—they may put a hindrance in his way, and 1 will give him an
exhortation to confirm his purpose still more ; so by his divine power
1 For those heavenly beings, • the lhidiant one*,’ sue Humour, In trod. p. 611.

• e<w\
111 , <SL
No. 539. 33
lie stood in the air in front of the king and thus spoke, to strengthen his
resolve:
“ Wherefore is all this noise and din, as of a village holiday?
Why is this crowd assembled here? will the ascetic kindly say?”
The king replied :
“ I’ve crossed the bound and left the world, ’tis this has brought these hosts of
men ;
I leave them with a joyous heart: thou know’st it all,—why ask me then?”
[57] Then the ascetic repeated a stanza to confirm his resolve :
“Think not thou hast already crossed, while with this body still beset;
There are still many foes in front,—thou hast not won thy victory yet.”
The Great Being exclaimed :
“Nor pleasures known nor those unknown have power my steadfast soul to
bend,
What foe can stay me in my course as I press onwards to the end?”
Then he repeated a stanza, declaring the hindrances :
“ Sleep, sloth, loose thoughts to pleasure turned, surfeit, a discontented mind—
The body brings these bosom-guests,—many a hindrance shalt thou find.”
[58] The Great Being then praised him in this stanza:
“ Wise, Brahmin, are thy warning words, I thank thee, stranger, for the same;
Answer my question if thou wilt; who art thou, say, and what thy name.”
Narada replied:.
“Know I am Narada by name,—a kassapa1; my heavenly rest
I have just left to tell thee this,—to associate with the wise is best.
The four perfections exercise,—find in this path thy highest joy;
Whate’er it be thou lackest yet, by patience and by calm supply;
High thoughts of self, low thoughts of self,—nor this, nor that befits the sage;
Be virtue, knowledge, and the law the guardians of thy pilgrimage.”
Narada then returned through the sky to his own abode. After ho
was gone, another ascetic, named Migajina, who had just arisen from an
ecstatic trance, beheld the Great Being and resolved to utter an exhortation
to him that he might send the multitude awayr; so he appeared above him
in the air and thus spoke:
[59] “ Horses and elephants, and they who in city or in country dwell,—
Thou hast left them all, 0 Janaka: an earthen bowl contents thee well.
Say, have thy subjects or thy friends, thy ministers or kinsmen dear,
Wounded thy heart by treachery that thou hast chosen this refuge here?”
The Bodhisatta replied:
“ Never, 0 seer, at any time, in any place, on any plea,
Have I done wrong to any friend nor any friend done wrong to me.
' Nfuada is sometimes called the son of the Muni Kayyapa; see Wilson, fislmu
Piiruiut, Vol. ii. p. ly.
■ VI 3

{ f t ) ) ) VfiT .
kU-LJ
The JataJca. Book XXII.
T saw the world devoured by pain, darkened with misery and with sin ;
I watched its victims bound and slain, caught helplessly its toils within;
1 drew the warning to myself and here the ascetic’s life begin.1'
[60] The ascetic, wishing to hear more, asked him :
“None chooses the ascetic’s life unless some teacher point the way,
By practice or by theory: who was thy holy teacher, say.”
The Great Being replied :
“ Never at any time, 0 seer, have I heard words that touched my heart
From Brahman or ascetic lips, bidding me choose the ascetic’s part.”
He then told him at length why he had left the world :
“I wandered through my royal park one summer’s day in all my pride,
With songs and tuneful instruments filling the air on every side,
And there I saw a .Mango-tree, which near the wall had taken root,—
It stood all broken and despoiled by the rude crowds that sought its fruit.
Startled 1 left my royal pomp and stopped to gaze with curious eye,
Contrasting with this fruitful tree a barren one which grew close by.
The fruitful tree stood there forlorn, its leaves all stripped, its branches bare,
The barren tree stood green and strong, its foliage waving in the air.
[01] We kings are like that fruitful tree, with many a foe to lay us low,
And rob us of the pleasant fruit which for a little while we show.
The elephant for ivory, the panther for his skin is slain,
Houseless and friendless at the last the wealthy find their wealth their bane ;
That of my teachers from them my lesson did 1 gain.”
pair trees were,
MigSjina, having heard the king, exhorted him to be earnest and
returned to hi.s own abode.
When he was gone, Queen Slvnll fell at the king’s feet, and said:
“ In chariots or on elephants, footmen or horsemen, all as one,
Thy subjects raise a common wail, ‘Our king has left us and is gone!’
O comfort first their stricken hearts and crown thy son to rule instead ;
Then, if thou wilt, forsake the world the pilgrim’s lonely path to tread."
The Bodhisatta replied :
“ I’ve left behind my subjects all, friends, kinsmen, home and native laud ;
[62] But th’ nobles of Videha race, Dlgh&vu trained to hear command,—
Fear not, 0 queen of Mithila, they will be near to uphold thy hand.”
The queen exclaimed, “O king, thou hast become an ascetic, what am
I to do?” Then he said to her, “f will counsel thee, carry out my
words”; so lie addressed her thus:
“ If thou would’st teach ray son to rule, sinning in thought, and word and deed,
An evil ending will be thine—this is the destiny decreed;
A beggar’s portion, gained as alms, so say the wise, is all our need.”
Thus he counselled her, and while they went on, talking together, the
sun set.
The queen encamped in a suitable place, while the king went to the
root of a tree and passed the night there, and the next day, after perform
•

I f)| <SL
iVo. 539. * 35
ing Ills ablutions, went on bis way. The queen gave orders that the army
should come after, and followed him. At the time for going the round
for alms they reached a city called Thuna. At that time a man in the
city had bought a large piece of flesh at a slaughter-house and, after frying
it on a prong with some coals, had placed it on a hoard to grow cool; but
while he was busied about something else a dog ran off with it. The man
pursued it as far as the southern gate of the city, but stopped there, being
tired. The king and queen were coming up separately in front of the dog,
[63] which in alarm at seeing them dropped the meat and made off. The
C4reat Being saw this, and inflected, “ He has dropped it and gone off,
disregarding it, the real owner is uuknown, there is ?tot another piece of
offal alms so good as this: 1 will eat it’’; so taking out his own earthen
dish and seizing the meat he wiped it, and, putting it on the dish, went to a
pleasant spot where there was some water and ate it. The queen thought
to herself, “ If the king were worthy of the kingdom he would not eat the
dusty leavings of a dog, he is not really my husband ”; and she said aloud,
“O great king, dost thou eat such a disgusting morsel!” “It is your
own blind folly,” he replied, “ which prevents your seeing the especial
value of this piece of alms”; so he carefully examined the spot where it
had been dropped, and ate it as if it were ambrosia, and then washed his
mouth and his hands and feet.
Then the queen addressed him in words of blame :
“ Should the fourth eating-time come round, a man will die if still he fust;
Yet for all that tlfe noble soul would loatho so foul a mass to taste ;
This is not right which thou bast done,—shame on thee, shame, I say, 0 king ;
Eating the leavings of a dog, thou hast done a most unworthy thing.”
The Great Being replied :
“Leavings of householder or dog are not forbidden food, I Ween ;
[04] If it be gained by lawful means, all food is pure and lawful, queen.”
As they thus talked together they reached the city-gate. Some boys
were playing there ; and a girl was shaking some sand in a small winnow ing
basket. On oiie of her hands there was a single bracelet, and on the
other two; these two jangled together, the other one was noiseless. The
king saw the incident, and thought to himself, “Sivall keeps following me;
a wife is the ascetic’s bane, and men blame me and say that even when I
have left the world I cannot leave my wife ; if this girl is wise, she will be
able to tell Sivall the reason why she should turn back and leave me.
I will hear her story and send Sivall away. So he said to her:
“ Nestling beneath thy mother’s care, girl, with those trinkets on thee bound,
Why is one arm so musical while the other never makes a sound '
The girl replied :
“ Ascetic, on this hand 1 wear two bracelets last instead ut one,
’Tls from their contact that they sound,—’tin by the second this is done,
3- 3

f ( l ) ? . (C T
The Jat aka. Book XXII. .
O-Lj
"But mark this other hand of mine: a single bracelet it doth wear,
That keeps its place and makes no sound, silent because no other’s there.
The second jangles and makes jars, that which is single cannot jar;
Would’st thou be happy ? be alone; only the lonely happy are.”
[65] Having heard the girl’s words, lie took up the idea and addressed
the queen :
“ Hear what she says ; this servant girl would overwhelm my head with shame
Were I to yield to thy request; it is the second brings the blame.
Here are two paths: do thou take one, the other by myself take I ;
Call me not husband from henceforth, thou art no more my wife : goodbye. ’
The queen, on hearing him, bade him take the better path to the right,
while she chose the left ; but after going a little way, being unable to
' restrain her grief, she again came to him, and she and the king entered
the city together.
Explaining this, the Master said : “ With these words on their lips
they entered the city of Thuna.”
[66] After they had entered, the Bodhisatta went on his begging-round
and reached the door of the house of a maker of arrows, while Sivali stood
on one side. Now at that time the arrow-maker had heated an arrow in a
pan of coals and had wetted it with some sour rice-gruel, and, closing one
eye, was looking with the other while he made the arrow straight. The
Bodhisatta reflected, “ If this man is wise, he will be able to explain the
incident,—I will ask him ’; so he went up to him :
The Master described what had happened in a stanza:
“ To a fietcher’s house he came for alms; the man with one eye closed did stand,
And with the other sideways looked to shape the arrow in his hand.”
Then the Great Being said to him :
“One eye thou closest and dost gaze with the other sideways,—is this right?
I pray, explain thy attitude; thinkest thou, it improves thy sight ! ”
He replied :
“The wide horizon of both eyes serves only to distract the view ;
But if you get a single line, your aim is fixed, your vision true.
It is the second that makes jars, that which is single cannot jar;
Would’st thou be happy ? be alone; only the lonely happy are.”
[67] After these words of advice, he was silent. The Great Being
proceeded on his round, and, having collected some food of various sorts,
went out of the city, and sat down in a spot pleasant with water; and
having done all he had to do, he put away his bowl in his bag and
addressed Sivali:
“ Thou hear’st the fletcher: like the girl, he would o’erwhelm my head with
shame
Were I to yield to thy request; it is the second brings the blame.
Here are two paths: do thou take one, the other bj myself take I ;
Call me not husband from henceforth, thou art no more my wife: goodbye.”

yys& '
Go^ \
| D <SL
.vy^Jy *£
38
The Jdtcika. Booh XXII.
No. 540.
SAMA-JATAKA.
II ho, as I filled,” etc. This story the Master told at Jetavana, about a certain
pnest wh° supported his mother. They say that there was a wealthy merchant a t
’ 't'uttlu, who was worth eighteen crores ; and he had a son who was very dear and
winning to las father and mother. One day the youth went upon the terrace of the
house, and opened a window and looked down on the street; and when he saw
the great crowd going to Jetavana with perfumes and garlands in their hands to
lieai' the law preached, [6!)] he exclaimed that he would go too. So having ordered
perfumes and garlands to be brought, he went to the monastery, and having dis­
tributed dresses, medicines, drinks, etc. to the assembly and honoured the Blessed
One with perfumes and garlands, ho sat down on one side. After hearing the law,
and perceiving the evil consequences of desire and the blessings arising from
adopting the religious life, when the assembly broke up he asked the Blessed One
lor ordination, but he was told that the Tath&gatas do not ordain anyone who
lias not obtained the permission of his parents; so he went away, and lived a week
without food, and having at last obtained his parents’ consent, he returned and
begged for ordination. The Master sent a priest who ordained him : and after
he was ordained he obtained great honour and gain; he won the favour of his
teachers and preceptors, and having received full orders he mastered the law in
live years. Then lie thought to himself, “I live here distracted,—it is not
suitable for me, ’ and he became anxious to reach the goal of mystic insight; so
ing obtained instruction in meditation from his teacher, he departed to a
tier village and dwelt in the forest, and there having entered a course of
ual insight, he tailed, however much lie laboured and strove for twelve years,
tin any special idea, llis parents also, as time went on, became poor, for
,-e who hired their land or carried on merchandise for them, finding out that.
.ueie was no son or brother in the family to enforce the payment, seined Tth.it
they could lay their hands upon and ran away as they pleased, and the servant.-,
and labourers in the house seized the gold and coin and made off therewith, so
that, at the end the two were reduced to an evil plight and had not even an ewer
toi poiuing water; and at last they sold their dwelling, and finding themselves
homeless, and in extreme misery, they wandered begging for alms, clothed in
rags and carrying potsherds m their hands. Now at that time a Brother came
from .Jetavana to the son’s place of abode; he performed the duties of hospitality
and, ns he sat quietly, he first asked whence he was come; and learning that lm
was come horn Jetavana he asked after the health of the Teacher'and the
principal dimples and then asked for news of his parents, “Tell me, Sir. about
the welfare of such and such a merchant’s family inSavatthi.” “ O f iend, don’t
ask for news of that family." “ Why not, Sir ?’• “ They say that there was one
son hi that family, but he has become an ascetic under the law, and since lie left,
the world that family has gone to ruin ; and he present time the two old
people are reduced to a most lamentable state a oeg f,,r njnis » when he heard
the other’s wrords he could not remain mono von hut began to wool > with his eyes
full of tears, and when the other asked him why he wept, • O ,-sir,” he replied
“they are my own father and mother, l air their son.” “0 friend, thy father
and mother have come to ruin through thee,—do thou go and take care of them.”
“For twelve years,” he thought to himself,have laboured and striven but never
been able to attain the path or the fruit: t m u s t be incompetent: what have
I to do with the ascetic life ? 1 will bec'|>'e jl miwoholder and wall support uiv
parents and give away my wealth, air 111 ’ v'cntmii1 ■ 1 “ome dest'-ned for

• Got&x
?(f)f <SL
.w-^^ iVo. .
5 539 37
She still continued to follow him even after this speech; but she
could not persuade the king to turn back, and the people followed hei.
Now there was a forest not far off and the Great Being saw a dark tract
of trees. He was wishing to make the queen turn back, and he saw
some mufija grass near the road; so lie cut a stalk of it, and said to
her, “ See, Slvall, this stalk cannot be joined again, so our intercourse
can never be joined again’', and he repeated this half stanza; “Like
to a mufija reed full-grown, live on, 0 SivalT, alone.' ’When she heard
him, she said, “I am henceforth to have no intercourse with King
Mahajanaka”; and being unable to control her grief, she beat her breast
with both hands and fell senseless [68] on the road. The Bodhisatta, perceiv­
ing that she was unconscious, plunged into the wood, carefully obliterating
his footsteps. His ministers came and sprinkled her body with water and
rubbed her hands and feet, and at last she recovered consciousness. She
asked, “ Where is the king?” “ Do you not know 1 ” they said. “ Search
for him,” she cried. But though they ran hither and thither they saw him
not. So she made a great lamentation, and after erecting a tope where he
had stood, she offered worship with flowers and perfumes, and returned.
The Bodhisatta entered into the region of Himavat, and in the course of
seven days he perfected the Faculties and the Attainments, and he returned
no more to the land of men. The queen also erected topes on the spots
where he had conversed with the arrow-maker, and with the girl, and
where he had eaten the meat, and where he had conversed with Miga
aud with Nftrada, and offered worship with flowers and perfumes;
then, surrounded by the army, she entered Mithila and had her
coronation performed in the mango-garden, aud made him enter with i.
army into the city. But she herself, having adopted the ascetic life ot a
rishi, dwelt in that garden and practised the preparatory rites for producing
mystic meditation until at last she attained absorption and became destined
to birth in the Brahma world.
The Master, his lesson ended, said, “This is not the first time that the
TathfUrata performed the grea t Renunciation ; lie performed it also formerly. So
saying he identified the Birth : “At that time the sea-goddess was Uppalavappa
Naradft was Sariputta, Migaima was Moggallfuia, the girl was the princess
Khoina, the maker of arr- as Ananda, Slvali was the mother of Babula,
I'rincc Dlghftvu was R&bula, t, parents were the members of the royal family,
and I myself was the king Mabijjanaka.”

■ S '
( I ) <SL
Xs^ ^ / JVo. 540. ' 39
heaven.” So having determined he gave up his abode in the forest to the elder,
and the next day departed and by successive stages, readied the monastery at the
back of Jetavana which is not far from Savatthi. There he found two roads, one .
leading to Jetavana, the other to Savatthi. As he stood there, he thought, “Shall
I see my parents first or the Buddha?” Then he said to himself, “In old days I
saw my parents for a long time, from henceforth I shall rarely have the chance >.-f
seeing the Buddha; I will see the perfectly Enlightened One to-day and hear the
law, and then to-morrow morning I will see my parents.” So he left the road to
Savatthi and in the evening arrived at Jetavana. Now that very day at daybreak,
the Master, as he looked upon the world, had seen the potentialities of this
young man, and when he came to visit him he praised the virtues of parents
in the Mfitiposaka-sutta1. As lie stood at the end of the assembly of elders and
listened, he thought, “ If I become a householder 1 can supportvmy parents ; but
the Master also says, ‘ A son who has become an ascetic can be helpful ’; I went
away before without seeing the Master, and I failed in such an imperfect
ordination ; 1 will now support my parents while still remaining an ascetic without
becoming a householder.” .So he took his ticketand his ticket-food and gruel, and
felt as if he had committed a sin deserving expulsion after a solitary abode of
twelve years in the forest. In the morning he went to Savatthi and ho thought
to himself, “Shall I first get the gruel or see my parents?” He reflected that it
would not bo right to visit them in their poverty empty-handed ; so he first got
the gruel and then went to the door of their old house. When he saw them
sitting by the opposite wall after having gono their round for the alms given in
broth, he stood not far from them in a sudden burst of sorrow with.his eyes full
of tears. They saw him but knew him not; then his mother, thinking that it
was someone standing for alms, said to him, “We have nothing tit to h<> given
to you, be pleased to pass on.” When he heard her, he repressed the grief
which filled his heart and remained still standing as before with his eyes Tull of
tears, ^nd when he was addressed a second and a third time he Still continued
standing. At last the father said to thd"mother, “Go to him.: can this ho
thy son'2!” She rose and went to him and, recognising him, fell.at his feet
and lamented, and the father also joined his lamentations, and there was a loud
outburst of sorrow. To see his parents he could not control himself, but hurst
into tears; then, after yielding to his feelings, he'said, “Do not grieve, I will
[71] support you”; so having comforted them and made them drink some gruel,
ana sit down on one side, he went again and begged for some food and gave it to
them, and then went and asked for alms for himself, and having finished his
meal, took up his abode at a short distance off. From that day forward he
watched over his parents in this manner; he gave them all the alms he received
for himself, even those at the fortnightly distributions, and he went on separate
expeditions for his own alms, and ate them ; and whatever fofld he received as
provision for the rainy season ho gave to them, while ho took their worn-out
garments and dyed thony with the doors fast closed and used them himself: *
but the days were few when he gained alms and there were many when he
failed to win anything, and his inner and outer clothing became very rough. As
he watched over his parents he gradually grew very pale and thin and his friends
and intimates said to him, “Your complexion used to he bright, but now you
have become very pale,—has some illness come upon you?” He replied, “No
illness has come upon me, but a hindrance has befallen me,” and he told them the
history. “Sir,” they replied, “the Master does not allow us to waste the offerings
of the faithful, you do an unlawful act in giving to laymen the offerings of the
faithful.” When be heard this he shrank ashamed. But not satisfied with this
they went and told it to the Master, saying, “ So and so, Sir, has wasted the
offerings of the faithful and used them to feed laymen.” The Master sent for the
young man of family and said to him, " Is A f*'11® y°u, an ascetic, take the
1 Query Briilrnmna-sainyutta, ii. 1). '
2 [Reading kho for ho. Prof. Cowell, omitting (jaccha, translates: ‘Who is this
who is as ft son of your own ? ’]

r j l ,
y) a.l /p The Jdtakn. Booh XXTT.
\ *kl \ wm« -ius
offerings Of the faithful and support laymen with them?” He confessed that it
was true. Then the Master, wishing to praise what he had done and to declare
an old action of his own, said, “When you support laymen whom do you support?'’
“My parents,” he answered. Then the Master, wishing to encourage him still
more said, “Well done, well done” three times; “You are in a path which
1 have traversed before you: I in old time, while going the round for alms,
supported my parents.” The ascetic was encouraged thereby. At the request
of the Brethren the Master, to make known his former actions, told them a legend
of the olden time.
Once on a time, not far from Benares on the near bank of the river,
there was a village of hunters, and another village on the further side; five
hundred families dwelt in each. Now two hunter chiefs dwelt in the two
villages who were fast friends ; and they had made a compact in their
youth, that if one of them had a daughter and the other a son, they would
wed the pair together. In course of time [72] a son was born to the chief
in the near village and a daughter to the one in the further; the name
Dukulaka was given to the first as he was taken up when he was born
in a wrapping of fine cloth', while the second was named Parika.
because she was born on the further side of the river. They were both
fail’ to look at and of a complexion like gold ; and though they were born
in a village of hunters they never injured any living creature. When he
was sixteen years old his parents said to Dukulaka, “ 0 son, we will bring
you a bride”; but he, a pure being newly come from the Brahma world,
dosed both his ears, saying, “I do not want to dwell in a house, do not
mention such a thing”; and though they spoke three times to the same
effect, he shewed no inclination for it. Parika also, when her parents
said to her, “Our friend’s son is handsome and with a complexion like
gold, we are going to give you to him,” made the same answer and closed
her ears, for she too had come from the Brahma world. Dukulaka
privately sent her a message, “If you wish to live as a wife with
her husband, go into some other family, for I have no wish for
such a thing,” and she too sent a similar message to him. But
however unwilling they were, the parents would celebrate the marriage.
But both of them lived apart like the Archangel Brahman, without
descending into the ocean of carnal passion. Dukulaka never killed fish
or deer, he never even sold fish which was brought to him. At last his
parents said to him, “Though you are born iu a family of hunters you do
not like to dwell in a house, nor kill any living creature; what wall you
do?” “If you will give me leave,” he replied, “I will become an ascetic
this very day.” They gave them both leave at <>• c. Having bid them
farewell, they went out along the shore of t1 Ganges and entered the
Himavat region, where the river Migasammata flow's down from the
mountain and enters the Ganges ; then, leaving the Ganges, they went up
1 dnkiUa.

___
4
<SL
540. 41
ATo. J
along the Migasammata. Now at that moment Sakha's palace grew hot.
Sakka, having ascertained the reason, commanded Vissakamma, “ O Vissa-
kamma, two great beings have left the world and entered Hiiriavat, we
must find an abode for them,—go and build them [73] a hut of leaves and
provide all the necessaries of an ascetic’s life a quarter of a mile from the
river Migasammata and come back hither.” So he went and prepared
everything as it is described in the Mugapakkha Birth1, and returned to
his own home, after having driven away all beasts that caused unpleasant
noises, and having made a footpath near. They saw the footpath and
followed it to the hermitage. When Dukulaka went into the hermitage and
saw all the necessaries for an ascetic’s life, he exclaimed, “ This is a gift to
us from Sakka ”; so having taken off his outer garment and put on a robe
of red bark and thrown a black antelope-hide over his shoulder and twisted
his hair in a knot, and assumed the garb of an anchorite, and having also
given ordination to Parika, he took up his abode there with her, exercising
all the feelings of benevolence which belong to the world of sensual
pleasure3. Through the influence of their benevolent feelings all the birds
and beasts felt only kindly feelings towards each other,—not one of them
did harm to any other. Pari brings water and food, sweeps the hermitage,
and does all that has to be done, and both collect various kinds of fruits
and eat them, and then they enter their, respective huts of leaves and live
there fulfilling the rules of the ascetic life. Sakka ministers to their wants.
One day he foresaw that a danger threatened them, “They will lose their
sight,” so he went to Dukfilakaj and having sat on one side, after saluting
him, he said, “Sir, I foresee a danger which threatens you,—you must
have a son to take care of you : follow the way of the world.” “ 0 Sakka,
why dost thou mention such a thing ? Even when we lived in a house we
shrank in disgust from all carnal intercourse; can we practise it now
when we have come into the forest and are living au anchorite life here 1 ”
“ Well, if you will not do as I say,—then at the proper season touch Part’s
navel with your hand. .This he promised to do; and Sakka, after saluting
him, returned to his own abode. The Great Being told the matter to
Pari, and at the proper time he touched her navel with his hand.
Then the Bodhisatta descended from the heavenly world and entered her
womb and was conceived there. [74], At the end of the tenth month
she bore a son of golden hue, and they called his name accordingly
Suvannaaama. .(Now the Kinnari nymphs in another mountain had
nursed Pari.) The parents washed the babe and laid it down in the
different
hilt of leaves and went out to collect sorts of fruit. While
they were gone the Kiunaras took the child and washed it in their eaves,
1 [No. 530 in Westergaard’s Catalogue, but no such title occurs in our collection.
ViBsakamma however performs this duty in other Births : see iv. 303, v. 98 (trans.).J
- Ak opposed to the Brahmaloka.

(*(t)| <SL
jST^-
•- :''42 The Jcitaka. Book XXII.
and, going up to tlie top of the mountain, they adorned it with various
flowers, and made the sectarial marks with yellow orpiment, red arsenic,
and other paints, and then brought it back to its bed in the hut; and when
Pari came home she gave the child suck. They cherished him as !u; giew
up year after year, and when he was about sixteen they used to leave him
in the hut and go out to collect forest roots and fruits. The Bodhisatta
considered, “Some danger will one day happen”; he used to watch the path
by which they went. One day they were returning home at evening time
after collecting roots and fruits, and not far from the hermitage a great
cloud rose up. They took shelter in the roots of a tree and stood on an
ant-hill; and in this ant-hill a snake lived. Now water dropped from their
bodies, which carried the smell of sweat to the snakes nostrils, and, being
angry, it puffed out its breatli and smote them as they stood there, and
they both were struck blind and neither could see the other. Dukulaka
called out to Pari, “My eyes are gone, I cannot see you”; and she too made
the same complaint. “We have no life left,” they said, and they wandered
about, lamenting and unable to find the path. “ What former sin can we
have committed?” they thought. Now in former times they had been
born in a doctor’s family, and the doctor had treated a rich man for
a disease of his eyes, but the patient had given him no fee; and being
angry he had said to his wife, “ What shall we do?” She, being also angry,
had said, “We do not want his money; make some preparation and call it
a medicine and blind one of his eyes with it. He agreed and acted on hoi
advice, and for this sin the two eyes of botj) of them now became blind.
Then the Great Being reflected, “ On other days [75] ray parents have
always returned at this hour, I know not what has happened to them, I will
go and meet them ” ; so he went to meet them and made a sound. They
recognised the sound, and making an answering noise they said, in their
affection for the boy, “O Sama, there is a danger here, do not come near.”
So he held out to them a long pole and told them to lay hold of the end of
it, and thev, seizing hold of it, came up to him. Then he said to them,
“ How have you lost your sight?” “ When it rained we took shelter in the
roots of a tree and stood on an ant-hill, and that made us blind.” W hen
he heard it, he knew what had happened. “There must have been a snake
there, and in his anger he emitted a poisonous breath ”; and as he looked
at them he wept and also laughed. Then they asked him why he wept
and also laughed. “I wept because your sight is gone while you are still
young, but T laughed to think that I shall now take care of you ; do not
grieve, I will take care of you.” So he led them back to the hermitage
and he tied ropes in all directions, to distinguish the day and the night
apartments, the cloisters, and all the different rooms; and from that day
forwards he made them keep within, while he himself collected the forest
roots and fruits, and in the morning swept them apartments, ami fetched

'
(S g°)^Tx: <SL
\S5l^2^'/ iVo. 540. 43
t - : : ^
water from the Migasammatii river, and prepared their food and the water
for washing and brushes for their teeth, ancl gave them all sorts of sweet
fruits, and after they had washed their mouths he ate his own meal. After
eating his meal he saluted his parents and surrounded by a troop of deep
went into the forest to gather fruit. Having gathered fruit with a band
of Kinnaras in the mountain he returned at evening time, and having taken
water in a pot and heated it, he let them bathe and wash their feet as they
chose, then he brought a potsherd full of hot coals and steamed their limbs,
and gave them all sorts of fruits when they were seated, and at the end ate
his own meal and put by what was left. In this way he took care of lvis
parents.
Now at that time a king named Piliyakkha reigned in Benares. He
in his great desire for venison had entrusted the kingdom to his mother,
and armed with the five kinds of weapons had come into the region of
Himavat, and while there had gone on killing deer and eating their flesh,
[7(3] till he came to the river Migasammata, and at last reached the spot
where Siiraa used to come and draw water. Seeing there the footsteps of
deer he erected his shelter with boughs of the colour of gems, and taking
his bow and fitting a poisoned arrow on the string he lay there in ambush.
In the evening the Great Being having collected his fruits and put them in
the hermitage made his salutation to his. parents, and saying, “ I will bathe
and go and fetch some water,” took his pot, and surrounded by his train of
deer, singled out two, deer from the herd surrounding, and putting the jar
on their backs, leading them with his hand, went to the bathing-place. The
king in his shelter saw him coming, and said to himself, “All the time that
I have been wandering here I have never seen a man before ; is be a god
or a naga? Now if I go up and ask him, he will fly up into heaven if he.
is a god, and he will sink into the earth if he is a naga. But I shall not
always live here in Himavat, and one day I shall go back to Benares, and
my ministers will ask me whether I have not seen some new marvel in the
course, of my rambles in Himavat. If 1 tell them that I have seen such
and such a creature, and they proceed to ask me what its name was, they
will blame me if f have to answer that l do not know ) so 1 will wound it
and disable it, and then ask it. ’ In the meantime the animals went down
first and drank the water and came up from the bathing-place; and then
the Bodhisatta went slowly down iuto the water like a great elder who
was perfectly versed in the rules, and, being intent on obtaining absolute
calm, put on his bark garment and threw his deer-skiu on one shoulder
and, lifting up his water-jar, filled it and set it on his left shoulder. At
this moment the king, seeing that it was the time to shoot, lot fly a
poisoned arrow and wounded the Great .Being in the right side, and tin'
arrow weut out at the left side. The troop of deer, seeing that he was
wounded, fled in terror, but Suvannasanw, although wounded, balanced

I J P <SL
^ ^ 4 4
The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
— -p
the water-jar as well as he could, and, recovering his recollection,
slowly went up out of the water. He dug out the sand and heaped it on
one side and, placing his head in the direction of his parents’ hut, [77] he
laid himself down like a golden image on the sand which was in colour
like a silver plate. Then recalling his memory he considered all the
circumstances; “ T have no enemies in this district of Himavat, and I
have no enmity against anyone.” As he said these words, blood poured
out ot his mouth and, without seeing the king, he addressed this stanza
to him:
“ Who, as I filled my water-jar, has from his ambush wounded me,—
Brahman or Khattiya, Vessa,—who can my unknown assailant be?”
Then he added another stanza to shew the worthlessness of his flesh as
food :
“ Thou canst not take my flesh for food, thou caust not turn to use my skin ;
Why couldst thou think me worth thine aim; what was the gain thou
thougbt’st to win ! ”
And again another asking him his name, Ac. :
“ Who art thou, say,—whose son art thou ? and what name shall I call thee by ?
Why dost thou lie in ambush there? Answer my questions truthfully.”
When the king heard this, he thought to himself, “ Though he has
fallen wounded by my poisoned arrow, yet he neither reviles me nor
blames me ; he speaks to me gently as if soothing my heart,—I will go up
to him”; so he went and stood near him, saying :
“ I of the Kii.sis am the lord, King Piliyakklia named ; and here,
Leaving my throne for greed of flesh, I roam to hunt the forest deer.
Skilled in the archer’s craft am I, stout is my heart nor given to change;
No Naga can escape my shaft if once he comes within my range.”
[78] Thus praising his own merits, he proceeded to ask the other his
name and family:
“But who art thou? Whose son art thou? How art thou called? Tby
name make known ;
Thy father’s name and family,—tell me thy father’s and thine own.”
The Great Being reflected, “ If I told him that 1 belonged to the gods
or the Kinnaras, or that I was a Khattiya or of similar race, lie would
believe me; but one must only speak the truth,” so he said :
“They called me Sania while I lived,—an outcast hunter’s son am I ;
But here stretched out upon the ground in woful plight thou see’st me lie.
Pierced by that poisoned shaft of thine, I helpless lie like any deer,
The victim of thy fatal skill, bathed in my blood 1 wallow here.
Thy shaft has pierced my body through, 1 vomit blood with every breath.—
Yet, faint and weak, I ask thee still, why from thy ambush seek my death ?
Thou canst not take my flesh for food, thou canst not turn to use my skin ;
Why could’st thou think me worth thy aim ; what was the gain thou
tbought’st to win ? ”

. No. 540. * 45 u i L
When the king heard this, he did not tell the real truth, but made up
a false story and said :
“A deer had come within my range, I thought that it my prize would be,
But seeing thee it fled in fright,—I had no angry thought for thee.”
[79] Then the Great Being replied, “ What say’st thou, 0 king? In
all this Hiinavat there is not a deer which Hies when he sees me ” :
“Since ray first years of thought began, as far as memory reaches back,
No quiet deer or beast of prey has fled in fear to cross my track.
Since I first donned my dress of bark and left behind my childish days
No quiet deer or beast of prey has Hed to see me cross their ways.
Nay, the grim goblins are my friends, who roam with me this forest’s shade,—
Why should this deer then, as you say, at seeing me have fled afraid ? ”
When the king heard him, he thought to himself, “ I have wounded
this innocent being and told a lie,—I will now confess the truth.’ So he
said:
“ Sarna, no deer beheld thee there, why should I tell a needless lie 1
I was o’ercome by wrath and greed and shot that arrow,—it was I.
Then he thought again, “Suvannasama cannot be dwelling alone in this
forest, his relations no doubt live here; I will ask him about them. So
he uttered a stanza :
“Whence didst thou come this morning, friend,—who bade thee take thy
water-jar ** .
And fill it from the river’s bank and bear the burden back so far ?
[80] When he heard this, he felt a great pang and uttered a stanza,
as the blood poured from his mouth :
“ My parents live in yonder wood, blind and dependent on my care,
For their sakes to the river’s bank I came to till my water-jar. ’ ,
Then he went on, bewailing their condition :
“ Their life is but a flickering spark their food at most a week’s supply,—
Without this water which I bring blind, weak, and helpless they will die.
I reck not of the pain of death, that is the common fate of all;
Ne’er more to soe my father’s face—’tis this which doth my heart appal
Long, long, a sad and weary time my mother there will nurse her woe,
At midnight and at early morn her tears will like a river flow3.
Long, long, a sad and weary time my father there will nurse his woe,
At midnight and at early morn his tears will like a river flow.
They will go wandering through the wood and of their tarrying son complain,
Expecting still to hear my step or feel my soothing touch—in vain.
This thought is as a second shaft which pierces deeper than before,
That I, alas! lie dying here, fated to see their face no more.” i
i The Schol. explains u«a as ‘food,’-I have taken it as = ushma. [Tins is also
given as an alternative by the Scholiast. This word however occurs in Pali as «m* or
Keumfi.j
9 [This stanza is twice said.]
8 Lit. they will only grow dry as a river does.

/ssfc
' G0l^®X
<SL
\ { t%
X$.§*fc .
The Jat aka. Bool X X IT.
[81] The king, on hearing his lamentation, thought to himself, “This
man has been fostering his parents in his excessive piety and devotion to
duty, and even now amidst all his pain he only thinks of them,—I have
done evil to such a holy being,—how can I comfort him ? When. I find
my Self in hell what good will my kingdom do me? 1 will watch over his
father and mother as he watched over them ; thus his death will be
counteracted to them." Then he uttered his resolution in the following
stanzas :
“ O Sama of auspicious face, let not despair thy soul oppress,
Lo I myself will wait upon thy parents in their lone distress.
I am well practised with the bow,—my promise is a surety good,-
ril be a substitute for thee and nurse thy parents in the wood.
I’ll search for leavings of the deer, and roots and fruits to meet their need;
I’ll wait myself upon them both, their household slave in very deed.
Which is the forest where they are? Tell me, 0 Sama, for I vow
I will protect and foster them as thou thyself hast done till now.”
The Great Being replied, “ It is well, O king, then do thou foster
them,’’ so he pointed out the road to him :
“Where my head lies there runs a path two hundred bow lengths through
the trees,
’Twill lead thee to my parents’ hut,—go, nurse them there if so thou please.”
[82] Having thus shewn the path and borne the great pain patiently
in his love for his parents, he folded his hands respectfully, and made his
last request that he would take care of them :
“Honour to thee. O Kasi king, as thus thou goest upon thy way;
Helpless my parents arc and blind,—0 guard and nurse them both, 1 pray.
Honour to thee, O Kasi king,—I fold my hands respectfully,
Bear to my parents in my name tlu- message I have given to thee.”
The king accepted the trust, and the Great Being, having thus delivered
his final message, became unconscious. Explaining this, the Master said:
“When Sanaa of auspicious face thus to the king these words iiad said,
Faint with the poison of the shaft lie lay unconscious as if dead.”
Up to this point when he uttered his words he had spoken as one out
of breath; but here his speech was interrupted, as his form, heart, thoughts,
and vital powers Were successively affected by the violence of the poison.1,
his mouth and his eyes closed, his hands and feet became stiffened, and
his whole body was wet with blood. The king exclaimed, “ Till just this
moment lie was talking to me, what has suddenly stopped his inhaling and
exbaling his breath ? These functions have now ceased, his body lias
become stiff, surely Sama is now dead ” ; and being unable to control his
sorrow, he smote his head with his bauds and bewailed in a loud voice.
1 Should we not read upattitulihavangu iVc..

• G<W\
|( *))) <SL
\%>—"Vt/
N^ £ -/ iVo. 540. ' 47
Here the Master, to make the matter clearer, spoke these stanzas:
“ Bitterly did the king lament, ‘ I knew not until this befell
That I should e’er grow old or die,—I know it now, alas! too well.
All men are mortal, now I see; for even Sanrn had to die,
Who gave good counsel to the last, yea in his dying agony;
[83] Hell is my sure and certain doom,—that murdered sgint lies speechless there •
In every village all I meet will with one voice my guilt declare.
But iii this lone unpeopled wood who will there be to know my name ?
Here in this desert solitude who will remind me of my shame?’”
xNow at this time a daughter of the gods, named Bahusodarl, who dwelt
in the Gandhamadana mountain and who had been a mother to the Great
Being in his seventh existence before this one, was continually thinking of
him with a mother’s affection ; but on that clay in the enjoyment of her
divine bliss she did not remember him as usual; and her friends only said
that she had gone to the assembly of the gods [and so remained silent].
Suddenly thinking of him at the very moment when he became unconscious,
she said to herself, “What has become of my son?” and then she saw
that King Piliyakkha had wminded him with a poisoned arrow on the
bank of the Migasammata and that he was lying on a sandbank, while
the king was loudly lamenting. “If I do not go to him, my son
Suvannasama will perish there and the king’s heart will break, and Sfima’s
parents will die of hunger and thirst. But if I go there, the king will
carry the jar of water and go to his parents, and after hearing their words,
[84] will take them to their son, and I and they will make .a solemn
asseveration which shall overpower the poison in Sauia’s body, and my
son shall then regain his life and his parents their sight, and the king,
after hearing Sama’s instruction, will go and distribute great gifts of
charity and become destined for heaven; so I will go there at once.” Bo
she went, and standing unseen in the sky, by the bank of the river
Migasammata, she discoursed with the king.
Here the Master, to make the matter clearer, spoke these stanzas:
“The goddess, hidden out of sight upon the Gandhamadan mount,
L ttered these verses in his ears, by pity moved on his account;
‘ A wicked action hast thou done,— heavy the guilt which rests on thee;
Barents and son all innocent, thy single shaft hath skin the three;
Come, T will tell thee how to find a refuge from thy guilt and rest •
Nurse the blind pair in yonder wood, so shall thy sinful soul be blest.’”
When he heard her words, he believed what she said, that if he
went and supported the father and mother, he would attain to heaven ;
so he made a resolve, “ What have I to do with a kingdom ? I will go
and devote myself to nursing them.” After an outburst of weeping lie
conquered his sorrow, aud thinking that Sama was indeed dead, he paid
homage to his body with all kinds of flowers and sprinkled it with water,
aud thrice went round it, turning his right side towards it, and made his

m i, <
sl
The Jat aka. Book XXII.
obeisance at the four several points. Then he took the jar which had
been consecrated by him, he turned his face to the soutli and went on Ins
way witli a heavy heai’t.
Here the Master added this verse of explanation:
“After a burst of bitter tears, lamenting for the hapless youth, j}
The king took up the water-jar and turned his face towards the south.
[85] Strong as he was by nature, the king took up the water-jar and
resolutely forced his way to the hermitage and at last reached the door of
wise Dukula’s hut. The wise man, seated inside, heard the sound of
approaching footsteps, and, as he pondered doubtfully, he uttered these
two lines:
“Whose are these footsteps which I hear? someone approaches by this way; , ,
Tis not the sound of Sitma’s steps,■—who art thou, tell me, fc>u, pi ay.
When the king heard him, lie thought to himself, “ If 1 tell him that I
have killed his son and do not reveal my royal character, they will he \
angry and speak roughly to me, and then my anger will be roused against
them and I shall do them some outrage, and this would be sinful; but
there is no one who does not feel afraid when he hears that it is a king,
I will therefore make myself known to them so he placed the jar in the
enclosure where the Water-jar should be put, and standing in the doorway
of the hut, exclaimed :
“ I of the Kasis am the lord, King Piliyakklia named; and here,
Leaving my throne for greed of flesh, I roam to hunt the forest deer.
Skilled in the archer’s craft am I, stout is my heart nor given to change ;
No Naga can escape my shaft if once he comes within my range.
The wise man gave him a friendly greeting, and replied1 :
“Welcome, O king, a happy chance directed thee this way:
Mighty thou art and glorious : what errand brings thee, pray f
The tindook and the piyal leaves, and kasumfirt sweet,
Though few and little, take the best we have, 0 king, and eat.
And this cool water from a cave high hidden on a hill,
0 mighty monarch, take of it, drink if it be thy will.
[86] When the king heard his welcome he thought to himself, “ It
would not be right to address him at once with the bare statement that I
have just killed his son; I will begin to talk with him as if I knew
nothing about it and then tell him ”; so he said to him :
“How can a blind man roam the woods? These fruits,—who brought them
He must have had good eyes y-wis, who gathered such a varied store.”
The old man repeated two stanzas to shew the king that he and his
wife did not gather the fruit, but that their son had brought it to them :
. Repeating the four stanzas given in Vol. iv. p. 270, Vol. v. p. 171.

I I I . Vsi.
/Y y ~ ^ s \
No. 540. . 49
“ Sam a our son is young in years, not very tall but fair to the eye,
The long black hair that crowns his head curls like a dog’s tail1 naturally.
lie brought the fruit, and then went off, hastening to fill our water-jar;
He will be back here presently,—the way to the river is not far.”
The king replied :
“ Sama, that duteous son of yours, whom you describe so fair’, so good,—
I have slain him : those black curls of his are lying yonder, drenched in
blood.”
Parika s hut of leaves was close by, and as she sat there she heard the
king s voice, and went out anxious to learn what had happened, [87] and,
having gone near Dukiila by the aid of a rope, she exclaimed:
‘Hell me, Dukiila, who is this who says that Sama has been slain?
‘ Our Sama slain,’—such evil news seem to have cleft my heart in twain.
Like a young tender pepul shoot torn by tho blast from off the tree,—
Our Sama slain,—to hear such news my heart is pierced with agony.”
The old man gave her words of counsel:
“It is the king of Kasi land,—his cruel bow ha,s slain, I wot,
Our Sama by the river’s bank, but let us pause and curse him not.”
Parika replied:
“ Our darling son, our life’s sole stay, longed for and waited for so long,—
How shall my heart contain its wrath against the man who did this wrong?”
The old man exclaimed :
“A darling son, our life’s sole stay, longed for and waited for so long!
Out all the wise forbid our wrath against the doer of the wrong.”
Then they both uttered their laments, beating their breasts and praising
the Bodhisatta’s virtues. Then the king tried to comfort them:
“Weep not, I pray you, overmuch, for your loved Sama’s hapless fate;
Lo I will wait upon you both,"—mourn not as wholly desolate ;
I am well practised with the bow, my promise is a surety good,
Lo I will wait upon you both and nurse you in this lonely wood.
PH search for leavings of the deer, and roots and fruits for all your need ;
Lo L will wait upon you both, your household slave in very deed.”
[88] They remonstrated with him :
“ This is not right, G king of men, this would be utterlv unmeet;
Thou art our lord and rightful king: here we pay homage to thy feet.”
When the king heard this he was glad. “A wonderful thing,” he
thought, “ they do not utter one harsh word against me who have committed
such a sin, they only receive me kindly ”; and he uttered this stanza :
“Ye foresters, proclaim the right, this welcome is time piety;
Thou art a father from henceforth, and thou a mother unto me.”
1 Cf. Hifcop, n. 136. “ Even whilst being raised to honour, a bad man invariably
reverts to His natural habit; as a dog’s tail, after all the expedients of sudorifics and
unguents, remains curled.” I read sunagga-.
i. Vi. 4

-------->
t(S )| ' <SL
X''^!!j^5 0 The JdtaJca. Booh XXII.
_____i-----------—--------------------------- " "
They respectfully raised their hands and made their petition, “We
have no need of any act of service from thee, but guide ns, holding out the
end of a staff, and show us our Sam a,” and they uttered this couplet of
stanzas :
“ Glory to thee, 0 Kasi-king who art thy realm’s prosperity,
Take us and lead us to the spot where Sama, our loved son, doth he.
There fallen prostrate at his feet, touching his face, eyes, every limb ,
We will await the approach of death, patient so long as near to him.
[89] While they were thus speaking, the sun set. Then the king
thought, “If I take them there now, their hearts will break at the sight;
and if three persons thus die through me I shall certainly he down in heli,
__therefore I will not let them go thither”; so he said these stanzas :
“A region full of beasts of prey, as though the world’s extremest bound,—
’Tis there where Sama lies, as if the moon had fallen on the ground.
A region full of beasts of prey, as though the world’s extremest bound,—
Wh there where Sama lies, as if the sun had fallen on the ground.
At the world’s furthest end he lies, covered with dust and stained with blood;
Stay rather in your cottage here nor tempt the dangers of the wood.
They answered in this stanza to shew their fearlessness:
“ Let the wild creatures do their worst,—by thousands, millions, let them swarm,
We have no fear of beasts of prey, they cannot do us aught of harm.
So the king, being unable to stop them, took them by the hand and led
them there.
[90] When he had brought them near, he said to them, “This is your
son.” Then his father clasped his head to his bosom and his mother his
feet, and they sat down and lamented.
The Master, to make the matter clear, spoke these stanzas' :
“ (Covered with dust and pierced to th’ heart, beholding thus their Sama lie
Prostrate as if a sun or moon had fallen earthward from the sky,
The parents lifted up their arms, lamenting with a bitter cry.
‘0 Sama, ait thou fast asleep? art angry? or are we forgot?
Or say, has something vexed thy mind, that thou best still and answerest not (
Who will now dress our matted locks and wipe the dirt and dust away,
When Sama is no longer here, the i>oor blind couple’s only stay?
•Who now will sweep the floor for us, or bring us water, hot or cold?
Who fetch us forest roots and fruits, as we sit helpless, blind, and old .
1 If I follow the schol. who seems to connect bhujn with bkunjati. But could the
words mean “ beating our faces, arms and eyes’’ ? Sumh, tumbh mean 1 to strike. Cf.
’gm ‘to hurt.’ [The rendering in the text is clearly right; ‘his’ not ‘our’: but
there is nothing to give a clue to the sense of lafoumbhamdna except the scholiast’s
note ‘ vattenta.’l , ....
* I have omitted some of these stanzas, as they are fuU of repetitions.

|(¥)| * <SL
tfo. 540. 51
[91] After long lamentation the mother smote her bosom with her
hand, and considering her sorrow carefully, she said to herself, “This is all
mere grief for my son,—he has swooned through the violence of the poison,
1 will perform a solemn asseveration of truth to take the poison from him ”;
so she performed an act of truth and repeated the following stanzas :
“ If it be true that in old days Sama lived always virtuously,
Then may this poison in his veins lose its fell force and harmless be.
If in old days he spoke the truth and nursed his parents night and day,
Then may this poison in his veins be overpowei’ed and ebb away.
Whatever merit we have gained in former days, his sire and I,
May it o’erpower the poison’s strength and may our darling son not die1 *.”
[92] When his mother had thus made the solemn asseveration, Sama
turned as he lay there. Then his father also made his solemn asseveration
in the same words; and while he was still speaking, Sama turned round
and lay on the other side5.
Then the goddess made her solemn asseveration. The Master in
explanation uttered these stanzas:
“The goddess hidden out of sight upon the Gandhamfidan mount
Performed a solemn act of truth, by pity moved on Sama’s count;
‘Here in this Gandhamaclan mount long have I passed my life alone,
I n ■ forest depths where every tree beareth a perfume of its own,
inhabitants
And none of earth’s is dearer to my inmost heart,—
As this is true so from his veins may all the poison’s power depart.’
While thus in turn by pity moved they all their solemn witness bore,
Lo in their sight up Sama sprang, young, fair, and vigorous as before.”
Thus the Great Being’s recovery from his wound, the restoration of
both his parents’ sight, and the appearance of dawn,—[93] all these four
marvels were produced in the hermitage at the same moment by the
goddess’s supernatural power. The father and mother were beyond measure
delighted to find that they had regained their sight and that Sama was
restored to health. Then Sama uttered these stanzas:
“ I am your Sama, safe and well,’-—see me before you and rejoice:
Dry up your team and weep no more, but greet mo with a happy voice.
Welcome to thee too, mighty king, may fortune wait on thy commands ;
Thou art our monarch: let ns know what thou desirest at 'our hands.
Tindukas, piyals, madhukas, our choicest fruits we bring our guest,—
Fruits sweet as honey to the taste,—eat’ whatsoe’er may please thee best.
Here is cold water, gracious lord, brought from the oaves in yonder hill,
The mountain-stream best quenches thirst,-—if thou art thirsty, drink thy fill3 *.”
The king also beholding this miracle exclaimed:
“ I am bewildered and amazed, which way to turn I cannot tell,
An hour ago I saw thee dead,—who now stand here alive and well! ’
1 [Here eight stanzas have been compressed into three.]
- [The prose narrative is often repeated in verse, as it iR heie. Such repetitions
have generally been omitted.] 8 l^ee ft^ove’ P-
4-55

(
\
v \
\ MNM4 -W
S A. / ' The Jdtaka. Booh XXII. ^
K /
|I _jJt
—~—'
Sama thought to himself, “ This king looked upon me as dead, I will
explain to him my being alive ”; so he said :
“A man possessed of all his powers, with not one thought or feeling fled,
Because a swoon has stopped their play, that living man they think is dead.”
Then being desirous to lead the king into the real meanmg of the
whole matter, he added two stanzas to teach him the Law:
[94] “Those mortals who obey the Law and nurse their parents in distress,
The gods observe their piety and come to heal their sicknesses.
Those mortals who obey the Law and nurse their parents in distress,
The gods in this world praise their deed and in the next with heaven them bless.”
The king, on hearing this, thought to himself, “This is a wonderful
miracle : even the gods heal him who cherishes his parents when he falls
into sickness; this Sama is exceeding glorious ” ; then he said :
“I am bewildered more and more, which way to turn I cannot see,
Sama, to thee I fly for help, Sama, do thou my refuge be.”
Then the Great Being said, “ O king, if thou wishest to reach the world
of the gods and enjoy divine happiness there, thou must practise these ten
duties,” and he uttered these stanzas concerning them :
“ Towards thy parents first of all fulfil thy duty, warrior king;
Duty fulfilled in this life here to heaven hereafter thee shall bring1.
Towards thy children and thy wife, fulfil thy duty, warrior king;
Duty fulfilled in this life here to heaven hereafter thee shall bring.
Duty to friends and ministers, thy soldiers with their different aims,
To townships and to villages, thy realm with all its subject swarms,
To ascetics, Brahman holy men. duty to birds and beasts, 0 king,
Duty fulfilled in this life'here to heaven hereafter thee shall bring.
Duty fulfilled brings happiness,—yea Indra, Brahma, all their host,
By following duty won their bliss: duty pursue at any cost.”
[95] The Great Being, having thus declared to him the ten duties of a king,
gave him some still further instruction, and taught him the five precepts.
The king accepted the teaching-with bended head, and, having reverentially
taken his leave, went to Benares, and, after giving many gifts and per­
forming many other virtuous actions, passed away with his court to swell
the host of heaven. The Bodhisatta also, with his parents, having attained
the supernatural faculties and the various degrees of ecstatic meditation,
went to the Brahma world.
m
After the lesson, the Master said, “ 0 Brethren, it is an immemorial custom
with the wise to support their parents.” He then declared the truths (after which
the Brother attained to the Fruit of the First Path) and identified the Birth: “At
that time the king was Ananda, the goddess was Uppalavanna, Sakka was
Anuruddha, the father was Kassapa, the mother was BhaddakapilanI, and
Suvannasanm was I myself.”
1 [Soo Vo), v. p. 123 (text), Mahftvagga, t. 281.]
Uk]'

- GOlfeX *
»(S)i '( .
at
No. 541. 53
Ho. 541 \
NIMI-JATAKA.
“Zo these grey hairs" etc. This story the Master told while dwelling in
Makhadeva 8 mango park, near MithilS, about a smile. One day at eventide, the
Master with a large company of Brethren was walking up and down in this
mango park, when he espied a pleasant spot. Being desirous of telling his
behaviour in former times, he allowed a smile to be seen on his face. When
asked by the Beverend Ananda why he smiled, he answered, “ In yonder spot,
Ananda, I once dwelt, deep in ecstatic meditation, in the time of King
Makhadeva.” Then at his request, he sat down upon an offered seat, and told a
story of the past.
Once upon a time, in the kingdom of Videha, and in the city of Mithila,
a certain Makhadeva was king". Four and eighty thousand years ho took
bis pleasure as a young man, four and eighty thousand years he was
viceroy, eighty and four thousand years lie was king.
Now he told bis barber to be sure to inform him as soon as ever he
should see grey hairs on his head. When by and by the barber saw grey
hairs, and told him, he made the man pull them out with a pair of tongs,
and to lay them upon his hand, and seeing death as it were clinging to his
forehead, [96] “now,” tliiuks he, “is the time for me to leave the world.”
So he gave the barber his choice of a village, and sending for his eldest
son, he told him to undertake the government, since he was himself about
to renounce the world. “ Why, ray lord ? ” asked he. The king replied :
“Lo these grey hairs that on my head appear
Take of my life in passing year by year :
They are Gad’s messengers, which bring to mind
The time I must renounce the world is near.”
With these words he made his son king with the ceremonial sprinkling,
and leaving him directions to act thus and thus, he left the city ; and1
embracing the life of a Brother, through eighty-four thousand years he
fostered the Four Excellencies, aud he was then reborn in Brahma’s heaven.
His son also, in like manner, renounced the world, and became'
destined to Brahma’s heaven. So also his son again; and so oDe royal
prince after another, to the number of eighty and four thousand less t wo—
each as he saw a white hair in his head became an ascetic in this mango
park, and fostered the Four Excellencies, and was born in Brahma’s
1 No. 511 was not amongst Prof. Cowell’s MSS.
- See No. <J. Vol. i. p. 137 (trans. p. 30). See also note i. 33 brans.
\

/VV—~s?v\
<SL
% $ %
^^''^54 ,. The Jataka. Booh XXII.
heaven. The first of all this line to be there born, King Ma.kha.deva,
standing in Brahma’s heaven looked down upon the fortunes of his family,
and was glad at heart to see that four and eighty thousand princes less
two had renounced the world. He pondered: “Will there be nirvana
now, or not % ” Seeing that there would not, he resolved that he and no
other must round off his family. Accordingly, he came from thence and
was conceived in the womb of the king’s consort in Mithila city. On his
name-day, the soothsayers looking at his marks, said, “Great king, this
prince is born to round off your family. This your family of hermits will
go no further.” Hearing this, the king said, “The boy is born to round
off my family like the hoop of a chariot-wheel! ” so he gave him the
name of Nemi’-Kumara, or Prince Hoop.
From his childhood upwards, the boy was devoted to giving, to virtue,
to keeping the sabbath vow. Then his father, as usual, saw a white hair,
gave a village to his barber, made his son king, became a hermit in the
mango park, and was destined for Brahma’s heaven. King Nimi, in his
devotion to almsgiving, made five almshalls, one at each of the four gates
of the city, and one in the midst of it, and [97] distributed great gifts: in
each of the almshalls he distributed a hundred thousand pieces of money,
that is five hundred thousand each day; continually he kept the Five
Precepts; on the moon-days8 he observed the sabbath; he encouraged the
multitude in almsgiving and good works; he pointed out the road to
heaven, and affrighted them with the fear of death, and preached the Law.
They abiding by his admonitions, giving gifts and doing good, passed away
one after another and were born in the world of gods : that world became
full, hell was as it were empty. Then in the Heaven of the Thirty-
three, the company of gods assemtiled in feudhamma the divine hall oi
assembly, crying aloud—“ Hail to our teacher, King Nimi! By his doing,
by the knowledge of a Buddha, we have attained to this divine enjoyment
infinite ! ” Thus they sang the virtues of the Great Being. Even in the
world of men that sound of praise was spread, as oil spreads over the
surface of the great deep.
The Master explained this to the assembled Brethren in the following
. lines:
“ It was a marvel in the world how good men did arise
In the days of good King Nimi, the worthy and the wise.
Alms gave Videha’s monarch, the conqueror oi his foes ;
AikKih ho gave in charity, this thought m him arose:
‘Which is more fruitful-holy life or giving alms! who knows3 i
At that moment Sakka’s throne became hot. Sakka pondering the
1 Sic, but below, Nimi.
3 The scholiast says that this doubt occurred to him in the night, and that he could
not decide.

t(f)f . <SL
iVo. 541. 55
reason, saw him reflecting there. [98] “I will solve the question,” he
said; and going about, and swiftly, he made the palace one blaze of light,
and entering the chamber, stood there glowing; and at the king’s request,
made all clear.
To explain this, the Master said:
“The mighty monarch of the gods, he of the thousand eyes,
Perceives his thought; before his light away the darkness flies.
Great Nimi spake to Vasava, and all his flesh did creep:
‘Who art thou? or a demigod or Sakka’s self must be:
dor I have never seen or heard such glory as I seg.’
1 hen V asava to Nimi spake, knowing his flesh did creep:
‘ Sakka, the king of gods, I am ; to visit you Fin here ;
Ask what you will, O king, and let your flesh not creep for fear.’
Then Nimi spake to Vasava, this invitation made:
‘Most puissant lord of all that breathe, this question solve for me:
Holy to live, or alms to give, which should more fruitful bo i ’
Then Vasava to Nimi spake, solving his question so,
And told the fruit of holy life to him who did not know :
‘ He’s bom a Khattiya, who lives holy in the third degree :
A god, the middle; and the first brings perfect purity.’
Not easy are these states to win by any charity,
Which hermits who have left t. world win by austerity.”
[99] By these verses he illustrated the great fruitfulness of a holy life,
and then recited others, naming the kings who in times past had been
unable to get beyond the domain of sense by giving great gifts :
“Dudlpa, Sagara, Sela, Mucalinda, Bhaglrasa,
Usinara and Atthaka, Assaka, and Puthujjana, \
Yea, kings and brahmins, Khattiya chiefs, many and many a one,
For all their sacrifice, beyond the Peta world came none.”
Having thus explained how much greater was the fruitfulness of holy
life than that of almsgiving, he described those ascetics who by the holy
life had passed the Peta \Vorld to be born in Brahma’s heaven, and said:
“These holy hermits who had left the world,
Seven sages, passed beyond : Yamahanu,
Sdmayaga, Manojava, Samudda,
Magha, and Bharata, and Kiilikara:
Four others : Kassapa, Anglrasa,
Akitti, Kisavaccha, these besides.”
[100] So far, he described by tradition the great fruit of a holy life;
but now he went on, declaring what he had himself seen : ■
“Slda’s a river in the north, uunavigable1, deep:
About it, like a fire of reeds, blaze golden mountains steep,
1 “Because,” quoth the scholiast, “the water is so delicate, that even a peacock’s
feather will not float, but sinks to the bottom.”

f(S)|
<SL
The Jatcika, Book XXII.
,
With creepers filled and fragrant plants river and hills as well.
Thereby ten thousand eremites once on a time did dwell.
Noble am I, who kept the vow of temperance, self-control,
Almsgiving: solitary then tended1 each stedfast soul.
Caste or no caste, the upright man I would attend at need :
For every mortal man is bound by his own act and deed.
Apart from righteousness, all castes are sure to sink to hell:
All castes are purified if they are righteous and act well/’
[102] After this, he said: “But, great king, although holy living is
more fruitful by far than almsgiving, yet both these are the thoughts of
great men: do you be watchful in both, give alms and follow virtue.” With
this advice, he went to his own place.
Then the company of gods said : “ Sire, we have not seen you lately ;
where have you been ? ” “ Sirs, a doubt arose in the mind of King Nimi
at Mithila. and I went to resolve the question, and to place him beyond
doubt.” And then he described the occurrence in verse :
“ Listen to me, Sirs, one and all that here assembled be :
Men who are righteous differ much in caste and quality.
There is King Nimi, wise and good, the better part who chose—
King of Videha, gave great gifts, that conqueror of his foes;
And as these bounteous gifts he gave, behold this doubt arose :
‘Which is more fruitful—holy life or giving alms? who knows?’”
[103] So he spoke, without omission, telling the king’s quality. This
made the deities long to see that king; and they said, “Sire, King Nimi
is our teacher; by following his admonitions, by his means, we have
attained to the joy of godhood. We wish to see him—send for him, Sire,
and show him to us!” Sakka consented, and sent Matali: “Friend
Matali, yoke my royal car, go to Mithila, place King Nimi in the divine
chariot and bring him here.” Matali obeyed and departed. Whilst Sakka
was talking with the gods, and giving liis orders to Matali, and sending
his chariot, one month had past by men’s reckoning. So it was the holy
day of the full moon : King Nimi opening the eastern window was sitting
on the upper floor, surrounded by his courtiers, contemplating virtue; and
just as the moon’s disk rose in the east this chariot appeared. The people
had eaten their evening meal, and sat at their doors talking comfortably
together. “Why, there are two moons to-day!” they cried. As they
gossiped, the chariot became plain to their view. “No, it is no moon,”
they said, “but a chariot!” In due course there appeared Mfl,tali’s team of
a thousand thoroughbreds, and the car of Sakka, and they wondered whom
that could be for? Ah, their king was righteous; for him Sakka’s divine
1 The scholiast adds upatthahim to complete the construction. He adds a long
dull story to explain how this came about. This stanza iB quite as abrupt in the
original.

<SL
iVo.. 541. 57
car must be sent; Sakka must wish to see their king. So iii delight they
cried out:
“ A marvel in the world, to make one shiver with delight:
For glorious Yideha comes the car divine in sight! ”
As the people talked and talked, swift as the wind came Matali, who
turned the chariot, and brought it to rest out of the way by the sill of the
window, and called on the king to enter.
[104] Explaining this, the Master said :
“ The mighty Matali, the charioteer
Of heaven, summoned now Videha’s king
Who lived in Mithila : ‘ Come, noble king,
Lord of the world, upon this chariot mount:
Indra and all the gods, the Thirty-three, ■
Would see you, waiting in Sudhamma Hall.’”
The king thought, “ I shall see the gods’ dwelling-place, which I never
have seen; and I shall be showing kindness to Matali,” so he addressed
his women and all the people, and said—“In a short time I shall return :
you must be watchful, do good and give alms.” Then he got into the car.
The Master said, to explain this1:
“Then with all speed, Videha’s king arose,
And went towards the chariot, and got in.
When he was in it, Matali thus spoke :
‘By which road shall I take you, noble king 1
Where dwell the wicked, or where dwell the good?’”
At this the king thought—“I have never seen either of these places
before, and I should like to see both.” He answered :
“ Matali, charioteer divine, both places I would see:
Both where the righteous men abide, and where the wicked be.”
Matali thinking, “ One cannot see both at once; I will question him,”
recited a stanza : *
“ V\ hich first, great monarch, noble king—which place first would you see,
That where the righteous men abide, or where the wicked be 1 ”
[105] Then the king, thinking that go to heaven he would in any
case, and that he might as well choose to see hell2, recited the next stanza:
“ I’d see the place of sinful men ; please let me go to hell;
Where they who once did cruel deeds and where the wicked dwell.”
Then he just.showed him Yetaranl3, the river of hell.
To explain this, the Master said:
“ Matali showed the' king VetaranI,
A river stinking, full of corrosive brine,
Hot, covered all with burning flames of fire.”
1 The composite character of the following episode is clear.
2 With the description of hell compare Vol. v. p. 266 ff. (translation, p. 137 IT.),
Mahavastu, i. 9ff., 16 ff., Qiksiisamuccaya, p. 75 S.
3 The scholiast gives a long description of the horrors of this region.

' eot$©\
f(S)| - <SL
The Jataka. .Book XXII.
The king was terrified when he saw creatures thus sorely tormented in
VetaranI, and he asked Matali what sins they had done. Matali told him.
This the Master explained:
“Then Nimi, when he saw the people fall
In this deep river-flood, asked Matali
[106] ‘Pear comes on me to see it, charioteer:
Tell me, what is the sin these mortals did
Who are cast in the river?’ He replied,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘Who in the world of life are strong themselves,
Yet hurt the weak, oppress them, doing sin,.
These cruel creatures begat sin, and they
Are cast into the stream VetaranI.’ ”
Thus did Matali answer his question. And when the king had seen
the hell VetaranI, he caused this place to disappear, and driving the chariot
onwards showed him the place where they are torn by dogs and other
beasts. He answered the king’s question as follow’s.
This the Master explained:
“‘Black dogs and speckled vultures, flocks of crows
Most horrid, prey upon them. When I look,
Fear seizes on me. Tell me, Matali,
What sin have these committed, charioteer,
Whom ravens prey on?’ Matali replied.
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘These are the churls, the misers, foul of tongue
To brahmins and ascetics, that do hurt;
These cruel creatines begat sin, and they
Are those you see of ravens here the prey.’ ”
[107] His other questions are answered in the same way.
“‘Their bodies all ablaze they lie prostrate,
Pounded with red-hot lumps : when I behold,
Fear seizes on me. Tell me, Matali,
What sins have these committed, charioteer,
Who lie there beaten with the red-hot lumps?’
Then Matali the charioteer replied,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘These hi the world of life were sinful men,
Who hurt and did torment those without sin,
Both men and women, sinful as they were.
These cruel creatures begat sin, and they
Now lie there beaten with the red-hot lumps.’
‘Others lie struggling in a pit of coals,
Roaring, them bodies charred: when I behold,
[108] Fear seizes on me: tell me, Matali,
What sin have these committed, charioteer,
Who he there struggling in the fiery pit?’
Then Matali the charioteer replied,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘These are they who before a crowd of men
Suborned a witness and forswore a debt;
And thus destroying people, mighty -ang,
These cruel creatures begat sin, uud they
Lie there now struggling m the pit of coals.

59
IJliJ. *>•5«- t oL
‘Blazing and flaming, all one mass of fire,
I see an iron cauldron, huge and great:
Fear comes upon me, as I look upon it.
Matali, tell me, charioteer divine—
‘What sin these mortals did, that here headfirst
They’re east into the iron cauldron huge ? ’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘Whoso has hurt a brahmin or ascetic,
Foul men of sin, and he a virtuous man,
Those cruel creatures begat sin, and they
Now headlong fall into the iron bowl.’
[109] ‘They wring them by the neck and cast them in,
Filling the cauldron full of boiling water!
Fear seizes on me: toll me, Matali, ,
What sin has been committed by those mortals,
That with their heads all battered, there they lie?’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘ These are the wicked men who in the world
Caught birds, and did destroy them, mighty king ;
And thus, destroying other creatures, they
By these their cruel acts gave rise to sin,
And they lie yonder, with their own nocks wrung.’
‘There flows a river, deep, with shallow banks.
Easy of access: thither go the men,
Scoreht with the heat, and drink : but as they drink,
The water turns to chaff1 ; which when I see,
Fear seizes on mo. Tell me, Matali,
What sin has been committed by those mortals,
That as they drink, the water turns to chaff?’
[110] Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘These men are they who mixt good grain with chaff',
And sold it to a buyer, doing ill;
Therefore now scoreht with heat and parcht with thirst,
Even as they drink, the water turns to chaff'.’ *
‘With spikes and spears and arrowheads they pierce
Those loudly-wailing folk on either side:
Fear seizes on me : tell me, Matali,
What sin has been committed by those mortals,
That they lie yonder riddled with the spears?’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘These in the world of life were wicked men
Who took what was not theirs, and lived upon it_
Goats, sheep, kine, bulls, corn, treasure, silver, gold:
These cruel creatures begat sin, and they
Now yonder lie all riddled with the spears.’
[111] ‘Who are these fastened by the neck I see,
Some cut to pieces, others all to-torn :
Fear seizes on me : tell me, Matali,
What sin has been committed by those mortals,
That they lie yonder torn in little bits.
1 “ And all blazes up” '• Bohol.

1(f)! (si
The Jataka. Booh XXII.
k ^ J
, Then answered Mg,tali the charioteer,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘ Fishers and butchers, hunters of tho boar,
Slayers of cattle, bulls, and goats, who slew
And laid the corpses in the slaughter-house,
These cruel creatures begat sin, and they
Are lying yonder torn in little bits.’
‘Yon lake of filth and ordure, stinking foul,
With evil scent unclean, where starving men
Eat of the contents ! this when I behold,
Fear seizes on me : tell me, Matali,
What sin has been committed by those mortals,
Whom there I see devouring dirt and filth ?'
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘ These are malicious persons1, who, for hurt
Of others, lived with them, and harmed their friends :
[112] These cruel creatures begat sin, and now,
Poor fools, they have ordure and filth to eat.’
‘Yon lake is full of blood, and stinking foul,
With evil scent unclean, where scorcht with heat
Men drink the contents ! which when I behold,
Fear seizes on me ; tell me, Matali,
What sin has been committed by those mortals,
That they must now drink of the draught of blood !
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘ They who have slain a mother or a father,
Whom they should reverence; excommunicate
These cruel creatures begat sin, and they
Are those who youder drink the draught of blood.’
‘That tongue see, pierced with a hook, like as a shield
Stuck with a hundred barbs ; and who are those
[113] Who struggle leaping like a fish on land,
And roaring, drabble spittle ? when I see it,
Fear seizes on me : tell me, Matali,
What sin has been committed by those mortals,
Whom I see yonder swallowing the hook ? ’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘These men are they who in the market-place
Haggling and cheapening from their greed of gain
Have practised knavery, and thought it hidden,
Like one that hooks a fish : but for the knavo
There is no safety, dogged by all his deeds :
These cruel creatures begat sin, and they
Are lying yonder swallowing the hook.’
‘Yon women, bent and broken, stretching their arms
And wailing, wretched, smeared with stains of blood,
Like cattle in the shambles, stand waist-deep
buried in earth, the upper trunk ablaze !
[114] Fear seizes on me: tell me, Matali,
What sin has been committed by those women,
That now they stand all buried in the earth
Waist-deep, the upper trunk a mass ot name .
* karanika: ■ kuranakavaka.’ The small St Petersburg Dictionary gives -Lehrer’
as ono meaning of it. There is nothing more to guide us.

No. 541. 61 iS L i
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘They were of noble birth when in the world,
Lived lives unclean, did deeds of wickedness,
Were traitors, left their husbands, and besides
Did other things to satisfy their lust;
They spent their lives in dalliance; therefore now
Stand blazing, waist-deep buried in the earth.’
‘Why do they seize yon persons by the legs
And cast them headlong into Naraka1 ?
Fear seizes on me : tell me, Matali,
[115] What sin has been committed by those men,
That they are so hurled headlong into Naraka?’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘ These in tho world did evil, did seduce
Another’s wife, stole his most precious thing,
Ho now are headlong cast in Nai’aka.
They suffer misery for countless years
In hell; there is no safety for the sinner,
But he is ever dogged by his own deeds.
These cruel creatures begat sin, and they
Are now cast headlong into Naraka.”’
With these words, Matali the charioteer made this hell to disappear
also, and driving the chariot onwards, showed him the hell of torment for
heretics. On request he explained it to him.
“ ‘ Many and various causes I have seen
Most terrible, amongst these hells : to see them
Fear seizes on me: tell me, Matali,
What sin has been committed by those mortals,
Why they must suffer this excessive pain,
So sharp, so cruel, so intolerable?’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how sin ripens and bears fruit:
‘ Who in the world were wicked heretics,
Who put their faith in false delusion,
Made proselytes of others to their heresy,
[116] They by their heresy begetting sin
Must therefore suffer this excessive pain,
So sharp, so cruel, so intolerable.’”
Now in heaven the gods were sitting in Sudhamma Hall, looking for
the king’s coming. “Matali is a long time away,” thought Sakka; and
he perceived the reason, so he said, “ Matali is going the round as guide,
showing all the different hells to the king and telling him what sin led to
each hell. So calling to him a young god, very swift, he said to him—
“ Go tell Matali to bring the king quickly hither. He is using up King
Nimi’s life; he must not go round all the hells.” With speed the young
god went, and gave his message. When Matali heard it, he said, “We
must not delay”; then showing to the king at one flash all the great hells
in the four quarters, he recited a stanza:
1 “An abyss full of blazing coals” : sohol.

! . .
The Jdtaka. Book XXII
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
“Now, mighty monarch, thou hast seen the place
Of sinners, and where cruel men are sent,
And where the wicked go : now, royal sage,
Come let us hasten to the king of heaven.”
With this speech he turned the chariot towards heaven. As the king
went towards heaven he beheld [117] in the air the mansion of a goddess,
BiranT, with pinnacles of jewels and gold, ornamented in great magnificence,
having a park and a lake covered with lilies, and surrounded with trees
worthy of the place: and there was this goddess seated upon a divan in a
gabled chamber towards the front, and attended by a thousand nymphs,
looking out through an open window. He asked Matali who she was, and
Matali explained it to him.
“‘Behold yon mansion with five pinnacles:
There, deekt with garlands, lies upon a couch
A most puissant woman, who assumes
All kinds of majesty and wondrous power.
Joy comes on me to see it, charioteer:
But tell me, Matali, what her good deeds,
That she is happy in this heavenly mansion.’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how good ripens and bears fruit :
‘ 11 card you ever in the world of Blranl 1
A bralnniu’s home-bom slave, wTho once received
A guest at the right moment, welcomed him
As mother might her son ; and therefore now,
Generous and chaste, lives happy in this mansion.’”
[118] With these words, Matali drove the chariot onwards and showed
him the seven golden mansions of the god Sonadinna. The other, when he
saw these and the glory of the god, asked an explanation, which Matali
gave.
“‘There are seven mansions, shining clear and bright,
Where dwells n mighty being, richly dight,
Who with his wives inhabits them. Delight
Moves me, to see it: tell me, Matali,
What is the good this mortal did, that he
Dwells happy in this mansion heavenly?’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Declaring how good ripens and bears fruit:
‘This once was Sonadinna, one who gave
With royal bounty, and for hermits wrought
Seven hermitages : all their needs did crave
He faithfully provided. Food lie brought,
Betiding to lie on, clothes to wear, and light,
Contented with those men of life upright,
He kept the sabbath day, and each fortnight
The eighth, the fourteenth and the fifteenth days;
Generous, controlled, he walked in holy ways1,
So now dwells in this mansion of delight.’”
[119] Thus he described the deeds of Sonadinna ; then driving onwards
his chariot, he showed a mansion of crystal: in height it was five and
1 See xv. 320ls ff., translation tv. 202 with note f.

1)1
• ( (CT
541. 63
No.
twenty leagues, it had hundreds of columns made of the seven precious
things, hundreds of pinnacles, it was set about with lattices and little
bells, a banner of gold and silver flew, beside it was a park and grove full
of many bright flowers, with a lovely lake of lilies, nymphs cunning to sing
and to make music were there in plenty. Then the king seeing this asked
what were the deeds of these nymphs, and the other told him.
“ ‘ Y on mansion built of crystal, shining bright,
With pinnacles uplifted in the height,
With lood and drink in plenty, and a throng
Of goodly women skilled in dance and song !
•Toy seizes on me: tell me, Matali,
W hat good these women did, that now in heaven
they dwell within this palace of delight?’ •
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how good ripens and bears fruit:
‘These women ever walked in holy ways,
Faithful lay sisters, kept the holy days,
Generous, controlled, and watchful, heart-serene,
Now happy in the mansion you have seen.’”
He drove the chariot on, and showed a mansion of gems : it stood on
a level spot, lofty, like a mountain of gems, bright shining, full of gods
that played and sang divine music. Seeing this, the king asked what were
the deeds of these gods, and the other replied.
[120] Yon mansion built of jewels, shining bright,
Symmetrical, proportioned, a fair sight,
Where in divinest melody around,
Songs, dances, drums and tabotlrs do resound:
I never have beheld a sight so fair.
Nor sounds so sweet have ever heard, I swear !
Joy seizes oh me: tell mo, Matali,
What good these mortals (lid, that now I see
Happy in this heavenly mansion of delight?’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how good ripens and bears fruit:
1 fhese were lay Brethren in the world of men:
Provided parks and wells, or water drew
In the well-shed, and tranquil saints did feed,
found clothes, food, drink and bedding, every heed,
Contented with those men of life upright,
Who kept the sabbath day, and each fortnight
I he eighth, the fourteenth and the fifteenth days •
Generous, controlled, they walked in holy ways
And now dwell in this mansion of delight.’ ” ‘ • ’
Thus having described the deeds of these persons, he drove on and showed
him another crystal mansion : with many a pinnacle, and all manner of
Howers all about, and fine trees, echoing with the songs of birds of nil
kinds, by which flowed a river of pure water, [121] become the dwelling-
place of a virtuous person surrounded by a company of nymphs. Seeing
this the king asked what his deeds were; and the other told him.
“‘Yon mansion built of crystal, shining bright,
Its pinnacles uplifted in the height,

(1
)| <§L
The JdtaJca. Book XXII.
"
With food and drink in plenty, and a throng
Of goodly women skilled in dance and song,
And rivers, fringed with many a flower and tree—
Joy seizes on mo: tell me, Matali,
What good this mortal did in life, that he
Kejoices in this mansion heavenly ?’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how good ripens and boars fruit:
‘At Kirnbila a householder was he,
Bounteous, gave parks and wells, and faithfully
Drew water, and the tranquil saints did feed,
Found clothes, food, drink and bedding, every need,
Contented with these men of life upright,
He kept the sabbath day, and each fortnight
The eighth, the fourteenth and the fifteenth days ;
Generous, controlled, he walked in holy ways,
And now dwells in this mansion of delight.’”
Thus he described the deeds of this man, and drove on. Then he
showed another crystal mansion : this even more than the last was grown
about with all manner of fruit and flowers and clumps of trees. This
seen, the king asked what were the deeds of this man who was so fortunate,
and the other told him.
“‘Yon mansion, built of jewels, shining bright,
Its pinnacles uplifted in the height,
With food and drink in plenty, and a throng
[122] Of goodly women skilled in dance and song,
And rivers, fringed with many a tree and flower,
Royal and elephant trees, and mango, sal,
Roseapple sweet, and tindook, piyal bower,
And orchard-trees fruit-bearing one and all—
Joy seizes on me: tell me, Matali,
What good this mortal did in life, that he
Rejoices in this mansion heavenly?’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how good ripens and bears fruit:
‘At Mitbila a householder was he,
Bounteous, gave parks and wells, and faithfully
Drew water, and the tranquil saints did feed,
Found clothes, food, drink and bedding, all their need,
Contented with these men of life upright,
He kept the sabbath day, and each fortnight
The eighth, the fourteenth and the fifteenth days;
Generous, controlled, he walked in holy ways,
And now dwells in this mansion of delight.’”
Thus he described the deeds of this man also, and drove on. Then he
showed another mansion of jewels, like the first, and at the king’s request
told him the deeds of a god who was happy there.
“‘Yon mansion built of jewels, shining bright,
Symmetrical, proportioned, a fair sight,
Where in divinest melody around,
Songs, dances, drums and tabours do resound :
I never have beheld a sight so lair,
Nor sounds so sweet have ever heard, I swear!

|(I )| - <SL
Vo. 541. 65
[123] Joy seizes on me: tell me, Matali,
What good these mortals did, whom now I see
Happy in this heavenly mansion of delight?’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
describing how good ripens and bears fruit:
‘Once a Benares householder was he,
Bounteous, gave parks and wells, and faithfully
Drew water, and the tranquil saints did feed,
Fouiid clothes, food, drink and bedding, all their need,
Contented with these men of life upright,
He kept the sabbath day, and each fortnight
The eighth, the fourteenth and the fifteenth days;
Generous, controlled, he walked in holy ways,
And now dwells in this mansion of delight.’”
Again driving on, he showed a mansion of gold, like the sun in his
strength, and at the king’s request told him the deeds of the god who
dwelt there.
“ ‘ Behold you mansion made of flaming fire,
Bed like the sun whereas he riseth higher!
Joy seizes on me : tell me, Matali,
What good this mortal did in life, that he
Rejoices in this mansion heavenly'?’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how good ripens and bears fruit:
‘ Once a Savatthi householder was he,
Bounteous, gave parks and wells, and faithfully
Drew water, and the tranquil saints did feed,
Found clothes, food, drink and bedding, all their need,
Contented with these men of life upright,
He kept the sabbath day, and each fortnight
The eighth, the fourteenth and the fifteenth days;
Generous, controlled, lie walked in holy ways,
And now dwells in this mansion of delight.’”
[124] As lie thus described these eight mansions, Saleka, king of the
gods, thinking that Matali was a long time in coming, sent another swill
god with a message. Matali, on hearing the message, saw that there must
be no more delay; so at one flash he showed many mansions, and described
to the king what were tho-deeds of those who dwelt in them.
“‘See many fiery mansions in the air,
As in a bank of cloud the lightning’s flare !
Joy seizes on rpe : tell me, Matali,
What good these mortals did, whom now I. see
Rejoicing in the heavenly mansion there i ’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how good ripens and bears fruit:
‘ Good-living, well-instructed, full of faith,
They acted as the Master’s teaching aaith ;
By living as the Allwise Buddha told
They came to these abodes- you now behold.’ ”
Having thus shown him these mansions in the sky, he set out to come
before Sakka with these words :
“ Thou’st seen the places of the good and wicked in the tur;
Unto the monarch of the gods come
a. vi. 5

f(S)| <SL
The JdtaJcct Book XXII. J
„ . ,
[125] With these words he drove on, and showed him the seven hills
which make a ring about Sineru; to explain how the king questioned Matali
on seeing these, the Master said :
“As the king journeyed on his way in the celestial car
Drawn by a thousand steeds, he saw the mountain peaks afar
In Slda ocean, and he asked, * Tell me what hills these are.’”
At this question of Nimi the god Matali replied :
“ The mighty hills Sudassara, Karavlka, Isadhara,
Yugandhara, Nemindhara, Vinataka, Aaeakanua.
These hills are in Sldantara, in order there they lie,
Which high-upstanding in the air thou, mighty king, dost see."
Thus lie showed the Heaven of the Four Great Kings, and drove on
until he could show the statues of Indra which stood around the great
Cittakuta gateway of the Heaven of the Thirty-three. At this sight the
king asked, and the other answered.
“ ‘ This place so fine, elaborate, adorned,
Set round with Indra’s statues, as it were
By tigers guarded—[120] as I see this sight,
Joy comes upon me : tell me, Matali,
What is the name of this that I behold ?’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how good ripens and bears fruit:
‘This place is Cittakuta which you see,
The entrance to the place of heaven’s king,
The doorway of the Mountain Beautiful:
Elaborate, adorned, and set about
With Indra’s statues, as by tigers guarded.
Enter, wise king! enter this spotless place.’”
With these words Matali led the king within ; so it is said—
“Journeying in the car celestial,
• Drawn by a thousand steeds, the mighty king
Beheld the place where all the gods assemble.”
And as he passed along, standing in the ear still, he saw the place of
the gods’ assemblage in Sudhamma, and questioned Matali, who replied.
“‘As in the autumn is the sky all blue,
So is that jewelled mansion to the view.
Joy comes upon me: tell me, Matali,
What is this mansion which I now behold ?’
Then answered Matali the charioteer,
Describing how good ripens and bears fruit:
[127] ‘This is Sudhamma, where the gods assemble,
Supported by fair columns, finely wrought,
Eight-sided, made of gems and jewels rare,
Where dwell the Three-and-thirty, with their chief,
Lord Indra, thinking of the happiness
Of gods and men : enter, this lovely place,
0 might}- monarch, where the gods abide!
The gods bn their part sat watching for his arrival; and when they
heard that, the king was come, they went out to meet him with divine

' G°^N\
tut )| , <SL
.Vo. 541. G7
flowers and perfumes as far as the great Cittakuta gateway; and pre­
senting him with their flowers and perfumes they brought him to
Sudhamma Hall. The king dismounting from the ear entered the liall of
the gods, and the gods offered him a seat, Sakka the like and all pleasures
too.
Explaining this, the Master said1 2:
“ The gods beheld the king arrive: and then, their guest to greet,
Cried—‘Welcome, mighty monarch, whom we are so glad to meet!
O king ! beside the king of gods we pray you take a seat.1
And Sakka welcomed Vedeha, the king of Mithila town,
Ay, Vasava offered him all joys and prayed him to 'sit down.
-‘ Amid the rulers of the world O welcome to our land :
Dwell with the gods, 0 king! who have all wishes at command,
Enjoy immortal pleasures, where the Three-and-thirty stand.’ ”
Thus Sakka offered him celestial pleasures; and the king declining
made answerJ:
“As when a chariot, or when goods are given ou demand,
So is it to enjoy a bliss given by another's hand.
[128] I care not blessings to receive given by another’s hand,
My goods are mine and mine alone when on my deeds I stand.
I’ll go and do much good to men, give alms throughout the land,
Will follow virtue, exercise control and self-command :
He that so acts is happy, and fears no remorse at hand.”
Thus did the Great Being discourse to the gods with honeyed sound;
and discoursing he stayed seven days by men’s reckoning, and gave delight
to the company of the gods. And standing in the midst of the gods he
described the virtue of Matali:
“A most obliging personage is Matali the charioteer, \
The places where the good abide and where the bad, he showed me clear.”
Then the king took leave of Sakka, saying that he wished to go to the
world of men. Then Sakka said, “Friend Matali, take King Nimi at once
to Mithila.” He got ready the chariot; the king exchanged friendly
greetings with the company of gods, left them and entered the car.
Matali drove the car eastwards to Mithila. There the crowd, seeing the
chariot, were delighted to know’ that their king was returning. Matali
passed round the city of Mithila rightwise, and put down the Great Being
at the same window, took leave, and returned to his own place. A great
number of people surrounded the king, and asked him what, the gods’
world was like. The king, describing the happiness of the gods and of
Sakka their king, exhorted them to give alms and do good, for so they
should be born in that divine place.
Afterwards, when his barber found a white hair and told him, he
1 Vol. xv. p. 356 (iv. 225 of the translotion).
2 Vol. iv. p. 358 (iv. 225 of the translation); and n. ->?.
* 5—2

, r \
The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
made the barber put aside that white hair; [129] then lie gave a village
to the barber, and desiring to renounce the world, made his son king in
his place. So when asked why he wished to renounce the world, he
recited the stanza, “Lo, these grey hairs”; and like the former kings he
renounced the world, and dwelt in the same mango grove, developing the
Four Excellencies, and became destined to Brahma’s heaven.
It is his renouncing of the world which is described by the Master
in the last stanza :
“Thus spake King Nimi, lord of Mithila,
And having made a mighty sacrifice,
Entered upon the path of self-control.”
And his son, named Kajara-janaka, also renounced the world, and
brought his line to an end.
s
When the Master had finished this discourse, he said—“So, Brethren, this is
not the first time the Tathagata left the world ; he did the same before.” Then
lie identified the Birth: “At that time, Anuruddha was Sakka, Ananda was
Matali, the eighty-four kings were the Buddha’s followers, and Kina: Nimi was I
myself.”
No. 542.
THE KHANDAHAEA-JATAKA.
11 A'; Puppkavati once there reigned," etc. The Teacher, while dwelling on
the (I'ijjhakuta mountain, related this story concerning Devadatta. Its sub­
stance is contained in the section relating to the sin of causing schisms in the
community; it is to bo fully known by studying the Tathagata’s conduct from
Ins first becoming an ascetic down to the murder of King Bimbisara. As soon
as he had caused him to be killed, Devadatta went to Ajatasattu and said to
him, “0 king, thy desire lias attained its end, but mine has not yet attained it.”
lie replied, “What is your desire?” “1 wish to have Dasabala ‘killed and then
myselt become .Buddha/’ “Well, what have we to do/” “We must collect
some archers together.” The king assented and collected five hundred archers,
all able to shoot as quick as the lightning, and of these lie chose out one-and-
thirty [130] and sent them to wait on Devadatta, telling them to carry out his
commands. He called the chief one amongst them and said to him, “My friend,
the ascetic Ootama lives on the Gijjhakiitu mountain: at a certain time he
walks up and down in his place of retirement during the day; do von go there
.■Hid wound him with a poisoned arrow, and when you have killed him return
hither by such a road.” Then he sent two archers by tb,.t mad, and said to
them, “You will meet a man coming by yotir road,—kill him and return bv
such a road." Then he sent four archers by that road with the same instructions
and after that similarly eight and sixteen. If you ask why he did this, he did it
to conceal his own wickedness. So this chief man among the archers bound his
sword on his left side and his quiver on his back, and taking his bow made of a

/ n
l ( t ) l -
x^r-w^x i\ro. 542. 69
ram’s horn went to the Tathagata; but after he had strung his bow to wound
him, and fixed the arrow, and pulled the string, he could not discharge it. His
whole body became stiff as if it were crushed, and he stood terrified with the fear
of death. When the Teacher saw him he spoke in a gentle voice, “Fear not,
come hither.” He at once threw down his weapons and fell with his head on
the Blessed One’s feet, saying, “My lord, sin has overpowered me like a child
or a fool or a sinner; I knew not thy virtues, and I came here at the command
of that blind dotard Devadatta, to take away thy life: forgive me, I pray.” He
gained his pardon and sat down on one side. Then the Teacher revealed
the Truths to him and caused him to attain the first grade of sanctification.
Then he told him to return by another road than that ordered by Devadatta ;
and himself came down from his covered walk and sat at the Ijoot of a tree. As
the first archer did not return, the two others came along the toad to meet him,
aud wondered why he delayed so long, until at last they saw the Buddha, when
. they went up to him, and after saluting him sat down on one side of him. Then
he revealed the Truths to them also and made them attain the first grade of
sanctification, and told them to return by another road than that ordered by
Devadatta. In the same way, as the others came up and successively sat down,
he established them also in the first grade of sanctification and sent them away
by another road. Then the archer who first returned [131] went to Devadatta
and said to him, “Master, I was not able to kill the Allwise One, he is the
Mighty One, the Blessed One of supernatural powers.” Thus they all recognised
that they had saved their lives only through the All wise One, and they embraced
the ascetic life under him, and became arhats. This incident became known in
the assembly of the Brotherhood, anil one day they began to talk of it in the
hall of truth; “Brethren, have you heard how Devadatta, in his enmity against
one porsou, the Blessed One, has tried hard to deprive many people of their
lives, and how they all saved their lives through the Teacher?” In came the
Master and asked, “Brethren, what are you talking of as you sit here?” and
when they told him, “This is not the first time,” said he; “he tried before this to
deprive many people of their lives in his enmity against me” ; and he told them
a story of the past.
In the olden time this Benares was called Pupphavatl. The son of
King Yasavatti reigned there, named Ekaraja, and his son Candakumara
A
was viceroy. brahmin named Khandahala was the family priest: he
gave the king counsel in temporal and spiritual matters, and the king,
having a high opinion of his wisdom, made him a judge. But he, being
fond of bribes, used to take bribes and dispossess the real owners and put
the wrong owners in possession. One day a man who had lost his suit
went out of the judgment hall loudly complaining, and, as he saw
Candakumara passing by to visit the king, he threw himself at his feet.
The prince asked him what was the matter. “My lord, Khandahala robs
the suitor’s when he judges : I have lost my cause, although I gave him a
bribe.” The prince told him to cease his fears, and, having taken him
to court, made him the owner of the disputed property. The people
When
loudly shouted their applause. the king heard it and risked the
reason, they replied, “Candakumara has rightly decided a suit which was
determined wrongly by Khandahala : this is why there was such shouting.”
When the prince came and had paid his hom age, the king said to lum,
“My soft, they say you have just judged a case. (s> ^n< • 1 io
the office of judge to the prince and told him thence oh i o ( e eirnme

:(§)| ' <
sl
The Jcitaka. Book XXII.
'
suits. Khandahala’s income began to fall off, and from that time lie
conceived a hatred against the prince and watched for some fault in him.
Now the king had little religious insight; and one day at dawn, at the
end of his sleep he saw the heaven of the Thirty-three gods with its
ornamented portico, and its walls made of the seven precious things, sixty
[132] yojanas in extent, with golden streets, a thousand yojanas in height,
adorned with the Vejayanta and other palaces, with all the glories of the
Nandana and other forests and the Nanda and other lakes and tilled
everywhere with heavenly beings. He longed to enter into it and he
thought, “when the teacher Khandahala comes I will ask him the way
to the world of the gods, and I will enter it by the road which he points
out.” Khaudahala came to the palace in the early morning, and asked
whether the king had passed a happy night. Then the king commanded
that a seat should be given him and asked his question. The Teacher
has thus narrated it:
“In Puppbavatl once there reigned a wicked king who in his need
Asked Khandahiila, his base priest, brahmin in name but not in deed ;
Thou art a seer to whom, they say, all sacred learning has been given,—
Tell me the road whose travellers rise by their good merits up to heaven.”
Now this was a question which, in default of an all-knowing Buddha
or his disciples, one must ask of a Bodhisatta, but which the king asked
of Khandahala; just as a man who for seven days had lost his way might
ask guidance of another who had lpst his way for a fortnight. He thought
to himself, “Now is the time to see my enemy’s back, now I will kill
Candakumara and fulfil my desire.” So he addressed the king:
“Exceeding many gifts bestow, those who deserve not death destroy,—
Thus men surpassing merit win and reach at last to heaven’s joy.”
The king asked:
“What are th’ exceeding many gifts! aud who deserve not to bo slain !
I’ll give the gifts, the victims slay, if you but make your meaning plain.”
[ 133] Then he explained his meaning; *
“Thy sons, thy queens must offered be, thy merchant princes too must fall,
Thy choicest hulls, thy noblest steeds,—yea the four kinds of victims all”;
And thus, being asked the road to heaven, in answer to the question
he declared the road to hell.
He said to himself, “If I take Candakumara alone they will think
that I have done it through enmity to him”; so he put him in with a
number of people. When the matter came to be talked about, the
ladies of the royal palace, hearing the rumour, were tilled with alarm,
and at once raised a loud cry. Explaining this, the Master recited a
stanza :
“The royal holies heard the news: ‘.Princes and queens are doomed,’ they cried,
And a wild cry of sudden fiur rose tip to heaven on every side,”

■ G°l^\ '
UP ■ . §L
No. 542. 71
The entire royal family were agitated like a grove of sal trees shaken
by the wind at the world’s end ; even the brahmin asked the king whether
or not it was possible for him to offer the sacrifice. “What dost thou mean.
0 teacher 1 If I offer it I shall go to the world of the gods.” “0 king,
those who are timid and weak of purpose cannot offer this sacrifice. Do
thou assemble them all here, and I will make the offering in the sacrificial
pit.” So he took sufficient forces and went out of the city, and ordered a
sacrificial pit to be dug with a level floor, and surrounded it with a fence;
for ancient brahmins had enjoined that this surrounding fence should be
made, lest some righteous ascetic or brahmin might come find stop the rite.
[131] The king also caused a proclamation to be made, “ By sacrificing
my sons and daughters and my wives I shall go to the world of the gods,
do you go and announce this to them and bring them all here”; and he
at once ordered them to bring his sons:
“Warn Canda, Suriya1 of my will, then Bhaddasena in his turn,
Sura and Vamagotta next,—they must all die: my will is stern.”
So they went first to Candakuinara and said, “0 prince, thy father
desires to kill thee and go to heaven; he has sent us to seize thee.”
“By whose instructions has he ordered me to be seized?” “By those of
Khandabala.” “Does he wish to have me alone seized or others also
with me?” “Others also with thee, for he desires to offer a sacrifice
of the four kinds of victims.” He thought to himself, “He has
no enmity against others, but he intends to put many to death in his
enmity against me alone, because I prevent him from committing robbery
by his unjust judgment; it is my duty to obtain an interview with my
father and gain from him the release of all the rest.” So he (laid to them,
“Carry out my father’s commands.” They took him to the palace yard
and placed him by himself, and then they brought the other three" and
when they had set them near they informed the king. Then he bade
them bring his daughters arid place them near the others:
“UpasenI and Kokila, Mudita, Nanda, each in turn,
Tell the princesses of'their doom,—-they must all die: my will is stern.”
>So they went and brought them weeping and wailing, and placed
them near their brothers. Then the king uttered a stanza to order that
his wives should be seized :
“Tell Vijaya, first of all my queens, Sunandfl, Kesiuf, each in turn,—
With all their beauty and their charms, they must all die: my will is stern.”
[135] Then they brought them also, loudly wailing, and placed them
> The scholiast adds that these were the sons of Queen Gotama, but perhaps
Canda- Suriya is only one name; see afterwards. Two pnnees are eagerly mentioned
and identified at the final Bununary.
" Should it not- be ‘four’?

' Go^X
; <SL
l & t
,
The Jdtaka. Book XXTI.
near the princes. Then the king uttered a stanza ordering them to seize
his four merchants:
“Punnamukha and Bhaddiya, Singala, Yaddha, each in turn,
Bear to my merchants my command,—they all must die: my will is stern.”
The king’s officers went and brought them. When the king’s sons
and wives were brought the citizens uttered not a word; but the merchants
had a widely-spread kindred, and the whole city was troubled when they
were seized, and loudly protested against their being sacrificed, and went
with their relatives into the king’s presence. Then the merchants sur­
rounded by their kindred begged the king to spare their lives. Explaining
this, the Master said :
“ The merchants raised a bitter cry, surrounded by their sons and wives,
‘Leave but the topknot, shave our heads,—make us thy slaves, but spare
our lives.’”
Still however much they entreated, they could not find mercy. The king’s
officers at last forced the rest to retire and dragged the merchants to stand
near the princes.
Then the king ordered the elephants and the other animals to be
brought:
“Bring hither all my elephants, of matchless might, and costly price,
My best of horses and of mules, let them all be the sacrifice;
[130] My bulls the leaders of the herd,—a noble offering they shall bo;
And all the officiating priests shall have their gifts accordingly.
Make ready for the sacrifice against to-morrow’s dawning light;
And bid the princes feast their fill, enjoying now their life’s last night.”
The king’s father and mother were still living, so men went and told
(hem of their son’s purposed offering. In consternation they took their
hearts in their hands and went weeping before him, “Is it true, 0 son,
that thou purposest such a sacrifice?”
The Teacher thus described it:
“ The mother left her royal home, ‘ My son, what means this monstrous thing ?
Must thy four sons be put to death to swell thy cruel offering?”’
The king answered:
“When I lose Cauda I lose all; but him and them will I resign,
For by this costly sacrifice a heavenly dwelling will be mine.”
His mother said ;
“To sacrifice thy sons, my child, can never lead to heaven’s bliss;
Give ear to no such lying words; the road to bell and night is this.”
[137] Take thou the well-proved royal road : let all thy wealth in alms be given,
And hurt no living thing on earth—this is the certain path to heaven.”
The king replied:
“1 must obey my teacher’s words,- my sons alas ! must all be slain,—
’Tis bal’d indeed to part with them, but heavens the prize which 1 shall gain."

|(1 )| . <SL
\%>~-—
TVo. 542. 73
So the mother went away, being unable to convince him by her words.
Then the father heard the tidings and came to remonstrate.
The Teacher describes what happened:
“The father Vasavatti came: ‘Strange tidings fill my soul with fright!
Must thy four sons be put to death to crown to the full thy monstrous rite ? ’ ”
The same dialogue is repeated [138] and the old king, unable to turn
his son, goes away repeating as his parting words:
“Give all thou canst and never harm a living thing of thine own will;
And with thy sons as body-guard shield thou thy laud from every ill.”
1 lien Oandakumara thought within himself, “All this sorrow has be­
fallen so many people on my single account, I will entreat my father and so
.deliver them all from the pain of death”; so he thus spoke to his father:
“Let us bo Khandahiila’s slaves, but spare our lives and do not kill,
His horses and his elephants we’ll watch in chains, if such his will.
Let us be Khandaliala’s slaves, but spare our lives and do not kill,
W e’ll sweep his stables and his yards, and work in chains, if such liis will.
Give us as slaves to whom thou wilt,—we are as bondsmen in thy hands ;
Or banish us from thy domains to beg our bread in foreign lands.”
The king listened to his lamentations,and felt his heart broken; and his
eyes filled with tears, and he ordered them all to be set free: “ No one,”
he said, “ shall kill my sons, I have no need of the world of the gods.”
1 hose piteous pleadings for their lives do break my heart,—go Set them free,
Release the princes, lot them go: no more of sacrifice for me.”
On hearing the king’s words they set the whole multitude at liberty,
beginning with the princes and ending with the birds. Khamluhalu [139] *
was busily engaged in the sacrificial pit, and a man said to him, “You
villain Khandahala, the king lias released the princes; do you go and kill
your own sons and offer a sacrifice with their throats’ blood.” “What has
the king been doing? ’’ he cried, and lie rushed in haste and said to him:
“ 1 warned thee that this sacrifice would prove a hard and toilsome one;
Why interfere to stop the rite when it is all so well begun?
They who give offerings such as these go by a certain road to heaven ;
Or those who heartily approve, seeing the same by others given.”
The blinded king, hearing the words of the incensed brahmin, and
having his thoughts fixed on religion, ordered his sons to be recaptured.
Then Oandakumara reasoned with his father:
“Why did the brahmin at our birth utter vain blessings on our path.
When 'twas our fate that we should die innocent victims of thy wrath ?
Why didst thou spare us while still babes, too young as yet, to feel the blow ?
Wc aro to die to-day instead, now that the joys of youth we know.
Think of us riding clothed in mail on horse or elephant to the fight,
And then as victims butchered here in sacrifice- can this bo right. ?
In battle ’gainst, a rebel chief or in a forest such as l
Are went to serve : whom now thou slay’st without a cause or reason why.

I ( J f ) t . „ (fiT
The Jataka. Booh XXII.
2 74
\ $ V ."vvx^*yv' L X L - i
See the wild birds who build their nests and sing amidst thc trees all daj,
They love their young and tend them well—and thou, would st thou t y
children slay 1
[140] Nor think thy treacherous brahmin friend will spare thy life when
Thy'turn,°O6 king, will follow next: I shall not perish all alone.
Kings give these brahmins villages, choice cities are their appanage,
On every' family they feed and gain a goodly' heritage ,
And ’tis these benefactors, sire, whom they most readily betray;
The brahmin order, take my word, arc faithless and ingrate alway •
[141] The king exclaimed, on hearing his son’s reproach :
“These piteous pleadings for their lives do break my heart,—go set them free,
Release the princes and the rest, no more ot sacrifice for me.
Khandahiila again rushed up as before and repeated his former expostu­
lations; and the prince again reasoned with his father :
“If they who sacrifice their sons are, when they die, all glorified,
Then let the brahmin offer his: the king shall follow him as guide.
If they who sacrifice their sons go straight to heaven when they die,
Why does the brahmin offer not himself and all his family (
Nay rather, they who offer up such victims all shall go to hell,
And those who dare to approve the deed shall perish at the last a* well.
When the prince, as he uttered these wrcrds, found that he could not
convince his father, lie turned to the multitude who surrounded the king
and thus addressed them :
11421 “How can the fathers, mothers, here stand silent, looking on, and none,
Loving their children as they do, forbids the king to slay his son ,
I love the welfare of the king, I love to see your hearts rejoice,
And is there none among you found to utter one protesting voice)
But not one spoke a word. Then the prince bade his wives go and
implore the king to show pity :
“ (Jo, noble ladies, with your prayers, implore the king, implore hispriest.
To spare these guiltless sons of his, well-proved in battles sternest test,
imolore the king, implore the priest, to spare these sons unstained by crime,
Whose names arc blazoned through the world, the glory of their land and
time.”
They went and implored him to show mercy; but the king paid no
regard. Then the prince feeling himself helpless began to lament:
"0 bad 1 but been born from courts aloof,
Under some cobbler's, sweeper's, outcast's roof,
1 should have lived my days to the end in peace,
Nor died a victim to a king’s caprice.”
Theu he exclaimed:
I UAnd*telf hiuT J®^have'1 w'roog^'him^^ <'»* and all.”
• He then repeats the six stanzas ‘‘ Lot us be KhandaMla's slaves,“ Ac. from p. .
73

f ( t ) s <SL
\c% X^_-4^'/
X^f -
TVo. 542. 75
[143] These are the Teacher’s words:
“Loudly wails Sela when she sees her brothers sentenced by the king,
‘My father longs for heaven, they say, aud this forsooth his offering.’”
‘ But the king paid no regard to her either. Then the prince’s son Yftsula,
seeing his father’s grief, said, “I will entreat my grandfather, I will make
him grant me my father’s life,” and he fell at the king’s feet and lamented.
The Teacher thus described it:
“Then Vasula with uncertain steps went this way, that way to the throne,
‘O spare our father, children we,—leave us not helpless and alone.’”
The king heard his lament, and Iris heart being as it were cleft in twain,
he embraced the boy with tears in his eyes and said to him, “ Be comforted,
my child, I will give thy father up to thee,” and he uttered his orders:
“Here is thy father, Vasula; thy words o’orpower me,—he is free;
Kelease the princes, let them go,—no more of sacritice for me.”
Then again Khandahala rushed up with his old expostulations, [144]
and again the king blindly yielded to his words and ordered his sons to be
recaptured. 4
Then Khandahala thought to himself, “This tender-hearted king now
seizes his sons and now releases them : he will now again release them
through the words of his children; I will take him into the sacrificial
pit.” So he repeated a verse to urge him to go thither:
“The sacrifice has been prepared, the costliest treasures have boon given:
Go forth, O king, to otter it, and claim the choicest joys of heaven.”
When they took the Bodlrisatta into the sacrificial pit the royal ladies
went out in a body. ,
The Teacher has described it:
“ Prince Chanda’s seven hundred queens, radiant in all their youthful bloom,
With hair dishevelled, weeping eyas, followed the hero to his doom ;
And other ladies joined the train like beings from heaven’s firmament,
With hair dishevelled, weeping eyes, following the hem as he went.”
Then they all raised their lamentations:
“With earrings, aloes, sandal-wood, in KasI silk of costly juice,
Sec (Janda, Suriya1 yonder led as victims to the. sacrifice.
Piercing their mother’s heart with woe, filling the citizens with gloom,
See Cauda, Suriya yonder led as victims to their cruel doom.
Bathed and perfumed with richest scents and with white robes of KasS dre*t,
See Cauda, Suriya yonder led as victims at the king’s behest.
f 1451 They who once rode on elephants, a gallant sight for every eye,
Our Cauda, Suriya yonder see, toiling along on foot to dm.
They who in chariots wont to ride, or mutes, or 1*<««» {phWigK
Our Oanda, Suriya1 yonder sec, toiling on toot to die ere night.
1 It is curious to observe that the prose throughout has only one prince, but the
verses seom to have two.

| ( f ) j VCT
' The Jdtakn. Book X X 77.
While the queens were thus lamenting, the officers carried the JBodhisatta
out of the city. The whole city went out with him in great agitation. But
as the vast multitude went out, the gates were not wide enough to give
them room ; and the brahmin apprehensive of what might happen, ordered
the gates to be stopped up. The multitude were thus unable to find an
outlet; but there was a garden near the inner gate, and they gathered
there and lamented the prince’s fate with a loud cry ; and at the sound a
great concourse of birds gathered in the sky. The citizens raised a general
wailing and thus addressed the birds :
“Birds, would ye feast on flesh? then fly to Bupphavatl’s eastern gate,
There the mad king is offering up his four brave sons in blinded hate.
Birds, would ye feast on flesh ? then fly to Bupphavatl’s eastern gate,
There the mad king is offering up four daughters in his blinded hate1 *.”
[ 116] Thus did the multitude lament in the garden. Then they went to
the Bodhisafcta’s house, going round it in solemn procession and uttering
their hi mentations as they gazed on the queens’ apartments, the towers and
gardens, [147] the groves and lakes, and the elephants’ stables3: •
“Villages uninhabited turn to a forest solitude;
So will our capital lie waste, if once our princes shod their blood”
[148] Uuable to find a way out of the city, they Wandered about lamenting
within its walls. ,
In the meantime the Bodhisatta was led to the sacrificial pit. Then
liia mother, Queen Go tarn i, threw herself prostrate at the king’s feet, begging
with tears and cries that he would spare her son’s life:
“1 shall go crazy in my grief, covered with dust, undone, forlorn,
If my son Canda3 has to die, rny breath will choke me as 1 mourn.”
When she got no answer from the king, she embraced the prince’s four
wives and said to them, “My son must have gone away from you in dis­
pleasure, why do you not persuade him to turn back ? ”
“Why do you not talk lovingly each to the other as ye stand,
And dance around him cheerfully, clasping each other hand in hand,
Until his melancholy flies and leaves him clued at your command,
For who can dance, indeed, like you, although they search through all the land I”
Then seeing nothing else that could be done she ceased to lament with
the royal ladies and began to curse Khandabala :
“Now may thy mother, cruel priest, feel all the hitter agony
Which tears my heart when I behold ruy precious Canda led to die4.
1 Six .stanza* are omitted here about the four queens, householders, elephants,
horses, bulls, and the complete sacrifice of four kinds of victims. Sec Morris, Pali
Tart S. Jou.ru. 18(14. p. 80.
• Home 15 stanzas arc here omitted. » • tin y only repeat what has boon said before,
■' This verse is repeated with the name Suriya instead of Candu.
4 Op. iv. 288 V

|( I ) | <SL
. JVb. 542. ■ 77
[149] Now may thy wife, 0 cruel priest, feel all the bitter agony
L Which tears my soul when I behold my precious Suriya led to die ;
May she see sons and husbaud slain, for thou, 0 cruel priest, to-day
The pride and glory of the world, those guiltless lion-hearts wouldst "slay.”
Then the Bodhisatta entreated his father in the sacrificial pit1:
[150] “Some women long and beg for sons and offer prayers and gifts to heaven,
They long for sons and grandsons too, but none to cheer their homes are
given ;
0 slay us not thus recklessly, though given in answer unto prayer,
Nor offer us a sacrifice in spite of all our mother’s care.”
When he received no reply from his father, he fell lamenting at his
mother’s feet :
“Tenderly hast thou nursed thy son, hard is the lot which falls to thee;
1 bow before thy sacred feet: all blessings on my father be.
Give me thy feet to kiss once more, embrace me, mother, ere we part,
’Tis a long journey which I go, a hitter sorrow to thy heart.”
[151] Then his mother uttered her stanzas of wailing:
“Bind on your head, ray darling son, a diaden^ of lotus leaves,
With campak flowers,—such coronal thy manly beauty well receives.
For the last time anoint thyself with all those unguents rich and rare
Which in old days before the king in court festivities thou didst wear.
For the last time put on, my boy, bright KaSl silk in fine array,
And wear the jewels and the pearls which thou shouldst wear on gala day.”
Then his chief queen, named Canda, fell at his feet and bitterly lamented :
“This lord of lands, this sovereign king, whose will in all his realm is done;
Sole heir of all his country’s wealth, has no affection for his son.”
When the king heard her he replied:
“My sons are dear, myself is dear, and ye, my queens, are dear as well:
1 sacrifice my son, because 1 wish to go to heaven, not hell.”
[ 1 52] Canda exclaimed :
“O king, in mercy, slay me first, nor let the anguish rend my heart,
Thy l<oy is garlanded for both, he is complete in every part.
Slay us together on the pile, and let me go where Canda goes :
Infinite merit, will be thine, two souls will rise to heaven's repose,”
The king answered:
“ Wish not for death before its time; gallant brothers-in-law hast thou ;
They will console thee, large-eyed one, for the dear prince thou losest now.”
Then she beat her breast with her hands, and threatened to drink
poison, and at length she burst into loud lamentations :
“No friends or counsellors surround this king,
Who dare to warn him not to do tins mig,
1 I omit the eight lines repeated from p. 1».

t i l (SI.
78 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
He has no faithful ministers, not one,
Who dares persuade him not to slay his son.
[153] His other sons wear all their bravery,
Let them be offered and set Canda free.
Cut me in pieces, offer me,—but spare my eldest son, my knight, ^
Him whom the world doth reverence, the lion-hearted in the fight.’’
Having thus mourned out her soul and found no comfort, she went
u p to the Bodhisatta and stood weeping by his side, until he said to her,
“ () Canda, during my lifetime many various pearls and gems have been
given by me to thee in times of social unbending; now to-day T give thee
this last ornament from my body; pray accept it.”
Canda burst into tears, uttering the following stanzas:
“His shoulders once were bright with flowers, which hung down as his
diadem,—
To-day the cruel sharp bright sword spreads its dark shadow over
them.
Soon will the sword come sweeping down upon that guiltless royal
neck,—
Ah ! iron bands must bind my heart,—or else what could it do but
break ?
[154] With aloes and with sandal decked, wearing rich silks and many a ring,
Go, Canda-Suriya, to the pile, befitting offering for the king.
With aloes and with sandal-wood, with silken robes and gems of price,
Go, Canda-Suriya, to the pile, the great king’s worthy sacrifice.
Bathed for the offering, waiting there in silk and gems the impending
blow,
Go, Canda-Suriya, to the pile, filling the people's hearts with woe.
While she thus lamented, all the preparations were completed in the
sacrificial pit. They brought the prince and placed him in his proper
position with his neck bent forward. Khandahala held the golden bowl
close and took the sword and stood up, saying, “ I will cut his neck.”
When the queen Canda saw this, she said to herself, “ I have no other
refuge, I will bless rny lord with all my power of truth,” and she clasped
her hands, and, walking amidst the assembly, performed a solemn assevera-;)f
tion of truth.
The Teacher thus described it :
“When all is readv for the rite and Canda sit..-, and waits the blow,
The daughter of the Paneal king went through the assembly, high and
low:
‘As truly as the brahmin here works a vile purpose by his guile,
Ho may 1 gain my dear-loved lord restored mo in a little while.
May aU the spirits in this place—ghosts, goblins, fairies—hear my word,
Do my commission loyally and reunite me to my lord.
[1661 Oh all ye gods who fill this place, lo! prostrate at, your feet T fall,
Protect me in my helplessness, hear me m mercy as 1 call. ■

/% 5 ^ \ f '
§ ( f ) l (CT
No. 542. '■ 79
Sakka, the king of the gods, having heard her cry1 and seen what
had happened, took a blazing mass of iron and frightened the king, and
dispersed the assembly.
The Teacher has described the scene:
“ A heavenly being heard the cry and came to earth to help the right,
Whirling a blazing iron mass, filling the tyrant’s heart with fright,
‘ Know me, 0 tyrant, who I am ; mark well the weapon which I wield,
Haim not thy guiltless eldest son, the lion of the battlefield.
Where has earth seen a crime like this,—thy sons, their wives, to slaughter
given,
With all thy noblest citizens, worthy to fill my highest heavenV
The tyrant and his minister then set the guiltless victims free,
And all the crowd seized sticks and stones, and in a fit of frenzied glee
Made Khandahiila there and then pay forfeit for his cruelty.”
[156] When they had killed the minister, the great crowd sought to put
the king himself to death ; but Sakka embraced him and would not allow
them to kill him. The multitude decided that they would spare his life,
“ but we will not give him rule or dwelling in this city,—we will make
him an outcast and appoint his dwelling outside this city.” So they
stripped him of his royal garments and made him wear a yellow dress,
and put a yellow cloth on his head, and having made him an outcast sent
him away to an outcast-settlement. And all who had helped in any way
in the sacrifice or approved of it went to hell as their portion.
The Teacher uttered this stanza:
“All who had done so vile a deed passed straight to hell.—none could attain
An afterbirth in any heaven, who bore the trace of suck a stain.”
The great multitude, having caused the two monsters of wickedness -
to be removed out of sight, brought the materials for the coronation and
anointed Prince Cauda as king.
“When .ill the captives were released, a vast assembly gathering
With solemn pomp and festival anointed Canda to be king;
A vast assembly, gods and men, waved cloths and flags and sang his praise,
Starting a new and happy reign of plenty, peace and halcyon days.
Men, women, gods and goddesses joinc1 in one great festivity,
Comfort and peace filled every hom< .id every captive was set free.”
[157] The Bodhisatta cause ...all his father’s wants to he attended to,
but he was not allowed to enter within the city; and when all his allow ­
ance was spent, he used to go up to the Bodhisatta, when the latter went
to join in the amusements of the public gardens or other public spectacles.
At these times he did not use to join his hands to salute his son, for
he said to himself, “I am the true king,’’ but he addressed him, “Live
1 I read tassu.
♦

. <SL
%$%
^ S ^ S O ... The JataJca. Booh XXII.
long, 0 Master ”; and when he was asked what he wanted, lie mentioned
it, and the Bodhisatta ordered the sum to be given to him.
When the Master had ended his discourse, lie added, “ Brethren, this is not
the first time that Devadatta lias sought to kill many persons on my sole
account; he did the same before.” Then' he identified the Birth: “At that
time Devadatta was Khandahiilu, Mah&maya was Queen Gotaina, Rahula’s
mother was Canda, Rahula was Vasula, Uppalavanpa was Selii, Kassapa of the
Varna family was Sura, Moggallana was Gatidasena, Sariputta was Prince Suriya
and I myself was Candaraja.”
No. 543.
B H U RID ATTA - J AT AKA.
“ Whatever jewels there may be,” etc. This story the Master told, while
dwelling at Savatthi, about some lay-brethren who kept the fast-days. On a
fast-dav, it is said, they rose early in the morning, took upon them the fasting
vows, gave alms, and after their meal took perfumes and garlands in their hands
and went to Jetavana, and at the time of hearing the Law seated themselves on
one side. The Master, coming to the Hall of Truth, having sat down in the
adorned Buddha-seat, looked upon the assembly of the brethren. [158] Now the
Tathagatas like to converse with those among the brethren or others, in reference
to whom a religious discourse takes its rise; therefore on the present occasion,
as he knew that a religious discourse concerning former teachers would arise in
connection with these lay-brethren, while he was conversing with them, he asked
them, “0 lay-brethren, do you keep the fast-day'{” On their replying in the
affirmative, he said, “Tt is right and well done of you, O lay-brethren : but yet
it is no matter for wonder that you who have a Buddha teacher like me should
keep the fast-day,—sages of old who were without any teacher forsook great
glory and kept the fast-day.” And so saying, he told at their request an old
legend of the past.
I.
Once upon a time, Brahmadatta, when he was reigning in Benares,
hud made his son viceroy; but when lie saw his great glory, he became
suspicious lest he should also seize the kingdom. So he said to him, “ l>o
you depart hence and dwell for the present where you please, and at my
death take the hereditary kingdom.” The prince complied, and after
saluting his father, went out and proceeding to the Yamuna built a hut of
leaves between the river and the sea and dwelt there, living on roots and
fruits. Now at that time a young Naga teiuale in the Nuga-world beneath
the ocean who had lost her husband, and on account of her carnal passions
*

54s- ■ oL
n°-
81
1 -1
--------------------—" ...... ■ ■■■
when she saw the happiness of the other Nagas who had husbands living
she had left the Naga-world, was wandering by the seashore, when she
observed the prince’s footprints, and following the track saw the hut
of leaves. Now the prince happened to be away, having gone out in
search of various kinds of fruit. She entered into the hut, and as she
saw the wooden bedstead and the rest of the furniture she thought to
herself, “This is the dwelling-place of some ascetic, T will prove him,
whether he is an ascetic from faith or not. If he is an ascetic from faith
and bent upon self-abnegation he will not accept my adorned bod; but it
he is at heart a lover of pleasure and not an ascetic from faith he will lie
down on my bed ; then I will take him and make him nyy husband and
dwell here.” So she went back to the Naga-world and collected divine
flowers and perfumes and prepared a bed of flowers, and having made an
offering of flowers and scattered perfumed powder about and adorned the
hut, she departed to the abode of the Nagas. When the prince returned
at evening time and entered the hut, and saw what she had done, he said,
“Who has prepared [159] this bed?” And when he ate the various fruits,
he exclaimed, “Oh these sweet-scented flowers, this bed has been pleasantly
arranged,” and being tilled with pleasure as he was not a true ascetic at
heart, he lay down on the couch of flowei’S and fell fast asleep. The next
day he rose at sunrise and went off to collect fruits, without sweeping his
hut of leaves. At that moment the female Naga came up and seeing the
withered flowers knew at once, “ This man is a lover of pleasure and not
an ascetic from faith, I shall be able to capture him ”; so she took away
the old flowers and brought others and spread a fresh bed and adorned the
hut of leaves and strewed flowers etc. in the covered walk and then
returned to the Naga-world. He rested that night also on that bed of
flowers and the next day he thought to himself, “Who can it be that
adorns this hut?” So he did not go out to gather fruits, but remained
concealed not far from the hut. The Naga woman, having collected
perfumes and flowers, came along the path to the hermitage. 1 he prince,
having beheld the Naga in all her great beauty, at once fell in love with
her, and, without letting himself be seen, entered the hut as she was
preparing the couch and asked her who she was. “ My lord, I am a Naga
woman.” “Hast thou a husband or not?” “I am a widow without a
husband; and where dost thou dwell?” “I am Brahmadattakumara, the
son of the king of Benares; but why dost thou wander about, leaving the
abode of the Nagas?” “ My lord, as I beheld the happiness of the other
Naga women who had husbands I became discontented on account ol
carnal passion and I came away and go wandering about seeking tor a
husband.” “I also am not an ascetic from faith, but I have come to
dwell here because my father drove me away ; vex not thy si ,
thy husband and we will dwell here in concord.’’ She at once consented ,
G
j. VI.

The Jcitaka. Book XXII. J
and from that time they lived harmoniously together there. By her magic
power she made a costly house and brought a costly couch and spread a
bed. Thenceforth he ate no roots or fruits but feasted on divine meat and
drink. After a while she conceived and brought forth a son whom they
called Sagara-Brahmadatta. [ 1 CO] When the child was able to walk, site
brought forth a daughter, and as she was born on the seashore they called
her Samuddaja. Now7 a forester wdio lived in Benares came to that place,
and on giving him greeting recognised the prince, and after he had stayed
there a few days, he said, “ My lord, I will tell the king’s family that you
are dwelling here,” and he accordingly departed and went to the city.
Now just then the king died, and after the ministers had buried him they
met together on the seventh day, and they deliberated together, “a
kingdom without a king cannot stand ; we know not where the prince
dwells nor whether he is alive or dead,—we will send forth the festal car
and so get a king.” At that time the forester came to the city, and having
heard the news w7ent to the ministers and told them that before he came
there he had been staying three or four days near the prince. The ministers
paid him respect and went there under his guidance, and after a friendly
greeting told the prince that the king was dead and asked him to assume
the kingdom. He thought to himself, “I w7ill learn what the Naga woman
thinks”; so he went to her and said, “Lad)7, my father is dead and his
ministers have come to raise the royal umbrella over me; let us go and
we will both reign in Benares which is twelve yojanas in extent, and you
shall be the chief among the sixteen thousand queens.” “My lord, .[
cannot go.” “Why?” “ We possess deadly poison and we are easily
displeased for a trifling matter; and the anger of a co-wife is a serious
thing; if I see or hear anything and cast an angry glance thereon, it will
be instantly scattered like a handful of chaff; therefore I cannot go.” The
prince asked her again the next day; and then she said to him, “I myself
will on no account go, but these my sons are not young Nagas; as they
are your children they are of the race of men ; if you love me watch over
them. But as they are of a watery nature and therefore delicate, they
would die if they went by the road and bore the burden of the wind and
sunshine; so I will hollow out a boat and All it with water, and you shall
let them play in the water and when you have brought them to the city
[161] you shall have a lake prepared in the precincts of the palace; in
this way they will not suffer.” With these words, having saluted the
prince and walked round him respectfully, she embraced her sons and
folded them between her breasts and kissed their heads, and entrusted
them to him. and with many tears and sobs at once vanished and departed
to the Naga-world. The prince also, overcome with sorrow, his eyes filled
with tears, went out of the house, and, after wiping his eyes, proceeded to
the ministers, who at once besprinkled him and said, “Sire, let ns go to

l( W Vs No. 543. 83 {C T
Vy~// - ■■■ —------— ~ K._jW_A
city.” He commanded them to hollow out a ship and put it on a cart
and fill it with water. “Strew all sorts of flowers of various colours and
scents on the surface of the water, for my sons have a Watery nature and
they will go along joyfully playing there”; and the minister’s did so.
When the king came to Benares he entered the city which was all adorned,
and he seated himself on the terrace, surrounded by sixteen thousand
dancing girls and his ministers and other officers; and having held a great
drinking feast for seven days, he caused a lake to he prepared for his sons,
where they sported continually. But one day when the water was let into
the lake, a tortoise entered, and not seeing any way of exjjt it floated on
the surface of the water; and while the lads were playing about, it rose
out of the water and putting out its head looked at them and then sank
down in the water. When they saw it they were frightened and ran to
their father, and said to him, “ 0 father, a yakkha has frightened us in
the lake.” The king ordered some men to go and seize it, and they threw
a net and caught the tortoise and shewed it to the king. When the princes
saw it, they cried out, “0 father, it is a demon.” The king through love
of his sons was angry with the tortoise, and ordered the attendants to
punish it. Some said, “ It is an enemy to the king, it should be pounded
to powder with a pestle and mortar,” others said, “Let us cook it three
times over and eat it,” others, “ Bake it upon hot coals,” others, “ It must
be baked in a jar ”; but one minister who was afraid of the water, said,
“ It should be thrown into the whirlpool of the Yamuna, it will be utterly
destroyed there, there is no punishment for it like that.” The tortoise, as
he heard his words, [162] thrust out his head and said, “Friend, what sin
have I committed that you are discussing such a punishment ior me 1
The other punishments I can bear, but this last is excessively cruel, do not
even mention it.” When the king heard him, he said, “This is the one
to carry into action,” so he ordered him to be thrown into the whirlpool of
the Yamuna; there he found a current which led to the dwelling of the
Nagas, and went by it to their place. Now at that time some young sons
of the Naga king Dhatarattlia1 were sporting in that stream, and when
they saw they cried, “Seize that slave.” The tortoise thought, “1 have
escaped from the hand of the king of Benares to fall into the hands ot
these fierce Nagas; by what means shall I get away?” Then he thought
of a plan, and, making up a false story, he said to them, “Why do you
speak in this way who belong to the court of King Dhatarattlia ? I am a
tortoise named CittaciUa, and I am come to Dbatarattha as a messenger
from the king of Benares; our king has sent me as he wishes to
give his daughter to King Dbatarattha, shew me to bun,” and they we
pleased took him, and going to the king related the whole matter.
The king ordered them to bring him; but being displeased when he
1 The Naga king. e ^

|(g)f <SL
84 "' The Jataka. Book XXII.
saw him, he said, “ Those who have such mean bodies cannot act as
messengers.” The tortoise, when he heard this, replied by telling his own
good qualities, “Why should the king need messengers as tall as a palm
tree! a small body or a big body is of no matter,—the real matter is the
power to carry out the errand where you are sent. Now our king, 0
monarch, has many messengers; men do his business on the dry land,
birds in the air, and I in the water, for I am a favourite of the king’s
named C'ittacuja and 1 have a particular post, do not scoff at me.” Then
King Dhatarattha asked him why he was sent by the king, and he made
answer, “The king said to me that he had made friendship with all the
kings of Jambudlpa, and that he now wished to give his daughter
Samuddaja in order to make friendship with the Naga king Dhatarattha;
with these words he sent me, and do you make no delay but send a
company at once with me and name the day and receive the maiden.”
Being highly pleased [1G3] the king paid him great honour and sent four
Naga youths with him, bidding them go and fix a day after hearing the
king’s words, and then return, and they, having taken the tortoise with
them, departed from the abode of the Niigas. The tortoise saw a lotus-
pond between the Yamuna and Benares, and wishing to escape by some
device he said, “ 0 Naga youths, our king and his queen and son saw me
coming out of the water as I went to the king’s palace, and they asked me
to give them some lotuses and lotus roots; I will gather some for them ;
do you let me go here, and, if you do not see me, go forward to the king,—
I will meet you there.” They believed him and let him go, and he hid
himself; and the others, as they could not see him, thought that he must
have gone on to the king, and so proceeded to the palace in the guise of
young men. The king received them with honour and asked them from
whence they had come. “From Dhatarattha, your majesty.” “Wherefore?”
“O king, we are his messengers; Dhatarattha asks after your health and
he will give you whatever you desire ; and he asks you to give us your
daughter Samuddaja as his queen.” To explain this they repeated the
first stanza:
“ Whatever jeyvels there may be in Dhatarattha’s palace stored,
They all are yours, his royal boon ; give us your daughter for our lord.”
When the king heard it he replied in the second stanza:
“No’er lias a man boon known to wed his daughter to a Naga king;
Such match were utterly unfit,—how could we think of such a thing?”
The youths made ansyver, “ If an alliance with Dhatarattha seems so
improper to you, then why did you send your attendant the tortoise
Oittacula to our king, offering to give your daughter Samuddaja? [164]
Since after sending such a message you now shew scorn to our king, we
shall know how to deal with you as you deserve ” So saying they uttered
two stanzas by way of threat:

111
. * Q
t
No. 543. 85 i
“ You sacrifice your life, O king,—your throne and kingdom what are they ?
Before a Naga in his wrath all mortal glory fades away;
You a poor mortal standing there, who, by your vanity undone,
Would look with scorn on Yamuna, king Varuna’s imperial son1.”
Then the king repeated two stanzas :
“ I do not scorn that king of yours, Dhatarattha of wide renown,
Of many Nagas is he king, he wears by right a royal crown ;
But great and noble though he be, sprung from Videha’s khattiya line, /
My daughter is of purer blood,—let him not dream of child of mine.”
Although the Naga youths wished to kill him on the spot by the blast
of their breath, yet they reflected that as they had been sent to fix the
marriage' day it would not be right to go away and leave the man
dead; so they vanished at once out of sight, saying, “we will depart and
tell the king.” Their king asked them whether they had brought the
princess. They being angry replied, “0 king, why dost thou send us
about hither and thither without cause 1 If thou wishest to kill us, then
slay us here at once. [165] He reviles and defames thee, aud sets hiss
daughter on a pinnacle in his pride of birth,”—in this way repeating
things said and unsaid, they roused the king’s wrath. He ordered them
to assemble his army, saying;
“Assataras and Kambalas®,—summon the Nagas one and all;
Towards Benares let them flock, but do no harm to great or small.”
Then the Nagas answered, “ If no man is to be harmed, thou what
shall we do, if we go there?” He uttered two stanzas to tell them what
they were to do and what he himself would do ;
“ Over the tanks aud palaces, the public roads and tops of trees,
Over the gatoways twined in wreaths let them hang dangling in the breeze ;
While with white body and white hoods 1 will the city all invest,
And drawing close my lines of siege with terror fill each Kasi breast.”
The Nagaa did so. [166] The Teacher thus described what happened :
“Seeing the snakes on,every side, the women throng, a trembling crowd,
And as the monsters swell their hoods in fear they shriek and wail aloud;
Benares city prostrate lay before these wild invading bands,
.Raising their amis all begged and prayed, ‘Give him the daughter he demands.’”
While the king lay in bed lie beard the wailing of his own wives and
those of the citizens, and being afraid of deatli from the threats of the four
youths, he thrice exclaimed, “I will give to Dhatarattha my daughter
Samuddaja ”; and all the Naga kings, when they heard it, retired for the
distance of a league, and, fixing their camp thcio, built a very city of the
gods and despatched a complimentary present, saying, “Let him send his
1 Vanina is called a Naga raja in Lalitu Vistara, p. 2-19, 13. These lines seem to
be a quotation from another poem.
- Names of Niiga tribes.

t(f)| <§L
\%-----_<#/
86 The Jataka. Book XXII.
daughter as he says.” [107] The king, having received the proffered
present, dismissed those who brought it, saying, “Do you depart, I will
send my daughter by the hands of my ministers.” Then he sent for his
daughter and, taking her upon the terrace, he opened a window and said
to her, “ Daughter, behold this adorned city; they say that you are to be
the chief queen of a king there,—the city is not far off, you can come back
when you feel a home-longing,—but you must go there now.” Then he
made the attendants wash her head and adorn her with all kinds of
ornaments and set her in a covered carriage and sent her off in the care
of his ministers. The Naga kings came to meet her and paid her great
honour. The ministers entered the city and gave her up and returned
with much wealth. The princess was taken up into the palace and made
to lie on a divinely decked bed; and the young Naga women, assuming
humpbacked and other deformed appearances, waited on her us if they
were human attendants. As soon as .she lay down on the heavenly bed
she felt a divinely soft touch and fell asleep. Dhatarattha, having received
her, vanished instantly with all his host and appeared in the world of the
Nagas. When the princess awoke and saw the adorned heavenly bed and
the golden and jewelled palaces, etc., and the gardens and tanks and the
Niiga-world, itself like an adorned city of the gods, she asked the hump­
backed and other female attendants, “This city is magnificently adorned,
it is not like our city; whose is it?” “O lady, it belongs to your lord,—
it is not those of scanty merits who win such glory as this,—you have
obtained it by reason of your great merits.” Then Dhatarattha ordered
the drums to be carried about the Naga city, which was five hundred
yojanas in extent, with a proclamation that whoever betrayed any signs of
his snake-nature to iSamuddaja should be punished; therefore not one
dared to appear as a snake before her. So she lived affectionately and
harmoniously with him under the idea that it was a world of men1.
II.
in course of time Dhatarattha’s queen conceived and brought forth a
son, and from his fair appearance they named him Sudassana; then
again she bore a second whom they called Datta, [168]—now he was a
Bodhisatta. Then she bore another whom they called Subhaga, and a
fourth whom they called Ariltha. Yet even though she had borne these
four sons, she knew not that it was the world of the NagRs. But one
day they said to Ariltha, “Your mother is a woman, not a Naga.”
Ariltha said to himself, “I will prove her,” so one day while drinking his
mother’s breast, he assumed a serpents form and struck the back of her
i [■ Nugiu'u-khanibun nitUntam.’]

xI S a / No.543. , 87 ' a L
foot with his tail. When she saw his serpent-form she uttered a great
cry in her terror and threw him on the ground, and struck his eye with
her nail so that the blood poured forth. The king, hearing her cry, asked
why she screamed, and when lie learned what Arittha had done, he came
up, with threats, “Seize the slave and put him to death.” The princess,
knowing his passionate nature, exclaimed in her love for her son, “ My
lord, I struck my son’s eye, forgive him.” The king, when she said this,
replied, “ What can I do? ” and for gave him. That very day she learned
that it was the dwelling of the Nagas, and thenceforth Arittha was always -
called Kanarittha (or one-eyed Arittha).
Now the four princes grew up to years of discretion. Then their
father gave them each a kingdom a hundred yojanas square; they
possessed great glory, and each was attended by sixteen thousand Naga
maidens. Now their father’s kingdom was only a hundred yojanas square,
and the three sons went every month to visit their parents. But the
Bodhisatta went every fortnight, and he used to propound some question
which had arisen in the Naga realm and then go with his father to visit
the great king Virupakkha1, when he would discuss the question with
him. Now one day when Virupakkha had gone with the Naga assembly
to the world of the gods, and were sitting there waiting upon Sakka, a
question arose among the gods and none could answer it, but the Great
Being who was seated on a noble throne answered it. Then the king of
the gods honoured him with divine flowers and fruits, and addressed
him, “0 Datta, thou art endued with a wisdom as broad as the earth;
henceforth be thou called Bhuridatta,” and he gave him this name.
[1G9] From that time forth ho used to go to pay his homage to Sakka,
and when he saw the exceedingly delightful splendour of his court with
its heavenly nymphs he longed for the heavenly world, “ What have I to
do with this frog eating snake-nature? I will return to the snake-world
and keep the fast and follow the observances by which one may be born
among the gods.” With these thoughts he asked his parents on his return
to the abode of the snakes, “O my father and mother, I will keep the
fast.” “By all means, O son, keep it; but when you keep it do not go
outside, but keep it within this one empty palace in the Naga realm, for
there is great fear of the Nagas outside.” He consented; so he kept the
fast only in the parks and gardens of the empty palace. But the snake
maidens kept waiting on him with their musical instruments, and he
thought to himself, “ If I dwell here my observance of the fast will never
come to its completion,—I will go to the haunts of men and keep the fast
there.” So in his fear of being hindered he said to his wife, without
telling it to his pareuts, “ Lady, if I. go to the haunts of men there is a
banyan tree on the bank of the Yamuna,—T will fold up my body in the
1 I read this by conjecture for Virukkha.

<SL
t®|
\%>-— < //
The Jcitaka, Book XXII.
8 8
top of an ant-hill near by and undertake the fast with its four divisions1,
and T will lie down there and observe the fast; and when I have lain
there all night and kept the fast let ten of your women come every time
at dawn with musical instruments in their hands, and after decking mo
with perfumes and flowers let them conduct me back with song and dance to
the abode of the Nagas.” With these words he went and folded his body
on the top of an ant-hill, and saying aloud, “ Let who will take my skin
or muscles or bones or blood,” he undertook the fast with its lour divisions
and lay down, after assuming a body which only consisted of a head and
a tail, and kept the fast. At daybreak the Naga girls came, and having
done as they were ordered, conducted him to the Naga abode; and while
he observed the fast in this fashion, [170] a long period of time elapsed2.
III.
Now at that time a Brahmin3 who dsvelt in a village near the gate of
Benares used to go into the forest with his son Somadatta and set snares
and nets and stakes and kill wild animals, and carrying the flesh on a
pole sold it and so made a livelihood. One day he failed to catch even a
young lizard, and he said to his son, “ If we go home empty-handed your
mother will be angry, let us catch something at any rate”; so he went
towards the ant-hill where the Bodhisatta was lying, and observing the
footsteps of the deer who went down to the Yamuna to drink, he said,
‘‘My sou, this is a haunt of deer, do you return and wait, while I will
wound some deer that lias come to drink”; so taking his bow he stood
watching for deer at the foot of a tree. Now at evening time a deer came
to drink,—he wounded it; it did not however fall at once, but spurred on
by the force of the arrow it fled with the blood flowing down, and the
father and son pursuing it to the spot where it fell took its flesh and,
going out of the wood, reached that banyan as the sun set. “ It is a bad
time, we cannot go on, we will stay here,” so saying they laid the flesh
on one side and climbing the tree lay among the branches. The Brahmin
woke at dawn, and was listening to hear the sound of the deer, when the
Naga maidens came up and prepared the flowery couch for the Bodhisatta.
He. laid aside his snake’s body and assuming a divine body adorned with
all kinds of ornaments sat on his flower-bed with all the glory of a Sakka.
1 |In i. 390'- wo read caturuiiganama n nayataiii bralimaeariyavamih vasiiit, which by
the light of u. 190 S. wo may interpret “free from jealousy, drunkenness, desire, and
wrath.” (But compare Maj. Nik. i. 77.) 1 do not find it however in connexion with
the Uponatha vow; although eight divisions of this arc recognised in tv. 318", traits,
p. 300. The CutupoMt.hu Jat aka, No. 411, would have thrown light on this subject;
hut its name only is mentioned in its proper place, a reference being given to another
which has not been identified.] [' Uposathu khaudam nitthitam.’]
a Be is called later on Alambfiyana, see p. 95.

■ e°l&x
f ( I ) | *SL
iVo. 543. .., 89
The Naga maidens honoured him with perfumes and garlands and played
their heavenly instruments and performed their dance and song. When
the Brahmin heard the sound he said, “Who is this1? I will tiud out”;
and ho called to his son, but though he called he could not wake him.
“Let him sleep on, he said, “he is tired, I will go myself alone”; so he
came down from the tree and approached, but the Naga maidens when
they saw him sank into the earth with all their instruments and departed
to the abode ot the Nitgas, [171] and the JBodhisafcta was left alone. The
Brahmin, standing near, questioned him in these two stanzas:
“ What youth is this, red-eyed, who here is seen,
His shoulders broad with ample space between,—
And what ten maidens these who guard him‘round
Clad in fair robes, with golden bracelets bound I
Who art thou ’midst this forest greenery,
Bright like a fire just newly dressed with ghee 1
Art thou a Sakka or a yakkha, say,
Or some famed Naga priuoo of potent sway?”
When the Great Being heard him he thought, “ If I say that I am one
of the Sakkas he will believe me, for he is a Brahmin ; but I must speak
only the truth to-day,” so he thus declared his Naga birth :
“I am a Naga great in power, invincible with poisonous breath,
A prosperous land with all its sons my angry bite could smite with death ;
My mother is Samuddaja, Dhatarattha as sire I claim,
Sudaasan’s youngest brother I, and' Bhfifidatta is my name.”
But when the Great Being said this, he reflected, “This Brahmin is
fierce and cruel, he may betray me to a snake-charmer, and so hinder my
performance of the fast; what if I were to take him to the Naga kingdom
and give him great honour there, and thus .carry on my fast without a
break?” So he said [172] to him, “0 Brahmin, I will give thee great
honour, come to the pleasant home of the Nagas, let us go at once thither.”
“My lord, I have a son, I will go if he comes too.” The Bodhisatta
replied, “Go, Brahmin, and fetch him,” and he thus described to him his
own dwelling:
“ Awful and dark is yonder lake, incessant storms its waters toss,
That is my home: my subjects there all hear and none my bidding cross ;
Plunge thou beneath the dark blue waves,—the peacocks and the herons
call,—
Plunge and enjoy the bliss there stored for those who keep the precepts all.”
The Brahmin went and told this to his son and brought him, and the
Great Being took them both and went to the bank of the Yamuna, and,
standing there, said:
“ Fear not, 0 Brahmin with thy son,—follow my words and thou shalt live
Honoured and happy in my home with all the pleasures 1 can give.” So
So saying the Great Being by his power brought the father and son to

/ > --n\ \
f(®)| . " <
sl
\%^-—
90
The Jdtcika. Book XXII.
the dwelling of the Nagas, where they obtained a divine condition; and
he bestowed on them divine prosperity and gave to each of them tour
hundred Naga maidens, and great was the prosperity they enjoyed. The
Bodhisatta continued to practise his fast diligently, and every fortnight
he went to pay honour to his parents and discoursed on the law; and then
going to the Brahmin he inquired concerning his health, and said to him,
“Tell me anything that you want, enjoy yourself without discontent”;
and, after giving a kindly greeting also to Somadatta, he proceeded to his
own home. The Brahmin, after dwelling a year in the Naga realm,
through his lack of previous merit began to grow discontented [173] and
longed to return to the world of men ; the dwelling-place of the Nagas
seemed like a hell to him, the adorned palace like a prison, the Naga
maidens with their ornaments like female yakkhas. He thought to him­
self, “1 am discontented, I will learn what Somadatta thinks”; so lie
went to him and said, “Art thou not discontented, my son?” “Why
should 1 be discontented ? let us not feel any such feeling. Are you
discontented, father?” “Yes, my son?” “Why so?” “ Because I do
not see your mother and your brothers and sisters; come, my son, let us
go.” He answered that he would not go, but, being repeatedly entreated
by his father, he at last consented. The Brahmin reflected, “ I have won
my sou’s consent, but if 1 tell Bhuridatta that I am discontented, he will
heap more honour upon me, and I shall not be able to go. My object can
only be attained in one way. 1 will describe his prosperity and then ask
him, ‘ why do you leave all this glory and go to the world of men to
practise the. observance of the fast?’ When he answers, ‘for the sake of
obtaining heaven,’I will tell him, ‘far more then should we do so, who
have made our livelihood by slaughtering living creatures. I too will go
to the world of men, and see my kindred, and will then leave the world
and follow the law of the ascetics,’ and then he will let me depart.”
Having thus determined, one day when the other came up to him and
asked him whether he was discontented, he assured him that nothing was
wanting that he could supply, and, without making any mention of his
intended departure, at first he only described the other’s prosperity in the
following stanzas :
“Level the ground on every side, with tayara blossoms whitened o’er,
Red with the cochineal insect-swarms, the brightest verdure for its floor,
With sacred shrines in every wood, and swan-tilled lake; which charm the eye,
While strewn the fallen lotus leaves as carpets on the surface lie,—
The thousand-columned palaces with halls where heavenly maidens dance,
Their columns all of jewels wrought, whose angles in the sunshine glance;—
flii| Thou host indeed a glorious homo, won by thy merits as thine own,
When all desires are gratified as soon as each new wish is known ;—
Thou onviest not great Sakha's halls,'—what are his stateliest, courts to thine?
Thy palaces more glorious are and with more dazzling splendours shine.”

• G°t&X *.
IC f )| <SL
iVo. 543. 91
The Great Being replied, “Say not so, Brahmin; our glory compared
to Sakka’s seems only as a mustard-seed beside Mount Meru,—we are not
even equal to his attendants,” and he repeated a stanza:
“ Our highest thoughts cannot conceive the imperial pomp round Sakka’s throne,
Or the four Regents1 in his court, each in his own appointed zone.”
When he heard him repeat his words “ this palace of yours is Sakka’s
palace,’ he said, “ I have had this in my mind, and it is through my
desire to obtain Vejayanta- that I practise the observance of the fast,”—
then he repeated a stanza, describing his own earnest wish :
“1 long intensely for the home of the immortal saints on high,
Therefore upon that ant-hill top I keep the fast unceasingly.”
[175] The Brahmin, on hearing this, thought to himself, “ Now 1
have gained my opportunity,” and filled with joy he repeated two stanzas,
I (egging leave to depart:
“ I too sought deer when with my son into that forest glade 1 sped;
The friends I left at home know not whether I am alive or dead ;
0 Bhflridatta, let us go, thou glorious lord of Ivasi race,
Let us depart and see once more mu- kindred in their native place.”
The Bodliisatta answered :
“’Tis my desire that you should dwell with us, and here pass happy hours;
Where iu the upper world of men will you find haunts of peace, like ours i
But would you dwell awhile elsewhere and yet enjoy our pleasures still,
Then Like my loave,—go, see your friends, and be as happy as you will.”
And thinking to himself “ if he obtains this happiness through hie ho
will be sure not to tell it to anyone else,—I will give him my jewel which
grants all desires,” he gave him the jewel and said ;
“The lienrer of this heavenly gem beholds his children and his farm;
Take it, O Brahmin, and begone,—its bearer never comes to harm.”
The Brahmin replied :
“I understand thy words too well, 1 am grown old as thou caust see.
1 will adopt the ascetic life, what are life’s pleasure!- now to me t”
The Bodhisatta said;
“ If thou shouldst fail and break thy vow then seek life’s common joys once
more,
And come and find me out again and I will give thee ample store.”
[176] The Brahmin answered :
“ 0 Bhflridatta, I accept with thanks the oiler thou hast made:
Should the occasion conic to me I will return to claim thy aid.’
1 The four lokfipdias. - J h heaven.

' e<W \
/ n
111
% L
92 The Jcltaka. Book XXII.
The Great Being perceived that he had no desire to abide there, so he
commanded some young Nagas to take Mm to the world of men. The
Master thus described what happened :
“ Then Bhiiridatta gave commands to four of his young Nagas, ‘ Go,
Take ye this Brahmin in your charge and lead him where he wants to go.’
T he four attendants heard the words,—at once their lord’s command was
done:
They brought the Brahmin to the place and leaving him returned alone.”
Then the Brahmin, as he went along, said to his son, “ Somadatta, we
wounded a deer in this place and a boar in that,” and seeing a lake on the
way he exclaimed, “ Somadatta, let us bathe”; so they both took off their
divine ornaments and clothes, and wrapping them up in a bundle laid
them on the bank and bathed. At that very moment the ornaments
vanished and returnod to the Naga-world, and their former poor yellow
clothes were wrapped rounds heir bodies, and their bows, arrows, and
spears came back as they were before. “We are undone, father,” bewailed
Somadatta; but his father comforted him, “ Fear not; as long as there
arc* deer we shall make a livelihood by killing deer in the forest.”
Somadatta s mother heard of their coming, and having gone to meet them
she brought them home and she satisfied them with food and drink.
When the Brahmin had eaten and fallen asleep she asked her son, [177]
“ ^ 1,ere liave y°u been all this time 1” “ O mother, we were carried by
the Naga king Bhiiridatta to the great Naga realm, and we liave now
come back, as we were discontented.” “Have you brought any jewels 1”
“None, mother.” “ Why did he not give any to you?” “Mother,
Bhiiridatta gavo to my father a jewel which grants all desires, but
he would not accept it.” “ Wherefore?” “He is going, they say,
to become an ascetic.” “ What, after leaving me so long with the burden
ot the children and dwelling iu the Naga realm, he is now going to
become an ascetic?” so flying into a passion she struck his back with the
spoon which she used for frying the rice and upbraided him, saying,
“ Thou wicked Brahmin, why didst say that thou wast going to become an
ascetic and so refuse the precious jewel, and why didst thou come here
and not take the ascetic’s vow? Depart from my house directly.” But
lie said lo her, “ Good lady, be not angry, as long as there are deer in the
forest J will support you and your children.” So the next day he went
with his son into the forest and followed there the same livelihood as
before'. 1
1 [' Vannppftvewmn.lihanihnu nititiHnnV]

3
iSL
No. 543. 9
IY.
Now at that time a garula bird which dwelt in a silk-cotton tree in
Himavat in a region of the great southern ocean swept up the water with |
the wind of its wings, and swooping down on the Naga region seized a
Naga king by the head ; but this was the period when the garulas did
not know how to seize the Nagas,—they learned how in the Pundara
Jataka1. So although he seized it by the head, without scattering the
water, he carried it dangling to the summit of Himavat. A Brahmin,
an old inhabitant of Kasi, who was following the life of an anchorite
in the region of Himavat, was dwelling in a hut of leaves which he
had built, and there was a great banyan tree at the end of his covered
walk, and ho had made his abode by day at its root. The garula
carried the Naga to the top of the banyan, and the Naga as it hung
down in its effort to escape twined its tail round a branch. The garida,
being unaware of it, flew up to heaven by dint of his great strength and
carried up the banyan tree without its roots". The bird then bore the
Naga to the silk-cotton tree and struck it with his beak and split open its
belly, and having eaten [178] the fat dropped the body into the middle of
the sea. The banyan tree as it fell made a great noise, and the bird,
wondering what noise it could be, looked down, and seeing the tree
thought to himself, “From whence did I carry that off ?” and recognising
that it was the banyan at the end of the anchorite’s covered walk, he
considered, “This tree was of great service to him,—is an evil consequence
following me or not?. I will ask him and learn.” So he went to him in
the guise of a young pupil ; now at that moment the ascetic was
smoothing the earth down. So the king of the garulas, having saluted
him and sat down on one side, asked him, as if he were himself ignorant
of the fact, what had once grown in that spot. He replied, “ A garula
was carrying off a Naga for his food, which twined its tail round a branch
of a banyan tree in order to escape; but the bird by its great strength
made a spring upwards and flew off, and so the tree was torn up; this is
the place out of which it was torn.” “ What demerit accrued to the
bird?” “If he did it not knowiug what he did, it was only ignorance,
not a sin.” “ What was the case with the Naga ? ” “ He did not seize
the tree with an intent to hurt it, therefore he also has no demerit.” The
garula was pleased with the ascetic and said, “ My friend, l am that king
of the garulas, and 1 am pleased with your explanation of my question.
Now you live here in the forest and I know the AUmkayana spell of
] .Kit. SIS, Vol. v. p. 43 (trans.). ’
-• [BJ 'amok* ‘roots and all,’ which suits the context better.]

? (fj <SL
\%>-----^dF/ .
94 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
priceless value. I will give it to you as my fee for your lesson, be
pleased to accept it.” “ I know enough about spells,—you can be going.
But he continued to press him and at last he persuaded him to accept it,
so he gave him the spell and shewed him the simples and depaited.
Now at that time a poor Brahmin in Benares had got deeply into
debt, and being pressed by his creditors he said to himself, “ W hy should
I go on living here? I am sure it will be better to go into the forest and
die.” So having gone from his home he went by successive journeys till
he came to that hermitage. He entered it and pleased the ascetic by his
diligent discharge of his duties. The ascetic said to himself, 1 This
Brahmin is very helpful to me, I will give him the divine spell which the
king of garulas gave to me.” So he said to him, “ O Brahmin, 1 know the
Alamlmyana spell, I will give it to you, do you take it.” The other
replied, “Peace, good friend, I do not want any spell,” [179] but the
other pressed him again and again and at last persuaded him; so he gave
him the spell and shewed hint the simples necessary for it and described
the entire method of using it.
The Brahmin said to himself, “I have gained a means of livelihood”;
so after staying there a few days, he made the excuse of an attack of
rheumatism, and after begging the ascetic’s forgiveness he took his
respectful leave of him and departed from the forest, and by successive
stages reached the bank of the Yamuna, from whence he went along
the high road repeating the spell. Now at that very time a thousand
Naga youths who waited on Bhuridatta were carrying that jewel
which grants all desires. They had come out of the Naga-world and
had stopped and placed it on a hillock of sand, and there, after playing
all night in the water by its radiance, they had put on all their
ornaments at the approach of morning, and, causing the jewel to con­
tract its splendour1, had sat down, guarding it. The Brahmin reached
the spot while he was repeating his charm, and they, on hearing the
charm, seized with terror lest it should be the gurula king, plunged into
tho earth without staying to take the jewel and fled to the Naga-world.
The Brahmin, when he saw the jewel, exclaimed, “ My spell has at once
Succeeded”; and he joyfully seized the jewel and went on his way. Now
at that very time the outcast Brahmin was entering the forest with his
son Somadatta to kill deer, and when he saw the jewel on the other’s
hund he said to his son, “ Is not this the jcwml which Bhuridatta gave to
us?” “Yes,” said his son, ‘‘ it is the very same.” “ Weil, 1 will tell him
its evil qualities and so deceive him and get the jewel for my own.
“O father, you did not keep the jewel before when Bhuridatta gave it
to you: this Brahmin will assuredly cheat you,-be silent about if “Let
■ Or perhaps “causing briugmg its splendour amongst them."

| l ) | ■ '
No. 543. 9 5 ^ ^
be, my son; you shall see'which can cheat best, he or I.” So he went to
Alambayana and addressed him :
“ Where did you get that gem of yours, bringing good luck and fair to th’ eye ;
But having certain signs and marks, which I can recognise it by?”
[180] Alambayana answered in the following stanza :
“ This morning as I walked along I saw the jewel where it lay,
Its thousand red-eyed guards all fled and left it there to he my prey.”
The outcast’s son, wishing to cheat him, proceeded.,in three stanzas to
tell him the jewel’s evil qualities, desiring to secure it himself:
“ Carefully tended, honoured well, and worn or stowed away with care,
It brings its owner all good things, however large his wishes are;
But if he shews it disrespect and wears or stows it heedlessly,
Sore will he rue the finding it,—’twill only bring him misery.
Do you have nought to do therewith,—you have no skill such ware to hold:
(live it to me and take instead a hundred pounds of yellow gold.”
Then Alambayana spoke a stanza in reply :
“ I will not sell this gem of mine, though cows or jewels offered be;
Its signs and marks I know full well, and it shall ne’er be bought from me.”
[181] The Brahmin said :
“ If cows or jewels will not buy from you that jewel which you wear,
What is the price you’ll sell it for ? come, a true answer let me hear.”
Alambayana answered :
“ He who can tell me where to find the mighty Niiga in his pride,
To him this jewel will I give, flashing its rays on every side.” „
The Brahmin said :
“Is this perchance the Garu} King, come in a Brahmin’s guise to-day,
.Seeking, while on the track for food, to seize the Naga as his prey ?”
Alambayana answered :
“No bird-king I,—a garu} bird ne’er came across these eyes of mine,—
I am a Brahmin doctor, friend, and snakes and snake bites are my line.”
The Brahmin said :
“What special power do you possess, or have you learned some subtil skill
Which gives you this immunity to handle snakes whose fangs can kill ?” >
He replied, thus describing his power :
“ The hermit Kosiya in the wood kept a long painful penance well,
Aud at the end a Garula revealed to him the serpent-spell.
That holiest sage, who dwelt retired upon a lonely mountain height,
l waited on with earnest zeal and served unwearied day and night;
And at the last to recompense my years of faithful ministry
My blessed teacher did reveal the heavenly secret unto mrt
[182] Trusting in this all-powerful spell, the fiercest snakes i do not tear; *
I counteract their deadliest bites, I Alainbtiysna the seer.

W y ^ $ \ / n
? (!)! • <SL
+ / f k^/ mk A
"•-’- 90
'''':~ The Jatala. Bool XXII.
As he heard him, the outcast Brahmin thought to himself, “ This
Alam baya na is ready to give the pearl of gerns to anyone who shews him
the Niiga; I will shew him Bhuridatta and so secure the gem”; so he
uttered this stanza as he consulted with his son :
“Let us secure this gem, my son ; come, Somadatta, let’s be quick,
Nor lose our luck as did the fool1 who smashed his meal-dish with his stick."1
Somadatta replied :
“ All honour due he shewed, to you, when you came in that stranger’s way ;
And would you turn and rob him now, his kindly welcome to repay ?
If you want wealth, go seek for it from Bhuridatta as before ;
Ask him and he will gladly give all that your heart desires, and more.”
The Brahmin said :
“ That which, by lucky fortune brought, in bowl or hand all ready lies,
Eat it at once nor questions ask, lest thou shouldst lose the offered prize.”
Somadatta replied :
[183] “ Earth yawns for him, hell’s fiercest fires await the traitor at the end,
Or, with fell hunger gnawed, he pines a living death, who cheats his
friend.
Ask Bhuridatta,—he will give, if you want wealth, the wished-for boon ;
But if you sin, I fear the sin will find you out and that right soon.”
The Bralnnin said :
“ But, through a costly sacrifice Brahmins may sin and yet be clean ;
1 Great sacrifices we will bring and, so made pure, escape the sin.”
Somadatta said :
“Cease your vile talk, I will not stay,—this very moment 1 depart,
I will not go one step with you, this baseness rankling in your heart.”
So saying, the wise youth, rejecting his father’s couusel, exclaimed
with a loud voice which startled the deities in the neighbourhood, “I will
not go with such a sinner,” and fled away as his father stood looking on ;
and, plunging into the recesses of Himavat, there became an ascetic, and,
having practised the Faculties and the Attainments and become, perfected
in mystic meditation, he was born in the Brahma world. The Teacher
explained this in the following stanza :
“The noble Somadatta tines rebuked his father where he stood,
Startling f.he spirits of the place, and turned and hurried from the wood.”
The outcast Brahmin thought to himself, “ Whither will Somadatta
go except to his own home?” and when he saw that. AI am bay ana was a
little vexed, [184] he said to him, “ Do not mind, Alatnbayana, I will
introduce you to Bhuridatta.” So he took him and went to the place
where the snake king kept the fast-day ; and when be saw him lying on
i Of. Hitopud. iv.r story 8.

lit) I <SL
N »- 543. 97
the top of the ant-hill with his hoods contracted he stood a little way off,
and holding out his hand uttered two stanzas:
“ Seize this King-serpent where ho lies and snatch forthwith that priceless gem
"Which bright-red like a lady-bird glows on his head a diadem.
On yonder ant-heap see ! he lies, stretched out without a thought of fear,_
Spread like a heap of cotton there,—seize him befoi’e he knows you’re near.”
The Great Being opened his eyes, and, seeing the outcast, he pondered,
<! T took this fellow to my Naga home and settled him in high prosperity,
but he would not accept the jewel which I gave him, and now7 he is come
here with a snake-charmer. But if I were angry with him for his
treachery, my moral character would be injured. Now my first of all
duties is to keep the fast-day in its four periods,—that must remain
inviolate; so whether Alambayana cut me in pieces or cook me or fix
me on a spit, I must at all events not be angry with him.” So closing his
eyes and following the highest ideal of Resolution he placed his head
between his hoods and lay perfectly motionless1.
Y.
Then the outcast Brahmin exclaimed, “O Alambayana, do you seize
this Naga and give me the gem.” Alambayana, being delighted at seeing
the Naga, and not caring the least for the gem, threw it into his hand,
saying, “Take it, Brahmin”; but the jewel slipped out of his hand, and as
soon as it fell it went into the ground and was lost in the Naga-world.
The Brahmin found himself bereft of the three things, the priceless gem,
Bhuridatta’s friendship, and his son, and went off to his home, loudly
lamenting, “ I have lost everything, I would not follow my son’s words.”
But Alambayana, [185] having first anointed his body with divine drugs
and eaten a little and so fortified himself within, uttered the divine spell,
and, going up to the Bodhisatta, seized him by the tail, and, holding him
fast, opened his. mouth and, having himself eaten a drug, spat into it.
The pure-natured Naga king did not allow himself to feel any auger
through tear of violating the moral precepts, and though he opened his
eyes did not open them to the full3. After he had made the snake full of
the magic drug, and, holding him by the tail with his head downwards,
hacl shaken him and made him vomit the food he had swallowed, ho
sttetched him out at full length on the ground. Then pressing him like
a pillow with his hands he crushed his bones to pieces, and then, seizing
his tail, pounded him as if he were beating cloth. The Great Being felt
no anger even though he suffered such pain.
1 [‘ Sila-khandam nittkitam.’]
Would their full gaze have made the, offender blind
H. VI. 7

II)! <SL
^^98 The Jdtalca. Booh XXII.
^ • % " '
The Teacher described this in the following stanza:
“By dint of drugs of magic power and muttering spells with evil iskill, ^
He seized and held him without fear and made him subject to his
Having thus made the Great Being helpless, he prepared a basket of
creepers and threw him into it; at first his huge body would not go into
it, but after kicking it with his heels he forced it to enter. Tlien,^ going
to a certain village, he set the basket down in the middle of it and
shouted aloud, “Let all come here who wish to see a snake dance” ; and
all the villagers crowded round. Then he called to the Naga king to
come out, and the Great Being reflected, “It will be best for me to please
the crowd and dance to-day; perhaps he will gain plenty of money and in
liis content will let me go; whatever he makes me do, I will do it. So
when Alambayana took him out of the basket and told him to swell out
he assumed his full size; and so when he told him to become small 01
round or heaped up like a bank1, or to assume one hood or two hoods 01
three or four or five or ten or twenty or any number up to a hundred,
or to become high or low, or to make liis body visible or invisible, or to
become blue or yellow or red or white or pink, or to emit water, or to
emit water and smoke, [ 18G] he made himself assume all these various
appearances as he was commanded and exhibited his dancing powers.
No one who witnessed it could keep back his tears and the people brought
gold coin, gold, garments, ornaments, and the like, so that he received a
hundred thousand pieces in that village alone.
Now at first, after he had captured the Great Being, he had intended
to let him go when he had gained a thousand pieces; but when he had
made such a harvest, he said, “ I have gained all this money in one little
village,—what a fortune I shall get in a city! ” So, after settling his
family there, he made a basket all covered with jewels, and having thrown
the Great Being into it, he mounted a luxurious carriage and started with
a great train of attendants. He made him dance in every village and
town which they passed, and at last they reached Benares. He gave the
snake-king honey and fried grain, and killed frogs for him to eat; but
ho would not take the food, through fear of not being released from his
captivity3; but even though he did not take his food, the other made
him shew his sports, and began with the four villages at the gates of the
city, where he spent a month. Theft on the fast-day of the fifteenth he
announced to the king that he would that day exhibit the snake’s dancing
powers before him. The king in consequence, made a proclamation by
boat of drum and collected a large crowd, and tiers of scaflolding were
erected in the courtyard of the palace-.
i B“ vappito, from vappol [The toxt roads vippito.]
a Through the guilt which he would incur through eating.
■J [Kilana-khandam nitthitam.]

t j p * <
sl
No. 543. 99
VI.
But on the clay when the Bodhisatta was seized by Alambana, the
Great Being’s mother saw in a dream that a black man with red eyes had
cut off her arm with a sword and was carrying it away, streaming with
blood. She sprang up in terror, but on feeling her right arm she recog­
nised it to be only a dream. Then she considered in herself, “I have
seen an evil frightful dream ; it portends some misfortune either to my
four sons or to King Dhatarattha or to myself.” But presently she fixed
her thoughts especially on the Bodhisatta: “ Now all the others are
dwelling in the Naga-world, but he has gone into the world of men
'resolved to keep the precepts and under a vow to observe the fast-day;
therefore I wonder whether some snake-charmer or garula is seizing him.”
So she thought of him more and more, and at last at the end of a fortnight
she became quite dejected, saying, “ My son could not live a whole fort­
night without me,—surely [187] some evil must have befallen him.”
After a month had passed there was no limit to the tears which flowed
from her eyes in her distress, and she sat watching the road by which he
would come back, continually saying, “ Surely he will now be coming
home,—surely he will now be coming home.” Then her eldest son
Sudassana came with a great retinue to pay a visit to his parents at the
end of a month’s absence, and having left his attendants outside he
ascended the palace, and after saluting his mother stood on one side;
but she said nothing to him as she kept sorrowing for Bhuridatta. He
thought to himself, “ Whenever I have returned before my mother has
always been pleased and given me a kind wmlcome, but to-day she is
in deep distress; what can be the reason?” So he asked her, saying:
“ You see me come with all success, my every wish lias hit the mark ;
And yet you shew no signs of joy, and your whole countenance is dark,—
Dark as a lotus rudely plucked which droops and withers in the hand ;
la this the welcome which you give when I come back from foreign land?”
Even at these words of his she still said nothing. Then Sudassaua
thought, “ Can she have been abused or slandered by someone ? ” So he
uttered another stanza, questioning her :
“ Has anyone upbraided you or are you racked with secret pain,
That thus your countenance is dark, e’en when you see me back again?”
She replied as follows :
u 1 saw an evil dream, my son, a month agoue this very day i .
[188] There came a man who lopped my arm as on my bed I sleeping lay,
And carried off the bleeding limb,—no tears oi nunc ns hand could s . y.
Blank terror overpowers my heart, and since 1 saw "rtiJiLt t.ruol
A moment’s peace or happiness I have not known by day or night.
7—2

/■'vs*6 ' G°l^\
I I P <
s l
The Jdtaka. Took XXII.
When she had said this she burst out lamenting, “ I cannot see any­
where my darling son your youngest brother; some evil must have
happened to him,” and she exclaimed :
“ He whom fair maidens in their bloom used to be proud to wait upon,
Their hair adorned with golden nets,—Bhuridatta,—alas ! is gone ;
He whom stout soldiers used to guard, with their drawn swords, a gallant train,
Flashing like kanikara flowers,—alas ! I look for him in vain !
I must pursue your brother’s track and find where he has fixed to dwell,
Fulfilling his. ascetic vow, and learn myself if all be well.”
Having uttered these words she set out with his retinue aswell as her own.
Now Bhuridatta’s wives had not felt anxious when they did not find
him on the top of the ant-hill, as they said that he was no doubt gone to
his mother’s home; but when they heard that she was coming weeping
because she could nowhere see her son, they went to meet her and fell at
her feet, making a loud lamentation, “ 0 lady, it is a month to-day since
we last saw your son.”
The Teacher described this as follows :
“ The wives of Bhuridatta there beheld his mother drawing nigh,
And putting out their arms they wept with an exceeding bitter cry ;
‘ Bhuridatta, thy sou, went hence a month ago, we know not where;
Whether he be alive or dead we cannot tell in our despair.’”
[189] The mother joined with her daughters-in-law in their lamenta­
tions in the middle of the road and then went up with them into the
palace, and there her grief burst forth as she looked on her son’s bed :
' Like a lone bird whoso brood is slain, when it beholds its empty nest,
So sorrow, when I look in vain for Bhuridatta, fills my breast.
Deep in my heart my grief for him burns with a fierce and steady glow
Just like the furnace which a smith carries where’er he is called to go.”
As she thus wept, Bhuridatta’s house seemed to be filled with one
continuous sound like the hollow roar of the ocean. No one could
remain unmoved, and the whole dwelling was like a sal-forest smitten
by the storm of doom’s-day.
The Teacher thus described it:
“ Like sfd-trees prostrate in a storm, their branches broken, roots uptorn,
So mother, wives, and children,-lay in that lone dwelling-place forlorn.”
Arittha and Subhaga also, the brothers, who had come to visit their
parents, heard the noise and entered Bhuridatta’s dwelling and tried to
comfort their mother.
The Teacher thus described it:
“Arittha then and Subhaga, eager to help and comfort, come,
Hearing the sounds of wild lament which rose in Bhuridattahome;
‘Mother, be calm, thy wailings end, —this is the lot of all who live;
They all must pass from birth to birth; change rules in all things,—do not
grieve,’ ”

' G°l^\
'(f)? ' . <SL
—-vy
I . s f f * ^ _ _
iVo. 543. 101
[190] Samuddaja1 replied:
“ My son, I know it but too well, this is the lot of all who live,
But now no common loss is mine,—left thus forlorn I can hut grieve;
Verily if I see him not, my jewel and my soul’s delight,
My Bhuridatta, I will end my wretched life this very night.”
Her sons answered:
“ Mourn not, dear mother, still your grief,—we’ll bring our brother hack;
Through the wide earth on every side we will pursue his track
O’er hill and dale, through village, town and city, till he’s found,—
Within ten days we promise you to bring him safe and sound.”
Then Sudassana thought, “If we all three go in one direction there will
be much delay: we must go to three different places,—one to the world
of the gods, one to Himavat, and one to the world of men. But if
Kfinarittha2 goes to the land of men he will set that village or town on fire
where he shall happen to see Bhuridatta, for he is cruel-natured,—it
will not do to send him ”; so he said to him, “ Do thou go to the world of
the gods; if the gods have carried him to their world in order to learn the
law from him, then do thou bring him thence.” But he said to Subhaga,
“ Do thou go to Himavat and search for Bhuridatta in the five rivers and
come back.” But as he was resolving to go himself to the world of men,
he reflected, “ If I go as a young man people will revile3 me; 1 must
go as an ascetic, for ascetics are dear and welcome to men.” So he took
the garb of an ascetic and, after bidding his mother farewell, set out.
Now the Bodhisatta had a sister, born of another mother, named
Accimukki, who had a very great love for the Bodhisatta. "When she
saw Subhaga setting out, she said to him, [191] “Brother, I am greatly
troubled, I will go with you.” “Sister,” he replied, “you cannot go with
me, for I have assumed an ascetic’s dress.” “ I will become a little frog
and I will go inside your matted hair.” On his consenting, she became a
young frog and lay down in his matted hair. Subhaga resolved that ho
would search for him from the very commencement, so asked his wife
where he spent the fast-day and went there first of all. When he saw
there the blood on the spot where the Great Being had been seized by
Alambana and the place where the latter had made the basket of creeping
plants, he felt sure that the Bodhisatta had been seized by a snake-charmer
and being overcome with grief, and having his eyes filled with tears, he
followed Alambaua’s track. When he came to the village where he had
first displayed the dancing, he asked the people whether a snake-charmer
had shewn his tricks there with such and such a kind of snake. “Yes,
Alambitna shewed these tricks a month ago.” “ Did he gain anything
thereby?” “Yes, he gained a hundred thousand pieces in this one
1 See rupra, p. 85. * ’^ee P'
3 I read osapissanti {*J(ivaijpp)-

' G<W\
I m l
<
s l
----/ /
102 The Jdtaha. Book X X I I .____________
— su°h and s«Ch a vUlaga”
He went off and, asking lus way as he went, he at as a1^ ‘
palace-gate. Now at that very moment Alambana had come
bathed and anointed, and wearing a tunic of fenc cloth and ma
attendant carry his jewelled basket. A great crow a£ *t was
placed for the king, and he, while he was still within the Palace’ ^
a message, “I am coming, let him make the king of snakes p ay. 11en
Alambana placed the jewelled basket on a variegated rug, «d^gave the
si„n saying “Come hither, O snake-king.” At that moment feudassana
was'standing at the edge of the crowd, while the Great Being ; p u "
head and looked round surveying the people. Now i agas
crowd for two reasons, to see whether any garula is near or any actors, it
they see any garulas, they do not dance for feat, 1 any ac ms,
not dance for shame. The Great Being, as he looked, belie d his brother
in another part of the crowd, and, repressing the tears which fi « •
eyes he came out of the basket and went up to his brother. The crow ,
seeing him approach, retreated in fear and Sudassana was left alone ; so le
went up to him and laid his head on his foot and wept; and feudassana
also wept. The Great Being at last stopped weeping and went into the
basket. Alambana said to himself, “ This Naga must have bitten yonder
ascetic, I must comfort him ”; so he went up to him and said :
ri92l “It slipped out of my hand and seized vour foot with all its might;
L Did it chance bite you? never fear-there’s no harm in its bite.
Sudassana wished to have some talk with him, so he answered :
“This snake of yours can harm me not,
I am a match for him, I wot;
Search where you will, you will not see
One who can charm a snake like me.
Alambana did not know who it was, so he answered angrily ;
“This lout dressed out in Brahmin guise challenges me to-day,—
Let all the assembly hear my words and give us both fair play.
Then Sudassana uttered a stanza in answer:
“A frorj shall be my champion, and let a snake be yours,
Live thousand pieces be the stake, and let us shew our powers.
Alambana rejoined:
■ »
*
■ is met ”
, , i • , „ri(i onid “Well, let us shew our powers
[193] Sadassana heard him and said, , 1 i
i Road m cf. p. 84, 1. 23, text.

f(S )| . <SL
\%*T----%?*/
tJ ^ 5 K No. 543. 103
for five thousand pieces ”; and so undismayed he vent up into the royal
palace and, going up to the king his father-in-law, he said this stanza :
“ 0 noble monarch, hear my words,—ne’er may good luck thy steps forsake;
Wilt thou be surety in my name? Five thousand pieces is the stake.”
The king thought to himself, “ This ascetic asks for a very large sum,
what can it mean ? ” so he replied :
“ Is it some debt your father left or is it all your own,
That you should come and ask from mo such an unheard-of loan?”
Sudassana repeated two stanzas :
“Alambana would beat me with his snake;
I with my frog his Brahmin pride will break.
Come forth, 0 king, with all thy train appear,
And see the beating which awaits him here.”
The king consented and went out with the ascetic. When Alambana
saw him, lie thought, “This ascetic has gone aud got the king on his side,
he must be some friend of the royal family”; so he grew frightened and
began to follow him, saying:
“ I do not want to humble thee, I will not boast at all;
But you despise this snake too much, and prido may have a fall.”
[194] Sudassana uttered two stanzas:
“ I do not seek to hurabJo thee, a Brahmin, or despise thy skill;
But wherefore thus cajole the crowd with harmless snakes that cannot kill 1
If people knew your real worth as well as I can see it plain,—
Why talk of gold?—a little meal would be the limit of your gain.”
Alambana grew angry and said:
“ You mendicant in ass’s skin, uncombed and Squalid to the sight,
You dare to scorn this snake of mine, and say forsooth it cannot bite;
Come near and try what it can do,—learn by experience if you must;
I warrant you its harmless bite will make of you a heap of dust.”
Then Sudassana uttered a stanza, mocking him :
“ A rat or water-snake perchance may bite
And leave its poison if you anger it:
But your red-headed snake is harmless quite,
It will not bite, however much it spit.”
Alambana replied in two stanzas:
“ I have been told by holy saints who practised penance ceaselessly,—
Those wlic> in this life give their alms will go to heaven when they die;
I counsel you to give at once if you have anything to give,—
This snake will turn you into dust,—you have but little timo to live.”
Sudassana said:
“I too have heard from holy saints, those who give alms will go to heaven;
Give you your- alms while yet you may, if you have aught that can be given.

' e°‘^oN\
I ® ! <SL
104 The Jdtaka. Booh X X II.
[195] This is no common snake of mine, she’ll make you lower your boastful
tone ;
A daughter of the Naga king, and a half-sister of my own,—
Accimukhl,—her mouth shoots flames ; her poison’s of the deadliest known.”
Then he called to her in the middle of the crowd, “ 0 Accimukhl,
come out of my matted locks and stand on my hand ”; and he put out his
hand; and when she heard his voice she uttered a cry like a frog three
times, while she was lying in his hair, and then came out and sat on
his shoulder, and springing up dropped three drops of poison on the palm
of his hand and then entered again into his matted locks. Sudassana
stood holding the poison and exclaimed three times, “This country will
be destroyed, this country will be wholly destroyed ”; the sound tilled all
Benares with its extent of twelve leagues. The king asked what should
destroy it. “ O king, I see no place where I can drop this poisoi
“This earth is big enough, drop it there.” “That is not possible,”
answered, and he repeated a stanza:
“If I should drop it on the ground,—listen, 0 king, to me,—
The grass and creeping plants and herbs would parched and blasted be.”
“Well then, throw it into the sky.” “That also is not possible,” he
said, and he repeated a stanza :
“If I should do thy best, 0 Icing, and throw it in the sky,
No rain nor snow will fall from heaven till seven long ycal's roll by.”
“Then throw it into the water.” “That is not possible,” he said, and
he repeated a stanza :
[19G] “If in the water it were dropped,—listen, 0 Icing, to me,—
Fishes and tortoises would die and all that lives i’ the sea.”
Then the king exclaimed, “I am utterly at a loss,—do you tell us
some way to prevent the land being destroyed.” “0 king, cause three
holes to be dug here in succession.” The king did so. Sudassana filled
the middle hole with drugs, the second with cowdung, the third with
heavenly medicines; then he let fall the drops of poison into the middle
hole. A flame, which filled the hole with smoke, burst out; this spread
and caught the hole with the cowdung, and then bursting out again it
caught the hole filled with the heavenly plants and consumed them all,
and then itself became extinguished. Alambayana was standing near that
hole, and the heat of the poison smote him,—the colour of his skin at
once vanished and he became a white leper. Filled with terror, he
exclaimed three times, “I will set the snake-king free.” On hearing
him the Bodhisatta came out of the jewelled basket, and assuming a form
radiant with all kinds of ornaments, he stood with all the glory of Indra.
8uda8Ha.ua also and Accimukhl stood by. Then Sudassana said to the
king, “Dost thou not know whose children these are? ’ “I know not.”
“Thou dost not know us, but thou knowest that the king of Kasi gave

/s&S- ' G°ijx
I I ! <SL
iVb. 543. “ 105
Ills daughter Samuddaja to Bhatarattha. “ X know it well, foi she was
my youngest sister.” “ We are her sons, and you are our uncle.” Then
the king embraced them and kissed their heads and wept, and brought
them up into the palace, and paid them great honour. While he was
shewing all kindness to Bhuridatta he asked him how Alamb&na had
caught him, when he possessed such a terrible poison. Sudassana related
the whole story and then said, “ 0 great monarch, a king ought to rule
his kingdom in this way,” and he taught his uncle the Law. Then he said,
“O uncle, our mother is pining for want of seeing Bhuridatta, we cannot
stay longer away from her.” “ It is right, you shall go ; but X too want
to see my sister; how can I see her 1 ” “0 uncle, where is our grand­
father, the king of Kasi 1 ” [197] “ He could not bear to live without my
sister, so he left his kingdom and became an ascetic, and is now dwelling
in such and such a forest.” “ Uncle, my mother is longing to see you and
my grandfather; we will take her and go to our grandfather’s hermitage,
and then you too will see him.” So they fixed a day and departed from
the palace; and the king, after parting with his sister’s sons, returned
weeping; and they sank into the earth and went to the Naga-world1.
VII.
When the Great Being thus came among them, the city became tilled
with one universal lamentation. He himself was tired out with his
month’s residence in the basket and took to a sick-bed; and there was
no limit to the number of Nagas who came to visit him, and he tired
himself out, talking to them. In the meantime Kanarittha, who had gone
to the world of the gods" and did not find the Great Being there, was the
first to come back; so they made him the doorkeeper of the Great Being’s
sick residence, for they said that he was passionate and could keep away
the crowd of Nagas. Hub hag a also, after searching all Ilimavat and after
that the great ocean and the other rivers, came in the course of his
wanderings to search the Yamuna. But when the outcast Brahmin saw
that Alambana had become a leper, he thought to himself, “He has become
a leper because he worried Bhuridatta; now I too, through lust of the
jewel, betrayed him, although he had been my benefactor, to Alambana,
and this crime will come upon me. Before it comes, I will go to the
Yamuna and will wash away the guilt in the sacred bathing-place.” So
he went down into the water, saying that he would wash away the sin of
his treachery. At that moment Sul>haga came to the spot, and, hearing
his words, said to himself, “This evil wretch for the sake of a gem-charm
1 [Nftgara-pavesana-khandam nitthitam.J
. * Cf. p. 100.

Afy—~xV\
<SL
\($ %
\%>'---^'<y
N\^?? .vX&^y'
106 The Jataka. Book X X II.
betrayed my brother, who had given him such a means of enriching
himself, to Alambana; I will not spare his life.” So, twisting his tail
round his feet and dragging him into the water, he held him down;
then when he was breathless he let him remain quiet a while, [19S] and
when the other lifted his head up he dragged him in again and held him
down; this he repeated several times, until at last the outcast Brahmin
lifted his head and said:
“I’m bathing at this sacred spot here in Payaga’s holy flood;
My limbs are wet with sacred drops,—what cruel demon seeks my blood ? ”
Subhaga answered him in the following stanza :
“ He who, men say, in ancient days to this proud Kasi wrathful came,
And wrapped it round with his strong coils, that serpent-king of glorious
fame,
His son am I, who hold thee now: Subhaga, Brahmin, is my name.”
dhe Brahmin thought, “ Bhuridatta’s brother will not spare my life,—
but what if I were to move him to tender-heartedness by reciting the
praises of his father and mother, and then beg my life ? ” So he recited
this stanza:
' “Scion of Kasi’s1 royal race divine,
Thy mother born from that illustrious line,
J hou wouldst not leave the meanest Brahmin’s slave
To perish drowned beneath the ruthless wave.” 199 200
[199] Subhaga thought, “This wicked Brahmin thinks to deceive me
and persuade me to let him go, but I will not give him his life ”; so he
answered, reminding him of his old deeds :
“A thirsty deer approached to drink—from your tree-porch your shaft flew
down :
Jn fear and pain your victim fled, spurred by an impulse not its own;
Deep in the wood you saw it fall and bore it on your carrying-pole
To where a banyan’s shoots’ grew thick, clustering around the parent bole;
The parrots sported in the boughs, the kokil’s song melodious rose,
Green spread the grassy sward below,—evening invited to repose;
But there your cruel eye perceived my brother, who the boughs among
In summer pomp of colour drest sported with his attendant throng.
He in his joynuco harmed you not, but you in malice did him slay,
An innocent victim,—lo that crime comes back on your own head to-day,
I will not spare your life an hour,—my utmost vengeance you shall pay.”
Then the Brahmin thought, “ He will not give me my life, but I must
try my best to escape ”; so he uttered the following stanza;
“Study, the offering of prayers, libations in the sacred lire,
These three things make a Brahmin’s life inviolate to mortal’s ire.”
[200] Subhaga, when he heard this, began to hesitate and he thought
1 [The text roads Kamaaa'U, ' another- name for the king of Kiwi’ (Schol.).]

|(f)| <SL
jVo. 543. 107
to himself, “ I will carry him to the Naga-world and ask my brothers
about this ”; so he repeated two stanzas :
“Beneath the Yamuna's sacred stream, stretching to far Himalaya’s feet,
Lies deep the Naga capital where Dhatarattha holds his seat;
There all my hero brethren dwell, to them will I refer thy plea,
And as their judgment shall decide, so shall thy final sentence be.”
He then seized him by the neck, and, shaking him with loud abuse and
reviling.1’, carried him to the gate of the Great Being’s palace1.
till. *
Ka.narittha who had become the doorkeeper was sitting there, and
when he saw that the other was being dragged along so roughly he went
.to meet them, and said, “Subhaga, do not hurt him; all Brahmins ai’e
tine sons of the great spirit Brahman; if he learned that we w'ere hurting
his son he would be angry and would destroy all our Naga-world. In
the world Brahmins rank as the highest and possess great dignity; thou
dost not know what their dignity is, but I do.” For they say that
Kanarittha in the birth immediately preceding this had been born us a
sacrificing Brahmin, and therefore he spoke so positively. Moreover being
skilled in sacrificial lore from his former experiences, he said to Subhaga
and the Naga assembly, “Come, I will describe to you the character of
sacrificial Brahmins,” and lie went on as follows :
“The Veda and the sacrifice, things of high worth and dignity,
Belong to Brahmins as their right, however worthless they may be;
Great honour is their privilege; and he who flouts them in his scorn,
Loses his wealth and breaks the law, and lives guilt-burdened and forlorn.”
[201] Then Kanarittha asked Subhaga if he knew who had made the
world; and when he confessed his ignorance, he told this stanza to shew
that it was created by Brahman the grandfather of the Brahmins:
“Brahmins ho made for study; for command
He made the Khattiyas; Vessas plough the land;
Suddas he servants made to obey the rest;
Thus from the first went forth the Lord's behest.”
Then he said, “These Brahmins have great powers, and he who
conciliates them and gives them gifts is not fated to enter any new
birth, but goes at once to the world of the gods ”; and he repeated
these stanzas:
“ Kuvera, Soma, Varuna, of old,
Dhatii, Vidhilta, and the Sun and Moon,
Offered their sacrifices manifold,
And to thoir Brahmin priests gfive every boon.
1 [! Mahiisattassa panyesana-lihandam mtthitam.’]

f (f)f' <SL
— / /
.■flit®/
108 The Jdtaka. Book XX II.
The giant Ajjun too who wi-ought such woe,
. Round whose huge bulk a thousand arms once grew,
Each several pair with its own threatening bow,
Heaped on the sacred flame the offerings due.”
[202] Then he went on describing the glory of the Brahmins and how
the best gifts are to be given to them.
“ That ancient king who feasted them so well
Became at last a god, old stories tell.
King Mujalinda long the fire adored,
Glutting its thirst with all the ghee ho poured;
And at the last the earned reward it brought,
He found the pathway to the heaven he sought.”
He also repeated these stanzas to illustrate this lesson :
[203] “ Dujlpa lived a thousand years in all,
Chariots and hosts unnumbered at his call;
But an ascetic’s life was his at last,
And from his hermitage to heaven he past.
Sagara all the earth in triumph crost,
And raised a golden sacrificial post;
None worshipped fire more zealously than he,
And he too rose to be a deity.
The milk and curds which Aiiga, Kasi’s lord,
In his long offerings so profusely poured,
Swelled Gangs, to an ocean by their flood,
Until at last in Sakka’s courts ho stood.
Great Sakka’s general on the heavenly plain,
By soma-offerings did the honour gain;
[204] He who now marshals the immortal powers
Rose from a mortal sin-stained lot like ours.
Brahma the great Creator, he who made
The mountains landmarks in his altar yard,
Whose host the Ganges in its path obeyed,
By sacrifice attained his great reward.”
Then he said to him, “ Brother, know you how this sea became salt
and undrinkable 1 ” “I know not, Arittha." “You only know how to
injure Brahmins,—listen to me.” Then he repeated a stanza:
“ A hermit student, versed in prayer and spell,
Once stood upon the shore, as I’ve heard tell;
[205] He touched the sea,—it forthwith swallowed him,
And since that day has been undrinkable.”
“ These Brahmins are all like this ”; and he uttered another stanza:
“ When Sakka first attained his royal throne,
His special favour upon Brahmins shone;
East, west, north, south, they made their ritual known,
And found at last a Veda of their own.
Thus Arittha described the Brahmins and their sacrifices and Vedas.
When they beard his words, rtmny Nagas came to visit the Bodhisatta’s
sick-bed, and they said to ore another, “He is telling a legend of the past,”

■ e°5>\ 8
f(S): < L
No. 543. 109
and they seemed to be in danger of accepting false doctrine. Now the
Bodhisatta heard it all as he lay in his bed, and the Nagas told him about
it; then the Bodhisatta reflected, “Arittha is telling a false legend,— I
will interrupt his discourse, and put true views Into the assembly.” So
he rose and bathed, and put on all his ornaments, and sat down in the
pulpit and gathered all the Naga multitude together. Then he sent for
Arittha and said to him, “Arittha, you have spoken falsely when you
describe the Brahmins and the Vedas, for the sacrifice of victims by all
these ceremonies of the Vedas is not held to be desirable and it does not
lead to heaven,—see what unreality there is in your words ” ; so he
repeated these gathas describing the various kinds of sacrifice:
[206] “ These Veda studies are the wise man’s toils,
The lure which tempts the victims whom ho spoils;
A mirage formed to catch the careless eye,
But which the prudent passes safely by.
j The Vedas have no hidden power to save
| The traitor or the coward or the knave;
The fire, though tended well for long years past,
Leaves his base master without hope at last.
Though all earth’s trees in one vast heap were piled
To satisfy the fire’s insatiate child,
Still would it crave for more, insatiate still,—•
How could a Naga hope that maw to fill ?
Milk ever changes,—thus where milk has been
Butter and. curds in natural course are seen ;
And the same thirst for change pervades the fire,
Once stirred to life it mounts still higher and higher.
Fire bursts not forth in wood that' ’s dry or new,
Fire needs an effort ere it leaps to view ;
If dry fresh timber of itself could burn,
Spontaneous would each forest blaze in turn.
If he wins merit who to feed the flame
Piles wood and straw, the merit is the same
AYhen cooks light fires or blacksmiths at their trade
Or those who burn the corpses of the dead.
[207] But none, however zealously he prays
Or heaps the fuel round to feed the blaze,
Gains any merit by his mummeries,—
The fire for all its crest of smoko soon dies.
Were Fire the honoured being that you think,
Would it thus dwell with refuse and with stink,
Feeding on carrion with a foul delight,
Where men in horror hasten from tho sight?
Some worship as a god the crested flame,
Barbarians give to water that high name;
But both alike have wandered from their road:
Neither is worthy to be called a god-

|(I> ) <SL
110 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
To worship fire, the common drudge of all,
Senseless and blind and deaf to every call,
And then one’s self to live a life of sin,—
How could one dream that this a heaven could win ?
*•' ; These Brahmins all a livelihood require,
,And so they tell us Brahma worships lire;
Why should the increate who all things planned
Worship himself the creature of his hand?
Doctrines and rules of their own, absurd and vain,
Our sires imagined wealth and power to gain ;
‘Brahmins ho made for study, for command
He made the Khattiyas; Vessas plough the land ;
Suddas he servants made to obey the rest;
Thus from the first went forth his high behest1.’
[208] We sec these rules enforced before our eyes,
None but the Brahmins oiler sacrifice,
None but the Khattiya exercises sway,
The Yessas plough, the Suddas must obey.
These greedy liars propagato deceit,
And fools believe the fictions they repeat;
He who has eyes can see the sickening sight;
Why docs not Brahma set his creatures right ?
If his wido power no limits can restrain,
Why is his hand so rarely spread to bless ?
Why aro his creatures all condemned to pain ?
Why does ho not to all give happiness?
Why do fraud, lies, and ignorance prevail ?
Why triumphs falsehood,—truth and justice fail?
I count yotn’ Brahma one th: injust among,
Who made a world in which to shelter wrong.
Those men are counted pure who only kill
Frogs, worms, bees, snakes or insects as they will,—
Those are your savage customs which I hate,—
Such as Kamboja2 hordes might emulate.
[210] If ho who kills is counted innocent
And if the victim safe to heaven is sent,
[211] Let Brahmins Brahmins kill—so all were well—
And those who listen to the words they tell.
Wo see no cattle asking to be slain
That they a new and better life may gain,—
Rather they go unwilling to their death
And in vain struggles yield their latest breath.
To veil the post, the victim and the blow
The Brahmins let their choicest rhetoric flow;
‘The post shall as a cow of plenty be
Securing all thy heart’s desires to thee’;
But. if the wood thus round the victim spread
Had been as full of treasure its they said,
1 See p. 106.
,J The Kambojas were a north-western tribe who wero supposed to have lost their
original Aryan customs and b have become barbarous, sue Mann, x. 44.

' Got^\
f(¥ )| <SL
, ■OVt^ s' _ _ 4
No. 543. ' 111
As fall of silver, gold and gems for us,
With heaven’s unknown delights as overplus,
They would have offered for themselves alone
And kept the rich reversion as their own.
These cruel cheats, as ignorant as vile,
Weave their long frauds the simple to beguile,
‘Offer thy wealth, cut nails and beard and hair,
And thou shalt have thy bosom’s fondest prayer.’
The offerer, simple to their hearts’ content,
Comes with his purse, they gather round him fast,
Like crows around an owl, on mischief bent,
[212] And leavo him bankrupt and stripped bare at last,
The solid coin which he erewhilo possessed,
Exchanged for promises which none can test.
Like grasping strangers1 II sent by those who reign
The cultivators’ earnings to distrain,
These rob where’er they prowl with evil eye,—
No law condemns them, yet they ought to die.
The priests a shoot of Butea must hold
As part o’ the rite sacred from days of old;
Indra’s right arm ’tis called ; but were it so,
Would Indra triumph o’er his demon foe?
Indra’s own arm can give him better aid,
’Twas no vain sham which made hell’s hosts afraid.
‘ Eaoh mountain-range which now some kingdom guards
Was onco a heap in ancient altar-yards,
And pious worshippers with patient hands
Piled up the mound at some great lord’s commands.’
So Brahmins say,—fie on the idle boast,
Mountains are heaved aloft at other cost;
And the brick moimd, search as you may, contains
No veins of iron for the miner’s pains.
[213] A holy seer well known in ancient days,
On the .seashore was praying, legend says ;
There was he drowned and since this fate befell
The ocean’s waves have been undrinkable.
Rivers have drowned their learned men at will
By hundreds and have kept their waters still;
Their streams flow on and never taste the worse,
Why should the sea alone incur the curse?
And the salt-streams which run upon the laud
Spring from no curse but own the digger’s hand.
At first there were no women and no men ;
’Twas mind first brought mankind to light,—and then,
i Though they all started equal in the race,
* Their various failures made them soou change place;
It was no lack of merit in the past,
1 But present faults which made them hrst or last.
I A-kasiya.
II Vossagtjavibhaiujam may mean ‘diffevon e of occupation.

? ® | <SL
\%>-
—. s7^y//
112 The Jataka. Book XXII.
A clever low-caste lad would use his wit,
And read the hymns nor find his head-piece split;
The Brahmins made the Vedas to their cost
When others gained tho knowledge which they lost.
Thus sentences are made and learned by rote
In metric forms not easily forgot,—
The obscurity but tempts the foolish mind,
They swallow all they’re told with impulse blind.
Brahmins are not like violent beasts of prey,
No tigers, lions of the woods are they;
They are to cows and oxen near akin,
Differing outside they are as dull within.
[214] If the victorious king would cease to fight
And live in peace with his friends and follow right,
Conquering those passions which his bosom rend,
What happy lives would all his subjects spend !
The Brahmin’s Veda, Khattiya’s policy,
Both arbitrary and delusive be,
They blindly grope their way along a road
By some huge inundation overflowed.
In Brahmin’s Veda, Khattiya’s policy,
One secret meaning we aliko can see ;
For after all, loss, gain and glory, and shame
Touch the four castes alike, to all the same.
As householders to gain a livelihood
Count all pursuits legitimate and good,
So Brahmins now in our degenerate day
Will gain a livelihood in any way.
The householder is led by love of gain,
Blindly he follows, dragged in pleasure's train,
Trying all trades, deceitful and a fool,
Fallen alas! how far from wisdom’s rule.”
[’217] The Great Being, having thus confuted their arguments, estab­
lished his own doctrine, and when they heard his exposition the assembly
of Nagas was filled with joy. The Great Being delivered the outcast
Brahmin from the Naga-world and did not wound him with a single
contemptuous speech. Hagara-brahmadatta also did not let the appointed
day pass, but went witli his complete army to his father’s dwelling-place.
The Great Being also, having proclaimed by befit of drum that he would
visit his maternal uncle and grandfather, crossed over from the Yamuna
and went first to that hermitage with great pomp and magnificence, and
his remaining brothers and his hither and mother came afterwards. At
tha t moment iSagara-bmhtnadatLa, not recognising the Great Being, os he
approached with his great retinue, asked his father1:
“ Whoso drums are those l whoso labours, conchs, and what those instruments,
whose voice
Swells with deep concert through the air and makes the monarch’s heart rejoice?
1 Seo v. p. 322

?(!):*) <SL
iVo. 543. * 113
Who is this youth who marches there, with quiver and with bow arrayed,
Wearing a golden coronet that shines like lightning round his head ?
Who is it that approaches there, whose youthful countenance shines bright,
Like an acacia brand which glows in a smith’s forgo with steady light ?
[218] Whose bright umbrella, golden-hued, o’erpowers the sun in noonday’s
pride,
While deftly hangs a fly-flapper ready for action by his side?
See peacocks’ tails on golden sticks wave by his face with colours blent1,
While his bright ear-rings deck his brow as lightning wreaths the firmament.
What hero owns that long large eye, that tuft of wool between the brows,
Those teeth as white as buds or shells, their liue so faultless and so even,
Those lac-dyed hands, those bimba lips,—he shines forth like the sun in heaven ;
Like some tall sal-tree full of bloom, upon a mountain peak alone,
Indra >h his triumphant dress with every demon foe o’erthrown.
Who is it bursts upon our view, drawing from out its sheath his brand,
-Its jewelled handle and rich work radiant with splendour in his hand,
Who now takes off his golden shoes, richly inwrought with varied thread,
And, bending with obeisance low, pours honour on the Sage’s head !”
[219] Being thus asked by his son Sagara-brahmadatta, the ascetic,
possessed of transcendent knowledge and supernatural power, replied,
“ 0 my son, these are the sons of King Dhatarattha, the Naga sons of thy
sister”; and he repeated this gatha :
“These are all Dhatarattha’s sons glorious iu power and great in fame,—
They all revere Samuddaja and her as common mother claim.”
While they were thus talking, the host of Nagas came up and saluted
the ascetic’s feet and then sat down on one side. Samuddaja also saluted
her father, and then after weeping returned with the Nagas to the Nitga-
world. Sagara-brahmadatta stayed there for a few days and then went ^
to Benares, and Samuddaja died in the Naga-world. The Bodliisatta,
having kept the precepts all his life and performed all the duties of the
fast-day, at the end of his life went with the host of Nagas to fill the
seats of heaven.
After the lesson the Teacher exclaimed, “ Thus pious disciples, wise men of
former times before the Buddha was born, gave up the glory of the Nuga state
and rigorously fulfilled the duties of the fast-day”; and he then identified the
birth ; “At that time the family of thegreat King were my father and mother,
Devadatta was the outcast Brahmin, Auanda was Somadatta, UppalavaimS was
AccimukhI, Saripputta was Sudassana, Moggallana was Subhaga, Suuakkhatta
was Kaniirittha, and I myself was BhOridatta.”
1 Does this refer to his whiskers? or is it to be taken literally?
a. Vi. 8

?(Df <
sl
^---''U^N/
•vX&s'
114 The Jdtaha. Booh XXII.
No. 544.
MAHAN ARMDAKASSAPA-JATAKA.
“ There was a king of the Videhas,” etc. This story was told by the Master,
while dwelling in the Latthivana pleasure garden, in relation to the conversion
of Uruvela-Kassapa. Now the Teacher by whom the glorious reign of law was
begun, [220] after converting tho ascetics Uruvela-Kassapa and the rest, came
to the pleasure garden of Latthivana, surrounded by the thousand bhikkhus
who had before been ascetics, in order to persuade the King of Magadlia to give
his promise1 2; and at that time, when the Magadha king, who had come with
an attending company of twelve myriads, had seated himself after saluting the
Buddha, a dispute arose among the Brahmans and householders of his train,
“ Has Uruvela-Kassapa placed himself under the spiritual guidance of the great
Samana, or has the great Samana placed himself under the spiritual guidance of
Uruvela-Kassapa?” Then the Blessed One thought to himself, “I will shew
them that Kassapa has placed himself under my spiritual guidance,” and he
uttered this stanza :
“What was it that you saw, O inhabitant of Uruvela, that you, renowned
for your asceticism-, abandoned your sacred fire? I ask you, Kassapa, this
question,—how is it that your fire sa< rifice has been deserted ?”
Then the elder, who understood the Buddha’s purport, replied in this
stanza :
“The sacrifices only sneak of forms and sounds and tastes, and sensual
pleasures and women; and knowing that all these things, being found in the
elements of material existence, are filth, I took no more delight in sacrifices or
offerings.”
And in order to shew that he was a disciple, he laid his head upon the
Bu idha’s feet and said, “The Blessed One is my teacher, and I am his disciple.”
So saying he rose into the air seven times, to the height of a palm tree, two
palm trees, and so on to seven palm trees, and then having come down and
saluted the Blessed One, he sat down on one side. The great multitude when
they saw that miracle uttered t.he glories of the Teacher, saying, “0 great is
the power of Buddha ; though filled with such a firm conviction of his own, and
though he believed himself to be a saint, Uruvela-Kassapa burst the bonds
of error and was converted by the Tathugata.” The Teacher said, “It is not
wonderful that I who have now attained omniscience should have converted
him ; in olden time when I was the Brahma named Narada and still subject to
passion, 1 burst this man’s bonds of error and made him humble”; and so
saying he told the following, at the request of the audience :
In the olden time at Mithila in the kingdom of Videha there ruled a
just king of righteousness named Angati. Now in the womb of his chief
queen there was conceived a fair and gracious daughter, named Ruja,
1 Ho gave the Vejuvona pleasure garden to the fraternity, Muhuv. i. 22. t!f. this
introduction with the whole chapter.
2 Or perhaps “yon, an ascetic and a teacher. Sec Rhys David’s note Vinaya,
trana., i. p. 138. [See Jdt. j- p. 88, Vtn. i. p. 38-]

• Goi*X
K ty ,
<
s l
V%. >-----x^y
No. 544. 115
possessing great merit, and one who had offered prayer for a hundred
thousand ages. All his other sixteen thousand wives were barren. This
daughter became very dear and engaging to him. Every day he used to
send her five and twenty baskets full of various flowers and delicate
raiment, bidding her adorn herself with them ; [221] and he used to send
her a thousand pieces, bidding her give away alms every fortnight as
there was abundance of food and drink. Now he had three ministers,
Yijaya, Sunama and Alata; and one day when the feast came round
on the full moon of the fourth month, and the city and the palace were
adorned like the city of the gods, having properly batliyd and anointed
himself and put on all sorts of ornaments, as he stood with his ministers
on a terrace at an open window and saw the round moon mounting up
into the clear sky, he asked his ministers, “ Pleasant indeed is this clear
night,—with what amusement shall we divert ourselves ?”
The Teacher thus explained the matter :
“There was a Khattiya king of the Videhas named Ahgati, possessing many
carriages, wealthy and with an innumerable army. One day on the fifteenth
night of the fortnight, ere the first watch was over, on the full moon of the
fourth month of the rains, he gathered his ministers together, Yijaya, and
Sunama, and the general Alataka, all wise, fathers of sons, wearing a smile, and
full of experience. The Videha king questioned them, ‘Let each of you utter
his wish, this is the full moon of the fourth month, it is moonlight without any
darkness ; with what diversion to-night shall We pass the time away
Thus asked by the king, each spoke in accordance with the desire
of his heart.
The Teacher thus explained the matter :
“Then the general Alata thus spoke to the king: ‘Let us gather a gay gallant r
army together ; [222] let us go forth to battle, with a countless host of men ; let
us bring under thy power those who have kept themselves independent; this is
my opinion, let us conquer what is still unconquered.” Hearing the words of
Alata, Sunama spoke thus, ‘All your enemies, O king, are met together here,
they have laid aside their strength and behave themselves with submission ;
to-day is the chief festival ; war pleases me. not. Let them forthwith bring
to us meat and drink and all kinds of food : O king, enjoy thy pleasure in dance
and song and music/' Hearing the words of Sunama, Yijaya spoke thus, ‘ All
pleasures, 0 great king, are ill ways ready at thy side; these are. not hard to find,
so as to rejoice in all thy desires : but even if they are always attained, this
resolution is not approved by me. Let us wait on somo Saiuana or Brahmin,
learned in sacred lore, one who versed in the text and its meaning may remove
our doubt to-day as to the object of our desire1/ Having heard the words
of Vijaya, the king Ahgati said, ‘This saying of Vijaya is what pleases me also.
Lot us wait on some Samana or Brahmin learned in sacred lore, one who versed
in the sacred text and its meaning may remove our doubt to-day us to the
object of our desire. Do ye all carry out this resolution ; on what teacher shall
we wait i Who, to-day, versed in the sacred text and its meaning, will remove
our doubt as to the ohjoct of our desire? Having heard the words of \ idclia,
Alata replied, ‘There is yonder naked ascetic in tbo deer-park, approved by all
as wise, Ounu of the Kassapa family, famous, a man of varied discourse, and
with a large following of disciples; wait on him, O king, he will remove our
iso*
1
8—2

?(!):*) <SL
\W>---'X /
116 The Jataka. Book XXII.
doubt.’ Having heard the words of Alata, the king commanded his charioteer,
‘We will go to the deer-park, bring hither the chariot yoked.’
[223] Then they yoked his chariot made of ivory and with silver decorations,
having its equipage all bright and clean, white and spotless like a clear night1
in its appearance. Four Sindh horses were yoked therein, white as lilies, swift
as the wind, well-trained, wearing golden wreaths,—white the umbrella, white
the car, white the horses and white the fan. The Videha king as he set out
with his counsellors shone like the moon. Many wise and strong men armed
with spears and swords, mounted on horses, followed the king of heroes.
Having traversed the distance, as it were, in a moment, and alighted from
the chariot, the Videha with his ministers approached Guna on foot; and even
the Brahmins and wealthy men who were already gathered at the place the king
did not order to be removed, though they left him no room.”
[224] Surrounded by that mixed assembly the king sat on one side
and made his greeting.
The Teacher thus explained the matter :
“Then the king sat down on one side on a soft mattress, covered with soft
variegated squirrel-skins and with a soft cushion put over them. The king,
being seated, addressed him with the compliments of friendship and civility,
‘Are your bodily needs provided for? are your vital airs not wasted? is your
mode of life comfortable ? do you get your due supply of alms ? are your move­
ments unimpeded 1 is your sight unimpaired V Guna courteously answered the
Videha who was so attentive to his duties, ‘All my wants are provided for, and
those two last-mentioned points are as I would wish them. You too,—are your
neighbours not too strong for you ? have you such good health as you need 1
does your chariot carry you well ? have you none of the sicknesses which afflict
the body?’ The king, seeking to know the law, having received this kindly
greeting, next proceeded to ask him concerning the meaning and text of the law
and the rules of right conduct. ‘ How, 0 Kassapa, should a mortal fulfil the
law towards his parents, how towards his teacher, and how towards his wife and
children ? how should he behave towards the aged, how towards Samanas and
Brahmins, how should he deal with his army, how with the people in the
country ? How should he practise the law and so eventually attain to heaven ?
and how do some on account of unrighteousness fall down into hell ?’ ”
[225] Through the lack of some one who was preeminent among
omniscient buddhas, paccekabuddhas, buddhist disciples, or sages, the king
asked his successive royal questions well deserving to be asked, of a poor
naked mendicant who knew nothing and was as blind as a child; and he,
being thus asked, giving no proper answer to the question but seizing the
opportunity with a “Hear, O king,” declared his own false doctrine, like
one who strikes an ox when it is going along or throws refuse into another’s
food-vessel.
The Teacher thus explained the matter :
“Having heard the Videha king’s words, Kassapa thus replied: ‘Hear, 0
king, a true unerring utterance. There is no fruit, good or evil, in following
the law ; there is no other world, 0 king,—who has ever come back hither
from thence? There are no ancestors,- how can there be father or mother?
There is uo teachor,—who will tame what cannot be tamed ? All beings are
equal and alike, there are none who should receive or pay honour; there
is no such thing as strength or courage,—how can there be vigour or heroism ?
1 Dosinu.

/s&Z- ' G°lfeX
f ( l) | <SL
— &• y
No. 544. t 117
All beings are predestined, just as the stern-rope must follow the ship. Every
mortal gets what he is to get, what then is the use of giving 1 There is no
use, O king, in giving,—the giver is helpless and weak ; gifts are enjoined by
fools and accepted by the wise; weak fools who think themselves wise give
to the prudent.’” 6
[226] Having thus described the uselessness of giving, he went on to
describe the powerlessness of sin to produce consequences hereafter :
‘“ There are seven aggregafls indestructible and uninjuring,—fire, earth,
"a , > air> pleasure, and pain, and the soul; of these seven there is none that
can destroy or divide, nor are they ever to be destroyed; weapons pass harmless
amongst these aggregates. He who carries off another’s head with a sharp
sword docs not divide these aggregates : how then should there be any con­
sequence from evil doing ? All beiugs become pure by passing through eighty-
eui great^ icons ; till that period arrives not even the self-restrained becomes
pure, lill that period arrives, however much they have followed virtue, they
■ do not become pure, and even if they commit many sins they do not go beyond
that limit. One by one we are purified through the eighty-four great toons : we
-cannot go beyond our destiny any more than the sea beyond its shore.’ ”
[227] Lhus did the advocate of annihilation enforce his own doctrine
by his vehemence without appealing to any precedent1:
Having heard Kassapa’s words, Alata thus replied: ‘What you say approves
itself also to me. I too remember having gone througli a former birth. I was
a cow-killing huntsman named Piiigala in a city. Many a sin did I commit in
wealthy Benares,—many living creatures 1 slew, buffaloes, hogs, and goats.
assrng from that birth, I was then born in the prosperous family of a general:
verily there are no evil consequences for sin, I did not have to go to hell.’
Now there happened to be a slave clothed in rags, named Bijaka, who was
keeping the fast, and who had come to listen to Guna; when he hoard Kassapa’s
words and Alata’s reply,^ he drew many a hot sigh and burst into tears. The
v ideha king asked him, ‘ Why dost thou weep'? what hast thou seen or heard ?
why dost thou shew me thy pain ? ’
[228] Bijaka replied, ‘ I have no pain to vex me: listen to me, 0 king. I
too remember my former birth, a happy one; I was one Bhavasetthi in the
city of Saketa, devoted to virtue, pure, given to alms, and esteemed .by Brahmins
and rich men; and I remember no single evil deed that I committed. But
when I passed from that life 1 was conceived in the womb of a poor prostitute,
and was born to a miserable life. But miserable as I am I keep my tranquil
mind, and I give the half of my food to whosoever desires it. I fast every
fourteenth and fifteenth day, and I never hurt living creatures, and I abstain
from theft. But all the good deeds which I do produce no fruit; as Alata says,
I think that virtue is useless. I lose my game in life as an unskilful dice-
player; Alata wins as ho has done, just like a skilled player; I see no door by
which I may go to heaven; it is for this that I weep when I heard what
Kassapa said.’
[229] Having heard Bljaka’s words, King Aiigati said, ‘There is no door to
heaven : only wait on destiny. Whether thy lot be happiness or misery it is
only garnet! through destiny: all will at last reach deliverance from trans­
migration; be not eager for the future. I too have been fortunate in former
births and devoted to Brahmins and rich men, but while I was busy adminis­
tering the laws 1 myself had meanwhile no enjoyment.’”
Thus having spoken he took his leave: “0 venerable Kassapa, all this
long time I have been heedless, but now at last 1 have found a teacher,
1 ? nippadesato. See St Petersb. Diet, pradeptt.

f(S)f
<SL
\% >-------^
118 .
The Jcitaka. Booh XXII.
and from henceforth, following your teaching, I will take my delight only
in pleasure, and not even hearing discourses on virtue shall hinder me.
Stay where you are, I will now depart; we may yet see one another
again and meet hereafter.”
So saying the King of Yideha went to his home.
[230] When the king first visited Guna he saluted him respectfully
and then asked his question; but when lie went away, he went without
any salutation: because Guna was untrue to his name, through his own un­
worthiness1 *, he received no salutation, still less did he get alms. So after
the night was passed and the next day had come, the king gathered his
ministers together and said to them, “Prepare all the elements of enjoyment,
henceforth I will only follow the pursuit of pleasure, no other business
is to be mentioned before me, let such and such a one carry on the ad­
ministration of justice,” and he gave himself up accordingly to enjoyment.
The Teacher thus explained the matter :
“ When the night turned to day Ahgati summoned his ministers into his
presence and thus addressed them: 1 In the Candaka palace let them always
provide pleasures ready for me, let no one come with messages concerning public
or secret matters. Let Vijaya, Sunama, and the general Alataka, all three well
skilled in law, sit in judgment on these matters.’ So the king, having said
this, thought only of pleasure and busied himself no more in the company of
Brahmins and wealthy men.
Then on the fourteenth night the dear daughter of the king, named Ruja,
said to her nurse-mother, ‘Adorn mo quickly with my jewels, let my female
companions wait on me; to-morrow is the sacred fifteenth day, I will go into
the royal presence.’ They brought her a garland and precious sandal wood,
gems, shells, peurla, and precious things and garments of various dyes ; and her
many attendants, surrounding her as she sat on a golden chair, adorned her,
shining in her beauty.
[231J Then in the midst of her train, blazing with all kinds of ornaments,
Ruja entered the palace Candaka as lightning enters a cloud. Having drawn
near the Icing and saluted him, with all due respect*, she sat down on one side
on a chair iiilaid with gold.
[232] The king, when he beheld her surrounded l>y her train as if a company
of heavenly nymphs had visited him, thus addressed her: ‘Do you enjoy yourself
in the tank within the precincts of the palace? do they always bring you all
sorts of delicate food ? Do you and your maidens gather all kinds of garlands
and build bowers for yourselves continually, intent upon sport i Is anything
wanting to you? Let them bring it forthwith,—ask what you will, impetuous3
one, even though it be as hard to get as tho moon.’
Hearing his words Ruja answered her father:
‘0 king, in my lord’s presence every desire of mine is gained. To-morrow
is tho sacred fifteenth day,- Jot them bring me a thousand pieces, that I may
give it all as a gift to the mendicants.’
1 [There is a play upon the words Quito nttiino aguwitdyu.]
~ Vinatje ratan seems used adverbially.
» [Prof. Cowell has written in the margin, 'op. but the scholiast explains
kutfdamukhi as referring to mustard-paste (siuapakuMena...sasupakalikena) used by
women for the face.]

n
■ e<w\
■ I
(g )f ■ <SL
No, 544. , 119 j
Hearing Ruja’s words King Augati replied :
‘Much wealth has been wasted by you idly and without fruit. You keep
the fast-days and neither eat nor drink; this idea of the duty of fasting comes
from destiny,—there is no merit because you abstain. [233]1 While you live
with us, Ruja, put not food away; there is no other world than this,—why vex
thyself for nought?’
Then Ruja bright in her beauty, when she heard his words, thus answered him,
knowing as sho did the past and the future law: ‘ I havo heard in time past and
I have seen it with mine own eyes,—he who follows children becomes himself a
child. The fool who associates with fools plunges deep into folly. It is fitting
for A’.-‘ >d Bijaka to be deceived ; [234] but thou art a king full of learning,
•■»«« and skilled in the conduct of affairs; how hast thou fallen into such a low
theory, worthy of children 1 If a man is purified by the mere course of existence,
then Guna’s own asceticism is useless; like a moth flying into the lighted candle,
the idiot has adopted a naked mendicant’s life. Having accepted the idea that
all will at last be purified through transmigration, in their great ignorance many
corrupt their actions; and being fast caught in the effects of former sins they
find it hard to escape, as the fish from the hook.
I will tell thee a parable, 0 king, for thy case; the wise sometimes learn
the truth by a parable. As the ship of the merchants, heavy through taking in
too large a cargo, sinks overladen into the sea, so a man, accumulating sin little
by little, sinks overladen into hell. Alata’s present cargo, 0 king, is not what
he is collecting now ; for that which he is now taking on board he will hereafter
sink to hell. Formerly Alata’s deeds were righteous, and it is as their result
that he enjoys this prosperity. That merit of his is being spent, for he is all
intent upon vice; having forsaken the straight road, he is running headlong in a
crooked 2>ath.
[235] As the balance properly hung in the weighing-house2 causes the end
to swing up when the weight is put in, so does a man cause his fate at last to
rise if he gathers together every piece of merit little by little, like that slave
Bijaka intent on merit and thinking too much of heaven.
In the sorrow which the slave Bijaka now suffers he receives the fruit of
sins which he fonnerly committed. That sin is melting away since he is devoted
to moral virtue, but let him not enter into Kassapa’s devious paths.’
Then she proceeded to shew the evil of practising sin and the good results of
following worthy friends8:
‘Whatever friend a king honours, whether he be good or evil, devoted to
vice or to virtue, the king falls into his power. As is the friend whom he
chooses for himself and follows, such he himself becomes,—such is the power of
intimacy. [230] One in constant intercourse affects his fellow, a close comrade
his associate, just as a poisoned arrow defiles a pure quiver. Let not the wise
become the friend of the wicked for fear of contamination. If a man ties up
stinking fish with a band of kusa grass, the grass will acquire a putrid smell, so
is intimacy with a fool; but if a man binds up myrrh in a common leaf, it will
acquire a pleasant odour, so is intimacy with the wise. Therefore, knowing the
maturity of his own actions like the ripeness of a basket of fruit, let not the wise
man follow the wicked but follow the good, for the wicked lead to hell, while the
good bring us to heaven.’
The princess, having discoursed on righteousness in these six stanzas,
declared the sorrows which she had undergone in her past births:
1 [A couplet has here been omitted, referriug to Bijaka, and almost the same as the
lines on p. ‘22V3 * it.: “B. wept to hear what Kassapa said.” Obviously they do not
belong to this place.]
a Obscure. * [Cp. iv. 43’.-, trana., p. 270. |

| ( t I <SL
\% >«. .,-<>/
x^Wy XrT7"T7’
120 The Jdtaka. 2>00& X X I1.
‘I too remember seven births which I have experienced, and when I go
from my present life I shall yet pass through seven future ones. My seventh
former birth, O king, was as the son of a smith in the city Rajagaha in Magaclha.
I had an evil companion and I committed much evil; we went about corrupting
other men’s wives as if we had been immortal. Those actions remained laid up
like fire covered with ashes. By the effect of other actions I was born m the
land of Yarnsa [237] in a merchant’s family in Kosambi, great and prosperous
and wealthy: I was an only son, continually fostered and honoured. There 1
followed a friend who was devoted to good works, wise and full of sacred learning,
and lie grounded me in what was good. I fasted through many a fourteenth
and fifteenth night; and that action remained laid up like a treasure in water.
But the fruit of the evil deeds which I had done in Magadha came round to me
at last like a noxious poison. I passed from thence for a long time, O king,
into the Roruva hell, I endured the effects of my own works; when I remember
it m-ieves rue still. After spending there a wretched time through a long
series of years, I became a castrated goat in Bhennakata. [238] I carried the
sons of the wealthy on my back and in a carnage; it was the fated consequence
of my going after other men’s wives.
After that I was born in the womb of a monkey in a forest; and on the
day of my birth they shewed me to the leader of the herd, who exclaimed,
“ Bring my son to me,” and violently seized my testicles with his teeth and bit
them off in spite of my cries.’ She explained this in verse.
< Passing from this birth, O king, I was born as a monkey in a great forest;
I was mutilated by the fierce leader of the herd: this was the fated consequence
of my going after other men’s wives.’
Then she went on to describe the other births :
< j was next born, 0 king, as an ox among the Dasannas, castrated but
swift and fair to look at, and I long drew a carriage: this was the fatal conse­
quence of my going after other men’s wives. When I passed from that birth I
was born in a family among the Vajjl people1; but I was neither man nor
woman, for it is a very hard thing to attain the being born as a manthis was
the fatal consequence of my going after other men’s wives. Next, 0 king, I
was born in the Nandana wood,—a nymph of a lovely complexion in the heaven
of the Thirty-three, dressed in garments and ornaments of various hues and
wearing jewelled earrings, skilled in dance and song, an attendant in Sakka’s
court ° While J stayed there I remembered all these births and also the seven
futuiv births which I shall experience when I go from lienee. The good which
t <xid jn Kosambi has come round in its turn, and when I pass from this birth
I shall be born only among gods or men. For seven births, 0 king, I shall be
honoured and worshipped, but till the sixth is past I shall not be free from my
female sex r239] But there is my seventh birth, 0 king,—a prosperous son of
the gods 1 shall be born at last as a male deity m a divine body. Even to-day
thev are gathering garlands from the heavenly tree in Nandana, and there is a
son of the gods, named Java, who is seeking a garland for me 1 heso sixteen
years of mv present life are only as one moment m heaven,-a hundred mortal
autumns are only as one heavenly day and night. Thus do our actions follow
us even through countless births, bringing good or evil,—no action is ever lost.
[240] Then she declared the supreme Law :
‘He who desires to rise continually from birth to birth, let him avoid
another’s wife as a man witli washed feet the mire. He who desires to rise
continually from birth to birth, let him worship the Lord as his attendants
Worship I udra. He who wishes tor heavenly eq)oymente, a hoftve®v Me, glory.
*>»»» <» * « » : « “
1 They live on the noi,'-om shores of the Ganges, opposite to Magadha.

f( f ) |
iVo. 544. ,121
pleasures, without doubt in former time they had lived a virtuous life ; all
beings separately abide by their own deserts. Dost thou thyself think, 0 king,
what caused thee to own these wives of thine like heavenly nymphs, beautifully
adorned and dressed with golden nets ? ’ ”
[241] Thus she counselled her father. The Teacher thus explained the
matter:
“ Thus did the maiden Ruja please her father, she taught the bewildered
one the true road, and devoutly declared to him the law.”
Having proclaimed the law to her father all night from early morning,
she said to him, “ O king, listen not to the words of a naked heretic, but
receive the words of some good friend1 like me, who tells thee that there is
this world and there is another world, and that there are fated consequences
to every good or evil action,— rush not on by a wrong road.” Still she
was not able to deliver her father from his false doctrine; he was only
pleased when he heard her sweet words, for all parents naturally love their
dear children’s speech, but they do not give up their old opinions. So too
there arose a stir in the city, “The king’s daughter Ruja is trying to
drive away heretical views by teaching the law,” and the multitude were
well-pleased, “ The wise princess will set him free from false teaching to­
day and will inaugurate prosperity for the citizens.’ But though she
could not make her father understand she did not lose heart, but
resolving that by some means or other she would bring her father tiue
happiness, she placed her joined hands on her head and after having made
her obeisance in the ten directions, she offered worship, saying, “In this
world there are righteous Samanas and Brahmins who support the world,
there are the presiding deities, there are the great Brahma deities, let
them come and cause my father to give up his heresy; [242] and if they
have no power in themselves, then let them come by my power and viitue
and drive away this heresy and bring about the welfare of the whole
world.” Now the Great Brahma of that time was a Bodhisatta named
Narada; and the Bodhisattas in their mercy, compassion, and sovereignty,
cast their eyes over the world from time to time to behold the righteous
and the wicked beings. As he was that day looking over the world he
saw the princess worshipping the presiding deities in her desire to deliver
her father from heresy, and he thought to himself, “Except me, none other
can drive away false teaching, I must come to-day and shew kindness to
the princess and bring happiness to the king and his people. In what
garb shall I go 1 Ascetics are dear and venerable to men and their words
are counted worthy to be received; I will go in the garb of an ascetic.”
So he assumed a pleasing human form, having a complexion like gold,
with his hair matted and a golden needle thrust into the tangle; and
having put on a tattered dress red outside and within, and having hung
> fTho Good Friend is a locus communis of Budcmsm. Seo etc]

?(f)f <SL
— <^y
\ty*tij .v^Zs
122 The JataJca. Book XXII.
over one shoulder a black antelope’s hide made of silver and decorated
with golden stars, and having taken a golden begging bowl hung with a
string of pearls, and having laid on his shoulders a golden carrying pole
curved in three places1, and taken up a coral water-pot by a string of
pearls, he went with this garb through the heavens shining like the moon
in the firmament, and having entered the terrace of the Oanda palace he
stood in the sky in front of the king.
The Teacher thus explained it:
“Then Narada came down to men from the Brahma-world, and surveying
Jambudlpa he beheld King Aiigati. Then he stood on the palace before the
king, and liuja, having beheld him, saluted the divine sage who had come.”
[243] Then the king, being rebuked by the Brahma’s glory, could not
remain on his throne, but came down and stood on the ground and asked
him the cause of his coming and his name and family.
The Master thus explained it:
“Then the king, alarmed in his mind, having come down from bus seat spoke
thus to Narada, making his inquiries; * Whence comest thou, of heavenly
aspect, like the moon illumining the night ; tell me in answer thy name and
family, how do they call thee in the world of men?’”
Then he thought to himself, “ This king docs not believe in another
world, I will tell him about another world,” so he uttered a verse :
“I come new from the gods like the moon illumining the night,—I tell thee
my name and family as thou askest: they know me as Narada and Kassapa.”
Then the king thought to himself, “ By and bye I will ask him about
another world; I will now ask him as to the purpose of this miracle.”
“In that thou goest and standest in this marvellous fashion, I ask thee,
0 Narada, what does it mean ; for what reason is this miracle wrought?”
[244] Narada replied:
“Truth, righteousness, self-command, and liberality,—these were in old days
my notorious virtues ; by these same virtues diligently followed I go swift
as thought wherever I desire.”
Even while he was thus speaking the king, unable to believe in
another world from the inveteracy of his evil doctrines, exclaimed, “ Is
there such a thing as recompense for good actions?” and repeated a stanza:
“Thou uttorest a marvel wheu thou talkest of the might brought by good
actions ; if these things are as thou sayeafc, Narada, this question, being asked,
do thou answer me truly."
Narada replied :
“Ask me, O king; this is thy business; this doubt of thine which thou
fouloet, 1 will assuredly solve it for theo by reasoning, by logic, and by proofs.”
' To tit ncok and shoulders ?

t( t) l <SL
jVo. 544. 123
[245] The king said :
“ I ask thee this matter, 0 Narada ; give me not a false answer to my
question ; are there really gods or ancestors,—is there another world as people
say?”
Narada answered:
“There are iudeed gods and ancestors, there is another world as people say ;
but men being greedy and infatuated for pleasure know not of another world in
their illusion.”
When the king heard this he laughed and uttered a verse :
“ If thou believest, Narada, that there is in another world a dwelling-place
for the dead, then give me here five hundred pieces, and I1 will give thee a
thousand in the next world.”
Then the Great Being replied, reproving him in the midst of the
assembly:
“ I would give thee the five hundred if I knew that thou wast virtuous and
generous ; but who would press thee for the thousand in the next world, if thou,
the merciless one, wast dwelling in hell i Here when a man is averse to virtue,
a lover of sin, idle, and cruel,—wise men do not entrust a loan to him: there is
no return from such a debtor. [246] When men know that another is skilful,
active, virtuous and generous, they invite him to borrow by the advantages they
hold out; when he has done his business, he will bring back what he has
borrowed.”
The king, thus rebuked, was not ready with an answer.
The multitude, being delighted, shouted, “ O princess, thou art a being
of miraculous power, thou wilt deliver the king this day trorn his false
doctrines,” and the whole city was filled with excitement. Then by the
power of the Great Being there was not a person within the range of the
seven leagues over which Mithila extends who did not hear his teaching
of the law. Then the Great Being reflected, “This king has grasped his
false doctriues very firmly; 1 will frighten him with the fear of hell
and make him give them up, and then I will comfort him with some
heaven of the gods”; so he said to him, “O king, if thou dost not give up
these doctriues, thou wilt go to hell with its endless torments,” and he
began to give an account of the different hells:
“When thou goest hence thou wilt see thyself dragged by flocks of ravens
and devoured by them as thou livest in hell, and by crows, vultures, and hawks,
with thy body torn and dripping blood: who would press thee for a thousand
pieces in the next world ? ”
[247] Having described the raven hell, he said, “ If thou dost, not
dwell there, thou wilt dwell in a hell in the space between three spheres,”
and he uttered a stanza to describe it:
“Blind darkness is there, and no moon or sun, a hell evermore tumultuous
and dreadful; it is not known as either night or day: who would wander seeking
money in such a place ? ”

t(fl)
<SL
•*-••'-- 124 The Jataka. Book XXII.
Then having described that intermediate hell at full length, he said,
“O king, if thou abandonest not thy false doctrines, thou wilt suffer not
only this but other torments as well,” and he uttered a stanza:
“ Two dogs Sabala and Sama of giant size, mighty and strong, devour with
their iron teeth him who is driven hence and goes to another world.”
A similar rule applies to the subsequent hells; thefelore all these
worlds, together with their guardians, are to be described in a pregnant
prose version of the various gathas as in the preceding narrative.
“As he lives in hell thus devoured by cruel beasts of torture, with his body
torn and dripping blood, who would press him for a thousand pieces in the next
world ?
[248] With arrows and well-sharpened spears the Kajupakalas as enemies
smite and wound him in hell who before committed evil.
As he wanders in hell thus smitten in belly and side, and with his entrails
mangled, his body torn and dripping blood,—who would press him for a thousand
pieces in the next world ?
Heaven rains down these spears, arrows, javelins and spikes and various
weapons, flames fall like burning coals, it rains missiles of rock on the cruel
man.
An intolerable hot wind blows in hell, not even a transient pleasure is felt
there; rushing about, sick, with no refuge,—who would press him for a thousand
pieces in the next world ?
Hurrying along yoked in chariots, treading along the fiery ground, [249]
urged on with goads and sticks,- -who would press him for a thousand pieces in
the next world (
As ho climbs a fearful blazing mountain studded with razors, his body
gashed and dripping with blood,—who would press him for a thousand pieces in
the next world 1
As he climbs a dreadful blazing heap of burning coals like a mountain, with
his body all burned, and miserable, and weeping,—who would press him for a
thousand pieces in the next world?
There are lofty thickets like heaps of clouds, full of thorns, with sharp iron
spikes which drink the blood of men,—women and men who go after other
people’s wives have to climb it, driven on by the servants of Yania bearing
spears in their hands.
As he climbs the infernal silk-cotton tree all covered with blood, his body
gashed and flayed, sick and racked with pain, panting with deep hot sighs and
thus expiating his former crimes,—who would ask him for his old debt?
[250] There are lofty forests like heaps of clouds, covered with swords for
leaves, armed with iron knives wliich drink the blood of men ; as he climbs
the tree with iron leaves, cut with sharp swords, his body gashed and dripping
blood, - -who would press him for the thousand pieces in the next world ?
When he escapes from that hell of iron leavos and falls into the river Veta-
ranl, who would ask him for his old debt?
On flow. Ihc river Votamni, cruel1 with boiling water and covered with iron
lotuses and sharp leavos; as he is hurried along covered with blood and with his
limbs all cut, in the stream of Vetaranl where there is nothing to rest upon,—
who would ask him for his debt ?’’
i •-Uara might moan 'solid.’

/s&s- ' G°i^X
—<V\ . ■ \
P ) | <SL
544. ' 125
No.
When the king heard this description of hell from the Great Being,
bewildered in heart and seeking a refuge, he thus addressed him:
“I tremble like a tree which is being cut down ; confused in mind, I know
not which way to turn ; I am tormented with terror, great is my fear, when
I hear these verses uttered by thee. As when a thing burning is plunged in
the water, or like an island in a stormy ocean, or like a lamp in the darkness,
thou art my refuge, 0 sage.
[251] Teach me, 0 seer, the sacred text and its meaning ; verily the past has
been all sin; teach me, Narada, the path of piu-ity, so that I may not fall into hell.”
Then the Great Being to teach him the path of purity told him by way
of example of various former kings who had followed righteousness :
“ Dhatarattha Vessamitta and Atthaka, Yamataggi and Uftinnara and King
Sivi, these and other kings, waiting diligently on Brahmins and Sanmnas, all
went to .Sakka’s heaven ; do thou, 0 king, avoid unrighteousness and follow
righteousness. Let them proclaim in thy palace, bearing food in their hands,
‘ Who is hungry or thirsty ? Who wants a garland or ointment? What naked
man would put on garments decked with various jewels ? Who would take an
umbrella for his journey, and soft delicate shoes?’ Thus let them proclaim
aloud in thy city evening and morning. But not to labour the aged man nor
the aged ox and horse: give to each the due honour still; when he was strong
he fulfilled his position of trust.”
[252] Thus the Great Being, having discoursed to him concerning
liberality and good conduct, seeing that the king would be pleased at
being compared to a chariot, proceeded to instruct him in the law under
the figure of a chariot which brings every desire :
“Thy body is called a chariot, swift and provided with the miud as a
charioteer : having the abstinence from all injury as its axle, liberality as its
covering, a careful walk with the feet as the circumference of the wheel, a
careful handling with tho hands as the side of the carriage; watchfulness over
the belly is the name of the wheel, watchfulness over tho tongue is the
prevention of the wheel’s rattling. Its parts .are all complete through
truthful speech, it is well fastened together by the absence of slander, its
frame is all smooth with friendly words and joined well1 2 3with well-measured
speech; well-constructed with faith and the absence of covetousness, with the
respectful salutation of humility as tho carriage-pole, with the shaft of gentleness
and meekness, with the rope of self-restraint, according to the five moral pre­
cepts, and the key(?) of absence of anger, and the white umbrella of righteous­
ness, driven with a thorough knowledge of the proper seasons, having the
three sticks” prepared.in his assured confidence, having humble speech as the
thong, and with the absence of vain-glory as the yoke, with tho cushion of
unattached thoughts, following wisdom and free from dust,—let memory be
thy goad, and the ready application of firmness thy reins ; mind pursues the
path of self-control with its steeds all equally trained, desire and lust are au
evil path, but self-control is the straight road. [253] As the steed rushes along
after forms and sounds and smells, intellect uses the scourge and the soul is the
charioteer. If one goes with his chariot, if this calmness and firmness bo stead­
fast, he will attain all desires, O king,—he will never go to hell.
[254] Thus, 0 king, I have described to thee in various ways that path to
happiness which 1 bogged Niirada to loll me that I might not fall into hell V
1 ailesitol
2 [The ascetic carried a tidandam, three sticks in a bundle, but the referouco is
obscure.]
3 Some of tho phrases hero are obscure. I leave '*"3 hue 1131 6 untranslated.

' G°W\
I I I <SL
126 The JdtaJcci. Book XXII.
Having thus instructed him in the law and taken away his false
doctrines, and established him in the moral precepts, he commanded him
henceforth to eschew evil friends and to follow virtuous friends and to
take heed how he walked; then he praised the virtues of the princess and
[255] exhorted the royal court and the royal wives, and then passed in
their sight to the world of Brahma with great majesty.
The Master, having ended his lesson, exclaimed, “Not now only, but formerly
also Brethren, I converted Uruvela-Kassapa and cut the net of heresy which
bound him” ; so saying, ho identified the Birth, and uttered these stanzas at
the end :
“Devadatta was Alata, Bhaddaji was Sunama, Sariputta was Vijaya,
Mogallana Biiaka, the Licchavi prince Sunakkhalta the naked ascetic Buna ;
Ananda was Ruja' who converted the king, and Uruvela-Kassapa the king who
held false doctrines, and the Bodhisatta1 was the great Brahma; thus ye hold
the story of the birth.”
No. 545.
V1DHUKAPAN p IT A-J AT AKA.
“ Thou art pale and thin and weak,” etc. Tho Master told this tale while
dwelling in JetaVana, concerning tho Perfection of Wisdom. One day the
Brethren raised a discussion in the Hall of Truth, saying, “ Sirs, the Master
has great and wide wisdom, lie is ready and quick-witted, he is sharp and keen­
witted and able to crush the arguments of his opponents, by the power of Ins
wisdom ho overthrows the subtil questions propounded by Kliattiya sages and
reduces them to silence, and having established them in the three Refuges and
the moral precepts, causes them to enter on the path which lends to immor­
tality ” The Master came and asked what was the topic which the Brethren
were debating as they sat together ; and on hearing what it was he said “ It is
not wonderful, Brethren, that the Tathfigata, having attained the Perfection of
Wisdom should overthrow the arguments of his opponents and convert h hattiyas
ami others For in the earlier ages, when he was still seeking for supreme know­
ledge he was wise and able to crush the arguments of his opponents Yea verily
in the time of Yidlmmkumara, on the summit of the Black Mountain which is
sixty leagues in height, by the force of my wisdom I converted the iakkha
general, runiiaka, and reduced him to silence and made him give his own life
as a gift ” ; and so saying he told a story of the past.
I.
time
Once upon a in the Kuru kingdom in the city of Indapatta a
kiim- ruled named Dianafijaya-korabba. He had a nmnster named
Vidhurapandita who gave his instructions concerning temporal and
matters; S»,u,ace m
spiritual and having a swoot and gr«t
discoursing of the law. ho bowitchod all the kmg, of Jambnorpa by hrs
■ So. himsolf at that time.

• G0|*X
—V\V\
|( t ) | ; <SL
iVo. 545. 127
sweet discourses concerning the law as elephants are fascinated by a
favourite lute1, [256] nor did he suffer them to depart to their own
kingdoms, but dwelt in that city in great glory, teaching the law to
the people with all a Buddha’s power. Now there were four rich
Brahmin householders in Benares, friends, who, having seen the misery
of desires, went into the Himalaya and embraced the ascetic life, and
having entered upon the transcendental faculties and the mystical medita­
tions, continued to dwell a long time there, feeding on the forest roots
and fruits, and then, as they went their rounds to procure salt and sour
condiments, came to beg in the city Kalacampa in the kingdom of Anga.
There four householders who were friends, being pleased with their de-
. portment, having paid them respect and taken their begging vessels,
waited upon them with choice food, each in his own house, and taking
their promise arranged a home for them in their garden. So the four
ascetics having taken their food in the houses of the four householders,
went away to pass the day, one going to the heaven of the Thirty-three,
another to the world of the Nagas, another to the world of the Supannas,
and the fourth to the park Migacira belonging to the Ivoravya king. Now
he who spent his day in the world of the gods, after beholding Sakka s
glory, described it in full to his attendant, and so too did he who spent
his day in the Naga and Supanna world, and so too he who spent
his day in the park of the Koravya king Dhanafijaya; each described in
full the glory of that respective king. So these four attendants desired
these heavenly abodes, and having performed gifts and other works of
merit, at the end of their lives, one was born as Sakka, another was born
with a wife and child in the Naga world, another was born, as the
Supanna king in the palace of the Simbali lake, and the fourth was con­
ceived by the chief queen of King Dhananjaya; while the four ascetics
were born in the Brahma world. The Koravya prince grew up, and on
his father’s death assumed his kingdom and ruled in righteousness, but he
was famed for his skill in dice. He listened to the instruction of Vidhura-
pandita and gave alms and kept the moral law and observed the fast.
One day when he had undertaken the fast, he went into the garden,
determining to practise pious meditation, [257] and, having seated himself
in a pleasant spot, he performed the duties of an ascetic. Sakka also,
having undertaken to keep the fast, found that there were obstacles in
the world of the gods, so he went into that very garden in the world
of men, and, having seated himself in a pleasant spot, performed the
duties of an ascetic. Varuna also, the Naga king, having undertaken to
keep the fast, found that there were obstacles in the Naga world, so ho
went into that same garden, and, having seated himself in a pleasant
place, performed the duties of an ascetic. The Supanna king also, having
1 Cf. Kathfisaritsfigara (Tawney’s transb, Vol. 1. i>. 67).

(* ( 2 v fil
%8 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
'*s's^^?2p • "S' 1----------------------------------------------— — ________________________________________________________________________________________________
undertaken to keep the fast, found that there were obstacles in the
Supanna world, so'he went into that same garden, and, having seated
himself in a pleasant spot, performed the duties of an ascetic. Then these
four, having risen from their places at evening time, as they stood on the
bank of the royal lake, came together and looked at one another, and,
being filled with their old kindly affection, they woke up their former
friendship and sat down with a pleasant greeting. Sakka sat down on a
royal seat, and the others seated themselves as befitted the dignity of each.
Then Sakka said to them, “TVe are all four kings,—now what is the pre­
eminent virtue of each 1 ” Then Vanina the Naga king replied, “ My
virtue is superior to that of you three,” and when they inquired why, he
said, I his Supanna king is our enemy, whether before or after we are
born, yet even when I see him such a destructive enemy of our race I
never feel any anger; therefore my virtue is superior”; and he then
uttered the first stanza of the Catuposatha-jataka1:
‘•1 he good man who feels no anger towards one who merits anger and who
never lets anger arise within him, he who even when angered does not allow it
to be seen,—him they indeed call an ascetic.
[2.18] “ .These are my qualities; therefore my virtue is superior.”
The Supanna king, hearing this, said, “This Naga is my chief food;
but since, even though I see such food at hand, I endure my hunger and
do not commit evil for the sake of food, my virtue is superior,” and he
uttered this stanza:
“He who bears hunger with a pinched belly, a self-restrained hermit who
cots and drinks by rule, and commits no evil for the sake of food,—him thev
indeed call an ascetic.” ’
Then Sakka the king of the gods said, “I left behind various kinds of
heavenly glory, all immediate sources of happiness, and came to the world
of mankind in order to maintain my virtue,—therefore my virtue is
superior”; and he uttered this stanza:
“Having abandoned all sport and pleasure, he utters no false word in the
m S tllUn P°“P “““ “ “ •* * * * — * » - » the,
Thus did Sakka describe his own virtue.
Then King Dhanafijaya said, “I to-day have abandoned my court
and my seraglio with sixteen thousand dancing girls, and I practise an
ascetic’s duties in a garden; therefore my virtue is superior”; and he
added this stanza:
I*'/)] '*Those who with full knowledge abandon all that they call their own
and all the workings of lust, he who is self-restrained, resolute, unselfish and
free from desire,--him they indeed call an ascetic.” ’
1 8c. the jataka concerning the four vows for keeping the fust; of. Yol. iv Jut
No. 441. [The Birth is not there given, but only a reference to the Punnaka Birth
which haB not been identifierj

|(E)i - <
sl
No.
545. . 129
' C W
Thus they each declared their own virtue as superior, and then they
asked Dhanahjaya, “O king, is there any wise man in thy court who
could solve this doubt?” “Yes, 0 kings, I have Vidhura-pandita, who
fills a post of unequalled responsibility and declares civil and ecclesiastical
law, he will solve our doubt, we will go to him.” They at once con­
sented. So they all went out of the garden and proceeded to the hall for
religious assemblies, and, having ordered it to be adorned, they seated the
Bodhisatta on a high seat, and, having offered him a friendly greeting, sat
down on one side and said, “ O wise sir! a doubt has risen in our minds,
do thou solve it for us :
“ We ask thee the minister of lofty wisdom: a dispute has arisen in our
utterances,—do thou consider1 and solve our perplexities to-day, let us through
thee to-day escape from our doubt.”
[260] The wise man, having heard their words, replied, “ 0 kings, how
shall I know what you said well or ill concerning your virtue, as you
uttered the stanzas iu your dispute 1 ” and he added this stanza :
“ Those wise men who know the real state of things and who speak wisely at
the proper time,—how shall they, however wise, draw out the meaning of verses
which have not been uttered to them? How does the Niiga king speak, how
Garula, the son of Vinata? Or what says the king of the Gandhabbas? Or
how speaks the most noble king of the Kurus ? ”
Then they uttered this stanza to him :
“ The Niiga king preaches forbearance, Garula the son of Vinata gentleness,
the king of the Gandhabbas abstinence from carnal lust, and the most noble king
of the Kurus freedom from all hindrances to religious perfection.”
Then the Great Being, having heard their words, uttered this stanza:
“ All these sayings are well spoken,—-there is nothing here uttered amiss ;
and he in whom these are properly fitted [261] like the spokes in the nave of a
wheel,—he, who is endowed with these four virtues, is called an ascetic iudeed.”
Thus the Great Being declared the virtue of each of them to be one
and the same. Then the four, when they heard him, were well pleased,
and uttered this stanza in his praise :
“ Thou art the best, tho.u art incomparable, thou art wise, a guardian and
knower of the law: having grasped the problem by thy wisdom, thou cuttest
the doubts in thy skill as the ivory-workman the ivory with his saw.”'
Thus all the four were pleasod with his explanation of their question.
Then Sakka rewarded him with a robe of heavenly silk, Garula with a
golden garland, Varuna the Niiga king with a jewel, and King Dhanahjaya
with a thousand cows, etc. ; then Dhananjaya addressed him in this stanza :
“ I give thee a thousand cows and a bull and an elephant, and these ten
chariots drawn with thoroughbred horses, and sixteen excellent villages, being
41 pleased with thy solution of the question
" ” kes kamkham in line 26 as a participle—the verb occurs on p. 229 *:
" a noun with asyndeton, So '261,4.J
ulaih nitthitam.’]
9

C
V:kJS§y^30 The Jdtalca. Booh X X II. n il j
*----------------------------------------------------------------------------------——-——-------------------- ~~ ~
[262] Then Sakka and the rest, having paid all honour to the Great
Being, departed to their own abodes. Here ends the section of the four­
fold fast.
II.
Now the queen of the Naga king was the lady Vimala; and when she
saw that no jewelled ornament was on his neck, she asked him where it
was. He replied, “ I was pleased at hearing the moral discourse of
Vidhura-pandita the son of the Brahmin Canda, and I presented the jewel
to him, and not only I, but Sakka honoured him with a robe of heavenly
silk, the Supanna king gave him a golden garland, and King Dhanaftjaya
a thousand oxen and many other things besides.” “He is, I suppose,
eloquent in the law.” “Lady, what are you talking about? It is as if a
Buddha had appeared in Jambudlpa! a hundred kings in all Jambudlpa,
being caught in his sweet words, do not return to their own kingdoms,
but remain like wild elephants fascinated by the sound of their favourite
lute,—this is the character of his eloquence!” When she heard the
account of his preeminence she longed to hear him discourse on the law,
and she thought in herself, “If I tell the king that I long to hear him
discourse on the law, and ask him to bring him here, he will not bring
him to me; what if I were to pretend to be ill and complained of a sick
woman’s longing ? ” So she gave a sign to her attendants and took to her
bed. When the king did not see her when he paid his visit to her, he
asked the attendants where Yimala was. They replied that she was sick,
and when he went to see her he sat on the side of her bed and rubbed her
body as he repeated a stanza:
“ au<l ^1'n and weak,—your colour and form was not like this before,—
O V nnalti, answer my question, what is this pain of the body which dias come
upon you ? ” v
She told him in the following :
[263] "There is an affection in women,—it is called a longing, 0 king;
0 monarch of the Nagas, I desire Vidhura’s heart brought here without guile.”
He replied to her :
,. 'Umu longest for the moon or the sun or the wind; the very sight of
Vidhura is hard to get; who will be able to bring him here?”
When she heard his words, she exclaimed, “ I shall die if I do not
obtain it,’ so she turned round in her bed and showed her back and covered
her face with the end of her robe. The Naga king went to his ow
chamber and sat on his bed and pondered how bent Vimaln, was ov
ing Vidhura’s heart; “ She will die if she does not oht
heart; how can I get i+ for her?” Now his daught

1§E 545' i3 i(C T
n N o ‘
a, J ■ " 1 i&L
h x ;’ ■ ■ ■ princess, came in all her beauty and ornaments to pay her respects to her
father, and, having saluted him, she stood on one side. She saw that his
countenance was troubled, and she said to him, “You are greatly dis­
tressed,—what is the reason?”
“ 0 father, why are you full of care, why is your face like a lotus plucked
by the hand? [264] Why are you woe-begone, 0 king? Do not grieve, 0 con­
queror of enemies.”
Hearing his daughter’s words, the Naga king answered:
“ Thy mother, 0 Irandatl desires Vidhura’s heart, the very sight of Yidhura
is hard to get,—who will be able to bring him here 1 ”
Then he said to her, “ Daughter, there is no one in my court who can
bring Yidhura here; do thou give life to thy mother, and' seek out some
husband -who can bring Vidhura.”
So he dismissed her with a half-stanza, suggesting improper thoughts
to his daughter:
Seek thou for a husband, who shall bring Vidhura here.’
And when she heard her father’s words, she went forth in the night and
gave free course to her passionate desire.”
[265] As she went she gathered all the flowers in the Himalaya which
had colour, scent, or taste, and, having adorned the entire mountain like
a precious jewel, she spread a couch of flowers upon it, and, having executed
a pleasant dance, she sang a sweet song ;
“ V hat gandhabba or demon, what Naga, kimpurasa or man, or what sage,
able to grant all desires, will be my husband the livelong night V’
Now at that time the nephew of the great king Vessavana1, named
Punnaka, the Yakkha general, as he was riding on a magic Sindh horse,
three leagues in length, and hastening over the red arsenic surface of the
Black Mountain to a gathering of the Yakkhas, heard that song of hers,
and the voice of the woman which he had heard in his last previous life
pierced his skin and nerves and penetrated to his very bones • and, being
fascinated by it, he turned back, seated as he was on his Sindh horse, and
thus addressed her, comforting her, “O lady, I can bring you Vidhura’s
heart by my knowledge, holiness, and calmness,—do not be anxious about
it,” and he added this verse :
“ Be comforted, I will be thy husband, I will be thy husband, 0 thou of fault­
less eyes: verily my knowledge is such, be comforted, you shall l>e my wife.”
Then Irandatl answered, with her thoughts following the old experience of
a wooing in a former birth, [266] “Come, let us go to my father he will oxnlain
this matter to thee.” ’ 'F
Adorned clad in bright raiment, wearing garlands, and anointed with sandal,
she seized the Yakkha by the hand and went into her lather’s presence.
1 Kuvera. ■”
9—2

r
\i^ lK y ^ i3 2 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
J
And Punnaka,- having taken her back, went to her father the Naga
king and asked for her as his wife :
“0 Naga chief, hear my words, receive a fitting present for thy daughter;
I ask for Irandatl: give her to me as my possession. A hundred elephants,
a hundred horses, a hundred mules and chariots, a hundred complete waggons1
filled with all sorts of gems,—take thou all these, 0 Naga king, and give me thy
daughter Irandatl” > s b, b j
Then the Naga king replied :
“It ait while I consult my kinsmen, my friends, and acquaintances; a busi­
ness done without consultation leads afterwards to regret.”
[26j] Then the Naga king, having entered his palace, spoke these words as
he consulted his wife, “This Punnaka the Yakkha asks me for Irandatl; shall
we give her to him in exchange for much wealth l ”
Vimala answered:
“ Our Irandatl is not to be won by wealth or treasure : if he obtains by his
own worth and brings here the sage’s heart, the princess shall be won by that
wealth,—we ask no further treasure.”
Punyaka, *"* *"* * ^ *“*■ with
... “0ur lrandatl is not to be won by wealth or treasure ; if thou obtainest by
thine own worth and bringest here the sage’s heart, the princess shall be won by
that wealth,—we ask no further treasure.” ^
Punnaka replied :
I, “ H'“ wh°m some PeoPle caI] a ®a.ge, others will call a fool; tell me, for they
0 N5gaf”reU °pini0ns atout the matter> who is be whom thou callest a sagi,
[268] The Naga king answered :
“ Oiou hast heard of Vidhura the minister of the Korawn in„„ nv,n„„~
jaya, bring that sage here, and let Irandatl be thy lawful wife!” g
Hearing these words of Varuna, the Yakkha sprang up greatly pleased - iust
“ °'“!9 to h“
With ears of gold and hoofs of ruby, and mail-armour of molten gold.
The man brought the Sindh horse thus caparisoned; and Punnaka, having
mounted him, went through the sky to Vessavana and told’ him of the
adventure, thus describing the Naga world; this is described as follows :
“ Punriaka, having mounted his horse, a charger fit for bearing the gods
Inmeelf nchly adorned and with his beard and hair trimmed, went through
W‘th the Fa-ssiou of desire> tongmg to win the Naga maiden
Kuvem : C 3 “g g°ne t0 the ^lorioua ^g , thus addressed Vessavana
There is the palace Bhogavatl called the Golden Home, the capital of the
snake kingdom erected in its golden city. 1 0i e
Watch-towers which mimic lips and necks, with rubies and cat’s eve jewels
palaces built of marble and rich with gold, and covered with jewels inlaid with
1 Vnlabhi may mean a tent or shed.

I
i(Ds ..
n<
sl
i ^ i ^ 7 iVo. 545. 133
Mangoes, tilakca-trees and rose-apples, sattapannas, mucalindas and ketakas,
piyakas, uddalakas and sahas, and sinduvaritas with their wealth of blossom above,
Champacs, nagamalikas, bhaginlmalas, and jujube trees,—all these different
trees bending with their boughs, lend their beauty to the Naga palace.
There is a huge date palm made of precious stones with golden blossoms that
fade not, and there dwells the Naga king Varuna, endowed with magical powers
and born of supernatural birth.
There dwells his queen Vimala with a body like a golden creeper, tall like a
young kala plant, fair to see with her breasts like nimba fruits.
Fair-skinned and painted with lac dye, like a kanikara tree blossoming in a
sheltered spot, like a nymph dwelling in the deva world, like lightning flashing
from a thick cloud.
[270] Bewildered and full of a strange longing, she desires Yidhura’s heart.
I will give it to them, 0 king,—they will give me for it Irandatl.’ ”
As he dared not go without Yessavana’s permission, he repeated these
stanzas to inform him about it. But Yessavana did not listen to him, as he
was busy settling some dispute about a palace between two sons of the gods.
Punnaka, knowing that his woi’ds were not listened to, [271] remained
near that one of the two disputants who proved victorious in the contest.
Vessavana, having decided the dispute, took no thought of the defeated
candidate, but said to the other, “Go thou and dwell in thy palace.”
Directly the words were said “go thou,” Punnaka called some sons of the
gods as witnesses, saying, “Ye see that I am sent by my uncle,” and at
once ordered his steed to be brought and mounted it and set out.
The Teacher thus described what took place:
“ Punnaka, having bidden farewell to Vessavana Kuvera the glorious lord of
beings, thus gave his command to his servant standing there, ‘ Bring hither
my thoroughbred harnessed.’ With ears of gold, hoofs of ruby, and mail-armour
of molten gold. Punnaka, having mounted the god-bearing steed, well-adorned
and with his beard and hair well-trimmed, went through space in the sky.”
As he went through the air he pondered, “Vidhura-pandita has a great
retinue and he cannot be taken by force, but Dhananjaya Koravya is
renowned for his skill in gambling. I will conquer him in play and
so seize Vidhura-pandita. Now.there are many jewels in his house:
he will not play for any poor sum; I shall have to bring a jewel of great
value, the king will not accept a common jewel. Now there is a precious
jewel of price belonging to the universal monarch, in the Vepulla Moun­
tain near the city Rajagaha; I will take that and entice the king to play
and so conquer him.” He did so.
The Teacher declared the whole story :
“ He went to pleasant Rajagaha, the far-off city ot Ahgn, rich in provisions and
abounding with food and drink. Like Masakkasara, Indra’s capital, [272] filled
with the notes of peacocks and herons, resonant, full of beautiful courts, and
with every kind of bird like the mountain Himavat covered with flowers. So
Punnaka climbed Mount Vepulla, with its heaps of rocks inhabited by kim-
purisas, seeking for the glorious jewel, and at last he saw it in the middle of the
mountain.

' G°t&X
I <SL
(f t
X<^ :^:^134 The Jataka. Book XXII.
When he saw the glorious precious gem thus flashing light, gleaming so
splendidly with its beauty, shining like lightning in the sky,—he at once seized
the precious lapis lazuli, the jewel of priceless value, and mounted on his peerless
steed, himself of noble beauty, he rushed through space in the sky.
He went to the city Indapatta, and he alighted in the court of the Kurus ;
[273] the fearless Yakkha summoned the hundred warriors who were gathered
there.
1 Who wishes to conquer from us the prize of kings 1 or whom shall we
conquer in the contest of worth ? what peerless jewel shall we win ? or who shall
win our best of treasures V”
Thus in four lines he praised Koravya. Then the king thought to
himself, “ I have never before seen a hero like this who uttered such
words; who can it be?” and he asked him in this stanza:
“In what kingdom is thy birthplace? these are not the words of a Koravya:
thou surpassest us all in thy form and appearance; tell me thy name and
kindred.”
The other reflected, “This king asks my name: now it is the servant
Punnaka; but if I tell him that I am Punnaka, he will say, ‘He is a servant,
why does he speak to me so audaciously?’ and he will despise me; I will
tell him my name in my last past birth.” So he uttered a stanza:
“ I am a youth named Kaccayana, 0 king; they call me one of no mean
namo; [274] my kindred and friends are in Anga; I have come here for the sake
of play.”
Then the king asked him, “ What wilt thou give if thou art conquered
in play ? what hast thou got ? ” and he uttered this stanza :
“ What jewels has the youth, which the gamester who conquers him may
win ? A king has many jewels,—how canst thou, a poor man, challenge them ?”
Then Punnaka answered :
“This is a fascinating jewel of mine, it is a glorious jewel which brings
wealth ; and the gamester who conquers me shall win this peerless steed which
plagues all enemies.'’
When the king heard him, he replied :
“ IV hat will one jewel do, 0 youth ? and what will one thoroughbred avail ?
Many precious jewels belong to a king, and many peerless steeds swift like
the wind1,”
III.
[275] WheD lie heard the king’s speech, lie said, “0 king, why dost
thou say this? there is one horse, and there are also a thousand and
a hundred thousand horses; there is one jewol, and there are alHO a
thousand jewels; but nil the horses put together are not equal to this
one, see what its swiftness is.” Haying, he mounted the horse and
i i)oha}ii-khan<}am.']

f( f ) | <SL
iYo. 545. , 135
\
* . ... ,j.
•galloped it along tlie top of a wall, arid the city wall seven leagues in
length was as it were surrounded ,by horses striking neck against neck,
and then in course of time neither horse nor Yakkha could be distinguished,
and a single strip of red cloth tied on his belly seemed to be spread out all
round the wall. Then. he alighted from the horse, and, telling him that
he had now seen the steed’s swiftness, he bade him next mark something
new: and lo he made the' horse gallop within the city garden on the
surface of the water, and he, leapt without wetting his hoofs; then he
made him walk on fhe leaves- of the lotus beds, and when he clapped his
hand and stretched out his arm the horse came and stood upon the palm
of his hand. Then he said, “ This is indeed a jewel of a horse, O king.
“It. is indeed, O youth.” “Well, let the jewel ot a hofse be put on.one
side for-a while,—see now the power of the precious jewel.”
“ 0 greatest of men, behold this peerless jewel of mine ; in it are the bodies
of women and the bodies of men; the bodies of beasts are in it and the bodies of
birds, the Naga kings and supannas,—all are created in this jewel.
“An elephant host, a chariot host, horses, foot-soldiers, and banners, behold
this complete army created in the jewel; elephant-riders, the king’s body-guard,
warriors fighting from chariots, warriors fighting on foot, and troops in battle
array,—behold all created in this jewel.
[276] “ Behold created in this jewel a city furnished with solid foundations
and with many gateways and walls, and with many pleasant spots where four
roads meet. Pillars and trenches, bars and bolts, watch-towers and gates,
behold all created in the jewel.
“See1 various troops of birds in the roads under the gateways, geese, herons,
peacocks, ruddy geese and ospreys ; cuckoos, spotted birds, peacocks, jtvaji-
vakas,—birds of every sorjt behold gathered together and created in the jewel.
“See a marvellous city with grand walls, making the hair stand erect with
wonder, pleasant with banners upraised, and with its sands all of^golu,—-see the
hermitages divided regularly in blocks, and the different houses and their yards,
with streets and blind lanes between.
“Behold the drinking shops and taverns, the slaughter-houses and cooks’
shops, and the harlots and wantons, created in the jewel. The garland-weavers,
the washermen, the astrologers, the cloth merchants, the gold workers, the
jewellers—behold created in the jewel.
[277] “ See drums and tabours, conclis, tambours and tambourines and all
kinds of cymbals, created in.the jewel.
« Cymbals, and lutes, dance and song well executed, musical instruments and
gongs, behold created in the jewel.
“ Jumpers and wrestlers too are here, and a sight of jugglers, and royal bards
and barbers, behold created in the jewel.
“Crowds are gathered here of men and women, see the seats tiers beyond
tiers created in the jewel.
“See the wrestlers in the crowd striking their doubled arms, see the strikers
and the stricken, created in the jewel.
troops boa*.
« See on the slopes of the mountains of various doer, lions, tigers,
bears, wolves, and hyenas; rhinoceroses, ra Jut all
antelopes, wild boars, nimkas and hogs, spotted kadah-doer, cats, rabbin, a
kinds of hosts of beasts, created in the jewql.
> [Cf. Vol. v. p. 4062, traus., p- ‘215^

/f> —^V\ ^
f(f)l <SL
The Jcitaka. Book XXII.
[278] “ Rivers well-situated, paved with golden sand, clear with flowing waters
and filled with quantities of fishes; crocodiles, sea-monsters are here and por­
poises and tortoises, pathinas, pavusas, valajas, and munjarohitas.
“ Behold created in the jewel all kinds of trees, filled with various birds, and
a forest with its branches made of lapis lazuli.
“See too lakes well-distributed in the four quarters, filled with quantities
of birds and abounding with fish with broad scales. See the earth surrounded
by the sea, abounding with water everywhere, and diversified with trees,—
all created in the jewel.
“Sec the Videhas in front, the Goyauiyas behind, the Kurus and Jambudlpa
all created in the jewel.
“See the sun and the moon, shining on the four sides, as they go round
Mount Sineru,—created in the jewel.
“ See Sineru and Himavat and the miraculous sea and the four guardians of
the world,—created in the jewel.
“ See parks and forests, crags and mountains, pleasant to look at and full of
strange monsters,—all created iu the jewel.
“ Indra’s gardens Phurusaka, Cittalata, Missaka, and Nandana, and his
palace Vejayanta,—behold all created in the jewel.
“ Indra’s palace Sudhamma, the heaven of the Thirty-three, the heavenly
tree Paricchatta in full flower, and Indra’s elephant Eravana,—behold created
in the jewel. See here the maidens of the gods risen like lightning in the air,
wandering about in the Nandana,—all created in the jewel.
[270] “ See the heavenly maidens bewitching the sons of heaven, and the sons
of heaven wandering about, all created in the jewel.
“ Behold more than a thousand palaces covered with lapis lazuli, all created
with brilliant colours in the jewel. And the beings of the Tavatirhsa heaven
and the V fun a heaven and the Tusita heaven, and those of the Paranimmita
heaven all created in the jewel. See here pure lakes with transparent water
covered with heavenly coral trees and lotuses and water-lilies.
“ In this jewel are ten white lines and ten beautiful lines dark blue; twenty-
one brown, and fourteen yellow. Twenty golden lines, twenty silver, and thirty
appear of a red colour. Sixteen are black, twenty-five are of the colour of madder,—
these are mixed with bandhuka flowers and variegated with blue lotuses.
“0 king, best of men, look at this bright flame-like jewel, perfect in all its
parts,—this is the destined prize1 for him who wins2.”
IV.
[280] Punnaka, having thus spoken, went on to say, “ 0 great king,
if I am overcome by thee in play I will give thee this precious jewel, but
what wilt thou give me 1 ” “ Except my body and white umbrella let all
that I have be the prize.” “ Then my lord, do not delay—I have come
from a far distance—let the gaming room be got ready.” So the king
gave orders to his ministers and they quickly got the hall ready and
prepared a carpet of the finest fibre-cloth3 for the king and seats for the
other kings, and having appointed a suitable seat for Punnaka, they told
1 odhmimkam ? ’ [' Mi<ni-kfiandam.’]
J vampol hakattharanam ?

p I
\vJltw -Wo. 545. ■(. 137 o i j
'N^vv^^ .sS^y' ___________________________________________________________
the king that the time was come. Then Punnaka addressed the king in a
verse :
“0 king, proceed to the appointed goal,—thou hast not such a jewel: let us
conquer by fair dealing, and by the absence of violence, and when thou art
conquered pay down thy stake.”
Then the king replied, “ 0 youth, do not be afraid of me as the king,
our several victory or defeat shall be by fair dealing and by the absence
of violence.” Then Punnaka uttered a verse as calling the other kings to
witness that the victory was to be gained by fair dealing only :
“ 0 lofty Pancala and Surasena, O Macchas, and Maddas, with the Kekakas,
—let them all see that the contest is without treachery, no onp is to interfere in
our assembly.”
[281] Then the king attended by a hundred kings took Punnaka and
went into the gaming hall, and they all sat down on suitable seats, and
placed the golden dice on the silver board. Then Punnaka said quickly,
“ 0 king, there are twenty-four throws in playing with dice, they are
called mdlifca, savata, bahula, santi, bhadra}, &c.; choose thou whichever
pleases thee.” The king assented and chose the bahula, Punnaka chose
that called sdvat.a. Then the king said, “ 0 youth, do thou play the dice
first.” “ 0 king, the first throw does not fall to me, do thou play.” The
king consented. Now his mother in his last existence but one before this
was his guardian deity and by her power the king wins in play. She was
standing close by, and the king remembering the goddess sang the song of
play2 and turned the dice in his hand and threw them up into the air. By
Punnaka’s power the dice fall so as to conquer the king. The king by his
skill in play recognised that the dice were falling against him [282] and
seizing them and mixing them together in the air he threw them again in
the air but he detected that they were again falling against him and seized
them as they were. Then Punnaka thought to himself, ‘ This king,
though he is playing with a Yakkha like me, mixes the dice as they fall
■ and so takes them up, what can be the reason of this?” Then, having
recognised the power of the- guardian goddess, he opened his eyes wide as
if he were angry and looked at her and she being frightened fled and took
refuge trembling in the top of the Cakkavala mountain. The king, when
he threw the dice a third time, although he knew that they would fall
against him could not put out his hand and seize them in consequence of
Punnaka’s power and they fell against the king. Then Punnaka threw
the dice and they fell favourable to him. Then knowing that he had won
clapped a I
he his hands with loud noise, saying three times, “ have won,
’ These terms are obscure. Cf. the scene of Darduraka in ‘ The Toycart,’ Act n.,
and the Comvi. mi the Ghdndogya-upanishad, iv. 1. h
2 [B d here adds six corrupt stanzas.]

IS;
<
sl
The Jataka. Book XXII.
x ^ ^ l 3 8
I have won,” and 'that sound thrilled through all Jarnbudlpa. The
• Teacher' described the event as follows:
“The king of the Kurus and the Yakkha Punnaka entered wild with the
intoxication of play ; the king played the losing throw and the \ akkha Punnaka
the winning throw. They two met there in contest in the presence of the kings
and amidst the witnesses,—the Yakkha conquered the mightiest of men and
loud was the tumult which arose there.”
The king was displeased at being conquered, and Punnaka repeated
a verse to comfort him :
[283] “Victory and defeat belong to one or another of the contending parties,
O king; O king, thou hast lost the great prize ; being worsted, pay down the
price forthwith.”
Then he bade him take it in the following verse :
“Elephants, oxen, horses, jewels and earrings, whatever gems I have in
the earth, take the best of wealth, 0 Kaccaua,—take it and go where thou
wishes t.”
Punnaka answered :
“ Elephants, oxen, horses, jewels and earrings, whatever gems thou hast in
the earth, Vidhurathe minister is the best of them all,—he has been won by me,
pay him down to me.”
The king said :
“ He is my minister, my refuge and help, my shelter, my fortress and my
defence,- -that minister of mine is not to be weighed against wealth, that minister
of mine is like my life.”
Punnaka answered :
“ There would be a long contest between thee and me, let us go to him and
ask him what he wishes, [284] let him decide this matter between us, let then
what he determines bo the judgment of us both.”
The king replied :
“ Verily thou speakest truth; 0 youth, thou utterest no injustice, let us go
at once and ask him; in this way we shall both be satistied.”
So saying the king took the hundred kings and Punnaka went gladly
in haste to the court of justice; and the sage rose from his seat and
saluted the king and sat on one side. Then Punnaka addressed the Great
Being and said, “ 0 wise man, thou art firm in justice, thou wilt not utter
a falsehood, even for the sake of life; such is the echo of thy fame which
has spread through the whole world. I shall know to-day whether thou
art really firm in justice,” and so saying he uttered a verse:
“ Have the gods truly set thee among the Kurus as the councillor Vidhura
firm in justice! Art thou the slave or the kinsman of the king? What is thy
value in the world, Vidhura ?”
Then the Great Being thought to himself, “This man asks this question
of me ; but I cannot tell him whether I am a kinsman of the king or
whether I am superior to the king or whether 1 am nothing bo the king.

t( S)! (&
t
No. 545. '«• 139k^ ^ J
In this world there is no protection like the truth | [285] one must speak
the truth.” So he uttered two verses to show that he was no kinsman to
the king nor his superior, but only one of his four slaves :
“ Some are slaves from their mothers, others are slaves bought for -money
some come of their own will as slaves, others are slaves driven by fear These
aie the foui sorts of slaves among men. I verily am a slave from my birth-
Sotht?1 To T W°e C°T from,the kinS> 1 am king’s slave even i/l go to
another,—he may give me by right to thee, 0 young man.”
Punnaka, on hearing this, being excessively pleased, clapped his hands
and said :
th /™ V ^ sec1onc,1, vict017 to-day, thy minister when asked has answered
& C ‘S b“ ”
Hearing this the king was angry with the Great Being and said, “Not
-regarding one who can confer honour like me tliou regardest this young
man who catches thine eye”; then turning to Punnaka, and saying, “If
he is a slave take him and go,” he uttered the following stanza :
kinsman >“T T t Z saying, ‘I amaslave and not a
thou wilt.” k ’ ° Kaccaua>th,s best of treasures, take it and go whither
But when the kiug had thus spoken, he reflected, “ The young man
will take the sage and go where he pleases, and after he is once gone I
shall find it hard to get any sweet converse about holy things ■ what if I
were to set him in his proper place and ask him some question in reference
to a householder’s life V” So he said to him, “ 0 sage, after thou art gone
I shall find it hard to get any sweet converse about holy things; wilt
thou sit down in a well-decorated pulpit and. taking thy proper position
expound to me a question relating to the householder’s life 1 ” He assented,
and having sat down in a well-decorated pulpit he expounded the question
which the king asked ; and this was the question :
“ 0 Vidhura, how shall, there be a prosperous life to him who lives ns a house­
holder in h.s own house? how shall there be for him kind favour among his own
people ? how shall he be freefrom suffering? and how shall the young man who
speaks truth escape all sorrow when he reaches the next world ? ’’ Then Vidhura
full of wisdom and insight, he who sees the real aim and presses steadily onward
he who knows all doctrines, uttered these words : J ’
“ L.et him, nT ilave ? Yif! in °ommon with an°ther; let him not eat a dainty
meal alone ; et him not deal in vain conversation, for this increases not wisdom
Virtuous, faithful to Ins duties not careless, quick to discern, humble-minded,
not hard-hearted, compassionate, affectionate, gentle, [287] skilled in winning
Inends, ready to distribute, prudent m an-auging m accordance with the
season,—let him continually satisfy the monks and Brahmins with food and
drink. Let him long for righteousness and be a pillar of the sacred text ever
ready to ask questions and let him reverentially attend to the virtuous learned,
J hus shall there he a prosperous life to one who lives as a householder in his
T n vTt.’ tbus sbab tkerc be for him kind favour among his own people ; thus
siau he be free from suffering; and thus the youth who speaks truth shall
escape all sorrow when he reaches the next world.”

• eo^T\
<
s l
I m l
"-■ '*-- ■'■’-'l^ o The Jataka. Book XXII.
The Great Being, having thus expounded the question relating to the
householder’s life, came down from his seat and made his salutation to the
king. The king also, having paid him great respect, went away to
his own abode, surrounded by the hundred kings1.
[288] When the Great Being returned, Punnaka said to him :
“Come, I will now depart,—you were given to me by the king; attend only to
this duty—this is the ancient law.”
The sage Vidhura replied :
“ I know it, 0 youth; I was won by thee ; I was given by the king to thee; let
me lodge thee for three days in my home while I exhort my sons.”
When Punnaka heard this, he thought within himself, “ The sage has
spoken the truth ; this will be a great benefit to me; if he had asked
leave to lodge me there for seven days or even for a fortnight, I ought at
once to have assented ” ; so he answered :
“ Let that advantage be for me too, let us dwell there three days ; do, Sir,
whatever needs to be done in thy home; instruct to-day thy sons and thy wife,
that they may be happy after thou art gone.”
So saying, Punnaka went with the Great Being to his home.
[289] The Teacher thus described the incident:
“Gladly assenting and eagerly longing, the Yakkha went with Vidhura; and
the test of the holy ones introduced him into his home, attended by elephants
and thoroughbred steeds.”
Now the Great Being had three palaces for the three seasons,—one of
them was called Konea, another Mayura, and the third Piyaketa; this
verse was uttered about them :
“He went there to Konea, Mayura, and Piyaketa, each of most pleasant
aspect, furnished with abundance of food and plenty to eat and to drink, like
Indra’s own palace Maaakkasara.”
After his arrival, he had a sleeping-chamber, and a raised platform in
the seventh story of the decorated palace, and having had a royal couch
spread and every kind of dainty to eat and drink set out, he presented to
him five hundred women like daughters of the gods, saying, “ Let these be
your attendants, stay here without a care,” and then went to his own abode.
When he was gone, these women took their different musical instruments
and performed all kinds of dances as they attended on Punnaka.
The Teacher has thus described it:
“These women adorned like nymphs among the gods dance and sing and
address him, each better in her turn2.
The guardian of the law, having given him food and drink and fair women,
[290J next, thinking only of his highest good, brought him into the presence of
his wife.
1 Gharavaaa-paiihtuh. ’] varavaravi1
. .. -

t ( f) | <SL
No. 545. e 141
Then he said to his wife, who was adorned with sandal and liquid perfumes
and stood like an ornament of purest gold, ‘ Come, listen, lady; call thy sons
here, 0 fair one with eyes of the hue of copper.’
Anujja, hearing her husband’s words, spoke to her daughter-in-law, fair-eyed
and with nails like copper, * 0 Ceta, who wearest thy bracelets as an armour,
and art like a blue water-lily, go, call my sons hither.’ ”
Having uttered her assent and traversed the whole length of the
palace she assembled all the friends as well as the sons and daughters,
saying, “Your father wishes to give you an exhortation, this will be your
last sight of him.” When the young prince Dhammapala-kumara heard
this he began to weep, and went before his father surrounded by his
younger brothers. When the father saw them, unable to maintain his
tranquillity, he embraced them with eyes full ot tears, and kissed their
heads and pressed his eldest son for a moment to his heart. Then, raising
him up from his bosom and going out of the royal chamber, he sat down
in the middle of the couch on the raised platform and delivered his
address to his thousand sons.
[291] The Teacher has thus described it:
“The guardian of the law, without trembling, kissed his sons on their fore­
heads when they drew near, and having addressed them uttered these words,
‘I have been given by the king to this young man. I am subject to lnm, but
to-day I was free to seek my own pleasure, he will now take me and go whither
he will, and I am come to admonish you, for how could I go if I had not given
you salvation ? If Janasandha, the king who dwells in Kurukhetta, should
very earnestly ask you, ‘What do you reckon as having been ancient even in
ancient time ? what did your father teach first and foremost 1 ’ and if lie were
then to say, ‘Ye are all of an equal position with me,-which of you hero is not
more than a king?1 do you make a respectful salutation and reply to him,
‘ Say not so, 0 monarch, this is not the law; how shall the basebom jackal be
of equal position with the royal tiger ? ’ ’’
[292] Having heard this discourse of his the sons and daughters and
all the kinsmen, friends, servants, and common folk were unable to main­
tain their tranquillity and uttered a loud cry; and the Great Being
con '‘led them8.
V.
Then having come to all those kinsmen and seeing that they were
silent he said, “Children, do not grieve, all material things are imper­
manent, honour ends in misfortune; nevertheless I will tell you of a
means of obtaining honour, namely, a king’s court; listen to it with your
minds earnestly intent.” Then through the Buddha's magic power he
made them enter into a royal corn t,
1 I read the line as ho na idha rahno ahbhadhiko ; the scholiast explains it as
Ko nu.
2 [‘ Lakkha-khcmdam.’]

The Jdtaha. Booh XXII.
42
(•..( S O - A u i l j
The Teacher thus described it:
“ Then Vidhura thus addressed his friends and his enemies, his kindred, and
his intimates, with his mind and will detached from all things, “Come, dear
ones, sit down and listen to me as I tell of a royal dwelling, how a man who
enters a king’s court may attain to honour. When he enters a king’s court ho
does not win honour while he is unknown, nor does one ever win it who is a
coward, nor the foolish man, nor the thoughtless. When the king finds out his
moral qualities, his wisdom and his purity of heart, then he learns to trust him
and hides not his secrets from him.
When he is asked to carry out some business, like a well-fixed balance, with
a level beam, and evenly poised, he must not hesitate; if like the balance, he
is ready to undertake every burden, he may dwell in a king’s court.
[293] Whether by day or by night, the wiser man should not hesitate when
set upon the king’s business ; such an one may dwell in a king’s court. The wise
man who, when set upon the king’s business, whether by day or by night,
undertakes every commission,—he is the one who may dwell in a king’s court.
He who sees a path made for the king and carefully put in order for him,
and refrains from entering himself therein, though advised to do so,—he is the
one who may dwell in a king’s court. Let him on no account ever enjoy the
same pleasures as the king, let him follow behind in everything,.—such an one
may dwell in a king’s court. Let him not put on a garment like the king’s nor
garlands nor ointment like his ; let him not v alar ornaments or practise
a tone of voice like his; let him always wear a different attire,—such an one
may dwell in a king’s court. If the king sports with his ministers or surrounded
by his wives, lot not the minister make any allusion to the royal ladies. He
who is not lifted up, nor fickle, who is prudent and keeps his senses under
control, ho who is possessed of insight and resolution,—such an one may dwell in
a king’s court.
[294] Let him not sport with the king’s wives nor talk with them privately;
let him not take money from his treasury,—such an one may dwell in a king’s
court. Let him not think too much of sleep, nor drink strong drink to excess
nor kill the deer in the king’s forest,—such an one may dwell in a king’s court!
Let him not seat himself on the king’s chair or couch or scat or elephant or
chariot; as thinking himself a privileged person,—such an one may dwell in
a king’s court. Let him prudently keep not too far from the king nor yet too
near to him, and let hiru stand ready before him, telling something for his lord
to hear. The king does not count as a common person, tiie king must not be
else
paired with aflyone ; kings are easily vexed, as the eye is hurt if touched by
a barley-awn. Let not the wise man, thinking himself to be held in honour
ever venture to speak roughly to the-suspicious king. If he gets his opportunity’
let him take it; but let him not trust in kings ; let him be on his guard as in
the case of fire1,—such an one may dwell in a. king’s court. If the ruler favours
his sou or his brother with a gift of some villages or towns or some people in
his kingdom as clients, let him quietly wait in silence, nor speak of him as
prudent or faulty.
[295] If the king increases the pay of his elephant-driver or his life-
guardsman, his chariot-soldier or his foot-soldier, through hearing some story of
their exploits, let him not interfere to hinder it,—such an one may dwell in
a king’s court. The wise man will keep his belly small like the bow2, but he
will bond easily like the bamboo; let him not go contrary to the king2, g0 j16
may dwell in a king’s court, Let him keep his belly small like the bow, and let
him have no tongue like the fish; let him be moderate in eating, brave and
prudent; such an one may dwell in a king’s court.
1 This line is obscure.
2 The bow must not be kept bent into too great a curve.
» Or “let him not go contrary to other people.’

\($% <SL
No.
5 4 5 . , 1 4 3
Let him not visit a woman too often, fearing the loss of his strength; the
foolish man is a victim to cough, asthma, bodily pain and childishness. Let
him not laugh too much, nor keep always silent; he should utter, when the due
season comes, a concise and measured speech. Not given to anger, not ready to
take offence, truthful, gentle, no slanderer, let him not speak foolish words,—such
an one may dwell in a king’s court.
[296] Trained, educated, self-controlled, experienced in business1, temperate,
gentle, careful, pure, skilful,—such an one may dwell in a king’s court. Humble
in behaviour towards the old, ready to obey, and full of respect, compassionate,
and pleasant to live with,—such an one may dwell in a king's court. Let him
keep at a distance from a spy sent by a foreign king to intermeddle2 ; let him
look to his own lord alone, and own no other king.
Let him pay respect to monks and Brahmins who are virtuous and learned ;
let him carefully wait on them ; such an one may dwell in a king’s court. Let
him satisfy virtuous and learned monks and Brahmins with fobd and drink,
such an one may dwell in a king’s court. Let him draw near and devotedly
attend on'virtuous and learned monks and Brahmins,—desiring thereby his own
real good.
Let him not seek to deprive monks or Brahmins of any gift previously be­
stowed on them, and let him in no way hinder mendicants at a time ot
distributing alms. Ono who is righteous, endowed with wisdom, and skilled
in all business arrangements, and well-vorsod in times and seasons, such an
one may dwell in a king’s court. [297] One who is energetic in business,
careful and skilful, and able to conduct his affairs successlully, such an one
may dwell in a king’s court.
Visiting repeatedly the threshingfloor, the house, the cattle and the field,
he should have the corn carefully measured and stored in his granaiies, and
he should have it carefully measured for cooking in his home. [Let him not
employ or promote3 *] a son or a brother who'is not stedfast in virtue; such
children are no true members of one’s own body, they are to be counted as il
they were dead ; let him cause clothing and food for sustenance to be given to
them and let them sit while they take it. Let him employ in offices of authority
servants and agents who are established in virtue and are skilful in business and
can rise to an emergency.
One who is virtuous and free from greed and devoted to Iris king, never
absent from him1 and seeking his interest,—such an one may dwell in a kings
court. Let him know the king’s wish, and hold fast to his thoughts, and let his
action be never contrary to him,—such an one may dwell in a kings court.
[298] He will rub him with perfumes and bathe him, he will bend Ins head
low when washing his feet; when smitten he will not be angry ; such an one
may dwell in a king’s court.
He will make his salu ion to a jar full of water, or offer his reverential
greeting to a crow, yea, he >.J1 givo to all petitioners and be ever prudent and
preeminent—he will give away his bed, his garment, his carriage, his house, his
home and shower down blessings like a cloud on all beings. This, Sirs, is the
way to dwell in a king’s court, this is how a man is to behave himself and so
to conciliate the king’s favour, and to obtain honour from his rulers5.”
1 katatto = katatto (krtartha ?).
3 So the scholiast seems to explain it.
3 Some line to this effect seems to have dropped from the text.
1 I would read uviraho.
5 [‘Hajavasati-khandaih.']

/Y y ~ ^ s\ •'
t ( f) | ' *SL
N'
X^ l^144 The Jcitaka. Book XXII.
. '
• ' VI.
Three days went by as he thus discoursed to liis sons, wives, friends
and others. Then, knowing that the time was accomplished, early in the
morning, after having eaten his meal of various dainties, he said, I will
take my leave of the,king and depart with the young man”; so,ho went
to the king's palace surrounded by a company of kinsmen and saluted the
king and stood on one side, and uttered his words of wise practical counsel.
The Teacher has thus described it:
“ Having thus counselled’the company of his kindred, the wise one, surrounded
by his friends, went up to the king. [299] Having saluted his feet with his
head and made a reverential homage, Vidhura with his hands clasped thus
addressed the king, ‘ This youth, wishing to employ me according to his will, is
loading me away; 1 will speak for the sake of my kindred,—hear what 1 say,
0 enemy-conqueror. Wilt thou be pleased to look to my sons aiid whatever
property I may have besides in my house, so that when 1 am gone my company
of kinsmen may not hereafter perish? As when the earth trembles that which
is upon it likewise trembles, and as when the earth is firm it all remains firm1,
so I see that my kindred fall in my fall; this I perceive was my error.’”
When the king heard this, he said, “<J sage, thy going pleases me not;
do not go; I will send for the young man oil some pretext, then we will
kill him and hush it up”; and in illustration of this he repeated a
stanza:
“Thou canst not go, this is my resolve; having smitten and slain this
Katiya2 fellow, do thou dwell here,—this is what seems best to me; do not go
hence, 0 thou possessed of such vast wisdom.’
Wheu the Great Being heard this he exclaimed, “ Such au intention is
not worthy of thee,” and then he added,
“ Ho not set thy mind on unrighteousness, tie thou devoted to temporal and
spiritual good3; shame on an action which is ignoble and sinful, which wheu
a man has done, he goes afterwards to hell.
[300] This i3 not righteousness, this 'is not what ought to be done; a king,
0 lord of men, is the supreme authority of a poor slave, which sets him to kill
or to burn or kills by its own act; I have no wrath against him and I depart.”
So saying the Great Being respectfully saluted the king and exhorted
the king’s wives and his officers; and then went out from the palace
while they, unable to retain their fortitude, burst out into a bitter cry;
and all the inhabitants of the city exclaimed, “Thesage is going with the
young man, come, we will see him as he goes,” and they ga2ed upon him
in the king’s court. Then they too said to one anotner, “Sorrow not for
it, all material things are transitory, be zealous in almsgiving and other
good works,” and then they returned and went each to his own house.
1 This line is very obscure.
8 Cf. kaccana, supra.
s Or “ the sacred text and its inner moaning.”

. . .
(jCwyJ i^Xi
No. 545. , 145
v*s>— yJ._________________________________________________________
The Teaclier has thus described it:
“Having embraced his eldest sou and controlled the anguish in his heart, with
* eyes filled with tears he entered the palace.”
Now in the palace there were a thousand sons, a thousand daughters,
a thousand wives, and seven hundred courtezans, and with these and
the other servants and attendants and relations and friends lying prostrate
everywhere the palace appeared like a sal grove with its trees strewed
about by the fury of the great wind which heralds the end of the world.
The Teacher has thus described it:
“The sons and wives of Vidhura lie prostrate in the palace like sal-trees
shaken and shattered by the wind.
[301] A thousand wives, and seven hundred female slaves wailed stretching
out their arms, in the palace of Vidhura. The ladies of the harem and the
princes, the Vesiyas and Brahmins wailed stretching out their arms in the
palace of Vidhura. Elephant-drivers, the soldiers of the body-guard, chariot-
riders and foot-soldiers wailed stretching out their arms in the palace of
Vidhura. The people of the country and the towns collected together wailed
stretching out their arms in the palace of Vidhura.”
The Great Being, having comforted the vast assembly and performed
all that remained to be done and exhorted the ladies of the harem and
pointed out all that needed to be told, went to Punnaka and announced
to him that he had done everything that was to be done.
The Teacher has thus described it:
“ Having done all that was to be done within the house and having instructed
all the people, his friends and counsellors and companions, his wives, sons and
relations, and having arranged the outside work which demanded attention and
informed them of the stores in the house, the treasure and the debts that were to
be paid, he thus spoke to Punnaka, ‘ Thou hast dwelt three days in my house,
I have done all that needed to be done in my home, I have instructed my sons
and my wives, let us now act according to thy will, 0 Kaccana1.’ ”
[302] Punnaka replied:
“ If, 0 thou who actest of thine own will2, thou hast instructed thy sons, thy
wives, and thy dependents, then alas ! thou standest here as one 'about to
cross: this is a long journey before thee. Take hold, without fear, of the tail
of thy noble steed, this is tliy last sight of the world of the living.”
Then the Great Being said to him:
“Of whom shall I be afraid, when I have done no evil to him by body, speech
or thought, whereby I could come to misfortune 1”
Ho the Great Being, uttering a loud shout, fearless like an undismayed
lion, said, “This is my robe—put it not off without my permission”; and
then, guided by his own perfect resolution, and having girt his robes
tightly, lie disentangled the horse’s tail and seizing it firmly with both
hands, he. pressed the horse’s thighs with his two feet and said to him,
1 Elsewhere Entiyana.
- Is kattc a vocative for katta ?
J. vi. 10

HP '■
(SI.
146 The JcitaTca. Booh XXII.
“I have seized the tail, proceed, O youth, as thou wilt.” At that
moment Punnaka gave a signal to the horse who was endowed with
reason, and he forthwith bounded into the sky, carrying the seer.
The Teacher has thus described it:
“ The prince of horses bearing Vidhura went up into the sky and soon
reached the Black Mountain1 without coming in contact with the boughs of
trees or the rocks.”
[303] While Punnaka thus went off carrying the Great Being with
him, the seer’s sons and the other spectators went to Punnaka’s dwelling;
but when they found not the Great Being, they lamented with loud and 1 _
repeated cries, falling down as if their feet had been cut off'’.
When they thus had seen and heard the Great Being, as he went up
without any cause into the sky, and had thus uttered their lamentations, \
they all went wailing to the king’s gate, accompanied by all the citizens.
The king, hearing the loud sound of lamentation, opened his window and
asked why they lamented. They replied, “0 sire, that was no Brahmin
youth, but a Yakkha who has come in the guise of a Brahmin and earned
off the seer; [304] without him there is no life for us ; if he does not
return on the seventh day from this, we will collect timber in hundreds,
yea, thousands of carts and will all enter the fire2 *.”
When the king heard their words, he replied, “ The sage with his
honied speech will soon beguile the youth by his religious discourse and
will make him fall down at his feet, and will ere long come back and
bring smiles to your tearful faces,—sorrow not”; and he repeated a
stanza :
“The seer is wise, and learned, and skilful; he will soon set himself free ■
fear not, he will come back.”
Meantime Punnaka, after he had set the Great Being on the top of
the Black Mountain, thought to himself, “ As long as this man lives there
is no chance of prosperity for me; I will kill him, and take his heart’s *
flesh and I will then go to the Naga world and give it to Vimala8, and
having thus obtained his daughter Iranda.ti I shall rise to the world of
the gods.”
The Teacher has thus described it :
“ When he had gone there he thought to himself, ‘ Rational beings exist in
various gradations ; I Uavo no possible use for his life, -1 will kill him and take
his heart.’ ”
[305] Then again lie thought, “ What if without killing him by my
own hand I were to cause him to perish by shewing him some frightful
1 Is this KSlttgiri the same as the fCcllapubbatu, a peak of the Himalaya ?
* [Here a verse paraphrase of the above has been omitted ]
a This Naga is called V&ruua afterward*?.
i-

?(f)f
( i ■ r-y
<SL
No.
5 4 5 . .. 1 4 7 k-, A J
shape ? ” So having assumed the form of a frightful demon, he went
up to him and threw him down, and seizing him in his mouth made as if
* he were about to devour him ; but not a hair of the Great Being stood on
end. Then ho came up in the shape of a lion and of a furious elephant, he
threatened to attack him with teeth and tusks; and when the other still
shewed no fear, lie assumed the appearance of a great serpent as big as a
great trough-shaped canoe, and coming up to him hissing and coiling his
body round him it covered his head with its hood, but the other shewed no
signs of alarm. Then he said, “As he stands on the top of a mountain
and falls down, I will shatter him into fragments by the fall, —so he raised
up a mighty wind; but it stirred not the end of one of his hairs. I hen he
set him on the top of a mountain and himself standing in the form of an
elephant, he made it shake to and fro like a wild date palm tree, but even
then he could not stir one hair of his head from its place. Then he said,
“ I will make his heart burst by terror at some frightful sound ’ ; so he
entered the inside of the mountain, and uttering a tremendous roai filled
heaven and earth with one mighty sound; but still the Great Being shewed
no alarm; for he knew that he who had thus come in the fornj of a
Yakkha and a lion and an elephant and a Naga, and had shaken the
mountain with the wind and rain, and had entered into the mountain and
uttered the great roar, was still only a man and nothing else, then the
Yakkha thought to himself, “ I shall not be able to kill him by external
attacks, I shall only destroy him by my own hand.” So he set the Great
Being on the top of a mountain and himself going to the mountain’s foot
rose up from the centre of the mountain as though he weio inserting a
white thread into a perforated gem, and with a roar he seized the Great
Being violently and whirled him round, and flung him head downwards
■ into the sky where there was nothing that he could lay hold of. It has
thus been described :
13061 “Having gone thither and entered within the mountain Katiyana of
evil mind held him with his head downwards in the open expanse of the world1.
While he hung there as on the precipice of hell frightful to see and most
difficult to traverse, he the best of all the Kurus in action thus addressed
Punnaka undismayed : ‘ Thou art base in thy nature, though thou assumes*
for'a time a noble form, utterly licentious though wearing the guise of one
restrained, thou art doing a cruel and monstrous deed,-there is nothing good
in thy nature What is thy reason for killing me, when thou wishest to see me
thrown down this precipice? Thy appearance bespeaks thee as something
superhuman, tell me what kind of a god thou art.
[307] Punnaka answered:
“Thou hast heard perchance of the Yakkha Punnaka-he is the minister
of King Kuvera. There is an earth-ruling Naga cAlled \aruna m.gh y, pme,
and endowed with beauty and strength ; l desire his younger sister, the Mga
maiden named Irandatl; for the love of that fair damsel 1 have set my nund on
killing thee, O sage.”
i So, the sky.
10—2

'S T ,
V \% )h i8 The Jataka. Book XXII.
\%>----yA/ __________________ _______________________________________
The Great Being reflected, “ This world is ruined by a thing being
misund'erstood, why should a wooer of a Naga maiden want my death ? I
will learn the whole truth of the matter,” so he uttered a stanza : °
“Be not deceived, 0 Yakkha; many peojfle are destroyed by a thing being
misunderstood; what has thy love for that fair maiden to do with my death ?
Come, let us hear the whole.”
Then Punnaka said to him, “In my love for the daughter of that mighty
Ivaga I consulted her kinsfolk, and when I sought her hand my father-in-law
told me that they knew that I was moved by an honourable passion. ‘ We
will give thee the damsel endowed with beautiful body and eyes, fair-smiling
and ^ with her limbs perfumed with sandal wood, if thou bringest to me the
sages heart won in fair fight; [308] the maiden is to be won by this prize, we
ask no other gift besides. fhus 1 am not deceived,—listen, O thou doer of
right actions ; there is nothing misunderstood by me ; the Nagas will give me
the Naga maiden Irandati for thy heart won in fair fight. It'is for this that I
am set on killing thee, it is in this way that I have need of thy death. If I
threw thee hence down into hell 1 would kill thee and take thy heart.”
When the Great Being heard this he reflected, “ Vimala1 has no need
ot mj heart. Varuna, after he had heard the discourse on the law and
honoured me with his jewel must have gone home and described my power
in discoursing concerning the law, and Vimala must have felt a great
longing to hear my words. Punnaka must have been ordered by Varuna
through a misconception, and he influenced by this his own misconception
has brought about all this calamity. Now my character as a sage consists
in my power to bring to light and to discover absolute truths. If Punnaka
kills me, what good will it do? Come, I will say to him, ‘Young man I
know the law as followed by good men; before I die, set me on the top ’of
the mountain and hear the law of good men from me; and afterwards do
what thou wilt’; and after having declared to him the law of good men
I will let him take my life.” So he uttered this stanza as he hung with
his head downwards :
“Hold me up forthwith, O Katiyana, if thou needest my heart ; rsODl I will
declare fco thee this day all the laws of the good man.”
Then Punnaka reflected, “ This law will never have been declared
before to gods or men ; I will forthwith hold him up and hear the law of
good men so he lifted the Great Being up and set him on the summit
of the mountain.
The Teacher has thus described it:
“ Punnaka, having quickly placed the best of the performers of good actions
among the Kurus upon the mountain’s summit, asked the Teacher of loftv
wisdom, as he sat looking at a pipul tree, * I have brought thee up from the
precipice, I have need of thy heart this day,—tell me then to-day nil the laws of
the good mfiii.”’
The Great Being said:
“I am saved by thee from the precipice; if thou needest my heart 1 will
declare to thee this day all the laws of the good man.”
■ The wife of Kuvera.
»

ffl®> (
ct
V fvS^ -7 No. 545. 149kjl^l
_____________________________!__________________________________________________
Then the Great Being said, “ My body is dirty, I will bathe.” The
. Yakkha consented, so he brought some water, and when he was bathing,
he gave the Great Being some heavenly cloth and perfumes, &c., and after-
lie was adorned and drest he gave him some heavenly food. When he had
eaten, the Great Being caused the top of the Black Mountain to be covered
with adornment, and prepared a richly decorated seat, and being seated
thereon uttered a stanza, describing in it the duty of the good man with a
Buddha’s triumphant mastery :
“ 0 youth, follow thou the path already traversed ; put away from thee the
soiled hand1; [310] be not ever treacherous to thy friends, nor fall into the
power of unchaste women.”
Ml
The Yakkha, being unable to comprehend these four rules expressed
so concisely, asked in detail:
“ How does one follow the path already traversed 1 How does one bum the
wet hand ? 1\ ho is the unchaste woman i Who is treacherous to his friend ?
Tell me the meaning at my request.”
The Great Being replied :
“ Let a man follow his actions, who invites him even to a seat, when he comes
as a stranger and never seen before ; him the wise call one who follows in the
path already traversed.
In whosesoever house a man dwells even for one night, and receives there food
and drink, let him not conceive an evil thought against him in his mind ; ho
who is treacherous to his friend burns the inhoeent hand2. Let not a man break
a bough of that tree under whose shadow he sits or lies,—the wretch is treacherous
to his friend. Let a man give this earth filled with riches to the womau wrkom
he has chosen, yet she will despise him if she gets the opportunity; let him not
fall into the power of unchaste women. Thus does a man follow the path
already traversed ; thus does he burn the wet hand ; this is the unchaste
woman ; this is one that is treacherous to his friend ; such a man is righteous,
abandon thou unrighteousness.”
[311] Thus did the Great Being declare to the Yakkha with a Buddha's
triumphant mastery the four duties of a good man, and when he heard
them Punnaka reflected, “ In these four propositions the sage is only
asking bis own life; for he verily welcomed me though I was before
unknown; I dwelt in his house three days, receiving great honour from
him; I, doing him this wrong, do it for a woman’s sake ; I am moreover
in every way treacherous to my friends ; if I shall do injury to the sage,
I shall not follow the duty of a good man; what need have I of the Naga
maiden? I will carry him forthwith to Indapatta and gladden the
weeping faces of its inhabitants and I will seat him in the convocation
hall there.” Then he spoke aloud :
1 [This line seems corrupt and does not agree with the comm., which explains it
“do not bum the wet hand.” In the verses addo is translated here both ‘soiled’
and ‘ wet ’; adubbha- is the word used for ‘ innocent. ’]
2 I.e. the hand which had given him food?

' G\ \
1 ( 1 / 1 v C T
7%e
Book XXII. ZJLj
“ I dwelt three days in thy house, I was served with food and drink, thou
wast my friend, I will let thee go, 0 seer of excellent wisdom, thou shalt
depart at thy' will to thine own home. [312] Yea, let all that concerns the
Naga race perish, I have had enough of the Naga maiden ; by thine own well-
spoken words thou art set free, 0 seer, from my threatened blow to-day.”
The Great Being replied, “ O youth, send me not away to my own
home but carry me to the Naga dwelling,” and he uttered this stanza:
“Come, Yakkha, carry me to thy father-in-law, and act as is best towards
me; I will shew to him a royal Naga palace which he has never seen before.
Punnaka said:
“The wise man should not look on that which is not for a man’s well­
being ; why then, 0 seer of excellent wisdom, dost thou wish to go amongst
thy enemies?”
The Great Being answered :
“ Verily I know it all; the wise man ought not to look upon it; but I have
never at any time committed evil, and therefore I fear not the coming of death.”
[313] “ Moreover by my discourse concerning the law such a cruel being
as thyself was won over and softened, and now thou sayest, ‘ I have had
enough of the Naga maiden, go thou to thine own home’; it is now my
task to soften the Naga king, carry me thither forthwith.” When he
heard this, Punnaka consented, saying :
“ Come, thou shalt see with me that world of unequalled glory where the
NMb king dwells amidst dance and song like King Vessavnna1 in Nolinl.
filled with troops of Naga maidens, gladdened constantly with their sports day
and night, abounding with garlands and covered with flowers, it shines like the
lightning in the sky. Filled with food and with drink, with dance and song
and instruments of music; filled with maidens richly attired, it shines with
dresses and ornaments.”
Then Punnaka placed him, the bast doer of good actions among the Kurus,
on a seat behind him and carried the illustrious sage to the palace of the Naga
king. When he reached that place of unrivalled glory, the sage stood behind
Punnaka; and the Naga king, beholding the concord between them, thus
addressed his son-in-law as he had done before.
[314] “Thou didst go before to the world of men, seeking for the sage’s heart;
hast thou returned here with success, bringing the sage of unequalled wisdom ?”
Punnaka replied:
“Ho whom thou desirest is come, he is my guardian in duty, won by righteous
tnf.'Uis ; behold him as he speaks before thee,—intercourse with the good brings
huppiuess.”
The Naga king uttered a stanza as lie saw the Great Being :
“This mortal, beholding me whom he had never seen before and pierced with
the fear of death, does not speak to me in his terror; this is not like a wise
man.”
The Great Being thus addressed the Naga king while he conceived this
idea, even though he had not directly said that he would not pay him
1 Knve''i.

' Go^ \
■(f)? Vsl,
No. 545. 151
respect,—as the Great Being knew by his omniscience how best to deal
with all creatures:
[315] “ I am not terrified, 0 Naga, nor am I pierced with the fear of death ;
the victim should not address his executioner, nor should the latter ask his
victim to address him1.”
\
Then the Naga king uttered a stanza in the Great Being’s praise:
“ It is as thou sayest, 0 sage,—thou speakest the truth ; the victim should
not address his executioner nor should the latter ask his victim to address him V’
' Then the Great Being spoke kindly to the Naga king :
“This splendour and glory and this might and Naga birth of thine, are 1
subject to death and not immortal; I ask thee this question, 0 Naga king, how
' didst thou obtain this palace ? Was it gained without a cause or as the develop­
ment of a previous condition ? was it made by thyself or given by the gods 1
Explain to me this matter, 0 Naga king, how thou didst win this palace2.”
■ [31G] The Naga king replied:
“ It was not gained without a cause, nor was it the development of a previous
condition; it was not made. by myself nor given by the gods’; this palace of
mine was gained by my own virtuous deeds3.”
The Great Being answered:
“ What holy vow was it, what practice of sanctity 1 Of what good action
was this the fruit,—this splendour and glory,and might and Naga birth of thine
and this.great palace, O Naga3?”
The Naga king replied4: '
“ I and my wife in the world of men were both full of faith and bountiful;
my,house was made into a drinking-hall, and priests and Brahmins were cheered
there. Garlands and perfumes and ointments, lamps and couches and resting-
places, raiment and beds and -food and drink, I virtuously gave away there as
free gifts. That was my vow and practice of sanctity, this is the fruit of that
good conduct, this splendour and glory and Naga birth and this great palace,
0 seer.” ,'
• [317] The Great Being said :
“ If thou hast thus gained this palace, thou knowest about the fruit of holy
actions and rebirth ; therefore practise virtue with all diligence that thou
mayest live again in a palace.”
The Naga king replied :
“ There are no priests or Brahmins here to whom we may give food and
drink, 0 holy one: tell me this thing I pray, how may I again live in a palace 1”
The Great Being said:
“There are snakes who have been born here, sons and wives and dependents;
commit no sin towards them in word or deed at any time. Thus follow thou,
0 Naga, innocence in word and deed,—so shalt thou dwell here all thy life in
a palace and then depart hence to the world of the gods.”
1 [The same thought is repeated in different words after this passage.]
2 [Seev. 1719=trans., p. 79.]
3 [See v. 17123 = trans., p. 79.]
4 [See v. 171 foll. = trau8,, p. 79, Suuwng.-Vil. i. 177.]

,
V .( M j IJ52 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
----------------------------------*------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------
[318] The Naga king, having heard the religious discourse of the
Great Being, thought to himself, “The sage cannot stay long away from
his home; I will shew him to Vimala and let her hear his good words,
and so calm her longing desire, and I will gratify King Dhananjaya and
then it will be right to send the sage home ”; so he said:
“Verily that best of kings is mourning in thy absence, whose intimate
minister thou art; having once regained thee, though now distressed and sick,
a man will regain happiness.”
The Great Being praised the Naga:
“ Thou dost indeed utter the holy words of the good, a peerless piece of right
doctrine ; in such crises of life as these the character of men like me is made
known.”
Then the Naga king still more delighted uttered a stanza:
“ ■'5ayI wast thou taken for nothing ? Say, did he conquer thee in the game ?
He says that he won thee fairly—how didst thou come into his power 1 ”
The Great Being replied :
kunnaka conquered in the game with dice him who was my lord and king ;
[•519] he being conquered gave me to the other ; so I was won fairly and not by
wrong. J
The great Naga delighted and overjoyed, when he heard these noble words
of the sage, seized the lord of lofty wisdom by the hand and thms went into the
presence ot his wife, “ He for whom, 0 Vimala, you grew pale and food lost its
savour in your eyes, this sun, for the sake of whose heart this trouble came
upon you,—listen well to his words, you will never see him again.”
Vimala, when she saw the lord of great wisdom, folded the ten fingers of her
hands in reverence, and thus addressed the best of the Kurus with her whole
soul lull of delight:
“ This mortal, beholding me whom he had never seen before and pierced
with the fear of death, does not speak to me in his terror; this is not like a wise
man.”
“ I am not terrified, 0 Nagi, nor am I pierced with the fear of death ; the
victim should not address Ins executioner, nor should the latter ask his victim to
address him1.”
* * * * * *
[322] Thus the Naga maiden asked the sage the same question which the
Is aga, Varuna had asked him before ; and the sage by his answer satisfied her as
he had before satisfied Varuna.
J he sage, seeing that the Naga king and the Naga maiden were both pleased
with his answers, undaunted in soul and with not one hair erect with fear, thus
addressed Varuna : “hear not, 0 Naga, hero I am ; whatever use this bodv may
lie to thoe, whatever it can do by its heart and its flesh, I myself will carry out
according to thy will.”
The Naga king replied :
“The heart of sages is their wisdom, wo are delighted to-day with thy
wisdom ; let him whoso name implies perfection2 take his bride to-day and let
him put thee in possession to-day of the Kurus.”
1 The same dialogue is hero repeated, with the gender altered to suit Vimala.
2 anUnammo'! in allusion to Ins name Punnaka from pu?ma ‘full.’

VST
No. 545. '' 153
[323] Having thus spoken, Varuna gave Irandatl to Punnaka and
he in his joy poured out his heart to the Great Being.
The Great Being has thus described the matter:
“Punnaka, delighted and overjoyed, having won the Naga maiden Irandatl,
with his whole soul full of joy, thus addressed him who was the best of the
Kurus in action : ‘ Thou hast made me possessed of a wife, I will do what is due
to thee, 0 Vidhura; I give this pearl of jewels and I will put thee to-day in
possession of the Kurus.’”
Then the Great Being praised him in another stanzS :
“May thy friendship with thy loved wife be indissoluble, and do thou in thy
joy with a happy heart give me the jewel and carry me to Indapatta.” Then
Punnaka placed the best of the Kurus in action on a seat before him and
carried him, the lord of supreme wisdom, to the city Indapatta. Swift as the
mind of man may travel, his speed was even swifter still; and Punnaka bore
the best of the Kurus to the city Indapatta.
[324] Then he said to him : “ Behold before thee the city Indapatta and its
pleasant mango groves and districts ; I am possessed of a wife, and thou hast
obtained thine own home.”
Now on that very day at morning-tide the king saw a dream, and this
was what he saw. At the door of the king’s palace there stood a great
tree whose trunk was wisdom, and whose branches and boughs were like
the virtues, and its fruits the five sacred products of the cow', and it was
covered with elephants and horses richly caparisoned; and a great
ihultitude with folded hands were worshipping it with all reverence.
Then a black man, clothed with red cloth, and wearing earrings of red
flowers, and bearing weapons in his hand, came up and cut the tree down
by the roots in spite of the expostulations of the multitude, and dragged
it off and went away, and then came back and planted it again in its old
place and departed. Then the king as he comprehended the dream said to
himself, “The sage Vidhura and no one else is like the great tree; that
youth and no other, who carried off the sage, is like the man who cut the
tree down by the roots in spite of the expostulations of the multitude;
and verily he will come back and set him at the door of the Hall of Truth
and depart. We shall behold the seer again to-day.” So he joyfully
ordered the whole city to be decorated and the Hall of Truth to be got
ready and a pulpit in a pavilion adorned with jewels; and himself
surrounded by a hundred kings, with their counsellors, and a multitude
of citizens and country people, he consoled them all by saying, “ Fear not,
you will see the sage again to-day ; and he seated himself in the Hall
Punnaka
of Truth, looking for the sage’s return. Then brought the
sage down and seated him in the middle of the assembly at the door
of the Hall of Truth, and then departed with Irandatl to his own
celestial city.
1 Milk, ghee, curds, buttermilk, and butior.

• Go^-V
•
m
The Jataka. Book XXII.
[325] The Teacher has tlius described it:
“ Punnaka of noble race, having set down him, the best of the Kurus in action,
in the middle of the religious assembly, mounted his own noble steed and sped
in the sky through the air. When the king beheld him, he, tilled with delight,
sprang up and embraced him with his arms, and without a moment’s fear
seated him on a throne before him in the midst of the congregation.”
Then after exchanging friendly greeting with him he welcomed him
affectionately and uttered a stanza:
“Thou guidest us like a ready-furnished chariot, the Kurus rejoice at seeing
thee; answer me and tell me this,—how was it that that young man let thee go?”
The Great Being replied :
“He whom thou callest a young man, O great king, is no common man,
0 best of heroes ; if thou hast ever heard of the Yakkha Punnaka, it was he, the
minister of King Kuvera. There is a Naga king named Varuna, mighty,
endowed with strength and a noble presence,—now Punnaka loves his younger
daughter, the Nfiga maiden Irandatl. [320] He laid his plan for my death for
the sake of that fair maiden whom he loved,-—he thus obtained his wife, and
1 was allowed to depart and the jewel was won.
“The Niiga king, being pleased with my solution of his question as to
the four ends of men, paid me the honour of giving me a jewel; and when
he returned to the Naga world, his queen Vimala asked him where the
jewel was. He described my skill in discoursing concei’ning the law, and
she, being desirous of hearing such a discourse, feigned a longing for my
heart. The Naga king, not understanding her real wish, said to his
daughter Irandatl, “Thy mother has a longing for Vidhura’s heart, find
out a noble; who is able to bring it for her.” As she was seeking one, she
saw the Yakkha Punnaka who was the son of Yessavana’s1 sister, and, as
she knew that he was in love with her, she sent him to her father, who
said to him, ‘ If thou art able to bring me Vidhura’s heart thou shalt
obtain her.’ So he, having brought from the mountaiu Vepulla the gem
which might well belong to a universal monarch, played dice with me and
having won me by his play he remained three days in my house. Then
he made me lay hold of his horse’s tail, and dashed me against the trees
and mountains in Himavat, but he could not kill me. Then he rushed
forward on a whirlwind in the seventh sphere of the winds and he set
me on the top of the Black Mountain sixty leagues high; there he
assailed ine as a lion and in other shapes, but he could not kill me.
Then at last at his request I told him how I could be killed. Then I
proceeded to tell him the duties of the good man, and when he heard
them he was highly pleased and wished to bring me hither. Then I took
him and went to the Naga world and 1 told the law to the king and to
Vimala, and all the court was highly pleased; and after I had stayed
1 Kuvera.

%$%
' <SL
V o . 5 4 0 . 1 5 5
there six days the king [327] gave Irandatl to Punnaka. He was de­
lighted when he gained her, and honoured me with many jewels as his
present. Then at the king's command he mounted me on a magic horse
created by his will, and seating himself in the middle seat and Irandatl
behind, he brought me here and put me down in the middle of the court,
and then went away with Irandatl to his own city. Thus, 0 king, for
the sake of that fair maiden whom he loved he laid his plan for my death
and thus through me he obtained his wife. When the king had heard
my discourse on the law, he was pleased and let me depart and I received
from Punnaka this jewel which grants all desires and which is worthy of
a universal emperor; accept it, 0 monarch,” and so saying he gave the
jewel to the king. Then the king, in the morning, being desirous to tell
the citizens the dream which he had seen, related to them the history
as follows:
•' There grew a tree before my gates, its trunk was wisdom and its boughs
the moral virtues ; it ripened into all that was natural and developed, its fruits
were the five products of the cow, and it was covered with elephants and cattle.
Put while it resounded with dance, song, and musical instruments a man came
and cut it up from the roots and carried it away; it then came to this palace of
ours,—pay your homage to this tree.
Let all who are joyful by my means shew it to-day by their actions; bring
your presents in abundance, and pay your homage to this tree.
Whatever captives there may be in my realm, let them set them all loose
from their captiv ity; as this tree has been delivered from its captivity, so lot
them release others from bondage.
[328] Let them spend this.month in holiday, hanging up their ploughs ; let
them feast the Brahmins with flesh and rice; let them drink in private, and still
seem total abstainers, with their full cups flowing over. Let them invite their
friends on the highway, and keep a strict watch in the kingdom so that none
may injure his neighbour,—pay your homage to this tree.”
When he had thus spoken,
“The queens, the princes, the Vesiyas, and the Brahmins brought to the
sage much food and drink.
“ Riders on elephants, body-guards, riders in chariots, foot-soldiers, brought
to the sage much food and drink. [329] The people of the country and the
city gathered together in crowds brought to the sage much food and drink, the
vast assembly were filled with joy, beholding the seer after he had come: when
the sage had come a triumphant waving of cloths took place.”
After a month the festival came to an end: the Great Being, as
fulfilling a Buddha’s duties, taught the great assembly the law, counselled
the king and so fulfilled his span of life and so became destined for
heaven. Abiding in his teaching, and following their king all the in­
habitants of the Kuril kingdom gave gifts and performed good works and
at the end of their lives went to swell the hosts of heaven.

(((g)?) ' (fiT
The Jataka. Book XXII.
The Master, having brought his lesson to an end, said, “Not now only but
formerly; also did the Buddha, having obtained complete wisdom, shew himself
skilful in adapting means to ends. Then he identified the Birth : “ At that
time the sage’s father and mother were the royal family, the eldest queen
was Rahula’s mother, the eldest son wyas Bahula, Varuna the Naga king was
Sariputta, the garula king was MoggaJlana, Sakka was Anuruddha, the king
Dhananjaya was Ananda, and the wise Vidhura was myself.”
No. 546.
THE MAHA-UMMAGGA-JATAKA1.
“ King Brahmadatta of Pahculof etc. The Teacher, while dwelling at
Jetavana, told this about the perfection of knowledge. One day the Brethren
sat in the Hall of Truth and described the Buddha’s perfection of knowledge:
“ Brethren, the omniscient Buddha whose wisdom is vast, ready, swift, sharp,
crushing heretical doctrines, after having converted, by the power of his own
knowledge, the Brahmins Kutadanta and the rest, the ascetics Sabhiya and the
rest, the thieves Angulimala &c., the yakkhas Alavaka &c., the gods Sakka
and the rest, and the Brahmins Baka &c., made them humble, and ordained a
vast multitude as ascetics and established them in the fruition of the paths of
sanctification.” The Teacher came up and asked what they were discoursing
about, and when they told him, be replied, [330] “Not now only is the Buddha
omniscient,—in past time also, before his knowledge was fully mature, he was
full of all wisdom, as he went about for the sake of wisdom and knowledge,”
and then he told a story of the past.
In days gone by, a king named Vedeha ruled in Mithila, and he had
four sages who instructed him in the law, named Senaka, Pukkusa,
Kavinda, and Devinda. Now when the Bodhisatta Was conceived in his
mother’s womb the king saw at dawn the following dream: four columns of
fire blazed up in the four corners of the royal ‘court as high as the great
wall, and in the midst of them rose a flame of the size of a fire-fly, and at
that moment it suddenly exceeded the four columns of fire and rose up as
high as the Brahma world and illumined the whole world; even a grain of
mustard-seed lying on the ground is distinctly seen. The world of men
with the world of gods worshipped it with garlands and incense; a vast
multitude passed through this flame but not even a hair of their skin was
singed. The king when he saw this vision started up in terror and sat
pondering what was going to happen, and waited for the dawn. The four
wise men also when they came in the morning asked him whether he had
1 [There is an English translation of the Sinhalese version of this story: Ummagga-
Jfitaka (The Story of the Tunnel), translated from the Sinhaloso by T. B. Yatawara;
Luzac, 1898.]

f(t)t • <SL
/x S ^ 7 . -A7^ 546- 157
slept well. “How could I sleep well,” he replied, “when I have seen
such a dream ?” Then Pandit Senaka replied, “ Fear not, 0 king, it is an
auspicious dream, thou wilt be prosperous,” and when he was asked to
explain, lie went on, “0 king, a fifth sage will be born who will surpass
us four; we four are like the four columns of fire, but in the midst of us
■''here will arise as it were a fifth column of fire, one who is unparalleled
and fills a post which is unequalled in the world of gods or of men.”
“ Where is he at this moment 1 ” “ 0 king, he will either assume a body
or come out of his mother’s womb ”; thus did he by his science what he
had seen by his divine eye and the king from that time forward remembered
his words. Now at the four gates of Mithila there were four market
towns, called the East town, the South town, the West*town, and the
North town1; [331] and in the East town there dwelt a certain rich man
named Sirivaddhaka, and his wife was named Sumanadevl. Now on that
day when the king saw the vision, the Great Being went from the heaven
of the Thirty-three and was conceived in her womb; and a thousand other
sons of the gods went from that heaven and wei’e conceived in the families of
various wealthy merchants in that village, and at tho end of the tenth month
the lady Sumana brought forth a child of the colour of gold. Now at that
moment Sakka, as he looked over the world of mankind, beheld the Great
Being’s birth; and saying to himself that he ought to make known in the
world of gods and men that this Buddha-shoot had sprung into being, he
came up in a visible form as the child was being born and placed a piece
of a medicinal herb in its hand, and then returned to his own dwelling.
The Great Being seized it -firmly in his closed hand; and as he came from his
mother’s womb she did not feel the slightest pain, but he passed out as
easily as water from a sacred water-pot. When his mother saw the piece
of the medicinal herb in his hand, she said, to him, “ My child, what is
this which you have got 1 ” He replied, “ It is a medicinal plant, mother,”
and he placed it in her hand and told her to take it and give it to all who
are afflicted with any sickness. Full of joy she told it to the merchant
Sirivaddhaka, who had suffered for seven years from a pain in his head.
Full of joy he said to.himself, “This child came out of his mother’s womb
holding a medicinal plant and as soon as he was horn he talked with his
mother; a medicine given by a being of such surpassing merit must
possess great efficacy”; so he rubbed it on a grindstone and smeared a little
of it on his forehead, and the pain, in his head which had lasted seven
years passed away at once like water from a lotus leaf. Transported with
joy he exclaimed, “This is a medicine of marvellous efficacy”; the news
spread on every side that the Great Being had been born with a medicine
in his hand, and all who were sick crowded to the merchant’s house an
begged for the medicine. They gave a little to all who came, hav‘
1 In the Pali, Pacinayavamajjhaha, DtzkkhiMijnv&nuijjhaka, &o.

('(f)?) <SL
V^ '-- 15S The Jdtctka. Boole X X II.
rubbed some of it on a grindstone and mixed it with water, and as soon as
the affeeted body was touched with the divine medicine all diseases were
cured, and the delighted patients went away proclaiming the marvellous
virtues of the medicine in the house of the merchant Sirivaddhaka. [332]
On the day of naming the child the merchant thought to himself, “My
child need not be called after one of his ancestors; let him bear the name
of the medicine,” so he gave him the name Osadha Kumara. Then he
thought again, “ My son possesses great merit, he will not be born alone,
many other children will be bom at the same time ”; so hearing from his
inquiries that thousands of other boys were born with him, he sent them
all nurses and gave them clothes, and resolving that they should be his
son’s attendants he celebrated a festival for them with the Great Being
and adorned the. boys and brought them every day to wait upon him.
The Great Being grew up playing with them, and when he was seven years
old he was as beautiful as a golden statue. As he was playing with them
in the village some elephants arid other animals passed by and disturbed
their games, and sometimes the children were distressed by the rain and
the heat. Now one day as they played, an unseasonable rainstorm came
on, and when the Great Being who was as strong as an elephant saw it,
he ran into a house, and as the other children ran after him they fell over
one another’s feet and bruised their knees and other limbs. Then he
thought to himself, “A hall for play ought to be built here, we will not
play in this way,” and he said to the boys, “ Let us build a hall here
where we can stand, sit, or lie in time of wind, hot sunshine, or rain,—let
each one of you bring his piece of money.” The thousand boys ail did so
and the Great Being sent for a master-carpenter and gave him the money,
telling him to build a hall in that place. He took the money, and levelled
the ground and cut posts and spread out the measuring line, but he did not
grasp the Great Being’s idea; so he told the carpenter how he was to
stretch out his line so as to do it properly. He replied, “ I have stretched
it out according to my practical experience, I cannot do it in any other
way.” “ If you do not know even so much as this how can you take
our money and build a hall? Take the line, I will measure and shew
you,” so he made him take the line and himself drew out the plan, and it
was done as if Vissakamma had done it. [333] Then he said to the
carpenter, “ Will you be able to draw out the plan in this way 1 ”
“J shall not be able, Sir.” “Will you be able to do it by my instructions?”
“1 shall be able, Sir.” Then the Great Being so arranged the hall that
there was in one part a place for ordinary strangers, in another a lodging
for the destitute, in another a place for the lying-in of destitute women, in
noth or a lodging for stranger Buddhist priests and Brahmins, in another a
'ging for other sorts of men. in another a place where foreign merchants
d stow their goods, and all these apartments had doors opening

Id)? <SL
i ■■ n
iVo. 546. • 159
outside. There also he had a public place erected for sports, and a court
of justice, and a hall for religious assemblies. When the ' work was
completed he summoned painters, and having himself examined them set
them to work at painting beautiful pictures, so that the hall became like
Sakka’s heavenly palace Sudhamma. Still he thought that the palace was
not yet complete, “ I must have a • tank constructed as well,”—so he
ordered the ground to be dug for an architect and having discussed it with
him and given him money he made him construct a tank with a thousand
bends in the bank and a hundred bathing ghats. The water was covered
with the five kinds of lotuses and was as beautiful as the lake in the
heavenly garden Nandana. On its hank he planted various trees and had
a park made like Nandana. And near this hall he established a public
distribution of alms to holy men whether Buddhists ori Brahmins, and
for strangers and for people from the neighbouring villages.
These actions of his were blazed abroad everywhere and crowds
gathered to the place, and the Great Being used to sit in the hall and
discuss the right and the wrong of the good or evil circumstances of all
the petitioners who resorted there and gave his judgment on each, and it
became like the happy time when a Buddha makes his appearance in the
world.
Now at that time, when seven years had expired, King Vedelia
remembered how the four sages had said that a fifth sage should he
bom who would surpass them in wisdom, and he said to himself, “ Where
is he now? ” and he sent out his four councillors by the four gates of the
city, bidding them to find out where he was. When they went out by the
other three gates they saw no sign of the Great Being, but when they
went out by the eastern gate they saw the hall and its various buildings
and they felt sure at once that only a wise man could have built this
palace or caused it to be built, [334] and they asked the people, “ What
architect built this hall?” They replied, “This palace was not built by
any architect by his own power, but by the direction of Mahosadha Pandit,
the son of the merchant Sirivaddha.” “How old is he?” “He has
just completed his seventh year.” The councillor reckoned up all the
events from the day ..on which the king saw the dream and he said to
himself, “This being fulfils the king’s dream,” and he sent a messenger
with this message to the king: “ Mahosadha, the son of the merchant
Sirivaddha in the East market town, who is now seven years old, has
caused such a hall and tank and park to be made,—shall I bring him
into thy presence or not ? ” When the king heard this lie was highly de­
lighted and sent for Senaka, and after relating the account he asked him
whether he should send for this sage. But life, being envious of the
title, replied, “ 0 king, a man is not; to be called a sage merely because
lie lias caused hails and such things to be made; anyone can cause

' e°l&x
f( 1 )1 ) (flT
The J'ataka. Book XXII. U L j
these things to be made, this is but a little matter.” When the lung
heard his words he said to himself, “There must be some secret reason
for all this,” and was silent. Then he sent back the messenger with a
command that the councillor should remain for a time in the place and
carefully examine the sage. The councillor remained there and 'carefully
investigated the sage’s actions, and this is the series of the tests or casec-
of examination1:
1 « The piece of meat2.” One day when the Great Being was going
to the play-hall, a hawk carried off a piece of flesh from the slab of a
slaughterhouse and flew up into the air; some lads, seeing it, determined
to make him drop it and pursued him. The hawk flew in different
directions, and they, looking up, followed behind and wearied them­
selves, flinging stones and other missiles and stumbling over one another.
Then the sage said to them, “ I will make him drop it,” and they begged
him to do so. He told them to look ; and then himself with looking up he
ran with the swiftness of the wind and trod upon the hawk’s shadow and
then clapping his hands uttered a loud shout. By his energy that shout
seemed to pierce the bird’s belly through and through and in its terioi he
dropped the flesh ; and the Great Being, knowing by watching the shadow
that it was dropped, [335] caught it in the air before it reached the
ground. The people seeing the marvel, made a great noise, shouting and
clapping their hands. The minister, hearing of it, sent an account to the
king telling him how the sage had by this means made the bird drop
the flesh. The king, when he heard of it, asked Senaka whether he
should summon him to the court. Seuaka reflected, “ From the time of
his coming I shall lose all my glory and the king will forget my existence,
—I must not let him bring him here so in envy he said, “He is not a
sage for such an action as this, this is only a small matter ”; and the
king being impartial, sent word that the minister should test him further
where he was.
2. “The cattle3.” A certain man who dwelt in the village of
Yavamajjhaka bought some cattle from another village and brought them
home. The next day he took them to a field of grass to graze and rode
on the back of one of the cattle. Being tired he got down and sat on the
ground and fell asleep, and meanwhile a thief came and carried off the
cattle. When bo woke he saw not his cattle, but as he gazed on every
side he beheld the thief running away. Jumping up he shouted, “Where
are you taking my cattle'!” “They are my cattle, and I am carrying
them to the place which I wish.” A great crowd collected as they heard
the dispute. When the sage heard the noise as they passed by the
door of the hall, he sent for them both. When he saw their behaviour
» (Three verses are here given containing a list of the Tests for committing to
memory.] 3 [‘ Maintain.'} ' Oono.']

(* ( 546- 161 ^IT
M> )h No-
\
\ %
\
>
.
^—
.ini
y
y
h
.
Z
/
- ----:----------------------------------------------------------—“
—. ^ w a.
he at once knew which was the thief and which the real ownec. but
though he felt sure, he asked them what they were quarrelling about.
The owner said, 1' 1 bought these cattle from a certain person in such
a village, and I brought them home and put them in a field of grass.
This thief saw that I was not watching and came and carried them off'.
Looking in all directions I caught sight of him and pursued and caught
him. The people of such a village know that I bought the cattle and
took them.” The thief replied, “This man speaks falsely, they were born
in my house.” The sage said, “I will decide your case fairly; will you
abide by my decision?” and they promised so to abide. Then thinking to
himself that he must win the hearts of the people he first asked the thief,
« What have you fed these cattle with, and what have you given them to
drink ? ” “ They have drunk rice gruel and have been fed on sesame flour
and kidney beaus.” Then he asked the real owner, who said, “ My lord,
how could a poor man like me get rice gruel and the rest ? 1 fed them on
grass.” The pandit caused an assembly to be brought together and
ordered panic seeds to be brought and ground in a mortar and moistened
with water and given to the cattle, and they forthwith vomited only grass.
He shewed this to the assembly, and then asked the thief, “Art thou the
thief or not?” He confessed that he was the thief. He said to him,
“Then do not commit such a sin henceforth.” But the Bodhisatta’s
attendants carried the man away and cut off his hands and feet and made
him helpless. Then the sage addressed him with words of good counsel,
“ This suffering has come upon thee only in this present life, but in the
future life thou wilt suffer great torment in the different hells, therefore
henceforth abandon such practices”; he taught him the five command­
ments. The minister sent an account of the incident to the king, who
asked Senaka, but he advised him to wait, “It is only an affair about
cattle and anybody could decide it.” The king, being impartial, sent the
■ same command. (This is to be understood in all the subsequent cases,—
we shall give each in order according to the list.)
3. “The necklace of thread1.” A certain poor woman had tied
together several threads of different colours and made them into a neck­
lace, which she took off fropi her neck and placed on her clothes as she
went down to bathe in a tank which the pandit had caused to be made.
A young woman who saw this conceived a longing for it, took it up and
said to her, “Mother, this is a very beautiful necklace, how much did it cost
to make ? ’ [33G] I will make such a one for myself. May I put it on my
own neck and ascertain its size?” The other gave her leave, and she put
it on her neck and ran off. The elder woman seeing it came quickly out
of the water, and putting on her clothes ran after her and seized hold_ of
her dress, crying, “You are running ^
„ i i‘ Gan!hi.']
11
J. VI,

fC ll <SL
X^ g ^ 1 /62 The Jdtakci. Book XXII.
The other replied, “I am not taking anything of yours, it is the necklace
which I wear on my neck and a great crowd collected as they heard
this. The sage, while he played with the boys, heard them quarrelling
as they passed by the door of the hall and asked what the noise was
about. "When he heard the cause of the quarrel he sent for them both,
and having known at once by her countenance which was the thief, lie
asked them whether they would abide by his decision. On their both
agreeing to do so, he asked the thief, “ What scent do you use for this
necklace? ” She replied, “I always use sabbasamhdraka1 to scent it with.”
Then he asked the other, who replied, “How shall a poor woman like me
get snbhasarahd raka ? I always scent it with perfume made of piyaugu
flowers.” Then the sage had a vessel of water brought and put the
necklace in it. Then he sent for a perfume-seller and told him to smell
the vessel and find out what it smelt of. He directly recognised the
smell of the piyangu flower, and quoted the stanza which has been already
given in the first book2:
“ No omnigatherum it is ; only the kaiigv. smells;
Yon wicked woman told a lie; the truth the gammer tells.”
The Great Being told the bystanders all the circumstances and asked
each of them respectively, “Art thou the thief? Art thou not the thief?”
and made the guilty one confess, and from that time his wisdom became
known to the people.
4. “The cotton thread.” A certain woman who used to watch
cotton fields was watching one day and she took some clean cotton and
spun some fine thread and made it into a ball and placed it in her lap.
As she went home she thought to herself, “I will bathe in the great
sage’s tank,” so she placed the ball on her dress and went down into
the tank to bathe. Another woman saw it, and conceiving a longing for
it took it up, saying, “This is a beautiful ball of thread; pray did you
make it yourself?” So she lightly snapped her fingers and put it in her
lap as if to examine it more closely, and walked off with it. (This is to. be
told at full as before.) The sage asked the thief, “When you made the
ball what did you put inside3?” She replied, “A cotton seed.” Then he
asked the other, and she replied, “A timbaru seed.” When the crowd
had heard what each said, he untwisted the ball of cotton and found a
timbaru seed inside and forced the thief to confess her guilt. The great
multitude were highly pleased and shouted their applause at the way in
which the case had been decided.
1 A perfume compounded of many different scents.
3 [No. 110, Vol. i. p. 124 ( . :>us., p. 254). The verse is not there given, hot only
alluded to, Prof, Cowell does not translum it.J
8 To roll it round.

' g°^Tx
K m )’i ■ l£ T
JVo. 546. 163
5. “ The son.” A certain woman took lier son and went down to
the sage’s tank to wash her face. After she had bathed her son she
laid him in her dress and having washed her own face went to bathe. At
that moment a female goblin saw the child and wished to eat it, so she
took hold of the dress and said, “ My friend, this is a fine child, is he your
son 1 ” Then she asked if she might give him suck, and on obtaining the
mother’s consent, she took him and played with him for a while and then
tried to run off with him. The other ran after her and seized hold of
her, shouting, “ Whither are you carrying my child ? ” The goblin replied,
“ Why do you touch the child1? he is mine.” As they wrangled they
passed by the door of the hall, and the sage, hearing the noise, sent for
them and asked what was the matter. When he heard the story, [337]
although he knew at once by her red unwinking eyes that one of them
was a goblin, he asked them whether they would abide by his decision.
On their promising to do so, he drew a line and laid the child in the
middle of the line and bade the goblin seize the child by the hands and
the mother by the feet. Then he said to them, “ Lay hold of it and pull;
the child is hers who can pull it over.” They both pulled, and the child,
being pained while it was pulled, uttered a loud cry. Then the mother,
with a heart which seemed ready to burst, let the child go and stood
weeping. The sage asked the multitude, “ Is it the heart of the mother
which is tender towards the child or the heart of her who is not the
mother ? ” They answered, “The mother’s heart.” “ Is she the mother who
kept hold of the child or she who let it go ? ” They replied, “ She who
let it go.” “Do you know who she is who stole the child1?” “We do
not know, 0 sage.” “She is a goblin,—she seized it in order to eat it.”
When they asked how he knew that he replied, “ I knew her by her
unwinking and red eyes and by her casting no shadow and by her fearless­
ness and want of mercy.” Then he asked her what she was, and she
confessed that she was a goblin. “Why did you seize the child?” “To
eat it.” “You blind fool,” he said, “you committed sin in old time and
so were born as a goblin; and now you still go on committing sin,
blind fool that you are.” Then he exhorted her and established her in
the five precepts and sent her away; and the mother blessed him, and
saying, “ May’st thou live long, my lord,” took her son and went her way.
6. “The black ball.” There was a certain man who was called
GoJakaJa,—now he got the name gola ‘ ball ’ from his dwarfish size, and
kola from his black colour. He worked in a certain house for seven
.years and obtained a wife, and she was named Dlghatala. One day he
said to her, “Wife, cook some sweetmeats and food, we will pay a visit
to your parents.” At first she opposed the plan, saying, “ W hat have I to
do with parents now?” but after the third time of asking he induced her
to cook some cakes, and having taken some provisions and a present he
11-2

f(S )| . . <SL
\%->----4*7
■ \^7? .stf&s'
164
The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
set out on the journey with her. In the course of the journey he came
to a stream which was not really deep,'but they, being both afraid of
water, dared not cross it and stood on the hank. Now a poor man named
Dlghapitthi came to that place as he walked along the bank, and when
they saw him they asked him whether the river was deep or shallow.
Seeing that they were afraid of the water he told them that it was very
deep and full of voracious fish. “How then will you go across it?”
“I have struck up a friendship with the crocodiles and monsters that live
here, and therefore they do not hurt me." “ Do take us with you,” they
said. When he consented they gave him some meat and drink; and
when he finished his meal he asked them which he should carry over first.
“Take your sister first and then take me,” said Golakaja. Then the man
placed her on his shoulders and took the provisions and the present and
went down into the stream. When he had gone a little way, he crouched
down and walked along in a bent posture. Golakala, as he stood on the
bank, thought to himself, “This stream must indeed be very deep; if it is
so difficult for even such a man as Dlghapitthi, it must be impassable for
me.” When the other had carried the woman to the middle of the stream,
he said to her, “ Lady, I will cherish you, and you shall live bravely
arrayed with fine dresses and ornaments and men-servants and maid­
servants; what will this poor dwarf do for you? listen to what I tell
.you.” She listened to his' words and ceased to love her husband, and
being at once infatuated with the stranger, she consented, saying, “ If you
will not abandon me, I will do as you say.” So when they reached the
opposite bank, they amused themselves and left Golakala, bidding him
stay where he was. While he stood there looking on, they ate up the
meat and drink and departed. When he saw it, he exclaimed, “They
have struck up a friendship and are running away, leaving me here.”
[338] As he ran backwards and forwards he went a little way into the
water and then drew back again in fear, and then in his anger at their
conduct, lie made a desperate leap, saying, “Let me live or die,” and when
once fairly in, he discovered how shallow the water was. So he crossed
it and pursued him and shouted, “You wicked thief, whither are you
carrying my wife?” The other replied, “How is she your wife? she is
mine”; and he seized him by the neck and whirled him round and threw
him off. The other laid hold of Dighatala’s hand and shouted, “Stop,
where are you going? you are my wife whom 1 got after working for
seven years in a house ”; and as he thus disputed he came near the hall.
A great crowd collected. The Great Being asked what the noise was
about, and having sent for them and heard what each said he asked
whether they would abide by his decision. On their both agreeing to do
so, he sent for Dlghapitthi and asked him his name. Then he asked his
wife’s name, hut he, not knowing what it was, mentioned some other name.

( * )| <SL
I X jS ^ 7 iVo. 546. 165
_
------------0------------- - 7£
Then he asked him the names of his parents and he told them, but when
he asked him the names of his wife’s parents he, not knowing, mentioned
some other names. The Great Being put his story together and had him
removed. Then he sent for the other and asked him the names of all in
the same way. He, knowing the truth, gave them correctly. Then he
had him removed and sent for Dlghatala and asked her what her name was
and she gave it. Then he asked her her husband’s name and she, not
knowing, gave a wrong name. Then he asked her her parents’ names and
she gave them correctly, but when he asked her the names of her husband’s
parents’ names, she talked at random and gave wrong names. Then the sage
sent for the other two and asked the multitude, “ Does the woman’s story
agr | with Dighapitthi or Golakala.” They replied, “With Golakala.”
Then ne pronounced his sentence, “ This man is her husoand, the other
is a thief”; and when he asked him he made him confess that he had
acted as the thief.
’ 7. “ The chariot.” A certain man, who was sitting in a chariot,
alighted from it to wash his face. At that moment Sakka was con­
sidering and as he beheld the sage he resolved that he would make
known the power and wisdom of Maliosadha the embryo Buddha. So he
came down in the form of a man1, and followed the chariot holding on
behind. The man who sat in the chariot asked, “ Why have you come?’’
He replied, “To serve you.” The man agreed, and dismounting from the
chariot went aside at a call of nature. Immediately Sakka mounted in the
chariot and went off at speed. The owner of the chariot, his business done,
returned; and when he saw Sakka hurrying away with the chariot, he ran
quickly behind, crying, "“Stop, stop, where are you taking my chariot 1”
Sakka replied, “ Your chariot must be another, this is mine.” Thus
wrangling they came to the gate of the hall. The sage asked, “ What is
this ? ” and sent for him : as he came, by his fearlessness and his eyes which
winked not, the sage knew that this was Sakka and the other was the
owner. Nevertheless he enquired the cause of the quarrel, and asked
them, ‘'Will you abide by my decision?” They said, “ Yes.” He went
on, “ I will cause the chariot to be driven, and you must both hold on
behind : the owner Will not let go, the other will.” Then he told a man to
drive the chariot, and he did so, the others holding on behind. The owner2
went a little way, then being unable to run further he let go, but Sakka
went on running with the chariot. When he had recalled the chariot, the
sage said to the people : “This man ran a little way [339] and let go; the
other ran out with the chariot and came back with it, yet there is not a
drop of sweat on his body, no panting, he is fearless, his eyes wink not—
. 1 [Here Prof. Cowell’s MS. comes to an end, and the mark remains in his copy of
the text.]
a ltead °idmiko.

(iff)?) , <SL
The Jcitaica. Book XX11.
this is Sakka, king of the gods.” Then he asked, “Are you king of the
gods 1 ” “ Yes.” “ Why did you come here 1 ” “ To spread the fame of
your wisdom, O sage!” “Then,” said he, “don’t do that kind of thing
again.” Now Sakka revealed his power by standing poised in the air, and
praised the sage, saying, “ A wise judgment this ! ” So he went to his
own place. Then the minister unsummoned went to the king, and said,
“ 0 great king, thus was the Chariot Question resolved : and even Sakka
was subdued by him; why do you not recognise superiority in men1?” The
king asked Senaka, “ What say you, Senaka, shall we bring the sage here!”
Senaka replied, “ That is not all that makes a sage. Wait awhile: I will
test him and find out.”
8. “The pole.” So one day, with a view of testing the sage, they
fetcht an acacia pole, and cutting off about a span, they had it nicely
smoothed by a turner, and sent it to the East Market-town, with this
message : “ The people of the Market-town have a name for wisdom. Let
them find out then which end is the top and which the root of this stick.
If they cannot, there is a fine of a thousand pieces.” The people gathered
together but could not find it out, and they said to their foreman,
“ Perhaps Mahosadba the sage would know ; send and ask him.” The
foreman sent for the sage from his playground, and told him the matter,
how they could not find it out but perhaps he could. The sage thought in
himself, “ The king can gain nothing from knowing which is the top and
which is the root; no doubt it is sent to test me.” He said, “ Bring it
here, my friends, I will find out.” Holding it in his hand, he knew which
was the top and which the root; yet to please the heart of the people, he
sent for a pot of water, and tied a string round the middle of the stick,
and holding it by the end of the string he let it down to the surface of the
water. The root being heavier sank first. Then he asked the people,
“Is the root of a tree heavier, or the topi” “ The root, wise sir!” “ See
then, this part sinks first, and this is therefore the root.” By this mark
he distinguished the root from the top. The people sent it back to the
king, distinguishing which was the root and which was the top. The king
was pleased, and asked, who had found it outl They said, “The sage
Mahosadba, son of foreman Sirivaddhi.” “Senaka, shall we send for
himl” he asked. “ Wait, my lord,” he replied, “ let us try him in another
way.”
9. “The head.” One day, two heads were brought, one a woman’s
and one a man’s; these were sent to be distinguished, with a fine of a
thousand pieces in case of failure. The villagers could not decide and
asked the Great Being. He recognised them at sight, because, they say,
the sutures in a man’s head are straight, and in a woman’s head they are
crooked. By this mark he told which was which; and they sent back to
the king. The rest is as before.

|(I)| , <SL
No.
5 4 6 . . 1 6 7
10. “ The snake.” One day a male and a female snake were brought,
and sent for the villagers to decide which was which. They asked the
sage, and he knew at once when he saw them; for the tail of the male
snake is thick, that of the female is thin ; the male snake’s head is thick,
the female’s is long; the eyes of the male are big, of the female small, the
head1 of the male is rounded, that of the female cut short. By these
signs [340] he distinguished male from female. The rest is as before.
11. “ The cock.” One day a message was sent to the people of the
East Market-town to this effect: “Send us a bull white all over, with
horns on his legs, and a hump on the head, which utters his voice at three
times5 unfailingly; otherwise there is a line of a thousand' pieces.” Not
knowing one, they asked the sage. He said: “The king means you to send
him.a cock. This creature has horns on his feet, the spurs; a hump on
his head, the crest; and crowing thrice2 * utters his voice at three times
unfailingly. Then send him a cock such as he describes.” They sent
one.
12. “The gem.” The gem which Sakka gave to King Kusa was
octagonal. Its thread was broken, and no one could remove the old thread
and put in a new. One day they sent this gem, with directions to take
out the old thread and to put in a new; the villagers could do neither the
one nor the other, and in their difficulty they told the sage. He bade
them fear nothing, and asked for a lump of honey. With this he smeared
the two holes in the gem, and twisting a thread of wool, he smeared the
end of this also with honey, he pushed it a little way into the hole, and put
it in a place where ants were passing. The ants smelling the honey came
out of their hole, and eating away the old thread bit hold of the end of the
woollen thread and pulled it out at the other end. When he saw that it
had passed through, he bade them present it to the king, who was pleased
when he heard how the thread had been put in.
13. “The calving.” The royal bull was fed up for some months, so
that his belly swelled out, his horns were washed, he was anointed with
oil, and bathed with turmeric, and then they sent him to the East
Market-town, with this message : “ You have a name for wisdom. Here
is the king’s royal bull, in calf; deliver him and send him back with the
calf, or else there is a fine of a thousand pieces.” The villagers, perplexed
what to do, applied to the sage ; who thought fit to meet one question with
another, and asked, “ Can you find a bold man able to speak to the king?”
“ That is no hard matter,” they replied. So they summoned him, and the
Great Being said—“ Go, my good mau, let your hair down loose over your
shoulders, and go to the palace gate weeping and lamenting sore. Answer
1 savatthiko ? I follow the Burmese version.
2 The Burmese version has “ three notes “ when it crows it gives forth dearly
three notes—one short, one middling, and one long.”

G°t*X
<
s l
% m
\%>—.%x*$/yy/
168 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
none but the king, only lament; and if the king sends for you to ask why
you lament, say, This seven days my son is in labour and cannot bring
forth; 0 help me ! tell me how I may deliver him ! Then the king will
say, What madness ! this is impossible ; men do not bear childi’en. Then
you must say, If that be true, how can the people of the East Market-town
deliver your royal bull of a calf?” As he was bidden, so he did. Th.
king asked who thought of that counter-quip ; and on hearing that it was
the sage Mahosadha he was pleased.
14. “The boiled rice.” Another day, to test the sage, this message
was sent: “ The people of the East Market-town must send us some
boiled rice cooked under eight conditions, and these are—[341] without
rice, without water, without a pot, without an oven, without fire, without
firewood, without being sent along a road either by woman or man. If
they cannot do it, there is a fine of a thousand pieces.” The people
perplext applied to the sage; who said, “ Be not troubled. Take some
broken rice1, for that is not rice; snow, for that is not water ; art earthen
bowl, which is no pot; chop up some wood-blocks, which are no oven ;
kindle fire by rubbing, instead of a proper fire; take leaves instead of
firewood; cook your sour rice, put it in a new vessel, press it well down,
put it on the head of a eunuch, who is neither man nor woman, leave the
main road and go along a footpath, and take it to the king.” They did so;
and the king was pleased when he heard by whom the question had been
solved.
15. “The sand.” Another day, to test the sage, they sent this’
message to the villagers: “The king wishes to amuse himself in a swing,
and the old rope is broken ; you are to make a rope of sand, or else pay a
fine of a thousand pieces.” They knew not what to do, and appealed to
the sage, who saw that this was the place for a counter-question. He
reassured the people; and sending for two or three clever speakers, he
bade them go tell the king : “ My lord, the villagers do not know whether
the sand-rope is to be thick or thin; send them a bit of the old rope, a
span long or four fingers; this they will look at and twist a rope of the
same size.” If the king replied, “Sand-rope there never was in my house,”
they were to reply, “ If your majesty cannot make a sand-x-ope, how can
the villagers do so ? ” They did so; and the king was pleased on hearing
that the sage had thought of this counter-quip.
16. “The tank.” Another day, the message was : “The king desires
to disport him in the water; you must send me a new taxxk covered with
water lilies of all five kinds, otherwise there is a fine of a thousand pieces.”
They told the sage, who saw that a counter-quip was wanted. He sent for
several men clever at speaking, and said to them : “ Go and play in the
water till yoxxr eyes are x-ed, go to the palace doox with wet hair and wet
i ];av7 ]‘t.

' G°i^X
f ( f )| '
.v<5!^2>'// No. 546. 169
garments and your bodies all over mud, holding in your hands ropes,
staves, and clods; send word to the king of your coming, and when you
are admitted say to him, Sire, inasmuch as your majesty has ordered the
people of the East Market-town to send you a tank, we brought a great
tank to suit your taste ; but she being used to a life in the forest, no
ooner saw the town with its walls, moats, and watch-towers, than she
took fright and broke the ropes and off into the forest: we pelted her
with clods and beat her with sticks but could not make her come back.
Give us then the old tank which your majesty is said to have brought
from the forest, and we will yoke them together and bring the other back.
The king will say, I never had a tank brought in from the forest, [342] and
never send a tank there to be yoked and bring in another ! Then you
must say, If that is so, how7 can the villagers send you a tank1?” They did
so'; and the king was pleased to hear that the sage had thought of this.
17. “ The park.” Again on a day the king sent a message: “ I wish
to disport me in the park, and my park is old. The people of the East
Market-town must send me a new park, tilled with trees and flowers.”
The sage reassured them as before, and sent men to speak in the same
manner as above.
18. Then the king was pleased, and said to Senaka: “Well, Senaka,
shall wc send for the sage?” But he, grudging the other's prosperity,
said, “ That is not all that makes a sage ; wait.” On hearing this the
king thought, “The sage Mahosadha was wise even as a child, and took
my fancy. In all these mysterious tests and counter-quips he has given
answers like a Buddha. Yet such a wise man as tins Senaka will not let
me summon him to my side. What care I for Senaka? I will bring the
•man here.” So with a great following he set out for the village, mounted
upon his royal horse. But as he went the horse put his foot into a hole
and broke his leg; so the king turned back from that place to the town.
Then Senaka entered the presence and said: “Sire, did you go to the
East Market-town to bring the sage back?” “Yes, sir,” said the king.
“Sire,” said Senaka, “you make me as one of no account. I begged you
to wait awhile; but off you went in a hurry, and at the outset your royal
horse broke his leg.” The king had nothing to say to this. Again on a
day he asked Senaka, “Shall we send for the sage, Senaka?” “If so,
your majesty, don’t go yourself but send a messenger, saying, O sage! as
I was on my way to fetch you my horse broke his leg: send us a better
horse and a more excellent one1. If he takes the first alternative he will
come himself, if the second he will send his father. Then will be a
problem to test him.” The king sent a messenger with this message.
The sage on hearing it recognised that the king wished to see himself and
1 (uiataran ho pcteiu teKhdtaraii cu. Thol® is a play on the words; assataru may
mean a mule, or a calf.

' Goks*\ * 1,
I): . <SL
170 The Jdtaha. Book X X I1.
Jiis father. So he Went to his father, and said greeting him, “Father, the
king wishes to see you and me. You go first with a thousand merchants
in attendance; arid when you go, go not empty-handed, but take a sandal-
woocT casket filled with fresh ghee. The king will speak kindly ±o you,
and offer you a householder’s seat; take it and sit down. When you are
seated, I will come; the king will speak kindly to me and offer me sue!
another seat. Then I will look at you; take the cue and say, rising
from your seat, Son Mahosadha the wise, take this seat. Then the ques­
tion will be ripe for solution.” He did so. On arriving at the palace
door he caused his arrival to be made known to the king,, and on the
king’s invitation, he entered, and greeted the king, and stood on one side.
The king spoke to him kindly, and asked where was' his son the wise
Mahosadha. “ Coming after me, my lord.” The king was pleased to
hear of his coming, and bade the father sit in a suitable place. He found a
place and sat there. [343] Meanwhile the Great Being drest himself in
all his splendour, and attended by the thousand youths lie came seated in
a magnificeut chariot. As he entered the town he beheld an ass by the
side of a ditch, and he directed some stout fellows to fasten up the mouth
of the ass so that it should make nQ noise, to put him in a bag .and carry
him on their shoulders. They did so; the Bodhisat entered the city with
his great company. The people' could not praise him enough. “ This,”
they cried, “ is the wise Mahosadha, the merchant Sirivaddhaka’s son;
this they say is he, who was born holding a herb of virtue in his hand;
he it is who knew the answers to so many problems set to test him.” On
arriving before the palace he sent in word of his coming. The king was
pleased to hear it and said, “ Let my son the wise Mahosadha make haste
to come in.” So with his attendants he entered the palace and saluted
the king and stood on one side. The king delighted to see him spoke to
him very sweetly, and bade him find a fit seat and sit down. He looked
at his father, and his father at this cue uprose from his seat and invited
him to sit there, which he did. Thereupon the foolish men who were
there, Seuaka, Pukkusa, Kavinda, Devinda, and others, seeing him sit
there, clapt their hands and laughed loudly and cried, “This is the
blind fool they call wise I He has made his father rise from his seat, and
sits there himself ! Wise he should not be called surely.” The king also
was crestfallen. Then the Great Being said, “Why, my lord! are you
sad ?” “ Yes, wise sir, I am sad. I was glad to hear of you, but to see
you I am not glad.” “ Why so? ” “Because you have made your father
rise from his seat, and sit there yourself.” “What, my lord! do you think
that in all eases the sire is better than the sons?” “Yes, sir.” “Did
you not send word to me to bring you the better horse or the more
excellent horse?” So saying he rose up and looking towards the young
fellows, said, “Bring in the ass you have brought. Placing this ass

No. 546. 171 4
____' _______|______________________________
before the king he went on, “Sire, what is the price of this ass'!” The
king said, “ If it be serviceable, it is worth eight rupees.” “ But if he get
a mule colt out of a tkorobred Sindh mare, what will the price of it
be1?” “It will be priceless.” “Why do you say that, my lord? Have
you not just said that in all cases the sire is better than the sons? By
j Our own saying the ass is worth more than the mule colt. How have
not your wise men clapt their hands and laughed at me because they did
not know that? What wisdom is this of your wise men ! where did you
get them ? ” And in contempt for all four of them he addrest the king in
this stanza of the First Book1:
“ Thinkst thou that the sire is always better than the son, 0 excellent king ?
Then is yon creature better than the mule; the ass is the mule’s sire
After this said, [344] he went on, “My lord, if the sire is better than
the son, take my sire into your service; if the son is better than the sire,
take' me.” The king was delighted; and all the company cried out
applauding and praising a thousand times—“ Well indeed has the wise
man solved the question.” There was cracking of fingers and waving of a
thousand scarves : the four were crestfallen.
Now no one knows better than the Bodhisat the value of parents. If
one ask then, why ho did so: it was not to throw contempt on his father,
but when the king sent the message, send the better horse or the more
excellent horse,” he did thus in order to solve that problem, and to make
his wisdom to be recognised, and to take the shine out of the four sages '.
The king was pleased; and taking the golden vase filled with scented
water, poured the water upon the merchant’s hand, saying, “Enjoy the
East Market-town as a gift from the king.—Let the other merchants,'’ he
went on, “ be subordinate to this.” This done he sent to the mother of
the Bodhisat all kinds of ornaments. Delighted as he was at the Bod-
hisat’s solution of the Ass Question, he wished to make the Bodhisat as
his own son, and to the father said, “Good sir, give me the Great Being
to be my son.” He replied, “ Sire, very young is he still; even yet his
mouth smells of milk: but when he is old, he shall be with you.” The
king said however, “Good sir, henceforth you must give up your attach­
ment to the boy ; from this day he is my son. 1 can support my son, so
go your ways.” Then he sent him away. He did obeisance to the king,
and embraced his son, and throwing his arms about him kissed him upon
the head, and gave him good counsel The boy also bade his father fare­
well, and begged him not to be anxious, and sent him away.
The king then asked the sage, whether he would take his meals inside
the palace or without it. He thinking that with so large a retinue it
1 Voh i. p. -174 (trails., p. 254); cf. i. p- 53. See also Blilinda, 20o.
3 The metre shews corruption; I do not ii.n_de.tstand Twm«i.
* Gadrabha-panho ni(!hii<i.’

■ G\ \
f ( f )| <SL
----yy
'V^W:^ t 'm'T'*' s'
172 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
were best to have his meals outside the palace, replied to that effect.
Then the king gave him a suitable house, and providing for the main­
tenance of the thousand youths and all, gave him all that was needful.
From that time the sage attended upon the king.
19. Now the king desired to test the sage. At that time there was a
precious jewel in a crow’s nest on a palm-tree which stood on the bank 1
a lake near the southern gate, and the image of this jewel was to be seen
reflected upon the lake, They told the king that there was a jewel in the
lake. He sent for Senaka, [345] saying, “They tell me there is a
jewel in the lake; how are we to get it?” Senaka said, “The best way
is to drain out the water.” The king instructed him to do so; and he
collected a number of men, and got out the water and mud, and dug up
the soil at the bottom-^but no jewel could he see. But when the lake
was again full, there was the reflexion of the jewel to be seen once more.
Again Senaka did the same thing, and found no jewel. Then the king
sent for the sage, and said, “A jewel has been seen in the lake, and
Senaka has taken out the water and mud and dug up the earth without
finding it, but no sooner is the lake full than it appears again. Can you
get hold of it?” He replied, “That is no hard task, sire, I will get it for
you.” The king was pleased at this promise, and with a great following
ho went to the lake, ready to see the might of the sage’s knowledge. The
Great Being stood on the bank, and looked. He perceived that the jewel
was not in the lake, but must be in the tree, and he said aloud, “ Sire,
there is no jewel in the tank.” “ What! is it not visible in the water?”
So he sent for a pail of water, and said, “ Now my lord, see—is not thus
jewel visible both in the pail and the lake?” “Then where can the jewel
be?” “Sire, it is the reflexion which is visible both in the lake and in
the pail, but the jewel is in a crow’s nest in this palm-tree: send up a man
and have it brought down.” The king did so: the man brought down the
jewel, and the sage put it into the king’s hand. All the people applauded
the sage and mocked at Senaka—“Here’s a precious jewel in a crow’s
nest up a tree, and Senaka makes strong men dig out the lake! Surely a
wise man should be like Mahosadha1.” Thus they praised the Great
Being; and the king being delighted with him, gave him a necklace of
pearls from his own neck, and strings of pearls to the thousand boys, and
to him and his retinue he granted the right to wait upon him without
ceremonya.
Again, on a day the king went with the sage into the park; [346]
when a chameleon, which lived on the top of the arched gateway, saw the
king approach and came down and lay flat upon the ground. The king
seeing this asked, “ What is he doing, wise sir?” “Paying respect to
1 There is mi Jteod to add na, us the editor suggests,
a * EkunavUati-pahho nitthito1; end of the Nmeieen Problems.

___
n
<SL
No. 546. :e 173
you, sire." “ If so, let not bis service be without reward; give him a
largess.” “ Sire, a largess is of no use to him ; all he wants is something
to eat.” “And what does he eat?” “Meat, sire.” “How much ought
he to have?” “A farthing’s worth, sire.” “A farthing’s worth is no gift
from a king,” said the king, and he sent a man with orders to bring
regularly and give, to the chameleon a half-anna’s worth of meat. This
was done thereafter. But on a fast day, when there is no killing, the
man could find no meat; so he bored a hole through the half-anna piece,
and strung it upon a thread, aud tied it upon the chameleon’s neck.
This made the creature proud. That day the king again went into the
park; but the chameleon as he saw the king draw near, in pride of wealth
made himself equal to the king, thinking within himself—“You may be
very rich, Vedeha, but so am I.” So he did not come down, but lay still
on the archway, stroking his head. The king seeing this said, “ Wise sir,
this creature does not come down to-day as usual; what is the reason ? ”
and he recited the first stanza :
“ Yon chameleon used not to climb upon the archway: explain, Muhosadha,
why the chameleon has become stiff-necked.”
The sage perceived that the man must have been unable to find meat
on this fast day when there was no killing, and that the creature must
have become proud because of the coin hung about his neck; so lie recited
this stanza:
“ The chameleon has got what he never had before, a half-anna piece; hence
he despises Vedeha lord of Mithila.”
[347] The king sent for the man and questioned him, aud he told him
all about it truly. Then he was more than ever pleased with the sage,
who (it seemed) knew the idea of the chameleon, without asking any ques­
tions, with a wisdom like the supreme wisdom of a Buddha; so he gave
him the revenue taken at the four gates. Being angry with the chameleon,
he thought of discontinuing the gift, but the sage told him that it was
unfitting and dissuaded him1.
Now a lad Pinguttara living in Mithila came to Takkasila, and studied
under a famous teacher, and soon completed his education,; theu after
diligent study he proposed to take leave of his teacher and go. But in
this teacher’s family there wiis a custom, that if there should be a daughter
ripe for marriage she should be given to the eldest pupil. This teacher
had a daughter beautiful as a nymph divine, so ho said, “ My son, I will
give you my daughter and you shall take her with you.” Now this lad
was unfortunate and unlucky, but tin girl was very lucky. When he
saw her he did not care for her; but though he said so, he agreed, not
wishing to disregard his master’s words, and the brahmin married the
1 ‘ Xahintaku-panho nitfhUoHere endetb the Chameleon Question.

f(¥)| <SL
^ ^ ^ 1 7 4 The Jdtaka. Booh XXII.
daughter to him. 'Night came, when he lay upon the prepared bed; no
sooner had she got into the bed than up he got groaning and lay down
upon the floor. She got out and lay beside him, then he got up and went
to bed again; when she came into the bed again he got out—for ill luck
cannot mate with good luck. So the girl stayed in bed and lie stayed on
the ground. Thus they spent seven days. Then he took leave of hi?
teacher and departed taking her with him. On the road there was not so
much as an exchange of talk between them. Both unhappy they came to
Mithila. Not far from the town, Pihguttara saw a fig-tree covered with
fruit, and being hungry he climbed up and ate some of the figs. The girl
also being hungry came to the foot of the tree and called out—“Throw
down some fruit for me too.” “ What! ” says he, “ have you no hands or
feet 1 Climb up and get it yourself." She climbed up also and ate. No
sooner did he see that she had climbed than he came down quickly, [348]
and piled thorns around the tree, and made off saying to himself—“ I
have got rid of the miserable woman at last.” She could not get down,
but remained sitting where she was. Now the king, who had been
amusing himself in the forest, was coming back to town on Ins elephant
in the evening time when he saw her, and fell in love; so lie sent to ask
had she a husband or no. She replied, “Yes, I have a husband to whom
my family gave me; but he has gone away and left me here alone." The
courtier told this tale to the king, who said, “ Treasure trove belongs to
the Crown.” She was brought down and placed on the elephant and
conveyed to the palace, where she was sprinkled with the water of conse­
cration as his queen consort. Dear and darling she was to him; and the
name Udumbara or Queen Fig was given to her because he first saw her
upon a fig-tree. . . ,,
One day after this, they who dwelt by the city gate had to clean the
road for the king to go disporting into his park; and Pmguttara, who
had to earn his living, tucked up his clothes and set to work clearing the
road with a hoe. Before the road was clean the king with Queen Udum­
bara came along in a chariot; and the queen seeing the wretch clearing
the road could not restrain her triumph, but smiled to see the wretch
there. The king was angry to see her smile, and asked why she did so.
“ My lord," she said, “ that road-cleaner fellow is my former husband, who
made me climb up the fig-tree and then piled thorns about it and left me;
when I saw him I could not help feeling triumphant at my good fortune,
and smiled to see the wretch there.” The king said, “You he, you
laughed at someone else, and I will kill you!" And he drew his sword.
She was alarmed and said, “Sire, pray ask your wise men! The king
i v .i i her. “No, my lord, 1 do not, said
asked Senaka whether he believed ner. r *
Senaku “for who would leave such a woman if he once possest her?
When she heard this she was more frightened than ever. But the king

No. 54G. 175
thought, “What does Senaka know about it? I will ask the sage”; and
asked him reciting this stanza1 :
“ Should a woman be virtuous and fair, and a man not desire ber—do you
believe it Mahosadha ? ”
[349] The sage replied :
“ 0 king, I do believe it: the man would be an unlucky wretch; good luck
and ill luck never can mate together."
These words allayed the king’s anger, and his heart was calmed, and
much pleased he said, “ 0 wise man! if you had not been here, I should
have trusted the words of that fool Senaka and lost this precious woman :
you have saved me my queen.” He recompensed the sage with a thousand
pieces of money. Then the queen said to the king respectfully, “Sire, it
is all .through this wise man that my life has been saved ; grant me the
boon, that I may treat him as my youngest brother.” “Yes, my queen, I
consent, the boon is granted.” “Then, my lord, from this day I will eat no
dainties without my brother, from this day in season and out of season my
door shall be open to send him sweet food—this boon I crave.” “You
may have this boon also, my lady,” quoth the king. Here endeth the
Question of Good and Bad Luck2.
Another day, the king after breakfast was walking up and down in
the long walk when he saw through a doorway a goat and a dog making
friends. Now this goat was in the habit of eating the grass thrown to the
elephants beside their stable before they touched it; the elephant-keepers
beat it and drove it away; and as it ran away bleating, one man ran quickly
after and struck it on the back with a stick. The goat with its back humped
in pain went and lay down by the great wall of the palace, on a bench.
Now there was a dog which had fed all its days upon the bones, skin, and
. refuse of the royal kitchen. That same day the cook had finished preparing
the food, and had dished it up, and while he was wiping the sweat off his
body the dog could no longer bear the smell of the meat and fish, and
entered the kitchen, pushed off the cover [350] and began eating the meat.
But the cook hearing the noise of the dishes ran in and saw the dog: 1m
* clapt to the door and beat it with sticks and stones. The dog dropt the
meat from his mouth and ran off yelping; andythe cook seeing him run,
ran* after and struck him full on the back with a stick. The dog humping
his back and, holding up one leg came to the place where the goat was
lying. Then the goat said, “ Friend, why do you hump your back ? Are
you suffering from colic? ” The dog replied,'“You are humping your back
too, have you an attack of colic?” , He told his tale. Then the goat
added, “ Well, can you eyer go to the kitchen ll8ain ? ” “ No, it is as
1 See Vol. u. p' H5. ,
2 ‘ Sirikalakj'Wi-Panlw niUM°-

I f )| <SL
The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
much as my life’s' worth.—Can you go to the stable again? b>o
more than you, ’tis as much as my life’s worth.” Well, they began to
wonder how they could live. Then the goat said, “ If we could manage
to live together I have an idea.” “ Pray tell it.” “ Well, sir, you must
go to the stable; the elephant-keepers will take no notice of you, for
(think they) he eats no grass; and you must bring me my grass. I Wm
(to to the kitchen, and the cook will take no notice of me, thinking that
I eat no meat, so I will bring you your meat.” “ That’s a good plan,
said the other, and they made a bargain of it: the dog went to the stable
and brought a bundle of grass in his teeth and laid it beside the great
wall; the other went to the kitchen and brought away a great lump of
meat in his mouth to the same place. The dog ate the meat and the goat
ate the grass; and so by this device they lived together in harmony by
the great wall. When the king saw their friendship he thought—" Never
have I seen such a thing before. Here are two natural enemies living in
friendship together. I will put this in the form of a question to my wise
men ; those who cannot understand it I will banish from the realm, and
if anyone guesses it [351] I will declare him the sage incomparable and
shew him all honour. There is no time to-day ; but to-morrow when they
come to wait upon me I will ask them the question. Ho next day when
the wise men had come to wait upon him, he put his question in these
words:
“Two natural enemies, who never l>efore in the world could come within
seven paces of each other, have become friends and go inseparable. What is
the reason ?”
After this he added another stanza:
“ If this day before noon you cannot solve me this question, I will banish
you all. I have no need of ignorant men.”
Now Senaka was seated in the first seat, the sage in the last; and
thought the sage to himself, “This king is too slow of wit to have thought
out this question by himself, he must have seen something. If 1 can get
one day’s grace I will solve the riddle. Senaka is sure to 6nd some means
to postpone it for a day.” And the other four wise men could see nothing,
being like men in a dark room: Senaka looked at the Bodhisat to
see what he would do, the Bodhisat looked at Senaka. By the way
Mahosadha looked Senaka perceived his state of mind ; he sees that even
this wise man does not understand the question, he cannot answer it
to-day but wants a day’s grace; he would fulfil this wish. Ho lie laughed
loudly in a reassuring manner and said, “ W hat, sire, you will banish, us
all if we cannot answer your question, \” “ Vvs. sir. “Ah, yon, know
that it is a- knotty question, and we cannot solve it; do but wait a little.
A knotty question cannot be solved in ■*, crowd. Wo will think it over,

' G°i^X
1 1 1 <SL
iVo. 546. 177
— ---------------------------------------—--------—---------------------—-JL._____
and afterwards [352] explain it to you. So let us have a chance.” So he
said relying on the Great Being, and then recited these two stanzas :
“In a great crowd, where is a great din of people assembled, our minds are
distracted, our thoughts cannot concentrate, and we cannot solve the question.
But alone, calm in thought, apart they will go and ponder on the matter, in
solitude grappling with it firmly, then they will solve it for thee, 0 lord of men.”
The Ling, exasperated though he was at his speech, said, threatening
them, “ Very well, think it over and tell me; if you do not, I will banish
you. ihe four wise men left the palace, and Senaka said to the others,
‘ Friends, a delicate question this which the king has put; if we cannot
solve it there is great fear for us. So take a good meal and reflect
carefully.’ After this they went each to his own house. The sage on
his part rose and sought out Queen Udumbara, and to her he said, “ 0
queen, where was the king most of to-day and yesterday?” “Walking
up and down the long walk, good sir, and looking out of the window.”
“Ah, thought the Bodhisat, “he must have seen something there.” So
he went to the place and looked out and saw the doings of the goat and
the dog. “The king’s question is solved!” he concluded, and home he
went. The three others found out nothing, and came to Senaka, who
asked, “Have you found out the question?” “ No, master.” “If so, the
king will banish you, and what will you do?” “ But you have found it
out?’ “Indeed no, not I.” “If you cannot find it out, how can we?
We roared like lions before the king, and said, Let us think and we will
solve it; and now if we cannot, he will be angry. What are we to do?”
“ This question is not for us to solve: [353] no doubt the sage has solved
it in a hundred ways.” “ Then let us go to him.” So they came all four
to the Bodhisat’s door, and sent to announce their coming, and entering
spoke politely to him; then standing on one side they asked the Great
Being, “Well, sir, have you thought out the question?” “ If,I have not,
who will? Of course I have.” “Then tell us too.” He thought to
himself, “If I do not tell them, the king will banish them, and will honour
me with the seven precious things. But let not these fools perish—I will
tell them.” So he made them sit down on low seats, and to uplift their
hands in salutation, and without telling them what the king had really
seen, he composed four stanzas, and taught them one each in the Pali
language, to recite when the king should ask them, and sent them away.
Next day they went to wait on the king, and sat where they were told to
Sit, and the king asked Senaka, “ Have you solved the question, Senaka?”
“Sire, if I do not know it who can?” “Tell me, then.” “Listen, my
lord,” and he recited a stanza as he had been taught:
oung beggars and young princes like and delight in ram’s1 flesh ; dog’s
flesh they do not eat. Yet there might be friendship betwixt ram and dog.’’
I he words mendo and urabbho mean ‘ram,’ and I have translated them literally
in the following stanzas, reserving ‘goat’ for elaka.
J. vi. 12

' G°^\
(CT
The Jataka. Book XXII.
Although Seuaka recited the stanza he did not know its meaningbut
the king did because he had seen the thing. “ Senaka has found it out,
he thought; and then turned to Pukkusa and asked him. “ What? am
not I a wise man?” asked Pukkusa, and recited his stanza as he had been
taught:
“ They take off a goatskin to cover the horse’s back withal, but a dogskin
they do not use for covering: yet there might be friendship betwixt ram and
dog.”
[354] Neither did he understand the matter, but the king thought he
did because he had seen the thing. Then he asked Kavinda and he also
recited his stanza:
“ Twisted horns hath a ram, the dog hath none at all; one eateth grass, one
flesh : yet there might be friendship betwixt ram and dog.”
“ He has found it out too,” thought the king, and passed on to
Devinda ; who with the others recited his stanza as he had been taught:
“Grass and leaves doth the ram eat, the dog neither grass nor leaves ; the
dog would take a hare or a cat: yet there might be friendship betwixt ram and
dog.”
Next the king questioned the sage : “ My son, do you understand this
question ? ” “ Sire, who else can understand it from Avici to Bhavagga,
from lowest hell to highest heaven?” “Tell me, then.” “Listen, sire”;
and he made clear his knowledge of the fact by reciting these two stanzas:
“ The ram, with eight half-feet on his four feet, and eight hooves, unobserved,
brings meat for the other, and he brings grass for him1 *. The chief of Videha,
the lord of men, on his terrace beheld with his own eyes the interchange of food
given by each to the other, between bow-wow and full-mouth.”
[355] The king, not knowing that the others had their knowledge
through the Bodhisat, was delighted to think that all five had found out
the riddle each by his own wisdom, and recited this stanza :
“No small gain is it that I have men so wise in my house. A matter
profound and subtile they have penetrated with noble speech, the clever men ! ”
So he said to them, “ One good turn deserves another,” and made his
return in the following stanza :
“ To each I give a chariot and a she-mule, to each a rich village, very choice,
these I givo to all the wise men, delighted at their noble speech.”
All tlris he gave. Here endeth the Question of the Goat in the
Twelfth Book3.
i I have transposed the two last lines, to suit the obvious sense; the grammar is
incorrect as they stand. One might almost suppose that Senaka was reciting his verse
learnt by rote.
3 Maulaka-panho: see iv. 186 (traus., p. llo.l.

—~nV\ • > y-**
1 ( f) ? ) ' (CT
No. 546. . ' 179
But Queen Udumbara knew that the others had got their knowledge
of the question through the sage; and thought she, “ The king has given
the same reward to all five, like a man who makes no difference between
peas and beans. Surely my brother should have had a special reward.”
So she went and asked the king, “Who discovered the riddle for you, sir?”
The five wise men, madam.” “But my lord, through whom did the
four get their knowledge?” “ I do not know, madam.” “Sire, what do
those men know ! It was the sage—who wished that these fools should
not be ruined through him, and taught them the problem. [356] Then you
give the same reward to them all. That is not right; you should make a
distinction for the sage.” The king was pleased that the' sage had not
revealed that they had their knowledge through him, and being desirous
of giving him an exceeding great reward, he thought, “ Never mind : I
will ask my son another question, and when he replies, I will give him a
great reward.” Thinking of this he hit on the Question of Poor and Rich.
One day, when the five wise men had come to wait upon him, and
when they were comfortably seated, the king said, “ Senaka, I will ask a
question.” “ Do, sire.” Then he recited the first stanza in the Question
of Poor and Rich :
“Endowed with wisdom and bereft of wealth, or wealthy and without wisdom
—I ask you this question, Senaka : Which of these two do clever men call the
better?”
Now this question had been handed down from generation to genera­
tion in Senaka’s family, so he replied at once :
“ Verily, 0 king, wise men and fools, men educated or uneducated, do service
to the wealthy, although they be high-born and he be base-born. Beholding
this I say: The wise is mean, and the wealthy is better.”
The king listened to this answer; then without asking the other three,
he said to the sage Makosadlm who sat by :
“ Thee also I ask, lofty in wisdom, Mahosadha, who knowest all the Law :
A fool with wealth or a wise man with small store, which of the two do clever
men call the better 1 ”
[357] Then the Great Being replied, “ Hear, 0 king :
“The fool commits sinful acts, thinking ‘In this world I am the better’; he
looks at this world and not at the next, and gets the worst of it in both.
Beholding this I say: The wise is better than the wealthy fool.”
This said, the king looked at Senaka : “Well, you see Mahosadha says
the wise man is the best.” Senaka said, “ Your majesty, Mahosadha is a
child ; even now his mouth smells of milk. What can he know?” and he
recited this stanza:
, ‘‘ ^dence does not givo riches, nor does family or personal beauty. Look at
Gorimanda greatly prospering, because Luck favours the wretch1.
Beholding this I say : The wise is mean, the wealthy is better.”
1 Bead sirl hlnam as two words.
12—2
\

(
11)1
. , <SL
^ ^ ^ 1 8 0 The, Jataka. Book XXII.
[358]-Hearing this the king said, “What now, Mahosadha my son?”
He answered, “My lord, what does Senaka know? He is like a crow
where rice is scattered, like a dog trying to lap up milk : sees himself but
sees not the stick which is ready to fall upon his head. Listen, my loid,
and he recited this stanza :
“ He that is small of wit, when he gets wealth, is intosicated : struck hj
misfortune he becomes stupefied : struck by ill luck or good luck as chance may
come, he writhes like a fish in the hot sun. Beholding this I say : The wise is
better than the wealthy fool.”
“How then, master!” said the king on hearing this. Senaka said,
“ My lord, what does he know ? Not to speak of men, it is the fine tree
full of fruit which the birds go after,” and he recited this stanza:
“ As in the forest, the birds gather from all quarters to the tree which has
sweet fruit, so to the rich man who has treasure and wealth crowds flock
together for their profit. Beholding this I say: 1 he wise is mean, the
wealthy is the better.”
“ Well, my son, what now?” the king asked. The sage answered,
“ What does that pot-belly know ? Listen, my lord,” and he recited this
stanza:
« The powerful fool does not well to win treasure by violence ; roar loud as
he will, they1 drag the simpleton off to hell. [359] Beholding this I say : The
wise is better than the wealthy fool.’'
Again the king said, “ Well, Senaka ? ” to which Senaka replied :
“ Whatsoever streams pour themselves into the Ganges, all these lose name
and kind The Ganges falling into the sea, is no longer to be distinguished. So
the world is devoted to wealth. Beholding this I say: The wise is mean, the
rich is better.”
Again the king said, “ Well, sage?” and he answered, “Hear, 0 king! ”
with a couple of stanzas :
“This mighty ocean of which he spoke, whereinto always flow rivers in­
numerable, this sea beating incessantly on the shore can never pass oyer it,
mighty ocean though it be. So it is with the chatterings of the fool: Ins
prosperity cannot overpass the wise. Beholding this I say : The wise is bettei
than the prosperous fool.”
[300] “ Well, Senaka?” said the king. “ Hear, 0 king!” said he, and
recited this stanza :
“ A wealthy rnan in high position may lack all self-control, but if he says
anything to others, his word has weight in the midst of his kinsfolk; but wisdom
has not that effect for the man without wealth. Beholding this I say : The
wise is mean, the rich is better.”
“ Well, my son ? ” said the king again. “ Listen, sire ! what does that
stupid Senaka know?” and he recited this stanza:
“For another’s sake or his own the fool and small of wit speaks falsely ; he
is put to shame in the midst of company, and hereafter he goeth to misery.
Beholding this I say : The wise is better than the wealthy tom.”
i j e . nirayopala,’ the guardians of hell.

tljiQy Sl^L
No.
5 4 6 . "
_________________________________________________________________________________:_____________
Then Senaka recited a stanza :
“Even if one be of great wisdom, but without rice1 or grain, and needy,
should he say anything, his word has no weight in the midst of his kinsfolk,
[301] and prosperity does not come to a man for his knowledge. Beholding
this I say : The wise is mean, the rich is better.”
Again the king said, “ What say you to that, my son 1 ” And the
sage replied, “ What does Senaka know ? he looks at this world, not the
next,” and lie recited this stanza :
“Not for his own sake nor another’s does the man of gi'eat wisdom speak a
lie; he is honoured in the midst of the assembly, and hereafter he goes; >
happiness. Beholding this I say ; The wise is better than the wealthy fool.”
Then Senaka recited a stanza :
“Elephants, kine, horses, jewelled earrings, women, are found in rich families;
these all are for the enjoyment of the rich man without supernatural power.
Beholding this I say: The wise is mean, the rich is better.”
The sage said, “What does he know?” and continuing to explain the
matter he recited this stanza;
“ The fool, who does thoughtless acts and speaks foolish words, the unwise,
is cast off by Fortune as a snake casts the old skin. Beholding this I say : Ihe
wise is better than the wealthy fool.”
[362] “ What now?” asked the king then; and Senaka said, “ My
lord, what can this little boy know ? Listen!” and he recited this stanza,
thinking that he would silence the sage :
“We are five wise men, venerable sir, all waiting upon you with gestures of
respect; and you are our lord aud master, like Sakka, lord of all creatures, king
of the gods. Beholding this I say; The wise is mean, the rich is bettor.
When the king heard this he thought, “That was neatly said of
' Senaka j I wonder whether my son will be able to refute it and to say
something else.” So he asked him, “ Well, wise sir, what now?” But
this argument of Senaka’s there was none able to refute except the
Bodhisat; so the Great Being refuted it by saying, “ Sire, what does this
fool know? He only looks at himself and knows not the excellence of
wisdom. Listen, sire,” aud he recited this stanza :
“The wealthy fool is but the slave of a wise man, when questions of this
kind arise ■ when the sage solves it cleverly, then the fool falls into confusion.
Beholding ’this I say : The wise is better than the wealthy fool.”
As if he drew forth golden sand from the foot of Sineru, as though he
bought the full moon up in the sky, so did ho set forth this argument,
so did the Great Being shew his wisdom. Then the king said to Senaka,
“ Well, Senaka, cap that if you can ! ” But like one who had used up all
the corn in his granary, he sat without answer, disturbed, [363] grieving.
1 analayo. Following the Burmese version i derive this from nali, a measure (of
rice, &o.).

{(f)! <SL
' ^ ^ ^ 1 8 2 The Jataka. Book XXII.
If he eoultl have produced another argument, even a thousand stauzas
would not1 have finished this Birth. But when he remained without an
answer, the Great Being went on with this stanza in praise of wisdom,
as though he poured out a deep flood :
“ Verily wisdom is esteemed of the good; wealth is beloved because men
are devoted to enjoyment. The knowledge of the Buddhas is incomparable, anu
wealth never surpasses wisdom.”
Hearing this the king was so pleased with the Great Being’s solution
of the question, that he rewarded him with riches in a great shower, and
recited a,stanza:
“Whatsoever I asked he has answered me, Mahosadha2 the only preacher
of the Law. A thousand kine, a bull and an elephant, and ten chariots drawn
by tborobreds, and sixteen excellent villages, here I give thee, pleased with thy
answer to the questiou3.”
Here endeth the Question of Rich and Poor (Book xx).
From that day the Bodhisat’s glory was great, and Queen Udumbara
managed it all. When he was sixteen she thought : “My young brother
has grown up, and great is his glory ; we must find a wife for him.”
This she said to the king, and the king was well pleased. “ Vei’y good,”
said he, “ tell him.” [361] She told him, and he agreed, and she said,
“ Then let us find you a bride, my son.” The Great Being thought, “ I
should never be satisfied if they choose me a wife; I will find one for
myself.” And he said, “ Madam, do not tell the king for a few days, and
I will go seek a wife to suit my taste, and then I will tell you.” “ Do so,
my son,” she replied. He took leave of the queen, and went to his house,
and informed his companions. Then he got by some means the outfit of a
tailor, and alone went out by the northern gate into North Town. Now
in that place was an ancient and decayed merchant-family, and in this
f amily was a daughter, the lady Amara, a beautiful girl, wise, and with
all the marks of good luck. That morning early, thi3 girl had set out to
the place where her father was plowing, to bring him rice-gruel which
she had cooked, and it so happened that she went by the same road.
When the Great Being saw her coming he thought, “ A woman with all
lucky marks! If she is unwed she must be my wife.” She also when
she beheld him thought, “If I could live in the house of such a man, I
might restore my family.” The Great Being thought, “ Whether she be
wed or not I do not know : I will ask her by hand-gesture, and if she be
wise she will understand.” So standing afar off he clenched his fist. She
understood that he was asking whether she had a husband, and spread out
her hand. Then he went up to her, and asked her name. She said, “ My
1 ua seems to be wanted before nitth'tpeyya.
9 I translate as though Muliosaclho; I oanuot understand the syntax of the text.
:l Sirimti nda-pufiho niffhito.

/s<0- ' G°l^X
f( t ) | <SL
No.546. 483 ^
name is that which neither is, nor was, nor ever shall he.” “Madam
there is nothing in the world immortal, and your name must be Amara,
the Immortal.” “ Even so, master.” “ For whom, madam, do you carry
that gruel 1 ” “For the god of old time.” “Gods of old time are one’s
parents1 *, and no doubt you mean your father.” “ So it must be, master.”
What does your father do?” “He makes two out of one.” Now the
making two out of one is plowing. “He is plowing, madam.” [365]
“ Even so, master.” “And where is your father plowing?” “Where
those who go come not again.” “ The place whence those who go come
not again is the cemetery: he is plowing then near a cemetery.” “Even
so, master.” “ Will you8 come again to-day, madam?” “If a come I
will not come3, if a come not I will come.” “ Your father, methinks,
madam, is plowing by a riverside, and if the flood come you will not
come, if it come not you will.” After this interchange of talk, the
lady Amara offered him a drink of the gruel. The Great Being, thinking
it ungracious to refuse, said he would like some. Then she put down the
jar of gruel; and the Great Being thought, “ If she offer it to me without
first washing the pot and giving me water to wash my hands, I will leave
her and go. ’ But she took up water in the pot and offered him water
for washing, placed the pot empty upon the ground not in his hands,
stirred up the gruel in the jar, filled the pot with it. But there was not
much rice in it, and the Great Being said, “ Why, madam, there is very
little rice here!” “ We got no water, master.” “ You mean when your
field was in growth, you gpt no water upon it.” “ Even so, master.” So
she kept some gruel for her father, and gave some to the Bodhisat. He
drank, and gargled his mouth, and said, “ Madam, I will go to your
house; kindly shew me the way.” She did so by reciting a stanza which
is given in the First Book :
“ By the way of the cakes and gruel, and the double-leaf tree in flower, by the
hand wherewith I eat I bid thee go, not by that wherewith I eat not: that is
the way to the market-town, that secret path you must find4 * 6.”
Here endeth the Question'of the Secret Path.
[366] He reached the house by the way indicated; and Amara’s
mother saw him and gave him a seat. “ May I offer you some gruel,
master?” she asked. “Thank you, mother—sister Amara gave me a little.”
She at once recognized that he must have come on her daughter’s account.
1 pubbadevata nama mdtapitaro.
Reading with Bc£ essasiti, or C*” cssatha ti.
Thi eS8a^ 13 •’he original, having no subjeot, might refer to the father, “ if he come.”
i ,j,llci'ease8 the subtlety of the rid/le.
then s°b°linst exnl"“" mas: “Entering the village you will see a cake-shop and
, , a 8ruel-«fcop, further on an ebony tree in flower (kovildro, Bauhinia Variogata):
6 a patl1 to •’he right (south)."—Channapahtha-pailho nifthito.

' G°i^X
<SL
1 ( 1 ) 1
^x^T^xl84
The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
The Great Being, when he saw their poverty, said, “Mother, I am a tailor :
have you anything to mend?” “ Yes, master, but nothing to pay.”
“There is no need to pay, mother; bring the things and I will mend
them.” She brought him some old clothes, and each as she brought it the
Bodhisat mended. The wise man’s business always goes well, you know.
He said then, “Go tell the people in the street.” She published it abroad
in the village; and in one day by his tailoring the Great Being earned
a thousand pieces of money. The old dame cooked him a midday meal,
and in the evening asked how much she should cook. “ Enough, mother,
for all those who live in this house.” She cooked a quantity of rice with
some curry and condiments.
Now Amara in the evening came back from the forest, bearing a
faggot of wood upon her head and leaves on her hip. She threw down
the wood before the front door and came in by the back door. Her father
returned later. The Great Being ate of a tasteful meal; the girl served
her parents before herself eating, washed their feet and the Bodliisat’s
feet. For several days he lived there watching her. Then one day to
test her, he said, “ My dear Amara, take half a measure of lice and with
it make me gruel, a cake, and boiled rice.” She agreed at once; and
husked the rice; with the big grains she made gruel, the middling grains
she boiled, and made a cake with the little ones, adding the suitable
condiments. She gave the gruel with its condiments to the Great Being ;
[367] he no sooner took a mouthful of it than he felt its choice flavour
thrill through him : nevertheless to test her he said, “ Madam, if you
don’t know how to cook why did you spoil my rice?” and spat it out on
the ground. But she was not augry; only gave him the cake, saying,
“ If the gruel is not good eat the cake.” He did the same with that, and
again rejecting the boiled rice, said, “If you don’t know how to cook why
did you waste my property?” As though angry he mixed all three to­
gether and smeared them all over her body from the head downwards, and
told her to sit at the door. “Very good, master,” she said, not angry at
all, and did so. Finding that there was no pride in her he said, “Come
here, madam.” At the first word she came.
When the Great Being came, he had brought with him a thousand
rupees and a dress in his betel-nut-bag. Now he took out this dress and
placed it in her hands, saying, “ Madam, bathe with your companions and
put on this dress and come to me.” She did so. The sage gave her parents
all the money lie had brought or earned, and comforted them, and tool1
her back to the town with him. There to test her he made her sit dow u
in the gatekeeper’s house, and telling the gatekeeper s wile of his pla,ll3>
went to his own house. Then he :^ent fm some m >iis men, and sa;‘d, “ I
have left a woman in such and su-di a^ muse; take a thousand pieces of
money with you and test her.” H,J monf,y and sent them

' G°i^X
<
s l
m
yisi^ s^ No. 546. e 185
away. They did as they were bid. She refused, saying, “ That is not
worth the dust on ray master’s feet.” The men came back and told the
result. He sent them again, and a third time; and the fourth time he
bade them drag her away by force. They did so, and when she saw the
Great Being in all his glory she did not know him, but smiled and wept
at the same time as she looked at him. He asked her why she did this.
She replied, “ Master, I smiled when I beheld your magnificence, and
thought that this magnificence was not given you without cause, but for
some good deed in a former life : see the fruit of goodness ! I thought, and
I smiled. But I wept to think that now you would sin against the
property which another watched and tended, [3G8] and would go to hell:
in pity for that 1 wept.” After this test he knew her chastity, and sent
her back to the same place. Putting on his tailor’s disguise, he went
back to her and there spent the night.
Next morning he repaired to the palace and told Queen Udumbara all
about it; she informed the king, and adorning Amara with all kinds of
ornaments, and seated her in a great chariot, and with great honour
brought her to the Great Being’s house, and made a gala day. The king
sent the Bodhisat a gift worth a thousand pieces of money : all the people
of the town sent gifts from the doorkeepers onwards. Lady Amara
divided the gifts sent by the king into halves, and sent one portion back
to the king; in the same way she divided all the gifts sent to her by the
citizens, and returned half, thus winning the hearts of the people. From
that time the Great Being lived with her in happiness, and instructed the
king in things temporal and spiritual.
One day Senaka said to the other three who had come to see him,
“ Friends, we are not enough for this common man’s son Mahosadha; and
now he has gotten him a wife cleverer than himself. Gan we find a
means to make a breach between him and the king ? ” “ What do we
know, sir teacher—you must decide.” “Well, never mind, there is a way.
I will steal the jewel from the royal crest; you, Pukkusa, take his golden
necklace; you, Kaviuda, take his woollen robe ; you, Devinda, his golden
slipper.” They all four found a way to do these things. Then Senaka
said, “ We must now get them into the fellow’s house without his know­
ledge.” So Senaka put the jewel in a pot of dates and sent it by a slave-
girl, saying, “ If anyone else wants to have this pot of dates, refuse, but
give them pot and all to the people in Mahosadha’s house.” She took it
and went to the sage’s house, and walked up and down crying, “ D’ye lack
dates!” But the lady Amara standing by the door saw this : she noticed
that the girl went nowhere else, there must be something behind it; so
making a sign for her servants to approach, she cried herself to the girl,
“Gome here, girl, J will take the dates.” [369] When she came, the
mistress called for her servants, but none answered, so she sent the girl to

( g l
56 The Jcitaka. Book XXII.
fetch them. While she was gone Amara put her hand into the pot and
found the jewel. When the girl returned Amara asked her, “ Whose
servant are you, girl?” “Pandit Senaka’s maid.” Then she enquired
her name and her mother’s name and said, “Well, give me some dates.
“ If you want it, mother, take it pot and all—I want no payment.’ “You
may go, then,” said Amara, and sent her away. Then she wrote down o..
a leaf, “ On such a day of such a month the teacher Senaka sent a jewel
from the king’s crest for a present by the hand of such and such a girl.”
Pukkusa sent the golden necklet hidden in a casket of jasmine flowers ;
Kaviuda sent the robe in a basket of vegetables; Devinda sent the golden
slipper in a bundle of straw. She received them all and put down names
and all on a leaf, which she put away, telling the Great Being about it.
Then those four men went to the palace, and said, “ Why, my lord! won t
you wear your jewelled crest?” “Yes, I will—fetch it,” said the king.
But they could not find the jewel or the other things. Then the four
said, “My lord, your ornaments are in Mahosadha’s house, and he uses
them: that common man’s son is your enemy!” So they slandered
him. Then his well-wishers went and told Mahosadha; and he said, “I will
go to the king and find out.” He waited upon the king, who was angry
and said, “I know him not! what does he want here? ” He would not
grant him an audience. When the sage learnt that the king was angry he
returned home. The king sent to seize him; which the sago hearing
from well-wishers indicated to Amara that it was time he departed. So
he escaped out of the city in disguise to South Town where he plied
the trade of a potter in a potter’s house. All the city was full of the
news that he had run away. Senaka and the other three hearing that he
was gone, each unknown to the rest sent a letter to the lady Amara, to
this effect: “ Never mind: are we not wise men?” [370] She took all
four letters, and answered to each that he should come at such a time.
When they came, she had them clean shaven with razors, and threw them
into the jakes, and tormented them sore, and wrapping them up in rolls of
matting sent word to the king. Taking them and the four precious things
together she went to the king’s courtyard and there greeting him said:
“ My lord, the wise Mahosadha is no thief; here are the thieves. Senaka
stole the jewel, Pukkusa stole the golden necklace, Devinda stole the
golden slipper: on such a day of such a month by the hand of such and
such a slave-girl these four were sent as presents. Look at this leaf.
Take what is yours, and cast out the thieves.” And thus heaping
contumely on these four persons 3he returned home. But the king was
perplext about this, and since the Bodhisat had gone and there were no
other wise men he said nothing, but told them to bathe and go home.
Now the deity that dwelt in the royal parasol no longer hearing the
voice of the Bodhisat’s discourse wondered what might be the cause, and

X°X~XV\
f(S)| <SL
iV o . 5 4 6 . '• 1 8 7
when she l\ad found it out determined to bring the sage back. So at night
she appeared through a hole in the circuit of the parasol, and asked the
king four questions which are found in the Questions of the Goddess,
Book iv1, the verses beginning “ He strikes with hands and feet.” The
king could not answer, and said so, but offered to ask his wise men, asking
a day’s delay. Next day he sent a message summoning them, but they
replied, “ We are ashamed to shew ourselves in the street, shaven as we
are.” So he sent them four skullcaps to wear on their heads. (That is
the origin of these caps, so they say.) Then they came, and sat where
they were invited to go, and the king said, “ Senaka, last night the deity
that dwells in my parasol asked me four questions, which I could not
solve but said I would ask my wise men. Pray solve them for me.” And
then he*-recited the first stanza :
“ He strikes with hands and feet, and beats on the face; yet, 0 king, he is
dear, and grows dearer than a husband4.”
Senaka stammered out whatever came first, “ Strikes how, strikes
whom,” [371] and could make neither head nor tail of it] the others were
all dumb. The king was full of distress. When again at night the goddess
asked whether he had found out the riddle, he said, “ I asked my four
wise men, and not oven they could say.” She replied, “ What do they
know 1 Save wise Mahosadha there is none can solve it. If you do not
send for him and get him to solve these questions, I will cleave your head
with this fiery blade.” After thus frightening him she went on : “0 king,
when you want fire don’t blow a firefly, and when you want milk don’t
milk a horn." Then she repeated the Firefly Question8 of the Fifth Book:
“When light is extinguisht, who that goes in search of fire ever thinks a
firefly to be fire, if he sees it at night? If he crumbles over it cow-dung and
. grass, it is a foolish idea; he cannot make it burn. So also a beast gets no
benefit by wrong means, if it milks a cow by the horn where milk will not flow.
By many means men obtain benefit, by punishment of enemies and kindness
shewn to friends. By winning over the chiefs of the army, and by the counsel
of friends, the lords of tlie earth possess the earth and the fulness thereof.”
[372] “ They are not like.you, blowing at a firefly in the belief that it
is a fire: you are like one blowing at a firefly when fire is at hand, like
one who throws down the balance and weighs with the hand, like one
who wants milk and milks the horn, when you ask deep questions of
Senaka. and the like of him. What do they know 1 Like fireflies are
they, like a great flaming fire is Mahosadha blazing with wisdom. If you
do not find out this question, you are a dead man.” Having thus ter­
rified the king, she disappeared4.
1 Vol. m. p. 152 alludes to this.
Reading kantena.
3 Xhajjopanaka-pahho: in. 197.
4 Khajjopanaka-pailho nitihito. Here endeih the Firefly Question.

1(1)1 <SL
--------^-y
188 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
Hereat the king, smitten with mortal fear, sent out the next day four
of his courtiers, with orders to mount each in a chariot, and to go forth
from the four gates of the city, and wheresoever they should find his son,
the wise Mahosadha, to shew him all honour and speedily to bring him
back. Three of these found not the sage; but the fourth who went out
by south gate found the Great Being in the South Town, who, after
fetching clay and turning his master’s wheel, sat all clay-besmeared on
a bundle of straw eating balls of rice dipt in a little soup. Now the
reason why he did so was this : he thought that the king might suspect
him of desiring to grasp the sovereign power, but if he heard that he was
living by the craft of a potter this suspicion would be put away. When
he perceived the courtier he knew that the man had come for himself; he
understood that his prosperity would be restored, and he should eat all
manner of choice food prepared by the lady Amarii: so he dropt the ball
of rice which he held, stood up, and rinsed his mouth. At that moment
up came the courtier : now this was one of Senaka’s faction, so he addrest
him rudely as follows: “ Wise Teacher, what Senaka said was useful
information. Your prosperity gone, all your wisdom was unavailing; and
now there you sit all besmeared with clay on a truss of straw, eating food
like that! ” and he recited this stanza from the Bhuri-panha or Question
of Wisdom, Book x1:
[373] “ Is it true, as they say, that you are one of profound wisdom ? So
great prosperity, cleverness, and intelligence does not serve you, thus brought to
insignificance, while you eat a little soup like that.”
Then the Great Being said, “ Blind fool! By power of my wisdom
when I want to restore that prosperity I will do it ”; and he recited a
couple of stanzas.
“ I make weal ripen by woe, I discriminate between seasonable and un­
seasonable times, hiding at my own will; I unlock the doom of profit; therefore
I am content with boiled rice. When I perceive the time for an effort, maturing
my profit by my designs, 1 will bear myself valiantly like a lion, and by that
mighty power you shall see me again.”
Then the courtier said: “ Wise sir, the deity who lives in the parasol
has put a question to the king, and the king asked the four wise men,—
not a wise man of them could solve it! Therefore the king has sent me
for you.” [374] “In that case,” said the Great Being, “do you not see
the power of wisdom 1 At such a time prosperity is of no use, but only
one who is wise.'' Thus he praised wisdom. Then the courtier handed
over to the Great Being the thousand pieces of money and the suit of
clothes provided by the king, that he might bathe him and dress at once.
The potter was terrified to think that Mahosadha the sage had been his
workman, but the Great Being consoled him, saying, “ Fear not, my master,
i Vol. iv. p- 72.

f(I )| <SL
JVo. 546. , 189
you have been of great help to me.” Then he gave him a thousand pieces;
and with the mud-stains yet upon him mounted in the chariot and went
to town. The courtier told the king of his arrival. “ Where did you
find the sage, my son?” “My lord, he was earning his livelihood as a
potter in the South Town ; but as soon as he heard that you had sent for
hsm, without bathing, the mud yet staining his body, he came.” The
king thought, “ If he were my enemy he would have come with pomp and
retinue; he is not my enemy.” Then he gave orders to take him to his
house, and bathe him, and adorn him, and to bid him come back with the
pomp that should be provided. This was done. He returned, and entered,
and gave the king greeting, and stood on one side. The king spoke kindly
to him, then to test him said this stanza: '
“ Some do no sin because they are wealthy, but others do no sin for fear of
' the taint of blame. You are able, if your mind desired much wealth. Why do
you not do me harm 1 ”
The Bodhisat said :
“ Wise men do not sinful deeds for the sake of the pleasure that wealth gives.
[375] Good men, even though struck by misfortune and brought low, neither
tor friendship nor for enmity will renounce the right.”
Again the king recited this stanza, the mysterious saying of a Khattiya1:
“ He who for any cause, small or great, shoidd upraise himself from a low
place, thereafter would walk in righteousness.”
And the Great Being recited this stanza with an illustration of a tree:
“ From off a tree beneath whose shade a man should sit and rest,
’Twere treachery tff lop a branch. False friends we do detest2 3.”
Then he went on: “Sire, if it is treachery to lop a branch from a tree
which one has used, what are we to say of one who kills a man 1 Your
majesty has given my father great wealth, and has shewn me great
favour : how could I be so treacherous as to injure you ? ’ Thus having
demonstrated altogether his loyalty he reproached the king tor his fault:
“ When any man has disclosed the right to any, or has cleared his doubts,
the other becomes his protection and refuge ; and a wise man will not dostroy
this friendship.”
Now admonishing the king he said these two stanzas’ :
“ The idle sensual layman I detest,
The false ascetic is a rogue contest.
A bad king will a case unheard decide ;
Wrath in the sage can ne’er be justified. .
[376] The warrior prince takes careful thought, and well-weighed verdict gives,
When kings their judgment ponder well, their fame lor ever lives4.”
1 khatti/yamaya : of. Dhp. p- 155.
3 Vol. v. p. 240-trans., p. 123.
3 See in. 105, 154 = tarns., pp. 70, 103, iv. 451 = tains, p. 279.
4 Bhnripanho nitthito.

f/y(y-—f')\v l\ <SL
x^T^490 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
When lie had thus said, the king caused the Great Being to sit on the
royal throne under the white parasol outspread, and himself sitting on a
low seat he said : “Wise sir, the deity who dwells in the white parasol
asked me four questions. I consulted the four wise men and they could
not find them out: solve me the questions, my son!” “Sire, be it the
deity of the parasol, or be they the four great kings, or be they who thry
may; let who will ask a question and I will answer it.” So the king put
the question as the goddess had done, and said :
“ lie strikes with hands aud feet, he beats the face ; and he, 0 king, is dearer
than a husband.”
When the Great Being had heard the question, the meaning became
as clear as though the moon had risen in the sky. “Listen, 0 king!” he
said, “ When a child on the mother’s lap happy and playful beats his
mother with hands and feet, pulls her hair, beats her face with his fist,
she says, Little rogue, why do you beat me? And in love she presses
him close to her breast unable to restrain her affection, and kisses him;
and at such a time he is dearer to her than his father.” Thus did he make
clear this question, as though he made the sun rise in the sky; and hearing
this the goddess shewed half her body from the aperture in the royal
parasol, and said in a sweet voice, “ The question is well solved ! ” Then
she presented the Great Being with a precious casket full of divine
perfumes and flowers, and disappeared. The king also [377] presented
him with flowers and so forth, and asked him the second question, reciting
the second stanza :
“She abuses him roundly, yet wishes him to be near: and he, 0 king, is
dearer than a husband.”
The Great Being said, “ Sire, the child of seven years, who can now do
his mother’s bidding, when he is told to go to the field or to the bazaar,
says, If you will give me this or that sweetmeat I will go; she says, Here
my son, and gives them; then he eats them and says, Yes, you sit in the
cool shade of the house and I am to go out on your business ! He makes
a grimace, or mocks her with gestures, and won’t go. She is angry, picks
up a stick and cries—You eat what I give you and then won’t do anything
for me in the field ! She scares him, off he runs at full speed; she cannot
follow and cries—Get out, may the thieves chop you up into little bits'
So she abuses him roundly as much as she will; but what her mouth
s[>cak8 she does not wish at all, and so she wishes him to be near.
He plays about the livelong day, and at evening not daring to come home
he goes to the house of some kinsman. The mother watches the road for
his coming, and sees him not, and thinking that he durst not. return has
her heart full of pain; with tears streaming from her eyes she searches
the houses of her kinsfolk, and when she Bees her son she hugs and kisses

No. 546. * 191
him and squeezes him tight with both arms, and loves him more than ever,
as she cries, Did you take my words in earnest ? Thus, sire, a mother ever
loves her son more in the hour of anger.” Thus he explained the second
question: the goddess made him the same offering as before and so did the
king. Then the king asked him the third question in another stanza:
“ She reviles him without cause, and without reason reproaches ; yet he, 0
king, is dearer than a husband.”
The Great Being said, “ Sire, when a pair of lovers in secret [378]
enjoy their love’s delights, and one says to the other, You don’t care for
me, your heart is elsewhere I know ! all false and without reason, chiding
and reproaching each other, then they grow dearer to each'other. That is
the meaning of the question.” The goddess made the same offering as
before, and so did the king; who then asked him another question,
reciting the fourth stanza:
“ One takes food and drink, clothes and lodging,—verily the good men carry
them off: yet they, 0 king, are dearer than a husband.”
He replied, “ Sire, this question has reference to righteous mendicant
brahmins. Pious families that believe in this world and the next give to
them and delight in giving : when they see such brahmins receiving what
is given and eating it, and think, It is to us they came to beg, our own
food which they eat—they increase affection towards them. Thus verily
they take the things, and wearing on the shoulder what has been given,
they become dear.” When this question had been answered the goddess
exprest her approval by the same offering as before, and laid before the
Great Being’s feet a precious casket full of the seven precious things,
praying him to accept it; the king also delighted made him Commander
in Chief. Henceforward great was the glory of the Great Being. Here
endeth the Question of the Goddess1.
Again these four said, “ This common fellow is waxen greater: what
are we to do?” SeDaka said to them, “All right, I know a plan. Let
us go to the fellow and ask him, To whom is it right to tell a secret ? If
he says, To no one, we will speak against him to the king and say that he
is a traitor.” So the four went to the wise man’s house, and greeted him,
and said, “ Wise sir,, we want to ask you a question.” “ Ask away,” said
he. Senaka said, “ Wise sir, wherein should a man be firmly estab­
lished ? ” “ Xn the truth.” “ That done, [37.9] what is the next thing to
do? ” “ jje mu8t make wealth,” “ What next after that? ” “ He must
learn good counsel.” “After that what next?” “ He must tell no man
his own secret.” “ Thank you, sir,” they said, and went away happy,
thinking, “ This day we shall see the fellow’s back 1 ” Then they entered
the king’s presence and said to him, “Sire, the fellow is a traitor to you!”
1 Devatdpucchita-po.nho nipthito.

• e<W\
!(I)f <SL
192
The Jataka. Book XXII.
The king replied, “ I do not believe you, he will never be traitor to me.”
“ Believe it, sire, for it is true ! but if you do not believe, then ask him to
whom a secret ought to be told : if he is no traitor, he will say, To so and
so ; but if he is a traitor he will say, A secret should be told to no one:
when your desire is fulfilled, then you may speak. Then believe us, and
be suspicious no longer.” Accordingly one day when all were seated
together he recited the first stanza of the Wise Man’s Question, Book XX1:
“ The five wise men are now together, and a question occurs to mo : listen.
To whom should a secret be revealed, whether good or bad ?
This said, Senaka, thinking to bring the king over to their side,
repeated this stanza:
“Bo thou declare thy mind, 0 lord of the earth ! thou art our supporter and
bearest our burdens. The five clever men will understand thy wish and pleasure,
and will then speak, 0 master of men !”
Then the king in his human infirmity recited this stanza:
“ If a womau be virtuous, and faithful, subservient to her husband’s wish
and will, affectionate, [380] a secret should be told whether good or bid to t
wife.”
“ Now the king is on my side!” thought Senaka, and pleased he
repeated a stanza, explaining his own course of conduct:
“He who protects a sick man in distress and who is his refuge and support,
may reveal to his friend a secret whether good or bad.
Then the king asked Pukkusa: “ How does it seem to you, Pukkusal
to whom should a secret be told 1 ” and Pukkusa recited this stanza :
“Old or young or betwixt, if a brother be virtuous and trusty, to such a
brother a secret may be told whether good or bad.
Next the king asked Kavinda, and he recited this stanza :
“ When a sou is obedient to his father’s heart, a true son, of lofty wisdom, to
that son a secret may be revealed whether good or bad.
And then the kiug asked Devinda, who recited this stanza:
uO lord of men! if a mother cherishes her son with loving fondness, to his
mother he may reveal a secret ^whether good or bad. ’
[381] After asking them the king asked, “How do you look upon it,
wise sir1?” and he recited this stanza .
“Good is the secrecy of a secret, the revealing of a secret is not to be praised.
The clever man should keep it to himself whilst it is not accomplished ; but
after it is done he may speak when he will.”
When the sago had said this the king was displeased : then the king
looked at Senaka and Senaka looked at the king. This the Bodhisat saw,
and recognized the fact, that these four had once before slandered him to
i Vol. iv. P- 473, trana., p. 293.

| ¥ ) | <SL
\%>'-— «<v
No. 546. 193
the king, and that this question must have been put to test him. Now
whilst they were talking the sun had set, and lamps had been lit. “Hard
are the ways of kings,” thought he, “what will happen no one can tell) I
must depart with speed.” So he rose from his seat, and greeted the king,
and went away thinking, “ Of these four, one said it should he told to a
frond, one to a brother, one to a son, one to a mother: they must have
done or seen something; or I think, they have heard others tell what
they have seen. Well, well, I shall find out to-day.” Such was his
thought. Now on other days, these four on coming out of the palace used
to sit on a trough at the palace door, and talk of their plans before going
home : so the sage thought that if he should hide beneath that trough he
might learn their secrets. Lifting the trough accordingly, he caused a rug
to be spread beneath it and crept in, giving directions to his men to fetch
him when the four wise men had gone away after their talk. The men
promised and departed. Meanwhile Senaka was saying to the king,
‘Sire, you do not believe us, [382] now what do you think 1” The king
accepted the word of these breedbates without investigation, and asked
in terror, “What are we to do now, wise Senaka?” “Sire, without
delay, without a word to anyone, he must be killed.” “ 0 Senaka, no
one cares for my interests but you. Take you friends with you and wait
at the door, and in the morning when the fellow comes to wait upon me,
cleave his head with a sword.” So saying he gave them his own precious
sword. “ Very good, my lord, fear nothing, we will kill him.” They
went out saying, “We have seen the back of our enemy ! ” and sat down
on the trough. Then Senaka said, “ Friends, who shall strike the fellow? ”
The others said, “You, our teacher,” layiug the task on him. Then
Senaka said, “ You said, friends, that a secret ought to be told to such
and such a person: was it something you had done, or seen, or, heard ? ”
“ Never mind that, teacher: when you said that a secret might be told
to a friend, was that something which you had done? ” “What does that
matter to you ? ” he asked. “ Pray tell us, teacher,” they repeated. He
said, “If the king come to know this secret, my life would be forfeit.”
“ Do not fear, teacher, there’s no one here to betray your secret, tell us,
teacher.” Then, tapping upon the trough, Senaka said, “What if that
clodhopper is under this !” “O teacher ! the fellow in all his glory would
not creep into such a place as this ! He must be intoxicated with his pros-
ferity. Come, tell us.” Senaka told his secret and said, “Do you know
such and such a harlot in this city?” “ Yes, teacher.” “Is she now to
be seen ? ” “ No, teacher.” “ In the sal-grove 1 lay with her, and after­
wards killed her to get her ornaments, which I tied up in a bundle and
took to my bouse and hung up on an elephant’s tusk in such a room of
such a storey : but use them [383] I cannot until it has blown over. This
J- VI- 13

%$%
/y>—'CV\
<SL
The JdtaJca. Book XXI1.
194
crime I have disclosed to a friend, and he has not told a soul; and that is
why I said a secret may be told to a friend.” The sage heard this secret
of Senaka’s and bore it in mind. Then Pukkusa told his secret. n
my thigh is a spot of leprosy. In the morning my young brother washes
it, puts a salve on it and a bandage, and never tells a soul. When the king s
heart is soft he cries, Come here, Pukkusa, and he often lays his head on
my thigh. But if he knew he would kill me. No one knows this except
my young brother; and that is why I said, A secret may be told to a
brother.” Kavinda told his secret. “As for me, in the dark fortnight
on the fast-day a goblin named Naradeva takes possession of me, and I
bark like a mad dog. I told my son of this; and he, when he sees me to
be possest, fastens me up indoors, and then he leaves me shutting the door
and to hide my noises he gathers a party of people. That is why I said
that a secret might be told to a son.” Then they all three asked Devinda,
and he told his secret. “ I am inspector of the king’s jewels ; and I stole
a wonderful lucky gem, the gift of Sakka to King Kusa, and gave it to
my mother. When I go to Court she hands it to me, without a word to
anyone; and by reason of that gem I am pervaded with the spirit of good
fortune when 1 enter the palace. The king speaks to me first before any
of you, and giveB mo each day to spend eight rupees, or sixteen, or thnty-
two, or sixty-four. If the king knew of my having that gem concealed
I’m'a dead man! That is why I said that a secret might be told to a
mother.” - , ,
The Great Being took careful note of all their secrets; [384 J but they,
after disclosing their secrets as if they had ript up their bellies and let the
entrails out, rose up from the seat and departed, saying, “Be sure to come
early and we will kill the churl.”
When they were gone the sage’s men came and turned up the trough
and took the Great Being home. He washed and drest and ate; and
knowing that his sister Queen Udumbarr would that day send him a
message from the palace, lie placed a trusty man on the look-out, bidding
him send in at once anyone coming from the palace. Then he lay down
on his bed. .
At that time the king also was lying upon his bed and remembering
the virtue of the sage. “ The sage Mahosadha lias served me since he
was seven years old, and never done me wrong. When the goddess asked
m,; her questions but for the sage I had been a dead man. To accept the
words of revengeful enemies, to give them a sword and bid them slay a
peerless sage, this I ought never to have done. After to-morrow I shall
Jee him no more!” He grieved, sweat poured from his body, possest
with grief his heart had no peace. Queen UdumbarT, who was with lum
on his couch, seeing him in this frame, asked, “Have I done any offence

l(t)|
■ <SL
v%>----%#/
546. ( 195
No.
against you? or has any other thing caused grief to my lord?’' and she
repeated this stanza:
“ Why art thou perplext, 0 king ? we hear not the voice of the lord of men !
What dost thou ponder thus downcast ? there is no offence from me, my lord.”
Then the king repeated a stanza :
“ Ihcy said, ‘the wise Mahosadha must be slain and condemned by me to
death is the most wise one. As I think on this I am downcast. There is no
fault in thee, my queen.”
[385] When she heard this, grief crushed her like a rock for the Great
Being; and she thought, “I know a plan to console the king: when he
goes to sleep I will scud a message to my brother.” Then she said to him,
“■ Sire, it is your doing that the churl’s son was raised to great power;
you made him commander-in-chief. Now they say he has become your
enemy. No enemy is insignificant; killed he must be, so do not grieve.”
Thus she consoled the king ; his grief waned and ho fell asleep. Then up
queen
rose the and went to her chamber, and wrote a letter to this effect.
“Mahosadha, the four wise men have slandered you; the king is angry,
and to-morrow has commanded that you bo slain in the gate, ho not
come to the palace to-morrow morning; or if you do come, come with
power to bold the city in your hand.” She put the letter within a sweet­
meat, and tied it up with a thread, and put it in a new jar, perfumed it,
sealed it up, and gave it to a handmaid, saying, “ Take this sweetmeat
and give it to my brotheiv” She did so. You must not wonder how she
got out in the night; for the king had erewhiles given this boon to the
queen, and therefore no one hindered her. The Bodhisat received the
present and dismissed the woman, who returned and reported that she had
delivered it. Then the queen went and lay down by the king. The
Bodhisat opened the sweetmeat, and read the letter, and understood it,
and after deliberating what should be done went to rest.
Early in the morning, the other four wise men sword in hand stood by
the gate, but not seeing the sage they became downcast, and went in to the
king. “ Well,” said lie, “ is the clodhopper killed? ” They replied, “We
have not seen him, sire.” And the Great Being at sunrise got the whole
city into his power, set guards here aud there, and in a chariot with a great
host of men and great magnificence came to the palace gates. The king
of
stood looking out an open window. Then the Great Being got down
from “If were
his chariot and saluted him; and the king thought, lie my
enemy, [386] he would not salute me.” Then the king sent for him, and
sat upon his throne. The Great Being came in and sat on one side : the
four wise men also sat down there. Then the king made as if lie knew
nothing and said, “ My son, yesterday you left us and now you come
13—2

' G°^«x
<SL
1 ( 1 ) 1
^ 2^2Xj_9g The Jdtaka. Book XXII.'
again; why do you treat me thus negligently?” and he repeated this
stanza :
“At evening you went, now you come. What have you heard ? what doth
your mind fear ? Who commanded you, 0 most wise ? Come, we are listening
for the word : toll me.”
The Great Being replied, “ Sire, you listened to the four wisemen and
commanded my death, that is why I did not come,” and reproaching him
repeated this stanza :
The wise Mahosadha must be slain ’: if you told this last night secretly to
your wife, your secret was disclosed and I heard it.”
When the king heard this he looked angrily at his wife thinking that
she must have sent word of it on the instant. Observing this the Great
Being said, “ Why are you angry with the queen, my lord? I know all
the past, present, and future. Suppose the queen did tell your secret:
who told me the secrets of master Senaka, and Pukkusa, and the rest of
them? But I know all their secrets”; and he told Senaka’s secret in
this stanza:
“The sinful and wicked deed which Senaka did in the sal-grove [387] he
told to a friend in secret, that secret has been disclosed and I have heard it. ’
Looking at Senaka, the king asked, “ Is it true ? ” “ Sire, it is true,”
he replied, and the king ordered him to be cast into prison. Then the
sage told Pukkusa’s secret in this stanza :
“ In the man Pukkusa, 0 king of men, there is a disease unfit for a king’s
touching: he told it in secret to his brother. That secret has been disclosed
and I have heal’d it.”
The king looking upon him asked, “ Is it true?” “Yes, my lord,”
said he; and the king sent him also to prison. Then the sage told
K-iivinda’s secret in this stanza :
« Diseased is yon man, of evil nature, possest of Naradeva. lie told it in
secret to his sou: this secret has been disclosed and I. have heard it.”
[388] “Is it true, Kavinda ? ” the king asked; and he answered, “It is
true.” Then the king sent him also to prison. The sage now told De-
vinda’s secret in this stanza:
“The noble and precious gem of eight facets, which Sakka gave to your
grandfather, that is now in Devinda’s hands, and he told it to his mother in
secret. That secret has been disclosed and I have heard it. ’
“Is it true, Devinda?” the king asked; and he answered, “It is
true." So he sent him also to prison. Thus they who had plotted to
slay the Bodhisat were all in bonds together. And the Bodhisat said,
“This is why I say, a man should toll his secret to no one; those who

<SL
^ ^ _J
546. 197
No.
, _______ : __________________________________________ i£____
said that a secret ought to be told, have all come to utter ruin.” And
he recited these stanzas, proclaiming a higher doctrine:
“ The secrecy of a secret is always good, nor is it well to divulge a secret.
When a tiling is not accomplished the wise man should keep it to himself: when
he has accomplished his aim let him speak an he will. One should not disclose
. a secret thing, but should guard it like a treasure; for a secret thing is not well
repealed by the prudent. Not to a woman would the wise man tell a secret, not
to a foe, nor to one who can be enticed by self-interest, nor for affection’s sake.
He who discloses a secret thing unknown, through fear of broken confidence
must endure to be the other’s slave. As many as are those who know a man’s
secret, so many are his anxieties: therefore one should not disclose a secret
Go apart to tell a secret by day; by night in a soft whisper: [389] for listeners
hear the words, therefore the words soon come out1.”
When the king heard the Great Being speak he was angry, and
thought he, “ These men, traitors themselves to their king, make out that
the wise‘man is traitor to me!” Then he said, “Go drive them out of the
town, and impale them or cleave their heads ! ” So they bound their
hands behind them, at every street corner gave them a hundred blows.
But as they were dragged along, the sage said, “ My lord, these are your
ancient ministers, pardon them their fault! ” The king consented, and
gave them to be his slaves. He set them free at once. Then the king
said, “Well, they shall not live in my dominion,” and ordered that they
should be banished. But the sage begged him to pardon their blind folly,
and appeased him, and persuaded him to restore their positions. The
king was much pleased with the sage: if this were his tender mercy
towards his foes, what must it be to others' Thenceforward the four
wise men, like snakes witp their teeth drawn and their poison gone, could
not find a word to say, we are told.
Here endeth the Question of the Five Wise Men, and likewise the
Story of Calumny2.
After this time he used to instruct the king in things temporal and
spiritual: and he thought, “ I am indeed the king’s white parasol ; it is I
manage the kingdom : [390] vigilant I must therefore be.” He caused a
great rampart to be built for the city- Along the rampart were watch-
towers at the sates, and between the watch-towers he dug three moats—
a water-moat, a mud-moat, and a dry-moat. Within the city ho caused all
the old houses to be restored : large banks were dug and made reservoirs
for water ; all the storehouses wore tilled with corn. All the confidential
priests had to bring down from Himavat mud and edible lily-seeds. The .
water conduits were cleaned out, and the old houses outside were also
restored. This was done as a defence against future dangers. Merchants
who came from one place or another were asked whence they came; and
on their replying, thev were asked what their king liked; when this was
1 See v. 81 (trans., p- 45).
2 Pancapandita-paiiho: Paribhiiuhina-knlhd.

‘ G°t&X
f (1)1 ., <SL
The Jdtaha. Booh XXII.
told, they were kindly treated before they went away. Then he sent for a
hundred and one soldiers and said to them, “ My men, take these gifts to
the hundred and one royal cities, and give them to their several kings to
please them : live there in their service, listen to their actions and plans,
and send me word. I will care for your wives and children.” And he
sent with them earrings for some, and golden slippers for others, a..d
golden necklets for others, with letters engraved upon them, which he
appointed to reveal themselves when it should suit his purpose. The men
went this way and that, and gave these gifts to the kings, saying that they
were come to live in their service. When asked whence they came, they
told the names of other places than that from which they had really
come. Their offer accepted, they remained there in attendance, and made
themselves to be trusted.
Now in the kingdom of Ekabala was a king named Saihkhapala, who
was collecting arms and assembling ail army. The man who had come to
him sent a message to the sage, saying, “This is the news here, but what
he intends I know not; send and find out the truth of the matter. Then
the Great Being called a parrot and said, “ Friend, go and find out what
King Sainkhapala is doing in Ekabala, [391] then travel over all India
and bring me the news.” He fed it with honey and grain, and gave it
sweet water to drink, anointed the joints of the wings with oil a hundred
and a thousand times refined, stood by the eastern window, and let it go.
The parrot went to the man aforesaid and found out the truth. As he
passed back through India he came to Uttarapaficala city in the kingdom
of Kampilla. There was reigning a king named Cftlani-Brahmadatta, who
had for spiritual and temporal adviser a brahmin Kevatta, wise and learned.
The brahmin one morning awoke at dawn, and looking by the light of the
lamp upon his magnificent chamber, as he regarded its splendour, thought,
“T, i whom does this splendour belong 1 To no one but to Culani-Brahma­
datta. A king who gives splendour like this ought to be the chief king
in all India, and I will be his chaplain-in-chief.” And so early in the
morning he went to the king, and when he had enquired whether he had
slept well, he said, “My lord, there is something I wish to say.” “Say
on, teacher.” “ My lord, a secret cannot bo told in the town, let us go
into the park.” “ Very well, teacher.” The king went to the park with
him, and left the retinue without, and set a guard, and entered the park
with the brahmin, and sat down upon the royal seat. The parrot, seeing
this, thought that there must be something afoot; “ io-day 1 shall lioai
something which must be sent to my wise master.” So he flew into the
and perched
park, amid the leaves of the royal sal-tree. Jim king said,
“ Speak on, teacher.” He said, “ Sire, bend your ear this way ; this is a
plan for four ears only. If, sire, you will do what I advise.. I will make
you chief king in all India.” The king heard him greedily, and answered

'(D? (fiT
'-v/ Aro. 546. 199 k^ J
^------.—.-------------------------------------------------:---------------------;—*6-------
well pleased, “Tell me, my teacher, and I will do it.” “My lord, let us
raise an army, and first besiege a small city. Then I will enter' the city
by a postern gate, and will say to the king, Sire, there is no use in your
fighting : just be our man; your kingdom you may keep, but if you fight
with our mighty force, [392] you will be utterly conquered. If he does1
wh xt I advise, we will receive him; if not, we will fight and kill him, and
with two armies go and take another city, and then another, and in this
way we shall gain dominion over all India and drink the cup of victory.
Then we will bring the hundred and one kings to our city, and make a
drinking booth in. the park, and seat them there, and provide them with
poisoned liquor, and so kill them all and cast them into the Ganges.
Thus we will get the hundred and one royal capitals into our hands, and
you will become chief king of all India.” “Very well, my teacher,” said
he, “ I will do so.” “ Sire, this plan is for four ears only, no one else
must know of it. Make no delay but set forth at once.” The king was
pleased with this advice and resolved to do so. The parrot which had
overheard all their conversation let fall on Kevatta’s head a lump of dung
as though it dropt from a twig. “ What’s that 1 ” cried he, looking
upwards with mouth gaping wide: whereupon the bird dropt another
into his mouth and flew off crying out, “ Cree cree ! O Kevatta, you think
your plan is for four ears only, but now it is for six; by and by it will
be for eight ears and for hundreds of them ! ” “ Catch him, catcli him !”
they cried; but swift as the wind he flew to, Mithila and entered the wise
man’s house. Now the parrot’s custom was this: If news from any place
was for the sage’s ears alone, he would perch on his shoulder; if Queen
Amara was also to hear it, he perched on his lap; if the company might
hear it, upon the ground. This time he perched on the shoulder, and at
that sign the company retired, knowing it to be secret. The sage took
him up to the top storey and asked him, “ Well, my dear, what have you
seen, what have you heard 1 ” He said, “ My lord, in no other king of all
India have I seen any danger; but only Kevatta, chaplain to Cujani-
Brahmadatta in the city of Uttarapaficala, took his king into the park and
told him a plan for their four ears: I was sitting amidst the branches and
dropt a ball of dung in his mouth, and here I am ! ” Then he told the
sage all he had seen and heard. [393] “ Did the king agree to it l” asked
he. “ Yes, he did,”'said the parrot. Bo the sage tended the bird as was
fitting, and put him in his golden cage strewn with soft rugs. He thought
to himself, “ Kevatta methinks does not know that I ant the wise Maho-
sadha. [ will not allow him to accomplish his plan.” Then he removed
outside all the poor people who lived in the city, and lie brought from all
the kingdom, the country side, and the suburb villages, and settled within
1 Reading karissati.

Wf,
((( (fiT
The JCitakci. Booh XXII.
the city the rich families of the powerful, and he gathered great quantities
of corn. . ,
And Culani-Brahmadatta did as Kevatta had proposed : he went with
his army and laid siege to a city. Kevatta, as he had suggested, went
into the city and explained matters to the king and won him over. Then
joining the two armies Culani-Brahmadatta followed Kevatta’s adv.cc
and went on to another kingdom, until lie had brought all the kings of
India under liis power except King Vedeha. The men provided by the
Bodhisat kept on sending messages to say, “ Brahmadatta has taken sue i
and such towns, be on your guard”; to which he replied, “ I am on my
guard here, be watchful yourselves without remissness.” In seven years
and seven months and seven days Brahmadatta gained possession of all
India excepting Yedelia. Then he said to Kevatta : “ Teacher, let us
seize the empire of Vedeha at Mithila!” “Sire,1’ he said, “we shall
never be able to get possession of the city where wise Mahosadha lives:
lie is full of this sorb of skill, very clever in device.” Then he expatiated
on the virtue of the Great Being, as though lie drew it on the disk of the
moon. Now he was himself very skilful in device, so he said, “Ihe
kingdom of Mithila is very small, and the dominion of all India is enough
for us.” Thus he consoled the king; but the other princes said, “No, we
will take the kingdom of Mithila and drink the cup of victory!" Kevatta
would have stayed them, saying, “ What good will it be to take Vedeha’s
kingdom i That king is our man already. Come back.’ Such was Ins
counsel; they listened to him and turned back. The Great Being’s men
sent him word that Brahmadatta with a hundred and one kings on his
way to Mithila turned back [394] and went to his own city. He sent
word in answer, that they were to observe what he did.
Now Brahmudatta deliberated with Kevatta what was next to do.
Hoping to drink the cup of victory, they adorned the park, and told the
servants to set out wine in thousands of jars, to prepare fish and flesh ot
all sorts. This news also the sage’s men sent to him. Now they did not
know of the plan to poison the kings, but the Great Being knew it from
what the parrot had told him ; he sent a message to them accordingly,
that they should inform him of the day lixt for this festival, and they did
so. Then he thought, “It is not right that so many kings should be
killed while a wise man like myself lives. I will help them. ’ He sent
for ten thousand warriors, his birth-fellows, and said, “ Friends, on such a
day Ofilani-Brah madatta, they tell me, wishes to adorn Ins park and to
drink wine with the hundred and one kings. Go ye thither, and before
anyone sits on the seats provided for the kings, take possession of the
seat of honour next to Culani-Brahmadatta, saying, This is for our king.
When they ask whose men you are, tell them King Vedeha’s. They will
make a great outcry and soy, What! for seven years and seven months

• ®oi&X
f )! * C
(t( ct
K^sJroS^*/ No. 546. 201kLJ-l^
and seven days we have been conquering kingdoms, and not once did we
see your king Vedeha ! What king is he? Go find him a seat at the
end! You must then squabble and say, Except Brahmadatta, no king
is above our king! If we cannot get even a seat for our king we will not
let you eat or drink now! So shouting and jumping about, terrify them
-ith the noise, break all the pots with your great clubs, scatter the food,
and make it unfit to eat, rush amongst the crowd at the top of your speed,
and make a din like titans invading the city of the gods, calling aloud,
We are the wise Mahosadha’s men of Mithila city: catch us if you
can ! Thus shew them that you are there, and then return to me.”
They promised to obey, [395] and took their leave; and, armed with the
five weapons, set off. They entered the decorated park like Nandana
Grove, and beheld all its magnificent array, the seats placed tor the
hundred and one kings, the white parasols outspread, and all the rest.
They did all as directed by the Great Being, and after causing contusion
amongst the crowd they returned to Mithila.
The king’s men told him what had happened : Brahmadatta was
angry, that such a fine plan to poison the princes had failed; whilst
the princes were angry, because they had been deprived of the cup ot
victory; and t he soldiers were angry, because they had lost the chance
of free drink. So Brahmadatta said to the princes, “ Come, friends, let us
go to Mithila, and cut off King Vedeha’s head with the sword, and trample
it underfoot, and then coino back and drink the cup of victory ! Go toll
your armies to get them ready.” Then going apart with Kevatta, he told
him about it, saying, “See, we shall capture the enemy who has threatened
this fine plan. With the hundred and one princes and the eighteen
complete armies we shall assail that town. Come, my teacher ! ’ But
the brahmin was wise enough to know that they could never capture the
sage Mahosadha, but all they would get would be disgrace; the king must
be dissuaded. So he said: “ Sire! this king of Vedeha has no strength; the
management is in the hands of the sage Mahosadha, and he is very
powerful. Guarded by him, as a lion guards his den, Mithila can be
taken by none. We shall only be disgraced : do not think of going.”
But the king, mad with soldier’s pride and the intoxication of empire,
cried out, “What will he do !” and departed, with the hundred and one
princes and the eighteen! complete armies1. Kevatta, unable to persuade
him to take his advice, and thinking that it was of no use to thwart him,
wont with him.
But those warriors came to Mithila in one night, and told the sago all
that had passed. And the men whom ho had before sent into service
sent, hint word, that Culani-Brahinaclatta was on his way with the hundred
and one kings to take King Vedeha ; he must be vigilant. The messages
1 “ Eighteen akklidhim’s,” each being 10,000,000'1.

' G°‘feX r
■
The Jdtcika. Book XXII.
' ___• __________
• •SQ&s'
came one after another: “ To-day he is in such a place, [396] to-day in
such a place, to-day he will reach the city.” On hearing this the Great
Being redoubled his care. And King Veclelm heard it noised about on
all sides that Brahmadatta was on his way to take the city. Now
Brahmadatta in the early evening surrounded the city by the light of
a hundred thousand torches. He girdled it with fences of elephants ano
of chariots and of horses, and at regular intervals placed a mass of
soldiers : there stood the men, shouting, snapping their fingers, roaring,
dancing, crying aloud. With the light of the torches and the sheen of the
armour the whole city of Mithila in its seven leagues was one blaze ol
light, the noise of elephants and horses, of chariots, and men made the
very earth to crack. The four wise men, hearing the waves of sound and
not knowing what it should be, went to the king and said, “Sire, there is
a great din, and we know not what it is: will the king enquire?”
Hereat the king thought, “No doubt Brahmadatta is come”; and he opened
a window, and looked out. When he saw that he was indeed come, the
king was dismayed, and said to them, “ We are dead men ! to-morrow he
will kill us all doubtless ! ” So they sat talking together. But when the
Great Being saw that he had come, fearless as a lion he set guards in all
the city, and then went up into the palace to encourage the king. Greet­
ing him, he stood on one side. The king was encouraged to see him, and
thought, “ There is no one can save me from this trouble except the wise
Mahosadha !” and he addressed him as follows :
“Brahmadatta of Pancala has come with all his host; this army of Paftcala
is infinite, 0 Mahosadha! Men with burdens on their backs', foot-soldiers,
men skilful in fight, men ready to destroy, a great din, the noise of drums and
conchs, here is all skill in the use of steel weapons, here are banners and knights
in mail, accomplished warriors and heroes ! Ten sages ace here, profound in
wisdom, secret in stratagem, and eleventh, the mother of the king2 encouraging
! jjilthimati (fein.): explained by sohol. as containing a force of carpenters laden
with all necessary materials.
- To explain this, the scholiast tells the following story.—Amongst those wise
men the king's mother, they say, was still more wise. One day a man set out to cross
over a river, holding a bundle of husked rice, a meal of boiled rice wrapt in a leaf, and
a thousand rupees. When he came to the mid-river he could get no further, and so he
called out to the men on the bank—“ See, I have in my hand a bundle of husked rice,
a leaf of boiled rice, and a thousand rupees; I will give whichever of these I like if
anyone will take me across.” Then a strong man girt up his loins and dived in,
caught the man by the hands and pulled him across. “Now,” quoth lie, "give me
my due.” “You may have the husked rice or the boiled rice," said the man.
[308] " What!” said ho, “I saved you without thinking of my own life! That is
not what I want—give me the money.” “I told you that 1 would give you what 1
liked, and now what I like I give you. Take it if you will. llie other told a by­
stander, aud he also said, “ The man gives you what he likes; then take it.” “ Not
I!” said the other, and complained before the judges of court. They all said the
same. The man discontented with this sentence complained to the king, who sent

t(M)•) (CT
No.
W - S ^ t / 5 4 6 . ' 2 0 3 l ’ l i
tbe host of Pancala. [397] Here are a hundred and one warrior-princes in
attendance, their kingdoms reft from them, terror-stricken and overcome by the
men of Pancala. What they profess that they do for the king ;—will they nill
they speak fair they must; with Pancala they go perforce, being in his power.
Mitliila the royal city is surrounded by this host arrayed with three intervals1,
digging about it on all sides. It is surrounded as it were by stars on all sides.
Think, Mahosadha ! How shall deliverance come 1”
[398] When the Great Being heard this, he thought, “ This king is
terribly in fear of his life. The sick man’s refuge is the physician,
[399] tbe hungry man’s is food, and drink the thirsty man’s, but I and
I alone am his refuge. I will console him.” Then, like a lion roaring
upon the Vermilion uplands2, he cried, “ Fear not, sire, but enjoy your
royal power. As I would scare a crow with a clod, or a monkey with a
. bow, I will scatter that mighty host, and leave them not so much as a
waistcloth of their own.” And he recited this stanza :
“ Stretch out your feet, eat and be merry : Brahmadatta shall leave the host
of Pancala and flee away.”
After encouraging the king, the wise man came out and caused the
drums of festival to beat about the city, with a proclamation—“Oyez!
Have no fear. Procure garlands, scents, and perfumes, food and drink,
and keep seven days’, holiday. Let the people stay where they will,
drink deep, sing and dance and make merry, shout and cheer and snap
their fingers: all be at my cost. I am the wise Mahosadha: behold my
power! ” Thus he encouraged the townsfolk. They did so: and those
without heard the sound of singing and musick. Men came in by the
postern gate. Now it was not their way to arrest strangers at sight,
except a foe; so the access was not closed. These men therefore saw the
people taken up with merrymaking. And Culani-Brahrnadatfca heard the
noise in the town, and said to his courtiers: “Look ye, we have encom­
passed this city with eighteen great hosts, and the people shew neither
for the judges and heard both sides, and knowing no better decision gave it against
the man who had risked his life. At this moment the king's mother, Queen Talata,
who sat near, hearing the king’s mistaken award, asked him if he had carefully
considered bis sentence. He replied, “ Mother, that is the best 1 can do; decide it
better if you can.” “And bo I will,” said she. Then she said to the man: “Friend,
put down on the ground the three things which you held in youi' hand; put them in
order. And tell me, when you were in the water what did you say?” He told her.
“ Mow then,” said she, “ take which you like.” He took up the money. As he began
to go away she asked him, “ So you like the money?” “Yes." “And did you, or
did you not say to the man, that you would give him which you liked? ” “ Yos, I did
say so.” “Then you must give him the money.” He gave it weeping and wailing.
Then king and courtiers applauded in great delight; and after this her wisdom became
noised abroad everywhere.
f *-lne between oaeli of the encircling bands and the wall.
Manotilutalam, in the Himalaya.

—'•NX
t(I)|
<SL
^ ^ ^ 2 0 4
The Jdtaka. Booh XXII.
fear nor anxiety : but full of delight and happiness they snap fingers, they
make merry, they leap and sing. What is the meaning of this 1 ” Then
the men sent aforetime to foreign service spoke falsely as follows: “ My
lord, we entered the city by the postern on some business, and seeing the
people all taken up in merrymaking we asked, [400] Why are you so
careless when all the kings of India are here besieging your city? 'And
they replied, When our king was a boy he had a wish to hold festival
when all the kings of India should have besieged the city; and now that
wish is fulfilled : therefore he sent round a proclamation, and himself
keeps festival in the palace.” This made the king angry ; and he sent
out a division of his army with these orders: “Disperse all about the
city, fill up the trenches, break down the walls, raze the gate-towers,
enter the city, use the people’s heads like pumpkins cast on a cart, and
bring me here the head of King Vedeha.” Then the mighty warriors,
armed with all manner of weapons, marched up to the gate, assisted by
the .sage’s men with red-hot missiles1, showers of mud, and stones thrown
upon them. When they were in the ditch attempting to destroy the wall,
the men in the gate-towers dealt havock with arrows, javelins, and spears.
The sage’s men mocked and jeered at the men of Brahmadatta, with
gestures and signs of the hands, and crying, “ If you can’t take us, have
a bite or a sup, do 1 ” and holding out bowls of toddy and skewers with
meat or fish, which they ate and drank themselves, and promenaded the
walls. The others quite unsuccessful returned to Cidani-Brahmadatta,
and said, “My lord, no one but a magician could get in.” The king
waited four or five days, not seeing how to take what he wanted to take.
Then lie asked Kevatta: “Teacher, take the city we cannot, not a man
can get near it! What’s to be done1?” “Never mind, your majesty.
The city gets water from outside, we will cut off the water and so take it.
They will bo worn out for want of water, and will open the gates.”
“ That is the plan,” said the king. After that, they hindered the people
from getting near the water. The wise man’s spies wrote on a leaf, and
fastened it on an arrow, and so sent word to him. Now he had already
given orders, that whosoever sees a leaf fastened upon an arrow [401] was
to bring it to him. A man saw this, and took it to the sage, who read
the message. “ Ho knows not that I am the sage Mahosadha,” he
thought. Procuring bamboo poles sixty cubits long, he had them split in
two, the knots removed, and then joined again, covered over with leather,
aud smeared with mud. He then sent for the soil and lily-seed brought
from Himavat by the hermits, he planted the seed in the mud by the edge
of the tank, and placed the bamboo over it, and filled it with water. In
one night it grew up and flowered, rising a fathom above the top of the
do not understand and the variety of readings suggests a corruption here
1 1 mula,
Some suit of missile is wanted, sand perhaps, or red-hot metal. is red-hot.
Pukka

f l f . ' VSL
iV o . 5 4 6 . . 2 0 5
bamboo. Then he pulled it up and gave it to his men with orders to take
it to Bralimadatta. They rolled up the stalk, and threw it over the wall,
cryiug out, “ Ho servants of Bralimadatta ! don’t starve for want of food.
Here you are, wear the flower and fill your bellies with the stalk ! ” One
of the wise man’s spies picked it up, and brought it to the king, and said,
feee, your majesty, the stalk of this lily : never was so long a stalk seen
before ' “ Measure it,'’ said the king. They measured it and made it
out to be eighty fathoms instead of sixty. The king asked, “ Where did
that grow ? One replied with a made-up tale : “ One day, my lord,
being thirsty for a little toddy, I went into the city by the postern, and
I saw the great tanks made for the people to play in. There was a
number of people in a boat plucking flowers. That was where this grew
by the edge of the tank; but those which grew in the deep water would
- be a hundred cubits high.” Hearing this the 'king said to Kevatta,
“Teacher, we cannot take them by cutting off the water; make an end
of that attempt.” “Well,” said he, “ then we will take them by cutting
off their food; the city gets its food from outside.” “Very good, teacher.”
The sage learnt this as before, and thought, “He does not know that I am
the sage Mahosadha!” Along the rampart he laid mud and there planted
rice. Now the wishes of the Bodhisats always do succeed: in one night
the rice sprang up and shewed over the top of the rampart. [402] This
Bralimadatta saw, and asked, “ Friend, what is that which shews green
above the rampart ? ” A scout of the sage’s replied, as though catching
the words from the king’s lips, “ My lord, Mahosadha the farmer’s son,
foreseeing danger to come, collected from all the realm grain with which
he filled his granaries, throwing out the residue upon the ramparts. No
doubt this rice, warmed with the heat and soaked in the rain, grew up
there into plants. I myself one day went in by the postern on some
business, and picked up a handful of this rice from a heap on the rampart,
and dropt it in the street; whereupon the people laughed at me, and cried,
“ You’re hungry, it seems j tie up some of it in the corner of your robe, take
it home, and cook it and eat it.” Hearing this, the king said to Kevatta,
“Teacher, by cutting off the grain we shall not take this place; that
is not the way.” “ Then, my lord, we will take it by cutting oflf the
supply of wood, which the city gets from without.” “ S0 be it, teacher.”
The Bodhisat as before got to know of it; and he built a heap of firewood
which shewed beyond the rice. The people laughed at the Brahruadatta’s
men, and said, “If you are hungry, here is something to cook your food
with,” throwing down great logs of wood as they said it. The king asked,
What is this firewood shewing above the rampart?” The scouts said,
the farmer’s son, foreseeing danger to come, collected firewood, and
stored it m the sheds behind the houses; what was over he stacked by the
lam part side. ’ Then the king said to Kevatta, “Teacher, we cannot take

I I I ' v .. <SL
■X<2S)6 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
the place by cutting off the wood ; enough of that plan.” “ Never mind,
sire, I have another plan.” “ What is that plan, teacher? I see no end
to your plans. Videha we cannot take; let us go back to our city."
«< My lord, if it is said that Culani-Brahniadatta with a hundred and one
princes could not take Videha, we shall be disgraced. Mahosadha is not
the only wise man, for I am another: I will use a stratagem. V li t
stratagem, teacher?” “We will have a Battle of the Law.” [403] “What
do you mean by that?” “Sire, no army-shall fight. The two sages
of the two kings shall appear in one place, and of these whichever shall
salute the other shall be conquered. Mahosadha does not know this idea.
I am older and he is younger, and when ho sees me he will salute me.
Thus we shall conquer Vedeha, and this done we will return home, bo
we shall not be disgraced. That is what is meant by a Battle of the
Law.” But the Bodhisat learnt this secret as before. “ If I let Kevatta
conquer me thus,” he thought, “ I am no sage.” Brahmadatta said,
“A capital plan”: and he wrote a letter and sent it to Vedeha by t c
postern, to this effect: “To-morrow there shall be a Battle of the Law
between the two sages; and he who shall refuse to fighfc shall be accounted
vanquished.” On receipt of this Vedeha sent for the sage and told him.
He answered, “Good, my lord: send word to prepare a place for the
Battle of the Law by the western gate, and there to assemble bo he
«ave a letter to the messenger, and next day they prepared t ie p ace
for the Battle of the Law to see the defeat of Kevatta. But the hundred
and one princes, not knowing what might befall, surrounded Kevat^i to
protect him. These princes went to the place prepared, and stood looking
towards the east, and there also was the sage Kevatta. But early in t le
morning, the Bodhisat bathed in sweet-scented water, and clothed himse
i„ a Kasi robe worth a hundred thousand pieces, and adorned himself
fully, and after a dainty breakfast went with a great following to the
palace-gate. Bidden to enter, he did so, and greeted the king, and sat
down-on one side. “ Well, sage Mahosadha?” said the king. “1 am
going to the place of the Battle.” “ And what am I to do ? ” “ My lord,
I wish to conquer Kevatta with a gem; I must have the eight-sided
ffem ” “ Take it, my son.” He took it, and took his leave, and surrounded
by the thousand warriors, his birtlimates, [404] he entered the noble
chariot drawn by a team of white thorobreds, worth ninety thousand
pieces of money, and at the time of the mid-day meal he came to
the gate. . ,.. .
Kevatta stood watching for Ids arrival, and saying, “ Now he comes
now he comes,” craning his neck till it seemed to be lengthened, and
sweating in the heat of the son. The Great Being with hi.retinmg like
an inundating sea, like a roused lion, fearh« «><l * * * * * m m d he
„sto to he opened and came forth from the city; descending from hie

0 -
% \ ■ "
No. 546. ■* 207 iS L
chariot like a lion aroused, he went forward. The hundred and one
princes beholding his majesty, acclaimed him with thousands of cries,
“ Here is the sage Mahosadha, son of Sirivaddka, who hath no peer for
wisdom in all India!” And he like Sakka surrounded with his troop of
gods, in glory and grandeur unparalleled, holding in his hand the precious
gem, stood before Kevatta. And Kevatta at first sight of him had not
force to stand still, but advanced to meet him, and said, “Sage Mahosadha,
we are sages both, and although I have been dwelling near you all this
time, you have never yet sent rue so much as a gift. Why is this 1 ” The
Great Being said, “ Wise sir, I was looking for a gift which should be not
unworthy of you, and to-day I have found this gem. Pray take it; there
is not its like in the world.” The other seeing the gem ablaze in his
hand, thought that he must be desiring to offer it, and said, “Give it me
then,” holding out his hand. “ Take it,” said the Great Being, and dropt
it upon the tips of the fingers of his outstretched hand. But the brahmin
could not support the weight of the gem in his fingers, and it slipt down
and rolled to the Bodhisat’s feet; the brahmin in his greed to get it,
stooped down to the other’s feet. Then the Great Being would not let
him rise, but with one hand held his shoulderblades and with the other his
loins, as he cried, “ Rise teacher, rise, I am younger than you, young
enough to be your grandson; do no obeisance to me.” As he said this
again and again, he rubbed his face and forehead against the ground, till it
was all bloody, then with the words “ Blind fool, did you think to have an
obeisance from me?” [405] he caught him by the throat and threw him
away from himself. He fell twenty fathoms away; then got up and ran
off. Then the Great Being’s men picked up the gem, but the echo of the
Bodhisat’s words, “ Rise up, rise, do no obeisance to me 1” rose above the
din of the crowd. All the people shouted aloud with one voice, “Brahmin
Kevatta did obeisance to the sage’s feet! ” And the kings, Brahmadatta
and all, saw Kevatta bowed before the feet of the Great Being. “Our
sage,” they thought, “ has done obeisance to the Great Being ; now we are
concpiered ! he will make an end of us all ”; and each mounting his
horse they began to flee away to Uttarapaficala, The Bodhisat’s men
seeing them flee, again made a clamour, crying, “ Culaiu-Brahmadatta is
in flight with his hundred and one princes ! ” Hearing this, the princes
terrified more and more, ran on and scattered the great host; while the
Bodhisat’s men, shouting and yelling, made a yet louder din. The Great
Being with his retinue returned to the city; while Brahmadatta’s army
ran in rout for three leagues. Kevatta mounted upon a horse came up
with the army wiping off the blood from his forehead, and cried, “ Ho
there, do not run ! I did not bow to the churl! Stop, stop ! ” But the
army would not stoi>, and made mock of Kevatta, reviling bim, “ Man of
sin! villain brahmin ! You would make a Battle of the Law, and then

The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
1
\ v l y S y i i 0 8 ... n i l
'v y ^ ."y* -______________________________________________________________________—______________
bow before a stripling young enough to be your grandson ! Is not this a
thing most unmeet for you ! ” They would not listen to him, but went on.
He dashed on into the army, and cried, “ Ho you, you must believe me, I
did not bow to him, he tricked me with a gem 1 ” So by one means
or another, he convinced the princes and made them believe him, and
rallied the broken army.
Now so great was this host, that if each man of them had taken a clod
or a handful of earth and thrown it into the moat, they could have filled
the moat and made a heap as high as the rampart. But we know that the
intentions of the Bodhisats are fulfilled; and there was not one who threw
a clod or a handful of earth towards the city. They all returned back to
their position. [40G] Then the king asked Kevatta, “What are we to do,
teacher 1 ” “ My lord, let no one come out from the postern, and cut off
all access. The people unable to come out will be discouraged and will
open the gate. Thus we shall capture our enemies.” The sage was
informed as before of the matter, and thought: “If they stay here long we
shall have no peace; a way must be found to get rid of them. I will
devise a stratagem to make them go.” So he searched for a man clever
in such things, and found one named Anukevatta. To him he said,
“Teacher, I have a thing which I want you to carry out.” “What am I
to do, wise sir 1 Tell me.” “ Stand on the rampart, and when you see our
men incautious, immediately let down cakes, fish, meat, and other food to
Brahmadatta’s men, and say, Here, eat this and this, don’t be down­
hearted; try to stay here a few days longer; before long the people will
be like hens in a coop and will open the gate of themselves, and then you
will be able to capture Vedeha and that villain of a farmer’s son. Our
men when they hear this, with harsh upbraiding, will bind you hand and
foot in the sight of Brahmadatta’s army, and will pretend to beat you with
bamboos, and pull you down, and tying your hair in five knots1 will
daub you with brickdust, put a garland of kanavera2 upon you,
belabour you soundly until weals rise on your back, take you up on the
rampart, tie you up, and let you down by a rope to Brahmadatta’s men,
crying out, Go, traitor! Then you will be taken before Brahmadatta, and
he will ask your offence; you must say to him, Great king, once I
was held in great honour, but the farmer’s son denounced me to my king
for a traitor and robbed me of all. I wished to make the man shorter by
a head who had ruined me, and in pity for the despondency of your
men [407] I gave them food and drink. For that, with the old grudge in
his heart, he brought this destruction upon me. Your own men, 0 king,
know all about it. Thus by one means or another you must win the
king’s confidence, and then say to him : Sire, now you have me, trouble
1 See v. 2ffd, trans., v. p. 125, note 2.
5 Perhaps Sanscr. karavtra. See iv. IB), note 1 (trans.).

)% '
« ( f (CT
No. 546. 209 o l i
no more. Now Yedeha and the farmer’s son are dead men ! I know the
strong places and the weak places of the ramparts in this city. I know
where crocodiles are in the moat and where they are not; before long
I will bring the city into your hands. The king will believe you and do
you honour, and will place the army in your charge. Then you must
bring down the army into the places infested by snakes and crocodiles;
the ai-my in fear of the crocodiles will refuse to go down. You must then
say to the king, Your army, my lord, has been corrupted by the farmer’s
son; there is not a man of them, not even teacher Kevatta and the
princes, who has not been bribed. They just walk about guarding you,
they are all the creatures of the farmer’s son, and I alone am your man.
If you do not believe me, order the kings to come before you in full
dress; then examine their dresses, their ornaments, their swords, all
given them by the farmer’s son and insci’ibed with his name, and assure
yourself. He will do so, and make sure, and in fear will dismiss the
princes. Then he will ask you what is to be done 1 and you must reply,
My lord, the farmer’s son is full of resource, and if you stay here a few
days he will gain over all the army and capture yourself. Make no delay,
but this very night in the middle watch let us take horso and depart, that
we die not in the enemy’s hands. He will follow your advice; and while
he flees away you must return and tell my people.” Thereupon
Anukevatta replied, “ Good, wise sir, I will do your bidding.” “ Well
then, you must put up-with a few blows.” [408] “Wise sir, do what you
will with my body, only spare my life and my limbs.”
Then after shewing all respect to Anukevatta’s family, he caused him
to be roughly handled in this manner and handed him over to
Brahmadatta’s men. The king tested him, and trusted him, honoured
him and gave him charge of the army; he brought the army down to
the places which were infested by snakes and crocodiles; and the men
terrified by the crocodiles, and wounded by arrows, spears, and lances cast
by soldiers who stood upon the battlements, thus perished, after which
none were so brave as to approach. Then Anukevatta approached the
king, and said to him, “0 great king, there is not a man to fight for you:
all have been bribed. If you do not believe me, send for the princes, and
see the inscriptions upon their garments and accoutrements.” This the king
did ; and seeing inscriptions upon all their garments and accoutrements, he
felt sure that indeed these had taken bribes. “Teacher,” he said, “what’s to
be done now1?” “My lord, there’s nothing to be done; if you delay, the
farmer’s son will capture you. Sire, if the teacher Kevatta does walk
about with a sore on his forehead, yet he also has taken his bribe; he
accepted that precious gem, and made you run in rout for three leagues,
and then won your confidence again and made you return. He is a
traitor! I would not obey him a single night; this very night in the
J. vi. 14

' G°i^X
t c p <
s l
0 The Jataka. Book XXII.
middle watcli you should escape. You have not a friend hut me.
“Then, teacher, get my horse and chariot ready yourself.” Finding that
the king was assuredly bent on escape, he encouraged him and hade him
fear nothing ; then he went out and told the scouts that the king was to
escape that night, let them not think of sleep. He next prepared , the
king’s horse, arranging the reins so that the more he pulled the faster the
horse would go; and at midnight he said, “My lord, your horse is ready;
see, it is time.” The king mounted the horse and fled. Anukevatta also
got on horseback, as though to go with him, but after going a little way
he turned back; and the king’s horse, by the arrangement of its reins,
[409] pull as the king would, went on. Then Anukevatta came amongst
the army, and shouted with a loud voice, “ Culani-Brahmadatta has fled!”
The scouts and their attendants cried out too. The other princes, hearing
the noise, thought in their terror, “Sage Mahosadha must have opened the
gate and come out; we shall all be dead men ! ” Giving but a look at all
the materials of their use and enjoyment1, away they ran. The men
shouted the louder, “The princes are in rout!” Hearing the noise, all
the others who stood at the gate and on the towers shouted and clapt
their hands. Then the whole city within and without was one great roar,
as though the earth cleft asunder, or the great deep were broken up,
whilst the innumerable myriads of that mighty host in mortal terror,
without refuge or defence, cried aloud, “ Brahmadatta is taken by
Mahosadha with the hundred and one kings!” Away they ran in iout,
throwing down even their waistclothes. The camp was empty. Culani-
Brahmadatta entered his own city with the hundred and one chiefs.
Next morning, the soldiers opened the city gates and went forth, and
seeing the great booty, reported it to the Great Being, asking what they
were to do. He said, “The goods which they have left are ours. Give to
our king that which belonged to the princes, and bring to me that which
belonged to Kevatta and the other private persons; all the rest let the
citizens take.” It took half a month to remove the jewels of price and
valuable goods, four months for the rest. The Great Being gave great
honour to Anukevatta. From that day the citizens of Mithila had plenty
of gold.
Now Brahmadatta and those kings had been a year in the city of
Uttarapaucala; when one day, Kevatta, looking upon his face in a mitioi,
saw the scar on his forehead and thought, “That is the doing of the
farmer’s son: he made me a laughingstock before all those kings! ”
Anger arose in him. “ How can I manage to see his back ? he thought.
“Ah, here is a plan. Our king’s daughter, Paficalacandl [410] is peerless
in beauty, like a divine nymph; I will shew her to King Vcdeha. He
1 upabhoyaparihhoga-: this compound occurs in Jit. n. 481*, and in Buddhist
Sanskrit: (jikeasamuccayo 648, 6821, 891--

|( I ) | <SL
No. 546. 211
will be caught by desire like a fish that has swallowed the hook: I will
land him and Mahosadha with him, and kill them both, and drink the cup
of victory! ” With this resolve, he approached the king. “ My lord,”
said he, “I have an idea.” “ Yes, teacher, your idea left me once without
a rag to cover me. What will you do now? Hold your peace.” “ Sire,
there never was a plan equal to this.” “ Speak on, then.” “ Sire, we two
must be alone.” “ So be it.” The brahmin took him into an upper
storey, and said, “Great king! I will attract King Vedelia by desire, to
bring him here, and kill him.” “ A good plan, teacher, but how are we to
arouse his desire?” “Sire, your daughter Paficalacandi is peerless in
beauty ; we will have her charms and accomplishments celebrated in verse
by poets, aud have those poems sung in Mithila. When we find that he
is saying to himself, If the mighty monarch Vedeha cannot get this pearl
of maidens, what is his kingdom to him ? and that he is caught in the
attraction of the idea, I will go and fix a day; on the day fixt by me he
will come, like a fish that has swallowed the hook, and the farmer’s son
with him; then we will kill them.” This pleased the king, and he
agreed: “A fine plan that, my teacher! so we will do.”
But a maynah bird, that watched the king’s bed, took note of it.
And so the king sent for clever poets, and paid them richly, and
shewed them his daughter, bidding them make a poem on her beauty; and
they made songs of exceeding great sweetness, and recited them to the
king. He rewarded them richly. Musicians learnt these songs from the
poets, and sang them in public, and thus they were spread abroad.
When they had been spread abroad, the king sent for the singers, and
said, “ My children, climb into the trees by night with some birds, sit
there and sing, and, in the morning, [411] tie bells about their necks, let
them fly, and come down.” This he did that the world might say, the
very gods sing the beauty of the King of Pancala’s daughter. Again the
king sent for these poets, and said to them, “ My children, make poems to
this effect, that such a princess is not for any king in all India save
Vedeha King of Mithila, praising the king’s majesty and the girl’s
beauty.” They did so, and reported it; the king paid them well, and
told them to go to' Mithila and sing in the same way. They went to
Mithila, singing these songs on the way, and there sang , them in public.
Crowds of people heard the songs, and amidst loud applause paid them
well. At night they would climb into the trees and sing, and, in the
morning, tied bells about the birds’ necks before they came down. People
heard the sound of the bells in the air, and all the city rang with the
news, that the very gods were singing the beauty of the king’s daughter.
The king hearing of it sent for the poets, and made an audienoe in his
palace. He was to think that they wanted to give him the peerless
daughter of King Cfxlani. So he paid them well, and they came back and
14—2

I I I ,
<SL
] 2 The Jataka. Booh XXII.
told Brahmadatta. Then Kevatta said to him, “Now, sire, ’tis time for
me to go and settle the day.” “ Very good, teacher, what must you take
with you?” “A little present.” He gave it. The other went with it,
accompanied by a large following, to Yedeha’s kingdom. On his arrival
being made known, all the city was in an uproar: “ King Culani and
Vedeha, they say, will strike a friendship; Culani will give his daughter
to our king, and Kevatta, they say, is coming to fix a day.” King
Vedeha also heard this; and the Great Being heard it, and thought, “I
like not his coming; I must find out about it exactly.” So he sent word
to spies that lived with Culani. They replied, “We do not quite
understand this business. The king and Kevatta were sitting and
talking in the royal bedchamber; but the maynah which watches the
bedchamber will know about it.” On hearing this, the Great Being
thought: [412] “That our enemies may not have an advantage, 1 will
parcel out the whole city and decorate it, and not allow Kevatta to see it.
So from the city gate to the palace, and from the palace to his own house,
on both sides of the road he erected lattice-work, and covered all over
with mats, covered all with pictures, scattered flowers upon the ground,
set jars full of water-in place, hung flags and banners. Kevatta as he
entered the city could not see its arrangements; he thought the king bad
decorated it for his sake, and did not understand that it had been done
that he might not see. When he came before the king, he offered his
gift, and with a courteous greeting sat down on one side. Then after
an honourable reception, he recited two stanzas, to announce the reason
of his arrival:
“A king who wishes for thy friendship sends thee these precious things:
now let worthy sweet-spoken ambassadors come from that place; jet them
utter gentle words which shall give pleasure, and let the people of Pancala and
Videha bo one.”
“Sire,” lie went on, “he would have sent another* in place of me, but
me he sent, feeling sure that no other could tell the tale so pleasantly as I
should do. Go, teacher, quoth he, win over the king to look favourably
upon it, and bring him back with you. Now, sire, go, and you shall
receive an excellent and beautiful princess, and thei’e shall be friendship
established between our king and you.” The king was pleased at this
proposal; he was attracted by the idea that he should receive a princess of
peerless beauty, and replied, “ Teacher, there was a quarrel between you
and the wise Mahosadha at the Battle of the Law. Now go and see my
son ; [413] you two wise men must make up your differences ; and after a
talk together, come back.” Kevatta promised to go and see the sage, and
he went.
Now the Great Being that day, determined to avoid talking with this
man of sin, in the morning drank a little ghee; they smeared the floor

i f )| <SL
^SLi^y No.
5 4 6 . '■ 2 1 3
with wet cow-dung, and smeared the pillars with oil; all chairs and seats
they removed except one narrow couch on which he lay. To his servants
he gave orders as follows: “When the brahmin begins to talk, say,
Brahmin, do not talk with the sage; he has taken a dose of ghee to-day.
And when I make as though to talk with him, stop me, saying, My lord,
you have taken a dose of ghee—do not talk.” After these instructions
the Great Being covered himself with a red robe, and lay down on his
couch,1 after posting men at the seven gate-towers1. Kevatta, reaching the
first gate, asked where the wise man was 1 Then the servants answered,
“Brahmin, do not make much noise; if you wish to go in, go silently.
To-day the sage has taken ghee, and he cannot stand a noise.” At the
ether gates they told him the same thing. When he came to the seventh
gate, he entered the presence of the sage, and the sage made as though to
- speak : but they said, “ My lord, do not talk; you have taken a strong
dose of ghee—why should you talk with this wretched brahmin!” So
they stayed him. The other came in, but could not find where to sit, nor
a place to stand by the bed. He passed over the wet cow-dung and stood.
Then one looked at him and rubbed his eyes, one lifted his eyebrow, one
scratched his elbow. When he saw this, he was annoyed, and said, “Wise
sir, I am going.” Another said, “ Ha, wretched brahmin, don’t make a
noise! If you do, I’ll break your bones for you! ” Terrified he looked
back, when another struck him on the back with a bamboo stick, another
caught him by the throat and pushed him, another slapt him on the back,
until he departed in fear, like a fawn from the panther’s mouth, and
returned to the palace.
Now the king thought: [414] “To-day my son will be pleased to hear
the news. What a talking there will be between the tvyo wise men
about the Law! To-day they will be reconciled together, and I shall be
tbe gainer.” So when he saw Kevatta, he recited a stanza, asking about
their conversation together:
“ How did your meeting with Mahosadha come off, Kevatta ? Pray tell me
that. Was Mahosadha reconciled, was he pleased 1 ”
To this Kevatta replied, “Sire, you think that is a wise man, but there
is not another man less good,” and he recited a stanza:
“ He is a man ignoble of nature, lord of men ! disagreeable, obstinate, wicked
in disposition, like one dumb or deaf :■ he said not a word.”
This displeased the king, but he found no fault. He provided Kevatta
and his attendants with all that they needed apd a. house to live in, and
bade him go and rest. After he had sent him away the king thought
3 sattamesu meanB seventh; there seems to be a confusion of two versions, one of
which is repiosentod hy the Burmese story, 11 He lay down in the innermost of the
seven closets on the ground floor.” So CM.

■ eo^X
t ( f) | <SL
214
The JdtoJca. Book XXII.
to himself, “My son is wise, and knows well how to be courteous; yet he
would not speak courteously to this man and did not want to see him.
Surely he must have seen cause for some apprehension in the future!” and
he composed a stanza of his own:
“ Verily this resolution is very hard to understand; a clear issue has been
foreseen by this strong man. Therefore my body is shaken : who shall lose his
own and fall into the hands of his foe l ”
[415] “No doubt my son saw some mischief in the brahmin’s visit. He
will have come here for no friendly purpose. He must have wished to
attract me by desire, and make me go to his city, and there capture
me. The sage must have foreseen some danger to come.” As he was
turning over these thoughts in his mind, with alarm, the four wise men
came in. The king said to Senaka, “Well, Senaka, do you think I ought
to go to the city of Uttarapancala and marry King Oulanfs daughter?”
He replied, “ 0 sire, what is this you say ! When luck comes your way,
who would drive it off with blows? If you go there and marry her, you
will have no equal save Culanl-Brahmadatta in all India, because you will
have married the daughter of the chief king. The king knows that the
other princes are his men, and Vedeha alone is his peer, and so desires to
give you his peerless daughter. Do as he says and we also shall receive
dresses and ornaments.” When the king asked the others, they all said
the same. And as they were thus conversing, Brahmin Ivevafta came
from his lodging to take his leave of the king, and go; and he said, “Sire,
I cannot linger here, I would go, prince of men!” The king shewed him
respect, and let him go.
When the Great Being heard of his departure, he bathed and dressed
and went to wait on the king, and saluting him sat on one side. Thought
the king: “Wise Mahosadha my son is great and full of resource, he
knows past, present and future; he will know whether I ought to go or
not”; yet befooled by passion he did not keep to his first resolve, but
asked bis question in a stanza :
“All six have one opinion, and they are sages supreme in wisdom. To go or
not to go, to abide here—Mahosadha, tell me your opinion also.”
[416] At this the sage thought, “This king is exceedingly greedy
in desire : blind and foolish he listens to the words of these four. I will
tell him the mischief of going and dissuade him.” So he repeated four
stanzas:
“Do you know, great king: mighty and strong is King Cfllaul-Brahmadatta,
and he wants you to kill, as a hunter catches the deer by decoy. As a fish
greedy for food does not recognize the hook hidden in the bait, or a mortal his
greedy
dearth, so you O king, Ita desire, do not recognize C'ukm’s daughter, you,
mortal, your own death. Go to Pan cal a, and in a little time you will destroy
yourself, as a deer caught on the road comes into great danger. ’

(f )| <SL
iV o . 5 4 6 . , 2 1 5 ^
[417] At this heavy rebuke1, the king was angry. “The man thinks
I am his slave,” he thought, “he forgets I am a king. He knows that the
chief king has sent to offer me his daughter, and says not a word of good
wishes, but foretells that I shall be caught and killed like a silly deer or a
hsh that swallows the hook or a deer caught on the road!” and immediately
he recited a stanza :
“ I was foolish, I was deaf and dumb, to consult you on high matters. How
can you understand things like other men, when you grew up hanging on to the
plow-tail?” J o i o o
AVith these opprobrious words, he said, “This clodhopper is hindering
my good luck ! away with him !” and to get rid of him he uttered this
stanza: Hi
“lake this fellow by the neck and rid my kingdom of him, who speaks
to hinder my getting a jewel.”
But he, seeing the king’s anger, thought, “ If any one at the bidding of
this king seize me by hand or by neck, or touch me, I shall be disgraced
to my dying day ; therefore I will go of myself.” [118] So he saluted the
king and went to his house. Now the king had merely spoken in anger :
but out of respect for the Bodhisat he did not command any one to carry
out his words. Then the Great Being thought, “This king is a fool, he
knows not his own profit or unprofit. He is in love • and determined to
get that princess, he does not perceive the danger to come j he will go to
his ruin. I ought not to let his words lie in my mind. He is my great
benefactor, and has done me much honour. I must have confidence in
him. But first I will send the parrot and find out the facts, then I will
go myself.” So he sent the parrot.
To explain this the Master said :
“Then he went out of Yedeha’s presence, nnd spake to'his messenger,
M&thara [sic] the clever parrot: * Gome, my green parrot, do a service for me!
The king of Pancala has a maynah that watches his bed; ask him in full for he
knows all, knows all the secret of the king and Kosiya.’ Matthara [.«<•] the
clever parrot listened, and went—the green parrot—to the maynah bird. Then
this clever parrot Mathara spake to the sweet-voiced maynah" in her fine cage:
‘Is all well with you in your fine cage? is all happy, O Vessfi2? Do they give
you parched honey-corn in your fine cage?’ ‘All is well with me, sir, indeed?all
is happy, they do give me parched honey-corn, 0 clever parrot. Why have you
come, sir, and why were you sent ? 1 never saw you or heard of you before.’ ”
[419] On hearing this, he thought: “If I say, I am come from Mithila,
for her life she will never trust me. On my way I noticed the town
Aritthapura in this kingdom of Sivi; so I will make up a false tale, how
the king of Sivi has sent me hither,” and he said—
I was King Sivi’s chamberlain in his palace, and from thence that righteous
mg set the prisoners free from bondage.”
1 Beading, as Pausbell suggests, atinujganhavte for -to.
salihO kiru sakitnetu pessajutikd, ntinui. Sohol.

?(S' G°l^X)|
<SL
\^T«2j5>216 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
[420] Then the ■ maynah gave him the honey-corn and honey-water
which stood ready for her in a golden dish, and said, “ Sir, you have come
a long way: what has brought you 1 ” He made up a tale, desirous to
learn the secret, and said,
“ I once had to wife a sweet-voiced maynah, and a hawk killed her before
my eyes.”
Then she asked, “ But how did the hawk kill your ’wife 1 ” He told
her this story. “ Listen, madam. One day our king invited me to join
him at a water-party. My wife and I went with him, and amused our­
selves. In the evening we returned with him to the palace. To dry our
feathers, my wife and I flew out of a window and sat on the top of a
pinnacle. At that moment a hawk swooped down to catch us as we were
leaving the pinnacle. In fear of my life I flew swiftly off; but she was
heavy then, and could not fly fast; hence before my eyes he killed her and
carried her off. The king saw me weeping for her loss, and asked me the
reason. On hearing what had occurred, he said, ‘ Lnough, friend, do not
weep, but look for another wife.’ I replied, ‘What need I, my lord,
to wed another, wicked and vicious! Better to live alone. He said,
‘ Friend, I know a bird virtuous like your wife; King Cidani’s chamber-
lain is a maynah like her. Go and ask her will, and let her reply, and if
she likes you come and tell me; then I or my queen will go with great
pomp and bring her back.’ With these words he sent me, and that is why
I am come.” And he said:
« p’uii of love for her I am come to you: if you give me leave we might dwell
together.”
[421] These words pleased her exceedingly; but without shewing her
feelings she said, as though unwilling:
“Parrot should love parrot, and maynah maynah: how can there be union
between parrot aud maynah ?”
The other hearing this thought, “ She does not reject me ; she is only
making much of herself. Indeed she loves me doubtless. I will find some
parables to make her trust me.” So he said—
“Whomsoever the lover loves, be it a low Oandall, all are alike: in love tlieie
is no unlikeuess.”
This said, he went on, to shew the measure of the differences in the
birth of men,
“ The mother of the king of Sivi is named Jambfivatl, and she was the beloved
queen consort of Vasudeva the Kanha.”
Now' the king of Sivi’s mother, Jambavatl, was ot the Candala caste,
and she was the beloved queen consort ot Vasudeva, one of the Kunhagana
clan the eldest of ton brothers. The story goes, that he one day went out
from Dvaravati into the park ; and on his way he espied a very beautiful

t(S )| <SL
546. 217
No.
girl, standing by the way, as she journeyed on some business from her
Candala village to town. He fell in love, and asked her birth; and on
hearing that she was a Candali, he was distressed. Finding that’ she was
unmarried, he turned back at once, and took her home, surrounded her
with precious things, and made her his chief queen. She brought forth a
sbn Sivi, who ruled in Dvaravati at his father’s death.
[422] After giving this example, he went on: “ Thus even a prince
such as he mated with a Candala woman; and what of us, who are but of
the animal kingdom ? If we like to mate together, there is no more to be
said.” And he gave another example as follows :
“ Rathavati, a fairy, also loved Vaccha, and the man loved the animal. In
love there is no unlikeness.
Ik
“Vaccha was a hermit of that name, and the way she loved him was
this. In times gone by, a brahmin, who had seen the evil of the passions,
left great wealth to follow the ascetic life, and lived in Himavat in a hut
of leaves which he made him. Not far from this hut in a cave lived a
number of fairies, and in the same place lived a spider. This spider used
to spin his web, and crack the heads of these creatures, and drink their
blood. Now the fairies were weak and timid, the spider was mighty and
very poisonous: they could do nothing against him, so they came to the
hermit, and saluted him, and told him how a spider was destroying them
and they could see no help; wherefore they begged him to kill the spider
and save them. But the ascetic drove them away, crying, “ Men like me
take no life!” A female of these creatures, named Rahavati, was un­
married ; and they brought her all finely arrayed to the hermit, and said,
“ Let her be your handmaiden, and do you slay our enemy.” When the
hermit saw her he fell in love, and kept her with him, and lay in wait for
the spider at the cave’s mouth, and as he came out for food killed him with
a club. So he lived with the fairy and begat sons and daughters on her,
and then died. Thus she loved him.”
The parrot, having described this example, said, “Vaccha the hermit,
although a man, lived with a fairy, who belonged to the animal world;
why should not we do the same, vTho both are birds'?”
When she heard him she said, “My lord, the heart is not always the
same: I fear separation from my beloved.” But he, beiiig wise and versed
in the wiles of women, further tested her with this stanza:
“ Verily I shall go away, 0 sweet-voiced maynah. This is a refusal; no
doubt you despise me.”
[423] Hearing this she felt as though her heart would break; but
before him she made as tnough she was burning with newly awakened
lov e, and recited a stanza anu a balf:
“ No luck for tlie hasty 0 wise parrot Mathara, Stay here until yoii shall
see the king, and hear the sound of tabours and see the splendour of our king.”

■ <SL
l i f t )
218 The Jataka. Booh XXII.
So when evening came they took their pleasure together; an<l they
lived in friendship and pleasure and delight. Then the parrot thougn
“ Now she will not hide the secret from me; now I must ask it of her and
go -Maynah,” quoth he. “ What is it, my lord?” “ I want to ask you
something; shall I say it?” “Say on, my lord.” “Never mind, to-day is
a festival; another day I will see about it.” “If it be suitable-to a
festival, say it, if not, my lord, say nothing.” “ Indeed, this is a thing ^
for a festival day.” “Then speak.” “If you will listen, I will speak.
Then he asked the secret in a stanza and a half:
“This sound so loud heard over the countryside—the daughter of the king
of Pancala, bright as a star-lie will give her to the Videhas, and this will .
be their wedding ! ”
T4241 When she heard this she said, “My lord ! on a day of festival
you have said a thing most unlucky!” “I say it is lucky, you say it
Is unlucky: what can this mean?” “I eannot tell you, my lord.
« Madam, from the time when you refuse to tell me a secret which you
know, our happy union ends.” Importuned by him she replied, Then,
my lord, listen :—
“ Let not even your enemies have such a wedding, Mathara, as there shall be
betwixt the kings of Pancala and \ideha.”
Then he asked, “Why do you ask such a thing, madam?” She
replied, “Listen now, and I will tell you the mischief of it, and she
repeated another stanza:
“The mighty king of Pancala will attract Videha, and then he will kill him;
his friend she will not be.”
So she told the whole secret to the wise parrot; and the wise parrot,
hearing it, extolled Kevatta: “This teacher is fertile in resource; tis
a wonderful plan to kill the king. But what is so unlucky a thing to
us? silence is best.” Thus lie attained the fruit of his journey. Am
after passing the night with her, he said, “Lady, I would go to the Sm
country, and tell the king how I have got a loving wife ; and he too
leave in the following words:
[4-251 “Now give me leave for just seven nights, that I may tell the nnghty
king of Sivi, how*I have found a dwelling-place with a maynah.
The maynah hereat, although unwilling to part with him, yet unable
to refuse, recited the next stanza:
return1.”
• -*i, and the Burmese version; all three MSS.
i Reading Ctgamis$tuu with Comm, ana
have -li.

1/s&(s1- ' c°)t&1x <SL
{/.'• 'V%\
X5!i^2 ^ 2Vo. 546. 219
The other said : “Lady, what is this you say! if I see you not after
seven days, how can I live?” So lie spake with his lips, but thought in
his heart, “Live or die1, what care I for you?” He rose up, and after
flying for a short distance towards the Sivi country, he turned off and
went to Mithila. Then descending upon the wise man’s shoulder, when
the Great Being had taken him to the upper storey, and asked his news, he
told him all. The other did him all honour as before.
This the Master explained as follows :
‘ And then MSthara, the wise parrot, said to Mahosadha: ‘ This is the story
of the maynah.”’ 3
On hearing it the Great Being thought: “The king will go, will I
nill I, and if he go, he will be utterly destroyed. [426] And if by bearing
a grudge against such a king who gave me such wealth, I refrain from
doing well to him, I shall be disgraced. When there is found one so wise
J, why should he perish ? I will set out before the king, and see
Lu., ii; and I will arrange all well, and I will build a city for King
Vedeha to dwell in, and a smaller passage a mile long, and a great tunnel
of half a league ; and I will consecrate King Oulani’s daughter and make
her our king’s handmaiden; and even when our city is surrounded by
the hundred anh me. kimgL uyfihi i’ncn ffu ii»7iiu';h, Vv,’”,
save our king, us the moon is saved from the jaws of Rahu, and bring
Jura home. His return is in my hands." As he thought thus, joy per­
vaded his body, and by force of this joy he uttered this aspiration :
A man should always work for his interest in whoso house he is fed.”
dims bathed and anointed he went in great pomp to the palace, and
saluting the king, stood on one side. “ My lord," he asked, “are you
K'-mg to the city of Uttarapaficala ? ” “Yes, my son ; if I cannot gain
rancalacandi, what is my kingdom to me ? Leave me not, but come with
me. By going thither, two benefits will be mine: I shall gain the most
precious of women, and make friendship with the king." Then the wise
man said, “ Well, my lord, I will go on ahead, and build dwellings for
you; do you come when I send word.” Saying this, he repeated two
stanzas:
“1 ruly l will go first, lord of men, to the lovely city of Panealn’c
gtUJn,oo«ussW vVeSdeXha, f0c1o’ mthe,e mS,i.g°ht;yr w Varerdioerh, aw' 1h eWn1 rI se n1 dl iwavo°r d1.,”Uilt dwelli»Ss for tl e
[427] The king on hearing this was pleased that he should not desert
and 8ai(l> “My soil, if you go on ahead, what do you want?” “An
army sire." « Take as many as you wish, my son.” The other went on,
1 > ord, Lave the four prisons opened, and break the chains that bind the
wiriafc i8 not intelligible; but the variants suggest that the Burmese version,
1 1 f0ll0w- K^es the right sense.

lift <SL
\ &\MNM« A:' S' ^ / V _/A J
x % , , 220 The JdtaJca. Book XXII.
robbers therein, and send these also with me.” “Do as you will, my sou,”
he replied. The Great Being caused the prisons to be opened, and brought
forth mighty heroes who were able to do their duty wherever they should
be sent, and bade them serve him ; lie shewed great favour to these, and
took with him eighteen companies of men, masons, blacksmiths, carpenters,
painters, men skilled in all arts and crafts, with their razor-adzes, spadbs,
Hoes, and many other tools. So with a great company he went out of
the city.
The Master explained it by this stanza :
“The Mahosadha went on ahead, to the goodly town of the king of Pancala,
to build dwellings for Vedeha the glorious.”
On his way, the Great Being built a village at every league’s end, and
left a courtier in charge of each village, with these directions : “ Against
the king’s return with Pahcala-candl you are to prepare elephants, horses,
and chariots, to keep off his enemies, and to convey him speedily to
Mithiia.” Arrived at tho Ganges’ bank, he called Anandukumara, and
said to him, “ Atianda, take three hundred wrights, go to Upper Ganges,
procure choice timber, build three hundred ships, make them cut stores
of' wood for the town, fill tho ship with light wood, and come back soon.’
Himvlf in slop ho crossed over the Ganges, and from his «andr. ,.v,k< e
v, f;.( t , ut the distances, thinking—“ This is half a league, here •dial
i , u. ,rre(vt tunnel: in this place shall be the town for our king to dwell
from [428]
in this place to the palace, a mile long, shall be the small
passage.” So he marked out the place; and then entered the city.
When King Ciilani heard of the Bodhisat’s coming, he was exceeding y
well pleased; “for thought he, “Now the desire of my heart shall be
fulfilled; now that lie is come, Vedeha will not be long in coming . then
will I kill them both and make one kingdom in all India.” All the city
was in a ferment: “This, they say, is the wise Mahosadha, who put to
flight the hundred and one kings as a crow is scared by a clod ! ” The
Great Being proceeded to the palace gates whilst the citizens gazed at
his beauty; then dismounting from the car, he sent word to the king.
“ Let him come,” the king said; and lie entered, and greeted the king,
and sat down on one side. Then the king spoke politely to him, and
asked, “My son, when will the king come?” “When T send for him,
mv lord” “But why are you come, then?” “To build for our king
a place to dwell in, my lord.” “ Good, my son.” He gave an allowance
for the escort, and shewed great honour to the Great Being, and allotted
him a house, and said: “My son, until your king shall come, live here,
and do not be idle, but do what should be done/; But as ho entered the
palace, he stood at the foot of the stairs, thinking, Here mus be the
L r of the little tunnel ” ; and again this came into Ins mind, The k.ng

■ G°ifeX
iCtjl - <
sl
iVo. 546. 221
told me to do for him anything that liad to be done ; I must take care
that this stairway does not fall in while we are digging the tunnel.”
So he said to the king, “ My lord, as I entered, standing by the stair-foot,
and looking at the new work, I saw a fault in the great staircase. If it
please you, give me word and I will make it all right.” “ Good, my son,
do so.” He examined the place carefully, and determined where the exit of
the tunnel should be1; then he removed the stair, and to keep the earth
from falling into this place, he arranged a platform of wood, and thus
fixed the stair firmly so that it should not collapse. The king all un­
witting thought this to be done from goodwill to himself. The other
spent that day [429] in superintending the repairs, and on the next day
he said to the king, “My lord, if I could know where our king is to dwell,
I could make it all right and take care of it.” “ Very good, wise sir:
choose a place for his dwelling where you will in the city, except my
palace.” “ Sire, we are strangers, you have many favourites : if we take
their houses, your soldiers will quarrel with us. What are we to do?”
“Wise sir, do not listen to them, but choose the place which may please
you.” “ My lord, they will come to you over and over again with com­
plaints, and that will not be pleasant for you; but if you will, let our
men be on guard until we take possession of the houses, and they will not
be able to get past the door, but will go away. Thus both you and we
shall be content.” The king agreed. The Great Being placed his own
guards at the foot and head of the stairway, at the great gate, everywhere,
giving oi’ders that no one was to pass by. Then he ordered his men to go
to the queen-mother’s house, and to make as though they would pull it
down. When they began to pull down bricks and mud from the gates
and walls, the queen-mother heard the news and asked, “ You fellows,
why do you break down my house ? ” “ Mahosadha the sage wishes to
pull it down and to build a palace for his king.” “If that bo so, you
may live in this place.” “Our king’s retinue is very large; this place
will not do, and we will fnako a large house for him.” “You do not
know me: I am the queen-mother, and now I will go to my son and
see about it.” “ We are acting by the king’s orders ; stop us if you can ! ”
She grew angry, and said, “Now I will see what is to be done with you,”
and proceeded to the palace gate.; but they would not let her go in.
“Fellows, I am the king’s mother!” “Oh, we know you; but the king
has ordered us to let no one come in. Go away! ” She was unable to
get into the palace, and stood looking at her house. Then one of the
men said, [430] “What are you doing here? Away with you!” He
seized her by the throat and threw her upon the ground. She thought,
“Yerily it must be the king’s command, otherwise they would not be
able to do this : I will visit the sage.” She asked him, “ Son Mahosadha,
mu
1 Omitting with B(i; I can think of uo correction.

i(£)| , (fil
The Jataka. Book XXII.
why do you pull down my house?” but he would not speak to her.
But a bystander said, “What did you say, madam?” “My son, why
does the sage pull down my house?” “To build a dwelling for King
Vedeha.” “Why, my son! in all this great city can he find no other
place to live in? take this bribe, a hundred thousand pieces of money,
and let him build elsewhere.” “ Very good, madam, we will leave your
house alone; but do not tell any one that you have given this bribe,
that no others may wish to bribe us to spare their houses.” “ My son !
if it were said that the queen-mother had need to bribe, the shame would
be mine ! I shall tell no one.” The man consented, and took the hundred
thousand pieces, and left that house. Then he went to Kevatta’s house;
who went to the palace gate, and had the skin of his back torn by bamboo
sticks, but being unable to get an entrance, he also gave a hundred thou­
sand pieces. In this way, by seizing houses in all parts of the city, and
procuring bribes, they got nine crores of gold pieces.
After this the Great Being traversed the whole city, and returned
to the palace. The king asked him whether he had found a place.
“Sire,” he said, “they are all willing to give; but as soon as we take
possession they are stricken with grief. We do not wish to be the cause
of unpleasantness. Outside the city, about a mile hence, between the
city and the Ganges, there is a place where we could build a palace for
our king.” When the king heard this, he was pleased ; for, thought he,
“ to fight with men inside the city is dangerous, it is impossible to dis­
tinguish friend from foe; but without the city it is easy to fight, therefore
without the city [431] I will smite them and kill them.” Then he said,
“Good, my son, build in the place that you have seen.” “We will, sire.
But your people must not come to the place where we build, in search
of firewood or herbs or such like things; if they do, there is sure to
be a quarrel, and this will be pleasant for neither of us,” “Very good,
my son, forbid all access on that side.” “My lord, our elephants like
to disport them in the water; if the water becomes muddy, and the
people complain that since Mahosadha came we have had no clean water
to drink, you must put up with it.” The king replied, “ Let your ele­
phants play.” Then he proclaimed by beat of drum: “Whosoever shall
go lienee to the place where the sage Mahosadha is building, he shall be
fined a thousand pieces.”
Then the Great Being took leave of the king, and with his attendants
went out of the city, and began to build a city on the spot that had been
set apart. On the other side of the Ganges he built a village called
Gagguli: there he stationed his elephants, horses and chariots, his lcine
and oxen. Me busied himself with the making ot the city, and assigned
to each their task. Having distributed ail the work, he set about making
the great tunnel; the mouth of which was upon the Ganges bank. Sixty

/s<&- ' e° ^ \
| ( I - <SL
t
No. 546. 223
thousand warriors were digging the great tunnel: the earth they removed
in leather sacks and dropt in the rivei’, and whenever the earth was dropt
in the elephants trampled it underfoot, and the Ganges ran muddy. The
citizens complained that, since Mahosadha had come, they could get no
clean water to drink; the river ran muddy, and what was to be done 1
Then the wise man’s spies told them that Maliosadha’s elephants were
playing about in the water, and stirring up the mud, and that was why it
ran muddy. Now the intentions of the Bodhisats are always fulfilled;
therefore in the tunnel all roots and stones sank into the earth. The
entrance to the lesser tunnel was in that city \ seven hundred men were
digging,.at the lesser tunnel; [432] the earth they brought out in leather
sacks and dropt in the city, and as they dropt each load, they mixt it
with water, and built a wall, and used it for other works. The entrance
into the greater tunnel was in the city: it was provided with a door,
eighteen hands high, fitted with machinery, so that one peg being pressed
all were closed up1. On either side, the tunnel was built up with bricks
and worked with stucco; it was roofed over with planks and smeared
with cement2, and whitened. In all there were eighty great doors and
sixty-four small doors, which all by the pressure of one peg closed, and by
the pressure of one peg opened. On either side there were some hundreds
of lamp-cells, also fitted with machinery, so that when one was opened
all opened, and when one was shut all were shut. On either side were
a hundred and one chambers for a hundred and one warriors : in each
one was laid a bed of various colours, in each was a great couch shaded by
a white sunshade, each had a throne near the great couch, each had a
statue of a woman, very beau if’ul—without touching them no one could
tell they were not human. Moreover, in the tunnel on either side, clever
painters made all manner of paintings : the splendour of Sakka, the zones
of Mount Sineru, the sea and the ocean, the four continents, Himavat,
Lake Anotatta, the Vermilion Mountain, Sun and Moon, the heaven of the
four great kings with the six heavens of sense and their divisions—all
were to be seen in the tunnel. The floor was strewn with sand white
as a silver plate, and on the roof full-blown lotus flowers. On both sides
were booths of all sorts; here and there hung festoons of flowers and
scented blooms. Thus they adorned the tunnel until it was like the divine
hall of Sudhamma.
Now those three hundred wrights, having built three hundred ships,
freighted them with loads of articles all ready prepared, and brought them
down, and told the sage. He used them in the city, and made them put
up the ships in a secret place to bring them out when he should give
1 Verbaps there has been an omission {see just below); one barrier is mentioned,
yet the verb is plural.
3 uUoka- ?

/gy-—'x \\
f ( f ) | <SL
y*s>— / /
'\'i/-7', >j^lA _/x' ,-jj
224 The JataJca. Book XXII.
the word. In the city, the water-moat, the wall, [433] gate and tower,
dwellings for prince and people, elephant-stables, tanks, all were finished.
So great tunnel and little tunnel, and all the city, were finished in four
months. And at the end of the four months, the Great Being sent a
messenger to the king, to bid him come.
When the king heard this message, he was pleased, and set out with a
large company.
The Master said:
“Then the king set out with an army in four divisions, to visit the pros­
perous city of Kampilliya, with its innumerable chariots.”
In due time he arrived at the Ganges. Theu the Great Being went
out to meet him, and conducted him to the city which he had built. 4he
king entered the palace, and ate a rich meal, and after resting a little, in
the evening sent a messenger to King Culanx to say that he had come.
Explaining this, the Master said :
“ Then lie on arriving sent word to Brabmadatta : ‘ Mighty king, I am come
to salute thy feet. Now give me to wife that woman most beauteous, full of
grace, attended by her handmaidens.’ ”
[434] CulanI was very glad at the message, and thought, “Where will
my enemy go now? I shall cleave both their heads, and drink the cup of
victory ! ” But he shewed only joy to the messenger, and did him respect,
and recited the following stanza:
“Welcome art thou, Vedeha, a good coming is thine! Enquire now for
a lucky hour, and I will give thee my daughter, full of grace, attended by her
handmaidens.”
The messenger now went back to Vedeha, and said, “My lord, the
king says: ‘ Enquire for an hour suited to this auspicious event, and
I will give you my daughter.’” He sent the man back, saying, This
very day is a lucky hour ! ’’
The Master explained it thus :
“Then King Vedeha enquired for a lucky hour; which done, he sent word to
Brahmadatta : ‘ Give me now to wife that woman most beauteous, full of grace,
attended by her handmaidens.’ And King CulanI said : ‘I give thee now to
wife that woman most beauteous, full of grace, attended by her handmaidens.
But in saying “ I will send her now, even now,” he lied : and he gave
the word to the hundred and one kings: “ Make ready for battle with
your eighteen mighty hosts, and come forth: we will cleave the heads
of our two enemies, and drink the cup of victory! ” And he placed in
the palace his mother Queen Tahiti, and his consort Queen Nandi, and
his son Paficftlacanda, and his daughter PaficalacandT, with the women,
aud came forth himself.
The Bodhisat treated very hospitably the great army which came with
King Vedeha: [435] some were drinking, spirits, some eating fish and

• G°i&X
t ( I I , <SL
iVo. 546. 225
flesh, some lay wearied with their long inarch; but King Vedeha, with
Senaka and the other wise men, sat on a goodly dais amidst his courtiers.
But King CulanI surrounded the city in four lines with three intervals,
and kindled several hundreds of thousands of torches, and there they
stood, ready to take it when the sun should rise. On learning this, the
Great Being gave commission to three hundred of his own warriors:
“Go by the little tunnel, and bring in by that tunnel the king’s mother
and consort, his son and daughter; take them through the great tunnel,
but do not let them out by the door of the great tunnel; keep them
safe in the tunnel until we come, but when we come, Wring them out
of the tunnel, and place them in the Great Court.” When they had
received these commands, they went along the lesser tunnel, and pushed
up the platform beneath the staircase; they seized the guards at the top
and bottom of the staircase and on the terrace, the humpbacks, and all
the others that were there, bound them hand and foot, gagged them, and
hid them away here and there; ate some of the food prepared for the
king, destroyed the rest, and went up to the terrace. Now Queen Talata
on that day, uncertain what might befall, had made Queen Nanda and the
son and daughter lie with her in one bed. These warriors, standing at
the door of the chamber, called to them. She came out and said, “What
is it, my children?” They said, “Madam, our king has killed Vedeha
and Mahosadha, and has made one kingdom in all India, and surrounded
by the hundred and one princes in great glory he is drinking deep : he has
sent us to bring you four to him also.” They came down to the foot of
the staircase. When the men took them into tl;e tunnel, they said : “All
. this time we have lived here, and never have entered this street before! ”
The men replied, “ Men do not go into this street every day; this is
a street of rejoicing, and because this is a day of rejoicing, the king [436]
told us to fetch you by this way.” And they believed it. Then some of
the men conducted the four, others returned to the palace, broke open the
treasury, and carried off all the precious things they wanted. The four
went on by the greater tunnel, and seeing it to be like the glorious hall of
the gods, thought that it had been made for the king. Then they were
brought to a place not far from the river, and placed in a fine chamber
within the tunnel: some kept watch over them, others went and told the
Bodhisat of their arrival.
“Now,” thought the Bodhisat, “my heart’s desire shall bo fulfilled.”
Highly pleased, he went into the king’s presence and stood on one side.
The king, uneasy with desire, was thinking, “Now he will send his
daughter, now, now”: and netting up he looked out of the window. There
was the city all one blaze of light with those thousands of torches, and
surrounded by a g,.oat }10St i ju feaf and suspicion he cried, “ What is
this. and recited a stanza to his wise men:
J. Vi. 15

Jdtaka. Book
^-^26 ' The XXII.
“ Elephants, horses, chariots, footmen, a host in armour stands there, torches
blaze with light; what do they mean, wise sirs ? ”
To this Senaka replied : “ Do not trouble, sire: large numbers ot
torches are blazing; I suppose the king is bringing his daughter to you.”
And Pukkusa said, “ No doubt lie wishes to shew honour at your visit,
and therefore has come with a guard.” They told him whatever they
liked. But the king heard the words of command—“ Put a detachment
here, set a guard there, be vigilant ! ” and he saw the soldiers under arms;
so that he was frightened to death, and longing to hear some word from
the Great Being, he recited another stanza:
“ Elephants, horses, chariots, footmen, a host in armour stands there, torches
ablaze with light: what will they do, wise sir?”
[437] Then the Great Being thought, “I will first terrify this bliud
fool for a little, then I will shew my power and console him.” So he
said,
“ Sire, the mighty Culanlya is watching you, Brahmadatta is a traitor: in
the morning he will slay you.”
On hearing this all were frightened to death : the king’s throat was
parched, the spittle ceased, his body burnt; frightened to death and
whimpering he recited two stanzas:
“My heart throbs, my mouth is parched, I cannot rest, I am like one burnt
in the fire and then put in the sun. As the smith’s fire burns inwardly and is
not seen outside, so my heart burns within me and is not seen outside.
When the Great Being heard this lament, he thought, “This blind fool
would not do my bidding at other times; I will punish him still more,”
and he said:
“ Wamor, you are careless, neglectful of advice, unwise: now let your clever
advisers save you. A king who will not do the bidding of a wise and faithful
counsellor, being bent on his own pleasure, is like a deer caught in a trap. As
a fish, greedy for the bait, does not notice the hook hidden in the meat which is
wrapped round it, does not recognise its own death: so you, 0 king, greedy with
lust, like the fish, do not recognise Cnlaneyya’s daughter as your own death. If
you go to Pari cilia, (I said,) you will speedily lose your happiness, as a deer
caught on the highway will fall into great danger. A bad man, my lord, would
bite like a snake in yotir lap; no wise man should make friends with him;
unhappy must l>e the association with an evil man. [438] Whatsoever man, my
lord, one should recognise for virtuous and instructed, he is the man for the
wise to make his friend : happy would lie the association with a good man.”
Then to drive home the reproach, that a man should not ho so treated,
lie recalled the words which the king had once said before, and went on —
Foolish thou art, 0 king, deaf and dumb, that didst upbraid the l»at
“
advice in me, asking how 1 could know what was good like another, when
I had grown up at the plow-tail ? Take yon fellow by the neck, you said,
and cast him out of rny kingdom, who tries by his talk to keep me from getting
a precious thing1! ”
i See p- 214 above.

(«(Ij?) . - <SL
.•dx&s' iV o . 5 4 6 . 2 2 7
Having recited these two stanzas, lie said, “ Sire, how could I, a clod­
hopper, know what is good as Senaka does and the other wise men?
That is not my calling. I know only the clodhopper’s trade, hut this
matter is known to Senaka and his like; they are wise gentlemen, and
now to-day [439] let them deliver you from the eighteen mighty hosts
that compass you round about; and bid them take me by the throat and
cast me forth. Why do you ask me now 1 ” Thus he rebuked him merci­
lessly. When the king heard it, he thought, “ The sage is reciting the
wrongs that I have done. Long ago he knew the danger to come, that is
why he so bitterly reproaches me. But he cannot have spent all this
time idly; surely he must have arranged for my safety.” So to reproach
the other, he recited two stanzas :
“ Mahosadha, the wise do not throw up the past in one’s teeth; why do you
goad me like a horse tied fast? If you see deliverance or safety, comfort me:
why throw up the past against me ? ”
Then the Great Being thought, “This king is very blind and foolish,
and knows not the differences amongst men : a while I will torment him,
then I will save him”; and he said—
“ ’Tis too late for men to act, too hard and difficult; I cannot deliver you,
and you must decide for yourself. There are elephants which can fly through
the air, magical, glorious: they that possess,,such as these can go away with
them. Horses there are which can fly through the air, magical, glorious : they
that possess such as these can go away with them. Birds also there are, and
goblins, which do the like. But it is too late for men to act, too hard and
difficult: I cannot save you, and you must decide for yourself.”
[440] The king, hearing this, sat still without a word ; but Senaka
thought, “There is no help but the sage for the king or for ns; but
the king is too much afraid to be able to answer him. Then I will ask
him.” And he asked him in two stanzas:
“A man who cannot see the shore in the mighty ocean, when he finds a
footing is full of joy. So to us and the king thou, MahOaadha, art. linn ground
to stand on; thou' art our best of counsellors; deliver us from woe.”
The Great Being reproached him in this stanza:
u’Tis too late for men to act, too hard and difficult: I caimot deliver you,
and you must decide for yourself, Senaka.”
The king, unable to find an opening, and terrified out of bis life, could
not say a word to the Great Being; but thinking that perhaps Senaka
might have a plan, ho asked him in this stanza:
“ Hear this word of mine : you see this great danger, and now Senaka, 1 ask
yott--\vhut do you think ought to be done here l
[441] Senaka thinking, “The king asks a plan: good or bad, I will tell
Inm one,” recited a stanza:
“ Lot us set firo to tbe door let us take a sword, lot ns wound one another,
death”00 We 8haU uea-se to live ; let not Brahmadatta kill us by a lingering
15—2

<SL
l ( f ) l
^ ^ -^ 2 2 8 ' The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
The king fell in a passion to hear this; “ That will do for your funeral
pyre and your children’s,” he thought; and he then asked Pukkusa and
the rest, who also spoke foolishly each after his own kind; here is the
tradition :
“ Hear this word: you see this great danger. Now I ask Pukkusa—what do
you think ought to be done here ? ” “ Let us take poison and die, and we shall
soon cease to live : let not Brahmadatta kill us by a lingering death A°"
I ask Kavinda.” “Let us fasten a noose and die, let us cast ourselves from
a height, let not Brahmadatta kill us by a lingering death.” “Now 1 ask
Devinda.” “Let us set fire to the door, let us take a sword, let us wound
one another, and soon we shall cease to live : I cannot save us, but M ahosadha
can do so easily.”
Devinda thought, “ What is the king doing? Here is fire, and he
blows at a firefly ! Except Mahosadha, there is none other can save
us : [442] yet he leaves him and asks us ! What do we know about it ?
Thus thinking, and seeing no other plan, he repeated the plan proposed by
Senaka, and praised the Great Being in two stanzas:
“This is my meaning, sire: Let us all ask the wise man ; and it for all
our asking Mahosadha cannot easily save us, then let us follow Senakas
advice.”
On hearing this, the king remembered his ill-treatment of the Bodhisat,
and being unable to speak to him, he lamented in his hearing thus:
“As one that searches for sap in the plantain tree or the silk-cotton tree,
find.- none; so we searching for an answer to this problem have found none.
Our dwelling is in a bad place, like elephants in a place where no water is, with
worthless men and fools that know nothing. My heart throbs, my mouth is
parched, I cannot rest, I am like one burnt in the lire and then put m the sun.
As the smith’s fire burns inwardly and is not seen outside, so my heart >um-
withiu and is not seen outside.”
Then the sage thought, “The king is exceedingly troubled : If I do not
console him, he will break bis heart and die.” So he consoled him.
[443] This the Master explained by saying :
“Then this wise sage Mahosadha, discerning of the good, when he beheld
Yrdelm sorrowful thus spake to him. ‘Fear not, 0 king, fear not, lord ot
chariots • I will set thee free, like the moon when it is caught by Ralm, like the
sun when it is caught by Rahu, like an elephant sunk in the mud, like a snake
shut up in a basket, like fish in the net; I will set thee free with thy chariots
and thy army; l will scare away Paficala, as a crow is scared by a clod. Or
what use indued is the wisdom or the counsellor of such a kind as cannot set thee
free from trouble when thou art in difficulties? ’'
When lie heard this, he was comforted: “Now my life is safe!” lie
thought: all were delighted when the Bodhisat spoke out like a lion.
Then Senaka asked, “Wise sir, how will you get away with us all/” “By
a decorated tunnel,” he said, “ make ready.” So saying, he gave the word
to his men to open the tunnel:
[444] “Come, men, up and open the mouth of the entrance: Vedeha with his
court is to go through the tunnel.”

( ( f ) ) . (fiT
Wo. 546. 229
Up rose they and opened the door of the tunnel, and all the tunnel
shone in a blaze of light like the decorated hall of the gods. The Master
explained it by saying:
“ Hearing the wise man’s voice, his followers opened the tunnel door and the
mechanical bolts.”
The door opened, they told the Great Being, and he gave the word to
the king: “Time, my lord! come down from the terrace.” The king
came down, Senaka took off his headdress, unloosed his gown. The Great
Being asked him what he did; he replied, “ Wise sir, when a man goes
through a tunnel, he must take off his turban and wrap his clothes tight
around' him.” The other replied, “ Senaka, do not suppose that you must
crawl through the tunnel upon your knees. If you wish to go on an
elephant, mount your elephant: lofty is our tunnel, eighteen hands high,
with a wide door; dress yourself as fine as you will, and go in front
of the king.” Then the Bodhisat made Senaka go first, and went himself
last, with the king in the middle, and this was the reason : in the tunnel
was a world of eatables and drinkables, and the men ate and drank as
they gazed at the tunnel, saying, “ Do not go quickly, but gaze at the
decorated tunnel”; but the Great Being went behind urging the king
to go on, while the king went on gazing at the tunnel adorned like the
hall of the gods.
[415] The Master explained it, saying,
“In front went Senaka, behind went Mahosadha, and in the midst King
^ edeha with the men of his court.”
Now when the king’s coming was known, the men brought out of the
tunnel the other king’s mother and wife, son and daughter, and set thorn
in the great courtyard ; the king also with the Bodhisat came out of the
tunnel. When these four saw the king and the sage, they were frightened
to death, and shrieked in their fear—“Without doubt weave in the hands
of our enemies! it must have been the wise man’s soldiers who came for
us ! ” And King CulanI, in fear lest Yedeha should escape—now he was
about a mile from the Ganges—hearing their outcry in the quiet night,
wished to say, “It is like the voice of Queen Nanda!” but he feared
that he might be laughed at for thinking such a thing, and said nothing.
At that moment, the Great Being placed Princess Paucalacandl upon a
lieap of treasure, and administered the ceremonial sprinkling, as he said,
“ Sire, here is she for whose sake you came; let her be your queen ! ”
T% brought out the three hundred ships ; the king came from the wide
courtyard and boarded a ship richly decorated, and these four went on
board with him. The Master thus explained it:
“ Vttfeha comine forth from the 5tunnel went aboard ship, and when he was
aboftid, : ‘This i. now your feta-in.^', my 1
1 The brother takeB the place of the absent father-in-law, according to the scholiast.

/& {E ^ \ / n
?(f)| <SL
--•"^ ' 230 The jcltaka. Booh XXII.
lord, this is yc.iir mother-in-law, O master of men: as you would treat your
mother, so treat your mother-in-law. As a brother by the same father and
mother, so protect Pahcfilacanda, 0 lord of chariots. Pahcalacandl is a royal
princess, much wooed1; love her, she is your wife, 0 lord of chariots.’ ”
[416] The king consented. But why did the Great Being say nothing
about the queen-mother ? Because she was an old woman. Now all this
the Bodhisat said as he stood upon the bank. Then the king, delivered
from great trouble, wishing to proceed in the ship, said, “ My son, you
speak standing upon the shore”: and recited a stanza—
“Come aboard with speed : why do you stand on the bank? From danger
and trouble we have been delivered ; now, Mahosadha, let us go.”
The Great Being replied, “ My lord, it is not meet that I go with you,”
and he said,
“This is not right, sire, that I, the leader of an army, should desert my army
and come myself. All this army, left l>ehind in the town, I will bring away
with the consent of Brahmadatta.
“Amongst these men, some are sleeping for weariness after their long
journey, some eating and drinking, and know not of our departure, some
aie sick, after having worked with me four months, and there arc many
assistants ot mine. I cannot go if I leave one man behind me; no, 1 will
return, and all that army J. will bring off with Brahmadatta’s consent,
without a blow. Vou, sire, should go with all speed, not tarrying any­
where; I have stationed relays of elephants and conveyances on the road,
so that you may leave behind those that are weary, and with others ever
fresh may quickly return to Mithila.” Then the king recited a stanza;
“ A small army against a great, how will you prevail ? The weak will lie
destroyed by the strong, wise sir! ”
[447] Then the Bodhisat recited a stanza:
A small army with counsel conquers a largo army that has none, one king
conquers many, the rising sun conquers the darkness.”
With these words, the Great Being saluted the king, and sent him
away, lhe king remembering how he had been delivered from the hands
of enemies, and by winning the princess had attained his heart’s desire,
ledeotiug on the Bodhisat’s virtues, in joy and delight described to Senaka
the wise man’s virtues in this stanza:
“ Happiness truly comes, 0 Senaka, by living with the wise. As birds from
f' Gnsed cage, as lish from a net, so Mahosadha set us free when wc were in the
hands of my enemies.”
To this Senaka replied with another, praising the sage:
11 bveil so, sire, there is happiness amongst the wise. As birds from a closed
cage, as fish from a net, so Mahosadha set us free when we were in the hands of
our enemies.”
ahhijjhitd =■= ,
V

r * )| <
s l
JVo. 546.. • 231
Then Vedeha crossed over the river, and at a league’s distance he
found the village which the Bodhisat had prepared; there the meu posted
by the Bodhisat supplied elephants and other transport and gave them
food and drink. He sent back elephants or horses and transport when
were
they exhausted, and took others, and proceeded to the next village;
and in this way he traversed the journey of a hundred leagues, and next
morning he was in Mithila.
[448] But the Bodhisat went to the gate of the tunnel; and drawing
his sword, which was slung over his shoulder, he buried it in the sand, at
the gate of the tunnel; then he entered the tunnel, and went into the
town, and bathed him in scented water, and ate a choice meal, and retired
to his goodly couch, glad to think that the desire of his heart had been
fulfilled. When the night was ended, King Cujain gave his orders to the
army, and came up to the city. The Master thus explained it:
“The mighty Cfdanlya watched all night, and at sunrise approached Upakfirl.
Mounting his noble elephant, strong, sixty years old, Cdlanaya, mighty king of
Ikmcala, addressed his army; fully armed with jewelled harness, an arrow1 in
his hand, he addressed his men collected in great numbers.”
Then to describe them in kind—
“Men mounted on elephants, lifeguardsmen, charioteers,footmen, meu skilful
in archery, bowmen, all gathered together.”
Now the king commanded them to take Vedeha alive:
“Send the tusked elephants, mighty, sixty years old, let them trample down
the city which Vedeha has nobly built. Let the arrows2 fly this way and that
way, sped by the bow, arrows like the teeth of calves3, sharp-pointed, piercing
the very bones. Let heroes come forth in armour clad, with weapons finely
decorated, bold and heroic, ready to face an elephant Spears bathed in oil,
their points glittering like tire, stand gleaming like the constellation of a hundred
-tars. [449] At tho onset of such heroes, with mighty weapons, clad in mail and
armour, who never run away, how shall Vedeha escape, even if he fly like a bird!
My thirty and nine thousand4 * warriors, all picked men, whose like T never saw,
all my mighty host.
“See the mighty tusked elephants, caparisoned, of sixty years, on whose
backs are the brilliant and goodly princes ; brilliant are they on their backs,
as the gods in Nandana, with glorious ornaments, glorious dress and robes :
swords of the colour of the sheat-fish6 * *, well oiled, glittering, held fast by mighty
meu, well-finished, very sharp, shining, spotless, made of tempered steel11, strong,
1 The text yharam udaya, pdninam makes no sense; the Burmese paraphrase,
" with the device of an arrow on his finger-nail,” suggests that wo should read saram
and take puninmh as locative. Singhalese €s3 = gh, b3 = s; Burmese 80 = gh,
00 - s.
* sena=arrows, as fitted with hawk’s feathers.
3 I.e. white or shining.
4 So the scholiast and the Burmese version both interpret tim{i.,.nuvutyo,
6 Silurus Boalis
" Kikdyatairuiya: ‘ sattaviire koncasaknne khiidapotva gahitena nikdya»ava kata.’
The Burmese version explains it as follows: “Steel was obtained by burning the
excrement of Koslihiniyw, which had been fod on flesh mixt with steel dust got from

(§L
k m
\>>-—
/ ~ * , _ . .
— 232 The Jdtaka. Book X X II.
holJ by mighty men who strike and strike again. In golden trappings and
bloodred girths they gleam as they turn like lightning in a thick cloud. Mailed
heroes with banners waving, skilled in the use of sword and shield, grasping.the
hilt, accomplished soldiers, mighty fighters on elephant-back,—encompassed by
such as these thou hast no escape ; 1 see no power by which thou canst come to
Mithila.”
[450] Thus he threatened Vedelni, thinking to capture him then and
there; and goading his elephant, bidding the army seize and strike and
kill, King Culani came like a flood to the city of Upakiiri.
Then the Great Being’s spies thought, “Who knows what will happen?”
and with their attendants surrounded him. Just then the Bodhibat rose
from his bed, and attended to his bodily needs, and after breakfast adorned
and dressed himself, putting on his kasi robe worth a hundred thousand
pieces of money, and with his red robe over one shoulder, and holding his
presentation stair inlaid with the seven precious jewels, golden sandals
upon his feet, and being fanned with a yakstail fan like some divine
nymph richly arrayed, came up on the terrace, and opening a window
shewed himself to King Culani, as ho walked to and fro with the grace
of the king of the gods. And King Culani, seeing his beauty, could not
line! peace of mind, [451] but quickly drove up his elephant, thinking that
he should take him now. The sage thought, “He has hastened hither
■ xpccting that A edeha is caught; he knows not that his own children are
taken, and that our king is gone. I will shew my face like a golden
mirror, and speak to him.” So standing at the window, lie uttered these
words in a voice sweot as honey :
i a ^ k;lvc }'°u driven up your elephant thus in haste? You come with a
glad look; you think that you have got what you want. Throw down that bow,
put away that arrow, put ofl that shining armour set with jewels and coral.”
When lie heard the man’s voice, he thought, “The clodhopper is
making fun of me; to-day I will see what is to be done with him”;
then threatened him, saying,
^ our countenance looks pleased, you speak with a smile. It is in the hour
of death that such beauty is seen.”
As they thus talked together, the soldiers noticed the Great Being’s
beauty; “our king,” they said, “is talking with wise Mahosadha; what
can it be about? Let us listen to their talk.” So they drew near the
king. But the sage, when the king lmd finished speaking, replied, “ You
do not know that I am the wise Mahosadha. I will not suffer you to .
kill me. Your plan [452] is thwarted; what was thought in the heart
the filings of Jtiti steel. The steel obtained from the excrement was again filed and
inixt with flesh us before and given to the birds. And so the process was seven times
repeated. From the steel obtained from the seventh burning tbe swords were made."

f ( I )| <SL
— <^'/
No. 546. 233
of you and Kevatta has uot come to pass, but that has come to pass which
you said with your lips.” And he explained this by saying,
“Your thunders are in vain, 0 king! your plan is thwarted, man of war!
The king is as hard for you to catch as a thorobrcd for a hack. Our king
crossed the Ganges yesterday, with his courtiers and attendants. You will be
like a crow trying to chase the royal goose.”
Again, like a maned lion without fear, he gave an illustration in these
words:
“Jackals, in the night time, seeing the Judas tree in flower, think the flowers
to be lumps of meat1, and gather in troops, these vilest of Ijeasts. When the
watches ot the night are past, and the sun has risen, they see the Judas tree in
flower, and lose their wish, those vilest of beasts. Even so you, O king, for •
. all that you have surrounded Vedeha, shall lose your wish and go, as the jackals
went from the Judas tree.”
When the king heard his fearless words, lie thought, “The clodhopper
is bold enough in his speech : no doubt Vedeha must have escaped.” He
was very angry. “Long ago,” he thought, [453] “through this clodhopper
1 had not so much us a rag to cover mo; now by his doing my enemy
who was in my hands has escaped. In truth he has done me much
evil, and I will be revenged on him for both.” Then he gave orders as
follows:
“Cut off his hands and feet, ears and nose, for he delivered Vedeha my
enemy from my hands ; cut off his flesh and cook it on skewers, for ho delivered
\ edeha my enemy out of my hands. As a bull’s hide is spread out on the
ground, or a lion’s or tiger’s fastened flat with pegs, so 1 will peg him out and
I'ierce him with spikes, for he delivered Vedeha my enemy out of my hand.”
The Great Being smiled when he heard this, and thought, “ This king
does not know that his queen and family have been conveyed by me to
Mithila, and so he is giving all these orders’about me. But in his anger
he might transfix me with an arrow, or dcr something else that might'
please him; I will therefore overwhelm him with pain and(sorrow, ahd
will make him faint on his elepliaut’s back, while I tell him about it.”
So he said :
“If you cut off my hands and feet, my oars and nose, so will Vedeha deal
with Paucfilacanda, so with Paficalacandl, so with Queen Nanda, your wife and
children. [454] If you cut off my flesh and cook it on skewers, so will Vedeha
cook that of l ancalacanda, of Pane&Iacaudi, of Queen Nanda, • your -wife and
children. If you peg me out and pierce me with spikes, so will Vedeha deal
with Paucfilacanda, with Panefilaeamli, with Queen Nanda, your wife and
children. So it. has been secretly arranged between Vedeha and me. • Like as
a leather shield of a hundred layers, carefully wrought by the leather-workers,
is a defence to keep off arrows; so 1 bring happiness and avert trouble from
glorious Vedeha, and I keep off your devices as a shield keeps Off ail arrow.”
[453] Hearing this, the king thought, “What is this clodhopper
talking ofl As I do to him, quotha, so King Vedeha will do to my
• I
1 See n. 265 (fcrans. p. 185).
> ’

?(f)| <SL
The Jatalca, Booh XXII.
X^ : - -r ^ '2 3 4 .
>
family ? He does not know that I have set a careful guard over my
family, but lie is only threatening me in fear of instant death. I don’t
believe what he says.”
The Great Being divined that he thought him to be speaking in fear,
and resolved to explain. Bo he said—
“ Gome, sire, see your inner apartments are empty: wife, children, mother,
0 warrior, were carried through a tunnel and put in charge of Vedoha.”
Then the king thought, “The sage speaks with much assurance. I
did hear in the night beside the Ganges the voice of Queen Nanda; very
wise is the sage, perhaps he speaks the truth! ” Great grief came upon
him, but he gathered all his courage, and dissembling his grief, sent a
courtier to enquire, and recited this stanza:
“Come, enter my inner apartments and enquire whether the man’s words be
truth or lies.”
The messenger with his attendants went, and opened the door, and
entered; there with hands and feet bound, and gags in their mouths,
hanging to [legs, he discovered the sentries of the inner apartments, the
dwarfs and hunchbacks, and so forth : broken vessels were scattered about,
with food and drink, the doors of the treasury were broken open, and the
treasure plundered, the bedroom with open doors, and a tribe of crows
which had come in by the open windows; [456] it was like a deserted
village, or a place of corpses. In this inglorious state he beheld the
palace; and he told the news to the king, saying,
“ Even so, sire, as Mahosadha said: empty is your inner palace, like a
waterside village inhabited by crows.”
The king trembling with grief at the loss of his four dear ones, said,
“Tliis sorrow has come on me through the clodhopper ! ” and like a snake
struck with a stick, he was exceedingly wroth with the Bodhisat. When
the Great Being saw his appearance, he thought, “This king has great
glory; if he should ever in anger say, ‘ What do I want with so and so 1 ’
in a warrior’s pride he might hurt me. Suppose I should describe the
beauty of Queen Nanda to him, making as if he had never seen her;
he would then remember her, and would understand that he would never
recover this precious woman if he killed me. Then out of love to his
spouse, ho would do ino no harm.” So standing for safety in the upper
storey, he removed his golden-coloured hand from beneath bis red robe,
and pointing the way by which she went, he described her beauties
thus;
“This way, sire, went the woman beauteous in every lirub, her lips like
plates of gold, her voice like the music of the wild goose. Ibis wav was she
taken, sire, the woman beauteous in every limb, clad in silken raiment, dark,
with fair girdle of gold. Her feet reddened, fair to see, with girdles of gold and
jewels, with eyes like a pigeou, slender, with lips hl»o »m >a fruit, and slender

' G°i^X
.■ % L
K i t
No. 546. 235
waist, well-born, slender-waisted like a creeper ur a place of sacrifice1, her hair
long, black, and a little curled at the end, well-born, like a fawn, like a flame of
lire in winter time. Like a river hidden in the clefts of a mountain under the
low reeds, [457] beauteous in nose or thigh, peerless, with breasts like the tin-
dook fruit,—not too long, not too short, not hairless and not too hairy.”
As the Great Being thus praised her grace, it seemed to the king as if
lie had never seen her before: great longing arose in him, and the Great
Being who perceived this recited a stanza : ■
“ And so you are pleased at Nanda’s death, glorious king: now Nanda and I
will go before Yama.”
(458] In all this the Great Being praised Nanda and no one else, and
this was -his reason : people never love others as they do a beloved wife;
and he praised her only, because he thought that if the king remembered
her he would remember his children also. When the wise Great Being
praised her in this voice of honey, Queen Nanda seemed to stand in
person before the king. Then the king thought: “No other save Maho-
sadlia can bring back my wife and give her to me ”: as he remembered,
sorrow came over him. Thereupon the Great Being said, “Be not troubled,
sire: queen and sou and mother shall all come back; my return is the
only condition. Be comforted, majesty 1” So he comforted the king; and
the king said, “ I watched and guarded ray .own city so carefully, 1 have
surrounded this city of Upakarl with so great a host, yet this wise man
has taken out of my guarded city queen and son and mother, and lias
handed them over to Vedeha! whilst we were besieging the city, without
a single one’s knowing, he sent Vedeha away with his army and transport!
Can it be that ho knows magic, or how to delude tho eyes 1 ” And he
questioned him thus:
“Do you study magical art, or have you bewitched my eyes, that you ln*ve
delivered Vedeha my enemy out of my hand ?”
On hearing this, the Great Being said: “Sire, I do know magic,
for wise men who have learnt magic, when dauger comes, deliver both
themselves and others:
“Wise men, sire, learn magic in this world ; they deliver themselves, wise
men, full of counsel. I have young men who are clever at breaking barriers;
by the way which they mado me Veueha lias gone to Mithila.”
[459] This suggested that he had gone by the decorated tunnel; so the
king said, “What is this underground way?” and wished to see it. The
Great Being understood from bis look that this was what lie wanted, and
offered to shew it to him :
“ Gome see, O king, a tunnel well made, big enough for elephants or horses,' •
chariots or foot soldiers, brightly illuminated, a tunnel well built.”
1 valli = , the ground being raised and narrow in the middle.

?(f)f <SL
236 •> The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
Then he went on, “Sire, behold the tunnel which was made by my
knowledge: bright as though sun and moon rose within it, decorated,
with eighty great doors and sixty-four small doors, with a hundred and
one bedchambers, and many hundreds of lamp-niches; come with me in
joy and delight, and with your guard enter the city of Upakarl.” With
these words he caused the city gate to be thrown open; and the king
with the hundred and one princes came in. The Great Being descended
from the upper storey, and saluted the king, and led him with his retinue
into the tunnel. When the king saw this tunnel like a decorated city of
the gods, he spoke the praise of the Bodhisat:
“No small gain is it to that Vedeha, who has in his house or kingdom men
so wise as you are, Mahosadha1 *! ”
[460] Then the Great Being shewed him the hundred and one bed­
chambers: tilt; door of one being opened, all opened, and one shut, all shut.
The king went first, gazing at the tunnel, and the wise man went after ; all
the soldiers also entered the tunnel. But when the sage knew that the
king had emerged from the tunnel, lie kept the rest from coining out
by going up to a handle and shutting the tunnel door: then the eighty
great doors and the sixty-four small doors, and the doors of the hundred
and one bedchambers, and the doors of the hundreds of lamp-niches all
shut together; and the whole tunnel became dark as bell. All the great
company were terrified.
Now the Great Being took the sword, which he had hidden yesterday3
as he entered the tunnel: eighteen cubits from the ground he leapt into
the air, descended, and catching the king’s arm, brandished the sword,
and frightened him, crying—“Sire, whose are all the kingdoms of India!”
“gout's, wise sir! spare me!” He replied, “Fear not, sire. I did not
take up my sword from any wish to kill you, but in order to shew my
wisdom.” Then he handed his sword to the king, and when he had taken
it, the other said, “If you wish to kill me, sire, kill me now with that
sword ; if you wish, to spare me, spare me.” “ Wise sir,” lie replied, “ I
promise you safety, fear not.” Ho as he held the sword, they both struck
up a friendship in all sincerity. Then the king said to the Bodhisat,
“Wise sir, with such wisdom ns yours, why not seize the kingdom?”
“Sire, if I wished it, this day I could take all the kingdoms of India and
slay all the kings; but it is not the wise man’s part to gain glory by
slaving others,” “ Wise sir, a great multitude is in distress, being unable
to get out; open the tunnel door and spare their lives.” He opened the
door: all the tunnel became a blaze of light, the people were comforted,
all the kings with their retinue game out and approached the sage, who
1 Cp. p. 178 above.
- Beading hiyyo for bhiyyo (so ituimoae vovsion).

Ao. 546. 237 ^
stood in the wide courtyard with the king. [461] Then those kings said :
“ Wise sir, you have given us our lives; if the door had remained shut
for a little while longer, all would have died there.” “My lords, this
is not the first time your lives have been saved by me.” “When, wise
sir?” “Do you remember when all the kingdoms of India had been
conquered except our'city, and when you went to the park of Uttara-
paficala ready to drink the cup of victory?” “Yes, wise sir.” “Then
this king, with Kevatta, by evil device had poisoned the drink and food,
and intended to murder you; but I did not wish you to die a foul death
before me; so I sent in my men, and broke all the vessels, and thwarted
their plan, and gave you your lives.” They all in fear asked Cujanl,
“Is this true, sire?” “Indeed what I did was by Kevatta’s advice;
the sage speaks truth.” Then they all embraced the Great Being, and
said, “Wise sir, you have been the salvation of us all, you have saved
our lives.” They all bestowed ornaments upon him in respect. The sage
said to the king, “Fear not, sire; the fault lay in association with a
wicked friend. Ask pardon of the kings.” The king said, “I did the
thing because of a bad man: it was my fault; pardon me, never will
I do such a thing again.” Ho received their pardon; they confessed
their faults to each other, and became friends. Then the king sent for
plenty of all sorts of food, perfumes and garlands, and for seven days
they all took their pleasure in the tunnel, and entered the city, and
did great honour to the Great Being; and the king surrounded by the
hundred and one princes sat on a great throne, and desiring to keep the
sage in his court, he said,
“ Support, and honour, double allowance of food and wages, and other great
boons I give ; eat and enjoy at will: but do not return to Vedeka ; what can he
• do for you ? ”
[462] But the sage declined in these words :
“ When one deserts a patron, sire, for the sake of gain, it is a disgrace
to both oneself and the other. While Vedeha lives I could not be another’s
man ; while Vedeha remains, I could not live in another’s kingdom.”
Then the king said to him, “Well, sir, when your king attains to
godhead, promise me to come hither.” “ If l live, I will come, sire.”
So the king did him great honour for seven days, and after that as he
took his leave, ho recited a stanza, promising to give him this and that:
“ I give you a thousand ntkkha* of gold, eighty villages in Kitsi, four hundred
female slaves, and a hundred wives. Take all your army, and go in peace,
Mahosftdlm.”
And ho replied : “Sire, do not trouble about your family. When my
king went hack to his country, I told him to treat Queen Nandh us his
own mother, and Pailcalaeanda as his younger brother, and I married
your daughter to him with the ceremonial sprinkling, I will soon send

| f - (c t
The Jdtaka. Book XXII. O-Lj
.ifS^y ________________________ _ •
back yopr mother, wife, ■ and son.” “ Good ! ” said the king, and ga\ e
him a dowry for his daughter, men slaves and women slaves, dress and
ornaments, gold and precious metal, decorated elephants and horses anil
chariots. He then gave orders for the army to execute : [403]
“ Let them give even double quantity to the elephants and horses, let them
content charioteers and footmen with food and drink.”
This said, he dismissed the sage with these words :
“Go, wise sir, taking elephants, horses, chariots, and footmen; let King
Vedeha see you back in Mithila.”
Thus he dismissed the sage with great honour. And the hundred and
one kings did honour to the Great Being, and gave him rich gifts. And
the spies who had been on service with them Surrounded the sage. With
a great company he set out; and on the way, he sent men to receive the
revenues of those villages which King Ciijanl had given him. Then lit
arrived at the kingdom of Vedeha.
Now Senaka had placed a man in the way, to watch and see whether
King G'ujani came or not, and to tell him of the coming of anyone. He
saw the Great Being at three leagues off, and returning told how the sage
was returning with a great company. V ith this news he went to the
palace. The king also looking out by a window in the upper storey saw
the great host, and was frightened. “The Groat Being s company is small,
this is very large ; can it be Ofcjanl come himself?” He put this question
as follows :
“Elephants, horses, chariots, footmen, a great army is visible, with four
divisions, terrible in asjiect; what does it mean, wise sirs?”
Senaka replied ;
“The greatest joy is what you see, sire: Mahosadfth is safe, with all his
host.”
The king said to this, “Senaka, the wise man’s army is small, this
[464] is very great.” “Sire, King Oulani must have been pleased with
him, and therefore must have given this host to him.” The king pro­
claimed through the city by beat of drum :
“ Let the city be decorated to welcome the return of the wise man.”
The townspeople obeyed. The wise man entered the city and came to
the king’s palace; then the king rose, and embraced him, and returning
to his throne spoke pleasantly to him :
« As four men leave a corpse in the cemetery, so we left you in the kingdom
of Ksmpilliya and returned. But you--by what colour, or what means, or what
device did you save yourself?”
The Great Being replied :
u u. OI1„ uurnuse -Vedelm, I overmastered another, by plan I outdid plan,
. •• I r ' ..... | king as the ocean encompasses India.”
U warrior, and I encompassed tue kio,, i

'Ay'----SjV\ • ' ^
t ( l) | (&T
No. 546. '- 239 Z* LJ
This pleased the king. Then the other told him of the gift which
King CulanI had made:
“A thousand nikkhas of gold were given to me, and eighty villages in Kfisi
four hundred slave women, and a hundred wives, and with all the army 1 have
returned wife home.” J
Then the king, exceedingly pleased and overjoyed, uttered this pious
hymn in praise of the Great Being’s merit:
[4Go] “Happiness truly comes by living with the wise. As birds from a
closed cage, as fish from a net, so Mahosadha set us free when we were in the
hands of our enemies.”
Senaka answered him thus : ■
“Even so, sire, there is happiness with a wise man. As birds from a closed
cage, as fish from the net, so Mahcsadha set us free when we were in the hands
of our enemies.”
lhen the king set the drum of festival beating around the city:
“ there lie a festival for seven days, and let all who have goodwill
to me do honour and service to the wise man.” The Master thus ex­
plained it:
“ Let them sound all manner of lutes, drums and tabors, let concha of
Magadha boom, merrily roll the kettledrums.”
Townsfolk and countryfolk in general, eager to do honour to the sage,
on hearing the proclamation made merry with a will. The Master ex­
plained it thus:
“Women and maids, vesiya and brahmin wives, brought plenty of food and
drink to the sage. Elephant drivers, lifegUard-smeii, charioteers, footmen, all
did the like; and so did all the people from country and villages assembled.
The multitude were glad to see the sage returned, and at his reception shawls
were waved in the air.” '
[466] At the end of the festival, the Great Being went to the palace
and said, “Sire, King CujanT’s mother and wife and son should be sent
back at once.” “Very good, my son, send them back.” So he shewed
all respect to those three, and entertained also the host that had come
with him ; thus he sent the three back well attended, with his own men,
and the hundred wives and the four hundred slave women whom the
king had given him, he sent with Queen Narnia, and the company that
came with him he also sent. When this great company reached the city
of Uttarapancala, the king asked his mother, “Did King Vedeha treat
you well, my mother?” “My sou, wluit are you saying? lie treated
me with the same honour as if I had been a goddess.” Then she told
how Queen Nanda had been treated as a mother, and Pancalaeanda
as a younger brother. This pleased the king very much, and he sent a
rich gift; aud from that time forward both lived in friendship and amity1.
1
Mahuumnuigga-khltHdum itiffhitavi,
*

/s#*- ' Go^X
<SL
% $ %
\%^—v /
X^?y .'gvX/
240 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
Now , Paiicalacandl was very dear and precious to the king; and
in the second year she bore him a son. In his tenth year, King "V edeha
died. The Bodhisat raised the royal parasol for him, and asked leave
to go to his grandfather, King CulanT. The boy said, “Wise sir, do
not leave me in my childhood; I will honour you as a father.” And
Pancalacandl said, “Wise sir, there is none to protect us if you go;
do not go.” But ho replied, “My promise has been given; I cannot
but go.” So amidst the lamentations of the multitude, he departed with
his servants, and came to ITttarapaficala city. The king healing of his
arrival came to meet him, and led him into the city with great pomp, and
gave him a great house, and besides the eighty villages given at first,
[167] gave him another present; and he served that king. At that time
a religious woman, named BlierT, used to take her meals constantly in
the palace; she was wise and learned, and she had never seen the Great
Being before; she heard the report that the wise Mahosadha. was serving
the king. He also had never seen her before, but he heard that a religious
woman named Bherl had her meals in the palace. Now Queen Nanda
was ill pleased with the Bodhisat, because he had separated her from her
husband’s love, and caused her annoyance ; so she sent for five women
whom she trusted, and said, “ Watch for a fault in the wise man, and
let us try to make him fall out with the king.” So they went about
looking for an occasion against him. And one day it so happened that
this religious woman after her meal was going forth, and caught sight
of the Bodhisat in the courtyard on his way to wait on the king. He
saluted her, and stood still. She thought, “This they say is a wise man :
I will see whether lie he wise or no.” So she asked him a question by
a gesture of the hand : looking towards the Bodhisat* she opened her
band. Her idea was to enquire whether the king took good care or
not of this wise man whom he had brought from another country. W hen
the Bodhisat saw that she was asking him a question by gesture, he
answered it by clenching his fist: what he meant was, “ Your reverence1,
the king brought me here in fulfilment of a promise, and now he keeps his
fist tight closed and gives me nothing.” She understood; and stretching
out her hand she rubbed her head, as much as to say, “Wise sir, if you
are displeased, why do you not become an ascetic like mei” At this
the Great Being stroked his stomach, as who should say, “Your reverence ,
them are many that I have to support, and that is why I do not become
an ascetic ” After this dumb questioning she returned to her dwelling,
a* aa* * *«** »"■' in *° “ * ***. fi7 etl,p
confidantes mw M tfcfa frr» * «™1»»; »".l coining
th, king, they Mill, “My lord, Million* h«» .mole o plot with Bhnn
, toll, «».; th. n. »■ "<»»"■ h»- i.W»«i'll? k— Th.
Burmese version him a male ascetic ip d,,s sto1-'

f(¥ )| <SL
\%>----/ /
\% .1
jVo. 546. 241
the ascetic to seize your kingdom, and he is your enemy.” So they
slandered him. “What have you heard or seen?” the king asked.
[468] They said, “ Sire, as the ascetic was going out after her meal,
seeing the Great Being, she opened her hand; as who should say, ‘ Cannot
you crush the king flat like the palm of the hand or a threshing-floor,
and seize the kingdom for yourself? ’ And Maliosadha clenched his fist,
making as though he held a sword, as who should say, ‘ In a few days
I will cut off his head and get him into my power.’ She signalled, ‘ Cut
off his head,’ by rubbing her own head with her hand; the Great Being
signalled, * I will cut him in half,’ by rubbing his belly. Be vigilant,
sire ! Mahosadha ought to be put to death.” The king, hearing this,
thought, “ I cannot hurt this wise man; I will question the ascetic. ’
Next day- accordingly, at the time of her meal, he came up and asked,
“Madam, have you seen wise Mahosadha?” “Yes, sire, yesterday, as
I was going out after my meal.” “ Did you have any conversation to­
gether?” “Conversation? no; but I had heard of his wisdom, and in
order to try it I asked him, by dumb signs, shutting my haud, whether
the king was openhauded to him or closefisted, did he treat him with
kindness or not. He closed his fist, implying that his master had made
him come hither in fulfilment of a promise, and now gave him nothing.
Then I rubbed my head, to enquire why he did not become an ascetic
if he were not satisfied; he stroked his belly, meaning that there were
many for him to feed, many bellies to fill, and therefore he did not
become an ascetic.” “And is Mahosadha a wise man? ‘A es, indeed,
sire: in all the earth there is not his like for wisdom. Alter hearing
her account, the king dismissed her. After she had gone, the sage came
to wait upon the king; and the king asked him, “ Have you seen, Sir,
. the ascetic Bheri ? ” “ Yes, sire, I saw her yesterday on her way out, and
she asked me a question by dumb signs, and I answered her at once,
And he told the story as she had done. The king in his pleasure that
day gave him the post of commander-in-chief, and put him in sole charge.
Great was his glory, second only to the kings. He thought: “ I he king
all at once [469] lias given'me exceeding great renown; this is what
kings do even when they wish to slay. Suppose I try the king to see
whether he has goodwill towards me or not. No one else will be able
to find this out; but the ascetic Bheri is full of wisdom, and she will
find a way.” So taking a quantity of flowers and scents, he went to
the ascetic and, after saluting her, said, “Madam, since you told the
king of my merits, the king has overwhelmed me with spleudid gifts;
but whether he does it in sincerity or not I do not know. It would
be well if you could find out for me the king’s mind.” She promised
to do so; and next day, as she was going to the palace, the Question
of Dakarakkhasa the Water-Demon came into her mind. Then this
J. vx. Id

242 The Jcitctka. Book XXII. iS I j
________________________________________________________________________________________________
occurred to her: ' “ I must not be like a spy, but I must find an op­
portunity to ask the question, and discover whether the king has good­
will to the wise man.” So she went. And after her meal, she sat still,
and the king saluting her sat down on one side. Then she thought, “ If
the king bears ill will to the sage, and when he is asked the question
if he declares his ill will in the presence of a number of people, that will
not do; I will ask him apart.” She said, “ Sire, I wish to speak to you
in private.” The king sent his attendants away. She said, “ I want to
ask your majesty a question.” “Ask, madam, and if I know it I will
reply.” Then she recited the first stanza in the Question of Dakarak-
khasa1:
“ If there were seven of you voyaging on the ocean, and a demon seeking for
a human sacrifice should seize the ship, in what order would you give them up
and save yourself from the water-demon ?”
[170] The king answered by another stanza, in all sincerity :
“ First I would give my mother, next my wife, next my brother, fourth my
friend, fifth my brahmin, sixth myself, but I would not give up Mahosadha.”
rims the ascetic discovered the goodwill of the king towards the Great
Being; but his merit was not published thereby, so she thought of some­
thing else : “ In a large company I will praise the merits of these others,
and the king will praise the wise man’s merit instead; thus the wise
man’s merit will be made as clear as the moon shining in the sky.” So
she collected all the denizens of the inner palace, and in their presence
asked the same question and received the same answer; then she said,
“Sire, you say that you would give first your mother: but a mother
is of great merit, and your mother is not as other mothers, she is very
useful.’ And she recited her merits in a couple of stanzas :
“She reared you and she brought you forth, and for a long time was kind to
you, when Chambhl offended against you she was wise and saw what was for
3]0ur good, and by putting a counterfeit in your place she saved you from harm.
tMich a mother, who gave you life, your own mother who bore you in her womb,
for what fault could you give her to the water-demon2?”
1 Mentioned in v. 75 (p. 42 of translation).
Culani's father was named Mahaculani; and when tire child was young, the
mother committed adultery with the chaplain Ohatnbhl, then poisoned her husband
and made the brahmin king in his place, and became hiB queen. One day [471] the
boy said he was hungry, and she gave him molasses to eat; but flies swarmed about
it, so the boy, to get rid of tho flies, dropt some upon the ground and drove away
those that were near him. The flies flew away and settled on the molasses that was
on the ground. So be ate his sweetmeat, washed his hands, rinsed his mouth, and
wont away. But tho brahmin, seeing this, thought: “ If he has found out. this way of
getting rid of the flies, when he grows up he will take tho kingdom from me; so I will
kill him now.” He told Quoen Talata, and she said, "Very good, my lord ; I killed my
husband for love of you, and what is the boy to me V Hut let us kill him secretly.”
So she deceived the brahmin. But being oluvor and .kilt'ul «he hit on a plan. Sending

(. ( No. 546. 243 ,
\%>—'A / _______________________________________________
[472] To this the king replied, “ Many are my mother’s virtues, and
I acknowledge her claims upon me, but mine are still more numerous1,”
and then he described her faults in a couple of stanzas :
“Like a young girl she wears ornaments which she ought not to use, she
mocks unseasonably at doorkeepers and guards, unbidden she sends messages
to rival kings ; and for these faults I would give her to the water-demon.”
for the cook, she said to him, “Friend, my son prince CulanI and your son young
Dhanusekha were bom on one day, they have grown up together in friendship. The
brahmin Chambhi wants to kill iny son; prithee save his life ! ” He was willing, and
asked how. “Let my son,” she said, “be often in your house; you and he must
both sleep in the great kitchen for several days to avoid suspicion. 'When all is safe,
put a heap of sheep’s bones in the place where you lie, and at the time when men go to
sleep, set fire to the kitchen, and without a word to anyone take my son and yours,
go out by the house door, and go to another country, and protect my son s life without
letting anyone kuow that he is a prince.” He promised, and she gave him a quantity
of treasure. He did as she bade, and went with the boy to the city of Siigala in the
Madda kingdom, where he served the king: he dismissed his former cook and took
this in his place. The two boys used to go to the palace with him. The king asked
whose sons they were; the cook said they were his. “.Surely they are not alike! ”
said the king. “ They had different mothers,” he said. As time went on they played
about in the palace with the king's daughter. Then Cfilani and the princess, from
seeing each other constantly, fell in love. In the playroom, the prince used to make
the princess fetch his ball or dice; if she would not, he hit her on the head and made
her cry; the king hearing her cry asked who had done it, and the nurses would come
to enquire; but the princess thought, “If I say he did it, my father will play the
king over him,” and for love of him she would not tell, but said no one had struck
her. But one day the king saw him do it; and he thought, “ This lad is not like the
cook, he is handsome and attractive and very fearless; he cannot be his son. So
after that he shewed favour to the lad. The nurses used to bring food for the
princess in the playroom, and she gave some to the other children; they used to go
down on their knees to take it, but prince Cu]anl without stopping his play put out
his hand for it as he stood. The king saw this. One day, CulanI’s ball ran under
the king’s little couch. The lad went to got it, but in pride of his own majesty
[172] pulled it out with a stick, that he might not bend under the bed of a foreign
king. When the king saw this, he felt sure that the lad was no cook’s son; so he
sent for the cook, and asked him whoso son he was. “ Mine, my lord,” he said.
“ I know who is your son' and who is not; tell me the truth—if you do not, you are a
dead man,” and he drew his sword. The cook, terrified out of his wits, said, “ My
lord, I will tell yon, but I ask you for secrecy.” The king granted his request, and
promised immunity. Then he told the truth. Then the king adorned his daughter,
and gave her to the lad for his handmaiden.—Now on the day when these ran away,
there was a great outcry throughout the city, “ The cook and his son and prince
Cfilani aro burnt up in the kitchen ! ” Queen Talata, hearing it, told the brahmin that
his wish had been fulfilled, and they were all threo burnt up in the kitchen. Ho was
highly pleased, and Queen Talata, shewing him tho goat's bones as prince Oulani’s,
had them burnt.
1 The text oan hardly be right, aguna is wanted, as the context Bhews, and warn’
is not wautud. The Burmese version has “her faults are more than tho virtues."
Bead pan’ ev' aguiui ?
16—3

/"I
<SL
X^ ^ 2 4 4 The Jat aha. Book XXII.
[473] “ So be it, sire; yet your wife has much merit,” and she declared
her merit thus:
“She is chief amongst womankind, she is exceeding gracious of speech,
devoted, virtuous, who cleaves to you like your shadow, not given to anger,
prudent, wise, who sees your good: for what fault would you give your wife
to the water-demon ? ”
He described her faults :
“ By her sensual attractions she has made me subject to evil influence, and
asks what she should not for her sons. In my passion I give her many and
many a gift; I relinquish what is very hard to give, and afterwards I bitterly
repent: for that fault I would give my wife to the water-demon.”
The ascetic said, “ Be it so : but your younger brother Prince Tikhina-
luanti is useful to you ; for what fault would you give him 1
[474] “ He who gave prosperity to the people, and when you were living in
foreign parts brought you back home, he whom great wealth could not influence,
peerless bowman and hero, TikhinamantI: for what fault would you give your
brother to the water-demon1f ”
The king described his fault:
“He thinks, ‘I gave prosperity to the people, I brought him back home
when he was living in foreign parts, great wealth could not influence me, I
am a peerless bowman and hero, and sharp in counsel, by me he was made
king.' He does not come to wait on me, madam, as he used to do ; that is
the fault for which 1 would give iny brother to the water-demon.”
[475] The ascetic said, “ So much for your brother’s fault: but Prince
Dhanusekha is devoted in his love for you, and very useful ”: and she
described his merit:
“In one night both you and Dhanusekhava were born here, both called
Pancala, friends and companions : through all j’our life he has followed you,
your joy and pain were his, zealous and careful by night and day in all service :
for what fault would you give your friend to the water-demon ?”
1 He was horn while his mother lived with the brahmin. When he grew up, the
brahmin put a sword in his hand, told him to take it and stand by him. He, thinking
that the brahmin was his father, did so. But one of the courtiers told him that he
was not that man’s son. “ When you were in your mother’s womb,” said he, “ Queen
Talata murdered the king and made this man king instead; you are the son of King
Mahaeulani. ” He was angry, and determined to find a way to kill the brahmin. He
ontered the palace, and gave the sword to one servant, and then said to another,
‘Make a brawl at the palace gate, and declare that this sword is yours.” Then he
went in, and they began brawling. The prince sent a messenger to enquire what the
noise was. He returned and said it was a quarrel about the sword. The brahmin
heaving it asked, what sword? The prince said, “Is the sword which you gave me
another’s property? ” “ What have you said, my son ! ” “ Well, shall I send for it?
will you recognize it ? ” He sent for it, and, drawing it from the scabbard, said, “ Look
at it”; on pretence of shewing it to the brahmin he went up to him, and with one
blow cut off his head, which dropt at his feet. Then he cleansed the palace, and
decorated the city, and was proclaimed king. Then his mother told him how prince
<’ii]anf was living in Madda; whereupon the prince went thither with an army and
brought back hie brother and made him king.

• G0^>\
?(I)| <SL
iVo. 546. * 245
Then the king described his fault:
“ Madam, through all my life he used to make merry with me, and to-day
also he makes free excessively for the same reason. If I talk in secret with
my wife, in he comes unbidden and unannounced. Give him a chance and
an opening, he acts shamelessly and disrespectfully. That is the fault for which
I would give my friend to the water-demon.”
The ascetic said; “ So much for his fault; but the chaplain is very
useful to you,” and she described his merit:
“ lie is clever, knows all omens and sounds, skilled in signs and dreams,
goings out and comings in, [476] understands all the tokens in earth and air
and stare : for what fault would you give the brahmin to the water-demon 1”
The king explained his fault:
“ Even in company he stares at me with open eyes; therefore I would give
this rascal with his puckered brows to the water-demon.”
Then the ascetic said: “Sire, you say you would give to the water-
demon all these five, beginning with your mother, and that you would
give your own life lor the wise Mahosadha, not taking into account your
great glory: what merit do you see in him 1 ” and she recited these
stanzas :
“Sire, you dwell amidst your courtiers in a great continent surrounded bv
the sea, with the ocean in place of an encircling wall: lord of the earth, with
a mighty empire, victorious, sole emperor, your glory has become great. You
have sixteen thousand women drest in jewels and ornaments, women of all
nations, resplendent like maidens divine. Thus provided for every need, every
desire fulfilled, you have lived long in happiness and bliss. Then by what reason
or what cause do you sacrifice your precious life to protect the sage?”
[477] On hearing this, he recited the following stanzas in praise of the
wise man’s merit:
“ Since Mahosadha, madam, came to me, I have not seen the stedfast man
do the most trifling wrong. If I should die before him at any time, he would
bring happiness to my sons and grandsons. He knows all things, past or future.
This man without sin I would not give to the water-demon.”
Thus this Birth came to its appropriate end. Then the ascetic thought:
“This is not enough to shew'forth the wise man’s merits; I will make
them known to all people in the city, like one that spreads scented oil
over the surface of the sea.” So taking the king with her, she came
down from the palace, and prepared a seat in the palace courtyard, and
made him sit there; then gathering the people together, she asked the
king that Question of the Water-Demon over again from the beginning;
and when he had answered it as described above, she addressed the people
thus:
Hear this, men of Pahcalu, which Ciljanl has said. To protect the wise
loan he sacrifices his own precious life. [478J His mother’s life, his wife’s and
his brother’s, his friend's life and his own, PanciUa is ready to sacrifice. So
marvellous is the power of wisdom, so clever and so intelligent, for good in this
world and For happiness in the next.’’

■ ■
|(S)| <r ySL
> ^ IP 246 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
So like one that places the topmost pinnacle upon a heap of treasuie,
she put the pinnacle on her demonstration of the Great Being’s merit.
Here endeth the Question of the Water-Demon1, and here endeth also
the whole tale of the Great Tunnel.
This is the identification of the Birth :
“ Uppalavanni was Blien, Suddhodana was the wise man’s father, M ah a may a
his mother, the beautiful Biniba was Amara, Ananda was the parrot, Sariputta
was CfiianI, Mahosadha was the lord of the world : thus understand the Birth.
Devadutta was Kevatta, Cullanandiku, was Talata, Simdan was Pahcalacandi,
Yasassikii was the queen, Ambattha was Kavinda, Potthapada was Pukkusa,
Pilotika was Devinda, Saecaka was Seuaka, Ditthamangaiika was Queen Udum-
barii, Kundall was the maynali bird, and Laludayl was Vedelia.’
No. 547.
VESSANTARA-JATAKA.
[479] “ Ten boons,” etc. This story the Master told while dwelling near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Grove, about a shower of rain.
When the Master turning the precious Wheel of the Law came in due
course to Rajagaha, where he spent the winter, with Elder Udftyi leading the
way, and attended by twenty thousand saints, he entered Kapilavatthu: where­
upon the Sakya princes gathered together to see the chief of their clan. 1 hey
inspected the Blessed One’s abode, saying, “ A delightful place this Banyan
Grove, worthy of Sakka.” Then they made all due provision for guarding it;
and making ready to meet him with fragrant posies in their hands, they sent
first all the youngest boys and girls of the township drest in their best, next the
princes and princesses, and amongst these themselves did honour to the Master
with fragrant flowers and powders, escorting the Blessed One as far as the
Banyan Park ; where the Blessed One took his seat, surrounded by twenty
thousand saints upon the Buddha’s goodly seat, which was appointed for him.
Now the Siikiyas are a proud and stiff-necked race; and they, thinking within
themselves, “ Siddhattha’s boy is younger than we ; lie is our younger brother,
our nephew, our grandson,” said to the younger princes: “You do him obeisance ;
we will sit behind you.” As they sat there without duing obeisance to him, the
Blessed One, perceiving their intent,thought, to himself; “My kinsfolk do me no
obeisance ; well, I will make them do so.” So be caused to arise in him that
ecstasy which is based on transcendent faculty, rose up into the air, and as
though shaking off the dust of his feet upon their heads, performed a miracle
like the twofold miracle at the foot of the knot-mango tree-. The king, seeing
thig wondor, said, “Sir, 'ii the day of your birth, when 1 saw your feet placed
upon the head of Brahmin Kaladevula who had eoino to do you obeisance, l did
obeisance to you, and that was the first time. <*n tho day of the blowing
Festival^ when you sate on tho royal seat under the shade of a rose-apple tree,
1 l)u kara h k ho ml jia fiho nitthito.
• See No. 488 (trans. iv. 107).
a Hardy, Manual, p. 150; and Vol. tv. p. 104 of this translation.

1 ( 1 )i (fiT
\X ^ 3 ^ v No. 547. .t247
when I saw that the shadow of the tree moved not, I did obeisance to your feet;
and that was the second time. And now again, I see a miracle which never L
saw before, and do obeisance to your feet: this is the third time. ’ But when
the king had thus done obeisance, not one Sakiya could sit still and refrain,
they did obeisance one and all.
The Blessed One, having thus made his kinsfolk do him obeisance, came down
from the air and sat upon the appointed seat; when the Blessed One was there
se ted, his kinsfolk were made wise, and sat with peace in their hearts. Then
a great cloud arose, and burst in a shower of rain: down came the rain red and
with a loud noise, and those who desired to be wet were wetted, [480] but he
who did not, had not even a drop fallen upon his body. All who saw it
were astonished at the miracle, and cried one to another—“ Lo a marvel! lo
a miracle ! lo the power of the Buddhas, on whose kinsfolk such a shower of
rain is falling!” On hearing this, the Buddha said: “This is not the first
time, Brethren, that a great shower of rain has fallen upon my kinsfolk ; and
then, at their request, he told a story of the pas t.
Once upon a time, a king named Sivi, reigning in the city ol Jetuttara
in the kingdom of Sivi, had a son named Safijaya. hen the lad came
of age, the king brought him a princess named Phusati, daughter ol
king Madda, and handed over the kingdom to him, making khusatl his
queen consort. Her former connexion with the world was as follows.
In the ninety-first age from this, a Teacher arose in the world named
Vipassl. Whilst he was dwelling in the deer-park of Khema, near the
city of Bandliumati, a certain king sent to King Bandhuma a golden
wreath worth a hundred thousand pieces of money, with precious sandal
wood. Now the king had two daughters; and being desirous to give this
present to them, he gave the sandal wood to the elder and the golden
wreath to the younger. But both declined to use these gifts tor them­
selves; and with the intent to offer them in respect to the Master, they
said to the king: “ Father, we will offer to the Dasabala this sandal wood
and this golden wreath.” To this the king gave his consent. So the elder
princess powdered the sandal wood, and filled with the powder a golden
box ; and the younger sister caused the golden wreath to be made into
a golden necklet, and laid it in a golden box. Then they both proceeded
to the hermitage in the deer-park; and the elder sister, reverently sprink­
ling the Dasabala’s golden body with the sandal wood powder, scattered
the rest in his cell, and said this prayer: “ Sir, in time to come, may I be
the mother of a Buddha like you.” The younger reverently placed upon
the Dasabala’s golden body the gold-lace necklet which had been made out
of the golden wreath, and prayed, “ Sir, until I attain sainthood, may this
ornament never part from my body. And tbe Master granted cheii
prayers.
[481] Both these, after their life was past, came into being in the
world of gods. The elder sister, passing from the world of gods to the

•
The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
k*)lj
world of men and back again, at the end of the ninety-first age became
Queen M'aya mother of the Buddha. The younger sister passing to and
fro in like manner, in the time of the Dasabala Kassapa became the
daughter of King Kiki; and being born with the semblance of a necklet
upon her neck and shoulders, beautiful as though drawn by a painter,
she was named Uracchada. When she was a girl of sixteen years, she
heard a pious utterance of the Master, and attained to the fruit of the
First Path, and so the very same day she attained sainthood, and then
entered the Order, and entered Nirvana.
Now King Kiki had seven other daughters, whose names were :
“Samanl, Samana, the holy Sister Gutta,
BhikkhudSsika, and Dhammit and Sudhamma,
And of the sisters the seventh Samghadasl.”
fn this manifestation of the Buddha, these sisters were—
“Khema, Uppalavanna, the third was Patacara,
Gotama, Dhammadinna, and sixthly Mahamaya,
And of this band of sisters the seventh was Visakha.”
Now of these Phusatl became Sudhamma; who did good deeds and
gave alms, and by fruit of the offering of sandal wood done to Buddha
VipassI, had her body as it were sprinkled with choice sandal wood. Then
passing to and fro between the worlds of men and of gods, eventually she
became chief queen of Sakka king of the gods. After her days there
were done1, and the five customary signs were to be seen, Sakka king of
the gods, realizing that her time was exhausted, escorted her with great
glory to the pleasaunce in Nandaua grove; then as she reclined on
a richly adorned seat, he, sitting beside it, said to her: “Dear Phusatl,
ton boons I grant you : choose.” With these words, he uttered the first
stanza in this Great Vessantara Birth with its thousand stanzas:
“ Ten boons 1 give thee, Phusatl, 0 beauteous lady bright:
G'hoose thou whatever on the earth is precious in thy sight.”
[482] Thus came she to be established in the world of god3 by the
preaching in the Great Vessantara.
But she, not knowing the circumstances of her re-birth, felt faint, and
said the second stanza :
“Glory to thee, 0 king of gods! what, sin is done by me,
To send me .from this lovely place as winds blow down a tree?”
And Sakka perceiving her despondency uttered two stanzas :
“ Dear art thou still as thou hast been, and sin thou hast not done:
i speak because thy merit now is all used up and gone.
Now thy departure is at hand, the hour of death draws nigh :
Ten boons 1 offer thee to choose ; then choose, Indore thou die.”
1 I.e. before she liccanxe the mother of Buddha.

f(S)| <SL
JVb. 5 4 7 . * 2 4 9
Hearing these words of Sakka, and convinced that she must die, she
said, choosing the boons1:
“ King Sakka, lord of beings all, a boon hath granted me:
I bless him: craving that my life in Sivi’s realm may be.
Black eyes, black pupils like a fawn, black eyebrows may I have,
And Phusatl my name: this boon, 0 bounteous one, 1 crave.
A son be mine, revered by kings, famed, glorious, debonair,
Bounteous, ungrudging, one to lend a ready ear to prayer.
And while the babe is in my womb let not my figure go,
Let it be slim and graceful like a finely fashioned bow.
[483] Still Sakka, may my breasts be firm, nor white-haired may I be2;
My body all unblemished, may I set the death-doomed free3.
Mid herons’ cries, and peacocks’ calls, with waiting women fair,
Poets and bards to siug our praise, shawls waving in the air4,
When rattling on the painted door the menial calls aloud,
‘God bless King Sivi! come to meat!’ be 1 his queen avowed.”
Sakka said :
“ Know that these boons, my lady bright, which I have granted thee,
In Sivi kingdom, beauteous one, all ten fulfilled shall be.”
[484] “So spake the monarch of the gods, the great Sujampati,
Called Vasava, well pleased to grant a boon to Phusatl.’’
When she had thus chosen her boons, she left that world, and was
conceived in the womb of King Madda’s queen5; and when she was born,
because her body was as it were sprinkled with the perfume of sandal
wood, on her name-day they called her by the name Phusatl. She grew
uj) amidst a great company of attendants until in her sixteenth year she
surpassed all other in beauty. At that time Prince Safijaya, son of the
King of Sivi, was to be invested with the White Umbrella; the princess
was sent for to be his bride, and she was made Queen Consort at the head
• of sixteen thousand women; wherefore it is said —
“Next born a princess, Phusatl was to the city led
Jetuttara, ana there anon to Safyaya was wed.”
1 The Ten Boons, according to the scholiast, are: (1) to he chief queen, (2) to have
dark eyes, (3) to have dark eyebrows, (4) to be named Phusatl, (5) to have a son, (G) to
keep her figure slim, (7) flint her breasts he firm, (8) not to become grey-haired, (9) to
have soft skin, (10) to save the condemned. This section is called Daia-vura-gdthfi.
- Reading iiasxan tu for naisantu. 01. the Burmese version, p. 7: “grant that
my hair may not whiten.’’
3 I.e. may I be fair enough to keep my influence over the king.
4 The compound khttjjatecalukkhakdkinne I cannot undorstand. It may oonluin
khujja ‘humpback’ and cefaka ‘slave’; but the second part may possibly represent
some Huoh word os celam ‘cloth,’ or even cehikkht'pa ‘waving of oloths in token of
joy.’ Tho next compound I translate as though it were sutamd gadha0, as Fausboll
suggests in his note. Citraggulerughusite seems to contaiu cujgala ‘a peg’ and ugglio-
sit a ‘sounded,1 in some form; the scholiast uses the word 'door.'
5 Here the story proper begins; we have returned to the time referred to in the
introduction, p. 247.

:®J <SL
The Jcitaka. Book XXII. ■ J
SaQjaya loved her lief and dearly. Now Sakka pondering remembered
how that nine of his ten boons given to Phusati were fulfilled. “ But one
is left unfulfilled,” he thought, “a goodly son ; this I will fulfil for her.’
At that time the Great Being was in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three,
and his time was done; perceiving which Sakka approached him, and
said, “Venerable Sir, you must enter the world of men; without delay
you must be conceived in the womb of Phusati, Queen Consort of the
King of Sivi.”
With these words, asking the consent of the Great Being and the
sixty thousand sons of the gods who were destined to re-birth, he went to
his own place. The Great Being came down and was re-born there, and
the sixty thousand gods were born in the families of sixty thousand
courtiers. Phusati, when the Great Being was conceived in her womb,
finding herself with child, desired six alms-halls to be built, one at each
of the four gates, one in the middle of the city, and one at her own door;
that each day she might distribute six hundred thousand pieces. The
king, learning how it was with her, consulted the fortune-tellers, who
said, “Great King, in thy wife’s womb is conceived a being devoted to
almsgiving, who will never be satisfied with giving.” Hearing this he
was pleased, and made a practice of giving as before said.
[485] From the time of the Bod hi safe conception, there was no end
one might say to the king’s revenue; by the influence of the king’s
goodness, the kings of all India sent him presents.
Now the queen while with child remained with her large company of
attendants, until ten months were fulfilled, and then she wished to visit
the city. She informed the king, who caused the city to be decorated like
to a city of the gods : lie set his queen in a noble chariot, and made
procession about tire city rightwise. When they had reached the midst
of flic Vessa1 quarter, the pains of travail" seized upon her. They told
the king, and then and ihere he caused a lying-in chamber to be made
and made her go there; and then she brought forth a son; wherefore it
is mtid—
“ Ten months site bore me in her .womb ; procession then they made;
And Phusati in Vessa. Street of me was brought to bed.”
The Great Being came from his mother’s womb free from impurity,
open-eyed, and on the instant holding out his hand to his mother, he said,
“Mother, I wish to make some gift; is there anything?” She replied,
“ Yes, my son, give as you will,” and dropped a purse of a thousand pieces
into the outstretched hand. Three times the Great Being spoke as soon as
born : in the Ummagga Birth, in this Birth, and in his last Birth. On
1 Vai>;yii.
* kummajo.viiid.

(!,--(-- ‘ - et- oi V C). \ | <SL
S '
*>• 547. •- 251
liis name-day, because he was born in the Yessa Street, they gave him the
name Vessantara ; wherefore it is said :
“ ^ name not from the mother’s side nor from the father’s came;
As 1 was born in Yessa Street, Vessantara’s my name.”
On his very birthday, a female flying elephant brought a young one,
esteemed to be of lucky omen, white all over, and left it in the royal
stables. Because this creature came to supply a need of the Great Being,
they named it Paccaya. The king appointed four times sixty 1 nurses for
the Great Being, neither too tall nor too short, and free from all other
fault, with sweet milk ; lie appointed also nurses for the sixty thousand
children born with him, and so he grew up surrounddcl by this great
company of sixty thousand children. The king caused to be made a
prince’s necklace with a hundred thousand pieces of money, and gave it to
his son ; but he, being of four or five years of age, [486] gave it away to
his nurses, nor would he take it back when they wished to give it. They
told this to the king, who said, “What my son has given is well given ; be
it a Brahmin’s gift,” and had another necklace made. But the prince still
in his childhood gave this also to his nurses, and so nine times over.
When he was eight years old, as he reclined on his couch, the boy
thought to himself: “ All that I give comes from without, and this does
not satisfy me ; I wish to give something of my very own. If one should
ask my heart, I would cut open my breast, and tear it out, and give it ;
if oue ask my eyes, 1 would pluck out my eyes and give them; if one
should ask my flesh, 1 would cut off all the flesh of my body and give it.”
And thus he pondered with all his being and the depths of his heart; this
earth, forty thousand quadrillions of leagues2 in extent, and two hundred
thousands of leagues in depth, quaked thundering like a great mad
elephant; Sineru chief of mountains bowed like a sapling in hot steam,
and seemed to dance, and stood leaning towards the city of Jetuttara ; at
the earth’s rumbling the sky thundered with lightning and rain ; forked
lightning flashed; the ocean was stirred up : Sakka king of the gods clapt
his arms, Mali a brahma gave a sign of approval, high as Brahmas World
all was in uproar; wherefore it is said also :
“ When I was yet a little boy, but of the age of eight
Upon my terrace, charity and gifts I meditate.
If any man should ask of me blood, body, heart, or eve,
Or blood or body, eye or heart I’d give him, was my cry.
And as with all my being 1 pondered with thoughts like these
The unshaken earth did shake and quake with mountains, woods and
trees.”
1 So the Burmese, p. 9: but cutimtthi usually means 01. The idea was however
that four should uttend on him in each of the sixty divisions of the day and night.
Pour nahutaa (the nahuta is one followed by 28 ciphers).

x The Jdtaka. Booh XXII. lo^Li
5 ^ 2
By the age of sixteen, the Bodhisatta had attained a mastery of all
sciences. Then his father, desiring to make him king, consulted with his
mother; from the family of King Madda they brought his first cousin,
named Maddi, with sixteen thousand attendant women, and made her his
Queen Consort, and sprinkled him with the water of coronation. From
the time of his receiving the kingdom he distributed much alms, givii g
each day six hundred thousand pieces of money.
By and by Queen Maddi [487] brought forth a son, and they laid him
in a golden hammock, for which reason they gave him the name of Prince
Jaii. By the time he could go on foot the queen bore a daughter, and they
laid her in a black skin, for which reason they gave her the name of
Kanliajina. Each month the Great Being would visit his six alms-halls
six times, mounted upon his magnificent elephant.
Now at that time there wras drought in the kingdom of Kalinga : the
corn grew not, there was a great famine, and men being unable to live
used robbery. Tormented by want, the people gathered in the king’s
courtyard and upbraided him. Hearing this the king said, “ What is it,
my children 1 ” They told him. He replied, “Good, my children, I will
bring the rain,” and dismissed them. He pledged himself to virtue, and
kept the holy-day vow, but he could not make the rain come ; so he
summoned the citizens together, and said to them, “ I pledged myself to
virtue, and seven days I kept the holy-day vow, yet T could not make the
rain come: what is to be done now 1 ” They replied, “ If you cannot
bring the rain, my lord, Vessantara in the city of Jetuttara, King
Safijaya’s son, is devoted to charity; he has a glorious elephant all white,
and wherever he goes the rain falls; send brahmins, and ask for that
elephant, and bring him hither.” The king agreed ; and assembling the
brahmins he chose out eight of them, gave them provisions for their
journey, and said to them, “Go and fetch Vessantara’s elephant.” On this
mission, the brahmins proceeded in due course to Jetuttara city; in the
alins-hall they received entertainment; sprinkled their bodies with dust
and smeared them with mud ; and on the day of the full moon, to ask for
the king’s elephant, they went, to the eastern gate at the time the king
came to the alms-hall. Early in the morning, the king, intending a visit
to the alms-hall, washed himself with sixteen pitchers of perfumed water,
and broke his fast, and mounted upon the back of his noble elephant richly
adorned proceeded to the eastern gate. The brahmins found no opportunity
there, and went to the southern gate, standing upon a mound ami watched
the king giving alms at the eastern gate. When he came to the southern
gate, stretching out their hands they cried, “ V ietory to the noble
Vessantara!" The Great Being, as he saw the brahmins, drove the
elephant to the place whereon they stood, and seated upon its back uttered
the first stanza : [4S8]

n
<SL
No. 547. 253
“ With hairy armpits, hairy heads, stained teeth, and dust on poll,
0 brahmins, stretching forth your hands, what is it that you crave?”
To this the brahmins replied :
“ We crave a precious thing, 0 prince that dost thy people save :
That choice and saving1 elephant with tusks like any pole.”
When the Great Being heard this, he thought, “I am willing to give
anything that is my own, from my head onwards, and what they ask is
something without me; I will fulfil their wish ” ; and from the elephant’s
back, he replied :
“ I give, and never shrink from it, that which the brahihius want-,
This noble beast, for riding fit, fierce tuskfed elephant ”;
and thus consenting:
“The king, the saviour of his folk, dismounted from its back,
And glad in sacrificing, gave the brahmins what they lack.”
The ornaments on the elephant’s four feet were worth four hundred
thousand, those on his two sides were worth two hundred thousand, the
blanket under his belly a hundred thousand, on his back were nets of
pearls, of gold, and of jewels, three nets worth three hundred thousand,
in the two ears two hundred thousand, on his back a rug worth a
hundred thousand, the ornament on the frontal globes worth a hundred
thousand, three wrappings2 three hundred thousand, the small ear-orna­
ments two hundred thqusand, those on the two tusks two hundred
thousand, the ornament for luck on his trunk a hundred thousand, that on
his tail a hundred thousand, not to mention the priceless ornaments on his
body two and twenty hundred thousand, a ladder to mount by one hundred
thousand, the food-vessel a hundred thousand, [48DJ which comes to as
much as four and twenty hundred thousand: moreover the jewels great
and small upon the canopy, the jewels in his necklace of pearls, the jewels
in the goad, the jewels in the pearl necklace about his neck, the jewels on
his frontal globes, all these without price, the elephant also without price,
making with the elephant seven priceless things—all these lie gave to the
brahmins ; besides five hundred attendants with the grooms and stable­
men : and with that gift the earthquake came to pass, and the other
portents as related above.
To explain this, the Master spoke:
“ Then was a mighty terror felt, then bristling of tire hair ;
A lien the great elephant was given the earth did quake for fear.
i hen was a mighty terror felt, then bristling of the hair;
When the great elephant was given, trembled the town for fear.
V\ ith a resounding mighty roar the city all did ring
A hen the great elephant was given by Sivi's foster-king.”
1 uriilhavo V 2 HQtariuakii ?

!® f <SL
254 J7te Jdtaka. Book XXII.
The city of Jetuttara all did tremble. The brahmins, we are told, at
the southern gate received the elephant, mounted upon his back, and
amidst a thronging multitude passed through the midst of the city.
The crowd, beholding them, cried out, “0 brahmins, mounted upon our
elephant, why are ye taking our elephant?” The brahmins replied, “The
great king Vessantara has given the elephant to us : who are you 1 ” ard
so with contumelious gestures to the crowd, through the city they passed
and out by the northern gate by aid of the deities1 *. The people of the
city, angry with the Bodhisat, uttered loud reproaches.
To explain this, the Master said :
“Upon that loud and mighty sound, so terrible to hear,
When the great elephant was given the earth did quake for fear.
Upon that loud and mighty sound, so terrible to hear,
When the great elephant was given trembled the town to hear.
So loud and mighty was the sound all terrible did ring,
When the great elephant was given by Rivi’s foster-king.”
[490] The citizens, trembling at heart for this gift, addressed them­
selves to the king. Therefore it is said :
“Then princo and brahmin, Vesiya and Ugga4, great and small,
Mahouts and footmen, charioteers and soldiers, one and all,
The country landowners, and all the Si vi folk come by.
Seeing the elephant depart, thus to the king did cry:
‘ Thy realm is ruined, sire: why should Vessantara thy son
Thus give away our elephant revered by every one?
Why give our saviour elephant, pole-tusk&d, goodly, white3,
Which ever knew the vantage-ground to choose in every tight ?
With jewels and his yak-tail fan ; which trampled down all foes;
Jjong-tusk&d, furious, white as Mount Kelasa with his snows;
With trappings and white parasol, fit riding for a kiug,
With leech and driver, he has given away this precious thing.’ ”
After saying this, they said again :
“ ‘ Whoso bestoweth food and drink, with raiment, fire and fleet,
That is a right and proper gift, for brahmins that is meet.
0 Sahjaya, thy peoples friend, say why this thing was done
By him, a prince of our own lme, Vessantara, thy son?
The bidding of the Sivi folk if ye refuse to do,
The people then will act, methinkw, against your son and you.’”
[491] Hearing this, the king suspected that they wished to slay
Vessantara; and he said:
“Yea, let my country he no more, my kingdom no more be,
Banish I will not from bis realm a prince from fault quite free,
Nor will obey the people’s voice: my true-born son is ho.
1 deoatamttanena Boems to be out of place; it should go with nikkhamimu accord­
ing to the Burmese, and oommon souse.
3 Ugga: a mixed caste, by a Kehatriya fattier from a (y'udra mother. The soholiust,
however, explains the word by upgutCi pafiiiata, as though from uggacchati.
3 See below, p. 207 (text, p. i>br>).

<SL
l ( f ) l
_________________No. 547. 255
Yea, let my country be no more, my kingdom no more be,
Banish I will not from his realm a prince from fault quite free
Ivor will obey the people’s voice: my very son is he.
No, I will work no harm on him; all noble is he still;
And it would be a shame for me, and it would cause much ill.
\ essantara, my very son, with sword how could I kill 1
The people of Sivi replied :
Xot chastisement doth he deserve, nor sword, nor prison cell,
But from the kingdom banish him, on Vamka’s mount to dwell.”
The king said :
Behold the people’s will! and I that will do not gainsay.
But. let him bide one happy night before he go away.
After the space of this one night, when dawns the coming day,
together let the people come and banish him away.”
They agreed to the king’s proposal for just the one night. Then he
let them go away, and thinking- to send a message to his son, he com­
missioned an agent, who accordingly went to Vessantara’s house and told
him what had befallen.
[492] To make this clear, the following stanzas were said :
“ Kise, fellow, hie away post-haste, and tell the prince my word.
‘ The people all, and citizens, in wrath, with one accord,
Uggas and princes, Vesiyas and brahmins too, my son,
Mahouts and lifeguards, charioteers, and footmen, every one,
All citizens, all country folk, together here have run,—
After the space of this one /light, when dawns the coming day,
They will assemble one and all and banish tlieo away.’
This fellow sent by Sivi’s king swift on his errand pressed,
Upon an armed elephant, perfumed, and finely drest.
Head bathed in water, jewelled rings in ears,—and on he rode
Till to that lovely town he came, Vessantara's abode.
Then he .beheld the happy prince abiding in his land,
Like Vasava the king of gods ; round him the courtiers stand.
Thither in haste- the fellow went, and to the prince said he_
11 [icar ill tidings, royal sir: O be not wroth with me ! ’
With due obeisance, weeping sore, he said.uuto the king:
‘ Thou art my master, sire, and thou dost give me every thing;
Bad news I have to tell thee iiow :. do thou some comfort bring.
The people all and citizens, iii Wrath, with one consent,
and princes, Vesiyas and brahmins, all are bent,'
Uggas
MahoUte and lifeguards, charioteers, the footmen every one
All citizens and country folk together now have 'run,”
After the sptj.ee of this one night, when dawns the coming day
Determined1 all to come in crowds and banish thee awav’” *
»*
1 he (Treat Being said :
are the people wroth with me 9 for no offence 1 see.
J ell me, good follow, wherefore pray they wish to .banish me 9 ”
\

ff/i
H I
(<*>) <SL
"X25 6
The Jcitaka. Book XXII.
[493] The agent said :
“ Uggas and Vesiyas, charioteers, and brahmins every one,
Mahouts and lifeguards, charioteers and footmen, thither run,
All angry at thy giving gifts, and therefore banish thee.”
Healing this, the Great Being, in all content, said :
“ My very eye and heart I’d give: why not what is not mine,
Or gold or treasure, precious stones, or pearls, or jewels fine.
Comes any one to ask of mo, I’d give iny hand, my right1,
Nor for a moment, hesitate : in gifts is my delight.
Now let the people banish me, now let the jieople kijh
Or cut me sevenfold, for cease from gifts I never will.
On hearing this, the agent again spoke, no message of the king’s or ot
the people’s, but another command out of his own mind :
“ This is the Sivi people’s will; they bade me tell you so:
Where Kontimarii by the hill Aranjara doth flow, )(
Thither depart, where banished men, good sir, are wont to go.
This he said, we are told, by inspiration of a deity.
Hearing this, the Bodhisatta replied: “Very well, I shall go by the
road that those go who have offended ; but me the citizens do not banish
for any offence, they banish me for the gift of the elephant. In this case
I wish to give the great gift of the seven hundreds, and I pray the citizens
to grant me one day’s delay for that. To-morrow I will make my gift, the
next day I will go ” :
r494l “ So I by that, same road shall go as they who do offend :
But first to make a gift, one night and day T pray them lend.
“ Very good,” said the agent, “ I will report this to the citizens, and
away he went.
The man goue, the Great Being summoning one of his captains said to
him, “To-morrow I am to make the gift called the gift of the seven
hundreds. You must get ready seven hundred elephants, with the same
number of horses, chariots, girls, cows, men slaves and women slaves, and
provide every kind of food and drink, even the strong liquor, everything
which is fit to give.” So having arranged for the great gift of the seven
hundreds, lie dismissed his courtiers, arid alone departed to the dwelling of
Maddi; where seating himself on the royal couch, he began to address
her.
The Master thus described it :
“ Thus did the king t.o Maddi speak, that lady passing fair:
‘All that T ovor gave to thee, or goods or gram, beware,
Or gold or treasure, precious stones, and plenty more beside,
Thy father’s dower, find a place this treasure all to hide.
Then out spake Maddi to the king, that princess passing fair:
‘ Where shall I find a place, my lord, to hide it' tell me where I
1 Heading duklMnum with H’1, adukkhinam violates tlw uiutro.

| ( I )| <SL
iVo. 547. 257
Vessantara said :
“Iix due proportion on the good thy wealth in gifts bestow,
No other place than this is safe to keep it, well I know.’
[495] She consented, and withal he exhorted her in this wise :
“ Be kind, 0 Maddl, to thy sons, thy husband’s parents both,
To him who will thy husband be do service, nothing loth.
And if no man should wish to be thy husband, when I’m gone,
Go seek a husband for thyself, but do not pine alone.”
Then Maddi thought, “Why I wonder does Vessantara say such a
thing to me?” And she asked him, “My lord, why do you say to me
what you ought not to say?” The Great Being replied, “Lady, the
people of Sivi, angry with me for the gift of the elephant, are banish­
ing me from the realm: to-morrow I am to make the gift of the
seven hundreds, and next day I depart from the city.” And he said:
“ ‘ To-morrow to a forest drear, beset with beasts of prey,
I go : and whether I can live within it, who can say?’
Then spake the princess Maddl, spake the lady passing fair :
‘ It is not so ! a wicked word ! to say it do not dare !
It is not meet and right, my king, that thou alone shouldst faro:
Whatever journey thou shalt go, I also will be there.
Give me the choice to die with thee, or live from thee apart,
Death is my choice, unless I can live with thee where thou art.
Kindle a blazing fiery flame the fiercest that can be,—
There T would rather die the death than live apart from thee.
[496] As close behind an elephant his mate is often found
Moving' through mountain pass or wood, o’er rough or level ground,
So with my boys-I’ll follow thee, wherever thou mayst lead,
Nor shalt thou find me burdensome or difficult to feed1.’”
With these words she began to praise the region of Himalaya as if she
had seen it:
“ When you shall see your pretty boys, and hoar their prattle ring
Under the greenwood, you’ll forget that ever you were king.
To sec your pretty boys a’t play, and hear their prattle ring
Under the greenwood, you’ll forget that ever you were king.
When you shall see your pretty boys, and hear their prattle ring
In our fair home, you v/ill forget that ever you were king.
To see your pretty boys at play, and hear their prattle ring
In our fair home, you will forget that ever you were king.
To see your boys all gay-bedeckt, the flowers to watch them bring
In our fair home, you will forget that ever you were king.
To see your boys at play all gay, the flowers to watch them bring
In our fair home, you will forget that ever you were king.
When you Itehold your dancing boys their wreaths of flowers bring
In our. fair home, you will forgot that ever you were kiug.
1 The last two stanzas are repeated, with a difference, from v. 2f)931-4, trans. v.
p. 188.
j. vi. 17
M M V

;(§):■) </ nSL
\%>-—-^>7
X%¥
258 The Jcitaka. Book XXII.
When you behold them dance and play, and wreaths of flowers bring
In our fair home, you will forget that ever you were king.
The elephant of sixty years, all lonely wandering
The woodland, will make you forget that ever you were king.
The elephant of sixty years, at even wandering
And early, will make you forget that ever you were king.
[407] When you behold the elephant his herd of subjects bring,
The elephant of sixty years, and hear his trumpeting,
To hear the sound you will forget that ever you were king.
The woodland glades, the roaring beasts, and every wished-for thing
When you behold, you will forget that ever you were king.
The deer that come at eventide, the varied flowers that spring,
The dancing frogs—you will forget that ever you were king.
When you shall hear the rivers roar, the fairy creatures sing,
Believe me, you will clean forget that ever you were king.
When you shall hear the screech-owl’s note in mountain cave dwelling,
Believe me, you will clean forget that ever you were king.
Rhinoceros and buffalo, that make the woodland ring,
Lion and tiger- you’ll forget that ever you were king.
When on the mountain top you see the peacock dance and spring
Before the peahens, you’ll forget that ever you were king.
To see the egg-born peacock dance and spread his gorgeous wing
Before the peahens, you’ll forgot that over you were king.
The peacock with his purple ncc-k, to sec him dance and spring
Before the peahens —you’ll forget that ever you were king.
When in the winter you behold the trees all flowering
Waft their sweet odours, you’ll forget that over you were king.
When in the winter you behold the plants all flowering,
The bimbajfda, kutaja, and lotus1, scattering
Abroad their odours, you’ll forget that ever you were king.
When in the winter you behold the forest flowering
And blooming lotus, you’ll forget that ever you were king.”
[496J Thus did Maddi sing the praises of Himavat in these stanzas,
as though she were dwelling therein. Here endeth the Praise of
Himavat'-.
Now Queen Phusati thought: “A harsh command has been laid upon
my sou : what will he do? I will go and find out.” In a covered carriage
she went, and taking up her position at the door of their chamber, she
overheard their converse and uttered a bitter lamentation.
Describing this, the Master said :
“She heard the princess and hor son, the talk that passed between,
Then bitterly she did lament, that great and glorious queen.
‘ Better drink poison, better leap from of!' a cliff, say 1,
Or better bind a strangling nooso about my neck and die :
Why banish they Vessantara my unoffending son?
1 The plants named are: kutnjn (Wrightia AntidysDiitericaJ, bimbqjiUa (Mornordica
Mimndelpha), lemapadwaka (hairy lotus).
'J Ihmninnlti-L'inlomo.

<SL
% $ ))
\%>— / /
iVo. 547. ' 259
So studious and free from greed, giving to all who came,
Itespected by his rival kings, of great and glorious fame,
Why banish they Vessantara, my unoffending son1?
His parents’ prop, who did respect his elders every one,
Why banish they Vessantara, my unoffending son?
Beloved by the king and queen, by all his kith and kin,
Beloved by his friends, the realm and all that are therein,
Why banish they Vessantara, my unoffending son?’”
[499] After this bitter lament, she consoled her son and his wife,
and went before the king and said :
“ Like mangoes fallen to the ground, like money waste and spent,
So falls thy kingdom, if they will banish the innocent.
Like -a wild goose with crippled wing, when all the water’s gone,
Deserted by thy courtiers, thou wilt live in pain alone.
.. 1 tell thee true, 0 mighty king : let not thy good go by,
Nor banish him, the innocent, because the poople cry.”
Hearing which, the king answered :
“Thy son, the people’s banner, if I send to exile drear,
My royal duty 1 obey, than life itself more, dear,”
On hearing this, the queen said, lamenting:
“ Once hosts of men escorted him, with goodly banners flown,
Like forests full of flowering trees : to-day he goes alone1.
[500] Bright yellow robes, Gandhara make, once round abqut him shone,
Or glowing scarlet, as he went: to-day he goes alone.
With chariot, litter, elephant he went, in former days :
To-day the King Vessantara afoot must tramp the ways.
He once by sandal-scent perfumed, awaked by dance and song,
How wear rough skins, how axe and pot and pingo bear along!
Why will they not bring yellow robes, why not the garb of skin,
And dress of bark, the mighty woods that be may enter in?
How can a banisht king put on the robe of bark to wear,
To dress in bark and grass how will the princess MaddI bear ?
Maddl, who once Benares cloth and linen used to wear,
And tine kodumbara, how. bark and grasses will she bear ?
She who in litter or in car was earned to and fro,
The lovely princess, now to-day on foot how can she go ?
With tender hands and tender feet in happiness she stood :
How can the lovely princoss go trembling into the wood?
With tender hands and tender feet she lived in happy state :
The finest slippers she could wear would hurt her feet of late ;
To-day how caD the lovely one afoot now go her gait ?
Once she would go begarlanded amidst a thousand maids:
How can the beauteous one alone now walk the forest glades?
Once if she heard the jackal howl she would he all dismayed :
How can the timid beauteous one now walk the forest glade !
1 Four stanzas, almost the same, are here condensed into one. The tree is
fraijikfrra (Pti rospermuin Aoerifolium).
17—2

' e<w\
<SL
1 ( 1 ) 1
\%^----Vv
2G0 The Jataka. Book XXII.
She who of Indra’s royal race would ever shrink afraid,
Trembling like one possest, to hear the hoot some owl had made,
How can the timid beauteous one now walk the forest glade ?
Like as a bird beholds the nest empty, the brood all slain,
So when I see the empty place long shall I burn in pain.
[501] Like to a bird that Bees the nest empty, the brood all slain,
Thin, yellow I shall grow to see my dear son ne’er again.
Like to a bird that sees the nest empty, the brood all slain,
I’ll run distracted, if I see my dear son ne’er again.
As when an eagle sees its nest empty, its young brood slain,
So when I see the empty place long shall I live in pain.
As when an eagle sees its nest empty, its young brood slain,
Thin, yellow I shall grow to see my dear son ne’er again.
As when an eagle sees its nest empty, its young brood slain,
I’ll run distracted, if I see my dear son ne’er again.
Like ruddy geese beside a pond from which the water’s gone,
Long shall I live in pain, to see no more my dearest son.
Like ruddy geese beside a pond from which the water’s gone,
Thin, yellow I shall grow to see no more my dearest son.
Like ruddy geese l>eside a pond from which the water’s gone,
I’ll fly distracted, if I see no more my dearest son.
And if you banish from the realm my unoffending son,
In spite of this my sore complaint, mcthinks my life is done.”
[502] Explaining this matter, the Master said :
“ Hearing the queen bewailing sore, straight all together went
The palace dames, their arms outstretcht, to join in her lament.
And in the palace of the prince, prone lying all around
Women and children lay like trees blown down upon the ground.
And when the night was at an end, and the sun rose next day,
Then King Vessantara began his gifts to give away.
‘Food to the hungry give, strong drink to those who drink require1,
Give clothes to those who wish for clothes, each after his desire.
‘ Let not one suitor hither come go disappointed back,
Shew all respect, and food or drink to taste let no man lack.’
And so they gatherod thick and fast with joy and merry play,
As Sivi’s great and fostering king prepared to go away.
Thoy did cut down a mighty tree that full of fruit did stand,
When the innocent Vessantara they banished from the laud.
They did cut down a wishing-tree, with everv boon at hand,
When the innocent Vessantara they banished from the land.
They did cut down a wishing-tree, with choicest boons at hand,
When the innocent Vessantara they banished from the land.
Both old and young, and all between, did weep and wail that day,
Stretching their arms out, when the king prepared to go away,
Who fostered Hivi’s^renlin.
1 The scholiast says: "He knew that the gift of spirits brings no fruit with it.
lint gave it nevertheless, that tipplers might have the ’noble gift’ and might not bo
able to say that they could not get svhat thoy wanted.” This shews a tolerance not
iilvvayB Hoctj in tlio piout*.

/s#*- • e0(*X
?(f ):*) <
s l
\%>-
—
No. 547. 261
Wise women1, eunuchs, the king’s wives, did weep and wail that day,-
Stretching their arms out, when the king prepared to go away,
Who fostered Sivi’s realm.
And all the women in the town did weep and wail that day,
When Sivi’s great and fostering king prepared to go away.
The brahmans and ascetics too, and all who begged for need,
Stretching their arms out, cried aloud, ‘ It is a wicked deed ! ’
To all the city while the king his bounty did present,
And by the people’s sentence, fared forth into banishment.
[503] Seven hundred elephants he gave, with splendour all bedight2,
n ith girths of gold, caparisoned with trappings golden bright,
Each ridden by his own mahout, with spikM hook in hana:
Lo now the King Vcssantara goes banished from the land !
■ Seven hundred horses too lie gave, bedeckt in bright array,
Horses of Sindh, and thorobreds, all fleet of foot are they,
Each ridden by a henchman bold, with sword and bow in hand:
Lo now the King Vessantara goes banished from the land !
Seven hundred chariots all yoked, with banners dying free,
With tiger skin and panther hide, a gorgeous sight to see,
Each driven by mailed charioteers, all armed with bow in hand :
Lo now the King Vessantara goes banished from the land !
Seven hundred women too he gave, each standing in a car,—
With golden chains and ornaments bedeckt these women are,
With lovely dress and ornaments, with slender waist' and small,
Curved brows, a merry smile and bright, and shapely hips withal :
Lo now the King Vessantara goes banished from the land!
Seven hundred kino he also gave, with silver milkpails all :
Lo now the King Vessantara goes banished from the land !
Seven hundred female slaves he gave, as many men at call:
Lo now the King Vessantara goes banished from the land !
Cars, horses, women, elephants he gave, yet after all,
Lo now the King Vessantara goes banished from the land !
That was a thing most terrible, that made the hair to stand,
When now the King Vessantara goes banished from the land3 ! ”
[505] Now a deity told the news to the kings of all India: how
Vessantara was giving great gifts of high-born maidens and the like.
Therefore the Khattiyas by the divine power came in a chariot, and
returned with the high-born maidens find so forth that they had received.
Thus did Khattiyas, brahmans, Vessas, and Suddas, all receive gifts at his
hands before they departed. He was still distributing bis gifts when
evening fell; so lie returned to his dwelling, to greet his parents and that
1 atii/akklid: ‘bhutavijja ikkhanika,' ‘women posaoRt who have seen demons.’
® Compare above, p. 4722 (tranfl., p 80), v. 258® (trana* p. 132), and the following
lines.
3 The acholiftBt, in his comment paraphrasing the above, adds another stanza
(P 504):
“ Then sounded forth a mighty sound, a terrible great roar;
‘For giving gifts they banish thee—now hast thou given more!”'

<SL
% $ %
262 The JdtaJca. Book XXII.
night to depart. In gorgeous chariot he proceeded to the place where his
parents dwelt, and with him Maddi went, in order to take leave of his
parents with him. The Great Being greeted his father and announced
their coming.
To explain this, the Master said :
“Give greeting to King Saiijaya the righteous : bid him know
That since he now doth banish me, to Vamka hill I go.
Whatever beings, mighty king, the future time shall know,
With their desires unsatisfied to Yama’s house shall go.
For wrong1 I did my people, giving bounty from my hand,
By all the people’s sentence I go banished from the land.
That sin I now would expiate i’ the panther-haunted wood :
If you will wallow in the slough2, yet 1 will still do good.”
These four stanzas the Great Being addressed to his father : and then
he turned to his mother, asking her permission to leave the world with
these words •
“Mother, 1 bike my leave of you : a banished man I stand.
For wrong I did rny people, giving bounty from my hand,
By all the people’s sentence I go banished from the land.
[50C] That sin 1 now would expiate i’ the panther-haunted wood :
If you will wallow in the slough, yet I will still do good.”
1 n reply, Phusati said :
“ I give you leave to go, my son, and bike mv blessing too:
Leave Maddi and the boys behind, for she will never do ;
Fair rounded limbs and slender waist, why need she go with you?”
VesRantara said :
“ Fi eri a slave against her will I would not take away :
But if she wishes, let her come ; if not, then let her stay.”
On hearing what his son said, the king proceeded to entreat her.
Explaining this, the Master said :
“And then unto his daughter-in-law the king began to say:
‘ Let not your sandal-scented limbs bear dust and dirt, I pray,
Wear not bark-fibre wraps instead of fine Benares stuff ;
Blest princess, go not! forest life indeed is hard enough.’
Then princess Maddi, bright and fail1, her father-in-law addrest:
* To be without Vossantara 1 care not to lie blest.’
Then ftivi’s mighty fostering king thus spake to her again :
1 Come, Maddi, listen while the woes of forests I explain.
'Phe swarms of insects and of gnats, of beetles and of been
Would sting you in that forest life, unto your great disease.
[507] For dwellers on the river banks hear other plagues that wait:
The boa-constrictor (poisonless ’tis true, but strong and great),
If any man or any beast conic near, will take firm hold,
And drag them to his lurkiug-place emvrapt in many a fold.
1 tibhitiuim'. ‘ pil/.iiiii. aohol.
s pumkimlii: 1 scliol.

• GotfcTX.
/ & ^ S \ / n
■(1)1 'S L
xy*'----'Vy *
No. 547. 263
Then there are other dangerous beasts with black and matted hair ;
They can climb trees to catch a man : this beast is called a bear.
Along the stream Sotumbarfi there dwells the buffalo ;
Which with his great sharp-pointed horns can give a mighty blow.
Seeing these herds of mighty kine wander the forest through,
Like some poor cow that seeks her calf say what will Maddl do ?
When crowds of monkeys in the trees gather, they will affright
You, Maddl, in your iguorance with their uncomely sight.
Once on a time the jackal’s howl would bring great fear to you :
Now dwelling on the Vamka hill, Maddl, what will you do?
Why would you go to such a place ? Even at high midday,
When all the birds are stilled to rest, the forest roars away.’
Then beauteous Maddi to the king spake up and answered so :
‘ As for these things so terrible, which you have tried to shew,
I willingly accept them all; I am resolved to go.
[50Bl Through all the hill and forest grass, through clumps of bulrush reed,
With my own breast I’ll push my way, nor will complain indeed.
She that would keep a husband well must all her duties do ;
Ready to roll up balls of dung *, ready for fasting too,
She carefully must tend the fire, must mop up water still,—
But terrible is widowhood : great monarch, go 1 will.
The meanest harries her about; she eats of leavings still:
For terrible is widowhood—great monarch, go I will.
Knocked down and smothered in the dust, haled roughly by the hair—
A man may do them any hurt, all simply’stand and stare.
() terrible is widowhood ! great monarch, go I will.
Men pull about the widow’s sons with cruel blows and foul,
Though fair and proud of winning charm, as crows would peck an owl.
0 terrible is widowhood! great monarch, go 1 will.
Even in a prosperous household, bright with silver without end,
Unkindly speeches never cease from brother or from friend.
0 terrible is widowhood ! great monarch, go I will.
Naked are rivers waterless, a kingdom without king,
A widow may have brothers ten, yet is a naked thing.
O terrible is widowhood ! great monarch, go 1 will.
A banner is the chariot’s mark, a fire by smoke is known,
Kingdoms by kings, a wedded wife by husband of her own.
0 terrible is widowhood ! great monarch, go l will.
The wifo who shares her husband’s lot, be it rich or bo it poor,
Her fame the very gods do praise, in trouble she is sure.
My husband I will follow still, the yellow robo to wear,
To be the queen1* of all the earth without, I would not care.
0 terrible is widowhood ! great monarch, go I will.
Those women have no heart at all, they’re hard and cannot feel,
Who when their husbands are in woe, desire to be in weal.
When the great lord of Bivi land goes forth to banishment,
1 will go with him; for he gives all joy and all content.'
' yohanubbethanena: yohanam is cowdung (see v. 24(5). 1 take this to refer to the
putties of cowdung used u» fuel.
a icchc occurs for tho first lime here; it cornea from , 'to rule’ (schol.
‘ isaarii hot! ')•

/yy—A \
f i t )| <SL
204 .■ The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
[509] Then up and spake the mighty king to Maddl bright and fair :
‘ But leave your two young sons behind : for what can they do there,
Auspicious lady ? we will keep and give them every care.’”
Then Maddl answered to the king, that princess bright and fair:
‘My Jali and Kanhajina are dearest to my heart:
They’ll in the forest dwell with me, and they will ease my smart.’
[510] Thus answer made the monarch great, thus Sivi’s foster-king:
‘ Fine rice has been their food and well-cooked viands hitherto :
If they must feed on wild-trec fruit, what will the children do ?
From silver dishes well adorned or golden hitherto,
They ate: but with bare leaves instead what will the children do ?
Benares cloth has been their dress, or linen hitherto :
If they must dress in grass or bark, what will the children do ?
In carriages or palanquins they’ve ridden hitherto :
When they must run about on foot, what will the children do 1
In gabled chambers they would sleep safe-bolted hitherto:
Beneath the roots of trees to lie, what will the children do f
On cushions, rugs or broidered beds they rested hitherto :
Reclining on a l>ed of grass, what will the children do ?
They have been sprinkled with sweet scents and perfumes hitherto :
When covered all with dust and dirt, what will the children do?
\\ hen peacock’s feathers, yak’s tail fans have fanned them hitherto,
Bitten by insects and by flies, what will the children do?’”
As they conversed thus together, the dawn came, and after the dawn
up rose the sun. They brought round for the Great Being a gorgeous
carriage with a team of four Sindh horses, and stayed it at the door.
Maddl did obeisance to her husband’s parents, and, bidding farewell to the
other women, took leave, and with her two sons went before Vessantara
and took her place in the carriage.
Explaining this matter, the Master said :
“ Then Maddl answered to the king, that lady bright and fair :
‘ Bo not lament for us, my lord, nor lie perplexed so :
The children both will go with us wherever we shall go.’
\\ ith these words Maddl went away, that lady bright and fair :
Along tlio highroad, and the two children her path did share.
[511] Then King Vessantara himself, his vow performed as bound,
Does reverence to his parents both, and passes rightwise round.
Then, mounting in the chariot swift, drawn by its team of four,
With wife and children off he sped where V&rfika’s peak did soar.
Then drove the King Veaeantara where most the crowd did swell,
And cried—‘We go! a blessing on my kinsfolk—faro ye well!’”
Addressing these words to the crowd, the Great Being admonished
them to be careful, to give alms and do good deeds. As he went, the
Bodhimit’s mother, saying, “ [f my sou desires to give, let him give,” sent
to him two carts, one on each side, filled with ornaments, laden with the
seven precious things. In eighteen gifts be distributed to beggars he met
on the road all lie had, including even the mass of ornaments which lie-
worn on his own body. When he had got away from the city, he turned

/ ^ e • e0t&x
1 (f)! • <SL
Xv^ ^ / iVo. 547. 265
round and desired to look upon it; then according to his wish the earth
cleft asunder to the measure of the chariot, and turning round, brought
the chariot to face the city, and he beheld the place where his parents
dwelt. So then followed earthquakes and other wonders; wherefore it
is said :
“ When from the city he came forth, he turned again to look:
And, therefore, like a banyan tree great Mount Sineru shook.”
And as he looked, he uttered a stanza to induce Maddi to look also:
‘‘See, Maddi, see the lovely place from which we now haVe come —
The king of Sivfs dwelling-house aud our ancestral home ! ”
[512] Then the Great Being looking towards the sixty thousand
Qpurtiers, who were born when he was, and the rest of the people, made
them turn back ; and as he drove on with the carriage, he said to Maddi:
“ Lady, look out and see if any suitors are walking behind.” She sat
watching. Now four brahmins, who had been unable to be present at the
gift of the Seven Hundreds, had come to the city ; and finding that the
distribution was over, ascertained that the prince had gone. “ Did he
take anything with him1?” they asked. “Yes: a chariot.” So they
resolved to ask for the horses. These men Maddi saw approaching.
“ Beggars, my lord ! ” said she; the Great Being stayed the chariot. Up
they came and asked for the horses : the Great Being gave them.
Explaining this, the Master said :
“Theu did four brahmins catch him up, and for the horses plead:
He gave the horses on the spot—each beggar had one steed.”
The horses disposed of, the yoke of the chariot remained suspended in
the air; but no sooner were the brahmins gone than four gods in the guise
of red deer came and caught it. The Great Being who knew them to be
gods, uttered this stanza :
“See, Maddi, what a wondrous thing—a marvel, Maddi, see!
These clever horses, in the shape of red deer, drawing me!”
But then as he went up came another brahmin and asked for the
chariot. The Great Being dismounted bis wife and children, and gave
him the chariot; and when he gave the chariot, the gods disappeared.
To explain the gift of the chariot, the Master said :
“A fifth came thereupon, and asked the chariot of the king:
He gave this also, and his heart to keep it did not ding.
Then made the King Vessahtara his people to dismount,
And gave the chariot to the man who came on that account.”
[513] After this, they all went on afoot. Then the Great Being said
to Maddi:
“ Maddi, you take Kanluijiud, for she is light and young,
Hut Jiili is a heavy boy, so I’ll l>ring him along.”

? ® | <SL
2(H) The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
Then they took up the two children, and carried them on their hips.
Explaining this, the Master said :
“ He carrying his boy, and she her daughter, on they went,
Talking together on the road in joy and all content1.’
When they met anyone coming to meet them along the road, they
asked the way to Vaiiika hill, and learnt that it was afar oil. Thus it is
said :
“ Whenever they met travellers coming along the wTay,
They asked directions for their road, and where Mount Vaiiika lay.
The travellers all wept full sore to see them on the way,
And told them of their heavy task : ‘ The road is long,’ they say.”
The children cried to see fruit of all kinds on the trees which grew on
both sides of the road. Then by the Great Being’s power, the trees bowed
down their fruit so that their hands could reach it, and they picked out
the ripest and gave it to the little ones. Then Maddi cried out, “ A
marvel! ” Thus it is said :
“Whene'er the children did behold trees growing on the steep
Laden witli fruit, the children for the fruit began to weep.
But when they saw the children weep, the tall trees sorrowful
Lowed down their branches to their hands, that they the fruit might pull.
Then Maddi cried aloud in joy, that lady fair and bright,
To see the marvel, tit to make one’s hair to stand upright.
One's hair might stand upright to see the marvel here is shewn :
By power of King Vessautani the trees themselves bend down!”
[514] From the city of Jetuttaiu, the mountain named Suvannagirit&la
is five leagues distant; from thence the river Kontimara is five leagues
away, and five leagues more to Mount Arailjaragiri, five league? again to
the brahman village of Dunnivittha, thence ten leagues to his uncle’s city :
thus from Jetutlaru the journey was thirty leagues. The gods shortened
the journey, so that in one day they came to his uncle's city. Thus it is
said :
“The Yakklnt.s made the journey short, pitying the children’s plight,
And so to Ceta kingdom they arrived before the night.”
JNow they lefl. .Jctuttara at breakfast time, and in the evening they
came to the kingdom of Oeta and to his uncle’s city.
Kxplaining this, the Master said:
“Away to feta they proceed, a journey great and long,
A kingdom rich in food and drink, and prosperous, and strong."
.Now in his uncle’s city dwelt sixty thousand Khaltiyas. J he (ireat
Being entered not into the city, but sat in a hail at the city gate. Maddi
brushed off the dust on the Great Being’s feet, and rubbed them; then
with a view to announce the coming of Vessantam, she went forth from
1 "Here eudeth the Out Suction (Dana-kliandam).”

| ¥ ) f •.
\m >---x^'/
: -ss^^y
No. 547. 267
the hall, and stood within sight. So the women who came in and out of
the city saw her and came round.
Explaining this, the Master said :
“Seeing the auspicious lady there the women round her throng.
‘ The tender lady ! now afoot she needs must walk along.
In palanquin or chariot once the noble lady rode :
Now MaddI needs must go afoot; the woods are her abode.’ ”
[515] All the people then, seeing MaddI and Vessantara and the
children arrived in this unbecoming fashion, went and informed the king;
and sixty thousand princes came to him weeping and lamenting.
To explain this, the Master said :
“Seeing him, the C’eta princes came, with wailing and lament.
‘ Greet thee, my lord : we trust that you are prosperous and well
That of your father and his realm you have good news to tell.
Where is your army, mighty king? and where your royal car?
With not a chariot, not a horse, you now have journeyed far :
Were you defeated by your foes that here alone you are?’”
Then the Great Being told the princes the cause of his coming:
“ I thank you, sirs ; l>e sure that I am prosperous and well ;
And of my father and his realm I have good news to tell.
I gave the saviour elephant, pole-tusked, goodly white2,
Which ever knew the vantage-ground to choose in every fight;
His jewels, and his yak’s tail fan ; which trampled down the foes,
Long-tusk6d, furious, white as Mount Keliisa with his snows;
With trappings and white parasol, fit riding for a king,
With leech and driver : yes, 1 gave away this precious thing.
Therefore the people were in wrath, my father took it ill :
Therefore he banished mo, and 1 now go to Varhka hill.
1 pray you, tell me of a place to be my dwelling still.”
The princes answered :
[516] “Now welcome, welcome, mighty king, and with no doubtful voice:
Be lord of all that here is found, and use it at your choice.
Take herbs, roots, honey, meat, and rice, the whitest and the best.:
Enjoy it at your will, 0 king, and you shall be bur guest.”
Vessantara said :
“Your proffered gifts 1 here accept, with thanks for your goodwill.
But now the king has banished me ; 1 go to Van'ika hill.
1 pray you, tell me of a place to be my dwolling still.”
The princes said :
“‘Stay horn in Cota, mighty king, until a message go
To tell the king of Sivi land what we have come to know.’
Then they behind him in a throng escorting him did go,
All full of joy and confidence: this 1 would have thee know.” 1
1 Compute 58411 below, 632“, nu«l Mahabluirata (Calcutta) xn. 13,727.
4 Above, p. 251 (text, p. 400).

1 1 1
\%;> *
—
2G8 -
The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
The Great Being said :
“I would not have you send and tell the king that I am here:
He is not king in this affair : he has no power, I fear.
The palace folk and townsfolk all in wrath came gathering,
All eager that because of me they might destroy the king.”
[517] The princes said :
“If in that kingdom came to pass so terrible a thing,
Surrounded by the Ceta folk stay here, and be our king.
The realm is prosperous and rich, the people strong and great:
Be minded, sir, to stay with us and govern this our state.”
Vessalitara said :
“ Hear me, 0 sons of Ceta land ! I have no mind to stay,
As I go forth a banished man, nor here hold royal sway.
The Sivi people one and all would be ill pleased to know
That you laid sprinkled me for king, as banished forth I go.
If you should do it, that would be a most unpleasant thing,
To quarrel with the Sivi folk : I like not quarrelling.
Your proffered gifts 1 here accept, with thanks for your goodwill.
But now the king has banished me : 1 go to Varhka hill.
I pray you, tell me of a place to be my dwelling still.”
Thus tlie Great Being, in spite of so many requests, declined the
kingdom. And the princes paid him great honour ; but he would not
enter within the city ; so they adorned that hall where he was, and
surrounded it with a screen, and preparing a great bed, they kept careful
watch round about. One day and one uight he abode in the hall well-
guarded ; and next day, early in the morning, after a msal of all manner
of fine-flavoured food, attended by the princes, he left the hall, and sixty
thousand Khattiyas went with him for fifteen leagues, [518] then standing
at the entering in of the wood, they told of the fifteen leagues which yet
remained of his journey.
“ Yes, we will tell you how a king who leaves the woi'ld may be
Good, peaceful by his sacred tiro, and all tranquillity.
'That rocky mountain, mighty king, is Gandhnmadana,
Where with your children and your wife together you may stay.
The Ceta folk, with faces all hewept and streaming eyes,
Advise you to go northward straight where high its peaks uprise.
There you shall see Mount Vipula (and blessing with thee go),
Pleasant with many a growing tree that oasts cool shade below.
When you shall reach it, you shall see (ft blessing with thee still)
Kotumatl, a river deep and springing from the hill.
Full of all fish, » safe resort, its deep flood flow's away .
There you shall drink, and there shall bathe, and with your children play.
And there, upon a pleasant hill, cool-shaded, you will see,
Laden with fruit as honey sweet, a noble banyan tree.
Then you will see Mount Nalika, and that is haunted ground :
Fur there the birds in concert sing and woodland sprites abound.

!(1)! ■" vfiT
A To. 5 4 7 . ' 2 6 9
There further still towards the north is Mucalinda Lake,
On which the lilies blue and white a covering do make.
Then a thick forest, like a cloud, with grassy sward to tread,
Trees full of flowers and of fruit, all shady overhead,
Enter: a lion seeking prey wherewith ho may be fed.
There when the forest is in flower, a shower of song is heard,
The twitter hero and twitter there of many a bright-winged bird.
And if those mountain cataracts you follow to their spring,
You’ll find a lily-covered lake with blossoms' flowering,
Full of all fish, a safe resort, deep water without end,
Foursquare and peaceful, scented sweet, no odour to offend :
There build yourself a leafy cell, a little to the north,
And from the cell which you shall make in search of food go forth.”
[519] Thus did the princes tell him of his fifteen-league journey, and
letdiim go. But to prevent any fear of danger in Vessantara, and with
a view to leave no hold for any adversary, they gave directions to a certain
man of their country, wdse and skilful, to keep an eye upon his goings
and comings; whom they left at the entering in of the forest, and returned
to their own city.
And Vessantara with his wife and children proceeded to GandlnimiL-
dana; that day he abode there, then setting his face northwards he
passed by the foot of Mount Vipula, and rested on the bank of the river
KetumutI, to eat a goodly repast provided by the forester, and there
they bathed and drank, presenting their guide with a golden hairpin.
With mind full of calmness he crossed the stream, and r-esting awhile
under the banyan which stood on a flat space on the mountain, after eating
its fruit, he rose up and went on to the hill called Nalika. Still moving
• onwards, he passed along the banks of Lake Mucalinda to its north­
eastern corner : whence by a narrow footpath he penetrated" into the
thick forest, and passing through, he followed the course of the stream
which rose out of the mountain until ho came to the foursquare lake.
At this moment, Sakka king of the gods looked down and beheld that
which had happened. “The' Great Being,” he thought, “has entered
Himavat, and he must have a place to dwell in.” [520] So he gave
orders to Vissakamma: “Go, pray, and in the dells of Mount Yaiiika,
build a hermitage on a pleasant spot.” Vissakamma went and made two
hermitages with two covered walks, rooms for the night and rooms for
the day; alongside of the walks he plants rows of flowering trees and
clumps of banana, and makes ready all things necessary for hermits. Then
he writes an inscription, “ Whoso wishes to be a hermit, these are for
him.” and driving away all unhuman creatures and all harsh-voiced beasts
and birds, he went to his own place. 1
1 ka retry a (Pongainia Glabra), kakvdha (rormmalia Arjuna).
3 Read pavitUvii tarh.

| (fil
V% ^ v S 7 0 The Jdtcika. Book XXII.
The Great Being, when he beheld a path, felt sure that it must lead
to some hermits’ settlement. He left Maddx and the two children at the
entrance of the hermitage, and went in ; when seeing the inscription, lie
recognized that Sakka’s eye was upon him. He opened the door and
entered, and putting off his bow and sword, with the garments which he
wore, lie donned the garb of a hermit, took up the staff, and coming forth
entered the covered walk and paced up and down, and with the quietude
of a Pacceka Buddha approached his wife and children. Maddi fell at
his feet in tears; then with him entering the hermitage, she went to her
own cell and donned the ascetic dress. After this they made their
children to do the like. Thus the four noble hermits dwelt in the recesses
of Mount Variika.
Then Maddi asked a boon of the Great Being. “My lord, do you
stay here with the children, instead of going out in search of wild fruits;
and let me go instead.” Thenceforward she used to fetch the wild fruits
from the forest and feed them all three. The Bodhisatta also asked her
for a boon. “ Maddi, we aro now hermits ; and woman is the canker of
chastity. Henceforward then, do not approach me unseasonably.” She
consented.
By the power of the Great Being’s compassion, even the wild animals,
all that were within three leagues of their borders, had compassion one of
another. Daily at dawn, Maddi arises, provides water for their drinking
and food to eat, brings water and tooth-brush for cleansing the mouth,
sweeps out the hermitage, leaves the two children with their father,
basket, spade, and hook in hand [521] hies to the forest for wild roots
and fruits, with which she fills her basket: at evening she returns, lays
the wild fruits in the cell, washes the children ; then the four of them sit
at the door of the cell and eat their fruits. Then Maddi takes her two1
children, and retires to her own cell. Thus they livod in the recesses of
the mountain for seven months
At that time, in the kingdom of Kalinga, and in a brahmin village
named Dunnivittha, lived a brahmin Jujaka. He by quest of alms having
obtained a hundred rupees deposited them with a certain brahmin family,
and went out to get more wealth. As he was long away, the family
spent that money; the other came back and upbraided them, but they
could not return the money, and so they gave him their daughter named
Amittuiapana. He took the maiden with him to Dunnivittha, in Kalinga,
and there dwelt. Arnittatapauii tended the brahmin well. Home other
brahmins, young men, seeing her dutifulness, reproached their own wives
with it: “ See how carefully she tends an old man, whilst you are careless
of your young husbands ! ” This made the wives resolve to drive hor out
1 Read dm for devu..
J “ Hero endeth tho Entcriug into the Forest (tanappavrsana-khajidutn).''

|(f)t . (fiT
No.
5 4 7 . 2 7 1
of the village. So they would gather in crowds at the river side and
everywhere else, reviling her.
Explaining this, the Master said :
“Once in Kalinga, Jujaka a brahmin spent his life,
Who had Amittatapana, quite a young girl, to wife.
The women who with water pots down to the river came
Cried shame upon her, crowding up, and roundly cursed her name.
‘A “foe” indeed your mother was, a “foe” your father too1,
To let an old decrepit man wed a young wife like you.
Your peoplo brewed a secret plot, a bad, mean, cruel plan,
To let a fine young girl be wed to an old decrepit man.
[522] A hateful thing your life must be, as youthful as you are,
With an old husband to be wed ; nay, death were better far.
It surely seems, my pretty one, your parents were unkind
_ If for a fine young girl they could no other husband find.
Your fire-oblation, and your ninth2 were offered all for naught
If by an old decrepit man so young a wife was caught.
Some brahmin or ascetic once no doubt you have reviled,
Some virtuous or learned man, some hermit undefiled,
If by an old decrepit man so young a wife wus caught.
Painful a spear-thrust, full of pain the serpent’s fiery bite:
But a decrepit husband is more painful to tlio sight.
With an old husband there can be no joy and no delight,
No pleasant talk: his very laugh is ugly tP the sight.
When men and maidens, youth with youth, hold intercourse apart
They make an end of all the woes that harbour in the heart.
You are a girl whom nien desire, you’ro young and you are fair:
How can an old man give you joy? Go home and tarry there!’”
When she heard their mockery, she went home with her waterpot,
.weeping. “Why are you weeping?” the husband asked ; and she replied
in this stanza:
[523] “ I cannot fetch the water home, tlio women mock mo so :
Because my husband is so old they mock me when I go.” .
Jujaka said :
« You need not fetch the water home, you need not serve me so :
Do not be angry, lady mine : for I myself will go.”
The woman said :
“ You fetch the water ? no, indeed ! that’s not our usual way.
1 tell you plainly, if you do, with you 1 will not stay.
, Unless you buy a slave or maid this kind of work to do,
1 tell you plainly l will go and will not live with you.”
J fijaka said:
«How can l buy a slave? 1 have no craft, no coni, no pelf:
Como, be not angry, lady mine: I’ll do your work myself.”
1 A puu on amitto, ‘foe.’
" A sacrifice nine days after bivth ?
' I

' G°l^\
|( 'I ) | * VfiT
^ ^ ^ ^ 2 7 2 The Jatalca. Book XXII.
The woman said :
“Come now, and let me tell to you what I have heard them say.
Out yonder in the Vamka hill lives King Vessantara:
Go, husband, to Vessantara and ask him for a slave ;
The prince will certainly consent to give you what you crave.
Jujaka said :
“ I am an old decrepit man ; the road is rough and long ;
But do not worry, do not weep—and I am far from strong :
But he not angry, lady mine: I’ll do the work myself.
[524] The woman said :
“You’re like a soldier who gives in before the fight: but why?
And do you own that you arc beat before you go1 and try i
Unless you buy a slave or maid this kind of work to do,
I tell you plainly, I will go, 1 will not live with you.
That will be a most unpleasant thing, a painful thing for you.
When happy in another’s arms you shall behold me soon,
Drest gaily at the season’s change, or changes of the moon.
And as in your declining year’s my absence you deplore, n
Your wrinkles and your hoary hairs will double more and more.
Explaining this, the Master said :
“And now the brahmin full of fears to his wife’s will gives way;
So then tormented by his love, you might have heard him say :
* Get me provision for the road : make me some honey-cake,
Prepare some bannocks too, and set the barley-bread to bake.
And then an equal2 pair of slaves with me 1 11 bring away.
Who without wearying shall wait upon you night and day.’ ”
Quickly she prepared the provision, and informed him that it was
done. Meanwhile he repairs the weak places about his cottage, secures
the door, brings in wood from the forest, draws water in the pitcher,
fills all the pots and pans, and donning the garb of the ascetic he leaves
her with the words, “Be sure not to go out at improper times, and be
careful until I return.” Then putting on bis shoes, lie puts bis bag ot
provisions over his shoulder, walks round his wife rightwise, and depavts
with streaming eyes.
[525] Explaining this, the Master said :
“This done, the brahmin dons his shoes; then rising presently,
And walking round hor towards the right he bids bis wife good-bye.
So went bo, dressed in holiness, tears standing in his eyes :
To the rich Sivi capital to find a slave he hies.”
When he came to that city, lie asked the assembled people where
Vessnntara was.
1 Il< ailing nfiantva.
» •* Enual in cast", (luallty, and position,” schol.

f(S)f/ ‘ <SL
iV o . 5 4 7 . 2 7 3
Explaining this, the Master said :
“When further he had come, he asked the people gathered round—
‘ Say, where is King Vessantara ? where can the prince be found ? ’
To him replied the multitude who were assembled round :
‘ By such as you he’s ruined ; for by giving, giving still,
He’s banisht out of all the realm and dwells in Yamka hj|L
By such as you he’s ruined ; for by giving, giving still,
He took his wife and children and now dwells in Vatiika hill.’ ”
“ So you have destroyed our king, and now come here again ! Stand
still, will you,” and with sticks and clods, kicks and fisticuffs, they chased
him away, But he was guided by the gods into the right road for
Vuiiika hill.
. Explaining this, the Master said :
“So he, upbraided by his wife, in greedy passion’s sway,
Paid for his error in the wood where beasts and panthers prey.
Taking his staff and begging-bowl and sacrificial spoon,
He sought the forest where abode the giver of every boon.
Once in the forest, came the wolves thronging around his way :
He leapt aside, and went confused far from the path astray1.
This brahmin of unbridled greed, finding himself astray,
The way to Vatiika now quite lost, began these lines to say.
[526] ‘ Who’ll tell me of Yessantara, the prince’ all conquering,
Giver of peace in time of fear, the great and mighty king?
Refuge of suitors, as the earth to all that living lie,
Who’ll tell me of Vessantara, the great and mighty king?
All who seek favours go to him as rivers to the sea :
Who’ll tell me of Vessantara, the great and mighty king ?
Like to a safe and pleasant lake, with water fresh and cool,
With lilies spread, whose filaments cover the quiet pool:
Who’ll tell me of Vessantara, the great and mighty king?
Like a great fig-tree on the road, which growing there has made
A rest for weary wayfarers who hasten to its shade :
Who’ll toll mo of Vessantara, the great and mighty king?
Like banyan, sal, or mango'-tree, which on the road has made
A rest for weary wayfarers that hasten to its shade :
Who’ll tell mo of Vessantara, the great and mighty king ?
Who will give ear to my complaint, the forest all around?
Glad I should be, could anyone tel! where he may be found !
Who will give ear to my complaint, the forest all around ?
Great blessing it would lie, if one could tell where lie may bo found.’”
[527] Now the man who had been set to watch, who was ranging
the woods as a forester, heard this lamentable outcry; and thought he—
1 The scholiast says: “ When ho entered the wood, not knowing the road to
Vadik a hill he became perplex t and wout astray: as he sat there, the dogs of a country­
man of Oeta suummded him to keep watch; then he climbed up a tree and cried with
a loud voice” kandi I take it rather from , jn 471 i.e. ho leapt
( ). as tv.
aside, went astray. The scholiast anticipates wliat is soon to come.
j. vi. 18

' c°h5*\
t(s )| v <SL
The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
^ ^ ^ ^ 2 7 4
_________________________________________ ---------------
— —
“ Here is a brahmin crying out about Vessantara’s dwelling-place , be
cannot be here for any good purpose, lie will ask for MaddI or the
children, no doubt. Well, 1 will kill him.” So he approached the man,
and as he drew his bow, threatened him with the words—“ Brahmin, I
will not spare your life !”
Explaining this, the Master said :
“ The hunter ranging in the wood heard this lament, and said .
‘By such as you he’s ruined; for by giving, giving still,
lie’s baniskt out of all the realm and dwells in Vamka hill.
Bv such as you lie’s ruined ; for by giving, giving still,
Ho took his wife and children nud now dwells in Vamka hill.
A good-for-nothing fool you arc, if leaving home you wish
To seek the prince in forests, like a crane that seeks a fish.
Therefore, my worthy man, I will not spare your life; and so
My arrow now shall drink your blood when shot from out my how.
[’ll split your head, tear out your heart and liver in a trice,
Like birds to spirits of the road I’ll make you sacrifice.
I’ll take your flesh, I’ll take your fat, I’ll tako your heart and head,
And you shall bo a sacrifice1 as soon as you are dead.
You’ll he a welcome sacrifice, a goodly offering; >w
And then you’ll not destroy the wife and children of the king.
[528] The man, on hearing these words, was frightened to death, and
made a false reply.
“ The ambassador's inviolate, and no rnan may him kill.
This is ft very ancient rule ; so listen, if you will.
The people have repented them, liis father misses him.
His mother pines away for grief—her eyes are waxing dim.
I come as their ambassador, Vessantara to bring: „
Hear me, and tell me if you know where I may find the king.
Then the man was pleased to hear that he was come to fetch
Vessantara; he fastened up his dogs, and called the brahmin down, and
seating him upon a pile of twigs lie recited this stanza;
“I love the envoy and the prince; and here I give to you
A gilt, of welcome—leg of deer and pot of honey too ;
Our benefactor how to find I’ll tell you what to do.”
So saying, the man gave the brahmin food, with a gourd of honey and
a roast leg of doer, and set him on his way, raising his right hand to point
out the place where the Great Being lived: and he said
“Sir brahmin, yonder rocky mount is Gnndhamadan hill
Where lives the King Vessantara with wife and children still.
With brahmin’s dress, with hooka and spoon, the ascetic’s matted hair,
tSkinchui lie lies upon the ground and tends the five with care.
1 Heading iiliutilh ~ ^ r? fri.
,h,'<hn-lram<,,u,julam. Tho division of the words is doubtful. Hobo).
j| ^ .■». ca m l.lahama jafail ca dluin-nto. 1 sou nothmK

. - <
s l
No. 547. 275
See yonder, trees with many fruits, green on the mountain side,
While the dark mountain-peaks uplift till in the clouds they hide.
There shrubs, and creepers, horsear, sal, aud many another tree1
Sway in the wind like drunken men for anyone to see.
High up above the rows of trees the birds in concert sing,
Najjuha2, cuckoo, flocks of them, from tree to tree flitting*
[529] Thronging among the leafy twigs they bid the stranger come,
Welcome the guest, delighting all who make the woods their home,
Where with his children now abides Vessantara the king.
With brahmin’s dress, with hook and spoon, the ascetic’s, matted hair, *
Skinclad he lies upon the ground, and tends the fire with care.”
Moreover he said, in praise of the hermitage:
- “Mango, rose-apple, jackfruit, sal, all kinds of myrobolan,
Bu, golden tindook, many more, including the banyan3;
Plenty of figs, all growing low, all ripe, as sweet us sweet,
Dates, luscious grapes, and honeycomb, as much as you can eat.
The mango-trees are some in flower, some with the fruit just set,
Some ripe aud green as any frog, while some are unripe yet.
A man may stand beneath the trees and pluck them as they grow :
The choicest flavour, colour, taste, both ripe and unripe shew.
It makes mo cry aloud to see that greaWmd wondrous sight,
Like heaven where the gods abide, the garden of delight.
Palmyra, date-palm, coconut grow in that forest high,
festoons of flowers garlanded as when the banners fly,
Blossoms of every hue and tint like stars that dot the sky.
[530] Ebony, aloe, trumpet-flower, and many another tree4,
Acacias, berries, nuts, and all as thick as thick can he. ,
Hard by there is a lake bespread with lilies blue and white,
As in the garden of the gods, the Garden of Delight.
And there the cuckoos make the hills re-echo as they slug,
Intoxicated with the flowers which in their season spring.
See on the lilies drop by drop the honey-nectar fall,
And feel the breezes blowing free from out the south and west,
Until the pollen of the flowers is waften over all.
to suggest a 1 hook,’ unless perhaps tisada, 1 food-giver ’ C^Tll): but the rest of the
couplet describes the religious trappings of the ascetic, camam should be‘bowl’or
‘spoon,’ and asada perhaps ‘fire,’ as suggested by schol. Bd, aggijuhana-kutacxhu-
nankh&timamn ea. This coupiui might have described the ascetic who comes in later.
1 dliuru (Grislea Tomentosa), aasakaiuui (Vatiea Robusta), khodira (Acacia Ca
teohu), plumdana (Butea Frondosa).
- najjuha : I cannot identify this bird.
3 Other trees mentioned are: kupittha (Feronia Elophantum), kapitthaiui - kapi■
laim (The; pi sia Populueoidea).
4 The names of the trees are given in full, and may bo found in Childers. Wo may
add tiie following: kujaji ku!<yo‘?, kuttha (Cosliis Speeiosus j, uddhuhika
(unknown), lomarukkha — nowavakka ?, puttnjiva (I’utraujlva Hoxburghii).
18—2

?(f)| <SL
|® i3 ^ 7 6 , The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
Plenty of rice and berries1 ripe about the lake do fall,
Which fish and crabs2 and tortoises dart seeking with a zest,
And honey drips liko milk or ghee from the flowers one and all.
A frequent breeze blows through the trees where every scent is found,
And seems to intoxicate with flowers the forest all around.
The bcefcabout the scented flowers fly thronging with their hum,
There fly the many-coloured birds together, all and some,
Cooing and chirping in delight, each with his mate they come.
‘0 pretty cbicky, happy chap!’ they twitter and they tweet—
0 lovoy dovey, deary dear, my pretty little sweet3 !
• Festoons of flowers garlanded as when the banners fly.
Blossoms of every hue and tint, sweet odours wafted by,
Where with his children now abides Vessantara the king.
With brahmin’s dress, with hook and spoon, the ascetic s matted hair,
Skiuclad he lies upon the ground and tends the fire with care.
[531] Thus did the countryman describe the place where Vessantara
lived ; and Jfijaka delighted saluted him in this stanza :
“ Accept this piece of barley-bread all soaked with honey sweet,
And lumps of well-cookt honey-cake: I give it you to cat.
To this the countryman answered :
“ I thank you, but I have no need : keep your provision still ;
And take of my provision ; then go, brahmin, where you will.
[5321 Straight onward to a hermitage the pathway there, will lead,
Where Accata a hermit dwells, block-tooth d, with dirty head,
With brahmin dress, with hook and spoon, the ascetics matted M i,
Skin did lie lios upon the ground and tencls the fire with care:
(Jo thither, ask the way of him, and he will give you speed.
When this he heard, the brahmin walked round Ceta towards the right,
And went in search of Accata, his heart in high delight.
Then BharadvSja4 went along until he came anigh
Unto the hermit’s place, to whom he spake thus courteously :
“0 holy man, I trust that you are prosperous and well5,
With grain to glean and roots and fruit abundant where you dwel.
Have you been much by flies and gnats and creeping things annoyed,
Or from wild boasts of prey have you immunity enjoyed f
The ascetic said:
“ J thank you, brahmin—yes, 1 am both prosperous and well,
With gram to eat and roots and fruit abundant where 1 dwell.
1 The words *i my ha taka, samtadiya, patadiya need explanation. They appear to
be plants; the two latter are explained as a kiud of rice, bliirna is a flower =
Mahavattu hi. 02’*, etc.
- upayanakfi: ‘ kakkafakei.’
This couplet h; made up of words which oxpross joy und affection, and seems to
contain names for the birds playfully made; jwapulto means one who has living
children. Perhaps it is not too fanciful to hoar an echo of ihcir melodious chirp­
ing. The scholiast says: b-tm elan’ era uSmAni ahetum.
’ Tin'1 following hues occur: v. m v. P- 170; see also iv. P. 270).

|(¥ )| . * <SL
N o. 547. 277
From flies and gnats and creeping tilings I suffer not annoy,
And from wild beasts of prey I here immunity enjoy.
In all the innumerable years I’ve lived upon this ground,
No harmful sickness that I know has ever here been found.
Welcome, 0 brahmin ! bless the chance directed you this way,
Come enter with a blessing, come, and wash your feet I uray.
The tindook and the piyal leaves, and kasumarl sweet,
And fruits like honey, brahmin, take the best I have, ami eat,
And this cool water from a cave high hidden on a hill,
0 noble brahmin, take of it, drink if it bo your will.”
Jujaka said:
[533] “Accepted is your offering, and your oblation, sir.
1 seek the son of Sanjaya, once banisht far away
By Sivi’s people: if you know where he abides, please say.”
The ascetic said :
“You seek the King of Sivi, sir, not with a good intent:
Methinks your honour’s real desire upon his wife is bent:
Kanhajina for handmaiden, Jfili for serving-man,
Or you would fetch the mother with her children, if you can,
The prince has no enjoyments here, no wealth or food, my man.”
On hearing this, Jujaka said :
“ I wish no ill to any man, no boon I come to pray :
But sweet it is to see the good, pleasant with them to stay.
I never saw this monarch, whom his people sent away :
I tame to see him : if you know where he abides, please say.”
The other believed him. “Good, I will tell you ; only stay with me
here to-day.” So he entertained him with wild fruits and roots; and next
day, stretching out his hand, he shewed him the road. [He then recites
the verses given above, p. 274, “Sir brahmin-----with care,” and adds:]
[534] “The foliage of the pepper-tree in that fair spot is seen,
No dust is ever blown aloft, tho grass is ever green.
The grasses like a peacock’s neck, soft-cotton to the touch,
Grow never more than inches four, but always just so much.
Kapittha, mango, rose-apple, and ripe figs dangling low,
All trees whose fruit is good to eat in that fine forest grow.
There sweet and clean and fragrant streams as blue as beryl flow,
Through which disporting up and down the shoals of fishes go.
A lake lies in a lovely spot, with lilies blue and white,
Hard by, like that which is in heaven i’ the Garden of Delight.
Three kinds of lilies in that lake present them to the sight,
With varied colours : some are blue, some blood-red, others white.”
Thus he praised the foursquare lake of lilies, and went on to praise
Lake Mucalinda:
“ Ah soft as linen are the flowers, those lilies blue and white,
And other herbs grow there: the lake is Mucalinda bight.
And there in number infinite the full-blown flowers you see,
In summer and in winter both as high as to the knee.

■ g°^Tx
;(1 )| <SL
"^•^2 7 8
The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
Always the many-coloured flowers blow fragrant on the breeze,
And you may hear drawn by the sc.ent the buzzing of the bees.
[535] All round about the water’s edge are standing in a row
The ebony, the trumpet-flower, and tall kadamba-trces.
Six-petals and many another tree1 with flowers all a-blow,
And lcafy^ bowers all standing round about the lake one seas.
There trees of every shape and size, there flowers of every hue,
All shrubs and bushes, high and low are spread before the view :
The breezes sweetly waft the scent from flowers white, blue, and red,
That grow about the hermitage wherein the fire is fed.
[536] Close round about the water’s edge grow many plants and treas,
Which tremble as they echo to the murmurs of the bee:s.
The scent of all the lovely blooms .that grow about that shore
Will last you if you keep them for a week, or two, or more.
Three kinds of gourds, all dist.iuct, grow in this lake, and some
Have fruit ns big as waterpots, others big as a drum.
Mustard, green garlic, lilies blue to pick, and flowers full-blown,
Jasmine, sweet sandal, creepers huge about the trees are grown.
[537] Sweet jasmine, cotton, indigo, and plants of many a name,
Cress, trumpet-flower, grow all around like tongues of golden flame.
Yea. every kind of flower that grows in water or on land,
In and about this lovely lake lo and behold they stand.
There' crocodiles and water-beasts abide of every sort,
Rod doer and other animals for water do resort.
Turmeric, camphor, paniok-seed, the liquorice-plant, and all
Most fragrant seeds and grasses grow with stalks exceeding tall.
There lions, tigers, elephants a seeking for a mate,
Deer rod and dappled, jackals, dogs, and fawns so swift of gait,
[538] Yaks, antelopes, and flying fox, and monkeys great and small,
Boars, bulls, and other mighty beasts come flocking one and all:
Rhinoceros, muuguose, squirrel, boar, dog, jackal, buffalo,
Loris, hurc, speckled panther, wolf and lizard, there they go :
Spiders and snakes and hairy things, and every kind of bird,
Which us they chirp and twitter round all make their voices heard :
Hawk, woodcock, heron, piper, owl, the cuckoo with his flute.
Partridge, geese, ospreys, pheasants, cranes, and redbacks, follow suit.
[539] There sweetly singing to their mates the gorgeous-coloured things,
White-tufted, nlue-neckt, peacook-hued flutter their pretty wings.
Why should 1 try their thousand names in detail to rehearse ?
Imagine every kind of bird, and add them to my verse.
There a melodious company their thousand songs they make
And till the air with pleasant, noise round Mucalindu Lake.
Thu wood is full of elephants, of antelopes and deer,
Where hanging down from all the trees great creepers do appear.
There mustard grows, and sugar-cane, and many kinds of rice,
And beans and other plants and herbs, all comers to suflioe.
Yonder the footpath leads you straight, unto his settling-ground
Where never hunger, never thirst., and no distaste is found,
Where with bis children now abides V essantavu the king :
1 Again 1 otnii many names in the description, for which 1 know no English
equivalents.

• e<W\
f( f ) | (gL
^ ^ S 5'7 547. 279
No.
With brahmin’s dress, with hook and spoon, the ascetic’s matted hair,
okmclad he lies upon the ground, and tends the fire with care.”
[540] 'U hen this he heard, the brahmin walked around him towards the right,
And went to seek Vessantara, his heart in high delight.
Jujaka went on by the road pointed out to him by Accata the Hermit,
and arrived at the foursquare lake. “ It is now late evening,” he thought:
“ MaddI will by now be returned from the forest, and women are always
m the way. To-morrow, when she has gone into the forest, I will go to
Vessantara, and ask him for the children, and before she comes back I
will be away.” So he climbed a flat-topt hill not far off, and lay down in a
pleasant spot. Now at dawn of the next morning, MaddI had a dream,
and her dream was after this fashion : A black man clothed in two yellow'
robes, with red flowers in his two ears, came and entered the hut of leaves,
clutched MaddI bv the hair of her head and dragged her out, threw her
her
down on the ground backwards, and amidst shrieks tore out her two
eyes, cut off two arms, cut open her breast, and tearing out the heart
dripping with blood carried it away. She uwoke in affright, thinking—
“An evil dream have I seen; I have no one here but Vessantara to
interpret my dream, so 1 will ask him about it.” [fill] Then going to
the lint of the Great Being, she knocked at the door. “Who’s there'!”
“I, my lord, MaddI.” “Lady, why have you come here unseasonably, and
broken our compact 1 ” “ My lord, it is not from desire that I come; but
I have had an evil dream.” “Tell it to me then, MaddI,” She told it as
it had appeared: the Great Being understood what the dream meant.
“The perfection of my giving,” he thought, “is to be fulfilled : this day
comes a suitor to ask for my children. I will console MaddI ajul lot her
go.” So he said, “ Your mind must have been disturbed by uneasy sleep
or by indigestion ; fear nothing.” With this deceit he consoled her, and.
let her go. And when the night grew light, she did all that had to he
done, embraced and kissed the children, and said, “Last night T had a had
dream ; be careful, my dear.t! ” Then she gave them in charge of the
Great Being, begging him to take care of them, took her basket and tools,
wiped her tears, and away to the woods for fruits and roots.
But Jujaka, thinking that she would now be gone, came down from
the hill and went up the footpath towards the hermitage. And the Great
Being came out of his hut, and seated himself upon a slab of stone like a
golden image. “Now the suitor will come 1 lie thought, like a drunkard,
thirsting for a draught, and sat watching the road by which he would
come, his children playing about his feet. And as lie looked down the
road, lie saw the brahmin coming; taking up ms it were the burden of his
giving, for seven months laid down, lie cried in joy Brahmin, pray
draw near!” and to the boy Jali he addressed this stanza:
“Jfili, arise and stand: behold a brahmin in my sight!
’Tis the old time come back again, and tills me With delight !”

' Co^X
H I . <SL
Xv^ ^ 2 8 0 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
Hearing this, the boy says :
[542] “ Yes, yes, my father, I behold the brahmin whom you see ; #
He comes as though a boon to ask; our guest he needs must be.
And with these words, to shew him honour, the boy rose up from his
seat, and went to meet the brahmin, offering to relieve him of his baggage.
The brahmin looked at him, and thought, “This must be Jali, the son of
Vessantara : from the very first I will speak harshly to him.” So he
snapt his fingers at him, crying—“ Go away, go away ! ’’ The boy thought,
“ A harsh man this, to bo sure ! ” and looking at his body, he perceived in
him the eighteen blemishes of a man. But the brahmin came up to the
Bodhisatta, and politely greeting him, said :
“<) holy man, we trust that .you are prosperous and well,
With grain to glean and roots and fruit abundant where you dwell.
Have you been much by flies and gnats and creeping tilings annoyed,
Or from wild beasts of prey have you immunity enjoyed?”
The Bodhisatta answered politely :
“ 1 thank you, brahmin, and reply : we prosper and arc well
With grain to glean and roots and fruit abundant where we dwell.
From flies and gnats and creeping tilings we suffer no annoy,
And from wild beasts of prey we here immunity enjoy1.
Seven months wo have lived happy in this forest, and have not
Once seen a brahmin, as wo now see you, godlike, I wot,
With vilva-stalf and tindur-bux, and with the waterpot.
Welcome, 0 brahmin ! blest the chance directed you this way ;
Come, enter with a blessing, come and wash your feet, 1 pray.
The tindook and the piyal leaves, the kasumari sweet,
And fruits like honey, brahmin, take the best 1 have, and eat.
And this cool water from a cave high hidden on a hill,
0 noble brahmin, take of it, drink if it be your will2.”
After these words, the Great Being thought : “Not without cause is
this brahmin come to this great forest; I will ask him the reason without
delay”: and he recited this stanza :
[543] “ Now tell me what may be the cause, what can the reason be,
That brings you to this mighty wood 1 I pray you tell it me.
.1 >ijuka said :
As a great water-flood is full, and fails not any day,
So you, from whom I come to bog—give me your children, pray !”
On hearing this, the Great Being was delighted in heart j and said, like
one w ho sets in the outstretched hand a purse of a thousand pieces of money8:
“1 give, and shrink not: you shall he their master. But my queen
Went out this morning for our food ; at evening she’ll be soon.
> See vr. 58211 (above, >. 2711); v. 323'*, 877s1 (trims., pp. 171, 200); op. iv. 427M
(trims., p. 207).
- Hud p. 277 above.
I'crimps with au allusion to his mother’s gift. P- above. Ho the Burmese.

ill ■
<SL
.
No. 547 281
Stay hero this night : the morning light shall see you on your way.
She’ll wash them and perfume them both1, and garland them with flowers.
Stay here this night: the morning light shall seo you on your way.
Deckt out with flowers they both shall be, with scents and perfumes sweet;
Take them away, and plenty take of fruits and roots to eat.”
Jujaka
said :
[544] “ No, mighty monarch, I would go ; I do not wish to stay :
I’ll go, lost some impediment should thwart me in the way.
Women no generous givers are, to thwart they always try,
They know all sorts of cunning spells, and always go awry.
Let him who gives a gift in faith not see his mother’s face,
Or she will' And impediments : 0 king, I’d go apace.
Give me your children ; lot them not behold their mother’s face :
For ho that gives a gift in faith, his merit grows apace.
Give me your children ; lot them not behold their mother’s face : 1
He who gives wealth to such as I, to heaven he goes apaco.”
Vessantara said :
“ If you wish not to see my wife,—a faithful wife is she !
Let J&li and Kanhajina their grandsiro go and see.
When these fair children, sweet of speech, shall come within his sight,
He’ll give you wealth in plenty, full of joy and high delight.”
Jujaka said :
“ I fear the spoiling of my goods: 0 prince, I prithee hear !
The king may deal me punishment, may slay, or sell, I fear ;
Sods wealth and servants, how my wife would mock at me, and jeer! ”
[545] Vessantara said :
“When these fair children, sweet of speech, shall come within his sight,
The foster-king of Sivi folk, who always does the right,
Will give you wealth in plenty, filled with pleasure and delight.”
Jujaka said :
“ No, no, I will not do this thing which you would recommend :
I’ll take the children, on my wife as servants to attend.”
The children, hearing these harsh words, slunk behind the hut, and away
they ran from behind the hut, and hid close to a clump of bushes. Even
there they seemed to themselves caught by .Jujaka; trembling, ibex
see
could not keep still anywhere, but ran hither and thither, until they came
to the bank of the square lake; where, wrapping the bark garments lightly
about them, they plunged into the water and stood there eoncealed, their
heads hidden under the lily leaves.
Explaining this, the Master said :
“So Jail and Kanhajina hither aud thither ran,
lu deep distress to hear the voice of the pursuing man.”
And Jujaka, when he saw nothing of the children, upbraided the
Bodhisatta: “Ho Vessantara! when you gave me the children just now,
1 upayhiit6\ ‘slstlihhi upaxiihghiic.’

?(S> <SL
X^ ^ r^282 , The Jat aka. Book XXII.
as soon as I told you that I would not go to the city of Jetuttara, but
would make the children my wife’s attendants, you made them some sign,'
and caused them to run away, sitting there like innocence itself! Such
a liar there is not in the world, I’m thinking.” The Great Being was
moved. “They have run away, no doubt,” he thought, and said aloud,
“ Do not trouble about it, sir, I’ll fetch them.” So he arose and weno
behind the hut; perceiving that they must have fled to the woods, [516]
he followed their footprints to the lakeside, and then seeing a footprint
where they went down into the water, he perceived that they must have
gone into the water : so he called, “ Jali, my boy ! ” reciting these two
stanzas :
“ Come hither, my beloved son, my perfect state fulfil;
Come now and consecrate my heart, and follow out my will.
Be thou my ship to ferry me safe o’er existence' sea,
Beyond the worlds of birth and gods I’ll cross and I'll be free."
“ Come, Jali, my boy ! ” cried he; and the lad hearing his voice
thought thus: — “Let the brahmin do with me what lie will, I will not
quarrel with my father 1 ” He raised his head, parted the lily-leaves, and
came out of the water, throwing himself upon the Great Being’s right loot;
embracing the ankle he wept. Then the Great Being said : “ My boy,
where is your sister 1” He answered, “Father, all creatures take care of
themselves in time of danger.” The Great Being recognized that tho
children must have made a bargain together, and he cried out, “ Here,
Kanh& ! ” reciting two stanzas :
“Come hither, my beloved girl, my perfect state fulfil,
Come now and consecrate my heart, and follow out mf will.
Bo thou my ship to ferry me safe o'er existence’ sea,
Beyond the worlds of meu and gods I'll cross and lift1 me free!”
She also thought, “I will not quarrel with my father”; and in a
moment out she came, and falling on her father’s left foot clasped his
ankle and wept. Their tears fell upon the Great Being’s feet, coloured
like a lily-leaf; and his tears fell on their backs, which had the colour of
golden slabs. Then the Great Being raised up his children and comforted
them, saying, “My son Jali, don’t you know that 1 have gladly given you
away I Ho do that my desire may attain fulfilment.” And then and
there 1m put a price on the children, as one puts a price on cattle. To his
son lie said: “Hon Jiili, if you wish to become free, you must pay the
brahmin [-547J n thousand pieces of gold". But your sister is very
beautiful ; if any person of low birth should give the bralnnin so and so
much to make her free, ho would break her birthright. None but a king
' uddhariunm: of coming out of tliu river on the other aide. So Mahuvuatu n.
2*11nuditu kocchupo utUlhuriivii.
J nikkliu- equal to livo

f/$v( —f")\V|\ . - (gL
\% >-----
No. 547. 283
can give all things by the hundred; therefore if your sister would bo tree
let her pay the brahmin a hundred male and a hundred female slaves, with
elephants, horses, bulls, and gold pieces, all a hundred each.” Thus did lie
price the children, and comforted them, and took them back to the
hermitage. Then he took water in his waterpot, and calling the brahmin
-o come near, he poured out the water, praying that he might attain
omniscience. “ Dearer than my son a hundredfold, a thousandfold, a
hundred thousandfold is omniscience ! ” he cried, making the earth resound,
and to the brahmin he gave this precious gift of his children.
Explaining this, the Master said :
. “The roster4 dug of Sivi land then took his children both,
And gave this gift most' precious to the brahmin, nothing loth.
Then was there terror and affright, and the great earth did quake,,
What time the king with folded hands bestowed the children both ;
Then was there terror and affright, and the great earth did shake,
When Sivi’s king his children gave the brahmin, nothing loth.”
[548] When the Great Being liad made the gift, he was joyful, thinking
how good a gift lie had made, as lie stood looking upon the children: And
Jujaka went into the jungle, and bit off a creeper, and with it he bound the
boy’s right hand to the girl’s left, and drove them away beating them with
the ends of the creeper.
Explaining this, the Master said :
“The cruel brahmin bit a length of creeper off; which done,
He with the creeper bound their hands, and dragged the children on1.
And then the brahmin, staff in hand, holding the creeper tight.
Beat them and drove them on and on before- their father’s sight.”
Where he struck them, the skin was cut, the blood ran, when struck
they staggered against each other back to back. But in a rugged place the
man stumbled and fell : with their tender hands the children slipt off’ the
light bond, and ran away weeping to the Great Being.
Explaining this, the Master said :
“The children thus at lilierty then from the brahmin fly;
The boy looks on bis father’s face, the tears are in his eye.
Then liko a figdeaf in the wind the little boy did quake,
Embracing threw his arms around his father’s feet, and spake :
1 Father, will you dispose of us while mother is away ?
O do not give us till she come ! till she return, 0 stay !
And will you then dispose of us while mother is away ?
0 wait until she shall return, then give us if you will !
Then let the brahmin sell us both, then let the brahmin kill !
Ilis foot is huge, his nails are torn, his flesh hangs sagging down,
Long undorlip and broken nose, all trembling, tawny brown,
l\>t-belliod, broken-backed, with eyes that shew an ugly squint*,
All spots and wrinkles, yellow-haired, with heard of bloody tint,
1 auumnjjtUha ?
visiimacakkliulo: or ‘of different colours, as the Burmese version has it.

111 <SL
V$!^ 2 8 4 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
Yellow, loose-jointed, cruel, huge, in skins of goats bedight,
A crooked and inhuman thing, a most terrific sight;
[549] A man, or monstrous cannibal ? and canst thou tamely see
This goblin come into the wood to ask this boon of thee ?
And is thy heart a piece of stone fast bound about with steel,
To care not when this greedy man, who can no pity feel,
Binds us, and drives us off like kino 1 At least I would appeal
That sister Kapha, who as yet no trouble knows, may stay,
Now crying like a sucking fawn lost from the herd away.’'
[550J To this the Great Being answered not one word. Then the boy
said, lamenting on account of his parents 1:
“ I care not for the pain of death, that is the lot of all:
Ne’er more to see my mother’s face, ’tis this that doth appal.
I care not for the pain of death, that is the lot of all:
Ne’er more to see my father’s face, ’tis this that doth appal.
Long will my parents mourn and weep, long will they nurso their woe,
At midnight" and at dawn their tears will like a river flow,
No more to see Kanhajina, whom t-hoy had cherished so.
Those clusters of rose-apple trees which droop around the lake,
And all the, fruitage of the woods this day we do forsake.
Fig-tree and jack-fruit, banyan broad and every tree that grows,
Yea! all the fruitage of the woods this day wo do forsake.
There stand tiiey like a pleasant park, there cool the river flows,
The place where onco we used to play, this day we do forsake.
The fruit that once we Used to eat, the flowers we used to wear,
That yonder grow upon the hill, this day we do forsake.
And all the pretty little toys that onco we played with there,
The horses, oxen," elephants, this day we do forsake.”
[551] In despite of these lamentations, Jujaka came and drove him
away with his sister.
Explaining this, the Master said:
“The children to their father said as they were led away:
1 O father! wish our mother well, and happy be your day!
These oxen, horses, elephants wherewith we used to play,
(Jive them to mother, and they will somewhat her grief allay.
These oxen, horses, elephants wherewith we used to play,
When she looks on them, will anon somewhat her grief allay.’”
Now great pain arose in the Great Being because of his children, and
his heart grew hot within him : lm trembled violently, like an elephant
seized by a maned lion, like the moon, swallowed in Kabu’s jaws. Not
strong enough to endure it, lie went into the hut, tears streaming from
his eyes, and wept pitifully,
(Explaining this, the Master said:
“The warrior prince Vossuitara thus gave his gift, and went,
And there within his leafy bower ho sadly did lament.’’
1 Hee above, p. 80. The verses have been compressed in translation.

■ e°lfex
f(S )| ‘ <SL
iVo. 547. ' 285
What follow are the verses of the Great Being’s lamentation.
“ O when at morning or at eve for food my children cry,
Opprest by hunger or by thirst, who will their want supply?
[552] How will their little trembling feet along the roadway go,
Unshod? who’ll hike them by the hand and lead them gently so?
» How could the brahmin feel no shame, while I was standing by,
To strike my harmless innocents? a shameless man say 1!
No man with any sonse of shame would treat another so,
Were it a servant of my slave, and I brought very low.
I cannot sec him, but he scolds and beats my children dear,
While like a fish caught in a trap I’m standing helpless here."
Thes<y thoughts came into the Great Being’s mind, through his affec­
tion for the children; he could not away with the pain to think how the
brahmin cruelly beat his children, and he resolved to go in chase of the
man, and kill him, and to bring the children back. But no, he thought:
that was a mistake; to give a gift, then to repent because the children’s
trouble would be very great, that was not the way of the righteous. And
the two following stanzas contain the reflexions which throw light on that
matter.
“ Ho bound his sword upon his left, he armed him with his bow;
‘I’ll bring my children back again; to lo§£ them is great woe.
But even if my children die ’tis wicked to feel pain1:
Who knows the customs of the good, yet asks a gift again V”
[553] Meanwhile Jujaka beat the children as he led them along.
Then the boy said lamenting:
“How true that saying seems to be which men are wont to tell:
Who has no mother of his own is fatherless as well2.
Life’s nothing to us : lot us die ; we /ire his chattels now,
This cruel greedy violent man, who drives us like his cow.
These clusters of rose-apple trees, which droop around the lake,
And all the verdure of the^ woods, O Kapha, wo forsake.
Fig-tree and jack-fruit, banyan tree, find every tree that grows,
Yea all the many kinds of fruit, 0 Kanhii, we forsake.
Thoro stand they like a-pleasant park, there cool the river flows;
The place where once we used to play, 0 Kauliii, we forsake.
The fruit that once we used to eat, [he flowers we used to wear,
That yonder grow upon the hill, O Kan lift, we forsake.
And all the little protty toys that onco wo played with there,
The horses, oxen, elephants, 0 Kanhii, we forsake.”
1 This line docs not scan, and does not give the required sense, ‘it is nothing to
me ’ (mama mi kind, hot it, soli.). Read with U1* a(h&na me lor attlduum (op. line 25 of
text), ‘this is wrong,’ and omit turn (or omit m< ). —Perhaps uffhttnam clam is coir'culud
here.
a Reading: taka maid, jiitii n’ atthi has pita). So Burmese version.

/Y y ~ ^ s\
1(f)! <
sl
^ / v _y a_j
\s%?V
286 The Jdtaha. Booh XXII.
Again, the brahmin fell down in a rough place: the cord fell from his
hand, and the children, trembling like wounded fowls, ran away without
stopping back to their father.
Explaining this, the Master said:
“Now Jali and Kanhajina, thus by the brahmin led.
Somehow got free, and then away and on and on they fled.”
[554] But Jfijaka quickly got up, and followed them, cord and stick
in hand, spitting like the fire at the world’s end; “ Very clever you are
indeed,” said he, “at running away”; and he tied their hands and brought
them back.
Explaining this, the Master said :
“And so the brahmin took his cord, and so bis stalf he took,
And brought them back with beating, while the king was forced to look.”
As they were led away, Kanhajina turned back, and lamented to her
father. Explaining this, the Master said :
“Then spake Kanhajina and said: ‘My father, prithee see—
As though I were a home-born slave this brahmin thrashes me !
Brahmins are men of upright life : no brahmin he can be.
A goblin sure in brahmin-shape, that leads us off to eat.
And can you stay and see us led to be a goblin’s meat <
As his young daughter lamented, trembling as slm went, dire griet
serose in the Great Being: hie heart grew hot within him; his nose was
not large enough, so from his mouth he sent forth hot pantings; tears
like drops of blood fell from bis eyes. Then he thought: “All this pain
comes from affection, and no other cause; I must quiet this affection,
and be calm.” Thus by power of his knowledge he did away with that
keen pang of sorrow, and sat still as usual.
Ere they had yet reached the entering in of the mountains, the girl
went, on lamenting :
“Sore are those little feet of mine, hard in the wav we go.
The brahmin drives us on and on, the sun is sinking low.
[55S] On hills and forests, and on those that dwell in them, we call,
\Vo reverently bow to greet the spirits, one and nil,
That, haunt, this lake; its plants and roots and creepers, and WO pray
To wish onr mother health : lmt us the brahmin drives away.
If she would follow after us, lot her make no delay,
straight loads unto the hermitage this path by which wo go;
And if she will but follow this, she soon will find us so.
Thou gatherer of wild fruits and roots, thou of tho knotted hair,
To see the empty hermitage will cause thee great despair.
Long stayed our mother on her quest, great store she must have found,
Who knows not that a cruel man and greedy hath us bound,
A very cruel man, who now like cattle drives uk round.
Ah, had our mother come at eve, and had they chanced to moot,
Had she given him a meal of fruit with honey mixt, to eat,—

<SL
1 ( 1 ) 1
----Vs/
No. 547. . ’ 287
He would not drive us cruelly, when he his meal had bent;
Cruel be drove us, and our feet loud echoed as we went! ”
So for their mother longing sore the children did lament1 *.
[556] Now whereas the king gavo his dearly beloved children to the,
biahmin, the earth did resound with a great uproar that reached even to
Brahma’s heaven and pierced the hearts of the deities which dwelt in
1 lira a vat: who, hearing the children’s lamentation as the man drove them
along, thought with themselves, “If Maddi come betimes to the hermitage,
not seeing her children she will ask Vessantara about it; great will be
her longing when she hears that they have been given away ; she will
run after them, and will get into great tiouble: so they instructed
threeJ of the gods to take upon them the shape of a lion and a tiger and
a pard, and to obstruct3 her way, not to let her go back for all her asking
until the setting of the sun, that she might only get back by moonlight,
guarding her safe from the attacks of lions and other wild beasts.
Explaining this, the Master said :
“A Lion, Tiger, and a Pard, three creatures of the brake,
Which heard this lamentation loud, thus each to other spake :
‘Let not the princess back return at eve from seeking food,
Lest tho wild beasts should slay her in our kingdom of the wood.
If lion, pard, or tiger should the auspicious mother slay,
0 where would then Prince Jali be, 0 where Kunhajina?
The parent and the children both do you preserve this day.’ ”
They agreed, and obeyed the words of the gods. Becoming a lion
a tiger, and a pard, they lay down near the road by which she must go
Now Maddi was thinking to herself, [557] “ Last night 1 saw a bad dream ;
I will collect my fruits and roots and get mo betimes to the hermitage.”
Trembling she searched for tho roots and fruits: the Spade fell from her
hand, the basket fell from her shoulder, her right eye went a throbbing,
fruit-trees appeared as barren and barren trees as fruitful, she could not
tell whether she were on head or heels4. “What can be the meaning,”
she thought, “ of this strangeness to-day ! ” and she said —
“ Down falls my spade, a throbbing now in my right eye 1 foci.
The fruitful trees unfruitful seem, all round me seems to reel ! ”
And when she turned at evening time to go, the day’s work done,
Wild beasts beset her homeward path at setting of the sun.
“The hermitage is far, rnethinks, the sun is sinking low
And all the food tlioy have to eat is what 1 bring, I know.
Ami there my prince sits all alone within the leafy hut,
The hungry children comforting: and I returning not.
1 “ Here oudoth tho Children's Section {kum&rapunhu(n),n fjchol.
‘J fr. So Burmese version. The versiele linn Inyo.
* rumbhitva ?
* dq*a died, na jiinVlSyimu.

■ G°t&x
I I I <8L
: 288 The Jdtalca. Book XXII.
It is the time of evening meal, 0 woe is me! ’tis late:
Thirsting for water or for milk my children me await;
They come to meet me, standing like calves looking for their dam ;
Like wild-goose chicks above the lake—0 wretched that T am !
This is the sole and only path, with ponds and pits around:
And I can see no other road now I am homeward bound.
0 mighty monarchs of the woods, 0 royal beasts, T cry,
Bo brothers now in righteousness1, and let me safe go by !
1 am a banisht prince’s wife, a prince of glory fair;
As Sltft did for Rama, so I for my husband care.
When you go home at evening time, your children you can see:
So Jali and Kanhajina be given once more to mo !
Here are abundant roots and fruits, much food T have to shew :
The half I offer now to you : 0 let me safely go!
[558] A king my father, and a queen my mother—hoar mv cry!
Be brothers now in righteousness, and let me safe go lay !'
Then the gods, observing the time, saw that it was time to let her go ,
and they rose up and departed. The Master explained it thus:
“The beasts that heard her thus lament with great exceeding woe,
In voice of sweet and gentle sound, went off and Let her go.
When the beasts had departed, she returned to the hermitage. Now
it was the night of the full moon ; and when she came to the end of the
covered walk, where she had been used to see her children, and saw them
not, she cried out:
[559] “The children, dusty, close to home, arc wont to meet me here
Like calves that seek the mother-cow, like birds above the mere.
Like little deer, with prickt-up ear, they meet me on the way :
With joy and happiness they skip and Irohck in their play •
But Jail and Kanhajina I cannot see to-day.
\s goat and lioness may leave thoir young, a bird her cage,
To seek for food, so have I done thoir hunger to assuage :
But Jali and Kanhajina I cannot see to-day.
Here are thoir traces, close by home, like snakes upon the hill,
The little limps of earth they made all round, remaining still :
But Jali and Kanhajina T cannot see to-day.
All covered up with dust to mo my children used to rim,
Sprinkled with mud, but now indeed I can see neither one.
Like kids to welcome back tbeir dam they ran from homo away
As from the forest I returned ; I see them not to-day.
Hero they were playing, here this yellow viLva fruit let fall:
But d.ili and Kanhajina 1 cannot see to-day.
These breasts of mine are full of milk, mv heart will break withal:
But Jali aud KanhfijiuR T cannot see to-day.
They used to cling about mv hips, one hanging from my breast:
How they would meet me. dust begrimed et- time of evening rest.!
But Jali and Kanhajinn I cannot hoc to day.
i Rhe appeals to them as a princess. Bohol.

f(S) | <SL
v%r.«^x xYo. 547. 289
Once on a time this hermitage became our meeting-ground :
But now I see no children here, the whole place spins around.
[560] My children must be dead ! the place so silent has become—
The very ravens do not caw, the very birds are dumb.”
Lamenting in this fashion, she came up to the Great Being, ami set
down the basket of fruit. Seeing him sitting in silence, and no children
with him, she said:
“ Why art thou silent? how that dream comes to my thought again:
The birds and ravens make no sound, my children must be slain !
0 sir, have they been carried oil' by some wild beast of prey 1
Or in the deep deserted wood have they lteon led astray ?
[561] O do the pretty prattlers sleep? on errands do they fare?
0 have they wandered out afar in frolic or in play ?
1 cannot see their hands and feet, I cannot see their hair :
. Was it a bird that swooped? or who has carried them away?”
To this the Great Being made no reply. Then she asked, “ My lord,
why do you not speak to me? what is my fault?” and said:
“ ’Tis like the wound of arrow-shot, and still more bitter smart
(But Jali and Kanhajina I cannot see to-day !)
This is a second wound that thou hast struck me to the heart,
That I my children cannot see, that thou hast nought to say.
And so, O royal prince! this night since thou wilt not reply,
I think my days are done indeed, and thyji wilt see mo die.”
The Great Being thought that he would assuage his pain for the
children by harsh speech,- and recited this stanza :
[562] “O Maddl, royal princess born, whose glory is so great,
Thou wentst for food in early morn : why comest thou so late?’
She replied :
“ Bid you not hear the lion and the tiger loudly roar
When by the lako their thirst to slake they stood upon the shore ?
As in the woods I walked, there came the sign 1 knew so well :
My spade fell from my hand, and from my arm the basket fell.
Then hurt, alarmed, I wooshipt all the quarters, one by one,
Praying t.li.it good 'might coruo of this, my hands outstrotcht in prayer:
And that no lion and no pard, hyena, wolf or bear,
Might tear or harry or destroy iny daughter or my son.
A lion, tigor, and a pard, three ravening beasts, laid wait
And kept me from my homeward path: so that is why I’m late.”
This was all that the Great Being said to her until sunrise : after which
Maddi uttered a long lament:
[663] “My .hu sband and my children 1 have tended clay and night,
As pupil tends a teacher, when ho trios to do the right.
In goatskins clothed, wild roots and fruits I from the forest brought,
Ami every day and every night for your convenience sought.
i brought you yellow vilva fruit, my little girt and boy,
And many a ripe woodland fruit, to play and make you joy.
.r. vi. 19

MM <SL
e
The Jdtaha. Booh XXII.
^ ^ 1 5 5 ^ 2 9 0
This lotus root and lotus stalk, of golden yellow hue,
Join' with your little ones, 0 prince, and eat your portion too.
Give the white lily to your girl, to Jali give the blue,
And see them dance in garlands deckt: 0 call them, Sivi, do !
O mighty monarch ! lend an ear while with delightful sound
Kanhajina sings sweetly, and enters our settling-ground.
Since we wore banisht, joy and woe in common shared has been :
0 answer! my Kanhajina and Jfdi hast thou seen ?
How many holy brahmins I must have offended sore,
Of holy life, and virtuous, and full of sacred lore,
That Jali and Kanhajina I cannot see to-day!”
[564] To this lament the Great Being answered not one word. As he
said nothing, trembling she sought her children by the light of the moon ;
and wheresoever they used to play, under the rose-apple trees or where not,
she sought them, weeping the while, and saying:
“The.se clusters of rose-apple trees, that droop around the mere,
And all the fruitage of the woods—my children are not here!
Fig-tree and jack-fruit, banyan broad, and every tree that grows,
Yea, all the fruitage of the woods—my children are not here!
There stand they like a pleasant park, there cool the river flows,
The place where once they used to play—but now they are not here.
The fruit that once they used to eat, the flowers they used to wear
That yonder grow upon the hill—the children are not there !
And all the little toys that once they played with, there are those,
The oxen, horses, elephants—the children are not there!
Here are the many hares and owls, the dark and dappled deer,
With which the children used to play, but they themselves not here!
The peacocks with their gorgeous wings, the herons and the geese,
With which the children used to play, but they themselves not here!”
Not linding her darling children in the hermitage, she entered a clump
of (lowering plants and looked here and there for them, saying :
“The woodland thickets, full of flowers that every season blow,
Whore once the children used to play, but they themselves not here !
The lovely lakes that listen, when the ruddy geese give call,
When lotus white and lotus blue and trees like coral grow1,
Where once the children played, but now no children are at all.”
[565] But nowhere could she see the children. Then returning to the
Great Being, whom she beheld with his face cast down, she said to him :
“The kindling wood you have not split, the fire you have not lit,
Nor brought the water as before: why do you idly sit?
When I return unto my den my toil is done away,
But Jali and Kanhajina 1 cannot sec to-day!”
Still the Great Being sat, silont; and she distrust at his silence,
1 Scr iv. ij.v.t' (n. ■.•’26 of th<- imuslation).
4

<SL
1 ( 1 ) 1
\-% X -----• ,.;<' /
x^r. -ex^y
No. 547. -■ 291
trembling like a wounded fowl, went again round the places which she had
searched before, and returning said :
“ 0 husband mine, I cannot see by whom their death has come:
'Hie very ravens do not caw, the very birds are dumb.”
Xil! the Great Being said no word. And she, in her longing for the
Imtle ones, a third time searched the same places quick as the wind: in
one night the space which she traversed in seeking them was fifteen
leagues. Then the night gave place to dawn, and at sunrise she came
again to the Great Being, and stood before him lamenting. The Master
explained it thus :
“ When she had traversed in the search each forest and each hill,
Back to her husband she returned, and stood lamenting still.
[500] 1 In hills, woods, caves I cannot see l>y whom their death lias come :
The very ravens do not caw, the very birds are dumb.’
Then Maddl, dame of high renown, princess of royal birth,
Lamenting with her arms outstretcht fell down upon the earth.”
“She’s dead !” thought the Great Being, and trembled, “All, this is
no place for Maddl to die ! Had she died in Jetuttara city, great pomp
there would have been, two kingdoms would have quaked. But 1 am
alone in the forest, and what can I del” Great trouble came upon him ;
then recovering himself somewhat, Ik; determined to do what lie could.
Rising up he laid a’ hand on her heart, and felt it to be still warm ; lie
brought water in a pitcher, and although for seven months past lie had not
touched her body, in bis distress lie could no longer keep to the ascetic’s
part, but with tears in his eyes lie raised her head and laid it upon his lap,
sprinkling it with water, and chafing her face and bosom as he sat. Then
. Maddl after a little while regains her senses, and, rising up in confusion,
does obeisance to the Great Being, and asks, “ My lord Yessantara, where
are the children gone?” “I have given them,” says he, “to a brahmin.”
The Master thus explained it:
“He sprinkled her with water as she fell down faint as dead,
And when she had come back again to consciousness, he said”:—
[567] She .asked him, “My dear, if you had given the children to a
brahmin, why did you let me go weeping about all night, without saying a
word?” The Great Being replied :
“ I did not speak at once, because I .shrank to cause you pain.
A poor old brahmin came to l>eg, and so, of giving tain,
l gave the children : do not fear, O Maddl! breathe again.
0 ModVlI, do not grieve too sore, but set your eyes on me:
We ll get them back alive once more, and happy shall we he.
Good men should over give when asked, sons, cattle, wealth, and grain.
Maddl, rejoice ! a greater gift than children cannot lie.’’ 19
19 -2

{(f)! <SL
The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
x ^ T j ) ^ 7 2 9 2
Maddi replied :
“ I do rejoice! a greater gift than children cannot be.
By giving net your mind at rest; pray do the like again :
For you, the mighty fostering king of all the Sivi land,
Amidst a world of selfish men gave gifts with lavish hand. ’
To this the Great Being answered: “Why do you say this, Maddi? Jf
I had not been able to set my mind at peace by giving my children, these
miracles would not have happened to me”; and then he told her all the
earth-rumblings and what else had happened. [5b8] Then Maddi iejoicin0
described the miracles in these words :
“The earth did rumble, and the sound the highest heaven fills,
The lightning flared, the thunder woke the echoes of the hills !
Then Narada and Pabbata both greatly did rejoice,
Yea, all the Three and Thirty Gods with India, at that voice1.
Thus Maddi, dame of royal birth, princess of high degree, ^
Rejoiced with him : a greater gift than children none can be.
Thus the Great Being described his own gift; and thus did Maddi
repeat the tale, affirming that he Lad given a noble gift, and there she sat
rejoi<'ng in the same gift: on which occasion the Master repeated the
stanza, “Thus Maddi,” etc.2
As they were thus talking together, Sakka thought: “Yesterday
Vessantara gave his children to Jiijaka, and the earth did resound. Now
suppose a vile creature should come and ask him for Maddi herself, the
incomparable, the virtuous, and should take her away with him leaving
the king alone : ho will be left helpless and destitute. Well, then, I will
take the form of a brahmin, and beg for Maddi. Thus J will enable him
to attain the supreme height of perfection; I shall make it impossible that
she should be given to anyone else and then I will give her back.’ So at
dawn, to him goes Sakka. The Master explained it thus :
“And
ho
when night was at an end, about the peep of day,
Sakka in brahmin's form to them first early made his way.
I r,09] ‘O holy man, f trust that you are prosperous and well,
'With grain to glean, and roots and fruit abundant where you dwell .
Have you been much by flies and gnats and creeping things annoyed,
Or from wild beasts of prey have you immunity enjoyed? ”
The Great Being replied:
“ Thunk you, brahmin—yen, I am both prosperous and well,
With grain to glean, and fruits and roots abundant where 1 dwell.
From flies and gnats and creeping things I suffer no annoy,
And from wild beasts of prey l here immunity enjoy.
1 Four lnies in another metro interrupt this couplet, which mention the names of
India, Brahma, Prajap&ti, with kings Soma. Vania, and VeBBnvann.
unduth the Chapter of Maddi.' Muled.
J 11 Hare
;1 Sc-e above, p. 276.

; ( f ) ? (&T
iVo. 547. 293
I’ve lived here seven sad months, and you the second brahmin found,
Holding a goat-staff in his hand, to reach this forest-ground.
Welcome, 0 brahmin ! blest the chance directed you this way1 ;
Come enter with a blessing, corne, and wash your feet, I pray.
The tindqok and the piyal leaves, and kasumarl sweet,
And : • ts like honey, brahmin, take the best I have, and eat.
And this cool water from a cave high hidden on a hill,
0 noble brahmin ! take of it, drink if it be your will2.”
As thus they talked pleasantly together he asked of his coming:
“And now what reason or what cause directed you this way!
Why have you sought the mighty woods ? resolve mo this, I pray.”
then Sakka replied: “O king, I am old, but I have cqtne here to beg
your wife Maddi; pray give her to me,” and he repeated this stanza :
“ As a great water-flood is full and fails not any day,
So you, from whom I come to beg—give me your wife, I pray.”
To this the Great Being did not reply—“ Yesterday 1 gave away my
children to a brahmin, how can I give Maddi to you and be left alone in
the forest!” No, he was as though putting a purse of a thousand pieces
in his hand : indifferent, unattached, with no clinging of mind, he made
the mountain re-echo with this stanza :
[570] “ Weary am I, nor hide I that: yet in my own despite,
1 give, and shrink not: for in gifts my heart doth take delight.”
This said, quickly he drew water in a pitcher, and poured it upon his
hand3, and made over Maddi to the brahmin. At that moment, all the
portents which had occurred before were again seen and heard.
The Master thus explained it:
“Then he took up a water-jar, the king of Sivi land,
And taking Maddi, gave her straight into the brahmin’s hand.
Then was there terror and affright, then the great earth did quake,
What time he rendered Maddi for his visitor to take.
The faeo of Maddi did not frown4, she did not chafe or cry,
But looked on silent, thinking, He knows best the reason why.
‘Both Jali and Kanhajina 1 let another take,
And Maddi my devoted wife, and all for wisdom’s sake.
Not hateful is my faithful wife, nor yet my children are,
But perfect knowledge, to my mind, is something dearer far.’”
Then the Great Being looked upon Maddi’s face to see how she took it;
and she, asking him why he looked upon her, cried aloud with a lion’s
voice in these words:
“From maidenhood I was his wife, lie is my master still:
Let him to whomso he desire or give, or sell, or kill.”
1 See above, pp. 48,'277, 280. 2 See p. 280.
:1 As a symbol of donation, water was poured .upon the right hand (dakkhinodakim).
4 bhakull in 1 a frown.’ Not iu Childers.

{(f)! <SL
______ J
The Jataica. Bqok XXII.
[571] Then Sxkka, seeing lier excellent resolution, gave her praise; ami
the Master explained it thus :
“Thereat spake Sakka, seeing how her wishes did incline:
‘Conquered is every obstacle, both human and divine.
The earth did rumble, and the sound the highest heaven tills,
The lightning flares, the thunder wakes the echoes of the lulls.
Now Narada and Pabbata to hear this mighty voice, _
Yea, all the Three and Thirty Gods at this hard feat rejoice.
’Tis hard to do as good men do, to give as they cAn give,
Bad men can hardly imitate the life that good men live.
And so, when good and evil go to pass away from earth,
The, bad are born in hell below, in heaven the good have birth .
This is the Noble Vehicle2: both wife and child were given, jh
Therefore let him descend2 no more, but this bear fruit m heaven.
When thus Sakka had expressed his approval, he thought, “Now
1 must make no more delay here, but give her back and go”; and he
said:
[572] “Sir now I give you MaddI back, your fair and lovely wife,
A pair woll-inatchod, and fitted for a most harmonious ldo.
Like the inevitable bond ’twixt water and a shell,
So you with MaddI; mind and heart are both according well.
Of equal birth and family on either parents’ side
litre in a forest hermitage together you abide,
That ye may go on doing good where in the woods you dwell.
This said, he went on, offering a boon:
“Sakka the King of Gods am I, hero come thy place to see:
Choose thou a boon, 0 royal sage, eight boons I give to thee.
As lie spoke, lie rose into the air ablaze like the morning sun. Then
the Bodhisutta said, choosing his boons:
“Sakka, the lord of all the earth, has given me a boon.
Prithee my father reconcile, let him recall mo soon
And sot me in my royal seat: this the first boon I <ravo.
May I condemn no man to death, not though ho guilty
Condemned, may 1 release from death: this second boon 1 crave.
May all the people for their help look only unto mo,
The young, the old, the middle-aged; this the thml boon I crave.
May 1 not seek my neighbour’s wife, contented with my own,
Nor subject to a woman’s will: this the fourth boon 1 crave.
> Sec ii. 86 (trnns., p. 5(1), iv. 65 (trims., p. 42).
- No truce baa hitherto been found in the South of the Throe Vehicles of Northern
Buddhism WikmwnuKC*ya 828", op. Lot*. de la Bonne Loi 815); it is therefore worth
while quoting tho note on the word lirahmayanaA: “ sotthayfinaih, tividho hi sucarita-
dlmmmo evnriipo danudhauimo ariyainaggnasa pacoayo hotiti, brahinayiinam ti vuc-
anokhvmm:
CUt,.i "apayabhomim auokkamitva,” u««d absolutely. No example in
Childertt.

( ( g ) ) ■ (fiT
iVo. 547. 295
I prithee, Sakka, grant long life to my beloved son,
Conquering tlio world in righteousnoas: this the fifth boon 1 crave.
Then at the end of every night, at dawning of the day,
May food celestial be revealed : this the sixtli boon I crave.
May means of giving never fail, and may I give alway
With hearty gladness and content: this the seventh boon I crave.
[•>73] ilenoc freed, may I be straight advanced to heaven, then that I may
No more bo born upon the earth: this the eighth boon I crave.”
When Sakka, King of Gods, had heard his saying, thus said he:
“Ere long, the father whom you love, will wish his son to see.'’
With this address, Sakka went back to his own place. Explaining this,
the Master said :
“The Mighty One, the King of Gods, this said, Sujampati,
After the giving of the boons straight back to heaven went lie1. ’
Now the Bodhisatta and Maddi lived happily together in the hermitage
which >Sakka laid given them; but Jujaka, with the children, went 'em a
journey of sixty leagues. The deities watched over the children; Jujaka
when the sun went down used to tie up the children with osiers and leave
them lying upon the ground, but himself in fear of cruel and wild beasts
would climb up a tree and would sit in the fork of the boughs. Then a
god would come to the children in the form of Vessantara, and a goddess
in the form of Maddi; they would set free the children, and chafe their
hands and feet, rvash them and dress them, would give them food and put
them to rest on a celestial couch : [574] then at dawn they would lay
them down again in their bonds, and would disappear. Thus by help ot
the gods the children went on their way unhurt. Jujaka also was guided
by the gods, so that intending to go to the kingdom of Kalinga, in fifteen
days he came to the city of Jetuttara. The same night, Safijaya, king of
Sivi, dreamt a dream, and his dream was on this fashion: As he was seated
in high durbar, a man came and gave him two blossoms into his hand, and
lie hung them one on either ear; and the pollen fell from them upon his
chest. When ho awoke in the morning, he asked his brahmins what it
meant. They said, “Some knights of yours, sire, who have been long
absent, will return.” So next morning, after feasting on many a dainty
dish, he sat in his durbar, and the deities brought this brahmin and set
him in the courtyard of the palace. In a moment the king saw the children,
and said :
“Whose face is this that yellow shines, dry as though fire did scorch,
Like some gold bangle—one as though all shrivelled with a torch?
Both like in body, like in marks—who can those children be I
Like Jiili is the boy, and like Kanhajiua is she.
1 “Here endtth the Sakka Chapter." Solid. (Sakka-pabbaih).

' G°^x
%$% <SL
' Z::-^. The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
29(5
They’j-e like two little lion cubs that from their cave descend,
And like each other: and they seem all golden as they stand.”
After thus praising them in three stanzas the king sent a courtier to
them, with instructions to bring them to him. Quickly he brought them.;
and the king said to the brahmin:
“Good Bharadv&ja, tell me whence you have those children brought?”
Jujaka said :
“A fortnight since one gave them me, well pleased with what he wrought.
[575] The king said:
“By what, soft speech or word of truth did you make him believe?
From whom these children, cliiefest of all gifts, did you receive?”
J ujaka said :
“It was the King Vessantara, in forest lands who lives,
Gave them as slaves, who like the earth to all suitors freely gives.
Twas King Vessantara who gave his own as slaves to me,
To whom all suitors go, as go all rivers to the sea.”
Hearing this, the courtiers spake in dispraise of Vessantara:
“Were he at home, :t were ill done by any king that’s good:
How could he give his children then, when banisht in the wood?
O listen to me. gentles all, that here assembled stand,
How could the king bis children give to serve another’s hand?
.Slaves male or female he might give, a horse, a mule, a car,
Or elephants: but how give those who his own children arc?”
But the boy hearing this, could not stomach his father’s blame; but as
though raising with his arm Mount Sineru smitten by the windblast ,
he recited this stanza:
“How, grandsire, can lie give, when none in his possession^are,
Slaves male or female, elephants, a horse, a mule, a car?”
The king said:
[5761 “Children, I praise your father’s gift: no word of blame I say.
But then how was it with his heart when he gave you away?”
The lad replied:
“All full of trouble was bis heart, and it burned hot as well,
Ilis eyes were red like B.ohinl, and down the teardrops fell.”
Then spake KanhOjinii and said :
“Father, this hrahmin see—
With creejKU'b, like his homeborn slave, my back be loves to )>eat.
This is no hrahmin, father dear! for brahmins righteous be;
A goblin this in hrahmin shape, who drives us off to cat.
How can you see us driven off with all this cruelty?” i
i The world is destroyed Homotimos by fire or water, sometimes by wind. The
construction is difficult; I take vatatihiliutassa tineruno us gen. absol., and tho object
as understood.

' ®°W\
|(1 )| <SL
iVo. 547. , 297
The king, seeing that the brahmin did not let them go, recited a stanza .
“You children of a king and queen, royal your parents are:
Once you would climb upon my hip; why do you stand afar.
The lad replied:
“We’re children of a king and queen, royal our parents are^
But now a brahmin’s slaves arc wc, and so we stand afar.’
The king said:
“My dearest children, speak not so; my heart is parcht with heat,
My body’s like a blazing lire, uneasy is this seat.
My dearest children, speak not so; you make me sorrow sore.
Come, I will buy you with a price, ye shall be slaves no more.
[577] Come tell me truly as it is,—I will the brahmin pay-r
What price your father set on you when he gave you away ’
The lad replied:
“A thousand pieces was my price: to set my sister free.
Of elephants and all the rest1 a hundred each fixed he.
The king bade pay the price for the children.
‘“Up bailiff, pay the brahmin quick, and let the price be told:
A hundred male and female slaves, and cattle from the fold,
A hundred elephants and bulls, a thousand pounds in gold.
The bailiff paid the brahmin quick, at once the price was told:
A hundred male and female slaves, and cattle from the fold,
A hundred bulls and elephants, a thousand pounds in gold.”
Thereto he gave him a seven-storeyed palace; great was the brahmins
pomp! He put away all his treasure, and went up into his palace, and
lay down on his tine couch, eating choice meats.
The children were then washed and fed and drest; the grandfather
took one on his liip, the grandmother took the. other. To explain this, the
Master said:
“The children bought, well washt and drest, richly adorned, and fed,
[578] And sot on their grandparents’ hips, the king then spake and said:
‘JS.1L your parents are we trust both prosperous and well2,
With grain to glean and roots and fruits abundant where they dwell.
Have they been much'by flies and gnats and creeping things annoyed,
And have they from wild beasts of prey immunity enjoyed?”’
The lad replied :
“I thank thee, king, and answer thus: my parents both are well,
With grain to glean and roots and fruits abundant where they dwell.
From flies and gnats and creeping things they suffer not annoy,
And from wild beasts of prey they there immunity eujoy.
Wild bulbs and radishes she digs, catmint and herbs seeks she,
With jujubes, nuts, and vilva fruit she finds us food alway.
1 Beading hatthinudUatena with BA This must be the sense, but the reading is
uncertain.
« Sue ui. 371’1 (trans., p. 234).

?(fj <SL
The Jataha. Book XXII. J
W ;:> 2 !)8
And when she brings wild fruits and roots, whatever they may be,
We all’ together come and eat by night and eke by day.
Our mother’s thin arid yellow grown by seeking for our food,
Exposed to heat, exposed to wind in the boast-haunted wood.
Like to a tender lotus (lower hold in the hand which fades:
Her hair is thin1 * 3 with wandering amid the forest glades.
Beneath her armpits clotted dirt, her hair in topknot bound,
She tends the fire, and clothed in skins she sleeps upon the ground.”
Thus having described his mother’s hardships, lie reproached his
grandfather in these words:
“It is the custom in the world that each man loves his son ;
But this in one case it would seem your honour has not done.”
[579J The king acknowledged his fault:
“ It was ill done of me indeed to ruin the innocent,
When by the people’s voice I drove my son to banishment.
Then all the wealth which I possess, all that I have in hand,
Be his ; and let Vessautara come and rule in Sivi land.”
The lad replied :
“Not for my word will he return, the chief of Sivi land:
Then go thyself and fill thy son with blessings from thy hand.”
Then to his general-in-chief King Saiijaya thus said:
“ My horses, chariots, elephants, and soldiers go prepare,
And let the people come around, the chaplains all be there.
The sixty thousand warrior lords armed and adorned so fair,
Drest up iu blue or brown or white, with bloodrcd crests, be there.
Like as the spirit-haunted hills, whore troes a plenty grow,
Are bright and sweet with plants divine, so here the breezes blow.
Bring fourteen thousand elephants, with trappings all of gold,
With drivers holding lance and hook : as many home be told.
Sindh horses, all of noble breed, and very swift to go,
Each ridden by a henchman bold, and holding sword and bow11.
[580] Let fourteen thousand chariots lie yoked and well arrayed,
Their wheels well wrought of iron bauds, and all with gold inlaid.
Let them prepare the banners there, the shields and coats of mail,
And flows withal, those men of war that strike and do not fail.”
Thus the king described the constitution of his army; aud he gave
orders to level the road from Jetuttara away to Mount Vaiiika to a width
of eight rods11, and thus and thus to decorate it He said :
“Strow laja flowers all about, and scented garlands strow,
Let there be pious offerings on the way that ho shall go.
Each hamlet bring a hundred jars of wine for those who wish,
And set them down besido the road by which my sou shall go.
1 “ Torn out by the tiviga of tlio trees ” Schol.
,J Uompare v. 259* (trims., p. 182).
3 u*ubhdm — ‘M yatthie.

f ( t j <SL
J,^,/o , 5k* 4,#7 • / 2 9 9
Lot flesh and cakes be ready there, soup garnisht well with tish,
And set them down beside the road by which my son s ia 0 ■
Wine, oil, and ghee, milk, millet, rice, and curds in many a dish,
Let them be set beside the road by which my son shall go.
Cooks and confectioners be there, aud men to sing or play,
D&ncers and tumblers, tomtom men, to drive dull care awaj.
The lutes give voice, the harsh-mouth’d conch, and let the people thrum
On timbrels and on tabours and on every kind of drum.
[581 ] Thus the king described the preparation of the road.
But Jujaka ate too much and could not digest it, so lie died on the
spot. The king arranged for bis funeral: proclamation was made throng i
the city by beat of drum, but no relative could be found, and his goods
fell to the king again.
• On the seventh day, all the host assembled. The king in great ceremony
set out with Jali as his guide. This the Master explained as follows:
“Then did the mighty host set forth, the army of the land,
And went towards the Vatuka hill, while Jab led the band.
The elenhant of sixty years gave forth a trumpet sound1,
iond trumpeted the eighty least what time Ins girth they bound
Then rattled loud the chariot wheels, then neighed the horses loud,
As the great army marched along the dust rose m a cloud.
For every need provided well the host marcht with a will,
And Jali led the army oil as guide to Vamka lull.
They entered in the forest wide, so full of birds and L'ccs,
With every kind of flowering plant and any fruit you i lease.
There when the forest is in flower, a shower of song ^ hcanl,
The twitter here and twitter there of many a bright-* mgal bud.
A night and day they marcht, and came to the cud of their long road,
And entered on the district where Vessantara abode-.
15821 On the bank, of Lake MncaUn.la, Prince Jali caused them to
intrench a camp: the fourteen thousand chariots ho set facing the road by
which they came, and a guard here and there to keep oil lions, tigers,
rhinoceros, aud other wild beasts. There w„ a great nous. . clepW .
aud an forth; this the Great Being heard, and seared to deal, thought
he-» Have they killed my father and come hither after me! Taking
Madd, with him ho climbed a bill and surveyed the army, lsx,,laming
this, the Muster said :
avouching host Vossantara did hoar;
Upon the army, full of fear.
‘ o listen Maddi, how the woods are full of roaring sound,
The neighing of the horses hear, the banners see around.
. ..The people o£ liusi had returned him to Sonjaya .ruin having fallen iu tla-ir
country; he trumpeted with joy because he expected to see his mother again.
a0lf;< Here endeth the Maharaja Section (Mah^aja-pabbam)’’ Schol.

f(S)|
<SL
The. JataJca. Booh XXII.
V;; . :> 3 0 0
Can they be hunters, who with pits or hunting-nets or knives
Seek the wild creatures in the woods with shouts to take their lives ?
So we, exiled though innocent, in this wild forest land,
Kxpcct a cruel death, now fallen into an enemy’s hand.’”
hen she had heard these words, she looked at the army, and con­
vinced that it was their own army, she recited this stanza to comfort him
[583] “All will be well: thy enemies cun do no hurt to thee,
No more than any flame of fire could overcome the sea.”
So the Great Being was reassured, and with Maddi came down from
the hill and sat before his hut. This the Master explained :
11 -Then King Vessantara hereat descended from the hill,
And sat before his leafy hut and bad his heart be still.”
At that moment, Safijaya sent for his queen, and said to her: “ My
dear Phusatl, if we all go together it will be a great shock, so I will first
go alone. W hen you feel that they must be quiet and reassured, you may
come with a company.” After a little time, he told Jfili and Kanhiijina to
come. He turned his chariot to face the road by which he had come, and
set a guard in this pi ace and in that, mounted upon his caparisoned
elephant, and went to seek his son. The Master explained it thus :
“ Ho set, his army in array, his car turned to the road,
And sought the forest where his sou in loneliness abode.
Upon, his elephant, his robe ovor one shoulder thrown,
Clasping his upraised hands, he went to give his son the throne.
Then he beheld the beauteous prince, fearless, composed in will,
Seated before his hut of leaves and meditating still.
[584] Vessantara and Maddi then their father went to greet,
As they beheld him drawing nigh, eager his son to see.
Then Maddi made obeisance, laid her head before bis feet,
Then ho embraced them : with his hand he stroked them pleasantly.”
Then weeping and lamenting for sorrow, the king spoke kindly to
them.
“ I hope and trust, my son, that you are prosperous and well,
\\ ith grain to glean and fruits and roots abundant where you dwell.
Ibno you been much by flies and gnats and creeping things annoyed,
And have you from wild beasts of prey immunity enjoyed i ”
The Great Being answered his father:
“My lord, the life we hud to live a wretched life has been ;
We hml to live as host we could, to eat what we could glean.
Adversity breaks in a man, just as a charioteer
Ific.iks in a horse: adversity, 0 king, has turned us here.
Hut 'tis our parents’ absence which has made our bodies thin,
Banisht, 0 king, and with tho woods and forests to live in.”
After this lie asked the fate of his children.
“But Juli and K.uihujina, your hapless heirs, whom uow,
A brahmin cruel, merciless, drives on like any cow,

l i f t ' <SL
x^ !i^ !2 5 / iV o . 5 4 7 . ' 3 0 1
[585] If you know anything of these the royal children, tell,
As a physician tries to make a man with snake-bite well.”
The king said :
“Both Jfdi and Kanhajina, your children, now arc bought:
I paid the brahmin : therefore be consoled, my son, fear nought.”
The Great Being was consoled to hear this, and conversed pleasantly
with his father.
“ 1 hope, dear father, you are well, and trouble conies no more,
And that my mother does not weep until her eyes are sore."
The king replied:
“ Thank you, my son, I am quite well, and troublo comes no more,
So too your mother does not weep until her eyes are sore.”
The Great Being said :
“I hope the kingdom all is well, the countryside at pence,
The animals all strong to work, the rain clouds do not cease.”
The king replied :
“0 yes, the kingdom all is well, the countryside at peace,
The animals all strong to work, the rain clouds do not cease.”
As they thus talked together, Queen Phusatl, feeling suro that they
must be all relieved from anxiety, came to her son with a great company.
[58G] The Master explained it thus :
“ Now while they talked together thus, the mother there was seen
Approaching to the door afoot, barefooted though a queen.
Vossantara and MaddI then their mother went to greet,
And MaddI ran and laid her head before her mother’s feet.
The children safe and sound afar then MaddI-did espy,
Like little calves that see their dam loud greetings they did cry.
And MaddI saw them safe and sound: like one possest she sped,
Trembling, and felt all full of milk the breasts at which they fed.”
At that moment the hills resounded, the earth quaked, the great ocean
was troubled, Siueru, king of mountains, bent down : the six abodes of the
gods were all one mighty sound. Sakka, king of the gods, perceived that
six royal personages and their attendants lay senseless on the ground, and
not one of them could arise and sprinkle the others with water; so he
resolved to produce a shower ol rain. This he did, so that those who
wished to he wet were wet, and those who did not, not a drop of rain fell
upon them, but the water ran off as it runs from a lotus-leaf. That rain
was like rain that falls on a clump of lotus-lilies. [587] The six royal
persons wero restored to their senses, and all the people cried out at the
marvel, how the rain fell on the group of kinsfolk, and the great earth did
quake. This the Master explained as follows:
“ When these of kindred blood were met, a mighty sound outspake,
That all the hills reechoed round, and the great earth did quake.

:( f) f <SL
^^^302 The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
God brought a mighty cloud wherefrom he sent a shower of rain,
When as the King Yossantara his kindred met again.
King, queen, and son, and daughter-in-law, and grandsons, all were thcie,
When they were met their flesh did creep with rising of the hair.
The people clapt their hands and loud yiade to the king a prayer: ^
They called upon Vessantara and Maddl, one and all:
< Bo thou our lord, be king and queen, and listen to our coll
Then the Great Being addressed his father:
“ You and the people, countryfolk and townsfolk, banislit me,
When I upon my royal throne was ruling righteously."
The king replied, to allay his son’s resentment:
“ It was ill done of mo indeed to ruin the innocent,
When by the people’s voice I drove my son to banishment.
After reciting this verse, he added yet another, to ask for relief from
his own sorrow :
, «A father’s or a mother’s pain, or sister’s, to relieve,
A man should never hesitate his very life to give.”
[588] The Bodhisat, who had been desirous of resuming his royalty,
hut hail refrained from saying so much in order to inspire respect, now
agreed; whereupon the sixty thousand courtiers, Ins birthmates, cried
out—
“’Tis time to wash, 0 mighty king—wash off the dust and dirt !”
But the Great Being replied, “ Wait a little.” Then he entered his
hut, and took off his hermit’s dress, and put it away. Next he came out
of the hut, and said, “This is the place where I have spent nine months
and a half in ascetic practices, where I attained the summit of perfection
in giving, and where the earth did quake ” : thrice he went about the hut
Vightwise and made the five-fold prostration before it . Then the}
attended to his hair and beard, and poured over him the water of con­
secration, while he shone in all his magnificence like the king of the gods.
So it iB said,
“ Then did the King Vessantara wash off the dust and dirt.”
Great was his glory : every place quaked that he looked on, those skilled in
auspicious words uttered them, they caught up all manner of musical instiu-
meiits; over the mighty ocean there was a sound like the noise of thunder;
the precious elephant they brought richly caparisoned, and girding himself
with the sword of price he mounted the precious elephant, whilst the
sixty thousand courtiers, his birthmates, compassed him around in
gorgeous army.
■ «• Here cudoth the Section of the Six 1‘rinci h (OhaUuOtiy.i-lclatnilam):’ Sobol.
• Touching tho earth with forehead, elbows, ivaiist, feet, and lumen.

t( f )| <§L
No.
54 7 . _________________________« 0 3 J
Maddi also they bathed and adorned and sprinkled with the water of
consecration, and as they poured the water they cried aloud, ‘‘ May
Vessantara protect thee!” with other words of good omen. The Master
explained it thus:
“With washen head and goodly robes and ornaments of state,
Girt with his awful sword ho rode tho elephant his mate1.
And then the sixty thousand chiefs, so beauteous to view,
His birthmates, came about their lord and did obeisance due.
[589] The women then bathed Maddl, and all together pray—
‘Vessantara and Sahjaya preserve you all alway!’
Thus reestablished, and their past trouble remembering,
There in the pleasant master’s land they made a merry cheer.
Thus reestablished, and the past trouble remembering,
Happy and glad the lady went with her own children dear.
So in happiness she said to her children :
“I only ate one meal a day, I slept upon the ground,
That was my vow for love of you until you should l>e found.
But now my vow is brought to pass, and now again I pray,
What good so ever we have done preserve you both alway,
And may the groat king Sahjaya preserve you both alway:
What good so ever has beeu done by father or by me,
By that truth grow thou never old, immortal do thou bo.”
[590] Queen Pliusati said also, “Henceforth let my daughter-in-law be
robed in these robes, and wear these ornaments!” These she sent her in
boxes. This tho Master explained thus:
“Garments of cotton and of silk, linen and cloth so line
Her mother-in-law to Maddi sent which made her beauty shine.
Necklet and bracelet, frontlet-piece, foot-bangle, jewelled zone
Her mother-in-law to Maddi sent, wherewith her beauty shone.
And when the princess passing fair her jewellery surveyed,
She shone, as shines in Nandana the goddesses arrayed.
With washen head and ornaments and goodly robes to see,
She shone, like to some heavenly nymph before the Thirty-Three.
As when in Cifctalata Grove* the wind a plantain sways,
The princess of the beauteous lips looked lovely as that tree.
Like as a brilliant-feathered bird that Hies the airy ways,
She with her pretty pouting lips and beauty did amaze.
[591] They brought a fine young elephant, a mighty and a strong,
Which neither spear nor battle din could Wight, whose tusks were long.
She mounts upon the elephant, so mighty and so strong,
Which neither spear nor battle din could fright, whose tusks were long.”
So they two in great pomp proceeded to the camp. King Sanjaya and
his innumerable host’ amused themselves in hill sports and woodland
1 paecityo : “ born on the same day as himself.’ Schol.
" One of India's gardens.
a nkkhohini, tho proverbial word for an army complete in all points and numbering
10,000,000''.
\

!Ut)! <SL
The Jdtaka. Book XXII.
^ r g ; ^ ° 4
sports for 'a whole month. During that time, by the Great Being’s glory,
no hurt was done in all that great forest by wild beast or bird. The
Master thus explained it:
“By glory of Vessantara, through all that mighty wood,
No beast or bird did any harm to the others, all did good.
And when he was to go away, they all with one consent,
Birds, beasts, and all the creatures of the wood, together went:
But silent were all pleasant sounds when he had left the wood.”
[592] After the month’s merry-making, Sahjaya summoned his captain-
in-chief, and said, “We have stayed a long time in the forest; is the road
ready for my son’s return?” He replied, “Yes, my lord, it is time to
go.” He sent word to Vessantara, and with his army departed, following
with all his host the road which had been prepared from the heart of
Vamka hill to the city of Jetuttara. This the Master explained as
follows :
“The royal road was newly made, with flowers and bunting fair arrayed
From where he lived in forost glade down to tbe town Jetuttara.
His sixty thousand mates around, and boys and women places found,
Brahmins and Vesiyas, homeward bound unto the town Jetuttara.
There many an elephant mahout, the charioteers and men afoot,
With all the royal guard to boot were going to Jetuttara.
Warriors that skulls1 or pel ties wore, of mailed men with swords good store,
To guard the prince went on before down to the town Jetuttara.”
The king traversed this journey of sixty leagues in two months. He
then entered Jetuttara, decorated to receive him, and went up to the
palace. This the Master explained:
“Then the fair city entered they, with walls and arches high,
With songs and dances, food and drink in plentiful supply.
Delighted were the country folk and people of the town
To welcome back to Sivi land their prince of high renown.
All waved their kerchiefs in tho air to see the giver come;
Now is a gaol-delivery proclaimed by beat of drum.”
[593] So King Vessantara set free all creatures, down to the very cats;
and on the day that he entered the city, in the eveuing, he thought:
“When day dawns, the suitors who have heard of my return will come,
and what shall I give them?” At that moment Sakka’s throne grew hot:
lie considered, and saw the reason. He brought down a rain of the seven
kinds of jewels like a thundershower, filling the back and front of the
palace with them waist-high, and over all the city knee-deep. Next day,
he allotted this or that place to various families and let them pick up the
jewels; I lie rest he made to be collected and placed in his own dwelling
with liis treasure; and in his treasuries he had enough to distribute
always in future. This the Master explained as follows:
1 karotiya: sisakurotiko ti laddhftnainii hibc patimukkakarotino yodha.

t ( f )| <SL
____________________n °- 5j7- _________________ ?°5
“When as Vessantara came back, Sivi’s protector king,
The god a shower of precious gold upon the place did bring.
So wheii Vessantara the prince his generous gifts had given,
He died at last, and fully wise, he passed away to heaven.”
When the Master had ended this discourse of Vessantara, with its
thousand stanzas, he identified the Birth : “At that time, Devadatta was
Jiijaka, the lady Cinca was AinittatapanI, Clianna was Cetaputta, Sari-
putta was the ascetic Aocuta, Anuruddha was Sakka, King Suddhodana
was King Safijaya, Mahamaya was Phusati, Rahula’s mother was Queen
Maddi, Rahula was Prince Jali, Uppalavauna was Kunhajina, the
followers of Buddha wore the rest of the people, and King Vessantara
was I myself1.”
1 A number of verses follow, describing the contents of the Jntaka book, t hey are
the work of some copyist.
m
8r
\
J. Vi. so

1 * 1 ' * <SL
INDEX.
Abhassara deity 32 Assatara 85, 1G9
abhijjhitii 230 Attainments 18, 37
abhisasim 269 Atthaka o5, l-o
Accata 276 nttfcflra 13
.Acceptable service 109 atiyaKkna Mil
Accimnkhi 101, 113 Avicl heU b> 17S
Accuta 305 , . , ,.,-
Act of Truth 1, 51 *ntl'lUl ,137_
Actors 102 Bahnsodari 47
ntlda 149 Baka 156
aditbbha 149 j|al,l’'c® |(U9 ,7
AlfaM 108°8 Bandhnmati 247
J f f i m Banyan Grove 246
AkltU 68 Bark garments 13, 45
lw h 5vL993fi Batfle of the Law 206
I f f ItttJkl115 Benares 1, 18, 40, 43, 65, 69, 80, 81, 82,
Aims-hall 54, 250-252 Benares clpth 259
Alms verms holiness 55 £f. Bhaddaji 12b
AmarA 182, 246 * Bhaddakiipilam 52
Ambattha 246 Bhaddasena 71
Amittatiipam 305 Bhaddiya ji2
andluyo 181 bhadra 137
Ananda 37, 52, 53, 68, 113, 126, 156, 246 Bhaggan 18
f «a 108 127, 132, 134 Z T fim
% £S% m
Animals with magic properties 227 Bhavagga^ 1,8^
auokkamma 294 Bheimakata 120
Aimjja 141 „ Bheri' o.)0, 246
Anukeyatta 208 0. Bhikkhudasikii 248
anamajjatlm 283 Bhogavati 132
anunamtmo t in a ,, P rk0
Annruddha 52, 68, 156, 205 Lhflricbtta 87, 113
Annttatapana 270 Bhiiri-panho 188
Aranjara 2d6 266 Bijaka 117, 120
Architect’s plan lo8 Bimb& 246
Ardtha 86 Birani 02
Aritthujanaka 19, 21 28 Birtb ceremonies 2
Aritthapnra 215 Birth fellows 157
Armour 23 , 2.. , Birth fellows of a Buddha 2
Tl'loL n 10 m 17 19 29, 80. 40, Birth, miraculous 41
Asce m il 2 13, 16, 1/, Black ball question 163
115 2io, Black monntain jy0t 131t 14(>
Ass question 169 Blessed One 38, 69, 114, 240, 247
AsHaka 55 Bodliisatta 1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 13, 15, 16,
Assakanna 66 v ’ ’ ’

(fil
(If W ) v
3 foiclftoc-, J
,f,K^y ________________________________________
23, 24,, 25, 28, 29, 31, 34, 30, 37, Cotton thread question 102
41, 42, 43, 49, 52, 70, 70, 79, 80, Cow of plenty 110
80, 87, 88, 89, 91, 101, 108, 109, CulanI 240
113, 121, 120, 150, 171, 177, 181, Cfilani-Brahmadatta 198 ff.
182, 185, 180, 190, 207, 208, 215, Cullanandika 240
225, 240, 250, 252, 254, 250, 204, Cup of inauguration 31
270, 280, 281
Boiled rice question 168 Dakarakkhasa, question of 241, 242
Boons 294 Da.karalikhasa-pa.nho 246
Bow, mighty 25 dakkhiiiodakaih 293
Bralima 18, 110, 114, 121, 125, 120, 251, D&na-khandam 200
287, 292 dasa died na pahhiigiman 287
Brahma’s world 37, 40, 52, 53, 54, 08, Dasabala 247, 248
125, 127, 150 Dasanna 120
Brahmadatta 80, 81 Dasa-vara-gatha 249
Brahman 11, 40, 44, 107, 108, 110, 112, Datta 80
115, 155, 239, 261, 304 Degrees of holiness, three 55
Breath of snakes 42 Deity, how attained 108
Buddha 39, 54, 05, 68, 70, 80, 113, 111, Desire 17, 29
110, 127, 130, 141,1 55, 156, 109, Devadatta 08, 09, 80, 113, 126, 240, 30o
173, 182, 247, 248, 305 Devatdpucchita-panho 191
' Buddlrn born with medicinal plant in Devinda 150ff., 246
hand 157 Dhammii 248
Building 158 Dhainmadinnii 248
Burnouf referred to 32 Dhammapada referred to 31, 189
Butea shoot held in sacrifice 111 Dhammapala 141
Dhanafijaya 127 ff., 150
Cakkavala 137 Dbanuaekha 243
Calumny, utory of 197 Dliatu 107
Calving question 107 Dlmtarattha 83, 125
Cnmpii 20 Dighapitthi 164
Canda 6911., 80, 122, 130 Dighatalii 103
Candadev. 1, 2, 4, 7, 12, 15, 17 Dightivu 28, 34, 37
Candaka 118 Ditthamangalika 240
Candida 210 Bogs of hell 124
Candasena 80 Dolmlahhandam 134
Ca tes 11, 44, 50, 107, 110, 289, 250, dosind 110
255 201, 304 Dream 153, 279
Cattle question 100 Bream at conception of Buddha 156
Catuposatha-khaiulam 129 Brink 15, 200
cat limit hi 251 Budipa 55
Cetii 141 200 Duiipa 108
Cetapntta 300 Dukiila, Dukulaka 40, 41, 42, 48, 49
Ceylon 18 Dunnivittha 200
Chaklutttiyu-khaiidaih 302 Duties, ten .52
Chnmhbi 242 Duty of the good man 149
Chameleon question 173 Dvuravatl 210
Chfindogyu-upamshad Comm, referred to
JH7 ' Ecstatic meditation 18
Channa 305 Education 21
clwnimpatha- 183 l.kubala 198
Chariot, magic 25 Kkaraju 09
Chariot question 105 KkHtuivinatl-paUho 172
Ciknnsamuccnva referred to 57, 121, 210 Elders 18
Oini.fi 805 ’ Elephant flying 251
ritraggaDi'uyhusiti- 249 Elephants’ caparison 253
Cittakil)a 83 Elephants charmed by the lute 127
Cittokuta 00 Emendations suggested, with remarks on
Oiltidatii 130, 808 the text 2, 5, 15, 22, 23, 39, 49, 50,
Clothes 259 73, 75. 87, 93, 101, 102, ldO, 119,
Cock question 167 141, 143, 105, 171, 172, 179, 182,
Cuiiipni-fttivu merits mother, wife, hrr>- 163 IH7, 213, 218,221, 223, .30,
thei friend, brahmin, >clf, and v/iso 231, 230, 240, 243, 219, 2-r4, 2nh,
m„n 242 209, 270, 272, 274, 285, 296, 297

1 1 1 -
Index. ■ 309
Enlightened One 39 177, 179, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185,
Eravana 136 188, 190, 191, 194- 19a, 196, 19 ,
Etiquette of obeisance ‘207 203, 206, 212, *<-13, 21, - «>. - »
Eunuchs 261 220, 232, 241, , 250, 251, 25f.
242
Excellences 53, 68 253, 255, 2o6, 257, 262, -64, -6a,
266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 2(4, 2(9,
Faculties 13, 18, 32, 37 280, 282, 283, 284, 285, 286, 289,
Fairy 78 290, 291, 292, 293, 299, 300, 302
Fast 22 Great Benunciation 1, 19, 37
Father-in-law 229 Grey hairs 53
Fear of hell 4, 5 Grierson, Bihar Peasant Ltjc, referred
Feer referred to 10 to 26
Fire sacrifice 114 Guna 116, 126, 169
Fire worship 109 Gutha hell 6
Firefly question 187 Guttfi 248
Five sacred products of the law 153 Hall of Truth 1, 19, 80, 126, 153, 156
Food, lawful 35 171 . , ,, ou
Fortune tellers ha™ i impressions of on walls
7 Hands, 28
Four great kings, heaven of 66 referred to -8, 2,
Hardy
Fourfold sabbath vow 88 Hardy, , referred to 24b .
Manna
Friends, false 189 Harsacanta referred to 28
Friends honour of 10 Imtthattharadihi M
r„,it d-d, la i a t r S w « 66, rn, i» , m , m .
.1
£ 3 * !S * U 120,12»«„ 1W, Ml.
I" '
a r m ! 7,o.
Gandhamudana 47, 51, 268 Hermitage 17
Gandhara robes 259 Himakya 29 32 37, 40 41 43 44 4,,
Ganges 40, 108, 180, 220, etc. n'l 197 2^ 269 287 ’ '
Gaol-delivery 220 „ 154> 197> 209- 297
Garden goddesses 24 Himaranta-vannana 2o8
Garula 93, 94, 102, 127, 129 Hitopadesa reterred to 49, %
Honour before kings, how to attain 142
Gem octagonal 167 Householder^ life1 39
Gem question 167 Human sacrifice 274
Gharavasa-khawlam 140 Hunters village 40
Ghost 78 , 0,..>
Giant with 1000 amis 108 [ft-he 2W
(iift of the Seven Hundreds 256, 2bl Inauguration -9
Gift to tile Buddha rewarded 247 Indapatta 126, 134, 149
Gjjta£esati!£ 175 lnd^2M,292 ™
Goblin 12, 45, 78, 83, 89, 126, 131, 134, Indra’s right arm 111
137 146 163, 194, 266 • Inspector of King s jewels 194
Goddess’ of white umbrella 3 Irandati 30
gohaiiubbethanenu 263 Isadhara 66
Golakala 163
(Julakula problem 163 Jail 2)-, 30u
Golden Home 132 Jainbnvati 216
Good friend, the 121 Janibudipa t»
question
Good luck and bad luck 173 Juuakn 33
Gorimanda 179 Jauasandha 141
Gotanm 68, 80, 248 Jatakns translated :
Gotaml 76 89
IWmiva 136 Khundahala 68
Great Being 11.1 5, 17. 18, ‘20- 2‘2' Mabajanaka 19
or jj 85. 36, 43, 45. 46, H, Mah-iiiHriida-Kassapa 114
3.1
’ (>’ 87, , 91, 97, , 105, Mahauiumagga 156
50 54 7 89 98
107 112, 123, 121, 138. 139, HO, MQgapakkha l
141,’ 144, 145, 147, 148, 149, H >• 53
151, 152, 153, 1.54, 155, 162, 1(0. Sama 38
20—3

111 <SL
/ f y —sV \
Index.
Jatakas translated : katte 145
Vessantara 246 Kattharaka 13
Vidhurapanclita 126 Kfivinda 156 ff., 246
Jatakas referred to in text: Kekaka 137
Ayoghara 18 Kelasa 267
Catuposatha 128 Kesini 71
Hntthipala 18 Ketumati 268
Kuddfrlaka 18 Kevatta 198 IT., 246
Kusa 1 Khajjopa na ka-pa n ho 187
Mugapakkha 18, 19, 41 khalamkapado 2
Pandara 93 Khandahala 69 ff.
Ummagga 250 kltara 124 ^
Jatakas referred to in notes: Khattiya 21, 44, 55, 107, 110, 112, llo,
Catuposatha 88- 120, 261, 266
Java 120 khattiyamaya 189
Jetattura 247 Kliema 37, 247, 248
Jetavana 1, 19, 38, 39, 126, 156 Khuddakatissa, Elder 18
Jewel, a wonderful 135 khujjatecalakhliakdkinm; 249
Judas tree 233 Kiki 248
Jujaka 270, 305 Kdana-Khaiulam 98
Jungle scenes 258 fit. Killing 110, 117
Kimbila 64
Kaccana 138 Kirapurusa 130
Kaecayana 134 Kinnara 41, 43, 44
Kakanlaka-pafiho 173 Kisavaccba 55
kakkataka 276 Kodumbara cloth 2o9
Kiilacauipfi 20, 28, 127 ff. Kokila 71
Kaladevnla 246 Konca 140
Kaiagiri 146 Kontimiira 25b
Kftlapabbata 146 Koravya 127
Kfdavela 18 Kosambi
Kaiikara 55 Kosiya 9o
K-'ilinea 252 kuMamukhl lib
Kalupakala 124 Kumurapanham 287
Karnbalft 85 Kundah24b
Kamboja 110 Korulib 129 136
kamkham 129 Knrnkhetta 141
Kainpilla 198 £?®a,16!
Kampilliva 224 Kutadante 156
Kanarittha 87, 113 Knvera 107, 132, 147
kuiiavera 208
kamli 273 Lake question 1/2
Kanhiigana clan 216 Lukkha-khandam 111
Kanh/ijina 252, 305 La ita Vistara referred to 8o
lean ike 168 Laluday. 246
Kapilavattlm 246 “ Late Comers 18
Kara 13 Latthivana 114
kdranikd tiO Licchavi 1-6
Karuvlka 66 Letter 1J5
Karma 42 Life being used up 61
Karma a myth 116, 117 Life in the woodland 270
karotiua 304 Lokapalas 91, 136
Kasi l 7, 9, 10. 14, 44, 46, 48, 49, 50, Long life ..3
85, 93, 104, 105, 106, 108 Loves of fames for men 217
Kfiat cloth 29
KSsi silk 77 Maeajsa 137
Kiisiraja 1, 2, 18 ^addae, .,J7
Kassapa 83, 52, 55, 80, 114, 116 ff Maddlia 18 137, 247
Kutakandhakfua 18 05on.i
Katarujauaka 68 " f t g?
katatu, 143 A ugadha 114, 120
10 **■ 127 ft.fc.SSw . roto™) to «1, -167
xSUL% 212

t(f )| (gL
-fa d e s . -. 3 1 1
Mahfijanaka, King 19, 21, 23, 26, 34, 37 Naked ascetic 115, 119
Mahamaliyadeva, Elder 18 Nillika 268
Mah&maya 80, 246, 248, 305 NalinI 150
Mahanaga, Elder 18 * Naudft 70, 71, 224
Mahdrdja-pabbam 299 Nandana 70, 120, 136, 159, 201
Maharakkhita, Elder 18 Nandana Grove 248
Malidsattassa panyesani-khandaiu 105 Niirada 32, 33, 37, 114, 121, 122 ike., 292
Mahasiva, Elder 18 Naradeva 194
Mahfitissa, Elder 18 Naraka 61
Mahflumma gga-khandam 239 Necklace of thread question 161
Mahavagga referred to 29, 52 Nemi 54
Mahavaiiisaka, Elder 18 Nemindhara 66
Mahfivastn referred to 57, 114 Nimi 54, 55, 56, 58 68
Mahosadha 159, 246 Ninth day’s sacrifice 271
Makhadeva 53, 54 uippadesato 117
mala 204 Nirayapiila 180
rnalika 137 Nirvana 248
Maliyamakadeva 19 Northern sect 21
Mangana 18 Nurses, lucky marks of 251
• Manl-khandalii 136 Nurses, qualities of 2
Manimekhala 22 ,
"Manojava 55 od.hisutiikham 136
Manosilatalaru 203 Oil on the wateis 24 j
Manu referred to 110 Omens 287
Marks, lucky-2, 7 Osadha-kum&ra 158
Masakkasara 140 Outcasts 79
Matali 56 if.
Mathara 215 Pahbata 292
M d t ip on akhasutta 39 Paccaya 251
Matted hair 13, 101 paccayu 303 .
Mfiya 248 Paoceka Buddha 26, 28, 29, 31, 32, 116,
Maynah bird 214 165, 270
Mayors 140 pukka 204
Meals 21 pahkhadivam 54
Mechanical devices 223 paihkamhi 262
Mendaka-panho 178 Paficiila 78, 137
Meru 91 ** Paficiilacanda 224 If.
Migacira 127 Paiicalacapdi '2*G
Migajina 33, 34, 37 I'ancapaniUa-pauho 197
Migasammata 40, 41, 43, 47 Pannaku 126
Milinda referred to 171 Parable of a chariot 125
Mind the creator 111 Parammmita heaven 136 >
Minstrel, heavenly 9 Parasol, royal 240
Miracle 9, 22, 51, 56, 141, 209, 266, 292, Pari, Punka 40, 41, 42, 49
301 304 Pariblii ndana -katha. 197
Missaka’ 136 Parichatta 136
Mithila 19, 21, 22, 24, 30, 31, 34, 53, Paiinibbfma 19
54, 56, 64, 67, 114, 123, 156 ff. Park question 169
Moggallfina 37, 80, 113, 126, ‘156 Parrot, earner 199
Moon-days 54 Parrots are of the Yessa caste 215
Moon-feast 115 pastldijja 276
Mortality 16 Patiicara 248
Mucalinda 55. 269, 277 fath8 52, 248
Mud from Himalaya 197 Payaga 106
Mudita 71 Perfections 1, 2, 20
Mujalinda 108 Peta wo^d 55
Music 14 Petavatthu relerred to 10
Music in front of a chariot that contains Phurusaka,186
a rider 25 Pbusat. 247, 248, 805
Phussadeva, Plder 18
Niiga 14, 48, 80 ff.. 1*27 Piliyakkha ^H, 44, 47, 48
Nagarlkhamjam 86 f.4.0
Naaara - r>« w</na*hhatufam 105 11 „
y , \.r,r ■ Pmguttara 173
mijjuha 275 -

' G°i^X
'(«): <
s l
x3s^ggr312 Index.
Pit of sacrifice 73, 77 68, 79, 88, 89, 90, 91, 108, 190,
pittliimati 202 12.3, 127, 128, 130, 136, 140, lob,
Pivaketa 140 157, 159, 165, 160, 167, 194, 246,
piyavgu 162 248. 249, 250, 251, 270, 292, 293,
Play on words 169, 271 294, 295, 305
Plowing festival 246 Hakka-pnbbam 295
Poison of a frog 104 Sakya 246
Polajanaka 19, 20, 21, 22 Salt, how it came in the sea 108, 111
Pole for carrying 13 Salutation 79
Pole question 166 Sama 42, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 41), 50, 51,
Poor and rich question 179 52, 124
Pottliapuda 246 Samana, the great 114
Prajapati 292 Samana 248
Precepts 54. 113 Samanl 248
Predestination 117 Saiiighadasi 248
Price of meat question 160 Samkhapala 198
Price set on children 297 samxCuliya 82, 276
Prince, dumb 3 samsumbhamand 50
Princess hard to please 24 Samudda 55
pubbadevatii 183 Sand question lb8
Pukkusa 156 ff., 246 Sanjaya 247, 305
Pun 169, 271 santi 137
Punishments 3, 197 Sariputta 18, 37. 80, 113, 126, 156, 246,
Punnaka 131 _ 305
Punnatnukha 72 savafa 137
Pupphavati 69, 70, 76 Savatthi 38, 39, 65. 80
Purification 117 savatthiko 167
Puthuiiana 55 Secret path question 182
Secrets 192
Questions, hard 16o Sela 55
Questions of the goddess 187 Senaka 156 ff., 246
Seta 74, 80
Bahnla 37. 80, 15G, 305 Seven Hundreds, gift of the 256, 261
Rahula’lJ mother 305 Shadow of tree does not move 247
Rain, magical 301, 304 Shrines in a wood 90
Bain-making 252 Sjd5 55, 66
Bain, miraculous 247 Sldantara 66
Eujagaha 120, 132,2 46 ' Siddhattha 240
Hdjavaaatiklianduw 143 Siege 202 if.
llama 288 ‘ Signs, riddling 241
Bomnyana referred to 31 Sila-kluindam 97
Bathavati 217 sUetito 125
Begcnts 91, 136 Simbali 127
Requisites 13 siinghutaka 276
Biddles 24, 177 178, 182. 183 Sindh horse, magic 131
Bight side 24 Sindh horses 14, 116, 171, 261
Bightwise movement 8, 67, 276 Sitieru 66, 136, 251, 265, 2.>6, 301
Kipeuing of sin 58 ff. Singula 72
Bitual of sacrifice 111 oiriktyaItannipanho 174
Koruva hell 120 Sirimaudupaiilio 182
Rujfi 114, 126 Sirivaddhaka 157
rnmbhitvii 287 Sita 288
Sivali 24, 26, 28, 30, 32, 36, 36, 37
Sahala 124 fii'i 215, 247
Mtbbaiariihiiraka 162 Slavery i 2
Subhiya 1C6 Snake, dance 98, 102
Succaka 246 Snake, how to distinguish male and fe-
Sacriflee and offering 70, 71, 107, 108. male 167
109 Snake in anthill 42
Siigaru 55, 108 Snake question 167
Siigaia lirahmadatta 82 Snake'u breatli 42
Sages, seven 55 Solomon, judgment of 162
Sakka 1. 2, 9, 10, 13. 17. 20, 28, 29, Soma 107, 292
41, 52, 54, 55, 06, 57, 65, 66, 07, Somadutta 88, 113

/ / y
| 1 | ■ <SL
Index. -. 313
Somaynga 55 Ugga caste 254, 255
Son question 162 ulloka 223
Sonadinna 62 Umbrella, white 3, 17, 19, 2o, -6, S-, 136,
Sotumbarii 262 190, 197
Spell 93 ff. Umbrella, Goddess of 3, 19011.
Spirits of the woods 268 upabhoga-paribhoga 210
Spirituous liquors, gift of 260 upudhiratam 14
Sprinkling 229, 252 upaghate 281
Steel refined 231 Uparimandakamala 18
Step-father 244 Upaseni 71
Stone of ceremony 24, 25 • upayanakd 276
Street of the Yessas 250 Uposatlia 1, 54, 64, 80, h8, 98, 1-8
Striving 23 Uposatha-Khandam 88_
Subhaga 86, 113 Uppnlavannfi 18, 37, 52, 80, 113, 246,
Suburb towns at city gates 157 248, 305
Strdassara 66, 86, 113 Uracehada 248
Sudda 107, 110, 261 wrSXhaco 253
Sudliammfi 57,61,66,67,159, 246, 248,305 Uruvela 114
Sujampati 249 Uruvela Kassapa 114. 126
Sumana 157 ved 45
Sumahgana-Yilasini referred to 151 Usinara 55, 125
Sunakkhata 113, 126 Ussada bell 1, 3
Sunama 115, 126 Uttarapanoala 198 ff.
Sunanda 10, 12, 14
Sunanda 71 Vaccha 217
Sundaii 246 Yaddha 12
Supanna 127 (tsf also Garula) *ftjji 120
Sura 80 Valabhi 132
Surasena 137 Vama family 80
Suriya 71, 80 Vamagotta 71
Suvannabhiimi 21 Vamataggi 125 _
Suvannagiritiila 266 Vamatta-pabbliara 18
Suvannasama 41, 43, 45, 52 Vamka 262
Vamsa 120
Takkasila 173 Yanappavesana-Kliandain 92, 270
Talatfl, 224, 242, 246 . vappito 98
Tank question 168 varapothakattharapaih 136
Tathagattt 19, 38, 68, 69, 80, 114, 126 viirtlvnram 110
Temiya-kumara 3, 4, (5, 8, 13, 14 Vanuia 85, 107, 1*27, 147, 154, 156
Temptation 7 Vasava 67, 249, 255
Tests, sixteen great 7 Vasavatti 69, 73 —
Thirty-three, Heaven of the 54, 57, 66, Vasnla 75, 80
70 120, 127, 136, 157, 250 vatamsabd 253
'three Vehicles in Southern Buddhism 294 Veda 107, 108, 109, 112
Throne of Sakka becomes hot 1, 9, 41, 54 Vedas, three 21
Throws with dice 137 Vedeba, Videha 19, 28, 29, 34, 53, 54,
Thuna 35, 36 56, 57, 67, 85, 114, 115, 136, 156 0.,
Ticket-food 39 i, 246
Hdancjam 125 Vesiya, Vossa 11, 44, 107, lip, 155, 21»,
Tikhinamanti 244 239, 250, 254, 255, 261, 304
Tope 37 Vejayanta 70, 91, 136
Topknot, badge of slavery, 72 Velarani 124
Touch rt referred to 127 vclli 235
Toys 4, 9, 284 Vepulla 132
Transformations 147 Vermilion uplands 203
Treasures, sixteen great 24 \ essamitta 125
Trees and. plants 258, 259, 209, 275 Vessautara 305
Trick of the tortoise 83 Vessnvana 181, 150, 154, 292
Tunnel 223 Vetarani 57, 58
Tusita heaven 136 Vicious deeds ,r>7
V idhatu 107
IJdfiyi, Elder 246 Vidhuni 126 ff.
uddlutrimnn 282 Vijaya 118, 126
Udumbarft 174, 194, 246 \iuatn 129, 130, 146, 148

(K S *SL
)\
Index.
Vinataka 60 Wife’s duties 263
Vinrtya referred to 114 Wisdom 35, 36
vinaye ratarh 118 Wisdom question 188
Vipaasi 247 Wise judgment 202
rippito 98 Wise men’s questions 192
Vipula 208 Wise women 261
Virtuous deeds 62 If. Wishing-jewel 92
Virukklia 87 Wishing tree 260
Vinipakkha 87 Woodland sceneB 278
Yisukha 248 World of Sakka shakes 20
vimmaeakkhulo 283
Vishnu Purnna referred to 33 Yakkha, see Goblin
Yissakannna 9, 13, 18, 41, 269 Yakstail 14
rosaijga-vibhangam 111 Yamft 262, 292
Yama heaven 136
Water, delicate 55 Ynmahanu 55
Water of donation 293 Yamuna 85
Water worship 109 Yamuna 80, 83, 88, 89, 94
Wheel of the law 240 Yasassika 246
Wicked friend 237 yavamajjhaka 157
Widowhood 263 , Yellow dress a dishonour 79
Wife held in common with another 139 Yngandhara ocean 28, 66
I / ; 7 )
J
/ A 1
1*1
K j J y
CAMimumi.. ruiNTJen j»v juiii, ouat, ji.a. at thk univehhitv press,