BURMESE DRAMA
A Study, zaY/z- Translations, of Burmese Plays
BY
MAUXG HTIN AUNG, Ph.D. (Dubl.)
Of Lincoln’s Inn, H\rkisnr-ar-law; Fellow of the:
University of Rangoon
INDIAN BRANCH
HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

< !XF< )RD university press
AMEN HOUSE, LONDON, E.C.4
hdinburirh Glasgow Bombay
i .ikuttM Madras Melbourne
M„y. York Toronto Capetown
HUMPHREY MILFORD
PUBLISHER TO THE
UNIVERSITY

PREFACE
As a postgraduate research student working under the supervise >n
of the Professor of English Literature, 1 wrote, at Trinity College,
Dublin, a thesis entitled A Comparative Study oj Burmese with
English and European Drama. With the special permission, of the
Board of Trinity College and the supervising Professor, 1 spent three
terms at the School of Oriental Studies (University of London),
before submitting my thesis for the degree of Ph.D.
From the thesis for which I was granted the degree, 1 have omitted
only some portions that dealt with the English and European Drama,
and have given the work in its present form the new title, Burmese
Drama.
To Dr W. F. Trench, Professor of English Literature at the
University of Dublin, I owe a debt of gratitude the extent of which
I can never fully express. I had not only the benefit of his lectures
and personal supervision, but also his interest and help in my life
outside the college walls. I had the great fortune to become
acquainted with him before I went to Dublin, and it was through
his recommendation that I was admitted to Trinity College. Without
his kindness and help, the thesis would never have been written.
I am greatly indebted to Professor A. Berriedale Keith for his
kindness and help when I was writing the chapters dealing with the
Sanskrit drama.
My thanks are also due to the Provost and the Board of Trinity
College, Dublin, for-various favours granted, and to Miss E. M.
Swann for her interest and help.
M*H,A*
Bar Library, Rangoon \
March, 1935

CONTENTS
Chapter C*ul
INTRODUCTION
1. The Rise of a Vernacular Literature in*Burma 1
2. Sources of Information ... ... ... 6
I. THE ORIGINS OF BURMESE DRAMA
1. Burmese Music and Dancing ... ... 13
2. Folk Feasts and Spirit Dances ... ... 15
i. 3. Miracles and Interludes ... ... ... 18
4. Sir William Ridgeway’s Theory of the Origins
and Development of Burmese Drama ... 24
IL THE RISE OF A COURT DRAMA IN BURMA
1. The Ramayana of Valmiki ... ... ... 31
2. The Siamese Court Play of Rama ... ... 34
3. The Rama Play at the Burmese Court ... 42
4. The Burmese Court Drama ... ... ... 46
5. The Court Drama Reaches the People ... 49
III. U KYIN U
1. The Further History of the Interlude ... 53
2. The Life of U Kyin U ... ... ... 56
3. Mah Air ... ... ... ... ... 57
4. Daywagonban ... ... ... ... 61
5. Parpahein ... ... .... ... 65
6. The Characteristics and Achievement of
U Kyin U ... ... .... ... 68
IV. U PON NYA
1. The Life of U Pon Nya ... ... ... 76
2. Paduma ... ... ... ... ... 78
3. The Water-seller... ... ... ... 81
4. Wizaya ... ... ... ... ... 86
5. Kawthala ... ... ... ... 92

CONTENTS
Pag:
'I JVa ythaxdaya ... ... ... ... 9(
7. The Characteristics and Achievement of U Pon
Nya ... ... ... ... ... %
V. THE DECADENT PERIOD
E The Drama from 1866 to 1877 ... ... 10S
2. The History of Thaton ... ... ... 112
3. The Pa pj y )x Brother axd Sister ... ... 115
4. Saiv-phay axd Saw-may ... ... ... 121
5. The Characteristics of the Decadent Drama ... 126
VI. THE AFTERMATH
1. Dramatic Performances after the Annexation... 134
2. The English Drama in Buraia ... ... 136
VII, Bi;RMESE DRAMATIC PRACTICE
1. The Actors ... ... ... ... 140
2. The Puppet Show ... ... ... ... 144
APPENDIXES
I. The Rama Play (Extracts) ... ... 151
II. Mahaw (Extract) ... ... ... 156.
01. Daywagoxbax (In full) ... ... ... 159;
IV. Parpaheix (In full) ... ... ...186
V. Paduma (In full) ... ... ... 206
VI. The Water-seller (In full) ... ... 224:
AIL Wizaya (Extracts) ... ... 236
\T"II. Kawthala (Extracts) ... ... ... 240
IX. Waythandaya (Extract) ... ... 244
X. The History of Thatox (Extract) ... 246
XI. The Baboon Brother and Sister (Extract) 248
XII. Saw-Phay and Saw-may (Extract) ... 250
INDEX ... 253

INTRODUCTION
1. The Rise of a Vernacular Literature in Burma
Burma is a small country lying between the two great countries
of India and China, and at a first glance it may perhaps be
thought that Burmese civilization has little of originality or individu¬
ality, and that it is only a minor branch of the Indian and Chinese
civilizations. That is not the case. The peninsula of Indo-China
shades into India and China along its borders, but Burma proper,
where Burmese is spoken,1 lies away from these borders, and there¬
fore preserves special characteristics of her own. Surrounded on
three sides by highlands and on the fourth by the sea, Burma has
always remained insular, more insular even than England. The
barriers, however, were not impassable, and there were routes from
India and China along which foreign influences came, but in such a
restricted way that Burma could absorb them without losing her
individuality. Even now, when with better sea communications
foreign influences come in more extensively, the potver of absorption
possessed by Burma and the Burmese still leave them their individu¬
ality, and they are still a nation with a civilization of their own.
According to early chronicles which most English scholars, except
Mr G. E. Harvey, have accepted as quite reliable, the kingdom of
Prome in Lower Burma was flourishing as a civilized State by about
the fifth century before Christ. A fewT centuries earlier the first
.kingdom, named Tagaung, in Upper Burma, is said to have been
founded by a king who came overland from India. He found the
natives quite civilized and willing to be more so. That kingdom
was destroyed, but wTas revived and restored by another king from
India during the lifetime of the Buddha. It, too, was destroyed and
the kingdom of Prome was later founded by a prince of Tagaung.
Prome is generally believed to have dominated the regions around
1 Burma proper, is the valley of the Irrawaddy. On the west of it are the
Chins and allied tribes, on the north Kachins, and on the east the Shans.
They were under the Burmese kings and are now under the Government of
Burma. Being backward races, except the Shans, they have no writing.

BURMESE DRAMA
. ,tn India and the rest of Indo-China. During
1 T T, and music and poetry, as embodied in
; A d‘ dd and national forms. But there was
V .. t'.jt came from India probably knew writing,
perhaps limited; in any case, it never
The introduction of Buddhism into the country
d',t .Vd'. ... :t car.e through traders whose knowledge
;tddd
’ ’ was meac-e. The few religious tracts preserved in
’ J s"d:t \ , -. m upon merely as curious and sacred objects.
' . T -d t:iin the beginning, decayed and soon dis-
yd'.M Tm.'kinadom came to an end in the first century a.d.1 .
•' ‘ yd: Rdi d v.ao founded in Upper Burma at Pagan, which
dc
• -- the land and river trade-routes, and as a result of its
- ddrd: advantages, it became a powerful kingdom with the
"dersi-.n to the throne of Anawrahta in 1044. From, that point
tdrm.e-e tvs: rv ceases to be conjectural. Through the. influence of
fd da-pcd and saintlv monk, Shin Arahan, Buddhism in one of its
d-.-c* v(-n5 was introduced into the kingdom by Anawrahta. With
•tdvritir.g was also introduced. The alphabet was the ‘Square Pah’,
and the literature the Three Pitakas embodying all the religious
teachings in Pali. Curiously enough, the alphabet and the literature
dd dr
come directly from India, but from Burma itself—from the
Taking kingdom of Thaton. The Takings were a branch of the
Burmese race. Many think that they were a mixture of native tribes
with Indian traders. I venture to disagree. The earliest inhabitants of
Burma were Indonesians, who settled on the coast of Burma during
successive ‘ drifts ’ of humanity from the west, through India, to further
east. Later, there was an infiltration of Mongolian tribes, who came
ddn the rivers from the North. Inland, where the Indonesian element
was weak, the new-comers dominated and later became the Burmese;
along the coast where the Indonesian element was strong the tribes
united and became the Takings. However, all this is mere con¬
jecture. The early history of the Taking kingdom of Thaton, which
Anawrahta had to destroy to obtain possession of the alphabet and
the Three Pitakas, is not known, except that it was perhaps in
existence a few centuries before Christ and was under the influence
1 Pe Maung Tin and G. H. Luce, The Glass Palace Chronicle; A. Phayre,
Historx of Burma. G. E. Harvey in his History of Burma contends that the first
Burmese kingdom was Prome, and that it flourished only in about the seventh

INTRODUCTION 3
of Hindu traders from South India. After the introduction of
Buddhism into South India by Asoka in 261 b.c., the traders began
to bring Buddhist elements to Thaton. With the establishment in
the third or fourth century after Christ of the Hindu kingdoms in
java and Sumatra, Thaton became an important trading centre, and
with the rise of a great Buddhist centre at Conjeveram in Madras in
the fifth century, the Takings began to receive religious writings in
Pali. From that time onwards, learning was definitely established in
the kingdom, and, as a result, a Taking literature came into being.
Anawrahta was interested in Pali only, and therefore when, he
destroyed the city, he burnt all the manuscripts except those in Pali.1
The writing and learning that were thus introduced into Pagan
took root at once. Prose and poetry as embodied in the language of
the court and in songs had been in existence long before, though
unwritten, and now the new learning turned them into written forms
and began to develop them. Pali was studied everywhere, and in the
newlv-built temples with their crowded monastic life, works in Pali on
religion, on Pali grammar and prosody, and on the legal code of
Manu came to be produced.2 Translations were also made, and soon
Pagan became famous throughout India for its Pali scholarship. But
1 The Burmese language belongs to the Tibeto-Burmese group, whereas
the Taking belongs to the Mon-Khmar group. In spite of Anawrahta’s con¬
quest and in spite of the fact that racially they were cousins, the Takings
became completely merged with the Burmese only in the eighteenth century.
The probability of the Sanskrit drama reaching the Takings is considered in
chap. ii.
2 G. E. Harvey, op. cit., pp. 59, 70.
The most famous for literary activity was the Kyauku Ohnmin temple.
Though built perhaps even before Anawrahta, when a corrupted form of Bud¬
dhism was prevalent, it is still in an excellent condition (Harvey, p, 17).
The code of Manu was compiled originally in Sanskrit, during the period
200 b.c.-a.d. . 200. Since that time it has been one of the chief sources of
Hindu law (J. D. Mayne, Hindu Law). The Burmese received it in a Talaing-
Pali version in which the sacerdotal element had been done away with. That
explains why, although Manu is one of the chief sources also of Burmese
Buddhist law, it has little in common with Hindu law. The existence of the
code as the chief source of Taking law (Harvey, op. cit., p. Ill) raises again the
question, how far were the Taking writings under the influence of Sanskrit
and its literature?. We shall never know. When Anawrahta destroyed Taking
institutions and historical and literary works, he intended that all knowledge of
the past greatness of the Takings should pass into oblivion so as to smooth his
way towards unifying Burma into one single State.
Pali has been, since 1044, the classical language of Burma.

4 BURMESE DRAMA
-W-.S 4DVMtcir.pt to imitate the Pali language and its
±c vernacular, and Burma offers no parallel to the
.....t:iv anv Er.dish Renaissance scholars over the merits and
I the vermicular.
Trtr permi *v Pisan's ascendancy marked the zenith of Burmese
and civilization. It was a great centre of trade, and visitors
mm afar talked of the glory that was Pagan. Its supremacy was
"toti ned i v the whole of Burma, which had been united into a
vmmd m for the Erst time. It even demanded and probably obtained
mdnd allegiance from the greater part of Indo-China and the
c* verr.nrs of the outlving provinces of the Chinese Empire. But the
werkd uf Pasards ascendancy was not a great period in Burmese
literature. Her capital looked radiant with its golden temples, her
kmcs were learned and powerful, her troops marched in triumph, but
Pa jar. never forgot that no material thing was real, and everything
oeeayed and perished. Therefore, the scholars were interested only in
reheious themes, and religious themes seldom offer adequate scope for
the development of a great literature. Although the clearness of diction
and the artistrv of the death-song of the royal tutor, Anantathuria,
composed while awaiting execution in 1173, indicate that at least
a few must have practised the use of the vernacular for non¬
religious purposes, the efforts of writers in the vernacular were
chiefly directed towards the recording of inscriptions, which are still
preserved in countless numbers in the pagodas of Pagan.1 Many of
these inscriptions contain good prose. The earlier inscriptions
tend to be bombastic through sheer wealth of learning; the scholars
of Pagan could not at once learn to control their use of the newly-
acquired scholarship, just as the earlier writers of the Renaissance in
England failed to restrict their use of learned words. However, after
a few decades, the bombastic style gave place to a simpler and more
concise diction. In addition to the narrowness of scope offered by
religious themes, there was another reason which prevented Pagan,
1 The death-song is one of the greatest poems in the language and is the
oldest non-religious piece of literature existing in Burma. A translation is
given in G. E. Harvey, op. cit., p. 55, and another in Tin and Luce, The Glass
Palace Chronick\ p. 139.
G. E. Han ev, op cit. (p. 70) describes the inscriptions as 4 richly human and
intensely devout', and he ranks (p. 38) some of Kyanzittha’s (1084-1112)
inscriptions as literature.
Epigraphia Birmanicat a Government publication, gives the text of the
more important inscriptions with translations.

INTRODUCTION
in spite of its greatness in other directions, from being a great period
of Burmese literature. The love of beauty, which is the basis of all
literature, had adequate satisfaction in the developed art of architec¬
ture. The poets of Pagan wrote their poems in bricks, instead of
words, and their pagodas are still famous. When one stands on the
shore of the Irrawaddy and looks towards the ruins of Pagan, one is
reminded of the delicate beauty of an incomplete poem.1
Pagan fell in 1287 as the result of the Tartar onslaught during
the time of Kubla Khan, the Scourge of God, and the country broke
up into several little States, each attempting to control the others. For
the next fifty years, political straggles went on in the capitals, but
they failed to disturb the peace of smaller towns and villages. Many
who had grown tired of the strife around the thrones flocked to the
quiet of the village monasteries in order to find peace. Religion went
on undiminished, but the learning connected with it decayed, for the
royal patronage was lacking. Architecture also decayed because there
was no royal support and because the country had become poor. Men
turned to literature for its own sake, and during this period Burmese
prose and poetry assumed definite forms with fully developed diction,
rhythm, rhyme and style.2
1 Many temples and pagodas of the Pagan period are in an excellent state
of preservation and are still in use as places of worship. Scott O’Conner’s
Mandalay and Other Cities contains fine illustrations of the more famous of
these religious buildings.
The achievement of the Pagan kings, the 4Temple Builders’, is summed
up by Harvey thus: 4 The legacy of their fleeting sway has enriched posterity
for ever. It was they who made the sun-scorched wilderness, the solitary
plain of Myingyan, to blossom forth into the architectural magnificence of
Pagan. If they produced no nation-builder like Simon de Montfort, no
lawgiver like Edward I, they unified Burma for more than two centuries,
and that in itself. was an achievement. But their role was aesthetic and
religious rather than political. To them the world owes in great measure
the preservation of Theravada Buddhism, one of the purest faiths mankind has
ever known. Brahminism had strangled it in the land of its birth; in Ceylon
its existence was threatened again and again; east of Burma it was not yet
free from priestly corruptions; but the kings of Burma never wavered, and at
Pagan the stricken faith found a city of refuge. Vainglorious tyrants built
themselves lasting sepulchres, but none of these men has a tomb. . . . These
men’s magnificence went to glorify their religion, not to deck the tent wherein
they camped during this transitory life.’—History of Burma., p. 70.
2 Ibid., p. 103. Since that time, prose and poetry show continuous deve¬
lopment. The full history of Burmese literature still remains unwritten.
However, the Anthology of Burmese Literature, a Government publication,

6 BURMESE DRAMA
Tiv/cjh prose and poetry had thus assumed definite forms by
about the fourteenth, or early fifteenth century, the drama was un¬
known until very much later. The first real Burmese drama appeared,
though it had its origins some decades earlier, only towards the close
nf the eighteenth century, and during the next hundred years it
developed and then decayed. Burmese dramatic literature developed
in a historical sequence and in a way essentially similar to that of
the Elizabethan drama. But why the similarity? Is it accident? Is it
because of the similarity in the geographical isolation of the two
countries: Or, is there a definite way in which all dramas have to
develop in natural sequence ?
2. Sources of Information
The history of Burmese drama can be divided into six stages.
First, there is the age of the Nibhatkhin, comparable to the English
miracle play, ending about 1752. Second, we have, from 1752 to
1819, the period of the interlude1 (comparable to the English mora¬
lity and interlude) and the court drama. Third, we have the period
of the dramatist, U Kvin U, 1819 to 1853. Fourth, we have the
period of the poet, U Pon Nya, 1853 to 1878. Fifth, there is the
period of decadence, 1878 to 1886. Sixth, we have the time from
1886 to the present day. As dates are in many cases uncertain in
determining the periods I am taking the reigns of various kings. As
the drama depended much on the court and the victories and defeats
of the king, perhaps I am. justified in so doing. In any case, if a
date is wrong, it is wrong by not more than two or three years.
The time before 1752 is the most difficult period as far as .re¬
search is concerned. The centuries that followed the fall of Pagan—
the time of internal wars, 1287 to 1531—saw the rise of a vernacular
literature, which is found existing in the Empire of 1531 to 1752.2
arranges its extracts in more or less chronological order, and therefore gives a
good idea of the development. The subject is outside the scope of this work
but 1 mention it to show how late the first appearance of Burmese drama was
as compared with other branches of Burmese literature.
1 The term ‘interlude* is explained in chap. i.
Perhaps it will not be out of place to give a short summary of the
history. The various small States into which the country broke up after 1287
gave place, after some fifty years of incessant strife, to Ava, the kingdom of
the Burmese, and Pegu, that of the Takings. The small principality of
Toungoo under Ava rebelled and conquered the whole of Burma in 1531.

INTRODUCTION
The rise of the Nibhatkhin was the result of the rise of the vernacular
literature, for then learning had reached the people. But we do
not quite know at what time the Nibhatkhin first came into being.
According to tradition, the custom of holding religious processions and
pageants had existed long before 1752, about which time the interlude
and the Hama (a recitation of a story in verse) came into being, but
how long before nobody can tell. However, as it must have taken
some time for the vernacular literature to take root, I adopt tentatively
1531 to 1752 as the period of the Nibhatkhin.
For the story of the development of the Nihhatkhin, 1 am depen¬
dent on tradition alone. The tradition of its development from the
pageant is quite logical Moreover, it is general and not confined
to a particular district. I have discussed it with various Burmese
scholars and I have made inquiries in far-away villages, and always
I find the same tradition. In some out-of-the-way villages, which
the influences that affected the drama at the capital had failed
to reach, the development of the Nibhatkhin from the pageant was
within living memory. Until recently, in such villages, one could
even see the Nibhatkhin in its various stages of development. One
village would be presenting a procession, another a pageant, a third
would be staging a fully developed Nibhatkhin; in all the villages,
their particular practice had been the custom for many years, further
development having been checked by the introduction of the drama in
its more mature stages by touring troupes of professional actors, and
it had'continued to exist side by side with the performances of
strolling players, just as some miracle plays continued to be presented
in certain places in England, during the heyday of the Elizabethan
Under Bayinnaung (1551—81) the whole of Indo-China, the outlying provinces
of China, and Manipur owed allegiance to the Burmese king. After his death,
the Empire decayed until the ruler of Pegu, who had become independent,
defeated the Burmese, and turned Burma into a Talaing Empire in 1752.
The Empire was short-lived, for in the same year AI ngpava rebelled, founded
the last Burmese dynasty, and * Burmanized * the T ings by force. He and
his successors turned Burma into one united kingt i, which with the Shan
States, Siam, Manipur, and Assam, formed the Bun w Empire. The period
1752-1819 was the Age of Triumph, a fuller aqgjjv of which is given in
The Burmese lost Assam, Manipur, and the Hpk provinces of Arakan
and Tenasserim to the British in 1824. The res® ; b 'er Burma fell into
British hands in 1852. On 1 January 1886 the whl., -rv was proclaimed
a province of the Indian Empire. ,

BURMESE DRAMA
T\rnu. in 1M6 I saw a Nibhatkhin at the obscure town of Pauk.
? r this period, I am greatly indebted to the notes made by my
* Tier. They are the results of inquiries and researches spread over
perioi of forty or fifty years. I realize that to many European
s:*:i»‘.ars the section on the Nibhatkhin must appear conjectural in its
Tjpencenee on tradition. My plea is that at present there is nothin©-
cbe t-; depend on.1
With regard to the interlude, I am on surer ground. Again I
leper;d much on tradition, but it is now tradition supported by
~y,dence. Besides the general and common tradition, there is the
tradition of the spirit mediums and actors, and, as I shall explain, the
:mention of my own family.
Pr Sessional tradition of the mediums and actors is more reliable
:oaii common tradition because the two professions, especially the
r' 'Truer, are closed fraternities, and as written records were never in
use, tney handed down, the facts regarding the nature and history of
weir callings by word of mouth. To them oral tradition was as
strong as written records. Moreover, their oral tradition can be
checked by the stage conventions which exist at the present day. The
various stage conventions are considered in Chapter VII.
The tradition m my family2 begins from about the year 1800.
Aoout that time, an officer3 in the victorious army of King Bodawpaya
f "n HarVe>% Wh° Wrote his History of Burma at Exeter College
U.i.iOru, .oiten accepts oral tradition supported by no other evidence as
manually correct {History of Burma, pp. 33, 41, 211, 252, 267, 299) In two
minces, pp. ^ and 41, the tradition cited dates back to the eleventh century
v Pein> :District Magistrate, Burma Commission, now
, . Burrna’ hist0ncai researches and inquiries are often made bv
administrative officials, as their duties carry them all over the country and to
If remfeSt S‘ MeSSrS Stewart, Furnivall-great names tthe
* -—•
-
members of my family bLTuslT ^ ^ ^ °ffiCia! p0sitions of some
anything regarding their Mentity^U^nameS, ^ ai°ne Would not COI1vey
in favour of E^ley
duetion is essential* r S service record its pro-

INTRODUCTION 9
was appointed viceroy of the Seven Hiii Districts of Mindon, situated
between Arakan and the river Irrawaddy. It was during the Age of
Triumph, the period when the native interlude and the Siamese-
influenced court drama were being fused. At the miniature court of
the viceroy were presented interludes and court plays, and Hazcsas
were publicly recited. In his palace,1 a special apartment was built for
the regular performance of plays and interludes, a special troupe of
actors was taken under his patronage, and more famous troupes were
often invited'from the capital. In 1824 the unfortunate viceroy failed
to stem the advance of the British forces, and he was executed and his
palace burnt by royal order. From 1825 to 1852, the date of the
second Anglo-Burmese war, Mindon was administered directly from
the capital, and times were difficult; therefore dramatic performances
at Mindon were few and far between. Though the son of the late
viceroy was living, he wisely chose to leave the court, the administra¬
tion of justice and politics alone, and as a result, he had neither the
influence nor the wealth to patronize the drama. Therefore, as far as
the drama was concerned, a gap resulted in the tradition of the family.
In 1852 the British annexed the whole of Lower Burma, and Mindon
passed into British hands. The viceroy’s grandson was appointed
chief administrative officer. This officer, my great-grandfather, took
his office to be exactly similar in rank to that of his grand-sire, and
though the British Government did not know of it—or the authorities
at Rangoon did not care—he restored in effect the court of his
grandfather, and dramatic performances were revived.2 To him I am
indebted for preserving much of the custom and tradition of the
executed ancestor. To his revival of official performances of plays
and interludes, I owe my information gathered from members
of my family and the townspeople of Mindon. While the court
poet, U Pon Nya, wras further developing the drama, continuing the
work of U Kyin U at the Burmese capital of Mandalay, in the
out-of-the-way town of Mindon the interludes were still being per-
formed. But it must not be supposed that Mindon was the only
place where the interlude lived on. It survived in many places
alongside the plays of the two great dramatists. But only from
Mindon have I been able to obtain first-hand information and
1 Though it was termed the 'palace it was by no means a stately mansion
or an imposing castle. Except for its gilded spires, emblems of the king’s
authority, it was just a big house of timber and bamboo with thatched roofs.
2 He was U Sauk, Extra Assistant Commissioner.

i D BURMESE DRAMA
. ** v .vrTr.j A Dirt from the notes gathered by my father, I
*. ’ ; rr:it: n nr. the accounts given to me orally by my grand-
u * u w J urn ml-cunts who actually saw the interludes performed.
in ' up ct -f the ora! tradition regarding the nature of the
’ * r . fit ui ? t.m echoes of it in the plays of U Kyin U. He
" . t:w irteivjvk into a proper play, but the change was not
'W. and ;u h;s plays we find echoes of the interlude in its
” u Mum. His mays are considered in detail in another chapter.
- owe we a.s ) w utcmporary references to the interlude. Even from
F’ - or. pen ve have an account. Colonel Yule in 1855 saw an
w tow. r mmt midway between the interlude and the developed plays
ii v rtd.u ♦ >: the court plays offers an easier task for research.
Tne Kama play from Siam is preserved, with adaptations, it is true,
.wt v r.otis mil the original when a change was made in the pre¬
served ’wrswnb The other Siamese play of Eenaung has come down
f ‘ us; ^Te P^em Rama-yagan which Burmanized the Rama story
...th au'i come down. Accounts of the performances of the court plays
md the recitation of the poem at court are many and well known.
From the time when they were first composed down to the present
u,ib worKS of these court poets and dramatists have been studied
ana read. The influence of these works on the interlude is suggested,
not only by the ‘internal evidence5 in U Kyin U’s plays, .but also
oy the editorial prefaces to the works in their various editions.
. 1 oni.v three plays of U Kyin U exist at the present day as
tar as is known, the period is quite easy of research, because references
anu notes regarding him occur in various records of the court and the
noivJity, and because the Burma Research Society has published new
coitions ot two of his plays; and though the prefaces to them are short
and no attempt is made to make a complete study, suggestions for
lurther study and research are made by the editors.
The period of U Pon Nya offers the easiest task, as compared with
other periods, so far as research is concerned. AH his plays are .
„ ** Governor-General of India
he Z iTlt Z m : ?IS deSCriPtion of *e dramatic entertainment
m the nex£ chapter in connexion with Sir William
Rldria7 S theor>' of development of the Burmese drama
» wrong*
£Z2£SS££2r
hm h* - ^

INTRODUCTION 11
preserved in their entirety except the Waythandaya, and even that is
extant with only two scenes missing, while respecting the lost scenes
themselves some accounts are preserved. His works have been also
studied widely and editorial prefaces to his works offer adequate
accounts of his life and writings. Moreover, many courtiers ot U Pon
Nya’s time are still living, and from them, first-hand accounts have
been obtained by scholars of the present day. After all, U Pon Nya’s
period is very recent.1
For the decadent period, 1878 to 1886, I was dependent on oral
accounts of the plays until I went to England. Printing came
into general use in Burma during this period and very great
numbers of plays were printed. From the Government register
of published books we learn that as many as three or four editions
of 5,000 copies each of the more famous plays of the period
were sold out a few weeks after publication. Yet search as 1
might, I could not find any copies of the plays in, Burma. I discovered
later that every one of the more famous plays, with about a
hundred less-known plays of the period, are happily preserved in the
British Museum. Incidentally, I found that the oral accounts
regarding them were correct.
References to historical events and to non-dramatic works made
in the thesis are taken from standard works.
As regards my dependence on oral tradition, there is this to be
said. The oral accounts of a less civilized nation may be more
imaginative than accurate, but with the Burmese everything points to
the reliability of the tradition. After all, it goes back to only about
two hundred years, and the intervening period is not so long as to
undermine human memory. Moreover, as I have said, the truth of
the tradition can be ascertained from other sources. It should be
remembered that in a country where printing was not in genera! use
until about 1860, and records and literary works were written on palm-
leaf and parchment, both of which are very liable to destruction by
1 My chief informants for the period are:
1. Myothawundauk-kadaw, wife of the Myothawundauk, who distinguished
himself in the defence of the palace during the My ingun Rebellion, mentioned
in the chapter on U Pon Nya. She was a lady-in-waiting at court during the
last two reigns.
2. My mother’s elder brother. My maternal grandfather was Naymyo
Thiri Kyawhtin Nawyahta, Minister for Revenue at Minhla, and an ‘honorary
poet to the court’ in.the last two reigns.

BURMESE DRAMA
. r Jurmj a war, it is natural that original documents and
di rwt exist in great number. As this is the first attempt
xrrrt’Se drama as a whole and from a modem critical
1 am on virgin soil My hope is that better scholars
r cr:tready the results which I have reached in necessary
amm tradition, and that when all has been reconsidered
as neen rejected, the residue may be accepted as a contri-

CHAPTER I
THE ORIGINS OF BURMESE DRAMA
1. Burmese Music and Dancing
I have said that no Burmese drama is to be found before the
eighteenth century. The origins of that drama are to be found in the
remote past of Burma’s own national development, rather than in
foreign importations or influence.
No doubt, Burmese music and dancing arose out of primitive
religious rituals as in other countries. Society developed, civilization
expanded, and contact with the Hindus and Chinese gave new ideas,
but the native element always dominated, and the music and
dancing remained, as indeed they still remain, essentially Burmese.
In a.d. 800 when the Hindu expansion overseas was an accomplished
fact, when the Hindu and Chinese civilizations had come into contact
with each other, and when the rest of Indo-China had been drawn
into the influence of those civilizations, Burmese music and dancing
remained independent. In 800-2, when some parts of Tipper Burma
were under the nominal suzerainty of Nanchao (then a semi-indepen¬
dent State, now Yunnan), two Burmese deputations accompanied
Nanchao missions to the Court of the Chinese Emperor, and the
Burmese ‘sang songs containing Sanskrit words and went through
spelling dances, lining up in a pattern which read “Nanchao sends
holy music!”51 The Imperial Secretary has left us a poem describing
the occasion. The following is an extract:
Music from the land of P’iao, music from the land of P’iao,1 2
Brought hither from the great ocean’s south-west corner
Yung Ch’iang’s son, Shunant’o.
Has come with an offering of southern tunes to fete the New Year.
Our Emperor has taken his seat in the courtyard of the palace.
He does not press his cap strings to his ears, he is listening to you!
1 G. E. Harvey, History of Burma, p. 14.
2 The land of P’iao was the name by which Burma was known to the
Chinese until the tenth century (ibid., p. 11).

14 BURMESE DRAMA
At the first blast of the jewelled shell, their matted locks °row
crisp. b
At one blow from their copper gong their painted limbs leap.
Pearl streams glitter as they twist, as though the stars were shaken
in the sky
Flowery crowns nod and whirl, with the motion of dragon or
snake.1
The music and the dance were strange enough and pleasing
enough for the Emperor to bestow minor honorary offices at the
court on the leaders of the deputation. Burmese music and dancing
continued to develop, and at least the music reached great artistic
heights in the kingdom of Pagan, for the kings were' its patrons;
Alaungsithu, king from 1112 to 1167, was himself an accomplished
musician, and introduced new notes and tunes. With all its develop¬
ments, the music remained so national that when the great Anawrahta
(1044—77) led a raiding expedition into Bengal and wanted to leave a
sign that he had been there, he set up, not stone pillars as was the
practice of most eastern kings of the period, but stone images of
Burmese musicians. And when Alaungsithu, his grandson, later
raided Bengal, he found them; and men say that the stone musicians
played tunes as if they were alive, to the great delight of the homesick
king.2 .. .
Music and dancing could develop on their own without being
overwhelmed by an already developed drama, as the Burmese did not
know of the great Indian epics, the Mahabkarata and the Ra.maya.na>
or the Sanskrit drama and its kinsman the puppet show, although Java
and the rest of Indo-China, through their Hindu colonists and kings,
had definitely adopted the Indian epics and the drama as their own"
by about the sixth or seventh century. This absence of Hindu
influence on Burmese music and dancing explains why the Burmese
are the only civilized nation in the Far East who do not possess the
fighting dance—the dance essentially connected with the great Indian
epics.3
* The extract is taken from G. E. Harvey, op. cit., p. 14.
2 Harvey, pp. 30 and 48; Tin and Luce, The Glass Palace Chronicle, p. 114..
Alaungsithu was a great warrior, and traveller.
3 A fuller account of the Sanskrit drama and the epics is given in chap. iL

THE ORIGINS OF BURMESE DRAMA 15
2. Folk Feasts and Spirit Dances
According to legend, the Sanskrit drama was created in the Silver
Age to cheer up the people, who were no longer happy as they were
in the Golden Age; the Japanese drama wras first used by the gods to
beguile the sun-goddess to reappear; and the Chinese drama came
into being as the result of the Emperor Yuen Tsaung ordering, in the
eighth century after Christ, a group of children to be trained to sing
the various deeds of the great national heroes before his consort, in
appreciation of her love for him.1 The Burmese, however, have no
such legends, and the origins of their drama were in the religious
Nibhatkhin. But before considering those Burmese miracle plays,
perhaps it will not be out of place to give an account 'of the various
folk feasts and spirit dances, which have in them elements essentially
dramatic, and which gave some idea of the dramatic to the people and
paved a way for the coming of the religious pageants and plays.
Folk feasts can be divided into two classes, those directly connect¬
ed with Buddhism and those which are not. The Buddhist feasts,
occur on fixed dates and are celebrated all over the country. Of
those, two are especially interesting, the feast of the Full Moon of the
month of Tazaungmon (which occurs in November) and the feast of
the New Year (in April). Though the Full Moon of Tazaungmon is
an important Buddhist festival now, it is extremely probable that it
wa$ an important feast-day even before the introduction of Buddhism.2
Special celebrations connected with the date have two distinct
elements, the element of mimicry and the element of foolery.
On that day, in the villages men dress themselves as animals,,,
wearing appropriate masks, and dance through the village. The
animal most commonly imitated is a sort of unicorn known to
myth only. The desire to mimic animals probably came before the
desire to mimic spirits, and I think the mimicry of animals, such as
that we see in these celebrations, was the earliest attempt at the.
dramatic by the Burmese. Probably the mimicry of animals by men
resulted in the presentation of animal puppet shows. In a Burmese
puppet show, before the play begins, different animals come out one by
1 A. B. Keith, The Sanskrit Drama; F. A. Lombard, Japanese Drama; A.
E. Zucker, Chinese Theatre.
2 Some Buddhist festivals in Burma probably are of pre-Buddhist origins
(cf. the English Christmas which has many elements derived from pre-
Christian times). At least the special celebrations of Tazaungmon described
here are almost certainly pre-Buddhist.

16 BURMESE DRAMA
one, and each gives a special dance of its own.1 At night, as part of the
celebrations, there is a feast of fools. Young men and boys roam the
village, throwing zibyu fruits at houses and stealing things, which will
be found in the centre of the village the next morning: the objects of
the good-natured theft are mostly articles that would provoke laughter—
such as a lady’s under-skirt; or those which would cause temporary
inconvenience in the morning—such as cooking utensils, steps from
stairs, or a piece from the roof. The Feast of the New Year is one
of mirth and foolery. It is known as the Water Festival because on
that occasion, every Burman takes a delight in throwing water at his
neighbour and getting soaked himself as the result of the other’s
counter-attack. The men derive great enjoyment from drenching the
women, who in their turn are not slow to have their revenge. Young
men group themselves and dance joyously along the streets, at times
being chased by bands of elderly maiden ladies who lie in w'ait to
catch the ringleaders. When caught, the youths are lightly bound
with silken cords and their faces are blackened with soot. Then they
are made to perform a monkey dance before being granted their
release.. The spirit of fun apparent in these Burmese feasts of
foolery is akin to that which moved the young clerks of the Parlement
of Paris and the members of the Inns of Court in London to stage
their Feasts of Fools in medieval times.2
As the villagers lead a communal life and every joy and sorrow of
a villager is shared by all others, a joyful event is celebrated by a
public feast. Marriage, birth, the admission of a son to his novitiate
{for every Burmese boy enters priesthood for at least a week), and
the piercing of the ear of a daughter are occasions for mirth and jollity.
At these feasts they sing and dance and mimic, groups of villagers vie
with each other for new methods of giving entertainment, and there
is keen rivalry between youths and maidens. The most mirthful
feast of all is the Harvest Feast in February, when the paddy has been
reaped, and the village is ready to enjoy a well-earned rest of four
after a working period of eight months.
These folk feasts are of great antiquity, though, because of the
essentially unchanging life in the villages, they continue to exist
even at the present day. The Tazaungmon and other Buddhist feasts
1 PuPPe* show is described in a later chapter.
FooU’^Un’Av^r1^^.2^6 Medieval StaSe> chap, xiii, ‘The Feast of
Pools , also E. Welsford, The Court Masque, p. 2.

THE ORIGINS OF BURMESE DRAMA 17
have been celebrated year after year, at least since the reintroduction
of Buddhism in 1056, and at least since March, 638, when an early
king of Pagan, Popa Sawrahan (613-40), drew up the present Burmese
era, the dawn of every Burmese new' year has been the occasion for
mirthful water-throwing.1
Buddhism had been introduced into the country through com¬
mercial relations with India long before the foundation of the kingdom
of Pagan, but from the beginning it was only at second-hand and
therefore feeble. The real religion of the Burmese before the re-
introduction of Buddhism in 1056 was animistic, and they worshipped
various spirits, known as ?iai$. There were mediums, mostly women,
who danced to please the spirits, and as the spirits were supposed to
enter into the bodies of the mediums, sometimes it was believed that
the spirits, and not the mediums, were actually dancing. Sometimes
the medium herself actually believed that a spirit had taken control
of her body, but usually she only pretended that a spirit had entered
her, and gave an exhibition of acting. As the medium of each parti¬
cular not dressed herself in appropriate clothes, the spirit dances were
essentially dramatic.2 When Buddhism, in one of its purest forms,
was Introduced under Anawrahta, the great king realized the impossi¬
bility of attracting people suddenly to the new faith; so he com¬
promised by recognizing the nats as Buddhist spirits and giving them
shrines in his Shwezigon Pagoda as its guardian spirits. When asked
the reason, Anawrahta replied; ‘Men will not come suddenly to the
new faith. Let them come for their old gods, and they will gradually
be won over/3
So the worship of the nats lived on, and with the advance of
:
1 Shway-Yoe (Sir George Scott) in The Barman His Life ami Notions, and
Fielding Hall in The Soul of a People give detailed accounts of the feasts and
life in the villages. However, as far as I have been able to find out, the
Tazaungmon celebrations have never been described in any English work.
2 These dances are still performed on spirit-feast days at Taungbyon
(near Mandalay), a small town given up to spirit worship since the days of
Pagan’s greatness and perhaps even before.
The belief in, as distinct from the worship of, spirits is not alien to
Buddhism.
The chief works on the subject are; Sir R. C. Temple, The Thirty-Seven
Nats; Grant Brown, ‘The Taungbyon Festival’ in Journal of the Anthropolo¬
gical Institute, 1915; the same author’s 4 The Pre-Buddhist Religion of the
Burmese’ in Folk-Lore, 1921; and G. E. Harvey, History of Burma,
3 G. E. Harvey, op. cit., p. 33.

18 BURMESE DRAMA
civilization, the spirit dances became elaborate, for though the belief
was primitive, the people were no longer so. The dances benefited
from the developments that had taken place in Burmese music which,
as we have seen, flourished under the patronage of the Pagan kings.
New spirits were added, and they were usually those of heroic princes.
The dancers were now many, for the mediums turned themselves into
dancing and music mistresses. The chief medium of each spirit
dressed herself in the special dress of the spirit, but the junior
mediums, who were equivalent to the chorus of an English revue,
were in the dress of Burmese princesses. It is interesting to note the
origin of this dress. The mediums realized the necessity of dressing
themselves in fine raiment, but as everybody wore clothes of bright
colours, the only solution of the problem was to don the dress of the
court and official class, which the commoners were forbidden to
wear by law, except during feasts and dances. When drama proper
came into being, the hero and the heroine dressed themselves in the
court dress, even when they were representing common characters.
3. Miracles and Interludes
After the fall of the kingdom of Pagan in a.d. 12o7, Burma was
the scene of fierce civil wars, but the trouble was mainly in the
capitals, in the villages and small towns life went on in its joyous
way. Religion continued to spread in spite of the fact that the throne
of Pagan was no longer in existence to support it. Learning began
to reach the remotest parts of the country, carried far and near
by monks. To escape from the aimless strife of the civil wars, men
turned towards literature. Money was lacking to compose poems in
brick as had been done at Pagan, and men now expressed their love
for the religion and their love for the beautiful in writing. The new
literature further educated the people and made even "stronger the
already strong religious fervour. As a result, at village feasts and on
days of public rejoicing, the people turned towards their religion for
amusement and entertainment. So pageants depicting scenes from
the life of the Buddha and from his Birth Stories came into being.
Pageants were given on ordinary carts.that were in use for* all
kinds of transport and which are still in use in backward parts of the
country at the present day. Each cart carried a group of (amateur)
actors standing still and. representing a .set scene. Originally, no
doubt, there were only a few carts representing scenes from different
stories. Later, a pageant came to consist of many carts and many

quite gorgeous and the scheme elaborate. Thee ntoeant :; _r,v needed
r r jardzation. Therefore, the \ ifiaje came to he dherded into two
parts, eastern and western quarters or northern and Southern charters
*:he village was usual;}' greater in length than breadth, being built along
a main road). In larger villages and towns, the division was into four
quarters. Each quarter was responsible for the production of a
pageant. There was intense rivalry between the quarters to produce
the finest pageant; it was usually friendly, but often enmity arose,
and many pageants were occasions for free fights. The rivalry further
developed the pageant, for new ideas would be introduced by one
quarter to outrival, the others. Soon the pageant became a play, its
scenes coming to life.
The Nibhatkhin was the Burmese equivalent of the English miracle
and mystery plays. It was the pageant come to life. With the
pageant, the religious processions went along the main streets without
stopping, each cart representing a set scene. But with the Nibhatkhin,
each cart stopped at certain places. The most common of such places
were the market-place, the house of the chief administrative officer,
and the pagoda where the procession ended. At each of those places,
each cart stopped, and the scene came to life. Dialogue and action
were used. Therefore, people at the stopping places saw what was in
effect a play.
The Nibhatkhin was extremely popular, and it lived on until
recently, just as many of the English miracle plays continued to be
produced right through the Elizabethan period. I saw one in the out-
of-the-way town of Pauk as recently as 1916. However, 1 do not think
that Nibhatkhins are produced anywhere nowadays. Sometimes one
sees a procession on cars and motor lorries as a sort of reminiscence
of the Nibhatkhin. But such processions are mere shows and lack
the essential features of the Burmese miracle plays.
It was for the entertainment of the populace that the Nibhatkhin
came into being, and as the Burmese entertainment connotes
laughter, soon the element of humour came into the Nibhatkhin. At
first none of the characters was made humorous, for they all came out
of religious stories. And so the clown was introduced. The clown or
Lu-byet (‘the non-serious man?) was put into the Nibhatkhin as an
extra character, an attendant on the prince-hero. He was extremely
popular, and soon another clown, an attendant on the princess-heroine,

20
BURMESE DRAMA
was introduced. The clowns were usually males, though later a
female clown-attendant of the princess occasionally appeared. The
clown was so popular that he continued to appear as an extra
character even when the plays of the great dramatists came to be
produced later. He was essentially outside the play. He made up his
own part, he invented his own dialogue, and made up his jokes as the
play moved along. However, even with the Nibhatkhin, he was not
allowed to interfere with the movement of the play and its story. He
played and joked at the beginning of the first scene when the actual
story had not begun, he gave sometimes an outline of the story and its
sources, and he gave information regarding the production of the
procession and the play. He was the most privileged person amon«
the actors, for he alone could without offence laugh at, and satirize, all
things and all persons. ’
However, the clown was essentially unconnected with the actual
story, and soon the actual characters came to be burlesqued. As the
devil m the English miracle plays, the villain of the Nibhatkhin (in
the Birth Stones, the villain was a previous incarnation of Devadat
who repeatedly tried to harm the Buddha) became a humorous and
popular character. The Burmese love of humour and gentle satire
would have turned the whole Nibhatkhin into pure farce had not
a convention arisen with regard to the presentation of religious
characters. The Buddha was never to be represented on the stage.
Smnes about him up to the time he actually attained Buddhahood
cou e presented, but no one should impersonate him when he had
become the Buddha. It was soon followed by another convention
unll h> ara?ter, °f, an amhat (saint) should not be presented
unless it was absolutely necessary, and then only when the part was
to be taken by an able and ‘serious’ actor, who must be actuallv
nr!fnf f ^ °n thC day and night the Nibhatkhin was bein*
presented. As a person keeping a fast has to behave in a dignified
huTorousted the Part being turned into a
v ™di these developments, people did not forget that the
MbhatkJun^ was essentially a religious show presented l connexion
rmpossTblf0USTheStlVaIS’ ^ theref°re further devel°P™ent was
amateur actors to “nSerVatlSm of the Ullage, the dislike of the
amateur actors to be in anyway profane or thought to he sr> the
restricted scope of the stories and the characters fll n ^ h
P"V“,e,i “r

Encash miracle play, rat indirectly. The chance a kweTyfre the
drama was seized hy professional actors. To break an ay fr' ,nn the
tradition and the conservatism, persons outside the pale .k *l*v>d’
society were needed. Spirit dancers were such persms. *1 he;
worshipped the nats1 and most people looked upon them with fear
as being in touch with sinister and unnatural forces. They were rut*
side the religion, and their drunken dances—drunken from wine and
ecstacy—were outside the popular conception of moral behaviour.
Therefore the new professional actors were drawn from the ranks of
the spirit mediums. However, those who took to the new profession
were malcontents and failures in their original profession. The
increase in the number of the spirit dancers had caused the mediums
to form themselves into a fraternity, the entry to which was closely
guarded. The economic attractions of spirit dancing tempted people
who had no faith in the spirits to become mediums. These factors
caused discontent and disunion among the mediums, and within and
without the fraternity pseudo-mediums came into being. The
advance of education had robbed the nats of many worshippers, but
most people continued to patronize spirit dancing for mere love
of music and dancing. The result was the rise of a class of
professional entertainers who danced and sang and played on musical
instruments. The new dancers pretended to be mediums and semi¬
mediums, but their dancing was unconnected with any spirit feast.
The rise of this professional dancing was doubtless gradual and must
have preceded the Nibhatkhin. As early as about the year 1400,
two princes and their attendants, when turned out of their palace,
earned their living as wandering minstrels and professional dancers,
pretending to be spirit worshippers.2 Because of the very fact that
the new dancers were malcontents and failures in their original
1 The objects of the spirit worship are the thirty-seven nats, all of whom
are more or less of evil character; but there are in addition to these many
good nats who have little to do with human affairs.
2 One prince became King Minkaung (1401-22), the other, his brother,
helping him to gain the throne. An attendant became King Mohnyinthadot
(1427-40), and the others ministers (G. E. Harvey, op. cit., p. 96).
The new dancers were mostly men. Men mediums were secondary to
women mediums, and perhaps that was one of the reasons for the discontent
among the mediums, and also the reason why the men took to wandering all
over the country as dancers.

9?
BURMESE DRAMA
profession of mediums, they could break away also from the tradition
and censers*,s„ of the spirit „orshippers. Jxhey ” “■' ”
nothin® ”tr'Sld' T'VOrShip' Thep Ottered ly
Z t mh“mn■
piibdSs And ,he fo* “
hTfcelW S°°» they had developed i,
mto the Burmese eqmvalent of the English interlude.
the professional dancers became actors. People were r>A 1
a‘ ontln „tvr P“«d »d gave a little scene, or rather
■he herd^anllh”! “ ““ *“»■ «“ f»,le dancer
characters. The down had b° °[ ' ree dancers became minor
Nibhatkhin, and he became a IT® bef°re b°rr0wed from the
For two reasons
”n“ cartrSI T*' “ ‘h' branCh °f a “ '™»‘d i n ight
Second^ the journev^hroudi T”"? *° Mti"g pk“ “ * f»es.
possible for human beings and’N *7 her° ^ heroine made it
commoners to meet and take lTeS’ emons and S°ds> princes and
adventures. ThTL Bu me P adVentUreS and ™s-
Perhan, v Burmese lnterlude came into being.
intermediary stale onf°dev l0SICaI * "°nder whetber there ™as an
able to the' English Were plays compar-
Nibhatkhin on the one hand L pb ^ gap betWeen the
It is of course fmposIiJt 1 J 6 BUrmeSe interfude on the other.
lor no Burmese miracle play or interlude haf1 f
m writing. I have said1 *-w ^as come down to us
Nibhatkhin and that entertain™ &T ^ u ^ accounts regarding the
bde, and also W± enTccoZ ^ 1 ^ ^ the
absolutely no rnentioainZTJZntZ ^ But »
termed the Burmese morality play Yet Tra ^ C°Uld be
there must have been nl-w* 1. . , , 1 Aenture to think that
If it should be presumed that th^im"2 i !i t0,the En§Iish moralities,
the Nibhatkhin, there would be a , riude deveIoPed directly out of
.hnrd,eprofessio„,,ac,"«febYblr , tW“°,the 1 ^
the Nibhatkhin. I think also tWiT e igl°US pla-vs in imitation of
•“ *»« ^
i rt , . religion which formed the
Introduction, pp. 7-10.

THE ORIGINS OF BURMESE DRAMA 2 A
subject of the English morality plays. Again and again we find
writers writing and actors saying in the prologue or epilogue that a
plav represents but life in its various stages; as man begins in laughter
and ends in misery and death, a play begins with the happiness of the
hero and heroine, and then goes on to tell of their misery and parting.
To the conservative Burmese Buddhist, professional acting was a sin,
and to get over the difficulty, the idea came into being that the play
was only a species of preaching the religion. The existence of that idea
perhaps supports my theory that there actually were plays dealing with
morals which would favour the rise of such an idea. Perhaps the
strongest evidence that there was a morality stage in the history
of the development of Burmese drama is the existence of a popular
play which has never been printed, but which is still sometimes acted.
The play has no title. A rich miser marries a young wife and soon
dies. The wife at once remarries. The miser now in Hell sues the
wife and the new husband before the court of the governor of Hell,
for the restitution of the property he had so patiently gathered and
hoarded. There is a trial, and after hearing the arguments of both
sides, the judge decides in favour of the young couple. The play
ends with the judge moralizing on the emptiness and transitory nature
of human riches. The play is quite crude and short, so that when
presented today the actors have to lengthen the play to make it last
the night. There is very little action, and the king of later dramas
is absent. The names of the characters are general and abstract;
Mister Miserly, Mistress Wife, Master New Husband, and Death
(who takes the old husband to Hell).
The interlude was extremely popular, and at the court, at the houses
of officials (the Burmese had no hereditary nobility, and the officials
were the nobles) and at public feasts and festivals the interlude was
presented. The importance of the interlude in the development of
Burmese drama is great, but the importance of the professional actors
who first presented the interlude in the development of the acting
profession and stage conventions is even greater. The fact that the
original members of the profession were outside the social pale caused
all actors and actresses to be looked down upon; that fact explains
why in an essentially democratic society it was said with contempt that
‘beggars and actors, they are the eaters of food thrown away as waste*.1
1 The stage conventions and the acting profession are described in detail
in chap. vii.

?4
BURMESE DRAMA
W hile the interlude was developing, the drama, another form of
entertainment, was also becoming rapidly popular. The Hawsa or the
dramatic reading and recital of a Birth Story in verse was becoming
the .ashion. Tne Hawsa was in dialogue form, and the reciter changed
his voice and used dramatic gestures. As I have said, one cannot be
certain of many things regarding the interlude, but it seems exceed-
ing y probable that the early interludes were not literary. The actors
rrrietTd^ unpractised in verse composition and only knew the
jataka Birth Stones from translations. The Hawsa, on the other
hand, was a literary work. It was in verse. The reciter was an
accomplished verse-writer if not a poet, and when reciting pieces he
himself had not written, he invariably put in additions and modifica¬
tions. He knew Pali and therefore could read the Jatakas in the
original. Whilst the actor was looked upon as nothing more than
beggar, the rec.ter was greatly respected. This will perhaps explain
' th® H™[a’ and not the interlude, has come down to us in
writing.^ With all the differences, however, the reciter and the actor
AerdetT t0/Th °ther’and b0th contributed much to the rise of
oped play, just as both the dramatic recitations of the epic
Ramayana and the open-air performances of its scenes contributed
much to the rise of the developed Sanskrit play in India.
There is no special term for that entertainment which I have called
the interlude. The name Pya-zat, which means a play, is vaguely
r^toc^,-Tm0“ 7thKdeVel°Ped pIaTs> but it is certain&that
dteWd nkvs Th11^/ yA the time °f U Kyin U t0 denote
developed plays. _ Therefore, I have ventured to name it the interlude
partly because ot its similarity to the English interlude, but mainlv
because it was given in the middle of, or at least subsidia^ T the
main entertainment of dancing. y ’
in 1767 TrlUde and thC HaWm W6re at the heiSht of'their popularity
n 1/6/ when biam was conquered. The results of the conquest are
considered m Chapter II. inquest are
4. Sir William Ridgeway’s Theory of the Origins and
Development of Burmese Drama
Sir William Ridgeway, in The Dramas and Dramatic Dances of
^European Races, considers that the dramas and dramatic dances of
races support his theory regarding Greek tragedy, that it arose
D-Jir SPeCimeDS °f the Anthology of Burmese

THE ORIGINS OF BURMESE DRAMA 25
out of the worship of the dead. Most scholars are sceptical of that
animistic theory of the origin of the drama. With regard to the
Greek drama, Dr Farnell, in The Cult of the Greek States, seems to
prove clearly that Ridgeway is wrong. Likewise with regard to
Sanskrit drama. Dr Keith, in his book on the subject, rejects Ridge¬
way’s theory; and he adds more generally: 'Whether elsewhere the
worship of the dead resulted in drama is a matter open to grave cwuht.
Certainly in the case of the Greek drama, which offers the most
interesting parallel to that of India, the evidence of derivation from
the funeral games is wholly defective.’1
Ridgeway treats of Burmese drama in detail. He knows it only
from hearsay. He has never seen a play acted on the Burmese stage,
nor has he read any in the original or translation. All his information
is purely descriptive of the actual presentation of a play, not of the
play itself. His informants knew no Burmese dramatic literature nor
did they have any idea as to the history of the drama. Nevertheless,
Ridgeway gives quite a good estimate of the nature of the drama. The
fault lies chiefly with Mr Taw Sein Kho, on whose information
Ridgeway mainly relies. The late Mr Taw Sein Kho was no doubt
a great archaeologist, but he was a poor student of Burmese literature,
and he had absolutely no idea of the origins and development of
Burmese drama. In his letter2 to the Director-General of the Archaeo¬
logical Survey of India, who was in correspondence with him on the
nature of Burmese drama at the request of Ridgeway, he wrote:
‘The Ramayana in an adapted form is also acted. I am inclined
to think that it was derived by the Burmans from the Cambodians,
because the dresses and stage paraphernalia of the Burmans and
Cambodians in acting the play are so strikingly similar.’ As the
Siamese Ramayana was influenced by, or came from the same sources
as the Cambodian Ramayana, Mr Taw Sein Kho did good detective
work. But his letter shows clearly that he was absolutely ignorant of
the introduction of the Siamese Ramayana into Burma and its results.
He seems to have known nothing about the great dramatists, U
Kyin U and U Pon Nya, for Ridgeway does not mention them at ail.
Ridgeway traces the development of Burmese drama in three main
stages:
1 A. B. Keith, The Sanskrit Drama.
2 The letter is quoted in The Dramas and Dramatic Dances of Non-
European Races.

26 BURMESE DRAMA
1. The impersonation of the nats by mediums;
2. The true dramatic element borrowed from the Indian historical
plays of Rama, presented by puppet players;
3. Drama based on the Indian models, but finding its themes in
national history and mythology', intermixed with Buddhistic elements,
and performed by puppets and living actors.
I proceed to deal with these three alleged stages.
1. There is no doubt that the impersonation of the nats by
mediums had, and still has, the element of the dramatic, as I have
described. However, it is unreasonable to hold that the impersonation
in question was the origin of Burmese drama. Ridgeway puts
forward three lines of argument with regard to his theory: (a) the
worship of the dead and the ritual connected with it have resulted in
true dramas in other countries: the impersonation of the nats by
mediums is a ritual connected with the worship of the dead, and
therefore, as m other countries, it has resulted in the rise of a drama-
(b) the war dances had, and still have, the dramatic element in them-
(r-) the derivation of true Burmese drama from the earliest stages of
t e drama, the nat dances, is proved by the fact that there is a tree in
t s centre of the ‘stage’ when a play is being presented. These lines
ot argument are unsound.
(a) Whether the worship of the dead results in drama in other
countries is doubtful. We have seen that the view has been contro¬
verted as regards Greece and as regards India. Even if it were true
o countries around Burma, it would not follow that the theory holds
good as regards Burma, for that country' has a history and civilization
^ lnati°na beC3USe °f its geograPhical barriers.
in i} ^ 18 n0Dd0ubt as t0 the existence of the dramatic element
the nat dances. But such an element also existed in the various
“ardl^hem'%Bham‘“ p“Pie- Ridgeway has no information
» th.T Jib. d 8 ’u SP‘ri' d"“S md' »»*'ibutio„
,, , th drama, they were not mainly responsible and it
T°hev Tavetote ** ’dance!
Ihey gave to the country new dances and new dancers and thev
t"‘Th. md r;c-.But the «
trom the presentation of religious stories by amateurs. The nit
fedinTanTiri ‘‘T*18?7 professional, aNnidb haatlkihenin .to the religious
_ ling and education that inspired the It is true§that
those professionals later develooed the j. . , S , th t
professional actors and not as Spirit mediums™3' ^ 'h'r “ “ “

? 7
THE ORIGINS OF BURMESE DRAMA
Before proceeding any further perhaps I ought to explain what 1
mean when I speak of the ‘origins’ of Burmese drama. A creat deal
of confusion can result through the vagueness of the term 'origins’.
By it I mean that point where the drama has taken some denmte
shape as drama, and not merely as dramatic elements. If we were w
consider as origins all prehistoric dramatic elements in the life and
customs of the nation, it would lead us nowhere. The worship of the
fiats in some form or other must have been developed by the tribes
that first settled in Burma. And as religious ritual leads to music
and dancing among primitive people, the worship led to the develop¬
ment of Burmese music and dancing. But we cannot take music and
dancing as the origins of drama. No doubt music and dancing
are necessary for the rise of a drama, but speech is necessary too, and
yet we cannot say that the first attempt of man to express himself was
the real origin of drama. It is vital to distinguish mere dramatic
elements from true drama. In this connexion, Dr Keith’s treatment
of the origins of Sanskrit drama is enlightening. Many had contended
before him that the Sanskrit drama had its origins in Yedic ritual.
Dr Keith, however, rejects the theory. He recognizes the dramatic
elements in Yedic ritual, but he recognizes them as such and not as
the origins of the drama. No doubt the dramatic elements in the
ritual gave some idea of the dramatic to the Indian people, but the
drama did not arise out of them. It arose only when the great Indian
epics had spread all over the country, for the true origin of the drama
was in the recitation of the epics. With regard to Burmese drama,
although the elements of the dramatic existed in the worship of the
spirits and in various folk customs and folk feasts, the origin of the
true drama was in the religious pageants and the Nibhaikhin.
(c) Ridgeway puts forward the tree in the middle of the ‘stage5
as evidence of the fact that the drama developed out of the nat wor¬
ship. He contends that the tree is a symbol of the nat, because fiats
live in trees. He quotes from Colonel Yule’s account of his embassy
to Burma where the latter described a Burmese play in progress.
There was no actual stage in those days. The play was given in the
centre of an open place or yard, and the space for the actors was
marked off. . In the centre of that space was a tree. The ambassador
inquired as to the purpose of the tree, but he was given a 6 somewhat
vague answer5 that It represented a forest. He was not satisfied and
put forward the theory that there must have been some belief connect¬
ed with the tree, for It was present .on all the occasions on which he

28 BURMESE DRAMA
witnessed Burmese plays.1 Ridgeway approves of that theory. He
maintains that the tree is symbolic of the worship of the nats. In an
appendix to the book he quotes a letter from a resident in Burma
(which arrived too late to be discussed in the book itself), describing
some sort of a nat ritual where a spirit was supposed to be dwelling in a
tiee. However, nats are supposed to dwell, not only in trees, but also
in houses, mountains, streams, lakes, on Mount Mayvu, in fact every¬
where, and it is extremely unlikely that the tree should have been chosen
specially to represent the abode of the nat. In all the ritual connected
with the worship of the thirty-seven nats, the use of a tree does not occur
except m the case of the nat, U-Yin-Gyi. When offerings are made
to him, a wooden representation of a forked branch of a tree is used.
But that symbol is used only when that particular spirit alone is
emg worshipped, i.e. when all the nats are being worshipped en bloc
t.ie symbol is not used. U-Yin-Gyi has no special connexion with
the stage, and he is essentially connected with Lower Burma; and
pper Burma, not Lower, was the home of Burmese drama. And
vmat Colonel Yule took to be a vague answer was the true answer
\\hat he saw was an interlude and not a developed play, and, as has
been stated, the scene of the interlude was almost always the forest
for it needed nothmg except a tree to indicate the scene. Therefore’
the tree which the ambassador saw was a piece of stage scenery and
not!)mg more. J
Though Ridgeway’s theory that the drama had its origins in the
;rttP °f the ”ats>tberefore’ is not founded on fact, his contention
that the Burmese professional actors are the lineal descendants of the
meamms who impersonated the spirits of the dead is not wrong.
But the iact that the actors are the descendants of such persons should
not mislead us into thinking the drama to be a descendant of spirit
worship. There is a great danger of being thus misled if one knows
he \anous stage conventions without knowing the real history of the
tTonT h K t R’dgeWay been acquainted with those conven¬
tions, which (strangely enough) were not known to him and his
miormants, e might have been strengthened in his view. The
most important of the stage conventions is the nat chorus which
pla,. The ch„us
composed of females comes out and sings and dances to various nat
MiSSi0n Smt h ** G™™-Ge«eral of

THE ORIGINS OF BOFOIE-'E IRATE A 29
tunes piayed by the orchestra. The eh ,v.;> was hr?: intr )dueed
f »r tv;r reasons: the audience liked a dance, ana the alters did nw
i meet that their original calling v;as that of needrums.
2. According to Ridgeway, the second stale of the drama mas
readied when the "true dramatic element borrowed trim the Indian
historical plays of Rama, presented by the puppet players" had
entered Burmese drama. The weak points in this theory will he
apparent when the further history of the drama is considered in later
chapters. The ‘true dramatic element" was already In the Xibkatkhin,
or at least in the interlude; the Indian Ramayana coming by way of
Siam did influence Burmese drama, but this was possible ondy because
there was already a native drama to absorb this foreign influence. Nor
were the Rama plays presented at first by puppet players. When, the
translations and adaptations of the Siamese Ramayana were beirnr
first presented at court, puppet plays were unknown. Ridueway puts
forward some opinions regarding the Burmese puppet show also, but
they will be considered in Chapter VII.
3. According to Ridgeway, the third stage of Burmese drama
was reached when there appeared plays ‘based on the Indian models,
but finding their themes in the national history and mythology,
intermixed with Buddhistic elements, and performed by puppets and
living actors.’ It is true that after the introduction of the Siamese
Rama play to the Burmese court, plays of the type described appeared,
but the plays were by no means modelled on the Rama play. The
Siamese play gave rise to a native court drama which influenced the
interlude and prepared the way for the first great Burmese dramatist,
U Kyin U. And the ‘Buddhistic elements’ which entered the drama
have a history of their own. All these points are considered in later
chapters.
On the nature and achievements of Burmese drama, Ridgeway
says: ‘The Burmese drama has not remained crystallized as a piece
of religious ritual. On the contrary, it has made distinct steps
towards the true drama which Thepis in Greece and the forerunners
of Marlowe and Shakespeare in England detached from the sacred
shrines and lifted into a distinct artistic form. Yet it has not
advanced beyond the lyrical stage, consisting of dancing, singing and
instruments of music, the undulation of the vocal expression being
much more subtle and intense than the expression of features, whilst
gesture is restricted to the conventional gestures, of the dance. The
usual scene is the. palace, its inmates the characters, and the drama

30 BURMESE DRAMA
adheres tenaciously to the tradition of royalty. Hero and heroine
are prince and princess, their retinue courtiers, and the countrymen
jester and clown; the king is idealized, his deputies travestied.’ In
short, the Burmese drama is narrow in range. These opinions of
Ridgeway are true and just in many respects, but they have also their
weakness. He errs in thinking that Burmese drama is still in the
undeveloped lyrical stage. What he thinks to be an earlier stage is
in reality a later one. Dancing and singing have dominated the
Burmese pice (the public presentation of a play) since the fall of the
kingdom, but that stage was only reached after decadence had set
in in the drama developed so well by U Kyin U and U Pon Nya. What
Mr Taw Sein Kho described in his letter to the Director-General of
the Archaeological Survey, what most other informants of Ridgeway
also saw, was Burmese drama in decadence and distortion. The scene of
the drama is not always the palace, though the palace and its inmates
appear almost always in Burmese plays. The forest, village, city and
the common people often appear, though it is true that they are sub¬
ordinated to the dramatic interest in the palace and its inmates.
Burmese drama 'was forced to confine itself in general to the palace,
as in a society where other class distinctions scarcely existed, the king
and his courtiers alone were different, from the rest: and, in general,
a Burmese audience wanted characters somewhat different from those
of common life. The same was true of the Elizabethan drama. Though
the ‘domestic’ drama was popular, the best plays of the Elizabethans
have their scenes in distant lands or in high society. Therefore the
narrowness of its range does not necessarily make out Burmese drama
to be in an early stage of growth. For the sake of completeness, I
have described briefly these aspects of the drama, but they will be
considered in detail in later chapters.
The opinions expressed by Sir William Ridgeway are full of error.
The worth of the chapter on Burmese drama in his Dramas and
Dramatic Dances of Non-European Races consists in this, that it was
he who made the first attempt to study the development of Burmese
drama scientifically, to. compare it with the drama of other countries,
and to form an estimate of it according to western standards of
criticism. And, erroneous though his views are, it is much to his
credit that with, the ■ scanty and often misleading information before
him he could give such a shrewd estimate of Burmese drama.

CHAPTER II
THE RISE OF A COURT DRAMA IN BURMA
1. The Ramayana of Valmiki
Before considering the influence of the Siamese Rama play on
Burmese drama, perhaps it will not be out of place to attempt to give
an account of the great Indian epic, the Ramayana, in which the
Siamese play had its sources.
The Ramayana is one of the two Hindu epics, the other being the
Mahabharata. The Ramayana as a completed poem is the older of
the two, though the kernel of the Mahabharata may have been older.
Very probably the legend of Rama existed long before \almiki
composed the poem, to which later poets made large additions; the
original composition and the main additions belong to the period
400 b.c. The epic contains two separate stories, the court intrigues of
Ayodhya and the exile of Rama to the forest; the capture of Sita by
Ravana and the resulting war with the demon king. The first story
was probably in existence as a Buddhist Birth Story—the Dasaratha
Jataka—when the poem came into being.1
The poem is divided into seven books. The first book in its
present shape, which reveals additions to the original, tells of the
manner in which the poem came to be composed by Valmiki, of the
Hindu gods, the divine origin of the prince Rama, and his winning of
Sita as bride by bending a strong bow which none other could bend.
In the second book we read that Rama was going to be consecrated
heir, but the junior queen, Kaikeyi, the mother of Bharata, reminded
the .king that he had promised two boons to her for nursing him
when he was lying ill. She demanded firstly the choice of her own
son, Bharata, as heir, and secondly the exile of Rama. The doting
king was in great distress and tried to argue with the queen, but it
was in vain, and the promise had to be kept. Rama acquiesced, and
1 Dr A. B. Keith has kindly pointed out to me that many scholars doubt
whether the Dasaratha Jataka could be so old, and, therefore, the general
opinion would seem to regard it as being later than the poem.

32
BURMESE DRAMA
was ordered to the forest as an exile. His consort, Sita, and his
brother, Lakshmana, begged to accompany him into exile. So the
three left the city, followed by a wailing crowd who wanted to share
the exile, but they succeeded in getting away from the people and
reached the forest. The king died soon after of a broken heart, and
Bharata followed Rama to the forest, refusing to take the throne as
long as the rightful heir was living. Rama, however, had promised
his father to live fourteen years in exile, and therefore he refused to
take the throne. Bharata asked for a symbol with which to rule in his
name, and Rama gave his shoes, which Bharata, on his return to the
city, faithfully put on the throne, and he ruled in Rama’s name. The
third book deals with the two princes and the princess who entered a
thicker part of the forest where demons dwelt. The demons were
troubling the hermits who performed their austerities in the forest.
Now the king of the demons, Ravana, had divine powers, which had
been granted to him by Brahma, the chief god, for services rendered,
but as he had been abusing the divine gift, Rama’s chief mission was
to destroy the demon king. It happened that the demon’s sister,
Surpanakha, fell in love with Rama. He refused her advances and
suggested that she should approach Lakshmana, the younger brother,
as he was unmarried. The demon princess then tried to attract the
brother, but he suggested that she should ask Rama to take her as
his second queen. The sole result of these efforts and her attack on
Sita was the cutting-off of the demon princess’s nose by the younger
brother, who was impulsive by nature. The angry princess went
back to her brother, the demon king who, however, was not eager to
fight Rama and risk his life and throne. The sister succeeded in
winning him over only when she mentioned the loveliness of Sita.
The demon king sent his forces under the great warrior, Khara who
was worthy to be Rama’s opponent. There was a great and bloodv
tight, from which Rama emerged victorious. The demon king’s sister
then thought of a plan to which the king agreed. The latter disguised
himself as a hermit, and his follower, Mancha, assumed the form of
a golden deer and passed by the place where Rama and his com¬
panions dwelt. Sita wanted the deer, and Rama was pressed to give
chase to it. Rama left, charging his brother with the careful guardian-
sh.p of Sita. The deer was shot, but as he lay dying he imitated
Rama s \oice and shouted: ‘Lakshmana, help!’ Sita heard the words
and taunted Lakshmana until he went to his brother’s help, full of
evil forebodings. In his absence, the demon king approached the

and than showed his true form, hit a reruse a ri> aO.ue ’it
nut forcible on the demon*s tiyme cnarint ana driver. away. 1 ne
Kinu of the Vultures, friend ut Rama, gave cnase, but utter a name
battle, he was slain by the demon. Rama and his hi other soon
discovered their loss and went in search, of Sita. They met art’nr
demon, and there resulted another battle. Tne demon was Siam, nut
his spirit advised Rama to seek the help oi the monkey King, sugriva.
The fourth book tells how the two brothers met Sugriva, who in¬
formed them that he had been deprived of his throne by his brother,
the usurping Bali, who had also taken his wife. Rama, as Sugriva s
ally, joined in a battle for the throne in which the usurper was killed.
The queen bewailed the death of her hero, but she soon took tier first
husband back again, without giving much thought to the memory of
Bali. The fifth book tells us how Hanuman, the wise minister of
Sugriva, went as a spy to the demon kingdom and succeeded in
learning Ska’s whereabouts. The sixth book tells of the great battle
between Rama with his monkey allies and the demons. Their king
was slain bv Rama, and Sita was then restored to him. Rama, how¬
ever, behaved in a heartless manner. He told her that her long capti¬
vity in the kingdom of the demon had made her impure, he hau
waged the war merely to vindicate his honour and not because he
wanted her back. Now' Sita had akvays refused the advances of the
demon king, who had been afraid to win her by force. But Rama
thought otherwise, and Sita was in sore distress. Her innocence and
purity had never been in any way tarnished, and the fact was now
proved by a divine miracle—her successful emergence from an ordeal
by fire. So Rama was satisfied, and he returned with Sita to his own
capital where they were crowned. The seventh book, very probably
an. addition, tells of the further adventures of Sita. Her innocence
wras doubted, notwithstanding the divine miracle, by most of her
people, who believed her to have been the consort of the demon
king. They blamed Rama for taking her back. As a result of this
agitation, Sita was again exiled for some years. During her exile
her twin sons were born. At last, again by divine miracle and
help, her purity was proved to the satisfaction of the people. They
made ready to welcome her back to her city, hut she was received into
the bosom, of the earth goddess.
On this great national epic were founded many plays. For

34 BURMESE DRAMA
example, the thirteen Trivandrum plays commonly attributed to the
authorship of Bhasa contain two based on the Ramayana. The date
of the plays is generally accepted as the second or third century after
Christ.
2. The Siamese Court Play of Rama
From about the third century after Christ, the great Hindu expan¬
sion overseas began in earnest, and as a result many Hindu kingdoms
were founded in Indo-China, Malaya, Java, and the surrounding
regions. Before that time, very probably there was at least some
intercourse between India and those regions, and may be Buddhism
was not unknown in the regions mentioned. But by the third century
a.d. Buddhism had completely disappeared in them, except for very
faint traces remaining in Burma. In India itself, Buddhism was on
the wane and Brahmanism was in the ascendant. Therefore when the
merchants of Northern India spread a new culture in Indo-China and
the surrounding regions, the culture was distinctly Hindu. The
Indians took with them their religious epics, the Ramayana and the
Mahabharata. Though both came to be very well known, the former
was perhaps the more popular, probably because it was more finished
artistically. Sanskrit plays were also no doubt introduced. The
Hindu influence reached its height about the fourth and fifth
centuries—in the third century Bhasa was composing his plays, and
Kalidasa, the greatest of Hindu-Sanskrit dramatists lived about the
year 400. Hindu poems and romances must also have been brought
into the newly-founded kingdoms and trading centres.
The intensity or the new influence varied in the regions. Burma
was nearest and directly on the route from India. But probably
there was already a strong native civilization, and Hindu culture failed
to take root. Along the coast, however, at Thaton, there was quite a
strong outpost of Hindu culture, but even there the Hindu influence
was quite negligible compared with regions farther east. In Cambodia
the new culture was especially favoured, and in Java, Sumatra and
the Malay peninsula, it took deep root. In Siam, however, the
intensity was much less. In the narrow circle of the court the Hindu
influence was strong, but the people were quite untouched by it.
The chief reason was very probably the continuous, peaceful invasion
by people from the north, the Shans, or at least the forefathers
of the modern Shans. According to some scholars, they were
Buddhists, which is not unlikely as Buddhism, in a modified form,

have acted against the intensity of the Hindu :: hueiue. M* reaver,
Siam was one of the earliest converts from Hmuuism t > BvuCnism
vdrdch, especially alter the great Buddhist rrrssi ‘nary, Bnuanau sa,,T n '*
lived in the lifth century, was ousting Brahmanism in Indo-China.
At the Siamese court, however, the Hindu tradition was very strong
and remained so even when the king and his courtiers had become
Buddhists.
In Siam, as in the neighbouring regions, learning did not reach the
people for a long time even though it flourished at the court. The
Hindu tradition was not strong enough to prevent the courtiers from
creating a native literature. Buddhism prevented the courtiers from
looking upon the Hindu learning with a conservatism that would
not have allowed imitations. In Cambodia and elsewhere native
ideas could never shake off the dominance of Hindu culture, and
no native literature could come into being until quite modem
times. Moreover, the very fact that the Hindu tradition was strong
prevented the survival of Sanskrit literature in those regions, for once
the tradition was broken, only chaos resulted. To make it clear,
I will take the Java shadow-play. Sanskrit dramatic representation
gave rise to the Java shadow-play. Therefore, one would expect Java
to preserve a Hindu dramatic literature to herself and to the world.
But it failed to do so. The shadow-play of Java is interesting
as a special kind of dramatic performance, and not as dramatic
literature. The stories that are presented on the shadow-stage
in Java are taken mostly from the Hindu epics, but they have
very little dramatic structure. Yet originally they must have been
developed Sanskrit plays. Of course, to begin with, the Sanskrit
shadow-plays themselves were slight in structure, but by no means
so crude as the Javanese ones. The Hindu tradition was so strong
that once it was destroyed, not only did the Hindu drama in Java
decay and disappear, but a native drama in a developed form failed
to appear. Stories from Hindu sources as well as stories from
native history and mythology are still shown on the Java shadow-
stage, but the plays are all formless and crude. In Cambodia, where
the Hindu tradition was indeed very strong and lasted much longer,
some remnants of the developed Sanskrit drama are preserved, but
the tradition was so strong that no native element could enter it
There, up to the present day, a State theatre, with a special minister

36 BURMESE DRAMA
of State, presents the Ram ay ana, and less frequently that play which
the Burmese calls the Eenaung.1 Both are remnants of Sanskrit plays
no doubt introduced by the early Hindu kings. Throughout the
centuries, the two plays have been regularly presented with the full
patronage of the king and all the splendour at his command. It is
almost a ritual. During the intervening centuries, no fresh incentive
had come from India, and no new element, no native element, was
allowed to enter it; the result was that the Cambodian Ramayana
soon lost its freshness. Cambodia, therefore, not only has no native
drama; it also failed to preserve for posterity good examples of
Sanskrit dramatic literature.
To return to Siam. Even the courtiers did not look upon the
Hindu tradition with too much awe and conservatism. They recog¬
nized and retained the vital elements of Hindu culture as far as
possible so as not to clash with native and Buddhistic elements. The
results of such special circumstances are best seen in Siamese literature.
The court encouraged and the courtiers produced romances based on
and in imitation oi Sanskrit-Hindu romances. Native ideas, native tales,
and native mythology were introduced into works modelled on Hindu
literary works. In drama, the Siamese did not produce native plays,
and they retained the Ramayana as a play. But they introduced new
ideas and kept alive the old. In dramatic literature, as in all other
matters, the Siamese had to reject all that was contrary to Buddhism,
and some were retained only after much alteration to suit new needs.
A consideration oi the Siamese play of Rama shows clearly the
above facts.
The epic tradition was very strong in India and it prevented
Sanskrit drama from rising to still greater heights. In the new Hindu
regions of Indo-China and the Malay Archipelago epic tradition vTas
equally strong, if not stronger. In India the Sanskrit drama was
shackled by the epic tradition; in the new regions the drama was
very probably entirely subordinated to the epic. The dramatic
performances m Cambodia, in Siam, in Java, before modern influences
came in, were based mostly on the Mahabharata or the Ramayana.
Perhaps it is legitimate to assume that the Sanskrit plays introduced
into the new Hindu kingdoms were mostly those based on the epics:
mostly but not all. For the Eenaung, which is very probably from
Hindu-Sanskrit sources, tells a story unconnected with the two epics.
1 This is explained in the next section.

rhe Birth Story, the DuStiTutfU' Jutdka wlucn must rime i eei
in Siam after Bud Jr lisro. had taken root i and which, as alreac
rrobably existed he: ore the epich Rama was destined to be a
soon, otherwise he w as an ordinarv mortal; lie was of no diviit e
and all the supernatural help he had was his magic bow. . I:i toe
original, the supernatural was connected with the Hindu religion and
Hindu gods. The Siamese had to reject all those; the supernatural
in the ^Siamese play became just simple magic or help by the
Siamese equivalent of the Burmese nuts who are supposed to help or
hinder human beings just as ordinary mortals help or hinder each
other; the Hindu gods of the epic were religious, whereas the
Siamese supernatural beings in their play were quite independent of
religion in their acts and "behaviour. in the Hindu epic, the gods
were behind the scenes, planning the destiny of mortals, but such a
conception was entirely rejected by the Siamese. Therefore, whereas
the Hindu Ramayana was a religious epic, the Siamese play became
merely a dramatized Jataka Birth Story.
The Siamese play of Rama, dramatizing the epic, was influenced
also by the Sanskrit plays themselves founded on the epic. Whether
non-Rama Sanskrit plays had any direct influence is uncertain; it
would be natural to suppose that they might have had some influence,
but it was probably very slight. The play as a whole lacks unity
and dramatic structure, but taken separately, each scene is quite
dramatic. That dramatic element was doubtless borrowed from the
finished Sanskrit plays. The character of the villain, the demon king,
was borrowed direct from the Sanskrit Rama plays. In the epic, he
was a worthy rival of the hero in many ways, but in the Siamese
play he became merely a boastful villain, who could never rival the
hero. The summing up of the character of the demon king in the plays
of the great Sanskrit dramatist, Bhasa, by Dr Keith that he ‘was
nothing more than a miles gloriosus if not comic" can be applied
to the Siamese demon. The Sanskrit drama aimed at producing
sentiment, but it.would not allow a division of sentiment. : As Dr
Keith says: 4It would not allow the enemy of the hero to rival him

38 BURMESE DRAMA
in any degree; nothing is more striking than the failure to realize the
possibility of a great dramatic creation presented by the character of
Ravana as the rival of Rama for Sita’s love. Ravana varies in the
hands of the dramatists, but all tend to reduce him to the status of
a boastful and rather stupid villain, who is inferior at every point
to his rival.’ Therefore, it can be safely assumed that the Siamese
Ravana stepped straight out of the Sanskrit drama.
However, the interest was more in the epic than in the plays
founded on the epic. The Siamese aimed at presenting the epic
scene by scene. In the Sanskrit plays, the whole story was not given,
only some scenes being taken, as there were limits to the length of a'
Sanskrit play. A knowledge of the story was assumed in the
audience. As a result, in the Sanskrit plays, we have description
rather than action. But it was different with the Siamese. The
audience as a whole, composed not only of courtiers, but also of com¬
mon people who were often admitted to a State or palace performance,
did not know the story so well as a Hindu audience. Therefore!
action rather than description was given in the presentation of the
story. The Siamese play came to have many .elements comparable to
those existing in the Indian open-air performance of the epic, the
Rama Lila, where the whole epic is presented scene by scene (the
Rama Lila> though still performed at the present day in India, is very
ancient). But the Siamese play is much more developed drama, for
there is good dramatic construction in the individual scenes. The
Siamese had also to modify the story because they wanted to make
the action presentable on the stage. Therefore, they rejected the fight
wrth the vulture king, and they made Ravana much more like an
ordinary human being. The demon king was allowed to have ten
heads (they could be represented by a series of masks on the head)-
but he was no longer a very tall giant. All the demons were turned
into ordinary mortals as far as stature was concerned. In a Rama Lila
performance, the battle between the demons and Rama is presented
by means of tall, grotesque figures made of wood and paper. In the
Siamese performance, as in the Sanskrit plays, living actors took the
parts of the demons. The Rama Lila is primitive and crude; the
Siamese play, thanks to the influence of the Sanskrit drama and
native genius, became quite developed artistically. Though following
the epic, the Siamese play, unlike the Rama Lila, was not bound to
follow it blindly.
These points, and also some others, will perhaps be made clearer

by a consideration oi the story w tne
Rama's father holding cojrt, and inf station^reiar
kins, etc. is given by way of introduction. I ;ten
bita*s court where Rama wins tier t/tcr neati .a : k‘"yv
suitors by his strength and prowess with the bow. . Tnc prxcess is
brought to Rama's palace, and the kma cans his. ministers
announces his intention of appointing Rama as heir. The ;uw r
queen enters and asks for the fulfilment of a boon promised to her ;\v
the king when she nursed him back to health, .She now asks vr
the appointment of her own son, Bharata, as heir. The king tries
to protest, but the queen remains stubborn. Rama comes and. begs
his father’ to keep the promise. So the younger son is appointed.
The king, however, suggests to Rama that he should go into exile,
pointing out the danger to the State and to Rama himself if he
remains in the country. Rama agrees to leave the kingdom for
fourteen years, and begs his father to look after Sita, who, however,
refuses to stay behind. Lakshmana, the younger brother, of Rama,
begs leave to accompany his brother. Rama argues.with^Sita and his
brother to make them stay behind, but it is in vain. So the three
bid farewell to the king, and amidst the wailing of the courtiers, they
leave. It will be noticed that the queen does not ask that Rama
should be exiled, as in the epic. In the next scene, a Malay king,
monarch of a neighbouring kingdom, is holding court, when a
messenger enters and announces the arrival of two princes and a
princess, attended by only two or three retainers. The king gives
orders for them to be invited, and on learning, the identity of the
strangers and the reason of their journey, the king offers his throne
to Rama, who, however, refuses to accept it. The king then begs
Rama to rest a few days, to which request the latter agrees. In
the next scene, the ministers in Rama’s palace are begging. Bharata to
take the throne, but he refuses to do so as long as Rama is alive. In the
next scene, a messenger is refused admission to the palace of the Malay
king by an attendant of Rama, who has been appointed to guard the
palace gates. Blinded by conceit, the guard brags to the messenger
and a humorous conversation follows until the guard recognizes, the
messenger as an attendant on Bharata, who is announced as waiting
at the city gates. In the next scene, Rama refuses to return to his
kingdom until the promised fourteen years have elapsed, and Bharata
sadly returns home with Rama’s sandals. Rama bids farewell to the
Malay king, and amidst the homage and wailing of the court, Rama,

40
BURMESE DRAMA
Sita and Lakshmana leave for the forest. The Malay king is a Siamese
invention. Though the Burmese translation terms him the Malay
kmg, it is difficult to say where the kingdom was supposed to be as
the Burmese call not only Malays but Cambodians and Javanese
'■Malay’. There are three explanations of the introduction of
the Malay king’s court into the play. First, it is probably an
acknowledgement of the indebtedness of the Siamese to the neigh¬
bouring regions for the story of Rama. Second, the Siamese wanted
to lay the scene of the story as near Siam as possible. Third, the
Siamese play is essentially a court play, dealing with court-inmates,
and with scenes mostly laid at court; the court of the Malay king
gives yet another court scene. The next scene is the court of the
demon king and we understand that the forest is his domain. In this
scene, the sister of the demon king tries to make love to the two
brothers but she is not successful. It is not a comic scene as in
the Rama Lila, and no nose is cut off. She returns to her
brother, who at first refuses to interfere with Rama, but agrees
to do so when he learns that Sita is with Rama. We are told that
the demon kmg had been an unsuccessful applicant for the hand of
bita before her marriage. The sister turns herself into a doe and
Rama is pressed to give chase to it by Sita. Rama, full of evil fore-
codings, marks on the ground a circle around Sita, praying that
no evil being should enter the circle. The doe is shot and as she
lies dying she, shouts:^ ‘Lakshmana, help!’ Sita begs Lakshmana
to go to Rama’s help, in spite of the strict command given to him
not to leave Sita’s side. The demon king now appears, but he cannot
enter the magic circle. He is in the guise of a hermit, and as he
preaches and begs for food, Sita gradually comes out of the circle. He
makes advances, but is unsuccessful. He then seizes Sita and flies
away in his flying carriage. The death of the demon king’s sister is
moving and strikes m a note of pathos, for she dies by the hand of the
one she loves. The incident of the magic circle is very dramatic, and
the idea of such a circle is borrowed from folklore common both to the
Siamese and the Burmese. Rama and his brother then go in search
Sita, and after much wandering, they fall asleep in each other’s
tlTtrZty1*66- ,®Ugriva’the deP<>^d king of the monkeys, is on
brothers an 1 ” “ ?Tl’ the l0VC for each <*her of the
brothers and regrets that his own brother should be so heartless. He
_ ropsa ear which falls on the sleeping princes, who are awakened by
it. Rama aims an arrow at the monkey, who begs for mercy and tells

his ta'.e. This meetir.:: < >: Raw.i a-i tie m r.-;c-y a-.- ; - r~. r. -ra; tatic
than that described ir, the epic. In the epic,*, spit t ,:ses R-: ra to
seek the monkey king, wiiereas m tne rv.amsoe piw- .ae
accidental and more piaus;t>:e. Rama agrees ac p rv-'r,.... The
next scene is again a court scene—tne court or the usurpina m>'
ther. A battle follows soon after, in whicn tr.e
ihe great sorrow of his queen, who, however, returns to t.ae a:
,.f her first and rightful husband. Sugriva then sends Hanumat as a
spy to the demon king. Hanumat succeeds in learning Sita s wnere-
abouts and then opens the gates of the demon city^ tor Rama
and his army of monkeys to enter. There is a great fight ana tne
demon king is slain. Rama refuses to take back Sita, who, however,
proves her purity by an ordeal by fire. They are crowned king and
queen on their return to Rama’s own city. The happy ending was
perhaps just to please the happy throng who witnessed the play m
holiday mood, or perhaps it was borrowed from Sanskrit plays.
The Sanskrit dramatist aimed at harmony in every way, and to
him, a happy ending was the only ending possible; virtue must be
rewarded and lovers must be united. In the Sanskrit plays based
on the epic, Sita is always restored to Rama, thereby rejecting
the more artistic separation after vindication. The Siamese play
and the Sanskrit plays were the productions of courts where
polygamy prevailed and women had very little say in the matter.
If Rama took back Sita, all was well. The court could not see,^ or
refused to see, that Rama did not deserve Sita after all; after
various sufferings, after her faithfulness to Rama, after a captivity
against her will, Rama was cruel enough to denounce her as impure.
Though the Siamese Rama had many characteristics of a proper
play, it had many elements of the kind which we find in the Eliza¬
bethan masque. The actors and actresses wore gorgeous dress.
Though the majority of the performers were professionals, many lords
and ladies probably took part often, for at the Burmese court exiled
members of the Siamese nobility took part in the earlier presentations
of the play, but it may be that they had to do so as teachers of the new
art of court dramatic performance. Music and song were essentially
connected with the play, and all the characters danced. There was no
scenery, and change of scene was denoted (apart from references in the
dialogue) either by the characters leaving the stage, or when some of
the characters were supposed to be going on a journey, the actual
journey was bridged over by the orchestra playing while the characters

42 BURMESE DRAMA
walked up and down the stage—a dramatic practice which was taken
from the Siamese and used on the Burmese stage. The language was
the language of the court, artificial, but not so removed from reality as
to prevent it from being understood by the lowest classes. The
play was mostly in verse. The prose w7as poetic and elegant except in
comic scenes.
When the Burmese conquered Siam in 1767, they were able to
take the play back wdth them for various reasons. The play was to
both nations a Jataka story7. The manners and the language of the
Siamese court, as depicted in the play, were similar in many ways to
those of the Burmese court. The mythology was common to both
nations. The play was easy of reproduction at the Burmese court
because of the many characteristics common to both countries, and
because the captive and exiled members of the Siamese nobility at the
Burmese court were ready and willing to help not only because they
were anxious to teach the new art to their conquerors, but also because
they missed an entertainment to which they had been accustomed for
generations.
3. The Rama Play at the Burmese Court
The age that followed the conquest of Siam in 1767 was one of
triumph. In 1752 the Burmese Empire had been destroyed by the
Talaings, and the conquerors were ruthlessly putting into practice
their policy of stopping the continual war between Burmese and
Taking by exterminating the Burmese as a race. In the same year,
however, a humble villager arose, rallied the Burmese around him,
with the result that five years later the mighty Taking Empire was
destroyed and the Talaings as a race disappeared from Burma. The
obscure villager became the great Alaungpaya, founder of the famous
dynasty that bore his name. He tried to conquer Siam, but died
when victory was in sight. His son, Hsinbyushin, carried on the w7ar,
and continued the extension of the Empire. Manipur was soon
conquered, and in 1767 Siam was completely crushed and its capital
destroyed. The Siamese court was taken captive to the Burmese
capital. The. weary army was given no rest, however, for the Chinese
had invaded Burma. From 1765 to 1769, the Chinese carried on a
serious campaign against Burma. There were, four distinct invasions,
but each was repulsed. In 1769, the Chinese defeat was complete.
Of that, age of triumph, Harvey says:
The victory [against the Chinese], coming as it did on top of a

generation ot ■artinual wartare wmeA nv.g ex must i the
ora ce, shows that the exploits <>: A-ao:tarayo_ ^ _ ;• the
pan,'but were broad-bused tu. •: t.-K .
The chronicles t*'»r the p^r- >- P^ L _ ^
impossible to read them without Pemj strucu w.tn tr.eu -e.ee c —
It was during this age of trium-pr~h,3 after the Chmese# pu rea r--i '•
II was uuuuj' «5<w ***—
been sent back defeated and people could breathe again •.•itnou^nxiej.
that the Siamese Rama was produced at the Burmese court
first time. . . _
The court of Ava, then the capital ot Burma, was m mam \\a} =
comparable to the court of Elizabeth after the victory over Spain.
Glory and wealth and splendour surrounded the king ana ms
courtiers. Masters in the arts of war, they were also masters m
the arts of peace. Almost everyone was learned, and the aoiest
soldiers and statesmen were also the foremost poets. Queens and
ladies-in-waiting vied with princes and lords m the study and_pracace
of learning and literature. Experts in the study ot Pah, banskrn,
and Buddhistic lore, keen students of foreign institutions and litera¬
tures, thev were essentially Burmese, and enriched their own language
and literature with borrowings from all sources. The period WO to
1824 the date of the first British conquest, that period ot triumpn,
may easily be termed the age of translations, so keen were the people
for'knowledge from all sources. Siamese romances, Pali jtotofaw,
Chinese histories, Siamese and Cambodian chronicles a history m
Portugal, a Sanskrit work on sexual science—this list made at random
shows clearly the range and variety of the .translations. The court
led the people in the pursuit of learning and literature The courtiers
were learned, the king was a patron of learning, and at the court
the captives and hostages numbered among them great scholars an'
poets from conquered States. After the toils of war, men turned
towards learning for rest and recreation. Men gloried m their country
and studied their own literature, history, and institutions, and tha
study naturally led to the study of those of other countries. Almost
everyone studied and almost everyone wrote. The age ot triumph was
an age of learning.2 , . , .
The Siamese court plays appealed to the imagination ot th
court. The Siamese captives longed for their native entertainment.
» SomTactoun^Tf the~learned atmosphere of the court and ofAts more
famous translators and poets is given by G. E. Harvey, op. cit„ pp. 2.9 and 250.

44 BURMESE DRAMA
They themselves took part in the production of Rama, though it seems
that most of the actors at the Siamese court were professional; but
once the play had been well established in its new home, only profes¬
sional actors took part in the actual presentation, for the prejudice
against the actors and the'acting profession was strong: ‘actors and
beggars, eaters of food thrown away as waste.’ Though the play
was reproduced faithfully with all its dramatic qualities, the courtiers
were more interested in the songs, which were new both in tune
and in form. The Rama play at once enriched Burmese music and
verse-forms. But the court did not at once realize that a new art
had come. The Burmese equivalent of the English word ‘play’ was
still uncoined. They called Rama a zat, a derivative from Jataka.
Zat had by then come to mean a story; it could mean any story,
though to distinguish it from a Birth Story, hto-zat (made-up zat)
was used to denote a non-Jataka story. However, zat did not include
fables or moral tales or legends and fairy tales. . The Burmese inter¬
lude was without a name, and the courtiers realized the world of
difference that lay between the Nibhatkhin and the Siamese entertain¬
ment. Therefore, the courtiers just called Rama a zat; the name
suggested itself as they believed the Rama story to be a Jataka story.
However, when Aindarwantha, the companion play to Rama at
the Siamese court, was later introduced to the Burmese court, the
courtiers coined the term nan-dwin zat or ‘palace-story’, for that
play had nothing to do with the Jatakas, and a new name was needed.
When the Rama play reached the people, they thought it to be a
specimen of the native Nibhatkhin or Jh&z^-shown-as-pageant and
called it Ratna-khin or i^<2??2<2-shown-as-pageant. It was only when
the native interlude had been moulded into a more developed art
through the influence of the Burmese court drama that the term pya-
zat (the equivalent of the English ‘ play ’) was introduced. It is of
course impossible to ascertain when and by whom the word was first
coined, but by U Kyin U’s days, pya-zat or ‘shown-story’ had passed
into general use.
To return to the court. The play was presented with Siamese
(which were very similar to the Cambodian) dresses and costumes;
it was a faithful reproduction of the Siamese model. The introduction
of Burmese elements into the play through the professional actors
was prevented by the tradition of rigid faithfulness to the Siamese
model. The Siamese courtier-captives of course discouraged any
interference with the form of their entertainment, which they took to

be a perfect art; probably the} tli rjsht the Burmese, as tar as
dramatic representation was cone to he harhanans. Moreover,
manv of the Burmese scholars tne r.sehres were against avy suhstavtia;
changes in the presentation ot trv plav at their court. They were t v
of. the fhanrese rvav, out tae\ toe
borrowings from, and imitations ^ _ . . f - ,
that the model must he kept unchanged and mtact. The:r scpmastie
mind was such. The slightest distortion of the m .del caheu mrtn
protests. When the Siamese play, Aindarzvuntha was translated as
Eenaung, there was bitter criticism. The item or the p;a> pact
names; the official title Aindarznmiha given by the king ot the gOJS.
and the palace name of Eenaung. The Siamese called tneir pmp
Aindancuntha, but the Burmese translator called it Eenaung, tor ttut
name was easier to say. The play was known as Eenao (only a sugntiy
different pronunciation of the same name) m Cambodia. Alt tne
same there were protests against the Minister Myawaddi's calling ms
translation Eenaungzat. Therefore, the scenes (of the Rama play) were
presented in the same sequence as in the original, the characters were
the same, and the story remained the same. However, changes were
introduced in the actual words of the songs and speeches.^ buen
changes were considered legitimate because such slight modifications
werehllowed even at the Siamese court, thereby keeping the play
fresh. References to the topic of the day at the court, to Burmese
ideals and ideas, to the wit of an actor: they naturally caused
slight variations. Withal, the tradition of rigid faithfulness to the
original remained. The gesture, rather than actual acting ana facial
expression, was of great importance in the Siamese play, and that the
Burmese court rigidly followed. Gesture was of great importance
in the Sanskrit drama, and elaborate treatises were written on the
various gestures and their meaning. The code of the gesture m me
Sanskrit drama was as rigid as it was elaborate. In the Siamese plat,
it was very much less elaborate, but still very rigid. For example,
when Rama left the court of the Malay king, all the courtiers haa
to pay homage in an elaborate and very formal wav. It is difficult to
ascertain the reason of the importance of the gesture^ in the piav;
the Sanskrit drama may have influenced it; or the Siamese court
wished to show to the common .people the manners and customs
of their king’s palace; or maybe where the stage-lighting was
extremely bad, facial expression could not be seen, and therefore
gesture alone could convey the meaning to the audience, ot course,
apart from the actual dialogue. However, the importance of the

46 BURMESE DRAMA
gesture passed on to the Burmese reproduction of the play. The rigid
tradition soon called forth protests, if not in actual words, then in
deeds. If the Rama play could not be changed to meet Burmese
tastes, other plays would have to be invented. As a result, a native
court drama came into being.1
4. The Burmese Court Drama
It was during the reign of Hsinbyushin under whom the victories
against the Siamese and the Chinese had been won, that the Rama
play was first presented at court. He was succeeded by Singu, who
was king from 1776 to 1782. Singu could appreciate and compose
good poetry when sober, but such occasions were rare. All the same,
the learned atmosphere of the court was maintained, for his queen,
the daughter of the famous commander-in-chief who defeated the
Siamese and the Chinese invaders, was an accomplished poet herself,
and she ever encouraged the continued presentation of the Siamese
Rama at court. Singu was followed by Bodawpaya (1782-1811),
who was one of the strongest despots that ever sat on the Burmese
throne. But his despotism was of the enlightened kind, and
under his patronage, the learned atmosphere of the court remained
unimpaired. The earlier half of his reign saw the rise of a Burmese
court drama.
Some time about the year 17-83, a young courtier came to the
forefront of scholastic circles at the court. This young man, who
was a typical product of the age of learning, which was also the age of
triumph, had distinguished himself in various campaigns when he
began his literary7, career by composing songs modelled on those of
the Siamese Rama. He was essentially a scholar, learning and experi¬
menting, and he was an accomplished student of literature, both
Burmese and foreign. But in spite of his great learning, he kept his
own writings free from too rich an imagery and too. bombastic a
language; his Burmese was simple and pure. He wrote in the language
of the court but without artificiality, so that his songs were not only
admired at court, but understood and sung by the common people.
After making his name as a song-writer, he produced various literary
works of all kinds and thus enhanced his reputation, until he reached
the zenith of his literary career in about the year 1785, when he com¬
posed and produced the first Burmese court play.. .This 'young
. 1 Extracts from the Ramayana, The Statue Play attributed to Bhasa, and
the Siamese-Burmese Rama play are given in appendix i.

courtier later tv on tresn tame rs a statesman, cm: yv.wm rcc mi ir/i
known to history as tiie Minister MyawaduiT
As has been stated, there was at tl a Surmse c* :rt „ e wq\ w w
plav to Rama. It was known as Aindarzctmina. There was a so a
Siamese court romance of the same name and deahrm with, tin* same
theme. Aindarwuntha was a prince-s* Idler, and he had two» set? o:
adventures, one amorous and the other martial. Myawaddi was one
of those who broke away from the tradition that the Siamese models
at the Burmese court must be preserved without any substantial
change. He did not want to have his hands tied through this
tradition, and so he did not translate the play, Aindancuntha, out
translated instead the court romance. Then he dramatized the
romance, and called his new play, not Aindarwuntha but Eenaung? In
Eenaung, Myawaddi rejects the heroic adventures and tells only of the
hero-prince’s romantic intrigues.
The play is far too long. The Rama play was long, too, and it
took two or three days to present it entire. The court had all the
leisure in the world. Rama, if translated, would require about 400
of these pages. Eenaung is longer; it would be about 60U pages.
The play was written more to be read than acted, and as tar as
is known, it was never presented entire. Only some scenes were
acted. The play on the whole is disjointed; it is merely a collection
of scenes, connected only through the personality of the prince. As
the adventures are purely amorous, there is no action at all. W e are
told occasionally that the prince has gone on a journey or that he has
achieved a conquest, but the scene is always the palace. Following the
Siamese style, music and song are important elements in the play,
but dances and fine dresses are absent. It is not a masque.
The merit of the play lies in its language, dialogue, and character¬
ization. It is the language of the, court, refined and elegant as that of
Rama. But a certain element of simplicity is in it, and it is not too
rich in words or in imagery, so that the common people could under¬
stand and appreciate it; in short, the usual dear style of the author,
which is the hall-mark of his other writings, is also found in this
play. In dialogue, the play retains the freshness and liveliness of the
Rama play. In characterization, the play is a great advance on Rama
1 An account of his career is given in G. E. Harvey, op. cit., p. 296..
2 The play Aindarwuntha or Eenaung has been mentioned earlier m this
chapter, on pp. 36 and 44-5.

48
BURMESE DRAMA
and on the Siamese original of Aindarwuntha. There, as in the
Sanskrit plays, the depiction of character was almost unknown. Rama
was the perfect hero, Sita a lifeless damsel, Havana a boastful villain.
In Myawaddi’s Eenaung the hero is shown to be full of faults, other¬
wise he is still lifeless and uninteresting as Rama. However, the
characters of the women, the various loves of the prince, are well
portrayed. True, the women pass swiftly through the play, often the
interesting heroine never appears again after but one scene, and there
is no character development; but the play is a rich portrait gallery
where we see live women, who must have laughed and sorrowed at
the court. The Sanskrit plays w7ere written by men who did not or
could not write of the miseries women suffered at the court, as the
king s wives. They wrote from the point of view7 of men, and they
would have it that to be the king’s beloved was to reach the limits of
womanly happiness. The Siamese court drama followed the Sanskrit
m this respect. In Eenaung, however, we have a young courtier
sympathizing with the women of the court, gently satirizing the king
and showing up the disadvantages of being the king’s love. The
sorrows and laughter of the court maidens are well shown. Gentle
satire, pathos, and light comedy keep the play alive.
The contribution made by Eenaung to the development of
Burmese drama was no less in importance than that made by Rama.
Of course Eenaung itself owed a great deal to Rama, but without
Myawaddi s play, it seems rather doubtful that Rama could have
done so much for Burmese drama, for the interest in human psycho-
logy and character, so essential to good drama, wras absent in Rama.
Moreover, Eenaung taught the Court to break away from the Siamese
tradition and to develop a native drama with borrowings from and
imitations of the Siamese court drama. Because many of the
incidents in the play were invented by the author and not borrowed
from the original Siamese court romance, it also pointed out the
possibilities of an invented story as the subject of a play. In short,
Myawaddi paved the way for the coming of U Kyin U and U PonNya.’
Eenaung at once inspired others to imitate it. Many plays modelled
oir it were written by courtiers and produced at court. Although,
unfortunately, nomoi these plays has come-down to us, extracts in
the form of dramatic speeches and songs have come down, and from
those we can be certain.that many of the court piavs were not much
inferior to that of the Minister .Myawaddi. The most famous of the
imitators was the Lady Khin Son, herself a scholar and poet of much

49
THE RISE OF A COURT DRAMA I>* EURUA
renown, whose literary works were worthy u-wus :u v wu.a
those of Mvawaddi.1 The native c< »urt pmys were «• ’ r crAr tnai
even Rama soon, fell under their sway. Throuon tne:r wr.uer.ee. tae
tradition of rigidly following the Siairwse versi->r. was r-r-^en and
destroyed, and adaptations of Rama in the style M Et naun^ came t-> At*
presented at the Burmese court.
5. The Court Drama Reaches the People
The latter half of Bodawpaya’s reign saw the court drama becom-
mg national instead of being confined to the narrow limits of the
palace. The national interest in the drama was now so great that
the king had to create a new ministry, that of the stage. The new
minister greatly developed the puppet-show, \\tiicn is desciibeu in a
later chapter. * The drama became a regular entertainment at the
court, and a dramatic performance in the palace came to be looked
upon’as a semi-State function. Not only was the drama now looked
upon as a national entertainment at the court, but the court drama
itself was being spread all over the country through governors and
administrative officials imitating the court and holding little dramatic
performances of their own. The greatest gift the court performances
gave to the acting profession was to raise its status. The actors w ere
still looked upon with prejudice as being nothing more than beggars,
but they were no longer considered as being only a little better than
rogues and vagabonds. Many travelling companies also came to be
looked upon with less disfavour, for they would style themselves
‘the King’s actors’ or ‘those who had acted before such-and-such a
minister on such-and-such an occasion’. For their ability many actors
were given rewards of money and some sort of decoration, which might
be a medal or a special dress, and these the actors would wear during
their performances with great pride. The Burmese actors of the
period were very' much in the same position as those acting companies
i The fact that the Lady Khin S6n was the rival of Mvawaddi m the
literary circles of the court, reflects the difference in character, as far as
women were concerned, between the Burmese and most other oriental courts.
Burmese women have enjoyed equal rights with men from prehistoric times
‘when greater races bound the feet or veiled the faces of their women, or
doubted if she had a soul, the Burmese held her free and enthroned her as
chieftainess and queen’ (Harvey). Perhaps this difference in the atmosphere of
the court had much to do with the sympathetic portrayal of women >
Myawaddi in his Eenauvg. In India, the fact that women were given an
inferior social position is reflected in the absence of Sanskrit plays by women.

50 BURMESE DRAMA
who put themselves under the patronage and protection of some noble
lord in Elizabethan England.
Though the various plays presented at court were performed
all over the country in little towns and little courts, the Rama
play alone reached ■ the remotest corners of the country, and it
alone took root in the hearts of the people. What they wanted
was action, and of the court plays, only Rama could satisfy
the desire for action. The original Siamese version had been dead
for some time even at court, and what the people saw were adapta¬
tions, which contained elements borrowed from the Nibhatkhin and
the interlude. The story was shortened, many of the palace-scenes
cut out, romantic love-scenes between Rama and Sita put in, and
the demon king became a comic villain, whom everyone laughed at
and liked. The villain as a popular comic character wTas borrowed
straight from the Nibhatkhin and the interlude, where the Burmese
equivalent of the devil in the English miracle plays, kept the audience
in roars of laughter.
There was another important reason why the Rama play was so
popular, and why the play became more and more Burmese. Under
King Singu, while the court contented itself with the Siamese
version, a poet outside the court circle broke completely away from
the Siamese tradition and recast the story in a purely native form.
U Toe, who became famous among the people under Singu and who
was given official rewards and recognition under Bodawpaya, was
termed the ‘ Great Master of the Yagan’. The Yagan is a romance in
verse. It probably developed out of the Hawsa, a dramatic recitation
of a story, but in the Yagan the dramatic element is subordinated to
poetic description. The most famous of U Toe’s Yagans was the
Rama-yagan. In the history of Burmese poetry it enjoys a very
important place. It is famous for the clearness and beauty of the
language, for beautifully coined words and for richness in imagery.
He may be termed the Burmese 4poet’s poet’ because his language
inspired other poets to imitate his style. The Rama-yagan was
studied by his courtier-contemporaries although he was outside the
court; and imitations of his style are found in the. works of Burmese
authors, including U Pon Nya and authors of the present day.1
1 An admirable account (in Burmese) of the importance of the Rama-
yagan in Burmese literature and its influence on U Pon Nya is given in U Po-
Kya’s The Water-seller's Hay of U Pon Nya, a textbook of the Council of
National Education. . .

However, what concerns us here is his treatment tne stor\ . lie
does not treat the story as an epic but as a romance. He iwiiv s the
Siamese version as far as the roam mciaents oi the s.o,^ u.m-
cerned, but his scenes and characters are Burmese, ana tr.e ^ite
reflected in the poem is the life of the Burmese people—in his cay.
For example, he describes in detail the various test:'. ’.ties •>.. ti.e
occasion of Rama’s marriage to Sita, and the scene U Toe describes
must have been common in the life of the people:
From the dawning of the day, music and dancing did not stop,
and silence was banished for long. Acrobats cumDecl poles, jumpeu
through loops, balanced themselves on ropes, and people threw up
!hefl “swords in the air and caught them m their hands again, so
pleased thev were. Drums said,‘ Bain bain, bam; and the ritusterm
drums shouted, ‘We are the makers of noise . Dancers earned and
drums plaved so loud that every person who had a good arm raised it
in a dance" Noise, laughter, shouting, music, the feast was an occasion
for shows wondrous and entertaining.
The love-scenes between Rama and Srta are no doubt taken
from the life of many a Burmese man and maid. In portraying ms
characters, U Toe makes them more human and nearer to tae me
of the people. They are princes and princesses, but they are shown
to have all the passion and sorrow and laughter ol ordinary persons.
In describing the characters, he uses terms applicable to the
common people, and not to ladies and lords. In describing bita
he calls her lonma-galay or ‘little maid’, a colloquial term used
among the people and not at the court:
Her voice was dear and bell-like, as loveiy to hear aS music
She could use a crying tone, begging tone, musical tone Oh,
hand is shaking with desire to imitate her voice on my harp. Little
maid, little girl, how beautiful you were.
Throughout the poem there is an undercurrent of gentle satire
and humour To£ was read throughout the country and prepared
JSS* fl* people .0 appreciate ,he So- pl». ■ t»gh. the
professional actors to put more life, more realism into the play. The
result was the rise of a national drama, where the elements of the
Nibhatkhin the interlude, and the court drama were combined and
“is offhose dramatists that entertained the people has come
down to us. As they were experimental and unfinished, no one

52 BURMESE DRAMA
thought of writing them down and preserving them. But there are
accounts describing the dramatic performances of the period, and in
the dramatic works of U Kyin U we find echoes of those early plays.1
Therefore, we at least know that a national drama came into being
towards the end of Bodawpaya’s reign. It is interesting to note that
the rise of a real national drama coincided with fresh conquests by
the Burmese. Arakan and Assam fell into Burmese hands under this
king.
With the rise of a more realistic national drama, the artificial
drama of the court must naturally decay. Already the court drama
itself was becoming less artificial, as we have seen, even in the hands
of the court dramatists. But their plays, though far more realistic
than the translation of the Rama play, were still artificial. Adaptations
of Rama performed at the court were the beginnings of the decay.
The decay was furthered by the popularity of. U Toe’s poem at
Bodawpaya’s court. It was read again and again by the author before
the king. From such readings the court no doubt gradually went over
to the national and more realistic drama, and it is perhaps legitimate
to assume that plays presented at court in the closing years of the
reign were mostly people’s plays. The ascension of Bagyidaw to the
throne in 1819 on the death of his royal grandfather destroyed finally
the court drama, for his queen was of low origin, coarse, uneducated;
and learned lords and ladies, poets and scholars, shunned the court.
And it was in Bagyidaw’s reign that the age of triumph ended with
the annexation in 1824 of two of the three maritime provinces of
Burma by the British. Under his descendant Mindon, who became
king in 1853, the learned atmosphere of the court was fully restored,
and U Pon Nya wrote his plays and produced them at court. But as
his plays did not differ much from, and were dependent on, the
people’s drama of his day, he did not in any way revive that special
court drama which entertained the Minister Myawaddi and his
fellow-courtiers.
1 The indebtedness of U Kyin U to his precursors is considered in the
next chapter.

CHAPTER III
U KYIN U
1. The Further History of the Interlude
When U Kvin U started writing his plays, he was not turning tne
interlude into a real play. The work had been done before mm. It i*
impossible to determine, however, at what precise point the mteraiue
-P . „ nrooer nlav at what time the dancer-actors ceased to give a
plav as a sfoe-issue in’the midst of their main entertainment ot dancing
lid singing. The interlude, on being influenced by the court plap
betame longer and more elaborate, and gradually ^interlude ceased
to be an interlude and came to be the main entertainment given by
Seconal dancer-actors. In fact, dancing and s.ngm^ becan.
less and less important until they disappeared from the play. _
r n IT’s nlavs we find no dances, and only in Daywagor&an do we
so^Lngi. The interi.de was further developed by bec.m.ng
£:££££
Cl°* l0a”»» »“ W* »»” “ "
[Mly f ,he ~o.. *b
it ™ S= interlude las no, full, religious,
rroSstor Aretalufa. stories and there was some undercurrent
though the stories w j The court plays
of religious teaching, >nconnected with the Jatakas
sMed^t^^"mSOme
religious atmosphere in
Were introduced. There ^ founded entirely on a Jataka,
Rama because the play was dlrect or othenvise, to the
b* i'on61 The'kiterlude, on being influen’ced by the court plays, broke
up Is connexion with the ^ata^ for
to the Birth StoneJ J^dSigainsI' secular dancing and acting as
that return. Ihe prej ® , i wav t0 overcome
being sinful stiilremame strong, terlude preached the religion
it was to retain the idea * • por t’ne presentation
in some ways. The more common occasions tor the p

54 BURMESE DRAMA
of the interlude were religious feast days, and out of respect for those
occasions, the story had to be religious. Moreover, the interlude had
to contend with the Hawsa or dramatic recitation by one person of a
story, which was a rival in popularity; and all Hawsas were based on
religious stories. However, the most important reason why the
interlude had to depend again on the Jatakas for its stories was the
great popularity of the works of U Awbatha.
Shin U Awbatha was a monk who lived during the reigns of
Bodawpaya (1782-1819) and Bagyidaw (1819-37). He was a product
of the age of learning. Famed for his piety, religious learning, and
knowledge of Sanskrit and Pali, he chose, like his contemporaries, to
write in Burmese, and he enriched Burmese prose. The prose before
him had been much neglected. The scholars were more interested in
verse. When they did write prose, they never succeeded in forgetting
that they were essentially verse-writers, and they used rhymed,
balanced, and measured phrases. They used too rich an imagery.
They broke into verse when they wanted to express any intensity of
feeling. Often they introduced Pali words into their writings when
there were more suitable Burmese ones. Burmese prose before U
Awbatha was in the same position as English prose before Dry den.
U Awbatha introduced a prose which was expressive and clear, simple
yet effective. It was used to convey varieties of feelings and emotions,
but it was always kept restrained and was never allowed to lose its
clearness. His works are still well known and popular. The
importance of U Awbatha to Burmese language and literature can be
judged from the fact that from the junior forms to the Honours
course in Burmese at Rangoon University, his books are textbooks.1
There are hundreds of Birth Stories, but the most important
are the Ten Big Jatakas. They are much longer than the rest,
U Awbatha wrote Burmese prose versions of the eight longest
of those. He followed closely the Pali originals as far as the incidents
of the stories were concerned, but he portrayed character in detail,
and made the characters more lifelike and therefore more interesting.
The story was very well retold, but he was equally masterful in the
portrayal of character and in his understanding of human psychology.
He wrote his first Jataka in 1785 when Burmese arms were flash¬
ing victorious in. Assam and Manipur, but vainglorious references to
contemporary events found no place in his works. In the peaceful
, 1 A short account of U Awbatha is given in G. E. Harvev. on. nit-.,, n. 9m

tmosphere of a secluded ™,,2
own of Minbu, were the works con p t. _ti.,
’'mself, not with fleeting victories and events, nut u :tn ^
characteristics and emotions _ of human Mines. J^7rl'K ^
7
present day when few remember tre victors a,. *«.« ;~
of triumph, all read and enjoy me **«.*.**
Though his first Jataka was composed m ‘ •
ohAe height of their popularity until about wnen tne u.w.-
Mm** *. »"« The
<v . a stories of U Awbatha made the precursors o. L K>. c^
/ t0 the Birth Stories for inspiration. Though many suci stories
back to the Birth ^ ^ dealt mostly
"S * made p“uiar by the monk. Apart from the fact to
'lf„ob,ic probablv demanded interludes based on these, the venous
P and chamct'er, in U A.batos works were good ma.en.l tor
scenes an ■ the fact thlt the stories were well known
Through that knowledge, too, dramat.c ,tony resulted
Though U Awbatha never had any interest m the dram, of h,e
d, av, k h e i 'm nd l i i r r e e c c t t ! i } v s sa a v \e e a d B D u u r i m iu e c s e drama from si T nk h i e n g n a m ti t o o n a m l e v re ic b to o r m ie s
-
and the resulting i from the promising beginnings and
r—ut thro ^ Of tom end the eou„
plays; Bu™'“ ^ in thich heroes and villains did nothmg
£,
He came m to- The to ^ ^ M crate
"Se oi character and ~
He. Bn, ton was °”
to come one after another so to* *•of tk.
the interlude was being.un g tradition, contemporary
interlude of the period, & . tj Tr,,jn U we can
references, and the echoes of it m the plays of U K}m U,

56
BURMESE DRAMA
farity of ut" T beC°ming her°k when the P°PU-
%,°f L Awbatha s works showed « the way to better things ? ?
The return of the interlude to the fold of the Jataka did in
-y make the drama suffer. The range was not
classf f neS Were nUmerous and they wete concerned with all
ed art lomflfS 'V1*8868 °f The>ta^ was « develop,
of the Budd? °f ,th? St°neS existed in India long before the time
Buddha and therefore they were artistically finished through
retelling by generation after generation. In short the Vatahn §
s;icruhi t r-rt ™
itselr with a moral, but the moral suggested itsnlf
pomted out; the artistic qualities of the Jataka did not sufferTecaust
it was never pointedly didactic. Moreover, a Jataka contained aTZs
7Z *
TTeXH^nterlud ^ * ^ fr°m a difW ^dpoint.
its themes t 83111 7 retUrning -t0 the Birth Stories for
2. The Life of U Kyin U
meal? ^ Ufe °f U Kyin U -e very
p a>s, Parpahein and Daytoagonban.
,Vf (tSSsf BT?ed“W (!T~37> Tham'
and writings are nnt 1 „ 3}' The exact dates of his life
Sinbaungwe, but he migrated to
Z
returning to his native town when he had a f hlS Works>
and dramatic life. He was learned and knew Palf bZZ^^
Burmese history and probably
court drama well. He Drohahk- w f knew the Siamese
speeches for characters n t^ ! “ 3 Writer of songs and
these was published 4fte . 6 f T’^ m IatCr Bfe a codecti°n
set up a troupe of^actor^of hf ^ W’ he Proba% either
it!o®c7IZ7Z -77
as °Wn r ^ eng3ged b? sucb a ^oupe
UT'l
profession and the stage and ,COnneCted with the acting
scenes being left to be filled ■ i r° 6 -i K ^ ays *n outline only, many
-«d,v^Vrl%L“ A ^hn“U U "" b™g ^
copies and „„Hntalded ^ stage
r . eaa* We won. fame as dramatist

KYIN U
only in the later years of Bagyidaw’s reign; his plays were composed
after the first Anglo-Burmese War of 1824. Alter the end of Bagyi-
daw’s reign he did not write any more plays, though he prohably
wrote some poetical works. Either by Bagyidaw, or more probably
bv Tharrawaddv, he was given official recognition and reward. He
was made a nobleman, but his exact rank and position are not known.
Some think he was appointed a minister and some that he was
created Lord of Sinbaungwe. The balance of evidence points to the
latter. He spent his later years at his native town in retirement and
only left it once to tour the delta districts, where he was received with
great respect and esteem, for his plays were being read and produced
all over the country. On his return he wrote some verses on the
tastiness of the fishes of the Irrawaddy delta.
He wrote many plays and many songs and speeches, but only a tew
of his works survive at the present day, though accounts ot them are
many. His works were studied by every dramatist and every actor
after him, and are still widely read today. They were very popular
also at the court of the Burmese kings; and during Mindon s reign
(1853-78) a learned minister drew up a list of the surviving works of
the dramatist, with a note that many had been lost. His list included
three collections of songs and speeches, and six plays. The minister also
left notes and first-hand accounts of the works. All the three collec¬
tions exist at the present day. Of the plays, three exist, two are entirely
lost, and one may still exist, for many scholars living have read
manuscript copies of the play; but I have not been able to trace it.
' 3. Mabaw
We have seen how the interlude was influenced by U Awbatha s
Jatakas. When U Kyin U wrote his first two plays the influence
of the Jatakas on the drama was at the height of its intensity.
The first two plays were Waythandaya and Maliaic. Both were
founded on the Jatakas of U Awbatha, and only some central scenes
were taken, and a knowledge of the stories was assumed. Waythandaya
was immensely popular; it was well known up to about 1380, and
many adaptations of the play were acted by professionals and amateurs
alike in the early days of the British conquest of Upper Burma.
One of the informants of Sir William Ridgeway saw a version of the
play being presented. However, the actual play ot U Kym V
longer exists. Some Burmese scholars even doubt whether U LymU
ever wrote such a play, but the editors of Daywagonban published by

58
BURMESE DRAMA
the Burma Research Society accept the play as having existed. Mahaw
has fortunately come down to us, and it is of great importance to
students of the dramatist, for it is the only extant play of U Kyin U
based on an already existing story; the stories of all his other "plays
(excepting Waythandaya) were pure creations of the dramatist.
Perhaps it will not be out of place to give an outline of the
story of U Awbatha’s Mahaw-thada Jataka. Mahaw was a Future-
Buddha and son of a rich nobleman. From his childhood he was
extremely wise, and the fame of his wisdom spread far and wide.
As a result he was invited to the palace of his king and later he
became a minister. He had various battles of wit with the four
chief ministers, and he emerged victorious, the king adopting him as
his son. Now Sulani, the king of a neighbouring country, had a
minister called Kavwut who was thought to be very wise. The two
countries went to war: there was a battle of words and wit between the
two wise ministers. As the two armies stood watching, Mahaw and
Kaywut tried their utmost to humble each other. Mahaw threw a
priceless jewel on the ground and as Kaywut stooped to pick it up,
Mahaw seized him, thrust his brow in the dust, and made it bleed’
The two armies thought that Kaywut had submitted, and victory was
declared to be on the side of Mahaw’s king. The other army
returned to their country with the shamed and bleeding Kaywut
swearing vengeance on his opponent. Kaywut thought of a plan
which he discussed with his king on the highest tower of the palace
where nobody else was allowed to enter. The king, however, was very
fond of a female magpie which was kept in the tower. Kaywut
suggested that the king’s daughter should be offered in marriage
to Mahaw’s king; in case that king should be suspicious, musicians
should be sent to that kingdom to sing the beauty of the princess;
then the king would think that he was being given the most beautiful
princess as an act of friendship; on the offer being accepted, that
king and his ministers, including Mahaw, were to be invited into
the princess s city to celebrate the marriage, and then thev were to
be setzed and put to death. To this scheme, Kaywut’s king agreed
®"d. musicians were sent to the other kingdom. Kaywut followed.
Mahaw s King wanted to accept the offer at once, and all his ministers,
except Mahaw advised him to do so. Mahaw pointed out the dangers
connected with such an acceptance without inquiry, and as a result,
he was exiled by the king in anger. Mahaw, however, was soon
recalled and he outwardly agreed to the acceptance. In the meantime

U KYIN U 59
he had sent spies to the other cits, ml vis ::: rr.M t.m tmre sv;s
some scheme afoot, for the king and Kaywut had neeu seen, tj
retire to the tower before the minister was sent nn the embassy
offering marriage. On learning tnat there was <*r..y tne nmer s pet, t::e
magpie, present during the conference. Mahaw sent ms pet parmt t i
inquire. The bird flew to the other kingdom, entered tne t* wer,
and made love to the magpie. Amidst passionate wnumu arm: :u.r
talk, the parrot succeeded in finding out the true state of attams.
Mahaw then asked his king for permission to go and prepare the
bridal palace in the other city. He was given permission to go.
’ On arrival at the other city, Mahaw asked the king there tor
authority to build a palace and to improve the appearance or
the city. Mahaw had to be humoured, and his request was acceded
to. Mahaw then sent his men to pull down the houses ot various
rich persons in the city, including the house of Kaywut. Tne men
desisted only when some payment of money was made to them; the
persons concerned thought of course that they were offering bribes
without the knowledge of Mahaw, but he had deliberately ordered his
men to take the offered bribes. When some of his men were thus
creating confusion and intrigue in the city, Mahaw ordered others to
dig an underground passage from outside the city to the apartments
of the queen-mother of Kaywut’s king. When the arrangements had
been completed Mahaw returned to his own city. He begged his king
to leave him to guard his own city when the king and his ministers
were away to celebrate the marriage. Permission was granted. The
king and the other ministers set forth to the other city where they
were shown a welcome until all had entered the gates: then the visitors
were made prisoners. However, in the meantime, Mahaw had secretly
come with his own men, entered the city by the underground passage,
and taken away as prisoners the queen-mother and other princesses.
Now Mahaw appeared at the city gates demanding the release of his
king and followers. The demand had to be complied with so as to
obtain the release of the queen-mother. The enemy king made peace.
He later became great, friends with Mahaw, and begged the other king
to allow him to adopt Mahaw as his son. That king and Mahaw
agreed, and the latter was adopted as his son, becoming the chief
minister in place of Kaywut. The story did .not end there. Kaywut
and the queen-mother conspired to get Mahaw into trouble and
disgrace, but their plots came to nothing, the plotters themselves
being severely reprimanded.

60
BURMESE DRAMA
The story was so well known that U Kyin U could compress it
into a short play, taking only the central scenes. U Kyin U took only
the final struggle between the two kingdoms as represented by Mahaw
and Kavwut. The play begins with the king ordering Kaywut to
come before him for consultation, and the minister appears swearing
vengeance on Mahaw: &
I am Kaywut whose wisdom is famed all over the world, whose
wit and learning roar over the topmost towers of this city; I am the
tutor and adviser of the glorious king whose commands burn like fire
Though I am so famous, though I have been honoured and respected
everywhere, the minister, Mahaw, a youth young enough to be mv
grandson, shamed me before all mv followers. By guile and bv
cunning he succeeded in winning the battle. He threw down a
priceless ruby on the ground and as I stooped to pick it up, he sprang
at me, pushed my head down so that my forehead touched the
dust, and made me bleed. He was cruel, he was unjust, and mv
shame was complete. The scar will forever remain on mv brow
though 1 have tried my hardest to remove it.
By that soliloquy, the previous events of the story are summed
up. From that point the play follows the work of U Awbatha as far
as the story is concerned, except for a slight detail. That modification
of the story will be considered in connexion with U Kyin U’s
portray al of Mahaw s character. The play ends when Mahaw, on
receiving the information from his men that the tunnel has been
completed, tells the king that all is ready for him to set out to the
other city, and the king begins his journey, leaving Mahaw in charge
or his own city.
U Kyin U’s retelling of the story shows him to be an able
dramatist. He realizes that the incident in which Mahaw’s wisdom
is proved to the world and peace is restored between the two
ungaoms is. the central and most dramatic point in the story, and
that the earlier and later events are less dramatic and are unnecessary
to the play He.therefore begins the story from the middle, and in a
ew lines of soliloquy he retells the preceding events. He ends the
play at the point when the tunnel has been made, when success is
assured to Mahaw, leaving to the imagination of the audience the task
of filling m the details of the actual success. One test of greatness in
a story-teller or a dramatist is the ability to restrain himself and end
C S 0r^ at ^ Pomt when further.narration will be unnecessary, and
to leave something to the imagination of the audience.
In the portrayal of his characters, U Kyin U also shows his

U KYIN' U 61
greatness. His characters are mare real arm; litchke treat; thuse ot
U Awbatha’s. While he makes all his characters live, lie fnky
develops only two, Mahaw and Kaywut, the otners serving as trie
background to those two. U Kyin U improves on U Awnatr.a in
the portrayal of Mahaw. According to U Awhatr.a, Maliaw was too
good, too faultless, too completely able to control himseir. \\ nen ms
king sends Kaywut to pay a call on Mahaw, the wise minister turrets
all thoughts of duty, courtesy and diplomacy, and blinded by ms
intense hatred of the enemy, throws Kaywut out of the house. In the
Jat aka, Mahaw was too good and too wise to have any human hatred
of Kaywut, a fact which made him suitable to be the hero of a
religious story but not of good drama. For his unseeming, but very
human, behaviour, Mahaw is exiled by his king. That is tne swght
modification made by U Kyin U in the original story. U Awbatha
showed Mahaw’s king to be very foolish, and Mahaw is exiled just
because he could see through Kaywut. U Kyin U, however, does not
wish to develop the character of the king, and he wishes to justify the
exile of Mahaw because of his more convincing behaviour. In tne
character of Kaywut, too, U Kyin U introduces new aspects. To ti
Awbatha Kaywut was the representative of all that is evil, and ^ tne
worthy foe of Mahaw was Kaywut’s king, whose character was fully
portrayed. U Kyin U makes Kaywut the worthy rival of Mahaw, and
Kaywut is shown to be an able man also, and his point of view is
revealed to the audience with sympathy; after all Mahaw was unjust
and cruel to shame him before the two armies, and the throwing
of the ruby was cunning rather than wisdom. By his sympathetic
portrayal of Kaywut, U Kyin U shows his conception that the
tragedy of life is not the struggle between good and evil, but between
good and less good—a conception which we find m his other plays.
Mahaw is not divided into scenes, and the whole play is meant to
be presented without any pause or interval and without any scenery.1
4. Daywagonban
The following is the story of the play. The king of Zayyabomi is
. warned by the court astrologer that the elder of the two baby princes
is in danger of being stolen by ogres. The king puts on special
guards, but the sister of the king of the ogres succeeds in stealing the
baby by cunning. However, instead of eating up the little prince, she
1 An extract from this play is given in appendix ii

62 BURMESE DRAMA
loves him, and brings him up as her own son. He becomes the heir
of the ogre king who has no son of his own, and when the old ogre
dies, the human prince becomes king. Of course, the prince has been
brought up in ignorance of the fact that he is a human bein*
Because of his abilities and power, the king of the gods gives him
a magic bow and the title of Daywagonban or God-demon. Now the
king of Thiyizayya has two daughters, the elder of whom is so
beautiful that there are many suitors for her hand. Daywagonban is
one, but his request for the princess is received with jeers and sneers
bv her people as he is an ogre. Other princely suitors threaten the
old king with war unless the princess is given in marriage to them. The
two princesses have been betrothed to the two sons of Zayyabomi’s
king, but as the elder prince is supposed to have been eaten up
by ogres, the old king does not know what to do with the elder
daughter, for if he gives her to one prince in marriage, the rest will
make war. The younger prince, Daywagonban’s brother, arrives to
take away his princess, and the elder sister is also given into
his charge. The prince and the two princesses journey back to
Zayyabomi, but in the forest Daywagonban surprises them, and runs
away with the elder princess. The prince gives chase, and is warned
by the guardian-god of the forest that disaster will befall him if he
continues his chase. But the fiery prince refuses to listen to the
goa, for he has promised his father-in-law to protect the princess.
Daywagonban is not desirous of hurting the prince, but as the latter
persists m following him, he shoots an arrow at him. The prince falls
wounded, and his followers, including the younger princess, run away
m panic, thinking him to be dead. The guardian-god of the forest
reappears and cures the prince of his wound. The latter decides to
become a hermit, tired of the strife and struggle of life. He wins the
respect of a dragon and a galdn-bird. His bride finds the hermit
an requests him to seek the lost princess. The prince-hermit
remembers the dragon, and he asks the animal to bring back the
captive princess to safety. Meanwhile Daywagonban is annoyed
because the princess refuses his love. He puts her into a dungeon as
punishment. The dragon, being an animal capable of travelling
underground, succeeds in rescuing the princess. The two sisters now
ry to argue with the hermit to persuade him to take them back
to his city but he refuses to leave the forest. In the middle of their
argument, Daywagonban’s angry voice is heard, and the princesses run
away and seek refuge m a tree. The king of the ogres appears on the

U KYIN U 63
scene, finds at the hermitage the emerald casket in v;h:ch the princess
was first put before being taken to the dur.-e >n. :r.^ rodo-.vs tr.e t ot-
prints that lead from it until he comes to the tree, i He g <»; tr.e tree
denies all knowledge of the princess, in spite of the arguments aim
threats of Daywagonban. But as the king of the n^res is persistent,
the god of the tree has to put magic dresses on the princesses, nmkir.g
them look like ogresses. The god explains that the footprints are or.'y
those of two ogresses who often come to rest in the tree-trunx.
Daywagonban looks in the trunk, and thinking the princesses to i?c
ogresses, he is satisfied and goes back to the hermitage. The two
sisters thank the god and begin their journey to Zayyabomi which is
near, forgetting, however, to take off the magic dresses. Daywagonban,
now at the hermitage, accuses the prince-hermit, as the emerald casket
was found near his abode, of having hidden away the princess. He
accuses him of becoming a hermit to save himself from his,
Daywagonban’s, wrath. The hermit denies any knowledge of the
whereabouts of the princess, and he also denies that he is afraid of
Daywagonban’s wrath. He is not afraid and is ready to die, but he asks
for seven days’ grace so that he may spend the time in meditation and
prayer. Daywagonban grants the request. The princesses arrive at
Za}ryabomi, but as they appear to be ogresses their execution within
three days is ordered by the king, who is embittered against all ogres.
They try to explain, but without avail. That night two goddesses
appear to the princesses and comfort them with a promise to fetch the
prince-hermit at once. The goddesses go to the prince-hermit and
beg him to go and tell the true story to his father. But as the
seven days’ grace will expire at dawn, he goes to Daywagonban and begs
for a few more days, saying that it is a matter of life and death to
innocent persons; of course he cannot tell who the innocent persons
are, as Daywagonban would go and trouble the princesses if he should
know where they were. Daywagonban accuses the hermit of being a
coward and a liar, and orders him to be bound, ready for execution at
dawn. Realizing that Daywagonban is going to kill his own brother
the king of the gods sends his gods to cause thunder and lightning.
The ogre ministers point out to their king that the thunder and
lightning are signs that the gods are angry because a holy hermit is
going to be executed, but Daywagonban refuses to listen to them.
The king of the gods now has no other choice but to put a magic
sash on Daywagonban to make him realize that he is a human being,
and the brother of the hermit. The king of the gods is reluctant to

64
BURMESE DRAMA
use the magic sash, and the explanation seems to be that, as he
prophesied when he gave the magic bow to Daywagonban, the latter
is destined to become a glorious king if he but remains on the
throne of the ogres. The realization of what he really is causes
Daywagonban to renounce his throne. The two brothers hasten to meet
their parents and release the two princesses, determined to return and
hve as hermits in the forest afterwards, for they are tired of the strife
and misery of life.
Since it was first written, learned critics through the intervening
years have agreed that Daywagonban is the least artistic of U Kyin U’s
plays. Its chief defect is the lack of real unity. One feels that the
dramatist has not planned the course of the story beforehand, and
that he just puts m one exciting incident after another until, when
he thinks the play is long enough and the story rather in a muddle,
he brings in the king of the gods, and with one stroke unties the knot.
However, the play is not formless. The scenes are put together with
some harmony. The special atmosphere of the play, the impression of
its characters belonging to a strange, unreal world, lasts throughout the
plaj and gives harmony to the scenes. Moreover, each scene grows
out of the previous one, so that in its breathless excitement the
audience never realizes the lack of real unity until the play has ended.
In this play the dramatist does not attempt to portray character.
All the persons are full of life and are dramatic, but they are shown
only from the outside. This is one of the chief reasons why the play
appears less finished and less artistic than his other plays. This lack
of interest m the portrayal of character contributes one glaring defect
to the play. The young prince, the brother of Daywagonban, after
being wounded by the king of the ogres, completely changes his
character, and refuses to accompany his betrothed and her sister
to his own city, in spite of the fact that the two princesses are alone
and unprotected. There is no explanation of this illogical and cruel
behaviour unless of course the prince has partially lost his reason
because of his wounds..
The final moral of the story also contributes much to make the
play unsatisfactory-. The feeling of tiredness with life and strife which
is found m U Kyrn U’s non-Jataka plays seems out of place in this.
Life is shown to be one glorious adventure, one glorious excitement,
and then suddenly at the end we are given to understand that the
monastery is the best place in life.
W ith all its faults, the play is one of the best in Burmese. For

U KYIN r 65
sheer wealth, of imagination, no other Ar r.w $ i * v: „ Ar. ns,
princes, soldiers, ogres, spirit-animals1 hAit and sAvc. entertaining
the audience and holding its breathless, interest. hi >re own each
scene in the plav is well constructed c\i urcrurt'c. 1 ,,e orcmatist
seems to be bent on civ in a7 scene after scene of dramatic incident
and dialogue. And to me the pLy A t mi >t Purr.csc y A Ay;;:
U’s plays. The unreal world of romance ana adventure in which the
play moves lives in the imagination A the people. The very Lieu
of logic in the play is typically Burmese; rw other nati >n in the
world loves life and laughter more than the Burmese, and yet they
profoundly believe that life is one long pain and the cloister the only
safe place of refuge from life.2
5. Parpahein
This play is U Kyin IPs masterpiece.
It begins at once with a dramatic situation. The aged king,
wishing to retire to the monastery, is looking for a successor. He has
three sons, the eldest and the youngest being the sons of the chief
queen, and the other, Parpahein, being the son of a junior queen.
Because of his seniority in age and the seniority in rank of his mother,
the eldest, Zayathein, should be the heir, but unfortunately for
nursing him back to life, the king had long ago promised Parpahein’s
mother that the throne would be given to Parpahein. To make the
problem more difficult, Parpahein, strong and cruel, roams about the
country with his drunken followers, and the ministers are against his
succession, for it is very probable that the kingdom would go to rack
and ruin if the throne were given to him. The king holds his final
audience to appoint his successor, and Parpahein and his mother
appear on the scene. The mother is uncertain as to what course she
should take. She wants her son to be king, but at the same time
realizes that public opinion is against him. In the end,'at her son’s
.request, she demands the throne for him in full audience. The king
tries to argue wTith her and offers to give Parpahein a province. The
queen returns to her son greatly disappointed, but realizing that the
fiery nature of Parpahein will lead him into danger unless he is
pacified, tries to soothe him and advises him to give up all attempts to
become king. However, he thinks that the throne is worth all risks and
^ For example, the gal&n and the naga which possess supernatural powers
in Burmese mythology.
2 A translation of the play is given in appendix iii.

66 BURMESE DRAMA
begs his mother to let him go his own way. The king does not know
whether to break his word or not, but he is more or less forced to
decide in favour of Zayathein as all the ministers press for the appoint¬
ment of that prince as successor. The king then retires to the forest
and Zayathein becomes king. The new king bears no malice towards
Parpahein, who, however, refuses to come and pay homage to him.
As the messengers sent to order him to come and pay homage are
roughly treated by Parpahein and his followers, the king has no
choice but to arrest his brother and put him as a labourer in the
elephant stables as punishment. Athumbain, the youngest of the
brothers, tries to get Parpahein’s release, but in vain. That night,
however, Parpahein succeeds in escaping from the stables and tries
to scale the walls of the palace with the intention of assassinating the
king. The latter, fortunately, is not in the palace. He has come out
to listen unrecognized to the gossip of the city and learn the verdict
of his people on the happenings of the day and the changes in the
palace. The king sees Parpahein, and in the scuffle that follows,
the king is victorious. The palace-guards come out in alarm, and
Parpahein is given in charge to be executed at dawn. Athumbain
arrives on the scene, and succeeds in obtaining the king’s pardon
for Parpahein, who is, however, ordered to leave the kingdom at
once. Parpahein pretends to leave for the frontier, but actually
he goes to a remote part of the kingdom. He arrives there at dawn,
and succeeds in winning the villagers to his side. He and his men
make ready to march on the city. At dusk, in a part of the forest
near the rebellious villages, Athumbain and a few bodyguards arrive
on an embassy to a neighbouring kingdom to bring back its
princess to be the queen of Zayathein. They pitch their camp
for the night. During the night, Parpahein and his rebels march
through the forest on their way to attack the city, and discover
Athumbain and his followers. The young prince is executed on a
trivial charge, and his followers are forced to join the rebel army.
Parpahein and his men take the city and palace by surprise, but
Zayathein escapes with his magic sword and spear. There is still
some chance for him to regain the throne with his magic weapons,
and he goes to the forest to bide his time. There he finds the dead
body of his brother, and he is nearly maddened with grief. An
alchemist1 enters on the scene and recognizing his king, restores the
The Burmese alchemist is somewhat different from his European
counterpart.

67
U KYIN U
dead prince to life. The alchemist otters to win rack the throne, but
the two brothers are weary of world!}* glory and strife and they retire
to another part of the forest to live as holy men.
The storv is well constructed. From the dramatic situation at the
beginning, the play moves swiftly to the end. From the hrst tne
audience is given a hint that one of the two brothers must tad, but
the audience is left guessing which of the two will ultimately tall.
The fortunes of each ebb and flow in turn. Even when Parpahein is
victorious, there are many factors favouring the restoration of
the rightful king to the throne, for Zayathein has his magic weapons
with him, and the alchemist appears saying that he can win any
throne by his arts. It is only at the very end that Parpahein is
shown to be the victor.
Interplay of character is well shown in the play. The characters
of Parpahein and Zayathein are contrasted, and against both Athum-
bain is shown clearly. Parpahein’s character is directly shown to the
audience, but some traits in the characters of the other two princes
are merely portrayed indirectly through the reports that both are
popular with the whole kingdom. With regard to Parpahein, it is
made clear that the public estimate of his character is incomplete.
He is noble and loving to his mother, Athumbain is his favourite
brother, and there must be something admirable in a man who could
inspire the utmost loyalty in his retainers and who could inspire
enough confidence in men to raise a rebel army in a very short time.
He is anything but a weak man, and in his intentions he never wavers.
One could understand his execution of Athumbain if one realized
his strength of character; he is determined to become king, and he
could not take the risk of leaving Athumbain alive as the young
prince is the son of the senior queen and is adored by the whole
kingdom. At first sight, the inclusion of Athumbain seems to be
melodramatic and to belong in spirit to a tradition akin to the tradition
of Webster and lesser dramatists of ‘blood and thunder in the
Elizabethan period—a precocious child saying sweet words, a pathetic
little figure sacrificed to the strife of his elders. On further ^con¬
sideration, however, it can be seen that Athumbain is not a figure
intended merely to move the pity of the audience. He is not a
pathetic and innocent child sacrificed unknowingly m the struggle
for the throne. Though he does not mean to cause any disaster
to the kingdom, indirectly he is responsible* for the loss to the
country of its legitimate king, for Athumbain is the person who

68
BURMESE DRAMA
■causes the release of Parpahein. Athumbain is a conscious character
in the tragedy: he is not a mere puppet of fate. He is indeed
a lovable character, but his very lovableness causes the release of
Parpahein and the resulting disaster to the kingdom. It is the
tragedy of politics that the most kind-hearted of princes are usually
failures as rulers. Parpahein’s mother is a well-drawn character
even though we have only glimpses of her. She is torn between her
love for the king and for her son. She realizes that the king cannot
very well keep his promise, but she appreciates also her son’s conten¬
tion that he is a victim of injustice. She wants her son to be happy
and a king, but she has some sense of loyalty to the palace and to the
kingdom and does not wish to have wars and disasters. She says
bitterly and with due sarcasm that she has only beauty and therefore
could give no recommendation of birth to her son, but she is able to
understand the point of view of the court that the senior queen’s son
should be the heir. Above all she cares for the safety of her son,
but her fears and her love do not blind her to the fact that Parpahein
is determined, and she lets him go his own way when further argu¬
ment with him is useless. She is the only developed female character
in U Kyin U’s plays. All other female characters in his plays are just
figures that pass along the stage looking pretty.
The moral of the play that the strife of life is empty and
wearisome, fits the play, unlike Daywagonban. Whoever wins the
audience will pity the other, for both Zayathein and Parpahein, with
all his faults, win some regard from the audience. There must be
something wrong with human strife if one of the two has to lose-
there must be something empty about human glory when its pursuit
occasions so much human suffering. Moreover, whatever scepticism
the audience may have with regard to the truth of the moral is
destroyed, at least partially, by the alchemist’s poetic description of
the beauty and peace of the forest, which are shown in contrast to
the troubles of the palace.1
6. The Characteristics and Achievement of U Kyin U
. , S“Ce Aey Wfe first written> U Kyin U’s plays have been studied
by all connected with the Burmese stage, for he is essentially the
dramatists dramatist. He was a real son of the stage, and knew
drama, not merely as a poetical exercise, but as a practical art. He
A translation of the play is given in appendix iv.

U KYIN U 69
new and had to consider the various tact us that were mduencina
ne drama of his day. It was he who fl:* st useu toe care ms elements
hat composed the drama he found, mai iv of which were w uf.ietmg
nd alien, to produce a harmonious national drama. After him there
:ou!d be only one drama for the whole nation, as lx itli tUe court a mi
he people at once hailed him as their dramatist. The plays that U
>on Nva later wrote for the court were presented to and understood
w the people, and the standard of criticism for both was the same:
J Pon Nya’s plavs were judged by references to U Kyin U.
I now propose to consider U Kvin IPs use of the various elements
hat formed the drama when he first started writing his plays. Such
i consideration will not only help us in our estimate of the dramatist
3Ut also give us some idea as to the nature of the interlude and the
'actors that influenced it to develop. As I have written in detail on
die history of the interlude in previous sections, I propose to make
Dnly a general review here. However, the remarks here are intended
as supporting evidence found in U Kyin U as to the reliability of the
oral tradition and information on which I have to depend with regard
to the statements in previous sections.
The religious element was very strong in the interlude. As
has been already stated, the element was present from the begin¬
ning but it was partially undermined by the court plays, and it
was restored again as a result of the popularity of U Awbatha.
In the interludes based on the Jatakas, the religious element
was of course not out of place and the moral was not put in merely
for the sake of having a religious atmosphere: the moral and the
story were connected. But when the religious element and the moral
teaching were put in merely to make the interlude appear religious,
the harmony of the whole was fully destroyed. In some interludes,
religious discussions and direct preachings were often introduced.
Even in the Jatakas of U Awbatha, let alone the interludes of less
lettered and less artistic writers, religious teaching was accepted
without question, and the villain was totally wicked and the hero was
completely good; the very nature of the Jataka made it so. ^But such
a state of affairs, such an atmosphere, does not suit an artistic play.
Therefore, it can be seen that though the religious element contri¬
buted much to the rise and development of Burmese drama, U Kyin
U had to be careful; if the religious element offered advantages, the
use of it was also, beset with dangers and difficulties. In Mahow lie
takes a Jataka, but he makes both the hero and the villain more

70
BURMESE DRAMA
I™11' He h°me the moral-the power of knowledge and
learning over all obstacles-with all the more force through makfng the
good hero less good, and the bad villain less bad. Though he is quite
artistically successful, he abandons the Jataka, presumably becau
apart fr°m the fact that an original story gives him more scope to
use his dramatic powers, he cannot develop the character of the
villain and of the hero as much as he wishes. In an earlier section
have stated how the conservative nature of the people and the
danger that the comic spirit of both the actors and the audience
Slf dl3ma t0 be Pr0fene g3Ve rise t0 the sta§e invention
that the Buddha should never be presented on the stage. That and
he subsidy conventions resulting from the same" causes were
kss good ThetlStimakmS the Vlllam m0re interestins and the hero
ess good. The only way out was to make the villain a comic charac-
POrtravrof 1H6 6Ven “ the earHer Nibhatkhin> and thus make the
Lisfied wdth thmtmT aymfthetic- U Kyin U, however, is not
f . a 5 and therefore he completely abandons the Jataka
theheTo haf v7 P 78 °" Bifth St0ries' In Dayjgonban
Jill b Tn0US TdenCieS’ ^ n0t SatMed With — tlat, in
Parpahetn the villain is the hero, for though he is shown to be the less
^llai/isTheh10 bC fqu 7 1S the CCntre °f °Ur interest> as Macbeth the
L betw 1 u Shakespeare’s play. In the Jatakas the struggle
it is beta 70tf y S°0d 3nd the t0tally bad> but in U Kyin U’s P^y
between the less good with the lesser. Withal U Kvin U does
,he *-«•
moral teaching in his" pkvs “2™“'’ “d ™ fcld reliSious “
life but he cWq « f u " accepts religion as a refuge from
ml excuse for he° 7 "“T8 ^ °ften reliSion is - a
excuses to iive. wlp™! 7' ■“ Parpahein: ‘We §ive aI1
appeal to that . . °Ur re lgl0n’ we aPPeal to this, we
comfol^athefo.’lthetme pty^sayl ^ ^ giV£ C°mplete
this torture of grief Sis'torture6 fSvaB.g0 through again and again
I- - . . ^e/ngwe
1 know mv religion But J - ears • - 1 am wise.
my learning help mc drpwn^&'^XT* ”d
p..} more interest in character, but the

U KYIN U 71
popularity of the heroic Rama and the coming of national victories
undermined their influence, until XJ Avvhatha came with his Jatakas.
U Kvin U improves the art of portraying character. His interest in,
and his mastery of, the portrayal of dramatic character ere have ccready
considered in the sections dealing individually with his plays; hut I
wish to consider here the question of the absence of developed female
characters in his plays. His plays have many women in them, but
except for Parpahein’s mother, they are undeveloped. The princesses
in Daywagonban are just pretty dolls. In Mahaw. when Mahaw's men
<j0 round the city threatening to pull down houses on the plea that
improvements have to be made to make the city fit for the coming of
their king, a lady-in-waiting of the queen-mother comes out and scolds
their leader; she is very realistic and full of life and Aery temper, but
we have only that glimpse of her. In Daywagonban, the ogre-princess,
she who steals the little prince, begins well, but just as we are becom¬
ing interested in her, she changes into a mere doll. Even Parpahein’s
mother is unsatisfactory in the fact that we see too little of her.
When we remember that there are such living male characters as
Mahaw, Kaywut, Parpahein, Athumbain, it is surprising that there is
not one female character comparable to them. I can offer no
explanation. Myawaddi had already portrayed quite interesting female
characters, and one would have expected U Kyin U to take some hint
from him. And there was no difficulty in getting suitable actresses
to take the parts, for from the very beginning women took equal rank
and importance with men in Burmese dramatic productions; there
was no need to dress up boys as women to take female parts as was
done on the Elizabethan stage.
Comic characters are also absent from U Kyin. U’s work. The
comic spirit was strong in the Nibhatkhin and also in most, if not all,
interludes. The villain as chief comic character was the hall-mark of
the interlude, and even in the court plays comic figures were many;
the demon-king in Rama was a very popular comic character, and
there is a gentle satirical vein in Myawaddi. That comic element
U Kyin U rejects not completely, but almost. The dialogue between
the leader of Mahaw’s men and the lady-in-waiting is humorous,
and there is some element of humour in the sneers and jeers of the
ministers of the court of the two princesses, at Daywagonban s
embassy asking for the elder princess. The ogre-princess, in her first
few words, reminds one of the comic viilainess of the interlude and
of the demon-king’s sister in the popular adaptations of the Rama

72 BURMESE DRAMA
play. In Parpahein the speech of a minister in which he tries to hide
his fear for his own safety under a cloak of religious-mindedness has
some element of satiric humour. But these are all the instances of
the comic spirit in his plays. I can offer no explanation of this
almost complete absence of the comic element. Perhaps U Kyin U
thought that the introduction of comic scenes would spoil the artistry
and unity of his plays; perhaps he found the drama in danger of
being swamped by the comic element if there were to be no checks
against it. I do not know.
The actors and the audience were fond of heroics and scenes of
cblood and thunder’, with the result that the interlude was becoming
heroic. Rama was heroic, and the fiery speeches of Rama and the
demon-king were extremely popular and were imitated in the inter-
ludes. The feat of strength where the bow was bent by Rama, the
fight between the monkey-princes, the battle between Rama’s forces
and those of the demon-king, the killing of the latter by the god-given
bow—held the audience breathless. The influence of Myawaddi
counteracted, though rather feebly, the element of heroics, but the
national victories increased the appetite of the people for scenes of
mighty deeds and glorious victories.. The return to the Jataka checked
the heroic element, but we find traces of it in U Kyin U. Mahaw,
Kaywut, Daywagonban, and Parpahein indulge in bombastic and fiery
speeches. The execution of Athumbain and the raid on the palace by
Parpahein’s rebel army savour of the heroic interlude. The wounding
of Daywagonban’s brother by the god-given bow, the fight between
the naga-dmgon and the gal6n-bix&, the scenes where the two
pi incesses and the hermit are shown bound and dangling from the
gallows ready to be executed later, the thunder and lightning sent by the
king of the gods to warn Daywagonban—all these are echoes from the
blood-and-thunder interlude. In fact one might call Daywagonban
a series of heroic interludes.1 However, U Kyin U is very much
. 1 also shows some traces of the influence of Rama on the'
interlude, apart from the heroic element. The scene where the princes
demand the elder sister is reminiscent of the scene where the hand of Sita in
marriage was sought by Rama and other princes. The love of Daywagonban
tor the princess is a counterpart to the love, of the demon-king for Sita The
stealing of the princess' and the god-given bow are direct borrowings from
Rama, As has been stated, the ogre-princess reminds one of the demon-king’s
sister, who was changed into a comic villainess in popular adaptations of the
court play.

-estrained in his use of the blood-and-thunder scenes, ami his hemic
leroes have depth of character; they are not mere fKun_s siniutinj
defiance and doing glorious deeds. The artistic senius of U Kyi:; I'
is mainlv responsible for the restrained use of heroics. But tn.ere
is another reason. The audience was no longer keen on such things;
when U Kyin U was writing his plays, the Angio-Burmese War of
1824 was over, the Burmese had tasted their first defeat for many
years, and two of the three maritime provinces were in British hands.
The plays not only entertain but make the audience think. D Kyin
U is out to teach the audience to look at both sides of a question, tor
in Parpahein there is some justification for Parpahein’s contention
that he is a victim of injustice; after all the oid king did make the
promise, and the queen did deserve that promise, did earn it as a
reward for saving his life. Yet we can sympathize with the decision ot
the king to give the throne to Zayathein. In that play, too, we are
shown the dangers "of being humane in certain cases, the dangers ot
becoming a kindly man at the cost of losing strength as a king, for
Zayathein and Athumbain are both weak in their treatment of
Parpahein; good brothers they are, but their goodness plunges the
kingdom into disaster by causing the wrong man to hold power. In
Daywagonban, we are shown how empty strife is, how the irony of
life plays tricks on us, poor mortals, for look at Daywagonban, he is
fighting his own brother to win the very princess who was betrothed
to him since childhood. In that play, too, we are set a problem. Is
the hermit’s life worth the sacrifice of the three glorious years of
prophecy—would it not have been better if the king of the gods had
left well alone? The king of the gods himself is not keen on
telling Daywagonban the true nature of his birth and parentage, for
it would result in the loss of the promised years of glory to the
kingdom of the ogres. It is well for the hermit and the princesses to
be saved, but what of the ogre-kingdom left without a king and with¬
out a successor? Is it right for Daywagonban to save his soul at
the cost of the kingdom that has adopted him? The same question
arises with regard to Zayathein. When the alchemist is so ready, and
so certain of winning back the throne, is it right of Zayathein to
retire to the peace of the forest, leaving his unhappy kingdom under
a drunken king? The retirement to the cloister may often be an act
of great selfishness and may even appear ridiculous as in Daywagonban
where the hermit calmly lets his princess wander unguarded in the
forest These problems, which interest us now, interested still more the

74
But™'7 K,m U'S d'J’ f“ ,h“ the ,hr«“ ™> graced, half
shim 71 °St’ and men WCre dePressed and tired of life; manv
turned* *7 C°UrJ and liV£d 'n retirement and in Peace- and some
the etrnal 6 ^ f reIlgI°n and the monastery- And there was
last in R SUCcession’ for Alaungpaya’s dynasty-the
times broAe “7 ** SUCCeSSi°n by any faed ruIei s°me-
prom. hf succeeded brother, at other times son or grandson-
only toTT1 apP°lntments with regard to the succession were made
Baoyidaw-6 kter' ,Men did n0t know which Prince t0 follow;
weak mTn "T* g’ ^ a g°°d man’ a kind man, but a
a kindly * S°’ ^ thumb °f a wicked and scheming queen-
of 1 8°°d “»“*• ** »P-We for the collapse
ITa
it would ^ ^ C°Urt and the r6SuItin» British victory;
Zavathein- but itt0 T “ 7* Hke that king and like
might be £ 77 ^ l° Cb°°Se 3 Strong prince> for he
cunning o tt Vt\ 77 ^ °VerC°me by the wisdom and
politics and th 11- Mf Were tr0Ubled in mind and weary of
U Kvin U T f ^ 7 °f tlredness Wlth the world is found in
7
the war witth a T 7 P°htical conditions of the times, especially
'^pressed 7 .’ mUSt ^ contributed much to the ideal
by the peonle h 77’- ld6aS tbat mUSt bave been aPPreciated
a«d the deaA'17 7St ^ the defeat of their forces
«ge of trtl7- h7 General Band°ola-a product of the heroic
glory, the hhtl ” 1 77 War’the transitory nature of human
"ympathetie^ 0“, 7 f*’ ^ the suff-ings °f war. The
of the dramatist butV Was due mamly to the genius
thing towards it' f h 177 defeat must have contributed some-
Kavwut their own" ^ F Fu* U ^ audience couId see in
defeat. They could ’ !°°llSh.but none the less pathetic through
Satan. The ahil> Sympat lze W!tk that character as Milton did with
<1* ability toseethe0 ^ *** °f ^ °f the 0ther side>
measure 0 the V § 77 “ Villain’ are also due m some
valiant fbi whoTtTU Bnn“8e f°Und the British to be
TT*
practice unknown hi W°Unded With IovinS care-a
querors who 7ere d" ” 1 Ea8t~*nd f°Und them t0 be con-
Thereforetheplaysoru7- T6^6015!6 °f annexed Princes.
U Kvin u 7 k ? ym L are the P^duct of his times,
is doubtless a r0man7 T" “d m3glC and gods and heroic deeds,
the stage are suppose!’ f ^ SCen6S’ Whefe SOme of the characters on
are supposed mot to see and hear the others, though all are

visible to the audience, and his scenes where actors take the part of
animals—a practice which appears ridiculous sometimes, as in Mu haze
when the parrot and the magpie are represented by a mm and
woman—will not appear in the plays of a realist, such as U Pan Nya.
But U Kyin U is romantic only in the best sense of the w* ud.: v his
plays are not very far removed from truth to life, n ir are they term¬
less. How far his plays are true to life can be seen from a perusii
of them and the foregoing comments, but the other statement
needs explanation. U Kyin. U determined the form of the Burmese
play, its division into scenes. Rama was divided into scenes, hut i:
was very, very long. The interlude, by its very nature, was not thus
divided, but when it became longer and more and more a regular play,
the problem of form was not at once easy of solution. In Mahazc the
whole action is undivided, but his other two plays he divides into
scenes. Moreover, in his plays we find each scene artistically com¬
pleted, yet one grows out of the other, thereby giving a unity to
the plays, and preventing them from being merely collections of
unlinked scenes and interludes. Even in the less finished Daywagonban
we find that each scene has some connexion with the previous and
the next one; for example, the apparently unconnected scene where
the dragon fights the galon-biid contributes to the main action, for
the dragon saves the princess. It was U Kyin U who in effect first
laid down the chief doctrine of Burmese dramatic technique, that the
essence of a play should be the construction of the plot: the story
could be invented or borrowed, it might be well known to the audience
or otherwise, it could be realistic or romantic; but the unfolding of
the story should be clear and logical, and nothing should be hidden
from the audience. To obtain these results, the scenes needed not
only to be well constructed, but to be connected with each other and
all clearly related to the main action—a doctrine which was admitted
in theory unto the last, but neglected in practice during the decadent
period of the drama, with chaotic results.

CHAPTER IV
U PON NYA
1. The Life of U Pon Nya
minor Pnnh1NYA 7* *boUt the year 1807‘ His kther was a
hr th. °b|!man at the court of Prince Tharrawaddy, a younger
the young- bo"8 BagyidaW/who lost the w*r against the British), and
He 4 g ' W3S brougbt UP under the patronage of the prince
most learned'moni “^7 4^ 7 tUt°rShlp °f ““
brother and became king in 1837 UP 7"“ ag3mSt hiS
become a monk n ? /' U P°n Nya’m the meantime, had
prince , a tu ' Dunng the rebellion, his father fell fighting for the
offi“ b^he ir" "g U P” N-" “
Tharrntc rM ^ ramatlst Pleferred to remain a monk. Kincr
Nya who theCfntmUed t0 C°nSider himSCif 33 g0dfather *> U Pon
tati^of tht i JaS m C°nStant C°ntaCt With the «"«• On the
Nva left tt il;, ;s 7 p,agrascended the ^ ^ u pon
compose literary essays^ alout IS^hI ^ ^7, ^ ^ t0
immensely popular Ld VT k , CSSayS and lyrics became
the ‘Master of Sa I hv 47e °Wn dI °Ver the “““try as
to In 1850 h h * * name is more commonly referred
, h« kyT agam' "d ™ » »»«
Le, P.l “ 1851 re “”g' “ br°,her °f ,he
anil lost some more teXnT'PrmTLr" ”4 T ““
brother, Mindon, rebelled against The 7 ? r °ther
became the new kino- and miTrie • a f'mad kmg' Mlndon
became the crown prince and U PoTn^k1-thffiBntiSh' Kanaung
then already recognfted by J ^ ^ P°et He was
scholar and essayist of the day H °n aS the foremost poet,
won further fame as an astro7 astrologlcal works and
to die on the scaffold and asked'for 4 ! *7 7 WaS liable
exempting him from punishment by dearT^I?™*-^ bj th® kmg
-ve the court for t£ mona^^^

made. In about 1855 lie wrote his first play, Padun;a. In the next
rear the two brothers, the king and the prince, ewarrekcd, and
when the misunderstanding had been explained, U IV. Xva
was ordered to write a play to celebrate tm *. . nd fib
Water-seller was composed and presented. As rev ard, the hirm
appointed him chief court-poet and created him Art w Yvmrh
village. He would have been made a ruling chief or vfneial raid he
not been bom with a crippled arm, because a man born with arm
defect in his limbs could not become a member »;f the ru2:112 class.
U Pon Nya took part in various court intrigues. Most of his plavs
had some hidden meaning that concerned the court, and thev played
an important part in the plots and counter-plots to decide who was
to be heir, for though Kanaung was officially the heir, the king’s sons
did not accept him.
In 1865 Mvingun and Myingondaing, two of the king's sons,
decided to make a bid for the throne. They consulted U Pon Nya
as to the most suitable time as foretold by the stars, and the poet
told them that the next day at noon was the luckiest time for the
rebellion. This connivance in a rebellion against his king and his
master, Prince Kanaung, was a very disloyal and ungrateful act,
because the fiery temper of the two princes was well known, and it
was plain from the beginning that the rebellious sons intended to put
io death at once’ their own father, and their uncle, who also happened
to be the father-in-law of My ingun. U Pon Nya defended himself
later by saying that he was compelled to give his opinion as to the most
suitable time, because he was threatened with certain death. But he did
not inform the king of the plot when the princes had left after
promising him the highest rank of nobility; and though he might
have been threatened with death at the beginning, he seemed to
have been well content with the promised reward and quietly left
the capital that night. The next day at noon, the rebellion broke
nut. The courts of justice where the crown prince and the wisest
in the land were sitting in session were attacked, and the palace
raided. The king escaped, but the crown prince and his fellow-
judges were killed. The rebellion was put down the same after¬
noon, but by then the flower of the court and the nobility had
perished. The two rebels escaped, Myingondaing to die of fever at
Rangoon, and Myingun to retirement in French Indo-China. Pon
U
Nya was arrested and tried on a charge of treason by the .king
himself, and though a sentence of death was clearly deserved.

78
BURMESE DRAMA
the king remembered the proclamation exempting the poet from
punishment by death, and as he had a great admiration for the works of
the dramatist, U Pon Nya was merely sent to the house of the governor
of the city as a prisoner on parole. Unfortunately, the junior wives
of the governor and the ladies at his court took too great an interest
in the comfort of the prisoner, and the governor became extremely
jealous. After three months of what he suspected to be romantic
intrigues between his prisoner and his ladies, the governor decided to
put U Pon Nya to death. So one night in 1866 the poet was secretly
executed, and the body disposed of never to be discovered, under the
orders of the governor. A few weeks after the secret execution, the
king granted full pardon to U Pon Nya, believing him to be still alive.
Only then was the truth discovered, and when the news was reported
to the king, he said wearily: ‘Alas, a dog has killed a man.’
2. Paduma
Jataka.
The story is taken without any modification from a A
king has seven sons, and he is warned by his ministers that the
princes might rebel. In spite of his great love for his sons, the king
has no choice but to exile them with their princesses. The seven
princes and their consorts leave the capital, but soon lose their way
m the forest. There is no food, and the younger princes beg their
eldest brother, Paduma, to agree to their plan of killing and eating
their princesses. Paduma tries to argue against the proposal, but
realizes that his arguments are in vain, for the six brothers are
maddened with hunger. He has no other wav of escape but to flee
with his consort. So before dawn Paduma and his princess run away
rom the others. The sun rises and the two are in great agony
through the heat. They reach a stretch of sand, and Paduma is cheered
because sand is usually found near a river. But the very sand which
cheers Paduma increases the heat and burns the delicate feet of the
princess She can go no further and begs the prince to kill her; she
vou.d then be relieved from her agony, and he would have a better
chance of saving himself alone. But the prince cheers her by encour¬
aging words and piercing his flesh with his sword, makes the
princess drink the blood to quench her thirst. Then, he puts her on
his shoulder and continues the journey. Soon they reach a wide
river, on whose banks grow fruit trees, and safety at last seems
*7
t'oTr r a a f f t t, f fl l oa t t ing \ T hel , p ’ le ssly da™own " th e ° r r y i v f e ° r r . W Th P e a p n r d in c S e ee s s a p i m tie a s n h t i i m ed

XJ PON NYA 79
and. so does the prince, who jumps into the river and saves the man.
He is a criminal and has been sent down the river after having had
his hands and feet cut off, for he has been convicted of a felony.
He thanks the prince, and promises to try and become a imod man.
The prince praises him. The princess then suddenly starts m cry
against her hard fate, because she has no pretty clothes to wear, She
wants to appear handsome before the man. but the prince does w >t
realize that, and thinking that the real reason for the dissatisfaction is
hunger, goes in search of fruit. The princess at once makes love to
the limbless man, who at first refuses her advances. He has to agree
to love her when she threatens him with immediate death. She plans
to get rid of her lawful husband; she will pretend that she wants to
go to the top of the adjoining hill to offer fruits and flowers to the
hill-spirit as a token of gratitude for their safety; then the prince
will accompany her; because he has no belief in offerings to spirits,
he will be looking down the hill-side as she pretends to make the
offerings, and she will then push him down. The prince comes back,
and as planned, he is pushed down the hill-side into the river.
Believing him to be dead, the princess returns joyfully to her new
love. However, a fig tree saves the prince, for he is caught on its
branches. A crocodile arrives on the scene in search of figs and finds
the prince lying dazed on the tree. He carries the prince back to the
latter’s city. Paduma is welcomed back by the people, for the king
has died pining for his sons and the kingdom has been trying to trace,
the princes and their consorts. He becomes king.
The princess serves and looks after the limbless man in the
forest, but the man soon wishes to go back to the city as he misses its.
sights and pleasures. She carries him in a basket and tramps trom
city to city until, without knowing it, they arrive at Paduma’s capital.
The city is having a holiday and people throng the streets, for it is.
Paduma’s birthday. The princess is greatly admired, as the people
think her to be a faithful and dutiful wife. The king with his ministers,
tours the city, and he hears from the people of the arrival in the king¬
dom of a faithful countrywoman. Paduma wishes to reward her for
her virtue, and the princess, the seeming countrywoman, is brought
before him with the limbless man. She fails to recognize the king,
who, however, knows her at a glance. He tells the facts to his
ministers and orders that the couple be executed at once. As it is the
king’s birthday, however, no execution can be carried out, and the
princess and the limbless man are put into prison to await execution

BURMESE DRAMA
Tuvn. B\ that time the king recovers his composure and desires
revenue. He inquires whether the executions have taken place
: «*r. kwrnmu that the couple still live, he orders that they should
: mushed fr the kingdom.
Thu v us the first play of U Pon Nya, and we find in it his dramatic
‘ I:T mut-de** eloped. The play is full of faults, and by common.
'* *-$ considered the least artistic of his work. He fails to
rtra character. and the persons in the play appear to be mere
nugpets. IT is fault is seen most clearly in the first two scenes where
u.ee mothers spea..v in turn, without passion, without life. Paduma is
ery unsatistactory. He is too good, too inhumanly good. In the
earlier scenes, he is absolutely without life. In the third scene
however, where he and his princess are running away to safety, Paduma
worries fu life, and both appear real and human. After that, he becomes
vwinteresting again, and he keeps on preaching sermons, which must
cute neen rather boring to his wife. In the last scene he comes to
iiie again. 1 lie princess is not so unsatisfactory. It is true that she is
portrayed only from the outside, and the * sudden change from
a uond to a wicked women is illogical; but that is what U Pon
wants to show. He wants to show that there is no logic in a
v oman s character. It is bad from the very beginning, and it will always
be bad;, a man should not have any faith in women, and if a man has
such faith, he is^ sure to be soon disillusioned, and he has only
himself to Dlame for such disappointment.
U Pon Nya*s cllief obiect in ^is play is satire, but he fails to
..achieve lus .aim, because the satire does not convince us. It is too
bitter to convince.. His failure is surprising when one'remembers that
ne is the greatest literary satirist in Burmese literature. When he wrote
this piay, he was already very successful as a satirist. The merit
° is best satire is his humour, which prevents any suggestion of bitter-
ness,and yet in Paduma humour is absent and bitterness is the chief
note. 1 he play by no means expresses the real attitude of the dramatist
towards women. It expresses only a temporary mood. He was a
great favourite with the ladies of the court, and among his friends
and patrons were many women noted for their nobility of character:
the chief queen of Mmdon, fhe most loved person at that time, was
iem. M oreover, in his other plays he shows his respect for
women; the wile of the water-seller and Ma-di in Waythandaya are
charming and noble women.
L Pon Nya wrote this play as a warning and admonition to

U PON NYA 81
those ladies of the court, junior queens, who were Indulging in
romantic intrigues with courtiers. It is amusing to reflect that even
as a monk, U Pon Nva himself was suspected of having had amorous
adventures, and he lost his life through his friendship with the
charming ladies of the governor’s household. The first performance
of the plav was received with an uproar of protest on the part of the
court-ladies, and they clamoured for the destruction of every copy of
the play. But there was much that was new and interesting in it, and
the general opinion was that a new dramatist of rich promise had
arisen. Therefore the king, before whom the performance was made,
did not yield to the clamours of the ladies, but ordered that their
request to U Pon Nya asking him to write another play praising the
virtues in women, should be complied with. As a result, he wrote
Waythandaya.
The great merit of the play is in its lyrical qualities (which I am
unable to reproduce in my translation). The vigour of the verse, its
rhythm, the harmonious and elaborate rhyme scheme, the richness of
the imagery, all join together to make this play the most lyrical in
Burmese drama. However, these very qualities were the butt of
criticism by contemporary critics who, used to the straightforward
and clear style of U Kvin U and his imitators, held that too rich a
language was a fault in a play, for there would be a danger of
conveying wrong or obscure meanings to the audience. As those
critics belonged to the ‘people’s5 stage, they were of course thinking
of the less learned audience outside the court circles. There is no
doubt that in some scenes of Paduma the charge of difficulty
and obscurity of language is quite justified. For example, when the
crocodile and Paduma speak about women loving dogs and pigs,
U Pon Nya is speaking only metaphorically, but one realizes it is so
only on a second or third reading of the play. But the language in the
scene where Paduma and his princess are running away to safety, is
as clear as it is beautiful.1
3.
The Water-seller
The story of this play also is taken unchanged from a Jataka, A
prince returns to his city after a stay at a university in India. As he
rests for a few minutes outside the gates, a water-seller enters, and in
a soliloquy says that he is just entering the city to sell water and earn
1 A translation of this play is given in appendix v.

s2 BURMESE DRAMA
f; ,cd. He leaves and a woman water-seller appears. She is even
r rer dun the other water-seller, and she too enters the city on her
daily round. The prince also leaves the scene. In the next scene, the
rriitce is shown meeting the ministers of the kingdom, who tell him
that his father the kina is dead, and the country has been anxiously
awa;t;r;c his return. He is crowned king. At midday, the two water-
sellers meet outside the city gates after their rounds, and they fall in
love arm decide to marry. The woman is anxious that the marriage
sir.'ild re celebrated properly, and wants the man to bring his dowry
of a silver halfpenny and join it with hers, which also consists of a
silver halfpenny. The man has hidden his in a crack in the wall on the
other side of the city, and towards his hiding place he joyfully runs at
full speed. The new king is looking out of a window7 of his palace, and
sews the man running joyfully, heedless of the burning sun and the
m t pavements of the street. The king wants to know7 the cause of
this strange behaviour, and summons the man before him. The man
tells him the reason. The king likes him and gives him a silver half¬
penny , requesting him not to brave further the intense heat of the
day. The naan accepts the gift in great joy, but begs to be allowed to
fetch his own coin.. The king gives him a hundred coins, a thousand,
a million, but still the man wishes to go and fetch the hidden coin,
for he thinks that the small coin is more valuable than any other
property on earth, as he has earned it by his own labour. The man’s
character wins the love and admiration of the king, wfho therefore wishes
to give him half the kingdom and make him the crown prince. To this
desire on the part of the king, the ministers give their assent, and the
water-seller becomes crown prince. He orders his officials to fetch the
woman water-seller, who is waiting at the city gates. He then goes in
state to the other side of the city and brings his half-penny back in
triumph. In the evening, the king wants to go and rest in his
forest-garden, tired after the events of the day, and he requests the
crown prince and princess to accompany him. They arrive at the garden.
The princess goes to another part of the garden with the ladies to
play among the flowers, and the king dismisses his courtiers and goes to
sleep on the crown prince’s lap. As the king sleeps, the water-seller
decides to kill him and seize the throne. But he remembers and
realizes his duty and his grounds for gratitude to the king. His greed
and his sense of gratitude struggle, and in the end the good side of his
character prevails. The king wakes up, and to him the .crown prince
confesses the truth, expecting swift punishment. But instead, the

83
U PON NYA
king offers to give the throne to him, and serve under him as a minor
official. This further kindness on the part of the king makes the
prince realize more fully how wicked he has been in thinking of
killing his master. He begs leave to become a hermit in the forest,
for he feels that power and wealth destroy the goodness of character
in man. The king praises the prince for his piety, and gives the
permission. The prince further requests the king to look after his
princess, which the king promises to do. The princess, ladies, and
courtiers enter, and to them the prince narrates the incident. He bids
farewell to his princess who, however, refuses to stay behind without
him, and begs leave to accompany him to the forest as a hermitess.
Permission being obtained from the king, the two leave for the
forest.
This is perhaps the most artistic of Burmese plays. Tne play
moves smoothly, and the action is continuous; nothing unconnected
with the main action is put in. The time of the action represents
one day: at sunrise the two water-sellers begin their rounds while
the prince rests for a few moments at the city gates; from that time
till midday, the prince is with the ministers who crown him king; at
midday, the water-sellers have finished their rounds, and they meet;
soon afterwards while the king rests at the window, fatigued with state
ceremonies and affairs, he sees the water-seller; in the afternoon, the
water-seller marries his lover, and then fetches the hidden coin, while
doubtless the king is busy again with state affairs off-stage; after sun¬
set, the king is tired with the events and affairs of the day, and goes
with the water-sellers to the garden; at nightfall, the water-sellers
enter the forest. Almost every hour of the day is accounted for in
logical sequence, and very little happens off-stage. The whole of the
action takes place around the city, and there are only three different
places represented on the stage, outside the city gates, the palace, and
the king’s garden. Surely it is interesting and significant that the
effect of completeness and unity in this play is brought about by
a logical scheme which would suggest to the western reader that the
dramatist was acquainted with that doctrine of ‘unity of time’ which
meant so much to the sixteenth-and seventeenth-century dramatists
who thought they were following Aristotle’s precepts. \ex it is
certain that our dramatist knew nothing of western doctrine or
practice. U Pon Nya is only carrying out what U Kym U laid
down as the aim of dramatic technique, namely the logical and
smooth unfolding of the plot; and in The Water-seller this has

84 BURMESE DRAMA
led him to something which approximates to the observance of the
"unities5 of time and place as well as of action.
In the grouping of the characters, U Pon Nya shows his greatness
as a dramatist, and gives an impression of beauty of form and com¬
pleteness to the play. The first scene begins with the prince and the
two water-sellers. The attention of the audience is drawn and con¬
centrated on these three from the beginning. When their characters
have been portrayed in part, other persons are introduced to the
audience. But the attention of the audience is not allowed to waver
fmni the three. Others are mere figures that serve as background.
They are allowed to say so little that we can scarcely even call them
minor characters. The three characters are well portrayed, the man
water-seller the most fully of the three. He is the central figure, and
on one side of him we have the king, admiring the water-seller, liking
him; on the other side we have the woman, loving him. As a result
the play gives the impression of a symmetrical structure, with the
man as the centre, the king and the woman as wings, and other
persons of the play as background. In the last scene also, U Pon Nya
shows his mastery in grouping the figures on the stage to give an
effect of beauty of structure. When the king and his followers arrive
at the garden, the king and the crown prince occupy the centre of
the stage, and we have the princess with the ladies on one side, and
the courtiers on the other. When the climax of the play—the attempt
of the prince on the life of the king—is reached, other figures are
absent, because the attention of the audience has to be concentrated
on the prince alone. When the climax is over, again two distinct
groups of characters enter on different sides. At the end, the water-
sellers leave on one side, and the king and the courtiers on the other,
the centre of the stage being left empty.
Paduma shows that U Pon Nya had not learnt to portray charac¬
ter. With regard to the princess in that play, he was trying to
convince the audience that there was no logic or reason in a woman,
and that she had no character as she was merely a creature of desire.
Therefore he had no reason to dwell upon the princess but this
very fact should have caused him to portray Paduma’s character,
which he failed to do. This seems to prove that he only learnt to
portray character through the experience gained from his’first play.
In The If ater-seller, he is a master of that art. He wants the audience
to concentrate its interest on the man water-seller, but he sketches the
other two in convincing detail. The king is a philosopher and sincere

85
U POX NYA
friend, and one can appreciate his treatment of the water-selier.
He is’a conscientious king, but his place is really the study, and he
finds even one day of kingship tiresome. He would have nkeu tne
water-seller to share the responsibility of ruling tne kingdom, out fie
could appreciate his desire to seek the peace of the forest. ^ He is
human in his attitude towards religion; he wishes to be a Buddha one
dav he believes that the monastery alone can offer real peace; he
finds his crown burdensome; and he admires the water-selier for
being able to leave the luxuries of the palace for the simple life of a
hermit; but he himself cannot leave his palace and power, for, being
but an ordinary mortal, he loves comfort and wealth and power. The
woman water-seller is an ordinary woman, honest, charming, lovaole.
She earns her living scrupulously; she is poor but honest bne
appreciates the sterling qualities in the other water-seller, and falls in
love with him. She trusts him, but womanlike, she wants the marri¬
age to be celebrated according to convention. Luxury and power do
not change her character. Politics do not interest her. A lovable
woman as a water-seller, she remains lovable as a princess and there¬
fore the ladies at the court cry their hearts out when she leaves mem,
though thev have served her but one afternoon. She is a woman
above all and she loves the man water-seller for himselr alone; he
may change his social status, he may be a water-seller a prince, a
monk, but he remains forever her man, and she will follow him
everywhere. She has the utmost faith in him, and what he does
is right to her. When he wishes to go to the forest, she does not
persuade him to stay. Politics and religion and philosophy play a
very small part in her life; she just follows the water-seller to the
forest, because she loves him and cannot stay without him.
The portrayal of the man water-seller constitutes a real advance
in Burmese drama. It is a study in character development. L Kym ^
and his precursors had studied character, but m their work the
character was fixed from the beginning to the end and it did
develop before the eyes of the audience. We have seen hm*
brilliantly Parpahein was portrayed by U Kyin L; but throughout he
remained the same Parpahein that we knew when the _ piay bega^
The man water-seller is very poor, but his character is such that
he can keep himself cheerful and quite contented. Honesty and
buoyancy of temperament make him happy. His ou oo'
wealth is very narrow; he has no other ambition but to earn a
few coppers more. He cheerfully and frankly woos his bride, When

86 BURMESE DRAMA
through good fortune lie is given a princely sum of money, his regard
fir the silver halfpenny acquired through industry and thrift, and lii$
love for the woman remain. In the hour of his acquisition of half
the Kingdom, he does not forget either his lover or his halfpenny.
However, he soon loses his cheerfulness through having to fill his
office with docility and ability; the crown prince is no longer the
laughing water-seller, indulging in mock-heroics, laughing unashamed
at his own poverty. Wealth and power do not always make one happy
and cheerful To the previously contented water-seller ambition
comes to disturb his peace of mind. He is next only to the king, but
rtc wants to be king now—he, who was contented before with a half¬
penny hidden safely away. His greed and ambition tempt him, to kill
his triend and king, who is responsible for making him the crown
prince. Fortunately, his old sense of honesty and gratitude still
remain. The good and evil in him fight, and U Pon Nya gives us a
nne picture of the struggle in the mind of the water-seller. In the
end, the good wins. If the character of a person is essentially good,
m the end, in spite of all temptations, the good in him will carry him
through, just as the water-seller’s character finally triumphs over
ambition and greed that result from wealth and power. The king
offers him the whole kingdom, he has but to say ‘yes’, and from
being the lowest in the country, he will become the highest. But he
refuses the offer. He has tasted both poverty and wealth and in the
end he chooses poverty—the poverty and peace of a hermit’s life.
He has the courage to act according to his convictions, and we can
but respect and admire his final action.1
4. Wiza YA
The story of this play is taken with slight modifications from a
semi-religious work on the history of Buddhism in Ceylon, which is
classed in the same category as a Jataka. In the original not only the
history of Ceylon, but also some account of the history of the kingdom
in India from which the island was colonized, was given. U Pon Nya,
however, begins only at the point where the colonists leave their
mother country, and ends his play at the point where a dynasty is
assured to Ceylon.
The king is holding his court when he hears cries for help On
inquiry he learns that his elder son, Wizaya, has long been in the
1 A translation of the play is given in appendix vi.

87
U PON NT A
n,notice of roaming about the country with his seven hundred retainers,
robb'n” and otherwise ill-treating the people. The ministers have
been afraid to report the truth to the king, and the people m despair
. v_ come to cry for help under the very winnows oi the palace.
The kino- summons his son before him, and asks him whether the
Lort of his misdeeds is true. The prince, as answer, Pegs the king
" punish the ministers as they did not report his misdeeds oefore.
InCer at this impertinent retort, the king orders that the prince
be secured at once. The queen begs tor mercy, but the prince te. -
herein gentle words, not to be anxious as he is quite prepared to die
S king relents, but as the prince refuses to give an undertaking m
respect the law, the ministers, supported by the people, demand> tha.
b/prince and his seven hundred men should be put to death a
once The queen begs the king and ministers to give t0 tie P.n"^
,‘d his men a chance of saving themselves provided there is no
plibilitv of their ever returning to the kingdom In deference to
her wishes, it is decided to put Wizaya, his men, and their families on
rafts and send them floating southwards on the ocean. T e prince
bids'farewell to his parents, and his gentle and dignified tone shows
that he is no longer an irresponsible young prince; not fear o, uea,
but a sense of responsibility and duty towards his _ followers has
changed him. By fine seamanship and organization, he safely
rmvi crates the rafts until they reach Ceylon.
The prince decides to settle down and found a kingdom there
provided^such a course of action is possible. The king of the gods
Ses from his Evenly throne the arrival of the prince on the is and
and realizes that Wizaya is destined to spread Buddhism and Ceylo
be a stronghold of the religion. As a guardian of the religion, the
t cpin the orin.ce as much, as possible, and
311 and”help the prince. The minister changes himself into a hermit,
are demons on the island The: seeim es and
r™ n L
demo habit 0f wandering along the coast m
search oTshipwrecked sailors to eat.

BURMESE DRAMA
v,k“ her. thinking that the dog will lead them to
> ~e numan habitation. But the dog leads them to the seeming
. ermittss, who invites them to have a drink out of the pond; as
t enu drnvn t0 drink’ tile ogresses attack them from behind
This information regarding the method of trapping sailors is given to
tne audience through a conversation between the princess and her
mam. 1 he maid is sent by the ogre-princess to play the usual trick
’l ske 'du*u*d be fortunate enough to find some human beings. In the
next scene, we find Wizaya anxious and troubled in mind, for some
*- Towers he had sent to explore the island have not returned. He
peaces to go in search of them himself, as he thinks that there is
uanger anead and does not wish any of his remaining followers to take
an unknown risk. He finds the hermitess, who at first succeeds in
ueceiving him. But she falls in love with him, and her loving words
nnbecomme trom the lips of a holy woman, make him suspicious’
r;y tnrL‘aten,n§ her with *nstar,t death, he forces her to confess that
sue ,s an ogre-princess, and responsible for the disappearance of his
men, vvho are still alive as prisoners, as their god-given charms protect
meT; W f °C e 0gresses- The ogre-princess restores the
:° ^1Za-Va- In the ong,nal st°ry. the prince guessed that the
seem,ng hermitess was in reality an ogress through his powers of
observation, whereas U Pon Nya makes the ogress divulge her secret
rough her loving words. The ogress, who has now assumed human
torm, appears very beautiful, and Wizaya falls in love with her They
return to the coast, and the exiles are taken by the ogre-princess to a
suitable place inland where they encamp for the night. Meanwhile
the ogre-kmg, oblivious of the arrival of Wizaya and his men, is
cj. '!ng arrangements with his ministers to meet his bride in state
0gre-kinSdom at ^ght, and the king
decides to take all his followers m flying chariots and hold a great
feast m honour of her arrival. In the middle of the night Wizaya is
■waWd by- no,r of revelry, ,„d he inquircs of ’r ™ ^
1 ”oT,he8t ,7ndS' ThC Prin““ “* hi“ ‘h‘‘^ * Z
the „'7 n'08"!' ”°W Cckb™i“8 «« arrival of
he queen-to-be, in flymg chariots. Wizaya points out that human
tnem is inevitable. He wishes to fight the ogres at once when thev
are unprepared a‘nd ignorant of his arrival TkP ■ ’ ^
how powerful the ogres are but tL , PnnCeSS P°mts out
anv cost ’ the pnnce 18 determined to fight at

L' PON NY A 89
She decides on helping him, so as to show her inve tor him. and
to ensure his safety. She tells the prince that she wii! to the feast
in the skv, and when she is near her unde, she will make a noise. She
asks him to shoot his arrow towards the point in the sky from where
her voice will come. She will have left the feast before the arrow readies
its mark, and it will hit the ogre-king. As the driving and control
of the flying chariots depend on him, this will cause all the chariots
to fall from the sky, hurling the riders to death. The ogre-princess
leaves Wizaya, and soon after her voice is heard in the sky and the
prince shoots. The ogre-king falls down dead, pierced by the arrow,
and cries of pain and panic are heard off-stage. The princess enters
and tells the prince that all the ogres in Ceylon are dead, but there
are still some on the neighbouring isles. She advises the prince to
wear the armour of the dead king, and his followers that of the other
ogres as the armour will give them power and protection against all
enemies, spirit or human. Wizaya and his followers settle down on
the island, and soon organize a thriving state. They are responsible
and serious citizens now, and because of the fortunate and miraculous
way in which they have succeeded in founding the new state, they
hold that they are destined to establish Buddhism firmly on the
island, and to spread it to other lands. The prince is crowned king,
and an embassy is sent to the mainland of India to seek a princess to
be the new king’s queen, and also to seek her country’s alliance, as
such an alliance is necessary for the new kingdom to be recognized
by other countries. Some months pass. The ogre-princess now has
a" son and a daughter as a result of her morganatic marriage with
Wizaya. The embassy finds a suitable alliance, and the king of the
allied state agrees to give his daughter in marriage to Wizaya. He
summons his daughter to his presence, and requests her to depart for
Ceylon with the embassy. She is afraid and weeps, but when the
king points out to her that duty to her kingdom calls to her to go, she
agrees. She arrives at the coast of Ceylon, and when the news reaches
Wizaya, he asks the ogre-princess to leave the kingdom without
delay' because as he must be married to the newly arrived princess at
once, the ogress’s presence in the palace will be dangerous to the
peace and well-being of the kingdom. The ogress cries, and then
reproaches Wizaya as a traitor to honour and gratitude, and as a
faithless husband. The prince speaks of his great love for her, but
says that, as he owes a duty to his kingdom and the religion, he
has no choice but to marry the human princess. He points out that a

r<M BURMESE DRAMA
c ur.trv which has an ogress as queen will never be recognized
>v ^thtrs. The ocress decides to leave Wizaya, but she wishes
: i trim her eh barer, with her. But the king also wishes to have
them arrays with him, for he wants some memento, for she alone is
his 1 we. However, as the ogress refuses to go without her children,
the hire has to comply with her wishes, and she and the children
depart from Ceylon and disappear in the neighbouring islands.
When the next scene begins, we learn that some years have
core h\, but the king is still without an heir. His people beg him
t serai an embassy to his father, asking for Wizaya5s younger
brother, so that he may be appointed crown prince of Ceylon.
As w th the king and the people agree that the establishment
: a dynasty in Ceylon is vital to the interests of the religion,
the embassy is sent. The ambassadors find that the old king,
Wizard's father, has died and the brother is now king. Though
he is overjoyed to hear about his brother and wishes to help Ceylon
and tne spread of Buddhism, he holds that he owes a greater dutv
tv his own kingdom and therefore cannot become the crown prince.
He, however, gives his eldest son to the embassy, impressing upon
the young prince the duty that he, the prince, owes to the religion, to
his unde \\ izaya, and to Ceylon. The prince promises to be a
vo rthy ruler. He arrives in Ceylon, and his abilities satisfy his uncle
and the people. Soon after, Wizaya and his queen retire to the
monastery, and the nephew becomes king. In the next scene, we see
the king of another country in a dilemma. Princes from different
kingdoms are demanding the hand of his only daughter in marriage,
and the king realizes that no matter who gets the princess, other
suitors will declare war on him. In despair, he puts his daughter on
a raft and sends her floating southwards on the ocean. The princely
suitors try to swim to the raft, but they are all unsuccessful,
due raft arrives at an island near Ceylon, and an ogre finds the
princess and makes love to her. As she refuses his advances, he shuts
her up in a cave. The guardian-goddess of the ocean appears on the
scene, and by threatening the ogre with divine punishment, secures
the release of the princess. The goddess puts back the maiden on the
raft, and tells her that gentle ocean breezes will drive the raft until it
reaches Ceylon; it will stop at that part of the coast where the king’s
.garden meets the sea ; the king will find her, fall in love with her, and
make her queen; a glorious dynasty will result from the marriage,
and under the patronage of its kings, Buddhism will shine forth and

91
U PON NYA
read to other countries from Ceylon. As foretold by the goddess,
the raft reaches the island, and the king finds the princess. They fall
in love, and amid the acclamation of his people, preparations are
made for the royal marriage.
Though the story is on the whole identical with the original wars,
the atmosphere of U Pon Nya’s play is entirely different. Throughout
the play, the audience is made to feel that the welfare of the kingdom
of Cevlon is the one thing that matters, and unless and until such
welfare is assured, the story cannot end. The kingdom is really the
hero and Wizava and others are merely instruments for the good ot
the kingdom. A dynasty must be established, and the play ends only
when it has been'established. There is also an atmosphere ot an
all-conquering destiny. The persons in the play are ^destined to
contribute their share towards the establishment ot Ceylon as a
kingdom for on it depends the maintenance and spread of the religion.
Duty and destiny are given as the same thing in the play, and against
them everybody is powerless to struggle. The realization of this fact
causes the'chief characters of the play to suppress all personal feelings
and desires. Duty and destiny must be served at all costs. The
moment the erring Wizaya realizes his duty towards his followers, he
changes his character. Later he gives up the ogre-princess whom he
really loves, and the two children, because he must fulfil his destiny and
obtain for Ceylon the full status of a sovereign state. Tfie princess,
who later becomes Wizaya’s queen, does not wish to leave her own
country to go to a foreign land, and to take an unknown king as consort
but the moment she is made to realize that duty and destiny demand
that she must depart for Ceylon, she dries her tears and embarks on her
voyage. His brother wishes to see again Wizaya whom he dear
lows but he refrains from leaving his own kingdom, tor he think,
that his duty towards it is more important than his longing to ^ee his
brother He loves his son, but sends him to his unde, tor W izaja
needs an heir. This son, Wizaya’s nephew, from the few glimpse, of
him that the audience has, is shown to be coldly efficient, without any
sign of personal feeling or emotion. Other characters m the play have
to sacrifice their personal desires to duty or destiny, but this
prince promises to be the most successful and most -iliiug secant
o o f t t t n h e e k K i i n n g g d u o u m i . The o s g re-princess is the dm ost do h e u g m a n n o t o m f e a a l n l
the royal personages m the play. > - Wizava and
anythin, and she has no idea of what destiny means to Wizava and
2 kingdom. All she knows is love, and for that love she sacrifices

BURMESE DRAMA
*r s'*.vn people and her own country. To the end she fails to
onderstwad w appreciate Wizava’s conception of duty and destinv.
ui u ntrast t i tlie kings in the play who can send their sons and
Jeiichters t ♦ unknown lands for reasons of state, her children matter
erectly to her, she loves them even more than she loves Wizaya, and
she refuses to go away without them. She is a total failure in state
atfairs, tor she is the most human of them all, and she refuses to
he a cold instrument of state. Her tragedy lies in the fact that
unconsciously she is also the servant of that destiny which Wizaya
and his kind willingly serve. She is the chief instrument by which
the kingdom of Ceylon, destined to spread the religion to other lands,
is firmly established. As soon as she has served its purpose, destiny
sends her away in wretchedness. She has served the kingdom well,
but her further presence in it will be against its interests, so
she is exiled and forced to go back to the ogres, whose chief kingdom
she has betrayed. And no one among the people she has saved at the
cost of her own ogre-kingdom raises a finger to protect her from
injustice.
The play is very artistic. The atmosphere of the ruthlessness of
destiny is very well done. The theme makes the play something new
and original. In many ways, Wizaya introduces new developments in
Burmese drama, and in some ways it is a breakaway from U Kyin U’s
dramatic theory and practice. It will again be considered in detail in
the last section of this chapter, where an attempt will be made to
estimate the achievement and importance of U Pon Nva.1
5. Kawthala
This is the only play of U Pon Nya which has an original story.
The king of Bayanathi, who is emperor of all the neighbouring king¬
doms, has just succeeded to the throne on the death of his father. To
pay homage to him have come all his vassal-kings, except Kawthala,
who refuses to come, though he is king of but a small state, for the
new king has been a page at Kawtfaala’s court. Kawthala realizes
that his behaviour is unwise, and that the might of Bayanathi can
easily crush him at once, but his pride prevents him from kneeling
before the young emperor, who lately knelt to him as a page. Bava-
nathi sends an embassy to demand homage, pointing out that in the
e\ent of the countries going to war, Kawthala has no chance whatever
1 Extracts from this play .are given in appendix vii.

93
V POX XVA
to stand against the combined forces of Bayanathi and its vassal-
kings. The king of Bayanathi is not keen on war; he is certain of
victory, he is reluctant to shed blood, but he cannot encourage any
«icm of rebellion in the empire. Kawthaia’s ministers bea hint not
lobt defiant, but to swallow his pride in the interests of iris kingdom.
However, he wishes to go to war, and because his price ha^ under¬
mined his wisdom he even thinks that there are chances u. n.s
winning the struggle. The ministers give way in the end, the em¬
bassy is refused admission to the city, and war is declared against
Bavanathi. A few days later, Kawthaia’s city is besieged by over¬
whelming forces, but the emperor, who is still reluctant to shed
blood, offers peace and full pardon, provided Kawthala comes and
pays homage. The ministers of Kawthala demand that he should
accept the offered terms of peace and save the city and its people.
Kawthala refuses to surrender himself, but he decides to commit
suicide so that the ministers can make peace after his death. He bids
a tender farewell to his queen, who has been his consort since youth.
She wishes to die with him, but he persuades her to live for the sake
of his unborn heir, for she is pregnant. The ministers surrender the
city after his death, and offer the queen to the emperor as a token of
homage. The king of Bayanathi, being magnanimous, grants a full
pardon, and allows the vanquished state to retain its status as a king¬
dom, he himself to be its king, and Kawthaia’s ministers to be retained
in their offices. The king begs Kawthaia’s queen to marry him, for the
marriage will increase his prestige and power, as she is famed and
beloved in all countries. She begs leave to remain m her own country
in peace, wishing not to have any authority or power, and desiring
nothing else but peace. The king presses his suit and she agrees m
the end, for after all she is really a prisoner in his hands. They are
married’ soon afterwards in Bayanathi. Months pass, and a son is
bom to the queen. She loves the child, and memories of her lost love,
Kawthala, increase the love for the child, but she decides to put it to
death at once. For she realizes that her old kingdom would rebel to
put the prince on the throne, and the possibility of such a rebellion
would cause the king to kill the child. She thinks it is better for the
little prince to die before he has learnt to love life, and to die without
the torture of an execution. As only herself and her faithful lady-in-
waiting know of the birth, the killing of the child cannot be discovered.
The lady-in-waiting goes to the cemetery, according to her instructions,
and leaves the child among the graves. Kawthala is now a tree-god,

'*•+ BURMESE DRAMA
arid first-lieutenant of the king of the gods. He desires revenge on the
A-lnc of Bayanathi, but still more does he desire the restoration of his
' on tine to the throne of his lost kingdom. Observing that the little
rrinee is left ant .mg the graves to die, he by his godly powers causes two
goatherds wiv are near by, a man and wife, to go to that particular
part of the cemetery in search of pasture. They are overjoyed at
nr.dinc the child, for they have been longing for a son. The tree-god
then shows himself, and tells them his history. He requests them
to put tiie child in a magic pond in the forest for one night,
because in the morning the child will be changed into a youth of
sixteen years. In the next scene, the prince emerges from the
pone a crown-up youth, but he does not know? who or what he is,
until the tree-trod enlightens him. He gives the prince a magic bow,
and impresses upon him the necessity of regaining the throne and
resc.j.i..g the uynasty, but the prince will have to bide his time and
act .or ,umseb when the time comes. The young man promises to
follow the god’s advice faithfully. He becomes a goatherd, and
is quite happy with the couple who have adopted him. The man
becomes his constant friend and companion, and together they wander
tmm pasture to pasture. The prince, contented, has no immediate
plans towards fulfilling his promise to the tree-god. One morning he
aiii. his companion iall asleep on a grassy' mound while the goats graze.
The god of love now enters, and his duty is to watch the destiny of
ioieis. The prince is destined to love the daughter of the ogre-king,
who rules the ogre-country that is separated from Bayanathi by the
forest, where the goatherds are. The god hides the goats' and
causes a Iran ot their foot-marks to begin from the grassy mound and
end abruptly in the garden of the ogre-princess, who plays there
attended only by a maid of honour. The prince and his companion,
upon waking, suppose the goats to have wandered away of their own
accord, and follow the trail until they lose it in the garden where
they throw themselves on the ground and fall asleep through fatigue.
The ogre-princess, on finding them, falls in love with the prince, who
wakes up, and proposes marriage. When she points out that her father
is certain to withhold assent, the prince suggests elopement, to which
sne agrees; so they run away, while the maid of honour hastens to
report the matter to the ogre-king, who thereupon sets out in haste in
pursuit of the lovers. He finds them resting just outside the gates of
Bayanathi; whereupon he tries to kill the prince, who, however, aims
the god-given bow at him, and would kill him to end all danger of

V PON NYA 95
interference; but the princess persuades him to spare her father.
The ogre-king, then departing, enters the palace of the king of
Bavanathi, and by right of the treaty of alliance between the two king¬
doms, requests the king to capture and punish the daughter and her
lover. So the lovers are surprised and taken prisoners. The prince is
put on the scaffold, and the princess is chained to it. They are t > be
executed a few days later. The tree-god, through his supernatural
vision, sees what is happening, and rushes to the palace of Bavanathi,
where he makes known the facts regarding the young man, and the
king and queen hurry to the place of execution. The young prince, who
is wailing, recounts to them his story, not knowing that they are
connected with the events of his life. The play ends happily, with the
prince and princess saved from the scaffold. Whether they are happily
married and Kawthala’s dynasty is restored or whether they al! retire
to the monastery is uncertain.
This play is very unsatisfactory. U Pon Nya wrote it in imitation
of the Daywagonban of U Kyin U. Though he was at the height of
his fame as a dramatist after Wizaya, many critics maintained that L
Pon Nya could not write in the same clear style as U Kyin U; they
held that his language was too flowery and therefore less suitable for
the drama, and that he had too few dramatic scenes as compared to U
Kyin U. So U Pon Nya wrote this new play under the direct orders
of the king, who at once submitted it to those critics, to be read side
by side with Daywagonban. The critics declared that Kawthala was
as good as Daywagonban. They were wrong, however, and Kawthala
is unworthy of either U Pon Nya or U Kyin U. Though U Pon Nya
invented the story, his hands were tied, because he had to follow the
style of Daywagonban. That was why the incident of the ogre-king
being quelled by the god-given bow was put in, spoiling the unity of
action, for that incident has little to do with the main theme. The
ending, too, had to be almost the same as in Daywagonban. The
climax’and anticlimax, the tying of the hero and heroine to the
scaffold, ready for execution, and their subsequent rescue through the
help of the tree-god are similar to the tying of the hermit prince and
the princesses to the scaffold, ready for execution, and their subsequent
rescue through the help of the king of the gods. This half-forced
imitation of U Kyin U’s play explains why Kawthala begins so well
and vet ends so unsatisfactorily. The earlier part where Kawthala,
because of his foolish but human pride, struggles against Bayanathi, is
very dramatic and interesting, but after his death, the plot deteriorates.

96
BURMESE DRAMA
The play, However, is not without importance. It has one or two
new developments in dramatic technique, and like ail U Pon Nva’s
plays except Waythandava, it has some reference to the political
intrigues ot the time. It also gives us some idea as to the attitude of
I For. Nya towards l Kyin U and the romantic drama. All these
topics wiii he dealt with in the last section of this chapter.1
6 . Wa ythanda i \4
il.is may was written by U Pon Nya in compliance with the
request m the court ladies, and the orders of the king, which he
. c^e., a.ier the tirst performance of Paduma. It was bv wav of
an >c;gy for his satire against women in that play, but the apology was
r. •_i‘>n;cr necessary, for meanwhile the portrayal of the woman water-
seLer and or the ogre-princess, Wizava’s lover, had shown the real
attitude ot the dramatist towards women.
I ne story is taken from a Jataka, but U Pon Nya greatly modifies
it. I he ll aythandaya Jataka has been the best known of the Birth
Stones since U Awbatha wrote his version. The original story
was thus. ^ Waythandava, crown prince of a kingdom, was a great
giver of alms, and if anyone asked anything of him, he gave it
Knowing his character, wicked Brahmins took advantage of the
charitable prince, and at last, after he had given away the luckiest
white elephant in the kingdom, the king and his people decided to
exile him with his family. So Waythandaya, his wife Ma-di, and their
little son and daughter were sent to live in a thick forest, but the king
anxious for their safety, placed a great hunter, with his famous hunting
dogs, as guard, to watch ail comers to the forest. The prince was not
on y exiled but degraded, and he was not allowed to have servants and
followers. But Ma-di proved a good housewife, and looked after her
family well Now m a neighbouring kingdom, there lived a great
glutton Brahmin Zuzaka, and he had married a voung wife, who
wanted him to die, so that she could have all his money. Knowing
his miserliness, she pointed out that he could get two young slaves
w ithout any payment, if he would but go and ask Waythandava to give
hmi his children. She expected him to be killed by the hunter at the
entrance to the rorest, but the cunning Brahmin, by pretending to be a
messenger from \\ aythandaya’s father bringing good news to the exiles
gamed permission from the hunter to enter the forest. In the
a isence ot the princess, who had gone in search of fruit, the Brahmin
1 Extracts from this play are given in appendix viil

U PON NYA 97
oot Waythandaya to give up the children to him. Waythandaya
tvas stricken with remorse, but lie could do nothing as the Brahmin
had gone. When Ma-di returned to the hut, and found the children
oone, she fainted.
Meanwhile, the Brahmin, getting out of the forest, was made
by the gods to lose his way, so that he found himself at Waythan-
dava’s city, where he was arrested and taken before the king.
M the prince had given the children to the Brahmin, the king was
bound by honour to respect the gift, and not to molest the Brahmin,
to whom, thereupon, he gave a palace with all royal honours in
exchange for the children. The Brahmin soon choked himself to
death with over-eating, as he was unused to sumptuous banquets.
The return of the children to the city awToke in the hearts of the
people memories of Waythandaya and Ma-di, whom they once loved
and respected greatly, and they now begged the king to restore
Waythandaya to his office as crown prince. Amidst great rejoicings
the*king and the people went to the forest and brought.. back the
prince and princess, while the whole world acclaimed Ma-di as a
noble heroine, for the hardships she voluntarily underwent for love of
Wavthandaya. The story had been dramatized often before U Pon
Nya, and as has been stated, one of U Kyin IPs lost plays was on
Waythandaya. Though no Waythandaya play before U Pon Nya has
come down to us, we know from oral tradition among stage-folk that
the Brahmin villain was a favourite comic character, and the rough
treatment he suffered at the hands of his shrewish young wife
provoked great laughter. The Brahmin was hated and despised, yet
feared, by people in Burma, until about the time of U Kvin U, and
the Brahmin of those days was comparable to the Jew of Elizabethan
times. He was an Indian, a foreigner, tolerated and feared for
his knowledge of astrology, and through that knowledge, managing
to survive the fear and hostility of the people. In the prose work
of U Awbatha, through which Waythandaya’s story became first
popular, the character of the Brahmin was not comic, but it became
so in the earlier interludes. We do not know for certain what the
treatment of the Brahmin was in the hands of U Kyin U, but very
likely he was not a comic character, for U Kyin U did not introduce
any comic characters into his other plays, and in Mahan the Brahmin
Kaywut, Mahaw’s enemy, who would doubtless have been a comic
character in the hands of U Kyin IPs precursors and ^contemporaries,
was treated by him as a serious character. U Pon Nya, although lie

BURMESE DRAMA
vrjs doubtless acquainted with the stock character of the Brahmin and
with U Kyin U’s play, which was extant in his time, does not follow
the earlier dramatists, and he greatly modifies the story. Presuming a
knowledge of the story by the audience, he begins his play at the
point where Waythandaya is already in exile with his family. The
opening is a comic scene between two hermits in the forest. These
hermits, who are U Pon Nya’s own invention, have nothing to do with
the story except that, in the course of their conversation, we learn that
Waythandaya and his family are living as exiles in another part of the
.rest. In the second scene, we see a tree-god and a goddess. The
god teds the goddess that Zuzaka has succeeded in getting the children
and that it is the duty of the gods in the forest to look after them.
They decide to follow Zuzaka, and become visible to the children in
the form of their parents, but not visible to the Brahmin. When they
have departed, .Wa-di enters, crying, for she has forebodings of
disaster. She sees the hut from a distance, but the children and
" aythandaya do not come running to meet her as they usually do,
and when she calls there is no answer. She faints, and Waythandaya
comes weeping and, having nursed her back to consciousness, confesses
what he has done. Grief-stricken they decide that they must wait
patiently for better days, as it is too late to follow the Brahmin. In
the third scene, the guardian of the forest, the hunter, enters. It is
unfortunate that the last few lines of the play are missing, but from oral
and written accounts of the play, we know that the children are saved It
is legitimate perhaps to assume that the hunter finds Zuzaka with the
emluren and takes them all to the king, with happy results. No other
ending seems possible because (1) the entry of the hunter, marshalling
Ills hounds to look around the forest, clearly shows that U Pon Nya
intends him to contribute some incident of importance to the main
action: and (2) as only a few lines are missing, it is impossible that
L Pon Nya could have crowded into so limited a space all the con¬
cluding events of the original storv.
In this play L Pon Nya has very little interest in the narration of
the story. Perhaps the story was so well known that it would have
been pointless to pay much attention to it. He is intent upon doing
tnree things: to make the audience laugh, to make it weep, and to
show that all human beings, whether rich or poor, high or low reli¬
gious or otherwise, suffer the same through the loss of loved ones In
tne first scene, which is entirely comic, the humour is genuine and
not coarse as m Kawtkala. There is also a gentle satire against monks

U PON NYA 99
and hermits who became so only to earn, an easy living, but the satire
is not bitter, for those vagabonds were quite harmless and amusing, at
least in those days. The second scene is pure pathos. The pathos
begins with the god and goddess speaking about the pathetic
misfortunes and sufferings of Ma-di and the children, and it gradually
increases in intensity, until the climax is reached when the princess
faints, and Way than day a weeps with her in his arms. U Pon Nya
makes them entirely human, and in their sorrow, they behave and
suffer the same as ordinary men and women, although they are prince
and princess, and intensely religious. The third scene returns to
humour, but the humour is restrained, as otherwise it might interfere
with the course of the main action in the scene. The comic spirit of
the play is finely conceived, and also original, for U Pon Nya rejects
stock types of comic characters and does not even raise a smile for his
Zuzaka.
To the critics of the decadent period, Waythandaya was U Pon
Nva’s masterpiece as far as dramatic technique alone was concerned.
Thev held that the play conformed to the rales of their own drama.
The conformity is there, but it is not surprising, for the imitation of
this play and Wizaya by dramatists less gifted than U Pon Nya,
contributed much to the rise of the decadent drama. This topic is
discussed in the next section, and also in the chapter on the decadent.
period.1
7. The Characteristics and Achievement of U Pon Nya.
Since U Pon Nya established himself as a great dramatist through
the composition of The Water-seller, it has been the custom of
Burmese critics to compare and contrast him with U Kyin U, invari¬
ably supposing them to represent two entirely different types of the
drama. Doubtless there is an essential difference between the two,
but it must not be forgotten that the history of Burmese drama shows
a continuous development, and that U Pon Nya was the heir of
IX Kyin U’s experiments and achievements. However, the best way
to appreciate their qualities is to compare and contrast them.
U Pon Nya was a courtier, and he wrote his plays primarily for
production at court, but he did. not in any way revive the old court,
drama as established by the Rama play and its imitators, nor did he
introduce a new court drama comparable to the old. Since the final
. fusion of the court drama and the ‘people’s* drama by the time of
1 An extract from the play is given in appendix ix.

100 BURMESE DRAMA
U Kyir. U, the piays produced at court were plays which had been
rr -dueed outside. During the troublesome period of the two Anglo-
Eurmese wars of 1824 and 1852-6, although palace dramatic perfor¬
mances were rare because of the fact that the court was in disgrace
and disunion, the courtiers read and studied U Kyin U’s plays° 4S
nas been stated, the acceptance and popularity of U Kyin U as the
gre^te*. dramatist by both the court and the people prevented am*
r issd'ihti of the old court drama being revived. But there were two
other factors which acted against such revival: first, since the time of
I iy :n t, the production of a play even at court was entirely in the
hands o: professional actors, and so U Pon Nya had to conform to the
practice and tradition of those who would produce his plays; second,
the fact that U Pon Xya was a realist prevented him from ever
writing artificial court plays of the old type.
-l'>Kyin U 3 romanticist The world depicted in Daywagonban
and Purpuhiui was a world of fantasy and romance. Princes fought
and struggled, heroes accomplished valiant deeds, and gods and
demons and animals shared adventures with princes and princesses.
Even in Mahan, m spite of the absence of demons and gods the
atmosphere of the play, with its bombastic speeches and its love-scene
between the magpie and parrot, was romantic. In U Pon Nya’s
mays, the atmosphere of romance is missing. He does not use animals
as characters, except in Paduma, where the crocodile contributes to
the mam action by saving the prince, and by driving home the moral
that even animals are wiser than women; but he satirizes the uncon-
trom-d employment of animals as characters, by ironically making the
crocouile say learned and serious words which appear ridiculous in
the mouth 0f an animal and he is half apologetic about using the
crocoaue tor he makes it say in the address to the orchestra after
Padumayas been taken back to his city: ‘I have come only to make
“st^ rku? iDCreaSed int° kuShter’ 1 return
/ m forest. . . The difference m the use of supernatural charac-
crsy,so contributes to the difference in atmosphere. In U Kyin U’s
*Xr rwt , ”°nS W6re ^ k6eping With the romantic atmo-
St nL of humat t6-'' kCit Seri°USneSS °f PurP°se> joining in the
and ^venture Tt P ?r°Ugh thdr °Wn Iove °f romance
, . T ley aPPeared 30 Petty in the way they fought and
ejuarieLed; the teee-god m Daywagonban indulged in undignified
gauging when Daywagonban accused him of having stolen his
r™™*' ”a " ™ ‘h“* >% of Da>,,8onba“n to ilLge

U PON XYA 101
in trivia! threats and displays of temper,, when lie could have used
his god-given and demon-given powers in conquering the world or
spreading the religion. However, the character of the king of the
oods in Daywagonban was more interesting. He was not concerned
with the petty squabbles of the other characters of the play. The
Guardian of justice and religion, he interfered only when in¬
nocent persons were in danger of being executed, and no other
wav of saving them was possible. He was reluctant to show
himself and take an active part even when he had to save the
hermit. At first he contented himself with sending his lieutenants to
use their power to cause thunder and lightning. Only when they
had failed to have any effect on Daywagonban, did he himself take an
active part and use his own supernatural powers. This king of the
crods, different from other supernatural characters of U Kyin U, was
akin to U Pon Nva’s spirits and gods; that was why he seemed so
out of place in the fantastic world of Daywagonban. U Pon Nya
portrays his supernatural characters as belonging to a world other
than ours, but as being interested in the human world. Their
interest is not the result of idle curiosity or of mere love of adventure,
but arises from some serious purpose. Guardians of the religion
and servants of destiny, they interfere because it is their duty to
interfere, and when they do so, they are careful that their help or
hindrance should be as limited as possible. When they have to
show themselves, they usually do so in the guise of human beings,
and they do not appear at all unless their help is needed. That is
why no supernatural characters appear in The Water-seller and
Paduma; the crocodile in Paduma is not supernatural, he is just
an ordinary animal, unlike the naga and galSn of Daywagonban. . In
Wizaya, the king of the gods and his followers are servants of destiny,
and they have to see that human beings fulfil their duties as set
by destiny. But they interfere as little as possible. When the king of
the gods "sends one of his lieutenants to give protective charms to
Wizaya, the lieutenant does so only in the guise of a human hermit.
When the guardian-goddess of the ocean saves the princess, she does
not take- her to Wizaya’s nephew herself, but gently guides the
raft by means of ocean-breezes to the king’s garden, leaving him to
discover his consort as if by chance. The ogres^ or TVisaya
are not comparable to the quarrelsome and boastful ogies of
Daywagonban. The ogre-king is shown to be a worthy monarch,
but he and his kingdom have to be sacrificed in order that the

102 BURMESE DRAMA
r^i^'op may he firmly established in Ceylon. Duty and destiny
uir.u tne ogres and the gods to the human world, and through that
connexion, they seem real to us, though they belong actually to a
spiritual world ot their own, and through that connexion, they could
come into l Pm Xya's plays without destroying the atmosphere of
reaiism. L Pun Xya does not have to create a fantastic world to
accommodate his spirits, as U Kyin U had to. Even in Kawthala,
written ^-n imitation of Dayzcagonban, the tree-god, reincarnation of
kawthala. is mirercnt from the tree-god of U Kyin U’s play. U Pon
Xya s tree-god does not indulge in boastful speeches and displays of
temper. PL- is serious, not petty. His duty is to restore his dynastv
out :ie interferes as little as possible. He gives a magic bow'to his
s< nut he impresses upon the young man the necessity of acting for
fumseit; L Pon Xya’s gods can help, but the initiative must come
turn numan beings. In that play, too, we find the love-god acting as
a servant of destiny; he has to arrange a meeting between the destined
lovers, but he has to act as if the arranged meeting were by chance
Ana when the young prince is put on the gallows, the tree-god has
o sect, t. t tie p of his old enemy, for even gods are powerless against
me ad-conquering destiny. With all these differences between the
supernatural characters of the two dramatists, it is not improbable that
L Ion Xya owes something to the king of the gods of Dayzcagonban
l0: n-is conception of the supernatural.
,, ,In the portirayai of character U Pon Xya excels U Kyin U, mainlv
clause he is the heir of all the experiments of the earlier dramatist
He interests the audience in the development of character in the
course or tne may; The Water-seller is a fine study in character
development ana m Wizaya the effect of a sense of duty and
T™' °n.£he/haracters is well shown. As this topic has been
r^- ,m tarller sections, further discussion is unnecessary.
L Kym 1 nad not portrayed any developed female character, perhaps
i Td hi! :!T?-f°rtrayal 0f CharaCter Was then new and
chmaaeri FP v “ eXperimentinS in the depiction of male
non TffL "r .Xya’ C°mmg after U Kyin U> could turn to the
f ort.ayal of female characters, and it is even possible that he was forced
\Viz!va° theT§ niS 2 enCeildam0Uring for if‘ The ogre-princess of
e ptdumX ind are wel1 conceived, and
even Paduma s princess is a fine achievement in some ways. In the
portrayal of common people, U Pon Nya shows that he is a true realist!
I kun L showed the possibilities of portraying such people in

103
U PON NYA
Mahan, where the leader of Manaw’s men and a woman attendant on
the queen-mother quarrelled and argued and hurled insults at each
other. It is likely that that realistic and humorous scene taught
U Pon Nya something. As he was very famous as a writer of humorous
satires against various types of people, humorous satire naturally
comes into some of his plays. In Waythandaya the roguish but
rather charming hermits who lived on the credulity of simple villagers
are well satirized. In Kawthala the goatherd is a typical country¬
man of U Pon Nya’s time, good-natured, humorous, indulging in
ribald jokes, easygoing, yet at the back of it all, having a shrewd
common sense and the utmost loyalty. U Pon Nya has often been
criticized for the coarse jokes of his goatherd, but his love of realism
and his interest in all types of human character, make him portray,
the goatherd as he was in real life. It will be out of place to dwell
on the humour, satire, and realism of U Pon Nya in his non-dramatic
works, but as they are echoed in his plays, perhaps it is essential to
2ive some idea of what he is like in his other works: he is there
comparable to Chaucer of the Canterbury Tales and the goatherd
is but an example of his many creations who are akin to the miller
and his quarrelsome companions. The humour of U Pon Nya is
said to detract from the artistic unity of his plays. ^ Doubtless,
humour is dangerous in Burmese drama, in view of the actor’s
and the audience’s love of laughter, often uncontrolled. U Kym L
did not indulge in humorous scenes or characters, though the
interlude had been given to broad humour, perhaps because he thought
that the artistry and seriousness of the drama were in danger of being
lost in cheap farce. And in the decadent period the uncontrolled use
of humour does destroy the artistry of the plays. But U Pon Nya
keeps his humour under control, and often through it he increases the
artistry of his plays. Kawthala has no unity, but the fault is not with
the goatherd; in fact, one of the chief reasons why that play is at all
interesting, is the existence of that character. In Waythandaya the
humorous first scene has no direct connexion with the mam action, but
it stands as a contrast to the second scene, where pathos is the chief note.
Again in the third scene U Pon Nya uses humour, but he keeps it under
control so as to prevent it from interfering with the events connected
with the main action. The failure by the decadent dramatists, who
imitate his humorous scenes, encouraged to do so by their great
popularity with the audience, to equal or even approach anywhere near
U Pon Nya, emphasizes his greatness as a humorist. His humour is

BURMESE DRAMA
' rT-e'iy' nf,t fi,rce- and i4 aPPeaIs t0 Ae intellect, often helping to
rvrtrav_ t cr.aracter, or to satirize the fads and^ fashions uoif tmhee ttiimmee.. *
Him a;! his romantic tendencies, U Kyin U was a striver after
rertection or rorm -n his plays, and U Pon Nya follows him in that
respect. I Kyin L aimed at a logical and clear unfolding of the plot
In me section dealing with The Water-setter I have shown how U Pon
- ir‘ driving to conform with this doctrine of U Kyin U was led
on to something approximating to the observance of the three «unities
, 1 CcmKe’ 1 K>',n L also did not know anything of western drama"
!t ,,V!U be lnteresting to consider how far his plavs fitted
m witntne western theory of‘unities'. The unity of action would
T :° “ mam alm ln U Kyin U’s plays, for without it the
‘ M'1 of me plot was not possible. With regard to the
ry °?iaCe’he did n0t limit his P% to one, but he kept the
viTtC af°n “f tCW 28 P°SSible- The forest and the palace
,’J -Ja,Cfe ot actl0n ln Daywagonban and Parpahein; the
fz s011r m z°V 7edr rtrolmac vo°ne rParhte ro;bf utth eii —foresti etfot *a*no t^her, ojr zfrom
palace In Wahaw, the places of action were the two cities. With
• egaru to the unity of time, he did not limit himself to any fixed
S should te ^ ing i the Pl0t made * neC6SSdrv that
shcuH h 1° g3pS tme betW6en the scenes> and very" little
InTn
davs "Strge’nhe ^ °f the Pla>’s l™ted itself to a few
nays. In Daywagonban, he had some difficulty as to the time Six
"”.rr r? b"""n ,h' •* .1.= you»g
TtnUa, Ta ft U™ ?“ '"d ^ ”«'■ ™
iated bv he h months, m which Daywagonban had ,0 be ed„-
wWat;h.™:t ^“;r;,he action ^^
for sZeveZn fP’ l ,'.mr * pnnC6SS was Put into the dungeon
the i"' f ™ f8h,1J MW by die %ht between
l
betrothed whfth et of *• hemtit and his
iUsot’d i £,v h PPer "'hile ,he Pi— »*» being
e-***-,
JZ hi, 1 r , the most mature an3
action T ^
the dawning of the third day, and there were^T? ^ n£Xt’Unf1
time being accounted for "before the eyes of thePS> °* 1“
Mahasc though the actual time was not" ascertainable^" Kvm U
succeeded m producing the illusion of an

105
U PON NYA
hours or at the most a day or two, in spite ot the fact that tne
'• taken by the action in the relevant portion^ of the Jataka was
=ome months. U Pon Nya follows U Kyin U’s aim in Paduma
Without anv innovations, and without any startling success. In
ffe Water-seller he fully achieves what the other had aimed at, and as
have seen, the play has an effect of completeness and flawless artistry.
However in Wizaya we find that he no longer conforms to the unities
of time and place, and that he modifies U Kyin U’s conception of the
smooth movement of the action, though he still aims at the logical
unfolding of the plot. The time of the action is many years and
between the scene where the embassy is sent in search ot an ally for
Cevlon and the next where the embassy returns with a princess,
them is an interval long enough for the ogre-princess to give birth
to a son and daughter, and there is another interval, this time ot
many years, between the marriage of W izaya to his queen and the
demand of the people that an heir must be found for the kingdom.
The play has for its scenes the forest of Ceylon, the palace ot the
ogre-king, the capitals of three kingdoms, the palace ot W izaya, an
an island near Ceylon. With regard to the unity of action, U Kyin
U’s conception of the smooth and logical movement ot action, as
seen through his practice, was that all should be related to the
adventures of a hero, or a group of heroes. In Wizaya there are two
different sets of heroes, Wizaya and his contemporaries, ana the
group headed by the nephew. However, U Pon Nya does not rea^y
break away from U Kyin U, because the true action and the true
hero of the play is destiny, the other characters being mere servan
of it The modification then is that U Pon Nya takes an a s ra
notion as his hero. This point is missed by the later dramatists wo
follow U Pon Nya, and in their plays they give different adventures
of separate heroes, whose connexion with one another is some blood
relationship, without the essential action that bums Wizaya -o ms
nephew. Kawthala needs no comment as to ns importance in ■, . ■
Nya’s dramatic practice, except that the use of the magic pond is o
get out of the difficulty of the gap of sixteen years, which worn
otherwise divide the scenes. This device of the magic pond later
becomes common practice in the hands ot the decadent dramatist*
In Waythandaya he again conforms in some respects with our th
of the ^unities’. Even the palace is not used, and the entire action
takes place in the forest. The time of the action is not even one d^ ,
but only a few hours. However, he again changes his treatment of

BURMESE DRAMA
a;:;-'".. Tnc main action is the -_rriet and suffering of Ma-di, and that
:s wr. -r. t.-.-e sec <r.d scene, the other two scenes being used as
“ 1 : •' t;-c tcntrai scene. U Pon Xya seems to think that, though
tr.e r.r#t scene is r.-t ui recti v Connected with the story, and though
tree tmre scene i.as little :• i do with the portrayal of Ma-di’s character,
ti.ey contribute c i tr.e main action in that they stand in contrast to it,
ar.'U merer, re rt.p to neiffitcr. its effect. However, the result is not
s > artistic, and the play, in spite of its two ‘unities’, does not equal
Hu If aUr-fttur as a v. rk of art. I: has none the less some effect of
p r. rudeness a- a stry. L Pon Nya’s love of, and mastery in,
winuinu up r.is p.ay nto a well-balanced structure of three parts, a
U':rl.?“r: v;ith t;v' help to heighten the artistic effect. In
7'-‘ as has been already pointed out, the man is the
centra: part with the king and the woman water-seller as wings, and
-.a tnia, scene, at first, the king and the prince stand as the central
structure, vviiik- or. one side are male courtiers and on the other the
pi irwess ana tier ladies, and later, the empty middle-stage is the centre,
witn me sms and courtiers on one side, and the water-sellers on the
otner. In Waytkandaya the first scene and the last, both humorous,
stand as win-us to the second central scene of pathos. Again, the later
dramatists fail to understand the essential qualities of Waytkandaya,
arm they take it to mean that U Pon Nya’s conception of the
.tcimwuic .v a play is that humorous scenes and scenes of pathos
sm.-uid tokow each other in turn, with the result that most decadent
pews arc mere collections of pathetic and humorous scenes, without
any real connexion between them. It is ironical that imitation of U
oi, . \a, .mo rulk achieves L Kvin U’s ideal of plot construction
ana perfection of form m The Water-seller and who nearly repeats the
success m W aytkandaya, should result in the decadent period of the
drama.
L Pon X-Va's Pla>'s beionged to an epoch lasting for about twenty
Jtars in Burmese history, when the kingdom gave a final flicker
oe.ore permanent extinction. The years that followed U Kyin U
were of gloom. The hopes of winning back the provinces lost
to me Britan m 1824 were destroyed by the realization of the
™f!lc ,°: Bnfin’ hJ the madness of the able king, Tharrawaddy
t ^ . j, anu by the incompetence of his successor, Pagan (1847-53).
The ^country suffered another disaster in 1852 when, through the
kings fault more provinces fell into British hands. During that
period the drama was greatly neglected. In 1853 Mindon, who later

107
Ti PON NTA
became the patron of U Pon Nya, rebelled successfully against his
brother Pagan, and there came into being a promise of better nines.
He built a" new capital, Mandalay, with wide streets and pleasant
squares and his wisdom and statesmanship won him the love of his
We'and the respect of the British. There was again an under¬
standing between the court and the people, and the court became
once more the centre of learning, after the lapse of some fifty years.
Treaties of friendship between Burma and Britain and the personal
affection the king had for Queen Victoria seemed to assure lasting
peace to the country.1 Dreams of a mighty empire, reflected m the
heroic interludes, and to some extent in U Kyin U, were abandoned
for ever. Peace and contentment were the keynote ot the period, and
there entered the drama, restored to the forefront by U Pon Nya,
an atmosphere of calm, as opposed to that of strife in U Kym U.
Even in Wizaya that calmness prevailed. The epoch ended with the
execution of U Pon Nya and the rebellion of Myingun, which caused
the death of the heir to the throne, the ablest soldiers, the wisest
statesmen, and the most learned scholars of the day, leaving the king
alone to rule a country wrapped in gloom and a people torn
into different factions over the pressing and difficult problem ot
succession. . ,. . , . • ,
U Pon Nya followed U Kyin U in expressing political opinions
in his plavs, but he went further and used the drama as a political
weapon. In Paduma he attacked those ladies of the court who had
not shown enough respect or patronage to him, and he was so success¬
ful that he became a power in the land. The king, t e crown
prince, and the chief queen realized this, and they used The Hater-
seller to announce to the people, who were secretly getting ready for
a civil war, that the threatened rupture between the brothers king
and prince, happily, would not materialize. Even after its author s
death, the plav was once specially performed at court, to test opinion
with regard to the king’s plan to appoint an able prince, who was far
removed from the line of succession, as heir to the t rone. n
middle of the performance, a senior prince said: ‘It father wants to
1 One of the most prized possessions of King Mindon was a gold
watch which Queen Victoria had presented him, and which he ^
During the Indian Mutiny, in spite ot temptation, he remaine . y .
even sent help to the British, saying that he would never. strike a friend .
trouble’. CD G. E. Harvey, History of Burma, school edition: the ordinary
edition gives the history up to 1824 only.

BURMESE DRAMA
''::t J l!!'vT ?r:r^ as erwvit prince, there will be no objection, on
hy:t* but it u us re t mean that he will become king for, look
/; uUr-nihr. The project was consequently abandoned.
Th:s ' moment '** ^trates the p, wer 'f the drama in the politics of the
Kazvtkala was probably meant to convey to a small section of
x ?'L‘ 'rt‘- a jams: treating with the British and wanting
u:e the mutnne tnat destiny, a worthy foe, and the interests of
a ecu nttry w'um act against any personal motive of revenge. Wizaya
r:ttcr- tf‘" :r‘ l’,Vc;r ?aPTirtt:r? tor Prince My ingun. He had been,
arm tr< umrsume as tne youthrul Wizaya, and the suggestion was
Mym.L-un vuuid bring greatness to Burma if he were but
ertri
"s:,y: u:t:i tnc throne. Alsu, as Myingun had the project of
Kuur "atl:cr and tatfter-m-law, tne crown prince, the play
' •, as : m hairy meant tu sprem the doctrine that the destined greatness
country euiiec tor, and justified, sacrifices, The play was so
mr trmt primardy Myingun thought wrongly that public opinion
Been moulded to give him support when he rebelled. The
rebel non tailed, and U Pon Xya lost his life, chiefly through the very
play
which must Burmese critics acclaim as his masterpiece.

CHAPTER V
THE DECADENT PERIOD
1. The Drama from 1S66 to 1877
The vears that followed the Myingun rebellion and the execution
of U Pon Nya were years of distress and discontent. The rebellion
had taken its toil of able men, and the king was left alone to rule
a country, discontented especially for economic reasons. Lower
Burma was being developed by the British, and the resulting increase
in commerce with the west was changing the existing economic
conditions in both Lower and Upper Burma. Naturally, the period
of transition was one of distress and discontent. The English and
French were rivals in their desire to gain control of Burmese trade
relations, and the Burmese played on the rivalry by bargaining,
making secret treaties, and asking exorbitant prices for favours
granted, thereby denying economic stability to the country. The
kin» was without advisers and a dying man, and as tne eternal ques¬
tion of succession—the bane of Burmese politics—was improbable
of solution, the English and French struggled for influence, and
consequently, the palace was one mass of intrigue. Corruption was
rife in the kingdom, administration was neglected, the judges took
bribes and robbers roamed the country at will. Amidst such adverse
conditions, the drama could not flourish, and though the plays of U
Pon Nya were still acted, studied and imitated, no dramatist of even
moderate ability appeared.
We have seen that from the beginning, song and dance were the
main items of entertainment on the stage. Even when the Siamese
plavs were being presented at court and influencing the drama all
over the country, the song and dance were still important, nrst
because of the earlier tradition, second, because the protessional
actors were in reality singers and dancers, and third, because the
song was of great importance in the Rama play. However, with the
coming of developed plays, the dance was eliminated, aitnough the
song occasionally remained. In U Kyin U’s plays the dance did not

no BURMESE DRAMA
M'pear at all, and the song had lost its importance to such an extent
that or.h one scene in ali his plays had songs, which was in Davwa-
U v, here the hermit and the two princesses spoke to "each
' !n songs. Though L Pon Nya was a great writer of songs, not
one appeared m his plays. These great dramatists, through their
brilliance. made the audience interested in the play alone, and the
professional actors had no choice but to follow the dictates of the
famous playwrights. After U Pon Nya, through lack of interest in
true drama and because there were no able dramatists, the drama fell
again into the hands of the professional actors, who had always
considered themselves dancers and singers. They continued to
present the great plays and their imitations, but only as frameworks
:>>r tneir songs and dances. We shall see later that after the final
dicker of the drama during the years 1877-86 it perished in the
—*■ AUs of tiie actors with their interest in song and dance.
The people themselves wanted song and dance. They wanted an
entertainment pleasing to the eye and the ear, without taxing the brain.
They wanted an escape from the realities of life, because they were
weary ot the present and anxious for the future, as they knew not
u hat dreadful events the next few months would bring. They wanted
new dances and new tunes, and they applauded elaborate dresses and
brilliantly staged scenes; and the actors could give them what they
wanted as, through the influence of English and French touring
companies, the stage scenery and devices had developed by leaps and
bounds.1 They demanded both laughter and tears, but as they desired
tne drama to appeal only to their senses and not to the intellect, what
they really wished for and received were farce and sentimental pathos.
The spirit of the audience had changed since the days of the great
dramatists. The drama came into being in the age of triumph, when
the attitude of the audience towards life was one of serenity and
optimism. During U Kyin U’s time, disaster, in the shape of the
loss of provinces to the British, had overtaken the country, but there
seemed to be a promise of better times, and therefore the spirit of the
nation was still serene. When U Pon Nya wrote his plavs, more
provinces had been lost to the British, but again there was a promise
of better times, and the spirit of the audience remained calm and
serene. But after U Pon Nya, the spirit was one of despair and
anxiety.
* The develoPn>ent of the. stage is considered in detail in chap. vii.

THE DECADENT PERIOD 111
So for about a. decade after the death of U Pon Nya, the drama
decayed and was left entirely in the hands of actors. And in Upper
Burma, the real home of the drama, it never recovered from their
influence. True, some scholars in the quiet of a monastery wrote many
a play, retelling a religious story, but their plays were never meant to
be presented on the stage, nor did they follow the established dramatic
traditions. They were merely scholarly exercises, and though many
contained masterly prose and poetry, they did not really belong to the
true drama, for they were plays only in name.1 In Lower Burma,
however, scholars again assumed control of the drama, though they
had to comply with the desires of the actors in many matters. The
change in the venue of Burmese drama is significant. Rangoon, the
capital of British Burma, and not Mandalay, the national capital, was
now the centre of dramatic development. The reasons for the change
were many. The court was the centre of political intrigues and the
drama could no longer look to it for development. Upper Burma was in
a hopeless condition, and it never recovered until some years after the
completion of the British conquest in 1886. In Lower Burma, on the
other hand, by about 1875, the benefits of a developed commerce were
seen, and after a few years of transition, prosperity was return¬
ing. There was peace and stability of government. The spirit
of "the people in Lower Burma was no longer of anxiety and despair.
But it was not one of great serenity, for they realized that Upper
Burma would soon fall into British hands, and the Burmese would
never again have a kingdom of their own. There was intense regret,
and the Burmese Crown, from, which the past greatness of the nation
had flowed, came to be looked upon with great sentimentality. True,
the court in Upper Burma was in a disgraceful condition, especially
since the death of Mindon and the accession of his son, Theebaw
(1875-86), but that very deterioration, by contrast, enhanced the
sentimental respect for the past glories of the throne. The drama
therefore was used to present scenes of great splendour, in which
court manners and customs were shown to an audience who, having
come under an alien rule since 1824, knew their national court only
from hearsay. That was why sentimentality and spectacle continued to
dominate the drama, even though conditions had improved enough
1 Some plays of this type, printed in Lower Burma, are preserved in the
British Museum, e.g. Thuzvana-thama and Malm Zanakay both by monks and
founded on U Awbatha’s Jatakas of the same names. Many of these plays are
. still obtainable in Burma.

1 i 2 BURMESE DRAMA
.M'huars tv rehandle it. The introduction of cheap printing in
Li'”,-rr Burma was of the utmost importance to the drama. Printing
bed been knw.vr. t j the Burmese long before the British administered
Lou er Burma, but ;t mas an expensive and laborious affair. The
British introduced cheap and efficient printing presses, worked bv
chcap but skilled Indian labour. Once the stage of transition had
been completed and economic prosperity had returned, printing spread
a'.i over Lower Burma and widened the circle of admirers of the
drama, encouraged the study of the great plays in their original form
as distinct from the modified versions of the professional actors, and
-reate i a public eager not only to see but also to read plays. As a
result o: these various causes scholars began writing plays again after
IS.r, rut tr.eir ettorts were not very successful until Sava Yaw in
i$77 wrote and produced his History of Thaton.
2. The History of Thaton
Sava Yaw's story is remarkably original. In order that the
question of succession should be settled beforehand, the young
king of Tnaton is advised by his ministers to take a consort
without delay, and he promises to consider the matter. In the next
scene, a brother and sister, belonging to a semi-civilized tribe on a
neighbouring mountain, are entering the city to seek employment,
fir tney have been starving since the death of their parents. The
acer.e sn.tts to the centre of the city, where a rich nobleman and his
wife are quarrelling and blaming each other, because they have no
children to inherit their wealth. The characters are comic, and the
scene is humorous. As they stand shouting at each other, the brother
and sister pass by, and they are struck by the girl’s beauty and the
young man’s nobility of bearing. When they discover that the stran¬
gers are without parents and are looking for employment, they, in great
joy, adopt them as son and daughter. In the next scene, merchants
from the Shan hills arrive at the city, singing and dancing their
own songs and dances. They soon dispose of their wares, and
they are making preparations to leave when the brother arrives
He becomes friendly with the merchants, and after listening to their
tales of romance and adventure in their hills, he decides to accompany
them to their home. He asks permission to go from his foster-parents
and his sister, who reluctantly let him go. The foster-parents crv, and
the brother and sister bid farewell to each other in songs of great
tenderness. In the next scene, the chieftain of a Shan state is sorely

113
THE DECADENT PERIOD
troubled in mind, because he has only a daughter to succeed him.
Whde his daughter, the Shan princess, plays and sings and dances
in her garden, the merchants with the brother pass by. The brother
and the princess fall in love with each other and plight their
troth in song and dance. The chieftain arrives on the scene, but
fortunately for all concerned, he approves of the young man and
proclaims him heir.
Meanwhile the sister in Thaton is having her adventures. A god,
who had been brother to her in a previous existence, gives her an
ear-ring as a token of affection. She puts it away for wearing on special
occasions. The king passes by her window, falls in love, and makes
her queen. That night, as the new queen awaits her husband, she
sings happy songs to herself, then puts on the ear-ring, and falls
asleep- She now looks like an ogress for, unknown to the well-
meaning god, the ear-ring causes its wearer to have the appearance of
an ogress. The king, on entering, thinks her to be an ogress who has
assumed human form to bring disaster to his kingdom. So he orders
her execution and commands that her foster-father himself must
execute her, as he suspects the nobleman of having known all the
time that his adopted daughter is an evil being. So at dawn, the girl
is put into a velvet bag,1 and the doting father is ordered by soldiers
to beat her to death. He refuses, in spite of tortures, until the girl
begs him to dispatch her quickly and end her agony. She dies,
singing pathetic songs, while the father and even the soldiers cry.
In compliance with her request before her death, the dead body is
sent floating down the river on a raft. The father then engages a
bricklayer to build a pagoda on the spot where she was executed.
The bricklayer is a cynical old fellow, who thinks some unnecessary
fuss is being made of a dead girl. He is a comic character.
The god of the forest stops the raft and lays the dead queen
on the river bank. Her ghost appears before the brother,
now chief of the Shan state in succession to his father-in-law. He
at once leaves for Thaton attended by a minister. The god of
the forest, unknown to the brother, causes him to find the body
of his sister. He is grief-stricken, and guessing from the velvet
bag what had happened, swears revenge on the king of Thaton. He
1 According to established custom, Burmese royalty were put into velvet
bags before execution. Also, as no blood of royal persons should be shed on
the scaffold, the usual method of their execution was by drowning, burning or
beating. ©

BURMESE DRAMA
sends his minister hack to fetch his Shan army. He cries over the
' f d*. m his sister, sinking funeral songs. An ogress appears and pro-
:;;;ses to bring the sister back to life, if the brother will agree to take
her (the stress) us consort during his stay in the forest On his
acceptance of the proposal, she restores the sister to life. Soon the
egress does birth to a son, who at once attains manhood through his
mother's supernatural powers. The young man is seized with a
desire to travel and obtain homage from human kings, and he leaves
takrnu witn turn a magic sword. He returns after some time and
relates his adventures: he has received homage from all except one
kirn;; him, the young man tried to kill but the magic sword refused
to e me out of its sheath; awed by the incident, he secretly visited
the king's bed-chamber at night and drew a portrait of him. Now
tr.e wrnng man shows the portrait to his ogress-mother, his father
and to his aunt, who recognizes it to be that of her husband, the king
: ThatMiv She cries and sings as old memories are revived, and
iwwn dies of a broken heart.
The minister arrives with the Shan army, and the brother leads
his men to the sates of Thaton. The king brings out his forces, but
as the two armies face each other for battle, the sister, now a nat-
spint, appears on the scene and makes peace between her husband
and her brother. After extracting an oath from both that the peace
wnl not be broken, she leaves, dancing a spirit dance and singing a
sung, in which she tells of the various misfortunes that befell her in life
and blames fate for her tragedy.
The very title of the play illustrates the sentimental and romantic
attitude of the period towards history. Saya Yaw calls his play The
History of Thaton. but it has nothing to do with the history of the real
kingdom of Thaton which flourished before the eleventh century a.b.
No dramatist of the Age of Learning which introduced the Siamese
Ratrm or of L: Pon Nya’s time would have dared to call it a
‘ History k
I he pilot is formless, and it moves on without logic or unity.
Many of the incidents are unnecessary to the story, and some are
unexplained. The god who gives the ear-ring to the sister, never
appears again to save her whom he professes to love so well. The
ogress who brings the sister back to life makes no attempt to repeat
her performance when the girl dies of a broken heart. The story is.
disjointed as it is merely a framework for incidents which, make the
audience laugh or weep or gaze in awe.

THE DECADENT PERIOD 115
With all its faults, the play achieves what it sets out to do. It tries
to compromise between the tradition of dramatic scholarship on the
one hand, and the demands of the audience and the desires of the
acting profession on the other. To make the compromise possible,
qava Yaw has to evolve a new interpretation of the old doctrine that
the essence of dramatic technique was the logical and clear unfolding
of the plot.1 The great achievement of this play is in the way the
solids and dances are knit into it. The characters sing only when the?
are very happy or sad, and special dances are brought into the play in
a masterly way; the Shan dance is introduced through the incidents
connected with the Shan merchants, and a nat-spirit dance through
the device of making the sister such a spirit after death. The ending of
the play must have satisfied both the audience and the actors. It was
sentimental, pathetic, and strange enough for the decadent audience,
and it afforded an opportunity for the actors to show some, spirit¬
dancing_the basis of their profession. The lyrics and the poetical
language of the play satisfied the scholar-dramatists and brought back
the"drama definitely to the old tradition.2
3. The Baboon Brother and Sister
The History of Thaton was immensely popular, and it was produced
repeatedly alf over Lower Burma, and even troubled Upper Burma
saw it performed sometimes. Within a few weeks of puolication,
15,000 copies of the play in book form were sold. The figure was
gigantic for those days, and the people were astounded. In spite of the
fact that he was now looked upon as the greatest among contemporary
dramatists, Saya Yaw wrote no other play. In fact, although there is
ample evidence in the play that he Was intimately connected with the
drama and the acting profession, the History is the only dramatic
work he ever composed. Many imitations of the successful play were
put on the stage and published, but they were unworthy of their
model, and the appetite of the public for the drama remained unsatis¬
fied until U Ku composed The Baboon Brother and Sister.
U Ku was an able musician and song-writer. He had been
connected with the drama long before The Baboon Brother and Sister
(his first play), for he had been adviser to many acting troupes as he
was a noted*student of dramatic theory and practice. He wrote and.
1 This new conception of dramatic technique is considered in detail in s. 5.
. 2 An extract from this play is given in appendix x.

BURMESE DRAMA
pn diictJ his c Baboon Play’ (as it was commonly called) in 1877 a
te;v months alter The History of Thaton. It was an immediate success
or. the stage, and 20,000 copies of the play were sold in a short time.
The story, which is an original one, is as follows. The kino
awaits the return of his son and heir who is away at a university in
India. In a soliloquy, we learn that he has two other children
unknown to the people. He was out one day on a hunt in the forest
when he became separated from Ills followers. When darkness came
he climbed a tree for shelter, and found himself in the nest of a
baboon, who gave him fruit to eat but forced him to mate with her.
He was kept a prisoner ior a year, during which time a son and
can enter were bom to the baboon. Both children had the appearance
of human beings. Some time later, he escaped and returned to the
capital, where he told his story in all particulars except that two
children were bom to the baboon. As the prince in India is
tiie child of his queen whom he married only after his misadven¬
ture with the baboon, the king thinks that the baboon children,
if still alive, are the real heirs. In the next scene, we find the
prince returning from India with an attendant. They sing and dance
and make humorous speeches. On arrival at the palace, he is at once
crowned king, as his father wishes to retire to the monastery as soon
as possible.
A hunter and his wife are quarrelling, because the husband always
taltts and behaves as if he were a nobleman, and because the wife is a
shrew. They are comic characters. To escape from the nagging wife,
he goes into the forest in search of game. A brother and sister are’
m the forest. The girl has attained the age of sixteen years, and begs
the brother to tell the story of their birth, as she is now old enough
to know. He tells that their mother was a baboon and that they are
the children of her union with the king of the neighbouring city.
The mother had told him the facts as she lay dying. They go to the
grave of their mother and pray, cry, and sing pathetic songs. The
hunter enters, and in a soliloquy he considers whether the account of
the brother to which he has been listening unseen is true. He has
heard of the king s captivity in the hands of a baboon and therefore
concludes the account to be true. He tells the brother and sister that
he has been sent by the new king to bring them to the city, as they
are his own brother and sister. The two are afraid, and they bewail
their fate in songs, but in the end they decide that they are human
and must go and live among men.

THE DECADENT PERIOD 117
When the hunter and his companions arrive at his hut, the wife
Sumps t0 ,-p.e conclusion that the girl is the hunter’s mistress, and
Cats her. She cries, and her brother cries and begs for mercy in
s0n(S At last the hunter succeeds in making his wife believe his
7
account regarding the new-comers. She is willing to adopt them as
son and daughter, but considers his plan of taking them to the king
would be highly dangerous.
The next scene is between a landlord and his son in Upper Burma.
Thev are comic characters. As there is a shortage of labour and they
badl'v need a ploughman, they decide to visit their great friend, the
hunter, in Lower Burma, and ask his help. They arrive at the
hunter’s hut, and when they tell him and his wife the reason of the
visit, she suggests that her adopted son should become their plough¬
man! The hunter is against the proposal, but he is scolded into
silence by the wife. The young man and his sister refuse to part, but
when they are beaten by the wife, he has no choice but to go. They
bid each other farewell in tender songs.
The wife ill-treats the girl so much that the hunter, who dearly
loves the maiden as a daughter, desides on taking her to the king. He
tells his wife that if he were to offer the girl to the king without
mentioning her real origin, she would be made queen as she is
exceedingly beautiful, and they would be amply rewarded. The wife
points out that if the king should ever find out the truth, all of them
would be executed. He discusses the matter with the girl herself,
and both come to the conclusion that any risk is worth taking to get
away from the cruel woman. So he takes the maiden to the king,
telling him that she is a gift from the fairies in the forest. The king
makes her queen, and him a nobleman. The scene closes with the
hunter bragging to his wife.
The king wanders about the city at night, listening to the gossip
of his subjects. He hears a couple quarrelling. The husband accuses
the wife of copying the rude manners of the ex-hunter’s wife. The
quarrel leads to a discussion of the rumour that the queen is in reality
a baboon. They sleep and the king passes along the darkened stage.
Then, the ex-hunter and his wife are heard talking in bed. The wife
is frightened, and as her fear makes her more human, she is no longer
a nagging woman. She is anxious lest the king should hear the
rumour about his queen. The hunter consoles her, saying that no one
would dare to speak about the rumour to the king, as a bringer of bad
news usually gets identified with the bad news itself and is punished.

ILs BURMESE DRAMA
‘The king wiA never know. Let us sleep,5 the hunter says, and the
Mite echoesM Yes, he will never know. Aye, let us sleep,5 as the king
silently leaves the scene.
The next scene is the bedchamber of the queen, who is in travail.
In a soliloquy the king decides to wait until the heir is born. The
queen cries as she has had a bad dream. A son is born, and the
queen is overjoyed. The next moment an executioner arrives to take
her away. She is beaten to death.
As the ploughing is done, the brother joyously returns to the
hunter’s hut, and is puzzled as it is empty. A passer-by informs him
ot the misfortune that has come to his household. He sings sad
songs. That night, he enters the palace and runs away with his
nephew into the forest, where a god makes the child grow up at once
into a youth of eighteen years. The uncle and nephew wander about
the forest in search of food. The youth finds himself in a strange
city which adjoins the forest, and entering a pleasant garden, he falls
asleep on a bed of flowers. Now the city has no king but only a
queen, and soothsayers have foretold that a man, destined to be a
great king, will be found one day sleeping on the bed of flowers.
Some courtiers find the prince asleep, awaken him, and hastily fetch
the queen. The prince and the queen fall in love, and plight their
troth in song and dance. They go to the palace where the young
prince is crowned king. His uncle meanwhile is in great anxiety for
his nephew, and following footmarks, he arrives at the palace, where
he loudly demands the restoration of his nephew to him. He is taken
to the king, whom he tries to embrace, recognizing him to be his lost
nephew. But the king is ashamed of his lowly uncle, denies all
knowledge, and orders that he be trampled to death by elephants.
The scene is now the place of execution. The uncle sings doleful
songs. The elephants, though prodded on by their drivers, refuse to
trample on him. This is taken to be a sign of his innocence by those
present, and an appeal for pardon is made to the king, who arrives
on the scene, but he is reluctant to stop the execution. A goddess
appears, and the uncle recognizes her to be his sister. She tells
the king that she was his mother, and makes him repent and ask
for forgiveness from the uncle. She then leaves, dancing a spirit
dance and singing a sorrowful song in which she relates her tragic
story. °
The similarities between this play and The History of Thaton are
many and obvious. The idea of a brother and sister being parted,

the decadent PERIOD
i the ending are direct borrowings from the earlier play. In some
a*s H is more ‘decadent’ than the other. The hankering after
Sensational effect is seen in the author’s making the hero and heroine
Children of a baboon, in the scene where the queen is shown to be
"n travail, and in the final scene where elephants are used, to make it
more elaborate. But, in other ways this play is more artistic, for it
has some effect of unity. In the History, the misfortune that befell
the sister was unexplained and came without warning, but m this
olav there is an atmosphere of impending tragedy. From the begin¬
ning the audience is made to feel that in all probability, some
disaster will befall the brother and sister, as they are children of an
natural union. Whereas in the History the sister suffered through
no fault of her own, our heroine here agrees to deceive the king,
takin* the risk of execution with open eyes, and commits the sin m
incest1 Retribution is apparent, and this atmosphere of impending
punishment makes the play quite artistic up to the point where
the heroine is executed, notwithstanding the disjointed nature of the
«torv taken as a whole. And there are scenes where dramatic irony
* used with artistic effect. In one scene, the queen awakes after a
bad dream and the king pretends to be still greatly m love with her,
while the audience knows from his previous soliloquy that she is to
be executed as soon as the child is born. In another, the brother
approaches the hut singing and dancing in joy, little guessing that his
sister has been executed. The scene where the king listens to the
^ossip of his subjects, is the most dramatic m the play. The stage is
in darkness, the king moves and listens stealthily, and the atmosphere
is tense and full of suspense. Then voices of the quarrelling couple
are heard off-stage. They are envying the sudden good fortune or
the hunter and his wife, little realizing that the objects of their enu
i To keep the blood as pure as possible, Burmese kings often married
their half-sisters. This royal practice was not confined to but :sas
known in Siam, the East Indies, Peru when under the^^ ?
under the Pharaohs (G. E. Harvey, History of Burma, V-
neonte it has always been considered a sin and a crime to mart, one hal
brother or sister. In this play, although the sister is a kmg^s aaughter h
husband is king, there is no doubt that the marnage between them sugg
X0'*£TZ, the sister is in love with her
Burmese decadent dramatists often take incestuous love beto br0*6r rd
sister for their themes, like the Elizabethan decadent playwright.. Ct. herd,
’Tis 'Pito She’s a Whore. .

1 BURMESE DRAMA
" >' * u — put to death. Then, we hear the voices of the hunter
and ids y. ire. At the end of their discussion, they say to each other-
ww nine v:U never know. Let us sleep,5 not knowing that then
rwve just sea lea their own rate.
in spite of the great success of this play, U Ku did not write
tru-thcr in the real decadent manner until 1881. Perhaps, being a
student of the well-constructed piavs of U Kyin U and U Pon. Nva
he was dissatisfied with his ‘Baboon Play5, for he based his Wav-
tkafidaya Buyidat (1880), and Karka-wunnaya (1881) on
Jataka stories. He also produced The Water-seller with his own
additions. Though all these plays lie outside the real decadent
drama, they are worthy of consideration, because of their tolerable
success and because of his immense reputation with his contempor¬
aries.
Be seems to have realized that the drama was decaying. His.
return to the Jatakas for stories for his plays is probably an indication
that he is against the lack of serious purpose and some interpretation
of life in contemporary drama, and against the loosely-knit storv,
where the main action is obliterated by inclusion of unnecessary
incidents for sensational effect. In his three Jataka plays, he tries to
include both the realistic atmosphere of the Jataka plays of U Pon
Nya and the romantic atmosphere of the decadent drama with its.
song and dance. The result is not artistic. The characters who
have been speaking in the realistic style of U Pon Nya appear ridiculous
when they start to sing and dance in the best decadent manner.
Probably, when produced on the stage, the effect was worse as the
professional actors must have made the plays more in their own style
than the author had intended. In 1880, when'the boys of the
Government High School at Rangoon went to U Ku for help in their
terminal entertainment, he suggested the production of The Water-
seller with songs added to it. It was a great opportunity for experi¬
ment, as the actors would be amateurs and totally under his direction.
But this adapted Water-seller is a failure, and shows clearly how
difficult It Is for the two types of the drama to be joined into
a harmonious play. The water-sellers and the king sing songs com¬
posed by b Ku at the end of their speeches written by U Pon Nya.
The artistic unity of the great play is destroyed, in spite of the
lyrical beauty of the songs.1 The great success of another writer’s
^ U Po Kya’s edition of The Water-seller (a ‘ textbook * of the Council of
National Education) gives U Kirs songs in footnotes. .

121
THE DECADENT PERIOD
Saw-phay and Saw-may (which is considered in the next section)
c^SSO," tempted U Ku to abandon his experiments in the drama,
Ind he produced The History of Okkalapa in 1881 and Minnandar
■ -| ggj both written in the decadent manner.
The' great contribution of this dramatist to the study of
Burmese drama is his annotated edition of the Rama play, published
in 1880.1
4. Saw-phay and Saw-may
The story of this play is as follows. As the king is unmarried, he
is advised by his ministers to take as consort Saw-mav, daughter of
a rich nobleman, famed for her beauty, and he agrees. In the next
scene, on receiving a message from the king, the nobleman tries
to persuade Saw-may to accept the royal offer of marriage, but she is m
love with Saw-phay, a charming young man, but without any position
or wealth. Hopeful, who is present, takes the side of the daughter,
saving that she is too young to be queen. This Hopeful is a stupid,
comical fellow, who secretly hopes that the girl will ultimately tall m
love with him. The old nobleman, now very angry, swears that he
will force her to marry the king in a few days. The girl has made an
appointment to meet her lover that night, and now she decides to
run away. As she is anxious lest Hopeful should guess her intention,
she misleads him by saving that as she has always been m love with
him she will elope with him that night. At the appointed time,
Saw-phay enters the girl’s garden, and signals to her by gating the
call of a cuckoo, as prearranged. She enters, but as Hopeful follows
her the voung man hides behind a bush. Hopeful tells the girl tnat
her'father is soon coming to look round the garden, as he is suspicious
about a cuckoo cry at the dead of night. She hides herself behnv a
bush, and begs Hopeful to prevent the old man from looking round.
The father enters, and to him Hopeful tells of the adventure, he has
had at nights listening to the sweet call of a cuckoo. At last is
suspicions allayed, the old man leaves the garden. Coming out of their
hiding places, the lovers embrace each other, to t e g^eat anno^anc
of Hopeful, who now challenges Saw-phay to a tig , _ g
intervenes and tells Hopeful, that although she has always been. m I
with Saw-phay, she has also always loved Hopeful as a big broths.
At this he is appeased, and promises to follow them m thur fl.riht
1 An extract from this play is given in appendix xi.

1 id BURMESE DRAMA
D ^ : ri>t, a> companion. The lovers are elated, and they leave the
- v e v iti, HmxiY, ah dare:na, and sinking. In the next scene, the^
"e in :ht ff -rest, Leiviwj Saw-may at a sheltered place, the two men
sparer M tnr.t. They dance and sing and laugh as thev go
- Dun untn the}' reahre that they have lost the way and do not know
h 'V to 'jet Tick to the jirh Saw-phay is sad, but Hopeful tries his
h>t to cheer him up. The two wander on, until the god of the forest
wypairs, arid teds them that they are now far away from where the
maiden is, but nu harm will befall her as he will go there at once and
V u Dee: her. He also shows them the way they must follow to get back
The king, in pursuit of his betrothed and her lover, is now in the
: vest with his army. On finding the girl, he mocks her, insults her,
u u then orders her execution. The god now arrives on the scene,
mm enters into an argument with the king, telling him not to behave
.iwe a little child or an angry fool, and pointing out that there is no
jeod in killing the girl, for that will not win him her love. The king,
admitting his folly, goes back to his city, leaving the girl with the
h! as a friendly gift.
Meanwhile Saw-phay and Hopeful have lost their way again, and
find themselves in a city ruled by a beautiful queen, who, on being'
pressed by ministers to take a consort, has announced that she will
marry the man who can open her magic box. Her people are in
despair as they think that no one will ever be able to open the box,
imr tia$ a hundred locks on it. But Saw-phay wanders into the
pJaee and tenches the box, and through sheer luck, it flies open.
He marries the queen and becomes king himself, the happy occasion
’wing celebrated by songs and dances by the king and queen. The god,
tnmuqh his supernatural vision, sees the marriage celebrations, and
informs Saw-may, who weeps and sings doleful songs. She begs
imve to go to her lover, but the god is anxious for her safety as he
cannot accompany her, because being guardian of the forest, he
cartrmt leave it for long. In the end, however, he has to agree as the
oid persists in going, but he first changes her into a beggar with a
p -ck-mamed face. He warns her that she cannot be transformed
f nek into a princess until three months have elapsed, and if she tells
one that she is in reality a beautiful maiden, she will at once
became a statue made of pearl. He bids a tender farewell, and the
girl leaves the forest. Arriving at her lover’s city,, she enters the
palace aim finds him. In her excitement, she tells Saw-phay who she

123
THE DECADENT PERIOD
• foraetting the god’s warning, and as a result, she becomes a statue.
The cod through his supernatural vision, again sees what is happen-
• c and'coming at once, he throws some water on the statue, and
2t-mav comes to life again. She is made senior queen. ^
" The" last scene is the bedchamber of Saw-phay and^ baw-may.
Thev sin* to each other and fall asleep. Then the girl wakes up ana
sin*; a sorrowful song to herself, bewailing that, although her lover is
restored to her, she has to share him with another queen.
This play is undoubtedly the most artistic ot all the deusdem
, „ jt tells a coherent story, and there is no glaring attempt at
sensationalism, nor are there scenes comparable to the execution
scenes of The History of Thaion and of the ‘ Baboon Play . It is tree mom
blood and horror and too much pathos. And perhaps the story is
more logical and more natural because it is tne story ot lorers anu
not of brother and sister.
Saw-phav and Saw-may has an effect of artistic completeness which
no other play of the period possesses. The action moves logically and
smoothly, unhampered by unnecessary scenes or unconnected inci¬
dents The dramatist concentrates on creating an atmosphere o e ^
romance and nothing else, and that atmosphere is sustained tnroughom
the play, unbroken by scenes giving an impression of suspense ana
h°rTwo scenes need special mention. The scene where Hopeful
discourses on the cuckoo is perhaps the best comm scene m Burmese
drama. The humour is free from coarseness, a fault ot whicr otner
L^ists inching the great U F» Nva are '
something new in dramatic technique, for although irony has bee.
used before for other purposes, this is the first occasion where it ;s
used purely for comic effect. The audience, knowing that the cuckoo =
cry is^a signal, laughs with Hopeful, who, in spite ot his serious ™
and demeanour, is enjoying himself at the expense of tm old ma t.
But Hopeful himself is also the victim of the laughter, for ae oe, nm
realize that the signal is not for the elopement ot baw-may mu
Hopeful, but of Saw-may and Saw-phay. The last sc®n® 01 D® ^
is the least artistic, for it savours of senttmentahsm and ^f .{s
sensational effect. The logical ending of the p ^

- BURMESE DRAMA
' bay-nicy cries in the last scene, and closes the p]av
' - ; ,v _ ’ rAt:- T:'.c S'r-1:' scert appears also to be an attempt at
'."""A"'"' r,£! *h"vr’:n? the bedchamber of the two lovers on
* •"' T — P-'-'-cps the fault is not more heinous and not
e\vus:’\l than the bedr.a ni and underclothes scenes of some*
2urnPe and -America. In spite of its faults,
tree seme ir.iist appeal to many because of the tender pathos and
reautifu; poetry it contains. . In any case it delighted the audience of
me ou), j.,„ ii seems e'.en liitely that the dramatist put in the scene
•i-.ciir.st ms own artistic sense to please the audience and the actors
who admired so much the pathetic endings of The History of Thaton
2nd the 4Baboun Play’.
The immense popularity of the play tempted the dramatist to
write a second part to it.
.As Saw'*may ^ soon going to give birth to an heir, the rival queen
in jealousy plots with the court astrologer to bring about her downfall
A son is soon born, and the astrologer, summoned by the kino to
toretell the destiny of the little prince, pronounces him to be a wizard
and Saw-may a witch, although he realizes that the child is destined
to be a great emperor. King Saw-phay, believing the astrologer
esues both the mother and the son, and she leaves, singing sorrowful
songs ot farewell. Wandering into the forest, she meets her old
tnend the god, who sprinkles some water on the child, making him
grow up at once into a youth of sixteen years. As he is a man bom
to be a great king, flames issue from his mouth and arms He
wants to know who his father is, but the mother and the god evade
ms question. He is seized by a desire to worship the banvan
tree unuer which the Buddha attained Buddhahood, but as^he
cannot go to India, he prays that a replica of the tree should <mow
beiore him, and at once the desired replica appears. Overjoyed" the
young prince again successfully prays for a wall of fire to appear
• ouut tie replica, so that no one can go near it except himself. In
me meantime tne god has gone to the king and told him the truth
-gating his son, scolding him for his cruel treatment of the senior
queen- As the king doubts his words, the god asks him to go and see
1 It is neither a crime nor a sin to marry two wives, but in the case of
v—rs soc.ety frowns on it. Her husband’s taking even a mis ress is
ground tor a,von* for a wife. But Burmese kings, mainly for state rtfon
Z ^
:Ss. TWS ,S ^ B” h£2

125
THE DECADENT PERIOD
t|ie miracle of the tree in the forest. The king arrives there and
Marvelling at the miracle, tries to get nearer, but at once he and his
M'Uowers fall down unconscious, overcome by the wall of fire. The
vountf prince, troubled in mind over his unknown parentage, enters,
and raring nothing for the unconscious people at his feet, shouts out
to the world his question: ‘Who is my father?’ The mother, arriving
on the scene, is distracted, thinking the king to be dead. She tells
her son that the king at his feet is his father, and mother and son
crv. The god now enters, and the queen, in great grief, accuses
him of being the cause of all the trouble. But he calms her down
with soothing words and sprinkling the inevitable water on the
unconscious persons, restores them to consciousness. The king and his
queen are reconciled, but tired of the misery and disappointment of
power, they become monk and nun. The young prince, who becomes
king in his father’s place, promptly orders the execution of the other
queen and the astrologer.
The story, though quite coherent, is meant to be a framework for
sensational episodes. Flames coming forth from the mouthy of the
voung prince, the sudden appearance of the tree, the wall of fire, and
the king and followers falling unconscious are obvious attempts at
melodrama and sensation. Even religion is used to inspire an atmos¬
phere of strangeness and awe, and as a result, the entry into monastic
life of the hero and heroine lacks conviction and dramatic effect,
unlike similar incidents in U Kyin U’s Parpahein and U Pon N\a s
The Water-seller. And the showing on the stage of the queen giving
birth to a child is unforgivable in the dramatist of delightful romance
who has written the first part. He copies this from the travail scene
of the ‘Baboon Play’, but he has enough artistic sense left to retrain
from showing the actual execution of the other queen and the
astrologer. The play has a short comic scene in which Hopeful tries
his best to stop the new-born child from crying. It is delightful. ^
The success of this play was even greater than that of the first,
and the dramatist was again encouraged to write another,entitled Tin-tin
and Khin-khin. It is in reality a recasting of the First Part of Saw-phay
and Saw-may to suit and satisfy still more the tastes of the time. Tin-
tin is the equivalent of Saw-phay, Khin-khin of Saw-may, Hopeful
we find under another name, and in imitation of the cuckoo scene, we
have a ‘cat’ scene where the lover signals by imitating the mewing o
a cat and on the girl’s father coming into the garden. Hopefuls
equivalent discourses on the habits and customs of cats. In place

BURMESE DRAMA
a, foe fo^lnnc or 1 igical ar.d clear unfolding of plot perishes, for
tfor.- :s m. pi it tr, unfold.
The decadent dramatists try to appeal not to the mind but to the
senses, ar.d naturally we find in their plays glaring attempts at senti¬
mentality and sensationalism. Tears occur often and in great abundance
on the slightest excuse. Even in the quite artistic ‘Baboon Play’,
sentimentality is tne cruet' fault, and the hero appears weak and unat¬
tractive, for he does nothing but cry, trying to protect his sister not
by manly action but by tears. One reason why Saw-phay and Saw-may
appears so far above other plays of the period is in its freedom from
sentimental pathos until the last scene. When the heroine and hero
are parted, they cry, but they appear sincere in their sorrow, and the
play ends quite happily. In most other plays of the period,the hero and
nen me are made to undergo misfortune after misfortune, so as to give
them, ample opportunity to sing pathetic songs. The sentimentality is
heightened by sensationalism, for the more unusual and terrible the
suffering of hero or heroine the greater is the pathos. When a
quae,, is executed, she has to be slowly beaten. When a hero is put
to death, he has to be trodden on by elephants. When a princess is
banished, the orders for her exile have to be announced when she is
m travail. For, in the decadent drama, swift and sudden death or
misfortune seems out of place, and the agony has to be long drawn
out and unusual in order to increase the desired effect. Even in the
‘ Baboon Play’, written by the most learned of the decadent drama¬
tists, we find ample use of blood and horror. The First Part of Saw-
phay and Saw-may is the one play of the period which is free from
horror. In Tin-tin and Khin-khin, the last scene where the heroine dies
dancing, ill and mad, is typically decadent. Madness, leprosy, incest,
and a woman in travail are favourite subjects. Dead bodies are popular,’
and in one play, a scene occurs where the hero is shown roasting and
eating his new-born heir.1 &
Comic scenes occur in the decadent plays, as dramatic relief from
scenes of horror and pathos. The humour is good humour, and in
many ways it is an advance even on U Pon Nya. Lewd references
are very rare. There is some satire, but it is without bitterness. All
the comic characters are lovable in their own way. The comedy is
one of ‘humours’, and we have admirably drawn portraits of a
nagging wife and a cynical bricklaying philosopher in The History of
1 When Father Eats His Son, by an unknown author.

THE DECADENT PERIOD 129
Thaton, and the bragging hunter in the ‘ Baboon Play5. Hopeful is ah
artistically drawn character, and the cuckoo scene is delightful. Other
decadent "dramatists, though inferior in other respects to the authors
of the three plays that I have considered in detail, equal them in comic
scenes The chief fault of the decadent dramatists lies in their inability
to portray character, for their 4serious5 characters are lifeless; but their
comic ones are satisfactory, because although these lack depth, the
4 humours5 are well shown.
In lyrical beauty the decadent dramatists achieve some distinction.
The quality of their verse, especially in songs, is uniformly high. It
has a note of tenderness and wistfulness. It will not be out of place
perhaps to consider here the verse of Burmese drama. The interlude
was mostly in verse, for the actors were primarily singers, and perhaps
because of the influence of the Hawsa which was a story in verse. The
comic characters in the interlude seem to have used prose. The verse
was of the variety called the £four-syllabled line5. Burmese verse
depends on rhyme, the number of syllables in each line, and the number
of lines. In the ‘four-syllabled line5 verse, however, the number of
lines is not fixed, and therefore a passage can be of any length,
provided it has only one rhyme scheme. Bach line has four syllables
(as Burmese is monosyllabic, each syllable usually means a word).
The first line contains a syllable which rhymes with those contained
in the second and third lines. But the third, if it is a ‘key’ line,
will contain another syllable which rhymes with the fourth and fifth
lines, or fifth and sixth lines. The following diagram will perhaps
make it clear:
-- a
-a -
- a - b ‘key5 line
-a-
- - b -
- b - -
-b -
- b - c ‘key5 line
-c -
- c
The ‘ key5 line with two rhymes need not occur at regular intervals.
Although the first ‘key’ line in a passage usually occurs before the
sixth line, it is quite common for the next ‘key’ line to occur as late
as the sixteenth line. It will be seen that the purpose ot the

BURMESE DRAMA
• kev’ lines is to link the various rhymes of the whole passage. This
rhvme scheme is the basis of the ‘four-syllabled5 variety’ of verse
but rwrt elaborate schemes are used, especially in U Fon Nva’s
Paduma. The translations of the Siamese plays were mostly in prose
except in son as, which of course were in all varieties of verse.
The verse of the interlude was formless and experimental, and U
Kyin U is credited with giving form and strength to it. He did
nut use any prose, for there was no need to do so as he wrote
no comic scenes, which the audience of the day would naturally
expect to be in prose. For his verse he used the ‘ four-syllabled5
variety, but he introduced variations into it. Sometimes he used a
sMchtly elaborate rhyme scheme, and often he used five or six syllables
in one line, thus relieving the monotony that naturally occurred in
Fug speeches. The artistic quality of U Kyin U5s verse was its
strength, and one may well call it 4U Kyin U5s mighty line ’. He
treated specially of heroes and heroic deeds, and the verse suited
his plays, U Pon Xya retained the ‘four-syllabled5 verse, but he took
great liberties with the number of syllables, and often he made his
lines contain seven or eight syllables. He was also very fond of using
a line containing only three syllables. He used elaborate rhyme
schemes, pleasing to the ear, with a musical effect comparable to that
in SpenserT Epithalamion and Prothalamion. The following scheme,
taken from the speech of Paduma’s princess in which she makes love
to trie criminal, will perhaps give an idea of the elaborateness:
- - - a
- - a -
~ a - b
- - - c
c - b
- b - d
- - - a
- - a a
a a - d -
- d - - e
e - f
f - b - x y 2
~ - g a
g a a a
- a - - x y 2

THE DECADENT PERIOD 131
U Pon Nya had many comic scenes which were mostly in prose,
but not always. He was so fond of rhyme that he often used it in his
prose. As his verse often had seven or eight syllables in one line, and
his prose contained rhymes, sometimes it was difficult to say
whether a passage was in prose or in verse. The Water-seller was
mostlv in that half-prose, half-verse style. The decadent dramatists
retain the four-syllabled verse, but following U Pon Nya, they use
variations. Their songs, however, are in all varieties of verse.
Whether in song or in dialogue, they attempt to convey not strength,
but pathos and tenderness. Their prose, in contrast, is very bare and
therefore suited to their comic scenes. The history of the style of
verse in Burmese drama may perhaps be made clear by a reference to
the Elizabethan drama. U Kyin U was a Marlowe, U Pon Nya a
Shakespeare, and the decadent dramatists are Fords.
Because of the great similarities, one is tempted to compare the
decadent Burmese drama with the decadent Elizabethan drama. In
both there is the same love of pathos, sentimentality, and horror. To
take examples off-hand, Ford’s 'Tis Pity She's a Whore and our
<Baboon Play’ touch on incestuous love in order to arouse both pity
and horror, and the execution scenes in The History of That on and
the 4Baboon Play’ are comparable to the assassination scenes in
Webster. The love of spectacle is common to both decadent dramas.
We even find in the Burmese decadent drama a sentimental attitude
towards kingship and royalty comparable to the attitude of some
characters in Beaumont and Fletcher’s The Maid's Tragedy. The
similarities are so evident that one wonders whether there is a
similarity too between the causes of the decadence, whether the chief
cause of the decadence in Burmese drama was because it had spent
itself out in the hands of U Pon 'Nya and his contemporaries in the
same way as the Elizabethan drama could be considered to have
exhausted itself in the hands of Shakespeare and his contemporaries.
But, as far as it is known, the age of U Pon Nya is not comparable to
the age of Shakespeare, for Burmese drama, even during U Pon
Nya’s time, did not equal the Elizabethan drama in spontaneity
or intensity. In spite of the fact that there were many imitators
during his lifetime, U Pon Nya is the one dramatist of his period
that we now remember, which seems to show that there was no
outburst of national dramatic energy. And he was not a Shakes¬
peare, and had by no means exhausted the possibilities of the drama
when he was executed. Moreover, Burmese decadent drama is

132 BURMESE DRAMA
indeed very far below its Elizabethan counterpart in artistic
achievement.
After the publication of the Second Part of Saw-phay and Saw-may
early in 1883, the decadence went on unchecked. Even the able
autnor of that play, as has already been pointed out, became totally
decadent in his Tin-tin and Khin-khin. The learned dramatist of the
‘Baboon Play’ abandoned his scholarly attempts to preserve with
modifications the earlier tradition of the drama and became totally
decadent also. By the end of 1883 the drama had become sn
formless and chaotic that plays ceased to be printed. And by the
beginning of 1885 dramatic productions and the drama had gone
back to the thrall of professional actors, and sunk again to the low
levels from which it had been temporarily rescued by the scholar-
dramatists. In the winter of that year, Britain declared war against
the Burmese kingdom for the third time, and on 1 January 1886 the
annexation of the whole country was proclaimed. The British annex¬
ation gave the final blow to the dying drama, for Burmese drama,
from the beginnings to the days of the decadence, was mainly
dependent on the king's court. The court had introduced the Rama
play from Siam, it had inspired Myawaddi, U Kyin U and U Pon Nva,
and even when it was in eclipse towards the end, its mere
existence inspired the scholars of the decadent period, though living
under another rule, to fan the dying embers of the drama into
fame. The language of the drama was akin to that of the court, the
chief scene was usually the palace, and at least one king figured
in a play. Men’s minds connected the drama with the court, and
when the court fell, the drama fell with it. Of course, the end of the
kingdom caused chaotic conditions to prevail in other branches of
Burmese literature, for the court had always been their patron also,
but they recovered after a few years. It was the drama alone which
had no recovery. The British annexation in its effect on Burmese
drama is comparable to Cromwell’s closing of the English theatres,
for both events gave the death-blow to decadent and already dying
dramas. But in England the theatres were opened again, and though
the ‘old’ drama was dead, its tradition could inspire, to a certain
extent, the rise of the Restoration drama. In Burma there was no
Restoration and a new drama did not arise. Though after the first
shock of the annexation, dramatic performances were revived all over
the country, they were entirely in the hands of professional actors,
who did not produce any new' plays but only distorted the old. And

THE DECADENT PERIOD 133
•-d the rise of a new drama been possible, I believe that it would
iJ!ve been something akin to the English Restoration comedy, for a
”“^edv of ‘humours’ was developing rapidly in the decadent period,
«'en though it was subsidiary to sentimentality and pathos. But I am
wandering into the realms of pure conjecture, which is inexcusable in
a work attempting to be scientific.

CHAPTER VI
THE AFTERMATH
1. Dramatic Performances after the Annexation
The proclamation of annexation of the whole country as a province
the Indian Empire on 1 January 1886 came as "a surprise to
the people, for although it was realized that the end of the Burmese
kingdom was inevitable, the general expectation was that the British
v.Qiiia turn Lpper Burma into an internally independent state of the
same pattern as the native states of India. It was indeed a great shock
and the country was plunged into chaos. The old order was at an endj
and men did not know what the new would be like. Many felt that
the nation had been finally destroyed, and rather than accept the
changed conditions, they chose to fight desperately and then die on the
scaffold. Completely bewildered by the events, they fought without
unity or organization, for the throne around which they had usually
rallied was no longer in existence. The resulting guerilla warfare
brought disorder and suffering to the whole country until 1890 when
tranquillity was restored. The country went back to normal and
entered upon a new period of prosperity. Literature flourished again
and dramatic performances were revived all over the country.
The professional actors were left supreme in the field of dramatic
entertainment and, unhampered by critical scholars, they followed
their own ideas of what a dramatic performance should be. Sinpino
and dancing and theatrical effect were all that they considered impor¬
tant. A play was only to be a framework for song and dance, and even
dialogue was of no importance to them. They made no attempt to revive
or even preserve the ‘old’ drama, nor did they try to model a new one
on it. They used the ‘ old ’ plays or their own imitations of them as a
framework for controlling loosely the course of their performance
There was little interest in the actual play. For one thing, it was
never acted right up to its conclusion. During the performance certain
sonp and dances had to be repeated again and again on the audience
applauding persistently, while the play itself stood still. So when

THE AFTERMATH ^
. broke and the audience dispersed to work, at the most only the
^ half of the play had been shown. _
The continued contact with the outside world further elaoorated
v. sme scenery. The great development was in the lighting Even
win/the decadent period, the stage was lit only by feeble o.l fcmps,
L now powerful battery and arc lamps were used. Coloured lights
nlaved on the dancing actors and actresses, to the great delight ot the
P Hience. The developments in stage technique which would ha\e
been beneficial had the drama been alive, were wasted m the hands ot
t'36The^eople themselves neglected the ‘old’ plays. U Kyin U and
U Pon Nva seemed to belong to the dim past and even the decadent
nkvs which flourished but five years previously seemed to be far away,
L much had happened in the intervening years. Scholars continued to
reld and study the plays of the two great masters, but they were read
more for their prose and poetry than for their dramatic merit The
reason why the ‘old’ drama was so completely forgotten « not far to
seek It wL because of the popularity of the novel. When the Siamese
drama was introduced into Burma, the Siamese court romances were
introduced along with it, and for a time, at court, they rivalled he
plays The Burmese court dramatists wrote many imitations of
romances and thus the Burmese novel was born. But, as the drama
increased’ in popularity, the novel was soon forgotten. Again, when
the court drama had lost its freshness, the Birth Stones of L Awbadia
which were in many ways novels, became popular, but the “ , b
U Kvin U regained for the drama its popularity, and checked a y
further development of the novel. The later history ot t e no\ ^
“p"L totave studied the subject is ^
thesis, and no one h.s as ye. written on ■•-*>» .1
the annexation of Upper Burma, by which time ma y
Burmans had been educated in English schools, English and Eng is
translations of European novels began to influence the Burmese new: •
In about 1889 or 1890, there appeared the famous Maung in i uii a
L a bri ban. adaptation into Burmese, by an unknown
ana Ma Mai mu,* r Monte Cristo by
author, of an English translation of The UuJ En„lish
Dumas And from that time onwards until 1919 when the Eng ^
short story began to be imitated in Burmese, the novel was extrem .
popular and satisfied the people’s interest m character an ““
Lat had developed the drama. As has been stated,
of the throne prevented the rise of a new drama, but it

156 BURMESE DRAMA
r >r fovrity < tl;e novel which discouraged the people from reading
the once-famous plays and caused the ‘dead’ drama to be for-
Cot tell.
Yet the dramatic performances were popular everywhere, and in
the circumstances, ‘matinee idols’ adored by their admirers soon
appeared. These popular actors and actresses were admired purely
for their cancinc and singing. The result was to put the play yet
further into the background. When a performance started, the
audience clamoured for their favourite actor or actress, and during
scenes :it which he or she did not appear, it went to sleep. Three
of these popular 'stars' became exceptionally famous; Aungbala,
Sein Kadon, and Po Sein.1 When Aungbala died in 1910, his
funeral at Mandalay was similar in nature and incident to that of
Rudolph Valentino, the cinema actor. These three led famous
troupes of their own and toured the country, which on the whole
tended to lower even further the dramatic performances in artistic
value. For example, Sein Kadon danced with little electric bulbs all
over his dress, and Po Sein had two English ex-soldiers with rifles
standing motionless on each side of the stage whenever he appeared.
There is no denying that there had been threats against his life by
supporters of rival troupes, but I do not think that the rifles were
quite necessary. In any case, the fact that he was guarded by two
live English ex-soldiers impressed the audience, increased his prestige,
and enhanced the theatrical effect. Such ‘playing to the gallery’
by the actors further prevented the possibility of any revival of
scholarly interest in the dramatic performance. Moreover, as rival
supporters spread tales of immorality and bad conduct among those
actors whom they did not favour, the prejudice against the profession
increased in intensity among the more conservative Burmese. And
by about 1900, the performances could claim at the most only a
distant relationship with the drama of U Kyin U and U Pon Nya.
2. The English Drama in Burma
If we put the Sanskrit, Elizabethan, and Burmese dramas side by
side, we find that the Elizabethan and Burmese have much in
common, both differing greatly from the Sanskrit.2 Of the Sanskrit
drama Dr A. B. Keith says:
Po Sem was decorated later by the Government. See chap. viii.
Apart, of course, from the fact that the Sanskrit drama is classical in
language and in age.

THE AFTERMATH
( \ ‘The drama bears . . . essential traces of its connexion with
, Rrihmins They were idealist in outlook, capable ot large
me»«li7ations but regardless of accuracy in detail, and to create a
§eniVic drama’ was wholly incompatible with their temperament.
tw accurate delineation of facts or character was to them nothing;
i' Mmed at the creation in the mind of the audience ot sentiment,
i was necessary for this end was all that was attempted.
‘Kalidasa greatest"of Indian dramatists, experiences no uneasi-
, at the structure of life or the working of the world. He accepts
Shout question or discontent the fabric of Indian society.;
‘ Admirable as is Kalidasa’s work, it would be unjust to ignoie the
fact that in his dramas ... he shows no interest m the great problems
°f ^Fascinating1and exquisite as is the Cakuntala, it moves in a narrow
world removed far from the cruelty of real life, and it neither seeks
answer.hor does it solve, the riddles of life.
(b) ‘Idealist as it is, the spirit of the drama declines to pem.u
of a division of sentiment; it will not allow the enemvot the hero to
rival him in any degree . . . Equally effectively the drama banishes
from the possibilities the conception of a struggle of conscience in the
S of the hero or the heroine; if this were. represented it would
create a similar struggle in the mind of the audience^ and destroy
unity and purity of the sentiment, which is the part ot the dram
generat^he ,t ig a secondary element m the drama m its highest
form the heroic play or Nataka. To complicate it would divert the
mind from emotion to intellectual interest, and affect injuriously th
prcducno^nof^Sfa^in individuality has no appeal . . . and
indifference to individuality necessarily meant indifference to action,
and therefore to plot.’
Therefore, to realize the essential difference of Burmese drama
from the Sanskrit, one has but to remember: (a) the realism m
U Pon Nya and some element of it in U Kym L, their character
studies, the connexion between their plays and the political problems
of their times, U Pon Nya’s interest in the destiny that controlled,
action in Wizaya; (b) U Kyin U’s sympathy wuthParp^m,
Daywagonban, and Kaywut the villains, U Pon hi} a=m c s
struggle in the mind of the water-seller; and (r) the' u
doctrine that the essence of technique was in the *m0°* '
and clear unfolding of the plot. Though much lower m
Burmese drama is similar in nature and m aim to the EhzaL^
drama, and its development from religious ‘miracle to imena^
the influence of the Siamese-modified classical Sanskrit, urama
the interest of a court composed of learned men ot action,

BURMESE DRAMA
i Tudiuv t'aether of the "people’s drama5 and the court drama In the
hands of U Kyin U, the continuation and fuller achievement of his
aims and ideals In U Poc Xya, and the decadence have their counter¬
parts in the history of the Elizabethan drama. Yet whereas the
Elizabethan drama as represented by Shakespeare has influenced the
remnants of the Sanskrit drama to give birth to a new and vigorous
natwniil drama in India, It has failed to confer such a benefit on
Burma.
Although Kalidasa flourished long before decadence set in,
in, the tenth century a.d. in the Sanskrit drama, remnants of It
heed nip and still Eve on, in India. The best plays of Kalidasa and
’.Tier classical dramatists were often performed, right through the
mnturies t > the present day, though with ‘popular’ modifications. In
Em jab the Rama Lila, an open-air performance of the Rama legend,
vms the chief dramatic entertainment until recent times. Once the
st.my uf English Institutions and literature had taken root and spread
ah over India, Shakespeare was not only translated and read, but also
put on the stacre, with modifications to meet native and ‘popular5
tustes.1 Once Shakespeare had been successfully introduced, other
dramatists iuliowed as a matter of course, and the English drama
beMn to Influence the Indian stage.2 And in Bengal, helped perhaps
iin the awakening of a national consciousness somewhat comparable to
that which gave Ireland the Abbey Theatre, a new and intensely
living drama came to be well established by the end of the nineteenth
century.”
In Burma the 4 oid drama was not preserved on the native stage
professional actors. When the first Burmese translations of
Shakespeare—of Romeo and Juliet and Othello—appeared in a
Burmese magazine in 1912, the actors had so far removed themselves
.Ai^ drama and the scholars, that presentation of the translations
on iLe stage was never thought of, and was perhaps impossible. The
gre,i.L dissen Ice the actors did to Burmese dramatic development was
tlie dismissal from their theatre of the drama that had given them
tneir occupation, for had they retained but some remnants of the great
oi L> Kyin U and U Pon Nya, or even the decadent ones,
English drama could have influenced those remnants and created a
new arama. \\ ithout a theatre, the translated Shakespearian drama'
1 E. J. Sisson, Shakespeare in India.
.R, K. Yajnik, The Indian Theatre.
3 Guhathakerta: Bengalee Drama,

THE AFTERMATH ^
p , ld not and did not achieve success, even though the translator was
rhe learned scholar and journalist, U Shwe Kyu.1^ The translations
•vent unnoticed, and as the magazine became defunct m 19,o, t,w
' cious issue8 which contain them are now available only m some
F2 raries. After this failure to introduce Shakespeare into the vernacular,
further attempt was made, and Burmese is one of the very few
civilized languages into which the plays of the great dramatist have
not been successfully translated. _
In 1919, after the Great War, a wave ot national aspiration
-wept over Asia, and Burma was affected by it. With me resulting
revival of interest in Burmese institutions, the study of U Kyin L and
T pon Nya has become again popular, not only m scnoois ana
7
colleges but all over the country. In schools following the established
educational practice of prescribing Shakespeare’s plays as textoooks
the plavs of U Kyin U and U Pon Nya are now so preserved. The
newlv established Rangoon University, founded by me Governmen
h 1990 the Burma Research Society and the Burma Book CIud-
2
institutions founded by the British Government and Umvemty officials
interested in Burmese history and literature, encouraged and led to the
study of Burmese literature, including the drama, side by side wi,
the English. And when adaptations in Burmese of a play by wlohe.w
and another by Tchekov appeared m 1928 m the magazine
Book Club there were hopes that a new drama was m course ot be
,3 5
developed. But the study has been from the beginning independent
of and unconnected with, the theatre of the professional actors jvho
are in great demand and still popular with the majority ot ^e people^
Therefore the interest in the drama, even thoug sprea 1
university walls, remains academic rather than practical. And as^r
as I can see, there are no signs of the coming m the near futum *
new national drama.
1 The magazine in which the translation appeared was the Since Kyu
Magazine, and U Shwe Kyu was its founder and emtw.
2 The Text Publication Committee of the Research bo^ew m
U KyJn U s SliU- and Parpakein with editor* notes, contr„
much to our knowledge of the dramatist. , • £ t|ie two olavs.
. Th. ~ ft a.
^»-—*
through English channels.

CHAPTER VII
BURMESE DRAMATIC PRACTICE
1. The Actors
As Burmese plays were presented to the public by two different
uksses performers, actors and puppets, it is necessary to consider
each Cass separately.
Bemre the decadent period and the arrival of European influences
a raised platform as stage was never used by the actors. Their
"stage’ was an open space in the centre of the orchestra, around
which the audience sat. Both the performers and the audience stood
or sat on mats kid on the ground. In rare instances, a low fence of
bamboo marked the space on which the play was to be enacted. At
court or at the houses of officials, it was slightly different. There, from
a special apartment, the floor of which was raised about two or three
feet from the ground, the nobility looked down on the actors, behind
whom, were the members of the orchestra, and behind the orchestra,
the audience sat. There was neither curtain nor green-room, and the
actors got ready and waited for their parts sitting among the members
of the orchestra, in full view of the audience.
The stage scenery consisted of only a tree branch to represent a
forest, and a property box to represent the throne. The imagination
of the audience had to supplement the inadequate stage scenery.
The poetical language and the orchestra helped the audience to
visualize the scene. The translations given below in the appendixes
will make it clear how artistic the descriptions of scenery in the
p!a\s are. To take an example off-hand, the alchemist’s description
of the forest in the closing scene of Parpahein is indeed beautiful.1
C£. The Elizabethan drama. “I he Elizabethan drama, being without
scenery and elaborate stage apparatus, made its appeal to the mind rather than
to the eye, and used language as the main instrument by which the imagination
of its audience was aroused and satisfied. This familiar fact goes far to explain
the essential intellectual character of the Elizabethan drama, and the wonderful
literary power of the great dramatists.’—Cambridge History of English Literature,
vol. VI, p. 328.

141
BURMESE DRAMATIC PRACTICE
chestra, in the intervals between scenes, played a tune appro-
7116 °t the next scene: a royal march for a throne-room scene, a
Pftl mne’ for a martial scene, a ‘woodland tune’ for a forest
‘bai id SQ on. The tunes were so well known that the audi-
^ recognized them at once. The orchestra also played in the
enC® of°a scene, when certain actions could not be satisfactorily
m ented as in Parpahein, scene 7, where the brothers were
r6nnosed to be climbing the palace-walls, and m Paduma, scene 4,
lere the hero was presumed to be swimming in the river to rescue
the criminal. The costumes of the actors were picturesque, but
\ more gorgeous than those of the Elizabethans. Tney wore
aooropriate°court dresses. The king in full regalia when holding an
audience the ministers in their velvet gowns, the princes ana
princesses in gold and jewels appeared striking, but except ror the
material which was silk, the dresses were not expensive, tor tac
seeming gold and jewels were all imitation. Masks were worn
speci/purposes. Ogre, n^a-dragon, gahm-bird, had masks of n. .
oL which the actors representing them wore. Wnen an ogress
sunDOsed to have assumed human form, the actress rtpm
“ ^d the mast on ,0 the forehead, m.kmg *= Uce
”2 A soldier o« horseback or on an elephant « represented
simplv by an actor in uniform holding a dummy horse s head or
elephant’s head. Actors taking the part of gads wore si^8^*
which was traditionally believed to be worn by all gods Tne dresse.
not the creations of actors. The court dresses of course were
copied from those actually worn at court, but the dresses of gods and
other spirits and the masks were copies from the stone images which
had adorned the platforms of pagodas even before the rise of Pagan
in the eleventh century. Perhaps it is not irrelevant to mention that
Bunnese6 dramatic peirmauces, in apUe of d,e d.^dcncc on . c
Burmese actors used fhc mask pnrefy for the purpose of repreeutmp
certain characters, and masked dancing was un 'nown_ . j tjje
An acting troupe consisted of actors proper and members ot the
orchestra. Women were freely admitted to the troupe but tlmywer
all actresses. Playing in the orchestra was deemed to be a mans
> In Siam, even at the present day, the
perform in masks. Masked dancing, for religious purposes,
Tibet*

outmiv, pa vine mere '.r less rcwui wcces to the others, amt talcing the
pmfks him seif. When entered for a performance, the troupe was
t>aid hv rub he subscription or by some philanthropic person, usuailv
an ofheiah and therefore no charge for admission was made, all beipw
welcome to it. The Burmese actors as a class, unlike their Elizabethan
counterparts vdrm could endow a College of God’s Gift or buy a
con- Warms, vere poor. But they never starved, for even the poorest
villages mwTd welcome and feed them on their wanderings ail over
the O'-entry. The troupe was one large family, and the children of the
members accompanied it. In spite of the prejudice against them
and their poverty, the actors loved their art, and enjoyed the perfor¬
mer ces themselves.
There were many conventions connected with the stage, and they
can be d:\idt-d into two classes: those imposed on the actors by
themselves, and those imposed by the fear of becoming unpopular
with the audience.
The actors never forcot that they were originally spirit-dancers,
and therefore they had conventions by which they showed their
indebtedness to spirit worship. Before the performance offerings of
fowl were made to the thirty-seven nats. As a curtain-raiser, there
was a performance by a dancer or chorus of dancers. Each wore a red
cloth round the head—the sign of a spirit worshipper. Singing
invocations to the nats and dancing the appropriate dances, they asked
for protect!' m by the spirits, while the orchestra played a bar from each
of the thirty-seven, nat tunes. It was supposed that if this convention
was broken, disaster would befall the troupe, the performance would
prove a failure, and the actors would become mad; but often these
conventions had been known to be broken, accidentally or otherwise.
The actors were looked upon as irreligious and immoral, and on
the slightest excuse, they were in danger of being considered profane.
Therefore, as has been stated, they took. over the conventions from,
the Nibhatkhin. The Buddha was never impersonated, and an arahai
or saint only when absolutely necessary, and then by an able and
‘serious’ actor, who had to keep a fast that day. Not even a mild
.joke was to be made against the Buddha or an arahai, although even
monks and the religion itself could be the butt of a clown’s wit. But

BURMESE DRAMATIC PRACTICE 143
of course there were limits to the latitude allowed to him. The
neglect of these conventions was supposed to result in disaster to
the troupe and the death through diarrhoea of the actor who took the
oart or cracked the joke, and it would certainly result in the whole
troupe being beaten by the audience and then put in prison by the
officials. On the whole, the charge of irreligiousness attributed to the
actors was not justified, and throughout the years, they had never
been known even to attempt to evade the conventions. There were
also conventions connected with social decorum. Kissing was not
allowed on the stage. Although no penalty, supposed or real, was
attached to it, this convention has never been broken. The actors
could wear reproductions of all the regalia of a king, except the golden
shoes, which only the king himself and princes in the line of
succession could wear. The breaking of this rule was supposed to
result in the death by diarrhoea of the actor who wore the shoes, but
it was not punishable as a crime if they were actually worn on the
stage, and it is known to have been broken sometimes. All the
conventions, including those connected with spirit-dancing, still exist
at the present day.
During the decadent period the platform stage, the e.aDoraie
scenery and curtains were introduced from French and English
sources, for French touring companies often performed before the
court towards the close of Mindon’s reign (1853-78), and from about
1870 English touring companies of actors often visited Rangoon.
With the performances of these companies of European actors, the
general public had no contact. At the court the king and a few
courtiers, out of respect for the French embassy, witnessed presenta¬
tions of French operettas, but as they did not understand Frencn and
the actors could speak no Burmese, the court found the performances
boring at times. At Rangoon the English actors presented musical
comedies, or more truly, musical shows, to an audience composed
entirely of English residents. It must be stated that tne tournig
actors did in no way introduce specimens of the French or Englis
dramas, for what they presented were third-rate musical shows
But they did introduce some examples of western stage-craft, an
the Burmese professional actors, ever on the alert tor borrowings,
copied wholesale the platform stage, the curtain, and the elabora e
stage scenery, with the result that, during the decadent period, the
Burmese stage came to be a copy of the European stage At
Rangoon a permanent theatre was even built, a thing un nown

144 BURMESE DRAMA
Burmese drama before, and most of U Ku’s plays and The History of
That or; and Sazv-phay and Saw-may were produced at that theatre.
Admission to a performance was by payment, a practice alien to
dramatic performances before the decadent period. The rise of
* matinee idols’ resulted in the chief actor, instead of the leader of the
orchestra, becoming the head of a troupe of actors. Formerly, a
dramatic performance took place during the afternoon or early evening,
but now because of the repeated applause for the popular 4 idols’
a performance lasted throughout the night.
I have stated how the prejudice against professional actors increas¬
ed rather than diminished through the coming of popular actors or
actresses and the resulting rivalry between different troupes. But
the prejudice was gradually overcome through the efforts of one man,
To Sein, who used to perform with two ex-soldiers standing beside him
with rides. By about 1912, his reputation as a leading actor was firmly
established, and from that time onwards he concerned himself with
raising the prestige of his profession by destroying the bitterness and
the ugliness that had crept into it. By his charm of manner and
personality, he soon established himself as the undisputed leader of
the profession. His generous gifts to charity and irreproachable
conduct soon acquitted the profession from the charge of immorality
and irreligiousness. During the Great War he contributed much
to the Red Cross Fund. For his services to charity and his profession,
he was given a title by the Government in 1919. Such an honour had
never been given before to an actor (had such a thing happened under
the Burmese kings or even before 1914, the officials would certainly
have vehemently protested, taking it as an insult to their class), and the
Government’s action was the final denial of the old dictum that actors
and beggars were outside the pale of good society.
2. The Puppet Show
According to common tradition, the Burmese puppet show came
into being long before the drama, but as our knowledge of the history
of the puppet show before the reign of Bodawpaya (1782-1819) is
meagre, perhaps it will be better to consider first the puppet’s history
from that reign.
It will be remembered that, as stated in Chapter II, Bodawpaya,
under whom the court and the ‘ people’s ’ dramas united together to
give rise to a national drama, created a new ministry, that of the stage.
The new minister, being a conservative courtier, wanted the drama

BURMESE DRAMATIC PRACTICE 145
fa“ under the direct control of the state. But as living actors were
^ t such control, he turned his attention towards puppets, which
Vre in great demand by the people. He realized the possibilities of
ets"in the newly arisen national drama. The puppet show, which
Vs then entirely independent of the drama and the living actors,
started with different animals coming out one by one, and each gave
■"special dance to a particular tune of its own, played by the orchestra,
then a zawgyee1 appeared and danced, and finally, a prince and
Vincess came out, made love, sang and danced. The puppets were
horn Zi to 3 feet in height, and were worked by strings. As stage,
there vis a raised platform, with a black curtain, behind which the
show-men stood and manipulated the puppets. The men’s hands
were visible, but as the platform was about four feet high and the
audience had to look up, the.hands did not distinctly come into the
line of vision. The platform was about twenty feet in length, and the
width of the part in front of the curtain was about four feet.
The minister put the puppet show under direct state patronage
and control. Under him the puppet show became similar to an
ordinary dramatic presentation except that puppets performed instead
of living actors. The use of puppets to act the play of course
caused the introduction of new puppets, but it also rendered the
sawgyee and animal puppets unnecessary, yet they were retained all
1 Zawgvee is the Burmese term for an alchemist. It is a derivative of
the Indian word yoga but the Burmese alchemist has little in common with
the Indian ascetic. It is an example of how names of Pah and semi-Buddhist
odfin were applied to already-existing native ideas. .
°A man (but not a woman) becomes a sawgyee when he has introduced in o
his body the right metal-compounds. To obtain those compounds, he has to
‘quicksilver sawgyee’ and in the second, an ‘iron zawgyee , but both hate the
same powers. A ,««*>■« lives for millions of years, and can travel m the mr
in water, or under the earth, for his body has reached the state when t s
bevond the ordinary laws of nature. A halfway stage 10‘ the ’*
reached when a ‘ stone of live metal * (equivalent to the medieval Phll°s0Phe he
stone’) is obtained. A person in actual possession of the stone can fi> m th
air and travel under the earth, but his powers are enm-ly dependent ^n
the stone i.e. his body is still an ordinary human body. The stone turns 1;
into silver and brass into gold. It will be seen that a Burrnan ^ming
to become a sawgyee has much in common with the medieval Europe
alchemist.
vgyee are still widely current. For a
The beliefs connected with the zaz
the writer’s * Alchemy and Alchemists
detailed account of Burmese alchemy, see
in Burma * in Folk-Lore, December 1933. 10

BURMESE DRAMA
the same. Therefore after the minister’s innovation, the pupnet
show was actually a combination of two different things, the old
puppet show as seen in the animal puppets coming out to dance, and
the new puppet play. To many people it must have seemed that the
minister did not really introduce any new thing, but only lengthened
and made more elaborate that part of the show devoted to the prince
and princess. It should be remembered that the Burmese had no
puppet drama. In India, in Java, in Siam, in Bali, and in Turkey,
there was an actual puppet drama, but in Burma the puppet
show was entirely dependent for its plays on the drama of living
actors. The minister imposed two restrictions on the puppet show
First, the plays presented by puppets must either be founded on
the Jatakas, or on the great events in the nation’s history. Second,
tne dress, manners, and customs of the king and his court presented
"n tilc puppet stage should be correct in every detail.
The innovations of the able minister resulted in the rise of a new
class of puppet show-men. They were mostly drawn from the ranks
of the professional actors, but they were of proved ability and ex¬
perience, and had to serve at least some months of apprenticeship.
The show-men were never looked down upon, and the living actors
hemseh es held them .in respect. The puppet show-men were very
conservative. State control ended with the death of the minister,
perhaps because his successors were not so able; but the show-men
kept their stage exactly the same as it was in the time of the minister,
except _ that they presented the plays of U Kyin U, most of which
!ye tounded neither on the Jatakas nor on historical events,
during the decadent period, the puppets stuck to the ‘old’ plays,
and introduced no innovations either in stage-craft or in dramatic
technique. The annexation by the British in 1886 was disastrous
to t e puppet show, for, unlike the living actors, the puppets were
a most totally dependent on court patronage. When the country
became peaceful again by about 1885, the puppet show-men made
gallant attempts to revive their shows, and all over Burma they gave
performances. ^ But the show belonged to a dead past, and the
conservatism of the show-men would not allow the introduction of
' t in^ nevi* The old show-men died out, and there were not
many new-comers, for the profession, demanded a term of apprentice¬
ship and its conservatism did not suit the young men, products of the
an»e conditions. The result was that the puppet troupes gradually
isappeared. In 1921, when a puppet performance was given at

BURMESE DRAMATIC PRACTICE 147
pe<m many English officials asked to be my father’s guests, for
although they had been some years in Burma and heard so much of
the puppet show, they had never been able to find one. In 1929, on
inquiry, I found that there was not one puppet troupe in Lower
though there were two in Upper Burma; of these, only one
Burma,
Was diving performances occasionally, the members of the other being
content to earn their living by some other means.
Before considering the probable history of the puppet show before
the time of Bodawpaya, it is necessary to give an account of the
puppet-shadow show of the east. The home of the puppet show
was India. Pischel in The Home of the Puppet Stage even contends
that the Sanskrit shadow drama preceded the drama proper, but that
theorv is not accepted by Dr Keith and other scholars. From India,
with Hindu expansion overseas, the puppet-shadow show spread,
together with the epics and the drama, to Malaya and the East
Indies. In Java it found a permanent home, and there shadow
drama is still very popular. From Java it spread to Siam and other
countries of Indo-China, to Persia, Turkey, Arabia and Japan.
Perhaps it even spread to Europe; at least the English Punch is a
direct descendant of the Turkish puppet Karageuz, who himself was
a descendant of the Sanskrit puppet Vidusaka. To give an idea of
the puppet-shadow show, I will give a description of a Java shadow
performance.
As ‘stage’ there is a huge curtain with a light behind it. The
puppets are put between the light and the curtain, on which their
shadows are thrown. ‘The light shines through the transparent
material of which his (the puppet’s) many-coloured garments are
made. His shadow on the curtain glows with such bright hues within
the framework of dark shells that he looks like a figure in stained
glass. ... In the middle of the huge curtain is seen a fantastic vine
with interlacing branches. Monkeys and birds climb on it, and beneath
it two grim guards stand watch. When the play begins, the strange
shadow°tree vanishes. The stage manager is the Dalang. He sits on
a mat and gives the play.1 Back of him is the orchestra to accompany
the explanations of the Dalang. Whenever a new figure enters the
orchestra plays. The men in the audience are allowed to sit on the
right of the Dalang and see the actual puppets perform, and the
children sit at the Dalang's left hand. But the women are not permit¬
ted to see the real puppets act. They see only the shadows on the
1 i.e. he recites the words of the play.

148 BURMESE DRAMA
screen. The transparent sticks (tied to the side of the figures) that
guide the actors do not show on the screen.’1 The shadow shows of
other countries are essentially the same as in Java, except that (1)4 the
fantastic vine’ is not found anywhere else, (2) the audience, men and
women, see only the shadows, and (3) the faces are not distorted as
in Java; but this is because with the Mohammedan conquest, the
Javanese had to get over the religious difficulty. The Mohammedan
religion does not allow the reproduction of the human form in any wav,
and therefore the Javanese puppets came to have distorted bird-like
profiles, and the Turkish puppets were held high enough for the
heads of their shadows to be a little bit cut off, so that it could not
be said that they were real reproductions of the human form. In
Bali and in Siam, where the old Sanskrit-Hindu culture has remained
up to the present day, the faces of the puppets are human.
How far was the Burmese puppet show under the influence of the
shadow* play? The question must be answered with reference to its
history only before Bodawpaya, as it is obvious that after his time
the show could not be and was not under any foreign influence.
That there was no direct influence of the Sanskrit and East-Indian
shadow drama is certain because (1) a shadow show of any sort has
never been known to the Burmese, and (2), the introduction of anything
directly connected with the shadow show would bring with it semi-
Sanskrit plays founded on the epics, upon which the East-Indian
shadow drama was dependent, but as we have seen, no such plays were
ever brought into Burma. In this connexion Sir William Ridgeway’s
theory that the puppets first became known to the Burmese when the
‘Indian historical plays’ were introduced, falls to the ground as no
such plays were ever introduced. And (3) although a descendant of
the Sanskrit puppet Vidusaka, whether he be called Punch or Karageuz
or by some other name, is found in the East Indies, Turkey, China
and other countries where the shadow drama had spread, there is no
such puppet in Burma.
The question whether there was any indirect influence at all is
difficult to answer, and I dare not venture to express a definite
opinion. I give below evidence for and against the possibility of such
indirect influence. The balance of probability would perhaps seem
to indicate that the Burmese obtained some idea of their puppet show
from the shadow puppets of their neighbouring countries. Just as the
decadent actors could borrow some ideas of European stage-craft
1 Madge Anderson, The Heroes of the Puppet Stage.

BURMESE DRAMATIC PRACTICE 149
without ever knowing or caring for the European drama itself, the
Burmese may have borrowed their puppets and puppet stage-craft,
-Mthout ever caring for the shadow drama itself. Such borrowings
votc possible although the shadow drama itself never reached Burma,,
%r Burmese trading or raiding expeditions were in continuous contact
with Siam, and to a lesser extent with Malaya and the East Indies.
1. (a) The Burmese puppets are worked in delicate detail, and are
similar in this and other respects to the Javanese and Siamese figures.
(b) But the Burmese puppets are worked by strings, whereas
most other eastern puppets are moved by sticks from below. However,
some puppets of India and China are stringed.
2. (a) The Burmese puppet show-men make offerings to the
spirits before a performance. Such offerings are also made in Java
before the presentation of a shadow play.
[b) But, although the offerings are not made particularly to the
thirty-seven nats, it may be that the puppet show-men, who consider
their calling to be just a branch of the acting profession, are only
following the custom of the living actors.
3. (a) The puppet show begins with dances by animals, which are
perhaps reminiscent of the Javanese ‘fantastic vine5 with birds and
monkeys on it. A monkey appears among the Burmese puppets.
'(b) But Burmese folk feasts occasioned mimicry of animals, and
that practice may have influenced the puppet show. Moreover, tne
Burmese animal puppets consist, in addition to the monkey, of the tiger,
the elephant, and the horse. The zawgyee has no counterpart in the
Javanese show, and the Burmese show has no bird puppets.
4. (a) Burmese women are not admitted to membership of a
puppet troupe, and are not allowed to step on the puppet stage, even
when no actual performance is in progress. Is this reminiscent of the
Java show, where women are not allowed to see the actual puppets
perform ?
(b) But the practice may have been only an attempt by men. to
reserve the profession for themselves.
5. (a) An appropriate tune to identify a new animal puppet is played
in Burma. This is perhaps akin to the Javanese practice of identifying
a new figure that has entered by the orchestra playing a special tune.
(b) But the practice of identifying a new scene (which is almost
the same as identifying a new figure) by an appropriate tune has
always existed in the performances of living actors, and the puppet
show-men may have borrowed it.

APPENDIX I
THE RAMA PLAY1
The following extracts from the Rdrndydn of Valmiki, Tht- Statue
Play attributed to Bhasa, and the Siamese-Burmese Rama illustrate
i. the difference between the demon-king of the epic and the
demon-king of Sanskrit plays; and
ii. the indebtedness of the Siamese Rama, for its portrayal of the
demon as a boastful villain, to the Sanskrit plays founded on the epic,
rather than to the epic itself.
From The Ramayana2
The demon in the guise of a hermit praises the beauty o/sita,
who is surprised and alarmed at this unusual behaviour. He now
announces himself.
With knitted brow and furious eye
The stranger made his fierce reply:
‘In me, O fairest dame, behold,
The brother of the King of Gold,
The Lord of Ten Necks my title, named
■ Ravan, for might and valour famed.
Gods and Gandharva hosts I scare;
Snakes, spirits, birds that roam the air
Fly from my coming, wild with fear,
Trembling like men when Death is near.
What, O thou large-eyed dame, hast thou
To do with fallen Rama now,
From home and kingdom forced to fly
A wretched hermit soon to die ?
Accept thy lover, nor refuse
The giant king who fondly tvoos.
1 This play has been considered in chap. ii.
2 Translation by R. T. H. Griffith, The Rdmdyan of Valmiki reproduced
by permission of Messrs E. J. Lazarus & Co., Benares.

APPENDIX I
O listen, nor reject in scorn
A heart by Kama’s arrows tom.
If thou refuse to hear my prayer,
Of grief and coming woe beware ;
For the sad fate will fall on thee
Which came on hapless Urvasi
When with her foot she chanced to touch
Pururavas and sorrowed much.
My little finger raised in fight
Were more than match for Rama’s might.
O fairest, blithe and happy be
With him whom fortune sends to thee.’
Such were the words the giant said,
And Sita’s angry eyes were red.
She answered in that lonely place,
The monarch of the giant race:
‘ Art thou the brother of the Lord
Of Gold, whom all the world adored.
And sprung the illustrious seed,
Wouldst now attempt this evil deed ?
1 tell thee, impious Monarch, all
The giants for thy sin will fall,
Whose reckless lord and king thou art,
With foolish mind and lawless heart.
Yea, one may hope to steal the wife
Of Indra and escape with life.
But he who Rama’s dame would tear
From his loved side needs despair.
Yea, one may steal fair Sachi, dame
Of Him who shoots the thunder flame,
May live successfully in his aim,
And length of day may see;
But hope, O giant King, in vain,
Though cups of Amrit thou may drain,
To shun the penalty and pain
Of wronging one like me.’
The Raksha monarch, thus addressed,
His hands a while together pressed,

APPENDIX I 153
And straight before her startled eyes,
Stood monstrous in his giant size.
[sita is then put on the flying car and taken away.]
Fro?n The Statue Play1
To where rama and sita dwell, the demon-king comes in the
guise of a hermit, and discusses with rama the various funeral
rites for his dead father, the king. The demon-king tells of a
special kind of deer which would be suitable for sacrifice, and
rama leaves to look for such a deer, leaving sita alone with the
seeming hermit.
sita {aside). I am parted from my lord and now I am afraid.
rayana {aside). Rama removed by guile, 1 shall carry off from tne
hermitage the weeping damsel Sita left lonely like an offering devoid
of sacred stanzas.
sita. I will just go into the hut. {Begins to go.)
rayana {taking his own form). Sita, stay.
sita {fearfully). Oh 1 Who is this:
rayana. Dost thou not know me ?
I conquered in the battle Indra and the other gods with hosts ot
demons. When I saw my sister’s mutilation and heard of both my
brothers slain I beguiled Rama with my ruses; he is matchless in
his strength, but his wits are dulled by pride; and I have to carry
thee off, large-eyed lady—and I am Havana.
sita. Oh, Ra van a! {Moves away.)
rayana. Ah, once in Ravana’s view, whither will you go.
sita. * My lord 1 Save me, save me! Lakshmana, help! help I
ravana. Sita, listen to my heroic deeds.
Indra did I smash and made Kubera tremble. Soma dragged I
in the dust and thrashed the child of the Sun. Ho! A fig for them
They’re frightened gods that live in heaven. Blessed is the eart
where Sita dwells.
sita. My lord, protect me! Lakshmana, save me, sa\e me . ^
ravana. Run to Rama for protection or to Lakshmana, or, li tnou
wilt, to Dasaratha the king in heaven. What boot these cowar s
words ? Can fawns assail a tiger r
sita. Save me, my lord 1 Help! Lakshmana, help!
1 Translation by A. C. Woolner and L. Sarup, The Thirteen Tmandrmn
Plays, reproduced by permission of the University- of the Panjab.

APPENDIX I
Havana. Why this lament, large-eyed lady? Count me as thv lord
This Rama with all his mighty strength and a host of gods to heT
him is no match for me.
5IT'a (angrily). Thou art accursed.
Havana. Ha, ha, ha! See the fire in the virtuous wife.
When 1 sped rapidly aloft the Sun’s rays could not bum me.
Now her few words, ‘Thou art accursed’, make me burn.
[sita is then carried off in the flying car.}
From the Siamese-Burmese RAM A
The doe cries, ‘Lakshmana, help!5 sita, thinking that ravia
is in need of help, presses lakshmana to go. The demon-king
in the guise of a hermit enters with a begging bowl, sita
comes out of ike magic circle to offer him some fruit, whereupon
the seeming hermit praises her beauty. She is alarmed at this
unusual behaviour in a hermit, yet tries to appear calm. But
the hermit takes her in his arms, making her cry in terror.
demon-king. Hello, Mistress Sita. Ha, ha, my lovely blue-white
wasted her affection on a useless old hermit. Ha, ha, I am not a
hermit. Respect for a seeming hermit must soon change to love for
the king of the giants, with crown and jewels and armour. I must
show my true form, I cannot waste time. Ho, my lord of the orch¬
estra, play me a tune to help me change into the king of the giants
with ten crowned heads. . . . {The orchestra plays and stops.) Hello,
oh, my little girl! Now you can see my true nature, my true form,
my true beauty. Ha, ha, I am the king of the giants that was among
tne suitors for your hand at the test of the bow. Ha, ha, I have loved
you since we were young children Have you forgotten your child¬
hood, sweetheart? Look at your lover, you cannot' forget’ your lover
of childhood days, my little love, my lovely little bundle.
sita. Oh, alas, my lord, my lord! Oh, oh, if he were only a man
pretending to be a hermit, I could argue and plead with him. But he
is our ancient enemy. My lord Rama, my love, my life, save me, save
me I My golden breast is in pain. My golden heart is quaking. I am
dying, I am fainting, my lord, my protector!
DEMON-KING. How are you feeling, my little sister? Darling, you
cannot forget your suitor of bygone days. Don’t you know the saying,
* However good the new one may be, one longs for the old?’ Surely,
xn\ little maid, you haven’t forgotten your true love?
sita. Oh, oh, I cannot stand your insults, you evil spirit, you

APPENDIX I 155
demon! Oh, oh, I am afraid of you, you giant, you beast! Do not
stand there insulting me, taunting me, sending sly glances at me.
Oh,oh, where can I escape, how can I escape, from this danger? I
shall soon die.
demon-king. Come on, come on, Mistress Sita! Surely you will
hurry! Please don’t stand there wasting time. Your big and rightful
husband will soon be here, and surely you do not wish to put your
secret lover, your paramour, your new husband, in danger? Ha, ha,
you are only afraid of Rama, and so you are trying to appear the virtuo¬
us wife. At heart, you wish to be happy with a new love, but you are
afraid of your husband’s wrath. That doesn’t matter. Come with me,
I will give you happiness, and you needn’t be afraid of your husband.
Come on, come on, your stupid old husband will soon be here. Let
us love and enjoy and be happy in the air, in the sky. Ha, ha, this
little prince will take you in his arms, my little maid. We shall float
gently in the air and fly over palaces of gold and jewels, and listen to
the sweet music of the golden bells. Be not afraid, 1 can conquer
Rama. Come on, love! [sita is forced into the flying chariot.]

APPENDIX II
MAH AW1
U U
By Kyin
U Kyin U differs greatly from U Pon Nya in that he does not
encourage the comic spirit in the drama. The following scene, the
most humorous in his plays, is one of the rare attempts to raise
a laugh among the audience.
Enter Mahaw's men and start to pull dozen the mansion of the
queen-mother.
Enter in haste a maid-of-honour.
maid. Rude rascal, rough rogue, man as stupid as an ox, criminal
destined to have his body pierced with repeated punishment 1 What
do you think you are doing? You are trying to imitate the insect who
rushed at the candle-flame, bold through blindness. Now, don’t be
short-sighted, don’t be stupid! This is the abode of the queen-mother,
do you not know? Can you not see that it is built of glass and inlaid
with jewels and gilded with gold? You dirty-looking fellow, you
coarsely-clad man, what do you mean by coming here armed with
stick and sword, trying to pull our house down? This mansion is not
yours, not your business. Now, now, do not stand there jumping
with fury, with your dirty and faded-looking body quaking with
anger, do not look at me with a bold and angry-looking face. I
do not wish to quarrel with you. To tell you the truth, I cannot, for
I am a maid-of-honour and therefore miles above you. Go away,
man, go away!
man. What! Mistress Furious, you do look proud and hurt
standing there, looking at me with sorrow and anger! Your tongue
is as sharp as a dagger, and your words are as big as mountains.
You are as shameless as a prostitute. Now, now, do not come and
disturb me at my work. I am preparing the city for the royal
visit. I represent the king, I have his authority. W7hy are you
1 This play has been considered on pp. 57-61.

APPENDIX II
there? Do you think you can pierce my body with your
lo0k: You do look a sight S Your forehead is too wide, your hair-knot
% too small, and your body is too thin. You seem to be a bit
•'"sturbed, you are looking anxious. Have you lost your husband and
can you not find him ?
maid. Vain man, hard man, fellow whose stupidity is boundless
and limitless, uncouth stranger from another city! I do not care
whose authority you have, which king you represent. You are a
foolish stranger from an uncivilized and backward country. My
mistress, the queen-mother, will send you to the .king, and then, poor,
poor, ignorant countryman, you will be seized, tied with ropes,
kicked, beaten, and put into prison. My friend, go away, go away,
otherwise your luck will not be so beautiful.
MAN. You talk too much, my ugly, frowning woman. Your
words do not fit your action. If you are so powerful, why are you
standing there so helplessly? Your words are empty, your pride is
tfj-eat but founded on nothing, your anger can do me no harm. Do
not stand there threatening me, glaring at me! Do you not know who
I am? I am the leader of wise Mahaw’s men, I am the captain of
his guard. Minister Mahaw, the great Mahaw,the famous Mahaw.
Go back, go away, do not put a lighted match to a mountain of
gunpowder. Do you want to suffer grief and pain?
maid. Fountain-head of rudeness, barbarian, wild man! A ghost
is a frightful, evil, ugly being. But you are uglier than a ghost. In
fact, you look like a ghost whose face has been made more villainous-
looking through being blackened with soot. Hay, Mister Po\ert\-
stricken-ghost! You are what we call a berk in Pali. It means a
very foolish person. I am a palace-born, a dainty court-maiden.
I am not a mad dog, so do not stand there with a stick, attempting to
chase me away. You are indeed very insulting. Oh, I shall not aigue
with you any more, Captain Stupid-as-an-ox. I am going at once to
our beloved mistress, the queen-mother. You wait and watch what
happens. #
man. Go on, go and tell, run and report, Mistress Cold-as-
diamond-cold, you will soon be shivering with fright, mortification,
disappointment, suffering. You are uncouth, uncultured, unlearned.
I shall soon pound you into little bits as a cook pounds the paddy.
I am the trusted slave of Mahaw, the great Mahaw, the good Mahaw,
the renowned Mahaw. I am his faithful captain, gallant leader of his
men. And if you want trouble, if you want some painfu* punishment

158 APPENDIX II
that will make your eyes open wide with suffering, just say som-
more insulting words. You are rude, country woman.
^maid. You are like the thief who, on entering a house at night
and finding the owner sleeping peacefully inside, shouts, ‘Help, help
I find a stranger here!’ Man, you smell of the wilderness, even your
voice is rough and rude. The world is indeed a strange place when
there are men like you who can accuse a palace-born of being uncul¬
tured. Madman, foolish man, stupid man, your hour has come, vour
face will soon be distorted with heavy punishment as a wicked
criminal. I go to fetch my mistress. LEV#]

APPENDIX III
DA YWAGON BAN1
By U Kyin U
Scene 1
THE THRONE-ROOM AT ZAYYABOMI
Enter KING and ministers. They discuss affairs of state. The
KING sends for the court astrologers. They enter.
king. My famous astrologers, Brahmins of the purest rank, men
who divide and cut through the three Vedas! Please consider the
horoscopes of my two sons, seedlings of the throne and the white
umbrella. Work out the figures of your science, and tell me of their
future. [-d pause while the astrologers deliberate.1
chief astrologer. Glorious king that governs this country of
gold, I can foresee that your elder prince, who is heir to the throne
bathed in glory as the sun, is in danger of being taken away by the
ogres to their kingdom during this week. I beg that you will use
extra care to guard the palace against any entry by ogres during this
week, my noble lord.
king. My ministers, my masters of white magic and black foretell
the stealing by ogres of my heart, my first-born, my heir to this
throne. I wish to prevent this. Guardians of my kingdom, what do
you advise ? . . ,
chief minister. Let me submit this, lord. We will make tne
palace and the city strong and safe by putting officers, soldiers, and
guards at various points of vantage. The whole city will be divided^
into numerous units, each unit to be guarded by a special body of
armed men night and day. Furthermore, the whole city ana its
approaches will be guarded by cordons of soldiers. We assume full
responsibility to guard the city and our prince.
king. My noble lords! Yes, guard the city well until seven days
have elapsed. Ignore not the warning of the learned masters oi
1 This play has been considered on pp. 61-5.

APPENDIX III
astrology. Let the palace and my throne be guarded with men. armed
with arrows, swords, spears, guns and bombs. Bodies of
artillery-men, themselves surrounded by sword-bearing infantry 4a!]
surround the golden citv. r & ’" *
[Exeunt]
~
Scene 2
Enter ogress.
ogress. I am the pretty sister of the king of the ogres. I am
very handsome, neither tall nor short. My hair-knot is* lovely, my
body is pure with the purity of a virgin. I am handsome, though I
myself say it. I am well-experienced in the affairs of human beings.
My wit is forty-fold, my cunning is thousand-fold, I have ten thousand
disguises, I can change myself a million times, and my beauty is
million-million-fold. I am clex-er, though I myself say it. I am as
clever as the clever parrot of the Minister Mahaw. I can conquer all
by my wit. If a person has a crooked mind, I make it straight. If a
person has a long mind, I cut it short. If a person has a sticky mind,
I wash it. In fact, however clever a human being is, I can cope with
his wit and vanquish him. Now I must hurry to the abode of the
human beings, and get myself some human flesh, for I long to eat it
again. My big brother of the orchestra, please adorn my ears with
your jewels.
[The orchestra plays, and when it stops, she has arrived at the
walls of the city.]
What! Nobles and commoners, swords and spears guard the
city in and out. Friend ogress, it is extremely difficult to enter the
city. Friend ogress, you cannot lose your food, you cannot go back
to your own palace empty-handed, you cannot go home without
anything. Mistress ogress, you cannot go home without success, you
cannot afford to lose your reputation. Everybody would be laughin*
at you. It is difficult to enter the city, but it is not impossible to do
SO. use your wits, my mistress of cunning. You are the sister of the
ogre-king. Steel your heart and use your wits. Ah, I have thought of
a plan. I will create by my supernatural power a lovely cradle of gold
entwined with emerald necklaces, inlaid with gold. I will assume
human form and seek admission to the palace with my gift of the
jewelled cot. 1 6 r„ . ,
[Exit, j

APPENDIX III
161
Scene 3
A ROOM IN THE PALACE
Enter king and courtiers. Enter ogress with the cradle which
she begs to give as a present for the elder prince to sleep in.
The king accepts it, and appoints her as a lady-tH-wcuting
and puts her in charge of the cradle and the child. Exeunt
all except the ogress and the child.
ogress. It is night now, and I will take away both the cradle
and the child. Ha, ha, I am the wave of wit, mistress of cunning.
Do you wonder that I am the favourite rose of my dear brother?
I am the soul of cunning, the trumpeter of cunning-falsehood, the
university of strange-cunning. I dare cut off my knee even, for my
cunning will make it grow again. If a dead fish were to be married to
me, it would become alive through my wits. As Shin Kissee, the
famous monk, knew in his mind the eight volumes of Pali grammar,
I know all the divisions and kinds of wit and cunning. . . . But I
must hurry back to my forest, which looks half-shining, half green-
gloomy. My lord of the orchestra, will you show me your wit ? (Exit
with the child as the orchestra plays).
[Enter king and ministers in haste. Ministers inform the king
that the prince has been stolen. He blames them. Exeunt. In
outline only, left to be filled in later on the stage.]
Scene 4
THE FOREST
Enter ogress. In a soliloquy she says that she did not eat the
little prince but has brought him up as her own son, He is
now a youth of sixteen years, but does not realize that he is mi
an ogre. In outline.
Enter prince.
prince. I am the ogre-prince whose fame travels even to Mount
Mayyu that is surrounded by a thousand hills. My power and glory
exceed those of other ogres even. I am the ogre in whom glory
flowers, whose god-given weapons number a thousand, who stands in
solitary greatness among other beings. I will now wander into the
thickest part of the forest, glorying in my right arm, which is studded
with diamonds of strength, and inlaid with gold of power. My lord
of the orchestra, please show me the way,, and wet the faces of the
golden virgins watching this play with tears of emotion by your
music.

162 APPENDIX III
[The orchestra plays while ogress and prince walk up and
down the stage. When it stops, they have arrived at a thick part
of the forest.]
prince. Mother, how lovable and strange this part of the forest
looks! Rocks and rocks, and rocks again. That is a pretty cave in
which a king might live in pleasure, better than his golden pakce.
That piece of rock over there looks just like a bush, this like a fruit
tree. . . . Look at that one, it is in the shape of a dragon-snake’s
hood. Those rocks must contain metal-ores, and if only human
beings could find this spot and work on the ores with compounds of
alchemy, they would become zawgyees soon. Please look at that
cave, mother, it is sheltered from the many-coloured rays of the
sun, and how cool it appears! I am sure a zawgyee is laughing and
smiling inside the cave . . . What a lovely, strange forest this is
beloved mother.
ogress. Yes, my love. This is the forest where zawgyees and
fairies dwell in laughter. The whole forest is my domain, therefore
it is yours also. Come, my loved son, let us wander round the forest.
[Exeunt.]
Scene 5
Enter king of the gods.
king OF THE gods. The carpet which is diamonded and emeralded,
the carpet under the wondrous tree of paradise, the carpet on which I
sit and meditate in peace, seems hard and rough. It is a sign that
something in the human world is needing my attention. I must use
my divine vision and look down from this Mayyu Mount.
Ah, a worthy young prince, a youth worthy to pray to attain
Buddhahood, is now grown up. Because he was brought up in the
lap of an ogress, because he was fed on ogre milk, he is just like an
ogre. He is a worthy prince, and my duty is to honour him. I will
hasten to the abode of the ogres, and give the prince a name and
title.
[The orchestra plays, and when it stops, he has arrived at that
part of the forest where the ogres live.
Enter ogress.]
ogress. Friend that shines and glitters, master whose body glows
with shining rays, who are you? To what species of beings do
you belong?
KING OF THE gods. Friend ogress, Mistress Princess, listen to my

APPENDIX III 163
words. 1 am the master of the gods that live in glory in the six¬
storeyed paradise.
OGRESS. If you are the master of great-gloried power, if you are
the king that owns the topmost towers on Mount Mayyu, why have
von come to this forest where I live in laughter? My lord of the six
storeys, please enlighten me as to the reason for your visit to my
forest.
king of the gods. Ogress, my Princess, your adopted son, who
prays to be a Buddha, will soon become the ruler of the kingdom of
the ogres. I can foresee that for three years he will be the diamond
pillar that rules the kingdom underneath the white umbrella, for three
Years he will sojourn on the mountain of gold, the palace of ogres, for
three Years he will be the Defender of Buddhism. His fame will spread
all over the universe, his power will govern the four great continents
of the human world. Even now his future greatness is being foreseen
by the gods, and rumours that he will be a great king are current in
the towers of Mount Mayyu. I will honour him now, I will foretell his
future greatness and victories, I will give him this bow, and I will
give him the title of ‘ Daywagonban \ Let this be his name from
today, and let his childhood name disappear. His flame of glory will
even reach the sun.1 [Exeunt.]
Scene 6
Enter daywagonban and ogress.
daywa. Mistress of my gratitude to whom I owe a mountain
of debt greater, even than Mount Mayyu, mother that gave me
birth, I do not know as yet the eighteen branches of knowledge
that all princes should know. Please put me under the kind
tuition of the holy hermit, who often flies in the air, the recluse that
dwells in our forest, the gentle person that is always meditating and
fasting.
ogress. My glorious and true vision, my son of valour, my
child who has my life in his keeping, I will take you to the holy
1 The prophecy of the king of the gods will come true, provided Daywa¬
gonban remains on the throne. Even a god’s power of seeing into the future
is limited, and although the king of the gods here foresees that Daywagonban
will be a great king, provided he remains on the throne for three > ears, he
does not foresee that the ogre-prince will leave the throne of the kingdom of
the ogres.

164 APPENDIX III
hermit. You must stay as his pupil for three years. Be diligent in
your studies, my beloved son.
daywa. We must hasten to the hermit, my master of the orchestra
When the dead body of the Buddha was being burnt on the funeral*
pyre, the gods played their music that was heard in all corners of the
universe. Can you imitate that music of the gods ?
[The orchestra plays, and when it stops, they have arrived at
that part of the forest where the hermit lives. Greetings exchang¬
ed between the visitors and the hermit. The ogress requests the
hermit to take the prince as his pupil. The hermit agrees.
Exeunt. In outline only.]
Scene 7
A FOREST GARDEN, NEAR THIYIZAYYA CITY
Enter two princesses. They are the daughters of the king, and
have come to gather flowers and play among the roses and
jasmines. They talk to each other. In outline.
Enter hermit flying.
hermit. I the flying hermit am on my daily round of begginm Ah
that elder princess is pretty. The sight of her handsome and 'desir¬
able form makes my heart beat quickly, makes me breathe heavily.
I feel dizzy, I feel like an elephant that rages for want of a mate, I
feel sick with desire for her body. Oh, oh, I cannot control myself,
I am going mad. I have never seen such a beautiful sight before. I
feel like a Brahmin, as mad as a Brahmin.1 Oh, oh, what ails my body,
what ails it? I am falling, falling, falling. (The orchestra plays and he
falls down on the floor.)2 Ah, I have lost" my supernatural power, for
the purity of my mind was tainted with desire. But I was unable to
control my body, this body of mine full of worms, this body of rotting
flesh, I could not control my body as her body is so smooth and
handsome and lovely. Well, well, she is worthy to be the bride of my
royal pupil I will join them in marriage and in love, and their minds
should become one in happiness.
1 As has been stated in connexion with Zuzaka, the villain of U Pon Nya’s
Waythandaya, the Brahmin was hated by the people, but tolerated because of
his knowledge of astrology. Attacks on him, as this ‘as mad as a Brahmin'
of U Kyin IPs, were frequent on the Burmese stage.
2 A hermit attains supernatural powers by purifying his mind through long
meditation. When he loses these powers through his mind becoming impure,
he loses them not suddenly but gradually so that our hermit falls gradually to
the ground.

APPENDIX III 165
[Exeunt princesses. The orchestra plays as the hermit walks up
and down the stage. When it stops, he has arrived back at his
hermitage. Enter daywagonban.]
dvtwa. My learned and pure master that always shows me the path
of knowledge, hermit who leads me away from the path of suffering,
what ails you ? Why have you walked back to your monaster}' in sweat
and with bursting breast? This is indeed strange! Please tell me all
about the happenings of the morning, my honourable tutor.
hermit. I will tell, open your golden ears, my princely pupil.
Near the victorious city of Thiyizavya, I saw the two emerald-buds,
the Princess Minkissa, and her younger sister, Marla. I was struck by
the faultless beauty of Minkissa, and I became dazed with desire. I
lost my supernatural power of flying, as my mind became impure. So
1 had to return here on foot.
daywa. Master of the peaceful hermitage, hermit that seeks the
wav to Nirvana, I did not think that a maiden could be so beautiful
Will she make a suitable queen to share my throne?
hermit. Pupil, prince, have no doubts as to her beauty. Your
imagination cannot create her picture in your mind; wait till you see
her for yourself. Her beauty was great enough to create in me impure
desires which caused me to fall from the sky. She is indeed a ver}'
suitable princess for you, my royal pupil.
daywa. Come, I am sixteen, I have attained manhood. My glory
shines as rubies, my power glows as diamonds. I am a man, 1 will
get what I want. I will use my thunder, I will cast my net, and the
princess shall be mine. This- ogre, this Daywagonban, this, man of
prophecy, this feast of victory, this conqueror of all opposition, this
prince will surely conquer the emerald Minkissa, my princess.
r . - [Exeunt]
Scene 8
Enter hermit, and daywagonban. Enter ogre ministers. The
royal unde is dead, and the throne of the ogres awaits ike return
of daywagonban. He bids farewell to the hermit, who leaves
the scene. In outline only.
DAYWA. I shall soon be crowned king of the ogres. But I cannot
ascend my throne without a consort, for a king must have a queen to
give glory to his kingdom. If I were to rule without a queen, other
kings would laugh at me, blame me. My carriage, my Bag, my crest
would look faded and colourless. As a pleasant pond needs golden

166
APPENDIX III
water-lilies, I need a princess. Princess Minkissa, the queen of beaut-
surrounded by beautiful maids-of-honour, adorns the victorious cit-
of Thiyizayya, that glorious city guarded by moats and men and
arrows. My love is given to her alone, and I want her as my queen
My lords, hasten to her father the king, and ask him to give her to
my throne.
[The ogre ministers point out the dangers of such an embassv
to Thiyizayya, as its king, who is powerful, is certain to refuse
an ogre, and may even take the request as an insult. In outline
only.]
daywa. Stop, stop. No more arguments. Hasten and demand
in the name of this ogre-king the princess Minkissa. [Exeunt]
Scene 9
THE THRONE-ROOM AT THIYIZAYYA
Enter human ministers. Enter ogre ministers.
CHIEF OGRE minister. Our friends the human ministers! We have
arrived in haste from our lord, who is king of all other kings. He
loves Minkissa, your beautiful princess, and wants her to be his
queen. My lords, consider and meditate, and please give us your
opinion as to the success of our mission. We bear a letter to your
king.
. CHIEF HUMAN MINISTER. You slaves, you unnatural creatures, you
wild beings from the forest, are you mad, are you rude, are you
insulting us? How could our emerald and gold ever marry your ogre-
king? Man and ogre never mate. We never tire of gazing at our
princess, we adore her. Your insulting demand gives pain to our
ears. Mad ogres, leave our city at once, before our whips meet vour
backs.
CHIEF OGRE minister. Friends, wise ministers who give always
good advice! Blame us not for coming to your golden city of victories
and wonders. We have no desire to insult you. We have no desire to
soil the clearness of your faces. Please frown not at us, hate us not.
The bullocks obey the ploughman, these ministers obey their ogre-
king. We are only slaves that obey orders. We will soon leave your
city, but before we dare go back to our king, we must deliver the
royal epistle to your lord.
[Enter king.]

APPENDIX III 167
CHIEF HUMAN minister. Noble king, an embassy from the ogre-
kingdom waits at your feet. The fame of your daughter, our
incess, has spread even to the forest-country of the ogres, and their
king begs the hand of Minkissa in marriage.
[The letter is delivered. The ogre herald is asked to read it aloud.}
ogre herald. Daywagonban, who rules the manv-towered
kingdom of the ogres, the glorious kingdom of many god-given
weapons, the mighty monarch honoured by the king of the gods
himself, sends this message to his friend, the king of Thiyizavya. As
a shining, glittering, glowing emerald of many green-blue rays ^ is
made even more colourful by becoming united with the gold of a
master goldsmith, your heart, your breast, your royal princess, your
elder daughter Minkissa, would be made more beautiful if she were
joined to my throne as queen. I beg that the top-knot of pretty
princesses be granted to me as queen, my friend king.
KING- What, dare the heathen ogre hope to consort with my
palace-born daughter, whom people gaze upon in ecstasy? These weak
ogres think that they can insult me without danger. They do not
know their place. Ho, ministers, seize them all, and put them into
dungeons. Let others take warning from their example.
[The ogres are seized. But they point out to the human ministers
that the persons of ambassadors are inviolable.]
CHIEF HUMAN minister. King, destined to be the master who
takes men and gods over the whirlpool of suffering to the island of
peace! Without doubt, these strange beings from the forest deserve
to be put to death in torture, for they dared to insult this country- by-
asking the hand of the purest-gold in marriage. But my lord, right
through history, kings, future gods, never kill or otherwise molest
ambassadors and heralds. Lord of my life, you are a man of many
pravers in many existences, you are a man of knowledge and wisdom
attained through intense industry and meditation m this and previous
lives. We beg that you use your wisdom and restrain your anger.
king. Your advice is full of great wisdom. I will forgive them
and restrain my anger. But they do not deserve to remain one
moment longer in this civilized city of ours. You must escort them
back quickly to their natural abode, the wilderness. L » .]
CHIEF HUMAN MINISTER. Ha, ha, SO Y0U thought YOU Would get
our princess Minkissa, who is more beautiful than her lovely sister
Ha, ha, you remind me of a fellow who was wooing a married

168 APPENDIX III
woman, thinking she was a virgin. Never attempt the impossible, mv
friends, never climb where you cannot reach. Farewell.
CHIEF OGRE minister. Oh, oh, we thought we would gain great
praise from all the world, striving to unite our lord the king with
your beautiful princess. We hoped to unite gold with gold*
You are like a merchant who refuses to sell in his first venture. Your
goods will become stale, your princess will never get a husband.
CHIEF HUMAN minister. Ha, ha, our goods are not for sale.' Your
king washes his hands making ready to feast on the choicest food on
the table, forgetting that the meal is not for him. Farewell.
CHIEF OGRE minister. We must use our discretion, we will retreat
in good order. Then, when all is ready, we will use our god-given and
demon-given weapons, we will use our supernatural powers, we
will make the whole forest shake with thunder, all the mountains
quake with our shouts. Our war-cries will be heard even on Mount
Mayyu. This city and this king will soon be mere dust. The bomb
shall soon explode, a match shall soon set alight the mine of gun¬
powder. Explosions shall soon rend the air. My lord of the orchestra,
show us our way home, and imitate the sounds of explosions and
trumpets blown to call soldiers to battle.
[Exeunt human ministers, laughing and jeering, as the orchestra
plays, and the ogre ministers walk up and down. When the
orchestra stops, they have arrived at the forest. Enter day-
WAGONBAN.j
Entrance to the Box of Glory, 0 Master of the golden arrow.
Me went in daring and with valour to the city where Minkissa
dwells, and we delivered your message to her father the king. But
he did not like us. We gave him sweets, but he found them sour,
e said that you, a barbarous dweller in the forest, eater of uncooked
flesh, did not deserve even to look at the princess. He sent us away
at once. J
DAYWA. Ah, the little kingdom insults this great ogre, titled
Davwagonban by the king of the gods himself! It ought to agree to
my demand, it ought to soothe my nerves, it ought to give in submis¬
sion and m joy the princess Minkissa who laughs in the shadow of
water-lilies, who sleeps in a golden house. ... The tiny country has
insulted me. I will destroy it by my mighty army of victorious
ogres. Ministers, call the soldiers, shine the weapons. We march to
Thiyizayya on the seventh day from now. \Exeunt!

APPENDIX III 169
Scene 10
THE THRONE-ROOM AT THIYIZAYYA
Enter king and ministers. A herald enters and announces that
PRINCE thanyawza from the kingdom of Zayyahomi has arrived
to see the king. Enter prince.
king. Handsome young prince of a great line, your Sun and
Moon the royal father and mother of yours, how are they? I pray
everv day that they may be free from the ninety-six kinds of diseases,
that "flying horse and marble-white elephant—omens of victory over
enemies_should arrive at your city, that steady rain and wind should
fill your streams and granaries, and that your people should be in
peace and happiness, striving to reach the path to Nirvana. How are
VoU my prince ? Have you learnt the eighteen branches of princely
learning? How have you succeeded in your studies, could you swim
to your goal ?
prince. My noble king, thanks to the prayers of a godlike
king, the faces of my parents are bright as gold, the omens of victor}7
dwell now in my father’s stables, streams and food are in plenty, and
the people are happy in the religion. I have been fortunate enough
to reach the goal of my studies. I thank thee, noble king.
king. Son of glory, right-arm of your father, listen and take my
words to your heart. When you were born, my younger daughter was
born too. And your royal father and I agreed by treaty that
your elder brother should marry my elder daughter, and you
the vounger. Have you come to fulfil the agreement r But, where is
your brother? Is he absent at the head of a triumphant army, with
drums beating and arms flashing, conquering your father’s enemies?
prince. My noble lord, my royal brother is not absent in
another’s land. My parents often tell me his tragic story. He was
stolen and taken away to be eaten by an ogress, who entered the
palace disguised as a human being.
[A gap in the dialogue. . This scene is in outline only.]
king. Spectacles of your father’s eyes! Flying Pearl 1 lour talk
of ogres reminds me of Daywagonban. That king of the ogres sent me
an embassy to demand the elder princess. When I refused, the ogres
went away threatening vengeance. Soon after the ogre-embassy, em¬
bassies from two kingdoms came to demand the same princess. They
too went away in anger. I am anxious for her safety. I wish you to
take her away with you to your kingdom. Guard her well with your

170
APPENDIX III
life, my son. I give also your betrothed to you. Hasten back with
your princess and your royal sister-in-law, beloved prince.
prince. Be not anxious, father. I will respect and love the
faultlessly handsome princess, my sister, and will protect her with
my life,
[Enter the two princesses. Enter soldiers with a commander.
The prince and the ladies bid farewell to the king. The
PRINCE, princesses and soldiers move up stage, and the
king, etc., leave rhe scene. The orchestra plays as the prince
and his companions walk up and down. When it stops, they have
arrived at a thick part of the forest.]
prince. My valiant commander, we must rest here. Follow the
regulations as set down in the war books, and rest your army. Let
the infantry surround us, let the cavalry surround the infantry let
that special regiment of mighty men of valour watch the approaches to
our camp. Let there be perfect silence, so that we can hear the sound
of an approaching enemy. Put barricades of thorns around the whole
camp, and please see that fires bum round the barricades themselves.
[Exeunt commander and soldiers. The prince and the two
princesses sleep. A pause as the orchestra plays. Enter to one
corner of the stage, daywagonban]
daywa. My princess as pretty as a fairy? Though eighteen
regiments surround the tent where she is sleeping, this ogre honoured
y the king of the gods himself, this Daywagonban of superhuman
power can jump over the surrounding soldiers and get the princess
• - . When Buddha was born, thunder and the voice of the quaking
earth were heard. My lord of the orchestra, can you make such
sounds t
[Hs the orchestra plays, daywagonban runs, seizes the princess
minkissa and carries her off the stage. Alarms. The prince
orders the commander to follow daywagonban with his army,
e prince makes ready to follow. Enter forest-god.]
forest-god. Prince born to the throne of your line, you must
not be angry, you must not be too valiant, you must not roar as a
king-hon roars from his golden cave. The ogre-king is not an ordin¬
al . e'n“' e ls t^ie friend of gods, and he has a god-given bow. It
can kill a thousand soldiers at once. It is impossible to fight him.
Quench the fire of your anger. Save yourself and your faithful men.
■Retreat in order and in array, my prince.

APPENDIX III
prince. Friendly god that guards the hills and the forest, I too
an! a powerful prince. I am a king’s son bom in the topmost tower
0f my palace. I am not afraid of any danger. If I meet a tiger, I will
think that it is only a bump in the road. If I meet bushes after
bushes of thorns, I will think they are made of velvet. I owe a duty
t0 my sister-in-law. I had not been able to guard her, but I will
bring her back to safety. Farewell, god.
forest-god. If you refuse to listen, you will die. Listen, Davwa-
sonban is a powerful bowman. When he bends the bow to put on an
arrow his strength is such that his foot makes a mark in the ground
big as the mark made by a wheel when the cart sinks in the soft mud.
When he makes ready to shoot and takes his aim, when he beats the
bow to strengthen his heart and steady his aim, he makes a noise as
loud as thunder. Return, my prince, retreat to safety'.
prince. Friend that forever guards the hills and the forest, I do
not stop for wheel marks and thunder. I am not afraid of an ogre
who lives in forests and on hills and on the wild sea-shore. That ogre
shall die. I will win back my lovely emerald sister. Trumpets, sound;
drums, beat. We must risk our lives for our relations and our friends.
Farewell, god.
[Exit forest-god. Enter daywagonban to a corner, away
from the prince, while the orchestra plays. daywagonban is
supposed to be some distance away from his pursuers, so that
he cannot be seen by them. The orchestra stops.]
DAYWA. The eighteen regiments approach with trumpets sound¬
ing. Mouse comes to cat, crow comes to arrow, fish comes to
cooking-pot, the regiments come to me. I shall have to kill that
master of rudeness if he insists on following me. I must set my bow,
I must put on the arrow. Come on, come on. As wax gives way to
the heat of a fire, the ground itself gives way to me. Look! My foot
has made a mark as deep as a wheel-mark. L
[The orchestra plays and the prince, with followers, including
the YOUNGER princess walks on. When it stops, they have
arrived at the place where daywagonban set his bow.]
COMMANDER. Look, look, my lord! There is the mark of his foot.
The bow must be set. I have never seen such a mark made by a
bowman, I have only heard it told in history and m fables ... e

172 APPENDIX III
must hurry back, my prince, lest the whole army should be wiped out
and killed by the ogre’s arrows.
prince. Commander, we cannot go back just because we find a
foot-mark. Old and young would laugh at us if our army should
retreat from a mark made in the mud. In dice, in cards, in war loss
and gain come in turn. We have lost our princess, and it is now our
turn to win her back.
commander. 1 am not afraid, my lord. But beware of panic in
the ranks. A single brick can sometimes scare a thousand ravens
In this army, there may be many men afraid of the supernatural
If one should run, all would run. Therefore, my lord, I beg that
we should return to our city for the present. Then we will come
back with regiments composed of tried men only. Let us return
now, my prince.
[Enter daywagonban as the orchestra plays.]
daywa. They are still following me. I will frighten them, I do
not wish to kill them if they will retreat. I will warn them that I am
all ready to shoot with my god-given bow-. Now, I will tap
on my bow-string.
,
[The orchestra makes a noise exit daywagonban.]
commander. Do you .hear the thunder-like noise, prince? Have
you forgotten the god’s warning? The king of the ogres is making
ready to shoot. Stop, stop, O son of my lord, and save your army by
retreating. My lord, pity your army, consider your men, my prince.
prince. Commander, when we fly a flag, we must fly it high; when
w^e dive, we must reach the sea-bottom; when we attack, we must reach
victory or death. It is too late to retreat now. Care , not for the ogre
with an empty title. March on, march on, to victory!
[Enter daywagonban.]
daywa. He stops not at my warning, he comes on with his army.
Ha, ha, he is surrounded by his soldiers. But my-arrow can reach
him. Come on arrow, come on bow, make a noise like thunder, shake
Mount Mayyu itself with your noise, arrow, arrow, hit the prince.
[Shoots and exit. The arrow hits theprince, who falls unconsci¬
ous. Disorder * and alarm. Exeunt soldiers running on one side,
and the younger princess alone on the other.]

APPENDIX III 173
SCENE' 11
Enter forest-god.
forest-god. The prince of power listened not to my peaceful
words he cared not to remember my words of warning, and he went
to attack the ogre-king with human soldiers. He and his men were
^oing towards the deadly arrows of the god-given bow. I must
hasten and find out what has happened to the bold prince.
, ,
[The orchestra plays and when it stops he has arrived at the
place where theprince is lying wounded. He is anointed by the
,
forest-god with magic oil and recovers from his wounds. He
realizes the folly of haired and anger. He decides to become
a hermit and dwell in the forest where he nearly met his death.
Exeunt. In outline only.]
Scene 12
THE FOREST
Enter aakm-dragon.
naga. I dwrell in a golden palace in the womb of this earth, a
wondrous palace made of diamonds. I am a powerful spirit-animal.
My frown can turn beasts and men into mere ashes at once. I will
now go to play and look for food in that silver palace, which men
call a sand-bank, near the river. My learned master of the orchestra,
sound your divine drums.
[Enter galon-kird. The orchestra stops.]
galon. I am the king-galdn who dwells on the golden tower
built on the mountain top. I own the sky up to the second region.
All naga-dragons quake with fear of me. Look at the feathered crown
on my head, look at my pointed beak, my well-feathered wings. I
look really fierce. ... I must hasten to the silver sands near that
river and find some meat and fish.
naga I play in laughter on the sands, but here comes a galon.
My life is in danger, I must hide, I must hide. That banyan tree
over there is as huge as a palace, with its overhanging boughs. I will
hide under it. , ,
gal6n. I see my food, and this golden galon will swoop down and
catch that powerless being, that frightened naga who hides m fear
underneath that banyan tree. He shall not dwell long m that tree-
palace, I will soon get him. My lord of the orchestra, I will make a

174 APPENDIX III
sound, my swoop shall make a sound, which will disturb even the
gods on Mount Mayyu. Can you imitate that sound ?
{The orchestra plays. The galSn’s beak misses the naga and
strikes the tree, which is uprooted.]
What have I done? I have destroyed the sacred tree, the banyan
tree under whose cooling shade hermits sit and meditate. . . . Our
Lord attained Buddhahood under such a tree. I have sinned a
great sin, I am afraid. But I did not intend to destroy the tree-
monastery. I will assume human form, and ask the holy hermit that
dwells near here, whether I have sinned or not.
[Enter prince, now a hermit.]
Flower of a throne, prince-hermit who lives in piety and searches
the path to peace, because of the enmity between nagas and galons
that has lasted through the ages, I tried to fight a naga. I tried
to catch him as he hid under that monastic tree. I missed him but
felled the tree. Who is responsible for this outrage ? Have I sinned
a great sin? Please enlighten me, my learned hermit.
hermit. Listen, mighty spirit-bird. The galSn did not intend to
destroy the tree, so he is not responsible. The naga also did not
intend to cause the destruction of the tree by hiding under it. He is
also free from responsibility. Both of you are free from blame, my
PUPil bird- [Exit GALON.]
naga. In trying to save my life, I have indirectly caused the
destruction of the tree-monastery. If the hermit should be angry with
me, danger and distress will befall me. I must hasten to ask his for¬
giveness.
[The HERMIT tells the naga that he is free from blame. The
naga thanks the hermit. Exeunt.]
Scene 13
Enter hermit. Enter younger princess. She has been hiding
m fear of the ogre. She is relieved at finding the prince.
She begs hint to become a layman again, but in vain. Arguments
and tears. She then demands the safe restoration of her sister to
her. She suggested that as he was made responsible by her father
for princess minkissa’s safety, he should at once leave the
tree-monastery and search for her. The hermit, in despair„
wishes aloud that the naga were there. Enter naga.
hermit. Oh, friend naga, please listen to me, please help me.

APPENDIX III 17S
Please find out by your powers the fate of my sister-in-law, whose,
beauty makes her a kinswoman of goddesses. Please try your
best to bring her here if she should be still alive. Fight the ogres,
cheat the ogres, and bring her back to safety.
v4Gi4- My lord and master, be not anxious. If she is alive, I
will steal the fairy-like princess with all the six kinds of handsomeness.
I will steal her from the ogres, I will take her away from ogre-land.
[The naga moves up-stage, hermit and princess leave the scene,
and the orchestra plays. When it stops, the naga has arrived at
that part of the forest where the ogre-city is situated.]
Oh this is an imposing city. This is indeed worthy to be the
capital for the great Daywagonban to dwell in. Look at the well-
fortified turrets on the high walls, look at the iron gates. Moats
surround the city. Here are gates for soldiers to come out and attack
besiegers, over there are gates for soldiers to re-enter the city after an
attack. Those must be shelters for bowmen, these are corners for
spearmen. Look at those gardens and parks, look at these ponds and
lakes in which the water-lily sleeps. A wide river flows through the city,
dreaming of the forest-clad mountain-sides down which it has come.
From the drum-towers, sweet drums tell the hour. Towers in gold
and silver vie with each other in height. Is it the city of gods, is it the
abode of human kings, or is it only an ogre-city* But wherein is the
difference? Yes, a handsome city, an artistic creation of the ogre-
brain. But I must not lose time by admiring their city. I must use
my powers and hide myself to watch.
[Enter daywagonban, ogre ministers, and princess minkissa.]
daywa. She is under my power, in my hands, yet she has
persistently refused my love. What sort of a merchant is she? Her
goods are worthless, they ought to adorn a broken-down cottage. \et
she refuses to sell them. I will force the obstinate seller to part with
her wares. I will make her sell all I want, and all at my price. Ho,
ministers, put Mistress Thickhead into an emerald casket, lock her m
it, and put it in a deep dungeon. Let her suffer for seven days, let her
mind become weary with despair. Then she will yield.
[Exit. PRINCESS MINKISSA is put in an emerald casket, and
the casket is put in the dungeon. Ministers leave the stage.
princess minkissa is now supposed to be underground^]
NAGA. Ha, ha, I know where they have put the golden princess,
queen of grace. I will go into the ground, and travelling m t e

176 APPENDIX III
bosom of the earth, I will soon get the jewelled case with the
sweetest jewel in it. Ho, orchestra, make a big noise, let all ear1'
be tortured for some moments with loud noises while I steal mv
princess. [Orchestra plays and stops]
Ha, ha, ogres, ogres, I have got the emerald casket with the
princess in it. Now I will hasten back as swift as the flying horse
whom the ogre Ponaka rode in bygone days. My lord "of the
orchestra, can you imitate the sound made by horses’ hoofs?
[The orchestra plays, and the naga moves up-stage carrying the
emerald casket. When it stops, he has arrived back at the hermit¬
age. Enter hermit and younger princess. The naga delivers
the casket, and when it is opened minkissa cotnes out. Joy and
relief. The hermit thanks the naga, who leaves. Exeunt.]
Scene 14
Enter hermit and princesses. The speeches are in lyrics to
be sung.
princesses {together). Youth who wishes to travel on the path to
Nirvana, are you not too young to make the journey? Use vour
golden common sense. You are too young. Come back to your "city.
Lovely prince, your gold umbrellas and your gold towers await you.
Wait in peace in the shadow of your palace until you are older, then
go on your journey.
hermit. I need the gold umbrella of meditation, not the gold
umbrella of pleasure. My palace is this tree. I wish not to go back
to my city.
minkissa. If you wish to meditate and seek the way to peace,
you must do so in a safe and peaceful place. This wilderness is
full of dangers. Come back to your city where you can meditate
free from worry, free from care.
hermit. When enemies and dangers come, I will offer the
sweetest flower of loving-kindness, I will bathe them in the cool-clear
waters of forgiveness. Say farewell to your brother, and return to
your towered city.
YOUNGER princess. Love, your princess is tired of trees and wild
ponds. Let us go back to our golden palace and towers, mv prince.
You are too young to live in the forest. Come with me.
HERMIT. Younger and elder, my princesses, your words are sweet:
they jewel my ears. But I do not wish to go back. I am now only a
hermit, dweller in golden caves, not golden palaces.

APPENDIX III
minkissa. Listen to our words, follow our advice, grant our plead-
jjjjrs. Come back with us.
* hermit. My heart quakes with fear at the thought of re-swimming
the river of pain and disappointment. I care not for golden glory,
goiden throne. My palace is this forest.
6 princesses {together). But the forest cannot be your palace. You
are too young and the forest is too full of dangers. Come back to the
city where you can pursue your religion in peace and safety.
' hermit. I am not afraid of dangers. Death comes to us all, and I
have to die one day, whether I dwell in the city or the forest.
princesses {together). You are too young to be tied with the
ropes of King Death. Come back with us. You are a prince destined
to rule in glory-.
hermit. I care not for glory, my sisters, my ladies. It is useless
to try to make me go back. ... I have escaped from the pain of
striving to attain worldly glory. I will now strive to be able to row
you in the raft of peace to the everlasting Peace.
[Exit hermit, followed by princesses.]
Scene IS
THE FOREST
Actually, three scenes, each representing a different part of the
forest, are being shown simultaneously. Of course, the time
groups of actors are not supposed to see one anotherP
/« the centre of the stage is the tree under which the hermit
usually dwells. The emerald casket is still there, hermit and
princesses enter and sit under the tree. On one side is another
tree. A tree-god comes and sits under it On the other me,
daywagonban and his ministers enter.
DAYWA. It is now seven days since I put our obstinate visitor
in the dungeon. She must be in great terror now, and ready to
yield. She must now be repenting that she was so obstrn- •
Release Minkissa, my ministers, release the rose-bud, the faultless-
handsome.
1 It will be seen that U Kyin U. in this play and the next, often (1) shows
two scenes simultaneously, and (2) asks the audi‘^MLTthe aSLce.
groups of actors do not see each jjafaw, following
^
U Kyin U was a pioneer in stage-craft, in P .

178 APPENDIX III
[The ministers inform daywaggnban that the dungeon is empty ]
DAYWA. Ha, ha, a mere astrologer fights the gods, a mere human
princess tries to run away from Daywagonban. Woman who refuses
to love me, where are you? I will shout. My shout shall reach
her ears. You fool, you wretch, dare you run away from me? There I
can be no escape from my power; you will be caught, you shall be !
caught.
[He shouts. The princesses hear the voice and run. The tree-
god puts them inside the trunk of his tree.]
She depends on her two legs, I on my supernatural powers and
god-given weapons. Foolish woman that runs awTay from my love, you
shall be punished. My lord of the orchestra, trained in a university
of musical learning, show’ me the way, and help me in my search for j
the princess.
j
[The orchestra plays, and when it stops, he has arrived at the
tree-hermitage. He sees the emerald casket, and the foot-prints !
of the princesses. He decides to follow the foot-prints, which !
lead him to the tree-god. In outline only, to he told in a soli¬
loquy by DAYWAGONBAN.]
daywa. Brother Tree-god, I am looking for my wife. I see that
the interlude, there was no division into scenes. In his later plays, he intro¬
duced the innovation of dividing a play into scenes. However, as he was the
pioneer, he was often uncertain of his scenes. But, even when he was showing !
simultaneous scenes, he was careful that they should relate to one big scene, j
i.e. they should represent different parts of a forest, or different parts of a
palace. Contrary to practice in the interlude, he never showed one scene
representing a forest simultaneously with another representing a palace, or a
palace-scene of one city with another such scene of a different city. Simul¬
taneous scenes were abandoned by the dramatists and the living actors, with j
the coming of the realist U Pon Nya. But the puppet show-men, more
conservative than living actors, have retained up to the present day the
simultaneous scenes, even when the puppets are presenting U Pon Nya’s
Wizaya. The show-men also retained the practice of the interlude in showing
a forest-scene simultaneously with a palace-scene.
But even U Pon Nya retained some remnant of the earlier practice when
j
gods were being represented. When an actor taking the part of a god appeared,
he was supposed to be on Mount Mayyu, the abode of the gods, and although !
he was supposed to see the other actors representing human beings, it was |
assumed that he was invisible to them until, as the orchestra played, he walked j
up to the other actors. This practice was deemed not to be against realistic
effect, as in real life also a god is believed to be invisible to human beings j
until he goes to them and makes himself visible.

APPENDIX III 179
the trail of her foot-marks ends at your tree. Now, now, it is very
dangerous to hide my wife from me. I am a powerful ogre. If you
dare insult me, I will soon make you wander homeless in the forest,
like a slave.
tree-god. Listen, you powerful ogre of the forest. I do not care
whether vou lose or find your wife. I care not for your affairs. You
are very rude in accusing me, a perfect stranger, of eloping with you*
wife. You must be a blind cock, looking for a hen that has followed
another. . . . Ha, ha, you remind me of a complicated case in a
court of law. A slave was sued by a man in the court of a clerk of
law. The man’s own mother came and defended the slave. Now,
now, let me alone, do not put me in your complicated case, 1 cannot
be like that mother, I cannot defend your wife, and I cannot defend
you either.1 Brother, poor little brother, go home.
daywa. Brother god, do not say insulting words, do not crack,
jokes. My wife’s foot-marks abruptly end underneath your tree. You
cannot escape by mere denial. You are not a defendant in a court of
law. No arguments will save you. Where is my wife? Answer me
quickly. Although you are a god, you are not the son of the king of
the gods. I can punish you, I will punish you.
TREE-GOD. My master of courtly language and polite manners!
Collector of revenue from such powerless beings as ghosts and
demons, you cannot frighten me, my lad. I care not for your wife
that has left you because you are a mere animal-spirit. It is no good
threatening me, I am not afraid of such beings as you. This tree is a
shady banyan tree. Men come here to rest, breaking their tiresome
journey through the forest for a few peaceful moments of relaxation.
I am not responsible for their footmarks. Go home, lad. Do you
want some banyan flowers? I am an honourable god, I never steal
wives.
daywa. You minor-god, you slave-god, you dare laugh at me,
and mock me? Iam not the son of a merchant, I do not care whether
vour tree is an open market where men and cows and horses come to
trade. I want my wife, and I will look under every leaf of your tree
for my wife. . . .. ...
tree-god. You big brother of little spirits, you spirit afraid to go
near a place of worship, is this your tree? Just touch a leaf anu jou
will see what this loving brother of yours can do.
i The meaning is not clear. I think it is a reference to a contemporary
law-suit.

180 APPENDIX III
[In a soliloquy, the tree-god decides, as daywagonban a*?// ^
go away, to put magic dresses on the princesses which mitt
make them look like ogresses. He does so. He gives daywa¬
gonban permission to search the tree. The two princesses
come out. daywagonban thinks that they are ogresses, and heos
the tree-god for forgiveness. Exeunt tree-god and the
princesses still wearing the magic dresses, hi outline only.]
daywa. Aha, that wicked sham hermit has my wife. I know it
I knew' it, when I saw the emerald casket lying open near his tree. I
will punish him. The golden tower, which man calls the sun, is
now hanging on the side of Mount Mayyu, tired with its journey to
the human world and back. Its lights will soon' be extinguished. But
now it is shining like a ball of cotton on fire, for its guardians are
polishing its golden turrets to make the flying jewelled-tower ready
for another journey at dawn. My lord of the orchestra, we must hurry
to catch the hermit before the sun has completely set.
[The orchestra plays, and when it stops, he has arrived at the
hermitage, where he finds the hermit.]
You sham hermit, wTho spend your days in chewing chicken
bones, instead of studying your religious books, you have hidden
my princess. I know it. I put her inside an emerald casket in a
dungeon, but I lost both her and the casket. I find the latter near
your tree. Where have you, to whom have you, sent my princess? If
I do not find her, I will kill you.1
hermit. Listen, Daywagonban, I did not send your princess
away anywhere. I did not help her to go away from here, and I have
given her to nobody. I cannot produce her. But I am not afraid. If
only my death will give you satisfaction, and give peace to the forest,
I am ready to die. But grant me but seven days to live. I wish to
meditate and prepare for my death. I promise on oath to come to
you on the seventh day from now.
[daywagonban agrees to give him seven days' grace. Exeunt.]
Of course, he does not. realize that the hermit is his former enemv, the
prince.

APPENDIX III 181
Scene 15
ANOTHER PART OF THE FOREST
There is a cave on one side. Enter princesses. They are tired
with trying to get back to civilization. They go into the cave
to rest. Enter king with ministers.
king. My ministers, gods of wisdom, we have arrived at the
cave built in memory of my elder son, who was stolen away by ogres.
It is seven days since we were here last. Enter and see that the cave
is fit for pious- persons to meditate in, polish the gold, emboss my
coat-of-arms on the walls, put lovely and sweet-smelling flowers on
the floor. [Ministers go to the cave and then come out.}
chief minister. My lord, we have strewn the floor with flowers,
we have lit wax candles. But, my lord, we found, on the bed-throne
on which you usually sit and meditate, two ogresses fast asleep.
king. My darling son was stolen by an ogress, who entered my
palace with evil guile. Since then, I have blunted my love for ail
oares. Every day, I swear at them, I pray against them, I increase my
hatred for them. Lords, catch the two sparks of danger, capture the
two ogresses.
[Ministers enter the cave and come out with the princesses. They
look like ogresses as they are still in their magic dresses]
CHIEF MINISTER. My lord, here are the two ogresses who dared to
sleep in the candle-lit and sweet-flowered cave built in memory of
vour son.
king. My son, my heir to the throne, was stolen through cunning.
An ogress stole him. Now I can have my revenge. Waste not
your time, my ministers, by trial and expositions of criminal law\ '■
order that they be chained to the execution post. Let them be tied
and chained. Let them live in torture for some days, only to die
later.
[The PRINCESSES are tied as ordered. Exeunt all except the turn
PRINCESSES.]
PRINCESSES. Oh, oh, what sin did we commit in our previous lives
to suffer thus? Oh, it is cruel to be in a foreign land, it is terrible to
die by foreign hands. ... Oh, we must not die like this, howcomd
we? History will call this a rude episode if we are not rescue " e
poor sisters, we poor women! Our country, our people, where are
you! Father, Father, we raise our hands in prayer, will you not come

182 APPENDIX III
and save your helpless daughters? We are not ogresses, we are human
princesses. Oh, oh, who will go and tell the truth to the cruel king?
[Enter two goddesses.}
first goddess. We are the goddesses that guard the two handsome
and noble princesses, women as valuable as silver. Their father-in-law
thinks that they are ogresses and will kill them soon. Sister, we must
hasten and save our wards from pain and death.
[The orchestra plays as the goddesses walk towards the prin¬
cesses. The princesses ask them who they are.}
second goddess. Smile, laugh, be happy, princesses. We are your
unseen guardians that lead you on paths of virtue. We will soon fetch
the prince-hermit, who will tell his father that you are his daughter-
in-law and you her sister. [Exeunt.]
Scene 16
THE FOREST
Enter hermit. Enter goddesses.
goddesses (together). Oh, oh, lord. Listen, young prince who has
followed the example of the hermit Maydaryi and dwell in peace in
the gray-brown forest, with trees washed in mist and dew, we are the
goddesses who guard the two princesses, we guard and love them as
their mother, now dead, loved them. We have come in haste as the
two maidens are in great danger and pain.
hermit. I know who you are now, but I do not know how my
diamond-princesses are in pain. Why are they in pain? Are they
being put to death because of some crime ? Are their bodies a-weary
with pain?
goddesses (together). Oh, oh, lord! Listen, little Buddha-bud
who adorns himself in flowers of piety. The princesses look as if
they were ogresses. Your father, maddened by love of his elder born,
hates all ogres, and thinking the two princesses to be those hateful
beings, has put them in chains.
hermit. I hear. But how did they come to look like ogresses?
goddesses (together). Oh, oh, master. Listen, hermit, heir to a
throne, who strings the flowers of piety and meditation. A tree-god,
to save them, put magic dresses on the twro gold-buds, making them
look like ogresses. But he forgot to take the diesses off. The two
beauties are now as helpless as little sparrows caught in a strong net.

183
APPENDIX III
The only person who can save them is you, young prince, for you
a[one can tell the truth to your father, because to you alone will he
.1
listen _
[The hermit decides to go and save the princesses, out he
remembers that he will have to deliver himself to daywagonban
at dawn, for seven days have elapsed. He note hastens to
daywagonban to ask for a day's grace. Exeunt. In outline.]
Scene 17
Enter daywagonban and ministers. Enter hermit,
hermit. O king of the ogres, owner of the flying chariot, master
of thunder which shakes the whole universe! As I promised, I deserve
to die tomorrow at dawn. But I have two friends in great danger.
Unless I save them, they will die. King, I beg in humility tnat I be
oiven one day’s grace to enable me to journey to my friends m
trouble and in pain. (Aside) I must sing him verses, jewels ot the ear,
honey-sweet food of the ear. I must beg in sweet verses and humble
words I must beg a day’s life so that my princesses should live.
Great king, I care not for death. I am not afraid to die. I know I
shall have to die sooner or later at your hands. But I must save my two
friends. Only a few moments ago, two goddesses came and told me
the news that death is swiftly approaching my loved friends. Please
do not waver, king, let me go to save life. I swear to come back to
die at once.2
daywa. You cunning little hermit. As death approaches, you
think of all excuses, you speak false words- Seize this fa.se
hermit, my men. Tie him to a post, with his head downwards.
When the golden glass-tower stands in the middle of the sky tomorrow,
I will kill him. My cook shall cook me a delicious midday meal.
ministers. My lord, my king. How could this hermit harm you
ever? He has done no harm to you, has given you no insult It he
has spoken false words, he has done so only because he was maddened
by fear of death. Please let him alone, lord, let him dwell in »
tree-monastery, let him go his pious and harmless way.
i Even if the dresses were taken off now, it would be of no avail to save
the prlcesses, as the king would on.y think that the ogresses had assumed
hUT0?e7uS;se, he could not tell the ogre-king who his MenJ■***£
Daywagonban, learning the whereabouts of the princess, would go and
her again. ■

1S4 APPENDIX III
DAYWA, Your words enter not my ear. If he were a pious hermit
he would have come here to his death, without flinching, without fear'
This is no hermit, but a cunning fellow. This is no master of learn¬
ing, this is only a sham hermit. Stop your arguments, do as I order
-vou- iThe hermit is seized and bound with ropes.}
hermit. I am not afraid to die, but before I die I wish to
see my mother. O mother, O father, all my dreams of giving you
the cool water of religious truth are now’ shattered. ... I "am
not afraid of death, I am not frightened of torture. Even Shin
Mauggalan, the famous saint, had to suffer torture. ... But mv
friends, my sisters, little ladies, pretty princesses, how are ’you
going to escape from pain and death? Oh, oh, use your wits, mv
little mistresses, use your wits, use sweet words, and strive to
escape without my help. Oh, oh, I am all upside down, my heart
my breast, my intestines are all topsy-turvy, they hurt me so.
Oh, oh, you king of the gods, you king of the golden mountain"
Alavvu, can you not see me? Will you not save many lives? Have
you forgotten us? Friend, king of the gods, who rests at the foot of
the paradise-tree on a carpet inlaid with gold and adorned with
jewels, oh, mighty king of the gods, I ask your help, I ask your
help. ... J
[Enter king of the gods to one corner.]
king of the gods. Why is my carpet, usually softer than cotton
wool, why is my carpet of rubies and emeralds, why is my gold-and-
silver carpet so hard? It is as hard as stone. Oh, it is a sign that
someone pious needs my help. I must look down the mountain side.
• ■ . Ah, Daywagonban, whom I honoured by giving a title, is deter¬
mined to kill his brother with his mighty bow, to kill the holy hermit.
Mad ogre, he is as Daywadat, who tried to kill the master of gods
and men. That ogre must not kill a holy man. I must guard against
any insult to religion. I must warn the ogre-king. My followers of
gold my gods who bear the proud title of Umbonwala, my gods
who laugh and play on the tips of clouds! (Enter some gods.) My
four faithful gods, O masters of rain and clouds! The ogre-king is
going to kill a pious hermit, thinking him to be a sham one. Send
some thunderbolts, make the terrible noise of thunder, let lightning
rend the sky. The ogres will take the signs as warning, they will
realize that they are ill-treating a pious hermit.
LEADER of the rain-gods. As you order, noble king, we will rend

APPENDIX III 185
the sky with lightning, the air with thunder. Daywagonban shall
realize that he must not ill-treat a pious man.
[Thunder and lightning. Exeunt gods.]
chief minister. Lord, lord, can you hear the storm? The light-
nincr shows up fierce clouds, the gods are angry at our laying our
hands on a hermit, a kinsman of the lord himself. . . . Listen to
the thunder, look at the sky lighted up with lightning. Look, look,
lord, it is as bright as noon. Quick, oh quick, my king, order that the
pious hermit be freed at once.
daywa. You test my patience. No more words to my ears. This
hermit stole the lovely inmate of the palace. Now he has come here
to tell tales. 1 shall punish, I will punish, 1 will kill this crooked
hermit, when the round sun comes at dawn to drive away darkness
and rain. I will sleep now, disturb me not.
[Enter king of the gods.]
K!NG of the gods. He will not take warning from the signs in
the sky, he sleeps caring not for angry gods. At dawn he will kill
the hermit, his own brother. I must put this magic sash on him..
He will then realize and remember that he is a human being. He
will lose his ogre-teeth, his ogre-anger. I must hurry and make him
repent. He will then realize that the hermit is his brother, he will
know that his royal parents are mourning their absent and lost sons.
[The orchestra plays and when it stops, the king of the gods
has arrived at where daywagonban is. The king of the
gods puts the magic sash on daywagonban. He wakes up
and realizes the truth. He frees the hermit, and greets him
as brother. He decides to leave the world and become a hermit
also. He asks his brother to hasten home with him to free the
princesses and see their parents. Afterwards, the two brothei*
will come back to pursue the path of purity in ike forest, the
scene of their suffering and strife. Exeunt. In outline only.]

APPENDIX IV
PARPAHEIN1
By U Kyin U
Scene 1
THE THRONE-ROOM
Enter king and ministers. They discuss affairs of state. The
king announces Ms desire to retire to a monastery. But he has
not as yet decided on a successor. There are three sons, the
eldest and youngest being the sons of the chief queen atid the
other, the son of the queen of the ‘ northern wing of the palace3,
who ts op low hit th but the favourite of the king. Enter to an
extreme corner, away from king and ministers, northern
queen and her son, parpahein.
northern queen. Oil of emeralds, lovely chain that is twisted and
worked in gold, necklace and locket that I shall always wear entwined
around my neck throughout my life, even if I were to live a thousand
years! Do you still think of the promise, made by your father to me
when you were but a suckling babe, sixteen years ago ? He promised
that you should be the successor to the throne after him.
parpahein. Tes, my beloved lady, I always remember and think
of it. He made that promise because you were the owner of his
gratitude, because you did some act for which he owed you a. reward.
I want to rule this kingdom, my royal mother, and I think the time
is ripe for the promise to be fulfilled. Please go now and ask the
king to appoint me as his successor.
northern queen. One whom I can never love fully to my satis¬
faction, son of my heart whom I have always nursed and looked
after, my only child, in spite of your father’s gratitude, I have only
my beauty. Birth and honour are lacking; I am only Mistress Beauty.
I am afraid that the golden city will not be given to you, the son of
11 This play has been considered on pp. 65—8.

APPENDIX IV
^ unknown, of a nobody. Have you forgotten that there is an elder
rrn son 0f the great queen, who dwells in the front wing, adorned
with' countless towers, of the loved queen, surrounded by golden
"laidens, with all the glory and honour of the golden lion-king?
pytPAHEiN. Tower of my gratitude, mother to whom I owe a
mountain of gratitude higher than Mount Mayyu, I care not for my
elder brother, Zayathein. He is nothing, his opinion is nothing.
Mother, be not misled by his sweet words, by his grand words. He
is
a mere nothing. The only thing mighty about him is his conceit,
which has been made so by the king putting him before the court,
and because of the empty phrases of his courtiers. If my father the
k|n<r, whose glory enslaves the lowest and the highest in the world,
and&under whose peace and protection the whole kingdom fiounsnes,
wishes to make me his heir, all is well. If he does not, with a mmu
cunning and crooked, with a mind sharp-edged, I will plan and I will
think. Please go before the king, and learn for certain his decision.
[northern queen goes and kneels before the king.]
northern queen. Centre of the universe, to whom the whole
world gives homage, master of the whole kingdom, lord who shares
with the newly-risen sun the salute of this earth! "i our son and mine,
the prince, the pearl that this kingdom wears, has attained the age of
sixteen years. In full audience was a promise made by you, regard¬
ing him; a promise as strong and abiding as the thunder-lightnmg
machine of the sky, as elephant’s ivory, as abiding as if it had been
nailed to the wall by brass and iron nails. Fulfil that promise, my
king, and please grant the kingdom with a joyful heart to my son. ^
king. Mv consort from the northern wing, queen without lauit.
woman whose body shines with beauty as my glass thjone, snvereu
and diamonded, shines when the throne-room is lighted at night m
spite of my promise to you, your son cannot become king, partly
because of his lower birth, mainly because of his drunken ways.^ \our
son has proved himself to be a man of dirt, a man o amts,
cannot rule this kingdom of victories. And there is m\ rig t arm.
my eldest son, mv man who is a master of honour, and a conqueror
of glory. By birth and by character, he is entitled to this throne m
the near future. In any case, no one can be put a °'e im on
throne now. I will give your son a village, a town, a distnct. W >11
that not be enough ?
[northern queen returns to the prince.]

188 APPENDIX IV
NORTHERN queen. Son snow-water, rose-water, necklace of pear%
stringed with love! In spite of his sweet words to me, in spite of his
promise made in honour, your royal father refuses to give the city and
the kingdom to you. He promises to give you a principality, a district
to rule. He pretends that he is giving you the honour because of his
regard for us, but I know that he does not wish you to be near the
throne. He wants to exile you. Use your cunning, use your wisdom
my love. Err not, lose not in your anger. Control yourself, hide vour
feelings, and take what comes in good part.
parpahein. Mistress of my birth, keeper of my gratitude! If my
father, the god of the kingdom, really means to give the white umbrella
and the throne to the eldest prince, he wanders from the path of
honour. A king without honour cannot flourish long. The throne
itself will be without honour. Then, it will be easier for me to win
it; it will be easier for me to use my cunning. The throne will be
my right, and history will praise me for winning it.
NORTHERN queen. Lustrous emerald, pearl necklace that I always
wear in love, son of my body! Listen, my loved one, follow' not your
intention, your inclination. People can guess your intentions, your plot
will be discovered. Forget your wrongs, and control yourself. Bow
to the throne, put yourself in sweetness and pleasantness before them.
After all, to be a ruler of a district is a great honour, a piece of great
luck. Be content, and go to rule in peace.
parpahein. Mother with a million hearts for me, let me risk
my life. Pity me not, forbid me not. If my luck is good, whv
should I be content with a little district? If my father breaks his
promise, I am absolved from my allegiance to him. I will use my
cunning mind, my crooked mind, my wise mind, and I will gather
mighty men of valour, and by all possible methods, I will try to win
me back my throne. Forgive me, my dearest mother. [Exeunt.]
Scene 2
THE THRONE-ROOM
Enter four ministers.
FIRST MINISTER. The king may waver and keep his promise to
the northern queen. The kingdom will be ruined if the throne goes
to that roof of bad conduct, the man without any knowledge-fruit,
that bundle of drink, the doer of lowest deeds, prince without
honour. He will ill-treat us, we the four most loyal servants of His

APPENDIX IV 189
.M'j'esty He will beat us, he will punish us, he will make us bald by
'-ontinual torture. No, no, we must not let that prince ascend the
throne. We must tell the truth to the king of all glory, the victor that
conquers the flower of his enemies.
SECOND MINISTER. We must use our knowledge, our experience.
Let us not rest a moment, until the danger has passed. He beats, he
tortures. He is a drunken prince, he is brick, he is stone. When he
becomes king, if he becomes king, his whims, his desires, how could
We satisfy them, how could we please him? He cares only for his
strength,"he depends only on his right arm. He will execute some, he
will torture some, he will beat some, he will slay some, but he will
ill-treat all. We must tell our lord the king.
third minister. We must not die too soon. W e are not practised
long enough in the religion. If we die now, we will be reborn with¬
out” any hope of escaping from this whirlpool of existence. The
prince is certain to end our present existence as soon as he becomes
king. . • • We must protect our lives. . . . Ahem, I am afraid we
all love this life, in spite of all miseries, as insects love the candle.
We give all excuses to live. We appeal to our religion, we appeal to
this, we appeal to that. . . . Wrhat have you to say, friend over there ?
fourth minister. Yes. I will appeal to religion, and show you all
why we ought not to die. When the prince beats us and tortures us
and we die in agony, our minds will be bitter, our thoughts will be
away from religion, and we shall fall headlong into hell; or we shall
become formless beings, always in agony; m any case, we shall be like
buffaloes sunk in mud-Oh, we do not want to die m agony. We
do not mind being beaten, being tortured, being made to drink water
mixed with horse-dung, but we do mind being put to death. And
Parpahein probably, very likely, will at once slay us. We must tell
the true state of affairs to our lord the king.
[Enter king and herald.}
first minister. Let me submit this at once, mj lord, lour middle
son, Parpahein, is not a guardian of the religion not a keeper of
morals: he is a person crooked in his sense of honour He is a
drunkard, and he mixes in bad company. He roams about the country
robbing people and ill-treating all. His ways are crooked, hrs mmd
is on the wrong path, his words are all untruth. He does not bow
to vou, he does not enter the throne room to tender homage to
you. Think of the future of your kingdom, of your people. We

190 APPENDIX IV
kneel before you and beg that the throne should never be given to
Parpahein.
SECOND minister. Let me submit this, my lord. The young prince
Parpahein is always drunk, surrounded by evil persons, roaming the
streets, shouting obscene words. He will foul the clear waters of this
kingdom. In immorality, in cunning, in crookedness of mind, he bear*
the greatest fruit, his harvest is the richest. He is of great strength
his followers are mighty. He cares only for brute strength. He cares
only for drunken brawls. If you should give the kingdom to that bad
prince, the country will be haunted with misery, the kingdom will go
dry. ... I bow low at your feet, and beg to remind you that your
eldest son, Zayatiiein, from whom glory radiates and shines forth, has
no faults, and his charm of character disarms even the bitterest
enemies of the kingdom.
third minister. Grant me your ear, lord. Your son, Parpahein, is
shameless and lawless. He drinks and he gambles. His conduct has
holes, his deeds are rough and wild. He abuses his position, and
saying that he is a king's son, cares for nobody, cares not even for
your authority. He even hopes to rob you of your throne. It is not
right, my king, that such a shameless drunkard should reign in your
stead.
fourth minister. M\r lord, if lie should be king, if this prince
with little glory or honour should sit on your throne, outside and in¬
side the capital, there would be riots and discontent, people would be
unhappy, and the kingdom will suffer, as the great kingdom of Pagan
suffered, through Sukatay seizing the throne of King Kyaungbyu.
No, lord, the throne ought not to go to the bad prince. I humbly beg
that you give the kingdom to your eldest son, who belongs by right
to the front wing, the usual abode of a crown prince. He is the
rightful heir, and his ability alone points him out as the rightful
successor.
KING. I am afraid what you say is too true. My ministers will
never tell untruths to me. The Lord Buddha himself had to obey the
unanimous opinion of his clergy, and a king has to do as his mini¬
sters wish. I shall have to give the throne at once to Zayathein.
[Motions to the herald, who leaves and soon returns with zayathein.]
Coign of my heart, fruit of my love, son whom I love to look and
love always, heir to the palace, my jewel I Be my successor, receive
the throne of our race. Love your people as children of your breast.
Be just to them. Lead them to the religion. Mix with the wise,

APPENDIX IV 19!
keeo away from the foolish. Take notice of your astrologers, consult
Your ministers in all things. Control your feelings, and your desires.
Keep the Ten Moral Rules of Kings. Destroy all dangers to your
kingdom, reward you your soldiers. Promote the able, degrade the de¬
faulter. Raise those who deserve to be raised, lower those who ought
to be lowered. Take care that food, water, fire, and air are in plenty
in the city. Keep your swords and your spears shining. Build bridges,
towers, forts, and walls around your city. Defend your kingdom.
Tell not the state secrets even to your chief queen. Let there be
peace in your realm. If there is a big disorder, reduce it at once into
a small one. If there is a small disorder, reduce it to nothing. . .
Farewell, my beloved son, I now leave this world and go into the
monastery. Forget not the parting words of your father.
zayathein. I take it all into my mind. ... I will strive to make
mv kingdom pleasant and peaceful, and I will soon ascend the throne.
Farewell, gracious lord, beloved father. [Exeunt.\
Scene 3
A ROOM IN THE PALACE
Enter northern queen.
northern queen. Because he is the eldest son, Zayathein is now
king. He rules this kingdom in glory, and enjoys the peaceful shade
of the palace. Though he rules in his father’s stead, my son will not
bow down to his brother, will not even enter the throne room, where
the king is holding his first court. The new king will not forget the
old promise, and the fact that Parpahein comes not to kneel before
him will make him realize that in Parpahein lies the danger to his
throne. The might of my son is not equal to that of the new king,,
his present ability is nothing compared to that of Zayathein. He can.
only disturb the kingdom, not win it. And then he will lose his life.
It is no good: Parpahein cannot rebel, must not rebel I must coax
my son and make him use. sweet words to the king, and forget his
plots, abandoning his rebellious ideas.
[Enter parpahein.]
My prince, son that guards my life, man whose pride and valour
are shown to. the world as a flying flag! Do not be. rash, my son,
do not follow one side of your mind. Plot not against your brother.
Your men are not many, your officers are few. 'Why not. bide your
time, and wait at least until your might is equal to the king s ?

192
APPENDIX IV
parpahein. Mount Mayyu of my gratitude, mother with limitless
honour! It is useless to win me over, it is impossible to conquer me
through my ears. My father has given the throne to him, and I do
not wish to stay on in the palace under Zayathein, serving him
interior to him, looking like a man with a broken skin, powerless'
gloryless, honourless. Mother, I will take my chance. I either miss
or win. I will attack amidst bullets. If I am hit, it is the end. If J
am not hit, I reach my objective. I have no one to consider, I am
alone in the world except for you. If you forgive me, all is well
If I am killed, mourn me not. I am a son of my luck. What it
wills, I shall get. It will strive and plot. Fear not for me, loved
mother without any equal. [Exeunt ]
Scene 4
THE THRONE-ROOM
Enter zayathein, now king, ministers, etc.
king. I have been crowned king, and I now rule in glory the
kingdom of victories. I rule in my father’s place, but Parpahein has
not come before me, he has not come in to show his allegiance.
Ministers, send Parpahein my orders that he should come to this
room, while I hold audience. He must come at once, in the full
robes of a prince.
[Enter parpahein with some followers. They stand in an
extreme corner of the stage. They are supposed to be outside
the throne room, but near its entrance.]
parpahein. My followers who are crooked to the extreme,
spearheads of roughness and boldness, men without religion, 0
logs of lawlessness! My mother and I are alone in this world. My
father cared not for us, broke his promise to us, and left us unpro¬
tected against the world. If no one loves us, why should we love any
one? . . . I shall show my brother what I can do. I shall be as
irresponsible as a schoolboy, I shall be as high as the sky. ... I
will be a dirt\’ man, a drunken man. The king will send me messen¬
gers. He will send one, then two, then three, then more, summon¬
ing me to his presence. Beat them, cane them, ill-treat all the
messengers. Do anything to them, but let them not die. . . . Ha,
ha, I will show what I can do. (He sings boisterously) ‘This little
prince is in a faint. He will fall, he will die. He must have air, the

APPENDIX IV 193
air that comes through the white diamonded window of the throne-
room.’ ‘This is a lovely new perfume. It is inside an emerald case.
It is imprisoned in a little glass case, but its sweet smell will be all
over the city. It has the colour of amber. Yes, yes, the perfume
is going to be popular in the palace.’ 4Who will help me? I am an
exile, but I shall burn this city. Oh, beat you the dram, and catch
you this flamed
[Exeunt parpahein and followers. A courtier leaves the throne -
room, and comes hack a few moments later. He says that
on his giving the summons from the king, parpahein beat
him.}
king. Yes, he is in anger, because Father gave him not the
throne. He is a fool, a drunkard, and a danger to the country. I have
known it long, but I have always shielded him from punishment and
disgrace, because that will break his mother’s heart. I have given
him a chance to come and tender homage to me, and let me forgive
the past. ... I will give him yet another chance. I do not wish to
punish him. He is my brother, he Is the son of my father; after all,
he is only a child-brother of mine. And there Is his mother. She
saved my father’s life, at least she stopped his pain, while he lay in
agony with a poisoned wound. With her lips, with her own dainty
lips, she sucked out the poison from the wound. Also, when my
mother was ill, she nursed my younger brother as if he were her
own child. I must learn to forgive, as a king always must. . . .
My learned ministers, whose knowledge of east and west, front and
back, and whose vast experience make you the glory and pleasure of
my kingdom, my brother Parpahein, he is but a littie child, sponed
by too much love, but harmless. He is drunk, and I must not take
offence at his treatment of my messenger. He is only a littie child,
testing his elder brother’s love. We will soon send another
messenger.
[Enter parpahein as before.]
parpahein. Men ruined by lawlessness and foolishness, men of
my heart, men of my mind, who have always stood by me and fulfilled
my desires! My father that gave me life broke his promise. I was
to"1 flourish on the throne. But the royal mouth kept not to its words.
Until I rule on my rightful throne, I will not rest. The man who
caused the promise to be broken, the eldest prince who gained the
throne, the new king, Is certain to send further messages, ordering me

1 V t APPENDIX IV
tv come before him in audience. Ahem, break every bone in the
budy of any messenger that comes to me from the throne-room.
Fear not, my men.
[Exeunt. The king and ministers have been talking when
pakpahein spoke. Now they send two ministers to summon
parpahein. They come back hurt and in pain.]
minister. My lord, we took with us some followers, and sum¬
moned the prince to appear before you. But he and his drunken
mob attacked and overpowered us. He slew some, put some
between, the ‘bamboos5,1 broke the bones of many, and belaboured
us all. Now he is reeling with drink like a merry-go-round, and is
out in the streets, followed by his drunken slaves.
king. My brother cares not, loves not his elder brother, suc¬
cessor to his father on the throne. He is as King Zayathat.2 His
pride flies forth and will not bow to me. Not content with drinking
and gambling, he now slays the king’s messengers. I must punish
this brother of mine, whose character is crooked, and who is an enemy
to the throne. Strip him of his carriages, houses, fields, attendants,
villages, horses, elephants, swords, spears, weapons, gold umbrellas,
dresses, uniform, and all other property he possesses. Make him a
common attendant in the elephant-stables. Let him be guarded, and
let poverty and hardship tame his pride.
[Some ministers go out. They return with parpahein, held
roughly by soldiers.]
parpahein. Aha, aha! What did you say to me, my good fellows?
Am 1 drunk? Of course I am. It is my very great luck, my merit in
my previous lives, that gives me drink. Even if drink is bad for me,
it is my own look-out. I am a man, and I can do, I will do, as
I wish. I feel a prince only when I am drunk. If I am drunk, and.
if I misbehave, you can turn your eyes away. . . . Aha, although
my luck is thin at the moment, my wit is deep. I care not for any¬
thing, anybody. I think and plot. If I dive, I dive until I hold the
sand at the bottom of the sea. I am a prince of valour. What care
I for your [Exeunt.]
1 An instrument of torture to make criminals confess their deeds.
2 A king in India who killed his father and seized the throne, during the
lifetime of the Buddha.

APPENDIX IV 195
Scene 5
THE THRONE-ROOM
Enter king and minister, and converse. Enter in haste the
youngest prince, athumbain.
king. Brother of the palace-line, youth that I love, younger
brother who guesses the desires of his elder! You are sad, you are
crying. Why do you hasten in here with a fading facer Do you miss
our father? Did you enter this room forgetting that your beloved
is no longer here? Are you disappointed to find only me? Tell me,
little brother, tell me all your troubles.
athumbain. My lord, as it is. the duty of parents to punish
wayward children, you, who are our father now, have sent our middle
brother to the elephant-stables to stop him from drinking and gambl¬
ing. He is now really frightened, brother, his tusk is broken, his face
is faded and soiled. ... I feel sorry for him, lord, and please
forgive him this once. He has been tamed. Please release him now.
king. Brother whose presence in the palace, in the rooms,
among the towers, adorn them all, whose presence in the chambers
makes the emerald palace shine with my people’s love tor him,
brother tied to me with the string of love! No, no, I cannot release
him I did not want to punish him. But he was as the raven that
comes again after being soundly beaten with sticks he was the
cmoked tail of a dog, that can never be made straight. Beloved brother,
ask me not his pardon. He will try to plot against this throne,
against my life even. I must not neglect the fire that threatens to
burn too brightly, I must put it out at once. Ask me not his pardon.
athumbain. My royal brother, my elder of glory, my king whose
glory puts to shame the brightness of the world’s sun! Treat not
Parpahein as a stranger. We three belong to the bun-race, ^
same
have the same kind of intestines. Extinguish the royal pum^me
foraet your anger. I am his favourite brother, I will beg him, coax
him. I can make him abstain from bad deeds. If he s ou^err
again, then you can punish him. But please free
and believe me, I will make him behave. He loves me ^
I be? him to do. I promise that he shall never or gamble
drink
. ^ .,ti j Kmther there is his mother, my darling, my
again. And, beloved brother, tnere is n . . ; Will von
second mother. She is .11 sorrow, her face » clouded, «.ll !»»
not consider her, brother of my heart?

APPENDIX IV
xing. Friend of the Sun, brother tied to me with strong rones
of unidei: love, youth as graceful as a dragon-snake, third in the
royal line! In the country of the blind, the one-eyed man is kino-
Parnahein is the one-eyed man among foolish, drunkards. Because he
leads a crowd of half-wits, he thinks he can stand against the kin**
himself. He is still wisdomless, he is still untamed. Unless I destrov
his foolish pride once and for all, he will be a danger to the peace of
the kingdom. Ask me not to pardon him. He has to suffer only fo?*
his crime. He must remain in the stables for full three years, until
his fiery temper is tamed and killed. [Exeunt
Scene 6
OUTSIDE THE STABLES
Enter parpahein.
parpahein. Ahem, friend Zayathein has taken away all my rank,
all iny property, and ail my followers. He has put me as an attendant
in the elephant-stables. Yes, yes, everyone has his turn. If I wait
and if I plot, my turn too will come. There is always something for
somebody. Everyone seems to manage to live somehow. Look at the
headless crab, he seems to enjoy life very well. I am the son of a
king, I was born in the palace. I have hands, feet, head. Why should
I not reach my goal ? I was hatched among the towers of a golden
palace, I am a seedling from the royal line. What do I care? With a
little luck, I shall have three kings in my hand, and who can have
better cards than those? I will never die until I have killed my
royal brother. I must think out the various advantages my brother
has over me in our fight for the throne. Yes, he has the magic
sword that the king of the gods gave to our ancestor, and which my
royal father gave him with my throne. He has also the magic spear.
I have no weapons. No followers, either. The only thing I can do
is to -get the spear and the sword. Yes, I will disguise myself, and
leave this place as if I were an ordinary attendant. I will then climb
the walls of the palace and steal the magic weapons. Afterwards I will
jump on my beloved brother, I will tread on him, and I will kill him.
[Exit.]

APPENDIX IV 197
Scene 7
OUTSIDE THE PALACE-WALLS
Enter king on one side.
ki>;g. Because I am the eldest son, I have ascended the throne of
father. I am determined to follow the tradition of my dynasty,
and I will rule this kingdom with honour, flying the banner of justice
and law. However, I do not know what the men and women of my
city think. Do they praise me loudly? Or do they whisper my fail¬
ing ? Many events have happened since I was crowned king only this
morning. I must know the opinion of my people. Therefore, I have
come out of the palace, disguised as a poor labourer, so that I may
wander in my city and listen to my people’s gossip.
[Enter parpahein on the other side.]
parpahein. When I come to think of it, he is the ruler of this
mighty realm. Still, mv turn will come, and I shall be able to stand
against his might. . . . Well, I suppose I must dare. I am alone, I am
only a young prince. So what does it matter if I diet And if I live!
I will be as sharp as a thorn, my glory will be as pointed as a spear.
... I have been tattooed with magic charms; I now repeat the
magic words to myself. [A pause.] Now I will jump and climb tins
wall. Steady on, my prince!
KING. Ah, as I walk disguised as a poor man, I see before me a
nightman, a suspicious-looking person. He watches the palace-walls,
and the palace drum has just struck the hour of midnight. He cannot
be a very pure-and law-abiding person. I will pretend that I do not
see him. Hush! I will glance slyly and watch his movements.
parpahein. The time has come, the drum has struck the hour.
I must scale the walls quickly and steal the magic weapons. This
reminds me of the famous robber hero Ngatetpya, who raided even
the palace in the kingdom of Sagaing.1 I will dare as he dared. I am
* Sagaing, one of the many little kingdoms that came into being after the
fall of Pagan, flourished from 1315 to 1364. Ngatetpya was a great Phl”°-
oist and built many monasteries and pagodas, which he 3 wayS./"fthThouses
have been ‘built by public charity’. At night, drsgmsed, he ra.ded he hou^s
of the wealthy, including the palace itself. He was not even suspt 1
robberies until one night he met the king disguised as a
asked the king to be his lieutenant, and together they ra.ded ^ house
T„tr p,,„ «... d™ bu,

1 jrt APPENDIX IV
ii man, i am a prince of valour, I must not be afraid. Come on lad
care not for guns and swords and spears. Jump over the wall, risk
your life. Do and dare. Steel yourself. My lord of the orchestra
play me a short encouragement to climb the wall.
[The orchestra plays and stops.]
king. That man has some valour and some strength. He is
trying to scale the wall. He is a nightman, a robber, a thief. If he
is brave, I will be brave too. I will capture him single-handed
without using any weapon. As wax is subdued by fire, our friend of
the night will be subdued by his king. My lord of the orchestra
make ready to help me, the king. [The orchestra plays and stops']
parpahein. Come on, friend, scale this fort. Jump on to the wall
Though it is high and well-guarded with spikes and all, I have the
ability to negotiate it. I have a magic needle in my arm, I have on
me the neck of a wild bird, the hair of a cockroach, the wing of a
peacock, the intestines of a cat, the right arm of an alchemist who
died in his laboratory just as he was going to become a zawgvee, a
multi-coloured pumpkin. I have on my body tattooed pictures of a
monkey , a lizard, and an ogre. They will help me to conquer this
mighty wall.1 O master of the orchestra, make ready to help me
t0 wm- [The orchestra plays and stops.]
king. That person probably possesses some charm to be able to
climb the wall. Well, the might of a king’s body can match any
charm. I will conquer him without any weapon, with my right arm
only. My lord of the orchestra, help me to follow him.
met the king, proclaimed him hero; it came out at the trial that all the
proceeds of the raids were spent wholly on the poor and in building pagodas;
he and the king had learnt to admire each other, as during the raids they
risked their lives together many a time; his cynical sense of humour, his
respectful but fearless demeanour at the trial—all these factors combined
together to wm him his pardon. He later became a minister and led many
warlike expeditions, and was much loved and respected.
The reference results in dramatic irony, for Parpahein does not realize
that he is more like Ngatetpya than he imagines as he also is going to meet
the king In disguise.
1 All charms supposed to give their possessor great physical strength, and
make him immune from injury.

199
APPENDIX IV
[The orchestra plays, and the king chases parpahein £aid
catches him. Of course, f/zn- are supposed to he jumping m: and
off the wall, parpahein jumps on to the waif the king f Y'<w$
suit, parpahein jumps down again to escape pursuit, and the
king does likewise.]
KING. Aha, my luck is good. I came out to hear idle gossip, and
Instead 1 catch Parpahein, armed with a dagger, scaling the wall. \ our
behaviour condemns you, Parpahein. You came here to kill your king.
[Enter ministers and soldiers running. They recognize the king
and kneel down. Some surround the struggling parpahein.]
Take this rebel, my lords. Tie him with ropes, and execute him
when morning dawns.
[He zcalks towards the other side of the stage, followed by two
soldiers. The rest surround parapahein, and prepare to tie him
as a common criminal.]
PARPAHEIN. What ails you, friends? Why do you surround me
in haste? Tell me why have you entered my royal presence.
first minister. Your brother the king orders that you be^ im-
prisoned for the night, as you heard. Though you are the king s
brother, we servants of royal justice cannot consider your teehngs.
We must bind you as common criminals are bound. My lord resist
not, but yield to greater forces. Look at the spears flashing, look at
the’swords shining over your head. Restrain yourself, my lor ,
and let the soldiers bind you. . ,
parpahein. Ill-treat me not, although you have the king s
orders. Bind me not. I am a prince born. A king’s son shou
never be bound with ropes as a common criminal. I am not atrai
to die, to undergo torture. I will not resist. I will come with you
quietly to the prison. But bind me not. Let me not go down m
history as a common criminal, let it not be said m history a
treated me as a common criminal. Whatever I have done, I stil
remain a king’s son. Bind me not. Lead on, show me the way, I
will come quietly. — , y ..
SECOND MINISTER. Ah, Mister Criminal, Brother Felon, lo
cannot argue, my lord. You are a danger to our country, you are
rebel. You are the fire that threatens to bum our kingdom.
\They tie him with ropes. Enter the youngest prince, ATHLM
BAIN. On learning the facts, he runs and kneels before
parpahein.]

APPENDIX IV
a thu mb a in. Brother, you have rushed rashly into the net as
urds and wild fowls go to their deaths. There is no denying it
you are completely caught. In this state of affairs, do not make'
people hate you by being stem with them all. Do not be hard do
not be harsh, brother mine. Use sweet words and control your pride
Bow down low, and escape from death, my dear lord.
PARPAHEIN. Mv dear, pretty brother. In this life everything
ends, and why should I be afraid to meet the natural end? I will
never bow down and kneel for my brother’s protection. What do I
care? 1 shall be put to death. But even my bones shall shout defiance
to ail.
athumbain. Blame it on drink, and ask for pardon. Say drink
made you mad. Put our brother’s feet on your brow, kneel down,
raise up your hands in prayer, beg for pardon. He is your brother
after all, and he will pardon you and save you from your death.
[He runs to the king and kneels.]
Brother glory, the roof of all kings, owner of the white umbrella
that is perched proudly on the golden tower! While the whole city
sleeps, Brother Middle scales the wall. He is caught. He is a robber,
he is a thief, he is a rebel. He must be punished. By law, he can be
put to death. But provided a criminal is adequately punished,
provided there is no further danger from him, there is no need to
kill him outright. Parpahein is subdued. If you save him from
death, the country will praise you. Let him be beaten and caned at
the cross-roads, if you wish, but kill not your own brother, my dear
lord.
king. Brother who equals the most precious pearl in beauty, my
beloved Athumbain! Parpahein had only the worst of intentions
towards me, otherwise he would not have tried to climb over my
palace-wall at dead of night. He had only crooked thoughts, un¬
straight mind, unsmooth ideas. I must not under-estimate my
enemy, I must not think that the fire-mountain of danger is only an
insect of annoyance. Even if the fire should consist only of dying
sparks, I cannot neglect it, as otherwise with wind and time, it may
burn down my throne. Brother, the fire must be put out before it
burns anything. I must kill the rebel at once.
athumbain. Let me submit this, my brother. It is true that
his offence deserves death. He erred in his path, he wandered from
his allegiance. He plotted against his king. But the fire that dares
to burn is only a little fire, and a handful of sand will put it out.

APPENDIX IV 201
tT„ _ r,~ater and men and soldiers, when a handful of earth will
auish the fire? Why use the terrible weapon ot death wnen a
^ser^ punishment will do instead? Moreover, he is one of us, our
ftestines are of the same king, our blood flowed into us from the
!atne stream. His father is ours. If you wish not to consider him,
"onsider his sorrowing mother. If you wish not to consider her,
clease consider the wishes of this little brother, who was in your
mother’s womb, whose heart has the same golden blood as yours.
Please consider and be kind to this shadowed-face, stricken with
mlSKiNG. Beloved brother, worthy in every way to be a scion of our
House" though he did compass my death, though his guilt is glaring,
for vo’urs reasons, I will release him, and pardon him. lour sweet
and Gentle words win me over. Gods and men will praise you tor
/deed. My people who love you so well will blame me it I were
io refuse your prayer ... I pardon Parpahein and order that he be
released at once. But he is exiled. He must leave the city at the
moment of his release for the frontier. Take tms seated oidd an
proclaim his release, my little brother.
rExit, followed by some soldiers, athumbain goes to the other
group and proclaims the king’s orders, parpahein is released.
.]
Exeunt others
parpahein. Now is the time, I will attack and conquer this
kingdom as suddenly and successfully as the horse_ descends on the
line and checkmates the king in chess.1 I am a prince ^
northern wing. But my plots almost reach the sky. I am the '
in-law of success. Oh, yes, I will leave this city, ut no •_
I will come back soon to destroy the towers and castles of the km^.
I now go with a crooked mind, a mind full of ideas, a mm _
and strained with thought. My lord of the orchestra, please lead
me on my way.
[The orchestra plays the ‘forest tune', which lasts for some
minutes, while parpahein walks up and down. ten i
he has arrived at a village in the forest. Enter the headman
, „
of the village with some villagers.]
headman. Man well-known for ability and glory, prince ot t e
but the principles are the same. The horse is exao >
importance to the knight of European chess.

APPENDIX IV
golden palace, how come you here at dawn, without horse or carriage
or followers; It seems very strange to us. Please enlighten us jjn
your golden voice.
par pa hein. Officer who administers faithfully and ably the
district of Pviso-myaydaing, famous headman of this village! The
reason why I have come to this distant frontier is because I want to
win the throne, which was promised me by my royal father. He
broke his promise, and gave the throne to his beloved eldest son
before he retired to the monastery. I will fight this injustice, and will
put me on my rightful throne. My schemes are all worked out, mv
plots are all ready. But I need gallant and faithful followers. Will
you and your villagers help me to my throne? Think it over. If I
succeed, there will be ample reward.
headman. Let me submit this, my prince. Worry not, sorrow
not, for your throne. There is no need to get thin, to put a sorrowful
look on your face, through disappointment. We will win you back
your crown. Appoint us your officers, and we will soon march on the
capital. Please do not weary your mind with anxiety for your throne.
Your attack against your enemy-brother Zayathein must be success¬
ful, for these followers of yours, my prince, will be sharp, will be
thick-skinned, will be rough and daring. We will soon form our¬
selves into a victorious army. Death fighting for you is nothin^ to
us, my gallant lord. [Exeunt.]
Scene 8
THE FOREST
Enter athumbain with some followers. They are journeying to
an adjoining kingdom to bring back its princess to be married
to the KING. ATHUMBAIN is the royal ambassador. They decide
to pitch their camp for the night. They sleep. In outline only.
A pause.
(Heard off). We are not afraid, for we are men of valour. With
gongs beating, drums sounding, flags flying, we soldiers of Parpahein
march swiftly in the dark. The night is cool, the sky has turned
deep-brown with darkness, the mist in fear runs away from us, the
buds on the trees wave to us in greeting. The time has come, the
drum has struck. ^ We, the trusted soldiers of Parpahein, will march
on to victory'. We are glad to conquer, we are as swift as a flying
bird, we are the kinsmen of the Thuya soldier-gods. O fairies of
the forest, protect us on our march and in battle. Our swords are

203
APPENDIX IV
-whed our spears are shining, our flags are many. We will
drink ourselves to madness when we wm the city. \\ e vail uestroy
Zavathein, and he shall become the powerless brother. Come or. lads.
0
t diamonds, to gold, and to victory!
[parpahein enters with his army. He seises athumbain and
followers. He says that athumbain is guilty of a heinous crime.
When they were young, athumbain shared with him his
mother's milk, and therefore committed a robbery, parpahein
is still suffering from the effects of the wrong; he is thin and
weak because he was under-nourished as a child. Found guilty
of this mockery of an accusation athumbain is executed, and his
attendants forced to join the rebel army. Exeunt parpahein
and followers leaving the dead body of athumbain. In outline.j
Scene 9
THE THRONE-ROOM
Shouts and sounds of fighting are heard. Enter king with his
maoic sword and spear. A minister rushes in and reports that
parpahein and his rebels have seized the palace itself, attaching^
with suddenness in the dark. He begs the king to fly as
resistance will be of no avail, pointing out that if he escapes, he
can rally his supporters around him and win back the^ throne
from parpahein. Sounds of soldiers shouting death to tne king
are heard. The king jumps away from the stage as some rem
soldiers enter. They soon leave, shouting. In outline only.
Scene 10
THE FOREST
athumbain lying dead. Enter the king. He sees the body,
takes it in his arms, and weeps.
king. Brother Athumbain who was tied to me strong!} witft te
golden thread of love, brother whose bone was connected w th m
bone! I am burning as if the shining midday
, i TVats come down as pearl neckiateb.
W, drying np my heart. Tam, , , king, fo,
cannot restrain myself. I hate“ „0fcrvas much a I ivant
love cannot hide my grief. . .* -%• ££V£ become htaunted
for the whole wor.d, this veiy ££ yon,
with grief to hear my sorrow. . . • Mj sorrow anu .

204 APPENDIX IV
Athumbain, break my heart. . . . When Prince Rama and hh
brother lost the Princess Sita, they ran here and there with grief gut
t’leir sorrow was nothing compared to mine. . . Yes, we all have to
suffer, we all have to die. Until we reach Nirvana, we shall so
through attain and again this torture of grief, this torture of having to
lose always the ones we love. But this knowledge does not stav'ir.v
tears. I am king, I am lord, I am above my wisest ministers. I am
wise, 1 know my religion, I have studied, and I have learned wisdom
But when it comes to grief, my experience and my learning cannot
help me drowning in the ocean of my sorrow. . . . Athumbain
Athumbain. where are you, my brother? Yes, you and I, brother'
are now burnt out and destroyed, as if ten suns had burnt'us. For
what sin in previous lives do we perish thus? Athumbain, mv
brother, in this forest glade, adorned with handsome-stemmed trees,
perfumed with jasmine-smells, we plat' our drama of tears.
[Enter away from the brothers, a zawgyee.]
zawgyee. At last, I have achieved what I desired, I have obtained
the philosophers stone, and I have also become a zawgyee. lyjy
stone can turn lead into silver, brass into gold. I have eaten that
compound of alchemy, which makes me above nature, above this
earthliness. I cannot be hit by bullets and bombs, and swords and
spears wound me not at all .. . I can be king. But what care~I for
worldly power? Make way, make way, I wish to leave the abode of
human beings and retire to the forest. My lord of the orchestra,
please show me the beauties of the forest.
[He walks up and down as the orchestra plays. It rfops.]
I have reached a lovely part of the forest . . . Look at the
flower-towers, look at the waterfall. Here is a streamlet, there is a
little pond. Here are pebbles and silvery sand. Green moss covers
that rock, green water flows silently down that stone. The heat of
the midday sun has no effect on the coolness of this peaceful place.
Short trees and tall trees, big trees and small trees, they stand side by
side and greet the wanderer in the forest . . . That fern clings to
its lover, that tree is defiant. This bush looks inviting, that bamboo
looks charming. That place under that tree is smooth-lawned. Did
some fairy play there before I came and frightened it away?
What a lovely place! A poet can live here for ever to write his verses
on tins beauty.
[He walks on and meets the two brothers. He recognizes the

APPENDIX IV
king. He soothes the king, and touches the dead athumbaxn
with his wand, and restores him to life. . . . The brothers are
overjoyed. . . . The zawgyee offers to win back the throne
for them. But they are tired of life and its sorrows. They
decide to go to a thicker part of the forest, and live as hermits.
They bid farewell to the zawgyee. Exit the zawgyee on one
side, exeunt the brothers on the other, as the orchestra starts
to play.]

APPENDIX V
PADUMA1
By U Pon Nya
Scene 1
THE THRONE-ROOM
Enter king and ministers. He summons his seven sons to
appear before him. They enter.
king. My beloved sons, my golden princes, my men of destiny
your arms and horses and men are so many that there may be
trouble In the near future. Arrogant youth, blind youth, greedy
youth may urge you to plunging the country into ruin. We kind's
are taught: 'If the beak is long, cut the beak; if the wing is long,
cut the wing.’ Therefore I order that my beloved sons should
leave the city, and take for their palace the forest on the silver-misted
mountains, until your father grows tired of this world and enters the
abode of the gods, on pleasure bent. When your father has thus
departed this life for the six-storeyed paradise, you will come back to
rule the country, surrounded by mighty men of valour.
paduma (the eldest prince, aside to his brothers). My golden brothers,
you hear the orders of our lord the king. Being the owner of
power and wealth, he is anxious and therefore heartless, and he thinks
that our retainers are too many. We must be careful in our reply.
Do you wish to say anything in particular ?
second brother. Dear lord, hero of our dreams, our beloved
father acts as if he were a stranger to us. There is no remedy against
his cruel decision, for he is the master of this country’s power,
except to conquer his wrath by submission and humble appeal.
Beloved brother, please appeal for us.
paduma. Descendant of the Sun, Master of the Continent, our
beloved father ! You have ordered us to go away to dwell in the
far-off forest, thinking only of future rebellions and distress that may
1 This play has been considered on pp. 78-81.

APPENDIX V 207
; occasioned by our men and gold and jewels. Need we leave our
rloved palace where we were born and taught to play? Do you not
K °'vour own sons that now kneel in submission and in lover Strip
fslf power and wealth’ of §old and men and elePhants- We wil1
drink vet again the water of allegiance, and serve you with ever-will¬
ing hearts as humble commoners.
king. The blood of your father’s heart, my seven princes, I am
the fountain of justice in the kingdom, and I have to act according
- kingly duty. My love is knit to your bodies, but my duty to
*e kingdom demands that I must extinguish the fire that threatens
K burn too brightly. Prince Rama, his beloved, and his brother
were exiled from their kingdom, so that there should be no riots and
disorder in their father’s country. Necessity demands that my orders
should be absolute and there should be no further argument. Hasten
to the forest, blame hard Fate alone. Your father’s heart follows
. • i i \ Exeunt]
you into exile.1 1
SCENE 2
THE FOREST
Enter the seven brothers.
paduma. We have arrived at the cloud-darkened, misty-brown
hills. We have lost our bearings and we do not know which is east
or south or north. Our emerald consorts are so fatigueu that tney
refuse to walk any further. We can find no fruit or meat to appease
their hunger. Let us hold a council of war.
SECOND BROTHER. Brother with the grace of a god brother belov ed
of other brothers, brother meant to rule the world! We seven, lor
sake of our country, should take care that at least one ol us shodd
live, in order that there should be a king for our people. The duty we
owe to our people demands that we should preserve our lives as xong
possible. When rhere is a necessity, even
her son We must kill our wives m turn and divide
flelh for our food. I know we shall have to suffer for th, «n m ou
next existence, but let us leave the future to take care: ot -V
least we ought to postpone our deaths, even though King Death
certain to conquer us in the end Man resist three desires,
third brother.' Listen,.my lord. * OtW desires
the desire for food, that for drink, and that for woman. Other desnes
i PresumaWy, the exile of the princes is demanded by the ministers.

APPENDIX V
he can resist, frr there can be substitutes. Of the three, the dehres
Or f >nd and drink are more pressing than that for woman, their
intensity is ten times more. Even though death is certain, we should
postpone it as long as possible, as we cannot guess what help Fate
mav bring.
fourth brother. Let me submit this, my lord. On the red-hot
sands of a desert, a mother walks, with her only child, a suckling
babe, in her amis, and a basket on her head. The heat increases"
With a half-heart, almost broken with pain, she takes off her dress
and by putting it on her burning feet, she tries to fight the heat
of the sands. The heat increases. She puts down the basket, and
stands on it for a while. The heat does not diminish. She can stand
it no more. With a breaking heart, with little pearly tears in her
eyes, she takes her beloved jewel, her child, and stands on it, to
save herself from the intense burning-pain, if only for a few moments.
From this, my lord, let us take a moral. One cannot love others
better than oneself. I second my brother’s proposal to kill our wives.
Follow our plan, my jewel brother.
fifth brother. My lord, it is the habit of man to protect his wife
at the cost of his wealth. But he protects his life at the cost of his
wife. If a prince’s life is saved, and lie lives on, wife and jewels
he can always get. The situation is ugly, and we must preserve our
strength at the cost of our wives.
sixth brother. My lord it is written in a famous book, that
human nature makes a man forget the affairs of others when his
dear life is in danger. In another, it is written that let alone a
prince, a beggar, because of his manhood, is better than the best
born of females. We are men, we belong to that sex that gives
Buddhas to the world, for a Buddha is always a male. We are
princes, whom Fate has singled out for great deeds and campaigns
bold. Shall we lose our lives, just because we are scrupulous about
our females? Should we starve, while living food walks beside us?
A day of life is worth everything. Hurry, oh hurry, my lord, and
let us relieve our suffering.
seventh brother. When the great sages of the past gave names1
to various things, they named die wife £not to itch’, for the simple
reason that the purpose of a man taking his wife is to make her
scratch his back. There is no greater itch than the itching of the
1 This passage is a pun on the Burmese word, may a which, taken as one
word, means wife, but which as two means 4not to itch’.

APPENDIX V 209
intestines for want of food. Let us scratch our itching with the
help of our wives, though in a slightly different way than that in use
in the time of the great sages!
paduma. O flowers that are bound to me with the string of
brotherly love, C brothers, your unanimous opinion gives me great
sorrow, and a fear of impending disaster. Your plan appears to you
logical and suitable. But do not forget ancient fables and stories.
Nine million swans were once destroyed, because they learned to eat
the flesh of their fellows, and King Bawrithat was expelled from his
kingdom for eating human flesh. I cannot decide. I know it is against
ail human principles to kill and eat our princesses. The sight of your
tortured faces makes me wish, however, that I could agree to your
plan. We can blame but hard Fate, and pray and wish for swift and
sudden death.
Scene 3
ANOTHER PART OF THE FOREST
Enter paduma and his princess.
paduma. Small of waist and lovely of breast, the pride of the
palace, the rarest flower that I will always wear until death! Our
brothers have eaten up, in the madness of starvation, my royal sisters
that had laughed so often in the shadow of our palace. The brothers,
too, will die soon, for they will eat each other. We have walked and
run for miles. But we must go on, and along the rough paths of the
forest, can the palace-born princess walk?
princess The jewel of the whole world, the never-fading flower
of vour consort, man worth a kingdom! I feel my strength ebbing
awav, and I feel that my misery is going to end here. Mv golden
jewel, say farewell to me. Love, we now part for ever. Please leave
the lifeless body of your princess in the forest glade, and fly tor your
life, my dear lord. (
PADUMA. My playmate of the palace, have you ever heard ot
such a thing as this? How can you die when I am with your Do we
not live together? Then, shall we not die togetherr Talk not of
death, my love. I will carry you on my back, and take you out ot
this directionless, pathless, dark-brown forest, and the sun-baked
My lord of pore gold .hat I gate at fa i. ecaoay!
In this forest-desert, we shall never find well or pond or lahe.^ It

2i i > APPENDIX V
midsummer and midday, and the heat and fatigue are bursting even’
blood-stream of my poor chest . . . Oh, for some water! Mv lord
is not this life one long misery? Why can I not die, when I wish to
die from this pain? Do you love me, lord? Then, kill me now and
save both yourself and me. My golden lord, spare not this misery
this suffering that is me . . . Oh, oh, fires bum in my breast, and
my bodice is tom with the heaving of my chest. Love, do not look at
me, you might pity me too much. Kill me swiftly, lord, and relieve
me of my pain.
paduma. Friend of my heart who is lovely and soft in body and
in heart as honey-wax or lily! How can you die of such a little thino*
as thirst, as long as your big brother is still alive? Be not like the
elephant that gives up going through a gap, when only the tail is left
on the other side. We have walked through undergrowth and shrub
and rough, rocky ground. We see only pearl and silver sand before
us, and can we not walk easily now? Take heart, faint heart, my love.
Here is coo! water, (paduma makes a cut on his leg with his sword
and the princess sucks the blood.) Aha, you look refreshed, my little
girl. Steel your heart, and walk but a few steps more, and we shall
soon be out of this forest, and find a suitable place to settle on.
[The orchestra plays while the two walk, to denote that the
scene is changing, and when the orchestra stops they harce
arrived at the edge of the forest, by the side of a river.
On a raft, a mutilated and bleeding man, with his limbs missing,
enters l\
THE MAN. In the snare of life, I am caught in misery. Pursued
by bad luck, tempted by bad gods, I again and again took the
property of others, using all my wits.. I was caught red-handed,
and they have cut off my hands and feet, my nose and my ears, and
sent me adrift on a makeshift raft, so that I should drown in agony
... I do not know where this will end, where the raft will stop. The
only thing that can end this miserable wretch is death. . . . Help! Help!
paduma. Flower made of golden wax, jasmine that is united to
me by deeds of merit I did in a previous existence, the orchid-bud that
is strung with my love! Amidst the din made by the waves, the
whirlpools and the rapids of the swiftly flowing river, over the noisy
sands, I hear the louder cry of a man in pain. Look, look! What can
it be that floats on the river? Who can it be that cries in pain?
princess. Husband endowed with all the virtues, husband that is

APPENDIX V 211
always pure, the sun-descendant that shines for ever on my brow!
The unfortunate wretch that has been sent adrift on a makeshift
bamboo-raft by cruel men, will soon die among the waves, If none
saves him. Poor wretch, it would have been much kinder had he
been ordered to be killed at sight. Pity his fate, my lord.
PADUMA. Kindly princess, I think he has been punished by royal
justice. The raft is sinking, and the fellow will soon drown. Let me
save him, beloved, from certain death, and restore him to life, and 1
shall thereby gain exceptional merit. (Aside to the orchestra.) I that
pray to be a Buddha one day will now swim, and sacrifice my life
even to save this fellow-human. My lord of the drums and flutes,
use your nimble fingers, and play me a tune to show the way.
[The orchestra plays while paduma moves his hands, as if he
were swimming; he reaches the raft, and carries the man in his
arms to the princess. The orchestra stops.]
paduma. My consort, from whose body shine rays of beauty
and virtue, come and please look! Here is a frightful being, with
his limbs, nose, and ears cut off. He is alive, but that is all; he Is
just alive but will always be in pain. I presume he is a criminal
punished by royal justice.
the man. Let me submit this, my lord. I fell into bad company,
and did many misdeeds, and stole other people’s property. I was
brought to justice, and sent adrift down the stream to die in shame
and agony. Swift and sudden death was certain, half of me was in the
hands of King Death, and my step was on the border of Hell, when
my lord, pure and virtuous, one who will be a Buddha in the fiituie,
saved me. My old life is ended, my lord, and I have only you to
thank, only you to love and worship, in my new life.
paduma. Victim of bad fortune, 0 limbless man! In this
country of human beings, this world, nothing lasts for ever; all that
has a beginning will have an end one day; so it is useless to long for
anything, for that thing will not last, and that thing is not real lou
did not realize that, and you wanted worldly, useless things, lour
greed had cost you dear. Angry justice had punished you, and you
are half-dead, my man of misery. . . . From this, let us take a lesson.
Let us take refuge in religion, and lead a life of purity, without sin.
. . . Poor miserable man, death would have been better than this
pain. (To princess) The limit of gracefulness, princess weighe
down with the weight of beauty, woman that needs no adornment.

212 APPENDIX V
beauty that increases by being looked at! We are all alike. We have j
to suffer pain and misery, although we belong to the Sun-race. \ye j
have to suffer, just the same as other human beings. We reap as we !
sow. . . . We have no food or shelter now, but we have to be content
and wait for better fortune.
princess. My lord, is not Fate hard on us i We are all by our¬
selves in the forest, and there is none to cheer or help us. Look at
yourself, look at me. We are tired and worn out and dirty. Look at j
our clothes. They are soiled and torn. Look at your head-dress, look I
at my breast-cloth. Your playmate of the palace is dizzy and dirty.
She no longer looks like a human being. Our stars are ugly, the
death-gate opens wide for us. I hate our royal father, I hate him.
Oh, I loathe him. I cannot restrain myself, lord, I want to cry and cry.
paduma. My only friend in the world, my beauty that no sculptor
can copy, my love from whom comes the scent of the sweetest-
smelling flowers. Do not lose heart. If you are badly dressed in
palace-clothes, I will make you well-dressed in the clothes of the
forest, in gay flowers and green leaves. Try to wait in patience for
better days that will surely come. At the foot of that hill grow
flowers and fruit trees. I will now go and get red and yellow and
white fruits, whose sweet smell alone is lovely enough to attract the
gatherer. You are only hungry, and I will hasten to fetch those fruits.
[Exeunt.]
Scene 4 1
the same J
Enter, princess, carrying the man. j
princess. With the legs and arms cut off, with the body made j
beautiful by being turned into a stump, beautiful as a cockroach,
short and sweet, whose beauty seems to increase with every look,
my lord and lover Stumpy, whom I carry on my back! My luck
must be really good to meet such a charming and respectable person j
as you. Do not hate me, lord, do not be cruel to this body as lovely
as a jasmine-bud. I long for you every moment, and I desire to
love you as my husband. My lord Stumpy, with the body of gold, I
have serious intentions ; love, and please accept my proposal.
stumpy. My goddess -mistress, whose behaviour shows only
virtue, who bathes in the flower-scented waters of beauty! Spare me, ;
j
this suffering slave. Our fortunes can never join, we can never love.

APPENDIX V 213
\f T oratitude to you and your lord is great. Your kindness to me is
ninifold. Do not test me, my lady, I am really grateful. ... Or,
do you want me to be killed by your lord, and therefore will force me
to make love to you ? Your words give me pain, even to the very ears
that heard your words. Spare me, my mistress.
princess. Your darling’s life, you lump of beauty with a com¬
plexion as lovely as a black begging-bowl! Are you going to consider
birth and fortune? Have you never heard of a fairy-like princess
marrying a leper? Have you no love of physical comfort, have you
no material desires? Are you a saint? All human beings do not
choose their mates according to class; they have to take what they get.
When there is no better price to be obtained, one has to sell a blush¬
ing ruby for a basket of rice. ... You are getting a jewel at that
price now' and are you going to hesitate?
stumpy. Inmate of the palace, gold-in-millions, whose beauty is
as cooling as a full moon, and whose honour and respectability last
for ever, princess tom to great fortune. . . . I dare not, I dare not.
I do not want to be overdone in the heat of Hell, by sinning against
the noble lord that gave me new life. Have I not enough of sin.'
Have I not been shamed and punished? Do not sm, my royal princess,
punishment follows always. . . . WiU you not consider your birth,
0 princess, born in the palace of Sun-kings?
princess. The fire in my breast, my lord Stumpy! (Singing)
■ Will you turn away the silver beauty that wanders in the mist: ■>
it not time to discard your old flower, and wear the emerald-stemmed
jasmine-bud that languishes in vainr' You old-fashioned, ancon,
man l Will vou waste time and the day in talking o re ig10n>
using undecisive and inconclusive argument? If you wiU talk. o
religion, you will never enjoy the pleasures of this life. O Fate
Stumpy, will you not have some modern education. ^reJ0U atr^
to die? ‘Everything that has a beginning has an ending. \\e all h ^
to die some day. In this world of ours, one has to decide and
^^„"f glo^,,h„ is above the world! ££>
‘A frightened kid is made more so by being shown a scream^
cat. I am in terror, but this modesty increases the terror and smds
shivers down the spine by her words.’ I was on the
I lingered at the gate of death. Only my great
I do not wish to die so soon after being saved. I love life, please
spare me, my lady.

214 APPENDIX V
princess. The man, to consort with whom a life-time is too short
my limbless lord who radiates with beauty! (Singing) "Our fates, our
deeds in previous lives, have united us. If sink we must, we will sink
to the bottom of the river-bed, touching the silvery sands. Our love
makes our blood red with daring.’ Look here, my man, von cannot
resist the charms and snares of a palace-born by mere words. I will
seize your throat, as a tiger seizes his prey, if you do not hasten to
unite us. . . . Yield, O you ancient Father Stump.
stumpy (Singing). "She sets a new fashion, and discards the old.
She throws away the waist-cloth of purest silk, and wears a cotton-
handkerchief of the kind that is given away to the poor at funerals ’
Restrain, and consider, high-born princess. It is not right, mv lady
that a goddess should mate with a slave. Will you leave such a
shameful page in history? (The princess makes a gesture, threatening
to kill him.) You sea of desire! You night-market woman who sells
everything at any price! You that sells your womanhood at any price!
All right, I will agree as you seem to love so much "your lord without
legs and arms. But wiiat will your senior husband say when he
returns with fruit? We shall die. Then, how are we going to tie
ourselves with ropes of love ?
princess. O you as pretty as a coffin-stone, that is used to nail
dowm the lid, O you lump of flesh that should be gilded with gold-
leaf, my darling Stumpy! Do not worry yourself with the problem.
Who can stand the wiles of a palace-inmate? My old husband,
whose old age makes him crawl, he shall be settled. I will pretend,
my noble lord, when he comes, that I want, to offer some fruit in
thanksgiving to the spirit of the hill. I shall say it in a faint and
trembling voice, and I will cry. Can he resist? Oh, no. I will lean
on him. I will moan to him, I will say, c Father-love, brother-friend,
beloved golden fruit, I shall die if I do not go to the hill-top.’ Who
can see through the ready wit and wiles of a woman ? That stupid
fellow, that half-wit, my other •fellow7' will come with me to the
hill-top. Then I will say my prayers, and he will think that I am
serious, and will be looking the other way. Then I will push him
down the hill-side, and our minds will be for ever at rest, and you and
I shall for ever enjoy.
STUMPY. Oh, it is less dangerous to have a monkey by your bed¬
side, than to have a princess beside you. ... . Ha, ha, my lady has
just spoken a learned treatise on the virtues and merits of a palace-
bora. . . How learned she is, how pure her life ! I have got a bundle

APPENDIX V
of saintliness and good deeds. Her saintly teachings show me the
way to eternal peace. Amen, Amen, Amen !
Scene 5
THE SAME
Enter paduma and princess.
princess. The lord of my brow, who gave me new life on the
sun-kindled fires of sand, who gave me new birth, master of my
mtitude! When coming with you through the blue-brown forest, I
saw that high hill, and I prayed to the guardian-god that lives in the
glass and golden palace which hangs midway between the hill-top
and the sky. My mind met the spirit, I imagined I saw him. And I
made a prayer to him to save us, and I said on oath that it we should
be saved, I would make homage to him, with offerings of lovely wild
flowers, on his many-towered hill-palace. Your little maiden s pro¬
mise ought now to be fulfilled. The time is most suitable. Lord of
my brow, let us climb the hill in laughter and in play, and I will
pray to the spirit on the hill-top.
paduma. Lady beside whom pearls become dazed and dim,
woman who has not even an iota of fault, my sweet-smelling, pretty
rose l You are speaking childish-chatter. Your imagination makes you
think that you owe it all to the spirit. Do not have pagan ideas. You
must realize that it was only our luck that saved us from death, you
can see clearly that it was only our good fortune that rescued us.
Consider how our brothers and sisters died. Take a moral from their
fate, believe only in the religion, act only according to it. Our fortune
is exceptionally good, but we have only Karma to thank, and we owe
no gratitude to pagan gods. Resist your desire, and let us not go to
the hill. r . _ ,
princess. My man of great glory, you must not orgc P
kindness, you must not cancel our gratitude to him, by an appeal to
fate. Even a stupid god, a minor god, a wandering god, has some
power, and he can supplement both good and bad luck. You give me
religious arguments, but I am bigoted in my beliefs. Moreover, I
cannot resist my imagination. Maybe the spmt is powerless, but
some harm is sure to come if I do not make homage to him, for mj
mind will become distressed with imagined fear. I knot. I «
going against the wishes of my royal consort but I cannot hdpit
must go, I must go. Please come with me, beioved. [Exeunt.]

216 APPENDIX V
Scene 6
paduma is hurled on to the stage, and lies prostrate. Enter
crocodile to one comer away from paduma.
crocodile. At the foot of mountains, among a thousand streamlets
I have my hillock-palace. I am an animal of valour, and I overcome
all opposition by that great and deadly weapon, my tail. I am the
king of the river-forest, I am the king of crocodiles. I roam the
iorest and destroy all creatures that I can find. I jump swiftly and
they die. Ah, my luck was in. yesterday. I caught and caught, and I
ate and ate, until my royal stomach was stretched and made large
But, ho, ho, I cannot find any animal, or fish, or insect, and I am
afraid my stomach must be satisfied with being empty today. Still
I am a male, and must not lose heart. That big hill over there looks
tempting, and I will journey swiftly there. Before the sun has risen
before the heat makes me tired, I must use my legs at top speed, and
hasten towards that mist-browned hill, trusting to luck. Thus shall
f make my royal tour for the day. The great glory7 of this mighty
king shall make even the mother earth open herself, so that the royal
stomach shall be filled. My lord of the orchestra, show me. please,
the way, # *
[The orchestra plays, and when it stops, he has arrived at the
hill-slope where paduma is lying.]
CROCODILE. I have arrived at the hill, and I will look up the slope.
Aha, among the rocky stones and rocky walls, I espy a fig-tree. Ha,
ha, it is almost touching the water, as it is weighted down by figs,
and poor, starved, Mister Crocodile will feast to his heart’s content!
Oh, ho, ho, that branch on my right is exceptionally tempting, the
fat figs showing among branching leaves. I must eat and burst my
poor stomach.
[paduma moans faintly.]
Who is that moaning so miserably on the tree-fork? Who is that
picture of woe and misery? Are you spirit, or god, or man? How
did you get there? This is not the abode of human beings. This
wilderness, this doubly-forested hill that seems to touch the sky, this
hill-slope leads not to the human-country. Did you lose your
direction, or have I lost my correct vision? Tell me the truth, my
master.
PADUMA. My friend Crocodile that lives fortified and entrenched

APPENDIX V 217
hillock-palace, and who wears a coat of armour that no sword
10 spear can pierce! I will tell you my origin and my history. Think
Mt anything, imagine nothing. I am a royal prince. I struggled
through the forest with my consort, a dainty beauty, and playmate
ofmy youth. We reached the river-side, and as we rested, came
floating the criminal fellow Stumpy with hands and feet cut off,
hurried on by King Death. I saved him, and took him under my
care When I was absent gathering fruit, the sex-mad couple became
Tanners in sin, and they plotted to kill the consort of her youth. She
pushed me over the hill-side, and only some remains of my good luck
Led me from death to meet you, my noble animal. How wicked
and low a woman she is, my friend.
CROCODILE. It is the habit of women to fall in love with any man
that they can see. They are ready to ding to any man as husband; they
are attracted as by a magnet. Just as the ocean is ever receiving the
ereat rivers and various streamlets, without turning away one, a
woman is ready to welcome all men, whether they be old, or sick, or
poor, or bad. Do not take it too much to heart, my noble prince.
History abounds in instances of unfaithful women.
piduma. Friend royal Crocodile, I will follow your kind advice
and forget all about the woman. ... Can you help me to go back
to the abode of human beings?
crocodile. Worry not. My back is as wide as a house. Ride on
it and rest on it in happiness and in peace for a while, and I wdl
give your farewell to the thick forest and take you back to vour city
(lb the orchestra) We shall soon leave this wilderness for the abode
the humans. ... I know this prince will be a Buddha m a lutur^
world May I be reborn as a human being when he becomes such a
one, and mly I be shown the way to Nirvana by him, tor savmghib
life. My lord of the orchestra, just as he will carry me across the m_
of suffering to eternal peace, I will carry him across this river. Desire
you to share my merit ? Then play me a tune, and show me the .
to his city.
[The orchestra plays, and when it stops they have armed at
the city.]
paduma. You have rescued me jrom
Although you are only an animal, y _ j ^ t0
and nobility and wisdom. I;« ^ fa ^
you. How great my gratitude is, only I know. P -

2M APPENDIX V
and the fulfilment of your desires, Can I do anything to repay \v on
in part?
crocodile. My friend, prince, worry not yourself in thinking
how to repay me. I respect and honour and love you. I am satisfied
by the very fact that I have had the great honour of carrying you on
my back. 1 do not desire anything, my royal friend. What can I
desire in this country of man, so far off from my forest?
paduma. My thanks. I pray that I be a Buddha, and when mv
prayer is answered and fulfilled, may I be able to repay this great
kindness by helping you towards the attainment of Nirvana. May we
meet again in the after-life. Farewell to you, and a pleasant journey
to your palace, encircled by forests. Farewell. [Exiti]
crocodile. I have done my duty, and I will now return to mv
many-tunnelled palace. 1 have come only to make you smile. Let
that smile be increased to laughter, while I return to my forest, with
the help of the diamond-studded and jewelled orchestra. [Exit.]
Scene 7
THE THRONE-ROOM
Enter paduma and ministers.
minister. Prince possessing all the virtues and features that a
true prince should possess, descendant of the Sun ! Your father, the
great king, has gone to Mount Mayyu, to live in happiness in the
towered palace of a god. We have failed to trace any signs of the
seven princes and their consorts, who were exiled by royal order.
Me have waited and waited for news of you. We wish to listen to
your royal words that will tell us of the various happenings since you
left this city, and the reason why you have returned alone.
paduma. Representatives of the people, great of wisdom, 0
ministers! Alas, to tell you of the events that happened in the brown
forests and the high hills is to kindle a fire in my golden breast.
In the emerald-coloured hill-forest, my brothers, their loved ones, and
my beloved consort lost their lives through starvation. The memory
of their sad fate hurts me in my heart. I am the only scion of my
house, who escaped with my life through my good luck, and I arrived
back here at last with supernatural help. But what good is it all? I
am met only by bad news, and my breast is heaving. I can scarce
restrain my desire to weep.

APPENDIX V 219
minister. Let me submit this, my lord. In this never-lasting
jd of ours, everything perishes, and heat and cold, pleasure and
pain, go hand-in-hand. Pain, pain, only pain in this life, and that is
why'one yearns for the Nirvana of eternal peace, where pain is
stopped for ever. You, prince, can strive to be nearer to eternal
peace, when you have received the heirloom, the throne. Come, my
kina, 'ascend the throne of eight silver-white umbrellas, be crowned
lord of this realm, while the orchestra plays. [Exeunt.]
Scene 8
THE FOREST
Enter stumpy and princess.
stumpy. You, female-cobra that kills the rightful husband, when
a man, a future new husband, enters your presence! Emerald and
ruby, lake and lily, I and the palace-born, have been united tor
some time. I feel quite tired of this forest, and desire to return to
civilization and boast to others of my luxurious life. Think of a way,
princess. a
princess. Man without an equal in this world of men, flower
that I wear in mv hair, my prince Stumpy! You are not satishe
with ruling a princess in the wilderness. You want to dwell m the
shadow of a palace, and boast to citizens of your great fortune You
are my dear lord, and I will carry you in a basket on my head, and
take you back to civilization. 0 orchestra, please befriend us, and
help us on our way.
[The orchestra plays and when it stops, they have arrived at the
city.]
STUMPY. My lady-bountiful, my alms-house that is ready to
welcome every man! So this is the great city that is near .
It is indeed an imposing capital with towers and go an . •
However, we must first look to our. stomachs to sti eJ‘ ■
disturbs us through hunger. We will beg or oo , an u
to get our meals, Mistress Glue that snares man to get stuck,wm ^
who ties up every man by love. My great glory shall help us. Let us
move a little further on, and wait at a suitable place to beg.

220 APPENDIX V
Scene 9
A STREET IN THE CITY
Enter to one corner stumpy and princess. Enter king
fadL'Ma and his ministers on a state tour of the city.
STUMPY. Look here, you who are never satisfied with one husband
woman whose eyes draw men towards her, my magnetic lump! The'
-•ung of wondrous power and glory, the master of this city, will soon
re passing by, and we must try and win some alms from him. Now
look pleasant and appear to be a woman of pure heart who will
never break her marriage vows and who forever treads the path of
duty and love.
[The king and ministers approach them.}
minister. King honoured all over this wondrous universe,
master to whom this kingdom bows always in appreciation of his
virtue and justice! b onder is a woman of misery from the country
whose devotion to her husband is pleasing to the heart. She is newlv
arrived m this city, lord. Because of her purity and virtue, she is the
most deserving of all in this kingdom to receive alms from your royal
hands. If the receiver of your gifts is worthy, stainless, blameless,
your giving will indeed be an act of great merit, and will carry' you
nearer to the Buddhahood you greatly desire. In our opinion,"' lord,
it is but through a great piece of good fortune that you have the
opportunity to reward this poor and distressed countrywoman for her
immeasurable purity.
king. Ministers who serve me as my right arm, men whose
honour and chivalry shine as the moon, lords whose equals do not
exist in this universe, counsellors whose wisdom adorns my throne,
whose advice guides my acts, whose learning is immeasurable mv
noble statesmen who are greatly loved all over the country! Your
words are wise, and I wish to do a great deed towards the attainment
of the Great Knowledge. Bring the unfortunate woman before me, so
that I can question her, and admire her purity.
princess. Your humble servant, Misery, kneels at your feet, my
noble king, whose body shines with the light of glory.
king (aside). Oh, while pursuing merit, towards attaining mv
great desire, I am disturbed, for anger blinds me to my religion.
This is the wicked wife, this Misery' supposed to be so pure. She
treacherously tried to kill me, a prince born; yet she carries this
a u terous man on her head, in a basket, serving him with heart and

APPENDIX V 221
wi|l I feel ashamed for her, but she feels not thus herself. I must
restrain my anger that wishes to punish them at once, and I will
pretend that I am a stranger, and learn what she has to say. (To the
princess) Mistress Misery from the village, who is that fearsome-
lookin0', terrible man ? Is he your brother r Or is he the husband of
vour youth, whom you worship as a god? Enlighten me, my good
woman.
princess. Lord, we are united by the bonds tied in the golden
caves and jewelled monasteries in our previous lives. I married him
in youth, and I have loved and honoured him since then.
king. Village-dweller with all the beauty and charms of a palace-
bom, please explain to me how you came to be married to that fearful
and disfigured being. What are your origins and histories r
princess. I submit this for your ears, my king. This ugly and
limbless body is my true husband, the mate of my heart and intes¬
tines, the cousin I married at the tender age of fourteen. He then
wandered from the path of purity; goaded on by his past sins, he stole
property, and was punished by royal justice. His parents and his
relations disowned him when he was lying lost and bleeding, and he
was left all alone to die. ... But I love him, lord, and I fear to break
the great moral rules by which a wife is bound to her husband. So I
bear all misery, all poverty, and all the grumblings of a crippled man.
I fear not even death in the service of my husband. I carry him
about in my basket. Going on a journey, carrying him to a place
where he wishes to go, makes me feel as if I were travelling towards
the abode of the gods, in my gladness. In some ways, I do travel to
the abode of the gods, for because of my great devotion to my husband,
I am sure to reach the towered kingdom on Mount Mayyu, where I
shall laugh and play.
KING. My ministers and advisers, I alone know the truth, l
alone can disbelieve the soft words of this couple, because I have
taken part in their history. The words of this woman are dried
of truth, they are all lies. This is a wicked woman, faithless
woman, blinded to morality, made unconscious to morality, through
being made numb by lust. I will tell you the true story o t ^
couple, of myself, and of my wanderings. Please listen, my noble
lords. They are the two who plotted to kill their prince m or er a
they should live in adultery. When the six beloved brothers, and my
loving sisters died, I was afraid lest she, my wife, t is woman, s ^
die. I loved her as my life, and carried her on my back, on o a ,

222 APPENDIX V
or rough, rocky ground, from place to place. She was pale and
languishing through thirst, until I cut open a. vein on my knee and
gave her my blood to drink. We arrived at last at a safe place beside
a great river, and as we rested, this man came adrift on a raft. Seized
by great pity, I risked my life and saved him. This woman made
him her husband, made this cripple her husband, loving him, worship¬
ping him. And she pushed me down the hill-side, but I was saved
by great miracle, and through my friend, the King Crocodile, who
brought me back to this city. Now they are here, realizing not that
the king of this city is the one they had wronged. Punish them, seize
them, torture this woman without honour, as crooked as crooked iron
Take them to the executioner, and let them die in misery, nailed to a
wall. My lords, carry out my orders at once.
[The ministers seize the couple. A minister says in a low tone
that as it is the king's birthday, there can be no execution, and
the couple must wait in prison for the next day. Exeunt a
minister and attendants with princess and stumpy.]
king. My noble lords, are those poor wretches dead? Have the
adulterous Mistress Misery and the cripple died in pain, nailed to
the wall ? Have they been cut with swords and spears, their hearts
and intestines scattered in all directions? Poor wretches!
minister. King who shines on the world, as the moon shines
from Mount Mayyu, king to whom all other kings bow, my master of
the universe! The miserable woman and the cripple are still alive, my
lord. Today is your birthday, and as according to the law and custom
of this country, no blood must be shed on the king’s birthday, they
are in prison, awaiting execution at dawn.
king. My noble lords, this person, who prays to be a Buddha,
forgot his good sense, and trusted his wife too much. All women
are as dangerous and frightful as a forest-cobra with poison dripping
from its fangs. They will kill their rightful husbands the moment
they want a new lover. Their lust blinds them. As the tongue of
a snake, their cunning, their desires, their behaviour, are double-
tipped. They receive all, just as a roaring fire receives all rubbish.
They will love even men as low as dogs and pigs. One is more
certain of one s ability to drink up all the waters of the ocean, than
of the faithfulness of one’s wife. My lords, I have lost all my faith in
women, but I should have known better than to have had such faith
at all. I shall not punish the couple, my lords; please free them, but

APPENDIX V 223 -
pass orders that they must leave and never re-enter this kingdom, my
learned ministers.1 [Exeunt]
i Tviany of the passages in this play are ugly, but in the original, much
of the ugliness recedes to the background, because of the intense lyrical
beauty, which I fail to reproduce in this translation.

APPENDIX VI
THE WATER-SELLER1
By U Pon Nya
Scene 1
OUTSIDE THE CITY
The orchestra is playing when the prince enters, walks up and
down for some time, and sits down at one corner of the stage.
The orchestra stops, and a strong-looking man, cW in coarse
and dirty clothes, ewfm with two water jugs strung on a pole on
his shoulder. He is a water-seller.
man. Oh, how difficult it is in this towered and many-roomed
abode of human beings to get the food one needs. One does not
realize the depths of one’s stomach until one tries to fill it with a
limited amount of food. However, when I can get some red, some
black, or some broken rice, I swallow it, I wTash it down with vege¬
table soup. And, lads, life seems worth living then, and I glory in
my manhood. Aha, sometimes I can afford to buy some little fresh
fish even, and then my mouth soars towards the sky. Yes, but with
all my incessant selling of water, I can fill the stream of my stomach
with such good meals only three times a month, at the most. For
this great self, silver and copper do not exist; at least, I am blind to
them. My poverty is as complete as a fire. Come, I am a man, and
I must not lose heart. I must be content with the place in life
assigned by my luck, for it will certainly lead me along the path of
prosperity and greatness. I once saw a blind cock win a fight because
of his luck, and the whole audience roared with delight and admira¬
tion. If luck wills it, and I hit the target of good fortune, I shall be
clothed in gold. Well, well, I must hurry before the sun rises and
makes me hot. I must sell my sweet water, so that there can be
enough rice for my stomach. My lord of the golden and diamond
orchestra, help me on my rounds.
1 This play has been considered on pp 81—6.

APPENDIX VI 225
[The orchestra plays, and the man leaves.
A woman water-seller with a pot of water on her head, enters,
and the orchestra stops.]
woman. Oh, I am afraid I am known ali over this royal city
as the champion in poverty. My luck has lost its way and cannot
find me. Philosophers say that riches and poverty come in turn to
a person. But it seems I am for ever darkened by poverty. I have
to look after my stomach by selling water, and my head is always
aching with fatigue. I have to be satisfied with broken rice. I have
to wash it down with soup made from vegetables I myself gather,
though my stomach often protests, as the food is so tasteless and vile.
Oh, if only I could sell enough to buy red rice and some vegetables!
But my luck is so blank, and I have to steel myself and swallow the
food I can obtain. Oh, I want, I need, I long for vegetable soup. It
my horoscope flowers, if there is some accident, if my gods take me
on the right road, I shall meet a Mister Right, and marry him, the
Lord Vegetable, and then, I shall get drunk with luxury, and eat and
eat vegetables until my lady waxeth fat. Alas, it is no good wasting
time, railing at my poverty', philosophizing on my poverty, dreaming
against my poverty, and losing my sense of reality, of direction, o.
north andsouth. Good rice I shall never get, broken nee I can omy
set by hard selling. I will gather up my skirt, the wonderlm skirt o*
rany colours that scarcely covers me, the wonderful skirt of a thousmu
patches, and a million stitches, that wonderful dress covered wnh
dirt. I will gather it up, put my pot on my head, anu will wander
round the towm, as dainty as a waxen doll. The sun wdl soon come
and I must hurry. My lord of the orchestra, play me a tune to show
me the way.
[Exit. The orchestra plays, and the prince, who has been
silently watching the water-sellers, rises and makes his exit.J
Scene 2
THE THRONE-ROOM
The orehestra tops. Seme mini,Ur, fa tdth the
The king is deed, and the country ha, aeen patient y a..ottn
the rein of the PRKC* fim » «*««* <**■
tZZZm king- He thank, than, and leone, the
^ j / Thp orchestra again staii^
The ministers also me and leave, me
to play* In outline only» 15

APPENDIX VI
Scene 3
OUTSIDE THE CITY
The tiL'o zvater-seUcrs enter separately. The orchestra is plavim
The iiCO are seen to nod and greet each other. The orchestra
stops,
woman. The man. with a little hair-knot almost hiding the
brow, the water-seller with broken pole and strings, the man with
dirty dress and un-oiled hair, my ancient father. . . . Please do not
think me too inquisitive, but we are in the same trade, and you must
excuse me. May I inquire whether you have been able to hoard ant-
silver, after you have satisfied your needs, from your earnings? Mv
darling brother, please tell me the truth. As far as I can see, you
have not got much property; your dress is very dirty, and it scarcely
clothes you. What sort of dainty rice, what sweet soup, have you for
your meals? Please consider me as your sister, consider yourself as mv
big brother, and please tell me all.
man. My water-seller with luxuriant hair, aye, so luxuriant
that the knot is as big as an orange-pip, lady with a dress all patched
up, lady who is so beautiful that men turn their eyes away! Your
brother, this master of commerce, the possessor of a glorious right
arm, has been able to save a lot of money, after clothing himself in
silk and velvet, and after feeding himself with sweets and fat. Yes,
sister, a lot of money stored up in iron boxes, to wit, a silver halfpenny.
Riches are a curse, I can’t sleep at nights for fear of robbers and
thieves and swordsmen. I have to get up every night and sentry-go
round my house. As to my royal meals, for breakfast and dinner I
have lovely colour-mixed rice, made lovelier through mixing it with
that jewel of foods, some golden vegetable. Of course I do not like
much salt, nor oil, nor any other things tasty as those. Ahem, my
food is so rich that I have to swallow it hard, though my poor mouth
protests. As to my clothes and dresses, you can judge for yourself.
So, my little sister, I am well filled with riches and honour. Now,
don’t take me for a poor man.
woman. My little Croesus, my great rich man, my possessor of
a silver halfpenny! lour little sister has also managed to hoard the
same amount of silver. I have always wanted to join my property to
that of a suitable man, and take him as my beloved husband. But, I
have to be aware of fortune-hunters, and have hidden my wealth so
cleverly that no man knows of it. Aha, isn’t it funny that you should

APPENDIX VI 227
have the same amount of silver as I have? Perhaps we are destined
to build up a fortune together, perhaps our fates are united and
entwined. My wealth has also been a source of worry to me. I am
always in fear of robbers, and tremble lest the king should seize my
wealth as a danger to his throne. I have always wanted someone to
look after my silver, to share the heavy7 burden of wealth. But good
men are not common. And I have to remain an old maid, though
suitors are by the thousand. My golden breast quakes in fear and
anxiety, for there is no husband to protect me and mine. When will
the pickle ferment, when will the man of destiny, worthy to rule my
riches, come? Perhaps the time is far yet, my dear brother.
MAN. My lady-millionaire, with riches unspendable. Have you
not heard of that saying of the wise:—4If you choose too much,
you fail to get any. If you make it too dainty, it will not have beauty’ ?
Oh, let us not make our history long, with all sorts of arguments, and
love-makings, and with following man-made conventions. Our
destinies are the same, our professions are the same, our fortunes are
of the same amount, our age, our height, the measure of our beauty
are equal. One might almost think that a god had made us twins.
The rain falls when the fields are dry, the chorus-leader meets
his chorus. The time long-awaited has come. Let us not retreat.
Let us take each other as husband and wife. Ha, ha, I am a giant,
I am an ogre, I am a gnome. I will seize you, force you to marry
me, if you should refuse my proposal.
WOMAN. My life, Master Water-seller! Is that the way to make
love, all force and hurry ? Your courting is too violent. One might
think you were an official, giving orders to villagers, ^ou cannot grow
a vegetable garden in one month, you cannot get all the vegetables,
and as much as you want, after only a month’s gardening. Please
don’t be cross, but I am a woman, I have some maiden modesty. I
cannot marry in a callous way. My big brother, I don’t know what
to do. Please think and advise me. (She pauses and thinks far a
moment.) Do not think that I distrust you, but a woman has to be
careful, she has to have some proof that the man has serious intentions.
And we have to do all things according to convention, as then only
will our neighbours respect us. Now, if. you will bring your silver to
me as proof that you really are serious, we will jom our silver, and
men shall respect our great wealth. .Hasten, love, and bring your
silver, and then we shall live for ever after as happy, as a king to.
whom all men and all . gods do homage, on his many-towered an

22v APPENDIX VI
many-storied palace, with plays acted before him, with lovely maidens
and valiant men around him, with his beloved consort laughing
beside him, with scents and perfumes and flowers all floating in the
rooms, with dainty food and delicious sweets. My brother, hasten
hurry, and we will be as happy as that king.
man. The prettiest woman in the whole world, my flower that
brings victory, my woman the equal of whom I shall never find in
this life. . . . You are so beautiful, you are so priceless that my
heart is heavy lest you should only be laughing at me. After going
all the way to get the silver, suppose you laugh at me, and refuse
to marry me? Please promise me now that you will marry me as soon
as I have fetched my treasure, and I will at once hurry.
woman. O, Master Water-seller, who thinks of all sorts of
arguments, which none the less are sweet to the ear! I promise that,
I promise that. If you are not satisfied I will take any oath you want
ine to.
man. Aha, my fellow, today is your lucky day. The king of the
gods favours you now and you are going to have the best of wives.
I will now go and bring the silver which I have always loved,
which I have never spent though often I was nearly starved. I hid it
in a crack in the wall on the other side of the city, and I will now use
it to get the lovely jewel, my future wife. Though it is noon, though
the distance is great, though the streets are as hot as roaring fires,
though I am already fatigued and my heart and chest are all worn out,
I shall run and run. Love, await me inside the gate. I shall hurry
hurry. My lord of the harp, my lord of music, help me on my wav.
[Exit running, followed by the woman.]
Scene 4
THE THRONE-ROOM
Enter king and ministers. They converse.
KING. As I look from this tower, I see a man in the street,
in front of the courtyard. He seems to be in a hurry, but very
happy. Under the red-hot noon-sun, treading on the fire-hot pave¬
ment, he is waving his arms about, and laughing and dancing; ail
the time, he is running. Rather an unusual sight . . . Look, my
ministers, look, look, look! He is there, still running, skipping along,
smiling with pleasure, oblivious of the sweat dripping from ail over
his body, unconscious of the heat that burns his feet. Look at him,

APPENDIX VI 229
Ms body, his demeanour, his movements, they ail bear witness that
Ms heart is glad, and his mind is happy. Please stop him, my lords,
and bring him to me.
[A minister leaves, and presently returns zcith him.]
king. My man, my good fellow from the country, you do not
seem to be like others, you seem to be above nature. It is midday
and the earth is smoking with heat. Yet you go running and dancing.
Why the hurry? Why the gladness ? Why the laughter? Tel! me the
truth, my man, without fear or deceit.
man. My noble king, I am Mister Poverty, who earns his
living by selling water, carrying his pots all over the town, with the
chest strained almost to bursting. And with all that fatigue and
hard work, I have been able to save only a silver halfpenny, which is
hidden in a crack in the city wall, near the northern gate. Now my
betrothed wants me to join it to her wealth. So I am running to get
that miserable store of silver, to please my woman whom I love as my
life. I stop not for the sun-heat, I bow not to the burning sand.
I run and hurry to get my little wealth, 0 lord of my brow, Master
of the golden palace.
king. O my poor man, fancy your lover sending you ail the
way to the golden gate to fetch such a little com! It is at least
three more miles to that gate, and the sun burns your heart. Is that
little coin worth all that distance, all that heated distance.' Are
you going to run round the town for a halfpenny? Your blood win
go dry with heat, your health is sure to suffer, if you have not injure
it already. Do not be a stupid fellow. I will give you a silver penny,
and so return at leisure to your wife. . , _
man. Let me submit this, lord. I receive in stomach-,!aunes.
the silver that you give me in pity. However, I also uwh to tun and
fetch the little coin that is hidden in the wall One cannot M
farewell to one's property however trivial it may be. o' e m.
silver, lord. It is trivial, it is worthless, but I want it .be ran ,
“y™ M, fellow from the country, yon "an. to eat, while
you “e dtivi a cart; you wash to catch two
want bod, m, compensation and your own money, h on ore and a «
attached to «L little piece of silver without any valid
if you love silver so much, I now give you a m.ihou * ' "
you can not only please your wife, but even kill her b, the we.ght

j APPENDIX VI
the silver, if you should give it ail to her. Keep your dignity, be *
gentleman of leisure, take your place as a worthy citizen, and forget
all ah cut that little piece of silver hidden in a crack. Do not make
people smile at you, let not there be a scandal, you must not give even
a side-glance to that little coin.
nan. I receive with grateful heart and humble submission
your great gift of a million silver pieces. However, I still wish to run
and fetch the lovely little coin, which I earned by selling sweet and
fresh water, the reward of my labours.
kino. My village-dweller, you are clinging to that little piece
as desperately as the opium-eater clings to his drug. I want to do a
work of great merit. I like you. Though von are but a poor man
there are certain qualities in you, and I am sure you will make a good
ruler. 1 give you a half of this flowered kingdom. I will make you the
crown prince, and I will give yon that royal house on the north side
of this palace^and give you the golden-palaced, kingly luxury, if you
will but agree to forget that worthless silver in the city wall.
man. I receive your gift with a glad heart. However, with all
that glory I still wish to run and fetch that lovely little piece of silver
which I earned with my labour, and which now lies forlorn in
the wall.
king. My wise lords, whose wisdom and glory and learning are
great as any in history since the world first began, I hope to become a
Buddha one day, and to supplement my prayer, I wish to give alms, I
wish to make this man happy. I wish to make him crown prince
and give him half my powers and my wealth. Please make the
necessary orders, if you agree, my noble lords.
[The ministers deliberate and discuss among themselves, and
then tell the king that they agree. The king leaves the scene.
The ministers dress the water-seller in the full regalia of a
CROWN PRINCE.]
prince. Ministers and advisers whose wisdom shines and glows,
my lords that are now- paying me homage! Thanks to the king of
kings, the master of the universe, the greatest of men, thanks to his
kindly heart and pitying mind, I am now7 a joint ruler, the crown
prince, master of a golden house. I look round for the mistress of my
golden house, one who will share and increase my pleasure. And 1
think of one, who must have been my mate and friend in past lives.
I fell in love, I am still in love, with a woman water-seller who often

APPENDIX VI 23!
passes this palace. My old love is still my only love. 1 love her as
my life, I adore her as my heart, I like her as my intestines. I wish
vou to make ready the royal carriage that is gilded countless times
with sold, look and search for your princess, and please bring her
under a thousand golden umbrellas surrounded by court maidens
and bold guards. [Exeunt.]
Scene 5
THE SAME
Enter prince with ministers. The woman water-seller with
other ministers follows. They greet each other in great joy and
pleasure. The courtiers how to the prince and princess.
prince. Wise ministers, I have obtained an honour, a glory,
a pleasure, which is so difficult to obtain. But I cannot forget my
halfpenny. I try to reason with myself, I try to preach to myself,
but it is of no avail. If the Lord Buddha himself should now stand
before me, and preach to me, I could not forget my lovely little com.
I cannot wait, some one might rob me of it, of that little piece of silver
hidden in the wall. My lords, call forth my carriage, my horses, my
elephants, I will go and fetch it myself in state. If you please, my
noble lords. “ [Exeunt^
Scene 6
THE SAME
Enter prince with ministers. The halfpenny has been fetched.
A herald enters, announcing that the king wishes to go to th.
royal garden and rest pleasantly, now that the sun has gon.
down, and the afternoon is cool The king desires the prince
and princess to accompany him. In.outline only. Exeunt.
Scene 7
A WOODLAND SCENE
king, prince, and lords-in-waiting enter, followed by PRINCES
and ladies-in-waiting. The princess wishes to laugh and play
in one part of the garden. She leaves with her ladies. The king
oives his lords leave to wander about also, and they leave. I he
KING and PRINCE are left alone. The king is tired with the ex¬
citements of the day, and falls asleep on the prince s lap.

i ■; 9 APPENDIX VI
prince ito tiimsi-:f). Aha, my prayer lias been, answered, mv
hiek lias come borne. Now is the chance to get the whole throne,
to mount it without any rival My royal lord trusts me, has dismissed
his lords, and now sleeps on my lap, laughing in his dreams. It is so
complicated, it is so dissatisfying for two to rule a kingdom, and the
solution is now in my hands; the king is now solely in my power,
with no effort of my own. I will seize the hair-knot on the royal
head, I will grip it with all my strength, and then I will make a cut
at the neck. If I can do that, my rival and my danger will pass, and
I shall win city, palace, and courts of justice. Yes, I will do it. Take
heart, lad, and unsheathe your sword. (He unsheathes his sword.)
No. The journey as planned by my mind is smooth and fair, it will
take me along the road of success. But it will lead me on to do
a barbarous deed, a shameful deed. I was the bottom man, a wasted
man, a blunted man. This master of my gratitude gave me all this
glory, through the greatness of his heart. How can I be so cruel, so
heartless as to kill him, my greatest friend ? I shall be as a pig that
digs up the hole in the earth that has just given him delicious food. No,
no, the deed is shameful, unworthy, and I must forget it. (A pause.)
Come on, you are a man. If you are going to think of moral rules,
if you are going to be a man of purity, how can you succeed in
this life? It is no good considering future lives, if the present one is
to be spoiled. You must be heartless, forget all thought of gratitude,
when you are being given a glorious chance. Seize it, seize it, lad.
Success comes only after deliberate planning, heartless execution,
and swift action. I shall be the sole king, I shall sit in solitude on
my golden throne. Now! (He lifts up his sword.) No, oh, no! Is it
right that such a man as I, who has no support, no friend, no
relations, no glory nor strength nor wisdom, should kill such a one as
this noble lord on my lap, whose kindness and nobility and glory are
well known all over the world ? I have been saved from lifelong
poverty and misery by this dearest king, and I have been given
powers and riches second only to those of the king himself. It will be
like killing the Buddha. I shall be overdone in the fires of Hell,
I shall be for ever cursed in history. Think, think, use your good
sense, my crown prince, and restrain yourself from killing your
greatest friend. (A pause.) That is all talk. Come on, man. If you
want to eat the flesh of a monkey, you cannot look at his pathetic
face. There is no choice forme. I will have to do it and win, as a
valourless cock has to fight and win, when he is attacked. In this

APPENDIX VI
life if you do not attack, you will be attacked. Come on, fight,
win for yourself. After all, there will only be this one little sin,
and think of the power I shall have afterwards. If you want to he
•meat kill now, at once, swiftly, surely. If he awakes and sees you
withdrawn sword, you are done for. Attack, cut, kill! (A pause.}
Stop! stop! That will be an awful deed. This is a prince, without
fault, glorious, kindly, stainless, pure. And he is the master and
sole owner of your gratitude. Restrain, let not your body follow your
mind. Stop, stop. You are just in time to save yourself from the
meanest act of your life. [He sheathes his sword. The king awakes.]
prince. Pure in mind, one. who prays for the Banyan Tree ot
Buddhahood! This man of misery, this blank of riches, this poor¬
boned fellow, has attained an honour and enjoyment he never had
experienced even in his dreams. He obtained all this happiness
without any effort on his part, easily, smoothly, thanks to the kind¬
ness of your heart. Yet, I just made three attempts to murder you,
the master of my rice, the raiser of my status, the lord of my gratitude.^
0 lord wrapped and clothed in glory, pardon this wretch, this man of
punishment and misery.
king. My lord, ruler of half the kingdom, my master ot wonder¬
ful fortune, my prince on whom the flame of glory waves m bright¬
ness! You did wrong in trying to sin against one who raised you to
a half-throne through sheer regard for you; you were a perfect strangei,
and not my brother, nor are you a palace-born. As perhaps you
know, I am ready to give even my head to any that wishes to nave st.
If someone should come and ask for my mind, I will cut open my
golden breast, burst open my golden heart, the flower ot my blood,
and try to get my mind. You have no need to kill this god ot me
kingdom. If you want my throne, I give it to you today, without any
reservation or condition. I will leave my throne, so that you shall oe
free to take control of the lovely city, the abode of the ruling umbreha,
the possessor of towers, and in which musical drums te t e i mr °
the dwellers. Make me one of your officers, and I shall sene
humbly and well. ,
prince {sobbing). 0 drum of glory, lor o ^ ^’
future conqueror of the road to Nirvana, I am afraid, lord, to say
„„ amidst this temptation, this worthiness, to tove o, power a d
wealth. I date no. li,« on the edge of dm fore* ^
tiger-like and leoparddike ambitions abound. My greed .. wnbtu
an, limit in depth. Greed is always with us, and * » so Me*

?U APPENDIX VI
control. I have heard of King Mandat, who wanted the whole of the
>;x-st )reycJ paradise, n?t content with half the kingdom, which tV
king ri* the gods had given him in friendship. 1 am afraid, lord
I am sure to be entrapped in this net of greed and desire. If nw
rrhle king wdl permit me, I wish to leave this worldly princehoocL
and retire t > the peaceful forest, to meditate and pray, so that i shall
he able to drink the cool, clear water of Nirvana.
king. My brother of the crown, my man with oft-repeated praver,
my man above this worldliness! I admire you for being able to leave
ad this enjoyment at one moment. I give you full permission to retire
to the rorest glade, and to peace and purity.
prince. With all my heart, I now do homage to thee, my noble
lord. Please pardon this wretch for his sins, and farewell, lord.
king. My friend of the crown, I forgive you fully, and pray
that you should obtain peace and happiness in the pure life you are
going to lead from now.
[Enter princess, with her ladies, from one side. From the other
enter courtiers.]
PRINCE. Possessor of emerald-diamond eyes, beauty, Mistress
of the northern royal house, O guardian of my life! Your lover
committed a great sin. I tried to kill this noble king, to rob him
of his kingdom. The thought of it now makes me shiver, the
memory of the narrow escape from such a sin makes me sweat.
It shames me that I should have been so barbarous. I ought to put
a sword through my chest, to say goodbye to this human world.
When I asked for his forgiveness, this king not only gave pardon, but
offered to give me the whole of his kingdom. What a wonderful
master, how noble is this lord of the white umbrella, this stainless
gold-nugget. I sinned against such a man, and my eyes are now
opened. I have said farewell to luxury and pleasure, and I am soon
retiring to the forest-glade, where peace for ever reigns. Farewell,
love. I wish you to remain and rule the northern house, my love,'
ruy little life, my woman with the beauty of a palace-born, of a
princess of the sun. Farewell.
princess. Glory that flowers, man whom only my great luck
brought to me, my orchid that I wear always in my hair! WThat did
}ou say, lord: If you go alone to the forest, how can I live on, how
can I hearten myself, how can I stop myself from languishing and
from becoming gloomy? I can scarcely believe my ears. The words

APPENDIX VI
hurt me so. You are my only ruby, my onlv necklace, mv
emerald. I shall only be parted from you when the goklcic rut term n
mv soul, leaves my body. My master whom I ahvavs yearn hr, nv
master to whom I am addicted, how can 1 laugh alone in this c:tv. lit
spite of its towers and golden streets? I will come with you. iori. and
try to tread the path of purity, in imitation of my dearest prince.
[prince and princess leave on one side, hand in hand, Tkt
KING bows to them. The others kneel dozen and watch then: pu
The king leaves on the other side, foihzced bv Pit other:,
slowly and silently, except for the half-suppressed sobs -f iht
ladies-in-wailing, as the orchestra starts to play.}

APPENDIX VII
WIZAYA1
By U Fox Nya
I
The Opening Scene
THE THRONE-ROOM
Enter king and queen, tvith ministers.
(Heard off.) Help, O king, help us! Your son, Wizaya, is ili-trea;-
jng your people. Punish him, kill him, my lord! Ask your ministers,
send for witnesses. Your people humbly beg you to save them.
Help, O king, help!
king. My four ministers who destroy the flower of our enemies,
whose right arms are destined to accomplish glorious deeds, whose
valour cares not for death! My noble lords who are as brave and
graceful as the king-lion looking out of his silver den in the centre of
his forest and at the base of an imposing mountain! I have ruled this
kingdom for many years, but I have never heard before the angry yet
pathetic cries of my people, which you now hear. Hark, lords, their
shouts are loud as thunder. Tell me, lords, the reason.
CHIEF minister. Hearken, my lord! Your first-born to whom
you have given the title of ‘Great Wizaya’, is a fire-machine. With his
seven hundred slave-followers, he roams your city and your kingdom,
robbing, stealing, ill-treating all at will. Your elder son, your heir'
vour Wizaya is but a common robber, bandit, thief, and the people are’
anxious and troubled, and cannot stand his cruelties any longer.
king. My able lords! If what you say is true, my kingdom,
my country, will soon turn topsy-turvy. The matter must be ques¬
tioned, inquired into, and the people must be satisfied. Please send
tor the glorious prince of the Lion dynasty, my elder son, Crown
Prince Wizaya. Please order him to come at once, my noble lords.
[Enter Wisaya.]
1 This play has been considered on pp. 86-92.

APPENDIX VII 237
Son of the Front Wing, whose rays of promised gbrv shine
like diamonds, heir to the White Umbrella that shelters this kmcd ;rn,
the gem of this universe! My people and m\ ministers accuse v o;
of disturbing the peace of the country with your wild behaviour.
You are accused of robbing some and ill-treatme all. Look out of the
window, there are people in terror and in distress who demand,
your punishment. Without deceit and without hiding- anything, ted
your father the truth, my beloved son.
wizaya. My mighty father, who renders sweet justice from vwu:
throne adorned with carvings of budding lilies of the widen, kin.
worthy to be the elder brother of all glorious rulers, monarch destined
to be a god in the next existence! Your loved son has always twen
taught to tell the truth by his beloved parents. Father, I have read the
famous Jatakas of Thuwunnashan and Thotpadaka, which illustrate the
virtue of fearlessly telling the truth, of upholding the truth. I promise
you faithfully, royal father, to answer all your questions truthful!}’.
king. Good son, tell me at once whether my ministers' reports
about you are true.
wizaya. Let me submit, my lord, let me submit tins to your ears.
Your ministers fail in their duty, they tell you untruth. Half-truth is
untruth, my loved lord. Their reports regarding me are too mild,
they have not told you all that I have done. They have told you only
a thousandth part of my wild doings. Your people are all liars,
for they'tell you not the whole truth, not all the truth. Your ministers
have not fully reported all my crimes, and therefore they are guilty of
negligence. I beg you to dismiss them at once, my lord.
king. Flags of my kingdom, learned ministers who ably perform
your many duties, as you realize, 1 have brought up my two sons
with loving care. Let alone scolding them, I have not even once
frowned on them. But it seems, my lords, that my first-born is
a youth doomed to a life of wickedness and crime, a prince not wormy
of the name, a person who excels in foolishness and stupidity. Pernaps
I am to blame for loving him too much, perhaps I have spoiled
him by sparing the rod. But I am being punisiied, for as you have
just heard and witnessed, in full audience he has shamed me. I must
follow the custom of the rulers of the land and sea, powenui Lings,
and must not love my son more than my people. As his guilt is
proved, and as he has been ill-treating my loyal subjects, 1 na\e no
choice but to punish him at once. My noble lords, seize \\ izaya and ms
seven hundred retainers, and execute them without a moment s deia\.

APPENDIX VII
{Ministers seise WIZAYA, but the queen restrains them ]
QUEEN. Li;rd of my brow, my necklace of orchids that I always
v.car. friend of the sun. my beloved! Your handsome son Wizava "is
my heart, my life, my soul. Do not punish him, my loved lord, please
t-reive him this once. He means no harm, he has only youthful
to ikshrsess and pride. He mixes in bad company, and through bad
ir.riuence he has erred. But he will not repeat his offence, my lord-
ms youthru! stupidity shail not again prevent him from realizing what
he ;s doing. For my sake, your queen’s sake, your love’s sake,"please
spare my \\ izaya, 2nd I will see that he is not foolish again.
The rafts are ready to be sent adrift, and wizaya bids farewell
to his parents. He is no longer the irresponsible, defiant, and
wayward son.
WIZAYA. King whose glory is loftier than the highest mountains,
friend of the sun that is now shining from the sky, cleared of clouds
by winds, my lather who has been my protector since childhood!
Your beloved son must go now, must be sent adrift on the merciless
currents of the ocean. Dear lord, dear father, dear king, I deserve the
punishment, for my crimes are many and dangerous; I am indeed a
danger to the peace and welfare of the kingdom, and it is just and
right that I and my seven hundred retainers, with their families,
are now banished from your pleasant city. Father, I now bid
farewell to you. Kneeling down on the ground and lifting my
hands to my brow I tender homage to you as my king, and respect
and love as my fattier. ^ King destined to rule the whole world, dear
father, your son now bids you his last farewell. Mistress of virtue
and beauty, queen as lovable as a lily-bud, mother who gave me
nfe and nursed me tenderly on your goWen bfeast when j ^ ^
a child and not yet wayward, my father, god of this kingdom, is just
and I do not protest against his decision to send me adrift on the
ocean I must now start my voyage on the pathless sea, exposed
to wild waves and wilder winds. Mother, I kiss your feet, and bid
you farewell, borrow not for your wayward son, my darling mother
and try to stop those pearl-like tear-drops that dim the lustre of your
emerald eyes. Farewell, beloved mother, mountain of my gratitude.
Farewell, mourn you not, but please pray for me and send me your

APPENDIX VII 239
love over the ocean. Your love and praver will reach me
me, even though, the wide ocean separates you from.
Dearest mother, sorrow not for me.

APPENDIX VIII
KAWTHALA1
By U Pon Nya
I
Scene 2
THE THRONE-ROOM AT THAWITTHI
Enter kawthala and ministers.
KAWTHALA. My four masters of wonderful strength, which makes
it possible for you to bear the heavy burden of the affairs of this
state, my four flags that wave supreme in this golden city, O
ministers with all the six ministerial virtues! The great king, who
now rules Bayanathi, was a page in his youth, serving me, worshipping
me, bowing to me, crawling before me, in this very palace. Now",
because of his great ability and good luck, lie rules his mighty king¬
dom, receiving homage from all other kings. When a king without
glory meets one with glory, he ought to bow and kneel. Therefore,
I ought to submit, but I cannot. How shall I address him, speak to
him? I shall feel self-conscious, I shall feel shy to sav ‘my lord5
to him, my face will wear an expression awkward and old and
troubled. My prestige will suffer, my self-respect will be destroyed.
I am a king; I was a king when he was only a page in my court.
I do not wish to be a king under him, I do not wish to be a little
ink-blot on a page of figures. I will take a risk. Rebel from his
suzerainty, let us rebel, my lords. Blow the trumpet, sound the
drums, caii my soldiers and commanders to arms. Let us make our
weapons sparkle and shine, let us practise singing songs of victory,
my wise lords.
CHIEF MINISTER. Let me submit this, my royal lord. Your an¬
cestors, the glorious kings of a glorious line, always considered the
safety of their subjects. They loved the people as’the red blood in
1 This play has been considered on pp. 92-6.

APPENDIX VIII 1-1
their golden breasts. They wished that their ccmmcmdtrs -I . * w
should not shed one drop of blood without cause. A: * m a'
they wanted peace and happiness for their kirvjcAm. \\\ ^ v
noble king, that you forget not the policy * f j revv is k > ~ n
neighbouring country wishes to wage a purposeless war?tT*
thing is to ignore all attempts to draw you into war * Tw—w--1
weapon against all dangers and threats is patience r and who >Tlf
you do not desire war, there can be no wars against you. If y w
desire w7ar, many wars, not only one* will be waged icrahos: w-w
Fight not with hate, fight it with love. In this wind, irT kirl 1 u
begets love, kindness begets kindness. Consider this'in Vieira
consider this in your mind, my lord. Is it not better to march tr
victory w ith the weapon of submissiveness than through the wean n t -o'
hatred? l:our faithful ministers beg you to pause and consider.
king. My grand lord who has both strength of body and wisdom
of mind, my minister who serves well the umbrella of the kingdom,
my lord of the noblest birth! \\ hat you sav is true in many cases;
after the fall of Pagan, Ava, Sagaing and Pinya, rival kingdoms,
saved themselves from destruction through treating and agreeing and
loving each other. But there are cases too, in which open, fights alone
could and did save the thrones. I know it is against the religion t. »
shed blood, but you cannot succeed in worldly affairs if you are a cure
and religious man. You cannot follow both the religion and the world.
Although I am alone, although I rale a small country, it does not
follow that I will lose. You have read how Mahaw, though alone,
fought and tamed one hundred kings at once. I am a king, born of
kingly blood, made of kingly bone. My mouth is red with superhuman
powers, my glory shines brightly, my right hand is lit up with the
fire of strength. I am a man of destiny, why should I not be supreme
in this world ? Let alone a human king, I can fight the king of the
gods himself. I do not wish to crouch in fear, shivers of fright shall
not make me cold. I will write my name in history. Awav, a wav,
away, my noble lords, sound the dram of victory, man the walls. Fly
banners of defiance, make ready to stand a siege. Our city will be
besieged, but we shall conquer, we must conquer.
chief minister. My king, if you desire it, we will agree. There
are always two ways, smooth and rough. As you desire to pursue, as
you have determined to pursue, the rough way, we will follow you
and try to conquer by force of arms, if you wish it, even Mount
Mavvu, the abode of the gods. Now that you have decided on war.

APPENDIX VIII
we will try our utmost to ensure victory to our kingdom. Numbers
aVne do not ensure victory; the fact that the king of Bayanathi will
have all the support of his vassal kings, should not make us think that
victory can never come to our side. King Lion alone could be
successful against a thousand anger-mad elephants, and a cat could
conquer a thousand rats. We dare to risk our lives, so that you should
be king over the king of Bayanathi and his hundred kings.
kawthala. it will boot us well. I will now rest for a few
moments on the middle tower of gold, I will rest as softly, as quietlv
as untroubled as a jasmine-bud. I will rest so that I shall be strong
m mind and in body for the coming struggle. Make ready, prepare
my noble lords. We will think, we soon shall have new strength,
our wits will be ready, and our banners shall boldly ride the wind.
Victory shall be ours, my lords, [Exeunt ]
II
Scene 11
A ROOM IN THE PALACE
Enter queen with a newborn babe. Enter a lady-in-waiting.
queen. My lovely little king, my little silver, my little butterfly,
my silvery moon that fades the moon in the sky, my bracelet with the
sweet smell of lovely flowers, my little man, my breast-blood from
Kawtnala, your fathers bone and blood! Look, girl, isn5t he pretty?
Have you ever seen such a pretty babe, such a well-born baby? Look
at his brow, look at his features, does he not look like my lost master?
Oh, he opens anew the, wound, I long to die, I wish to see again my
lord, my Kawthala whom I shall see no more. Woman, haste, hurry,
give me some water, I feel dazed, I feel dizzy, my heart is falling
away from my body. ... Oh, oh, the child is a son, he will want his
throne back. Oh, there will be rebellions, his people will want'
him as king. The king of this palace will see the danger, will
realize that in this boy-prince lies the danger. As the boy grows
up, rebellions and disorders will increase in my own city of
Thawitthi. Bayanathi will then execute my son. O my poor child
why were you born at all? You are certain to be put to death by
your stepfather king-I think it is better to kill you now, when
you will not realize your misfortune and your approaching death
Also, it is easier to part with you now, before you have learnt to say
sweet little things, do little acts. ... It will also save your country

APPENDIX \
and this kingdom from disorder an
darling, will be saved from torture and
child, bone of my bone, Hnod mv
faithful lady, please hasten and throw
the graves in the cemetery. . . , His

APPENDIX IX
WAYTHANDAYA1
By U Pon Nya
When he turned dramatist U Pon Nya was already famous as a
humorist and satirist. He excelled especially in burlesque, where his
humour and satire were without any bitterness. In Paduma, his first
piay, he repressed the comic muse, and the satire there was without
artistry through bitterness. In The Water-seller there was just a trace
of humour and light satire. In Kazvthala there was a comic character
and it contained many humorous scenes, but the humour tended to be
coarse. In Wizaya he again repressed his comic spirit, and satire
also was entirely absent from that play. In Waythandaya, however,
he returns to his old role of humorist-satirist, and gives us two scenes
of the gayest laughter.
In the following extract, from the third scene, he burlesques the
heroic style of some contemporary playwrights.
Scene 3
THE FOREST IN WHICH WAYTHANDAYA IS LIVING IN EXILE
Enter sayta, the guardian-hunter, with his dogs.
sayta. Hark! I hear a strange noise from that hillock on my
right. A faint sound, but a strange sound, an ugly noise. What can it
be r Is it the cry of an elephant in pain? Oh, no. It sounds as if some
children are crying in terror. But how can that be? I must go and
investigate at once. I will go in haste with my bow and arrow. No,
sta\ I I must be careful, for I do not know7- what strange enemy I may
meet. I must take my hounds with me. . . . Q you enemy over
there, you are in for it! Know you not that this is Master Sayta,
possessor of a valiant temperament, Master of the golden bow?
And this is my domain, this forest is my domain in which I dwell and
spend my days in jasmine-happiness. 0 enemy over there, even if
1 This play has been considered on pp. 96-9.

you are the king of elephants e-rre with 1 * u~. * t „ ,„,t
My arrow will pierce all mine enemies. * '
hearken, my valiant dog-officers, Cinwir ~-rM 0 w"'
sur vi vor-of-the-Iitter, Bitch-leader, vvur nastw *'*L
Satya, this possessor of the big how. u aw 'v\ ,7fw
thinks that we shall soon find some business v - -it- ,
day. So we must form ourselves into rattle-army and w-
attack the enemy.
Lieutenant Beautiful-brave and Lieutenant Yietw-bhwk,
in-law of Bitch-leader, will lead the vanguard. Er.smn D;
cloud will act as scout and see that the b ur.ds bo mt m
close together. White-forepaws, s m o* a w i-d g u L
famous Mistress Yellow, is appcdr.ted, because * f bis ibi
bravery, to be the orderly officer for the whole urmv, Fligntv,
flirtatious bitches, who have been divorced fr m them .at f d hnMwffi
must march together in the centre of the main bodv, ana you, gallant
Female-Lieutenant Shoulder-stripes, I prom?re to he Cat? tarn ess, and
I hold you responsible for the discipline of tnos^ h'.no; * n:-.
Dogs over there, youths who are wild and still flerv-remmerW and
who are always snowing their ivory teeth, vou are niece d under the
uncle of the hairless Bitch-leader, an importation from Lower Burma,
the Pegu-hound, Captain Y ictor-red, who is now granted letters-
patent appointing him to be Commander. You will rim swift!v to
that hill on our left, usually occupied by eagles. You will hold the
hill at all costs, for it will be the base of <mr operations, and the
whole army will retreat to it if things should go against us.
Widows, old maids, diseased dogs, mothers with suckling babes,
lame, rheumatic, anaemic dogs must not accompany the array. You
must remain behind here. Your duty is to guard our huts, and watch
the entrances to our kitchen and our dining rooms. Sec that no
stranger breaks in here to steal our treasures, to wit, our cm iking
utensils, our cooked rice, that half-baked rabbit’s leg, and half-
consumed wing of chicken, Dog Sapphire, Dog Like-a-cat. though
old, do not forget your past glories and past experience in wars.
You will please see that discipline and ordered life remain unimpaired
in my absence, and guard you well my hut. March on, dogs, to
battle and to victory. [Exeunt.]

APPENDIX X
THE HISTORY OF THATON1
An Extract
SCENE: THE PLACE OF EXECUTION
Enter the queen, her adopted father the nobleman, and the
governor of the city.
queen (singing). ' O father, am I not too young to die? I have
not laughed long enough in the palace to die so soon, I have not
played long enough in this world to depart so suddenly. Father, is
not life ugly, is not my lord the king cruel?’
Father, dear father, you yourself will have to kill your beloved
daughter.^ You are my executioner. Beloved, do not’be afraid to
kill me. They will kill me in any case. I do not care. Consider
your own life, father.
NOBLEMAN. Poor, miserable daughter, my poor child. How can
I hurt this sweet, pink rosebud, how can I throw away my priceless
jewel r ^Child, loved child, what have we done to deserve all this
torture? When the king wished to wed you, I was so happy because
you would become our queen. How could we have guessed that
pretty fortune would soon turn all ugly? Oh, oh, my daughter, are
the ropes which tie your hands together hurting you? O cruel, cruel
king!
governor. My friend, I must enforce the king’s orders You
are to execute the beautiful queen. I have but to do my duty. Put
your dear daughter in this green-coloured velvet bag, and then beat
her to death.
queen. Father, please do not prolong my torture, I am losing
consciousness. Listen father, please listen to your daughter’s dyina
wish. When I am dead, please put my body on a raft and send
it adrift on the river, so that people will see it and pity my miserable
end. And on this spot, on this place where you and I are cruelly
This play has been considered on pp. 112-15.

1 desire all to know that the
Father, I am fainting, oh, deare
Let me enter the velvet hag rvw
GOVERNOR. Sire, sire, do vour duw, her.- :-*
The queen must bow to the ralace three Wm s
is the custom of all prisoners m the s --^v
*
queen (bowing towards Tv pWwe . R-.j. I i . - * '
now, I hate you, I will never S ,rg:ve - < v, R--— :n m , , ,. * <4 R ,m
I will hate you. Oh, no. King, I f-vwe - me*~ - - **" ^
heartless to your queen.
nobleman. Oh my daughter, w;v daughter. W v - V" ., r.
my loveliest daughter, mv sweet child ?
queen. Father, my dear father, think not >f thr hw ’ —
suffering soon.
governor. No further arguments, mv cueer. Mv hear: :s mihvw'
and dried with grief and pity, but 1 have to ' hev nr,” king.
{Tilt QUEEN is V t „gur; v: pR r m ^ '
queen. Oh, cruel life, oh, cruel love! Where is mv hr ;ther? Oh
I want to see him. Why is he not here: Father, rathe*„ I am be¬
coming unconscious. Quick, father, quick, relieve me of mv pain.
nobleman. Farewell, my loved one, mv dearest child, i rid rut
you on the raft and build a pagoda and fulfi] all vwar wishes. Oh.
oh, must I kill my child?
governor. Sire, sire, do as you are ordered to do. and relieve
your child of her torture.
nobleman. Farewell, my child, my child. \lh. gfgt,; a hkw with
the stick.}
QUEEN (faintly). Oh, oh, it hurts. Father, father, where are veu:
Where is brother, where is king? Father, ,-h my father. Hits.'

APPENDIX XI
THE BABOON BROTHER AND SISTER1
The decadent dramatists, in spite of all their faults, are not
without artistic ability. The following extract is an example of the
decadent style at its best.
Although the atmosphere of the following scene is one of pitv
and horror, there is restraint in the use of ‘blood and thunder’.
Moreover, after the audience has been moved to pity and horror,
its equilibrium is restored by the closing lines of lyrical beauty, in
which it is shown, through references to the executioner’s home and
the beauties of nature, that ordinary life is not sordid and complicated
but beautiful and simple.
SCENE : THE PLACE OF EXECUTION
Enter executioner with the queen {the baboon sister).
queen (singing). ‘My lovely son, my golden necklace, O my little
unfortunate, where are you? Your mother is dying, she is leaving
you all alone in the world as if she hates you so. ... ’
O executioner, let me go back for one moment, please give
me my son. Let me nurse him, hug him, warm him on my golden
breast for just one moment. ... O my brother, where are you ?
Do you not know that your sister is going to be killed ? Come, come,
come and save your beloved sister. . . . Son, my son, he will be
crying now for he must be hungry and looking for me, his mother.
. . . Oh, I am helpless. Swords and sticks are around me. The
executioner looks fierce. Oh, oh, before the sword touches me, before
the spear opens wide my breast, before the stick makes me swoon, I
am in pain, let I do not die. I am in great pain and yet live on,
so that I am tormented the more. Unfortunate that I am! Why can
I not die at once ?
1 This play has been considered on pp. 115-21.

APPENDIX XI
executioner. Handsome maiden, $ > \ xxm : . c 4 * b < *
sweet to die on the scaffold! You vill hr'c t . do - * d i ^ x
set and time is passing. No letter of narffo 1.x- m**" ■ ^ * - .
execution must be carried out. Ween n-t Ndv, Nxr : t, • x ; ; *
steel your heart and prepare for the end. L i* at y w* % * h
palace, gleaming with gold and jewels in the velj v ird rrxx -
the setting sun. Bow to it three times as all criminals m the >:Jff Id
are bound by custom, to do.
queen. Yes, executioner, I am readv to die, hut I 'x: A vxti
give me a few moments more so that I mav orav. Oh, xh. mm
thoughts are not on the religion, my mind wanders w n;v hr. ither and
my son, my loved ones. Oh, woe is me, I am afra:d I shad dec xm a
spirit after my death, half-tied to this human world, a!wavs ix verxwj
about my loved ones. I do not care. Whatever barmens, whatever I
become in the next existence, may I be able to help and 1< > ?k after
my beloved ones, and may I be able to make known my tragedy to the
world. (She bows towards the palace.) Three times have I bowed tw
thee, Master of the Palace! You ’are cruel, you are merciless and
cunning too! Oh, you are being foolish, my kine, for this sin whi
bear you down to hell to suffer countless tortures. . . . O mv cKier
master, my heart, my love, why are you so heartless and Kind to my
love for you ? [Sht faintsD
executioner. I must hurry and do my duty swift!}'. I will use
this heavy stick and strike her on the throat, as comely as a water-lily.
One blow will be enough. [He strikes and ike queen dks,}
Yes, the deed is done. This is indeed a glorious act of merit on
my part, alas! Poor girl. . . . Though the law requires that the body
of a criminal should lie on the scaffold for seven days, I cannot be
heartless enough to enforce it. 1 will cover the jasmine-like body
with thorns and sticks and leaves, so as to protect it from crows and
vultures, and thus preserve it for burial by her people. ... ! have
done my duty, accomplished my wicked deed, and that is the end of
the matter. No need for philosophy. . . . I must hurry home, for my
beloved wife is waiting for me, looking out from her window, shyly,
sweetly, expectantly. The sun of amber and gold has set, and from
that drooping tree which is gradually sinking into slumber, a sweet
young owl is peeping at me, hooting playfully. My lord of the
orchestra, can you reproduce his music? [Exit]

APPENDIX XII
SA W-PHA Y AND SA W-MA Y1
An Extract
A ROOM IN SAW-MAY’S HOUSE
Erne,- saw-may. In a soliloquy, she says that she must mislead
iiOPEFLL into thinking that she is in love Kith him, so as to
prevent him from discovering that she is making arrangements
m elope Kith her real lover, saw-phay. Enter hopeful.
. M0PEFVL- 1 sick of it all. Your father and you are always
ma -mg me do this, and do that, sending me on all sorts of errands
then "I ,11? T ™Sh y°Ur disheS' 1 h°Pe and h°Pe and hope, and
n wha. do I getr Nothing, I am sick of it all, so I am a0ing to
§
serve m another household and run after a new girl.
beauSuThlnd011’ M‘Ster f°PefU1’ Wh3t did y°U Say? Now’ now,
beautiful, handsome, pretty lover, where are you going? Some people
can e really cruel and hurt those who love them. Where are you
m°lngr ’ Hopefu!’ why do you hate me so? Do you feel towards
me as if I were a stranger? Do not go, please, Mister Hopeful.
h’ °h’ What dld you say? Do y°u mean that you love
to he ^ OK TW y°Uare Sayin§! Wh^ ^ the marriage W
tthhaatt y'o u 0 whililib mUat r 1 ry t hmme?k y°U 3re teaS'ng me? WiI1 yJ ou sayy ooaatlhn
saw-may. I swear solemnly that I shall marry dear Mister Hope-
fa tehen the sword ,wims ,h„ugh the the
J
the east, a„eI when the lily IWe, grows on ^
~ r M““r H°pefu1’wte is «• « - «S this s»-^„g
‘NicT? d”rr7onif you bri“« “ b“y>”
flowers, which I desire to wear on my happy wedding day
YesTrHng I dV ^ ^ ^ ^ 1 ^ CatCh what you “id.
ies, darling, I do not care for oaths and all such things for it is
tW *>“ »* argument is purp^t Y
This play has been considered on pp. 121-

APPENDIX XII
me see, it is lucky that the season of ham--
is good, for it will give me time to save i<ir
season comes. You know, I want some m -
curtain for our nuptial night. But. oh. it w
the money, and in the meantime you will r.t
saw-may. Oh, oh, Mister Hopeful, do
grateful to you for loving me. Oh, dariin •
care for father or king or crown. I do ;—
not want a palace, all I want is vou. I c ,
father, but we can elope before the king has
we elope, O Mister Hopeful, dear .Mister H
By the way, I hope you will not be so he
father about the proposed elopement, will vc
hopeful. Ho, ho, aha, ha, ha, what a v
thought of. les, beloved, we will run a
mistress, I love you so much that I could h
washing your under-clothes. O Saw-mav,
I want to kneel down and kiss your little t,,c
lips. Why did you tell not me of your
appear so indifferent to me ?
saw-may. Hush! Here comes father.

INDEX
(.The Appendixe
Abbey Theatre, 138
Actor's, 9, 23, 24, 44, 49, 51, 53, 56 1 Bah,
110, 132,^134-6, 139, 140-4, 146, 150; BandorA, 74
Elizabetnan period, 50; tradition Bayinr.aang, K;nj, 7 r,
of, 8
Beaumont. 131
Age of triumph, 9, 42, 43, 110, 114 Bengal, 14, 1?>
Aindarzuuntha, 44, 45, 4/, 48. See also Bengalee drama, lit
Eenaung
Btngadt Armor, 1; ra
Alaungpaya, King, 7 n, 74 : Bhasa, 34
Alaungsithu, King, 14 ‘ Blood and thunder a 72
Alchemist (zazcgyee), 66n, 140,146,150 ‘Blood and thunder’ mo m
Alchemy and Alchemists in Burma (Elizabethan a hi
146 n. ’
Bodawpaya, King, \ -A, 4 , 551
Alphabet, Burmese, 2 147, 149
Anantathuria, 4 Brahminism, 34
Anawrahta, King, 2, 3 n, 14, 17 Brahmin as villain, 97
Anglo-Burmese Wars: 1st, 9, 52 57 Buddha, not to he premnmi m tr.e
73, 74, 100, 106; 2nd, 9, 76, ’loo! stage, 2(J
106; 3rd, 132, 134 " . Buddhism: in India. 3, 34; in Sum,
Animals: as characters, 100; mimicry ' 34; introduced into Burma: mroar
of, 15; as puppets, 15, 146, 148, 150 : introduction 2; bv AruvuA* j
Animistic religion of the Burmese, : 15,17 ‘
17, 18. See also Spirit worship Buddhist Birth Stories, see Jataka
Annexation by the British: maritime Burma Book Club, 139
provinces _ l’824, 7 n, 52; Lower ! Burma Research Society, A, 5f, A
Burma 1852, 7 n, 9; whole country : 139 * '.*
1886, 7 n, 132, 134, 147 ' ! Buyidat, 120
Anthology of Burmese Literature, 5 n, 1
24 n. ; Qakuntala, 137
A
A
r
r
a
a
b
b
i
a
a
t
,
,
1
2
4
0
8
, 142
Ca
2
m
5,
b o
35
d
,
i a
3
n
6 ,
c h
44
ro nicles, 43; Rama'' av 2,
Arakan, 7 n, 52 Canterbury Tales, 103
Aristotle, 83 Ceylon, <86
Asoka, 3 Chambers, E. K., 16 n.
Assam, 7 n, 52, 54 Character, studv of, 55, 70-2 ’*•+ tS
Athumbain, character of, 67, 71, 73 10 2
Atmosphere: of calmness, 107; of ; Characters: animals as, 100; comic:
impending tragedy, 119; of light ; before L Kyin L, 71; in decadent
romance, 123; of romance, 65, 74, i drama, 113, 123, 128, 129; in U Fon
75, 100; of strife, 73, 74, 107 Nya, 97-9, 103; in U Kyin U, 71,
Audience, spirit of the, 110 72, 97; common people as, 142:
Aungbala, 136 female: in Mvawaddi, 4S; in U Pom
Ava, 43 | Nya, 102; in Sanskrit drama, 4S; in
Awbatha, U, 54-8, 61, 69, 71, 96, 97, i Siamese court drama, 48; in U Kyin
111 n. | U, 68, 71; grouping of, 84; super¬
natural, 100-2
Baboon Brother and Sister, The, 115- i China, 1, 35, 149; civilization of, 13;
21, 123, 124, 127-9, 131,132 | drama of, 15, 55; invasions, 43, 44

INDEX
1 hiut) t, 15 n.
C hir.5. 1 n. female parts, 71; chronicle plavs
C7v n , l'y 2t, H2 55; decadent, 131, 132; masque, 41 *
Eptgraphia Birnianica, 4 n.
C um:c scenes in dc cad: ; Epithalamion, 130
12\ 129, 131
Era, Burmese, 17
Immunto ns, ^ taco it 14 European literature, 139 n.
6, os tun m>, Hi
Conner I ■ >: Xu" Dna I Educa Family tradition (author’s) 8
Ormt, Mont t C; .hit. 7/ Farneil, Dr, 25
Cou-t, Burmi; w, 4 2-6, Female clown-attendant, 20
in. 132, 133 Fielding Hall, 17 n.
Court drama: Bur mes e. 6 Fletcher, 131
;-6 ff Doll, 144; ‘blood and thun¬ Folk feasts, 15-20, 150
der and heroics in, 55, 72; rise
Folk-Lore, 17n, 146 n.
4o-0; reaches the people, 49-52;
Fools, feasts of: at the Inns of Court
study of character in, 55; verse in,
and the Parlement of Paris, 16*
leU; ^larnest, 34-42; at the Burmese
Burmese feasts of foolery, 16 ’
^ court, 42-6; female characters in, 48 Ford, 119, 131
Lour: dress. 18
Four-syllabled line, 129-31
fy^rt Mas pit, The, 16 n.
. French drama, 143; embassy, 143;
C ritics ot the decadent period, 99
Indo-China, 77; operettas, 143 *
Crocodile, the, 10*5, luf
touring companies, 110, 143
Cromwell, 132
; Furnivall, J. S., 8 n.
Daianu, 148
i Galon-hird, 62, 65 n, 72, 75, 101 104
Dance, 2, 13, 14, 29, 30, 41, 53, 109 ; hi ’ *
119, H5, 134-6 : Gesture, 45
Dances, spirit, see Spirit dances i
Glass Palace Chronicle, The, 2n 4n
Dasuratha Jafaka, 31, 37 i 14 n.
Day-: ca non ha n, 53, 56, 57, 61-5, 70-3 '
! Gods, treatment of, U Kyin U con¬
75, 95, 100-2, 104, 139 n. I
trasted with U Pon Nya* 100-2
Daywagonban, character of, 72 Grant Brown, 17 n.
Death-song of Anantathuria, 4 : Great War, 139, 144
Decadent drama, 6, /5, 99; character- j Guhathakerta, 138 n.
f}lcs\ comic characters, !
11c, 12c, 128, 129; Ivrical beauty, Harvest feast, 16
129; plays, 108-26; verse, 130, 131 j
Harvey, G. E., 1, 2-5 nn, 8 n, 17n, 21 n
Demon, see Ogre !
42, 43 n, 47 n, 49 n, 54 n, 107 n’
Destiny, 91, 92, 101, 102, 108 j 119 n. ’
Dragon, see Naga-dragon !
Hazvsa, 7, 24, 50, 54, 129
Dramas and Dramatic'Dances of Non- j Hero, 22, 23, 69, 70, 91, 105, 130
Euiopean Races, The, see Ridgeway |
Heroic interludes, 55, 72; play (Sans¬
Dramatic irony, 119 ' j
krit), 137
Dramatic technique, Burmese theory I
Hindu culture, 34, 35, 148; expansion
Jn the decadent drama, 115, f overseas, 3, 13, 14, 34, 147; influ¬
126-8; m U Pon Nya, 83, 92, 96,99 i
ence, absence of, on Burmese music
104-6; in U Kyin U, 75, 83,92, 104-6 1
Dumas, 135 ! and dancing, 14; poems, 34; rom¬
ances, 34
Duty, 91, 102. See also Destiny
Hindu law, 3 n.
Eenao, 45 History of Burma, see Harvey, and
Phayre
Eenaung, 10, 36, 45, 47, 48. See also
History of Okkalapa, The, 121
Aindarzvuntha
English drama in Burma, 136-9, 143 History of Thaton, The, 112-16 118
119, 123, 124, 127, 128, 144
English theatres, closing of, 132 ’
Home of the Puppet Stage, The, 147
English touring companies, 110 143
Hopeful, character of, 129
Elizabeth, court of, 43
Hsinbyushin, King, 46
Eib 1 jo a2 -8 ? , h? 1 y 40 d r n a ; m a a ’ c 6 to ’ r s 7 , > 4 3° 9, > o 50 'i , , 1 i 4 3 2 2 * , HlJ|Hour: in decadent drama, 123,
‘blood and thunder’, 67; boys and 128, 129; in U Pon Nya, 80, 98, 99,
103, 104; in U Kyin U, 71, 72

India, 1-
inaian epics, sec Mahabhar
Ramayana
Indian Mutiny, lu7
Indian Ttit air t. Tin, n
Indian traders, 2, 3,' 34
Indo-China, 1, 4, 13, 14, 34, ;
Inns of Court, leasr of Fnn\
16
Inscriptions at Paean, 4
Interlude: Burmese, 6, 4, 1<I,,
5j-6, based on Jatakas, 5b
cblood and thunder1, 55, 72
characters in, /1 * heroic
interest in character in,
divided into scenes, 75; i
element in, 69; verse in’ L
English, 6, 22, 24
Ireland, 138
Irrawaddv, 57
Japan, 148
d, I K ^ 2, * ' “, “2
Japanese drama, 15
Japanese Drama, 15 n.
Jataka: D_asaratha,3l,37A2; Main.:: h IT Jt
, 1
thada, 58; If ay t nan Jay a, %
Jatakas m Burma. The, 56 n.
Jatakas, influence of, on: interlude,
MmlYmI .* ;
Xibhatkhiu, i?:
io-21); L Pon Xya, 78, 81, Ho, yp*
..VliisUa» It, i“t 1
puppet show, 146, 147; U Kvm v'
69,70 • • Masque, El „;.,i'.ethun» M
Matmee iuol>; 1 y
Jatakas of U Awbatha, 53-8, 6l, 69
Mayne, j. D., 5 n.
71, 96, 97, 111 R.
21, d? r\:i Slagt, T*u, M n.
Jatakas, Ten Big, 54
Mediums, spirit, ,-ee hr wit
Jatakas, translated, 43
Mating Yin Maung ana ]/,
Java, 3,14, 34-6,146-50
135
Javanese shadow show, see Puppet
Migrations inw Burma, 1, I
Show, Javanese
Milton, 74
Jew, 97
Mini :cry of animals, 15
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, Minder,, 9, 19
17 n.
Mindon, King, 52, 57, 7u
in '
Kachin, 1 n.
Minkaung, King, 21 n.
Radon, Sein, 136
Minnandar, 121
Kalidasa, 34, 137, 138
Miracle plays: Burmese, sr
Kanaung, Prince, 76, 77
khin; English, 6, 7, N
Karageuz, 14S, 149
Mohammedan religion, 14S
Karka-zvunnaya, 120
Mohnyinthadot, Kmg, 21 n,
Kawthala, 92-6, 98, 102,103,105, 108 Moliere, 139
Kaywut, as portrayed by: U Awba¬ Mon-Khmar, 3 n.
9 th 7 a , 61; U Kyin U, 61, 71, 72, 74 * Morality play: Burmese, 22,
lish, 6, 22, 25
Keith, Dr Berriedale, 15 n, 25, 27, 31 n. Music, Burmese, 2, 13, 14
37, 136, 137, 147
Myawaddi, Minister,
4’ Key ’ line, 129
70-2, 152
Kho, Taw Sein, 25, 30
Myingondame, Prince. 77
King of the gods (from Davzvamn- Myingun, Prince, 77-1M;
banh 101

■» : Plot, 75, 83, 104-6, 115, 126-8, 137
See also Dramatic technique
XmehJ% 13
Politics and the drama, 73 74 irr
3w-: ehtus 28, 29, D2; IT-Yin-Gvi , 108 ' ’ ,AU/»
,"• Spirit worship Polygamy, 41, 124 n.
Pop a Sawrahan, 17
» Portugal, 43
Precursors of U Kyin U, 55, 97
X j} myo Fhir: Kyav him Xawyahta,, : Printing, 11, 112 *
Prome, 1
-YVy Year, feast of the, 15-17 Prose, use of, 131
X;hhatkhm, 15, 19-22, 26, 27 29
Prothalamion, 130
Xovei, Burmese, 155, 156 I Punch, 149
Xyr. if Poo, 6, 9-11,50, 5«J, 52, 109-11,
: Puppet show: Burmese, 15, 144-50;
114, 12* \ 126-5, 13* »-2, 135, 137-9;
Ridgeway’s theory regarding 9Q-
a^c it: e v e m e n t, 99-165; comic
: refuted, 149; Javanese (i.e. shadotv
characters, 97-9, 103; comoared
snow), 35, 146-50; Sanskrit (i e
v.ith U Kyin U,j59, 99-108; female
: shadow show), 14, 35, 146-50; and
cnuracters, R>2; humour, Su, 98, 99, | women, 148, 150
lUj, /64; influence of patakas, 78,
| Puppet showmen, 146, 147 149
51, 96; life, 76-8; piavs, 78-99; I ^ 150 ’ *
politics, lOb-8; realism,’ 75, 100,
! Puppets: animal, 15, 146, 148, 150*
liC; satire, SO, 98, 99, lu3, 104;
kmd, 148, 150; Burmese, 144, 146*
theory of dramatic technique, 83,’
149, 150; Javanese, 148-50; Siamese
92, 9o, 99, lu4-6; verse, 130, 131
! 148, 149; Turkish, 148; of oS
: countries, 148, 149; sazvgvee- 146
150 ~ ’ 51
tess (lrom Davzcagonhan)
rii Wizuya) 91, 96, lu2 Rama Lila, 38, 138
Ogres in ' J JPon Xya contrasted with
Rama Play: Burmese, 10, 46-9, 51-3
those in U Kyin U, 1011-2
! 55, 71, 72, 75, 99, 109, 121; Ridge-
Operettas, French, 143
Oral tradi aon, dependence on, 8, 11, 1 ways theory concerning, 26, 29*
12 Siamese, 34-43, 46, 114, 132 *
Rama-yagan, 10, 50-2
Orchestra, 41, 141, 142, 150
i Ratnayana, 14, 25, 29, 31-4, 36, 37*
‘Origins’, significance of the term, 27
Cambodian, 25, 35, 36, 44 * *
Othello, 138
Rangoon, 9, 77, 111, 143*
, Rangoon University, 139
Paduma, 77-81, 96, 100 101, 105, 107
130, 141 Havana, character of, 37, 38
Red Cross Fund, 144
Paduma, character of, 80
Pagan, 2-6, 14, 17, 18 Restoration drama (English), 55, 132,
Pagan, King, 56, 76, 106, 107
Rhyme, use of, 129-31
Pageants, 18, 19, 44
Pali, 2, 3, 43, 54, 56 Ridgeway, Sir W iliiam: theory regard¬
ing Greek tragedy, 24, 25; theory
Parlement of Paris, Feast of Fools at
the, 16 regarding Burmese drama, 25, 26:
refuted, 26-aO; theory regarding
Parpahein, 56, 65-8, 70, 72, 73, 100
104, 125, 139-41 puppets, 29; refuted, 149; inform¬
ants of, 25, 28, 30, 57
Parpahein, character of, 68, 71-3*
mother of, 71, 73 ’ Romance, atmosphere of, 65, 74, 75,
Pauk, 8, 19
Pegu, 7 n. Romance, atmosphere of light, 123 .
Pein, U, 8 n. Romances, Hindu, 34
Romeo and Juliet, 138
Periods of Burmese drama, 6
Persia, 148 :
Sale, 76
Phayre, Sir Arthur, 2 n. ;
P’iao, 13 i Sanskrit, 3 n, 13, 43, 54; drama, 14,
Pischel, 147 .• 15, 25, 34-8, 48, 49 n, 136-8, 147-9
Pitakas, 2 j Sanskrit Drama, The, see Keith
Satan. 74

Satire, 96, 98-100, 103, 104
Sauk, U, 9 n.
Sazv-pkay and Saw-max, 121-8, 1C'
244 - ’
Scenes, division into, 75
Scholar dramatists, 112-32 114
Sein, Po, 136, 144
Shadow show, see PuDpet show
Shakespeare, 29, 70, 131, 138, 139
Shakespeare in India, 138 n. ‘
Shan dance, 115; States, 7 n.
Shans, 1 n, 34
Shin Arahan, 2
Shway-lc oe (Sir George Scott), 17 n
Shwezigon Pagoda, 17
Siam: conquered by the Burmese 7 n
42; Hindu culture in, 34-8; mask-
^ . ed dances in, 141 n.
Siamese: chronicles,43; court drama,
see Court Drama, Siamese; language.
56; nobility, 42,43; Rama, see''Rama
rlav, Siamese; romances, 43
Sinbaungwe, 57
Singu, King, 46, 50
Sisson, C. J., 138 n.
Song, 3, 13, 29, 30, 41, 53, 109 110 Tmtiw, C, >4, 1* -t—
^115,129,134-6 i. -V :r>*. C:
Son, Lady Khin, 48, 49 n.
Spain, 43
Spenser, 130
Vkmiku’f ‘?r" ^
Spirit dances, 15, 17, 18, 115, 142-
Venue m Burmese drama. 111
mediums, 17, 18, 21, 22, 26* 142* \ ernacuiur literature, 1-7
tradition of, 8; worship, 17 18 V*
\ erse iorms :n SursT'c.w drama ’ ■*-
22, 26-8, 142, 149, 150 * ’ * ’
*5 i
Stage scenery, 2S, 41, 110, 135, 14(1 Victoria, Queen; 111?
141, 143, 146
Vidusaka 148, Cy
Stewart, J. A., 8 n. \ iliage ,easts, sec FSk \asts
Stone musicians, 14
Viliam mq Tty 71, % *7, 124
Sumatra, 3, 34
Supernatural characters, 100-2 Water Festival, 15, 17
Ji ater-stiitr, Tne, 77. bl-v, V:y d %
Tagaung, 1
102, 104-8; as adapted w V Ku,
Takings, 2, 3 n, 7n. ^120
Taking literature, 3 Water-seller, character of the man, >5,
Tartar onslaught on Pagan, 5 Sta; character of the’a cman C hh
Taungbyon, 17 n. 102 v>
Tazaungmon, feast of, 15 Waythandaxa {bv U Kuf I2v* (4;
Tchekov, 139 U Pon^Nya‘ 11, 81, 96-9, IC, 105,
Temple, Sir R. C., 17 n. 10’t), 127; lost pkv bv U Kvm v]
Ten Big Jatakas, 54 57, 97
Tha, Saya Hsu, 126 li a jfataka^ %; pkvs and
Tharrawaddv, King, 56, 57, 76, 106 interludes founded on, 97*
Thaton, 2, 3, 34 Webster, 67
Thepes, 29 Welsford, E., 16 n.
Theebaw, King, 111 UhSaya, 66-92, 95, 99, 101, 102,
Thirty-seven Nats, The, 17 n, 21,28,150 10 7, 1US, 127
Three Pitakas, 2 Women and the puppet show, 149,
Thuwana-thama, 111 n. 1511
Tibet,. 35, 141 n.
Tin. Pe \Taimcr 9 n 1 i j.