00140746

I BOMBAY BRANCH |
OF THE ^
I ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY |
K Town Hall, Bombay. 3
Digitized with financial assistance from
Observer Research Foundation
on 01 June, 2019

MEDIEVAL SINHALESE ART»»
BY ANANDA K. COOMARASWAMY, D.Sc., FELLOW OF UNIVERSITY
COLLEGE, LONDON..©.!©.BEING A MONOGRAPH ON MEDIA;VAL
SINHALESE ARTS AND CRAFTS, MAINLY AS SURVIVING IN THE
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE STRUCTURE
OF SOCIETY AND THE STATUS OF THE CRAFTSMEN-.©©.©.©.©.

00140746
00140746

DEDICATION.
TO E. M. C., MY COMRADE IN THIS UNDERTAKING.

FOREWORD.
T his book is a record of the work and the life of the craftsman in a feudal society
not unlike that of Early Medieval Europe. It deals, not with a period of great
attainment in fine art, but with a beautiful and Signified scheme of peasant
decoration, based upon the traditions of Indian art and craft. Sinhalese art is essentially
Indian, but possesses this especial interest, that it is in many ways of an earlier character,
and more truly Hindu—though Buddhist in intention,—than any Indian art surviving
on the mainland so late as the beginning of the nineteenth century. The minor arts, and
the painting, are such as we might expect to have been associated with the culture of
Asoka’s time, and the builders of Barahat.
The period dealt with I have called Medireval; but it must be understood that changes of
style in decorative art take place comparatively slowly, and that it is generally impossible
to say at a glance whether a given piece of work be of the sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth
century, or even older or later. Most of the specimens here figured or described date from
the latter part of the eighteenth century. Mediseval conditions survived in full force until
the British occupation of Kandy in 1815, and what is actually described in this book is the
work of Sinhalese craftsmen under mediaeval conditions, mainly as these survived in the
eighteenth century, .and, in a- less degree, even to the present day.
Mediaeval Sinhalese Art was the art of a people for whom husbandry was the most honour­
able of all occupations, amongst whom the landless man was a nobody, and whose ploughmen
spoke as elegantly as courtiers; It was a religious art, and so a popular art. It was also
essentially a national art; the craftsmen, forming an integral part of the Civil Service,
were rewarded with grants of State land, no less than soldiers or husbandmen. It was the
art of a people whose kings were ‘one with the religion and the people,’—perhaps the most
Significant phrage in the whole of that magnificent chronicle, the Mahavaipsa, from which
I have so often quoted,— a phrase embodying an ideal hopeless of attainment by a foreign
ruler.
It was the aft of a poor people, the annual income of whose kings did not in the eighteenth
century exceed ¿zooo in money, beside revenue in kind. It was very different from the
sumptuary art of the great courts and wealthy cities of India, of which we trace but a faint
reflection here and there in the use of Indian materials, and the importation of Indian
craftsmen. But it is the only true art discoverable in Ceylon to-day. In a few years it may
be gone for ever.. I have tried to make a picture of it, before it was too late.
If we would understand the significance and the history of the arts and crafts in India,
it will be needful to begin with Such survivals of them as we can study readily, and work
back from these to earlier times. Hence, even from a wider point of view, I make no
apology for writing a large book about a time when the traditions of fine art were stereo­
typed, and even the traditions of the crafts intensely formalised and. rigid. Such an art is,
as- it were, an outlier, left by long continued denudation, in extent severely limited, yet
evidence unmistakcable of a former continuity which it helps us to understand. Even
so considered, the .intrinsic value of the art is great; the capacity for certain types of
designing survives even to this day amongst a few craftsmen almost perfectly developed;
and whatevef limitations even late Sinhalese art possessed, it is at least immeasurably
superior to anything produced by any would-be-modern Sinhalese artists of the present day.
An eighteenth century jataka painting is as much superior to a modern Low-country book
illustration, as a Kandyan jewel is to a modern imitation of a design borrowed from a
Birmingham catalogue, or a Kandyan temple to a modern structure such as that described
on p. 13a. ,
as •. Y

This book is not primarily intended as a work of scholarship, but is written first of all for
the Sinhalese people, as a memorial of a period which at present they are not willing
to understand. fThe ‘educated’ Sinhalese of to-day, after, on the one hand, a century of
foreign government, and of education in which the national culture has been completely
ignored, and, on the other hand, jn equal Jjeriod of subservient and obsequious imitation
of foreign manners, have little reason to be proud of their present achievement in the Art
of Living. Evidence of shallow thought is everywhere to be seen in an exaltation of the
present age at the expense of the past. It is, however, only in an effort to realise the ideals
of this very past, and of the past of India, that there lies the possibility of a true regeneration
and revitalising of the national life of the Sinhalese people. This book, then, is written
first of all as a contribution to the understanding of this past.
Secondly, it is meant for those in East or West who are interested in the reorganization
of life, and especially of the arts and crafts under modern conditions.
Thirdly, an endeavour has been made to render it as far as possible of value to the anthro­
pologist, and to students of sociology and folk-lore. Criticism, only too easy from several
points of view, should take into account the actual purpose of the book, and the fact that
such a detailed account of the arts and crafts of a small area in the East, is really pioneer work.
In Ceylon, as in India, the direct and indirect influence of contact with the West has been
fatal to the arts. The two most direct causes of this adverse influence have been the destruc­
tion of the organization of state-craftsmen, following upon the British occupation; and the
subsequent systematic neglect, by British and Sinhalese alike, of a local architectural
tradition. A less direct, but equally sure and certain, cause of the decline of the arts has
been the growth of commercialism,— that system of production under which the work of
European machines and machine-like men has in the East driven the village weaver from
his loom,* the craftsman from his tools, the ploughman from his songs, and has divorced art
from labour. In the words of Blake,
“When nations grow old
The arts grow cold,
And commerce settles on every tree.”
In such grim fashion has commerce settled in the East'
The Sinhalese people are not, in my opinion, happier 'or better than they were in the
eighteenth century. Talk of progress, and the reality, are not the same. Civilisation is
supposed to advance by the creation of new desires, to gratify which the individual must
endeavour to improve his position. But in reality it is not quantity, but quality of wants
that may be taken as evidence of progress in the Art of Living. No one acquainted with
modern Sinhalese taste will pretend that it gives evidence of any improvement in the quality
of wants. Indeed, it is sufficiently obvious that quantity, variety, and novelty are not really
compatible with quality.
From a study of the arts and crafts under mediæval conditions in East and West: under
modern conditions in the West: and under conditions resulting from the influence of West
on East, something may be learnt of the true and false relations between art and life. What
are the conditions necessary to the existence of a worthy art ? Let us first enquire what
conditions forbid its existence in the modern West. They may be summed up in the words
commercialism and irréligion.
* In euphemistic language, '■ '■ successfully contested the village weaver s market.”

The essential method of commercialism is to create a want in order to have the opportunity
of profiting by the filling of it. Under the commercial system, it is no longer demand
that regulates supply, but production that ‘forces a market.’’ Machinery has enabled the
capitalist to do this to the fullest extent. The promise of labour-saving machinery was:
a millenium for the worker, shorter hours and easier work; its result have been merely
increased production, increased profit to the capitalist, and not less, but less intelligent, work
for the producer. Not merely is the workman through division of labour no longer able
to make any whole thing, not only is he confined to making small parts of things, but it is
impossible for him to improve his position or to win reward for excellence in the craft itself.
Under guild conditions, it was possible and usual for the apprentice to rise through all
grades of knowledge and experience to the position of a master-craftsman. But take any
such trade as carpet making under modern conditions, by powei-looms. "fhe operator has
no longer to design or to weave in and out the threads with his own fingers. He is employed
in reality, not as a carpet weaver, but as the tender of a machine. He may rise to a higher
place it is true,— but it is the place of a man responsible for the successful running of many
machines by many men. He can never rise in virtue of his knowledge or experience in the
craft itself. That craft is for him destroyed as a means of culture, aud the community has
lost one more man’s intelligence,—for it is obviously futile to attempt to build up by evening
classes and free libraries, what the whole of a man’s work is for ever breaking down. It is no
longer possible for culture and refinement to come to the craftsman through his work; it
must be won, if won at all, in spite of his work; he must seek them in a brief hour snatched
from rest and sleep, at the expense of life itself. It is not strange that he does not seek them,
nor that their expression is lacking in his work. He has not even the capacity for idling,
but must continually seek amusement and excitement. There can be no quality of leisure
in his work., In short, commercial production absolutely forbids a union of art with labour^
*t@Llt is instructive to compare the still surviving, but fast disappearing, relics of this union
in the East, .with the results of Western endeavours through education and free libraries
to restore that general culture which cannot undef commercialism exist; not there does
the ploughman speak as elegantly as the courtier, not there are riches little valued ; nor can
these things be where life is lived, not as an art, but as a wild beast fight.*
The conditions of labour affect not merely the producer, but also the consumer, who under
modern conditions must put up with the lack of temperament in the mechanical work
composing his environment; and must suffer economically also, inasmuch as work in which
the worker is not interested, or of which he cannot be proud, generally costs the consumer
more in the long run than the initial cheapness saves.
But the primary importance of all that is meant by craftsmanship relates to the life of the
producer. .Cheap work, cheap men ; and the community suffers accordingly, A society
which sees wealth in things rather than in men, is ultimately doomed. It appears, therefore,
that it is absolutely essential that mechanical production should in the future be, not
abandoned, but controlled in the real interests of humanity. If this appears to be impossible,
as I am unwilling to believe, it must be admitted that civilization is not much better than a
failure; for it is not much good being more ingenious than our forefathers if we cannot be
either happier or better.
One of the most interesting and difficult distinctions that can be drawn is that between a
* “ The Burman, if asked to give his candid opinion after a year's experience of English life, would
probably say that the position of the vast majority of Englishmen was not much better than that of
34
chained slaves."— R. F. Johnston, 'Pekin to Mandalay,’p- °*
a 4 ' ■ ‘ V“

tool and a machine. It is, however, one that the craftsman can always draw for himself,
when he is free to do so. Thus the carpet loom is a tool, a contrivance for holding warp
threads at a stretch, for the pile to be woven round them by the craftsman’s fingers; but the
power loom is a machine, for it does the essential part of the work, and in so doing imposes
limitations on the spontaneity and freedom of the design and on the intelligence of the
worker. The gouge and chisel are tools, but the mechanical carver is a machine, perhaps
the most stupid yet invented. It is essential, then, for a re-union of art with labour, that
machinery should be controlled ; and this control can be properly exercised only by the
craftsman himself. The place of machinery in a true civilisation will be that of a hewer of
wood and drawer of water, a servant, not a master; its concern will be rather with the
■ preparation than with the subsequent manipulation of materials. Its purpose will be, not
to rob the craftsmen of that part of labour which is his very craft itself, but to save him
from the heaviest and least interesting work, and to carry out only the simpler and most
mechanical processes of manufacture. It is, of course, true that even in the preparation of
materials, and the execution of monotonous labour, the machine is in many cases inferior to
the hand. Thus, to take a single example, the hand-woven textile is, ceteris paribus, more
durable than the machine woven, owing to the regularity and mechanical character of the
strains put upon the threads of the latter; and the surface, even if quite unornamented, is
artistically superior. So again, a machine-stamped binding, or a machine-planed table, or
a lathe-spun bowl, lack the peculiar surface characteristic of each material, and developed
by hand-work on it ; the technical perfection of the surface in the one case is simply
uninteresting, in the other varied. The machine, however, has come to stay, and, rightly
used, may be transformed from a curse into a blessing. The problem is not how to abolish
machinery, but how so to regulate it that it shall serve without enslaving man ; how to stop
competition between machine and hand-work, by defining and delimiting intelligently the
proper spheres of each. The community cannot afford to dispense with the intellectual and'
imaginative forces, the educational and ethical factors which go with the existence of
skilled craftsmen and small workshops. It must, therefore, protect these in their proper
sphere. This can be done only by restoring the entire control of production to the actual
workers, as in the old guild systems; or by the endowment of craftsmanship as in Ceylon, in
the feudal manner, but substituting for the king or overlord the democratic community as
patron. The first method may perhaps be achieved through a development of the trade-
unions of the West, historically the representatives of the old guild associations of
producers.* The second may be achieved by the action of the community in appointing as
its servants, for life or good conduct, its craftsmen and its artists, just as it now appoints its
judges, its preachers, its professors and medical officers.
A community, convinced of the desirability of possessing within itself a body of skilled
craftsmen, and of benefiting from the educational influence and actual productions of such
workmen, could attain these ends by appointing master-craftsmen as servants of the com­
munity, endowing them with a salary, or with a house or other security from want, on
• condition of performance of work for the community. Such Public Craftsmen should be
required to keep apprentices, and choose from these one to be their successor in office.
Such a system would effect the object in view more certainly and more economically than
much larger sums spent on technical education, or the encouragement of competitive
designs for large public works. Without some such solution of the problem, humanity
* Works of thefirst importance on this subject are : A. f. Penty, ‘ Restoration of the Guild System,'
London, 1906; C. R. Ashbee, ‘ Craftsmanship in Competitive Industryj Campden, 1908.

will in the future have to face a complete alienation of art from labour, resulting in a civilisa­
tion “divorced from Nature, but unreclaimed by Art.”
Side by side with commercialism, the growth of irréligion has been destructive of the arts.
Needless to say that by irréligion I do not refer to the decline of one or another particular
form of dogmatic belief, but to the prevalence of that superficial view of life which concen­
trates the attention solely upon outward things, and not at all upon things of the imagination,
real things. The distinction between naturalism and idealism in art is one that is funda­
mentally religious. It is the lack of a metaphysic in modern materialistic culture that
makes it possible for the artist to find sufficient satisfaction in the imitation of beautiful
appearances, and a sufficient aim for art in the giving of pleasure. This reduction of the
highest aim of art from prophecy to amusement strikes at the root of any possible revival
of true art,— which has to do, not with imitation, but imagination. Art that is driven to
save its life, as in modern Europe, by emancipation from all metaphysical and subjective
conceptions, is bound in the end to lose that life ; it becomes, in fact, the work of amateurs
lacking equally in inspiration and tradition. To reunite imagination with technique is as
necessary as to reassociate art with labour.
So far as Ceylon is concerned, it is of course true, that as in later India, a “too conclusive
reliance on traditional practice has led to a mental stagnation which deprives Indian art of
its former vitality.” The true impulse to a wider and fuller life must come once more, as in
Ceylon it has always come, from India. If this book in any way contributes towards the
preparation of the ground for the reception of such impulses, the labour spent upon it will
be repaid in full.
It is of interest to record, in connection with the arts and crafts aspect of the questions just
discussed, that this book has been printed by hand, upon the press used by William Morris
for printing the Kelmscott Chaucer. The printing, carried on in the Norman Chapel at
Broad Campden, has occupied some fifteen months. I cannot help seeing in these very
facts an illustration of the way in which the East and the West may together be united in an
endeavour to restore that true Art of Living which has for so long been neglected by
humanity.
A few words may be said as to the pronunciation of Sinhalese words. The following
6
alphabet is employed in transliteration : a, a, ç, i, i, u, a, ft, rl, Iri, ¡rl, e, e, ai, o, , au,
4 4
k, kh, g, gh, a, c, ch, j, jh, H, t, th, , h, n, t, th, d, dh, n, p, ph, b, bh, m, y, r, I, v, /, sA, s,
h,d, m. A, also the semi-nasals, v, m- The chief vowel sounds are :
a like d in America. a like 00 in fool, or u in r«le.
H like a in fother. e like e in pen.
P like a in man, or e in effort. e like a in r^te.
# like a in man, but longer, a like 0 in top.
f like i in ill. a like 0 in rope.
i like ee in meet, or i in machine. au like ou in do«bt.
u like u in full.
IX

The chief consonant sounds requiring notice are:
ft like n in pi«k. d like th in thzX (nearly)
c like ch in church. dh, the same aspirated.
ch like chh in coac^-^ouse. n like n in in.
n like n in pu«ch. ph like ph in u/i^old.
t like t in cut. bh like bh in abhor.
fh like th in ou^-^ouse. I like / in lip.
4
like d in %i.d. V like V or w.
4
h like dh in va.2.d-hou&t, / like s in jure.
V like n in print, sA like sA in shun,
t like th in //^irst (nearly). s like s in run.
th, the same aspirated. I like / in rail.
7
ti like n in (Fr.) bo«.
The English reader is recommended to ignore all diacritical marks on consonants, pronounce
consonants as in English, and vowels as in French, except V’ which is like '■ a' in man.
The n in Sinhalese (sinihald) is pronounced like the n in pink, or, more exactly, like the n in
the French word, bon. The A should be distinctly pronounced, like the ^'in pin-head. A
few fully anglicised words such as adigar for adikarama, are printed without diacritical
marks. In Sinhalese words the common contraction ‘e’ (or ‘^’) for aydis, used side by side
with the full termination, as in dange, dangaya. The ending ya is also often omitted, as in
vihara, for vihdraya, a Buddhist temple. The corruption ‘e’ for aya in devale {deva + alaya,
god-mansion) is also used. Sinhalese words in the plural are usually given in the Sinhalese
form, as tuppop, plural of tuppofiya-, but the English ‘s’ is sometimes added instead.
The illustrations are for the most part drawings or photographs of objects in the Colombo
and Kandy Museum; belonging to the Dajada Maligava and Maha Dcvale, jCandy; and
in my own collection. A majority of the objects illustrated are of eighteenth century date.
I am indebted to many friends for assistance and advice. First and foremost to my wife for
taking over a thousand photographs in Ceylon ; most of those reproduced in the Plates are
her work, and they are but a selection of those taken. Those who have photographed in a
tropical climate will appreciate the labour involved. I am also indebted to her for working
out with me the subject of Sinhalese embroidery, and for her assistance in recording many
other observations made jointly. Secondly I have to thank Don M. de Zilva Wickrema-
singhe, of the Indian Institute, Oxford, for reading the proofs. Many errors have been
thus avoided; but he is not to be held responsible for those that remain. I am indebted
to Miss A. G. Daniels, B.A., for very kindly undertaking the heavy labour of making an
adequate index. To Mr. C. R. Ashbee I am greatly indebted for assistance and advice in
matters connected with the Press, and for the pressmark which he has specially drawn for
this book. It represents, in a design based on a Sinhalese painting, the gathering of flowers
from the tree of Eastern art, and records the history of the Press on which the book has been
printed. In Ceylon I have to thank Dr. Willey, Director of the Colombo Museum, for
tbe facilities which he kindly gave for the examination and photography of any and every
object in the Museum, and Mr. G. A. Joseph, the Librarian, for his continual assistance
in the same work. I have also to thank Mr. H. W. Codrington, C.C.S., for assistance and
information ; the Hon. J. P. Lewis, Government Agent of the Central Province; Mr. C.
B. Nugavela, Diva Nilame, Dajada Maligava; Mr. A. Ratvatte, Basnayaka Nilame, Maha
Devale; Mr. T. JB. Keppitipola, Basnayaka Nilame, ^mbekke Devale; Mr. W. Dunuville,

J.P.; Mr. S. D. Mahavalatenna, H. E. Dambevinne, A. Maijuvanvela, and other Kandyan
chiefs; Mr. P. E. Pieris, C.C.S.; Mudaliyir E. R. Gooneratne, for his invaluable assistance
in translating for me the Rupavaliya and Sariputra; the late Sllananda Thera, Librarian of
the Oriental Library ; many jewellers of Kandy and Colombo, and particularly Mr. A. B.
Casse Lebbe, for permission to borrow and photograph at any time any of the specimens
of Sinhalese work in their possession. Amongst Kandyan craftsmen I am chiefly indebted
to Devasurendra Muhandirama, of Emb?kke, for abundant information, ofwhich I was able
to tap the surface only in the course of, for a time, almost daily conversation and observation
of methods. I am indebted also to the invariable courtesy of Buddhist Priests, both at
Malvatte and in the country districts. For the use of photographs reproduced on Pis.
II., III., IV. (i), VIIL and VIIIa I have to thank Messrs. Skeen & Co. and the Colombo
Apothecaries Company.
, ' ANANDA K. COOMARASWAMY.
Bkoad Campden, Gloucestershire.
December ist, 1908.

CONTENTS.
FRONTISPIECE.
CHAP. I. THE SINHALESE PEOPLE.
Ramiyaija. Skanda Puraija. Vijaya. Kuveni. Introduction of Buddhism. The sacred
Bo-tree. Elala. Duftha Gamanl. The Brazen Palace. Ruvanveli Dagaba. The
Tooth--relic. Jetfhatissa. Buddhadasa. Sigiri. Polonnaruva. Parakrama Bahu the
Great. Tamil invasions. Totagomuva. The Portuguese. Division into Kandyan and
LoVv-country Sinhalest. Raja Sirpha I. Raja Siipha II. Robert Knox. Narendra
Sirpha. Kirti Sri Raja Sirpha. Rajadhi Raja Simha. English occupation of the Low-
country. Vikrama Raja Siipha. British rule. What might have been. Disintegration
of religion and society. Education. Final decline of art.
CHAP. II. SOCIAL ECONOMY OF THE KANDYAN SINHALESE IN THE
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.
Government. Justice. Character. Castes. Service tenure of land. Manors. “The
Ploughman fit to rule a kingdom.” Dutch trade. Muhammadans. Agriculture.
Manorial organization. Agricultural songs. Domestic architecture. Furniture. Costume.
Character. Four annual festivals. Buddhism, Jatakas. The priesthood. Devales.
Buddhism and art.
APPENDICES TO CHAP. II.
»Education. Books.
CHAP. III. PARTICULAR ACCOUNT OF THE ARTIFICERS.
Kottalbadde guild. The Four Guilds of royal craftsmen. Payment of craftsmen. Family
charters. Penalties for bad work. Rewards. High spirit of the craftsmen. Their
number. Their Indian origin. Apprerjticeship.
APPENDICES TO CHAP. HI.
Teaching of drawing. Netra Mangalya. Artificer tenant holdings. Vihara grants.
Viivakarma.
CHAP. IV. ELEMENTS OF SINHALESE DESIGN AND ORNAMENT.
Sun and moon. Kipdura. Serapepdiya. Ft-kanda-lihipiya. Makara. Bherupda
pakshaya. Haipsa. Siipha. Naga. Fish. Other animals. Man. Nari-lata-vela.
Flower, fruit and leaf ornament. Dots, straight lines, curves and other ornaments.
Repetition and other arrangements. Mapgul-lakupu.
APPENDIX TO CHAP. IV.
The Rupavaliya.
CHAP. V. ARCHITECTURE.
Domestic building. Palaces. Granaries. Rest houses. Vjharas. Monasteries. Devales.
Fortifications.
APPENDIX TO CHAP. V.
Mayamataya.

CHAP. VI. ’WOODWORK.
Pillars. Roofs. Doors! Bolts. Windows, ¿ridges. Domestic woodwork. Kitchen
furniture. Architectural Implements. Carving. Turning. Carpenters’Tools. Measures.
CHAP. VII. STONEWORK.
Indian influence. Yapahuva. K$galla district. Kandy district. Moonstones. Plasteying.
Stone utensils. Gems.
CHAP. VIII. FIGURE SCULPTURE.
Bali ceremony images. Images of Buddha. Images of deities and others.
APPENDtX TO CliAP. VIII.
Sariprrtra.
CCHHAAPP.. IIXX.. PPAAIINNTTIINNGG..
PPiiggmmeennttss.. Technique. Methods of wall painting. Varnish. Jataka paintings. Idealism.
RReeffeerreenncceess iinn Sinhalese literature to painting. Bali painting. History of painting.
Paintings at Sigiri.
APPENDICES TO CHAP. IX.
Paper Manuscripts. How to prepare colours. How to make glue.
CHAP. X. IVORY, BONE, HORN AND SHELL.
Use bf ivory. Statuettes. Panels. Doors. Combs. Caskets. Veli-pata. Knife handles.
Ivory turning. Horn combs. Chanks.
CHAP. XL METAL WORK: IRON, *BRASS, COPPER AND BRONZE;
GOLD AND SILVER; JEWELLERY.
Iron smelting. Manufacture of Steel. Smiths’ services. Knives. Arecanut sheers.
Surgical instruments. Writing styles. Locks and bolts. Hinges. Damascening.
Colouring iron. Brass casting. Brass vessels. Bronze lamps and cressets. Copper.
Gold and Silver plate. The Kandyan king’s throne. Palanquins. Begging bowls.
Royal patronage. Sannas. Writing styles. Tools. Jewellery. Low-country jewellery.
Design. Royal presents.
CHAP. XII. LAC-WORK.
Matale lac-work. Uses of lac. Method of work. Design. Colouring. Combined
with turning.
CHAP. XIII. EARTHENWARE.
Duties of Potters. Appliances. Vessels. Ecclesiastical vessels. Tiles. Finials. Bricks.
Well-rings. Ornamentatiofl. Painted earthenware.
APPENDIX TO CHAP. XIII.
Potter’s Song.
xiu

CHAP. XIV. WEAVING.
Indian and indigenous weavers. Objects woven. The loom. Patterns. Cotton. Laying
the warp. Kafhina robes.
CHAP. XV. EMBROIDERY.
Materials. Objects embroidered. Stitches.
APPENDIX TO CHAP. XV.
Revival of Sinhalese embroidery.
CHAP. XVI. MAT WEAVING AND DYEING.
Mat weaving by KinnarayO. Dumbara mats. The loom. Grass mats and baskets.
Dyeing. Talipot leaves. Cane.
APPENDICES TO CHAP. XVI.
Kinnaraya’s Song. Pannan Katura.
CHAP. XVII. HISTORY OF SINHALESE ART.
Archaic motifs. Common sources. Primitive motifs. Early methods. Later motifs.
The lotus. Architectural survivals. Relations with India. Representation of trees.
Sigiri. Early sculptures. Polonnaruva bronzes. Conclusions. Portuguese and Dutch
influence. English influence.
APPENDIX TO CHAP. XVII.
The influence of Greek on Indian Art.
THE KANDY ART ASSOCIATION.
ADDENDA ET CORRIGENDA.
GLOSSARY AND INDEX.
ERRATA.
DESCRIPTION OF PLATES.
PLATES I.— LIII.
XIV

LIST OF il l u st r a t io n s IN THE TEXT.
FIGURE P.
4
GE figure page
44
1. Royal dress - - - - 3 3 ‘ Liya pata - - - - 100
45
2. Vessantara Jataka - - - 41 - 'Siamese single '■ '■ kanaka'' or flame
3. Two pages of an i8th century ornament •- - - - 100
baifa book - - - - 50 46. Siamese double "kanaka" - - 100
4. 'Tiringi tale - - - "S 3 47. Sketch of Siamese architectural
ornament _ _ . - loi
5. Vaka deka - - - "6 5
6. Vakadeka-w'ithpaturaaxìàslnamala 65 48. Leaf of ¿i7-tree - - - - loi
7. Katura mala - - - "6 5 49. Fi-leaf borders- - - - loi
8. Tiringi tale - - - - 6 6 50. “ Knopand flower” - - - 102
9. Tundan veda "6 7 51. “ Cone” or shawl pattern - - 103
- - -
9A. Tamil forms used in teaching 52. Ceiling painting - . - 105
drawing - - - - 69 53. Spirals - - - - - 105
10. Kindura - - - - - 81 54. Diya-rçla - - - - 106
11. Canda kinnara jataka - 82 55. Chevron border - . - 106
12. èfrapendiya - - - "8 3 56. Chevron borders - - - 106
13. Sarja anna padgi - - 83 57. Svastika - - - - - 106
14. “bird’s head,” Siamese - 83 58. Feather decoration - - - 107
15. ra//(Tamil) - - - - 83 59. Cross hatching - _ - 107
16. T't-kanda-lihiifiya - - "8 4 60. Ceiling painting - - - 107
17. Makara - - - - - 84 61. Tundan vfda - - - - 108
18. Makara, Early Indian - "8 4 62. Ymtty OÏ tundan veda - - io8
I 8a. Bherurfda pakshaya - - * 85 63. Various borders - . _ 108
19. Hamsa - - - - - 85 64. Painted book-cover - - - 108
20. Hamsa pattava- - - - 85 65. Shawl borders - _ _ - 108
21. Anna padgi (Tamil) - - - 86 66. Affrontment - - - - 109
22. Simha (lion) - - - - 86 67. Vel-pota - - - - - 109
23. Kibihi-mttna - - - - 86 68. Flower-in-mouth design motif - no
23A. Simmam (Tamil lion) - "8 7 69. Mangul lakunu - - - - in
24. Nara simha (man-lion) - - 88 70. Plan of yeoman’s house - ~ * 15
25. Ga/it (elephant-lion) - - 88 71. Diagram of temple verandah - 117
26. Parrot - - - - - 89 72. Diagram of vihara typés - - 118
27. Usamba kunjara (bull-elephant) - 90 73. Wooden pillar- - - - 129
28. Designs from a brass box - - 91 74. Carved wooden pillar - - 129
29; Nari-lata-vfla (woman-vine) - 92 75. Scarf joint - - - - 130
30. Nari-lata, Siamese - - - 92 76. Timbered roof- - - - 130
31. Nari-lata - - - * 93 77. Design in wood of hamsa putuwa 130
32. PtcCir-WiS'/decorationofbookcover 94 78. Diagram of vihara types - - 131
33. Types of floral ornament - - 95 79. Lych gate - - - - 132
34. Lotus flowers' - - - - 96 80. Bolt post and bolt - - - 134
35,36,37. Forms of lotus origin - 96 81. Wooden door-bolt - - - 135
38. Pala-peti - - - - 97 82. Door bolt - - - - 135
39. Forms of pala-peti border - * 97 83. Detail of door bolt - - - i 35
40. Mal-gaha (flower-tree) - - 98 35
84. Carved plank bed - - - i
41. Decorative mango tree - - 98
85. Carved bed-head - - - 137
42. (“honeysuckle” type) - 99
86. Furniture frompaintings- 138
43. Liya-v^la ~ ' r ' - 100 87. Sweetmeat mould - - ■ ^39

FIGURE ]PAGE FIGURE PAGE
88. Kitchen knife and rasp _ 140 120. Key-plate - - - - 201
89. Carved wooden doorjamb - -F I4I 121. Key-plate - _ - . 201
90. Carved hamsa - - - I4I 122. Brass basket fastenings - 202
gi. Stock drill - - 142 123. Decoration on brass box - 202
92. Saws _ - - - - 142 124. Brass handle - - - - 203
93. Hand drill - - 142 125. Cast brass ornamentation- 204
94. Lamba tafuva - - - 152 126. Brass hanging lamp 204
95. Diagrammatical figure of seated 127. Brass cresset - - - - 204
Buddha - - - - 157 128. Brass fittings for palanquin 206
9 5 A. Sarapenda (J(rapindiyd) - - 182 129. Gold writing style- 208
96. Horn comb - 187 130. Bird pendant _ - - 212
97. Horn-comb-maker’s tools - - 187 131. Design for jewelled necklace - 212
98. Plan of iron furnaces- - - I9I 132. Pattern in lac on spear stave - 216
99. Section of iron furnace - - I9I 133. Vflpota pz.XX.tm - - - 217
100. Plan of steel furnace - - 192 134. Section of potter’s wheel - 220
101. Ornamentation of iron sickles - 194 135. Tiles - - - - . - 223
102. Details of damascened ornament 194 136. Eaves tiles - - . - 224
103. Bar-lock - - 195 137. Incised earthenware ornament - 226
104. Iron key-plate - - 196 138. Stamped earthenware ornament 227
105. Iron key-plate - - 196 139. Stamped ornament on pot 227
106. Key-plate - - 196 140. Spool for reeling cotton - 236
107. Iron key-plates - - 197 141. Sinhalese embroidery stitches - 240
108. Window bolt - - 198 142. “.Flower-tree” pattern on mat- 244
109. Box catch - - 198 143. Patterns in grass weaving 245
110. Iron hinges and hasp - - 198 144. Svastika pattern on grass bag - 245
in . Iron rivets - - 198 145. Lotus rosette (with makard) 250
112. Iron chest handle - - - 199 146. Lotus medallions - - - 251
113. Almirah hinge - - 199 147. Lotus rosette - - - - 251
114. Handle-rose - - - 199 148. Lotus ornament _ - _ 251
115. Details of damascening - - 199 149. Armlet- _ _ - _ 25«
116. Brass hinge - - - 199 150. Archaic motifs _ _ - 252
117. Brass hinge - - - 199 151. Illustration from jataka - 267
118. Key-plate - - 201 152. Illustration from jataka - 267
119. Key-plate with hamsa pttttuva - 201 153. Atamagala diagram (in Index)- 272

> I

CHAPTER I. THE SINHALESE PEOPLE.
“ The Mahavamsa, composed equally for the delight and amazement of good men."
T he Sinhalese people are inhabitants of Ceylon, but not all the people of The Sinha-
Ceylon are Sinhalese. The etymologically identical word ‘ Ceylonese,’ however, lesepeople.
is used to describe all persons born in Ceylon, whether Sinhalese, Tamil,
Eurasian or otherwise, except Europeans. The word Cingalese is an old-fashioned
and less correct spelling of Sinhalese. Of the three and a half millions forming, in
round numbers, the population of Ceylon, two and a third million are Sinhalese inhabiting
the southern two-thirds of the island, and rather less than one million are Tamils,
living mostly in the north, on the east coast, and in Colombo. -The remaining population
consists of Moormen (Muhammedans of Tamil extraction for the most part). Burghers
(mixed descendants of Dutch settlers), Malays, Eurasians, Europeans and a few others.
Of the influence exerted by these groups of people on Sinhalese art, we shall need to
consider only the Tamil,' for on the one hand Ceylon lies outside the range of the
Muhammedan conquests and influence, and for the rest, we must carefully avoid the
manifestations of European influence if we are to see Sinhalese art at its best and purest.
Fortunately, in the 18th.century this influence had scarcely at all affected the art of the
Kandyan province, although well marked in ,the low-country. As an introduction to
the study of Sinhalese art as it existed in the latter half of the 19th century, the present
chapter provides a brief history of the Sinhalese people, especially in respect of the
history of the arts and cfafts amongst them.
Almost the earliest Indian tradition of Ceylon is found in the Ramayaija, that beautiful Rdmayaifa
and romantic love-story, which has for so long been to India all and more than was the
tale of Troy to Greece, or Volsunga to the Scandinavians. It relates the capture of Srta,
a queen of Northern India, by Ravaija the Lord of Lanka (Ceylon) ; and the invasion of
Ceylon by Rama, aided by his brother Lakshman and by Hanuman and his monkey
army ; the defeat and death of Ravapa, and recovery of Sita. Lanka is also mentioned
in the Mahabharata.
Another reference to LaAka is found in the Skanda Puraija^ the story of a great and Skanda
malignant demon, for whose overthrow Skanda or Kartikeya was incarnated as a god of PurStfa
war and wisdom. This Kartikeya is still revered, particularly at his shrine at Katara-
gama in the feverish forests of the south-east of Ceylon, whence pilgrims resort from
even the distant parts of India ; Kataragam DeviyO, as he is generally known, was the
patron god of Elala ; and many devales of his are found elsewhere, although the one
just referred to is of peculiar sanctity.
These two stories afford some evidence of the existence of more or less civilised peo- Vijaya
pi es in Ceylon previous to the arrival of Vijaya ancj his companions. The details of
the account of Vijaya’s reception and settlement afford later and further indications of
the existence of an earlier civilisation in Ceylon; reference is found to cities, spinning,
sumptuous beds, etc. In any case it is clear that, according to the legends, the Sinhalese
cannot be of pure Aryan blood, as the first settlers married either the aborigines, or
women from Southern India, and there has been a very large amount of Tamil blood
introduced at many subsequent periods. Their civilisation and art are nevertheless dis­
tinctly Aryan and distinguished from, though closely resembling, that of Southern
India.
b I I

The Sinha- Professor Geiger says, “ There is hardly a corner of the Indian continent of whose his­
Ifse people tory we know so much as we do of that of the island of Ceylon.”* He here refers
to the history recorded in two Pali chronicles, the Dipavarpsa and Mahavarpsa, written in
the 4th and 5th centuries a.d., respectively, and the latter from time to time added to,
and continued up to the time of the British occupation of the Kandyan Provinces in 1815.
There are also other verse chronicles and historical ballads of various dates.
Vijaya The Mahavarpsa in Chapters VI.— Vlll. records the landing T of the first Aryan settlers
in Ceylon under the leadership of Vijaya. These w^ere the founders of the Sinhalese
race, so called because Vijaya’s father sprang from, and was the slayer of, a lion {simha).
The story is briefly as follows :— The King of Vahga, a principality of Magadha, had
a beautiful daughter, of whom it had been prophesied that a lion would be her mate.
To avoid this she was carefully guarded, but of course in vain. She escaped, and while
passing through a wilderness, was carried off by the ‘ lion,’ probably a chieftain of the
‘ Lion-race.’ They had a son (Sirphabahu) and a daughter. The son, when he grew
up became ashamed of and finally slew his father ; and marrying his sister established
himself as a king in Laja rata. Their eldest son was Vijaya, who, being expelled from
the kingdom on account of his lawless behaviour, took ship with 700 followers and
ultimately reached Ceylon. Landing here his followers went in search of food, but
Kuveni were one by one imprisoned by a Yakkhipi named Kuveni (just as was done by Kirke
to the followers of Odysseus). Vijaya himself, provided with a charmed thread, alone
was able to withstand Kuvepi’s sorcery and compel her to restore his imprisoned com­
panions ; she further provided them with rice and a vast variety of other articles which
she had obtained from the ships of mariners who had fallen a prey to her. Kuveni
enabled Vijaya to destroy the other Yakkhas and their city, and herself bore him three
children. But when his followers had settled in the layid and wished him to assume
the sovereignty, he repudiated Kuvepi as beneath him in rank, and sent to Madura to
the Papdiyan king to ask for a royal virgin to be his consort,— a custom followed by most
Sinhalese kings thereafter. Kuveni returned to the Yakkhas and was destroyed by them
for her treachery. It is mentioned that 1000 artisans were sent over in the Papejiyan
Princess’s retinue. According to tradition mentioned by Valentyn these were gold­
smiths, blacksmiths, brass-founders, -carpenters and stone-cutters (evidently the five
sections of the Kammalar, see below. Chap. III). Vijaya and his successors were of the
Buddhism Brahman faith, and it was not till 307 b.c. that Buddhism was established in Ceylon as
iniroduced’ the result of the preaching of Afeka’s son.“]: Mahinda, and later, of his daughter, Sangha-
mitta. The King at that time, Devanam Piyatissa, the most renowned of the Buddhist
kings of Ceylon [307-267 b.c.] was Mahinda’s first convert. Far reaching and many
sided were the results of this conversion. A period of immense religious fervour and
artistic activity followed. In 288 B.c. Sanghamitta landed in Ceylon with a branch of
The samd the sacred Bo tree beneath which the Buddha had attained enlightenment. We are
Bo-trei told that she brought with her eighteen personages of the royal blood, eighteen mem­
plan ted at bers of noble families, eight of the Brahman and eight of the setthi (trading) caste ; and
Anuradha~ eight each of the herdsman, goldsmith and ‘ kalihga ’ castes, as well as of weavers and
pura potters. The branch was planted with great ceremony in the Mahamegha garden at
* ‘ Dlpavamsa und Mahavamsa. . Leipzig, 1905, translated by E. M. Coomaraswamy,
Colombo, 1907.
■\ According to the usual tradition, in 543 B.c.,- but probably later.
J According to Vincent Smith and others, more probably his younger brother, perhaps already
a monk in Southern India (Vincent Smith, ‘ Early History of India,’ 1904, p. 165).

Anuradhapura, where it still flourishes as the oldest historical tree in the world, com- T“he Sinha-,
memorating the noble life and teaching of Gotama Buddha, who attained enlightenment lesepeople
beneath the parent tree. The religious enthusiasm of the royal adherents of the new
faith, led to the erection at successive periods of the great series of buildings whose
remains still cover many square miles of town and forest land. The oldest of these
are found at Mihintale, where a great stupa was erected over Mahinda’s ashes.
Wars with the Tamils began in 237 b.c., when the throne was seized by Tamil mercenaries. TLlala
Twenty-two years later it was recovered by Asela, but retaken by the Tamils under Elaja
in 205 B.c. Elala was the greatest of the Tamil rulers; He “ruled the kingdom for
forty-four years, administering justice with impartiality to friends and foes” (Mahavaipsa
Ch. XXI).* The dethroned dynasty took refuge at Magampattu on the south coast, the
great tank and dagaba remaining at Tissamaharama still. At last one of the princes, named
Duttha GamanI (Gamani the disobedient—because he would not be held back from war
at his father’s wish) engaged in a long and finally successful war, recovering Anurad­
hapura and killing Elaja in single combat, both being mounted upon elephants.-f- Elala
was buried with every honour. His tomb was so honoured that it was the custom for
even kings, when nearing it, to silence all music and pass on foot; this homage was
paid as late as a.d. 1818 when, on the suppression of the rebellion, the defeated aspirant
to the throne approaching the place in his escape, “although weary and almost incapable
of exertion, not knowing the exact spot,’^ dismounted and continued on foot till assured
that he had passed far beyond, the ancient memorial (Forbes I. 233).
Duffha Gamani (161-137 succeeded to the throne he had so hardly won, and
proved no less great as a ruler than as a warrior. He was a great patron of the church
and builder of dagabas and temples.
He erected the nine-storied brazen palace (Lohapasada) and built also the great T!he Brazen
Ruvanveli and Mirisavetiya dagabas. The Mahavaipsa accounts J of the hnWAing Palace,An-
operations and furniture of these are of the greatest interest, if only for comparison uradhapura
with the descriptions of buildings erected and offerings made by later kings, up to the
beginning of the nineteenth century itself. “ The monarch Duftha Gamani . . . con­
vening the priesthood, thus addressed them, ‘I will build for you a palace like unto
that of the devas ; send to the world of the devas,- and procure for me a plan of their,
palace.’ Accordingly they dispatched thither eight priests. . . .” On their way to the
Tavatirpsa heavens they saw a certain palace “having nine stories, provided with a
thousand apartments and a thousand sleeping rooms. It had four faces, each having
windows to the number of a thousand, like so many eyes; and the eaves of the roof
were decorated with a fringe tinkling (with gems). . . . The aforesaid eight theras,
seeing this palace, immediately made a drawing of it on a cloth with vermilion ;
and returning thence, presented the drawing to the priests who sent it to the court of
the king. The monarch on examining the same, and delighted therewith, repaired to
the celebrated gardens (Mahamegha) and there built the glorious Lohapasada according
to the plan of that renowned palace.”
“ The generous Raja at the very beginning of the undertaking, laid down eight
lacs at each of the four gates . . . and announced that on this occasion it was not fitting
* The quotations in this chapter from the ^ Mahavarfisa’ are taken from the translation by
Tumour and Wijesinha, Colombo, 1889; slight changes in the wording have been made in a
few cases.
■f- A picture of this fight is amongst the wall paintings at the Dainbulla Vihara.
i Chapters XXVIII.—XXXII.
b 2 3.

The Sinha- to exact unpaid labour; placing therefore (due) value on the work performed, he paid
Use people with money. This quadrangular palace was loo cubits long on each of its sides and
the same in height. In this splendid palace there were nine stories and in each of them
too rooms; all these rooms were finished with silver, and the cornices thereof were set
with gems. The flower ornaments appertaining thereto were also set with gems, and
the tinkling festoons were of silver. . . . Having heard of the beauty of the vehicle
used by the women of the Deva Vessavaija, he had made in the midst of the palace,
a gilded hall in the shape thereof. The hall was supported on golden pillars, repre­
senting lions and other animals as well as the dcvatas. . . . In the very middle of this
hall . . . there was a marvellously beautiful ivory throne. . . . On one side there was
the emblem of the sun in gold, on another, the moon in silver, and the stars in pearls.
On this most exquisite throne, covered with a cloth of inestimable value, was placed an
extremely beautiful ivory fan. On the footstool there was a pair of slippers ornamented
with beads, and above the throne glittered the white canopy or parasol of dominion,
mounted with a silver handle. The eight mangalika* were made of the seven gems,
and amidst the pearls and gems were rows of figures of the four-footed beasts; at the
points of the canopy were hung rows of silver bells. The building, the canopy, the
throne and the hall were all most superb.
“ The King had it suitably furnished with chairs of great value ; and likewise with
carpets of woollen fabric; even the bowl and the dipper were made of gold. Who
shall describe the other articles used in that palace ? . . . The building was covered
with brazen tiles; hence it got the name of ‘ Brazen Palace.’”')'
Ruvanveli Regarding the Ruvanv?li Dagaba the following is given, after a description of the
Ddgaba elaborate foundation J ;—
“ Revered Lords,” said the Raja to the priesthood, “ foi* the beginning of the build­
ing of the great cetiya, I shall to-morrow lay the festival-brick of the edifice : let
all our priesthood assemble there.” Accordingly next day “ the Raja proceeded to the
site and seeing the assembled priesthood, bowed down with profound veneration ; then
“ making ofierings of fragrant garlands, he stationed himself in the centre, on the spot
where the purfifaghafa (filled vessel, an auspicious emblem) was deposited with all
honours.” He then “ caused a minister of noble descent, well attired, to hold the end
of a fine rod of silver that was fitted into a gold pivot,§ and began to make him walk
round therewith along the prepared ground, with the intent to describe a great circle
to mark the base of the cetiya. Thereupon a great thera, of great spiritual power, by
name Siddhattha, who had an insight into the future, dissuaded the King, saying to
himself ‘The King is about to build a great thupa indeed; so great that while it is
yet incomplete he would die ; moreover if the thupa be a very great one it would
* Right auspicious objects, viz., lion, bull, elephant, water pot, fan, flag, trumpet or chank, and
lamp ; cj.. Index under afamagala.
f We are reminded of Henry III., whose “ master passion was for building and for collecting
works of art—images, pictures, jewels, relics, plate, and stuffs ... On the Abbey church he con~
tinuously showered his gifts ” {Lethaby, ‘ Westminster Abbey and the King’s Craftsmen^ 1906,
p. 40).
J One layer consisted of a paste of orpiment {? possibly to prevent white ants from working
up : vermilion is mentioned in the translation, but should have been orpiment) mixed with gingelly
oil. To argue from this, as Tennent does {Vol. I. p. 490), that oil painting was then practised,
is quite unwarranted.
§ Note the early use of compasses.
4

be exceedingly hard to repair.’ The Raja although anxious to build it of that size, ‘the Sinha-
by the advice of the priesthood . . . adopting the .proposal of the thera, described lese people
. . * a circle of moderate dimensions. The unwearied monarch placed in the centre
eight golden and eight silver vases, and surrounded them with 1008 fresh vases* and Ruvamfli
with cloth in quantities of 108 pieces. He then caused eight excellent bricks to be Dagaha
placed separately (one in each of the eight quarters), and causing a minister who
was selected and arrayed in every manner for that purpose, to take up one that was
marked with divers signs of prosperity, he laid the first auspicious stone in the fine
fragrant cement on the eastern quarter; and lo ! when jessamine flowers were offered
thereto the earth quaked. The other seven bricks also he had laid by seven state minis­
ters, and had auspicious ceremonies performed over them.” Subsequently “ the Raja
caused to be made of precious things an exquisitely beautiful bo-tree; the stem was of
pure silver; its leaves glittered with gems. The faded leaves were of gold; its fruit
and tender leaves were of coral. . . . On an invaluable golden throne, erected on the
east side of the bo-tree, the King placed a resplendent golden image of Buddha. The
features and members of that image were represented in their several appropriate colours,
in exquisitely resplendent gems. There stood (also) Maha Brahma bearing the silver
parasol of dominion; Sakka, the inaugurator, with his vijayuttara chank; Pancasikha
with his harp in his hand; Kalanaga, together with his band of singers and dancers;
the hundred armed Mira mounted on his elephant and surrounded by his host of attend­
ants. . . . The various acts performed at each of the places at which (Buddha had
tarried) for the seven times seven days satsatiya,’ see Index) he most fully represented,
as well as Brahma in the act of supplicating Buddha to expound his doctrines . . , the
advance of Bimbisara . . . .the acceptance of the Jetavana temple . . . the discourses
delivered in the Tavatiipsa heavens . . . the discourses addressed to Alavaka . > . his
parinibbaifa . . . many of the jatakas which were the best calculated to turn the hearts
of his people to conversion, were also represented. He caused Buddha’s acts during his
existence as Vessantara Raja to be depicted in detail; as well as from the period of his
descent from Tusitapura to his attaining Buddhahood at the foot of the bO-tree.”
Subsequently “when the construction of the spire and the plastering of the cetiya
alone remained to be completed, the Raja was afflicted with the disease that terminated
his existence. Sending for his younger brother Tissa from Dighavapi, he said to him,
‘ Perfect the work still left unfinished at the thdpa.’ As his brother (the King) was in
the last stage of weakness, tljis prince caused a case made of white cloths, to be sewed
by seamsters {then as now, needk'work was essentially a man's craft) and enveloped the
cetiya therewith. He also employed painters to paint the panelled basement; and upon
it (were represented) rows of filled vases, and ornaments radiating like the five fingers.
He employed parasol-frame weavers to form the frame of a (temporary) spire made of
bamboos; and in the same manner ... he formed a parapet round the pinnacle, repre­
senting thereon the sun and moon; and having painted the same most beautifully with
red stick lac and kuAkuma, he announced to the King, ‘The work which was to be
performed at the thupa is completed.’ The ruler of the land repaired thither, carried
extended on his palanquin; and having himself borne round the cetiya ... he bowed
down to it in worship, and extending himself on a carpet spread on the ground and
turning on his left side, he fixed his eyes on the magnificent Lohapisada; and finding
himself at the same time encircled by the priesthood, he was filled with joy.” Receiving
spiritual consolation, and giving directions for his cremation, and advice to his brother.
* CJ, Index, under ‘ kaJasthapanaya.'
3
b

The Sin/m- he passed away “while yet gazing on the Mahathupa, stretched on his bed.” So died
lese people this great man ; but his spirit lived on, and manifested itself continually in the religious
and architectural activity of successive Kings to the very beginning of the nineteenth
century. We cannot but be reminded of the death of another great builder king, the
Shah Jehan, who passed away gazing upon the Taj Mahal* as he lay upon his bed,
a prisoner in Agra fort. The present age, of lesser faith, will leave no such great me­
morials of its love and fear and hope.
GajaBahu We have seen that wars with the Tamils began in 237 b.c., the Sinhalese throne
being on several occasions thereafter occupied by Tamil usurpers. In a.d. 113 Gaja
Bahu turned the tables by invading southern India; he brought back 1200 Tamil cap­
tives (of whom some were no doubt craftsmen) and settled them in different parts of
his kingdom. The annual perahfra of the Maha Devale in Kandy still commemorates
his victory; it is said that the tooth-relic which now heads the procession was not con­
nected with it before the time of Kirti Sri. At this festival a high place has always been
held by the goddess Pattini. Gaja Bahu had brought back from India her halamba
or golden anklet and introduced her worship into Ceylon. Bronze copies of the anklets
are kept in Pattini Devales, and an oath taken on them is particularly binding. The
national game of amkeliya established in her honour, is still resorted to in times of
sickness.-b
The Tooth- In the ninth year of the reign of Sri Meghavaitna {t.e. a.d. 313) “ a certain Brahman
relic princess brought thither from Kalinga the Dathadhatu, or tooth-relic of Buddha, under
circumstances set forth in the Dathadhatuvamsa.% The monarch taking charge of it
himself and rendering the highest honours to it, in the most reverential manner deposited
it in a casket . . . and placed it in the building called the Dhammacakka built by
Devanam Piyatissa in the royal park.” This was at Anuradhapura. The relic was
afterwards enshrined at Polonnaruva, which was made the capital in a.d. 769, when
AnurS-dhapura was abandoned to the Tamils. Subsequently the tooth-relic was removed
successively to Beligala (Vijaya Bahu III., a.d. 1236), Dambadeijiya (Parakrama Bahu
II., a.d. 1240), and again to Polonnaruva. In the time of Bhuvaneka Bahu I. (a.d.
1277) Ceylon was invaded by Arya Cakravarti and the tooth relic carried away to India.
It was soon recovered by Parakrama III. (a.d. 1288) and brought back to Polonnaruwa.
Thereafter it was hidden for safety in various places, until it passed into the hands of
the Tamil Kings of Jaffna. It was taken from them by the Portuguese, who carried it to
Goa and there reduced it to ashes. But this (it is said) was merely a counterfeit. The real
tooth-relic was enshrined in Kandy by Vimala Dharma Suriya II. (a.d. 1679), who built
a temple for its reception; and his son Narendra Sirjiha, the last Sinhalese king, when
this fell into disrepair, built the present Dalada Maligava. It is to be hoped that the
late talk of completely remodelling this historic building so as to make it more com­
modious will be heard no more of.
The relic is now preserved in a series of elaborate jewelled caskets (dedicated by suc-
successive kings) one within the other, fastened by three keys kept by the Diva Nilame,
and the high priests of the Asgiriya and Malvatte. With the caskets is kept a quantity
of beautiful jewellery which has been dedicated from time to time. The tooth is only
exhibited upon rare occasions, perhaps once or twice a year, for some great personage,
and at the same time is shown to crowds of pilgrims from different parts of the country.
* The Taj is not, of course a temple; hut none the less ts a ’witness to the faith of those that built it.
t See C. y. R. Le Mesurier, J.C.B. R.A.S., Vol. F ill, No. 24, 1884.
See Mutu Coomaras'wamy, Dathdvansa, London, 1874.
6

The process ot removing the tooth* from its various coverings is an impressive cere- The Sinha-
mony. There are present in the small upper room of the Maligava the Diva Nilame lese people
in full dress, the two High Priests and some other priests. The modern and ugly iron-
barred cage is unlocked, and the golden chains and jewels lifted off the outer casket;
the caskets are removed one by one, three being unlocked by the aforesaid keys ; finally
the smallest casket containing the relic itself is reached ; from this it is removed with
trembling fingers and great reverence by one of the aged High Priests, and set in a silver
holder under a glass case for exhibition to the people.
But it is necessary to return to the history. In a.d. 332, Jetthatissa II. succeeded Jefthatissa
èri Mèghavaijpa, who was king when the relic first came to Ceylon. Jetthatissa “was
a skilful carver. This monarch, having carried out several arduous undertakings in
painting and carving, himself taught the art to many of his subjects. He sculptured
a beautiful image of the Bodhisatta, so perfect that it seemed as if it had been executed
by supernatural power ; and also a throne, a parasol, and a state room with some beau­
tiful works in ivory made for it ; and having administered the Government of Lanka for
nine years, he also fulfilled the destiny due to him” (Mahavaipsa, Ch. XXXVIII).
His successor, Buddhadasa (a.d. 339) was himself a great physician, and “ out of' Buddhadasa
benevolence towards the inhabitants of the island, the sovereign provided hospitals for
all villages, and appointed physicians to them. The Raja having composed the work
Saratthasangaha, containing the substance of all medical science, ordained that there
should be a physician for every twice five villages, and set apart one twentieth of the
produce of fields for the maintenance of these physicians” (Mahavarpsa, Ch. XXXVIII).
Thus he followed in the footsteps of the great Duttha Gamanl, who on his death-bed
was able to say, “ I have daily maintained at eighteen different places, hospitals with
suitable diet and medicines prepared by medical practitioners for the infirm” (Maha-
vatpsa, Ch. XXXII). The great Parakrama Bahu I. pursued the same policy eight
hundred years later.
Two distinguished foreigners visited Ceylon early in the fifth century. The first of Buddha­
these was the learned Brahman Buddhaghosa, who came to Ceylon from Northern ghosa
India about a.d. 400, to consult and copy the commentaries on the Tripitaka or Buddhist
canon. He further composed new commentaries, which are still regarded as authori­
tative. His influence led to what may be called a Buddhist revival.
In A.D. 412 the Chinese monk Fa Hian landed in Ceylon and remained two years Fa Hian
at Anuradhapura, copying the sacred books. He has left on record a detailed account
of the glories of Anuradhapura and the prosperity of Buddhism. J-
The great Mahavatpsa chronicle was compiled in the reign of King Dhatusena (a.d. Mahdvam-
461-479). Both the Dipavaipsa and the Mahavarpsa are based on the historical material sa comp iled
contained in the Sinhalese Atthakathas, no longer extant, and on legends and traditions
amongst the people. It is really an epic work with Duftha GamanI for its hero. It
covers the period 543-301 b.c. Continuations were added at various times, a final
supplement bringing the record up to the British occupation of Kandy in 1815.
In A.D. 479 Kassapa, son of Dhàtusèna by a concubine, seized the kingdom and Swirl
put his father to death ; he also attempted to murder his half-brother Mogallana,
rightful heir to the throne. Finding that he could not do so, “ he feared danger and
betook himself to the Sihagiri rock, that was hard for men to climb. He cleared it
round about and surrounded it with a rampart and built galleries in it with figures of
* It is much larger than, and quite unlike, a human tooth.
■f Beal, ’’Buddhist Records of the Western Worid,' 2 vols., 1906.
4
b

The Sinha­ lions (rather, a linn) ; wherefore it took its name of Rlhagiri (lion rock). Having gathered
lese people all his wealth he buried it there carefully. ... he built there a beautiful palace glorious
to behold, like unto a second Alakamanda, and lived there like its Lord, Kuvera. . . .
But he repented him afterwards of what he had done” (Mahavarrisa, Ch. XXXIX).
The existing remains at Sigiri are amongst the most interesting and remarkable in Ceylon.
Especially noteworthy are the cave paintings, of which further mention is made in a
later chapter.
Polonna- In the eighth century the Sinhalese were forced by the Tamils to abandon Anuradha-
ruva pura, and founded a new capital at Pulatthi (Polonnaruva). But even here they were
not safe, although they were sometimes able to reoccupy even Anuradhapura temporarily.
In the eleventh century, in the reign of the weak king Mahinda V., Lanka was altogether
overrun by the Tamils who destroyed the country and occupied Polonnaruva. The
warlike Vijaya Bahu I. restored the Sinhalese rule, and it was at Polonnaruva that Para-
krama Bahu the Great reigned from a.d. 1164 to 1197. This great man was at once
a warrior and statesman; he succeeded in bringing the whole country beneath his sway
and in driving out the Tamils; after which he ruled so firmly and justly that, as the
Dambulla inscription informs us, “even a woman might traverse the island with a pre­
cious jewel and not be asked what it was.” After peace was thus established, Parakrama
Bahu rebuilt and restored the harassed city of Polonnaruva, and also the buildings of
Anuradhapura “which had been wholly destroyed by the hosts of the Colians (Tamils).”
Thereafter “ Parakrama Bahu, the conqueror of kings, dwelt in the beautiful city of
Pulatthi (Polonnaruva), far from the strife of foes. A faithful and wise man, blessed
with the dawn of fortune, and a leader of those that love music and poetry, he passed
his time in the enjoyment of quiet pleasures and enjoyments” (Mahavaipsa, Chapter
LXXIV). He purged and purified the Buddhist church and erected noble buildings
for the church and the priesthood ; as “a round temple of the tooth-relic built wholly of
stone and adorned with beautiful pillars, staircases, walls and such like, and ornamented
with rows of figures of the lion, the kinnara and the hamsa^' and “ a beautiful image
house with five stories, that contained images of Gods and Brahmas and other beings,
and workmanship of flowers and plants, and adorned with pinnacles and eaves and inner
rooms, halls and chambers— an image house which bore worthily the name of Lanka
Tilaka (‘Brow-gem of Ceylon’; but not the present temple in Udanuvara).” Like so
many other kings before and after him, “this most excellent of men caused many tanks
and channels to be built in divers places, so that he might put an end to the calamity
of famine among men” (Mahavarpsa, Chap. LXXIX). Such was Parakrama Bahu the
Great; of English kings there is surely none but Alfred the Great with whom he may
be justly compared.
Tamil in­ After his death there was much unpeace in the land. During the apparently beneficent
vasions reign of a Tamil (Pandiyan) usurper named Parakrama, Ceylon was invaded by Tamils
from Kalinga, led by Magha. If the Papdiyan and Colian Tamils chastised the Sinha­
lese with whips, the men of Kalinga did so with scorpions. “ They robbed the inhabit­
ants of their garments and their jewels and everything that they had. . . . The rich
men they tied up with cloths and tortured and took possession of all their wealth. . . .
They broke down the image houses and destroyed many cetiyas. They took up their
dwelling in the viharas. . . . Many books also of great excellence they loosed from the
cords that bound them, and cast them away in divers places. . . . Alas, alas ! even so
did those Tamil giants, like the giants of Mara, destroy the kingdom and the religion
of the land” (Mahavarpsa, Chap. LXXX).
Troubled times continued, the capital being shifted from place to place, to Datuba-

deijiya, Yapahuva (whence was brought the beautiful pierced stone window now 'The Sinha-
in the Colombo Museum) Kurunegala, Gampola, Kotte, Sitavaka and Kandy. Yet ksepeople
many brave and patriotic kings made strenuous efforts for their people’s good. Of
Vijaya Bahu III. (a.d. 1236) it is said in the Raja-ratnakara that he “ established a
school in every village and charged the priests who superintended the same to take
nothing from the learners, promising that they should be rewarded for their trouble by
himself. His son Parakrama Bahu II. (a.d. 1240-1275) temporarily drove out the Pamkrama
Tamils and brought the whole country under his rule. At this time it is said that Bdhu II.
there were nearly one and a half million villages in the three districts of Ceylon (Pihifi
Rata, Ruhunu Rata, and Maya Rata) corresponding at a very moderate estimate to a
population of ten millions, about three times as great as the present. The distribu­
tion of the population, too, is now very different from what it was in the thirteenth
century. At that time the population was densest in the eastern and north central dis­
tricts, dense also in the north, but scanty on the western coast. In the eighteenth
century the north central districts, including the ancient capitals of Anuradhapura and
Polonnaruva had long been deserted, chiefly in consequence of the Tamil wars and the
disorganisation of the great irrigation systems which alone enabled those dry regions to
support a large population. Now, as Mr. Arunachalam points out* “ The most striking
change is the advance, by over 100 per cent, of the population of the western sea coast
and its vicinity, and the decline by almost as much of the populations of the ancient
kingdoms. . . . The change indicates clearly the difference caused in the condition of
the island by the disorganisation of its great irrigation system, and the consequent decay
of the great national industry, rice cultivation, and by the advent of Europeans. Popu­
lation and wealth have faded away from their ancient seats and gathered towards the
coast. The Island, no longer self-sufficient or self-centred, is dependent for its pros­
perity mainly on foreign enterprise, on the European capitalist and planter, and the South
Indian labourer and tradesttian.”
Parakrama Bahu II. undertook the restoration of Polonnaruva, being moved thereto by Polonnaru-
his own will and the following message from his son Vijaya Bahu, then governor and va restored
afterwards king (a.d. i275-1271): “There are now in the city of Pulatthi, palaces,
image-houses, viharas, parivepas, cetiyas, relic-houses, ramparts, towers, bird-shaped
houses-j- mansions, open halls, preaching-halls, temples of the gods, and such like build­
ings ; whereof some are yet standing, although the trees of the forest have grown over
and covered them. Others thereof are fast falling, because that the pillars thereof are
rotten and cannot support them. Others, alas! are bent down with the weight of huge
walls split from the top to, the bottom, and are tumbling down, because that there is no­
thing to support them. Sad, indeed, is it also to see others, unable to stand by reason of decay
and weakness, bending down to their fall day by day, like unto old men. Some there are
with broken ridge-poles and damaged beam-ends, and some with roofs fallen down and the
tiles thereof broken. In some the tiles have slipped through the breaches of the decayed
roo f, and in others only the walls and pillars remain. Some there are with fallen doors,
and, door-posts that have been displaced, and others with loose staircases and ruined
galleries. Of some buildings there only remain the signs of their foundations, and in
others even the sites cannot be distinguished. What need is there of further descrip-
* ‘ Sketches of Ceylon History I Ceylon National Revieial fan. 1906.
-j- Described as having the roof shaped like a bird's wing. The Mahavamsa., in Chapter
LXXVIII., mentions a dwelling '■ shaped like an eagle' built by Parakrama Bdhu for an ascetic
named Kapila.
9

‘the Sinha- tion f This city, which is now so ugly and displeasing to the eye, we purpose to make
lest people beautiful and pleasant. Let the king grant us leave thereto, and let the feast of corona­
tion be held in this great city afterwards!” To this end, the chronicler informs us,
“he gathered together smelters, turners, basket-makers, blacksmiths, potters, goldsmiths,
painters, porters, labourers, slaves, outcasts, skilful bricklayers, masons, carpenters, and
divers workers in stone. And again, he gathered together all sorts of blacksmiths’
tools, such as bellows, sledges, pincers and anvils; and also numerous sharp saws, adzes,
axes, wood-cleavers, stone-cutters’ chisels, knives, hammers, spades, mats, baskets and
such-like; all these . . . did he send unto his royal son” (Mahavaipsa, Ch. LXXXVIII).
When the work was completed, he himself went thither to hold a great coronation
festival.
Parakrama Bahu IV. (a.d. 1295), whose capital was at Kurunegala, himself composed
a ritual of the tooth-relic; and had the great Jataka book translated into Sinhalese and
spread abroad throughout Lanka; and also erected many ecclesiastical buildings.
Totagamu- Parakrama Bahu VI. who ruled at Koffe (a.d. 1410-1462) “was the Mascenas of his age
va and was himself a scholar and author. He established and endowed two great educa­
tional institutions, one at Totagamuva, the other at Keragala, the former presided over
by Ceylon’s greatest poet, ^rl Rahula Sthavira, commonly called Totagamuva. The
former institution was called the Vijayahahu Parivetfa, and was established at Tota-
gamuve Vihara, which stands between the 57th and 58th mile-posts on the road from
Colombo to Galle. It was a University catholic in its aims, and provided instruction
for Buddhists and Hindus, clerical and lay, in all the knowledge of the time. There
were classes and lectures in (i) the Buddhist Canon in all its branches (for Buddhist
monks), (2) the Sinhalese, Pali, Sanskrit and Tamil languages and literatures, (3) the
Four Vedas and the connected literature (for Brahman students), (4) Astronomy, . . .
(5) Medicine, (6) Prosody, (7) Dramaturgy, (8) Poetry, (Sanskrit, Pali, Sinhalese
and Tamil).”*
Arrival of In the beginning of the sixteenth century (a.d. 1506) the Portuguese first landed in
the Portu­ Ceylon; those who observed their arrival reported to the king, Parakrama Bahu VIII.,
guese “ there is in our harbour of Colombo a race of people fair of skin and comely withal.
They don jackets of iron and hats of iron; they rest not a minute in one place; they
walk here and there” (Rajavaliya).-f- They obtained permission to erect a factory;
and fortified their position. But the Portuguese proved unwelcome visitors; they
were “ cruel and hard of heart; they entered into fruitful provinces and laid waste
fields and gardens, and burned houses and villages, and ravished women of rank, and so
troubled the Sinhalese. They broke into towns and temples and image-houses, and
destroyed bo-trees and images of Buddha and the like sacred objects. And they de­
stroyed the country and the religion thereof, and built forts in divers places, and main­
tained continual warfare ” until, indeed, their final expulsion by the Dutch in a.d. 1658.
In 1587 they destroyed the magnificent Vishiju Devale at Devundara. According to
the Portuguese account J “Thome de Sousa gave it over to the soldiers to do their
work. They then proceeded to destroy the idols, of which there were more than a
thousand of diverse shapes, some of clay, some of wood, some of copper and several of
them gilt. After this they proceeded to overthrow the whole of the infernal machinery
* P. ArunSchalam, ‘Sketches of Ceylon History,’ loc. cit.
•j- A piece of keen observation,— the restless activity of Europeans contrasted ’with the leisure of
Eastern peoples, who are never in a hurry.
De Couto, Dec. 10, transl. by P. E. Pieris, Ceylon National Review,’ fan. 1906.
10

of the Pagoda, pulling down their domes and cloisters and breaking everything to pieces. V/if Sinha­
They then sacked the store-rooms, in which they found a large quantity of ivory, finé lese people
cloth, copper, pepper, sandalwood, jewels and precious stones, and the ornaments of the
Pagoda; everyone took what he liked best and the rest was thrown into the fire.”
From this period dated the division of what had been one people, into ‘Kandyan’ and Division in­
‘ Low-country’ Sinhalese. The Sinhalese in the immediate vicinity of Colombo and along to Kandyan
the coast were soon driven to make peace, and even allied themselves with the Portu­ and Low-
guese, often turning nominal Christians and adopting Portuguese names to curry favour, country
or under compulsion. The same process was continued in the time of the Dutch suc­ Sinhalese
cessors of the Portuguese. But the greater part of the Sinhalese people, the hardy
mountaineers of the interior, preserved their independence, keeping the foreigner at bay
for more than 200 years after, the first landing of the Portuguese. They have had their
reward; for in spite of the progress of denationalisation even amongst these, there are
still preserved amongst them sufficient traces of the old national life, sufficient remains
of skilful craftsmen’s handiwork, to enable us to form an estimate of the Sinhalese as a
live and individual people, with a national character and national art; an individuality
and art which it is more difficult and often impossible to trace in the low-country districts
long subjected to western influence.
Mayadunne and his son Raja Sirpha I. waged continual, and on the whole successful, war Raja Simha
against the Portuguese, from the Sinhalese capital at Sitavaka. Raja Sitpha’s successor, I.
Vimala Dharma Süriya I. (a.d. 1592) established his capital once more in Kandy, which
remained hereafter the seat of Government until the Kandyan provinces at last passed
under foreign rule.
In the long reign of Raja Sirpha II. (a.d. 1633-1687) the Portuguese wars were con­ Raja Simha
tinued ; an alliance was made with the Dutch, and the Portuguese finally expelled in II.
A.D. 1658, but the Dutch did not prove more faithful allies, although theirs was a policy
more purely commercial; there is a Sinhalese proverb, spoken when a man makes
a bad exchange and used in reference to the Dutch succeeding the Portuguese, “I
have given pepper and got ginger.” Raja Sirpha seems to have been a very cruel
and capricious monarch. One Robert Knox was a prisoner at his court for twenty RobertKnox
years, escaping then to write one of the most truthful, and at the same time fascinating
books of travel ever set down. His “ Historical Relation of the Island Ceylon ” (a.d.
1681) is a compendium of invaluable information, written in spirited and idiomatic
English; it is still the most interesting work on Ceylon and the Sinhalese, and is often
quoted in the present volume. Ribeiro’s “Fatalidade Histórica de Ceilao,” written a few
years later, gives a valuable account of the low-country at the same period.
In a .d. 1701 árl Vira Parakrama Naréndra Siipha became king in Kandy; he is chiefly Narendra
remembered as the KuijtJasalé King,’ for he “ formed a suburb named Kuijtjasale, nigh Sit¡iha
unto the chief city, in the large coconut grove ... he performed daily meritorious
works, such as almsgiving and the like, and caused books to be written also. And as he
saw that the temple of the Tooth-relic that his father had built at the great city (Kandy)
w as decaying, his heart moved within him, and he caused a fair twO-storied building
(the present Dajada Maligava, restored by KirtI árl, PI. VIII), to be built, the doors
whereof were ornamented with exquisite workmanship of divers kinds, and the plaster
work shone with exceeding brightness like a hill of silver; and the roof thereof was
ornamented; and on the walls of its two enclosures he had painted with exquisite art
the thirty-two jatakas, viz., the Vidura Játaka, the Guttila and Ummaga Jatakas . . . and
the Vessantara Jataka.” No trace of these paintings survives. He also “raised for him­
self a monument of glory by building a wall enclosing the great bo-tree, the cetiya, and
II

'The Sìnha- the Nata dévàle that stood in the middle of the city—a wall of stone, thick, high, and
lese people shining with plaster work, like unto a beautiful string of pearls adorning the neck of
the city that was like a fair woman” * (Mahavarpsa, Chap. XCVII). This wall around
the great majuva opposite the maligava still remains, and is not less beautiful than de­
scribed, though now unplastered and still worse, sadly cut into by the English church,
the police courts, and a private house. One wonders by what right, if any, these were
built on temple land. All of these buildings are painful eyesores (not least the church)
and it would be a worthy deed for some rich Buddhist to buy out the intruders’ rights
and restore the wall to its former beauty and perfection.
The order of priests had become extinct in Narèndra Sitpha’s reign. His successor,
Vijaya Raja Siipha (a.d. 1737-47) sent, by advice of one V^livifa Samapera, deputations
to Siam to bring over learned priests to restore the order, but died before their arrival.
When in Kirti Órl’s reign the Siamese priests arrived (a.d. 1753) Vplivita was placed
at the head of the order, with the title of SaAgha Raja.-f-
The last great kings were Kirti èri Raja Siipha (a.d. 1747-1780) and his brother èri
Rajadhi Raja Siipha (a.d. 1780-1798). Although of Tamil blood (Narendra Sirpha was
the last Sinhalese king ; Kirti Òri was his brother-in-law) they were worthy followers
of the great men who had preceded them. Kirti èri was an eager patron of religion
and art. At the beginning of his reign he found the priesthood decayed and religion
neglected— “ there was not even one priest in this beautiful island of Laftka.” When
in response to a second mission, the Siamese king sent a chapter of ten priests with
books and presents, he established them in a “beautiful monastery with a tiled roof. . .
at Puppharama (Malvatte Papsala, most or all of the buildings of which date from
Kirti èri ; but Rajadhi Raja Siipha built the Pohoya-ge) . . . and from that time the king
was wont to send for such of the novitiates and others as were skilled in the science of
language and the knowledge of the law, and had ordination conferred on them.” Of
these the greatest was V?livita Saranankara, who was made Sangha Raja or head of the
priesthood. The king also persuaded many persons of good family to enter the priest­
hood. Thus Raja Siipha restored the priesthood and encouraged learning.
Kirti Sri He was no less active in the building and repair of Buddhist buildings throughout his
Raja Siriiha kingdom ; there is hardly a vihara of any importance in the Kandy district which was
not restored by him, or newly built ; for example, on the east side of Kandy he built a
vihara called Gangarama; here he caused “a statue of the Conqueror (Buddha) nine
cubits high to be hewn out by cunning workmen skilled in the art of cutting stone . . .
and built a fine two-storied temple (still standing ; PI. VII., 5) delightful to behold
. . . and to the workmen who executed the beautiful paintings he,gave presents of
cloth and jewels and other things as they liked best, and pleased them in various ways”
(Mahavaipsa, Ch. C.).
The list of Kirti èri’s buildings, restorations and dedications, could be indefinitely
extended ; % but I have not thought it necessary to detail them further, because many
are referred to in other chapters, and still more, because the whole of this book, which
deals with the Sinhalese art of his and his brother’s times, is really a monument to his
greatness and better explains how much he did for Sinhalese art and religion than
* A most beautiful description. Kandy is lovely still, but must have been much more so in the
sir{ihala raja kak, “ in the days of the Sinhalese kings."
B. y.C.B.R.A.S.,
•f Mahavamsa, Ch. C., Lawrie's Gazetteer, pp. 941, 963, and P. Pieris,
Vol. XVIII., pp. 17-44, 1904.
J See ‘ Mahavatfisaj Chaps. XIX., C., and Lawrie's Gazetteer, passim.
12

any further words could do. Klrti ^rl lived in perfect harmony with his two brothers, 'fhe Sinha-
who aided him in every way in his work for the people and for religion. Of himself it lese people
is said that he “ meditated on the noble Law, and steadily practised the four kingly
virtues, viz., giving of gifts, speaking kind words, seeking the good of others, and
regarding their fellow creatures as they do themselves.” The princes, his brothers,
“ sought to do good in divers ways, and conducted themselves according to the king’s
wishes, and made themselves one with the religion and the people” (Mahavarpsa, Ch. XCIX).
Rajadhi Raja Sirjiha succeeded his brother in 1780, and reigned for eighteen years; Rajadhi
he carried on the traditions ot the preceding reign. He rebuilt the Pohoya-ge at Mai- Raja Simha
vatte, and 'maintained all that his brother had done “ for the advancement of the
country and the religion thereof. He was also 'skilled in many languages, such as Pali,
Sanskrit and the like, and given to charity, and was in form like unto the god of love. English oc-
And as he was skilled in the science of words, he composed the Asadisa Jataka in Sinha- cupation of
lese poetry and published it.” He was little troubled by wars or rebellions; but certain the low-
treasures of the Maha Devale are said to have been dedicated by him after a victory at country
Gurnb?bile (a.d. 1761) in which he was engaged before he came to the throne. In
A.D. 1795 Rajadhi Raja Sitpha was at war with the Dutch and solicited English aid;
the latter offered little resistance and by the next year ceded all places in their possession
to the British.
The last king of Kandy was the notorious ^ri Vikrama Raja Siipha (a.d. 1796-1815). Vikrama
Following at first in his predecessor’s footsteps, he “ afterwards joined himself to evil Raja Simha
companions and changed his ways ; and he caused great ministers and many other officers
to be seized and put to death; and like unto Death himself, he showed no mercy, and
caused many hundreds of people to be seized and brought from divers places and impaled;
and like a robber who plundereth the country around him, he seized their vast posses­
sions which they had inherited from generation to generation.” The Kandy lake and
parapef* was constructed for Vikrama Sirpha, also the Audience hall, the Pattirippuva, or
octagonal tower of the Da)ada Maligava, and other buildings. In 1801 the Alut (new)
Vihara at Asgiriya was built by Pilima Talava Adigar,-)- close to the Parapa (old)
Vihara which his father had built in 1766. A pathetic interest attaches to the cere­
monies performed on the completion of this work, perhaps the last of the many occa­
sions J recorded in Sinhalese history, when ruler and people met together, united by a
* It is said that this and other of the king’s works were carried out by '■ forced ’ labour {raja-
kariya) exacted without moderation^ and that this was a contributing cause of his unpopularity.
‘The king had a legal right to the unpaid service of any subject, but was expected to exercise the
right in moderation. The use of the term 'forced labour' is misleading.
■ f “ For the sake of merit, at the cost of 65,050 ridis {about ¿216^, or Rs. 32,520) and
cloths, etc., bestowed on labourers, artisans and superintendents ” {gal-sannasa at Asgiriya).
.■f The people were very dependent on the royal patronage, looking to the king for support in all
reli gious and social undertakings. During the succeeding century this sympathetic patronage was
l acking, and a secular and alien government, whose main business was that of the policeman,
ignored indigenous culture and social life. The hope of the future, if it is permitted to hope, lies
in a stimulation of that capacity for united action which was shown by the village communities in
so many aspects of the common life of the people, as well as on special occasions, similar to that
here spoken of, when villagers united to endow a temple or to build an afnbalam on their own
account. This stimulation can only result from a development of the people's intelligence through
the medium of their own national culture, invigorated by contact with the re-awakened life of
India, the mother-land. The king days are over ; the days of the people have yet to come.
13

The Sinha­ common religion* and a common culture, in sympathy and with mutual respect. “ When
lese people the image and building were completed the ceremony of painting the eyes of Buddha
was performed one morning towards dawn. The king, accompanied by his mother and
Vikrama sister, came to the vihara just after sunrise from a temporary pavilion erected for the
Siniha at occasion. With him were both his Adigars, Pilima Talava and Ehelepola, and a great
Asgiriya crowd of priests and chiefs, of whom Nugavela Basnayaka Nilame of the Mahâ Dévale
and Bovala Unnanse almost alone survived to tell the story in 1859. The king and
Çhelepola died in exile, Pilima Talava by an executioner, many others by the sword
or the gallows, and not a few were put to death by the English Government in the cruel
times of the rebellion of 1818. The king, then only twenty-one, in the days of his
youth and popularity, worshipped Buddha with his mother and sister, and, after causing
Ehelepola to read the contents of an ola dedicating Kahawatta and Udasgiriya to the
new vihara, he offered the writing by laying it on the table before the image. He said
that Udasgiriya was his mother’s village, and she joined in the offering. Then the royal
party walked round the vihara, and the king seeing the bare surface of the rock which
formed part of the back wall, ordered that the contents of the writing should be there
inscribed. About two months afterwards the king, with his mother and sister, again
visited the vihara. Ehelepola Adigar read the ola writing, which was compared with
the inscription by the king in presence of the chief priests, and praising the stone­
cutters he ordered them to be paid from the treasury” (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 74).
Beginning But the king’s mind became deranged ; he lived in perpetual fear of his life, and com­
of the end mitted great cruelties on those whom he feared. From 1800-1804 there was continuous
warfare between the Kandyan king and the English in the low-country. From that
time to 1815 there was no open war, but destructive raids were made by either party
when opportunity afforded to destroy a village or to burn a harvest. In 1812 Pilima
Talava attempted a rebellion, but failed, and was beheaded with several members of his
family. He was succeeded by Ehelapola, who in 1814 also revolted, and was forced to
flee to Colombo, while the king revenged himself upon his wife and family.
British rule About this time ten native merchants who were British subjects were barbarously treated
begins by the king, and seven died as a result ; this was made the chief pretext for an invasion
of Kandy by the British in 1815. Unsupported by his ill-used subjects, Vikrama Siipha
was easily overcome and captured, after which the Sinhalese voluntarily surrendered the
Government to the British, but with full Teservation of their rights and liberties.
Uva Rebel­ The Sinhalese soon regretted this surrender, though glad tt> be rid of the tyrant.
lion The chiefs especially disliked the curtailment of their powers. In 1817 a rebellion
broke out in Uva, developing into a war of independence with some chance of success ;
but the harassed people were unable to hold out, and the rebels were put down with
great severity in the following year. The results of foreign rule and of the insur­
rection and its suppression were disastrous. It was many years before thé country began
to recover its prosperity, while the breach in the continuity of national tradition and culture
has never been spanned. But with the exception of a small rising in 1848, this was the
last struggle, and the year 1815 may be taken as that of the final extinction of an indepen­
dence which had lasted with few interruptions for more than twenty-three centuries.
Had the British, instead of attempting to rule directly a people with whose religion and
traditions they were entirely out of sympathy, established a Sinhalese upon the throne as
* The last Kandyan kings united in their own persons devotion to the Buddhist and Hindu faiths,
very much as the Maharaja Scindia of Gwalior at the present day observes and respects Mu-
hammedan and Hindu rites alike.
14

their vassal, and left the administration of the country in his hands, and those of the The Sinha-
chiefs, the people would have suffered less, and the great break in the continuity of kse people
national life need not have taken place. Such at least is the view of Sir A. C. Lawrie,
whose remarks I quote ; “ It has been assumed by many writers that Ehelapola’s am- What might
bition was to be raised to the Kandyan throne by the help of the English troops. It have been
is said that was his main object in persuading General Brownrigg to invade the country.
I do not know that there is foundation for this, but if such was his policy, it may be
that he was a more able statesman than the Englishmen with whom he had to deal. If
Ehelepola had been raised to the throne as a king dependent on England, with a resi­
dent English garrison at once to support and to control him, the Kandyans might
possibly have been spared the horrors of the insurrection of 1817 and the cruelty of its
suppression by the English. The country might have flourished under a native riiler of
no mean capacity, whose worst tendencies might have been corrected and his best fos­
tered by English aid. The story of English rule in the Kandyan country during 1817
and 1818 cannot be related without shame. In 1819 hardly a member of the leading
families, the heads of the people, remained alive ; those whom the sword and the, gun
had spared, cholera and smallpox and privations had slain by hundreds. The subsequent
efforts of Government to rule and assist its Kandyan subjects were, for very many years,
only attempts begun and abandoned. Irrigation and education did not receive due
attention. The descendants of the higher classes of the Kandyan times rapidly died out,
the lower classes became ignorant and apathetic. If Ehelapola had reigned, much that
must now be regretted might have been avoided, but fate decided otherwise, and Ehela-
pola died an exile in Mauritius” (L^wrie’s‘Gazetteer,’p. 203).
Into the details of a century of British rule we need not enter. At the beginning of it Disijitegra-
the Kandyap Sinhalese were still an independent and self-contained community, with a tion of reli-
culture and art which had for all an equal appeal, and a state religion which was also gion and
the religion of the people. Now however, the old spirit has departed, and though the society
unspoilt villager is still a man worth knowing well, the ‘ educated ’ classes are sadly
degenerate and de-nationalised. Impoverished by the change from a society based on
personal relations to one based on the exchange of coin and free'T:rade in land, the aris­
tocracy are unable, even if willing, to support the old traditions ; nor, breaking with
these, have they in any adequate way acquired the culture of the west. By many, the
old life and old culture are despised, and all interest in the country and its past is dead.
The priesthood suffers ako from lack of the vigorous support of the kings ; temples are
allowed to fall into decay, and valuable and beautiful memorials of the past allowed to
disappear, or to be cheaply restored away by thaae who do not understand or care for
them.* As an example of the disintegration of society and of the general disorganisa­
tion of marmers and morals resulting, I give one quotation from the Report of the
Temple JLands tommissioners for 1871 : “ The Dambulla vihara is, as is well known,
a shrine held^-in great reverence by the Buddhists, and it is a place of great interest,
wo rthy of being maintained as a historical monument, being the only rock temple of
any impojtance in Ceylon, and possessing a painted roof, which is the best example
of Buddhist art in the Island. To this vihara belong large and valuable forests, which
should be preserved for supplying the necessary timber for the maintenance of the
buildings belonging to the vihara, and also for the benefit of the vihara tenants, to
whom the wild honey, jungle ropes, and pasture for cattle, to be found in these forests,
are of considerable value. The incumbent of the vihara, without regard to the inter-
' See “ yf» Open Letter to the Kandyan Chiefs,” by the author, Kandy, 1906.
IS

The Sinha- ests of which he was the guardian, sold to a low-country carpenter all the valuable
ksepeople timber in one of the large forests, and omitted to pay the money into the vihara chest.
Complaint was tnade to the Commissioners, but they had no power to act. They how­
ever called the attention of the ecclesiastical authorities to the matter, and the incum­
bent has been called upon to pay in to the credit of the vihara upwards of £,170,
probably less than a third of the amount he has received. It is doubtful whether he
will pay even this. Certainly he will go unpunished. The people know that their
priest has committed the greatest crime a Buddhist can commit, for in their language,
‘ he has robbed Buddha.’ They know also that he has committed a great offence
against our laws, in having appropriated to himself the property of which he was the
trustee. The Buddhist authorities will not seek to remove him, because they cannot
act without the aid of our Courts. The tenants will not act, because they are afraid
to take steps against a man of influence with money at command. Others will not act
because the expenses would come out of their own pockets. This is only one example
out of many; and nothing can be more injurious, nothing more demoralising, than for
the people to see frauds of this kind, committed by trustees of temple property, go
unpunished. It is not easy to suggest a remedy for fear of the out-cry, ‘ The Govern-
■ ment is supporting Buddhism : better let lying, fraud, and robbery go unpunished, than
do anything which would have any appearance of protecting from ruin, and from loss
to the public, those lands which have been set apart for the maintenance of a religion
which is not ours ’— even though that religion is the pure and simple creed which is
held by one-third of the human race, and has been the faith of the Sinhalese people for
4
2000 years. It would be well if this question coul , be dealt with merely as a matter of
good government, untrammelled by the odium theologicum. It is simply the question of
preserving for the public those public lands at present set apart for religious purposes,
' which, unless closely looked after, will gradually become lost to the public altogether.”
What the temples were really entitled to was the usufruct of lands dedicated to them ;
not to alienate or destroy the value of them. The ordinance of 1856, however, vested
absolute rights in the temple authorities and legalized abuse. There have been many
subsequent ordinances,' none of which have checked the misappropriation of temple
property. The last, of 1906, was much resented by Christians on the ground of its
giving Government support to Buddhism, by making Government Agents chairmen of
local committees ! All of which shows how dilEcult it is for one nation to govern
another reasonably, especially when of a different religion, and when the rulers have
no permanent personal interest in the land. No ruler who was really “ one with the
religion and the people,” could have borne for a year with the -situation which a suc­
cession of Christian rulers has merely aggravated.
Education The people take but little interest in education; it is left to others, whose interests are not
always identical with those of the people themselves, to provide what they will. The
officially recognised system of education, based on examinations such as the Cambridge
locals and London University courses, has no place for any aspect of the national
culture*—history, music, art or religion. It appeals only to the material interests.
* “ Our education has destroyed their love of their own literature^ the quickening soul of a people,
and their delight in their own arts and^ worst of all, their repose in their own traditional and
national religion. It has disgusted them with their own homes—their parents, their sisters, their
very wives. It has brought discontent into every family so far as its baneful influences have
reached”; spoken recently of English education in India, by Sir George Birdwood, this is, if
possible, even more true of Ceylon.
16

with the result that originality and initiative are destroyed, and the recognition of ‘The Sinha-
ethical ideals is not promoted. Even more harm is done in Mission schools, where kse people
not only the national culture is consistently ignored, but the religion of the people is
of set purpose undermined.
Something must be said of the history of the arts during the last century. That history Decline of
has been one of continuous decline. Those who read the following chapters and per- art
ceive how the religious, artistic and national life of the people formed together the
expression of one culture which all classes shared, will understand how impossible it
was that the arts should continue to flourish under foreign rulers, ignorant of, and in
the main opposed, to the perpetuation of that culture and religion. What befell the
royal craftsmen when the Buddhist king was replaced by the Christian Governor ? How
could there continue that identification of sentiment between ruler and craftsmen which
made possible the building of Gangarama, the Dalada Maligava, or the last festival
at Asgiriya ? Imagine the effect on English art if English independence had ceased
in the reign of Henry III., and the Government had passed into the hands of a nation
of materialists *— Westminster Abbey left unfinished. Gothic art no more the vehicle
of the national religious sentiment. One of the most sympathetic and cultured of
recent Colonial Secretaries of Ceylon, was able to enquire after two years in Ceylon,
what a Jataka might be. Now it is quite natural that an ordinary educated English­
man should lack that knowledge, but for the ruler of a Buddhist people to do so is
altogether incongruous and improper. Such an one cannot enter into the life of the
people, or be a guide or father to them; at the worst they will imitate him for interested
reasons, at the best they will ignore him altogether.
Even accepting the situation, we find that most injury is done to art through the
departmental notions of architecture prevailing.-f- A majority of official buildings are
ugly, and all are unrelated to the national style of art and architecture. Even in the ‘
few cases where an eflibrt has been made to build in the style of the country, the result
has been a fiasco ; the Ruvanveli ambalam for instance, is merely a contractor’s structure
masquerading as a Kandyan building.^
Government support of an institution like the Kandy Art Association § however
excellent in its degree, is totally inadequate to save the arts and crafts of the country
from gradual decay; from that only the people themselves can ultimately save them.
But the responsibility of Government (as the inheritors of the great traditions of the
Sinhalese kings) to support the culture and ar£6 of the land is none the less real. The
hereditary skill and taste of the ¿aste craftsmen might be preserved for the future
generations, if the Government gave directly to craftsmen even a quarter of the support
given by the later Sinhalese kings; which might be done in many ways, but especially
by the employment of craftsmen in all lesser building operations, placing the whole
design and execution in their hands (subject to the nature of actual requirements) and
not in that of engineers, untrained in art, least of all in Sinhalese art, and also by the
c ommissioning of more elaborate works of art than those now undertaken, and the
purchase of these without regard to the possibility or otherwise of immediate re-sale.
* T^he Government, as such, is necessarily entirely secular in its relation to the people.
\'Exactly as in India. The situation is well described by E. B. Havell in the ^Nineteenth''
Century ' for June, 1907,
X See ‘ Suggestions for the Encouragement of the Indigenous Arts and Crafts of Ceylon,’ by
the author, ‘ Tropical Agriculturalist^ Colombo, 1906.
§ For an account of this see Appendix I.
c I ■ 17

Ihe Sinha- If England chooses to assume the rule of other peoples, she has a responsibility towards
lese people their culture, no less than in respect of their material interests. If this responsibility
is shirked, her rule may not always be favourably compared with that of the Sinhalese
and Tamil kings who preceded her.
The arts, however, can only be saved in the long run by the people themselves. How
are the people to be saved? How shall they be re-energised and re-inspired, how become
once more socially constructive, how learn to re-express the national emotion in literature
and art? The answer is, by love of India. There is scarcely any part of Sinhalese life,
or religion, or art, which is quite comprehensible without reference to India; the
Sinhalese themselves are Indians ; the greatness of their civilization dates from the wave
of Indian influences that reach Ceylon through Atoka’s missionaries; the air and soil
in which the nation has grown and borne good fruit are Indian ; how should another
soil and atmosphere be suited to it now? India without Ceylon is incomplete, for in
many ways, Ceylon is a more perfect window through which to gaze on India’s past,
than any that can be found in India herself. Much more is Ceylon incomplete if alienated
from the Motherland. The most remarkable and significant of the awakenings to
national self-consciousness which have taken place in modern times, is the recognition
by the people of India of their fundamental unity. Of this unity Ceylon is economically,
mentally and spiritually, a part; and with its culture and its life, must her own survive
or perish.
i©k We have reviewed in the briefest possible space, the culture-history of the Sinhalese
people, as recorded in one of the most interesting chronicles known to the world. We
have seen something of the earth whence they sprang, and the waters that gave them
drink. At all times the national life was reflected in the national culture. The art
expression of that culture in the eighteenth century can only be understood and appreciated,
when the people themselves and the ideals of their religion and civilization are understood
and respected. An attitude of sympathy is essential also to the comprehension of much
that seems strange or repulsive in an alien culture. No aspect of Eastern art. can be
rightly appreciated by those who approach it only with the intention of discovering what
it has not accomplished. A study of what it has done will serve us better. Towards
that study the present work is a small contribution. In the light of the past and for
the help of the future, it is offered to the Sinhalese people as a monument to a part of
their departed glory.
i8

CHAPTER II. SOCIAL ECONOMY OF THE
KANDYAN SINHALESE IN THE EIGH­
TEENTH CENTURY.
Riches are not here valued, nor make any the more Honourable" (Knox).
T h e first chapter of this book is intended to provide an historical background
for the mental picture of the Sinhalese people which will be formed in the
reader’s mind. In the present chapter will be found a more detailed account
of the constitution of the Kandyan kingdom, and of the social economy of the Kandyans
in the 18th century. Sinhalese craftsmanship flourished exceedingly in the Kandyan
districts up to the very end of that century and even later, and almost the whole extent
of its decline coincides with the succeeding period of foreign rule and resulting decay
of the social organism; hence the importance of considering the social conditions of
the 18th century, if we are rightly to understand the craftsman and his art. If the
present chapter should appear at all superfluous, it should be remembered that the object
of this book is not merely to figure specimens of the work of Sinhalese craftsmen, but
to provide, if it be possible, some faint picture of a land and a time of which, even as
of Medisval Europe, it could be said ‘that in those times there was no such thing as
a piece of handicraft being ugly’; and this faint picture would be fainter still if we
should speak only of the craftsman’s handiwork and forget the man himself and his out­
look upon life.
At the close of the eighteenth century, the Kandyan kingdom consisted of ten disdvana or ..
districts, each in charge of a Dissva (earl), and nine other districts {rata) each in charge
of a chief usually known as the Ratemahdtmaya. All these districts together correspond
more or less with the area occupied by the present Central, Sabaragamuwa, Uva, North
Central, North Western (part), and Eastern (part) provinces, i.e., the whole of the
mountainous districts and some part of the low-country commanded by the mountains,
or which the Kandyan kings were otherwise able to protect.
The King ruled as an absolute monarch; his ministers could advise, but not control his Government
actions ; with him rested all decisions as to peace and war; he also promulgated edicts.
But the acts of his Government were presumed to be guided by the institutions of his
kingdom. Before innovations of importance were carried into effect, it was usual to
consult the principal chiefs and often also the principal priests, and such persohs were
usually called to councils when important matters were afoot. The King’s authority
was exercised through certain officers of State, of whom the two Adigars (‘Viziers’),
the Disavas, aijd the Ratemahatmayas were chief: the officers attached to the King’s
ho usehold (keepers of the robes, treasurer, armourer, etc.), the chiefs of departments
employed in his personal service (such as the Koftalbadde Nilame mentioned below) and
the principals of impi>rtant temples (the Diva Nilama of viharas and the Basnayaka Nilama
of devales) attended also on many public occasions.
The two Adigars possessed a general jurisdiction over the whole of the Kandyan
provinces; by them the King’s orders were communicated to the public and to the
chief residents in Kandy. The King’s orders to the chiefs resident in the provinces
were conveyed by olas (palm leaf mss.) written in the name of the first Adigar,
or in his absence from Kandy, in the name of the second. The Adigars were
c 2 19

Social charged with the conduct of public festivals, the repair of temples on behalf of the
economy King, and the catching of elephants in Kandy, and were expected to personally super­
intend all public works; they had charge also of the repair of the streets and of every
work contributing to the beauty and cleanliness of the capital. They had many other
duties, as well as various privileges and honours. Their staff of office consisted of
a lac-painted cane (vevela) curved at the top, which was delivered into their hands upon
their appointment; in former times the cane had merely a silver he^d and ferrule, but
a cane cased entirely in silver was introduced by the last king. For the better support
of their dignity, a disdvanaya was usually conferred upon each Adigar, in addition to
his own duties and offices. Under the Disavas and Ratemahatmayas were various minor
officers, such as Koralas, Vidanes, Araccis, etc. Independent of them were the officers
of public departments, and the principals of large temples.
’Justice The dispensation of justice was organized in a way that would not have been unsatisfactory,
had it been always purely administered; every person was at liberty to seek redress,
first by application to the headman of the village, next to the chief of the province, to
the Adigar, the ‘Great Court’ and finally to the King. But as (i) bribes were often
resorted to by both parties in a dispute, (2) fines levied belonged to the chiefs who levied
them, and these chiefs received no salary for their services, (3) the chiefs were occasionally
required by the King to make extraordinary contributions, necessarily exacted from the
people, and (4) the chief, as is the case in the Indian Civil Service to-day, combined
judicial and executive functions, it will be seen that opportunities for the miscarriage
of justice were not lacking. But the villager is scarcely less at the mercy of the headman
now than he was then. Nevertheless in many cases there can be no doubt that substantial
justice was obtained; it is said that there were some Kandyan chiefs reputed no less
for their ability in the investigation of suits than their integrity in the decision of them.
The customary laws regarding marriage, inheritance, crime, slaves, and the like are
detailed in the Nitinighaijduva (translation, Colombo, 1888), a work of fascinating interest
for the study of Sinhalese society.
The law’s delays were as proverbial as in England. One who appealed to the great court
or to the King might get immediate redress or might have to remain in Kandy for
months or years. Recourse was often had to swearing by ordeal of hot oil or red-hot
iron.* Litigation is now a much greater burden on the people than it was then, when
touting proctors had not been invented. It must be taken into consideration that the
people were naturally honest and law-abiding, and that even to-day the crime so prevalent
in the low-country districts long subjected to European influence is much less in the
interior; a more honest and trustworthy man than the unspoilt Kandyan villager it would
be hard to find. In illustration of his character I quote from a Government Agent’s
report of 1870, the following:
Character “ There is annually a gathering from all parts of the Island at Anuradhapura to visit
what are called sacred places. I suppose about 20,000 people come hefe, remain for a
few days, and then leave. There are no houses for their reception, but under the grand
umbrageous trees of our park-like environs they erect their little booths and picnic in
. the open air. As the height of the festival approaches, the place becomes instinct with
life; and when there is no room left to camp in, the later comers unceremoniously take
possession of the verandahs of the public buildings. So orderly is their conduct, however,
that no one thinks of disturbing them. The old Kacceri stands, a detached building
not far from the bazaar, and about one-eighth of a mile from the Assistant Agent’s house.
943
' For an instance, see Lawrie's Gazetteer, /. -
20

Till lately the treasure used to be lodged in a little iron box that a few men could easily Social
run away with, guarded by three native treasury watchers. There lay this sum of money, economy
year after year, at the mercy of any six men who chose to run with it into the neighbouring
jungle—once in, detection was almost impossible—and yet no one ever supposed the
attempt would be made. These 20,000 people from all parts of the country come and
go annually without a single policeman being here; and, as the Magistrate of the district,
I can only say that anything to surpass their decorum and sobriety of conduct it is
impossible to conceive. Such a thing as a row is unheard of. That does not look like
a people among whom crime of a heinous nature was indigenous! In what part of
Christendom would the money-box be safe ?”
Mention must be made of Caste, especially as the caste system of Ceylon is similar to Caste
the Dravidian in South India and differs from the well-known four-fold caste division
of the Hindus generally. Vijaya himself could hardly have found a place in the
Brahmanical caste system. The Sinhalese people from an early date had constant and
intimate relations with the Tamils in Southern India. So it is that we find the Dravidian
and not the Aryan caste system amongst the Sinhalese. In this system the cultivator
ranked highest. With the spread of Aryan civilization came the Brahmanical system,
which was superimposed upon the Dravidian, so that the Brahman and Kshattriya
ranked above the cultivator. Hence the order of castes in Ceylon came to be—
I. Bamurfu (Brahmans); 2. Baja (the ruling caste); 3. Govt (cultivators); subsequently
the Velenda or merchant was added. But as there was no place for Brahmans in a
Buddhist country, and the royal family formed a caste by itself, and merchants were
few or none, the goviyo have remained to this day of chief importance from the caste
point of view. That is, the goviya, or veUala as he is often called, is the man of high
caste. The goviyn included three ranks, the chiefs {radala or mudali peruvd), the nobles
or titled men (sifanc), and the rest of the goviyS; and these together formed as we have
seen over ninety per cent, of the community.
Authorities differ somewhat as to the order of precedence of the remaining classes.
They are given in the following order by the Janavamsa, a most interesting Sinhalese
poem of the fifteenth century, often regarded as an authoritative work, especially by
the artificers, but according to others it has been adapted in their interests. The jana-
vamsa, by one Siipha of Kessellena, purports to be founded on a Pali original.* It gives
interesting but mainly fanciful accounts of the origin of the different castes and endeavours
to show that all men are really of one race though occupied in different ways; stress
being laid upon the well-known saying of Buddha, “Not by birth does one become
a Vasala (outcaste), not by birth does he become a Brahman. By deed does one become a
Vasala, by deed does he become a Brahman.” In spite of the recognition of such
teaching as truly Buddhist, the strength of caste feeling is but little less than in India; nor
is it otherwise even amongst the converts to Christianity.
I now give a table of castes according to the yanavarnsa.
1. Goviyo (Jianduruvo [‘hondrews’ of Knox], vellalas, cultivators).
2. Pesakdrayo (saldgamayo, ‘chalia’ weavers).
3. Kamburu (navandanno, galladdo, artificers).^ , . ,
4. VajuvS, (carpenters, blacksmiths, etc.) J ' ^ '
5. Hanndli (tailors aili} ^broiderers).
6. Radav (dhobies, washefmen).
* Printed edition, Colombo, 1864; summary and partial translation by H. Nevill, Taprobanian,
Vol. I., parts 3 and 4, 1886.
C 3 ' 2 1

Social 7. Emheptayo (barbers).
economy 8. SommarayO (leather workers, shoemakers).*
9. Durdvo (toddy drawers).
10. KumbakarayO (badahelayo, potters).
11. Karavo (fishers).
12. V?ddo (hunters).
13. Beravdys (musicians and weavers, and often astrologers).
14. Hakuruvo (jaggery makers).
15. Hunno (lime burners).
16. Pannayo (grass cutters).
17. TamannS (iron smelters).
18. Ffl-vaduvO (rattan workers).
19. Gahalaya (menial servants).
20. PaduvB (servile or inferior cultivators and palanquin-bearers).
21. Mdlakdrays (inferior florists and gardeners).
22. Kinnarayo (mat weavers).
4
23. Ro iys (makers of ropes, tanners, etc.)
24. 0/^iJ (dancers).
25. IndrajalikayO (conjurors).
4
26. Cai} dlayB (eaters of unclean food, scavengers).
Of all these, only Nos. i, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 13, 20, are really important elements in the
Kandyan population to-day. Nos. 22 and 23 are clearly defined but very small com­
munities. The bulk of the population belong to the cultivators’ caste (No. i).
Slaves There were also a certain number of slaves {vdllu) but not very many, beihg persons born
so or who had become so in various ways, as by inability to pay a debt, by being sold as
children, or cast into slavery by. the king. Slavery was an economic institution and
did not interfere with caste distinctions. A man could not possess slaves of higher
caste than his own. Slaves could be freed or become free in various ways. Praedial
and domestic slavery of a mild form seems to have been an institution in most parts
of India from very remote times, although Megasthenes affirmed it “ a great thing that
no Indian slave existed.”
Knox gives a shorter list in much the same order; so also the Nttinighari^uva, where the
goviyB are also further divided into different ranks. Nowadays the fishers and other castes,
especially in the low-country, contest the precedence of the conservative veUdla; we find
in a list given by Casie Chitty in his Gazetteer (1834), that the fishers ranked second and
the toddy drawers third, the others very much as above. Bitter controversies still take
place regarding the relative rank of different castes; neither Buddhisrri nor Christianity
have greatly weakened the power of caste.
Land tenure Land and its tenure form, as might be expected, the key to the social economy of the
Kandyans. The possession of land was the foundation of the King’s right to the services
* 'The Jive castes numbered 4-8 are associated together as the Jive classes necessary to perform
personal service; '■'■both for the weddings and funerals of Raja, Bamu^u, Grahapati, Velanda,
Sudra and all men, the carpenter giving bedsteads, chairs, pavilions and the like; the tailor sewing
and giving jackets and hats; the washer spreading awnings and bringing clean clothes; the barber
cutting the hair and beard, trimming the face and adorning it; the leather-worker stitching leather
for the feet; thus thesefive are neededfor the wedding andfor the funeral" [Janavamsa). These
are often spoken of as 'the five servants I
22

and contributions of the people, and vice-versa.* All absolute property in land (except Social
'■ pravsnV lands, i.e. nindagam definitively granted as private property) was vested in the economy
King. In general, persons not owning land were liable to no regular service or duties,
though in some cases to light and occasional service. Lands which properly subjected
the possessor to regular public duties and contributions were low paddy lands which
could be cultivated every year (z.e., ordinary rice fields, kumburu) but not, as a rule,
gardens {vatu) or high grounds (/^w,‘chenas’). The land and the service were insep­
arably associated, one result of which was that wealthy persons would not care to buy up
lands held by men of low caste performing menial services; the accumulation of lands by
a few wealthy persons was thus desirably checked. No land was sold.-f* The lands with
their service usually descended regularly from father to son, independent of the fact that
the services might be regranted to cithers or dedicated to temples.
This is looking at the matter from the Western point of view. As a matter of fact, the idea Overlord-
is one rather of overlordship or dominion, than ownership of land as understood in the ship
modern west. It is probable that Sinhalese society “ developed itself, clearing by clearing,
in separate village communities, isolated from each other, and scattered over the land very
much as they evert now still are in the existing condition of the North Central Province. . .
The aggregation of a plurality of villages together under a common head . . . very soon
followed” (Phear). Thus arose the petty chieftain, who developed by a process of con­
solidation into a regulus or kinglet, becoming finally the king of the whole land. The
original chieftain did not own land ; what he possessed was the right to cultivate his own
share of village land, and also a right to certain contributions and services due to him from
the other shareholders. The King’s right arose by the gradual consolidation of such
rights into the hands of a central authority, and is therefore rather one of dominion than of
ownership. The point does not much affect the present issues, but reference in the text to
ownership of land should be taken as subject to this qualification of the implied idea. Even
praveiji lands dedicated to temples, were not absolute freeholds which the trustees could
dispose of as they liked; the land was still the King’s, and through him the people’s ; the
services only were dedicated for ever to the temple.
The personal serviees (except those of the tenants in royal villages and those of persons Service
belonging to the fourteen departments of public works), theoretically due to the King, tenure
became as a rule the perquisite of the local chief (Disava or Ratemahitmaya); the
chief being held responsible for any works required of him, the King had no need to
insist upon the rendering of particular services direct to himself. In the same way
lands which were abandoned by the tenants—as sometimes happened in the last King’s
reign on account of the severity of the duty§—reverted to the chief, who could appropriate
* All service lands might descend to, or be acquired by women, who either paid a money commuta­
tion, or provided a substitute to perform personal service. A woman might also hold Pattini devale
lands on condition ofpersonally performing the duties ofPattini Amma or priestess,
'Except.very rarely; see Knox, p. 143, also Lawrie's Gazetteer, p. 736.
J Which could only be done by the King, or by others with his express warrant, or at any rate the
Disava’s ; as otherwise the King or Disava would have lost the benefit of services due to them, with­
out being willing to do so.
§ Knoie remarks ‘ in my judgement they live far more at ease after they have relinquished the King’s
land, than when they had it.’^ But of holders of temple lands, per contra, he quotes the Sinhalese
saying to the effect that ‘•they will surely be punished in the next worldfor living so easy in this.’
For the last King’s over-exaction of rajakariya, see the report of the 'temple Lands Commissioners
1857-1858,/. 21.
C4 23

Social the crop or regrant the land to other tenants on payment of a suitable fee. The personal
economy services were often commuted for a money payment which was considered the chief’s
legal perquisite.
The great majority of persons living in these different sorts of villages were tenants, owing
service to a proprietor or Lord of the Manor, who might be the King, a temple, or a
chief. Included in the services due to the King, are those to be rendered to officials on
duty. The organization of society is best explained by a relation of the various tenancies,
according to caste and occupation; a village usually contained tenants of several classes.
A list of the principal tenancies or fiefs follows:
Messengers Atapattu vasama. Tenants of the first rank, messengers and guards. They had to mount
andguards guard in Kandy in turns of one month in three, but some paid a commutation instead.
They had to attend the Disava on journeys, and convey his orders, carrying the great
4 4
banner {dhaja pataka), swords of office, state umbrellas {pmtu ku aya, va ana talatta,
4
slsat, etc.). In Kandy they kept guard in a guard-house called atapattu ma uva, where
4
they had charge of the great banner, the kkam-mitiya or record, the mura dvu a (arms)
and any prisoners there might be. They were not liable to the payment of duties in kind.
If tenants of a temple, or ninda village, they owed corresponding services to the temple
or proprietor, such as keeping guard at the vallava (manor house), watching the threshing
floors, or walking in processions and going messages. The holding of atapattu lands
was a dignified position ; the Atapattu and Ganvasam people formed as it were the lesser
county families, while the Lord of the Manor represented the titled aristocracy.
Husband- Ganvasama. These tenants had no turn of duty as guards. They had to deliver into
^en the royal store duties in kind (rice and coconuts) or to pay a commutation ; to supply the
Disava with similar provisions, especially when travelling on duty in the district; with
corresponding duties if the proprietor was a temple or chief. The Ganvasam people were
often of the same social standing as the proprietor, and sometimes related to him. They
were generally the wealthiest in a village and held the most fertile lands. Consequently
4
they had to make contributions in the shape of a ukku and pfhindum (provisions) to the
proprietor and his retinue on his periodical visits, to his officers coming on duty, and to his
messengers despatched with orders to tenants. They had also to give the maha-kat monthly,
the penum-kat at festivals, and dan-kat during Vas, and to feed the workmen in the
mutteftuva or homefield, and the officers superintending the work. It should be explained
that the mutteftuva just referred to is the field belonging to the proprietor, whether a
chief or temple, and cultivated on his account jointly by tenants of every description.
The proprietor usually found the seed rice, and bore all cost of agricultural implements,
and sometimes gave the buffaloes. The service of the tenants was reckoned not by days,
but by the number of the different agricultural operations to which they had to con­
tribute labour. All the tenants took part in the cultivation, and were generally fed by
the proprietor or by the Ganvasam tenants on his behalf. The services of the different
classes of the tenantry on an estate were centred in its mutteffu field. Hence the passing
of the mutteftuva from the family of the landlord into the hands of strangers is invariably
followed by the tenants resisting their customary services in respect of the muttetfu.
A pei}uma or d^kuma is a customary gift made by the tenant to the proprietor, annually
or often. The pse^uma of the Ganvasam people consists of sweetmeats, provisions, etc.
A perium-kada (spl.-kai) is a yoke-load consisting of such gifts. The maha-kada is a
yoke-load of provisions given once a month. A dan-kada is a yoke-load of provisions
given to a priest. Vas is the rainy season when priests are the guests of the villagers,
and their wants regularly provided for without need for seeking daily alms. The
Ganvasama had to provide all that was required for strangers visiting the village, and
34

generally to discharge those duties of hospitality for which the Kandyan villages are Social
celebrated. This entailed upon the Garmasam the necessity of setting apart a place economy
called the Idange for lodging strangers. The whole charge of the muttettu work devolved
on the Ganvasama, which also had to superintend and assist in building work at the
proprietor’s house, attend at his house on festive and other occasions, in times of sick­
ness, and at funerals, bringing perium-kat and provisions. A Ganvasam tenant had to
accompany the proprietor on his journeys on public occasions, and to guard his house
in his absence. A woman of the pahguva (holding) likewise had to wait on the lady of
the house, and to accompany her on journeys. The Ganvasam took the lead in the annual
presentation of the tenants before the proprietor. In temple villages, in addition to the
above services performed to a lay chief, the Ganvasam had to superintend, and take
part in the preparations for, and celebration of, the festivals.
Heva vasama. The military class. Their services were similar to those of the Atapattu Soldiers
vasama, in addition to felling, dragging and guarding timber. In Kandy they kept
guard at the datfdu maduva, or palace timber shed. These were also called dunukara
vasatna, lit. archers. Bravery in battle was rewarded by titles and grants of land.
Badal paftguva. The holding held by smiths, called likewise Navan-panguva. Under Artificers
the general term are included blacksmiths [Acart), braziers {Lskuruvd) and silver and
goldsmiths {Badallo). The blacksmith supplied nails for roofing houses, hinges, locks,
and keys for doors, all kitchen utensils, agricultural implements, and tools for felling
and converting timber. His pei}uma consisted of areca-nut cutters, chunam boxes, ear and
tooth-picks. At the forge he was given the assistance of a tenant to blow the bellows,
and when employed out of his house he was given his food. The mended all
brass and copper vessels of a temple, and generally took part in the service of the other
smiths. The silver and goldsmiths worked for the proprietor in their special craft when
wanted, and in temples mended and polished all the sacred vessels, did engraving and carving
work, decorated the rate (car of the god) and remained on guard there during the
perahera. Supplied the silver rim for the (hala~gaha {perahfra festival tree), and attended
at the kaphifavlma (erection of the festival tree). The goldsmiths presented pei}um of
silver rings, chased betel boxes, ornamental arrow-heads, &c. The smith tenant also
attended and assisted at the smelting of iron. In consideration of the value of the service
of a smith, he generally held a large extent of fertile land.
Badahfla panguva. The tenement of land held by a potter {badahelayd or kumbald). Potters
His service consisted of supplying a proprietor with all the requisite earthenware for his
house and bath, and his lodgings on journeys, for his mutteffuva, for cooking, and for
soaking seed paddy, for festivals, yak and ball ceremonies, weddings, &c.; also the
supplying of tiles and bricks, and keeping the roofs of tiled buildings waterproof, giving
pei}um-valan (earthern vessels) to tenants for the perfum-kat, and making clay lamps, and
kalas (vases) for temples. The potter also made a present of chatties as his peifum to
proprietor and petty officers. When the quantity of bricks and tiles to be supplied
w as large, the proprietor found the kiln, shed, clay, and firewood.
Davul panguva. 'The tenement held by tenants of the tom-tom beater caste {Beravayo). Musicians
In temples their service came under the kind called the ptfa-kattale (out-door service).
At the daily tevava (musical service), at festivals, at pinkam, and on journeys of the
incumbent, they beat the hevisi (tom-toms). On their turn of duty in a temple, they
had to watch the temple and its property, to sweep and clean the premises, to gather
flowers for offering, and to fetch bolpen (water for temple use). The services of the
musician (hevisi-kdraya) were required by lay proprietors only occasionally, for weddings,
funerals, yak and ball ceremonies, and on state occasions. This class of persons was
2S

4
Social employed in weaving cloth, and their pemma consisted of a ta uppu-c\oih or a kerchief.
economy The performance of bait ceremonies was one of the principal services of the tenants
of the tom-tom beater taste. The daily temple music of hevisiya consisted of five vajjan.
The five vajjan of which a regular hevisiya is made up are: i, the davula (the common
drum) ; 2, the tçmmçpfama (kettle-drum) ; 3, the beraya (a drum longer than a davuld) ;
4, the taliya (cymbals) ; and 5, the horanfva (oboe).
A gikiyana was the tenancy of another class of musicians whose service consisted in singing
at dêvâles on Kenmura days (Wednesday and Saturday services) and on festivals, and in
the performance of the digge-nçttma, which latter was a service performed by women.
The songs generally related to the exploits of the god. The men sang and played on
cymbals, drums, &c., and the wômen danced. The ordinary tom-tom beater was not
allowed to play for dancers of this class, which is supposed to be of Tamil origin.
Washermen Rada vasama (washermen). The royal tenants performed three months a year service
in Kandy, in turn with other relays. The service of a washerman consisted in washing
weekly or monthly the soiled cloths of a family ; the robes, curtains, flags, and vestments
of a temple ; decorating temples with viyan (awnings) for festivals and pinkam, and private
houses on occasions of weddings, yak or bah ceremonies and arrival of distinguished
visitors ; the supplying on such occasions of piruvata-cdioùxe, for wearing, çtirili or covers
for seats, tables, &c., piyavili or carpets, and diya-redi or bathing-cloths ; the making
of pandam (torches) and panvffi (wicks), and the supplying of dambu (tow). The
washerman had also to attend his master on journeys, carrying his bundle of clothes
and bathing requisites. He supplied the Kapurala (incumbent of a dévale) and Yakdessa
with piruvafa, the former weekly when on duty at a dévale, and the latter for dancing
at festivals. He piruvafa for the muiteffu for serving out the food, ior petfum-kat
and tel-kat as covers, and for the state elephant during festivals. The petfuma he gave
consisted generally of a piece of wearing apparel or of a sudu-toppiya (Kandyan hat),
or in some cases of panâ-lèli (horns for combs). His perquisites vary according to the
occasion calling forth his services. Thus at the Sinhalese new year, besides the quota of
sweetmeats and rice given on such an occasion, every member of the family tied up a
coin in the cloth he delivered to him for washing. At kofahalu festivities (occasion of
a girl attaining puberty), the washerman was entitled to the cloth worn by the girl
and to her head ornaments, and at a funeral to all the cloths not allowed to be burnt on
the pyre.
Servants Nila vasama or ttliyam vasama. Their services embraced all domestic and outdoor
work of various and arduous kinds, some of which were the supplying of fuel and
water to the kitchen and bath, the pounding of rice, the extracting of oil, the mudding
of walls and floors, the dragging of timber and other building materials, the preparation
of clay and the supplying of firewood for the brick and tile kiln, blowing the bellows
for the smith, and supplying him with charcoal for the forge, the breaking of limestone,
the cutting of banks and ditches, putting up fences, clearing gardens, sweeping out
courtyards and compounds, joining in all agricultural operations on gardens, fields, and
hen, removing the crops, tying straw and assisting in thatching, the carrying of
palanquins and baggage on journeys, conveying to the proprietor the peifum-kat,
ajukku-kat, pehindum-kat, maha-kat, vas-dan-kat, &c., supplied by the other tenants, joining
in the preparations for festivals, carrying pandam in processions, and serving at the
proprietor’s on occasions of importance such as weddings, funerals, arrival of distin­
guished visitors, and at yak and ball ceremonies. Nilavasam tenants, for the most
part, are of a low caste, or belong to the lower classes of the Vellala caste. Hence their
yearly perfuma to the proprietor, instead of being a kada of sweetmeats, consisted of
26

vegetables, and their contributions of raw or uncooked articles of food. Besides service Social
as above, rendered to the proprietor, the Nilavasam tenants worked for the proprietor’s economy
Vidane, and for the Ganvasama, a few days in fields and hen, and carried their baggage
on journeys.
Tamannu. Their service consisted of giving a certain number of lumps of iron yearly, the Iron-
burning of charcoal for the forge, carrying baggage, assisting in field work and •Ayak or bait smelters
cérémonies. They put up the talimana (pair of bellows) for the smith, and smelt iron.
4
Ro iyS. The Roçlt tenants were very few in number, and found in but very few villages. Outcastes
They supplied prepared leather for drums, and ropes of hide, halters, thongs, and cords
for cattle, and bury carcasses of dead animals.
The kinds of villages were as follows :
1. Gabaiagam, or royal villages ; these usually contained lands which were cultivated Royal
entirely for the benefit of the crown, supplying all the requirements of the palace ; and manors
other lands which the tenants cultivated entirely for themselves ; or the crown land was
cultivated on the ayde (half share) system. Crown villages much resembled early English
royal manors ; they included original crown lands, and lands which had fallen in to the
crown by failure of the tenant to perform his service or by the death of a grantee.
2. Vihàregam, or villages belonging to a temple of Buddha. The tenants owed personal Religious
service to the temple or made payment in kind to the incumbent priests.* manors
3. Devalegam, or villages belonging to the temple of some deity.*
4. Nindagam, or villages which for the time being were the entire property of the grantee Private
or temporary chief ; if definitely granted by the King with a sannasa it became heredit- manors
able personal property and was called praveyi. The inhabitants in consideration for their
lands cultivated gratuitously for the benefit of the grantee and owed him other services. A
nindagama was to the proprietor what a gabadtlgama was to the king. Nindagam were
naturally highly prized by the grarrtees; they were usually bestowed as a reward for
eminent public services or bravery in battle, a policy followed by even the English as late
as iSao.j- Nindagam granted upon a sannasa are now the hereditary property of the
descendants of the original grantees.^
5. VidanSgam, villages under the orders of a Vidane, and containing usually people of low
caste liable to public service.
It will be clear from the account of the land system just given that both husbandmen and
craftsmen of all sorts worked either for the King, a religious foundation, or a chieftain, as
well as for themselves or their neighbours. Most of these services were themselves a
payment for lands held by the family, and so were not otherwise remunerated; and
even when work was done to order for a consideration, payment was made in kind,
usually shares of paddy from the threshing floor. It will be seen that there was very
little use of money, it was indeed so scarce that it •‘could hardly be said to be in circulation ;
* Phe value of the annual revenue of a few principal temples was estimated as follows : Dalada
M aligava,Rs. s6<)2: Randy Maha Dev<ile,Rs. styj-, Ridi Vihara,Rs. Saman Devale,
Rs. 4415 ; Danybulu Vihara, Rs. 873. Phe annual value of all temple villages together amounted
to Rs. ii5,567'4o {about fjqoo).
■ ÊiSee P. E. Pieris, ‘Ribeiro’s History of Ceilao^ Galle, 1906, yèr an account of Nivifigala
Nindagama, granted in 1820 “at a mark of Royal Favour and Munificence" to one Doloswela
Kottalawela Wijeysundara Wickremesinha Fennekoon Mudianse ; interesting particulars of the
service tenures are given.
X The annual value of all the nindagam was estimated by the Service Tenures Commission in 1872
as Rs. 4./i.,sS8-8s {about £^ooo).
27

Social even now it is not very much sought after in the remoter districts, the villager, much to the
economy disgust of planters, preferring to cultivate his own land, or to be lazy when occasion offers,
above work on an estate for wages. Craftsmen were usually fed and housed while away
from home working for the King, temple or chieftain ; meanwhile the family lived upon
the lands. It can only be when the craftsman is in some such way relieved of anxiety
about the future, that his work can bear the impress of that leisure and contentment of
which are born the inventiveness and feeling for quiet beauty that mark alike the
Eastern craftsman and the mediaeval European.
Interdepen- No man was independent of another. Take the case of a nindagama-, the villagers held
dence of all lands of the proprietor for their Own use, on condition of cultivating the muttettuva, or
men proprietor’s special field; for this, one tenant, in respect of his panguva or share, had to
supply cattle for ploughing and threshing, or perhaps one gave cattle for ploughing and
another for threshing ; there might be others to attend to the irrigation ; others for plough-
ing,sowing and watching; others for threshing-floor service; and others for storing the crop;
and so in every case, there was a remarkable inter-relation of parts of the social organism.
The Sinhalese are now supposed to be incapable of concerted action and unfitted for
self-government; and perhaps the ‘educated’ (which usually means denationalised) classes
are so; but it may well be doubted whether the men who were capable of working together
successfully so complex an arrangement, and indeed, ordering all the details of their culti­
vation by mutual arrangement, and who have possessed their Parish Councils from a time
antedating the witanagcmots of England, are not as capable of self-government as are a
people whose Parish Councils are but a thing of yesterday and who seem to have lost the
sense of communal interests and capacity for concerted action in small matters. The
capacity has now been half destroyed, with the destruction of the society through which it
was expressed; but surely it is there still. Observe how remarkably the different parts
of the social organism were fitted and dovetailed together; there was a place for every
man, and no man could be spared; class distinctions were not invidious, nor emphasized
The Plough- by difference of culture. “Their ordinary Plowmen and Husbandmen do speak elegantly,
man fit to and are full of complement. And there is no difference between the ability and speech of
rule a king- a Couniry-man and a Courtier." A Sinhalese proverb runs, ‘Take a Ploughman from the
dom Plough and wash off his dirt, and he is fit to rule a kingdom.’ “This was spoken,” says
Knox, “of the People of Cande TJda . . . because of the Civility, Understanding and
Gravity of the poorest men among them.” This, in the words of Okakura,* is the “ spiritual
feudalism whereby caste makes a peasant in all his poverty one of the aristocrats of
humanity.” Honour, pride, noblesse oblige, are of the caste idea. But Buddha saw all
men as one and proclaimed the equality and brotherhood of all. Christ’s position in the
West was similar. In neither place has-ihe teaching been accepted. The Western forms
of caste are less rigid but more sordid thfan the Eastern; that is all that can be said.
Such an organization of society seems strange already, even in the East, so rapid has been
the ‘progress’ of the nineteenth century. There was no trade in land, nor did agricultural
labourers work for hire. Craftsmen made no goods for sale and kept no shops.-f “ Riches
were little valued nor made any the more honourable.” Yet there flourished a prosperous
agricultural community, a pure and intellectual religion, and a highly skilled and intelligent
race of craftsmen. It is probable that in respect of most real advantages, the Kandyan
villager was better off in the eighteenth century than he is now.
* “ Ideals of the East,” 2nd ed., 1904, p. 67.
“ There are no Markets in the Island. Some few shops they have in the Cities, which sell Cloth,
Rice, Salt, Tobacco, Limes, Druggs, Fruits, Swords, Steel, Brass, Copper, Etc." (Knox.)
28

The villages were to a great degree isolated and self-contained, dependent on the outside Social
world for little but salt. A small external trade in Indian cloth and such things may have economy
been carried on by the Muhammedan ‘tavalam merchants’ who carried goods on pack
bulls along the steep and narrow jungle paths that led from village to village. No Villages
doubt Hindu and Muhammedan traders resided in Kandy. South Indian printed cot­ self-con
tons and gold woven cloths and brocades were purchased by the well-to-do for use as tained
ladies’ robes arrd for jackets for the chiefs; good specimens of such Ihdian textiles are
even now to be found in the possession of old families. For the dévale, printed ceiling
cloths with scenes from the purânas were needed ; these must have come from S. India,
or at least from Jaffna, which has still a small trade in printed cotton with the Sinhalese
provinces. Trade with the Dutch was a Royal monopoly. Cinnamon, elephants, areca Dutch
nut, other spices and arrack were the chief items of the trade ; money, metals (copper, Trade
lead, brass, iron and steel), Indian piece goods, china-ware (sent as presents to the King
and his officers of distinction) were the corresponding imports.
Reference must be made to the Muhammedan element in the population. Before the Muhamme-
fifteenth century the trade of the island had passed almost entirely into the hands of Arabs dans
who traded on the Indian seas. The trade included pearls, gems, spices, and elephants.
Later, there was much rivalry between these people and the Dutch. Arab adventurers
settled on the Indian and Ceylon coasts, intermarried with the inhabitants and became
important elements in the population. They were reinforced by coast Moormen from
Southern India, most of whom were actually converts ; at present a majority of Ceylon
Moormen are certainly of Tamil extraction.* A few of the Muhammedan communities
were settled in the interior, and owed services to the King, chieftains, or even to
Buddhist temples, chiefly the conveyance of grain on pack bulls.
It cannot be too well realised that the Sinhalese society was a community based on rice. Rice
Land was not the luxury of a few, but the daily occupation and livelihood of the majority ;
not to own land is still felt to be scarcely respectable. Every man from the King
down had an immediate interest in the cultivation of the land ; almost every man cultivated
the soil with his own hands. How markedly the same conditions still persist is shown
by the census of 1901 ; out of a thousand persons in the Central Province nine hundred
and six subsist by agriculture, thirty-two by the preparation and supply of material
substances, eighteen by personal service, ten by some profession, and nine by trade ; in
this tale craftsmen are included partly in the thirty-two who live by the supply of
material substances and partly in the ten professional, forming thus less than the 4‘2 per
cent, of the whole people which these two classes represent ; the proportion was probably
higher in the eighteenth century when artistic and literary production was more
appreciated.
'■ '■ Husbandry’’ says Knox, “is the great employment of the country. ... In this the best
men labour. Nor is it held any disgrace for Men of the greatest Quality to do any
work either at home or in the Field, if it be for themselves; but to work for hire with
th em is reckoned for a great shame : and vepy few are here to be found that will work so.”
Great chiefs were not ashamed to hold the plough in their own hands, and it was thought
becoming for the young men to reap at least a part of the harvest every year; for which
damascened and ivory-handled sickles were sometimes used. The great majority of men,
and amongst the village folk, of women also, were continually brought into close touch
with the soil and with each other by working together in the fields; even the crafts­
men did not as a body rely upon their craft as a direct means of livelihood, and used
*P. Ramanathan, J.C.B.R.A.S\y Vol. X., i888,/>/>- 234-262.
29

Social themselves to lay aside their tools to do a share of field work when need was, as at sowing
economy or harvest time. The structure of the regular Indian village community is every­
where apparent, more or less veiled or modified by later developments; the scattered
villages of the North Central Province show it best. It is true that the rice lands were
held individually and not as common property, but this did not remove the need for
communal action in cultivation, each shareholder or tenant or land-owner, as one may
prefer to call him, doing an amount of work proportional to the extent of his holding.
In such matters as fencing, water-supply and night-watching it would have been
absurd to deal with each field separately, and no-one ever thought of doing so. The
cultivators decided together in any year whether conditions allowed of the cultivation
of the whole or only a part of the fields, the water supply being thus treated as
common property due to each in the proportion of his holding. “At reaping they
are excellent good,” says Knox, “just after the English manner. The whole Town,
as I said before, as they joyn together in Tilling, so in their Harvest also; For all fall
in together in reaping one man’s Field, and so to the next, till every man’s Corn be
down. And the Custome is, that every man, during the reaping of his Corn, finds
all the rest with Victuals.” How strongly we are reminded of mediseval England, and
Langland’s “faire field ful of folke ... of alle maner of men, the mene and the riche.”
A great part of the cultivation was looked after by women, the custom varying in different
districts. But the presence of women at certain times and places was strictly taboo.
The ceremonial purity of the threshing floor was guarded with special care. A special
euphemistic vocabulary is made use of while threshing is going on ; women are prohibited
from entering, as are persons who have attended a funeral, or come from an ‘unclean’
house* (unless after bathing and putting on clean clothes), or have eaten unclean food.
Manorial An official named Gamerdla (like the bailiff of an English manor) was concerned with
organization the administrative organization needed to secure to the head of the village the rents and
services due to him; the office was usually hereditary in one of the wealthier families.
But as there was also much matter for internal administration in the village, in the interests
of the landholders themselves, they elected a Vel-viddne (like the praspositus of an English
manor) to control and carry out the system of fencing, ploughing, sowing, etc.
Village The village court, or gansabhdva, consisted of the principal and experienced men of
court the village who met at an ambalam or shady tree or other central place and gave doom
on civil and criminal disputes relating to boundaries, debts, thefts, and quarrels; they
were wont to aim at an amicable settlement, and directed their endeavours rather to
compromising a case than to the infliction of punishment. It will be seen that, as in
India, beneath the outward form of a despotic rule lay the democratic and communistic
organization of the villages. ,
Concerted The capacity for communal action is shown in the frequent cases of combination amongst
action villagers, to erect and endow viharas. This proof of the possibility of united action even
apart from Royal or viceregal patronage, is of particular promise for the future. Thus,
in Tumpane, the western division of the Central province, there were but few viharas
before the British accession, and the majority now existing have been built by villagers
since 1815, and endowed by them with small parcels of land. The villagers in such cases
had the right of selecting the incumbent on a vacancy, and also of ousting one who failed to
perform his duties. Thus, to take a special case, Yafivavala viharain Harispattuva, was
built in Kirti 8rl’s reign by the villagers, who dedicated small pieces of land consisting of
nine fields and four gardens. The King is said to have given an ivory image of Buddha
* Where, for example, a death has recently occurred.
3
°

and a karati^uva to the vihara on its completion. The incumbency did not descend in Social
pupillary succession, as in the case of other foundations, but was in the gift of the villagers, economy
After the rejection of an undesirable incumbent, rules were framed for the priest and for
the thirteen chief men of the village, defining the duties and rights of each (Lawrie’s
Gazetteer, p. 973).
There is great charm as one walks along the narrow village paths, in coming suddenly Agricul-
upon some hillside clearing where twenty or thirty men are at work, singing in chorus turaJsongs
with an old man leading them; or a party of women weeding and singing as they work
across a field with stooping backs in the hot sun. They say that the singing makes
the labour less arduous and irksome; no doubt it does. There is a verse in the Makha
Deva Jataka, a Sinhalese poem of the thirteenth century, referring to such scenes—
“ Hundreds of girls he saw, tending the earladen fields of hill-rice, singing sweet songs
without fault, wherein his own life was praised.” Of agricultural songs I give a few
specimens. “In Rayigam Korale renowned there grew a famous /«/a-palm, fairer than
speech can tell, with various beauty crowned, from village unto village known; fair
of hue this palm flower bloomed, as it were lotus petals expanded on the tree.” This
is part of a reaping song in praise of a tala tree (talipot, Corypha umbraculifera), a tall
and beautiful flowering palm. A sowing song begins as follows: “ When the fields are
well prepared, which lie round Balagala hill, right quickly then the seed is sown by
the four Regents of the Earth.” A threshing song contains the following verses: “ O
bull-king leader of the team, O Veriya going next him, and Kalata the bull-calf, make
haste to get the threshing ended; I will get your twin horns gilt, deck your pair of ears
with pearls, your dew-claws likewise; thus I shall adorn you. Ye bulls that wander
by the hillside, yoked together by a woodbine, wearing pearls and coral beads, and eating
tender leaves, draw the grain into this threshing floor” ; and in another version, “This
is not our threshing floor, ’tis the Moon-god’s threshing floor; this is not our threshing
floor, ’tis the Sun-god’s threshing floor . . . etc.” The semi-religious character of many
of the agricultural songs is very noteworthy. Some, like the last quoted, are associated
with elaborate and often beautiful ceremonies, intended to avert disaster, and to secure
the growth and successful ingathering of the crop, others belong to that ‘ pagan ’ conception
of all life as a sacrament, which gives so much beauty and dignity to common things.
The great simplicity of ordinary life must always be kept in mind. The house was a Domestic
one-storied timber and mud wall building with thatched roof, and if belonging to a man architecture
of some importance consisted of a number of rooms arranged about an inner square
verandah (the floors being daubed with cow-dung to keep them clean and smooth), within
which, again, was a square yard {hatares-midula') open to the sky, where sometimes a
few potherbs might be grown. The rooms were rather dark, having unglazed windows
on the inside only, for the sake of privacy. The poorest house, however, had but one
room, few more than two or three, except the valavva or ‘manor house’ of a great man.
Ordinary houses were not often made by the craftsmen, but each man put up his own,
the kapurala performing the necessary ceremonies. A verse from a Cambridgeshire
traditional song, ‘ Ground for the Floor,’ exactly describes the situation within :
As for grates. I’ve got none, for my fire’s on the ground.
And chairs I’ve got none to set myself down;
I’ve a three-legged stool, it’s the chief of my store.
In my neat little cottage with ground for the floor.
Household work was done by the women on the inside verandah ; here they pounded
31

Social rice and kurakkan, and wove their mats. One room was set apart as a kitchen. A granary
economy (atuvd) was built up on stone pillars as a protection against white ants, on the inner
verandah, or formed a separate building outside. The house could be enlarged by the
addition of other courtyards surrounded by their own set of rooms, and in this way there
often grew up quite a large house, consisting of several associated but independent parts,
occupied by the families of near relations or of married sons or daughters. This is, of
course, a feature of the well-known joint family system.
Furniture Furniture was of the simplest. Three-legged stools, or shaped logs {kolombu) afforded
seats according to rank; none but the King might sit upon a stool with a back. Four­
legged beds were in general use, but often only by the master of the house, the women,
children and servants sleeping on mats on the floor ; some beds were elaborately and
beautifully carved. For the kitchen a set of earthern pots, a vegetable sheer, a coconut
scraper (hiramanaya'), a stone for grinding curry-stuffs (miris-gald), a water dipper {kinissa),
baskets for corn, wooden spoons, and a spoon rack {henditlna) were the principal require­
ments. Three stones (lig-gal) formed a cooking hearth, supporting an earthen pot over
a wood fire; but in some districts an earthen hearth in the form of a ring open at one
side served the same purpose. Earthern or brass coconut oil lamps afforded a dim light.
Agricultural implements, including the yoke {kada) for carrying burdens were also stored
in the house. Clothing, books (if any) and valuables were kept in wooden chests.
Cloths were also stored in earthen pots for their better protection against insects. Cot­
shaped wooden cradles were suspended from the roof. For eating purposes, those who
could afford it, had silver, brass or china dishes (resp., tfti, pingand) on which to lay the
plantain leaf from which the food was directly taken. The king’s plantain leaf was laid
on a gold plate. Honorable persons used a low brass stand (serak-kalé) as a small table for
eating from, being seated on a stool themselves ; others ate upon the ground, the plantain
leaf being laid on an elegantly plaited grass tray or dish (atulpata). All, of course, ate
with the fingers ; the women separately and after the men had been served. Beef was
wholly avoided, and flesh and fish but very little used, rice being the staple food ; but
the diet of well-to-do persons was sufficiently varied with numerous curries, rice and other
corn cakes and sweetmeats skilfully prepared by the women of the household, who, how­
ever high in rank, took pride in culinary operations. The common drink was water.
When drinking from a vessel the people avoided soiling it, by holding the pot at a distance
and pouring water into the mouth, or the hand held as a cup against the mouth.
Costume Together with this simplicity of life and general absence of luxury went a well-considered
love of beautiful dress, affording a remarkable contrast to the modern tendency to combine
every sort of personal luxury with gloomy European costume in its extremest forms.
There could hardly be imagined a more beautiful sight than a Kandyan lady (PI. II.)
wearing her embroidered bodice covered with a sari of old Indian brocade, bare-footed,
and covered with delicate tinkling chains and pendants, rings and bracelets, of which
profusion one feels that nothing could be spared. The full dress of chiefs (PI. III.) is
equally striking, but less beautiful.
The Royal costume in the eighteenth century consisted of an eight-cornered hat {afa-
mulu-toppiya) with tree ornament {mal-gaha) on the top; a shirt {kamisiya), xxnàtr a long-
sleeved tunic {ba-hettayd) of silk brocade, with openings for head and arms, the shoulders
4
ornamented with bo-leaves, the wrists frilled ; and loose trousers (u ayd) frilled^ at the
ankle, or a gold-wrought tuppofiya and belt. Attached to the tunic was a cape {mante') of
white cotton or silk, or even thin gold plate, to protect the oiled hair. The king wore
also a profusion of jewellery, and carried a jewelled cane. Special officers of the palace
had charge of the royal wardrobe, jewellery, etc., and were required to be present at the
32

king’s toilet; another officer superintended the royal bath and the people whose service it Sncial
was to prepare it and himself dressed the king’s hair. All these gentlemen-in-waitipg economy
belonged to the highest families. Many pictures show the king wearing the ordinary
jacket of a chief, buttoned up the front, and with a round or a four-cornered hat (Fig. l). 'Royal dress
The full dress is well seen in the illustration of an ivory statuette of the eighteenth century,
Plate XXXVI, i ; on Plate V. of Davy’s ‘Travels in Ceylon,’ 1821 ; and in the portrait
of Vikrama Raja Sirpha in the Pattiruppuva in Kandy, reproduced on p. 65 of ‘Twentieth
Century Impressions of Ceylon.’ The earliest known portrait of a Sinhalese king is that
ofVimala Dharma Suriya I., in a .d. 1602, given in Spilbergen’s ‘Historiael Journal,’ 160^;
and reproduced in ‘Indische Batikunst,’ by RoufFaer and Jouynboll, Vol. III., and in this
book, Plate XXII. In this portrait the king is shown in crown, jacket and mante, but
wearing a cloth {tuppotiya) instead of trousers. Raja
Simha II., according to Knox (p, 34), dressed very
much in a fashion of his own. The king possessed a
crown, which he seldom wore. The regalia* {panca-
kakudhabharfdayd) consisted of the white umbrella
(chatraya), sword of state (kaduvd), fly whisk, {pal
vidundva or cdmaraya), forehead plate {nalalpatayd),
and golden shoes {mirivfdi sarigald) emblematic of
sovereignty. The king on occasions of state, and
chiefs’ and temple processions, were also attended by
bearers of emblems called collectively the ran avuda,
‘golden insignia’; these are seen in the procession
picture, Plate I. Amongst these may be mentioned
the emblems of the sun and the moon, and the
ornamented talipot leaf umbrella {vadana taldttd).
The latter represents an umbrella for use, the chatraya
or mutu kudaya being symbolic only. Chieftains and
palace officers wore a four-cornered hat {hatara-mulu- Fig. I. Royal dress: from pic­
toppiyd) with a tassel {boralaya) instead of the mal-gaha. tures of SUvisi vk>arai}a in a paper
A wavy white frill {r(lipdlama) round the top of the MS. of 1811. Shows round, four
hat was reserved to royalty and adigars, the mal-gaha and eight-cornered hats with bo-
to royalty and Mampipya Bap 4 ^ras. Inferior officers ralaya; hettuya with and without
wore a round hat {vata-toppiya), and no jacket. The mante; tuppofiya and belt.
tuppofiya and belt [paliya) completed their dress.
Nowadays the etiquette is not strictly observed, and Kandyan chiefs generally wear the
mal-gaha and other parts of the royal costume (P|. III). But European costume is being
generally adopted, with painful effects.
Knox gives the following description of the dress of the chiefs: “ The Nobles wear Dress of
Doublets of white or blew Callico, and about their middle a cloth, a ’white one next their chiefs
skin, and a blenjo one or of some other colour or painted, over the white: a blew or red
shash girt about their loyns, and a Knife with a carved handle wrought or inlaid with
Silver sticking in their bosom; and a compleat short Hanger carved and inlaid with Brass
and Silver by their sides, the Scabbard most part covered with Silver, bravely ingraven;
a painted Cane and sometimes a Tuck in it in their hands, and a boy always bare-headed
with long hair hanging down his back waiting upon him, ever holding a small bag in
his hand, which is instead of a Pocket, wherein is Betel-leaves and nuts. Which they
V
* The last king’s crown and regalia 'were sold by auction in London, in 1820.
d I , 33

Social constantly keep chewing in their mouths, with Ume kept in a Silver Box rarely engraven,
economy ■ which commonly they hold in their hands, in shape like a Silver Watch.
.“ The great ones also generally, and spruce young men, do wear their hair long hanging
down behind: but when they do any work or travail hard, it annoying them, they tie
it up behind. Heretofore generally they bored holes in their ears, and hung weights
in them to make them grow long, like the Malabars, but this King not boring his, that
fashion is almost left off, The men for ornament do wear Brass, Copper, Silver Rings
on their Fingers, and some of the greatest Gold. But none may wear any Silk.”
Sumptuary The details of costume and many other matters were regulated by well-defined sumptuary
laws ‘laws. Artificers, according to Knox, wore the same apparel as the goviyB. Of the
barbers, both men and women might wear doublets, but not sit on stools. Potters might
not wear any doublet, nor the cloth below the knee, or sit on stools. The mal-gaha or
flower ornament on the hat, the eight-cornered hat, shoes, stockings, trousers and all
regalia such as the sword of state, umbrella of dominion, and royal jewellery none but the
king might use. So, too, plastered walls, tiled roofs, finials and two-storied buildings
were forbidden to all save the King, temples, and the highest officers. The modes of
salutation, and even the language employed, varied according to the rank of the person
addressed. Great nicety in the employment of the proper titles for any occasion was
used.
Speaking of the difference in costume of the classes, Knox says of the ‘ Hondrews ’ {goviyd):
“These are distinguished from others by their names, and the wearing of their cloth, which
the Men wear down half their Legs, and the Women to their Heels: one end of which
Cloth the Women fling over their Shoulders, and with the very end carelesly cover their
Breasts; whereas the other sort of Women must go naked from the wast upwards, and
their Cloaths not hang down much below their Knees: except it be for cold; for then
either Women or Men may throw their Cloth over their Backs. But then they do excuse
it to the Hondrews, when they meet them, saying. Excuse me, it is for warmth.
They are distinguished also by their own Countrey Caps, which are of the fashion of
Mitres; there are two flaps tied up over the top of the Crown. If they be Hondrews, their
Caps are all of one Colour, either White or Blew : if of inferior quality, then the Cap
and the flaps on each side be of different Colours, whereof the Flaps are always Red.”
These caps are no longer worn, and were already out of fashion in the eighteenth century.
Their appearance is illustrated on Plate XXX., in figure 3. I do not know what the
knitted caps made by Knox and his fellow-prisoners in such quantities (Knox, p. 129)
were like, probably there are none of these in existence now. It is now usual, and
probably was so in the eighteenth century also, for any but officers on duty, to wear no
hat, or only a kerchief arranged turband-wise ; or in some districts, when engaged in field
work, enormous hats of bamboo leaf (bafa kola toppiya) or smaller low-crowned hats of
plaited grass.
One other garment must be mentioned, the diya-kacciya, described more fully in the
chapter on Weaving. It was the dress of runners and watchmen or guards (murakdraya),
(see PI. V.); and also a bathing costume generally; it is said also to have been regularly
worn as an undergarment. Those worn by persons of rank were elaborately and beauti­
fully ornamented.
The dress of women of high caste consisted of a heffaya with mante like that of a man.
Dress of and a. cloth {helayd) round the loins arranged in various ways (PI. XXXVI., 2, 3, 4).
women Otherwise, the end of the cloth, then called ohoriya, is thrown over the shoulder, in the
Tamil fashion (PI. II.), but this seems to have been rare in the eighteenth century, as
it is never seen in the pictures. The ohoriya {sari) is no doubt of Tamil origin.
34

“ But the women in their Apparel do far surpass the men neither are they so curious in Social
clothing themselves as in making their wives fine. The mens Pride consists in their economy
Attendance, having men bearing Arms before and behind them.
“ In their houses the women regard not much what dress they go in, but so put on their Womens
cloths as is most convenient for them to do their work. But when they go abroad, and dress
make themselves fine. They wear a short Frock with sleeves to cover their bodies of fine {Knox)
white Callico wrought with blew and red Thread in flowers and branches : on their Arms
Silver Bracelets, and their fingers and toes full of Silver Rings, about their necks, Neck­
laces of Beads or Silver^ curiously wrought and engraven, guilded with Gold, hanging
down so low as their brests. In their ears hang ornaments made of Silver set with
Stones, neatly engraven and guilded. Their ears they bore when they are young, and
rowl up Coker-nut and put into the holes to stretch them out, by which means they
grow so wide that they stand like round Circles on each side of their faces, which they
account a great ornament, but in my Judgment a great deformity, they being well featured
women.
“About their ¡Vasts they have one or two Silver girdles made with Wire and Silver Plate
handsomly engraven, hanging down on each side, one crossing the other behind. And as
they walk they chew Betel. But notwithstanding all their bravery neither man nor
woman wears shoos or stockings, that being a Royal dress, and only for the King himself.”
The women’s costume at the present day, in the low-country consists of a loose, low-cut
bodice, and a cloth round the lower part of the body, and is said to be of Malay origin,
like the tortoise-shell combs worn by low-country men.
The position of women, as usual in Buddhist countries, was good in many respects. The Position of
property of husband and wife remained distinct, the husband having no power over his •women
wife’s estate,—-an advantage very newly won in England, but of long standing in the
East, despite the supposed slavery of women there. Women could inherit service lands
and could exercise much influence. Seclusion was not customary, unless amongst the
aristocracy ; it is probably more fashionable now than in the middle ages. According
to Knox, there was rather too great freedom than the reverse, parents regarding their
daughters’ lovers with favour, on account of the services they were willing to render when
need was. What spirit and character Kandyan women could show is illustrated by more
than one anecdote. In the early days of British rule, Miyanadeijiya Lekam of Degaldoruva
was robbed in his own house by Malay desperadoes, and such wounds inflicted that his
bowels gushed out ; but such was his firmness, that he bound up his bowels with his
waistcloth and found time before his death to leave his property to his only daughter,
whose subsequent evidence led to the conviction and execution of the robbers ; so
courageous had been her behaviour throughout, that a grant of land was specially made
to her by the Government (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 137). One heroic tale sounds more
like a story of the Rajputs than one of the Sinhalese. It relates the history of a woman
trained in arms, whose prowess so delighted the king (sixteenth or seventeenth century)
that he rewarded her with gifts of elephants and lands, and made her Disava of the Four
Korales (Bell, Kegalla Report, p. 50).
The following example of a woman’s will is of interest for its own sake, and as showing
what things were held of value amongst the Sinhalese, particularly land, cattle, and
jewellery : “ I, Kombi Etanà, the granddaughter of Hannepetiya Râla, of Devarammulla,
in Uijasiyapattuva, do hereby make over to my daughter, Punci Etana, the following
property, which I inherited from my grandfather: one amuija of Vayalekutnbura, two
amuuu of Godakutobura, with all the houses, gardens, &c., attached to them, and the
garden Hevanetenne Megodavatte with the one pela ând five lâhas extent of Darandra;
35
d2

Social in arms one kastana sword, one gun, one patisthdna spear, one stone-handled knife ; one
economy single-fold chain, one pair of golden ear-rings, twelve silver bracelets, five double rings,
one pair of ankle rings, one set of silver jacket buttons, two metal basins, one large hatchet,
one small hatchet, one jagalat cap, fifty ridls, one pair of bullocks, two cows with their
young ones, four she-buffaloes with their young ones, one tuppofi cloth, one silk cloth”
(Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 159).
Women Religious dedications by women were not unusual. For example, Lat Etana, grand­
daughter of Abeyakon Mudiyanse of Medivaka Minuvangomuva, ‘did many meritorious
acts with a view of obtaining the other world.’ Her daughter, Kuda Etana, offered
to the Dalada Maligava certain lands, ‘ reserving her right to possess on giving one bag
of rice to the Maligava each year,’ and made other offerings of robes, books, mats and
cloths, and ‘for a general almsgiving,’ twenty-two cloths, three cows with calves, five
bill-hooks, five axes, five sickles, two areca-nut slicers and lime boxes, two sets ear-flowers,
and six silver bangles.” The merits of these offerings were to be shared by the gods,
the king, the ministers, the incumbent of both viharas, the low and high inhabitants
of the world, her ancestors, herself, and her dead relations, ‘and may I obtain such blessings
as to see the future Buddha’ (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 586).
Knox’s account of Kandyan women is as follows :
“They are in their gate and behaviour very high, stately in their carriage after the Portugal
manner, of whom I think they have learned : yet they hold it no scorn to admit the
meanest to come to speech of them. They are very thrifty, and it is a disgrace to them
to be prodigal, and their Pride and Glory to be accounted near and saving. And to
praise themselves they will sometimes say. That scraps and parings mil serve them; but
that the best is for their Husbands. The Men are not jealous of their Wives, for the greatest
Ladies in the Land will frequently talk and discourse with any Men they please, altho
their Husbands be in presence. And altho they be so stately, they will lay their hand
to such work as is necessary to be done in the House, notwithstanding they have Slaves
and Servants enough to do it.”
Character Of the character and manners of Kandyans generally, Knox remarks (pp. 63-5, and 97)
(Knox) “They are a people proper and very well favoured. . . . They are very active and nimble
in their limbs and very ingenious. . . . They are crafty and treacherous, not to be trusted
upon any protestations : for their manner of speaking is very smooth and courteous,
insomuch that they who are unacquainted with their dispositions and manners, may
easily be deceived by them. For they make no account nor conscience of lying, neither
is it any shame or disgrace to them, if they be catched in telling lies ; it is so customary.*
They are very vigilant and wakeful, sufficed with very little sleep : very hardy both for
diet and weather, very proud and self conceited. . . . They are not very malitious one
towards another ; and their anger doth not last long ; seldom or never any blood shed
among them in their quarrels. It is not customary to strike ; and it is very rare that
they give a blow so much as to their Slaves; who may very familiarly talk and dis­
course with their Masters. They are very near and covetous, and will pinch their own
bellies for profit ; very few spendthrifts or bad husbands are to be met with here. ... Of
all Vices they are least addicted to stealing, the which they do exceedingly hate and abhor ;
so that there are but few Robberies committed among them. They do much extol and
commend Chastity, Temperance, and Truth in words and actions; and confess that it
* Largely a matter of politeness, and without expectation of the person addressed being really
deceived, as in England ^ Not at home' stands for ‘ Will not see you.' A Kandyan will promise
anything, rather than appear ill mannered; it is your own fault if you look for performance.
36

is out of weakness and infirmity, that they cannot practice the same, acknowledging Social
that the contrary Vices are to be abhorred, being abomination both in the sight of God economy
and Man. . . . When they travel together a great many of them, the Roads are so narrow,
that but one can go abreast, and if there be Twenty of them, there is but one Argument
or Matter discoursed of among them all from the first to the last. And so they go talking
along all together, and every one carrieth his Provisions on his back for his whole Journey.
. . . At their leisure when their affairs will permit, they commonly meet at places built
for strangers and way-faring men to lodge in, in their Language called Amblomb, where
they sit chewing Betel, and looking one upon the other very gravely and solidly, discoursing
concerning the Affairs at Court, between the King and the great men; and what Employ­
ment the People of the City are busied about. For as it is the chief of their business
to serve the King, so the chief of their discourse is concerning such matters. Also they
talk of their own affairs, about Cattel and Husbandry. And when they meet with
Outlandish-men they enquire about the Laws and Government of their Countrey, and
if it be like theirs; and what Taxes and Duties we are bound to pay, and perform to
our King, &c.
“In short, in Carriage and Behaviour they are very grave and stately like unto the l!hey are
Portugals, in under standing quick and apprehensive, in design subtil and crafty, in grave and
discourse courteous but full of Flatteries, naturally inclined to temperance both in meat stately
and drink, but not to Chastity, near and Provident in their Families, commending good [Knox)
Husbandry. In their dispositions not passionate, neither hard to be reconciled again
when angry. In their Promises very unfaithful, approving lying in themselves, but
misliking it in others; delighting in sloath, deferring labour till urgent necessity con­
strain them, neat in apparel, nice in eating; and not given to much sleep.”
The four great annual festivals [mangalya*) are the Avurudu (New Year) in Vesak Fouinannual
(May), the Perahera in Ehala (July), the Karti or feast of lights (Hindu Dipavali) in festivals
II (November), and the Alutsal (harvest-home) in Duruffa (January). The great annual
holidays occupied two or three weeks previous to the New Year; at this time the fields
do not require much attention, the craftsmen are idle, and the people engage in games,
such as atfikeliya. Before the New Year, it was the duty of the astrologers to prepare a
notice, giving information of (i) the day and precise minute of its commencement; (2) the
auspicious hour for the NSnumura mangalya; (3) the auspicious hour for taking the first
cooked food ; (4) the hour for taking the first bath; (5) the hour for commencing business;
and (6) the auspicious hour for making presents. The Nanumura mangalya is a purification
ceremony immediately following the New Year, in which use is made of a composition
of lime-juice, sandal paste, etc., especially for cleansing the hair. In Buddhist temples
the reflection of the head of the image in a mirror is carefully bathed. At this time
the tenants of ninda villages appeared with presents before the proprietor, and attended
to the regular repairs of his valavva. In temple villages they likewise presented their
peifum, repaired the buildings, took part in the processions, erected booths for lights and
so forth. Children appeared before their parents, asked pardon for all offences; and chiefs
appeared before the king with presents. The whole festival lasted several days, till the
last ceremony was performed; during this time all people kept holiday, and chiefs and
people were exempted from public service. No craftsman would recommence work after
the holidays before the lucky hour; it is still a most inconvenient time, like the English
(>7
* For details see Knox, Part II., Ch. IF.; Davy, ‘ Travels in Ceylon^ pp. i ff-i Service
Tenures Commission Report, 1872,//. 461, 515, e/c.; Mahavatnsa, Ch. XCIX.; and Bell,
Ksgalla Report, p. 125.
37
dS

Social Christmas or Easter holidays, when nothing can be done, however great the hurry !
economy The Perahera was an annual festival held in honour of the four divinities, Nâtha, Vishiju,
Kataragama and Pattini. It was observed in all the principal dévales, but most grandly
Perahera in Kandy, where it is still an imposing spectacle. The festival was commenced by the
felling of a young jak tree, which must have borne no fruit. The ground about the
selected tree was cleaned, and censed with the smoke of burning dummala, the tree was
anointed with a preparation of sandal wood, and offerings made of a lamp with nine
wicks, and of nine betel leaves, and nine kinds of flowers.* The tree was then felled by
the wood-cutter of the Maha Vishnu Dévale, wearing a clean cloth, and ceremonially
purified. He divided the trunk in four, one part for each of the four dévales, to which
it was carried in state with drums and attendance. On the day of the new moon, at an
auspicious hour, the posts {kap) thus prepared were set up in the ground beneath a
temporary roof, and decorated with leaves, flowers, and fruits. The posts so set up were
called Ehala-gaha or July-tree. The a.ctua\ perahera followed. During the first five days
called Kumhal-perahera, the insignia were taken in procession round the ‘may-pole.’
During the next five, called the Devala-perahera, the procession went twice daily round the
outer court of the dévale ; in Kandy that is to say, round the great bo-maluva mentioned
above on p. 12. The procession was very grand, and ordered as follows:
MahaLêkam Mahàtmaya with the ... Lekammifiya and writing-style
Gajanayaka Nilame ,, Hastiya (elephant) maha-ko^iya
4
Kodituvakku Nilame „ Ko i-tuvakku-(ti (gun flag) maha-hiiya
Hatara Korale Disava „ Ira-saffda (sun and moon) maha-kodiya
Sat Korale do. ,, ... Simhaya (lion) maha-kodiya
Uva do. ,, ... Hamsaya {izcrei. goose) maha-kodiya
Matale do. ,, ... Sudu (white) maha-kodiya
Sabaragamuva do. „ ... Pataredi {yeWo-w si]^ maha-kodiya
9 Korala Tuna do. „ ... Bheruifdaya (double-headed eagle) maha-kodiya
10 Valapane do. „ ... Mayura (peacock) maha-kodiya
11 Udapalata do. ,, ... Nelum-mal (lotus-flowers) maha-kodiya
12 Nuvarakalaviya do. ,, ... Gajasirriha (elephant-trunk lion) maha-kodiya
13 Vellassa do. ,, ... Kotiya (leopard) maha-kodiya
14 Bintenna do. „ ... Giravcl (parrot) maha-kodiya
15 Tamankaduva do. ,, ... Valaha {besLx) maha-kodiya
16 Elephant of the Maligava, bearing the Shrine and tooth-relic, attended by other
elephants and the people of the Maligava
17-20 Elephants and people of the four devales, Natha, Vishiju, Kataragam and Pattini
21 Ratemahatmayas and their flags
22 Maha Lëkam D~ epartment Ei-kanda-lihiijiya kodiya
23 Nanâyakkâra Lëkam Nil-pata (blue-silk) kodiya
24 Atapattu Lëkam
25 Vedikkâra Lëkam Ratu-pata (red-silk) kodiya
26 Va^ana Tuvakkukâra Lëkam Sudu-pata (white-silk) kodiya
27 Pajjidakâra Lëkam Ratu-pata (red-silk) kodiya
The two Adigars brought up the rear. The Mahavarpsa mentions also “people of strange
countries, and men skilled in divers tongues, and numerous artificers and handicraftsmen.”
* Directions for these ceremonies are given in the book called Maydmataya, for particulars of which
see Appendix to Chapter IV.
38

Each official had a special banner proper to his district, of which some particulars are &cial
given above; further details are given by Bell, loc. cit. The flags were made of cotton, economy
dye-painted, perhaps made in Jaffna, or it may be by Tamils in Kandy; some still may
be found amongst the stores of the dévales. During the last five days, called the Maha Perahera
or Ran-doli-perahera, the procession passed through the main thoroughfare of the town also.
On these occasions the streets were “made clean, and on both sides along the Streets Poles
stuck up with Flags and Pennons hanging at the tops of them, and adorned with boughs
and branches of Coker-Nut-trees hanging like Fringes, and lighted Lamps all along
on both sides of the Streets, both by day and night” (Knox, p. 79). This part of the
perahfra was extremely magnificent. The palanquins {ran-dolt) of the divinities appeared
in the procession, each with its golden vessel and sword, and following the elephants
bearing the weapons of the gods ; and they were attended not only by the women of the
temple but by the court ladies and wives and daughters of the chiefs. “Next after the
Gods and their Attendance,” says Knox, “go some Thousands of Ladies and Gentle­
women, such as are the best sort of the Inhabitants of the Land, arrayed in the bravest
manner that their Ability can afford, and so go hand in hand three in a row : at
which time all the Beauties on Zelone in their Bravery do go to attend upon their
Gods in their progress about the City.”* The chiefs also vied with one another in the
splendour of their costume and the number of their attendants ; the king himself took
part, joining the evening procession during the last five days, being drawn in a golden
chariot drawn by eight horses. All the elephants and attendants available were present in
full glory. In Kandy the tooth-relic of Buddha was carried in procession with the insignia
of the four deities ; this custom is said to have been introduced by Kirti éri Raja Siipha,
to conciliate the Siamese Buddhist priests who came over to restore the priestly order,
and objected to this purely Hindu festival ; but tooth-relic and other processions existed
long before Kirti ârl’s time.
The festival concluded with one of the principal ceremonies, the diyakçplma or ‘cutting of
water.’ The last evening procession proceeded to the customary ferry {diyakepum-totd),-f
and the Kapuralas going in a richly-decorated boat to the middle of the stream, cut the
4
water at dawn with the ran-ka ma, or golden sword. At the same moment the golden
goglet iran-kçndiya) which was filled with water at the last year’s ceremony was emptied
into the river, and re-filled with the very water cut by the sword. The Kapurala then
recited an astaka, and the Jaya-mangala gathas from the pirit book, after which the
insignia and vessel of water were taken back to the dévale, to remain there till
the next year. After the perahçra, the officers and tenants taking part in it, as well as
the elephants, took part in ceremonies for the conciliation of the lesser divinities and evil
spirits ; these were called balibat-garayakun and valiyakun-nftîma.
The third annual festival, the Karti mafigalya, took place in November. The chief part of Karti
it consisted in the illumination of dévales and viharas with innumerable small earthern mangalya
lamps (meti-pdn). In Kandy, the palace and temples, and the principal streets (those
* It may be mentioned of this festival, that Davy records that during the whole time,that though there
were several thousand persons assembled, when he witnessed it, he saw no scene of riot or disturbance,
and no instance of drunkenness. In these days, when a part of the revenue of Government is derived
Jrom the farming out of liquor licenses, and taverns in Randy are numerous, it would hardly be
possible to say the same thing.
J- 'The diya-kepum-tota of the five devales, p^mbekke, Gadaladefiya, Vegiriya and Vallahagoda
was the Mahavfi ganga at Botalapifiya Bo-maluva in Kahatapifiya near Kandy; that of the
Kandy devales was at Gettembe, between Kandy and Peradefiya.
4 39
d

Social around the bo-maluva) were brilliantly illuminated, and the images of the gods were
economy carried in procession on elephants, with almost the same ceremonies and honours as during
the first part of the perahera.
Alutsal The Alutsal mangalya or harvest-home took place in January; the astrologers fixed two
mafigalya auspicious hours, one for bringing in the new rice, the other for dressing and eating it.
It was brought into Kandy from the royal and temple villages, the ears of rice in earthern
pots and the grain in clean white bags. The grain for the Maligava was conveyed on
an elephant, that for the devales and the palace was carried by men on yokes under covers
{gahoni) of white or clean cloth; they were met on the way by the Adigars and chiefs,
who attended them to the great square, and there the auspicious hour was awaited, after
which the grain was taken to its various destinations. At the same time the chiefs and
people in the country brought home the new rice in a similar fashion. Two or three days
afterwards occurred the auspicious hour for eating the first new rice of the season, dressed
in a particular manner.
Buddhism Some mention of religion must be made. The universal and state religion even under
most of the Tamil kings* was Buddhism. Any detailed account of Buddhism would be
out of place here; and the information is easily obtained elsewhere. But this much
should be understood, that it is a moral philosophy, founded by the great reformer,
Gotama Buddha (d. 543 b.c.), and distinguished more or less clearly from the Brahmanical
Hinduism on which it is founded, by its condemnation of ritual observances and sacrifices,
its rejection of all kinds of animism, its insistence on the equality and brotherhood of
all men, and by its monastic institutions. The existence of gods and heavens is not denied,
but they,' like man and earth, are not eternal, and do not give the highest unchanging
bliss; those whose merits bring them even to the highest heavens are not freed from
the necessity for rebirth in this or other worlds. The existence of individual souls is
denied, as is also that of a God or creator. Personal existence is an evil; the goal before
all humanity is the attainment of an unconditional state free from the operation of causality,
and called Nirvaria; this state is beyond the range of perception of gods and unenlightened
men. It corresponds to the fourth state of the Vedantist, of union with Brahma, that
is Being, of which nought else can be predicated save existence. But many Southern
Buddhists hold Nirvaija to be strictly annihilation, there being no remainder when the
elements composing individuality are dispersed.
Nirvaija is to be obtained not by prayer or by sacrifices, but by freeing the mind from
all attachment and desire. Rapid spiritual progress is only possible to the ascetic; but
extreme ascetism and self-torture are condemned as much as sensuous self-indulgence,
both hindering progress. But the simple mode of salvation, the ‘middle way’ for those
who remain in the world, and in^whom the immediate desire for emancipation has not
become intense, is self-restraint, and the performance of good actions without regard to
reward, and without thought of .ah Imrja'My. This means of salvation thus corresponds
to the karma-yoga of Hinduism, and is that which makes the rhost general appeal to
good men everywhere.
In practice. Buddhism is a religion of love and pity shown to all living beings; and affords
a sufficient sanction for morality in its recognition of the immutable laws of cause and effect,
or karma, the d.ue recompense, in this world or the next, inevitably attending upon every
action. But a great part of the secret of the success of Buddhism lay in the dynamic force
of the Buddha’s own personality, and the intensity of his love for all living beings. It
* ‘the last kings, as before noticed, were properly Hindus; but made themselves ‘one with the
religion and the peopled
40

should be understood that the Buddhahood could only be obtained as the result of a Social
determination exerted through countless ages and countless incarnations, in each of which economy
the highest virtues and greatest self-sacrifice must be observed. Hence it is said that in
all the world there is not one spot even so large as a mustard seed where he has not Buddhism
surrendered his body for the sake of creatures. But the greatest evidence of his perfect
love was shown in his renunciation of the bliss of Nirvana ages ago when he was born
as the Brahman Sumedha, in the time of Dlpankara Buddha. This implied his voluntary
endurance of the miseries of repeated earthly lives until he attained Buddhahood, in order
that he might reveal to all beings the way of salvation.
The history of many of these earthly lives, both before and after the one just referred Jatakas
to, is given in the Pansiyapanas Jataka Pota, or Book of the 550 Jatakas. Many of
these ‘Birth Stories’ are exceedingly beautiful; some have been made into extended
poems by mediaeval Sinhalese writers; certain ones are special favourites, well known
to every Sinhalese Buddhist, and depicted on the walls of every vihara. The best known
and most often painted is the Vessantara Jataka. The Bodhisat, in his last Birth but
one before that in which be attained Buddhahood, was born as a prince, Vessantara. In
due course he was married to MadrI Devi, daughter of a neighbouring king. A son and
daughter were born. At this time there was a famine in Kalinga, from want of rain ; the
king of that country, hearing that Vessantara possessed a rain-giving white elephant, sent
Brahmans to ask for it as a gift. When the messengers arrived, it was pohoya day, and
the prince, mounted on the elephant, was proceeding to the public alms-hall to distribute
the royal bounty. He gave away the elephant at once, though its trappings alone were
worth twenty-four lacs of treasure. But the citizens were angry at the loss of the
elephant from which they derived so much advantage, and complained to the prince’s
father, with the result that he was banished to the rocky hill called Vangagiriya. MadrI
Devi would not be left behind.
The two distributed all their
wealth, and set out for the forest
in a chariot. Very soon two
Brahmans appeared and begged
for the horses, which were given
at once; but Sakra sent four
devas in the shape of horses
to draw it. However, another
Brahman soon asked for the
chariot, and it also was given,
after which they were forced to
proceed on foot. At last they
reached V angagi riya, where V il-
vakarma had, by command of Fig. 2. Vessantara Jataka: gift of horses. Costume as
S akra, prepared for them two in Fig. 1. MadrI Devi is in the chariot with the two
fansal, one for Vessantara, the children. Four devas are seen above. From eighteenth
other for MadrI Devi and the century painting at Degaldoruva, as in PL I.
children. Here they led an
ascetic life for seven months. There was an old Brahman named Jujaka, the name of
whose wife was Amitta-tapa; one day she had gone to the well to fetch water, when
the other women insulted and bullied her. To pacify her, Jujaka promised to do the
household work himself in future; but she told him that the charitable Vessantara would
give him a slave to wait upon her. Accordingly he proceeded to Vafigagiriya, and asked
41

Social for the two children, who, hearing the talk, were frightened and hid themselves in a
economy neighbouring lotus pond. At last Jujaka departed with the children. MadrI Devi alone
remained ; and Sakra thinking it would not be right for her also to be given, appeared
yatakas as an aged Brahman, and asked for her as his slave. When he received her, he returned
her to Vessantara, saying she was to be kept for him, and reminding the hermit that
he could not again give away what was now no longer his own. But the trials were
now at an end; the necessary gifts had been made, to ensure the future reception of the
Buddhahood. Jujaka took the children to the grandparents, and was so liberally treated
by them that he died of over-eating! It was immediately decided to recall the prince,
and so he returned to the kingdom. It is then explained who the characters became in a
subsequent birth, Vessantara becoming Buddha, MadrI Devi becoming Yasodhara, and
so with the rest.
This well known, and here very much abbreviated story is well painted at Degaldoruva.
In PI. I. and in Fig. 2 are shown reproductions of parts of the work. In the Plate, Prince
Vessantara is seen riding the white elephant, and next, giving it away to the Brahmans,
who are just out of the picture. The lower panel shows MadrI Devi and the two
children walking in the forest; and again arrived at Vessantara’s cell, saluting him.
Fig. 2 shows the gift of horses.
It is quite impossible to summarise all the stories of the jatakas usually painted on
vihara walls. The Vessantara story is given by way of example. But the variety is
infinite; the Bodhisat* was born not only as a man, but very often as an animal or a deva.
The whole series of stories forms not merely a collection of edifying fables, of which
many are very beautiful, but is the most valuable collection of early folk-lore extant.
The stories are accessible in English, in the translation edited by Prof. Cowell, and
published at Cambridge (1895—1907); the last of the six volumes of this work has
just been issued.-f- The jatakas most usually illustrated are the Vessantara, Sattubhatta,
4
Sutasoma, Silava, Daham-Soi) a, Sasa, Kindura.
A separate subject connected with the former births, often depicted on vihara walls is
the Suvisi-vivaraija, or twenty-four assurances or annunciations received by the Bodhisat
on various occasions from previous Buddhas.
Maitri Representations of '■ Maitri' Buddha are often the subject of Vihara paintings, as at
Buddha Degaldoruva or Ridi Vihara on the rock ceilings. Maitri Buddha, the ‘loving one,’
is that bodhisatva or Buddha-elect who is to be next in the order of succession of these
great beings. The love of Buddhists turns naturally to such an one, still personal and
‘human,’ since the Buddha himself having reached nirvaija, has reached an unconditioned
state, unrelated to the world of men. In Ceylon, Nata deviyo is regarded as the Maitri
Buddha. At present he is in Divyaloka, where he awaits the time of his last incarnation,
and the attainment of Buddhahood.
Goiama Certain events in the actual life of Gotama Buddha must be related here, as they are so
Buddha often illustrated on vihara walls. The enlightenment (attaining of Buddhahood) took
place beneath the Bo-tree where the Prince had remained during the terrible mental
struggle symbolized in the descriptions and representations of his conflict with Mara,
the ‘devil’ of this temptation in the wilderness. The Prince was seated upon a throne
beneath the tree; the powers of evil, led by Mara, made repeated and terrific attacks
upon his person, accompanied by portents and horrors of every description (PI. XIV., 2).
* Incarnation of one ’who in a future birth ’will attain Buddhahood.
•f-iSi’c also Spence Hardy, '■ Buddhism^ Ch. V.: and Rhys Davids, ^Buddhist Birth Stories’
frubners Oriental Series.
42

These powers are depicted as material beings, fiends and devils of every kind, brandishing Social
weapons against the seated Prince, deserted by the terrified Devas, and left entirely alone, economy
save for the Earth Goddess Mahikantava, who remained with him throughout. She
is represented in a painting at Kelaniya as half-emergent from the earth beside his feet. Mura
The conflict is spoken of as Mara yuddhaya, Mara’s battle. yuddhaya
The less philosophical Buddhists no doubt believe in the real material conflict thus repre­
sented ; for others it is merely a symbol. As such it is most suggestive. The serenity
of the seated figure is powerfully contrasted with the vain efforts of the loathsome and
horrible devils around ; the devotion of the Earth Goddess is the crowning touch.
Ere the sun set, Mara abandoned the vain contest, and withdrew ; but the daughters
of Mara in the forms of beautiful women now approached and tempted him; but he
remained indifferent; and so the struggle ended. Hour by hour the divine insight of
the Prince grew, till by dawn came perfect knowledge, and the long-sought Buddhahood
was attained. The event was accompanied by many portents, of which one was the
spreading of the six-coloured aura (Budures) emanating from his body, throughout
all the spheres. In many seated figures of Buddha, this aura is represented as a halo
of coloured rays (Pis. XVIII, XIX). Also the Buddha broke into triumphant song, using
as a parable of life, the simple wood and clay-built house which in his time must have
differed little from the ordinary houses of the Sinhalese in the eighteenth century.
Then followed the period known as the satsatiya,* seven weeks. During the first he ^Satsatiya'
remained seated in the spot where the victory was won ; during the second he remained
in contemplation, with eyes fixed on the sacred tree beneath which he had been seated;
then he walked to and fro between that spot and the throne for seven days; then for
seven days he remained in a golden palace erected by the Devas, and as he sat here, the
whole of the Dharma, or truth, revealed presented itself to his mind, from the first words
spoken after enlightenment and quoted above to the last before his death. During the fifth
week he rested beneath a tree named Ajapkla. In the sixth week he sat by the lake
Mucalinda, and during a terrific storm was sheltered by the Naga Mucalinda, who erected
his hood as a canopy above him. During the last week he dwelt in a certain grove of
Khlrapala trees. Throughout this time he ate no food. On the fiftieth day two Brahman
merchants approached the place, and guided by a Devi who appeared in the sky, went
towards the Buddha, desiring to make offerings of honey. The story goes on to relate
that as it was not right for Buddha to receive anything in the hands, the Regent Gods
of the Four Quarters appeared, having each an almsbowl of emerald; but he would not
accept this. They then offered four bowls of stone, and when each entreated him to
accept the one offered by himself, Buddha received them all, and formed them into one
bowl, the fourfold origin of which appeared at the upper rim. In this bowl he received
the offering. Subsequently Buddha proceeded to Benares, and there began his mission,
preaching to all men the Dharma, and founding the order of Buddhist monks.
The following five precepts {pan-sil) are binding on the laity in general: not to destroy Pan-sil, the
life , not to steal, to refrain from adultery, falsehood, and intoxicants. Three other Jive precepts
precepts are observed on special occasions: not to eat at unseasonable hours, to abstain
from dancing, singing, music and unbecoming shows, and from the use of garlands,
scents, perfumes, cosmetics, ointments, and ornaments, to abstain from the use of high
and broad beds, and from sexual intercourse of any kind. The eight precepts {ata-sil) Ata-sil
♦ See PL XVIII., depicting the events of the last four of the seven weeks, and the offering of honey
by the two Brahman merchants on the fiftieth day; see also PL VII^. In PL XVIII. the
temptation by the daughters of Mara is shown in error as taking place in the fifth week.
43

Social thus indicated, are observed for twenty-four hours on the four pohoya or sabbath days
economy of each month, quarter days of the moon. At such times, married persons sleep apart,
and white clothes are worn; the ascetic life is, in fact, adopted for a short period. All
religions have recognized the great advantage of such fasts or practice of restraint at
regular intervals. Members of the priesthood have also at all times to abstain from
receiving gold or silver, and are very particularly prohibited from practising any magical
Dasa-sil art or science, making ten precepts in all (dasa-sil). False pretension to supernatural
attainment by monks is an unpardonable sin. All such things as incantations, charms
and ceremonial worship of gods are opposed to the spirit of Buddhism.
Giving of A beautiful aspect of Buddhist belief is the ‘giving of merit.’ This is the giving to
merit others of a share in the merit acquired by one’s own acts. The original merit is not
diminished, any more than a lamp from which a hundred lamps have been lighted burns
the dimmer. A Buddhist mother will take her child by the hand, when she goes with her
offerings of food or flowers to the Vihara, not merely that he may be trained in the path
of love and charity, but that he may share the merit of her actions. The great pilgrimage
to Adam’s Peak is similarly a means both of acquiring merit, and an opporunity of
bestowing it on others. The pilgrimage to Adam’s Peak is the outing of the year.
Parties of men, women, and children are made up and they trudge afoot from their own
villages to the summit of the peak, there lay their offerings upon the great footmark,
and so return home. A good deal of rough living is involved, but the whole expedition
is a delight, as one may judge who has met such a party of pilgrims on the narrow tracks
beyond Ratnapura, or even on the main roads below, singing almost continuously, carrying
their little store of luggage in a double bag (ploguvd) slung over the shoulder. The songs
show clearly that great sympathy which the people feel for one striving to become a
Buddha, and show also the spell which the great forest and high mountain cast upon them.
Very magnificent and very tender is the idea of helping the god by sharing with him the
merit of the pilgrimage; not that the merit is thereby lessened to the pilgrim, though
it is areal gift to the divinity. A few verses from the ^rl Paga Mana, one of the most
popular songs, are as follows :
Entering the forest of the god.
Beholding the god’s auspicious forest.
Bestowing merit on the god with cheerful heart.
Ever making him our refuge;
Buddha first all men adore.
They travel many a yodun in the forest.
Thinking of Saman DeviyO as they come,
‘By virtue of these merits (that we give) the Buddhahood thou shalt attain.’
Go we all to worship Samanala,
And overcome the ocean of rebirth.
Let us offer all these flowers and lamps.
Let us sing all through the forest!
Even very old and infirm people undertake this pilgrimage; it was undertaken by more
than one king. Lawrie (p. 119) mentions that Kapuvatte Kumarihami, a very wealthy
lady, ‘in old age and extreme weakness . . . undertook a pilgrimage to Adam’s Peak,
and died in February, 1884, when she was being carried down the mountain on the back
of one of her vassals.’
44

The object of the institution of the priesthood was “to cause the most virtuous, intelligent, Social
unselfish and spiritual-minded persons in a country to withdraw from the social surroundings economy
where their sensual and other selfish desires were naturally strengthened, devote their
lives to the acquisition of the highest wisdom, and fit themselves to teach and guide others Buddhist
out of the pleasant path leading towards misery, into the harder path that leads towards priesthood
true happiness and liberation.” No vow of obedience bound the monk ; “mental culture,
not mental death was the aim set before the Buddhist ascetic by the founder of his order.
Each one is to conquer self by himself” (Rhys Davids, ‘Buddhism’). A monk was always
free to cast off his robes and return to the world if he wished.
The principal duties of a Buddhist priest, beside the observance of the ten precepts, are to
care for the vihâra (Buddhist temple), keep it clean, and offer flowers daily, meditate and
study ; receive the offerings of worshippers, administer pansil and ata-sil on pahoya days ;
explain the teachings of Buddha when required ; read and expound the scriptures (bana)
on special occasions (particularly during Vas season) ; perform pirit service when required ;
superintend repairs to the vihâra buildings, and generally oversee the service of tenants;
often also they taught the children and practised medicine ; the priest in fact should be,
often was, and still sometimes is, the intellectual centre of the village. Of the relations
between priest and people the Temple Lands Commissioners speak as follows:
“ Besides the relation in which the priests stand to their tenants as landlords, and the
religious influence of their possession, they have other holds on the affection of the people.
Their pansalas are the schools for village children, and the sons of even the superior head­
men are very generally educated at them. They have also, frequently, some knowledge
of medicine, and when this is the case they generally give the benefit of their advice
gratuitously, which the vedarala seldom do. Add to this that, as every revenue officer
who has ever attempted to induce the natives to exert themselves for their own good
knows, the priests are generally, when properly applied to, foremost with their money,
if rich, or with their influence or both, in furthering every scheme for local improvement ;
and from what has been stated, it will be evident that not only is it their interest to be
kind and considerate to their tenants, but that they generally are so, and that their influence
among the people is, in a social point of view, usefully employed ” (quoted S.T. Report,
1872), p. 448. There was thus a close parallel between the position of the incumbent
of the village vihâra, and that of the parish priest of mediæval England; he, too, had
tithes and rents to gather in, and he taught the children at the church door, as the Buddhist
priest did in the pansala. Each at his best’, represented to the community the true ideal
of the man of religion
Buddhism was itself already founded on Hinduism, and close akin to some of the higher
forms of it ; and the outward forms of popular Hinduism have in later times been mixed Devales
with it, a fact not surprising when we consider the lóng continued Tamil influence on
Sinhalese religion, exerted through the Tamil queens and sometimes through actual Tamil
rulers, and in countless other ways. Hence it is that we find attached to almost every
vi hâra, a dévâle (devâlaya) where some Hindu god is worshipped, often under the same
roof, though not officially recognized by the Buddhist priest. The dëvâles are generally
endowed with lands after the manner of Buddhist temples ; the lay trustee [Basnayaka
Nilame), often a personage of political importance Corresponding to the Diva Nilame of a
Buddhist temple, and having jurisdiction over inhabitants of dévâle villages, while the
priest {kapurala or kapuva) was usually the principal tenant of the dévâle. Offerings
are commonly made by worshippers at both vihàras and dëvâles, the one with a view to
purely spiritual benefits, the other with a view to material ones. But the dévâles were
almost as much political as religious institutions.
45

Social The principal dévales are dedicated to the following five Hindu gods: {i)Vishnu; not
economy much resembling the Hindu Vishpu, but a Buddhist archangel, a candidate for Buddha-
hood and a tutelary deity of Lanka : (2) Nata deviyo, who is to the Buddhist no other
'Principal than the Maitri Buddha^ or Buddha of the next epoch, at present in the world of
gods of gods: (3) Kataragam deviya (see p. i) : (4) Pattini, goddess of chastity (see p. 6) : and
devales (5) Saman (Lakshmand), half-brother of Rama, who, with Vishiju and Kartikeya accepted
the general trust of guarding Lanka for Gotama Buddha ; Saman is the special deity and
guardian ofârl Pàda (Adam’s Peak), called after him, Samanaja.
Nature Beside these great Hindu gods thus worshipped in a somewhat altered form, a number
spirits of lesser beneficent divinities are also worshipped upon special occasions, as for example
Gana deviyo (Ganèéa), Bhomi devi (goddess of the earth, who alone remained by Buddha
when all other gods fled in terror of Mara’s attack) ; minor deities (devatavo) and nature
spirits, such as the guardians of the threshold and the door ; spirits dwelling in trees,
who should be propitiated before the tree is felled, and the like. The sun and moon
are regularly spoken of as gods, but are not worshipped with offerings, though often
invoked or mentioned with others in religious songs.
Demonism A very large element of demonism or devil propitiation also enters into popular religion,
and represents a survival of pre-Buddhist devil-dread ; the rites, carried out by priests
known as Kaffafya or Takdessa {ivomyaka, a demon), are directed to the cure or infliction
of disease by the aid of the demons.
Planet There is also planet worship to be mentioned, as well as the ordinary widespread reliance
worship upon astrology. Planet worship consists in the propitiation of planetary gods by bali
ceremonies. In connection with some of these the most elaborate temporary images
are made in wet clay ; some are repulsive, but certain of those representing gods are
dignified and even beautiful (PI. IV., 2). The rites are usually performed only by men
of low caste, especially beravayO.
Buddhism The attitude of Buddhism to the arts demands some consideration here. Buddhism
and art holds the one great aim of life, the goal for which all should strive, to be salvation from
the round of repeated or individual existence ; and considers rapid spiritual progress to
be compatible only with an ascetic life. By those that seek to follow the path that leads
to such salvation, even the highest intellectual and emotional pleasures must be renounced.
The priesthood accordingly were required, amongst other things to abstain from dancing,
singing, music and stage plays, not to use ornaments, nor to sleep on high or broad beds.
They were allowed to possess personally only their robes, a loin girdle, an alms-bowl,
a razor, a needle, a water strainer, a fan, and a pair of sandals, eight articles in all. The
robes were to be of dull orange colour (originally selected as a colour regarded with con­
tempt) and made of material first torn to pieces and then sewn together, so as to be of
no commercial value. But the priestly community as a whole could be endowed with
books, lands and houses, and so became at various times quite wealthy ; the houses were
often by no means lacking in adornment of carving and metal work ; also it often happened
that presents of beautifully adorned examples of one or other of the eight requisites were
made to individual priests, and were handed down by them in pupillary succession ; as
for example ivory-handled fans, beautifully decorated books and silk robes ; but all such
possessions made but a small item, and the vow of individual poverty has been for the
most part well kept, except at times of admitted degeneracy in the church. But it
appears that priests were sometimes wealthy enough to build or repair viharas and make
gifts (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 688, Palkutubure Unnànse) ; for an example of the in­
heritance of land, books, fan, bowl, etc., in pupillary succession see the same, p. 856;
but the goods are to be in charge of certain lay trustees, who were to be responsible.
46

‘Form, sound, taste, smell, touch, these intoxicate beings; cut off the yearning which Social
is inherent in them’ says the Dhammika Sutta, addressed to priests. Again, the first of economy
the ten ‘objects’ on which the thoughts of an ordained priest should dwell runs thus:
‘Beauty is nothing to me,— neither the beauty of the body nor that that comes of dress’ Asceticism
(Dasa Dhamma Suttam) ; but of course the beauty of Buddha’s own person is frequently
insisted on in Buddhist literature. As example of the ascetic attitude may be quoted the
story of Citta Gutta and the cave with the painted roof, from the Viiuddhi Marggaya
(first quarter of the fifth century a.d.) : —“Once on a time a number of monks were walking
from cave to cave, inspecting in them various paintings which were found to charm
the eye, and so came to the rock cave, Karanda Maha Lena. Seeing in this cave the
representations in paint of the seven Buddhas, Vipassiya, Sikhiya, Vessabhuya, Kakusand-
haya, Konagamanaya, Kassapaya and Gautamaya in the act of departing (renonucing
worldly pleasures) to become monks preparatory to attaining Buddhahood, they remarked
to the great monk (Citta Gutta Thera) who had been dwelling in it, ‘These paintings
are attractive’; and he addressing them, ‘Evetni (long life !), I who am living in this cave
have passed sixty years (in it), but no such paintings have ever come under my notice.
However, now because of you who have eyes, I have come to know of the existence of
the paintings.’ This great monk who has been dwelling in this rock cave for so long a
time, never opened his eyes and looked up, as he was wont to look about him only within
the distance of a yoke (about eight feet). Opposite this rock cave there is a huge na-tree.
This great monk, however, did not see (the top of) it. But when every year it flowered
in season, he saw the pollen, etc., of the flowers on the ground, and had thus discovered
that the tree had blossomed.”
This attitude is logical in the case of one who believes that rapid spiritual progress can Asceticism
thus only be made, and who is in haste. But it is admitted that spiritual progress pan be notf or all
made in other ways, and perhaps not much less quickly, for example, by the performance
of right action without attachment to the fruit. And for those who tread such paths art
is a means and an aid to spiritual progress, but it is important that it should be so used,
and not as an hindrance. And so like everything else, it has been made a part of religion.
The ascetic path has never been for all men, and all occasions. The citizen or ‘house­
holder’ is first, as without him the race would not continue and the purpose of the cosmos
would fail. Art is of the first importance as the form of culture which most easily
humanises his toil and spiritualizes his ideas. So long as man is related to the world
of phenomenal appearance, whether real or not, art of some kind is the necessary means
of spiritualizing that relation. This applies as much to the ornament of utilitarian objects
and to architecture, as to the purely substantive and ideal art which definitely aims at
the revelation of the divine. All art is a very essential part of culture, an integral and
inseparable part of any noble ‘ civilization.’ The ornament added lightly by the craftsman
to an every-day utensil, is at once the humanization of his labour, and the witness that man
does not live by bread alone.
B uddhism became indeed the chief patron rather than the opponent of fine arts, which Buddhism
spread with it from India to Ceylon, Burma, Siam, and Java in the south, and to China patron of
and Japan in the north. It thus came to pass that it was important for even the priests arts
to have some knowledge of the theoretical side of craftsmanship at least, and this was often ,
the case ; they were rather expected to explain such works as Sariputra to the less learned
craftsman than to learn from him. In the eighteenth century there were even craftsmen
amongst the priesthood; but unordained, as the Siamese sect which alone existed then
admitted only men of high caste to the priesthood itself (quite contrary to true Buddhism);
such a man was Silvatenna, who painted at Degaldoruva and Ridi vihara.
47

Social With regard to the conventionalism of Buddhist (and Hindu) art, and the strict rules of
economy proportion for the figure, we shall see that these probably originated (in India) amongst a
class of more or less priestly crattsmen perhaps, indeed probably, before the decay of
Convention Buddhism in India, not among the monks themselves. Just how long ago the rules were
in Buddhist formulated is uncertain (to hazard a guess, by the fifth century a.d., before the final decline
art of Buddhism in India, and when the craftsmen were still required to satisfy the require­
ments both of Buddhists and of Hindus), but no doubt one object of them was to make
possible the reproduction of images in suiHcient quantity by average workmen at all times.
This, rightly, I think, sets religious above ‘artistic’ considerations; but, art having thus
sought first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, the rest was added to it. For
such convention is a far greater help than hindrance to real art. It does not prevent the
man of genius from producing the most beautiful work possible, though ensuring that
it shall so far conform to an accepted standard as to be immediate and universal in its
appeal; at the same time it does prevent the possibility of“ the holy and elevating subjects
being treated absurdly or stupidly, so as to wound tbe feelings of serious men”; which
happens every day now that the old tradition is generally broken with. It is true that
present-day painters and imagers have no feeling for the human figure, and images of
Buddha are usually wooden and unrefined, sometimes even repulsive in aspect; yet even
the worst traditional work is preferable to the weak, effeminate and sensuous drawing
of low-country workmen, who under Western influence have attempted a more naturalistic
style, without any training whatever, and certainly without taste. The Burmese alabaster
Buddhas now so fashionable are equally offensive. The old tradition did really ensure a
certain dignity of treatment, however blindly and unfeelingly its rules were followed.
What is now needed is for men who do understand the human figure (— as the makers of
the tradition must have done—) and whose faith is real, to work willingly and consciously
on traditional lines, welcoming the tradition as a help, not rejecting it as a hindrance;
for the artist cannot again command the hearts of men, without some relation to the
symbols that have for so long appealed to them, and with which are bound up such
manifold and complex associations, and so much that is changeless and eternal.
Buddhism Buddhism in practice has also been the patron of the lesser arts, as every vihara and library
and the testifies. Kings, and others according to their means, made gifts of gold and silver plate,
lesser arts books with painted or carved ivory or chased metal covers, to the viharas, and ornamented
furniture (from pottery to beds) to the priesthood, and such things as writing styles and
fans to individual priests. Kirti ^rl gave so much, that he has now the credit of having
given almost everything of value now to be found in Kandyan Viharas. In a tudapata
of 1803 A.D., regarding the Kotabogofla Vihara, it is mentioned that Kirti 8rl ‘built the
Dalada temple in Kandy anew . . . and . . . did likewise make offerings of his own orna­
ments of gold and set with gems, pearls and diamonds, high and low lands, men slaves and
women slaves, elephants, horses, white and black cattle’ (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 472).
In 1815 A.D. one Upasaka Ranhoti Duraya (a lay preacher) of Haputale made offerings
to a vihara, of a “flag, beds, sheets, pillows, mattresses, brooms, iron walking-sticks,
blank ola leaves for writing, daitdisana, pitchers, cans, spittoons, and tom-toms.” An
image was made by subscription ; an ambalam was erected and several idai}4u (log bridges)
placed in position; note the practical charity. The temple itself “ was built by the
villagers, who joined in asweddumizing (reclaiming) a number of little deoiyas throughout
the hena” (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 328). Artificers were regularly employed for years
together on religious buildings, and well rewarded for their work. Craftsmen holding
temple lands were required to supply the requisites for the upkeep and service of the
temple. In such countless ways was art bound up with the religious life of the people.
48

Were it not, indeed, for the work lavished on Buddhist temples in Ceylon, and the offerings Social
made to the priesthood, this book might have been left unwritten. We shall see that economy
the landholding craftsmen were practically state-endowed ; and in return their work was
done essentially for the people themselves, whose palaces and picture galleries were the
viharas and dévales where they worshipped, and with which their festivals were associated.
Luxury was little, and the amount of fine art absorbed and hidden away by royalty and
other wealthy persons was small compared with that belonging to the Church and so
to the whole folk. Just so was it in mediæval Europe; art was for the people, and no
lack of it. Now it is otherwise, and art is for the rich only, and hard to come by.
APPENDIX TO CHAPTER II.
I. EDUCATION.
In times past the education of boys was carried on by Buddhist priests at the village pansala, Reading
the home of the incumbent of the nearest vihara, just as the village priest taught at the and writing
church door in mediaeval England. This system has been already referred to, on p. 45
above. At about the age of six the boy was taken to the pansala with an offering for
the teacher. At an auspicious hour the teacher took his seat and recited the first line of
vowels, beginning with the words svasti siddham, ‘let prosperity attend’; the alphabet
continues, ayanu, ayanu, etc., . . . ending with the words iti siddhi astu, ‘so let there be
success !’ The alphabet first given to the pupil was written in large characters, in three
lines on an ola leaf; afterwards a book was given containing the complete alphabet,
including combinations of letters. The letters were learnt by loud repetition in a singsong
tone; the pupil stood before the teacher holding the closed book to his forehead and so
repeated his lesson. Nothing else was taught until the alphabet could be repeated without
fault or hesitation. The form of the letters had next to be systematically learnt, the
teacher pointed to the letters and read; ‘the letter ‘a’ is read '■ ayanu” and so on.
Writing was only taught after this descriptive repetition was perfectly mastered. Writing
was learnt on a narrow board, called velipila, spread with sand; it stood on four legs, which
were sometimes turned and lacquered; the teacher had a carved ivory style {velipata) with
which he traced the sign sva, after which he guided the boy’s hand in copying : the boy
wrote with his middle finger, supported by the fore-finger and thumb; in this way,
little by little, the boy learnt to write the whole alphabet, and by that time he could read
short sentences : this might take six months or a year. Ola writing was taught afterwards.
The boy was given a long strip of ola, untrimmed, and the teacher wrote large letters
on this: the boy was given an ulkapiva, i.e., a blunt writing style, and with this he traced
the letters over and over again till the leaf was cut through; this was called safahan
kfplma ; the boy learnt in this way to exercise a very even pressure. Afterwards he used
karakola (talipot leaf) not tracing but copying the guru akuru (letters written by the
teacher) as in a copybook, writing smaller and smaller by degrees : finally he was allowed
to use a sharp style {panhiudd) and to write on puskola (prepared talipot leaf).
As an example of good handwriting (on paper) may be shown the script of Fig, 3, two
pages of an eighteenth century paper ‘prayer book,’ a breviary said to have been used by
Narendra Siipha himself. The book is further illustrated on Pis. XVII. and XX.
49
e I

3 5
Books G'^IS^O'S^ (?^©tji*)in^ yis\ £Q<<)tf
Writing ^Qo
i^^^^^e3csO»n<)cfxn"^^(S^ir3o!hj£i^<sQ^S^'S^ o
30 35 0 9 ® ® SlnSa^c»»^
<sX >^ n^ <>c^i^ B id <3'^^ B S^ cs e'en» <T/C 3 3 3
^fl(jst)®«^_^ At. J> ^iCt)^«®sgi>cca£^eii>s>
jft n ¿p 6Ji«>o<fc!>« ffX3«>aD<^E>»C5«^£''S'^n'86&,
o£3D> a»<3fc5»lc53g^irfifei)n9 ^n S‘<sa^S'«i%€tsca9i
9 4
o«Dl) e^ ^^:»»iEfs<^<^j^gflwgafe JJ
tf^i*cn«)iii^c^7i*<Sxys«i(5^nc)oir<^i^®(oino)
5
QgU>Safet<a ^<afl^ y
QCOg<S»iSv£?i?<SV«f*—-------
S<2Q g d^dgditih <5^$s iS5^^ S'5^5»
5 34 5
52 21 2 212 2 2 6 an<e>ia^t ^"t)<fee) Jy«!<X.Jt>^i)d« ^
S5^5 £9^ c^iPI£S^^^ S*^IS^^lS& Sa
lc oiiGC*)<)
egtitfij^aGtiiiiiSWnS'cSssaiSdii^^^^dd)-
9S JlcT^rS® ea^Saiff'inS JntFciS^-si «5
^VTehi»eawo^cPu>6'«^^<52rt<ois^tt53i>>t5g £>iae5
asoS'Saic3ca^c5i^i)nSc3^^'^<9^(A^^Siii^cO'sl^
iiinw fli*n (5'tine>SS 5 2 3
PtS<g-gO(ag,ci(^ ^ eri <sr^ Soi i^-&'o J<!^
^(f'er»Qal'^as^Q£flnai^Qg^<nss{Siiii5>5Dc8 «
^aS^<TW<^cs«'C^ itn<r«)to''fiic)ifC3«)(^ 5,“
fe^SfiaiSlQ 08)
«• eS^cd'S jnfiiis3coc ti^iS^ca c *s*
SSI
Ticin
^^^^i^ii)-<5'i<5rS6^c»Sn8ar)d^it(a<»'t)€"-ff>
■A ce 4^s ¿1 SH o eiStS
c54D^Oi»5)^oi9ca<f^inG'i^*^^cscsc5t>cftJic^ 6'd^
Jilin ¿)^<JD'<)9G<^g3-g^gi>
ip<SSS)in|)«iS(?ays>JnS'ih©i^ge»>SSita^__p^
«)^ci i5^ as ^0 ^ us efi^ «ii c)3 ^ 6 “
o»»SAg2)Sci>«as®ta<i*®<5^e36a^(rc*cn<52i5i«>3 "5c53^Soi?S'«>9JsST%e‘^iiB®§iQ««>>gS'fflC,^J'
S^Js^^S^^j^oSaeoSis^^^tsicoinX) i^oa
Fig. 3. Two pages of an eighteenth century paper katta book.
The standard of good writing (on olas) is conveyed in a corrupt Sanskrit verse current in
pansala schools:
Samani samapaddni, Samansani samah sirah
Akshardifi pratishtavyah, Mriduni lalitani ca
Lesson books ‘Well-formed letters should be similar in size, similar in their tails, and in their heads,
and (written) with a light pressure.’
The first book read and learnt after the alphabet was the Nampota, a list of important places
and temples, practically an elementary geography of Ceylon; next came Mangul-lakutfu,
a description of the 216 auspicious marks on the soles of the feet of Buddha, in which
book Sanskrit words appear, followed by sentences in Pali. Everything had to be learnt
by heart and repeated perfectly; much or all of the material so learnt was not understood
at the time, but laid a sure foundation for more advanced studies. The books next read
were Gana-devi-hHla (account of the youth and education of Ganeid), Vadan-kavi-pota
(grammar, orthography, &c.), Buddha-gajja (praise of Buddha in Sanskrit), Sakas-ka^a
(prose with difficult combinations of words; there is a saying “the tongue that hadi not
SO

uttered Sakas-ka^a is like a white ant’s”). After these came Namas/ifa (Sanskrit ilokas Education
on Buddha, and Sinhalese paraphrase); Navaratna (‘nine gems,’nine verses of high value
uttered by nine Pandits at the court of Vikrama); Vyasakara, Pratyaiataka, Anuruddha Curriculum
iataka, Bauddha Sataka (or Bhakti iataka), Surya Sataka, Vfittamalava, Vj-ittamaiakhyava,
Amara Simha (i.e., AmarakBsha,ths Sanskrit vocabulary), all in Sanskrit: these works com­
pleted a thorough general education; a majority of students did not, of course, proceed so
far. If, however, the student was in tended for a learned profession, as astrology or medicine,
or for the priesthood, he now proceeded to specialise ; he would read, for example, Toga-
Sataka (Arishta iataka) as his first hook in medicine. If intended for the priesthood he
would study Pali.
Teaching was not always carried on at the pansala : the child might be taught at home by a
priest or by his own father. In the case of aristocratic families, the incumbent of the
family vihara became the child’s tutor. Otherwise, and especially if there were no pansala
near, the father taught his own children in the same way.
Children were taught to be silent in the presence of their elders, and very obedient, and
remain so even when grown up. They were also expected to do their own share of house­
hold or other work at an early age, and so became capable and responsible much sooner
than in Europe, where children expect all their wants attended to by their elders.
The relation between pupil and teacher in the East is one of affectionate respect, almost
of reverence. This is marked in many gracious ways; I shall not easily forget the action
of a craftsman’s apprentice (a man full-grown) to whom I paid money in the presence
of his teacher and of another master craftsman ; taking the money in both hands he salaamed
to his gurunnanse" and gave it to him; he received the money and then gravely returned
both money and salute; and so also with the other master craftsmen there.
The old system of education above described could not have been preserved in its entirety ; ‘Progress’
it is in many respects unsuited to modern requirements, besides having intrinsic faults; hut
it is very unfortunate that so many of its real advantages are lacking in the modern system,
and especially unfortunate that an “ English education” such as the Royal College provides,
leaves the “educated” ignorant of everything that would appear to be of special interest
and value to him, and unable to hand on to others even that knowledge which he possesses
of the great world beyond, and the lesson he has learnt from a study of the history and
manners of other peoples. Most stupid of all is the affectation of despising everything
Sinhalese and thoughtlessly admiring everything English ; reminding one of that time in
England when ‘Falsehood in a Ciceronian dialect had no opposers; truth in patois no
listeners.’
II. BOOKS.
Sinhalese books are written on ‘olas,’ or strips of the leaf of the talipot palm, Corypha Preparation
umbraculifera. The leaves are prepared as follows: a leaf bud of the palm is cut down of olas
just before it opens; the leaf segments are separated and the midrib removed, dividing
each segment into two strips. 'These are loosely rolled and placed in a copper cauldron
with cold water and then boiled for an hour, and afterwards dried in the sun for three
days. The leaves are then again rolled, this time not singly, but in rolls a foot or so in
diameter. The rolls are exposed to the dew for three successive nights, after which they
become pliable. In this state they can be preserved a long time, especially if kept in a
smoky place, such as the loft in a kitchen. When required for use, the rolls are taken
one by one and smoothed by rubbing on a polished areca stump; the trunk is tied across
e 2 51

Books two posts and the ola laid across it with a weight attached to the stalk end ; the ola is then
pulled up and down across the trunk until it is smooth on both sides. The leaves are
Preparation next cut up into various standard sizes, the largest three spans in length, the next and
of leaves most usual length for valuable books being two spans and four fingers; smaller sizes vary
from eighteen inches downwards. Care is taken to make the strips of even breadth. All
the leaves are then punched with the two string holes in accordance with the following
rule:
Ayamena catur bhagam, Trihhdgam punar eva ca,
TJbhayoh satra-madhyena, Tatha kuryat chidra-lakshanam.
“Fold the leaf in three and again in four and perforate between the pairs of lines formed
by the folding.” The leaves are next strung on smooth rounded sticks passed through
the string holes, in thick parcels between wooden covers; the four sides of the leaves are
singed with a hot iron; the packet, now called pot-gefya, is so stored until required
for use. Each leaf is a. pat-iruva\ a ‘gathering’ of eight or sixteen leaves, lettered
alphabetically, is a pat-katfuva [Clough].
The leaves are removed from the packet one by one and written on with a sharp style
{panhiuda): after the writing and revision an ink composed of dummala oil and lamp
black is lightly rubbed on {kalu-madinavd) with a rag and wiped with clean chaff, after
which the writing stands out clearly.
The completed book consists of the written leaves, enclosed between two wooden covers
[pot-kambi) of the same size and shape which are painted, lacquered, carved or quite plain.
Book covers are also made of ivory, and silver. A string {pot-lanuva), composed sometimes
of cotton, sometimes of niyanda fibre, and often with different colored strands, passes
through one set of holes and through holes in the covers, and is wound round the, book
when not in use. One end of the string is attached to a flat button {pot-sakiya), ivory,
horn or metal, which prevents the string from slipping through the cover. The correct
rule for thus tying up the book is given in the verse;
Prathame daia-sOtraifi, PaBca-sOtraf maddhyame
Pripanam tripanam bandham, Mata mata vidhiyate.
“Ten strings at the top, five strings in the middle, three and three, and the cross strings
in pairs is the rule.” The Sanskrit is apparently corrupt.
The actual leaves of the book are rarely ornamented. The full stops, however, are some­
times rubricated, and the small space around the string-hole, which is liable to become
frayed and should not be written upon, has also occasionally some decoration in red. Books
of magic, such as Bali songs, charms and spells, are illustrated with pictures of demons,
diagrams, etc., in plain black; but only such as can be scratched with the style upon the
leaf. Horoscopes are written on full-length strips of leaf and are elaborately ornamented
Lette rs with geometrical decoration similarly incised. Letters were sent on strips of ola, neatly
folded, and bound with narrow strips of ola, passing once or several times round, in
accordance with etiquette, as given in a verse current in the pansalas:
Ekani iatru dvayatp. mitram, Trlf bandhum catur prabhurn
4
PaHca matapitabhratTiifani, Sho gurum sapta bhapatim.
“ One for an enemy, two for a friend, three for a relative, four for superiors, five for father.
52

mother, or brother, six for the guru, seven for the king.” Knox says that the King Books
“when he sends any Warrants or Orders to his Officers, hath his Writings wrapped up
in a way proper to himself, and none else do or may fold up their leaves in that manner
but he.” In some cases the actual letter was enclosed in an envelope, bearing, in addition
to the address, some amount of ornament. One such in the British Museum “is decorated
with scroll work . . . embroidered in gold thread with small bosses of red and blue silk.”*
* Wickremasinghe, ’•Sinhalese Manuscripts in the British Museum,’ 1900,^. 166.
Fig. 4. TPiringi tale; from a tracing of an old
example belonging to the Nilavala Muhandirams
of Mangalagama (pp. 57, 58); the design is some­
what inferior compared with that of Fig. 8. For
explanation see pp. 65, 66. Half size of original
drawing.
3
S

CHAPTER III. PARTICULAR ACCOUNT
OF THE ARTIFICERS.
‘To the craftsman his reward'
A MORE particular account of the Atari, Navandanns, or caste or guild of artificers
proper, will be necessary. The subdivisions of the caste, according to Valentyn,
are eleven in number, viz., atari, blacksmiths; badallu, silversmiths; va4uv0,
carpenters; liyana vaduva, turners; ridiketayankarayo, damasceners ; etdatkefayankarayo, ivory
carvers and cabinet makers; galvaduvo, stone cutters; ratne endra karayO (?), jewellers;
fwi/awij, arrow makers (lac workers); r/r/tfr«, painters; founders. But Valentyn’s
divisions are rather a list of names given to men who follow particular branches of their
craft, than actual caste divisions. The Janavaipsa merely distinguishes two principal
divisions of the caste, viz., (i) kamburs, navandanno or atari, divided into lokaruvO, workers
in copper, bronze and brass; sittaru, painters ; and svarriakdrayo, goldsmiths ; and including
also turners and blacksmiths: and, (2) vaduvs, carpenters, blacksmiths and masons,
including housebuilders, agricultural implement makers (who are also mentioned in the
first section) and arrow makers {ivaduvo, including all lac workers). The existence of
a confusion between the two classes is admitted, and appears to have been inevitable as
the work of the two to some extent overlapped. It seems likely that the kamburo (also
spoken of in the Janavarpsa as Kammara Brahmans') were strictly speaking the imported
kammalar workmen from the coast, who did fine work as goldsmiths, painters, etc., and
that the vaduvo were the indigenous artificers accustomed only to the ordinary work of
building, tool making, etc. Just in the same way there were two groups of weavers,
the who made country cloth (home-spun, so to say) and the ‘chalias’ (salagamayo)
who were brought over from South India to make fine and gold-woven cloths. Con­
fusion also results from the use of terms in a particular as well as in a general sense.
At the present day two main divisions, corresponding in the main with those of the Jana-
vamsa form the only real caste division. Those in the higher division (architects, painters,
gold and silversmiths, brass repoussers, ivory and wood carvers) called galladdo, do not
eat or intermarry with those in the lower division, called vaduvo (ordinary carpenters
and turners of wood and ivory, blacksmiths, damasceners, stone carvers and lac workers).
The term vaduva now has the general meaning of‘carpenter,’ and would hardly be used
in speaking of a blacksmith, still less of a goldsmith, but is used in the Mayamataya in
the sense of ‘architect,’ and together with sittaruva, ‘painter,’ refers to men of the superior
division. The tailors and embroiderers {hannali) and leather workers (hommarayo), potters
(badahelayo), weavers of country cloth {beravayd), mat-makers {kinharayo), and makers of
whips, cords, and preparers of hides (rofyo) were of other and inferior caste. These last
are only incidentally referred to in the present chapter.
For the requirements of the Royal household there existed fourteen Departments of
Public Works:
I, Atapattu-vasama-, 2, Gam-vasama-, 3, Muhandiram-vasama •, 4, Kodituvakku-vasama ■,
5, Kalu Heva Muhandiram-vasama-, 6, Batgamvala Muhandiram-vasama-, 7, Hipi-veda-
karayo-, 8, Kottal-badda-, 9, Henda-badda; 10, Badahfa-badda-, ii, Rada-badda-, 12,
Kuruve-y, 13, Madigl-, 14, Valanbadda Madigk. Of these, only the 8th (craftsmen), 9th
(inferior carpenrters) and loth (potters) especially concern us here, particularly the 8th.
54

In each district of the Kandyan kingdom certain craftsmen were organized as a department Artificers
known as Kotfal-badda, supervised by two officers called Koftal-badde Nilame, appointed
by the King for districts other than the DisSvaniya. In the Disavaniya, the office of Kottal- Kottal-
badde Nilame was usually united with that of Disava, who appointed a Koffalbadde Vidane, badda guild
usually of the craftsman caste, as his lieutenant. of craftsmen
The body of craftsmen thus organized in the Four Korales (one of the Disavani) consisted
of the following classes :
1. Seven Vaiuvo who performed all carpentry work for the King or Disava; they were
usually employed at the Dan^u Maduva (timber yard) in Kandy.
2. Five Liyana Va^uvo, or turners.
3. Five Sittaru, or painters.
4. Fourteen I~vaduvB, or arrow makers, who made bows, arrows, spears, staves, etc., and
gauded them with lac; of these men, two worked in the Royal armoury.
5. Fourteen Atapattu Karayo who furnished or executed fine work, and were principally
employed in ornamenting and inlaying locks, guns, knives, etc., with gold, silver or brass;
two of them worked in the Royal armoury.
4
6. Four Ba allu, or silversmiths, workers in gold, silver, brass, or copper; two of them
worked in the Royal armoury.
4
7. One Gal-va uva, or mason.
8. Twenty Mul-acari, or blacksmiths, a certain number of whom, varying according to
the exigency of the service, attended constantly in Kandy, and erecting workshops near
the Disava’s house, executed all kinds of common ironwork, for which the metal was
furnished them.
9. Eight blacksmiths without regular service lands such as the foregoing held. These
bad to appear before the Disava at New Year with a knife and scissors each, and were
liable to be called on for work at any time of emergency.
4
10. Ten Disava acari under a HaAgi iya, who worked for the Disava only. The last three
4 4
classes of blacksmiths were sometimes placed under the same Hangi iya and Atu-hangi iya.
All the above craftsmen, except the blacksmiths in class 9, perform either particular work
directed by the King, or work on public buildings allotted to the Disavaniya.
It may be remarked that certain of the Muhandiram-vasama people (3, above) guarded
4 4 4
the an u ma uva (Royal timber-yard) and others had to fell and fetch timber, cut wall
timber and plane it, and thatch public buildings or the Disava’s house.
Of the Henda-badda people (9, above), six families in the Four Korales had to provide
couches, stools, and baskets of various sorts woven in rattan.
4
The Ba ahela-badda in the Four Korales is described in a later chapter. The foregoing
constituted the general body of public craftsmen in one only of the ten disavani; when
to these are added those of the other districts and also the special workers belonging to
the Four Workshops now to be described, it will be seen that the Royal and public require­
ments were well provided for.
The best of the higher craftsmen (gold and silversmiths, painters and ivory carvers, etc.) ’the four
working immediately for the King formed a close, largely hereditary, corporation of guilds
craftsmen called the Patfal-hatara (Four Workshops); these men worked only for the [Patfal-
King, unless by his express permission (though, of course, their sons or pupils might hatard) of
do otherwise); they were liable to be continually engaged in Kandy, while the Koffal-badda Royal
men were divided into relays, serving by turns in Kandy for periods of two months. The Craftsmen
Kottal-badda men in each district were under a foreman (mul-acSriyd) belongjing to the
Paftal-hatara. Four other foremen, one from each paffala, were in constant Attendance
e 4 55

Artificers at the priace.* Originally there seems to have been only o n e c a l l e d the Abharana
(regalia) paftala, but this was afterwards divided into an Abharana pattala, or jewellery
workshop, an Otunna pattala, or crown workshop, a Rankafu paftala, or golden sword
workshop (armoury), and a Simhasana lion throne) pattala, the last including particularly
painters and ivory carvers. But the craftsmen seem to have passed from one pattala to
another, according to the work entrusted to them. A place in the pattal-hatara was
usually hereditary in the chief craftsmen families, and was a position much coveted.
The chief families had considerable standing, often owning land granted by the King
on the occasion of their first settlement, or as a reward for subsequent services.
The The rewards given to craftsmen on the completion of a large undertaking, such as the
Rewards completion of a vihara, consisted usually of rice, cloth, cattle, gold, silver, lands, etc. The
of craftsmen following instances quoted from various saunas afford an idea of the amount of wealth
expended in such ways by the State or private patrons: Lankatilaka, 1342 a.d., paddy,
gold, silver, and cloth valued at 3,600,000 gold masas 20,000]; Medavala, all neces­
saries, and a remuneration of 15,600 fanams; Asgiriya (Alut vihara) 65,050 ridls [f2168]
and cloths, etc.; Niyangampaha vihara, repairs and temporary building, 270 ridls [;^q] ;
Palkuijjbura vihara, 25,000 fanams. The cost of certain repairs is carefully specified in
the Pusulpitiya vihara sannasa; “these are the works I, . . . Panabokka Djammajoti, have
done in the Pusulpitiye Vihara, which I got from my teacher Aludeijiya, to wit:— New
carved rafters to the lower roof of the main vihara room, tiled both the stories, constructed
a small vihara five carpenters’ cubits long near the dagaba, a granite image of one cubit
in height which was in a dilapidated state was restored, I performed the Netra-pinkama,
constructed a place for flower-offerings to the bo-tree, built another small vihara in front
of the main vihara and above the rock on which the sacred foot is sculptured, another
hall five cubits long, two rows of rooms of eleven cubits, a hall of fifteen cubits, and
another central hall for the accommodation of officiating priests. The whole cost of the
work is 2,857 [>C95]5besides items which may have escaped my recollection” (Lawrie,
43
p. 749). Dehigama vihara was repaired in 1786, at a cost of 1300 masu [;C ]> besides
materials from the royal stores, and thirty amut}u paddy to feed the workmen; the
repairs were of two portals and the seated image, also the painting of one hundred images
of Buddha and thirty-two images of rahat priests, and other matters on the walls, and the
erection of a stone dagaba nine cubits high. At Gangarama, according to the Mahavarpsa,
16,150 pieces of money (say ^CSS^) were spent at the dedication feast; which probably
includes the gifts to workmen, of which mention is also made; “ the carvers of the
statue of Buddha and others did he satisfy by presenting them with gifts of elephants,
cattle, and divers things that had life and that had not life” (Mahavaipsa, Ch. C.).
Craftsmen at the present day require a daily wage of Rs. i to Rs. 3 if working in Kandy;
good painters at the Maligava receive Rs. 2. The difference in amount depends more
on the feeling of the craftsman for his employer than upon his superiority or otherwise.
If executing a commission at home, he prefers to leave the amount of his reward to the
patron’s judgment, to fixing a price beforehand, but he is likely to be weeks or months
in carrying out a piece of work which could be finished in a few days if he were persuaded
* fust so when 'English royal builders set about the building of a church, the artists employed “ were
the royal masons attached to the palace ”; '■‘■to the king’s palace were attached a chief royal mason,
carpenter, smith, and painter, just as there were a chief butler and cook ”; “ under the chief master-
mason or .carpenter a body of journeymen were permanently engaged" {Lethaby, ‘ Westminster Abbey
and the King’s Craftsmen’ 1906, p. 112). With the advance of civilization, the craftsmen have
been dispensed with, while the butler, the cook, and the clerk remain I
56

of the need for hurry, which he usually cannot be. These particulars apply only to the Artificers
real hereditary landed craftsmen, not to every low-country journeyman working for the
jewellers’ shops in Kandy.
The blacksmiths had occasional dealings with the veddas, or wild men of the woods. Smiths work
“ The wilder sort of them, when they want Arrows, will carry their load of Flesh in for Vfidas
the night, and hang it up in a Smith's shop, also a Leaf cut in the form they will have
their Arrows made, and hang by it. Which if the Smith do make according to their
Pattern they will requite, and bring him more Flesh : but if he make them not, they
will do him a mischief one time or another by shooting in the night. . . . They are so
curious of their Arrows that no Smith can please them. The King once to gratifie them
for a great Present they brought him, gave all of them of his best made Arrow-blades :
which nevertheless would not please their humour. For they went all of them to a Rock
by a River and ground them into another form” (Knox, pp. 62, 63).
Thus, in spite of the fact that the artificers were already paid for their services more or Payment of
less adequately by the lands they held, they were liberally rewarded for ecclesiastical craftsmen
work, and not infrequently also for special excellence or skill in craftsmanship otherwise
applied. But they were never paid a daily wage, nor required to work a given number
of hours a day. I have had craftsmen working at my house in Kandy for weeks together ;
just as they once worked in the royal workshop. They had no idea of‘making money’
or ‘bettering themselves’; they wanted only money sufficient to buy food for themselves
and their families ; they had no wish to save money. When a large piece of work was
completed they would expect some special gift, such as a good cloth. They rarely worked
a week without having to go home for a few days to find some strayed buffalo, or to take
part in the cultivation of their fields. Yet they were always most consciencious in money
matters, such as expenditure on materials ; and though they would have hated fixed hours
of work, often worked far into the night by lamp-light, purely by their own wish, and
because they so much loved the work itself. Their pride in real capacity was most naïve
and unaffected. Their greatest possible ambition was that I should buy them some small
piece of land and reward them with it, as did the kings of old.
The reason for the special payments for ecclesiastical work was that it was felt unbecoming
for the patron to obtain the credit for a meritorious action, unless the cost was really
borne by him ; unless, indeed, he did so bear it, there was no real merit acquired. The
feeling came out as strongly when the Ruvanveli dâgaba was built (see Chapter I.,p. 4),
and Duttha GamaijI deemed it unmeet that such work should be executed by unpaid
labour, and took extraordinary precautions to prevent any voluntary work being done,
lest any of the merit should be lost to himself ; he could share the merit by deliberate
gift, without loss to himself, but if voluntary work were done secretly, only the doer
obtained the merit. The lamp of sacrifice burned as steadily in India as in mediæval
Europe. There is no more evidence that in the religious architecture of the East any
saving of cost was attempted or desired, than there is of any such thing in mediæval
Eng lish building of church and shrine.*
The family of Nilavala Muhandirams of Eldeijiya and Maùgalagama, artificers belonging Nilavala
4
to the ranka u-paf^ala, may be chosen to illustrate these points. The early history of the family
family is given in a vitti-vaftBruva\ (statement of claim) in possession of the family, tracing
their settlement in Ceylon to the fourteenth or fifteenth century. When King Bhuvaneka
Bahu (? VI.) was reigning at Kotfe, he heard that a ve^y skilful master smith from India
*£. S. Prior, ‘History of Gothic Art in England,’ 1906,/. 97). * . ,
•f- translated by Don M, de Zilva Wickramesinghe in Bell's ‘ Report on the K^galla District,’p. 98.
57

Artificers had landed in Manaduva, and said that since such a master had come over to Sirphala
he should be honoured by being brought to the Court on an elephant, and despatched to
Nilavala him Vaduvavala Devasirpha Mulacari Nayide on an elephant and brought to Kotte the
family master smith of Manaduva on the same elephant. On his arrival he presented himself
charters before the king and offered to His Majesty a telescope {iri-hagda balana kannafiya) by
means of which to look at the sun and moon, and also •i petetiya (an instrument to reckon
time). He was liberally rewarded by the king, and he was given the village called
4
Mangalagama, in Kitjdigoda Korale, of Four Korales, for his sustenance {hada-v( illd),
and was invested with the title of Mandalavalli Nayide.
After Mandalavalli Nayide’s death, the ruling king (? Vira Parakrama Bahu VIII.)
enquired for his descendants. There being two orphan children related to each other as
aunt and nephew, he had them brought up at the Court and finally married to each other,
the girl being given the title of Etana (Lady) and the village of Mangalagama in mav-
urume (inheritance in the female line). Her daughter likewise possessed the village; she
married Kolomba Nayide, who served Raja Sirpha II. Her son, Madduma Nayide,
inherited the village and served Vimala Dharmma Surya II. His son, Gallat Nayide,
inherited from him, and served Narendra Sirpha of Kupdasale. His son, Madduma
Nayide, made the plaint detailed in the vattoruva giving these particulars. The siftuva,
or order of the Adigar who enquired into the case, confirmed the tenancy of Nilavala
Loku Nayide; its date is 1763 a.d. Lands and titles were conferred on other relatives;
Raja Sirpha I. of Sitavaka, invested the grandson of Mandavalli Nayide with the same
title, and he also served the king. In 1644 a.d. the following Sannasa was granted to
one Hadu Nayide of Mangalagama, a representative of the family who had given to
the king a gold-hilted sword :
“ Hail! The order delivered on Saturday, the 7th day of the waning moon, in the month
of Vap (September— October), in the year of Saka 1566 (1644 a.d.). Whereas the gold­
smith Hadu Nayida of Mahgalagama, having presented a (newly) gilt .¿«¿«-sword of gold,
hath performed faithful services to the Palace ; six amupams sowing extent of Mahagoda
in Kipdigoda Korale in the Disavaniya of Four Korales, including houses and gardens,
trees and plants, high lands and jungles appertaining thereto, have been granted (to him)
to be held as praveni land, so long as his children, grandchildren and their progeny shall
survive. The (original) order upon which this sannasa was granted, that order is thus
proclaimed the (final) decree” (H. C. P. Bell, Report on the Kegalla District, 1892,
pp. 98, 99). A later sannasa of the same family reads as follows:
“ His Majesty the supreme ruler of Sri Lanka, . . . passed a royal edict that a certain
portion of the Saddharmaya, doctrines inculcated by our King Buddha, the teacher of
the three worlds, be transcribed on leaves of beaten gold; and on the occasion when
Nilavala Ratnavalli Navaratna Abharapaya, to whom gold and gems had been supplied
for this purpose, completed and presented the work. His Majesty, out of his bountiful
liberality, commanded that the following allotment of lands ... in all three amupu in
extent, together with the houses, gardens, plantations, and high and muddy lands apper­
taining thereto (be granted to him), to be undisturbedly possessed by him and his
generations so long as they shall exist, . . . in the year of ^aka 1677” (1755 a.d.)
(Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 643). Representatives of the family still hold lands at Eldepiya
and Mahgalagama, and possess heirlooms of great historical interest (Lawrie’s Gazetteer,
p. 214). _ _ ^ .
Other The descendants of goldsmiths live.at Mottuvela, an ancestor of one of these obtained
charters the following sannasa in 1665 a.d.: “ During the reign of His Majesty the Mighty
Emperor Raja Siipha, . . . as Marukona Ratna Abharapa Vedakaraya offered himself
58

before the Great Gate, orders were given to make jewellery required for the royal Artificers
dress, and having made and submitted several jewelleries to the Great King, he stated
that he required the Mottuvela Nilapanguve Badavedilla in Pallesiya-pattuva of Asgiri
Korale, in the Disavaniya of Mátale, for his maintenance. . . . His Majesty . . . did . . . 'Their
in the year of Baka 1587, absolutely grant the high and low lands in Mottuvelagama charters
Bacjavedilla ... to Marukona Ratna Abharaija Vedakaraya, to be possessed without any
disturbance or hindrance during the existence of the sun, the moon, Senka^agala, and
the Mahaveli-ganga” (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 608).
At Ullandupitiya, a painter obtained the following sannasa in a .d. 1593: “When the
works of Jetavanáráma were fully completed on Thursday, the full moon day of the
month Vesak, the year of áaka 1515, the Great King Vimala Dharma Sürya, after
receiving the merits and becoming joyous on the occasion, thought of bestowing a land
to be possessed from generation to generation; and granted unto the painter, Rajeávara
Hittara Acariya of Ullandupitiya, ... a garden and three hena lands, situate at Ullandu­
pitiya in Kulugammanasiya-pattuva, to be possessed without any dispute whatsoever.”
(Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 872).
In A.D. 1710 the following sannasa was granted to an artificer of Gannoruva: “As
Gannoruve Navaratna Davuijda Abharaija Acariya was serving the Great Gate faithfully,
on this Tuesday, the eleventh day of the increasing moon, in the month of Esala, in the
year of áaka 1632, styled Vikfita, the field Vadudeijiya of three amuiju, with all its
appurtenant high and low lands, plantations, and buildings, was granted to him for his
maintenance. This is the purport of the command, and it is this” (Lawrie’s Gazetteer,
p. 278).
“ In the reign of King Kirti árl, Gannoruva Muhandirama, a descendant of the last-
mentioned, was a skilful goldsmith. He worked in the king’s palace. The king made
him presents of land and money and an elephant. Later it was reported to the king
(Rajádhi Raja Siijiha) that Gannoruva Muhandirama had died possessed of much property
belonging to His Majesty. He seized the property and removed it to the royal treasury”
(Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 277).
It will be observed that in this way the chief families of smiths possessed what was really Devlndra
a state endowment. The artificers were much considered and favoured by the Kings, Mulacariya
occasionally so much so as to lead to quarrels between them and the nobles, ending in
disaster to the former, befell at the time of the building of the Audience Hall in Kandy,
in the last King’s reign. Devendrá Mulácariya, whose descendants still flourish, was
foreman, and is said to have deliberately shortened, and then rejected as too short, the
timber supplied by the chiefs! ón their complaint the King ordered one of the smith’s
fingers to be cut off; but he drowned himself in the Kandy lake to avoid this disgrace.*
The iron cubit rule {riyan Mid) used by him is still preserved by his descendants (‘Ceylon
National Review,’ No. II., 1906, p. 235).
The names of artificers are not recorded in their work, nor as a rule remembered except Silvatenna
by their own descendants. The most famous painter of the late eighteenth century,
however, appears to have been Devaragampala ‘Unnanse’ Silvatenna, an ‘unordained
priest’ of acári caste, who painted at Degaldoruva, Ridi Vihara and elsewhere in Kirti
árl’s reign. He wore a white robe and was unordained, because only Vellalas were
admitted to the priesthood by the Siamese sect, which was the only one then in existence,
having been established in Ceylorj as the result of Kirti árl’s and his predecessors’ missions
* Devendrá Mulacariya also built the octagon [Maligdva Library') in Kandy; at Midefiya there
is a maduva built by him [Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 589).
59

Artificers to Siam.* The names of innumerable other craftsmen are recorded in sannas and deeds
of various sorts, but can hardly ever be associated with any particular piece of work.
Penalties We gather an idea of the reasons and manner of punishment of craftsmen from an incident
for bad’work connected with the building of the parapet of the Kandy lake, about a.d. 1806 ; although
the work was carried out as rajokariya by ordinary villagers, and was not (except as
regards the design), done by the craftsmen themselves. One Gannoruve Tikiri Gammahe
of Gannoruva had charge of part of the work, which was allotted to his people, and those
of Parakatavela Aracci. When the king came to inspect the work, the gammahe’s part
was still unfinished, but the rest completed. He was taken to prison by the kankanama
(overseer) of the V edakarayO people, and his certificate of office forfeited. He was eighteen
days in prison, but ‘got released,’ after which other adventures befel him.
A story is told of the goldsmith, Ratnavalli Navaratna Abharaija of Nilavala, already
mentioned, that seeing the King (Kirti Sri) one day asleep he conceived the idea of setting
a gem in the royal great toe nail; which he succeeded in doing without awakening the
sleeping monarch. His awakening was awaited with some trepidation, lest he should
have presumed too far; but the King was delighted at his skill, and rewarded him with
liberality.
Rewards Amongst the rewards and marks of favour bestowed by the Kings on artificers, were
portions of the royal dress; when the Gangarama Vihara was completed an entire costume
was presented. In the ordinary way no one would have been allowed to wear such
garments, the sumptuary laws being very definite; but probably the smiths could use them
as the kumara ^nduma at nstra mangalya (see Appendix to this Chapter); in the meanwhile
these gifts were, and still are in a few cases, greatly treasured. It is also said that the maker
of the crown might try it on his own head; which would have been horrible treason for
any other to do. Thepatabendi decoration was sometimes conferred on eminent craftsmen ;
it was a pafa-tahaduva or gold frontlet, tied on by the king himself as a mark of honour.
High spirit The high spirit of the craftsmen is sufficiently indicated in Knox’s account of them. He
of the crafts- says: “ Next after the degree of Hondrews may be placed Goldsmiths, Blacksmiths,
men Carpenters and Painters. Who are all of one degree and quality. But the Hondrews
will not eat with them: however in Apparel there is no difference; and they are also
privileged to sit on stools, which none of the inferior ranks of People hereafter mentioned,
may do. Heretofore they were accounted almost equal to the Inferior sort of Hondrews,
and they would eat in these Artificers’ Houses, but afterwards they were degraded upon
this occasion. It chanced some Hondrews came to a Smith’s Shop to have their Tools
mended, when it came to be Dinner time, the Smith leaves work, and goes in to his
House to dine, leaving the Hondrews in his Shop: who had waited there a great while
to have their work done. Now whether the Smith fearing lest their hunger might move
them to be so impudent or desperate as to partake with him of his Dinner, clapt to his
Door after him; Which was taken so hainously by those hungry people in his Shop,
that immediately they all went and declared abroad what an affront the Smith had put
upon them. Whereupon it was decreed and confirmed, that for ever all the people of
that rank should be deposed, and deprived of the Honour of having the Hondrews to
eat in their Houses. Which Decree has stood in force ever since.
Nevertheless these Smiths take much upon them, especially those who are the King’s
Smiths (i.e., pattal hatara men) ; that is, such who live in the King’s Towns, and do
his work. These have this Privilege, that each has a parcel of Towns belonging to them,
whom none but they are to work for. The ordinary work they do for them is mending
* See P. E. Pieris, ‘Kirti ¿rfs Embassy to Siam,’ f.C.B.R.A.S., Vol. XVIII.
60

their Tools, for which every man pays to his Smith a certain Rate of Corn in Harvest Artificers
time according to ancient Custom. But if any has work extraordinary, as making new
Tools or the like, besides the aforesaid rate of Corn, he must pay him for it. In order
to this, they come in an humble manner to the Smith with a Present, being Rice, Hens,
and other sorts of Provision, or a bottle of Rack, desiring him to appoint his time, when
they shall come to have their work done. Which when he hath appointed them, they
come at the set time, and bring both {char-) Coals and Iron with them. The Smith
sits very gravely upon his Stool, his Anvil before him, with his left hand towards the
forge, and a little Hammer in his Right. They themselves who come with their work
must blow the Bellows, and when the Iron is to be beaten with the great Maul, he holds
it, still sitting upon his Stool, and they must hammer it themselves, he only with his
little Hammer knocking it sometimes into fashion. And if it be anything to be filed,
he makes them go themselves and grind it upon a Stone, that his labour of fileing may
be tbe less; and when they have done it as well as they can, he goes over it again with
his file and finisheth it. That which makes these Smiths thus stately is, because the Towns
People are compelled to go to their own Smith, and none else. And if they should,
that Smith is liable to pay Damages that should work for any in another Smith’s Juris­
diction.”
We have seen that less than four per cent, of the Kandyan population now appear to ‘Their
belong to the artificers’ caste. But in the census report, on which this estimate is based, number
statistics are given of occupation, and not of caste; for in this social institution. Govern­
ment aifects a blindness which in actual administration it cannot maintain.* The number
of persons belonging to the craftsman castes greatly exceeds the number of those still
practising their craft, so that we may suppose that quite as many as ten per cent, of the
population in the eighteenth century, consisted of craftsmen and their dependents. Of
these, not more than half can have been navandanns (p. 54), the superior artificers which
alone are spoken of in the present chapter. It is necessary to say a few words as to their
origin.
At first sight it seems strange to suppose that many of them were of Indian origin; yet Indian
this is a point on which no doubt can be entertained. Numerous references to the origin of
importation of artificers from Southern India have been given in Chapter I.; that the some crafts-
practice continued even into the eighteenth century is attested by contemporary records men
and sannas. The navandanno at any one time, speaking of the eighteenth and immediately
preceding centuries at least, consisted partly of indigenous craftsmen, and partly of newly-
settled Tamil artificers, coming from Southern India, to work for the king, who showed
them favour and made them grants of land. Hence it is that not only do we find the
closest correspondence in detail and technique between South Indian (Tamil) and Sinhalese
work; but also that the artificer families have often Hindu names (such as Rajeivara
Devasurendra), they preserve traces of biva worship (such as Sanskrit ilokas written in
his praise), and of other Hindu ceremonies {nitra mangalya, etc.); their technical works are
obviously a part of the Indian Silpaiastra; some of their technical terms are corruptions
of Tamil words; they make use of Hindu mantrams (cf. p. 74); they are occasionally
referred to as Kammdlar; and so forth. The community of design elements would not
* Sofar does this fiction prevail, that a valuable paper, dealing with the origin, distribution and
traditions of the craftsmen in Ceylon, recently offered to the Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon Branch,
was rejected by the referee, a Government official {though not in any sense an official censor to this
learned society) who vetoed it on the ground that it dealt with caste; as if any such paper could do
otherwise !
61

Artificers alone suffice to prove the recent Indian origin of many of the craftsmen, as the decorative
motifs go back to a source common to both India and Ceylon.
Immigrant The indigenous craftsmen and the newly-arrived Tamils worked together side by side.
'Tamil They did not always agree, as we learn from the case of one Vaduge Anura Appa of
craftsmen Harispattuva who in a.d. 1765 made a complaint regarding tools stolen from him and
4
from a certain Demafa Ba ^la (Tamil goldsmith), and also against the Demala Badala
himself (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 354); ill-feeling between the old-established craftsman
and the newly-arrived ‘Tamil goldsmith’ evidently existed ! Nevertheless, the craftsmen
thus from time to time imported, very soon became part and parcel of the Kandyan
Sinhalese people, Buddhist by faith ; the style and feeling of their work was modified,
under the influence of the living local tradition, something of the Hindu-Dravidian
element being lost, and the Buddhist-Aryan acquired. It is remarkable indeed, that the
local tradition should have so successfully and continuously preserved its vitality and
individuality.
The The indigenous craftsmen, it will be perceived, represented both the original Sinhalese
indigenous stock, and the later immigrant craftsmen incorporated from time to time into their com-
tradition munity. It would be difficult to say how far an original Sinhalese element is represented
in the body of superior craftsmen; for we do not know much of the state of the arts in
very early times, and we have the record of the introduction of Indian craftsmen with
Buddhist missionaries from the North (p. 2), and again at the time of Gaja Bahu’s
invasion of Southern India (p. 6). The inferior craftsmen, potters, weavers (except
salagamayd), mat makers, etc., on the other hand no doubt represent an integral part of
the Sinhalese population, perhaps even carrying on the remote traditions of the pre-
Sinhalese inhabitants, who may have been by no means uncivilised.
In a general way it may be stated that the indigenous craftsmen of all sorts, integrally
a part of the Sinhalese population, were makers of the plainer and most necessary articles
normally required by a simple agricultural people, and the imported craftsmen were more
especially sumptuary artists from the big cities and craftsguilds of Southern India, making
the more elaborate and costly goods required by tbe Court and the capital. The distinction
is clearly marked in the case of weavers, the indigenous beravayo making country cloth,
good but not fine, and the imported salagamayS making the gold-woven muslins worn
by royalty and nobility. So, too, the dye-painting of cloth, the more elaborate sorts of
embroidery (with gold), and tailoring and sandal making and so forth were crafts practised
almost exclusively by foreign craftsmen, at the Court only. The king, sometimes himself
a Tamil, and always with Tamil queens, naturally favoured Tamil fashions, and the results
are seen in the Tamil influence upon jewellery and dress in the eighteenth century. India
was the source of sumptuous cloths and skilled craftsmen for the Sinhalese, much as Paris
sets the fashion in London. Even at the present day, those who require silk brocades or
gold-woven turbans in Ceylon, are obliged to import them from Southern India, and
dye-painted kerchiefs are made in Jaffna for sale in Kandy. It will thus be seen how
intimately connected was the art of Southern India and Ceylon; but while thus recognizing
the influence of the Tamil craftsmen, it is necessary to remember also the continuity
and vitality of the indigenous tradition, and to give to the Sinhalese people the full credit
for the fact that their art, taken as a whole, is perfectly distinct in style and feeling from
that of Southern India, and preserves clearer and more numerous traces of the Early Indian,
and especially of the Early Buddhist style, than can easily be found in India itself.
It is desirable to trace a little more fully the history of the kammslar, the South Indian
craftsmen who thus came to Ceylon from time to time, and there joined their fellows
already settled there and practising their craft. The Kammular in South India are the
62

craftsmen par excellence, the builders and sculptors of the great Hindu temples. The Artificers
following account of the Kammalar in South India is mainly condensed from Dr. Pulney
Andy’s paper in No. 50 of ‘The Journal of Indian Art and Industry’:
The kammalar are descendants of a race of Aryans who entered India across the Panjab Origin of
long before Vyasa began the collection and arrangement of the Vedas. They were known craftsmen
in early times as Viiva Brahmans, Deva Brahmans or Deva Kammalar, in contradistinction
to the modern Brahmans who are descendants of Vashishta. They spread gradually towards
the south and appear to have gone thence to Ceylon, Burma, Siam and Java, the art of
all which lands is closely related to that of South India. They reject the authority of
the Brahmans, having priests of their own caste, and perform many rites after the manner
of Brahmans. The Kammalar claim to have been at one time spiritual guides and
priests to the whole people, of which a trace survives in the proverb, ‘The Kammalan is
guru to the world,’ which is said to be current in Southern India. They still perform
priestly rites in connection with the consecration of images. They both claim and possess
various special privileges which they have always upheld with much vigour. Their
priests are or were learned in the Silpaiastra. The majority are Saivites. They trace
their ancestry to the five sons of Viivakarma, of whom the first-born Manu, worked in
iron; the second, Maya, in wood; the third, Tvastra, in brass, copper, and alloys; the
fourth, Silpi, in stone; and the fifth, Viivajna, was a gold and silversmith and jeweller.
Even to-day the blacksmith is said to take precedence amongst the artificers— a point
of difference from Ceylon. In former times the artisans had their own guilds, which
protected the interests of their own trades; but as these institutions gradually declined,
the Kammalar were driven to seek the aid of capitalists of other castes, and now they
are, in a majority of instances, reduced to mere paid workmen, earning daily wages.
The five occupations are not mutually exclusive; for example, the son of a goldsmith
may, if he likes, follow any of the other crafts, or vice-versa. We have seen this is only
partially the case in Ceylon, as there is a general division into two groups which do
not intermarry. In India the five sects form one compact community; as indeed they
do in Ceylon, though partly divided as remarked.
Some part of the foregoing history of the Kammalar is mythical. A critical examination
of the history and traditions of the Kammalar, and of their technical literature is greatly
to be desired, and may be expected to throw light on the general history of art, of guilds,
and perhaps of freemasonry. Will not the Vi^vakarma Kulabhimana Sabha in Madras
begin this much-needed investigation before the opportunities are lost for good and all ?
It is probably true that there existed a caste or guild of artificers at a time long ante­
cedent to the Christian era, and that they had spread all over India, perhaps as far as
the extreme south at the time of the founding of the Sinhalese nation by Vijaya. Later,
they passed to Ceylon, Java and other places. There is a remarkable unity underlying
the diverse developments of Indian art (including the art of Ceylon, Burma, Slam, and
Java), not merely as regards the persistence in time of elements of decoration, but also
ge ographically; here I refer to the present peculiar isolation of particular trades and
techniques which survive, so to say, in scattered ‘islands’ all over India (cf. ‘Indian Art
at Delhi,’ 1904, pp. 112, 154, 158, 179, 206, 221, 233, and also this work, in various
places). The argument from distribution is, that a knowledge of these crafts was once
more widely spread and continuous; it is also fairly clear that it was once very much more
extensive and thorough.
The greatest interest attaches to the system of apprenticeship and instruction found Apprenttce-
amongst the Kandyan craftsmen. From the social and guild point of view, the same ship
method may be said to be characteristic of all the craftsmen, both of the artificers’ caste
63

Artificers and also potters and weavers, etc. That is, the trade was hereditary, and the sons are
brought up to it as a matter of course,* and trained in the actual workshop, being given
Apprentice- easy or monotonous work at first (as grinding colours) and little by little picking up a
ship knowledge of the craft by precept, example, and practice; and so the tradition was
perpetuated. Thus from the very beginning, the disciple absorbed together, technique,
tradition and metaphysic. No technical education of the future can replace the workshop
training of the old craftsmen; for technical education supplies only technique, and that
inferior; the imagination it takes no account at all! When the son married and set up
for himself, he would be given tools, but would still very probably continue to work
with and for his father. We see here the working of the joint family system. Very
often also the craftsman trained up with his own sons those of other men of the same
caste. In either case the relation between master and pupil was one of lasting reverence
and affection; especially where the period of instruction was prolonged, and the informa­
tion imparted of great value, as amongst the higher craftsmen.
Such was the general type of apprenticeship amongst the craftsmen; but the teaching
of drawing and design was confined to the superior division of the artificer’s caste, the
galladdo from whom the paftal-hatara men were drawn. The lower division of craftsmen
had also some knowledge of design, but in the main relied upon the others to set out
their work.
APPENDIX TO CHAPTER III.
I. TEACHING OF DRAWING.
As architects, painters and designers, a thorough knowledge of drawing was essential
to the superior craftsmen, and we find a highly systematic course of instruction in use
for the education of apprentices. These were usually the sons of master craftsmen; but
the sons of relations and even of outsiders were also received. A man of the proper caste,
wishing to apprentice his son to a master-craftsman, would first find a'fortunate hour
{nckat balanavd), and then proceed to the craftsman’s house with his son of about six
years old, and one or more servants carrying presents of food and betel leaves on a yoke.
The boy was first set to learn drawing; he was given a yappsrwva, or wooden drawing-
board covered with a preparation known as vadi. Vadi was made by grinding together
tamarind seed (two palani), coconut charcoal (one palam), iron slag (two palam), and
indigo (ten manjadi) with the juice of kikirindi leaves {EcHpta erecta, L.) .-f The ingredients
were ground together and mixed with finely-powdered quartz {tiruvanagald) and smoothly
* “No Artificers" says Knox, ‘■‘■ ever change their 'Trade from Generation to Generation; but
the Son is the same as 'was his Father, and the Daughter marries only to those of the same Craft:
and her Portion is such Tools as are of use, and do belong unto the Trade.”
■ \This "was the practice; but the mnemonic verse in 'which particulars are given implies the use
of only one palam of the iron slag :
“ Neralukatu gurut yadalut swhkara t}a Dasafak pamaifa mada nil geiia ambarami i}a
Potuhcra siyambala cfa tunpalani ge i}a Madarada patyusin nimakara ga sosdi ija”
64

spread on the board and allowed to dry. Upon the board so prepared the pupil learnt ‘teaching of
to draw, using for his pencil the spine of a sea-urchin [ikiri kafuva) mounted in a bamboo drawing
handle; or failing that, a pointed style of kumbuk iferminalia glabra) bark. Now-a-days,
ordinary slates and slate-pencils are used.
The first copy was the vaka deka, or double curve of Fig. 5; the boy had first to trace
over and over again the teacher’s copy on the yafi-
poruva. After some control of the hand had thus
been acquired, and the form was deeply impressed on
the pupil’s mind, he had to draw the same from
memory, particular care being taken to show the
right feeling in drawing the subtle curve. When
he had attained some proficiency the figure was com­
plicated by the addition of ‘wedges’ {paturu); then a
‘flower’ {sina mala) was added at one end (these are
seen in Fig. 6), and finally the vaka deka by means
Fig. 5. Vaka deka \ modern
of internal divisions and external additions, was made
drawing, x |.
into the designs known as katuru mala (Fig. 7),
mottak karuppuva and tiringi tale (talaya or talai*)
(Figs. 4 and 8, and PI. XVII). These are successive complications all based on the
original vaka deka. The ornament of which the tiringi tale is built up is called liya pata
or liya pota (q.v. in Chapter IV). The tiringi tale itself is not a form used in decoration,
but is rather a ‘tour de force’ or test of skill; when the pupil was able to draw a good
example, not from a copy, of course, he was considered to be proficient at this sort of
work. A few specially good specimens have been handed down in craftsmen’s families
from the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries; these, like some working drawings
for royal jewellery which I have seen, were executed on Dutch paper, which was also
used for the very rare illuminated manuscripts. Pattern or copy books ippadimakada'
pot) were regularly used, and I have seen both modern examples, and an early one
(PI. XIV., i) on Dutch paper. Old copies were often set also on loose sheets of Dutch
or other paper, and not in regular books. Sinhalese paper was coarse and ill adapted to
fine brush drawing such as that of Fig. 8. English paper came into use later.
Fig. 6. Vaka deka Withpaturu and Fig. 7. Katuru mala; modern
slna mala ; modern drawing, x |. drawing, x| [D.S. M.].
* The words ‘ moUak karuppuva ’ and ‘ tiringi tale ’ are of interest as they are probably corruptions
of Tamil '■ moltaik karukku' (blunt or round edge), and '•tirigu talai' (twisted blade); I have seen
the latter word written ‘ tirikit talaV on a Sinhalese drawing (Fig. 4) dating from about the end of
the eighteenth century. ‘■ Katuru' is probably a corruption of kartfi, ‘agent’ or ‘craftsman.’
f I 65

‘teaching of At no time was the pupil taught to draw from nature. He was made free of the
draviing traditional idealised forms which have been handed down from generation to generation ;
much as the Gothic artist inherited the Freedom of the Tudor rose. The trained artist
is contemptuous of any fault in symmetry, carrying this idea almost too far; he thinks
Fig. 8. Tiritfgi tale, half-size of original. From an old drawing in
black and red belonging to T. B. Keppitipola, Basnayaka Nilame of
Embekke Devale. The vaka deka first drawn is clearly recognizable
within the elaborated design (this is not the case in Fig. 4, p. 53,
which represents an inferior example). The broad curved tongues
{tajfdd) are red in the original drawing. All these figures are drawn
with a brush, as described in Chapter IX. (Painting).
that the balanced design of the lid of the box shown PI. XXXVI., 6, is much superior
to that on the back, which is not equally symmetrical. He regards ‘design’ as the
knowledge of, and power to make use of, already determined forms ; in complete contrast
to the modern Western idea of the continually fresh adaptation of natural forms by each
artist at his own will and in his own way. He is scornful of those who do not know
(danne nf) the traditional forms, and of those who draw after their own vain imagining
(kalpanavafa andinavd). When shown, however, good work of other countries, as for
example, Kelmscott borders, he is interested, and remarks, ‘Ek eka rafa, ek eka -uda^
‘Each country has its own style’; which is getting very near to the root of the matter.
66

The method of setting about a piece of drawing is remarkable, and shows the strong ‘teaching of
visualising power of the painter, and his reliance upon memory. In drawing for example, draining
a lion, a beginning is made with the muzzle, and the brush is carried thence round the
whole outline, without preliminary sketching. The painter always seems to see his design
upon the surface, and merely to outline what is to
him already there. The drawing may or may not be
good, but there is never any vagueness or hesitation
about it; there is a total absence of all ‘messing
about,’all is concrete and clear.
The pupil was also taught to draw repeating patterns
with a geometrical construction, called tundan veda
(Fig. 9) and all the different types of conventional
floral ornament made use of in Sinhalese design.
These, by the way, varied a little in different families,
wherein ' they were traditionally transmitted frorn
generation to generation. The types of tiringi tale
also varied slightly. There was some opportunity for
individuality here; it should not be supposed that
the strictly traditional character of the arts made it
altogether impossible to distinguish one man’s work
from another’s. Most noteworthy is the great ease
and certainty with which beautiful ornament like that
of Fig. 9 can be drawn at a moment’s notice. If one
watches such sketches made, it seems rather as if
Fig. 9. Tundan veda; repeating the pattern grows of itself, than that the draftsman
design with geometrical con­ makes it.
struction ; modern drawing, x i. By this time the boy began to draw figure and animal
subjects ; the first of these was always a curious com­
bination of a bull and an elephant, called usamba-kunjara (bull-elephant); next in order
came the following designs; catur-nari-falakkiya (4-women-palanquin), panca-nari-gfta
(5-women-knot), sat-nsri-toraTfa (6-women-arch), sapta-nari-turavga (7-women-horse),
ashta-nari-ratha (8-women-chariot, and nava-nari-kunjara (9-women-elephant).* All of
these are drawn on the yatipsruva, from the teacher’s copies; it should, however, not
be forgotten that the object of instruction was not to enable the pupil to copy a design
before him, but to enable him (i), to reproduce from memory certain well-known designs
and figure subjects, and (2), to make use of the traditional elements, of design in the
decoration of whatsoever varied forms and surfaces he might be called upon to decorate.
Meanwhile the apprentice learnt by heart the Sanskrit Rttpavaliya, containing instructions technical
for the drawing of images of gods and mythical animals; Sariputra, containing instruction handbooks
for making images of Buddha; and Faijayantaya, a compendium of instruction in the
art s, containing, for example, a detailed description of the sixty-four kinds of jewels proper
for gods, kings, and men, the design and quantity of gold required for each ; measurements
of swords, thrones, dagabas, etc. The pupil had by this time begun to use the brush,
which he learnt to do by practising on unimportant work and by filling in details and
completing work laid down (lakutfu kara^avd) by the master. If the master was engaged
* Most or all of these are designs well known in India. They are not specially adapted to teaching
drawing, and it would seem rather by chance than intention that they have been made a part of
a regular course. For further details of these forms see Chapter IV., p. 90.
f 2 67

‘teaching of on the decoration of a vihara there was no lack of minor work which could be executed
drawing by pupils while he himself was busy with the most important and difficult parts. The
pupil, like the pupils of the painters of mediaeval Europe, thus got his hand in, by
completing the easier parts of real work in progress, instead of attempting too early to
execute individual work of the most difficult sort, or perpetually working at uninteresting
copies of no permanent value.
As it was usual for one man to practise several of the higher crafts at the same time (as
painting and ivory carving together, or with others as well), the pupils also had practice
in several crafts, but usually selected one or more as their special work. A galladda
proficient in five crafts was called silpacariya.
Workshop It should be pointed out that in the case of such pupils as we are considering, a general
education and religious education was imparted at the same time, similar to that given in pansala
schools. Reading, writing and arithmetic were thus taught; the latter was essential for
the purpose of the astrological calculations required to determine favourable times for
the commencement of important works, and for the understanding of the measurements
given in the technical books referred to. The rules for drawing figures necessitated the
construction and use of scales. A good deal of geometry of a practical character was
also learnt in connection with the construction of repeating patterns. The master crafts­
man had thus a small school where technical instruction was given in addition to an
ordinary education. The relation between master and pupil remained to the last, one
of affectionate reverence. It was customary for the pupil to offer whatever he earned
to his teacher, who, unless specially asked, returned the greeting and the gift with the
same grave courtesy with which it was offered. A friend of mine, now over fifty, tells
me that he always observes this custom with his father (now over eighty), who was his
teacher. The whole system was indeed mainly one of hereditary transmission of a craft
or ‘mystery’; and though other pupils were admitted, the master was loth to reveal his
last secrets save to a son, or perhaps to a faithful pupil at the completion of his course.
If the pupil was an outsider, his father from time to time made presents to the teacher,
and at the conclusion of the period of instruction some more substantial gift, such as a
buffalo. As the pupil grew up, he continued to work for and with his teacher, and thus
the tradition was perfectly transmitted. It is indeed a strange thing for anyone used to
the ecclecticism of modern Europe to be brought face to face with strong living traditions
in this way; for in Europe “whatever of art is left which is in any sense the result
of continuous tradition is, and long has been, so degraded as to have lost any claim to
be considered art at all”; while the only art existing in Ceylon, worthy the name of
art, is strictly traditional.
'Teaching in Before leaving the subject of teaching drawing, it may be noted that it is one worthy
English of close study in India and the East generally. The information gained from a com-
schools parative study of the methods employed in different parts of India would be of the utmost
historical, artistic and anthropological value. Since Indian craftsmen are admittedly
masters of design, their methods of instruction should be of permanent interest and value
to all interested in the teaching of drawing; and a proper and rational system of instruction
might be introduced into English schools in Ceylon, where at present the poor learner
is put through the old-fashioned South Kensington mill, and may ‘learn drawing’ without
acquiring any knowledge of Indian traditional design, or in any way connecting the subject
with his ordinary life or the past history of his country. The object of teaching drawing
should surely be educational, and not merely utilitarian! I have not space to enter into
the subject at length; but the points which I consider of greatest importance are, (i) a
greater recognition of the value of drawing from memory; (2) instruction in the use
68

of ruler and compasses at an early stage, the drawing of curves to be taught first of all, ‘Teaching of
leaving the straight lines to take care of themselves later. Anyone who can draw drawing
accurately a sensitive curve could also draw a straight line; (3) the postponement of
model drawing to a late stage; (4) the elimination of scientific perspective from the
ordinary drawing course; (5) recognition of local tradition, by a large use of Eastern
decorative forms for freehand work, and of brass and earthenware for model drawing;
and (6) cultivation of taste in, by explanation of, the principles of design, and exhibition
of examples or pictures of good work, mainly oriental. I do not wish to condemn direct
drawing from nature, but rather to postpone it to a late stage in the actual drawing course ;
at an earlier stage I would introduce it only in connection with nature study and not as a
part of the actual instruction in drawing. A logical contrast would thus be drawn between
drawing as a means of recording observations of scientific interest or practical value, and
drawing as an art, i.e., as a means of interpretation of nature; and both points of view
would be of interest.
The first thing to do in this investigation, would be to compare the South Indian methods
with those of Ceylon, and with one another, and from these observations to reconstruct
as it were a perfect text, exhibiting the instruction as a connected scheme. In this
direction I have made some enquiries at Tanjore, from an old master-craftsman named
Annasami Stapati Rayar. Drawing was taught as in Ceylon, upon a wooden board,
prepared by covering with a lime and rice, or charcoal, lime and rice paste, and drawn
upon with a leaden pencil. The forms first drawn were the simplified but comparatively
naturalistic outlines of certain fruits and vegetables (can this really be a part of the tradition,
or is it of modern origin ?); and certain double curves or conventional leaf forms, called
kadaikaddu, kurippu and akatti karukku (Fig. 10), which
apparently correspond to the Sinhalese vaka deka (an
example of the latter (Fig. 5) was recognized by the
Stapati as kadaikadiT)- Copy or sketch books, called
kaduttam pustakam, were used as in Ceylon. One such
in my possession, about a century old, consists mainly
of sketches or memory notes of images of the principal
deities and their attributes as detailed in the &stra.
Fig. 10. Tamil forms used in The chief iastra used by my informant was the Dhyana
teaching drawing, called kadai- Ratanavaliya. The Silpa &stra forms a bulky literature,
kaddu, and kurippa or akatti but usually very corrupt, and greatly neglected, alike
karukku. From A. Stapati by Indian and European scholars.* A knowledge of
Rayar, Tanjore, 1907. Sanskrit, Tamil and Telugu, and of the art, is required
for its adequate study and comprehension. Several of
the books are to be found in the Tanjore library, and in that of the TheosopHical Society
at Adyar. I venture to commend their investigation and the study of the methods of
teaching drawing, and of South Indian art and artists generally, to the members of the
Viivakarma Kulabhimana Sabha in Madras.
* The subject has been touched upon once or twice in the Journal of Indian Art\ see ‘Dravidian
Architectural Details,' by A. Rea, in Vol. V.
6.9

II. NETRA MANGALYA.
Netra The Netra Mangalya ceremony is one of great interest in itself, and important from our
Mangalya point of view as showing the craftsman in his sacerdotal capacity (see p. 63) and as
illustrating the relation between him and his patron. The ceremony was really the
dedication of the temple (more exactly, the image in it); and it will be well for the sake
of completeness to trace very briefly the whole course of events connected with the
building of a new vihara, before laying special stress on the nstra mangalya. The patron
was almost always the King, who had, of course, the state workmen at his disposal.
But in many cases the patron was a layman or group of laymen*; or might be a priest
who made himself responsible for the construction or restoration of a temple.-)' Having
determined to build and endow a new vihara, the King sent presents of betel, etc., by
yoke, to the artificer (whom hereafter I speak of as the foreman) in thz paffal-hatara who
was to be entrusted with the work, and requested him to undertake it. Any lesser man
than the King would on such an occasion go himself with the presents to the smith’s
house. The foreman appointed a meeting with the patron (as I shall call the King
hereafter) on the spot, after determining an auspicious moment for beginning the work
{nekat balanavd). He there received presents of clothing and rice, and performed various
prelimary ceremonies analogous to those proper to the building of a house, but more
elaborate. An altar to Gaija DeviyO (Gariesha) and bulat tatwva to Bhuma Devi were
erected and an atamagala diagram drawn (see glossary), after which the work on the
foundation was begun.
The artificers were provided with food and clothing while the work continued. Presents
were made to the foreman from time to time, especially when the image was first plastered
and whitened preliminary to painting, and again later as described below.
By far the most important ceremony connected with the building and decoration of a
vihara or with its renovation {jara-ves-arinava) was the actual netra mangalya or Eye
ceremonial. The ceremony had to be performed in the case of any image, whether set up
in a vihara or not. Even in the case of flat paintings it was necessary. D. S. Muhandiram
when making for me a book of drawings of gods according to the Rupavaliya, left the
eyes to be subsequently inserted on a suitable auspicious occasion, with some simpler
form of the ceremony described. Knox has a reference to the subject as follows: “Some
being devoutly disposed, will make the Image of this God (Buddha) at their own charge.
For the making whereof they must bountifully reward the Founder. Before the Eyes
are made, it is not accounted a God, but a lump of ordinary Metal, and thrown about
the Shop with no more regard than any thing else. But when the Eyes are to be made,
the Artificer is to have a good gratification, besides the first agreed upon reward. The
Eyes being formed, it is thenceforward a God.J And then, being brought with honour
from the Workman’s Shop, it is dedicated by Solemnities and Sacrifices, and carried
with great state into its shrine or little house, which is before built and prepared for it.
Sometimes a man will order the Smith to make this Idol, and then after it is made will
go about with it to well-disposed people to contribute towards the Wages the Smith
* As in the cases recorded in the Damunumeya and Ovala sannas, quoted on pp. 77, 78, below.
4
■f As, for example, recorded in the Dembaralave Vihara tu apata {Lawrie's Gazetteer, p.yij).
J Rather it is thus consecrated; as Knox himself remarks elsewhere, '■ As for these Images they say
they do not own them to be Gods themselves but only Figures, representing their Gods to their memories;
and as such they give to them honour and worship.'
70

is to have for making it. And men will give freely towards the charge. And this is N^tra
looked upon in the man that appointed the Image to be made, as a notable piece of MaAgalya
Devotion.”
Almost in the same way, the medieval guilds in Europe, wishing to make offerings to
the parish church, would sometimes undertake a work beyond their means, and raise
money for it by a popular entertainment or ‘Ale,’ which nowadays has degenerated into
a bazaar. But the Sinhalese made use of no such inducements; they had only to ask,
and the money was gladly given, by those who were eager to share in the merit of the work!
The ceremony would seem to be rather Hindu than Buddhist in origin; the underlying
idea seems to be an endeavour to secure good ‘conditions’ at the time of definitely
consecrating the image as a medium which shall put the worshipper in touch with the
unseen god whose symbol is thus set forth, and this is rather a Hindu than a Buddhist
idea; for Southern Buddhism does not regard Buddha as a still existent personal God,
and would not have been likely to originate such a ceremonial, in connection with a
mere memorial. But the ceremony no doubt dates back to the time when Buddhism
and Hinduism were more distinctly recognized as two aspects of one faith, which
historically and fundamentally they are. Some idea of danger (as of‘playing with fire,’
or ‘calling down lightning from heaven’) appears to attach to this consecration of the
image, whereby it is made a medium between the worshipper and his god (which would
be a Hindu not a Buddhist idea) ; and the object of the ceremonial is, in this connection,
to avert misfortunes, akin to those resulting from a glance of the‘evil eye,’which might
otherwise afflict the presumptuous builder and artist. Something of the same feeling
is shown in other cases, where images are held to be the vehicle of power. A golden
image at Morapaya vihara, is said to have possessed such power, that when a priest
attempted to repair its head, his own. head became leprous and withered away.* The-
image appears to be regarded as charged with power, like a Leyden jar, and similarly,
when dealing with it, means should be taken to avoid a shock ; but all this is rather foreign
to the spirit of Southern Buddhism, and belongs to the Hindu stratum in it.
The first essential was, as always, to find out a suitable day and hour for the ceremony How it is
{nekat balanavd). As the eyes had to be painted about five a.m. in memory of the fact begun
that Buddha attained enlightenment at that hour, a nfkata that falls at that time must
be waited for. Till then the ceremony had to be postponed, even if for a whole year,
as auspicious nekat falling at other times were of no use.
The preparations for the ceremony were elaborate. At about six p.m. the previous
evening, a beginning was made with the recitation of Kosala-bimba-vari}anava-\ ; at eight
or nine the arrangement of the kalasthapanaya was begun; about three a.m. the offerings
{pidinnd) at the altars were made; and about five the eyes were painted. Outside
*Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 375. ,
•\ A sixteenth or seventeenth century work in Sinhalese prose, relating how in Buddha’s time. King
Ko sala usedfrequently to visit Him with his retinue, to offer gifts and hear the doctrine. On two
occasions Buddha was away from His cell, and the retinue began to grumble at their long journey in
vain. Upon the next occasion the Kang asked from the Buddha whether, in order that they might not
again be disappointed altogether, he might get made a beautful image as a representation of Himself.
Upon permission being given this was accordingly done. The image was of red sandal wood {rat
handun pi(ima). It is, of course, generally held by German archceologists that no image of Buddha
was actually made until very long after His death. However that may be, the tale is recited as
affording a sort ofprecedent for the use of the image about to be consecrated.
u 71

Netra the vihara were erected eight altars (dibba-gl, lit., god’s houses) to Indra, Agni, Yama,
Mangalya Nairrita, Varuija, Vaijavya, Uttara and Isanah*; alternating with these were eight others
for the attendants of these gods. On each side of the door were prepared altars to the
guardian devatavO {dvdrapala), whose images (doratu-pala-rUpd) were carved at the base
of the door jambs (often on ivory plaques, as at the Dalada Maligava, Kandy); and on
the threshold an altar to the guardian (kshetrapald) of the site. One altar, for the Kadgapala
devatava was prepared outside the vihara, beyond the limits of the pansala grounds.
A kalasthapanaya was prepared, i.e., a collection of eighty pots [mutti), in which were
placed rice, coconuts, jaggery and money (a fanam in each); each pot was covered by a
napkin. A kanya nul (thread spun by a virgin) was drawn round, and the pots covered
with a cloth of five colours.
The details of the preparation of the kalasihdpanaya were as follows : rice {hal) was spread
on the ground, and an atamagala diagram [see glossary] drawn in it with the finger.
The area was next covered with mats over which five kinds of paddy had been thinly
spread, and the space was then divided into eighty parts by strips of coconut leaf. The
eighty pots were arranged in the places thus indicated, separated into two groups of
forty each, forming the Brahma Garbbhaya and the Vishifu Garbbhaya, A special pot set
in the middle of those of the former group, containing gold, silver, pearls and the nine
gems, was called Brahma Kalaya, and another pot set in the middle of the other group
and containing rice was called the Vishnu Kalaya. These chief pots were elevated on
stools above the others. The whole collection formed the kalasthapanaya.
Inside the vihara was prepared an altar to Gat}a Deviya (Gaoesha); also the indraklla.
This was a figure made of rags, supported on a rukattana stick (Alstonia scholaris) set up
in a kalage<}iya (earthen pot) in which the nine gems, gold, rice, etc., had been placed.
It was set in the middle of an atamagala diagram drawn in rice on the vihara floor, in
front of the image and facing it.
All the foregoing arrangements were made by two or more men or youths dressed as
Brahmans; the costume (brahmaiia endumd) consisted of dhofi, shawl, turban, ear-rings,
and thread. When completed another man, dressed in red clothing, called ratu (vduma
(red tuppofiya, heffaya, handkerchief, and tall pointed jagalat toppiya), and provided with
a sword, took a dummala kabala and a kotalaya and went before each of the altars offering
incense and water and reciting Sanskrit ilokas; he walked round the vihara ten times
(keeping always to the right), and finally proceeded with drums and music to the
Kadgapala altar and made offerings there, then returned to the vihara. The purpose
of the drum was to attract the attention of those to whom offerings were made. Offerings
were also made at the Gatja deviyo dibba-gi inside the vihare.
All was now ready for the second and most essential part of the ceremony. The foreman
dressed up as a prince, and had further a fine cloth (called vahantarava) over his head.
The costume (kumara ^ndumd) consisted of tuppotiya, hettaya, toppiya, sword and jewellery.
It would appear from the Mahavarpsa (Ch. LXXIII.) and other references that the eyes
were at one time regularly painted by the King himself. The chronicle states that
an ecclesiastical building (Dhammagdra) was erected by Parakrama Bahu I. “ It was
adorned with many images of the Conqueror made of gold and the other precious
substances, and decorated with an array of pictures of the Omniscient wrought on cloth.
And whenever the great king entered the house to paint with his own hands the eyes
of the images of the Conqueror, or to make offerings to the Tathagata, or to hear the
* Regents of the four quarters and four half-quarter points of the compass, E., S.E., etc., in the
order in which the names are given.
72

preaching of his doctrines that have never been surpassed, the nautch girls danced and Netra
sang songs sweet and melodious as the music of heaven; and it was also adorned with Mafigalya
(the image of) a peacock of great splendour that joined the women always in the dance,
uttering wild screams that amazed and delighted the people greatly.” The use of the
frequentative probably implies that the building referred to was regularly used by the
king for performing the Netra Mangalya ceremony for images intended for various
situations. Another instance is recorded in a sannasa held by one Kalu Nayide, of
Vannipola (Lawrie, p. 910): “When the King of Kings, ^rl Sanghabo Senasammata
Vikrama Bahu, was reigning in Senkaejagala, he ordered on the full moon day of the
twentieth year of his reign two sheets of cloth (twenty cubits by nine cubits) to be
woven, and caused Acharilla Dityaya and his son Sivanta Dityaya to paint thereon the
likeness of Buddha seated on the Vajrasana and surrounded by Sakra, Brahma, and other
Devas. On the completion of painting the two sheets, he ordered the performance of
the ceremony of placing pots full of water and of other rites; and on the completion
of the Netra Pinkama, his hands having been washed, he was graciously pleased to bestow
on the two artists, with the object of satisfying them and to enable them to make offerings
to Buddha, fields ... to be held absolutely from generation to generation.” Here the
King himself painted the eyes, as the reference to the washing of his hands shows ; and
this appears to have been the usual custom. It is stated likewise of Kirti ^rl, that on the
completion of the Gangarama Vihara, and all preparations had been duly made, that “he
set the eyes of the image amidst great rejoicing, and the sound of musical instruments.”
On the other hand, the eyes were sometimes painted by the craftsmen themselves, even
in the days of kings. A deed of a.d. 1753 makes mention of a land which had been
‘granted to Hamadi Bacjala for painting the eyes of Buddha’ (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 937).
Evidently the ceremony was performed by the king if possible; just as in modern times,
great men are availed of to lay foundation stones; but when the king was not available
(and, of course, always after 1815, when the rule of the Kandyan kings came to an end)
the chief painter, in royal garb, performed the ceremony himself; and it is thus that
the ritual has been described to me by present-day craftsmen.
The painter of the eyes, whether the King or craftsman, was accompanied by a second
man, also robed, and with a cloth over his head, but less elaborately; both, and also
the ‘Brahmans’ if not very youthful, entered the vihara, but all other men, and still
more, women, stood afar off. The second man carried a mirror [kannaiiya : originally, no
doubt, of metal) and the brushes and black paint for painting the eyes. On opening
the door, mantrams were said, and the dhoby spread a white cloth to walk upon (or
perhaps this was done at an earlier stage). Proceeding to the image, before which stood
the indraktla above described, the second man held the mirror in front of it while the
first man painted in the eyes. The second man repeated mantrams * the while. If there
*As “ Om ayusmantan karmasvaham visam visdradhayastu bhami sdbbhydse ayus svardhatemid-
ha m. Om netra prasddakSraya akshavudahava tathagataya dyusvargdya balavardhandya,
Om sdntir astu tushtir astu pustir astu avignam astu drogyam astu subham astu subhakarmmdstu
karmma siddhir astu": of ’which the general significance is perhaps, ‘'Hail! mayest thou become
possessed of the fruit of deeds may there be increase on earth .... and length of days. Hail
eyes! auspicious orbs gkiing felicity, increase, blessing, prosperity and po’wer. Hail! let there
be peace, let there be joy, let there be fulness, let there be freedom from hindrance, let there be
freedom from sickness, may it be auspicious, may our deeds be auspicious, may our actions be blessed';
but the mantrams are very corrupt, and are given as recorded. The correct originals could
probably be traced in India. I give this version merely as a sample of the corrupt Sanskrit in use.
73

Netra were more than one image, the same process was repeated for each, also for the images
Mangalya of gods, if any; but no ceremony was needed in the case of representations of human
beings, as, for example, if the patron were represented on the walls. The purpose of
the mirror was to receive the glance {helmd) of the image*; and similarly the indraktla
acted as a scapegoat, like the scarecrow [parnbaya) in a rice-field which serves not only
to frighten birds, but to avert the effects of the evil eye by receiving the glance.
As soon as the work was done the painter drew the vahantardva over his eyes, and thus
blindfolded, was led out and up to a vessel of water already prepared. Here he washed
his head, repeating the ashtaka
Ganga yamund tJrs, Gsdha sindhu sarasvati
Narmada sindhu kavert, Jalais nasmin sdnti mispurs,
P adman pair an visa laksh(m)l, P adman kesaran varan,
Nityan padmalayan divJ, Savahpatu sarasvail.
which is particularly corrupt; but the first part is of interest as it evidently represents
a mantram used in India for ceremonial bathing, viz.:
Om ganga ca yamuns caiva godavari sarasvati:
Narmade sindhu kaveri jak 'smin sannidhim kuru.
“ Hail! Oh ye Ganges, Jamna, Godavari, Sarasvati, Narmada, Sindhu (Indus) and Kaveri,
come and approach (hallow and purify) this water.” This is an invocation of the seven
sacred rivers of India, a prayer that the ceremonial may be, as it were, a lustration with
the very waters of these sacred rivers.-f It has also a mystical interpretation.;^: The
foreman, while thus purifying himself by ceremonial bathing, cut the water with his
sword (cf. diya-kepima or water-cutting ceremony performed by the kapurala of a devale
after & perah^ra-, see p. 39); and after that the vessel was shattered.
Returning to the vihara, the doors, carefully closed after the ceremony, were opened,
and the foreman stood on the threshold facing the people who cried, ‘ kartri darisenayafa
dva,’ i.e., the patron has come to see the work’; for so it was, and he now approached
the door and gave presents into the hand of the karaka (craftsman). These the latter
handed to a pupil, and taking water repeated mantrams§ and sprinkled the people.
* Is this a parallel to the Gorgon's head, which could only be safely regarded in a mirror ? It seems
to belong to the same group of ideas, but with this difference, that the mirror is not used by the painter
to avoid the necessity of looking at the image, but only as a ‘ lightning conductor to receive the glance.
A remarkable parallel to the use of the mirror on this occasion, is its use on the occasion of the annual
Nanamura mangalya, or head-washing festival. The priest washes the sacred reflection of the head
of Buddha in a mirror held in front of the image for the purpose {Service Tenures Commission, 1872,
^.501). It is said to be a weekly ceremony at the Mdligava {Rep. Temple Lands Comm., 1858,/. 5).
See also Rhys Davids, ‘ Buddhism^ for use of mirrors in Tibetan ceremonial.
•f- The same prayer is uttered by the Buddhist in Ceylon, and by the Hindu in Bengal! We have
here a single example of the ^geographical sense’ which pervades Hindu culture and religion.
See '■ Daily Practice of the Hindus’ Allahabad, 1906 (.?), p. 212.
4
§ These are evidently the verses called" doraka a asna,” which are referred to in the copper sannasa
4
(a.d. 1415) of Beligala Vihara, as having been recited by Sendipperuma Bat} ara when a netra
mangalya ceremony was celebrated there in the reign of Parakrama Bahu VI. {Bell, Kfgalla
Report, p. 28).
74

At the same time the Royal or other patron made grants of land to the temple, arranged Netra
for the establishment of priests for its service, or set afoot further building operations for Mangalya
4
their accommodation. Thus, in the Dambulla Vihara tu apata of a.d. 1726, it is stated
that King Senaratna restored and repaired the temple. “At the completion of the repairs,
which took three years, the king, on the festival of painting of the eyes of the images of
Buddha, proceeded to the temple accompanied by the three queens and three princes.
After the festival was over the king stood on the semicircular step-stone of Maharaja
Vihara and called on the priests there assembled to nominate a person fit to be appointed
incumbent of this vihara, sixty-five images of which, including the one in a reclining
posture, had been painted and finished. The priests, in response to the call, stated that
Kahavandala Tanhankara was fit to be incumbent, being also a lineal descendant of the
priests who had officiated in the temple since the days of King Valagam-Bahu, and a
person who took much pains in effecting the repairs. The king being very much pleased,
defined boundaries for the four villages aforesaid, viz., Sirasgamuva, Nalalkumbura,
Giriyagamuva, and Padeijiya. . . . For the above . . . and their appurtenances, high and
low lands, jungles, and ponds, he, the king, granted a árl Sannas in order that the rites and
ceremonies in the Dambulu Vihara might be continued to be performed duly, and that
this vihara benefice might permanently continue in the àisyanu-paramparava* of Kaha­
vandala Tanhankara. And further considering that a lasting sannas should be'given to
the said priest he also caused the figures of the sun and moon to be engraved on the'stone
lying to the south of the Devaraja Vihara. After this, standing on the semicircular stone
of the Maharaja Vihara, His Majesty directed Abasiipha Mudiyanse to have dormitories
built in the village Lenavela, and allowed him (for the expenditure) thirty amuiju of seed
paddy from Akuramboda, thirty pieces of iron, ten buffaloes from the fold of Dumbukola-
gama, ten oxen that were brought laden with sacks of sand from Kandalama, ten cows
with calves from Bovatte, and ten she-buffaloes with calves from the galatei village
Kaduruvela” (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 126).
On such occasions, king, chiefs and people were brought near together, taking part in
joint dedications. At Ovisa, for instance, in 1775, on the occasion of eye painting, the
King dedicated lands to the Nallegoda Vihara, and many dedications of praveifi Imàs by
villagers were also made, the chiefs and others being witnesses (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 671).
In the case of communal or private dedications, the Royal consent was required, and
readily given, often with the addition of further gifts. And so, to quote again the words
of the chronicle, the king was ‘one with the religion and the people.’-f-
After such almsgivings had been completed, the curtains before the image were drawn
back, and all the people entered with loud cries of‘Sadhu! Sadhul’ For some days
the festival {netra pinkama) continued, when many further presents were given to the
craftsmen, and the temple was formally endowed with lands.
The'workmen remained at the vihara a week before returning to their homes, and on
the night of their return a pirit service J was held to complete their purification.
'Pupillary succession,
■ fHow very different a state of affairs now exists, must be apparent to all who contrast with this
picture, that of the English Governor, often, it may be, conscientious, efficient and hardworking,
even perhaps sympathetic, but very far from being 'one with the religion and the people.'
i Described by D. y. Subasinha, ‘ ^twentieth Century Impressions of Ceylon, ' p.iQ-i; also J. F.
Dickson, J.C.R.J.S., Voi. Vili., p. 226.
75

III. ARTIFICER TENANT HOLDINGS.
The system of land tenure, by which certain services were to be rendered in return for
land held from the king, a religious foundation, or a chieftain, has been explained above
(p. 25), and the general character of the craftsmen’s services indicated. Some examples of
the holdings of artificers are here quoted in greater detail, from Lawrie’s Gazetteer.
The Dalada Maligava had a Badal Panguva at Çmbulpure, Hârispattuva; tenant,Vijëndragë
Punci Nayide, holding ij acre fields and i| acre garden. Services, commutable for
Rs. I‘So: to go to the Mâligâva and polish the gold and silver vessels and implements
of the temple during six days in a year; to give either an arecanut-cutter or two rings of
silver wire to the Diva Nilame after the New Year. When on duty at the Maligava, the
tenant received gruel in the morning, curry and rice in the afternoon, and a hun^uva of
raw rice in the evening.
The Gadaladeijiya Dévale had a Badal Panguva (goldsmith’s holding) at Gadalâdeijiya ;
tenant holding half an acre field. Services (commutable for Rs. y 3 5) : to supply a silver
sura and polish and repair the ran-avuda for the perahera ; put up an anamlstraya and
decorate it ; join in weeding the majuva ; supply one hutfifuva oil for Karti ; at each of
the festivals to give to the Basnayaka Nilame and the Vidane two silver rings each.
Also a Navan Panguva (smith’s holding) of the same extent. Services (commutable for
Rs. 5'85) : to give iron utensils for the multen-ge; work as a blacksmith ; clean ran-doliznà
pandan for the perahera ; nail laths ; give a pair of scissors and an arecanut-cutter for the
dalumura tatuva ; clear maluva, and put up an anamestraya and decorate it ; give a hurt4uva
of oil for Karti\ at each of the festivals to present to the Basnayaka Nilame and Vidane
an arecanut-cutter each.
At Etipola, a tenant held one acre field and 2I acres hena, and his service (commutable for
Rs. 2) was to appear before the proprietor at the New Year with forty betel leaves; and
to make billhooks for the proprietor, by whom iron and food were supplied, for six days
in the year.
At Embekke, the Kataragama Dévale possessed a Navan Panguva held by two goldsmiths
and a Buddhist priest. The area held was la. 3p. fields and la. 2p. gardens. The services
(commutable for Rs. 53'6o a year) were : to polish the gold, silver, brass, &c., vessels ; to
work in gold, silver, copper, and iron work ; to make and repair the hinges and keys ;
to join in repairs; to make a silver sura for the ehela tree; to maintain, whitewash, and
decorate an anamestra-ge -, to present the Basnayaka Nilame at each of the festivals with
a ring and an arecanut-cutter ; to make iron implements for the tenants for three months,
iron and charcoal being supplied.
So much for the services due to chieftains, or the proprietors of Ninda villages. The
service of the various Royal Artificer Tenants, as we have seen, consisted in supplying
craftsmen as members of the Koftal-badda and Pattal-hatara, the former for a part of the
year, the latter more continuously working for the king in Kandy.
IV. VIHARA GRANTS.
As examples of vihara sannas or charters recording endowment, so frequently referred to
above, I quote two, the first one of quite typical character registering Royal dedications ;
the second, dedications by the chief men of a village, decided upon in a common assembly,
and subsequently sanctioned by the Palace.
76

I. Degaldoruva (a .d. 1786). “ When His Great Majesty King Kirti ^rl Raja Sirtiha, Degal-
. . . was reigning with equity and justice in the city Siriva^dhanapura, which is styled doruva
Senkadagala Nuvara, and having won the affection of his subjects, His Majesty caused sannasa
new temples, dagabas, and images to be made, and others to be repaired: and when he
was by such deeds promulgating the Buddhist religion, his brother, who was also great
in royal birth, having heard that there was a small cave in a rock at Amu^iugama, in
Dumbara, and having supplied from the royal stores crow-bars, hammers, pickaxes, &c.,
caused the cave to be enlarged to a length of twelve cubits, and a breadth of eight cubits,
and a height of three cubits, and the floor of the front court or hall to be levelled, whereon
twelve pillars were set and stone steps were placed leading to the court from the stone
4
at the entrance sandun-ka a-gala, and when the work had thus far been carried on. His
Highness Asthana, the younger brother of the King Kirti 8rl, at whose feet virtuous
men performed services, as bees gather themselves around flowers, caused stone walls to
be put up, and doors and windows to be set with keys and bars, and an image of Buddha
of twelve cubits in length to be made in a reclining posture, and six other images in a
sitting posture to be placed at the head and feet of the image, and also caused twenty-four
Buddha’s images to be depicted on the ceiling and on the walls within and without, and
other workmanship and paintings to be made thereon and upon the stone pillars, the roof
of the front court to be put up with beams and rafters and covered with tiles, and on the
cross-walls thereof a representation of hell and heaven, near which he also caused a dagaba
of nine cubits in height to be erected, and a bO-tree to be planted, and a pohoya-ge and as
well as a priest’s residence to be constructed, enclosing the temple on all the four directions
with ditches and embankments, and he also caused jak, mango, cocoanut, and plantain trees
to be planted ; and having furnished the temple with curtains, cloths for ceiling, umbrellas,
flags, tom-toms, trumpets, and silver priests’-dishes, kettas, spitting pots, betel stands, and
lamps. His Majesty, on the seventeenth day of Bak of the increasing moon, in the year
of^aka 1693 (a .d. 1771), ordered the festival Netra Pinkama to be performed, and His
Majesty also furnished all the necessaries thereto, and having granted much riches as
clothes, money, &c.. to the artificers, the painters, and stone cutters. His Majesty received
merit and was filled with ecstasy, and for the purpose of carrying on the offerings of rice,
flowers, &c., and for the necessaries for five ordained and unordained priests in the said
temple to reside therein and perform the rites, and also for the necessaries of the chief
priest who presides over and causes the ceremonies to be performed therein. His Majesty
having received much instruction and exhortation in the Buddhist faith and full explana­
tion of the books Dighanikaya,Upasaka-Jana-Alahkaraya,Milindaprafeaya,and Mahavarpisa
from the High Priest Moratofa Dhammakanda, who had a thorough knowledge of
Buddhism, granted to him, his pupils, sub-pupils, in succession, to be held by them for
ever, the following property: . . . and His Majesty enjoined that none shall take forcibly
any of the above lands. His Majesty Sri Rajadhi Raja, who surpassed all other kings
in dignity and possessed a virtue that attracts all as bees to flowers, sitting on a golden
t hrone in the Audience Hall under a pearl canopy in the city of Senkadapura, surrounded
like Sakra by all his ministers, on Thursday, the seventh day of the increasing moon of
the month of Vesak, in the year of Saka 1708 (a .d. 1786), called Parabave, granted to
the said temple the lands above-mentioned, written on a copper Sannasa to be possessed
uninterruptedly as long as Buddhism lasts. Any one who shall take for his own use even
a blade of grass, fuel, flower, or fruit which belongs to Buddha shall be born as a pritaya"
(Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 138).
II. Damunumeya Vihara (a.d. 1635). “The chief men of the village Damunumeya, in
Megodatihe Haoguranketa in Hevaheta, having built a vihara, and not having time to
77

Damunu- get images made at the time they wished to hold a festival there, proceeded to the vihara
meya san- at Madanvala, borrowed therefrom three images and secured the attendance of its priest,
nasa Madanvala Unnanse, to officiate at Damunumeya Vihara. At the close of the religious
ceremonies that same evening the Upasakas took part in the observance of afasil On
the next morning a Pattra Pinkama was held, followed by a consultation among all present
that for the benefit of the vihara and the good of their own souls an offering of lands should
be made. It was resolved by the assembly that Bolagedara Haluvadana Râlahâmi should
offer two pelas sowing extent, Mudiyanse of Naranmëya three pelas, Madurave Râla
two pelas. When Haluvadana Râlahâmi brought this resolution to the notice of the
Mahàvâsala (the Palace), permission was given to carry it out, and accordingly, on
Saturday, the full moon day of the month of June, in the year of éaka 1557, the said
offering was made, and the lands were dedicated as vihara property. The merits of this
offering are due to the illustrious Mahavksala, to the ministers and high officials, and
all the people of the land. Those who shall help to settle any dispute that may arise
regarding these lands shall be blessed, and shall enjoy happiness among the gods, and
finally, having beheld Maitri Buddha, shall attain Nirvana. But those who shall take
unlawful possession of any of these lands, or enjoy the fruits thereof, shall be damned and
suffer the torments of hell” (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 324).
A very similar sannasa is that of the Ovala or Kehelvala Vihara, which was built by
villagers, who dedicated small bits of land.
III. Ovala, A.D. 1790: “Under the constellation Uturusala, ... in the year of âaka 1712,
. . . the following lands are dedicated by the charitable devotees of the village Kehelvala :
Ovala Medduma, Duraya and Nekat Duraya the lower bed of Siyaatbaleva, the coconut
tree by the border of the field standing on Gedaravatte, the coconut tree near the maduva,
the betel vine and the jak tree above the house, the jak tree (narned) valimiriya-kosgaha ;
Deldeniye Râla dedicated Varapota deniya . . . Pitiye Kirala Araccila dedicated one
coconut tree in Getakohovatte, and the coconut tree (named) gçfakosgaha-mula-polgaha
• (lit., the coconut tree in the corner by the gnarled jak tree) . . . and Pallege Araccila the
coconut tree on the border of Ovala Nekat Duraya’s garden ” (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p.. 663).
The two last give us delightful pictures of the village elders impatient to get their vihara
finished, and dedicating small parcels of land and single coconut trees.
V. VISVAKARMA.
Viávakarma, already referred to as the mythical ancestor of the Kammalar, is the patron
deity of arts and crafts, the great Over-craftsman of the Universe. He is the architect
of the gods, and revealer of the"Sthapatya Veda, or science of architecture and mechanics.
He is described in the Mahabharata as ‘ Lord of the arts, the carpenter of the Gods, the
fashioner of all ornaments. Who formed the celestial chariots of the deities, on whose
craft men subsist, and whom, a great and immortal God, they continually worship.’ He
is known in India also as Karu, the workman; Takshaka, the woodcutter; and Deva-
vardhika, the builder of the Gods. In the last capacity he is frequently referred to in
the Mahavarpsa, and as assisting human undertakings at the command of the Gods; as in
Ch. XXVIII., where by his aid, bricks are miraculously produced. In Ch. XXX., when
the King enquired of a certain bricklayer, “ In what form dost thou propose to construct
78

the cetiya?”, it is stated that Viivakarma in that instant inspired him. The bricklayer, FiJva-
filling a golden dish with water, and taking some water in the palm of his hand, dashed iarma
it against the water (in the dish); a great globule, like unto a ball of crystal rose to the
surface ; and he said, ‘I will construct it in this form.’ The delighted monarch bestowed
on him a suit of clothes worth a thousand, a splendid pair of slippers, and 12,000 kahapaifam
(coins) ” (Mahavairisa, Ch. XXX). It would be easy to quote any number of such stories
from Indian literature.
The Indian craftsman, indeed, conceives of his art not as the accumulated knowledge
of ages, but as originating in the divine skill of Viivakarma, and revealed by him. Beauty,
rhythm, proportion, idea, have an absolute existence on an ideal plane, where all who
seek may find. The reality of things exists in the mind, not in the detail of their appearance
to the eye. This inward inspiration upon which the Indian artist is taught to rely,
appearing like the still small voice of a god, that god was conceived of as Viivakarma.
He may be thought of as that part of Divinity which is conditioned by a special relation
to artistic expression. In another way, again, he may be conceived of as the sum total
of consciousness of individual craftsmen of all ages and places, composing a ‘group soul’
of a higher order of consciousness. These philosophical conceptions are not consciously
present in the minds of modern craftsmen, but they are not foreign to Indian thought.
Vi^vakarma, like the other divinities, is represented as possessing a certain form and
attributes. These are detailed in v. 149 of the Rupavaliya: “Salutation I give to Viiva-
karma, the fair and great, who is renowned and free, who hath five tilaka-muked. faces,
ten arms, holding a book and writing style, a sword, an adze (lit. a club), a citron, a cup,
a water-pot, a rosary, a cobra.(about his neck), a noose, hands betokening sternness and
beneficence (one closed and one open) and wearing a golden sacred thread.”
On PI. XXL will be found a representation of Vilvakarma, drawn to scale and with the
proper attributes as directed in the canon, prepared for me by Devasurendra Muhandirama
of Embekke.*
Viivakarma is not worshipped by craftsmen or others with offerings or ritual, but is often
referred to in charms and songs connected with building operations, where he is invoked
to ward off disasters and assist the craftsmen. An example of such a charm is the Vluvahu
Pfntma, “The Jump from the Threshold,” detailing ceremonies and offerings necessary
to hallow and protect a newly completed building, at the close of which the officiating
craftsman or kattafiya has to ‘spring from the threshold.’ Of this-work there is a printed
version, giving, beside the song itself, the auspicious mantrams that are chanted. This
Uluvahu Penima, after the manner of such works, recites the origin of the matter in hand,
in this case, the revelation of building and arts and crafts generally, by Viivakarma in the
time of the mythical Maha Sammata, and concludes with auspicious mantrams.
* “The initials [D.S.M.] attached to figures in this book, indicate the work of a craftsman named
Devasurendra Muhandirama of F-tnhekke.
79

CHAPTER IV. ELEMENTS OF SINHALESE
DESIGN AND ORNAMENT.
Before proceeding to a systematic description of the various crafts, architecture,
painting, woodwork, pottery, etc., it is necessary to explain the technical terms
applied to the different kinds of ornament, and give some account of their meaning
and origin. Accordingly, in the present Chapter the chief elements of Eighteenth Century
Kandyan Sinhalese design are named and explained,-)- the elements, that is to say, of the
strictly decorative art, distinguished from the more pictorial and sculpturesque art of the
jataka paintings and images. The motifs in Sinhalese decorative art may be tabulated as
follows, using, as far as possible, the names employed by the craftsmen themselves :
Divine. Symbols of the sun (/ra) and moon [handa).
4
Animal. Mythical: kindura,*'-içraplÿdiya’*^t-kanda~lihir}tya,makara*bherui) o-po^ksf>aya,
nara-simha,* gaja-simha.
Partly mythical, with a natural prototype : hamsa,^ simha* (inch ^ ktbihi), ndga.
Natural (real animals decoratively treated) : fish {rnatsya, etc.) ; birds, especially
parrot {girava), cock (kukula), peacock {moifara), s(la-lihii}iya ; beasts, especially
deer {mriga), hare {bava), squirrel (daitiu-lma), bull (usambd), elephant (fta),
horse (aivaya*); dog and crow; man iynanushya).
Vegetable. Mythical: nari-latâ~V(la kadu-pul,parasatu,palol,darnba, imbuì,
kap-ruka, mahari.
Conventional: katuru-mala (scissors flower), mala (jessamine), sim-mala,
nelum-mala (lotus), pala-peti (lotus petal), mala (flower in general), sapu-mala
(sapu flower), vtfakeyiya (Pandanus), mal-gaha (‘flower tree’), ‘flower in pot,’
liya-V(la (‘branch’ or ‘vine’), liya-pata (‘vine-leaf’), bs-kola (bo-leaf), bo-pat-
kangul, suliya, malaya ; and traditional forms without special Sinhalese names,
including ‘pine-apple,’ ‘palmette,’ ‘honeysuckle,’ ‘knop and flower,’ ‘cone,’
‘calyx-volute.’ No forms derived directly from fruits appear to occur.
Inorganic. Geometrical: dot (binduva), line {irï), curve (vaka), circle, spiral, triangle,
chevron {diya-rçla), arch {torat^a), cross, svastika-, diaper, esp. d?la (the ‘net’),
turi4an-v(4a, kalas-daugaya, kut}4i-rakkan-, chequer; plait {lanu-gçta)', borders,
gai-binduva, arimhuva,panava, hava4iya, and ‘fret.’
Certain methods of combining these elements are next briefly referred to, as: serial repe­
tition (G. Ranken-bordure) ; alternating repetition (knop and flower, etc.) ; interrupted
branch (G. intermittirende Wellenranke) ; continuous branch (G. fortplanzende Wellenranke) ;
knop or knot {gefa, pota, bandha)-, interlacements {pattava, dangaya)-, whorl {poruva);
‘ affrontment,’ (G. ‘ Wappen-stil,' a special case of symmetry) ; parsemé ; ‘flower in mouth.’
The io8 Mangalya laksharja or ma{n)gul-lakuitu are also explained and partially illustrated.
These elements of design I now describe in the foregoing order. Those marked with an
asterisk (*) are further described in mnemonic verses quoted from the Rupavaliya.
■)• Some other pattern names ’will be mentioned, and further examples given, in Chapters on Lac
Work and Weaving.
8o

SUN and MOON. The symbols of the sun and moon, the physical vestures of the great Design and
beings that control them, may be mentioned here. They are cut on sannas and on boundary ornament
stones as symbols of eternity, and are represented as a plain disc and crescent, the circle
sometimes with human features. Used as a charm or protection, on a divi-niya-pota Sun and
(cheetah’s claws mounted as a child’s pendant), they are seen in the example of PI. Moon
XLVIII., 9. But the circles in Figs. 15 and 17 (same PI.) represent not the sun, but
the disc of Vishnu, a weapon resembling the Sikh quoit. When used on a larger scale
in painted decoration, the sun has always a full round face with human features (as in
PI. XVI.; and the moon has in it the figure of a hare (see below, p. 89). The symbols
of the sun and moon are among the 108 magul-lakunu (Fig. 69). The sun and moon are
never worshipped with offerings, but are often invoked as guardians and protectors,
especially in religious agricultural songs.
KINDURA, KINNARA. The kindurO of Sinhalese painters, are beings, human above Kindura
and bird-like below; like a siren or a harpy, but with human arms and shoulders, and the
wings not large enough for flight (Fig. 10). Like
other mythical creatures, they are thought to dwell
in the Himalayas, that Indian forest of Broceliande,
where the boundary between the common world
and the ideal world of the imagination may at any
moment vanish. There has been some confusion as
to the meaning of the word kindura. The meaning
given by Monier Williams (Skt. Diet.) is a being of
the centaur type, half horse, half man; and he is, pre­
sumably, followed by Dawson (Hindu Mythology, Fig. 10. Kindura ; from a modern
p. 158), and Pincott (Prema Sagara, 1897, pp. 16, drawing [D. S. M.].
232). I do not know how the confusion arose. In
the man-bird form they are represented at Barahat (third century b.c.), at Ajanta (fifth
century a .d.), and mentioned by Aelian (second century a .d.) as follows; “These arq.
matchless for the melodious notes of their throat and tongue, so that . . . they are sirens,
or nearly so, for the mythical maidens so named are represented alike in the song of the
poet and the picture of the artist, as winged and having the legs of birds.” In the Prema
Sagara (loc. cit., p. 310) they are described as ‘playing away on pipes and kettle-drums.’
Griinwedel (‘Buddhist Art in India’) reproduces a rather graceful modern Siamese drawing
of the bird-woman form.*
The type of kindura known to Kandyan artists is, then, the true one. It is often called
liya~ or ‘ woman-i?Sif«ri7,’just as a mermaid is oftener spoken of than a merman. The
form is found not only in purely decorative work, but of necessity also in pictures of the
Canda Kinnara Jataka, as at Kelaijiya (PI. VIIa.). The story of the jataka is briefly thus:
The Bodhisat was incarnated as a Kinnara and lived with his wife Canda in the Himalayas.
The king of Benares committed his Government to his ministers and went alone to
th e Himalayas on a hunting expedition. The two Kinnaras, whose home was on the
Mountains of the Moon, had come down from them and were playing and singing by
a stream, Canda dancing to the sound of her fellow’s flute. The king heard the sound,
and creeping near, was smitten with love for Canda. ‘I will shoot the husband,’ thought
he, ‘and kill him, and I will live here with his wife.’ He shot and slew the Kinnara;
his mate fled in fear and sorrow to the top of the mountain, and a dialogue ensued between
* For a further discussion see Grunwedefs useful, but uninteresting and sometimes misleading work,
^Buddhist Art in India^ English edition, 1901,/. 47.
gi

Design and herself and the king, and she refused to live with him; his passion died away and he
ornament departed indifferent. Canda embraced her fellow and brought him to the hill-top and
cried aloud over him, taunting the gods to bring him to life again. Sakra’s throne grew
Kindura hot.* ‘Pondering, he perceived the cause; in the form of a Brahman he approached,
and from a water pot took water and sprinkled the great being with it.’ The dead Kinnara
was restored to life, and iakra departed, warning the Kinnaras never again to seek the
haunts of men. The master thus identified the Birth ‘At that time Anuruddha was the
king, Rahula’s mother was Canda, and I myself was the Kinnara.’ f
A scene from this story is shown also on the lid of a Kandyan brass box [heppuvd] in my
possession ; the hunter king is shooting at the male kindura, who with his mate is dancing
and playing unconscious of danger; the environment is given by the rock, the cheetah,
and the tree.::}:
Fig. 11. Canda kinnara jataka scene, from engraved tobacco box (heppuvd).
Two other sorts of kivduro are recognized by Kandyan painters: these are sanda-kindura,
altogether human in form, with wings like an angel, and the. jala-kindura or mermaid;
of these the sanda-kindura is rarely seen in Kandyan work, but has, I suspect, more than
a half share in the ‘angels’ that are oftener seen in low-country paintings, where the
•influence of the Christian angel has perhaps also to be reckoned with ; but the Christian
angel is after all really a gandharva or apsara.\ The jala-kindurd I have never seen used;
but a drawing made for me represents a typical ‘mermaid.’ A kindura and sanda kindura
are among the io8 magul-lakunu (mangalya lakshana, auspicious marks on the feet of
Buddha).
The Kinnara is described as follows in v. 146 of the Rupavaliya: The Lata Kinnara
“hath a tuft of hair on the head, a garland around the neck, a human body, and singeth
melodiously; hath a human face and hands, but the nether part like that of a bird, with
* &akra , or Indr a, is the Chief of the Gods, and Lord of Dlva-loka. In stories it is said that his
throne grows hot whenever important events take place on earth, requiring immediate attention.
■\ Condensedfrom ‘ The Jataka,’ Cambridge, 1895, PP- 179-idz. A somewhat similar
story is related in the Lakkariya Jataka; but here the two kinnaras are brought before the king by a
hunter who has captured, not slain them; this appears to be the story illustrated in the sculpture at
Barahat (‘ Cunningham, Bharhut Stupa, PI.XXVII., and p. 69). See also “ Two Kandyan Brass
Boxes,” ‘ Ceylon National Review,’ 1906.
J Observe that although the jataka is called canda kinnara, the representation is of liya kindura; so
also at Kelafya, in Pi. VIIk.,below. But on the same Plate, above, canda kiadurO may be seen in
the makara tor ana, as if is suing from the mouths of the makaras. The distinction drawn by Kandyan
painters may be erroneous.
§ See Baring Gould, ‘ Curious Myths of the Middle Ages ’; section ‘Swan Maidens.’
82

wings; a face fair and radiant, a neck graceful as Brahma’s.” The anatomical proportions Design and
are also given in the Rupavaliya, and are quoted in the Appendix to this Chapter. ornament
‘¿^RAPENDIYA.’ This beast, also called gurulu-
pakshaya, has a head rather like that of a lion, joined ^&(rapen-
to the body of a bird like the hanisa. The whole diya'
animal appears in Fig. 12, and in Pis. XI., 3 ; XIII., 9
and XLI. (chank); but the head alone, or the head and
wings only, are oftener seen (Pis. XI., i ; XLIIL, 3 ;
XLV., 10; XLVI.,2, 3, 9; LIL, 2, etc.). Thus used
it is very characteristic of metal-work, particularly
palanquin fittings, areca nut slicers, door handles; and
ivory work, especially ear-picks; but I do not remem­
ber to have seen a painted example. The main point
of difference from the lion’s head is seen at the point
Fig. 12. ‘ èerapendiya.’ From of the snout, which in the i^rapendiya curls inwards,
metal mounting of ran-doli (palan­ but in the lion ends in a small s-shaped scroll, well
quin) at Vishiju Dévale, Haogu- seen in PI. XXXVIII., 5, where the animals are side
ranketa. by side. The head of the makara is readily distin­
guished by its trunk. The word ‘ Sfrapendiya,’ which
I have also seen spelt iarapenda, is probably derived from a corruption of sarpa+indriya,
‘ruler of serpents,’ possibly of iarabha+indriya. A verse in the Rupavaliya bears this title
of &arabha dhyanam, and describes an animal, half beast, half bird: “ Half of the body is
like that of a bird, a face and four hands above, a face and four hands helow; like a
conflagration at the end of the world, uttering the sound of a storm in the blue firmament,
destroyed the might and the glory of the ten serpent kings. Adore the Incarnation of
Sarabha, . . . having eight feet.” The Tamil equivalent of the ¡^raplndiya is the sarja
anna pad^i (Fig. 13); the Siamese, ‘indriya' (.?), Figi 14. But the Tamil ydli (Fig. 15)
is a combination of lion’s body and
‘■ sarja’ head. There is also a
creature called sarapa mOrttwhich
I have seen represented in an old
Tamil drawing, with a lion’s face,
human trunk, wings, 4 hands,
lion’s body, 2 fore legs and 6 hind
legs.
Fig. 14. ‘ Indriya j
Fig. 13. Sarja anna ‘bird’s head,’ Siamese.
padgi, from modern Drawn hy P. C. Jina-
Tanjore drawing varavarpsa Unnanse, Fig. 15. Tali'. oldTamil
(Tamil). late Prince Prisdang. drawing, Tanjore.
g2 83

Design and ^t-kanda-lihiniya. This ‘ elephant-seizing-bird ’
ornament is a sort of roc, carrying off and devouring its
prey; (Fig. i6). It was the device on the
^t-kanda- flag of the Maha Lêkam Department. Davy
lihiniya (‘Travels in Ceylon,’ PL 8) reproduces some
drawings then to be seen on the walls of the
Maha Devale in Kandy, and amongst them is
one of these monsters carrying off an elephant.
It seems possible that the elephant’s head given
to this bird of prey, is a corruption of the
original conception. I have seen an Indian
Fig. 16. ^t-kanda-lihiniya. From a brass incense-burner, representing a bird seizing
modern drawing [D.S. M.]. two elephants, and with a head proper to a
bird of prey.
Makara MAKARA. The makara resembles a dolphin or crocodile ; the snout ends in a trunk like
an elephant’s, but shorter and often curled up so as to be inconspicuous ; the body and tail
are bird-like; but the Early Indian forms (Fig. i8) had a distinctly fishy tail; as also in
PI. XLVII., 8. Fig. 17 is from an old drawing by a pupil of Devaragampola Silvatenna.
The makara is one of the signs of the zodiac ; one of the 108 mangul-lakui}u ; it is also the
banner of the Indian god of love. A special form of necklace, called tnakara-malaya, is
shown in PI. XLIX., 11. But its only common use in eighteenth century Sinhalese art is in
the makara toran which abound in Sinhalese architecture above doorways and images, as in
Pis. VII., I ; VIIa, above the image : PI. XXXVIII., 9 shows a modern, debased rendering
in ivory. The makara torana is an ornamental arch springing from two profile makara
facing each other, and with a ‘ kibihi’ face in the position of the keystone ; the intermediate
space on either side is variously treated. In PI. VIIa. it is filled with flying sanda kindura.
The makara face is never used by itself ; Mr. Bell’s ‘•makara quadrifrons’ of the Medagoda
Dévale stone pillar is really a ‘kibihi quadrifrons.’ He also mentions makara faces in
error on p. 20. Almost all full-face detached heads are kibihi \ all profile, içrapendiya.
Mr. Bell finds the prototype of the curious ornamental arches (makara toran') in the chaitya
window of the early Buddhist cave temples of India (Kegalla Report, p. 21).
The makara is described as follows in v. 148 of the Rûpâvaliya; “The makara has the
trunk of an elephant, the feet of a lion, the ears of a pig, the body of a fish living in water,
the teeth turned outwards, eyes like Hanuman’s, and a splendid tail.”
Fig. 17. Makara. From a Fig. 18. Makara. From Barahat
colored drawing by Sêrugolayâ Stupa, Early Indian, circa 200 b.c.
Hitaranayide, a pupil of Devara­ [thus about zooo years earlier than
gampola Silvatenna. Fig. 17]. Cunningham, PI. IX.
84

BHERUNDA PAKSH A YA. A ‘ double-headed eagle,’ like Design and
the eagle in the arms of Russia and Austria. Fig. i 8 a , repre- ornament
senting the flag of the Three Korales, shows very well its
character. The form also appears in wood and ironwork, and Bherurfda
very commonly in modern brass trays and plates. As a jewelled pakshaya
pendant, it is not an unusual form (Pis. XXIII.,6andXLVIII.,6).
It may be noted here, that there can be little doubt of the
eastern origin of heraldry. The heroes of the Mahabharata
had each his own device. We have seen in the description of
the great perahera, how each district of the Kandyan kingdom
had its own flag and device ; also that the makara is the device
on the banner of the Indian Eros. So there need be no occasion
for surprise at recognizing in the arms of Austria and of
Russia, the very ‘double-headed eagle,’ an Indian form which
we find in Ceylon as the device of the Three Korales. The
historic evidence for the migration of this particular symbol,
by direct contact, is regarded as complete.*
Heraldry was introduced into Europe by the Crusaders. When
Fig. I 8 a . Bherutida pak­ at a later period, the European penetrated further East, he
shaya, flag of the Three brought back with him the old devices to their early home.
Korales. From Bell’s An especially striking instance was the return of the lion of
Kegalla Report. the Dutch, which has influenced in some cases, the representa­
tion of the Sinhalese lion itself, as in the corners of the ‘Sun
and Moon’ Flag figured by Bell in his ‘Report on the Kegalla
District.’ I possess also a jaggery-mould upon which an evidently Dutch lion rampant
with sword in paw is carved in sunk relief. The influence of the Dutch lion upon the
Sinhalese was facilitated by its presence on the small Dutch copper coins which were
soon in common use throughout Ceylon.
HAMSA. The hamsa is the well-known ‘sacred goose’ of Hinduism, where it stands Hamsa
for discrimination, being able, as the bird of Svarga Loka, to drink the milk only, from
a vessel of milk mixed with water. The name stands also for beautiful gait; it is regarded
Fig. 19 Hamsa. From a modern Fig. 20. Hanisa pattuva. From an
drawing [D. S. M.]. old padimakada pota (copy book).
7
* ’. Wilson, “ T/ir Swastika” Smithsonian Monogr
1
aph (n.d.), p. 963, quoting Count Goblet
d’Alviella, “La Migration des Symboles." But do not think the double-headed bird is a
Garuda, as there suggested.
3
g 85

Det^nanJ as beautiful and auspicious; in poetry, especially erotic, it stands for the breasts of women,
ornanunt or for women themselves; the resemblance between a swan and a beautiful girl is a
common motif in Indo-Aryan folk-lore. In Sinhalese as in Hindu decorative art the
Haifisa harpsa is everywhere to be seen ; figure 20, from a modern padimakada pota, shows the
typical Sinhalese form, the use of which is illustrated on Plates
XXIII., 2 ; XXVI., 2 ; XXXIX., 2, 8 ; etc. Very usual, too, is
the arrangement, called hamsa puttuva, of two, three, or more
harpsayo with entwined necks, as in Fig. 20 and Pis. XXXII., 8;
XL., 4, 12.
The following description of the hamsa is given in the Rupavaliya :
“The harpsa has nails like those of a dog, and eyes like those of
a fowl, a very red beak, a fish-like face, and an unexpanded tail.”
In Fig. 21 is shown the South Indian (Dravidian) form of the
4
4 harpsa ip anna pa gi’) for comparison. This illustrates very well
Fig. 21. Anna pa ^i.
the difference of feeling in Sinhalese (Buddhist) and Dravidian
From a modern Tan-
(Hindu) art; for other examples, compare Figs. 13, 15, and 24
jore drawing (Tamil).
with the Sinhalese treatment of the same forms. For an Indian
harpsa paftuva, see ‘Journal of Indian Art,’ Vol. V., PI. 84.
Sitpha SIMHA. The lion is the mythical ancestor, and totem animal of the Sinhalese, standing
for majesty and power, as in the case of Buddha’s name of Sakya-sirfiha, or the royal
name Rlja-siipha. A typical representation of the Sinhalese lion is given in Fig. 22,
from a modern drawing; see also Pis. XXVI., i ; XXIX., 7 ; XXXVIII., i and 5 ; and
XLV., 3. The full face detached, caWcA.kibihi-mana, shown in Fig. 23, is most often seen
in makara-toran, where it forms the central feature in the position of keystone of the arch ;
and it is used in design as the starting point of sprays and branches of foliaceous ornament.
Some sixteen, or thirty-two kinds of sitpha are recognized by Sinhalese artists; there are
three kinds beside the kesara sirnha, or lion proper; and the others are not really lions at
all, but other beasts, the word ‘lion’ being used generically for ‘animal,’ as the word ‘deer’
is used in speaking of ‘ mice, and such small deer,’ and regularly in the same way in older
English. But the nara sitpha and gaja sitnha, described below, are not reckoned as ‘lions’
by the ROpavaliya which gives the following account of lions: “ Kesarl, HariijI, Kyaghu,
VaratQ, §isO, MariijI, Matangi, Sikhi, Kinnarl, Gandharvaji, Bhalluka, Manjari, Tunga,
Sakha, Mriga, Viratika— these are the sixteen kinds of lions.”
a modern painted box [D. S. M.].

“The expert painter should know a further sixteen kinds, beside those already mentioned, Design and
the lion, the dog, and the fowl, the deer, the serpent, the elephant, the cat, the fox, the ornament
goat, the goat-faced animal, the horse, the monkey, the ass, the mrigindra (=a lion),
the tiger, the shark.” Sirfiha
“ Of the four lions (proper), Tfina, Kala, Paijdu and Kesarl, the Kesarl is the highest.”
“The lion has eyes like those of a hare, a fierce look, soft hair, long hair on the chest
and under the shoulders, back plump like a sheep’s, the body of a well blooded horse, a
stately walk, and a long tail.”
The last verse describes the kesara siT^ha, or
lion proper, as usually portrayed in Sinha­
lese art.
The lion is naturally a very common motif
in Sinhalese art. It must be confessed it
is often badly drawn. The position of
the lion rampant may perhaps be due to
European influence ; this is almost certain
when he carries a sword in the right paw,
as in the case of one carved on thejaggery-
mould referred to on p. 85,and the ira-handa
maha kodiya, illustrated by Bell (Kpgalla
Report, p. 126); these show clear evidence
of Dutch influence, the latter exerted prob­
ably at Jaifna, where the flag may have
been made. The common circulation of Fig. 23. ‘Simmam’ (lion). FromoldTamil
Dutch coins with lion rampant would ex­ drawing; rough sketch only (Tanjore).
plain such borrowings.
I give an example of a drawing of a lion from an old Tamil craftsman’s note-book, obtained
at Tanjore, for comparison with the Sinhalese drawing.
;©klt may be remarked that the title of king or lord is often given to representations of the
hamsa, lion or cobra—it is the hamsa raja, simha raja or naga raja whose form is represented,
rather than individual animals. This is but another way of saying that all Indian art is
idealistic, representing types rather than individuals.
i@,The Rupavaliya accounts of the lion (above), nara simha (overleaf), and horse (p. 90)
should be carefully noted. For comparison Lquote the description of a lion from an old
Chinese canon. “ With a form like that of the tiger, and with a colour tawny or sometimes
blue, the lion looks like the Muku-inu, a shaggy dog. It has a huge head hard as bronze,
a long tail, a forehead firm as iron, hook-like fangs, eyes like bended bows, and raised ears.
The eyes flash like lightning, and the roar is like thunder.”* It is only in the light of
descriptions that the aim of Eastern art in representing animal forms can be rightly
understood. A tendency to naturalism is but rarely found, and it is rather the expression
of a mental conception than a realistic picture that is aimed at. It is this point of view
which has preserved Oriental art from such paltry and emasculated realism as the lions of
Trafalgar Square. The artist’s lion need be like no lion on earth or in any Zoological
Garden; he is not illustrating a work on natural history; it is rather for him to express
through it the whole theory of his national existence and the strength of his individual and
national idiosyncracy. It is this possibility which explains the vitality and expressiveness
* Quoted by Sei-ichi Taki, '■ Ti'he Kokka,' igo'6, No. 198, p. 486.
87

Design and of the heraldic lions of England, the Barihat lion, the lion of the Sinhalese craftsmen, and
ornament the lions of Hokusai’s ‘Daily Exorcisms,’ as compared with the absence of imagination
in the handiwork of the English painter of domestic pets.
Nara sitpha NARA SIMHA. Lion with a man’s head, as in Fig. 24. The Rupivaliya account
describes the nara simha as of ‘ reddish hue down the knees, with fair nails, hair falling on
the back, dazzling with divine ornaments, beautiful eyes like the petals of a lotus, expert at
emitting flames of fire, possessing hot and cold dispositions like the Sun and Moon, with
curved teeth projecting outside the lips, with a tuft of hair on the crown, bestowing all good.’
Gaja shpha GAJA SIMHA. Lion with an elephant’s head, as in Fig. 25. This was the flag of
N uvarakalaviy a.
Fig, 24. Nara sitpha. From a Fig. 25. Gaja sirpha. From a
modern drawing [D.S.M.] modern drawing [D. S.M.]
Naga NAGA. The naga, or cobra, in relation to Indian religion and art is sufficiently well known
to need no long description. We do not find in the later Sinhalese art the semi-human
forms seen at Barahat, Ajanta, or Anuradhapura. The Naga Raja, Ananta, is often referred
to in Sinhalese poetry; the Naga Mucalinda who sheltered the Buddha is often depicted
or wrought (see PI. XVIII.). In decoration we find the naga as a simple cobra, e.g., on
woven cloths, embroidered on betel bags; in architecture as a protective symbol, e.g., the
naga bandha or ‘cobra knop’ marking the transition from the square to the octagonal part of
a wooden pillar.* The naga paruva is a whorl of cobras interlocked in succession, often
seen on modern brass trays; the simple naga paffuva, or pair of cobras with heads only
entwined I have only once seen and then not quite obvious; but the naga dapgaya (darapa
or dangarayd) an elaborate entwining of two cobras is not very rare (Pis. VII., 6, and LII.,
3); it is probably the same as Mr. Bell’s naga-putuwa (for pattuvd) and naga vpiksha; if so,
it may also be called nagapoffava, though I have never heard it. The form is well known in
widely separated parts of India (see Journal of Indian Art, Vol V., PI. 84), it is of interest
as corresponding to, and perhaps the origin of the classical caduceus. The cobra’s hood
is one of the 108 magul-lakunu.
Fish FISH. The mythical fish called matsya, an incarnation of Vishiju, is one of the 108
magul-lakupu. Fish are not often used in pure decoration ; but examples are to be found
in the ornament of earthenware, as in PI. XXV., 2. It may be remarked that fish
and wavy lines are symbolical of water, as in PI. I., where fishes are shown in the river,
preventing any possible mistake as to what is intended, much as ships and fishes are often
shown on the sea in old maps. The seven great rivers of India, in the magul-lakupu
(Fig. 69), are represented by seven squares, each containing a wavy line and a fish.
* Fhe gffa-liya-pota mentioned by Bell {K^galJa Report, p- 132) as the same, is really a distinct
form used in a similar position, see below, under ‘iiya patal
88

BIRDS. Birds have always a great fascination for the craftsman, perhaps because the Design and
shapes of many common objects readily lend themselves to the suggestion of bird form, ornament
Brass or bronze hanging lamps have frequently the form of birds (PI. XLIV., 4). A
well-known example is the brass lamp at Lankatilaka, which has very often been copied Birds
for the Kandy Art Association. The various bird pendants, especially the Panabokka
pendant (PI. L., 8) are examples of the feeling for bird ornament; so also the bird-shaped
handle of the plough (nimun-kurulld), and the bird-shaped block through which the taut
rope of a loom is passed (PI. XXIX., i, centre of end of warp).
The peacock {moriard) is not often seen ; it may be recognized by the long
tail (PI. XLV., 2), or, if in front view, from its fan form, quite distinct
from a harnsa or other bird. A peacock is amongst the 108 maguí lakm}u.
The makara's tail is not ‘ a peacock’s tail expanded,’ as indicated by Bell
(Kegalla Report, p. 133).
The parrot [giravd), as in Dravidian art, is often met with ; but ths giravd
pattuva of PI. XXXV., 2, is exceptional. The flag of Bintenna is a parrot.
The sfla-lihiniya is as much spoken of in Sinhalese poetry, as the nightin­
gale in some English verse ; but it is not often used in decorative art; I
cannot point to any example, unless it be amongst the birds on PI. XV.
Fig. 26. Parrot. or XIV., 7; but there is a reference to its use in a pottery poem which
From modern is quoted in a later chapter.
painted box Much the same is true of doves (koieyiyo), pigeons (par avi), cocks {kukulo)
[D.S.M.]. and kovulu mentioned in verse 14 of the Gana Devi Helia, which describes
the decoration of the young god’s palace thus: “ after the walls were
daubed with clay, and smoothly plastered with lime, a painter was engaged, who painted
pictures of makaras, hamsas, gavaras, leopards and lions, peacocks and.parrots, ringdoves
and cocks, pigeons and pretty kovulu.” Kandyan painters, indeed, show quite a Chaucerian
love of birds, and constantly introduce them in their designs, in association with flowers
and foliage (PI. XIV., 7). The different kinds of birds seen in the ceiling painting
reproduced on PI. XV. are drawn with great spirit and observation.
MRIGA. The deer is rarely found in decoration. One appears amongst the flowers in Mriga
the ceiling painting just teferred to They are found sometimes on kalala mats. In jatakas
and other romantic stories they are often introduced. The word mriga has also a general
sense, referring to any animal, just as the very word deer itself did in old English ; for
this, see simha and verses from the Rüpávaliya, quoted above, p. 87.
HARE. A legend often depicted on vihara walls is that of the Hare in the Moon. The Hare
story is briefly as follows: The Bodhisatta was born as a hare who one day observed that
other animals provided themselves with stores of food, from which, if need were, they
would have something to offer to a beggar ; reflecting that he himself had nothing suitable,
and could hardly offer grass, he determined to offer his own flesh if the occasion arose.
Perceiving this splendid display of virtue, áakra descended to the forest and appeared to
th e hare in the form of a Brahman, who addressed the hare thus: “Wise Sir, if I could
get something to eat, after keeping the fast, I would perform all my priestly duties.” To
which the hare replied, “Brahman, you have done well in coming to me for food. This
day I will grant you a boon that I have never granted before, but you shall not break the
moral law by taking animal life. Go, friend, and when you have piled together logs of
wood and kindled a fire, come and let me know, and I will sacrifice myself by falling into
the midst of the flames, and when my body is roasted, you shall eat my flesh and fulfil
all your priestly duties.” áakra did accordingly, though the fire was but a feigned one.
The Bodhisatta came, and offering his whole body as a free gift, he sprang up, and like
89

Design and a royal swan alighting on a cluster of lotuses, in an ecstacy of joy he fell on the heap of
ornament live coals. He was not burnt by the feigned fire ; éakra revealed himself as having
come to put the hare’s virtue to the test, and saying, “ O wise hare, be thy virtue known
throughout a whole æon,” he took up the hare and painted the figure of it on the moon,
then replaced it on a bed of grass in the same forest and returned to his own place in
heaven. This story is told in the Sasajâtaka (ed., Cowell, Cambridge, Vol. III., p. 34).
The hare is used decoratively in the forest scene shown on PI. XVI.; (ceiling painting)
the hares are arranged in pairs, face to face, or in heraldic language ‘affronted’. The
hare does not appear to be used with conscious symbolism in Sinhalese art ; in Hindu
mythology it stands for mildness and speed. In simple representations of the moon,
which like those of the sun, are a common vihara decoration, the hare is usually represented
on the moon’s disc. Other paintings show áakra with a brush in one hand, and the hare
under his left arm, painting its form on the moon’s disk.
Squirrel SQUIRREL. The use of the squirrel {daniu-knd) in decoration is shown in the forest
scene, PI. XVI. ; there is also a squirrel amongst the birds in the ceiling painting of PI. XV.,
and they are also found on a painted box in my possession. Their use is purely decorative.
Bull' BULL. The bull is not often seen in decoration. Fig. 66 shows a pair of bulls'
arranged face to face {Wappenstit), from a modern brass tray ; illustrating well how entirely
archaic even present-day ornament may be, when strictly traditional.
The bull is represented amongst the 108 magul-lakunu \ also in the atamagala diagram.
A curious device is the usamba-kuñjara (Fig. 27). This name of‘bull-elephant’ is given
to a combination of the two animals used as a copy in teaching drawing, and also rarely in
decoration, as on a carved wooden pillar at Entbekke devale. I have seen it also in an old
Tamil Kammalan’s kaiuttam pustakam atTanJore ; he
called it by the same name {psirasuba kunçaram).
'Elephant ELEPHANT. Not often used in pure ornament,
but more often in jâtaka and historical pictures ;
roughly painted on granary walls, PL VIL, 9 ; on
woven cloth, PI. XXIX., 7 ; carved on stone at the
entrance to the Dalada Mâligâvà. The elephant is
sometimes seen on eaves tiles. Two elephants are
Fig. 27. Usamba kunjara. From a also associated with the goddess árl (Lakshml),
modern drawing [D. S. M.]. pouring water on her seated figure, in the conven­
tional representation (PI. IX., i). I have seen a
bronze hanging lamp in the form of an elephant. There is a bronze elephant of unknown
purpose in the Colombo Museum. As in early Indian art (e.g. Barahat) the elephant is
usually very well drawn though not so in Fig. 27. It is one of the 108 maguí lakunu.
Horse HORSE. The horse {aSvayi) is but rarely met with in Kandyan decoration. The
following description is given in the Rüpâvaliya: “ The horse has hoofs like balls, and
the lower parts like a mound, a neigh like the sound of a storm, and lotus eyes ; he is swift
as the wind, stately as a lion, has the gait of a dancer, a face like a cluster of munamal flowers,
and the hinder part like a stack of corn.”
Hog, Crow DOG, CROW. These marks of degradation were occasionally inscribed on stones in
the case of villages degraded for any offence against the king. For such instances and
causes of offence see Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 17, 708, etc. They appear also on grants and
chàrters as symbols of the degradation awaiting those who should contravene them ; but
these instances can only by a stretch be included in the discussion of decorative art.
Man MAN. The romantic and conventional treatment is seen in PI. XVI., of a forest scene,
a ceiling painting. There is also a human figuré between two elephants in PI. VIL, 9- One
90

style of brass box (lieppuvd) of the Dutch shape has human figures with guns, riding Design and
horses, etc., and seems to show European influence, as does another in my possession, ornament
showing figures and horses amongst foliage in a Renaissance style. The jataka decoration
of Figs. 5, 11 and 28, is however, purely Sinhalese.
The most remarkable decorative use of the human figure, however, is in the peculiar Man
combinations of women arranged in the form of various animals and objects. A typical
example, and the only one often seen, is the panca-nari-gffa (5-women-knot) of which an
example is seen in Fig. 28 (a). There is a fine example carved in stone at the entrance to
the Dalada Màligâva, Kandy, and another at Haoguranketa, in which, however, there
is evident Dravidian feeling ; there is a very fine example in ivory (PI. XXXVIII., i) over
the dévale store-room door at RidI Vihara. The remaining combinations of this character
known to Sinhalese painters (and used as drawing ‘copies’) are the catur-niri-palakkiya
(j^-women-pa\a.nqnin), fat-nari-torana {6-'women-aTch),sapta-nari-turange (7-women-horse),
ashta-nuri-rat/ia (8-women chariot), and nava-nâri-kunjara (9-women-elephant) ; in some
of these the figure of Anahga, the Indian god of love, is also introduced, and it appears
possible that the whole series was once symbolical, associated perhaps with some Krishna
cult*. The original series may have been more complete; I have seen in a kaiuttam-
pustakam from Tanjore several of these combinations, and many other different ones. Such
curious combinations are also met with in other parts of India, even far north ; I have.
Fig. 28. Kandyan brass tobacco box {heppuva). h.,, panca ndri gcta\
B.,nari lata ; C.,div-narl-ratha ; D.,ndga dartgaya ; a iotmoi swastika-,
lions rampant as ‘supporters’ ; F., hamsapaffuva.
* See Journal of Indian Art, Vol. X., ‘ The Elephant in Industry and Art^ p. 64, where a
representation of a q-women elephant is reproduced, and described as ‘ Krishna riding on an elephant
improvised by the milkmaids of Gokulal
91

Designami for example, an Indian drawing of a rider and horse, the latter composed of several
ornament different animals, including one man. All of the forms are very ingenious ; that is all
that can be said for most of them ; but the 5-women-knot is sometimes beautiful. They
are certainly not very suitable for use as drawing copies, and I regard this as a late and
accidental development in Ceylon.
The figures of deities are hardly ever used in mere ornament, but have some auspicious
or protective idea associated. The conventional representation of the goddess Èri [Lakshmi)
bathing, seated upon a lotus, and with two elephants pouring water over her is occasionally
met with (PI. IX., l); it is a thoroughly Hindu form.
Nari-lata- NÀRI-LATÀ-VELA ; Of strictly mythical vegetable ornament, the nari-lata-vela is the
vfla most remarkable and most often used. It is a mythical climbing vine of which the flower
Fig. 29. Ndri-lata-vfla decoration of painted box. Ridi Vihara.
Fig. 30. Nari
has the appearance of a woman, ‘in all wise of perfect beauty, lata, Siamese
glorious in grace’; like other mythical things, it grows in the form, drawn by
Himalayas ; and has been known to shake the resolution of hermits P. C. Jinavara-
dwelling there. It is a very common element in Kandyan design vaipsa Unnanse,
(Figs. 29 and 31 ; PI. XXXIX., 3 ; PI. XL., 13, etc.); occasionally formerly Prince
parts of the plant are made to bear single faces also, reminding Prisdang.
one of some designs by Walter Crane.
The nari lata must not be confused with representations of other female figures (PI. XL.,
I, etc.) or divinities, such as the goddess hri or Lakshmi, PI. IX., i, seated, and holding
sprays of foliage; in the true nari-lata the lower part of the figure is replaced by
conventional foliage (PI. XXXIX., 3, and PI. XL., 13, are typical), in the other cases limbs
and garments are complete, and the figure is often seated on a throne.
I give a Siamese form (Fig. 30) for comparison with the many Sinhalese examples
illustrated.
The following story is a translation of an extract from the Kathavastu Prakaraifa kindly
forwarded by Mr. T. B. Parajiatella. It is here given in order to further illustrate the
nature of the mythical nari lata v(la.
“ Long ago when a Raja named Barribadat ruled according to the four good rules in Baranas
Nuvara (Benares) in Kasirafa on the plain of Dambadiva, enjoying regal luxuries, there
dwelt a young Brahman in Pasalgama. At the death of his parents becoming master of all
their property, as he was living in enjoyment of the comforts of a layman, many hermits
92

during the rainy season came from the Himalaya forest to Benares to the abodes of men Design and
and dwelt in ease in places such as the royal gardens and went too and fro in the city streets, ornament
Thereupon when the townspeople saw the hermits they prepared eatables and drinkables
and gave to them and made arrangements for them to remain there till the end of the wet
season, the hermits yeasaying them, dwelt in the royal gardens and such places. The
townspeople began to treat them with food consisting of delicious dishes of every kind.
At that time the aforesaid Brahmaija Kumara one day entering the city observing the
people very eagerly treating the hermits and himself also going near the hermits remained
Fig. 31. Nari lata, from a painted earthen pot.
a few days, thinking “I also follow the calling of a hermit and adopt the holy life, I too
shall be similarly treated.” Accordingly resolving that it was well to don the hermit’s
robes, returning home, he gave over to his relatives and friends all his moveables and
immovables, and adopted the life of a hermit, eating jungle roots and fruits and the like
food, he dwelt in a certain rock cave. Having attained dhyana in a short time, and able to
travel in the sky,one day when near his cave, he saw in a creeper called Nari Lata, a full
blown flower having the appearance of a woman, in all wise of perfect beauty, glorious in
grace. At that very moment he lost the power of dhyana which he had so long successfully
practised by great self control; his dhyana disappeared at the thought of indulgence, his
passions were let loose. Feeling very sorrowful thereat (bethought) ‘Now what shall I
do? What is the use of taking all this trouble and living in the jungle’, and returning
to the abodes of men, taking a wife and thinking to live in comfort, he went to his village,
cas t off his hermit’s robes and became a layman and begot children; following industrial
and commercial pursuits he with difficulty supported his wife and children, and at the
end of his life died in accordance with karma, having forfeited the privilege of birth in
Brahma Loka. Thus even for those who have successfully attained dhyana the power of
levitation is destroyed by the strength of lust and they are subject to samara's woe. To
those that heed this fact, that desire is as a thorn in the flesh, like a thief stealing away
the holy life, like a great fire to burn the holy forest (of hermits) and reduce to ashes;
considering those most evil consequences, drive away evil lusts and adopt a holy life.” This
story of the consequences of lust is taken from the Kathavastu Prakarana.
93

Designami A close parallel exists in the mediæval story of Alexander and the flower maidens
ornament (Mannhardt, II., p. i) “presumably founded on a legend current in ancient Greece”
and doubtless originally of Oriental origin (Philpot ‘ The Sacred Tree p. 6o).
“The story goes that in a certain wood, when spring came, numbers of enormous flower
buds appeared out of the ground, from each of which, as it opened, there leapt forth a
beautiful maiden. Their robes were a part of their growth, and in colour they were just
liketheirflowers, red and white (in the Indian story they are the flowers). . . . When . . .
the flowers withered . . . the beautiful creatures died. . . . Alexander and his knights,
coming upon this magical wood, mated with the flower maidens and for more than three
months lived in perfect happiness, till . . . one by one the nymphs died, and the king
and his companions had sorrowfully to resume their travels” (Philpot, loc. cit.).'
Kaju-pul, KADU-PUL; PARASATU. The ka^u-pul (sword-fruit) belongs to the «iî^'a-World,
Parasatu and is occasionally represented on vihara walls. The figure (33, i.) represents onfe (Irawn
by D. S. Muhandiram, after one done by his father in the vihâra at Çmbekke dévale ;
I have seen at Kelaijiya a form more sword-like. The parasatu belongs to the god-
world (dmya-lokd) and is the tree beneath which áakra (Indra) is seated on his throne.
It is mentioned in the Gaflaladeijiya rock inscription (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 236). The
representation of flowers which bloom on other planes, not on this earth, is pf particular
interest, as representing a metaphysical stage beyond even the idealization of fornis here
seen. The parasatu is described in verse 474 of Guttila kavya, where it is said that “The
brightness of the tree shone for 200 gav around it, the scent of its flower was perceived 400
gav away.” It is also described as ^00 gav in height and 1200 in circumference.' ,
Thepdlol is the tree of the Asuras ; it is too yodun in height and breadth and has branches
15 yoduns in circumference. The imbuì tree of the Gurulas is of the same dimensions,
so also the trees of the four great divisions of the earth, the damba (of Datnbadiva) the
kolon (of AparagOyana) the kap-ruka (of Uturukurudivayina) and the mahari tree (of
4
Purvavideha). Of these I have seen representations only of the ka u-pul ^nà. parasatu.
Perhaps the tree shown in PI. XIV., 4 is the grtzt damba of Daojbadiva, that is, India.
Katuru KATURU MALA. The katuru or katiri mala is doubtless so called from its crossing
mala petals resembling scissors or crossed sticks ; it is less often seen than the last ; it is well
seen on the lid of a painted book-box at Ridi vihara., and in this book on the betel-bag of
PI. XXXI.: see also Fig. 33, vni.
Picca mala PICCA MALA. The‘jessamine ’ (y«r»zCTa»2 ra»2¿ac) is a form used with great charm in
vihara decoration, especially as a background to paintings or bas-relief images of gods '
PI. XIV., 5). Figure 32 shows a very graceful use of picca mala in the decoration of a
wooden book cover (pot-kambiyd). The pattern is always drawn with great freedom, in
a style like that of‘brushwork’ as taught in the West. Observe that in Fig. 32 the
flowers are in bud (kfkulu maid) but they are more often drawn in half open profile {pipicca
mala) as shown on the right. The flower itself was much cultivated for floral offerings ;
it was the duty of certain
tenants {mala-kdrayd) to keep
the king supplied. The King,
says Knox, had these flowers
“brought to him every morn­
ing, wrapt in a white cloth,'
hanging upon a staff, and
carried by people, whose
Fig. 32. Picca mal decoration of book cover. The peculiar office it is. . . .These
flowers are in bud; opened flower in profile shown on right. Officers hold land ofthe King
94

for this service: their Office is, also to plant these Flowers, which they usually do near Design and
the Rivers where they most delight to grow.” ornament
i©kOfother conventional flower
and leaf ornament, some forms
are obviously based on natural
prototypes, and consciously used
as representative of them; others
have only fanciful names, and
their natural prototypes, if any,
can only be discovered by his­
torical and comparative inves­
tigation. Such investigations
are much to be desired, and
when accomplished, will throw
much light on the history of
Indian art. There are many
not known separately by name,
of which examples will be
found amongst the illustrations,
in addition to those specially
mentioned here.
SiNA-MALA. This charac- Slna-mala
teristic form is illustrated in Fig,
33,II.,a detail from RidI Vihara.
In Fig. 6 it is seen in associa­
tion with the vaka-deka, to
Fig. 33. Types of floral ornament: Kadti-pul. il. Sfna which it is soon added to form a
mala. IV. V?takeyiya. Y.Sapumala. VIII. Katirimala'. more elaborate drawing ‘copy.’
the others without technical names, and spoken of merely The sina-mala is much used;
as flower, mala or leaf, kola; No. IX. is spoken of in this either as a flower-spray pro­
work as ‘pine-apple.’ Various sources, i8th— 20th ceeding from the mouth of some
century Kandyan. beast, or attached to the stem
of some liya-Vfla ; also in
.jewellery, as on PI. XLIL, 5, pendants to cup; PI. XXIII., 7.
NELUN-MALA. The lotus is to oriental art all that the rose was to medieval English Nelun-mala
art. It underlies many forms not at first sight traceable to it. The most characteristic {Lotus)
simple lotus forms in use are the ‘rosettes,’ used to fill space (PI. XVIII.) or as
independent ornament, as in the case of pottery stamps (PI. XXV., 3), or in series,
especially on the beams of painted ceilings, as in PI. XV.; also typically at Kelaniya).
All circular objects, such as round boxes, lend themselves to simple lotus ornament.
We never observe that tendency to naturalism sometimes noticeable at Anuradhapura,
Ajanta, etc., but the simple rosette is capable of almost infinite variation; some of the
forms are shown in Fig. 34, others on PI. XX., 2; PI. XXIII., 2; PI. XXV., 3; PI.
XXXIX., 10, etc. It should be noted that the lotus-circle is always divided into 4,
8, 16 or more petals, never into multiples of 3 or 5 (PI. XXXII., 4 is an exception). The
Sinhalese artists had a good knowledge of practical geometry, enabling them to divide
the circle as they wished, as is seen in the arrangement of three hamsayB within a circle.
The carved bed of PI. X., 6, is a remarkable example of lotus ornament; there is a great
variety, of circular lotus-flowers, of which that in the centre has a kind of stem. The greater
95

part of the border consists of alternating half-lotus flowers in
Design and
full view, and lotus flowers in profile, the only example of the
ornament
latter position which I know of in mediasval Sinhalese art; it
is a most archaic arrangement, as seen, for example ätBarähat
(Cunningham, PI. XXL, central figure at the top).
The characteristic lotus throne, or padmdsana of divinities
and kings must not be overlooked (Pis. XVIII. and XIX.);
4
also the lotus pendent bracket capitals or peka a (PI. X., 4
and 5). The same motif is repeated in the pendent bell­
shaped earrings (PI. LI., 17).
It is interesting to compare with the different conventional
forms, the more pictorial treatment of a lotus, in a tank,
on PI. L, middle of the lower panel.
Lotus flowers are often painted on rock cave ceilings, and may
be very large. A cave temple at Helamada (Four Körales)
vin has on the ceiling large and small lotuses, surrounding one
large eight-petalled lotus, four feet in diameter.
Fig- 34 - Lotus flowers, Many lotus derivatives are also used without any conscious-,
various sources, i8th— ness of their origin. In Fig. 35, from a large door key, I
20th century Kandyan. give one example of such a form, belonging to the Egyfitian
strain in Sinhalese Art; and in Fig. 37, one from a painted
book cover, more suggestive of Assyrian. Fig. 36 is of the 'gegenständige Lotus-bhith und
Palmette' type.* Of Totus-palmette’ or ‘honeysuckle’ origin, too, is the vel-pota of
Fig. 67. The significance of these forms will be discussed in a later chapter.
3 3
Figs. S> ^ ®tid 37. Decorative forms of lotus origin: 35, from a key; 36, from
an eaves-tile; 37, from a painted book cover, the elements are of the cobra-head type.
In certain cases, e.g.. Fig. 34, m. and v., the lotus petals are replaced by forms which are
historically cobra heads, as can be proved by comparison with medallions at Barahat.-f-
Palä-peti PALA-PETI. Pala-peti is a form of ornament derived directly from the lotus; it is much
employed in Sinhalese art, and in all Indian art; it is a border or moulding (Fig. 37),
consisting of lotus petals, the petals fully seen, alternating with petals three-parts hidden by
those on either side of them, precisely as in the ordinary representations of the whole flower.
In the case of circular objects, such as metal dishes and vessels, sandal-wood grinding
stones, etc., the form at once suggests the lotus flower, and the petal ornament follows;
thence it has been adapted as a border applicable to straight work of every description,
particularly architectural mouldings. Innumerable examples of its use are illustrated in
the present book (PI. XLIL, i and 3, etc., etc.) It is sometimes greatly elaborated with
Hya-pata ornament (Fig. 39, m), but the simple forms are the most beautiful.
* Riegl, ‘ Stilfragen,' 1893,/’. 181.
7 7
A. K. Coomaraswamy, J.C.B.R.A.S., 1906,//’. S> ^-
96

It is interesting to follow some developments of the pala-peti\ in extreme forms the Design and
half-seen petal is omitted (PI. XXXVII., 5, and Fig. 39, c), and finally we have only ornament
a series of spathulate forms as in Fig. 39, b. There are, on the other hand, forms in
which the half-seen petal is terminated by a little cross (Pis. XXXI; XXXII., 7), or even Pala-peti
developed so as to be equally or more important than the fully-seen petal, resulting in
a more conspicuous alternation (PI. XXXII., 8 ;
XL., 17); this might result in a ‘ knop and flower ’
type of ornament, but never seems quite to do so.
PI. XL., 17, shows the most extreme development,
where the ‘dart’ has become a regular tree.
The truncated or rounded tips of the lotus petals
in most types may be remarked. The form in
Fig. 38, II., from Anuradhapura will explain the
Fig.' 38. Pala-peti: I., common origin of this truncation or flattening, the really
Kandyan form ; II., actual lotus petals pointed tip of the petal being represented first as
from ‘moonstone’ at Anuradhapura. curled inwards and so not affecting the outline,
and then omitted altogether; it is retained in
39
Fig, , c. But the half-seen alternating petal always retains the pointed tip. It is
the ‘dart’ in all patterns of the ‘egg and dart’ type, of which the classical and Indian
forms must have a common origin.
MALA. Many small four or eight-petalled forms stand simply for Mala
mal, flowers in general, without reference to special kinds (Pis. XVlI.;
-TffiiaatL A
XLIV., 7); but probably such forms are arrived at by a reduction
OQOoa B of lotus rosettes. In extreme cases they appear only as small equal
IHHfìIlfìKrìI C armed crosses (PI. XXXII., 7, second border; XLV., 9, border).
D SAPU-MALA,and VETAKEYIYA: these flowers,conventionalised Sapu-mala,
forms of those of the sapu-Xxt^ (Fig- 33> ''''•)> common Pandanus Vffakeyiya
E
(Fig. 33, IV.), are used in vihara decoration, like lotus rosettes, to
fill space, as on PI. XVIII.
MAL-GAHA: the ‘flower-tree’ is the name given to the little Mal-gaha
CÌitói G
jewelled tree on a Kandyan king’s hat, now worn by chiefs indis­
criminately ; and also to tree patterns, which would be called by
nfririnfn J comparative patternists ‘ trees of life,’ such as the forms shown in
Fig. 40 and PI. XXXII., i and 2). The mal-gaha usually springs from
a low triangular mound, representing earth or rock, as in Fig. 40
and PI. XIV., 4.
A beautiful form of the tree of life is treated almost pictorially
on the Kelaijiya vihara ceiling (PI. XIV., 4); the life symbolism is
Fig. 39. Forms of emphasized by the many forms of life—birds, animals and man—
pala-peti border associated with the tree and living under it; but the special interest
sh owing develop­ of this type is its identity with the tree forms characteristic of the
ment and changes. South Indian printed _ palampores; it is perhaps found in Ceylon
as the result of Tamil influence, or may belong to an older stratum
common to both races, the likelihood of which must always be remembered when
considering the origin of particular decorative forms.
The tree motif is in constant use; in embroidery it is illustrated in Fig. 4, on PI. XXVIII.
and PI. XXXIII., 4; with birds in PI. XXXII., i. It appears frequently between two
animals, in the symmetrical arrangement called ‘ affrontment.’
97
h I

Artificial trees of silver, with silver leaves, or of cheaper materials
Design and
(PI. VIIa., in front of left knee of seated image) are often placed
ornament
before an image as auspicious symbols of the famous wish-conferring
tree of plenty, the kalpa druma of Indra’s sphere. So also we read
Mal-gaha
in the Mahavaipsa, of jewelled, ornamented trees. Parakrama
Bahu I., for instance “ caused a theatre to be built, thè Sarassati
Mandapa, hard by his palace, so that he might listen to the sweet
and melodious singing of divers singers, and witness the delightful
dance. It glittered with golden pillars all around, and pleased the
mind with the paintings that described the events of his own life.
And it was adorned with an imitation of the ‘wish-conferring
tree of heaven’ (kap-rukd). The trunk and the branches thereof
glittered with gold, and were ornamented with a multitude of divers
Fig. 40. Mal-gaha, kinds of birds of beautiful workmanship. It shone also with divers
‘ flower-tree,’ from kinds of ornaments, such as ear-rings and bracelets and garlands of
a Dumbara mat pearls and the like, and with beautiful garments made of linen and
{kalalayd). China silk, silk, and such like”(Mahavaipsa,Ch.LXXIII.) Jewelled
representations of ¿ff-trees were also made ; for an early record
of such, see p. 5 above.
The ¿i-tree is of course constantly represented in Buddhist paintings (PI. XIX., etc). To
each Buddha belonged a tree, beneath the shade of which he sat at the critical period
5
of his life, the coming of enlightenment. The ¿ -tree {Ficus religiosa) of Gotama Buddha
has thus come to occupy, as a symbol, much the same position amongst Buddhists as the
cross amongst Christians. A branch of the actual tree beneath which the Buddha sat,
was brought to Anuradhapura in the third century, b.c. ; and there it still grows—
5
the oldest historical tree in the world. But a ¿ -tree of some
sort, large or small, is to be found near every vihara, and offerings
of flowers are laid on a stone altar before it. Sometimes white
cotton banners or garlands are attached to the branches. The
leaves are separately used as decorative motifs as described below.
Trees of various kinds are often represented in decorative
paintings, severely but beautifully conventionalised as in PI.
XIV., 8 and Fig. 41. In these pictures, grace and symmetry
are wonderfully combined.
Flower-in- ‘ FLOWER-IN-POT.’ Closely allied to the flower-tree, is the
pot tree or flower in a pot ; filled pots and flowers in pots are auspicious
objects used at weddings and festivals and are constantly seen in
all Eastern art (PI. VIIa., between the doors in the lower figure ;
and PI. XXXIII., 2). The ‘flower in pot’ is a very ancient
auspicious decorative symbol, and many examples in carved stone
may be seen at Anuradhapura. The symbolism goes back to the Fig. 41. Decorative
beginnings of Asiatic art. picture of mango tree :
Ltya-Vila LIYA-VELA. The ordinary meaning o i‘•vflal is a climbing Danagirigala vihara.
plant, a jungle rope; liya has the same meaning, as well as the
secondary meaning of woman, gracefulness, etc., as in liya kindurd. In Sinhalese ornament.
v?la or liya v(la has the technical meaning of vegetable ornament, consisting not of single
flowers or leaves, but of a continuous stem with rhythmically disposed floral or foliar
elements, such as German writers name fortplanzende Welknranke. The word ‘branch’
98

I have selected as the best equivalent for these Sinhalese and German terms.'* The words Design and
‘vine’ and ‘spray’ are also suitable equivalents, with the reservation, of course, that the ornament
grape vine, is not met with in Sinhalese art, even as a foreign element. In using the word
‘ branch,’ I have had in mind the Keltic stories-f- of Faery branches that stilled all sorrow Liya-vela
by the sound of their shaking; for as they through the ears lightened the burden of
sorrow, so'has the burden of labour been lightened by the painted or carved branches of the
craftsman.
Branches and vines are most various in form and treatment, and everywhere in continual
use ; they are especially characteristic of painted wood, carved door-jambs and embroidery.
Of these forms Mr. Bell remarks: “The main ornament, repeated in endless variety
. . . is the continuous scroll of foliage. . . . Single or double, large or small, plain
or complex, its convolutions throwing off leaves . . . or . . . sometimes a repeated flower,
or evei> enclosing partially or throughout, figures of dancers,—the one leading idea is
kept steadily in view, and it would be difficult, if not impossible, to substitute other
ornamentation more elegant, refined and better suited to its purpose.” Liya vfla ornament
frequently springs from the mouths of animals, as in Early
Indian art (PI. XL, 5 and 3). The feeling for growth is very
strong and logical in all the forms, though none approach
nature closely in detail; such a monstrosity as leaves growing
in opposite directions from one stem, or stems without a
logical beginning and end would be almost impossible to
the Kandyan designer. A careful study of PI. XV., and
Fig. 52, will show how exceedingly logical and full of feeling
for growth is the Sinhalese treatment of vines. The liya-
V(la may either be used to cover space as in PI. XXXVI., 6,
7 and 9, and in PI. XV.; or may form a border, in which
Fig. 42. Liyanf/a and other case the fforal or foliaceous elements alternate very regularly
ornament of earthenware, on opposite sides of the waved stem (Pis. XXXI., border ;
K?laniva. XXXII., 9 ; XXXVIII., 4; XXXIX., 9, etc). Fig. 12 on
PI. XXVI. shows an especially handsome form.
The alternating spirals characteristic of a certain type of metal work (Fig. 53, c) are strictly
ornament of the same type, and historically, its basis, but they would hardly be called
liya-Vfla by Sinhalese painters. A noteworthy form on Kelaijiya pottery is shown in
. Fig. 42 and will be discussed with correlated examples in the Chapter on the History
of Sinhalese Art; it will here suffice to note the archaic aspect of these types, suggestive
at first sight of Greek and other Mediterranean forms.
* The term ^branch' is however, hardly a full equivalent of the German ^ Wellenranke,’ as the
latter includes rhythmic forms of ornament {e.g.. Fig. 53, c) whose origin is geometrical, and
where the ‘vine’ idea is still undeveloped.
■f “ Cormac . . . was by himself in Teamhair one time, and he saw an armed man coming towards
him, quiet, with high looks, and having grey hair ; a shirt ribbed with gold thread next his skin,
broad shoes of white bronze between his feet and the ground, a shining branch, having nine apples
of red gold on his shoulder. And it is delightful the sound of that branch was, and no one on
earth would keep in mind any want, or trouble, or tiredness, when that branch was shaken for
him ; and whatever trouble there might be on him, he would forget it at the sound.” {Gods and
Fighting Men, Lady Gregory, p. 115, ‘Manannan’s Call to Cormac^ after Whitley Stokes,
Irische Fexte). And if there is, perhaps, in this Faery branch that stills all sorrow, a non-moral
element which is lacking in the craftsman’s branch, yet the idea of consolation in distress is in both.
99
h 2

Design and LIYA PATA or POTA.* This exceedingly conventional foliar ornament deserves
ornament particular study. It is more characteristic of Sinhalese design than any other form; instruc­
tion in the use of it is almost the first thing taught to young craftsmen. The elements of
Liya-pata it will be best understood from Fig. 44, wherein the rnanner of drawing is also displayed ;
it is not easy to draw the form well unless the parts are taken in the right order.-f-
V(la,
Fig. 43. Liya
Ivory, South Ken­ Fig. 44. Liya pata ornament,
sington. showing manner of drawing.
Work filled with it is called liya-pata-vda; a single element like the last in Fig. 44 would be
csR&A.geta-liya-pota ; such are often ushd much like Gothic crockets (PI. XXXV., 5 and 6).
The pattern lends itself on the other hand to the greatest possible elaboration, as seen in
elaborate examples of tiringitale (PI. XVII., and Figs. 4 and 8), or perhaps best, in fine ivory
carving (PI. XXXV., 4, also a beautiful piece. No. iWt in tbe Science and Art Museum,
Indian Section, South Kensington); it occurs especially in knife handles (PI. XXXVII., 2).
It is very characteristic of metal and woodwork. It is often found on wooden pillars at
the transition from square to octagonal section (Fig. 74, c). It is constantly used in the
tails and crests of conventional birds (Fig. 19) and bird-like tails of mythical animals
(Figs. 16, 17, etc.) in lions’ manes and the handles of door-bolts and water-dippers (PI.
XL, 2, XIII. and XLL), and, in fact, everywhere. It is sometimes used to elaborate a
pala-peti border as in the ivory door jambs of the Dajada Maligiva.
Fig. 45. Siamese single '■ kanaka’ or Fig. 46. Siamese d o u b l e o r
flame ornament, equivalent of Sin. flame ornament. Figs. 45—47 drawn
liya pata. by P. C. Jinavaravaipsa Unnanse.
*Pota. Pata=leaf : pafa=stripe: pota=a book: but craftsmen use the ’word'pota' in pattern
names in various senses., as strand, knop, item, element, 'affair,' 'thingumi-bob.' So used it is
apparently a corruption of'pata' or 'pata’ according to circumstances ■, thus, de-pota-lanuva is
evidently de-pafa-lanuva, two-ply-plait; and liya pota is liya pata, 'vine leaf’ both forms being
current in the last case.
■I- It is often badly drawn by illustrators, as in several places in Bells Kfgalla Report.

A liya-pata scroll completely turned in upon itself as in Fig. 22, is caWtA peralum pata. Design and
The liya-pata ornament is one that meets us in the Dravidian temples of South India, at ornament
Anuradhapura, and in other ancient buildings all over India (Sarnath ; near Kutab Minar;
Orissa^ etc., but not Barahat), but in elusive forms (e.g., Cunningham, Mahabodhi,
PI. XV), now approaching, now unlike, the modern Sinhalese, which seems the most
conventional of all, many of the others being more foliar or leaf-like.
There are close parallels in Chinese, Burmese and Siamese art. The Siamese kanaka is
shown in simple and elaborate forms, in Fig. 45 for comparison with Fig. 44, and in actual
use in Fig. 47. It will be seen that the Siamese forms are more pointed and severe than .
the Sinhalese, which are sometimes too soft and rounded, almost rococo. The vital
distinction between‘temperate’and ‘intemperate’curvature must never be forgotten.* The
history of this form alone would afford valuable clues for the unravelling of the history of
Indian art. It is probably based on leaf and stem form, from which it has been derived in a
long process of idealisation.
'TTTT
«TTTT
oY Y T
H'
Fig. 49. Bs-leaf
borders. A., from
Cû
bronze bell. B.-F.,
tree. Ficus religiosa, from woven cloths.
x^, showing stalk, G. and H., from
Fig. 47. Sketch of Siamese
and ‘drip-tip.’ embroidery.
architectural ornament, by
P.C.JinavaravamsaUnnanse,
showing use of ‘temperate’ BÖ-KOLA or BÖ-PATA. One of the most persistent Bs-kolaor
curves similar to those of forms in Sinhalese decoration is the ¿i-leaf. The bö-pata
Figs. 45 and 46. ho-Xxtt is held sacred to Buddha (see mal-gaha above);
but the separate ¿i-leaf does not seem to have come
into use so early as the ¿<7-tree iself; but yet before the decline of Buddhism in India,
as we find traces of it still in South Indian decorative art.
Typical forms are shown in Fig. 49; innumerable other instances of it will be met with in
the illustrations in this book (PI. XX., 3 ; XXIV., 2, h ; XXIX., 6 and 8 ; XLIV., 3, etc.)
The ¿ff-leaf motif sometimes influences other forms, as the lotus flower of PI. X., 5.
It may be remarked that the ¿iJ-leaf, representing the ‘fig-leaf’ worn by early man, has
given its form to the silver or glass ornament worn by little girls before other garments are
considered necessary.
* Ruskin, 'Stones of Venice, Vol. III., Ch. I.
h 3 loi
4
i 0 74

37
Design and The (-leaf is still a common element in South Indian decoration, as well as in Ceylon.
ornament It is. there, no doubt, a survival from Buddhist times, now used without any remembrance
of its former religious significance.
Bo-pat- BO-PAT-KANGUL. This arrangement of alternating ¿i-leaf and ‘dart,’ as seen in
kavgul PI. VIIa., fringing the altar, and PI. XXVIII., 2 (border of napkin), would seem to
have been suggested as a modification of pala-peti, the fully-seen petal being replaced
by a ¿s-leaf.
SULIYA. This is the name given to the small scrolls which first appear in the liya-pata at
Suliya the last stage in Fig. 44; if external to the main outline they are cs\\e.d pifa-suli (Fig. 44, c).
The suliya appears elsewhere also, as on PI. XX., 3, arranged like crockets around the
bo-leaf; and combined to form varieties of liya-Vfl (PI. XXIV., 5, suli-vela). The influence
of the form on woodwork is seen in PI. X., i.
Malaya MALAYA. The ‘garland’ plays an important part in all Indian decoration. Its use in
ornament is derived from the actual use of garlands of flowers used to decorate the person
or offered to an image, or hung round a building. In jewellery this idea is very evident;
neck chains are called garlands, and named after particular flowers. The motif is seen
only rarely in Sinhalese architecture, and chiefly in the carving of wooden pillars, where
a garland of pearls is often represented round the top. In ceiling paintings the garland
motif is sometimes used as a frame (PI. XIV., 4) as in South Indian palampores, or hung,
as it were, along the very top of the wall, just under the ceiling; both may be seen at
K?laijiya. The garland motif in Indian art is one that often at first sight suggests
Renaissance influence, but there can be no doubt of its indigenous character, from its
constant occurrence on the most ancient monuments. But it is often used in India in a
very rococo and insincere way, even combined with ribands tied in bows. In such matters
Sinhalese art tends to be somewhat more pure and severe than other Indian art.
Pine-apple' ‘PINE-APPLE’ : this form (Fig. 33, ix.) is not distinguished by a separate name by the
Sinhalese, to whom it is one of many kinds of conventional flower ; neither do I think that
it has any real connection with the pine-apple, the resemblance being quite illusory; but
the cross-hatching of the middle part of the flower deserves notice ; it represents,! suppose,
rather the central florets of such flowers of those of the Composite, than any real fruit: it
is of further interest as recalling Assyrian forms. The cross-hatching is associated with
several different flower forms; some common types are shown in Fig. 59.
'Palmette' ‘PALMETTE’: it is here only necessary to indicate the forms which may be classed
under this heading, as their historical significance is discussed in another Chapter. The
most typical forms are seen PI. XXXIV., 3 ; XXIX., 7, top right hand; PI. XXXIII., 6.
’’Honey­ ‘HONEYSUCKLE’: there are certain forms which may be called honeysuckle types;
suckle' of these, Fig. 42 is a good example. It is probable that these, like the other forms of a
Mediterranean character, are evidence rather of a stock of art motifs common to East
and West, rather than of a borrowing of East from West. In using this term for either
Eastern or Western forms, I only make use of an existing technical term, and do not,
of course, mean to suggest that they represent the honeysuckle plant.
‘ Knop and ‘KNOP AND FLOWER’: this ancient form, so characteristic
jlower' of Indian art, is rarely met with in Ceylon. Fig. 50, from a
damascened lock, is modern but traditional. It is suggested by
several forms on PI. XLVL, but these on examination are found
to show rather a serial arrangement of like elements than the Fig. 50. ‘Knop and
alternation characteristic of the ‘knop and flower.’ We find a Flower,’ from modern
typical example, however, on PI. XXIX., 7, top right hand, and damascened steel.
this has a very archaic aspect.

‘ CONE. ’ The ‘cone’ or ‘shawl’ pattern is really a North Indian form, which has filtered Design and
down to the South of India thence, especially on textiles. In Ceylon it appears on printed ornament
cloths made by Tamils at Batticaloa and Jaffna. In Sinhalese
art I have only once seen it, on a piece of modern but quite ‘Cone'
traditional damascened iron; in this form it is known to the
Tamil cloth-printers as ‘mango pattern.’ The absence of the-
form elsewhere is an illustration of the extreme freedom of
Fig. ‘Cone’ or Sinhalese art from Mohammedan influence.
‘shawl’ pattern. From ‘CALYX VOLUTE.’ The symmetrical scrolls so conspicuous ‘Calyx
modern damascened in vegetable ornament of lotus origin, and historically derivable volute’
handle rose. from the representation of calyx sepals in side view, are clearly
shown in Figs. 35 and 36 and PI. XXIX., 7, and recognizable
in many other forms.
i@kWe come now to the geometrical patterns, of which the majority are borders.
BINDUVA. The‘dot ’ is used singly, or in groups or series (PI. XXIV., various instances ; Binduva
PI. XXXVI., 8; PI. XL., 12, etc). It is characteristically seen in the ‘wire and pip’
filigree Jewellery (XLVIIL, 14, 16, etc.)
IRI, line. There is not much to tell of the use of the simple line, except to note that Straight
the teaching of drawing does not begin with straight lines, but with curves. The use of line
firm black outline, drawn with the fine stiff telitaifa brush, is very characteristic. Clearness
and definition belong to all Eastern decorative art, and this is emphasized by the defined
outlining. The line as such is often used in the ornament of pottery.
VAKA, curve. Perhaps the most marked feature of Indian decorative art, and the arts Curve
derived from it, in Ceylon, Burma and Siam, and China lies in the character of its abstract
curved forms. I shall digress for a moment to discuss the general treatment of curved
forms in Sinhalese and other Eastern ornament.
The curved boundary of leaf or stem or scroll has always a peculiar character of life and
crispness, not often sinking into mere roundness or softness. Curves of this character are
well illustrated in Fig. 69, vi. and xiii. (Sinhalese), and in Fig. 47 (Siamese). This
type of abstract curve is not confined to recognizedly vegetable ornament; it appears as
much in the Siamese ‘flame ornament’ and the outline of a Siamese gable, as every stem
and leaf of liya vela ornament in Ceylon, and in the details of South Indian architectural
decoration. The reason for this universality is that Indian art at its best is never realistic,
but is based on abstractions or ideal forms; hence the ideal curved form which exists
as the prototype of all curved forms, if rightly apprehended, must inevitably reappear in
all idealized forms of ornament. This is what we find to be the case. The type of
curve I speak of is best described as temperate, or disciplined, but is capable of degeneration
into rococo forms. By such standards must the quality of Indian craftsmanship at various
periods be criticised.
The point is well illustrated by a quotation from Ruskin: “Our first constituents of
orn ament will therefore be abstract lines, that is to say, the most frequent contours of
n atural objects, transferred to architectural forms when it is not right or possible to render
such forms distinctly imitative. For instance, the line or curve of the edge of a leaf may
be accurately given to the edge of a stone, without rendering the stone in the least like
a leaf, or suggestive of a leaf; and this the more fully, because the lines of nature are alike
in all her works; simpler or richer in combination, but the same in character; and when
they are taken out of their combinations it is impossible to say from which of her works
they have been borrowed, their universal property being that of ever-varying curvature
in the most subtle and subdued transitions, with peculiar expresssons of motion, elasticity,
h 4 103

Design and or dependence.”* As also remarked by him, curves of this type not only mark the force
ornament and vigour of vegetable growth, “ but some among the most beautiful of them are described
■ by bodies variously in motion, or subjected to-force; as by projectiles in the air, by the
Ideal curves particles of water in a gentle current, by planets in motion in an orbit, by their satellites,
if the actual path of the satellite in space be considered instead of its relation to the planet;
s- by boats, or birds, turning in the water or air, by clouds in various action upon the wind,
■ by sails in the curvatures they assume under its force, and by thousands of other objects
. moving or bearing force.” They appear also in the forms of flame. Disciplined spiral
forms suggest the curling of a tendril or the involution of a shell. Spiral and continuous
curve together give the simplest form of‘branch’ or vine.
Observe that these ideal and disciplined curves are as characteristic of Indian as of Gothic
art. The fact is, that the quality which had been looked upon as Gothicness, and which
Ruskin called Christian, is not a thing peculiar to Gothic art, but is found in all great and
ideal art. Hindu or Buddhist, ornament is often intensely and surprisingly Gothic in
feeling; and cannot fail to be so, since both agree in the recognition of abstract natural
form, or ideal form, as the true basis of all noble ornament, and the purpose of art to be the
revelation of a deeper reality than that of phenomenal appearance. And this applies only
to Gothic art of the thirteenth century; it is the essential character of all Indian art from
the beginning. Sinhalese art sometimes falls away from this ideal and becomes rococo.
It is not by chance that the Sinhalese craftsman comes to have these disciplined or temperate
curves at his command; for the most essential part of his artistic apprenticeship and
training consists of instruction calculated to impress their character indelibly upon his
mind, so that his hand cannot fail to trace them, whether he will or no. Hence the great
ease with which he repeats ornamental forms based on the fundamental curves, and the
certainty and freedom of his touch. The whole character of his later work depends on
the education in the use of flattened curves with which his training begins.
The first and most thorough part of the Sinhalese craftsman’s education in design consists
in the close study of the ideal curved form of the vaka deka, or double curve, and from this
point— the spiral being evolved by the reflexion of the simple curve upon itself—he is
carried on until he has such command of curved form as to design easily such forms as the
most elaborate tiringi tale; and the subtle sense of curvature thus ingrained in him expresses
itself ever after in whatso form of leaf or stem or feather that he may devise. Anyone
who has spent time copying much Sinhalese or similar Eastern ornament, or has critically
examined reproductions of original work drawn by untrained men will know how extremely
difficult it is to preserve the sensitive types of curvature consistently ; especially in repeating
patterns, it is fatally easy to allow the forms to degenerate and weaken. But the trained
craftsman never falters, because the curve is second nature to him; he could not draw
it wrong without deliberate effort. Such is the curve of energy and growth ; rhythmic
and disciplined, but unsatisfied, ever striving towards an end not yet attained; as of a vine
climbing upwards vigorously, or restless flames of fire. Contrasted with it is the rounded
curve, or circle; as of the lotus, expressing peace and balance. The circular form is
complete, without beginning or end; it is a form at perfect rest. Not wdthout reason
has the circular been chosen to typify the Law {Dharma). These facts seem to have been
unconsciously realised by the best designers.
Study the vihara ceiling reproduced on PI. XV., and analysed in Fig 52, The floral
ornament of the painted boards is overflowing with life and energy, almost restless in its
vigour, though the vigour is always a disciplined vigour of growth. But tiirn to the great
Stones of Venice^ ed. 2, p. 215.
104

beams on either hand, whereon the boards are set, and which are the constructional elements Defign and
of the roof and ceiling; we find that they are treated very differently. The repeated ornament
circular forms are expressive of stability and repose, in marked contrast to the changefulness
and vigour of the painted vine within. Here is a remarkable example of the architectural
quality in ornament; there could hardly be a better example of the appreciation of the-
meaning of curved forms or of their noble-use in ornament. :
Fig. 52. Ceiling painting at Gaijegoda, near Pelmadulla, Sab, showing
construction of the design, a a , main beams. See also PI. XV.
CIRCLE. Simple circles are seen especially on ivory, where it is scratched with a small Circle
two-pronged iron tool, used as compasses, the centre being a distinct dot (PI. XL., 3) ; in
PI. XXXVI., 8, the circle is combined with a dot external to it, forming a sort of ¿¡J-leaf.
In a few cases the circle is used as a sun symbol, especially on sannas-, see above p. 81.
SPIRAL. The use of this form is restricted. In painting I Spiral
know only one example of a half-spiral within a circle, from
vihara, which I have seen in a photograph taken by Mr. Bell.
But the typical occurence is on certain forms of cast brass work,
particularly sirak-kala (PI. XLIV., i ; XLV., 6, and Fig. 53) ;
here we find both series of unconnected double scrolls and
continuous series of alternating scrolls on either side of a
Fig. 53. Double spiral; continuous branch {G.fortlaufende Wellenranke'); see also PI. XL,
single spiral; ‘continuous 4, third band of ornament on seat. It is to be noted that this
branch ’ with alternating form is the prototype of all the more elaborate liya-vela patterns,
spirals. From brass whether simple borders, or used to fill space. It is so both
castings. historically and logically; and it is noteworthy that the
indigenous method of teaching drawing at Lucknow, now
almost forgotten, consists, as I am informed by Mr. Rädhä Kfishija, Drawing Master there,
in teaching first the simple spiral, several times coiled, and then in applying the type
of curve so learnt to the drawing of simple vine forms, in which the alternating curves
resemble those of the spiral in character.
TRIANGLE. Triangles in Kandyan art are of three sorts. First, the chevron border 'Triangle
(Fig. 56, a) is equivalent to a series of alternating upright and inverted triangles; if one
series be shaded or coloured, the other left plain, this is at once apparent, as in Figs.
56, B and c, and in Pis. XXXIII., 1-3, and XLIX., 10. Borders thus originating are
105

Design and distinguished by the presence of the two boundary lines, passing through the bases and
ornament apices of the triangles.
A second type of triangle is derived from the is-leaf (q.v.) and is used as a border of the
same general character (PI. XLIV., 3), but recognised by the absence of the line passing
through the apices of the triangle ; there is further generally some small star or projection
at the apex, corresponding to the drip-tip of the real leaf (PI. XXX., i, and Fig. 41, g).
On some woven cloths, pairs of these triangles are set point to point, forming an hour-glass
pattern, but still called bc-kola by the weavers.
The two triangles already mentioned are usually equilateral. A third kind is isosceles
and much elongated. It appears typically on lacquered sticks, and is called patura (wedge
or wing). It is also common on South Indian and Malayan printed cloths worn in Ceylon
(see PI. XXII., royal costume of 1603). It is considered by Rouffaer and Juynboll
(Indische Batikunst, III., 163) to be of Malay-Polynesian origin. The ‘¿ff-leaf triangle,’
on the other hand, is the one referred to by the same authors as similar to, but less
pronounced than the Malay-Polynesian type, and as probably of Buddhist origin.
Diya-r(la DIYA-R^LA. The chevron, ‘zig-zag’ or wave is often met with; as on PI. XL, 4,
outer ring of ornament on seat: and often on woven cloths and mats, as PI. XXVIII.,
1,15, also in paintings of textiles (PI. XIV., 5). The use of a zig-zag line to symbolize
water is of hoary antiquity, and now world wide. It is interesting to find the name diya
reía, ‘wave,’ still employed by Sinhalese craftsmen to denote chevron or zig-zag pattern.
V \ / -
7
Fig. 54. Diya-r(la,
wave pattern or
chevron.
w ' w ' W - Q
Fig. 55. Bordet- Fig. 56. Chevron Fig. 57. Svastika,
derived from borders and derived from pattern of
chevron (cast- triangle pattern. plaited grass bag.
brass).
Torada TORANA, arch : this form appears in PI. XXVII., ornamenting the central band in the
lotus throne on which the Buddha is seated; representing feathers in Figs. 12, 58, b, etc.
The special form called makara torana is described above, under makara. A somewhat
similar form of arch is called liya-torar}a, and is formed entirely of liya-pata ornament.
Cros s CROSS. The manner in which small equal armed crosses are derived from four petalled
flowerets, has been indicated above {mala).
Svastika SVASTIKA ; this well-known form is practically absent in Kandyan art; it is very rare
at Anuradhapura, so also at Barahat. It is one of the 108 magul-lakunu, having the form
of Fig. 69, X.; it is approached in the fret or key patterns of PI. XXIX., 7: and it
also appears very exceptionally on the carved panels of wooden pillars : compare also the
ornament of a paper ms., PI. XX., i ; and Fig. 28, e, four women arranged svastika-wise ;
the form is also not uncommon in grass plaited mats and bags (Fig. 57). But the svastika
is not used under this name in ornament, but only in the magul-lakui}u.
106

DIAPERS. These are beautiful and charac­ Design and
teristic. The most typical examples are called ornament
d(la, ‘net’ (PI. XXIV., 4); other diapers are
known as tundan vçda (Figs. 61 and 62). Diapers
Typical diapers are seen on painted textiles, as
PI. XIV., 6; also in great variety on actual
woven cloths (PI. XXIX., etc.). Examples on
a large scale are sometimes afforded by ceiling 9
Fig. 58. Methods of Fig. S - Types
paintings (Fig. 60). The origin of these
of flower centre
representing feathers. various forms is of interest ; historically
cross-hatching.
A-c, from drawings ; speaking, no doubt, they may be traced back
D, E, F, H, metal work; to Egypt ; but some may be derived from,
Gj'wood carving. or influenced by, representations of feathers (Fig. 58), some
perhaps from the central cross-hatching in flowers of the ‘ pine-
apple’ and daisy type (Fig. 59). In other cases there may be
the idea of representing flowers growing in defined spaces or
plots, as in many Persian carpets. Probably these ideas were
not consciously present in the minds of eighteenth century
craftsmen. The name tundan veda is given to such ornament
composed of floral elements enclosed in geometrical framework ;
passing into ‘parsemé’ by omission of the framework. The name
kalas dangaya is given to tundan vçda when the framework
resembles the outline of a water pot, as in Fig. 62.
Indian art especially excels in the beauty and variety of its diapers
and semé patterns. Such patterns are not found in Greek art, nor
in Early Indian; they appear to be a later and purely oriental
development ; a discovery almost as important in the history
of decorative art, as the ‘ branch’ (JVellenranké) itself. The various
Fig. 60. Diagram of
examples show that Kandyan painters, too, have still a great
ceiling painting at
capacity for good design, and that forms which might be thought
Dodantale.
to be late, or of North Indian origin, belong to pure Buddhist
and Hindu art, and have probably so belonged from the earliest
periods. The simplest form of diaper is the plain chequer, composed of triangles or
, squares, often seen on the painted roofs of cave temples, sometimes, also, on textiles as
PI. XXVIII., I, 17. „
KUNDIRAKKAN or KUNJIRAKKAN. This name is applied to certain characteristic Kutfdi-
borders used especially in ivory and wood carving; as seen in PI. XXXIX., i, 2, where rakkan
it is combined with arimbuva in the borders of the combs; PI. XL, 2, upright strip of
carving, with arimbuva on either side; and elsewhere, (PI. XXIV., i, c, etc.
LANU-GETA, plait: these forms are very characteristic and logical, and include Lanu-geta
‘ broken plaitwork’ and ‘knotwork’ but are not quite so far developed as in Christian Irish
art ; good examples of the treatment are shown on Pis. XII., 2 ; XXVIII., 3 ; and
XXIX., 4. The types in Fig. 63, v. and vi., called respectively, eka-pota lanuva (one-ply
plait,—a world-wide form), and de-pota lanuva (chequer-work or grass-matting shading)
seem to be of a different character.
The plait is often ornamented with two internal lines, or even with arimbuva (PI. XII., 2).
Elaborate plaits Àyere constructed as described by Romilly Allen (Celtic Art, p. 259), of
which I have seen an example in a padimakada pota. ‘ Broken plaitwork ’ was unknown
in the West before the sixth century, a.d. It is regarded by him as an independent
107

Design and Irish invention. It is not likely to have gone Eastwards from Ireland; more likely it
ornament was independently arrived at in the East also; if so, we have an interesting case of a
form of decoration originating independently in two widely separated areas, of which few
undoubted instances are known.
Fig. 62. Tundan-ve^a, variety
4
Fig. 6i. Tundan ve ^. From kalas-dangaya ; modern drawing
a modern drawing. (sketch for a bo-heffayd).
Gal-biifduva GAL-BINDUVA,‘set gem’: this characteristic border is shown in Fig. 63. The real
‘set gem’ border which is the prototype of the decorative form is seen on PI. XLIL, 2
and 5 ; and PI. XLIIIa., i, where it decorates the rims of gold and copper vessels. In the
typical painted gal-bivduva border of Fig. 63, i., the gold setting is clearly indicated.
‘Diamond’ borders like those of the serak-kale, PI. XLV., 6, on the rim, and PI. XXX., i,
border, are probably forms of gal-bigduva,^
though they might conceivably have arisen
from the opposition of two chevron borders.
II <$K$X^
umiiimr,
num r
TTUinmr-
„ ----- VIII
Fig. 63. Borders : I., Gal-binduva.
4
II., Kuij i rakkan. III., Panava (with
arimbuva. IV., Arimbuva. V., Eka-pota-
lanuva. Y\.,Depota lanuva{y\oi a border). Fig. 64. Painted wooden book
4
VII., Vili., Hava iya (sometimes so- cover with elaborated hava4iya or
called). chain pattern, paid peti border.
108

ARIMBUVA: a series of circles, or rather discs, between two bounding lines, is a very Design and
common border (Fig. 63, iv; PI. XXXIX., 7; XLIII., 3, etc.) The frame of ivory ornament
or wood carved panels is usually arimbuva.
PANAVA, the comb : close set parallel lines, as in Fig. 63, iii., where the arimbuva and Panava
paruiva are combined.
HAVADIYA. Two patterns, known by this name are shown in Fig. 63, vii. and viii. Havaiiya
Other examples of the first, which is distinguished as havaii pota will be found on Pis.
XXXI., and XXXII., 8 ; and of the second, which is sometimes distinguished as hava^i
dangaya, on PL XXXII., 4. An elaborate example of the first, is shown in Fig. 64,
from a painted book cover at Kelaijiya.
FRET. The form, well known in Greek and Chinese art, and to which the name‘fret’ Fret
is given, I have seen once only in Kandyan decorative art, viz., in that storehouse of old
patterns, the woven belt figured on PI. XXIX., 7.
I give, further, some notes on the methods of combining the motifs already described.
SERIAL REPETITION. This is the oldest and simplest expression of symmetry or Serial
rhythm in ornament, called in German, Ranken-bordure^ and it is frequently seen in repetition
Sinhalese decoration; Pis. XV., XVII., XXIV., XXV., etc., afford numerous examples.
Of archaic aspect are animal processions, such as those of Pis. XXIX., 7, and XXXVIII., 5. Alternate
ALTERNATE REPETITION. Of this arrangement of the elements of decoration, repetition
the now world-wide form called the ‘knop and flower’ is the best known example;
but typical instances of it are comparatively rare in Sinhalese art. Fig. 50 shows one
such form from a damascened lock; and other examples are seen in
PL XXIX., 7.
INTERRUPTED BRANCH (G. intermittirende Wellenranke). By Interrupted
this name I indicate borders, such as that shown in Fig. 65, in which branch
floral elements are disposed on an undulating line, which does not Fig 65. Border
represent a single continuous stem, but merely a foundation to which of shawl (PL
upwards and downward shoots are alternately attached. Further XXVIIL, 4).
instances are shown in Pis. XXIX., 7, and XXX., 2.
CONTINUOUS BRANCH. {G. foriplanzende Wellenranke). This is the universal Continuous
liya v(la or ‘vine’ pattern, representing a branch, with rhythmically disposed leaves and branch
flowers on either side, as in Figs. 32,
and innumerable other examples. For
. the simplest, and historically funda­
mental forms of a purely geometrical
character see Fig. 53.
Fig. 66. ‘ Affrontment’: two bulls, Fig. 67. ^Vfl-pota’ ornament, from lacquered
and sacred tree. From brass tray stick. This might be described as a ‘linked
(modern). honeysuckle ’ form.
KNOPS and KNOTS. The terms ^^^¡2,715/0, and ¿aWA« are used in this sense. Fig. 67 Knops and
shows, for exarriple, a form known as vfl-pota. In the terminology of patterns, this might Knots
be called an example of‘linked honeysuckle.’ Other forms are the naga bandha referred
to on p. 88 and tht geta~liya-pota described on p. too.
109

Design and INTERLACEMENTS. The terms paftuva and daogaya are applied to devices of linked
ornament animal forms, such as the hamsa paffuva and naga dangaya, described on pp. 85 and 88.
WHORL. An arrangement of several linked cobras, forming together a single whorl,
is often seen on brass trays, and is called naga poruva.
Affrontment AFFRONTMENT. This arrangement, called in Gtvmsn^Wappenstil’ of two animals
about a central form, as in ‘tree of life’ designs, or the ‘supporters’ of a shield, is a special
case of symmetry,* very frequently seen, and of hoary antiquity in art. Examples arc shown
in Figs. 28 E, 66, 68, etc., and elsewhere, in Pis. VII., 9, and XXXIX., 2.
Parsemé PARSEME. This arrangement of floral elements over an invisible framework to cover
space, is occasionally seen in wall decoration, but more especially in representations of
brocade or similar material in figure subjects; it is closely allied to typical tundan-vç4a,
from which it differs in the omission of the framework, and in that the floral elements
are more freely treated, not having to occupy such defined spaces. Fig. 33, vi., is an
.. example of a parsemé floral form. The use of detached lotus rosettes or Pandanus or
sapu flowers is analogous.
Fig. 68. Branches springing from mouths of lions. ‘ Wappen-stil’ arrange­
ment. Chased brass tobacco box (upper side of same box is shown in Fig. 11).
’■ Plower-in- ‘FLOWER-IN-MOUTH.’ “ Lo, in her mouth was an olive branch newly plucked off.”
mouth ’ A very characteristic and fanciful motif is the setting of a branch or spray from the mouth
of an animal [Figs. 12, (15) and 68] or bird (PI. XXIII., 2). A common example is the
starting of many sprays of vegetable ornament from a kibihi mana. These forms are
evidently derived from earlier types in which a branch is clearly carried in the mouth, as,
in the case of geese on Anuradhapura moonstones, carrying lotus sprays. The original
idea in such cases is probably that of flower offering, as in many Barahat sculptures. I
have myself used this motif in the cover design of the ‘Ceylon National Review.’
Mangul MANGUL-LAKUNU. These are the 108 auspicious symbols associated with each
lakunu foot of Buddha. A list of these symbols is learnt by every child in pansala schools, as
explained above (p. 50). A partial list is given by Hardy (Manual of Buddhism, p. 367).
In Fig. 69 I have reproduced from old drawings lent to me by Mr. T. B. Keppitipola,
a selection of the symbols as examples. It will be seen that the representations are of
an almost hieroglyphic character.
* Symmetry, it may be remarked, is one of the most characteristic features of oriental art. It is an
expression of thefundamental law and rhythm which underlies nature's manifestations. It is natural
and right that the representation of nature ‘ seen through the alembic of the human mind' should be more
formal and rhythmic than nature herself. Theformality and obedience of the true (¡raftsman is more
restful and more satisfying than any conscious effort after strangeness gr variety.
no ' .

■ Design and
ornament
Mangul-
lakunu
Fig. 69*. %t\tcX\QVi oimangul-lakunir. I.‘Seven
great rivers’(of India); II. ‘Himalaya forest’;
III. ‘Mansion of the Sun’; IV. ‘Filled water
pot’; V. ‘ Filled bowl ’ ; VI. ‘Flowers’ ;
VII. ‘ Cobra’s hood ’; VII. ‘Ear-ring’; IX.
‘ Sword ’ of State ; X. ‘ Svastika ’ ; XI.
‘Chank’; XII. ‘Umbrella’; XIII. ‘Balance.’
From drawings lent by T. B. Keppifipola,
Basnayaka Nilame of Embekke Devale.
* I have printed this Figure in red as a reminder that almost all drawings and diagrams of the
Kandyan craftsmen are drawn in red, this colour being the most easily prepared of those in use amongst
them. Dhis appears to have been the case from the earliest times, to judge from Mahdvamsa,
Ch. XVIII.: “ Using vermilion in a golden pencil and therewith making a streak."
APPENDIX TO CHAPTER IV.:
THE RUPAVALIYA.
A part of the artistic canon of Sinhalese painters is found in a Sanskrit work called the
R upavaliya, which is much relied on in Kandyan painters of the best sort. The versions
procurable are usually very corrupt and imperfect. Nothing is known of the date of the
work, which is clearly of Hindu origin. The learned Mudaliyar, E. R. Gooneratne, to
whom I am indebted for a revised text and a translation based on my own and other copies
of the work collated by Sllakkhandha Thera of Simbali Avasa, thinks that from the
language the work may have been written in the eleventh century. I proceed to give an
analysis of the contents, with translations of verses of interest in connection witn Sinhalese
art; which reservation it is necessary to make, because the figures of many of the gods
4• • III
'’-

‘The are never or hardly met with, though the best painters still possess the traditional knowledge
RafUvaliya necessary to represent them, and can do so when required. The verses are in the form
of an invocation to, or meditation {dhyana) on, the beings described.
SUMMARY.*
I. OfNathadeviyO. 2-14. The eight Nathas, ^iva, Brahma, Vishiju, Gauri, Matsyendra,
Bhaddra, Bauddha, Gaijesha. 15,18. Brahma dhyana. 16,19. Vishiju dhyana. 18.
Isvara dhyana. 20. Gopalanatha. 21-29. 8rlRama Candra. 39-41* The teM avatars
of Vishiju : Matsya, Kurma, Varaha, Narasirjiha, Vamana, Parasu Rama, Da§aratha Rama,
Bauddha, Krishna, Kalki. 42. Narasiiriha dhyana. 43. Rama. 44. Garuda dhyana.
45-54. Garuda dhyana in full. 55. ^arabha dhyana. 56-58. Sarabha dhyana in full.
59-62. Lakshml dhyana. 63. Sarasvatl dhyana. 64, 65. Sarasvatl dhyana at length.
66. Ganapati dhyana. 67. Ganapati dhyana in full, 68. Heramba Ganapati dhyana.
69. Three-eyed Ganapati dhyana. 70. Alinga devi dhyana. 71,72. Skandha dhyana.
73. Skandha dhyana in full. 74. Sada Siva dhyana. 75. Sada Siva dhySna in full.
76. Isvara dhyana. 77. Isvara dhyana in full. 78-80. Ardhanareivara. 81-83.
Nata, the dancer. 84. Vlrabhadra dhyana. 85. Aghora dhyana. 86-90. Aghora
dhyana in full. 91-96. Great Aghora dhyana. 97. Vatuka-natha dhyana. 98.
Vatuka-natha dhyana in full. 99. Siva Vafuka dhyana. 101-109. Kama Siva dhyana.
no Ambika svarupa. in . Bhuvanesvara dhyana. 112. Bhuvanadhi-pati. 113.
Jagadeka-Mata. 114. Siva devI dhyana. 116. Bhadrakali dhyana. 117. Kalyana
bala dhyana. 118. Matanga dhyana. 123-127. Paramesvarl dhyana. 128. Manmata
svarupa. 129-138. Of measurements. 139, 140. The sixteen kinds of ‘lions.’
141-143. Another sixteen kinds of ‘lions.’ 144. Haijisa rupa. 145. Advaya. 146.
Latakinnara. 147. Nasit talam. 148. Makara. 149. Viivakarma. 150. Vafa ropa.
152-156. Divinities from whose influence result humors and fever. 157. Result of
making images incorrectly. 158. The symbolism of the fingers.
Translation of certain verses as examples.-^'
3,4. Siva Natha. “ A fair face with three eyes, a bow and an arrow, a garland of serpents,
ear flowers, a rosary, four hands, a trisula, a rope, a spear having a deer impaled upon it,
hands pointing upwards and downward, a garment of tiger skin, his vehicle a white bull,
these are the marks of Siva Natha.’’
11. Bhadra Natha (Kartikeya). “Two handed, of purple hue, a long-handled axe, a flag
with a cock upon it, a crown, an adze, a purple garment, his vehicle the peacock, these
are the marks of Bhadra Natha.”
113. Jagadeka-Mata. “ I worship the one mother of the world, having four hands, and
the moon as a brow gem, high-bosomed, shining like gold, hands holding a fair white
lotus, a goad, and a garland of flowers.”
129. “The height [of a man] is 992 yava, or 124 inches [angal); 133- ‘inches’ and one
yava are equal to one mukha (‘face’). Nine mukha and one kala is the height of a man.”
130, 131. “ I describe the dimensions,J the height and the length and the measurements
* The work, in the examples which I have been able to procure, is manifestly incomplete.
■ ji'By E. R. Gooneratne, with slight verbal modifications. Verses 42, 56-8, 139, 149, describing
the kinnara, Sarabha, hariisa, makara, lion, horse, and ViSvakarma deviyo have been already quoted,
pp. 82, 83, 84, 86, 87, 88 and 90, above.
% The significance of these canons of measurement will appear later, in Chapter VIII., ‘ Figure
Sculpture.’
112

given in the world, and the size of the body and diversity of the figure of Brahma and othef 'The
chiefs of the world, of Sarvajña, of Devas, Asuras, of Danava Rakshasas, of Yakshas, of Ropdvaliya
Nagas, of Garudas, of Kinnaras, of Bhiitas, of Khumbaijdas, as well as of men, and of
tigers, four-footed beasts and birds.”
132,133,134. “The Bandhukais one tala mukha), the height of birds is two tala,
of Kinnaras three, a Bhtltas four, of Gaijesha five, of a tiger six, of a Yaksha seven, of a
man or a woman eight, of Asuras nine, of Devas and Buddhas ten,of Asura Rakshasas eleven;
there are no beings twelve tala in height.”
135. “An aygala (‘inch,’ or unit) is one matra, two matra make one kolaka, two kolaka
make one bhaga, three bhaga make one tala."
137. “The height of Gaijesha is five tala; three, two, two, eleven, twelve, six, six, three,
six tala, are the hair, face, neck, chest, belly, private part, thighs, teeth, and calf of the
leg respectively.”
138. Dimensions of Kinnara: “The two eyes are five kolaka, the hair and the crown
of the head are twelve kolaka, the neck, the chest, the navel, the private part, the thigh,
the knees, the calf of the leg, the feet, these are three talaT
157. In the making of an image, if aught be lacking to the head, it will result in the death
of parents; if aught in the back, to the destruction of the clan; if in the neck or two
feet, to the destruction of the wife ; if all be lacking, to the destruction of all. '
1 1 113

CHAPTER V. ARCHITECTURE.
"■ Dhe T'emples of their Gods are of rare and 'Exquisite Work” (Knox).
IT is not meant here to give any exhaustive account of late Mediaeval Sinhalese
architecture, but only such a general account of it as shall enable the reader to
understand its relation to the fine and lesser arts, and to comprehend the arrangement
of such temples as he may have the opportunity to visit. It must not be supposed that
Medieval Sinhalese architecture can compare either in extent or magnificence with that
of Southern India or with that of earlier times in Ceylon, to which the well-known remains
at Anuradhapura and Polonnaruva testify. But it will be found that the typical Kandyan
wooden architecture has a distinct character of its own, and that it responds directly to
the needs of a small agricultural people, not luxurious, and rather prosperous than wealthy.
In spite of the great remains at Anuradhapura it should be fully realised that the truly
national and indigenous architecture has always been one of wooden building; the great
stone buildings whose remains attract so many visitors to the ‘buried cities,’ were probably
erected with Indian assistance and partly by Indian workmen; so were many later stone
buildings (especially when for the worship of Hindu gods) such as the sixteenth century
Beretidi Kovil and the unmistakeable Hindu temple at Ridi Vihara. Other buildings
such as Lankatilaka, the Dalada Maligava and Gaijegoda vihara (Sab.) having more or
less stone work in their construction were probably made by native or long naturalised
gal-va4uv0\ but a majority of viharas are without stone construction, or have only a stone
doorstep or ‘moonstone,’ as at Degaldoruva; stone steps and plain balustrade are also
met with.
It should be remembered that in India, stone building was not practised until a little
before Aioka’s time (third century b.c.), and no doubt a knowledge of it came to Ceylon
from Northern India along with the Buddhist missionaries; but a wooden style was already
well established, and while serving as the model for the work in stone, has never been
itself displaced. Buddhist wooden architecture of the same general type is still to be
found in Nepal; in most other parts of India it has been replaced by stone.
At a later time, when a knowledge of stone building had spread to Southern India and
the great Dravidian building tradition sprang up, it was easy for the Sinhalese kings to
get such masons as they required thence; and it is probable that most of the gal-va4uvo
actually living in Ceylon as subjects of the Sinhalese kings in later times, were of South'
Indian blood.
Domestic We have already seen that the dwelling house was a simple framed one-storied building
building of timber and wattle and daub, like an English half-timbered cottage, with thatched
roof and small central courtyard. Each man built his own home, except a few noblemen
whose manor-houses were better and more pretentious than the wood and daub cottages
of the ordinary people. Nails were not used in ordinary building, but everything was
fastened with rattans and other jungle ropes. The solid timbers of royal buildings were
morticed and tenoned together in a very substantial manner. The use of stone was
confined to royal and religious buildings.
The house itself was built on a stone and mud foundation raised above the ground level;
this foundation, smoothly plastered and cowdunged, formed the floor and inner verandah,
and projected outside the walls as a narrow ledge or outer verandah {pila), used to sleep
or sit on. The houses of great persons only differed from those of lesser men by having
more rooms and courtyards, better timber, the beam ends and verandah pillars and their
brackets sometimes carved, and in a very few cases only, a tiled roof. Fig. 70 shows the
114 ' .

house of a small cultivator or yeoman, having two rooms Architec-
besides the inner verandah, and granary (afuva) on stone ti/re
pillars; such a house may have been built in the
eighteenth or early nineteenth century; few if any
houses older than the eighteenth century survive. One
4
of the most notable of old va/awasis thatofMa uvanvela,
a chieftain of ancient family and still powerful; the house
has been somewhat altered and added to, but retains
many old features including the massive doors showing
the marks of Dutch bullets. Almost the only old house
in Kandy itself is the Girihagama va/awa, but even that
is much altered and spoilt.*
The doors, single or double, were exceedingly massive
Fig. 70. Plan of small adze-hewn planks, turning on two dowels forming part
yeoman’s house, p.p. wood of the door itself and fitting into the frame above and
pillars: thatched roof over below. Windows were provided with similar but
all, except open yard. Scale smaller shutters, or fitted with bars of wood or iron;
iV inch=i foot. glass windows and hinged doors were not in use. Doors
and windows were fastened by a variety of ingenious and
elegant bolts, the doors sometimes also by a lock and key.
Of the palace in Kandy, only a part now remains, consisting of several buildings, some of Palaces
massive construction, adjoining the Maligava. Of these buildings a part forms the
Government Agent’s residence;-)' part the Kandyan Museum; while the Audience Hall
built for the last king is now a law-court. The m^da vahala or middle palace is “perhaps the
only real Kandyan building left intact in Kandy, and not spoiled by adaptation to material
requirements of the British Government at the time of the occupation of Kandy or
subsequently.”); A good idea of a Sinhalese royal palace may be gathered from Knox’s
description of that of Raja Siruha II. (seventeenth century). “The Palace is walled about
with a Clay Wall, and Thatched, to prevent the Clay’s being melted by the Rains, which
are great and violent: Within this wall it is all full of houses; most of which are low and
thatched ; but some are two Stories high, and tyled very handsomely, with open Galleries
for Air, rayled about with turned banisters, one Ebony, and one painted, but not much
prospect, standing between two Hills. And indeed the King lives there not so much for
.pleasure as security. The Palace itself hath many large and stately Gates two leaved;
these Gates, with their posts, excellently carved; the Iron work thereunto belonging, as
Bolts and Locks, all rarely engraven. The Windows inlaid with Silver plates and Phony.
On the top of the houses of his Palace and Treasury, stand pMrthen Pots at each corner;
which are for ornament; or which is a new fashion, something made of Earth resembling
Flowers and Branches. And no House besides, except Temples, may have these placed
* S omewhat later {nineteenth century") there came in a slightly modified type with wide outer
verandah and more windows {PL VI., 6), the result of Dutch influence and of more security;
later still a more pretentious stucco and plaster, semi-Italian style, costly and uncomfortable, has
been favoured by the well-to-do. The old houses had some disadvantages, but afforded a good
deal ofplain comfort which is lacking in the modern freaks that often replace them.
■ fl understand that this part of the palace is also, very properly, to be set apart for Museum
purposes in the near future.
); Address to Sir Henry Blake, Governor, on the opening of the Kandyan Art Museum in the
M?da Vahala, November, 1905.
1 2 IIS

Architec- upon them. The contrivance of his Palace is, as I may say, like Woodstock Bower, with
ture many turnings and windings, and doors, he himself having ordered and contrived all
these Buildings, and the manner of them.” The King also had several houses overlooking
the tank, built according to his own appointment “very handsom, born up with carved
Pillars and Painted, and round about Rails and Banisters turned, one Painted and one
Ebony, like Balconie.”
Granaries Two other kinds of buildings may be mentioned before speaking of religious ones. The
[Atii) granary {atuvo), always raised on low stone pillars as a protection against white ants, was
if small, built over some part of the inner verandah of the house ; if large, as in the case
of a royal store {maha gabaiâvd), a pansala, or the home of a well-to-do or powerful man,
it formed a separate building. But in the Kegalla district a special type of small granary
is found, a cask-shaped wattle-and-daub erection on stone pillars, whitened with kaolin,
and covered with a heavy thatch, standing near the house but not forming a part of it ;
this type (called bissa, pi. bihi) is noteworthy as being often ornamented with paintings
of elephants, etc. (PI. VII., 9). The outer walls of even quite small houses are sometimes
similarly painted with conventional designs (PI. VII., 6). The granaries were usually
sealed in clay with a wooden seal, of which a specimen is figured on PI. XIII., 5.
Best Houses The second building to be mentioned is the ambalama or wayside shelter. Of these there
{Ambalam) were many at no great distance apart on frequented paths, and better ones in each village,
erected by all the villagers, or by some one man (or even a woman), anxious to perform
so meritorious an act.* A beautiful ambalam of moderate size at Mangalagama (Four
Korales) is shown on PI. VII. The pillars are of stone, supporting on carved wooden
brackets an open timbered roof (Fig. 76) covered with tiles, and with two earthen finíais
at the end of the roof ridge. The smallest ambalam consisted of a foundation of four beams
to sit upon, with four posts at the corners and a thatched roof ; the better ones had more
pillars and were sometimes divided into compartments for the convenience of those desirous
of spending the night there. But a single-roomed ambalama could be sub-divided for the
sake of privacy by means of a pili-vela (‘clothes-line,’ made by Rodiyas,) consisting of
two cords of niyauda fibre passed through a central block ; the four ends of the cords being
fastened in the four corners of the room, and cloths hung over the cords themselves,
the room was conveniently divided into four separate compartments.
Ambalam were sometimes well carved, and even painted ; hut no provision was made for
the entertainment of the strangers, who usually carried their own food and cooking utensils.
But near to an ambalama, and elsewhere along the roads are to be seen ‘drinking fountains,’ ,
that is, stone or earthen pots kept supplied by the neighbours with pure water, covered
with a lid and provided with a dipper {kinissa).
4
There were, also, a few more pretentious rest-houses, called ma ama or i^ama, where
food and firewood, etc., were provided freely to strangers, being kept by a ma4ama-rala
4
or i ama-rala, who held lands for the performance of this duty. Such would appear to
have been the Governor’s house where Knox made a stay (on his escape) about six miles
south of Anurâdhapura; “ having reached his house,” says Knox, “according to the
* Tlhe practical Indian ideal of almsgiving, e.g., Mahünirvilva-tantra, VIII., 63 ; “ The house­
holder should dig tanks, plant trees, and erect rest-houses on the roads, and make bridges over revers,
by such great works he can conquer the three worlds." Cf. also p. 48 above. The rest-house
is a very ancient institution in the East. There is a rest-house episode {meeting of tnvo kings' sons on
their travels) in the Sutasoma Jataka, illustrated at Degaldoruva. For reference to decorated
ambalams see Chapter IX. For some account of rest-houses, and of storehouses, both public and
private in ancient India, see Fleet, J.R.A.S., 1907, pp. ¡23—525.
116

Country manner we went and sat down in the open house; which kind of Houses are Architec-
built for the reception of Strangers.”* ture
We have already seen (p. 37) ‘that the ambalama served not only as a halting place for
strangers, but was also generally resorted to for exchange of news and a quiet chew; Rest Houses
it served also as a meeting place for the village tribunal or gam-sabhuva, and was thus
intimately associated with the life of the village community.
One of the principal routes was from Hambantota to Kandy, passing through Vellavaya
and up’ on to the Uva patanas ; through {ittalapitiya, Dambevinne (Velimada), Paraijagama
(Fort MacDonald) to Maturafa and thence through Hanguranketa, Mirupe, Talatuoya
and Ampitiya to Kandy. The longest stage between two iiarti was not more than fifteen
miles. From Kandy, a main track proceeded to Anuradhapura. There was also a track
which passed down through the Three and Four Korales to Sitavaka and Colombo.-j'
The present-day Government Rest House, or Dak bungalow as it would be called in India,
4
may be regarded as the descendant of the old i am, but accommodates a very different type
of traveller. Rest-houses of the old type, in a debased Kandyan style, have in recent times
been built at Ratnapura, Ruvanveli, and Kegalla.
Wayfarers were of the following sorts, viz.; persons going to Kandy to perform their Services
or take in their produce-rent; officials on tour, who travelled with a great retinue and were
sometimes a grievous burden ; king’s messengers; traders, not many ; and parties of pilgrims,
especially on the way to Adam’s Peak or other shrines. Neither men nor women thought
much of walking long distances. Women of rank, and sometimes men, were borne in
palanquins. Carts were known, but few roads were practicable for wheeled traffic.
We may now proceed to an account of viharas and devales; and first of Viharas
viharas and buildings belonging to them. Viharas are of two chief {Buddhist
sorts, (i) cave temples {gal-vihard) and (2) temples entirely structural, temples)
Cave temples consist usually of a natural cave somewhat enlarged and
smoothed, with a dripline(iu^i?riiy<?) cut round the rock outside,beneath
which is a lean-to roof supported on carved wooden pillars, or stone
pillars with wooden brackets {pekadd) forming a verandah. A solid
Fig. 71. Diagram wall with one or more doors and windows separates this more or less
of verandah of cave open verandah from the actual cave in which the image or images are
temple. placed. This wall is of mud (wattle and daub), stone, burnt clay,
or brick, and being carefully smoothed and plastered is then covered
. with paintings of jatakas and other edifying subjects. Some cave temples, such as that
at Dambulla and Ridi viharas have been occupied continuously from a time not much
later than the introduction of Buddhism into Ceylon, but at first rather as retreats for the
priests than as temples; and many have early inscriptions in the A^oka character. Amongst
the most notable cave temples in the eighteenth century were Ridi Vihara, Danagirigda,
Degaldoruva, Dambulla and Aluvihara.J
Of structural viharas, those on an earthen foundation are raised, like granaries, on short
* We are strongly reminded of the old Irish 'brugaid,' an official who “was a public hospitaller as
well as a magistrate . . . and was held in high honour. He was bound to keep an open house for
the reception of certain functionaries . . . and also for the reception of strangers. He had a tract of
land and other large allowances to defray the expenses of his house" {foyce, ‘Social History of
Ancient Ireland').
Described in detail in Bells K?galla Report, pp. 59, 60.
Where according to tradition the Buddhist scriptures were first committed to writing in the first
century b.c. ; but see Wickramesinghe, 'Sinhalese MSS. in the British Museum^ pp. x., xi.
13 ’ 117

Archkec- stone pillars as a protection against white ants. They typically consist of a single
ture rectangular image house beneath a tiled roof having a double slope, the outer part of which
shelters the open verandah surrounding the image house itself. Fig. 7, on PI. VII., shows
Viharas a small vihara of this sort, attached to the devale at Alutnuvera near Balangoda ;
private viharas of chiefs (‘chapels of ease’) are often of this type {e.g., at Maduvanvela).
But viharas are often built on bare rock, especially when such is found on the top of some
low hill overlooking the surrounding hills and villages. The need for raising the buildings
on stone pillars is then avoided. The situation of such viharas is often most romantic,
as at Lankatilaka, where the beautiful temple buildings are visible from many points across
wide stretches of rice-field. But viharas are also sometimes built on an artificial stone, or
stone and mud, foundation, as the Dajada Maligava itself.
Viharas are rarely of two stories, as at Dodantale, where the ground floor serves as a
preaching hall [baija maiuva) and the upper floor for the image house [pilima-gi) and its
verandah ; or at the Dalada Maligava, where the tooth-relic is enshrined in an upper room.
Sometimes the roof over the image house is raised high above the verandah roof, the image
room being proportionately high within (as at Gangarama, PI. VII., 5) and if, as atGaijegoda
(Sab.) there is a small window in the wall high up, the effect of a clerestory is produced.
The ceiling is usually boarded, and the boards painted passing finely (PI. XV., Ganegoda
vihara ceiling); the verandah roof may be similarly treated (PI. XVI., Dalada Maligava
verandah ceiling,— now altered, and for the worse). Where the ceiling of the verandah or
inner room is left open, the handsome timbering is ample compensation, as in the upper
verandah, PI. VIII., Dalada Maligava. Observe here also the ‘rayled banister,’ as Knox
would have called it.
There is almost invariably a verandah (in the tiniest viharas merely a portico), the roof of
which is pitched at a lower angle than that of the roof of the main part of the building.
The verandah and main roof are structurally distinct, as indicated in the diagram (Fig. 72).
To this fact is due the pagoda-like appearance of many viharas (as in the Buddhist
architecture of Nepal and Burma, where Chinese influence may have carried the tendency
further); for the roof seems occasionally almost to turn up
at the edge, as contrasted in the slope of the inner and
outer parts of it. The constructive distinction between
verandah and main roof is probably due to the influence
of the cave temple, which forms the actual image house
{pilima-gi) and corresponds to the interior of the construe- .
tional vihara and against which a lean-to verandah is built,
as at Ridi Vihara.
Dagabas in particular were covered with pure white lime
plaster, and were almost too dazzling to look at in the
bright sun. The effect of a white dagaba shining far away
amongst the green rice-fields is often most beautiful. But
it is now usual to mix a large proportion of Ricketts’ blue
with the white, which thus loses all its purity and beauty.
There were various methods of preparing the fine plaster.
The best method of preparing lime plaster, was to mix
Fig. 72. Diagram of vihara lime and sand with a solution of astringent barks. Mr.
types, showing transition S. D. Mahavalat?nna has given me the following details:
from lean-to verandah, to Take equal quantities of husks of very tender cocoanuts,
tipped roof. bark of Aralu or Haritaki {Terminalia chebula), Nuag
118

{Ficus bengalensis), Kahata, Bo-asvatta {Ficus religiosa), and Go^apara fruit {Dillenia retusa). Architec-
Cut these up and pound them well in a wooden mortar; pour in about four gallons of ture
water to ten lbs. of this mixture and keep it all in a vessel for about a month to ferment.
Add some Aralu nuts, say a hundred to the gallon of water. Strain the liquor and use that Fluster
instead of water in preparing the mortar—three of fine sand to two of shell-lime, or two
of sand to two of rock lime, is the proportion said to have been in use in the ancient time.
Mortar thus prepared should be kept moist for about twenty days before using; and when
using, kitul-peni or treacle, kaippu kaduru or catechu, and gingelly oil are mixed up with the
liquor and used to moisten the mortar. If a superior gloss is required as in ornamental
work, the white of eggs is added. But the use of eggs is of quite modern origin.
Cinnabar, orpiment, etc., can be used to give different colours to the mortar.
The Buddhist temple is not complete without a bodhimaluva or platform, with or without
altars, surrounding a bo-Xie&; a pansala, or priests’ residence ; and a dagaba or dome-shaped
monument enshrining sacred relics, in addition to the actual vihara or image house.
Pansal are not now the comfortless caves at one time exclusively inhabited by the Monasteries
priesthood; though cave pansal are still found, having a general resemblance to a cave
temple in plan. The typical mediasval pansala resembles a substantial dwelling-house
of the same period—a rectangular building with the rooms opening into an inner verandah,
4
and courtyard open to the sky. Kuij asale and Lafikatilaka are typical examples; or
the monks’ cells may be arranged in a row under one roof, or forming a square surrounding
the pohoya-gl\ all these arrangements may be observed at the great monasteries at Asgiriya
and Malvatte in Kandy; in the latter there are also separate suites of rooms for the Sangha
Raja, besides a refectory, kitchens, and other offices. The Malvatte pansala is a storehouse
of eighteenth century wood and metal work, mostly constructed by Kirti §rl Raja Siipha.
It was partly constructed from the remains of a palace built at Mapanavatura; but two
doors and frames of the royal bedchamber were used in building the relic room at the
Dalada Maligava (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 532).
The pohoya-ge]\s&t referred to is a rectangular building, erected on a solid foundation within
the consecrated limits of twelve boundary stones {sUna gal) embedded in the ground; it
is the priests’ meeting and confession hall; bare of furniture within, except for some big
wood chests with iron locks and handles, it has a boarded and painted ceiling, massive doors
with inlaid iron locks, and several windows; such buildings are of course only found where
a considerable number of monks reside, not being required otherwise.
, Another building that has been referred to is the baita ma^uva or preaching hall; these
are open pillared buildings, sometimes temporary booths, where large crowds assemble
on pohoya days to hear the sacred books read, which is done by the priest who sits on an
elevated stool or rather cage, concealed from view by white cloths. The bat}a ma^uva
4
is usually separate from the vihara itself; at Do antale, however, the ground floor of the
vihara building itself is the batfa ma^uva.
The dagaba or stdpa is a dome-shaped monument, surmounted by a tee or finial, built on
a platform, usually square, but occasionally round or octagonal; the largest modern dagabas
rarely exceed sixty or seventy feet in circumference at the base, and most are smaller;
when placed under the overhanging ledge of cave temple they are often quite small (PI.
VIII., in the lower picture).
The bodhi maluva is the platform surrounding the ¿i-tree, usually held up by a retaining
wall of stone, of which that in Kandy, beautifully described in the Mahavaipsa as ‘a wall
of stone, thick, high, and shining with plaster work^ like unto a beautiful string of pearls
adorning the neck of the city that was like a fair woman,’ is the finest example.
14 119

Architec- “ Retaining walls of dagabas and tnaluvas and platforms are generally built of rubble,
ture roughly adjusted, but revetments of ashlar quite plain, or in roundels and ogee mouldings
at base and cornice, are not unfrequent.”— (Bell).
Devâks Dévales are usually lacking in carved or painted ornament. The main building consists
of an ante-room, having sometimes a dig-ge or pillared porch before it ; and the maligava
or sanctum containing an image or the insignia of the deity ; entrance to which is generally
forbidden to all but the kapurala himself, and he only enters it if free from defilement ; very
4
often there is a room over the maligava, czü[tà u u-mahal-gë {px Saman dévale nearRatnapura,
the building is of three stories) ; there may also be a gaba^a-ge or store-room ; and a small
vihare connected with the dévalé, under one roof as at Embekke, or detached as at
Alutnuvara (Balafigoda, PI. VII.) ; but smaller dévales were subordinate to the viharas,
as at Gadalàdeijiya. Other dévale buildings are the kitchen {mulutçn-gè) generally
detached, and the riffa-ga always so, being the halting place for the sacred insignia
{abharand) during processions ; for these, particularly the annual perahera, there is a wide
procession path around the dévale. There is always an ornamental palanquin {ran-doliya)
for the use of the god in the procession ; also ceremonial spears {patisthand) and fans {sesat),
besides drums (davul and tammçttam) and oboes (Jiorane), a chank [hakgediyd), awning cloths
(viyan redi), and of course the weapons or other insignia (abharai}d) of the god, usually
of gold or silver, or at least gilt.
Fortifica- Forts and fortifications were few or none, the Kandyans trusting rather to the woods and
tions hills as their natural protection. But watches were kept. The guard-house (mura-gi)
at the top of Malabar Street, in Kandy, a small house covered with flat tiles, still remains.
There were also certain kadavat or guarded entrances to the inner circle of the Kandyan
kingdom, as at Ambuluva, where part of a wall still remains. In the Jud. Com. Diary
for 6th October, 1819, there is a notice that a man in the last king’s reign was sent to
Moragammana to teach the people there how to pound rice for the king, according
to a new method, and on returning, found the gravets at Ambuluva shut (Lawrie’s
Gazetteer, p. 43).
1/^ A short sketch of eighteenth century Kandyan architecture is thus completed. Further
details are to be found in the chapters on stone and woodwork. As an appendix to the
present chapter, a summary account of the builders’ handbook, Mayamataya, is given,
based, not on the Sanskrit original, but on tbe corrupt Sinhalese version in use. Astrological
and ritual works are also much used, particularly Geval-shadvargaya, TJiuvahu p^nîma, etc.
A complete account of the ceremonies associated with building would be of greatest interest
and value, it is to be hoped that someone will communicate to the Royal Asiatic Society
a paper on this subject.
APPENDIX TO CHAPTER V.
MAYAMATAYA.
The Mayamataya is, according to the account which the unknown writer gives of his work,
a translation into Sinhalese of an original work written in Sanskrit ilokas, made in 8aka
1756 (a.d. 1837). The authorship of the original work is ascribed to the fishis-, its
date is quite uncertain, but it is probably not less than several centuries old, and contains
matter that may be much older. The work is intended for architects, but it is rather
120

an astrological handbook and guide to the reading of omens than a manual of craftsmanship Mayä-
like the Säriputra or the Vaijayantaya. The work is badly arranged, and full of contra- mataya
dictions and redundancies, and even considered apart from these defects, appears to
contain much that is puerile and superstitious. The chief subjects dealt with are the
propitiation of nature spirits who may be injured or offended at various stages of the work,
practical advice as to the planning of a house and laying out of a town, and information
as to auspicious and inauspicious omens, and astrological information as to what are
favourable times for beginning the different kinds of work. The Sinhalese builder is
still careful to begin his work at an auspicious hour, and believes that the neglect of this
precaution would be disastrous. But the elaborate ceremonies connected with the felling
of the ‘auspicious post’ {maguí kapa) are never now observed in the case of ordinary houses,
and even in the eighteenth century they would only have been observed in the case of
very important buildings, and when felling the ?hala gaha for the perahfraJ*
The injunction to avoid a hollow tree for the maguí kapa reminds us of the beautiful story
in the jataka book, the Kusanaji Jataka,-!- of which the gist is as follows;
The Bödhisat was born once as a deva that dwelt in a clump of kusa grass in the king’s Kusanäli
garden at Benares. In the same garden there grew a beautiful Wishing-tree, with a ‘Jaiaka
straight stem and spreading branches, and the king loved it. In it dwelt one who had
been a king of devas and was now reborn as a tree-devl; and the Bödhisat was her great
friend. Now the palace roof was a king-post roof, and the main pillar had grown
shaky. The royal carpenters were ordered to replace it with another; but they could
find no tree good enough, except the beautiful Wishing-tree. They came to the king
and told him that they feared to fell this sacred tree. But he ordered them to set about
it at once. So they went to the garden, and made offerings to the tree, meaning to fell
it the next day. But the tree devi was plunged into the deepest sorrow when she heard
their words and knew that her dear tree was to be destroyed. No one of the other forest
devas could offer help, when at last the Bödhisat came thither, and being told of the
news, answered hopefully, ‘ Have no fear, I will see that the tree is not cut down.’
Next day, when the carpenters came, the Bödhisat assumed the form of a chameleon and
ran up and down the tree, in and out, so that it seemed to be a hollow tree, and full of holes.
Then he rested on the branches and wagged his head to and fro. Seeing this, the master-
craftsman, thinking it was a hollow tree, laid his hand on it and exclaimed, ‘The tree is
rotten, we were too hasty last night in making our offerings, let us be off to find another.’
And so they went off full of scorn for the great tree which had been saved by the wisdom
of the Bödhisat.
An equally beautifulis the Bhadda áala Jätaka which I quote in full;
“Long ago, when Brahmadatta, who observed the Ten Duties of a ruler, was reigning Bhadda
in Benares, there came into his mind this thought, ‘Everywhere in India are kings whose ^äla'Jätaka
palaces have many columns; what if I build a palace supported by a single column only ?
Then shall I be the first and singular king among all other kings!’ So he summoned his
craftsmen, and ordered them to build him a magnificent palace supported by a single pillar.
‘ It shall be done,’ they said, and away they went into the forest.
There they found a tree, tall and straight, worthy to be the single pillar of such a palace.
‘Here are trees,’ said they, ‘but the road is rough, and we shall never be able to remove
them; let us go ask the king what is to be done.’ But when they did, the king said,
* As described on p. 38.
The Jätaka,' edited by E. B. Cowell, 1895— 1907. The Kusanä(i Jataka is No. 121 in
Vol. I.
121

Maya- ‘Somehow or other you must bring them, and that immediately.’ But they replied,
mataya ‘Neither somehow nor anyhow can it be done.’ ‘Then,’ said the king, ‘look for a tree
in my own park.’
Bhadda So they set out for the park, and there found a lordly §al tree, straight and beautiful,
^alajataka worshipped by village and town and the royal family alike. They told the king, who
answered, ‘You have found me a tree in the park; it is well, go now and fell it.’ ‘So
be it,’ said they, and returned to the park, taking scented garlands and other offerings in
their hands. When they were come back to the great tree, they hung upon it a garland
of five branches, and girt it with a cord, fastened a knop of flowers against it and lit a
lamp, and so honouring the tree, they spoke thus before it, ‘ On the seventh day from this
we shall fell this tree, for this is the king’s command. Let those devas who may be dwelling
in the tree depart elsewhither, and not unto us be the blame.’
The deva that dwelt in that tree heard their words, and thought to himself, ‘These
craftsmen are agreed to fell my tree, and to destroy my home. I myself shall perish
when my place of habitation is destroyed. Also the young iai trees that are all about me
will be destroyed; and in them there dwell many devas of my kith and kin. My own
death touches me not so near as the destruction of my children, let me then save their lives
if I may avail thereto.’ So at the hour of midnight, the tree-deva, in the radiance of his
divinity, entered the king’s resplendent chamber, and stood beside the royal pillow
sobbing, his glory lighting up the whole room. At which the king was overcome with
fear and surprise, and stammered out, ‘ What god art thou, that dost appear floating in
the air, wearing an angel’s garb; what is thy grief, why dost thou weep so heavily?’
To which the deva-prince replied, ‘I am called in thy realm, O king, the Lucky-tree;
for sixty-thousand years all men have loved and worshipped me. Many a house and
town, many a palace too they made, yet never did me wrong; honour thou me, even as
they did, O king.’ But the king answered, ‘Never have I yet seen a trunk so fine, so tall
and great of girth, so thick and strong. I shall raise a glorious palace, resting on a single
column; there shalt thou long endure.’ The deva-prince answered, ‘ Since thou are set
on my destruction, one thing I ask, to cut me small, cut me piecemeal and limb from limb,
0 king, if thou must cut at all. Cut first the top, the middle next, and then the root of me—
and if so thou fellest me, O king, death will not give me grievous pain.’ The king said
then, ‘This is a painful death—to sever from the living frame first the hands and feet, then
nose and ears, and last of all the head. O Lucky-tree, O forest-lord, why will thou thus
be cut piecemeal, what gain is thine thereby ? ’ To which the Lucky-tree replied, ‘ Hearken
now while I reveal the meaning of my wish to be felled in pieces— there is a sufficient and
a worthy reason for it: my kith and kin have grown up around me, and beneath my shade,
1 should crush them if I fell entire upon them, and very great would be their sorrow.’
The king was greatly moved at these words and thought within himself, ‘This is a noble-
minded god that would save the dwellings of his fellows despite the destruction of his
own ; and he broke into these words, ‘ O Lucky-tree, O forest lord, thy thought is noble
indeed; as thou wouldst save thy kindred, so I shall spare thee, have no more fear.’
Then the deva-prince spake to the king, and counselled him and left him. And the king
took to heart his words, and gave generous gifts and alms, until the time came for his
departure to join the hosts of heaven.”*
It must not be thought that the only idea in this so-called ‘ tree-worship’ is one of propitiation
of a feared unseen power; combined with and softening this feeling, is the old Hindu
1
* ‘ ‘The Jataka^ ed. Cowell: No. 465, Voi. IV. have endeavoured to put the unsympathetic
prose and doggerel verse of the original translation into passable English.
122

feeling of sympathy for everything that has life, and desire to avoid injury to living things. Mdyd-
It has everywhere been held that, apart from the little organized life of the tree itself, mataya
trees and forests are the abode of nature spirits (nymphs, dryads, devas, nats, etc.)
approximating to, but scarcely reaching the human plane of evolution. Nowhere has
this been more the case than in India, where, moreover, a logical perception of the unity
of all life is expressed in a repugnance to the destruction of life in any form.
“A true Hindu would not heedlessly injure the slightest object that has life. A tree is
as much a manifestation of the Divine Wisdom and Power as the man himself, and the
Devas engaged in the building up of a flower, love their work with as much fond regard
as the artist, who paints its picture, loves the semblance. The man, who, through
thoughtlessness or ignorance, injures these divine works, incurs the anger and ill-will of
these elemental workers. Therefore a Hindu in plucking a flower or cutting a twig prays
to the Supreme, and asks permission of the industrious ones who have made it. By the
very fact that he recognizes their labour and appreciates their actions he propitiates these
Sylvan Devas and gets their good-will and blessing.”*
There is thus a double strand in ‘tree-worship’—a desire to avert revenge by due
propitiation ; and a shrinking from the infliction of injury. In its extremest form, and
when the tree-deva is conceived to be malignant, the first feeling has led even to human
sacrifices offered to trees, and this, as it is clear from the literature,-j- must have been a
custom at some long past stage of social development; the other feeling finds expression
in the gentle consideration and beautiful ceremonial of the Mayamataya, verses 20— 27,
and in the universal Hindu love of trees and forests.
The idea of the actual relation between the deva and the tree is of a mystical character.
The anti-realism of Indian philosophy makes it possible for the most intellectual minds
to accept the possibility of other worlds and other beings than those we call material;
for even to the material world a merely relative reality is granted,— the phenomenal world
exists at all, only in so far as it exists in relation to a mind, and to none of us is it the same
identically. Hence the impossibility of questioning the ‘reality’ of another man’s sub­
jective experience, or denying the possible existence of beings of many orders, having a
reality as great, but no greater than that of this phenomenal world.
The relation between tree and deva is symbolically represented in art and literature in
various ways. Often a face is drawn amidst the branches.| to suggest rather than to show
the indwelling deva, whose life is, in a strange way, the tree’s life, or bound up with it,
,yet is not the tree itself. At other times the tree deva is represented as dwelling in a
mansion which is in, or perhaps rather ‘at’ or ‘through,’ the tree, and which is not
ordinarily visible to human beings.§ This is a form of the well-known folk-lore conception
of the ‘invisible house.’
The tree-deva is able to leave the tree, and has its own divine form, conceived as anthropo­
morphic, yet can assume other forms at will, and on returning, ‘enters’ the tree and
becomes invisible; the deva’s life is ended with that of the tree. Tree devas may be
e ither malignant or beneficent. In Alavakadamanaya the tree-spirit is a man-eating
devil; in the Sutasoma Jataka, a gentle dryad, to whom the man-eating raja endeavours
to make human offerings, in complete misunderstanding of her true character. But
otherwise, the tree-spirit is realised as gentle and beneficent, and honoured as such by
* S. C. Fasu, '■ Daily Practice of the Hindus^ pp. 33, 34.
•j' E. G. Sutasoma fataka, and Alavakadamanaya,
J As in illustrations to the Sutasoma Jataka, at Degaldoruva.
§ As in Alavakadamanaya and in pictures made for me, to illustrate it.
123

MilyJ- offerings of flowers and sandal paste, and the love of the people; his or her home must
mataya be kept clean and pure. There is a wonderful delicacy and beauty in these pagan ideas.
There is nothing more characteristic of paganism, than its ideal conception of the purity
and delicacy of the personified powers of nature, and of the local habitations of the gods.
Just as in Iceland Thorolf Mostbeard laid down that ‘no man unwashed should turn his
eyes to Holyfell, and that nought should he done to death there, either man or beast,’*
so in Ceylon, even the Kapurala may not enter the dévale sanctum unless free from
ceremonial defilement, the threshing floor is a sacred and pure place, and the worshipper
in a Hindu temple must bathe and put on a clean cloth washed by his own hands ere
worshipping, and the inner precincts are closed to those of lower caste who are eaters of
meat and otherwise follow the less spiritual modes of life.
c©^. Whatever views may be held as to the real meaning of these things, which some would
call superstition, and some would call poetry, I am sure at least of this, that no good will is
ever wasted, and that in the selfish or the loving attitude of men towards even a tree, there
is some actual meaning, some real truth, some impulse, which has, in its own way, its
own effect. It would be easy to say more, but this will perhaps suffice. Before turning,
however, from this subject, to me of such great interest, I will throw a sop to the philistine,
as follows: these feelings and ideas, whether they be regarded as ‘superstitious’ or not,
have nevertheless a practical aspect; for the Indian objection to the unnecessary destruc­
tion of trees and forests, however sentimental, would have checked or prevented such a
wholesale destruction of forest as has now, for example, turned whole districts in Ceylon
into nightmare prospects of unending tea plantations, reduced the rainfall, and increased
both the rate of soil erosion in the hills, and the liability of the lowlands to disastrous
floods, at the same time necessitating so strict a preservation of the remaining timber that
the husbandman is hard put to it to get the wood needed for fences, ploughs and the
like, and the householder to get the timber needed for the massive construction of houses
such as those of a century ago.
It is time to return from this digression to the MaySmataya itself.
Of particular interest are the verses speaking of good and evil craftsmen, and their fate
in this life and in lives to come. It must be understood that in the old days a man’s trade
was the heaven-ordained work of his caste or guild, and the resulting idea of noblesse oblige,
together with the sanction for morality which the doctrine of karma carries with it, had
something to do with the excellence of the old craftsmen’s work.
Some of the verses devoted to practical advice are shrewd and even obvious, as the
warning not to build on a site which is wet even in dry weather (v. 243) ; the recom­
mendation to grow such fruits as jak, coconut, mango, and sugar-cane about the house
(v. 266). The work, in fact, appears to contain a practical nucleus of sound advice, now
much corrupted, misunderstood and overlaid by meaningless superstition. It is, never­
theless, of interest as revealing some of the ideas associated by the architect with his
work, and giving details of methods of construction and social customs of which mention
might not be readily found elsewhere. A summary now follows :
Su mmary of t© Summary and partial translation of the Màyâmataya :
Maya- I— 5. Invocation of Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
mataya 5— 9. Of those for whom the book is intended, viz., learned and skilful architects.
10— 14. “They who know but the (bare) meaning of words sport not in forest of poesy.
(But now) let one who is wise (even) in the speech of common folk abide in the forest
of poetic sport. I sing in common speech, the meaning of what is written in the ilokas.
* Erbyggja Saga.
124

in Sinhalese that is meet for all. O master builders,* this is an incorhparable book, written Maya-
in the common tongue, which if any one regard with the eye of wisdom, ’twere for the mataya
bettering of work in this world. . . . How to build houses aright, what site and month are
meet, how beams should be cut, to explain, I shall unfold the virtues of Mayamataya.”
15—16. Of inauspicious months.
I7— 19. Of bad omens when setting about the work.
20— 27. Directions for felling the ‘auspicious post’ (maguí kapa).
(20) “ Know this O builders, when the maguí kapa is to be felled, that you should go
to the tree’s root and clear it round about, (21) draw the afamagala diagram, set filled pots
in the four corners, sprinkle sandal-milk, (22) the next day go and speak as follows : ‘Thou
Diva dwelling in this tree, be pleased to leave the tree, if thou dost wish well to my house,’
(23) thus praying, break a branch from the tree, lay it on the ground, drag it away and
throw it beneath another tree, (24) clean and order that tree trunk, scatter flowers, betel,
sandal, and say ‘ I pray thee. Diva,go to this tree and give thine own to me.’-f- (25) Having
thus besought the Diva, hearken how to fell and take away the tree thus won by prayer,
and what manner of man should fell the tree. (26) Of moderate hue, without a blemish
even so large as a gingelly seed, neither over tall nor over short, with long hair like a
peacock’s train, (27) with hairy chest and downy cheeks—nought amiss with his limbs—
by such persons should this be done.”
28— 38. What sorts of trees are not suitable, sex of tree, &c.
(30) “A tree thin at the top is female, say the rishis; one thin in the middle is of neither
sex; (31) a tree of one thickness throughout from root to end, should you see such an one,
know without doubt it is a male; (32— 35) if it be thin at the top, a ñerce yaklj^t is dwelling
in that tree, fell it not; (33) but if you see a tree with a trunk like a drum, cut that tree
for the house, and take it for the maguí kapa, no harm will follow. (34) If you fell a tree
with a hollow trunk to build your house, fear and sorrow will result, bringing every kind
of evil on the house. . . . (38) For dwellings of priests (sangharamd), and for divales, for
lion thrones (simhasand) and for royal palaces (rajamandira) it is well to choose a mi tree
(Bassia longifolia) for the maguí kapa.”
39— 41. Omens drawn from the manner in which the tree falls.
(39) “ When cutting down the maguí kapa, cut a furrow round the tree, and thus felling
the maguí kapa, mark which way it falls, consider what advantage or disadvantage will
result, learn from the direction of its fall whether the builder should build or not. (49)
If it falls to the East from the place where it is felled, the utmost wisdom will be attained
by the owner of the house; if to the South, that gives long life; if to the West, a shifty
mind.................”
42—45. Of measurements.
(42) “Taking the wag«/thus duly felled, note that a cubit (riyand) is measured thus—
a right cubit, a span and four fingers, thus the vadu-riyana (craftsman’s cubit) is measured by
builders. (43—45) For five cubits in length, verily the breádth should be three; for
s ix and a half cubits in length, take surely for the house three and a half in breadth. . . .
If eleven cubits be taken for the length of the house, let it be just seven and half in
* Tthe word ‘vadu' (vaduvs) I have translated ^buildersd as it means something much more than a
mere carpenter, and yet not an ‘ architect’ who only designs and does no work himself. The various
uses of the word are explained in Chapter HI.
•f- The whole of this procedure is related in the very beautiful Bhadda Éala fataka, quoted above;
see also Davy, ‘Travels in Ceylon^ 1821,/. 171, and ‘Service Tenures Commissioni 1872,
p, 461, and p. yf of this book.
125

Muya- breadth. (46) If thé length be overmuch, the housewife will die, if the breadti»,' death
mataya will result to the goodman, but if the house be duly meted, every blessing and joy will
follow, therefore do not make the breadth or length overmuch or overlittle.”
47— 50. Omens connected with the erection of the maguí kapa.
51— 55. Offering to nature spirit dwelling on the chosen site.
(51) “When preparing the pit to set up the maguí kapa, make offerings of sandal, ricé,
flowers and lamps, and virgin spikes of the king coconut; (52) prepare the ball thus and
set it near the maguí kapa, put offerings both of gold and silver in the pit ; (53) if betimes
you do not seek the Vâsu Devi’s* foot great misfortunes will befall the house, every
person in it will be destroyed. . . . (55) For the weal of men of this world, fishis of old
gave forth the word, no jest their speech, therefore build houses in such wise as to
avert misfortune.” '
56— 61. Of the Bhüma Naga, etc.
(56) “ In the three months of the Goat, Yama, and the Sun, dwells the Bhüma Naga laying
tail to West and head to East, back to the North and belly to the South ; (57) in the three
months of the Crab, the Lion and the Virgin he sleeps with tail to the North and head
to the South, back to the East and belly to the West; (58) in the three months of the
Scales, the Scorpion and the Bow he lies with tail to the East and head to the West, back
to the South and belly to the North ; (59) in the three months of the Makara, the Water-
pot and Fish the Bhüma Naga Raja lies tail to the South and head to the North, back to
the East and belly to the West ; (60) set up the trunk, knowing the portent of the Bhüma
Naga dwelling thus, prepare the site for the house, marking the four corners, make ball
offering in eight corners for the yakshas to enjoy. (61) Take ghi, milk-rice, sugarcane and
jaggery, idda flowers [Wrightia zeylanka), take oil, and twist a wick, take sandal, ratmal
(Ixora coccínea), betel, camphor, and let the (duru [kapurala) make offerings in the four
corners of the house.”
(The peculiarities of the Bhüma Naga (Earth Serpent) and omens connected are not further
explained, nor is it clear that any offerings are to be made to him).
62-T-72. Of various yakshas, not named, occupying the different quarters, facing which
the house should not be built until they have been propitiated by various offerings.
73— 81. Of Naga chiefs, occupying the different quarters, and the appropriate offerings
to be made to them.
82— 87. Knowledge of sites suitable for men of the four castes.
88— 89. Of setting up the four corner posts.
(89) “In the four corners set up the four posts of four colours thus, (viz.) at one time;
if set up at two or three (different) times they will not endure, so sayeth Mâyâmataya,
be sure of it.”
90. Of doors. “ If the cubit {riyana) be divided by the builder into four parts, each
of them is called a foot [padayd) : take eight feet for the height of the door and four and
a half in width.”
91— 93. Of the auspicious quarter in which to cut earth for the house (‘the first sod’),
viz., the N.E.
* "N
94— 96. On the auspicious quarter on which to sink the well, viz., the N.E.
97— 98. Of auspicious months, days, asterisms {nfkai) and aspects.
100. Of moving in: “Take my friend, rice from a virgin’s hand, let a pregnant woman
pound that grain, and after you have cooked it, invite Brahman priests to the house,
thereafter choosing a lucky hour, move in the goods and chattels.”
* i.e., the tutelary deity of the site, the ‘ Genius hod'
126

loi—-10(). Of the auspicious quarters on which to set cattle sheds, stables, dung heap, Maya-
buffalo-shed, kitchen, dlvale, copper workshop, a Berftfdi ksvil, a Ganapati kavil, cooly mataya
‘lines,’ smithies {kammal), znA. goldsmiths {ranakura) workshops, festal houses, houses for
kambura and tarahala smith’s families, for beravaya, dhobies, potters {kumbakarayo), flower
sellers {malakarayc), vihara and kovil. The laying out of a small town with a royal
residence in the midst of it, is what is here considered, as expressly stated in verse 115
below.
110— 118. Of fences, and omens drawn from the measuring.
(i 15) “This is the science of laying out a town, that fame, riches, and plenty may result;
if you know not how to build a town thus, evil will befall both king and town.”
119— 130. Of good and evil craftsmen :
^119) “ Builders that build houses thus (aright), after their death will be reborn in a
royal family; painters, if they make images accordingly, will be born in noble families:
(120) cunning and skilful builders, though they should die, are friends of mine, for an
they do, they become rulers and nobles, such is the old saying of the rishis. (121) One
who knows amiss his craft, taking hire wrongfully, the which wife and children eat and
enjoy, bringing misfortune on the owner of the house, (122) that builder after his death
will fall into hell and suffer: these sayings are in Mayamataya, what then, O builders,
is to be done? (123) There are men who make images of Buddha, though knowing
nought of their craft; put no faith in what they say. (124) Builders and painters both
who wot nought of their craft, when hire is given according to the work accomplished,
take that money and rush home therewith; (125) though they get thousands, there is
nothing even for a meal, they have not so much as a piece of cloth to wear; that is the
reward of past births, you know; (126) dying, they fall into hell and suffer pain a hundred
lacs of years; if they escape, they will possess a body deformed and live in great distress
and want; (127) when born as a man it will be as a needy builder; the painters eyes will
squint—look ye, what livelihood can be for him ? (128) Builders who know their business
well, will become rajas lacking nought, so also cunning painters are meet to become nobles.
{129) Builders and painters taking money falsely from other men, thereby grow poor,
so ancient sages have declared and shewn; (130) doubt not this saying was in the
Mayamataya book of rishis’ lore ; therefore let builders and painters study Mayamataya;
misfortunes ensuing both in this world and the next are told of in the ilokas, behold in
how excellent a manner.”
130— 141. What month and phases of the moon are auspicious for various buildings, e.g.:
(132) “Skilful and cunning builders make a buddalaya in Vesak month, or devales, as
for Vishnu Deviyo; (133) even so, ye painters make images of gods and Buddha with
zeal in Durutu month. . . .”
142. “ If the birth house {sutabamiyd) be set four cubits distant from the house, on the
North-east, it will be well: but if it be set twelve cubits from the house, wealth of cattle
will perish, the rishis say.”
1 43— 145. Of various auspicious and inauspicious dimensions.
146— 151. Of remedies for various misfortunes befalling the inmates, by removal of earth
from particular places in the house, wherein the cause of the evil is thought to be buried.
152— 163. Of the peculiarities of houses of various dimensions.
164— 191. Of days good for building, and further astrological information as to auspicious
months, nekat (asterisms) and dimensions.
19 2— 214. Of the seven ‘ sira ’ (Girikulu, Valmika, Mahanduva, Maha, Kappa, Manda, Uva),
the evil effects of which are to be , avoided, and of the different kinds of land by name,
according to the shape, and their virtues (Ayatana, Parnika, Ivat, Samanald). Emphasis
127

Maya- is laid on the importance of removing stones and potsherds, poisonous roots and creepers,
mataya otherwise disease and death will follow.
215— 223. Of five divisions of a land (Nanda^ Bhaddra, Jaya, Rikta, Por^a), and the
three parts of each, making fifteen in all, and of the results of building on one or the ojher
of these parts.
224— 227. Of the portent of various plants growing on the site. Iron in the sbrl will
lead to death.
228— 232. Classification of lands into seven kinds.
2 3 3— 255. Of other sorts of land according to shape, colour of soil, etc., thus; (240) “ What
would befall a man who should build a house on land of the hue of gold and graphite i
He will have gold, silver, iron and riches. (241) The man who chooses land free froni
stones to build a house will have cattle and no sickness, it has many virtues profitable to
all. (243) Land that.is wet at the time when there is no rain is bad. O sir! if a house
be built then, it will be involved in sickness night and day.”
256—260. Of various trees which should be removed before building. The holes made
by their removal are to be filled with earth from another place, and the house may be built
a year, or six -months later.
261. Apparently an old proverb. “ If any person build a house in the middle of a village
he will become the chief of the clan {kulayd)\ many who have not seen the ilokas of
Mayamataya do not believe it.”
262— 268. Further mention of lands of different colours or having certain plants growing
on them. Of good fruit trees. Of other auspicious and inauspicious trees, thus :
(266) “All such fruits as jak and coconut, mango, damba^ sugarcane and mandarins grown
on the land about the house are of excellent flavour”; (but v. 268 mentions mangos amongst
trees which should be removed).
68— 271. Of white-ant hills. Contradictory views of different rishis are mentioned.
272— 281. Of levelling the ground and the results. Further warning against ant hills.
Do not build on a graveyard. Of auspicious plants.
283. Colophon. “In the year 1759 of 8aka era, when the sun was in the ‘Scales,’
on the fifteenth day of the month ; in this year was the iloka book taken by me, and this
book of 281 verses finished.” '
128

CHAPTER VI. WOODWORK.
‘ He taketfi i3f crooked piece of wood, and full of knots, and carveth it with the diligence of his idleness,
and ihapeth it by the skill of his indolence'—E cclesiastes.
WE have seen that Kandyan architecture is one typically of wooden, not of stone
construction. It should be remembered that the general use of wood for
building domestic utensils is a survival from very early times, and that while
on the Indian continent wood was very largely superseded by stone as a building material,
jn Ceylon the indigenous style remained to the last one of wooden architecture. It is
therefore natural that much of the best Kandyan woodwork should be architectural, and that
*it should derive a special charm from its architectural adaptation. The timbered hall and
roof at their best are such as any people might be proud of, compafkble with the lesser sort
of Gothic timbered hall and roof ; the carved doors and windows are at once decorative and
constructional ; and every detail is of artistic and historic interest. The constant richness
and variety of carving, and its close relation to the nature of the material are always pleasing ;
and we never find it so disposed as to interfere with the utility of beam or frame ; it appears
almost always as if it were an essential and necessary part of the constructional work.
The wooden pillar ikapd) is the constructional
H I element most in evidence. In the simplest form
the pillar is slightly chamfered, except at the two
Î>N ends, which remain rectangular in section ; it
may taper slightly, or remain of one diameter
throughout. In the majority of cases, however,
the elementary form is more greatly modified,
becoming an octagonal shaft with rectangular
base and capital, the continuity of the octagonal
part being broken by a brief return to the plain
section, forming a central cube. The latter
especially is carved with a great variety of design,
lions, gaja-simhayo, hanisayB, dancers, etc. ; the
5
octagonal facets may be also carved, with ¿ -leaf
forms or their derivatives; thé capital with
garlands of pearls {mutu-dçla, pearl-net, a in
Fig. 74) ; and the base with horizontal stepped
incisions {âsana-kadaya, d in Fig. 74) a most
characteristic feature. The points of transition
from rectangular or octagonal section are softened
by iinops in the form of a conventional cobra’s
hood {naga bandha, b in Fig. 74) or scfbll of liya
pata ornament {g^fa-liya-pota, c in Fig. 74).
A considerable variety of turned wood pillars is
fig. '73. Plain Fig. 74. Carved also met with, but less often than the thirmed ;
pillar, verandah of wooden pillar (Bell, or very rarely a pillar is part turned, part square
headman’s house. Kêgalla Report). (Bell, Kçgalla Report, p. 22, Kumbukgama).
Uva. Wooden pillars often rest on a stone base as a
protection against white ants ; where the whole
building rests on low stone pillars, the wood pillars are morticed into huge beams forming
4
the framework of the floor. A separate carved capital or bracket (pe-ka uya ; not gonfs,
k I 129

Woodwork which is a carved rafter') almost invariably intervenes between the pillar and the beams
4
{dar} it) which it is to carry (PI. VII., 4, and Fig. 73). These may be comparatively
plain (PI. X. 3), but are more often carved in pendent lotus forms (PI. X., 4, 5); occasionally
this issues from the mouth of a krapsndiya ; sometimes the downward face of the flower
is occupied by a dancer, a hamsa-pattuva or other design in place of petals, as in a sihall
Fig. 75. Scarf joint in large beam, Fig. 76. Timbered roof of
Gaoegoda, Sab. Beam 8| in. thick. ambalam at Mangalagama.
ambalam by a bs-tree at Vekoladepiya, Four Korales. The bracket is made in two pieces,
fitting together, and when these are crossed together, the four-faced bracket is completed;
the top of the pillar itself is morticed into the bracket through the centre of the parts crossed.
The massive beams resting upon these brackets and the framing beams along the top of
vihara walls are often chamfered but
otherwise rarely carved. When the
size of the building makes a joint
(Fig. 75) necessary, it is placed by
choice immediately over a pillar, but
not always so. The characteristic
type of scarf joint is shown in Fig. 75.
The roof is spanned by the beams,*
forming the basis of a boarded ceil­
ing, generally painted. Upon these
horizontal beams stand other shoftei;
uprights (Fig.76),sometimes carved
in the fashion of pillars, carrying
the ridge-beam of the roof as in an
ordinary‘king-post’roof; from the
ridge-piece to the wall plate run the
rafters of which the under side is
often elaborately carved (PI. VIII.,
above); over these are nailed
‘reepers’ (laths) which carry the
tiles. The carved rafters project to
form overhanging eaves, as seen in
PI.VIII., above. In the same picture
will be seen the curious wooden
4
Fig. 77. Under side of pe-ka aya, carved with rod {idda) which passes through
hatnsa paituva, Vekoladeijiya, xj. the rafters just beneath the eaves,
J30

connecting them together. In some cases this rod is elaborately carved and twisted, as E^oodwork
at Ridi Vihara. Its accuracy and satisfactory construction are severe tests of good ’
craftsmanship.
Ther^ is usually a verandah to all important buildings, in which case a characteristic Roofs
pectiliarity of the roof appears, viz., the change of slope which gives a pagoda-like
appearance to many Kandyan buildings. This results from the separate construction and
different slope of the main roof and the verandah roof. In some cases the latter is a good
deal lower than the main roof, so that the verandah is practically a lean-to against the wall
of the main building (PL VII., 5) giving the false appearance of a two-storied building;
if a window is pierced, the effect of a clerestory is produced. The change of slope is
Sometimes emphasized by different tiling of the two parts of the roof.
'In the case of open buildings having a double series of pillars, but no walls, the change
of slope of the roof takes place naturally and constructionally over the inner series of pillars.
In this case, then, the ‘verandah’ becomes part of the main building related to the central
space as aisle to nave in a church. The Kandy ‘Audience Hall’ illustrates this type of
building well. It is described by Mr. Lewis* as follows:
“The audience hall of the kings, which is now used as a court-house, consists of a high-
pitched roof supported by four rows of wooden pillars arranged so as to form a nave with
its aisles, supported on a stone platform and without walls, the building being open on
all sides. The pillars . -. support heavy beams and a king-post roof. The wall plates
are elaborately carved and support carved terminals. The roof projects considerably over
the pillars. The slope of the roof over the aisles is at a less acute angle than that of the
roof over the main part of the building.”
The change of slope is also frequently seen in walled
buildings lacking a verandah, and is then the result of
special construction of the main roof; into which the
verandah roof is, as it were, absorbed (PI. VII., 1,2). We
seem to have the following pedigree;—lean-to verandah of
a cave-temple; lean-to verandah of constructional vihara;
verandah raised to roof level (PI. VII., 7) retaining difference
of slope ; adoption of same form in main roof even
when verandah is absent (PI. VII., i, 2); and to that an
historically speaking secondary lean-to verandah may be
added (PI. VII., 5).' The principles are easily applied in
the further elaborated case of buildings of two or more
stories, such as devales, and a few viharas (Dalada
Maligava, etc.)
Roofed walls and gates must be referred to. Where a
Fig. 78. Diagram of vihara vihara or devale was of some importance, the garth about
types, showing transition it was walled" in with a mud and rubble wall, tiled as a
frq m lean-to verandah, to protection against rain, or even covered with a timbered
hipped roof. and tiled roof, as at the Saman Devale, Ratnapura. Even
* ‘ T“he Book of Ceylon^ by H. W. Cave, 1908, p. 326. Mr. Lewis adds that the building was
begun in 1784 by Rajadhi Raja Sintha, but not completed until after the British occupation. The
pillars were still being carved about They are made of halmilla (Berrya amonilld),brought
from Nalanda, thirty miles distant. Excellent illustrations (Ños. 444 and 445) accompany
Mr. Lewis' description. The architect was Dlvendra Muldcariya, whose tragic end is related on
p. 59, above.
k2 131

Woodwork where the wall was not roofed, the entrances often were,
79
as shown in Fig. > so that the whole effect was similar
Koofs to that of the wall and lych gate of an English church
and churchyard.
The projection of the roofs of Kandyan buildings to a con­
siderable distance beyond the pillars or walls is a noticeable
feature. This is an adaptive character. As Mr. Lewis
remarks, the “ overhanging eaves are specially suited to a
rainy climate like that of most of the Kandyan country,
and serve to protect the walls from becoming sodden.
They have, therefore, instinctively been adopted by the
Kandyans, and in this the native builders show more sense of vihara garth at GaijegOiJa,
than European architects in Kandy and Colombo, who are Sab., showing timbering of
fond of erecting buildings with elaborate cement or plaster roof. The tiles are missing
façades which speedily look weather-beaten and shabby, on one side. The triangular
and the walls of which get soaked through annually and niches in the wall are for
therefore soon deteriorate.” The characteristic eaves tiles lamps at the karti maftgalya.
also serve as a ‘weather-boarding’ to protect the walls,
and are thus constructional as well as decorative. It is
needless to remark that Government, as in India, have consistently ignored the local
building traditions, thus at the same time striking at the foundation of the arts and crafts
of the country, and incurring needless trouble and expense through ignorance. Yet they
have been told more than once of their errors. In 1868, Mr. Russell, Government Agent
at Jaffna, wrote to Government regarding the preservation of ancient buildings, observing
at the same time, “the study of such works might possibly produce a beneficial effect on
the draughtsmen of the Public Works Department, who appear to me to have much to
learn in respect of adapting a building to the use for which it is intended and to the
conditions of climate under which it must be occupied.”*
But the Government remains equally blind to the artistic and the practical value of the
traditional crafts ; and the Europeanised Sinhalese are, if possible, more ignorant and
deluded. To take one instance only; at the Musæus Buddhist School in Colombo, it*
was decided to build a little temple for the use of the girls. Here, if anywhere, one might
have looked for some appreciation of tradition, some elementary conception of fitness and
the association of ideas; but no—the local paper informs us that the building “is a very
pretty structure, a vaulted roof with a fine dome, gothic windows, doors and a porch,
with parapet battlements of classic design, being very effective.”
As Mr. Lewis remarks, “It is lamentable to see everywhere this process taking place ;
old and artistic Kandyan work is being removed and replaced by nondescript and hideous
modern work after the style of the petty masons and contractors of the low country. The
new temples are adorned with plaster masonry, sometimes representing sham Venetian
blinds, bastard and attenuated Gothic pointed arches are introduced ; the Kandyan wooden
pillars give way to round ones of brick plastered over, of the stock quasi-classical pattern
that was introduced into the bungalows of the early English occupation ; the doorways
have semicircular arches with poor mouldings ; the door panels and mouldings are painted
in ugly loud colours which with the panels and mouldings have a Dutch character, but
lack the massiveness and picturesqueness of their Dutch originals ; and the pretty quaint
* Manual oj the North Central Province, p- 215.
132

little windows are being replaced by rectangular openings filled in with ugly wooden Woodwork
bars.”*
Doors were framed wooden structures, fitted and pegged together, and built into the Doors
substance of the wall; but some viharas had door-frames of stone. The doors were
either one or two-leaved, having tenons above and below, turning in sockets in the
frame; hinges are very rarely seen in old work. The parts of a complete door and
frame included the two uluvahu-kanu or kanda (door , padi-kasda (threshold), haras-
kadaya (lintel), ba-pata (horizontal plank at lintel level, to carry upper tenon of leaf), agul-
kanuva (‘bolt-post,’ upright carrying wood bolt), agula (bolt), and the door leaf itself
{dora hifind iflld). An additional horizontal, above the haras-kadaya and between an
upward extension of the jambs, is called uttara Iflla, and is generally decorated.
Door jambs are almost always carved, sometimes very elaborately, as in the example from
Dippitiya Vihara figured by Mr. Bell (Kegalla Report). The usual arrangement shows a
moulding at the inner angle, and liya v^la (‘branch’) ornament on the front; at
the base on either side, a carved representation of a guardian deity in low relief, or a figure
of a dancer, or an elephant or other form, above which come the ‘asana kadaya’ incisions
so characteristic of Kandyan woodwork (e.g. Fig. 74, n),then ^g(ta liyapotaoxnagabandha,
from which the rest of the carved jamb begins and continues. The lintel may be straight
or arched, and plain or carved. In some cases all the carving referred to is executed in ivory
and thus applied in lieu of carving the jamb itself (PI. XXXVIIL, i).
There are some good examples of Kandyan doors in the Colombo Museum. Mr. Bell
describes the leaves and one jamb of a door from Devanagala in the following words : “The
carving of the borders is exceedingly delicate. The framework of the panels is in high
relief, the ten panels themselves being plain. . The outer borders, upper and lower, are
carved in the universal foliage scroll with inner bevelled edges of paid peti: the centre
border (overlapping the right side plank so as to hide the line of junction when the door
is closed) has a perpendicular band of tiny ndri-latd. The door swung on tenons in a
socketed sill and lintel. The carving of the jamb is equally tasteful. Behind an outer
beading and inner splayed edge of lotus petals runs a long narrow panel with gracefully
intertwined double scroll of creeper— separating four figures, all different from each other.
'A space half moulded, half panelled, in flower design, intervenes between it and the base
panel, in which is placed besides a tree an elephant with head and right forefoot raised,
and curled trunk. The disappearance of the fellow jamb, lintel, and sill are much to be
ffegretted.’*
Another fine door remains at Devanagala; it is illustrated on PI. VII., Fig. 8, and is thus
described by Mr. Bell: “The present vihare is a modern tiled building of brick and clay,
35 ft. 5 in. by 16 ft. 4 in., unplastered and ugly. Into the outer wall have been fitted the
wooden doorframes and double-winged doors taken from an older vihare. The door on
the east side, which is much weatherworn, is panelled in six elongated compartments
containing figures of dancers and animals, bevelled in lotus-petal pattern and framed by
tiri y pitting and wide border of lotuses.” Another doorway, that of the Dippitiya Vihara,
is figured in the K^galla Report.
There is much good woodwork remaining at Vatt^rama, Pinnavala, Kafiigomuva, Levke
and other viharas in the Three or Four Korales. The work at Pinnavala and Kafiigomuva,
says Mr. Bell, is “a storehouse of information on Sinhalese sacred and secular zoology
and conventional floral design.” The Malvatte and Asgiriya Pansalas in Kandy are full
* H. W. Cave, ‘Book of Ceylon^ p- 342-
3 133
k

Woodwork of good eighteenth century woodwork. In the Kandy Museum
there are also remains of fine doors and door-frames and other
architectural woodwork.
Baiti Bolts in the case of one-leaf doors were wooden pins working in
an upright post {agul katfuvd) set against the inside of the jamb.
The free side of this post was often shaped on the model of
ordinary wooden pillars, but otherwise very rarely carved; but
the bolt itself afforded an opportunity, too good to miss, for
elaborate decoration, but never siich as to interfere with its use
(Figs. 8o and 8i ; and PI. XL, 2).
Another type of wooden bolt (sometimes called dcfviu-aguld) is
used on two-leaved doors and window shutters ; the nature of this
form will be best understood from the illustration (Figs. 82, 83).
These bolts can be opened from without by means of a long curved
iron rod passed through a small hole in the door (cf. Bell, Kegalla
Report, p. 21, Bamuijugama Dévale).
Windows Windows were of two main types, the first identical with the
ordinary Kandyan door on a small scale, the second fitted with
lacquered wooden bars. Those of the first type, as Mr. Lewis
remarks, are constructed in every respect like doors, having a
massive frame, and a single or double leaf fastened by a bolt.
There are typical windows of this character at Kutjdasale and
Degaldoruva Viharas; the latter with elegant iron bars. Mr. Fig. 80. Agulkaifuva
Lewis figures one,* no longer in situ, which is remarkable for its and agula (bolt-post
circular bolt and hinged leaf ; it shows very well the typical arched and bolt) from door at
lintel, equally characteristic of doors and windows. The arches Asgiriya Pansala.
are sometimes double, as in the door-lintel shown in PI. VIL, 8.
Such windows are sometimes provided with two lights, as in one case at Malvarte, also
figured by Mr. Lewis,-j' When, as in this case, and in that of the window of PI. IX., 3,
the window is also provided with wooden bars, we have an approach to the character of
the second type of window. There is in the Kandy Museum a remarkable windowJ of'
two lights, which I rescued from the remains of a house at Nàlanda. In this, as Mr.
Lewis remarks, we have “the tracery of decorated or perpendicular Gothic, with a double
ogee arch, independently developed.”
Windows of the second type are long and low, consisting of a long rectangular frame fitted
with turned and lacquered wooden bars, and without doors or shutters ; PL IX., 2, shows
such a window, in the wall of the refectory at Malvatte Pansala. Mr Lewis figures a
similar window from Lañkátilaka. He also notes that in % pansala window at Kuij42isàle
Vihara, which has seven turned bars, the two outer bars are not in the same plane with
the other five, but further recessed, apparently to give variety and greater play of light
and shade.
B ridges I am not acquainted with any remains of Kandyan wooden bridges of any importance.
I quote, however, from the Mahavarpsa (Ch. LXX.) an account of one built over the river
Kajavapi by the General Deva-Senapati by command of King Parâkrama Bâhu I. ; it was
“a bridge of timber, two hundred cubits in length and twenty cubits in breadth, fastened
* Cave, ‘ T'he Book oj Ceylon^ Figs. 507, 509.
•f Loc. cit. Fig. 506.
X Figured by Mr. Lewis, loc. cit. Fig. 505.
134

Woodwork
4
Fig. 81. Wooden door-bolt (aguld) with ^¡(rapendiya^ arimbuva border, and kuf} i-rakkan
diaper. From an eighteenth century door at Malvatte Pansala. Compare with PI. XL, 2.
Nearly half size of original.
Fig. 83. Detail of Fig. 82.
4
Fig. 82. Door-bolt (dat} u-aguld),
from eighteenth century double door Fig. 84. Carved plank bed ; detail of
at Malvatte Pansala. ornament; for entire bed see PI. X., 6.
k 4 135

Woodwork and made exceeding strong with plates of iron and pegs,—a bridge of exceeding great
beauty, that could be passed by elephants and horses and chariots and footmen.”
Bridges The simplest form of wooden bridge (edari^d) now everywhere seen is a single tree-trunk
passing from bank to bank of a small stream. If the stream is too wide to be spanned by
a single trunk, piles are driven and two or more trunks laid across them.
The chief forms of architectural woodwork have now been noted. The construction is
very massive, and would endure indefinitely were it not for the activity of white ants,
which is such that it may be doubted if any woodwork really ancient now survives, while
such as remains is so generally neglected that it cannot last very much longer. Only last
4
year the ancient Pohoya M uva Vihara in Kandy had to be pulled down and rebuilt from
this cause, as prophecied in “An Open Letter to the Kandyan Chiefs,” an appeal for the
better preservation of ancient buildings in Ceylon, published in 1905 ; a little regular care
would have prevented the necessity for this; needless to say no modern work can in any
real sense replace the old (for the same reasons that modern Gothic restoration in England
cannot replace Mediæval work) ; which if any one should doubt let him examine the
modern ‘Kandyan’ ambalams built by District Engineers at Kegalla, Ruvanvela and
Ratnapura.
The foregoing observations on architectural woodwork have a general application to all
buildings, such as viharas, dévales, palaces, and ambalams, in the construction of which
craftsmen are concerned, but only in a much reduced form to ordinary dwelling houses,
which each man made for himself. These were constructed of smaller timber tied with
jungle ropes, and the walls of wattle and daub, the roof thatched.
The sumptuary laws forbade any elaborate domestic architecture. Major Forbes* states
that “ the king did not permit any person to have a house two storeys high, nor to build
one with windows, nor even to roof with tiles nor whitewash mud walls, without obtaining
the royal sanction.” Davyj- remarks that “The dwellings of the people in general . . .
are invariably thatched ; only those of the highest rank being permitted to have tiled roofs.”
Only the king’s palace and religious building were allowed to have doors with ornamental
tops, or finials to the roofs, or to be plastered with lime.
Domestic i^W e pass now to the consideration of domestic and other woodwork not architectural.
woodwork The plain four-legged bed {?nda) is an ancient and wide-spread Indian form, consisting
of a frame of netted rope or rattan, supported by four feet. In Ceylon it is essentially a
Beds wooden frame (fÿda viyald) of four parts, and with four legs [kakut) ; usually with a low
head-rest in addition, morticed into the two upper legs, the tops of which project above
the frame for this purpose (PL IX., 7). In the most characteristic types, the influence
of architectural forms is evident, the legs being thirmed, and chamfered as are wooden
pillars (PI. XII., 4-7) ; turned and lacquered legs are also met with. The now commoner
turned and carved four-post beds in general use owe their form to European influence,
mainly Dutch ; it is curious that there still exists a real style in furniture, based on
eighteenth century European ; a more dignified and massive architectural style is that
really proper to the country, but so little furniture of any kind was formerly used, as to
make it natural for the European forms to come in with the Europeart habit; to say
nothing of the prevalent mania for the imitation of all things European ; though the
semi-Dutch style of furniture was arrived at before that mania reached its present height.
The mattress was formed of rope or rattan netting ; over this were laid a few cloths and
mats and a pillow, the sleeper covering himself from head to foot with cloth or cotton
* Vol. I.,p. 78. See also dement, ed., Vol. IL, p. 195.
■ f'T'ravels in Ceylon,' p. 256.
136

Woodwork
Beds
Fig. 85. Carved and pierced bed-head : said to have been used by Raja Sirpha I.
From Kabalamulla Devale, where the turned wooden legs are also preserved.
blanket. Plank beds are rarely met with ; the beautiful example of PI. X., 6, is almost
a solitary instance; the ‘chip’ carving is better shown in Fig. 84. The low head-rest
or rather head-board is sometimes finely carved (Pis. IX., 7; XL, 3 ; and Fig. 85).
Turning now to stools and chairs, we remark at once that the ancient hour-glass form of Stools
cane stool is still in general use; next often seen is the kolombuva, little more than a low,
slightly shaped log; while a more pretentious stool in use is the three-legged bankuva,
perhaps, as the name suggests, of Western origin, but at any rate long naturalized. These
banku are sometimes beautifully made and carved (PI. XL, 4) ; the flat legs are fitted into
the thickness of the seat by a ‘housed dovetail,’ very firm and solid.
None but the king was allowed to sit upon a chair with a back; as remarked by Sir
George Birdwood, “although chairs are not ordinarily used by the natives of India, they
have always been familiar with them as the thrones of kings.” A beautiful chair dedicated
by Kirti 8rl Raja Sitpha is preserved in the A s g i r i y a ; it is painted and inlaid
with ivory (PI. IX., 5). In Fig. 86 are shown a number of types of stools and chairs,
from paintings at Degaldoruva, sufficiently described in the legend attached.
A peculiar kind of chair is the priest’s pulpit, a two-storied wood frame to be covered
with white cloths while the priest sits within reading ban}a, his face concealed from the
congregation; there are good examples at Dambulla; and ordinary specimens in every
bana-ma4uva.
Ordinary tables were not in general use, though mentioned by Knox amongst the King’s T"abks
private treasures, most of which he had obtained from wrecks, or were gifts brought by
ambassadors.
A three-legged table used as a book-rest appears in a wall painting at Degaldoruva ; it
is no more than a tall bankuva (Fig. 86). A piece of ecclesiastical furniture is the
4
daii asana (PI. X., i); as seen in the picture it resembles a camp-stool, lacking the seat;
but some sort of top must have been attached to the four eyelets shown ; it is stated to
have been used as a book-rest by copyists, and is, at any rate, an exclusively ecclesiastical
piece of furniture ; but I have not seen a complete specimen, or one in actual use.
Te mporary trays or tables of sticks and leaves used at devil ceremonies to hold the
offerings of flowers are called tafu, or mal tatù.
Tables or altars for offerings of flowers before images, dagabas or ¿<?-trees have been in use
from the earliest times and are represented on the early Indian sculptures. These have
generally the form of a bench (Pis. VIIa., VIIL), the legs sometimes carved or turned;
and sometimes flattened with a double bend like those of the bankuva (PI. XL, 4), or
almost rectangular in section with the same double bend, as in the legs of the beautiful
and thoroughly characteristic altar table of PI. IX., 4, now in the Kandy Art Museum;
these legs are morticed into the very solid top, and supported by iron brackets ; in an
137

Wood-work olinda-kolombu^a (game-board, PI XLI 4) in my
collection, of exactly the same form, the legs trç
q'ables II \\ fitted on with a mortice dovetail and wedge, but this
would not have been strong enough for the big table
in the Kandy Museum.
£gxes IIII \\\\ Boxes are also mentioned by Knox in his list of the
King’s treasures ; the reference is probably to large
chests such as are used for storing cloths, insignia or
other ecclesiastical property (e.g., in Mahâ Dévale,
Kandy, and the Pohoya-ge, Malvatte), also in private
houses for similar purposes. All the typical,’ exam­
ples are of the kind known as Indo-Portuguese,
large wooden chests with hinged lids and big locks,
the handles, key plates, and hinges with evident
Renaissance feeling, and based on Western models;
we are thus led to ask whether these chests wdre
used at all before Portuguese times. It is difficult
to make an absolute statement on this point, as
wooden boxes must have been in use at an earlier
period ; perhaps this was so, but they had the lid
opening on tenons, like a door, of which I have
seen one example. However that may be, the Indo-
Portuguese chests are recognizable by the character '
of their metal fittings, and especially by the decora­
tive metal bosses over rivets, as in the little box
shown on PI. XLIIIa., 3. They are more often and
more typically found in the north of Ceylon, in
Jaffna, where Western influence has been stronger
and has acted longer; here we meet the ‘almirah’
(standing tupboard with shelves) in elaborate forms,
the hinges, evidently European in form, and the
woodwork thoroughly Renaissance in style. A type
of box commonly met with in the low-country is the
‘bible-box,’ an evident copy of a Dutch form, usually
Fig. 86. From jdtaka paintings made in calamander or ebony, with scallopings and
(eighteenth century) at Degaldoruva. flutings.
I. Table ; II., V. Stools (bankii) ; Also partly Western in origin are the ‘work-boxes,’
III. Lotus throne ^padmasano); divided into compartments with trays and lids,
IV. Chair. inlaid with ivory, that were- formerly made at
Màtara in the Southern Province; but these low-
country forms really lie outside the scope of the
present book, and are therefore not referred to in greater detail.* -r
Purely Kandyan, however, are large book-boxes or presses used in temples or pansalas. A
very beautiful and elaborately painted book-box is to be seen at the Ridi Vihara. Beside
* Bennett (‘ Ceylon and its Capabilities’ i%i^i,p. 761) says of low-country carpenters,“ The master
cabinet makers are generally Portuguese, but the workmen Singhalese these make very durable and
beautiful cabinet furniture of every description, but they complain greatly of English tools, as being
very badly adapted to the hardness of ebony and satin-wood timberP
138

the'painting, its lid is set with gems. I have myself had veiy successfully painted by three Woodwork
Kandyan painters, and fitted with handles, etc., by a founder, a similar book-box, on which
three men worked at the painting for six weeks. The total cost of this box was over
Rs. 200. Unfortunately, it is but rarely that work even as important as this is given to
Kandyan craftsmen, who for the most part make brass trays for passengers.
It is noteworthy that rare woods, such as ebony and calamander, were most sparingly
used by Kandyan carpenters. Ebony is sometimes used as inlay, often associated with
ivory, as at RidI Vihâra, with a fine eifect ; for ‘ raylings,’ as we are told by Knox ; but rare
woods are not used for the construction of large objects, such as boxes and doors. It is
really a misuse of material to attempt such work : the wood is rare (calamander now
almost -extinct as a result of the increased demand) and should be used as such, with
restraint and dignity ; it is difficult to get large pieces of it, and it readily cracks, as if
intended only for inlay. There is a Certain vulgarity associated with the use of rare materials
in large quantities where not required.
Turned circular wooden boxes, rarely more than a foot in diameter, are in general use, ’Jewel boxes
either for betel leaves and the accessories of chewing, or for jewellery or valuables ; they
were especially used in devales to hold valuable insignia, as the halamba of Pattini ; and
were thence called abharai^a-pefti (regalia-boxes: PI. XIII., 3). Like much other turned
work, these boxes are usually adorned with lac applied on the lathe.
Another type of box used for jewels is the vfl-petfiya, or cane box, fitted with brass hinge
and lock (PI. XLIIIa., 8) ; a stronger round form, with shallow detachable lid, is used for
storing grain, carrying food, or generally as a box of any kind ; one form is divided internally
to serve as a food-basket for rice and curries for a number of persons travelling.
i@LWe pass to the wooden articles used especially in the kitchen. Kitchen
The most noteworthy of these was the spoon rack (hçndi-ànd), furniture
of which fine examples are shown in PI. XL, figs. 5, 6, and 7.
This was suspended from a beam, and the long handles of the
wooden spoons set in the holes. The spoons themselves were
usually made of a piece of coconut shell {pol-katuvd) with two
holes into which the handle passes. Some are pierced for use
as strainers. Another use of small pieces (ends) of coconuut
shell was in making sweetmeat moulds ; two ends, of equal size,
were carved inside and then pressed together with the sweet­
meat between ; the moulds were called stnlpiffu iafu, the sweet­
meat itself, slnl piffu.
Nearly entire shells were used as the bowls of water dippers
Fig. 87. Sweetmeat {kinisi, PI. XIII., 6-9), the wooden handles, almost always
mould of coconut shell, beautifully carved, being passed through and pegged inside.
inside and section. The dippers, however, were not only of use in the kitchen, but
were a special piece of ecclesiastical furniture, used by priests
for taking water from a bowl, or a well^ to fill a kotalaya, or to pour over the feet before
entering the vihdrax but the use is not in any sense ‘sacrificial’ as indicated in the official
description of the beautiful ivory kinissazt. South Kensington* (PI. XLI).
The detached coconut shells elaborately carved, and sometimes silver mounted, and ot
* There is a fairly representafive series of examples of Kandyan carved woodwork at South
Kensington, which, with the exception of four fine pillars {probably not older than the eighteenth
century') from some temple or pansala, is mainly of a domestic character, including spoon racks,
game boards, dippers and other articles.
139

Woodwork which so much is often thought, are a modern and useless invention, suitable only for the
imitation European drawing-room. It is interesting that ivory carving is said td havé
Kitchen be,en learnt by practice on coconut shell, a material exceedingly hard and intractable.
furniture Other important pieces of kitchen furniture are the coconut scraper {hiramarfayd), a shapej
log (kolombuvd) carrying a toothed disc for .use as a rasp; and the vegetable slicer, a bill­
hook set edge upwards in a wooden holder and called vap-pihiya. Both were arranged
to sit upon conveniently while preparing the vegetables ; the scraper is often of the book-
rest form, called yatura-hiramatfaya, the two linked parts of the folding seat being cut from
a single piece of wood ; and in many cases the scraper and knife were combined as illustrated
in Fig. 88, from a painting at Degaldoruva.
Beside the sweetmeat-mould already referred to, there are flat cake-moulds (PI. XIII., 4)
and jaggery-moulds, the latter deeply carved with intaglio representations of elephants,
lions, and sometimes of an olinda poruva or game board, after the manner of butter-moulds
'in England. Granary seals were also made of wood ; One is figured on PI. XIII., 5.
A curious implement is the ‘ string-rice ’ press {idi appan
vangediyd), a wooden cylinder with plug working in it,
the end stopped with a perforated diaphragm, through
■ which the cooked rice is squeezed, much as mashed
potatoes sometimes are in England ; a beautiful example
now in theiKandy Museum, is shown in PI. XI., i.
Agricul­ Agricultural im'pletnents were largely of wooden con-
tural Imple­■ struction ; of these, the plough* is the principal.
ments Others of importance arC| the psruva or scraper, and
the lalia and kuruniya measures. The wooden bells or at Degaldoruva : combined
clappers {so-ka^d) hung from the necks of buffaloes are coconut scraper {hiramaijayd)
also interesting. Into the details of all these forms, and vegetable slicer {vappihiya).
however, it is hardly necessary to enter. Many are
characteristically ornamented.
Carving A few words must be said as to the carving. The designs are for the most part those
common to the whole of Sinhalese decorative àrtj but treated in a manner suited to the
material. The treatment is always extremely flat, no attejnpt at relief or undercutting
bein^ made. This admirable restraint is now a thing of the past, for the influence of
Kandyan wdodwhrk and carving is hardly perceptible in modern building and furnishing.
Furniture is based almost entirely on Dutch models, with fluted and bowed legs and
relief carving. The flattest treatment of carved wood is seen in the regular ‘chip-carving’
of the bed in PI. X.,'6, and Fig. 84, or the sweetmeat mould, PI. XIII., 4. Somewhat
greater relief is characteristic of the liya v(la ornament of door-jambs, and the carving
of pillars, capitals and bolts. Even in .these cases the treatment remains severe, the stems
of the foliage flattened and not rounded or underctìt. A characteristic feature is tb,e
emphasis of the outline 6f stems or interlaced work with an incised line next to the margin
on eaph side. In this, and some other respects, such as the flat balusters of the Asgiriya
chair (PI. IX., 5) we are reminded of old Scandinavian methods. Sòme “kinds of work,
as bed-heads (PI. XL, 3, and Fig. 85) were in many cases pierced as well as carved, giving
an appearance of greater relief and light and shade. Even here the flat surface and incised
outlines were retained. Wood-carving completely in the round is rarer; the string-rice
mould (PI. XL, i) and the handles of dippers (PI. XIII) aflbrd examples. Wood was
also used for figure sculpture, but not generally ; in such cases, as also in many cases of
See description by Lewis, J.G.B.R.A.S., Fill., p. 325, 1884.
140

Woodwork
Carving
Fig. 89. Carved wood doorjambs.
B, an extreme form of palû peti.
A, C, liya v(la. B and C from Fig. 90. Carving of hanisa, from a
Badulla Dévale. wooden pillar, Dalada Maligâva.
merely decorative carving (PI. IX., i), it was painted. Makar a toraija shrines for figures
of Buddha were sometimes made of wood carved in high relief, as in the example from
Danagirigala Vihara, figured by Mr. Bell (Kçgalla Report, p. 43-)[. There is also a small
example in the Colombo Museum.
A somewhat extensive use of turned wood is noteworthy. The feet and legs (PI. IX., 6) Turning
of benches, beds and seats were often turned, but it is perhaps in window bars (PI. IX.,
2 and 3) balcony railings (Pl. VIII., upper story of Mâligava), and vehicles (Fig. 2) that
turning is most resorted to. It is less often used in the case of larger constructional pillars."*
Not uncommon is a mixed form in which a pillar or leg is half turned and half thirmed
(PI. IX., 6) ; the handles of tools, such as bill hooks, and of cressets (PI. XLV., 5), are often
similarly treated. Turned railings are usually lacquered in rings of red and yellow and
green or black. The form of the turned rails or pillars is usually very satisfactory, con- ,
trasting markedly with work now done. It appears to be a craft in which degeneration
of form takes place with peculiar readiness.
The art of turning wood is indigenous ; but I am not sure that the method of PI. VI., 5
is so. The ivory turner’s lathe shown- In PI. V F, 4 is certainly a traditional one ; it consists
of a large concentrically grooved spindle {liyana kagda), set in two posts sunk into the
ground ; the object to be turned is fastened to the projecting end ; the spindle is turned
by hand as shown. A form of lathe similar to this is used by gem cutters, but is worked
by a bow (like the drill of Fig. 93). to enable one man to turn and grind simultaneously.
Carpenters now use the wheel-turned lathe exclusively, but I hâve seen a large grooved
spin dle of the older type, and have no doubt it represents the original and indigenous
f orm of lathe.
(©. It is to, be noted that all the carving was done with a few chisels only, the immense Carpenters'
variety of chisels and gouges found in the European carver’s workshop being quite tools
unknown. *
The tools used by Sinhalese carpenters are numerous and varied, and in form and adaptation
not very different from those used by European carpenters. The following is a rough listj
based upon a set of sketches made for me by a Kandyan craftsman, one or two of whose
drawings are reproduced : cubit-rule {riyan l^lld), plumb-line {latsba-k?ttty<^i line or taper
‘ 141 •

IVoodiwrk
Carpentets’
tools
Fig. 92. Hand saw, and
timber saw.
{nal-laifuva), compasses [kava-katuva), set
Fig. 91. Stock drill, Square (matfam poruva), wedge {li-palana-
with stone weight and kapiva), sledge hammer {kulu~ge4iya), axe
deerskin thon|;. {porava), small ad2e {¿‘t-veya), large adze
Qoku-veya),vaz\\et {at-koluva), hammer {mipya),
tenon saw (taha4u-kiyata), hand saw (at-kiyata.
Fig. 92), timber saw (haraskapana-kiyata,Y\g. 92), straight plane {yatu-k(t<iy<^i curved plane
{ravum-yatu-k((aya), chisels (various sizes, loku-niyana, myan-kaptva, kalambu-niyan-ka(uva),
.1
stock drill {gal-torapanaya. Fig. 91), hand drij [at-torapanaya. Fig. 93), scoring tool {iri-
gahana-katuva), awl {vidina-kafuva), gimlet {gyulettu-katuva, ? of European origin), rasps
(pullorama, peti-, va(a~, and loku-pullorartid), file {plra). The foot-rule, which measures a
‘carpenters’ cubit’ (yia4u-riyana) in length, is divided into twenty-four angalor ‘inches.’,..
The ornamentation of carpenters’ tools, as indicated in Figs. 91 and 92*, is a characteristic
expression of the craftsman’s pride and pleasure in his work. The ivpry compasses of
PL XXXV., I, and the damascened adze of PI. XLV., 9, illustrate the same thing. ‘ Ift
the Kandy Museum, also, there are adzes with fine lacquered handles, one of which is ■
•said to have been used by Devendra Mulacariya; and the iron cubit-rule Referred to below
as having belonged to him is ornamented with a silver damascened lion.’ 1*
4
Carpenters' Carpenters’ measure was different from that in common use. »^The va u riyana, or
measure carpenter’s cubit, was the ordinary cubit+a span+the four fingers’ width. The carpenter’s
angala or‘inch,’ ^Vof the va4u riyana, was the length of the third joint of the forefinger.
The span (viyata) was the space between thumb and little finger at full stretch, reckoned,
it is said, at 7 asgal.
I have examined a riyan~l^lla (‘cubit-rule’), now in the possession of Goijapola Galaddi, a
descendant of the Devendra Mulacariya already mentioned, to whom it once belonged. It
is an iron rod, rectangular in section and exactly'‘31 (English) inches long. One side
is divided into 24 avgal (each equal to lif English inches), the other into divisions
measuring respectively 3|-, 2 A, i vt, ih and H inches respectively. These measurements
are those in ordinary use amongst craftsmen; various special units are described in
Chapter VIII.*
Com mon The ^rdinary or ‘short’ cubit {pip riyana) was the distance from the elbow to the top of
m easure the second joint of the little finger, the fist being closed. The ordinary span was, I think,
the distance between thumb and forefinger at full stretch, and two spans made one cubit.
The ordinary avgala or ‘inch’ was the length of the second joint of the forefinger, and of
4
these ‘inches’ twelve formed the a iya or ‘foot.’ I have never seen a cubit rule of ordinary
measure,, so 'pannot give the exact value of the mip riyana in English units. From the
^ * Some other details are given by Modder^J.C.B.R.A.S., Vol.XIL,No. 43, iigz,pp. iSiitSj.
142,,

above calculations it would seem to be about 17 inches. ,Tt_shoul^ beVememb^rOd that Woodwork
Ofientals are smaller and slighter boned than Englishmen. \
• It must not be supposed that the measures employed were inexact by reason x)f their
derivation from variable standards, any more than the English ‘foot’ or ‘barleycorn’; the
craftsmen made use of an iron or wooden ‘cubit-rule’ [riyan Iflld^ as already mentioned.
The extreme accuracy in the work of the old craftsmen, indeed,, will be apparent to all
who examine it. In architectural woodwork the great test was considered to be in .the
accurate fitting of the wooden rod (idda, see p. 130 above) which passed through each rafter,
just within and under the eaves of a temple roof. It is said that when an important
building was ordered by the king, it was usually given into the charge not of one, but
of four mulacari (foremen), by each of whom, the fourth part of the timber was separately
prepared; and when all was ready, the four parcel's of timber were brought together.
><43

CHAPTER VII. STONEWORK.
WE have already seen that the indigenous style of architecture was one of wooden
building, and shall not, therefore, be surprised to find that the amount of
mediaeval^and strictly Sinhalese stonework is\ery limited. There were,
however, amongst the craftsmen a certaih numberfcf masons (ga/rfoteifew), no doubt mainly
of.South Indian origin, or descendants or pupils of Indian masons. As we have seen (p. 65,
above), the kottal-badda contingent of craftsmen in the Four Korales, consisting of eighty-
eight men, included only one mason. This may be taken to represent fairly the position
of stonework amongst the other crafts. Such stonework as does exist bears strong evidence
of Tamil design and workmanship, j Mr. Bell remarks (Kegalla Report, p. 19): “Few
5
men were caj able of artistic work; artd the services of these experts were only called in
on the rare occasions when some ruler; ambitious of erecting buildings of special strength
and beauty, reared around him palaces and temples too often left unfinished. Yapahu,
in the Seven Korales, and Bereijdi Kovil in the Three Korales, were such. -lArchitecture
and sculpture could never have thriven in the Kegalla district. T]¡ie paucity of artistic
remains attests this, such carved stonework as does exist itself bearing Witness to Dravidian
design and workmanship. The ‘Kurunegala Vistaraya’ records that artificers had to be
summoned from Gampola to put up the buildings on Beligala. . . . So, too, at fiereijdi
Kovil, where, though little more than the tasteful platform of the kBvil is left,—if the shrine
ever advanced further,—history and style unite in proclaiming with certainty its Dravidian
conception.” ’ " f.,.
One of the most important medieval cities, though somewhat earlier than the périod
dealt with in this volume, was Yapahuva,* above referred to. Founded about a.d. 1^25’,
it remained the capital until 1288, when the seat of Government was transferred to
Polonnaruva. In spite of this early date, I have mentioned the city because of the
beautiful stone window from the palace which can now be seen in the Colombo Museum,
and in order to quote from the Yapahuva Vistaraya, the interesting though doubtless
exaggerated legendary account of its foundation.
Eight gav from Anuradhapura, attended by the chief ministers and other officers of
State of the three kingdoms, the building of the cAy of Yapahu Nuvara was begun on
the rock called Sundaragiriparvata, after which the city was named. That same king
(Parakrama Bahu) commanded that it should be constructed of stone only, and that the
following workmen should be engaged: 120 lacs of masons, 100 chief blacksmiths, 250
hangiii (foremen), 3000 painters, 400 carvers.
The Adigárs thereupon commanded some to cut Stone pillars, some to carve, some to
smooth, some to carve figures, some to paint, some to carve figures of elephants, some
figures of lions, some of wolves, some figures of men, some of geese, some of birds, some
naga figures, some figures of gods, some figures of women, some of creepers, some M
parrots, some of peacocks, some figures of beaters of tom-toms, some figures of dancers
engaged irt^the act,pf dancing, some of conch-blowers engaged in blowing, some of figures
engaged in wrdfstling, some to carve' representations of beds, some of stone doors, some
4
* The references to Tapahuva, Bfr?i} i Ksvil, etc“., representa digressionfrom the main object of this
book, the description of late mediceval, and purely Sinhalese art. For a more detailed account of^he
ancient, early and mediaeval stonework, the studei¡t should consult the Reports of the Archceological
Survey, relating to Anuradhapura, Polonnaruva, and Slgiriya, and the Kegalla District, also the
Guide to the Colombo Museum, 1905.
144

of stone doorposts, and some of störte steps. iThese stones were then painted Over by Stonework
the painters.* ‘
In this style four maligaval of nine storeys each were built, with stairs leading up to them.
Round these 500 smaller houses of inferior workmanship were also built. A store eighty
cubits high, 500 houses outside the fort, 1,000 double shutters for the housed, a stone
wall 7 ft. high, a metal rampart encircling it, i,ooo golden atches, 1,000 silver arches,
were also constructed, and adorned with 1,000 flags and flap« and cloth dolls-f- appended
thereto, there being also 1,000 elephants, 1,000 horses, 24,000 “mercenaries, 2 lacs and
61,000 inhabitants in all. Like âakraya, enjoying health and happiness, and so reigning,
the king built and adorned the city, the only material usefl being stone.”
The Bereitçli Kövil near Sitävaka was, according to local tradition, built in the sixteenth
century by Raja Siipha I. It is altogether Hindu;' in purpose and construction.
In the Kegalla District there are more or less important remains of stonework at Beligala, Kegalla
Garjegofla, Apibulugala, Medagofla and a few other temples, described by Mr. Bell. At District
Beligala there is a well-preserved ‘moonstone,’ its design a makara torana adaptation of
the more usual types. There are also stone pillars, and a pair of balustrades. These remains
may be as old as the thirteenth century. At Gaijegoda there are more extensive remains,
with elaborate friezes of dancers, beautiful columns and balustrades. At Ambujugala there
are caryed pillars and a magnificent stone door-frame, probably of the fifteenth century.
At Mçdagoda there was a stone pillar, now in the Colombo Museum, originally, perhaps,
taken from the Bereijdi Kövil. It has a Kon pedestal, elaborately ornamented octagonal
shaft, and capital with four ‘kibihi’ (lion) faces above the mutu-dçla.
In .the Kurunegala District the most important stone remains are at Ridi Vihara, where Kurunfgala
there is a well-built and unmistakeable Hindu temple. In the Kandy District there are and Kandy
temples with important stonework at Gadaladeijiya and Lankatilaka.§ Both of these Districts
temples are very beautiful. The stonework at Gadalâdeijiya is mainly of fourteenth century
date. Patches only of the original plaster remain, with traces of painting. Perhaps the
most striking part of the stonework is the entrance porch. It is roofed by huge monoliths,
resting on very large stone pillars of the usual Kandyan type, with two smaller pillars beside
them, forming thus a cluster of three pillars on each side of the porch. The smaller pillars
are of more archaic pattern, recalling those characteristic of the Kegalla District and'
Anuradhapura ; this temple and that of Lankatilaka, indeed, as Mr. Lewis remarks, form
a link connecting Kandyan architecture with the older work at Anurâdhapura and
Çolonnaruva. At Lartkätilaka, the ‘Brow Spot of Ceylon,’ only the foundations are of
stone, the main structure being of brick, originally plastered.
Of Narendra Sirpha’s palace at Kupfiasale there remain in situ a few plain stone pillars and
a stone with an elephant carved on it near the river. Two stones with elephants carved
on them are now placed in Kandy at the entrance to the Daladà Màligâva, and there are
also two stones in the Kandy Museum, with carvings of vases. Of these, one is figured
in Cave’s ‘ Book of Ceylon,’ Fig. 494.
* 'this observation should he noted, and compared with the statements made on 'pp. ll 46 and 147
regarding the plastering and painting of stonework.
■f- Banners woven in the form of a man ; several of these were made by weavers at the Peradeniya
^Exhibition in 1906.
4
XModder, Tapahuva, y.C.B.R.A.S., XIII., 1893,^. ^° -
§ For pictures and descriptions of these temples, Mr. Lewis' account of Kandyan Architecture, in
Cave’s ‘ Book of Ceylon^ should be consulted.
1
I iH5

Stonework Perhaps the most remarkablfc eighteenth century stonework building in the Kandyan
District is the peculiar vihara at Galma^uva. This, the ‘most Hindu-looking Buddhist
temple in existence,’ or at least in Ceylon, was never finished. It is said to have been
built by Kirti èri, but that while it was in progress he heard of the cave at Degaldoruva,
he abandoned the scheme and set to work on the cave-temple at Degaldoruva. This,
however, seems improbable, considering the great difference in style of the two temples,
and the fact that the massive masonry and brickwork at Galmaduva were finished, nothing
remaining to be done but to set up the image and decorate the temple. The plan of the
building is a square stone chamber, covered by a pyramidal tower of stone and brick
masonry, reminding one of the gopuram of a Hindu temple. Around this building and
a little removed from it is a massive wall with an overhanging cornice, with five windows
on each of three of its sides, and a doorway in place of the central window on the other side.
The arches of the doorways and windows is remarkable. They are semi-circular cusped
arches with a keystone ; the door has six of these cusps, the windows two. In the image
room there is an asana, or throne for the image. The whole building contrasts markedly
with all other ‘Kandyan’ architecture.
Speaking now generally of Kandyan stonework, it will be found that stone masonry plays a
very small part in the construction of typical Kandyan buildings; in viharas there is fairly
often a carved stone doorstep (‘moonstone’) and no other work in stone. In the Kegalla
District “elaborately carved monolithic pillars are rare. . . . Basement revetments in
worked stone, where found, follow one recognized plan. First a low socle, next the
plinth, then a narrow fillet slightly retired, Lesbian cyma moulding of shallow lotus leaves
{pala peti) running back to the inner plane, a vertical block broken half way by a bold
torus, a second fillet slightly projecting, finished by ogee and rectangular cornice coping.
4
. . . Rises or balustrades \et-hoi} a-v(l) to steps are common everywhere.”* The last
are sometimes carved on the exterior face in the form of gaja simhayo, the trunks forming
the upper edges of the stones, hence called (t-hoi}4a-v(l, ‘elephants’ trunks’ ; or they may
be very severe and plain.
4
Carved ‘móonstones’ {handa-ka a-pahana), semi-circular stone doorsteps like those so
well known at Anuradhapura, are met with in some viharas, as at Degaldoruva, Beligala,
Alutnuvera, etc. In these there is considerable beauty and variety of design, but rarely
such as to compete with the older examples at Anuradhapura. A mediaeval specimen
from the palace at Haoguranketa, is to be seen in the Colombo Museum. Carved friezes
■ are sometimes found, as at Gadaladeijiya, Gaijegoda and other important viharas. Op
these are represented dwarfs, dancers and lions.
Genre carving is rare. At Kappago<J.a, on the sides of steps leading to the vihàra premises
are slabs with carvings of a calf taking the udder whilst licked by the mother, and of an
ox licking its raised left foot.
Practically all stonework was intended to be covered with plaster of milky whiteness,
just as the brickwork at Lankatilaka is only the foundation for work in modelled plaster
[see PI. VII., I, and description]. The Kandy bo maluva wall, so beautifully described by
the chronicler as resembling the necklet of a fair woman that was the city of Kandy,
must have been lovely indeed when the delicate mouldings were perfected in form, and
snowy white. The common whitewashing of the carved stone doors of temples, to which
objection is often taken, is not a modern fashion, but a somewhat careless continuation of
an old one. There can be no doubt that all architectural stonework was intended to be
plastered or painted, or both. This old Buddhist method does not survive so markedly in
* Bell, Regalia Report.
146

Southern India, where the úse of stone for building and for images is far more general Stonework
than in Ceylon. In Ceylon the earlier methods of building in wood and of making
images of impermanent materials have lived on side by -side with the work in stone.
But even in Southern India, stonework is very generally painted.
Before finally leaving the subject of stonework it is necessary to refer to the smaller Domestic
domestic and religious purposes for which stone articles are employed. The commonest stonework
of these perhaps is the curry stone (ku4u-miris-gald), a plain slab and roller for compounding
the ingredients of ‘ sambol,’ a preparation of condiments eaten with curry. Somewhat
more elaborate are medicine stones {bet-gal) used in the preparation of herb and mineral
medicines, and for the grinding of colours by painters. In form and use these bet-gal
resemble the pestle and mortar of Europe, but the mortar is flatter. The pestle is often
grotesquely carved. Two bet-gal are shown in PI. LII., 6, the pestles carved into heads
and the four angles of the mortar with cobra hoods. Somewhat similar in purpose are
the sandal wood grinding stones {handun-gal), on which sandal wood is rubbed down
with water to prepare the fragrant paste so often referred to in Indian poetry. The stones
are circular in outline, something like a bread platter, but having the upper side, on which
the wood is rubbed, quite smooth but carved below with three low legs, an elaborate
central pattern, and pala peti chamfer (see PI. LII., 7). The kurukkan-gala is a quern or
hand mill for grinding kurakkan, the grain chiefly grown in hillside cultivation.
In connection with viharas and bo-ma¡u, stone lamps, altars (for flower offerings), bowls
{patra)- and stone troughs for dyeing robes are sometimes to be found; there is one of
the Tatter at Haoguranketa said to have been carved by the late incumbent himself.
The stone pestle used by the potters will be described in the chapter on Pottery.
We have seen that the stock drill (Fig. 91), or gal torapanaya, has a stone weight.
A few words may be said about gems, and crystal. All gems found were strictly royal Gems
■ property, and, no doubt, found their way to the treasury in considerable numbers. They
were almost always cut ‘en cabochon.’ Occasionally stones are met with slightly facetted,
with original facets polished. The gem-cutting apparatus consisted of a lathe, similar
to the ivory turner’s lathe of PI. VI., 4, but worked by a bow, and having a copper plate
set with corundum powder.
The art of cutting quartz (crystal) which occurs abundantly in fine transparent masses
4
has been understood from remote times. There is a crystal Buddha at the D ada Maligava.
4
At Asgiriya there is a crystal karar} uva about a foot in height. Spectacles are still made
by hereditary workers in Uda Dumbara.
147

CHAPTER VIII. FIGURE SCULPTURE.
'"■ The sound of the tools that are raising the image of Buddha, let it reverberate in Heaven!"
—Empress Komio of Japan.
IN this chapter I speak of all sorts of images, whether in the round or in low relief,
and whatever the materials of which they are made.
The most primitive images made are the impermanent images made for use in yak
and bali ceremonies, and wax images of Ririyaka used in huniyan ceremonies. These are
made by the professional astrologers and dancers of the weaver [beravdya) caste, not by
the regular artists. The mud images of devils, and planetary or other gods are prepared
in low relief on a wooden foundation, or in the round, on a wicker construction; PI. IV., 2,
shows an elaborate erection of the first kind, which required fully two days for its construc­
tion by several men. The devils, it will be seen, are intentionally hideous; the gods’
faces, however, are refined and even beautiful. These gods’ heads were made separately
by the modellers, the rest of the work done on the spot. The smoothed clay is whitened
and painted with earths, and the figures decorated with cut leaves of coconut and plantain.
It is probable that in work of this kind, executed in impermanent materials we see a
survival of the most primitive form of Indo-Aryan plastic art.
More important from every other point of view are the images of Buddha, and of gods
and men. Images of Buddha and of gods are made according to certain canons laid down
in the work called Sariputra, which will subsequently be summarised. Images, says the
canon, may be made of gold, copper, clay, stone, wood, burnt clay (brick), and lime. Images
of silver, bronze, brass, and ivory were also made. Small images were most often made of
metal—brass, silver, and even gold. A majority of these belonging to the later times
are ill-formed and even grotesque, but earlier examples of a very superior character are
sometimes seen.
A few references to metal images are given in various places. Thus when the last king’s
favourite astrologer built a Vihara at Tibbotumulla, the king presented him with a gold
image, which he deposited in the vihara, which the king also endowed with lands.* The
golden image at Morapaya Vihara has been referred to above (p. 71). A golden image
valued at ^1,000 was stolen not long since from Niyangampaha Vihara atGampola. There
is a bronze-gilt Buddha at Danagirigala.-f- But bronze images do not appear to have been
often made in the later times. Very beautiful examples are occasionally met with which
may well date from the fifth century or earlier. Brass images of poor quality are still
commonly made.
There are many references in the chronicles and elsewhere, to images made of stone, brick,
mud and other materials. Thus, we learn from the Mahavaijisa, that at Gañgarima, Klrtl
árl “caused a fair statue of the Conqueror, nine cubits high, to be hewn out by cunning
workmen, skilled in the art of cutting stone and the like crafts. And he covered that
beautiful and graceful statue with leaf of gold, so that it looked like the living Buddha.”
At Ridi Vihara he had “a great sleeping image made with fine brick and mortar and clay,
and many other images of Buddha also, seated and erect. ... At the foot of the sleeping
image he let make in order, fair images of Ananda, the constant attendant of Buddha and
the preserver of the Law, and of Metteiya Bodhisatta, of the pre-eminent Natha Deva
* Lavirie's Gazetteer, p. 823.
43
•f- Figured in Bell’s Kfgalla Report, opposite '
148

and of the King DutthaGamanl.” And he gilded with gold the five large images of Buddha. Figure
Again we learn that a priest named Palkumbure Unnanse, of Palkumbure Vihara, in the sculpture
reign of Narëndra Siipha, “ effected repairs in this stone-built vihara, made a stone image
of one carpenter’s cubit high, whitewashed the vihara buildings, celebrated the festival of
netra-pinkama after giving over 25,000 fanams’ worth of things as remuneration to the
artists.”*
In 1801 Pilima Talava Adigâr built the Alut Vihàra at Asgiriya ; within it was an image
of Buddha, in the reclining posture, sculptured out of a solid block of stone, more than
forty feet long. Another stone image mentioned in a sannasa, is that of Urulevatte Vihara.
At Dambulla (Four Korales) there is a colossal clay image, a reclining figure of Buddha,
of which Mr. Bell-f- remarks: “this gigantic figure has been modelled so skilfully as to
give that impression of well balanced proportion, and calm repose, always aimed at, but
rarely attained, by Sinhalese artists in the representation of the sleeping figure.” Mr.
Bell gives the following measurements of this image, here re-arranged for more convenient
comparison with the canon :— total length from top of head to feet, 48 ft. 3 in. ; hair to
chin, 5 ft. 4 in.; nose, length 20 in.; across nostrils, 15 in.; each nostril, 5 in.; each knop
of hair, i ft. in circumference; mouth, 20 by 5 in.; eye, 14 in.; foot, 6 ft. 6 in. long.
The total length, 48 ft. 3 in., is 18# carpenters’ cubits. The figure is thus exactly twice
the standard size of nine cubits. The correspondence with the canon is very evident.
The face measure is two cubits : the whole figure up to the hair on the forehead is nine
‘ faces ’ : the top of the head is two thirds of a ‘ face ’ more. The other measurements given
correspond as nearly as could be expected, having regard to the vagueness of their exact
application, and their not having been made with the immediate object of comparison
with the canon. The foot is apparently too long. It is most desirable that measurements
of older images should be made in Ceylon and India, as they may be expected, when
compared with the canons, to throw light on the history of sculpture. At Embekke
Dévale there is a painted clay image of Kataragama Deviyo seated on a peacock, and a
painted wooden image of Devata Baijdara, about five feet high, kept in the Palle Dévale.
The Portuguese, as we have seen, destroyed in 1587 a.d., the Vishnu Dévale at Devundara ;
they destroyed ‘the idols, of which there were more than a thousand of divers shapes, some
of clay, some of wood, some of copper, and several of them gilt’ (p. 10, above).
It may be remarked the wood is but very rarely used for images of Buddha, but more often
for images in dévales.
fmages of crystal are rare. They are naturally always fairly small. There is one such
image at the Mâligâva, where it is kept in an elaborate silver and ivory shrine, suggestive
of Italian Renaissance work.
Ivory images of Buddha are not abundant. They were always painted. Kandyan crafts­
men are still skilful in making ivory figurines of drummers, Ratemahatmayas, and other
Kandyan characters, and the workmanship of these is superior to that of the ivory figures
shown on PI. XXXVI., where their chief value is in the illustration of eighteenth century
co stume. Such figures were not wholly coloured, but generally details of dress and features
picked out in red, and the hair blackened.
It should be understood that it is not possible to tell by inspection of what material the
larger statues are made. 'Whether of stone, brick or clay, they are always plastered and
painted or gilt. The same was, no doubt, true of the older statues at Anuradhapura and
Polonnaruva.
* Palkumbure Sannasa, Lawrie's Gazetteer, p. 688.
39
■f- Report on the Kfgalla District, pp- -
3 149
1

Figure Images in low relief are commonly found against temple walls, usually they represent
sculpture deities such as Vishiju, kings or heroes, or benefactors of the temple. The plastered
makara toraifa above a seated image (PI. VIIa.) is similarly modelled in clay, plastered
and painted. At the door of a vihara on each side of it, these are usually represented door
guardians (doratu-pala-rupd), with swords or clubs, symbolising the spiritual guardianship
of the shrine.
One is at a disadvantage in describing only the eighteenth century work ; for it represents
the old age of a great art, rather than its beginning or its prime. The earlier stone sculptures
of Ceylon, of various dates, and early bronzes are adequate examples of Indian art; but the
eighteenth century images, though possessed of dignity and other qualities, are generally
not beautiful, and are sometimes even grotesque.
Image making in Ceylon in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was at a comparatively
low level, though not so low as that now reached in the low-country by artists unfamiliar
with the canon, or in the weak alabaster images that are imported from Burma. The
matter is that the canon has been used, not as a guide merely, but quite slavishly by artists
who, in spite of their strong decorative sense and capacity for ordinary drawing, had little
or no feeling for the human figure as such, though they felt the symmetry, passivity, and
grandeur of the symbol they made stand for it. “The image must exemplify a person with
an unfettered, quiescent, and absolutely pure mind, pre-eminent from head to foot.” The
artist did actually work with such ideals before him, and they could not but be reflected
in it. The traditional work, despite the decay of the tradition, is still in restraint, dignity
and religious feeling vastly superior to the sensuous and eifeminate work of ignorant
craftsmen in the low country, influenced by European art, but with no taste or real
knowledge of drawing.
I proceed now to a description of the artistic canon, and method of making images.
APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VIII.
SARIPUTRA.
Griinwedel’s work on ‘Buddhist Art in India,’ while specially lacking in reference to
ancient or modern Sinhalese art, nevertheless makes mention of the interest attaching
to works containing formulas for the construction or drawing of Buddhist images, giving
detailed dimensions. These he speaks of as modern and as specially characteristic of
the northern school. It is therefore of special interest to be able to give some account
of the work known in Ceylon as Sariputra, which deals with the dimensions of images
in general and Buddha in particular.
I am indebted to my learned friend Mudaliyar E. R. Gooneratne of Galle, for a translation
of the Sariputra, based on a transcript of the copy in the Colombo Museum, compared
with three copies which he with difficulty secured in the Southern Province and which
were deficient in the first and more general part which appears in the Museum ms.
Before proceeding to give some idea of the contents of the work, I quote a part of the
learned Mudaliyar’s remarks upon it:—
ISO

“The work takes its name from the author, who says at the end of the work that he heard Silriputra
it, from whom he does not state, though the inference in such cases, is that he must have
heard it from one of the fishis. From the style of the verses, though they are presented
to us in an incorrect form, it is plain that the work is the production of a master hand.
The author must not only have been well versed in Sanskrit, but (it is clear) that he was
also a thoroughly efficient artist.
“ Sàriputra is a common name in Buddhist history. One or two distinguished disciples
of Buddha owned it, and subsequently at various periods, several distinguished authors
and grammarians went by this name. The meaning of the term is, the son of Sari
(Sari-putra). . . .
“The making and painting of images have been in the hands of a particular section of
the Sinhalese ; not being versed in the Sanskrit, and not understanding the texts, it is
plain that they only took care to have the paraphrase jotted down, to enable them to
take the measurement, regardless of the accuracy of the Sanskrit verses. Hence the work
is full of errors, and I have had great trouble to get the verses corrected and put into proper
metre before commencing the translation.
“ In the first part which treats of images in general, in the paper copy sent me, all the
Sanskrit stanzas were omitted and by the aid of the gloss I had to recast them.
“The second part which is confined to the making of images of Buddha, is more complete ;
only a few of the verses are missing, but those that were found were full of errors and
omissions, and were deficient in metre. I had them collated with three copies which
I procured. It is curious, however, that the missing verses and omissions in one copy
were nearly the same in the others, leading me to infer that they must be copies of one
original work. . . .
“ In conclusion I have to acknowledge with thanks the very great assistance rendered
me by Talamalagala Somànanda Thera, of the Simhall Avasa, Galle. But for his willing
support . . . I am doubtful whether this translation would have seen the light of day.”
Mr. Gooneratne also remarks, “ (i) I have confined myself to translating the original
literally. (2) In some places the text is so vague, as regards the exact positions of the
parts of which measurements are given, and the terms used are so uncommon, I am not
sure whether my rendering is quite correct. (3) Several of the verses had to be recast,
of course embodying the exact meaning of the gloss, nevertheless there may be
deficiencies, . . .”
Regarding the date of the Sinhalese gloss {sannaya) which constitutes the most important
part of the mss. regarded from the imager’s point of view, the following staternent, an
annexure discovered in one of the old copies, is supplied by Mr. Gooneratne :
“About A.D. 1165, after the translation of the Sinhalese commentaries into Pali, the pious
and illustrious King Sarvajna Parakrama Bahu ascended the throne of Laftka. Having
noted with concern the corruptions that had crept into the Saògha since the sway of
the great King Vaftagamini Abhaya he took action to purge it from its corrupt adherents,
w ith the aid of the illustrious Maha Kasyapa of Dinibulagala (Dambulla), and he
thoroughly renewed the Cètiya at Purvarama and other temples (Anuradhapura) and
the Uposatha hall, and embellished the parapet around the Bodhi tree with various beautiful
paintings. Maha Kasyapa then approached his Majesty and prayed for a translation of
the Sariputra, a portion of the old Vedanga, which treats of the dimensions of the images
of Buddha for the guidance of lay artists. The King deputed this work to a pupil of the
Maha Thera Kasyapa, who was competent to undertake it.”
I do not give the text and translation of the Sariputra in full, as they deserve separate
publication elsewhere. The parts of the translation omitted are the astrological details,
U 151

Sariputra some of the more minute measurements, and some of the verses of which the exact meaning
is not clear. The second part of the work (as found in the Colombo Museum ms.) treating
in particular of standing, seated, and reclining images of Buddha, is here first dealt with;
afterwards the first or general part and a further gloss accompanying it. The work is not
now well known either by imagers and painters or by the priesthood in the low-country,
but is familiar to the best craftsmen in tbe Kandyan districts. The diagram (PI. XXVII.
and Fig. 95) of a seated image is drawn by D. S. Muhandiram to illustrate the use of plumb
lines, and to show the appearance of a correctly measured image. The chief point to be
comprehended is the use of the lines: a framework, of which a plan appears in the top
left hand corner of the figure, and another (Fig. 94), taken from an actual example given
to me by the same artist and now in my possession, in the text, is fixed horizontally over
the place where the image is to be made, and the plummets suspended from it. The
plumb lines so hung serve as axes of reference, determining the position of the chief parts
of the body. They act as a simple ‘pointing machine.’ The lines shown in the diagram
are those generally relied upon by Kandyan workmen, but others are available if still more
exact work is required, or if the size of the image is so great as to make their use advisable.
The ‘karifa stttra’ of the diagram is the ‘parsva sUtra' of the text, which latter is probably
correct. The height is reckoned at 5 ‘faces’ from top of forehead to throne, i.e. 67J
inches, an approximation used, it is said, in small work instead of the 62 inches of the
canon.
Fig. 94. Plan of lamba tapiva, showing points from which plumb lines are suspended.
In the case of reclining images the ‘lines’ are not, of course, plumb lines, but threads drawn
from point to point.
Some explanation of the units of measurement must be given. They may be tabulated
thus:—
One mukha 3 angal (lit. fingers), ‘inches,’ or units.
i i
One tala 3 do.
i i
One bhaga do.
4I
One veda 4 do.
One kala 2 do.
One kolaka 2 do.
One matra I do.
One yava do., a ‘barleycorn*
152

The first three units as thus tabulated apply to images of Buddha only. Ssriputra
4
The ordinary architect’s cubit {^a u riyana), the foot {puda), and span [viyata) are scarcely
4
mentioned. The angala or ‘inch’ is presumably the va u angala, (distance from first to
to second joint of forefinger when bent), the twenty-fourth part of a va4u riyana., and
measures English inch (see p. 142). The '■ angala' of the text, however, is not merely
a fixed measure, but also may be translated ‘unit,’ as the instructions are intended to
provide for the construction of images of all sizes, both large and small. But there has
been much discussion as to the exact dimensions of the images in the case of images of
Buddha,* and special books have been written on the measurement of his person, usually
considered to be twelve cubits'f'; his span is usually considered much longer than the
span on which calculations are at present based; but such views are purely mythical.
The other units employed are technical and not in common use. The most important
is the mukha, or ‘face.’ This is the equivalent of 13I inches when images of Buddha are
spoken of. It is an unit corresponding to, but not identical with, the ‘head’ of European
artists. It is measured from the base of the hair on the forehead to the chin and is thus
less than a ‘ head ’ by the height of the crown of the head above the forehead. The standard
height of an image of Buddha, including the crown of the head, is 124 angal, as stated
in verse 22 of the canon, or more exactly 9 ‘faces’ and half a bhaga, making I23f inches
(about E. 13 feet 4 inches). The detailed measurements given actually add up to 121§
angal (9 ‘faces’) + 3I angal for the crown of the head. It will be seen that this canon of
proportion corresponds to about heads, in the terms of European art.
Some words are perhaps needed as to the purpose and use of artistic canons of proportion.
Probably they have been in use from the earliest times in the East, as we know that they
were in the West. But there is a tendency, not altogether unreasonable, to regard them
as purely mechanical devices, reliance upon which is a fetter upon free artistic expression,
and characterises rather the decline than the flower of a great tradition. But it is the
abuse, not the use, of canons .of proportion that does this, and it is therefore worth while
to enquire into the rationale of their use by Indian craftsmen and imagers. It is in drawing
from the life that a canon is likely to be a hindrance to the artist; but it is not the method
of Indian art to work from the model. Almost the whole philosophy of Indian art is
summed up in the verse of Sukracarya’s ‘Sukranitisara’ which enjoins meditation upon
the imager:
I “ In order that the form of an image may be brought fully and clearly before the mind,
the imager should meditate; and his success will be proportionate to his meditation. No
other way—not indeed seeing the object itself—will achieve his purpose.”
I The canon, then, is of use as a rule of thumb, relieving him of some part of the technical
difficulties, leaving him free to concentrate his thought more singly on the message or
burden of his work. It is only in this way that it must have been used in periods of great
achievement, or by great artists. It must also be remembered that the use of some such
device was always absolutely essential in the case of the many colossal images made, and
oft en executed in a relatively cramped space, such as the interior of a rock vihara. Further,
only a few of the measurements given are used in the case of the smaller images; all the
minuter details are necessary only in the case of colossal statues. And the fact that the
canon is now used mechanically by mere craftsmen is no contradiction of its value, for
* See J.C.B.R.A.S., Vol. V., No. 19, 1874.
•f- Clough gives Maha-purusha, ‘ name of Buddha alluding to his height, oahich is said to have been
four of his own cubits measuredfrom the tip of his middle finger to his elbow, and equal to twelve
cubits of common measure.'
153

Sariputra even their work is the better, not the worse, for their reliance upon tradition and rule.
This at first sight may be doubted, but will be obvious to those familiar with the
degeneration that everywhere results when even the old tradition, however rigidly inter­
preted, is abandoned, and a futile endeavour made to imitate a foreign style or the
individualism of Western art. st
A translation of the text of the canon now follows, beginning with Part II., which deals
with images of Buddha. Part I. deals with the measurements of images of gods and men.
SARIPUTRA. Part II., translation.
Hail to the Omniscient!
Standing i. “Let that Lord Buddha, having cheeks of a golden hue, lips of light red, captivating
images of eyes, brows that are lovely as a bow, shining like the moon, who eclipsed the lotus, who
Buddha is beauteous as the faces of the daughters of Mara, guard thee.
2. “Hearken, we shall now describe the dimensions of images of Buddha in the three
postures of sitting, standing and reclining.
3. “Images of Buddha are made from gold, copper, clay, stone, wood, burnt clay, and
lime.*
4. “. . . The size of the (image-) house should be in proportion to the size of the image,
and vice-versa. . . .
8. “We shall now describe the various heights of images. Those that are less than two
cubits (E. 62 inches) are called very small {alpa) images:
9. “Images above two cubits and up to five cubits are small {adhama): images above five
cubits and up to eight cubits are called middling {maddhyama):
10. “ Images above eight cubits, and up to twelve are called large {uttamd)\ images above
twelve cubits (E. 31 feet) are great (mahd).
11. “. . . No images of gold or other metal should be cast hollow within.
12. “The making of hollow images will ere long result in the loss of wife and wealth, and
lead to quarrels and famine,
13. “and to delay in the performance of work, and dread of enemies to royalty. The
joints of images of wood and stone, must be placed exactly where the joints are, and not
otherwise. If images are made thus it will result in length of days.
14. “If this rule be deviated from it will result in the loss of wealth and life. If the
measurements be out by half an angala, or (even) a barleycorn, it will result in loss of
wealth, and death. Therefore the measurements must be neither more nor less.
15. “The height of an image must be calculated by a division of it into a scale•j- of
inches . . .”
16— 21. “These verses treat of the relation between height and breadth of the image,
whether lucky or not, in accordance with Shadvargaya.
22. “One hundred and twenty-four aogal scale of an image is called the uttamadasatale.
[cf. Griinwedel, ‘Buddhist Art in India,’ 1901, p. 167, note by A. G.]
23. “Two kala and half an asgala is called a hhaga\ thirteen and a half is called a
* Cf. Sukracarya: “ There are the following kinds of images, arranged in order of durability :
(i) Images made of sand; (2) Images made offlour or meal; (3) Drawings; (4) Plasterings ;
(5) Earthen images; (6) Wooden images; (7) Stone images; (8) Metal images"
■h Patti Iflla f of wood, 'kadavasa hole' (ffor kaiadasi kolayd) if ofpaper.
154

mukha. From the top of the head* to the sole of the foot is nine mukha and half of Ssriputra
a hhaga.
24. “ According to this scale the length of the face is three bhaga. The ushnuha-\ is equal Standing
to eight yava. The length of the part just above the brow, covered by hair is three angal. images of
25. “From the centre of the forehead to the centre of the space between the eyes, and Buddha
from the end of the nostril to the jaw is one bhaga.\ The piece of flesh projecting beyond
the chin is half an angala.
26. “ From the base of the throat to the top of the neck is 3I inches, and from thence to
[the end of the breast and thence to] the end of the navel, and from thence to the end of
the penis is one tala in each case.
27. “The length of the thigh is two tala; the foot and the knee are two bhaga; these are
the principal measurements.
28. “The length of the [upper] arm is 27 arigal; the length from the elbow to the wrist
is 21 angal. The length of the hand [from the wrist to the end of the fingers] is 13I angal
. . . , the same as that of the face.
30. “ The back of the head, from the crown to the nape of the neck, is one face and three
angal angal\; the space from one ear to the other [measured over the crown] is 10
kolaka [20 angaf and twice this sum is the circumference [viz., 40 angal, the same as
stated below, but without including the thickness of the hair].
32. “The diameter [of each tuft of hair] is eight barleycorns, and the height six; the area
within which the hair is found is three faces and one veda [i.e., 44I angal round]; there
are 360 tufts of hair.
36. “The breadth of the chest is 4o| angal...[?]
37. “The space between the breasts is 19 angal...[?]
40. “The edge of the hair in front by the forehead is curved, in the shape of a bow or
like an arch. The height of the eyebrow is an angala, ahd the breadth two barleycorns . . .
42. “The length of the eye from the unguent-spot§ to the other end is three angah and
its breadth six barleycorns. The two lids are two barleycorns.
43. “The eye is divided into three parts, one black and two white. In the black part the
disc is of the size of a louse. [Part I. gives greater detail.]
44. “The space between the eyes is one kala-, the height of the nose at the top is one
angala, and the skin of the eyelid half a matra.
45. “The length of the nostril is one angala and a kala, the height of the nostril is one
angala, and the breadth of the hole is six barleycorns.
47. “The mouth is between the two cheeks [lit. parts which display or smile]. . . . The
upper lip has three curves.
48. “The width is i| kala [three angal~\; the breadth of the [lower] lip is one angala. . . .
50. “The face will be beautiful if the aforesaid parts are [thus] completed. The breadth
of the ear is two angal, the [total] length five kolaka; the length of the part above the
pendant is four angal; the pendant is three kolaka [six angal\
51 . “ The width of the pendant part is half an angala, the pendants on either side the same.
* Hhe translation reads ^forehead^ but evidently ^head' is intended. Nine mukha and half a
bhaga are I23f angal, practically the 124 angal of v. 22.
•f- Protuberance upon the skull, one of the thirty-two chief physical perfections or ‘ lakshanasd
% The face is divided into three equal parts.
§ Karavira, the small aperture at the beginning of the eye where unguents are placed, hence called
andun-vala in Sinhalese.
155

1
Sartputra The space between the pendant of the ear and the neck is 1 angal. The height of the
outside of the ear is i| angal.
Standing 54. “The length from the base of the neck to the nipple, thence to the other nipple, and
images of thence to the base of the neck is 13I angal.*
Buddha 55. “From the base of the neck to the armpit is one tala, and the part over is one kolaka.
The breadth of the palm is six angal, and its length seven angal, the thickness of the
palm one kolaka, the breadth of the thumb i§ angal.
56. “The length of the middle finger is six angal and four barleycorns; the fourth finger
is 5| angal; the forefinger is less by one barleycorn.
[Verses 57-63 give further minute details of the measurements of the fingers and finger nails.]
64. “The length of the foot is 13I angal, and from the ankle bone to the heel is one
bhaga [two angaf.
[Verses 65-71 give detailed measurements of the toes.]
72. “The breadth of the back between the two armpits is two mukha. . . .
73. “ . . . the space between the two thighs at their beginning is one angala, between
the two knees one kolaka [two angal\ and the space between the two [great] toes one kala
[two angaf and a barleycorn.
74. “The maddhya sntra [medial plumb line] drawn from the crown of the head must
touch the tip of the nose, the centre of the chest, the navel, the private part, the inner
side of the knees, and the inner sides of the feet.
75. “The parsva satra [side plumb line] drawn from the crown of the head must touch
the side of the forehead, the centre of the cheek, the side of the arm, the centre of the
thigh, the centre of the knee, as well as the centre of the ankle joint.
76. “The girth must be three times the breadth of the several parts. . . .
77. “The end of the hand [raised in] blessing must be in aline with the end of the chin,
the cheek and the nose, at a distance of eight barleycorns from the end of the mouth and
the nipple of the breast. [This is incomprehensible.]
78. “The kata sUtra [loin plumb line] must be drawn from the side of the little finger [of
the raised hand] to fall over the middle of the hip, the middle of the thigh, and outside
the knee.
86. “The kaksha satra [armpit plumb line] must be drawn from the side of the armpit,
by the side of the hip, the calf and its termination, and by the fifth toe of the leg.
87. “The bdhu satra [shoulder plumb line] must be drawn by the centre of the side of the
[left] arm by the end of it and outside the palm.
88. “A maddhya satra [medial plumb line] must be drawn [behind] from the centre of
the crown of the head, the centre of the rising part of the back, the centre of the [small
of the] back, and between the heels.'f-
90. “ If the plumb line is drawn amiss, the image maker will be afflicted with illness . . .
if correctly it will lead to the success of royalty and the protection of the maker.
t@kThe section specially referring to standing images of Buddha ends here.
Seat ed 91. “ I shall now describe [meditative] images. The tip of the nose, the thumb
images of and the heel must be visible to the eye [of the image].
Buddha 92. “The image must exemplify a person with an unfettered, quiescent, and absolutely
pure mind, pre-eminent from head to foot.
93. “From the place where the feet touch the throne, to the top of the hair on the head,
* This appears to contradict v. 37, but is evidently correct.
■f" Verses 84, 85, and 89 speak of two or three other plumb lines, but less clearly defined and
not named.
156

Sariputra the length is 62 angal* The expert imager must make the figure in the due proportion.
94! “The left foot is beneath, the right foot must be placed over it, the hands must be
Seated placed likewise. The image will then be pleasing.
images of 95. “The length from the feet to the hands is one face, and from thence to the private
Buddha part and navel one bhaga.
96. “From the base of the throat to the navel is 27 angal [i.e., two faces]. From the base
to the top of the neck is one bhaga less one inch.-f*
97. “ From the collar bone to the throat joint is half an angala. The face is 13I angal.
The height of the crown of the head is three angal, the top i| angal [cf. v. 24].
98. “The three J sedent positions are as aforesaid, and the skilful craftsmen must make
them accordingly.
[Verses 99-104 give details of position and dimensions of hands, knees and feet].
105. “The space between the two knees, the height from the ankle to the end of the hair
of the head, as also from [each] knee to the [opposite] shoulder are the same.§
[Verses 106-111 give measurements of the body, and arms, and indicate their relation.]
112. “ A line must be drawn from the middle of the forehead, the middle of the tip of
the nose, over the middle of the chest, and over the middle of the navel, the middle of the
private part, between the two joints of the thumbs, and the middle of the ankles of the feet;
113. “This is the maddhya satra [medial plumb line] which must be drawn at a distance
of twelve inches from the crown of the head.||
114-115. “ From the plumb line to the centre of the forehead is three inches, to the tip of
the nose one inch, to the bridge of the nose three inches, to the chin three inches, and
to the end of the neck seven inches : to the base of the neck seven inches and three barley­
corns, to the chest three inches, to the middle of the belly one inch, and the line must
touch the private part.
116. “This plumb line should be drawn as described above. [Another] line must be drawn
by the end of the mouth, the end of the nipple of the breast, the end of the wrist joint,
and the side of the instep [?]. This is called the mukha stttra [mouth plumb line].
117. “[Another] line must be drawn by the armpit, the side of the hip, the side of the calf
and by the elbow. This is called the [armpit plumb line].
118. “The expert imager should mark what is said above, and draw the lines accordingly.
Sideways from the centre of the crown, the side of the ear, the side of the arm and the
elbow, this line must be drawn over the three seated images.**
119. “The height of the seat should be either one third or one quarter or one fifth of the
height of the seated image.
The description of seated images ends here.
* More roughly in practice, for small images, and as in the figure, fivefaces, not including the hair.
i.e., half an angala less than the measure given in v. 26. The discrepancy appears to be explained
by
V.
97.
X I. Togasana, meditative, voith hands laidfiat on one another on the lap. 2. fhe right falling to
the ground over the thigh. 3. T'he right hand raised and held palm forward, the left hanging fiat
by the side or holding garment.
§ This is a very important check, useful even in the case of quite small images or drawings.
II So that the line may clear by one inch the tip of the nose, as indicated in the next verse; it will be
seen that the plumb line serves as an axis of reference from which by measurement the position of
various parts of the body is known.
** Cf. ■«. 98, also referring incidentally to the three varieties of seated image.
158

120. “I give below a description of recumbent images. The recumbent image should be Sariputrg
made exactly in the attitude of a devotee.
121. “The image must be made without contracting the vital joints, [allowing them to be Recumbent
pressed on the throne], then only will it lead to all prosperity. images of
122. “Otherwise it will end in the destruction of the place as well as of wealth. The Buddha
length of the [image-] house'should be divided into sixteen parts.
123. “Two of these should be vacant at either end, and the remainder occupied by the
reclining image. The breadth of the house should be divided into seven parts, three and
a half of which should be occupied by the couch of the reclining image.
124. “The breadth of the recumbent image must be one Brahma pada, and half of a prêta
pada. . . . The couch must be within the Brahma sotra precincts of the house.*
125. “When the reclining image is two angal within the limits of the Brahma sUtra it
will lead to all increase of prosperity ; if it is made to extend beyond the Brahma sUtra
it will destroy wealth and life.
126. “The maddhya satra must be drawn from behind the ear, the side of the pendent
of the ear, the navel and the centre of the private part, and the knees and between the
feet.-f'
127. “The parsva sOtra [must be drawn] from the [upper] side of the crown, by the side
of the neck, below the elbow and the wrist, and over the middle finger and the ankle.
128. “The mukha satra must be drawn from the middle of the crown, the middle of the
forehead, the middle of the nose, the side of the breast and the side of the lower hip.
129. “The vattisa satra [abdominal line] . . . [not clear].
131. “The space between the two nipples of the breasts is ii matra [ii angal, cf. with
the 13I avgal 0Î v. 54, where the body is upright and not contracted]. . . .
133. “... The netra satra [eye line] must be drawn from the side of the arm on which the
head rests.
134. “The line must be drawn from the thumb by the side of the cheek, the neck and the
pendent of the ear. The [under] armpit must be in a line with [i.e., immediately beneath]
the beginning of the shoulder of the other arm.
136. “The height of the pillow is the same as that of the face. The full rounded face
when complete with all its features is beautiful.
137. “The measurements of the standing, seated and reclining images of Buddha should
be as above, moreover, the images should be illustrative of the perfections of Buddha.
138. “If the image is perfect it will lead to the increase of merit and prosperity, otherwise
it will lead to the destruction of all wealth and length of days.
139. “The image of the Asura Rahu J should be drawn in accordance with the position he
occupied at the estimable feet [of the recumbent Buddha], covered with every ornament,
* This refers to a division of the site of a house or temple into four areas by means of lines called
Brahma satra, Deva satra, etc., dividing the •whole into 64 squares. The four central squares
com pose the Brahma pada ; the 12 surrounding squares the Deva pada; the 20 next surrounding
squares the Manushya pada; the •i% outer squares the Prêta pada. Diagonals are dra'wn from
corner to corner. A house should not be built upon the Brahma or Prêta areas. IVe are here told
that the image in a temple should be •within the Brahma area. Similar particulars are given in the
Bfihad Satiihita, II., 6, •vv. 55-58. The terms Brahma pada, etc., are also used in this verse
as units of measurement ; padaya=a foot ; also a quarter, part, etc.
•f- The line—not here a plumb line, of course—is asymmetrical as regards the head, because the head
is raised on a pillovo out of the straight line of the body, and so •with the other lines.
^ The figure of Rahu is not generally found in association •with reclining images in Ceylon.
159

Sariputra holding flowers and garlands in his hands, bending in three places, and in every respect
perfect.
“The end of the measurement of images as heard by Sariputra.”
Part II. of Sariputra ends here.
SARIPUTRA, Part I.
The first part of Sariputra treats of images in general, not as above, exclusively of images
of Buddha. Here the mukha or ‘face’ consists of 12 angal only, instead of 13I, and the
bhaga of 4 angal instead of 4|. The other units are unchanged.
Verses i— 30 give very detailed measurements of the head and features, body and limbs,
hands and feet. The dimensions are slightly less than those above detailed: thus the
breadth of the back between the armpits is two faces (of twelve angal each only), the
middle finger six angal long instead of six angal and four barleycorns, and so on. Verse 30
concludes; “all the rest not described may be suitably supplied.” Verses 30—43 treat
of the plumb lines and measurements to be made thereby. Reference is made to the part
‘slightly slanting,’ this seems to refer to a slight bend in the waist, which, like the ‘sway'
in thirteenth-century Gothic work, gives grace and delicacy. I do not think that reference
is here intended to the markedly curved figures known as trivanka* (triple-curved).
31. “Of images of which a part is erect, and a part slightly slanting, we give dimensions
of the part slightly slanting, between the Brahma satra [=medial plumb line, above] and
the lalata sutra not previously mentioned.
32. “The dimensions of the images of gods and men are nine tala [=nine mukha, or faces]
less by two angal from the crown of the head. From the termination of the hair down
to the foot the Brahma satra should be hung.
33. “The space between the two toes is one tala. The image should be erect and firmly
fixed. The part slanting should be measured by a curved line.
34. “In the part slightly slanting, from the Brahma satra to the lalata satra is two kala
and one angala [five angal\.
2,(>. “. . . From the Brahma sUtra to the face is three kala and half an angala [6| angal;
can this be a mistake ?].
37. “From the \Brahma\ satra to the chin is one angala; thus the measurement regarding
the face.
43. “From the first toe of the foot over the base of the throat and the forehead, also
from the eyebrow eye end of the nostrils and base of the throat and also over the breast
and side and the centre and beginning of the thigh, three lines must be drawn. . . .
[c©k Next follow measurements given in Sinhalese in the original copy, without any
mention of its being, like the foregoing, a gloss (sannaya) and without any iMa as its basis.
A part of this is quoted].
“The length of an image is 124 angal, when it is divided by four, 31 angal will be the
resultant. . . . When a line is drawn horizontally through the navel, the portion of the
elbow below it will be two angal, and the loins below, four angal; below that is the hip,
and below that the private part.” [The prose next refers to many other lines, such as
xlae. purua znd. prishfa ■, hikka [=Brahma ?); and lines drawn horizontally i| inches above
the navel, across the navel, the centre of the private part (six inches below the last), and
across the calf of the leg (eight inches below the last). It would appear that these notes
are with regard to a seated image of Buddha. Much that appears very vague in the prose
* Not'three sided' as suggested by the translation in the Mahuvarnsa, footnote on p. 256, ed. 1889.
The images in low relief within fhe porch at Lahkatilaka have been pointed out to me as ‘ trivaHka.’
160

would no doubt be quite clear to the expert imager, I have quoted only so much as Sdriputnfif
appears to be important or quite clear.]
Comparison with other canons.
Of the great series of works composing collectively the Silpa &astra, or Science of the Arts,
very little is at present known. The measurements given in the second part of Sariputra
are those usually met with in the parts of these works which deal with images. To
illustrate this point, and to present more clearly the chief peculiarities of the canon, the
following table of some of the principal measurements is prepared, the numbers being
given in ‘inches’ {angal)\
Sariputra Sariputra
0 1 . « Brihad
[figures of [other Sukracarya.* r, , ,
■' Sartihita.T
Buddha.] figures.]
Whole figure to top of forehead 9 faces 9 faces 9 faces ■ 9 faces.
,Face 134 12 12 12
Crown of head 34 3 3
? 3 ?
Three parts of face 4I each 4 each 4 each 4 each
Neck 3 4 4 4
l
Neck to breast 134 12 12 12
Breast to navel i 3 f 12 12
Navel to penis i 3 i 12 12
Thigh 27 24
24 24
Knee 4 4 4
44
Shank 27 24 24 24
Foot, height 4 4 4
„ length... 12 14 12
Hand 12 12 12
Palm 7 7 7
Middle finger h 6 5 5
It is évident that the universal Indian standard is one of nine ‘faces,’ which in the
terminology of European canons of proportion would be just over seven ‘heads.’ The
figure of Buddha is made only relatively ‘heroic’ by increasing the unit, without altering
the proportions to any appreciable extent. But there appears to have been some variation in
the standards ; the Rûpâvaliya (pp. 112,113, above), for instance, gives the height of a man
or a woman at eight, and an Asura at nine, Devas and Buddhas at ten ‘faces’; but verse
129 gives proportions agreeing with those prescribed in Sariputra for figures of the Buddha.
Slightly conflicting statements are also made by craftsmen ; as ten for Buddha, nine for
gods, eight for men, and seven for women. One craftsman reversed the last, explaining
this on the ground that tall women were considered beautiful.
Age of the canon, and the Silpa éastra generally.
Owing to the systematic neglect of the Silpa Sastra by English and Indian Sanskritists,
it is difficult to give any adequate account of the technical literature of Art and Craft in
India. This literature has evidently remained for centuries in the hands of craftsmen,
* Sukranltisâra, or Elements of Polity, by Sukracarya, ed. Calcutta, 1890.
•f- Brihat Samhita of Varaha Mthira, English 'Trans, by N. Chidambaram Iyer, Madura, 1884,
Pt. IL, Ch. XL
m I 161

Sariptttra whose knowledge of Sanskrit as a language was usually slight, though they might know
the text by heart. They relied on verbal glosses in the various vernaculars, Tamil and
Age of the Telugu in Southern India, and Sinhalese in Ceylon. It is quite clear that the Silpa Sastras
Stlpa are the remains of a very carefully systematised and complete literature, and it is certain
&astras that it must have taken many centuries for them to have become so imperfect and corrupt
as they now are.*
The golden age of Indian art and literature, when India was most herself, I conceive to
have been the period dating from the time of the Upanishads and of Buddha, to the close
of the fifth and sixth centuries a.d. The civilisation of this time found its ultimate literary
expression in the Ramayaija (about 300 a.d.) and the Mahabharata (about 400 a.d.) and
is in popular tradition centred round the court of Vikramaditya (about 375 a.d).
I have above (p. 63) referred to the now isolated occurrence of special crafts widely
scattered in different parts of India, and suggested that this indicates a once more universal
distribution. The study of Indian Art and Craft, in its profound unity in variety, suggest
that its present remains are but the wreck of its former grandeur. If so, this must have been
the case long ago, before the Hindu culture of the North was overrun by the Muhammadans.
It may well have been in the brilliant era of the Gupta rulers, culminating in the rule of
Vikramaditya. The great iron pillar at Delhi, erected in his reign, witnesses still to a
knowledge of metallurgy enabling the craftsmen of that day to forge a bar of iron larger
than any that could have been forged in Europe before the end of the nineteenth century.
It is probable that the Silpa ^astras were written down towards the close of this period.
They had previously been handed down orally by the hereditary craftsmen, amongst whom
their secret was jealously guarded. The brevity of the memory verses and their technical
language further preserved their meaning from common comprehension. The craftsmen
are reluctant to allow their technical books to be made public.
A certain parallel may be drawn between the writing down of the materials of the Silpa
Sastras, and those composing the epics of the Ramayaija, the Mahabharata and the
Mahavaipsa. There seems to have been a tendency at this time to put into permanent
form, traditions and accumulated learning previously transmitted orally in memory verses.-j'
There is a close correspondence between the literary and the artistic phenomena. Compare,
for example, a memory verse from the Rapavaliya (e.g. vv. 3 and 4, p. 112, above) with
this verse from the Dlpavaijisa, in which the history of the satsatiya is summarised: “The
throne, the Animisa (sanctuary), the cloisters, the Gem-court, the Ajapala (tree), and the
Mucalinda (tree) together with the Khirapala grove as the seventh.” In both cases wje^
have mnemonic verses of great brevity, evidently adapted to oral transmission; the artist
in each case had to fill in the meagre details, and make the story or the image live.
I suggest a parallel between the literary impulse which led to the writing down of these
mnemonic verses, and their expansion into epic history, and the impulse which led to the
writing down of the orally transmitted verses of the Silpa Sastra, and suggest also the
probability of these two processes having taken place about the same time.
* ^'Mutilated as they invariably are in many important parts, almost every line of them is not only
disfigured by gross errors, perpetuated by a succession of ignorant transcribers, but the technical
terms and memorial verses with which the whole abounds, are so little understood either by the artists
or the pundits of the present day, that it requires no ordinary exertion to comprehend and explain the
exact import of even a single section^'— 'R.am Raz, ‘ Essay on the Architecture of the Hindus^
London, 1834,/. 3.
•fiSfi Geiger, ‘Dlpava^sa and Mahsvaiflsa,' Colombo, \qo^,for a study of the evolution of the
'■ epic of Duttha Gamanii forming the main part of the M. as composed in the fifth century..^
162

1
select, then, the fifth century as a probable date for the writing down of the Silpa Sastras, Sariputra
but in doing so I do not attach, of course, importance to the exact figures, and do not forget
that not all the works in question are necessarily contemporaneous.
It is clear that the artistic canons and memory verses cannot have been formulated at a
very early period, for they imply the development of Hinduism from and through
Buddhism, such as could hardly have taken place before the close of the second century a.d.
They appear to be in the main independent of Buddhism ; we cannot suppose that any
vital tradition, or one concerned mainly with Hindu representations could have been
formulated in connection with the weak and effeminate sculpture of the Gandhâra school,
perhaps the least truly Indian and artistically least important of all sculpture in India.
There is some indication that the Silpa éâstras date from a time subsequent to the decline
of Buddhism as the complete expression of national religion. Thus in the Rûpâvaliya,
Buddha appears only as one of the ten avatars of Vishpu ; and as Ram Râz suggests,* there
is evidence in other works to show that the worship of the Jainas and Buddhists, though
still tolerated and provided for in these works, occupied a position of very minor importance
in them. But a purely Buddhist canon like the Sariputra would not have been preserved
in India at all after the complete extinction of Buddhism as a separate cult ; and it is not
likely to have been composed in Ceylon ; so that by this line of reasoning also we are thrown
back to the fifth century. Another piece of evidence is afforded by the Sukranltisara,'h
or ‘Elements of Polity,’ by Sukracarya, which was translated into Tibetan in the seventh
century a.d., and must therefore have been well known in India for a considerable time
previous to this. This work contains important chapters on the measurements of images,
summarised in part in the table given above, and also a clear presentation of the artistic
ideal of the imager himself.
The truth is that we have to consider in all probability two stages in the history of the
works in question, the first that of their formulation at the close of the fifth century in
Northern India, the second that of their subsequent use and final decay in the North,
finally completed as the result of Muhammadan conquest and influence. During this
second period, the traditions flourished in the South, where most of the remaining works
are Still to be found ; new recensions of them were made, with additions and interpolations
relating to representations of local deities and saints. Artistic expression in the South
culminated in the sculpture and architecture of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
after which there followed a gradual decline, rapidly accelerated in the nineteenth century,
uqtil now there are but few craftsmen who understand their own books, and but few copies
of these books procurable, and those imperfect and exceedingly corrupt.
Essay on the Architecture of the Hindus’ London, 1834. Lhis valuable book contains the
fullest account in English of the Silpa Èastras [so far as they relate to architecture) and some
discussion of their age.
■f In this case, and in the Bfihad Satphita of Varaha Mitra, the artistic canon does not stand by itself
as the body ofthe work, but forms a single chapter or afew chapters in a work of general information,
an encyclopedia.
*
m 2 163

CHAPTER IX. PAINTING.
OWING in a large measure to the activity of Kirti èri Raja Sirfiha, who was such
an eager friend of religion and of art, we find preserved a sufficient amount
of eighteenth century painting, to enable us to form an accurate idea of its scope
and capacity and methods, in which we are aided by a study of the good work which
can still be done by the hereditary painters when the opportunity is given them. The
few really good painters, now living, are equal to any but the very best eighteenth century
men, such as Silvatenna, who painted jatakas at Ridi Vihara and at Degaldoruva. The
eighteenth century work may be best studied in old and unrestored vihàras, such as
Degaldoruva, Ridi Vihara, Danagirigala, Dodantale, and in the low country at Kelaijiya.
Examples are also afforded by old painted furniture, like the book-box at Ridi Vihara,
and in the rare paper mss. of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries ; but I do not
know of any old paintings on cloth surviving.
The technique and character of Kandyan painting will first be described in detail.
The pigments were prepared as follows :
White {sudu pdta).—This is prepared from hydrous magnesite {makul, or kova makul)
obtained from a cave known as the makul gal-kna at Vetekgama near Maturata. It is
often mixed with other pigments to make pink, grey, etc.
Red {ratapafa).—^This is sadilingam or cinnabar, which is not known to occur in Ceylon
and must always have been imported. In all cases it forms the ground colour.
Yellow {p.aha pita).—This is gamboge from the gokatu tree (Garcinta morella)-, but the
material preferred for painting on wood or earthenware is orpiment (hiriyal, or mada
hiriyal) and this is now often used even when gokatu would be preferable.
Black (kalu pafd).—This is lamp-black,-to make which, jak-milk (ior-iiW, i.e. juice from
the fruit of Artocarpus integrifolid), kekuna oil (oil of Canarium zeylanicum), and rosin {hdl-
dummala, from the hal-trcs. Vateria acuminata) are ground up together and mixed with
shreds of cotton cloth, then set over a small fire in a clean earthen pot with a second pot
inverted above it. The soot is deposited in the upper pot and thence collected. Its oily
nature makes it difficult to mix with water.
Blue {nlla pafa).—This colour is very rarely seen; it was obtained from the leaves of
the indigo plant, nil-gas, but only in small quantities ; possibly some was also had from
the Dutch. In the great majority of old paintings blue and green are absent altogether.
Green [fiacca* fiatò).— Made by mixing blue with yellow.
Gold [ratram paid).—Gold is used in an old pattern-book of the eighteenth century which
I have, and in the baifadaham book (breviary) from which pages are reproduced on PI. XX ;
but I have seen no other examples. The gold prepared for use is said to have come
from Siam, which is quite possible. The use of gold leaf, however, applied to gild stone
or other statues is a common and ancient practice.
Shades of colour.— Red, black, and blue are mixed with white to form pink (imbuì sivi),
grey (sudu kalu or nil sivi) and pale blue (nil sivi). The grey is generally used to represent
blue or green or brown in nature and in representations of Vishnu, the ‘Blue God.’ A
little yellow added to the grey gives it the usual greenish tinge. The use of shades of
colour is very limited, and never such as to produce relief or interfere with the flatness
of the decoration.
A characteristic feature is the outlining of all forms with a clear black line : this outlining,
* It may be noted that the word pacca in ’■ pacca heffaya' (a chief ' s jacket, as in Fig. i) has little
or no colour significance, indicating rather the kind of jacket than the colour of it.
164

and the occasional use of small quantities of green or white in the detail of ornament, Painting
gives just the necessary softening required to harmonize the strong reds and yellows, and
reduce their extreme brilliancy. The whole range of colours may seem very limited, technique
but it will be found that a varied use can be made of them, and the very limitation was a
safeguard and a stimulus to the inventiveness of the painter. Regarding the exact meaning
of the names for colours, it may be noted that kalu means ‘black,’ but also ‘dark blue’
when applied to cloth ; nila means either blue or green, properly the former, it is applied
in poetry to the colour of parrot wings and compared with that of young rice. The
use of few colours in Sinhalese art is a point of importance, as also the fact that the
same word is sometimes used in different senses, as kalu, black or indigo; nila, blue or
green. The appreciation of shades of colour is even in Europe a comparatively modern
matter, and has gone to great extremes. The old appreciation of pure bright colour is
almost lost, a fact not generally realised hy persons who regard pure colour as barbaric.
One of the most important things needful to secure good colours, is long and careful
grinding. This work, often done by the pupils, may occupy as much as a month before
a large undertaking, such as the decoration of a vihara, is begun. The pounded colour
is ground with water in a stone mortar again and again until it is fine and smooth enough.
According to the best method, the pigments are mixed with dkml látu (gum of the elephant
apple tree, Feronia elephantum) and water, and thus used. The work is thus in no sense
fresco, but should be called tempera painting. Gum arabic is now successfully used when
the latu cannot be had. The use of dorar}a oil (oil of the doraija tree, Dipteroearpus
glandulosus) as a medium is said to be entirely a modern innovation; the effect is coarser
and altogether inferior. But some say that doratia oil was used for outside work, and
even in interiors when the lafu could not be'had. Certainly if oil was not used as the
medium for outdoor work, such as that above ifie vihara at Ridi Vihara, it is difficult
to understand how it can have lasted. The paintings at Ridi Vihara were executed in
the reign of Kirti árl Raja Sirpha. Siddhattha, the incumbent who had charge of the
works, after completing the viharas and their decoration, “caused a delightful picture to
be made of the Sage, seated amidst his five hundred disciples with Sariputra at their head,
above the image house, in the convenient hollow of the rock” (Mahavarpsa, Ch. G.).
There are external paintings also at Maniyangama and Lenagala. Mr. Bell (Regalía
Report, p. 30) says of the latter, that above the lean-to tiled verandah there “is still visible
a coloured representation of a perahfra, much faded, in which riders on elephants and
horses, with flag-bearers, escort a five-tiered karanduva on a car.” These paintings, at any
rate those at Maniyañgama, date from the time of Kirti árl Raja Sirpha. Ordinary interior
painting is sooner or later destroyed by even partial exposure to damp.
The brushes used for flat colouring of small spaces are made of cats’ or squirrels’ hair, and
are small and delicate. Larger brushes are made from the frayed $rial roots of vftakeyiya,
a species of Pandanus. Long stiff brushes for drawing fine lines are made from the awns
of the tell taifa grass (Aristida adscensionis). The tell taifa grass and the brush (tell kura)
are so-called from the resemblance to the snout of the teti fish. The tell taifa brushes
are very easily and rapidly made; the grass spike is wetted, and the awns stripped off
between the finger and thumb nail, shaken down to a level and tied on a pointed stick;
the longest awns form the fine point of the brush. Graphite pencils were unknown, but
actual lead pencils were used—but very sparingly, however, as the painter relied almost
entirely, perhaps altogether, on his brush.
The materials on which eighteenth century paintings were executed, were plaster (on
walls), wood (ceilings, furniture, etc.), cloth and paper and earthenware, as at the present
day. Accounts of paintings on cloth are quoted on pp. 72,73, above, from the Mahavarpsa.
m3 165

'Painting They refer, no doubt, to ordinary pigment painting, as dye-painting was not, at any rate
in the eighteenth century, a Sinhalese craft. I have seen no drawings on paper of Sinhalese
paper, which was very coarse and rough.* Such old drawings or paper ms. as have been
preserved are found to be on Dutch paper, or at a later time on English paper. No doubt
paper of Indian or Sinhalese manufacture was used at an earlier period.
Methods of Vihara walls were made sometimes of stone or brick, more often of mud mixed with sand,
wall laid on a wooden framework as in ordinary domestic work; the wooden framework was
painting filled with a mixture of puddled earth and sand, covered with a layer of finely ground clay
and sand, mixed with rice water. The surface was then covered with a layer of kirimetiya
(‘ milk clay,’ viz. kaolin) made very smooth, and then a coat of Maturata makul (magnesite).
The surface was thus made pure white. The sapu or bamboo wooden framework of
such walls lasts well; but some are riddled with white ants. In the case of the roof of
a rock temple, the plaster of clay, sand and rice water was applied direct with a coconut-
fibre brush, and then the kirimetiya and makul were laid over. The proportion of clay to
sand is one part to two. When there have been many successive redecorations the thick­
ness of plaster becomes considerable, and is sometimes heavy enough to fall away by its
own weight. According to the statement of good modern craftsmen, lime plaster was
not used as a basis for painting upon, but only for external surfaces not intended to be
painted. But a verse from the Gaija Devi Hella, quoted on p. 89, indicates that lime plaster
was sometimes painted on, as one would naturally have expected.
Painting is commenced upon the makul-covtvt& surface. The work is first sketched in
{lakuifu kald) with a fine brush and black paint, then the background filled in with pink,
leaving the figures white. The latter are then filled in with yellow, carefully outlined in
red, and the background filled up in pink exactly to the outline. Part of this work is done
by pupils. The pink is covered with a coat of red; and two or three alternate coats of
pink and red may be necessary to ensure a fine red at last. The final background is
invariably red, as in PI. I. Detail of features, etc., is added in red on the figures, which
are finally cleanly outlined with a firm black line, which at once defines, harmonizes and
unites the whole composition. All the line work is done with the fine teli tai}a brush.
The use of yellow for the face and figure is explained by the frequent comparison of the
colour of beautiful persons to that of gold. It is a fact that the most beautiful Indian
skin colour is golden brown, going with a very satiny texture, and this is recognized in
the Indian ideal of beauty, which demands a ‘fair’ skin. A very dark skin is despised,
and is actually more usual amongst persons of low caste, than those of high. The
elephant-keeper, in PL I., is accordingly represented as dark, in contrast to the goviydvatpsa
people attendant on the king. Trees, leaves, and water are usually represented in grey;
buildings are yellow, tiles red, and rocks black. The use of blue or green is most
exceptional.
Pattern work is done in a corresponding manner. It is usual to determine first the position
of the most important elements, such as flowers or animals, then to connect them together,
and last to add the leaves and detail on the stems. The black outline, and occasional use
of a little green, black, or white detail, temper any hardness of contrast between the red
and yellow. When a particular flower or animal is to be repeated several times, a paper
pattern {accuvd) is made, and the outline traced from it wherever required. Pouncing
seems to be unknown, although a familiar practice in India and Siam. When a limited
space has to be filled with a repeating pattern, it is carefully subdivided with compasses.
* I'he method of manufacture was described by Ondaatje, ‘ Observations on the Vegetable Products
of Ceylon^ Colombo, 1854.
166

so as to allow the pattern to begin and end well. All important principles of the construe- Painting
tion of design were fully understood, as may be judged from an examination of Figs. 29
and 52.
The methods of painting on wood are similar, except that hiriyal is preferred to gokafu,
and the work is usually protected by a layer of varnish {valicciya). The whole is first
covered with an even coat of pink, the design sketched on this, and the background filled
in with red, and detail as before. Painting on earthenware is done in the same way.
The varnish is made as follows: powdered dummala (which must be white and clean. Varnish
not dark) is mixed with dorarfa (oil) and boiled for half an hour or more and then allowed
to cool, when it is ready for use. The varnish so prepared smells strongly of turpentine
and dries quickly.* The yellow gokatu (gamboge) paint is said to be itself a valicciya
and not to require any other varnish. A superior method of varnishing small wooden
articles is to cover the painting with a thin coating of carefully cleaned and strained lac
(keppettiya laka^a), applied with! heat. Old book covers will always be found to have
been thus treated.
One great merit of the old Sinhalese painter is the thoroughness of his knowledge of the
preparation and properties of the pigments and tools at his disposal; their natural limitations
moreover tended to restraint and gravity. The readiness with which excellent implements
are made from the commonest and simplest materials is very striking. The old methods
are still well understood and sometimes followed by the best workmen ; but, unfortunately,
those responsible for modern vihara decoration rarely take the trouble to secure their
services; and the majority of inferior painters run riot with Aspinall’s enamel and Rickett’s
blue, with which they depict designs more like those to be looked for on second-rate
Christmas cards than suitable for temple walls.
Vihara walls are usually covered with jataka subjects, in long panels of continuous narration, yataka
set close together, one above the other (Pis. I. and VIIIa), the narrow space between paintings
sufficing for a short explanatory note; or a label may be inset in the picture itself; both
methods are illustrated in PI. XVIII. The ‘continuous narration’ should be specially
noted. In this primitive method, the same figures are repeated frequently in continuous
pictures, in fresh situations revealing the progress of the story; so that the result is a
panorama, where, however, the observer and not the picture itself must move. Thus
in PI. I. the one elephant appears twice, first ridden by King Vessantara, afterwards as
being given by him to certain Brahmans who in the original are shown on the right;
below again, Madri Devi and the two children are twice depicted, once passing along the
highway, and then arriving at the hermitage.
It is worth while to describe in slightly greater detail the wall paintings of a particular
vihara. I have already quoted from the Degaldoruva sannasa some account of the
decoration of the vihara there; it is stated that twenty-four images of Buddha were painted
on the walls and ceilings, beside other workmanship. Of these paintings, the jataka
paintings on the outer surface of the wall of the pilima-ge are the most interesting and
im portant. Fourj atakas are illustrated ; these are the Sattubhatta and Vessantara Jatakas on
the left of the main door, Sutasoma Jataka between the doors, and the Sllava Jataka on the
right. The little iron-barred window referred to above, p. 134, separates the Sattubhatta
and Vessantara Jatakas on the left. Mr. Cave in his ‘Book of Ceylon’, Fig. 489, gives a
good picture of Degaldoruva, showing the doors and the painted wall; in the same picture
may be observed the twelve monolithic pillars with their cushion capitals, the painted
* 1 have found an alcoholic solution of shellac a convenient substitute for the methods described, and
preferable in effect to the intense brilliancy of newly applied dummala varnish,
m 4 167

Pointing ceiling, and the beautiful ‘ moonstone’ or doorstep. Four painters worked at Degaldoruva,
the work being completed in 1771, or at any rate before 1786, when the sannasa was granted.
yataka Their names were Nilagama Pafabenda, who was the chief gihiya, or foreman : Devara-
paintings gampola Silvatenna Unnanse, who was an ‘unordained’ priest of acari caste, and worked
also at Ridi Vihara, being still remembered as the best painter of his day, Kosvatte
Hitaranayide, by whom the Sutasoma Jataka is said to have been done ; and another
man whose name is not remembered. The work was overseen by Moratofa Maha
Nay aka of Malvatte, who was the first incumbent.
The value of these paintings lies not merely in their beauty and charm as decoration,
but in the fact that they are priceless historical documents that could not be reproduced
under modern conditions. The gorgeous trappings of the elephants, the king’s and the
attendants’ dresses and the royal insignia ; the hermitage ; the village scene at the well in
the Vessantara Jataka, are all most faithfully drawn, and these pictures, like the medieval
manuscripts of Europe, are invaluable records of past manners and customs. In the
Sutasoma Jataka, the most interesting pictures are perhaps those in which the king’s sons
meet in an ambalam ; the representations of the king’s kitchen, with the gahoniya hanging
from a hook on a pillar, covering the provisions brought in from some royal manor ; the
king’s expulsion ; and his offerings of human victims as a sacrifice to the tree deva.
4
In the Sllava Jataka, perhaps the most interesting scenes are those showing Senaka Paij it
expounding the dimrma to men and women, and a school scene showing a seated paijdit and
a row of respectful scholars, of whom the first is repeating his lesson to the master. Of
the other paintings at Degaldoruva, the most noteworthy are the Buddha and Maitri
Buddha on the rock ceiling within the pilima-ge.
Another temple which may be briefly described is the Kelaijiya Vihara. The main
building consists of an image room with a large reclining image and an antechamber
(PI. VIIa., below) with four doors, the walls and ceiling elaborately painted. Upon the
walls are depicted many jatakas, such as the Vessantara and Kiodura, a representation
of Mara’s battle, where the figure of Mihikata rising from the earth at the Buddha’s feet
. should be noticed, and also decorative panels of nari-Iata, flowers in pots, and portraits of
royal benefactors and successive incumbents. These paintings are not in the best manner,
but for nineteenth century low-country work are very good. Most of the characteristic
features of Kandyan painting can be recognized, such as ‘continuous narration,’ and
many of the details of pattern work on the walls, and especially the ceiling, are excellent
(PI. XIV., 3, 4, 5, and 7). It is instructive to examine the wall paintings critically and
determine the degenerate features. It will be found, for example, that the trees are more
slovenly in treatment than at Degaldoruva, often mere daubs ; there is also a tendency
to more relief and realism, and variety of colour. But the sprays and branches and birds
are well done, and the treatment of the makara toraifa and branches within the image room
could hardly be improved upon.
Other temples where good eighteenth century Kandyan painting is to be seen, include
Dodantale, Danagirigala, Lankatilaka (PI. VIIa), Ridi Vihàra, Gaijegoda (PI. XV.), and
many others. Almost all the painting at the Dalada Maligava has been renewed in recent
times, and although the designs are for the most part traditional, the colours are gaudy and
varied to an intolerable degree. One of the few remaining good paintings (PI. XVI.)
has been restored and altered very recently.
t©. In Kandyan painting there is an entire absence of perspective and shading. The
primary object is to tell an edifying story in an attractive way. The work is thus rather epic
in character, than artistic in the modern sense. It has a great deal in common with the
mural painting of Egypt ; in its pure gay colour, decorative flat treatment and restfulness,
168

it is most admirable as wall painting. As in Egypt, “ the wall is a wall still and not Fainting
a window; nay a book rather, where, if you will, you may read the stories of the gods
and heroes, and whose characters, whether you read them or not, delight you always with
the beauty of their form and colour.” Beside jstakas we find other subjects on walls,
particularly the sai-satiya, suvisi-vharana, rows of arhat priests, mara-yuddhaya, etc. Large
wall spaces are not usually covered with mere pattern work, which only appears as an
accessory (PI. VIIa). If the religious subjects are not depicted, beautifully designed
pictures of trees may be found, as at Danagirigala (PI. XIV., 8). Portraits of royal or other
patrons are sometimes painted flat on the walls, as at Doflantale, where there is a valuable
costume representation of Kirti érl wearing the famous kurulla bendi malaya now in the
Maligava, and carrying a jewelled cane ; but more often the figure of the patron is modelled
in low relief. All figure subjects, whether images of Buddha in the round, or Gods or
patrons in low relief on the walls are invariably painted, the costume of the Gods or men
covered with fine diaper and other pattern work (PI. XIV., 5 and 6).
Figures are represented in full, three-quarter or side face, never as seen from behind.
This fact is remarked by the medieval poet, Totagomuva (see p. 10), in a verse of the
Sela Lihiiji Sandéáaya: “True friends, alike when adverse fortune comes or when success,
like painted images upon a wall, show not their backs.”
The off eye is foreshortened in three-quarter face presentations, but the near eye is drawn
as if seen in front view, and the same is true of profiles. Lines to indicate the eye socket
are drawn above and below the lines of the eye itself. The four lines just mentioned
are drawn in red, the eyebrow black. The pupil is a black spot. In large paintings
the white of the eye on either side of the pupil is barred by vertical red lines, curved
concentrically with the limit of the pupil.
In small paintings by good artists, and particularly in renderings of jataka subjects, the
figure and features are sufficiently well done to allow even a critical observer to enjoy
the work as a whole, as one decorative construction. But in larger paintings it very
often happens that the distortion of the features and misproportion of the limbs is painful.
Paintings of Buddha are usually carefully and correctly drawn in accordance with the
measurements of the canon, but hardly show any appreciation of the physical beauty of
the figure.
The figures have a good deal of vivacity and dignity, but are rarely drawn with any feeling
for the beauty of the human form; they are sometimes almost grotesque. The canon of
rneasurement (Sáriputra) is not made use of in drawing figures in jataka scenes, but only
in representing Buddha or figures of the gods. The absence of perspective is so much a
part of the style that we can hardly call it a fault. We can imagine an improvement in
the drawing, but the introduction of perspective and relief and division of the picture into
several planes would so alter the work—not necessarily for the better—that it could no
longer be called Kandyan painting.
The most essential character of Kandyan painting, as of Kandyan design in general, is Idealism
it s idealism. This idealism belongs to all Indian art; but in Kandyan art it appears in
almost an extreme form. Some of the maguí lakum, for example, are little more than
hieroglyphics. But the idealism is very marked also in design and picture. Observe,
for example, the trees on PI. I. and XIV., 8; these are not portraits of particular trees,
but abstractions, representing the artist’s generalised conception of all such trees. When
I say ‘the artist,’ I do not refef to any individual, but imply the whole body of artists
who together worked out the language long ago; and I say language because traditions
and conventions are to the artist what words and metre are to the poet, and these no one
man made. The idealism of Kandyan art is part of its inheritance from India; but as
169

Painting we have already observed, Kandyan art does not represent Indian art at its greatest or even
at a very great period, but rather Indian art at the level of a great and beautiful scheme
Idealism of peasant decoration. Kandyan art as we see it represents a tradition handed down from
the earliest stratum of Indian art, modified and enriched by subsequent influences but in
many ways primitive; just as the original manner of building in wood, and of making
images in impermanent materials, survives in spite of the work in stone of Anuradhapura
and Polonnaruva. Could the sculptors of Barahat have come to life in eighteenth century
Kandy, they would have found little that would have seemed strange or unfamiliar in the
style or subject of the paintings on its vihara walls. The sculptured trees at Barahat differ
only from those painted at Danagirigala in their more intense feeling for beauty and the
deeper emotion which inspires them. This we should expect in work so much nearer the
beginning of a great tradition.
We shall understand the idealism of Indian and Sinhalese art as well from a study of the
Barahat or Kandyan trees, as in any other way. There are two ways of seeing a tree;
at first glance or in a photograph, it strikes us as an irregular growth of branches and
leaves, producing a confused effect of light and shade. We soon learn to distinguish more
than this, and to tell one kind of tree from another. But as we consider more deeply
a number of trees of different kinds, we realise that each has, as it were, a law of its being:
its leaves have a certain form, with a certain range of variation, its branches a certain
manner of growth, its flowers a particular symmetry. Each actual tree seems to be an
incarnation or embodiment of some more perfect and rhythmical idea of the tree. This
idea it is the aim of art to reveal.
A good example of the idealistic treatment is afforded by the lotus. The lotus to Indian
art and for the Indian mystic, is all that the rose was to Mediasval Europe. As English
medieval art is one long ‘Romaunt of the Rose,’ so Indian art is a romance of the
many-petalled flower that is the throne of all divinities, and whose ideal form continually
re-incarnates in every vessel and in every design. The simple lotus form represents the
ideal, form of all lotuses, as does the Tudor rose for all roses, it carries the emotion of
all lotuses compressed into one abstraction. This is the secret of the constancy of art
forms, that the ideal form they represent is eternal and immutable, a thought in the heart
of lávara; that is why the trees at Barahat and the trees in a Kandyan vihara are expressed
by the same formula. The impulse to the expression of emotion in art, is born of the
sense of the unity of all life, the recognition of the many in the one. The representation
of ideal forms, the reduction of various complex appearances to their simplest terms is
an expression of the desire to see the one in the many.* There is here a great affinity
between art and science; what natural law resuming the sequence of phenomena is for
phenomena, ideal art is for the expression of emotion. Scientific drawing is concerned
with the appearance of things as they seem to be in themselves; art with things as they
really are within ourselves: in other words science is objective, art subjective. It is most
important that their aims should not, as is now usually the case, be confused.
* This impulse in its extremest art form produces such hieroglyphs as many of the maguí lakunu, as
shown in Fig. 69. In religion it results in a corresponding asceticism. We feel that the hieroglyphs
or symbols are scarcely any longer to be classed as art., so slight is their intrinsic manifestation, arid so
entirely does the emotional value depend on association. We get a glimpse here again of the nature of the
antipathy between religion and art. Theformer must in the end transcend the latter. Of the golden
crowns which must be offered at the throne of truth, before the truth itself is known, art like all else
related to time and space, is one. Butfor most of us, the time is not yet arrived, when we are prepared
not merely to refine, but to transcend this life.
170

The memory element is in Indian art almost as characteristic as its consistent idealism. Painting
As already remarked, the Kandyan artist carried in his head the elements of his art, and
composed them as occasion required. His fault lay in becoming the slave rather than Idealism
the master of the tradition thus transmitted ; there have been many times in the history of
Indian art when it has been otherwise, but eighteenth century Kandyan was not one of
these high-water marks.
The essential points in the traditional representations were summarised in mnemonic
verses, for example, “This is the appearance of Vishiju, two hands, a chank, a discus, a
head-dress, a crown, ear-flowers, a golden garment, his colour blue, his vehicle xhtgaruia"
(Rupavaliya, v. 57). Such mnemonic verses correspond to the memory verses of the
early literature, and may once have been transmitted orally in the same way. Thus the
Dlpavaipsa, I., 29, describes the satsatiya thus: “The throne, the sanctuary, the cloisters,
the gem palace, the ajapala (tree), the (naga) mucalinda, together with the Khirapala
(grove) as the seventh.” But all this is subservient to the idealism and the living tradition.
From the verse alone, a quite inadequate figure of Vishiju would be drawn, just as from
the verse alone, a very poor idea of the satsatiya would be gathered. Each had to be filled
in by the artist, whether painter or reciter, as best he knew.
In some verses of the canon the idealism is more evident. The Buddha, for example,
is one with “an unfettered, quiescent, and absolutely pure mind” (Sariputra); of the horse
it is said that “his neigh has the sound of the storm, ... he is swift as the wind, stately
as the lion and has the gait of a dancer” (Rupavaliya). The expression of these abstract
ideas is of more value than the exact imitation of natural forms.
We are not told, and do not want to be told, what the animal itself was like, but what it
meant to the men who painted it, what it was like for them, and so what they were like.
As I have said above (p. 87), the artist’s lion need be like no lion on earth or in any
zoological garden ; the artist is not preparing the plates of a work on natural history; but
makes his lion at once a portrait of the universe and an expression of the whole theory
of his national existence. At the same time it must be recognized that the eighteenth
century craftsman in Ceylon was merely making use of such expressions already formulated,
and was not himself a creator. The same applies to the imager, who used the formula,
and was influenced, no doubt, by the suggestions of such verses as those just quoted, but
can hardly at this time have been accustomed to practise meditation and mental visualising
as truly great Indian artists have always done.
It must not be supposed, however, that tradition, by its very nature, fetters the expression
and production o( great art; on the contrary it enables the great artists to speak in a
language uhderstanded of the people, and without that necessity for explanation which
reduces the value of more individualistic art; and the existence of an art language is no
more a fetter to the true artist, than the existence of a word language is to the true poet.
And what did tradition mean to the lesser craftsmen, for whom art was but a craft? It
gave them a conception so defined as to avoid all danger of the sacred subjects being treated
ab surdly or irreverently. How well this aim was attained is shown by the vulgarity and
stupidity that do appear in Indian art, where the tradition is rudely and contemptuously
broken with. But while the tradition lasted, it saved the man of small capacity from
his own folly, and made it possible for him to work acceptably within its limits.
If, for example, the spiritual conflict of Buddha with the powers of evil had been depicted
by some great artist, in the shape of a strong man whose face was torn by conflicting
emotions, a wonderful picture might have resulted; but it would not have been peaceful,
impersonal, ideal. Such a rendering of ‘expression’ in the face would be quite foreign
to the aesthetic and philosophic conceptions of Indian art, which is not at all concerned
171

Painting with the interpretation of individuality. It would not be possible for many such personal
individual pictures to be made; and one essential of religious art, is that there shall be
Idealism a possibility of the work being done fairly well by average craftsmen. This does not at
all rule out the genius, who has a greater, not a less, opportunity than has such a man
nowadays who can only do good work, in conscious opposition to the spirit of the age.
Furthermore, only great individual artists could depict the mental struggle adequately as
such; but the concrete symbolism made it possible for average workmen at all times to
produce a sufficient result; without preventing the great man from throwing all his genius
into the expression of peace in the seated figure.
The serene seated figure, surrounded by vainly attacking devils, is a most assuring and
peaceful promise of final victory over the passions. The Buddha is not represented in his
painful struggles, but with the calmness of perfect victory and peace. So, too, in earlier
Christianity, representations of Christ in glory, or transfigured, were much oftener made,
than of Christ upon the cross.
In times of great artistic expression, we have both the work of men of genius, and that
of ordinary workmen. Their work is united by the bond of a common tradition, or means
of expression, just as the work of contemporaneous poets is united by a common language
and association of ideas. But in eighteenth century Kandyan art we have to deal not
with the work of men of individual genius as well as that of ordinary workmen, we have
only the work of the latter. The value of the concrete traditional symbolism in this case
can hardly be overestimated, a point which those who are acquainted with the extraordinary
vulgarity and unsuitability of modern vihara decoration, often executed by low-country
painters who are not hereditary craftsmen, will understand.
References To enable us to judge of the light in which art, and especially painting, was ordinarily
to Sinhalese regarded, an examination of some literary references will be useful. There was at this
literature time no great philosophy of art; it was regarded almost entirely as decorative in aim.
Here is the translation of a verse in the Nllakobo Sandeiaya (eighteenth century); the
writer, addressing the parrot messenger, “ Sit quietly on the fruitladen kaduru tree, and
behold the ambalam built at Polonnaruvavela, adorned with paintings of lions and leopards,
as if by the advent of Viivakarma with his mighty power.”
Again in the description of the building of a palace for the youthful GatfSia, in the Gaifa
Devi H^lla, “After the walls were daubed with clay, and smoothly plastered with lime,
an artist was engaged, who painted pictures of makaras and hamsas, gavaras, leopards
and lions, peacocks and parrots, ringdoves and cocks, pigeons and pretty kovulas.”
Verse 205 of the Gira Sandeiaya (fifteenth century) speaks of “ the monks reaching
the different parts of such a great vihara (Pepiliyana), and opening the painted covers
of the books of sacred doctrine to investigate the meaning of the Abhidhamma text.”
Verse 91 of the Sevul Sandeiaya (late sixteenth century) describes the paintings in a Hindu
Temple near Sitavaka: “Beholding with a heart filled with boundless joy the paintings
representing in detail the war between Rama and Ravaija, the war of the Mahabharata, the
wars of the auspicious Skanda, and the wars waged by Hvara against the Asuras in ancient
times.”
Other quotations could be given, but these show that the mediaeval poets did not fail
to notice and appreciate the paintings of their time.
The whole of the Mahavaqisa is extraordinarily full of the idea of art and craft, especially
architectural. The ideals of civic and architectural magnificence and beauty are continually
dwelt upon, often in poetical and imaginative passages of the highest order.* I quote
9
* Mahavamsa, Chs. LXXXVIll. and XCVII., quoted above,pp- , n,
172

in full the description of the restoration of RidI Vihara by Kirti ári. “And the lord of Painting
the land gave unto the novice Siddhattha the large vihara called Rajata [Ridi Vihara] that
the king DutthagamanI had built, who had verily come (into this world) with the desire Ridi Vihara
to become the chief disciple of Maitri Buddha. And the ruler of Laftka caused that
priest to be ordained, and bestowed offices on him and on all the priests who dwelt in the
Uposatarama, and also showed them favour in many ways. And that they might restore
that vihara which had been long in a state of decay, the lord of Lanka provided them with
divers artificers and many painters, and much refined gold for gilding the statue of Buddha,
and all the labour and instruments that were necessary. And when the eminent monk
Siddhattha had received all these things he removed everything that was old and decayed,
and made the thick high wall of solid stone, to shine, and the floor and the outer wall also.
And he caused a picture of the Supreme Buddha, as he was engaged in the battle with
Mara, to be painted on the roof of the rock, and divers flowers and branches also. He
caused also the great sleeping image to be made with fine brick and mortar and clay, and
many other images of Buddha also, sitting and upright. And on the inner wall he caused
about a thousand beautiful pictures of the Supreme Buddha to be painted with exquisite
art. At the foot of the great sleeping image he caused to be made, in due order, beautiful
images of Ananda, the constant attendant of Buddha and the preserver of the Law, and
of Maitri Bodhisatva, of the excellent Natha Deva and of the king Dutthagamanl. And
he gilded with gold the five large images of Buddha, and completed the other works that
had to be done inside. On the outside wall also, he caused to be painted a beautiful row
of figures of Devas and Brahmas carrying flowers in their hands, as if they had come to
worship. He caused also to be made a large arch, beautiful and pleasant to the sight,
and two figures of lions on the two sides of the door, and figures of demons on the spaces
between them, in the walls. He also had pictures made of the sixteen principal shrines
consisting of Mahiyañgana and the rest, and a likeness of the excellent footprint (of Buddha)
on the Sacca-baddha Pabbata, and many scenes also, painted with exquisite art from many
Jatakas, showing the ten-fold Parami, the three-fold Cariya, the five great self-denying
sacrifices, and other virtues (of the Bodhisatta). And in the haU he caused many pictures
to be painted; lions, elephants, and swans, in rows; likewise flowers and branches also.
“Then in the beautiful cave that is on the top of that selfsame rock he made a fair, large and
excellent image-house pleasant to the sight, and many works in stone that were wrought
to perfection. In it he made a large, beautiful, and life-like sitting image of Buddha,
pleasant to behold, and on both sides thereof two fine upright statues. He also caused
to be made there the images of Maitri Bodhisatva and of Uppalavaijija, and many images
of Buddha, and hundreds also of Arhats. Likewise also there were figures of the twenty-
four Buddhas (before Gautama) and as many Bodhi trees, suvisi-vivaraiia, pictures of the
sixteen principal shrines, of demons and other evil spirits, of the five different venerable
convocations, and divers other paintings of exquisite beauty. In that very place he placed
relics of Buddha, and built thereon a Cetiya, and adorned it with a pinnacle of gold. And
on the top of the image-Louse in that excellent rock basin he caused a delightful picture
to be made of the Sage, seated amidst his five hundred disciples, with Sariputta at their
head. And even in the different courts (of the vihara) he built walls and open halls, and
divers gates also, and rows of steps and other excellent works. He repaired many old
works, also built many new ones; and completed all in a beautiful manner.
“And when the time for holding the feast of the setting of the eyes of the images had come,
and the king had sent his ministers with apparel and other ornaments (to conduct it),
they adorned the place with many continuous rows of arches; and when they had made
an end of putting on all the ornaments that were necessary and had arranged the order
173

Painting of the high ceremonial, they celebrated the great feast, and, under a lucky star and at a
favourable hour, performed the ceremony of setting the eyes of the images.
Ridi Vihara “ From that time forth many inhabitants of the country came together from different parts,
in great number, like unto a sea that overflowed the land; and when they had seen the
works of gold and divers other things that had been wrought there, they were exceedingly
delighted, as if they had seen the Supreme Buddha performing the double miracle. And
with their hearts full of joy they made great offerings, accompanied with shouts, and
paved their way to heaven.
“ And in the festival which was held at that vihara they invited the priesthood, and prepared
seats for them in the upper hall of the vihara, and caused the priests who were preachers
of the Law to sit thereon and recite the Maha-mangala-sutta and other discourses which
were pleasant to be listened to ; and then they made due offerings in honour of the Law.
And all the people who heard and saw these things enjoyed the pleasure of seeing (the
image of) the Supreme Buddha at the same time that they listened to his holy doctrine;
and they rejoiced exceedingly as if they heard the doctrine preached by the living Buddha
himself. Thus, day after day, did they show to the people both the beauty of his (Buddha’s)
form and the dignity of his discourses,
“And, on the courtyard without, an open hall was built on stone pillars with seats prepared
(for priests). And the great body of the priests assembled themselves together there, and
were instructed in the rules of moral conduct, such as the five precepts and others; and
they had everyone the opportunity daily of hearing much of the Law expounded to them.
Moreover, he (the priest Siddhattha) in his great loving-kindness, did often invite preachers
of religion, and make them discourse to the people all through the three watches of the
night.
“And he (the priest or king) caused that vihara named Rajata to be completed, and that
great feast to be held in the two thousand three hundred and first year of the Parinibbina
of the Supreme Buddha” (Mahavarjisa, Ch. C.) Such work was a labour of love to all
concerned.
Painting on The following mention of painting on cloth is connected with Parakrama Bahu II.: “ And
cloth he longed every day to behold a beautiful picture of the Blessed One— a perfect likeness
of the Master as he was in his lifetime. So the chief of men employed many skilled
painters to paint on a beautiful cloth a surpassing likeness of Buddha, as the Blessed One
appeared on earth when he walked on the great bridge of gold and gems” (Mahavaipsa,
Ch. LXXXV.).
Siri- The following account of the building of a Maha Vihara for the Tooth-relic, by Vijaya
va44hana
Bahu III., in the thirteenth century, contains most interesting descriptions of buildings,
images and golden utensils, of which the chronicle speaks in truly poetical language, which
must, of course, lose greatly in translation. The period is earlier than that generally dealt
with in this volume; but the ideal, if not the attainment, of the eighteenth century was
similar, and the chronicler’s words give the keynote of the part played by the arts in
Sinhalese life from first to last. The description includes an account of the magnificent
procession along the decorated road from Dambadeijiya to Sirivaddhana*:
“And afterwards the king built the Maha Vihara in the noble city of Sirivaddhana wherein
he was born— a city that could not be compared for its situation—and endowed it with
great possessions. It consisted of stately houses and open halls, of high walls and gates.
44
* The distance from Dambadeifiya to Siriva hanapura given in the text is altered to half a yojana
and one usabha {about seven miles'), in accordance •with the footnote to F. H, Madder's paper on
‘Dambadeifiya,' J.C.B.R.A.S., Vol. XV., No. 48,1897,^. 23.
174

and was ornamented with ¿i-trees, digabas, groves, and image-houses. The workmanship Painting
thereof was diverse and of exceeding beauty, and it was adorned with great splendour.
And in the vast space that extended from the city of Jambuddoiji to the city of Sirivadejhana, Siri-
44
the length and breadth whereof was about half a yojana and one usabha, (the highway was) va hana
made even like the face of a drum, covered throughout with sand, exceeding fine and soft.
And the divers flags and banners which ornamented the sides thereof were so great in
number that they seemed to hide the rays of the sun ; and rows of plantain trees were placed
along the length thereof, with divers vessels for water, of exceeding beautiful workmanship,
filled with ornamental flowers. And within this vast space the chief of men caused royal
arches to be raised, one at every space of five cubits, at every space of ten cubits a cloth-
arch,* and at every space of hundred cubits a stately house of great size, consisting of three
stories and lofty spires, and containing images of the supreme Buddha,—all finished with
paintings of exceeding great beauty.
“Afterwards he ornamented the vihàra with many painted arches round the circuit of the
vihara wall, of great size and beauty,— arches that looked contemptuously on the beautiful
bow of the Chief of the Gods ; with white parasols that looked like the moon in her
fullest splendour, and beautiful flags of five colours and divers shapes, like beautiful dancers
dancing in the firmament of heaven ; with rows of splendid halls glittering with jewels,
like beautiful rows of mansions that were come down from the world of gods ; with
numerous images of Brahmas dancing in rows with parasols in their hands, that were
moved by instruments ; with moving images of gods of divers forms that went to and fro
with their joined hands raised in adoration ; with moving figures of horses prancing hither
and thither with the beauty of waves, rising and falling one after the other in the great sea ;
with moving likenesses of great elephants, clothed in the trappings of elephants, making
men doubt whether they were not rain-clouds that had descended to the earth ;—^with
these and divers other shows of this kind which delight the world, and are used at feasts,
did he make the vihàra exceeding attractive.
“Then again the king commanded all the priests and novitiates and the lay devotees also,
male and female, who were dwellers in the island of Laùkà, to wait for the procession in
great crowds without the vihàra and around it, at the space of a league from each other,
raising shouts of applause and uttering the praises of the supreme Buddha, and holding
in their hands offerings, flowers, and such like things that were needful at feasts in honour
of Buddha ; and (he likewise commanded) all others, men and women who knew the
vafiae of the three sacred gems, to adorn themselves in their best apparel (and to tarry for
the procession) with things that were fit for offerings. And the king also, moved by great
devotion, decked himself in all the royal ornaments and, in the midst of his fourfold army,
placed the two relics of the Tooth and the Alms-bowl in a carriage of great splendour,
decorated with all the ornament meet for such a vehicle. Then he caused rows of men
to carry before the procession these articles and divers others that were used at feasts;
namely, banners of gold and banners of silver, water-pots of gold and water-pots of silver,
ch owries of gold and chowries of silver, caskets of gold and caskets of silver, beautiful fans
of gold and fans of silver, pokkharai)is\ of gold and pokkharaifis of silver, and flower vases
made of gold and flower vases made of silver. Then the king, followed with the sound
of the five instruments of music and forming a procession of great magnificence, carried
44
the relics by stages along the decorated highway into the city of Siriva hana, and placed
4
* T“he Sinhalese are still excee ingly expert at street decoration. 'The r(li-palam or arches of folded
cloth., •which it is the duty of the dhobies to prepare, are a very characteristic feature of the decoration.
•f Pokkharaf is a lotus pond. These "were probably miniature representations of it.
17s

Painting them on the seat that was prepared for Buddha in the spacious ornamented hall that was
built in the middle of the vihara, and caused offerings to be made thereunto by the divers
Siri- people (who had assembled there).
44
va hana “ And when the morning was come all the people arrayed themselves in their best garments,
and, being exceeding desirous of gaining merit, went up with flowers of the jasmine and
champac and ironwood, and other kinds of flowers of divers hues mixed with flowers of
gold (leaf) and the like, and devoutly made their offerings to the Tooth-relic and the Bowl-
relic. And they made offerings also of many heaps of sweet white rice that looked like
heaps of the glory that had long gathered around the great king, and of divers kinds of fruit,
such as plantains, jak, mango, and the like fruits that were exceeding ripe, sweet, and
luscious. Then the king himself, in like manner, made offerings of divers kinds to those
two noble relics; and then he who was expert in all courtesy ministered unto the Order
and carefully provided them with food and drink,—food hard and soft, and drink that could
be sucked, and drink that could be swallowed. And the lord of the land, who was exceeding
delighted on that occasion, bestowed on several hundreds of priests the eight things that
were needful for monks. Afterwards, throughout the three watches of the night, he
illuminated the vihara all round with lacs and crores of lighted lamps fed with perfumed
oil, and with garlands of divers lamps perfumed with camphor oil, so that the whole face
of the land looked like the firmament that was studded with stars. And the lord of the
land held a feast in honour of Buddha, to which all men were drawn by the sweet songs
of singers and the dances of many dancers as they danced in divers characters on the excellent
stages that were raised here and there,— a feast the tumult whereof was greatly increased
by the sound of the five musical instruments which, like a blast proceeding from the sea
of his merits, sufficed to drown the roar of the ocean and to put to shame the thunder of
the clouds,—whereat also the voice of religion was heard from pulpits reverently set up
by the faithful at divers places, whereon sat preachers of the sacred Law, who, with beautiful
fans in their hands, proclaimed the good Law that convinced the hearts of the hearers
thereof,— a feast which also was made pleasant by the shouts of the four classes of Buddha’s
disciples,* who went hither and thither viewing all things with admiration and congratu­
lating each other as they praised the virtues of the three sacred gems, exclaiming, “Oh,
the Buddha! Oh, the Dhamma! Oh, the Sangha!”— whose praises also were sung in
strains like those of the Nandis-f" by the masters of the ceremonies as they stood in crowds
on every side invoking the blessings of Buddha.
“And for seven days the lord of the land held this great feast in honour of the three sacred
objects (Buddha, the Law, and the Church) in such a manner as if he were showing here
(on earth) how even the chief of the gods held the feasts of Buddha in heaven, and as if
he proclaimed how the kings of the olden time, the great rulers of the Sinhalese, held
their feasts in honour of the Supreme Buddha, and as if he proclaimed to all men how
the perfections of the Omniscient Buddha, like unto the wish-conferring tree of heaven,
yield fruit in and out of every season.
“And afterwards when he (the king) had made the Maha Vihara the property in common
of the brethren, he dedicated it to the great priesthood, and thus filled the measure of his
merit and his fame” (Mahavaipsa, Ch. LXXXV.).
Bali Before concluding this chapter, it is desirable to give an account of the methods of
fainting painting temporary mud images made by astrologers for bali ceremonies. This painting
* Monks, nuns, lay disciples, and female devotees.
•f- Speakers of prologues in a drama, or panegyrists.
176

is quite distinct from that practised by the craftsmen proper, and represents an historically Painting
and actually more primitive art. The finished images, when a little dried, are first
whitened with kaolin paste, then painted in colours, red, green, grey and black. The red
is made of pounded iron oxide {^guru-gala) as used for the slip-painting of pottery; the
green from pounded leaves of ranavara (Cassia auriculata); the black from pounded
coconut-shell charcoal; and grey by mixing kaolin with the black. The colours are
applied with a brush, and are combined with other decoration in the form of leaves and
flowers of coconut, cut stalks of plaintain, etc. Some idea of the style and scope of this
¿a/i painting will be gathered from PI. IV., 2.
Fa Hian (a .d. 400) states that on a certain occasion during his visit, both sides of a
procession road were decorated with representations of Buddha in the five hundred
bodily forms which he assumed in his different births before the last; “these figures are all
beautifully painted in divers colours, and have a very life-like appearance ” no doubt they
were made of impermanent materials somewhat similar to those used in bait ceremonies.
(©k A few words may be said as to the history of painting in Geylon. Naturally there are no History of
surviving examples of primitive work of this character where earth and leaves supply the painting
pigments and materials. We are forced to rely upon inference and literary evidence for
anything even as old as the oldest stone sculptures, at which time.an equally developed
school of painting must also have existed. Painting was one of the 64 arts and sciences
practised in ancient India. It is frequently referred to in the Mahabharata and Ramayaija.
It may have been known in a primitive form to the original inhabitants of Ceylon before
the arrival of Vijaya. The first mention of it in the Mahavarpsa, is the reference to the
use of ‘painted vases’ in the reign of Devanam Piyatissa (307 b.c.). It is very likely
indeed that the foundation of the craft as now surviving in Ceylon, dates, like so much
else of Hindu-Buddhist culture, from the time of the settlement of Anoka’s missionaries,
and the great intellectual stimulus resulting from the contact of the art of Barahat with
the more primitive art, of which we have no remains, but which may have existed in
Ceylon. In connection with the building of the Ruvanveli Dagaba, we are told of the
mixing of orpiment (mistranslated vermilion in the English edition) with oil for use in
cementing the foundations; this has been taken as evidence of a practise of oil-painting,
but without the least justification. But we hear also (p. 5, above) of the decoration
of the relic chamber with representations of jatakas, and it is probable that tempera
painting (in water colour) is here meant, though not expressly indicated.
The artist king, Jettha Tissa (a .d. 330), has been referred to above, p. 7. The earliest
paintings actually surviving in Ceylon are those at Sigiriya. These differ in character and
in technique from all modern work, but very closely resemble the famous Ajanta paintings
of the same century. This period was one of great artistic activity, which began in India
in the fourth century under the Gupta dynasty, and absorbed Dravidian tradition into its
own.-f- The character of the art of this period may be judged best from the Ajanta wall
paintings, and the Ellora sculptures. The Sigiri paintings show that Ceylon was in close
tou ch with the art growth of the time. The early Chinese historians speak in raptures of
i mages made in Ceylon ; and it is clear that the fourth and fifth centuries were one of the
great periods of Sinhalese art. But they stand isolated from the historical development
of the later art, which possesses far less capacity for drawing the human form. The Sigiri
paintings are somewhat sensuous, and though apparently representing goddesses and
* Beal, '■ Buddhist Records’ I., p. lxxv.
•f' Okakura, ‘ Ideals of the East’ p. 78.
177
n I

Painting attendants, are not markedly religious in feeling. They appear to have left no trace on
later Sinhalese art. Were they not thus an isolated landmark, it would be easier to fit
them into the historical evolution of Sinhalese art as we know it.
Sigiriya It will be worth while to give a brief account of them. They are executed on the plastered
tempera surface of the Sigiriya rock, those remaining being only found in an almost inaccessible
paintings cave; probably the whole rock surface over the gallery was once plastered and painted.
The plaster consists of a groundwork of earth (white ants’ nest ?) and kaolin, half an inch
in thickness, strengthened with an admixture of paddy husk, and perhaps coconut fibre,
and covered with white chunam (lime) smoothed with a trowel. Only three pigments
are used, yellow, red, and green, but these are varied by shading and mixture, unlike their
use in modern work; blue is absent. Mr. Bell* thinks that the paintings are portraits
of Court ladies proceeding to the vihara with flower offerings. To me the fact that the
figures are cut off at half-length by conventional clouds suggests that they represent divine
beings; who are always so represented in modern work.
The work is much freer and shows much greater knowledge of the human figure than
any work now done; but is equally less ideal in character and less religious. Perhaps
we cannot judge much from this single surviving example of what must have been a great
school, working over a very extended area, and partly affected by Chinese influence.-f-
Their one great value is the demonstration of the fact that the work of the Ajanfa school
was so widespread. A controversy has arisen as to whether the artists were Sinhalese
or Indian. "The point is of little real importance. The Chinese and others at this time
thought exceedingly highly of Sinhalese images, which goes to show that art of a high
type flourished in Ceylon ; and suggests that the painters may also have been indigenous;
but if so, it can hardly be claimed that the school was so,—only that it was so widespread
as to have representatives even in Ceylon. The fact that the work differs so much from all
modern work suggests that special conditions made it possible. As regards technique it
is true that the work is much more enduring in character than any now done; but I do
not know that it was necessarily oil colour. The painters of to-day have a method of
varnishing water colour work, so as to make it very durable. There are outdoor paintings
at Ridi Vihara; the rock wall over the vihara is covered with remains of paintings of
priests on a plaster surface now much broken away (see p. 165, above). I do not know
in what manner these were executed, as they were inaccessible; they date from the
eighteenth century.. The problems raised by the Sigiriya paintings are many and hard,
but lie mainly outside the scope of the present volume; the chief concern is the place
of the school in relation to the historical evolution of modern Sinhalese art.
Passing on to later times, we find at Polonnaruva in the Maha Demala Saya certain jataka
paintings, more like the Sigiriya work than modern work; and on certain of the dagabas
(Ruvanveli and Abhayagiriya) at Anuradhapura, paintings (patterns) in a very bad state
of preservation, but which also incline to the earlier type in their free and almost careless
. execution.:];
Subsequently we find in the Mahavaipsa frequent references to paintings on cloth and the
painting of temples, evidently of the same character as the eighteenth century work known
to us. The modern work seems to represent the continuous tradition handed on from the
earliest times; for it has much in common with the Barahat sculptures, and the style of
painting which we may suppose to have existed in Anoka’s times. There are many
*J.C.B.R.A.S., VoL XV., No. 48, 1897.
•f- As suggested by Mr. W. A. De Silva in the y.C.B.R.A.S., Vol. XXI., No. 57, 1906, p. 91.
J Some of these are illustrated in Smither's ^Architectural Remains,’ PI. xxxii.
178

primitive features, such as the method of continuous narration, where the same figure Painting
or figures are repeated again and again without separation into different scenes, but in
fresh situations revealing the progress of the story. The figures are shown in three aspects
only, full face, three-quarter face, and side face. It is most probable that the Kandyan
painting of the eighteenth century represents a survival of an early style which has always
continued more or less independent of the other schools of more developed art which
existed at various times; just as building in wood has always been the truly indigenous
style of architecture, apart from exceptional periods of important work in stone, mainly
under Indian inspiration.
APPENDIX TO CHAPTER IX.
I. PAPER MANUSCRIPTS.
Of paper manuscripts I am acquainted with two only, and am indebted to the owners for the
loan of them. The oldest is a small ba^a daham pota, containing a selection of sutras or
discourses of the Buddha, and said to have been used by the Kuij(Jasale king (Narendra
Sirtiha) as a prayer book or breviary; it now belongs to Indajoti Unnanse of the Meda
Pansala, Malvatte. It is written on i68 leaves (two blank) of Dutch paper measuring
5 inches by 3^ inches. There are twenty-seven lines to a page, rubricated throughout,
with stops (kundali) in blue and red and the words separated by red marks. Each stltra
is separated from the one following it by a tail-piece very delicately drawn in colour
(Pis. XVII. and XX); there is also a page of pure pattern work at the beginning and end.
The colours used are red, yellow, black, blue, emerald green and gold. The writing
is in a fine hamsa tipi hand, on lines ruled feint with a stylus but not marked in any clearer
way. The book is bound in brown leather, gold tooled with a pattern, the elements of
which are identical with those of one of the tail-pieces; two very finely worked silver
clasps are still perfectly preserved. Pages of the book are reproduced on PI. XX., and
in Fig. 3 ; the clasps and binding are shown in PI. LII. This little book is so very beautiful
and complete in every way as to give cause to regret the absence of others like it. It
may be supposed that the binding was executed by some Dutchman or Portuguese resident
in Kandy, who must also have explained to the silversmith the form of clasp required;
the silver work being typically Kandyan, and the best of its kind.
The other book is both larger and later; it was written in a.d. 1811 by Iriyagama
Dhammadassi at a cost of 200 ridls, at the request of a certain official and court favourite
w ho wished to perform a meritorious action for the benefit of the soul of the late Queen
Mother who had been his patron. Full details of the many lands and offices held by this
man are given in the long colophon, translated below; affording an interesting side­
light on Kandyan court life 100 years ago. The book is written on 150 leaves (two blank)
of Dutch paper measuring 13|- inches by qf inches, thirty-three lines to the page, and
is plainly bound in leather; folios 1-146 are numbered consecutively, the text beginning
as above stated, after the usual invocation of Buddha; folios 2-4 are painted on the
recto side only, with 7, 8, and 8 of the 24 assurances {sSvisi vharaifa)', the text begins
on folio 5 (numbered i) and ends on folio 145 (numbered 141) with the last of the 24
n 2 179

Painting assurances as a tail-piece; on the verso of same are the seven scenes of the sat-satiya
or seven weeks’ fast of Buddha, the last four of which are shown on PI. XVIII.; the next
leaf bears a note to the effect that a priest named Parakunibure Vipassi inherited the
book, and on the back, above, a picture of Buddha besought by Mahâ Brahma to reveal
the Dharma, and below, of Buddha preaching bar}a for the first time in Isipatana Àrama
at Benares; the next leaf shows Buddha preaching (PI. XIX.), walking and standing;
4
the next, the holy footstep, and Buddha reclining ; and a scene from the Daham Soij a
Jataka ; the next leaf contains the colophon, and the last, like the first, is blank.
The book now belongs to a priest named Vçlivita, of Malvatte Pansala, to whom it has
descended in pupillary succession.
The paintings are typical examples of the Kandyan style of the eighteenth century, exactly
resembling those usually found on vihara walls, of which they may serve as specimens.
Translation of colophon of paper ms. of Viáuddhi Margaya:
“I, Dehigama Navaratna Atapattu Vâsala Mudiyânsê, having been brought up with filial
affection from my earliest infancy by the great (or elder) queen who was mother of the
queen of Medavasala (the ‘middle palace’) and occupied the position of chief queen to
His Noble Majesty the King named Vijaya Râja Siipha [árl Vikrama R.S., the last king]
received the following (villages and offices) from His Noble Majesty árl Rajadhi Raja
Simha, Lord of Lanka,— (viz.) Mâvatura, Dehipagoda, Ktlragama, Pelena, Hunubadda
Secretaryship of the Palanquin Department, Kotakepitiya, Aoibepussa, Randeijiya,
Mapanavatura, Alavatugoda, Mahara-niyangama, Haputale, Dulmure, Atabâge, Beravà-
gaijneve, Haloluva, Gahalagamboda, AnkumbOra, Ganhatara, Morâgammâna, Talëvela,
Dumbara-depalata, Üravala, Pelava, Gañgoda, Vatura, Kiravella, Attaragama, Mulgama,
Linipitiya, Valatveva, Gâlëveva, Pâlugâlëveva, Galveva, Hiripifiya, Baojbaragammana,
Ganafa, Pubbiliya, Vatuvala, Matgomuva, Teldeijiya, Rainbukvçlla, Porokara
4
Muhandiramship of the two villages Màvela and Përâdeniya {gaba ¿lgam), Dunjbara-
Mahâ-uyanvatte, Nilambavatte, Basnâyaka Nilameship of Dodanvala Dêvàle, Basnâyaka
Nilameship of Maha Dëvâle,Tappakâra Muhandiramship of Avudha-gë (Royal Armoury),
Vannoku Nilameship (? State appraiser), Mahabadda-haloluve Muhandiramship, office
of Maha Lëkam (Chief Secretary), offices of Atapattuvë Lëkam, Nanayakkàra Lëkama,
Vadana Tuvakkukara Lëkama, ÏCodituvakku Lëkama, Atapattu of this district of Yafi-
nuvara. Secretaryship of Vasal-maduva (Royal pavilion), Padikara Lëkama of Yafinuvara
palace, Keijgollë Atapattu Küruvë Lëkama, Adigarship of the viharagam and devalegam in
Yatinuvara, Muhandiramship of Bogomuva and Maruvaliya, office of Disava of Paffipola,
and Secretaryship of Sat-korale Kuruva.
As the late elder queen was the cause of my receiving these and numerous benefits, I have
thought it fit to make return by performing a meritorious action, such as to secure to
her the bliss of heaven and Nirvaija.
I have (therefore) on this Friday, the seventh day of the first fortnight of the month of
Vap of the year 2354 of the illustrious Buddhist era, offered to his Grace Velivifa
Saranaùkara (nephew of the learned Pontiff Saranañkara* who is a refuge to the helpless
and a true observer of the four holy rules of conduct, called Catu Parisuddhasila), this
paper copy of Viáuddhi Marggaya (which I had made at a cost of 200 ridls by application
to the Buddhist monk Iriyagama DhammadhassI, a pupil of Butavatte Lëkama who is
an abode of fortitude, memory, perseverance, and a multitude of other good qualities, and
is adorned with stainless conduct) a commentary on the stanza beginning with the words,
‘‘‘Slle patifthaya naro sapaMo" (composed by the great Elder, Buddhaghosa, renowned
* The '■ Sangha Paja' referred to onp. 12.
180

for clear intellect), containing 58 bhaijavaras,* 14,500 granthas, and 400,064 letters and Painting
embodying a compendium of the Tripifaka.
May all the gods equally participate in the store of merit acquired by ourselves so that
they may vouchsafe prosperity of every kind.
Oh Gods, Brahmas, Yakshas, Rakshasas, Prêtas, Piacas and all other beings of the
innumerable worlds and of this blest world, who have assembled here and elsewhere ! may
ye accept the merit that I offer you with boundless love !
May the multitude of Gods in the seven oceans. Mount Meru, the worlds of the Asuras
and Nagas, the six heavens, the six dëvâlayas, Samankula, Himalaya, the seven tanks, the
tank Anotatta, the sky, the earth, all the worlds of the Brahmas, this world and Ceylon,
graciously accepting the merit, attain Nirvâija by virtue of seeing Maitreya Buddha!
Let there be success and prosperity.”
On recto of folio 142 (as numbered) is a later note to the effect, “The 150 leaves of the
Viiuddhi Marggaya which Parakumbure Vipassi Sâml inherited from Velivifa Saraijankara
Sami.”
II. HOW TO PREPARE COLOURS.+
1. Take equal parts of hiriyal and ran-hiriyal, and grind with the juice of milla \¡zr)s.,gammalu
bark, and goka(u bark, and roast it; the colour of gold is produced.
2. Take badulla milk, k(ppitiya lakada, hal-dummala, and old jak milk in equal parts, grind
these four together, and warm-; apply to what you will; this is black badama.
3. For red badama grind sadilirigam and warm with juice of ratmal bark; apply it to any
work you will; the colour is red.
4. For yellow badama take gokafu juice, hiriyal, and ratukaha in equal parts; collect old
jak milk and grind with dorai}a oil; apply it to any work you will, polish it with a cheetah’s
tooth ; this is yellow badama.
5. For a good effect take sea sand, roast and sift it; apply it with arrack where required,
polish it with a cheetah’s tooth; this is blue badama.
6. Take equal parts of hiriyal, gokofu milk, quicksilver, alum, sal-ammoniac, borax and
white lead {sudu iyan) and grind in dorarta oil; apply it to whatever work is needed, polish
it with a cheetah’s tooth ; this is gold coloured badama.
Badama ... Varnish, composition.
Hiriyal ... ... Orpiment (in lump).
Ran-hiriyal ... ... Orpiment (scaly).
Milla ... ... Vitex altissima, L.
Gammalu ... ... Pterocarpus Marsupium, Roxb.
Gokalu ... ... Garcinia Morelia, Desr.
Badulla ... ... Semecarpus Gardneri, Thw.
Kfppifiya lakaia ■ ■. Stick lac.
H al-dummala ... Resin from the hal tree, Valeria acuminata, Hayne.
Sadiliñgam ... ... Cinnabar.
Ratmal ' ... ... Ixora coccínea, L.
Ratukaha ... ... Bixa orellana, L.
Doraifa ... ... Dipterocarpus glandulosus,'Th.'n.
* A bhsnavara is equal to 250 verses of 32 syllables each.
■f Old recipes from D. S. Muhandiram, Rmbfkke. It will be seen that the ‘ colours ’ referred to
are compositions, not pigments.
n 3 181

III. HOW TO MAKE GLUE.
“Whensoever they have occasion to use Glew, they make it after this fashion. They take
the Curd of milk, and strain the water from it through a cloth. Then tying it up in a
cloth like a Pudding, they put it into boyling water, and let it boyl a good while. Which
done it will be hard like Cheese-curd, then mixing it with Lime, use it. If it be not
for present use, they will roul up these Curds into a Ball; which becomes hard, and as they
have occasion will scrape some of it off with a Knife, and so temper it with Lime. This
Lime with them is as soft as Butter.”*

CHAPTER X. IVORY, BONE, HORN, AND
SHELL.
IT is remarkable that nowhere in India has ivory in mediæval or modern times held
a really prominent place amongst the arts and crafts, although its use must date
back to a remote antiquity, and where practised, was so well understood. No
collection of strictly Indian ivories can compare with that in the Colombo Museum,
although individually finer pieces of work are to be found on the mainland. An explanation
of this may be found in the Hindu reluctance to make use of animal products, and their
vid^v of bones, leather, and other remains of the dead body as unclean. The worship of
the tooth-relic, for example, would be quite impossible to a Hindu. With the rarest
exceptions, ivory has not been used in India for the fabrication of Hindu images ; and even
for domestic purposes ivory has not been used as extensively as might have been expected.
The Buddhists had no such scruples ; we know that they were willing to eat even the
flesh of animals slain by others, and in the same way to use animal products. Ivory has
always been a comparatively rare and costly material. That ivory was valued very long
ago by Buddhists is suggested by Chadanta Jataka, where a great elephant was robbed
of its tusks, and died from the suffering ; but this was regarded as a great sin, and held
up to execration in the story. In the ordinary way no elephant would have been killed
for the sake of its ivory ; indeed, the elephant alive would be of greater value.
It is, then, not altogether surprising that even in India, the traditions of ivory carving
“centre round the early Chalukyan and Buddhistic traditions rather than the more recent
Dravidian and Indo-Aryan schools of South Indian decoration.”* The same thing is, of
course, much more obvious in Ceylon, and we are again reminded of the value of late
Sinhalese art as preserving something of the Buddhist Indian art which preceded the more
definitely Hindu art of the seventh century and onwards.
Whilst in Africa and India elephants of both sexes have tusks, in Ceylon not more than
one in a hundred possess them, and those exclusively males; and these are particularly
valued, as the tusks are of so much use in enabling them to perform any work required
of them. But nearly all Ceylon elephants have ‘tushes’ or tusks not more than a foot or
so in length and an inch or two in thickness. The tusks of those elephants which possess
them rarely exceed fifty or sixty pounds in weight. Large tusks are highly valued and
gçnerally form part of the treasure of the greater viharas and dévales ; it is usual to place
a pair of tusks on either side of temple doorways, either permanently or on special occasions.
They are to be found in the dévale storerooms still, and were kept in reserve, ready to
be given to the temple craftsmen whenever work in ivory at or for the temple was required.
In a vihara at Badulla may be seen a large pair with an inlaid inscription in silver letters.
Ceylon ivory is valued in the East above African on account of its density of texture and
delicacy of tint ; but the quantity obtainable must always have been small. It is indeed
surprising that under the circumstances, so large an amount of work in ivory should exist
and such great skill in its manipulation attained.
But few references to Sinhalese ivory are to be found in works on Indian art. Mr. Maskell,
in his ‘Ivories,’ devotes a chapter to ‘India, Arabia and Persia,’ in which, after a violent
attack on Indian ivories in general, he does some justice to those of Ceylon. He perceives
that for true Hindu art, that is. Early Hindu in feeling, we must go to Ceylon. He
reproduces in his PI. lxxii. two beautiful fragments from a door jamb, one representing
* Watt, ‘Indian Art at Delhi’ 1904, p. 186.
4
n 183

Ivory a hantsa procession, the birds carrying each a spray in the mouth, as on the Anuradhapura
moonstones; the other a liya vela or ‘vine.’ These, as he says, are of bold and broad
workmanship. He speaks also, of course, of the fine kinissa or water dipper of PI. XLI., 3.
He refers to the ‘numerous Cingalese caskets made by native Christians which have
Biblical subjects from European models’ {sic), but I know of none such except the large
casket at South Kensington, and according to Mr. Andrews (‘Journal of Indian Art,’
Vol. X.) even this casket is Goanese, not Sinhalese. Such hybrid art is never of much value.
In Sir George Watt’s ‘Indian Art at Delhi,’ there are scattered references to Sinhalese
ivories, and a casket, supposed to be Sinhalese, is figured on PI. 78, 4.
Kinissa The beautiful kinissa here reproduced on PI. XLI., 3, has been illustrated in colours in
the ‘Journal of Indian Art,’ Vol. X., PI. 86, to accompany Mr. Andrew’s paper on ‘The
Elephant in Industry and Art.’ It is there, and also in the South Kensington ‘Portfolio
of Indian Art,’ incorrectly described as a ‘Sacrificial Ladle.’ Mr. Andrews describes the
typical liya pata decoration of the handle as follows:— “There is a distinct method of
conventional elaboration in the scrollwork, very striking and quite unmistakeable. The
general form of the scrolls may be likened to the upward flow of smoke and flame ; and as
thin threads of smoke rising beside heavy ones are curled over as they meet the downward
roll of the greater, so we see in this ornament innumerable lines flowing along the general
direction, but terminating in tiny volutes under the shadow of larger ones. Sometimes
two masses will divide and join higher up, and in the hollows so formed, sparks like pearls
may be seen to rise. And with all the scrolls and sparks and ripples the balance of the
gently waving mass that issues from the jaws of the grinning fire-breathing yali in this
example is perfect.”
The crafts of ivory carving and ivory turning are distinct. The ivory carver is usually
an all round craftsman of the highest rank, a galladda, used to practise both painting and
building also; the ivory turner does no other work, and belongs to the va^uvo. These
distinctions have been explained on p. 54.
Statuettes The ivory carver’s chief tools are his saws and gravers and chisels. The work he does is
varied in character, covering a wide range of objects required for religious, architectural
and personal use. The statuettes and images are of special interest. Ivory statuettes of
Buddha are not very rare ; good examples are to be found in the Colombo Museum. They
appear to have been usually painted; traces of paint can still be seen on some. I have
seen only standing figures in ivory, none seated or reclining. Statuettes of kings, and
ordinary men and women are also common, and are sometimes excellently done. Some
figures of Rafemahatmayas, drummers and other characters executed in the twentieth
century are superior to any old ones I have seen. The figures (from the Colombo Museum)
shown on Plate XXXVI. are of the eighteenth or early nineteenth century and more
useful as records of the costume of the royalty and nobility, than remarkable as works of
art; the costume is explained in the description of the Plate.
The Mahavaijisa speaks of a park made at Polonnaruva by Parakrama Bahu (a.d.
1164-1197), which was railed “ with pillars decorated with rows of images made of ivory,”
of which the ivory-railed palanquin of PI. IX. reminds us in a smaller way. Parakrama
Bahu also built in the ‘Island Park,’ a pavilion named Samimaijdapa ‘wrought with
ivory.’
Panels Next to the statuettes may be mentioned plaques and panels such as those figures of devas
representing the guardians of the threshold, which are seen at the base of the door jamb
at the doors of viharas and devales. These are illustrated in PI. XXXV., 5 and 6. The
head-dress, robes and jewellery are those traditionally given to figures of devas or kings.
It will be seen that the treatment is stiff and conventional, but not without dignity and
184

beauty. The right hand of the deva of PI. XXXV., 6, is especially fine. The figures are Ivory
enclosed within carved arimbuva border, carrying Itya pata crockets on the inner side.
We sometimes find that the ivory plaques of door jambs represent not devas, but dancing- Doors
girls, animals or other subjects. Thus at Ridi Vihâra, the figures at the dévale store-room
door are those of dancing-girls (PI. XXXVIII., 2), those at the side entrance to the lower
vihâra verandah are gaja-simhays. Probably such secular subjects are only represented
in the case of decorated doors, which are not the actual doors of a sanctuary ; for the
guardian devas are for the protection of the spiritual atmosphere of the sanctuary, and
this kind of guardianship is not needed for verandah or store-room doors, where a good
lock and key suffice for more worldly guardianship. But it is mainly sanctuary doors
on which decoration is lavished without stint ; and so magnificent a secular door as that
of the dévale store-room at RidI Vihâra is not to be seen elsewhere. It is shown on
PI. XXXVIII. in Figs. I and 2, and represents an extraordinarily high level of attainnient
in the application of ivory carving to architectural decoration. The contrast of the
comparatively plain door, with its ivory and ebony-covered frame, with the once gaily
painted wall could not be better conceived ; it will be many a long day ere anything so
fine is done in Ceylon again. Not all the efforts of the Department of Public Instruction,
aided by all the technical schools and Public Works Department’s draughtsmen can do
what Kirti éri and the royal craftsmen did so easily a hundred and fifty years ago. Indeed,
they do not want to do the same thing, and hardly know that they could not. If we
consider a capacity for producing and understanding literature and art to be any test of
‘civilisation,’ then, even though we know that Sinhalese art in the eighteenth century
is no more than a great and beautiful scheme of peasant decoration, we are driven to feel
that in the possession of such skilled craftsmen and in their organic relation to the life of
the people, a higher and more beautiful life is indicated than that of which the railway
goods-yard and the Governors’ Residences are visible evidence. The purchase of xylonite
combs made in Birmingham does not indicate any real advance upon the days when the
local craftsmen spent days and weeks on the elaboration of ever varied and beautiful design.
It is difficult sometimes to see where the advantage of the modern conditions lies, either
economically or ethically.
But it is necessary to return to the immediate subject before us, and in so doing, we may Combs
speak next of combs. The number and variety of Sinhalese ivory combs is surprising.
Their general characteristics are well shown in Pis. XXXIX. and XL. and need little
further detailed description beyond what is given in the explanations of the Plates. The
combs are most often elaborately carved, and often fretted, but occasionally more severe
and plain. Figure and genre subjects, plant and geometrical ornament abound. In the
case of figure subjects we find two ways of treating the back : either the back and front
are identical, so that the figure faces both ways ; or the back of the figure is treated as such,
and figure faces one way only. Of the combs illustrated on PI. XXXIX., No. 4 is of a
very unusual form. No. 6 is almost unornamented, but none the less finely designed, and
N o. 2, perhaps the most beautiful, is of bone, as is also No. 11 on PI. XL. The comb
shown in Fig. 10 on PI. XXXIX. shows traces of colouring.
A piece of ivory sawn for a comb {panava), but not finished, is called pana-katuva \ thé
same name is given to the central part of an old comb, when all the teeth are broken or
removed ; such pieces are often repaired by rivetting into a groove a thin strip of ivory
cut into new teeth.
Book-covers {pot-kambi) of ivory are rare, but sometimes very finely worked. A very
beautiful small pair is shown on PI. XXXVII., 5, and a somewhat over-elaborate pair
on PI. XXXVIII., 7.
185

Ivory Caskets are perhaps more characteristic of low-country than of Kandyan work, and often
show European influence, but rather in the form and metal fittings than in design of
Caskets ornament. PI. XXXVI., 6, 7 and 9 shows good examples of caskets ; the first of these
is in bone, and it will be observed that the beautiful design is well adapted to the harder
and rougher material. In Fig. 6 the European form is evident. PI. XL., 7, represents
a long narrow casket in which the golden Algama sannasa is preserved, in the Maha Devale
in Kandy. PI. XXXVIII., 9, shows a modern casket, of the type made in Galle for the
larger Colombo jewellers, to be sent to large exhibitions like those at Paris and Chicago.
It will be at once seen that the over-elaborated and greatly undercut treatment is far
inferior to the older and more restrained work with which it must be compared; the
paid peti horàtr is tortured and twisted out of all meaning, the devas are mere dolls, and
there is no meaning in the makara torana used thus a mere ornament.
Vfli-pata On Pis. XXXVIII. and XL., Figs. 6 and 2, are represented examples of the ivory styles
[vçli-pata) used by priests in the pansala schools for teaching writing in sand. These call
up for us a picture of the old incumbent of some village vihara, shrivelled, but still keen,
standing, in his yellow robes, by the long narrow v^li-pila or ‘sand-bench,’ with its brightly-
lacquered legs, holding in his hand the ivory v?li-pata, and watching the beginner’s efforts
to trace the letters with his finger in the sand ; then smoothing over the sand with the
vçli-pata, and again tracing the copy for the pupil to imitate. But this is a picture of
the past, not of the present.
Knÿ'e Knife and sword handles are sometimes of ivory, more often, perhaps, of horn, and almost
handles always so in the case of swords. Silver rivets and mountings are usually added to the
ivory or horn handle. On PI. XXXVII. is shown a very small selection of the forms of
ivory handles, which are very varied and well made ; PI. XLVIL, 11, shows the common
form of sword handle, with its silver fittings. A peculiar fibrous material sometimes used,
and called ‘ unicorn horn,’ valuable also medicinally, is probably identical with the so-called
‘fish-tooth,’ which Sir George Watt refers to as being a common substitute for ivory in
India, and actually preferred for sword and dagger hafts. In some cases we find a handle
of this material inlaid with pegs of ivory. The same method of inlaying with ivory pegs
is applied to articles of horn, as in the comb illustrated on PI. XL., 12.
Ivory dice, for pactsi, are shown on PI. XL., 3. The numbers on them are represented
by lac-filled incised circles.
Ivory The ivory carving already described is done by craftsmen of the upper group, the same man
turning being often a painter and an ivory carver. Ivory turning is done by men of the lower
division. The ivory carver is called from his work, çt-dat-kçfayan-karaya ; the turner, like
4
the turner of wood, Uyana-va uvâ. The chief articles fashioned on the lathe are fan handles,
handles of knives, and various implements and tools, boxes, book-buttons, {pot-saki), scent-
sprays, pacisi pieces. Fan handles and boxes of horn are also made. Most of these are
decorated with dots and circles incised and filled with coloured lac applied on the lathe.
This decoration is an excellent instance of the good effect produced by simple means directly
adapted to the material, and arising out of the method of manufacture and the nature of
the materials available. The dots are made with a pointed tool; the circles with one
having two points, used like a pair of compasses, one point being stationary, the other
describing a circle about it. Fan handles so decorated are illustrated on PI. XXXVII.,
6-9, a knife handle in Fig. i on thé same Plate, and an oboe {horan?vd) in Fig. 11 ; Fig. 10
represents an uiakkiya, or double hand drum (usually made of lacquered wood). I have
also an inlaid sickle with an ivory handle, and an ivory flageolet. Pacisi pieces are made in
ivory or horn, and distinguished by ornament of red or yellow lac. A typical turned ivory
186

box is shown on PI. XXXVI., 8, and horn pill-boxes on Plate XL., 15 and 16. The Ivory
ivory boxes are used for jewellery, sometimes for medicine.
One of the most remarkable feats of the turner is the manufacture of scent-sprays. The
simidiya, or ivory scent-spray consists of a hollow cylindrical base, and a long neck. The
base, holding the scent, is so thin that it is easily compressed by slight pressure of the hand.
The method of turning ivory to this extreme thinness, almost that of paper, is kept a secret,
but would seem to depend only on great patience and delicacy of handling.
The ivory turner’s lathe is shown on PI. VI., 4. It is extremely simple, and in principle Ivory lathe
identical with the carpenter’s lathe. The essential parts of it are the wooden spindle
{liyana kandd)\ the two supports embedded in the ground, the one in the figure furthest
from the observer being the pifa-kariuva, the nearer, the vftna-katfuva; the andina-larjuva or
string for turning the lathe; and the hand-rest, the faftala-l^lla. The other tools used,
an adze, saws, rasps and graver are seen in the foreground. It will be seen that the ivory
to be turned is attached to the end of the lathe, outside the v?ma-kai}uva, instead of between
it and the pita-katfuva; this is very convenient for hollowing out boxes and the like.
Horn work may now be referred to in greater detail.
The carved horn handles of weapons, and the turned horn
pill-boxes of the vedardla have been mentioned. An
elaborate horn comb such as that illustrated on PI. XL.,
12, is perhaps the work of a superior craftsman; but
the common hom combs in general use, sold everywhere
for ten cents, are made in some districts by rodiyo, and
elsewhere by smiths, beravayo or durayi caste men. A
more than usually elaborate example is illustrated in
Fig. 96.* I shall now describe in detail the manufacture
of these combs by rodiys, as seen at Ella, Uva.
The usual tools of the horn-comb-maker include a small Fig. 96. Carved and pierced
adze (i| inch cutting edge), a coarse rasp, one or two horn comb, xf.
knives, a marking awl, a vice, two or three saws, a file,
and one or two tools for incising patterns; the iron tools are made by local blacksmiths.
The combs are made of buffalo horn cut transversely, the tops of the horns being used for Horn combs
tool- and knife-handles and the like. A flat piece of horn is sawn off and cut roughly into
the shape of the comb, and then made thinner with adze and rasp, and the shaping then
finished with a knife. Next the guide lines
for the inner ends of the teeth and for the
patterns are scored with the marking awl,
which is a small bone tool with a sharp point
inserted near one end. The comb is now
set in the vice, which is held conveniently
against a stone by pressure of the worker’s
leg (PI. V., 9).
The vice (Fig. 97) consists of two pieces of
Fig. 97, Horn-comb-maker’s tools. wood tied together near one end, and having
A, Vice, length iii inches (Bandaravela a wedge inserted at the other, which, when
District). it is driven in, causes the short ends to grip
B and C, Pattern-marking tools. very tightly whatever is placed between them.
* For another, with ntiri lata design, see PI. XL., 13.
187

Ivory The vice is usually ornamented with a little primitive carving. The teeth are now cut,
first on one side, small teeth with a fine saw, then on the other, coarse teeth with a thicker
saw; these teeth are cut very regularly and with astonishing quickness. Each tooth is
next filed back and front to make its edges smooth. Finally the comb is taken out of the
vice and a simple pattern incised with a chisel-shaped or with a two- or three-pointed iron
tool. Last of all the comb is polished by rubbing with wood ashes and horn shavings.*
(©.The use of conch shell {iankhd) is very limited. There is still a large trade in chanks or
conch shells obtained in Jaffna, and exported to India, but this has no connection with
the Sinhalese districts. The only objects of Sinhalese manufacture made of conch shell
that I have seen are bracelets, and the entire shells used as trumpets. In the case of
bracelets, what is generally found are pieces of shell, ornamented with lac-filled incised
dots and circles, and mounted in brass.
The beautiful shell trumpet {hak-gei'tyd) of PI. XLL, i, is said to have been given by
Narendra Sirpha to a temple in Uda Nuvara; it is certainly as old as the earlier part of
the eighteenth century, and is one of the finest pieces of Sinhalese craftsmanship illustrated.
The shell is engraved and the incisions filled with red lac, and is mounted in brass,
damascened with silver. The metal mounting terminates in a complete Sfraplndiya^ with
clasped legs and an extension of the tail passing round the mouth of the shell and ending in
a large scroll.
Devales had tenants whose service it was to blow these chanks during the perahfra. Thus
4
at AlavatugO(}a, the tenant of the hakge i panguva had to blow the chank for fifteen days
of the perah^ra and the four festivals, to weed a part of the compound, and to decorate the
devale for the perahera, and to give the vidane a basket of sweetmeats once a year. These
8
services were commutable for Rs. ¡' ^ (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 14).
Another conch shell trumpet is shown on PI. XLIIIa, 4. This is one known as the Jaya
6aka, or Chank of Victory, and it is said to have been dedicated by Rajadhi Raja Siipha
to the Maha Devale, Kancly (where it still is) after a victory over the Dutch at Gurub?bile.
It is mounted in gold, the mounting covering the mouthpiece, in order, it is said, that none
other than the royal lips should ever be applied to it.
7
* ^/i/s account is taken from the description by the author and Mrs. Coomaraswamy, Spolia
Zeylanica, Vol. III., part X., 1905.
188

CHAPTER XI. METAL WORK; IRON,
BRASS, COPPER AND BRONZE; GOLD
AND SILVER; JEWELLERY.
‘ ‘the smith also sitting by the anvil, and considering the iron •work.'—Ecclesiasticus.
A KNOWLEDGE of iron is of great antiquity in India; the metals gold, silver,
iron, lead, copper, and tin were known in the Vedic period, and are mentioned in
the Vedic literature. Megasthenes at a later period noted the occurrence of
these metals, and states that they were “employed in making articles of use and ornament,
as well as the implements and accoutrements of war.” There is abundant evidence that
the ancient Hindus were skilled in manufacturing and working iron and in making and
tempering steel. “ Indian steel has been celebrated from the remotest antiquity, and the
blades of Damascus, which maintained their pre-eminence even after the blades of Toledo
became celebrated, were in fact of Indian iron. . . . The ondanique of Marco Polo’s travels
refers originally, as Colonel Yule has shown, to Indian steel, the word being a corruption
of the Persian Hund’waniy, Le., Indian steel. The same word found its way into Spanish,
in the shapes of alhinde and alfinde, first with the meaning of steel, and then of a steel mirror,
and finally of the metal foil of a glass mirror. The ondanique of Kirman, which Marco
Polo mentions, was so called from its comparative excellence, and the swords of Kirman
were eagerly sought after, in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, by the Turks, who gave
great prices for them. . . . Arrian mentions Indian steel, as imported into the Abyssian
ports; and Salmasins mentions that among the surviving Greek treatises was one ‘on the
tempering of Indian steel.’”*
Of monuments remaining in India, the most famous is Chandragupta’s wrought-iron pillar
near Delhi, which weighs ten tons and is about fifteen hundred years old. Of this pillar,
Ferguson-f wrote that “it opens our eye to an unsuspected state of affairs to find the
Hindus at that age capable of forging a bar of iron larger than any that have been forged
even in Europe up to a very late date, and not frequently even now. ... It is almost equally
startling to find that after an exposure to wind and rain for fourteen centuries, it is unrusted,
and the capital and inscription are as clear and as sharp now as when put up fourteen
centuries ago.” There are other monuments, such as the huge iron girders at Puri; the
ornamental gates of Somnalli; and the 24 ft. wrought-iron gun at Nurvar, that bear witness
to the metallurgical skill of the Hindus.
Iron and steel are still made in India, but the industry is dying out. In 1880 the Duirdusti
mines on the Godavari were still worked; the iron sand being “melted with charcoal,
without any flux, and is obtained at once in a perfectly tough and malleable state, superior
to any English iron, or even the best Swedish. . . . Excellent steel is also still fused for
gun barrels and sword blades.” A more detailed account of iron and steel manufacture
in India in still more recent times is given by V. S. Sambasiva Iyer in a lecture on “ Iron
Smelting in Mysore,” published in Madras in 1902. Mr. Iyer thinks it possible that with
improved methods it may be possible to continue and revive the industry in Mysore, where
there is still some market for the local iron and steel, though these cost rather more than
imported materials. Even in Ceylon there is a decided preference for the local product.
*Sir George Bird^wood, '•Industrial Arts of India.’
‘History of Indian and Eastern Architecture.'
189

Metalwork while for making steel, the country-made iron is said to be altogether superior, probably
on account of its freedom from phosphorus.
Iron Seeing that a knowledge of iron is so ancient and widespread in India, it is not surprising
smelting to find it also in Ceylon, which is, strictly speaking, no more than a part of India. The
oldest specimens of iron in Ceylon are probably those found by Mr. Parker at Tissa-
maharlma.* Heaps of slag which are found in every district show how widespread an
industry this smelting of iron has been. At present the industry survives only near
Balangoda, where a certain amount of iron is made as a service rent, and where there still
live two very old men who understand the method of conversion to steel. With these
two men the latter craft will become a thing entirely of the past. One can hardly help
regretting the decay of so ancient and interesting a craft; nor is the change quite unmixed
gain, for comparatively little of the European iron is of the fine quality of Indian. But
with Mr. Vredenburg,-f- “ I doubt whether the iron industry can ever be revived in India
by smelting according to the native methods. . . . To try to smelt iron on a small scale
at the present day is probably equivalent, from an economic point of view, to attempting
to prepare galvanized or corrugated iron, or lead pipes, or soda water bottles on a small
scale or by manual labour.” The steel industry in Ceylon is already dead, for steel has
never been made of late years in the ordinary way of trade, and the old men who make
it cannot live many years more; a few families, however, are still partially occupied in
iron smelting, and though it is likely that even by them it will be abandoned sooner or
later, I see no reason why the smelters should be discouraged or laid under any unnecessary
disability in connection with obtaining wood for charcoal, or otherwise.
The methods i of the few remaining smelters are unchanged. Iron is still smelted at
Hatarabage, near Balangoda,by men oflow caste {yamannu). The photographs reproduced
on PI. LIIL, Figs. 1-3, show the workshop of an old man named Kiri Ukkuva, and his
sons. The furnace is beneath the thatched roof of a shed open on all sides; it is quite close
to the house occupied by the smelter and his family; for it is generally more convenient
to collect and bring the ore to the furnace, than to establish the furnace near the ore. But
smelters used also to erect the furnace near the ore, as in the case of those who used to
visit Nuvara Eliya to work the iron ores there found. The ore is generally the nodular
hematite or limonite which arises as a decomposition product of the country rocks, and is
widely distributed in small quantities. Before smelting, the ore is broken into small
pieces, and roasted to drive off water. In some districts it appears that the ore used has
been magnetite. The analysis § of a typical hematite is as follows :
Per cent. Per cent.
SiO, ... 9-14 s Nil
A1203 9-85 P.0, ... •05
Fe^Os 72-30 p •022
FeO •22
H,0 ... 8-40 99-96
* Journal C.B.R.A.S., Voi. VIII., No. 27, 1884,/. 153 (61).
■f Rec. Geol. Surv. India, Vol. XXXIII., p. 313.
J Further accounts see Robert Knox, ‘ Historical Relation of Ceylon'; W. C. Ondaatje, Government
Calender, 1884; SirS. Baker,^ Fight Tear sin Ceylon'; Davy, ‘ Travels in Ceylon’; Mineralogical
Survey of Ceylon, Reports for 1903, 1904, etc.
§ Analysis made at the Imperial Institute.
190

The essential parts of the furnace are the well or Metal work
furnace proper; a wall of wattle and daub pro­
tecting the bellows blower from the heat of the Iron
fire ; and the bellows behind this wall. The well smelting
has two openings, one in front, from which the
slag runs out, and through which the bloom of
iron is ultimately extracted; and a smaller opening
behind, through which a blast of air from the
bellows is forced into the well. The bottom of
the furnace is covered with sand, which also fills
Fig. 98. Plan of iron furnaces at up the front opening. A charcoal fire is started
4 at the bottom of the well and covered with layers
Hatarabage, Balaijgo a; ^ inch = i
foot. of ore and charcoal until the well is filled, a con­
tinuous blast of air from the bellows keeping up ^
AA, wattle and daub wall between
the fire meanwhile. Additional ore and charcoal
furnace and bellows.
are added as the work proceeds, the stoking with
B, bellows in use; B', bellows un­
charcoal, together with the occasional letting out
covered.
of slag, being sufficient occupation for one man.
C, sticks acting as springs to raise
The bellows, from which a continuous blast is kept
cover of bellows.
for three hours or more, are worked by two other
D, stakes supporting strap for blower.
men, who share the work by turns; they are of a
E, well of furnace.
primitive but ingenious type. Behind the furnace
F, bank of sand closing opening.
are embedded vertically in the ground two logs of
GG, flat surface, about 2 feet 9 inches
wood, about 17 inches in diameter, and hollowed
above the ground, at level of III in
out above to a depth of three or four inches ; over
Fig. 99.
each of these a piece of deer skin is tied, having
KLMN, line of section of Fig. 99.
a small hole near its centre, and at the centre a
piece of cord attached, which latter is fastened
six or seven feet above to a springy stick, the lower end of
which is embedded in the ground. From each of these two
sections of the bellows a small pipe conducts the blast into
the hole leading to the well of the furnace. The bellows
blower stands with his feet, one on each of the deer skins,
facing the wall and lifting and putting down his feet in turn,
drives a continuous blast of air into the furnace ; for as he
puts down his foot to press out the air from one skin, he covers
the hole in it with the sole of his foot ; and meanwhile the
other skin is filled with air through the hole, which is
uncovered when he lifts his foot, the skin being pulled up by Fig. 99. Section of iron
the tension of the bent stick upon the string. On either side furnace shown in plan in
of t he blower is a stake which he grips hold of, and to which Fig, 98; i inch = i foot.
a strap is fastened that passes round behind him and supports The well is filled with ore
his back. and charcoal. Lettering as
After three hours or more, when the iron is found to be ready, in Fig. 98.
the sand is cleared away and the bloom pushed out through
the opening, and then follows the process of “cutting the iron.”
The bloom of iron is taken up in long tongs made of greenwood sticks tied together near
one end, and it is then beaten a little into shape with thick sticks ; then while it is held
down on a log with two of the wooden tongs a third man takes a ketta and cuts the lump
191

Metalwork of iron nearly haff through ; the gash so made is widened by the insertion of a green log,
which is beaten in so as to force the edges further -apart ; this is done that the quality
Iron of the iron may be examined, for the outside is spongy, and the whole texture far from
smelting homogeneous. The bloom is then thrown into water and afterwards taken out and left
to finish cooling.
The bloom thus made is soft and malleable, and weighs about 6 lb.; it is sold to the
blacksmiths for 50 cents.
It is of interest to note that there was evidently associated with the iron smelters’ furnace,
as with all agricultural and craft operations, some idea of ceremonial purity and of religion.
I have not been able to obtain any songs relating to the subject, but it is noted by Lawrie
(Gazetteer, p. 686) that in 1811 when some villagers had gone, as they often did, to Nuvara
Eliya to smelt iron, that one of their companions fell sick, whereupon he was at once carried
away, lest by death he should defile the furnaces. Some hint of a survival of primitive
j religious ideas is also found in the two cobras which may be seen moulded on the wattle-
and-daub wall of the steel furnace, PI. LIIL, 5 and 6.
Steel The manufacture of steel, even as a service rent is quite extinct ; but two very old men
manufacture at Alutnuvara still keep up the tradition, and are able to demonstrate the process when
required ; with these men a knowledge of the process will be gone, so that a record of
their methods is of much value. The steel makers are smiths {navandanns), thus of much
higher caste than the yamannu from whom they buy the iron required. Thé process of
steel making is more delicate than that above described. The furnace (PI. LIII., 5 and 6,
and Fig. too) is smaller, and at the ground level, instead of being raised three feet above
the ground ; it is a semi-circular hearth filled with charcoal, into which air is conducted
from the bellows, which rre identical with those of the iron furnace. The hearth is defined
by a low clay wall, rising about six inches above the ground. The steel is made in clay
crucibles, each about eight inches long, two inches
oO oO in diameter, and a quarter of an inch in thickness.
Into the crucible is put a piece of iron, with some
chips of ranavara {Cassia auriculata); in the pro­
portion of I2| oz. iron to 5 oz. wood,* in the case
examined. The crucible is covered with a lid,
having small holes pierced for the escape of gas;
six crucibles thus prepared are embedded in the
charcoal, and a fire started. Very soon the gases
burn off, and while this goes on the blowing is
stopped. Then the blast is kept up continuously,
while the tubes are turned about and more char­
coal added, the great object being to keep up a
constant and even distribution of heat. When the
Fig. too. Plan of steel furnace, steel is likely to be ready, a hole is opened in the
Alutnuvara, Balangoda: ^ inch = i front part of the hearth, so that the blast goes right
foot. Lettering as before. through the furnace, and the tubes are lifted up
one by one in long iron tongs and shaken to see
if the steel is quite liquid. Any which are not quite ready are returned to the furnace
* Ondaatje {loc. cit.) gives seven parts of iron to three of dried wood as the proportion producing
the best steel. He states also that the wood of kuiu-miris {T'oddalid aculeata) is also used, and the
proportions are then three of iron to one of wood, or better, five of iron to one of wood; but the steel so
made is of inferior quality.
192

for a time. The others are laid down to cool and subsequently broken open and the bar Metal work
of steel removed. The steel is highly crystalline, and is used for the best cutting tools.
The bars, which weigh from 12 to 15 oz., are worth from 75 cents to a rupee each.
A specimen of the steel has been analyzed at the Imperial Institute, with the following
results :—
Per cent. Per cent.
99’77
Iron ... ... Sulphur ... ... 0^07
Manganese ... 0’07 Phosphorus ... o'oz
Silicon ... ... 0'07 Carbon (combined) ... i '97
The steel is thus very free from sulphur and phosphorus and very rich in carbon. It is Steel
stated to resemble somewhat the older forms of Sheffield tool steel, which, however,
seldom contained more than i'5 per cent of carbon. The high percentage of carbon is
characteristic and interesting, for it has been pointed out by Ritter Cecil von Schwarz*
that “it is well known by every manufacturer of crucible cast steel how difficult it is *
sometimes to get the exact degree of hardness to suit certain purposes, especially with
reference to steel for cutting blades, &c. With the ordinary process endeavours are made
to reach the required degree of hardness by selecting such raw materials as on an average
have the required contents of carbon in order to correspond with the required hardness as
far as possible. The natives [of India] reached this degree by introducing into their cast
steel an excess of carbon, by taking this excess gradually away afterwards, by means of
the slow tempering process, having it thus completely in their power to attain the exact
degree by interrupting this decarbonising process exactly at the proper time in order to
cast steel of a quality exactly suitable for the purpose.”
The work of the blacksmith falls to be considered next. The general duties of a smith Smiths'
are enumerated above, on p. 25. We have seen that he purchases iron from the smelter, services
This rough bloom he prepares for use by repeated heating and hammering ; or makes steel
from it in the manner already described. But the chief part of his work is the manufacture
of tools and implements. We have seen that for each royal manor, a smith was appointed
whose duty it was to make the tools required by the tenants ; and certain fees and perquisites
were due to the smith for this work, viz. a certain rate of corn in harvest time, according
to ancient custom, and extra presents in the case of special work. These smiths were
‘protected,’ for the tenants of each manor were compelled to go to their own smith, and
none else ; and any smith working out of his own district was liable to pay damages to
the smith whose rights were thus infringed.
Beside the smiths of the royal manors, who should probably be included under the Koftal-
badda group of state craftsmen (p. 55, above), there were the king’s craftsmen working
in the Four Workshops ; and the smiths who were tenants on private manors, or tenants
of religious foundations. The last named owed service rent to the proprietors, of which
services examples may be quoted. Thus, at Nàyakunjbura, Mátale North, tenants held
land s from the Dambulla Vihára ; the services, commutable for the considerable sum of
Rs. 54'20, were to supply the vihara with nails and keys at the Nànumura Mañgalya ; to
give one vahun-kctta and five hiramana (kitchen knives and rasps), iron being supplied ; to
give thirty days’ work in iron ; to appear before the incumbent at the Old and New Year
and eat each time, to give him six arecanut sheers and chisels or some such small articles,
and the same to the Vidáne ; to give fourpence as sivurumila ; to contribute one day’s share
to the dan-kada in common with the other pangu of the village (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 638).
* Quoted by P. C. Ray, 'History of Hindu Chemistry I ed. 1905, p. 55.
193

Metal work At Paldeijiya, ^Maftale North, Dulleve Adigar owned a blacksmiths’ pahguva, of one acre
two poles and two amut}u garden, the service for which, commutable at Rs. 15, were twice
Smiths' a year to give a penuma, each time an arecanut-slicer or a good knife; yearly to pay two
services ridls as ganpandura; to accompany the proprietor on important occasions not more than
twice a year, and carry the mura-avudha; to work as a blacksmith for thirty days a year,
the proprietor supplying the iron.
The blacksmith tenants of a navan-pahguva of i| acres at Alatuvagoda had to give yearly
a billhook, a coconut scraper, an arecanut-slicer and a pair of scissors to the devale; to
repair the locks and keys when required, and to nail laths; to appear before the Basnayaka
Nilame with two arecanut slicers to the kankinama (overseer) and to the vidane (headman).
These services were commutable for Rs. I9'40 (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, pp. 14, 15).
The blacksmith’s forge is somewhat similar to the smelter’s hearth, having a wattle and
daub wall between the hearth and the bellows. The latter may be of several kinds, either
like the English form, or the iron-smelter’s bellows already described, or consisting of
two bullock-hide bags, with a bamboo nozzle, and at the other end a wide slit with wooden
lips; air is admitted through these lips, which are then dosed and the bellows compressed;
the blower sits between the two bellows and works each in turn so as to keep up a continuous
blast. The blacksmith’s tools consist of hammers,
tongs and pincers, files, punches, etc., beside the
gal-toraparfaya (Fig. 91), or instrument for boring
holes, shown in use on PI. V., 6.
The chief work of ordinary smiths consisted in
making agricultural implements— mamoties (udalti),
billhooks (¿ift), sickles {d^-kcti)-, and knives (pihiyd),
arecanut-slicers {gird), and betel pounders. Their
other work consisted in making tools for carpenters,
ivory-workers, etc.; palanquin fittings, surgical
instruments, elephant goads {ahkus, hevdd), writing
styles, {ulkafu,panhit),\ock.%, keys, key-plates, hinges,
bolts, handles and handle roses, swords, guns, spears,
arrow heads.
Some of these may be referred to in greater detail.
The sickles (PI. XLV., i/|.) are provided with a
sharply serrated edge, and the blade ends in a fine
point, easily inserted between the stalks of the
grain. Punched ornament is commonly applied
I ^ O O O i
(Fig. 101). In rarer cases
the sickle may be damascened
and have an ivory handle. A
% % special smaller form is used
for reaping kurakkan (PI.
XLV., 13). Somewhat simi­
lar in appearance zxt pan-keti,
III.
grass mat-weavers’ knives, of Fig. 102. Details
Fig loi. Stamped ornament of which one end is adapted for of ornament from
iron sickles, x i. cutting, the other is lance damascened knives.
shaped, for purposes of inser­
tion between the strands of plaited grass (PI. XLV., 11, 12). Knives are, of all Kandyan
‘curiosities,’ perhaps the best known to collectors. The simplest are of plain steel, but
194

very graceful form, with wooden or horn handles, and carried in the belt every villager, Metal work
to lop off inconvenient branches as he passes through the jungle, to open coconuts, or cut
jungle ropes. From these knives there are all transitions to the most elaborate and costly Knives
of silver or gold inlaid and overlaid knives worn by the greatest chiefs as a part of the
costume, and never intended for use. The workmanship of many of these is most exquisite,
the mounting and sheaths being equally beautiful (PI. XLVII., i-8); but this fine work
is done rather by the higher craftsmen, the silversmiths and ivory carvers, than by the mere
blacksmith. Many of the best knives were doubtless made in the Four Workshops, the
blades being supplied to the silversmith by the blacksmiths. Folding knives are rarely
seen (PI. XLVII., 9, and XL., 18).
The blacksmiths’ almost invariable penuma to the proprietor consists of a giraya or arecanut Arecanut
slicer. The nature of these most indispensable of personal possessions will be understood slicers
from the illustrations on PI. XLVL, 1-9; these represent a few of the more elaborately
ornamented forms, but the variety and number is so great as to make it impossible to do
this adequately. The killotaya or lime box is but rarely made of iron or steel, but generally
of copper, brass, or one of the precious metals. Betel pounders {bulat-vangeii) are small
iron mortars with a brass-mounted pestle working through a screw lid, used by old and
toothless persons for grinding up the ingredients of a chew (betel leaf, lime and spices).
Elephant goads are often elaborate and beautiful, and even if of plain iron are well shaped
and graceful. They are said to be formed after the mod^l of the claw of the (t-kanda-lihirtiya,
the great elephant-devouring roc (Fig. 16). They are mounted on lacquered sticks and
used as indicated in PI. I., by the rider and the keeper of the elephant; the name aiikusa
4
is applied to the rider’s goad, hen uva to the keeper’s.
Palanquin fittings are of damascened iron, often beautiful and elaborate; good examples
may be seen at the Kandy Maha Devale and the Vishiju Devale, Hanguranketa. Generally
of plain iron are the two kontiru or iron palanquin-rests, which are mounted on lacquered
staffs carried by the bearers, to support the pole of the palanquin whilst resting.
Surgical instruments appear to have been made. Sinhalese medicine is stronger on the Surgical
side of drugs and applications than in practical surgery; at any rate not much is known instruments
of medical instruments in use, but Mr. Bell states that the Gefaberiya family of Gopala
Moors are in possession of ‘some implements of surgery made of iron, steel and brass, for
excising wounds, cauterization, etc.’ (Kegalla Report, p. 100). The Gopala Moors referred
to were hereditary medical practitioners, much favoured by the Kandyan kings.
Of writing styles, referred to above on p. 49, the majority are of steel, and all have at least Writing
a steel point and cutting edge. The common form is that of the gold style of Fig. 129, styles
but variously ornamented styles are also found. The essential point is that the style should
be long and heavy enough, and well
balanced, so as to form the rounded letters
well. The leaf to be written upon is held
in the left hand, and the point of the style
is set in a notch in the left thumb nail, while
it is moved with the other hand.
Iron or steel locks, handles and door bolts Locks and
are amongst the best types of Kandyan bolts
smithying. Locks are almost always of one
Fig. 103. Narissa yatura,‘bax-loc^i,'L)egz\- form, the narissa yatura, or bar lock. The
doruva Vihara: from copy of the original form of these locks will be understood from
made for the author by a Kandyan black­ Fig. 103. It will be seen that in this
1
smith. X about . instance the bar is square in section, and
02 , 1 9 5

Metalwork the liasp hinged; more often the bar is round in section, and with the hasp moves in one
piece on its own axis. Plate XLIIIa, 7, however, shows another lock-bar, which is also
Locks and flat and provided with a hinged hasp, not seen in the picture. The great variety and
bolts excellence of the workmanship of these locks, which are best seen on the doors of old
viharas, makes them a source of perpetual interest; one regrets the more that all demand
for such work is now extinct, and if locks are used, they are either of European manufacture,
or so poor design (as at K$galla Ambalam) as to be contemptible.
The bar locks have large and beautiful keys, brass and silver mounted (PI. XLIIIa, 5, and
Fig. 104. Iron key-plate, Dana- Fig. 105. Iron key-plate, x |.
girigala Vihara. x f. Malvatte Pansala.
XLIV., 8). Noteworthy also are the key-
plates, often of brass, as in PI. XLIIIa, 5, but
also of iron or steel. Fig. 104 shows a fine
example from Danagirigala Vihara, having the
4
form of a bhsrur} a-pakshaya. In many cases
the key-plates are much plainer, but still of
very elegant outline; a large series is shown in
Fig. 107, including some of iron and some of
brass. Another iron key-plate is shown in Fig.
105, having the form of a ¿i-leaf.
A form of lock much more rarely met with is
the ambarana yatura or ratchet lock; here the
bar is moved by a toothed turnkey, and the form
of the key-hole is correspondingly modified
(Fig. 106).
Bolts, as we have seen, are in most cases of wood.
Iron bolts are less often seen. Fig. 108 repre­
sents such a bolt from a window in tht pohoya-ge
at Malvatte Pansala. The bolt is in the form
196

yn
Metal "work of a bird, the beak engaging with a Staple, and the
flattened tail used as a lever to turn the whole
^Qlts /■----- y / bolt about the nail that fastens it.
A great variety of ingenious
bolts are found inside the
brass tobacco boxes (heppti)
in common use. They are
of brass or iron, or both Fig. 109. Catch of
combined, manipulated by a brass box, seen from
turning bosses or rivets on within. Copper,
form of a bird, Malvatte Pansala,
the outside of the box ; the brass, and iron, x
box is ‘locked’ by turning
turning the two annular holdfasts with which the bar can engage only when in the correct
position. An example of such a catch is shown in Fig. 109.
Hinges Hinges are not often met with, as in most cases the old-fashioned massive doors turn on
wooden tenons. But massive iron hinges are to be seen at the Dajada Maligava, and hinges
are sometimes found in other buildings. Fig. iio, i, shows the hinge of a window leaf
from the Girihagama Valavva in Kandy; the
same figure, ii., shows a hinge from Dodantale
Vihara, and iii., a hasp from the same place. The
iron rivets used to fasten hinges are sometimes
in — s—
--------___________ ''xbnn
Fig. IIO. Iron hinges and hasp, i., from
Girihagama Valavva, Kandy ; ii. and iii. from
Dodantale Vihara. x
of good form; a few are illustrated in Fig. in. It will be seen that all the hinges
are distinctly Kandyan in details, but it is, nevertheless, uncertain if the hinge can-be
regarded as strictly indigenous, and not of European origin. Tamil and Sinhalese iron­
work show undoubted European influence. This is more clearly seen in the low-country,
and especially at Jaffna, than in Kandyan work. Fig. 117 shows a brass hinge from an
old Dutch house at Jaffna; Fig. 115 a detached brass hinge, also obtained in Jaffna ; and
Fig. 113 an iron hinge from a Dutch almirah in Jaffna, evidently of local manufacture,
but unmistakeably deriving from European forms. These may serve to illustrate the strong
European influence evident in such types of ironwork. The same thing will be seen quite
as clearly in the brass key-plates described and illustrated below. Semi-European iron
and brass fittings are characteristic of the ‘Indo-Portuguese’ chests or presses, which are
most abundant in Jaffna and the low-country, but are found also in vihara and devale
storerooms. These fittings include the hinges, locks, key-plates, handles and bossed rivets.
PI. XLIIIa,3, shows a small example of such a box with brass fittings.
Handles and handle roses of plain or damascened iron or steel are like the bar locks, necessary
parts of the furniture of a vihara door. Such handles consist of three parts, the ring, the
staple, and the handle-rose. The rose is almost always domed. In most cases the whole
198

Fig. 112. Iron handle of large press,
pohoya-gs, Malvatte Pansala.
Fig. 113. Metal hinge of
almirah, JafFna. Adapted
European form, x |.
Fig. 114. Part of a handle
rose, BisOvela Vihara, K$-
galla Dist. A, brass overlay Fig. 116. Brass hinge, from old house
in form of ¿ff-leaf; b, silver at JafFna. European form, x i.
wire inlay.
A ,0
Fig. 115. Details of
damascening.
A. Brass on steel.
B. Silver and brass on Fig. uy. Brass hinge, JafFna. European
steel. form. X
o 4 199

Metalwork is elaborately damascened. PI. IV., 3, shows a blacksmith at work damascening a handle-
rose with silver wire.
Damascen- A digression is made here to explain the nature of the damascening. This takes in Ceylon
ing three forms; the simplest is that known in Northern India as koftgari, where the surface
of the iron is roughened by fine crossed scratching, and the silver wire pressed into these,
engaging firmly with the rough surface. This method is only employed in inferior work,
and is not very often met with. The two other forms, which are generally combined in
the same piece of work, are those of inlay and overlay. In the case of inlay, a very narrow
groove is cut in the steel, and the silver or brass wire laid in this; the surface is then
hammered, causing the two sides of the groove to grip the silver wire very tightly; and
when the surface is smoothed and filed, the design shows up brightly in clear outline.
In the case of overlay, the surface to be covered is first slightly excavated, and round its
circumference a groove is undercut in the matrix; then the brass or silver plate is fitted
into the groove, and the overhanging edge of it beaten down so as to hold the overlaid
plate quite firmly. In most cases the surface of the matrix is carved before the overlay
is applied, and then the design appears in relief through the overlay, the silver or brass
being beaten down on to the carved matrix until closely moulded to its surface. The
overlaid metal may also be chased after its application to the matrix. These various ways
of damascening are known as ridi-ketayan-ve^a. The work is for the most -part done by
blacksmiths; but the finer knives and boxes are made by silversmiths.
Colouring Kandyan blacksmiths frequently make use of a method of colouring their wrought iron
iron work, the effect of which is to darken the surface and make it look like European ‘blued’
steel; the process is adapted to show up damascened work well against the dark surface,
and also to check rusting. The process is by way of being a trade secret. The recipe
is as follows :—Take three parts of sinakkdran (alum), one part of pal-manikkan (copperas),
two parts of the leaves of (hm^ fmbul-fmbiliya [Oxalis corniculata, L.) and grind together
and allow to stand three days; add the juice of one lime, and spread over the iron to be
coloured ; place carefully in the fire till the right colour is attained. The process is called
4
yaka a pafa ganava or yakaia kalu karai}ava (to colour or blacken iron).
Apparently the oxalic or other organic acid in the preparation reduces any higher oxide
of iron to the ferrous state, and when applied to the steel and heated, slight etching takes
place and a probable reduction of part of the sulphate to sulphide of iron. The temperature
employed would affect the amount of reduction and oxidation. The blue colour is probably
due to an uneven distribution of oxide and sulphide of iron.
Brass work i@k Brass wares fall into two groups, the wrought and the cast. In a general way, the ham­
mered and chased work is done by silversmiths, the cast work by the IskaruvO or founders,
who belong to the lower group of the craftsmen. The wrought work includes, as has
already been partly indicated, hinges, key-plates, boxes, trays, lanterns, lime-boxes, arecanut
slicers, and mountings of all kinds, as well as some of the cheaper kinds of jewellery.
Brass hinges are characteristic and beautiful; they show, however, as above suggested,
traces of European influence. Fig. 122 shows several hinges and a catch, from various
•usv^l-petti or cane baskets, and PI. XLIIIa, 8, shows one of these baskets with the hinge and
handle in situ. Another brass hinge appears on the wooden abharana-petfiya, PI. XIII., 3.
4
Brass key-plates {muna-taha ti) are common ; many show in their design strong European
influence, others are partly or wholly of Sinhalese design. The appearance of these key-
plates will be better understood from the accompanying figures (Figs. 118, r 19, 120, 121)
than from any description. They are generally both pierced and chased. The pierced
key-plates are sometimes mounted over red cloth to show up the pattern the better.
Brass boxes are found in great variety, and here again there is strong evidence of European
200

Fig. 118. Brass key-plate, from large press in pjg j j g. Brass key-plate with hamsa
pohoya-ge, Malvatte Pansala. x Slightly puttuva, Malvatte Pansala. x i.
restored.
Fig. 120. Brass key-plate, Malvatte
Pansala. Original mounted over red Fig. I2I. Brass key-plate.
cloth. X f. Ma^uvanvela, Sab. x |.
201

Fig. 122. Brass hinges, lock, and catches from cane baskets {vevel-petti).
Fig. 123. Decoration of underside of brass x i.
influence. The flat oval Dutch tobacco boxes (heppii) are still quite commonly distributed
in the Kandyan provinces; and still more common are the locally made betel boxes of the
same form but engraved with purely Sinhalese designs. Examples of these have been
given in Figs. 11, 28, and 68 ; another is here illustrated in Fig. 123.
The large brass trays still made at the Kacceri under the auspices of the Kandy Art
Association, are amongst the few purely Kandyan manufactures which continue to be made
in considerable numbers and of good workmanship. They were used for offerings of
flowers or food at temples, or for the presentation of gifts to king or chieftain, or for handing
round betel leaves at an entertainment such as a wedding. The trays still made are a
storehouse of Sinhalese design, remaining almost entirely traditional in treatment; but a
Japanese motif, a large peacock with tail outspread is often introduced as a centre. The
Kandyan brass work thus still made is of better quality than almost any Indian brass ware
made for sale to tourists; that of Benares is about the worst,—and the best patronised. The
202

English and American tourists in search of Indian ‘curios’ is, it may be remarked, as a Metalwork
rule almost devoid of taste and intelligence. In Ceylon this defect is made up for by the
help of the Kandy Art Association, which guarantees good work and generally secures it,
at any rate in brass, if not always in silver.
Door handles in brass are illustrated on PI. XLIII., 3 and 7, and
PI. XLIIIa, 6. Fig. 124 shows the smaller handle of a cupboard.
The handles of all small boxes, heppu, etc., are also generally of
brass, sometimes of silver (PI. XLIIIa, 3 and 8).
Dishes of brass, sometimes bronze and rarely silver, were used for
eating rice, a leaf being laid on the dish, and the rice itself on the
leaf. These disfies, or t^i, for serving or taking rice are very
common.
Arecanut slicers {girò) are commonly made of brass, the cutting
blade, of course, excepted. PI. XLVL, 9, shows a very fine
example, inlaid with silver wire ; Nos. 4 and 8 are also of brass.
Fig. 124. Brass handle,
Brass casting is a craft as important or more so than that of wrought Brass
■ Mahavalatenna.
brass ; but the lokarmo or founders belong to the lower division of casting
the craftsmen. A brassfounder’s workshop is shown on PI. V., 6.
Three furnaces with crucibles are seen in the foreground, and some moulds on the left
hand at the back. The method of casting is that known as ciré perdue. In the case of
solid articles such as images, a mould is first made in wax, then covered with fireproof
clay prepared from white ants’ nests and other ingredients ; the wax is then melted out
(through a hole in this covering of clay, and replaced by molten metal. In the case of
hollow vessels, a solid model of the fireproof clay is first made, and a wooden rod being
driven through the centre of the mass, it is turned smooth on a lathe. The model is then
covered with wax, again turned smooth, and covered with clay. When dry, the wax
is melted out through a hole in this outer layer, and replaced by metal. Objects so cast
in brass are afterwards turned smooth, or carved or repoussed or damascened.
Various vessels are cast in brass and bronze. Perhaps the commonest of these is the kotalaya. Brass
or water vessel found at every vihara, where it contains the water used to sprinkle flowers vessels
laid upon the altar ; these are open spouted vessels, and are also used for drinking from,
the water being poured from the spout to the mouth, with the hand held below the lip
to form a cup, thus avoiding contact of the vessel with the mouth ; but the vessels so used
are generally made of earthenware. A vessel much less often seen is the tel-kulava, with
a narrow grooved spout ; these are used to hold coconut oil for replenishing lighted lamps.
4
Another kind of water vessel is the kev iya, a spouted vessel with a lid ; I have seen only
three examples, one in copper, and two in silver, but there can be little doubt that they
were also made in brass. A common form of brass water vessel in domestic use is the
gurulettu or ‘goglet,’ usually with a hinged lid. These are large below, with a tall narrow
neck. Another vessel not rarely seen is the wide-mouthed sembu, or lota, but these are
generally importations from India or the north of Ceylon. The same applies to the great
brass water vessels carried by women on the hips, which, however, are not often seen in
Sinhalese districts, where earthen vessels are in general use. Many or most of the large
brass lamps, and rivetted copper cauldrons, are rather the work of Indian craftsmen settled
in the low-country, than of actual Kandyan smiths.
A common piece of cast brass is the serak-kak ; this is a low stand for a plate or leaf of rice,
used at meal times, or sometimes to hold the ingredients and accessories of a betel chew.
The typical bulat-taffuva or betel tray, however, differs from the serak-kale in having a more
or less basin shaped, instead of a nearly flat surface. The ornamentation of the serak-kale
203

Metal work is often interesting, consisting of spirals and double
spirals (Fig. 125), obtained by applying ‘worms’ of
I
wax to the surface of the original mould; ‘ cable,’ in
imitation of twisted wire is similarly produced.
Bronze Bronze is less commonly used than brass for casting;
but some objects, such as elephant bells, cymbals,
moulds for beating up brass, silver, or gold, tools used
OtyV^ by repoussers are almost invariably of bronze. PI.
XLV., 7, shows a bronze camphor burner, perhaps of
Fig. 125. Ornament of cast brass, Indian origin. Bronze elephant bells are shown on
produced by application of string PI. XLIV., 3, and XLV., 8. An example of the kind
wax to the surface of the wax of mould referred to is seen in the model of a shoe
mould. represented on PI. XLV., i. This was the mould for
the gold Shoes of State {miri V(ia sangala) worn py ,,
Narendra Siijiha; it is still in the possession of the Mangalagama galaddo who made the
shoes. In recent times a model has been made in copper and placed in the Cblomb»
Museum. Moulds for small boxes, such as that shown in PI. XLIIL, 5, are similarly
used by gold and silversmiths, but such moulds are also made of wood.
Lamps Lamps are made of brass, less often of bronze; there are two main types, the standing
lamps and the hanging. Of the latter, the variety is
very great. Perhaps the most interesting are those in
the form of birds, shown on PI. XLIV., 4, and Fig. 126.
A common type is barrel-shaped; another kind has.
the form of an elephant. In almost all cases the mouth
of the lamp is fashioned as a i?rapendiya head; some­
times a small bird is perched above, as on the lamp
shown in PI. XLIV., 4. Fig. 5 on the same Plate
shows a small standing lamp; like most of its kind this
lamp is of Indian form, and, indeed, probably of Tamil
manufacture. Similar lamps with five or more wicks
are also made to hang.
Cressets Fig. 126. Brass hanging lamp. Generally made of bronze are the cressets {at-pandam).
Lankatilaka Vihâra. Length These have the form of hafted cups, for attachment to
inches. a lacquered wooden handle. The Dajada Mah'gava
has one of silver with an ivory handle. Bronze cressets
are illustrated on PI. XLV 2, 3, and 5, and in Fig. 127
representing a specially beautiful form, wdth lotus petal
motif. These cressets are used at night, to burn oily
tow and resin, the bowl being held low so as to light
the ground. Less often seen are double or triple
cressets with long handles for carrying erect in proces­
sions.
We find that some dévales had tenants whose duty it
was to carry these cressets on perah^ra nights. At Fig. 127. Bronze cresset, lotus
Vallahago(Ja, for example, a '■ pandan-allana'' tenant form. Handle missing. Diameter
had, beside other duties, to ‘carry a pandama supplied of bowl, 4 inches.
by himself and steeped in oil supplied by the dévale
for fifteen nights of the perahfra at Vallahagofia.’ Dhoby tenants (washermen) had to
supply the rag balls for burning with oil in the hand cressets. Thus at Palipâna, the
204

tenant of a rada paAguva belonging to the Palipana Vihara had to offer to the Diva Nilame Metal work
and to the kartya-kararfa-rala (bailiff) of the Maligava soon after the New Year a white
Kandyan hat each, and to supply for the perahp-a fifty rag balls called pandan-ui}di ; these
services were commutable for Rs. 8'8o (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 686).
Copper is more sparingly used than brass ; but in the case of lime boxes {killofa) we find. Copper
perhaps, more examples in copper than in any other metal. The finest example is that
shown on PL XLVL, lo. This very old specimen is of copper filigree set with cabochon
glass over foil in lieu of garnets. The design and workmanship are bold and romantic,
and the form unusual. Copper killota of the more usual form are shown on the same
Plate in Figs, ii and 12; it will be observed that inlay of silver wire on copper has a
specially clear and good effect. On PI. XLIIIa, i, is shown a very handsome copper
keitdiya or water vessel from the Ridi Vihàra. The neck and lid are set with cabochon
garnets, and the neck, base and spout are beautifully chased with liya pata scrolls. Fig. 2
on the same Plate represents a horn powder flask mounted in silver-plated copper filigree.
Clepsydras or water clocks {pMefl) were of copper. These instruments were used Water-
only by thè king and by the astrologers. “ They have,” says PCnox, “ no Clocks, Hour-glasses, clocks
or Sun-Dials, but keep their time by guess. The King indeed hath a kind of Instrument
to measure time. It is a Copper Dish holding about a Pint, with a very small hole in the
bottom. This Dish they set a swimming in an Earthen Pot of water, the water leaking
in at the bottom till the Dish be full, it sinks. And then they take it out, and set it empty
on the water again, and that makes one Pay. Few or none use this but the King, who
keeps a man on purpose to watch it continually. The people will use it upon some
occasions, as if they are to sow their Corn at any particular hour, as being the good lucky
Season, then they make use of the Copper Pan, to know the time exactly.” The piya, or
'■ Pay' as Knox calls it, is an ‘hour’ of twenty-four minutes, thirty making a day; the
pi-tefiya usually measure one p?ya, but there are others larger and smaller.
The tragic Story of Dilavati, the learned daughter of the great Indian astronomer. Dilavati
Bhaskaracarya, is called to mind by these water clocks. It had been foretold that Dilavati
would lose her husband soon after marriage, unless the ceremony were performed at a
certain auspicious moment. Her father prepared the wedding ceremonies accordingly,
and set the water clock to sink at the auspicious moment and so give the signal for tbe
ceremony to be performed. The child, however, in her play, found the dish, and leaning
over the basin in which it was floating, a pearl fell from her necklace and blocked the hole
by ^hich water was filling the bowl ; and it was not till long after the set time that the
distracted father found that his precautions had been taken in vain ; and it was after this
that he determined that she, even if widowed, should at least be the great and learned
woman she afterwards became.
A remarkable alloy, used as a niello, and also in the manufacture of certain small articles
such as nails used in superstitious ceremonies, is pas-ls or ‘ five metals.’ It appears to have
consisted of gold, silver, copper, lead and iron. The following couplet details its com­
position in the above sense: ‘PaHca lohan hema raupyan, tamrayah sisakan matam.’ It is
said that lokada (bronze or bell-metal) is sometimes used instead of lead.
Silver and gold articles, other than jewellery, are naturally rare. The country was not Gold and
rich in specie, and it is said that even the revenue paid to the last king, who has the silver plate
reputation of an extortioner, did not exceed 15,000 Rupees, the then equivalent of ,^1500.
The finest examples of gold and silver plate remaining are to be found in temples, the
king’s own property having been for the most part looted and removed in 1815. PI. XDID
shows a number of silver and gold articles from Kandy temples. The silver lamp, the
gold fan {ran-vafaha-pata) and betel stand {dalamura tafuva) are of exceedingly fine design
205

Metal work and workmanship. The silver ken^iya from the Mahâ Dévale is also very beautiful, and
noticeable for its simplicity and restraint. The little pacca-kusalana or sandal wood paste
cup, gold mounted and set with rubies and sapphires, is said to have beet} dedicated by
Rajadhi Raja Simha, with the jaya saka and the Algama sannasa, after a victory over the
Dutch at Gurubebile ; it was no doubt used at Royal inauguration ceremonies, when the
sword of state was first girded on a new king. On such occasions, the sword having been
girded on the prince by a member of the Pilima Talava family, whose privilege this was,
the Kapurala “presented a pot of sandal-powder, in which the prince, who may now be
called king, dipped his fingers and touched the sword ; and this ceremony was performed
in the Maha as well as in the Nâta Dévale” (Davy, ‘Travels in Ceylon,’ p. i68).
Kandyan “The royal throne,” says Davy, “was of plated gold, ornamented with precious stones.”
throne The throne thus referred to is now at Windsor Palace, where, by the kindness of
Mr. Fortescue, I have had an opportunity of examining it. It is a large arm chair, covered
with repoussé gold plate, set with gems, amongst, -
which are a few turquoises, the only ones I haVa
seen in Kandyan work. The other gems arfi,
mainly amethysts and crystal. The arms end
in characteristic lions. The back has a sun-face
in the centre, flanked by dévas on lotus thrones.
The detail of this work is very beautifully
executed. The remainder of the gold plate is
chased in somewhat florid style with designs of
the pine-apple, sun-flower and acanthus foliage
type, suggestive of European influence. On
the top of the back are three cut crystal balls.
Palanquins Palanquin fittings are of iron, brass, or silver.
Fig. 128 shows details from the brass fittings of
a palanquin at the Vishiju Dévale, Haoguran-
keta ; Knox remarks of Royal palanquins {ran-
doli) that they are “nothing so well made as in
other parts of India. The ends of the Bambou
it is carried by, are largely tipped with silver,
and curiously wrought and engraven : for he
hath very good workmen of that professipn.”
Ceremonial pingoes may also be silver tipped,
as in the case of a beautiful example at the
Embekke Dévale (PI. LIE, 2).
Begging Begging bowls were generally made of iron,
bowls rarely of precious metals. There is a gold
bowl, if I remember rightly, at the Daladâ
Fig. 128. Brass palanquin fittings. Maligâva. A copper giltpdtra is mentioned in
Vishiju Dévale, Haoguranketa. a sannasa as having been given by Naréndra
Simha to the Maniyangama Vihara. The
copper bowl has the royal sign manual, upon it (Bell, Kegalla Report, p. 66).
Royal The king took great delight in cunning workmanship. We may picture him going about
patronage the Four Workshops and keenly criticising all that was going forward there, just as Akbar
the Great and other Eastern rulers have ever been wont to do. This royal interest in art and
craft must not be regarded as the mere amusement of an idle monarch ; the proper compre­
hension of such matters belonged to ideal of kingly state. The destruction of the state
206

patronage of craft which followed upon the British occupa'tiony .struck one of the many Metalwork
blows at the national culture, which have so impoverished thé outlook of the Sinhalese
people during the last hundred years, inflicting injury which it will take a great deal of
‘compulsory education’ to cure.
Knox relates of Raja Siipha that he took great delight in the crafts: “he will try his Royal
Guns, and shoot at Marks, which are excellently true, and rarely inlay’d with silver. Gold, patronage
and Ivory. For the Smiths that make them dare not present them to his hand, not having
suiBciently proved them. He hath Eight or Nine small Cannon, lately taken from the
Dutch, which he hath mounted in Field-Carriages, all rarely carved, and inlay’d with Silver
and Brass, and coloured Stones, set in convenient places, and painted with Images and
Flowers. But the Guns disgrace the Carriages. He keeps them in an House on the
Plain. Upon some Festival times he useth them. I think, they are set there chiefly for
a Memorial of his late Victories: For he hath many, and far better Guns of Brass that
;.are not so regarded.
.;“ln his Palace he passeth his time with looking upon certain Toyes and Fancies that he
>i^ath,-;and upon his arms and Guns, calling in some or other of his great Men to see the
same, asking them if they have a Gun will shoot further than that : and how much Steel
such a Knife, as he will shew them, needs to have in it.”
The ran-avudha-kkam-mahâtmaya, or keeper of the armoury, had charge of the royal arms,
of which he kept a register, and it was his business to see that they were kept in good order
by the different smiths attached to the department. Attached to this department were
forty-eight young men of rank who assisted the kkam-mahatmaya (Davy “^Travels in
Ceylon,’ p. 153).
Sannas or charters are generally engraved on copper, less often on silver or gold. The Sannas
Mahâ Devale possesses a gold sannasa, which is kept in a silver-mounted ivory box
(PI. XL., 7). Copper sannas are much commoner, and are to be found in the hands of temple
representatives, and lay grantees of lands or villages. In some cases they are very beauti­
fully engraved and ornamented, as may be seen from the reproductions of sannas in Bell’s
‘ Report on the Kegalla District.’ The Molligoda sannasa, for example, is a silver-mounted
copper plate, 19^ by 3! inches, smooth and polished, the letters small, close and beautifully
engraved. The royal sign manual, ÈRI, which heads every such grant, is inlaid in gold,
within a plain space, having an embossed fluted gold framing raised upon the surface of
the plate. This sannasa, dated áaka 1736 (a.d. 1814) was perhaps the last sannasa obtained
from a Kandyan king ; in workmanship it must be one of the most beautiful.
Another fine sannasa is the Gefaberiya sannasa (a.d. 1760). It also is a copper plate
with ornamental silver framing ; the ÈRI is inlaid in gold, with a sun and moon face,
sixteen stars and fourteen flower ornaments. These and other sannas are figured by
Mr. Bell.
Religious books, especially satras, or sermons of the Buddha, were also sometimes engraved
on metal plates and dedicated to a temple, as an act of merit, sometimes especially intended
for enshrinement in a dâgaba.
A beautiful piece of goldsmith’s work is the gold writing style {panhiÿda) of Fig. 129. It Writing
bears the royal sign, ÈRI, and is said to have been given by Narëndra Simha to Dehigama, style
who held the office of Mahâgabadâ Nilame (Second Treasurer) and was also Diva Nilame
of the Mâligâva.
4
There is a reference in the Mátale Mahâ Disâvë Ka a-im-pota to a golden writing style {ran-
panhiuda), given as a badge of office to a public ofiicial : “ Niharepola Alahakkon Mohattâla
was appointed Lékama (Secretary) of Tun Korala, and also received the ran-panhinda and
the flag” (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 552). It will be remembered also that before the Mahâ
207

Metal -work Lekama (First Secretary, or Treasurer) were carried in the perahera,
the ‘great record’ (maha lekammifiya) and the writing style, emblems
Writing of his office (p. 38, above). The gold style figured is therefore a badge
style of office of a Lekama.
The style is of the most usual and best form, similar to those commonly
made in steel. In this case only the point and knife edge are of steel.
The style has a beautifully carved wooden case, silver mounted and
ivory tipped. The names of the different parts of a style are indicated
at the side of the figure ; beginning from the top these names translated
mean : the ‘umbrella’ (so called from the resemblance to the talipot-
'leaf umbrella, seen on the right and left of the lower illustration on
PI. XXII.), the ‘leaf,’ the ‘pipe,’ the ‘knop,’ and the ‘pen.’ The right
proportion of these parts is laid down in a corrupt Sanskrit verse of
the Vaijayantaya, of which text and translation follow :
Chatra patra naia garf^an, Catur dvi tri eka mangalam,
Lekhantya dalangaca eva, Sarva vtsati mahgalam.
“The propitious (measurements) are for the chatra four, the patra two,
4
the nàia three, the gav a one and the kkhantya ten, and the whole,
twenty angal (inches).” The value of tradition in preserving the
right measurements in the case of a tool of this kind, where the relative
weight and balance of the parts are of so much importance, will be
easily understood.
‘Tools The tools used by goldsmiths are very simple. The gini-kabala is a
low earthen vessel or dish, generally a common nsmbiliya, filled with
chaff, covered by a little charcoal fire (see PI. VI., 6). With this fire
is used a small b^boo or metal blow-pipe, and a short earthen no2zle,
which is set in the fire and through which the blast is directed ; also
small crucible made of the clay of white ant hills. The other tools are
tongs and pincers, hammers and anvil (a square of steel or bronze
embedded in a heavy log, before which the jeweller squats), files,
gravers and chasers, doming blocks, bead punches, and sometimes one
or two bronze moulds for special purposes. The heat obtainable in
the simple furnace is very great, more than enough to melt silver or
gold pretty quickly. It is remarkable that with such a rough blow­
pipe such fine work can be done ; for the work to be soldered is placed
on the fire and covered with charcoal and heated through, instead of
directing a fine flame to one part alone. Different solders are used,
melting more or less readily ; and parts which must not be disturbed
writing style are also covered with a resistant preparation (powdered china paste)
{ran-panhinda), before the object is laid in the fire. The loose pieces to be soldered
length 14I inches. are kept in place by a sticky paste of olinda seed rubbed down on a
Black parts are rough stone.
steel. Author’s Certain special weights are used by goldsmiths, just as special measures
collection. are used by the carpenters. The weight chiefly used is the seed of
the madafiya {Adenanthera pavonia, L.). The average weight of these
seeds, which vary but little, is 3'6 grains. Twenty-four of these seeds make a kalaHji or
4
maHjs i.
208

A nalalpata is a gold or jewelled forehead plate, worn by the king, or others, chiefs or even Metal ’work
craftsmen, who have been honoured with patabendi names. Thé frontlet is in the latter
case calledpatatahaiuva. PL XXIII., 3,shows a design for ajewelled nalalpafa, for the king. Jewellery
Those worn by others consist of a plain gold plate of similar outline but smaller and without
the pearl pendants indicated in the design. The ceremony of naming, and assuming the
royal sword at the inauguration ceremony of a king, are thus described by Davy (p. 163) :
“it was that of choosing a name and putting on the regal sword. It was the duty of the
royal astrologers to ascertain a fortunate period for the ceremony, and invent fortunate
names ; each individual being required to write a name on a plate of gold, set with precious
stones, and deposit it in the Nata-dewale. On the day fixed, which was sometimes a year
or two after the election, the prince went in great state to the Maha-Visnu-dewale, where
he presented offerings and made prostrations to the god. Thence, he passed to the Nata-
dewale, and having gone through the same religious ceremony, he inspected the plates,
dhose the name that pleased him, and read it to the first Adikar, who proclaimed aloud,—
’‘’¡This is the name that the gods have chosen for the king to bear.’ Then the gold plate,
the Nàlalpate, on which the name was inscribed, was tied to the prince’s forehead by a
member of the Pilamë Talawë family, which being of royal descent, enjoyed this privilege
and that of putting on the regal sword, which was attached to a belt that passed over the
shoulder and came round the waist. The sword having been girded on the prince, the
Kapuralle presented a pot of sandal-powder, in which the prince, who may iiow be called
king, dipped his fingers and touched the sword ; and this ceremony was performed in the
Maha, as well as in the Nata-dewale.”
A short chapter of the Brihad Sanihita (Part II., Chapter II.) deals with royal forehead plates.
They are doubtless also referred to in the Vaijayantaya, the ieistra used by Sinhalese jewellers.
In this work are described the sixty-four kinds of royal ornaments and many other kinds of
jewellery and metal work, as in the verse quoted above (p. 208) detailing the measurements
of writing styles. The translation of this work, which Mudaliyâr E. R. Goonaratne kindly
undertook to prepare for me, is unfortunately not available at the time of writing the present
chapter.
The general character of Sinhalese jewellery may be gathered from Plates XLVII.— LI.
The examples illustrated belong for the most part to the finer kind of jewellery worn by
the ladies of rank. But a good deal of jewellery was also worn by men, and especially by
the king. “When the king,” says Davy, “appeared on state occasions, he was either
dressed in the most magnificent robes, loaded with a profusion of jewellery, or in complete
armour of gold,* ornamented with rubies, emeralds, and diamonds.” He almost always
carried a jewelled cane. A special officer {lekam-mahâtmaya) had charge of the jewels
which the king wore habitually. Davy states that but few others were permitted to wear
ornaments of gold : “ those only who have been honoured with presents of the kind from
the hand of royalty, to whom, according to their sumptuary laws, this precious metal is
peculiarly confined.” All gems were also reserved to the use of royalty. But splendid
jewellery was also worn by the chiefs and their families, and even the ordinary govi-vanisa
families had generally one or two gold chains and rings, and a good many of silver.
t©kGems were almost invariably cut ‘en cabochon,’ never facetted. Coloured gems so
cut produce rich colour effects, rather than the flashy brilliancy characteristic of so much
European jewellery. Many a ring or pendant set with rubies or comparatively small value,
has all the glow of an enamel ; whereas facetted stones reflect a much larger proportion
* The Maiigalagama galladds still possess old designs for such gold ^ armour d
209
P *

Metal work of white light, and cannot be used in the same way to produce a generally decorative and
harmonious effect. The Sinhalese lapidaries are very skilful in turning the smallest speck
'Jewellery of colour in a stone to good advantage, so that a good effect when set is produced. Stones
are also sometimes set over coloured paste or foil to enhance the colour effect; glass and
crystal are sometimes similarly treated.
The decorative principles so well understood by the old Sinhalese and Tamil jewellers are
now generally abandoned, and almost all make use of European trade catalogues as the
sources of their designs, to meet the demand of the ‘educated’ Sinhalese who want
‘improved jewellery,’ and the demand of tourists, whose only idea of unfacetted stones
is that they are ‘uncut’ and ‘barbaric.’
Degenera- At one time it occurred to me to lay considerable stress in this volume upon the degeneration
tion of modern Sinhalese craft; but it would have been a thankless task, and it will suffice to s»y
that nowhere is it more conspicuous than in jewellery, and in general, it could hardly be
more complete. It is a compliment to true Sinhalese art to say that the jewellery now
made has nothing characteristically Sinhalese about it. With the loss of the tradition-
of good design, has gone the capacity for fine work ; not only is it impossible to get fine old
work copied, but modern settings in particular are so insecure that the stones frequently
fall out in a few days. Sinhalese jewellery to-day has indeed sunk “ to the level of the
extravagantly hard and vulgar trinketry of Birmingham, Paris, and Vienna.”
Bezels It may be remarked that bezels with teeth or claws were unknown to Sinhalese jewellers
until modern times. When first introduced they were not ineffectively used, but are now
reduced to pin-like and hardly effective teeth which, as explained, fail to hold the gem
firmly. Old settings rather resembled damascening, in that the gem was held by the
undercut surface of the metal, as in a ‘gipsy’ ring. But the most characteristic setting
was that known as tahaiu kola bemma, where the gems are set in soft gold over wax, the
gold being moulded and pressed into shape around the gem as the work proceeds. Work
so done is extremely rich and decorative in effect, but difficult to repair.
Charms Not much is known of Sinhalese jewellery in relation to its talismanic and protective
character. The children’s pendant called divi niya fota, cheetah’s claws ornament, consists
of two cheetah’s claws, mounted in silver, and suspended by a chain about a child’s neck.
Examples are illustrated on PI. XLVIII., Figs. 9, 10, and 14-17. Many specimens have
on the reverse side, representations of the ‘Five Weapons’ of Vishiju (spear, sword, discus,
bow, and chank). A navaratna muduva is a ring set with nine stones, said to be those
associated with the influence of the nine planets. Amulets to hold charmed oil or written
mantrams are worn on armlets and waist belts. An armlet carrying such an amulet is
called keccagama (PI. XLIX., 13).
It will be observed that gems are used not only in actual jewellery, but also in the decoration
of copper, silver and gold plate (Pis. XLIL, 2, 3, and 5, XLIIIa, i), the handle of a staff
(PI. XXIII., 4), and even on furniture or on a door-leaf or jamb. The eflects produced
are decorative and harmonious.
A dat-katuva (toothpick) and kan-henda (ear-spoon, PI. XLVIII., 13), the former of silver
or ivory, the latter of silver, are almost universally carried. In the low-country it is not
Low-country unusual for women to carry silver chatelaines, based on European models, often consisting
Jewellery of a large bunch of sham keys. There is also a large group, comprising the Dutch forms
made at Matara, chiefly combs, brooches, buttons, rings. Matara diamonds (white zircons)
are largely used. PI. XLIX., i, shows a typical example of this work; Figs. 2 and 3
on the same Plate illustrate examples of a brooch and part of a hair pin set with facetted
coloured stones. Though generally poor in effect, this low-country ‘Indo-Dutch’ or
‘ Indo-Portuguese’jewellery is sometimes beautiful, and it is possible to meet with ear-rings,
210

brooches and buttons strongly reminiscent of seventeenth century Italian or Portuguese Metalwork
jewellery, and exceedingly beautiful.
It is, however, with Kandyan jewellery that we are specially concerned. As might be 'Jewellery
expected, much of it shows strong Tamil influence ; but many forms are distinctive, and
experience enables the collector to judge with some certainty of their origin. The jewellery
worn by men consisted of gold chains, pendants, girdles, and especially rings ; by women,
ear-rings, chains, pendants, and girdles, bracelets, and finger rings. It will be found that Design
much of the gold jewellery is of South Indian design ; there is also much having a distinct
local character. The principal forms have distinctive names. In the case of the chains,
these are the names of flowers or seeds, as pol-mal-malaya {‘coconut-flower-garland’,
PL XLVIII., i), aralu-malaya (‘«ra/a-seed-garland,’ PI. XLVIIL, 4), peti-malaya (‘flower’
• ; oc ‘petal’ garland, PI. XLIX., 4 and 12), ge^i-malaya (garland of fruits). These names are
reminiscent of the garlands of real flowers which play so important a part in Indian festal
• dress, and which are the origin of the more permanent garlands wrought by the jeweller,
in gold and silver. It is highly characteristic of Indian art that these ‘garlands’ should be
in design entirely suggestive, and in no way imitative of the forms suggested. The naïve
realism which is so characteristic of all modern Western art, in jewellery producing the
wholly unimaginative elaborate imitations of flowers, leaves, and animals by the school of
Lalique, is never apparent in Indian design. The passion for imitation may be taken as
prima facie evidence of the lack of a true artistic impulse, which is always a desire, conscious
or sub-conscious, to express or manifest Idea. Why, indeed, imitate, where you can never
rival ? Nor is it by a conscious intellectual effort that a flower is to be ‘conventionalised’
and made into applied ornament. No Indian craftsman sets a flower in a vase before him
and worries out of it some sort of ornament by taking thought. If the flower has not meant
so much to him that he has already a clear memory picture of its essential characters, he may
as well ignore it in his decoration ; for a decorative art not intimately related to his own
experience can have no intrinsic vitality, nor would the appeal of some rare plant conven­
tionalised as ornament be strong for others. It is true, of course, that the original memory
pictures are now handed on as crystallised traditions ; but the force of their appeal is thereby
strengthened by association of ideas—artistic, emotional or religious. The traditional
forms have thus a significance not merely foreign to any imitative art, but dependent on the
fact that they represent rather race conceptions than the ideas of one person or one period.
They are a vital expression of the race mind ; to reject them, and expect great art to live
on as before, would be to sever the roots of a forest tree and look then for flowers and fruits
to appear upon its branches. And so the goldsmith’s chains are not like real flowers ; but
they mean flowers to himself and to the wearers of them.
The same principles apply to the treatment of birds in jewellery. The bird pendant of
PI. L., I, is pure ornament, without that descriptive character which would be as much out
of place as a didactic motif. To wear a real bird, as this pendant is worn by a Kandyan girl
in PI. II., would be barbarous ; to imitate a real bird very closely in the manner of Lalique
would be idle ; but all that is beautiful in the general idea of a bird, colour, form and poise
can be suggested.
Lastly we have wholly imaginative forms, such as the makara and bherunia used as chain
and pendant motifs. On PI. XLIX., ii, is shown a beautiful makara malaya\ on PI.
XLVIII., 6, a bheruifda pendant.
The bird pendant {kurulu-padakkamd) of PI. L., 8, is of special interest. It is said to have
been made for Molligofla Adigâr. It has a Sinhalese inscription on the reverse, the
translation of which is as follows : “ In the month ofDuruta in the year 1861 of 8aka, the
padakkama made by Mahgalagama Muhandirama at Doflantale.” Doflantale is a village
p 2 211

Metalwork in the Four Korales, and was then the residence of Molligoda Adigar, at whose valavva
the goldsmith was doubtless working. The pendant has passed into the hands of the
'Jewellery Panabokka family, and now by marriage to the Halafigodas. I am indebted to Mr. T. B.
Panabokka for a copy of the inscription, in which, however, there must be some mistake
about the date. Saka 1761, however,
would be A.D. 1839, well within the life­
4
time of the second Molligo a Adigar,
who died in a .d. 1845.
A similar kurulu padakkama is amongst
the beautiful jewels dedicated to the
tooth-relic, and kept at the Dalada
Maligava, hung upon the outer casket.
A story connects this jewel with the
father of Pijima Talava : Pilima Talava-
in 1815 stated that “ In the reign of Kirti
Sri, my father Kapuvatte, Disava of
SafFragam, went as ambassador to Batavia,
and received as presents a gold chain and
a diamond ring. He died on the passage,
and before his death desired that the
ornaments might be presented to the
king. I myself, then eleven years of age,
presented them, and the king observed:
‘I bore great love to the Disava; that
merit may attend him, this diamond shall
be set in the forehead of the bird which
Fig. 130. Kurulu padakkama, bird pendant,
is now being made for dedication to the
from picture of Kirti Sri at Do^antale Vihara.
Dajada Maligava.’ ”* This, or a similar
pendant, was worn by the king
himself, and it is shown in his like­
ness painted on the vihara wall at
Doijantale (Fig. 130).
The goldsmiths usually made care­
ful designs or working drawings,
intended for the approval of the
king or other patron. But in many
cases the forms of jewellery were
so constant, and varied so little,
that it would be quite suiScient to
order them by name only; this
applies, for example, to the various
chains named after flowers or fruits,
to the different kinds of bracelets,
ear-rings, etc. Finger rings, pen­
dants, jewelled canes, and the like Fig. 131. Design for jewelled necklace,
might differ more; on Pis. XX. Maftgalagama.
* Resident’s Diary, z^th March, 1815, quoted by Lawrie, Gazetteer, p. 419.
212

and XXIII. are reproduced a number of old designs, still in the possession of the Man- Metalwork
galagama Another is shown in Fig. 131. Designs of this character are usually 'Jewellery
drawn with a brush in black or red.
The king was in the habit of making presents to the chiefs of jewellery, swords, etc., from Royal
the royal workshops as rewards for service. Thus, we find it stated in the Palingupana presents
sannasa, that Pafiogupana Mudaliyar was sent to attack the Dutch at Mâtara, where
they had distressed the inhabitants. When he returned victorious the king was highly
pleased, and “bestowed on him an çta (tusked elephant), an aliya (a female elephant), a
cutlass inlaid with gold, a knife and a gold chain and many other honourable rewards,” as
well as valuable landed property (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 684). It is recorded also that
Raja Sirpha II., when one of the Dutch ambassadors entered his service for love of a
Sinhalese woman, “sent to both of them rich Apparel, and to her many Jewels and Bracelets
of Gold and Silver” (Knox, p. 181).
On one occasion we read of the Sinhalese king sending valuable presents to an Indian
prince, who had been restored to his throne by the Sinhalese general; the latter sent “a
letter to Lanka, to the great king thereof, telling him that the prince had arrived destitute.
And when the great king had heard thereof he sent unto him gifts : vessels of gold and
silver meet to set food in for the king’s table, and lamps of gold and silver in great number,
and raiment of great price such as kings wear, and earrings, and chains for the neck, and
bracelets set with jewels. These and other gifts did the king, in his great delight, send as
tokens of his good-will and pleasure” (Mahavaipsa, Ch. LXXVI).
When kirti 8rl, after the return of his embassy to Siam, received the three Siamese
ambassadors, “the audience hall was adorned with awnings and hangings of silk and gold
embroideries. And here our mighty king, the lord of kings, seated on his throne, received
with all graciousness the three Siamese ambassadors who brought the letter and presents
from their king. They were at the same time presented with three embroidered tuppoti,
three red and three yellow, an extra one being given to the ambassador who carried the
king’s letter ; various presents were also given to the attendants.”*
Metal and other objects were sometimes given by the king or by private persons as a sort of
token or sannasa. Thus, in a transfer deed, dated Ovisa, 8aka 1728 (a.d. 1806), the wife
of ‘ Adikârigë Mudiyânse’ states : “I have thus confirmed this transfer by giving to Siyatu
4
the pata-taha uva (forehead-plate) which the Mudiyânse had received from the king, and
a tooth of his mouth as a keta sakshiya for these lands.” Again, one Diogirala of Meda-
mahâ-nuvara, having been sent away on king’s service to Tamankaduva, died before his
return ; before his death he sent home his arecanut sheer and a lime box and a silver-
mounted gun “in token of bequest of land” (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, pp. 670, 574).
We have seen already how lavish were the king’s gifts to viharas and pansalas on the
occasions of temple restoration or foundation ; but gifts were also made to temples on
special occasions. Thus it is related that when Râja Siipha (II.) was once on his way to
Balana to give battle to the Portuguese, the pole of his palanquin snapped, and he had to
alig ht at Dodanvela. “He enquired what the place was, and they told him, ‘It was the
Nahamige Kovila.’ Then the king made a vow that if he succeeded in the expedition he
would present his crown and jewels to the ksvila on his return. The king was victorious,
and the promise was kept. Thus the crown came to the possession of the kevila, which was
afterwards called Dodanvela Devale. The crown is now in the possession of Giragama
Diva Nilame. It is of thin plain gold. In the dévale are pieces of silk, part of the king’s
dress. In the inner room of the dévale there is a large collection of curious old swords,
2
*'• Kirti èrfs Embassy to Siam,’by P. E. Pieris, J.C.B.R.A.S.,No. 54, Fol.XFIIL,igo ,p. 22.
3
P 213

Metalwork Raja Sirpha’s and others, and Portuguese, &c., and two pictures of kings” (Lawrie’s
Gazetteer, p. 175.
Jewellery Many references are made to jewellery in the Mahavarpsa. One description may be quoted:
“And then on the day of the full moon the king adorned himself with all the grace of a
god, with a diadem and a chain of gold and bracelets and precious ornaments of such kind
thickly set with divers gems. And many hundred women of the queen’s chamber, whose
forms, beautifully attired, were like those of goddesses for elegance, accompanied him, and
many chieftains also, of great fame, clothed with divers robes and jewels and glittering
ornaments. And the earth sunk, as it were, with the weight of this great multitude, and
of the troops of horses and elephants in their trappings of shining gold, and of the wor­
shippers who honoured the Cetiya with offerings of lamps which they carried on their
bodies. And every quarter thereof was covered, as it were, with parasols and banners and
chowries; and the caverns seemed to burst asunder with the sounds of divers instruments
of music; and the eyes of all the people were filled with tears of joy by reason of the
exceeding great beauty of the sight; and the caskets and flags and vases and fans and pots
and other utensils of gold sent forth rays which made all the place to seem yellow.”
(Mahavamsa, Ch. LXXVI.) There are also numerable references to offerings of jewels
and ornaments to the Maligava and other temples.
214

CHAPTER XII. LAC-WORK.
1
T he lac-workers, or -vaiuvo, literally arrow-makers, belonged to the lower
division of the acariya, being essentially turners. They generally did both the
wood-turning and the ornamentation necessary for the work expected of them,
such as bows, arrows, spears, staves, bed-legs, handles of cressets, banner poles, etc. Some
idea of their relative numbers may be gathered from the fact above mentioned (p. 55) that
amongst ninety-eight craftsmen forming the Koftal-badda contingent of the Four Korales
4
there were fourteen l-va uva, of whom two worked in the armoury, presumably as assistants
to the regular craftsmen of the pattal hatara.
Ceylon lac* is the product of two species of the lac insects, both different from the Indian.
One called kfppitiya or kcn-lakada {‘Tachardia albizzice. Green) occurs on several trees,
amongst which are the k?ppifiya {Croton aromaticus), kon {Schkicheria trijuga), and hinguru
{Acacia ccesid). The other species {Tachardia conchiferata. Green) is called telakfriya lakada,
and is found on an euphorbaceous plant called telakiriya {Excascaria agallochd); this is a rarer
species, but produces lac of a brighter and clearer quality. Beside these, small quantities
of imported Indian lac are sometimes used.
Lac-work is now carried on in Kandyan districts at Hapuvida (South Matale), Pallekasda,
near Balangocfa, and Hürikatjuva in Pata Dumbara, and in the low-country at Áñgalmaduva,
nearTañgdla.
The Matale work is by far the most distinctive, and may be described in detail, after which»
the Hürikaduva and Añgalmaduva methods will be referred to.
Both types of lac-work differ fundamentally from painting in that brushes are never used ;
in this respect the work differs entirely also from the lacquer varnish work of Japan, with
which it is sometimes compared and confused. Plain lac is, however, occasionally used
as varnish, especially for painted wood (see p. 167, above). The technique differs also
from that of the Maidive Islands, where the lac applied by turning is afterwards incised,
a process also characteristic of the well-known Sindh boxes.
4
The Matale work is called niyapoten v( a or finger-nail work; this name is given because
the work is done chiefly with the finger or thumb nail, and no lathe is employed. The lac
pigments are prepared as follows: the freshly collected twigs bearing the lac insects are
dried in the sun; the resin is then removed, pounded, and winnowed or sifted. The
crushed lac is enclosed in narrow bolster-shaped bags of thin cloth; the bags are heated
over charcoal fires and twisted till the melted lac oozes through the cloth. The lac is
scraped off; a part of it is next softened over a fire and attached to the point of a small stick,
and then again warmed and a second stick attached. The softened lac is then drawn out
between the two sticks, worked about, doubled up, and redrawn many times until it assumes
the form of a long stout ribbon of glistening fibrous lac of a bright golden brown colour.
The pigments are now mixed into the lac by softening it and pounding the coloured
powders into it. The four colours used are red, yellow, green and black; of these the red
is vermilion {sadiliñgam)-, the yellow, orpiment {hiriyal); the green is yellow with the
addition of “dhobies’ blue,” formerly '■ panir (indigo); and the black is prepared in the
same way as the black used in painting.
The lac thus prepared is used for the decoration of a large variety of articles, especially
wooden sticks of various kinds, such as staffs (/ífrá«?//), handles of ceremonial spears, banners,
fans, &c., ceremonial pingos, &c., and also to many other things such as powder horns
* Idhis account of lac and lac-work in Ceylon is partly based on Mr. E. E. Green's article on Lac,
Annals R. B. G., Peradefya, Vol. I., Part F., Supplement, 1903.
4
P 215

4
Lac-work [ve ibehet karaka), oboes (horan?), book covers (^pot kambi), &c., and it is also used as an
inlay in ivory, horn, and chank work. For the last purpose the ivory is incised with lines
and circles which are filled up with the coloured lac. In the case of turned ivory or horn,
this is effected by holding a piece of lac against it, while revolving on the lathe; the lac,
heated by friction, is softened and fills up the incised grooves. Such ornament in Kandyan
districts is almost invariably confined to incised lines and circles similar to work from
Jodhpur in India*; but flat plates of ivory inlaid with scroll and floral ornament are used
in the fittings of calamander boxes made in the low-country, particularly at Matara, and
this style reminds one of the similar methods of decorating ivory used on the musical
instruments still made at Tanjore. Examples of lac-work are illustrated in PI. XXIV., and
of lac inlay in PI. XXXVI, 8 ; XXXVII., i, 6-9, 11 ; XL., 3 ; XLI., i.
4
Returning to a consideration of the ordinary niyapoten ve a, it will be best to describe the
process in its simplest and commonest form, namely, in the decoration of a staff. The
stick having been shaped and smoothed, the workman squats on the ground, having before-
him a chatty {gii}i kabala) containing a charcoal fire. The lac-worker’s tools consist of
short sticks with a lump of coloured lac at one end of each and a short strip of puskola (talipot
leaf, Corypha umbracultfera). The stick is first coated with the ground colour, usually red.
To effect this, the stick is warmed over the fire and lac applied, which lac is pressed and
smoothed out with the piece of talipot leaf, while still kept warm over the fire; in this way
the whole stick is gradually covered with a coating of red lac. It now remains to add the
tpattern, which may be very elaborate. For this it is needful to draw out the lac into strips
of the desired thinness. To do this, the lump of lac is well warmed, and then, a small piece
being held between finger and thumb, the rest is pulled away, leaving a long thin connecting
thread which is wound round the bent knee, into a skein. After passing four or five times
round the knee the lac becomes cold and must be warmed afresh.
Now to apply a narrow band of coloured lac to the stick, the stick
is warmed gently, while kept continually turning by a small boy
^ ^ who squats behind the operator, and one end of the string of lac is
attached to the stick by pressure, and the rest likewise as the stick
turns; the thread of lac is nipped off by the thumb nail when a
revolution is complete. The stick is then warmed again and
smoothed with the leaf. For more complex patterns (and some
are very elaborate) string lac is applied in just the same way, and
nipped off with the nail;' dots are thus formed by applying the
end of the thread of lac and cutting off a tiny piece with the nail;
such dots are consequently square or diamond-shaj>ed.
The lac-work is usually limited to a small number of good con­
ventional patterns admirably adapted to the nature of the material;
_ __ V j ^ when, as occasionally happens, these are departed from, and an
H endeavour is made to represent some more ambitious subject, such
1 J as an elephant or lion (as occasionally on book covers), the result
is necessarily not quite so satisfactory. Most of the work, how­
Fig. 132. '■ Kalas- ever, is from a decorative point of view thoroughly sound, and
dangaya' pattern, the colours pleasing.
from lacquered spear Sinhalese lac-work is characteristic by great brilliancy and gaiety
stave, Colombo of colouring. The objects decorated are usually small; and even
Museum, when somewhat larger, as in the case of bed-legs, the small amount
4
* Watt, '■ Inian Art at Delhi,’p. 179.
216

of furniture used at all, and the sim­ Lac-work
plicity of the interior, made such bright
spots of colour perfectly appropriate.
The following are many of the names
applied to patterns formed in finger­
nail work:—velpota (Fig. 133), cidara-
kortiu (plain lines), bindu and galbmdu
(diamond-shaped spots), kola Vfla (an
interlacing ‘branch’ or ‘ vine’ pattern),
palapeti (petal pattern), lanug?ta (plait Fig- 133 - Vflpota pattern, from lacquered
patterns), patura (elongated isosceles staff.
7
triangles), bo-kola (¿¡-leaf), dfla (net
pattern), suli v?la (another vine pattern). For illustrations of these see PI. XXIV., and
Figs. 132 and 133.
4
The Ahgalmafiuva and Hurika uva process differs from that above described in that the
lac is applied to the wood while revolving on a turning lathe, the heat of friction softening
the lac and causing it to adhere. This process is more limited, being only applicable to
objects which can be turned on a lathe, and it does not admit of the delicate pattern work
of the finger-nail process. In fact, the ornamentation can only consist of concentric bands
of colour applied to the different parts of small, usually ricketty, tables, chairs, tom-tom
frames, and walking sticks. The old Kandyan lac-striped round boxes (abhararfa heppu),
bed legs {?nda kakul), betel stands, &c., were handsome and substantial.
Hones {kana If lid) were also made by lac-workers, and consist of lac mixed with powdered
kurmdugala, properly corundun, sometimes garnet.
217

CHAPTER XIII. EARTHENWARE.
T he rather simple types of earthenware made and used by Sinhalese for ceremonial,
architectural, and domestic purposes are more varied than might at first sight be
supposed, and, apart from any question of painted pottery, will be found to possess
much excellence in respect of beauty of form and adaptation to the end in view. This
last consideration it is which determines the primary form of the vessels. Hardly any
work of a merely ornamental character falls to be considered in the present paper. It is,
however, this primarily utilitarian character and aim which give so much charm to the
elegance of form and very simple decoration which accompany it ; it has been said, indeed,
that ugly pottery can only be made by an exertion of the cultivated intellect, and has only
been so made in comparatively modern times. Much the same is true of India, where
unglazed pottery is everywhere made for domestic and other purposes. Says Sir George
Bird wood : “Truest to nature in the directness and simplicity of its forms, and their adapta­
tion to use, and purest in art, of all its homely and sumptuary handicrafts, is the pottery of
India, and the forms of it shown on ancient Buddhist and Hindu sculptures, and the ancient
Buddhist paintings of Ajanta, are identical with those still everywhere thrown from the
village hand-wheels.” We do not, however, find in Ceylon the more elaborate types of
glazed pottery made in some parts of India ; but it will be found that Sinhalese pottery
fulfils the requirements of good workmanship in earthenware; viz., first, the vessel must
be of a shape convenient for its purpose; secondly, that shape must be one that arises
naturally from the mode of manufacture and exhibits to advantage the plastic properties of
clay, without becoming weak or fanciful ; thirdly, ornament should not interfere with
usefulness and should be appropriate in amount and character in relation to the purpose
of the vessel and the material it is made of ; fourthly, smoothness of surface and elaborate
refinements (however good in their right place) are not to be thought of as ends in them­
selves, and may appear unsuitable if striven for in vessels meant for ordinary daily use and
made of a material not over fine. Nevertheless, the application of some simple glaze would
not be out of place, and it is perhaps rather strange that it is never met with in Ceylon.*
The Sinhalese potters {baiahçlayo') are found all over the country in every village affording
the necessary clay, but often aggregated in greater numbers in places where an especially
good supply of suitable clay is available. Thence the potter carries his pots for sale to
more remote districts in huge pingo loads. Nowadays a good deal of pottery is taken in
carts along the cart roads ; in this way the fine red pots made by a settlement of Tamils at
Nikapata near Haputale travel down the road to Balangocja, and the Kelani pots with their
white incised patterns come up to Ratnapura and Kegalla and even Kandy. Some pottery
is also imported from Southern India.
The general duties of potters have been enumerated on p. 25, above. Like other craftsmen,
potters held land either directly from the Crown, from the proprietor of a nindagama or
the grantee of a royal village, or from a vihara or dévale. Every manor had not only its
smith to make and mend the tools of the grantee, a washer to wash the clothes, and other
service tenants, but also a potter, ‘ to fit them with Earthen Ware.’ He, like other tenants,
supplied the king or lord with earthenware as service rent, but was paid for work done for
4
others. The ba ah(la-badda formed one of the 14 Departments of Public Works; the
contingent from the Four Korales is described as follows ;—
4
“ In Galbo a Korale and Parapaküru KOrale are eight potters under the orders of a vidsne
of their own caste appointed by the Disava. In Kiodigo^a Korale and Beligal KOrale
* Enamelled tiles are found at Anuràdhapura.
218

are fourteen under another vidane, but sometimes one vidane is appointed over the potters Earthen-
of these three korales. ware
“The potters of the first division attend on duty in Kandy during one month at the Maha
Gabaiava, and are then relieved by those of the second division, who serve one month more.
During this period they are obliged to furnish as many earthen vessels [^alari) as are required
for the Maha Gabaiava, and to make tiles and bricks and perform any other potter’s work
required for the king’s service. At their departure from duty each division supplies one
hundred earthen vessels to the Disava’s house.
“This two months’ duty is performed in rotation with the potters of the upper districts, the
Seven Korales, Uva, and Mátale, and recurs once in ten months.
“ In the Disavanaya they are bound to furnish tiles, bricks, and all kinds of pottery for
the Disava’s use, and earthen vessels to the different resthouses ivafi) when the king or
ambassadors come into the Disavanaya.”*
The following are examples of potter’s services due to the proprietor of nindagam and to
devales or viharas:
At the village of Kinigama in Mátale North, Dull?ve Adigár owned seven ninda pañgu.
The services due from the three tenants (Aracci Paijditayalágé, Badde Vidánayalágé, and
Upásaka Paijditayalágé) of six of these were “ at the old and new year to give a pingo
(yoke load) of earthenware consisting of twelve small pots or a proportional number of
large pots, and a separate peifuma such as a goblet or jug, if the tenant is expert enough to
make them, if not he brings forty leaves of betel; he repairs the roof of the valawa with
tiles provided by the proprietor; on great occasions, weddings, or devil dances he brings
cooking vessels.”
In Kotagepitiya a potter named Paijditage owed the following services to the Haogurañketa
Pattini Dévále for two pdas of field and two kurui}is hem “yearly to give two valankat
(pingo loads of pottery), one for the perahera and the other for the Alutsal; to present a
•ualankada to the Basnáyaka Nilame at the perahera; to make tiles when required (clay
and firewood being supplied); to shift the tiles of the Dévále.” These services were corn-
mutable for Rs. 5.85.
The Kuijdasále Vihára has one valandena pañguva in Valala. “Tenants: Paijditagedara
Komali. Services (commutable for Rs. 16‘2o): to supply for the four festivals eight pingos
4
of earthenware, two for each festival, each pingo consists of two tali, two ka¡age i, two koras,
4
two nembili, two bat-valan, three loku-appalla, six appalla-po i, one etiliya, and one dummala
kabala; for the Alutsal Mangalya to give four large mutti; for the Kdrti Mañgalya fifty
karti-pam, for the Nanamura Mañgalya two embul mutti •, after the New Year to offer the
incumbent six appalla-podi and two puñei mufíi as a perfumad^
These extracts will show what sort of services were rendered by the potters in respect of the
lands held by them. They worked also for themselves and their neighbours, receiving
payment from the latter in money or, more often, in kind.
The potter may be found at work in the verandah of his house, or sometimes in a separate
sh ed wholly devoted to the work. His appliances are, as may be supposed, simple enough.
His wheel {poruva) is a circular board about 2| feet in diameter mounted on a stone pivot
which fits into a larger stone socket embedded in the ground, the horizontal surface of
the wheel itself standing not more than six inches above the ground (Fig. 134). The
wheel is turned by a boy (PI. V., i) who squats on the ground opposite the potter and keeps
* Sir John D'Oyley's '■ Sketch of the Constitution of the Kandyan Kingdom' (T.R.A.S., London,
VoLIlL,PartIL,i^2i)-
47 495
+ Lawrie, ‘ Gazetteer of the Central Province of Ceylon^ p- ^> -
219

Earthen- it going with his hands. A lump of clay is dumped on the
waff wheel, enough for half a dozen or more pots, and they are
moulded one by one under the potter’s hands, cut off, and set
aside to dry. To finish off the rims, a strip of wet cotton is
used ; with this the potter smooths off the edges as the wheel
Fig. 134. Section of turns, and pressing through it with his nail, he makes the little
potter’s wheel in situ. mouldings at the top. As removed from the wheel the pots
A. Wheel (diameter are bottomless and have to dry for a few hours or a day or two
28 inches). before they can be finished ; when they are ready the potter
B, c. Stone pivot and takes a smooth stone in his left hand and a sort of wooden bat
socket. {valantalana Iflla) in his right hand, and holding the stone
G, G. Ground level. inside the vessel he beats and pats its sides till finally they meet
across the bottom (PI. V., 2) ; the vessel is rubbed smooth with
the bat.* Occasionally the surface is polished by rubbing with a smooth seed. Any
ornament required is now added, and the pot is ready for the fire. Firing is done in a low
kiln with stone sides and a domed covering of wet clay and sticks. The kiln is square in
plan, and has three or four openings along one side for the insertion of fuel, and on the other
sides smaller openings for the escape of air. Long sticks are used for fuel, pushed through
the openings by degrees as they burn away. The kiln is usually protected from the weather
by a rough shed.
The clay used is alluvial material such as is obtainable in most valley rice fields. The
best kind is very dark and stiff ; the colour after firing varies from a fine terracotta red to a
rather unpleasant yellowish gray.
(©k As Knox observed so long ago, the Sinhalese are apt at making “ all sorts of earthenware
to boil, stew, fry, and fetch water in.” Generic terms for all pots are hdiya, kalasa., and
walanda. They may be classified according to form into kalagedi, mufti, appalla, and (fili',
4
the kalage iya approaches a complete sphere, the others are successively shallower. The
kalage^iya is a water-carrying vessel indispensable to every family. Four examples are
shown in PI. XXV., i— 4. It is carried by women on the hip, the arm passing round the
neck. A favourite dance of the alatte women (women of a gikiyana— a nafana panguva
holding) is the kalage^i neftma (dancing with new pots) ; the pot used becomes the dancer’s
perquisite, but such kalage^i are, I think, smaller than those in general use. The mutfiya
has a wide mouth and is a vessel used for boiling rice. PI. XXV., 5, shows a decorated
mutfiya used for new rice at the Alutsal Mahgalya at the Kuijdasale Vihara. An ordinary
muffiya is seen on the worker’s right hand in PI. V., 2, also against the wall, PI. V., 3.
Mufti are used for other general purposes ; pots used to collect kitul syrup are, for example,
called uga-mufti. Embul muffi are pots made to hold the medicinal preparation of the juices
of plants used at the Nanamura Mafigalya.-\ Appalla are shallower vessels used for cooking
4
curries ; these are (larger) loku-appalla and (smaller) appalla-po i. '^tili are shallow pots for
cooking curries (see PI. V., i, between the potters). A larger sort of broad shallow pan
is used for cooking sweetmeats or other special purposes ; a variety with handles (called
kanbola (tiHyd) is shown on PI. XXV., 12.
* For use of stone and mallet in India, see ‘ Journal of Indian Art^ Voi. VII., PI. 58 and accom­
panying article.
■\ The astrologers, at New Tear, “ had to superintend the preparation of a thousand small pots of the
juices of wild medicinal plants at the Nata devale, from whence, carefully covered and sealed, they
were to he sent to the palace, and distributed with much ceremony to the otlur temples" {Davyj Travels
in Ceylonj p. 168).
220

Beside the above-mentioned four types there are other vessels, of which the nsmbiliya Earthen-
(= nambu + heljyd) is the most important. This is a shallow dish with a rim projecting ware ;
inwards and completely covered inside with an elegant arrangement of deep furrowings
(PL XXV., lo). These are scored before firing by means of a rough wooden comb Nembiliya
iirigahana katuva), a process illustrated in PI. V., 4. The rtfmbiliya is used for washing rice
to remove stones and dirt, very much as a gemming basket is used to separate the heavier
gem minerals from the common lighter constituents of the gravel. The fragments of grit,
&c., remain behind in the grooves of the nfmbiliya, or are held back by its inwardly pro­
jecting rim, as the rice is stirred up in the water and gently poured over the edge; this
vessel is in daily use in every household. A similar vessel made to stand by the addition
of a ring foot is called a koraha; the ring foot is not made in one piece with the rest of
the vessel, but is added after the completion of the underside of the vessel as if for a
nsmbiliya ; this vessel in this stage is inverted on the wheel and the ring of fresh clay added
to form a foot.
A more typical koraha, however, is the larger type sometimes called polkoraha and shown Koraha
on PI. XXV., 7. These large pots are used for various general purposes, but especially
by dhobies for washing clothes, and by mothers for washing their children. A vil-koraha
is a large vessel used for soaking seed paddy.
A shallow dish with a ring foot (thus resembling the smaller type of koraha, but without
internal furrowing) is sometimes used for eating rice from, and is called a batvalanda.
A vessel rarely seen is the psrnuva, or oven (PI. XXV., 6), a large three-legged affair with a Pornuva
big lid ; the interior is half filled with sand, and the oven is said to be very efficient; the
sand (as in the “sand bath” of the chemical laboratory) both retains the heat and preserves
an even temperature.
Large wide-mouthed vessels with lids, formerly used for storing cloths and garments, are Pilt-heliya
called pili-hfliya (PI. LII., 4), or if smaller halu-h(liya. Clothes in such vessels were better
protected from white ants than if stored in wooden boxes.
The name kalaha (kal,asa, kalayd), equivalent to Sanskrit kalasa, is strictly applicable to all Kalaha
vessels with only one opening, especially those of the kalagediya type; but it is more
specially applied to a kind of vase open at both ends, but otherwise resembling a kalageiiya
with an extended neck (PI. XXVI., 12), and used for holding sprays of coconut flower on
auspicious and ceremonial occasions (weddings, mahgalya, &c.) a pair being placed on the
two sides of the doorway, or as lamp stands, especially at festivals.
A taliya is a large wide-mouthed vessel similar to a patra. A pin-taliya is such a vessel of 'T'aliya
water set by the wayside for the use of travellers. Such vessels are to be seen everywhere,
usually supported in a forked branch, often roofed over. The vessel has usually a wooden
lid, and a ladle {kinissa). It is not customary in the East to apply the lips to the rim of such
a common drinking vessel, but the water is poured from the bowl of the ladle (or from
the spout of a kotalayd) into the hollow of the left hand held against the mouth. This
admirable sanitary precaution might with advantage be adopted in the West.
A particularly interesting piece of earthenware is the bumm?
4
iycl (which may be translated Bumm(
4
iy^
“ bullfrog”). This is a vessel open at both ends like a kalaha, but the difference of diameter
4
between the two ends is greater; there is a large belly as in a kalage iya; the large end is
covered with a talagoya skin (attached with paste made from habaralissa, or from rice and
plantain), and a strap is added for hanging over the shoulder. The drum so made is used
at harvest times and for hkeliya.
Money boxes are made at Kglaijiya in the form of a mamma. This is a world-wide and very
old form for a money box, the idea being the suggestion of abundance and plenty. It is,
in fact, sympathetic magic.
221

Earthen- Earthen spittoons {pa^ikkam) and one-handled mugs [pakuru) are occasionally seen.
•ware' ' Earthen stills are used in preparing arrack from the fermented juice of the coconut, and
in making dummala oil.*
A piece of earthenware only used locally is the lipa (PI. XXVI.,7). This is a low cylindrical
earthen stand replacing the three stones {Hggal) which are usually used to raise the cooking
pot above the fire upon the ground. Finally we have the elegant gini kabala or fire dish
(PI. XXV., It), which is a form rarely met with, but suitable for use as a small hearth,
or to provide a fire for the goldsmith’s blowpipe ; but an ordinary koraha is more commonly
used as gini kabala, as in the picture, PI. VI., 6. A narrow-necked water vessel or goglet
(^gurulettu), generally rather rough in execution, is also sometimes met with. The list of
domestic pottery is thus exhausted. It will be seen that it faithfully reflects the simplicity
and lack of luxury characterizing the typical old-fashioned household. The vessels are
few, and each serves some simple purpose for which it is specially adapted. The ordinary
price of a kalageiiya is about 20 to 25 cents, of a nlmbiliya 6 to 15 cents, of a koraha 25
to 50 cents. The value of this rough earthenware is thus so small that breakages are not of
very serious consequence. Pieces of earthenware may remain in use for many years, and
are occasionally even found to be mended. On the other hand, Davy stated that there
was an ‘extraordinarily great’ consumption of earthenware amongst the Sinhalese inasmuch
as “ after a feast at which people of different castes have been entertained, all the earthen­
ware vessels used on the occasion are destroyed.-f”
Ecclesias- The vessels used especially in connection with viharas and dëvàles may be spoken of
tical collectively as ecclesiastical earthenware. Of these vessels the most common and most
characteristic is the kotalaya ; this is a spouted vessel for holding the water with which
flower offerings are sprinkled. Either an earthen or a bronze kotalaya may be found in
every vihara ; the bronze kotala are smaller and more elegant than the earthen. Earthen
kotala are also in domestic use as drinking vessels. PI. XXV., 8, shows a decorated kotalaya
from Dodantale Vihara. A curious variety of the kotalaya is the valalu kotalaya, which
must be inverted and filled from below. The same arrangement is sometimes found in
the case of a kotalaya of the common form, but closed above, and then yatura kotalaya,
‘secret jug.’
Very large wide-mouthed earthen vessels called patra are found in most viharas and are
used to hold water or to receive offerings of rice, &c., from worshippers. A very fine
painted example is to be seen at Dodantale Vihâra, but most specimens are plain or with
very simple decoration of simple lines or of ¿ff-leaves in red. Besides the big patras used
in viharas, smaller earthen alms-bowls are made, though the alms-bowls actually used by
priests are usually metal. Some potters (at Kelaijiya) make an alms-bowl for presentation
to a priest, with every batch of pots turned out. Earthen incense burners \dummala kabal) ,
often of very elegant form and skilful execution, are used in dévales and viharas, the incense
(powdered dummala resin) is sprinkled on burning charcoal carried on the dummala kabala.
Two of these incense burners are shown on PI. XXVI., 4 and 5.
'Wide-mouthed vessels decorated with moulded cobras, are used in Pattini Dévales to hold
the halamba, and are called halamba-hfliya or nayi-heliya. Similar vessels without cobra
ornament are also made for betel leaves and thence called bulat-hfliya.
Specially small vessels (PI. XXVI., 7) were made for the kiri-uturai}a mangalya or ceremony
of boiling milk at a dévale, generally after the New Year and after a diya-kepTma. The
boiled milk is sprinkled about the premises as an auspicious emblem of prosperity.
* Davy, ‘ ^travels in Ceylon,’ p. 243 ; ‘ Ceylon National Review,” No. 2, 1906,^. 238.
-f- ‘ Travels in Ceylon, p. 125.
222

Other ecclesiastical earthenwares include lamps {rnffipahan) chiefly the small plain shallow -
dishes for burning cocoanut oil with a cotton wick, and used in great quantities on festive in>pri *
occasions, being placed round the viharas or devales compound in niches provided for the
purpose in the walls. They are also set up on lampstands {pdnkandu, PI. XXVI., 9 and i o)
or protected from the wind in a lantern or cage {punkuduva, PL XXVI., 8). Occasionally
very handsome and elaborately ornamented pankartdu are met with, bearing a larger lamp
above with notches for three wicks. These tall stands are made in several pieces, fitting
one on to the other, the whole tapering slightly towards the top (PI. XXVI., ii), A
m(tipandama is an earthen cresset used like those of metal as a torch, being filled with tow
and oil and carried in processions.
The punava or pund-kalaya, used in devil-dancing ceremonies, is a remarkable vessel
resembling a kotalaya with twelve spouts.* It is decorated with cobras and elaborately
painted (PI. XXVI., 6).
i@k Of architectural earthenware, the chief forms are tiles. The most characteristic and Tiles
oldest types are flat. Such tiles are of nearly
oblong form, but taper slightly upwards, where
a projection on the under side serves to keep
them from slipping oif the reepers. Other flat
tiles are pointed at the lower end, and very
beautiful roofs are often seen in which the
pointed and square ended tiles are arranged on
patterns or in alternate rows, giving great
variety. Tile hangers are very clever in cover­
ing all sorts of awkward angles and steep slopes
(PI. VI., 2), and good old Kandyan roofs are
ccnseqiiently very picturesque, an effect which
is greatly enhanced by the change of slope which
is usually found and which 'corresponds to a
structural feature of the timbering. We some­
times, but not very often, meet with especial
bent coping tiles of the flat type, but semi-
cylindrical tiles are more commonly used. Flat
tiles of the above types are usually ornamented
with very simple parallel incised lines (Fig. 135);
these seem to be a survival of the much deeper
grooves which are to be seen on the old tiles so
common at Slgiriya and Anuradhapura; the
grooves were doubtless originally intended to
facilitate the flow of rain water, but the simple
incised lines found on Kandyan tiles are of no
pr actical use for this purpose, and thus represent
merely vestigial ornament. VIII. , Plan and section of coping tile;
The roofing tiles most commonly seen at the IX. , Plan of ornamented semi-cylindrical
present day are semi-cylindrical in form, tapering coping tile.
slightly upwards. They are often associated Scale of figs. I.-VIII., | cm.= i inch.
with flat tiles on the same roof, and are generally Scale of Fig. IX., dt inch= i inch.
* According to C. J. R. Le Mesurier {Nuvara Eliya Manual) the pUnava must have also seven
6
rims or tiers. l"his appears to be the case in the example figured {PI. XXVI., ).
223

Earthen-: used also for ridge or coping tiles. These semi-cylindrical tiles are leis characteristic than
ware ' the flat ones, but, nevertheless, quite pleasing and satisfactory. When used four or five
thick they are a very efficient protection against heat, owing to the layers of air which
occupy the spaces between the tiles ; they are generally so used in the northern districts.
The new-fashioned Basel Mission and Mangalore tiles are perhaps slightly more convenient,
especially in respect of leakage, but of course far less cool ; in addition to which their rigid
form and mechanical effect are distinctly unpleasant. Instead of the slight curves and
irregularities of a roof covered with ordinary tiles, we see what is practically a plane surface
crossed by strictly parallel lines which are wearisome and uninteresting. The ordinary
tiles if well burnt and well laid are much to be preferred in respect of appearance and
comfort ; though requiring slightly more attention, for in the services due to temples we
see regular provision made for the annual shifting of tiles.
Eaves tiles A special variety of tile is the eaves- or hanging tile, used on dévale and vihara roofs to fringe
the eaves. These tiles have a plain flat upper portion which passes under the last row of
tiles at the edge of the roof, and is inclined at an angle of about 110-120° to the visible
down-hanging part of the tile which forms the roof fringe and which is alone shown in
the figures. The hanging part of these tiles is sometimes approximately square in form
(PI. XXVI., I and 2), but they
have more often the shape of con­
ventionalized ¿<J-leaves (Fig. 136).
Animal figures, usually those
of the lion (siriihd) and goose
(hamsd), are embossed on both the
outer and inner surfaces of the
hanging tile, but sometimes the
inner less easily seen surface is left
plain. This relievo decoration is
effected by pressing down the tile
oh to a wooden mould on which
the lion (found usually on the
obverse) is engraved, the clay being
pressed well into the mould ffom
behind by the action of the fingers.
Kandyan eaves-tiles, ¿¡j-leaf form, decorated The addition of ornament on the
with simha (A) and harrisa (B). A., Length 15I inches. reverse is more difficult. The
B., length about 8| inches. figure, usually a hanisa, is prepared ,
in the same way by pressing soft
clay into a suitable mould, but instead of the whole tile being so pressed against the mould,
only the actual animal form is made, and when this is lifted off the mould it is applied to
the back of the tile (the obverse of which has already been ornamented). The result of ,
this pressing of both animal forms into hollow moulds is that when they are applied together
back to back on the obverse and reverse of the tile there remains a hollow space within
the tile, and between the two animal shells. It is usual to pierce a small round hole on the
animal’s body on the reverse side to admit of the escape of heated air when the tile is fired.
The decorated tiles so made stand out in high relief, and show up well in brilliant sunshine.
A simpler method results in the production of similarly decorated tiles with less relief.
This result is attained by merely pressing the clay tile between the two wooden moulds.
It is obvious that equally high relief cannot be obtained in this way, as there is no way of
pressing the clay into the hollows of a deep mould.
224

Rectangular tiles with lions or geese are used for the decoration of wall surfaces, and are Earthen-
then often painted to enhance their effect. Examples are to be seen at the Dalada Maligava wati
and at the Old Palace, Kandy.
The handsome earthen finials, often decorated with cobras (PI. VII., 2), which complete Finials
the effect of a Kandyan roof must also be mentioned here. They are found on ambalams
and on devales and vihara roofs, where, however, the earthen finials are often replaced by
more pretentious ones of gilt bronze. It should be remembered that in the old days only
chiefs of the rank of a Disava were allowed to build tiled houses; much less was it generally
permitted to make use of finials on domestic roofs.
4
Bricks [ga ol) must also be briefly mentioned, though not very widely used, except in the Bricks
erection of dagabas and for some other special purposes. It may be remarked that they are
of the rather flat narrow form which is so much more satisfactory in appearance and makes
a stronger wall than the bricks of more nearly equal dimensions which are now more
generally used.
Mr. F. H. Modder has described the earthen rings {flraketd) used for lining Kandyan wells Well-rings
called c«/z«. He says: “ These wells are very common in the Kandyan district.* They
are circular in shape, about three feet in diameter, and instead of being built up with stone,
earthen rings made by the village potter, and each about a foot and a half broad, are inserted
and fitted in from the bottom of the well, increasing from two feet in diameter as they come
up to the top to three feet. The earthen rings are called urd-koffa (^-ketd), and the wells are
known as arakefa Hn, abbreviated into ttra lin. The Urd-kotfa (-kfta) help to keep the water
cool, and if they could be made of larger dimensions so as to get into wells of all sizes,
they would certainly be a useful and cheap substitute for stone. Each of the rings used at
present can be made at a cost of about 37I cents, and the cost of a well thus built would
not exceed a couple of rupees.”'}' Urdkffa well-rings are more often made of wood, generally
the hollowed segment of a tree.
In describing the ordinary methods of ornamenting earthen vessels, I refer only to such Ornament
decoration as is applied before firing. What is ordinarily known as ‘painted Kandyan
pottery’ is painted with oil colours (formerly with water colour varnished) after the pots are
fired, and this work will not be referred to in the present section. Leaving that oil-painted
pottery aside, the decoration of pottery may be classed as incised, stamped, and slip-painted.
Thfe'simplest form of slip-painting is the application of concentric bands of red, to apply
which the vessel is inverted on the wheel, which is revolved slowly while the brush is held
against it (see PI. V., 3, where a kalage^iya is being thus treated). The red paint is made
by grinding up with water certain ferruginous nodules and concretions called gurugal, while
white paint is similarly made from kaolin. Beside the plain stripes, simple geometrical
ornaments in red or white is sometimes seen, as on the porijuva (PI. XXV., 6). Black
stripes are sometimes done with graphite.
Incised ornament, if more than a mere concentric line, is usually combined with the red Incised
.striped painting. The pot is allowed to get very hard and dry and the pattern then engraved Ornament
on the red bands with a sharp tool. PI. XXV., 2, shows a kalage^iya so treated. This vessel
is ornamented with alternate concentric stripes of red and gray; the incised ornament
(Fig. 137, a) is cut on the red bands, of which the uppermost has geometrical forms only.
* / have not myself seen such a well. Mr. Parker {J.C.B.R.A.S., Vol. VIII., No. 27, 1884,
^.32) describes ancient earthen well-rings from Pissamahdrdma, and indicates that similar ones were
in use in the South and East of Ceylon. For other forms of ancient eartjienware, seefurther the same
article by Mr. Parker.
\J.C.B.R.A.S., Vol. XIII., No. 44, 1893,/.. 38.
q I 225

Enrifie?ì-
ware
4
Fig. 137. Incised ornament of earthenware, a. P?lma ulla ; b., c., d., Kelaniya ;
E. Matara. a.— n. from kalage^i', e. from a goglet. Variously reduced.
the middle a conventional branch or vine (vf/a), and the ornament on the lowest red band
consists of fishes alternating with a sort of inverted trident ; on a still lower zone, a few
upright lines appear in widely separated groups. The pattern after burning stands out
on the lighter colour of the, plain clay, against the darker red due to the guruga/a paint. '
Highly finished water vessels {kalage^i) are made at Kelaijiya, and on these the incised
decoration reaches its highest level of design and execution. It is usually made conspicuous
by an infilling of kaolin after firing. Fig. 137, b.-d., shows part of the incised ornament
on such pots. The remarkably Greek appearance of these designs will be remarked. The 1
Kelaoi pottery is much appreciated, and as already stated travels far and wide. There is
also made a great variety of grotesque animals, toys, money boxes, &c., which hardly call
for further notice on the present occasion.
One special form of incised ornament has already been referred to, i.e., furrowing inside
nimbili. The utilitarian object of this grooving has been indicated, but, nevertheless, the
arrangement of the groovings will be found to differ much in various specimens, and always
to be elegant and decorative.
The incised ornamentation of tiles has also been referred to above ; examples are shown in
Fig. 135, where Nos. 1-6 represent flat roofing tiles. Nos. 7 and 8 a coping or ridge tile in
, plan and section, and No. 9 a semi-cylindrical ridge tile with incised ornament,— such as is
only very rarely met with, however, on the curved tiles.
Stamped t©kThe most beautiful decoration is put on with wooden stamps {acca), which are of
Ornament varied form. The simplest are merely blunt wooden chisels with which simple various
226

'Earthen­
ware
J J i L
IIIIIIHII
^ iS i
K .'^ x:
4 mé^ m
Fig. 138. Stamped ornament of earthen vessels, a., b., simple forms, c., with
4
rosettes (lotus), d., with rosettes (lotus) and ¿^-leaves, a., b., and c., on ka¡age i
from Kolonna Korale; d., on muffiya from Kupdasale Pansala. Reduced.
arrangements of lines are formed, as in Stamped
Fig. 138, A, B, taken from two pots from ornament
Kolonnava; in one of these a small tri­
angular stamp is also used. Fig. 138,0,
4
is from another Kolonna ka¡age iya which
is shown in full on PI. XXV., 3 ; we have
here an elaborate rosette beside some
other simpler forms. Fig. 138, d, from
the muttiya of PI. XXV., 5 (from Kupda-
sale), and Fig. 139, from PI. XXV., i
(from near Balaftgoda), show a still more
excellent type of stamped decoration with
Fig. 139. Stamped ornament ofkalagediya from
conventionalized ¿¿¡-leaf forms in addition
near Balangoda. Now in Kandy Museum.
to simple lines and rosettes. The kotalaya
Bff-leaves and rosettes. Reduced.
of PI. XXV., 8, is also ornamented with
¿^-leaves and rosettes. The constant
application of the bB-\ts£ decoration in all sorts of Kandyan work is very remarkable; its
o utline can be recognized sometimes only with difficulty; at other times it is exceedingly
obvious. We have already seen certain hanging tiles of this form, and now find it again
as a stamp.
Before leaving the subject of stamped ornament, brief reference must be made to the finger­
mark decoration seen on the larger koraha of PI. XXV., 7, a type of decoration often seen
on the modern flowerpots also.
The general subject of painted pottery lies somewhat outside the scope of the present Painted
chapter; for the painting is of the same character as that applied to book covers, woodwork, pottery
and other objects, and is applied to earthenware only after it has left the potter’s hands,
q 2 227

Earthen- The best work has been done in the Kandy District, but comparatively little of real delicacy
<ware is now met with, while a great deal of careless gaudy stuff is to be seen. Tall classical
amphors*, too, are now largely made and painted, usually very badly, and considering their
Painted exotic form and poor decoration are not very pleasing.
pottery The only colours properly used in painting pottery are red, yellow, white, and black, i.e.,
the ordinary pigments of the Kandyan painter. The designs and decoration are also
identical with those found in other paintings, so that there is no need to describe them in
further detail upon the present occasion.
c©kThe subject of Sinhalese (especially Kandyan) pottery has now been reviewed in some
detail, although there are many points on which fuller information would be desirable.
A full account of early types of earthenware found at Sigiri, Anuradhapura, and elsewhere
would be of great value and interest. It is also possible that I have overlooked some forms
of earthenware to be found in other districts than those (chiefly Sabaragamuva and the
Central Province) which I have especially studied. I have found, however, that once a
familiarity with the typical forms had been obtained, I scarcely ever met with aberrant
or unusual forms ; in other words there is great fixity of type, and we do not find individual
potters experimenting on their own account, probably because the fixed types exactly fulfil
the purposes for which they were required, and it would not occur to the potter to work
for mere amusement or for the production of beautiful forms apart from practical ends.
Nor was the material available, or the potter’s skill sufficient, to so interest the leisured
or more wealthy classes as to lead to a demand for decorative pottery considered apart from
ordinary household requirements.
The most elaborate earthenware we meet with is made for use in connection with religious
buildings, for the needs of which the king or other rich patrons were willing to secure the
services of all the best workmen, or for which the potter was willing to work unpaid, or
to which he had to supply earthenware as a service rent.
The art of pottery has degenerated far less than the other Sinhalese industrial arts, and
though there is nowadays little demand for good work in decorated finials, imposing lamp-
stands or moulded eaves-tiles, the potter’s ordinary wares have not changed much, either
lately, or probably even for a very long time. We may congratulate ourselves then that
Sinhalese pottery has so far degenerated very little; this is mainly because it is so cheap
and so intimately adapted to local requirements as not to invite the competition of imported
machine-made wares. Unfortunately, however, the kerosine tin has made some progress,
and is commonly seen in use instead of a kalage^iya. This is pitiful, but less fatal than a
degeneration of form in the kalagediya itself. The growing use of Basel Mission and
Mangalore tiles is more to be regretted, no less on the score of comfort than of appearance ;
an ancient building re-covered with such tiles, perhaps subscribed for at considerable cost
by poor village contributors to some vihara funds, is robbed of most of its distinctive
character. Is it too much to ask those concerned to take a little trouble and exercise some
thought in dealing with such buildings ? Now that the old sumptuary laws forbidding
tiled roofs to any but Disavas are no longer in force, the builder of a new house might even,
ifhe cared to do so,make it beautiful by giving due consideration to its roof. Unfortunately,
the elements of beauty or dignity, which may enter into even such homely matters, are the
last which are likely to influence him; and at the same time the capacity for good work
in making and laying tiles is dying out, so that it is increasingly difficult to get it, and a
majority of persons are scarcely aware that good work ever was done, or can recognize it
when they see it.
* I have sometimes wondered if these can possibly be indigenous, but have never seen old examples.
228

APPENDIX TO CHAPTER XIII. POTTER’S
SONG.
The following is the translation of a very interesting craft song, the text of which was
kindly forwarded to me by Mr. S. D. Mahavalatenna:
1.
Waking before the dawn, carrying the basket, (the potter) fares to the place-of-clay ;
After cleaning the basket and clearing the place-of-clay, he worships his guardian god;
Wearing (only) a loin cloth, and gladly taking (the basket) in hand he goes down into the pit;
Not breaking down the two sides (of the pit) he digs the clay from the middle and fills
the basket.
2.
Breaking up the clay, he takes a yoke-load and heaps it in the potter’s yard ;
Separating the pieces of clay he breaks them to an equal size and spreads them on a big mat
in the sun;
After having dried the clay, and removed the stones, he pounds it in a mortar and in a
kulla winnows it;
Then taking up the powder, he adds an equal quantity of water and makes it into balls.
Taking up the balls of clay and putting one upon the other, he covers them with leaves;
Three days afterwards he divides them into three and kneads them again.
Knowing the right proportion he adds the finest sand and sprinkling water kneads again ;
After kneading, he makes them into rounded balls again, and makes a heap of them ; and
takes them up again after three days.
4
'
After thus preparing it, he treads and kneads the clay again and again;
When it is like sticky wax he knows that it is ready;
Then according to the size of the vessels to be made he divides it into separate lumps;
The lumps thus made he stores near the workshop and covers them carefully.
Next day with a split cane he separates the lumps of clay one by one.
And having duly divided them, again makes them up in balls and keeps them in a heap
as on the previous day;
The next day, waking at dawn, he sweeps and tidies up the Workshop,
And having all the balls of clay close at hand, he sits before the wheel.
6.
He takes with the right hand the balls of clay one by one and sets them on the wheel.
With the left hand he turns the wheel,* with the right hand he moulds (the vessel).
Knowing the size and shape, as required he presses down his hand;
Then when the right shape appears, he stays the form, and moulds the rim.-f-
* Usually the wheel is turned by a young assistant.
•f- ‘ Uedttgahasteyi’; i.e., he moulds the rim with a wet rag, turning it over,
3 229
q

Having (thus) stayed the form and turned the rim, he turns the wheel very fast.
And looking now and then to see if it is smooth, he amends with the finger tip any
unevenness.
Sprinkling a little water he polishes (the pot), then takes it carefully with open hand.
Duly keeps it standing by, and takes it up again after thirty hours from the time of making
thus.
8.
(Then) taking the galihe^a* in the left hand and the metialuva \ in the right, holding the
vessel tightly with the feet.
He beats it with the blade,J making it bigger as much as need be.
And after thus beating it to the required degree, and having polished it, he sets it in the
sunshine.
After it is partly dried, he draws leafy branches {liyav(l), garlands and flower-petals round
the vessel;
Drawing round it lines, flower-petals, cocks, parrots, pigeons, tflalihiifi.
And, each in turn, ¿ff-leaves, bunches of flowers and dates, «iJ-flowers, olu- and lotus-flowers.
Making the orbs of sun and moon, makara toran and the golden hantsa.
Elephants, horses, cattle, deer, lions, tigers, wolves, bears, cobras, atiA poloAgas,
10.
Swimming tisaru, flying lihiifi, fair kindurS, and honey bees.
Great boas, fierce serpents not a few, sharks, tortoises, and golden peacocks.
Beautiful damsels whose ever-waxing breasts are full-grown golden swans.
Forgetting not to draw dear delightful children.
11.
Drawing round it ndri lata, leafy branches, and eke the letters of the alphabet with vowel signs.
And inserting in the midst a trident with the signs Om hrim as a talisman.
Drawing in the four c o r n e r s — peacock, cobra, swan, and serpent.
The signs of the Zodiac, the nine planets, and the twenty-seven asterisms,||
* Stone held inside the vessel while the sides are hammered over till they meet, as described above.
•f- Meti aluva, evidently another name for the bat, valantalana Iflla.
J Alla, lit. palm of the hand, doubtless means the blade of the bat or valantalana l?lla; the
description previously given should be carefully read to make the meaning of this verse clear.
§ Paftuva, a symmetrical arrangement of two, three, or four animals with necks entwined.
II Phe poem mentions a long list of decorations, some of which could hardly be found room for on an
earthen vessel. All the work referred to is of the kind done before firing, and does not include
painting, which {except slip painting) is no part of the potters' art.
230

He takes good (red) gurugala and (white) makulu and mixes them with water to a thick
consistency,
Mingling them with the right amount of oil, that they may shine:
Thereafter he sets them in the sun to dry them well.
And after that having stacked them in the kiln, on the first day he dries them in the smoke.
3
‘ -
On the second day putting only a certain quantity of firewood he lights a moderate fire.
On the third day he makes the fire fierce enough, and burns (the pots) till they are done;
Afterwards he draws* the fire and puts it out and leaves three days for cooling.
On the fourth day ascertaining that the kiln is quite cool, he takes out the vessels one by one.
PROVERBS.
The following are some Sinhalese proverbs connected with pottery:
“The devil broke the koraha as he went away” (Eng. ‘The cat did it’).
“ Six months’ labour of the potter, is one stroke to the man with the cudgel.”
“A pot filled to the brim does not shake.”
“ The water in a half-filled pot shakes.”
“When an elephant gets thin, it cannot be bathed in a koraha."
“ Like a ppt placed with its mouth downwards.”
“ One cannot put the hand even into a koraha in a hurry.”
* 'The firensiood is in the form of long sticks which are pushed in as they burn away; hence the
expression “ to draw away the firewood” when thefire is to be put out.
1 4

CHAPTER XIV. WEAVING.
WE have seen above (p. 54) that there were two groups of weavers in Sinhalese
Ceylon, the saldgamayo from Southern India, who made fine and gold-woven
cloths, and the beravsyo, or caste of indigenous weavers, who were also
musicians, astrologers, etc. The history of the salagamays, or ‘ chalias,’ is briefly as follows;
Vijaya Bahu III. of Daajbadeijiya, to revive the art of weaving fine cloth, sent letters and
presents by a Muhammadan Tamil named Pati Mira Lebbe to Southern India; and he
brought back eight master weavers, and these were given villages, wives and honours by
the king. Their descendants incurred the disfavour of the Kandyan kings, and were
ultimately compelled to leave the interior, and settle on the south-west coast, where they
were allowed to occupy royal lands where cinnamon grew, on condition of peeling and
preparing the same for the requirements of the king. They came thus to be cinnamon-
peelers by trade, and were employed as such by the Portuguese and Dutch.
The Janavaipsa records many previous importations of Indian weavers *; but in every
case the industry decayed, and fresh blood had to be imported. With the detailed history
of these weavers we are not here concerned, as they seem never to have become an integral
part of the Sinhalese population as the imported Indian smiths have done.
The indigenous weavers, the beravays, on the other hand have probably made their plainer,
homespun cottons, much as they are still made in one Kandyan village, from time
immemorial, unaffected by changes of fashion at court or the influence of Indian weavers.-^
With their work the descriptions given in this chapter, and the pictures in the Plates,
are exclusively concerned.
The weaving of homespun cotton cloths was once universal in the Kandyan provinces. It
is now done only at Talaguije, Uda Dumbara, and perhaps occasionally near Vellassa in
Uva; and not long ago near Balango^a also. Remains of looms, ginning machines and
other accessories may be met with in other districts. At Talaguije the industry still
flourishes a little; two families have looms, and a number of the village women are skilled
in spinning. The villagers themselves still use some of the cloth made, but the industry
would hardly survive were it not for the demand for ftirili made through the Kandy Art
Association.
The weavers, as we have seen (p. 25, 26), were of low caste, and had other duties to perform
beside weaving. Their annual petfuma consisted of a taiuppu cloth or a lensuva or similar
piece of woven cloth. I have not been able to find any mention of cloths given as a regular
service rent, but this must have been quite usual; service at the loom was called al-gi
rnjakariya.
It should be borne in mind that Eastern garments are not as a rule needle-made, but consist ’
of whole pieces of cloth as woven on the loom; hence the necessity for making cloths of
different shapes and sizes. The following different kinds of cloth were made: napkins
4
or towels [indulka a), wearing cloths for men {iuppofi) and women {pada, held), aprons or
bathing drawers for men (diya kacci), kerchiefs or shawls {knsu,ura maid), belts {pati), mats,
quilts,or sheets carpets {paramadand),co'i^K for cbatties as carried on yokes {gahoni),
* Janavamsa, trans. by H. Nevill, ‘Taprobanian, VoL L, Pt. 3, and Sir A. Johnston, ''Account
of a fag representing the Introduction of the Caste of Chalias or Cinnamon-peelers into Ceylon."
^ Kuveifi is described as having been found by Vijaya,' seated at the foot of a tree, spinning thread'
{Mahavatpsa, Ch. VII.) Cotton weaving is no doubt amongst the oldest of Indian crafts. The
similarity of methods throughout India and Burma is very striking : cf. Silberrad's description of the
' Cotton Fabrics of the North-Western Provinces and Oudhj Journal of Indian Art, No. 82, 1903.
232 k

and pillow cases {kofta urd); besides plain white, blue, or red material for other purposes, as Weaving
to be cut up for priests’ robes, jackets, caps, pillow cases and betel bags; a variety of narrow
braids were also made on small looms. No fine muslins or cloths with gold thread were
made by the village weavers. The plain material was measured as to width by the span
4
{lakaya), and as to length by the carpenters’ cubit (gia u-riyand).
Of these cloths, some may be more particularly described. A tuppotiya is a white cloth, Tuppotiya
eight or nine cubits long, made in two pieces neatly joined up the middle; single widths
are calledit, and measure six or seven cubits in length, and four to six spans in breadth,
which varied according to the owner’s caste, persons of low caste being only allowed to
wear narrow cloths. Women of low caste were obliged to substitute for the ohoriya, or the
skirt and bodice, of the higher castes, two short cloths, one to be wrapped round the loins,
and the other to be thrown over the shoulder.
Pieces of blue cloth were called kalu kdftgan; they were sometimes as much as twenty or Plain cloth
thirty cubits long, and used as hangings on occasions of mourning; the material was also
made into betel bags, etc. The cloths so far spoken of were usually quite plain white or
coloured. Scarcely any plain red material was made. Except green (seen very rarely
indeed) only the three colours, red, white, and blue are found even in the most ornamental
woven cloths. The other cloths mentioned are usually woven in pattern work. The
ftirilla is the equivalent of the Indian dart, and serves the same purposes, though thinner,
and less often used as a mat. The greater part of the cloths made now at Talaguije are
(tirili; they are usually entirely covered with pattern work, but old examples have plain
centres and only a worked border; the largest I have seen measures about 4;^ x 2 cubits
(11x5 ft.); a more usual size is about 6x3! ft. or less. p,tirili are represented on
Pi. XXVIII., in Fig. I, showing different patterns ; on PI. XXIX., in Figs. 4 and 5 ; and in
progress in the pictures of a loom on Pis. VI. and XXIX. Iratfuva is a word of Tamil
extraction, said to be occasionally used for (tirilla.
Diya kacci are undergarments or drawers made in one piece, having a large apron to hang Piya
down in front, a narrower flap with less ornament behind and a woven tape to tie round the kacciya
waist. They formed the most essential undergarment of old Kandyans, and were also a
bathing or running costume; diya kacci were worn also by watchmen and messengers ; on
PI. V. will be found a photograph of a Sinhalese man dressed as a watchman or guard
{murakdrayd), showing the manner of wearing the diya kacciya. Some of these garments
are quite plain, others most elaborately ornamented. Diya kacci are said to have been made
on special looms with double heddles {alu-vel). Such looms were called afa-vel-aluva.
There can be no doubt that special small looms were also used for making braids. The belt
i^papya) of a diya kacciya was sometimes made in one piece with the rest. Diya kacci so cut
as to be much narrower behind than in front were called pat kapapu (leaf cut). Diya kacci
are from five to six feet in full length, the apron averaging about one and a half by two feet.
Gahoni are bell-shaped or skirt-shaped cloths used to cover baskets or pots of food or other Gahoniya
offerings when carried on a yoke along the road for the king or any temple. The effect is
th at of a small three-flounced skirt, each flounce with a pattern border (PI. XXIX., 6).
The ‘skirt’ is really made of a single straight piece of cloth, joined up with one seam and
left open at both ends; one end is turned over and gathered in upon a string, thus forming
the waist and two of the flounces, and the third flounce is a separate piece of cloth sewn
on between the two others. A wall painting at Degaldoruva (about 1786) shows a yoke
[kada) and pair of gahsni suspended from a post in the royal kitchen. Every day the
country people brought in such tribute of food, betel, sweetmeats, etc., to the king, the
chief, or temple where their service was due ; as, for instance, when bringing first fruits
{alutsdl) from the temple lands to the temple or pansala. Even nowadays men may be
>'* 233

Weaving seen carrying such loads, covered with gahsni made up of plain or printed material, but I
have never seen the woven ones in use, and there are very few in existence now.
Woven pillow cases [kofta urd) are now very rarely taet with. Embroidered examples
Belts are less scarce. Belts {pati) are also rare, by far the finest example being one belonging
to the present High Priest of Malvatte, and shown on PI. XXIX., 7. This belt is
remarkable in many respects, not least in variety and type of design; it is said to be Uva
work, probably eighteenth century. The belts more usually worn, over the voluminous
folds of Kandyan costume, are more often of Indian origin, as in the case of the chief whose
portrait appears on PI. III. Napkins are usually plain and coarse, but sometimes patterned;
if more elaboration is desired, it is obtained by embroidery of finer material (PI. XXXIII.,
4, 5 ; and XXVIII., 2, 3). Kerchiefs and shawls are usually covered with pattern work,
hut are rarely met with; the kerchiefs \lensu. Port.) were worn by men on the head, as a
small turban, or used as the ceremonial covering of an offering; the shawl [ura malayo) over
the shoulder, as in India. ^
The loom So much for homespun cottons; the manner of their weaving is as follows t' ^he loom
(aluvd) and the manner of working it are identical in all essentials with the looms and
methods in use all over India and Burma. It is set up in an open shed (al-ge% sometimes
used as a name for the loom itself), on a platform {al-ptla) continuous with the outer
verandah {pila) of the weaver’s house, in one room of which are stored all materials and
accessories. A reference to the pictures will explain the general appearance of the loom,
and the manner of working it. For plain cloth, all that is needed is to throw the shuttle
(nadavd) to and fro, while alternate threads of the warp (nal-heda) are separated by the
heddles [alúcela; or aluva* the essential part of the mechanism, the loom itself) these are
moved by pedals [pa-medumd) of coconut shell {pol-katuva) which hang down into a hole
(al-vald) beneath the loom, in which hole the weaver’s feet move up and down. The
heddles are attached to narrow slips of wood {alu-kampaha), resembling the beam of a scale,
and these are suspended by the middle (about which they move) to a beam above. In
the Sinhalese looms which I have seen, only two heddles are employed, to separate alternate
warp threads; it is said that more were sometimes used formerly. The weft is pressed home
by a sleay or reed-frame, suspended like the heddles from a beam above. The sleay {rodu
Iplld) consists of three parts, the upper piece [poruvata) held by the weaver, the lower piece
{yatfinan gal l^lla) below the web, and the teeth [a¡u-karala), thin slips of cane, through
which the warp threads pass.
Patterns To make geometrical patterns, the necessary warp threads are picked up (PI. VI., 1) with
a narrow lath or weaver’s sword {sfma l(lla), and a wider lath is then inserted and turned up
sideways so as to form a ‘shed’ for the passage of the shuttle. Before the sword is pulled
out again, slips of cane are passed between the separated warp threads behind the heddles;
there they accumulate and preserve the pattern, as seen on PI. XXIX., i, making it easy
to pick up the threads again when the pattern is repeated or reversed.
The following are the names of the patterns still woven at Talaguije, and found on the
ftirili now obtainable : mal-petta, hln malpetta, maha mal-petta, ata-peti mala, para mala, d(ti
mala, katura mala, pfhena mal-petta, hali-dangaya, hin negi dasgaya, de-pota lanuva, valalu
lanuva, diya rfla, bo-kola, iri koudu, etc. These are illustrated on PI. XXVIII., i. Other
names which I have obtained are pannan küra, hln ratava, maha ratava, gal-piyum, doniba
* There is a tradition to the effect that in the time of the mythical King Maha Sammata, in the course
of a great war, all looms were destroyed by fire ; and the form of the heddles was only preserved in
the ashes, which lay undisturbed in the form of them; and hence the name aluva, from alu, ashes,
instead of the former name, umandave. This popular etymology is quite fancifuj.
234

mala, bo-pata (two triangles, apex to apex), ata pota lanuva, etc. The names of many Weaving
patterns found on old cloths are now forgotten.
Irregular patterns such as birds, cobras, ¿ff-leaves and large flowers are put in by hand work
(atev^id), i.e., tapestry. The whole is thus a combination of weaving and tapestry.
As the work progresses it is wound by quarter turns on a square cloth-beam {pn-kandd) next
the weaver, the tension of the warp being regulated by a cord which passes round a post
{man-kanuva) at the remote end of it, and thence to the weaver’s right hand, near which it
is fastened. This rope is passed through a bird-shaped block [‘kurulla’), between the post
and the web ; this wooden bird bobs up and down while the work is going on. There is
no thread-beam, only a rod on which the warp threads are strung, so that the warp must be
stretched out at full length while work is going on (PI. XXIX., i). The web is kept tightly
stretched at the near end by an arrangement of two crossed canes {kaiumal-hedd), of which
the two ends next the weaver are connected by a tight thread, and the other two have pin
points which pass into the web and keep it stretched; moveahle thread loops regulate the
tension. The warp is supported at a point not far behind the heddles, by a horizontal bar,
called alkatiuve lella. A cloth fresh from the loom is called alvala redda.
We may now turn to the preparation of the thread and laying of the warp. Cotton was
extensively grown on hen (‘chenas’) or dry fields in Kandyan districts, so much that cotton
yarn could be traded thence to Anuradhapura and those parts where cotton was not so much
grown; as we gather from Knox, who himself traded in cotton yarn, on the occasion of his
escape. The cotton is of two sorts, a large kind which lasts several years, and a dwarf,
annual sort (bala kapu).
An interesting tale of a cotton field is related in the Ummagga Jataka, in a Sinhalese prose Ummagga
version of the early fourteenth century; it is a rather charming picture of a little village Jataka
episode. A certain woman, watching in a cotton field, had spun some cotton into fine
thread, and made a ball of it. On her way home she bathed in a certain tank, leaving the
ball of cotton with her cloth on the bank. Another woman took it up as if only to admire
it, hut walked off with it altogether. The first woman followed, and as they passed by a
certain pandit’s hall, quarrelling, he sent for them. They agreed to abide by his decision.
He asked one, around what she had rolled the thread, to which she replied that she had
rolled it round a cotton seed; the real owner replied to the same question, that she had
rolled it round a timbiri seed; and when the ball was unrolled, such was found to be the
case, and so the thief was discovered. The judgment of a Solomon.
The cotton is not usually, however, spun in the field, but taken home and dried and cleaned Tarn
in larger quantities. It is freed from seeds by passing through the rollers of a small machine
(kapu kapana yantrayd) resembling a mangle (PI. XXIX., 3). It is next carded by whipping
with a bow (pulun-talanavd), and lightly rolled into tufts ready for spinning from. The
action of spinning is a charming and graceful one; it is woman’s work, but weaving is
done by men and women alike. A tuft of cotton is held in the left hand, and thread spun
from it on to a long weighted spindle (idda), the end of which rests in a pod or coconut shell
on the ground; it is kept turning by the motion of the right hand against the thigh, or by
the fingers (PI. VI., 3); the thread winds itself round the big end.
It is very usual for a number of women to meet together for a spinning bee, when the work
is done to the accompaniment of songs, those most favoured being Vessantara, Magamana
and Vidhura Jatakas, YasOdharavata, Mara Yuddhaya, and Maha-hhinishkramaijaya, all
religious songs.
The thread so spun is unwound on to a conical reel (hulu d^d) of split bamboo, thence on
to another large reel (madavd) made of bamhoo and string (Fig. 140) and thence on to
a bobbin (Jiarassald), ready to be laid in the shuttles. The winding on to bobbins is accom-
235

plished with the aid of a winding machine (harassal ambarana
Weaving
yantrayd), consisting of a wheel, with a string connecting it to a small
rod carrying the bobbin; when'the wheel is turned, the bobbin
revolves rapidly, and the reel is discharged on to it.
Laying the So much for the weft thread. That required for the warp is wound
•warp off the bamboo and string reel directly, to form a skein. This skein
is laid (process called dig-gahanavd) on a temporary frame of sticks,
and is the length of the warp required. The weaver walks up and
down along this framework, disposing the thread upon it with the
aid of a little forked stick (/«</« kulé). When completed, the skeins
Fig. 140. Madava, are lifted off, and rods passed through the ends, the whole laid
spool for reeling horizontally a couple of feet above the ground, and kept on the
cotton. stretch by strings attaching the rods to posts at each end. Strung
bows [h(t-li) are passed through the warp, to prevent tangling and to
preserve the lease or plane in which it lies. The warp is next well
sized on both sides with a starchy decoction (process called nul velanavd), after which
the threads are well brushed, and then carefully separated and arranged (process called
palal lanavd). The number of threads, of course, depends upon the width of cloth required.
Ordinarily, 120 threads are reckoned to the span. When finally dry, the warp is lifted
up and re-adjusted on the loom itself, the cloth beam of which has a groove into which is
laid the rod carrying the warp, which is held tightly when a turn is given to the beam.
The most troublesome part of the process is passing the threads through the heddles and
reed, for which purpose they have to be broken one by one, and rejoined after being
threaded through the loops and teeth. The length of the warp is often made sufficient for
two cloths in order to reduce this labour.
Kafhina Spinning, but not weaving, was sometimes done by women of high caste. A particularly
robes meritorious act is held to be the presentation to the Sañgha, at the close of Vas or Buddhist
Lent, of kafhina robes, i.e., priests’ robes, spun, woven, and made up in a single day. Even
kings frequently performed this ceremony, “employing hundreds of thousands of persons in
all such work as picking the cotton, after it is extracted from the fruit, weighing, converting
it into balls, spinning, weaving, washing, cutting into pieces, stitching, dyeing” (Rtlpa-
valiya, trans., p. 48). Thus on a certain occasion, Parakrama Bahu II. offered no less than
eighty such robes to the priesthood, in memory of the eighty chief disciples of the Buddha.
“The learned king gathered together the inhabitants of Lanka—a great multitude of men
and women— and set them all to work to prepare the cotton and other things, and speedily
finished the work of the robes. And he caused the eighty kafhina robes to be given in the
course of a single day” (Mahavaipsa, Ch. LXXXV.) And so he did on many other
occasions, nor was he alone in this practice. Private individuals acquired merit in the
same way; and it was on such occasions that the ladies of the household lent a hand in
spinning.
No yarn is now dyed locally, except occasionally with an aniline green. It seems, however,
natural to suppose that the red and blue dyeing, with madder and indigo, used to be done
by the weavers themselves, but evidence to that effect is very scanty. Nowadays, the red
and blue yarn are purchased in Batticaloa, where they are imported from India for use by
the Tamil weavers there. The blue has been difficult to obtain lately and black has been,
substituted, but the effect is not nearly as good. Good blue yarn is obtainable in Jaffna,
and I lately supplied a quantity of this to the Talagupe weavers. For further remarks on-
dyeing see Chapter XVI.
236

CHAPTER XV. EMBROIDERY.
Em broidery ¡s one of the least known of Sinhalese crafts, or at least remained
so until the publication of an account written by Mrs. Coomaraswamy in the
“Ceylon National Review,” No. 2, 1906. “This,” says Mrs. Coomaraswamy,
“is how I first came to hear of such embroidery. I was staying at Haldummulla ; we had
a visit from an ex-Àracci of a neighbouring village, who brought with him some of his
household treasures to show us. Among them was a large bag, made of fine blue cloth
with embroidered work on it in red and white cotton. He explained this was a precious
possession which no money would make him part with, and that it had been in his family
for generations. This was my first experience of this kind of work and I thereupon made
up my mind to get to know more about it. Some months after this I saw another bag,
and then found out that although this kind of work is now almost unknown, yet here and
there in out of the way villages old men can be found who know the stitches, although they
have almost given up making anything now. Many other things I also found out— how
that it is owing to modern conditions of life that this fine art has fallen into decay; that
now, even if people would work at it, they cannot ; the cloth cannot be got, the colours
cannot be got, the cottons cannot be bought, and the things that used to be made have gone
out of fashion. The cotton was grown by the people themselves, they used to dye it with
home-made dyes, and weave it into the cloth they wanted. Now all this is past ; the fine
blue hand-made cotton cloth that used to be universal, is now to be obtained only with the
greatest difficulty, if at all. It is no longer made and dyed by the Sinhalese themselves.”
There seem to have been, as in the case of weaving, two classes of work done, the first
limited in amount, for the Court and aristocracy, and Indian in style, the second more
strictly indigenous. The hannali, or tailors proper, were few in number, and held lands
in respect of which it was their duty to make “ the splendid and barbarous dresses of the
king and his court” (Davy). As tenants of dévales and viharas they had to prepare sacred
vestments, curtains, flags, etc., and to assist in decorating the car. As tenants of lay proprie­
tors, they had to make up the pacca hçftaya (brocade jacket), gold embroidered toppiya
(square hat of the chieftain), and to embroider jackets for the wives and daughters. The
materials used by such tailors were largely of Indian origin, as red felt, velvet, tinsel, the
brocades used for jackets, or the gold thread for embroidering hats and ceremonial fans.
The chief examples of the more elaborate ‘tailor-made’ embroidery now met with, are
hats and ceremonial fans {sesat). Mr. A. Ratvatte has a four-cornered toppiya worn by
Migastenna Adigàr, made of red velvet, with gold passing. On PI. XLL, 2, is illustrated
a similarly embroidered large sesata or processional ‘ banner ’ or ‘ fan ’ from the Maha Dévale,
Kandy. The basis is red velvet, with gold and silver thread passed over cords, and applique
of green velvet in enclosed areas. The reverse is of blue velvet, with sun, moon and stars
in metal. Diameter 34 inches.
The more purely Sinhalese embroidery, corresponding to the homespun cotton manutacture,
and executed in the home-made materials, appear to have been done mainly by the dhobies
{radav, washermen) who had charge of all matters connected with cotton cloth, not merely
its washing, but also the ‘getting up’ of Kandyan hats, preparation of decorations {rçH-
palama), supply of cloths for use on special occasions, and embroidery of betel-bags, cotton
.jackets, handkerchiefs, etc. At the present day a few dhobies may be found who understand
some of the old stitches, and who make small betel-bags out of such materials as they can
t)btain, but I have not met with any hamali practising their craft even in a degenerate form.
The following are specimens of dhoby tenancies : “ Henayalage holds a Hênaye Panguva
(pa. 3/. o/. fields and oa. op. 4/. gardens). Services (commutable for Rs. lyffis) : monthly
237

Embroidery to give two piruvata, one for the multen-g! and the other for the Kapurala ; for the perahera
to make up for the two Kapuralas two hats and two jackets and to supply them with one
pirmata each ; to give piruvata for the people who carry the randoli ; for the perahfra to
put up a viyana at the dévale ; to spread piyavUi and supply dambu ; when the Basnayaka
Nilame visits the dévale to prepare lodgings ; to wash the tira, halu, and other cloths of the
dévale ; at the perahera to present a toppiya to the Basnayaka Nilame.”
At Mlvatura, a dhoby tenant held an acre of field. His services (commutable for Rs. i ryo)
were ; to wash curtains, hangings, and sacred napkins during two consecutive months,
receiving food and two seers raw rice for starch and sixpence to buy blue and soap ; to
spread cloths supplied by temple at the elephant shed for the festivals and ten days of
perahfra ; to present to the Diva Nilame a Kandyan hat (Lawrie’s Gazetteer, pp. 660, 600).
Materials The materials used were the white, blue, and red cotton cloth made in the villages, and
cotton thread of the same colours, also very rarely a small amount of coloured silk. The
most characteristic work is entirely executed in the blue, red, and white cottons.
Tilings em­ The embroidered objects most often seen are betel-bags (bulat-payi) of all sizes ; less common
broidered are kerchiefs or napkins (Jensu), caps [ispay), jackets {hettd), pillow cases {koffa ura),
pacisi cloths, saddle cloths {palas). The betel-bags (Pis. XXX.— XXIII.) vary in size
from small ones carried in the waist belt, to very large ones, four feet or more in length.
The latter were carried by a servant in processions or on journeys, slung over the shoulder.
Noblemen were never without an attendant carrying their betel-bag (see above, pp. 33, 34)
and lime-box ; less important personages carried their own. The large bags are exactly
the same in construction as the small ones— a bag of oval shape made of blue cloth lined
with undyed cotton cloth, which opens nearly half way down the whole length at the sides ;
the inner part is separated into two divisions. The inner division, again consisting of .a
double piece of cloth, is also used as a pocket, called horapayiya,'-hiààen pocket' ; it has a
very small opening at the upper end, through which spices, money and other valuables
are put. Larger things were carried in the two outer pockets. The handle is made of
embroidered cloth, or of a band of plaited cord, and is finished off at the end with a beauti­
fully and ingeniously worked, and very hard, ball (vsge^i-borale) and tassel {pohottuvd). The
outside of the bag is embroidered on both sides in red and white cotton with conventional
designs, sometimes very elaborately. Bags of later make are often done in red cloth,
probably because the blue hand-made cloth could no longer be obtained ; some of these
are equally good, the tradition both in design and stitches being for some time well main­
tained. Few or no good bags are now made, partly owing to the lack of proper materials.
One of the most perfect small bags I have seen was of red hand-made cloth embroidered
entirely with silk, the use of which is very exceptional. I have referred to the plaited cord
of which the handles are sometimes made ; for this, cotton cord of two colours is plaited
into a thick stout flat braid which is very handsome and durable. It may be mentioned
that similar plaited cord strings, but round, of two or three colours are made by priests
for ola book strings {pot-lam).
The embroidery of bags consists generally of a centre design, floral or otherwise, framed
by three or more borders parallel to the edge of the bag. Of these borders the innermost
4
is almost always pala peti, the largest liya-Vfla, the others a variety of hava iya or gal-bmdu
pattern. A limited amount of coloured silk is sometimes used ; the small bag of PI. XXX., i,
is exceptional in having embroidery entirely in silk. It may be noted that silk is frequently
mentioned in the Mahavarfisa, but never with any suggestion of its being an indigenous
product. The edges of bags are either bound with woven braid, which was made in a great
variety of designs, or stitched over with the peculiar ‘centipede’ binding stitch described
below.
238

Less common than the oval bags, are square ones. These are made from a square piece ’Embroidery
of material, the four corners of which are drawn together for the attachment of the handle,
consisting of four cords instead of the two of oval bags.
Jackets worn by govi-varitsa ladies were generally embroidered. The left-hand girl’s dress 'Jackets
on PI. II. shows a bodice embroidered with flowers and parrots, probably in gold thread,
and perhaps the work of the regular tailors. On PI. XXX., 2, is shown a part of a jacket
sleeve, copied from one said to have been worn by a queen in the eighteenth century ; it
is of particularly admirable design. In my own collection are two similar cotton jackets,
each with a mante, the one embroidered with blue and red cotton, the other with red cotton
5
and gold thread. The latter has at the back, an embroidered design of ¿ -leaf and two
birds affronted.
Jackets worn by devil-dancers in Sabaragamuva and the low country are often well em­
broidered, either with thread in the style of the betel-bags, or with appliqué. On
PI. XXIII., 1-3, are illustrated a fine embroidered dancer’s jacket, the ‘ Gard-yakshaya’*
costume. This consists of a red hand-made cotton cloth skirt and jacket, the skirt with
three flounces. The jacket fastens behind. The whole is covered with very elaborate
blue and white cotton appliqué embroidery, the edge of the applied cloth being turned in
and sewn with white cotton. The design on the chest (‘flower in vase’) might almost be
called ‘braided,’ as it is executed by sewing down very narrow strips of applied cloth
following the pattern. In the photograph the blue appliqué hardly shows, but follows
the white outline just inside it.
Appliqué work is also found on a larger scale, on flags and pillow cases. Appliqué flags
are not often well made, and may represent an attempt to find a substitute for the more
satisfactory dye-painted flags formerly used. The embroidered flags done for the Kandy
Art Association recently, have been of very poor workmanship.
Very few pillow cases {koffa ura) have remained to us, but those that have are generally of Pillowcases
one type— a centre piece of blue cloth, embroidered with a design, and a border three or
four inches wide, of a patchwork of red, white, and blue squares of cotton cloth. Probably
an earlier type was one with an embroidered border instead of the patchwork, just as the
later type is thé kind completely made of patchwork ; but I have never seen one. But as
we find woven pillow cases of the same shape and size with patterns all over, it is very
probable that the better examples used to be embroidered all over.
A saddle cloth {palasa) in red cloth, embroidered in white and blue cotton, was exhibited by
Nikaveva Disava at the Exhibition of Kandyan Art in January, 1906.
The only embroidered caps met with, are those known as ispayya (PI. XXX., 3). These are Caps
the “Countrey Caps” described by Knox as resembling mitres (p. 34, above). The flaps are
thinly quilted, and the cap finely embroidered in coloured silks. There is one of these caps
in the Kandy Museum ; the one illustrated was lent by Mr. T. B. Kçppitipola.
‘On occasions of ceremony,’ says Davy, ‘when full dressed, the men cover the body with a
short jacket; and those who have the privilege, lay aside the handkerchief for a capi and
dec orate themselves with gold chains and girdles.’
Embroidered kerchiefs, napkins and shawls are met with. The kerchiefs and shawls may Shawls and
have been worn on the head or thrown over the shoulders as an ura mdlaya. The most napkins
elaborate shawl I have seen, indeed almost the only example, is illustrated on PI. XXVIII., 4.
4
This shawl, the property of the D adâ. Mâligava, measures 49 inches square, the border
two inches wide. The centre is occupied by drawn thread-work, the circles in blue, red, or
silver thread. The inner border, a series of little trees, is done in gold thread, outlined
* Garayaka is a house demon. See D. de S. Gooneratne, J.C.B.R.A.S., Vol. IV. p. 35.
239

Embroidery alternately in blue and red. The flowers of the outer border are red, with a gold centre;
the leaves outlined blue. The shawl appears to consist of linen. Smaller kerchiefs or
napkins are not so rare (Pis. XXVIII., 2, 3, and XXXIII., 4, 5); there are at the Maligava
a considerable number, ranging in size from 13 to 24 inches square. They are embroidered
in red and blue. The material is usually cotton, occasionally linen. Fine drawn thread-
work resembling lace is sometimes found, and round the outer edge there is sometimes
a fringe of needlework ‘lace’ (PI. XXVIII., 2 and 3). Very characteristic of these napkins
is a peculiar style of embroidery in which both sides are made exactly alike (as in certain
types of Kashmir shawl). The effect is evidently obtained by working in even stitches
equal on back and front, with spaces between, which are afterwards filled when going over
the work a second time. Many of the designs so worked resemble, and are perhaps copied
from, the elaborate interlacing patterns of the woven cloth. The purpose of the small
napkins was for use in covering offerings, and similar ceremonial purposes. On PI. I., the
left-hand figure represents an officer carrying some ceremonial object under an embroidered
napkin, with tassels. So used, the napkin is called pesa lensuva.
Fig. 141. Stitches used in Sinhalese embroidery: 1-4, Binding stitches;
1,2, and 3 are single double and triple buttonhole stitches; 4, an elaborated
herring-bone. 5, 6, Chain stitch, plain and elaborated. 7, Border pattern
in two colours. 8, Herringbone or feather stitch. 9, Buttonhole stitch
gusset. 3A, reverse of i, 2, 3. 4A, 6a, 8a, reverse of 4, 6, 8.
Stitches The stitches most used are illustrated in Fig. 141. Most of the work is done with chain
stitch. If the background is blue, the pattern is outlined in white and red chain stitch, the
red inside, the white outside. The double outline is a very characteristic feature. The
borders of betel-bags are also separated from each other by three rows of chain stitch, red
or blue between two white lines. The stitch is often complicated by intertwining red or
240

blue threads, or one thread of each colour, as the work proceeds, as indicated in Fig. 141,6. 'Embroidery
Binding stitches are especially characteristic and well developed. Fig. 141, No. i, shows
a stitch used for binding together the outer cloth and the lining of the upper part of a betel- Stitches
bag, along the opening. It gives a firm edge, and is easy to work. The first stitch goes
straight through the edge of the stuff; the second catches up the threads where they cross
in the middle, as shown in the figure, without going through the cloth again. The stitches
shown in Fig. 141, Nos. 1-4, are all binding stitches, and must be imagined as binding over
the raw edges of cloth, or covering a seam ; they are drawn quite flat for the sake of clearness.
In these figures, small Roman figures indicate the order of making the stitches. Thus in i,
the needle, inserted at r., goes from i. to ii. in front, then from ii. to m. through the thickness
of the material, and then between iii. and iv. two buttonhole stitches are made, looping into
the first stitch. Each loop of the succeeding stitches embraces the loop immediately
preceding. In 2 and 3, the single loop is replaced by two and three loops respectively.
The two last especially make a very firm and useful edge. They are sometimes strengthened
and elaborated by intertwining a coloured thread along each side, below tbe edge of the
material. No. 2 is called amu karala, ‘amu ear’ (ear of corn).
No. 4 is the most complicated of all, and appears to be peculiar to Sinhalese embroidery. Centipede
It is called pattfya (centipede) or mudum m^sma (back-bone stitch); it is an elaborated stitch
herringbone. Two needles are in use together; sometimes even the three colours are
worked together. This stitch is most often used for binding the outer edges of large and
small betel-bags.
The method of working is as follows; at i. the white thread is brought to the front, the
needle is again inserted at ii. and brought out at in., on a line with i. on the other side of the
seam; it then goes back to iv. on a line with ii. on the right-hand side, and is brought out at
V., at a little distance below i. vi., vii. and viii. are the same repeated, but after vin. the
needle is brought out at ix. at some distance below v., leaving space for two other stitches
between; these stitches are begun below v., with a different coloured cotton, generally red,
and worked exactly the same as the first four stitches; after they are completed the first
needle is taken up again, the thread of which comes out on the right-hand side, at ix., just
below the two stitches of the red colour. The next stitch is a little different, in that the
needle does not go back to the extreme outside on the left but catches down a stitch at about
a quarter the width of the whole, as can be seen in the diagram. It then takes a slanting
direction behind the material, coming out below the red stitches, still on the left side; the
needle is shown in this position. Exactly the same is done on the right-hand side, and so on.
The thread always goes back to its own colour, that is if the white thread is being worked
it catches down a white stitch on the opposite side and so with the red. The backs of the
stitches are seen in No. 4A. If three colours are used, then more space must be left for the
insertion of four stitches between v. and ix. instead of two only.
No. 5 is the ordinary chain stitch which is used so much in this work. Chain stitch
No. 6 is also a chain stitch, but with coloured threads intertwined, one on each side of the
needle as it is worked. Sometimes a red thread is used on one side and a blue on the other.
No. 6 a shows the back of Nos. 5 and 6.
No. 7 is a very usual combination of two kinds of stitches; it consists of two Y-shaped
stitches held down by a stitch at the top and bottom, thus forming a square, this is then
filled in with a satin stitch of a different colour. This satin stitch is often used for filling
in small squares and other spaces.
A buttonhole stitch is often used for the conventional foliage when it needs filling in as can Buttonhole
be seen in the beautiful border of PI. XXXII., 9. The design of this particular border stitch
r I 241

Embroidery is outlined in white and filled in with a red buttonhole stitch which widens or narrows
according to the space needed to be filled. It has a very rich effect.
Seams No. 8 is a feather stitch used occasionally for filling in a space ; 8a is the back of the stitch.
No. 9 shows the method employed in joining the seams of a tuppoftya. The seams are sewn
close together though not overlapping, and at each end the seam widens out into a kind of
gusset, the space being filled up with a buttonhole stitch worked as shown, though often
with much thicker and closer stitches. At the end of the seam this gusset may be one
or two inches wide. It is a most satisfactory way of joining two pieces of cloth ; there
is no puckering and it is extremely strong. A simple cross stitch is rare.
In appliqué work there are two or three ways of stitching on the applied cloth ; the edges
are always carefully turned in, and may then be bound by hemming, by an even running
close to the edge, or by chain stitch.
APPENDIX TO CHAPTER XV. REVIVAL
OF SINHALESE EMBROIDERY.
Through the efforts of Mrs. Coomaraswamy, there has taken place of late some revival of
interest in Sinhalese embroidery. Mrs. Coomaraswamy has taught a class of Kandyan
girls at the Clarence Memorial School in Kandy, and a class of Sinhalese ladies in Colombo.
Great interest was shown, and some very excellent work resulted. Prizes were offered
through the Ceylon Society of Arts, and a good display of work was shown at the annual
exhibitions in 1905 and 1906. But the best evidence of the value of such work, was the
interest awakened in old traditions and designs, as, for example, in the case of the daughter
of a Kandyan chief, who brought to the class a highly valued memorial of the past, the
jacket referred to above (p. 239), and made the very excellent copy of part of the sleeve,
reproduced on PL XXX., 2.
At the same time, the Department of Public Instruction, through Mrs. Evans, the newly-
appointed Inspectress of Needlework, has abolished some of the worst abuses in connection
with the teaching of embroidery in schools. It may perhaps be hoped that the day of
gaudy Berlin woolwork, and gold-embroidered mottoes to be framed under glass and hung
on the wall, is now passing away, even in Ceylon, where all things Early Victorian linger
still.
242

CHAPTER XVI. MAT WEAVING AND
DYEING.
I. MAT WEAVING BY KINNARAYO.
T he well-known Dumbara mats, called kalalaya (PL XXXIV.), are made by men
and women of the Kinnaraya caste, practically the lowest of Kandyan castes,
excepting the Rodiyo. The fibre of which the mats are made is niyayda, the
bowstring hemp, Sansevkria zeylanica. The rounded green leaves of this common xerophitic
plant are gathered, and scraped against a log {niyandaporuvd) with a wooden tool [gl-valld)
shaped like a spokeshave. This scraping removes the fleshy part of the leaf, leaving the
white fibre, which is oiled and brushed, and then ready for use almost immediately. Part
of the material is left white, the rest dyed red, yellow, or black in the manner explained
below.
The warp thread {kalal heda) is spun like cotton on a spindle [iddd) (as shown on the right
of Plate IV). The weft elements are not spun at all, but consist of parallel fibres, of the
width of the mat.
The loom (PI. IV.) is a low horizontal contrivance, something like the loom used in cotton
weaving, but much more primitive. There is no ahala, or pit for the weaver’s feet; the
operator squats on the mat itself, supported by a few flat logs between it and the ground.
The pattern is picked up with a weaver’s lath (vemd); this lath, having an eye at one end,
serves as a bodkin * with which to draw the weft threads through the warp. A sleay [alu
karald) similar to the cotton weavers’, but not suspended, is used to drive the weft home.
The raising and separation of alternate warp thteads to form a ‘shed’ is effected by a very
44
primitive type of heddles {yo(la-ka uvd). The loops of the heddles, through which the
warp threads pass, do not move. Every alternate warp thread passes through a loop. The
separation of alternate threads to form the shed, is effected by the movement of two wooden
rods, placed on the far side of the tripod ; of these rods one (uttara-pata or kontaliyd) rests on
the warp, the other i^pannam-bate) passes between alternate threads of it. Relative move­
ment of these rods raises and separates alternate threads on the near side of the heddles.
The warp is carried on two rods, kofta kura and andina kanda. The first of these, on the
left in PI. IV., is tied to a stouter rod {heda kandd), and this is fastened to sticks firmly
driven into the ground. At the other end, the andina kanda is tightly strained by two
4
cords {ka u-pa-lanu) attached to two posts {kalsl-kai}u) in the ground. The heddles are
supported by a tripod arrangement of sticks {tun-pa kolk), which is shifted along as the
work progresses.
The warp is hid {dig-gahanava or h(da lanavd) in two operations. The spun thread {nal)
is first unwound from the spindle, then broken, and passed through the heddles and through
the teeth of the sleay or reed; the short ends left projecting through the teeth are tied
temporarily to avoid slipping out. The remainder of the warp is then laid to the required
length, and the threads broken off and joined on to the short ends projecting through the
heddles.
When the weaving is finished the projecting ends of fibre at each end of the mat are turned
up over a thread drawn tight along the edge (like a piping cord) and knotted each one to it
by another thread which catches up each projecting end in a slip knot, forming a neat
binding.
* Called h(da liya in the song quoted on p. 246.
r 2 243

Mat The niyanda fibre is dyed red, yellow, and black as follows: the red
weaving and colour is obtained by boiling the fibre with patasgi ICcesalpinia
dyeing sappan) •wooi.,korakaha [Memecylon umhellatuni) leaves and (?) gingelly
oil or seeds; the yellow from a decoction of veni-v(l {Coscinium
fenestratum); the black with the help of gall nuts, arala and bulu
(T'erminalia chebula and T. beleria). The dye fades considerably in
a year or two. The KinnarayO make also whips, fly-whisks, brooms
and other objects of niyanda fibre. It is a material the use of which
is confined to the KinnarayO and RofliyO.
Perfectly plain mats are called pannam kalala; those decorated with
birds, as is usually done, are kurullu kalala; those with a variety
of patterns are v(d<t kalala or v(da pfduru. The following names of
patterns are in use, the first five being illustrated on PI. XXXIV.:
Fig. 142. Mal-gaha toran-petta, ratvatte-alankaraya, tarava, tani-vfl iruva, depota-lanuva,
(‘flower-tree’) pattern taraka-petta, pannam-petta, tunpota lanuva, dfl-g^ta-lanuva, mal-gaha
of Dumbara mat. (Fig. 142), etc.; also animals, as birds, deer, cobras, elephants.
A Kinnara song relating to mat weaving is given in the Appendix to
this chapter.
2. GRASS MATS AND BASKETS.
Grass mats [pMuru) are made by the PannayO or grass cutters, and also, but more particularly
for their own use, by women of all castes, inchiA.mg govivamsa; and the making of decorated
grass mats, dishes, and baskets was a domestic accomplishment which even the daughters of
a chief did not despise. The mats here referred to are made from various grasses {hfvan,
Cyperus dehiscent, gal(hi, C. corymbosus, etc.) and palm leaves {indi-kola, Phoenix zeylanica;
coconut; talipot, Corypha umbraculifera ; and palmyra). The best are those made of iudi-
kola or hfvan. Beside mats, baskets are made, also betel pouches {bulat main), boxes, etc.,
of dyed grasses. The grass-weaver uses a grass knife having a point at one end, and a
cutting edge at the other. A combined sickle and point for weaving, like that shown in
PL XLV., 11, is called pan ketta; a tool consisting of a small straight blade only, and a point
at the other end, is called hembili-katuva.
Country housewives take a pride in the variety of patterns they may know, and their skill in
making mats. The mats are in constant use for various purposes, especially for drying
grains in the sun ; they are also ofiered to any visitor to sit upon. An inferior, but not of
low caste, would receive a mat to sit on, and would be insulted if it were not offered; an
equal would be given a kolombuva; and a superior, especially a priest, a larger stool or chair,
covered with a white cloth. In large country houses, a number of mats are kept in store,
arranged in a ‘mat-rack’ {pfduru-ana) on the wall.
Dyeing Patavgi {Ccesalpinia sappari) is the most important dye used for grass. It produces a fine red.
The proper process is rather complicated, and the practice varies in different districts. At
Niriella (Sab.) I found the following methods in use:
On the first day two handfuls of korakaha leaves {Memecylon umbellatum, Burm.) are pounded
in a mortar, squeezed out in water by hand, and the resulting liquid, resembling pea soup,
strained; two handfuls of patangi chips are added and the whole left to stand. On the
second day the solution has become red. The patangi chips are removed, pounded, and
replaced, and the whole boiled with the indi-kola which is to be dyed, tied up in little
sheaves. The pot is allowed to cool and left till next day. On the third day leaves of
bombu-kola {Symplocos spicata), hln-bovifiya {Osbeckia octandrd), and korakaha, pieces of kebella
244

bark {Aporosa Lindleyana), and a handful of chips of a yellow wood called ahu {Morinda Mat
tinctorid), together with a small bundle of roots of ratmulgas [Knoxia platycarpa, Arn. var.) weaving and
are pounded and added to the solution in which the /sif« leaves remain; the whole is boiled dyeing
and then allowed to cool and stand till next day, when the leaves are removed and dried,
after which they are ready for use.
I have another receipt from Velimada. To a pound of galfhi (another grass used for mats)
take two pounds korakaha (or v(likaha), half a pound of kiribat-mul (root of Knoxia platy-
carpa), two po\xnA% patangi chips, four cents’ weight of green saffron, half cent weight of
lime, and four pots of pure water. Boil for three days with a strong fire in the morning,
slow fire during the day, and again strong fire in evening and slow fire during the night.
Fig. 144. Svastika
pattern from grass bag,
Ambalaùgoda.
The pot must not be removed from the
XU XIII
hearth during the three days, after which
Fig. 143. Patterns of Kandyan grass mats
the dyed grass can be removed and dried
[peduru) and dishes {atul-pat), etc. x^. I., Lanu-
in the shade.
g(ta; II., Vanga-giriya (the small squares are the
The colour thus produced is a fine fast
two cells occupied by Prince Vessantara and
red, which does indeed fade slowly, but
MadrI Devi, see p. 41, above); III., Bhayam
lasts as long as the mat is likely to, which
kara ; IV., Taraka piyum; V., Haras rafava;
is more than can be said of the aniline
VI., Idda mal piyum or katura mal; VIII., Diya
dyes which have entirely repAzctà patajtgi
rela ; IX., Ata-peti mala; X., Mal-petta ; XI.,
in many districts. Of these the magenta
Gal-piyum; XII., Kolomba rafava or sevvandl or
is unpleasant and the green very fugitive.
samadra {samudra ?) mala; XIII., Pahada mane
The customary method of dyeing grasses
or kiribat rafava; four of these together called
or palm leaves black is to bury them in
piyum dahasaya. The names in use in different
rice-field mud. The lower oxide of iron
districts vary considerably.
in the mud combines with the tannin in
the grass to form tannate of iron (ink).
A yellow dye is sometimes got from the young fruits of the kaha {Bixa orellana), or from
saffron, which is pounded in a mortar, extracted with water, and boiled for an hour with the
leaves to be dyed.
It m ay be mentioned that the yellow dye of priests’ robes is obtained from the wood of the
jak, in an extract of which the cloth to be dyed is soaked ; the extract is sometimes boiled
also with bomba leaves. The yellow dye is not permanent, but is easily renewed.
The patterns of woven mats have regular names, many of which correspond to those used
by cotton weavers. A number of common or characteristic patterns are illustrated in
Fig. 143. Many of the names of patterns are mentioned in the humorous mat-weaving
song quoted in the Appendix to this chapter.
24s

3. TALIPOT LEAVES.
weaving and "j-jig leaves of the talipot, or tala palm (Corypha umbraculiferd) are put to many uses. Their
dyeing preparation as ‘olas’ for writing upon is detailed above, on pp. 51, 52. The only other use
needing reference here, is in combination with mica to make ceremonial processional fans
{sisai). An example of these is shown on PI. LIL, 3. In use, it would be mounted on
a lacquered staff, and borne as shown on PI. I., on the left-hand side of the upper picture.
4. CANE.
Cane or rattan (vi-v^i. Calamus Roxburghi) is extensively used for making baskets, for
stringing bed frames, and generally in place of rope. A typical v^l-pettiya, or cane basket,
is shown on PI. XLIIIa, 8. More common is a plain round basket with a flat lid, used for
carrying or storing grain, food, etc. The cane is sometimes dyed black or red, and woven
in simple patterns.
APPENDIX TO CHAPTER XVI.
I. KINNARAYA’S SONG.
I. Early in the morning, when the wife has cooked and given food, set out to pluck niyanda;
scrape and wash it, and from that niyasda take three handfuls.
а. To make niyanda red take leaves of korakaha, patangi and alum ; to make it yellow use
venivfl; to make it black use aralu and bulu.
3. Take a little combed niyanda and for spinning thread, a spindle ; wind the thread upon
the spindle, fasten the beam, lay the warp.
4. Take slips of bamboo for the reed, and talipot slips for the outside of the heddles, make
the pannam-bate smooth, in the h?da-liya cut the holes.
5. Between the aforesaid (rods) let there be another, called the uttara pata, as the custom is;
from the tripod {tunpa knlle) let the valuvadu (hanks of fibre) be suspended; little by little
drawing through different spaces (weave the mat).
б. Sing all the time a kavi-pada^ a meet song for the world, weaving as best you can, to
make a good mat for to-morrow.
7. Weave pannam at the beginning, toran-petta next to that, in black and white; weave
depota-lanuva, del-gefa-lanuva, parrots and doves into the mat.
8. Weave two rows of taraka-petta, put in whatever sort of work you can, singing withal a
kavi-pada telling to the world whatso you know.
9. Weave in the mat ratvat-alankiraya, stretch out the hands to weave, ever keep an eye
upon the work on either hand; this is our right from ancient days.
10. The tanivfl iruva has its name of old ; therewithal ’tis the custom to sing kavi-pada;
in thick darkness one cannot well fare to and fro : give not if a lower price is offered.
II. Parrots and doves I weave into the mat, parrots, maliti, sela-lihini•, knots I tie around
the edges of the mat; I will make a mat for Aunt to see.
12. From the beginning in the time of Maha Sammata, thenceforward are the eighteen
separate castes: svu-pada song (quatrains) was then composed: weaving was also invented
then.
246

ij. Who was then married to that king? Queen M?nik Pala was married there: our Kinnaraya's
beginning, too, was in the time of Maha Sammata; for that king had servants even then, song
14. Who gave to that king the woven mats ? what did he give to the man who wove
and gave the mats ? who gave the kavi-pada, banishing ill-fortune ? Lord Buddha gave
the kavi-pada, banishing ill-fortune.
15. Kakusanda, Ksnagama, by those Munis’ help, by help of KaSyapa, Gautama, by help of
Makkama, Samanala and ^rt Pada, by their help no ill-fortune attends these songs.
APPENDIX II.
PANNAN KATURA, the story of how in the time of King Maha Sammata, a daughter Mat
and her mother-in-law had words and wove (in rivalry). weaving
1. Long ago King Sammata had no mat for his bed; when he told his chamberlain of this, song
the chamberlain spake thus to the king,—
2. “There are living in these villages, here and there, women who can plait; I will go and
fetch them quickly.”
3. The chamberlain went from village to village, in search of cunning women, “ By his
Majesty’s orders, weave a good mat and bring (it here) to-morrow.”
4. Now there were no rushes with which to weave the king’s mat; “My Mother-in-law,
let us gather and bring good rushes.
5. “ Hear me, my Mother, listen kindly (to my prayer), do not stay, let us go. Mother, to
cut rushes;
6. “ Let us go to the field-of-rushes and seek for good rushes, let us cut the rushes quickly.
Mother,
7. “ Let us bring the rushes home, straightway lay them in the sun, then taking up the
rushes, let us. Mother, weave a mat of them;
8. “ (See the) growing beauty (of the) women gathering, neatly they bind the loosened
hair upon their head; let us. Mother, take a good grass-knife and go to gather (rushes) in
the meadow.”
9. Polishing her teeth with powder, she smiled at her handsome husband, saying, “ My
Mother-in-law has gone to gather rushes in the field, see ! I, too, will go to gather rushes.”
10. “ ‘ A seven months child is in your womb, parti-coloured spots are on your breast, it will
miscarry if you go to gather in the field-of-rushes, do not go,’ my husband called to me:
11. “See how the women gather and bring the rushes, (how) they have prepared them and
are ready to (begin the) plaiting, (see how) the women fare on the path; do you go. Mother,
I cannot go for this man’s worrying.”
12. “ Let us go, elder sister, to gather rushes, already they have gone to the ran-minuvan
(golden rushes) meadow.” “ If I go to gather rushes, staying till afternoon, who will give
mil k to the baby ?”
13. Then were the women ready to set out, dressed in clean white cloths: “ I cannot leave
my pretty babe and go.
14. “ Mother, hear my loving words, do you go with our seven good friends, kind and
friendly women, bringing minuvan rushes from the meadow.
15. “Anoint with oil and sandal paste and neatly bind your hair, putting oil on your face,
go seek the minuvan. Mother, will you not go to cut the rushes.
16. “Take a grass-knife with you, go to seek the field-of-rushes gladly, cut the rushes, split
and dry them, tie them in a bundle and leave them to dry.
r 4 247

Mat 17- “ Sister, why do you delay ? if I go now the baby will cry and the boys will beat him,
•weaving you go then, my sister, to tie up the rushes.”
song 18. Tying up the rushes and putting the bundles on their heads, “ Let us go” said,the
women, ready in a row, going one by one along the path, “let us split the rushes and
weave a mat for the king.”
19. Bringing the rushes and laying them in the sun to dry, straightway they split the
rushes everywhere, and taking up a handful to begin the work, “I weave a depta ratava"
(said one).
20. Then splitting up the rushes, charming women, whose breasts are like the parrot’s beak,
(shining) with dust of gold, begin the mat; thus the women begin the mats,—
21. The women weaving mats begin from the corner, after splitting up the rush and
dyeing it, round (the mat) they weave mal-peti ornament, they weave the rata piyum.
22. “We will weave piyum for the head and the same for the foot, in the middle a good
çspat pattern, thus will we weave a mat for the king to see.”
23. They wove pretty mal-peti and white-spotted elephants, and cobras, poloUgas and beasts
in a row, parrots and s^la-lihit}i with every beast round about, a mat like the full moon
they wove.
24. The women kind and lovely, who went to fetch rushes from the meadow, weaving
parrots, maliti and pretty mal-peti, begin a mat to show the king.
25. How pretty their faces, shining like gold ! How pretty the silver worn on their
hands ! How pretty this woman’s breasts ! How cleverly the pretty girl splits the rush.
26. After fetching rushes from the field and drying them in the yard, I begin a mat as I
sit on the ledge. “ Why, my sister, are the edges of your mat untidily woven?”
27. A man’s luck changes often ! No one ever saw the like of this ! A nice sort of mat
Namal Kumariya is weaving ! “ Sister your minuvan mat is full of holes,” said she.
28. “ Sister, my baby called out for his milk, in my house there is always chattering and
nagging, I used short rushes that is why the mat is small ; well, sister I did it amiss,” said she.
29. She begun to weave tuskers, horses, elephants and bears, dépota ratava and lanu dange
in the mat ; the mat is not dyed a good colour ; “The reason is sister that I started badly.”
30. She weaves parrots, maliti, pretty mal-peti, suras, elephants, arches, and finishes the
mat, in the four corners the four Varan Deviya, a splendid mat she takes to show the king,
31. At the head of the mat is lévara, at the foot Mihikata, in the four corners the four
Varan DeviyO, (such) a mat she weaves to give the great king.
32. They went with the mat to give it to the king, mother and daughter-in-law wove
the mat together, a splendid mat they took with them and gave it to His Highness.
33. When he asked who wove the mat, and they told him a mother and a daughter in
this village, “Bring them before me” said he, and both were brought in to the presence
of the king.
34. To both he gave one elephant-load of goods, saying “Take and divide in peace; it
is well if day by day you weave more mats and bring them to the king.”
35. “By our fortune of old this gift has come to us; give me. Mother, half of the
present given by the king” ; “What, wench, shall I give you a gift?” she exclaimed;
from that day forth these two disagreed.
36. From that time they would not weave together, the mother-in-law mis-saying the
daughter, thenceforth disagreeing with the husband too, these two wove one against the
other.
37 Dear and loving Mother hearken to my words” (she said), and being very sleepy she
began to cry. ‘Dear daughter, tell the kindly word.” “Give me at least a mat to sleep
upon.”
248

38. “O stupid one! why do you speak dolefully? how can a woman live who cannot Mat
weave ? ” Swaying from side to side she asked, “ Am I a slave to give you a mat ? ” weaving
39. “Dear daughter, why do you talk to me? Find out how to get (for yourself) on in song
future. Why are you thus angry with me ? Let us see what we two can do at weaving.
40. “ I weave a mat with haras rafciva, in the middle doves and parrots I am weaving, first
for a foot I start with pannan-katuru, I will turn out a mat for my daughter to see.”
41. “ I am weaving a mat withpiyum ratava, pretty todu and squirrels I am weaving around
it, with sun and moon at head and foot, playing I will weave a mat for my Mother to see.”
1
42. “Why do you bandy words with me ? I can weave to melt the earth sunu-v?l dayge
I start round the mat, lanu-g^ta and pohottuva I will weave for my daughter.”
43. “ Do you speak against me ? see, I start on the mat a havaiidange, I begin thegfta-pana
pattern, see rat-mal and pohotfu. Mother.”
1
44. “When the moon in the sky is bright, ministers are willing to wage war, Lo a fine
four-legged beast, I will weave a hare for my daughter to see.”
45. “A pandit, a four-footed beast I am weaving, a friend and a four-hoofed beast, I have no
ill-will towards you, I will weave a fox for my Mother to eat the hare,”
46. “Four legs and eight hoofs—I begin the weaving, cloven hoofs, shining white spots,
two horns on the head I am weaving, a pretty deer I will weave for my daughter to see.”
47. “ Four feet, twenty nails I begin, a devil’s face, a round chin and a beard, a tail like a
cat and shining white spots, I will weave for my mother a cheetah to eat the deer.”
48. “ Hear what I say well, an elephant I will weave for my daughter, with huge trunk
blowing in the ten directions and two shining tusks like tender golden buds.”
49. “I will make the lord and king reigning over every jungle beast, who jumps into sea­
water and swims ashore, I will weave for my Mother a lion to eat the elephant.”
50. “ Devil dances are held for those who are sick and cannot be cured, for the tovil tatuva
in the four corners of the mat, lo, there is a fowl for my daughter.”
51. “Nought else have I done for fame in the world save a little weaving, I learnt to
gather goods. I’ll better my Mother, a kola-diviya I will weave to spring on the fowl and
devour it.”
52. “ The good Lord’s praise I am telling, and the holy law o’er the three worlds spread, the
shining diamond throne filled with blessings, Mara’s army I weave in the mat for my
daughter.”
5
53. A beautiful ¿5-tree she weaves in the mat, she tells of the highest law for men, a ¿ -tree
and crystal throne she weaves in the mat. Him she weaves who drove away the gathered
army (of Mara).
54. “ in time gone by we two were agreed, not saying harsh words, let us be in peace
(again), fast friends we were ever in times gone by; you are not my daughter, you are my
Mother.”
55. “ Trustfully hearken to my many kind words, think how we two have grown up by the
help of the Gods. If misfortune be due, be it far from us ; in the future we two will be
born from one Mother’s womb.”
249

CHAPTER XVII. HISTORY OF SINHALESE
ART.
Materials are not yet available for the detailed history of Indian art or of any
off-shoot or branch of Indian art. It is only possible in speaking of the history
of Sinhalese art, to indicate its main sources, and the influences that seem most
to have affected it.
Accepting the general outline of the history given in Chapter I., it is clear that we have to
consider the following elements which have, or may have, gone to the building up of the
traditions of Sinhalese arts and crafts as they existed in late mediasval times:—the art of
indigenous peoples, pre-Vijayan ‘ Yakkhas’; the art brought by the Vijayan immigrants ;
the art brought with Buddhism and the Aiokan culture from N. India; the influence of
Dravidian art in early times, and at subsequent periods; the influence of Muhammadan
art; of Chinese and Malayan ; and finally of Portuguese, Dutch, and English.
Probably the most widely exerted influence in all Oriental art, is that which accompanied
and followed the A§okan Buddhist missions. To this rule Ceylon formed no exception.
It must, of course, be understood that the culture which was thus carried was not Buddhist
in the sense of being non-Hindu, but was rather what we ought to call Early Indian. It is
this fact which explains the perfectly true statement* that for Hindu art proper, one must
go to Ceylon. Mediaeval and modern Sinhalese art is essentially Indian art, but it is not
modern Hindu, rather it is such an art as might have survived in some yet Buddhist part
of the mainland, if Buddhism had not there been entirely merged in Hinduism.
Early Indian art of the Aiokan period can be best
studied in the Barahat sculptures (200— 150 b.c.).
There are, as might be looked for, many motifs in
Sinhalese art directly comparable with those character­
istic at Barahat; of these survivals, it will be worth
while to notice some of the most important or con­
spicuous. One of these survivals, is the use of rosettes
(lotus flowers), not as an essential part of a design, but
to fill awkward spaces, and so preserve the flatness and
evenness of the whole design, as, for example, in PI.
XVIII. Fig. 145 shows a lotus rosette similarly used at
Barahat. There are, moreover, significant resemblances Fig. 145. Lotus rosette (with
and survivals in the forms of the lotus rosettes them­ makard), Barahat.
selves. Amongst the lotus medallions of Barahat which
have parallels in medisval Sinhalese work there are some in which the outer whorl of petals
is replaced by cobra heads, all turned in one direction, right or left, around the centre (see
Figs. 4 and 5, from Cunningham’s‘Bharhut Stupa,’ PI. XXXVIII.); in others the same forms
can be recognized, but the cobra heads are so much more conventionalised that recognition
would be difficult without the other type to guide us (see Fig. 6 from Cunningham’s
PI. XXXVIII.). The evolution from cobras’ heads to purely conventional forms had
already taken place at Barahat; and the more conventional type alone survives in Kandyan
art (Fig. 147, also Fig. 34, iii. and v.)
Conventionalised cobra heads are also recognizable in Fig. 37. This form differs, however,
from the true whorl in having the elements symmetrically disposed about a median line.
*E.g., Mr. Maskell, ‘Imries,’ 1905,/. 334.
250

History of
Sinhalese art
Fig. 147. Lotus
rosette, Sinhalese,
18th century. Cf.
Fig. 149. Arm-
Fig. 146,5.
let, Barahat. Cf.
Fig. 146. Lotus medal­ Fig. 148. Lotus
PI. XXXIII., 2.
lions, Barahat. ornament, Barahat.
How far these may represent either cobra heads, or lotus leaves, as in Fig. 148, A, b, from Archaic
Barahat, it would be hard to distinguish. The form has probably a double ancestry. motifs
Resembling í*ig. 148, b, is the armlet of Fig. 149, also from a Barahat sculpture (Cunning­
ham, PI. XXII). It is a little surprising to find the form of this armlet or arm decoration so
perfectly preserved in modern Sinhalese art, as the Gara-yakshaya costume (PI. XXXIIL, 2
and 3) shows it to have been. The resemblance in form and application amounts almost to
identity; a survival of 2000 years. Another example of the same form otherwise applied
will be found in the border of a betel-bag, PI. XXXII., 6; here the chevron decoration of
the central element seems like an Assyrian reminiscence. Also of Assyrian kinship are the
cross-hatched flower centres (Fig. 59) and ornament of the ‘pine-apple’ type (Fig. 150, a).
The ornaments considered above, except the last referred to, belong to the ‘palmetto’ and
‘ honeysuckle ’ types, which are most familiar through their Greek forms, but occur also at
Barahat. They have Egyptian affinities too. The question of the origin of the most
striking of these forms, so ‘Early Mediterranean’ in aspect, is one difficult of solution; one
may trace them, perhaps, to Northern India, and thence, not to Greece (where they did not
so much originate as develope), but to the common sources of all Indo-Aryan decorative art. Common
It is perhaps hardly possible to say more than that there survive in Sinhalese art a large sources
number of decorative motifs of archaic character. The most striking group of these occurs
on the decorated pottery made at Kelaijiya, Matara, etc. The most characteristic of these
forms are shown in Fig. 137, b-e. With these riiay be associated the lac-work design of
Fig. 133 and the archaic motifs of the woven belt of PI. XXIX., 7. Of similarly
archaic character are the simple forms of spiral and vine or branch (Fig. 150, c); affront-
ment (Fig. 150, d); lotus derivatives like Fig. 150, e and f, directly comparable with
Egyptian and Mediterranean equivalents; the alternation of elements in ‘knop and flower’
mot ifs (Fig. I JO, b); and the cross-hatched‘daisy’or‘pine-apple’ (Fig. 150, a). These
m otifs have a common origin in an art which we may call Early Asiatic or Indo-European;
they are the decorative analogues of the community of primitive religious conceptions in
East and West, and of the fundamental common motifs in Aryan folklore. The subject of
their origin is again referred to in the Appendix to this chapter.
More primitive than the decorative motifs above spoken of, are those everywhere character- Primitive
istic of barbaric art; forms which, it would appear, have arisen independently in different motifs
parts of the world, and not necessarily traceable to a common centre of distribution. Such
forms are the plaits resembling basket-work (pp. 107, io8, above); simple cross-hatchings,
251

History of
Sinhalese art
Fig, 1 jo. Archaic motifs in Sinhalese decorative art.
circles, diamonds, dots and lines. These may have been characteristic even of a primitive
art possessed by the pre-Sinhalese inhabitants, or they may have been brought into Ceylon
at a later period with more advanced forms.
B^rly Analogous to the survival of primitive patterns, is the maintenance of the once universal
methods (pre-Aiokan) practice of building in wood. In spite of the repeated construction of stone
buildings at Anuradhapura, Polonnaruva, Yapahuva and elsewhere, the indigenous style
of architecture has remained to this day one of wooden construction. Another survival
from the earliest time is the continued practice of constructing images of impermanent
materials as clay, brick, etc., that has continued side by side with the more familiar, but
actually rarer, use of stone. The use of mud and primitive colours in the construction of
¿«//images is a survival of primitive methods, exactly analogous to the corresponding beliefs
that have survived side by side with the clear-cut non-animistic philosophy of Buddhism.
Later motifs Few decorative motifs are of later origin. The elaboration of simple motifs must always
have continued ; but most of them, such as the continuous branch, were already developed
at Barâhat,* and awaited only such an extension of their use as is illustrated in the pro­
gression from a simple border, to a design covering a large space as in Fig. 52. One
definitely Buddhist decorative motif is the ¿S-leaf, and the form of triangle derived from it
(see p. 106, above). Apparently post-Aéokan must be most of the patterns used for filling
space, or rather most of the ways of so using patterns ; thus the ‘continuous branch,’ well
known at Barâhat, was afterwards used in carefully constructed patterns covering large areas
as in Fig. 52 and PI. XV. When or where such methods of design originated it would
be hard to say. From such constructed patterns to patterns based on an invisible framework
{parsemé) the transition must have been easy.
Lotus The lotus petal {palâpeti) border or moulding is ancient, and its origin clear from the petals
of lotus medallions, such as we see at Barâhat. Where the lotus petal motif was first used
* It is probable that closer parallels could be draosm, were it notfor the almost complete absence of the
remains of examples of the minor artsfrom Indian sites.
252

as a moulding it would be hard to say ; but it is evidently the equivalent and source of the History of
classic ‘egg and dart’ in the West, while it has retained its individuality in the East. Sinhalese art
In architectural matters the relation of Sinhalese art to the Early Buddhist art of Northern
India is too obvious to need a detailed commentary. ‘ The tasselled ornament of the Meda- Architec-
goda pillar in the Colombo Museum, goes back to the tasselled chakra of Barâhat ; and the turalsurvi-
makara torai}a arch, to the chaitiya windows of the Early Buddhist cave temples of India, vals
Again, the wooden torat)., ‘triumphal arches,’ characteristic of street and gateway decoration
for festival occasions, afford one out of many instances of a survival of the use of wood in
architectural details ; in the gaily ornamented torana at the gateway of a devale procession
path at perahçra time, we see the prototype of the stone gateways of Sanchi. The national
style of architecture has remained in Ceylon an architecture of wooden construction.
Instances of similar survivals of wood construction could be multipled. This fact, con­
trasting with the universally stone architecture of Southern India, and of what may fairly
be called Hindu buildings in Ceylon (Bereijdi Kovil, etc.) again illustrates the survival of
Early Hindu culture in Ceylon, better preserved than on the mainland. The influence of
later Dravidian architecture is also everywhere apparent.
The history of Sinhalese art in post-Aáokan and in mediæval times is mainly one of continual Relations
action and interaction with India. During the whole of this period, and until the close of with India
the period of mediæval conditions, the relations between Southern India and Ceylon were
similar to those obtaining in the Middle Ages between France and England ; continually
fluctuating intimate intercourse, now friendly, now hostile, migration of craftsmen to
centres of civic activity, or to abandoned sites rebuilt by victorious kings, sometimes with
the capture of craftsmen amongst other prisoners ; sometimes their importation. Through­
out this intercourse, India remained the exhaustless reservoir from which Ceylon was able
to draw, whenever it became necessary to renew the traditions which fell into decay in
Ceylon, as was from time to time the case. This process of renewal is well brought out in
the Janavaipsa accounts of the history of the crafts in Ceylon. Its results are equally evident
in the community of motifs in Sinhalese and Dravidian art. The system of teaching
drawing (pp. 64— 69, above) is Dravidian, and many common elements of design have been
noticed in Chapter IV. A striking instance is afforded by the tree of life in a garlanded
frame, PI. XIV., 4, which is identical in design with the decoration of South Indian
palampores. The forms of jewellery, as well as the ‘gold leaf’ technique {taha^u kola
bçmma) are of South Indian origin. It is by no means easy always to say whether a given
piece of jewellery is of South Indian or Sinhalese manufacture.
We have spoken so far almost exclusively of the history of decorative art ; but the art was Representa-
one whole, and must so be considered from a historical point of view. If we compare the tion of trees
Barâhat sculptures and the Kandyan paintings as regards style and subject matter, we shall
find that the conventions of ancient and modern artists are close akin. The ancient method
of‘continuous narration’ is equally characteristic of both. The whole picture is brought
into one plane, and there is little or no attempt at perspective. A delight in delicate detail,
as in the delineation of feathers, costume, etc., and in clear distinct outline is apparent in
both schools. The representation of trees is very characteristic ; the sculptured trees of
Barâhat and the painted trees of a Kandyan vihâra have much in common. The treatment
is entirely decorative and idealistic. The lost school of Barâhat painting, if such existed,
must have been very like Kandyan. Unfortunately we have few remains of the minor arts
dating from Aáokan times ; it is likely that a study of these would increase the impression
of similarity between Kandyan and Barâhat art.
With regard to figure sculpture, we do not know the date of the earliest stone figures of
Buddha in Ceylon. To judge from the remains at Barâhat the early Buddhist artists
253

History of represented the Buddha by symbols only. Hence it has been assumed, in view of the
Sinhalese art Greeko-Roman character of the Gandhara sculptures, that “The ideal type of Buddha was
created for Buddhist art by foreigners.”* The improbability of this is discussed in the
Appendix to this chapter. In any case, it is fairly evident that the first sculptors of
Buddhist Images in Ceylon must have been Indians, and they may not have come to Ceylon
until some time later than the Aáokan missions, and the beginning of the general influence
of Northern Buddhist Art in Ceylon.
Sigiri The fifth century Sigiri paintings have already been referred to. They are almost certainly
paintings the work of Indian craftsmen. They were probably related to an indigenous school of
painting, much as the building in stone, and the fine weaving, were related to the indigenous
style of building in wood, and home-spun weaving; that is to say they were exotic products
of an art, never permanently naturalised in Ceylon. They are in every respect different
from modern Kandyan painting, which there is good reason to regard as the lineal
descendant of an early formal style similar in feeling to that of the Jataka sculptures at
Barahat. Into such a line of descent the Sigiri paintings would nowhere fit.
iEarly We may gather, however, that in the fifth century, as well as at other times, a school of
sculptures highly skilled craftsmen existed in Ceylon, and if of Indian origin, at least were much at
home in Ceylon. We have the Sigiri paintings; and with respect to figure sculpture
Tennent states that the “early historians of China speak in raptures of work of this kind,
obtained from Singhalese sculptors in the fourth and fifth centuries.”'}' It is possible that
the very beautiful small bronzes of somewhere about this date which are sometimes met
with in Ceylon, may have been the work of Sinhalese sculptors. This was a period of
culmination of Indian culture, both in the mainland and in Ceylon (see above, p. 162) and
the province was more intimately related to the mainland than is now the case. Perhaps
it would be correct to say of such a period, not so much that its productions in Ceylon were
the work of Indian craftsmen, as that in India at that time, of which Ceylon was a part,
there existed a common school of craftsmen great in artistic achievement; but that these
in Ceylon were unable to maintain a continuous tradition, owing to the disturbed state of
the country and other causes.
Polonna- We know from the recent discoveries of bronzes at Polonnaruva that fine Hindu art
ruva flourished there in the twelfth century still; and the better known stone sculptures,
bronzes especially the figure of Parakrama Bahu, show that here too a high level of attainment was
again reached. But the work is much rather Hindu than Buddhist, and there can be little
doubt that many or most of the craftsmen were of Dravidian origin.
Conclusions The sum of the conclusions so far drawn then is, that there exists in Sinhalese art an early
stratum of indispensable barbaric decorative motives, such as are found in savage countries
still, and survive everywhere in the art of civilised lands; then a main stream of North
Indian Buddhist influence; and thereafter the influence of continued reliance upon and
intercourse with India, especially Southern India, accounting at every period for the strong
admixture of purely Hindu with Buddhist motifs. The independent influence of China
may have been considerable at certain periods, and was also exerted at second hand through
India. Malayan influence is suggested in the elongated triangles described on p. 106.
Muhammadan influence on Sinhalese art has been of the slightest, J and on this account
Sinhalese art is of particular value as preserving Early Hindu feeling which in most parts of
the mainland has been obscured by Muhammadan or later Hindu motifs. Sinhalese
* Grmvwedel, ‘ Buddhist Art in Indiai p. 68. -f T'ennent, ‘ Ceylon' i\th ed.,p. 476.
J It may perhaps he traced in the cone pattern of Fig. 51 and in a few forms ofjewellery, such as
the crescent pendant of PL XLVIII., 5.
254

decorative art is thus in a sense both freer and wider than that of Northern India in later History of
times, and gentler, less grotesque, more akin to medieval European, than the Dravidian art Sinhalese art
of Southern India, to which it is, nevertheless, so closely related.
In later mediseval times, we have to consider Portuguese and Dutch and finally English Portuguese
influence on Sinhalese art. The influence of Portuguese and Dutch in the low-country and Dutch
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, on art, costume, and manners was extremely Influence
marked ; but as regards the unconquered inland districts, comparatively slight. We trace
it in the forms of furniture; but here again it is almost entirely in the low-country that
almirahs, four-post beds, chairs and tables came into use, and only in the nineteenth century
that these spread rapidly into the Kandyan districts. In building, the same is also true;
the round pillared open verandahs, romanesque arches and other details of nineteenth
century domestic architecture have mainly spread from the low-country, and are often the
work of low-country architects and masons. The direct influence of the Portuguese and
Dutch on Kandyan culture was limited to that of the presents sent to the Kandyan kings;
the influence of the prisoners at the Kandyan Court, some of them having been, it is said,
employed as builders, and one, at least, appointed Kottalbadde Nilame; and the influence
of articles of commerce, principally cotton materials, metal ware, etc. Portuguese influence
is, for example, traceable in the type of chest called Indo-Portuguese, with iron or brass
fittings with Renaissance ornament. It is evident in many specimens of iron work; hinges
seem directly based on European forms. There is much repoussed and chased ornament of
metal work that seems also to show traces of Renaissance influence, yet may almost equally
well be quite indigenous. The silver and ivory casket of the Crystal Buddha at the Dajada
Maligava is suggestive of Italian workmanship. I have seen also old brocades that may
have been of Italian or Spanish origin. Dutch influence is seen in the brass tobacco boxes,
of which Dutch examples are still common, beside the Sinhalese imitations; and in certain
methods of representing lions, as in the corners of the Flag of the Four Korales figured
by Bell (Kegalla Report, p. 126). A similar lion rampant holding a sword is carved on a
jaggery mould in my collection. These forms are quite distinctly European, and diiferent
from typical Sinhalese lions.
Of English influence on purely Sinhalese art, the less said the better. It is been character- 'English
ised, from the English side, by almost complete indifference to indigenous culture, the result influence
of an ideal of purely material prosperity; the destruction of indigenous crafts by the
competition of cheap machine-made materials and luxuries; the neglect of surviving
architectural tradition and capacity for building; and by an entirely false and unnatural
system of education, the result of which is to make the ‘educated,’ strangers in their own
land. The immediate effect of British rule, was to destroy the system of State support of
the arts and crafts; the links that bound the Kottalbadde and the Pattal-hatara craftsmen to
the national life were snapped at a blow; by the withdrawal of support from the national
religion, it came about that funds formerly available for building and decoration of temples
were misappropriated. From the Sinhalese side, the history of the nineteenth century
has been one of continual and snobbish imitation of the external features ofWestern culture,
misunderstood and misapplied. . The results have been even more disastrous than is yet the
case in India; it is, indeed, almost a matter for surprise that so much of the indigenous
traditions of art and craft still survive. If it is so, if there are still devoted and skilled crafts­
men of the old school, this is thanks neither to the patronage of the Sinhalese themselves
nor to that of their British rulers; it is due to the vitality still latent in the old tradition,
the effectiveness of the caste system in conserving, if somewhat forlornly, some of the best
part of the old life, and lastly, and not least, to the affectionate devotion of the hereditary
craftsmen to their art and its traditions.
255

APPENDIX TO CHAPTER XVII. THE IN­
FLUENCE OF GREEK ON INDIAN ART.
The consideration of the origins of Sinhalese Art carries the enquirer back through Indian
Art to a remoter past, and raises the question of the origins of the Early Indian Art which
we have seen to be an immediate ancestor of Sinhalese. In the following notes I consider
briefly a special aspect of this question, viz., the Influence of Greek on Indian Art, without
limiting the scope of the enquiry to the facies of Indian Art preserved in late Mediseval
Ceylon.
When I first met with types of ornament, such as those reproduced in Figs. 133,137 and 150,
forcibly recalling early Mediterranean forms, I assumed the common view as to the extent,
permanence and importance of the influence of Greek on Indian Art, and endeavoured to
explain the presence of these decorative forms in Ceylon on those lines.* At that time I
•accepted such statements as those of Griinwedel-f- that the ideal type of Buddha was created
for India by foreigners. T also assumed that decorative forms such as the continuous branch,
palmette, honeysuckle, etc., being known from the Mediterranean area long before their
earliest known occurrence in India must have originated where they are first found, and
travelled thence to India; accepting, for example, Riegl’s statement that neither intermit-
tirende norfortplanzende Wellenranke (‘interrupted’ and ‘continuous branch’) borders were
known in the East in pre-Hellenic times.J
I have since seen reason to doubt the somewhat simple solutions of the difficulties thus
provided, and to believe that the influence of Greek on Indian Art, however extensive at
a certain period, was ultimately neither very profound nor very important. It is the
concentration of attention upon the effeminate and artistically unimportant work of the
Gandhara school that has given undue prominence to the Greek influence.§ It must be
admitted also that a certain prejudice has led European investigators to think of Classic
Greece naturally as the source of all art, and to suppose that the, influence of Classic Art must
have been as permanently important in the East as in the West. At the same time, it is to be
remembered that it is not generally realised by Western scholars, who are not always artists,
that Eastern Art, whether Indian, or Chinese, has a value and significance not less than that
of the Western Art of any time. ^The main difficulty so far seems to have been that Indian
Art has been studied only by archaeologists. It is not archaeologists, but artists, or at
any rate students of art rather than of archeology, who are best qualified to judge of the
significance of works of art considered as art, and to unravel the influences apparent in them.
No artist, familiar with the true genius of Indian art, could suppose that the work of the
Gandhara school was the real foundation of Indian figure sculpture, or that Indian art could
have been founded on such a decadent Greeko-Roman basis.
So far from foreigners having given to India the ideal type of Buddha, the Gandhara
*J.C.B.R.A.S., Vol. XIX., 1906,//. 72-89.
•f ‘ Buddhist Art in India,' p. 68.
X' Stilfraz'enI p. 12 c. ihe ^continuous branch' first appears in India at Bardhat (Cunningham's
'Bharhut Stupa,' PI. XL.)
§ Mr. Vincent Smith truly remarks: “ The way in which Indian sculptors of the Kushdn period
adopted Grceco-Romanfashions and mixed them up with thefamiliar Persianforms may be compared
with the modern practice of mingling European and Asiatic designs without much regard to con-
gruity but the artistic result was of equally small value in both cases. Perhaps, too, the sculptors,
or some of them, were not Indians, but themselves ‘ Greeko-Romans.'
256

sculptures should perhaps be regarded as the work of late Greeko-Roman craftsmen striving Greek
in vain to interpret Indian ideals. The sculptures themselves show how little of value in art Influence on
the Western world had at this time to offer to the East. History repeats itself: the result Indian Art
of foreign influence on Indian art during the first few centuries of the Christian era, was not,
perhaps, of any more value than the influence of Western art on Indian at the present day.
The zenith of Greek art was in the fifth century b.c., if not earlier; the zenith of Indian
art, in times certainly later than the third century a.d. The sequence of cause and effect
would be hard to trace; it was not of the decadence of the one, that the achievement of
the other was born.
The question, however, depends essentially upon religious and philosophical considerations.
The philosophies of Greek and Indian Art are poles apart. Putting aside a few rare and
beautiful fragments of archaic art, the Greek representations of the gods belong entirely to
the Olympian aspect of Greek religion*; Greek art, as has been said, has in it no touch of
mysticism. The gods are but grand and beautiful men; sometimes, as in the case of many
Apollos, it is uncertain even whether the representation is of a god or of an athlete.
Indian art is essentially transcendental.-f- Indian art is concerned not with the representation
of perfect men, but with the intimation of Divinity. Its greatest manifestations have,
though perhaps not always so conspicuously as in Egyptian art, that sense of ‘ Being beyond
Appearance,’ which we miss in the Greek representations of beautiful Olympians. Without
saying that this or the other aim of art is the greatest, it is obvious to those acquainted
with both, that the genius of Greek, and the genius of Indian art, are so different that it is
difficult, and even impossible, to imagine a dependence of the one upon the other. Beside
the recognition of this fact, the question of just how far Classic influence can be traced in the
outward detail of Indian art, becomes of little moment.
The transcendentalism which is the essential character of true Indian art, is not of late
classic origin. That is not, of course, to say that Classic influence was non-existent, but
that its limits have not been defined, and that its importance has been over-rated. It would
be idle to deny that the Gandhara and the Amaravati sculptures exhibit the results of the
strongest classical influence. The Greek influence at Sanchi, Barahat, and Mahabodhi is
much less evident. It is, however, true to say that the early schools are compounded of
Assyrian, Persian, Hellenistic and Indian elements. The point is not that classic influence
was absent, but that itwas itself decadent, and at best un-Indfan,and that nearly all that is good
in later Indian art is there in spite of it.¿ Of course, if it be said, as Mr. Vincent Smith J says,
that “After a.d. 300 Indian sculpture properly so-called hardly deserves to be reckoned as
* J. E. Harrison, in the ‘ Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion’ Ch. I., etc,
A. K. Coomaraswamy, ‘ The Aims of Indian Art’ Campden, 1908.
J ‘ Imperial Gazetteer of India’ 1908,//., 121. How completely it is possiblefor the archaologist
to misunderstand the true significance of Indian art is indicated in the two sentences which immediately
follow that quoted in the text—“ The figures both of men and animals become stiff andformal,percep­
tion of thefacts of nature almost disappears, and the idea ofpower is clumsily expressed by the multi­
plication of members. The many-headed, many-armed gods and goddesses whose images crowd the
walls and roofs of mediceval temples have no pretensions to beauty, and are frequently hideous and
grotesque.” Such sentences show that the greatest archaological knowledge is no guarantee of any
comprehension ofthe true problem of Indian art—the study of the development of the Indian ideal, and
its emancipation from the fetters of borrowed art-formulas little adapted to its expression. Until
artists and archaeologists together have attacked this problem with the patient care hitherto devoted to
the study of the Classic influence at an earlier period, it cannot be pretended that the study of truly
Indian art has been seriously undertaken.
SI 257

Greek art,” the whole question is begged. But no artist familiar with the Indian art of all periods
Influence on would for a moment accept such a statement; the sculpture dealt with by Mr. Havell,* for
Indian Art instance, is all of a much later date.-f- It may rather be doubted whether any of the most
beautiful or important Indian sculpture can be certainly assigned to a date earlier than
300 A.D. It would be truer to say that not until the direct effects of the foreign influence
had been forgotten, could the truly Indian schools of sculpture have arisen.
t©k.The main outlines are thus quite clear. The more detailed aspects of the question
may also be considered, without laying undue stress on minor points.
More than the merely negative evidence of the absence of surviving work in stone would
be needed to convince an unprejudiced student that in India alone, the Aryans possessed
their share of all Early Aryan culture, except the power and the will to shape a log or mould
clay into the forms of human or divine beings.
The Mahabharata and Ramayapa contain frequent references to “storeyed towers, galleries
of pictures, and castes of painters, not to speak of the golden statue of a heroine, and the
magnificence of personal adornment.” “ Indeed,” continues Okakura, “ it is difficult to
imagine that those centuries in which the wandering minstrels sang the ballads that were
later to become the epics, were devoid of image worship, for descriptive literature, con­
cerning the forms of the gods, means correlative attempts at plastic actualisation. This
idea finds corroboration in the sculptures of Aioka’s rails, where we find images of Indras
and Devas worshipping the ¿i-tree. These things point to the early use of clay, paste, and
other impermanent materials, as in ancient China.”J
Golden images, made by the ‘chief smith’ and the king, are mentioned in the Kusa Jataka,
in such a way as to suggest that such images were well known at the time of the composition
of the story,§ which in its present form has preserved the tradition of the third century b.c.
We pass next to references to the construction of images in Buddha’s own time. The
Kosala Bimba Varnanava states that a gilt sandal-wood image of Buddha was erected with
his consent, to compensate the disappointment felt by those who should come from afar
to visit him, if they should find him absent.
It is also related in the Divyavadana that Bimbisara, king of Magadha, desired to have a
representation of Buddha painted upon a cloth. Buddha let his shadow fall upon it, com­
manding that the outlines should be filled in with colour, and that the chief articles of the
faith should be written on it. This slender evidence Griinwedelcondemns, rightly enough, as
unauthentic, but he still claims it as showing that there was no desire to create an ideal type.H
It seems unlikely that a teacher such as the Buddha should have countenanced the con­
struction of images of himself in his own lifetime; and he is represented at Barahat and
Sanchi by the feet or the wheel.
There are also literary references to images in post-Buddhist and pre-Gandhara times.
Thus the Mahavaipsa informs us that in the relic chamber of the Ruvanv^li Dagaba, King
Dutiha GamanI (161— 137 b.c.) placed a resplendent golden image of Buddha, in the
attitude in which he achieved Buddhahood. The features and members of that image were
represented in their several appropriate colours, in gloriously resplendent gems. Figures
of the gods were also set in the relic chamber.
* jE. B. Havell, ‘ Indian Painting and Sculpture^ London, 1908. ‘I’his is the only important work
on the subject of Indian art, considered as art, and not merely as materialfor the archceologist.
■f- Mr. Havell would place the zenith of Indian art in the seventh or eighth centuries a.d.
J Okakura, ‘ Ideals of the East,' 1904 ed., p.JS'
§ ‘ 'The Jdtaka,' Cambridge, V., 531.
j{ Grunwedel, ‘ Buddhist Art in India jp. 68.
258

There is thus some literary evidence, tending to show that images were believed, in later Greek
times, to have been made long before the Gandhara period. Influence on
It will be noticed that the literary references speak always of precious metals,or impermanent Indian Art
materials such as wood or cloth. Had they spoken of early stone images the anachronism
would be evident. This adherence to actual possibilities is a point in favour of the literary
references.
A different line of argument may now be followed, based on observation of surviving Imper-
methods, where impermanent materials are employed. manent
The absence of images from ancient sites, as Barahat, is taken as proof of the non-existence materials
of an early school of sculptors or imagers. This negative evidence is, however, insufficient
to prove that images of impermanent materials or the precious metals were not made.
Even at Anuradhapura we find no statues of Buddha associated with the great stapas, the
only figure sculpture being in low relief on stelce as at Barahat. But it does not certainly
follow that wood; clay, or stone images were not worshipped in the neighbouring viharas.
Had wooden or clay images been worshipped in Aioka’s day, we should have no trace left
to show it, yet the negative evidence would be misleading. And even if, as is probable,
images of Buddha himself were unknown until several centuries after his death, this would
not in itself be a proof of the non-existence of images of any sort.
The use of impermanent materials is probably the true explanation of the difficulty. It can
be specially illustrated by survival in Ceylon. The Sariputra states that images may be
made from “gold, copper, clay, stone, wood, burnt clay* (brick) or lime.” And, in fact,
we find that a majority of images in mediaeval and modern viharas are of brick, metal, or
clay, very few of stone. Even when of stone they are always covered with plaster and
painted, so that one cannot tell by inspection, of what material the image is really made;
only metal images are, as it were, naked. How thoroughly this idea was associated with
images is suggested by the description of one of the 32 Maha-purusha-laksharja or superior
beauties or teches of the Buddha: “ His skin was soft and smooth, as an image polished by
the tooth of a tiger .”T One does not polish stone images with tigers’ teeth; the comparison,
moreover, has an air of antiquity; an early Chinese artist would have understood it. No
doubt the early stone statues of Ceylon (Anuradhapura, Kalaveva, Polonnaruva) were also
once under cover, plastered and painted. Contrast with their appearance, that of stone
sculpture intended to stand as it were naked out of doors, like the elaborately carved dvarpals
at Anuradhapura; or of statues executed in marble (like that of‘Duftha Gamani’ on the
Ruvanv?li Dagaba platform), which certainly were not intended to be covered by plaster,
but only to be painted; in both of these cases the detail and finish of the work is very
different and very much finer.
There are other examples of the survival of the early use of impermanent materials. In the
sixteenth century a.d. the Portuguese at Devundara in the Southern Province, “proceeded
to destroy the idols [of the Vishnu devale] of which there were more than a thousand of
diverse shapes, some of clay, some of wood, some of copper, and several of gilt.”.]; None of
sto ne are mentioned; what should we know of the existence of those idols, had we not the
P ortuguese record to inform us ?
The use of impermanent materials survives also in the most primitive form of image making
* Cf. Tennent, vol. I., p. 477 : A still more common expedient, which is employed to the present
time, was toform thefigures of Buddha with pieces of burnt clay joined together by cement; and coated
with highly polished chunam, in order to prepare the surface for the painter."
f Hardy, ^ Manual of Buddhism,’ 1853,/. 368.
]; De Couto, Dec. X., trans, by P. E. Pieris, Galle, 1905.
s 2 259

Greek in Ceylon—the wax images of Rtrt yaka used in huntyan ceremonies ; and the mud images,
Influence on sometimes with a wicker foundation, used in halt màyak ceremonies.
Indian Art An instance of the use of precious metal and impermanent material combined is afforded by
the gold-plated clay images from an old dàgaba near KurunSgala, now in the Colombo
Museum.
Thus we are able to trace in Sinhalese art as known to us, a survival of the Early Asiatic use
of impermanent materials (wood, clay, or brick), or of metal, but not stone, for making
images ; we trace it not only in the present use of those materials to construct entire images,
but also in the fact that even stone images are covered with plaster and painted. Similar
survivals, such as colossal mud images, floor diagrams, etc., can be traced in India also.
It becomes, therefore, unreasonable to say, as Grunwedel does,* that all Early Buddhist
sculpture was colossal and in stone, and only in the Middle Ages became “a miniature
manufacture in different materials—wood and clay in place of stone, and later in metal
casts.” It would be much truer to say that just as wooden building preceded stone con­
struction, so also the use of wood and brick and clay for figure sculpture must in general
have preceded that of stone ; and even in the case of images of Buddha, these materials
must have been made use of from the beginning, and also, as at present, contemporaneously
with the use of stone. The absence of stone statues is no more evidence of the absence
of statues of wood or clay, than the absence of stone buildings is evidence of the absence of
buildings of wood or mud.
Canon One interesting point of distinction between the technical methods of East and West is
found in the Indian canons of proportion. The ‘face,’ and not the ‘head,’ is taken as the
standard of measurement. The generally recognized standard for a human or divine figure
is a height of nine ‘faces’ (equivalent to about ‘heads’ in European terminology). The
whole artistic canon (Silpa lastra) of India appears to be independent of Western influence,
both in its insistence upon the importance of meditation, in the manner of describing the
details of the proportions, and in the technical methods of pointing (use of a horizontal
framework with suspended plumb lines, as a pointing machine).
Source of Certain conclusions drawn from the study of decorative art may also be referred to.
^branch' With reference to the important ‘branch’ (‘ Wellenranke’) motif, there is no reason to suppose
motif it to be of Greek origin in Eastern art. It first appeared in Mediterranean art on certain
Mykenean and Rhodian vases,-f in a very simple form still found in Sinhalese art (Fig. 53)
and not far removed from the most primitive possible forms of the kind. In the East, it
appears first at Barahat,J in a fully developed and quite un-Greek form, in the earliest Indian
art preserved in lasting materials. As its first appearance in Mediterranean art is in late
pre-historic times, a period of admitted Oriental influence on Greek art, the discovery of
this motif cannot be credited to classic Greece ; it is much more likely to be of Eastern
origin, like the lotus flowers and buds, palmettes, spirals, etc., and the mythical animals §
which first appear in Mediterranean art at the same time, succeeding the geometrical forms
which represented indigenous design.^It is not likely that the ‘branch’ was invented about
* ^Buddhist Art in India,'p. 2.
-f' Riegl, '■ Stifragef Figs. 50, 76.
Cunningham, ‘ Bharhut Stupa,' PI. XL.
§ Griinwedel (p. 18) regards the mythical animals in Indian art as borrowings from Western Asia
or Greece ; and then proceeds to explain the success with which they were used, by supposing that
indigenous types of the same character already existed. No doubt they did; and if so, what need to
postulate a borrowing ? The sphinxes, griffins, chimaeras, and sirens, etc., in Greek art were as
much Oriental in origin as the lotus buds and rosettes and palmettes.
260

this time in more than one area. If it was invented in any one place, there is not sufficient Greek
evidence to show that this was not in Western Asia or Persia, whose art was the inheritor Influence on
and continuator of Egyptian. There need, however, be no antagonism between the claims Indian Art
of East and West. The Mediterranean in early times was so much an integral part of the
Oriental world, that it is easier and truer to explain resemblances by common origin, than
by borrowings.* The reason of the resemblances may be sought in the existence of a
“common Early Asiatic art, which has left its uttermost ripple marks alike on the shores of
Hellas, the extreme west of Ireland, Etruria, Phoenicia, Egypt, India and China.”-h The
real home of this art may have been in Mesopotamia. It owed much to Egyptian influence.
The sources of Mediterranean and Indian decorative art thus go back rather to a common
origin, than are borrowed in either direction. It might still be argued that Indian art had
borrowed from or been influenced by the later developments of Greek decorative art. As
regards Barahat and the decorative art generally, there is no evidence of this, and certainly
there was no need for it. For Greek decorative art, compared with Egyptian or Early
Indian, is unsympathetic in its treatment of vegetable form, “ a hopeless divergence from
any rational type,” as Flinders Petrie calls it..]: The Greeks invented nothing dynamic
in decorative art; the fact that the particular forms of their decorative art are still imitated
is by no means evidence to the contrary; what they did do was to take conventionalized
vegetable forms, and make them lifeless, changing lotus flowers into ‘honeysuckle’ and
‘acanthus,’ and lotus petals into ‘egg and dart.’
Their decorative art was so different in spirit from Indian, that it could have given little
to it; they regarded very little any aspect of nature except man himself; they had no
conception of ideal art in relation to any but the human form; whereas the Indian love of
nature, and sense of unity with it, led the Indian artist to cover surfaces with all sorts of
idealized vegetable forms, as well as animal. The idealistic rendering of trees at Barahat,
reached a perfection which the Greeks never at any time attained. Even the figure
sculpture at Barahat has little affinity with Greek sculpture of the same date, but only a
kinship! with the archaic Greek sculpture of centuries earlier. And history shows at the
same time how slight the intercourse with Greece at this time had been; Alexander’s
influence on Indian culture must have been of the slightest: “within three years of his
departure ... all trace of his rule had disappeared. . . . India was not Hellenized. She India not
continued to live her life of ‘splendid isolation,’ and soon forgot the passing of the Hellenized
Macedonian storm.”l|
It is such reasons as the foregoing, and especially a consideration of the fundamental
difference in the Spirit and aims of Classic Greek and true Indian art, that make it necessary
to reconsider the question of the extent and nature of Greek influence on Indian Art. The
result of such a reconsideration will be to show that the concentration of attention upon the
period of strongest and undoubted Classic influence, has magnified out of all proportion, the
importance of the foreign elements. Early India did not, alone in all the world, lack all
knowledge of the arts; the period of strong Greeko-Roman influence was not of great
arti stic importance; and it was not until this influence had largely, if not entirely, faded,
that the really great achievement of Indian art was attained.
* See Burrows A I'ke Discoveries in Crete^ isted., \goj,pp. 134, 135,eft.
-]• Okakura, ‘ Ideals of the East,' Introduction by Sister Nivedita.
X ‘ Egyptian Decorative Art,' p. 72.
§ Both as regards conceptions, and in respect of the manner of execution, viz., in low relief.
2
II Vincent Smith, ‘ Early History oflndia^ nded., 1908, p. 110.
s 3 261

APPENDIX I. THE KANDY ART ASSOCIA­
TION.
During the Agency of Sir John F. Dickson in 1882 an Association of those interested in
ancient art work was formed, and supported with the income derived from the annual sub­
scriptions of the members of the Association, The services of the best workmen in silver,
brass, and pottery were employed in making articles of Kandyan art and workmanship.
The Assistant Government Agent of the Kaccheri, subsequently Mr. H. Nevill, when
Fiscal C.O., undertook the supervision of the workmen, and as the object of the Association
became more widely known, orders were placed with him, and he arranged for them to be
carried out by the workmen in Kandy and Matale districts.
The work connected with the receipt of orders became entirely centred at the Kacceri, and
was conducted by the successive occupants of the office of Assistant Government Agent,
under general supervision of the Hon. the Government Agent.
The first home of the Association was in the rooms below the United Service Library, but
eventually a room was set apart at the downstairs of the Kacceri for the custody of the
articles made, and where parties could purchase and inspect them.
In 1893, the Association then known as the Kandyan Art Society being less prosperous,
application was made to Government for a loan of Rs. 2,000 to enable the Society to get
together a collection of Kandyan art work ; the grant of that amount was sanctioned by the
Governor, Sir A. E. Havelock. The whole amount of the advance has been repaid.
The necessity of having a place more suitable for the custody of these collections and the sale
of work was much felt, and there appeared to be no building more suitable for the purpose
than the building known as Palle Vahala which for many years in occupation of the Fiscal
C.O., was handed over for use in the future as a Museum and home for Kandyan art.
APPENDIX II. ADDENDA ET CORRI-
GENDA.
P. 7. Jetthatissa. According to the Pujavaliya (translation, p. 25), Jetthatissa ‘constructed
images with his own hands from ivory, sandal wood, kihiri wood, and stone, and established
them as examples to be imitated thereafter for the benefit of Lanka.’
P. 9. ‘■ Bird-shaped houses' According to a footnote on p. 2 of the Appendix of a Petition to
H.M. Edward VII., printed in 1905, and signed by the Mahanayakas of Malvatte and
Asgirya, and other priests, on behalf of the Sangha, against the Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance then before the Legislative Council, one of the dwellings permitted to a priest
is an adhyoga, which is stated to be a ‘house covered with a roof resembling the wings of a
gurulu ’ {guruld, mythical bird). The roof which, so far as I know, now best answers such
a description, is that of the porch at Lankatilaka. Perhaps such roofs, raised above the walls,
tiled as if with feathers, and having a double slope, may not unnaturally be likened to the
wings of a great bird. I conceive .that the idea of such an injunction must have been to
prevent priests from living in ordinary dwelling houses, which had thatched roofs.
------Parakrama Baku II. also repaired the palace at Attanagala, saying, ‘To effect repairs of
old buildings is a meritorious deed, which confers long life and prosperity. Do such a
meritorious deed in my name also’ (Pujavaliya, translation, p. 48).
262

P. lo. ‘ They rest not a minute in one place.' Compare the ‘Secretum Secretorum' (translation,
J.R.A.S., 1908): ‘He who makes many movements is vainglorious and deceitful, and who­
ever is quiet in his demeanour ... is perfect of understanding and thoughtful in mind.’
P. 12. Some particulars of the life of Velivita PitjcJapatika Saraijankara, the Safigha Raja,
are given on pp. XXI. and 109 of Wickremasinghe’s ‘Catalogue of Sinhalese mss. in the
British Museum.’ See also Mahavaipsa, Ch. XVII., vv. 50-62.
P. 13. Rajakariya. Knox describes the immoderate demands made upon the people at a
previous period, the reign of Raja Siijiha II.
But Bennett confesses that prior to 1832, under British rule also, “the people had grounds
for discontent, from the incessant calls for their services and labour (occasionally exceeding
the duties which they had formerly been liable to under the Malabar dynasty), and which
had been enforced regardless of the ancient customs of the country, or the claims and
conditions of individuals” (‘Ceylon and its Capabilities,’ p. 423). See also the ‘Manual of
the North Central Province,’p. 140 : “although we continued the Rajakariya we omitted to
have it applied to agriculture. ... A more unfortunate system could hardly be devised
for agriculture, as it allowed the works to fall into ruin and discouraged cultivation.”
Rajakariya is often described as forced labour, and regarded as having been an intolerable
tyranny; but properly understoood, it was hardly more than a system of commanding
public assistance in works of public utility, analogous to the rates of a municipality. It was
only “the perversion of the compulsory labour from one of its chief original purposes, and
the neglect to enforce it for legitimate works under the later kings, and by the British
Government adopting their system, which occasioned the decay of agriculture and the
wasting of population.”
P. 20. A Government Agents report. This is a report by Mr. Liesching, quoted, ‘Manual
North Central Province,’ p. 43.
P. 21. Character of the Sinhalese. Cf. A. O. Brodie, J.C.B.R.A.S., III., p. 161 ; “The
people of Nuwara Kalawiya are the most gentle I have had the fortune to meet. . . . Serious
assaults, robberies, murders, are all but unknown, and during three years I have not had to
punish one native of the district for pilfering.” Also Davy, ‘Travels in Ceylon,’ 1821,
p. 289 : “Amongst few people, I believe, are family attachments more strong and sincere:
there is little to divert or weaken them; and they are strengthened equally by their mode
of life and their religion.” At the present day, it is mainly in the low-country, where
European influence has been long felt, and the social culture of the race has been destroyed,
that crime is prevalent.
P. 22. Thefive servants. We read in the Mahavaqisa (Ch. LVII.) that the heads of the five
trades were chosen as messengers to carry a welcome from Kitti Sirimegha to his son
Parakrama, afterwards Parakrama Bahu I. (1164— 1197 a.d.), an indication of the social
importance of these master craftsmen at the time.
The ‘five servants’ are also referred to (Mahavaijisa Ch. LVII.), as granted to a certain
ecclesiastic, together with workmen skilled in aU manner of works, to minister unto him.
P. 27. Gaba
4
agam. Knox (pp. 43-44) thus describes the royal manors: “Many Towns
are in the King’s hand, the Inhabitants whereof are to Till and Manure a quantity of the
Land according to their Ability, and lay up the Corn for the King’s use. These Towns the
King often bestows upon some of his Nobles for their Encouragement and Maintenance,
with all the fruits and benefits that before came to the King from them. In each of these
Towns there is a Smith to make and mend the Tools of them to whom the King hath
granted them, and a Potter to fit them with Earthenware, and a Washer to wash their
Cloaths, and other men to supply what there is need of. And each of these hath a piece of
Land for this their Service, whether it be to the King or the Lord; but what they do for the
s 4 263

other People they are paid for. Thus all that have any Place or Employment under the
King, are paid without any Charge to the King.”
P. 29. Tavalam merchants. Those travelling from Galle and Hambantota to the Kandyan
provinces carried salt, salt fish, cotton handkerchiefs and cloth ; and brought back ivory,
beeswax, cotton, pepper, coffee, ginger, cardamoms, honey, turmeric, deer horns, skins, ghee,
and various vegetable drugs (Bennett, ‘Ceylon and its Capabilities,’ p. 293).
------Husbandry. “ Every man is a cultivator or proprietor of land, and I do not suppose
there is one Sinhalese villager who is to any extent dependent on a trade for a livelihood”
(A. O. Brodie, J.C.B.R.A.S., III., 14).
P. 35. Women. For the story of a woman archer, see Lawrie, Gazetteer, p. 622.
P. 36. Dedications by women. Ambamalla Vihara “ was built at her own expense hy a
woman of the village” (Bell, Kegalla Report, p. 67).
P. 38. Perahfra. The potters during the five days of the ran-doliperahera took part in the
procession, carrying earthen vessels with sprays of coconut flower (Service Tenures, Com­
mission Report, 1872, p. 465).
P. 39, Karti Mangalya. “ Which is celebrated only by lighting of Lamps round about the
Pagoda. At which time they stick up the longest Poles they can get in the Woods, at the
doors of the Pagods and of the King’s Palace. Upon which they make contrivances to set
Lamps in rows one above the other, even unto the very tops of the Poles ” (Knox, p. 80).
P. 48. Dedications. Cf. gift to Dodanvela Dévale, Lawrie’s Gazetteer, p. 175.
P. 52. Method of tying books. For an early representation of a book apparently tied as here
described see Arch. Onderzoek op Java en Madura, i : Tjandi Djago, PL 3 (Çyàmatâra).
P. 53. Phe King's letters. “ In those letters or dispatches which were sent hy the King
to the Dutch Government, the monarch seemed particularly anxious to display his
magnificence in the richness and splendour with which they were executed. The writing
was enclosed in leaves of beaten gold in the shape of a cocoa-tree leaf. This was rolled up
in a cover richly ornamented, and almost hid in a profusion of pearls and precious stones.
The whole was closed in a box of silver or ivory, which was sealed with the Emperor’s great
seal” (Percival, ‘Account of Ceylon,’ 1805, p. 206).
P. 54. Caste. For interesting mythical accounts of caste, see the Janavaijisa, translation by
H. Nevill, Taprobanian, Vol. I., 1886.
P. 55. Kotfalbadde Nilame. Knox tells a romantic story of a European who entered the
King’s service for love of a Sinhalese woman, and was made ‘Courtalbad’ (Koftalbadde
Nilame), ‘ which is chief over all the Smiths and Carpenters in Cande Uda" (‘An Historical
Relation of the Island Ceylon, p. 181).
P. 56. Rewards of Craftsmen. It is mentioned in the Dambulla gal-sannasa that Vimala
Dharma Surya II., upon the occasion of fixing a bell on the rock in front of the Maharaja
Vihâra at Dambulla, rewarded the artificer, Mahena Galladdâ, with an amuifam of land and
200 fanams in money.
4
P. 59. Names of artificers. At Dëvanagala, the gal-va uva has recorded his name and
village in a rock inscription (Bell, Kegalla Report, p. 59).
P. 60. Social position of craftsmen. The following story affords some evidence on this point :
the son of the deported king, Vijaya Bahu (afterwards ârl Parakrama Bahu VL, who reigned
at Kotte, 1415 — i462A.D.),inorder that he might escape the messengers of Alakeivaraya,
was placed in the joint charge of the gamarala of Polvatte near Ambujugala, and of a
blacksmith. “At night,” says the Rajavaliya, “he would go to the house of the gamarala.,
but in the daytime used to play with the child of the blacksmith. ... In this manner the
prince lived till he attained the age of sixteen.”
1
------ ‘he King's smiths. The craftsmen here referred to are not the paftal hatara men, but
264

those who work for the tenants of royal villages (manors): “ In each of these Towns there
is a Smith to make and mend the Tools of them to whom the King hath granted them, and a
Potter to fit them with Earthenware, and a Washer to wash their Cloaths, and other men to
supply what there is need of. And each one of these hath a piece of land for this their
Service ” (Knox, p. 44).
P. 61. Number of the craftsmen. Out of 51 tenancies in the Nivitigala nindagama, three
were those of blacksmiths, three of silversmiths, and four of potters. (Service Tenures
Commission Report, 18,72, p. 469).
Out of 117 villages in Nuvara Kalaviya, four only were smiths’ villages, and five potters
villages, the extent of these amounting to 8o| acres in a total of 790 acres {loc. cit. p. 457).
P. 63. Former greatness and continuity of Indian art and craft. “Too little effort has been spent
in reconstructing the idea of that great splendour and activity which must have existed, in
order to leave such wreckage as it has to a later age.” These words of Okakura (‘ Ideals of
the East, 2nd ed., p. 76), though written originally in a slightly different connection, hold
good here also, for the surviving arts and crafts in India are indeed but the wreckage of a
former magnificence.
It may be noted in passing that Okakura’s reference to the cast iron pillar of ASoka at
Delhi is mistaken; the pillar referred to is of wrought iron, and belongs to the time of
Chandragupta II.
P.64. No artificers ever change their I'rade. Cf. Dekker,‘Shoemaker’s Holiday’: “ Had I
a son or a daughter «hould marry out of the generation and blood of the shoemakers, he
should pack.”
Pp. 65, 95, and Fig. 33, ii. Sina mala. (^Inapatfana is a name for Madras,— (Grierson,
J.R.A.S., 1908, p. 358. )
P. 66. Vain imagining. Cf. Sukracarya, Sukranitisara: “Some are of opinion that that
which pleases the fancy is beautiful; but the measurements which do not agree with those
given in the sastras, cannot be pleasing to the wise.”
P. 69. 'Teaching of drawing in India. It is stated by Mr. Thurston (Journal of Indian Art,
Vol. X., p. 46) that the children of the Gudigars (sandal-wood carvers) “are early taught to
draw their beautiful scrollwork and designs on a slate.” It is of the utmost importance
that these old methods of training in design should be investigated before it is too late.
Indifference on the one hand, and ‘art schools’ on the other, are rapidly sweeping them out
of existence. Supposing there to be recogni2ed any excellence in Indian design, one would
have thought the first steps taken for the preservation of Indian art would have been to study
the methods of Indian designers; but so far from this, those methods have been completely
ignored.
P. 70. Netra mafigalya. See also Bfihat Saiphita, II., Ch. XIII., “On the Fixing of the
Images in Temples,” and also ManasSra, Ch. LVIII. (fide Ram Raz, ‘Essay on Hindu
Architecture,’ 1834, p. 5).
I am reminded by Mr. Parsons that the eyes of many images of Buddha at Anuradhapura
were separate structures, the ‘iris’ of blue glass or enamel, the ‘sclerotic’ of quartz. There
are examples of these artificial eyes in the Colombo Museum, where also the large Buddha
in the grounds has eye cavities.
P. 74. Nanamura maAgalya. The grossest of all these ceremonies appears to be that of
‘shaving’ the head of an image, as reflected in a mirror, described by Davy (‘Travels in
Ceylon,’ 1821, p. 125).
------Dorakada asi}a. See also Bell, Kegalla Report, p. 132.
P. 75. For other accounts of netra maAgalya ceremonies held on various occasions see Maha-
vaipsa, Ch. C., vv. 192, 273.
265

P. 79. Hands betokening {not sternness but) mildness and beneficence. Varada hasta : the hand
hanging down with palm towards the worshipper, the fingers slightly bent up— as if
granting the wishes of the devotee ; abhaya hasta : the other hand raised, as if signifying,
‘Do not fear.’ This is the usual position of the hands, or of two of the hands in Indian
sculptures representing the gods ; it is an attitude of blessing. There is in Indian art, both
sculpture and painting, as also in dancing, an elaborate symbolism of the hands and fingers.
P. 91. Fig. 28, E. Human svastika. Certain Celtic anthropomorphic designs closely
resemble this form ; see Romilly Allen, ‘ Celtic Art,’ pp. 294-295.
------Footnote. See also ‘Journal of Indian Art,’ Vol. X., p. 47 (five-women horse) and Vol.
XII., PI. 112 (nine-women-elephant).
P. 113. Rnpavaliya, v. 158, reads: “The forefinger is Yama, the third finger is Vishiju,
the fourth finger is Anañga, the fifth finger is the Sun.” The position (mudrd) of the hands
and fingers in Indian sculpture is always significant. For similar ideas in Christian art see
Didron et Durand,' Manuel d’Iconographie Chrétienne,’ Paris, 1845,quoted by R. Hendrie,
‘Theophilus,’ London, 1847, pp. 427, 428.
P. II6. Practical charity. The following entries in the list of charities hung up in Burford
Church, in Gloucestershire, afford an interesting parallel :
“Two houses on ye East side of ye High Street were formerly given to repair ye Bridge and
ye way leading to it.”
“John Harris, alderman of Oxon, gave tool to be lent to 10 Tradesmen gratis, who are to
repay it by ye yearly payment of 20s He also gave tool, for ye Apprenticing of Poor Boys.”
P. 117. Wayfarers. “The things which the people carry as their rents and taxes, are Wine,
Oyl, Corn, Honey, Wax, Cloth, Iron, Elephants Teeth, Tobacco, Money” (Knox, p. 48).
P. 119. Plaster. For other old recipes see Bfihad Saiphita, II., Ch, X. Bennett (‘ Ceylon
and its Capabilities,’ p. 338) states that the white stucco used in Ceylon and Southern India
is a mixture of fine sand, shell lime, green coco-nut water and coarse sugar or jaggery ; he
states truly that ‘when laid on by experienced plasterers, it displays the polish and appearance
of marble.’ The material now used, often a mere whitewash, is generally mixed with a
greater or less proportion of Reckitt’s blue, entirely destroying the value of milky whiteness.
------Pans ala. Mr. Lewis gives the following account of the small but typical pansala at
Huduhumpola near Kandy (Cave, ‘Book of Ceylon,’ p. 369) :
“The Huduhumpola pansala is built in the shape of a quadrangle opening into a spacious
verandah which occupies the whole of this side of the building. The roof is supported by
wooden pillars of the style already described. The usual small verandah surrounds the
other three sides of the quadrangle. Opening into it are the doors of the monks’ cells,
each of the usual Kandyan pattern, which is that of the main door also, only on a smaller
scale, each door about eighteen inches wide. Each cell has its own kitchen attached, and
there is also a larger kitchen for general use. There is a window of coupled lights with
carved tops in the room facing the main entrance. The whole of the centre of the quad­
rangle is occupied'by a preaching hall supported on carved wooden pillars more slender
than those in the vestibule.”
P. 120. Maysmataya. For some account of the original work see Râm Râz, ‘ Essay on the
Architecture of the Hindus,’ 1834, p. 6.
P. 121. Supported by a single column. The Mahavamsa (Ch. LXXIII.) mentions a palace
supported on a single column, built for Parakrama Bahu I.
P. 123. Often a face is drawn amidst the branches. As in Fig. 151, here reproduced from
Degaldoruva, showing the cannibal king seated beneath the tree, with a thorn in his foot.
------Human sacrifice is illustrated in the accompanying Figure from Degaldoruva.
366

The survival of the memory of human sacrifice in Buddhist stories, is evidence of their
pre-Buddhist origin and great antiquity.
Fig. 151. From Sutasoma Fig. 152. Human offerings to a
Jataka at Degaldoruva. tree devi, Sutasoma Jataka, Degal­
doruva.
P. 124. Ceremonial purity associated with the gods. According to Davy (pp. 148, 149) the
Diva Nilame had on certain occasions to present offerings to the image of Buddha. On
these occasions he had to bathe, put on a clean cloth, and abstain from meat for at least
twenty-four hours, “not from the idea that these observances would be grateful to Boodhoo,
but from the persuasion that the gods, in whose keeping the temple is supposed to be, are
particularly attentive to bodily purity, and resent its neglect.”
P. 125. Erection of the Maguí Kapa. Compare Btihad Saiphita, I., Ch. XLIII., erection of
the Indra Dvaja. With the Mayamataya generally, compare also Brihad Sarphita, II.,
Chs. VI., ‘House Building,’ VIL, ‘Underground water currents,’ VIII., ‘On gardens,’
and XII., ‘The Entry into the Forest’ (to cut wood for images). Other parts of the
Brihad Saiphita (II., Chs. II., III., XL) correspond rather to parts of Sariputra, Rüpavaliya,
and Vaijayantaya.
P. 126. Vasu Devi. I.e. Vastu Devi, the Genius Loci (here regarded as feminine); not
Vásu Deva=Krishija.
P. 136. Wooden bridges. For other references see Püjávaliya, translation, p. 49. Abridge
at Ambagamuhoya had houses built upon it and‘was firm enough for elephants . . . to walk
over.’ The largest mentioned was of 500 cubits length, at Kehelsanava, near Bentota.
P. 140. Kuruniya. ‘In fashion it is an handsom turned measure, some of them are made
with Canes like a Basket’ (Knox).
P. 142. Vadu riyana. According to Knox, this is ‘ as much as will reach from one Elbow to
the other, the Thumbs touching one another at the tops, and so stretching out both Elbows.’
P. 147. Gem-cutting. Remains from the Piprahwa Stupa in India show that as long ago as
450 B.C., or at least in the third century b.c., Indian lapidaries were familiar with the use of
the lathe, and very skilful in shaping, polishing and piercing stones of extreme hardness.
P. 162. Zenith of Indian art. Mr. E. B. Havell would regard the seventh or eighth
centuries a .d. as probably the period of greatest achievement in Indian art. This would
tend to throw forward by some time the suggested date of writing down of the Silpa áastras.
267

P. 164. Colours. Clough gives: />izx-^e/i.ej)'ij=the five primitive colours, white, black, blue
or green, yellow and red.
P. 164. Archaological value of old paintings. This is well illustrated by Général L. de
Beylié’s use of those at Aluvihara and Dambulla in his investigation of ancient architecture
(L’Architecture Hindoue en Extreme Orient,’ Paris, 1907,pp. 373-378). While, however,
it is true that early forms of architecture are preserved in these traditional paintings, it is
decidedly misleading to describe them as ‘of the first century before Christ’ ; it is only true
that they ‘ sont biens la répétition des anciennes fresques.’
P. 178. Ajanta and Stgiriya. Mr. Vincent Smith (Imperial Gazetteer of India, 1908, II.,
121) suggests that the Ajantà painters were Persians. But he seems to have been unaware
of the existence of similar paintings in Ceylon.
P. 186. Dice. Clough gives’■ palaka^dice,particularly the long sort used in playing chaupai.’
The game of chaupai (==pacisi) has been so long forgotten, that though I have seen many
game-cloths and dice of Sinhalese make, I have not found any Sinhalese acquainted with the
game, or the name of it The game is commonly played by Tamils ; indeed, all the chief
games of this kind, olinda keliya, nerinci (a form of ‘noughts and crosses’ or ‘nine men’s
morris’), the cheetah and fourteen dogs, etc., are essentially Indian games, and not of local
origin.
------Ivory. In 1908 the Colombo Museum also acquired a'ceremonial ivory shuttle,’orna­
mented with lac, and said to have been granted as a sannasa or Royal Warrant to a family of
weavers. A warrant so given as a token, is properly called kçfa sakshiya (or sakkiya) ; the
word sannasa implies writing.
There is also in my own collection a lac-ornamented ivory spindle. Another object is an
ivory toy, consisting of a disc very deeply furrowed round the edge ; such toys are said to
have been played with on a piece of string by the Kandyan ladies. I have also a similar toy
in copper and silver.
At the Përâdçniya Exhibition in 1906 there was exhibited a beautiful ‘model’ of the
Dalada Mâligâva, made in ivory, with a brazen roof. The ‘model’ represented a typical
structural vihara, and not the Mâligâva in any detail. It is said to have been presented to
Veva Indasara Terunnânse, incumbent of the Hittettia Vihâra at Matara by Kirti 8rl Raja
Siipha in 1755 a.d. as a reward for a versified panegyric on the king’s rule.
P. 194. Knives of steel. Probably in most cases only the edge of a cutting instrument was
of steel, the remainder of iron. This is implied in a well-known Sinhalese proverb : ‘Like
the rustic who got his knife by imposing on the blacksmith ’— referring to a countryman
who went to a blacksmith to get a knife made, and gave him only the iron for it, keeping
back the steel, thinking by that means to cheat the smith, but actually cheating only
himself.
Other proverbs connected with smithing, etc., are :
‘To get the hand burnt in spite of possessing pincers.’
‘The dog that has been brought up in a blacksmith’s shop is not afraid even of thunder.’
‘ Like the silversmith’s father beating his son for undertaking an urgent work.’
Subjection to petticoat government is as bad as standing behind an adze.’
‘ The iron style of a man who is too lazy to write is heavier than the staff of King Gaja Bâhu ’
(a great iron rod).
‘The adze which straightens timber is itself not straight.’
P. 231. Pottery proverbs. Another well-known proverb, taken from a Buddhist rafra, is:
‘As all earthen vessels made by the potter break at last, so is the life of man.’
268

GLOSSARY AND INDEX.
NOTE. Words in italics are usually Sinhalese or Latin unless otherwise stated.. Place
and personal names are printed in Roman type. The following abbreviations are used;
s.=singular; pl.=plural; S.=Sanskrit; P.=Pali; T.=Tamil; H.=Hindustani; G.=German;
Po.=Portuguese; 'n.=vide; ».=note; Sab.=Sabaragamuva Province; C.P.=Central
Province; ib.=ibidem\ q.v.=quemuidem; abt.=about; nr.=near; rey.ssand following pages.
All Sinhalese words are indexed in the singular; the plural is given also in many cases,
especially where the following rules do not suffice: words ending in a, ya, va form the plural
by dropping these terminations, as gama, gam; ka^aya, ka4a; katuva, katu; words ending
3
in form their plural in S.
object between them, 90, 97, no; Fig.
Abharar}aya, insignia of a deviyo, 120: 66; Pis. VII., 9, XXIII., 2, XXIX., 7,
jewellery. XXXIX., 2.
Abharar}a heppuva, a lacquered turned box Agni, Regent of the S.E. quarter, 72.
for insignia, regalia or other jewellery, Agriculture, 24, 26-29: implements, 32,
139, 200,217; PI. XIII., 3. 140: songs, 31.
Abharana pattala, ‘Jewellery Workshop,’ Agula, bolt, 133, 134; Figs. 80-82; PI.
a division of the royal craftsmen, 56. XL, 2.
0
Abharaifa pe ya^=abharai}a heppuva, q.v. Agul-ianuva,\>o\t-pQi%\., 133,134; Fig. 80;
Abhayagiriya Dagaba, remains of painting PI. IX., 9.
at, 178. Ahu {Morinda tinctoria), wood affording a
Abhidhamma, a Buddhist work, 172. yellow dye, 245..
Aboriginal inhabitants, i. Ajanta, paintings in the caves of (2nd—7th
Acanthus, in Gk. art derived fromlotus,26o. centuries A.D.), representation of kinnara,
Acariya, acariya, an expert: a craftsman, 81: naturalism, 95: compared with
the caste so-called, 21, 168,215: particu­ paintings at Sigiriya, 178, 179.
larly a blacksmith, 25, 54. Ajapala, tree beneath which the Buddha
Accuva, a pattern, stencil, 166: a pottery sat during the fifth week of the sat-satiya,
stamp, 226. q.v., PI. XVIII.
Acarilla Dityaya, a painter, 73. Akatti karukku (T.), an elementary form
Adam’s Peak, 117: see Samaijala. used by Tamil craftsmen for teaching
Adara-kondu, plain lines in lac-work, 217; drawing, 69 ; Fig. 10.
PI. XXVII. Akbar the Great, founder of the Mughal
Adhama, small (images), 154. Empire (1556-1605),aconnoisseur, 206.
Adhyoga, a kind of dwelling allowed to Akuramboda, a village, 75.
priests, 262. Alabaster images from Burma, 150.
Adigar, {adikaramd),viz\&L\ present at dedi­ Alakamanda, palace of the ruler of the
cation of a temple by the king, 14: mythical city of Alaka, 8.
duties, 19, 20, 144: hats, 33: in Kandy Alakeivaraya, 264.
perahera,q,^\ attendant on king, PI. XXII. Alatte women, women of zgtkiyanapaAguva,
Adiya, foot, a unit of measurement, 142. dancers, 220.
Adukku (pi.), cooked provisions due to Alavaka, a demon converted by Buddha, 5.
landlord, 24: -kat, yoke loads of such Alavaka damanaya, a work relating the cir­
provisions borne by other tenants, 26. cumstances of Alavaka’s conversion, 123.
4
Adyar, Theosophical Society’s library, 69. Alavatugo a, a village in the C.P., 180,194.
Affrontment [Wapp>enstil, G.), design motif Alexander the Great and the flower maidens.
of two animals facing, with a tree or other 94.
269

Alfred the Great, 8. Ambalangoda, on W. coast of Ceylon,
Algama gold sannasa, 206; ivory casket for, pattern of plaited bag. Fig. 144.
186. Ambarana yatura, ratchet lock, 196: key-
^l-ge, weaving shed, loom, 234. plate of. Fig. 106.
Al-gi-rajakariya, service tenants’ work at Ambepussa, a village, 180.
the loom, 232. Ambulugala, a village in the K$galla Dist.,
Aliya, female elephant, as a gift, 213. Sab., 145.
Al-kai}uvl lella, horizontal bar supporting Ambuluva, a village in the C.P., site of a
the warp, 235. guard-house, 120.
Alla, palm of the hand, potter’s mallet, 230. Amkeliya, game of‘horn pulling,’ 6, 37.
Alloys, see bronze,etc. Amphoras, earthen jars with two handles,
Almirah (Po.), a cupboard: a hinge from ? indigenous, 228.
one, 113. Ampifiya, a village nr. Kandy, 117.
Alms bowl, earthen, 222: Buddha’s, a relic, Amu karala, an ear of amu, corn, 241.
175- Amulets, 210.
Alpa (images), very small, 154. Amutfa, pi. izwawa, a measure of paddy, about
Alphabet, 49, 230. five or six bushels, 75: as much ground as
Alpila, low platform whereon loom is this will sow, about 2| acres, 194.
erected, 234, Amuijugama, a hamlet of Degaldoruva,
Altars, 137; PI. VIIa, above. _ C.P.,77.
Alternate repetition, motif in design, 109. Ananda, favourite disciple of Buddha,
Alum, ingredient of a paste, 181: of a dye, images of, 148, 173.
246: used in colouring iron, 200. Anañga, the Bodiless One, Hindu God of
Alutnuvara Devale, nr. BalafigOiJa, vihara Love, 91.
attached to, 118, 120 ; PI. VII., 7 : steel Ananta, a mythical Naga (cobra) king, 88.
furnace and manufacture nr., 192 ; Fig. half-share (cultivation), 27.
100. Apdina-kanda, thread-beam of a mat-
Alutnuvara Devale, K$galla Dist., 146. weaver’s loom, 243 : -lanuva, cord for
Alut-sal, a. [mangalyaya), ‘New Rice,’ turning a lathe, 187.
harvest home, first fruits, festival, 37,40: F. H. Andrews, on ivories, (91), 184.
earthenware for, 219, 220; gahsniya mti, Anamestra-ge, anamsstraya, booth for lights
during temple festivals, 76.
233-
Alut Vihara, v. Asgiriya. Andun-vala, the part beneath the eye dark­
A(uva, loom, heddles, 234: -kampaha, ened with antimony, unguent-spot, 155.
karala (sleay); -V(la (heddles),—parts of Angala, pi. apgal, lit. finger; inch, unit,
loom, 234. in craftsman measure, i/t English inch,
Alvala, hole for weaver’s feet, 234. 113, 142, 152 seq., 208.
Alvala redda, cloth fresh from the loom, 235. Angalmaduva, nr. Tangalla on the S. coast
d’Alviella, Count Goblet, 85. of Ceylon, lac-work of, 215, 217.
Amarakosha, Sanskrit dictionary, 51. Animism, 46; v. also folk-lore.
Amara Sitpha, v. amarakosha. Anklet, of Pattini, 6.
Amaravati sculptures, 257. Ankunjbura, a village in the C.P., 180.
Ambalama, pi. ambalam, resthouse for way­ Ankusa, elephant driver’s goad (said to be
farers and strangers, 37, 116, 117: built fashioned after the claw of the (t-kanda-
as works of charity, 13: gam-sabhsva held lihhfiya, q.v.), 195; PL I.: v. also
in or near, 30; at Mangalagama, Fig. 76; hepduva.
PL VII., 3: represented in jataka painting Anna pad^i (T.), sacred goose, hairisaya, 86 ;
at Degaldoruva, 168: at K§galla, Ruvan- Fig. 21.
vela, and Ratnapura, 136.
270

Annasami Stapati Rayar, a Tanjor'e crafts­ Art, distinguished from science, 170.
man, 69. Artificers (craftsmen other than potters and
Anuradhapura, early history, 3-9; pilgrim­ weavers), duties of, 25: general account,
ages, 20: decorative art, 95, 98, loi, Ch. III. : see also craftsmen.
106, no: architecture, 114,144-6,184: Arunachalam, The Hon. P., 9,10.
statues plastered, 149, 259; outdoor Àrya Cakravarti, Tamil invader, 6.
paintings, 178: cotton traded to, 235: Aryan origin of Sinhalese, 1,2: civilisation
Fig. 38. and caste system, 21.
Anuruddha iataka, a Buddhist work, 51. Asarfaya, throne, seat, pedestal, 146; Fig.
Aparagôyânaya, mythical continent W. of
95- 4
Mt. Meru, 94. Ami}a-ka aya, pediment of a pillar, usually
Appala, appalapo^i, earthen dish, 220. with horizontal incisions, 129, 133;
Appliqué, V. embroidery. Fig. 74.
Apprenticeship, 63 seq. Asceticism, 40,47: dress, PI. I.
Apsara, a heavenly nymph, 82. Asela, 225 B.C., 3.
Arab trade, 29. Asgiriya,6,17,119,133: dedication of Alut
Aracci, a village headman, 20. Vihara, 13, 14: cost of do., 56: pansala
Âracci Paijditayalage, name of a potter, door. Fig. 80; PL IX., 9: chair in po/ioj/Æ-
219. ge, 137, 140: crystal karai}4uva, 147:
Aralu iA’erminalia chebuld), myrobalan, in­ image, 149 : key-plates. Fig. 107.
gredient of plaster, n 8,119: of black dye, Ashtaka, a verse of eight lines, 39, 74.
244: -millaya, ‘aralu-seed garland,’ 211. Ashta-niri-ratha, ‘8-women-chariot,’ 67,9 r.
Arch {torai}a, q.vl), constructional, at Gal- Aioka, Emperor of N. India, b.c. 272-231,
maduva, 146. 2,18,177,178.
Archæology and art, 257. Assyrian influence and survivals in art, 96,
Architecture, Chs. V., VI., VIL; Pis. VII., 102,251; Fig. 150, A, D, etc.
V IIa , VIII., IX.: bird-shaped houses, 9, Asterisms, lunar, v. nekata.
262 : bridges, 136 : ceilings and roofs, Asthana, brother of Klrti 8rl Raja Sirpha,
118: ceremonies, 79, izo seq.\ dagabas, patron of work at Degaldoruva, 7 9 7 4 .
118: devales, 120: domestic, 114; Fig. Asura, demon, foe of the gods, > 172:
70: military, 120: modern oiBcial, 17, stature, 113,161: Rahu, 159: -rakshasas,
255 : palace, 115, 116 : rest-house, 116 ; stature, 113.
typically wooden, resembling Nepalese, Aivaya, horse, 90.
etc., rather than Dravidian, 114, 129: Ata, hand.
verandah, 117, 118, 131; Figs. 71,72: Ata, eight.
viharas, 117. Afabage, a village in the C.P., 90.
Arecanutslicers, 195, 203; PI. XLVI., 1-9. AtamagalaàizgT3xa,\\.t. 8 auspicious objects,
Arhat, an adept, a Buddhist ascetic who has 4,70,72,90,125. It is a magic diagram
attained self-conquest: painted representa­ drawn on the ground on various occasions,
tions, 169,173. generally indicated in a mnemonic verse :
Arimbieva, a border motif, circles between Devadi sarua-karmmesku, etat mangala
lines, 107, 109, 185; Fig. 63, IV.; PI. lakshatfam,
XXXV., 5,6, etc. GarbhsdiHca vhâhanca, tad vidinca
Aríshfa Sataka, v. Toga iataka. vidhyate.
Armoury, royal, zoy.v. also ranka^u paffala, ‘In all doings connected with the gods,
amdha-ge. ’tis an auspicious thing, likewise in
Arrow, borne by king as an emblem of State, pregnancy and marriage ’tis enjoined.’
PI. XXII.: -heads, 25, made for veddas, A mnemonic verse details the objects
57 : -makers, î-va4uv0, lac-workers, q.v. represented :
271

Mfidafiga bheri vfishabatica ncigam, Avudha^e',wmo\xty■> 180.
Tatvalakam vijanJ keiartca, Avurudu {mangalyaya). New Year festival,
Makar am patakanca pradlpacashfakam, 37
-
Konashiakam sarva surashfa maAgalam.
‘A drum, a bull, a cobra, a fan, a lion, a
makara, a man-flag, and a lamp are the B.
eight auspicious emblems,’
Badahçla-badda, Potters’ Department, 54,
55,218.
Badahfla paAguva, a potters’ holding, 25,
219.
Back-bone stitch, v. embroidery.
Badalpanguva, a smith’s holding, 25,76.
54
Badahelaya, potter, 22,25, > 218.
Badulla, town in Ova P., inscribed tusks in
Vihàra, 183: carving from Dévale, Fig.
89.
Fig. 153. Atamagala Badulla [gaka), {Semecarpus Gardneri), 181.
Badala, pi. badallu, gold- or silver-smith,
Afa-mulu-toppiya, 8-cornered hat, 32; Fig. i. 25 . 54 . 55 -
Atapattukarayo,craítsmaTít^n2Sit&oiatapattu Badama, composition, varnish, paste, 181.
rank, 55. Bada-vçdilla, land given as means of support
Atapattu maduva, guard house, 24. to a craftsman, 58, 59.
Atapattu vasama, tenants of the first rank, Badde Vidânayalâgë, name of a potter, 219.
guards, messengers, 24, 54. Bags, V. betel bags.
Afa-peti-mala,’’ 8-petal-flower,’design motif, Baku sOtra, shoulder plumb line, 156 ; Fig.
on woven cloths, 234; PI. XXVIII., 5: 95 -
on grass mats, Fig. 143, ix. Baker, Sir S., 190.
A(a-pota-lanuva, ‘8-ply-plait,’ a design Bala kapu, annual cotton, 235.
motif, on woven cloths, 235. Balana, village in Kégalla Dist., Sab., 213.
Ata-v(l-aluva, a kind of loom, 233. Balaôgoda, Sab., iron smelting, etc., 190
Afa-sil, eight precepts, 43,45,78. seq., 218: pottery. Fig. 139 : lac-work,
At-kiyata, at-koluva, at-torapanaya, at-v(ya, 215-
carpenters’tools, 142. B«//ceremonies, stellar or planetary worship,
At-pandama, hand cresset, 204; Fig. 127; 25-27. 46, 52, 148, 176, 177, 252, 260;
Pl.XLV.,2,3,5. PL IV.
Attanagala, nr. Veyañgoda, W.P., 262. Balihat gara-yakun nefima, 39.
Attaragama, a village in the C.P., 180. Bambaragammana, village in the C.P., i8o.
Afthakathi, lost early Sinhalese chronicles, Bamboo, 5, 34, 235.
7 Bamupa, a Brahman, caste, 21.
-
Afu-hafigidiya, an overseer, 55. Bamapugama Dévale, Këgalla Dist., Sab.,
Atul-pata, tray or dish of plaited grass, 32 : 134-
patterns of. Fig. 143. Baifa, doctrine, sermons of the Buddha, 45 :
Afuva, granary, 32, 115, 116. -dahampota, book of such scriptures, 164,
Audience Hall, Kandy, 13,77,115,131. 179; Fig. 3; Pis. XX., LII.
Avata, ceremonial or processional fan, v. Bana preaching hall, 118,119,137.
sesata. Baai/yia, a knop, knot ; motif in design, 109.
Avatar, an incarnation ; Buddha one of the Bandhuka, (?), 113.
ten avatars of Vishiju, 112,163. BaAkuva (Port.), 3-legged stool, 137, 138.
272

Ba-pata, part of door-frame, 133. ' Berendi Kovil, remains of Hindu temple nr.
Barahat (Bharhut), monument of Asokan Sitavaka, 114, 144, 145 ; any temple so-
age in N. India, sculptures of, loi, 106, called, 127.
no; kmnaras, 81, 82: lotus rosettes, Betel, (bulat vela. Piper betle, L.),commonly
cobra heads, 96: style like Kandyan chewed, 33: -bags, v.bulat-payiya,-malla\
paintings, 170, 178: connection with -dishes, V. bulat tatuva.
Sinhalese art, 177, 251, 252: Greek Beylié, Général L. de, 268.
influence, 257, 258, 259, 261: details Bezel, setting of a gem, 210.
, from. Figs. 18, 146, 148, 149. Bhadra Natha (=Kartikeya), 112.
Baring Gould, Rev. S.,‘Swan Maidens,’ 82. Bliaga, measure=4 or 4I angui, 113, 152.
Baskets, grass, 244: cane, 246: see also Bhakti iataka, v. Bauddha iataka.
vel-pettiya. Bhanavàra,Tsittrìc2i\ term, i8i.
Basnayaka Nilame^ principal lay officer of a Bhaskaracarya, Indian astronomer, 205.
devale, 19, 45. Bhayam-kara, ‘the horror,’ name of a pattern.
Bafa-kola-toppiya, large hat of bamboo Fig- 143-
leaves, 34. Bherui}daya (^pakshaya), double-headed bird,
Batgamvala Muhandiram vasama, a Depart­ flag ofThree Korales, 31 : motif in design,
ment of Public Works, (low caste), 54. 85, 211 ; Figs. I 8a, 104; Pis. XXIII.,
Batticaloa, on the E. coast of Ceylon, Tamil 6, XLVIIL, 6.
weavers, 103: cotton yarn obtained from, Bhojana salava, refectory, at Malvatte, 134.
236. Bhiimi Naga, Earth Serpent, 126.
Bat-valanda, an earthen vessel for eating Bhumi Devi, Earth Goddess (Mahlkan-
rice, 221. tava), 40, 70.
Bauddha Sataka, a Buddhist scripture, 51. Bhutas, a class of goblins or demigods, 113.
Beal, S., 7, 177. Bhuvaneka Bahu L, 6.
Bear, flag of Tamankaduva, 3 8: as ornament, Bible-boxes, Dutch, 138.
in craft song, 230. Bimbisara, king of Magadha in time of
Bed, wooden, 136, 137; Pis. IX., 7, X.. 6. Buddha, 5, 259.
Bee, as ornament, in craft song, 230. Binduva, ‘ dot,’motif in design, 103, 217.
Begging bowls, metal, 206: earthen, 222. Birds in art, 89, 113, 262: lamps, 203;
Belietgala, a mortar for preparing medicines, Fig. 126 : part of loom, 235 : woven on
147; PI. LIE, 6. cotton cloths, 235 : on Dumbara mats,
Beligala, Kegalla Dist., Sab., 6, 74, 144, 244, 248: jewellery, 211; Fig. 130:
■ 145, 146. bird-shaped houses, 9, 262 : various
Bell, H.C.P.,35, 37, 39, 57, 58,74, 84, 85, representations. Pis. XIV., XV., XXIX.,
87-89,99, 100, 105,117,120, 129, 144, XXX., XXXII., XXXIV., XXXV.,
145, 146, 148, 149, 165, 178, 195,255, XXXVIIL, XLVIII.
264, 265, 266, 267. Birdwood, Sir G., 16, 137, 189, 210, 218.
Bellows, smelters’, 191, 192; Fig. 98; PI. BisOvela Vihara, Regalia Dist., Sab., 114.
LIII. Bissa, pi. bihi, round granary, 116 ; PI. VII.
Belma, glance, of a newly painted image, 74. Blacksmiths, duties, 25, 55, 76, 193, 194;
Benares brass-work, 202. tools, 194.
Bennett,}. W., 138, 263. Blake, Sir Henry, 115.
Beravagaijijeve, a village, 180. Blow-pipe, Jewellers’, 208.
Beravciya, drummer, caste so-called; mu­ Boa, 230.
sicians, astrologers and weavers, 22, 25, Bo-asvatta,=bs-gaka, q.v. , .
46, 54,127,148, 187, 232. Bodhisatva, Bodisat, Buddha elect, future
Beraya, drum, ‘ tom-tom,’ 26. Buddha, 42.
t 1 273

Bo-gaha, ¿ff-tree [Ficus rdigiosa): each of the Bovala linnanse, Buddhist priest, 14.
Buddhas that have appeared on earth Boxes, V. wood, ivory, metal, etc.
for the salvation of mankind attained Brahma, Flindu god, 8 : -garbbhaya, 72 :
enlightenment beneath a particular tree, -kalaya, 72 : -padaya, inner division of a
afterwards held sacred to them. This site, 159: -sOtra, 160.
crowning point in the life of Gotama Brahman, caste, 21.
Buddha was reached as he sat beneath a Brahmaifa (nduma. Brahman costume worn
Ficus religiosa, hence called the bodhi-tres, at netra mangalyaya, 72.
or tree of wisdom. Of that victory, the Braid, 233: PI.XXXII., 8,9 (binding edge).
¿ff-tree stands as a perpetual symbol in Branch, continuous, liya v?la [fortplanzenide
Buddhist art. At Anuradhapura, 2: Wellenranke, G.), motif in design, veget­
jewelled, 5: in Kandy, 11: significance able ornament rhythmically disposed
in Buddhism, 42, 98, 119: flower about a common stem, 98, 99, 230; Figs.
ofiFerings, 137. 42,43, p; Pis. XV.,XXVI., I2,XXXI.,
Bs-hettaya, long-sleeved tunic worn by kings, etc.: origin, 104, 105, 109, 260: archaic
32; Fig. 62; Pis. XXII.,XXXVI., I. forms on metal work, 109,204; Fig. 53;
Bs-kola, bo-pata, ¿5-leaf, leaf of ¿5-tree, Fig. on pottery, 226.
48; 101,102,106; triangle derived, 106: Branch, interrupted [intermittirende Wellen-
on wooden pillars, 129: antiquity of ranke^ G.), 109; Fig. 65; Pis. XXVIII,
motif, 252: other references, 129, 217, 4, XXX., 2, etc.
222,230,234,23 c, 239,233. Examples Brass, arecanut slicers, 203: betel boxes,
of use. Figs. 49,105, 114,136,138,139; 195: bolt, 198: boxes, 82, 198, 202;
Pis. XXVIII., I (9), 2, XXIX., 6, 8, Figs. 11, 28, 68, 123; Pi. XLIIL, 4, 5 :
XLVIII.,7. box-fittings, PI.XLIIIa, 3; casting, 105,
Bo-maiuva, bodhi-m., platform or garth sur­ 200,203; do., worm and cable ornament,
5
rounding a ¿ -tree, 76, 119, 147: in 204; Fig. 125: catches, Fig. 122,1., II.;
Kandy, 12, 146. dishes, 202; PI. XLV., 6: door-handles.
5
Bo-patiya, belt with ¿ -leaf lappets, design Fig. 124; Pis. XLIII., 3,7, XLIIIa, 6:
for, PI. XX., 3. elephant-goad, PI. XLIV., 2 : -founder’s
Bs-pat-kangul, design motif of alternating workshop, 203 ; PI. V., 6: hinges. Fig.
¿5-leaf and arrow, 102; Pis. VIIIa, 122; Pis. XIII., 3, XLIIIa, 8; </5.,Indo-
XXVIII., 2. Portuguese,Figs. 116,117: images, 148:
Bogomuva, a village in the C.P., 180. jewellery. Pis. L., 15-19, LL, 4: kettle,
Bokkalaya, a bossed handle-rose. PI. XLV., 4: key-plates, 196,198; Figs.
Bol-pen, water for temple use, 25. 107,118-121: lamps, 89,203,204; Fig.
Bolts, wooden, 134; Figs. 80-83; PI. XL, 126; PL XLIV., 5,4: lantern, PI. XLIV.,
2; metal, 115, 196,198; Figs. 108, 109; 7: lock,Fig.i22,iv.: mango,PI.XLIIL,
1 7
P .XLIIIa., . 6: -mounted knife, PI. XLVIL, 8: oil-
Botnbu-kola, leaf of bonibu [Symplocos spicata), jug, PI. XLV., 10: palanquin fittings.
244^ 245* Fig. 128: rice table. Pis. XLIV., i,
Bone, carved box, PI. XXXVI., 6; comb, XLV., 6; surgical instruments, 195:
PI. XXXIX., 2. water vessels, 203: wrought, 200: see
Book-cov^T=pot-kambiya, q.v. also damascening.
Books, s/tf, 51-53,264: paper, 179-181. Brazen Palace, Anuradhapura, 3, 4.
Boralaya [l=bslaya, E. ball), a ball or tassel, Brick [gadoid), 225: images constructed of,
33; Fig-1- 148,149,173.
Borax, 181. Bridges, 134, 136, 267.
Botalapifiya Bomaluva, nr. Kandy, 39. Bfihad Satphita, encyclopaedic work by
Bovatte, 75. Varaha Mihira, 159, i6i, 163, 209.
274

British accession, 2, 7, 14, 30. ’ Bulat-vela {Piper betle), a species of pepper,
53
British Museum, - the leaves of which are used for chewing
Broceliande, Himalayas the Indian, 81. with lime and spices, 33.
Brodie, A. O., 263. Bull, 67, 904 Figs. 27,66.
Bronze, camphor burner, 204; PL XLV., Bulu {Terminalta beleria), myrobalan, in­
7: cresset. Fig. 127; PI. XLV., 2, 3, 5 : gredient of a dye, 244.
elephant bells, 204; Pis. XLIV., 5, Bummdiyn ‘bull-frog,’ earthen and skin
XLV.,8: images,i48: tools,vessels,203, drum used at harvest festivals, 221.
204: other references, 204, 225, 254. Burford Church, Glos., 266.
Brownrigg, General, 15. Burghers, descendants of Dutch settlers
Brugaid, Irish rest-house, 117. in Ceylon, i.
Brush, painters’, 165, 166: -drawing, 66, Burmese art, 101, 118, 150.
67,103; -work, 94; Fig. 32. Burrows, Ronald, 261.
Buddhalaya, a Buddhist temple, 127.
Buddha (Gotama Buddha), d. 543 b.c., more
probably 487 b.c., life, teachings, etc.,
5, 42, 58, 98, loi, 163, 169, 250, 258:
stature, 113, 153, 161: not a god, 71 : Calamander {Diospyros quasita,Th.'fi.), 139,
tooth-relic, 6 : footprint, 173 : Maitri 216.
B., 42: V, also Buddhism. Images of B., Calyx volute, archaic design motif, 103;
5, 12, 30, 56, 70-75, 147, 148-160, 169, Figs. 35,36; PI. XXIX., 7.
173,258,259,260; PI. VIIa ; diagram. Camaraya, fly-whisk, 33 ; PI. XXII.
Fig. 95: paintings of, 5, 47, 72, 73, 77, Camphor burner, 204; PI. XLV., 7,
168, ijii 172,173,180,259; Pis. XIV., Cap4^lay0, caste, 22.
2, XVII., XIX. Cane (w-wf/a),ceremonial, etc, 20, 32, 209;
Buddhadasa, a.d. 339, organised charity Pis. XXIII., 4, 5: fencing sticks, PL
and medical relief, etc., 7. XIII., I, 2 : baskets, etc., 55, 200, 246;
Buddha-gajja, a Buddhist scripture, 50. PL XLIIIa, 8 : teeth of reed, 234.
Buddhaghosa, 7. Canons of proportion, of images, 150 seq.'.
Buddhism, and art, 46-48: charity, dedica­ V. also Silpa sdstra, Ropavaliya, Siriputra^
tions, 7, 36, 48, 70, 77, 78, Ii6, 264: Vaijayantaya.
doctrines and observances, 14,40,41,43, Caps, V. dress, ispayya, toppiya, etc.
71,73,74,181,207,262: duties of priests, Carpenters, 54, 55, 125, 129 seq.\ tools,
45: ethics, 40, 43, 183: introduction 141, 142.
into, and history in, Ceylon, z, 7,62,117: Casie Chitty, 22.
results of disestablishment, i6: State Caste, 21, 22, 54, 222: a spiritual aris­
patronage, 4, 5, 10, ii, 13, 14. tocracy, 28 : ignored by Government,
Budu-rfs, aura of the Buddha, represented 61 •. V. also sumptuary laws.
as six-coloured rays, 43; Pis, XIV., 2, Catur-nari-palakkiya, ‘4-women-palanquin,’
XVIII., XIX. 67,91.
Bulat-hfliya, earthen jarfor hetel leaves, 222. Cauldrons, 203.
Bulat-malla, pi. -main, pouch for betel Cave, representation in art, PL I.: -temples,
leaves, 244. 117, V. also Degaldoruva, Dambulla:
Bulat-payiya, betel-bag, 237-239; Pis. paintings, 47: v.
3
a
3
lso
3
S
4
igiriya.
XXX.—XXIII. Cave,H.W., 131, i > i > HS» 167,266.
Bulat-tatuva, dish or tray for betel leaves, Ceilings, wooden, 130: painted. Fig. 52 ;
203: altar for offerings of i/o., 70. Pis. XIV., 2, 3,4, XV., XVI.
Bulat-vange 4 iya, mortar for betel leaves and Ceremonial purity, 30, 31, 120, 124, 267.
spices, 195.
t 2 275

Ceremonies, foundation laying, 5: eye­ 146, 147.
V.
painting, netra mafigalyaya : inaugura­ Cockatrice, v. §erapendiya.
tion of king, 206 : New Year, etc., v. Coconut {pol-gaha. Cocos nuciferd) leaf, 72:
mangalyaya; tree-cutting, 121 sey. arrack, 222: leaf mats, 244: oil, 223 :
Cetiya (P.), a religious monument,/«wiVw. -scraper, hiramanaya. Fig. 88: -shell,
Chzit {pufuva)137,138,206; PL IX., 5. pol-katuva, 139, 140, 234, 235, charcoal,
Chatty a window, prototype of makara 177, sweetmeat mould. Fig. 87, water-
tor ana, 84. dippers, 139, PI. XLIII., 6-9: trees
Chalia weavers, v. salagamayS, known by name, 78.
9
Chandragupta II. (Vikramaditya), a.d. olians, Tamils, q.v.
373-413, Indian Emperor, 162, (177), Colombo Museum, 9, 90, 133, 144, 145,
189. 146,150,152, 183, 184, 204, 260; Fig.
Chank iyaka, Turbinella rapa), large white 132 ; Pis. X., 7, XIII., 2, 4-6, XXXII.,
shell used as a trumpet, or cut into I, 2, 8, XXXIII., 1-3, XXXV., 4, 5,
bracelets, 188; Fig. 69(xi.); Pls.XLI., i, XXXVI., 1-5, XXXVII., 10, II,
XLIIIa,4. XXXIX., 4, 7, 9, 10, XL., I, 5, 6, 17,
Charity, v. Buddhism. 18, XLIII., 2,4, XLIV., 3, 5, XLV., 5,
Charters, v. sannasa. XLVL, I, 2, 4-8, II, 12, L., 7, 9-19,
1
Chatra, vxahvclhi, 33; Fig. 69; PI. .; part LI., 8-ii,LII.,7.
of a writing style, 208. Colouring iron, 200.
‘Chatty,’any earthen vessel of moderate size Colours,
V.
painting, dyeing, five colours.
used for cooking. Combs,
V.
ivory, horn, bone.
Chaupai=pacisi, g.v.. Commutation of service rents, 24,76, 219.
Cheetah {diviyd), 249: tooth as polishing Compasses, early mention, 4, 142: ivory,
tool, 181. PI. XXV., I.
Chequer, motif in design, 107; Fig. 63 (vi): Conch,
V.
chank.
V. also divi-niya-pota. Cone, ‘shawl pattern,’ 103; Fig. 51.
Chevron, i/ff., 105; Figs. 55, 56. Continuous narration, 167; PI. I.
Chidambaram Iyer, N., 161. Coomaraswamy, A. K., 15, 17, 96, 136,
China, art parallels, influence, etc., 87, loi, 258: collection illustrated. Figs. 11, 28,
109,118,177, 178: silk, 98. 68, 87, 94, 103, 127, 129; Pis. X., 6,
Chisels, 141, 142. XII., I, 6, 7. XIII., 3, 7, 8, XIV., I,
‘Chunam’ {hum), lime, for chewing or XVII. (upper), XXL, XXVI., i, 2,
plastering: -boxes, v. killotaya. XXVIIL, I, XXIX., 5, XXX., I. 2,
Cingalese, d. Sinhalese. XXXII., 3, 6, XXXIV., XXXV., I,
Cinnabar, 119, 164, 181, 215. 3, 6, XXXVI., 6, 8, XXXVIL, 1-3,
Cinnamon peelers, salagamayo, q.v., 232. XXXVIII., 3, 5, 6, 8, XXXIX., 2, 6, *
Circle, motif in design, 104, 105: sun- XL., 8-12, 14-16, XLL, I, 4, XLIII.,
symbol, 81,105. 5, XLIIIa, 2, 3, XLIV., 6, XLV., 12,
Cire perdue (Fr.), method of casting, 203. XLVL, 3, 9, 10, XLVIL, 9, XLVIIL,
Citta Gutta, name of a monk, 47. 8,13,14, 16,17, L., I, 2, 3, LI., 1,2,4,
Clepsydra, water-clock, q.v. v. also Wilson, 12, 15.
Vishiju Puraija, V., 189. Coomaraswamy, E. M. (Mrs. A. K.), 2,
Cloth,
V.
weaving, embroidery, etc. 188, 237.
Clough, Dictionary, 153, 268. Coomaraswamy, Sir Mutu, 6.
Cobra («ig«),43, 88, 223, 225, 230, 235; Co-operation, capacity for amongst Sinha­
Pis. XXV., 4, 6, XXIX., 4, XXXIV., lese, 28, 30.
LIIL, 6: heads in lotus medallions, Copper, bowl, 206: cauldrons, 203;
Barahat and Ceylon, 251, 252; Figs. charters, 74, 207; filigree, 205; Pi.
276

XLIIIa, 2 : lime-boxes, Pis. XLVI., io­ 268: general view, PI. VIIL: details and
ta, XLIV., 6: water vessel, 205; PI. objects, from, illustrated. Fig. 90; Pis.
XLIIIa, i. IX. , 6, XVI., XXVIII., 2-4, XXXIII.,
Copperas, 200. 4, 5, XLII., 1-3.
Coral, 5. Dalumura, high word for bulai (betel) : the
Cotton, 235: V. also weaving, embroidery. turn to supply betel to a landlord : dalu­
Cow-dung, 31, 114. mura tatuva, royal or ceremonial betel
Cowell, Prof. E. B., 42, 121, 122. dish, 205 ; PI. XLII., 3. An ordinary
Craftsmen, Ch. III.: apprenticeship, 64: betel dish is a bulat tatuva.
classification, 54 : dress, 60 : fed, 32, 56, Damascening {ridi-kftayan-Vfdd), 54, 102,
70, 76: good and evil, 124, 127 ; high 103, 198, 200, 207; Figs. 50, 51, 102,
spirit, 60, 61 : Indian origin, a, 6, 58, IIS, a; Pis. XLIIIa, 7, XLVI, 2, 3, 5,
61-63, 232 : numbers, 61: payment, 12, 9, 11,12,14, I s, XLVIL, 2, 9, XLI., I :
56, 57, 60, 61, 77, 264: ‘protection,’ 6a, damascener at work, PI. IV., 3 : orna­
61: penalties, 59, 60: in Mahavanisa, mented tools, 142, 205.
10, 173: masters of many crafts, 68: Damba {Eugenia jambos,, L.), a fruit tree,
royal, 264: status, 60, 264. 128: a mythical tree, 94.
Craftsmen at work. Pis. V., VI. Dambadeijiya (Jambuddoiji), formerly Sin­
Craft-songs, 235, 246. halese capital, 6, 174.
Crane, Walter, 92. Danibu, rags, balls of tow for cressets, 26,
Crescent, 254; PI. XLVIII., 5. 238.
Cressets, 204, 223; Fig. 127; PI. XLV., 2, Daiabadiva, ‘land of the rose apple,’ con­
3 . 5 - tinent S. of Mt. Meru, viz. India, 94.
Cross, motif in design^reduced floweret, Dambevinne, a village in Uva, 117.
97, 106. Dambulla, properly Daajbulu, cave temples,
Cross-hatching, motif in design, 102; Fig. abt. thirty miles N. of Matale, 3, 8, 15,
59 1
- 27. 75. 17. 137. 193: interior, PI.
Crow, 90. VIII.: ceiling painting, PI. XIV., 2.
Crown, 33 ; PL XXII. Dambulla, a cave temple in the Kfgalla
Crystal, quartz {palittguva), là^y, 149. • Dist., Sab., 149.
Cubit, {riyana), 59, 126, 142. Damunumeya Vihara and sannasa, 77, 78.
Cunningham, General, 82, 84, loi, 257. Danagirigala Vihara, a cave temple in the
Curve \vaka), temperate, ideal, education Regalia Dist., Sab., 117, 141, 148, 164,
in drawing, etc., 65, 103, 104. 169, 170: Figs. 41, 104; Pis. VII., 4,
X. , 2-5, XIV., 8. See also Bell, Regalia
Report, p. 43 {sannasa, a.d. 1787, details
D. work executed, payment of craftsmen,
etc.)
Dagaba, dome-shaped monument, erected Dancing, 26, 176, 220: representations of.
over relies, etc., passim, Pis. XVIII., XXXVIII., 2, XXXIX, 9.
Dalada Maligava, Temple of the Tooth Daudàsanaya, ? book table, 48,137; Pi. XL
Relic, Kandy, built in the eighteenth Daodu, wood, timber: beam, 130: -agula,
century by Narendra Siipha, restored by bolt, 134 ; -majuva (royal) timber shed,
Kirti §rl, and added toby VikramaSiipha, 25. 55 -
7 . 6 , II, 13,17,27,36,38,39,40,48,72, Daudu-lena, squirrel, 90.
Dangaraya, dangaya, meander, coil, motif in
74.76, 90, 91. 100, 114, 115, 118, 119,
131, 141, 143, 147, 149, 168, 169, 198, design, 88, no.
204, 206, 212, 214, 225, 239, 255, 267, Dan-kada, pi. -kat, yoke load of provisions
given by tenant to proprietor, 24,193.
‘ 3 277

Daratfaya=dangaya^ q.v. '■ De-pota-lanuva, ‘two-ply-plait,’ motif in
Dari (H.) —(tirilla, qhi. design, {a) chequer work, 107; Fig. 63,
Dasa Dhamma Suttam, a Buddhist scripture, VI.: (b) plaitwork of two strands, 234»
4
-
7
- .
244; Pis. XXVIII., I (i 3a), XXXIV.
Dasa-sil, ten precepts binding on Buddhist Design, list of motifs, 80: teaching, 64 seq.:
priests, 44. theory, 2 u .
Dafkadhatu, Tooth Relic of Buddha, 6: De Silva, W. A., 178.
-vantsa, history of do., 6. Deti mala, ‘tooth flower,’ ‘tooth pattern,’
Dat-kafttva, tooth-pick, 21 o. pattern of woven cloths, 234; PI.
Davula, drum, 26, 120: -paftgteva, holding XXVII., I (7).
of a beravaya tenant, 2 5. Deva, fern. minor divinity, god, 3,113,
Davy, John, 33, 37, 39, 84, 125, 136, 190, 121-5, 161: purity, 124, 267: represen­
206, 207, 209, 220, 222, 237, 263, 267. tations in art. Figs. 2, 151, ij2; Pis.
De Couto, I o. VIIIa, XVlII., XXII.
Deer {mriga), 89, 230, 249; PI. XXXIV.: Dfva, horizontal beam of roof: -suliya,
=any wild beast, 86. carved end of such a beam (Lewis).
Degaldoruva Vihara, cave temple about Diva Brahman, Deva kammalar, reputed
two miles from Kandy, 47,114,146,164, ancestral name of craftsmen, 63.
167, 168; paintings, 42,116,123, Deva padaya, ‘quarter of the gods,’ third
140,167,168,233; Figs. 2, 88,151,152; division of a site, 159: -stttra, string
PI. I.: names of painters, 168: sannasa, delimiting do.
77: window, 134: bolt. Fig. 103. Devaraja Vihara, Dambulla, 75.
Degeneration, of social structure and arts Deva-vardhika, name of Viivakarma, 78.
and crafts generally, 15, 17, 185, 210: Devsla-perahfra, the second five days of the
architecture, 132: dress, 33: turnery, p. in Kandy, 38.
141: painting, 167,168,171,172: ivory Devalaya, devale [deva+alaya), temple of a
carving, 210; PI. XXXVIII., 9: em­ Hindu god or local Ashy,passim: organi­
broidery, 237: dyeing, 245. sation and structure, 45, 120; chief
Dehigama, name of an official to whom deities worshipped, 46: purity of sanctum,
the gold style of Fig. 129 was given by 124: in Mayamataya, 125, 127.
Narendra Siipha, 207. Devale-gama, village belonging to a devale,
Dehigama Navaratna Atapattu Vasala 27.
Mudiyanse, had made an illuminated DSvanagala Vihara, Kegalla Dist., Sab.,
copy of Viiuddhi Marggaya, 180. 133,264; PI. VII., 8.
Dehigama Vihara, 56. Devanam Piyatissa, ‘Beloved of the Gods,’
Dehipagoda, a village in the C.P., 180. 307-267 B.C., contemporary of Aioka,
D?-k(ita, sickle, q.v. established Buddhism as State religion
Dekuma, customary gift from a tenant, 24. in Ceylon, 2, 6, 177.
D(la, net, name of motif in design, 107,217. Devaragampola Silvatenna, an ‘ unordained
Dfl-gffa-lanuva, ‘net-knot-plait,’ pattern of priest’ and painter, worked at Degal­
grass mats, 244. doruva and RidI Vihara for KirtI 8rl, 47,
Delhi, iron pillar of Chandragupta II., 162, 59,84,168.
189. Devaramulla, a village in the C.P., 35.
Dema(a Baiala, Tamil goldsmith, 62. Devasurendra Muhandirama, a craftsman
Dembaralave Vihara, 70. of Fmbekke, painter, ivory carver, etc.,
Detfiya, a marshy hollow between two hills, source of much valuable information, 70,
a valley. 79,152, i8i: drawings by. Figs. 10,16,
Depiyan-ioruva, door with two leaves 19, 22,23, 24,25, 26, 27, 33 (i.,vii.,vin.,
(Lewis). X.), 34 (n.),44, 91,92, 93, 95; PI. XXL
278

Devata Bandarâ, a local deity, image at A.D., basis'of MahavamsUf 2: memory
Çmbekke, 14g. verses, 162, 171.
Devatavâ, a minor divinity, 4, 46, 72. Dippitiya Vihara, Kegalla Dist., Sab. 133.
Dêvëndra Mulâcariyâ, a craftsman and Disava, governor of a disavanaya, chieftain,
architect in the reign of the last king, 59, 19, 20, 23, 55, 219: -âcâri, craftsmen
131,142. working for iy/iâxîiz only, 55.
Devil ceremonies, 26, 239. Disdvanaya, district in charge of a disava,
DeviyS (honorific pL), a more ceremonious 19.20-
term than tieva, q.v. Diva Nilame, Diyavadana Nilame, principal
Devundara, on the S. coast of Ceylon, site lay officer of the Dafada Mâligâva, 6, 7,
of a dëvâie destroyed by the Portuguese,
10, 149, 260. Divi-niya-pota, child’s amulet, cheetah’s
Dhaja pataka, great banner, 24. claws mounted in gold or silver, 210;
Dhammacakka, ‘ Wheel of the Latv,’ name Pis. XLVIIL, 9,10,14-17.
of a building erected by Dêvânam Piya- Div-nari-ratha, ‘ 2-women-chariot,’ Fig. 28.
tissa, 6. Dmul-latu, gum of the elephant-apple tree,
Dhammâgâra, ‘ House of the Law,’ name of used as medium for painting, 165.
a building erected by Paràkrama Bahu Divya loka, world of the gods, 94.
I., 72. Divyavadana, a Buddhist scripture, 259.
Dhammika Sutta, a Buddhist scripture, 47. Diya-kacciya, bathing dress, dress of watch­
Dharma (S.), dhamma (P.), sacred law, men or guards, 34, 2 3 3 : worn, PI. V., I o :
righteousness, doctrine, 43, 168. -redda, pi. -redi, do. 26.
‘Dhoby’ (H.), washerman {radava), 21 : Diya-rela, ‘ wave,’ zig-zag, wave or chevron
duties, 26, 237 238. motif in design, 106; Figs. 54, 143
Dhoti(H.),Hindu dress,worn by ‘brahman’ (viii.); Pl.XXVIIL, I (15).
at Nëtra Mangalyaya, 72. Diya-kçpma, ceremony of‘cutting water’
Dhyana, meditation, 93, 112. after the annual perahfra of a dévale, 222 :
Dhydna Ratandvaliya, Silpa éâstra in use in after nëtra mangalyaya, 39,74: -kepum-tota,
Tanjore, 69. place where the ceremony is performed, 3 g.
Diapers, 107; Pis. XIV., 6, XXVIII., 1,3: Dodantale Vihara, Kegalla Dist., Sab., 118,
Vfda,kalas dasgaya.
V. also chequer, iaWiz« 119, 164,168,169, 198, 211, 222; Figs.
Dibba^gë, ‘god’s house,’ altar, 72. 60, no, 130; PI. XXV., 8.
Dice, 186, 268; PI. XL., 3. Dodanvela Dévale, C.P., 180, 213.
Dickson, Sir J., 75, 262. Dolosvela K. W. W. T ennekoon Mudianse,
Didron et Durand, Christian symbolism, 27.
266. Domba mala {Calophyllum Inophyllum, L.)
Dtg-gahanava, to lay warp, 236, 243. Door, 115, 133, 185 ; Pis. VII., 8, VIIIa:
Dig-gë, porch of a dévale, forming ante­ ivory ornamented, 185 ; PI. XXXVIIL,
chamber to the maligdva or sanctuary. i: guardians, 184, 185: handles, 203;
(Here daily hëvisi is performed, and also Fig. 124: Pis. XLIIL, 7, XLIIIa, 6.
the dances of women [dig-gë rifttma, 26) See also J. P. Lewis, ‘ Spolia Zeylanica,’
at festivals. Worshippers have access V., 127.
only to the dig-gë, the kapurala alone Dora hitina lella, leaf of door, 133.
entering the maligava.) 120. Dorakadaasna,chirmi, recited on threshold,
Dtghanikaya, a Buddhist scripture, 77. 74, 265 :
V.
also Wickremasinghe, Sin.
Dipankara Buddha, a former Buddha, 41. MSS. in British Museum, p. 40.
Dipavali, Hindu festival of lights. Sin. karti Dorat}a {Dipterocarpus glandulosus, Thw.),
mangalyaya, 37. oil of, as a medium, 165 : ingredient of
Dipavama, Sin. chronicles of fourth century varnish, 167, 181.
4 279
t

Doratu-pala, divine guardian of a doorway, Dvara-palo, doratu-pala, q.v.
150: -rapaya, image of do., 72, 150,184; Dyeing, 236, 244, 245.
Pis. XXXV., 5, 6, XL., 5.
Doruva, dora, a door.
Dot, binduva, q.v. E.
Dowson, J., 81.
D’Oyley, Sir John, 219. Earthenware, 218-231; Figs. 133-139;
Drawing, teaching of, 64-69. Pis. XXV., XXVI.,LII.,4,5.
Drawn thread, v. embroidery. ‘Early Indian’ art (up to about 30 a.d.),
Dress, 22-'si;, 212: caps and hats, 24, 227, sources of, 251: ^>. also Barahat.
239; Pls.XXII.,XXIII., I,XXXVI., 1-5; Ear-pick {kan-henda, pi. -hetfdi), 210; Pis.
chief’s, 33: gifts of king’s, 60, 213; XL., 8, 10, XLVIII., 13.
gods’, PI. XXL, etc.: guard’s, PI. V., 10: Ebony [Diospyros ebenum. Keen.), 115, 116,
hermit’s, PI. I.: king’s, 33, 209; Pis. 139, 185.
XXII., XXXVI., I: craftsmen’s, 60,72: Ecclesiasticus, 129, 189.
V.
also sumptuary laws. Edaoda, log bridge, 48.
Drums, v. davula, bummfdiyd, temmettama, Education, 10, 16, 49-51: of craftsmen, 63,
beraya, udakkiya. 64,68-69: deficiencies of modern, 16,51:
Dulleve Adigar, 194, 219. mission schools, 17 : v. also schools.
Dulmure, a village in the C.P., 180. Eduru=kapurala, q.v.
Dumbara, part of the C.P.: mat-weavers ‘Egg and dart,’ border and moulding,
(kinnarayd) and mats, 243; Fig. 40; Pis. equivalent of lotus petal {paid peti)
IV., XXXIV. moulding, 97, 253,261.
Dummala, rosin, from the hal tree, or dug Egyptian analogies in Indian art, 168, 251.
in recent deposits of vegetable matter, Ehala-gaha,^]\i\y tree,’25, 38,76, 121.
used as incense, to produce a flash of Ehelapola, Adigar of last king, 14, 15.
brilliant flame in devil-dancing cere­ Eka-pota-lanuva, ‘ one-ply-plait,’ 107; Fig.
monies, and as ingredient of a varnish, 38, 63, V.; PI. XXXVII., 5.
167, 222: oil, 52, 222 (pj. also ‘Ceylon Elaja, 205 B.C., Tamil usurper who ruled
Nat. Review,’ I., 238 [1906]): -kabala, justly, 3.
incense burner, 222; PI. XXVI, 4, 5. Eldeijiya, village in the C.P., 57, 58.
Dunukaravasama,xm\itzry tenants,lit. bow­ Elephant, 26, 38, 39,40,41,56,67, 84,90,
men, 25. 183, 230, 249: representations. Pis. I.,
Daporuva (Clough, under ashfapadd), per­ VI I., 7, XX VIII., I, XXIX.,7, XXXIV.:
haps the proper Sinhalese name for a bells, 204: goad, 195: PI. XLIV., 2.
pacisi cloth or board, q.v. Elipat-kanda, inner threshold of door
Duravs, toddy drawers (caste), 22. (Lewis).
Durayd, man or headman of paduvO caste, Ella, Üva P., horn-comb-makers, 187.
187. Ellora sculptures, W. India, 177.
5
January, 37. mb?kke, village and Devale in C.P.,
Dutch, held low-country of Ceylon, 1658- 39, 76, 79, 90, 120, 149, 206:
V.
also
1795 A.D., 1,11: ambassador in Kandyan Keppifipola.
service, 213: influence on arts, 85,87,91, fiimbekke Devasurendra Hañgidiya, great­
115, 128, 136, 140, 164, 179, 198,202, grandfather of Dévasuréndra Muhandi-
210, 256: paper, 65, 166, 179: trade, 29: ram, y.i;., drew tiriiigi talaya of PI. XVII.;
wars with, 13, 29,115,188, 206, 213.
V.
also Manuviravikrama.
Duftha GamanI, 167-137 b.c., first great EtnbeptayO, barbers (caste), 22.
builder king in Ceylon, 3-5, 7, 57, 149: Embroidery, 237-242; Fig. 141 ; Pis.
statues of, 170, 173. XXVIII., 2-4, XXX.— XXXIII., XLL,
280

2: degeneration, passing, 237: materials, Ferguson, J.,’189.
betel-bags, 238 : jackets, pillow-cases. Festivals, v. mafigalyaya.
Caps, napkins, quilting, applique, 239 ; Fig-leaf, loi.
stitches, 240-242: revival by Mrs. Filigree, 205: Pis. XLVII., 1,4, XLVIIL,
Coomaraswamy, 242 : v, also weaving, 3 ,11,i2 ,i3 ,i6,L.,2,3,4,7,13.
hannaliya, radavU. Filled vase, bowl, water-pot, auspicious
^,mbul-muttiya, earthen pot for hair wash, emblems, 5; Fig. 69.
220. Fish, 88, 226: representations. Figs. 69,
Çmbulpure, a village in the C.P., 76. 137; Pis. I., XXXIV.: -tooth, ivory
Enamelled tiles, 218. substitute, 186.
Jiÿda, bed, 136; -kakula, bed-leg, 217: Five, colours, viz. red, rala, blue (or green),
-viyala, -frame, 136. nila, yellow, kaha, white, sudu, black,
English, Church, Kandy, 12; occupation kalu, 72, 164, 175, 268 : crafts, 63, 263:
of Kandy, 1815 A.d., 14; unsympathetic -fingered ornament, 5 : metals, v. pas-la:
government, 15, 75: paper, 166; in­ musical instruments, 26, 174: servants,
fluence on art, etc., 255. occupations, 22: weapons of Vishnu,
Erbyggya Saga, 124. 210; PI. XLVIII., 15, 17.
^spat, name of pattern, 248. Flags, 38, 39, 84, 85, 88, 89, 240.
Ew, elephant, tusker, 213. Fleet, J. F., 116.
JLt-dat-ketayan-karayô,ivory carvers, 54,186. Flower,offerings, no, 173,176: -in-mouth,
^t-hon4a-Vf la,' elephant trunk,’stone balus­ design motif, 110: -in-pot, do., 98, 239;
trade, 146. Pis. VIIIa, XXXIII., 2: -tree, do.. Fig.
^tiliya, earthen vessel, 220; PI. V. 40.
Btirilla, pl. (tirili, cotton cloth, dari, cover Folk-lore, 70-75, 120-128: circumambu-
for seats, beds, etc., 26, 233 ; Pis. lation, 72: charms, 210: gorgon’s head,
XXVIII., I, XXIX., 4, 5. 74: invisible house, 123: scapegoat, 74:
Etipola, a village in the C.P., 76. sympathetic magic, 221 : tree-worship,
Etiquette, master and pupil, 49, 51, 64, 68. 38, 121-125:
V.
also agriculture, cere­
'^.t-kanda-lihii}iya, elephant-roc, 84, 195; monial purity, craft-songs, design, sun
Fig. 16: -kodiya, flag 6f Maha Lêkam and moon, festivals, hare, diva, diya-
Department, 38. keplma, nfkala, ball, yaka, etc.
Ettalapifiya, Üva P., 117. Forbes, Major, 136.
Evil eye, 71,74. Forest, pilgrims passing through, 44: love
European restlessness, i o, 263 : influence,on of, 113: -scenes. Fig. u ; PI. XVI.
arts, 255: on architecture, 115, 132: on Forge, blacksmiths’, 194.
furniture, 137, 138 : on metal work, 91, Fortifications, 120.
149, 198, 200, 202, 206. Forlplanzende Wdlenranke (G.), v. branch.
Eye, representation of in painting, 169; v. Four Workshops, v. paftal halara.
also netra niaûgalyaya. Freemasonry, 63.
Fret, motif in design, 109; PI. XXIX., 7.
Furnace, iron, 191; Figs.98, 99: steel, 192;
Fig. 100.
Furniture, v. woodwork.
Faery branches, 99.
Fa Hian, 7, 177. G.
Fan, ivory, 4: gold, 205; -handles, PI.
XXXVII., 6-9: ceremonial, v. sísala, Gabadn-gama, a Royal Village or Manor, 27,
avala. 75, 263 : ‘King’s Towns,’ 60, 263.
Feathers, representation of. Fig. 58. Gabada-ge, a store-room, barn, 120.
281

Gadalàdeniya Viharaj 39, 120, 145, 146: bordermotif restmhVmg gal-bindu, q.v., on
services of tenants,76: parasatu, mythical woven cloths, 234: on grass mats, 245,
tree mentioned in rock inscription, 94 : Fig’ H 3 -
key-plate from. Fig. 107, vni.: De vale Gal-sannasa, a charter or grant cut on stone,
roof, PI. VII., 2. at Asgiriya, 13: at Gadaladeniya, 94: at
Gaiola, a brick, 225. Dambulla, 264: at Devanagala, 264.
Oaha^ gas, pi. gas, a tree, plant. Gal-torapai}aya, stock drill, a carpenter’s
Gahalagamboda, a village, 180. tool, 142: stone weight, 147: a smith’s
Gahalayd, menial servant, 22. tool, 194: illustrated. Fig. 91 : in use,
Gahoniya, a bell-shaped cover of cotton PI. V., 6.
4
material, placed over offering or dues Gal-mduva, pi. gal~va uvs, stone-mason,
{penutn, q.v.) carried on a yoke to an their rank as craftsmen, 54: their num­
overlord or temple, used at Alutsal Man- bers, 55 : often of Indian derivation, 114,
galya, 40 ; represented at Degaldoruva, 144: name of a mason recorded in an
168, 233: described, 233: illustrated, inscription, 264.
PI. XXIX., 6. Galveva, a village, 180.
Gaja Bahu I., a.d. i 13-135, invaded S. Gal-vihdraya, a cave temple (Buddhist),
India, introduced Pattini worship, 117 : see also Dambulla, Degaldoruva,
brought back captives, 6 : craftsmen Ridi Vihara, Danagirigala.
probably amongst the latter, 6, 62. Gama, p\.gam, a village.
GiyWzi?2/w_yi?, ‘elephant-lion,’mythical lion Gama-rala, the headman of a village, gener­
with elephant’s head and trunk, flag of ally an hereditary office in the family of
Nuvara-kalaviya, 38; described, 88: the principal tenant, 30, 263.
carved in wood, 129: in stone, as a Gamboge (Gam/zza morella, Desr.), v.gokafu.
balustrade, 146 : in ivory at Ridi Vihara, Game-boards, 138, 140: illustrated, Pis.
185: illustrated. Fig. 25. XII.,i-3,XLI.,4.
Gal-blnduva, ‘gem-dot,’ (not ‘set gem’ as Game cloths, 238.
translated on p. 108), a border motif Games, 268.
derived from gems set in rows, described, Gammahe, headman of a village, 60.
108 : in lac-work, 217 : illustrated. Fig. Gammalu {Pterocarpus marsupium, Roxb.),
63 : prototype, on rim of cup, PI. XLII., 181.
5; PI. XLIIIa, I. Gampola, a town in the C.P., at one time
Gala, p\.gal, stone, rock, gem. the Sinhalese capital, 9: craftsmen from,
Galfhi (Cyperus corymbosus), a grass used by working at Beligala, 144: golden image
mat-weavers, 244, 245. stolen from Niyangampaha Vihara, 148.
Gàléveva, a village, 180. Gam-sabhava, village tribunal, 30; held in
4
Galih? a, potter’s stone, 230. the village ambalama, 117.
Galladda, pi. galladdo, a jeweller, painter, Gam-vasama, gan-vasama, tenants of the
mason, etc., a superior craftsman, 54, 64 ; second rank, 54: their duties, 24.
one proficient in five crafts called silpa- Garya Devi H^lla, a sort of Gospel of the
cariya, ‘master of craft,’ 68: an ivory- Infant Gaije^a, in verse, a school book, 51:
carver, 184 : also served in Kuruve Dept., descriptions of paintings quoted, 89, 172;
see Bell, Kegalla Report, p. 113. plaster referred to, 89,166,172.
Galma^uva Gedigé Vihara, a stone and Gaija DeviyO, Gaijeia, worshipped, 46, 72.
brick vihara, built in a Hindu style, at Gaifapati ksvil, a temple for the worship ot
Galmaijuva, in the Central Province, 146. Gaijeia, 127.
Gal-oruva, a stone trough for dyeing priests’ Gaijata, a village in the C.P., 180.
4
robes. Gai} a, knob, knop, part of a writing style,
Gal-piyuma, ‘gem-flower,’ ‘gem-lotus,’ a 2o8 ;■ Fig. 129.
282

Gandhara, in North-West India, Grsco- Gav,—\yodüd=ahoa\.,miles,' J44.
Roman Buddhist sculptures, 163: artistic Gavarä, a kind of buffalo, 172.
4
value small, 163, 257: not true Indian Ge i-malaya, ‘garland of fruits,’ a kind of
art, 254, 256, 257. necklace, 211 ; PI. XLVIII., 4.
Gandharva, musicians of Indra’s heaven, 82. '■ Gegenständige Lotus-blüth undPalmnte' (G.),
Gaijegoda Vihara, Ratnapura Dist., Sab., design motif, 96.
stonework, 114: ‘clerestory ’ effect, 118: Geiger, Wilhelm, on the Dipavamsa and
scarf-joint in beam, 130; Fig. 75 : lych Mahavaipsa, 2,162.
pteinwall, 132; Fig. 79: ceiling paint­ Gems, on jewelled ¿ff-tree at Ruvanveli
ing, 104,105, 168 ; Fig. 52; PI. XV. Dagaba, 5 : cut‘en cabochon,’ 147,209 :
Gaijego^a Vihara, Kegalla Dist., Sab., stone use of, 210.
carving at, 145,146. Genre carving, 146 ; PI. XXXIX., 5.
Gaijesha (Gaije^a), the Hindu God of Wis­ Gentlemen-in-waiting, 33, 209.
dom, son of Siva by Parvatl, proportions Geographical sense, 74.
of image given in the Rupavaliya, 113: Geometry, practical knowledge of, 95.
see also Gaija DeviyO. Gefaya, a knop or knot, 109 : see also del-
Gangarama, a vihara near Kandy, built for geta~lanuva, lanu-getaya, geta-liya-pota.
Kirti Sri Raja Siipha, 12,17: expenses of Getaberiya, a village in the Kegalla Dist.,
the dedication festival (netrapinkama) ,56: Sab., home of the Gopala Moors, noted
example of a two-storied constructional for medicinal skill, 195 : sannasa, 207.
vihara, n8; PI. VII., 5: gilt stone image Geta-liya-pota, distinguished from näga
of Buddha, 148. bandha, 88, a scroll or knop of liya-
Ganges, one of the Seven Sacred Rivers of pata work, 100, 109, 129 : as ‘stop’ to a
India, 74. chamfer, 133: illustrated. Fig. 44.
Gangoda, a village in the C.P., 180. G(ta-pana, pattern of a woven mat, 249.
Ganhatara, a village, 180. Gettembe, near Kandy, the diya-kepum-tofa
Gannoruva, a village in the C.P., close to (q.v.) of the Kandy dèvales, 39.
Kandy, 59. Ge-va//a, wooden fibre-scraper used by mat-
Gannoruva Muhandirama, a craftsman of weavers, 243.
Gannoruva, 59. Gbl, ghee (H.), clarified butter, offering of,
Gannoruve Navaratna Davuijda Abharaija 126.
Acariya, a craftsman of Gannoruva, 59. Gihiya, a foreman, 168.
Gannoruve Tikiri Gammahe, a craftsman Gijukltu-katuva, gimlet, 142.
foreman of Gannoruva, 60. Glkiyana panguva, holding of tenants owing
Gan-pandura, a customary gift, rent, 194. musical service to a dévale, 26, 220.
Gan-sabhava, v. gam-sabhava. Gingelly oil, ingredient of fine plaster, 119 :
Gan-vasama, v. gam-vasama. ofadye, 243.
Gara-yakshaya, gara-yaka, a house demon, Gini-kabala, ‘ fire-dish,’ an earthen vessel or
devil-dancer’s costume, 239; PI. XXXIII., dish used as a portable hearth, 208, 216,
1-3- 222; PI. XXV., 11.
Garland (malayd), motif in design, 102 Giragama Diva Nilame, 213.
frame of a ceiling painting, PI. XIV., 4 Girä-poftuva, design of two parrots with
on belt, PI. XIV., 5; offerings of, 4 necks entwined, 89; PI. XXXV., 2.
prototype of jewelled necklace, 211. Gira Sande^aya, ‘The Parrot Messenger,’
4
Garu a, mythical bird, vehicle of Vishpu, an anonymous poem of the fifteenth
171 ; distinct from 85; century, 172.
Gate, of palace, 115; of vihara garth, 132: Girava, pi. girav, a parrot, q.v.
the Great Gate, see Maha Vasala. Giraya, pi. gira, areca-nut slicer, 195, 203 ;
Gautama, Gotama, name of Buddha, 246. Pi. XLVI., 1-9.
283

Girdles, seejewellery. Mahavaipsa, 213,214: writingstyle, 207:
Girihagama Valavva, Kandy, 115, 198; V. also ran, ratram.
Fig. 110. Goldsmiths, in the train of Sanghamitta,
Giriyagamuva, a village, 75. third century b.c., 2 : duties of, 25,76.
Glue, 182. Gonfs, carved rafter, 129 ; PI. VIII.
Goa, 6. Gooneratne, D. de S., 239.
Godakumbura, a hamlet, 35. Gooneratne, Mudaliyar E. R., in , 150,
Goiafara {Dillenia retusa, Thunb.), fruits 151, «0/209.
an ingredient of fine plaster, 119. Goose, V. hanisaya.
4
Go apola Galladda, a craftsman, a descen­ Gopala Moors, 195.
dant of Devendra Mulacariya, 142. Gopuram, porch of a Hindu temple, 146.
Godavari, one of the Seven Sacred Rivers of Gorgon’s Head, see Folk-lore.
India, 74. Gothic Art, 66, 104.
Gods, Hindu, worshipped by Buddhists in Goviya, pi. goviys, cultivator, husbandman,
Ceylon, 45,46: representations of. Fig. i; rank, 21, 22 : dress, 34.
PL XVIII. See also Bhumi Devi, deva, Govi-vanisaya, cultivator caste, fair com­
devatdvd, Ga)ie&, Hatara Varan DeviyO, plexion of, 166 : jewellery worn by, 209 ;
Kataragama DeviyO, Kfishija, Natha mats woven by women, 244.
DeviyO, Saman DeviyO, Vishiju, etc. Granary [apiva, bissa), 115,116; PI. VII.,
Goglet [gurulettuva), 222. 9: seal, 116, 140; PI. XIII., 5.
Gokatu, gamboge {Garcinia morella, Desr.), Graphite, used in decoration of pottery, 225.
yellow pigment, 164, 167 : ingredient of Grass, mats and baskets, 244 : do., patterns,
a varnish or paste, 181. 106,245,Figs. 143,144: patterns derived’
Gold, ‘armour,’ 209 ; betel dish, PI. XLIL, from, 107.
3: betel-leaf box, PI. XLIX., 10: bowl, Greece, influence on Indian art, 256-260 :
4,206: chains, 209, 211: chunam-box, V. also honeysuckle, fret.
PI. XLVL, 13: the colour of fair skin, Green, E. E., on lac-work, 215.
166: crown, 213: damascening, 207: Gregory, Lady, quoted, 99.
fan 205; Pl.XLIL, 2: images, at Ruvan- ‘Ground for the Floor,’ Cambridgeshire
v?li Dagaba, second century b.c., 5, 259, traditional song, 31.
at Morapaya Vihara, 71, at Niyangam- Griinwedel, A., ‘ Buddhist Art in India,’ on
paha Vihara, 148, in Ramayaija, and in kindurO, 81 : on artistic canons, 150,154:
Kusa Jatakaya, 259 : insignia, royal, 33, on the origin of the ideal type of Buddha,
of a devale, 39; ‘koku' sword, 58 : ladle 254, 256, 258: on early Buddhist
or dipper, 4: -lace fringe of shawl, PI. sculpture, 259: on mythical animals in
XXVIII., 4: leaves of jewelled i^d-tree, 5: Indian art, 260.
-mounted chank, 188, PI.XLIIL, 4, cup, Guilds, in India, 63 : in Europe, 71,1:. also
PI. XLII., 5 ; passing (embroidery) 237; cs&te,pattai hatara, kopal-badde, etc.
P1.XLI.,2: pendants, 2 i I: as a pigment, Gum arable, a medium in tempera painting,
164; PI. XX., 1,2: pillars, 4: pinnacle 165.
(finial), 173 : plate, 205: -plated images, Gupta dynasty, in North Western India,
gilt images, 148,173,260: -plated throne fourth century A.D., a period of artistic
now at Windsor, 206: plates inscribed activity, 177,162.
with Buddhist scriptures, 58: pokkharai}is Guru akuru, letters set as a copy by the
(miniature tanks), 175 : rings, 209, 210 ; teacher, 49. ■
PI. LL, I, 2, 3, 5-14: use of, a royal Gurubebile, a village in the C.P., 13,188,206.
prerogative, 209: case for royal letters, Gurugala, red iron ore, limonite, used in
264: sun emblem,4: thread, 239; throne, painting bali images, 177: in slip­
5 ; vases, 5 : vessels, etc., mentioned in painting of pottery, 225, 226, 231.
284

Guruld, mythical bird, 94, 262. Handle-rose, 200; Fig. 114; Pis. XLIII.,
7
Gurulettuva, goglet, 203, 222. 3, > XLIIIa, 6: during manufacture,
Gurunnanse, ‘Mr. Teacher,’ polite name PI. IV., 3.
for teacher, 51. Handun-gala, sandal-wood grinding stone,
Guttila Kavya, fifteenth century poetic 147; PI. LIL, 7.
version of the Guttila Jatakaya, by Tofa- Handuruva, cultivator caste, 21.
gamuva,—description of mythical tree, Hangidiya, foreman craftsman, 55,144.
parasatu, 94. Hanguraftketa, village in C.P., 91,117,146,
.Gwalior, Maharaja Scindia of, 14. 147: Vishnu Devale, 195: Pattini
Devale, 219.
H. Hannaliya,t3.i\or and embroiderer, caste,21,
54
. 237-
Habaralissa, plant, not ascertained, 221. Hanuman, monkey god who assisted
Hadu Nayide, name of a craftsman, 58. Rama, I.
Hair, oiled, 32: how worn. Fig. i; Pis. I., Haputale, Uva, 180.
II., XXII., XXXVL, 1-5, XXXIX., 5, Hapuvida, nr. Matale, 215.
4
8, 9. Haras-ka aya,\mte\oin.ioov, 133: -kapana
4
Hak-ge iya, chank, conch-shell, used as a timber saw, 142; Fig. 92: -rafava,
trumpet in devales and Hindu temples, pattern of grass mat. Fig. 143.
120, 188; Pk XLL, I, XLIIIa, 4: Harassala, bobbin, 235.
hakge4i panguva, holding of a tenant Harassal arnbarana yantraya, winding
whose service was to blow the chank, 188. machine, 236.
Hnkuruvci,]zgg^ty maker, caste, 22. Hardy, Rev. F. Spence, no, 260.
Hal, rice (uncooked), 72. Hare {sasa), 89; PI. XVI.
Halamba, golden anklet of Pattini, bronze Haritaki, v. aralu.
copies worn by dancers, 6, 139: -hfliya, Harrison, J. E., 258.
earthen vessel to hold halamba, etc., 222. Harvest festival, v. alutsal maUgalyaya.
Hali-dangaya, pattern of woven cloths, 234; Hastiya, elephant (flag), 38.
PI. XXVIII., I (4). Hatarabage, Sab., iron smelted at, 190.
Ha Imilla {Berrya amonilld), 131, Hatara, four: -lake redda, a cloth four spans
Haloluva, village near Kandy, 180, wide: -mulu-toppiya, 4-cornered hat,
Hal-gaha {Vateria acuminata'), 164, i8i : 33 : Varan DeviyS, Regents of the Four
-dummala, rosin of do., 164. Quarters, 43, 72: represented, with
Haluva, a cloth: halu-h?liya, -taliya, earthen Maha Brahma, PI. XVIII.
vessels for storing cloths, 221. Hataresmidula, square yard, interior of
Hamadi Ba^ala, name of a craftsman, 73. house, 31.
Hambantota, on S. coast Ceylon, 117. Havadiya, chain, ‘silver girdles,’ 35; PI. L.,
HantsayS, mythical sacred goose, swan, 8, 1-7: havadi dangaya, chain pattern, 109;
85, 95,129,172,184,224,230; Figs. 19, Fig. 63 (vni.); PI. XXXIII., 3: havadi
90,136; Pis. XXVI., 2, XXXIX., 2, 8: pota, chain pattern (a form of reel and
described in Rüpavaliya, 86; flag of Ova, bead),io9; Figs. 63 (vn.), 64; Pl.L.,1-7.
3 Havell, E. B., 17, 258,267.
^-
Hamsa-lipi, a style of writing, 179: -puttuva, Havelock, Sir A. E., 262.
design of hamsays with necks entwined, Head dress, divine. Pis. XXL, XXXV., 5,
86, no, 130; Figs. 20, 28, F, 77, 119, , 6, XXXIX., I, 3, 7: worn by prince,
123; Pk XI., 5, XIV., I, XXXII., 8, PL I: V. also hair, hat, etc.
XL., 4,12. H?da-kat}da, thread beam of mat weaver’s
Hasda-ka 4 a-pahana, ‘ moonstone,’ semi­ loom, 243 : -lattavd, to lay warp, 243 :
circular stone doorstep, i46- -liya,~vema, mat-weaver’s bodkin, 246.
285

Heddles, v. weaving. Hiriyal, orpiment, 164, 167, 181,215.
Helamada,cave temple in Kegalla Dist.,g6. Hittettia Vihara, nr. Matara, 268.
Helaya, woman’s cloth, worn round waist Hokusai, Japanese artist, 88.
‘ and thrown over shoulder, 34, 232. Hommaraya, leather worker, caste, 22, 54.
Hfliya, earthen pot, 220. ‘ Hondrews,’ v. handuruva.
Hematite, 190. Hone (kana Iflla), 217.
Hfrnbili-kapMva, pouch-weaver’s tool, 244. ‘Honeysuckle,’ motif in design, 96, 102,
Hsna, pi. y^i'«,‘chena,’ high or dry cultivated 261; Figs. 133, 137.
ground, 23, 26, 27, 235. Horagone Devale, Dva, key-plate. Fig.
Henda-badda, Department of Workers in 107, (ii.)
Cane, 54, 55. Horanlva, oboe, 26, 120, 186, 216: pis.
Hittda, pi. hçijdi, spoon : hendi ana, spoon XXIV., 6, XXXVII., II.
rack, 32, 139; PI. XL, 5-7. Jiora payiya, ‘hidden pocket’ of a betel bag,
Henduva, elephant goad, 295 : Pis. I., 238.
XLV., 2. Horoscopes, 52.
Henry III. and Westminster Abbey, 4. Horn, buffalo horn, boxes, 186, 187; PI.
Heppuva, any small box, brass tobacco box, XL., 15-17: combs, 187; Fig. 96; PI.
82, 91, 198, 202, 203; Figs. 11,28,123. XL., 12-14:' comb-makers’ tools and
Heraldry, Eastern origin, 85. methods, 187; Fig. 97: knife handle,
H?rimi(iya, a staff, 215. PI. XL., 18: powder horn, mounted
bows for separating warp threads, copper filigree, PI. XLIIIa, 2.
236. Horse {aSvayd), 90, 230 ; PI. XXIX., 7.
Hftfaya, short jacket worn by men or Hospitals, for all villages, 7.
women, 33, 34; Fig. i; Pis. II., XXX., Hospitality, 24, 25.
2, XXXVI., 2-5 ; pacca heftaya, brocade Huduhumpala Pansala, 266.
jacket worn by chiefs, 164, 237; PI. HI. Hulu dfva, spool for cotton, 235.
Heva vasama, military tenants, 25. Human sacrifice, 168,267; Figs. 151,152.
Hevtstya, daily music at a temple, 26: Huviuva, a grain measure, 76.
hevisi-karaya, musician, 25. Httniyan, black magic, 148, 260.
Hikka sütra, ? brahma satra, 160. Hunna, lime burner, caste, 22.
4
Himalayas, the Broceliande of India, 81, Hurika uva, a village in the C.P., 215,217.
93; symbol. Fig. 69.
Htn, small: -bsvitiya, Osbeckia octandra, 244:
çmbul-çn}biliya, Oxalis cornkulate, 200:
-guru. Acacia cæsia, 215: -dcl-gcta-lanuva,
-mal-petta, patterns of woven cloths, 234; IJama, official rest-house. Government inn,
PI. XXVIII., i: -ncgi-dangaya, do., do.-, 116,117: -raia, keeper of an i4ama, 116.
-rafava, pattern of woven cloth, 234. I4an-ge, i4ama, q.v.
Hinduism, Hindu influence on arts, customs, Idealism, Kandyan art shares with Indian
etc., 29, 70-75, 172: architecture in both the primitive idealism of all early
Ceylon, 144, 145, 146: Hindu origin decorative art, and the deliberate
of craftsmen, 63 : Sinhalese art funda­ idealism of later Indian, but the Kandyan
mentally Hindu, 183. tradition already decadent, 169-172 :
Hinge, 200,202: Figs, no, 113 (116,117, contrasted with naturalism in design,
Jaffna), 122: Pis. XIII., 3, XXXVI., 6, especially of jewellery, 211.
XLHI., I : hinged game-board, XII., 3. Idi-appan-van-gc4iya, ‘string-rice’ press,
Hiramaifaya, coconut scraper, kitchen rasp, 140; PI. XL, I.
32,140,193; Fig. 88. Intermittirende Welknranke (G.), v. ‘ branch.’
Hiripitiya, a village, 180. Ira-havda-balana kannd4iya, telescope, 58.
286

Ikirl kafuva, sea urchin spine, used by Iron {yakadd), and steel [vanaya), early use
drawing students, 65. in India, 189 : smelting in Ceylon, 191-
Images, 148-163,258,259: earliest mention 193: arecanut slicers, 195: bolts, 115,
in Mahavartisa, 5 : of gods and brahmas, 196, 198; Fig. 108; PI. XLIIIa,, 7»
8: ofthe Bodhisattva, 7, 173: ofBuddha, colouring of, 200: cubit-rule, 142:
V.
Buddha: of Ànanda,
v.
Ànanda: of damascening, 195: handles, 198; Fig.
consecration of, v. nHra mafigalyayai 112: hasp. Fig. 110: hinges, 198 ; Figs,
borrowed for consecration ceremony, no, 113 (Jaffna): key-plates, 196; Figs.
78 : carried on elephants, 40 : v. also 104-107: knives, 197: locks, 195; Fig.
Sariputra, Rapavaliya. 103: palanquin fittings, 195,206: rivets.
Imbuì gaha, ^Eriodendron anfractuosum, 94. Fig. Ill : sickles, 194; Fig. loi : slag,
Imbuì sivi, pink colour, 164. 64 : supplied to blacksmith, 76, 268 :
Impermanent materials used for images, surgical instruments, 195: tools, 141,
etc., use of and survival in Sinhalese art, 142, 187, 194, 244: writing styles, 195.
148, 252, 259. _ Irrigation, 9, 15.
Inauguration of king, 206. Isa-kadaya, bed head. Fig. 85; PI. XL, 3.
Incense burners, v. dummala kabala. Isanah, Regent of the N.E. quarter, 72.
Indajoti Unnanse,of Malvatte Pansala, 179. Ispayya, pi. ispay, mitre-shaped cap, 34,
India, craftsmen from, 58, 61, 63: essential _ 239; PI. XXX., 3.
unity of people, 18, 74: relations with Isvara, conditioned aspect of Brahman, God,
Ceylon, 1-13, 18, 21, 62, 253: v. also 170,172, 248: from the Buddhist stand­
■ . Hindu, Tamil, etc. point, a god. The names of gods are
Indian art, former magnificence and unity, taken over from Hindu mythology with­
63, 265: golden age, 162, 267: art- out much consideration of their philo­
philosophy, 123: canons of proportion, sophic significance.
j6i : brocades, etc., 237: lac, 215: 1-vaduvs (pi.), ‘arrow-makers,’ lac-workers,
pottery imported, 218: yarn imported, 54, 55, 215.
236. Ivory, 183-188; Pis. XXXV.— XLI.:
Indigo, 64, 164, 215, 236. other references;—book-covers, 52:
Inai-k^la, leaves of Phoenix zeylanica, used boxes, 207: book-button {potsakiya), 52:
for plaited mats and dishes, etc., 244. carving, 100, 133, 140: door guardians,
Indo-Portuguese style, 138, 198, 210; PI. 72: compasses, 142: handle of sickle,
XLIIIa, 3. 194: knife-handles, 156; PI. XLVIL, 3,
Indra, or áakra, chief of the gods, 72. 8; inlay, 138; PI. IX., 5: images, 30,
Indrakajalika,]ag^\tr, caste, 22. 149: lac ornament, 105, 216: shuttle,
Indrakila, rag figure used as a ‘scapegoat,’ spindle,268: style, lp)(lipatd),ig)\ throne,
72-74. 4: toothpick, 210: -turner, 54; PI. VI.,
Indriya (Siamese),=’■ s?rapsndiya^ 83 ; Fig. 14. 4: vihara model, 268.
Indus,
V.
Sindho.
Ink, 52.
4
Ira-hasda-maha-ko iya, sun and moon flag,
_ 38, 87. Jaffna, Tooth-relic captured by Tamil
Irattuva (T.),=ptirilla, q.v. kings of, 6: dye-painted kerchiefs from,
Ireland, Irish art, 107, 108, 99. 62 : do. flags, 87: cone or mango motif
Iri, line, 103 : -kondu, lines on woven cloth, on textiles, 103 : Indo-Portuguese furni­
234: -gahana kafuva, graver, scoring ture, 138, 198: European influence on
tool, 142, 187, 221. metal-work, 198 : blue dyed cotton ob­
Iriyagama Dhammadassi,a Buddhist monk, tainable, 236: metal-work showing
179. European influence. Figs. 113,116,117.
287

Jagadeka Mata, ‘The One Mother of the Jdtaka-pota, v. Pamiyapanas-jdtaka-pota.
World,’ description in Rtlpavaliya, ii2. Jaya-mangala gdthd (pi.), auspicious verses
yagalat toppiya, a kind of hat, 36, 72. recited at the close of a pirit ceremony
Jaggery (hakuru, palm sugar), wooden and ■ iix&x diya-keplma {q.v.), 39.
moulds for, 140. Jaya saka, ‘chank of victory,’ ;.a gold-
Jak {kos, Artocarpus integrifolia, L.) used as a mounted chank in the Mahâ Dévale,
yellow dye for priests’ robes, 245. Kandy, 188, 206; PI. XLIIIa, 4.
Jala kindura, merman, mermaid, 82. Jessamine {picca mala, Jasminum sambac),
Jambuddom=Dambadeijiya, q.v. offering of flowers, 5 : cultivation for the
Jamna, one of the Seven Sacred Rivers of king, 94, 95 ; Fig. 32 ; PI. XIV., 5.
India, 74. Jetavana Vihara, Anuradhapura, 5.
Janavanisaya, ‘History of Mankind,’ an Jetavanârâmaya, f a building in Kandy, 59.
anonymous work in Sinhalese, probably Jetthatissa II., a.d. 332-339, a royal crafts­
composed in the fifteenth century, man, 7, 177, 261.
describing the origin of the universe and Jewel boxes, wooden, 139.
its inhabitants, and the gradual formation Jewellery, 209-214; Pis. II., III., XXIIL,
of the various castes. List of castes, 21, XLVIII.— LI.; designs for. Fig. 131;
22: classification of craftsmen, 54: origin Pis. XIV., 5, XX., 3, XXIII. : bracelets,
of weavers, 232: importation of Indian 177, 188; PI. L., 9-19: earrings, PI.
craftsmen, 232, 254. LI., 15-18; girdles, 35; PI. L., 1-7;
Japanese peacock motif in modern Kandyan finger-rings, 210; Pis. XXIII., 8, LI.:
brass work, 202. low-country, 210; PI. XLIX, 1-3: pen­
Jara-v(s-arìnava, to restore or re-decorate dants, 211, 212 ; Fig. 130; Pis. XXIli.,
a building, 70. 6-7, XLVIII., 5, 6, 9, 10, 14-17, L., 8 :
Jataka, Jatakas, v. Jàtakaya. necklaces, 211 ; Pis. XLVIII., 1-4, 7, 8,
Jatakaya, a story of a previous incarnation II, 12, XLIX., 4-9, II, 12: representa­
of the Buddha, whilst still a Bodhisattva, tions of, as worn. Pis. II., III., XXII.,
represented at the Ruvanv?li Dagaba, XXXVI., 1-9.
second century b.c., 5, 177: represented Jinavaravaipsa, P. C., a Buddhist priest,
at the Dalada Maligava in the reign of formerly Prince Prisdang of Siam,
Narendra Siqiha, 11 : sung by women Siamese drawings by. Figs. 14, 30,45-47.
spinning, 235 : ignorance of, illustrating Jodhpur, India, lac-ornamented ivory work
aloofness of foreign rulers, 17: paintings resembling Sinhalese, 216.
of, in various viharas, 42, 43, 116, Johnston, Sir A., 232.
138, 167-169, 173, 177. Joint-family system, 32, 64.
Jatakaya, Asadisa, translated ihto Sinhalese Joris van Spilberehen, PI. XXII.
by èri Rajadhi Raja Sirnha, 13 : Bhadda Joyce, P.W., on Early Irish hospitality, 117.
&ala, quoted 121, 122: Cauda Kinnara Justice, of Elala, 3 ; administration of, by
{Sanda Kindurd), described, 81, 82 ; Fig. Parakrama Bahu I., 20, 30.
11 ; PL VII 4a : Chadanta, described, 183:
Daham Sov a [=Sasa J.), 89, 90, 180:
. K.
Guttila, 11 : Kusa, reference to a golden
image, 258: Kusanali, quoted, 121: Kabalamulla Vihara, Sab., 137.
Magamdna, 235 : Makha Deva, 31, 235 : Kacceri, Government offices, 20, 202.
Sasa, 89, 90, 180: Sattubhatta, 167: Kada, pi. kat, yoke-load, 26, 32, 233.
4
Silava, 168: Takkdriya, 82: Sutalom'a, Ka addsi kolaya, paper scale, 154.
116,«., 123,168,267: Ummagga, 11,235: ^Ka4avata, gravet, outpost, 120.
5 4 44
Vessantara, > 11, 167, described, 41, 42, Ka oika u (T.), figure used in teaching
235 ; Fig. 2 ; Pi. I. : Vidhura, ii, 35. . drawing (Tamil), 69; Fig. 10.
288

Ka^igomava Vihara, KSgalla Dist., 133. Kalpa druma, wishing tree, 98.
Ka4a-im-pota, boundary book, local Kalpanavata andinavä, to draw after one’s
geography. own (vain) imagining, 66.
Ka4u-pa-lanuva, cord supporting mat- Kalu, black, dark blue, 164, 165: -kangan,
weaver’s loom, 243. dark blue cloth, 233 : -madinava, to
Kadu-pul, ‘ sword fruit,’ motif in design, 94; blacken the writing on olas, 52.
Fig- 33 W- Kalu Hava Muhandiram Vasama, a Depart­
Kaduru gaha, 172. ment of labourers, 54.
Kaduttam-pustakam (T.), sketch or copy Kambura, goldsmith, 21, 54, 127.
book (Tamil), 69, 90, 91. Kamisiya (Port.), shirt, 32; PI. III.
Kaduva, sword, sword of State, 33. Kammälar (T.), higher craftsmen in India,
Kadgapala devatava, guardian deity, 72. caste, 54, 61-63, 78.
Kahagaha [Bixa orellana), yellow dye, 245. Kammära Brahmans, do., 54.
Kaha papa, yellow colour, 164. Kämbaranga yatura, ratchet lock, key-plate
Kahavatte, a royal village dedicated to for. Fig. 106.
Asgiriya, 14. Kammala,ioxgp, smithy, 127.
Kahapanam, golden fanam, small coin, 79. Kanaka (Siamese), flame ornament, loi ;
Kahata, plant not ascertained, 119. Figs. 45, 46.
Kahatapitlya, nr. Kandy, 39. Kana l(Ua, hone, 217.
Kahavandala Tanhankara, an incumbent of Kandy, 6, 9, ii, 20, 39, 40, 55, 115, 117,
Dambulla, 75. 119, 120, 170, 219: Art Association, 17,
Kaippu kaduru, ? catechu, 119. 89, 202, 203, 232, 240, 262; Museum,
Kaksha sOtra, armpit plumb-line, 156, 158; 115.134. 137. 140. i4S> 239, 262; Fig.
39 4
Fig. 95. ^ > Pis. IX., 4> XI., I, 3, ’ S? XII., 2,
Ka/a, measure=two angal, 112, 152. 3,4, s, XIII., I, XXV., I, 2,11, XXVI.,
Kalaha, pi. kalas, earthen vessel of any kind, 4, XXIX., 3.
221 : vase for sprays of coconut flower at Kandyan, people and Low-country, 11 :
festivals, lamp stand, etc., 25; PI.XXVI., kingdom, constitution, etc., 19 : throne,
12. 206: chiefs, PI. III.: ladies, PI. II.
Kalas-dangaya, ‘pot-meander,’ repeating Kan-henda, ear-spoon, 210.
diaper, the framework having the sec­ Kankanama, ‘kangany,’ overseer, 60.
tional outline of a kala-gediya, 107; Figs. Kanbola ptiliya, a shallow earthen pan, 220 ;
62, 132. PI. XXV., 12.
Kalagediya, nearly round water-pot, 72,220, Kannadiya, mirror, 73.
222, 226, 227, 228; Figs. 138, 139; Kanya nal, thread spun by a virgin, 72.
Pis. V., 3,XXV.,i-4, LII., 5. Kaolin, kirimfpiya, q.v., 166, 177, 178, 225,
Kalagedin^pma, dancing with new pots, 120. 226.
Kalalaya, ‘Dumbara mat,’ mat of niyanda Kapa, wooden post, 38, 129: kap-hitavima,
fibre, 89, 243; Pis. IV., XXXIV. erection of the festival tree, 25.
Kalsl-h?da, warp thread of kalalaya, 243 : Kapila, 9.
-kaiju (pi.), posts of mat-weaver’s loom, Kappàgoija Vihära, Kègalla Dist., 146.
Kap-ruka, wishing tree, 94, 98.
243-
Kalambu-niyana-katuva, chisel, 142. Kapurala, kapuva, incumbent of a devale,
Kalanaga, 5. 26, 31, 39, 45, 120, 124, 206, 209.
KalaHji, a weight, 208. Kapuvatte, Kumarihami, 44: Disäva of
Kalasthapanaya, ceremony of placing pots,. Sabaragamuva.
5 7 73 Kàraka, craftsman, n. of VHvakarma, 74.
. I- - . ^ “
Ralinga, caste, 2 : part of Eastern India, Karakola, talipot leaf for writing, 49.
6, 8.
289
u I

Karanduva, reliquary in the form of a 137; Pis. VIIa. XIV., 3, 4,7.
dâgaba, 31, 147, 165. Kendha, spouted water vessel, with lid, 203,
Karavira, unguent spot of eye, 155. 205, 206 ; copper, gem-set, from RidI
Karava, fisher, caste, 22. V., PI. XLIIIa, I : silver, from Maha
Kariya-karana-rala, bailiff of a manor, 205. Dévale, PI. XLIL, 4; used to pour water
Karma, ‘works,’ law of cause and effect, 40. in confirmation of gifts, as in Pi. I.
Kart}a sütra, ear plumb-line, 152 ; Fig. 95. Kenmura days at dévales, 26.
Kàrtikéya, son of éiva, l, 46, II2. Keppifipola, T. B., Basnayaka Nilame of
Karti mangalyaya, festival of lights, Hindu Rmbekke Dévale, no, in , 239; Figs.
Dipavali, 37, 39, 76, 133, 264. 8, 95 A.
Kartri, agent, craftsman, 74. Keppittyd (Croton aromaticus), 215: -lakada,
Karu, ‘workman,’ n. of Viivakarma, 78. stick lac from do., 167, 181, 215-217.
Kassapa, 7. Keragala, 10.
Kastanaya, sword, 36. Kssara simha, shaggy lion, lion proper, 86.
Kasyapa, 246. Kessellena, 21.
Kataragama Dévale, 1,38,76,149: DêviyO, Keta sakkiya, or sakshiya, token of grant,
=Kârtikéya, q.v. 213, 268.
Katâraya, drip line cut over a cave, 117. Key (yaturu-mudda, Lewis), 96, 196; Fig.
Kata satra, loin plumb-line, 136. 35; Pis. XLIIIa, 5, XLIV., 8.
Kathavastu Prakarana, a collection of Key-plate (müna tahaduva), 196, 200; Figs.
Buddhist stories, 92, 93. 104-107,118-121; PI. XLIIIa, 5.
Kafhina robes, spun, made, and presented to KibihimUna, lion face, occupying position of
priests in one day, 236. keystone in makara arch, 86, no; Fig.
Katiraya, sticks laid crosswise, thus, X 23; PI. XL, 5, 6.
(Clough); katuru or katiri mala, '■ katiri Ktkirindi (Kclipta erecta), leaves used in
flower,’motifindesign,94: Fig. 33 (viii). colouring iron, 64.
Kaftâdiyâ, devil-dancing priest, etc., 46,79. Killotaya, pi. killota, lime boxes, 195, 205 ;
Katu-mal-heda, crossed canes of looms, 235. pis. XLVL, 10-16.
Katuru-mala (? =kaj-tri mala), 65 ; Fig. 7; Kindura, mythical man-bird, 8, 81, 82, 113,
(=.? katiri mala), v. katiraya. 230; Figs. 10, ii; Jatakaya, 81, 168. ■
Kafuva, any sharp tool, as a chisel, awl, 142: King, relations to people, and position as
pol-katuva, coconut-shell, q.v, monarch, 13, 14, 15, 19, 75, 77, 92:
Kava-katuva, compasses, 142. inauguration ceremonies, 209 : dress, v.
Kaverl, Cauvery, one of the seven sacred dress: letters, 53, 264: presents from,
rivers of India, 74. and offerings to temples, 75, 213; paints
Kavi-pada, verse, 246. eyes of images, 73 : patronage of crafts,
Kebella [Aporosa Lindleyana), 244. 70, 75, 206, 207 : ‘king’s towns,’ v.
Keccagama, amulet worn on upper arm, 210; gabaddgama.
Pl.XLIX., 13. King-post roof, I2I, 130.
Kegalla, ii7, 196, 218: a Dist. of Sabara- Kinigama, 219.
gamuva, described by H. C. P. Bell, in Kinissa, pi. kinisi, water ladle, dipper, 32,
an archæological ‘Report on the Kegalla 116, 139, 184, 221: silver and ivory
District,’/izrj/>w. example at S. Kensington, 184 ; PI.
Kehelvala, Vihara, C.P., 78. XLL, 3.
Kekulu mala, flower in bud, 94. Kinnara (P.), f. kindura.
Kfkuna oil, oil of Canarium zeylankum, 164. Kinnaraya, mat-weaver, caste, 22, 54: work
Kelaijiya, a Vihara (and former city) nr. of, 243, 244; Pis. III., XXXIV.; craft-
Colombo, 43, 81, 94, 95, 97, 99, 102, song, 246.
164, 168,218,221,222,226; Figs. 42, Kiravella, a village, 180.
290

Kiribat-mul, root of Knoxia platycarpa, 245. Koftgari (H.), a form of damascening, 200.
Kiri-itirima, v. k.-uturana-mangalyaya. Kola, leaf: -Vfla, ‘branch’ or ‘vine’ motif
Kirimetiya, ‘ milk-clay,’ kaolin, 166. or pattern, 217: koladktiya, cheetah, 250.
'Kiri-uturarfa-mafigalyaya, ceremony of boil­ Kolaka, measure=;two mgal, 113, 152.
ing milk at a devale after New Year, 220, Kolomba Nayide, n. of a craftsman, 58.
222; earthen vessel used, PI. XXVI., 7. Kolomba rafava, pattern of grass mats. Fig.
Kiri Okkuva, n. of an iron smelter, 190. 143 -
Kirti Sri Raja Sirfiha, Tamil king in Kandy, Kolontbuva, stool, shaped log, 32, 137, 140,
A.D. 1747-1780, patron of religion and 244; Pis. X., 2, XI., 4.
arts, 12, 13, 77, 164: had Tooth Relic Kolon, mythical tree, 94.
borne in perahfra^ 39: restored Dajada Kolonnava, a part of Sabaragamuva.
Maligava, 48: gifts to temples, 48: gem Komio, Empress of Japan, 148.
said to have been set in his toe-nail, 60 : Ksn, Schlekheria trijuga, 215: -laka^a, lac
painted eyes of image at Gangarama, 73; insect, Tachardia albhzice. Green, do.
had Malvatte Pansala built, 119: gave ' Konta-liya, v. uttara pata.
chair to Asgiriya pohoya-ge, 137: built Konteruva, support for palanquin, 195.
Galmaduva Vihara, 146: had images Koraha, pi. koras, earthen vessel with wide
made at Gangarama and Ridi Vihara, mouth, 221, 222, 231; PI. XXV., 7-9.
148: picture at Do^antale, 169: restored Korakaha, Memecylon umbellatum, dye-stuff,
Ridi Vihara, 173: gave ivory model of a 243-245-.
vihara to Hittetia Vihara, 268. Koralaya, district, or officer in charge of a
Kitchen furniture, 139, 140. district subordinate to a disavanaya, 20.
'"'Kitul {Caryota urens), 220: -pent, 220: Kovi, crucible for steel, PI. LIIL, 6.
treacle, 119. juice oi]ak,Artocarpm integrifolius,
195
Knives, 186, 194, j 268; PI. XLVII., 164.
3
1-9. Kjsala-bimba-varitandva,^'Rhtory ofKosala’s
Knop and flower, motif in design, 97, 102, image (of Buddha),’ an uncanonical
109; Fig. 50; PI. XXIX., 7. Buddhist scripture recited at mtra mafi-
Knop, knot, motif in design, 109: knot- galyaya,7i,2S9-
• work,
V.
plait. Kosvatte Hitaranayide, n. of a craftsman,
Knox, Robert, prisoner in Ceylon for twenty 168.
years, on Dutch, 11: on Sinhalese charac­ Kofa-haluva, cloth worn by a girl at attain­
ter, 19, 36, 37: ‘hondrews,’ 21, 60: on ment of puberty, perquisite of the family
castes, 22: easy life of temple tenants, 23: washerman, 26.
agriculture, 28-30: on dress, 33, 34, 35: Kofagepitiya, a village in the C.P., 180,219.
on women, 35: (Xiperahera, 39: on king’s Kotalaya, water vessel with spout, but no
letters, 53: smith’s work for veddas, 57: lid (distinction from kettbliyd), 139, 203,
on craftsmen, 60, 61, 64, 70, 263, 265: 221,222,223; PL XXV., 8.
on king’s florists, 94: architecture, 114- Kofiya maha kodiya, leopard flag, 38.
116: on boxes, 138: on glue, 182: iron­ Kotfa kiira, warp rod of mat-weaver’s loom,
smelting, 190: on water-clocks, 205: on 243: awy«,pillowcase, 233, 234.
palanquins, 206: royal patronage of Artificer’s Department, 54,55,
crafts, 207: royal gifts, 213: pottery, 76, 144, 193, 215: officers of, viz.
220: cotton trade, 235: on caps, 34,239; Nilame, Vidane, Hangidiya, etc., 19, 55.
on royal manors, 263: rent in kind, 266. Kotte {kottaya, a fort), former capital, nr.
Kobeyiya, dove, 89. Colombo, 9, I o, 57.
Koii-tuvakku-etimaha-ko4iya, ‘ gun-flag,’ 3 8: Ksmd makul, hydro-magnesite, v. makul.
k.-t. vasama. Artillery Department, 54. Kovila, temple of a Hindu or local deity,
Koiiya, flag: district flags, 38. 127, 144,213.
u 2 291

Kovulla, pi. kovulu,=kokila, Indian cuckoo,
89, 172.
4
Krishija, Hindu God, 91. Lac (laka d), resinous product of the lac
Kshattriya, caste, 21. insect, 215-217: as a plain varnish, 167:
Kshetra~pala, guardian of threshold, 72. preparation, colouring and uses'of, 215-
4
Ku u, small: -miris, Toddalia aculeata, 192: 217: not to be confused with Idcquer as
curry-stone, 147. applied in Japan, 215: -inlaid ivory, 186;
Kukula, pi, kukulu, cock, 89. Pis. XXXVL, 8, XXXVII., I, 6-9, 11;
Kulaya, c\z.n, 128. -inlaid shell, 188; PL XLL, i: patterns
Kulla, winnow, 229. of lac-work, 106,217; Figs. 132 133;
Kulu-ge4iya, sledge-hammer, 142. PL XXVII.
KumSra enduma, ‘prince’s costume,’ 60, 72. Lace, edging of needle-lace, 240 ; PL
Kumbakdraya, kumbald, potter, 22, 25, 127. XXVIII., 2, 3.
Kumbuk, Terminalia glabra, 65. Lacquered, i.e., covered with lac by
KuQjbukgama, 129. methods described in Ch. XII., book-
Kumbura, rice-field, 23. covers, 52: bench legs, 49, 186: box,
Kundaliya, sign of full stop in writing, 179; PL XIII., 3: cane, 20: railings, 141 :
Fig. 3; PI. XX., I. handles of tools, 142 : cresset handles,
Kuij 4 asale, nr. Kandy, Vihara and pansala, 204: staves, 106, 195, 216; Figs. 132,
etc., II, 119, 134, 145, 219, 220: -Raja 133; PL XXVII., I.
4 4
=Narendra Sirpha, q.v.\ bed from pan­ Lac-work {Iaka a-ve a), 215-217 : -workers,
sala, PI. IX., 7, chatty. Fig. 138 (d); PL i-va4uvo, 54, 55,215: lacquered cane, 20:
XXV., 5. lac as a varnish, 167 : lacquered objects
Kunii rakkan, kunji rakkan, chip-carved illustrated. Figs. 132, 133; Pis. IX., 5,
diaper, so-called, 107; Fig. 63. (legs of chair), XIII., 3, XXVII.: lac-
Kunkuma, lime plaster, 5. inlaid, XXVI., 8, XXVII., 6-9, XLL, I.
4
Kuragarpa, 180. Lac-worker, see l-va uva: tools, methods,
4
Kurakkan, ‘millet,’ ^Eleusine coracana, 32: 216: of Angalma uva, Hapuvida, Huri-
kftta, sickle, 194 ; PI. XLV., 13 : gala, kaijuva, Pallekanda, etc., 215.
quern or hand-mill, 147. Laha, a measure of grain, 140.
KurippU (T.), 69; Fig. 10 (=9a). Lakaya, span, measure of length, used for
Kurulla, pi. kurulu, bird: -shaped block of cloth, 233.
loom, 235 : nimun-, handle of plough, Lakshana, mark, tech, perfection, 155.
89 : kurulu bendi malaya, necklace with Lakshmaija, half brother of Rama, known
bird pendant, see next: -padakkama, bird in Ceylon as Saman DeviyO, entrusted
pendant, 211, 212; Fig. 130; Pis. II., with the charge of Ceylon and especially
L., 8 : -kalalaya, Dumbara mat with of Adam’s Peak (Samanaja), 46: see
birds, 244; PI. XXXIV.: v. also bird. Saman Deviyo.
Kurundugala, stone, garnet or corundum, Lakshmi, see èri.
used as emery, 217. Lakunu kald, ‘ having marked the outlines ’
Kurunegala, cap. of N.W. Prov. Ceylon, 9, of a design, 166 : lakutiu karanavi, to
10: -vistaraya, history of, 144. mark the outlines of a design, 67.
Kuruniya, measure of grain, 140. Lalata stura, one of the plumb-lines used in
Ksruve, Elephant Department, 54. making images, 160.
Kusa grass, 121. Lalique, modern French jeweller, 211.
Kusaldna, cup, PI. XLIL, 5. Lamba-k(taya, plumb-line, 141 ; -tafuva,
'Kmèryì, yakkhini consort of Vijaya, 2. frame for suspension of plumb-lines, 152,
Kuvera, Hindu God, 8. 157;^Figs. 94,95.
Lamp {pana), for coconut oil, metal, 32,
292

204; Fig. 126: earthen, 223: Lensum (Port.), kerchief, 234.
-stands, pan-kanda, 223 : PL XXVI., 9, Lethaby, W. R., 4, 56.
10, II. Letters, (epistles), royal and common, 52,
Lamp-black, 52, 164. 264: alphabet, 49, 230.
Land tenure, feudal, 7, 22, 23, 24-30, 54 Levke Vihara, 133.
seq., 76, 263 : in particular of various Lewis, Hon. J. P., G.A. of C.P., 132, 134,
craftsmen, blacksmiths, 24, 193, 194, 145, 266.
263, goldsmiths, 25, 54 seq., 76, Liesching, — , 20, 263.
musicians, 25, 26, 188, potters, 25, Lig-gal, three stones of hearth, 32, 222.
tailors, 237, washermen, 26, 263: v. also Lihiniya, a bird, 230.
panguva, ba^a-ve^Hla. Ltkeliya, a kind of morris-dancing, 221.
Lanka,=Ceylon. Lilavatl, daughter of Bhaskaracarya, 205.
Lanka-tilaka,‘Brow-spot of Ceylon,’temple Lime, ingredient of chew: -boxes, v.
built by Parakrama Bahu, 8 : -Vihara, a kill otaya.
temple in Uda Nuvara, C.P., exterior, Linipitiya, a village in the C.P., 180.
PI. VII., i: interior, PI. VIIIa: cost of Lion, sinihaya, sintha. Sin. art, 86-88, 171,
fourteenth century building, 56: bird­ 173, 230: Dutch lion, lion in Rapavaliya,
shaped lamp, 89, 204; Fig. 12b: pansala, kinds of lions, etc., 86, 87 ; representa­
119: images, 160: roof of porch, tions, Fig. 22 ; Pis. XIV., 7, XXIX., 7,
262. XLV., 3 ; lion-face, ^kibihi’ q.v.; v. also
4
Lantern, {pan-ku uvd): metal, PI. XLIV., nara simha,gaja simba, yalt (T.)
7: earthen, 223; PI. XXVI., 8. Upa, earthen hearth, 222.
Lanuva, cord, string: lanu-dangaya, design, Ll-palana-katuva, wedge, 142.
248: lanu-geta, plait design, 107, 217, Liya, woman, vine, creeper, branch:
245, 248 ; Fig. 143 (i): Pis. XL, 6, 7, -kisdura, V. kindura: ~pata, -pota, orna­
XXVIII., I, 3, XXIX., 4, XXXIII., 5. ment so-called, 65, 96, 100, loi, 102,
LatS kinnara, kindura, v. kiudura. 106, 129, 184, 185, 205; Figs. 44, 45;
Laid, woman, creeper, vine, ‘branch’: v. Pis. XL, 2, XXXVIIL, 8, XLL, 3:
.. also nari-lata, liya-v^la. -torai}a, 106: -v(la,vmt,creeper,‘branch,’
Lathe, 141, 147, 187; PL VI., 4, 5. q.v.
Lawrie, Sir A. C., 12,14,15,20,23,31,35, Liyana-kanda, essential part of lathe, 141,
36, 44,46,48, 56, 58, 59, 62,70, 75, 76, 187: -va4uva, turner, 54, 55,186.
77,78, 90, 94, 119, 120, 148, 149, 188, Locks, 195, 202; Figs. 103,109,122 (iv.):
192. i93> 194» 205, 207, 212, 213, 214, V. also yatura.
219,238,264. Lohapasada, Bra2en Palace, 5.
4
Lead, iyam, ingredient of alloy, 205: pencils, Loka a, bell metal or bronze, q.v.
69,165. Lokaruva, founder, brazier, 25, 200, 203;
Leather, book-bindings, 179; PL LIL, i: Pl.V.,6,7.
-workers, v. sommarayO. Loku, large: -appalla, earthen dish, 220:
hekama, kkam-mahatmayH, secretary, head -niyana, chisel, -pullorama, rasp, V(ya,
of a department, 38, 207, 209, 180: adze, 142.
-mitiya, great record, archives containing Loom, cotton weavers’ (aluvd), 234; Pis.
record of land holdings and services, 24, VI. , I, 2, XXIX., I, 2: mat-weavers’,
243,246; PL IV.
38-
Lekhanfya, pen, essential part of a writing Lotus (nelum-mala, piyuma), motif in design,
style, 208. 95-97; Figs. 34-37, 138, 139, 147; Pis.
Le Mesurier, C. J. R., 6, 223. XIV., 8, XVlII.: pictorial representa­
Lenagala, 165. tion, PL I.: as a survival, 250, 251: v.
75
Lenavela, « also pala-peti.
3
U 293

Low-country, Ceylon with exception of the Mahd-bhinishkramaijaya, the ‘Great Re­
Kandyan provinces, beginning of the nunciation’ (of the Buddha), sung by
distinction, ii; crime, 22: dress, 35: women whilst spinning, 235.
grass weaving, Fig. 144: jewellery, 210. Mahabodhi, temple at Buddha Gaya, a
Buddhist site in India, 258.
Maha Brahma, represented at Ruvanvçli
M.
Dagaba, second century b.c., 5.
Ma¡}a-hiriyal, lump orpiment, 164. Maha Demaja Saya, a building at Polon-
Madama, rest-house, dak-bungalow main­ naruva, 178.
tained by the State, 116; -rala, the Maha Devale, see Maha Vishnu Devale,
keeper of such a rest-house, ib. Kandy.
Madanvala, a village in the C.P., yB : M. Maha gabadava, royal store-house, 116:
Unnanse, a priest, tb. supply of earthen vessels for, in Kandy,
Madafiya {Adanantherapavonta, L.), plant of 219.
which the seeds are used as weights by Mahagoda, a village in the Kegalla District,
goldsmiths, 208. Sab., 58.
Madava, spool for reeling cotton, 235; Fig. Maha-kada, pi. -kat, a yoke-load of raw pro­
140. visions, chiefly vegetables and coconut
Maduva, an open shelter or hall: at . oil, given regularly once a month to the
Mideniya, built by Devendrá Mulacariya, proprietor of a village, by the gam-vasam
59 ; see also bat}a maduva. and nila-vasam tenants, 24, 26.
Maduvanvela, a village in Kolonna Korale, Maha Kasyapa, a priest of Dambulla gal-
Sab., valavva at, 115 : vihara, 118 ; key- vihara, 151.
plate of vihara. Fig. 121. Maha-kodiya, great flag of a Disavanaya: list
Madder, 236. of these, 38.
Maddhyama, of medium size, 154. Maha lekam-mipya. Great Record, borne in
Maddhya sütra, medial plumb-line, 156-159; the perahera at Kandy, 38.
Fig- 95 - Maha mal-petta, a pattern of woven cloths,
Madduma Nayide, a craftsman who served 234; PI. XXVIII., I (ii).
Vimala Dharma Stlrya II., 58; his grand­ Maha-mangala sutta (P.), recited at a Nêtra
son, ib. Pinkama, 174.
Madige, Pack-bull Department, 54. Mahâmsgha,tht park at Anurâdhapura, 2,3.
Madura, in S. India, Vijaya obtains a consort Mahanirudifa-tantra, a Hindu scripture, on
from, and 1000 craftsmen sent in her charity, 116.
retinue, 2. Maha perahçra, the last five days of the
Magadha, or Bihar, a kingdom of Northern perahçra in Kandy, 39.
India, 600-360 B.C., 2. Maha-purusha, ‘ Great-man,’ an epithet of
Magampattuva, a district in the Southern Buddha, alluding to his supposed colossal
Province, 3. stature, 153.
Magha, a Tamil general, 8. Maha-purusha-lakshatfa, 32 superior beauties
Magic, books of, 52: sympathetic, 221. or teches of the Buddha, such as smooth
Magnesite (raa¿a/), used as white paint, 164. skin, long tongue, lion’s strength, etc.,
Maguíkapa, auspicious or ceremonial pillar, 259.
121, 125, 126. Mahara-niyangama, a village probably in
Maha (S. and P. maha), great. the C.P., 180.
Mahabharata, one of the two great Indian Mahârâja Vihârâ, the chief cave temple at
epics, I, 78, 162, 177, 257: paintings in Damhulla, 75, 263.
a temple near Sitavaka mentioned in the Maha a pattern of woven cloths, 234.
Sevul Sandeáaya, 173. Mahari, mythical tree of Purvavideha, 94.
294

Maha Satnmata, name of the first king of by Vijaya Bahu in the thirteenth century,
the Surya race, mythical first king of not now remaining, 174.
Ceylon, 79, 246, 247. Maha Vishnu Devale, Kandy, origin of
Maha-thupa, ‘ great stupa,’ viz. the Ruvan- perahfra, 6: gifts by Rajadhi Raja Siipha,
veli Dagaba, 6. 13, 188: names of Basnayaka Nilame-
Mahavalatenna, S. D., 118, 229. varu, 14,180 : annual revenue, 27: pera-
Mahavalatenna, near Balangoda, Sab., key- hera,2^,Z9‘ paintingon wall, 84: chests
plate from. Fig. 107, I; brass handle in, 138: Klgamz sannasa, 186,207: jaya
from. Fig. 124: brass founders’ work­ saka, 188: palanquin with damascened
shop, PI. V. fittings, 195, 206; Fig. 128: inaugura­
Mahavanisaya, ‘The Great Chronicle,’ the tion ceremony of a king, 209 : embroidered
history of Ceylon, ‘composed equally for sSsata, 237; PI. XLI., 2.
the amazement and delight of good men,’ Mahena Galladda, a craftsman, 264.
I, z: compiled, 2, 7: building of the Mahikantava, Mihikata, Earth Goddesses,
Ruvanveli Dagaba by Duttha GamanI, 43, 168, 248.
3-6: JetthatissaII.,Buddhadasa,Kassapa, Mahinda, son or brother of Asoka, apostle
Sigiriya, 7: sources, 7: Parakrama Bahu of Buddhism in Ceylon, 2, 3.
I., 8: Tamil ravages, 8: message of Para­ Mahinda V., a weak king in the eleventh
krama Bahu to his son regarding the century, 8.
restoration of Polonnaruva, 9: bird­ Mahivangama, town and shrine, 173.
shaped houses, 9 : buildings of Narendra Maitrl Bodhisattva (Metteiya Bodhisatta,
Sirpha, ii, 12; princes ‘one with the P.), ‘The Friendly One,’ the next
religion and the people,’ 13 : craftsmen Buddha, representations of, 42,148,168,
in perahfra, 38 : gifts to craftsmen, 56 : 173 : identified with Natha Deviyo, 46.
painting of eyes of images by the king, Makara, a mythical animal, description in
72: painting on cloth, 72, 73 : read at Rupavaliya, flag of Ananga, sign of the
a nltra pinkama, 77 : Vi^vakarma men­ zodiac, distinct from kibihi, etc., 84 :
tioned, 79, 79: decorated theatre of mentioned in Gania Devi Hella, 172 : in
Parakrama Bahu I., 98: use of vermilion, jewellery, 211: illustrated. Fig. 17:
III: wall of the bs-maluva in Kandy, like Early Indian form at Barahat, Fig. 18.
a string of pearls adorning the neck of a Makara-malaya, ‘ makara-garland,’ a kind of
fair woman, 119: bridges, 134, 136: necklace, 84, 211 ; PI. XLIX., r i.
stone statue of Buddha at GaUgarama, Makara-toralia, ‘makara-arch,’ 84: shrine
148: '■ trivanka' images, 160; epic of for an image, 141 : on ‘moonstone’ at
Duttha GamanI, 162: out-of-door rock Beligala, 145 : set over images, 150; at
paintings at Ridl Vihara, 165: art and Lankatilaka, PI. VIIIa: well drawn at
craft and civic grandeur, 172-176 : Ridl K?laijiya, 168 : degenerate use on ivory
Vihara, account of work at, 173, 174: casket, 186; mentioned in pottery craft
painted vases, 177: ivory-wrought song, 230 : origin of, 84, 253.
pavilion of Parakrama Bahu I., 184: Makkama, 247.
royal presents, 213 : jewellery and gold Makul, called also kova makul, term loosely
plate, 214: aborigines spinning, 232: applied to any white gritty clay, but
giving of kathina robes, 236 : mentioned, properly hydro-magnesite obtained in a
37, 258, 262. cave near Maturata, used as a white paint,
Mahavasala, ‘Great Gate,’ i.e. the palace, 164, 166 : mentioned in potter’s song,
court, 78. 231 : see also Davy, ‘Travels in Ceylon,’
Mahaveli Ganga, largest river in Ceylon, pp. 27, 251.
39 - Makul gal-lena, the cave near Maturala,
Maha Vihara, a Temple of the Tooth built whence makul is obtained.
u 4 295

37 4
Mala, pi. mal, flower, pattern. annual festivals, " o: see also Avurudu,
MdlákarayS (pi.), ‘inferior florists or gar­ Kiri-itirlma, Perahera, Karti, Alutsal,
deners, flower sellers, 22, 127; supplied Ndnamura, Nitra mangalyaya.
the king with jessamine flowers, 94. Mango, pattern, 103; Fig. 51: emblem
Malaya, a garland, necklace, motif in from a Pattini Dévale, PI. XLIII., 6 :
design, 102 : see also garland. decorative painting of a tree. Fig. 41.
Malays, i. Mangul lakunu, the 216 auspicious marks on
Malay influence on Sinhalese art, 106, 255. the soles of Buddha’s two feet, the list of,
Maidive Islands, a dependency of Ceylon in a school book, 50, no: kindura, 81:
the Indian Ocean, lac-work of, 215. makara,%â^\ cobra, fish, 88; peacock, 89:
Mal-gaha, ‘flower-tree,’ tree of life, etc., elephant, 90; svastika, 106: hieroglyphic
ornament on royal hat, 32-34; PI. III.: character, 169, 170: examples of, illus­
as a motif in design, 97,98,244; Fig. 40: trated, Fig. 69.
see also tree. Mâniyangama Vihara, out-of-door paint­
Maligava, a palace ; the Dajada Maligava, ings, 165 : a copper-gilt patra given by
Temple of the Tooth, q.v. Narëndra Sirpha, 206,
Malla, a bag or basket, v. bulat-malla. Man-kaifuva, post supporting warp, 235.
Mal-petta, pi. -peti, ‘ flower-petal,’ ‘ corolla,’ Manjadi, a weight, 64, 208.
name of a pattern on woven cloths and Mannhardt, W., 94.
mats, 234, 237; Fig. 143; PI. XXVIII. Manors, royal, ecclesiastical, private, 27 ;
Mal-tahaiuva, a handle-rose. • manorial organization, 30, 60, 218, 263.
Mal-tatuva, an altar or shelf for flower Mante, a short cape attached to a jacket,
offerings, 137. 32-34: Fig. I ; Pis. XXII., XXXVI, 1,4.
Ma\uva, yard, garth ; in Kandy, encroach­ Mantra, sacred or auspicious verse, charms,
ments upon, 12 : weeded by tenants, 76. 61; \i's,&A.z\.nHramangalyaya,jq,,'y\.
Malvatte Pansala, one of the two great Manu, a son of Viivakarma, 63.
monasteries in Kandy, 6, 119, 134, 179, Manushya-padaya, ‘human quarter,’ the
196,262: z^t%ts,vcipohoya-ge, 138: wood second division of a building site, 159.
and metal work, illustrated. Figs. 105, Manuviravikrama Dêvasurêndra, Badal
107,108,112,118-120; PI. IX., 2. 3. Muhandirama, grandfather of Devasu-
Mampitiya Bapdaras,an aristocratic family, rëndra Muhandiram {q.v.), drew tiringi
33 - . talaya, red and yellow, in author’s collec­
Man, in decorative art, 67, 90-92, 266 ; tion: V. also Fmbekke.
Figs. 28, 29, 31 ; PI. XLI., 3. Mapanavatura, a village in the C.P., 119,
Manaduva, a port in Ceylon, 58. 180.
Mandalavalli Nayide, title bestowed by Mara, Maraya, chief of demons, the great
Bhuvaneka Bahu on an Indian craftsman, enemy of Buddha, a personification of
58. temptation, represented as attacking
Mañgalagama, a village in the Kegalla Buddha with innumerable hosts of
District, Sab., granted to Mandalavalli demons, immediately previous to his
Nayide and possessed by his descendants, attainment of Buddhahood, 5, 8, 42, 43:
57, 58 : craftsmen of, and their work, temptation of Buddha by the daughters
204, 209, 211, 213; Figs. 4, 131; Pis. of Mara, PI. XVIII.
XX., 3, XXIII.: ambalamazi, 116, 130; Mara yuddhaya, Mara’s battle, the contest
Fig. 76; PI. VIL, 3. above referred to, represented in art, 43,
Mañgalika, an auspicious emblem, 4 ; see 168, 171-173,249; PI. XIV., 2: verses
also afamagala. sung by women spinning, 235.
Mangalyaya, a festival or wedding; the four Maruvaliya, a village, 180.
296

Maskell, Alfred, Sinhalese art essentially toration by Kirti ári Raja Siipha, 56.
Hindu, 183,251; Sinhalese ivories, 183, The sannasa, quoted by Lawrie, is of
184. much interest.
Masks, V. Gara-yakshaya costume. Medavasala, see Meda Váhala.
Masons|v. gal-vaiuvB. Medical relief, 7.
Mátale, a town and district in the C.P.; MedivakaMinuvangomuva, a village in the
Maha Disave kaia-im-pota, 207: lac- C.P., 36.
work, 215. Megasthenes on slavery in India, 22: on
Matara, a town on the S.W. coast of Ceylon, metals in use in India, 189.
ivory inlaid boxes, 138,216; ‘diamonds’ Memory verses,—formation of letters, 50:
(white zircons), 210: victory of the folding of olas, 52 : tieing of books, 52 :
Dutch at, 213: lac-inlaid ivory, 216: preparation of vadi, 64: in the Dipa-
design on pottery. Fig. 137, E. vartisa, 162: proportions of writing style,
Matgomuva, a village, 180. 208: see also Rüpávaliya, Striputra,
Matra, a measure of length, one angala, q.v., Vaijayantaya, etc.
113. 152- Meijik Pála, queen of the mythical king
Matsya, fish, especially the fish-avatar of Maha Sammata, 246.
Vishiju, 88. Merit, acquired religious, 13 : shared with
Mattam psruva, set square, a carpenter’s others, 44,78.
tool, 142. Mermaid, see jala-kiudura.
Mattress, of rope or rattan, (cane), 136. Metal-work, 194-208.
Maturata, a village in the C.P., 117: mag­ Metí, clay, potters’ clay; -alia, potter’s bat
nesite from, 164,166. or mallet, 230: -pahan, -pan, earthen
Mats, grass and fibre, 243-245. lamps, 39,223: -pandama, earthen cresset,
Mavatura, a village in the C.P., 180. 223.
Mavela, a village in the C.P., 180. Ml [Bassia longifolia, L.), 12 5.
Mav-urumaya, inheritance in the female Mica and talipot work, 246 ; PI. LII., 3.
line, 58. Mideijiya, a village in the C.P., 59.
Maya, a son of Viávakarma, 63. Mihikata=Mahikántáva, q.v.
Máyádunné, king at Sltavaka in the six­ Mihintale, a hill near Anurádhapura, scene
teenth century, 11. of Mahinda’s conversion of Dévánam
Mayamataya^ a work treating of building Piyatissa.
sites, ceremonies, etc., 38, 54, 120-128: Milinda-pralnaya, ‘Questions of King
translated extracts, 124-128. Milinda,’ a Buddhist book, 77.
Mayá Rata, one of the ‘ tri-Sinhala,’ three Milla [Fitex altissima, L.), 181.
divisions of Ceylon, 9. Minuvan {Cyperus sp.), a grass used by mat-
May-pole, v. ^hala-gaha, July-tree. weavers, mentioned in a song, 247.
Mayura, peacock, q.v. Mirisavetiya Dágaba, a monument at Anu­
Measurements, units of, used by imagers, rádhapura, built by Duttha GámanI, 3.
152: padaya, cubit, 126: cubit, 142: Miris-gala, a stone for grinding curry-stufFs,
carpenter’s measure, 142: see also canon, 32-
4
M?dagofia Devale, Kegalla Dist., Sab., 84, Miri-v? i-sangala, golden shoes of State, 33:
145. moulds for, 204; PI. XLV., i.
Meda Pansala, Middle Pansala, part of the Mirror, used in mtra mañgalya ceremony,
Malvatte Pansala, Kandy, 179. 73 . 74 -
Meda Váhala, Middle Palace, part of the Mirupe, a village in the C.P^ 117.
palace in Kandy, 115,180. Mitiriyana, ordinary or ‘short’ cubit, about
Medavala Vihara, in the C.P., cost of res­ seventeen English inches, 142.
297

Mitiya, hammer, 142. tavalam merchants, 29: Gopala Moors,
Miyanadeijiya Lekama of Degaldoruva, 35. physicians, 195: in India, 162, 163:
Modder, F. H., on weights and measures, influence on Sinhalese art and culture,—
142: on Yapahuva, 145: on Damba- trousers worn by king and upper classes,
deijiya, 174; on Kandyan wells, 223. 32, etc.; ‘mango pattern,’ 103; crescent,
Mogallâna, half brother of Kassapa, 7. PI. XLVIII., 5; very limited extent, 254.
Mogallana, disciple of Buddha, PI. XIX. Muhandirama, rank next to a Mudaliyar.
Molligoda sannasa, 207. Muhandirama, Dëvasurêndra, see Devasu-
Motfara, peacock, q.v. rêndra Muhandirama.
Monasteries, mepansala, Asgiriya,Malvatte. Muhandiram-vasama, or heva-vamma,
Money, little used, 28. soldiers and guards, 54 : also felled and
Monier-Williams, Sir M., on the meaning worked timber, 55.
of kinnara, 81. Mukha, face, unit of artistic canon, 112,
Monolithic pillars, 145, 167. 152, 153, 161; Fig. 95.
Moon {handa), see sun and moon. Mukha sütra, ‘ mouth plumb-line,’ 158,159;
Moonstone, stone doorstep {handa-kada- Fig- 95 -
pahand), 114, 145, 146, 168. Mul-acariya, foreman craftsman, 55, 143 :
Moormen, I, 29: see also Muhammadans. blacksmith, 55.
Moragammana, a village in the C.P., 120, Mulgama, a village in the C.P., 180.
180. Mulut(n-ge, mult(ti-ge, kitchen of a dévale,
Morapaya Vihara, magic power of golden 120: iron utensils for, 76; cloths [piru-
image, 71. •vafa) for, 238.
Moratota Dhammakhanda, Maha Nâyaka Münamala {Mimusops Ekngi, L.), 90.
(High Priest) of Malvatte, 77, 168. Mona-tahaduva,ksy-plztt, 196, 200; Figs.
Morris, William, quoted, 19, 48, 68, 169. 104-107, 118-121.
Mottaik karukku (T-), 65. Mura avudha, arms of the guard, 24: pro­
Mottak karuppuva, a drawing exercise, and cessional spear or lance, 194.
type of ornament, 65. Mura-ge, guard-house, 120.
Mottuvela, a village in the C.P., 58. Mura-kârayâ, a guard, watchman, service of
Moulds, clay, for casting, 203 : bronze, for the Atapattu-vasama tenants, 24: dress,
repoussé metal-work, 214, 208: wood, 34, 233; PI. V., 10.
for sweetmeats, jaggery, etc,, 139, 255: Murricciya, rivet of a handle-rose.
for tiles, 224. Musaeus Buddhist School, decadent archi­
Mfiga, deer, 89 : on Dumbara mat, PI. tecture of new vihara, 132.
XXXIV.: any wild animal, 87, Music, Parakrama Baku’s love of, 8 :
Mfigendra, lord of beasts, lion, 87. neglected in modern education, 16:
Mucalinda, the Nâga, who sheltered the tenants providing, 25, 26, 188 ; agricul­
Buddha with his hood during the sixth tural songs, 31 ; the five instruments,
week of the sat-satiya, q.v., 88 ; PI. XVIII. 26, 175, 176; spinning songs, 235.*
Mudaliyar, a title (properly signifying Muttettuva, proprietor’s home-field, culti­
Revenue OfBcer of à Korale, but often vated for him by the tenants of the village,
honorary), 150. 24, 26, 28.
Mudali peruva, chiefs, govi-vamsa aris­ Muttiya, pi. mutfi, a chatty, earthen pot;
tocracy, 21. used in kalasthapanaya, 72 : described,
Mudum mçsma, ‘back-bone stitch’ in em­ 220: ornamented, 227: illustrated. Fig.
broidery, 241 ; Fig. 141,4. 138, d ; Pis. V., I, 2, 3, XXV., 5: see
Mug {pukuruva), earthen, 222. also uga-mutfiya, fmbul-muttiya.
Muhammadans in Ceylon, of Tamil origin, Mutu Coomaraswamy, Sir, v. Coomara-
I, 29: tenants of Buddhist temples, swamy. Sir Mutu.
298

Mutu-dfla, pearl net, motif in design, Nari-lata-vfla, woman-creeper, woman-
especially carved on wooden or stone branch, 92-94, 133, 168, 187, 230;
pillars, 129, 145. Figs. 26 (b), 29, 31 ; Pis. XXXVIII., 3,
Mutu kuiaya, ‘ pearl umbrella,’ pearl-fringed XXXIX., 3, XL., 13, XLVIIL, 10.
white umbrella, emblem of royalty. State Narissa yatura, lit. ‘man-head lock,’ bar-
umbrella, 24, 33 ; Pis. I., XXII. lock characteristic of Kandyan doors,
Mykenean vases, with early forms oiWellen- 195; Fig. 103; PL XLIIIa, 7. The
ranke or branch design, 259. heads in all cases are, however, lion-heads.
■ Narmada, Nerbudda, one of the Seven
Sacred Rivers of India, 74.
Natana pañguva, holding of a tenant who
must provide dancers at a devale, 220.
N.
Natha, a god: Natha Deviyo, Deva, some­
Naiava, shuttle, 234. times identified with Maitri Buddha, 46,
Nagaha, Messua ferrea, 47, 230. 148, 173.
Naga, cobra, q.v.-. mythical beings, half Natha Devale, Kandy, 12: royal inaugura­
human, half cobra, 126, 144: -bandha, tion ceremonies, 206, 209: New Year
cobra hood or knop, stop of a chamfer, ceremonies, 220.
89,129; Fig. 74, c: -i&sgayiZ, design of Naturalism not characteristic of Indian and
entwined cobras, 88, no; Fig. 28; PI. Sinhalese art, 87, 95, 211.
LII., 3: -poruva, design of entwined Nature spirits [devo), ¿^6,121,123, 126.
cobras in a ring, 88, no: -puttuva, Nava-nari-kuñjaraya, ‘ 9-women-elephant,’
-vviksha,=naga dangaya, q.v. 67,91.
Nagula, piongh, 140. iVízw»ífi2»«á, artificer, caste, 54, 61, 192.
Nahamige Kovila, 213. Navan-panguva, holding of an artificer
Nairrita, Hindu God, Regent of S.W. tenant, 25, 76, 194.
quarter, 72. Navaratna, nine gems, viz. nine verses
Nala, pipe or neck of a writing style, 208. uttered by nine pandits at the court of
NalalkuQjbura, 75. Vikramaditya, 51 : -mudava, ring set with
Nalanda, N.C.P., 131. nine stones, 210; PL LI., 12.
Nalal-patiya, forehead plate, 209, 2 3; old Nayakumbura, 193.
design for, PI. XXIII, 3. Nayi-hfliya, earthen jar decorated with
Naldva, flageolet, 186. cobras, 222
Nallegoda Vihara, 75. N^kata, asterism of the moon, 64, 71, 126,
Namashta, Sanskrit work on Buddha, 51. 127: npkat balanava, to find an auspicious
Nanumura mangalyaya, head washing fes­ n?kata for an undertaking, 70.
tival, after New Year, 37, 74, 193, 219, Nelum-mala, lotus, q.v.
220. N^mbiliya {nsmbu+hfliyd) earthen vessel for
Napkins-, {kada\ indul-kada: Isnsuva, Port.), cleaning rice, 208, 221, 226; PL V., 4,
234, 239; Pis. XXVIII., 2, 3, XXXIII., XXV., lo.
4 >S- Netra mañgalyaya, netra pinkama, ceremony
Ndrasane yatura (Bell, Kegalla Report), and festival of painting the eyes of an
V. narissa yatura. image, 14, 56, 60, 61, 70-75, 149, 174.
man-lion, 88; Fig. 24. Nitra stura, eye plumb-line, 259.
Narendra Siipha, king at Kuijdasale, nr. Nevill, H., 21, 232, 264, 262.
Kandy, built present Dalada Maligava, New Y ear, ceremonies, avurudu mañgalyaya,
6 : his breviary, 49 ^ Fig. 3 ; PL XX., i, 26, 37, 220, 222.
2: mould for State shoes, 204; other Niharepola Alahakkon Mohottala, 207.
0
references, 12, 145» i49> Nikapata, a village in va, 218.
299

Nila, nila, ntlapata, blue or green colour, i 64, Ola, leaf of Corypha umbraculifera, used for
165: nil-pafa koipiya, blue-silk flag, 38. MSS. 14, 19, 48, 49 : preparation, 51, 52.
Nilagama Pafabeoda, a craftsman, i68. Oliuda, Abrus precatorius, of which the red
NlMobo Sandeiaya, The Parrot Messenger, and black seeds are used in certain games,
a Sinhalese poem of the eighteenth and in preparation of a paste used by
century, 172. goldsmiths, 208: -kolonpbuva, -poruva,
Nilaojbevatte, a village in the 180. oligda stool or board, for the game oliuda
Nilava Muhandirams, craftsmen of Man- keliya, 138, 140; Pis. XII., 1-3, XLI., 4.
galagama, 57; N. Loku Nayide, N. Ollya (pi.), dancers, caste, 22.
Ratnavalli Navaratna Abharaijaya, crafts­ Ologuva, double bag carried over the
men, 58. shoulder, 44.
Nila vasama, tenants performing menial Olu, Nymphaa lotus, 230.
services, 26, 27. Omens, 125, 126, 127.
Nil-gas, indigo plant, 164. Ondaatje, W. C., 166, 190, 192.
4
Nttinighar} uva, book of Kandyan law, 20, On-kanda, cloth beam, 235.
22. Orpiment (hiriyal), 4,119, 177, 215.
Nil-stvi, grey, 164. Ofunna Faff ala, ‘Crown Workshop,’ one of
Nimun-kurulla, handle of plough, 89. the ‘Four Workshops,’ 56.
Ninda-gama, a village temporarily or per­ Ovala, 78 : sannasa, 70.
manently granted to a chief as personal Oxalic acid, 200.
property without services due, 23,24,27,
28,37,218, 219.
Nine planets, 210, 230,
Niriella, a village in Sab., 244. Pacca, green-, brocade jacket, 164,
Nirvana, 40. 237: -kusalsna, ‘emerald’ cup, 206:
Nivedita, Sister, 261, -papa, green colour, 164.
Nivitigala Nindagama, 27. Pacisi (H.), chaupai, a kind of race game
Niyasda [Sanseviera zeylanicd), fibre used for played on a chequered four-armed cloth,
Dumbara mats, 52, n6, 243, 244: or similarly marked board (da-psruva,
-psruva, log for scraping the fibre, 243. Clough), 186, 268. The word pacisi is
Niyangampaha Vihara, 56,148. not in use amongst the Sinhalese, and I
Niyan-kafuva, chisel, 142. have been unable to learn the correct
4
Niya-poten-v( a, ‘finger-nail work,’ lac- term,— perhaps chaupai.
work, 215, 216. Padaya, foot measure, 153: quarter, airt,
Nuga gaha (Ficus Bengalensis), 118; PI. I. 159; a cloth eight cubits long, 233.
Nugavela Basnayaka Nilame, 14. Padakkama,&penA7Lnt,zii-, Fig. 130; Pis.
Nal, spun thread, 243: -hfda, warp, 234: XLVIII.,s, 6,XLIX., II.
-lanuva, line, tape, 142: -velanava, to lay Paddy,(M alay), rice in the husk, 72,
warp, 236. Padeijiya, a village in the C.P., 75.
4
Nuvara Eliya, hill station, C.P., 190, 192. Pa i-kanda, threshold, '
Nuvara Kalaviya, district now part of the Pa
4
ikkama, spittoon, 222.
N.C.P., 263. Padimakadapoia (prob. corruption ofpatima-
ka4a pota), craftsman’s copy- or sketch
book, 65,86, 107; Fig. 20; PI. XIV., i.
o. PadmSsanaya, lotus throne, 96,138.
4
Pa u kule, forked stick used in laying warp,
Oboe, horai}?va, q.v. 236.
4
Ohoriya (r<Zr/),dress of ladies, 34,23 3 ; PI. II, Pa uva, caste, inferior cultivators, palanquin
Okakura, Kakuzo, 28,177, 258, 261. bearers, 22.
300

Pahada muñe, pattern of grass mat, Fig. 143. Palkunjbura Vihara, 56, 149.
Painting, 164-181; Pis. XIV.—XXL: Pallekarjda, nr. Balangoda, 215.
¿^//images, 176; PI. IV., 2: book-covers. Palle Vahala, Lower Palace, Kandy, now
Figs. 32,64; boxes, 94; Fig. 29: ceil­ Museum of Kandyan Art, 262.
ings, roofs of cave temples, etc., 15, 107 ; Pal-rndnikkan, copperas, 200.
Figs. 52.60; Pis. XIV., 3,4, XV., XVI.: Palmette, design motif, 102, 251.
on cloth, 3, 73, 174: continuous narra­ Palmyra, Borassusfiabelliformis, 244.
tion, 168; Pis. I., XVIII.: described in Palol {Stereospermum suaveolens), 94.
Mahavartisa, 5, ii, 12, 173, 174: do., Palugaleveva, a village, 180.
earliest references (painted vases), 177: Pambaya, scarecrow, 74.
do. by Fa Hian, 177: do. in Sinhalese Pa-meduma, pedals of loom, 234.
literature, 172: expression, 171 : eye, Panabokka, T. B., 212.
representation of, 169: eyes of images, tj. Panabokka Dhammajoti, a priest, 56.
ultra mañgalyaya: figures shown only in Panava, comb, horn or ivory, 109, 185;
full, side, or three-quarter view, 169: Fig.63; Pis.XXXIX.,XL.:pana-kafuva,
history of, in Ceylon, 170, 177: of piece of ivory for a comb, or comb with
images, etc., 5, 145, 149, 184: of ivory, teeth broken away, 185; PI. XXXIX., 7:
184: in oil, 177: outdoor, 178: absence -lllla, piece of horn or ivory for a comb,
of perspective and shading, 168: pig­ 26.
ments, technique, etc., 164 rey.; pottery, PaHca, five: -kakudha-bhandaya, regalia, five
225, 227, 228; Fig. 31; PI. XXVI., 6, emblems of State, 33: ^nari-geta, ‘five-
12: valueofold, 164,168,268: teaching, women-knot,’ 67, 91; Fig. 28; PI.
64 seq.: on walls of houses and granaries, XXXVIII., I (overdoor): -u.also‘Five.’
V.
116, 166; PI. VII., 6, 9: also Devara- Pand . iyans=Tamils, inhabitants of S. India,
gampola Silvatenna, Degaldoruva, Do- 8
dan tale, Dambulla, Danagirigala, Pandama, cresset, torch, 26,76, 204.
Sigiriya, Buddha,^^^^, satsatiya, Mara Pandan-allana panguva, holding of tenant
yuddhaya. whose service is to carry a cresset in
Palace, of Raja Sitpha II., 115: supported processions, 204: pandan-undi, balls of
by a single column, 121, 122. tow for cressets, 205.
Palal lanava, to order warp threads, 236. Papditage, Papditagedara, names of potters,
Palam, a weight, 64. 219.
Palanquin, doliya, palakkiya, 206, 213; PI. PaAguva, holding of a tenant, share of land
IX., I.; ~Ttil,ksnteruva, 195. for which service is due, 25,28,193, 194:
V.
Pala-peti, lotus petal border or moulding, also land tenure.
96, 97, 100, 102, 133, 146, 147, 186, Panhmda, pi. panhit, writing style, for
217, 252; Figs. 38, 39, 64, 89 (b); writing on olas, 49, 52, 207: v. also ran-
Pis. XXXII., 7, 8, 9, XXXIII., 6, panhitfda.
XXXVII., s, XXXVIIL, 4,7, XL., 17: Pan, any grass used for mats, etc.: -k^tta,
as equivalent, or origin, of ‘ egg and dart,’ grass weaver’s tool, 194, 244.
97,261. Pana, lamp, earthen or metal: pan-kajida,
Palampores, printed cotton hangings, S. lamp-stand, 223; PI. XXVI., 9-12:
Indian, 97. -knduva, lantern, 223; Pis. XXVI., 8,
Paldeijiya, a village in the C.P., 194. XLIV.,7: -n]?tiya, wick, 26.
Paliogupana, sannasa, 213. weaving: plain stripes, PI. XXIV.:
4
Palinguva, quart2, crystal: karai} uva, -bate, rod used by mat-weavers, 243:
image, spectacles, 147. -kalsla, Dumbara mat woven in stripes,
Palipana, village in the C.P., 204, 205. 244: -katuru, pattern of mat, probably
301

stripes, 249: -kura, pattern of woven Parrot,giraw, 89; Fig. 26: flag, 38.
cloth, 234; -petta, pattern of Dumbara Parsemé, method of design, 107,110.
mat, 244. PaSaka (Clough), dice, 268.
59
Pai}i}ayo, grass cutters, caste, 22, 244. ParriiarSira, side plumb-line, 152,15^> ^ *
Pansala, priest’s residence, 12, 41, 119, Pas-lo, alloy of five metals, 205.
134, 139, 186: V. also Malvatte, Pa/a,leaf, too: wing: leafofa book: f. also
Asgiriya. pota, liya-pata‘ pat-iruva,'fttàgf. leaf of a
Pan-sil, five precepts binding on Buddhist book, 5 2 : -kapapu, ‘ leaf cut,’ kind of diya
laity, 43, 45. kacciya, 233 : -katfuva (Clough),gathering
Pansiyapanas Jataka Pota, Book of the 550 of eight or sixteen leaves of a book, 52.
Jatakas, 41. Pafa, a stripe, 100: silk, 38: -redi maha
Paper, Dutch, 65, 166, 179: English, 65, ko4iya, yellow silk flag, 38.
166: Sinhalese, 65, 166: mss., 179; Fig. Pata, colour, 164.
3; Pis. XVII., XX. Pafa-tahacluva, gold frontlet, 60, 209, 213.
Parakrama Bahu I., The Great, a.d. i 164- Pafabaÿdinavâ, p.p. pafabfvdi, to confer a
1197, ‘a faithful and wise man,’ ruled title or office by binding a metal plate on
and rebuilt Polonnaruva, also Anurad- the forehead, 60, 209.
hapura, 7: the Alfred of Ceylon, 8: Patangi, Ccesalpinia sappan, dye-wood, 243,
painted eyes of images, 72: his decorated 244, 245.
theatre, 98: said to have commissioned Patchwork, 239.
a translation of Sariputra, 151 : built a Pa^/ri/^aaaya, ceremonial spear, lance carried
pavilion ‘wrought with ivory,’ 184: in processions, 36, 120; PI. XLVIL, 10.
palace on a single column, 266. Pafiya, belt, 33, 233, 234; Pis. III.,XXIX.,
Parakrama Bahu II., a.d. 1240-1275, 7 -
restored Polonnaruva, 9; had representa­ Patra, bowl, alms bowl, 147,206,208,221,
tion of Buddha painted on cloth, 174: 222 : -pinkama, presentation of alms
offered eighty kafkina robes, 236 : built bowls, 78.
Yapahuva, 144; other references 6, 262. Pattala, workshop, 55, 56 : PatfalHatara,
Parakrama Bahu III., a.d. 1288, 6. ‘The Four Workshops,’ i.e. the body of
Parakrama Bahu IV., a.d. 1295, translated royal craftsmen working in Kandy, 55,
jatakas into Sinhalese, i o. 64,70,76,215.
Parakrama Bahu VI., a.d. 1410-1462, Patfala-lçlla, hand-rest of ivory turner’s
educationist, 10. lathe, 187.
Parakrama Bahu VIII., in whose reign the Pattçya, centipede, a stitch so-cajled, 241.
Portuguese arrived, 10. Patti-lçlla, wooden ‘ yard measure,’ 154.
Parakrama, Tamil usurper, 8. Pattini, Hindu Goddess, 6, 23, 38,46,139,
ParakuQjbure Vipassi Sami, a monk, 180, 222: Pattini Amma, priestess of a Pattini
181. dévale, 23.
Para mala, design (lotus flower) on woven Pattipola, disâvanaya, 180.
cloth, 234; PI. XXVIII., I (6). Pattirippuva, a raised place or platform,
Parami (ten) chief (virtues), 173. particularly the ‘Octagon,’ part of the
Paraijatella, T. B., 92. Dajada Mâligâva, 13, 33.
Parasatu, mythical tree, 94. Patura, '^.paturu, wedge, 65,106; Fig. 6 :
Paraviya (pigeon), 89. elongated isosceles triangle, 217; PL
Parinibbaifa (P.), complete emancipation of* XXIV., I (g).
Buddha at death, 5, 174. Payiya, ^\.payi, v. bulat payiya.
Parish Councils, 28. Peacock {moi^ard), 89, 230: also a Japanese
Parker, H., 190, 225. design of modern introduction, 202.
302

Pedura, pi. pfduru, grass or leaf mat, 244; Pifima Talava Adigar, 13, 14, 149, 206,
designs. Fig. 143. 209, 212.
Peduru-ana, mat-rack, 244. Pill-boxes, horn, 187.
P'ehindum-kada, pi. -kat, yoke-load of pro­ Pillow-cases, 239.
visions, 24, 26. Pincott, F., 81.
Plkaiaya, lotus bracket-capital, 96, 117, Pine-apple, type of design, 95, 102; Fig.
129, 130; Fig. 97; Pis. VII., 4, X., 3-5. 33 (ix.): a survival in Sin. art, 252.
Pelava, a village in the C.P., 180. Pingana, china dish, 32.
Pelena, a village in the C.P., 180. ‘Pingo,’ yoke, a springy stick, loaded at
Peifuma, tenant’s customary gift, 24, 25, 26, both ends and carried on the shoulder:
194,195,219: weaver’s, 232. silver mounted, PI. LI., 2: v. also kada=
Penum-kada, yoke load of customary gifts, yoke-load.
24, 25, 26: -valan, yoke load of earthen Pinkama, a deed of merit, a celebration,
v e ss e ls , o f potter, 25. festival, 25, 26 : v. netra pinkama, patra
Pepiliyana, 172. pinkama.
Peradeuiya, nr. Kandy, 180: Rubber Ex­ Pinnavala Vihara, Xggalla Dist., 133.
hibition, 1906,145. Pin-taliya, earthen vessel for offerings of
Perahera, annual festival and procession of rice, etc., 221.
devales, and in Kandy, of the devales and Pipicca mala, a flower fully opened, 94.
the Dajada Maligava, 6, 25, 37, 38, 39, Ptra, file, 142.
85,120, 165,188, 204, 205, 208, 238. Pirit, a special Buddhist service, 39,45,75:
Per alum pata, var. of liya pata, i o i., V. also Wickremasinghe, Sin. Mss. in
Percival, Robert, 264. Brit. Mus., p. 40.
Peres valalla, hollow ivory ring with relics, Piruvataya, any cloth supplied by the
slipped over beralaya or mal-gaha on washerman and returned after use, 26,
toppiya-. perfs muiuva, kind of finger-ring. 238.
Pesakaraya, caste, 21. Pita, outside: -katfuva, post of ivory turner’s
Pe-tefiya, clepsydra, water-clock, 58, 205 : lathe, 187: -kattalaya, out-door service,
V. also Service Tenures Comm. Rep., 25: -payiya,=hora payiya, q.v.\ -suliya,
1872, p. 516. scroll outside main design, 102.
Peti-malaya, ‘petal garland,’ 211; PI. Piyavilla, carpet, cloth to walk on, 26, 238.
XLIX., 4, 12. Piyum-dahasaya, ‘ 16 lotus flowers,’ pattern
.Peti-pulkrama, rasp, 142. of grass mats, etc.. Fig. 143 (xin).
Pfya, an fhour’ of twenty-four minutes, Piyum rafava, ‘lotus flower pattern,’ pattern
205. of grass mats, etc., 248.
Phear, Sir J. B., 23. Planetary worship, gods, v. bait ceremonies.
Philpot, J. H., 94. Plaster, ‘wall of stone . . . shining with
Picca mala [Jasmtntitn sambac), jessamine, plaster work,’ 12, 146: of vihara walls
94i,Fig. 32; PI. XIV., 5. and roofs of cave temples preparatory to
Pidema, offerings to gods, 71. painting, 166: recipes for lime plaster,
Pieris, P. E., 10, 12, 27, 60, 213, 260. n8, 119: atSigiriya, 178.
Pihiti Rata, one ofthe three ancient divisions Plaitwork, strapwork (Janu-gifa), 107, 252;
of Ceylon, 9. Pis. XL, 6,7, XII., 2, XXVII., XXVIII.,
Pila, verandah, 114, 234. I (13), 3. XXIX., 4, XXXIII., 5.
Pilgrimage to Adam’s Peak, 44. Ploughman, ‘fit to rule a kingdom,’ 28.
Pili-hfliya, earthen vessel with lid, used for Plumb-lines, 42,152 seq.- Fig. 95.
storing cloths, 221; PI. LIE, 4: -v(la, PohoUuva, tassel, 238, 248; PI. XXXIV.
clothes line, 116. Pohoya, quarters of the moon observed as
303

sacred days by Buddhists, 41, 44, 45. Prêta pada, outermost division oF a site,
Pohoya-gi, detached building at a vihara, ‘quarter of goblins,’ 159.
enclosed within land delimited by special Pretaya, goblin, ghost, 77.
boundary posts {sfma) and used as a con­ Priests, priesthood {sangha), 15, 43-47, 59.
fessional and vestry room, for ordinations, Prince Prisdang,ti. Jinavaravaipsa Unnanse,
etc., 119: at Malvatte, Kandy, 12, 13, P. C.
179; Figs. 108, H2. Prior, E. S., 57.
Pohoya Majuva Vihara, Kandy, 136. Prishfa, name of a plumb-line, 160.
Pointing machine, 152. Protection of craftsmen, 60,193,265.
Pokkharatfi, lotus pond, tank, 175. Proverbs, 128,231,268.
Pol-kafuva, coconut shell, v. coconut. Pubbiliya, 180.
Pol-koraha, a large earthen vessel for washin g Public Works Departments of Sinhalese
clothes, etc., 221 ; PI. XXV., 7. kings, 54 : neglect of indigenous archi­
Polonnaruva, Sinhalese capital, 9th— 13th tecture by modern P.W.D., 132.
centuries, 6, 8, 9, 144, 145, 149, 170, historical work of the fourteenth
178, 184. century, 262.
Polonnaruvavela, 172. Pokuruva, a mug, 222.
Pol-mal-mdlaya, ‘ coconut-flower-garland,’ Pulatthi=Polonnaruva, q.v.
a kind of necklace, an; PI. XLVIIL, i. Pullorama, rasp, 142.
Polonga, a poisonous snake, 230. Pulney Andy, on kammalâr, 63.
Polvatte, 264. * Pulun talanava, to clean cotton with a bow,
Polynesian influence, 106, 235-
Poru-pafiya, narrow belt. Pundva, pund kalaya, earthen pot with
Parava, axe, 142. twelve spouts, used in yak ceremonies,
Portuguese, arrival, ravages, destruction of 223; PI. XXVI., 6.
Vishiju Devale at Devundara, 10, 260: Ps-«:/, indigo, 215.
captured and destroyed tooth-relic, 6 : Pumaghafa (P.), filled vessel, auspicious
expulsion, n : influence, n, 138, 179, emblem, 4.
211,255. Puppet shows, 175.
Psrnuva, earthen oven, 221 ; PI. XXV., vi. Püppharâma,=Malvatte Pansala, I2.
Poruva, potter’s wheel, 219: whorl, design, Purdifa, poetical works on Hindu theology,
V. naga poruvai agricultural implement, more or less popular, i, 29.
140. Püsva, n. of a plumb-line, 160.
5
Poruvata, upper part of sleay, 234. Pürvarâma (at Anuradhapura), i’ 1 •
abook; pot-ge4iya, hmià\t of prepared Pûrvavidêha, mythical continent E. of Mt.
olas, 52; -kambiya, book cover, wooden, Meru, 94.
ivory or metal, 52, 94, 185, 216; Figs. Pus-kola, prepared talipot leaf, ola, 49, 216.
32, 64; Pis. XXXVII., 5, XXXVIII., 7: Pusulpifiye Vihara, 56.
-lanuva, book string, 52, 238 : -sakiya, Pottuva, design of two or more animals
book-button, 52, 186. with necks entwined, no, 230; v. also
POta,=e\ement, item, kind, thing, v. dht hartisa p., ndga p.
niyapota, hava4ipota, liyapota: knot, 109. Putuva, a chair.
4
Potter, ba ah(layd, q.v., duties of, 25, 219 :
tools, 219-220: song, 229: u also^ Q*
earthenware. Quart2 {tiruvdna-gala), powdered, an in­
Pratya-Sataka, 51. gredient of the paste called vadi, 64 :
PrUvSift, private property, for which service images, spectacles, etc., 147.
is not owing to an overlord,23,27» 58»75" Quicksilver, ingredient of a varnish, 181.
Prema Bogara, 81. Quilted caps, 239.
304

R . Svvord Workshop, one of the Pattai
Halara, q.v., 56, 57: -karuva, goldsmith,
Rabana, large hand drum. 127 (misprint, ranakura) : -kendiya, golden
Radala, chief, 21. goglet, 39: -pan-hinda, golden writing
Radava, pi. radav, 'dhoby, washerman, style, 207; Fig. 129: -vataha-pata, go\àe,n
caste, 21: general duties, 26: em­ fan, 205; PL XLIL, 2. ,
broiderers, 238: rada-badda. Department Randeijiya, a village in the C.P., 180.
of Washermen, 54: -panguva, holding Ranken-bordure (G.), serial repetition of
of a washer tenant, 205: -vasama, the elements in a border, 109.
3
washer tenants, 26. jRató,district, 19: rate-mahatmaya,c\útitm
Railings, 141 ; PI. VIII. in charge oíz. rata, 19,23, 149.
Raja (royal), caste, 21: raja, king: raja- Rata, red, 164: -(nduma, red costume, at
kariya, personal service due from tenants, netra mañgalyaya, 72 : -piyum, red lotus
to king, or other proprietor, 60, unwise flower pattern on grass mat, 248 : rat-mal
exaction by last king, 13, 23, 263, and [Ixora coccinea), 126, 181,248: rat-mul-
by the British, 263 : raja-mandiraya, gas [Knoxia platycarpd), 244.
royal palace, 125. Ratha, car of a god, 25.
Rajadhi Raja Siipha, a.d. 1780— 1798,13, Rat-haudun piUma, red sandal-wood image,
59: began the ‘Audience Hall,’ 131: 71. _ ,
offerings to ,Maha Devale, 188, 206: Ratnapura, capital of Sabaragamuva Prov.,
granted Degaldoruva sannasa, 77. ,44,117,218.
Raja-ratnakara, sixteenth century historical Ratnavalli Navaratna Abharapa, name' of a
work, 9. craftsman, 60.
Raja Sirpha I., a.d. i 581— 1592, 58, 145 : Ratne endra karaya,]owe\íor, 54.
À.D. 1633— 1687, II, 33, 58, 115, 207, Ratram,pata, gold colour, 164.
213, 263. Rattan, v. cane.
Rajata Vihara, v. Ridi Vihara. Ratukaha [Bixa orellana), dye-stuff, 181.
Rajavaliya, ‘The line of kings,’ historical Ratu-pata koddya, red silk flag, 38.
work, 10, 236. Ratvatte, A., 237 ; gold killotaya, PI.
Raje^vara Hittara Acariya, name of a XLVI., 13: -alankaraya, pattern of
craftsman, 59. Dumbara mat, 244; PI. XXXIV.
Rama, avatar of Vishiju, and king of Ayod- Ravana, mythical Lord of Lanka, and foe of
haya; rescued his wife Sita from Ravaija, Rama, i, 172.
Lord ci Lanka, commonly identified Ravum-yatu-ketaya, curved plane, 142.
with Ceylon, as related in the Ramayatfa, Ray, P. C., 163.
q.V., I. Rea, A., 69.
Ramdyaifa, Hindu epic, i, 162, 177, 258: Reel and head, design motif, 109; Fig. 63
1 8 3
paintings in a sixteenth century temple, (vii.); P s.XXXII., ,XXXIII., .
172. Reeper,=lath, 130.
Rambukvella, a village in the C.P., 180. Regalia, 33.
Ram Raz, 162,163. Relics, D.'Tooth relic: alms-bowl, 175.
Ranavara [Cassia aurkulatd), 177, 192. Rfli-pdlama, waved white frill on Kandyan
Ran, gold: dvudha, golden insignia, 33, hats, 33: street decoration of arches of
76 : -lekam mahatmaya. Keeper of the frilled cloth, 175, 237.
Armoury, 207 : -dsliya, palanquin used "i Rest-houses, v. amhalama,madama,idama-ge.
by royalty or for religious purposes, 39, Restlessness of Europeans, 10, 263.
76, 120, 206, 238: -doli perah?ra, 39, Rhys Davids, Prof. 'I'., 42,45,74.
264: -hiriyal, orpiment, 181 ; -kajuva, Ribeiro, 11, 27.
golden sword, 39: -haju pattala. Golden Rice [padi), cultivation, v. agriculture:
X I 305

ceremonial use, 72: bowl for cleaning, v. Ruvanveli Dagaba, Anuradhapura, 4, 5,
n?mbiliya: mortar for pounding, PI. X.,7; 57, 177, 178, 258, 259; ambalam (Four
mould for string-rice, 140; PI. XL, I. Korales), 17.
Ridl, silver, q.v.\ -kftayan-kdraya, damas­
cener, 54; PI. IV., 3 : -kffayan-ve^a,
s.
damascening, 200, v. also damascening:
-vívela, silver-mounted cane of office, 20.
RidI Vihara, 27, 42, 47, 91, 94, 95, 114, Saddlecloth [palasa), 239-
117, 118, 131, 138, 145, 148, 164, 165, Sadilingam, vermilion, cinnabar, 164, 181,
168, 173, 174, 178, 185,205: details and 215.
objects from, illustrated. Figs. 29, 106; Saka, era, beginning a.d. 77"^-
Pis. XXXVIII., I, 2,4, XLIIIa., 1,7. Saka, haka, a chank, q-v-
Riegl, A., 96, 256,260. Sakas-kada, lesson book used in pansala
Rings, D. jewellery. schools, 50, 51.
Ririyaka, a devil, 148, 260. Sakra, Sakraya, 8akka (=Indra), Hindu
Rishis, inspired sages, reputed authors of god, 82, 94, 145.
sacred books, etc. Salagamaya, ‘chalia,’ caste, cinnamon
Rlm-gi, resting place for insignia during peelers and weavers of fine cloth, 21, 54,
procession round a, devale, 120. 232.
Schwarz, Ritter C. von, 93. Sal-tree {Vateria acuminata), 122; v, also hal-
Rivets, 186, 198. galia.
Riyana, cubit, q.v.\ riyan-lella, cubit-rule, Saman DeviyO (Lakshmaija), 44,46.
59, 141,142, 143. Samanala, 247: v. also Adam’s Peak.
Roads, 117. Saman Devale, Ratnapura, 27,120, 131.
4
Ro iyd, outcaste: makers of rope, horn Sambasiva Iyer, V. S., 189.
combs, tanners, etc., 22, 27, 54, 187, ‘Sambol,’ condiments eaten with curry,
244: making combs, PI. V., 9. ■ 147 -
Rodulflla, weaver’s sleay, 234. Samlmandipa, pavilion built for Parakrama
Romilly Allen, 107. Bahu L, 184.
Rosette, 95. Samsara, phenomenal universe, round of
Rouffaer andjouynboll, 33, 106. rebirth, 93.
Row, serial arrangement of decorative Sanchi, Buddhist stupa in Central India,
motifs, esp. animals, 4, 173; Pis. XXIX., second century b.c., 257.
7, XXX., 2, XXXVIII., 5. Sandal-wood (haudun, Santaluk album),
Royal, V. dress, ilng, gabadd-gama: crafts­ image of Buddha, 71, 258: cup for paste,
men, 54, 55, 56, 193, 121, 264. 206. ; i
Rubrication, of paper mss., PL XX., i; of Sanda kindurd, 82.
olas, 52. Sauda-katpa-gala, ‘moonstone,’ stond door­
Ruhuna Rafa, one of the three ancient step, 77: sanda-kada-pahana, do., 146.
divisions of Ceylon, 2. Safigha, priesthood, q.v.-. Sangha Raja,
Rukattana [Alstonia scholaris), 72. appointed by Kirti 8rl, 12, 119, 263.
Rupdvaliya, Sanskrit book of directions for Sanghamitta, daughter of Aioka, brought
the form of images, etc., canon, sum­ branch of bs-tcee to Ceylon, 2.
marised, 111-113: other references, 67, Sankha {saka, haka), chank, q.v.
7°.79> 83, 86, 87,88,90,161,162,163, Sannasa, pi. sannas, charter engraved on
171; also PI. XXL and description. stone or metal, 27,207: granted to crafts­
Ruskin,J.,quoted, 51, loi, 103,104. men, 58, 59, 73: sun and moon cut on,
Russell, H. S. O., 132. 81,207: Algama, 186, 206: Beligala
306

Vihara, 74: Damunumeya Vihara, 77, Sei-ichi Taki, 87.
78: Degaldoruva Vihara, 77, 167, 168: Sfla lihiniya, bird, Gracuia religiosce, 89, 230:
Kehelvala Vihara, 78: Molligoda, Geta- S.L. Sandeiaya, fifteenth century poem by
beriya, 207: Palkumbure,and Urulevatte Totagomuva, 169.
Viharas, 149: Pusulpitiya Vihara, 56: Serna lella, weaver’s sword, 234.
for other grants or charters, v. tuiapata^ Sembuva, small brass or copper water vessel,
sittuva, kfta sakkiya or sakshiya. 203.
Sanskrit, mantrams and verses quoted, 52, Serugolaya Hitaranayide,a pupil of Devara-
73, 74, 205, 208 : texts translated, v. gampola Silvatenna, drew original of
Rttpava/iya, Sdriputra. Fig. 17- . .
Sapta-nari-turange, ‘ 7-women-horse,’ 67, Senaka Paijdit, in Silava 'Jataka, at Degal­
91- doruva, 168.
Sapu [Michelia champacd), 97, no, 166: Senkadagala, Senkadapura=Kandy, 73, 77.
-mala, decorative motif, 97; Fig. 33. Serak-kalaya, brass stand for eating rice,
&arabha (S.), 83. from a leaf dish, 32, 105, 108, 203; Pis.
Saranankara, Velivita Piijdapatika (a.d. XLIV., i,XLV.,6.
1698-1778), 12, 119, 263. &erapludiya, (? corruption of iarabhd +
Sarapa (T.), 83. dhyanani), 83, 130, 177, 182, 204; Figs.
&arapenda,=Sfrapl'odiya, q.v.: Fig. 98, A. 12, 95, a; Pis. XL, I, 3, XIII., 9, XL.,
Sarasvatl, one of the Seven Sacred Rivers of 8,9, XLI., I, 3, XLVI., 2, 3, 9, XLVIL,
India, 74. 7, 8, LIL, 2.
Sdratihasangha, medical work composed by Serial repetition, motif in design, 109,,
Buddhadasa, 7. Service Tenures Commission Report,
Sari (T.), woman’s dress,=Sinhalese ohoriya, Ceylon, 27, 37, 45, 74, 125, 265.
32 Sssata, ceremonial fan for royal or religious
' . -
Sdriputra, a work on the proportions of use, consisting of an embroidered cloth
images, so named from its author, 47, 67, disc, or talipot leaf decorated with mica,
121, 148, 150-163, 169, 171,259. with images of sun, moon, etc., mounted
Sariputta, Sariputra, disciple of Buddha, on a lacquered staff, 24, 120, 237; PI.
I., XXII., XLI., 2, LIL, 3.
173-
Sarvajna Parakrama Bahu,=Parakrama Seven Sacred Rivers of India, 74, 88; Fig.
Bahu L, 151. 69.
Safahan kfpima, pupil’s tracing of letters on Sevul Sandeiaya, the ‘Cock’s Message, six­
ola, 49< teenth century Sinhalese poem, 172.
&at-ndri-torar}a, ‘7-women-arch,’ 67, 91. Shadvargaya, a Sanskrit work on auspicious
‘Seven Weeks,’period in Buddha’s measurements, used by Sinhalese crafts­
life immediately following the attain­ men, 154.
ment of enlightenment, 5, 162, 169,171, Sharks, 230.
180; Pis. VIIIa, XVIII. Shawls, 234, 239.
4
Sarja annapa gi (T.), 83. Shawl pattern, cone, 103; Fig. 51.
Scarf joint, 130; Fig. 75. Shellac, substitute for stick lac, 167.
Scent spray, ivory [simidiya), 187. Shuttle [naddva), v. ‘weaving’ and ‘ivory.’
Schools, under Sinhalese kings, 9, 10: Siam, Kirti 8rl’s embassy to, 12,59,60,213:
pansala schools, 49-51,186: of craft and parallels to Sinhalese art, loi, 103, 164;
art, 64-68: represented at Degaldoruva, , Figs. 14,30,45,46,47.
168: Mission, 17. Sickle (df-ketta), 194; Fig. loi; PI. XLV.,
Scissors, as customary gift from tenant, 76.
13-14-
Seamsters, 5, 237. Siddhattha, a priest in the time of Duttha
Secretum Secrelorum, 263. Gamani, 4: first incumbent at Degal-
X 2 307

doruva, 165: novice, appointed incum­ Sindh lac-work, 215.
bent of Ridi Vihara, 173. Sindhu, Indus, one of the Seven Sacred
Sigiriya, a steep rock, fortified by the parri­ Rivers of India, 74.
cide king Kassapa in the fifth century, 7; Sinhalese art, essentially Indian, 250:
cave paintings, 177, 178, 254. origins, 250 seq.
Sllakkhanda Thera, 111. Sini pitta, sweetmeats, slnlpiptu kafu, moulds
Silberrad, C. A., 232. for<A., 139; Fig. 87.
Silk, embroidery on cotton, 238; PI. XXX., Sirivaflflhana, nr. Dambadeijiya, 174.
4
Sirivafl hanapura,=Kandy, 77.
Silpacariya,mz%tev of crafts, especially of five SiSyanu-paramparava, pupillary succession,
crafts, 68; also as a craftsman’s name. 75
- .
Silpa Sastra, Science of the Arts, Sanskrit Sita, wife of Rama and heroine of Rama-
technical works on art, 61, 63, 67, 6g, yaija, 1.
120-128, 150-163. Sifana (pi.), nobles or titled men, 21.
Silpi, one of the five sons of Viávakarma, 63. Sitavaka, in the Four Korales, a medixval
Silvatenna, Devaragampola, a noted capital, 9,11,117, 145,172.
eighteenth century Sinhalese painter, Sittara, painter, 54, 55.
worked at Degaldoruva, Ridi Vihara, Sittuva, order of an Adigar, recorded on an
etc., 47, 59, 84, 164,168. ola, 58.
Silver, artificial trees, 98: bells, 4: book ^iva Natha, 112.
clasps, 179; PI. LII., I: book cover, 52: Siva worship, survivals amongst descendants
bowl of ladle, PI. XLI., 3: boxes, PI. of Indian craftsmen, 61.
XLIII., I, 5: samas, 207: chatelaine, Siv-pada, poetry, quatrains, 246.
210; ear-spoon, 210: festoons, 4: girdles, Sivurumila, contribution for priests’ robes
35; PI. L., 1-7; handle of parasol, 4: given by temple tenants, 193.
keniiya, 206; PI. XLIL, 4: lamp, 205; Skanda,sonofSiva, 172: -Puraija, i.
Pl.XLIL, I: moon emblem, 4: -mounted Sleay, v. weaving.
objects. Pis. XXXVI.,6,7, XLVII., i, 3, Smith, Vincent A., 2, 22, 256, 257, 258,
4, 5, 7, II, LII., 2: palanquin fittings, 268.
206 : embroidery, 237 : parasol, 5 ; Smithers,J. G., 178.
pokkharanis (miniature tanks), 175: ridi Smiths, V. goldsmiths, blacksmiths, etc.
vívela, 20 : toothpick, 210: vases, 5 ; So-kajaya, wooden buffalo bell, 140.
vessels, 213. Sommarayd, leather worker, caste, 22.
Silversmiths, duties of, 25. South Kensington, Science and Art
Siriihala raja kale, phrase signifying, ‘ in the Museum, 139, 100, 184; Fig. 43; PI.
days of the Sinhalese kings,’ used in the XLI., 3.
sense of the ‘ good old times,’ 12. Spectacles, crystal, 147.
Sinihasana,\\on throne, 125. Spence Hardy, 42.
Simhasana Patfala, ‘Lion Throne Work- Spilberghen, J. van, 33.
shop,’ 56. Spindle, V. ‘weaving,’ ‘ivory.’
Simhaya {sitiihd), pi. sinihayo, lion, in Sinhalese Spinning, of niyanda fibre, 243; PI. IV., i;
art, 2, 21, 87, 224; Figs. 22, 136; Pis, of cotton, ■!;. weaving.
XII., 3, XXVI., I: flag, 38: ti. also kibihi. Spiral, design motif, 99, 105.
Simijiya, ivory scent spray, 187. Spittoons, 222.
Simmam (T.), lion, 87. Spoons, spoon-racks, v. hftida.
Slnakkaran, alum, 200. ‘Spray,’ design motif, v. ‘branch’: -in-
Sina mala, motif in design, 65, 95; Figs. 6, mouth, "u. ‘flower-in-mouth.’
7 > 33 (”•): Pis. XXIII., 7, XXXV., 3, Squirrels, 90; PI. XVI.
XXXVIII., 8. ^rl, Hindu Goddess, Lakshmi, 90, 92; PI.
308

(in'.)
IX., I, XXIX., (2), XL., 1 (?): Royal Fig. 69 ; PI. I., XVII., XLVIIL,9.
designation and sign manual, 206, 207; Sima gal (ph), boundary stones, 119.
Fig. 129. Sunu-vel-dange, pattern of plaited grass mat,
&ri-bB-malaya, ‘Blessed Bo garland,’ a kind 249.
of gold necklace, which, however, does Sura, a talisman, charm, usually of metal,
not resemble a garland of bo-leaves; the containing charmed oil or writing: a
name probably signifies, garland such as ring round the ehala gaha, 76.
is fit to deck a bo-tree, PI. XLIX., 5. Surya Èataka, Sanskrit work in praise of the
^rl Pada, the Holy Footstep, i.e. Adam’s sun, a lesson book, 51.
Peak, q.v. Sutabumiya, birth house, 127.
SrJPdga Mana, pilgrim song, 44. Sutra, sutta (P.), sermons of the Buddha,
Stars, in Sinhalese decorative art, 4, 237; Buddhist scriptures, 160, 179, 207; Fig.
Fig. 143 (iv). 3; PI.XX., I.
Steel, V. iron and steel. Suvisi vivararia, ‘twenty-four assurances’
Stills, earthen, 222. given to the Buddha in former incarna­
Stokes, Whitley, 99. tions, regarding his future Buddhahood,
Stone, 144-148: other references:— 42, 169, 173, 179.
building not of Indian origin, 114, 129, Svarifa-kdrayU, goldsmith, 54.
253 : cutters, masons, v. gal~va4uvd : Svastika, 106; Figs. 28, 57, 69, 144.
door frames, 133 : elephant carved, 90 : Swan Maidens, 81, 86.
images, 148 seq.\ medicine mortar, PI. Sweetmeat moulds, 139;, Fig. 87; PI.
LII.,6: pillars, 118,129,167; Pis. VII., XIII., 4.
3, 4, 5, 9, VIII. (above): sandal wood Sword (kastanayd), handles, 186: PI.
grinding stone, PI. LII., 7 - wall of bo- XLVIL, II.
maluva, Kandy, 12. Symmetry and rhythm in art, no.
Stool {kolombuva, baftkuva, q.v.) 137 ; Fig.
86; PI. XL, 4, X., 2.
Street decoration, 39,175. T.
Stupa, dome-shaped Buddhist monument,
dagaba. Table, 137; Fig. 86, i.; PI. IX., 4.
Subasinha, D. J., 75. Taduppu cloth, plain country-woven cotton
Sudu, white: -iyan, white lead, 181 : -kalu, material, 26.
‘white black,’ i.e. grey: -maha-kodiya, Tahadu kola b(mma, method of setting stones
whitefiag, 38: -pafa, white colour, 164: in soft gold, 210, 253.
white silk flag, 38: -toppiya, Tahadu-kiyata, tenon-saw, 142.
Kandyan chief’s hat, 26. Tala-paka, talipot {Corypha umbraculifera),
Sukracarya (? fifth century a.d.), i53, 154, 3L 33. 49. 5L 216, 244: v. also sesata,
i6j,
163, 265. vadana talutta.
7
Sukranitisara, encyclopedic Sanskrit work * ’fl/iZ,unit of measurement,‘face,’ 13I atfgal,
by Sukracarya, q.v. 113,152.
Suliya, scroll, 102: suli-v^la, branch motif Talagoya [Varanus dracaena), a kind of
withra/tyaforms, 102,217; Pl.XXIV.,5. lizard, 221.
Sumptuary laws, seats, 32, 60, 244: dress, Talaguije, a village in the C.P. where
33> 34. 60: gems,gold,209: tiles,225: cotton is still woven, 232,233, 234,236:
two-storied houses, finials, tiles, plaster, V. also ‘weaving.’
whitewash, 34. l'alai, tale, talaya, v. tiringi tale.
Sun and moon (tra-handd) emblems, 4, 5, Talamalagala Somananda Thera, 151.
33. 75. 230, 237, 249: flag of Four Talatuoya, a village in the C.P., 117-
Korales, 38: sun or moon represented, Tale vela, a village, 180.
X 3 309

Talimana, bellows, 27. Tevava, musical service of a temple, 2 5.
Talipot, V. tala palm. Theosophical Society’s Library, Adyar, 69.
Taliya, cymbals, 26. Thera, a Buddhist monk, passim.
Taliya, earthen vessel, 221. Thome de Sousa, 10.
Tamarind seed, 64. Throne, asatfaya, 4, 5, 7, 206.
Tamils, historical references, i, 3, 6, 8, 9, Thurston, E., 265.
12: influence on art and customs, 62, 61, Tibbotumulla Vihara, 148.
65, 91,97, 211 : Tamil drawings, 13, 15, Tibetan Buddhism, 74.
Figs- 13- 15. 21,23 A. Tiger, 113, 230.
Temmettama, drum, tom-tom, 26,120. Tilaka, hrow-spot, 79.
Tannava, broad tongues of black or red in Tdes, 225; Fig. 135; PI. XXVI., I, 2, 3.
tiringi tale designs. Fig. 8. Timbirt, Diospyros embryopteris, 235.
Tani-vel-iruva, pattern of Dumbara mat, Tiraya, curtain, 238.
244; PI. XXXIV. Tirigu talai (T.), tirikit talat, v. tirlsgi tale.
Tanjore, drawings from, 90, 91 ; Figs. 10, Tirtngi tale {talaya, talai), design used in
13, 15, 21, 23 a : lac-inlay, 216: library, teaching drawing, and use of liya pata
69: teaching of drawing, 69. motif, 65 seq., too, 104; Figs. 4, 8; PI.
Tarahala, goldsmith, 127. XVII., I.
Tarakaya, star: tar aka piyum, ‘star lotus,’ Tiruvanagala, crystal, milky quartz, 64.
design of woven mats. Fig. 143 (iv.): Tisara, crane, ‘swan,’ 230.
taraka petta, ‘star flower,’ pattern of Tissamaharama, capital in third century
Dumbara mat, 244. B.C., 3,190, 225.
Tarava, star, pattern of Dumbara mat, PI. Tobacco box, heppuva, q.v.
XXXIV. Tooth relic, history, 6, 7, 8, 11: other
Taihagata, epithet of Budda, 72. references, 38, 39, 174, 212.
Tatuva, pl. tatù, dish, tray shelf, 137. Toppiya, Kandyan hat, 33, 237, 238.
Tavalama, oxen laden with merchandise, Toraifa, triumphal arch, 106, 253: toran
29, 264. petta, ‘arch flower,’ pattern of Dumbara
Telaktriya {Exccscaria agallocha), 215: mat, 244; PI. XXIV.
-laka/j-a (Tachardia conchiferata),\dLC insect Torapatiaya-, stock drill.
of same, 215. Tortoises, 230.
Teldeijiya, a village in the C.P., 180. Totagamuva, èri Rabula Sthavira, 10, 169.
Telescope, 58. Tourists, devoid of taste and intelligence,
Teliya, an eel-like fish with pointed snout; 203.
teli-kura, paint brush : -tana, (Aristida Tovil tatuva, altar for offering to devils, 249.
adscensionis) from which brushes are Trade, not characteristic of Sinhalese, 28 ;
made, 103, 165. with Dutch, 29 ; between Galle and
Tel, oil : -kat, yoke loads of oil due from Kandy, 264.
tenants, 26 : -kulava, vessel for filling Tradition, in art, 62 : in Buddhist art, 48 ;
lamps, 203; PI. XLV., 10. foreign and indigenous, 62: in education
Temperance, abstinence from drink, 39: of craftsmen, 66-68 : the language of art,
temperate curves, loi, 103 seq. 171 : in metal work, jewellery, etc., 208,
Tempera painting, 164^^7. 211.
Tempering steel, 193. Travellers, provision for, 116, 117, 221.
Temples, revenues, 27 : -Lands Com­ Tree (gaha), tree of life, etc., as decorative
missioners Report, 74: misappropriation motif, etc., 32, 34, 97, 244; Figs. 40,
of lands, 6: v. also kovila,vihara, devale. 142; Pis. I.,XIV., 4,8, XVIII., XXIII.,
Tennent, Sir Emerson, 4, 136,254, 259. 4, XXVIII., 4; V. also mal-gaha: repre­
Tefiya, metal, dish, 32, 203. sentations at Barahat, 253, 261.
310

Tree worship and folk-lore, 121-125. JJluvahu Penima, ‘The Spring from the
Triangle, motif in design, 105,106; Fig.56. Door,’ a book describing ceremonies on
T'ripitaka, ‘Three baskets,’ Buddhist canon, the completion of the erection of a house,
i8i. 79,120.
Triittla, trident, 112. Umbrella, symbol of dominion, 4, 33 ; Fig.
Trkanka, ‘ triple curved ’ images, 160. 69, XII.; PI. XIX.
Tu^apata, a grant recorded on ola, Kotabo- ‘Unicorn’horn, 186.
goda Vihara, 48 : Dembaralava V., 70 : Vpasaka-jana-alankaraya, a Buddhist book,
Dambulla V., 75. 77 -
Tunapfhena mala, ‘ triple flowering pattern,’ Upasaka Paijditayalage, name of a potter,
pattern of woven cloth, PI. XXIX., 6, 8. 219.
Tuttdan v?ia, repeating patterns, 67, 107, Uppalavaijija, ‘The Lotus-hued’ (Vishiju),
no; Figs. 9,61, 62. image of, 173.
Tun-pa-kolle, tripod of loom for Dumbara Uposataramaya, the pansala at Ridi Vihara,
mats, 243. 173-
Tunpota lanuva, ‘three-ply-plait,’ pattern of XJra-malaya, shawl, head-cloth, 234, 239 ;
Dumbara mats, 244. _ PI. XXVIII., 4.
Tuppotiya, a wearing cloth ten cubits long, tjravala, a village in theC.P., 180.
32, 33, 36, 213, 233, 241; Fig. i; Pis. Xjrd-k(taya, a well-ring, 225.
III., XXXVI., 5. Xira-litida, pi. nrs-lin, well, lined with
Turnery, u6, 141, 215, 217; Pis. VI., 5, earthen or wooden rings, 225.
IX., 1-3, 5, 6, XIII., 3. Urulevatte Vihara, measurements of colossal
Tumour, G., and Wijesinha, L. C., 3: clay image of Buddha, 149.
MahSvaijisa quotations, v. Mahavamsa. Usabha, a measure of distance, 174, 175.
Tvastra, third son of Vi^vakarma, 63. TJsamba (for usabha'), a bull, 90.'.
Usamba-kunjaraya, ‘ bull-elephant,’ a design
u. of these animals combined, 67, 90; Fig.
27.
Uda Dumbara, ‘ Upper Dumbara,’ a part of TJshiftsha, protuberance on the skull, one of
the C.P., 147. the thirty-two chief physical perfections
TJ4a-halla, pi. udahalu, string net for carrying of the Buddha, 155.
or hanging earthen vessels. Uttama, large, of an image, 154.
TJdakkiya, double hand-drum, 186; PL* Uttama-dasatdlaya, a scale of 124 angal, 154.
XXXVII. Uttara, Regent of the North, 72.
4
JJa Nuvara, ‘The Upper City,’ a part of Uttar a l^lla, part of a door-frame, 133.
the C.P., 8, 188. Vttara-pata, a wooden rod, part of a mat-
Udasgiriya, a village in the C.P., 14. weaver’s loom, 243.
Udasiya-pattuva,=Udis-pattuva, a district ■ Uturukurudiviyina, the continent north of
in the C.P., 35. Mount Meru, 94.
Ui&yi?,loose trousers, frilled at the ankle, 34; Uva Patanas, a part of the Cva Province,
as worn. Pis. XXII., XXXVI., i. 7
. “ -
Vdu-mahal-ge, upper room of a devale, 120. Uva, rebellion in, 14.
Uga-muftiya, an earthen pot for collecting
kitulsyrup, 220.
V.
Vliyam-vasama, v. Nila-vasama.
Vl-kafuua, a blunt writing style used by Vadana talatta, talipot leaf umbrella, richly
pupils, 49. ornamented, formerly restricted to royal
Ullandupitiya, a village in the C.P., 59. and religious use, afterwards used by
IJluvahu-kavuva, door-post, jamb, 133. chiefs and others on public occasions,
4 3
X ”

being carried by atapattu tenants, 24, 33; Vallah^o4a, 39, 204.
5
Pis. I., XXII. Vallavva, manor house, 24, 31, 37, i i >
Vadan-kavi-pota, lesson book, grammar, etc., 212.
5 Valuva, tuft of cotton ready for spinning.
?-
Vadi, composition for priming panels for Valuvaduva, hank of niyanda fibre, 246.
drawing, 64. Valvidunava, chamara, fly-whisk, 33.
Vadimbuva, wall plate (Lewis). Vartisa sStra, abdominal plumb-line, 159.
Vadiya, rest-house, 219. Vanga-giriya, hermitage of Prince Vessan-
Vaduva, craftsman, builder, painter, etc.; tara in the Vessantara Jataka, 41; Fig.
now specially applied to the lower 143; Pl.I.
division of the craftsmen, particularly Van-ged'tya-, rice mortar,
carpenters and turners, but not black­ Vannipola, 73.
smiths, 21,54,55,125,184: vadu-avgala, Vap-pihiya, vegetable knife, 140; Fig. 88.
craftsman’s inch (1^5 English inch), Varada abhaya hastam (S.), hands in an
142, 153 : -riyana, craftsman’s cubit (31 attitude of blessing (a mudrd), 79.
English inches), 125,142, 153, 233. Varaha Mihira,' 161, 163.
Va^uge Anura Appu, a craftsman, 62. Varakaula Ukkubanda, his betel bag, PI.
Vaduvarala Devasimha Mulacari Nayide, XXXI.
a craftsman, 58. Varan DeviyO, Guardian Gods, Regent of
Vahantarava, veil, fine cloth, 72,74. the Four Quarters, 72, 248.
kitchen knife, 193. Varnish, 167, 181.
Vaijavya, Regent of the North West, 72. Varuna, Hindu God, Regent of the West,
Vaijantaya, Silpa iastra, dealing with 72.
measurements of architecture, jewellery, Vas, Buddhist Lent, three months of rainy
swords, etc., 67,121,208,209. season, 45, 211, 236: -dan-kada, yoke­
Vajjan, five kinds of music, 26. load of provisions given to priest, 26.
Vajrasana, throne ornamented with vajras, Vasala, outcaste, 21.
73 - Vasal Mafluva, royal pavilion, 180.
Vaka, curve, 103: vaka deka, double curve, Vases, of silver and gold, 5; earthen, kalasa,
basis of instruction in drawing, 65, 69, q.v.
95,104; Figs.5, 6, 8. Vasu Devi,genius loci, 126.
Vala, pi. vallu, slave, 22. Fafa, round: -pullorama, rasp, 142: -toppiya,
Valala, 219. 33
-
Valalu-kotalaya, ring-shaped puzzle-jug, Vafavva, tenon of door serving as hinge
222: -lanuva, ‘ring-plait’ design of (Lewis).
woven mat, 234; PI. XXVIII., i (3). VattaramaVihara, 133.
Valanda, pi. valan, earthen vessel, earthen­ Vattoruva, register, record ofjudgment, 58.
ware, 219, 220: valan-badde-madige. Vatta, pi. vatu, garden, 23.
Department of Moormen without Vatuvala, village in C.P., i8o.
regular Service Lands, 54: valan-dena Veda, measure, four angal, 152.
panguva, holding of a potter tenant, 219: V(do; work; -kaMa, Dumbara mat with
valan-kada, yoke-load of pottery, 219: pattern work, 244: -karaya, workman,
•valan-meti, potter’s clay: valan-talana- 60: -pidura, do,
l^lla, potter’s mallet, 220, 230. Vedarala, physician, 45, 187.
Valaha, bear (flag), 38. Vfdda, hunter, man of the woods, 22, 57.
Valatveva, 180. Vedibehet, gun-powder; -karaka, powder
Valentyn, Rev. F., 2, 54. horn, 216; PL XLIIIa, 2.
Valicciya, varnish, 167. Ve-gedi boralaya, ball of tassel of betel bag,
Vali~yakun n^ttma, kind of devil dance, 39. 238.
312

Vegiriya, 39- Vijêndragë Punci Nayide, «. of a craftsman,
Vekoladeiiiya, village in Three Korales, 76-
130. Vikramaditya,=Chandragupta II., Indian
Vela^ jungle rope, creeper, line, branch or Emperor, 162.
vine motif in design, 98: -ka4iuva, Vikrama Raja Siriiha, 13, 33, 180; PI.
heddles, 243. XXII.: jewellery for, PI. XX., 3.
Velerida, merchant, 21. Vil-koraha, earthen vessel for soaking seeds,
Veli-kaha,=kora-kaha, q.v. 221.
Veli-pata, ivory style for writing and erasing Village community, 23, 28, 29, 30, 31.
on sand, 49, 186; Pis. XXXVIIL, 6, Vimala Dharma Surya I., 33, 59 ; PL
XL., 2. XXII.: V. D. S. II., 6, 58,264.
V(li-pila, narrow wooden bench or tray with Vira Parakrama Bahu VIII., 58.
sand for teaching writing, 49, 186. Virasuba kunçaram (T.), v. usamba kunjaraya.
Velivita Saraijankara, a Buddhist Priest, Vishpu, Hindu God, in Buddhism, tutelary
nephew of the Safigharaja, 180, 181. deity of Lanka, 38, 88, 146, 150, 164,
Velivifa Pitjdapatika Sarapahkara, Sangha- 171, 210 : five weapons, PL XLVIIL,
raja, 12, 263. 15, 17: Dévale, Kandy=Mahâ Dévale,
Vellala, man of high caste, cultivator, 21, 186, 237; Pis. XL., 7, XLL, 2, XLIL,
22, 26, 59. 4, 5: Devundara, 10, ii, 260: Hangu-
Vellasa, 232. raiiketa, 195, 206; Fig. 128: -garbbhaya,
V^avaya, 117. 72; -kalaya,jz.
Velvet, 237. Viiuddhi Mârggaya, ‘The Way of Purity,’
Vel-viddne, prcepositus, 30. 47,180,181 ; Pis. XVIII., XIX.
Verna, weaver’s lath, 243: v^ma-kaijuva, post Visvajna, a son of Viévakarma, 63.
of a lathe, 187. VEvakarma, God of Arts and Crafts, 63,78,
Vendum giriya, ‘praying’ arecanut sheer, 79; PL XXL
PI. XLVL, 5. Viëvakarma Kulabhimâna Sabha, Madras,
Veni-v?l (Coscinium fenestratum), 243. 63, 69.
Verandahs, 114, 118, 131; Pis. VIII., IX., Vitti-vaftoruva, statement of claim, 57.
.
8 Viyana, viyan-redda, awning, 26, 120, 238.
Vermilion {sadiliAgam), 3,4, n i. Viyata, span measure, 142, 153.
Vesak, Sinhalese New Year, May, 37. Vredenburg, A. S., 190.
Vftakeyiyd {Pandanus), 97, 165; Fig. 33; Vrittimalakhyava, Vrittimâlâva, Vyasakara,
PI. XVIII. Sanskrit works studied in pansala schools,
Vetekgama, 164. 51-
Ve-v(la, cane, rattan, 20; -peffiya, basket,
200; PL XLIIIa, 8. w.
Vidane, village officer, 20, 27, 188, 218:
-gama, village under orders of a Vidane, Walls, construction of, 117: preparation
for painting, 166.
?-T
Vidina katuva, awl, 142. W a p p e n S t ilFig. 68.
Viharaya, Buddhist temple, 117 and/««»«. Washerman {radava), duties, etc., 26, 237,
Vihare-gama, village belonging to a Bud­ 238.
dhist temple, 27. Water, representation in art, 88 : -clock,
Vijaya, founder of Sinhalese race, i, 2, 21, {pe-t(tiya), 205.
63,177: VijayaBahu I., 8: VijayaBahu Watt, Sir G., 183, 184, 186, 216.
III., 6, 9, 174, 232: Vijaya Raja Siipha, Weaving, weavers, 26, C4, 222-226; Pis.
V. Vikrama R. S. VI.,i-3,XXVIIL, i,XXIX.
313

Ta/i (T.), a mythical monster, 83,184.
Wellenranke, (G.), ‘ branch,’y.v. 7
Tama,"Hindn God, Regent of the South, ^'
Well-rings, 225. 9
Tamanna, iron smelter, caste, 22, 27» ^ °>
Westminster Abbey, 17.
192.
White ants, 116, 118, 128, 221.
Wickremasinghe, Don M. de Zilva, 53 > Yapahuva, a mediasval capital, 9, 144!
Vistar ay a, history of Y., 144.
57, 117, 263.
Tasodharavata, Story of Buddha’s wife, sung
Wilson, T., 85.
Windows, 115, 134; PI. IX., 2, 3. by women spinning, 235.
Women, dress and manners, 32, 34, 35 > 3 ^> Yatinuvara,partofthe C.P., 180.
37, 1:7; Pis. II., XXXVI., 2,4. Tatiporuva, wooden panel, drawing board,
Wood, woodwork, 129-143 ; Figs. 73-93 ! 64, 65, 67.
Pis. VI., 5, IX.— XIII., XLI., 4 . Yativavala Vihara, 30.
XLVIL, 1,3,4:— other references, book- Yattinangal Islla, part of sleay, 234.
covers, 94, and see ‘Architecture.’ Tatu-kftaya, phne, 142.
Writing, teaching, 49, 50: -style, 195, 207, Tatara, lock: -htramaijaya, 140; Fig. 88:
208; Fig. 129. -mudda, key (Lewis): -kotalaya, secret
jug, 222.
Y. Tasua,^\>2Ac'jcoxn^ \ angala, 112, 152.
Togasana, contemplative position, 156,158.
Takn,yakkha, yaksha, a devil, demon, 2,113,
Toga èataka, a medical work, 51.
126: yak ceremonies, devil worship, 25,
Tojana, measure of distance, about fifteen
26, 27, 46, 148, 260.
miles, 174, 175.
Takaia, iron, q.v.-. y. kalu karatjavH, or
ganava, to colour iron, 200.
Takdessa,on& who conductsceremonies,
46. z .
Takim, Takkhiifi, femsileyaka, 2, 125. Zodiac, signs of the, 84, 230.
ADDENDA TO INDEX.
Maha Vishnu Devale, v, Vishnu Dévàle, Kandy.
In all cases of doubt, the transliterations and diacritical marks given in the index are to
be preferred. The entries under afamagala, idealism, contain information additional to
the text.
314

ERRATA.
Minor errors of omission of diacritics, and slight inconsistencies in the use of plural forms,
italics, etc., are for the most part, not noticed.
7, Is. 39 and 40. For It covers the period 543— 301 b.c., read Its first part covers the
period 543 B.c.— 301 a.d.
12, Notes. For P. B. Pieris read P. E. Pieris.
For Mahavamsa, Chaps. XIX., C., etc., read Mahavamsa, Chaps. XCIX., C., etc.
1
13, . 19. For 1796 read 1798.
24,1. 15. 'Pot avuda K2.A avudha.
1
. ] 8. For vallava read vallavva.
1
25, . 27. For rate read ratha.
Is. 18, 23. For Ickuruvo, Iskuruva, read lokaruvs, lokaruva.
32, Is. 12, 17. For earthern read earthen.
1
33, . 6. After 1821 add {PI. XXII).
1
. 22. For avuda read avudha.
38, Footnote. For IV. read V.
1
39, . 33. For asfaka read ashtaka.
1 - 39 - For earthern read earthen..
4 °^ 1. 6. For earthern read earthen.
1. 9. For gahoni read gahsni.
35 - For ascetism read asceticism.
42.1. 33. For bodhisatva read Bsdhisattva.
1. 36. For Nata deviyo read Nat ha Deviya.
43 > 1 - 25. For truth, revealed read truth revealed,.
1. 26. Delete the words and quoted above.
45 1
. . 24. For Vedarala read Vedaralas.
46. 1 . 3 - For Nata deviys read Nat ha Deviys.
52.1. 29. For satrafi read stttrafi.
54 , 1 - 5 - Pot galva^uvo rezd gal-va4uv0.
1. 6.
For lokuruvs read lokaruvs.
1. 9. For navandanno read navandanno.
For lokaruvs read Iskaruvs.
55, Is. 3 and 30. For Disavaniya read DisSvanaya.
1
. 37. For disavani read disavana.
56.1. 18. For Djammajoti read Dhammajoti.
58. 1 . 5 - For iri hauda read ira handa.
1. 13. For Ptana read Etana.
1. i6. For Dharmma read Dharma,
1. 29. For Disavaniya read Disavanaya.
60,1.45. Delete the words in brackets; and see p. 64.
61.1. 21. For in read to.
1.9. Por galladda Ttzd galladda.
1
. 24 and Fig. For Fig. 10 read Fig. 9A.
1
. 18. For Bhama read Bhttmi.
1. 16. Por gsdavari sarasvati xtzd gsdavert sarasvatt.
Is. 26, 28. It is not made clear that the ‘foreman’ and ‘craftsman’ are the same
person here.
315

y.C.R.^.S.
75, Note. For read J.C.B.R.A.S. \ '
76,1. 12. For Gadaladeniya read Gadaladeriiya. ,
1. 14. For ran-avudha read ran-avudha.
1 - 35 - For chieftains, or read temples or to.
77 >1. 36. For Dhammakanda read Dhammakhandha.
78, 1. 28. For in the corner by read at the foot of.
79 , 1. 23. For sternness read midness,—
Ii, 1. 24. For Dawson read Dowson.
87 and Fig. For Fig. 23 read Fig. 2 3a.
89, last line, For Bodhisatta read Bsdhisattva.
1.
94 , 30. Delete it is less often seen than the last.
1
. 32. For Fig. 32 read Fig. 33 (some copies).
1
P. 95 . 3. The paragraph beginning Of other conventional flower should be read on the
preceding page, above line 29.
P. 103, 1. 31. Before every, read in.
1 6
P. 105, . . For noble read right.
1. 7. For it is read they are.
1. 18. For fortlaufende read fortplanzende.
106,1. 13. For Batikunst read Batikkunst.
1. 25. For equal armed read equal-armed.
For four petalled read four-petalled.
P. 108.1. 5 - For ‘■ set gem' read ‘gem dot.'
P. 109.1. 3 °- For fortlaufende read fortplanzende.
P. 111.1. 2 of Appendix. For in read by.
1
P. 112, . 38. For kala read kala.
1
P. 116, . 21. For ambalam read ambalama.
P. 118, Fig. 72. For tipped read hipped (in some copies),
last line. For Nuag read nuga.
1
P. 119. . 29. For süna read sima.
P. 120.1. 16. For pafisthana xe&d. pafisthana.
1. 17. For horanc read horai}f.
P. 12b, passim. For Bhuma read Bhami.
P. 127, 1. 3. For ranakura read rankaruvo.
P. 129, 1. 3. For Ecclesiastes read Ecclesiasticus.
P. 148, 1. 26. For Moräpaya read Morapaya (some copies).
P. 152, last line but one. For matra read mätra.
1
P. 154, . 36. Delete quotation marks.
P. 161, Note. For Varaha read Varaha.
P. 163, Note. For Varaha Mitra read Varaha Mihira.
P. 171,1. 13. For ajapala read Ajapala.
For mucalinda read Mucalinda.
P. 203 last line but one. For tafíuva read tafuva.
1 4
P. 204 . 14. For Vf a sangala read vedi sangala.
1
. 15. For galaddo read galladdö.
P. 205, last line. For dalamura read dalumura.
1
P. 209, . 27. For E. R. Gooneratne read Arthur Jayawardena.
1
P. 220, . 26. For walanda read valanda.
1
P. 223. . 2. For cocoanut read coconut (in some copies).
316

1
P. 230, . 7. For aluva read «//<?, *
1
P. 236, . 31. For Rapavaliya Paj^valiya,
1
P. 248, . 28. For begun read begati.
1
P. 266, . 4. For one or read or of (in some copies).
1
P. 102, . 35. For XXXIV. read XXIV.
For 6 read 3.
1
P. 169, . 7. For FIZa read VIIIk.
1
. 10. For kurulla read kurulu.
1
P. 198, . 12. Delete turning.
Index s.v. ¿rt-bs-malaya, see correction, description of PI. XLIX.
1
Supra, delete, p. 316, . 7.
PLATES.
For PI. XVIIa read PI. XVII.
In some cases the transliteration employed differs from that used in the text, particularly
in the use of w for v and ch for c.
317

POSTSCRIPT.
Well-rings. A photograph of earthen well-rings in situ is given in the Ann. Rep. Arch.
Sur. India for 1903-4, Fig. 2.
Teaching of drawing. The method of teaching drawing on a primed panel closely resembles
that described by Cennini in his Treatise on Painting (trans. by Mrs. Merrifield, London,
1844, Chs. 5-8).
AvalokiteSvara. On PI. XXII. King Vimala Dharma Surya I. is represented wearing a
crown with a small image of Buddha upon the front of it. This was probably adopted from
the small Dhyani Buddha represented on the headdress of the Bodhisattva Avalokiteivara.
It appears also on the headdress of the very early alto-relievo figure of‘Kushta Raja’ at
Veligama. The cult of Avalokiteivara was well known in Ceylon in the ninth century.
It is just possible that the Veligama figure itself really represents Avalokiteivara.
Greek Influence in Decorative Art: p. 261. I do not mean to imply that the use of classic
decorative motifs (such as the acanthus) at Gandhara left no trace on later Indian decorative
art. On the contrary, such traces are not difficult to detect. But they no more inspired
Indian decorative art, than the Gandhara Buddhas inspired the Divine Ideal in Indian
sculpture; and the fundamental decorative motifs are of oriental (including Egyptian)
rather than classic origin. Such forms as those appearing on the woven belt of PI. XXIX.,
7, are much older than the period of classic influence at Gandhara, or even Barahat;
they are the common heritage of East and West.

DESCRIPTION OF PLATES.
PLATE I.
Details from jataka paintings at Degaldoruva Vihara, done between 1771 and 1786 a.d.
The pictures are chosen from those immediately to the left of the door of the image-room,
illustrating the Vessantara Jataka, of which a summary has been given above, p. 42. In the
original paintings, there is no division into separate scenes; there is instead ‘continuous
narration,’ the key to the events being only given by a few words of Sinhalese beneath the
principal scenes. The upper panel reproduced shows first Prince Vessantara, riding in
state upon the rain-giving white elephant. “Early in the morning,” says the jataka, “the
Prince, intending a visit to the alms-hall, washed himself with sixteen pitchers of perfumed
water, and broke his fast, and mounted upon the back of his noble elephant richly adorned
proceeded to the eastern gate.” Finally, near the southern gate, he met the Brahmans
from Kalinga, and in answer to their prayer gave to them the elephant, with all its trappings,
and this gift is represented on the right hand of the same panel.
Many interesting details should be observed. The Prince is dressed in the traditional royal
costume of a king or deva, not in the actual costume worn by the eighteenth century
Kandyan kings. In other respects the picture fairly represents a Kandyan State procession.
The five attendants, beginning from the left, carry respectively something, perhaps an
offering, covered by a napkin {pesa-lensuva) ; a sSsata with lacquered handle; sayda
4
koaya (?); mutu kupaya and vapana talatta. The sixth and seventh attendants are half
hidden; the eighth is the elephant-keeper, carrying the goad [heti4uva), his lower caste
indicated by his darker colour. The goad has a lacquered handle. The Prince has ready
to hand a smaller goad (amkusd). Then follow two attendants carrying emblems of
authority, and another with a white flag {sudu kodiya^, with a little streamer {savarama).
In the second scene, on the extreme right, the Prince is seen pouring water from a keifdiya
into the hands of the Brahmans, who come next in the original, in ratification of the gift;
immediately behind him is his chief attendant or minister, distinguished by the bsralaya
worn upon the vafa toppiya which the others wear alone. The elephant’s trappings,
described in the jataka as priceless, are also to be noted, especially the alternate red and
yellow cloth lappets in the form of ¿i-leaves, the jewelled anklets and ornament, worn
Hpop the frontal lobes and over the eyes. The lotus rosettes {nelum-mal) are used decora-
tively to fill out the space evenly, but have nothing to do with the picture. The first
of these is of the form in which the outer ring of petals is replaced by a whorl of cobra
heads.
The lower panel in two scenes shows us the arrival of Vessantara and MadrI Devi and
the two children at the hermitages prepared for them by Viivakarma at ^akra’s order at
Vangagiriya. On the left is thC'mountain Vipula, by the foot of which they passed, and
next the river Ketumatl where they rested and ate and bathed and drank before proceeding
further. The trees represent thick forest, through which they passed until they came
to the ‘four-square lake.’ Then Vessantara, seeing a path, knew that it led to a hermitage,
and going in front of the others, found indeed the pansala prepared, he entered, “and
putting oif his bow and sword, with the garments which he wore, he donned the garb
of a hermit, and coming forth entered the covered- walk and paced up and down and . . .
approached his wife and children. Madrl fell at his feet in tears; then with him entering
the hermitage, she went to her own cell and donned the ascetic dress.” This is the second
scene, shown on the right hand of the lower picture.
319

The hermit’s cave, with the couch, curtain and water-pot {ken^iya), and the hermit’s dress,
consisting of a cloth, a deer-skin and a girdle, should be observed. He holds in his hands a
rosary (nava-guna-v?ld) and a staff.
4
The two inscriptions read respectively, £// fta dan dun vaga and Madrl devl han n iiefunu
vaga\ i.e., “ Gift of the white elephant,” and “ Madrl Devi’s weeping and prostration
(before Vessantara).” (The syllable nu has been omitted in the reproduction.) ■
PLATE II.
DAUGHTERS OF KANDYAN CHIEFS.
To illustrate the wearing of jewellery, chiefly ear-rings, necklaces, pendants, bracelets and
rings. The bird pendant and chain worn by the second girl are the kurulu b^di malaya,
the ‘garland with the bird,’ shown on a larger scale on Plate L., figure 8.
The embroidered hfffaya and gold-woven ohoriya of the first girl should be noted ; but the
second wears a quite plain hettaya, and an ohoriya of English material.
34 35
For details regarding the dress of Kandyan women, and explanation of terms, see pp. > -
Photos by Skeen & Co.
PLATE III.
KANDYAN CHIEF.
A Kandyan chief in full dress, as follows: hatara-mulu-toppiya (four-cornered hat), with
mal-gaha (strictly a royal prerogative); kamisiya (shirt), under pacca hfttaya (‘green’jacket)
with gold buttons; tuppotiya (skirt or body cloth), with broad patiya\ knife, finger-ring
and handkerchief. Part of a sesata is seen behind the chieftain.
The brocade of the heffaya, the pa(iya, and the tuppotiya are of Indian manufacture, the
rest probably all local, except perhaps the material of the shirt.
For an account of Kandyan dress, and explanation of terms, see pp. 32-34.
Photo by Skeen & Co.
PLATE IV.
1. Kinnara caste weavers of Dumbara mats. On the left a woman seated on a paddy-
pounder (mortar for husking rice), spinning the fibre; on the right a man also spinning,
his back towards the pila, or narrow verandah of the hut; in the centre a boy weaving,
in the act of drawing weft fibres through the warp. For description see pp. 243, 244.
Photo by Skeen & Co.
2. Platform prepared with figures of yakshat and planetary deities for a bali ceremony.
The names of those represented, from right to left, are Senasurage Era^takaya, Vavul
Rakshaya, Esvaha Baliya, Guruju Rakshaya; the next conspicuous head is the ‘kibihi’ of
a makara toraifa^ beneath which is an Iruge Rupaya, and above it, Vesamunu Divya Raja;
and next in order to the left, but scarcely seen, Praija Mangalya (.'’), Skanda Divya Raja,
Da^akrodaya Raja and Iruge Eraitakaya. The picture is shown here to illustrate the
existence of a plastic art in impermanent materials. Further references will be found on
pp. 148, 177, 252, 259.
3. Damascener {ridl-ketiyan-karayd) at work, inlaying a handle-rose with silver wire
(Peradeijiya Exhibition, 1906).
320

PLATE V.
CRAFTSMEN AT WORK.
Figure 1-4. Potters at work:
4
1. Making a «attjya; ?tili md ka(age i hthiviA. Duiubara.
2. Completing the under side of a n^mbiliya; on the worker’s right, a muttiya with
water: Balangoda.
4
3. Painting red stripes on a ka\age iya\ stacks of mu^i behind. The workshop is
the verandah of the potter’s house: Madampe.
4
4. Scoring furrows in nlmbili and koras; Balango a.
5. Weaver of grass bags or baskets {bulat-mal); a low-country woman living at Hal-
dummulla.
6. Brass founder using stock drill {gal-torapanaya) to bore holes in metal: a low-country
man, at Mahavalatenna, near Balaftgoda. See Fig. 91 and pp. 142, 194.
7. Brass founders’ shop, at Mahavalatenna, Balangoda; low-country men working at an
up-country valawa. In the foreground are three furnaces, two containing crucibles.
8. Fair at annual perahera at Saman Devale, Ratnapura; low-country metal-work sold
inland.
4
9. Ro iya maker of horn combs; Ella, Ova. See p. 189.
I o. Goviya dressed as mura-karaya (watchman), wearing diya kacciya and armed with sword
and spear; Haldummulla.
PLATE VI.
CRAFTSMEN AT WORK.
1. Cloth-weaver at work, separating warp threads with sema If Ha to produce a pattern.
See p. 234.
2. Cloth-weaver at work, about to throw the shuttle. The left hand rests on the sleay or
reed-frame, ready to press back the weft thread after the shuttle is thrown. See p. 234.
3.. Spinning cotton. Figs, i— 3 portray the chief weaver of Talagune, a beravdya woman
reamed Tikirati,— a stirring woman and great character. See p. 232.
4: Ivory-turner at work. Seep. 187.
5. Wood-turner at work, using the modern form of lathe. Near Niriella, Sabaragamuva.
See p. 141.
6. Silversmith working in house verandah. The anvil embedded in a heavy log is imme­
diately in front of the smith, who is about to use the blow-pipe to solder a piece of work just
laid on the gini-kabala (here, as usual, a common korahd), or fire-pot.
PEATE VII.
ARCHITECTURE.
I. Lahkatilaka. The most beautiful of the mediaeval Kandyan buildings. Brick construc­
tion on a stone foundation upon bare rock. On the extreme left the rock surface is covered
with the engraved gal-sannasa. Much of the brickwork has been left unplastered. At the
4
main entrance should be noticed the stone balustrades {et-hon av?l), and above, the large
y I 321

makara toraija arch. The hipped roof over the porch is typical; the number of roofs at
different levels is a striking feature, but more unusual.
2. Roof of Dévale attached to Gadaladeijiya Vihara. Shows flat tiles on the hipped roof,
which is terminated by an earthen finial.
3. at Mahgalagama. Timbered roof supported on stone monoliths. Flat tiles
and earthen finials. Seep. 116.
4. Interior of verandah of Danagirigala Vihara. Timbered lean-to roof supported by mono­
liths. Mud wall with window on the left. Typical pekaiaya capital between monolith
and roof timbers. See p. 129.
5. Gahgârâma Vihara, Kandy. Shows hipped roof with overhanging eaves, and lean-to
verandah. Plastered ¿i-leaves can be made out upon the upper part of the roof. The vihara
4
is built on a stone foundation. On the right a part of the bana-ma uva, or preaching hall,
is visible. See p. 118.
6. Part of a cottage, showing designs painted on whitewashed wall. The right hand design
of two entwined serpents is known as nâga-dangaya. On the roof are semi-cylindrical tiles ;
in Kandyan times such a house would have been thatched. In front of the house various
seeds and grains are spread out to dry. Near Balangoda.
7. Detached Vihara at Alutnuvara Devale near Balangoda. Shows typical constructional
features of a vihara supported on short monoliths. See pp. 117, 118.
8. Door of Devanagala Vihâra, Sab.
9. Bissa, or outdoor granary, made of plastered cane basketwork, whitewashed and decorated.
Access to interior only by raising the thatched lid. See p. 116.
PLATE VIII.
Above. Dajada Mâligava, Kandy, showing the two storeys. The timbered floor of the
second storey is supported on painted monolithic pillars. Observe the ‘ rayled banisters,’
wooden pillars, ornamented rafters Agones') and ‘idda’ of upper storey. The eaves of the
verandah roof are decorated with perforated metal ‘weatherhoarding’ and strings of flags.
Below. Interior of rock temple at Dambulla (Dambulu), showing a small dagaba and
numerous images, as well as the painted walls and roof.
Photos by Colombo Apothecaries Co. and Skeen & Co.
PLATE VIIIa.
INTERIORS OF VIHARAS.
Above. Interior of Lankatilaka Vihara, pilima-ge. The following items of the decoration
may be noted : makara torana over the image, with devas above; on the right, partly hidden
by the curtain, and on the left, in a corresponding position, pictures of the sat-satiya or seven
weeks (p. 43), arranged thus: 2 i
4 3
5
6
7
Below. Interior of K?laniya Vihara, vestibule. Wall paintings of the eighteenth century.
Above, sat-satiya ; below, four tiers of jataka paintings, the uppermost, Dhammapala Jataka,
the third from the top, the Canda Kioidura Jataka, then a narrow band of nSri lata v^la
ornament, flowers in vases below; on the right, portraits of benefactors.
Photos by Skeen & Co.
322

PLATE IX. WOODWORK.
1. Ran-doU, ceremonial palanquin of the Vishiju Devale, Kandy, shotving end carved and
painted figure of árl with elephants, and carved and turned ivory feet and corner pieces.
The background of the carved portion is painted red, the figure yellow with limbs green.
Width of palanquin 29 inches. The bent bamboo carrier, lacquered red, black, yellow and
green, and with damascened fittings, is visible above. The end (not visible) is covered with
copper gilt, the extremity set with a cabochon crystal in a claw mount.
2. Window of refectory {hhojana salavd) at Malvatte Pansala.
3. Window at Malvatte Pansala.
4. Table in the Kandy Museum. Height 22| inches, dimensions of top, 29^x43 inches,
1
the top 3 inches thick, but hollowed out beneath to reduce weight. Compare with game
table of PI. XLI., IV. Seep. 137.
5. Chair kept in the pohoya-gS at Asgiriya, where it was dedicated by Kirti árl. The chair
is painted, and inlaid with ivory, parts are of ebony ; the back is 31 inches above the ground.
6. Bench or table leg, Dalada Maligava.
7. Bed at Kuij(Jasale Pansala. Dimensions, 46 x 82^ inches, height of actual bed, 24 inches
from ground, the legs 4I inches square.
8. Cradle, in a house near Ratnapura.
9. Door at Asgiriya Pansala, seen from within. See p. 133.
PLATE X. WOODWORK.
1. Daifdasana, literally ‘wooden seat.’ This is a piece of ecclesiastical furniture used in
pansalas, but whether actually as a seat (which is unlikely) or as a table for books I am
uncertain. The four hooks upon the inner sides of the horizontal bars must, it would
appear, have supported a cloth cover. References to daifdasana are found in sannas (p. 48)
and lists of offerings, but I have never seen one in use, or pictured in a jataka painting. The
daifdiisana figured is kept in the apartments formerly occupied by the Sangha Raja at
Malvatte Pansala. It is incomplete, but shows traces of painting. Height above the
ground, i8| inches. Seep. 137.
4
2. Kolombuva, wooden stool. Do antale Pansala. Height 8 inches. Made from one
piede of wood.
3. Half of pskadaya capital, plain type, Docjantale. Length 27 inches.
4. Half of pekadaya capital, pendent lotus form, Danagirigala. Length 31I inches.
5. The same from beneath, showing the ‘lotus.’ The form of the inner petals is probably
influenced by that of the ¿i7-leaf. The lotus thus seen measures inches square.
6. Carved plank bed. This is a particularly old and fine example of Kandyan wood
carving. The border on three sides consists of an archaic arrangement of lotus flowers in
full and side view; the two lower corners and the centre are carved with different lotus
forms, the lower right hand one being unfinished. The blank border at the top represents
the space occupied by the head board. The table measures 34x72^: inches. The centre
lotus is supported on the left by a kind of stalk. On the right is a tree, with strange bird-
lilce forms affronted. On the left, a little above the centre, an excavation has been made
(covered in the picture by a restoration), and a game-board cut out, similar to those shown
on Plate XII. The legs on the table when obtained, were probably not original, and have
been replaced by old bench legs from Jaffna, of a type, also, but more rarely met with in
Sinhalese districts. Author’s collection.
7. Carved rice pounder. Colombo Museum.
y'2 323

PLATE XI.
WOODWORK.
1. Idi appan van-ge^iya, ‘string ‘hopper’ masher.’ The central part consists of a cylinder
in which a piston works up and down; cooked rice flour is placed in the cylinder and
squeezed out through the holes in a metal plate beneath, much as potatoes are wormed in a
masher. ‘Hoppers’ (a corruption of appd) are a kind of rice bread especially used at the
first daily meal; there are two chief sorts, the ordinary, and the ‘string’ hopper. Machines
for preparing the latter are not often so elaborately carved as that figured, which was lately
presented by Mr. T. B. Paraijatella to the Kandy Museum. It may have been used in the
Royal kitchen, or in that of some chief; but the use of ornamented tools and kitchen and
agricultural implements was equally characteristic of all classes. Measurements, 16 x 6|
inches, diameter of cylinder, if inch.
4
2. Door bolt (aguld), carved with liya pata ornament, and on the right kui} i rakkan diaper.
Malvatte Pansala.
3. Bed-head {isa kaiayd), Kandy Museum. Length 30 inches, ¿erapsndiya, lion and Hya-
v(la (branch) ornament, framed by a variety of diapers.
4. Three-legged stool [bankuva). The legs are fitted to the seat by housed dovetails. The
top is carved with a central lotus, primitive ‘ Welknranke,’ two-ply plait and chevron or
wave patterns. Height inches. Many of these stools have been copied by the Kandy
Industrial School, and sold by the Ceylon Social Reform Society, as examples of Kandyan
furniture.
5. 6, 7. Spoon-racks {h^ndi-ana-val). No. 5 from the Kandy Museum, kibihi' (lion)
face above, and hanisa pOftuva below. The influence of architectural forms is seen in the
4
‘stepping’ of asana ka a type. No. 6 has also a ^kibihi' face above; Nos. 6 and 7 have lanu-
gefa (plait) ornament. Both are in the Colombo Museum collection.
The spoon-rack used to be’a regular article of kitchen furniture; the long thin handles of
the coconut-shell spoons used in cooking are slipped through the holes in the rack. Racks
of plaited grass are also used in -some districts.
PLATE XII.
WOODWORK.
I, 2, 3. Gameboards {olinda-kolotribu). The game is generally played by two players with
olinda seeds, starting with seven or five seeds in each hole. It is sometimes called rnutu-
kfliya, or ‘pearl game,’ and may have been played with pearls by princesses once. It is
still commonly played by Kandyan women, but like all indigenous games is declining in
popularity. No. i, author’s collection, measures io^x6 inches; Nos. 2 and 3 from the
Kandy Museum. See also Plate XLL, 4.
4, 5, 6, and 7. Bed-legs. Characteristic and typically Kandyan types, showing influence
of architectural forms. Nos. 4, 5, from a bed in the Kandy Museum, obtained by the author
near Ratnapura; No. 6, copy of bed-leg (4I inches square) from Kuijdasale Pansala (the
same bed is shown on PI. IX. in fig. 7); No. 7 from Kuijdasale.
PLATE XIII.
WOODWORK.
I, 2. Fencing sticks. No. I from Kandy Museum, with wooden guard, with ¿i-leaf
ornament; No. 2 from Colombo Museum, with ivory guard measuring 6x3! inches.
In each case the stick itself is of cane {vs-vgl). >
324

3- Abharai}a pett'iya, ‘regalia box.’ Turned and lacquered wood, with brass hinges.
Diameter 13 inches. Author’s collection.
4. Sweetmeat mould. Colombo Museum.
5. Granary seal. Colombo Museum.
6. Handle of a kinissa. Colombo Museum.
7. 8. Kinisi. Author’s collection. The bowl of No. elegantly carved with liya pata
ornament.
9. Kinissa. The handle in the form of a ¡(rafindiya.
PLATE XIV.
PAINTING.
1. Two pages of a craftsman’s notebook i^padimakada potd), probably of early nineteenth
century date. The leaves of Dutch, the covers of Sinhalese paper. The two pages shown
contain an outline drawing of a hamsa puttuva (also in Fig. 20), and a half-finished drawing
of a hamsa, with elaborate foliaceous background. Both are brush drawings. The book
was obtained from D. S. Muhandiram of Embekke. The other subjects drawn in the book
are elephants (five), hamsa (two others), hamsa pu^uva (two others with three and four
hamsayo respectively), lion; also a half-finished lanu-geta and panca-nari-gfta designs.
Author’s collection.
2. Representation of Mara Tuddhaya, from roof of Dambulla (Dartjbulu) rock Vihara.
3. Representations of the Nine Planets, from painted timber roof of Kelaijiya Vihara.
4. ‘Tree of life’ or kalpa druma (?) from the same. Both the tree and the ‘garland’ {malayd)
frame recall the palampore designs of S. India.
5. Picca mala ornament framing an image in relief, Kelaijiya Vihara. Note also the
chevron ornament of dress.
7. Birds and floral ornament, Kelaijiya Vihara.
8. Trees, from wall at Danagirigala Vihara. Blank spaces in the lower part were filled
in the original, but too much damaged to copy. Small spaces are filled with lotus rosettes
in a characteristic manner. The small tree on the right is a plantain, the large symmetrical
tree is na {Mesua ferred), the other large tree sapu (Mkhelia champacd).
PLATE XV.
Vihara ceiling painting at Gaijego^a, near Pelmadulla. The original in shades of blue and
red. For description and analysis see p. 105. The rows of lotus on right and left are painted
on two of the main beams, the remainder on the timbered ceiling. The birds and animals
in the design should not be overlooked. The photograph is taken looking directly upwards.
PLATE XVI.
Verandah ceiling painting from the Dalada Maligava, Kandy. Drawn from a photograph,
by Ethel M. Coomaraswamy. Original in shades of brown and green. The painting
represents a forest scene, with birds (parrots), animals (hares and squirrels), and hunters.
PLATE XVII.
Above. Tirtngitale, drawn by Embekke Devasurendra Hangifliya, early nineteenth century,
grandfather of D. S. Muhandirama of Fmbekke. See p. 64 seq.
Below. Tail pieces from the paper ms. described on p. 179 and illustrated also in Fig. 3
and on Plate XX., i and 2.
. y 3 325

In a few cases, Plate XVII., the original gold appears in the reproduction as yellow. It
will be seen that the elements of the central design, the least characteristically Sinhalese, are
repeated in the binding of the same volume (PI. LII.) which I suppose to have been
executed by some European resident in Kandy at the time.
PLATES XVIII. AND XIX.
SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF BUDDHA.
From an illuminated ms. written in a.d. i8i i, and described on pp. 179-181.
PI. XVIII. Last four of the sat-satiya, or Seven Weeks. See p. 43 and description below
Plate XVIII.
PI. XIX. The Buddha preaching to disciples.
PLATE XX.
1. A page from the ms. described on p. 179. See also PI. XVII. and Fig. 3.
2. Last page of the same ms.
3. Design for a royal belt {bo-patiya), with ¿i-leaf pendant. An heirloom of the Mangala-
gama galladdo. Slightly reduced.
PLATE XXL
THE GOD VI^VAKARMA, REVEALER OF CRAFTSMANSHIP AND
ARCHITECTURE.
Drawn by Devasurendra Muhandiram of Embekke.
Viivakarma is represented according to the description given in the canon (Rupavaliya),
of which a text and translation are here quoted.
Sinduram paHca-vaktram daia-bhuja-sahitam
4
Pustakam, lekhya, khat} am (.?),
Khatvangam, bijaparam, vara-matha {?) kalaiam
Kun4akam (.?), akshamalam,
Nagam paSarii vahantam, varada-bhaya~hastam
Pita yajno-pavitam,
Vijnatan jnata-muktim, sudarsana maha
ViSvakarmam namami.
“ Salutation I give to Viivakarma, the fair and great, far famed and wisdom-freed, who hath
five iilaka-mzrktA. faces, ten arms, holding a book and writing style, .... an adze (lit.
a club), a citron,... a water-pot, ... a rosary, wearing a cobra tied (about his neck), with
hands betokening sternness and beneficence,* and wearing a golden sacred thread.”
PLATE XXII.
ROYAL DRESS.
Above. Viniala Dharma Surya I. and Joris van Spilberghen at Kandy, July, 1602. From t
the engraving reproduced in Rouifaer and Jouynboll’s ‘Indische Batikkunst.’ The,
Sinhalese King wears a jewelled crown surmounted by a triiala, and having a Buddha figure ,
* The hand ’with the sword betokens majesty or sternness; the left hand, in '•vara' position, betokens
beneficence or mildness. N.B.— Delete the correction given on p. 316, /. 7.
326

in the front ; a jacket and mante and a patterned tuppotiya, probably of muslin with gold or
silver thread (not silk as suggested by R. and J.). He carries a sword hanging by a bandolier
over the right shoulder. A lotus flower is in the left hand. The jewellery worn includes
earrings, two necklaces with jewelled pendants, armlets and anklets.
Below. The last Kandyan King attended by his ministers; from a Sinhalese drawing
reproduced in Davy’s “’Travels in Ceylon.’ "rhe King wears a crown surmounted by a
boralaya, shirt {kamisiya), tunic (bo-hettayd), cape (mante), trousers (u^aya), and sandals,
earrings, necklaces and pendants. He bears as an emblem a lacquered arrow. Two
4
Adigars stand on the left. The three attendants near them hold the va ana talatta, sesata,
and mutu kuiaya ; the same and other emblems are held by other attendants on the right,
and a kneeling attendant waves a cUmara.
PLATE XXIII.
WORKING DRAWINGS OF A GOLDSMITH.
Heirlooms of the Mangalagama galladdo. No. i is said to have been for Kirti ârl Raja
Sirpha, the others for the last king.
1. Stencils (accti) for fretted gold hat (afa-mulu-toppiya, see p. 32 and Fig. i).
2. Design of lotus and affronted hamsays, purpose unknown.
3. Design probably for a jewelled nalalpatiya.
4. 5. Designs for gold-mounted and jewelled canes. The kings are always represented
as carrying such canes.
6. Design for a pendant; bhirunpa, or double-headed bird.
7. Design for a pendant.
8. Designs for finger rings.
For other designs belonging to the same series see PI. XVII. and Figs. 4 and 131.
PLATE XXIV.
LACWORK.
I, 2. Upper part of a lacquered staff. Modern Kandyan. Names of patterns: a., v(l-
pota or paha 4 e vel-pota ; b., âdâra-koijpu ; c., gal-bindu or mort binduva ; d., kola Vfla (leafy
hyz.nc\\) or kalas-davgaya ; 'e.., pâha 4 e or pala peti-, 'e.,lanu-dangaya\ G.,patura\ n.,b 3 -kola
(¿ff-leaf) ; k., binduva or tani binduva.
3. Kalas-dattgaya pattern from a lacquered ‘pingo’ or yoke. Colombo Museum.
4. Dfla (net) pattern from lacquered staff.
5. Suli v(la pattern from lacquered staff.
6. Horaiffva with lacquered wood body (kandd). Height 13 inches.
7. Vedi-behet-karakaya (powder horn) of lacquered wood. Gal-biÿdu, eka~pota~lanuva,
patura and other patterns.
Slightly reduced. From coloured drawings by Ethel M. Coomaraswamy.
PLATE XXV.
EARTHENWARE.
«
».1-4, Kalagedi. For description see p. 220.
‘ * I. Kalagediya, with stamped ornament of ¿ff-leaves, rosettes, etc. From Alutnuvara,
1' . Balahgoda; now in Kandy Museum. For detail of ornament see Fig. 139.
•_ 2'. Kalagediya, with incised ornament of simple form of branch, fishes, etc. Pelma-
27
dulla. Sab. For detail of ornament see Fig. 1, ■>
y 4 327

3- Kalagediya, with stamped ornament of rosettes (lotus) etc. Kolonna Korale. For
detail of ornament see Fig. 138, c.
4. Kalagediya, with stamped ornament and well defined shoulder, usually characteristic
of Tamil forms. Pelmadulla, Sab.
5. Mutfiya, with stamped ¿<J-leaf and rosette ornament. Used for new rice at Alutsal
Mangalya at Kuijdasale. For details of ornament see Fig. 138, d. See also p. 218, 220.
6. Pornuva, sand oven, with slip-painted ornamented in red. See p. 221.
7. Pol-koraha. Balangoda. Diameter 16 inches. See pp. 221, 225.
8. Kotalaya, with stamped ornament of ¿i-leaves and rosettes. Dodantale. See p. 220.
9. Koraha. See p. 221. Type of vessel often used as a. gini kabala, as in PI. VI., 6.
10. Nembiliya. See p. 221.
11. Gini kabala. Balangoda. Diameter 12 inches. See p. 222.
12. Kanbola ^tiliya, pan. Balangoda. Diameter 16 inches. See p. 220. The
two last are rare types.
PLATE XXVI.
EARTHENWARE.
I, 2. Obverse (with sirtiha) and reverse (with hattisd) of eaves-tile from Dajada Maligava.
Width 6| inches. See p. 224.
3. Coping tile with incised ornament. See p. 223 and Fig. 135 (vii. and viii).
4. DaOTwa/i? (incense burner), with cobra ornament. Kandy Museum. Seep. 222.
5. Pummala kabala.
6. Panava or pma-kalaya; resembles kotalaya with twelve spouts and seven rims; used in
devil dancing ceremonies. See p. 223.
7. Small vessel and hearth (lipa) used for kiri-uturaifa ceremony (at Kuijdasale Devale).
The lipa, 3^ inches high, diameter 5 inches. Those in domestic use are much larger.
8. Pan-kuduva, lamp-cage or lantern. Mangalagama. See p. 220.
9. 10. Pan-kandu, stands for earthen lamps {meti-pahan). Mangalagama. See p. 223.
II. Large pan-kanda or lamp-stand. Danagirigala. Made in a number of separate tiers.
The total height is about 3 feet. See p.. 223.
12. Kalaha, vase or lamp-stand. Height 16^ inches, slip-painted light yellow on red
with fine liya-v?la design.’ Property of Mr. A. Ratvatte. See p. 221.
PLATE XXVII.
Diagram figure of seated Buddha, to show canons of measurement and practical method
of determining the proportions of images.
PLATE XXVIII.
WOVEN AND EMBROIDERED CLOTHS.
I. Patterns still used on ^tirili made at Talaguije.
I. Hin d(l-g(ta lanuva (small net-knot plait). 2. Avul h(re (medley of rings).
3. Valalu lanuva (linked plait). Also combined with 13. 4. Hali-dangaya (rice-,
meander). 5. (eight-petal flower). i>. Para mala, j . D(timala [tooth
flower). 8. Hin mal-petta {htùo mal-petta). 9. Bs-kola [bs-\tai). 10. Tuifapihena
mal-petta (triple blooming flower); the same with ten rows (counted diagonally)
328

•wonXá he dahaya pfhem ma¡-petta. ii, Maha mal-petla mal~p>ettd), 12. Katuru
OTíz/íj: (scissors-flower or pattern). 13. Depota lanuva {two-p\y phit). 14. Mal-petta
(flower-petals). 15. r-f/i* (wave pattern). 17. Kin-negidaÿgaya i&tÛT-mfinàei)-,
the same smaller is called pannan kara.
Straight lines are irikondu (hairlines). These pattern names taken down from Tikirati
of Talaguije. See p. 234.
2. Embroidered napkin {¡ensuva). Dalada Mâligava. The two sides identical. Border
of bo-pat kaogul design, spear and ¿ff-leaf.
3. Embroidered napkin. Dalada Maligava. The two sides identical. Design of four
elaborate plaits framed by border oi'-intermittirende Wellenranke' type, on a flowered ground.
Needle ‘lace’ edging.
4. Embroidered shawl (ura malayo). Dalada Maligava.
PLATE XXIX.
LOOMS AND WOVEN CLOTHS.
1. Loom, seen from the position occupied by the weaver. Observe the pattern faintly
shown in the warp threads, resulting from the insertions of numerous thin rods to preserve
the ‘sheds’ for use when required. See p. 234.
2. Near view of loom on the right side, showing a row of ¿i-leaves just started.
3. Kapu kapana yantraya, cotton ginning machine.
4. Part of an (tirila, with elaborate plait designs, birds and cobras. Collection of the Hon.
J. P. Lewis.
5. Dtirila from Talagnije, typical designs. Author’s collection.
6. Gahoniya, belonging to the Tibofuvave Maha Nayaka of Malvatte. Length 31 inches.
7. Pafiya, belt, belonging to the Tibotuvave Maha Nayaka of Malvatte. Measures
75 X 8| inches. The centre is plain, the two ends alike. The colours are black, red, pink,
blue—green and yellow. This unique specimen is said to have been made in Uva. The
The patterns are of especial interest: note especially serial repetition (animal processions),
afirontment, knop and flower, intermittirende Wellenranke, calyx volute, and fret motifs.
8. Detail of a gahOniya flounce. Gilimale. Bi-leaf design.
PLATE XXX.
EMBROIDERY.
1. Small betel-bag, fine red cotton embroidered in blue and yellow silk. Length 8 J inches.
Author’s collection. See p. 238.
2. Embroidery on white cotton, copy of part of an embroidered jacket {hfffaya), said to
have been used by a queen in the eighteenth century. See p. 239.
3. Ispayya, embroidered cap, with quilted flaps, worked with coloured silks. Lent by Mr.
T. B. Keppitipola. See p. 239.
PLATE XXXI.
em broidery.
. Etubroidered betel-bag, property of Varakaule Ukku Bapd^ of Uda Nuvara. Typical
example of a large bag. Length over 4 feet.
329

PLATE XXXII.
EMBROIDERY.
I, 2. Betel-bag. Colombo Museum.
4. Betel-bag, red felt, embroidered with blue and white cotton. The five-petalled lotus
is unusual. Four borders, and centipede stitch binding.
5. Tassel of a bag similar to that illustrated in No. 4.
6. Part of border of a large bag, author’s collection. For the palmette design, cf. PI.
XXXIII., I, and p. 251.
7. Border of a bag belonging to Mr. T. B. Pohath Kehelpannala.
8. Detail of, showing hamsapattuva, four borders, and braid edging. The innermost border
is an interesting development of pala peti\ the large border, havaifiya, the two narrow
borders would be called gal-bindu or gal-piyum.
9. Detail of large bag, belonging to the Ekneligodas. Four borders and braid binding.
The large liya vela border filled with buttonhole stitch.
PLATE XXXIII.
I, 2, 3. Gara-yakshaya costume, a devil dancer’s dress. Colombo Museum. Blue and
white appliqué on red material.
4. Embroidered napkin. Dalada Mâligâva. Centre of fine lace-like drawn thread work,
and embroidery in red and blue, alike on both sides. 23^ inches square.
5. Embroidered napkin. Daladà Maligâva. Centre embroidered with a Pali verse in
praise of a king; border an elaborate plait design. 13^ inches square.
6. Centre of a large betel-bag.
PLATE XXXIV.
DUMBARA MATS.
Dutribara mats {kalala) made of dyed niyaÿda (‘bowstring’ hemp) fibre. Made by
Kinnara caste mat-weavers. The process is explained in text, p. 243. Mat-weavers at
work are shown in PI. IV. Names of patterns shown in the margin. Modern work by
Hurikaduva Madigë Hênavala Galkofa-gedara Punciya and Hurikaduva Madigë Kofa-
gavatte-gedara Lapiya of Hiirikaduva. Size of larger mat, 66 x 26| inches. Author’s
collection.
PLATE XXXV.
IVORY.
1. Kava-kapiva, ivory compasses. Length 6^ inches. Author’s collection.
2. Gira-patfuva. Fragment of ivory carving, purpose unknown. Very fine work repre­
senting parrots with necks entwined {girs-pottuva). Collection of Mr. P. E. Pieris, C.C.S.
3. Fragment of carved ivory, purpose uncertain. Very fine work, very dark with age,
perhaps earlier than seventeenth century. Perhaps part of a fan. Median panel carved
and pierced Hya vela, with sina mala flowers; liya pata border and centre. Signs of metal
fittings or rivets distinct in centre. The ends adapted to fit into other pieces. Outer
surface curved, and hollpwed within, tapering slightly to each end; hence cannot be a book
cover. Possibly one of a pair of centre plates for a fan, somewhat similar in form to that
shown in Plate XLII., 2. Length ii^ inches. Author’s collection.
330

4- Carved ivory from base of a temple doorjamb (said to be from Ridi Vihara door, PI.
XXXVIII, i). Very elaborate//yawork. Height 9^ inches. Colombo Museum
collection.
5. Dorapi pala rnpaya, guardian deity from a temple door jamb. Height of plaque icl­
inches. Colombo Museum collection.
6. Dorafu-pala-rUpaya, guardian deity from a temple door jamb. Dimensions of plaque
I ixVx 3f inches. The right hand especially fine. Very old example. Author’s collection.
PLATE XXXVI.
IVORY.
1. Ivory figure of king, in full dress: ata-mula-toppiya (mal-gaha missing), bc-hettaya with
mante, bs-pafiya, and trousers, and jewellery. The cane is now missing. Height of figure
5| inches. Colombo Museum collection.
2, 3, 4. Ivory figures of Kandyan ladies, wearing hettaya with mante, helaya variously
arranged, and jewellery. Height of tallest figure 4I inches. Colombo Museum collection.
Cf. Davy, ‘Travels in Ceylon,’ PI. 4.
5. Ivory figure of Kandyan chief, wearing vata-toppiya, hfttaya with mante, and tuppotiya
•with, pafiya. Same scale. Colombo Museum collection.
For explanation of costume see text, pp. 32-35.
6. Bone jewel-box, silver-mounted. Flat severe carving, suited to material. Silver
mounting in ‘ Indo-Portuguese ’ style. Outside measure 5f x 3I x 2| inches. Author’s
collection.
7. Ivory jewel-box, silver-mounted and finely carved, with turned feet. Outside measure
12x8x4! inches. Property of Sir Everard Im Thurrn.
8. Turned ivory jewel-box, with incised lines, circles and dots,filled with red lac. Diameter
3f inches. Author’s collection.
9. Ivory jewel-casket, carved, with silver fittings. Lid in one piece. Height 4f, length
6|- inches. Lent by Messrs. Don Theodoris. The three boxes, shown in figures 6, 7,
and 9 show some European influence in the form and fittings.
Fig. 9, photo by Messrs. Skeen & Co.
PLATE XXXVII.
IVORY.
I, 2, 3, 4. Ivory handles of knives. Author’s collection.
1. Turned handle, ornamented with incised circles filled with red lac.
2. Most usual type, with liya pata carving.
3. &erapeudiya head.
4. Simple form with leaf-like scroll.
5. Fot-kambiya, book-cover. Liya vela centre panel, eka pota lanuva, and paid peti border
and moulding. Measures 4I x 2| inches. Property of an ex-Aracci at Horagone.
6, 7, 8, 9. Fan handles. Turned ivory, ornamented with incised lines and circles, filled
with red lac. The small pieces above (missing in 7 and 8) are fixed at the top of the
actual fan. Lent by A. R. Casse Lebbe.
4
ro. XJakkiya, ivory drum frame, Colombo Museum, lent by Mr. P. E. Pieris, C.C.S.
Height 7! inches, diameter 41^ inches.
II. Horan^a, ivory oboe. Ornamented with incised lines and circles, filled with red
lac. The mouth-piece and bell are of brass or bronze. The reed is placed at the end of a
33
*

narrow metal tube, next to a flat metal plate (missing in this example), against which the
lips are pressed without pressure on the reed itself. This specimen is apparently pierced
in four holes only, but this is due to its consisting of two separate pieces or joints, one of
which was turned upon the other at the time of photographing, thus concealing the three
other holes. Colombo Museum collection. Length 13 inches.
[The nalava or flageolet is an instrument much less often seen ; it consists entirely of ivory
without metal fittings or reed].
PLATE XXXVIII.
IVORY.
1. Doorway of store-room (.?) at Ridi Vihara. Jambs and lintel overlaid with ivory and
ebony, probably the finest example of such work in Ceylon. Dancing figures and asana
kaia at base of jamb on each side; liya vela and pala peti on jambs; panca nari gefa in
centre of lintel, supported by lions within liya vela frames. Eighteenth century work,
probably of the time of Kirti èri. The wooden threshold [^paii-kanda') is carved in the
usual manner. Remains of painting on plastered wall.
4
2. Detail of above; lower part of jamb, showing asana ka a, and commencement of liya
Vfla band.
4. Detail of above, showing pala peti moulding and liya v(la band on jamb of door.
3. Ivory panel, probably part of a doorjamb. Nari-lata-v(la design. Measures 6|x if
inches. Author’s collection.
5. Ivory panel, pierced and carved with flower {stna maid), lion {simhd), and Serapetjdiya.
Perhaps from a door jamb. Measures 6fx 2 inches. Author’s collection.
6. Vfli-pata, ivory style used by Buddhist priests when teaching writing mpansala schools,
as described on pp. 49, 186. Length 6f inches. Modern work. Author’s collection.
7. Pot-kambiya, pierced and carved ivory book cover, with ivory button {pot-sakiya).
8. Piece of carved ivory, purpose unknown, perhaps part of a fan. Elaborate and very
finely carved liya pata and sJna mala work. Length 4^ inches. Author’s collection.
Contrast Figs. 8 and 9, one is rich, the other rococo.
9. Ivory box, gold mounted. Modern Low-country work. Debased, inorganic and over
ornamented style, deeply undercut. Subject, makara torai}a with four divas-, degraded
forms, and riotous liya pata borders.
PLATE XXXIX.
IVORY COMBS.
1. Panava, ivory comb, carved and pierced. Figure of a devi seated on throne, holding
branches; attendandant dancers, in kuriii-rakkan and arimbuva frame. Width 5 inches.
Kandy Museum collection.
4
2. Panava, bone comb. Two hamsays, affronted, with tree of life, in kui} i-rakkan and
arimbuva \>Qit&sx. Measures 3jx 2f inches. Author’s collection.
3. Carved and pierced ivory panel, perhaps a pana-katuva, or central part of a broken
comb. Very fine example of nari-lata figure. Measures 6f x 4 inches. Colombo Museum
collection.
4. Panava, ivory comb, remarkable and unique form. Poor design of liya pata repeated
in pierced and carved work. Measures 31x5 inches. Colombo Museum collection.
5. Panava, ivory comb. Genre subjects: woman and child, woman and baby, lovers.
Dresses painted red and black stripes. Observe old-fashioned manner of doing the hair
332

on one side (also in figures 8 and 9). The carved figures within pierced liya vela frame.
Measures 4^x3! inches. Colombo Museum collection.
6. ivory comb. Large plain form. Measures 5I x 3’ inches. Author’s collection.
7. Pans-katuva, central part of broken comb. Figure of a de-vf, seated on throne, holding
branches, with attendants. Colombo Museum collection.
8. Panclva, ivory comb. Standing figure of a woman, holding cdmara, supported by two
hanisayo. Liya pata ‘crockets,’ arimbuva and kundi-rakkan frame. Reverse shows back of
figure. Lent by A. R. Casse Lebbe.
9. ivory comb. Figure ofdancer, with//yiri;?/« panels. Measures a| inches square.
10. Panava, ivory comb. Central lotus, with liya pata and arimbuva frame. Lines
coloured. Measures 5:^x4 inches. Colombo Museum collection.
PLATE XL.
IVORY AND HORN.
1. Ivory panel, probably a ‘ pana-katuval or central part of double comb with teeth broken
and subsequently removed. Figure of a devi seated on throne, and holding branches.
'Kundi-rakkan and arirnbuva border. Colombo Museum collection.
2. V(li-pata, ivory style used by Buddhist priest in pansala schools for teaching writing.
Length 6i inches. Kandy Museum collection.
3. Ivory dice,palaka,pahada kahuru, for game of chaupai or pacisi. Engraved circles inlaid
with lac indicate the numbers, 6, 5,4, 3. Length 3^ inches. Kandy Museum collection.
4. Panova, ivory comb. Double comb, obverse and reverse carved alike, with hanisa
puttuva, and pair of birds supporting. Compare hamsa pattuva with Fig. 20, p. 85, in
both cases the reduced ‘tree of life’ between the affronted animals is clearly recognizable.
Measures inches. Kandy Museum collection.
5. Doratu-pola-rspaya, figure of a deva from a vihara doorjamb. Figure in traditional
divine costume, holding a comara\ arimbuva border. Panel measures 9|x3| inches,
Colombo Museum collection.
6. Silver-mounted ivory arm-ring. Diameter 4 inches. Colombo Museum collection.
7. Ivory sannas box, contiiniag gold sannasa. Poor silver mounting. Length 17J inches.
Maha Devale, Kandy.
8. Kan-h(nda, ivory ear-pick. Finely carved i^rapendiya. Length 3I inches. Author’s
collection.
9. Kan-henda, ivory ear-pick. Poorly carved. Length 2| inches. Author’s collection.
10. Kan-henda, Ivory OAr-pids.. Well carved with‘pine-apple’type of ornament. Length
3 inches. Author’s collection.
11. plain ivory comb. Width about 3J inches. Author’s collection.
12. Large horn comb, pierced and inlaid with ivory. Hamsa pUffuva design, with four
heads (of Sfrapendiya ?). Measures 5|x4f inches. Author’s collection.
13. Panova, horn comb, pierced work, with nori lata figure, within arimbuva border.
Length inches. Kegalla Kacceri.
14. Panava, horn comb. Measures 3I x 2| inches. Author’s collection.
15. Beket-karakaya, pill box; turned horn.
16. Behet-kdrakaya, pill box; turned horn.
17. Behet-karakaya, pill box. Carved horn, silver mounted, with ivory lid. Remarkable
variety of paid peti border carved on lower part of box. Length 4 inches. Colombo
Museum collection.
18. Folding knife, horn handle. Length of handle4|inches. Colombo Museum collection.
333

PLATE XLI.
MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTS.
1. èankha, chank (shell) trumpet, engraved and inlaid with red lac, mounted in brass,
damascened silver. The metal mounting terminates in a finely wrought ¡çrapeudiya, the
legs clasped, an extension of the tail passing round the mouth of the shell and ending in
a large scroll. The tongue has the form of a wa/«, and is pierced, perhaps for suspension.
The eyes are rubies. The shell itself is engraved with Uya vela, arinibuva, pain peti, slna
mala and other designs, inlaid with red lac. Total length lo inches. Said to have been
made for Narêndra Sirpha, and given to a temple in Udanuvara. Author’s collection.
2. Sesata, ceremonial processional fan, the long handle not shown. Red velvet, with gold
and silver thread, passed over cords, and appliqué of green velvet within certain areas thus
delimited. The obverse is of blue velvet, with sun, moon, and stars. Diameter 34 inches.
Maha Dévale, Kandy.
3. Kinissa, ladle. Bowl of silver, very finely wrought ; handle of ivory with man’s figure,
elaborate liya pata ornament, and simha head (approaching içrapetfdiya in form, but with
characteristic snout). A very fine example, but not a ‘sacrificial ladle’ as described,
‘Journal of Indian Art,’ Vol. X., PI. 86, and p. 57 (‘The Elephant in Industry and Art,’
by F. H. Andrews); probably dedicated to a temple, or may have been used in the Palace.
Length I foot, 6 inches ; diameter of bowl 5J inches. Museum of Science and Art, Indian
Section, South Kensington. For ordinary examples see PI. XIII.
4. Oliuda kolombuva, game board, with characteristic bent legs. Top measures I4|x8f
inches. Author’s collection. For other examples see PI. XII.
PLATE XLII.
MAHÂ DÉVÂLE AND DALADÀ MÀLIGÂVA PLATE.
1. Silver hanging lamp of very fine design and workmanship. Ornament mainly pala peti.
Height II inches, diameter 13I inches. Dalada Mâligâva.
2. Ran-vafaha-pata, round gold fan. An offering dedicated by Kirti èri to the Tooth
Relic. Gold, set with cabochon sapphires. The border is thus actual ‘gal-binduva.'
Length 17-f inches. Dajada Mâligâva.
3. Dalumura tafuva, or ceremonial tray. Gold, set with cabochon sapphires. Diameter
13! inches. Dajada Mâligâva. Dedicated to the Tooth Relic, it is said, by the mother
of Kirti èri.
4
4. Keri iya, water vessel for ecclesiastical purposes. Plain silver. Height ii| inches.
Maha Dévale, Kandy.
5. Pacca kusalana, ‘emerald goblet’ (for sandal-wood paste). Bowl of black stone (not
‘emerald’), gold mounted and set with rubies, except four corner stones of the foot, which
are sapphires. '■ Gal-bindu’ rim, with '■ stna-mala’ pendants. Height 2 inches. Used by
Râjâdhi Râja Siipha,and dedicated by him to the MahâDêvâle after a victory at Gurubçbile.
Mahâ Dévale.
Photographs by A. K. Coomaraswamy, by the kindness of Mr. C. B. Nugavela, Diva
Nilame of the Dajadà Mâligâva, and Mr. A. Ratvatte, Basnâyaka Nilame of the Mahâ
Dévale, Kandy.
334

PLATE XLIII.
OBJECTS OF BRASS AND SILVER.
1. Ridt pettiya, silver jewel box. Very fine old example in a pure style. The flattened
stem of the liya Vfla ornament recalls similar treatment at Barahat. Height 9, diameter
8 inches. Property of Maduvanvela Raîëmahatmayà.
2. Brass jewel box,‘Indo-Portuguese’ style. Measurement, 8 x 5 x 4 inches. Probably
Low-country work. Colombo Museum collection.
3. Brass door-handle and rose. Diameter of rose 5 inches. Gadalâdeniya Vihâra.
4. Brass jewel or betel-leaf box. Probably Tamil work. Ornament, two peacocks
affronted, and liya v(la\ a form of paid peti border. Colombo Museum collection.
5. Small silver box, under side showing engraving (irivfdd). ‘ Acanthus’ and ‘ pine-apple’
type of design, possibly showing Renaissance influence. Size of box, 3xz| inches.
Author’s collection.
6. Amba, brass mango ; set with jewels. From a Pattini Dévale. Length 2o| inches.
Collection of Mr. P. E. Pieris, C.C.S. This mango is also described and illustrated in
‘ Spolia Zeylanica,’ V., 141 (1908). The birds, however, are rather peacocks than garuias.
7. Brass door-handle and rose, key and key-plate. Diameter of rose about 6| inches.
Lankatilaka Vihara.
PLATE XLIIIa.
MISCELLANEOUS METAL WORK.
1. Ketfdiya, water vessel for ecclesiastical use. Copper, neck and lid set with cabochon
garnets. Gem set border round neck shows well the gem set origin of the gal-bindu pattern.
Elaborate paid peti borders on body, and liya pata chasing on spout. Height inches to
top of lid. Ridi Vihara.
4
2. Ve i-bet-kdrakaya, powder horn. Horn, mounted in copper, silver plated, with filigree
ornament. Length inches. Author’s collection.
3. Brass-mounted wooden box, ‘Indo-Portuguese’ style. Outside measuses 6|^x4^x21
inches. Author’s collection.
4. The 'Jaya Sakai or chank of victory dedicated by éri Rajadhi Siqiha to the Maha
Dévale after a victory at Gurubçbile over the Dutch.' Mounted in gold, in order, it is
said, that no other lips should be set to it. Length 7 inches. Maha Dévale, Kandy.
5. Key and key-plate, Asgiriya Vihara, Kandy.
6. Door handle with rose, Asgiriya Vihara. Partly shown also in Fig. 5.
7. Bolt of a damascened narissa yatura (bar-lock), Ridi Vihara. The last is of the flat
variety, with hinged hasp (not shown) ; it ends in a '•kibihi' (lion) head, and has another on
the top of the hasp.
8. Vfl-pettiya,czxizh!&k.e,t\ with brass fittings. Property of Maduvanvela Raîémahàtmaya.
PLATE XLIV.
OBJECTS OF BRASS, COPPER AND BRONZE.
1. Sirak-kale, brass table for taking rice. Patterns: ‘ continuous branch’ (elementary form),
cable, double spiral. Height 6|, diameter of top 7 inches. Colombo Museum collection.
2. Ankusa, elephant-goad used by attendant on foot. Brass, with double iron point (half
missing, but in any case not visible in side view) proceeding from l^rapeudiya head.
Lacquered wooden handle, 5 or 6 feet long, top only shown in figure. Length from socket-
rim to apex 12I inches. Property of Mr. T. B. Parapatella.
335

3- Bronze elephant bell, with ¿i-leaf and triangle (¿ff-leaf type) ornament. Diameter of
mouth 8 inches. Colombo Museum collection.
4. Brass lamp, in shape of a bird. Tail to beak 7 inches. Colombo Museum collection.
5. Brass lamp w i t h P r o b a b l y Tamil work. Height 9I inches. Colombo Museum
collection.
6. Killstaya, lime-box. Copper throughout. Diameter 4I inches. Author’s collection.
4
7. Pdn-ku uva, lantern. Pierced brass. Ga^aladeijiya Vihara.
8. Key of vihara door, iron, brass mounted. Ma^uvanvela Vihara. Reduced.
PLATE XLV.
OBJECTS OF BRASS, BRONZE AND IRON,
1. Bronze mould for the gold state shoes {mirive^i sangala, p. 33) of King Narendra Sirpha.
Made by the Mangalagama artificers, in whose possession it remains. Length 11 inches.
? Renaissance influence in the ornament.
2. At-pandama, hand cresset; with peacock {moijara) bracket. Property of Ammitiyagoda
BaijiJara.
3. At-pandama, hand cresset; with lion {sintha) bracket. Diameter of bowl 8| inches,
Property of Mafluvanvela Ratemahatmaya.
4. Brass kettle. Length of horizontal part of handle 5| inches. Property of Ammifiya-
gofia Baijdara. ? Dutch influence in the shape; but not necessarily.
5. At-pandama, hmdLcrti&ti-, with laced bracket and turned wood handle. Length 2 feet.
Colombo Museum collection.
6. Sirak-kak, brass table for taking rice (see p. 32). Note the patterns— triangle, chevron,
simple form of ‘continuous branch,’ double spiral, paid peti, gal binduva, etc. Height 8|
inches. Property of Mr. G. S. Saxton, C.C.S.
7. Pandama, small bronze standing lamp of ancient pattern ; compare with Cunningham,
‘Mahabodhi,’ Plate XXVIII. Length 10 inches. Property of Mr. T. B. Paraijatella.
Perhaps Tamil.
8. Tcy«, adze; steel, damascened silver. Width of blade 3I inches. Modern, property
of Sir Everard Im Thurm.
9. Bronze elephant bell. Diameter of mouth 4I inches. Lent by A. R. Casse Lebbe.
10. Tel-kuldva, oil vessel for filling and replenishing coconut oil lamps. Spout in form
of ifrapiridiya head. Height about i foot. Karagastalava Vihara, Sab.
11. 12. Pan-keti, mat-weavers’ knives. The blade is used for cutting projecting ends of
grass, the point for plaiting. From Balahgoda. Length i oj inches. Author’s collection.
13. Kurakkan-ketta, {ov ve.'ipmg kurakkan. Balahgofla.
14. D^-ketta, ordinary sickle for reaping rice. Wooden handle, brass mounted, blade with
punched ornament, pointed, serrate on inner edge. Length from tip to insertion about
13 inches.
PLATE XLVI.
ARECANUT SLICERS [gird) AND CHUNAM (LIME-) BOXES {killsta).
1. G/risrytf, arecanut sheer; steel, damascened silver. Perhaps Tamil work. Length io|
inches. Colombo Museum collection.
2. Giraya, arecanut sheer; steel damascened silver. Representing head and body of
ifrapeudiya. Length 10 inches. Colombo Museum collection.
336

Giraya^ axecanut slicer; steel damascened silver and brass. Representing head and
body of Serapendiya, showing the wings. A fine and old example. Length 12 inches.
Author’s collection.
4> Giraya, arecanut slicer; brass with steel blade. Length 5! inches. Colombo Museum
collection.
5. saluting’arecanut slicer; steel damascened silver. Length 6| inches.
Colombo Museum collection.
6. Giraya, arecanut slicer; steel damascened silver, ends of handles in Serapsndiya form.
■ Length 5 inches. Colombo Museum collection.
7. Giraya, arecanut slicer; steel damascened silver. Length 5 J inches. Colombo Museum
collection. *
8. Giraya, arecanut slicer; brass with steel blade. Length 6 inches. Colombo Museum
collection.
9. Giraya, arecanut slicer; brass, silver damascened, with steel blade. Represents head
and body of krapeudiya, the wings and feathers clearly indicated. A fine and old example.
Length 8| inches. Author’s collection.
10. Kilktaya, lime-box; copper filigree set with glass over coloured foil to represent
cabochon garnets, nine on each side. Opens by hinge at lowest part of the figure,
screw fastening at opposite point, at commencement of chain. Chain, swivel and spoon
particularly fine. Diameter of box 6 inches, thickness 1 inch. Interior divided into one
large and four small compartments. Probably seventeenth century or older. Author’s
collection.
11. Killotaya, lime-box; copper, silver damascened, Diameter of box 2 inches. Chain
and spoon missing. Colombo Museum collection.
12. Killotaya, Y\me-hox\ copper, damascened silver. Diameter of box about 2^ inches.
Colombo Museum collection.
13. Killotaya, lime-box; gold, very finely chased. Diameter of box about 2J inches.
Property of Mr. A. Ratvatte, Basnayaka Nilame of the Maha Devale, Kandy, Formerly
belonged to Levke Disava.
14. Killotaya, lime-box; from the Nevill collection?
1^. Killotaya, lime-box; steel, copper mounted, silver damascened. Diameter of box
about 3I inches. Colombo Museum collection.
16. Killotaya,\imt-hox-, from the Nevill collection?
Photographs by E. M. C., except Figs. 14 and 16.
•PLATE XLVII.
KNIVES, SPEAR HEAD, SWORD.
1. Pair of knives (one missing) and writing style in silver wood and ivory sheath. The
central tube into which the style fits is of ivory. The upper part (broken) of the style is
of brass inlaid with silver. Ornament, pair of birds affronted on handle of style, krapeudiya
pn handle of knife. Sheath 8f inches long. Collection of Mr. P. E. Pieris, C.C.S.
2. Knife with ivory handle, brass mounted with silver inlay. Liya pata and liya vfla orna­
ment; 1757 cut on handle. Length about 14 inches. Collection ofMr.P.E. Pieris, C.C.S.
3. Knife in silver-mounted wood sheath, handle with pair of kf‘^p^tidiyas, addorsed.
Collection of H. E. Monsignor Zaleski, Papal Delegate.
4. Silver-mounted wood sheath of knife shown in Fig. 5. Typical wire and grain or
filigree work.
337

5- Silver-mounted knife with ivory handle. LiyapatainA Syavfla ornarntni. l/engthi3^
inches.
6. Brass-mounted knife, silver rivets, etc. Length io| inches. Lent Aracci at
Belihul Oya.
7. Knife, with very fine pierced silver mounting. Liya pata, liya vela, slna~mala and
lerapsndiya ornament; the krapendiyas disposed in Uya vela fashion. Reduced. Lent by
A. R. Casse Lebbe.
8. Brass-mounted knife, horn or ivory handle with silver rivets. &(rapendiya (or makara i)
and liya pata ornament. Reduced. f
9. Folding knife ; copper handle, silver inlaid with pala peti border and owner’s initials.
Length 6^- inches. Author’s collection.
10. Head of processional spear {patisthanayd), steel damascened with brass and silver.
Reduced. Colombo Museum collection.
11. Sword hilt, horn, silver and brass mounted with large head of lion, and small heads of
Serapsndiya. Total length of hilt and mounting, 9 inches. Lent by Aracci at Belihul Oya.
PLATE XLVIII.
JEWELLERY: NECK-CHAINS AND PENDANTS.
1. ‘coconut flower garland,’ gold necklace. ^
2, 3. Necklaces of gold beads alternating with coral. No. 2, 21 inches long.
4. Gedi malaya, ‘garland of seeds,’ gold bead necklace, beads in form of fruits or seeds.
Thirty-one beads, total length 42 inches.
Nos. 1-4, property of Mr. H. E. Dambevinne. "
5. Necklace and pendant. Necklace of pearls and gold beads, strung in ‘cage’ fashion
(kudu-potd). Pendant suggests Muhammadan influence. Width of pendant 2 J inches.
6. Kurulu-b?ndi tnalaya, bird pendant necklace, bherun/}a type of pendant. Width of
pendant 2I inches. Pendants {padakkam) of two last in taliadu kola bfmma. Both are
property of Mr. H. E. Dambevinne.
7. Necklace of gold ¿i-leaves set with rubies alternating with beads. Itahaclu kola bgmma
work. Property of Iddamalgoda Kumarihami.
8. Gold necklace of collar type (? peti pafiya),shovt'mg clasp. Length 13 J, width f inches.
Author’s collection.
9. Diviya niya pota, child’s charm pendant, reverse with sun, moon, bo-leaf, chank and bow
emblems. Obverse consists of green glass. Width 2| inches. Gold example, property
of Mr. A. Ratvatte.
10. 15. Diviya niya pota, obverse (10) with nari lata design, reverse (15) with five weapons
of Vishiju, sword, chank, bow, spear and discus. Silver, property of Mr. P. B. Nugavela.
11. Pearl, cornelian and gold filigree necklace, florid example of a common type. Length
about 15 inches.
12. Part of gold filigree necklace, very long, property of Iddamalgoda Kumarihami.
13. Ear and tooth pick, length about 5I inches. Silver, Colombo Museum collection.
14. Diviya niya pota, silver, with chain, Colombo Museum collection.
16, 17. Divi niya pota, obverse (16) with filigree decoration, reverse (17) with five weapons
of Vishiju as in No. 15. Author’s collection.
Nos. 5, 6, and 7 show Tamil influence. Nos. 4, 6, 12, and 13 might be used by men or
women. Nos. 9, 10, 14, and 17 are worn by children only.
338

PLATE XLIX.
JEWELLERY; NECK-CHAINS AND OTHER JEWELLERY.
1-3. Low-country jewellery showing Dutch influence.
4. Pethmalaya, ‘garland of flowers’ or petals : gold.
r Siri-bo-malaya, ‘pepper-flower-garland.’ The spelling and explanation given in the
Index under Sri-bo-malaya are wrong. Siri-bs is a variety of betel {Piper betle) and the
resemblance of the gold necklace to the flower spikes of the creeper is obvious.
_ 6. Necklace of gold beads and pearls.
7. Necklace of gold filigree, pearl, and carnelian.
8. Necklace of gold beads and filigree and carnelian.
9. Necklace of gold filigree beads and pearls.
I o. Gold betel-boy, length 4 inches.
11. Makara mdlaya: gold beads as in PI. XLVIIL, 5, two makaras affronted, and pendant
with two birds. Property of Mr. A. Ratvatte.
12. Parts of peti malaya necklaces.
13. Keccagama, armlet with talisman case, set with sapphires and rubies. Gold, length 9
inches. Property of Mr. A. Ratvatte.
PLATE L.
JEWELLERY: WAIST CHAINS, PENDANTS AND BANGLES.
4
I-^. Silver waist chains {hava i). No. 5, with talisman cases, would be called a sura-v?la.
Nos. I, 5, 6, may be Tamil. Nos. 1-3, Author’s collection ; Nos. 4-7, Colombo
. Museum collection.
8. Kurulu padakkama, bird pendant described on p. 212. Gold, tahadu kola bemma work.
Width 4! inches across wings. The eyes are sapphires, and the lowest row and seven
other stones including the centre are emerald or green zircon, all the other stones are ruby.
9-19. Bangles. No. 13 {sçri-valalla), i| inches wide. Nos. 9-13 Colombo Museum
collection.
PLATE LI.
JEWELLERY: RINGS AND EAR-RINGS.
I, 2. Front and back of large chief’s ring (/irej : emerald centre, rubies next, pale
sapphires outside. Natural size. Author’s collection.
3. Ring belonging to a headman at Nahanuela: set ruby and (?) crystal.
4. Rings of base metal, generally set with imitation gems.
5. 6, 7. Gold gem set rings, property of Mr. A. Ratvatte. Showing repousse under side,
as also in Nos. 2, 13, 14.
8,^, 10. Rings in the Colombo Museum'collection. 'No.S,vaftappa-muduva {{) 2Ïncht%
diameter, set with rubies and table-cut emeralds, and amethyst in centre# No. 2 set with
cinnamon stones ; No. 3 with pale rubies and sapphire in centre.
II. Copper gilt ring.
12. Gold nava-ratna ring, set with nine stones, including pearl ; the stones differ in colour,
but do not all differ in kind. Author’s collection.
13, 14. Rings belonging to Maduvanvela Ratêmahatmayâ. No. 14a typical pirfs muduva,
or chief’s full dress ring. Slightly reduced.
15. Ear-ring set with rubies and pearls. Author’s collection.
16. Silver ear-rings, peasant type. Üva,
17. Silver filigree ear-rings, peasant type, Üva.
18. Gold gem-set ear-ring, bs-leaf form, Haputale.
339

PLATE LU.
MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTS.
1. Outside of bana book described on p. 179, and illustrated, Pis. XVII., XX., and Fig. 3.
Property of Indajoti Unnanse of Malvatte.
2. One end of silver-mounted lacquered ceremonial pingo or yoke, Enibekke Devale.
3. Talipot and mica sesata, with naga dangaya design. Property of Mr. G. S. Saxton, C.C.S.
4. Pili-heliya, earthen jar for storing cloths.
4
5. Ka¡age iya with incised ornament. Kelaniya.
6. Behet gal, stone mortars for preparing medicines. Balango(Ja, property of Mahavala-
tenna Ratëmahâtmaya.
7. Handun-gala, stone for grinding sandal wood to paste. Under side, showing ornament.
Colombo Museum collection.
PLATE LIII.
MANUFACTURE OF IRON AND STEEL.
See description on Plate, and in text, p. 189 seq.
340

Plate in.
Skeen & Co., Photo. Bemrose, Collo., Derby, F.ng.
KANDYAN CHIEF.

Plate IV.
1
. MAT WEAVERS (Kinnarayo).
Bemrose, Collo.y Derby,
2 . BALI CEREMONY. 3 . DAMASCENER.

Plate V.
BRASS FOUNDERS' WORKSHOP. FAIR AT RELIGIOUS FESTIVAL.
Hemrose, Collo., Derby, Eng.
CRAFTSMEN AND COSTUME.

Plate VI.
Bemrosi, Collo., Derby, Kn/'.
CRAFTSMEN AT WORK.

Plate VII.
BUILDINGS.

Plate Vili.
Skeen & Co., Photo. Btmrose, Collo. ^ Derby, Eng,
DAMBULLA GAL-VIHARE, INTERIOR.

Hate VIIIa.
Sk«n & Co., Photo. Setnrose, Colio.^ Derby, Eng.
KELANIYA VIHARE, INTERIOR.

Plate IX.
Bemrose, Collo., Derby, Eng.
WOODWORK.

Plate X.
Bemmse, Collo,, Derby, Eng.
WOODWORK.

Plate XI.
“ W'mf •
I V*-. V '
i, S•
I
• w
i€^
WOODEN RICE-SQUEEZER, BOLT, BED-HEAD AND STOOL. SPOON RACKS.
Ben:ri>se, Collo., Derby, Eng.

Plaie XII.
Bevtrose, Cello.^ Derby, Eng.
. GAME BOARDS. BED LEGS.

Plate Xin.
Bentrose, Colh.. Derby, Eng.
WOODWORK.

Plate XIV,
Beinrose, Colio., Derby, Eng.
PAINTING AND DESIGN.

Bemrpse, CoHo., Derby, Kns'.
VIHARA CEILING-PAINTING AT GANEGAMA, NEAR PELMADULLA.
Eaki.y Nineteenth Century.

>•
O
Z
<
<
§
<
o
§ï
<
<
Q
<
<
Û
O
z
H
Z
<
0.
C5 •á'
z± ^ ^
Lü
ü
I
<
O
z
<
cc
UJ
>

Plate XVII
7
TiniNQl ALÄI,
DRAWN BY EMBEKKA OEVASURENDRA HANQIOIYA, EARLY XIXtr CENTURY.
L-PIECE8 FROM AN EIGHTEENTH CENTURY M S.

Plate XVIII,
FROM AN ILLUMINATED MS. WRITTEN IN 1811 A.D.
Scenes from the life of Gotama Buddha; part of the Sat Satiya or seven weeks’ fast.
Fourth week, Buddha seated in the Fifth week, Buddha seated beneath
golden palace erected by the Dewas, the tree Ajapala, tempted by the
reflecting on the Dharmma. daughters of Mara.
Sixth week, Buddha sheltered by the Seventh week, Buddha receiving offer­
Naga, Muchalinda. ings of milk-rice from two Brahman
merchants, and an alms-bowl from
the Regents of the four quarters.
[Original measure$ 9i X inch.']

Plate XIX.
FROM AN ILLUMINATED MS. WRITTEN IN 1811 AD.
Gotama Buddha seated, preaching.
\_Original measures 8| X inch.']

Plate XX.
3 5
■c)«x>» «<S. e^«icoxj ixf cw PoTDl^
.jg.aitfuJOTg~'gi-ffie)e^g>d«g~<t)tfN<yt>'0’il<5gy>g? j
36 9 0
2Silo C J &)'^^o'^
9 3
j><np.r^gV^airw^^Ot^g^ #i
355
z^JlX_')>hc)^€hd (n
I ^1—^g>iflji
<S^siSic»2‘ .....I «-"■“ ■• •»—
.Si<r<)kOtXitn<it)S'«s^<5w6^ifS'C33iK«SjQ£>c3
5
¿pi i^-.i.ww.i ' «pt&ff'oJi» <T'«*) gC'«y^
y Cl. js)*2 E ei auh * S'»! vn e 5'<n «1« ix»-«)d s
05» ■fli9'S)'E eioid shtiSE oS’Siih^ tiSTSck
4 aSi) Jrm* 9§C^'i<JoiE (SVn^i^ciag ffawhE gSVs 'f))
ys9 5 »a) 1 * 0 5b9 5 {>e5«v.m'5ge3Cj»yi^^,^ » 3 ).* Sai 5 s 5 ^m i
eX EB <^«^ E <»<Fh C») E (^ (o>^
« EiOHTEENTH CCNTURr MS LAST PAGE OF AN EIQHTEENTH CENTURY MS.
S. WORKING DRAWING FOR A OEM-SET BELT FOR SRI VIKRAMA RAJA 8INHA [l79e-lBi8 A D.]
[Fi</urea 1 a«rf 2 Jiaiura^ me ,• figure 3 tligktly reduced]

Plate XXI.

Plate XXII.
QBflI Confitti Udtt Cand; gnUKmt fai SingaleiTe fp^fac iFìmala, Darma,SuiÌ, Ada, fjel fai Coulombog^^opt/Don Tan bàli Coulorebo, fatfc nfbffl*
fafaigiji fai 3(nttoio{)ema(clit/na(ctlebenbanfgnquaIUcrtint>(Santi(Iinct 30210 ban^peiUiecg&ea/UiojDt in btfel^iRotpbcmlc.
Vimala Dharma SCirya I. and Joris van Spilberghen at Kandy, July, 1602.
Sri Vikrama Raja Sirpha, the last Kandyan king, attended by his ministers.
ROYAL COSTUME.

Plate XXIII.
Banrose, Collo., Derby^ Eng.
WORKING DRAWINGS OF AN EIGHTEENTH CENTURY KANDYAN GOLDSMITH.

LAC WORK.

Plate XXV.
10
■m.
Bemrose, Collo., Derby, En^.
EARTHENWARE.

Plate XXVI.
I ^*1 ■>>
li . ’v: ' ,• Y ■
5 . 0, > i ^ •
liiUtrost, Coilo., Dir/>x, Eng.
EARTHENWARE.

Plate XXVIII.
Bemrose, Collo., Derby, Eng.
WOVEN AND EMBROIDERED CLOTHS.

I’liite XXIX.
I aVtC-ie'iSi .♦ 'A'suiKijf tj/^
¡CiHiMsreiunb
V-',^!-v -
Bemrose, CoHo., Derby, Eng^.
LOOMS AND WOVEN CLOTHS.

Plate XXX.
yyvsNYWvYvVY'/y^>VYyvWYVvvv
EMBROIDERY.

Plate XXXI.
EMBROIDERED BETEL BAG.

EMBROIDERED BETEL-BAGS.

mate XXXllI.
Bemrose, Collo., Derby, Eng.
EMBROIDERED GARMENTS, HANDKERCHIEFS AND BAG.

Plate XXXIV.
»Mwew9*jir««eeem
-i
nV/'-L .'■‘'r
fttttítí íííí^irn •:
wimKMSsm
•'Ja!/!!! .''''!^•''■*^^:i•.'^^'..:. . ' '!'
tonni petta
ratvatte-
alafikaraya
<T!Í kurulltí
naga, I tarava,
hiaga,
Ikurullu
depota-
laniiva
rrrrT«r*V:^fc^»<v'wm*
□/>rt
*r.-:e*!:t*v3tóatWi'ff»a'«** 3
SS^
^ pobottuva
DUMBARA MATS.
With pattern names.

Plate XXXV.
Bemrosc, Collo., Dethy, Eng.
IVORY.

Plate XXXVl.
Bemrose, Collo., Derby, Eng.
IVORY.

Plate XXXVII.
Bemrose. Colio., Derby, Ert£^.
IVORY.

>
X
X
>
oc
o
>

Plate XXXIX.
10|
Bemrose. Collo., Derby, Eng.
IVORY COMBS.

Plate XL,
Bcmrose, Collo., Deròy, Eng.
IVORY AND HORN.

Plate XLII.
Bemrose, Collo., Derby, Eng.
GOLD AND SILVER PLATE, MAHA DEWALA AND DALADA MALIGAWA, KANDY.

Plate XUII.
Bemrose, Collo., Derby, Eng.
SILVER AND BRASS.

Plate XT.IUa.
Bemrose, Collo., Derby, Eng.
METAL WORK.

Plate XI.IV,
Jiemrose, Collo. ^ Derby, Eng.
BRASS AND BRONZE.

Plate XLV.
Bemrfise. Collo,, Derby, En^.
BRASS, BRONZE AND IRON.

Plate XLVI.
Hemrose, Collo., Derby,
ARECA-NUT SLICERS, AND CHUNAM BOXES.

Plate XLVII,
Bejjiroae, Collo., Derby^ Eng,
KNIVES, SPEAR HEAD, SWORD.

Plate XLVIII.
Bcmrose. Collo., Derby ¡ins:
NECK-CHAINS AND PENDANTS,

ríate XLIX.
Bemrosc'y Collo., Deriiy,
NECK-CHAINS AND OTHER JEWELLERY.

Plate L.
Bet/irasc, CoUo., Derby., Evg.
SILVER WAIST CHAINS, GOLD PENDANT, SILVER AND BRASS BANGLES.

Plate I.I.
141
Bewrosf^ Colio., Derby, Eng.
FINGER RINGS AND EARRINGS.

Plate I,II.
■ ■ V-'i«:-"
Bcfnrose, Collo., ~Derhy, Eitg.
MISCELLANEOUS.

Plate LIII.
Iron smelting furnace ; general vie 2. Iron smelting furnace ; the bellows.
3. The furnace at work. 4. The bellows-blower.
5. Steel furnace at work. 6. Steel furnace; removing crucibles.
MANUFACTURE OF IRON AND STEEL.

Four hundred and twenty-five copies printed under the care of the Author at the Essex
House Press in the Norman Chapel at Broad Campden, Gloucestershire. Begun September,
1907, and finished December, 1908.

00140746
00140746

Digitized with financial assistance from
Observer Research Foundation
on 01 June, 2019