=== PAGE 1 ===
Profan

Aufsatz Nr. 92 Paper No. 92

MICHAEL HAHN

Gopadatta’s Jatakamala
On the first complete edition of its 16 extant legends

Off-print from:

Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies
Indogakubukkydgakukenkyti

Vol. 55, No. 3, March 2007
pp. 1043-1051 [= (15)-(23)]

As


=== PAGE 2 ===
Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies Vol. 55, No.3, March 2007 (15)

Gopadatta’ Jatakamala

On the first complete edition of its 16 extant legends

Michael HAHN

1, The Gopadatta hypothesis

It is now almost 30 years ago that I raised the ‘Gopadatta hypothesis,’ i.e. the at-
tribution of at first 14, later 15 Buddhist legends, transmitted anonymously in the
Buddhist Sanskrit literature of Nepal” and written in the campii style, to Gopadatta,
author of a Saptakumdrikavadana which is available as a separate text both in
Sanskrit and Tibetan. I also contended that these 15 legends were taken from
Gopadatta’s Ja@takamala whose existence is known from Somendra’s postscript to
the Bodhisattvavadanakalpalata composed by his father Ksemendra. A fragmentary
manuscript of Gopadatta’s Jatakamala was purchased by Giuseppe TUCCI in Nepal
around 1930 (cf. his note in the Winternitz Felicitation Volume) but seems to be lost for
good. For the details cf. my booklet Haribhatta and Gopadatta, Tokyo 1977 and
1992.

I would like to emphasize once more that the Gopadatta hypothesis is proved be-
yond doubt only for the Svajataka (No. 10 in the list below) from which Sarvananda
quotes half a stanza in his 7ika@sarvasva, marking it with the words iti Gopadattah.
However, by the “argument of vicinity”, i.e., the fact that the legends in question
form groups of 3, 5, or 10 (11) legends in the secondary or tertiary sources (see
below), and by self-quotations (in the case of the *4jatasatrvavadana and the Punyaraisya-
vaddna) all the remaining legends are de facto included in that hypothesis except the
Maitrakanyakavadana and this has been subjected to a separate study by Konrad
KLAus who regards Gopadatta’s authorship as very likely.

2, The 16 legends attributed to Gopadatta - The current state of research
The 15 legends which I attribute to Gopadatta can be found in four secondary

sources and one tertiary source:

—1043—


=== PAGE 3 ===
(16) Gopadatta’ Jatakamala (M. HAHN)

1) Jatakamalavadanasiitra (JMAS): 11 legends
2) Avadanasarasamuccaya (ASS): 2 legends (plus 3 already contained in JMAS)
3) Bodhisattvajatakavaddnamala (BJAM): | legend
4) A fragmentary palm leaf manuscript from Tibet microfilmed and published by

Rahula SAMKRITYAYANA
5) Asokavadanamala (ASS): 1 legend, plus 2 already known from BJAM and
JMAS

For the details of these sources cf. again HAHN 1992. A primary source in the
strict sense of the word would be a complete or fragmentary manuscript of
Gopadatta’s Jatakamala like the one mentioned by TUCCI. In our context, a second-
ary source is an extract of one or several legends in more or less unaltered form,
placed in a new environment, while a tertiary source is the extract from a second-
ary source, again placed in another environment, however this time with substantial
changes. The last case includes additions to, and deletions of, the original source,
transformation of the prose portions into verse and other deliberate changes of the
original wording. This is what generally happened when older sources were embedd-
ed in the so-called “Buddhist puranas” or Avadadnamailas. For a structural analysis of
these works | refer to the recent paper by Kiyoshi OKANO entitled “Subhdsitama-
haratnavadanamaila ni tsuite”® and to my analysis of the Mahajjatakamala. These
are the 15 legends which I attribute to the author of the Saptakumarikdvaddna; they

are given here in the order of their sources:

No. Title Location Parallels/Tertiary sources”
1. Suprabhasa JMAS 0,3 MJM 7

2. Rsipaficaka JMAS 35 ASS | (identical)

3. Sarthavaha JMAS 36 ASS 2 (identical), SAM 4
4. Sarvamdada JMAS 37 ASS 3 (identical), MJM 45
5, Jfanavati JMAS 38

6. Kapisvara JMAS 39

7, Megha JMAS 40

8. Matrposahastin JMAS 41 BKAM 33

9, Naga JMAS 42
10. Svan JMAS 43 MJM 8

—1044—


=== PAGE 4 ===
Gopadatta’ Jatakamala (M. HAHN) (17)

ll. Matsarananda ASS 4 ARM 25, SMRAM 20/24, DA(T) 20°

12, Bhavalubdhaka ASS 5 AAM 12

13. Maitrakanyaka BJAM 11 DA 38, JMAS 54 (identical)

14, *Ajatagatru® palm leaf ms. from Tibet; cf. JBORS xxiv (1937), pp. 149-58,
15. Punyaragi ? AAM 13

Additional abbreviations:

ARM Avadanaratnamala (unpublished)

BKAM Bhadrakalpavadanamala (unpublished)

DA(T) Divyavadana (Tokyo University Library, ms. No. 170)
JBORS Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society
SAM Sambhadravadanamala (unpublished)

SMRAM Subhasitamaharatnavadanamala

Between 1980 and 1996 all but three of the 16 ‘Gopadatta’ legends (the
SaptakumGrikavadana included) were edited (or re-edited; Nos. 13 and 14), one of them
(No. 5) in a so far unpublished M.A. thesis. Six of these editions are accompanied by
English translations (Nos. 2-4, 11, 12, 15), four by German translations (5, 7, 9, 13).”
The three legends not yet published according to their secondary sources are Nos. |
(Suprabhasa), 8 (Matrposahastin), and 10 (Svan). Nos. 1 and 10 are already known
from their tertiary source, the Mahajjatakamala. However, there is a great differ-
ence in their respective adaptations. While the Svajataka is preserved quite faithful-
ly in the Mahajjatakamala with all its stanzas the Suprabhasajataka was handled
extremely freely. In the Mahajjatakamala version we find less than half the stanzas
of the Jatakamalavadanasiitra and even that version seems to be mutilated in the
beginning and end. Thus the published text of the Mahajjatakamadla gives only a
rather imperfect picture of the original story. The Matyposahastijataka contains the
longest and most difficult prose passages of all the 16 legends and also the greatest
number of textual corruptions. This is the main reason why it has so far not been
published.

3. The current research project
The current research project entails an edition of all the 16 extant legends in one

—1045—


=== PAGE 5 ===
(18) Gopadatta’ Jatakamala (M. HAHN)

volume, accompanied by an English translation. Apart from the practical aspect of
having the extant parts of the work in one volume, there are two major reasons for
winding up the research on this work at this time. The first reason is that it seems
to be fairly sure that the only primary source, the manuscript mentioned by TUCCI
about 75 years ago (uncertain; see below, footnote 8), is now lost for good. Our col-
leagues in Rome have made great effort to secure and describe what is still avail-
able of TuCct’s collections. While some works have unexpectedly turned up, like
Sarvaraksita’s Maniciidajataka, if only in microfilm, others, like Dharmatrata’s A-
bhidharmasamuccayakarika or Gopadatta’s Jatakamala, were not found. Thus the
previously nourished hope that access to TUCCI’s fragmentary manuscript might
verify (or even falsify) the Gopadatta hypothesis, provide us with intelligible readings
for the many corrupt passages in the secondary and tertiary source and even give us
a number of new, so far unknown legends has evaporated.® The second reason is
that over the years a greater familiarity with Gopadatta’s style and train of thought
has been achieved, which makes it possible to improve upon the text and translation
of several of the legends. Of great help is the fact that in a digitized text the search
for possible parallels to difficult words and expressions becomes incredibly faster
and also much more reliable.

The starting point of the planned edition and translation of the 16 extant legends
is the manuscript of the Jatakamalavadanasiitra which is dated 1690 AD and con-
tains 11 of the 16 extant ‘Gopadatta’ stories. Its owner, the Ryukoku University in
Kyoto, has already published an excellent facsimile edition of the whole manuscript”
and is supporting the current editorial project through a Numata Fellowship. It will
be supplemented by two stories from the Avadanasadrasamuccaya, one from the
Asokavadanamala, one from the palm leaf manuscript from Tibet, and by the
Saptakumarikavadana with its three independent sources (Sanskrit, Tibetan, commen-
tary) plus the secondary source of the ASokdvadanamdla.

Only recently I tried to determine the percentage of Gopadatta’s work that is still
extant in the sources described above. The result is quite surprising. From the colo-
phon of Tuccl’s manuscript we know that the size of the whole work was 3,300
granthas or 3,300 x 32 = 106,600 syllables. In order to determine the size of the ex-

tant parts we have to count the syllables, i.e., the vowels of the computerized texts

—1046—


=== PAGE 6 ===
Gopadatta’ Jatakamala (M. HAHN) (19)

which is, in fact, a simple task. All one has to do is to replace the vowels, starting
with the diphthongs ai and au by an arbitrary place-holder, e.g. nothing, and make a
note of the number of replacements of each vowel. Their total is the number of syl-
lables which in Indian texts are defined as open syllables, i.e., syllables ending in a
vowel, no matter whether this is etymologically or morphologically justified or not.
In our case the number of lost or inadvertently omitted aksaras had to be included
which are indicated in my files by the respective metrical symbols of a long, short
or metrically undetermined syllable. The result of the calculation which includes
also the titles of the stories as given in the secondary sources is 98,636 aksaras or
3,127 granthas. There is a certain degree of uncertainty because some of the stories
may be either incomplete or, on the contrary, contain additions of the compiler, as is
certainly the case with the Punyarasi and Suprabhisa stories. But the variance
should most likely be within the limit of 50 granthas so that the exact number of
granthas of the 16 stories lies between 3,077 and 3,177. Since the average length of
the stories is 3127/16 ~ 195 granthas that means that only one or two stories would
be missing. The missing story (or at least one of them) could be the
Drdhadhyasayavadana that according to TUCCI’s communication was the last story
of the work, In fact, the number of stanzas in the 16 extant ‘Gopadatta’ stories
(1,288) is only slightly less than that in Aryasiira’s Jatakamdla (1,430), and the size of
Aryastira’s whole work is also 3,300 granthas. The consequence is that my former
assumption that the number of stories in Gopadatta’s Jatakamala was 34, like those
of the Ja@takamalas of his two predecessors Aryasiira and Haribhatta, cannot be cor-
rect. My assumption was based on the tacit presupposition that the work follows
these two models both in its internal and external structure.

This presupposition, however, is obviously wrong, because the similarities that
one notices during a first perusal of the stories are only superficial. Already in
HAHN 1977 I came to the conclusion that the external structure of Gopadatta’s work
deviates from that of his predecessors. We do not find the regular structure of the
introductory and concluding section that we are used to from Aryaéiira and
Haribhatta and also the use of metres is at variance, as I have shown in a separate
paper. One gains the impression that on the stylistic level Gopadatta is both an
eclecticist and syncretist; he fréely uses and combines the literary devices which he

—1047—


=== PAGE 7 ===
(20) Gopadatta’ Jatakamala (M. HAHN)

finds in the works of his predecessors and deliberately abandons their somewhat
rigid structure.

In the next section we will see that also the internal organisation of Gopadatta’s
work is different, and therefore there is no need to assume that only in the number
of legends he should strictly follow the mode! of Aryasiira and Haribhatta. That
Haribhatta sticks to the number of Aryasiira can easily be explained as a token of
his admiration since he expressly mentions Aryastirra as the great and unsurpassable
master of the genre in the introduction to his own work.! For Gopadatta who had
more than one predecessor in the field there was no need to do this.

I will not conceal that there is one weak point in my reasoning. It is again based
on a certain presupposition, namely that all the 16 legends which | attribute to
Gopadatta are from his Jatakamala and not from any other work. The sceptic might
argue that the title of the work is Jatakamala, not AvadaGnamala, and hence one
would expect it to consist only of real Jatakas, i.e. stories about the bodhisattva. As
we shall see in the next section, there are six stories among the 16 which do not ful-
fil this criterion. My counter-argument is the group-wise occurrence of the legends,
above all the 1] legends in the Jatakam@lavadanasiitra. Since chapters 1-34 are the
complete Jatakamala of Aryasiira, and chapters 44-53 are taken from Haribhatta’s
Jatakamla it would only be naturally if chapters 35-43 that bear such a great sty-
listic resemblance to each other were also taken from one and the same work.!?) And
a second counter-argument is the above-mentioned DrdhadhyaSayadvadana whose
title proves that Gopadatta did not make a sharp distinction between jatakas and

avadanas.

4, Structure and content of Gopadatta’s Jatakamala

Unfortunately we know nothing about the internal organisation of Gopadatta’s
work, In the cases of the Ja@takamalas of Aryasiira and Haribhatta it is obvious that
their legends are meant to illustrate the six moral perfections. In Aryaégiira’s work
the first three decades seem to be devoted to giving or dana (1-10), morality or sila
(11-20), and forbearance or ksanti (21-30). The situation is somewhat unclear with re-
gard to the last four legends. In Haribhatta’s work we find the following distribu-

tion: giving or dana is illustrated in legends I-11, morality or sila in legends 12-17,

—1048—


=== PAGE 8 ===
Gopadatta’ Jatakamala (M. HAHN) (21)

forbearance or ksanti in legends 18-21, striving or virya in legends 22-25, medita-
tion or dhyana in legend 26, and wisdom or prajfid in legends 27-34. Particularly in
Haribhatta’s J@takamala the moral perfections are most clearly mentioned or alluded
to in the mottos and epilogues. The situation is different with regard to Gopadatta’s
work. In one case, the Prabhasa legend, I have a vague suspicion that it might have
been the opening story, as in the works of Haribhatta and Ksemendra, since it de-
scribes the future Buddha's first bodhicitta, thus marking the very beginning of his

bodhisattva career. This is what the stories (here arranged alphabctically) themselves

disclose:
No. Title of the legend Motto Epilogue Content
1. Ajatagatru (As) - missing 2
2. Bhavalubdhaka(Bhi) — The dangers of the longing for existence (bhava)
3, Jitainavati (Jv) virya dana, virya karund, dana
4. Kapigvara (Ki) dana, kypa dana, Sila Sila
5. Maitrakanyaka (Mk) Sila (2) Sila (?) Sila (2)
6. Matrposahastin(Mph) _ Sila (?) Sila (2) Sila (2)
7, Matsarananda (Mn) dana dana dana
8. Megha (Me) The illusory character of nature
9, Naga (Na) ksGnti ksGnti ksanti
10, Punyarasi (Pr) The unreal nature of things
lL. Rsipaficaka (Rp) The dangers of birth (avi) [si/a in HJM XV!]
12, Saptakumarika (Sk) - (vairagya) -
13. Sarthavaha (Sv) dana dana dana
14, Sarvamdada (Sd) dana dana dana
15. Suprabhasa (Sp) - (bodhicitta) (karmasvakata)
16, Svan (Sv) (tyaiga) (tyaga) (parahita)

The attributions given above are only tentative. A more detailed analysis might
yield slightly different results. And it should be emphasized that sometimes the con-
nection between the content of a legend and the moral perfection it is meant to il-
lustrate seems to be quite arbitrary. This, however, would be the topic of another
paper. One can see that six of the legends cannot be pressed into the pattern of the

—1049—


=== PAGE 9 ===
(22) Gopadatta’ Jatakamala (M. HAHN)

six moral perfections: 1, Ajatasatru, 2, Bhavalubdhaka, 8. Megha, 10. Punyarasi, 11,
Rsipaficaka, and 12. Saptakumarika. They are neither j@takas nor avadanas in the
conventional sense of these terms, but they relate some historical or quasi-historical
incidents or consist of philosophical discussions. In this respect they resemble parts
of Kumaralata’s Kalpanamanditika Dystantapankti (alias Agvaghosa’s Siitralamkara)
on the one hand and Ksemendra’s Bodhisattvavadanakalpalata on the other hand.
This is perhaps Gopadatta’s most important innovation to the campii form as de-
veloped by his two predecessors Aryagtira and Haribhatta. In a kind of (over) simpli-
fication one could claim that Aryasiira expanded well-known stories — the content
of which he did not change substantially — by the embellishments of kdvya, includ-
ing long niti and subhdsita portions. Haribhatta then took the liberty of reworking
the plots so as to create a logically structured story, organized very much according
to the Indian drama with which he was obviously quite familiar. Gopadatta finally
frequently focusses on ethical and philosophical topics which he elaborates prefera-
bly in the form of dialogues. This is mostly done in verse, which may account for
the substantial reduction of the prose portions in his stories as compared to the

works of his predecessors.

1) With the exception of the Ajatasatru story; see below.

2) In: Minami ajia kotengaku, 1, 2006, pp. 1-19.

3) Metrical adaptations, if not stated otherwise.

4) The metrical adaptation of the Matsaranandavadana can be found in various manu-
scripts of the Avadanaratnamala or Ratnavadanamdla cycle, in one of the Divydva-
dana manuscripts and in a separate manuscript. For the details of all these manuscripts
and their mutual relationship cf. Ratna HANDURUKANDE, Five Buddhist Legends in the
Campii Style, Bonn 1983, pp. (10)-(11).

5) The title of legend No. 14 is reconstructed. It is not given in the legend itself.

6) For the details see HAHN 1992 and OKANO 2006.

7) All the bibliographical details can be found in HAHN 1992, except for the following
two papers that were published after 1992: 1) Michael HAHN, “Der duldsame Nagakdig.
Gopadattas Nagajataka”, Berliner Indologische Studien 8 (1995), pp. 87-135; 2) Mi-
chael HAHN, “Die Einladung der Pratyekabuddhas. Gopadattas Meghajataka”, Berliner
Indologische Studien 9 (1996), pp. 157-201.

8) According to Giuseppe Tucci, “Animadversiones Indicae. 8. Sankarasvamin,
Sivasvamin and Gopadatta”, in: Festschrift fiir Moriz Winternitz, Leipzig 1933, pp.

—1050—


=== PAGE 10 ===
Gopadatta’ Jatakamala (M. HAHN) (23)

243-6, the colophon states that the manuscript “was copied by the Bengali upasaka
$riMuktidasa in the year 1810, 10 month, 19" day from parinirvana.” This is not suf-
ficient to determine the date exactly, however, according to what we know about the
dating of Buddha’s parinirvana in Bengal at that time (for which the year 543 BC is a
likely candidate) the date given in the colophon could correspond to Friday, 20 January
1268 AD. I owe this precious information to Dr Karl-Heinz Gouzio, Bonn. This date
would make it a rather old and presumably precious manuscript.

While reading TUCCI’s paper again, I noticed that due to a possible misunderstanding
of a crucial passage 1 might have looked for the manuscript at a wrong place all the
time. TUCCI writes: “A fragmentary collection of Avadanas in the kavya style was found
in Nepal by me while examining the manuscripts recently purchased.” (p. 246) I had al-
ways understood this sentence as “purchased [by me, i.e. TuCCI].” However, it is equally
possible, or even more likely, that TUCCI actually meant: “[by the (then) Bir Library].”
Such a manuscript, however, is mentioned neither in Buddhisagara Parajuli’s catalogue
of the Bir Library nor in the title list of the NGMPP. In this connection it might be
worthwhile to relate a story that I once heard about TUCCI from someone who knew him
well. It says that TUCCI had purchased some precious manuscripts in Nepal. This leaked
out to the Nepalese authorities who approached him in his hotel and dernanded that he
should return the manuscripts. Allegedly Tucci became furious and replied that he was
now the rightful owner of the manuscripts and would rather burn than return them. Was
this perhaps the fate of the sole manuscript of Gopadatta’s Jalakamala?

9) In Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Buddhist Siitras from Nepal, ed. by Taijun INOKUCHI,
Kyoto 1990 (Facsimile Series of Rare Texts in the Library of the Ryukoku University.
9.), pp. 69-250.

10) “Zur Verteilung der VersmaBe in der buddhistischen Campii-Dichtung”, Zeitschrift
der Deutschen Morgenlidischen Gesellschaft, Supplement V, XX. Deutscher Orientali-
stentag vom 24. bis 29. Mdz 1980 in Berlin, Ausgewahlte Vortrdge, herausgegeben von
Fritz Steppat, Wiesbaden 1982 (1983), pp. 245-252.

11) GcGryasiiraracitani na jGtakani karta ksamah samatayapy anugantum anyah |
SitamSur eva kumudapratibodhasaktas taraiganah samudito ‘py asamartha eva || 2 || “No
other author is able to imitate in a similar (high) standard the jatakas composed by the
teacher (Gcdrya) Siira. Only the ‘cool-rayed’ (moon) is able to open the night-lotuses,
while even the whole group of stars is unable to achieve this.”

12) The separate placements of Suprabhiisa at the beginning (chapter 0.3) and Maitrakan-
yaka at the end (chapter 54) are determined by other factors (content and incorporation
of the complete Bodhisattvajatakavadanamala).

(Key Words) Gopadotta, Jatakamala, complete edition
(Professor, University of Marburg)

—1051—
