NOTES ON KANDYAN ART. :
4
[Reprinted from ** Spolia Zeylanica,” Vol. VII,, Part XXV., 2 ee
I
September, 1910.| re
Pti
*
¢
ES
> =
3

SMITHSONIAN
INSTITUTION
aaeeeeae=S5jNie ri ee n e eee a

NOTES ON KANDYAN ART. 39
NOTES ON KANDYAN ART.
By Ananpa K. Coomaraswamy, D.Sc.
(With two Plates.)
CHANK IN THE MuszuM aT Kanpy.
i Bac Kandy Museum has lately acquired a very beautiful chank,
mounted in damascened brass, and comparable with the fine
specimen which is figured in ‘‘ Medieval Sinhalese Art,”’ Pl. XLI., I.
As in that case, the termination is in the form of a serapendiya head, -
and a continuation of the metal work runs round the mouth of the |
|
chank. The foliar scrolls proceeding from the animal’s mouth are
partly broken. The chank itself is plain, and not inlaid as in the
other example. Like the other, it comes from Uda Nuwara ; in this
case, from the Dewale at Lankatilaka. The other example was given
by Narendra Sinha to a Dewale at Eldeniya (or Aludeniya ?), and
it may be assumed that this specimen also is at least as old as the
earlier part of the eighteenth century. It measures 102 inches in
full length.
CaRVED PowpER Horn.
Mr. A. B. Casse Lebbe possesses a very fine carved Kandyan
powder horn. The material is buffalo horn, and the delicate carving
a fine example of liya pata work.
WEIGHT OF A STOCK-DRILL. q
When last in Ceylon I obtained a beautifully carved stock-drill
(torapanaya) weight, elaborately carved in serpentine. This
material is probably derived from the exposure near Ragalla, which
was examined by Mr. Parsons, and is described in the Administra-
tion Report of the Mineralogical Survey for 1906. It is interesting _
to note that the carved weight shows signs of local abrasion, where
it has evidently been rubbed down in recent times for medicinal
purposes, as described in the report referred to.
Seen from above, the weight has a pentagonal section ; there is a
ring of pala peti ornament round the bore, and below this are the
five angular ornaments of naga bandha form ; below this again is a
simpler form of pala peti, followed by several delicate mouldings.
The total height of the weight is 34 in., the diameter of the
bore is % in. above and { in. below. Other illustrations of

40 SPOLIA ZEYLANICA.
stock-drill weights from Ceylon will be found in ‘‘ Medieval
Sinhalese Art,” fig. 91, and in Mr. Parker’s ‘* Ancient Ceylon,”
figs. 240, 241.
The present specimen is said to have belonged to Devendra
Mulacariya, and was obtained from one of his descendants.
PHOTOGRAPH OF A KANDYAN KENDTIYA.
The accompanying photograph of a kendiya was taken some
years ago by Messrs. Skeen & Co., and lately given to me by Mr.
F. Skeen ; the present whereabouts of the original is unknown. It
represents a fine specimen, probably made in silver, and no doubt
formerly the property of a Buddhist temple. It is scarcely dis-
tinguished in form from an ordinary kotalaya, except by the presence
of a lid.
FILIGREE AND OTHER BEADS.
The great variety of beautiful gold beads found in Kandyan
jewellery, whether of local or Tamil origin, is very remarkable, and
I illustrate here a selection, which should not, however, be regarded
as exhausting all the varieties obtainable. All the principal types
are known by name. Any filigree bead is wayiramuni; one with
stars (No. 1) is called taruka wayiramuni, “ star filigree bead”; one
with dots (No. 16) is called arimbu wayiramuni,*< dot filigree bead ”’ ;
one like No. 4 arimbu surulu-wayiramun(but-this appears ra
be-an-error,-as_this is not actually a filigree bead, but belongs to the
other-class)~ 2
Beads other than filigree are called bubul. Ribbed varieties
(Nos. 14, 19, and 21) are called reli bubul, ‘‘ waved beads,” or ‘‘ un-
dulated”’ ; those with a sharp angle, diamond-shaped in section, are
called dippatan, ‘‘ two-facetted’’; those chased (Nos. 3 and 7) are
called ketayan bubul, <‘ chased beads,” or * cut beads ” ; those covered
with dots, arimbu bubul, ‘‘ dotted beads” (No. 5). All these are —
made in two halves, and soldered along the median line. They are,
of course, hollow, and very light and delicate.
Another small Kandyan bead, not shown here, is the gotamuni,
resembling a grain of rice in size and shape ; these are made, not in
two halves, but by rolling round a piece of thin gold of the requisite
size upon itself.
The following are some names of gold feolaots additional to those
given in my ‘‘ Medieval Sinhalese Art.” I should have been glad to
illustrate some, but could not obtain permission to take the photo-
graphs of the jewellery at the Dalada Maligawa, from a list of which
the names are taken. The names are: muna-mal malaya, pusu-
vandan malaya, hunu-vel malaya, dan-vel malaya, arimbu surul
malaya, mohana malaya, sakra malaya, torapat sangili malaya,
sinamum malaya. The previously recorded names, peti malaya,

=
4
PLATH A.
ZBY LANICA.
ZZ E ar wy
fa ike ehean ss &
KENDIYA,.
POWDER HORN.
KANDYAN ART (A. K. Coomaraswamy).
Bemyrose, Collo., Derby.

NOTES ON KANDYAN ART. 4]
polmal malaya, and gedi malaya, also occur in the list.* It would be
exceedingly interesting, and to local and European art students a
very valuable thing, if the Ceylon Government would arrange to
publish an adequately illustrated account of the Maligawa treasure,
in co-operation with the temple authorities ; it is a work which
could hardly be accomplished in any other way. *
. I am indebted to Mr. T. B. Keppitipola for some of the above
information ; he is one of the few Kandyan chiefs who, at the
present time, take an interest in the arts and legends of the
Kandyans.
Bo-LEAF AS A Decorative Morttr.
The well-known Sinhalese bo-leaf ornament, considered as a
Buddhist symbol or decorative motif, is certainly of considerable
antiquity in India and Ceylon. It appears probable, however,
that the form belongs to that large class of ornamental motifs which,
like the classical ‘‘ acanthus,” owe their name and later significance
to an accidental resemblance in a form of quite different origin.
General Beylié writes as follows on the bo-leaf of India :—
‘““Lanceolate ornament, or, more exactly, conventional leaf
ornament, has had its own special history in each country, but
particularly in Egypt, where we constantly meet with it on the
tombs of Antinoe. It formed later the foundation of the decorative
system of Musulman art (13th century) and by reaction of the
figured work of Louis XIII. It is not impossible that the lanceolate
ornament of the Musulman style, although of Assyrian and Egyp-
tian origin, was only adopted in its ordinary form after having
undergone a final transformation in the Indies. The leaf of Ficus
religiosa appears as a nimbus in many statues of Buddha in memory
of the sacred bo-tree under which he attained wisdom. We may
anyhow regard it as certain that the temples of Cambodia (9th-
12th centuries) and the palace of Angkor-Vat ...... have never felt
any other than Hindu and Chinese influence.
“We may add that the principal of the lanceolate or conventional
leaf is not Indian, but Oriental, while the multi-lobed ornament,
evidently of a leafy character, which appears to originate in Musul-
man art in the 13th century, on the belly of the vases of Mossul, is
very probably of Hindu origin.”
In other words, the bo-leaf form is of Assyrian or Egyptian
origin—like the majority of motifs in decorative art, traced to their
ultimate source—and was adopted as a Buddhist symbol in India,
* Another well-known form is the siri-bo-malaya, erroneously described as
Sri-bo-malaya in the index to my ‘‘ Medieval Sinhalese Art,” where it is illus-
trated (Plate XLIX., 5). This form comes mainly from the Galle District,
and does not appear to be Kandyan.
Other necklace names which I have heard are kalamediri malaya and
patteya malaya. Another kind of bead is called karawila eta. It would be
* very advantageous if examples of all these named varieties could be exhibited
in the Colombo Museum.

42 SPOLIA ZEYLANICA,
and then more deliberately based on the actual bo-leaf outline ; and
this Indian type again influenced Musulman, and through Musulman,
European types of ornaments.
Since writing the above, Mr. Keppitipola has kindly sent me a full
list of the names of the beads illustrated. The names are as follows :—
1, Arimbupets wayiramuni; 2, Arimbu wayiramuni ; 3, 4, 7,
Ketayan bubul ; 5, Arimbu bubul ; 6, Silamuni ; 8, Murukasa wayira-
muni; 9, Surulu silamuni ; 10,15, Murukasa arimbu wayiramune ;
11, Wayiramunt ; 12, 13, Pattan arimbu bubul ; 14, 18, 20, Arimbu
palakka ; 16, Surulu palakka ; 17, Dipattan bubul ; 19, 21, 22, Reli
palakka.
It will be seen that wayiramuni is the term applied to a filigree
bead, bubul to a bead not of pierced or trellis work ; an ovoid or
elongated bead is called palakka. The term pattan is used, as in
gemming phraseology, to signify ‘‘ facetted.”” Arimbu signifies a
grain or dot.

SPOLIA ZHYLANICA. PLATE B,
BRASS MOUNTED CHANK.
GOLD BEADS.
a ee ee ae
— — - ; t
. 1 iS 3 4 5
(inch scale for beads only.)
KANDYAN ART (A. K. CoomaraAswamy).
Bemyrose, Collo., Derby.