TITLE: Why Were the Jātakas Hidden Away at Wat Si Chum? (Sukhothai Epigraphy)
AUTHOR: David L. Gosling
YEAR: 1984
LANGUAGE: EN/TH
ORIGINAL_FILE: JSS_072_0c_Gosling_WhyWereJatakasHiddenAwayAtWatSichum.pdf
EXTRACTED_CHARACTERS: 13788
STATUS: OK
============================================================

WHY WERE THE JAT AKAS "HIDDEN AWAY" AT WAT SiCHUM? 
BETTY GOSLING 
When Lucien Foumereau visited Sukhothai in the early 1890s, a source of joy 
and amazement was the collection of stone engravings depicting scenes from the 
Jatakas that he discovered at Wat Si Chum. Lodged in a narrow tunnel-1ike stairwell 
only a couple of feet wide that had been built into the thick walls of the monastery's 
mondop, or image bouse, the Jataka plaques, as they remain today, were all but 
inaccessible. Foumereau described the apprehension with which be crawled into the 
small opening that appeared to have been knocked haphazardly into the wall just 
south of the grandiose entryway that led to the shrine proper. He documented his 
excitement at catching glimpses of the engravings that lined the unlit ceiling of the . 
.. boyaux mysterieux." And be reported a sigh of relief when he finally emerged at 
the end of his arduous intramural journey at the summit of the monument.l 
Why was the dark stairway constructed, and why were the Jatakas so obscurely 
placed? Now, almost a century after Fournereau's exploration, the Si Chum mondop 
and its Jataka plaques remain something of a mystery. At" Pagan, monuments· with 
stairways embedded within exceptionally thick walls are not uncommon, but in the 
Pagan m·onuments there is some logical architectural relationship between the stairways 
and the interiors and exteriors of the monuments that is not evident at Si Chum. There 
are several terra cotta collections at Pagan depicting the entire 547 or 550 J'iitakas 
(depending on the recension), butthey were placed conspicuously on the exteriors of 
monuments to edify a populace only minimally familiar with the teachings of the 
Tberavada texts.2 As in India, the an~ient folk tales that bad been retold and incor­
porated into the Buddhist canon as stories of the Buddha's previous lives served to 
link popular thought with more sophisticated reJigious tenets. But the inaccessibility of 
the Si Chum J'iitakas belies any such traditional intent. 
In 1924 George Coedes suggested that the plaques perhaps had been lodged in 
the Sl Chum stairwell for safekeeping following some unknown catastrophe. 3 The 
1. Lucien Fournereau, Le Siam Ancien, part 2, Annales du Musee Gulmet 31 (Paris, 1907), pp. 
4-6. 
2. Gordon H. Luce, Old Burma-Early Pagan, vol. I~ Artibus Asiae, Supplementum 25 (Locust 
Valley, New York), pp. 40, 61, 62, 241, 242, passim. 
3. George Coedes, Recueil des inscriptions du Siam, vol. 1, Inscriptions de Sukhodaya (Bangkok. 
1924), p. 177. 
WHY WERE THE JATAKAS "HIDDEN AWAY" 15 
Jatakas are incomplete...,. only the first one hundred or so are depicted, and the last of 
these are executed with fewer details and less precision than the early ones. Some sort 
of political threat might be suggested as a reason. But the plaques are fitted into the 
stairwell in such a way that they could not have been added after the completion of the 
building. 4 The huge mondop does not suggest itself as an emergency measure. 
But it is generally agreed, on the other hand, that, although the mondop must· 
have been constructed to house the plaques, they had probably been originally intended 
for another site.5 Although each plaque is numbered according to its position in the 
Pali canon, tbis ordering is not always followed.6 Moreover, the overhead positioning 
of the plaques makes the numbers, as well as their accompanying inscriptions, illegible· 
under normal circumstances, suggesting that the identifications were no longer attributed 
their former significance. 
Inscriptional and archaeological data provide some clues as to the plaques' 
original provenance. Coedes suggested that the Jarakas were those which Inscription 2 
states surrounded a large, tall chedi, 7 now identified as the Mahathat, Sukhothai's most 
important religious monument, located at the center of the city. 8 Not only is this the 
only inscriptional evidence of Jarc.ka engravings at Sukhothai, but the stone engravings 
are the only extant examples to which the inscriptional passage could apply. 
In 1981 I was able to demonstrate that if the Pali text numbering was followed­
rather than the sequence of the plaques as placed at Si Chum- the plaques could be 
arranged to form a four-foot high panel, rather than the long 17-inch, one-panel wide 
arrangement one finds in the mondop.9 I have also recently suggested that prior to the 
renovations at Wat Mahathiit around 1330 and 1345, the core of the chedi had been a 
simple step pyramid of five stages similar to four other step pyramids that can be found 
at Sukhothai. A feature common to the four pyramids whose bases can still be seen 
(the base ofthe Mahathiit pyramid is now surrounded by galleries) is the four-foot 
height of the bottom story.•o Putting inscriptional and archaeological evidence 
4. Jean Boisselier, Thai Painting {Tokyo, 1976), pp. 75, 168, 169. 
5. A.B. Griswold, Towards a History of Sukhodaya Art (Bangkok, 1967). pp, 27, 49. M.C. 
Subhadradis Diskul, Sukhothai Art (Bangkok, n.d.), p. 79. It is Boisselier's opinion that the 
plaques were executed for the Si Chum location (Thai Painting, p. 75). 
6. Boisselier, Thai Painting, p. 75. 
7. Coedes. Recuell, p. 177. 
8. See Betty Gosling, "Once More, Inscription 2: An Art Historian's View." JSS 69. 1-2 
(1981) : 13-42. 
9. Ibid, pp. 30, 31. 
10. Elizabeth Gosling, "The History of Sukhothai as a Ceremonial Center: A Study of Early 
Siamese Architecture and Society," University of Michigan Ph.D. dissertation {1983), pp. 
211-26. 
16 Betty Gosling 
together, I would suggest that Coed~s's theory is correct and that the Jatakas might 
possibly have adorned the bottom story of the Mahiithat pyramidal base. 
Inscription 2 tells us furthermorC? that when the renovator of the Mahiithat, the 
monk Si Satbii, returned from a lengthy journey to Sri Lanka around 1345 with relics 
for the Mabathat, it was falling into ruin and that it required extensive repairs.ll 
Apparently, the project which SI Sathii appears to have begun around 1330 had come 
to nought in his absence, and it can be hypothesized that the Jatakas, like the monu-. 
ment itself, bad either been ruined or left uncompleted. If, as SI Satha states in 
Inscription 2,12 he completed the stupa with stucco and brick (around 1.345), the stone 
engravings may well have been omitted from this stage of reconstruction. 
But before we continue with this line of thought, it must be mentioned that 
our theory demands a slight re-dating of the Jataka engravings.· Boisselier, basing his 
conclusions on comparisons of the figures in the engravings with Sukhothai's "high 
classic" sculpture, usually dated (correctly, I think), to the latter half of the fourteenth 
century, suggested the J'lltaka figures as prototypes and dated them accordingly to the 
Luthai reign (1349-c. 1370).13 Our proposed date of c. 1330, although somewhat 
earlier than Boisselier's date, does not alter the chronological relation to later sculpture. 
The use of stucco architectural decor, which appears to have become the norm in the 
1330s, 1340s, and 1350s,l4 suggests in itself that perhaps the stone engravings derive 
from a somewhat different period. 
But even if one accepts these arguments, it -is still necessary to explain why, 
even when renovations of the Mahathiit resumed around 134_5, the plaques were nc;>t 
repaired, completed, and installed, if not on the Mahiithat itself, on some other monu-
ment in the large Mahathiit compound. The Jlitakas' removal from the most 
conspicuous site in the city to a place of obscurity requires some explanation other than 
a simple change in architectural plans. The inscriptional evidence is not helpful, for the 
passage concerning the Jatakas is mutilated. Mr. A. B. Griswold and Dr. Prasert ~a 
Nagara have filled in the lacunae to read that the plaques "were pried loose by foolish 
men to get gold, and ruined." The translators state, however, that their interpretation 
is highly conjectural.lS 
11. Lines 2.18-20. A.B. Griswold and Prasert na Nagara, "Epigraphic and Historical Studies, 
No. 10 : King Lodaiya of Sukhodaya and His Contemporaries," JSS 60.1 (1972): 100, 
120-1. 
12. Lines 2.20-40. Ibid., pp. 100-102, 120-25. 
13. Boisselier, Thai Painting, p. 75. 
14. Gosling, ''Sukhothai," pp. 184-85. 
15. Griswold and Prasert, "Studies, 10," p. 125. 
WHY WERE THE JATAKAS ''IDDDEN AWAY" 17 
It is my opinion· that the answer to the Sl Chum riddle is reflected, at least in 
part, in the religious attitudes of some Thai Buddhists in much more recent times. 
Prince Damrong reported that King Rama III disapproved of depictions of the Jatakas 
because he considered that portrayal of the Buddha in the form of spirits, animals, and 
persons was not appropriate.I6 Gerini explained that although the Jatakas had been 
incorporated into the Buddhist texts in early times, the modern school of Buddhism, 
particularly the Siamese Orthodox. School, questioned and even denied the canonicity 
of the stories. This school reasoned that the Buddha himself did not discourse much 
on himself, and previous lives such as those found in the Jatakas are not referred to in 
other orthodox texts." Over the centuries, with only few exceptions, it has been 
tniditional in Thailand to depict only the last ten of the Jatakas (the Tosachat), with 
emphasis on the last of these, the Vessantara JO.taka (the Mahachat, or Great Life), 
valued especially for its spiritual and moral values. IS (The most notable exception: the 
set of 500 statues, one for each Jataka, which were cast in 1458. Only a few, in ruinous 
condition, have survived.)l!l 
It would be unreasonable to project these modern-day attitudes back to the 
Sukhothai period without some supporting evidence, but although information is scarce, 
a few analogies can be drawn. As in later times, it appears that by the latter half of 
the fourteenth century, the. Tosachat and the Mahachat had been singled out as impor­
tant texts. 20 After the 1345 reference to the Jataka plaques around the chedi, there is 
no further mention of the 500 Jatakas as a complete set. 
Furthermore, recent architectural studies have indicated that the installation 
of relics at Wat Mahiithat around 1345 marked something of a watershed in the con­
struction of Buddhist monuments at Sukhothai. Between the Ram Khamhieng period, 
at the end of the thirteenth century, and the mid-fourteenth century, little architectural· 
construction appears to have taken place.21 The ruined state of the Mahithit in the 
1340s appears to reflect the religious climate of the times. But the installation of 
authentic relics from Sri Lanka seems to have inaugurated a new wave of Buddhist ac­
tivity, evidenced not only in the fervent Liithai inscriptions22 but in an-inordinate 
16. · Prince Damrong Rajanubhab, Monuments of the Buddha in Siam, second edition (Bangkok, 
1973), p. 35. 
17. G.E. Gerini, A Retrospective View and Account of the Origin of the Thet Mahft Ch'at Ceremony, 
second edition (Bangkok, 1976), p. 53. 
18. Elizabeth Lyons, The Tasachat in Thai Painting {Bangkok, 1963), p. 5. 
19. Boisselier, Thai Sculpture (New York, 1975), p. 176. · 
20. Inscription 102.1.35. Griswold and Prasert "Studies, 7," JSS 59.1 (1971) : 166, 169. 
Inscription 3.1.37. Griswold and Prasert, "Studies, 11," JSS 61.1 (1973) : 88; 99. 
21. Gosling, "Sukhothai," pp. 177-85. 
22. Griswold and Prasert, "Studies, 11," JSS 61.1 (1973): 71-178. 
18 Betty Gosling 
amount of architectural construction, increasing as the century progressed.23 What is 
significant for the present discussion is that the period between the execution of the 
Jataka plaques and their installation in the Si Chum mondop spans the 1345 watershed. 
Putting these diverse scraps of information together, we would suggest that 
whereas the Jatakas would have served ~ell to bridge popular b.elief and the higher 
tenets of Theravada Buddhism in the first half of the fourteenth century, they may no 
longer have been considered the best means of incorporating the old traditions during 
the latter half of the century, when Theravada orthodoxy was more securely established. 
We have written elsewhere of the comparatively provincial state of affairs during the 
Ram Khamhaeng period.24 The importance of animism as a major component of the 
state religion is documented in Inscription 1.25 In our opinion, the Jot aka plaques, 
often depicting the Buddha in the guise of an animal or an animistic spirit, bore rele.., 
vance to the Mahithit Ch'edi in the early periods of Sukhothai's history that would not 
apply in the years of strict orthodoxy that were to follow. 
We propose that in the second half of the fourteenth century, a Jess conspicuous 
site, the tunnelled stairwell in the Wat Si Chum mondop, would have been considered a 
more appropriate location. Wi~hout doubt, the colossal seated Buddha image in the 
central shrine of the SI Chum mondop is the monastery's major focus of devotion. At 
Wat Mahithat the frieze depicting 168 almost identical monks in the walking mode 
that no~ surrounds the Chedi recalls, as the Jatakas could not, the journey to Sri 
Lanka and the installation of the Sinhalese relics. The Jotakas, on the other hand, 
were preserved at SI Chum, if not for their explicit statements of Buddhist thought, at 
· least for their sanctity, and perhaps their beauty-attributes for which they are still 
revered today. 
23. Gosling, "Sukhothai," pp. 185-204. 
24. Betty Gosling, "Some Thoughts on the Introduction of Theravada Buddhism at Sukhothai," 
paper presented at the International Congress on Thai Studies, New Delhi, 1981.. 
25. Inscription 1.3.6-10. Griswold and Prasert, "Studies, 9," JSS 59.2 (1971): 200, 214. 