TITLE: The Multi-life Stories of Gautama Buddha and Vardhamāna Mahāvīra
AUTHOR: Naomi Appleton
YEAR: 2012
LANGUAGE: EN
SOURCE: Buddhist Studies Review 29.1 (2012): 5–16 | DOI: 10.1558/bsrv.v29i1.5
TYPE: Journal Article (PDF)
EXTRACTED_CHARACTERS: 42632
STATUS: OK============================================================

BSRV 29.1 (2012) 5–16 Buddhist Studies Review ISSN (print) 0256-2897
doi: 10.1558/bsrv.v29i1.5 Buddhist Studies Review ISSN (online) 1747-9681
The Multi-life Stories of Gautama Buddha and
Vardhamāna Mahāvīra
Naomi appletoN
UNiversity of Cardiff
AppletonN1@Cardiff.ac.uk
abstraCt
Like Buddhist traditions, Jain traditions preserve many stories about peo-
ple’s past lives. Unlike Buddhist traditions, relatively few of these stories
narrate the past lives of the tradition’s central figure, the jina. In Jainism
there is no equivalent path to the bodhisatt(v)a path; the karma that guar-
antees jinahood is bound a mere two births before that attainment, and the
person who attracts that karma cannot do so willfully, nor is he aware of it
being bound. There is therefore no Jain equivalent to the ubiquitous jātaka
literature. In this paper I will explore what the absence of a jātaka genre in
Jain traditions tells us about the genre’s role in Buddhism. Focusing upon
the multi-life stories of Gautama Buddha and Vardhamāna Mahāvīra, I will
ask how these two strikingly similar narratives betray some fundamental
differences between Buddhist and Jain understandings of the ultimate reli-
gious goal and the method of its attainment.
Keywords
Buddha, Buddhism, Mahāvīra, Jainism, biography
INtrodUCtIoN
Once upon a time, in the long distant past, there was a young man who wished to
pursue liberation from the cycle of rebirth and redeath. He encountered a fully lib-
erated being, a conqueror of saṃsāra, who had founded a community of followers
whom he guided and instructed. this great victor predicted that the young man
would in fact achieve the same great attainment in the long distant future. After
innumerable lifetimes, during which time there were 22 or 23 intervening fully
liberated teachers, the young man did indeed achieve this same attainment, and
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2012, Unit S3, Kelham House, 3 Lancaster Street, Sheffield S3 8AF

6 Naomi Appleton
founded his own religious community, in sixth or fifth century BCE North India.
This story could be that of Gautama Buddha’s long career, which began when he
made an aspiration to achieve buddhahood at the feet of the past buddha dīpaṅkara.
Following dīpaṅkara’s prediction that he would achieve his aspiration and become
a fully awakened being, the Bodhisattva (as he then became) experienced many
many lifetimes in which he pursued the qualities required for buddhahood (as
recorded in the hundreds of jātaka stories) and repeatedly renewed his bodhisat-
tva vow at the feet of — according to the Pāli tradition — a further 23 past bud-
dhas. Eventually he perfected the required qualities, achieved buddhahood, and
founded the current Buddhist tradition. This story is found in the Buddhavaṃsa and
Nidānakathā of the Pāli tradition, as part of the longer narration of the Bodhisattva’s
repeated prediction to buddhahood at the feet of multiple past buddhas. It is also
found in the Mahāvastu and Divyāvadāna, amongst other texts, interlinked with
the story of a past life of the monk Dharmaruci: In the past he and the aspiring
Bodhisattva were friends, but while the latter became a Bodhisattva, the former
pursued the worst possible karmic course and spent as long a time in hell and other
bad rebirths as the Bodhisattva spent attaining buddhahood. Although the focus
of these versions is not so clearly the long path of Gautama Buddha, his aspiration
and prediction are still recorded in similar terms to the Pāli tradition.1 The rest of
the story — the Bodhisattva’s long path and eventual attainment of buddhahood
— is recorded elsewhere, and well known to Buddhists the world over.
In addition to the story of Gautama Buddha, however, the narrative above
could also refer to the multi-life story of Vardhamāna Mahāvīra, who was the
founder (or re-founder) of Jainism. In a distant past life Mahāvīra was a man
named Marīci, the grandson of the first jina of this half time-cycle,2 Ṛṣabha Jina,
and the son of its first cakravartin (universal emperor), Bharata. Marīci became
an ascetic in the company of his grandfather, but found the ascetic practices too
arduous and so lessened his observances and vows to a more comfortable level.
Nonetheless, he continued to teach the correct Dharma and send all who were
capable of the true path to his grandfather, until eventually illness and the desire
for an attendant led him to take on a pupil of his own. In due course Ṛṣabha
Jina predicted that Marīci would, after 22 intervening jinas, become a jina named
Mahāvīra, meanwhile becoming the first vāsudeva (half-cakravartin), and a cakra-
1. there are many different versions of the story but the general outline remains the same. In
the Buddhavaṃsa (Morris 1882, 6–16; English trans. Horner 1975, 9–25) and the Nidānakathā
of the Jātakatthavaṇṇanā (Fausboll 1877, 1–28; English trans. Jayawickrama 1990, 3–35) the
Bodhisattva is called Sumedha, and he is a renouncer who meets the Buddha dīpaṅkara
and immediately begins his practice of the ten perfections required for buddhahood. In the
Mahāvastu (Senart 1882, 231–238; English trans. Jones 1949, 188–203) he is called Megha, while
he is Sumati in the Divyāvadāna (Cowell and Neil 1886, 152–254); in both he has a badly-be-
haved friend (Meghadatta or Mati) who becomes dharmaruci. this story of dharmaruci is
also preserved in the Pāli Apadāna; for a summary and references see dPPN.
2. Jains believe that Jambūdvīpa (the continent on which we live) is subject to a beginningless
and endless time cycle consisting of two halves: one upward (the utsarapiṇī) and one down-
ward (the avasarpaṇī). Each half time-cycle is sub-divided into six kālas of varying qualities. It
is a universal law that 24 jinas are born during each half time-cycle. For further detail see Jaini
1979, 29–34.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2012

The Multi-life Stories of Gautama Buddha and Vardhamāna Mahāvīra 7
vartin (universal emperor). Filled with pride at this prediction, Marīci continued
his imperfect asceticism and bound much bad karma.3
After a large number of intervening births, Marīci was born in a royal family but
became an ascetic. Mocked by his cousin for his emaciated appearance, he vowed
to have the strength to kill him in a future life. this opportunity arose two births
later, when he was born as the first vāsudeva, named tripṛṣṭa. In an amazing dis-
play of strength he killed a fierce lion — his cousin reborn — with his bare hands.
Later, enacting the standard narrative for each of the nine vāsudevas that appear
during each half time-cycle, he battled with and killed his multi-life adversary —
the prativāsudeva — in the company of the baladeva, his (tripṛṣṭa’s) half-brother,
who remained a pious Jain layman devoted to the principles of non-harm. As with
all vāsudevas (which include Lakṣmaṇa and Kṛṣṇa at other points in the time-
cycle), this act of violence resulted in birth in a hell realm. this was followed by
a multitude of animal and hell births, before he eventually achieved human birth
once more and acquired some good karma. Next he became a cakravartin, then a
god, and once more a king-turned-ascetic; in this birth he finally bound the karma
that guarantees jinahood, and he achieved this, as Mahāvīra, two births later.4
the start and end points of the stories of these two figures are very similar, as
are the numbers of buddhas and jinas that appear in between prediction and attain-
ment, at least if we take the Pāli tradition as our parallel. However, it is also clear
that there are some rather striking differences between the multi-life stories of
the Buddha and Mahāvīra. I propose to take the two stages of the story — predic-
tion and path — in turn and examine what these overlapping narratives can reveal
about Buddhist and Jain attitudes towards the operation of karma, the relevance
of intention, and the attainment of the ultimate religious goals. As contempo-
rary and closely-related traditions, Jainism and Buddhism can shed much light on
one another’s understandings of key religious ideals. The multi-life story of their
founders is just one place in which we may find fruitful comparative material.5
PrEdICtIoN
A close comparison of the two figures’ multi-life stories is made compelling by the
initial prediction to liberation that is made of each character in a distant past life.
3. For Jains karma is a physical substance, often compared to dust, which is bound to the soul
(jīva) and thereby keeps the soul trapped in the realm of saṃsāra. removing this karma and
preventing the influx of new karma, largely achieved through immobility asceticism, results
in the soul returning to its natural condition of omniscience and bliss, and rising up to the
realm of liberated souls at the top of the universe. See dundas 2002, 93–105.
4. I have summarised the story from Johnson’s translation of Hemacandra’s twelfth-century
Triṣaṣtiśalākāpuruṣacaritra, or ‘Lives of the Sixty-three Illustrious Men’ where it is found in
Book 1, Chapter 6 (in the Ṛṣabhacaritra) and Book 10, Chapter 1 (in the Mahāvīracaritra). On the
other sources for this story see note 15 below.
5. I am not the first person to notice this parallel. In his large comparison of Buddhist and
Jain traditions, Āgama aura Tripiṭaka (2005), Nagraj devotes a short chapter to the stories
of Sumedha and Marīci (126–134). However, although he brings together some interesting
material, there is little analysis. His motivation seems to be to highlight parallels, rather than
to probe deeper into the possible reasons behind the subtle and not-so-subtle differences that
remain. Jaini (1981) has also made a few comments on the parallel. He is, however, mistaken
in saying (p. 96): ‘the first Buddha and the first tīrthaṅkara of each age makes a prophecy
concerning the identity of the last one’. This is based upon a misreading of the Buddhavaṃsa,
which actually mentions 27 past buddhas.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2012

8 Naomi Appleton
However, the reason for the prediction, and the actions that precede and follow it,
subtly separate the two characters, as well as reflecting the two traditions’ differ-
ent attitudes towards intentionality, karmic responsibility, and omniscience.
the first key difference is the fact that whereas the Bodhisattva-to-be himself
wishes for — and even asks for — his prediction to buddhahood, Marīci makes no
such aspiration. taking the Buddhist tradition first, the Bodhisattva-to-be makes
a clear aspiration — referred to in the Mahāvastu and Divyāvadāna versions as a
praṇidhāna or vow — to become a fully awakened buddha. His desire to attain
buddhahood is sincere and clearly expressed, and is accompanied by an act of
service to dīpaṅkara Buddha, whom he has only just met by chance. Marīci, on
the other hand, is a family member of the first jina Ṛṣabha, and goes forth in his
community long before he is predicted to any great attainments. He makes no
aspiration to become a jina, and indeed is somewhat half-hearted in his efforts
to progress on his spiritual path.
In addition to the extent of aspiration, the nature of the two predictions is also
somewhat different. dīpaṅkara’s prediction is made to the aspiring Bodhisattva,
and acts as confirmation of what the latter has already declared — that he will
become a buddha in the future. In contrast, Ṛṣabha Jina’s prediction of Marīci’s
attainments is made at the request of another person, in fact his father, the cakra-
vartin Bharata, who asks about the future attainments of any member of Ṛṣabha’s
retinue after Ṛṣabha has named all the significant characters (jinas, cakravartins,
and so on) of the coming age. Marīci only hears about his predicted future from
his father later on, for he is not present at the time. Furthermore, the prediction
is not simply to jinahood, but also includes the very worldly — and morally dubi-
ous — attainments of cakravartin and vāsudeva.
the role of intention is clearly important here. As is well known, in early
Buddhism the key ethical (and karmic) determinant of an action is its intention,
and the Buddha famously declared that karma is intention. One implication of this
is that certain powerful statements of intention — such as aspirations or vows
— can be particularly potent in karmic terms. thus dīpaṅakara’s prediction of
the eventual buddhahood of Gautama is a confirmation of the potency and effi-
cacy of the aspiring Bodhisattva’s vow. And this vow is a very positive one, for
it involves delaying the achievement of Awakening for many many lifetimes in
order to become a Buddha who can help others achieve Awakening too. In con-
trast, for Jains all actions are karmicly significant, not just those that are intended
and consciously performed.6 Although aspirations can still be significant in Jain
terms, they are rarely entirely positive. Aspiring to become a jina may involve
some good karma, especially if the aspiration is to help others by teaching, but it
also involves an aspiration to have power, and to build up asceticism in exchange
for that power, and so ultimately it is negative (Jaini 1981, 99).
the prediction of the two characters’ future attainments also reveals some-
thing of the two traditions’ understanding of the omniscience of their religious
leaders. In both narratives the prediction of future attainments is necessarily
true, and not simply a statement of likely developments in the future. the early
6. According to Jain karma theory every action — even breathing — results in more karma being
bound to the soul. that is not to say that good and bad actions are not differentiated in Jainism,
for good actions, which are closely related to good mental states, will bind less harmful karma
than bad actions and for a shorter time, but ultimately the ideal is to eliminate all karma.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2012

The Multi-life Stories of Gautama Buddha and Vardhamāna Mahāvīra 9
Buddhist tradition demonstrates some ambivalence towards the idea that the
Buddha (and by extension all buddhas) was completely omniscient, and seems to
have been especially wary of the possibility that predictions of the future might
compromise the notion that people are free to act and responsible for their own
karma. Nonetheless the prediction by dīpaṅkara Buddha is powerful because, as
Sumedha reasons in the Buddhavaṃsa (II, 110, my translation):
the words of Buddhas are not duplicitous. Conquerors do not speak in vain.
there is no untruth amongst Buddhas. Certainly I will become a Buddha!
Thus Sumedha can take comfort from the Buddha’s words, although he is
also aware that the prediction does not mean he can simply rest on his laurels;
rather he must now diligently pursue the qualities necessary for buddhahood
over countless lives. the future is assured, but must still be worked for. Ṛṣabha
Jina’s prediction of Marīci’s future is also necessarily true, for jinas are omnis-
cient, in the sense that they have simultaneous vision of everything as if time and
space have collapsed, and so there is no possibility of them being wrong. Ṛṣabha’s
statement is therefore not a prediction so much as a vision into a time that only
he can access, and this vision includes the identities of all the future jinas as well
as other significant figures.
While both statements about the future are equally true, Ṛṣabha Jina’s prediction
is a simple statement of fact, with no agency in the story. In contrast, dīpaṅkara
Buddha’s prediction is necessary to the beginning of the Bodhisattva’s career, and
kick-starts the Bodhisattva’s pursuit of buddhahood. Although the distinction is
subtle, dīpaṅkara’s prediction could be said to have an effect on a future that is not
yet known, whereas Ṛṣabha’s prediction is simply a statement about something as
if it has already happened, since from his perspective it has. the agency of the pre-
diction is of course closely linked to the agency of the potential religious leaders.
Because Ṛṣabha’s prediction is not related to any aspiration on Marīci’s part, and
indeed is simply part of a much larger set of names of future characters reeled off
by the Jina, there is no sense that the prediction requires any actions in order to be
fulfilled. Indeed, Ṛṣabha Jina’s omniscient vision appears to encourage apathy, for
Marīci sees the prediction as removing any concerns about his own lax conduct, for
everything is going to be okay in the long run. the Bodhisattva, on the other hand,
is receiving a helping hand on a path that he has already embarked upon.
the passive characterisation of Marīci is further contrasted with the active
participation of the Bodhisattva when we consider that the Bodhisattva made an
active choice to pursue buddhahood rather than arhatship. It is said that at the
time of his aspiration he could have become an arhat, but instead of taking this
easier option, he pursued the longer and more arduous path to buddhahood, in
order to eventually help other beings escape saṃsāra. Thus in the Buddhavaṃsa
(II, 54-56, my translation) we hear:
While lying on the ground, this thought occurred to me:
‘If I so wished, I could today burn off my defilements,
But what is the point in my here realising the Dharma myself, unknown?
Having become all-knowing, I will become a Buddha [in the world] with its gods.
What is the use of crossing over alone, a man of visible strength?
Having become all-knowing, I will carry across [the world] with the gods’.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2012

10 Naomi Appleton
His aspiration is thus selfless and admirable, as is his decision to turn away
from the immediate benefits of becoming an arhat. Marīci, on the other hand, is
shown as wasting his opportunity to properly pursue asceticism in the company
of the jina. He is said to be ‘free from painful and evil meditation, adorned with
right belief’ though his soul is ‘stained with karma like a fine cloth with mud’
(Johnson 1931–1962, vol. 1, 352). Although we are not told that he could have
achieved arhatship in that lifetime, the implication is that he made a mistake
by rejecting the possible benefits of austerities. His own father, the cakravartin
Bharata, managed to become an arhat after a long military and royal career, yet
Marīci’s constant false asceticism gets him nowhere. Instead of reducing his kar-
mic load through properly-performed ascetic activities, Marīci in fact binds to
himself further bad karma by taking on a pupil of his own and falsely telling him
that he is a teacher of the dharma. thus even in the rare moments when Marīci
is an active character, his actions propel him away from, rather than towards,
his eventual attainment.
Given that Ṛṣabha Jina’s prediction is simply a statement of fact, whereas
dīpaṅkara Buddha’s is a confirmation of the efficacy of a karmicly potent vow
made by an individual deeply committed to a particular achievement, it is no
surprise that the responses of Marīci and Sumedha to their predicted futures is
somewhat different. once the Bodhisattva receives his prediction to buddhahood
he is delighted, one could even say proud, yet he uses the predicion to encourage
further work and progress. In the Buddhavaṃsa he specifically considers each of
the ten perfections that he will need to practise over countless lives, examining
their characteristics. In contrast, the prediction of Marīci’s future greatness only
serves to increase his negative karmic load further, because it prompts him to
consider all the great people in his family – his grandfather the jina, his father
the cakravartin, and himself, who will in future lifetimes achieve both of these
high states. He reasons (Johnson 1931–1962, vol 1, 353):
‘My family alone is superior to all families, like the sun to the planets, like the
moon to the constellations’. By taking pride in his family in this way, Marīci made
low-family karma for himself, like a spider making a web.
Because of his pride, as well as his predicted future as a cakravartin and vāsudeva
and the violence entailed therein, Marīci’s long multi-life-story will inevitably
involve a large amount of suffering in hell and in other unfortunate births.
PAtH
A comparison between the multi-life stories of Gautama Buddha and Vardhamāna
Mahāvīra need not stop at the aftermath of their predictions to spiritual leader-
ship. Since the two figures were contemporary religious teachers, with largely
comparable final-life biographies (which I will not examine here), and since there
is a tradition that links the number 24 with the number of past teachers in both
religions, a wider comparison is appealing. To what extent do these two charac-
ters, embarking on their long path, have similar experiences?
Let us begin by addressing the question of the number of past buddhas and
jinas. In Jainism there are 24 jinas in each half time-cycle, and Mahāvīra is the
24th in the current cycle. In a Pāli tradition that begins with the Buddhavaṃsa,
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2012

The Multi-life Stories of Gautama Buddha and Vardhamāna Mahāvīra 11
Gautama Buddha encounters 24 past buddhas and becomes therefore the 25th,
although there are in fact another three past buddhas mentioned in this text
who were prior to dīpaṅkara and did not meet Gautama-to-be. Although there
is a wider tradition of infinite past buddhas, these 24 took on special significance
in some theravāda countries as they are the buddhas who predicted Gautama’s
buddhahood.7 Gombrich (1980) has argued that the Buddhists took the notion
that there were 24 past buddhas from the Jains, whose tradition of earlier jinas,
and specific regard for the number 24, seems to predate the equivalent Buddhist
understanding.8 However, ohira (1994) has argued the reverse, proposing that
the notion and the number were borrowed by the Jains from the Buddhists, and
suggesting an early link between the popular jātaka genre and the idea of past
buddhas.9 Even if we set aside the question of where the notion of past buddhas
and jinas first came from (if indeed it had only a single source), we are still left
with a puzzle over the origin of the number. the idea of 24 buddhas first appears
in the Buddhavaṃsa, which might date to the early post-Aśokan period, and cer-
tainly to no later than the fifth century. Several Śvetāmbara scriptures enumerate
24 jinas, but their dating is unknown, and ohira (1994, 479) argues that they all
belong to the fourth or fifth centuries CE, though the number seems to be fairly
commonplace by this period. We cannot therefore base an argument for priority
on this small selection of texts of debatable age.10 Given that we cannot trace the
source for, nor positively determine the direction of, this numerical tradition, it
is perhaps best to move on to a more fertile area of enquiry, namely the behav-
iour of the potential religious leaders during their past lives.
Without ignoring the important stories of the Buddha’s bad karma such as
those discussed by John Strong elsewhere in this volume, I do not think it very
contentious to say that Buddhists generally conceived of the Buddha’s long path
in positive terms. they did not, for example, tell stories of his time in hell realms,
or in the realm of the hungry ghosts. Indeed, in both Pāli and Sanskrit tradi-
tions some negative births, such as female birth, birth in the worst of the hells,
7. thus, for example, Sri Lankan temples will often portray the 24 buddhas on the wall, with the
Bodhisattva kneeling beside each one. However, in Myanmar the traditional depiction is of
28 buddhas, in other words including those mentioned in the Buddhavaṃsa who did not meet
the Bodhisattva.
8. Gombrich (1980, 64) argues: ‘there does not appear to have been a period before Jainism
acquired the theory of the twenty-four tīrthaṃkaras, or any reason why the doctrine should
not have been part of Mahāvīra’s own teaching. that the analogous Buddhist doctrine of
previous Buddhas was influenced by Jainism seems much more likely than that the Jains bor-
rowed their doctrine from the Buddhists. In particular, the precise number 24, apparently
original in Jain doctrine, probably entered Buddhism only some centuries after the Buddha’.
Unfortunately Gombrich cites no sources as evidence for this argument, and ohira (1994)
argues that the list of 24 jinas is not actually found in the earliest Jain texts.
9. the core of ohira’s argument is that there is no particular preference for the number 24 in
Jain texts, and that the number was chosen simply because it was already being used by the
Buddhists and it allowed for the accommodation of the nine jinas already known from the
earliest scriptures. However, the argument is somewhat speculative to say the least.
10. Having visited a number of Buddhist and Jain temples it is hard to avoid speculating that the
number 24 works so well visually — with examples in both traditions of four neat rows of six
figures or a similarly symmetrical depiction — that this might well have been an influence
just as strong as the textual traditions. However, this is mere speculation, and would require
investigation by an art historian.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2012

12 Naomi Appleton
or as a small animal, are explicitly said to be impossible from a particular stage
of the bodhisattva path.11 these lists differ in the details but the overall message
is clear: being a bodhisattva makes good karma and good rebirths inevitable. Such
good rebirths can include positions of worldly power, and indeed there are many
jātaka stories in which the Bodhisattva is a king, just as Mahāvīra-to-be enjoys
an occasional royal birth. However, one cannot imagine a jātaka story recount-
ing how the Bodhisattva was driven by extraordinary hatred to kill his multi-life
adversary and was subsequently born in hell, as happens in the multi-life-story
of Mahāvīra. (Indeed, one is reminded rather of the multi-life-story of devadatta,
the Buddha’s trouble-making cousin.)
The bodhisattva path, then, is a positive one, fuelled by a positive aspiration
and ending in the ultimate positive attainment of buddhahood. the jātaka stories
recount multiple tales of the extraordinarily good actions of the Bodhisattva, and
betray a focus especially on the perfections, perhaps most clearly the perfection
of generosity, which is prominent in the infamous Vessantara-jātaka as well as the
many stories of bodily self-sacrifice popular throughout the Buddhist world.12
As I have argued elsewhere (2010, Chapter 3), the association between the jātaka
genre and the perfections does not go back to the beginning of the genre’s his-
tory, and indeed the Pāli collection in particular contains many stories of more
morally dubious or inconsequential actions. However, a strong tradition none-
theless emerged that the stories illustrate the long path to perfection that was
steadfastly pursued by the Buddha during those of his countless past lives when
he was a Bodhisattva. Jātakas, whatever their origins or history, became inextri-
cably linked to ideas about the bodhisattva path and the qualities required for the
attainment of buddhahood.
As may be suggested by Mahāvīra’s multi-life-story, there is no equivalent
genre of narrative in Jainism. there are some stories of the past lives of jinas
– other jinas as well as Mahāvīra – but these do not narrate a path or any self-
directed progress towards an ultimate goal. As P.S. Jaini noted over thirty years
ago, this is because there is no equivalent to the bodhisattva path in Jainism: the
attainment of jinahood is karmically determined, but the karma in question is
bound a mere two births before that attainment, and the binding of this karma
cannot be successfully aspired to and neither does the person have any idea that
it has been bound (Jaini 1981). As a consequence, for most of the 24 jinas of this
time cycle, we find records of only two past lives, that in which the karma was
bound and the one intervening birth, which is almost inevitably as a god.13 Even
11. For a discussion of the exclusions in various Pāli commentarial sources, in which they apply
from the very beginning of the bodhisattva path, see Endo 1997, 260–264 and Appleton 2010,
93–97. the Mahāvastu preserves a similar list of states into which an irreversible bodhisattva
(one that has reached the eighth bhūmi) cannot be born: Senart 1882, 102–104; English trans.
Jones 1949, 81–82.
12. In the theravāda tradition the standard list is of ten perfections: giving (dāna), morality (sīla),
renunciation (nekkhamma), wisdom (paññā), energy (viriya), forbearance (khanti), truthful-
ness (sacca), determination (adhiṭṭhāna), loving kindness (mettā), and equanimity (upekkhā). In
the Indian Mahāyāna tradition the number is more usually six: giving (dāna), morality (�īla),
energy (vīrya), forbearance (kṣānti), meditation (dhyāna) and wisdom (prajñā).
13. of the 24 jinas, only Ṛṣabha (1), Śānti (16), Nemi (22), Pārśva (23) and Mahāvīra (24) have
lifestories that extend beyond two lifetimes into the past. For a discussion of some of these
multi-life stories and their relation to the jātaka genre see Appleton, forthcoming.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2012

The Multi-life Stories of Gautama Buddha and Vardhamāna Mahāvīra 13
in cases such as Mahāvīra’s, where we have a longer multi-life account, the nar-
rative clearly undermines any idea we might have that aspiring to jinahood is a
good thing, or that progress towards it can be directed.
If jinahood is not fuelled by strong aspiration and many lives of dedicated pur-
suit of special qualities, then how is it that some people become jinas and others
simply arhats? the answer given by the Jain commentarial tradition is that some
souls are marked out as those which will become jinas whereas others are not,
just as some souls have the inherent capacity to attain mokṣa whereas others are
destined to wander forever in the realm of saṃsāra (Jaini 2003, 16–18; see also Jaini
1977). thus the attainment of jinahood, as opposed to another form of mokṣa, is
no indicator of long-term effort, but is rather an inherent capability of the soul,
present throughout that soul’s beginningless existence. Furthermore, the activi-
ties required for the binding of the karma that guarantees jinahood, several lists
of which circulate within the tradition, are all activities that can be undertaken
within a single lifetime, for example devotion to the jinas, learning the ancient
scriptures, and practising austerities (Jaini 1981, 98). In contrast, the Buddhist
perfections are qualities that require gradual improvement over multiple lives.
Given these doctrinal differences, it is no surprise that the multi-life stories of
Gautama Buddha and Vardhamāna Mahāvīra are so very different. Marīci did not
have a clear intention to become a jina, and once he believed he would become
one his path — if we can even call it that — became much harder. His long mul-
ti-life biography is not a reflection of the difficulty of the path to jinahood, nor
does it highlight the greatness of his ultimate achievement. rather, it shows the
uncontrollable nature of karma, and the perils of pride or complacency. Marīci
had the chance to make real spiritual progress in the community headed by
Ṛṣabha Jina, but instead he chose a wrong path, one that led him to spend multi-
ple lifetimes in hell. In contrast, Gautama Buddha’s long story, that takes broadly
the same amount of time as Mahāvīra’s, demonstrates the difficulty of his chosen
path, the steadfastness of his aspiration, and his unshakeable determination to
pursue the perfections over a multitude of lifetimes, as illustrated in jātaka sto-
ries. In other words the Bodhisattva’s path is propelled by his intention, aspira-
tion, determination; the jina-to-be’s path is propelled by the unstoppable force
of his karma and the inherent propensities of his soul.
CoNCLUSIoN
As we have seen from examining these two biographies, there is a striking con-
trast between the stories in terms of the nature of the prediction, the actions
that precede and follow the prediction, and the experiences between prediction
and attainment. Whereas the Bodhisattva makes a sincere aspiration and uses
the prediction of his eventual achievement of buddhahood to encourage him on
his long and arduous path, Mahāvīra-to-be is actually harmed by his prediction,
which in any case he does not seek. But whilst these contrasts are striking, the
similarities in narrative structure are equally so, for each character meets a reli-
gious leader of the past and receives a prediction, which is fulfilled after a similar
number of intervening leaders. Given the possibility that the followers of each
tradition were aware of one another’s beliefs, practices and stories, one has to
ask why these stories overlap so strongly.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2012

14 Naomi Appleton
Although it is well known that Gautama Buddha and Vardhamāna Mahāvīra
were contemporaries, and that the Buddhist and Jain traditions emerged out of
a similar social and religious context, the question of historical influence is a
thorny one given the difficulty of assigning reliable dates to anything in ancient
India. one partially-datable phenomenon, however, is the popularity of jātakas,
which are depicted on the stūpas at Bhārhut in perhaps the second or first century
BCE. textual sources are difficult to date, but it is notable that some isolated jātaka
stories are found in the suttas in the four main Nikāyas of the Pāli scriptures, as
well as being found in large numbers in scriptures from other Buddhist schools
such as the Mahāvastu and Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya. In contrast, only one past-life
story of a jina appears in the aṅgas of the Śvetāmbara Jain scriptures, arguably
the oldest surviving scriptural corpus which is not in any case accepted by the
Digambara tradition as authentic.14 The rest appear primarily in the later genre
of Universal Histories, of which the earliest extant examples date from the ninth
century, though many of the narratives are drawn from commentaries on a ritual
text (the Āvaśyaka) from perhaps a couple of centuries earlier.15 It is thus tempt-
ing to ask if past-life stories of jinas were included as a response to a powerful
Buddhist genre? Could it be that Mahāvīra’s multi-life story was composed as a
deliberate parallel to the Buddha’s, to show the different conceptions of karmic
forces? It is difficult to tell to what extent Jain scholar-monks were aware of the
narratives of their competitors, but it is very tempting to see the development
of Mahāvīra’s long lifestory as in some way influenced by an awareness of — and
explicit rejection of — the Buddhist jātaka genre.
We get some understanding of Jain attitudes towards the Buddhist jātaka genre
from a medieval (perhaps tenth century) Jain tamil work called the Nīlakēci.16 In
this text a Jain nun called Nīlakēci enters into debate with key religious figures,
including several close followers of the Buddha and later the Buddha himself. In
several of these debates she challenges the genre of jātaka stories, claiming they
are ridiculous since they show a foolish Bodhisattva giving away his body parts
14. Both Śvetāmbara and digambara Jains state that the oldest scriptures are lost, and while the
former nonetheless compiled a set of core scriptures, the Digambaras rejected their authen-
ticity. For a good overview of the scriptural contents, as well as the dispute over their authen-
ticity, see dundas 2002, Chapter 3.
15. The Āvaśyaka-cūrṇi, which is the earliest narrative commentary on the Āvaśyakasūtra, is
ascribed to Jinadāsa (sixth or seventh century) and is further supplemented by the sub-com-
mentaries of Haribhadra (eighth century) and Malayagiri (eleventh or twelfth century). For
an overview of the Āvaśyaka tradition in English see Balbir’s contribution to Granoff 2008,
71–73. It is likely that the narrative corpus represented by the Āvaśyaka tradition formed
the source for much of the material that makes up the Mahāpurāna texts, dubbed in English
the Universal Histories. these texts relate the history of the current half time-cycle, with a
focus upon the lives of the 63 illustrious men: 24 jinas, 12 cakravartins, and 9 sets of vāsudevas,
prativāsudevas and baladevas. The earliest of these texts are the Caüppaṇṇamahāprusacariya by
the ninth-century Śvetāmbara monk Śīlaṅka, and the digambara Triṣaṣṭilakṣaṇaśrīmahāpurāṇ
asaṅgraha or Mahāpurāṇa of Jinasena and Guṇabhadra from the same century. the most well-
known text of this genre in scholarly circles, perhaps partly because it is the only one avail-
able in a full English translation, is the twelfth-century Śvetāmbara Triṣaṣṭiśalākāpuruṣacaritra
of Hemacandra (Johnson 1931–1962). For an overview of the Jain genre of purāṇas see Cort
and Jaini in doniger 1993.
16. MMyy uunnddeerrssttaannddiinngg ooff tthhiiss tteexxtt iiss llaarrggeellyy bbaasseedd uuppoonn tthhee EEnngglliisshh ssuummmmaarryy pprroovviiddeedd bbyy CChhaakkrraa--
varti in the introduction to his 1994 edition of the text.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2012

The Multi-life Stories of Gautama Buddha and Vardhamāna Mahāvīra 15
to people who can make no use of them, or to headless men who cannot in any
case have survived their decapitation long enough to request a new head! She
suggests that the stories contradict the Buddhist non-acceptance of an essential
soul or self, since they show an individual progressing through multiple lives, and
she asks how it can be that Buddhists can revere the Bodhisattva in the form of
an animal and yet still eat meat.17 Given the time Nīlakēci spends ridiculing the
jātaka genre, it is clear that it was a lively part of Buddhism at the time. this text
suggests that not only did the Jains not feel the need for a jātaka genre of their
own, they openly mocked the Buddhist love of these stories.
regardless of the tricky question of historical influence, the lack of a Jain jātaka
genre can therefore tell us much about Buddhism. By looking at how the two tra-
ditions found different ways of understanding the past lives of their founders,
our assumptions about the jātaka genre are forced into the open. The comparison
highlights the way in which jātakas take their meaning from understandings of the
bodhisattva path and rely upon the possibility of pursuing a self-intentioned future.
It reminds us how closely entwined the narrative and doctrinal aspects of the tra-
ditions are. We can see how integral the jātaka genre is to Buddhist doctrine and
practice, and we can begin to appreciate it as a unique genre that marks Buddhist
narrative out from its counterparts. As specialists in Buddhism it is all too easy to
forget that Buddhism did not emerge in isolation, but rather in dialogue with and
opposition to other religious movements such as Jainism, Brahmanical Hinduism
and Ājīvikism. A study of how two traditions approached similar questions, such
as I have here attempted, can therefore be very revealing.
ACKNoWLEdGEMENt
the research for this article was supported by a British Academy Postdoctoral
Fellowship.
ABBrEVIAtIoNS
DPPN G.P. Malalasekera, Dictionary of Pāli Proper Names. http://www.palikanon.com/
english/pali_names/dic_idx.html
BIBLIoGrAPHY
Appleton, Naomi. 2010. Jātaka Stories in Theravāda Buddhism: Narrating the Bodhisatta Path.
Farnham: Ashgate.
———. Forthcoming. ‘Jinas-to-be and Bodhisattvas: Paths to Perfection in Jain
and Buddhist Narratives.’ In Jaina Narratives, edited by Peter Flügel and olle
Qvarnström. SoAS Jaina Studies Series, routledge.
Chakravarti, A. 1994. Neelakesi. Jaipur: Prakrit Bharati Academy.
Cowell, E.B. and r.A. Neil, eds. 1886. The Divyāvadāna. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Doniger, Wendy. 1993. Purāṇa Perennis. Albany NY: State University of New York Press.
Dundas, Paul. 2002. The Jains. London : Routledge. 2nd edn.
17. Her critique of gift-of-the-body jātakas occupies Chapter 2, when she is in debate with the
Buddhist nun Kundalakesi. the other criticisms are largely found in Chapter 3, when she
debates with the Buddhist monk Arkachandra, though some of the arguments show up again
in her discussion with Moggallāna in Chapter 4 (Chakravarti 1994).
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2012

16 Naomi Appleton
Endo, toshiichi. 1997. Buddha in Theravada Buddhism. Dehiwela, Sri Lanka: Buddhist
Cultural Centre.
Fausboll, V., ed. 1877. The Jātaka together with its commentary being tales of the anterior
births of Gotama Buddha, volume 1. London: trübner.
Gombrich, richard. 1980. ‘the Significance of Former Buddhas in the theravādin
Tradition.’ In Buddhist Studies in Honour of Walpola Rahula, edited by Balasooriya et
al., 62–72. London: Gordon Fraser.
Granoff, Phyllis, ed. 2008. The Clever Adultress and Other Stories: A Treasury of Jain Literature.
oakville: Mosaic Press.
Horner, I.B., trans. 1975. The Minor Anthologies of the Pali Canon Part III: Chronicle of Buddhas
(Buddhavaṃsa) and Basket of Conduct (Cariyāpiṭaka). Oxford: The Pali Text Society.
Jaini, P.S. 1977. ‘Bhavyatva and Abhavyatva: A Jaina doctrine of “Predestination”’. In
Mahāvīra and His Teachings, edited by A. N. Upadhye et al., 95–111. Bombay:
Bhagvān Mahāvīra 2500th Nirvāṇa Mahotsava Samiti.
———. 1979. The Jaina Path of Purification. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
———. 1981. ‘tīrthaṅkara-Prakṛti and the Bodhisattva Path.’ Journal of the Pali Text
Society 9: 96–104.
———. 2003. ‘From Nigoda to Mokṣa: the Story of Marudevī.’ In Jainism and Early
Buddhism: Essays in Honor of Padmanabh S. Jaini, edited by olle Qvarnström, 1–27.
Fremont CA: Asian Humanities Press.
Jayawickrama, N.A. (trans.) 1990. The Story of Gotama Buddha: The Nidāna-kathā of the
Jātakaṭṭhakathā. Oxford: The Pali Text Society.
Johnson, Helen M. (trans.) 1931–1962. Triṣaṣṭiśalākāpuruṣacaritra, or, The Lives of Sixty-
Three Illustrious Persons by Ācārya Śrī Hemacandra, 6 vols. Baroda oriental Institute.
Jones, J.J., trans. 1949. The Mahāvastu, Volume 1. London: Luzac & Company.
Senart, É., ed. 1882. Le Mahāvastu, Tome Premier. Paris: L’Imprimerie Nationale.
Morris, r., ed. 1882. The Buddhavaṃsa and the Cariyāpiṭaka. London: The Pali Text Society.
Nagraj, Rashtrasant Muni Shri. 2005. Āgama Aura Tripiṭaka: A Comparative Study of Lord
Mahāvīra and Lord Buddha. English translation by Muni Shri Mahendra Kumarji
and K. C. Lalvani. New delhi: Concept Publishing Company.
ohira, Suzuko. 1994. ‘the twenty-Four Buddhas and the twenty-Four tīrthaṅkaras.’ In
Festschrift Klaus Bruhn zur Vollendung des 65. Lebensjahres dargebracht von Schülern,
Freunden und Kollegen, edited by Nalini Balbir and Joachim K. Bautze, 475–488.
reinbek: Verlag für orientalistische Fachpublikationen.
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2012