ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume IV-2/W2, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada
LINE-DRAWING ENHANCED INTERACTIVE MURAL RESTORATION FOR
DUNHUANG MOGAO GROTTOES
X.Y. Fu a, Y. Han a, Z. J. Sun b, X. J. Ma c, *, Y. Q. Xu a, *
a Academy of Arts & Design, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China – (fuxy15, hanyi14) @mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
yqxu@tsinghua.edu.cn
b Dunhuang Research Academy, Dunhuang, Gansu, China - sunzj@dha.ac.cn
c Department of Computer Science and Engineering, the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay,
Kowloon, Hong Kong - mxj@cse.ust.hk
Commission II
KEY WORDS: Dunhuang Mogao Grottoes, Mural, Restoration, Line Drawing, Interaction
ABSTRACT:
Dunhuang Mogao Grottoes in western China is one of the most famous World Cultural Heritage Sites, known for its glorious Chinese
Buddhist art spanning a period of 1,000 years. However, it has been suffering from damage and degradation caused by man-made and
natural factors. In this article, we present a novel line-drawing enhanced interactive system for digital restoration of damaged murals
in Mogao Grottoes. Our system consists of four components, namely data pre-processing, damaged area selection, line-drawing
segmentation, and mural restoration. Each component is a hybrid of efficient algorithms and user interactions. We introduce the
infrastructure and process of using our system, from data capture and collection, database establishment, to interactive restoration. We
conduct a user study with 15 participants who have varied experiences with and skills on repairing murals and editing images. Results
and feedback suggest that our system can achieve satisfactory restoration results without overburdening the users. It can benefit both
experts trained in restoration and amateurs interested in cultural heritage conservation.
1. INTRODUCTION
Murals are one of the most valuable heritages for studying
ancient history, as it preserves a faithful pictorial record of the
lives and beliefs at the time. Existing murals have given
archaeologists important insights into the economics, politics,
religions, and cultures in the past. Dated back to 1,600 years ago,
the Dunhuang Mogao Grottoes is a shrine of splendid Chinese
Buddhist artwork spanning a period of 1,000 years with more
than ten genres of murals and statues (Whitfield et al., 2015).
Figure 1 shows the exquisite mural of Amitabha Sutra in Mogao
Grottoes, south wall, Cave 220.
Unfortunately, most of the existing murals are suffering from
degradations due to historical or natural reasons, such as
chemical reaction (Sayre, 1973), water, wind, salt erosion,
vegetation, and fungal influence (Milanesi et al., 2006). In such Figure 1. Mogao Cave 220, south wall, Amitabha Sutra.
cases of Dunhuang Mogao Grottoes, which is located in a
desertification area (Wang et al., 2000), damages found on its instruments, animals, and natural sceneries. Complex content and
murals include flaking (Ma and Wang, 2014), disruption (Fan et extensive size of damaged areas make it difficult for many
al., 2009), blister (Chen and Yu, 2008), etc. Researchers have solutions (e.g., (Blazek et al., 2009), (Mastio et al., 2007),
been using suitable material and techniques to physically repair (Pappas and Pitas, 2000)), using automatic image processing
some of the flaking, disruption, and blister on Dunhuang murals algorithms like edge extraction, to detect damage and segment
(Fan et al., 2008) (Fan et al., 2009). However, such physical regions. In such a cases, manual supervision and correction is
restoration projects aim at controlling and relieving further then necessary, generating intensive and time consuming labour.
deterioration rather than restoring color and content of murals.
This is a task that requires exquisite skills and accurate operations Fortunately, there exist line drawings of some of the Dunhuang
to avoid manual damage to murals. murals on paper (Fraser, 2000) (Cahill et al., 2001). These
illustrations can serve as valuable references for digital
Digital restoration represents a repeatable and efficient approach restoration. Built upon these facts, we introduce an infrastructure
that requires minimal physical interactions with murals. for digitally repairing damaged murals in Dunhuang Mogao
Dunhuang murals often illustrate a story with complex, non- Grottoes, providing data collection, database establishment, and
linear composition of many characters, architectures, musical interactive restoration that leverages existing line drawings. Our
* Corresponding author
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-2-W2-99-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License. 99

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume IV-2/W2, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada
restoration results can serve as references for physical restoration Amano proposed a correlation-based approach to extract the
and art reproduction of murals. Experimental results show that image description rule from local regions. These methods can
our system can achieve good interactive experience, both for identify defective areas that are salient and related, but often fail
experts and amateurs. when distinctions between defects and the image are not obvious.
In the rest of the paper, we first review related work on mural Large sized images need to be perceptually segmented before
restoration in Section 2. In section 3, we provide an overview and being processed. There are plenty of advanced techniques to
details of our line-drawing enhanced interactive system for solve this problem which can be divided into edge-based, region-
Dunhuang mural restoration. Section 4 shows the validation and based and hybrid segmentation algorithms. Edge-based
evaluation results of our system with both experts and amateur segmentation rely on the discontinuity and abrupt changes of
users. In section 5, we discuss the limitation and practical boundaries in gray-scale level (Palmer et al., 1996), and need
applications of this work, followed by conclusion and future additional algorithms like gap filling and smoothing to close the
work in Section 6. extracted curves, which would be rather time consuming.
Region-based segmentation utilize the similar properties of
2. RELATED WORK pixels in gray or color value to produce meaningful regions.
Representative technology is seeded region growing algorithm
Restoration of murals aims at repairing the deteriorated parts (Adams and Bischof, 1994). It groups the pixels according to the
while maintaining the original condition of murals to the best criteria and given seeds and gains better results than edge-based
extent. The state-of-art techniques can be divided into physical methods, but the initial seed should be selected accurately.
restoration and digital restoration. Hybrid segmentation technologies combine multiple methods to
gain more accurate results. (Fan et al., 2001) proposes a hybrid
2.1 Physical restoration method by integrating the results of color-edge extraction and
seeded region growing. (Achanta et al., 2012) introduces the
Physical restoration concerns controlling and relieving simple linear iterative clustering (SLIC) algorithm, which adapts
deterioration of a mural. Common techniques include cleaning a k-means clustering approach to efficiently generate superpixels.
(Carretti et al., 2005), grouting (Baglioni et al., 1997), As for Dunhuang murals, extensive damage areas have destroyed
reinforcement (Li et al., 2013), desalination (Chen et al., 2009), the integrity of image both in edge and color, traditional methods
etc. often fail to make satisfactory segmentation results.
As for Dunhuang Mogao Grottoes, conservators follow the Image inpainting algorithms can be applied to the selected
principle of keeping the original state of murals when applying regions of interest to reconstruct their structures and fill up the
restoration. The physical restoration of Dunhuang Mogao pixels with colors closed to the original. Existing inpainting
Grottoes started in 1951 (Li, 2004). Over the years, conservators algorithms for removing unwanted elements from an image, such
have developed customized materials, tools, and techniques to as text, logos, and signature, etc., can be based on texture
handle the different types of damages, such as detachment, synthesis (Efros and Leung, 1999) (Harrison, 2001), Partial
disruption and flaking (Fan et al., 2008) (Fan et al., 2009). Differential Equation (PDE) (Bertalmio et al., 2003) (Chan and
Physical restoration requires the conservators to be highly Shen, 2002), given exemplar (Criminisi et al., 2004) (Drori et al.,
concentrated and skillful to prevent secondary damage, because 2003), or a combination of them (Starck et al., 2005). However,
direct touch is extremely dangerous especially for murals in very these approaches may not be suitable for mural restoration.
bad conditions. Texture synthesis, in fact, is more suitable for images with simple
repeated patterns such as brick walls, feathers, and textiles.
2.2 Digital Restoration Partial-Differential-Equation-based methods may introduce
blurry artifacts and thus are less commonly used these days.
Digital restoration can recover the color and content of murals
Exemplar-based approaches can remove large objects from a
with minimal physical interactions. Technical problems of digital
target image and fill the hole with textures and structure from
restoration consist of two steps: how to detect or select damaged
specified exemplars. In this paper, we adapt the exemplar-based
region, and how to fill the region up with proper pixels.
method and tailor it to meet the characteristics of Dunhuang
Underlying algorithms include defect detection, image
murals.
segmentation, image inpainting and texture synthesis.
2.3 Digital Restoration
Digital restoration can recover the color and content of murals
with minimal physical interactions. Technical problems of digital
restoration consist of two steps: how to detect or select damaged
region, and how to fill the region up with proper pixels.
Underlying algorithms include defect detection, image
segmentation, image inpainting and texture synthesis.
Defects detection aims to separate regions to be fixed from intact
areas. Traditionally, it is done manually, which is subjective and Figure 2. Interactive system flowchart.
enervating (Padalkar and Joshi, 2015) (Turakhia et al., 2012).
Researchers have tried to automate this process, at least partially. 3. INTERACTIVE MURAL RESTORATION
They exploited color information to locate defects on images
automatically (Chang et al., 2005) (Amano, 2006) or semi- In this article, we propose a digital mural restoration
automatically (Giakoumis et al., 2006). For example, Chang’s infrastructure that supports data capturing and processing,
mechanism makes use of signal filters and structural information. database establishment, and interactive reconstruction for
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-2-W2-99-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License. 100

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume IV-2/W2, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada
the images. We use X-Rite Color Checker to calibrate the digital
color and panoramic photography for image stitching.
Resol
Type Amount Size Camera Lens
ution
Multiple
5760 Canon Canon
photos 72
542 * EOS 5D 24-70
for dpi
3840 Mark III
stitching
Detailed Canon
Figure 3. System interface. The system consists of a menu bar, 5184 Canon
photos of 72 24-70
two vertical split windows and a status bar. 134 * EOS 5D
selected dpi and
3456 Mark III
parts 70-200
Dunhuang murals. We design the system in a way that it is easy
to learn and master by both experts and amateurs. Full 8272 Hasselbl HC
300
frame 45 * ad H5D- 2.8/80
dpi
3.1 Overview of system workflow photos 6200 40 mm
The interactive restoration system consists of data pre-processing, Table 1. Information of digital mural database.
damaged area selection, line-drawing segmentation, and mural
restoration. As stressed above, Dunhuang murals are complex in Line-drawing Database. We digitalize a totally 195 pieces of line
content and have large amounts of damaged areas, which makes drawings from different sources, such as books and unpublished
it very difficult for traditional image processing approaches to artwork by Dunhuang artists. These drawings are usually large in
solve the restoration problem automatically. Thus, we try to size and thus cannot be scanned all at once. Instead, we applied
involve aids of users by combining interactions with classical the photo stitching technique to combine images of different
image processing algorithms in each steps and results show that segments into one piece. The line drawings are mostly produced
our approach gains satisfactory restoration effects, which can’t on Chinese rice paper which is very sensitive to wrinkles, as
be obtained through traditional ways. shown in Figure 4 (a). The digital copy line drawing may contain
shades of various intensities as a result of the wrinkles and the
As illustrated in Figure 2, our system works like this: once the lighting condition. Besides, the lines are drawn in graded ink and
mural image and its associated line drawing are loaded from the thus are not uniform in color. Some of the lines are even lighter
database, we align them together semi-automatically by moving, than the shades, making it difficult to extract the meaningful
rescaling, and rotating the contour illustration overlaid on top of contours using simple algorithms. We observe that the shades
the mural image. Then users iteratively pick out the deteriorated tend to occupy a large area with slow variation in gray-scale
regions with the assistance of our system’s damaged area values, while lines are thinner structures and its change of gray
selection algorithm. The next step is to separate the different value in certain direction is rather rapid. Therefore, we apply a
visual elements in the mural. The initial segmentation result is median filter to obtain the parts of shadows and wrinkles. Then
automatically generated using the structure information of the we subtract these areas from the original copy and convert the
line drawing. It may have flaws, depending on the quality of the remaining to a binary black-and-white image. The result of line
drawing. Users can interactively refine the segmentation results. drawing digitalization is shown in Figure 4(b).
After that, users can specify a reference color and a treatment
method to algorithmically repaint the target area. 3.3 Pre-processing
Figure 3 shows an overview of our system interface. We keep a In this paper, we use the Bodhisattva of Cave 320 (Figure 4(c))
simple and clean style to minimize visual distractions. The to demonstrate the process and performance of our proposed
interface consists of a menu bar, two vertical split screens, and a system. Cave 320 was painted in Tang Dynasty, and is
status bar. The menu bar lists the six steps listed in Figure 2 in a representative in terms of content and style. Besides, the
sequential order to guide users through the process. The two Bodhisattva suffers from various degradations to different extent,
vertical split screens with synchronous scrolling and scaling but the whole figure remains relatively complete and most of the
enable users to compare the input (left screen) and the output elements are identifiable. We selected the high quality line
(right screen) after each manipulation. All the user interactions drawing of Bodhisattva in Cave 320 painted by artists from
with proper visual feedback are conducted on the left screen, such Dunhuang Research Academy in China (Figure 4(a)).
as clicking and dragging. Users can check the intermediate and
final states of the restored image on the right screen. The status Before being presented to users, each pair of line drawing and
bar informs user the progress of the algorithms running in the mural image in our system needs to be aligned together (Figure
backend of the system. 4(d)). Since the experimental binary image of line drawing
almost align with the fresco, we apply the simple affine
3.2 Data Collection and Database Establishment transformation method to optimize the alignment. That is, we
choose three couples of key points on the fresco image and the
Our system contains a database of mural images and a database line-drawing image, then we calculate the parameters of affine
of line drawings. transformation matrix according to the chosen key points, finally
we apply the affine transformation to the line-drawing image so
Digital Mural Database. We have captured three types of digital that it can scale, rotate and translate to fit the fresco image. Note
images of Mogao Cave 156/159/172/254/320, details are shown that if the line-drawing image is very different from the mural
in Table 1. We build a soft, uniform lighting environment for the image, the alignment turns out to be difficult and not suitable to
photo taking process to maintain the primitiveness of content on be done through simple algorithms. More advanced algorithms
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-2-W2-99-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License. 101

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume IV-2/W2, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada
Figure 4. (a) Original line drawing on Chinese rice paper; (b) digitalized line drawing after pre-processing; (c) photo of original mural;
(d) alignment of line drawing and mural image; (e) restoration result.
can be found in (Szeliski, 2006) (Russell et al., 2011) to deal with explore the potential to automatically adjust the threshold based
complex cases. on the number of clicks, so that users who have little knowledge
about setting the threshold in person can also benefit from
3.4 Damaged Area Selection dynamic configuration.
With the help of a RGB color-based algorithm running in the 3.5 Line-drawing Segmentation
backend, users can interactively pick out the damaged areas.
With a few clicks in a damaged area, all pixels within a certain Region segmentation aims to separate visual components with
color range of the selected pixels will be automatically different colors and textures. There are plenty of advanced
highlighted consequently. The color range is determined by a techniques to solve this problem as described in section 2. Our
threshold, user can manually adjust its value or simply use the expected outputs are segmentations of entire perceptive
default number. Users can save the result and perform these meaningful regions with clear and occlusive boundaries.
actions iteratively until they are satisfied with the aggregated Traditional algorithms, like level sets (Tsai et al., 2003) (Paragios
outcome. and Deriche, 2000) algorithm and k-means (Ray and Turi, 1999)
approach can’t meet our requirements of segmenting visual
RGB color-based defects selecting strategy. Setting a threshold components because of the noise information of defects.
t and click at one pixel pc each time. The color of p is denoted as
rcgcbc, and the color range C(t) is defined as equation (1). The
size of the set is calculated as equation (2). The system then
traverses all pixels in the image and selects ∀p, r g b ∈C(cid:4666)t(cid:4667).
p p p
C(cid:4666)t(cid:4667) = (cid:4668) rgb | r ∈ (cid:4670)r -t, r +t(cid:4671), (1)
c c
g ∈(cid:3427)g -t, g +t(cid:3431),
c c
b ∈ (cid:4670)b -t, b +t(cid:4671)}
c c
|C(cid:4666)t(cid:4667)|= (2t+1)3 (2)
The choice of color range has a direct impact on the effectiveness
of the selection algorithm. We experiment with different
parameter configurations to infer a proper t as the default setting.
We use the precision and recall of selection results to quantize
the performance. Note that, we want to reduce the false positive
rate, so that the well-preserved areas would not get treated by
mistake. As shown in Figure 5 (b) and (c), we achieve the highest
precision when t=5, and the highest recall when t=7. But we can
see that when t=7, it introduces more false positive points in the
face area compared to the hand-labeled ground truth (Figure 5 (a), Figure 5. Experimental results of precision and recall. Figure (a)
in red and blue frames). Hence, we set the default threshold for shows partial damage selection result when t = 7 (left) and
color range inference to t=5. We also allow users to manually ground truth (right), defects are shown in green color. For five
adjust the value before each click according to their needs. Users clicks results, Figure (b) shows the curve of precision and
can increase the threshold to shorten the processing time or lower Figure (c) shows the curve of recall.
it to more fine-grained selection. In the future, we will further
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-2-W2-99-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License. 102

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume IV-2/W2, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada
Inspired by the work of (Blazek et al., 2009), who utilize Region Merging. This interaction assigns the same identity to
ultraviolet spectrum technology to detect defects and laid the components with similar content and texture. Users simply left
results on the mural image to segment it, we started to segment click on all the regions to merge and confirm at the end to assign
the line drawing by applying connected-component analysis and a consistent label. They can right click to cancel a selection
using the results to segment the mural image. There are two before hitting the apply button. Note that regions to merge do not
classical algorithms for connected-component analysis, i.e., need to be adjacent.
seed-filling (Vincent and Soille, 1991) and two-pass (Rosenfeld
and Pfaltz, 1966). Seed-filling is a recursive labeling algorithm. We present the segmentation results before (Figure 6(a)) and
It starts with a ‘seed’ pixel in the target region and recursively after (Figure 6(d)) performing interactive region splitting and
expands the label to all the non-border neighbors. This process is merging on the Bodhisattva image. As exemplified the zoom-in
rather slow, and thus we choose to use the two-pass method in views, we separate the baldachin from the background (Figure
this work. 6(b)) and combine the hand and arm segments into one
component (Figure 6(c)).
Two-pass is a row-by-row labeling algorithm. It scans the input
binary image twice, and keeps a record of different sets of 3.6 Interactive Restoration
equivalence classes throughout the process. The first pass is to
label all the non-border pixels. For each pixel, if none of its To perform interactive restoration, the most essential step of the
neighbors are marked by a number, it gets a new numerical label. entire process, users need to select a target region, appoint a
Otherwise, it takes the minimum label of its neighbors. reference region from which the color and texture for inpainting
Additionally, the algorithm puts the pixel and its neighbors into are borrowed. User can choose to repaint the entire target region
the same set of equivalence classes. The labels received after the or just the selected damaged region extracted in the previous step.
first pass are only temporary, since there may be more than one
labels in one connected region. The second pass is to find the If there is a large well-preserved area in the target region and the
minimum label in each set of equivalence classes and use it to condition of the remaining parts is not too severe, the target
replace all the temporary labels of the members in the set. The region can serve as its own reference for restoration. If the target
original result of region segmentation is shown in Figure 6(a). region is seriously damaged with only some small, discrete areas
staying intact, it is better to employ another better-preserved
However, over segmentation may occur due to the complex region with similar content as the reference.
structure of the mural, while gaps on the contours extracted from
the line drawing may mistakenly connect separate regions. We extend the exemplar-based image inpainting algorithm
Therefore, our system provides two operations, region splitting proposed in (Criminisi et al., 2004) in our system. The whole
and region merging, for users to interactively modify the auto- inpainting process employs a best-filling-first strategy. That is,
segmentation result. pixels with high-continuation and high-confidence neighbors
will be painted first. We use a R×R patch window to fill the
Region Splitting. This function is for users to correct target region (indicated b T) with pixels from the reference
misconnected components or obtain more detailed sub-regions region (indicated by S)
for finer operations. To perform this action, user need to first
point out the problematic region by a left click. The selected As stressed in (Efros and Leung, 1999), the size of the R×R patch
region and the line(s) with gap(s) inside it get highlighted. Then, window can greatly influence the quality and efficiency of the
users can close an unwanted gap by drawing a line that starts and inpainting algorithm. A large R can shorten the processing time,
ends on the existing contour. Later, users can left click on one of but come to drab inpainting results. On the contrary, a small R
the newly divided sub-regions to assign it a new label. The other may increase the diversity and complexity of the textures but with
sub-region automatically inherits the old label. low running speed. To find an appropriate patch size for our
Figure 6. Segmentation result. (a) Original segmentation result; (b) Split baldachin region and background region; (c) Merge arms; (d)
Optimized segmentation result.
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-2-W2-99-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License. 103

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume IV-2/W2, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada
system, we evaluate the performance and efficiency of the 4000 GPU, 8.00GB RAM for computing. We invited 15 users to
inpainting algorithm with different R on mural data from 1 to 25. attend our user experiment, and divided them into three groups
To balance the performance and efficiency and avoid obvious by their backgrounds. We observed and video recorded their
repetition of small patches appearing in the restoration result, we manipulations, and spontaneous comments throughout the course
choose the default R = 6. Our system also allows users to adjust of the study.
the value of R interactively, and provides a small sample result
for each R to facilitate this process. Group 1: Specialists (P1-P5, 4 males, 1 female, age range 27-45
years old) who have been working at Dunhuang Research
Comparing our restoration result (Figure 4(e)) to the original Academy for more than 2 years for physical restoration and
condition of the mural (Figure 4(c)), nearly all the obvious conservation.
damages on the Bodhisattva figure are fixed. It shows that our
system successfully reconstructs the integrated structure and Group 2: Professional designers (P6-P10, 5 females, age range
harmonious color style of the mural. 23-25 years old) who are experts on image editing with five or
more years of experiences.
4. VALIDATION AND EVALUATION
Group 3: Engineers (P11-P15, 4 males, 1 female, age range 24-
The approach we proposed leverages unique data, and the 31 years old) who have strong technical background but are less
workflow is designed particularly for restoring Dunhuang murals. familiar with image processing and editing.
Our system works in a way where its manipulations are similar
to those in existing image editing software. 4.3 Study Procedure
To understand how experts and amateurs may perceive and The study aims to investigate both the user experiences and
interact with our system, we conduct a preliminary user study of performance of each component of our system. Each participant
15 users. Five experts from Dunhuang Research Academy in is required to perform four tasks that correspond to the four
China and 10 amateurs majored in design or engineering are functional operations of our system. The procedure can be
involved in our experiment. We assess the system from three described as follows:
aspects: 1) system performance, such as user satisfaction with the
output; 2) interaction experience, such as learnability, ease of use, Training: Before each session, we show the participants the
satisfaction, and task completion statues; and 3) interface design. system interface and detailed interactions related to the task on
the computer. Then we ask them to repeat the operations and try
4.1 Validation a similar assignment.
Currently, there is no standard measurement or parameterized Main task: After trained, the participants proceed to the main
method to validate the correctness of restored Dunhuang murals, task. (Session 1) damaged area selection, i.e., picking out all the
especially for digital restoration. The validation of our system is damaged regions in the given image; (Session 2) region splitting,
done by two authoritative experts from Dunhuang Research i.e., separating the given area into two regions; (Session 3) region
Academy in China. One is a practical artist who has been merging, i.e., combining two or three pre-determined areas; and
studying and facsimileing Dunhuang murals for years, the other (Session 4) interactive restoration, i.e., repairing a given region
one is an associate research fellow from The Conservation by specifying the reference and patch size. We recorded all the
Research Institute of Dunhuang Research Academy. They user interactions and took screenshots of the participants’ results
conclude three principles to validate restoration results according in each session.
to the standard ones for physical restoration.
Rating: Upon the completion of each task, participants rate the
1. Originality. That means representative features should corresponding system component for its learnability, ease of use,
remain unchanged in the aspect of cultural heritage and level of satisfaction on a five-point Likert Scale. We also
conservation; interview them to collect their comments and feedback,
2. Integrity. Spectators should feel the paintings are especially in comparison with traditional restoration and other
integrated when appreciating; image-processing or graphics editing tools that they have used
3. Recognizability. The restoration traces should be before.
identified by experienced observation or instrumental
detection.
Learn Interaction Satisfaction
They validate the digital results produced by our system mean 4.87 3.73 3.73
Session1
according to the principles. They clarify that our overall effect is sd 0.34 0.93 0.93
acceptable and reliable with the features of originality, integrity, mean 4.00 3.60 3.87
and recognizability, partially beyond the limitation of physical Session2
sd 1.10 1.02 1.09
restoration by repainting the missing part. From aspects of art
mean 4.60 4.20 4.00
aesthetic, they comment that the repainted effects correspond to Session3
sd 0.61 0.98 0.97
practical painting knowledge and techniques, and the texture
mean 4.33 3.73 3.93
produced by flat-coating simulating and line-drawing Session4
sd 0.70 0.68 0.93
overlapping are reasonable and naturally presented.
mean 4.45 3.82 3.88
Overall
4.2 Experiment Setup and Participants sd 0.89 0.88 0.94
Our system is built with Python and Qt. It runs in the environment Table 2. User rating for the system. Session 1-4 refer to
of Ubuntu 12.0.4 on a 14-inch Thinkpad-T430 laptop, within an damaged area selection, region splitting, region merging and
Intel® Core™ i7-3520M @ 2.90GHz CPU, Intel® HD Graphics interactive restoration.
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-2-W2-99-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License. 104

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume IV-2/W2, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada
4.4 Evaluation Results trained in restoration and amateurs interested in cultural heritage
conservation.
Overall, participants’ reactions and feedback were positive,
Table 2 shows the mean and standard deviation of rating scores In the future, we will improve this work in several directions.
of learnability, ease of use, satisfaction and the overall rating. All First, we will apply our system to more mural images from
the participants considered the system very easy to learn (Avg. = different dynasties and with different damage conditions. Second,
4.45) and the interactions fairly intuitive (Avg. = 3.82). They we will extend our system to support collaborative mural
were quite satisfied with the results (Avg. = 3.88). restoration. Third, we plan to improve the current interaction
functions, especially for the region splitting task. In addition, we
Participants found our digital mural restoration system quite will add more image-editing related operations, such as dragging
unique within the use of line drawings. They suggested the and layering, revocation, etc., to improve the interaction
feasibility of our system for two purposes: 1) assisting experts to experiences.
perform professional physical restoration and protection, in a
way that allows experts to preview the texture and color of crack ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
virtually in advance before heading to physical tasks; 2)
providing an engaging, explorative experience for amateurs This work is supported by the National Basic Research Program
without the restraint from rigorous academic restoration; of China under Grant No. 2012CB725300 and the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61232013,
5. DISCUSSION 61373072. The authors thank La Tu, Wen Wei, Juan Du, Yanting
Chen for their support.
Limitation. Although the overall performance of our system is
good according to the evaluation and validation results, it still has
some limitations. REFERENCES
First of all, the use of line drawing for mural restoration is one of Achanta, R., Shaji, A., Smith, K., Lucchi, A., Fua, P., Susstrunk,
the novel parts of our approach, however, it may also become the S., 2012. SLIC superpixels compared to state-of-the-art
bottleneck, as the quality and quantity of line drawing available superpixel methods. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
affect the performance and scalability of our system. The second Machine Intelligence, 34(11), pp. 2274–2282.
limitation is the tradeoff between efficiency and quality. Since it
is difficult to achieve restoration results with good quality Adams, F. and Bischof, L., 1994. Seeded region growing. IEEE
completely automatically, we have introduced many user Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
interactions to guide the process. However, some of the 16(6), pp. 641-647.
interactions rely on subjective judgment, such as damage
selection and reference appointment. It may take time for users Amano, T., 2006. Correlation based image defect detection. 18th
to gain enough experiences to provide confident opinions rather Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit, 1(1), pp. 18–21.
quickly. Third, it may be challenging to invite multiple people to
collaboratively restore a mural, as their choices of system Baglioni, P., Dei, L., Pique, F., Sarti, G., Ferroni, E., 1997. New
configuration and manual intervention at each step may lead to qutogenous lime-based grouts used in the conservation of lime-
very different results. How to combine individual results into a based wall paintings. Stud. Conserv, 42(1), pp. 43–54.
mural of consistent style and effect will be a tough task.
Bertalmio, M., Vese, L., Sapiro, G. and Osher, S., 2003.
Potential Extension. Digital restoration of murals is a long-term Simultaneous structure and texture image inpainting. IEEE Trans.
task. The whole infrastructure can be extended to incorporate Image Process, 12(8), pp. 882–889.
new features and applications. For example, we can take
advantage of crowdsourcing to collect line drawing. It can make Blazek, J., Zitová, B., Benes, M. and Hradilová, J., 2009. Fresco
the whole process more cost-effective and attract more people to restoration digital image processing approach. 17th Eur. Signal
appreciate the beauty of Dunhuang murals. One of the practical Process. Conf. (EUSIPCO 2009), Eusipco, pp. 1210–1214.
applications of our work is to demonstrate the system in Art
museums, inviting visitors to help restore murals. Furthermore, Cahill, J., Silbergeld, J. and Tang, K., 2001. Chinese Art and
we can put the system online to involving the general public in Authenticity. Bull. Am. Acad. Arts Sci, 55(1), pp. 17–36.
preserving the treasure. Our system can also serve as an
interactive platform that supports creativity and learning. Artists Carretti, E., Salvadori, B., Baglioni, P. and Dei, L., 2005.
can create their own style of mural. Children can play scrawl Microemulsions and micellar solutions for cleaning fresco
games with mural fragments and learn about Dunhuang culture surfaces. Studies in Conservation, 1, pp. 50.
at the same time.
Chan, T. F. and Shen, J., 2002. Mathematical Models for local
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK non-texture inpainting. SIAM, J. Appl. Math, 62(3), pp. 1019-
1043.
In this article, we present a novel line-drawing and pattern-
enhanced infrastructure that supports digital restoration of Chang, R. C., Sie, Y. L., Chou, S. M. and Shih, T. K., 2005. Photo
damaged murals in Dunhuang Mogao Grottoes, western China. defect detection for image inpainting. Seventh IEEE Int. Symp.
We describe each part of the proposed infrastructure with Multimed, pp. 403–407.
illustrations and examples, from data capture and pre-processing,
database establishment, to interactive restoration via a system Chen, G., Fan, Z., Yu, Q., Su, B., Li, Y., Qiao, H., Tang, W.,
that integrates user interactions with algorithms. The results of a 2009. Primary test of desalination to treat the disrupted wall
preliminary user study show that our system enable more painting in Cang Jie Temple of Baishui, Shaanxi Province.
efficient mural restoration with good quality for both experts Dunhuang Research, 6, pp. 6.
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-2-W2-99-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License. 105

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume IV-2/W2, 2017
26th International CIPA Symposium 2017, 28 August–01 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada
Chen, G. and Yu, Z., 2008. Test for blister and soluble salt in Palmer, P., Dabis, H. and Kittler, J., 1996. A performance
powdering and the layer of plaster for the wall -painting in Cave measure for boundary detection algorithms. Computer Vision
351 at Mogao Grottoes. Dunhuang Research, 6, pp. 39-45+119- and Image Understanding, 63(3), pp. 476-494.
120+116.
Pappas, M. and Pitas, I., 2000. Digital color restoration of old
Criminisi, A., Pérez, P. and Toyama, K., 2004. Region filling and paintings. IEEE Trans. Image Process, 9(2), pp. 291–294.
object removal by exemplar-based image inpainting. IEEE Trans.
Image Process. 13(9), pp. 1200–1212. Paragios, N. and Deriche, R., 2000. Geodesic active contours and
level sets for the detection and tracking of moving objects. IEEE
Drori, I., Cohen, D. and Yeshurun, H., 2003. Fragment-based Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 22(3),
image completion. ACM Trans. Graph, 22(3), pp. 303. pp. 266-280.
Efros, A. A. and Leung, T. K., 1999. Texture synthesis by non- Ray, S. and Turi, R. H., 1999. Determination of number of
parametric sampling. Comput. Vision. Proc. Seventh IEEE Int. clusters in k-means clustering and application in colour image
Conf, 2(2), pp. 1033–1038. segmentation. Proceedings of the 4th international conference on
advances in pattern recognition and digital techniques, pp. 137-
Fan, J., Yau, D. K. Y., Elmagarmid, A. K., Aref, W. G., 2001. 143.
Automatic image segmentation by integrating color-edge
extraction and seeded region growing. IEEE Transactions on Rosenfeld, A. and Pfaltz, J. L., 1966. Sequential operations in
Image Processing, 10(10), pp. 1454-1466. digital picture processing. Journal of the ACM,13(4), pp. 471–
494.
Fan, Z. X., Chen, G. Q., Su, B. M., Li, R. F., Qiao, H., Tang, W.,
2009. The testing study for repairing the disruption wall paintings Russell, B., Sivic, J., Ponce, J., Dessales, H., 2011. Automatic
in Cave 98 at Mogao Grottoes. Dunhuang Research, 6, pp. 4- alignment of paintings and photographs depicting a 3D scene.
7+120+125. IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops,
pp. 545-552.
Fan, Z. X., Rickerby, S., Shekede, L., Qiao, H., Tang, W., Yang,
J.J., 2008. The technique measurement for repairing the mural - Sayre, E. V., 1973. Investigation of Italian frescoes, their
paintings in Cave 85 at Mogao Grottoes. Dunhuang Research, 6, materials, deterioration and treatment. Application of science in
pp. 19-22. examination of works of art-proceedings of the seminar: June 15-
19, 1970, conducted by the research laboratory, Museum of Fine
Fraser, S. E., 2000. Formulas of creativity: artist’s sketches and Arts, Boston, Massachussetts, 1973, pp. 176-181.
techniques of copying at Dunhuang. Artibus Asiae 59(3/4), pp.
189–224. Starck, J. L., Elad, M., Donoho, D. L., 2005. Image
decomposition via the combination of sparse representations and
Giakoumis, I., Nikolaidis, N. and Pitas, I., 2006. Digital image a variational approach. IEEE Trans. Image Process, 14(10), pp.
processing techniques for the detection and removal of cracks in 1570-1582.
digitized paintings. Image Process. IEEE, 15(1), pp. 178–188.
Szeliski, R., 2006. Image Alignment and Stitching: A Tutorial.
Harrison, P., 2001. A non-hierarchical procedure for re-synthesis Found. Trends® Comput. Graph. Vis, 2(1), pp. 1–104.
of complex textures. Proc. WSCG, 190–197.
Tsai, A., Yezzi, A., Wells, W., Tempany, C., Tucker, D., Fan, A.,
Li, J. M., Zhang, H., Fan, Z. X., He, X., He, S. M., et al., 2013. Grimson, W. E., Willsky, A., 2003. A shape-based approach to
Investigation of the renewed diseases on murals at Mogao the segmentation of medical imagery using level sets. IEEE
Grottoes. Heritage Science, 1(1), pp. 31. Transactions on Medical Imaging, 22(2), pp. 137–154.
Li, Z. X., 2004. Sixty years on the conservation of the Dunhuang Turakhia, N., Shah, R. and Joshi, M., 2012. Automatic crack
Grottoes. Dunhuang Research, 3, pp. 10-26+111. detection in heritage site images for image inpainting. Proc.
Eighth Indian Conf. Comput. Vision, Graph. Image Process.
Ma, Z. F. and Wang, W. F., 2014. On the materials and flaking ICVGIP ’12, pp. 1–8.
of the wall paintings in Mogao Cave 44. Dunhuang Research, 5,
pp. 108-118. Vincent, L. and Soille, P., 1991. Watershed in digital spaces:an
efficient algorithm based on immersion simulation. IEEE Trans.
Mastio, A. D., Cappellini, V., Caldelli, R., Rosa, A. D. and Piva, Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell, 13(6), pp. 583–598.
A., 2007. Virtual restoration and protection of cultural heritage
images. In Digital Signal Processing, 15th IEEE International Wang, W. F., Wang, T., Zhang, W. M., Zhang, G. B., Qiu, F.,
Conference, pp. 471-474 Zhan, H. T, 2000. Study on the design of a comprehensive sand
drift control system at Mogao Grottoes, Dunhuang. Arid Land
Milanesi, C., Baldi, F., Vignani, R., Ciampolini, F., Faleri, C. and Geography, 20(4), pp. 409-414.
Cresti, M., 2006. Fungal deterioration of medieval wall fresco
determined by analysing small fragments containing copper. Int. Whitfield, R., Whitfield, S. and Agnew, N., 2015. Cave Temples
Biodeterior. Biodegrad, 57(1), pp. 7–13. of Mogao at Dunhuang: Art History on the Silk Road (2nd. Ed.) .
Getty Publications.
Padalkar, M. G. and Joshi, M. V., 2015. Auto-inpainting heritage
scenes: a complete framework for detecting and infilling cracks
in images and videos with quantitative assessment. Mach. Vis.
Appl, 26(2-3), pp. 317–337.
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper.
doi:10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-2-W2-99-2017 | © Authors 2017. CC BY 4.0 License. 106