TITLE: Archaeological Evidences from Makkhaya Old City: Jātaka Plaques & Mon Relics
AUTHOR: U Lwin Thaw
YEAR: 2018
LANGUAGE: EN/Burmese
ORIGINAL_FILE: Archaeologicl Evidences from Makkhaya Old City.pdf
EXTRACTED_CHARACTERS: 33579
STATUS: OK
============================================================

Yadanabon University Research Journal 2019, Vol-10, No.1                                               1 
 
Archaeologicl Evidences from Makkhaya Old City 
 
   Min Lwin 
 
Abstract 
Makkhaya is among the ancient site of Myanmar old cities and various types of evidences 
related to earliest societies were found. Early people lived in Makkhaya  period by period. Their 
traces were found in this site with many evidences. They are stone and wooden images of the 
Buddha, city wall, religious monuments, structure remains, stone inscription, wall painting, 
wood carving, human figure marked brick and an imal figure marked brick and pot and 
potsherd, etc. Recent archaeological investigations on this site reveal its cultural levels 
associated not only with historical context, but with Prehistoric context of even Neolithic 
cultural level, passing through Metal Age, followed by Pyu Culture.      
Keywords: Religious monuments, Neolithic cultural level, passing    
           through Metal Age, Pyu Culture.      
 
Introduction 
  In Makkhaya region Pyu, Mon, Shan and Myanmar lived. But culture advanced in this 
site period by period. It can be found that structure remain, surface finds religious building 
and other ancient monuments. In this site many sources have been collected mainly on the 
datas and ev idences such as background history, location and its environment, topography, 
burial remain, stone inscription and Old Mon village. Makkhaya ancient site is situated in 
Kyaukse plain, known as cultural context to historical character of Bagan and Post Baga n 
periods. In fact, lying at the junction of Zawgyi and Myit Nge Rivers, this area is provided by 
variety of environmental features of water supply and other lowland and highland natural 
resources – which serves as to the favourable condition for the early  settlements. There are 
considerable numbers of survival remains of religious structures and ruins of its cultural 
evidences which cover at and around the region. But, these remains have been more or less 
ignorant manner in former accounts. Indeed, recentl y bearing evidences from the site reveal 
some more information, added up to its cultural level. These evidences include material 
remains of Neolithic culture, Metal Age context, and of Pyu culture, as well as those of 
historical context, particularly of stone inscriptions. 
 
Location and its Environment 
  Makkhaya is situated in Sint Kkaing township, Kyaukse district, Mandalay region, 
beside Yangon-Mandalay road. It is on the junction of Zawgyi river and Duttha -waddy river.1 
Makkhaya is located in the east o f Shan Yoma ranges, in the west of Panlaung river, in the 
south of Kyaukse district and in the north of Patheingyi township and Amarapura township. It 
is in the dry zone, about 250 feet above sea level. 2 65 percent of the ancient town is flat land 
and 35 percent is formed with plateaus. One of the Geologists said that most of the rock in this 
area is metamorphic rock. The city wall is in rectangular. The gate way is in the south of the 
wall. 
 
  
                                                           
  Lecturer, Department of Archaeology, Yadanabon University 
1 See Map.1 
2 Aung Nyein Chan,  ru©&modkUokawoec&D;rSwfwrf; (Record on Field Trip at Makkhaya)  , 2004, p.3 (Hereafter 
cited as Aung Nyein Chan, Record on Field Trip at Makkhaya ) 
Yadanabon University Research Journal 2019, Vol-10, No.1                                               2 
 
Topography of Makkhaya 
  The old Makkhaya  City is located at junction of Zaw Gyi River and Duttha -waddy 
River which is three miles north along the Duttha -waddy River to Tabyat Tha. There is a 
village called Kyune Oo at the eastern bank of Zaw Gyi River across from Makkhaya. The 
Zaw Gyi River was flow at the south and east part of the city walls. In the west is Aebya 
Village where pagodas built by Myanmar and Mon people are found. In the Myit Nge or 
Duttha-waddy River is flowing, Kinbet (uif;buf) known as Kin Village (uif;½Gm) in the 
north. Presently, Makkhaya is located at Aebya site number 36/1 in Sink Kaing Township. At 
the place, old city brick walls and broken pieces of pots are found. 
  Indeed, this area is provided suitably by natural geographic feature of water supported 
not only by two main rivers of Myit Nge and Zawgi, bult also by surrounding natural lakes of 
Ta On Inn and Min Hla Tank. The soil is furtile and so the fruits and seeds can be grown well 
in its land. 3 Otherwise, it shows that the region of Makkhaya old city is favourable to a ncient 
settlements.  
  
Background History of Makkhaya 
  The city was founded by Amattaya during the reign of Anawratha in Bagan period. 4 
Therefore the city was called Amat Taya ( one hundred high official of the Myanmar royal 
court) and now the name is pronounced and known as Makkhaya. 5 The walls are seen to be 
two and a half furlong from west to east and three furlong from south to north. The main 
entrance gate is found at the south. At the southern end in the city many pagodas can be seen. 
Makkhaya is in Kyaukse nine districts. Some evidences that the Stone Age people lived have 
got from nine districts. There are many legends as to the antiquity of Makkhaya but the fact 
remains that Stone Age dwellers had inhabited the region, for it was founded close to a Stone 
Age site of Eabya village. There, chippings of stone left form cutting weapons had been found 
in large piles. In the vicinity, many stone axes and stone adzes as well as clay and shell beads 
had been found. Also, seven miles  south of Makkhaya, when the banks of a stream between 
Belin and Nabepin villages collapsed, skeletons, stone tablets, clay pot and bowls, multi -
coloured clay beads as well as bronze bracelets and spearheads were found.6  
  Pyu people had lived in Makkhaya  from the earliest time of Pyu to the fall of Pyu or 
the raise of Bagan period. Mon people also lived in Makkhaya according to some historical 
records as well as the evidence of Mon villages that are in Makkhaya ancient town area are 
named with Mon words. Many ancient buildings and religious buildings, ceti and temples are 
the evidence of peoples living in that area; Myinsaing, Makkhaya, Tamoak, after Bagan 
period and before Pinya.7 
  According to ancient Myanmar Chronicles, as regard to the name of Makkhay a, the 
Zabukoncha Text reveals that it was early named as Maggadharj, meaning the City of 
Prawn or Crab King, which was ruled by from King Thirisandar to King Saw Oo Swa with 
160 kings, and also known as its names in derivation to Magkadarj and Makkhar.  In 
some variant sayings, it is asserted that the city was built by Amattaya (100 Ministers of the 
Myanmar royal court) during the reign of King Anawratha of Bagan period. 8 Therefore the 
city was called Amat Taya and now the name is pronounced and known as Makkhaya. 
                                                           
3 See Map.2 
4 Aung Nyein Chan, Record on Field Trip at Makkhaya, 2004, pp.46-50 
5 Ashin Kutala Bhiwansa, ru©&m0Ho (History of Makkhaya) , Yangon, Shwe Say Gandar Press, 2006,   
   pp.28-30 ( Hereafter cited as Bhiwansa, History of Makkhaya) 
6 Wing Maung (Tampawaddi), “Ancient City of Mekayya on the Kyaukse Plains”, Enchanting Myanmar, Vol.6, 
No.3, July-September, 2007, p.27 ( Hereafter cited as Wing Maung, “Ancient City of Mekayya”) 
7 Bhiwansa, History of Makkhaya, pp.28-35  
8 Aung Nyein Chan, Record on Field Trip at Makkhaya, 2004, pp.46-50 
Yadanabon University Research Journal 2019, Vol-10, No.1                                               3 
 
In fact, the name of Makkhaya is found in the lists of the Eleven Kha-ruin (11 Villages) of 
Lay Dwin in Bagan Period. These 11 Kha-ruins of 11 Villages are also called as Mlacsā 11 
Kha-ruins, and they are as follows: 
(1) Pinlè (Paṅlay); 
(2) Myitmana (Plañmanā); 
(3) Myittha (Mlacsā); 
(4) Myinggondaing (Mraṅ Khun Tuiṅ); 
(5) Yamon (Raṅun); 
(6)  Panan (Panan); 
(7) Mekkhaya (Makkharā); 
(8) Tapyettha (Taplat sā); 
(9) Thindaung (Sanbon); 
(10) Tamot-hso (Tamut); and 
(11) Hkanlu (Khamlu).9 
According to ancient Myanmar Chronicles, as regard to the name of Makkhaya, the 
Zabukoncha Text reveals that it was early named as one of the ancient pyu region. 
 
List of Ancient Pyu Regions 
Sr No                   Site Town Region 
1 [Hom0wDysL ([Hvif;) 0ufvuf ppfukdif; 
2 wrÜ'Dy ysL tif;0a'o ppfukdif; 
3 ru©&m ysL ausmufqnfa'o rEÅav; 
4 y,fv,f ysL ausmufqnfa'o rEÅav; 
5 aumif;pif ysL Aef;armf       ucsif 
6 
  jrif;rl rEÅav; 
7 &GmykBuD; ysL jrif;rl rEÅav; 
8 v,fukdif; ysL 
rif;bl; 6-c½dkdif 
(puk? pvif;? azmif;vif;? 
Muyif;? v,fukdif;? ryifp&) 
rauG; 
 
Neolithic Evidences 
  Makkhaya region is popularly known as the historical site founded after Bagan Period, 
recently archaeological investigations indicate to prehistoric cultural context before Bagan . It 
has been proved by the traceable remains of Neolithic stone tools, potsherds and pottery, 
finger-marked bricks and traceable evidences of burials. 
As Neolithic context, some considerable numbers of the chippings, flakes, and parts of 
polished stone artifacts have been found at Aebya village. In its vicinity, it is recorded that 
many polished stone axes and stone adzes as well as clay and shell beads have been found.10    
  In additional accounts, recently field study in this site yielded some sample remains of 
polished stone artifacts have been collected, and the statistic data on these samples are 24 
pieces. 
                                                           
9  (a) Gordon H, Luce, Old Burma Early Bagan, Vol. I, New York, J.J.Augustin Publisher, Locust Valley, 
1969, p.13 
 (b) Than Tun, acwfa[mif;jrefrm&mZ0if? jrefrm&mZ0ifpmwrf;trSwfwpf  (Ancient Myanmar History: Studies in 
Myanmar History Number One), 3rd ed., Yangon, Inwa Publishing House, 2002, pp.129-130 (Hereafter 
cited as Than Tun, Myanmar History) 
10 Wing Maung, “Ancient City of Mekayya”, p.28 
Yadanabon University Research Journal 2019, Vol-10, No.1                                               4 
 
  Majority of these findings are of flakes by means of the manufacture of polished stone 
tools, and few of the fragmented part of polished hand axes. 11 Moreover, associated with these 
evidences of stone artifacts, some fragmented pieces of potsherds have been recovered at this 
area. In fact, althoug h these potsherds are uncertain in primary context to the flakes of stone 
artifacts, some sherds reveal coarse fabric and texture of grey in colour – which are probably 
similar features of Neolithic pottery. 12 Indeed, according to the local informants, cons iderable 
numbers of stone artifacts of Neolithic context have also been found in the project of water 
sharing canals from Myit Nge River at Aebya Village. In fact, in the aspect of geographical 
setting, Makkhaya and some evidenced Neolithic sites of Shwesa ryan and Taunggaing as well 
as Taungthaman at its end are lying along the river bank of Myit Nge. So, the area of 
Makkhaya probably provided to the related unit for thriving of Neolithic Culture in the valley. 
 
Metal Evidences 
  As the Post Neolithic level of cultural phase to Makkhaya area, it is reported that some 
7 miles to the south of it, when the banks of a stream between Belin and Nabepin Villages 
collapsed, skeletons, stone tablets, clay pots and bowls, multi -coloured clay beads as well as 
bronze bracelets and spearheads were found. 13 It indicates that some remnant of the material 
remains from this area shows up to Bronze Age Cultural context – similar to those found from 
Samon River Valley, near the Makkhaya region. 
 
Pyu Evidences 
  Indeed, Pyu cultural evidences from Makkhaya are in considerable scale. According to 
the sayings of local people, Pyu burial urns, pottery and other antiquities have been found near 
Aebya. As other provided evidences, finger-marked bricks – those of Pyu character have been 
covered in the ruins of brick structural remains. One reliable account to Pyu burial system, the 
cemetery has been excavated near the Stupa No.(43), just to the southwest of the city wall. 
Although there are faint features in ex posure, some traceable remains of bone fragments and 
of pots have been discernable at present condition. 14  By these evidences, the region of 
Makkhaya unfolds its existence since in the time of prehistoric cultural level and successive 
phase of Pyu culture. 
 
Historical Context 
  Archaeological evidences from Makkhaya are in fact mainly of historical context, 
particularly in Bagan and Post Cultural Phases. They can be found in the following two 
remain groups: 
(A)  Structural Remains 
(B)  Other Material Finds 
 
  
                                                           
11 See Fig.1 
12 See Fig.2 
13 Wing Maung, “Ancient City of Mekayya”, pp.28-29 
14 See Fig.3 
Yadanabon University Research Journal 2019, Vol-10, No.1                                               5 
 
(A) Structural Remains 
(a) Structural Remains of City Layout 
  The structural remains for the city layout of Makkhaya are of only traceable manner. 
The ruined city walls have 500 yards from north to south alignment and 400 yards from east to 
west. It has been mentioned that there are 8 gateways and additional one for taking out of the 
death, so there were totally 9 gateways of the city. 15 Noticeably, the corners of this city walls 
had rounded features just like those found from the Pyu cities. In the middle of the walled city, 
located to the north of Shaw Yaung Taw pagoda, but now in absent feature, the palace site 
belongs to 600 ft long in north to south and 450 ft in east to west. 16 In fact, the eastern part of 
the city was lost away by the erosion of Zawgyi River. 
 
(b) Structural Remains of Religious Buildings 
  Structural remains of religious monuments from Makkhaya old city are related to 
Bagan, Pinya, Innwa, Nyaungyan and Konbaung  periods. The remains of these Buddhist 
monuments are distributed at and around the ancient city – 4 ancient pagodas to the south of 
Makkhara, and about 40 monuments in the middle of the city site.17   
  Among these religious structures, the outstanding mon uments are Makkhaya 
Shwezigon Ceti, Shwe Yaung Taw Temple, Shwezarti ceti, Yarzargyi pagoda, Shwebonpwint 
pagoda, Innkon pagoda, Shinpin Seit -O pagoda, Hlaingshe pagoda, Paunglaung pagoda, Pa -
hta-ma-myin and Du -ti-ya-myin pagodas. 18 At Aebya, there are also  a group of 8 pagodas, 
known as Aebya Shitszu teik Pagodas .19 In fact, the majority of the monuments have been 
carried out by conservation and reconstruction, and so as the limited studies in this term paper, 
three famous monuments and one monastic remains have been approached.     
 
(1) Makkhaya Shwezigon 
  Makkhaya Shwezigon Ceti is contributed to the Late King Uzana of Pinya Period after 
Bagan. It is 2 furlongs far from southwest of the ruined city. 20 It is square in plan with 
projection, measuring about 163 ft 6 inches on each side. Each corner has a mythical featu re 
of Manu Siha (half human- 2 half lions figure) in stucco work. There is a form of bulbous 
dome like as Bagan Shwezigon, decorated with ornamented bands of Kittimukha frieze, and 
lotus patterns in modern art of work, resting on three terraces. To approac h these terraces, the 
stairways have been arranged in four sides. Originally around the exterior walls of the 
terraces, it might have been decorated with the glazed plaques of 550 Jatakas stories of 
Buddha, and some of them are now maintained in the Shwe Yaung Taw temple.  
  In fact, this ceti was taken to conservation work in 2008, and at present, it belongs to 
137 ft high, resting on the 200 ft in plinth height. 21 In survey study, the first terrace is found to 
be 12 ft 3 inches, and the second and third to 11 ft 7 inches on each height. The average-width 
of the stairways belongs to 10 ft 7 inches. 
 
  
                                                           
15 Wing Maung, “Ancient City of Mekayya”, p.25 
    
16 Nyant Nyunt (Kyaukse), ru©&mordkif; (History of Makkhaya), Kyaukse, Maha Gandharyon Monastery, Shwese 
Gandha Makkhaya Literature Series (2), pp.78-79 (Hereafter cited as Nyaunt Nyaunt, History of Makkhaya) 
17 According to the local sayings, at and around Makkhay there are 126 pagods in list.  
18 See Fig.4 
19 See Fig.5 
20 (a) Wing Maung, “Ancient City of Mekayya”, p.25     (b) See Fig.6(a) and (b)  
21 See Fig.7 
Yadanabon University Research Journal 2019, Vol-10, No.1                                               6 
 
(2) Wall Paintings in Shwe Yaung Taw Pagoda 
 Shweyaungtaw Pagoda is 25 feet high and can be seen two furlong away from south -
western of Nan -U monastery. About three hundred feet on the east of the pagoda a road laid 
bricks in about thirty feet wide can be seen. On each side of the road there are two lions of 
thirty feet high. In some places cement lays bare and bricks can be seen, as written in 'Record 
of Research on Makkhaya'. In the book, brick vaulted arches at the base of the temple are 
intact. At each side of the cardinal points there is each Buddha statue. The type of the temple 
seems to be of Bagan era. The temple remains in a state of good preservation except the west 
wing that is a little renovated. Some say that the temple was established by Pyu before Bagan 
era but others say that it was built in the reign of King Anawrahta.22 
 In the temple, wall paintings can be found. Most of the themes are the lives of the 
Buddha. Most of the murals were depicted in temples of Bagan and Innwa eras, so, works of 
art in Shwe Yaung Taw temple probably dates back to be Ea rly Bagan era. Just base of the 
fresco glosses are written. But syntax seems poor. 23 Composition is likely good enough.  At 
the base in one fresco of four great omen it runs, 'When our Siddhattha, Buddha -to-be leaves 
for the garden with four militaries, he will see the four great signs and ask his charioteer.' 
Words such as Buddha -to-be, garden and charioteer are misspelling. There are two strange 
things in the temple. In one corner at the central pillar at which side stands a Buddha image 
that depicts a fig ure of Bheikkhuni or a nun. At the right corner of the image in the eastern 
gate there is a figure of Bheikkhuni too. One member of the pagoda trustee explained that the 
figure was redepicted as those of other sides faded.24 
 The second thing is that a fresco partitioned with glass panes which is in the north -east 
corner of the temple. It is said to be three dimensional pictures. 25 There are human figures in 
the picture. They are in a queue like rowers paddling a boat. The artist drew three men in a 
single man or one upon another. But the viewer can see only when he scrutinizes the drawing. 
Two men are depicted in a single dimension. Such excellent skill is mysterious enough. It is 
known as three-dimensional mural. 
 Through a figure of a Bhikkhuni in the mural  painting the temple dates back to Bagan 
era. But by means of symbols on the bricks, it seems to be Pyu era. So, it may be surmised 
that Pyu established the temple firstly and then a certain king of Bagan renovated it.26 
 
(3) Shwezati Ceti 
  It is situated in the east of Aebya village. The plan of the Pagoda belongs to more or 
less square in shape, measuring about 69 ft 9 inches in south and north and 68 ft 11 inches in 
east and west. Above it is resting the circular base that look like octagonal stupa of hu ge 
massive form, and then also two terraces with corner stupas, and 28 projecting corners. It is 
also built on slightly higher platform with 4 flights of steps. One noticeable fact is that there is 
a building assumed such as religious building near Shwesati Ceti. 
 
(4) Monastery near Shwezigon Ceti 
  It is situated in the south of the Zigongyi. Being in lost of its superstructure, it has been 
identified by monastic structural remains of late Bagan or Post Bagan period. There are two 
entrance ways in each sid e of the front wall at east face and the throne was placed in the 
middle of these two entrances.27 Inside the structure, there is a central cell - which served as to 
                                                           
22 Aung Nyein Chan, Record on Field Trip at Makkhaya, 2004, pp.52-54 
23 See Fig.8 
24 Aung Nyein Chan, Record on Field Trip at Makkhaya, 2004, pp.46-50 
25 See Fig.9 
26 Aung Nyein Chan, Record on Field Trip at Makkhaya, 2004, p.52 
27 See Fig.10 
Yadanabon University Research Journal 2019, Vol-10, No.1                                               7 
 
the chief monk of the monastery. In construction technique, over the archways of the 
entrances are found to be made up of radiating arch with wedge shaped key bricks and 
wooden lintels. The bricks styles placed in the walls are identified by vertical and horizontal 
order in turn toward the upper part. In survey, this structure is measured in 110  ft long in the 
east side, and the inner cell in 22 ft 9 inches long on each side. 28 The brick sizes used in this 
structure are to be found in 1 ft 8 inches x 8 inches x 2 inches. 
 
(B) Other Material Finds 
  Other Material finds in historical context from Makkhaya old city include stone 
inscriptions, glazed plaques, wooden objects and terracotta objects. 
(a) Study on Stone Inscription 
As epigraphic evidences to Makkhaya  old city, there are two inscriptions in study. The first 
one is recovered from the renovation work at an ancient ceti near southern city wall – by 
means of removing ruined brickbats and earth from the eastern entrance hall of it. It belongs to 
15 inches h igh, 10 inches wide and 0.7 inches thick. 29 Bearing with 10 lines in inferior 
inscribed manner, it reveals the donation of oil post to the ceti, made by Panyan of Bagan in 
687 M.E (i.e. C.E 1325).30  
 In fact, the most important inscription, provided to the primary source for the 
Shwezigon Ceti and the history of Makkhaya has been found at the temple to the southwest of 
it, known as Mingyi Yannaung Gu. According to this inscription, Makkhaya Zigon was 
donated by King Uzina in C.E 1325.  It is in a large size type with the dimension of 6 ft 6 
inches high, 3 ft 1 inch wide and 6 inches thick, bearing with 21 inscribed lines. The top part 
of this inscription is also decorated with the figures of god and floral designs, usually similar 
adornment of Pinya period wo rk.31 According to this inscription, valuable information about 
Makkhaya Zigon Ceti have been known that it was donated by King Uzana in 687 M.E (i.e. 
C.E 1325) by means of encasing the original small one over the large ceti with the dimension 
of 102 ton. In fact, this inscription is the mixed inscribed one, known as Sint Htoee, because 
the later parts of this inscription show the different character of inscribed alphabets, smaller 
rather than those of the former parts, revealing to the donations of religiou s monuments 
around the Makkhaya Zigon and their necessaries in 716 M.E (i.e C.E 1354) after 29 years 
later the establishment of Makkhaya Zigon Ceti.  
  In Makkhaya ancient city, many inscriptions were found a certain inscription in a 
monastery and copied i t. It is a stone slab of one and half feet in width and half written. It is 
oval shape. 
 This inscription was about the donation of a person named “Nga Hlut Su Te”. In this 
inscription, he offered to human and deities or spirits. He can’t accept, someone i ntends to 
destroy for his donation. He was prayed about the good life to all over the life especially 
living uppermost, living in ground and living in water.  
 At the corner of north -east of Myazigon pagoda campus, there is a deteriorated stupa. 
An ancient stone tablet can be found the arched way of their stupa. Style of carving script is 
Bagan's style. Now this stupa is called "Kyauk Saya" (ausmufpm&) stupa, which was 
reconstructed by the monk of Myazigon monastry. This stupa may be the model of Myazigon 
pagoda so that the stone tablet is put the stupa. 
                                                           
28 See Fig.11 
29 Nyaunt Nyaunt, History of Makkhaya, pp. 65-66 
30 See Fig.12 
31 (a) Wing Maung (Tampawaddi), “ru©&mpnf;ckHawmfausmufpm (odkUr[kwf) Opöemrif;BuD;\b0rSwfwrf;” 
(“Makkhaya Zigotaw Inscription (or) Record of the Life of King Uzana”,  ru©&ma&Tpnf;ckHaqmif;yg;rsm; (Articles 
on Makkhaya Shwezigon), Makkhaya, Shweyaungtaw Monastery, 2009, p. 50 
   (b) See Fig.13 
Yadanabon University Research Journal 2019, Vol-10, No.1                                               8 
 
 The votive tablet discovered inside the stupa is similar to tablet of Bagan period. The 
script at the base of the tablet also painted that it is from the time of Bagan dynasty. People 
had probably settled down at this place before Bagan period. So it is possible that the law suits 
on the own ship of the farms and construction religious structures at Makkhaya.32 
 One of the stone tablets which were carved with ancient Mon script can be found at 
Kyauk Saya. Acc ording to this inscription Mon people probably settled down at Makkhaya. 
The names of the villages of "Taline Yama" (wvdkif;&mr) and "Mhon Kha Yaing" 
(rkefc½kdif) in this region were found in the inscription. 
 Little stone inscription near Phayahla (bk&m;v S) Pagoda had been studied. This 
inscription is a record that Monk U Pa Li Maha Htay had renovated temple at his birth place. 
Scripts are carved on both sides of the tablet. The old script carved previously becomes 
fainted and they were carved again to mak e them clear and some more new script was also 
added. Each side has fifteen lines of Myanmar scripts which are from 800 years ago. It was 
found that the scripts are very clear and they are historical heritage, cultural heritage and 
literature.33 
 
(b) Glazed Plaques 
  Glazed plaques found at Makkhaya old city are preserved in Shwe Yaung Taw 
Templs. Nearly all of these plaques were removed from Makkhaya Zigongyi Ceti. Although 
some of the plaques are broken into pieces but considerable numbers are in a good co ndition. 
All glazed plaques are depicted the lives of the Buddha from 550 Jatakas stories.34 Each of 
plaque consists of gloss of concerned episode. In fact, the stylistic illustrations on them show 
in manner of those found at Shwezigon, Dhammarazaka and Min galar Cetis from Bagan. 
Among these plaques, survey and rubbings works are studied in 6 plaques such as of Kassapa 
Mand Jataka, S lavangarja Jataka, Va upatha Jataka, Saku aJataka, Kapota 
Jataka, and Valhakasa Jataka.35Average dimension of these plaques is found to be 8 inches 
to 10 inches on each side.     
 
(c) Wooden objects and Terracotta objects 
  Wooden objects recorded in Makkhaya are the sculptural objects in the figures of 
Buddha images and Nagas heads. The work of art features on these figures reveals elaborate 
depiction of long tongues and crest.36 
The marks of the bricks are numeric, animal figures, sole of human and paw of animal and 
floral scroll. When numerical bricks are studied, there are many characteristi cs. Why are some 
bricks incised with such numeric? 
As terracotta objects, considerable numbers of votive tablets, pottery of libation jars and 
water-dippers, and clay pipes which were recovered from Makkhaya old city are also 
preserved at Shwe Yaung Taw Te mple.37 Indeed, considerable numbers of terracotta objects 
of the fragmented remains of libation jars have been recovered in the field survey in Aebya 
villages.38 
 
(d) Figure Marked Brick from Makkhaya 
                                                           
32 Aung Nyein Chan, Record on Field Trip at Makkhaya, 2004, pp. 58-59 
33 Aung Nyein Chan, Record on Field Trip at Makkhaya, 2004, pp.96-97 
34 See Fig.14 
35 See Fig.15 
36 See Fig.16 
37 See Fig.17 (a) and (b) 
38 See Fig.18(a) , (b) and (c) 
Yadanabon University Research Journal 2019, Vol-10, No.1                                               9 
 
  The expedition team got Shweyaungtaw  Pagoda at west side there remains a row of 
bricks. Some bricks have marks and they are studied. The marks of the bricks are numeric, 
animal figures, sole of human and paw of animal and floral scroll. When numerical bricks are 
studied, there are many characteristics. Why are some bricks incised with such numeric? 
 These are not vague to be scratches but they are digits indeed. But it is difficult enough 
to distinguish what digits they are. Among such numbers they are oval, crescent, centre -dotted 
oval and 'la' shape. But the bricks belonged to Pyu era and it seems to be a conception of Pyu. 
It is surmised to be the secret numbers used by the architects of Shwe Yaung Taw pagoda. But 
it seems to be the number of workers or donors. As digits mean number, they m ay be brick 
donors or relics of the Buddha. 
 On the bricks of fauna, there are lion, tiger and seeming elephant. It is supposed that these 
animals would exorcise evil forces and prevent from disasters and they are probably the guardians 
of the pagoda or secret guardians. 
 It is awesome that there are soles and paws on bricks. Why are the marks made? The 
sole mark on the brick is not different from that of human today. So, if the brick seems to be 
of Pyu era, the shape of Pyu man does not differ from that of modern man. The same goes true 
for Bagan bricks. Some authors write that when someone wants to see Pyu, the ancestor of 
Bamar, he could look at his image in the mirror. It is supposed to be the soles of the brick -
maker or the donor of the pagoda. 
 The paws of animals are hoofs of buffalo, cow and horse and claw feet of tiger, dog 
and cat. It can be conjectured that ancient men offered the meats of such animals to the 
pagoda as offerings. But as wild beasts haunted there and as an evidence the paws are inci sed 
on bricks. 
 Bricks of floral designs likely reveal artistic work, decoration and durability. As suck 
queer bricks are found in the compound of the pagoda it is likely archaic. If the date is 
supposed to be early Stone Age, Shweyaungtaw pagoda seems to be older than Bagan era. 
 
Conclusion 
  Although Makkhaya is generally known as to the historical site of Bagan and Post 
Bagan Period, archaeological culture on this site lights since in Pre Bagan  Context from even 
Neolithic phase of Prehistoric culture. In comprehensive study on the material remains from 
this site, the cultural validity of it can be pointed out as follows: 
(1)  The informative and surface finds of stone artifacts and flakes at and aro und 
Makkhaya prove to that of in Neolithic site, possibly of workshop site in character. It is also 
provided by the fact that as strategic position, Makkhaya area is located on the river bank of 
Myit Nge river, along with the other evidenced Neolithic site s of Shwesaryan, Taunggaing, 
and even Taungthaman at its end, so formed as one domain in the cultural catchment cluster in 
Myit Nge Valley of late Stone Age culture in archaeological landscapes of Myanmar. 
(2) After the Stone Age as Metal Age cultural context,  though on faint manner in 
exposures of direct evidences for it, some considerable numbers of bronze artifacts have been 
reported in its environs. In fact, in the ancient environmental context, the region of Makkhaya 
is situated in the close orientation to the clearly Metal Age cultural sites of Samon Velley. It is 
indicated that the Metal Age culture has not appeared in this area. 
(3) As regard to the Pyu culture from this site, traditional accounts mentioned that this 
area was of early Pyu settlement. Indeed,  reliable evidences come from the remains of Pyu 
burial urn and skeletal remains through out of both informative finds and archaeological 
excavation. This fact shows that Makkhaya related to Pyu culture.  
(4) Indeed, the rich sources of evidences from this sit e are of historical context revealing 
Bagan Period and Post Bagan periods of Pinya, Innwa, Nyaungyan and Konbaung. Very 
considerable numbers of Buddhist religious structures and antiquities of concerned periods 
Yadanabon University Research Journal 2019, Vol-10, No.1                                               10 
 
cover at and around the site. So, although th e important status in urbanized character is lost in 
these days, ancient Makkhaya might have been in its existence with flourished settlement 
pattern in his heydays.  
In fact, to the more interpretation on the validity of its cultural levels, the further t horough 
study and the survivals of its archaeological remains in preservation and conservation work is 
essential to Makkhaya. 
 
 
  
Yadanabon University Research Journal 2019, Vol-10, No.1                                               11 
 
Reference 
Aung Nyein Chan              ru©&modkUokawoec&D;rSwfwrf; (Record on Field Trip at 
Makkhaya), Yangon, Sarpay Beikman Press, 2994 
Kusala Bhiwansa, Ashin ru©&m0Ho (History of Makkhaya ) , Yangon, Shwe Say 
Gandar Press, 2006 
Luce, Gordon H. Old Burma Early Bagan , Vol. I, New York, 
J.J.Augustin Publisher, Locust Valley, 1969 
Nyant Nyunt (Kyaukse) ru©&mordkif; (History of Makkhaya), Kyaukse, Maha 
Gandharyon Monastery, Shwese Gandha Makkhaya 
Literature Series (2) 
Than Tun, Dr acwfa[mif;jrefrm&mZ0if? jrefrm&mZ0ifpmwrf;trSwf  wpf 
(Ancient Myanmar History: Studies in Myanmar 
History Number One ), 3rd ed., Yangon, Innwa  
Publishing House, 2002 
WingMaung, (Tampawaddi) “Ancient City of Mekayya on the Kyaukse Plains”, 
Enchanting Myanmar, Vol. 6, No. 3, July -September, 
2007 
 