Mindfulness (2024) 15:2415–2427
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-024-02434-2
ORIGINAL PAPER
Ethics, Mindfulness, and Consciousness: A Study of Their Relation
in Early Buddhism
Eviatar Shulman1
Accepted: 13 August 2024 / Published online: 1 October 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Scholarly discussions of mindfulness normally treat the term as reflecting a specific, independent, psychological function.
Here, mindfulness is placed within a broader understanding of the Buddhist cultivation of consciousness, with special atten-
tion to the ethical aspects of mindfulness. Focusing on sources from early Buddhism, the article demonstrates how ethics
was thought to have a positive, indeed a necessary, effect on a successful practice of mindfulness. The article moves beyond
the Sati-paṭṭhāna-sutta (“The Foundations of Mindfulness”), which has been emphasized in scholarship, to related texts in
the Middle Length Discourses (Majjhima-Nikāya) and beyond them to other Pāli sources. Here, we learn that “You should
cultivate the four applications of mindfulness based on ethics, established in ethics.” While the emphasis on ethics in these
sources reminds us of the conceptual dimensions of mindfulness, it also allows scholars to see both ethics and mindfulness
as partaking in the broader attempt to enrich consciousness and make it healthier, softer, and more lucid. Buddhist practice
works to change the structures of subjectivity and make them more conducive to liberation, in whatever way it may be defined.
Thus, the Buddhist contemplative tradition can be seen to participate in an effort to change the quality of consciousness,
rather than being a mere attempt to reach an annihilation of “suffering.” These considerations allow us to see mindfulness
as a form of ethical activity in itself.
Keywords Consciousness · Buddhist contemplative tradition · Ethics and mindfulness · Early Buddhist philosophy ·
Buddhist meditation
Mindfulness can mean many things, both in the contempo- Dreyfus, 2011a; Gethin, 2011; Shulman, 2010). Contempo-
rary Western context and in the extensive variety of histori- rary discussions, especially ones oriented more toward psy-
cal Buddhist traditions. No one definition prevails, perhaps chological and experimental disciplines, also incline to see
an attestation to the inherent richness of the practice and mindfulness as a particular mental function that performs
to its potential to help people grow and heal. In the mod- specific tasks in the mind (Stanley, 2015, p. 95). While in
ern West, mindfulness more commonly refers to a mode of traditional Buddhist contexts mindfulness is also understood
attentive awareness that relates to the present contents of as a mental process or method of observation, it cannot be
experience in a calm, focused, and accepting way; its quality divorced and abstracted from the thick webs of mental con-
of observation is referred to as non-judgmental and non- ditioning in which it is couched. These have a markedly ethi-
conceptual (Bishop et al., 2004; Grossman et. al., 2004; cal component, and an important aspect of mindfulness prac-
Kabat-Zinn, 1990, 2011). In traditional Buddhist contexts tice is the way it enhances and develops the ethical mind.
that coined the term, including in the canonical texts of A central aim of the present contribution is to raise
early Buddhism, the focused attention of mindfulness more attention to the potentials of ethical actions and attitudes
commonly includes a conceptual and judgmental, or at least within practices of mindfulness. This will be done by
an evaluative, direction of one’s observation (Bodhi, 2011; pointing to the role of ethics in early Buddhist mindful-
ness practice, where they are understood not only as neces-
* sary conditions for a successful mindfulness practice, but
Eviatar Shulman
Eviatar.shulman@mail.huji.ac.il as essential to that very practice itself. In an important
sense, mindfulness can be seen as a moral practice, which
1 Dept. of Comparative Religion, Dept. of Asian Studies, The participates in the Buddhist effort to ripen consciousness
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Vol.:(0123456789)

2 416 Mindfulness (2024) 15:2415–2427
and make it more disposed toward well-being and insight. Whittingham; 2010; Lewis & Rozelle, 2016; Monteiro,
Mindfulness calibrates the mind to be better attuned to 2015; Murphy, 2016; Valerio, 2016; Wilson, 2014), and
Buddhist notions of truth, which themselves can be seen as on the problem of dissociating mindfulness practice from
the theoretical conceptualization, or a finer resolution, of its ethical background (Stanley, 2015). Here, the flexibility
Buddhist ethical attitudes and instructions: the philosophi- of mindfulness is highlighted, coupled with an emphasis
cal positions of impermanence, suffering, and selflessness on the qualitative nature of consciousness, which mind-
(anicca, dukkha, anatta) resonate the practices of Buddhist fulness can enrich and enhance. This can allow modern
morality and their application in advanced meditation. An approaches to benefit from the Buddhist understanding of
ethical mind creates the conditions not only for concen- mindfulness in new ways, which may have been prevented
trated meditation, but also for an internalization of such in its secularized and modernized framework (McMahan,
ideas (Shulman, 2014). There have been many studies that 2008, 2017; Wilson, 2014).
acknowledge the importance of the relation between the
cultivation of ethics and mindfulness in both traditional
Mindfulness Within Consciousness
Buddhist and modern contexts (e.g. a variety of articles
in the collections of Monteiro et al., 2017; Stanley et al.,
2018). The present discussion moves beyond these in Take the following text from the Saṃyutta-nikāya:
seeing mindfulness as a form of ethical activity in itself,
Monks, there are these five defilements of gold that
which is couched within an expanded effort to enrich the
when the gold is afflicted by them, it is not soft, not
very nature of consciousness and subjectivity.
pliable, not shining, stiff, not fully conducive to
A key contention of this discussion is that in order to
work. Which five? Iron, monks, is a defilement of
understand the positive impact of ethics on mindfulness,
gold that when the gold is afflicted by it, the gold is
mindfulness itself must be placed within a broader con-
not soft, not pliable, not shining, stiff, not fully con-
text of thought about consciousness. In discussions of
ducive to work. Copper… tin… lead… silver, monks,
mindfulness in academic circles, whether ones directed
is a defilement of gold that when the gold is afflicted
more toward psychological or Buddhist sources, it is taken
by it, the gold is not soft, not pliable, not shining,
mainly as a specified internal state that has a definite role
stiff, not fully conducive to work.
in managing human mental life — hence the concern with
In the very same way, monks, there are these five
definition (e.g., Bishop et al., 2004), which would thereby
defilements of consciousness (citta) that when con-
also allow the term to be studied quantitatively, and ide-
sciousness is afflicted by them, consciousness is
ally situated in the brain (Thompson, 2017). However, it is
not soft, not pliable, not shining, stiff, and does not
perhaps better to take mindfulness as a potential, a quality
enter concentration fully toward the destruction of
of attentiveness, a capacity that can be developed, so that
the inflows. Which five? Sensual desire… hostil-
when it is activated it can act to support and deepen the
ity… sloth and torpor… restlessness and remorse…
structures of subjectivity, the foundations in which experi-
doubt is a defilement of consciousness that when
ence takes shape. While Buddhist notions of consciousness
consciousness is afflicted by it, consciousness is
can easily be reduced to mechanical frameworks (Waldron,
not soft, not pliable, not shining, stiff, and does not
2017), not only in modern scholarship but also in histori-
enter concentration fully toward the destruction of
cal Buddhist contexts in Asia, they allow for a more flex-
the inflows.
ible and expansive understanding of the mental, one that is
pañcime bhikkhave jātarūpassa upakkilesā yehi
recalcitrantly qualitative and subjective, so that conscious-
upakkilesehi upakkliṭṭhaṃ jātarūpaṃ na ceva
ness can be seen as a, or the, basic quality of experience.
mudu hoti na ca kammaniyaṃ na ca pabhassaraṃ
Within such an understanding of consciousness, mindful-
pabhaṅgu ca na ca sammā upeti kammāya. katame
ness is a technique used within consciousness in order to
pañca? ayo… lohaṃ… tipu… sīsaṃ… sajjhu bhik-
develop it.
khave jātarūpassa upakkileso yena upakkilesena
For some, the diversity in the potential interpretations
upakiliṭṭhaṃ jātarūpaṃ na ceva mudu hoti na ca
of mindfulness may be a source of perplexity. Scholars
kammaniyaṃ na ca pabbhasaraṃ pabhaṅgu ca na
have felt that a clearer definition of the term must be
ca sammā upeti kammāya.
reached (Malinowski, 2008; Van Dam et al., 2018), and
evameva kho, bhikkhave, pañcime cittassa
that there are too many definitions available (Purser &
upakkilesā, yehi upakkilesehi upakkiliṭṭhaṃ
Milillo, 2015). Questions on the relation between mod-
cittaṃ na ceva mudu hoti na ca kammaniyaṃ,
ern and traditional Buddhist understandings of the term
na ca pabhassaraṃ pabhaṅgu ca, na ca sammā
have been raised time and again (Dreyfus, 2011a; Dunne,
samādhiyati āsavānaṃ khayāya. katame pañca?
2011; Husgafvel, 2016; Kabat-Zinn, 2011; Kang &

Mindfulness (2024) 15:2415–2427 2417
kāmacchando… [byāpādo… thīnamiddhaṃ… consciousness. This is a subtle point that may be difficult
uddhaccakukkuccaṃ… vicikicchā] cittassa upa- to appreciate within current scientific perplexity about
kkileso yena upakkilesena upakiliṭṭhaṃ cittaṃ consciousness, for which, at best, the mind performs speci-
na ceva mudu hoti na ca kammaniyaṃ na ca fied functions in the service of the biological organism.
pabbhasaraṃ pabhaṅgu ca na ca sammā samādhiyati Yet in the Indian and Buddhist religious contexts, prac-
āsavānaṃ khayāya. (SN V.92; VRI V.214) tices of attention would be seen to derive from conscious-
ness, which itself is considered as the basic condition
The five defilements (upakkilesa) of consciousnes
of existence. The phenomenological logic of the Indian
(citta) listed here are more often referred to as the obstruc-
approach may be more intuitive than it seems at first —
tions (nīvaraṇa) of sensual desire (kāmacchanda), hostility
experience is the most basic, phenomenologically real,
(byāpāda), sloth and torpor (thinamiddha), restlessness
fact of human life. Within it, everything that exists relies
and remorse (uddhaccakukkucca), and doubt (vicikicchā).
on subjective presentation and is given within the human
In some cases, removing these obstructions is the condi-
immediate mode of knowing self and world. Within this
tion for a successful mindfulness practice, as in the five
picture, the mental is the gateway to the physical, rather
discourses that follow the one just quoted (most clearly in
than vice versa.
the Āvaraṇa-nīvaraṇa-sutta at SN V.94–96; VRI V.219),
In Indian philosophical traditions, there is a strong incli-
which combine to say that the seven limbs of enlighten-
nation to see consciousness as the most basic, indeed the
ment (bojjhaṅgā) are “conducive to the realization of
only stable, fact about human experience. The Bhagavad-
the fruit of liberation through knowledge” (vijjā-vimutti-
gītā recommends that practitioners differentiate between
phala-sacchikiriyāya saṃvattanti), so long as they are not
the existent and the non-existent, taking the first to be the
characterized by these same obstructions. The first of the
hard and stable reality of conscious selfhood, and the sec-
seven limbs is mindfulness, which in this scheme leads to
ond as the ephemeral facts of the senses, objectivity, and
qualities associated with deep meditative experience in
materiality (verse 2.15; see elaborate discussion of text and
jhāna (Arbel, 2017, ch. 4, Gethin, 2001, ch. 5; Shulman,
commentary in Ram-Prasad, 2013). Such understandings
2014, ch. 3), such as pīti (rapture), samādhi (concentra-
reflect a powerful metaphysical framework, first articu-
tion), and upekkhā (equanimity). More commonly, as in
lated in the Upaniṣads (Olivelle, 1998), which discuss the
the gradual scheme of the path (anupubbisikkhā, e.g., in
dependency of the material world on subjective fact of
the Sāmaññaphala-sutta at DN I.70–72), the practice of
knowing, and relate creation stories on the emergence of
mindfulness precedes the effort to deal with these same
physicality and objectivity from the primordial Self (as in
obstructions. In this sequence, the obstructions appear as
Bṛhādāraṇyaka-upaniṣad 1.4, Chāndogya-upaniṣad 6, and
subjective stances or attitudes that must be subdued in
Aitareya-upaniṣad 1). These perspectives are developed in
order to enter the samādhi meditative states of jhāna (see
compelling ways by different Indian schools, most distinctly
below); as the text quoted says, so long as they exist —
in Advaita Vedānta non-dualism (Potter, 2014), with the
“consciousness does not enter concentration fully toward
Sāmkhya system providing a related formulation within a
the destruction of the inflows.” In the gradual sequence,
dualistic framework (Larson, 1979).
one deals with the obstructions immediately after prac-
Buddhism debated the Upaniṣadic notion of an abso-
ticing mindfulness and awareness (sati-sampajañña,
lute Self (Collins, 1982; Gombrich, 1996, ch. 1; Shulman,
addressed through the formula on awareness of body-
2014, ch. 2; although see Bhattacarya, 2015) and denied an
postures), suggesting the mindfulness and the practices
ontological basis for reality in eternal or cosmic conscious-
to which it is related cleanse the mind of impurities that
ness, yet it nonetheless developed its ideas within this intel-
remain so that samādhi can ensue.
lectual climate. Buddhism thus prioritizes consciousness and
For the context of the present discussion, it is important
subjective experience in many strands of its psychological
to see how this last text understands consciousness and the
and philosophical analyses, while adopting its own, more
role of Buddhist practice in developing it. Here, we learn,
pragmatic and empirical approach. For Buddhist philosophy,
consciousness has textures, such as softness, lightness, or
consciousness has no essence; it is not a Self. Nevertheless,
brightness; consciousness can be stiff and rigid or condu-
it remains the fundamental condition for, or feature of, any
cive to understanding. Consciousness is not a general or
life event, the sine qua non of experience. Buddhism thus
abstract idea, but a living, changing, and conditioned locus
developed a powerful interest in the subjective structures and
of mental life that possesses different qualities, which can
mental conditioning of experience, accepting that subjectiv-
be cultivated for its liberating effect.
ity is the governing factor that conditions human life and
Within this Buddhist context, mindfulness can be
provides the gateway to most forms of objectivity. As Sonam
understood as a set of techniques for paying attention,
Kachru (2021) insightfully framed this position, Bud-
which are deliberately used to alter, deepen, and enhance
dhism is interested in the different ways of “being minded,”

2 418 Mindfulness (2024) 15:2415–2427
speaking of humans as “cosmological beings,” who are born These central Abhidhamma treatises highlight the under-
into a mind and world that are completely intertwined and standing that in Buddhism, consciousness is not one, self-
relationally defined and experienced. Reality is, for certain evident thing, but a variegated reality, deeply immersed in
forms of Buddhism, this same mental appearance. the changing webs of conditioned human action. Conscious-
A convenient example for the Buddhist approach could ness is never abstract, without texture, quality, and moral
be the mature and influential eleventh century introduc- inclination. It determines the next moment, and the one after,
tory manual to Abhidhamma — advanced Buddhist phi- again and again, through its inner structures, which possess
losophy, the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha (Bodhi, 2000; Heim, moral value. As Daniel Stuart (2020: p. 284) says in another
2022; Olendzki, 2011; Wijeratne & Gethin 2007). In its Buddhist philosophical context: “Consciousness is no longer
first verse, this text defines four ultimately real elements a simple element of human experience, standing separate
of existence. Of these, the first is consciousness (citta), from sense experience and only capable of cognizing feel-
which is spelled out in the first chapter of the work as a ings/sensations. It is a complex of relational cognitions,
list of no fewer than 89 types or states (or 121, depending dynamically intertwined with and engaged in filtering the
on the counting of jhānas). Thus, any moment of exist- data of sense experience.” Thus, the Buddhist idea is not to
ence is defined as an event of consciousness, to which are establish consciousness as a clear, unchanging, unitary fact,
tied relevant accompanying mental factors (cetasika), with yet at the same time it does see consciousness(es) as the
52 such cetasikas defined in the second chapter. The next defining feature of reality, the central fact of existence and
three chapters then analyze diverse patterns of interac- experience. Here, I would argue that the attempts to employ
tion between consciousness(es) and its (or their) related Buddhist resources to define a minimal form of conscious-
factors, one of which is sati, mindfulness, which accom- ness as the stable point of perspective, a so-called minimal-
panies certain positive states of mind. Matter (rūpa), the self (Zahavi 2011, followed by Dreyfus, 2011b; Thompson,
third fundamental category of existence, is discussed in 2011; and others), do not suit the philosophy of the early
Chapter 6, and includes both material elements and sense Buddhist tradition (Krueger, 2011). For this context, Bud-
experience. However, matter too is explained to arise from dhists would agree with Dennett’s (1991) warning against
karma, here defined as the conscious quality of intention “Cartesian materialism”: there is no permanent subject who
or volition (cetanā), as well as from consciousness itself, is cognizant of “the theatre of experience.” Nevertheless,
and specifically from 75 states of consciousness described as Dennett too realizes, in a manner that is becoming the
in the first chapter, while nutriment (āhāra) and heat or norm in philosophy of mind (e.g., Koch 2012; Nagel, 1974),
climate (utu) are also causes of matter. This chapter ends experience is a fundamental feature of life.
with a succinct reference to the fourth and final category The early Buddhist discourses, as these are preserved in
of existent — nibbāna (nirvāṇa). the Pāli nikāyas, offer their own formulations for the deter-
This is not the place to enter the intricate analyses of minative powers of consciousness and ethics, even if they
the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha or observe how it synthesizes do not necessarily argue this point straightforwardly. An
and revises earlier canonical sources, texts that all betray a important statement is provided by the seminal formulation
deep interest in the subjective determination of experience on the 12 links of dependent-origination (Shulman 2008).
and in providing a meticulous definition for any moment of This theory explains, among other things, how conscious-
consciousness, the qualities it harbors, and the conditioning ness (viññāṇā) is conditioned by inclinations that were cre-
that shapes it. We should, however, mention one of the key ated through previous actions (saṅkhāra), then to condition
ideas of the Dhammasaṅgaṇī, the first Abhidhamma trea- perceptual experience, desire, and attachment, which then
tise that provides the structure for Theravāda Abhidhamma, propel the process of rebirth. “Dependent on mental con-
which defines any moment, or “arising of consciousness” structions – consciousness (arises)” (saṅkhāra-paccayā
(cittuppāda), as possessing a positive (kusala), negative viññāṇaṃ; SN II.1), etc., as is stated in the paradigmatic
(akusala), or undefined (abyākata) moral quality. These formulation of this teaching at the opening of the second
moral qualities are embedded within any mental factor that book of the Saṃyutta-nikāya, then to be repeated time and
characterizes each conscious state, thereby serving as the again. Here, we see that subjective inclinations determine
most important determining factor for the flow of experi- perceptual, conative, emotional, and cognitive aspects of
ence. A central concern of this Buddhist analytical project experience, while also impacting the realities into which
becomes the identification of the finely tuned manner in humans are born.
which any phenomenon of experience, and any conscious Another informative example for the primacy of con-
state, possesses such a conditioning, ethical quality. With sciousness in the early tradition is the definition of “the
this, the Dhammasaṅgaṇī provides a mature Buddhist under- world” (loka), or of “everything” (sabbaṃ), as consisting of
standing that sees life as deeply concerned with the ethical the five aggregates (the physical and mental features of expe-
quality of consciousness. rience) or the six senses and their perceptual objects, in texts

Mindfulness (2024) 15:2415–2427 2419
like the Sabba-sutta (SN IV.15; VRI IV.23) or the Samiddhi- translations for Pāli or Sanskrit terms that in English are ren-
sutta (SN IV.39; VRI IV.68). “The world” proves to be equal dered as consciousness, attention, awareness, perception,
to the structures of subjective experience (Gethin, 1986; mind, understanding, knowledge, or mindfulness are just as
Harvey 1995, ch. 8). slippery as their counterparts in other languages, in which they
The following, classic verses from the Dhammapada are all used to circularly define each other. Here, it is more
demonstrate the conditioning force of consciousness: important to see the overall picture, according to which sub-
jectivity is the basic condition of human life, which Buddhist
36. It is so difficult to see, so fine, flying about as it
practice is designed to cultivate and enhance.
pleases;
Another important concept that emphasizes the primacy of
the wise man should guard his consciousness –
mind and the power of ethics in determining mental life is the
a protected consciousness leads to pleasure.
doctrine of karma, to which we now turn.
sududdasaṃ sunipuṇaṃ yathākāmanipātinaṃ;
cittaṃ rakketha medhavī, cittaṃ guttaṃ sukhāvahaṃ.
37. It goes far, alone, bodyless, hidden deep inside; Karma
those who will control their consciousness
will be freed from the bonds of Māra.
The texts that have been quoted suggest that for Buddhism,
dūraṅgamaṃ ekacaraṃ asarīraṃ guhāsayaṃ;
consciousness shapes human life: the structures of con-
ye cittaṃ saṃyamessanti mokkhanti mārabhandhanā.
sciousness and of subjectivity, the ways of being-minded,
43. A mother or father cannot do this for anyone,
are responsible not solely for the what people experience,
nor can any other relatives –
but for the realities in which they find themselves. Here it
a well-directed consciousness
is worth recalling that the conditioning of experience by
will take one to the best.
action and by the patterns of subjectivity refers also to the
na taṃ matā pitā kayirā aññe vāpi ca ñātakā;
meaning of karma — anything a person does, feels, thinks,
sammāpaṇihitaṃ cittaṃ seyyaso naṃ tato kare.
or intends influences the way she or he exists in the world.
Compare these last verses, which employ the concept of Karma is often thought of as a metaphysical doctrine
citta, translated here as consciousness, to the Dhammapada’s regarding rebirth and other types of retribution that exceed
famous opening verses: empirical observation. At the same time, it has a pragmatic
side, which is grounded in the understanding that life is
1.1,2All events are preceded by mind, made be mind,
generated through the habituated patterns of mental life.
mind is their chief.
When, for example, a person is less inclined to anger, she
If one speaks or acts with a defiled mind,
(or he) will have more flexibility when dealing with diffi-
suffering will pursue him,
cult situations, will conduct her body and heart in a health-
like the wheel following the foot of the bull.
ier manner, and will shape situations that are more benefi-
All events are preceded by mind, made be mind, mind
cial to her and to her environment. Furthermore, people
is their chief.
around her will appreciate this quality, respect her, and
If one speaks or acts with a bright mind,
be favorably disposed toward her. This is why the ethical
joy will pursue him,
mind is the best predictor of human health and prosperity.
like one’s persistent shade.
In this context of karma and the Buddhist understanding
manopubbaṅgamā dhammā manoseṭṭhā manomayā,
of consciousness, it should be emphasized that the notion of
manasā ce paduṭṭhean bhāsati vā karoti vā,
experience does not refer only to subjective perception, but
tato naṃ dukkham anveti, cakkaṃ’va vahato padaṃ.
also, at the very least, to the way objective content is appropri-
manopubbaṅgamā dhamma manoseṭṭhā manomayā,
ated and presented in consciousness. Within this view, reality
manasā ce pasannena bhāsati vā karoti vā,
is at least pragmatically and epistemically, and in some places
tato naṃ sukkham anveti, chāyā’va anapātinī.
ontologically and metaphysically, placed within the mental,
We learn that experience follows upon its mental condi- responsive to a synergic movement between inner and outer
tioning, it is produced by the mind, which generates joy or conditions and contents, which are themselves subjectively
pain, depending on its moral quality. Here we can see how in determined and presented. Within the present discussion, the
speaking of consciousness, we are using slippery terms — as question of how this notion of karma relates to rebirth, or how
opposed to the previous verses that focused on “conscious- powerful is the subjective impact on external objects, can be
ness” (citta), the last ones employ the concept of “mind” left aside. Yet the idea that experience is thickly determined by
(manas), while the doctrine of dependent-origination pre- subjective presentation and appropriation, which has at least
ferred viññāṇa, a term that can mean consciousness, but can some degree of influence on the external world, is central to
also be seen to relate to cognition or perception. Indeed, the the Buddhist effort of mental cultivation.

2 420 Mindfulness (2024) 15:2415–2427
Although such understandings move away from mod- of consciousness may be no less compelling. Suffering is
ernized presentations of Buddhist doctrine, it is worth not a straightforward category, and its employment in early
recalling the manner in which these understandings of Buddhist texts does not necessarily correspond to the way
karma are expressed in the classic articulations of Bud- it is understood by modern, individual, post-enlightenment
dhist folklore found in the tales on the Buddha’s previ- subjects. Modernized Buddhism has catered to contempo-
ous lives (Jātaka; Appleton, 2010; Shulman, 2018), a key rary sensitivities by suggesting that the suffering that trou-
mode of cultural understanding in Theravāda societies for bled the early Buddhists is purely psychological. Yet the
millennia. These tales are helpful in understanding the early Buddhist understanding of suffering related more to the
Buddhist notion of consciousness, and the way its tex- anxieties facing endless rebirth and to being placed “within
tures are conditioned through thought and action, thereby the jaws of death” (as in Sutta-nipāta 776, maccu-mukhe)
highlighting the value of ethical cultivation. Such stories and to concerns in face of the afterlife. This is implied by
work under the assumption that the traces of one’s actions the definition of suffering in the first noble truth — “birth
that are preserved within conscious inclinations are carried is suffering, old age is also suffering, sickness is also suf-
by people across lives; indeed, this is the only thing they fering, death is also suffering, etc.” (jāti’pi dukkhā jarā’pi
are thought to take with them from this life. The Buddha dukkhā vyādhi’pi dukkhā maraṇaṃ’pi dukkhaṃ; SN V.421;
is the being who grew aware of this fact, and made use of VRI V.1081). Moreover, the Buddha (as he is presented in
the laws of karma in order to produce, over vast expanses the texts) could ask his students — “and which is the suf-
of time, an enlightened consciousness. fering for the understanding of which one lives the holy life
The tales of the Buddha’s previous births ostensibly under the ascetic Gotama?” (katamaṃ pana taṃ dukkhaṃ
relate the marvelous acts he produced in the distant past, yassa pariññāya samaṇe gotame brahmacariyaṃ vussatīti,
even when he was born as an animal. Once, he was born SN IV.51; VRI IV.81). The very framing of the question
as a magnificent white elephant, who refused the role of suggests that the answer is not self-evident, and the fact
the prize royal elephant until the mahouts of the palace that different answers are provided for this type of question
guaranteed the safety and welfare of his blind mother who speaks for itself.
remained behind in the forest (Jātaka 455). In another Indeed, the Buddha’s answer here is painfully differ-
rebirth as an elephant, while knowing that his efforts for ent than what contemporary students of Buddhism would
the sake of others are the only ones that will expand his accept:
consciousness to the state of an all-knowing Buddha, the
sight (or – the eye) is suffering; for the understand-
bodhisatta, the Buddha-to-be, sawed off his own huge,
ing of this one lives the holy life under the ascetic
glorious tusks in order to help the hunter who shot him
Gotama. Forms are suffering… eye-consciousness is
complete his mission successfully (Jātaka 514). Once, as
suffering… eye-contact is suffering… any feeling that
a monkey, he climbed down a deep precipice in order to
arises based on eye contact, whether pleasurable, pain-
save a lost and hopeless traveler, then carrying him back
ful or neither, is suffering… hearing (or - the ear)…
up on his back and showing him the way home, even after
smell (or - the nose)… taste (or - the tongue)… touch
the latter tried to kill and eat him (Jātaka 516). In another
(or- the body)… the mind (or – thought)...
lifetime, as a golden deer-king, he offered his own life in
cakkhu kho, āvuso, dukkhaṃ, tassa pariññāya
place of the pregnant doe whose turn it was to become
bhagavati brahmacariyaṃ vussati. rūpā…
the king’s lunch of game (Jātaka 12). Such perseverance,
cakkhuviññāṇaṃ… cakkhusamphassaṃ… yampidaṃ
patience, and care were cultivated by the bodhisatta for
cakkhusamphassapaccayā uppajjati vedayitaṃ
many lifetimes, thereby slowly but surely creating the state
sukhaṃ vā dukkhaṃ vā adukkhamasukhaṃ vā tampi
of mind and heart that would later allow him to forsake
dukkhaṃ. tassa pariññāya bhagavati brahmacariyaṃ
desire and achieve insight. These stories, familiar to Bud-
vussati… sotaṃ…ghāṇaṃ…jihvā…kayo… mano…
dhists from the pictures or carvings on the walls of tem-
(SN IV.51; VRI IV.81).
ples (Brown, 1997), from public festivals and performances
(Spencer, 1966; Bowie, 2017), or from their central role To think that any moment of sight or hearing, any pos-
in traditional storytelling (Obeyesekere, 1991; Hallisey & sible sensory experience, is suffering, suggests that the
Hansen, 1996), present the Bodhisattva’s path to awakening annihilation of suffering is not a simple end we can eas-
as a ripening of his ethical mind. ily penetrate. In a corresponding statement, the Buddha
Buddhism is often thought of as a concentrated effort responds to the question “which is suffering?” (katamaṃ nu
to lead to the end of suffering, and there are many state- kho dukkhaṃ) by listing the five aggregates, meaning that
ments in the texts that would support such an interpreta- any experience is suffering by definition (SN III.196; VRI
tion. However, seen in this light, the idea of Buddhism as an III.174). What would the annihilation of all these experi-
effort toward the maturation, cultivation, and development ences actually mean?

Mindfulness (2024) 15:2415–2427 2421
Rather than thinking of Buddhist practice necessarily The list of practices in the Sati-paṭṭhāna is not definitive,
as an effort to alleviate suffering, it may be fruitful to con- and when compared to parallel versions of this text that sur-
template it as an effort toward the maturation of conscious- vive in other languages, some elements are added and others
ness, as the dedicated and sustained attempt to cultivate lost (Kuan, 2008; Anālayo 2011). This points to the dynamic
and develop the basic, natural conditions of experience. nature of the practice and demonstrates that mindfulness
For Buddhist thinkers, a development of this sort will affect is a flexible category, spanning a diversity of both concep-
conditions in the present life and in ones further ahead. tual and non-conceptual applications of attention. To take
In this sense, Buddhism is surely interested in changing again the example of “establishing mindfulness” in relation
the reality of suffering — in altering the mental struc- to the body, the human body is not presented as magnificent
tures that create it, while knowing that mind is chief of and awe-striking, but is thoroughly disgusting and full of
all things. This knowledge is liberating, drawing one away filth. The gruesome nature of the body may be no less real,
from constricted conditioning and toward greater calm and but the sole emphasis on this aspect shows that evaluation,
contentment. indeed judgement, is active (Dreyfus, 2011a). The concep-
This is the philosophical and psychological climate in tual emphasis of this text is fortified in its longer version,
which mindfulness is meant to operate, one in which con- the “Great Discourse on the Establishing of Mindfulness”
templative practice is used in service of the developing of (Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna-sutta, Dīgha 22), where the observation
consciousness. A contemplative effort of this sort continues of the four noble truths is expanded through the importation
an ethical practice, which creates positive conditions within of a discourse that provides a comprehensive, theoretical
the mind and helps it become more conducive to health exposition of this teaching (the Saccavibhaṅga-sutta, MN
and development. We turn to an analysis of mindfulness 141).
and its relation to ethics and mental cultivation in the early When these two discourses are paired with the other two
discourses. key articulations of mindfulness in the Majjhima, the rela-
tion between mindfulness and concentrated meditation is
underscored. In the Kāyagatāsati-sutta (“The Discourse on
Mindfulness, Samādhi, and Mental
Mindfulness Directed to the Body”, MN 119), the medita-
Cultivation tions on the body that are listed in the Sati-paṭṭhāna are
repeated, but here lead to the deep meditative states of
Mindfulness receives diverse presentations in the early jhāna, which are not mentioned in the Pāli version of the
Buddhist discourses. The texts that have been given the latter (although they do appear in the Chinese; see Anālayo,
main bulk of scholarly attention are a number of discourses 2011, pp. 80–93; Kuan, 2008, Ch. 5). A less direct relation
from the Majjhima-nikāya (“The Collection of the Buddha’s between sati and jhāna can be identified in the Satipaṭṭhāna
Middle-length Discourses,” hereafter the Majjhima or MN), through the analysis of the seven limbs of enlightenment,
among which the Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta (MN 10) is by far the referred to above. References to jhāna are further advanced
most prominent (Anālayo, 2003). This text can be consid- in the Ānāpānassati-sutta (“The Discourse on Mindfulness
ered as an anthology of mindfulness practices, which are of Breathing,” MN 118), where an elaboration on the scheme
classified according to analytical observations of the body of the seven limbs of enlightenment is used that establishes
(kāya), feelings (vedanā), consciousness/mind (citta), and mindfulness through practices of breathing, observations of
“phenomena” (dhamma). In this text, it is evident that mind- the mind and of feelings, and conceptual modes of observa-
fulness is understood as a form of attentiveness that needs tion, which allow the mind to intensify its concentration. In
to be constructed or “established” ([sati-]paṭṭhāna, Sanskrit the last, the monk carries out his breathing while observ-
smṛty-upasthāna). For example, one is instructed to contem- ing impermanence (anicca), dispassion (virāga), cessation
plate the disgusting nature of bodily organs and grow mind- (nirodha), and relinquishment (paṭinisagga). With the four
ful of the way that the body is similar to a corpse in different applications of mindfulness fixed, the practitioner proceeds
stages of disintegration. Or, one analyzes mental content through the scheme of the seven limbs, and with them enters
according to Buddhist philosophical schemes, such as the states of samādhi.
five obstructions, four noble truths, or five aggregates. In
this text, sati is presented as a direction of attention in ways
The Ethics of Mindfulness
that will train the senses to perceive reality according to the
Buddhist notion of truth. When one sees that the body is like
a corpse and grows accustomed to perceiving its disgusting The general trend in the discourses on mindfulness that are
nature, the mind will incline toward detachment. Mindful- more commonly emphasized in contemporary discussion,
ness is thereby used in order to actively change the structures and which were referred to in the previous section, is to
of subjective presentation (Shulman, 2010). present sati as an application of attention that is oriented

2 422 Mindfulness (2024) 15:2415–2427
toward the entrance into samādhi. When a broader tex- He abandons covetousness to the world; he abides
tual sample is examined, it becomes clear that the relation with a consciousness devoid of covetousness, and
between sati and samādhi was considered to follow upon purifies his consciousness from covetousness.
earlier ethical practice. For example, in the influential cat- He abandons the hostility and anger[or – the defect
egorization of the gradual path (anupubbi-sikkhā) from the of hostility]; he abides with a consciousness with
Long Discourses (discussed above), sati appears within the no hostility, caring for all beings and creatures, and
continuum that begins with a diversity of ethical practices, purifies his consciousness from hostility.
proceeds through preliminary meditative practices that He abandons sloth and torpor; he abides without
include sati, and culminates in samādhi experience and the sloth and torpor, perceiving light, mindful and aware,
arising of the knowledges that constitute awakening (Ben- and purifies his consciousness from sloth and torpor.
David, 2024). In this sequence, ethical practices receive He abandons restlessness and remorse; he abides
elaborate treatment, and include, among other things, abid- with no over-excitement, his consciousness internally
ing by the precepts and cultivating a variety of behavioral calmed, and purifies his consciousness from restless-
restrictions that lead to a calmed mental state of reduced ness and remorse.
anxiety (bhaya) and inner joy that is free of guilt (ajjhataṃ He abandons doubt; he abides having crossed doubt,
anavajja-sukhaṃ paṭisaṃvedeti; DN I.70). Only at this without saying this or that about ethical qualities
stage is one said to pursue a more intense and focused (kusalesu dhammesu), and purifies his consciousness
mental observation, when practices of mindfulness and from doubt.
awareness (sati-sampajañña) appear between restraint of so abhijjhaṃ loke pahāya vigatābhijjhena
the senses (indriya-saṃvara) and content (saṃtuṭṭhi), then cetasā viharati, abhijjhāya cittaṃ parisodheti;
leading to the clearing of the obstructions and to samādhi byāpādapadosaṃ pahāya abyāpannacitto viharati
states of jhāna. Simply, mindfulness facilitates the transi- sabbapāṇabhūtahitānukampī, byāpādapadosā
tion from ethical practice to concentrated meditation. cittaṃ parisodheti; thīnamiddhaṃ pahāya viga-
A corresponding articulation that is more interesting tathinamiddho viharati ālokasaññī sato sampajāno,
for our purposes is found in the Gaṇakamoggallāna-sutta thinamiddhā cittaṃ parisodheti; uddhaccakukkuccaṃ
(“Discourse to the accountant Moggallāna,” MN 107), which pahāya anuddhato viharati ajjhattaṃ vūpasantacitto,
reworks parts of the same sequence in a manner that pro- uddhaccakukkuccā cittaṃ parisodheti; vicikicchaṃ
vides new emphases on the role of mindfulness in the ethi- pahāya tiṇṇavicikiccho viharati akathaṃkathī
cal project. In this text, the expansive ethical instruction of kusalesu dhammesu, vicikicchāya cittaṃ parisodheti
the gradual sequence is condensed into a short formula in (MN III.3; VRI III.75).
which the Buddha instructs his disciple to be ethical (silavā
This passage may read as a familiar, ordinary contempla-
hohi, MN III.2; VRI III.75), and thus to abide restrained
tive technique used on the path toward samādhi and libera-
in the restraint of the pātimokkha (the monkish behavioral
tion. However, its wording and placement right before the
code; pātimokkha-saṃvara-saṃvuto viharāhi), endowed
entrance into samādhi reveal a deep understanding regarding
with good conduct in both his behavior and senses (ācāra-
the nature of the mind and the manner in which its quality
gocara-sampanno), while finding fault in the slightest blame
is affected by moral practice. This meditation points to the
(aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayadassāvī), and training after hav-
combined work of ethical and mental cultivation, which go
ing undertaken the rules of training (samādāya sikkhassu
hand in hand, with the latter being a more advanced and
sikkhāpadesu). This leads to the instruction to restrain the
refined level of the former. Together, they impact subtle
senses, which is equal to the one in the gradual path, and to
inclinations of mind, which are adapted to make conscious-
guidance regarding restrictions of food and of sleep, which
ness more ethically cleansed and complete. It is not only that
replace the cultivation of content.
one “abides with a consciousness with no hostility, caring
At this stage, the discourse relates to the practice of
for all beings and creatures, and purifies his consciousness
mindfulness and awareness, which lead to the adoption of
from hostility,” an attitude we would surely see as moral.
a remote place of practice and the removal of the obstruc-
Here, sloth and torpor, restlessness and remorse, and sen-
tions, after which the monk will achieve the four jhānas.
sual desire and doubt, which are elements that we would
After the monk returns from his alms-round, he sits cross-
not necessarily classify as moral, are transformed in a man-
legged, places his body erect, and establishes mindfulness
ner that shows how the ethical quality of consciousness that
in front of him (so pacchābhattaṃ piṇḍapātapaṭikkanto
is pursued through practice, and which allows the mind to
nisīdati pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya
enter samādhi, is an alteration of basic inclination of con-
parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā, MN III.3). In a beautiful
sciousness. The ethical efforts, and the meditative or atten-
formulaic passage, the discourse formulaically describes
tive one involved in sati and related practices, were designed
the way that the monk removes the obstructions:

Mindfulness (2024) 15:2415–2427 2423
to create this change in the textures of consciousness. Calm the position articulated by the authors was coherent in their
(as in samatha) is shown to be a moral quality, reflecting the eyes, and that they were reinforcing the connection that the
way the mind was cultivated and transformed. tradition identified between sati and jhāna. The differences
This contemplation offers an example for the way that between the versions of these texts actually recommend that
meditation is used as a method to purify the mind and both versions rely on creative elaboration, a key theme in
maximize its moral potential, with mindfulness fulfilling an the historical development of the texts and the shaping of
important role in the process. This passage emphasizes the the textual record we possess (Shulman, 2024). Be that as it
manner in which mindfulness is activated at different stages may, the ethical dimensions of mindfulness practice come
of the practice: First, it appears as part of the practice of out here in a powerful manner, no matter which version of
mindfulness and awareness to bodily comportment. It then the text one prefers to go by: mindfulness is seen as a way
participates in the purification of the obstructions, as part to further polish the moral mind and enhance its medita-
of the abandoning of sloth and torpor. Finally, in its most tive powers, employed to uproot thoughts of sensual desire
advanced form, it will be part of the description of the third (kāmupasaṃhitaṃ vitakkaṃ).
and fourth jhānas. Interestingly, the ending of the Kāyagatāsati-sutta (of
Another fascinating, more complicated expression of the the Majjhima, discussed above) also echoes these same
manner in which mindfulness drives ethical practice home to schemes by speaking of the ten benefits provided by mind-
bring about samādhi experience comes in the Dantabhūmi- fulness of the body: The three first are ethical components,
sutta (MN 125, “The Discourse on the Stages [of practice including an ascetic capability to bear the hardships of
by the] Tamed”). Here, the Buddha uses a long simile on practice, to bear unpleasant situations (arati) and not be
the taming of an elephant, who is caught in the forest and overpowered by pleasant ones, and to bear fear and dread
slowly led to become an obedient, royal animal through the (bhayabheravasaho hoti). This last practice resonates with
patient efforts of his trainer. Similarly, the monk’s path of the mental stance of ethical maturation that one attains
cultivation resembles the training of the beast. In describing through the practice of sīla, which allows deep meditation
the training of a monk, the text draws on the formulas of the to develop, as is articulated in the seminal Majjhima “Dis-
gradual sequence, but is based more strongly on ones that course on Fear and Dread” (Bhayabherava-sutta, MN 4;
were quoted and discussed in the last text to the account- Shulman, 2021, Ch. 6). The other seven benefits relate to
ant Moggallāna. Here, quite surprisingly, after the sequence advanced attainments in samādhi, special powers (iddhi)
that leads to the uprooting of the obstructions, the authors and wisdom that appear at the end of the sequence of the
have the Buddha say that the student should cultivate sati- gradual path.
paṭṭhāna. In this case, the establishing of mindfulness is These texts join to suggest that mindfulness was designed
used explicitly in order to subdue the habits and thought to be employed in a variety of methods during advanced
patterns of household life (gehasitānañ c’eva sīlānaṃ stages of the path in order to take ethical practice to new
gehasitānañ c’eva saṃkalppānaṃ abhinimmadanāya, MN levels. An explicit connection between ethical practices and
III.136; VRI III.219), much like the trainer would try to the establishing of mindfulness is made in a series of dis-
crush the behavioral and mental patterns of the elephant courses in the Chapter devoted to sati-paṭṭhāna in the Con-
that derive from his life in the forest. In a unique statement, nected Discourses, the Sati-paṭṭhāna-saṃyutta (Chapter 3 in
the text then suggests that the four practices of sati-paṭṭhāna Book V of the Saṃyutta-Nikāya). For example, we find the
are to be employed in order to drive away thoughts that are Venerable Bhadda asking Venerable Ānanda — “what is the
related to the body, feelings, consciousness, and mental goal of these wholesome ethical practices (sīla) explained
objects (kāye kāyānupassī viharāhi mā ca kāyupasaṃhitaṃ by the Lord?” (…imāni kusalāni sīlāni kiṃatthiyāni vuttāni
vitakkaṃ vitakkesi, MN III.136; VRI III.220). Strikingly, bhagavatā). The answer is straightforward — “these whole-
this leads directly to the second jhāna, which follows upon some ethical practices explained by the Lord were explained
the quieting (vūpasama) of thoughts (vitakka) and related by him for the very cultivation of the four foundations of
mental processes (vicāra). mindfulness” (yānimāni kusalāni sīlāni vuttāni bhagavatā,
Anālayo (2006) has argued that the position advocated imāni kusalāni sīlāni yāvadeva catunnaṃ satipaṭṭhānānaṃ
by the Dantabhūmi-sutta is a mistake of oral transmis- bhāvanāya vuttāni bhagavatā; discourse no. 21 in the col-
sion, while Kuan (2008) has hinged parts of his compelling lection – the Sīla-sutta). Here I translate kusalāni sīlāni as
analysis of mindfulness in the early discourses on this text. “wholesome ethical practices” in line with accepted trans-
Anālayo bases his arguments on the difference between the lation of kusala as wholesome, taking sīla to relate broadly
Pāli and Chinese versions, and on his more general empha- to ethics or to commendable behavior. Another common
sis on mistakes in oral transmission (Anālayo, 2022, Ch. translation for ksuala is skillful (e.g., Harvey, 2000, pp.
3). While it potentially could be true that there was such 42–43), which underscores the prudence and benefits of ethi-
a “mistake” here, the more compelling explanation is that cal activity. This text provides a strong statement — kusala

2 424 Mindfulness (2024) 15:2415–2427
involves a positive moral quality of the healthy and whole- of grounding mindfulness practice in a developed moral
some mind, that here is said to have a determinative effect consciousness.
on the practice of mindfulness. An interesting formulation on the relation between mind-
In discourse no. 5 in the collection (Akusla-sutta), the fulness and ethical practice is found in the ninth book of
Buddha says that “the heap of unskillful ethical qualities” the Aṅguttara-nikāya, the Buddha’s collection of Numbered
(akusala-rāsi) is equal to the five obstructions. The corre- Discourses, where we find a full section (vagga) of ten texts
sponding “heap of skillful ethical qualities” (kusala-rāsī) that present the four sati-paṭṭhānas as methods for establish-
is equal to the four practices of establishing mindfulness. ing an ethical mind. Thus, in the first discourse (no. 63), it
In this text, as in discourse no. 45, the Kusala-rāsi-sutta is suggested that the four foundations are “to be cultivated
that reproduces the second part of the text, mindfulness is for the driving away of the five weaknesses of the training”
seen to be the same as ethical activity itself, a tool used to (imesaṃ kho bhikkhave pañcannaṃ sikkhādubbalyānaṃ
cleanse the mind of the most subtle attitudes that could be pahānāya cattāro satipaṭṭhānā bhāvetabbā; AN IV.457).
considered unwholesome. These five weaknesses are defined in the text as the five
Another confident expression of the close relation most basic ethical faults discussed extensively in the textual
between mindfulness and ethics appears in a textual model tradition, of harming living beings, stealing, sexual miscon-
that is repeated in numerous texts, in which the Buddha pro- duct, lying, and intoxication. The rest of this section of the
vides a condensed (saṃkhittena) instruction on a practice Aṅguttara consists of nine other discourses that employ the
that a student may use to guide his secluded meditation. four foundations of mindfulness for a further purification of
In this sequence, the Buddha instructs different monks — mind and perfection of its ethical quality, using other lists of
“you should cultivate the four applications of mindfulness Buddhist practice, such as the obstructions (nīvaraṇa), the
based on ethics, established in ethics” (sīlaṃ nissāya sīle objects of sensual pleasure (kāmaguṇa), etc.
patiṭṭhāya cattāro satipaṭṭhāne bhāveyyāsi; SN V.143). These texts provide important articulations on the close
This statement concludes the condensed instruction, which relationship between mindfulness and ethics, which relate a
begins with the Buddha saying: “first, you must purify [the strand of the tradition that seems to be assumed by that texts
mind] in relation to positive moral qualities [i.e. wholesome that are more concerned with meditative practice per se. In
ones]” (ādimeva visodhehi kusalesu dhammesu); “positive these texts, ethics and mindfulness appear as complemen-
moral qualities” is then explained as “a well-purified ethi- tary, inter-related practices, which join to prepare the mind
cal practice (or purified behavior) and a straight view” (ko for deeper meditation and insight. On the one hand, ethics
cādi kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ? sīlañca suvisuddhaṃ diṭṭhi serves as a necessary preliminary practice to mindfulness.
ca ujukā), a sequence that is repeated to three students in On the other hand, mindfulness continues ethical practice
discourse nos. 3, 15, and 16 of the collection. Notice the and applies it in more refined ways that are related to the
conceptual element in the maintenance of a correct view practices of mental cultivation. Both help mature conscious-
that is paired with ethical action, and which together serve ness and deepen its quality, making it more conducive to
as a basis for the practice of sati-paṭṭhāna. In another text religious transformation.
that is very similar to the latter (no. 47), the same formula- There is thus a direct continuity between ethics, success-
tion on the purification in relation to “positive mental quali- ful meditation, and the development of understanding. As
ties” is defined as abandoning negative activities of body, emphasized by Giuliano Giustarini (2017), these practices
speech, and mind (kāya/vacī/mano-duccaritaṃ pahāya) overlap, so that they are not only inter-related but actually
and cultivating positive ones instead (kāya/vacī/mano- penetrate each other. For example, in the popular sequence
succaritaṃ bhāvessasi; SN V.188). This is a classic ethical of the “ten courses of action” (dasakammapatha), we find
formulation, which again provides the basis for the estab- ethical action of the body — one should not harm living
lishing of mindfulness. In discourse no. 46, the explana- beings, not steal, and abstain from sexual misconduct, next
tion that the monk receives for the purification in relation to ethical speech — the avoiding lying, slander, and harsh
to positive mental states is “you must abide restrained in and idle speech, and joined with a positive mental stance
the restraint of the Pātimokkha [the monkish code], accom- that includes non-covetousness, non-hostility, and correct
plished in the adoption of good conduct, seeing terror in the view. These ten elements are considered together as parts of
slightest fault; having adopted the rules of training – you the same whole. This means that ethical action and mental
should train in them” (pātimokkhasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharāhi cultivation participate in the same process.
ācāragocarasampanno amattesu vajjesu bhayadassavī Before concluding, it is important to notice that ethical
samādāya sikkhesu sikkhāpadesu; SN V.187), a formula action and attitudes are situated within a broader religious
that is familiar from the framing of the practice in the context. Here, faith in the Buddha-Dharma-Saṅgha has a
Gaṇakamoggallāna-sutta, discussed above. Combined, relaxing and supportive quality, which helps one be more
these corresponding articulations point to the importance attuned to what in Buddhism are seen as the deeper truths

Mindfulness (2024) 15:2415–2427 2425
of life. “Faith,” saddhā, inclines toward notions of trust Conclusion
or confidence (Saddhātissa, 1978), but evidently includes
elements of faith as well. As Obeyesekere has it — “Not This article has argued that the understanding of mindful-
only is the Buddha the center of Buddhist faith, but he is, ness should be placed in a broader context than the employ-
par excellence, the hero of its mythology” (1991, p. 231). ment of a certain psychological function, one that is inher-
Trust or faith in the Buddha is reassuring, and provides a ently ethical and impacts the very nature of consciousness.
sense of security that is considered important for mental In early Buddhism, the practices of ethical cultivation,
development. Positive attitudes toward the Buddha further meditative contemplation, and development of philosophi-
bring pasāda (Skt. prasāda), a sense of calm and blessing, cal insight were all interrelated, with mindfulness possessing
a relaxation of mental anxiety that inspires well-being (Rot- a built-in ethical dimension and offering the opportunity to
man, 2009; Pinkney, 2013). In fact, certain Buddhist texts refine ethical attitudes: the mental cultivation of mindful-
present faith in the triple-gem as a corresponding option to ness provides a finer level of ethical action than bodily or
ethical cultivation in order to produce a ripe mental state behavioral practices; both produce a positive effect on qual-
for advanced practice, as in the influential Aṅguttara-nikāya ity of consciousness. The Buddhist idea is that ethics are
6.10. These values may not seem ethical in the modern, sec- fundamentally healthy, conforming to the positive potentials
ularized sense, but so long as ethics seeks a healthy way of of both mind and world — when one is ethical, one creates
being human in society, while defining virtue and morality, good karma, which on the one hand is only a shaping of
these considerations apply. one’s subjective habits and inclinations, but on the other
Generosity (dāna) is another value that is fundamental builds on the cosmological picture of karma, according to
to the Buddhist pursuit of a better mind and consciousness. which positive action leads to more pleasant and healthy
The paradigmatic ritual of generosity is the daily action of realities, while negative ones lead to pain. This law works
providing sustenance for Buddhist monks (Bowie, 1998; on both internal and external levels of reality, in both the
Harvey, 2000, pp. 61–65; Heim, 2004; Cassaniti, 2015, pp. present life and the next.
97–98). Giving directs the mind to an attitude of selfless- Modern mindfulness techniques are justifiably selective
ness, which can be thought of as a condition for affluence. in their importation and adaptation of practices from the
This act of giving is also one of gratitude toward the Buddha Buddhist tradition. It may nonetheless be beneficial to lis-
and the community of monks, who took up the hardships of ten to the voice here that emerges from the early Buddhist
spiritual practice for the welfare of society (Hallisey, 1988). body of teachings, and to consider the idea that ethics have
The Buddha’s efforts not only show the way, but generated a positive effect on mind and consciousness. Specifically,
the community of monks that has become a field of merit, mindfulness can be conceived of as a potential of conscious
which allows people to plant their seeds of giving in fertile experience, a method to empower and enrich consciousness
karmic ground. The Saṅgha is the “the highest field of merit by diligent, finely tuned methods of ethical cultivation.
for the people of the world” (anuttaraṃ puññakkhettaṃ
lokassa), so that giving also has a positive karmatic effect, Funding Open access funding provided by Hebrew University of
Jerusalem.
much like ethics.
Among the most popular scriptures in Theravāda soci- Data Availability All Pāli sources are availbe freely in different sources,
eties are paritta texts used for protection (Harvey, 1993; such as the Vipassana Research Institute (VRI) edition at https://w ww.
Shulman, 2019). Perhaps the most widely used of these are tipita ka.o rg. Scholars normally quote according to the editions of the
Pāli Text Society, but reference is made here to the VRI version as well.
the Discourse on Love (or Loving-kindness, Metta-sutta,
Sutta-nipāta I.8) and the Discourse on the Highest Blessing Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
(Mahāmaṅgala-sutta, Sutta-nipāta II.4). The first of these bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
effectively teaches that the best way to keep oneself healthy tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
and prosperous is to hold a mind of boundless care toward
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
all living beings, of whatever conceivable kind, like a mother were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
caring for her only son. The second discourse supplies a included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
list of ethical practices, which emphasize the social, rather otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
than the renunciate, ethic of Buddhism (Hallisey, 2015).
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
These ideas again exemplify the deep commitment within need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
Theravāda to the power of the ethical mind, reminding us copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
not reduce our notions of ethics to what seems natural in
our own society.

2 426 Mindfulness (2024) 15:2415–2427
References Giustarini, G. (2017). The interaction of morality (sīla) with cogni-
tive factors in the Pāli Nikāyas. Journal of Indian International
Journal of Buddhist Studies, 18, 43–70.
Anālayo, Bh. (2003). Satipaṭṭhāna: The direct path to realization.
Gombrich, R. F. (1996). How Buddhism began. Athlone.
Windhorse Publications.
Grossman, P., Niemann, L., Schmidt, S., & Walach, H. (2004). Mind-
Anālayo, Bh. (2006). The Chinese versions of the Dantabhūmi Sutta.
fulness-based stress reduction and health benefits: A meta-anal-
Buddhist Studies Review, 23(1), 5–19. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 558/
ysis. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 57(1), 35–43. https://
bsrv.v 23i1.5
doi.o rg/1 0.1 016/s 0022-3 999(03)0 0573-7
Anālayo, Bh. (2011). A comparative study of the Majjhima-nikāya, vol.
Hallisey, C. (1988). Devotion in the Buddhist literature of medieval Sri
1 + 2. Dharma Drum Publishing Corporation.
Lanka. (Doctoral Dissertation), University of Chicago. ProQuest
Anālayo, Bh. (2022). Early Buddhist oral tradition: Textual formation
Dissertations and Theses.
and transmission. Wisdom Publications.
Hallisey, C. (2015). Auspicious things. In D. Lopez (Ed.), Buddhism
Appleton, N. (2010). Jātaka stories in Theravāda Buddhism: Narrating
in practice (abridged, pp. 296–310). Princeton University Press.
the Bodhisatta path. Ashgate.
Hallisey, C., & Hansen, A. (1996). Narrative, sub-ethics, and the moral
Arbel, K. (2017). Early Buddhist meditation: The four jhānas as the
life: Some evidence from Theravāda Buddhism. The Journal of
actualization of insight. Routledge.
Religious Ethics, 24(2), 305–325.
Ben-David, A. (2024). Bridging the gap between sīla and samādhi:
Harvey, P. (1993). The dynamics of paritta chanting in Southern Bud-
The role of mindfulness in pre-meditative practice. Mindfulness.
dhism. In W. Karel (Ed.), Love divine: Studies in bhakti and devo-
https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/s 12671-0 24-0 2411-9
tional mysticism (pp. 53–84). Curzon Press.
Bhattacarya, K. (2015). The Atman-Brahman in ancient Buddhism.
Harvey, P. (1995). The selfless mind: Personality, consciousness and
Canon.
nirvana in early Buddhism. Curzon.
Bodhi, B., (trans.), (2000). A comprehensive manual of Abhidhamma,
Harvey, P. (2000). An introduction to Buddhist ethics: Foundations,
the Abhidhammattha Sangaha of Ācariya Anuruddha. BPS Pari-
values and issues. Cambridge University Press.
yatti Editions.
Heim, M. (2022). The Dhammasaṅgaṇī and the Vibhaṅga: The
Bodhi, B. (2011). What does mindfulness really mean? A canonical
perfectly awakened Buddha and the first Abhidhammikas. In
perspective. Contemporary Buddhism, 12(1), 19–39. https://d oi.
W. Edelglass, P. Herter, & S. McClintock (Eds.), The Rout-
org/1 0.1 080/1 46399 47.2 011.5 64813
ledge handbook of Indian Buddhist philosophy (pp. 143–159).
Bishop, S. R., Lau, M., Shapiro, S., Carlson, L., Anderson, N. D.,
Routledge.
Carmody, J., Segal, Z. V., Abbey, S., Specca, M., Velting, D., &
Heim, M. (2004). Theories of the gift in South Asia: Hindu, Buddhist,
Devins, G. (2004). Mindfulness: A proposed operational defini-
and Jain reflections on Dāna. Routledge.
tion. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11(3), 230–241.
Husgafvel, V. (2016). On the Buddhist roots of contemporary non-
https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 093/c lipsy.b ph077
religious mindfulness practice: Moving beyond sectarian and
Bowie, K. A. (1998). The alchemy of charity: Of class and Buddhism
essentialist approaches. Temenos, 52(1), 87–126. https://d oi.o rg/
in Northern Thailand. American Anthropologist, 100(2), 469–481.
10.3 3356/t emeno s.5 5371
https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 525/a a.1 998.1 00.2.4 69
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: The program of the
Bowie, K. A. (2017). Of beggars and Buddhas: The politics of humor
stress reduction clinic at the university of Massachusetts medical
in the Vessantara Jataka in Thailand. University of Wisconsin
center. Dell.
Press.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (2011). Some reflections on the origins of MBSR, skill-
Brown, R. L. (1997). Narrative as icon: The Jātaka stories in ancient
ful means, and the trouble with maps. Contemporary Buddhism,
Indian and Southeast Asian architecture. In J. Schober (Ed.),
12(1), 281–306. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 080/1 46399 47.2 011.5 64844
Sacred biography in the Buddhist traditions of South and South-
Kachru, S. (2021). Mind and world in Indian Buddhism. Columbia
east Asia (pp. 64–103). University of Hawai’i Press.
University Press.
Cassaniti, J. (2015). Living Buddhism: Mind, self and emotion in a Thai
Kang, C., & Whittingham, K. (2010). Mindfulness: A dialogue between
community. Cornell University Press.
Buddhism and clinical psychology. Mindfulness, 1(3), 161–173.
Collins, S. (1982). Selfless persons: Imagery and thought in Theravāda
https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/s 12671-0 10-0 018-1
Buddhism. Cambridge University Press.
Koch, Ch. (2012). Consciousness: Confessions of a romantic reduc-
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness explained. Little Brown.
tionist. MIT.
Dreyfus, G. (2011a). Is mindfulness present-centred and non-judgmen-
Krueger, J. W. (2011). The who and the how of experience. In M.
tal? A discussion of the cognitive dimensions of mindfulness.
Siderits, E. Thompson, & D. Zahavi (Eds.), Self no self? Per-
Contemporary Buddhism, 12(1), 41–54. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 080/
spectives from analytical, phenomenological, and Indian tradi-
146399 47.2 011.5 64815
tions (pp. 27–55). Oxford University Press.
Dreyfus, G. (2011b). Self and subjectivity: A middle-way approach.
Kuan, T. (2008). Mindfulness in early Buddhism: New approaches
In M. Siderits, E. Thompson, & D. Zahavi (Eds.), Self no self?
through psychology and textual analysis of Pali. Routledge.
Perspectives from analytical, phenomenological, and Indian tradi-
Larson, G. (1979). Classical Sāṃkhya: An interpretation of its his-
tions (pp. 114–156). Oxford University Press.
tory and meaning. Motilal Banarsidass.
Dunne, J. (2011). Toward an understanding of non-dual mindfulness.
Lewis, D. J., & Rozelle, D. (2016). Mindfulness-based interven-
Contemporary Buddhism, 12(1), 71–88. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 080/
tions: Clinical psychology, Buddhadharma, or both? A wisdom
146399 47.2 011.5 64820
perspective. In R. E. Purser, D. Forbes, & A. Burke (Eds.),
Gethin, R. (1986). The five khandhas: Their treatment in the Nikāyas
Handbook of mindfulness: Culture, context, and social engage-
and early Abhidhamma. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 14, 35–53.
ment (pp. 243–268). Springer.
https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/B F0016 5825
Malinowski, P. (2008). Mindfulness as psychological dimension: Con-
Gethin, R. M. L. (2001). The Buddhist path to awakening. Oneworld.
cepts and applications. The Irish Journal of Psychology, 29(1–2),
Gethin, R. (2011). On some definitions of mindfulness. Contempo-
155–166. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 080/0 30339 10.2 008.1 04462 81
rary Buddhism, 12(1), 263–279. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 080/1 4639
McMahan, D. L. (2008). The making of Buddhist modernism. Oxford
947.2 011.5 64843
University Press.

Mindfulness (2024) 15:2415–2427 2427
McMahan, D. L. (2017). How meditation works: Theorizing the role Stanley, S. (2015). Sīla and sati: An exploration of ethics and mind-
of cultural context in Buddhist contemplative practices. In D. L. fulness in Pāli Buddhism and their implications for secular
McMahan & E. Braun (Eds.), Meditation, Buddhism and science mindfulness-based applications. In E. Shonin, W. Van Gordon,
(pp. 21–46). Oxford University Press. & N. N. Singh (Eds.), Buddhist foundations of mindfulness (pp.
Monteiro, L. (2015). Dharma and distress: Buddhist teachings that sup- 89–113). Springer International Publishing. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.
port the psychological principles in a mindfulness program. In E. 1007/9 78-3-3 19-1 8591-0_6
Shonin, W. Van Gordon, & N. Singh (Eds.), Buddhist foundations Stanley, S., Purser, R. E., & Singh, N. N., (eds.), (2018). Handbook of
of mindfulness (pp. 181–215). Springer. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/ ethical foundations of mindfulness. Springer. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.
978-3-3 19-1 8591-0_1 0 1007/9 78-3-3 19-7 6538-9
Monteiro, L. M., Compson, J. F., & Musten, F., (eds.), (2017). Prac- Stuart, D. (2020). Map becomes territory: Knowledge and modes of
titioner's guide to ethics and mindfulness-based interventions. existence in middle period Buddhist meditation practice. In Ch.
Springer. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/9 78-3-3 19-6 4924-5 Pecchia & V. Eltschinger (Eds.), Mārga: Paths to liberation in
Murphy, A. (2016). Mindfulness-based therapy in modern psychology: South Asian Buddhist traditions (pp. 277–302). Austrian Academy
Convergence and divergence from early Buddhist thought. Con- of Sciences.
temporary Buddhism, 17(2), 275–325. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 080/ Thompson, E. (2011). Self-no-self? Memory and reflexive awareness.
146399 47.2 016.1 22832 4 In M. Siderits, E. Thompson, & D. Zahavi (Eds.), Self no self?
Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical Review, 83, Perspectives from analytical, phenomenological, and Indian tradi-
435–450. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.2 307/2 18391 4 tions (pp. 157–175). Oxford University Press.
Obeyesekere, G. (1991). Buddhism and conscience: An exploratory Thompson, E. (2017). Looping effects and the cognitive science of
essay. Daedelus, 120(2), 219–239. mindfulness meditation. In D. L. McMahan & E. Braun (Eds.),
Olendzki, A. (2011). The construction of mindfulness. Contemporary Meditation, Buddhism and science (pp. 47–61). Oxford University
Buddhism, 12(1), 55–70. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 080/1 46399 47.2 011. Press.
564817 Valerio, A. (2016). Owning mindfulness: A bibliometric analysis of
Olivelle, P. (1998). The early Upaniṣads: Annotated text and transla- mindfulness literature trends within and outside of Buddhist con-
tion. Oxford University Press. texts. Contemporary Buddhism, 17(1), 157–183. https://d oi.o rg/
Pinkney, A. M. (2013). Prasāda, the gracious gift, in contemporary 10.1 080/1 46399 47.2 016.1 16242 5
and classical South Asia. Journal of the American Academy of Van Dam, N. T., Van Vugt, M. K., Vago, D. R., Schmalzl, L., Saron, C.
Religion, 81(3), 734–756. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 093/j aarel/l ft022 D., Olendzki, A., Meissner, T., Lazar, S. W., Kerr, C. E., Gorchov,
Potter, K. H. (2014). The encyclopedia of philosophies, vol. 3: Advaita J., Fox, K. C. R., Field, B. A., Britton, W. B., Brefczynski-Lewis,
Vedānta up to Śaṃkara and his pupils. Princeton University Press. J. A., & Meyer, D. E. (2018). Mind the hype: A critical evaluation
Purser, R. E., & Milillo, J. (2015). Mindfulness revisited: A Buddhist- and prescriptive agenda for research on mindfulness and medita-
based conceptualization. Journal of Management Inquiry, 24(1), tion. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 13(1), 36–61. https://
3–24. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 177/1 05649 26145 32315 doi.o rg/1 0.1 177/1 74569 16177 09589
Ram-Prasad, C. (2013). Divine Self, Human Self: The Philosophy of Waldron, W. S. (2017). Reflections on Indian Buddhist thought and
Being in Two Gita Commentaries. Bloomsbury. the scientific study of meditation, or why scientists should talk
Rotman, A. (2009). Thus have I seen: Visualizing faith in early Indian more with their Buddhist subjects. In D. L. McMahan & E. Braun
Buddhism. Oxford University Press. (Eds.), Meditation, Buddhism and science (pp. 84–113). Oxford
Saddhātissa, H. (1978). The Saddhā concept in Buddhism. The Eastern University Press.
Buddhist, 11(2), 137–142. Wijeratne, R. P., & Gethin, R. (2007). Summary of the topics of Abhid-
Shulman, E. (2008). Early meanings of dependent-origination. Jour- hamma (Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha) by Anuruddha, and exposi-
nal of Indian Philosophy, 36(2), 297–317. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/ tion of the topics of Abhidhamma (abhidhammatthavibāvinī) by
s10781-0 07-9 030-8 Suamṅgala, being a commentary on Anuruddha’s summary of the
Shulman, E. (2010). Mindful wisdom: The Sati-paṭṭhāna-sutta on topics of Abhidhamma. The Pali Text Society.
mindfulness, memory, and liberation. History of Religions, 49(4), Wilson, J. (2014). Mindful America: Meditation and the mutual trans-
393–420. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 086/6 49856 formation of Buddhism and American culture. Oxford University
Shulman, E. (2014). Rethinking the Buddha: Early Buddhist philosophy Press.
as meditative perception. Cambridge University Press. Zahavi, D. (2011). The experiential self: Objections and clarifications.
Shulman, E. (2018). Contemplating the Buddha in the Jātakas. Reli- In M. Siderits, E. Thompson, & D. Zahavi (Eds.), Self no self?
gious of South Asia, 21(1), 9–33. https://d oi.o rg/ 10.1 558/ rosa. Perspectives from analytical, phenomenological, and Indian tradi-
37510 tions (pp. 56–78). Oxford University Press.
Shulman, E. (2019). The protective Buddha: On the cosmological logic
of paritta. Numen, 66, 207–242. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 163/1 5685 Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
276-1 23415 33 jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Shulman, E. (2021). Visions of the Buddha: Creative dimensions of
early Buddhist scripture. Oxford University Press.
Shulman, E. (2024). Performing Theravāda: Introduction. Numen, 71,
111–140. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 163/1 56852 76-2 02400 01
Spencer, R. F. (1966). Ethical expression in Burmese Jātaka. The Jour-
nal of American Folklore, 79(311), 278–301.