R E V I S T A D E E T N O G R A F I E Ş I F O L C L O R
J O U R N A L OF E T H N O G R A P H Y AND F O L K L O R E
New Series 1-2 2023
C O N T E N T S
FROM ASIA TOWARDS EUROPE: CULTURES DESCRIBED
ELENE GOGIASHVILI, TEODOSIO DE BONIS
In the Labyrinth of Fables: Traces of Panchatantra in
Georgian Literary and Oral Narrative Tradition .................................................. 5
KHANKISHI MEMMEDOV
New Models of Azerbaijani, Turkish and English Proverbs .................................. 21
HİCRAN KARATAŞ
Personal Experience Stories at the Crossroad of Archaeology and Folklore ...... 36
DARIA ŁAWRYNOW
Cossack Military Culture as Expressed in Folklore ............................................... 57
OLEG SMOLIAK, NATALIIA OVOD, OLENA SPOLSKA
Traditional Pre-Christmas Holidays of Western Podillya ..................................... 77
MUHAMED ÇITAKU
The Influence of “The Song of Roland” on the Legendary Albanian
“Songs of the Frontier Warriors” ............................................................................ 98
GEORGE-BOGDAN TOFAN
George Vâlsan as Ethnographer .............................................................................. 106
GUANG TIAN, GANG CHEN, YANGKUO LI
The Food Culture of Ethnic Minorities in China ................................................... 121
MUSICS FROM THE FURTHEST-EAST TO THE NEAREST-EAST (2)
IZALY ZEMTSOVSKY and ALMA KUNANBAEVA
Homo Lyricus, or Lyric Song in the Ethnomusicological Stratigraphy of
“Folkloric Culture”: Notes for a Monograph (part 2) ............................................ 139
RUXANDRA TRANDAFOIU
Manele Music as a Marker of Collective Shame in the Online Discourse
of the Romanian Diaspora in the United Kingdom ................................................ 168
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 1-298

PEIHONG YANG
Neo-Folklore Motifs in a Chen Yi’s Piano Work .................................................... 184
RESTITUTIO
Bucharest, 1969: The 5th Congress of the “International Society for
Folk Narrative Research” (Facsimile Papers, Part VIII)
Iconographic Intros: B.M. du TOIT / N.-T. TING / F.L. UTLEY / M. NOLSØE /
M. BRĂTULESCU / R. NICULESCU / I.C. CHIȚIMIA ........................................... 198
BRIAN M. du TOIT, African Folk-Narrative Research and Anthropology ............... 202
NAI-TUNG TING, The Cannibal Grandma: a Study of the
Chinese Versions of a Subtype of AT 333 ..................................................................... 211
FRANCIS LEE UTLEY, The Medieval Folk Jest, with Special Emphasis on
Chaucer and Boccaccio ............................................................................................... 218
MORTAN NOLSØE, Data Concerning the Early Faroese Ballad Tradition ............. 231
MONICA BRĂTULESCU, Stages in the Transformation of Folk Narrative
under the Influence of Christianity ............................................................................... 238
RADU NICULESCU, „Estetica basmului” (L’Esthétique du conte) de George
Călinescu – contribution roumaine à l’élaboration d’une ésthétique du conte .......... 245
ION C. CHIȚIMIA, Contamination et mutation comme modes de création
dans la structure des narrations populaire ................................................................. 258
MARIN MARIAN-BĂLAȘA
Remembering “69: Celebrities” Letters Connected with
the 5th ISFNR (part 1) ............................................................................................... 265
List of Contributors ................................................................................................... 294

R E V I S T A D E E T N O G R A F I E Ş I F O L C L O R
J O U R N A L OF E T H N O G R A P H Y AND F O L K L O R E
Serie nouă 1-2 2023
[C U P R I N S]
[DINSPRE ASIA ÎNSPRE EUROPA: CULTURI DESCRISE]
ELENE GOGIASHVILI, TEODOSIO DE BONIS
[În labirintul fabulelor: urme ale Panchatantrei în literatura și
tradiția narațiunii orale georgiene] .......................................................................... 5
KHANKISHI MEMMEDOV
[Modele ale proverbelor azerbaijane, turcești și engleze] ...................................... 21
HİCRAN KARATAŞ
[Experiențe personale la intersecția dintre arheologie și folclor] .......................... 36
DARIA ŁAWRYNOW
[Cultura militară cazacă exprimată folcloric] ........................................................ 57
OLEG SMOLIAK, NATALIIA OVOD, OLENA SPOLSKA
[Sărbătorile tradiționale de dinaintea Crăciunului în vestul Podoliei] .................. 77
MUHAMED ÇITAKU
[Influența „Cântecului lui Roland” asupra legendarelor
„Cântece ale războinicilor frontieriști” din Albania] ............................................. 98
GEORGE-BOGDAN TOFAN
[George Vâlsan ca etnograf] ...................................................................................... 106
GUANG TIAN, GANG CHEN, YANGKUO LI
[Cultura hranei între minoritățile etnice ale Chinei] ............................................. 121
[MUZICI DIN ORIENTUL CEL-MAI-ÎNDEPĂRTAT
PÂNĂ-N ORIENTUL CEL-MAI-APROPIAT (2)]
IZALY ZEMTSOVSKY și ALMA KUNANBAEVA
[Homo Lyricus sau cântecul liric în stratigrafia etnomuzicală
a „culturii folclorice”: note pentru o monografie (partea 2)] ................................ 139
RUXANDRA TRANDAFOIU
[Muzica manelelor ca indicator al rușinii colective
în discursul online al diasporei românești din Anglia] ........................................... 168
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 1-298

PEIHONG YANG
[Motive neofolclorice într-o lucrare de pian a lui Chen Yi] ................................... 184
RESTITUTIO
[București, 1969: al 5-lea Congres al „Societății Internaționale pentru Studiul
Narațiunilor Populare” (articole facsimil, partea VIII)]
[Introduceri iconografice]: B.M. du TOIT / N.-T. TING / F.L. UTLEY / M. NOLSØE /
M. BRĂTULESCU / R. NICULESCU / I.C. CHIȚIMIA ........................................... 198
BRIAN M. du TOIT, [Studierea și antropologia narațiunilor folclorice africane] ....... 202
NAI-TUNG TING, [Bunica cea canibală: studiu asupra versiunilor chineze
ale unui subtip AT 333] ................................................................................................ 211
FRANCIS LEE UTLEY, [Gluma medievală folclorică, în special la
Chaucer și Boccaccio] .................................................................................................. 218
MORTAN NOLSØE, [Date privitoare la tradiția timpurie a baladei faroeze] ............. 231
MONICA BRĂTULESCU, [Stadii în transformarea narațiunii folclorice
sub influența creștinismului] ........................................................................................ 238
RADU NICULESCU, [„Estetica basmului”, a lui George Călinescu, o contribuție
românească la elaborarea unei estetici a basmului] ..................................................... 245
ION C. CHIȚIMIA, [Contaminarea și mutația ca modalități de creație
în structura narațiunilor folclorice] .............................................................................. 258
MARIN MARIAN-BĂLAȘA
[Rememorarea lui ‘69. Scrisori ale celebrităților legate de
al 5-lea ISFNR (partea 1)] ........................................................................................ 265
[Lista autorilor] ......................................................................................................... 294

FROM ASIA TOWARDS EUROPE: CULTURES DESCRIBED
IN THE LABYRINTH OF FABLES:
TRACES OF PANCHATANTRA IN GEORGIAN
LITERARY AND ORAL NARRATIVE TRADITION
ELENE GOGIASHVILI, TEODOSIO DE BONIS
ABSTRACT
In Georgia, the fables of Panchatantra are well-known through the book of Kalila
and Dimna. However, some rare examples of direct parallels with the fables of
Panchatantra appeared in Georgian literary sources and folk oral narratives. Next to
the brief history of Panchatantras’s journey through centuries, and an overview of
Georgian historical chronicles Kartlis Tskhovreba (The Life of Kartli), A Book of
Wisdom and Lies by Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani, and Georgian folktales outline the
transformations of some fables from Panchatantra in Georgia. The paper examines
the role of animals in the fables in general, and shows the ways of interpretations on
the example of the theme of ingratitude in context of European and Oriental
narrative traditions.
Keywords: folktale, translation, literature, Kalila and Dimna.
INTRODUCTION
It is accurate to define the Panchatantra as the Adam of collections of stories
framed and chained together. Not only as the first pure and original corpus, but also
and above all in reference to the boundless progeny to which it has given birth over
the centuries. Johannes Hertel, in the course of his extensive studies of the text,
came to record over two hundred different versions of it in more than 50 languages,
most of them outside India. This masterly Chinese box structure was constructed
with the purpose of instructing and entertaining, thus serving as both
Fürstenspiegel and moral bible for the people (Alphonso-Karakala 1975, 74).
The author and the date of composition of the original text, the so-called
Ur-Panchatantra, remains unknown to this day. Thanks to references to other
texts, however, it is possible to establish its approximate time limits: the lower
limit, which is more uncertain, is set by scholars around 300 CE thanks to the
authorʼs clear knowledge of the technical literature of political science with
references to Kautilya’s Arthashastra (generally assigned to the first centuries of
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 5-20

6 Elene Gogiashvili, Teodosio De Bonis
the common era). As for the upper limit, reference is made to the translation of the
text into Pahlavi around 550 CE.
In the Prelude of the Panchatantra, it is told the story of Amarasakti, king of
Mahilaropya, who, in despair over the poor education of his three degenerate sons,
appeals to any guru who believes can awaken their intellect by offering a
handsome reward. The octogenarian Brahman Vishnu Sharma takes up the
challenge, guaranteeing to be able to bring the lazy princes to the path of virtue in
just six months. And so the great labyrinth of Panchatantra begins, winding its
way through five treatises (Tantra), each educating on a principle of Niiti, the wise
conduct of life: I. The loss of Friends; II. The Winning of Friends; III. The Crow
and the Owl; IV. The Loss of Gains; V. How to Avoid Ill-Considered Actions
(Alphonso-Karakala 1975, 75).
However, the doctrines we find in the text are not entirely new. The
similarities and influences of the Arthashastra, the treatise on political management
and organisation of which the original date and author are also still debated, are in
fact clear and evident. Although both are centred on the pursuit of the self for the
collective good, the Arthashastra has nothing to say about individual salvation,
while the Panchatantra, being intended for rulers and ruled, encapsulates the
concepts of good governance in pleasant moral pills open to different levels of
interpretation and application. A clear example that sums up the point of contact
between the two texts, though often misinterpreted, is the story of the lion and the
crow, whose moral reads: “The individual may be sacrificed for the family, the
family for the village, the village for the state and for the self all the world may be
sacrificed” (Kumar Gautam 2014, 67).
The article is divided into four main sections. The first explains the history of
spreading of the fables of Panchatantra in the world. The second tells about first
appearance of a fable of Panchatantra in Georgian medieval historical chronicles.
The third overviews traces of Panchatantra in Georgian original book of fables by
Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani, 17th-18th centuries. The fourth examines the role of
animals in the fables in general, and shows the ways of interpretation of the theme
of ingratitude in context of European and Oriental narrative traditions.
FROM PANCHATANTRA TO KALILA AND DIMNA
Given the depth and delicacy of its precepts and moral codes, it is not
surprising that the Panchatantra struck emissaries and rulers from the kingdoms
bordering India and thus began its westward journey by spreading its roots.
According to legend, the text first migrated to Iran during the 6th century AD
thanks to the court physicist of the Sassanid king Khosru I Anushiravan, Borzuy.
He first went to India in search of a miraculous herb that could bring the dead back
to life. After finding it and preparing the potion, he realised that it was ineffective
and complaining to some Pandits, he was advised to consult a sage to investigate
the mystery further. The sage then revealed to him that the herb he was looking for

In the Labyrinth of Fables… 7
was nothing but knowledge, and the dead body a man without it. To bring men
back to life it was therefore necessary to give them virtuous teachings contained in
a secret book kept in the treasury of the king of India. Borzuy later managed to
bring the text back to his homeland and it was then translated into the Pahlavi
language, as well as readapted to the Zoroastrian thought of the time in content
(Grigore 2013, 141).
The Pahlavi text was immediately translated into Old Syriac by Bud
Periodeutes in 570 AD under the title Kalinag-wa-Damanag and later by Abdullah
ibn al-Moqaffa into Arabic in 750 AD under the title Kalilah wa Dimnah, both
referring to the name of the two jackals featured in the first book of the
Panchatantra. Although there were other Arabic translations, that of Abdullah ibn
al-Moqaffa was the one that was most widely adopted, becoming the main
disseminator of the Sanskrit text in Europe (Alphonso-Karakala 1975, 79).
Considering the five additional chapters of the Pahlavi version, some taken from
the twelfth book of the Mahabharata and others narrating Borzuy’s journey
(Grigore 2013, 142), and the subsequent additions incorporated in the Kalilah wa
Dimnah, we notice that the original third-century text transformed enormously
since the very first translations, until it became an ever-deepening and hardly
discernible underground pillar of many other versions.
This brings us to Ali bin Salin’s Ottoman Turkish translation entitled
Humayunname (The Royal Book), dedicated to Sultan Suleiman in the early 16th
century. This translation served as the basis for many new variants (Grigore 2013,
145-146).
No other translated book in Georgia has had such complicated history than the
book of Kalila and Dimna – in Georgian Kilila da Damana. The following
scheme by Georgian orientalist Magali Todua (1927-2016) shows the way from
Ur-Panchatantra to Georgian versions (Todua 2006, 132, see the genealogic sketch
bellow).
A significant part in the creation of Georgian versions of Kalila and Dimna
played Georgian King Vakhtang VI (1675-1737), author and organiser of
numerous cultural and educational projects in Georgia’s intellectual life in the 18th
century. During his long stay in Persia, Vakhtang VI not only mastered the
language but also gained an understanding of the literary trends and selected
certain works to be translated into Georgian. He made a word for word translation
of Kalila and Dimna, based on the Anwar-I-Suhaili. The revision of Vakhtang’s
translation has made his tutor Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani. In his comments, Vakhtang
VI mentions about older translations of Kalila and Dimna into Georgian, but only
the 18th-century translations are preserved at the present. However, some fables of
Panchatantra has been occur in Georgian literary sources and folk oral narratives.
An overview of Georgian historical chronicles Kartlis Tskhovreba (The Life of
Kartli), A book of Wisdom and Lies by Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani and Georgian
folktales outline the transformations of some fables from Panchatantra in Georgia.

8 Elene Gogiashvili, Teodosio De Bonis
A FABLE OF PANCHATANTRA IN GEORGIAN EARLY SOURCES
In Georgian written sources, an adaptation of a fable from the Panchatantra
first appeared in the Georgian historical chronicles Kartlis Tskhovreba (The Life
of Kartli), a series of distinct texts dating from the 9th to the 14th century.
An interpretation of the fable about a crow and a hawk related to the battle of birds
in Panchatantra (book III) is inserted in the chronicles of the King Vakhtang
Gorgasali (c. 439 or 443-502 or 522). It is not exactly clear, what was the primary
source of this fable, seeing that it does not absolute match any fables from the book
of Kalila and Dimna (Gvakharia 1995, 230). Probably this fable could be regarded
as a first appearance of the Panchatantra in Georgian literature at all.

In the Labyrinth of Fables… 9
The name of the author of the chronicles of the king Vakhtang Gorgasali is
Juansher.1 He described a political ideal of a powerful ruler, the last great king
among the kings of Georgia before the Arabic invasion. Trapped between two
empires, Byzantine and Persia, the king was depicted as a warrior for Christianity,
fighting against the Zoroastrian attempts to subvert his ideal Christian ruling, but
he also exhibited undeniable classical influences, considering himself as both
defending the faith and striving towards the ideal of a philosopher-king. King
Vakhtang’s campaigns to faraway countries, namely, India, are presented as a fairy
world, which geographically extended over the whole East. Juansher tells a story of
Vakhtang’s adventures in Sindeti.2 Retelling the dispute of the king of the Sinds
with Vakhtang, Juansher inserts a fable about the battles between crows and hawks
taken from the Panchatantra. The king of Sindeti reminds Vakhtang about the evil
deeds of Persians in reference to the Christians and warns him that the service in
the interest of Persians will not return to him with good:
“King Vakht’ang, you are like that unreasonable crow which met a wounded hawk,
beaten by the eagle; unable to fly it was doomed to death. And the crow behaved
contrary to the usual rules of crows. for when the ordinary crow sees a hawk, it begins
to caw loudly, informing the other crows, and the whole flock falls upon the hawk to
drive it off from its nest and secure peace for themselves, for even animals understand
what is in their interest. The crow did not act in this way, but took pity on that hawk. It
ceased to bring up its nestlings and began to collect diligently grasshoppers and snakes
for the hawk, because it is not easy for a crow to obtain other food. And in such a way it
supported the hawk. When the wounds on the hawk’s wings healed, it said to itself: how
many days I am eating grasshoppers and snakes; I cannot regain the power of my
ancestors this way, for grasshoppers do not give me the strength I need. If I could catch
some bird I would feed myself; but let me catch that crow, my benefactor; I will eat it
and rest for a couple of days: when I regain strength, I will start to hunt according to the
customs of my ancestors. And he did so: he caught the crow and ate it. Then it began to
hunt large and fast-winged birds. And the crow gained no glory for its kindness, and
they talk of it as of an unreasonable suicide. Nor was the hawk censured for its
ingratitude and cruelty, for such is the usage and the custom of the hawk’s race: it
would lose strength and die feeding on those grasshoppers and so it behaved according
to the rules and saved itself from death. The crow, on the other hand, behaved contrary
to his own rules and died. The Persians, who were from the beginning, are now, and
1 The identification of the author and dating of his works has been a subject of scholarly debates.
Some modern scholars have suggested, though controversially, that the bulk of this work was, in fact,
authored by the 11th-century chronicler Leonti Mroveli while the author of its untitled continuation,
also ascribed to Juansher, is conventionally referred to as Pseudo-Juansher (Rapp 2003, 240;
Gogoladze 2018, 285).
2 It is difficult to identify this land by means of the historical sources of the epoch. Sindeti should be a
part of India. Such kind of knowledge about these corners of the earth was well reflected on the
historical and literary legacy of the European and Eastern peoples of early medieval times. India
represents for them a synonym for the whole East in general. Even Abyssinia (Ethiopia) was thought
to be one of the constituent parts of India for the world panorama (Gogoladze, 301-302).

10 Elene Gogiashvili, Teodosio De Bonis
will ever be in the future, the enemies of the worshippers of the cross, are now showing
love with a powerless hypocrisy. But when the time comes there will be no mercy or
fond memories on their part for the worshipers of the cross. This has happened more
than once, and we know this from books. When you saw the Persians exhausted by their
fight with me, you did not behave as you should, you did not rejoice and offer thanks to
your God, and summon other tribes and enemies to make war with the Persians and give
aid to the enemies of Persia. You did nothing of the kind, but leaving your fathers’
home turned to the commander of the great Christian army of Greeks, and (toiling
hard), in two years became the main support for the Persians. But as soon as they
recover, they will doom you and your country to destruction and eliminate a multitude
of cross worshipers. This you truly bring on yourself and on the heads of the
worshippers of the cross. Now, why did I tell you this parable about the crow? Because
you, King, sovereign and brave, voluntarily enslaved your own self to your enemy. So
why should I not call you unreasonable?” (Kartlis Tskhovreba 2014, 99).
King Vakhtang answers that he has arrived not as a servant of Persians, but as
a servant of Christ: “I came into this world not for its glory, not to serve the King
of Persia, but to serve the Creator, incomprehensible, and the consubstantial
Trinity, the maker of the world, in their glory, for ever and ever. By my appearance
here I am saving, in the first place, Jerusalem, the holy city, where the feet of our
Jesus Christ walked and where he toiled in order to save our souls.” (Kartlis
Tskhovreba 2014, 99-100). Vakhtang defeats the King of Sinds in the direct
combat but does not kill him. He spares the wounded king of the Sinds and brings
him to the king of Persia. With the mediation of the king Vakhtang, Persians
liberate him and achieve obeisance of Sindeti.
A BOOK OF WISDOM AND LIES BY SULKHAN-SABA ORBELIANI
The collection of fables by Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani (1658-1725) was written
at the end of the 17th century and in the early years of the 18th. Among his other
scholarly and literary works was a contribution to King Vakhtang VI’s translation
of the Persian Anwar-I-Suhaili into Georgian under the title of Kilila da Damana.
A Book of Wisdom and Lies (the Georgian original title is “Sibrdzne-sitsruisa”
which literally translates into “the wisdom of the lie”, or “the significance of the
fictional story”) is a so-called framing narration including fables, didactic legends,
fairytales, adventures and philosophical sentences, which is proof of the author’s
deep knowledge of literary sources and oral narratives.
In Orbeliani’s work, the setting is a king’s court. The protagonists are the great
and renowned monarch Pinez, his wise and ingenious vazir, Sedrak, and his chief
eunuch Ruka, a character of irascible and somewhat cynical disposition. In the
prologue, it is stated that the king’s only sorrow was that he had no children.
At length, God had pity on Pinez and granted him a son, whom he christened
Jumber. As the child grew up, his father wondered how to provide for his education,
until he had a dream in which he saw a young man of noble and splendid appearance.
As the king and his court are out hunting one day, they come upon a young man

In the Labyrinth of Fables… 11
asleep under a tree. His appearance corresponds exactly to that of the figure in the
king’s dream. It turns out that the young man’s name is Leon, an orphan; the
monarch then takes him to be a tutor to the young prince, his son. The remainder of
the work consists of an exchange of stories, parables, and aphorisms between the
various characters, in which Leon takes the opportunity to express liberal, if
sometimes Spartan views on education and on the duties of princes, and the eunuch
Ruka airs his realistic and disillusioned view of human nature.
The title of the work by Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani has an enigmatic underlying
message. The Georgian heading Sibrdzne Sitsruisa suggests two variants of
reading: wisdom of lies (falsehood), and wisdom of fiction (imaginary story).
Scholars focus on the similarity of the book’s name to that of another Georgian
classic, Sibrdzne Balahvarisi, the Wisdom of Balahvari, which became well known
in medieval Europe as the story of Barlaam and Josaphat. This is a Christianized
version of the life of the Buddha. The story reached Georgia through Iranian and
Arabic channels, and was subsequently rendered into Greek through the
intermediary of St. Euthymius the Athonite (c. 955-1028). Attention has already
been drawn by Georgian and European scholars to certain general affinities
between the two works. David M. Lang designated several specific features which
suggest that “Sulkhan-Saba had the Balahvari story directly in mind, or at least at
the back of his mind, when he set to work on his own book. Firstly, the word
“sibrdzne”, wisdom, occurs as the key-word in both titles. Secondly, the names
P’inez and Ruk’a given to the king and the eunuch in Orbeliani’s book strongly
recall those of the Indian king Abenes (in some variants, Iabenes) and his
astrologer Rak’isin the Wisdom of Balahvar” (Lang 1956: 440).
Many of the tales and fables used by Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani may be traced to
Persian, Turkish, Arabic, Greek or Indian sources, others were undoubtedly picked
up by Orbeliani from Georgian folk narrative tradition. A large number of the
humorous tales in A Book of Wisdom and Lies are international, and as such had
long become acclimatized in Georgian folklore. Reminiscences have been detected
of such works as Chardavrishiani (The four dervishes), Bakhtiarname (The book
of Bakhtiar), and Timsariani (The seven viziers) which are versions of medieval
Persian romances, translated into Georgian in the eighteenth century. The Sindbad-
Namah (the adventures of Sindbad) exists in a Georgian redaction, known as
Timsariani (Timsariani 1903). Bakhtiarname is the story of Prince Bakhtiar, son of
King Azdabakht. The plot of the romance is structured around fables told by nine
viziers (Gvakharia 1968, 4-7). Some tales originate from The Thousand Nights and
One Nights, i.e. ATU 62, The Fox and the Cock, and ATU 670, Knowledge of
Animal Languages.
Sulkhan-Saba did not collect all of his material from written sources. Many
components in his book are taken from Georgian folktales and some are original tales
created by Sulkhan Saba Orbeliani’s imagination. Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani assembled
these variegated motifs to create an imaginative ensemble infused with distinct and
authentic Georgian story-telling elements. In A book of Wisdom and Lies there are

12 Elene Gogiashvili, Teodosio De Bonis
more than 30 plots which are widespread in Georgian oral narrative repertoire
(Cholokashvili 2005, 7). Despite of framing narration and literary and folkloric
motifs, A book of Wisdom and Lies by Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani is an original work
with unique composition and teaching suggestions, still popular among Georgians as
a book which instructed and entertained many generations of readers.
THE ROLE OF ANIMALS IN THE FABLES IN CONTEXT OF EUROPEAN
AND ORIENTAL NARRATIVE TRADITIONS: THE THEME OF INGRATITUDE
The composition of the animal tales depends on oral narrative traditions and
historical-cultural processes. The international relations and diversity of forms are
very complex.3 One of the sources of animal tales is mythological beliefs but
certainly not the only one.4 The origin of motifs is not always clear, but variations
of cultural background are noticeable. As well as original, literary plots are also
included in the national repertoire of storytelling.5 Some of the animal tales are
undoubtedly borrowed and the plots also date back to ancient times. For example, a
lion or a monkey, never found in Georgian natural environment, became common
characters in Georgian folktales. Meanwhile, antiquity has left a rich fable heritage
in which animals play a big role. In Georgian folklore, there are many falls of
literary influences in the folktales: the plots from the national literature and the
plots from translated literature.
The animal tales broadly reflect the human life with its passions, greed, deceit,
stupidity, friendship, loyalty and gratitude. However, fables and animal tales are
different in terms of the genre specifics. Selected animal tales can be used for
creating fables but can be used for satire purposes too.
The animal tales present stories in which the animals are the main characters.
However, this feature is not completely reliable. In animal tales sometimes humans
3 The collecting of the Georgian folktales including animal tales started in the XIX century. Georgian
folklorists Aleksandre Khakhanashvili, Mikheil Chikovani, Apolon Tsanava, Pikria Zandukeli
focused on several cultural-historical aspects of Georgian animal tales such were: origins, themes,
didactic and entertainment functions, literary influences (Turashvili 209-211).
4 Rusudan Cholokashvili researched the animal tales in connection with the mythological relicts, pre-
Christian and pagan beliefs (Cholokashvili 2004, 2005, 2006).
5 Elene Virsaladze made the first systematization of the Georgian animal tales (Virsaladze 333-363).
Teimuraz Kurdovanidze continued the work on the catalogue of Georgian animal tales according to
the system of Anti Aarne and Stith Thompson (Kurdovanidze 2000). After T. Kurdovanidze’s
catalogue, there are 121 tale types of animal tales spread in Georgian folklore and only 69 of them
accord to the system of Aarne-Thompson Types of International Folktales (Kurdovanidze 2002: 168).
In 2010-2012, based on the Folklore Archive of Shota Rustaveli Institute of Georgian Literature, the
project “Electronic Platform of the Comparative Analysis of the Georgian Folk Prose” by Elguja
Dadunashvili was carried out (Web Platform of Comparative Folk Narrative Research 2012). Within
the frame of this project it was also created an electronic programme which helps to analyse the
episodes of the tales and to compare them with the Types of International Folktales’ catalogue. The
Electronic programme gave an opportunity to disclose the relevance of the types of the animal tales
which are not reached by the catalogue of the Types of International Folktales.

In the Labyrinth of Fables… 13
appear as in fairy tales, but the key difference between these genres is the role of
the animal: in fairy tales the animals are supporting characters and can be helpers
of the hero or antagonist figures, in animal tales, the hero is an animal itself and
people only the object of its actions.
Animal tales are not stories inspired by animal life, they actually have very
little to do with animals’ behaviour and habits. Yet, in order to give tales the
marks of realism and make them believable, animals act according to their
nature: the donkey brays, the cock crows, the fox lives in a hole, the bear is slow
and sleepy, etc.
The protagonists in the Panchatantra are mostly animals, both wild and
domestic. The allegories they represent draw on the Indian cultural tradition and,
by referring to it, allow us to quickly associate the characters with human flaws
and virtues. The psychological profile of some characters is certainly more
defined and fixed than others. The lion, for example, is always identified as the
undisputed king of the forest, noble, proud but often foolish: a characteristic that
legitimises the need for the text insofar as it was intended for educating about the
art of governing, although, according to many scholars, it was intended for
ministers rather than kings. The ruler therefore needs to be guided and supported
in his choices by advisors and this is where the two jackals Karataka and
Damanaka, the epitome of greed and cunning, come into play in the first book.
Their role is often played by the fox in the European tradition, as it is in the
Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani text, where its wit is also punished (e.g. in story 19,
“Building a village”). Moreover, in story 53 of the Georgian text “The Donkey
and the Tiger”, the tiger seems to replace the lion of the Panchatantra. The
reference to the frame story in Book I is clear: just as the lion, frightened by the
bestial moaning of what he does not know to be a harmless ox, decides not to
approach, so does the tiger, having heard the donkey. The latter, like the dog and
the snake, appears in both texts but with very different characteristics. In Indian
tradition it represents the one whose only priority is to satisfy the pleasures of the
flesh, specifically sexual activity and eating. In The Wisdom of the Lie, it takes
on a more ambivalent, but certainly more dignified, character: for example, the
wit-stupidity duplicity can be seen in stories 36 (“The Wolf as a Farrier”) and 46
(“The foolish donkey”). As for the dog, the Indian one is a symbol of spite and
greed and is associated with the unworthy activity of hunting, characteristics
which do not appear at all in the Georgian tradition (we see it for instance in
story 19, “Dog and cock work together”). Another important example of
deviation from the Indian tradition, as well as duplicity of role, is also given by
the figure of the snake. The Indian snake is double-tongued and double-crossing,
a character that cannot in any way be trusted but only feared. On the other hand,
the Georgian snake, although dangerous and treacherous as we see in story
110 “The man and the snake”, is also capable of gratitude, as it appears in stories
111 “The good-hearted snake” and 124 “The peasant and the three snakes”.

14 Elene Gogiashvili, Teodosio De Bonis
THE JOURNEY OF “THE CROCODILE, THE BRAHMAN, AND THE FOX”
As already mentioned, all ancient and medieval translations come from the
lost Pahlavi one, which in turn originates from the lost Ur-Panchatantra, the
original version. Before and while travelling to the West the text evolved and
transformed multiple times also within India itself and gave birth to many
different versions, making it hard to establish the initial structure and tales. Yet,
thanks to extensive scholarly research, we can group the Indian collections in two
main families: the North-Western and the Southern. In the North-Western family
the most relevant is the Tantrakhyayika, a version from Kashmir to which
Johannes Hertel assigned the primacy after bringing to light other numerous
unknown versions. On the other hand, the major representative of the Southern
Family is the so-called Southern Panchatantra, that Frank Edgerton believed
contains more than 75 per cent of the original prose after completing his attempt
to reconstruct the text of the original Panchatantra on the basis of all the extant
versions. Whether he succeeded or not most scholars would concede that “the
reconstructed text contains every story that was found in the original, and the
original contained no stories other than those included in the reconstructed text”
(Olivelle 1997).
The theme of ingratitude, along with the fable “The Crocodile, the Brahman,
and the Fox” can be found only in Southern versions of the Panchatantra.
Edgerton does not insert it in his reconstructed collection of fables considered
“original” and neither does Hertel. Nevertheless, it is appropriate to mention it in
this research context as it represents a clear direct link to Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani’s
work and many other.
“The Crocodile, the Brahman, and the Fox” falls in the category of ATU 155,
The rescued animal threatens to eat his benefactor, but is then returned to
captivity. The dynamics of this story type see a man (or an animal) who rescues a
character considered dangerous (crocodile, snake, etc.) from a trap, who then seeks
to kill the rescuer in return. Other characters (generally 3) are then asked whether a
good deed should be repaid with a bad one. The last of the judges is generally a fox
(or jackal), who asks the ungrateful to show how it was trapped. The latter is then
killed or kept in captivity.
This fable introduces a crocodile as one of the two main characters, typically a
symbol of hidden danger in Indian tradition. It is interesting to dwell on the choice
of judges: the first two are represented by a mango tree and a cow, both sacred to
Hindus, while the third and decisive one is a fox (or jackal depending on the
translations). As mentioned before, the latter represents the typical minister-
counsellor whose main characteristic is wit and seems to be indirectly elevated to
the level of the first judges, probably to underline once again his importance in
good governance. In this version of the story we therefore see how ingratitude is
eventually punished and the two characters ally themselves in doing so, a final
detail that will be totally reversed in the Georgian text.

In the Labyrinth of Fables… 15
THE CROCODILE, THE BRAHMAN, AND THE FOX, PANCHATANTRA
“A crocodile beseeched a Brahman to carry it to Benares, so it could live in the Ganges.
Touched with compassion, the Brahman put the crocodile into his bag and carried it to
the holy river. However, just as he was about to release the crocodile into the water, the
latter seized him, and was about to kill him. The Brahman accused his captor of
ingratitude, who in turn replied that virtue and custom allowed one to eat the person
who had sustained him. The Brahman insisted that three impartial judges should decide
the case, and declared himself willing to abide by their decision. They turned first to a
mango tree, whom the Brahman asked if it were permitted to repay a good deed with
evil. The mango tree replied that such was the treatment he and his kind always
received from humans. "They partake of our fruits and of our shade, and then uproot
us," it said. Next they turned to an old cow. She too said that humans had abandoned her
after she was of no more use to them. Any moment she expected to fall prey to a wild
animal. They still needed a third judgment, and for this they turned to a fox. He too
seemed inclined against the Brahman, but before finalizing his decision, he wanted to
see how the two had journeyed together. To demonstrate, the unsuspecting crocodile
crept back into the Brahmanʼs bag. Acting on a cue from the fox, the Braham struck the
now helpless crocodile dead with a stone, and the fox ate it up.” (Benfey 1859,
113-114. Abstract translation by D.L. Ashlimanʼs).
THE FARMER AND THE SNAKE, AESOP
One winter a Farmer found a Snake stiff and frozen with cold. He had compassion on it,
and taking it up, placed it in his bosom. The Snake was quickly revived by the warmth,
and resuming its natural instincts, bit its benefactor, inflicting on him a mortal wound.
“Oh,” cried the Farmer with his last breath, “I am rightly served for pitying a
scoundrel.” The greatest kindness will not bind the ungrateful. (Aesop 1887, translation
by George Fyler Townsend).
There is another Aesop’s version of the fable about ingratitude – “The Walnut
Tree”. Illustrating the ingratitude of those who requite good deeds with cruelty, it
concerns a walnut tree standing by the roadside whose nuts the passersby used to
knock off by throwing sticks and stones. It then complained, “People gladly enjoy my
fruits, but they have a terrible way of showing their gratitude.” Its complaint is related
to a debate on gratitude that occurs in a parallel Indian story from the Panchatantra.
There a mango tree is asked whether it is lawful to return evil for good and replies that
its experience of man is violent treatment despite providing him with fruit and shade.
In the Latin collection of anecdotes and tales Gesta Romanorum (Deeds of the
Romans), written in Latin by an anonymous English scribe about 1330, the story
about ungratefulness has the same structure as “The Crocodile, the Brahman, and
the Fox” but the characters are an emperor, a serpent and a philosopher:
ABOUT THE KING FREEING THE SERPENT, GESTA ROMANORUM
An emperor rode out in the afternoon to hunt. Happening to pass a certain wood, he
heard a serpent, which some shepherds had caught and bound firmly to a tree, making a

16 Elene Gogiashvili, Teodosio De Bonis
most horrible clamor. Moved by pity, he loosed it, and warmed its frozen body in his
own bosom. No sooner, however, did the animal find itself recovered, than it began to
bite its benefactor, and shot a flood of poison into the wound. “What have you done?”
said the emperor. “Wherefore have you rendered evil for good?” The serpent, like the
ass of Balaam, being suddenly endowed with voice, replied, “The propensities which
nature has implanted no one can destroy. You have done what you could; and I have
only acted according to my nature. You exhibited towards me all the kindness in your
power, and I have recompensed you as well as I might. I offered poison, because, except
poison, I had nothing to offer. Moreover, I am an enemy to man; for through him
I became punished with a curse.” As they thus contended, they entreated a philosopher
to judge between them, and to state which was in the wrong. “I know this matter,”
answered the umpire, “only by your relation; but I should like to see the thing itself
upon which I am to pronounce judgment. Let the serpent, therefore, be bound to the
tree, as he was in the first instance, and let my lord the emperor remain unbound; I shall
then determine the matter between you.” This was done accordingly. “Now you are
bound,” said the philosopher, addressing the serpent, loose yourself if you can.”
“I cannot,” said the serpent; “I am bound so fast that I can scarcely move.” “Then die,”
rejoined the philosopher, “by a just sentence. You were always ungrateful to man, and
you always will be. My lord, you are now free. Shake the venom from your bosom, and
go your way. Do not repeat your folly. Remember that the serpent is only influence by
his natural propensities.” The emperor thanked the philosopher for his assistance and
advice, and departed. (Gesta Romanorum 1906, 336-337, translation by Charles Swan).
In the end of this story is an appended moral: My beloved, the emperor is any
good ecclesiastic, the wood is the world, and the serpent is the devil. The shepherds
are the prophets, patriarchs, Christian preachers, etc. The philosopher is a discreet
confessor.
In The Thousand Nights and One Night, in the tale of the wolf and the fox
there is inserted tale of the ungrateful serpent: The serpent seeks help only as long
as its safety is threatened; when safe again, it threatens to bite its rescuer. This tale
is told in attractive and poetic way according to poetic characteristics of
The Thousand Nights and One Night. Cited is a text from John Payne’s translation:
THE TALE OF THE WOLF AND THE FOX,
THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND ONE NIGHT
As for the reward thou promisest me, I liken thee therein to the serpent that fled from
the charmer. A man saw her affrighted and said to her, “What ails thee, O serpent?”
Quoth she, “I am fleeing from the serpent-charmer, who is in chase of me, and if thou
wilt save me and hide me with thee, I will make fair thy recompense and do thee all
manner of kindness.” So he took her, moved both by desire of the promised recompense
and a wish to find favour with God, and hid her in his bosom. When the charmer had
passed and gone his way and the serpent had no longer any reason to fear, he said to
her, “Where is the recompense thou didst promise me? Behold, I have saved thee from
that thou dreadest.” “Tell me where I shall bite thee,” replied she, “for thou knowest we
overpass not that recompense.” So saying, she gave him a bite, of which he died.

In the Labyrinth of Fables… 17
And I liken thee, O dullard, to the serpent in her dealings with the man. Hast thou not
heard what the poet says? Trust not in one in whose heart thou hast made wrath to
abide/ And thinkest his anger at last is over and pacified./ Verily vipers, though smooth
and soft to the feel and the eye/ And graceful of movements they be, yet death-dealing
venom they hide.” (The Thousand Nights and One Night 1901, 33).
In A Book of Wisdom and Lies by Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani the fable on the
theme of ingratitude is included in the dispute between the main characters Ruka
and Leon. Ruka argues that no one ever returns a good deed for another.
THE MAN AND THE SNAKE, A BOOK OF WISDOM AND LIES
A man was going along the road when he saw a thorn-buch on with a snake caught in it.
Unable to escape, it was writhing and hissing. The man pitied it when he saw it, and said
to himself: “If I save the life of that snake it will be grateful to me.” He went up to the
bush and held out the point of his spear. The snake coiled round it, slid on to the man’s
shoulder and twined itself tightly round his neck. He asked it: “What harm have I done
you, that you should do this to me? Have I not saved you from death?” The snake said:
“Nobody ever repays one good deed with another, and neither shall I.” The man pleaded
with it: “Spare me until we come to that plane-tree yonder, and we will ask it to judge: if
the tree takes my part and forbids you to harm me, you shall let me go; otherwise, do with
me as you will!’ The snake loosened its hold a little and they went on and approached the
plane-tree. The man said to it: “I have saved the life of this snake, and now it is about to
strangle me.” The plane-tree said: “I, who am a tree, stand here alone in the heat of the
plains; there is nowhere for travelers to rest but in my shade. They come to refresh
themselves, and I provide this cool shelter for them. Then they break off my branches;
some of these they burn, others they make into little boxes, and say: “This is a fine piece
of wood!” No good deed is repaid with another. Serpent, tighten your hold!” The snake
squeezed the man’s neck more tightly, so that he begged it again: “Loosen your coils a
little! Here is an ox grazing: let us put our case to it.” They went on, and consulted the ox.
It said: “I plought, harrow and thresh the corn, from summer to winter I labour for men;
and they throw me to the ground and slaughter me because “a guest has arrived”! No one
ever returns a good deed for another: serpent, tighten you hold!” The snake clasped the
man’s neck still more tightly. He pleaded with it: “Spare me yet a little longer and let us
ask that fox over there!” They went on, and spoke to the fox. The man complained of the
snake’s ingratitude, and the snake repeated the verdict of the plane-tree and the ox. The
fox said to the snake: “I have been appointed Supreme Judge by the lion, the king of
beasts. How can I give judgement while you are coiled round this man’s neck? Release
him, and both of you go down on your knees!” As soon as the snake obeyed and glided to
the ground the fox struck it on the head with a piece of wood and killed it. “That is snake
justice!” it said. Then the man’s thoughts turned to the fox, and he decided to strike it with
his spear, thinking: “It has a fine pelt.” The fox divined what was in his mind and took to
its heels, saying to itself: “I was wrong to save him!” (Orbeliani 1982, 129-130, translation
by Katharine Vivian).
In Georgian folkloric version of the tale type ATU155 as main characters
appear a monkey, a snake and a fox.

18 Elene Gogiashvili, Teodosio De Bonis
THE FOX AS JUDGE, GEORGIAN FOLKTALE
Once a monkey saw a snake crushed under a large stone. The monkey raised the stone a
little and the snake crawled out. When it was at liberty, it said to the monkey, “I am
going to eat you.” The monkey answered, “Softly. First let us hear the judgment of
someone, and if I am condemned, then you shall eat me.” Afterwards they met the fox.
The fox said, “The better to render judgment I must see just how the matter has
happened.” They all returned to the spot and arranged matters as they were at first.
But as soon as the monkey saw the snake under the stone he cried out, “Where you are,
there I will leave you.” (Ketelauri 1977, 25-27, abstract’s translation by Elene
Gogiashvili).
This tale type are widespread in Asian folklore with several variations.
“The Jackal’s Judgement” from Sri Lanka with a crocodile and a man as main
characters (Parker, 1910, no. 63, pp. 339-40), Italian “The Ingrates” with a man, a
snake and a fox (Crane, 1885, no. 38, pp. 150-51), Sicilian “The Lion, the horse
and the fox” (Gonzenbach 1870, no. 69, pp. 77-78), Greek “The man, the serpent
and the fox” (Morosi 1870, 75), Pakistani “The young man and the snake”
(Swynnerton 1892, no. 42, pp. 133-38). In some folkloric versions, the judge is the
King Solomon, for example, in Romanian version of the ATU155 (Gaster 1915,
no. 112, pp. 325-326). In Europe, this type of story is documented in the twelfth
century by Petrus Alfonsus, Disciplina clericalis (No. 5) and in Gesta Romanorum.
CONCLUSION
Every Orientalist, dealing with fables is a folklorist, and every folklorist
becomes an Orientalist to some extent. Methodologically regarded, the study of
animal tales and fables has always indicated the interdisciplinary character of the
research. It is also important to notice that our work is not a matter of going back to
the 19th-century theories of tales’ migration, but an example of the importance of
cultural transfer in different regions. The literary approach and the folkloristic
approach thus come closer in examining the specifics of genres and their
possibilities of narrative interpretations.
REFERENCES CITED
Aesop’s Fables. Translated by George Fyler Townsend. Chicago: Belford, Clarke & Co.,
1887. https://www.sacred-texts.com/cla/aesop/index.htm
Alphonso-Karakala, John B. Facets of Panchatantra. Indian Literature, vol. 18, No. 2 (1975):
73-91.
Benfey, Theodor. Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und
Erzählungen. Bd. 1. Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859.
Cholokashvili, Rusudan. “Tskhovelta zgaprebis mtavari gmiri – melia” [A fox as main
character of the animal tales]. Kartuli Folklori XIX (2006): 52-59.
----------------. Udzveles Rtsmena-tsarmodgenata kvali khalkhur zgaprul eposshi [Traces of
old customs and beliefs in Georgian folktales]. Tbilisi: Nekeri, 2004.

In the Labyrinth of Fables… 19
----------------. Tskhovelta eposi [The Epics of Animals]. Tbilisi: Nekeri, 2005.
Crane, Thomas Frederick. Italian Popular Tales. London: Macmillan and Company, 1885.
Edgerton, F. The Panchatantra. George Allen Unwin LTD, 1965.
Edwardes, Stephen M. “Tree-worship in India”. Empire Forestry Journal. Commonwealth
Forestry Association, vol. 1, No. 1 (1922): 78-89.
Gaster, Moses. Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories. London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915.
Gesta Romanorum, translated by Charles Swan. London: George Bell and Sons, 1906.
No.no. 174, pp. 336-337.
Gogoladze, Andro. “The Myth of Alexander The Great in Medieval Georgian Chronicles”.
Études Balkaniques. LIV/2 (2018): 285-313.
Gonzenbach, Laura. Sicilianische Märchen, aus dem Volksmund gesammelt. Leipzig:
Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1870.
Grigore, George. Kalila wa Dimna and its journey to the world literature. Bucharest:
Center for Arab Studies, 2013.
Gvakharia, Aleksandre. Sparsuli khalkhuri dastanebis kartuli versiebi [Georgian versions
of Persian folk dastani]. Tbilisi: Metsniereba, 1968.
Gvakharia, Aleksandre. Kartul-sparsuli literaturuli urtiertobebis istoriidan [From the
history of Georgian-Persian literary relations]. Tbilisi: Tbilisi University Press, 1995.
Kartlis Tskhovreba. The Georgian chronicles (a history of Georgia), translated and with
commentary by Dmitri Gamq’relidze, Medea abashidze, Arrian Chant’uria. Georgian
National Academy of Sciences. Tbilisi: Artanuji Publishing, 2014.
Kurdovanidze, Teimuraz. Kartuli Zgapari [Georgian Folktale]. Tbilisi: Merani, 2002.
----------------. The index of Georgian folktale plot types: systematic directory, according to
the system of Aarne–Thompson. Tbilisi: Merani, 2000.
Lang, David M. “Wisdom and Lies: Variations on a Georgian Literary Theme”. Bulletin of
the School of Oriental and African Studies 18(03) (1956): 437-448.
Mabbet, Ian W. “The Date of the Arthashastra”. Journal of the American Oriental Society,
vol. 84, No. 2 (1964): 162-169.
Morosi, Giuseppe. Studi sui Dialetti Greci della Terra dʼOtranto: Preceduto da una
raccolta di Canti, Leggende, Proverbi, e Indovinelli. Lecce: Tip. Editrice Salentina,
1870.
Olivelle P. Pancatantra. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Orbeliani, Sulkhan-Saba. A Book of Wisdom and Lies. Translated by Katharine Vivian.
London: Octagon press, 1982.
Panaino A. La novella degli scacchi e della tavola reale. Milano: Mimesis, 1998.
Parker, Henry. Village Folk-Tales of Ceylon. vol. 1. London: Luzac and Company, 1910.
Pradeep Kumar Gautam. “Kautilya’s Arthashastra and the Panchatantra”. World Affairs:
The Journal of International Issues, vol. 18, No. 2 (2014): 64-73.
Rapp, Stephen H. Studies in Medieval Georgian Historiography: Early Texts and Eurasian
Contexts, Peeters, 2003.
Swynnerton, Charles. Indian Nightsʼ Entertainment: Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus.
London: Elliot Stock, 1892.
The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night. First completely done into English prose
and verse from the original Arabic by John Payne. In nine volumes. Volume 3.
London: printed for subscribers only, 1901. https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_Book_
of_the_Thousand_Nights_and_One_Night/The_Wolf_and_the_Fox

20 Elene Gogiashvili, Teodosio De Bonis
The Disciplina Clericalis of Petrus Alfonsi. University of California Press, 1977.
Timsariani. Edited by E. Takaishvili. Tbilisi: Artem Kutateladzis stamba, 1903.
Turashvili, Marine. “Several Questions of the Comparative Analysis of the Georgian
Animal Tales (According to the Archive Materials)”. Sjani. Journal of Literary
Theory and Comparative Literature XV (2014): 209-217.
Uther, Hans-Jörg. The Types of International Folktales: A Classification and Bibliography.
Based on the System of Antti Aarne and Stith Thompson. Vol. 1. Helsinki: Academia
Scientiarum Fennica, 2004.
Virsaladze, Elene. “Zgapris siuzhetta sadziebeli: zghaprebi tsxovelebis shesaxeb”
[The index of Folktales: animal tales]. Literaturuli Dziebani XII (1959): 333-363.
Web Platform of Comparative Folk Narrative Research. Author of the project Elguja
Dadunashvili. http://www.folktreasury.ge/Folklore/#englisch 2012.

NEW MODELS OF AZERBAIJANI,
TURKISH AND ENGLISH PROVERBS
KHANKISHI MEMMEDOV
ABSTRACT
There are now many works on this subject in academic journals around the world.
The reason is very simple: there are enough intelligent people who bow and kneel
before the depth, wisdom, power, intelligence and reason of the untold wealth of the
peopleʼs history called folklore. This study examines several new models of
proverbs and their structural-semantic analysis, not found either in reality or in
academic folklore archives. It is noted that these models and terms are used in the
literature for the first time by the author of these lines. These are the following:
1) dildonmez (unrelenting) proverbs – here the consonants “l” and “r” are not used,
causing the tongue to turn in the mouth; in other words, the language in such works
should remain in a stable state and not change its state during the performance;
2) evvel-akhir (beginning-end) proverbs – (literally “beginning-end”, i.e. the same
sound at the beginning and at the end of the line); 3) chokhyarpag (multi-leaved)
proverbs – literally “multi-leaf”; where the text is built on cross rhymes and named
according to the number of cross lines: ikiyarpag/goshayarpag (two-leaved/double
leaved), uchyarpag (three-leaved), dordyarpag (four-leaved), beshyarpag
(five-leaved), etc. The results of the study show that the internal semantics of
proverbs hides an inexhaustible stylistic richness, as well as reveal the possibility of
creating images of languages. It is noted that, from the point of view of the modern
system of thinking, the new models of approach of Azerbaijani, Turkish and English
proverbs “dildonmez”, “evvel-akhir” and “chokhyarpag” require their systematic
study, as well as their transmission to the younger generations. Because today the
world needs more intellectual weapons, and this is the need of the hour.
Keywords: Azerbaijani folklore, Turkish folklore, English folklore, “dildonmez”
proverbs, “evvel-akhir” proverbs, “chokhyarpag” proverbs, structural-semantic
analysis.
INTRODUCTION
Research shows that no genre of world folklore has had as many articles or
books written about it as proverbs and sayings. It would be wrong to give an exact
figure for this number, which now umbers fifty, perhaps hundreds of thousands.
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 21-35

22 Khankishi Memmedov
There are now many works on this subject in the press organs of the most advanced
countries of the world (Arnott 2007; Başgöz 2006; Bekiroğlu 2014; Dundes 1975;
Gray 2018; Kara 1995; Macadam 2006; Mieder 2019, Syzdykov 2014). In our
opinion, this is also natural. Because, there are many intelligent people who respect
the depth, wisdom and power of the untold wealth of the peopleʼs history called
folklore, and draw strength, power and lessons from it. To learn from proverbs,
though, one must be a diver. For that you need to study history, geography,
philosophy, logic, music, ethnography, mathematics, folk medicine, mythology,
pedagogy, psychology, almost all sciences. And this is not everyoneʼs destiny.
Because proverbs and sayings, considered small particles of the philosophy of life,
whose date of study is older than Aristotle, are masterpieces, each of them a book
without a “preface”, resembling a world with a thousand doors, but whose
mysterious and magical locks have not yet been fully opened. Each lock reveals
one mystery. Each lock has a magic code. It depends on who opens it and how one
enters this world, and if one can enter this world, how does one understand it, how
does one perceive it? Understanding them correctly and categorizing them
correctly and using them at the right time is wisdom in itself. People who are in the
essence of the blood and the soul is not reasonable, they are not given to
understand the folk wisdom, or rather, simply cannot. Therefore, a comprehensive
study of folklore is considered the most valid unit for society and confirms the
relevance of the problem under study. Because even today, many people have a
great need for proverbs. Because this philosophy, called “proverbs”, teaches people
to draw the right conclusions from life events and thus comprehend reality in the
mind, teaching an adequate perception of truth, expands the way of human
thinking, improves his tastes, brings joy to his soul, strengthens his will, or rather,
takes a person by the hand, becoming a light, a beacon, which leads him through
life, and as a result prolongs human life. In this sense we can use the expression:
“Whoever wants to live long, let him engage in folklore”. For this reason every
proverb and saying is as close and dear to us as every ayat of our holy book.
Therefore, our trust in them is very strong. These sayings, far from any assumption,
are axioms, not in need of correction or proof; they are immutable laws.
Apparently, for this reason proverbs and proverbs are considered the standard of
intellectual development of every nation. That is why one of the main tasks of
literary studies is the full disclosure of the mystery of proverbs, striking people
with the richness of form, breadth of content, simplicity, fluidity, truthfulness,
closeness to the peopleʼs spirit, wisdom. For this, new research is needed.
THREE NEW MODELS OF PROVERBS AND SAYINGS
This study examines several new models of proverbs and their structural and
semantic analysis, which have not been found either in reality or in academic
folklore archives. Note that these models and terms are used by us in the literature
for the first time. These are the following:

New Models of Azerbaijani, Turkish and English Proverbs 23
1) “Dildonmez” (unrelenting) proverbs – “dildonmez” refers to examples of
words that do not use the consonants “l” and “r”, causing the tongue to turn in the
mouth. In other words, the tongue in such works should remain in a stable state and
not change its state during performance;
2) “Evvel-akhir” (beginning-end) proverbs – literally “beginning-end” (i.e. the
same sound at the beginning and at the end of a line);
3) “Chokhyarpag” (multi-leaved) proverbs – literally “multi-leaved” etc.
Where the text is built on cross rhymes and named according to the number of
cross lines: ikiyarpag/goshayarpag (two-leaved/double-leaved), uchyarpag (three-
leaved), dordyarpag (four-leaved), beshyarpag (five-leaved), etc.
As seen, proverbs and sayings with rich semantic and stylistic features attract
attention not only with their ideological content and artistic meaning, but also with
the features of form. This means that each of the proverbs and sayings, similar to
the colorful plot and composition, drawn by the people and based on the
psychology of life, has its own life in the poetics, so its potential is very wide.
DISCUSSION AND RESULTS
1. “DILDONMEZ” (unrelenting) PROVERBS
First of all, what is dildonmez? “Dildonmez” refers to examples of words in
which the consonants “l” and “r” are not used, causing the tongue to turn in the
mouth. In other words, the language in such works should remain in a stable state
and not change its state during performance. By the way, in some literary circles
this phonopoetic operation is also called “dilterpenmez”. Thus, we conclude that
“dildonmez” is in fact a form of lipogram. It should be noted that the case of
omission of any letter or several letters in the text is still found in ancient sources.
Any omission of language in a text is called “lipogram” in English, “leipogramm”
in German, “lipogramme” in French, “lipograma” in Romanian, Spanish and
Portuguese, and “lipogram” in Russian. The term “λειπογραμμέτη”, formed from
the Greek words “λειπω” for “refusal” and “γράμ” for “writing”, is also called
“lipogram” in ancient Greek. İn the sixth century B.C., the Greek lyricist Lasus of
Hermionen wrote two poems without the letter “σ” (Ode to the Centaurs and Hymn
to Demeter). In history we also find poems without the letters “alpha” and “beta”.
Nestor of Laranda used this phrase when he rewrote Homerʼs Iliad. The most
famous lipograms are also found in the work of the French writer Jorj Pereka.
In his 300-page novel La Disparition, he did not use the letter “e” one of the most
common vowels in French. The book, titled “La Disparition” in Hungarian and
French, “Disappearance” in Russian and “A Void” in English, has been translated
into various languages, including English, Italian, German, Romanian, Spanish,
Turkish, Swedish, Dutch, Japanese and even Catalan. G. Derjavin of Turkish-Tatar
origin wrote twelve poems without an “r” between 1791 and 1802: “Anacreon in
Assembly” (consists of 31 lines and 138 words) – 1791, “Nightingale in Sleep”
(consists of 20 lines and 82 words) – 1797, etc. The Russian-American poet of

24 Khankishi Memmedov
Ukrainian origin, D. Burlyuk, also wrote poems without the presence of “r” and
“s”. The American writer Edgar Allan Poe did not use the letter “z” in his poem
“The Raven,” published in 1845. As you can see, this method has been used from
time to time and it is known to the literary world. It is also interesting that the
record in this area belongs to the American writer Ernest Vincent Wright. His
famous 1939 novel Gadsby, which is over 50,000 words, did not use the letter “e”!
In general, in world literature, we witness the refusal to use at most five letters at
the same time in both poetry and prose works. But in Azerbaijani and Turkish
literature, it is observed that nine letters which are pronounced without moving
your lips, are not used at the same time in the text. Of course, it is a miracle.
It should be noted that writing any work in English without using the letters
“z”, “x”, “g” is not so difficult, but writing anything in this language without
using the letters “a” and “e” is a difficult task. In both Azerbaijani and Turkish, it
is difficult to write even a small work without the presence of “l” and “r”
consonants, because the vast majority of words belonging to both languages
contain “l” and “r” consonants. But this work is not impossible. Works created
from words, which do not use the l and r consonants, are called “dildonmez” or
“lebdeymez” in the Azerbaijani and Turkish languages. According to researchers,
there is only one “dildonmez” poem in Azerbaijani and Turkish literature. It is
associated with the name of Aşıq Ələskər [Ashug Alesker]. In fact, this
“dildonmez” is erroneous. Now letʼs pay attention to the second and third stanzas
of this poem:
Gözüm sağı, səhər çağı, The right eye, early in early morning,
Gеyək ağı, gəzək bağı. Wearing white, walking in the garden.
Hamı sеvib bu sayağı, Thatʼs the way everyone likes to walk,
Qaymağa, həm yağa bax, bbax. Weʼll look at the sour cream, and butter.
Əziz ayə, müəmmayə, Dear, to the side of this secret,
Salsan sayə bu məvayə. If you look carefully at this paradise.
Səbəb sənsən bu sevdayə, The reason in this love is of course you,
Böyük ağa, sağa bax, bax! (Elçin, 1993: 39). My darling, look to the right, and right.
As we can see, the letters “l” and “p” are used in the poem, which indicates
the violation of the required conditions. Thus, we conclude that there are no poems
of the “dildonmez” form in Azerbaijani and Turkish literature. In any case, this is
true. Note that such poems occur only in the works of the author of these lines
(Memmedov, 2022, p. 186).
But i wonder if “dildonmez” refers to other samples of folklore, such as our
inexhaustible treasure proverbs? After all, most proverbs, characterized as “ready-
made poems”, are short poems. Our study shows that “dildonmez” is plentiful in
Azerbaijani, Turkish and English proverbs. More than five hundred proverbs were
included in the study, and it was noted that there are many “dildonmez” examples
among them.

New Models of Azerbaijani, Turkish and English Proverbs 25
1.1. EXAMPLES OF AZERBAIJANI “DILDONMEZ” PROVERBS:
• Asta get, amma usta get [Make haste slowly];
• Asta qaçana imam qənim [(To) put oneʼs best foot (leg) foremost];
• Baxma deyənə, bax dediyinə [Donʼt look at what he says, look at what he
does];
• Can de, can eşit [Give your soul, they will give soul];
• Cаvaba, cavab [To serve with the same sauce];
• Əkməyən biçməz [No pain, no gain/ No pains, no gains/ No gains, without
pains/ Nothing to be got without pains];
• Xoş sözdən kimsə doydum deməz [Meakness is not weakness];
• Kişi yıxdığını kəsməz [Never hit a man when he is down/ Donʼt strike a
man when he is down];
• Nə yeni dosta, nə də köhnə düşmənə güvənməyin [Trust not a new friend
nor an old enemy];
• Odda yanmaz, suda batmaz [Throw him into the Nile and he will come
up with a fish in his mouth];
• Öz yağında bişmək, qaynamaq [(To) stew in oneʼs juice];
• Sən mənə, mən də sənə [You roll my log and Iʼll roll yours];
• Sənə xoş, mənə də xoş [Fair field and no favour];
• Siçan tutmayan pişiyin nə faydası [Keep no more cats than will catch mice];
• Soğana baxıb göz yaşı axıtmaq [(To) weep over an onion];
• Yaxşının sədası yox, pisinsə söz-söhbəti çox [When I did well, I heard it
never; when I did ill, I heard it ever];
• Yanan ocağa su tökmək [(To) cool oneʼs heels];
• Zəhməti çox, qazancı az [A grain of wheat in a basket of chaff].
1.2. EXAMPLES OF TURKISH “DILDONMEZ” PROVERBS:
• Aç ayı oynamaz [An empty belly hears nobody];
• Az konuş, öz konuş [Deh ver your words not by number, but by weight];
• Can çıkmayınca huy çıkmaz [Change of habit cannot alter nature];
• Çox duyun, az konuşun [Hear much, speak little];
• Daz daznan yatdı, daz da naz atdı [A bald man slept with a bald woman,
and she flirted];
• Dediğim gibi yap, yaptığımı yapma [Do as I say, not as I do];
• Dumanı çok, sıcağı yok [Great boast, small roast];
• Göze göz, dişe diş [An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth];
• Havada köşk inşa etmek [He builds castles in the air];
• Hocanın dediğini yap, yaptığını yapma [Discourse is silver; silence is gold];
• Kan suya dönüşmez [Blood changes not into water];
• Kendi yağını kendi başına yakmak [(To) treat somebody with a dose of his
own medicine];

26 Khankishi Memmedov
• Koyundan vazgeçmektense yününden vazgeç [Better give the wool than
the whole sheep];
• Sakınamayacaksan ok atma [Do not shoot an arrow which you canʼt ward off];
• Şimdiki güne hiç gün çatamaz [There is no time like the present/ No time
like the present];
• Susuz kuyudan su çekmek [It is a bad well into which one must put water];
• Uyuyan kopegi uyatmayın [Let sleeping dogs lie/ It is ill to wake up
sleeping dogs];
• Yemek için yaşama, yaşamak işin ye [Do not live to eat, but eat to live];
1.3. EXAMPLES OF ENGLISH “DILDONMEZ” PROVERBS:
• A good beginning makes a good ending;
• A man can die but once;
• A man is known by the company he keeps;
• A penny saved is a penny gained;
• A quiet baby gets no suck;
• A stich in time saves nine;
• Appetite comes with eating;
• As a man is so is his company;
• Confidence is the companion of success;
• Diamond cuts diamond;
• Dogs do not bite dogs;
• Easy come, easy go;
• Give a dog a bad name and hang him;
• Man make houses, women make homes;
• Many a fine dish has nothing on it;
• Money makes money;
• Out of sight, out of mind;
• So many men, so many minds;
• The best defense is offence;
• Time is money.
Thus, by the example of samples of models of Azerbaijani, Turkish and English
proverbs and sayings “dildonmez”, we are living witnesses of how high the artistry
is, as if nothing is left out of stylistic control, and how unusual is the worldly folklore
– the national wealth, uniting all indentification indicators into a coded system of
thinking, that it is full of unsolved mysteries and new themes, which nobody has ever
known. Of course, this also means that from the point of view of the modern system
of thinking, folklore is an inseparable projection of national existence. In our opinion,
there is no need to prove that the issue under study is literally a new development for
folkloristics, a new model of approach, a new paradigm of thinking, a new mental
and spiritual discourse, a new model of the world opening before us. Because, for the

New Models of Azerbaijani, Turkish and English Proverbs 27
first time in the literature, the term “dildonmez” of the proverb indicates a new
world. In essence, this world is our own world, our memory, the world of our
national consciousness, our philosophy of ethnic wisdom, our national intellectual
potential, our ethno-psychological potential, which we carry in the depth of our
thought, but forget under the influence of the cosmic rhythm and aura of the new
times. Of course, what has been said is very interesting in terms of presenting and
correctly understanding the essence of the Azerbaijani, English and Turkish ethno-
cultural thought system and thereby the laws of the world defined by
phenomenological cognition. We believe that this article can also be considered a
valuable contribution for those who appreciate the inexhaustible wisdom of proverbs.
2. “EVVEL-AKHIR” (beginning-end) PROVERBS
One of the common, rich and colorful types of Azerbaijani and Turkish
literature are “evvel-akhir” works written in the form of poems. In such works, the
lines begin with the same letter and end with the same letter. Such works of verse
are sometimes called “literal” poetry. Although there is no strict prohibition, the
beginning and end of a poem are usually built on consonantal sounds. But there are
enough “evvel-akhir” poems that begin with vowels. Although “evvel-akhir”
verses are most often recited at ashug gatherings (mejlis), it is not forbidden to read
with the accompaniment of saz. The word begins with the consonant “n” and ends
with the same consonant:
Nazlı yarım, heç doymaram bu səndən, Sweetheart, I canʼt satiate enough of you,
Noğul-nabat şirin olmaz busəndən. Lollipop is not sweeter than you.
Nökər Cüma çox çəkinər bu səndən, The servant Juma is fearing of you,
Namərdlərin dilin vursun, baz ilan The man having betroitor let serpent bite tim.
(Efendiyev, 2013: 289).
But are folklore examples in the form of “evvel-akhir” applicable to proverbs?
Research shows that “evvel-akhir” is sufficient in Azerbaijani, Turkish and English
proverbs.
2.1. MODELS OF AZERBAIJANI “EVVEL-AKHIR” PROVERBS:
• İt də getdi, ip də getdi [If you sell the cow, you sell her milk too];
• Kipriklərilə od götürmək [(To) take the chestnut out of the fire with the
catʼs paw];
• Korun arvadına nə bəzək-düzək [(A) blind man`s wife needs no paint];
• Korun bircə arzusu olar, o da heç olmazsa bir gözü ilə görmək [(A) blind
manwould be glad to see];
• Köhnə hamama təzə nırx gətirmək [You cannot put an old head on young
shoulders];
• Könlü balıq istəyənin quyruğu suda gərək [He who would eat the nut must
first crack the shell/ For getting fish you mustnʼt mind diving for it/ Hewho

28 Khankishi Memmedov
would catch fish must notmind getting wet/ For getting fish never be afraid
of wetting your feet];
• Qurtdalayıb qurdunu çıxartmaq [Let well (enough) alone/ Leave well
alone/ Leave well enough alone];
• Mən varlı deyiləm ki, ucuz mal alım [(The) poor man pays for all (the poor
must pay for all];
• Neylərəm qızıl taxtı, təki qızıl baxtım olsun [(An) ounce of luck is better
thana pound of gold];
• Nə borc alan ol, nə borc verən [Neither a borrower nor a lender be];
• Nə əkərsən, onu da biçərsən [As a man sows, so shall he reap/ As you sow
you shall mow];
• Nə qədər az danışsan, o qədər ağıllı sayılarsan [(A) still tongue makes a
wise head/ A quiet tongue makes a wise head];
• Nə qədər çox bilsən, o qədər tez qocalarsan [Too much knowledge makes
the head bald];
• Nöqsansız dost axtarsan, dostsuz qalarsan [You will never have a friend if
you must have one without fault];
• Zurna-qaval olmasa, toy-düyün də olmaz [No longer pipe, no longer
dance].
2.2. MODELS OF TURKISH “EVVEL-AKHIR” PROVERBS:
• Akşamın işini sabaha bırakma [Make hay while the sun shines];
• Ecel geldi cihana, baş ağrısı bahane [Death takes no denial];
• Kara para gibi sahibine kayıtmak [Back again, like a bad penny];
• Kaz gibi uyanık olmak [Be on oneʼs guard];
• Kelbi iyi olmak [(To) wear oneʼs heart upon oneʼs sleeve];
• Kuruşu kuruşun üstüne koymak [(To) make both ends meet];
• Ne dostu seçende, ne de deyişende telesmeyin [Be slow in choosing a
friend, slower in changing him];
• Eğri ağaca “yayım” deme, her gördüğüne “dayım” deme [Believe nothing
of what you hear, and only half of what you see];
• Kiyamet gününe kalmak [(To) put off till Doomsday];
• Koyunu kurda emanet etmek [(To) set the wolf to keep the sheep];
• Kushʼu gözünden vurmak [(To) hit the high sports];
• Ne iyidir, ne kötü, ne yağlıdır, ne yavan [Neither good no bad, middling
well];
• Reng vermeyen iplige iyi demezler [It is an ill wool that will not take dye];
• Zehmet çekmeyen/çok çalışmayan bal yemez [He that will not work shall
not eat/ (To) sing for oneʼs supper];
• Zehmetsiz elde edilen kazancın bereketi olmaz [Light come, light go/
Lightly come, lightly go].

New Models of Azerbaijani, Turkish and English Proverbs 29
2.3. MODELS OF ENGLISH “EVVEL-AKHIR” PROVERBS:
• Donʼt count your chickens before they are hatched;
• Donʼt whistle (halloo) until you are out of the wood;
• Draw not your bow till your arrow is fixed;
• Dry feet, warm head bring safe to bed;
• Near the death he stands that stands near a crown;
• Necessity is the mother of invention;
• Need makes the queen spin;
• Neither rhyme nor reason;
• Never hit a man when he is down;
• Never write what you dare not sign;
• New brooms sweep clean;
• Nothing new under the sun;
• Saying and doing are two things;
• Scornful dogs will eat dirty puddings;
• So many countries so many customs;
• So many countries, so many customs;
• So many men, so many minds;
• Standers-by see more than gamesters;
• Two wrongs donʼt make a right;
• То be in oneʼs birthday suit;
• То find a mareʼs nest;
• То make both ends meet.
Thus, we observe a variety of examples of “evvel-akhir” forms that are part of
our folklore. In our opinion, the question under study attracts attention from the
point of view of cognition of many unwritten laws of the world.
3. “CHOKHYARPAG” (multi-leaved) PROVERBS
In the “chokhyarpag” poems, the lines are built on cross-rhymes with each
other from beginning to end, and these conditions persist in all stanzas.
Of course, it is very difficult to create such examples without a close
acquaintance with the subtleties of the language and the richness of its
vocabulary. Although “ikiyarpag”/“goshayarpag” (two-leaved/double-leaved)
forms are found in the works of many master artists, “chokhyarpag” forms are
found only in the works of Şamil Dəlidağ [Shamil Dalidag]. Both Azerbaijani
and Turkish proverbs contain enough “chokhyarpag”, especially “ikiyarpag”
(two-leaved) and “uchyarpag” (three-leaved). In our opinion, this is interesting,
as well as relevant in terms of the study of proverbs and sayings in a new way, in
a new context. Let us pay attention to one sample of the poem “goshayarpag” by
Aşıq Ələskər [Ashug Alesker]:

30 Khankishi Memmedov
Sallan qələm qaşdı, yanı yoldaşdı, Go, fine eyebrow beauty, beside your spouse,
Qalmışam ataşdı, mən başı daşdı. I felt myself in a fire, my head was very dizzy.
Huş başımdan çaşdı, dilim dolaşdı, Thoughts flew out of my head, my tongue was
slurred,
Gözlərim sataşdı, buxağa düşdü. And my eyes cought sight of your chin.
As you can see, here the words “qaşdı” and “yoldaşdı”, “ataşdı” and “daşdı”,
“çaşdı” and “dolaşdı” cross rhyme. These conditions persist until the end. Now
letʼs turn our attention to one quatrain:
Gəl, sözü ləl gözəl, məndən üzmə əl, Come to me, my beauty, donʼt leave me alone,
Olma xar, ver qərar, ol həmkar, simsar. Donʼt be shy, make up your mind, be a friend.
Dəcəl, şətəl əməl, yaradar xələl, Naughty, wicked deeds do harm,
Ol vəfadar, naçar qəlb zar-zar ağlar. Be faithful, my poor heart weeps.
Here the words “gəl”, “ləl”, “gözəl” and “əl” cross rhyme with each other, and
the number of such rhymes is four. in the second stanza, the words “xar”, “qərar”,
“həmkar” and “simsar” rhyme, and this condition is observed in all lines and
stanzas. The number of such rhymes in “üçyarpaq” verses is three, in “dördyarpaq”
four, in “beşyarpaq” five, in “altıyarpaq” six.
Studies show that the semantically rich Azerbaijani, Turkish and English
languages have enough “chokhyarpag” proverbs. Of course, this tells us that the
poetic thinking, national social consciousness and psychology of the speakers of all
three languages is very deep. Here we would like to draw attention to the richness
of the Azerbaijani language. For example, the three-word expression “Üz yara sarı”
[Uz yara sari] has no less and no more, exactly one hundred meanings. Of course,
these things are still a mystery to the literary world and are not explained (in the
futureI have in the plan and program to prepare such a work). It goes without
saying that explaining each such statement is an interesting dissertation.
It should be noted that, speaking of the structural-analytical nature of
proverbs, many researchers paid attention not to the meaning, but to the form, as in
this research paper. In our opinion, this is also legitimate. Because the inability to
fully analyze a fiction text with descriptive poetics is a well-known problem.in
other words, there is no absolute analysis that reveals all the codes of any work.
Thus, if all the codes of any artistic specimen are discovered, then development,
and therefore life, will stop. In other words, as long as the world is alive, the secret
codes of research will be revealed. Approaching this context, we propose to
supplement the existing classification of proverbs with the following groups:
1. “Ikiyarpag” (two-leaved) proverbs (often called “goshayarpag": double leaved);
2. “Uchyarpag” (three-leaved) proverbs;
3. “Dordyarpag” (four-leaved) proverbs;
4. “Beshyarpag” (five-leaved) proverbs, etc.
There are enough “ikiyarpag” proverbs in Azerbaijani, Turkish and English
folklore. But although there are “uchyarpag”, “dordyarpag” and “beshyarpag”

New Models of Azerbaijani, Turkish and English Proverbs 31
proverbs in Azerbaijani and Turkish folklore, we did not find such models of
proverbs in English folklore. But this cannot be the case. Of course, this is a
separate topic of research. Cross rhymes are highlighted in italics.
3.1. AZERBAIJANI “IKIYARPAG” PROVERBS:
• Adamı adam eyləyən paradı, parasız adamın üzü qaradı [Money makes a
man/ Wealth makes the man/ Money makes the man];
• Adın nədir İrəşid, birini de, beşini eşit [Give every man thy ear, but fewthy
voice/ Hear much, speak little];
• Ağa odda yanmaz, suda da batmaz [(The) Queen never dies];
• Ağası çox, nökəri yox [Too many chiefs, not enough indians];
• Ağası gülüm, başına külüm [As is the gardener, so is the garden];
• Axmaq axmağı görər, tez də onu tərif edər [One fool praises another];
• Al paxla, gül paxla, şeytan gəldi torpaxla [Soon learnt, soon forgotten/
Soon learn, soon forgotten];
• Arsıza söz, kümbəzə qoz [Like water off a duckʼs back/ (A) fine fellow
indeed!];
• Аz aşım, ağrımaz başım [(A) steel tongue makes a wise head];
• Bir balaca boyu var, dam dolusu toyu var [(A) little body often harbours a
great soul/ Shallow streams (waters) make most din];
• El gücü, sel gücü [Many hands make light work/ More hands mean more
work];
• Günəşi udsa da qara buludlar, yenə günəş adlı bir qüdrəti var [(The)
Мoonis a Мoon whether it shines or notbv];
• Harda aş, orda baş [Where God builds a church, the devil will build a
chapel];
• Saxla samanı, gələr zamanı [It`s no good throwing away dirty water until
one`s got clean];
• Səhər naxıra, axşam axura [Go to bed with the lamb and rise with the lark].
3.2. TURKISH “IKIYARPAG” PROVERBS:
• Aba da bir, diba da bir giyene, güzel de bir, çirkin de bir sevene [Where
love fails, we spy all faults];
• Alimin sefaleti, alemin sefaleti [Misery of the scholar, misery of the world];
• Allah imhal eder, ihmal etmez [God stays long, but strikes at last];
• Anlayana sivrisinek saz, anlamayana davul zurna az [A word to the wise is
enough];
• Az konuş, öz konuş [Deh ver your words not by number, but by weight];
• Bir elin nesi var, iki elin sesi var [Many hands make light work];
• Cömertlik fazilet, cimrilik ise rezalet [Generosity is virtue and misery is
vice];

32 Khankishi Memmedov
• Dikensiz gül olmaz, engelsiz yar olmaz [There is no garden without its
weeds];
• Haydan gelen huya gider, selden gelen suya gider [Easy come, easy go];
• İt ürür, kervan yürür [The moon does not heed the barking of dogs];
• Nerde hareket, orda bereket [Business is the salt of life];
• Sabır zafere, sabırsızlık da küfre götürür [Patience leads to triumph, and
impatience to blasphemy];
• Sana vereyim bir öğüt, kendi ununu kendin üğüt [If you want a thing well
done, do it yourself];
• Sevgi üzel, nefret genel [Love is particular, hatred is general];
• Sona kalan, dona kalır [First come, first served].
3.3. ENGLISH “IKIYARPAG” PROVERBS:
• A fault confessed is half redressed;
• A friend in need is a friend indeed;
• A good beginning makes a good ending;
• A little pot is soon hot;
• A man of words and not of deeds is like a garden full of weeds;
• After dinner sit a while, after supper walk a mile;
• An hour is the morning is worth two in the evening;
• As you saw, you shall mow;
• Eat at pleasure, drink with measure;
• Fast bind, fast find;
• Forewarned, forearmed;
• Harm watch, harm catch;
• Keen eyes are small gain in the head without brain;
• Man make houses, women make homes;
• Money spent on the brain is never spent in vain;
• No bees no honey, no work no money;
• Some are wise and some are otherwise;
• The proof of the pudding is in the eating;
• What canʼt be cured, must be endured;
• То know everything is to know nothing.
3.4. AZERBAIJANI” UCHYARPAG” PROVERBS:
• Aftan olsun, oftan olsun, təki oğlana qaftan olsun [Catch not at the shadow
and lose the substance];
• Alaq otu nə əkilər, nə də səpilər, özü artıb törəyər [A weed is neither
planted nor sown, it grows and reproduces];
• Ağ ərik, sarı ərik, dərərik, görərik [White apricot, yellow apricot, we will
cut it, we will see];

New Models of Azerbaijani, Turkish and English Proverbs 33
• Aparanda el aparar, yel aparar, sel aparar [When carried away, the land
carries away, the wind carries away, the flood carries away];
• Atdım göyə fındığı, nəyimə lazım nə qaldığı, nə sındığı [I threw a hazelnut
into the sky, I donʼt care if itʼs broken or left intact];
• Baş kəsənin, yaş kəsənin, daş kəsənin axırı olmaz [There is no end to the
beheading, the age-cutting, the stone-cutting].
3.5. TURKISH “UCHYARPAG” PROVERBS:
• Allah verirse el getirir, sel getirir, yel getirir [When carried away, the land
carries away, the wind carries away, the flood carries away];
• Alli yelek, pullu yelek, gomlek yok, canfes neye gerek? [Red vest, sequin
embroidered vest, no shirt, canfels, what more do you need?];
• Armudu sapıyla, üzümü çöpüyle, pekmezi küpüyle [A pear is recognized
by its stem and a grape by its whorl];
• Buyurmadan tutan evlat, gun dogmadan kalkan avrat, deh demeden
yuruyen at [The child who does not listen to words, the woman who getsup
before sunrise, the horse who walks without fear];
• Besledik büyüttük danayı, şimdi tanımaz oldu anayı, babayı [Have nursed
and raised the calf, and now it does not recognize its mother and father];
• Varsa pulun, herkes kulun, yoksa pulun, dardır yolun [If you have money,
the whole world is yours];
• Yaman komşu, yaman avrat, yaman at, birinden göç, birin boşa, birin sat
[Better a finger off than aye wagging].
3.6. AZERBAIJANI “DORDYARPAG” PROVERBS:
• Alma arvadın dulunu, dalıynan gələr qulunu, satar sоyar pulunu, ayrı qоyar
malını [Donʼt marry a widow, her newborn will follow her, will sell and
steal your money, and separate your property];
• Dərdi kim çəkər-kəməsər, söyüşü kim deyər-eybəcər [Whoever takes pain
is a bad person, and whoever curses is ugly].
3.7. TURKISH “DORDYARPAG” PROVERBS:
• Erken kalkmayan avrat, söz dinlemeyen evlat, mahmuzla gitmeyen at,
kapında varsa kaldır at [The wife who does not get up early, the son who
does not obey, the horse that does not go with a spur; If you have it at your
door, remove it and throw it away].
It should be noted that “goshayarpag” proverbs with the same structure and
the same meaning are numerous in the Azerbaijani-Turkish-English languages. Let
us focus on some examples:
• Dəymə mənə, dəyməyim sənə (azeri),
Vurma bana, vurmayım sana (türk),
Donʼt trouble trouble until trouble troubles you (english);

34 Khankishi Memmedov
• Gərək əkəsən, sonra da biçəsən (azeri),
Gerek ekesen, sonra da biçesen (türk),
[No pain, no gain/ No pains, no gains/ No gains, without pains] (english);
• Nahardan sonra istirahət, şamdan sonrasa hərəkət (azeri),
Nahardan sonra elleş, şamdan sonra eyleş (türk),
[After dinner rest a while, after supper walk a mile/ After dinner sit a while,
after supper walk a mile] (english);
• Tapdın sənindir, tapmadın özgənindir (azeri),
Bulsan senindir, bulmasan özge birisinindir (türk),
[Finders keepers, losers weepers] (english).
• Tərifi çox, təltifi az (azeri),
Terifi çok, teltifi yok (türk),
[Great boast, small roast] (english);
• Ürək istəyər, dil də deyər (azeri),
Kalp ne ister, dil de onu diyer (türk),
[What the heart thinks the tongue speaks] (english).
CONCLUSION
Thus, when approaching the problem from the point of view of the principles
of folklore poetics, the historical landscape of proverbs and sayings, its genre
features, artistic and aesthetic function and, as a consequence, the national-
spiritual, artistic thinking and historical-cultural thinking of folk-spiritual, artistic
thinking and historical-cultural thinking of peoples, which is seen by how many
new problems arise from the research. The result of the research is that in the
internal semantics of proverbs inexhaustible stylistic wealth is hidden, which is a
reliable foundation, a powerful base for beautiful and unexpected artistic and
aesthetic discoveries, stylistic findings. In this sense, the task is to do more serious
work and systematize proverbs in terms of ideological-compositional, volume-
rhythmic/poetic, linguistic, their study from ethno-cultural and ethno-psychological
aspects, as well as the study of the complex of these aspects as philosophical
concepts. Because, such poetic models, which are the most important code of the
national-energetic system of thinking and ethno-cosmic code of behavior, linking
ethno-cultural memory with its roots and ancient historical origins, increase the
creative activity of people, it is important in enriching their spirituality and artistic
thinking, in understanding the phenomenological essence of the world and in
understanding its regularities determined by phenomenological cognition.
In approaching all of the above from the point of view of the modern system of
thinking, the new models of “dildonmez”, “evvel-akhir” and “chokhyarpag”
approach of Azerbaijani, Turkish and English proverbs should be systematically
studied and brought to the younger generations. Because today the world needs
more intellectual weapons, and this is the need of the hour.

New Models of Azerbaijani, Turkish and English Proverbs 35
REFERENCES
Arnott, Stephen (2007). Peculiar Proverbs. Weird Words of Wisdom from Around the
World. New York: St. Martinʼs Press, 271 pp.
Başgöz, İlhan (2006). “Atasözleri Hakkında Atasözleri ya da Atasözlerinin Toplumsal
Anlamı” [Proverbs about Proverbs or Social Meaning of Proverbs]. Çev. Toçoğlu,
N.T. Millî Folklor 70: 85-91.
Bekiroğlu, Onur (2014). “Türkçe Atasözlerinde İletişim Olgusunun İzleri ve Sosyo-
Kültürel Çıkarımları” [Traces of Communication Phenomenon in Turkish Proverbs
and Socio-Cultural Implications]. Millî Folklor 103: 80-98.
Dundes, Alan (1975). “On The Structure of the Proverb”. Proverbium 25: 961-973.
Elçin, Quliyev Vilayət (1993). Özümüz və sözümüz [We and our Word]. Bakı: Azərnəşr,
115 pp.
Əfəndiyev, Paşa (2013). Azərbaycan şifahi xalq ədəbiyyatı [Azerbaijani Oral Folk
Literature]. Bakı: Elm və təhsil, 404 pp.
Gray, James (2018). Proverbs and Maxims from Burmese Sources; or the Nîti Literature of
Burma. London: Trubner & Co., 1886; rpt. London: Forgotten Books, 175 pp.
Kara, Gyorgy (1995). “ʼThe Bush Protects the Little Birdʼ.” Acta Orientalia Academiae
Scientiarum Hungaricae. Tomus 48, 3, pp. 421-428.
Macadam, J.H. (2006). A Collection of Proverbs of All Nations on Bread and Baking.
London: MacLaren, 1924. Rpt. Belgrade: Balkankult Foundation, 161 pp.
Məmmədov, Xankişi (2022). “Yüzə yüz” [One Hundred Poems]. Şeirlər. Bakı, Müəllim.
215 pp.
Mieder, Wolfgang (2019). “American Proverbs and Related Sayings.” American Folklore and
Folklife Studies. Ed. Simon J. Bronner. New York: Oxford University Press, 146-168.
Syzdykov, Kanat (2014). “Contrastive Studies on Proverbs.” Procedia – Social and
Behavioral Sciences 136, pp. 318-321.

PERSONAL EXPERIENCE NARRATIVES AT THE
CROSSROAD OF ARCHAEOLOGY AND FOLKLORE
HİCRAN KARATAŞ
ABSTRACT
Archaeological heritage of Turkey has been suffering for ages from severe
destruction through the activities of local antiquities looters. The main reasons for
this escalating phenomenon among the Turkish population include poverty,
enhanced global demand for looted archaeological material in the worldwide
market, gaps in laws, folklore, and the addiction to adrenalin experienced by looters.
To comprehend the ongoing archaeological destruction caused by looters in Turkey,
we need to be willing to investigate their folklore formed in the framework of illicit
looting. Even though Turkish law strictly states looting as a crime, Anatolian-
Turkish folklore, including oral tradition, does not condemn looters even as
deviants. Hence, folklore must be listed as one of the significant excuses why
Anatolian archaeological heritage keeps being looted. In recent decades, the
destruction of archaeological sites of Anatolia and the loss of cultural heritage have
entered a dangerous phase due to local looters having access to technological
devices, software, and international connections, as well as folkloric spiritual,
ritualistic guidance. My research aims to understand how and under which
circumstances looters become looters in the first place.
Keywords: Turkey, cultural heritage, folklore, antiquities looters, personal
experience narratives.
INTRODUCTION
Archaeology and folklore use different lenses to attach meaning to the past.
Folklorists take the past as a given and describe and explain change; or take change
as a given and describe and explain that which perseveres (Oring 2012, 224). This
past is created by people who have used objects, built landscapes, and invented
rituals and traditions which reflect their ethos. Hence it is crucial to understand the
material remains, rituals, and traditions of the people of the past and to interpret
these within their contexts, whether in the form of folklore or archeology. At times,
folklore provides a rational interpretation for materials and whether they can prove
uninterrupted continuity of transmission.
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 36-56

Personal Experience Narratives at the Crossroad of Archaeology and Folklore 37
Moreover, folklore promises some later interpretations of historical sites.
Contemporary folklore presents attitudes toward various aspects of cultural heritage
protection and preservation, as the two disciplines were formed with common
motivations. Folklore was proposed to define the latter forms of old antiquities
(Thomas 1846, 862). In the past, folklore was commonly understood as comparing
and identifying remnants of archaic beliefs and customs in modern-age traditions.
It was attributed to less cultured people (Gomme 1890, 3). Therefore, this relatively
limited definition of folklore referred solely to illiterate peasants who were able to
store and transmit their folklore via face-to-face interaction. The ability to write and
cultural transmission functioned as critical criteria in deciding whose folklore was
worth being studied for a long time (Newell 1891). The definition of folklore
included communicative, aesthetic, and performative aspects of life. Dundes defined
folk broadly as any group of people who shared at least one common factor and
added that we are all folk in the presence of others (Dundes 1977). Hence, folklorists
started to study oral traditions such as legends, tales and proverbs, rituals, social
norms, and beliefs connected to the past and present.
Folklorists and archaeologists view all tangible and intangible deeds of human
beings as fast-disappearing relics of the past (Bascom 1953; Dorson 1970;
Gazin-Schwartz and Holtorf 1999). Lore refers to past knowledge of a society that
has inadvertently survived but is in danger of dying out (Ben-Amos 1984, 104).
The goal of archaeology is not to reconstruct the one actual past, but to develop
rich and sensitive interpretations, to make the past intelligible in the present.
Many such interpretations and understandings of the past are therefore possible.
Both folklorists and archaeologists record their findings as comprehensively as
they can, knowing that their records will likely be all that future generations will
have (Gazin-Schwartz and Hortorf 1999, 5-6).
Folklore gives researchers a more expansive, interdisciplinary space where
they can explore, analyze and interpret daily life about a particular archeological
object. Numerous studies have emphasized the importance and value of folklore in
understanding a specific group, society, and phenomenon (Merrifield 1987;
Renfrew 1994; Gilchrist 2008; Gazin-Schwartz and Holtorf 1999; Gazin-Schwartz
2001; Layton 1999; Shankland 1999; Matsuda 1998; Gündüz 2001). Even though
what archaeological objects mean or still mean to people in their daily lives can be
interpreted in different ways, anthropologists, folklorists, and archaeologists share
a common concern that the archaeological heritage of nations faces severe
destruction due to the activities of local antiquities looters. The potential and
irreversible loss of valuable cultural and historical information that may be used to
trace the history of humanity brings the two disciplines together to understand why
looters turn their backs on their cultural heritage. The results of this study suggest
that ethnoarchaeological fieldwork enables us to explore the social, cultural,
economic, and political reasons behind illicit looting. Knowing why and how
antiquity looters pursue their activity is a first step that may help communities to

38 Hicran Karataş
take measures to stop it. Interviews with antiquities looters provide archaeologists
with essential and multifaceted information, including the motivations, dimensions,
and methods behind the looting and vandalizing of archaeological sites and the
prevalence of antiquities looting at local and global levels. This study has also
shown that a lack of cultural heritage awareness stems from folklore,
re-interpretation of hadiths, and cultural codes which tolerate ongoing illicit looting.
Turkish looters have little understanding of the value of their cultural heritage rooted
in Prehistoric times. This is a significant problem that national and global
archaeological heritage protection and preservation programs must deal with.
METHODS AND DATA
Conducting fieldwork in three cities in the Black Sea Region of Turkey,
known as Paphlagonia, in the past, I was able to work among active looters
between June 2017 and September 2017. A retired looter and mentor, Muslim,
introduced me to the looters who were working in groups of six to eight. I aimed to
understand the motivations and dimensions of antiquities looting and to draw an
ethnographic picture of how this very phenomenon has been able to continue
despite penal codes. Thanks to being introduced to the looters by one of their most
respected mentors, I interviewed 68 active and 23 retired members of the looter
community by assuring them anonymity both in audio recordings and written
records. All respondents’ real names were exchanged with pseudonyms, which are
common Turkish male names to protect the privacy and security of informants as a
critical ethical responsibility for the research (Hick 1977; Amstrong 1993;
Guenther 2009; McCormack et al. l, 2012; Svalastog and Eriksson 2010; Brear
2018). The interviews conducted during fieldwork were unstructured to allow
topics relevant to the different dimensions of the study to surface unexpectedly.
I have to say that this preference became helpful in the field as each interview
brought new questions to ask the next informant and redirected me to previous
ones to fill specific gaps. The questions asked during the interviews were
categorized into four groups: Personal information; extent and type of participation
in illegal excavations; methods and knowledge used and gained during their
practices; and feelings, thoughts, and attitudes about unlawful digging.
The questions in the personal information category related to how looters started
for the first time were replied to with personal experience narratives. These
personal experience narratives focusing on the first illicit excavations reflect the
motivations of looters who had gained so much field experience during the
interviews. Even though Turkey’s illegal excavations have previously been related
to poverty in prior studies, I must say that all informants in the present study,
including retired looters, had regular income, and their motivation to loot was not
even remotely related to poverty (Özdoğan 2005, 111-123; Özel and Karadayı
1998, 1-14; Özgen 2001, 119-120; Rose and Acar 1995; Lawrence and Main 1995,
150-160; Brodie 2002, 2-3; Atwood 2004, 144). This false assumption is likely

Personal Experience Narratives at the Crossroad of Archaeology and Folklore 39
caused by the inadequacy of ethnographic and qualitative studies conducted among
treasure hunters in Turkey. Both folklorists and anthropologists are reluctant to
perform field work on criminal groups.
Enthusiastic researchers, on the other hand, must be willing to face difficulties
while working on the fine line between crimefighting teams and criminals (Inciardi
1993; Burgois 1989; Amstrong 1993; Small 1983; Humphreys 1970; Scarce 1994;
Källman and Korsell, 2009; Şenesen 2016; Yolcu and Karakaya 2017; Uysal 1974;
1983; 1985). However, the tendency of folklorists to gravitate towards marginal or
otherwise overlooked social groups is valuable precisely because sociological
understanding cannot rest solely on the grasp of the mainstream (Oring 2012: xvii).
Instead of judging looters and other criminal groups, we should try to understand
them, as knowing the structure of a problem is also the key to solving it. Studies
show that plundering archaeological heritage dates to ancient times, and its
motivations and structures vary from culture to culture (Wobst 2013; Weihe 1995;
Vitelli 1996; Özdoğan 2002; Al-Houdalieh 2012). Studies also show that looters’
motivations, strategies, and methods to deal with the guilt are affected by the
culture in which they work (Kimberly 2012; Barker 2018; Bauer 2015; Campbell
2013; Matsuda 1998; Karataş 2021).
The age of the active looters in this study ranged from 19 to 49, and all were
trained in traditional occupations such as carpentry, turnery, and foundry, which
gave them qualifications and experience to use in excavations that require
operating hoists, pulleys, forklifts, and in one case even dynamite. Four retired
looters mentored active ones as they had a lot of field experience. The personal
experience narratives of the former members of the looter community included
methods, knowledge, and strategies. These narratives also reflected how and why
they became looters and their motivation when they started.
CULTURAL AND FOLKLORIC EXCUSES FOR LOOTING
Turkey’s archaeological loss through illicit excavations has been reported in
several studies, in which inadequacy of law enforcement and poverty have been
introduced as main causes of the problem (Özdoğan 2005, 111-123; Özel and
Karadayı 1998, 1-14; Özgen 2001, 119-120; Rose and Acar 1995; Lawrence and
Main 1995, 150-160; Brodie 2002, 2-3; Atwood 2004, 144). Few have emphasized
the impacts of culture and folklore on cultural heritage protection and preservation
(Matsuda 1998; Moses 2015; Bauer 2015; Al-Houdalieh 2012a, 2012b, 2012c;
Atwood 2004; Shapiro 1994; Karataş 2021).
In the case of Turkey, culture and folklore supply an eligible environment
where looters perform illicit activities without feeling any guilt and being socially
labeled as criminals. First, social actors not involved in looting do not view looters
as criminals as their activity does not harm the innocent and the society directly.
Non-intellectual informants stated that looters are not as dangerous as other
criminals such as rapists, murderers, and thieves. Most of them were not aware that

40 Hicran Karataş
looters were plundering their and future generation’s cultural heritage. They simply
made fun of looters with nicknames such as gravediggers, grave engineers, sappers,
and contractors. As the looters interviewed had fulltime jobs in respected
traditional occupations, they knew that these tags only referred to their night work,
so they did not seem to care. The second reason why people do not label looters as
criminals is related to their labor which is viewed as sacred. Informants not
involved in looting stated that looters were being exploited by high level agents in
organized antiquities trafficking who are the real criminals to be accused. Indeed,
looters earn only one to five percent of the final sale in the network of antiquities
trafficking (Shapiro 1994; Kimberly 2012; Rose 1993; Thorasarat 2001; Durney
2013). Folk beliefs such as luck, destiny and sharing encourage looters to believe
that they only follow their fate which has been already written. All the stress
experienced before, during, and after excavations are eased by attributing all
possibilities to destiny, luck, and sharing. Most of the informants stated that luck is
at the very center of the activity, and they just push it to the edge. One of the active
looters, Ergül stated: “We take all sorts of precautions by having hojas by our side,
not entering into the site without ablution, keeping it clean. However, if someone
among us is to get sick or struck by jinn, it will happen anyway”. The notions of
luck, destiny and sharing and their relation to the treasures are often reported in
cross-cultural studies, showing that looting is mostly related to the notion of luck.
Luck promises looters that digging at the right place and time can make them rich
overnight (Al-Shamy 2005; Foster 1964; Coldwell 1977; Moses 2015; Shuzhong
2001). Narratives, tales, and legends handed down through generations guarantee
that once upon time people lived in Anatolia who got rich overnight, and looters
can do it too if they are lucky. During my fieldwork, I personally witnessed looters
console themselves by telling narratives of a distant past when heroes were tested
over and over again before they were awarded with treasures. Indeed, the strongest
motivation of ongoing antiquities looting in Turkey is the treasure narrative that
real persons turned into heroes over time. Theoretically this perception is
acceptable since personal experience narratives told through generations tend to be
anonymized and become legends. Indeed, all personal experience narratives,
particularly ones with supernatural components, might eventually turn into legends
(Dégh and Vázsonyi 1974, 239).
TREASURE NARRATIVES IN ANATOLIAN-TURKISH FOLKLORE
Finding buried treasure is one of the oldest and most common motifs in oral
tradition worldwide, and folk heroes are expected to discover buried or hidden
treasures. Treasure tales are short historical accounts that deal with people who
lived in distant or recent past, in local places as well known by locals. Supernatural
spirits, such as ghosts, devils, and jinn, accompany or protect buried treasures that
wait for the prospectus owner. Treasure narratives promise people that only those
with a pure heart and intention are awarded treasures (Foster 1964; El-Shamy

Personal Experience Narratives at the Crossroad of Archaeology and Folklore 41
2005; Ernst and Garry 2005; Hurley 1951; Foster 1964; Uysal 1974, 1983, 1985;
Yolcu and Karakaya 2017; Rose 2019; Boratav 2013; Alangu 1990).
Treasure narratives in Anatolian Turkish oral tradition warn looters about the
dangerous aspects of searching for treasures, but also encourage them to look for
treasures constantly and patiently. Turkish buried treasure narratives include
golden, silver coins or jewel deposits located in wells, mills, caves, landscapes, or
under a certain tree. Traditional treasure narratives do not mention other
archaeological objects, such as statues. The narratives introduce valuable materials
that can be melted and sold in the market as soon as they are discovered. Therefore,
proto forms of personal experience narratives do not contain archaeological assets
that are not gold or silver, as the value of historical artifacts that cannot be
converted into money by melting was only discovered after World War II. Studies
on the history of illicit antiquity looting show that the priceless sentimental value
of archaeological objects has been understood (Simmel 2004, 73-76; Addyman
2001, 141-144; Ali and Coningham 2001, 25-31; Alva 2001, 89-96; Bisheh 2001,
115; Gilgan 2001, 73-87; Hadjisavvas 2001, 133-136; Källman and Korsell 2009,
101-103; Marthari 2001, 161-172; Pastore 2001, 155-160; Shankar 2001, 33-36;
Shuzhong 2001, 19-24; Thosarat 2001, 7-17).
Five main characteristics emerge when comparing treasure narratives to the
personal experience narratives of looters. First, the narratives are based on simple
historic events. Migrations, wars, riots, international affairs, and domestic
governing events are used to explain who buried treasures, and how and why they
buried them. Second, their plots have two parts. In the first part, the treasure is
hidden or buried for some reason, followed by the search in the next part.
Third, most treasures are protected by charms activated by their original owners or
protected by jinn. Fourth, treasures are classified into three categories of hidden
treasures: normal ones, “trap” treasures that ambush people to harm them, and
those seized by jinn. Last, narratives usually end with the treasure being found after
constant hard work.
Treasure stories are presented as historical facts amounting almost to a
documentary of actual treasure being rediscovered. To do so, they link to Turkey’s
rich history. In these stories, Hittites, Phrygians, Persians, Romans, Byzantines,
Seljuks, Ottomans, and Non-Muslim minorities are shown as the original owners of
treasures. Most narratives have supernatural creatures, jinn, who protect these
treasures, and are familiar to the current settlers of the land. Hence, the effect of a
supernatural element does not destroy the credibility of the narrative. Having
collected seventy-five personal experience narratives from the looters, I can testify
that the narratives of today have common elements with traditional narratives,
which were in the form of legend, tale, and memorat. Narratives of current looters
reflect real-life experiences, which can mostly be proved through witnesses and/or
news. These narratives have several supernatural motifs, such as Elija (Hızır),
dream, and jinn that are already respected in Turkish social life. Methods, risk

42 Hicran Karataş
rituals and attitudes toward archaeological heritage are woven together in personal
narratives that alone mirror the cultural reasons of ongoing antiquities looting in
Turkey. At this point, I must say that the looters interviewed were unaware of the
gradual disappearance of archaeological resources because they believed Anatolia
is full of gold and silver. Even though they claimed they were patriotic, they did
not consider their activity treason. This was ironic as penal codes label looters and
smugglers as criminals who commit a crime against the Turkish state.
The archaeology community in Turkey and elsewhere battle against looting
objects from archaeological sites (Barker 2018; Al-Houdalieh 2012a, 2012b;
Bowman 2008; Brodie and Renfrew 2005; Byrne 2016; Elia 1997; Gates 1997;
Matsuda 1998). Raising local awareness about archaeological heritage protection
and preservation requires strategies beyond penal codes that seem ineffective.
Numerous cross-cultural studies on the effectiveness of legal and regulatory
systems have already declared them insufficient (Atwood 2004, 170; Shapiro 1994,
293; Bator 1982, 312; Weihe 1995, 84-90; Özgen 2001, 120; Rose and Acar 1995,
46-50; Brodie 2002, 4-19; Al-Houdalieh 2012b, 25). In Turkey, penal codes related
to antiquities looting have been effective since 1874, and were updated in 1983,
imposing six months to five years imprisonment plus a fine (Çal 1997, 392; Özel
and Karadayı 1998, 1-14; Shaw 2003, 108-130, Law 2863).
PERSONAL EXPERIENCE STORIES OF LOOTERS: “HOW I BECAME A LOOTER!”
Being one of the most significant source countries of cultural property makes
Turkey highly vulnerable to looting and smuggling. Turkey’s law for the
prevention of looting and stealing cultural property (No. 2863) emphasizes that any
above or underground and undersea cultural property is state property regardless of
whether the object or archaeological site has been discovered. It also states that any
person or group that finds or knows the existence of such property must notify the
authorities, which must then be reported to the Ministry and regional museum
directors. The department of anti-smuggling and organized crime (KOM) within
the Turkish National Police and Gendarmerie General Command is entitled to
perform operations and develop prevention strategies within the state’s borders.
Considering that 52,969 archaeological objects were captured during police and
gendarmerie operations performed in 2019, it is evident that looters continue their
illicit excavations despite the law (KOM 2020). This reckless looter attitude was
also the starting point of my research. I aimed to understand how and why they
would go on their illicit activities by putting their freedom at risk and how they
started to loot in the first place. Hence, one of my questions in the interviews was
“how did you start to join illicit excavations?”
As poverty and inadequacy of law enforcement have been listed as the causes
of ongoing antiquity looting in Turkey, I wanted to test this assumption. To do this,
I focused on their personal experience stories around their first engagement with
looting activity. These narratives reflect their motivation beyond poverty, the

Personal Experience Narratives at the Crossroad of Archaeology and Folklore 43
inadequacy of law enforcement, and the gap in-laws. Personal experience stories,
in this very sense, are narrative creations of the person who owns the experience.
The unique understanding of the storyteller makes the story worthy of listening to
and believable. It is possible to check personal experience stories through witnesses
and news. I observed that many of the stories collected in my fieldwork had
credibility, as many were reported in local newspapers. Stahl defined personal
experience stories as first-person narratives usually composed orally by the tellers
and based on actual incidents in their lives (1986, 269). The experience’s
uniqueness makes it story-worthy and transferrable from mouth to mouth. She adds
that a personal experience story tends to become increasingly polished in form and
style as the teller repeats it in varying contexts. Dégh and Vázsonyi suggested that
context is key to defining whether a narrative is a personal experience story or a
legend told in a first-person format (1974). This is because several folklore genres
share the main characteristics of unique experiences such as form, style, motifs,
and function. Legends, memorates, anecdotes, and even jokes share standard
content, context, and forms (Honko 1965; Dégh and Vázsonyi 1971; Sthal 1977).
Regarding the personal experience stories of active antiquity looters, the most
distinctive features of the genre are content and format. Looters who claim to have
contact with jinn to pinpoint the specific location of antiquities buried or hidden
tell their testimonials supporting and proving the validity of established faith in the
existence of the jinn. These personal narratives fit well with the term memorate
(coined in 1934 by C.W. von Sydow), which has been accepted to identify personal
accounts of experiences with the supernatural. Stahl subdivided personal
experience narratives emphasizing content spirituality into memorate and personal
stories (1986). Looters’ personal experience stories are repeated to describe the
cases experienced in the field. These narratives serve as guidance for newcomers
and existing looter community members. They are even posted on Facebook group
pages to let the community hear about what recently happened in the field.
Knowledge of antiquity looting, including its methods, news, magic, tools,
networks, and prospective places where antiquities may be buried, is schooled with
personal experience narratives.
Furthermore, modifications in antiquity looters’ folklore can be traceable
through these narratives. To illustrate, stories of treasure hunters in two different
sources written respectively in the 14th and 17th centuries showed that looters’
motifs, components, and techniques have hardly changed over time (Kahraman and
Dağlı 2006, 88-97; Ibn-i Haldun 1996, 331-336). Petitions given by people who
wanted to be granted the license to excavate to search for treasures in the 18th
century reflect the typical motifs of recent personal experience narratives of
looters. Applicants wrote these petitions due to being granted a license described
dreams, Elijah, Jinn, and other magical components such as charms, talismans,
witchcraft recipes, and prospective signs indicating the exact place of treasures.
They were basically written as personal experience narratives in which experiences
belonged to the applicants or their close relatives (Kocaoğlu 2021; Karataş 2021).

44 Hicran Karataş
All my informants had regular day jobs or lived on their pensions by which
they could make it to the end of the month. Even though they were not involved in
illicit looting because of poverty, they asserted that their formal occupations did
not promise a wealthy life which they hoped to achieve by pursuing their
secondary work. Looters interviewed could be classified into two groups regarding
their experience in illicit antiquity looting. The first group was influenced by the
excitement that criminal activity provided. Thirty-two informants stated that they
grew up listening to treasure narratives and playing treasure-hunting games in
caves, hills, and construction sites. When they were teenagers, they went to
deserted areas where treasures were believed to be buried. Adem referred to his
childhood as follows:
When I was nine or maybe ten years old, I used to go to the caves near our
neighborhood with my friends who are now working with me. I used to take my mother’s
little mattock with me, and search for ruins. First, I found bones that belonged to animals;
then I started to find coins which made me so happy and excited. Then I couldn’t stop.
Most of the looters interviewed were primary school graduates who then
trained as apprentices in blue-collar jobs. As many of their masters had illicit
antiquity looting experience, this master-apprentice relationship trained the young
in their formal occupations and side hustle. When mentioning how personal
narratives of prior looters affect future ones, some participants said that listening to
stories had been their strongest motivation to become a looter. Erdem, a 34-year-
old turner at his repair shop, stated:
When I was an apprentice to my master, other masters and mine told fascinating field
experiences. I willingly eavesdropped. Then my peers in other repair shops and I told each
other these stories over and over. We were twelve or thirteen years old back then. I said
these stories not only to them but also to my close friends in my neighborhood. My team
includes two from that first group and three from the second. Now we tell our own stories
that personally happened to us.
One of the informants, Asım, worked in a restaurant where masters used to
have lunch. During their time in the restaurant, Asım happened to listen to their
personal experience narratives relating to illicit antiquity looting. Then, he quit his
job at the restaurant and applied to be an apprentice for one of these masters. Asım
referred to his first encounter with the master as destiny that he was supposed to
follow:
I worked in a restaurant where masters in the industrial estate came to have lunch.
While serving the customers, I also listened to their stories. Other waiters didn’t care to
listen to them. It was only I who was interested in listening. Then I followed one of the
masters to his repair shop and asked if he could take me as his apprentice. I wasn’t the only
one who got pulled in by listening to stories. Afterwards, I came to know friends with
whom we started to go digging.
Motifs in personal narratives of active looters are affected by prior narratives
as well. Supernatural elements are the most visible motifs to point this affection.
Dream, Elija (Hızır) and Jinn introduced in personal experience narratives of

Personal Experience Narratives at the Crossroad of Archaeology and Folklore 45
looters are common supernatural elements throughout Muslim looter communities.
Ethnographic studies conducted on looters show that these motifs are mostly
effective in the process of being looter and searching for the exact place of
antiquities (Al-Houdalieh 2012; Ibn-i Haldun 1996; Kocaoğlu 2021; Savran 1997;
Şenesen 2016; Uysal 1974, 1983, 1985; Yocu and Karakaya 2017). Looters stated
that they started antiquity looting after meeting Elijah in person or in a dream, and
were promised to be awarded for their good deeds. One of the informants, Levent,
claimed that Elijah tested him in person, and then visited him in his dream to show
the place of a treasure:
“I have a garden outside of the town. I was secretly saving money to build a well.
Before I went to the Friday prayer, I withdrew the money. After the prayer, I walked
through the bazaar. Hızır caught up with me touching my arm. He told me to give him one
fourth of my money by mentioning the exact amount in my pocket. He was holding a sick
kitten in his arms. He said the money was its’ share, I had to use this money to save this
kitten. I was scared when I saw his eyes which weren’t alive. I immediately gave the money
that he asked for. I had to postpone my plans. I then had a dream at night where I saw him
holding the same cat. He took me to a house. He told me to look for this place and added
that my share was buried in the garden of this house. I found the house and it was deserted.
I gathered my friends to dig the place. As soon as we entered the garden we fell into sleep.
Hızır didn’t tell me how to extract the treasure, so I was supposed to get over this problem
all by myself. I consulted hojas who told me to find the grave of the owner of the house and
take some soil from the grave to the garden. I did what they advised. It took four months to
come up with the solution. I found old books in a laced wooden box.”
Elija as a figure of the old prophet filled with wisdom is the archetypical actor
who offers friendship, guidance, consolation, good news, and teaching in cross-
cultural myths (Jung 1989). His mythical functions can be observed in experiences of
looters encountered with Elijah. Eight of my informants claimed that meeting with
Elijah, regardless of the type of interaction, kept their hope high feeling that they are
special, chosen, and tested. The first encounter with Elijah was regarded as a sign
that they would be awarded with a treasure if only they pursue to follow the path that
Elijah showed or advised. Two looters stated that they couldn’t give up looting even
though they didn’t find any valuable archaeological asset because they encountered
Elijah. They believed that all their failures were tests of Elijah, and they will be
awarded with a gift at some prospective test. Elijah and dream motifs in looters’
personal experience narratives function in similar ways that are seen as sacred.
Compared to Elijah, the dream motif is accompanied with doubt as looters are
already too involved in antiquity looting activities. They are aware that their
subconscious is busy with treasures. When I asked them how they made sure whether
their dream was a guide dream, most informants replied my question by focusing on
the structure of the dream, and their feeling about it. To illustrate, I would like to
present the dream of Ercan who lives in one of the historic houses of Safranbolu and
owns his own business. He comes from a rich local family and goes illicit digging to
search for a certain lock that his late mother gave him in his dream.

46 Hicran Karataş
“Two years after I started to work as an apprentice, I had a dream in which my mother
was still alive. She was wearing a white prayer scarf just like when she was alive. She
performed her prayer, then she laid food for me. She brought a loaf of bread wrapped in a
white muslin cloth. She gave me a little old lock. It was locked. I asked her where the key
was. She pointed to the bread loaf without saying anything. I woke up just as I was about to
break the bread in half. When I had this dream, I was seventeen years old. My friends were
going to digging but I wasn’t involved in looting back then. After this dream, I started to go
digging with them to search for this very lock. I am excited to find it as I go deeper in every
excavation. I would be ecstatic to find it. I just can’t stop searching.”
The credibility of a dream is estimated with criteria including feelings,
cleanliness of the dreamer, and the figures being seen in the dream. I am told that
qualifications of cleanliness of the dreamer refers to ritual purification which can
be achieved by purification ritual (ghusul). Looters interviewed were Sunni male
adherents, and for them purification ritual is broken only after sexual intercourse or
ejaculation (Sabiq 2012, 49-52). Respondents telling their dreams were adding
explanation about their state of cleanliness by adding details such as “Before I went
to bed, I performed salaah”, “I just performed wudu before I slept”. Credibility of
the dream motif in personal experience narratives is strengthened by these details,
so the listeners of the narratives are freed from doubt. These motifs are also
effective to ease guilt on the part of active illicit antiquity looters by making them
believe that they are chosen and guided by supernatural forces.
Personal experience narratives reflecting how looters became a member of
looter groups mirrored the hierarchy of group structure as well. Looters that were
interviewed worked in groups of six to eight, and their group structure had
hierarchic characteristics. Duties and responsibilities of each member were well-
defined, and altruism in group dynamics was tested by false tasks. A prospective
member of the group would be tested with fake tasks, such as digging in fake
excavation sites, being given so-called dangerous tasks, and being given false
secrets of groups. Personal experience narratives of a first excavation in search of
archaeological objects are accompanied with tests that check members’ strength,
intelligence and reliability. All respondents, retired and active ones, told their first
excavation experience stories including their test that led them into the groups.
Indeed, test rituals are common in criminal groups as the freedom and security of
group members depend on the reliability of one another (Campbell 1984, 25;
Spergel 1995, 91; Hagedorn 1988, 90; Jankowski 1988, 132: Keiser 1969, 21).
The reliability tests of looters are adopted from the master-apprentice acculturation
process in which masters test them over and over before they trust them. Ayhan,
Salami and other informants summarized the process with these words:
“He must be young, clever, strong, reckless, trustworthy, discreet, and quick. Not only
our freedom but also our lives depend on each other. When your pickaxe touches a hard
object in the pit, you want it for yourself. It is in the nature of the job. The devil stands
behind the looter during the excavation. When you find something, he starts to whisper in
your ears. You have to trust both your self-control and others’. That is why anyone

Personal Experience Narratives at the Crossroad of Archaeology and Folklore 47
intended to join the group must be tested. When I joined the group, my master tested me by
giving me a task. He gave me a box to hide for a while. I hid it in the coop. it stayed there
for a week and half. Then he asked me to bring it back. When I brought it back, he checked
if I opened it. Off course I hadn’t. The night of the event, they took me to a real
excavation.”
All groups serve two functions: to complete group projects and to fulfill
member needs. Group projects vary in the opportunities for, and requirements
imposed on members. They pursue their functions by creating and enacting a
coordinated pattern of member-task-tool relationships that are called the
coordination network (McGrath, Arrow and Berdahl 2000, 98). The networks of
looting groups are based on friendship of members, division of labor, tasks, and
roles that are well-defined. Labor consists of digging and removing the debris from
the pit. Exploring prospective archaeological sites, organizing and planning the
excavation, supplying the tools, handling the locals to ensure the excavation will
not be interrupted, and dealing with possible buyers of discovered archaeological
assets are components of task division in an illicit looter group. Sappers and
shovelers are relatively high ranks in group hierarchy comparing stand guards as
they are expected to sacrifice their freedom in case of a raid. The newest member
of the group works as a stand guard and is responsible for the safety of those
working in the excavation. In many cases, the safety of those who work 4-11
meters below ground depends entirely on stand guards because sappers and
shovelers are unaware of what is going on outside. In case of a raid, experienced
stand guards are expected to stall off the gendarmes. During my fieldwork, I was
able to reach eight active groups, seven of which was working with double
safeguards. My respondents proudly mentioned their early experiences in antiquity
looting stressing that they started out as stand guards. Ergül, like other looters,
described how he became skilled in fieldwork by emphasizing his early role in the
group:
“All of us started as stand guards when we were the newest member of the team. I was
17 years old. After being tested, I started watching over my guys. While they were
working, I would stand somewhere near them to make sure no one was coming nearby. It is
not only the police that we are hiding from. Villagers, hikers, campers, wild animals, and
basically anything that may be a threat to the group. Two of us were responsible to keep
these threats away from the site. In case of a raid, of course, we were the first to be
sacrificed, and we knew it from the beginning. If something unexpected comes up, you may
have to give up on yourself for others. It happens too.”
The personal experience narratives of illicit antiquity looters also showed that
some informants became addicted to go looting after their first excavation
experience. Forty-four of the active looters claimed that they were addicted to the
excitement and adventure that they experienced during excavations. To illustrate,
Resul, a 31 year-old informant, shared his feeling about looting with these words:
“I swear, mine is a sickness. I can’t stop digging. I don’t care so much about

48 Hicran Karataş
money, but the thrill. Even thinking about the excavation makes me excited, I can’t
imagine my life without it”. I must add that many informants outside the looting
community defined looting as a sickness too. A female participant, Müşerref, who
is a relative of a looter, mocked her cousin for being addicted to constant digging
and told him to dig her own garden if he couldn’t find a place to dig. Mother of
another looter, Gülsem, informed me that his son gets literally sick when he cannot
dig for a while. During my fieldwork, I heard many stories about being addicted to
looting told by insiders and outsiders alike. The retired looters also complained
about missing their looting days, and four of them kept mentoring active ones to be
close to the activity. Therefore, they were able to keep up with recent events among
current looters. Muslim, a 67-year-old mentor, told me that he felt alive, young and
like a real man. He could not cut his relationship with looters even though he did
not get anything in return, except the excitement.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The problem of illicit antiquity looting should be evaluated with its social and
cultural dimensions and motivations shaped by religion, politics, economy, and
folklore in a particular society. This approach will surely be able to provide us with
a deep understanding of the multifaceted realities of archaeological looting. Even
though poverty and inadequacy of law enforcement have consistently been shown
as the strongest motivations for antiquity looting in previous studies, my fieldwork
indicates the main impulses behind the problem are not fully related to economics.
Knowing that all my informants relied on a stable income provided by their full-
time job or pension, I must say that looters pursue this activity to gain extra money,
experience excitement, and fulfill their free time. At this point it is worth
mentioning that earning money is given priority over the interests of future
generations, and humanity in general. As a result, illicit looting enables looters to
dream a better life that cannot be achieved by doing their formal job. Dreaming of
being rich overnight is of course nurtured by folklore as well.
The ownership of treasures including minerals, mainly gold and silver, below
and above the surface of the earth has been regulated with Ore (rikaz) in Islam.
Despite secular penal codes, rikaz regulations do not condemn illicit looting since
finding a treasure requires one to pay taxes to the Islamic state. However, the
practice of rikaz is reinterpreted in Islamic societies, including Turkey (Aktan
1996, 87-88; Al-Houdalieh 2021b, 24; Sabiq 1998, 282-283; Karataş 2021, 114).
Accordingly, instead of paying one-fifth of the estimated value of an object to the
state treasury, looters prefer to donate it to the poor. This re-interpretation of the
rikaz can also be traced through their personal experience stories. To illustrate, they
emphasized that they did nothing wrong as they donated one-fifth of the estimated
market price of antiquities found in illicit excavations. Kartal, a 32-year-old
informant who was a leader in a looter group at the time of fieldwork, whispered
“Is there anyone who claims ownership?”. Kartal knew that no one around the

Personal Experience Narratives at the Crossroad of Archaeology and Folklore 49
excavation site would be able to claim it, but he was easing his guilt. He said
“I need to ask if there is someone to claim it. We already donate one-fifth of its
worth to the poor. If it brings more money than we expect, we donate even more”.
Personal experience narratives show that illicit antiquity looters cared more about
the rules of religion than the state’s secular laws, and they had difficulty
understanding how laws could prohibit looting when religion did not explicitly
prohibit and condemn it. Muhammed, a 24-year-old informant, expressed his
thoughts as follows: “I haven’t heard any fatwa that prohibits looting. It means that
Islam is not against it, right? There is something fishy going on in this”. In fact, the
Presidency of Religious Affairs granted a ruling (fatwa) in 2014 stating that
searching antiquities is forbidden as it violates public and individual rights. Islamic
fatwa, however, has no effect beyond confirming the regulation of secular laws.
It does not emphasize the value and importance of archaeological resources for the
present, future generations, and the history of humankind. Not having this awareness
is our biggest problem that endangers the historical consciousness of future
generations. This also explains why imams, muezzins of various mosques, and self-
educated hojas help illicit antiquity looters to remove antiquities by performing
rituals without contradicting their religious ethos. The fatwa of the supreme muslim
council, on the other hand, does not contradict the legal provisions of treasure.
However, members of the council seem to be aware that illegal digging to find
valuable objects leads to destruction of heritage resources, thus inflicting damage
upon the nations’ past, present, and future. Also, fatwa forbids illicit looting if the
looted objects are being sold to a second party (Al-Houdalieh 2012c, 25).
Anatolian-Turkish folklore, which includes social norms, beliefs and oral
tradition provide looters with reasoning to pursue their illicit activities without
feeling guilt despite penal codes. Firstly, social norms label looting as gravedigging
and hobby. Knowing the lion’s share of profit is not being given to looters, social
actors not involved in looting tag the activity as side work that requires elbow grease.
Moreover, condemnatory social norms give weight to anti-social activities that
directly harm individuals and society. Additionally, there are folk beliefs that luck,
destiny, and sharing encourage looters to follow their fates. Narratives, tales, and
proverbs in the Turkish oral tradition decorated with Elija, dream, luck, and treasures
present stories that prove it is possible to get rich overnight by being at the right place
at the right time. Indeed, finding a priceless archaeological object was associated
with being at the right place at the right time by most respondents too. Additionally,
many of the informants stated that the stories they heard positively influenced their
endurance when they became disappointed in excavations. The looting of antiquities
with the assistance of jinn has been in Anatolian-Turkish folklore for ages. Studies
show that looters have been searching for archaeological objects with the help of jinn
for ages (Al-Haudalieh 2012a; Ibn-i Haldun 1996). These studies also show that in
addition to Muslims, Non-Muslims have also been taking advantage of jinn to find
the exact location of a hidden treasure.

50 Hicran Karataş
The archaeology community in Turkey and worldwide battle against the
looting of objects from archaeological sites (Barker 2018; Al-Houdalieh 2012a,
2012b; Bowman 2008; Brodie and Renfrew 2005; Byrne 2016; Elia 1997; Matsuda
1998). Raising local awareness about archaeological heritage protection and
preservation requires strategies beyond penal codes which seem to be not effective.
Numerous cross-cultural studies on the effectiveness of legal and regulatory
strategies have already declared them insufficient (Atwood 2004, 170; Shapiro
1994, 293; Bator 1982, 312; Weihe 1995, 84-90; Özgen 2001, 120; Rose and Acar
1995, 46-50; Brodie 2002, 4-19; Al-Houdalieh 2012b, 25). Turkish society is not
aware that their cultural heritage is being stolen since even news do not present the
issue as a problem. The fact that looting archaeological heritage equals theft only
occurs to archaeologists and intellectuals in Turkey. To achieve the required
national awareness among folk can only be possible if all parties fight against it.
The Ministry of Culture and Tourism, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Interior
should initiate a joint program with national media emphasizing the importance of
cultural patrimony and involvement in cultural heritage preservation. In this way,
future generations can grow up with an awareness of their cultural heritage that
must be embraced and appreciated by them in the first place.
The results of this study suggest that ethnoarchaeological fieldwork enables us
to explore the social, cultural, economic, and political motivations and dimensions
of illicit looting. Knowing why and how antiquity looters pursue their activity is a
first step that helps communities to take measures to stop it. Conducting interviews
with antiquities looters warrants archaeologists important, multifaceted information
about motivations, dimensions, methods behind the plundering and/or vandalizing
of archaeological resources, and the prevalence of antiquities looting at local and
global levels. This study has shown that lack of cultural heritage awareness in
Turkey mostly stems from folklore and culture, which both provide a suitable
environment for antiquity looters. The study aimed to explore how illicit antiquity
looters were involved in the practice despite the penal codes that involve
imprisonment plus penal fine. My interviews with active and retired looters showed
that they all grew up listening to treasure narratives and personal experience
narratives from their masters. Treasure narratives in the form of memorates,
legends and tales documented between the 14th-20th centuries show that they are
only different from the present-day folklore of illicit looters in their tools and
methods. Regardless of their time, they reflect the rational motivation of illicit
antiquity looters that looting promises being rich overnight by being at the right
place at the right time. Personal experience stories with supernatural components
called memorates in which dream, jinn, and Elijah are common motifs tend to turn
into legends overtime. Hence, we can assume that the legends of past generations
were personal experience stories that became anonymous, and memorates of
present looters will probably turn into legend in the future too. As these secular and
spiritual stories introduce us to the knowledge of illicit antiquity looters

Personal Experience Narratives at the Crossroad of Archaeology and Folklore 51
accumulated throughout ages, we must carefully analyze the elements of the
acculturation process in illicit antiquity looting.*
REFERENCES
Acar, Özgen. and Melik Kaylan. “The Turkish connection: An investigative report on the
smuggling of classical antiquities.” Connoisseur, 220 (1990): 130-137.
Addyman, Peter. “Antiquities without archaeology in the United Kingdom”. In Trade in
Illicit Antiquities: The Destruction of The World’s Archaeological Heritage, edited by
N. Brodie, J. Doole and C. Renfrew, 141-144. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for
Archaeological Research University of Cambridge, 2001.
Aktan, Hamza. “Define”. In İslâm ansiklopedisi, 9 in 46: 87-88. Ankara: TDV, 1996.
Al-Houdalieh, S. Hussein. “Archaeological Heritage and Spiritual Protection: Looting and
the Jinn in Palestine.” Journal of Mediterranean Archaeology, 25/1(2012a): 99-120.
Al-Houdalieh, S. Hussein. “Palestinian Antiquities Looters, Their Skill Development,
Methodology and Specialized Terminology: An Ethnographic Study.” Palestine
Exploration Quarterly, 144/2(2012b): 115-127.
Al-Houdalieh, S. Hussein. “The Attitudes of Palestinians Religious Scholars and
Institutions Toward the Looting of Palestine’s Archaeological Heritage.” Present
Pasts, 4/1(2012c): 22-30.
Alangu, Tahir. Keloğlan Masalları [Kaloghlan Tales]. İstanbul: Afa, 1990.
Ali, İhsan and Robin Coningham. “Recording and Preserving Gandhara’s Cultural
Heritage.” In Trade in Illicit Antiquities: The Destruction of the World’s
Archaeological Heritage, edited by N. Brodie, J. Doole and C. Renfrew, 25-31.
Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research University of Cambrige,
2001.
Alva, Walter. “The Destruction, Looting and Traffic of the Archaeological Heritage of
Peru.” In Trade in Illicit Antiquities: The Destruction of the World’s Archaeological
Heritage, edited by N. Brodie, J. Doole and C. Renfrew, 86-96. Cambridge:
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research University of Cambridge, 2001.
Amstrong, Gary. “Like that Desmond Morris?” In Interpreting the Field: Accounts of
Ethnography, edited by D. Hobbs and T. May, 3-43. Oxford: Clarendon, 1993.
Atwood, Roger. Stealing History: Tomb Raiders, Smugglers, and The Looting of The Ancient
World. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin, 2004.
Barker, Alex W. “Looting, the Antiquities Trade, and Competing Valuations of the Past.”
Annual Review of Anthropology, 47(2018): 455-474.
Bascom, William R. “Folklore and Anthropology.” Journal of American Folklore,
66/262(1953): 283-290.
Bator, M. Paul “An Essay on the International Trade in Art.” Stanford Law Review,
34(1982): 275-384.
* Acknowledgments: I am grateful to Muslim, who made my interviews possible by introducing me to
the looters. I am indebted to Metin Özarslan and John Zemke for their moral support and helpful
comments. I would also like to present my gratitude to The Scientific and Technological Research
Council of Turkey (TUBİTAK) for supporting this research with a grant. I would also like to thank
the reviewers for their time and insightful comments.

52 Hicran Karataş
Bauer, Alexander A. “The Destruction of Heritage in Syria and Irak and Its Implications.”
International Journal of Cultural Property, 22/1(2015): 1-6.
Ben-Amos, Dan “The Seven Strands of Tradition: Varieties in Its Meaning in American
Folklore Studies.” Journal of Folklore Research, 21/2.3(1984): 97-131.
Bisheh, Ghazi. “One Damn Illicit Excavation After Another: The Destruction of the
Archaelogical Heritage of Jordan.” In Trade in Illicit Antiquities: The Destruction of
the World’s Archaeological Heritage, edited by N. Brodie, J. Doole and C. Renfrew,
115-118. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research University of
Cambridge, 2001.
Boratav, Pertev N. 100 Soruda Türk Folkloru [Turkish folklore in 100 questions]. Ankara:
Bilgesu, 2013.
Bourgois, Philip. “In Search of Haratio Alger: Culture and Ideology in the Crack
Economy.” Contemporary Drug Problems, 16 (1989): 619-649.
Bowman, Blythe. “Transnational Crimes Against Culture: Looting at Archaeological Sites
and the Grey Market in Antiquities.” Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice,
24/3(2008): 225-242.
Brear, Michelle. “Process and Outcomes of a Recursive, Dialogic Member Checking
Approach: A Project Ethnography.” Qualitative Health Research, 29/3(2018):
944-957. https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732318812448.
Brodie, Neil. 2002. “Introduction.” In Illicit Antiquities: The Theft of Culture and the
Extinction of Archaeology, edited by N. Brodie and K.W. Tubb, 1-22. London, New
York: Routledge.
Brodie, Neil. and Colin Renfrew. “Looting and the World’s Archaeological Heritage:
The Inadequate Response.” Annual Review of Anthropology, 34(2005): 343-361.
Burke, Peter. “History and Folklore.” Folklore, 115/2(2004): 133-139.
Byrne, Denis. “The Problem with Looting: An Alternative Perspective on Antiquities
Trafficking in Southeast Asia.” Journal of Field Archaeology, 41/3(2016): 344-354.
Çal, Halit. “Osmanlı Devleti’nde Âsâr-ı Atîka Nizamnâmeleri” [Antiquities Laws in the
Ottoman State]. Vakıflar, 26(1997): 391-400.
Campbell, B. P. “The Illicit Antiquities Trade as a Transnational Criminal Network:
Characterizing and Anticipating Trafficking of Cultural Heritage.” International
Journal of Cultural Property, 20(2013): 113-153.
Coldwell, Joyce I. H. “Treasure Stories and Beliefs in Atlantic Canada.” Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, Memorial University of Newfoundland, 1977.
Dégh, Linda and Andrew Vázsonyi. “The Memorate and the Proto-Memorate.” The Journal
of American Folklore, 87/345(1974): 225-239.
Dorson, M. R. “Is There a Folk in the City.” Journal of American Folklore, 83/328(1970):
185-216.
Dundes, Alan. “Who are the Folk?” In Frontiers of Folklore, edited by W.R. Bascom, 17-23.
Washington: Westview Press, 1977.
Dorson, Richard M. “Reevaluating Art Crime’s Famous Figures.” International Journal of
Cultural Property, 20/2(2013): 221-232.
El-Shamy, Hasan. “Hero, Hero in Folk.” In Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs,
Tales, Music, and Art, edited by T.A. Green, II: 432-437. Santa Barbara: ABC-Clio,
1997.

Personal Experience Narratives at the Crossroad of Archaeology and Folklore 53
Elia, Ricardo J. “Looting, Collecting, and The Destruction of Archaeological Resources.”
Nonrenewable Resources, 6/2(1997): 85-98.
Foster, George M. “Treasure Tales, and the Image of the Static Economy in a Mexican
Peasant Community.” AFS, 77/303(1964): 39-44.
Gazin-Schwartz Amy. “Archaeology and Folklore of Material Culture, Ritual, and
Everyday life.” International Journal of Historical Archaeology, 5/4(2001): 263-280.
Gazin-Schwartz Amy. and Cornelius Holtorf. “Archaeology and Folklore Studies.”
In Archaeology and Folklore, edited by A. Gazin-Schwartz and C. Holtorf, 1-24.
London: Routledge, 1999.
Gilchrist, Roberta. “Magic for Dead? The Archaeology of Magic in Later Medieval Burials.”
Medieval Archaeology, 52/1(2008): 119-159. doi.org/10.1179/174581708x335468.
Gilgan, Elizabeth. “Looting and the Market for Maya objects: A Belizean Perspective.”
In Trade in illicit antiquities: The Destruction of the World’s Archaeological
Heritage, edited by N. Brodie, J. Doole and C. Renfrew, 73-87. Cambridge:
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research University of Cambridge, 2001.
Gomme, George L., ed. The Handbook of Folklore. London: The Folklore Society, 1890.
Guenther, Katja M. “The Politics of Names: Rethinking the Methodological and Ethical
Significance of Naming People, Organization and Places.” Qualitative Research,
9/4(2009): 411-421.
Gündüz, Réna. El Mundo Ceremonial de los Huaqueros. Lima: Editorial Universitaria, 2001.
Hadjisavvas, Sophocles. “The Destruction of the Archaeological Heritage of Cyprus.”
In Trade in Illicit Antiquities: The Destruction of the World’s Archaeological
Heritage, edited by N. Brodie, J. Doole and C. Renfrew, 133-139. Cambridge:
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research University of Cambridge, 2001.
Hagedorn, M. John. People and Folks: Gangs, Crime and The Underclass in a Rustbelt
City. Chicago: Lake View Press, 1988.
Hicks, George L. “Informant Anonymity and Scientific Accuracy: The Problem of
Pseudonyms.” Human Organization, 36/2(1977): 214-220.
Honko, Lauri. “Memorates and the Study of Folk Beliefs.” Journal of the Folklore
Institute, 1.1/2(1964): 5-19.
Humphrey, Caroline. “Russian Protection and the Appropriation of Law and Order.”
In States and illegal Practices, edited by J. Heyman, 199-232. New York: Berg, 1999.
Hurley, Gerard T. “Buried Treasure Tales in America.” Western Folklore 10/3(1951): 197-216.
İbn-i Haldun. Mukaddime. Translated by Z.K. Ugan. İstanbul: MEB, 1996.
Inciardi, James A. “Some Considerations on the Methods, Dangers, and Ethics of Crack-
House Research.” In Women and Crack Cocaine, edited by J.A. Lockwood and
A.E. Pottieger, 147-157. New York: Macmillan, 1993.
Jankowski, S. M. Islands in the Street Gangs and American Urban Society. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1991.
Jung, C. Gustav. Memories, Dreams, and Reflections. New York: Vintage, 1989.
Kahraman, Seyit A. and Yücel Dağlı eds. Günümüz Türkçesiyle Evliyâ Çelebi
Seyahatnâmesi I. İstanbul: Yapı Kredi, 2006.
Källman, Lars and Linda Korsell. “Crime Goes Underground: Crimes against Historical
Sites and Remains in Sweden.” In Criminology and Archaeology, edited by
S. Mackenzie and P. Green, 103-124. Oregon: Hart Publishing, 2009.
Karataş, Hicran. Azıcık Suçlu: Defineci Folkloru [A Little bit Criminal: Folklore of
Looters]. İstanbul: Doğu Kütüphanesi, 2021.

54 Hicran Karataş
Keiser, R.L. The Vice Lords. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1969.
Kimberly, L. Alderman. “Honor amongst Thieves: Organized Crime and the Illicit
Antiquities Trade.” Indiana Law Review, 45/2(2012): 601-627.
Kocaoğlu, Burak. Osmanlı Devleti’nde Definecilik [Treasure hunting in Ottoman Empire
(1781-1900)]. Ankara: Berivan, 2021.
Lawrence, M. Kaye “The Future of The Past: Recovering Cultural Property.” Cordozo
journal of International and Comparative Law, 23(1996): 23-41.
Lawrence, M. Kaye and Carla T. Main. “The Saga of the Lydian Hoard: from Usak to New
York and Back again.” In Antiquities, Trade or Betrayed: Legal, Ethical and
Conversation Issues, edited by K. W. Tubb, 150-162. London: Archetype, 1995.
Layton, Robert. “Folklore and World View.” In Archaeology and Folklore, edited by
A. Gazin-Schwartz and C. Holtorf, 24-33. London: Routledge, 1999.
Marthari, Marisa. “Altering Information from the Past: Illegal Excavations in Greece and
the Case of the Early Bronze Age Cyclades”. In Trade in Illicit Antiquities:
The Destruction of the World’s Archaeological Heritage, edited by N. Brodie,
J. Doole and C. Renfrew, 161-172. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for
Archaeological Research University of Cambridge, 2001.
Matsuda, David J. “The Ethics of Archaeology, Subsistence Digging, and Artifact Looting
in Latin America.” International Journal of Cultural Property, 7/1(1998): 87-98.
McCormack Dianne, Tracy Carr, Rose McCloskey, Lisa Keeping-Burke, Karen E. Furlong,
and Shelley Doucet. “Getting through ethics: the fit between research ethics board
assessments and qualitative research”. Journal of Empirical Research on Human
Research Ethics 5(2012): 30-36.
McGrath, Joseph E., Holly Arrow and Jennifer L. Berdahl. “The Study of Groups: Past,
Present, and Future.” Personality, and Social Psychology Review, 4/1(2000): 95-105.
Merrifield, Ralph. The Archaeology of Ritual and Magic. B.T. Batsford, 1987.
Moses, Nancy. Stolen, Smuggled, Sold: On the Hunt for Cultural Treasures. New York:
Rowman&Littlefield, 2015.
Nafziger, James A. R. “International Penal Aspects of Protecting Cultural Property.”
The International Lawyer, 19/3(1985): 835-852.
Newell, W. Wells. “The Study of Folklore.” Transactions of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 9(1891): 134-136.
Oring, Elliot. Just Folklore: Analysis, Interpretation, Critique. Long Beach: Cantilever,
2012.
Özdoğan, Mehmet. “Ideology and Archaeology in Turkey.” In Archaeology under Fire:
Nationalism, Politics and Heritage in Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East, edited
by L. Meskell, 111-123. London: Routledge, 2005.
Özel, Sibel and Ayhan Karadayı. “Laws regarding the protection of the cultural heritage of
Turkey.” In The Law of Cultural Property and Natural Heritage: Protection, Transfer
and Access, edited by M. Phelan, III: 1-14. Evanston: Kalos Kapp Press, 1998.
Özgen, Engin. “Some Remarks on the Destruction of Turkey’s Archaeological Heritage”.
In Trade in Illicit Antiquities: The Destruction of the World’s Archaeological
Heritage, edited by N. Brodie, J. Doole and C. Renfrew, 119-120. Cambridge:
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research University of Cambridge, 2001.
Pastore, Giovanni. “The Looting of Archaeological Sites in Italy”. In Trade in Illicit
Antiquities: The Destruction of the World’s Archaeological Heritage, edited by

Personal Experience Narratives at the Crossroad of Archaeology and Folklore 55
N. Brodie, J. Doole and C. Renfrew, 155-160. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for
Archaeological Research University of Cambridge, 2001.
Renfrew, Colin. “The Archaeology of Religion.”. In The Ancient Mind: Elements of
Cognitive Archaeology, edited by C. Renfrew and E. Zubrow, 47-54. Cambridge:
Cambridge University, 1994.
Rose, Deidre. “Telling Treasure Tales: Commemoration and Consciousness in Dominica.”
The Journal of American Folklore, 122/484(2009): 127-147.
Rose, Mark and Özgen Acar. “Turkey’s War on Illicit Antiquities Trade.” Archaeology,
48/2(1995): 45-56.
Sabiq, Sayyid. Fıqh us-Sunnah at Taharat and as-Salah. Oak Brook: American Trust
Publications, 2012.
Savran, Gönül. “Adana Bölgesinde Halk Defineciliği” [Applications searching for treasure
in Adana]. In V. Milletlerarası Türk Halk Kültürü Kongresi Gelenek, Görenek ve
İnançlar, 375-384. Ankara: Kültür Bakanlığı, 1997.
Scarce, Rik “(No) Trial (But) Tribulations: When Courts and Ethnography Conflict.”
Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, 23/1(1994): 123-149.
Şenesen, İsmail. “Türkiye’deki define ve definecilikle ilgili inanışlar ve bu inanışların motif
index’e göre değerlendirilmesi.” Ç.Ü. Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, 25/2(2016):
283-298.
Shankar, Ajai. “The Threat to Cultural Sites in India from Illegal Excavation”. In Trade in
Illicit Antiquities: The Destruction of the World’s Archaeological Heritage, edited by
N. Brodie, J. Doole and C. Renfrew, 33-36. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for
Archaeological Research University of Cambridge, 2001.
Shankland, David. “Integrating the Past: Folklore, Mounds and People at Çatalhöyük.”
In Archaeology and Folklore, edited by A. Gazin-Schwartz and C. Holtorf, 134-153.
London: Routledge, 1999.
Shapiro, Daniel. “Legal Issues in The Trade of Antiquities.” International Journal of
Cultural Property, 3/2(1994): 365-395.
Shaw, Wendy M.K. Possessors and Possessed: Museums, Archaeology, and the
Visualization of History in the Late Ottoman Empire. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 2003.
Shuzhong, He. “Illicit excavation in contemporary China.” In Trade in Illicit Antiquities:
The Destruction of the World’s Archaeological Heritage, edited by N. Brodie,
J. Doole and C. Renfrew, 19-24. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for the
Archaeological Research University of Cambridge, 2001.
Simmel, Georg. The Philosophy of Money. Translated by T. Bottomore and D. Frisby.
London: Routledge, 2004.
Small, Stephan. Police and People in London II: A Group of Black Young People. London:
Policy Studies Institute, 1983.
Spergel, A. Irving. The Youth Gang Problem: A Community Approach. New York: Oxford
University, 1995.
Stahl, Sandra. K. D. “Personal Experience Stories.” In Handbook of American Folklore,
edited by R. Dorson, 265-276. Bloomington: Indiana University, 1986.
Svalastog Anna-Lydia and Stefan Eriksson. “You can Use My Name; You Don’t Have to
Steal My Story – A Critique of Anonymity in Indigenous Studies.” Developing World
Bioethics 2(2010): 104-110.

56 Hicran Karataş
Thoms, J. William. “Folk-lore.” Athenaeum, (Aug. 22 1846) No. 982: 862-863.
Thosarat, Rachaine. “The Destruction of the Cultural Heritage of Thailand and Cambodia.”
In Trade in Illicit Antiquities: The Destruction of the World’s Archaeological
Heritage, edited by N. Brodie, J. Doole and C. Renfrew, 7-17. Cambridge: McDonald
Institute for Archaeological Research University of Cambridge, 2001.
Uysal, Ahmet E. “Türkiye’de Gizli Hazineleriyle ilgili İnançlar ve Uygulamalar” [Folk
beliefs and practices related to hidden treasures in Turkey]. Erdem, 1(1985): 107-110.
Uysal, Ahmet E. “Turkish Treasure Lore: Traditions and Practices.” International Folklore
Review, 3(1983):135-143.
Uysal, Ahmet E. “Türkiye’de Halk Defineciliğinde Folklor Unsurları” [Folklore elements
of treasure hunting in Turkey]. In I. Uluslararası Türk Folkloru Semineri Bildirileri
[Proceedings of I. International Turkish Folklore Seminars], 416-424. Ankara:
Başbakanlık, 1974.
Vitelli, Karen D. “An Archaeologist’s Response to the Draft Principles to govern a licit
International Traffic in Cultural Property.” In Legal Aspects of International Trade in
Art, edited by M. Briat and J. A. Freeberg, 109-112. The Hague: Kluwer Law
International, 1996.
Weihe, Hugo K. “Licit International Traffic in Cultural Objects for Art’s Sake.”
International Journal of Cultural Property 4/1(1995): 81-90.
Wobst, Martin H. “Archaeologists, Indigenous Intellectual Property and Oral History.”
In Negotiating Culture: Heritage, Ownership, and Intellectual Property, edited by
L. La Follette, 122-144. Boston: University of Massachusetts, 2013.
Yolcu, Mehmet A. and Hüseyin Karakaya “Definecilik Folkloru” [Folklore of Treasure
Hunting]. Karadeniz Araştırmaları, 14/54(2017): 117-133.

COSSACK MILITARY CULTURE
AS EXPRESSED IN FOLKLORE
DARIA ŁAWRYNOW
ABSTRACT
The article presents main examples of Cossack military culture and his role in the
daily lives of Kuban, Ural and Kazakh Cossack communities. The investigated
material consists of a corpus of oral works (songs, proverbs), examples of rituals,
elements of the physical education system and folk games. Cossack folk culture and
traditions were based upon the fundament of military society. Its members placed
their identity in the broader context of warfare, which they understood both as a
source of income and glory, as both a practical and ethical interpretation of their
historical role. The articleʼs methodology is based on the functional analysis,
ethnographic studies and comparative literature methods. Research on this aspect of
Cossack culture is an important element of broader studies on Cossack identity. The
analyzed materials shed light on the process of creating historical memories and
identities of Cossack communities and fits into a wider range of Cossack studies.
Keywords: Cossack folklore, military culture, Kuban Cossack, Kazakh Cossack,
Ural Cossack.
AIM AND METHODOLOGY
The aim of this article will be to analyze chosen examples of Cossack military
culture and elaborate upon the role it played in the daily lives of Kuban, Ural and
Kazakh Cossack communities. By military culture we should understand not only
folk oral and musical works related to warfare and the military (songs of historical
subject matter, marches, legends of Cossack military leaders, folk proverbs, folk
literature), but also all connected traditions, such as yearly competitions in
wrestling or pugilism, ritual duels during trizna and war games, including the
conquering of “snow castles”; also included are drill exercises, initiation rites,
meant to aid in bringing up a new generation of warriors or serve as rituals, e.g.
ritual farewells to those going to war [cf. Yarovoy 2014: 53-54, 152-153, 184,
Kotlyarevskiy 1868: 131, Snegirev 1837: 25-27, Mykhaylyna 2007: 199, 234,
Adamovich 2012: 143, Kalyandruk 2007: 239, 241-243].
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 57-76

58 Daria Ławrynow
The exemplary material consists of a corpus of oral/folk literature, mainly
songs and dumas, as well as proverbs, as well as examples of rituals and customs
connected with the military, elements of the physical education system and folk
games.
The study is based on an analysis of materials recorded from the second half
of the 19th century up until the beginning of the 21st century; these are collections
of traditional songs, including lyric-epics, as well as folk epics and proverbs.
The articleʼs methodology is based on the functional analysis of chosen works
of Cossack culture [cf. Bogatyriew 1979: 320-333, Hübner 2005: 15-35, Malinowski
1958: 31-33, Paluch 1987: 134-142]. The specific character of this research requires
the study of literature, ethnographic studies and the use of comparative literature
methods.
The research is comparative and focuses on two related socioethnic groups,
which developed in ethnic isolation: the Kuban Cossacks of the former Black Sea
Host, and the Kazakh Cossacks.
The study was also made under the premise that the main subject of analysis is
not the historical fact itself, but rather the manifestation of a certain worldview, a
reflection of archetypes and stereotypes of thought. Folk culture is understood to be
a source of historical memory. For this reason, we have decided against strictly
defining the timeframe of the study.
While cossack military culture has yet to be thoroughly investigated, since the
fall of the Soviet Union there has been a growing interest in slavic military culture
in general. Major works on this subject include the research G. Adamovich [2012],
A. Afanasʼyev [1995], B. Gorbunov [1997], V. Dolgov [2014: 57-60], Y. Fihurnyy
[2004], T. Kalandryuk [2007], O. Mandzyak [2006, 2007], Shevtsov [2010] and
others [Tumanov, Yeganov, Neretina, Knyazev, Tumanov, Sapegin 1999]. Cossack
military culture in particular was investigated in more detail in books and articles
by, among others [Aleksandrov 1997, 1999a, 1999b, 97-100, Huska 2013: 32-37,
Yarowoy 2014, Kozlov 2003, Matveyev 2002, 2009: 120-134, 2011, Medvedev
1993, Zadunaysʼkyy 2006].
It follows that there is still need for more thorough research on the character and
role of Cossack military culture, which was unique from other folk cultures of the
former Russian Empire. This is because the Cossacks formed a highly militarized
community, which resulted in the dominance of themes connected with war and
battle in their folklore, as well as a particular lasting popularity of those customs
connected with war and weapon worship. Some of these traditions had archaic,
Slavic roots (e.g. cyclical duels during certain holidays), others were local in origin.
It is important to remember that the military culture investigated in this article was a
reflection or manifestation of the local worldview and value system. It constituted a
source of historical memory and helped in transmitting values and beliefs.
This article is the effect of original research (text analysis, library inquiries) on
Cossack cultural identity and military culture, which was also used for the

Cossack Military Culture as Expressed in Folklore 59
monograph Friends among Foes. The Identity of Kuban Black Sea Host Cossacks
and Kazakh Cossacks (on the basis of folklore materials).
Another aim of this research paper is to introduce Cossack issues to the wider
scientific discourse and to further the development of Cossack studies as an
academic discipline – this discipline is still very new in Russian and Ukrainian
universities and essentially unheard of in Western Europe.
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF COSSACK COMMUNITIES
The Ukrainian, Russian and Kazakh Cossack communities were, from their
beginnings, reliant on warfare for their livelihood. Their lifestyle was based
primarily around hunting, fishing, robbery and mercenary work [Plokhy 2001: 19-20,
Boeck 2009: 2-4, Gordon 1983: 15-16, Seaton 1972: 3, 6-8]. Therefore, the
mentality of these various groups (later known as hosts), as well as their cultural
works, were closely connected with the sphere of military operations. At first, the
Cossacks living in the borderlands of Poland, the Russian Empire and the Euro-
Asian frontier were organized in loose warbands, but with time they formed a kind
of military democracy. In time, these Cossack communities, nominally under
Polish jurisdiction, developed into a quasi-state in their own right [cf. Brekhunenko
2011: 179-184, Horobetsʼ 2017: 9-10, 17-18, 441-468, Chirovsky 1963: 154-156,
Plokhy 2006: 165]. Russian communities initially retained their autonomous status
and were gradually incorporated into the stateʼs larger military structure
[Brekhunenko 2011: 229-245, Venkov 2008: 64-65, 278, 2009: 16-19, Alekseyev,
Minenko 1995: 23, Plekhanov, Plekhanov 2009, Kharuzin 1885: XVI-XIX,
XXII-XXIV, McNeal 1987: 5-11, 54-58, OʼRourke 2000: 27-31, 2007: 221-224,
Boeck 2009: 2-4, 23-24, 27].
This internal consolidation, which took place starting with the beginning of
the 17th Century, served to foster the simultaneous processes of self-identification.
Its benchmark will be the worship of warfare, as well as the value system derived
from this worship. It is important to note that military service and engaging in
warfare were considered a voluntary lifestyle choice, chosen by the Cossacks of
their own volition. Therefore, all of the Russian Empireʼs attempts at interfering
with or reforming the Cossack military were met with heavy resistance – they were
perceived as encroaching upon essential freedoms [Venkov 2009: 16-19,
Zheleznov 1910: 272-277, 311-316, 319-356, Gulyayev 1895: 26-27, 30-32,
Korolenko 1914: 139-143, Bilyy 2009: 165-167, Bigday 1992: 344-346, Rudakova
2011: 493-498, Julicher 2003: 76-105, Boeck 2009: 25-26, 28-29, 35, McNeal
1987: 5-6, 12-18, 42-49, Rourke 2007: 222]. This was the case with both Russian
and Ukrainian Cossacks. Additionally, during the period of strictest Imperial
government control (from 1735-1775), the latter of the two often abandoned the
traditional Cossack lifestyle entirely [Repan 2009: 37-41]. It is then evident that
with stricter government control over all the Cossack hosts came two trends in the
Cossack identity discourse. One of these was placing oneʼs “craft” into a broader

60 Daria Ławrynow
patriotic context: being a Cossack became associated with being in service to the
Tsar and the fatherland. The other was the disassociation of oneʼs social class with
oneʼs identity, since the class is no longer considered oneʼs own choice – with
“making a living the Cossack way”. The latter was traditionally understood as
independent decision making regarding war raids and a solely war-based source of
income. Therefore, as stated in historical sources, the Cossacks would start to rebel
whenever the authorities tried to decrease their degree of independence and make
them into mercenary forces [cf. Matveyev 2002, 2009: 120-134, 2011, Yarovoy 2014:
3-4, 191, Minutin 2015, Vasilʼyev 2009, Brekhunenko 2011: 296-299, Repan 2009:
37-41, 71-72, 134-138, Boeck, 2009: 230].
Cossack culture, as investigated in this article, was based upon the fundament
of military society. Its members placed their identity in the broader context of
warfare, which they understood both as a source of income and glory, as both a
practical and ethical interpretation of their historical role. It is important to note the
field research conducted by Galina Vlasova and Yekaterina Dotsenko among
modern Kazakh Cossack communities. Their members traditionally identify
themselves with the “free volunteers” of old, who served as self-governing
mercenaries in the times of Genghis Khan – their service to the Tsars was a
compromise and not compulsive [Vlasova 2008: 65]. In exchange for military
service, the Tsar freed them from other feudal duties and did not intervene in their
internal matters [Vlasova 2008: 65]. This is also evidenced by older, XVIII century
ethnographic research by Alexander Rigelʼman on the Cossacks of Don – they
conclude that military service was considered a voluntary choice, motivated mainly
by religion [Rigelʼman 1846: 3-7, Novitskiy 1912: 625-639].
THE ROLE OF FOLKLORE AND MILITARY CULTURE
IN THE LIFE OF COSSACK COMMUNITIES
In the beginning, the Russian and Ukrainian Cossacks served for as long as
they could, later however their military duty was regulated by law to last between
20 to 30 years – therefore, most of a Cossack manʼs life was spent in the military
[Novitskiy 1912: 625-639].
The general attitude to the military “profession” was already apparent on the
lexical level, e.g. in official letters, where all Cossack communities were called
“armies” and the Zaporhozians additionally received the adjective “free” or used the
term “knighthood” [cf. Wójcik 1972: 73-78, Sementovskiy 1846: 5, 25-27, Kharuzin
1885: XVIII, XXII, Lishin 1894: 390, 727, 775, Ryabinin 1866: 28-32, 53-54,
Bondarʼ 2002, Brekhunenko 2011: 276-280, 296]. Therefore, it was a secondary
concern if the Cossacks were subservient to anyone, since they still made their living
in battle, regardless of the geopolitical situation. Combat was also considered a
guarantor of freedoms, e.g. in the duma attributed to hetman Ivan Mazepa, titled Всі
покою щиро прагнуть, where the speaker states that it is thanks to the sword that
we have rights (же през шаблі маєм права) [Ohlobyn 2001].

Cossack Military Culture as Expressed in Folklore 61
In this way, folklore and traditions served to uphold historical memory, as
well as consisting a chance for the youth to socialize. A Cossack manʼs destiny was
warfare, while a Cossack womanʼs – giving birth to and caring for the future
warrior. Therefore, it comes as no surprise that in one song a husband instructs his
wife to marry their daughter to a Cossack, so that she can give birth to a hero for
Tsar the Father (Пусть для батюшки Царя родить в свет богатыря!) [Myakutin
1905: 114].
Here is another interesting dialogue between a girl and a young soldier, who is
calling her to come serve with him, since military service is full of merriness and
even entertainment:
Развеселое житье:/ Быстры реченьки/ сладкой водкой протекли/ наши
круты бережки/ виноградом обросли
A pleasant life:/ With sweet water/ the swift river flows/ and grapevine on the
river banks grows [Myakutin 1905: 120-121].
The girl, however, refuses, saying that she served in the army herself and saw
rivers of blood and tears.
Cossack folklore was a reflection of the “microcosm” of the Cossack lifestyle,
as military attributes accompanied the Cossacks throughout their whole lives.
This is evidenced by e.g. rites: a boy was accustomed to tools of war since his very
birth – his family would gift him bullets or arrows. After the child grows his first
tooth, his father or godfather would make him sit on a horse and strap a saber to his
side, then observe if his offspring behaves “like a Cossack”, that is if he sat on the
horse without fear. Then the boy would receive gifts connected with warfare
[Kashakarov 2015: 20, Yarovoy 2014: 178, Naumov 2010: 242-243, Maslov 2007:
23-26]. Cossack lullabys, on the other hand, contain the themes of going out to war
and “giving your son a horse”, but especially of inherited destiny, a kind of cycle
of warfare:
Богатырь ты будешь с виду/ и казак душой (...)/ И отец твой, храбрый
воин/ Закален в бою
You shall be a hero/ and a true Cossack (...)/ Like your father, the famous
soldier/ he who was hardened in battle [Bagizbayeva 1977: 97-98].
In another lullaby the mother introduces her son to his role as a warrior:
Сам узнаешь, будет время, бранное житье./ Смело вденешь ногу в
стремя/ и возмешь ружье (...)/ Да готовясь в бой опасный/ вспомни мать
свою...
Youʼll see, youʼll lead the army life./ Youʼll put your leg in a stirrup/ youʼll
pick your army gear up (...)/ And while you prepare for deadly battle/ youʼll
think of your old mother...) [Yenoborisov 2014: 247].
The interior of a Cossackʼs house would remind a Cossack of his
responsibilities as well: the walls decorated with sabers, daggers, powder weaponry

62 Daria Ławrynow
[Belova 2013-2014, Naumov 2010: 242-243], and the symbol of the master of the
household – the lash, both a weapon and a symbol of justice, a tool for punishment
[Glushchenko 1999: 67-68, Ivchenko].
WAR AS SUBJECT MATTER IN THE SONGS OF KUBAN,
URAL AND KAZAKH COSSACKS
Songs constituted the most popular genre in Cossack folklore. Their core
themes revolved around war, military, fighting enemies. This is exemplified by
words such as Любим шумные веселья/ Любим драться мы с врагами [We like
noisy joy/ We like fight enemies] [Sbornik tekstov kazachʼikh pesen...]. This song
praises a militarized lifestyle, as well as calls for maintaining good sense while
feasting and always being prepared for battle. In other song, Наше дело лишь бы
драться... [Our thing itʼs only to fight], the Cossacks declare that they do not even
want to wait for an enemy to appear, but find one themselves [Myakutin 1904:
207-211].
The average Cossackʼs life is also shown in songs with historical subject
matter, often in the context of particular events: a life of military duties and
constant readiness for war, in a way ingrained in oneʼs psyche. In one of these
pieces we receive this image of the local “profession”:
Служба – то казачья доля, И ее над нами власть./ Если нам случится
драться С неприятелем когда/ Станем дружно защищаться, победим
врага всегда./ Государь нас одевает И велит поить кормить/ И за службу
награждает, Лишь сумей то заслужить.
Service – thatʼs the Cossackʼs fate, and we are in its thrall./ Whenever we
will have to do battle with our foe/ Weʼll fight together side by side, and
defeat them every time./ Our lord honors us with the uniform, gives us drink
and food/ and heʼll reward us for our service – we only have to earn it
[Kazhenova 2007].
Other songs display courage and readiness for battle despite unfavourable
conditions (Утром рано весной [In the morning, early in the Spring]
[Zakharchenko 2002: 52], Гарнизон наш в Баязете [Our garrison in Bayazet]
[Maslov 2007: 54]), sometimes contrasting the indomitable spirit of the average
Cossack with the doubting and submissive nature of high-ranked officers (Мы не
по морю гуляли [We werenʼt carousing by the sea] [Zakharchenko 2002: 33]).
Some works also glorify military traditions and persistance in the face of adversity
(Мы сыны Кубани славни, древнеруськи козакы [We are sons of Kuban, Ancient
Russian Cossacks] [Zakharchenko 2002: 11]).
One often displayed trait was the insane courage of the heroes, which would
allow them to achieve a victory against more numerous foes [Matveyev 2002:
69-72]. For this reason, folklore pieces often took the form of a “chronicle of battle”,
teeming with colorful descriptions of battle tactics [Matveyev 2002: 69-72].

Cossack Military Culture as Expressed in Folklore 63
Cossack songs also differed from those of soldiers or recruits in their general
mood: there served to motivate, invigorate and were filled to the brim with humor.
They were rarely melancholic.
Cossack musical folklore, particularly marches, also consisted a part of
military culture in that they served as a part of battle preparations. These marches
were sung during military excercises and drills, but also games and other
amusements, such as customary traditional melee matches, called “kulachki”.
These songs were to aid in education, socialization and evoking a certain mood – a
battle trance [Yarovoy 2014: 23, 60, 144, Kalyandruk 2007: 181-182, 184].
Additionally, similar to proverbs and traditional sayings, they served as a tool for
education [Ibidem]. Examples of such educational songs include Конь боевой с
походным вьюком [Military horse with army pack saddle] and По сырой земле
туман стелется [Fog spreads over damp ground], both being a kind of father to
son instruction. In the latter song, the father warns his son – a Cossack of the
Choperski regiment, of the “evil Circassians” [Manuylov 2007: 22-23].
His offspring was not cautious enough, however, which is why the rest of this work
consists of the wounded heroʼs plea to his comrades to not abandon him in a
foreign land [Ibidem].
THE ROLE OF MILITARY EDUCATION IN THE LIFE OF COSSACK
COMMUNITIES AND ITS INFLUENCE ON FOLK CULTURE
Let us now take a while to examine the system of Cossack military
preparations in general. As evidenced by Oleg Matveyevʼs research on the Kuban
Cossacks, these peopleʼs military tactics were strongly influenced by their specific
lifestyle. They were at once warriors and farmers, which is why they prefered
simplicity, precision, perseverance and making efficient use of oneʼs energy both
in physical labour and during military operations [Manuylov 2007: 73-74]. Spartak
Aleksandrov reached similar conclusions on the grounds of earlier sources, as well
as his original research of the communityʼs traditional military culture – he states
that, over time, the Kuban Cossacks created their own system of physical and
moral education, suitable for preparing one towards the role of courageous warrior
and good husbandman. The various traditions and rituals of Cossack physical
education fulfilled both a symbolic and practical function – the youth socialized
during physical labor, while assisting parents in farm work was interspersed with
military-themed games and amusements [Aleksandrov 1999a: 6, 12-19, 23-25].
Both childrenʼs games and the ritualized elements of family holidays were filled
with military contexts, as well as traditions taken from folk games and cyclical
battle exercises (“kulachki”, but also other brawls popular among Slavic agrarian
cultures, including ritual brawls, e.g. during Easter or the funeral rites of Trizna
[Yarovoy 2014: 54, 180-184, Mandzyak 2006: 12, 60-62, Aleksandrov 1999b:
97-100, Bondarʼ 2002]) and horse-riding competitions (“jigitovka”). Therefore,
they were focused on training one to be resilient to pain and hardship, teaching

64 Daria Ławrynow
courage, honesty, discipline, responsibility and managing oneʼs energy efficiently
[Aleksandrov 1999a: 13-19]. Aleksandrov also mentions the role songs and dances
played in forming a mindset that would be effective in battle. In 19th centuary
Ukrainian folk songs were even included in school curriculums, since learning
them was considered important for oneʼs identity and morality of Kuban Cossacks
[Aleksandrov 1999a: 18-19, 32, 36-39]. Similarly, the Orenburg Host included the
learning of war songs among other mandatory classes [Starikov 1891: 174].
The importance attributed to traditional physical education and military
culture is also evidenced by the various initiatives for basing the curriculum of
local schools on the aforementioned folk songs [Aleksandrov 1999a: 29-45].
According to the Kuban Cossacks themselves, such a process would not only
strengthen the studentsʼ constitution, but also their patriotism, religiousness and
sense of local identity; it would also teach specific moral virtues, such as solidarity,
perseverance, selflessness, faith and a strong spirit [Ibidem].
Traditional cyclical melee contests and childrenʼs games, based on military
drills or war expeditions were present among Ural and Kazakh Cossacks as well
[Zheleznov 1910: 2-16]. One characteristic of these games was a particular form of
roleplaying. The participants would split up into two groups: the always victorious
“our people” and “the foreigners”, which embodied the current enemy, i.e. the
Kyrgyz people [Cf. Sochineniya Chokana Chingisovicha Valikhanova 1904:
289-292, Kazhenova 2007], Circassians, as well as various Muslim peoples and,
later on, Germans and the Japanese [Mandzyak 2007: 38-39, Gorbunov 1996:
11-12, Shcherbina 2008].
The children of Kazakh Cossacks would also play the old Russian game of
conquering “castles” made of snow [Starikov 1891: 219-220]. In addition, this host
would adopt some Kazakh traditions, such as traditional whip fights, wrestling
matches (“kures”) or horse races organized in the steppes during holidays
(“bayga”) – the participants of these competitions often included women [Naumov
2010: 95, Vlasova 2008: 32-33, 231]. In 1882, Filaret Sinkovsky was horrified to
find out that Cossack children know more of horse acrobatics and the Kazakh
language than of the fundamental Orthodox prayers [Bizhigitova 2013].
It can then be said that drills and military exercises were an integral part of
traditional Cossack culture, along with the mandatory learning of folk songs,
agility exercises such as horse acrobatics and dances, which were supposed to lead
the users into a trance-like state [Starikov 1891: 174, Yarovoy 2014: 23, 60, 144,
Kalyandruk 2007: 181-182, 184, Mandzyak 2006: 19-25, 226].
The themes of fun, combat and death – of the “bloody dance” appear in the
traditional battle culture of all the communities discussed here.
One characteristic of Cossacks was, according to researchers, a nonchalant
attitude towards life and death [Sichynsʼkyy 1992: 117, Wójcik 1972: 110,
Alʼbovskiy 2005: 33, Nelepin 1995: 141, Volkov 1998: 222]. They considered
death on the battlefield perfectly natural, in a way even destined [Ryblova 2005:

Cossack Military Culture as Expressed in Folklore 65
209-224]. In songs concerning the agony of a wounded hero there often appears the
motif of death as a symbolic wedding. This motif appears frequently in Cossack
and more general soldier folklore; it appears in the songs of many different groups
[cf. Pavlenko 2003: 134-135, Lanovyk 2006: 8, Astapenko 1998: 64, Strukova
2015, Kitaynik 1949: 52-53, Eliasov, Yarnevskiy 1969: 298, Pryyemka, Marozava,
Lukʼyanava, Karatay 2010: 68, 72], including those of Kuban Cossacks. Natalya
Suprun-Yaremko cites the piece titled Ой поля, ви, поля [Oh, fields, you fields],
which consists of a dialogue between a Cossack man and his horse [Suprun-
Yaremko 2005: 419-420]. The death itself takes the form of a type of magical
initiation, the hero was “married by a swift bullet (...) betrothed by a sharp saber”
[Ibidem]. The perception of death as the crowning moment in a heroʼs life or as a
moment of transition has its roots in Old Germanic, and even Indo-Iranian military
culture, along with the cult of the horse as a comrade in battle, bidding farewell to
its dying master. The Ural folklore motif of death through ingesting three “drinks”,
however, has not been noted in Kuban folklore. This motif is also rooted in
mythology, however in Cossack folklore it took on a humorous character
[cf. Ryblova 2006: 161, Sasnowski 2010: 127, Myakutin 1905: 83-86].
In the folklore of Don and Ural Cossacks the heroʼs death is often shown
metaphorically – as the ingesting of three “drinks” [Myakutin 105: 83-84]. In some
of the songs the mother watches her fatally wounded son, staggering and “soiled
with Muslim blood” and believes him to be drunk [Myakutin 105: 84-86] – his
state brings to mind the battle frenzy known to occur in berserkers. It is important
to note that Kazakh Cossack folklore, similarly to other Cossack folklores, gives
equal praise to oneʼs skill in battle as it does their “feasting skill”; the battle itself is
often described as a feast with guests. The Cossacks “offer” their enemies “gifts” in
the form of bullets [cf. Myakutin 1904: 155, 158, 162, 171, Lanovyk 2006: 36],
they “brew beer” or “make wine” for their enemies [Lanovyk 2006: 72, Fihurnyy
2004: 138-139]. Service in the military is a form of entertainment, during which
one can display “how to revel the Cossack way” [Myakutin 1904: 165]. War, in
turn, is a kind of “bloody dance”, but also a way to “purify” oneʼs land of an
enemyʼs presence [Yakovenko 2002: 244-248]. According to Yuriy Fihurnyy, such
an outlook was not specific to the times of Kievan Rusʼ, but may even be
connected with the customs of the step peoples (such as the Scythian custom of
drinking an enemyʼs blood to absorb their strength), or with the customary victory
feast, organized as a form of payment or thanks by the military leader, which is a
known custom among the Caucasus Narts, Germanic peoples and in the Kievan
Rusʼ court [Fihurnyy 2004: 126-137, Akunov 2014, Shchukin 2005: 204-206].
It is important to note that the songs of all Cossack hosts often copied motifs from
old Russian poems, such as the “bloody feast”, “bloody wine”, “brewing beer” for
the enemy, the “field sown with bones” or “plentiful heads” and “furrowed with
pikes” or “hooves” [cf. Afanasʼyev 1995: 129-131, Yeremin 1966: 158-159,
Dmitriyev, Likhacheva, Likhachev 1982: 350-351, Sokolov 1955: 236, Prozorov

66 Daria Ławrynow
2006]. According to Yulya Kononova, the Cossack songs did take over these old
Russian motifs, however for the Cossacks they lost their original mystical
connotations in favor of a more “mundane” identification of battle with a cheerful
event in the life cycle of the army in question [Kononova 2015: 268]. Accordingly,
one of the songs contains the motif of obeying two orders: the order to attack, but
also to drink a “portion of wine” as a toast for victory or to strengthen oneʼs
courage [Myakutin 1904: 66, 165]. According to Andrey Yarowoy, the metaphor
of battle as a feast was supposed to “familiarize” a Cossack with the enemy, to
establish a kind of connection between them [Yarovoy 2014: 155]. Another
traditional motif present in Kazakh Cossack folklore was that of death as wedding
[Myakutin 1905: 62-69, 74-79, Bagizbayeva 1977: 36, Vlasova 2008: 21-22].
Interestingly enough, in one of the variants of the songs from this cycle, sung
among the Cossacks of north Kazakhstan, the hero says to tell his wife that he
“died for his fatherland”, and only then the traditional “wedding” part begins
[Vlasova 2008: 22]. In another variant the Cossack “fraternizes” with the bird who
will, in a moment, “feast” on his body; the hero asks the bird to tell his mother of
his death [Myakutin 1905: 80]. This motif of death is also accompanied by feelings
of local patriotism – the Cossack dies “in a foreign land, on strange soil” and
reminisces about “his Ural”, his “lovely homeland” [Myakutin 1905: 79-81,
Bagizbayeva 1977: 36-37], sometimes even the “Holy Rusʼ” [Myakutin 1905,
78-79]. In one of the songs, the dying hero asks to be buried under a kurgan
(another tradition of the steppe peoples), on which “his landʼs native snowball tree”
would be grown for birds to perch on and tell him “tidings from his lovely
homeland” [Myakutin 1905: 81]. Foreign land, such as “the wild Asian steppe” is
not only enemy territory, but also culturally alien, a symbolic threshold of the
familiar world. Therefore, some of the songs feature the wounded Cossackʼs pleas
not to leave him behind in the steppes [Myakutin 1905: 81-83]. This plea refers
both to customary Cossack comradeship and the aforementioned idea of
“the worldʼs threshold”. For a Cossack in military service war was also a mission –
he was to conquer other nations and “civilize” (often simply Russify) new lands.
Therefore, he had to feel there is a purpose to his actions, to familiarize himself
with the environment and conditions – on a conscious level as well. For this reason
the folk songs contain not only the simple argument of “as my ancestors did, so do
I”, but also offer solemn couplets and humor. This humor and lighthearted attitude
are a common characteristic of the Cossack army song. The collective speakers, all
of them engaged in a war, make light of danger, death and difficult material
conditions; thus, they emphasize their “stoutness”, courage and dedication to the
cause [Myakutin 1904: 140-143, 155-158, 162-164, 171-173, 194-195]. Through
joke they “tame” the danger that awaits them in a culturally alien environment and
thus reduce stress. The death of the Cossack is surrounded by symbols: the Cossack
dies “on a road that no one walked, on the crossroads”, oftentimes under “the only
tree in a field” (which is reminiscent of the Slavic symbol of the “world tree”

Cossack Military Culture as Expressed in Folklore 67
[cf. Yarovoy 2014: 72-73, 95, 99-103]), grass grows upon his body – something
ends so that something new may begin [Myakutin 1905: 54-57, 59-61,
Bagizbayeva 1977: 35].
The Cossack would also die in full equipment: “with a bridle on the right, a
sharp saber – on the left, at agile legs – a lively horse” [Myakutin 1905: 59].
This image brings to mind the rites of the Saka, Scythian and Sarmatian tribes, in
which a warrior would be buried with his weapon, his dead horse and its equipment
[cf. Baypakov, Artyukhova, Kurmankulov, Marʼyashev et al. 2006, Sulimirski,
1979: 136-146, 192]. One Cossack prayer, a “funeral psalm”, written down in north
Kazakhstan, also contained a statement alluding to warfare: “I go to fight the foe, a
Godly battle until the end” – for the dying this “battle” is a sort of “ticket” to
eternal life in paradise [Vlasova 2008: 181-182].
It is important to note that, aside from the sacralization of weapons, the
Cossacks also traditionally valued their companion in battle – their horse, which
exists in a way on the threshold between the earthly and the unearthly, enabling it
to e.g. foretell the Cossack their imminent death [Myakutin 1905: 58]. The horse is
inherently associated with the freedom of the Cossack lifestyle; in one of the songs
noted in north Kazakhstan, the heroine laments her sad fate, which could be
different if she had a horse – then she would be a “free Cossack”, able to live
independently [Vlasova 2008: 9]. Weaponry too should be an object of respect.
This is enforced in a lighthearted way by e.g. the fairy tale titled Кукиш с маслом
[Diddly squat], in which a worn out pike takes offense at being turned into a
scarecrow by its owner, and a scarecrow dressed in an enemyʼs (a Tatarʼs) clothes.
It punishes the Cossack by provoking the birds to ravage his farm, in order to teach
him to use items for their natural purpose [Mashkovtsev 2017].
The themes of the horse and weaponry as oneʼs most faithful companions is
also featured in Cossack songs of the bandit cycle, for example the piece titled
Далеченько, далеченько, того было подальше [It was so far, so far away]
[Myakutin 1905: 30-31]. Its hero is about to be questioned by the Tsar himself, so
he tries to think of a metaphorical answer to questions about his fellow bandits: he
names his horse an ataman, his bow a yesaul and his bullet a messenger [Ibidem].
These items – attributes of the Cossack way of life, such as “miss saber”,
the trusted steed or different weapons will be present again and again in songs and
rites [Fihurnyy 2004: 70].
THE ART OF WARCRAFT IN COSSACK PROVERBS
Proverbs are another important element of Cossack military culture, as they
reflect the values and mental characteristics of said group. They can take the form
of advice and often refer to local cultural codes, based on local codes of honor.
In this way, they exhibit patriotism and a sense of duty to protect the fatherland:
Береги землю родимую, как мать любимую [Protect the fatherland like you
would your own mother] [Aleksandrov 1999b: 99], 3 родной зэмли умры нэ

68 Daria Ławrynow
сходы (Die before backing down from your fatherland] [Tkachenko 2008: 118],
Дураку и батькивщина нэ в моду [To a fool even his homeland is not in vogue]
[Tkachenko 2008: 114]), as well as bravery: Отвага казаку – половина удачи
[Courage in a Cossack – that is halfway to success] [Aleksandrov 1999b: 99],
Назад тикэ раки лазять [Only crawfish walk backwards], Бой отвагу любит
[Battle loves courage] [Aleksandrov 1999a: 26]. Additionally, they praised
ingenuity and cleverness: То не козак, шо поборов, а той, що вивернувся
[Itʼs not victory that makes a Cossack, but the ability to pull through] [Aleksandrov
1999b: 99], Где саблей не возьмешь, там пикой достанешь [Where a saber is
no good, one has to use a pike] [Maslov 2007: 59], patience and perseverance:
Тэрпы, козак, горе-будеш пыть мэд [Suffer ordeals, o Cossack, and you shall
drink the mead], Опизнывся, козак, так будэшь и так! [Even if you are late, o
Cossack, you shall still arrive!] [Pivenʼ 1995: 30], physical prowess: Богатырская
рука однажды бьет [A heroʼs hand strikes once] [Ibidem], Як нэма сили, то й
свит нэ милий [Without strength the whole world is unpleasant] [Aleksandrov
1999a: 26] but not deceit Не той правей, хто сильней, а той, хто честней
[Not he is right who is stronger, but he who is more fair] [Aleksandrov 1999b: 99].
Noted were also many proverbs referring to religious values: На Бога
надейся, а сам ни плошай [Trust in God and never give up yourself]
[Aleksandrov 1999b: 99], Береженного Бог береже, а козака шабля стереже
[A cautious man is protected by God, a Cossack by his saber] [Aleksandrov
1999a: 26].
Popular among Kuban Cossacks were also sayings derived from the
Zaporozhian traditions of the free lifestyle: Стэп та воля – то козацька доля
[The steppe and freedom – that is a Cossackʼs fate] [Aleksandrov 1999a: 26].
Proverbs could also be considered a short characteristic of the average
Cossack, suggesting a militarized lifestyle: Казак без седла, что черкес без
кинжала [A Cossack without his saddle is like a Circassian without his dagger]
[Aleksandrov 1999a: 26], Казак без пики, как девушка без ожерелья [A Cossack
without his pike is like a girl without a necklace] [Maslov 2007: 50], Казака ни с
кем не спутаешь: пулями меченный, шрамами отмеченный [You wonʼt
mistake a Cossack for anyone else: he is marked by bullets, awarded with scars]
[Maslov 2007: 59], На тэ казак народывся, шоб Богу и царю сгодывся
[The Cossack was born to serve God and the Tsar] [Tkachenko 2008: 124] – the
last one clearly characterizes the Cossackʼs destiny), or highlighting the realities of
local society: У казака две опоры: плуг да сабля [A Cossack can trust his plough
and his saber] [Maslov 2007: 59], Хорош на гумне, хорош и на войне [He who is
good at threshing is also good at fighting] [Korolenko, Popko 2009: 46].
CONCLUSION
It is important to note that modern Cossack local identity is also sustained
through many links to folk culture. The authorʼs observations made during field

Cossack Military Culture as Expressed in Folklore 69
inquiries in Astana and Almaty in 2014 have shown that the local Cossacks uphold
memory of their past mainly through cultural activities: they organize various
lessons on history, music, dance and traditional martial arts, as well as concerts and
live shows. However, continuing military traditions through the creation of
structured militias, law enforcement or border patrols is not taken into
consideration, unlike in Russian and Ukrainian Cossack communities. In Kuban,
on the other hand, we can see a growing interest in the regionʼs history and cultural
heritage. School curriculums often see the introduction of such subjects as
Knowledge about Kuban (Кубановедение), Cossack class profiles are also created,
as well as whole Cossack schools, which focus on fostering patriotic and military
values among the youth. Great emphasis is placed on a patriotic upbringing and
military education, as well as on teaching the local culture: songs, dances, legends,
handcrafts.
As we can see from the exemplary material, works of folklore have been, and
still are, a reflection of the Cossack worldview, its practical realization in the act of
communication. Historically, they have also complemented Cossack military
activity, along with its ideological basis.
REFERENCES
Adamovich, G.E. Krivich. Rukopashnyy boy: sistema slavyanskikh yedinoborstv [Hand-to-
hand combat: the system of Slavic martial arts]. Minsk: Bukmaster, 2012 (in Russian).
Afanasʼyev, A.N. Poeticheskiye vozzreniya slavyan naprirodu: Opyt sravnitelʼnogo
izucheniya slavyanskikh predaniy i verovaniy v svyazi s mificheskimiskazaniyami
drugikh rodstvennykh narodov. V trekh tomakh [Poetic views of the Slavs on nature:
An experience of a comparative study of Slavic traditions and beliefs in connection
with the mythical tales of other kindred peoples. In three volumes]. vol. 1. Moscow:
Akademicheskiy proyekt, 1995 (in Russian).
Akty, otnosyashchіesya k istorіi Voyska Donskogo [Acts related to the history of the Don
Cossacks], vol. 2, edited by A.A. Lishin, Novocherkassk: Oblastnoye pravleniye
Voyska Donskogo, 1894 (in Russian).
Akunov, V.V. Berserki. Voiny-medvedi drevnego Severa [Berserkers. Warriors-Bears of the
Ancient North]. Moscow: Veche, 2014 (in Russian).
Alʼbovskiy, E.A. Kharʼkovskiye kazaki. Vtoraya polovina XVII st. [Kharkov Cossacks.
Second half of the 17th century], vol. 1. Kharʼkov: Kharʼk. Chastnyy muzey gor.
usadʼby, 2005 (in Russian).
Aleksandrov, S.G. Narodnyye podvizhnyye igry kubanskogo kazachestva: Uchebno-metod.
pos [Folk outdoor games of the Kuban Cossacks: Teaching aid]. Krasnodar:
Kubanskaya gosudarstvennaya akademiya fizicheskoy kulʼtury, 1997 (in Russian).
Aleksandrov, S.G. Otrazheniye traditsiyfizicheskoy podgotovki v ustnom narodnom
tvorchestve kubanskogo kazachestva [Reflection of the traditions of physical
education in the oral folk art of the Kuban Cossacks]. Voprosy Severo-Kavkazskoy
istorii: Sb. nauch. st. 97-100, 1999 (in Russian).
Aleksandrov, S.G. Fizicheskoye vospitaniye detey i molodezhi kubanskogo kazachestva
(ser. XIX – nach. XX vv.). Istoriko-etnograficheskiy ocherk [Physical education of

70 Daria Ławrynow
children and youth people of the Kuban Cossacks (mid-XIX – early XX centuries).
Historical and ethnographic essay]. Krasnodar: Kubanskoye knizhnoye izdatelʼstvo,
1999 (in Russian).
Aleksandrov, S.G. Traditsionnyye rukopashnyye sostyazaniya kubanskikh kazakov ser. ХІХ
– nach. ХX vv. (K postanovke voprosa) [Traditional hand-to-hand combat
competitions of the Kuban Cossacks mid. ХІХ – beginning. XX centuries (To the
formulation of the question),]. http://www.cossackdom.com/calture/alexandrov_
rukopash.htm (accessed 23 November 2021) (in Russian).
Alekseyev, V.V., Minenko, N.A. Istoriya kazachestva Aziatskoy Rossii v trekh tomakh: XVI
pervaya polovina XIX veka [History of the Asian Russian Cossacks in three volumes:
XVI-first half of the XIX century]. Yekaterinburg: In-t UrO RAN, 1995 (in Russian).
Arzyutov, H., Huska, M.B., Huska, M.V. Tradytsiyni zasoby fizychnoho vykhovannya
zaporizʼkykh kozakiv [Traditional elements of physical education of Zaporozhian
Cossacks]. Visnyk Kamʼyanetsʼ-Podilʼsʼkoho natsionalʼnoho universytetu imeni
Ivana Ohiyenka 6. 32-37, 2013 (in Ukrainian).
Astapenko, G. Na tikhom, na volʼnom, na slavnom Donu: byt, obychai, obryady, prazdniki
donskikh kazakov [On the quiet, on the free, on the glorious Don: life, customs, rituals,
celebrations of the Don Cossacks]. Rostov-on-Don: OOO «Todiks: papir», 1998 (in
Russian).
Bagizbayeva, M.M. Folʼklor semirechenskikh kazakov [Folklore of the Semirechye
Cossacks], vol. 1. Almaty: Mektep, 1977 (in Russian).
Baypakov, K.M., Artyukhova, O.A., Kurmankulov, Zh. K., Marʼyashev A.N. et al.
Arkheologiya Kazakhstana [Kazakhstan Archeology]. Almaty: Oner, 2006 (in Russian).
Belova, T.N. Kniga dlya chteniya po istorii kazachestva (dlya 5-7-kh klassov) [A book for
reading on the history of the Cossacks (for grades 5-7)]. 2013-2014. URL:
http://www.imha.ru/1144542231-kazachestvo-legendy-i-byl.html (accessed 23 November
2021) (in Russian).
Bigday, A.D. Pesni kubanskikh kazakov, vol. 1: Pesni chernomorskikh kazakov [Songs of
the Kuban Cossacks, vol. 1: Songs of the Black Sea Cossacks]. Edited by V. G.
Zakharchenko, Krasnodar: Krasnodarskoye knizhnoye izdatelʼstvo, 1992 (in Russian).
Bilyy, D. Ukrayintsi Kubani v 1792-1921 rokakh. Evolyutsiya sotsialʼnykh identychnostey
[Ukrainians of the Kuban in 1792-1921. Evolution of social identities]. Lviv –
Donetsʼk: Skhidnyy vydavnychyy dim, 2009 (in Ukrainian).
Bizhigitova, K.S. Religiozno-nravstvennoye sostoyaniye sibirskikh i semirechenskikh
kazakov (vtoraya polovina XIX – nachalo XX vv.) [Religious and moral state of the
Siberian and Semirechye Cossacks (second half of the 19th – early 20th centuries)].
2013. URL: http://articlekz.com/article/10747 (accessed 23 November 2021)
(in Russian).
Boeck, B.J. Imperial Boundaries: Cossack Communities and Empire-Building in the Age of
Peter the Great. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Bogatyriew, P. Semiotyka kultury ludowej [Semiotics of folk culture]. transl. M.R. Mayenowa.
Warsaw: PIW, 1979 (in Polish).
Bondarʼ, N.I. Voiny i khleboroby (nekotoryye aspekty muzhskoy subkulʼtury Kubanskogo
kazachestva) [Warriors and peasant (some aspects of the male subculture of the Kuban
Cossacks)]. 2002. URL: https://etnos.ru/knigi-teksty/108-voprosy-kazachej-istorii-i-
kultury-2002/903-voiny-i-khleboroby-nekotorye-aspekty-muzhskoj-subkultury-
kubanskogo-kazachestva.html (accessed 23 November 2021) (in Russian).

Cossack Military Culture as Expressed in Folklore 71
Brekhunenko, V. Kozaky na stepovomu kordoni Yevropy: Typolohiya kozatsʼkykh spilʼnot
XVI – pershoyi polovyny XVII st. [Cossacks on the steppe border of Europe: Typology
of Cossack communities of the XVI – first half of the XVII century]. Kiev: ZAT.
«VIPOL», 2011 (in Ukrainian).
Chirovsky, N. Old Ukraine its socio-economic history prior to 1781. Madison: Florham
Park Press, 1963.
Dmitriyev, L.A., Likhacheva, O.P., Likhachev, D.S. Skazaniya i povesti o Kulikovskoy
bitve [Legends and tales about the Battle of Kulikovo]. Moscow: Nauka,
1982 (in Russian).
Dolgov, V.V. Poyedinki v drevnerusskoy voinskoy kulʼture [Duels in ancient Russian
military culture]. Voyenno-istoricheskiy zhurnal 6. 57–60, 2014 (in Russian).
Eliasov, L.Y., Yarnevskiy, I.Z. Folʼklor kazakov Sibiri. Ulan-Ude: Buryatskiy filial SO AN
SSSR, 1969 (in Russian).
Eryka Lassoty i Wilhelma Beauplana opisy Ukrainy [Erik Lassotas and Wilhelm Beauplans
descriptions of Ukraine]. edited by Z. Wójcik, transl. Z. Staniszewska, S. Meller,
Warsaw: PIW, 1972 (in Polish).
Fihurnyy, Y. Istorychni vytoky ukrayinsʼkoho lytsarstva [Historical origins of Ukrainian
knighthood]. Kiev: Vydavnychyy dim «Stylos», 2004 (in Ukrainian).
Glushchenko, V.V. Kazak, chto v imeni tvoyem: filosofiya razvitiya kazachestva [Cossack,
whatʼs in yourself: the philosophy of progress of the Cossacks]. Rostov-on-Don:
Molot, 1999 (in Russian).
Gorbunov, B.V. Igra «v voynu» v narodnoy traditsii (po Materialam ryazanskogo kraya)
[The game “at war” in the folk tradition (based on the materials of the Ryazan
Territory),]. Zhivaya Starina. Zhurnal o russkom folʼklore i traditsionnoy kulʼture
4(12). 11-12, 1996 (in Russian).
Gorbunov, B.V. Traditsionnyye rukopashnyye sostyazaniya v narodnoy kulʼture vostochnykh
slavyan XIX – nachala XX vv. [Traditional hand-to-hand combat competitions in the folk
culture of the Eastern Slavs of the 19th- early 20th centuries]. Moscow: Koordinatsionno-
metodicheskiy tsentr etnologii i antropologii RAN, 1997 (in Russian).
Gordon, L. Cossack rebellions. Social Turmoil in the Sixteenth-Centuary Ukraine. Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1983.
Gulyayev, A.L. Otryvki iz proshlago Uralʼskogo voyska [Excerpts from the past of tje Ural
Cossacks host]. Uralʼsk: Tipografiya M. A. Zhavoronkovoy, 1895 (in Russian).
Horobetsʼ, V. Zirky ta tereny kozatsʼkoyirevolyutsiyi. Istoriya zvytyah i porazok
[Advantages and disadvantages of the Cossack revolution. History of victories and
defeats]. Kharkiv: Klub simeynoho dozvillya, 2017 (in Ukrainian).
Hübner, I. Semiotyka a literatura i literaturoznawstwo [Semiotics and literature and literary
studies]. Acta Universitatis Lodziensis, Folia Litteraria Polonica 7. 15-35,
2005 (in Polish).
Istoriya donskogo kazachestva. Uchebnik dlya studentov vysshikh uchebnykh zavedeniy
[History of the Don Cossacks. Textbook for students of higher educational
institutions], edited by A.V. Venkov, Rostov-on-Don: Izdatelʼstvo Yuzhnogo
federalʼnogo universiteta (in Russian).
Ivchenko, S. Zasapozhnyy simvol vlasti. Kazachʼya nagayka v traditsiyakh i v boyu [Visible
symbol of power. Cossacks nagayka in traditions and in battle]. 2008. URL:
https://nagayka.ucoz.ru/ (accessed 23 November 2021) (in Russian).

72 Daria Ławrynow
Jakowenko, N. Druga strona lustra. Z historii wyobrażeń i idei na Ukrainie XVI-XVII
wieku [The other side of the mirror. From the history of ideas and ideas in Ukraine in
the 16th-17th centuries]. transl. K. Kotyńska. Warsaw: Wydawnictwa Uniwersytetu
Warszawskiego, 2002 (in Polish).
Julicher, P. Rebels and Rogues under the Tsars. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland
& Co, 2003.
Kalyandruk, T. Tayemnytsi boyovykh mystetstv Ukrayiny [Secrets of martial arts of
Ukraine]. Lviv: LA “Piramida”, 2007 (in Ukrainian).
Kashkarov A.P. Kazaki: traditsii, obychai, kulʼtura (kratkoye rukovodstvo nastoyashchego
kazaka) [Cossacks: traditions, customs, culture (a brief guide for a real Cossack)].
Rostov-on-Don: Feniks, 2015 (in Russian).
Kazhenova, G.T. Etnokulʼturnyye osobennosti sibirskogo kazachestva v kontekste
vzaimodeystviya i vzaimovliyaniya skazakhskim naseleniyem stepnogo kraya
[Ethnocultural features of the Siberian Cossacks in the context of interaction and mutual
influence with the Kazakh population of the steppe region (XIX century),]. 2007. URL:
http://articlekz.com/article/5209 (accessed 23 November 2021) (in Russian).
Kazhgali uly, A. Vizualʼnyy arkhetip [Visual archetype]. Almaty: Interprint, 2014
(in Russian).
Kharuzin, M. Svedeniya o kazatskikh obshchinakh na Donu. Materialy dlya obychnogo
prava, sobrannyye Mikhailom Kharuzinym [Information about Cossack communities
on the Don. Materials for customary law collected by Mikhail Kharuzin], vol. 1,
Moscow: tip. M. P. Shchepkina, 1885 (in Russian).
Kitaynik, M.G. Uralʼskiy folʼklor [Uralʼsk folklore]. Sverdlovsk: Sverdl. obl. gos. izdvo,
1949 (in Russian).
Kononova, Y.N. “Besposhchadno vragov bitʼ, svoyey zhizni ne shchaditʼ: kontsept “vrag”
v istoricheskikhpesnyakh perioda Kavkazskoy voyny. In Kavkazskayavoyna: simvoly,
obrazy, stereotipy [“Mercilessly beat enemies, do not spare your life”: the concept of
“enemy” in historical songs of the period of the Caucasian War], edited
by T.V. Kovalenko, 263-275. Krasnodar: Ekoinvest, 2015 (in Russian).
Korolenko, P.P., Popko, I.D. Chernomorskiye kazaki (sbornik) [Black Sea Cossacks
(collection)]. Moscow: Veche, 2009 (in Russian).
Korolenko, V.G. Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy [Full Collection of Works], vol. 6,
Saint-Petersburg: Tovarishchestvo A. F. Marks, 1914 (in Russian).
Kotlyarevskiy, A. O pogrebalʼnykh obychayakh yazycheskikh slavyan [About burial
customs of the pagan Slavs]. Moscow: Tipografiya K. A. Popova, 1868 (in Russian).
Kozlov, V. V. Fizicheskoye vospitaniye vkazachʼikh yunkerskikh i voyennykh uchilishchakh
imperatorskoy Rossii (1867–1917 gg.) [Physical education in the Cossack cadet and
military schools of Imperial Russia (1867–1917)]. Voyenno-istoricheskiy arkhiv
11 (47). 2003. URL: http://www.scarb.ru/literatura/metodicheskaja/fizicheskoe-vospitanie
(accessed 23 November 2021) (in Russian).
Lanovyk, M.B., Lanovyk, Z.B. Ukrayinsʼka usna narodna tvorchistʼ [Ukrainian oral folk
art]. Kiev: Znannya-Pres, 2006 (in Ukrainian).
Malinowski B. Szkice z teorii kultury [Sketches in the theory of culture]. Warsaw: Książka i
Wiedza, 1958 (in Polish).
Mandzyak, O. Boyovi tradytsiyi ariyiv: Na shlyakhu do realiy ukrayinsʼkykh boyovykh
mystetstv [Martial traditions of the Aryans: On the way to the realities of Ukrainian
martial arts]. Ternopil: Mandrivetsʼ, 2006 (in Ukrainian).

Cossack Military Culture as Expressed in Folklore 73
Mandzyak, O. Voyinsʼko-fizychne vykhovannya ariyiv: narodniihry v praktytsi
ukrayinsʼkykh boyovykh mystetstv [Military and physical education of Aryans: folk
games in the practice of Ukrainian martial arts]. Ternopil: Mandrivetsʼ, 2007
(in Ukrainian).
Manuylov, A.N. Obychnoye pravo kubanskikh kazakov [Customary law of the Kuban
Cossacks]. Saint-Petersburg: Aleteyya, 2007 (in Russian).
Mashkovtsev, V.I. Skazki kazachʼyego Yaika: Skazki, pritchi, pobayki i byliny [Tales of the
Yaik Cossack: Tales, parables, fables and epics]. Magnitogorsk: Magnitogorskiy Dom
pechati, 2017 (in Russian).
Maslov, A.V. Kubanskaya starina. Zhiznʼ i byt kazakov. Elektivnyy kurs [Kuban antiquity.
Life of the Cossacks. Elective course]. Krasnodar: Perspektivy obrazovaniya, 2007
(in Russian).
Materіaly dlya geografіi i statistiki Rossіi: Uralʼskoye kazachʼye voysko [Materials for
geography and statistics of Russia: Ural Cossack host], vol. II, edited by A. Ryabinin,
Saint-Petersburg: Tip. E. Veymara, 1866 (in Russian).
Matveyev, O.V. Boyevaya podgotovka kubanskikh plastunov v period Kavkazskoy voyny
[Combat training of the Kuban plastuns in the Caucasian war]. Reytar. Voyenno-
istoricheskiy zhurnal 43: 120–134, 2009 (in Russian).
Matveyev, O.V. “Chto znachit russkiy boy udalyy...?”: ratnoye remeslo v istoricheskoy
kartine mira kubanskogo kazachestva [“What does Russian battle mean...?”: military
craft in the historical worldview of the Kuban Cossacks]. In Dikarevskiye chteniya (8).
Itogi folʼklorno-etnograficheskikh issledovaniy etnicheskikh kulʼtur Severnogo
Kavkaza za 2001 god, edited by M. V. Sementsov, Krasnodar: Izd-vo Tsentra
narodnykh kulʼtur Kubani, 2002 (in Russian).
McNeal, R.H. Tsar and Cossack 1855-1914. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 1987.
Medvedev, A.N. Kazaki i rukopashnyy boy [Cossacks and hand-to-hand combat]. Moscow:
Zdorovʼye naroda, 1993 (in Russian).
Minutin, S. Rossiyskoye kazachestvo. Yego istoricheskaya rolʼ v razvitii mestnogo
samoupravleniya i gosudarstvennogo stroitelʼstva [Russian Cossacks. Our historical
role in the development of self-governance and state building]. Nizhny Novgorod:
Dialog kulʼtur, 2015 (in Russian).
Mykhaylyna, L. Slovʼyany VIII-X st. mizh Dniprom i Karpatamy [Slavs VIII-X centuries
between the Dnieper and the Carpathians]. Kiev: Instytut arkheolohiyi NAN
Ukrayiny, 2007 (in Ukrainian).
Myakutin, A.I. Pesni Orenburgskikh kazakov, vol. I: pesni istoricheskiya [Songs of the
Orenburg Cossacks, vol. I: historical songs]. Orenburg: Izd. Orenb. Kazachʼyego
voyska, 1904 (in Russian).
Myakutin, A.I. Pesni Orenburgskikh kazakov, vol. 2: Pesni bylevyye [Songs of the
Orenburg Cossacks, vol. 2: bylin songs]. Orenburg: Izd. Orenb. Kazachʼyego voyska,
1905 (in Russian).
Nelepin, R.A. Istoriya kazachestva [History of the Cossacks], vol. 1, Saint-Petersburg:
Pravoslavnaya Rusʼ, 1995 (in Russian).
Novitskiy V.F. et al., Voyennaya entsiklopediya [A military encyclopedia], vol. 6, Saint-
Petersburg: T-vo I. Sytina, 1912 (in Russian).
OʼRourke, S. From Region to Nation: The Don Cossacks 1870–1920. In Russian empire:
space, people, power, 1700–1930, edited by J. Burbank, M. von Hagen, A. Remnev,
221-224. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 2007.

74 Daria Ławrynow
OʼRourke, S. Warriors and Peasants: The Don Cossacks in Late Imperial Russia. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2000.
Ohlobyn, O. Hetʼman Ivan Mazepa ta yoho doba [Hetman Ivan Mazepa and his time],
New-York-Kiev-Lviv-Paris-Toronto: Vydannya Orhanizatsiyi oborony Chotyrʼokh
Svobid Ukrayiny ta Ligy Vyzvolennya Ukrayiny, 2001(in Ukrainian).
Paluch, A.K. Funkcja, funkcjonalizm, funkcjonalizm strukturalny [Function, functionalism,
structural functionalism]. In Słownik etnologiczny. Terminy ogólne, edited by
Z. Staszczak, 134-142, Poznan – Warsaw: PWN, 1987 (in Polish).
Pavlenko, I.Y. Istorychni pisni Zaporozhzhya: rehionalʼni osoblyvosti ta shlyakhy rozvytku:
Monohrafiya [Historical songs of Zaporozhye: regional features and ways of
development: Monograph]. Zaporizhia: Tandem-U, 2003 (in Ukrainian).
Pazaabradavyya pyesni. Myetadychnyya wkazanni iilyustratsyyny materyyal da
pravyadzyennya falʼklornay praktyki studentaw I kursa filalahichnaha fakulʼteta
[Non-ritual songs. Methodical instructions and illustrative material for the folklore
practice of first-year students of the Faculty of Philology], edited by V.V. Pryyemka,
T.A. Marozava, T.V. Lukʼyanava, V.K. Karatay, Minsk: BDU, 2010 (in Belarussian).
Pivenʼ, O. Torbyna smikhu ta mishok rehotu [Bag of laught and sack of laughter].
Krasnodar: Sovetskaya Kubanʼ, 1995 (in Ukrainian).
Plekhanov, A.A., Plekhanov, A. M. Kazachestvo na rubezhakh otechestva [Cossacks on the
borders of the fatherland], Moscow: Veche, 2009 (in Russian).
Plokhy, S. The Cossacks and Religion in Early Modern Ukraine. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2001.
Plokhy, S. The Origins of the Slavic Nations Premodern Identities in Russia, Ukraine, and
Belarus. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Prozorov, L. Vremena russkikh bogatyrey. Po stranitsam bylin – v glubʼ vremen [Times of
Russian heroes. Through the pages of epics – into the depths of time]. 2006. URL:
https://www.litmir.me/br/?b=22587&p=1 (accessed 23 November 2021) (in Russian).
Repan, O. Irzha na lezi: Livoberezhne kozatstvo irosiysʼko-turetsʼka viyna 1735-1739 rokiv
[Rust on the blade: the Left-Bank Ukraine Cossacks and the Russo-Turkish War of
1735-1739]. Kiev: Vyd.dim “Kyyevo-MohylyansʼKa Akademiya”, 2009 (in Ukrainian).
Rigelʼman, A.I. Istoriya ili povestvovaniye o Donskikh kazakakh [History or narrative about
the Don Cossacks]. Moscow: Universitetskaya Tipografiya, 1846 (in Russian).
Rudakova, N. Kozatstvo vukrayinsʼkomu folʼklori krizʼ vymiry tradytsiynoyi obraznoyi
systemy [Cossacks in Ukrainian folklore across the views of the traditional image
system]. Literatura. Folʼklor. Problemy poetyky 35. 493-498, 2011 (in Ukrainian).
Ryblova, M.A. Motiv gibeli atamana v russkom folʼklore [The motif of the death of ataman
in Russian folklore]. In Itogi folʼklorno- etnograficheskikh issledovaniy etnicheskikh
kulʼtur Severnogo Kavkaza za 2004 god, “Dikarevskiye chteniya” 11, edited
by M. V. Sementsov, 209-224. Krasnodar: OOO RITS «Mir Kubani», 2005, URL:
http://ryblova.ru/stati/voinskaya-obrjadnost/motiv-gibeli-atamana-v-russkom-folklore
(accessed 23 November 2021) (in Russian).
Sasnowski, Z. Muzychnaya kulʼtura rytsarskaha saslowya Vyalikaha knyastva Litowskaha i
Karalyewstva Polʼskaha [Musical culture of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the
Crown of the Kingdom of Poland]. Minsk: Knihazbor, 2010 (in Belarussian).
Sbornik tekstov kazachʼikh pesen – Ofitserskaya kavaleriyskaya shkola [Collection of
Cossack songs texts – Cavalry officer school]. URL: http://oksh.ru/oksha/
oksha_kultura_pesni_sbor.html (accessed 23 November 2021) (in Russian).

Cossack Military Culture as Expressed in Folklore 75
Seaton, A. The Cossacks. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 1972.
Sementovskiy, N.M. Starina malorossiyskaya, zaporozhskaya i donskaya [Little Russian,
Zaporozye and Don antiquity]. Saint-Petersburg: tip. I. Fishona, 1846 (in Russian).
Shcherbina, F.A. Perezhitoye, peredumannoye i osushchestvlennoye [Experienced, thought
and realized]. 2008. URL: https://uchebnikfree.com/rossii-istoriya/sobranie-
sochineniy-seriya-neizdannyie.html (accessed 23 November 2021) (in Russian).
Shchukin, M.B. Gotskiy putʼ (goty, Rim i chernyakhovskaya kulʼtura) [Gothic way (Goths,
Rome and Chernyakhov culture)]. Saint-Petersburg: Filologicheskiy fakulʼtet SpbGu,
2005 (in Russian).
Shevtsov, A. Russkiy boy na lyubki [Russian fight lyubki]. Saint-Petersburg: Vesʼ, 2010
(in Russian).
Sichynsʼkyy, V. Chuzhyntsi pro Ukrayinu [Foreigners about Ukraine], Kiev: Svit, 1992
(in Ukrainian).
Slavyanskiy folʼklor severnogo Kazakhstana [Slavic folklore of northern Kazakhstan]. vol.
1, edited by G.I. Vlasova, Astana: Kazakhstanskiy filial MGU im. M.V. Lomonosova,
2008 (in Russian).
Snegirev, I.M. Russkiye prostonarodnyye prazdniki i suyevernyye obryady [Russian folk
celebrations and superstitious rituales]. Moscow: Universitetska Tipografiya, 1837 (in
Russian).
Sochineniya Chokana Chingisovicha Valikhanova [Works of Chokan Chingisovich
Valikhanov], edited by N.I. Veselovskiy, Saint-Petersburg: Tip. Glavnogo
Upravleniya Udelov, 1904 (in Russian).
Sokolov, A.N. Ocherki po istorii russkoy poemy XVIII i pervoy poloviny XIX veka [Essays
about the history of the Russian poems of the 18th and first half of the 19th century],
Moscow: Izd-vo Moskovskogo universiteta, 1955 (in Russian).
Starikov, F. Istoriko-statisticheskiy ocherk Orenburgskago kazachʼyago voyska s
prilozheniyem statʼi o domashnem byte orenburgskikh kazakov, risunkov so znamen i
karty [Historical and statistical essay of the Orenburg Cossack host with an article
about the domestic life of the Orenburg Cossacks, drawings from banners and maps].
Orenburg: Tip. B. Breslina, 1891 (in Russian).
Strukova, M. Dobraya voyna, volya i smertʼ v kazachʼyem slove [Good war, freedom and
death in the Cossack word]. 2015. URL: https://strukova.at.ua/load/kritika/
dobraja_vojna_volja_i_smert_v_kazachem_slove/2-1-0-25 (accessed 23 November
2021) (in Russian).
Sulimirski, T. Sarmaci [Sarmatians], transl. A. Baranowska, T. Baranowski. Warsaw: PIW,
1979 (in Polish).
Suprun-Yaremko, N. Ukrayintsi Kubani ta yikhni pisni [Kuban Ukrainians and our songs].
Kiev: Muz. Ukrayina, 2005 (in Ukrainian).
Tkachenko, P.I. Kubanskiye poslovitsy i pogovorki. S.D. Mastepanov o poslovitsakh
i pogovorkakh narodov Severnogo Kavkaza [Kuban proverbs and sayings.
S.D. Mastepanov about proverbs and sayings of the North Caucasus nations].
Krasnodar: Traditsiya, 2008 (in Russian).
Tumanov, A.A. Yeganov, A. V., Neretina, L. A., Knyazev, O. V., Tumanov, V.A., Sapegin,
S.S. Russkiy rukopashnyy boy [Russian hand-to-hand combat], Chelyabinsk: Ural Ltd,
1999 (in Russian).
Vasilʼyev, I.Y. Gosudarstvo i obshchestvo v sisteme tsennostey kubanskogo
kazachestva [State and society in the system of Kuban Cossacks values]. 2007.

76 Daria Ławrynow
URL: http://annales.info/rus/kazak/cenkubkaz.htm/ (accessed 23 November 2021)
(in Russian).
Vasilʼyev, I.Y. Nravstvennyye tsennosti kubanskogo kazachestva i ikh translyatsiya [Kuban
Cossacks moral values and their translation], 2009. URL: http://slavakubani.ru/
kazachestvo/cossack-identify/moral-values/nravstvennye-tsennosti-kubanskogo-
kazachestva-i-ikh-translyatsiya/ (accessed 23 November 2021) (in Russian).
Venkov, A.V. Azovskoye sideniye [Azov seat]. Moscow: Veche, 2009 (in Russian).
Volkov, Y.G. Donskiye kazaki v proshlom i nastoyashchem [Don Cossacks in the past and
now]. Rostov-on-Don: Gingo, 1998 (in Russian).
Volvenko, A. The Zemstvo Reform, the Cossacks, and Administrative Policy on the Don,
1864–1882. In Russian empire: space, people, power, 1700–1930, edited by
J. Burbank, M. von Hagen, A. Remnev, 350-359. Bloomington and Indianapolis:
Indiana University Press, 2007.
Yarkov, A.P. Kazaki v Kyrgyzstane [Cossacks in Kyrgyzstan]. Bishkek: KRSU, 2002
(in Russian).
Yarovoy, A.V. Voinskaya kulʼtura kazachestva: simvolicheskoye prostranstvo i ritual
[Cossacks military culture: symbolic space and ritual], Moskva-Berlin: Direkt-Media,
2014 (in Russian).
Yenoborisov, G.V. Ot Urala do Kharbina. Orenburgskoye kazachʼye voysko [From
the Ural to Khabarovsk. Orenburg Cossack host]. Moscow: Veche, 2014 (in Russian).
Yeremin, I.P. Literatura drevney Rusi [Literature of ancient Russia], vol. 2, Moscow:
Nauka, 1966 (in Russian).
Zadunaysʼkyy, V. Boyove mystetstvo ta viysʼkova spadshchyna ukrayinsʼkykh kozakiv v
kintsi XIX – na pochatku XXI st.: monohrafiya [Martial arts and military heritage of
the Ukrainian Cossacks in the late XIX – early XXI centuries: monograph]. Donetsk:
Nord-Pres, 2006 (in Ukrainian).
Zakharchenko, V.G. Poyet Kubanskiy kazachiy khor [Sings the Kuban Cossack Choir].
Krasnodar: Edvi, 2002 (in Russian).
Zheleznov, I.I. Uralʼtsy: ocherki byta uralʼskikh kazakov [Uralʼtsy: essays about the life of the
Ural Cossacks], edited by N.A. Borodin, Saint-Petersburg: Tip. T-va “Obshchestvennaya
polʼza”, 1910 (in Russian).

TRADITIONAL PRE-CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS
OF WESTERN PODILLYA
OLEG SMOLIAK, NATALIIA OVOD, OLENA SPOLSKA
ABSTRACT
The article analyzes folk winter holidays celebrated in December before
Christmas as the greatest holiday of all Christians. There is a combination of folk
(pre-Christian) traditions with Christian traditions, which co-exist to this day. The
holidays analyzed in the research are dedicated to the most common names of saints
in Western Podillya1 (as well as in Ukraine as a whole), which are most often given
to the local residents. Dmytro’s/St. Demetrios Day celebration, in addition to its
Christian custom, characterized by church services in memory of martyrs and
honoring birthday people, is also known by the traditions related to celebrating the
land in winter period, protecting cattle, as well as the cult of deceased ancestors.
Celebrations of Dmytro’s/St. Demetrios holiday are proceeded by the celebration of
Michael’s Day, which symbolizes the arrival of winter. In Western Podillya
St. Michael is known as a protector against evil forces. He is also perceived by the
locals as the patron saint of wild forest animals and hunters. Until the middle of the
20th century St. Catherine’s Day celebration in Western Podillya followed the
rituals reflecting pre-Christian beliefs. Among them are rites of “destiny calling”,
fortune telling and divination (considering the destiny of a future marriage couple),
as well as honoring the cult of ancestors. During Varvara/St. Barbara celebration the
most evident are magical actions associated with fire and water as the main elements
in the world creation and symbols of the Nativity of Jesus Christ in the Christian
tradition. Such lunar symbols as dumplings and pies are important for the
understanding of celebration rituals. Most ritual actions convey love courtships
related to the choice of a future marriage partner. St. Anna’s holiday completes the
cycle of holidays related to Christmas celebrations. It marks the beginning of
Christmas preparations: women clean houses, men arrange farm buildings and
property, provide food for festive meals, girls organize groups for singing carols and
other traditional customs of Christmas holidays celebration.
Keywords: Western Podillya, Christian religion, ceremonial action, divination,
folk holiday.
1 Western Podillya occupies almost the entire part of the Ternopil region (except the northern
districts) in Western Ukraine.
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 77-97

78 O. Smoliak, N. Ovod, O. Spolska
INTRODUCTION
The traditional calendar of Western Podillya locals, as well as Ukrainians in
general, is undoubtedly subordinated to agricultural work, as it is fundamentally
agrarian. This is due to the fact that it is regulated by the beginning and the end of
various types of agricultural farm work. With the advent of Christianity, the church
calendar began to influence the traditional calendar rituals of Ukrainians: pagan
holidays were superimposed on Christian ones. Therefore, the elements of double
beliefs can be clearly traced in the calendar holidays and rituals. In this peculiar
combination naturalized Christian beliefs have been coexisting along with the
pagan folk rites till present.
Until the middle of the 20th century the ancient ceremonials, observed in
Western Podillya, were supposed to ensure success and prosperity in business
occupations of people as well as in their family life. According to the field
research, in present times the majority of local population no longer understands
their original meaning, but retains them as a certain traditional heritage. After all,
as it was noted by historian P. Bogatyriov, “misinterpretation of the rite increased
belief in its power and use” (Bogatyrev 1971: 189).
Winter holidays are the most revered among all annual calendar holidays in
Western Podillya. This was emphasized by the interviewed respondents themselves
during the survey. In particular, they note that the winter cycle of holidays is rich in
various rites and customs, and their magical actions are aimed at the celebration of
Christmas of Jesus Christ the Son of God, the Old New Year and Epiphany.
In Western Podillya pre-Christmas period begins with the first group of
holidays2 – Dmytro’s/St. Demetrios Day (in the pre-Christian period it is autumn
Yuriy’s3/St. George’s Day in Autumn celebrated in November 8). It is followed by
the celebration of the Archangel Michael holiday (November 21). The second
group of holidays includes St. Catherine’s Day (December 7) and St. Andrew’s
Day (December 13). The last (third) group of holidays is represented by the
holidays of Varvara/St. Barbara (December 17) and St. Anna (December 22).
As you can see, a certain sequence is being followed in the pre-Christmas cycle of
holidays, which is directly related to the movement of the Moon around the Earth,
that is fundamentally lunar by nature. The primacy of the lunar calendar in
sequence of winter holidays was also emphasized by K. Kutelmah, as he noted in
particular: “The lunar calendar was the most ancient among many peoples, since
the movement of the Moon was very easy to observe even with the naked eye.
2 The grouping of pre-Christmas holidays is based on the common content, the system of motivational
components and their magical prelude to the great Christmas of the Son of God Jesus Christ, the Old
New Year and Epiphany.
3 Until recently, our ancestors used to believe that the autumn Yuriy/Georgeʼs Day in Autumn (in the
Christian period overlapping St. Demetrios’ Day) closed the earth with a key for winter rectreation
and the spring Yuriy / George's Day in Spring (May 6) opened it.

Traditional Pre-Christmas Holidays of Western Podillya 79
People noticed that the Moon returned to the same Sun-related coordinate in the
sky about every 30 days. This is well demonstrated by the lunar phases as different
shapes of the visible part of the Moon. Although counting time, especially the annual
cycle, was according to the Sun” (Kutelmakh 1994: 125). The solar calendar came to
use during the transition of our ancestors to settlements and agriculture and settled
farming. As it is known from archaeological data, in the IV AD, proto-Ukrainians
already used the lunar-solar calendar (Rybakov 1962: 81). This practice has been
common among the Ukrainians until recently. After all, Christmas and Kupala
(a pagan fertility rite later adapted into the Orthodox Christian calendar by
connecting it with St. John’s Day) holidays are celebrated according to the solar
calendar, while Easter and Green Holidays (the Eve of Holy Trinity) are celebrated
according to the lunar calendar. This gives reason to claim that at the initial stage,
traditional astronomy was focused on the movement of the Moon, because in
ancient times the observation of the rising and setting of the moon in the sky was at
the basis of a calendar year division.
AGRARIAN MOTIFS IN THE HOLIDAYS OF DMYTRO/DEMETRIOS’
AND MYKHAILO/MICHAEL
The first group of holidays begins with Dmytro’s holiday/St. Demetrios’ Day4
celebrated in November 85. In contrast to other winter holidays, there are
perceptible motives connected with the recreation of the land, with the cattle cults,
commemorating ancestors, etc.
The first motif stems from the fact that the old-timers of Western Podillya
believe that the farm land goes to rest since Dmytro holiday/St. Demetrios’ Day
(autumn Yuriy’s Day/St. George’s Day in Autumn in the older period6). This is
connected with the pre-Christian beliefs that St. Yuriy /St. George is primarily the
guardian of the peace of the lands during the winter period: on November 8 he
closes the farm land for rest, and on May 6 he opens it. After all, our ancestors
considered the land and soil to be holy: “Holy is everything that it gives birth to.
All food in Ukraine is highly respected and called a Gift of God, and as a Gift of
God, it must be respected” (Mytropolyt 1994: 38).
Locals of Western Podillya have long cultivated great respect for the land.
They believed that it is a living entity and only land itself can give life to others.
4 Saint Demetrius (or Demetrios) of Thessalonica or Holy Great-Martyr Demetrius was a Christian
martyr run through with spears in around 306 AD.
5 The dates of the holidays are given according to the Orthodox (Julian) calendar.
6 The Great Martyr Yuriy (George) came from a noble Roman family and held a high position in
the army. When the persecution of Christians began, he took their side, for which, after eight days
of severe torture, on May 6, 303, he was beheaded in Nicomedia (Asia Minor). The Christian
Church included St. George among the ranks of saints. After the victory over the Pechenegs on
November 8, 1036, Yaroslav the Wise ordered to celebrate the holiday of Yuriy / St. George Day
on November 8. This day was called the autumn or cold Yuriy.

80 O. Smoliak, N. Ovod, O. Spolska
Therefore, on Dmytro holiday/St. Demetrios’ Day local folks used to express
gratitude to their farm land for providing them with food, giving crops and bread,
giving them strength in difficult times. On this day, the whole family used to go
out to their plots of land at sunrise, kneel down, bow their heads to the ground
and said: “My holy land, let me hug you, I give you a kiss you like a child to its
mother. Go to rest before the thunder rolls and St. Yuriy opens you. We thank
you for the strength you filled us with”. Then they crossed the farm land three
times and kissed it7.
Dmytro holiday/St. Demetrios’ Day has obvious analogies related to the
patronage of cattle during the holiday of Yuriy/St. George’s Day. This patronage is
most evident in the spring period, when people begin drive their cattle out to the
pasture, completely entrusting their safety to the protection of St. Yuriy/St. George.
Calendar-wise, St. Yuriy /St. George was believed to look after the cattle in winter
period exactly six months later, so that he would protect them from wolves and
other predators. These rites are dominated by cults of domestic animals: goat,
sheep, horse, and ox, as the main personified totems in the Christmas rituals of
Western Podillya. After all, as the informant pointed out: “in the ancient times the
cattle was especially revered on Dmytro’s Day: on this day, every cattle owner had
to give the domestic animals enough food and water and clean their stables”8.
In ancient times Dmytro/Demetrios’ celebration, as noted by local old-timers,
was full of joyful moods. This is confirmed by a number of local carol motifs,
which are dominated by the festive idea of joy over farming prosperity from cattle
breeding and gratitude for it to its Creator:
Ой господарю, господарочку, Oh master, fine master,
Ой відкрий ж нам та й воротечка. Oh, open that door for us.
Заженемо ж ти стадочко коров, Let’s drive in a herd of cows,
А всі корови мальовані And all the cows are beautiful,
За ними бички вгодовані And the bulls are fattened as well.
(Hnatiuk 1914, vol. 1: 157).
The rites related to the protection of livestock and cattle in the winter period
have been observed until recently during the celebration of this holiday. First of all,
these are the rites of sowing the stables with poppy seeds, which was supposed to
protect them from all kinds of evil forces.
Shepherd rites are also associated with Dmytro/St. Demetrios’ celebration.
After that day, all the cattle could no longer be driven to pastures. That is why
cattle breeders of West Podillya finally used to pay the shepherds for their work
(mainly with rye grain).
7 The incantation was recorded by O. Smoliak from Zhiga P., born in 1907 in the village of Skala-
Podilska, Borshchiv district, Ternopil region. The recording was made in 1992.
8 From the ethnographic records by Ovod N. from Irkha M., born in 1916 in the village of Mali
Chornokintsi, Chortkiv district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on June 1, 2006.

Traditional Pre-Christmas Holidays of Western Podillya 81
The most common custom of Dmytro/St. Demetrios’ celebration in Western
Podillya is the commemoration of deceased ancestors (being widespread until the
1940’s in some areas of Western Podillya, in particular in its northern
Pidvolochysk and Zboriv districts, this tradition has not survived to this day).
Commemoration of deceased ancestors usually took place before Dmytro’s Day on
Saturday (if the holiday fell on Saturday, then ancestors were commemorated on
the same day). That is why it was also called “Dmytro’s”, “family” or
“grandfathers’ Saturday”9. On this day, all the dead were commemorated with
services in churches and then celebrated with memorial dinner at home till the
beginning of the 20th century. It was a kind of autumn wake for dead relatives.
Usually, housewives would cook many dishes and gave each of them to beggars
who went from house to house on this day and prayed for the souls of the dead.
On Dmytro’s Saturday, memorial dinners usually took place mainly in the evening
(no meals were consumed up to that time as everyone was fasting). At dinner each
member of the family used to scoop up a spoon of the dish before consuming the
food and put it in a separate plate, which together with the spoon remained on the
table until the end of the meal, and after the dinner it was put for the whole night in
pokut10. Some water was left near this plate and a towel was hung overnight so that
“the souls of the dead could wash and have dinner”11. Similar rituals were common
in other regions of Ukraine. The Hutsuls in the Carpathians made a kind of “grave
commemorations” on Dmytro’s Saturday. They used to put some bread and a lit
candle on the graves, and they also used to eat ritual meals, giving bread to the
poor and beggars “for the dead souls” (Kutelmakh 1994: 164). In Kholm region, a
round wheat cake flavored with honey was specially baked for the commemoration
of the deceased (Ryzhyk 1997: 265). On this day kolyvo12 and pancakes were usual
ritual dishes in Volyn Polissia. Pancakes were made with all doors or windows
open, “so that their sweet and delicious flavor would lure the ancestors’ home.
As they had been living underground in the darkness for so many years, they begun
to see poorly, and it would be easier for them to get to their relatives by the scent of
pancakes” (Sapiha 1993: 96). In the South of Ukraine, rich flavored bread was
baked from white wheat flour and given to midwives who fastened up navels...
Let them commemorate all the deceased (Krasykov, Oliinyk & Osadcha 1998: 45).
Starting from the Middle Ages, when church rites were combined with pagan
ones, the cult of ancestors began to be observed at the level of Christian
dogmatism. Thus, commemoration of the dead was integrated into church rites
9 The traditions of the “grandfathers’ Saturday” in O. Voropai’s book Zvychai nashoho narodu.
Etnohrafichnyi narys [Звичаї нашого народу : етнографічний нарис] (Voropai 1958: 247].
10 A corner with a nearby space in a Ukrainian peasant house, located diagonally from the stove,
where two benches meet at the edges. Usually it was the most honorable place in the house.
11 From the ethnographic records by Ovod N. from Humeniuk A., born in 1925 in the village of Mali
Chornokintsi, Chortkiv district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on June 1, 2006.
12 A ritual Ukrainian dish of cereals with sweet gravy, the first thing served at a memorial dinner.

82 O. Smoliak, N. Ovod, O. Spolska
(this tradition was observed in the studied region until the beginning of the 20th
century). Usually, in the morning, housewives used to bring three small loaves of
bread with the names of the dead written on sheets of paper to churches, so that
priests would mention their names during the church sermon. According to popular
folk beliefs, the first bread was intended for long-deceased relatives, the second
was for grandparents who died recently, and the third was for those who died
untimely (in war, in fire or drowned in water, etc.) (Skurativskyi 1995: 228).
Dmytro/St. Demetrios’ Day usually was celebrated after all agricultural work
was finished and it should be considered as expression of gratitude to the ancestors
for their gifts. Although this holiday was mostly bright and joyful, some of its
elements still had a mysterious and mystical coloring. According to the folklore
beliefs, it was supposed to communicate with the souls of deceased ancestors and
to please them in various ways on this day. In the region of Western Podillya some
beliefs, retained to this day, claim that on the eve Dmytro/St. Demetrios’ Day one
can see the shadows of the dead in cemeteries at night when they would rise from
the graves and go to the houses of their relatives13.
A number of magical actions aimed at obtaining the future desired result have
been retained in the traditional celebration. This is primarily due to the fact that our
ancestors tried to achieve the desirable result with their persuasive rites. In the
ancient time there was a Western Podillya tradition to celebrate in sheepskin coats,
“so that there would not be severe frosts in winter” and “so that winter crops would
not freeze”14.
In some localities of Western Podillya, in particular in the Transnistrian
Region (Monastyrysk, Buchach, Zalishchyky and Borshchiv districts of Ternopil
region) there was the custom of driving chickens to the planted garlic beds in the
morning “so that the garlic would be big”15 (observed until the beginning of the
20th century). And in the villages of Koropets, Hryhoriv and Velesniv of the
Monastyrysk district of Ternopil region beliefs related to maintaining the water
level in the wells were retained until the 60’s of the 20th century: the first ones to
take water from the well on Dmytro/St. Demetrios’ Day should scoop it up with
their hands and pour it on the top of the log frame, “so that the water level would
not decrease in winter”16.
Traditionally, the girls from Western Podillya used to wrap white flowered
headscarves, lowering one side over the sheepskin coats symbolizing the roads
13 As recorded by Smoliak O. from his grandmother Yatsyshyn H., born in 1888, in the village of
Nastasiv, Ternopil district, Ternopil region. The recording was made in 1972.
14 From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from Zhiga P., born in 1907 in the village of Skala-
Podilska, Borshchiv district, Ternopil region. The recording was made in August 11, 1992.
15 From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from Vohnenna M., born in 1916 in the village of
Kovalivka, Monastyrysk district, Ternopil region. The recording was made in June 12, 1996.
16 From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from Kliovan H., born in 1920 in the village of
Grygoriv, Monastyrysk district, Ternopil region. The recording was made in June 13, 1996.

Traditional Pre-Christmas Holidays of Western Podillya 83
covered with snow all the time in winter. And on this day, all married women
imitated shoveling snow with a bread shovel, “so that bread would be baked well
all winter”17.
Until the beginning of the 20th century the ancient magical custom of
welcoming winter with noise effects was retained on Dmytro/St. Demetrios’ Day.
In the southern regions of Western Podillya (Burdyakivtsi village, Tsygany village,
and Skala-Podilska village of Borshchiv district, Ternopil region) after the church
service women used to dress in long skirts with raised hems (“so that the cloth
whitens well in summer”) and would go out in groups on the roads beat each other
with metal forms for baking bread. This was their way to greet winter and ask “that
it should not be cold”. After that, the women would go to an old tree (maple or
willow) and they would attach these forms to the tree branches “so that the birds
would not freeze in winter”18.
A rare, in our opinion, rite, related to ancient magical actions, was frequently
followed by elderly men in Western Podillya (Bilivtsi village, Borshchiv district,
Ternopil region) in ancient times. It was associated with scaring evil spirits away
from the house and the entire yard. For this purpose, men used to make a thin, long
candle, lit it from coal in the stove and solemnly carried it around the house from
its southwestern corner to its southeastern corner. After that, they used to put the
candle in a wooden bucket with some water at the bottom and were waiting until it
burned out completely. According to the popular beliefs of the locals, “this candle
was supposed to burn completely the evil forces aiming at the house at that time”19.
As you can see, the magic combination of fire and water is this ritual is considered
to be one of the best protections against evil forces in the pre-Christmas period.
An interesting form of practical magic for the next cabbage harvest was
sprinkling the cabbage roots with the ashes after cabbages were cut in the kitchen
garden. According to local old-timers, this would contribute to the good growth of
cabbages during the next year20. So, Dmytro’s celebration initiated the future
harvest of vegetables, especially of cabbages as the most valued.
Nowadays, Dmytro/St. Demetrios’ Day has lost a significant part of its ancient
customs and is celebrated only by attending church services, celebrating patronal
holidays and honoring birthday people named Dmytro. All rites come down mainly
to feasts and fun.
17 From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from Solomaha M., born in 1917 in the village of
Kryvche, Borshchiv district, Ternopil region. The recording was made in July 11, 1992.
18 From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from Zhiga P., born in 1907 in the village of Skala-
Podilska, Borshchiv district, Ternopil region. The recording was made in August 11, 1992.
19 From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from Hulko H., born in 1919 in the village of
Bilivtsi, Borshchiv district, Ternopil region. The recording was made in March 23, 1995.
20 The above-mentioned rituals were recorded by N. Ovod during folklore and ethnographic
expeditions to the villages of Kovalivka, Hryhoriv, and Velesniv, Monastyrysk district, Ternopil
region on June 11, 1999.

84 O. Smoliak, N. Ovod, O. Spolska
St. Michael’s (November 21)21 celebration is a peculiar addition to the
traditional rites of Dmytro’s/St. Demetrios’ holiday. While Dmytro’s/Demetrios’
celebration motifs are related to honoring the land in the winter period and
protecting cattle, as well as the cult of deceased ancestors, then the motifs
associated with the water element (the first snow and the protection against evil
forces) are dominant in the rituals of St. Michael’s Day.
Mostly, St. Michael is associated with the cult of water in local folklore. Until
our time, there are popular legends in the studied region, describing St. Michael
coming down from heaven to earth on a white horse on the eve of November
21 and bringing the first winter snow with him. In folk thinking this snow is
especially desired, because if it does not snow on this day, then the following
winter will be snowless. Snow is a natural protection of winter crops from severe
frosts. Even today, local residents believe that if St. Michael comes on a “white
horse”, it is a good omen for harvest and health.
According to Christian dogmas, St. Michael is the supreme leader in the
heavenly struggle against the enemies of God, the guardian angel of all the
Christians. According to folk concepts, St. Michael is often depicted as a symbol of
fire in popular iconography. As it is said in David’s Psalm 104 (105): “He spread
out a cloud as a covering, and a fire to give light at night” (Bibliia: 747).
St. Michael is usually depicted on the icons as a warrior with a flaming sword in
his hand.
St. Michael belongs to the most revered saints in Ukraine (together with
St. Demetrios and St. Nicholas). This is confirmed by the number of Christian
churches built in honor of St. Michael, and accordingly, the church holidays
celebrated by the Ukrainian people in honor of Saint Michael the Archangel. It
should be noted that, in addition to symbols of the sun, moon and stars consisting
the ancient Ukrainian astral trinity, the gonfalons of Zaporizhzhya Cossack army
often featured St. Michael as a warrior on a white horse.
In Slavic mythology, the celestial nature of the Moon was perceived as a
symbol of a knight (warrior) on a white horse who defeats a dragon. It is a very old
concept that has been developed in the collective consciousness of the Ukrainian
people. On a symbolic level, the Ukrainian knight-warrior is an eternal fighter and
winner, while the white horse is a symbol of good and light, which together with
the knight defeated the dragon symbolizing evil and darkness. According to
Christian ideological perception, this image symbolizes the victory of Christianity
over the pagan beliefs. According to folk imagery, thunder rumbles symbolize
21 In the Christian liturgy, Saint Michael the Archangel is glorified as the Archstrategist, the defender
of the Church and chief opponent of Satan. Since the devil’s expulsion from heaven, he has waged a
ceaseless struggle with the forces of darkness, with the forces of Satan. The celebration of this date
was adopted at the beginning of the 4th century by Council of Laodicea.

Traditional Pre-Christmas Holidays of Western Podillya 85
Saint Michael the Archangel fighting in the sky with evil forces – the devil
himself22.
The motive of defeating the evil forces is indicative in St. Michael rituals.
According to folk beliefs, Saint Michael the Archangel is an implacable the
defender against evil powers, the guardian of all forest animals and hunters. This is
confirmed by the statement of V. Chicherov, who noted: “The connection of evil
forces with darkness explains the increase of its power during the period of the sun
decline. After St. Michael’s Day, predatory wild animals dominate in the woods,
causing damage to farming chores, snakes prevail in the forests before falling
asleep in winter hibernation” (Chicherov 1957: 36). All this proves that Saint
Michael the Archangel had unlimited power over all the animals. After all, our
ancient ancestors had been mainly engaged in hunting, therefore the hunters had
their patron saint.
Since ancient times, locals have consumed such ritual dishes as meat jelly and
pies during St. Michael celebration, inviting their neighbors and close relatives to
the feast (there is a notable analogy with the second day of the Christmas holidays).
It was already forbidden to send suitors on Dmytro’s Day, and St. Michael’s Day
celebration used to end the season of autumn weddings.
All of the above gives grounds to conclude that St. Michael mainly represents
the water element, which is the creative force giving life to all living beings in the
world and is an irreconcilable and eternal fighter against evil forces.
The modern essence of St. Michael celebration is also reduced to honoring the
namesakes, as well as celebrating church holidays, mainly consisting of two parts:
church and secular. The basis of the church service is the celebration during the
Liturgy with the invited priests from neighboring parishes, while the secular one is
fun and feasts shared with the visiting close and distant relatives.
FORTUNE TELLING MOTIFES FOR THE FUTURE MARRIAGE
ON ST. CATHERINE’S DAY
The second pre-Christmas group of holidays begins with St. Catherine Day
(December 7). It is worth noting that this period of pre-Christmas cycle of holidays
most closely corresponds in time to the Roman Brumalia23, mainly popular in the
ancient period in the Thracian lands24. As we can see from the essence of
St. Catherine celebration rites, some elements have been retained from Brumalia
22 From the ethnographic records by Spolska O from Turchyn E, born in 1926 in the village of
Horodnytsia, Pidvolochysk district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on July 17, 2007.
23 Roman Brumalia falls on the period from November 24 to December 17.
24 Slavic-Thracian mutual influences, observed within the Carpathian region, were most noticeable in
the 3rd – the first half of the 1st century BC. The Thracians, like the proto-Ukrainians, were
developing farming and agriculture, cattle breeding, and various minor occupations. In addition to
traditional religious ideas and beliefs in the sacred power of fire, the cult of the Sun can be traced in
the Thracian spiritual culture.

86 O. Smoliak, N. Ovod, O. Spolska
youth festivities, but they have far more indigenous features and are mainly marked
by the divination for the future marriage and aiming to continue the natural human
reproduction cycle.
St. Catherine Day is the holiday of great Christian martyr25, and during the pagan
period it used to be an occasion for girls and women to summon their destinies during
the holiday of the goddess Dolya (Destiny)26. In ancient times, Ukrainians believed
that when someone is born, God always sends them Destiny – good or bad. According
to folk beliefs, one’s Dolya (Destiny) always follows people and always accompanies
them in any sircumstances: either helps or causes sorrow (Kononenko,
A., Kononenko, S. and Kononenko, V. 1993: 60). Therefore, the most important rite
for girls and women on Saint Catherine’s Day was to summon their destinies and to
bargain with them to be fortunate. In Western Podillya this rite was mainly performed
by girls and unmarried women (in our time, this custom has become rudimentary in
the studied region and is retained only in the passive memory of local old-timers). In
ancient times on St. Catherine’s day, Ukrainian women gathered at vechornytsi
(traditional evening gatherings with music, songs, jokes and rituals) and performed
divinations and some harmless spell-working to influence their future: usually they
cooked a millet pot of porridge with poppyseeds, tied it with a new rushnyk
(a decorative and ritual cloth, which is a symbol of family) and went out to the gates
for “destiny calling”. The ritual itself would be performed as follows: a girl used to go
out to the gates and knock on it with a makogin (erotic symbol) and called her fate:
“Dolya, luck, come for dinner!” After that, she listened carefully to hear any voices in
the village that spoke of her Destiny. A good omen of happy Destiny (Fortune) was to
hear a man’s voice, and a bad omen of unhappy Destiny (Misfortune) was to hear a
woman’s voice27. In Sumy region, Dolya rites (Destiny Calling) was summoned by
calling to the possible partner to come and eat some porridge (Borysenko 2007: 256).
This magical action is based on ancient worldviews, grounded in the masculine
principle, contributing to a happy marriage in the future28.
In some villages of Western Podillya (in particular, in the Transnistrian
villages of Zeleniy Gai, Pechorna, Dobrovlyany of Zalishchyky district and
25 The Great Martyr Catherine (translated from Greek as “pure soul”) was executed for her Christian
faith around 373 AD. A few years later, Egyptian Christians found the remains of the great martyr
and buried them in a monastery on Mount Sinai.
26 According to ancient Ukrainian beliefs, each person has his or her own God-ordained Destiny
(Dolya). The destiny appears as a new star in the sky immediately after the birth of a person, and with
the death the star falls from the sky to the earth. A person’s destiny is both good (Fortune) and bad
(Misfortune).
27 As noted by a local resident Teodoziv S., born in 1929 in the village Postolivka, Husyatin district,
Ternopil region, the rite of “Destiny calling” was observed in this area until the 50s of the 20th
century. Recorded by Spolska O. on June 17, 2006.
28 V. Voitovych believes that “It is the most favorable time to get married at that time (on
St. Catherine Day), when the activity of the Sun is the least, and the new Moon is coming to the sky”
(Voitovych 2005: 216).

Traditional Pre-Christmas Holidays of Western Podillya 87
Horoshova, Kudryntsi, Ivane Zolote, Kryvche of Borshchiv district, Ternopil
region), girls used to take a handful of porridge during dinnertime, then they used
to run out into the yard and throw the porridge on the rooftop and thus calling out
for their future destined husband to eat porridge. If a guy was passing by at that
time, he had to be a fortunate destined partner for a girl who “called him”29.
In the above-mentioned Transnistrian villages of Western Podillya,
“Dolya/Destiny calling” used to be performed on the outskirts of the village since
ancient times: if someone responds from faraway, so the destiny is far away, and
when someone responds from nearby, so the destiny is close30. As P. Chubynskyi
reported: “On Catherine’s Day, girls used to call on their destiny, and on Andrew’s
Day, destiny turned into fortune with its gifts” (Chubinskiy 1878: 257).
Unfortunately, this rite is no longer observed in the studied region nowadays, but is
only retained in the passive memory of local old-timers.
St. Catherine’s Day, like other pre-Christmas winter holidays, followed the
tradition of honoring ancestors as patrons of maiden destiny according to ancient
beliefs. So, girls used to bring a bunch of immortelle flowers to the grave of a long-
deceased relative on this day, “so that their Destiny would not die”. Another rite,
connected with the girls making a “sacrifice” to the willow tree, was also observed
in the studied region. A kind of “sacrifice” was a shawl specially made for this
purpose, and the girls threw it over willow branches “so that she would not be a
widow”31. There are reminiscences related to the fetishization of a willow as sacred
Ukrainian tree and offering it a shawl as a symbolic sacrifice (a symbol of loyalty)
in this rite. As noted by O. Kurochkin “Saint Catherine’s Day was a maiden
holiday and the occasion for girls and unmarried women to summon their destinies
and to bargain with them to be fortunate as the most fortune-telling rites predicted
future marriages” (Kurochkin 1994: 361).
On Catherine’s Day girls from many villages in Western Podillya used to cut
off a twig from a cherry tree and put it in a bottle with water or planted it into the
ground (it was a widespread tradition in many areas of Ukraine). If the cherry twig
blossoms before Christmas or Melanka (14 January), it is a good omen of getting
married within that year. If a twig dries down, it is not a good portent and the girl
will not be wed the next year. In the same way, they predicted health or death for
the next year. They used to put as many cherry twigs into the water as there are
family members, marking them with corresponding colored threads. If someone’s
twig blooms, so they will live long. If someone’s twig wither, so they will get sick
or die. Therefore, according to the folklore concepts, the plants that bloomed in the
29 From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from a local M. Pankiv, born in 1916 in the village of
Pechorna, Zalishchyky district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on April 14, 1996.
30 From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from Solomakha M., born in 1917 in the village
of Kryvche, Borshchiv district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on November 7, 1992.
31 From the ethnographic records by Spolska O. from Tulko E., born in 1921 in the village of
Yazlovets, Buchach district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on May 21, 2004.

88 O. Smoliak, N. Ovod, O. Spolska
most severe winter time were a symbol of the new revival of nature. Thus, a special
power was attributed to them as they were magically connected with the destiny of
people.
There was another Catherine’s Day divination related to tree leaves in the
researched region. Girls used to gather different tree leaves (and apple-tree leaf for
a girl). They used to assign a male name to each leaf and put the leaves under the
pillow before going to bed. Before going to sleep a girl would pray for a good
Destiny (Dolya), so that it would have mercy on her. In the morning, she would ask
the youngest boy in the family to pull out one of the leaves symbolizing the boy
with assigned name as her future husband. If she gets an apple-tree leaf, then she
will have to be a maiden the next year. So, fortune-telling, mostly associated with a
future (happy or unhappy) marriage, was an integral component of Catherine’s
vechornytsi rituals.
The motif of matchmaking of a young people can be quite clearly traced in
Catherine’s Day rites, which are formalized in St. Andrew’s evening games and
entertainment. It is mainly manifested in the custom of matchmaking at the table
for dinner party after the girls performed “Destiny calling” and young lads entered
the house in the evening. Usually, a young man used to hide one or two nuts in his
fists, and then he would ask a girl to guess the number of nuts. If the girl guessed
where the pair of nuts was, so they would sit at the table together, and if not, then
the challenge was to find another girl (Skurativskyi 1995: 244).
After the ceremonial dinner, the boys and girls from Western Podillya usually
organized various games and fun. The most common was this one: a girl used to
blindfold a boy with a scarf, and several other girls would call him from different
corners. The young man goes to the calling voices shouts, and the girls would
move to another place. The blindfolded man had to catch his “destined girl”.
As you can see, this game primarily belongs to the rudimentary ones, as it
significantly related to the “Destiny calling” ceremony.
There is a notable combination of pre-Christian rites and customs with
Christian ones in Catherine’s celebrations. It is primarily manifested in the fact that
the custom of going to church, lighting a candle and praying on Catherine’s Day
was followed by the girls in the studied region up to the 50’s of the XX century.
When the candle burned down, the candlewick was taken home and a cross was
made from it and carried near the heart, “so that the spirit of the loved one would
enter the heart”32. This kind of cross was often used by girls to charm men they
liked. After that the cross was tied with a red thread, once attached to a jug in with
Jordan water, and together with a bunch of cornflowers it was buried under the gate
of the yard where the beloved man lived. As a result of such rituals, the young man
would definitely look for this girl who cast a spell and he would try to marry her.
32 From the ethnographic records by Spolska O. from E. Turchyn, born in 1926 in the village of
Horodnytsia of the Pidvolochysk district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on July 17, 2007.

Traditional Pre-Christmas Holidays of Western Podillya 89
As we can see, the most long-standing pre-Christian customs were preserved in
Catherine’s rites. This is particularly proved by the spellcasting magic that
undoubtedly dominates it.
There was another Catherine’s Day custom for young unmarried men to put
handkerchiefs, given by their girlfriends, under the pillow at night. If a lad was
dreaming of his girl, he would definitely marry her. In the ancient period, courtship
rituals were equally performed by both girls and boys. This allows to argue that
unmarried young people (regardless of gender) were primarily concerned about the
future choice of a marriage partner during the pre-Christmas period.
Until the beginning of the 20th century there was an ancient custom of
arranging a girl to sleep with her parents on the bench in the most important corner
of the house – pokut. It was believed that “her parents would soon expect her
wedding in their house (would sit on the bench with wedding cakes) and bless her
for marriage”33.
Ritual motifs, associated with fire and water as the main elements of world
creation, appear in Catherine’s Day celebration. It is confirmed by the use of
candles (there is notable magic associated with the fire as active life-creating
element). Housewives used to light three candles in front of the icons from the
early morning on holiday, “so that the family generations would not be broken”34.
As the respondent from Western Podillya said “On Catherine’s Day all water
also had miraculous properties: on this day, the girls or women who had a wounds
or sores on their bodies used to go to the well to perform a symbolic “drowning of
a sore”35. At the same time, they threw the shirt, worn for three weeks, into the ice
hole, believing that the sore would be definitely healed.
There is an ancient tradition of washing oneself with water from melted snow
on Catherine’s Day in the researched region, “so that the beauty blooms and the
evil eye would not have power”36.
In the modern folk tradition, St. Catherine is revered as the patroness of
pupils, students and scientists, because she always sought new knowledge, and
St. Catherine is also supposed to assist in a difficult childbirth, because she knew
how to heal (Muzychenko, Mishchenko and Haidamaka 2000: 13).
Unfortunately, today St. Catherine’s Day celebration has almost completely
lost its traditional customs and beliefs in the studied region (a significant part of
maiden fortune-telling is performed on St. Andrew’s Day). It is celebrated only at
33 From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from Tuka A., born in 1917 in the village Lapshyn,
Berezhany district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on November 10, 1992.
34 From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from Tuka A., born in 1917 in the village Lapshyn,
Berezhany district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on November 10, 1992.
35 From the ethnographic records by N. Ovod from Golovetska S., born in 1934 in the village of
Zolotyi Potik, Buchach district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on April 28, 1996.
36From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from Tuka A., born in 1917 in the village Lapshyn,
Berezhany district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on November 10, 1992.

90 O. Smoliak, N. Ovod, O. Spolska
the level of birthday parties as close neighbors, relatives, friends come to the house
from the very morning and congratulate the birthday people, wishing them good
health and all the best. The latter accordingly invite them to the table and treat them
with drinks and snacks.
LIFE-CREATING CULTS OF THE HOLIDAYS OF VARVARA/BARBARA
AND ANNA
The last (third) group of winter pre-Christmas celebrations is represented by
the sequence of holidays of St. Barbara and St. Anna (these holidays have more
allusions to Epiphany as the third Christmas holiday). The first holiday is
Varvara/St. Barbara Day37. This holiday has retained the ancient symbolism
associated with the moon and lunar cycles. Because of that, until recently, it was
characterized by cooking varenyky or pyrogy (dumplings) in Western Podillya
region.
Actually, one can see the mystic approaching of the Christmas holidays in the
cooking of dumplings. As varenyky (dumplings with various fillings) are the main
dish of the Christmas Eve Supper and the Feast of the Epiphany. It should be noted
that Western Podillya varenyky (as well as Ukrainian dumplings in general) are
made in the shape of halfmoon. In general, Ukrainian dumplings are definitely a
festive treat. They are traditionally cooked for Sunday lunch or dinner and are
served on various major and minor holiday occasions, so they are a cult dish.
Their shape clearly resembles a phase of the new moon. As K. Sosenko notes,
“the very fact of eating varenyky every Sunday indicates a very strong lunar
motive, as Sunday is the seventh day of the lunar week” (Sosenko 1994: 54).
If the holiday of Varvara/Barbara is connected with lunar symbols, then it is
undoubtedly related to the Christmas holidays (the holidays with mostly common
astral-lunar symbolism, found in most of their attributes, such as dishes, cookies,
carol singing, etc.). This fact is proved by mandatory ritual series: cooking
varenyky (dumplings) for the feasts of Varvara/Barbara, Anna and St. Nicholas.
It should be noted that until recently, varenyky used to be the main gift for good
wishers and carol singers.
In the ancient times, Western Podillya girls used to cook varenyky
(dumplings) with poppy seeds (charm magic) for Varvara/Barbara, but often
instead of poppy seeds, they would put a bundle of wool there38, which was a kind
37 Great Martyr Barbara, was an early Christian saint and martyr. Accounts place her death in the 3rd
century (December 17, 306 AD) in Heliopolis Phoenicia. According to church sources, the remains of
the holy great martyr Barbara were transferred to Constantinople in the VI century. In the 12th
century, the relics of Saint Barbara were brought from Constantinople to the St. Michael’s Golden-
Domed Monastery in Kyiv by Princess Varvara, the daughter of the Byzantine emperor Alexios
I Komnenos when she married Rus’ prince Mykhailo Izyaslavovych. The relics were transferred to St.
Volodymyr’s Cathedral where they rest until our time.
38 A dumpling with wool visually resembles female genitalia.

Traditional Pre-Christmas Holidays of Western Podillya 91
of erotic symbolism (it was also a kind of initiation of future marriage). In addition
to wool, girls could also fill the dumplings with flour. While serving the boys, the
girls carefully watched who got the dumpling filled with flour in order to poke at
the boy (Skurativskyi 1992: 102). A very old tradition of youth fun games is felt
here a peculiar way to obtain the desired result.
It should be noted that the holiday of Varvara/Barbara was a kind of love
magic practiced on St. Catherine’s Day and St. Andrew’s Day in Western Podillya.
This was especially evident in the rituals that initiated the future marriage. First of
all, this holiday was filled with girls’ addresses to Dolya (Destiny) or praying to
God for a marriage partner. They “encoded” this request in the kerchiefs, which
they began to embroider since that day in order to present them to the wedding
guests the following year.
According to the source: “In ancient times, young girls began to learn how to
embroider rushnyky (ritual cloth towels) on the feast of Varvara/Barbara in order to
bind honorable wedding elders during the weddings. Every girl had to prepare
handmade wedding rushnyky and wedding shirts for a groom and his parents before
the marriage. The matchmakers usually evaluated the skills and mastery of the
future housewife”39.
Until the 40’s of the 20th century unmarried girls from the village Mechyshchiv,
Berezhany district, Ternopil region retained the tradition of baking and preserving
seven loaves of bread on the shelf on Varvara/Barbara’s Day, “for not to be married to
a suitor from faraway”40. By the way, each loaf had its own magical purpose: the first
loaf was for a crow, “so that it would not call bad luck”; the second was for the evil
people, “so that they do not speak evil”; the third was for the destined partner, “so that
he would not be from afar”; the fourth was for the Mother of God, “to protect against
all calamity”; the fifth was for the deceased family, “so that sins of the dead would not
fall on those alive”; the sixth was for the drowned, “so that they wouldn’t pull water
from their eyes”, and the seventh was for St. Barbara, “so that she would give a girl her
destined partner”41. All these loaves of bread were supposed to be preserved until
Christmas, and then a girl would put them all in a pillowcase, “so that it would be good
to sleep on a pillow with her sweetheart”. Finally, they crumbled them and gave
crumbles to the birds (nowadays, this tradition is not observed in this area). As you can
see, this custom is based on a set of magical actions that were supposed to facilitate
future marriage, honor ancestors, and ward off evil forces.
According to the old-timers of Western Podillya, our ancestors used to believe
that the land was transformed on Varvara/Barbara’s Day. This belief was
39 From the ethnographic records by N. Ovod from Irkha M., born in 1916 in the village Mali
Chornokintsi, Chortkiv district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on June 1, 2006.
40 From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from O. Tkachyk, born in 1929 in the village of
Mechyshchiv, Berezhany district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on October 12, 1993.
41 From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from O. Tkachyk, born in 1929 in the village of
Mechyshchiv, Berezhany district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on October 12, 1993.

92 O. Smoliak, N. Ovod, O. Spolska
connected with a natural seasonal cycle of spring coming after winter. In order for
the land not to befall anything evil at this time, the local residents used to pour holy
water on the crosses standing at the crossroads, “so that Jesus Christ would
protect”42.
The cult of water is especially important for Varvara/Barbara celebration as
water is the second life-giving element in creation mythology. Locals believed that
all the water on this day was “preparing for spring enrichment”, so it should not be
“disturbed”: do not take water from wells, rivers, streams, especially from the wells,
“because it might not be good for drinking by the next Varvara/Barbara’s Day”43.
The cult of the water as a life-giving element was complemented by the cult of
fire. Because of that, even before the 40’s of the XX century, the tradition of treating
the sick with fire and water was observed in Western Podillya on Varvara/Barbara’s
Day. Usually, twenty lit candles were placed from the right side the table to the left,
and locals used to read a prayer over the water in glassware while holding the
thirteenth candle. Afterwards, the sick person should drink this water and should
wash oneself with it44. As we can see, the celebrating of Varvara/Barbara’s Day, as
well as Catherine’s and Andrew’s holidays were dominated by the rites of fire and
water as the main elements that anticipated the coming of Christmas.
According to the resident of Kryvche village (Borshchyv District, Ternopil
region), the ritual of covering one’s nakedness with a shawl was cultivated among
women during Varvara/Barbara’s ancient celebration, so that “fortune would cover
them with all good”45. This ritual reflects an element of contagious magic
(protection of the reproductive body parts from evil spirits). Also, on this day,
women were forbidden to wash clothes, whiten houses and knead clay, they were
only allowed to embroider and spin. This was due to the belief that Saint Barbara,
according to oral tradition, loved to embroider and even embroidered robes for
Jesus Christ himself (Potebnya 1887: 194).
Lately, the celebration of Varvara/Barbara’s Day has completely lost its
characteristic rituals in Western Podillya and is reduced to honoring the namesakes.
The tradition of singing pious religious songs on the feast of Barbara remained
only in some villages of the Berezhany and Kozova districts of Ternopil region, as
“whoever sings about the Lord at this time, has better life on earth”46.
42 From the ethnographic records by O. Smoliak from A. Zazulyak, born in 1903 in the village of
Verbivka, Borshchiv district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on March 24, 1993.
43 Ibid.
44 This treatment was described from the words of E. Turchyn, (born in 1926 in the village of
Horodnytsia of the Pidvolochy district, Ternopil region) who heard it from her grandmother. The
recording was made by N. Ovod on July 09, 2006.
45 According to Solomakha M., born in 1917 in the village of Kryvche, Borshchiv district, Ternopil
region, as told to O. Smoliak. The recording was made on January 7, 1992.
46 Shaida I., born in 1928 in the village of Poruchyn, Berezhany district, Ternopil region, told about
the singing of pious songs on St. Barbara’s Day. Recorded by O. Spolska on June 6, 2004.

Traditional Pre-Christmas Holidays of Western Podillya 93
The third group of winter holidays of the pre-Christmas cycle is completed by
St. Anna’s Day (December 22). This holiday is called “Conception of the Holy
Mother of God by righteous Anna” in the Christian tradition. Anna, a priest’s
daughter, was married to Joachim. They had no children for a very long time, and
only at the end of their lives did the Lord give them the only daughter, Maria, who
became the Mother of God (Katrii 1982: 288).
In Ukrainian traditional rites, this day does not have any specific characteristic
customs, and it completes those traditions dominating the celebration of
Varvara/Barbara’s holiday.
The most widespread and observed until recently was St. Anna’s tradition of
the “polaznyk” as an omen of good and happiness for the whole family in the
coming year. The “Polaznyk” tradition mainly had a cleansing character and
contributed to the welcoming of the Epiphany (the birth of water in the pre-
Christian period).
Anna’s holiday had special significance for pregnant women. On this day,
they had to observe a strict fast and they were also forbidden to do any physical
labor (Matvieieva and Holoborodko 1995: 21).
On this day, girls used to gather in communities to discuss the coming
celebration the Christmas holidays in Western Podillya. “A girl could become a
member of such a community only when she already knew how to embroider, spin
and sew. After all, it was not accustomed to be idle during vechornytsi (evening
parties) till early mornings”47.
Starting from Anna’s holiday, housewives would prepare for Christmas
holidays: they were whitewashing and cleaning their houses, feeding cattle and
poultry, so that they would have enough meat for the holidays, etc. Since
St. Anna’s Day the unmarried men would start matchmaking and engagement rites
(Maksymovych 2002: 136).
CONCLUSIONS
As our observations have shown, the pre-Christmas cycle of holidays is
divided into three groups, each inspired by Christmas, namely one of its three
components.
The first group of Dmytro’s/St. Demetrios and Mykhailo’s/St. Michael
holidays in the pre-Christmas cycle is a kind of preparation for the main winter
cycle. That is primarily evident from the essential celebrating content.
On Dmytro’s holiday, local residents expressed gratitude to the nurturing farm land
for its mercy with specially prepared dishes and corresponding prayers.
Cattle was given a special role in Dmytro’s feast. On this day, the local
residents used to place their cattle under the care of autumn Yuriy, who was
47 From the ethnographic records by Ovod N. from Teodoziv S., born in 1929 in the village of
Postolivka, Husyatin district, Ternopil region. The recording was made on July 27, 2006.

94 O. Smoliak, N. Ovod, O. Spolska
supposed to guard and protect the livestock until the first drive to the pasture.
That is why the residents of Western Podillya tried to feed the cattle as best as
possible and take care of them, since they were a kind of totem animals for their
owner in the winter period, bringing happiness and well-being. The cult of
ancestors also played an important role in Dmytro’s holiday, as until recently, the
locals used to commemorate their deceased ancestors by preparing special dishes
for them. It was a kind of gratitude and tribute to the ancestors for the gifts during
the previous agrarian year. The celebration of Dmytro’s holiday also symbolizes
protection against evil forces, especially the protection of livestock and cattle.
St. Michael’s Day (November 21) symbolized the advent of winter and was a
peculiar addition to the traditional rites of Dmytro’s/St. Demetrios holiday. Until
recently, local residents still believed that if St. Michael comes on a white horse
(a white horse is a symbol of the water element), then winter will come on the Day
of The Presentation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, known as Vvedennya.
In Western Podillya, St. Michael is worshiped as a fighter against evil forces.
He is also perceived by local residents as the patron saint of wild forest animals
and hunters. That is why hunters always used to go to churches on St. Michael’s
Day and light candles as talismans against bad luck on the hunt. Since ancient
times, locals have consumed such ritual dishes, such as meat jelly and pies on the
feast of St. Michael, inviting their neighbors and close relatives to the table (there
is an analogy with the second day of the Christmas).
The second pre-Christmas group of holidays in Western Podillya starts with
celebration of St. Catherine Day. The holiday of Catherine is full of rituals, dated
back to pre-Christian times. First of all, this is shown in the rite of Dolya “Destiny
calling”, characterized by the custom of cooking a millet porridge with poppy
seeds and bringing it to the gate to “treat Destiny”.
Fire and water (as elements of world creation) often dominate in Catherine’s
rites. On this day, girls would go to church to pray and light candles. After that, the
candlewicks were taken home and crosses were made and carried near the heart,
“to charm the sweetheart”. Also, they used to wash themselves with melted snow
water “so that the evil eye would not have power”. Catherine’s holiday is almost
not celebrated at present, and some of its elements have been transferred to
Andrew’s holiday.
The last group of winter pre-Christmas celebrations are represented by the
holidays of St. Barbara and St. Anna as they symbolize the advent of Epiphany
(commonly associated with water rituals). Primarily, it is expressed in the use of
water as the main component in various types of divination, tradition of “polaznyk”
as an omen of good and happiness for the whole household in the coming year, and
also in the lunar symbolism of ritual dishes resembling fish in their shape as the
primary sign of water symbolism. These holidays mark the beginning of Christmas
preparations: women clean houses and redecorate the interior, men arrange farm
buildings and property, provide food for festive meals, and girls organize groups

Traditional Pre-Christmas Holidays of Western Podillya 95
for singing carols etc. In chronological terms all this provided harmonious
transition from pre-Christmas weekdays to Christmas as the greatest holiday of the
year.
Summarizing the above, it should be noted that the spiritual culture of
Ukrainians is largely connected to their rites, customs and traditions that have
survived to our days since ancient pre-Christian times. After the introduction of
Christianity, beliefs in heavenly forces, in the Son of God Jesus Christ promoted
and developed the traits of decency, hard work and humanity in the Ukrainian
mentality and worldview. All that means loving your neighbor as yourself,
community support and help, as well as protection from unwanted guests
(enemies).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliia abo knyhy sviatoho pysma staroho i novoho zapovitu iz movy davnoievreiskoi y
hretskoi na ukrainsku nanovoho perekladena. 988-1988 [Iuvileine vydannia z nahody
tysiacholittia khrystyianstva]. Yevanhelsko-liuteranska misiia – dumky pro viru
[The Bible or books of the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments have been
newly translated from the ancient Hebrew and Greek languages into Ukrainian.
988–1988. (Anniversary edition on the occasion of the millennium of Christianity).
Evangelical Lutheran mission – thoughts about faith.]
Bogatyrev, Pеtr. 1971. Voprosy teorii narodnogo iskusstva [Questions of the theory of folk
art]. Moscow: Iskusstvo.
Borysenko, Valentyna. 2007. Sviata i obriady narodnoho kalendaria [Holidays and
ceremonies of the national calendar] Іn: Ukrainska etnolohiia: navch. posibnyk
[Ukrainian ethnology: study guide] Kyiv: Lybid: 254-316.
Chicherov, Vladimir. 1957. Zimniy period russkogo zemledelʼcheskogo kalendarya
XVI-ХІХ vekov (ocherki po istorii narodnykh verovaniy) [Winter period of the Russian
agricultural calendar of the 16th–19th centuries (essays on the history of folk beliefs).]
Mosсow: Izd-vo AN SSSR.
Chubinskiy, Pavel. 1878. Trudy etnografichesko-statisticheskoy ekspeditsii v Zapadno-
russkiy kray. Materialy i issledovaniya, sobrannye P. P. Chubinskim [Proceedings of
an ethnographic-statistical expedition to the Western Russian region. Materials and
research collected by P.P. Chubinskiy] Vol. 3, Sankt-Petersburg.
Hrushevskyi, Mykhailo. 1994. Istoriia ukrainskoi literatury: V 6 t. 9 kn. (uporiad.
L.M. Kopanytsia; prymit. S.K. Rosovetskoho) [History of Ukrainian literature:
In 6 vols. 9 books]. Compiled by L.M. Kopanytsia; notes by S.K. Rosovetskyi.
Vol. 4 Oral creativity of the late princely and transition centuries XIII-XVII, Book. 2.
Kyiv: Lybid.
Hnatiuk, Volodymyr. 1914. Koliadky i shchedrivky. T.1, Etnohrafichnyi zbirnyk. Vydaie
Etnohrafichna komisiia Naukovoho Tovarystva imeni Shevchenka. Nakladom
Naukovoho Tovarystva imeni Shevchenka [Christmas Carols and Epiphany carols
(shchedrivkas). Vol. 1, Ethnographic collection. Published by the Ethnographic
Commission of the Shevchenko Scientific Society] Lviv, Vol. 35 (XXXV); T.2,
Etnohrafichnyi zbirnyk. Vydaie Etnohrafichna komisiia Naukovoho Tovarystva imeni
Shevchenka. Nakladom Naukovoho Tovarystva imeni Shevchenka [Vol. 2,

96 O. Smoliak, N. Ovod, O. Spolska
Ethnographic collection. Published by the Ethnographic Commission of the
Shevchenko Scientific Society] Lviv, Vol. 36 (XXXVI).
Katrii, Yulian. 1982. Piznai svii obriad. Liturhiinyi rik Ukrainskoi katolytskoi tserkvy.
Chastyna 1. Druhe vydannia [Know your ritual. Liturgical year of the Ukrainian
Catholic Church] Part 1, Second edition. New York: Vyd-vo oo. Vasyliian.
Krasykov, Mykhailo, Oliinyk, Nadiia & Osadcha Valeriia. 1998. Muravskyi shliakh – 97:
Materialy kompleksnoi folklorno-etnohrafichnoi ekspedytsii [Ant route – 97: Materials
of a comprehensive folklore and ethnographic expedition] Kharkiv.
Kononenko, Andrey, Kononenko, Sergey & Kononenko, Viсtor. 1993. Personazhi
slavyanskoy mifologii (Ris. slovarʼ) [Characters of Slavic Mythology (Drawing
Dictionary] Kyiv: Korsar.
Kurochkin, Oleksandr. 1994. Obriadovist (Kalendarni sviata y obriady) [Rituals (Calendar
holidays and ceremonies)] Іn: Podillia. Istorychno-etnohrafichne doslidzhennia,
(red.: Artiukh L. F., Balushok V. H., Boltarovych Z. Ye. ta in.) [Podillya Historical
and ethnographic research]. Edited: Artyukh L. F., Balushok V. G., Boltarovych
Z. E. and others. Kyiv: Dolia: 358–385.
Kutelmakh, Kornelii. 1994. Zvychai ta obriady [Customs and ceremonies], Іn: Ukrainske
narodoznavstvo: navch. posibnyk, (red: M. Hlushko, T. Hontar, H. Horyn ta in.);
(za red. S. Pavliuka, H. Horyn, R. Kyrchiva) [Ukrainian ethnology: teaching. manual].
Ed.: M. Glushko, T. Gontar, H. Horyn, etc.; edited by S. Pavlyuk, H. Horyn,
R. Kyrchiv. Lviv: Vydavnychyi tsentr “Feniks”: 121–167.
Maksymovych, Mykhailo. 2002. Dni ta misiatsi ukrainskoho selianyna, (upor., perekl. z ros.
vstup. st. ta prym. V. Hnatiuka) [Days and months of the Ukrainian peasant]. Ed., transl.
from Russian introduction. Art. and approx. by V. Hnatyuk. Kyiv: Oberehy.
Matvieieva, Nadiia & Holoborodko, Andrii. 1995. Sviati i sviata Ukrainy: Kalendar
tserkovnykh sviat i narodnykh tradytsii: Slovnyk-dovidnyk [Saints and holidays
of Ukraine: Calendar of church holidays and folk traditions: Dictionary-reference]
Kyiv: Ukr. tsentr dukhovnoi kultury.
Mytropolyt, Ilarion. 1994. Dokhrystyianski viruvannia ukrainskoho narodu: Istorychno-
relihiina monohrafiia. Vydannia druhe [Pre-Christian beliefs of the Ukrainian people:
Historical and religious monograph. The second edition] Kyiv: Oberehy.
Muzychenko, Yaroslav, Mishchenko Kateryna & Haidamaka Oleksandr. 2000. Raduisia
zemle, koliada іde [Rejoice, earth, the Christmas carol is coming] Kyiv: Smoloskyp.
Onyshchuk, Anton. 1912. Narodnyi kaliendar. Zvychai y viruvannia pryviazani do
poodynokykh dniv u rotsi, zapysav u 1907-10, r. v Zelenytsy, Nadvirnianskoho pov.
Antin Onyshchuk, narod uchytel [People’s calendar. Customs and beliefs are tied to
single days of the year, recorded in 1907-10, in Zelenytsia, Nadvirnya County by Antin
Onyshchuk, a folk teacher] In: Materiialy do ukrainskoi etnolohii. Vydaie Etnohrafichna
komisiia Naukovoho Tovarystva im. Shevchenka u Lvovi [Materials for Ukrainian
ethnology. Issued by the Ethnographic Commission of the Shevchenko Scientific
Society in Lviv] Lviv: Editing Shevchenko Scientific Society, Vol. XV: 1-61.
Potebnya, Aleksandr 1887. Obʼyasnenіya malorusskikh i srodnykh narodnykh pesen. T. 2:
Kolyadki i shchedrovki [Explanations of Little Russian and related folk songs. Vol. 2:
Christmas Carols and Epiphany carols]. Warsaw: tip. M. Zemkevich.
Ryzhyk, Yevhen. 1997. Kalendarni obriady ukraintsiv Kholmshchyny i Pidliashshia
[Calendar rites of Ukrainians of Kholm region and Pidliassia region].

Traditional Pre-Christmas Holidays of Western Podillya 97
Іn: Kholmshchyna i Pidliashshia. Istoryko-etnohrafichne doslidzhennia, (red. kolehiia:
V. Borysenko, M. Lesiv, T. Kara-Vasyleva ta in.) [Holmshchyna and Pidliassia.
Historical and ethnographic research]. Editorial board: V. Borysenko, M. Lesiv,
T. Kara-Vasyleva, etc. Kyiv: Rodovid: 251-269.
Rybakov, Boris. 1962. Kalendarʼ IV veka iz zemli polyan [Calendar of the 4th century from
the land of the glades]. Sovetskaya arkheologiya [Soviet archeology], No.4: 66-89.
Sapiha, Vasyl. 1993. Ukrainski narodni sviata ta zvychai [Ukrainian folk holidays and
customs] Kyiv: T-vo “Znannia Ukrainy”.
Skurativskyi, Vasyl. 1992. Oberehy pamiati. Narodnyi ahrokalendar [Memory charms.
People’s agricultural calendar] Kyiv: Vyd-vo “Skarbnytsia”.
Skurativskyi, Vasyl. 1995. Didukh: Sviata ukrainskoho narodu [Didukh: Holidays of the
Ukrainian people] Kyiv: Osvita.
Sosenko, Ksenofont. 1994. Kulturno-istorychna postat staroukrainskykh sviat Rizdva i
Shchedroho Vechera (Repryntne vydannia) [The cultural and historical figure of the
old Ukrainian holidays of Christmas and the Great Supper (Reprint edition)] Kyiv:
SINTO.
Voitovych, Valerii. 2005. Ukrainska mifolohiia [Ukrainian mythology] Kyiv: Lybid.
Voropai, Oleksa. 1958. Zvychai nashoho narodu: etnohrafichnyi narys: (u 2 t.) [Customs of
our people: an ethnographic essay: (in 2 volumes)]. Vol. 1, Munchen: Ukrainske
vydavnytstvo.

THE INFLUENCE OF THE “SONG OF ROLAND”
ON THE LEGENDARY ALBANIAN
“SONGS OF THE FRONTIER WARRIORS”
MUHAMED ÇITAKU
ABSTRACT
The epic poem The Song of Roland has had an immense influence on European
literature over the centuries, including on the ancient legendary Albanian songs,
The Songs of the Frontier Warriors. The relation between these two epics has only
recently been studied, and hence, it represents an insufficiently explored field.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to enhance the research with new findings.
Using a comparative method, in this study, we depicted the impact of The Song of
Roland on The Songs of the Frontier Warriors using different layers. These included
the abilities of the main hero, the fighting, the cult of the horse, the cult of the
weapon, the threat that comes from the sea, the Moor who is the same as the
Saracens of The Song of Roland, the figure of the sun, the dream, the lament, and the
introduction of The Songs of the Frontier Warriors. By analyzing the influence of
The Song of Roland on The Songs of the Frontier Warriors, the understanding of
inter-European interactions that took place in the past, and subsequently the
reciprocal relations between cultures, is improved. Keywords: The Song of Roland,
The Songs of the Frontier Warriors, hero, horse, sword, sun.
INTRODUCTION
The Songs of the Frontier Warriors are among the oldest songs in Southeast
Europe, particularly in the Balkans. They are a series of songs about the deeds of
two main heroes, Muji and Halili. The events are related to the various wars that
these two heroes pursue in Jutbina and Kladusha (now Croatia and Bosnia), where
at that point in time, was the border separating the two great world empires, the
Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires. Through these two heroes, the songs
portray the wars that the Muslims of the Ottoman Empire and the Catholics of the
Austro-Hungarian Empire fought at the border point (Elsie, Mathie-Heck 2004, p.
5). This conflict is preserved by the Muslims under the Ottoman Empire in a group
of songs called The Songs of the Frontier Warriors (originally Këngët e
kreshnikëve), which were songs about the frontiers (krajishnik slv. frontier). These
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 98-105

The Influence of “The Song of Roland” on the Legendary Albanian Songs... 99
songs have been preserved in only two nations that were then under the Ottoman
Empire, by the Bosnians from Bosnia and the Albanians that extend to several
countries, such as Albania, Kosovo, Macedonia, and Serbia. For a century, there
has been a debate about which of these two nations created these songs and which
borrowed them. The issue has remained at the level of hypotheses, completely
unresolved because it has become a socio-cultural rivalry between the Bosnian and
Albanian people, a competition about who can demonstrate a stronger argument for
having created these songs to demonstrate cultural superiority over the opposite
nation. In this study, we examine The Songs of the Frontier Warriors sung by
Albanians by investigating how they have been influenced by The Song of Roland.
Amongst the renowned scholars who have highly praised The Songs of the
Frontier Warriors and collected such songs are Milman Parry and Albert B. Lord,
who gathered many of these songs in Bosnian and Albanian in Novi Pazar, and
considered their rhapsodists as one of the last humanists in the world. These two
authors based their theories on Homer, his verse, repetitions, and the manner of
structuring events on The Songs of the Frontier Warriors and their rhapsodies,
among which the most prominent is Avdo Međedović (Lord 1991, p. 57).
HISTORY OF THE SONGS OF THE FRONTIER WARRIORS
The conflict between the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Ottoman Empire
on the Lika border where Jutbina and Kladusha were located, the setting
of The Songs of the Frontier Warriors, is not older than five centuries.
Nevertheless, the origin of The Songs of the Frontier Warriors takes us to an
earlier time as they have traces beginning in ancient times. This has led scholars to
think that The Songs of the Frontier Warriors were originally songs of pre-
medieval heroes associated with the events of an early period. According to the
theories, these songs later changed as an adaptation to new times, heroes, and
events that represent the conflict of the last five centuries of border wars between
the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Ottoman Empire. This change was made
possible by two important issues in these nations:
1) The great cultural changes that occurred when the Bosnian and Albanian
people who lived around the border largely converted from Catholicism to Islam.
This religious change also affected their folklore; the medieval-Catholic elements
were removed from the songs, and new Islamic elements were added.
2) The second reason that enabled this change is related to the wars that
followed because of border conflicts between Muslims and Catholics across the
border, which were so intense that earlier events began to wither within the songs.
Subsequently, the changes in the songs reflecting the new events were inevitable.
Unquestionably, changing folklore to represent a new atmosphere is not limited to
these nations. It is found in the folklore of many cultures and adaptations because
new events are characteristic of folklore in general; everything folkloristic that
does not adapt to time risks being forgotten and lost.

100 Muhamed Çitaku
EUROPEAN CULTURAL STRATA IN THE SONGS OF THE FRONTIER WARRIORS
Research on The Songs of the Frontier Warriors has demonstrated that
European literature has influenced these songs from antiquity to the twentieth
century. This long influence is realized through the ancient age of The Songs of the
Frontier Warriors on the one hand, and on the other hand, by how active they were
in Albanian culture until the end of the twentieth century, at the time when they
were collected by Milman Parry and Albert B. Lord. Various features from the
different centuries they passed through were preserved in the songs. From the
earlier centuries, we find elements of magic, animism, along with the society
organized through a matriarchal order, in particular the family of the main hero,
Muji, which is led by his mother. There is also a layer of Greek Antiquity features,
which highlights the role that mythology plays in these songs; this is similar to the
role played by mythology in The Iliad and The Odyssey. In The Songs of the
Frontier Warriors, there are mythological characters called Zana, Orë, and
Shtojzovalle, and similar to the mythology of The Iliad and The Odyssey, the
course of events and the characters’ victory or loss during duels with opponents are
determined by mythology. The Songs of the Frontier Warriors have similarly
inherited elements of Byzantine Acritic songs with which they have a similar
name, as both are called frontier songs (acritic gr. frontier, and krajishnik for the
Slavic for frontier). The Songs of the Frontier Warriors likewise inherited various
features from the Middle Ages. Initially related to this period, it is thought that a
part of the ancient mythology in The Songs of the Frontier Warriors was combined
with symbolism of third of the Middle Ages, such as the three fairies that are often
found in these songs.
Scholars have also demonstrated that the influence of The Songs of the
Frontier Warriors is also derived from Spanish literature, precisely from The Poem
of the Cid, from which the Austrian albanologist Maximilian Lambertz argues that
The Songs of the Frontier Warriors borrow the figures of nature (Lambertz 1998,
p. 77). According to Lambertz, this borrowing by The Songs of the Frontier
Warriors occurred somewhere between 1100–1200, which he posits is evident in
from description in The Songs of the Frontier Warriors about nature, such as: “the
sun is shining brightly, and it is getting a little warmer, the night is gone and the
day is not rising.” Likewise, Lambertz notes that The Poem of the Cid and The
Songs of the Frontier Warriors both convey the border wars between Muslims and
Catholics (Lambertz 1998, p. 77).
The Songs of the Frontier Warriors are also strongly related to The Song of
Roland, which we will elaborate on more extensively at this point. From this
overview of the relation between The Songs of the Frontier Warriors and European
literature from various periods, we realize that the interaction that these songs have
with The Song of Roland is not the only interaction with European literature. The
interaction between The Songs of the Frontier Warriors and The Song of Roland is

The Influence of “The Song of Roland” on the Legendary Albanian Songs... 101
among the many relations that The Songs of the Frontier Warriors have with other
European cultural works and authors. Moreover, The Songs of the Frontier
Warriors are not the only part of Albanian culture that has interacted with other
European cultures, and this is evident in all parts of Albanian folklore. Interactions
with other European epics are seen in The Sister with Nine Brothers, which in
Europe appears as Lenore ballad, and in the Song of Rozafat or the motive of
human sacrifice, as well as in other legendary songs that are also found among
European literature. Customarily, each interaction is unique and affects different
layers; thus, the interaction between The Song of Roland and The Songs of the
Frontier Warriors requires a special approach.
The Song of Roland and The Songs of the Frontier Warriors
The features of The Songs of the Frontier Warriors that are the most
appealing, and hence, draw the attention of scholars, are the ancient elements of
these songs. Research on these features has often been conducted to prove the
antiquity of The Songs of the Frontier Warriors, and consequently, the antiquity of
the Albanian culture. Features of later periods found in The Songs of the Frontier
Warriors, such as those of the Byzantine period, the Middle Ages, and later
centuries, are the subject of later studies, which also include studies of the impact
that The Song of Roland had on The Songs of the Frontier Warriors.
Initially, the relation between these two epics was seen as non-reciprocal and
without a mutual relationship; however, The Song of Roland influenced The Songs
of the Frontier Warriors. The influence is evident in the various layers of these
songs, but the hypotheses lingered regarding how this influence appeared. One
theory argues that the interaction was direct, as the rhapsodist knew The Song of
Roland, and based on the model of this song, built several aesthetic categories in
The Songs of the Frontier Warriors. This is unsurprising, considering that The
Songs of the Frontier Warriors was inspired by more distant cultures, such as
The Poem of the Cid in Spain. Another theory argues that the interaction between
The Song of Roland and The Songs of the Frontier Warriors occurred indirectly
through mediating literature that served as a bridge between these two epics.
According to this theory, this began with the influence of The Song of Roland on
European literature over the centuries, which ultimately influenced The Songs of
the Frontier Warriors, thus excluding a direct interaction between The Song of
Roland and The Songs of the Frontier Warriors.
However, the influence of The Song of Roland on The Songs of the Frontier
Warriors is evident through several layers, among the most important being the
potential of the protagonist of The Songs of the Frontier Warriors, such as the
duels, horse and weapon cults, danger coming from the sea, the Moor who is the
same as the Saracens of The Song of Roland, the figure of the sun, the dream, the
lamenting, and the introduction of The Songs of the Frontier Warriors (Sinani
2011, p. 19).

100 Muhamed Çitaku
EUROPEAN CULTURAL STRATA IN THE SONGS OF THE FRONTIER WARRIORS
Research on The Songs of the Frontier Warriors has demonstrated that
European literature has influenced these songs from antiquity to the twentieth
century. This long influence is realized through the ancient age of The Songs of the
Frontier Warriors on the one hand, and on the other hand, by how active they were
in Albanian culture until the end of the twentieth century, at the time when they
were collected by Milman Parry and Albert B. Lord. Various features from the
different centuries they passed through were preserved in the songs. From the
earlier centuries, we find elements of magic, animism, along with the society
organized through a matriarchal order, in particular the family of the main hero,
Muji, which is led by his mother. There is also a layer of Greek Antiquity features,
which highlights the role that mythology plays in these songs; this is similar to the
role played by mythology in The Iliad and The Odyssey. In The Songs of the
Frontier Warriors, there are mythological characters called Zana, Orë, and
Shtojzovalle, and similar to the mythology of The Iliad and The Odyssey, the
course of events and the characters’ victory or loss during duels with opponents are
determined by mythology. The Songs of the Frontier Warriors have similarly
inherited elements of Byzantine Acritic songs with which they have a similar
name, as both are called frontier songs (acritic gr. frontier, and krajishnik for the
Slavic for frontier). The Songs of the Frontier Warriors likewise inherited various
features from the Middle Ages. Initially related to this period, it is thought that a
part of the ancient mythology in The Songs of the Frontier Warriors was combined
with symbolism of third of the Middle Ages, such as the three fairies that are often
found in these songs.
Scholars have also demonstrated that the influence of The Songs of the
Frontier Warriors is also derived from Spanish literature, precisely from The Poem
of the Cid, from which the Austrian albanologist Maximilian Lambertz argues that
The Songs of the Frontier Warriors borrow the figures of nature (Lambertz 1998,
p. 77). According to Lambertz, this borrowing by The Songs of the Frontier
Warriors occurred somewhere between 1100-1200, which he posits is evident in
from description in The Songs of the Frontier Warriors about nature, such as: “the
sun is shining brightly, and it is getting a little warmer, the night is gone and the
day is not rising.” Likewise, Lambertz notes that The Poem of the Cid and The
Songs of the Frontier Warriors both convey the border wars between Muslims and
Catholics (Lambertz 1998, p. 77).
The Songs of the Frontier Warriors are also strongly related to The Song of
Roland, which we will elaborate on more extensively at this point. From this
overview of the relation between The Songs of the Frontier Warriors and European
literature from various periods, we realize that the interaction that these songs have
with The Song of Roland is not the only interaction with European literature. The
interaction between The Songs of the Frontier Warriors and The Song of Roland is

The Influence of “The Song of Roland” on the Legendary Albanian Songs... 103
Invariably, the similarity in the swords’ personification in these two epics is
very apparent as their acts are similar. In both The Song of Roland and The Songs
of the Frontier Warriors, the swords of the heroes have the same qualities; they are
distinguished by velocity, ingenuity, and capability to anticipate danger. Another
quality of the heroes’ swords is their endurance, as the swords of the heroes are
stronger than those of their enemies in both epics. This similarity in the details
between the swords encountered in these two epics is not accidental; it represents
the influence of The Song of Roland on The Songs of the Frontier Warriors (Sejdiu
2019, p. 40). The difference between the swords in these epics is only in their
naming, and so they are similar in essence but different in form. While the name of
Roland’s sword is Durendal, the name of Muji and Halili’s sword is Dimiski
(sword from Damascus).
It should be noted that in addition to the similarities in the fighting, there
are also distinctions between the fighting in The Song of Roland and The Songs
of the Frontier Warriors. The difference is that the institutional organizations
found in The Song of Roland are not found in The Songs of the Frontier
Warriors. In The Songs of the Frontier Warriors, both the institution of the king
and the leader of the army are missing, things that we have in The Song of
Roland. The heroes of The Songs of the Frontier Warriors fight for the
protection of their country in the classical sense, as they fight for the protection
of pastures, houses, meadows, and whatever comprises their beloved country.
For them, there is no concept of homeland, there is no concept of state, and there
is no concept of fighting for a king. The Songs of the Frontier Warriors does not
include the concept of an army but instead features the knights, made up of
30 people, organized spontaneously to withstand the attacks of their opponents.
This organizational form emerges not because of a decree from the king; instead,
they are organized as a band of warriors (Sejdiu 2019, p. 38). Therefore, in The
Song of Roland, we have the state, while in The Songs of the Frontier Warriors
we have the tribe; in The Song of Roland, we have the army, while in The Songs
of the Frontier Warriors we have the band; and in The Song of Roland we have
the soldier, and in The Songs of the Frontier Warriors, we have the hero who
fights independently and not under the orders of a king. In this way, the war in
The Songs of the Frontier Warriors is an individual war. The same applies to the
duels analyzed above, and despite all these common elements mentioned, the
difference is that the duels in The Song of Roland are distinguished by a military
organization, while in The Songs of the Frontier Warriors, the duels are
individual (Sejdiu 2019, p. 38).
Nevertheless, along with the duel, other themes and characters are the same in
these two epics. In both epics, there is a danger that comes from the sea, and
finally, we have the Moor found in The Songs of the Frontier Warriors, the
opponent of the heroes, who is the same as the Saracens in The Song of Roland
(Sinani 2011, p. 19).

104 Muhamed Çitaku
Other interactions between the two epics
The influence of The Song of Roland on The Songs of Frontier Warriors is
similarly examined in other important elements of these epics, such as the images
of the sun and the heroes’ dreams and laments.
The sun in The Song of Roland plays the role of the character who listens and
supports the king, and the king in this epic addresses the sun with a special request
to never set. Comparably, the sun also plays a significant role in The Songs of the
Frontier Warriors. In some songs, the sun supports the protagonists, Muji and
Halili; it takes care of them but also occasionally listens to them. Like the king in
The Song of Roland, Halili in The Songs of the Frontier Warriors addresses the sun
with the request not to rise, a request that the sun accomplishes so that Halili can
arrive at night to meet the king (Berisha 2013, p. 233).
Additionally, dreams have similar features in these two epics as they warn of
future events that will happen to the heroes, which are primarily misfortunate.
Scholars at this point are not all in agreement because dreams also have this function
in The Iliad and The Odyssey. Accordingly, in addition to the probability of being
influenced by The Song of Roland (Berisha 2013, p. 235), The Songs of the Frontier
Warriors are likely influenced by The Iliad and The Odyssey (Lambertz 1998, p. 65).
Laments play a specific role in these two epics. The Songs of the Frontier
Warriors include many laments for dead characters; among which, the
lamentations for Muji’s son Omera, who died young and was mourned by his
mother Ajkuna, stand out. This kind of mourning is also encountered in The Song
of Roland, and there are many other similarities between the lamentations in these
two epics. In both epics, the laments reveal the characteristics of the dead hero in
the war, in the families, and in society, and in these elegiac dirges, great lines of
grief are uttered (Lambertz 1998, p. 65).
Furthermore, the influence of The Song of Roland on The Songs of Frontier
Warriors is also studied at the form level. Regarding the form, initially, both
The Song of Roland and The Songs of the Frontier Warriors have the same form in
how the verses begin or end. Additionally, some elongated vowels, such as EEEE
in The Songs of the Frontier Warriors and AOI in The Song of Roland, are similar.
However, these vowels, which are sometimes at the opening and sometimes in the
concluding parts of the verses, are not clearly defined. They may have been used as
contempt or as a calling; they may have been used for disappointment, despair, and
sorrow; but they may have also been used to pause the rhapsode using singing.
However, the presence of these vowels at the beginning or the end of the verses
indicates the closeness of these two epics (Sejdiu 2019, p. 30).
The repetition of different elements is another similarity in form of The Song
of Roland and The Songs of the Frontier Warriors. This includes the repetition of
the same questions between the characters and the same answers between them,
which we find in both epics (Berisha 2013, p. 226). This also includes the
decasyllable verses used in both The Song of Roland and The Songs of the Frontier
Warriors (Sinani 2011, p. 327).

The Influence of “The Song of Roland” on the Legendary Albanian Songs... 105
CONCLUSION
The Songs of the Frontier Warriors are old legendary Albanian songs with a
very ancient history, evidenced by their old elements of magic, animism, matriarchy,
and Greek Antiquity, the elements of which are the same as those found in Homer’s
Iliad and Odyssey. While these songs were part of the lives of Albanian people until
the end of the twentieth century, they comprise features of earlier times, starting from
the Middle Ages, to the Ottoman expansion to Southeast Europe in the fifteenth
century, to the features of the late twentieth century. From the presence of these
features in The Songs of the Frontier Warriors, they carry a part of each period they
pass through, each period engraving its own form, elements, culture, and literary
aspects. These characteristics are distributed throughout the thousands of verses of
The Songs of the Frontier Warriors; some are observed in the mythology of these
songs, some are present in the themes and motives, some in the characters, and some
in the artistic aspects of the form. Their study is of interest because deciphering the
features of these songs can provide their source.
Throughout history, The Songs of the Frontier Warriors have also interacted
with The Song of Roland. The impact of The Song of Roland on The Songs of the
Frontier Warriors touches on issues related to the character of the hero, the
fighting, the cult of the horse and the weapon, and the danger that comes from the
sea found in The Songs of the Frontier Warriors. In this context, the sun has the
same characteristics in both epics; it listens to the demands, dreams, and laments of
the heroes. Nor should the influences that The Song of Roland has made on
The Songs of the Frontier Warriors be omitted on a form level, such as the
introduction and repetition in The Songs of the Frontier Warriors. Therefore, a
comparative study that reveals the influence of The Song of Roland on The Songs of
the Frontier Warriors makes it possible to understand the meaning and function of
many features of The Songs of the Frontier Warriors. These features preserve much
of their source, which provides a more extensive understanding of these epic poems.
REFERENCES
Berisha, Labinot. 2013. Këngët kreshnike shqiptare dhe epet e lashta [Albanian heroic
songs and ancient epics]. Tiranë: Argeta-LMG.
Elsie, Robert and Mathie-Heck, Janice (eds. and trans.). 2004. Songs of the Frontier
Warriors, Këngë Kreshnikësh. Illinois: Bolchazy-Carducci Publishers.
Lambertz, Maximilian. 1998. Epika popullore e shqiptarëve (Cikli i Mujit dhe Halilit)
[Folk epic of Albanians (Cycle of Muji and Halil)] p. 4-95. In: Çështje të folklorit
shqiptar 6 [Issues of Albanian folklore 6] 1998. Tiranë: Akademia e Shkencave e
Republikës së Shqipërisë.
Lord, Albert B. (ed.). 1991. Epic singers and oral tradition. New York: Cornell University
Press.
Sinani, Shaban. 2011. Epos në etnos [Epic in ethnos]. Tiranë: Naimi.
Sejdiu, Shefki. 2019. Studime dhe diskutime [Studies and discussions]. Prishtinë: Era.

GEORGE VÂLSAN AS ETHNOGRAPHER
GEORGE-BOGDAN TOFAN
ABSTRACT
This paper aims to put build a memory of the efforts of the savant George Vâlsan
during his later years and his activity in the city of Cluj, between 1919-1929.
Besides the science of Geography, one of his main goals was to serve the “new
science” of Ethnography, especially the creation and organization of the
Ethnographic Museum of Transylvania, alongside the management of the Romanian
Ethnographic Society of Cluj (1923-1927) and the geographic-ethnographic section
of ASTRA (1920-1929). He is thus seen as a trailblazer, becoming fully aware that
he will only accomplish his “ethnographic duties” if he surrounds himself with
young individuals eager for knowledge and ready to answer his long term call,
lauched ever since his studies in Berlin.
Keywords: people, identity, museum, “new science”, sheepherding.
Gheorghe (or George) Vâlsan was born in
Bucharest, on 21st January 1885, in a modest
family – Mihail and Alexandrina, as their only
son.
As his father constantly moved while
working for the Romanian Railroads, his son
started primary school in Iaşi, continued it in
Craiova, where he also attended secondary
school, which he graduated in Piteşti.
He graduated high school at Gheorghe
Lazăr in Bucureşti, in 1903.
Between 1904-1908 he attended the
courses of the Faculty of Letters and
Philosophy at the University of Bucharest,
where one of his professors was none other
than Simion Mehedinţi, who held Geography
as well as Ethnography classes.
Photo 1. George Vâlsan. Portrait.
Source: Mihail Macri.
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 106-120

George Vâlsan as Ethnographer 107
He exhibited extraordinary qualities in terms of research and science, being
active during typological geographic field trips, regularly organised by the
Geographic Seminar1. Thusly, under the direct tutelage of Simion Mehedinţi, he
proved to be one of the best students and was later awarded an assistant position at
the Geography Department, a position held until his departure abroad (1911).
He further continued and widened his area of scientific expertise, mostly around
the city of Bucharest and then across the entire Romanian Plain; during the summers
of 1910 and 1911, alongside linguist George Giuglea, he conducted ethno-
geographic research on the Romanian communities south of the Danube (Serbian
Craina and Northwestern Bulgaria), later publishing The Romanians of Serbia and
Bulgaria ‒ Settlement, age, number, appearance, economic and social conditions2,
which proved highly beneficial at the 1919 Paris Peace Conference3.
In 1911 he received a scholarship from the Romanian Geography Society to
study in Berlin, where he attended the lectures of geographer Albrecht Penck as
well as ethnographer Felix von Luschan. At the same time, he pleaded for an
increase in ethnographic research in Romania, as he observed a total lack of
interest in this matter, compared to our state neighbours which, “are all years
ahead in the field of Ethnography and have long established and rich
ethnographic museums”4. As the notion/word “Ethnography” was something of a
rarity in those days, he decided to hold the same conference the following year in
Bucharest (14th November 1912), in front of infantry school students, a lecture
entitled Our Ethnographic Duties, published in the volume For the Minds and
Hearts of Our Soldiers, Infantry Magazine Publishing House, series I, Bucharest,
pp. 23-40, 1912.
Between 1913 and 1914, he attended the geography lectures and seminars of
Emmanuel de Martonne in Sorbonne, applying for doctoral studies. Unfortunately
he was unable to graduate as the First World War shortly errupted. Back at home,
he dedicated his time to completing his PhD thesis (The Romanian Plain.
Contributions to Physical Geography), defended in Bucharest, on 19 November / 2
December 1915, as the first Geography doctoral thesis in Romania.
Shortly after, he developed a Titles and Works Memo (1916), listing his entire
scientific activity, in order to apply for a position at the Geography Department
Faculty of Sciences in Iaşi, vacant following the death of professor Ştefan
Popescu5. Several works survived to this day: The Ethnography of Serbian
Romanians and The Romanians of Maramureş, published based on direct
observations in the field, made during the year 1912.
1 Mehedinţi, 1946: 173-174.
2 Arion et al., 1913: 13-27.
3 Clopoţel, 1935: 51.
4 Vâlsan, 1927: 4-5.
5 Meruţiu, 1938: 3.

108 George-Bogdan Tofan
Furthermore, on 25th March 1916, a week before the competition in Iaşi,
Gheorghe Kirileanu recommended his friend George Vâlsan to the dean of the Faculty
of Sciences at the university on the banks of Bahlui River, Vasile C. Buţureanu,
notifying him of the fact that “my friend George Vâlsan will apply for this position and
he is one of the most pre-eminent young men I have ever known. We met on a trip to
the source of the River Bistriţa and Maramureş. I had the priviledge of cherishing
his distinguished character, deep
patriotism, lively intelligence, rich
knowledge, and accurate
investigative nature”6. Besides the
previously mentioned studies, there
was also Ethnographic readings,
unpublished however, never
mentioned by Vâlsan ever again7.
Shortly after attaining the
position in Iaşi (29th April 1916),
with the war brewing, George
Vâlsan was mobilized to Galaţi,
within the 7th Hunter Battalion, but
his stomach illness made him unfit
for duty. His health further
deteriorated the following year
after the Ciurea railway accident
and he was thus unable to continue
his university lectures or conduct
any further field research. His
fighting spirit enabled him
however to publish seven papers by
1918 as “professor at the
University of Iaşi”8.
Photo 2. Facsimile of the autographed title page of George Vâlsanʼs doctoral thesis.
Source: authorʼs personal collection.
As recognition of his scientific geographic and ethnographic merits, he was
elected as corresponding member of the Romanian Academy on 5th June 1918,
alongside his colleague, Constantin Brătescu, in the historical section, while on
21st June 1920, alongside another Romanian savant, Emil Racoviţă, became an
active member of the Academy, consolidating the prolific activity of the 35 year
old geographer, proving without a doubt that his work had been at the forefront of
6 Kirileanu, 1977: 42.
7 Onişor, 1971: 454.
8 Mehedinţi et Vâlsan, apud Dimitriu, 1973: 271.

George Vâlsan as Ethnographer 109
the “scientific movement”9. Due to his infirmity, he had rather limited activity
within the Romanian Academy, with some ethnographic presentations such as
Dimitrie Cantemirʼs Map of Moldavia (July 1924) and The Lower Danube in the
Life of Romanians (October 1927), as well as several reports, like the one
concerning the study entitled Contributions to the medical ethnography of
Oltenia10, authored by Dr. Charles Laugier, published in 1925 at the “Scrisul
Românesc” Publishing House in Craiova. In a press excerpt11, we discovered that
this work was highly praised by the Romanian Academy, which is why, in 1927, its
author was awarded the “Demostene Constandini” Prize consisting of 4,000 lei,
George Vâlsan acting as raporteur.
The professional evolution of Vâlsan was at that time fulminant and in the
autumn of 1919, a university board headed by Sextil Puşcariu and comprised of
Onisifor Ghibu, Ioan Lupaş, Iuliu
Haţieganu, Ludovic Mrazec, Vasile
Pârvan, Dimitrie Gusti, Gheorge
Bogdan-Duică, Nicoale Iorga, Victor
Babeş, Petru Poni, and others
decided to invite professor George
Vâlsan to Cluj, in order to establish
the Romanian geographic school
within the University of Upper
Dacia12. Furthermore, he was offered
the position of tenure professor
within the Faculty of Sciences, as
well as professor within the General
and Human Geography Department
and director of the Institute of
Geography.
On 19th November 1919, he
held the inaugural speech of his
Geography class, named National
Conscience and Geography, later
published in 1921 as a 23 page
brochure, at the “Convorbiri literare”
Publishing House Bucharest.
Photo 3. Facsimile of the cover of the inaugural Geography lecture held at the University
of Upper Dacia Cluj, 19th November 1919.
Source: authorʼs personal collection.
9 Analele Academiei Române, 1921: 113.
10 Onişor, 1971: 455.
11 Biserica şi Şcoala, 1927 (34): 5.
12 Păcurar, 2019: 69.

110 George-Bogdan Tofan
His speech perfectly conveyed a series of programmatic ideas regarding the role
of several fields of study – Philology, History, Ethnography and Geography – in
creating and shaping national conscience13.
This research does not aim for a detailed presentation of George Vâlsanʼs role
in handling the reorganisation of the entire geographic education in Cluj (staff
management; supply of necessary material; establishment and promotion of
scientific publications; creating relationships with prominent domestic and foreign
institutions and scientists, fieldtrip organisation etc), but tries to focus on his lesser
known ethnographic research and work. We believe that such qualities have been
intentionally ommited by some “biographers” and successors at the helm of the
Institute of Geography, a problem exacerbated by the passing of time, as stated by
the renowned ethnographer Ion Muşlea, in his work The Bio-Bibliography of
George Vâlsan14.
A valuable information for our scientific effort has been discovered in a report
of Transilvania magazine, year LII, July-August 1921, nr. 7-8, stating that, during
the second plenary meeting of the scientific-literary departments of ASTRA, held on
15th July 1921 in Sibiu, its members decided to increase the number of active
members from five to 15 for the eight sections, including the historical-
ethnographic department. This last unit was comprised of the initial members
Teodor V. Păcăţian, as president, Dr. Ion Lupaş, raporteur, Dr. Elie Dăianu, Vasile
Goldiş and Nicolae Togan, while the proposed members were university professor
George Vâlsan, Alexandru Lapedatu, Silviu Dragomir, Ioan Ursu, Nicolae Bănescu,
Virgil Păcală and Virgil Şotropa15.
Post 1918 Union, the Inspectorate for Transylvanian Museums had been
pleading to the Sibiu Association for the creation of an ethnographic museum in
Cluj ever since 1920, but only on 4 May 1922, the „Prince Charles” Cultural
Foundation tasked professors Emil Panaitescu, George Vâlsan and Romulus Vuia
with the establishment of an ethnographic museum in the city on the banks of
Someşul Mic, starting from scratch as they lacked “any sort of artifacts, glass
cases, staff, building, or even funds”16.
In a letter dated 7th May 1922, addressed to the General Director for Arts,
His Highness Prince Charles, Emil Panaitescu wrote that “regarding the
proposals made for the establishment of the museum, we kindly ask Your
Highness to organise a commission that will include, among others,
Mr. S. Puşcariu, director of the Museum of Romanian Language, and
Mr. A. Lapedatu, president of the Commission for Historical Monuments. This
group should have the freedom to further include other members if deemed
necessary. With Mr. Vâlsan currently abroad, it is imperative to form the
13 Idem: 60.
14 Muşlea, 1944 (3): 267-268.
15 Transilvania, 1921 (7-8): 585.
16 Panaitescu, 1928 (12-13): 241.

George Vâlsan as Ethnographer 111
commission in the manner previously stated. Mr. dl. Vâlsan will evidently also be
part of this commission”17. This proposal clearly emphasizes that we are
witnessing an enlargement of the commission by two additional members, as
George Vâlsan was on extended medical leave abroad, most probably in Paris;
therefore, the commission was fully legitimized on 1st June 1922 and Sextil
Puşcariu was appointed president, while Romulus Vuia was appointed secretary.
Vâlsanʼs absence was also noted in the report of the Associationʼs scientific-
literary sections meeting, held in Sibiu on 14th July 1922, when Vâlsan sent an
apology letter, lamenting his inability to attend.
An elaborate plan for systematic exploration of some of the most important
ethnographic areas of Transylvania was devised following several intense sessions,
the first expeditions being organised by the commission secretary, at that time
assistant at the newly established Institute of Geography of the University of Cluj.
He conducted research in Haţeg and the Land of Pădureni, areas seen as “the
estate” of his doctoral thesis, which was defended in 1924, under the direct
guidance of George Vâlsan18. In fact, in a report written on 15th July 1920, George
Vâlsan stated: “Prof. Romul Vuia presented me an ethnographic study on the land
of Haţeg. It contained original content [...] alongside numerous drawings and
remarkable photographs. [...] ...the study is superior to every other ethnographic
paper published so far in Romanian. I believe this work of prof. R. Vuia is the best
study of general ethnography I have come across”19.
Another important role in the museumʼs continuing activity was played by the
Romanian Ethnographic Society, created on 31st October 1923, its executive board
being comprised of: George Vâlsan, president, who was in Paris at that time; Sextil
Puşcariu and Vasile Bogrea, vicepresidents; Romulus Vuia, secretary and archivist,
while George Oprescu worked as bookkeeper.
According to its statute, besides ethnographic and folklore, human geography
and historical anthropology studies also needed to be conducted. Meetings were
held monthly, with a series of speeches reports, as well as public conferences, later
bound and published, either as anniversary volumes or periodicals.
In the second meeting presided by Vasile Bogrea, the participants read the
thank you letter sent by Vâlsan, on 26th November 1923, which includes the
following: “As long as I am physically and spiritually fit, I assure you that I will do
my very best to respond this unanimous trust put upon me, the news bringing me
joy and the soothing touch of an unexpected greeting. The Committee of the
Ethnographic Society has so many people I respect and treasure, my shyness and
reserve of this position dwindling at the thought that I will always benefit from the
wise advice of some many experienced and well-versed friends. With great
17 Bucharest State Archives, Royal Cultural Foundation, Department: Arts. Service. Museums; File
5/1922, f. 6.
18 Pascu, 1973: 4.
19 Onişor, 1966: 273.

112 George-Bogdan Tofan
expectations of the future, I bid the first Romanian ethnographic society a long life
and members devoted to ethnographic research”20.
One of the most emotional
meetings took place on 24th
January 1924, chaired by its very
own president, who read his
famous Purpose of Ethnography
in Romania, published two
months later in a journal edited
by linguist Sextil Puşcariu21. It
appears that the original title of
this presentation was The
Ethnographic Design in Current
Day Romania, according to the
stipulations found in the end
note of the Romanian
Ethnographic Society ‒ Twenty
Years of Existence ‒, signed by
geographer-ethnologist Teodor
Onişor. Due to the lack of
progress, he organised the
conference once again in 1926,
at Dej and Gherla, and finally
published it in 1927, within the
Library of the geographic-
ethnographic section of Astra.
Photo 4. Facsimile of the lecture held at the Romanian Ethnographic Society,
24th January 1924, with autograph for geographer Nicolae Dragomir.
Source: Al. Păcurar, 2014, p. 218.
The following year, the conference hall of the Library of the University of
Cluj, under the guidance of Vasile Goldiş and notary public Horia Petra-Petrescu,
hosted the plenary session of the literary and scientific sections of the Association.
The report of 22nd May 1925, published in Transilvania, Year 56, September-
October 1925, Nr. 9-10, line 30, mentioned the fact that, following the efforts of
professor, the history-ethnography section changed its name to geographic-
ethnographic, being headquartered in Cluj, with a temporary committee including
G. Vâlsan, president, and S. Opreanu, secretary and bookkeeper, and eight active
members (V. Meruţiu, N. Orghidan, R. Vuia, I. Bârlea, I. Banciu, Tr. Gherman,
20 Onişor, 1944 (1): 83.
21 Vâlsan, 1924 (2): 101-106.

George Vâlsan as Ethnographer 113
V. Branişte, and V. Păcală), as well as 13 corresponding members (C. Pavel,
N. Dragomir, A. Florinescu, R. Călinescu, Tr. Magher, I. Mureşan, Tr. Simu,
P. Suciu. I. Silaghi, I. Rodeanu, A. Ţiplea, N. Vornicu, and Al. Iosof).
In his report, Vâlsan petitioned
for the Transilvania journal to be
published every month, criticising its
technical aspects (format and
lettering), as well as demanding each
member of ASTRA an even more
sedulous contribution, both in terms of
publications and, lectures-conferences;
he also announced the publication of
12 illustrated postcards with a
ethnographic-geographic theme, as
well as several monographs focusing
on life in the geographic-historic
province of Transilvania, all bearing
the mark of the «Geographic and
Ethnographic Section». Another
publication was included in the 1927
Association Calendar - it was a speech
given at a geography competition,
entitled The Land of Our Country,
pages 44-46.
Photo 5. Facsimile of the cover of George Vâlsanʼs Brochure, A New Science: Etnography,
“Ardealul” Institute of Graphic Arts, 1927.
Source: authorʼs personal collection
The fourth recommendation was for every member to regularly pay and
subscribe to Transilvania magazine. This proposal must have been highly
appreciated by those present, Onisifor Ghibu and Alexandru Borza stating that
Vâlsanʼs example should be followed by the other sections as well.
At the end of the summer of the same year, a general meeting of ASTRA was
summoned in Reghin, and a new committee was elected for the next five years,
George Vâlsan being confirmed as president of the geographic-ethnografic section.
His health problems however prevented him from attending and he sent a
congratulatory telegram from Carmen Sylva resort (currently Eforie Sud), where he
was under medical supervision22.
1925 ended with an important meeting at the Romanian Ethnographic Society,
where its president conferred the following: “Given the support of Minister
Alexandru Lapedatu to our society, I propose for him to be declared an honorary
22 Transilvania, 1925 (11-12): 609.

114 George-Bogdan Tofan
member of the Society”23, proposal unanimously accepted and voted by the
participants. George Vâlsan also gave a fascinating lecture – Dimitrie Cantemir as
ethnographer.
Another major event worth mentioning took place in 1926, when the
geographic-ethnographic section gained its own library, Library of the geographic-
ethnographic section of ASTRA, due to George Vâlsan hard work. He intended to
publish a series of monographs of Romanian villages and cities, especially small
regions, which would focus and illustrate the major problems of the Romanian
lands and their people. But first, “pecuniary means must be found in order for these
precious cultural contributions to see the light of day”24.
The first three numbers contain the following: The Szeklerisation of
Romanians through Religion, by Sabin Opreanu, an analysis of the delicate
problem of Romanians in eastern Transylvania; the second number – A New
Science: Ethnography, by George Vâlsan, comprised of the two fundamental
lectures held in 1911 and 1924, emphasizing the value of written records and
archive documents for the “new” science, as it “paints the icon of each ethnic
group on this Earth, untangles their origins and sets to find the laws governing
them. [...] A people is a force of nature, like a river or a storm. In similar fashion,
sometimes it can unleash and destroy. And as such a force can be put in the service
of man, so can the powerful forces of the people be directed towards higher and
more noble goals, unattainable in any other way”25; in part two of the brochure,
Vâlsan presented the scope of ethnography in Romania, petitioning for proper
ethnographic studies, since everything “that is ancient culture in our lands might
partially disappear without being studied”26; number 3 contains the monograph
The Hills and Fortress of Ciceu, by Eliseu Sighiartău27, where the human and
geographic characteristics paint an almost complete view of the identity of Ciceu
Land. The remaining five numbers were never published due to lack of funds.
One of the studies set to be published in the Geographic-Ethnographic
Library of a ASTRA series, in the autumn of 1927, apparently belonged to one of
George Vâlsanʼs most valued students, geographer-ethnologist Nicolae Dragomir.
His magister sent him a letter on 15th April 1927, asking him to write a paper on
the commune of Sălişte, “one that can be easily understood”, even sketching his
research plan: “Put extra thought in the following questions: What makes Săliştea
different from other communes? What are the features that set it apart and make it
appear so beautiful and interesting? How should one describe it so that others
might know and love it? [...] Finally... think of her as your dear mother, who gave
birth and cared for you, who deserves the reward of a work that shows the entire
23 Onişor, 1944 (1): 85.
24 Transilvania, 1927 (10-11): 546.
25 Vâlsan, 1927: 11-12.
26 Idem: 37.
27 Transilvania, 1927 (5-6): 243.

George Vâlsan as Ethnographer 115
world your undying gratitude”28. Unfortunately, only one subchapter by Nicolae
Dragomir was published in the 1927 Association Calendar, Year XVI, Nr. 139,
that is Nedeea from Poiana Muierii (pp. 127-135), part of the work Sheepherding
of Sălişteni. His efforts resulted in a doctoral thesis, which he was unable to
defend, while his thorough studies eventually earned him the George Vâlsan
Award of the Romanian Academy in 194129.
Photo 6. Facsimile of the letter written by George Vâlsan to professor Nicolae Dragomir on 15th
April 1927. Source: Al. Păcurar, 2013, p. 212.
Despite efervescent attempts to live up to George Vâlsan, the last general
meeting of the Romanian Ethnographic Society took place on 16th December
1926, as the lack of funds forced the society to close. The last speech of its
president was Remembering Vasile Bogrea, a former vicepresident of the
organisation. It was an emotional commemoration where Vâlsan declared: “Poor
Vasile Bogrea passed away, little of body and great in science, the pride of the
28 Păcurar, 2013: 212.
29 Dragomir, apud Păcurar, 2014: 214.

116 George-Bogdan Tofan
University of Cluj and the minuscule «Ethnographic Society» which he loved more
than anything. [...] It is our duty for us to show what Bogrea meant for Romanian
folklore and Ethnographic Society of Cluj ‒ the first major attempt for a scientific
research of the Romanian people, comprised of specialized ethnographers,
geographers, philologists, historians and doctors, ‒ a society whose activity was
linked to Vasile Bogrea until the end”30.
Most scientific and lectures during the four year run of the Romanian
Ethnographic Society (1923-1927) were held by geographers and ethnographers,
George Vâlsan having five: The Ethnographic Design in Current Day Romania
(24th January 1924); Old News about Serbian Romanians (1924); Geographic
Elements in Our Fairytales (21st March 1925); Cantemir as ethnographer
(15th December 1925) and Words on Vasile Bogrea (16th December 1926).
Unfortunately, in 1925, George Vâlsan resigned as leading coordinator, witnessing
a certain disregard for the societyʼs wellbeing. Optimist and confident by nature, he
recanted on his decision and tried to bring to fruition some of the “ethnographic
duties” of his generation31.
One of his failures was the inability to publish a review under the societyʼs
aegis, named Geography and ethnography studies and files. He did manage to
prepare an early print of its first volume, but financial issues prevented its
publication32. Vâlsanʼs ethnographic activity included a lecture held on 11st
October 1921 at the Museum of Romanian Language in Cluj, about The Plan for
Dictionary of Folk Geographic Terms33, followed by the ethnographic and
geographic conference ‒ Dobrogea, at Turda, Sibiu and Aiud (1925-1926),
Geographic and Ethnographic Aspects of the Land of Brăila, March 1926, held at
the “Petre Armencea” Library in Brăila34; Dobrogeaʼs Worth to the Romanian
State, September 1926, held at the newly established “Coasta de Argint” Peopleʼs
University of Balcic35 and What it means to be a Romanian?, published in the To
read and pass around brochure in 1927 at Sibiu.
The official consecration of the Ethnographic Museum of Cluj took place the
following year (17th June 1928), an establishment which had already been
inagurated long before, its director being Romulus Vuia, who was also the main
tenure of the newly developed discipline of Ethnography at the University of Cluj.
A lesser known fact is that the summary of the six points stated by the young Vuia
was inscribed on cover number 4 of A New Science: Ethnography by George
Vâlsan, a document of great value for the history of Romanian ethnography and
museography. This brochure was gifted by Romulus Vuia to his colleague, Ion
30 Vâlsan, 1931 (1): 3.
31 Onişor, 1944 (1): 87.
32 Vâlsan, 1971: 102-103.
33 Dacoromania, 1921: 562.
34 Universul literar, 1926 (13): 15.
35 Universul literar, 1926 (38): 15.

George Vâlsan as Ethnographer 117
Vlăduţiu36. Evidently, with the dissolution of Ethnographic Society, the museumʼs
viability was also questioned and, by the beginning of 1928, it was no longer a
state funded institution. For that matter, a last query has been identified at the
National Archives of Bucharest, Royal Cultural Foundation Fund, File 118/1929,
pages 5, 6, 7. It was a memo submitted by George Vâlsan to the Ministry of
Religions and Arts, dated 28th January 1928, a true plea for the necessity of the
museumʼs continued activity37.
We must not overlook Vâlsanʼs foray into the coordination of scientific
doctoral studies on geography and ethnography, some of them true research
benchmarks, such as: Haţeg Land and Pădureni Region. Antropogeographic and
Ethnographic Study, 1924, by Romulus Vuia, the first geography-history doctoral
thesis at Cluj Faculty of Science; Land of the Szeklers. Human Geography and
Ethnography, by Sabin Opreanu, 1926; From the Past of the Sheepherders of
Sălişte and the Surrounding Communes, by Nicolae Dragomir, 1926, unfinished;
Customs of the Brasov “Youngmen”, by Ion Muşlea, 1927; Pastoral Life in the
Căliman Mountains, by Laurian Someşan, 1934, and Pastoral Life in the Rodna
Mountains, by Tiberiu Morariu in 1935. George Vâlsan also prophetically
emphasized the ethnographic value of written records, including archive
documents, mentioning the interdisciplinary link between ethnography and
geography stemming from their methodology, and shared research methods (direct
observation; descriptive, explanatory, selective, comparative, and cartographic
methods). Thusly, he succeeded in implementing Ethnography as an independent
discipline within the education curriculum at the geography section of Cluj Faculty
of Science.
Following his transfer to the Physical Geography Department of the
University of Bucharest (1st January 1930), George Vâlsan was listed in
Transilvania (1931 and 1932) as rightful member of the Central Committee, losing
his active role in the geographic-ethnographic section, which was at that time
coordinated by the director of the Geography Institute of “King Ferdinand 1st”
University of Cluj, Vasile Meruţiu, who promoted his hometown fellow Tiberiu
Morariu as secretary and assistant at the Ethnographic Museum of Cluj. Alongside
the two professors, other active members included Romulus Vuia, Traian
Gherman, Petre Suciu, Virgil Vătăşianu, Traian Filipescu, and Ion Muşlea.
In early 1934, apace with the geographic-ethnographic section, the president
of ASTRA, Iuliu Moldovan, deemed necessary to establish a new demographic and
ethno-political section, coordinated by Silviu Dragomir, together with Sabin
Manoilă, Sabin Opreanu, Lucian Bolcaş, Petru Râmneanţu, Ionel Moga, Ştefan
Manciulea, and D.D. Roşca38, with a program focused on an antirevisionist
36 Vlăduţiu, 1973: 641.
37 Sălăgean, 1999: 28-30.
38 Transilvania, 1935 (5): 339.

118 George-Bogdan Tofan
scientific activity at home and abroad, publishing for this intended purpose a
review in French (Revue de Transylvanie).
In the summer 1935, George Vâlsan died on the shore of the Black Sea, at the
Techirghiol Maritime Sanatorium (Carmen Sylva), at the age of 50, ending a
prestigious scientific carrier spanning 20 decades.
REFERENCES
Arion, Virgil, Pârvan, Vasile, Vâlsan, George, Papahagi, Pericle, Bogdan-Duică, Gheorghe
1913: România şi popoarele balcanice [Romania and the Balkan People]. Bucharest:
Tipografia Românească.
Clopoţel, Ion 1935: † George Vâlsan. Cluj: Satul şi Şcoala 5 (1-2): 51.
Dragomir, Nicolae 2014: Oierii mărgineni [The Shepherds of Mărginimea Sibiului]. Ediţie
îngrijită şi studiu istorico-etnografic: Alexandru Păcurar. Cluj-Napoca: Editura
Argonaut.
Kirileanu, GheorgheTeodorescu 1977: Corespondenţă [Correspondence].Ediţie îngrijită,
note, tabel cronologic, bibliografie şi indici de Mircea Handoca. Bucharest: Editura
Minerva.
Mehedinţi, Simion 1946: Premise şi concluzii la Terra. Amintiri şi mărturisiri [Premises
and Conclusions at Terra. Memories and confessions]. Bucharest: Monitorul Oficial şi
Imprimeriile Statului. Imprimeria Naţională.
Mehedinţi, Simion, Vâlsan, George 1973: Lecturi geografice [Geographic Readings].
Ediţie îngrijită de Călin Dimitriu, prefaţă de Victor Tufescu. Bucharest: Editura
Albatros.
Meruţiu, Vasile 1938: † Prof. G. Vâlsan. Lucrările Institutului de Geografie al Universităţii
din Cluj [Travaux de lʼInstitut de Géographie de lʼUniversité de Cluj (Roumanie),
vol. 6. Cluj: Tipografia Cartea Românească.
Muşlea, Ion 1944: Bio-Bibliografia lui George Vâlsan [Bio-Bibliography of George
Vâlsan]. Sibiu: Transilvania 75 (3): 267-268.
Onişor, Teodor 1944: Societatea Etnografică Română ‒ Douăzeci de ani de la înfiinţarea ei
[Romanian Ethnographic Society, 20 Years since its Establishment]. Sibiu: Transil-
vania 75 (1): 81-89.
Onişor, Teodor 1966: Romulus Vuia. Cluj-Napoca: Anuarul Muzeului Etnografic al
Transilvaniei pe anii 1962-1964: 269-306.
Onişor, Teodor 1971: Activitatea etnografică a lui George Vâlsan. I. Concepţia lui asupra
etnografiei şi a metodelor de cercetare ştiinţifică [The Ethnographic Activity of
George Vâlsan. I. View on Ethnography and Scientific Research Methods]. Cluj-
Napoca: Anuarul Muzeului Etnografic al Transilvaniei pe anii 1968-1970: 449-476.
Pascu, Viorica 1973: Muzeul Etnografic al Transilvaniei la semicentenarul său
[The Ethnographic Museum of Transylvania at its 50 Year Anniversary].
Cluj-Napoca: Anuarul Muzeului Etnografic al Transilvaniei pe anii 1971-1973: 3-20.
Păcurar, Alexandru 2013: Corespondenţa lui Nicolae Dragomir cu magistrul său George
Vâlsan şi cu Constantin Brătescu (inedită) [The Correspondence of Nicolae Dragomir
with his Master George Vâlsan and with Constantin Brătescu (unpublished)].
Cluj-Napoca: Studia UBB Geographia, LVII, 1: 207-234.

George Vâlsan as Ethnographer 119
Păcurar, A. Alexandru 2019: Lucrările Institutului de Geografie al Universităţii din Cluj
[Travaux de lʼInstitut de Géographie de lʼUniversité de Cluj (Roumanie)
(1922-1947)]. Cluj-Napoca: Editura Argonaut.
Panaitescu, Emil 1928: Muzeul Etnografic din Cluj [Cluj Ethnographic Museum]. Cluj:
Societatea de mâine, 5 (12-13): 241-242.
Sălăgean, Tudor 1999: George Vâlsan ‒ Pledoarie pentru Muzeul Etnografic al Ardealului
(1929) [George Vâlsan ‒ Plea for the Ethnographic Museum of Transylvania (1929)].
Cluj-Napoca: Anuarul Muzeului Etnografic al Transilvaniei: 23-31.
Vâlsan, George 1924: Menirea etnografiei în România [Purpose of Ethnography in
Romania]. Cluj-Napoca: Revista Cultura, Anul I, 2: 101-106.
Vâlsan, George 1927: O nouă ştiinţă: Etnografia [A New Science: Ethnography]. Cluj:
Institutul de Arte Grafice „Ardealul”.
Vâlsan, George 1931: În amintirea lui Vasile Bogrea [Remembrance – Vasile Bogrea]. Cluj:
Societatea de mâine, 8 (1): 3-4.
Vâlsan, George 1971: Opere alese [Selected Works]. Bucharest: Editura Ştiinţifică.
Vlăduţiu, Ion, 1973: O mărturie inedită cu privire la inaugurarea Muzeului Etnografic al
Transilvaniei. [An Unique Testimony Regarding the Inauguration of the Ethnographic
Museum of Transylvania]. Cluj-Napoca: Anuarul Muzeului Etnografic al Transilvaniei
pe anii 1971-1973: 641-645.
*** 1921: Analele Academiei Române, Seria II ‒ Tomul XL, 1919-1920, Partea
administrativă şi dezvaterile [Annals of the Romanian Academy, Series II - Tome XL,
1919-19290, Administrative Part and Debates]. Bucharest: Librăriile „Cartea
Românească” şi Pavel Suru.
*** 1921: „Dacoromania”, Buletinul „Muzeului Limbii Române”, Anul I, 1920-1921, Cluj:
Editura Institutului de Arte Grafice „Ardealul”.
*** 1922: Arhivele Statului Bucureşti, Fond Fundaţia Culturală Regală, Direcţia: Arte.
Serviciul: Muzee; Dosar 5/1922, f. 6., Scrisoare manuscris a prof. Emil Panaitescu către
Directorul General al Direcţiei Artelor, 7 mai 1922, Cluj.
*** 1926: „Universul literar”, Anul XLII, Nr. 13, 28 martie 1926, inthe digital collection of
Lucian Blaga Central University Library, Cluj-Napoca, http://dspace.bcucluj.ro/
bitstream/123456789/18653/1/BCUCLUJ_FP_486684_1926_0042_0013.pdf.
*** 1926: „Universul literar”, Anul XLII, Nr. 38, 19 septembrie 1926, inthe digital collection
of Lucian Blaga Central University Library, Cluj-Napoca, http://dspace.bcucluj.ro/
bitstream/123456789/18678/1/BCUCLUJ_FP_486684_1926_0042_0038.pdf.
*** 1927: Calendarul „Asociaţiunii” pe anul 1927, Anul XVI, Nr. 139, întocmit de Horia
Petra-Petrescu. Sibiu: Editura „Asociaţiunii”, inthe digital collection of Lucian Blaga
Central University Library, Cluj-Napoca, http://documente.bcucluj.ro/web/bibdigit/
periodice/calendarulasociatiunii/BCUCLUJ_FP_C452_1927.pdf.
*** 1927: „Biserica şi Şcoala”, Anul L, nr. 34, 21 august 1927, in the digital collection of
Lucian Blaga Central University Library, Cluj-Napoca, http://documente.bcucluj.ro/
web/bibdigit/periodice/bisericasiscola/1927/BCUCLUJ_FP_279232_1927_051_034.pdf.
*** 1921: „Transilvania”, Anul 52, nr. 7-8, iulie-august 1921, in the digital collection of
Lucian Blaga Central University Library, Cluj-Napoca, https://www.bcucluj.ro/public-
view/vpdf.php?htsbt=sdf5y4Rdf4DdGg|transilvania.
*** 1925: „Transilvania”, Anul 56, nr. 9-10, septembrie-octombrie 1925, in the digital
collection of Lucian Blaga Central University Library, Cluj-Napoca,
https://www.bcucluj.ro/public-view/vpdf.php?htsbt=sdf5y4Rdf4DdGg|transilvania.

120 George-Bogdan Tofan
*** 1927: „Transilvania”, Anul 58, nr. 5-6, mai-iunie 1927, in the digital collection of
Lucian Blaga Central University Library, Cluj-Napoca, https://www.bcucluj.ro/public-
view/vpdf.php?htsbt=sdf5y4Rdf4DdGg|transilvania.
*** 1927: „Transilvania”, Anul 59, nr. 10-11, octombrie-noiembrie 1927, in the digital
collection of Lucian Blaga Central University Library, Cluj-Napoca,
https://www.bcucluj.ro/public-view/vpdf.php?htsbt=sdf5y4Rdf4DdGg|transilvania.
*** 1935: „Transilvania”, Anul 66, nr. 5, septembrie-octombrie 1935, in the digital
collection of Lucian Blaga Central University Library, Cluj-Napoca,
https://www.bcucluj.ro/public-view/vpdf.php?htsbt=sdf5y4Rdf4DdGg|transilvania.

THE FOOD CULTURE OF
ETHNIC MINORITIES IN CHINA
GUANG TIAN, GANG CHEN, YANGKUO LI
ABSTRACT
Each of China’s 55 different ethnic minorities has its unique diet and customs
with special ethnic character and historical tradition in the content and form of
“eating” and “drinking.” In the composition of the Chinese diet, the diet and
customs of ethnic minorities are an essential part. Chinese food enjoys a
worldwide reputation, directly related to the fact that people of all ethnic groups
living in the same region can learn from each other in terms of diet and customs
and learn from each other’s strengths to compensate for their weaknesses.
It provides a good guarantee for improving the physical quality and health of all
ethnic groups in China. The ethnic minorities have notable differences in the
source and composition of food, processing and use of cooking utensils, cooking
and eating customs, and etiquette. The dishes are rich and colorful, and the
dietary concepts are in full bloom. The tastes and habits are various, and the
customs and styles of hospitality are different.
Keywords: Food culture; ethnic minorities; unique diet; diet and custom.
INTRODUCTION
China is a multi-ethnic country with 56 ethnic groups. Traditionally,
the 55 ethnic groups other than the Han ethnic nation, who make up 92.1% of the
total population, are ethnic minorities. According to the seventh national census
statistics, as of May 11, 2021, the total population of ethnic minorities in China is
125,467,390. Nine ethnic minorities have more than 5 million, including Zhuang,
Manchu, Hui, Miao, Uygur, Tujia, Yi, Mongolian, and Tibetan. The Zhuang ethnic
group has the largest population, reaching 18 million. The ethnic minorities in
China, except for a few ethnic groups such as Russian, Tatar, and Tajik, are
primarily ethnic groups of native origin belonging to the Mongolian race
(Wang 2021). The geographical distribution of ethnic minorities in China has its
characteristics as follows:
First, the ethnic minorities are widely distributed who can be found
everywhere in the vast territory. In the eastern plain where the Han ethnic group
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 121-138

122 Guang Tian, Gang Chen, Yangkuo Li
lives, many ethnic minorities intermingle with them. Secondly, the distribution of
ethnic minorities along the border areas is especially concentrated in the north,
west, and south border areas. Yunnan Province, located on the southwestern border
of China, has 25 minority nationalities (each with more than 5,000 people).
The residential characteristic of ethnic minorities is that people of the same ethnic
group tend to live together. Even if they are interlaced with the Han ethnic group
on a large scale, they still gather together in the form of ethnic villages, ethnic
townships, and even ethnic counties. They live in such a way so that they can
maintain their ethnic characteristics well. Thirdly, the terrain of China is high in the
West and low in the east. The distributions of minority ethnic groups are primarily
on the plateau, mountainous areas, and grassland, and meadow terrain. As a result,
nomadic and hunting-oriented production mode has been formed, which is quite
different from the Han ethnic in the plain areas.
These significant differences between nature and humanity make the diet and
customs of ethnic minorities very different, make the Chinese diet culture shine
with great brilliance, and vividly reflect the other historical evolution processes of
various ethnic groups (Tian and Chen 2019). It also supports one frequently used
Chinese saying that is concerned with material factors is that “One sort of water
and earth [local environment] breeds one sort of person” (yifang shuitu yang yifang
ren 一方水土养一方人) (Lin and Waley 2021). By exploring the food culture of
ethnic minorities in China, we intend to provide evidence to prove some scholars’
findings that Chinese cuisines are complicated and diverse and share a distinct food
ideology (Anderson 1988; Li and Hsieh 2004).
THE STAPLE FOOD OF ETHNIC MINORITIES
Staple food is the food that provides the primary energy needed by the human
body. People accustomed to one staple food are usually not adapted to another.
The staple food of ethnic minorities in China can be divided into two categories
according to their geographical environment and production sources: grain-based
and meat-based. The settled ethnic groups take grain as a staple food, while the
nomadic ethnic groups take meat as a staple food (Li and Tian 2014). Most of the
ethnic minorities in China belong to settled groups, and settlement is closely
related to farming. Their primary food sources are rice, wheat, maize, and tuber
crops such as potatoes, and sweet potatoes, mainly starch (Jiang and Tian 2019).
Therefore, like the Han ethnic people, carbohydrates are also the primary source of
energy intake for ethnic minorities in China. Restricted by water and heat
conditions, the natural distribution of grain crops along the Qinling-Huaihe River
line takes the form of “northern wheat and southern rice,” which determines the
staple food customs of southern minorities who like rice and northern minorities
who prefer noodles. A few Mongolian, Tibetan, Kazak, and other ethnic groups
who still maintain a nomadic lifestyle have gradually transitioned to grain, forming
that grain and meat are mixed as a staple food.

The Food Culture of Ethnic Minorities in China 123
Noodles as the Staple Food
Northern minorities like to eat wheat and other miscellaneous grains. Cooked
wheaten food can be divided into steamed bread and soup noodles. There are
numerous patterns to enumerate, including noodles, pancakes, steamed buns,
dumplings, soup noodles, mixed noodles, and other varieties.
Among the northern minorities who mainly eat pasta, the Hui ethnic people
who believe in Islam live together with the Han people all over the country. Still,
they maintain their unique eating habits no matter where they live, and their diet
and customs are unique among many minorities. The Hui people avoid eating pork,
dogs, horses, mules, and scaleless fish, as well as all animals dead in illness or
abnormality. Because of the strict dietary taboos, there are Muslim restaurants
owned by Hui ethnic people in almost every city and town in China, and their
staple food is pasta. Lanzhou Qingtang Beef Ramen, which is famous all over the
country, is the most characteristic popular snack in Hui staple food. It is the
representative of Muslim soup noodles, which, among all famous national snacks,
has won the “Golden Ding Award” three times as well as the “Muslim Famous
Food” and the “Chinese Famous Snack Award.”
Lanzhou Qingtang Beef Ramen, originally known as “hot pot beef noodles,”
was created in 1915 by Ma Baozi, a Hui ethnic man living in Lanzhou. Zhang Shu, a
poet of the Qing Dynasty, once wrote a poem to praise Lanzhou Qingtang Beef
Ramen. As he put it: Such delicious food is hard to renew as I go far away from my
hometown. Sunrise recites the Sutra, and evening falls in the empty tower. I sigh
when burning incense as I am looking only for beef noodles. It is not the five springs
that enter the mountains, but nourishing one’s mind is necessary (Ma 2017).
All noodles are hand-made, and the whole process is divided into five steps:
selecting fine flour, adding flour without any harmful substances, and flour Agent,
a kind of “fluffy ash water” made of plant ash. According to traditional methods,
after noodles are blended, kneaded, beaten, and waked, the gluten protein in the
dough is more extensible and elastic. Then the noodles were pulled by the noodle
puller and made into noodles of varied sizes and shapes following customers’
demand.
The best part of Lanzhou Qingtang Beef Ramen is its soup, which is made by
boiling a specially treated beef with liver, bone, butter, in addition to more than ten
different natural spices for a long time without any colored sauce. When a bowl of
finished beef noodles is served, the customer can see the fresh soup juice, the white
radish, the red hot oil, the green coriander, and garlic seedlings. That is the
so-called “One clear, two whites, three reds, four greens, and five yellows”
(一清二白三红四绿五黄) (Yan 2019). The noodles are with flexibility and
bright-yellow infusion, which is smooth and refreshing. Soft beef is with tendons,
long and harmonious flavor, and fragrance.
Therefore, such noodle is popular among people with its function of satisfying
hunger and thirst and its cheapness and affordability, dubbed “Lanzhou Qingtang

124 Guang Tian, Gang Chen, Yangkuo Li
Beef Ramen” and promoted to the whole country, winning praise from customers
domestically and internationally. The first “Lanzhou Beef Ramen Making
Professional Ability Assessment Specification” in China has been approved by the
Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security. Lanzhou Beef Ramen has now
become a brand of the Chinese diet. On August 6, 2012, “the China Lanzhou Beef
Ramen Festival” was held in Lanzhou. The Chinese Cooking Association officially
named Lanzhou “the land of Chinese beef noodles.” In recent years, Lanzhou
Jinding Beef Noodle Muslim Co., Ltd. has launched a series of beef noodles
highlighting “clear soup, tender meat, gluten, and flavor” to promote the excellent
Chinese dietary culture. The company was built by the fourth and fifth generations
of Lanzhou beef noodles operators. Basing itself on the market, the company
tapped the characteristics and conducted intensive scientific researches and
innovations. It raises the quality of beef noodles to a new level, which has obtained
high acceptance in the food industry and excellent customer praise (Ma 2017).
The Hui people’s folk characteristic flavor food includes brewing skin, Ramen
noodles, big brine noodles, meat fried noodles, tofu jelly, cow head scraps, and bastard
noodles. Their favored foods are combined with the local characteristics of the
inhabitants, for example, the famous Muslim Wanshengma pastry （万盛马糕点）in
Xining City, Qinghai Province; Jinfeng stewed chicken （ 金 凤 扒 鸡 ） in
Shijiazhuang, and Baiyunzhang steamed buns （白运章包子）in Baoding, Hebei
Province; Majia roasted wheat （沈阳马家烧麦）in Shenyang, Liaoning Province;
Pita Bread Soaked in beef or lamb Soup（牛羊肉泡馍）in Xian, Shaanxi Province;
Wengzi Tangyuan （翁子汤圆） in Changde, Hunan Province.
In peacetime and festivals, Manchu’s staple food is called bobo（悖悖）(steamed
bun), with a unique flavor and various varieties. Many of them are well-known
throughout the country, such as soybean noodle steamed bun, suye steamed bun
(苏叶包子), and sticky cake steamed bun （粘豆包). Soybean noodle burned bun is
made by grinding rhubarb rice and millet into fine noodles and steaming with
soybean noodles, which are golden, sticky, and delicious. Suye steamed bun is a
mixture of sticky sorghum noodles and bean paste, steamed with suye wrapped
outside, having a special aroma and unique flavor of suye (Folium Perillae).
The sticky baked, steamed bun is made by steaming the flour of rhubarb rice after
being soaked in some bean paste. It can be eaten fried or dipped in sugar, which is
both sweet and fragrant. The rubbing-strip steamed bun is the predecessor of Saqima
(萨齐玛), a traditional cake of Manchu ethnic people (Tian et al. 2018).
It was an essential offering of Manchu people in the past. So it is also called
“beating-cake-median-strip.” To make the rubbing-strip steamed bun, the cooked
rice must be put on the cake stone, beaten repeatedly into the dough with a wooden
hammer, and then dipped in the soybean noodles, rubbed into strips, fried, cut into
pieces, and sprinkled with a thick layer of cooked soybean noodles. Later, instead
of cooked bean noodles, white sugar became “sugar wrapped.” Such a steamed bun

The Food Culture of Ethnic Minorities in China 125
is renamed Saqima, also known as Sugar Rong Cake (芙蓉糕). This steamed bun
has good color, fragrance, taste, and shape and is loved by people (Liu 2020).
The Korean people break the rule of “northern wheat and southern rice.”
Though they live in the Northeast, they eat rice. The most famous traditional food
of theirs is glutinous rice cakes and cold noodles. Glutinous rice cakes are made by
beating steamed glutinous rice into balls, cutting it into pieces, sprinkling bean
flour, and adding dilute honey and sugar. Cold noodles are made of buckwheat
noodles with starch, water, and evenly formed noodles and, after boiling, cooled
with chilly water, flavored oil, pepper, pickles, pickled beef, and beef soup are
added to make cold noodles. They taste refreshing and delicious. Cold noodles are
very particular about the taste of soup, so the saying “ten soups, three sides” shows
that soup is even more critical than noodles themselves. The soup includes broth,
bean juice soup, pickle soup, etc., among which the best is soup boiled with
pheasant or beef. Seasonings include beef slices or chicken shreds, apple slices,
egg shreds, sesame, sesame oil, chili noodles, green sauce, vinegar, flavor, and so
on. Combining all these materials, cold noodles are sweet with an acid, spicy
fragrance, refreshing, and delicious taste (Wang 2015).
Geographical Differences for Staple Food
The vast areas of southwestern China include most of the Qinghai-Tibet
Plateau, Sichuan Basin, Qinba Mountains, and Yunnan-Guizhou Plateau.
The corresponding administrative divisions are mainly Sichuan, Chongqing, Yunnan,
Guizhou, and most of the Tibet Autonomous Region, where ethnic minorities live in
large numbers, and the staple food customs are varied (Li and Guo 2004).
The Tujia, Buyi, Dong, Zhuang, and Shui ethnic groups distributed in the
plains and valley of Yunnan-Guizhou Plateau mainly live on rice all year-round,
including Indica rice and japonica rice primarily. In the history of Miao, Yao, Dong,
and Zhuang ethnic groups, glutinous rice has been the leading food for a long time.
Yi, Miao, Gelao, and other ethnic groups live in mountainous areas. Because they
have only dry land, they can only grow potatoes, maize, and wheat, so their staple
food is mainly wheat, maize, potatoes, buckwheat, and other coarse grains. Some
ethnic minorities especially like rice, supplemented by wheat, maize, cassava, and
potatoes. For instance, the Yao ethnic people (a typical mountainous ethnic group)
mainly live in the mountainous areas in Guangxi, Hunan, Yunnan, Guangdong,
Jiangxi, and Hainan provinces. They engage in mountainous agriculture, and their
staple food is corn, rice, sweet potato, etc. They often add corn, millet, sweet potato,
cassava, taro, and beans to rice porridge or rice (Li and Tian 2014).
Sometimes, they also use simmering or baking to process food, such as
steaming red potatoes and other potatoes, simmering bitter bamboo shoots, roasted
tender corn, baked rice, etc. During the farming period, the Yao people often have
a picnic on the spot. They gather to share their dishes, with the staple food being
rice dumplings and tubular bamboo rice, which are readily carried and stored in

126 Guang Tian, Gang Chen, Yangkuo Li
various places. In addition to rice, Baogu rice is the most common staple food for
the Tujia ethnic group. Baogu rice is mainly made of Baogu noodles mixed with
some rice and boiled in tripod pots or steamed in wooden steamers. Sometimes
they also eat bean rice, which is cooked with mung beans, peas, and rice. Glutinous
rice is mild and easy to stick into a ball. Long-term eating of glutinous rice and
food made of glutinous rice nourishes and strengthens the stomach. Therefore,
glutinous rice is also a favorite food of Guizhou minority people. After steaming
the glutinous rice, add lard to fry in an iron pan. After cooking, the other prepared
ingredients such as fried peanuts, shredded eggs, sausage slices, sour radish
granules, sugar as stuffing are added as fillings to be kneaded into rice balls, which
can be eaten directly (Tian and Chen 2019).
In Xishuangbanna, Yunan Province, Dai people usually use banana leaves to
wrap glutinous rice with salt, hot pepper, sour meat, roast chicken, and mumi
(Dai dialect, meaning sauce) moss pine. This type of food is convenient to carry.
Young men and women of the Dong ethnic group take the “glutinous rice ball,”
which can be eaten anywhere as a social gift and food. On the days of Gan’ao
(赶坳), girls will bring glutinous rice balls to their lovers for reunion and beauty.
The bamboo cake is a representative glutinous rice food. It is made by soaking
glutinous rice and then steaming it with a steamer. After it is fully absorbed and
expanded, it is then poured into a treadle-operated tilt hammer to the hull until it
does not show rice grains and then is rolled into cakes of different sizes. Besides
being eaten at home, this is also a good gift for relatives and friends during the
Spring Festival (Fang 2007).
Yi, Miao, Gelao, and other ethnic groups mostly live in mountainous areas
and cultivate dry land. They can grow potatoes, maize, wheat, and so on, so they
have cereal, maize, potatoes, buckwheat, and other coarse grains as their staple
food. A folk proverb circulating for a long time in Guizhou shows that the natural
conditions in Weining and Bijie are poor, and the ordinary family can only live on
buckwheat. The wise Yi people, however, make delicious buckwheat crisp with
Tartary buckwheat. It is said that Buckwheat Crisp was a birthday cake created by
Lady Shexiang, a female leader of the Xiyi nationality in the early Ming Dynasty,
to offer to Zhu Yuanzhang, the Taizu of the Ming Dynasty who claimed great
praise after tasting it.
The process of making buckwheat crisp is to sift out the fine powder of
Tartary buckwheat flour and mix it with brown sugar, vegetable oil, eggs, and a
small amount of alum, soda, and alkali. The filling is made of beans, brown sugar,
cooked vegetable oil, cooked lard, sesame, roses, melon strips, and so forth. The
filling is wrapped into the buckwheat flour and pressed into shape before being
baked in the oven. Buckwheat crisp is fragrant, crisp, and delicious with gold color.
Its varieties include Xisha, sugar, crystal, ham, and so on. With its unique flavor,
buckwheat crisp is welcomed by consumers and has become an exceptional food of
the Yi ethnicity (Song and Long 2019).

The Food Culture of Ethnic Minorities in China 127
As the staple food, another most common way of eating rice is rice noodles.
Rice noodle is a unique food in Yunnan which ethnic minorities in Yunnan like
very much. Rice noodles, made of rice flour mixed with an appropriate amount of
potato flour, are rich in carbohydrates, vitamins, minerals, and enzymes.
The noodles are delicate and ripe, resistant to boiling, and rotten. The soup after
boiling is not turbid. It tastes delicious and tender, tough but easy to digest,
especially suitable for hot pot and leisure fast food. People often say that a trip to
Yunnan without eating “cross-bridge rice noodles (过桥米线)” is equivalent to a
journey in vain. Cross-bridge rice noodles are a unique local snack with rice
noodles and other foods added to the cooked chicken soup. It originated from
Mengzi, a key town in southern Yunnan, where Han, Yi, Miao, Zhuang, and Hani
ethnic groups live together.
Legend has it that a scholar lived there, studying on a small island in the heart
of a lake in Mengzi South Lake. His wife would deliver meals to her husband
through a small stone bridge every day. One day, the wife thought her husband
studied so hard, so she stewed a fat and strong hen, put it in a jar, ready to deliver
meals to her husband, but due to temporary accidents, it was not delivered on time.
When she finished making the meal, she found that the soup pot was still warm.
She noticed that a thick layer of butter covered the soup noodles that played the
role of insulation. So she crossed the path and took the stone bridge to her husband.
After soaking the rice noodles in the hot chicken soup, she immediately took them
out and put them in a bowl. The scholar ate them with great satisfaction, and later,
he passed the imperial exam. People named this kind of food “cross-bridge rice
noodles” over 100 years ago to praise the virtuous wife (Wang 2002).
The cross-bridge rice noodles are made from rice noodles, soup (made of
chicken, pork ribs, and pork bones), and ingredients (cooked chicken oil,
MSG, pepper noodles, raw meat slices, peas, pea, tender leeks, spinach, tofu peel,
soy sauce, chili oil, etc.), which are cooked respectively. When people want to eat,
these materials are mixed, such cooking style and method of food are constantly
improved, and innovated through the past dynasties. Well-made, with a growing
reputation at home and abroad, it has become a famous snack in southern Yunnan.
It is the top grade of rice noodles. Now there are thousands of rice noodles shops in
Mengzi. Rice noodles are easy to make, white and crystal in color, soft and smooth
in taste, not hot and humid, not dry. They are a kind of delicious snack for people
of all ages. The soup is made of cooked lard, red oil, ginger, garlic juice, soy sauce,
and vinegar served in a large bowl. Hot rice noodles, fresh vegetables or fried cattle,
and mutton are put into eating. Rice noodles, especially the takeaway rice noodles,
are more sophisticated in producing soup juice, with Huaxi Wang’s beef noodles
and Shuicheng mutton being the most famous (Cheng and Yu 2017).
Shezu people live in Fujian and Zhejiang, and Taiwan Provinces have unique
staple foods, such as rice dumplings (folk name Rongjiao), black rice (the seasonal
food on March 3 Festival). It is shiny black rice cooked with sticky rice soaked in

128 Guang Tian, Gang Chen, Yangkuo Li
the juice after tamping the tender leaves of the black rice tree. It is said that if you
eat black rice, you will not be afraid of ants biting.
The Tibetans living in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau live on “Zanba” （糌粑）as
their staple food. Zanba is a food made from the flour of fried highland barley.
When eating, Tibetans mix it with butter, cream residue, and sugar, knead it into a
ball by hand, and swallow it with strong tea or milk tea. Zanba is easy to store and
carry and very convenient to eat. So in Tibetan areas, especially in pastoral areas,
Tibetan herders with sheepskin bags, which are used to carry Zanba, can be seen
everywhere at any time. They seldom eat other food products except for Zanba.
The characteristic staple food of Qinghai Sala nationality includes oil
fragrance, wonton pot steamed bun, cold noodles, rough bulk rice, stirring, boiling
rice, etc. “Oil fragrance,” that is, oil cakes, are fried by every family on every Eid
al-Fitr, Gurban Festival, and other festivals. These families fry such oil cakes for
their meals and as gifts to each other. When there is a memorial to the deceased or
a jubilant wedding, fried oil fragrance should also be used to respect ancestors and
follow the customs. Oil fragrance is regarded as a food symbolizing sincere faith
by Islamic people, who will give it a gift to relatives, friends, or imams. It has now
become the traditional holy food of Muslims, a symbol of solidarity, friendship,
and happiness. “Wonton pot steamed bun,” that is, a kind of steamed bun baked in
wonton pot. The wonton pot is a round cast iron product, divided into two halves,
the upper half is the pot’s lid, the lower half is the pot’s body, and there are buttons
between the two (Samantha and Hu 2019).
When making a wonton pot steamed bun, the first step is to place the wonton
pot in the hearth fire or hot red earth, then put the wheat noodles or barley dough
into the pot and then put wonton pot into the hearth to bake for more than
20 minutes. The steamed buns made in this way are golden in color, crisp in the
outer layer, crispy in the Inner layer, sweet and delicious, easy to carry, and durable
to store. “Cold noodles” refers to noodles made by such a process: After mixing the
dough on the large case board, roll the dough flat with a rolling stick about 1-meter
long. When proceeding to a certain extent, move the rod into it, wrap it tightly with
the face, and push it out repeatedly with the hand. After a few times, spread it out,
sprinkle a proper amount of flapping surface, roll the rolling stick into it from
another direction, do the roll-up operation, and then unfold it and spread the
flapping surface. Repeat such a process several times until the dough is rolled into
a “large sheet” with the size of about one square meter. Then cut the rolled noodles
into thin strips with a knife, and divide them into bunches of small handles. Boil
them in a boiling water pot for about 3 minutes. Remove them, and put them on the
board. Mix them with cooking oil while they are hot and evenly (Han et al., 2017).
Cold noodles have no soup, so they can also be used as dry food when going
out to work. They are convenient to carry, delicious, and affordable, and well-
received by the Salar people. Among them, “Qiaohua De” is a Salar dialect,
meaning that after heating the oil in the frying spoon, stir the onions, and put them

The Food Culture of Ethnic Minorities in China 129
into the stir-fried diced mutton to make soup. “Loose rice with bean flour” refers to
rice made by: boiling water in an iron pot or boiled water after boiling the potatoes,
and then gradually add bean flour into the boiling water, and stir while sprinkling
until it becomes a thick paste of rice porridge, which can be served in a bowl, and
eaten with vegetables.
Buckwheat flour can also be used for bulk meals. “Mixing dough” can be made
the same as bulk rice. When eating, people can put it in a bowl and pour in “Qiaohua
De,” with hot sauce, garlic paste, vinegar, and so on, which is very delicious.
“Cooking” is made by boiling mutton soup with radish, mushrooms, noodles,
potatoes, cooked meat, meatballs, tofu, rape, garlic seedlings, and other ingredients.
“Salad buns” are steamed buns with the shape of dumplings made of dead-faced
wrapping stuffing (including leek, radish, tofu, black fungus) on the surface of which
are poured oil before eating to make the surface of the bun bubble. It plays the role of
appetizer and vitamin supplements (Song and Long 2019).
Predominantly Carnivorous
The most common staple food of nomadic people in China is hand-grabbed
mutton. The practice is to slaughter the fat and tender sheep, open the stomach,
peel off the skin, remove the viscera, wash them, remove the head and hoof, unload
the whole sheep into several large pieces and boil them in clear water. When the
meat is boiled, they take it out, put it on the table on a large plate without
chopsticks, and grab it by hand, and this is why it is called hand-grabbed mutton.
It is served on the plate after cooking in plain water without oil explosion, adding
various spices, and other things, such as hand-grabbed meat, that have no good
appearance when looked at from the outside. However, this is precisely what it is
unique about. It keeps mutton fresh and tender.
In addition to sheep meat, Mongolians also eat beef, goat meat, camel meat,
and a small amount of horse meat. Yellow mutton is also hunted and eaten during
the hunting season. The most common way to eat mutton is hand-grabbed mutton.
In addition, there are more than 70 kinds of traditional eating methods, such as
whole-lamb feast, tender-skinned whole-lamb feast, cured whole-lamb dinner,
roast lamb, roast lamb heart, fried mutton belly, braised mutton, and so on. Among
these eating methods, the most distinctive is the Mongolian roast whole sheep
(after peeling off), oven-roasted natural sheep with a skin called Alashan Roast
Whole sheep (He 1993).
Many nomadic people in China, such as Uygur, Kazakh, Uzbek in Xinjiang,
and even many Mongolian herdsmen in Inner Mongolia, have settled down
gradually in modern times and began their farming life. Their staple food has
tended to be replaced by grain gradually. Uygur people eat three meals a day,
which are mainly made of wheat flour. There are dozens of kinds of staple foods in
their daily life. The most common varieties are steamed bread, grabbed rice with
mutton, steamed buns, noodles, and so forth. However, the tradition of eating beef

130 Guang Tian, Gang Chen, Yangkuo Li
and mutton is still distinct. There is a custom of “no meat, no meal.” For example,
the most famous “grabbed rice with mutton” comes from “hand grab mutton”
(Adaleti 2010).
Grabbed rice with mutton is the Chinese name of a kind of food with ethnic
characteristics. It is called Borau (originally Persian) in the Uygur language,
meaning mixed braised rice with mutton, rice, carrots, and vegetable oil. It is a
traditional food that all ethnic minorities in Xinjiang, especially Muslim people,
like to eat. The making process is as follows: firstly, the mutton with bones is cut
into walnut-sized pieces, fried in clear oil, then carrots, onions, and seasonings are
added, together they are stewed to about half-maturity, the washed rice is put on
the meat, soaked in water, and braised in gentle fire, sometimes dried apricots,
raisins, and other ingredients are added, with thin-skinned steamed buns,
accompanied by milk tea, and roast meat, which makes the food have more
national characteristics, and local flavor. Such food is a product of the combination
of nomadic people and farming culture. Carrot is the core of the grabbed rice,
commonly known as “Xinjiang Ginseng,” Many people call it “Radix Ginseng,”
It has the functions of invigorating Qi （气）(air in the body), promoting blood
circulation, generating Jin （精）(the fundamental substance that maintains the
bodyʼs functioning), quenching thirst, calming the mind, and improving
intelligence. Onion is an indispensable condiment in grabbed rice. It contains many
proteins, amino acids, sugar, mercaptan, dimethyl disulfide, trisulfide, and other
ingredients (Wang 2018).
Pharmacologically, it has the functions of dispelling wind, sweating, relieving
exterior symptoms and swelling, treating cold, headache, stuffy nose, stroke,
swelling of face, and dysentery. Therefore, mutton grabbing is also a very
nourishing food. In Uygur, Uzbek, and other minority areas, grabbed rice with
mutton is necessary to entertain relatives and guests during essential occasions
such as the New Year celebrations, weddings, funerals, and marriages. The guests
sit around the table with a clean napkin on top. Then the host will take the dishes in
one hand and the pot in the other, let the guests clean their hands one by one, and
hand them a clean towel to dry. Later, the host will bring a few plates of grabbed
rice with mutton and put napkins on them. The typical custom is that two or three
people share one container. The guests will grab directly from the plate. The food
is named “grabbing rice,” which retains the custom of holding food by hand.
It reflects the combination of animal husbandry and agriculture (Adaleti 2010).
NON-STAPLE FOOD OF ETHNIC MINORITIES
Non-staple food is meat, fish, and vegetable food intake to supplement and
improve the nutritional composition of staple food and enrich the variety of dietary
food. From the point of view of chemical balance, the main component of grain is a
carbohydrate, which is acidic in chemical characteristics. It also needs to be

The Food Culture of Ethnic Minorities in China 131
supplemented and perfected by alkaline foods rich in protein, fat, vitamins, and
inorganic salts, such as meat, beans, and vegetables. Staple and non-staple foods
should be matched to complement each other’s strengths and weaknesses to maintain
chemical balance in people’s bodies and promote human health. There are many
kinds and varieties of non-staple food, and the selection and processing of non-staple
food of different ethnic groups are disputed, which has become the most splendid
part of the dietary culture of ethnic minorities in China (Li and Tian 2014).
The word “Qingzhen” (meaning Halal Food) has existed since ancient times.
Lu You, a famous poet in the Song Dynasty, said in “Appreciating Plum in
Garden”: “After reading all kinds of flowers in spring, I found this one has a
unique flavor (Qingzhen).” “Qingzhen” here means noble and elegant and has
nothing to do with Islam. The Hui ethnic make their foods based on their
understanding of the Islamic doctrine: “if the basis of the teachings is clear, it is
clean; if the basis is true, it is right; when the basis is clean, there is no dust, and
dirty things; when the basis is true, it is unstained,” and that “Allah has no sole
respect, so-called halal.” Therefore, the “Muslim diet” can be interpreted as the
“Islamic diet,” According to the doctrine, the raw materials of Muslim dishes must
be kept fresh and clean (Lan and Tian 2015).
The edible animals mainly include ruminant grass-eating animals, cereal-
eating poultry, scaly fish, shrimp in oceans and rivers, etc. Their cooking
techniques can be used for reference, and developed in the Han cuisine, such as
grilled meat strips, shallot-fried meat, and pot-collapsed mutton in Beijing Muslim
cuisine. Since 651 A.D. (the second year of Tang Yonghui reign), many Islamic
people from Central Asia have come to China to do business and deal in jewelry.
Restorative materials, spices such as bean curd, pepper, fennel, cinnamon, and so
on, have greatly enriched the connotation of Chinese cooking with taste as the core
and gradually helped form the characteristics of the Hui diet. The proportion of
beef and mutton in the dishes is very large, related to the Islamic dietary ideas and
the advocacy of “tasty food,” Healthy food is pure, with a good appearance, a
delicious smell and taste, and rich nutritional value. Take sheep as an example.
They are gentle and clean. Their meat is delicious, which also has nourishing and
therapeutic effects on the human body. Mutton contains minerals such as protein,
fat, vitamins, and minerals such as calcium, phosphorus, and iron (He 1993).
Eating mutton frequently can stimulate people’s appetite, strengthen strength,
disperse coldness, and help to prevent kidney deficiency. The most distinctive part
of the rural Hui diet in Northwest China is the “nine bowls, and three rows” folk
banquet, which is usually used to entertain a substantial number of guests, and
relatives at the wedding and funeral ceremonies. Many Halal banquet dishes
prevailing in southern Ningxia are also well-known throughout the country.
“Wuluo” means that five kinds of stir-fried dishes are served at the same time,
“Four Seas” means that four types of dishes with soup are done at one time;
“Jiukui,” “Thirteen Flowers,” and “Round moon on the fifteenth” are respectively

132 Guang Tian, Gang Chen, Yangkuo Li
the good words of nine bowls, thirteen bowls, and fifteen bowls of dishes.
Sweet food occupies a specific position in the daily fare of the Hui ethnic people.
Many famous dishes of the Hui people are prepared with the Arab Muslims’
preference for sweet food. These foods include cold cakes, cut cakes, fermented
grains of eight coarse bowls of cereal, sweet twist, sweet steamed bread, steamed
bread, rice cake, and persimmon cake (Wang 2017).
Milk is an indispensable non-staple food for nomadic people, and dairy
products are regarded as high-quality treasures. The Mongolian people call dairy
products “Chaganyide,” which means holy and pure food, namely “white food.”
The food made from meat is called “Ulanyide,” or “Red Food,” In addition to
ordinary milk, Mongolian people also eat goat’s milk, horse’s milk, deer’s milk,
and camel’s milk. A few of them are fresh milk drinks, while most are processed
into dairy products, such as yogurt, milk tofu, cream, cream residue, cheese crisp,
milk powder, and so on. More than ten kinds can be eaten at dinner, and they can
also be used as snacks for both old and young people. If there are visitors, first of
all, dairy products should be offered, and when children come, they should also
apply the surface of the milk or cream on their foreheads to express good wishes
(Tian and Chen 2019).
“Panax notoginseng ” (三七) is produced in the areas where the Zhuang ethnic
people live together, a traditional and precious traditional Chinese medicine. Panax
notoginseng has the effect of dispersing blood stasis to stop bleeding, reducing
swelling, relieving pain, and the prevention, treatment, and health care effect in
treating cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases and maintaining the
physiological balance of the body. It is known as “Jinbuhuan” (so invaluable that it
will not be exchanged even by gold), and “Shencao (the God grass) of Southern
China.” Zhuang ethnic people are proficient in the flavor and functions of “Panax
Notoginseng,” The food and therapeutic dishes they cook using the flowers, leaves,
roots, and mustaches of Panax Notoginseng are used very distinctively (Zheng
et al. 2008).
There is “Panax notoginseng” steamed pot chicken, Tianma (天麻) steamed
pot chicken, Cordyceps Sinensis （虫草）steamed pot chicken, and other
nourishing dishes with a unique flavor. Yanshan County, located in the
southeastern part of Yunnan Province, is known as the “township of Notoginseng
in China,” Notoginseng Steamed Pot Chicken is a famous dish of local flavor in
this area. When making this dish, firstly, the delicate roots of Panax notoginseng
are soaked in clear water and washed and put into the clean chicken abdomen.
Such chicken pieces are placed in a steam pot with seasonings. Then this pot will
be placed in a sand pot containing 45 kg of water. The contact points of the two
pots are sealed and stewed in an intense fire for three or four hours until the
chicken is cooked and the meat and bones are separated. The chicken stewed has
the original taste, delicate fragrance, and sweet soup juice and has a nourishing
effect.

The Food Culture of Ethnic Minorities in China 133
Dai ethnic people live in hot and humid areas in Southwest Yunnan with a
wide range of insect species. It is an integral part of Dai ethnic people’s food
composition to use insects as raw materials (cicadas, bamboo worms, spiders,
turtles, ant eggs, etc.) to make various dishes and snacks with unique local flavors.
Dai ethnic people, in general, like to eat ants’ eggs. They often eat that of a kind of
yellow ants nested in trees. When they take ants’ eggs, they first drive the ants
away and then get their eggs. Ant eggs vary in size. Some are big as mung beans.
Some are as small as rice grains and white and bright. After being washed, and
dried, stir-fry them with eggs. It tastes delicious. Such food can be eaten raw and
cooked and used to make the sauce and mix with eggs and fry. Sour fruit, balsam
pear, bitter bamboo shoots, and pepper are often eaten by Dai ethnic people,
supplemented by wild pepper, coriander, garlic, citronella, and so on, are also clean
and hygienic, and healthy with pure flavor (Fang 2007).
The Hezhe ethnic minority people live by fishing in the Heilongjiang Province
of Northeast China. They like raw fish. They treat their distinguished guests with a
raw fish banquet. “Killing raw fish” and “raw fish shavings” are famous dishes of
their food. Fish roe, gill, crisp fish bone, fish nose, shark fin, and fish belly can be
eaten directly after supplemented with oil, sauce, vinegar, salt, and raw vegetables
such as potato shreds and beans sprouts. Jingpo ethnic people in the South of China
are accustomed to pound raw fish directly into meat paste and salt the raw fish into
the fish sauce (Ma and Tie 2017).
The feast on Luoba ethnic people’s banquet is rat meat. The wild rat, which
haunts the mountains, is nearly a foot long, weighs about one kilogram, and has a
round, slender body. At ordinary times, the Luoba people can causally hunt and eat
such rats. However, as the Spring Festival is coming, they store dried rats for
guests. When the guests arrive, the host will put the dried rats on the rod, shave off
the hairs, throw away the viscera, cut them into small pieces, and stew them in a
stone pot with seasoning. The meat is tender and delicious. There are also Li ethnic
people (who eat gopher, vole, and squirrel), Dai ethnic people (who eat bamboo
rat), and some Miao ethnic people in the Yongxi area of Zhenyuan County,
Guizhou Province. They drink wine with rat meat as a delicacy to treat their guests
(Li and Guo 2004).
UNIQUE DINING UTENSILS
Chinese diet pays attention to “color, aroma, taste, shape, and utensils,”
It shows that food and utensils are inseparable. Gourmet food must be equipped
with utensils to show its perfection. Cooking and tableware are essential
components of Chinese dietary culture, reflecting the national dietary etiquette
culture and national development. In the early years of Chinese history, when
people ate raw food, they did not use cooking utensils until entering the age of
cooked food when they learned to use fire to process food. They needed to use
cooking utensils to process food and use food utensils. The earliest cooking and

134 Guang Tian, Gang Chen, Yangkuo Li
utensils were generally made of stone. Later, wooden and pottery utensils came
into being. The emergence of smelting technology made copper articles appear on
the table. Smelting iron requires a higher melting point, higher technology, so iron
cookers were the latest to appear. The use of utensils is also closely related to the
mode of production (Jiang and Tian 2019).
The settlement life of farming nationalities promotes the fine development of
eating utensils. The local folklore story portrays the rapid growth, complexity,
variety, and exquisite beauty of the kitchen utensils of the settled nationalities.
The dietary utensils of nomadic people need to adapt to the migration life and
experience the galloping, and turbulence on horseback, so they are durable, light,
and portable. All these show the development and evolution of cooking utensils
and tableware from material to form, reflect the productivity level and production
mode of human society, and are symbols of the human diet and civilization
progress.
The Dai, Hani, Lahu, Blang, Yao, and Jinuo ethnic groups in China use modern
tools such as electric cookers while retaining their arched pots and steamers. Their
traditional ranges are slightly like wooden barrels outside, but the bottom of the cone
is made of bamboo bars. These cookers are slightly arched inward and upward with
many small tiny holes for steaming the staple foods. The apparent differences in
cooking methods and procedures are clear among different ethnic groups. There are
five ways to cook rice: cooking in an electric cooker, in arched pots (steaming after
drying), one-time steaming, two-time steaming, and steaming rice with steamer after
boiling and filtering the soup first (Fang 2007).
Dai, Blang, and Lahu ethnic groups cook three times a day; Yao and Jinuo
ethnic groups cook twice a day and have cold lunch at noon; Hani ethnic groups
cook once a day and eat cold meals at noon and in the evening. The bamboo barrel
roast rice with Dai characteristics is mainly made of glutinous rice or purple rice.
Now it is primarily made and eaten at national festivals or when distinguished
guests come. Usually, this method is seldom used. Dai, Yao, and Jinuo ethnic
people eat the meals in the fields wrapped in banana leaves, making full use of
natural resources that are simple to use, convenient to carry, and easy to get. They
will not cause waste of resources and environmental pollution (Tian 2010).
The Mongolian people, a legendary people with a long history, live in
grasslands and have a nomadic life of “migrating by water, and grass” generation by
generation, mainly live in the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region and Northeast
and Northwest China. They are typical nomadic people, and their utensils are
practical and exquisite. They adapt to the food structure of dairy products and meat
products. Their utensils are made of local materials, many of which are wooden and
leather products. They also like copper and silver products with distinctive
characteristics. Mongolian traditional customs require that everyone use their
wooden bowls and chopsticks, especially in the group dinner or banquet. If someone
does not have his bowls and chopsticks, people will laugh at him.

The Food Culture of Ethnic Minorities in China 135
Therefore, the dance with bowls on their heads occupies a vital position in the
history of the development of Mongolian folk dance. Mongols who are good at
singing and dancing have teacups or bowls of small oil lamps or bowls overhead at
wedding banquets and festive parties. The bowls are filled with fresh water or milk
wine. They dance with two wine cups or a bunch of bamboo chopsticks in their
hands in singing and music. The top of the Mongolian wooden ladle is carved with
a vine pattern or a horse’s head, and there is a hole at the top which can be pierced
into the leather rope for carrying (Wang 2017).
Tamping milk, rice, and tea are all used as pestles. Mongols like to use silver
bowls, the outside of which are engraved with patterns. The traditional moire, seal
pattern, circle pattern, deformed and short flower, and grass branches and vines
follow the rhythm of circular rotation of organ type, which is lively and realistic.
Mongolian containers for water, milk and wine are mostly made of leather, such as
Huhule, a kind of drinking utensil made of horsehide or cowhide. It is shaped like a
ship. The center part of the utensil is in the shape of a kettle mouth. It is a wooden
plug with a hole through which a leather rope can hang on the body or the horse. It
is solid and durable.
The pot used by the herdsmen is called Jilabuqi, made of iron or copper, and
has an edge in the middle. The top edge of the pot is cast with traditional patterns,
and some of it has Mongolian characteristics. They use this pot for cooking meat
and boiling milk tea, so it is tremendous. Both copper spoons and iron spoons have
two different shapes. One is round with a small volume. The other is oval with a
large volume. Milk drums are made of wood, iron, copper, leather, and so on.
Some wooden ones are cylindrical and covered, generally about 1.5 feet high, with
a hoop in the middle and one handle on each side or no grip. Copper and iron ones
are cylindrical.
The handles of both ends and central parts are embellished with patterns,
which are beautiful and strong. The silver-inlaid buckets are more exquisite with
the patterns inlaid on both the upper and lower parts, which is unique, and novel.
Mongolian people like to pack horse milk wine in large leather bags made of whole
skins peeled off and can hold 300 liters. Mongolian people also want to use animal
stomachs (such as sheep stomachs, cattle stomachs) as storage utensils to store
butter, and so on. For instance, the stomach of large livestock can hold 50 kg of
butter (Li and Wu 1998).
Tibetan cooking utensils form an organic whole. Every family is equipped
with butter teapots, milk teapots, tea sets, and wine utensils, and the tableware is
preferred to be made of copper with an iron triangle as cookers. Tibetans like to use
wooden bowls painted with red, yellow, and orange paint. Exquisite people usually
use dishes made of gold, silver, copper, or even jade inlaid. Tibetan knife is the
leading tableware to carry with, which has a long history and exquisite
craftsmanship. It is used to cut meat and food, slaughter sheep, peel sheep when
cooking, and carved wood and other things when working. Therefore, everyone has
one and cannot leave it away (Li and Guo 2004).

136 Guang Tian, Gang Chen, Yangkuo Li
Due to the different living environment and frequent exchanges with the Han
ethnic group, and along with the social and economic development, and changes,
the Manchu catering utensils have experienced the changes of the wooden era,
metalized era (copper pot charcoal fire), and the use of pottery as well as the
changes of cooking methods. Manchu hotpot and “eight dishes and eight bowls”
banquet reflect the integration of Manchu characteristics and Han ethnic people
from meals to tableware. Manchu people also pay great attention to dishes, bowls,
and other tableware and their technology and texture. New bowls and chopsticks
must be added to the New Year celebration with the meanings and wishes of
making the family prosperous (Ma and Tie 2017).
Manchu official cuisine emphasizes yellow dishes, yellow bowls, golden cups,
red and white chopsticks, golden spoon, and so on, coupled with jade utensils,
which are very luxurious with aulic tendency. Ewenki ethnic people are good at
making use of local resources according to local conditions. The rich birch bark has
become the material for making food utensils. The cups, plates, bowls, and daily
dishes are birch bark, often decorated with patterns. Birch bark has heat insulation
properties, so birch bark bowls and plates are not hot but lightweight and
environmentally friendly. Ewenki ethnic people are notable for their creativity
(Tian et al., 2018).
CONCLUSION
Diet customs, including food sources, food processing, food varieties, and
dietary etiquette, have been gradually formed during human evolution over
thousands of years. It reflects the impact of geography, climate, and environment.
It also reveals the mode of production, religious beliefs, living habits, ethnic
changes, and even ethnic physiological differences in human beings. From a
nation’s diet customs, we can see its historical evolution and characters. China is a
multi-ethnic country with a vast territory. The enormous cultural differences
between different ethnic groups and the natural differences of their environment
overlap, which results in significant differences in diet, and customs among
different ethnicities. Every kind of diet and custom of every ethnic group results
from its historical evolution, reflecting its tradition and historical process. It is the
embodiment and symbol of its national characteristics.
Ethnic minorities in China tend to be more regionally oriented regarding food
sources, dietary structure, cooking materials, dietary therapy, dietary aesthetics,
and dietary ethics. Therefore, they are more “grounded” and conform to ecological
and environmental protection concepts. Their food is native. The natural and
straightforward processing method, the condiments are all taken from nature, and
chemical additives are never abused, so the food keeps its original flavor and is
naturally “green,” They are well versed in the principle of “medicine and food are
of the same origin. Medicine and diet are of the same merit.” They are proficient in
the characteristics and health care functions of birds, animals, grass, trees, fish, and

The Food Culture of Ethnic Minorities in China 137
insects. They are good at absorbing their essence through daily diet and
strengthening their health. Their dietary etiquette is respectful to their ancestors,
hospitable, warm, and considerate, containing simple humanistic ethics, which
reflects the virtues of the Chinese nation.
The ethnic minorities’ diet customs have contributed to the nation’s
reproduction and cultural evolution. At the same time, it is a gold mine to be
further developed, which needs further rescue and excavation. By protecting and
developing this precious heritage, we can further promote the Chinese diet culture
and make such diet culture keep pace with the times and flourish forever.
REFERENCES
Adaleti, T.R. 2010. “Uyghur Diet Culture and Its Changes-Take Urban Uyghurs for
Example [维吾尔族的饮食文化及其变迁-以城市维吾尔族为例].” Tribune of Social
Sciences in Xinjiang 3: 91-96.
Anderson, E.N. 1988. The Food of China. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Cheng, X. and G. Yu. 2017. “Embedded Inheritance and High-Quality Development of
Food Intangible Cultural Heritage – Taking Yunnan Bridge Rice Noodles as an
Example.” Ideological Front 43(5): 162-172.
Fang, T. 2007. “On Yunnan’s Diet Culture [论云南饮食文化].” Social Science Front (3):
160-168.
Han, L., D. Tong, J. Yuan, Y.L. Chen, and X.J. MA. 2017. “Development of Muslim
Kunguomo with Potato Flour.” Grain, Oil and Food Technology 25(1): 19-23.
He, D.Q. 1993. “Mongolian meat-Whole Roast Lamb, Mongolian Hot pot, and Handle
Meat.” Chinese Food 3: 41-42.
Jiang, Y.C. and R. Tian. 2019. “Anthropological Thoughts on the Chinese Culinary
Culture.” Journal of Sociology and Social Anthropology 10(1-3): 42-60.
Lan, X.H. and G. Tian. 2015. “On Diet Ethnography-Based on a Hui Restaurant in Lishui,
Zhejiang.” Journal of Hui Muslim Minority Studies 2: 88-96.
Li, D.K. and G. Tian. 2014. Foodways Anthropology [饮食人类学]. Yinchuan, PRC:
Ningxia People’s Publisher.
Li, J.R., and Y.H. Hsieh. 2004. “Traditional Chinese Food Technology and Cuisine.” Asia
Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition 13 (2): 147-155.
Li, Y.Q. and Z.Q. Guo. 2004. “Sichuan Ethnic Minorities’ Food Customs.” Food and
Health (4): 38-39.
Li, Z.R. and X.H. Wu. 1998. “A Brief Discussion on the Coordination of Mongolian
Traditional Diet Culture [浅谈蒙古族传统饮食文化的协调性].” Heilongjiang National
Series 1: 95-97.
Lin, J.F. and P. Waley. 2021. “Taste and Place of Nanxiong Cuisine in South China: a
Regional Analytical Framework. Food.” Culture & Society. DOI: 10.1080/15528014.
2021.1930736
Liu, M.K. 2020. “Sweet Food Integrated with the Manchu and Han People in the Qing
Dynasty [甜食与清代满汉民族融合].” Journal of Hubei Second Normal College 7: 61-66.
Ma, X.H. 2017. “Musara Noodle Shop [穆萨拉面馆].” Journal of Qinghai Lake, (06):
96-99.

138 Guang Tian, Gang Chen, Yangkuo Li
Ma, B. and H.N. Ti, Honna. 2017. “The Inheritance and Development of the Hezhe Ethnic
Folk Culture and Art [赫哲族民俗文化艺术的传承与发展].” Journal of Suihua
University 5: 101-104.
Samantha and Hu, Tao. 2019. “Special Cuisine on the Qinghai Plateau.” Fine Food 4:
19-22.
Song, Y.J. and C.L. Long. 2019. “Traditional Knowledge and Culture of Buckwheat.”
Science 2: 9-12.
Tian, R., K. Tian, C. Wang and C.H. Wang. 2018. “Food Culture in China: from Social,
Political Perspectives.” Trames-Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences 22(4):
345-364.
Tian, G. and G. Chen. 2019. Anthropology of Chinese Foodways. Miami, FL: North
America Business Press.
Tian, J. 2009. “Study on Dai Bamboo Culture in Xishuangbanna [西双版纳傣族竹文化究].”
Journal of Chongqing Industrial and Commercial University (Natural Science Edition)
26(2): 137-140.
Wang, H.M. 2015. “Analysis of Traditional Eating Habits and Taboos in South Korea.”
Journal of Nanning Vocational and Technical College 20 (5): 26-28.
Wang, J.L. 2021. The Ethnic Minority Population in Our Province Has Grown Steadily [我
省少数民族人口稳步增长]. Shanxi Economic Daily, October 6: A2.
Wang, I.J. 2002. “Rice Line Across the Bridge.” Southwest Militia 1: 46.
Wang, M. 2017. Study on the Mongolian Traditional Diet Making Skills. Ph.D. dissertation,
Inner Mongolia Normal University.
Wang, W.M. 2018. “Uyghur Food Culture and Its Changes-Take Northern Xinjiang as an
Example.” Yangtze River Series 7: 89-90.
Yan, X.Y. 2019. “Study on the Cultural Characteristics of Lanzhou Muslim Foods and the
Strategy of Modelling Ethnic Products-Taking Lanzhou Beef Noodle as an Example [论兰州清
真饮食文化特色及其民族品牌塑造策略-以兰州牛肉面为例].” China Food Safety Magazine
27:52-53.
Zheng, Z., H.L. Zhou, and Y.Q. LuoYanqiu. 2008. “Sanqi Flower Gold not for-Yunnan
Zhuang Medicine Introduction [三七花香金不换——云南壮族医药简介].” Journal of
Yunnan University of Traditional Chinese Medicine 3: 71.

MUSICS FROM THE FURTHEST-EAST TO THE NEAREST-EAST (2)
HOMO LYRICUS, OR LYRIC SONG
IN THE ETHNOMUSICOLOGICAL STRATIGRAPHY
OF “FOLKLORIC CULTURE”:
NOTES FOR A MONOGRAPH (PART 2)
IZALY ZEMTSOVSKY and ALMA KUNANBAEVA
ABSTRACT
Authors concentrate on the very fact that there existed among the cultures of Eurasia
songs resembling Japanese oiwake, this uniquely sophisticated form that were also
in some respects analogous to it in significance. That solo-performed lyric “long”
song is an international phenomenon, one that is found to this day along practically
the entire length of the Great Silk Road. Such masterworks constitute one-of-a-kind
creative products that are, as it were, Mona Lisas of oral tradition. Authors gave the
creator of lyric songs, the lyric singer and poet, the name Homo Lyricus. The article
consists of six sections: Just how unique is oiwake? (preface); Methodological
foundations (after Boris Putilov); Toward future research: hypotheses and
limitations; Lyric drawn-out song in the great expanse of typological succession;
On the problem of authorship in Eurasian drawn-out song; Some concluding theses
on freedom as the essence of lyric song; and a musical supplement. Note: “folkloric
culture,” as opposed to “folk culture,” the term is Boris Putilov’s.
Keywords: ethnomusicology, folkloristics, lyric singer and poet, lyric long solo
song, drawn-out song, oiwake, urtyn duu, ozyn кüi, hora lungă, typological
succession, Great Silk Road, Eurasia, Boris Putilov.
4. LYRIC DRAWN-OUT SONG IN THE GREAT EXPANSE
OF TYPOLOGICAL SUCCESSION
The next and most extensive section of our prospective monograph will
naturally be dedicated to a discussion of the typology of the musical forms of
“long” songs, again following Putilov. It is here that we will need to build up the
analytical core of our research, which will be based on our engagement with and
consideration of a great quantity of evidence. Since our research remains to be
completed, however, it would be premature at the moment to attempt to compile
any kind of exhaustive list of the typical forms of “drawn-out” songs in various
ethnic contexts. One thing is certain: the elaboration of this typology must
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 139-167

140 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva
inevitably lead to a series of hypotheses, among them a hypothesis regarding the
regional “zoning” of these types, i.e., about the geo-ethnic (or “ethnogeographic”)
zones that correspond to them.
We would like to stress here that what interests us is musical typology—
though the scope of this article will not allow us to explore every aspect of the
issue. We must limit ourselves at present to a preliminary outline.
From a musical perspective, all drawn-out songs can be sorted into two
overarching groups, based on the way their melos is perceived: a “vertical” group
and a “horizontal” group. Songs with a vertical melos (for example, Tatar and
Bashkir songs, with their mellifluous pentatonicism) produce an effect of stopped
time: you cannot disturb such beauty; you can only dwell in it and delight in it,
inhabiting the elevated aesthetic state that engendered it. Songs with a horizontal
melos (for example, Russian, Armenian, or Kazakh songs) produce an effect of
time coming into being. This is a different kind of magic: in these songs, Time as
such is simulated, and we seem to participate in its unfurling, to experience it
viscerally. As Asafyev wrote: “When we hear such songs in traditional folk
performance, we seem to become aware of a process of burgeoning growth: the
vibrant, organic growth of the melody.”1 The melos of these songs may be defined
with recourse to the concept of “genres of melodic dynamics.”2 Melodic
symphonism is to the utmost degree intrinsic to cultures that are characterized by
horizontal thinking—above all, steppe cultures such as the mid-southern Russian,
the eastern Ukrainian, and the Kazakh (of Saryarqa).
We posit that the musical character of these songs is, as a rule, monodic; in
our future book, we will need to dedicate a special section to the substantiation of
this claim. The issue of the monodic type of song is of the utmost complexity and
cannot be covered here in its entirety. Its significance, however, is enormous: from
our point of view, it is monody that is the sole intonational foundation upon which
the expansive melodic protraction that occurs in drawn-out songs could flourish.
We are also consciously setting aside any consideration of liturgical musical
art as it interacts with the folkloric and oral-professional branches of sung lyric.
That is a topic of the utmost importance, and also of the utmost complexity.
Musical mastery of the lyrical domain of spiritual culture has run on a course if not
always parallel to, then often in deep cross-correlation with development in
religious cult, folklore, and authorial creativity.
At every turning point in the development of a given cultural phenomenon, a
range of possibilities will open up for art (including folklore), possibilities related
to how far a given artistic form or creative idea may be progressed or advanced. In
practice, almost none of these ideas is realized in full within the confines of a
1 Boris Asaf’ev, Untitled manuscript fragments from the archival records of the Central State Archive
of Art and Literature of the USSR (TsGALI), f. 2658, op. 1, d. 277, I. 2. This manuscript is cited here
for the first time.
2 Zemtsovsky 2006a: 6.

Homo Lyricus... (2) 141
single culture; such ideas seem always to develop with reference to the widest
typological horizon possible for a given art form (considered as a totality). Putilov
was thus correct twice over: first, in his claim that it is worthwhile to examine the
issue from the perspective of typological succession, in which there are,
effectively, no geographical barriers; and second, in his claim that discreteness lies
in the very foundations of typological succession.
In considering the typology of Russian drawn-out song and the possibilities
that were opened up to it by the history of the form, we have come to see several
paths of development. One is from within Russian tradition itself, with tradition
potentially inviting its own transformation. Other paths come from without,
offering fundamentally different means toward the fulfillment of the same (not in
the literal, but in the typological sense) artistic idea. We would venture to suggest
that, according to the law of typological succession, within the theoretical
geo-historical sequence of expansively protracted songs—a sequence that disrupts
the Russian material—the very idea of expansive protraction, coming after
(in a historical-typological sense) Russian drawn-out song, has revealed a number
of fundamentally different but artistically commensurate paths toward
self-realization that have taken shape on ethnically various foundations.
If we acknowledge that the culminating form of lyric protraction in oral
tradition always appears in several different configurations—each of which seems,
in a sense, to anticipate the appearance of the culminating form in the moment
when the sequence is disrupted—then it follows, inevitably, that we will only be
able to come to any kind of conclusion about the exceptional musical originality of
Russian drawn-out song if we base our research on a broad range of evidence.
Moreover, we repeat that only an international approach will allow us to determine
the typological place drawn-out song inhabits in world cultural activity (i.e., to
determine what typological parallels there are to the musically highly developed
forms of solo lyric song in men’s tradition3). Thus, it is only on the basis of
comparative analysis that we may with any degree of certainty call Russian drawn-
out song a globally unique example of melodic symphonism (though, to be sure, as
a type of solo “Renaissance lyric,” with that genre’s phenomenon of cantilena-
narration, it does have the most wide-ranging historical parallels, at least in the
Eurasian context).
The Oiwake type might be compared with the masterly Uzbek katta ashula
(lit. ‘big song’), Turkish uzun hava (lit. ‘long melody’), Tatar and Bashkir uzun küi
(lit. ‘long melody’) or even Romanian hora lungă (lit. ‘long song’). As for hora
lungă, the word ‘hora’ does not refer to the well-known dance form ‘hora’.
The hora lungă of the Romanian province of Maramureş derives instead from
‘horea’, the Romanian word meaning “oration.” This etymology is revealing, for
the combination of prolonged singing and expressive “musical speaking”
3 There can be musical accompaniment to these songs, but it is not obligatory. Either way, the
presence or absence of accompaniment has no definitive bearing on the type of melodic protraction.

142 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva
amalgamated into the body of a lyric song is indeed its characteristic feature. The
long-drawn-out melody of these genres has no regular measures and has a rubato
rhythm, i.e., a fluctuation of tempo within a musical phrase. They have elastic
melodic stanzas that, theoretically, can be extended, diminished, and adorned
according to the performer’s will.
We have reason to hypothesize that several different models of composition
may coexist when it comes to such songs, which are solo and lyrical, traditional but
at the same time characterized by their highly developed melodic breadth. Such
models might include, for example, the Balkan (in particular Bulgarian, Serbian,
Macedonian, and Greek), the Georgian, the Italian, the Korean, the Turkish, the
Ukrainian, and certain others.
To illustrate our point, we will limit ourselves to a discussion of examples
from three cultures that contrast typologically with that of the Russian drawn-out
song, but that are also (again typologically) commensurate with it: the Tatar ozyn
küi, the Kazakh än, and the Mongolian urtiin duu. The possibility of direct
borrowing among these four cultures with regards to the formation of their “long”
songs is virtually nonexistent, since the underlying principles of their musical-
poetic composition are too different.4 In all four cultures—the Russian, the Tatar,
the Kazakh, and the Mongolian—we can find lyric drawn-out songs of exceptional
artistic power. Although these songs originated in the specific geographical areas
inhabited by each of these four ethnic groups, they are now known not just to
members of one specific region or class, but to practically everyone in their
respective nations.
Tatar, Kazakh, and Mongolian “drawn-out” songs each feature the particular
kind of lyric protraction the culture has selected. We will call these varieties of
protraction, in short, the ornamental, the syllabic, and the intrasyllabic-melodic.
These varieties of protraction are in some ways concurrent with and in other ways
on a continuum with Russian song, as well as with each other.
4 Tatar song is performed both with or without instrumental accompaniment, while Kazakh and
Mongolian song are usually performed only with instrumental accompaniment. The significance of
this detail should be considered separately, as one of the signs of professionalism in oral tradition.
Though beyond the scope of this article, data from at least two other typologically commensurate
cultures—Ukrainian and Armenian—may provide further evidence. (Ukrainian song, incidentally,
might be called “semi-drawn-out” in terms of its expansive syllabic protractions, but “drawn-out” in
terms of its melodic prolongation.) The paper on which the present text has been based contrasted,
respectively, the Kazakh songs “Iapyr-ai [Oh, wonder!]” and “Naz qongyr [Gentle delight]” (from
Boris Erzakovich’s 1932 transcription of a performance by the distinguished singer Tämta
Ibragimova. See Erzakovich 1955; Erzakovich 1994, quoted here in editing by AK) with the
Ukrainian “Oi za haiem zelenen’kym [Oh, behind the green grove]” and “Oi u poli verba [Oh, willow
in the field],” (transcribed by Gnat Tantsiura from the uncommonly rich repertoire of Iavdokha
Zuïkha, 1855-1935. See Tantsiura 1965). The Tatar “Kara urman” is taken from a performance by
Ilham Shakirov (1935-2019), along with an unpublished musical transcription by Nailia Almeeva.
The Mongolian drawn-out songs are cited from Dorjdagwa 1970: 31, and for Greek songs see: Baud-
Bovy 1935: 39 and Baud-Bovy 1958: 47.

Homo Lyricus... (2) 143
If Russian drawn-out song, which has an inherently diatonic melos, is built, as
a rule, on the principle of horizontal expansion, or the active symphonization of the
original melodic motifs—that is, if it is built on a principle of continuous
“elongation” through certain reference points or “knots,” which comes to a climax
and is followed by a precadential deceleration that leads to an ending—then Tatar
song, as a result of its feeling for a well-defined rhythmic structure, its preservation
of a certain tonal-intonational base of melodic construction, and its loving
cultivation of a seemingly spherical musical form, has opted for the narrowest
ornamental protraction of its syllables. The pentatonic scale used by Tatar ozın köy
is like a vertical crystal column, shimmering melodically as a row of tones
arranged as if conforming to the laws of nature.5
Kazakh song has opted for a broad melodic span as a result of its strict
preservation of a hendecasyllabic poetic structure; for the most part, intrasyllabic
melodics are totally absent. All the richness of “lyricization” is concentrated on the
melodic coming-into-being.6 As a result, Kazakh drawn-out song is characterized
by “a widening of the tonal field.”7 However, the strophic coupling we find as a
rule in the most developed Russian drawn-out songs is also preserved here—
generally, to be sure, in the form of a refrain that is fused with the melostrophe.
Kazakh song, as a whole, is constructed on the basis of melodic lines, though it is
also characterized by an internally rich “cellular” devеlopment of the melody.
We find in Kazakh song a particular type of protraction, not of the syllable, but of
the melostrophe—as much on account of the interpolations that so clearly make the
melodic line asymmetrical as, in a less obvious way, on account of the very
melodic elasticity that exceeds the symmetry of the system. We might say that a
certain kind of melodic symphonism can also be found in Kazakh song, but in the
context of a different compositional system (vis-à-vis Russian drawn-out song),
one based not on melodic motifs, but on melodic lines. Thus, it might be
worthwhile to compare these two varieties of “symphonism”: one based on
melodic motifs (in Russian song), and the other based on melodic lines (in Kazakh
song).
Mongolian song is distinguished by its exceptionally developed double
protraction—both intrasyllabic and melodic. In this, it is analogous to Russian
drawn-out song, with the difference that Mongolian song boasts a vast intonational
span that is not to be found in Russian song.8 Our preliminary analysis suggests
5 We are unwittingly reminded of Khristofor Kushnarev’s observation that the dominant characteristic
of the “music of the East” is “the principle of singing ‘around’ clearly expressed modal supports,
executed, first of all, by means of tones that are correlated with these supports in major and minor
seconds…” (Kushnarev 1958: 42).
6 For more, see Amirova, 1990; Amirova 2021.
7 For more, see Kozhabekov.
8 This, of course, is reflective of the difference between the peasant’s cultivated fields and the
nomad’s steppe expanses. On the whole, it must be admitted that the Mongolian melos remains
insufficiently studied to this day. Cf. Zemtsovsky 1998.

144 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva
that here too a doubled melostrophe has been preserved, though in this case without
the refrains that are so customary in Kazakh song.
There is a reason why we have chosen examples from areas to the east of
Russian territory: in all the material at our disposal, we were unable to find any
corresponding forms from the mid-northern area of Western Europe (i.e., outside of
the Mediterranean Basin). If we may go by the work of Walter Wiora,9 for one
(whose musical-analytical anthology, which compiles all basic melodic types of
European song with reference to the modes of Gregorian chant, is unique in both
content and significance), then we can assume that “drawn-out” forms of “long”
songs analogous to oiwake do not exist in Western Europe. Perhaps further
research into more specialized publications will give us the opportunity to
investigate ever more specific traces of the form in question—for example, in the
context of German song culture.10
Taken as a whole, it seems to us that the lyric drawn-out song of Eurasia exists
in two basic geographical zones marked by the enormous territorial spread of various
cultures within them. The first zone is the southern European, which encompasses
the Mediterranean Basin as well as the Adriatic and Balkan regions adjacent to it.
The second zone, which includes the areas of Central Asia and the South Siberian
steppe, may be called the Altaian-Kazakh-Buryat-Tuvan-Mongolian. As we see it,
each of these zones falls into one of two subcategories when it comes to singing type:
the cantilena (or, if you like, bel canto) type, and the ornamental-melismatic type.
Both subtypes can be traced back to the earliest musical styles of their respective
regions.11 However, as we have already stressed, an investigation of the origins and
history of these phenomena is beyond the scope of this text.12
There are two ethnic types specific to the zones of Eurasian drawn-out song that
occupy a unique and perhaps preeminent position within these zones. One is
associated with central and southern Russia and eastern Ukraine, and the other is
associated with the Saryarqa region of central Kazakhstan. Located at the very heart
of Eurasia, these cultures cannot be classified as either Western European or East
Asian. Neither Europe nor Asia is to be found in them, but instead a unique kind of
musical Eurasia. To use Asafyev’s terminology, we might sum up this uniqueness by
9 Wiora 1952.
10 See, for example, the famous Lochamer Liederbuch [Lochamer Songbook] from Nuremberg
(c.1450), in particular No. 37 (“Mein Herz in Freuden sich erquicket [My Heart Quickens for Joy]”).
Mikhail Saponov has pointed out, however, that there is evidence that the songs included in this
collection have been reworked by minstrels (“evidently the songs of wandering minstrels”—see
Saponov 1996: 184). See also the latest publication of the Liederbuch, with scholarly commentary:
Lewon, 2007-2009. Cf. also the work of Lydia Kershner: Kershner 1959; Kershner 1965.
11 For example, according to Buryat researcher Dashinima Dugarov, the traditional drawn-out songs
of the steppe peoples of Central Asia can be traced back to the drawn-out songs of their ethnic
ancestors, the Xianbei (1st century BCE – 3rd century CE). See Dugarov 1991: 241.
12 We may add that in contrast to scholarship, life concerns itself with results, not sources. What is
reinterpreted or revised is less important than the fact that only that which is reinterpreted or revised
can be considered living.

Homo Lyricus... (2) 145
saying that it lies in the symphonism of this region’s sung melos. This kind of
melodic symphonism is not found in the oral traditions of Europe or Asia.
Kazakh lyric songs (specifically those of Saryarqa) have their own special place
in this schema: their musical “niche” in the Eurasian context is in many respects
puzzling, or at least not fully explained. Although they are, in a sense, steppe
analogues to European lyric song,13 the output of Kazakh oral-professional singers is
nevertheless closer to the output of Greek Byzantium and Old Rus’ than it is to that
of Western Europe. With these Kazakh and Greek analogues, we are not far from
another, well-known Eurasian connection, that between Russian and Kipchak
contexts.14 As a result, the phenomenon of Kazakh lyric song may serve almost as
the centerpiece to our argument for the international typological affinities inherent in
the more general phenomenon of Eurasian oral-professional, melodically highly
developed lyric song culture. As we hope to show, this phenomenon unites within
itself, on the one hand, Ukrainian, southern Russian, and Don Cossack steppe lyric
song; and on the other, the steppe lyric song of Eurasian (Mongolian and Turkic)
nomads. At the same time, this phenomenon is a “link” in the Eurasian “chain,” like
the more apparent Kazakh-Bashkir link, or the less apparent Kazakh-Armenian
link.15 We have not ruled out the possibility that Kazakh lyric song, which at first
glance appears to be a late phenomenon, might actually be one of the clearest echoes
we have of the ancient Dasht-i-Kipchak steppe culture.16
Considered as a whole, the regional map of Eurasian drawn-out song, “zoned”
on the basis of musical morphology, remains a highly controversial issue. We can
improve the accuracy of this map only with years of specialist work on the
traditional cultures of the Eurasian continent.
5. ON THE PROBLEM OF AUTHORSHIP IN EURASIAN DRAWN-OUT SONG
In examining the international phenomenon of “drawn-out” “long” song, we have
considered multiple perspectives but have focused chiefly on two: the musical-formal-
creative perspective (covered, for example, in our discussion of melodic symphonism),
and what we might call the institutional perspective. The latter is, of course, linked to
13 Upon his acquaintance with Aleksandr Zataevich’s unique collection of Kazakh melodies, Romain
Rolland immediately remarked: “[T]hese melodies did not seem to me at all foreign, remote…
clearly, they are kindred to that European musical flora which at some point was superseded and
drowned out by the metered music of the educated classes.” See Zataevich 1931: iv. (Cf. the reprinted
edition: 2003: 32.) For more, see Erzakovich 1955: 127. For the text of Rolland’s letter to Zataevich,
see Zataevich 1958: 273 (correspondence between Zataevich and Rolland, translated from the French,
with commentary, by Varvara Dernova).
14 Cf. Zemtsovsky 1989; Zemtsovsky 1990.
15 Unfortunately, none of these “links” has been studied sufficiently by ethnomusicologists.
One exception is a structural similarity between Russian and Kazakh drawn-out songs noticed by
Varvara Dernova (in an unpublished review of IZ’s 1964 doctoral dissertation on Russian drawn-out
song). The extent to which Armenian song culture is related to this phenomenon is a subject that
requires more research. We will note, however, the existence of the Armeno-Kipchak language.
16 For more on Dasht-i-Kipchak, see Kliashtornyi 2000.

146 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva
the broader issue of professionalism (or, if you will, semi-professionalism) in the music
of oral tradition, and by extension to the role the authorial principle plays therein.
Is Homo Lyricus simply a performer, a singer, a musician who uses his or her
craftsmanship to fine-tune a song; or does he or she play a direct role in the process of
creating a song, in the manner of a poet and/or composer?
A notable feature of the professional lyric singers of Kazakhstan is their
conscious attitude toward authorial rights and the preservation of them, which is
accomplished in several ways: by cementing or “fixing” the titles of songs that are
becoming widely known; by referring to a song’s authorship straightaway in its
first sung verse; and by relating canonical legends about the song’s creation,
generally before the performance of the song itself, which facilitates the natural
evolution of these legends into memorates, or story-reminiscences about the author.
According to Dina Amirova,17 there are three basic types that belong to the
Kazakh “institution” of lyric singers: in the Kazakh language, they are called sal,
seri, and änshi. The great contribution of each of these three types to the
development of Kazakh lyric song is indisputable.18 We do not, however, think that
all three types should be understood as absolute equals within a single social-
artistic category. In fact, the etymology of each term—which is of the utmost
significance to our understanding of lyric singers as a phenomenon—confirms our
view on the matter. Än simply means “song,” and seri is literally “singer, musician,
artist, dandy, beau (read: handsome man), cavalier.” Sal, on the other hand, has
quite a different sense. At base, it means simply “poet, composer, singer, man of
art.” But this root term also carries a number of other connotations that must be
taken into account if we are to get the full picture of what is understood by the term
sal. Etymologically, sal is linked to the hunting tradition of battue, an event that is
beautiful in its sporting elements and festive to the point of theatricality. Thus the
terms salburyn (a collective, multi-day hunt far from the aul, or village, generally
with the help of a berkut, or golden eagle) and änsalu (lit. “to drive a song” or “to
play a song,” whence the metaphor “a long hunt” for “pursuit of the melody”).
There is yet another meaning of sal, and this will not be found in the dictionary: it
17 Amirova 1990: 7; Amirova 2021.
18 The songs of the most famous singers of Saryarqa, as well as factual information about them, have
been preserved up to the present day. These singers include Aqan Seri Qoramsauly (1843-1913),
Birzhan-sal Qozhaghululy (1834-1897), Zhaiau Musa Baizhanuly (1835-1929), Ükili Ybyrai
Sandybaiuly (1860-1932), Mukhit Meräliuly (1841-1918), Mädi Bäpiuly (1880-1921), Äset
Naimanbaiuly (1867-1922), and Estai Berkimbaiuly (1874-1946). The phenomenal Ämire
Qashaubaiuly (1888-1934) became widely known outside of Kazakhstan as well: he took part in two
International Exhibitions of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts (Paris, 1925; Frankfurt-am-Main,
1927) with success. Twentieth-century successors of the great singer-poet-composers of the past—
including Manabek Urzhanov (1901-1966), Zhüsipbek Elebekov (1904-1977), and the prematurely
deceased Zhänibek Kärmenov (1949-1992), whom we both had the good fortune to hear on several
occasions—have been instrumental in the preservation of the treasury of Kazakh sung lyric as well as
its inclusion in the nation’s modern musical-poetic oral “thesaurus.”

Homo Lyricus... (2) 147
refers to coitus. This shade of meaning brings to mind such terms as Slavic sal’nyi
(“obscene, bawdy, dirty”), which comes from Russian salo, and French sale (dirty).
In reference to singers, who are distinguished by their exceptional sexual energy,
these connotations are not accidental. Edyge Tursunov (1942-2016) has further
traced the term to the Turkic root sal, one of the meanings of which is “to forget
about everything in one’s enthusiasm for something.”19
To the group that includes the pan-Kazakh sal-seri, we may add the qaiqy
from Mangystau in western Kazakhstan. The qaiqy is a regional equivalent of sal-
seri, though the most outstanding exemplars of professional lyric singing among
the Kazakhs come from Saryarqa (lit. “Golden Steppe”) in central Kazakhstan.
Be that as it may, the etymology of the word qaiqy (lit. “stubbornly turned up,”
“capriciously whimsical”) is no less telling. Compare, for example, the
connotations of certain words from a closely related Kazakh semantic field, words
such as qaiqaq (figuratively, “snobbish, haughty aristocrat”), qazhqang (“self-
satisfied, having a high opinion of oneself”), or qaikitu (“to get full of oneself, to
put on airs”). We know of seven composer-poet-performers who lived in
Mangystau at the end of the nineteenth century: Tastemir, Öskenbai, Tursyn,
Zhylgeldi, Dosat, Sholtaman, and Ädil. Among the people, they are called Zheti
qaiqy, or “the Seven Qaiqy.”20
It is astonishing what typological parallels there are to the amorous Kazakh
sal/seri/qaiqy (to say nothing of their oral-professional lyric songs) in the world of
Western European courtly poetry. We are reminded, at least, of the following
argument: “Except feats of arms and love, nothing can occur in the courtly world—
and even those two are of a special sort: they are not occurrences or emotions which
can be absent for a time; they are permanently connected with the person of the
perfect knight, they are part of his definition, so that he cannot for one moment be
without adventure in arms nor for one moment without amorous entanglement. If he
could, he would lose himself and no longer be a knight.”21 It is tempting to reread
this entire passage, only with the Kazakh sal-seri in place of the European knight!
We have not, however, exhausted all of the semantic overtones that can be
found in the names given to Kazakh lyric singers. In particular, no one has yet
noticed a further possible etymology of the Kazakh word sal, from Greek σαλός
[salós].22 Given the fact that many diverse ancient Greek and Kazakh typological
19 Tursunov 1999: 195.
20 For more on the qaiqy of Mangystau, see Tilegenov 2000.
21 Auerbach 2003: 140.
22 In particular, it is well known that in the context of early Egyptian and Syro-Palestinian monasticism,
there was a transformation of the concept of saloj, which signified weakness of the mind and mental
pathologies, into the religious term salós (σαλός), which refers to hermit monks and a particular type of
saintliness (“salós” literally means “stupid,” “insane,” “blessed”). In Byzantium the term salós, with this
latter meaning of saintliness, became fixed at the beginning of the fifth century. The Blessed Nicholas of
Pskov (a “fool for Christ”) is a particularly famous example. In 1570, he managed to strike fear into Ivan
the Terrible himself, who had been on his way to crush Pskov. For more, see Ivanov 2006.

148 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva
parallels have already been discussed in the field of folkloristics,23 it could be of
some use to consider such an unexpected etymology. At the very least, this
etymological linkage helps to emphasize the fact that it is an obligatory feature of
the folk author-performers in question that their behavior will contrast sharply with
that of other strata in their respective societies.
Our attention has also been drawn to another key word, this one from Latin:
Sălii, meaning “dancers,” “leapers.” According to the dictionary definition, the
Sălii were two ancient priestly collegia, each made up of twelve patricians,
dedicated to Mars, who were the guardians of sacred shields. They performed war
dances and sacred songs.24 Interestingly, these Sălii were associated with the verb
sălĭo, which means not only “to jump” or “to leap,” but also “to mount” or “to
cover” (in reference to the copulation of animals).
There is more. We know that sal and seri not only coexisted, but also actively
engaged with each other, and they did so within the very same traveling artistic
“communes,” as we would call them today. In fact, in traditional Kazakh society,
“groups of itinerant singers and bards (aqyns) also existed. Along with musicians,
these groups traditionally included a humorist-wit, a smith-jeweler and a
strongman-wrestler. In the make-up of such ‘brigades,’ it was as though the
implied poetic metaphors had been personified—the ‘forging’ of a word, a
triumphant word, a muscular word, and a striking or well-aimed word. The image
and its embodiment traveled together, the word being sharpened simultaneously as
an idea and as a visible action.”25
Typologically analogous “brigades” can be found in the most various traditions,
from that of the European minstrel26 to that of the Mongolian nomad. Nogala Bjerke
has given us one example in the figure of the poet and singer Dulduityn
Danzanravjaa (1803-1856). Danzanravjaa was behind the building of the first
Mongolian museum as well as the first Mongolian theater, for which he himself
produced the scripts, the music, and the sets; he also organized a large acting troupe
for the theater and took on the role of theatrical director for it. Beginning in 1827, he
set out to travel almost the entire length and breadth of Mongolia, taking part in
festivals, listening to folk songs, and creating and performing songs himself.
And here is something interesting. In his travels, he was invariably accompanied by a
group of talented girls who made up a peculiar ensemble: they were adept at singing,
dancing, drawing, and composing and writing down poems, in both Tibetan and
Mongolian. Their leader was a girl named Dadishura, at whose request Danzanravjaa
composed a number of lovely verses.27 It comes as no surprise that there were
religious figures who persecuted Danzanravjaa, calling him “rabid,” a “drunkard,” an
23 See, for example, Kunanbaeva 2019.
24 Sobolevskii 1949: 770.
25 Kunanbay 2001: 191.
26 For more, see Mikhail Saponov’s brilliant monograph: Saponov 1996: 100-105.
27 B’erke 2006: 80, 21

Homo Lyricus... (2) 149
“idiot in the guise of a monk.”28 The poet, for his part, made use of these derogatory
nicknames, signed his poems with them, and defiantly said: “if one is able to
comprehend the essence of the secret writings, then supernatural possibilities are
attainable: one can make medicine out of poison, and rashan [holy water with
healing properties] out of vodka.”29
Oyuuntsetseg Dörvöljingiin30 has argued that it was during the era of the
“Mongolian Renaissance” (from the middle of the sixteenth century to the latter
half of the seventeenth), that the authorial principle began to play a prominent role
in Mongolian drawn-out “long” song, or urtiin duu. The Mongolian people know
the names of the poets and singers who created these great monuments of vocal art;
these names have been imprinted in their cultural memory. But of all these poets
and singers, the one most read in Mongolia is indeed Dulduityn Danzanravjaa.
According to Dörvöljingiin, he is responsible for dozens of the best Khalkha urtiin
duu poetic texts, as well as, possibly, the music for them. A great number of these
masterpieces are beloved throughout Mongolia to this day. There is a modern
tradition of recognizing the authorship of other urtiin duu as well. According to one
legend, for example, the expansively protracted song known as “The Four
Seasons,” still popular as a kind of hymn to blossoming nature, was composed by a
great but as yet unknown singer-soloist for the first pan-Mongolian Naadam
festival in 1689.31
It does not follow, of course, that the phenomenon of “fools,” oddballs, and
eccentrics who lead their lives in the world of art, at a great remove from the
“normal” routine of everyday life (types ingeniously embodied by the Mongolian
Danzanravjaa and the Kazakh Birzhan-sal), can be found only among the nomads
of Central Asia; such characters are also highly popular among the sedentary
Uzbeks, for example. American ethnomusicologist Theodore Levin has made such
figures the subject of his vivid, beautifully written book One Hundred Fools of
God.32 There, he discusses some of the very best of these traditional musicians,
those who seem to live entirely, deliriously in the world art, like “madmen.” These
musicians have been given the Arabic name abdāl, which in the Central Asian
context means “friend of God” or “fool of God,” but also “dervish” or “ascetic.”
In all cases, this is a person who does not belong entirely to “this world.” It is these
28 In connection with this nickname, it is difficult not to think of the old Russian “fools for Christ.”
Some of Danzanravjaa’s other nicknames, however, bring to mind something closer to Western
European minstrels, who at times bore pejorative or derogatory names such as “Roach Face,” “Frog
Mouth,” “Goat Tail,” or even “Charlatan,” “Scoundrel,” “Windbag,” and so on. Mikhail Saponov has
called these wandering musicians, poets, healers, hunters, and jongleurs of the Middle Ages
“outcasts” (Saponov 1996: 95, 35).
29 B’erke 2006: 21.
30 Dörvöljingiin 1990, chapter 2.
31 Smirnov 1975: 81, n.16. (On pages 15-16, Smirnov presents another legend concerning the origin
of this song in the obo festival.)
32 Levin 1996.

150 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva
figures, these “holy fools,” whose voices are able to reach God and humans
equally. The person who lives in the name of art is “odd” to those who lead
“normal” lives; but he or she, in showing others the truest path to God, is a societal
necessity. It is not by chance that in their ecstatic songs about divine love, Central
Asian Sufis have drawn from the art of these musical “oddballs,” with that art’s
amatory-lyric figurations. In such a context, the nicknames “fool” and “oddball”
can be understood in an almost sacred sense.
The figure of the musician or lyric singer as “madman” can be found in other
traditions as well. From a typological perspective, it is an international phenomenon.
When his or her “normal” contemporaries referred to a great musician-poet-artist-
minstrel as a “fool” or an “idiot,”33 the function of the personal insult was by no
means simply to put the artist down. On the contrary, such terms may be said to have
exalted the artist in his or her identity as someone of high typological status. We are
speaking here of a layer of culture of very great significance, the oral nature of which
should not deter us from registering the issue of authorship that is partly obscured by
it. Mikhail Saponov has hypothesized convincingly that orality acts here as “a marker
of special musical professionalism, as well as a marker of the special status of the
folk artistic cultural practice most naturally called minstrelsy.”34
We have not ruled out the possibility that “minstrelness” as a general umbrella
term might pertain typologically to Europe and Central Asia in equal measure.
The flamboyant, handsome Kazakh sal-seri, the Mongolian “idiot in the guise of a
monk,” and the Uzbek “fool of God” are, if not directly related to, then related at
one remove from the various types of Western European minstrel. Indeed, what the
Old French word “jongleur” designated was as international a phenomenon as the
concrete figure of the jongleur himself35—only today we may say with certainty
that the phenomenon was international not only in the European context.
The evidence collected by Alan P. Merriam (1923-1980) in his book
The Anthropology of Music provides some foundation for cautious speculation about
the existence of even broader typological parallels to the Kazakh sal-seri.36 These
parallels come from beyond the borders of Europe, from areas encompassing not
only Africa, but also various Pacific Islands (for example, the Trobriand Islands).
At least three observations from different scholars come to mind. As George Thomas
Basden (1873-1944) has maintained, “talent is recognized, and many artists become
very popular. [...] The leader of a chorus is accorded much the same honour amongst
the Ibos as that granted to the minstrel in ancient days in England.”37 Philip Comi
33 Might Dostoevsky’s titular Idiot belong in some way to this historical line?
34 Saponov 1996: 15 (Saponov’s emphasis).
35 Ibid, 34. Saponov recognizes how extensive the free circulation has been of terms designating such
syncretic artists (Ibid, 35 et passim).
36 Merriam 1965: 134 et passim. Cf. also the striking parallels to the Kazakh sal-seri Tursunov has
noticed in reference to members of Polynesian ritual secret societies called the “Arioi” (Tursunov
1999: 181 et passim).
37 Basden 1921: 190.

Homo Lyricus... (2) 151
Gbeho (1904-1976), speaking of the general Ghanaian context, says that there
“musicians are treated with reverence, and they have a tremendous influence over the
rest.”38 Merriam has proposed one model of the professional musician in traditional
culture that is characterized by its combination of high importance but relatively low
social status.39 The musician in this model is also characterized by behavior that
deviates from existing norms, and by the advantages or benefits derived from that
behavior.40 Merriam writes: “the musician may be assigned a special status in
society, which allows him certain privileges not given to others because of his
importance to society at large. We can approach this hypothesis through
Malinowski’s report on the behavior, and its consequences, of a Trobriands singer:
‘Mokadayu, of Okopukopu, was a famous singer. Like all of his profession he was
no less renowned for his success with the ladies. “For,” say the natives, “the throat is
a long passage like the wilu (vulva), and the two attract each other.” “A man who has
a beautiful voice will like women very much and they will like him.” Many stories
are told of how he slept with all the wives of the chief in Olivilevi, how he seduced
this and that married woman…’”41
It is difficult not to agree with Merriam’s final conclusion: “This pattern of
low status and high importance, deviant behavior and the capitalization of it,
cannot be said to characterize the musician in all societies, but it seems to be a
basic organization for a number of groups in a rather remarkable world
distribution. While it is to be expected that other patterns will emerge, this one is
clearly of considerable importance. It is to be hoped that further research will
disclose its actual geographic extent, as well as its social significance.”42
None of what has been said here about the lyric songs of the minstrel and
Central Asian (and especially the African) traditions would seem to apply, for
example, to the Russian lyric “Remember, remember, my dear, our former love,”
which has become one of the classic drawn-out songs.43 We must, then, ask a
38 Gbeho 1952: 31.
39 “Life in a village without musicians is not to be considered, and people spoke of leaving the village
where no musicians present. […] The fact of the matter is that without musicians a village is
incomplete; people want to sing and dance, and a number of important village activities simply cannot
be carried out without musicians. The villagers are unanimous in stating that musicians are extremely
important people; without them, life would be intolerable” (Merriam 1965: 136).
40 “… this pattern of low status and high importance, coupled with deviant behavior allowed by the
society and capitalized upon by the musician, may be fairly widespread…” (Ibid, 137). Cf. also the
well-known West African griots, gifted bards and musicians who wandered from village to village,
amusing the inhabitants with songs and tales. The griots were also allowed to behave in ways that
were not permissible for others in their society. In modern times, a notion of “griotism” has come to
characterize an entire stratum of the contemporary cultures of West Africa, including an oral tradition
of maintaining and passing along important familial and local histories through poetry and music.
41 Malinowski 1925: 203.
42 Merriam 1965: 140.
43 For an analysis of these songs, see Zemtsovsky 1967: 105-109, 165; and Zemtsovsky 1990a, where
musical treatments of this poetic text in various styles— “drawn-out,” round dance, and petty-bourgeois
romance—are compared. See also: Vasil’eva 1994. The song is cited here after Lopatin 1956, № 37.

152 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva
heretical question: is it possible that this song—at least in the remarkably elegant,
indeed perfect variant collected by Nikolai Lopatin and Vasily Prokunin in 1889—is
not a peasant creation at all? Lopatin, when transcribing it in its most classical
(in terms of form) “drawn-out” variant, noted that “this is by nature a one-man,
solo song.”44 He considered it necessary, moreover, to state that he had transcribed
it not from a folk—that is, peasant—performance, but from a performance by Ivan
Lavrov, a distinguished artist of the dramatic theater, who had heard the song in the
Yaroslavl Governorate roughly a quarter of century before Prokunin would fix it in
notation.45 However excellent Lavrov’s musical hearing may have been, we cannot
rule out the possibility that the theater actor had adjusted the song to make it
conform to his own artistic taste and had, over time, refined it to the level of
classical beauty we still find so astonishing today.46 In any case, the song’s deep
connection with peasant creativity and its separation from it are both in evidence
here—to say nothing of the role played in its ultimate development by the talent of
a performer-professional “from the outside” (as a rule, from among the
intelligentsia). In short, the presence of this notated form (and perhaps even of the
entire type of analogous men’s solo songs in question here, taken as a whole) in the
corpus of Russian peasant folklore (specifically) is to a certain degree problematic.
It seems we have reason to speak not only of adaptations of folkloric material
by the written tradition (for example, by poets or composers), but also of
44 Lopatin 1956: 144. The collectors did not transcribe this variant “from the voices [performances] of
the people directly” (ibid, 41). Rather, this delightful melody “was transcribed by Prokunin from Ivan
Ivanovich Lavrov (1827-1902), an artist of the Moscow Imperial Theatres, as well as a connoisseur
and performer of folksongs, which he compiled in great numbers over the course of his travels
throughout Russia [...] during the 1840s and the early 1850s” (ibid., 41-42). Lavrov learned the song
from burlaks in Rybinsk but never performed it publicly, which was, in Lopatin’s view, his way of
ensuring that he would never distort the song by adapting it for concert performance. (See also the
way Lopatin and Prukunin have described the qualities of Lavrov’s singing: “possessing in his youth
a powerful tenor, he was able to master that broad manner of singing characteristic of the best folk
voices, which has already [in the 1880s—IZ, AK] become a rarity; expressly searching out the best
singers of the Volga region, he transcribed the song texts he heard and at the same time committed to
memory the best Volga melodies” [ibid, 42].) According to Lopatin, Nos. 22, 33, 37, 42, 45, and 75
were transcribed from Lavrov, while Nos. 34 (“Skazhite, mysli, pro moe neschast’e [Tell me, my
thoughts, of my misfortune]”), 35 (“Eko serdtse, eko bednoe moe [O my heart, my poor heart]”), and
62 (“Nochi moi temnye [My dark nights]”) were transcribed from Nikolai Pavlovich Glebov, another
amateur “from the outside,” who learned these songs in childhood (!) in his father’s house.
45 The same is true of another masterwork from Lopatin and Prokunin’s collection, the drawn-out song
“Ne odna vo pole dorozhen’ka prolegala [Not one little path ran through the field]” (No. 22). Cf. also
“Ne shumi, mati zelenaia dubrovushka [Don’t rustle, mother green oak]” (No. 58). The latter song was
reprinted (No. 28, “Dubrovushka [Oak]”) in Zemtsovsky 1966; “Remember, remember, my dear”
appears there as No. 45. Lopatin’s variant of No. 22 has not been reprinted; see the 1966 anthology for
two peasant variants: Lineva 1909: Nos. 7 and 5 (in the 1966 anthology, these are Nos. 49-50).
46 That “Remember, remember, my dear” from Lopatin and Prokunin’s collection is a unique masterwork
rather than the customary peasant variant is corroborated by the hardly incidental fact that a musician of
such depth as Boleslav Yavorsky (1877-1942) considered it possible to prepare, with singers, this notated
version of the song for performance alongside classical romances (Iavorskii 1964: 353).

Homo Lyricus... (2) 153
adaptations of a sort by the folkloric or circumfolkloric oral milieux themselves.
The latter is precisely the situation we find with the song “Remember, remember,
my dear.” The word “adaptation” here refers, of course, not to the process of
harmonization, but to a master’s work of bringing the melody to perfect
completion, of fashioning an ideal artifact. In other words, what we are seeing here
once again is a departure from the framework of folklore as such.
The case of the Georgian polyphonic masterpiece “Tsintskaro”47 is analogous
to that of the Russian solo song “Remember, remember, my dear.” In this instance,
a superior variant was performed by the professional Kakhetian folk singer Vano
Mchedlishvili (1903-1970); then it was transcribed; and finally it was refined by
another great professional singer, Hamlet Gonashvili (1928-1985), who was also
Kakhetian but effectively became “the voice of Georgia.”48 His performance of
“Tsintskaro” has attained truly international fame. To this day, Georgian
musicologists are still arguing over whether Mchedlishvili composed the song or
merely adapted it. From our point of view, the existence of folkloric parallels,
which our Georgian colleagues have so expertly identified, does not at all negate
the fact that there has been authorial intervention, as was the case with the Russian
“Remember, remember, my dear.” Moreover, the fact that the music is polyphonic
implies that there has been what we might call a polyphonic redaction of the song
by an individual artist, which would be quite natural given the fact that Georgian
music is, of course, predominantly polyphonic.
What we see indicated in these characteristic examples is a particular
phenomenon that we will provisionally call “hidden authorship.” In examining this
phenomenon, we are also by necessity drawing attention to the question of the
authorial principle within the framework of collective tradition. The conventional
division of folklore along the lines of social class does not in all cases adequately
capture the reality of oral tradition, in particular of the “folkloric culture” Putilov
has written about. Vladimir Shishmarev’s thesis seems apropos here: “The theory
of a new love […] is not a class moment, but a cultural moment in the development
of medieval lyric song.”49 We are in agreement with Shishmarev, who regarded
47 For a standard example, see Mills 2004: 48 [No. 42].
48 Cf. two comments from distinguished Georgian musicians: “It seems to me that Hamlet Gonashvili
was not a singer who preserved traditional singing or revitalized it, as so many other famous
performers have done. Hamlet Gonashvili created traditional singing in its new, natural hypostasis”
(Jansug Kakhidze, composer and conductor); “He was the kind of person born once every hundred
years. He had in his voice that which is absolutely impossible to learn in any academy. His voice had
in it the centuries-old sufferings of the Georgian people, and in his songs you can feel the Georgian
people’s sorrow and grief; I have not heard this in the voices of other singers and probably never will
hear it again” (Paata Burchuladze, opera singer). See Vladimir Sarishvili, “On pel o bessmertii,
rytsarstve, schast’e Gruzii [He Sang about Immortality, Chivalry, the Happiness of Georgia],”
http://www. nukri.org/index.php?name=News&file=article&sid=805, retrieved 25 July 2008. We
would like to thank Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania, Tamaz Gabisonia, Nino Kalandadze and
Otar Kapanadze for their invaluable discussions with us on Georgian song.
49 Shishmarev 1911: 334.

154 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva
lyric song as a universal generic form, common to all people.50 We are absolutely
convinced that when speaking of highly developed lyric songs, one must proceed
not from social class, but from personality, the personality that has found the
freedom of self-expression; one must refer to the “artistic elite” of any given social
stratum. To be sure, “hidden authorship” is not the same as Mikhail Steblin-
Kamensky’s (1903-1981) well-known opposition between “conscious” and
“unconscious” authorship. It does not refer to something that “belongs” to an
(individual) author; in the main, it refers to something that “belongs” to the
collective. What this means is that issues related to the opposition between
“folklore” and “composer” are not yet relevant here: the creative principle exists
within the framework and foundations of tradition, but the created work itself takes
its place among the outstanding contributions of phenomenally gifted individuals:
performer-creators whose personal stamp, as plainly discernible as it may be,
nevertheless may still be taken up by tradition and infused back into it.
“Hidden authorship” need not extend to the issue of song creation as a whole,
considered as a unity of melody and poetic text. We can, of course, find in tradition
author-pioneers, whose contributions to creative art are made before a song is
“picked up” by the people and achieves popularity among them, as well as author-
completers, whose work completes the process of creation at a certain point in the
lifespan of a beloved song. The latter create a certain standard of performance, any
alteration of which is perceived not as a reinvigorating variation, but as the
disfigurement of something exemplary.
In music, just as in the applied arts, tradition thrives in the space between the
collective and the individual. Hence Aleksandr Veselovsky’s insightful proposition
about “the collective self-determination of the individual.”51 It makes sense, then,
to speak not only of folk craftsmen, but also of folk poets and folk composers—of,
as Boris Asafyev has put it, the beautiful, meticulous work of generations of skilled
craftsmen whose identities are unknown to us, “craftsmen of initial solos [zapev]
and craftsmen of undervoicing [podgolosok], of the techniques of protraction and
ornamentation.”52
Throughout this section, we have thus highlighted those rare but noteworthy
instances when there is evidence of the authorial principle, which in one way or
another affects the fate of individual lyric songs in various ethnic traditions.
One cannot help but come to the conclusion that all hypotheses regarding the
highly developed sung lyric hinge on the role and significance of the peasantry in
relation to it, as well as on the potential capacity of the “folkloric culture” of a
given ethnos to transcend creatively the boundaries of that ethnos—i.e., by the
50 Ibid, 559. On the same page: “From a historical perspective it is much more important to
understand [this form] as proceeding from itself…” This echoes our root idea considering the causa
sui of lyric song (see note 9).
51 Veselovskii 1940: 271.
52 Asaf’ev 1954a: 221.

Homo Lyricus... (2) 155
creation within folkloric culture of a special institution of lyric singers. In places
where tradition has been ripe for and has accommodated the “institutionalizing”
of Homines Lyrici, we find a socially determined category of creator-performers
who create and perform unique masterpieces of the sung genre. In places where
this has not happened, where the institution of lyric singers has not appeared,
where for one reason of another the development of lyric song forms in the
peasant (or, more broadly, the folkloric) tradition itself has ceased, this type of
melos either is canonized, as in the case of oiwake; or it falls silent for a time,
awaiting the appearance of a second Ilham Shakirov, as in the case of Tatar ozın
köy; or the tradition of solo drawn-out singing in general is broken and, under
such unfavorable conditions, gradually dies out, to be renewed in some fresh
capacity—as, for example, it was in the works of Classical and Romantic
composers who picked up the tradition and developed it to a remarkable new
degree. Similarly, in the Russian tradition, for example, where no special social-
artistic institution of lyric singers has taken shape, the greatest examples of
“drawn-out” melodics are to be found in the works of composers of genius,
works that are rooted in a lyric, inherently monodic melos. The compositions of
Sergei Rachmaninov, for one, unexpectedly reveal their profoundly “oral” nature
despite the fact that they are situated within the framework of what is
conventionally called the “written” tradition.53
6. SOME CONCLUDING THESES ON FREEDOM AS THE ESSENCE
OF LYRIC SONG
We would like, finally, to offer a few theses on the essence of sung lyric, in
particular one aspect that has not yet been emphasized sufficiently.
If it is true that the great masses of the peasantry have not been involved in
shifts of artistic style and direction (as represented, for example, by the
Renaissance and Baroque periods, Neoclassicism, or the Enlightenment) and
have instead gone on with their own traditional lives in a practically medieval
mode that has remained almost unchanged for centuries, then the peasants,
according to one hypothesis, would not themselves have been able to create the
solo-performed, melodically highly developed lyric song that interests us
here.54 For that requires a particular type of highly gifted individual, and a
53 On the subject of Rachmaninov’s performance style as a composer-pianist of “oral art,” see Asaf’ev
1954: 297.
54 Nikolai Lopatin was also certain that “in the heyday of folk creativity, folksong was not created
exclusively by the common people” (Lopatin 1956: 66). Cf.: “In the fourteenth century, in France and
Germany, the long-forgotten folk song was heard once again; it was written down, it was imitated. [...] Its
immediate bearers may have been roving singers, but the civilized bourgeoisie may also have played its
own role: its members had adopted the conventions of courtoisie and were familiar with the lyric songs of
that tradition, but they were also in close proximity to the peasantry and its songs; both strains may have
come together in the daily usage of the bourgeois family” (Veselovskii 1940: 288). Cf. also Morris 2004.

156 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva
particular type of individual freedom. This kind of individual cannot function
creatively within the strict context of folklore, where, as Putilov has shown,
even the human being is subject to what might be called “technical necessity.”
On the contrary, when it comes to solo lyric song of this type, the crux of the
matter is concentrated specifically in the individual personality of the
“performer,” or performer-creator, Homo Lyricus. In the words of Leonid
Batkin, “over the span of time from the fifteenth century to the eighteenth […]
the principle of traditionalism […] gave way to the principle of the
individual”—even if this individuality “was more experienced, intoned, than
cognized” (emphasis ours).55
Lyric song is not only a what, but also a how, and this how is enclosed within
a particular kind of energy, the energy of free self-affirmation, the free—to
highlight this once again—self-realization of the individual. This creative energy
finds its expression above all in the lyric melos, as well as in the nature of lyric
performance. Thus, we will insist that the essence of lyric song lies in its
freedom—freedom in several different senses. We do not presume to have any
definitive answers to a question as complex and contradictory as that presented by
the issue of freedom; we will merely delineate seven aspects of it that we believe
have the most direct connection to lyric song.
1. The striving toward personal freedom (including freedom from an
oppressive collective), in poetry as much as in life: Oh, if only I had some little
grey wings, some little gold feathers, I’d fly up and around, I’d land wherever
I’d like. This, incidentally, is why all Russian songs about dreams and desires
[volia-voliushka] are so singularly beautiful and profound, so poignant and deeply
felt. These songs are saturated with the poetry of the subjunctive mood; they are
about freedom pitted against the unfreedom that comes from social, familial, and
other kinds of bondage.56 To this we must add the social-artistic “freedom of
behavior” enjoyed by lyric singers, who are permitted much in their everyday lives
that is forbidden to others.
2. The freedom of open space (as found in songs predominantly of the plains
and steppes, rather than of the forest). According to Asafyev, they “astound us with
the expanse of space they encompass: it seems to us that the musical motif is
infinite, the breath of the singer inexhaustible, the fullness of the sound
immeasurable.”57 (Here also, presumably, is an origin of the broad intervallic leaps
55 Batkin 1989: 219, 133.
56 Why indeed has no anthology of Russian songs about freedom been compiled, to this day? It would
truly be a collection of masterpieces.
57 Asaf’ev 1987: 156 (Asafyev’s emphasis). Asafyev is referring here to the songs of the “Eastern
steppes”—though it is quite possible that he also had Kazakh lyric song in mind. Cf. the Udmurt word
kyrzan—“song”—which means, and may perhaps be translated as, “free soul,” or “soul of the
steppe.” (See Zemtsovsky 2007: 31, n. 38.) Apropos, Evgenya Lineva has recorded a strikingly
profound folk saying: “the soul can’t reach far enough to sing a song [i.e., a lyric drawn-out song] to
the end” (Lineva 1909: xxviii).

Homo Lyricus... (2) 157
characteristic of drawn-out song.) We are reminded of Turgenev’s Yakov the Turk,
a natural-born singer, whose performance creates an effect “as though the familiar
steppes were unfolding before our eyes and stretching away into endless
distance.”58 Thirty-five years after the publication of A Hunter’s Sketches, Stepan
Ponomarev (1865-1889) wrote, in his deeply lyrical style, “You let the songs
unfold, and you see that they are filled with the steppe…”59
3. Freedom from war, with the possibility of a long, peaceful life. Such is
the case, generally speaking, in the inner territories of a given ethnos, where
there are no shared borders and the people are economically more secure.
(We see exactly the opposite scenario in areas where there is a developed epic
tradition; these areas are concentrated predominantly in ethnic borderlands,
areas of tension in all senses.)
4. Freedom of movement. We are thinking here of the copious evidence
collected by Aleksandr Veselovsky on wandering minstrels, as well as an
important observation by István Frank, the author of a remarkable book on
trouvères and Minnesänger. According to Frank, lyric song travels “from
person to person, poet to poet: the movement of these tastes, ideas, forms,
melodies occurs in the course of personal contact.”60
5. Freedom of breath—of that great, “speaking” breath that occurs when a
melody soars in asymmetric waves, culminating, in the words of Ilya Khlopkov
(one of the great Russian singers who performed for Lopatin and Prokunin), in a
state in which “you can’t hold the voice back: how can you hold it back, your
hand’s numb!”61 This kind of breath is the fruit of true artistic freedom, the
freedom of the joy one feels in flights of self-expression. (Structurally, this breath
manifests itself above all in a rhythmic freedom that enables the free, unrestricted
flow of a musical thought.) There is a special paradox here, one we will call the
oiwake paradox: on the one hand, we have the meticulous precision of protraction,
and on the other, the unquenchable freedom of self-expression. The important point
is that freedom in art does not equate to arbitrariness, but to the revelation of a
particular beauty that, by virtue of the consummate perfection of its artistic form,
endures and in a sense becomes “fixed.” Thus, there is no inherent conflict between
this perfect artistic form and the principle of artistic freedom.
6. Freedom of spiritual self-realization, that is, creative freedom, with the
primacy it gives to beauty. It gives us wings, allows us to forget about the
routine of everyday life and contemplate the eternal, that which is higher than
58 Turgenev 1906: 62.
59 Ponomarev 1887: 32-33.
60 Frank 1952: v. Mikhail Saponov (Saponov 1996: 103) brings up the phenomenon of “borrowing
that occurs when singers of various lands interact with each other” and concludes: “the minstrel
becomes the bearer of an international oral corpus.” (Cf. ibid., 277-278, on the common poetic
language of the Middle Ages.)
61 Lopatin 1956: 119.

158 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva
we are: this is what is most important in lyric song. We are reminded of a
Hasidic legend about Pinchas of Koretz, a famous rabbi in his own time, who
stopped one day while walking with his pupils to listen to a watchmaker singing
a Ukrainian song from the roof of a house being built nearby. Rabbi Pinchas
listened for a long time, and then started to sing the melody himself. His pupils
were horrified. But Rabbi Pinchas said to them: “This muzhik sings in such a
way that the heavens open up before him. If you can’t see that, you’re blind.”
Citing this legend in 1915, Joel Engel was delighted by the way it showed the
great power of art to bring together such different kinds of people as the peasant
laborer and the rabbi.62 This, of course, is true; but what startles us even more
about this legend is the force of its insight into the very essence of lyric song.
We simply cannot think of an illustration better than this one. When the heavens
open up to song, then everything earthly fades into the background, and the
human being attains an inner freedom unlike anything else, as well as a true
aspirationality of the spirit. Homo Lyricus is by definition free, and his or her
unseen addressee is above words and melody, for the audience is the heavens
themselves. It is a rare occasion when artistic riches like this are revealed, when
the singer resounds as if in two worlds simultaneously—“here” on earth, and
“there” in the melosphere.
7. It is clear, if we consider all of the points above, that in lyric song there is
truly an extraordinary freedom of melos, a kind of freedom that is only possible
or actualizable in solo singing.63 To our minds, this freedom is comparable to the
freedom unlocked in painting by the discovery of one-point perspective. As is
well known, the latter concept had emerged already in ancient Greece, but it was
only when it was rediscovered during the Renaissance and in particular the
post-Renaissance period that it became a dominant trend. “One-point
perspective is the triumph of the artist’s subjective, personal point of view.”64
We are convinced that this parallel between lyric melos and one-point
perspective in painting warrants serious consideration. We would like to stress,
however, that it would be unwise to connect lyric song with one-point
perspective in any chronological way; we see them simply as internally
commensurate creative phenomena, based in different art forms, that shed light
on and clarify each other.
We will make one final conjecture: it is not impossible that there may be a link
between one-point perspective and the formation of the particular phenomenon in
musical hearing that Boleslav Yavorsky has called “inner aural tuning.” According to
Yavorsky, the “discovery” of inner aural tuning was a revolution more powerful than
the Copernican, since as a result of it, “the human being achieved the capacity for
thinking”65—thinking musically. We would add: thinking lyrically.
62 Engel 2003.
63 Kakhetian song is a great exception. For more, see Tsitsishvili 2010.
64 Steblin-Kamenskii 1976: 32. Cf. Gurevich 1984: 97; Sachs 1946: 101-103, 273.
65 Iavorskii 1964: 523. Cf. also Iavorski 1987: 228 et passim (41-49, 124-126, 173-177, etc.).

Homo Lyricus... (2) 159
7. CONCLUSION: IN FAVOR OF BOLD HYPOTHESES
Let us summarize. What we have presented here is no more than a brief
sketch. There is much that we have not yet fully worked out; indeed, there is
much that have not yet even considered. Be that as it may, we think there is
some value in putting forth our hypothesis that there exists a special category of
solo music in oral tradition that consists of unique, melodically highly
developed songs, masterpieces of “sung symphonism,” or “the culture of
drawn-out song.” We may consider it to be an example in its own domain of
what Asafyev has described as “that pinnacle in the history of every art form on
which the efforts of years converge and suddenly give birth to a new kind of
beauty.”66
What is most important in working through this hypothesis is not a full
accounting of all the evidence, but a methodological willingness to reconsider
long-held ideas when the evidence conflicts with them. For that reason, our text
will have no conclusion. Everything we have written here is just a beginning.
It is not yet a dance, but an invitation to a dance. Refinements—and
refutations—will follow. We are in agreement with John Platt, who insisted:
“There is no point in making hypotheses that are not falsifiable because such
hypotheses do not say anything.”67
(Translated by Scott Bartling)
MUSICAL SUPPLEMENT68
Kazakh song “Iapyrai”
66 Asaf’ev 1987: 29.
67 Platt 1964.
68 All sources are indicated within footnotes 4 and 43.

160 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva
Russian song “Remember”

Homo Lyricus... (2) 161
Tatar song “Kara urman”

162 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva

Homo Lyricus... (2) 163
Mongolian song “Urtyn saikhan”

164 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(Part 2)
Amirova, Dina. 1990. Kazakhskaia professional’naia lirika ustnoi traditsii [The Kazakh
Professional Lyrics of the Oral Tradition]. Dissertation abstract for Ph.D. in Art
Criticism. Leningrad: LGITMiK.
Amirova, Dina. 2021. Kazakhskaia professional’naia lirika ustnoi traditsii: nauchnaia
monografiia [The Kazakh Professional Lyrics of the Oral Tradition: Scientific
Monograph]. Almaty: Kazakh State Conservatory named after Qurmanghazy
Asaf’ev, Boris. 1954. Izbrannye trudy, Tom 2 [Selected Works. Volume 2]. Moscow:
Akademiia nauk SSSR.
Asaf’ev, Boris. 1954a. Izbrannye trudy. Tom 3 [Selected Works. Volume 3]. Moscow:
Akademiia nauk SSSR
Asaf’ev, Boris. 1987. O russkoi pesennosti [On Russian Songfulness]. In: O narodnoi
muzyke [On Folk Music], eds. Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva. Leningrad:
Muzyka.
Auerbach, Erich. 2003. Mimesis: The Representation of Reality in Western Literature. 50th
Anniversary Edition, trans. Willard R. Trask. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton
University Press.
Bartók, Béla. 1966. Ethnomusikologische Schriften Faksinile-Nachdrucke. II. Volksmusik
der Rumänen von Maramureş. Herausgegeben von Denijs Dille. Mainz: B. Schott’s
Sőhne.
Basden, G. T. 1921. Among the Ibos of Nigeria. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott.
Batkin, Leonid. 1989. Ital’ianskoe Vozrozhdenie v poiskakh individual’nosti [The Italian
Renaissance in Search of Individuality]. Moscow: Nauka.
Baud-Bovy, Samuel. 1935. Chansons du Dodécanèse. Tome 1. Athènes: Librairie J. N. Sideris.
Baud-Bovy, Samuel. 1958. Études sur la chanson cleftique. Athènes: Archives musicales
de folklore.
B’erke, Nogala. 2006. Poeziia D. Ravzhi [The Poetry of Danzanravjaa]. Elista: Dzhangar.
Dörvöljingiin, Oyuuntsetseg. 1990. Genezis i evoliutsiia mongol’skogo vokal’no-
poeticheskogo zhanra urtyn-duu [The Genesis and Evolution of the Mongolian Vocal-
Poetic Genre of Urtyn Duu], thesis abstract, Moscow State Tchaikovsky Conservatory
Dorjdagwa, Jagzawyn. 1970. Urtyn duu. Ulaanbaatar: Ulsyn Khevlelijn gazar.
Dugarov, Dashinima. 1991. Istoricheskie korni belogo shamanstva [The Historical Roots of
White Shamanism]. Moscow: Nauka.
Engel, Joel [Iulii]. 2003. Evreiskaia narodnaia pesnia. Etnograficheskaia poezdka (1915)
[Jewish Folk Song. An Ethnographic Journey (1915)]. Ed. by Irina Sergeeva.
In: Skhidnii svit [Eastern World] 3.
Erzakovich, Boris. 1955. Kazakhskie narodnye pesni [Kazakh Folk Songs]. Almaty:
Ghylym.
Erzakovich, Boris. 1955a. Pis’ma Romena Rollana k Zataevichu [Romain Rolland’s Letters
to Zataevich], Vestnik AN Kazakhskoi SSR [Bulletin of the Academy of Sciences of
the Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic] 10.
Erzakovich, Boris. 1994. Antologiia kazakhskikh narodnykh liubovnykh pesen [Anthology
of Kazakh Folk Love Songs]. Almaty: Ghylym.
Frank, István. 1952. Trouvères et Minnesänger. Saarbrücken: West-Ost.

Homo Lyricus... (2) 165
Gbeho, Philip. 1952. The Indigenous Gold Coast Music. In: African Music Society
Newsletter 1, no. 5: 30-34
Gurevich, Aron. 1984. Kategorii srednevekovoi kul’tury [Categories of Medieval Culture]
Moscow: Iskusstvo
Iavorskii, Boleslav. 1964. Izbrannye trudy. Tom 1 [Selected Works. Vol. 1]. Moscow:
Muzyka.
Iavorskii, Boleslav L. 1987. Izbrannye trudy [Selected Works]. Vol. 2, Part 1. Moscow:
Sovetskii kompozitor [Soviet Composer Publishers].
Ivanov, Sergei. 2006. Holy Fools in Byzantium and Beyond, trans. Simon Franklin. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Kershner, Lidiia. 1959. Narodno-pesennye istoki melodiki Bakha [Folk-Song Sources of
Bach’s Melodics]. Moscow: Gosudarstvennoe muzykal’noe izd-vo.
Kershner, Lidiia. 1965. Nemetskaia narodnaia muzyka [German Folk Music]. Moscow:
Muzyka.
Kliashtornyi, Sergei and Tursun Sultanov. 2000. Gosudarstva i narody evraziiskikh stepei.
Drevnost’ i Srednevekov’e [States and Peoples of the Eurasian Steppes. Antiquity and
the Middle Ages]. St. Petersburg: Peterburgskoe Vostokovedenie.
Kozhabekov, Il’ias. n/d. O ladovom stroenii kazakhskikh pesen [On the Modal Construction
of Kazakh Songs]. manuscript.
Kunanbaeva, Alma. 2019. Surprises of Typology: From the World of Ancient Greek and
Kazakh Lyric Poetry. In: Revista de etnografie şi folclor / Journal of Ethnography and
Folklore 1-2: 23-39.
Kunanbay, Alma. 2001. The Soul of Kazakhstan. (With photographs by Wayne Eastep).
New York: Easten Press.
Kushnarev, Khristofor. 1958. Voprosy istorii i teorii armianskoi monodicheskoi muzyki
[Questions in the History and Theory of Armenian Monodic Music]. Leningrad:
Gosudarstvennoe muzykal’noe izd-vo
Levin, Theodore. 1996. The Hundred Thousand Fools of God: Musical Travels in Central
Asia (and Queens, New York). Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Lewon, Marc, ed., 2007-2009. Das Lochamer Liederbuch in neuer Übertragung und mit
ausführlichem Kommentar. 3 Bände [The Lochamer Liederbuch in a New
Transcription and with Detailed Commentary. 3 Volumes]. Reichelsheim: Vertrag der
Spielleute.
Lineva, Evgeniia. 1909. Velikorusskie pesni v narodnoi garmonizatsii. Vyp. 2. Pesni
novgorodskie [Great Russian Songs in Folk Harmonization. Vol. 2: Novgorodian
Songs]. St. Petersburg: Imperatorskaia akademiia nauk
Lopatin, Nikolai and Vasilii Prokunin. 1956. Russkie narodnye liricheskie pesni [Russian
Folk Lyric Songs] Moscow: Gosudarstvennoe muzykal’noe izd-vo.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. 1925. Complex and Myth in Mother-Right. In: Psyche 5: 194-216.
Merriam, Alan P. 1965. The Anthropology of Music. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press.
Mills, Joan, ed., 2004. 99 Georgian Songs: A Collection of Traditional Folk, Church and
Urban Songs from Georgia, introduced by Edisher Garakanidze, song notes and trans.
by Joseph Jordania. Aberystwyth: Black Mountain Press.
Morris, Colin. 2004. The Discovery of the Individual, 1050-1200. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press.

166 Izaly Zemtsovsky and Alma Kunanbaeva
Platt, John R. 1964. Strong Inference. In: Science. New Series. Vol. 146, No. 3642: 347-353.
Ponomarev, Stepan. 1887. Chto poet pro sebia Priural’e. Pesni Srednego Zavolzh’ia i ikh
soderzhanie [What the Cisural Region Sings about Itself. Songs of the Central
Transvolga and Their Contents]. In: Severnyi Vestnik [The Northern Herald] 11: 32-46.
Sachs, Curt. 1946. The Commonwealth of Art: Style in the Fine Arts, Music and the Dance.
New York: Norton.
Saponov, Mikhail. 1996. Menestreli: Ocherki muzykal’noi kul’tury Zapadnogo
Srednevekov’ia [Minstrels: Essays on the Musical Culture of the Western Middle
Ages]. Moscow: Prest.
Shishmarev, Vladimir. 1911. Lirika i liriki pozdnego Srednevekov’ia. Ocherki po istorii
poezii Frantsii i Provansa [Lyric Song and Lyric Singers of Late Middle Ages. Notes
on the History of the Poetry of France and Provence]. St. Petersburg: Zapiski istoriko-
filologicheskogo fak-ta SPb universiteta [Transactions of historical-philological
department of SPb university].
Smirnov, Boris. 1975. Muzyka Narodnoi Mongolii [Music of People’s Mongolia]. Moscow:
Muzyka.
Sobolevskii, Sergei. 1949. Latinsko-russkii slovar’ [Latin-Russian Dictionary]. Moscow:
Gosudarstvenoe izd-vo inostrannykh i national’nykh slovarei.
Steblin-Kamenskii, Mikhail. 1976. Mif [Myth]. Leningrad: Nauka.
Tantsiura, Gnat T. 1965. Pisni Iavdokhi Zuikhi. Musical editor Z. I. Vasilenko. Kyiv:
Naukova dumka.
Oiwake. 1990. International Symposium on Oiwake Music. Genealogy of song of the races
– Roots of Esashi Oiwake. Published by the Executive Committee of the World
Oiwake Festival in Esashi (in Japanese language).
Tilegenov, Altynbek. 2000. Adaidyng zheti qaiqysy [The Seven Qaiqy of the Adai].
Almaty: ROST.
Tsitsishvili, Nino. 2010. A Historical Examination of the Links between Georgian
Polyphony and Central Asian-Transcaucasian Monophony. In: Echoes from Georgia:
Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony, eds. Rusudan Tsurtsumia and Joseph
Jordania. New York: Nova Science Publishers, Inc.: 195-213.
Turgenev, Ivan. 1906. The Singers. In: A Sportsman’s Sketches, Vol. 2, trans. Constance
Garnett. New York: Macmillan.
Tursunov, Edyge. 1999. Vozniknovenie baksy, akynov, seri i zhyrau [The Origin of the
Bakshi, the Aqyn, the Seri, and the Zhyrau]. Astana: Foliant.
Vasil’eva, Elena. 1994. Vspomni [Remember]. In: Pesennaia lirika ustnoi traditsii [Sung
Lyric in Oral Tradition], ed. and comp. Izaly Zemtsovsky. St. Petersburg: Russian
Institute for the History of the Arts: 54-75.
Veselovskii, Aleksandr. 1940. Istoricheskaia poetika [Historical Poetics]. Leningrad:
Khudozhestvennaia literatura.
Wiora, Walter. 1952. Europäischer Volksgesang: gemeinsame Formen in charakteristischen
Abwandlungen [European Folksong: Common Forms in Characteristic Variations].
Cologne: Arno Volk Verlag.
Zataevich, Aleksandr. 1931. 500 Kazakhskikh pesen i kiuev [500 Kazakh Songs and Küys]
(Almaty: Narkompros Kazakhskoi ASSR (reprinted in 2003).
Zataevich, Aleksandr. 1958. Issledovaniia, vospominaniia, pis’ma i dokumenty [Research,
Memoirs, Letters, and Papers]. Almaty: Kazakhskoe gosudarstvennoe izdatel’stvo
khudozhestvennoi literatury.

Homo Lyricus... (2) 167
Zemtsovsky, Izaly. 1966. Russkie narodnye protiazhnye pesni: Antologiia [Russian Folk
Drawn-Out Songs: An Anthology]. Leningrad: Muzyka.
Zemtsovsky, Izaly. 1967. Russkaia protiazhnaia pesnia: opyt issledovaniia [Russian
Drawn-Out Song: A Research]. Leningrad: Muzyka.
Zemtsovsky, Izaly. 1989. Kypchaki i bulgary v evraziiksoi muzykal’noi kul’ture [Kipchaks
and Bulgars in Eurasian Musical Culture]. In: Problemy etnogeneza narodov Volgo-
Kamskogo regiona v svete dannykh fol’kloristiki [Problems in the Ethnogenesis of the
Peoples of the Volga-Kama Region in the Light of Data from Folkloristics].
Astrakhan: Conservatory: 34-48.
Zemtsovsky, Izaly. 1990. Music and Ethnic History: An Attempt to Substantiate a Eurasian
Hypothesis. In: Yearbook for Traditional Music 22: 20-28.
Zemtsovsky, Izaly. 1990a. Folk Music Text as Document of a Specific Ethnoperception. In:
The Seventh European Seminar in Ethnomusicology. Berlin: International Institute for
Comparative Studies and Documentation: 493-496
Zemtsovsky, Izaly. 1998. The Melodic System of Pentatonicism: A Sketch about the
Mongolian Version. In: Ethnologische, Historische und Systematische
Musikwissenschaft: Oskár Elschek zum 65. Geburtstag [Ethnological, Historical, and
Systematic Musicology: For Oskár Elschek’s 65th Birthday], ed. Franz Födermayr,
Ladislav Burlas. Bratislava: ASCO Art and Science, 1998: 193-195.
Zemtsovsky, Izaly. 2006a. Tri kita muzyki ustnoi traditsii [The Three Whales of Music in
Oral Tradition]. In: Traditsionnaia kul’tura. Poiski. Interpretatsii. Materialy. Sbornik
statei konferentsii pamiati L. M. Ivlevoi [Traditional Culture. Investigations.
Interpretations. Materials. Collection of Articles from a Conference in Memory of
Larisa Ivleva]. St. Petersburg: RIII: 5-8.
Zemtsovsky, Izaly. 2007. Metafory narodnopesennoi terminologii [Metaphors of Folksong
Terminology]. In: AB-60. Sbornik statei k 60-letiiu Al’berta Kashfullovicha Baiburna
[AB-60. Collection of Articles for the 60th Birthday of Albert Kashfullovich
Baiburin]. St. Petersburg: Izd-vo Evropeiskogo universiteta v Sankt-Peterburge:
61-76.
Zemtsovsky, Izaly and Alma Kunanbaeva. 2022. Homo Lyricus, or Lyric Song in the
Ethnomusicological Stratigraphy of “Folkloric Culture”: Notes for a Monograph
(part 1). In: Revista de etnografie şi folclor / Journal of Ethnography and Folklore
1-2: 121-146.

MANELE MUSIC AS A MARKER OF COLLECTIVE
SHAME IN THE ONLINE DISCOURSE OF THE
ROMANIAN DIASPORA IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
RUXANDRA TRANDAFOIU
ABSTRACT
This article charts the reception of manele music among the Romanian diaspora in
the UK. Using a netnographic approach applied to an online diasporic community, it
studies the replication of acerbic debates in Romania about the role of manele within
Romanian musical tradition. It also shows how the racialization of the Roma and the
rejection of manele as “inferior” music serve both psychological and political
purposes for a community that has experienced a loss in status due to migration.
Manele become thus the measuring tape of cultural taste but also markers of
collective shame that separate the “good” Romanians from the “bad”. These power
games need to be understood in the context of old dissensions among Romanian
elites related to Romania’s uncomfortable belonging to the Balkans. They also
represent a renewed contestation of Oriental influences in Romanian culture that
threaten to disrupt Romania’s presupposed belonging to the West.
Keywords: manele, Roma, Romania, diaspora, Orientalism, shame.
INTRODUCTION
Manele1 have acquired an important status as one of the most popular music
genres in Romania. Their popularity has been matched by fierce contestation. The
development of the genre is associated with Roma music and musicians, whose
contribution to traditional Romanian folklore is evident, but sits uncomfortably
with Romanian preconceptions of cultural and ethnic authenticity. The genre’s
hybridity and Oriental influences also threaten to place Romanian music firmly in a
Balkan context of rich cultural circulation, exchange and appropriation.
The combined burdens of Balkanism and Orientalism thus resurface to deny what
many Romanians consider to be their rightful belonging to Western culture and to a
Europe they often feel excluded from. The postsocialist transition came along not
1 I use the plural (manele) to indicate the richness and diversity of musical influences comprised in
this genre.
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 168-183

Manele Music as a Marker of Collective Shame... 169
just with big questions about “who are we” and “where do we belong”, but also
with mass emigration that saw between three and five million Romanians travel to
Western Europe for work. While diaspora theory usually sees immigrants as agents
of change, displaying a cosmopolitan outlook, the loss in social status and
confusion about appropriate ways to display cultural identity markers, can also
bring along conservative and exclusionary practices. This chapter aims to trace
these identity debates in the context of the consumption and circulation of manele.
It does so by using netnography for data collection and analysis focusing on
Romanians in UK, an online diasporic hub and associated Facebook group based in
the United Kingdom. The first part of the article provides an overview of the role
of manele in Romania’s cultural renegotiation of identity in the postsocialist
period, within the context of Balkanist, Orientalist and Westernization discourses.
After a brief explanation of the methodology for data collection, two further
sections focus on the instrumentalization of manele as a social and racial category,
away from their natural musical home, and on manele as an indicator of collective
shame in the context of migration.
MANELE, THE MEASURING TAPE OF TASTE
Manele are a mix of Romani, Romanian, Turkish and pop sounds (Beissinger
2016) and considered to be part of Balkan music more generally. Manele
developed from muzică lăutărească, the first manele singers being lăutari2.
The main characteristics3 of manele are their unmistakable Oriental influences,
specifically the çiftetelli rhythm, melody and instrumentation, and the use of
traditional instruments like violins, accordions and cimbaloms, combined with
synthetisers that give manele their electronic sound.
Although popular with many Romanians, manele have become a bone of
contention both in cultural and political terms. Their association with the Roma, the
most racialised and discriminated ethnic minority in the region, makes it difficult to
accept manele as being an intrinsic part of Romania’s musical heritage. This
tendency is aggravated by the genre’s hybridity, and its association with Turkish
and Oriental influences. As Haliliuc (2015: 292) observes: “public intellectuals
conflate Manele with the vilified Balkans and disidentify Romanian culture from
both Manele performers and fans and from the Balkan region that the music would
signify.” In the view of those criticizing the embracing of manele at the level of
popular culture, manele bring Romania (symbolically) closer to the South-East and
the Orient and further away from a desired Western trajectory. These public
debates embody the same ambivalence of love and hate that characterized
2 Romani musicians playing in bands called tarafs. A historical professional category among the
Roma, lăutari entertained guests at weddings, funerals and Romanian celebrations. Muzică
lăutărească refers to the music played by lăutari at these community events.
3 These distinguish the genre, to a certain extent, from other hybrid incarnations of “Balkan” offerings
like the Bulgarian chalga or the Serbian turbo-folk.

170 Ruxandra Trandafoiu
Todorova’s (2009) well know description of Balkanism. Like Balkanism, manele
are rejected for being too “Oriental”, yet they are occasionally appropriated as a
marker of cultural tradition. This ambivalence is partly driven by manele’s mix of
traditional sounds that place them firmly in the Romanian folkloric tradition and
lyrics that have little to do with village traditions and reflect instead the
contradictions and challenges of postsocialist urban life. Some of the public
intellectuals Haliliuc talks about4 take offence with the unpleasant nature of the
lyrics that deal with “one’s own wealth, talent at running illegitimate businesses,
threats of violence against rivals, as well as the objectification of women” (Ilioaia
2014). Because of their linguistic and thematic departure from traditional folklore,
manele are also associated with “bad taste”.
Musically, anti-manele attitudes ignore the genre’s developing links to
Western pop and hip-hop (Trandafoiu 2016) in favour of “nesting orientalisms”
(Bakić-Hayden 1995). Various ethnopop genres are used to “describe ethno-
cultural dimensions and mechanisms within society as West European – East
European-Balkan – Turkish/Romani in descending order of negativity. They typify
perceptions of culture: music that teeters on the threshold between East and West
or “bad” versus “good” taste” (Beissinger 2016: 107). Consequently, while ethno
rock is viewed positively, manele remain at the bottom rung of the value scale.
Through these “Balkanist lenses, public intellectuals, television campaigns, and
politicians created a symbolic environment in which the postsocialist subjects of
Romania are prevented from recognizing and working through personal and
societal fragmentation that accompanies adaptation to new political and economic
structures” (Haliliuc 2015: 303).
Despite public rejection, the popularity of manele is growing with both
audiences and performers. Several television and YouTube music channels5 also
dedicate much of their output to manele. The genre has overspilled its original
ethnic boundaries, in the transition from “old” manele dominated by Romani
musicians of lăutar tradition to “new” manele sung by Romanian musicians. While
this transition has produced a diversification in sounds, themes and a multiplication
of female performers in a genre that was once the exclusive domain of Romani
males, the appropriation of manele by white Romanian males is often seen as
unfair, and part of the tendency to appropriate the music of the Roma without
attribution or recognition of its history (Silverman 2013). The effect on the Roma
and their music is that “not only is their music no longer stylistically distinctive,
but also they themselves are no longer necessary as performers” (Silverman 2015:
178). Thus, in a context that dilutes the Roma’s symbolic and economic power
achieved through manele, the “rhetorical identification with the position of cultural
victim besieged by Roma and Balkan hybrid influences, which intellectuals have
4 George Pruteanu and Ruxandra Cesereanu come from a linguistic background and express concerns
about the grammatical and vocabulary distortions promoted by manele.
5 Taraf, Favorit, Manele TV, Balkan Music TV and others.

Manele Music as a Marker of Collective Shame... 171
forged by reviving the discursive logic of Balkanism” (Haliliuc 2015: 303) becomes
even more problematic.
Mihăilescu (2016) views manele as a “game of pride and shame”. “By their
Balkan/Oriental “nature”… They are a matter of shame for “official society,”
which perceives the manea trend as outrageous debauchery, a kind of falling back
into Oriental moods and values: manele are a way of losing (national) face”
(Mihăilescu, 2016: 256). Hybridity and ambivalence do not fit authenticity claims
and threaten proclaimed uniqueness. However, in the almost vicarious pride that
informally imbues manele’s popular spread, we can spot the manifestation of guilty
pleasures. This can explain the gap between manele’s commercial success and their
vilification by those who would like to see Romanian culture more aligned to
Western customs. Many associate manele with bad taste and Balkanism, but they
still listen to the music and know who the main performers are.
Current analyses of the representation of manele in public discourse focus
almost exclusively on the views of public intellectuals. They also tend to reframe
racism and anti-Roma attitudes as a desire for Europeanisation. However, it is
important to understand whether Orientalist discourses or indeed the shame and
pride ambiguity occasionally claimed in relation to manele have been cascaded
down to the level of average people, particularly those who are expected to hold
cosmopolitan attitudes. I refer here to migrants, who are traditionally viewed as
more dynamic, aspirational and culturally open than average citizens.
Consequently, the expectation is that once abroad, Romanians might exhibit more
tolerance towards hybrid musical influences, recognize the role of manele in
advancing Roma equality and display a less essentialist attitude about their
Romanian cultural identity. It is not inconceivable that manele might be even
praised for their ability to express the contradictions of the post-socialist transition
and promote a sense of pride in Romania’s multicultural heritage.
This article is an attempt to test this assumption, while nonetheless
acknowledging that current migration research has highlighted that despite
multicultural experiences, migrants are occasionally less not more tolerant. This
happens for several reasons, but mainly because of discrimination leading to feelings
of inferiority and the need to integrate at all costs, a process that includes displaying
shame towards their home culture. As previous research has revealed (Macri 2010),
the shame of being Romanian is compounded by the shame of being East European,
due to a fascination with the West and the historic negative associations with the East
and especially the Balkans. In a case of “nested orientalism”6 at a distance, migrants
would therefore not only replicate Balkanism and Orientalism, but perform an even
more drastic rejection of difference by symbolically transferring any inadequacies
onto the minority within: in our case, the Roma.
6 Writing about the role of Muslims as “others” in the post-Yugoslav imaginary, Bakić-Hayden
explains nesting orientalism as a process that shifts the “"essence" of "otherness" to different peoples,
cultures and religions” (1995: 930).

172 Ruxandra Trandafoiu
As Macri highlights in her digital ethnography with the Romanian community
in Ireland, “otherness” has two important functions. Like other communities,
Romanians use comparisons with “others” in the elaboration of their own identities
and, more importantly “our image in the eyes of ‘the Others’ tends to put a
significant constraint on who we are and who we claim we are” (Macri 2011: 129).
Constant gazing, watching both us and others while others also watch us, often lead
to feelings of inadequacy and inferiority, as well as shame and stigma (Macri 2011:
136). Shame can be counteracted by moving stigma onto another. To “pass”, to use
Goffman’s (1963) classic terminology, the group needs to purge stigma by
transferring it to a group that enjoys even less power, less recognition and less
acceptance. Self-stigmatization is thus managed by shifting negative characteristics
onto others. This mechanism is not only unsuccessful in terms of expunging
internalized stigma, but also creates hatred towards the Roma within the Romanian
diaspora.
The inescapable link between ethnicity and class promoted by migration
(Mădroane 2021) also compounds feelings of shame. Recent Romanian migrants
to the UK are, for the most part, low skilled. Consequently, they are assigned a
low-class status in the British society, which encourages discrimination and
resource scarcity. “Paradoxically, while migration is likely to enhance their
social status at home, migrants may have to put up with discrimination and
exploitation at their destination and with ensuing sentiments of shame”
(Mădroane 2021: 63). However, shame can be internalised or rejected, since
migration can be construed as a mechanism for countering poverty in the home
country and gaining agency. The “moral emotion of shame” (Mădroane
2021: 76) can therefore be negotiated.
The following analysis is an attempt to establish whether indeed there is a
negotiation in the way the culture of the homeland is exhibited in the consumption
and circulation of music, or whether, there is an outright rejection of manele among
migrant groups because of the shame and stigma that comes with being gazed upon
as a migrant. While referring to the example of Bulgarian folklore, Todorova
makes the valid observation that: “What is interesting here is not the problem of
reception of art in a different cultural context or milieu, but (…) in a broader sense
the problem of the sensibility of the observed being aware of being observed”
(2009: 60). In this case, despite higher expectations of tolerance among the
diaspora, one could also expect the negative impact of the fear of being judged and
found wanting. Thus, migrants would enact a “pick and mix” approach, through
which they would appropriate elements of high culture, but reject types of music
that they perceive to be too Eastern or inferior. As Bakić-Hayden reminds us, “the
construction of "essences" is ultimately motivated by political (or other) power and
only obscured by symbolism of some other, "higher" purpose” (1995: 930). In this
case, acts of cultural inclusion or exclusion would be motivated by perceived
power hierarchies which place migrants in subaltern positions.

Manele Music as a Marker of Collective Shame... 173
METHODOLOGY
The research used netnography (Kozinets 2020) as the main method of
collecting and interpreting data. Netnography is “a specific way to conduct
qualitative social media research” (Kozinets 2020: 7)7 that entails specific
processes of selection, interaction, immersion, analysis and interpretation of social
media texts. It aims to understand the “cultural experiences” (Kozinets 2020: 14) of
actors interacting online. I used this approach in a previous study of Romanian
diasporic groups online (Trandafoiu 2013).
This time I returned to one of the online diasporic hubs I had studied a decade
ago. Romanians in UK has been the primary information portal for Romanians
living in the UK for the past twenty years. Its discussion forum contains virtual
posts and threads on 11,000 different topics organized in 12 categories, from
practical information about life in the UK, to sport and entertainment. Over 56,000
users have participated in these discussions. I used the search facility in the
community forum to look for posts containing the word “manele”. The search
returned 294 results. The posts comprised the period 6 November 2000 to
12 January 2015. They fell into two main categories: posts advertising events that
included manele music and posts that represented the opinions and discussions of
the community on a variety of topics that nevertheless included a mention of
manele. In their turn, these mentions could be categorized into different types:
some participants in the online forum used manele to refer to the musical genre,
while others used manele as a social descriptor. In this latter case, most typically a
category of Romanian nationals was described as manele lovers to connote
education level, social type or ethnicity. However, there was overlap between the
two uses and often the commentary transitioned seamlessly from manele used to
refer to the musical genre to manele being used as a social category.
In line with established netnographic ethical protocols, cloaking was used for
protecting the identity of the participants. As Kozinets explains (2020: 400),
cloaking may include the name of the social media site, however, online
pseudonyms and other means of identification need to be removed. Although the
risk of harm is low, since the posts have been translated from Romanian into
English, which makes them less traceable and the authors less identifiable, the
research corpus contains racist language. By removing actual names and online
pseudonyms, those making derogatory comments cannot be identified.
Since no mention of manele was made after 2015 and the traffic on the
community forum seemed sparce, I contacted Inno Brezeanu, the site’s initiator
and administrator to enquire about more current community discussions. Brezeanu
replied8 to indicate that “The communication style has changed a lot over the past
7 Emphasis in the original.
8 E-mail communication on 6 and 7 September 2022.

174 Ruxandra Trandafoiu
few years, the forums are largely abandoned… People mainly communicate on
Facebook, there are hundreds of Romanian groups on Facebook which are
organised by city or area. The new generation doesn’t really communicate, they
mainly exchange photos on Snapchat.”
I consequently switched my attention to the Facebook equivalent of the
Romanians in UK diasporic hub. This public Facebook group has, at the time of
writing in September 2022, 48.5 thousand members. Two types of searches were
performed, one for the hashtag #manele and a general one for any post containing
the word manele.
The hashtag search only yielded three posts, which are analysed in the
following section of this article. The general word search, on the other hand,
generated numerous posts. To prevent a replication of the older comments
observed in the discussion forum, only the most recent twenty posts were selected
for analysis. This approach allowed for an updated view of how manele are talked
about, while also providing the advantage of a comparative assessment. These
recent posts span spring and summer 2022.
The analysis looked for any shifts that might have occurred in the way
Romanians in the UK talk about manele and the role manele play in the Romanian
diasporic imaginary. Modifications in meaning and role in the move from Romani
in UK discussion forum to Romani in UK Facebook group were expected.
Important changes in diaspora’s demographics had occurred in the last decade in
the UK, from Romanians being a marginal community, to becoming one of the
biggest foreign-born communities in the UK, currently standing at well over a
million. During this time, changes had also occurred in the music industry, in the
transition from “old manele” which were the almost exclusive domain of Roma
musicians, to “new manele”, a genre hybridised by even more musical influences,
notably pop, and “democratised”, one could argue, by the presence of non-Roma
musicians and a significant number of women. Whether the expectations were met
is discussed in the following section.
MANELE AS A SOCIAL AND RACIAL CATEGORY
The analysis starts with an overview of the posts generated by the search of the
community forum hosted by Romanians in UK. Between 2013 and 2015 the forum
was inundated with posts publicizing club nights and venues that played manele
music among an impressive mix of other genres. London based clubs like Ciao Ciao
Club Kilburn, Club Funky Hendon or Unique Club Finchley thus advertised manele
among Balkan, Latino, house, R&B, lăutărească and grecească. House DJs like
Frantz, Francess and Adrian T. were frequently joined by guests like Alex Velea,
Delia Matache, Andra, Antonia, Pepe, Puya, Directia 5, Anda Adam, White
Sensation and Andreea Banica. The club mix described above was typically billed as
“Romanian retro party”, “Traditional Romanian Night”, Petrecere tradițională

Manele Music as a Marker of Collective Shame... 175
românească9, Muzică de petrecere10 and Karaoke românesc11. Posts (such as one on
31st of December 2013) called participants to party (să petrecem) “with good
Romanian music (House, Manele, Latino, R&B, Blue)’. Advertising fliers further
described the mix as being “Lăutarească – Manele – House – Dance – Latino” or
“Lăutarească – Manele – Populară – Dance – House – Grecească”.
These posters indicate the mainstreaming of manele as part of a hybrid that
combines Balkan music (e.g., grecească) with the global sounds of House, Dance
and Latin music. The popularity of manele within the club scene shows that the
genre’s recognition has cascaded beyond its initial boundaries (music played at
family events by mainly Romani musicians) into the mainstream Romanian club
scene. Moreover, the mainstreaming now includes Romanian communities abroad
who attempt to replicate the club scene back home by inviting DJs and musicians
from the homeland. While this evolution could be interpreted as a process of
popularization and democratization, it also signals a disconnection between the
original signification of manele and its current wider consumption practices.
Through appropriation and mainstreaming, manele have been culturally
disembedded from their original cultural and ethnic space and has been
depoliticized through reframing and resignification.
This process has entailed giving a new meaning, or rather diluting the original
relevance of manele as contemporary Roma music for celebratory occasions. In the
new context where Romanianness is expressed at a distance, manele only mean
having a good old Romanian time. The process of appropriation also sees Balkan
and manele music as enhancers of Romanian identity expressed through the ability
to have a good time and party like no other. Some of the party nights invited
audiences to wear traditional Romanian clothes and, consequently, win special
prizes. Like the traditional Romanian blouse “ie”, manele have become standout
elements that signify Romanianness. These visual and aural identity markers are
thus both exoticized and commodified. Romanianness at a distance is both
enhanced and easily traded. What happens on the Romanian club scene in London
is an interesting process of re-evaluation of what constitutes national culture when
abroad. This revision shows both a bottom-up approach (revellers love to dance to
the beats) and a top-down one, with DJs and club promoters including manele into
a wider mix of dance music.
It was therefore even more puzzling to note that while Romanians in London
were happy to listen to manele in the clubs, they maintained a patronizing attitude
towards the genre in the conversations that took place in the online forum. There
was an overwhelming tendency to reject manele as good music or part of a
valuable cultural tradition. This was evident in the predisposition to avoid manele
music. Emi (7 Nov. 2011), for example, asked for recommendations for a “decent”
9 Traditional Romanian party.
10 Party music.
11 Romanian Karaoke.

176 Ruxandra Trandafoiu
Romanian restaurant in London that doesn’t play manele, because she wanted to
bring along her English friends. As it was not a unique request, Emi’s attitude
shows that manele have become a marker of embarrassment or shame among some
Romanians. In discussing the community’s music choices for an upcoming reunion
Scar (31 Jan 2010) asked the organizers to avoid playing manele and added that he
also had “an issue with Romanian hip-hop and its extremely explicit lyrics”.
Some posts (by Kia on 14 July 2011) associated the love of manele with poor
literacy. Manele were also seen as an indicator of “lack of civilization” and
“manners”, even when absent. In a post on 28 June 2011, during a visit to London,
Figgy compared UK’s capital to Bucharest and observed that the absence of
manele ringtones, common in Bucharest’s tube stations, allowed her to have a
restful holiday. Although she described London positively, she criticized the
occasional presence of badly dressed and morose Eastern Europeans. Figgy’s posts
suggest an association between manele and anything Balkan or Eastern, considered
inferior to Western ways of life.
On rare occasions, forum participants discussed manele as a music genre and
not as an indicator of bad taste. Katy (17 June 2009) observed: ‘in the old days
I used to listen to Oriental music at parties; only after 2am you got blues. Manele
only started to circulate in the 90s. There is better music than that, that engages
more of your senses, not entirely sentimental. These new manele should be banned,
in my opinion. Old muzică lautarească represented so much more…’ Such posts
create a hierarchy of quality between old and new manele, but they also give value
to the music played by lăutars.
Lon (17 Feb 2009) observed: “I am to a certain extent a fan of authentic
oriental music. Current Romanian reworkings are far removed from it.’ In a further
post he explained how he saw manele as a commercial re-elaboration of more
traditional music. Andy (16 Feb 2009) similarly stated that some folk artists
“pimped” Romanian folklore. Phin (16 Feb. 2009) thought that in the 1990s manele
broke away from true muzică lautarească, although old manele still “had some
quality” in comparison to contemporary iterations. Rab (16 Feb 2009), a former
DJ in the 1990s, mentioned that manele had always features among personal
requests at parties. When Damian & Brothers were invited to the Romanian
Cultural Institute in London, he explained, “people danced in the aisles without
shame”. Despite their popularity, he himself hated manele, so he usually
compromised by playing both manele and traditional folk music, sung by Maria
Tănase. In these posts there is a clear tendency to see a division between the old
and the new, between authenticity and contamination, between music that can be
included into the Romanian cultural repertoire and music that is negated.
Ame (11 March 2011) deplored the degeneration of muzică lautarească into
manele while observing that Bregović would never be a fan of manele or adopt
them for his albums12. Andy replied to ton Ame’s comment by saying that beyond
12 This presumption turned out not to be true.

Manele Music as a Marker of Collective Shame... 177
the melody, manele also have problematic lyrics. In response to this exchange,
Figgy posted an interview with Goran Bregović, published in the Romanian press.
While promoting his album Alkohol in 2011, Bregović described manele as “urban
Gypsy music”13 and praised his collaboration with manelist Florin Salam, who,
according to Bregović, always brought something new to the music.
When asked about the commercialization of Gypsy music in his 2011
interview, Bregović replied that it is far from being commercial. Instead, his
description of manele and “Gypsy” music more generally was one that praised
manele’s local origins and the Romanian essence of the music:
“When I first came to Romania, I listened to a manele CD and loved it.
Manele is my favourite music in Romania. I love Gypsy music because it doesn’t
just produce sounds, it also produces madness, it sits aside from the usual tones.
I think that’s why we loved punk in the beginning; its rhythms were different from
other musical genres. Traditional Gypsy music has evolved, Gypsies moved to the
city, so it’s normal that its rhythms have changed. That’s what manele means to
me: a sort of urban Gypsy music. Florin Salam is modern, more modern than the
previous generation of manele singers. He is a kind of hip-hop artist of the manele,
he feels free, and you can see that” (Mitan 2011)14.
When asked about the ambiguous reputation of manele in Romania, Bregović
replied that “it is a question of taste. So, what if university graduates do not listen
to manele? I have no issues, I’m not Romanian, I am not prejudiced. The more the
Gypsies are badmouthed, the prouder they are. When I am in the presence of
Gypsy musicians, I feel I am in the presence of true art” (Mitan 2011).
In the online discussion that ensued the posting of Bregović’s interview, the
more acceptant voices were drowned by those whose opinion was that manele
listening equates with being a cocălar, which in Romanian is the equivalent of
“Chav”. Any support for manele was labelled as endorsement for cultural
devaluation. Some participants felt phonically aggressed by the high sound levels
of manele and their widespread presence.
In a similar post, Demy (17 June 2009) commented: “I hate Gypsies who speak
broken English, Romanians who listen to manele on the bus and, of course English
cocălari who give Romanian cocălari a run for their money.” These attitudes showed
that the Romanian diaspora in the UK had adopted elements of the British class
system, through which cultural elements are used as class markers and to reinforce
social hierarchies. If one expects Eastern diasporas to imbue elements of more liberal
Western cultures, this example shows an opposite reaction: some Romanians become
more conservative and less inclusive in their views, while keen to express their
13 While muzică țigănească (Gypsy music) is an accepted label that is widely used in Romania for
promotion and videoclip titles that help with YouTube search algorhythms, in the English-speaking
academic world the word ‘Gypsy’ has been largely replaced by ‘Roma’ and ‘Romany’, with
academics of Romani descent like Ian Hancock being clear advocates of this linguistic (and political)
shift. See: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EF_SNLdqDsI.
14 My own translation from Romanian into English.

178 Ruxandra Trandafoiu
belonging to what they perceive to be the superior British culture. Manele are also
used to reinforce boundaries between those eager to integrate and those Romanians
who may not pass the taste test. These “lower-grade” Romanians are grouped with
the Roma and members of the Moldovan community, who are conceived by some
elements of the Romanian diaspora to be “inferior” or “spoilt” Romanians. In a long
post on 17 Aug. 2011, for example, Nino complained about those who had “manele
in their headphones and gold on their fingers”, while describing Romanian Roma and
Moldovan citizens in London.
At certain points in the discussions, it is easy to detect a slippage from manele
understood as a (contested) musical category to manele as a social category and
finally to manele as a racial category. In the latter incarnation, manele music
became an instrument of racialization and discrimination. Hat (6 Sep. 2011)
bemoaned Roma who called themselves Romanian and who did not show up to GP
appointments, despite requesting interpreters, or attended but answered phones
with manele ringtone during the consultation. Icy (19 May 2010) talked about the
image that Romanians have in the UK and used course language to complain that
Romanians are often mistaken for the Roma, a problem exacerbated by Romanians
listening to manele, which is “Gypsy music”. Andy (26 April 2010) also inferred
that the love of gold and manele, together with a lack of cleanliness, puts a section
of the Romanian community in an in-between category: they are not Roma, but
they are not “cultivated” (read “civilized”) Romanians either. Phin (8 March 2010)
complained about the Gypsification of the Romanian society, as expressed by
Romanians’ love for manele and telenovelas, at odds, in their view, with the
political aims of the 1989 anti-communist revolution. Many (22 Jan 2010) similarly
thought that “we protected the Roma because the Europeans said that it was a
“cool” thing to do; we watched with open mouths Gypsy telenovelas, listened to
manele on high with the car windows open. Consequently, the image of the
average Romanian abroad is associated with that of the Roma, more so in the UK,
where they have known us for less time.” In these posts we see manele
instrumentalised in the service of racism and anti-Roma attitudes, but also used as a
weapon in a cultural war fought by Romanians against Romanians.
In these views manele are associated with low quality, Gypsification,
Chav culture, poor image of Romanians abroad and dumbed down television.
As manele is clearly a popular genre at parties, but pro-manele views are virtually
absent from the online discussions, we can assume that Romanians self-censor their
true musical preferences because of negative associations. While many loudly
reject manele, they do not necessarily boycott the genre and know enough about it
to give ample examples and talk about who is who in the industry.
MANELE AS COLLECTIVE SHAME
The analysis of the Facebook group Romanians in UK proves that current
debates have indeed moved to this online community, although some of the manele

Manele Music as a Marker of Collective Shame... 179
related ones carry on some of the themes identified previously, in the online
discussion forum. The initial search for the use of the hashtag #manele only
brought up one post from June 2019, which was advertising Pasha restaurant and
its services. The advertised music included, according to the post’s description and
hashtags, live music, ambiental, manele and muzică de petrecere. The hashtag
#maneaua was identified in one post from November 2014. The post simply said:
“I didn’t think there was something worse15 sounding than #maneaua!!! #WTF”
The rather ambiguous post had one like but no comments.
The hashtag #freemanele was found in one post from May 2016, in which the
contributor shared a news story about a fight breaking out on a Bucharest tram
between one of the passengers and a young man listening to manele too loudly.
The post earned eleven likes and 15 comments. Most of them were racist remarks
aimed at the Roma community, using course language. One contributor referred to
Antonescu’s “unfinished business”16; one participant called manele a “virus”;
another claimed that “manele has wrecked our young people”. Associated with a
lack of “culture”, “civilization” and “manners”, manele were thus blamed for
ruining “our saintly tradition inherited from our forefathers”.
Once the search for hashtags was exhausted, a general search for the word
manele was undertaken, with the most recent twenty posts spanning the summer of
2022 selected for analysis. They included around a hundred comments. On the rare
occasion that manele were mentioned in relation to music, the posts imparted
information about concerts, television programmes and news about maneliști17.
Video messages featuring Nicolae Guță, a famous manele singer, invited audiences
to a manele festival, but these posts did not yield any comments. A post advertising
sound systems for UK events that included folklore, Romanian and international
pop music (muzică usoară romanească si internatională) and manele also lacked
reactions.
The posts and ensuing comments in which manele were instrumentalised as
descriptors of race and class were nevertheless more popular. In these posts people
listening to manele were typically described as Gypsies, “cocălari” and
“boschetari”18, lacking “manners”, eating and spitting out sunflower seeds, living
in poor conditions and using bad grammar. Occasionally, they were described as
living in “tents”, another reference to the perceived transient lifestyle of the Roma.
The disclaimer “I have no manele on my phone” was used as a mark of class and
ethnic identity19. Although the words Balkans and Balkanism do not appear among
the comments, their association is inferred. People and places within the Balkan
area can be construed as being inferior with regards to tastes and behaviours.
15 The Romanian word used here is „nașpa”.
16 This is a reference to former Romanian Prime-Minister Ion Antonescu, whose fascist views resulted in
the persecution and death of hundreds of thousands of Jews and Roma during World War Two.
17 Manele singers.
18 This description would be similar to “hobo”, “drifter” or “tramp” and is offensive.
19 The rejection of manele was seen as an indicator of Romanianness and having a better education.

180 Ruxandra Trandafoiu
Apart from being used as a tool for racializing and marginalizing groups, the
word manele is also used to delineate a difference between Romania and the UK.
Generally, Romania is viewed as having a weaker education system, being
backward and corrupt, and being besieged by more criminality and social issues
than the UK. Romania’s inferior status is often mentioned as a reason to emigrate.
At the same time, nostalgia is expressed with reference to Romanian traditions,
foods, family events and unparalleled landscapes, that prompt some to announce,
“I have never hidden my origins.” Sandra’s comment from May 2022 summarises
this comparative approach: “Those who travel are usually passionate about history
and culture. But the majority of Romanians are not, they only know about resorts,
mici20, beer and manele”. Criticism coupled with nostalgia may seem inconsistent,
but it is not unique in migration literature. Previous research with Romanians in
Ireland encountered a similar nostalgia for Romania’s beautiful countryside and
praise for Romania’s history but shame with regards to Romania’s social and
political landscape (Macri 2011).
One of the outcomes is the construction of Romanians as “good citizens” and
that of the Roma or manele lovers as “bad citizens” in a complex process of
building barriers that are both ethnicity and class related in the context of migration
and diasporic life. The activation of an exclusion-inclusion mechanism through
discourse has important consequences. One is the effect on the Roma minority.
A study of young Romani students (Pantea 2014) revealed that the Roma
“experienced shame not because of resenting their origin, but because they were
very aware at the negative connotations being attributed to the Roma” (Pantea
2014: 611). The importance of the outside gaze and the ensuing (self)re-evaluation
is also evident in the case of Romanians, who in the diaspora shift from being a
majority to becoming a minority. This diminishing of their symbolic social status
may account for the survival of negative attitudes directed at manele.
The biggest difference observed between the old online discussion group and
the new Facebook community group was not in the way manele was perceived, but
in language. Facebook allows, in the absence of moderators with the right to
exclude rude people from the group, the intensifying of emotional and
discriminatory language. The language was coloured with expletives and
prejudiced words, indicating the ability of this communication platform to support
the radicalization of anti-Roma discourse. To give just one example of this
unfortunate outcome, mentions of the Roma were occasionally accompanied by
GIFs featuring black people and crows.
CONCLUSION
There is a clear dissonance between the popularity of manele and their
outright rejection in discussions about culture, identity and music. Embraced by the
20 Mici are skinless meat sausages found in various incarnations throughout Souh-Eastern Europe.

Manele Music as a Marker of Collective Shame... 181
club circuit, music promoters and DJs, they are loathed by a segment of the
Romanian society and its diaspora. This dissonance is indicative of a deepening of
social fissures in postsocialist Romania and of a mirroring of those ruptures within
communities that construct Romanianness at a distance. Manele are not a guilty
pleasure, but one that instils profound feelings of shame.
The following post by Many (26 Nov 2009) summarizes this tendency:
“We say “Manele are horrible, and we don’t like them”, but we all go like sheep to
clubs that play manele…And God forbid, “I’m not dancing, to protest against
manele” but we get pissed there and bring business to the same clubs.” A shameful
complicity describing the cognitive dissonance created by manele is also obvious
in Mik’s (19 June 2009) post: “it is us Romanians who sell and promote Gypsy
shows all over the television”. He was replying to Darrel (18 June 2009) who had
posted “it is wrong to say that cocălari who listen to manele and muzică
lautarească are Gypsy. Many Romanians who have nothing to do with the Gypsy
race listen to manele.” Rab (18 June 2009) observed that the majority of manelişti
are Romanian but added: “I also like muzică lautarească and Gypsy music, but not
manele.” Some participants attempted to justify their musical preference by
separating traditional Romanian folklore from hybrids that reinforce Oriental
sounds, when the barrier is often porous. These artificial barriers indicate the
ethnicization and politicization of Romanian music, as well as the recirculation of
old tropes of Balkanism and Orientalism.
In their rejection of manele as a valuable cultural product and marker of
Romanian identity, both pro-Western intellectuals and immigrants expose an
interesting paradox: they claim to hold Western values, but in fact promote
typically Eastern brands of ethnic nationalism and racism. In the case of the
diaspora, anti-Muslim attitudes encountered in the West, enhance their refutation of
the Orient as a cultural home. The renegotiation of musical tastes in the context of
the old Romanian obsession with Westernization and the perceived problematic
hybridity of Romanian culture, leads to replaying old arguments. The East and the
Orient are not accepted as valid cultural anchors, but their influence is used as a
self-exoticization device. Manele are not part of Romanian culture, but they
somehow make Romanians stand out. Consequently, they become more than a
musical genre; they become a cultural, social and ethnic category that is
instrumentalised for various purposes, using nostalgic references to a past that is no
more.
The tendency of the Romanian diaspora in the UK to obsessively generate
labels and name categories of citizens, is a futile exercise that only serves the
community’s internal logic. Outside it, the British public would not specifically
recognize Roma as Roma and Romanians as Romanians, particularly in the context
of large Indian and Eastern European immigrations to the UK. Moreover, they
would be unaware of any cultural traits or social categories in the Romanian
context. The accusations of manele giving a bad name to Romanians, encouraging

182 Ruxandra Trandafoiu
the confusion between Roma and Romanians or lowering the status of Romanian
culture do not have a base in reality, when knowledge about Romania, Eastern
Europe or manele music is poor.
The difference between muzică lautarească and manele is also ideologized.
Traditionally lăutari featured in the background of community events, they
provided musical accompaniment to the proceedings and lacked the attention and
status accorded to manele performers. The lăutar was part of an amorphous group,
while manele singers are musical stars in their own right. However, Romanian
audiences remain in control of celebratory events, through a system of music
dedications accompanied by money offerings that display wealth and create a
contractual obligation for the manele performer to sing. This is a mechanism
through which hierarchies of power are re-established between Romanians and
Roma. A similar mechanism is deployed by Romanians online when they show
more tolerance for the lăutari and their subservient status than for manele
celebrities. It is an attempt to place manele musicians back into a subservient
position.
These processes of racialization have historical roots: “A historical framework
is crucial for an understanding of contemporary manelişti: the centuries-long
enslavement of Roma in the Romanian principalities and the important role of
lăutari, the male house slaves who provided music for their masters. While slaves
were emancipated 150 years ago, lăutari have continued to carry on the tradition of
making music for dominant society – precisely what manelişti persist in doing
today. Mainstream Romanian society-controlled Roma – and lăutari – for hundreds
of years, and while the nature of the control has changed since emancipation, the
legacy of this institutionalized role in society has remained” (Beissinger, 2016:
131-2).
Racialization is even more important in the context of migration, with
migrants attempting to recover their status as “masters” by hand-picking elements
of culture while discriminating against the Roma and displaying ambivalent
attitudes with regards to their heritage. It is essential therefore to continue to study
the role of music in processes of political transition, as well as the cultural
transition inevitably experienced through migration and mobility. Both are
important indicators of how a culture sees itself and negotiates its position at the
interface between West and East.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bakić-Hayden, Milica, “Nesting Orientalisms: The Case of Former Yugoslavia,” Slavic
Review, 54(4) (Winter 1995), 917-931.
Beissinger, Margaret “Romanian Manele and Regional Parallels, “Oriental” Ethnopop in
the Balkans”, in Beissinger, Margaret, Rădulescu, Speranţa and Anca Giurchescu
(eds.), Manele in Romania: Cultural Expression and Social Meaning in Balkan
Popular Music, Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2016, 95-138.

Manele Music as a Marker of Collective Shame... 183
Goffman, Ervin Stigma. Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity. London: Penguin
Books, 1963.
Haliliuc, Alina, “Manele Music and the Discourse of Balkanism in Romania”,
Communication, Culture & Critique 8 (2015), 290-308.
Ilioaia, Mihai-Alexandru “Manele and the Hegemony of ‘Good Taste’”, Romedia
Foundation, March 3 (2014). Accessed September 15, 2022. https://romediafoundation.
wordpress.com/2014/03/03/manele-and-the-hegemony-of-good-taste/.
Kozinets, Robert, Netnography: the essential guide to qualitative social media research.
LA: Sage, 2020.
Macri, Gloria “Who Do They Think They Are? Online Narratives among Romanian
Diaspora in Ireland”, in De Pretto, Laura, Macri, Gloria and Catherine Wong (eds.)
Diasporas: Revisiting and Discovering. Brill, 2010, 205-214.
Macri, Gloria “Stories of Love and Hate. Images of ‘Homeland’ in the Identity Narratives of
Romanians in Ireland”, International Review of Social Research 1(2), 2011, 125-143.
Mădroane, Irina Diana “Shame, (Dis)empowerment and Resistance in Diasporic Media:
Romanian Transnational Migrants’ Reclassification Struggles”, in Reifová, Irena and
Martin Hájek (eds.), Mediated Shame of Class and Poverty Across Europe, Palgrave,
2021, 61-83.
Mihăilescu, Vintilă “Turbo-Authenticity: An Essay on Manelism”, in Beissinger, Margaret,
Rădulescu, Speranţa and Anca Giurchescu (eds.), Manele in Romania: Cultural
Expression and Social Meaning in Balkan Popular Music, Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers, 2016, 247-258.
Mitan, Madalina “Goran Bregovic – de ce îi plac manelele, țiganii și România – Interviu”,
March 11 (2011). Accessed September 15, 2022. http://www.ziare.com/muzica/
albume/goran-bregovic-de-ce-ii-plac-manelele-tiganii-si-romania-interviu-ziare-com-
1080731.
Pantea, Maria-Carmen “On pride, shame, passing and avoidance: an inquiry into Roma
young people’s relationship with their ethnicity”, Identities, 21(5), 2014, 604-622.
Silverman, Carol “Global Balkan Gypsy Music: Issues of Migration, Appropriation,
and representation”, in Krüger, Simone and Ruxandra Trandafoiu (eds.),
The Globalization of Musics in Transit. Music Migration and Tourism. New York,
Routledge, 2013, 185-208.
Silverman, Carol “Gypsy/Klezmer Dialectics: Jewish and Romani Traces and Erasures in
Contemporary European World Music”, Ethnomusicology Forum, 24(2), 2015, 159-180.
Todorova, Maria (2009) Imagining the Balkans. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Trandafoiu, Ruxandra (2013) Diaspora Online: Identity Politics and Romanian Migrants.
Oxford: Berghahn.
Trandafoiu, Ruxandra (2016) ‘Manele, Symbolic Geography and Music Cosmopolitanism
in Romania’, Popular Music History 11(1), 61-79.

NEO-FOLKLORE MOTIFS IN A CHEN YIʼS
PIANO WORK
PEIHONG YANG
ABSTRACT
The blending of traditional and cross-cultural musical elements improves musical
compositions and piano playing techniques. The research purpose is to investigate
the main features of neo-folklore motifs in the piano work of Chen Yi and analyse
the specifics of piano art in the work To E. The research used different methods of
analysis, comparison, and calculation for the Socio-Metric Rating Index and the
Efficiency Ratio. The analysis revealed that the main indicator was a novelty in
music that was evident in the development of different cultures, the new artistic
ideas, and the use of a modal system, new rhythmic intonations and structures.
The practical significance is in the use of neo-folklore features in the process of
creating new compositions and improvising on the piano. Future research is needed
to investigate neo-folklore features and compare several pieces of music reflecting
cross-cultural traditions.
Keywords: artistic effect, instrumental performance, intercultural influence, intonation
flexibility, rhythmic beat.
INTRODUCTION
Chinese piano creativity is influenced by traditional and modern music, which
helps to reflect the realities of musical culture (Zheng and Leung 2021).
The Chinese professional piano school began in the 1910s and has been considered
a starting point of modern Chinese piano music (Van 2018). Piano creativity is a
mixture of national and European traditions, manifested in playing changes and
repertoire diversity (Xue and Loo 2019).
One of the key features is playing with the right hand, based on tonal thinking
and the development of atonal technique (pitch playing characterised by illogical
note sequences used to create harmonious sound effects) with the use of the left hand
(Wan 2022). The cross-cultural influence in Chinese piano music has also led to the
revision of the musical theory and the writing of piano compositions (Gao 2021).
An important feature of piano music is the blend of folk traditions, which
influenced the development of different arrangements that affect the artistry,
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 184-197

Neo-Folklore Motifs in a Chen Yiʼs Piano Work 185
expressiveness, texture and sound quality (Xu 2018). The folk traditions in piano
music manifest in a subtle sound, lively tempo and unique rhythmic patterns
(Dai 2021). Chinese piano music is based on enhanced sound quality, thought-out
intonation, and bright melodic patterns, which reflect national uniqueness
(Tang 2021). Lively melodic patterns promote compositional change and facilitate
the development of contemporary melodies (Gibbs 2021). The inner meaning of
piano music allows composers to develop ancient Chinese poetic thought with an
artistic effect (Wang and Luo 2022). Piano compositions based on classical poetry
increase music popularity among a wide target audience (Xu 2018).
A striking stylistic trend in piano work is neo-folklorism, which manifests in
new relationships between folklore and creativity (Cheng et al. 2022).
Neo-folklorism in piano music reflects a holistic music structure, evident in a
dynamic experience subject to influence beyond just intonation, modal structure,
rhythm, and melody (Li and Southcott 2015). Neo-folklorism promotes a mixture
of musical genres, including lyrical and rhythmic music. Moreover, the crossing of
genres in a free way facilitates an updated interpretation of melodies and manifests
in music expressiveness and imagery (Ye 2018). Neo-folklorism also supports the
blending of European traditions in piano music. Changes in metro-rhythm patterns,
modal structure, energy, and brightness are common features of this type of music.
In modern piano music, the most well-known neo-folklorist composer is Chen Yi
(Ye 2018).
Chen Yi is a Chinese-American composer who skilfully links artistry and
dramaturgy in her piano works (Bain 2020). A key feature of her piano music is her
orientation toward European music. Chen Yiʼs work is marked by the development
of new playing techniques, which appeared in the blending of modern music and
Western music traditions (Kielian-Gilbert 2020). The modern compositions reflect
the features of national melodies and music modes used during the classical and
romantic periods. The modern pieces of music reflected Chinese folk traditions,
songs and folk features of instrumental music (Kielian-Gilbert 2020). The playing
techniques and the melodies follow a five-step modal structure that influences
intonation patterns and accompaniment (Dai 2021). The musical elegance and
brightness of Chen Yiʼs music contribute to the vivid musical patterns and the use
of melisma (Bain 2020).
The piano work To E represents a new creative approach to piano music that is
evident in live performance, rhythmic sound, unique national patterns and
dissonant chords common to European music (Dai 2021). The modernity of the
sound is reflected in the polyphony, smooth melodic transitions, and imitation of
the gongs and drums typical for Chinese music (Bain 2020). To analyse the neo-
folklore motifs in the composerʼs piano work, the scholars reviewed the layer of
scientific literature on Chinese piano music and neo-folklorism.
The analysis of the piano trio INO-2 reveals the uniqueness of the stylistic,
melodious and rhythmic patterns common for neo-folklore motifs. The stylistic

186 Peihong Yang
features of the composition are based on the synthesis of traditional folklore and
modern musical techniques. The first part reflects folk genres, imitating the sounds
of a ballad full of melisma and intonation changes.
Asymmetric rhythm is marked by a change in the eights. The polyphonic
techniques have a positive impact on the development of neo-folklorism (Djalilova
2019). Chen Yiʼs piano compositions are based on the interplay of Chinese and
Western music, characterised by their brilliance and playing mastery. The play
To E is based on a variety of compositional approaches, supported by ancient
Chinese traditions and philosophy, which improves performance techniques.
Her compositions have a unique musical system, characterised by tonality and a
unique framework. Improvisational techniques are characterised by the presence of
high but, emotional experience, lyrical melodies and flexible melodic patterns
(Shen 2011).
The musical works of Chen Yi are characterised by inner meaning and
folklore elements as well as unique musical features, aesthetics, and dynamics.
The pieces of music are distinctive because they have musical contrasts,
symbolism, and a variety of patterns that influence the popularisation of music
among different social groups (Kielian-Gilbert 2020). The blending of Eastern and
Western traditions of piano music lead to some problems with different historical
developments of music. To mitigate the cultural differences in music, expressive
elements should be used to guide the development of new musical forms.
The traditional oral music, and the artistic and technical means of modern music
influence the development of neo-folklorism. The originality of neo-folklorism in
Azerbaijan is associated with the national musical thinking reflected in piano music
(Mikayılova 2020). The popularisation of Chinese piano music is achieved by
using modern musical elements that allow a musician to vary the timbre, rhythm,
and melody. The national uniqueness is a result of borrowing folk song melodies.
The contrast between themes and sounds adds brightness and emotional colouring
to the performance (Lu 2022).
The folklore in professional piano music influences the creation of neo-
folklore motifs. A holistic musical image has a positive impact on the
expressiveness of the sound. The borrowing of composersʼ techniques from
different countries improves the Western modal manner of performance and
preserves the national traditions. The musical arrangement supports the artistic
skills, modification and enrichment of melodies (Cheng et al. 2022). Cultural and
historical factors influence the interest in piano music and musical thinking.
The multi-ethnic character changes the understanding of piano music and
performance models. The blending of national and Chinese elements affects the
artistry of performance and the sound images as a result of understanding the sound
patterns (Deng 2022).
Piano creativity is marked by the brightness of interpretation and the
polyphonic genres, formed as a result of the musical thinking evolution. The neo-

Neo-Folklore Motifs in a Chen Yiʼs Piano Work 187
folklorism enriches musical compositions with different moods, experiences, and
images. Creative individuality is manifested in the musical elements. Imitating the
sounds of other musical instruments influences the creation of textured elements,
bright, and expressive instrumental possibilities (Chernyavska and Mengzhe 2021).
The blending of European traditions with Chinese piano art has been subjected
to global changes. Musical expressiveness affects the genre and manner of musical
performance. The diversity of creativity in piano performances is evident in the
content and thematic patterns. The variety of musical modes, metre and rhythmic
systems affects the originality and uniqueness of expression (Ye 2018).
Li Yinghaiʼs piano works are based on European and Western traditions, which
cause a change in compositional techniques. The works reflect a polyphonic
manner of performance, achieved as a result of a comparison of independent
melodic lines. Based on the sound calmness, conciseness of images, and rhythmic
musical patterns link different musical elements borrowed across countries (Van
2018). The scholars used the sources of literature to analyse the uniqueness of neo-
folklore motifs, a change in compositional techniques and a combination of
intercultural musical traditions.
The research purpose was to identify the key features of non-folklore motifs
found in Chen Yiʼs piano work and research the features of piano art in the work
To E. Research objectives are the following:
- analysing the key features of neo-folklorism and identifying the key features
of Chen Yiʼs play To E;
- investigating the features of the piano composition To E, based on three parts
of the work;
- analysing the key features of the musical parts and their significance for the
preservation of neo-folklore motifs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Research design
In the first stage, the scholars identify the key features of neo-folklore motifs
and ideas that manifest themselves in music. The key features were identified using
the method of analysis (Wang 2020). The analysis method helped to single out the
common elements by comparing the features of the inner meaning of musical
genres, frequency of use in compositions, popularisation among listeners, and
differences from other motifs. The scholars focused on these features and rated the
main elements for the following:
- a novelty in music;
- the blending of different cultures;
- intonation flexibility;
- artistic improvement of folklore;
- diversity of technical and stylistic techniques.

188 Peihong Yang
In the second stage, the researchers analysed the key features of neo-
folklorism in Chen Yiʼs piano work To E. The work To E was chosen for analysis
because it combined the core elements of Chinese and European musical cultures
important for neo-folklorism. The Socio-Metric Ranking Index was used to
identify the positive and negative elements of music (Wang 2020):
l = (1)
s
q – relative assessment of the positive impact of the parameter;
p
q – relative negative assessment of the positive impact of the parameter;
n
N – a number of parameters.
Further, the scholars analysed the piano work To E and paid special attention
to key features of the three main parts (the main theme, middle and final parts).
Based on the comparison, the differences between the parts were identified, which
influenced their structure, tempo, and rhythm. Comparison is a logical technique
used to analyse different features. The comparison method is possible to apply to
one common feature, in this case, neo-folklore motifs. The different semantic
parameters are influenced by cultural uniqueness and traditional motifs found in
Chinese music.
At the final stage, the scholars analysed the brightness of the performance and
the relationships between the parts of the play To E with neo-folklore motifs.
Their analysis was based on the efficiency coefficient:
k = (2)
ef
k – relative estimation;
m
k – maximum allowable value.
k n
The indicators comparison using the contingency coefficient was based on the
following:
k = (3)
c
φ2 – linear relationship between parameters (a number between 0 and 1,
where 1 indicates a high relationship between quantities);
k , k , k – a number of indicators.
1 2 n
Sample
The research involved 127 future pianists from LongYan City Fujian
Province. The main selection condition was that the participants should be the last
course students who take in the piano programme and have already acquired the
necessary theoretical and practical skills. Originally, the research planned to
involve 130 pianists, but 3 students refused to participate in the experimental part
for unspecified reasons. The pianists were involved in the final stage of the
research only, which was initially agreed upon with students.

Neo-Folklore Motifs in a Chen Yiʼs Piano Work 189
Statistical processing
The statistical data processing was performed using Microsoft Excel.
The Excel programme was used to calculate the data and obtain the necessary
results using formulas of different complexity. Moreover, the scholars visualised
diagrams based on the data obtained.
Ethical issues
The research ensured compliance with ethical standards following the
provisions of the International Code of Practice for Marketing and Sociological
Research ICC/ESOMAR (ESOMAR 2016). Under these provisions, no conflicts of
interest in the work, relevance and data were identified. No previously published
results were used in the research.
Research limitations
The main research limitations were the analysis of one piano play To E,
excluding the analysis of other similar pieces of music. Despite the limitations, the
key features of this work were identified by the research and their comparison with
the key features of neo-folklorism was made.
Results
Initially, the key features of neo-folklorism were revealed in the work, consi-
dered the basis for Chen Yiʼs piano creativity. The results are available in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Features of neo-folklore motifs in piano music
Novelty in music is one of the important elements of neo-folklorism in piano
music, based on the blending of modern and folk traditions. The use of new
musical compositions is associated with the diversity of artistic tasks and the use of

190 Peihong Yang
a new mode system typical not only for Chinese music. Moreover, harmony as a
result of rhythmic intonations and timbre structure is achieved. The novelty is
manifested in a change in musical culture, closely connected with the repertoireʼs
uniqueness.
The blending of different cultures is an important feature of neo-folklorism
being an outcome of the mixture of Chinese and European music traditions which
helps to update music structure and corresponds to modernity. The cross-cultural
approach to music development influences melodic lines in a wider range.
The music range affects the changes in intonation, the emotionality of melodies and
the uniqueness of the sound. This approach improves the piano playing techniques,
manifested in the folklore sound change, diversity of genres, and artistic images.
Intonation flexibility is based on different stylistic changes that affect the
structure of musical material and its semantic expressions. Intonation reflects a
national character, language, thinking, and ethics. Intonation affects the new
rhythmic patterns, timbre, and tonality. Intonation influences expressive sound,
which is achieved by using melisma and changes in melodic patterns. Musical
expressiveness affects the expansion of the repertoire and the sound insights, its
pitch and the construction system.
The diversity of technical and stylistic techniques is a result of different
musical genres used for musical performance. Genre diversity affects the new
timbres, rhythmic intonations, and musical structures, based on the combination of
previously analysed elements (novelty in music, the blending of different cultures,
intonation flexibility, and a variety of technical and stylistic techniques).
Style diversity influences the development of a new artistic style manifested in
social significance. The mixture of styles reflects modern piano creativity.
The update of the figurative structure affects the artistic improvement of
folklore, which is in the mode and harmonic structure and musical techniques.
Artistry affects expressive sound, the development of new images, and the
imitation of the folk instrumentsʼ sounds. The artistic improvement of folklore is
associated with the possibility of the composer changing the intonation of the
composition, and use of a new bright sound. Artistic rethinking was based on the
development of modern expressive means that were not previously found in
folklore music.
One of the bright piano works based on neo-folklorism is the composition
To E by Chen Yi. The scholars compared the common features of neo-folklore
motifs and their use in the piece of music. The research concluded that the key
features were a novelty in music, the blending of different cultures, and intonation
flexibility. This is due to the fact that a composer used a new vision of music,
pivotal for the composition popularisation. The scholars calculated the Socio-
Metric Rating Index and visualised the data. The results are available in Figure 2.
At the next research stage, the key features of the piece of music To E were
analysed. The scholars compared them with neo-folklore motifs and analysed the

Neo-Folklore Motifs in a Chen Yiʼs Piano Work 191
specifics of Chinese archaic piano art. The work To E, based on the mixture of
Chinese and European music, consists of a three-part form.
Figure 2. Key features of neo-folklorism in the piece of music To E by Chen Yi
The First Part (Main Theme)
Intonation is the core of the thematic character of the piano composition,
based on a song and unique sound. In the main theme, intonation is the starting
point of a vivid expressive sound with a variety of musical notes. The contrast of
intonation affected the brightness of the performance and manifested in a
combination of the Dong song (Kam) and the melody of the Beijing opera.
The improvisation techniques influence the development of latitude of diverse
performances and affect the musical culture. The sound harmony was achieved by
the initial acceleration of the rhythmic patterns and their further slowing.
Middle Part
The middle part is based on the intonation material of the Beijing opera, which
affects the thematic character and the instrumental nature of the performance. In
the second part, the music exposure is evident in the Largo-Allegro part, the main
part is Adagio and Andante, and the reprise is Allegro. The key features are
expressed in improvisation techniques, rhythm, an expanded melodic range, as well
as melisma. The unique sound of the composition reaches its full potential in the
second part, introducing bright and outstanding sounds. The principle of dialogue
is possible in a combination of the upper and lower registers during the playing of
the piano, which influences the rhythm and the timbre of percussion instruments.
This approach supports the development and implementation of one musical
thought (Figure 3).

192 Peihong Yang
Figure 3. Fragment of the second part of the piano work To E by Chen Yi
Final Part
The final part is based on improvisation and intonation creativity, which helps
to develop polyphonic sounds. The research finds that the musical interval depends
on intonation. The dynamism of the sound is achieved through the archaic
intonations that ascend into octave unison and form a passage. Intonation contains
octave replicas in the low register and passages in the upper register.
The intonation is used as a link between musical forms, and modern and vivid
sound patterns typical for the European musical style. The modern performance is
evident in the use of wide tonality, complex chords, and melodic movements.
Figure 4. Similar
elements of the
parts of To E and
neo-folklore
motifs

Neo-Folklore Motifs in a Chen Yiʼs Piano Work 193
Note. Proximity coefficient: the Main Theme-the Middle Part: 0.79; the Main
Theme-the Final Part: 0.90; the Middle Part-The Final Part: 0.93.
The results showed that the play To E had folklore motifs such as polyphony
and rhythmic sound patterns. Chinese unique traditions are evident in the imitation
of the sounds of gongs and drums. The free rhythm is found in the change and
dynamics of the European music culture. The second part sounds more bright and
reflects neo-folklore motifs, full of intonation changes. At the same time, mixed
rhythms are created by seven-dimensional and five-dimensional musical groups,
influencing the brightness of the melodic patterns.
DISCUSSION
The blending of Eastern and Western piano traditions has a great impact on the
development of creative thinking, the core of neo-folklore motifs. The development
of creative thinking shapes the musical transparency and vividness of images.
This approach promotes the development of the composerʼs techniques, the progress
of national culture and the enrichment of national culture (Schwartz et al. 2020).
Acoustic sound has a great impact on musical expressiveness, influenced by the
global understanding of Chinese piano art. The blending of piano music from
different cultures affects the aesthetics of sound, tonality, and rhythmic patterns.
Intonation diversity influences the uniqueness of sound and the popularisation of
philosophical ideas and musical performance (Zhu, Chen, and Yang 2021).
The emphasis on the stylistic features of musical compositions of piano performance
increases the sound complexity. Artistic variations and changes in sound effects add
emotional colouring and affect the perception of the listeners.
Compositional and expressive elements promote the mixture of European and
Asian traditions. The impact of different cultures enriches music traditions (Weiß
et al. 2019). In this research, the emphasis is on the features of neo-folklorism such
as novelty in music, the blending of different national cultures, intonation
flexibility, artistic improvement of folklore, and a variety of technical and stylistic
techniques.
The development of traditional Chinese music and its fusion with folklore is
caused by changes in musical elements (rhythm, technology and tonality), which
helps to attract more listeners to musical performances. The emphasis on the
imagery, intonation, and change in texture affects the quality of perception and
helps to transform musical techniques (Ma 2019). The acoustic features of the
musical instrument have a great impact on the quality of melodies since they
influence sound and spatial heterogeneity. The sound quality is achieved by
timber change. During the music performance, a musician adds emotional tension
and expressiveness linked with a thought, good musical ear and movements.
Improvisation leads to a change in musical space and helps to develop a
naturalistic sound. The dynamism in music is perceived through sounds and
feelings (Robb 2022).

194 Peihong Yang
Modern music initiates the search for new timbres, a unique combination of
sounds, which helps to manage emotional expressiveness. In oriental music,
melodiousness is manifested in the use of pentatonic scale, characterised by unique
musical modes and rhythmic patterns. The unique combination of folk music and
musical traditions of other countries influences the artistic interpretation of
melodies, the synthesis of different cultures, their philosophy and their melodic
patterns (Sit, Mak, and Neill 2017). Neo-folklorism is a way to upgrade the
creative principles of different cultures and performance techniques. Moreover, it
influences the complexity of the repertoire, both for solo and joint repertoire.
A variety of musical piano skills helps musicians to develop a positive atmosphere
that attracts listeners (Zhukov and Rowley 2022). The research analysis of the play
To E reveals that its second part has brighter musical images than other parts and
has unique neo-folklore elements (intonation flexibility, novelty, and the blending
of different cultures).
The piano performance is based on artistic elements and performing skills,
which help a composer introduce amazing sounds that influence the emotions of
listeners. Musical tension and expression affect the brightness of music
performance and produce a rich artistic performance. The folklore elements such as
a mode system and intonation influence the transformation of melodies and
musical performance (Zhu 2021). The development of the musical repertoire has a
direct impact on the cross-cultural relations that reflect the identity of composers,
performers and theorists. Cross-cultural orientation causes a change in the
repertoire, aesthetics, and expressive means. Folklore elements mirror unique
traditions of folk culture, which can manifest themselves in bright and artistic
piano techniques (vibrato, glissando, bell sound effects, etc.) (Everett 2021).
The piano music of Chen Yi has a unique compositional and aesthetic practice
framework, which manifests itself in musical and performative impulses in
contemporary art.
The musical texture is developed under the influence of unemotional features
that affect perception. The music has many long patterns and transitional
movements that inspire different associations and experiences. The changed
stylistics affects the perception and stylistic transparency (Kielian-Gilbert 2020).
The piano solo of Chinese composers who received education in other countries,
like Chen Yi, was full of transformations of the folk melodies and tunes.
For melodious performance, rhythmic changes, imitation of timbre and pitch are
used. The use of post-tonal structures leads to a violation of linear continuity and
introduces a change in rhythmic processes (Roeder 2020).
An analysis of scientific literature showed that the expressiveness of piano
music was achieved by the use of neo-folklore motifs. In this research, the key
features of neo-folklorism were revealed and investigated using the example
of To E by Chen Yi.

Neo-Folklore Motifs in a Chen Yiʼs Piano Work 195
CONCLUSIONS
The research identified the key features of neo-folklore motifs in Chinese
piano music. The results show that the most significant feature of neo-folklore is a
novelty, associated with a change in musical culture. The blend of different
cultures is also identified since the intercultural approach is aimed at expanding the
melodic line affecting the transformation of intonations.
Intonation flexibility influences greatly sound expressiveness and changes in
rhythm, timbre, and tonality. The diversity of technical and stylistic techniques and
the artistic improvement of folklore are also features of neo-folklorism, achieved as
a result of the experimentation with new timbres, colouristic and artistic
techniques.
The research results revealed that the main features of neo-folklore in the
piano work of Chen Yi To E, which was the object of research, were intonation
flexibility (2.47), a novelty in music (2.31), and the blending of different cultures
(2, 01). These conclusions were based on the analysis of the composition and its
relationship with Chinese and European music.
The research revealed the key features of To E by Chen Yi and their similarity
with neo-folklore motifs. The results showed that the uniqueness of the first part
(main theme) was the variety of musical records and notes. The acceleration and
slowing of the tempo support the melodious performance. The main contrast is
based on a combination of the Dong (Kam) song and melodies common for the
Beijing opera. The middle part is characterised by a variety of thematic patterns
and imitation of the percussion instruments. The final part of the piano work To E
is characterised by many octave replicas, as a result of intonation changes of
different musical forms. The results have shown that the second part of the play is
more melodic, based on the key neo-folklore motifs, evident in the intonation
changes throughout the part.
The research significance is in the possibility of applying the key features of
the musical composition To E to the piano playing with a focus on neo-folklore
motifs. Future research is needed to analyse several piano compositions, and
identify and compare the key neo-folklore elements in each piece of music.
REFERENCES
Bain, Jennifer. 2020. “Introduction: The Music of Chen Yi.” Music Theory Online 26 (3):
1-4. doi: 10.30535/MTO.26.3.9.
Cheng, Mengwei, Botian Pang, Xiaoxuan Zeng, Weifeng Xu, and Yuan Chang. 2022.
“Integration of the Traditions of Folk-Instrumental Art into the Works of Chinese
Composers of the 20th and 21st Centuries.” Rupkatha Journal on Interdisciplinary
Studies in Humanities 14 (2): 1-16. doi: 10.21659/rupkatha.v14n2.19.
Chernyavska, Marianna, and Mengzhe Zhang. 2021. “Preludes and Fugues for Piano in the
Polyphonic Works of Chinese Composers.” Rast Müzikoloji Dergisi 9 (S3):
2943-2960. doi: 10.12975/rastmd.2021931.

196 Peihong Yang
Dai, Yue. 2021. “A Behavioural Cultural-Based Development Analysis of Entrepreneurship
in China.” Administrative Sciences 11 (3): 91. doi: 10.3390/ADMSCI11030091.
Deng, Yu. 2022. “The Timbre Relationship between Piano Performance Skills and Piano
Combined with Opera Music Elements in the Context of the Internet Of Things.”
Security and Communication Networks 2022 (4259995). doi: 10.1155/2022/4259995.
Djalilova, Natalia. 2019. “The Neo-Folklore Style in a Rotaruʼs Trio for Violin, Piano and
Cello “INO-2”. İnönü Üniversitesi Kültür ve Sanat Dergisi 5 (2): 85-91. doi:
10.22252/ ijca.656283.
ESOMA. 2016. “International Code of Practice for Marketing and Sociological Research
ICC / ESOMAR”. Accessed August 15 2022. https://www.esomar.org/uploads/public/
knowledge-and-standards/codes-and-guidelines/ICCESOMAR_Code_Russian_.pdf.
Everett, U. Yayoi. 2021. “From Exoticism to Interculturalism: Counterframing the East-
West Binary.” Music Theory Spectrum 43 (2): 330-338. doi: 10.1093/mts/mtab001.
Gao, Jin. 2021. “Exploring Childrenʼs Well-Being and Creativity in Chinese Folk Music
Lessons.” Thinking Skills and Creativity 41 (100903). doi: 10.1016/j.tsc.2021.100903.
Gibbs, S. Levi. 2021. “Going Beyond the Western Pass: Chinese Folk Models of Danger
and Abandonment in Songs of Separation.” Modern China 47 (2): 178-207. doi:
10.1177/0097700419860417.
Kielian-Gilbert, Marianne. 2020. “Experiencing Chen Yiʼs Music: Local and Cosmopolitan
Reciprocities in Ning for Pipa, Violin and Cello (2002).” Music Theory Online 26 (3):
1-14. doi: 10.30535/mto.26.3.13.
Li, Sicong, and Jane Southcott. 2015. “The meaning of Learning Piano Keyboard in the
Lives of Older Chinese People.” International Journal of Lifelong Education 34 (3):
316-333. doi: 10.1080/02601370.2014.999361.
Lu, Dong. 2022. “Inheritance and Promotion of Chinese Traditional Music Culture in
College Piano Education.” Heritage Science 10 (1): 75. doi: 10.1186/s40494-022-
00717-2.
Ma, Li. 2019. “Traditional Music Protection System from the ecological Perspective Based
on Big Data Analysis.” Ekoloji 28 (107): 3667-3676.
Mikayılova, Sevil. 2020. “Mugam Principles Used in Gara Garayevʼs Piano Works in the
East-West.” Rast Müzikoloji Dergisi 8 (2): 2382-2395. doi: 10.12975/pp2382-2395.
Robb, Hamish. 2022. “Marie Jaëll: Pioneer of Musical Embodiment Studies.” Nineteenth
Century Music 45 (3): 220-243. doi: 10.1525/ncm.2022.45.3.220.
Roeder, John. 2020. “Interactions of Folk Melody and Transformational (Dis)Continuities
in Chen Yiʼsba Ban (1999).” Music Theory Online 26 (3): 1-9. doi:
10.30535/MTO.26.3. 12.
Schwartz, L. Bennet, Zehra F. Peynircioğlu, and Joshua R. Tatz. 2020. “Effect of
Processing Fluency on Metamemory for Written Music in Piano Players.” Psychology
of Music 48 (5): 693-706. doi: 10.1177/0305735618817925.
Shen, Chia-Ching. 2011. “Asian Inspiration: Chinese Influences in the Solo Piano Music of
Chen Yi.” The Florida State University. Accessed August 15 2022.
https://diginole.lib. fsu.edu/islandora/object/fsu:253994/datastream/PDF/view.
Sit, Alison, Anita S. Mak, and James T. Neill. 2017. “Does Cross-Cultural Training in
Tertiary Education Enhance Cross-Cultural Adjustment? A Systematic Review.”
International Journal of Intercultural Relations 57: 1-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ijintrel.2017.
01.001.

Neo-Folklore Motifs in a Chen Yiʼs Piano Work 197
Tang, Kai. 2021. “Singing Chinese Nation: Heritage Preservation, the Yuanshengtai
Movement, and New Trends in Chinese Folk Music in the Twenty-First Century.”
Ethnomusicology 65 (1): 1-31. doi: 10.5406/ethnomusicology.65.1.0001.
Van, Dun. 2018. “The Piano Compositions of Chinese Composer Li Yinghai.” Music
Scholarship 2: 111-117. doi: 10.17674/1997-0854.2018.2.111-117.
Wan, Weijia. 2022. “Digital Technologies in Music Education: The Case of Chinese
Students.” Musica Hodie 22 (2): e70752. doi: 10.5216/mh.v22.70752.
Wang, Jianjian. 2020. “Preservation and Promotion of Chinaʼs Musical Cultural Heritage
on the Internet.” Heritage Science 9 (1): 135. doi: 10.1186/s40494-021-00612-2.
Wang, Qian, and Juniy Luo. 2022. “Chinese Folk Music and Its Effect on Human
Mathematical Thinking Skills.” Interdisciplinary Science Reviews 47 (1): 97-106. doi:
10.1080/03080188.2021.1956798.
Weiß, Christof, Matthias Mauch, Simon Dixon, and Meinard Müller. 2019. “Investigating
Style Evolution of Western Classical Music: A Computational Approach.” Musicae
Scientiae 23 (4): 486-5071. doi: 10.1177/1029864918757595.
Xu, Ning. 2018. “Analysis of the Correlation between Folk Music Education and Chinese
Traditional Culture.” Kuram Ve Uygulamada Egitim Bilimleri 18 (5): 2564-2570. doi:
10.12738/estp.2018.5.159.
Xue, Ke, and Fing Yung Loo. 2019. “Transcoding the I Ching as Composition Techniques
in Chou Wen Chung, Zhao Xiaosheng and Chung Yiu Kwong.” Musica Hodie 19:
e52739. doi: 10.5216/mh.v19.52739.
Ye, Bai. 2018. “Conceptual Models of Chinese Piano Music Integration into the Space of
Modern Music.” International Review of the Aesthetics and Sociology of Music 49 (1):
137-147.
Zheng, Yuan, and Bo-Wah Leung. 2021. “Cultivating Music Studentsʼ Creativity in Piano
Performance: A multiple-case Study in China.” Music Education Research 23 (5):
594-608. doi: 10.1080/14613808.2021.1977787.
Zhu, Jiaqiang, Xiaoxiang Chen, and Yuxiao Yang. 2021. “Effects of Amateur Musical
Experience on Categorical Perception of Lexical Tones by Native Chinese Adults: An
ERP Study.” Frontiers in Psychology 12: 611189. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021. 611189.
Zhu, Ying. 2021. “Multimedia Recognition of Piano Music Based on the Hidden Markov
Model.” Advances in Multimedia 2021: 2981531. doi: 10.1155/2021/2981531.
Zhukov, Katie, and Jennifer Rowley. 2022. “Crafting Successful Music Careers: Insights
from the Professional Lives of Australian Pianists.” Research Studies in Music
Education 44 (1): 158-174. doi: 10.1177/1321103X211034647.

RESTITUTIO
Bucharest, 1969
The 5th Congress of the „International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII)
RESTITUTIO
BUCHAREST, 1969: THE 5TH CONGRESS OF THE
BUCHAREST, 1969: THE 5TH CONGRESS OF THE
“INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY FOR FOLK NARRATIVE
“INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY FOR FOLK NARRATIVE
RESEARCH” (FACSIMILE PAPERS, PART VIII)
RESEARCH” (FACSIMILE PAPERS, PART VIII)
1, 2: Brian
M. du Toit:
Gainsville;
Nai-Tung
Ting: Ma-
comb (FL
1919/5/44542,
1915/16/44519)
3, 4: Mortan Nolsøe*: Oslo, Elizar/Eleazar M. Meletinsky**: Moscow, Germina Comanici: Bucharest;
Nai-Tung Ting (FL 1914/26/44558, 1919/34/44520)
* seen in REF/JEF 1-2/2021: 224, 225, 1-2/2022: 195 (cf. note 2, p. 252). ** paper in REF/JEF 1-2/2018: 335-344.
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 198-264

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 199
5: Francis Lee Utley: Columbus/USA, Paul V. Vehvilainen*: Portland (FL 1917/25/44496)**
6: Francis Lee Utley, Corneliu Bărbulescu***: Bucharest (FL 1917/36/44507)
7: Mortan Nolsøe, Elizar M. Meletinsky (FL 1914/25/44557)
8: Paul V. Vehvilainen (FL 1917/20/44495)
9: Corneliu Bărbulescu (FL 1917/35/44508)
10. E.M. Meletinsky; in the background: Mortan Nolsøe (1913/36/44415)
* paper in REF/JEF 1-2/2017: 251-254. ** in the background: Nancy Schmitz, with photo and text in REF/JEF 1-
2/2021: 221, 226-234. *** paper in REF/JEF 1-2/2017: 286-294, portrait also visible in the presidium of the
Congress Opening: REF/JEF 1-2/2016: 195.

200 Bucharest, 1969
11 & 12: Monica Brătulescu: Bucharest; Stanca Fotino*, Ion C. Chițimia**: Bucharest, Monica
Brătulescu (FL 1917/24/44497; 1917/22/44498)
* photos and text in
REF/JEF 1-2/2022:
197, 269-277.
** also visible in the
presidium of the Con-
gress Opening: REF/
JEF 1-2/2016: 195, 1-
2/2021: 223; next
photo of him, first in
the background: Sen
Gupta Sankar: Calcutta
(as in REF/JEF 1-2/
2020: 243, 300 and 1-
2/2021: 285).
13: Radu Niculescu:
Bucharest
(FL 1918/6/44450)
14: Ion C. Chițimia
(FL 1913/34/44413)
15, 16: E.M. Meletinsky, Radu Niculescu; Bengt Holbek: Copenhagen, Ghizela Sulițeanu***:
Bucharest (FL 1918/13/44461; 1919/29/44561)
*** paper in REF/JEF 1-2/2020: 301-326.

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 201
17: ?, Reimund Kvideland, Robert Wildhaber*: Basel
(FL 1917/7/44489)
18: P.V. Vehvilainen, Bengt Holbek,
Reimund Kvideland: Bergen
(1918/8/44451)**
19: ?, ?, Nai-
Tung Ting, ?,
Val Cordun: Bu-
charest, Faragó
József: Cluj,
Helga Stein***
(FL 1915/15/44468)
20: Lauri (Olavi)
Honko***†:
Helsinki (FL
1915/9/44513)
21: ? (FL
1915/20/44526)
* visible in REF/JEF 1-2/2021: 225, 285. ** M. Nolsøe, B. Holbek,
R. Kvideland, Lauri Honko and several other Scandinavians are
also present or just visible in photos of REF/JEF 1-2/ 2021: 224, 225, 285, 1-2/2022: 195, 277. *** also seen in
REF/JEF 1-2/ 2021: 223, 224, 1-2/2022: 219. ***† text and photo in REF/JEF 1-2/2016: 224-232 (+ supra).

202 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 203

204 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 205

206 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 207

208 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 209

210 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 211

212 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 213

214 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 215

216 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 217
(aceste 2 poze, ultimele, merg pe jumătatea goală, jos de tot, a paginii-facsimil
[articol N.-T. TING] set B p. 7)
26 & 27: George Macovescu:
Bucharest, Congress Opening
formal speech: Romanian Academy,
o8/26/1969
(FL 1913/13/44386, 1913/15/
44388)
In the presidium, Alexandru I.
Amzulescu, Corneliu Bărbulescu,
Karel C. Peeters, Vasilij Grigorevič
Bazanov, Mihai Pop, Kurt Ranke,
Miron Nicolescu, Stith Thompson
(covered by the speaker or, respect-
tively, flowers), Lawrence Krader,
Ion C. Chițimia. Same lineup can
be better seen in the two photos of
REF/JEF 1-2/2016: 195.
( acest text – care urmează – merge imediat lângă ultima bucățică de facsimil autograf –
final text UTLEY, set C. p. 13, adică precum o coloană pe dreapta, lăsată liberă de petecul
de facsimil de pe stânga; iar imediat apoi: pozele + legendele lor )

218 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 219

220 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 221

222 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 223

224 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 225

226 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 227

228 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 229

230 Bucharest, 1969
MMB Editorial Note
MMB Editorial Note
Footnote or text proper, read or left aside
Footnote or text proper, read or left aside
during the oral presentation, Utley’s last nine
during the oral presentation, Utley’s last nine
handwritten slips of paper have a value per se.
handwritten slips of paper have a value per se.
Their text also was typed on 2 perfectly white
Their text also was typed on 2 perfectly white
paper sheets, with a different machine that of
paper sheets, with a different machine that of
the author’s, possibly after the Congress and
the author’s, possibly after the Congress and in
in the idea that there will be a volume (or a
the idea that there will be a volume (or a series)
series) which will go for print, or that the edi-
which will go for print, or that the editors
tors would need an easy-to-read and judge
would need an easy-to-read and judge text.
text. Compared to the original, autographed
Compared to the original, autographed version,
verIs iocnon, sIi dceorends idtheer esde ctohned asreyc, otnydpaedry ,v etyrspioend
veresqiounal leyq duualll layn dd duilslp aennsda bdleis.pensable.
24: Lia Vasilescu, Max Lüthi:
Zürich, Francis Lee Utley
(FL 1919/27/44560)
25: L. Vasilescu, Francis Lee Utley,
Katharine Mary Briggs*
(1914/30/44559)
* text & photos in REF/JEF 1-2/2020:
244-250, 243, 259, 300.

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 231

232 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 233

234 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 235

236 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 237

238 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 239

240 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 241

242 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 243

244 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 245

246 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 247

248 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 249

250 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 251

252 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 253

254 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 255

256 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 257

258 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 259

260 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 261

262 Bucharest, 1969

The 5th Congress of the “International Society for Folk Narrative Research” (VIII) 263

264 Bucharest, 1969

REMEMBERING ’69: CELEBRITIES’ LETTERS
CONNECTED TO THE 5TH ISFNR CONGRESS (PART 1)
MARIN MARIAN-BĂLAȘA
ABSTRACT
This is a pictorial-like based article devoted to the publishing of the academically
consistent letters which were exchanged in connection with the 5th ISFNR Congress
(Bucharest, Romania: August 25-31, 1969). Selected out of several hundreds, though
an incomplete collections, these 100+ belong (with just a tiny exception) to the Archive
of the „C. Brăiloiu” Institute of Ethnography and Folklore, in Bucharest (archival
records: AIEF, MS 270), where the team of its director of yore, Mihai Pop, preserved
them, boxed and closed them up), and then ignored. Forgotten for a half a century,
they are exposed now especially for the contemporary research to better realize the
power of connecting, exchanging, building up both personal, socio-political and
academic ideas and careers, through meeting-arrangements, postal letters, public
gatherings, and influential ideological and professional/epistemological discussions.
Keywords: ISFNR/International Society for Folk Narrative Research, SIEF/Société
Internationale d’Ethnologie et de Folklore, folklore, folklore studies, ethnology,
narratives, archive, letters, academic life, personalities.
Among many things academically-related, the 1960s were characterized by
the competition between SIEF (Société Internationale d’Ethnologie et de Folklore)
and ISFNR (International Society for Folk Narrative Research), the two major
European institutions (actually of global membership) focusing on the study of folk
life and folklore products. Many professionals in this field belonged to both
institutions, and the Romanian prof. Mihai Pop (1907-2000), a diplomate during
the WW2 period, then a very successful leader, mentor and influencer during
communism, worked as a turntable for both communist East and democrat West,
SIEF and ISFNR, people and systems1. One of the pinnacles of his achievements
was the organizing and hosting of the 5th ISFNR Congress in Bucharest (August
26-31, Bucharest). In several Editorial Notes, initially prefacing, then modestly
piercing/inserting, footnoting or ending texts and pictures, I already gave some data
1 For the popularity and prestige of M. Pop and his institution among Westerners, see (for just an
example) Brunvand 1972.
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 265-293

266 Marin Marian-Bălașa
and explanations on the (complex) fate of the 1969 ISFNR Congress’s aftermath2.
On the one hand, it was about the political and academic importance, consistency
or weight of that particular event; on the other hand, it was about the numerous
presentation papers left behind, collected or sent by participants, and hoped to
come out as a volume (perhaps/rather 2 or 3) of printed Proceedings. As the
ISFNR used that meetings before and after the 5th congress to get finalized by
printing, the Bucharest one was a regrettable exception in that respect; and
questions on plans and happenings connected with that falling through haunted the
questioning minds of many ISFNR members afterwards, for many years.
On the occasion of launching the process of publishing the delivered texts left
behind by participants I also included a formal letter coming from the most
important academic publishing firm in Bucharest3, which was informing director
Mihai Pop on the failure in obtaining the cooperation of two foreign/international
publishing venues – in view of printing properly all the ISFNR Congress works.
Mihai Pop himself – the major, very charismatic and political personality involved
in managing whatsoever connected to organizing and finalizing the 1969 congress
in Bucharest – also abandoned the printing project. In the meantime (1972) he
became the president of the SIEF, and kept that position for over a decade.
If reading the website of the SIEF one can see that SIEF still considers that
particular decade as one of the worse, least fruitful, truly disappointing period of its
survival. And if one reads the historical re-evaluations of SIEF-connected
colleagues4, one obtains a deeper perception on the proportions and effects of
what(ever) people did or not, achieved or failed. Accordingly, it all meant that
Mihai Pop – though in a not-at-all-confronting way, by actually doing nothing
– succeeded in neutralizing the SIEF (and its intended anthropological academic
bend), succeeded in leaving room for the ISFNR (with its literary,
descriptive/scholastic ethnographism, as well as positivistic/materialist focus) to
prosper. Simply put, he supported and continued quite efficiently Kurt Ranke’s
competing, winning/expanding and consolidating work. During that period most of
the professional communities joined the ISFNR, as that when the SIEF somehow
resurrected it counted the same personalities within its leading board. Two-of-one,
same-in-two… For sure, postmodern analysts of academic missions, paradigms and
histories will have a lot to understand on such a matter.
Coming back to the Bucharestan congress only, as mentioned, the mid-1970s
buried the Proceedings publishing project, the texts/articles left behind lying
dormant for many decades. Only to resurge after almost a decade post-2007 – since
our Journal of Ethnography and Folklore became fully international (i.e. publishing
only in international languages) –, at the beginning with the idea of just illustrating
2 Apart from the signed lines in Marian-Bălașa 2016, 2017, 2018, from 2020 on all the Iconographical
Intros and notes to pictures bore various pieces of information.
3 Marian-Bălașa 2016: 192.
4 See, for example, Kuhn 2015 and especially Rogan 2013, 2015.

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 267
the 1969 Congress by a handful selection of original texts. Hence, in 2015-2017
I could not foresee the grandeur of the entire new project, as it grew up naturally,
progressively. Only after accessing all that was preserved in the institutional
archive (two large boxes with academic texts and one of letters from participants)
the historic and trans-historic value of whatever was hoped and achieved in 1969,
of whatever marked the moment and set up for future academic developments by
that time, turned to be very significant, very impressive.
The present contribution is not about the large picture given by all the texts –
that had been published since 2016, and continue, respectively awaits over the next
five years to fulfill/complete this recuperation/“Restitutio” project. Just like in a
parenthesis, I mention here that some congress papers were not found in the
archival boxes, perhaps not handed over after the actual presentation in 1969
(though the session secretaries, young employees of the Institute in Bucharest,
seemed to be quite serious in performing their tasks), some fellows possibly
intending/promising to provide ulterior, re-edited versions or text developments.
Apart from counting/not counting on missing text pieces, in order to avoid to
stretch the project over a 15 years span, as well as to publish papers inaccessible to
most of us, I decided to ignore/reject everything that was presented in Russian and
was left written in Cyrillic alphabet.
As said, here and now it is neither about academic papers per se, nor about the
tough process of identifying (in over 200 photos taken during the Congress) the
many participants – as to also publish that rich resource and make pictorials that
would surpass the humble idea of just decoratively illustrate the printed texts,
eventually succeeding in providing an iconographic metatext5. Both purpose and
content of the present material are about illustrating the extension and style of
performing specifically academic interests, enthusiasm, diplomacy, discipline,
charisma, subjectivity and intellect in connection to un-specifically objective,
administrative, social and political conjectures. In the end, what is here at stake is
the observation/analysis of that which can be perceived and conceived today as the
infrastructure of knowledge – as well as career – production.
Not all the letters received and/or sent in connection to the Congress in 1969
were preserved in the archival box. From the very content of some of them it is
obvious that the exchange was way more intense/frequent, and many letters clearly
mention the known-about other exchanges. For instance, some letters were sent to
the president Kurt Ranke in Göttingen, who forwarded them to Mihai Pop, Ranke’s
trusted man in Bucharest. The wheel of professional connections in the USA or
other American parts rolled down towards Bucharest grace either to the pleasure of
having already met the charming Mihai Pop in some Western/USA visited
university centers, as well as own to the curiosity of visiting a communist country
5 This one facet accompanies the facsimile texts (though shortened, still existing in electronic,
enlargeable size), now as introductory (“introducing”) pictorials, each series of the annual project
opening with 3 or 4 pages of photos capturing authors’ and other participants’ faces.

268 Marin Marian-Bălașa
recently opening up to the world. Learning about the place of the Congress had
launched numerous gestures of redirecting infos, names and addresses, people
extensively crisscrossing information, intentions and recommendations. To avoid
mishaps and misunderstandings, info-sharing was almost excessive, crossing and
jumping throughout all sides, repeating itself and insuring efficiency. To history
sensitive minds many letters are of worth mostly for noticing the pragmatism of
those times collegial support, good intend, efforts, determination.
Out of the very numerous letters still found I selected and scanned for
publishing only the most interesting or generous from intellectual, human, and
academic points of view, letters which also are less charged with rather
administrative, banal aspects, and which present various particularities
(peculiarities included).
Within this line, here you are a handful of samples. From Stith Thompson
there exists only a letter announcing that he will come to the Congress (and his
wife Louise will accompany him), plus M. Pop’s answer. From Thomas A. Sebeok
there is 1 administrative letter + 1 telegram. Carl-Herman Tillhagen writes 7 lines
only (informing he’ll come); Katharine Mary Briggs – only 8 lines (now/here,
insignificant). In 1968 Gisela Burde-Schneidewind sends to Pop 2 letters, whereas
in December 1969, long after the Congress, Pop provides for her a certificate of
participation. From India, Sen Gupta Sankar/Shankar has 2 letters, complaining he
could not raise the necessary finance, and we have for him one answer from Pop.
(Eventually, he will be successful, as his presence in Bucharest is visually
documented.) Rosa del Conte has one letter of her and one answer from Pop, plus
one autobiographical note – all of no interest. Also 2 letters from Byrd H. Granger
provide many administrative details related to the Congress – uninteresting to us or
posterity. Most of the Russians and Germans are very formal, simplistic,
materialistic/pragmatic. Like others, Albert B. Lord has a boring page (hotel
reservation & $10 fee). Katharine Luomala’s 2 letters are equally insignificant.
Kurt Ranke signs only 3 letters, their disparity proving that his exchange with
Mihai Pop („Liebes Mihai”) was much more frequent/intense. The little left behind
is, however, strictly managerial by content, reason why only the page in which
Ranke proposes/nominates a list of Congress leaders is worth knowing/publishing
here.
The decision for publishing the letters in their original, scanned format, not
just as fragments or quotes, lies in the trust that handwritting and annotations are
immaterial/intangible signs, signals and values, and they do symbolize,
contain/encompass and suggest indispensable aspects, such as those of pure
historical documents, of a remapping, recharting and rechartering of an extensive
human geography, and above all, of a complex charge of humane, sensitive loads.
All these can be perceived only by watching and reading the documents entirely,
attentively, as if one would touch and feel these epistlegrams’ original support,
mental elaboration, typing or handwriting, revising, signing, folding, posting, and

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 269
sharing, thus & hence mediating the paradigmatic moves and joints of the real
ISFNR world of the 1960s.
As implied here, the „facsimile” idea and matter may not be clear to all
colleagues, in the sense that many seniors still consider that a „facsimile format”
refers to a document rendition that respects in print the original dimensions of a
manuscript. That is way it is worth and timely (since a new/different idea of
„facsimile” has been used here since 2016 on) to explain it. Indeed, prior to the
contemporary scanning, storage and circulating methods a facsimile publication used
to be a 100% reproduction of originals, physical dimension included. Though, that
old concept is nowadays revolute, dispensable, as thorough studies over old writings
need no longer printed paper reproductions, rather implying work upon virtual
images, scans and processed/unprocessed photos, which became handy and faultless,
indisputably preferred. Since the virtual handling, high resolution techniques and
preservation were installed and became current worldwide, documents can be copied,
stored, reproduced and distributed in any form, format/resolution and dimension one
desires; thus, why not first to make known about documents in elementary
forms/formats (as done here), and then – on request, if the case – provide those
digitized documents in as large dimension (pixels/gigabytes) as they exists in the
patrimonial archives they were also scanned and digitized. So, in terms of publishing
the sequence of conference papers delivered within the 5th ISFNR, as well as with the
case of letters here presented in smaller than the original format/dimension, I always
talk of „facsimile” by keeping in mind the preserved and available originals in their
virtual, digitized format. As suggested, whenever somebody will need to see all the
tiniest details that may not appear properly/clearly on the hereby printed pages, and
read the faded words of some letters, virtual reproductions, expandable at will, can
easily be provided/accessed.
Another explanation may also be useful in connection with the light,
nonconventional, more precisely „incomplete” introduction/presentation of
mentioned personalities. In the past, the academic pedantry required all names or
persons be accompanied by the parenthesis carrying the life span years, perhaps the
affiliation too, or rather a more or less generous footnote sketching/resembling a
biodata. Such an expectation or politeness was useful („natural”) in the times prior
to the internet. With the excessive information available there today, and with so
many info resources (Wikipedia getting more and more academic!), such a mimetic
convention is nowadays not only useless, but ridiculously redundant. At least with
occasions (such as the present one), let students search a little bit around the online
universe (if interested in biodata, years, works or other details), and spare some of
us from wasting time in doing such a simplistic, unimaginative work (just for the
sake of prolonging the outfashioned formal framework of bureaucratic intellectual
writing). I do hope that subtler issues were suggested within the lines above, as to
invite or at least leave space for different sights, meanings and interests in
revisiting the academic histories and human involvements of yore.

270 Marin Marian-Bălașa
REFERENCES
Brunvand, Jan H. 1972: The Study of Romanian Folklore, in „Journal of the Folklore
Institute” (Indiana University Press) 9/ 2-3/1972: 133-161.
Kuhn, Konrad J. 2015: Europeanization as Strategy: Disciplinary Shifts in Switzerland and
the Formation of European Ethnology, in „Ethnologia Europaea” 45/1/2015: 80-97.
Marian-Bălașa, Marin 2016: Editorial Introduction, Photos, and a Formal Letter, in
REF/JEF 1-2/2016: 189-192.
Marian-Bălașa, Marin 2017: Editorial Notes and Infos, in REF/JEF 1-2/2017: 207-208.
Marian-Bălașa, Marin 2018: Editorial Note and Info, in REF/JEF 1-2/2018: 317-318.
REF/JEF = „Revista de etnografie și folclor / Journal of Ethnography and Folklore”
(Romanian Academy, Bucharest), New Series, 2007-.
Rogan, Bjarne 2013: Sigurd Erixon on the Post-War International Scene: International
Activities, European Ethnology and CIAP from 1945 to the mid-1950s, in „ARV. Nordic
Yearbook of Folklore” 69/2013: 89-152.
Rogan, Bjarne 2015: When the Folklorists Won the Battle but Lost the War: The Cumbersome
(Re-)Birth of SIEF in 1964, in „Cultural Analysis” 13/2014: 23-50.
An adhoc leading committee for
ISFNR business discussions
(August 1969, Bucharest):
Lawrence Krader, ?, ?, Roger
Lecotté, Tekla Dömötör, Mihai
Pop, ?, Robert Wildhaber, Kurt
Ranke, Karel C. Peeters
(FL 1918/24/44470)
Karel C. Peeters, ?, ?, Roger
Lecotté, Tekla Dömötör, Mihai
Pop, ?, Robert Wildhaber, Kurt
Ranke (FL 1918/23/44469)*
* Like most of the letters to be
published here, also the photos
belong to the archive of the „C.
Brăiloiu” Institute of Ethnography
and Folklore (of the Romanian
Academy), and bear the archival record figures. The 2nd pic was published in REF/JEF 1-2/2018: 318,
the 1st is scheduled to get published, together with their entire 5 pics series, in REF/JEF 1-2/2027.

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 271
1. Sender’s delivered paper &
photos, in REF/JEF 1-2/ 2020:
282-300, 1-2/2021: 224, 285, 1-
2/2022: 277, and others.
2. Though working with several
assistants in the operation of
following the intense incoming
mail and careful answering (see
on various letters warning,
questioning and ordering hand-
written notes in Romanian,
exchanged between Mihai Pop
and his managing team), it
seems that the Romanian
director read and personally
answered many letters.

272 Marin Marian-Bălașa
3. Prof. (Solomon)
Adeboye Babalola’s
systematic care for insuring
his presence to Bucharest.
4. Coming after a previous contact
and benefitting from some kind of
support or recommendation by M.
Pop, Otto Blehr expresses interest
in “the last Indo-European pagans”
in Pakistan (research project), and
the desire to attend the Bucharestan
ISFNR Congress.

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 273
5. & 6. Otto Blehr
proceeds with the
registering
formalities and is
included among
speakers, thus
published in the
printed Program; yet
his presence is not
certain: no individual
photo taken during
the delivering
session, no
confirmation by
someone that could
recognize him on one
of the remaining
group photos.

274 Marin Marian-Bălașa
7. Student of Alan Dundes (U.
of C. – Berkeley), Mrs. Luba
Blumberg might not have
made it from Spain to
Romania that summer (as a
passive attendee), since there
is no female company around
Dundes on any of his photos
(printed in REF/JEF 1-2/2021:
221, and forthcoming vols).
8. David E. Bynum’s lines are referring to
previous correspondence with Albert B.
Lord (who mediates his and Bynum’s pre-
sence to the Congress) and Kurt Ranke, as
well as with Francis Lee Utley (also an
important ISFNR leading figure). It seems
that by this time neither Lord nor Bynum
are members of the ISFNR, hence they
membership need first to get recommend-
ded, discussed and approved in order to
attend the Congress. Apparently, members
would be accepted also by postal or verbal
dialogues and agreements, so that Bynum
could proceed, as he does here, by forwar-
ding the title of his paper and subsequent
insertion in the printed Program. His paper
and photos are published in REF/JEF 1-2/
2017: 239-250, and forthcoming.

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 275
9. J. Westley Childers is
hasting to forward his title
and abstract immediately
after receiving the “1st
Circular” (inviting letter)
about the Congress in
Bucharest. His presented
paper is scheduled to come
out in IEF/JEF 1-2/2027.
10. Besides this letter, Ariane De Félice,
also sends an “adhering bulletin” (perhaps
the ISFNR membership application), her
abstract, together with two small slips of
paper that amass her publishing references
(both on the following page).

276 Marin Marian-Bălașa
11. & 12. Obverse and reverse of
Ariane De Félice’s list of published
works submitted (for her
membership file) on April 1969.

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 277
13. As a Hungarian from
Transylvania and a Roma-
nian language, literature
and folklore at the Univer-
sity of Budapest, Domokos
Sámuel addresses himself
to Mihai Pop in Romanian.
In this unique letter sent in
Romanian, the sender asks
whether his book with bi-
lingual stories had arrived,
and request a personal
invitation for the Congress.
Then he also mentions a
book he published in Ro-
mania, and the hope his
articles on Romanian
folklore are known. Yet,
the Hungarian colleague
will neither appear in the congress
Program (too late contacting?),
and probably nor during the
Congress itself in Bucharest.
14. Prof. Brian M. du Toit, from
Gainesville, is doing fieldwork
in his native South-Africa,
where the congress invite is
rerouted. Fearing delays, he
insists on administrative issues.
As M. Pop does too, adding for
his helpers the note “R (=
answer/reply to be sent) + BD
(=sort of specific “bulletin”) /
(we) confirm/ wait for
specifications/ boarding/
arrival”. Du Toit’s paper and
photos are hosted in the present,
2023 REF/JEF volume.

278 Marin Marian-Bălașa
15. Alan Dundes’s letter proves
that he met Pop before (surely
when the later visited Berkeley, in
1965), and insists now only on the
administrative detail of being sent a
very official invitation (institutional
logo/letterhead on typical station-
ery) for securing his travel finance.
He mentions Pop’s interest in struc-
turalism, and Propp’s Morphology
as being recently released in the
USA. Nothing announces their
intense cooperation in 1975, within
Dundes’s department in Berkeley.
16. Pop’s answer (3rd April 1969) is
friendlier. His mentions imply that
he also recommended Dundes to be
invited to the International Folklore
Festivals (held in Bucharest in the
same time period as the ISFNR
congress), which also includes a
Symposium. Of which also other
colleagues are noticed (as that was
devoted to The Folklore in the
Contemporary World). Academic
infos are briefed, and Dundes is
encouraged to come to Bucharest
by the hint that he might already be
popular among all the local
researchers and students.

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 279
17. This long confession is
important mostly by the fact
that it marks the Dundes’
interest in the contemporary
urban folklore – a theme
which will strongly mark his
influence, fame and career in
the years to come. Curiously,
the Bucharestan ISFNR
meeting will also be the first
congress Alan Dundes ever
attended. Which, as we can
see here, meant a lot for his
both emotional and scholarly
biography.
18. As with the previous
docs, the reply date (reading
“Bucharest, 2nd June”) is
covered. Complying with the
sender’s worries and writing
style, plus the tone, are all
reassuring. The date of the
Symposium and the coordi-
nation between the three
separate events announced
occur in many letters.

280 Marin Marian-Bălașa
19. & 20. Together with
its reply bellow, this mini-
exchange shares a
particular curio: that of a
pride and expectation of a
Welshman – speaking on
behalf of all his
countrymen –, to be noted
down and published as
belonging to or
representing Wales (and
not, God forbidden,
England). Securing his
own grace, the diplomat
Mihai Pop puts (this time,
like in other delicate
situations) the Organizing
Committee to apologize
and answer the fellow with
healthy, witty humor.

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 281
21a. & 21b.
Collage of the
obverse and
reverse of the
same sheet of
paper. Entering
straight into the
subject, this letter
demonstrates a
close relationship
and solid writing
correspondence
between Wayland
D. Hand and Mihai
Pop. The LA prof.
D.K. Wilgus will
travel from Ireland
to Romania, and
his quiet presence
during the ISFNR
congress was
documented by
several photos
(REF/JEF 1-2/
2026).

282 Marin Marian-Bălașa
22. & 23. On the letter bellow
Mihai Pop writes for his
secretaries and assistants “to
be thanked for his contribution
to the good organization of the
exhibition”. It was about
informing and inviting the
biggest (mostly University)
Publishing Houses in the USA
to bring their books into
Romania and exhibit them
during the Congress.
As seen in Hand’s
letter, he was very
efficient in this
respect; as seen in
photos (REF/JEF 1-2/
2016: 253, 1-2/2021:
293, 1-2/2024) the
international book-
stands were rich &
impressive.

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 283
24. This document
answers Pop’s above
translated command,
but it rather looks as if
the text would flow
directly from his own
good humored mind
and dictating or typing
hand.
25a. On W.D. Hand’s
advice/recomenda-
tion, J.B. Toelken
will be invited (as
requested by Pop
himself in the hand-
written note on the
paper edge), and will
be present in Bucha-
rest (as seen in pics of
REF/JEF 1-2/2021:
224, 1-2/2026).

284 Marin Marian-Bălașa
25b. Reverse ending
of the letter above.
26. A pedant
rebound and
completion of the
previous mes-
sage. This
concludes the
W.D. Hand
letters possessed
by the Archive of
the Brăiloiu
Institute in
Bucharest. The
following bunch
(docs 27-30) is
an external ad-
dition, obtained
by the kind
searching effort
and trasfer, as
well as permis-
sion mediating,
of custodian
Jennifer Duncan, from Logan, Utah. Contacted in view of confirming the identity of W.D.
Hand in the Congress pictures I worked with, and in order to clarify the involvement of
Hand’s collaborator, Linda Dégh, she kindly supplied the next set of 4 letters. They belong
to the fund called „Wayland D. Hand Folklore Papers, 1938-1986 (COLL MSS 297)”, kept
in the Special Collections and Archives Department of the Utah State University.*
* reproduction permission secured by written agreement.

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 285
27. & 28. A quick
exchange before W.D.
Hand’s take off for
Bucharest and Budapest.
(A book of Linda Dégh was
supposed to go with Hand
to Bucharest, to find Mihai
Pop, and it will arrive there
in time, but – as seen in the
last letter – not directly by
Hand’s hands).

286 Marin Marian-Bălașa
29. The post-Congress postal
correspondence solves the
enigmas of Dégh’s absence
from Bucharest, the Hand’s
solo presentation of their
common paper, and his
individual extension – the
drawing on blackboard (seen
only in the picture of REF/JEF
1-2/2019: 183, and not also
found in the printed paper of
the same volume, p. 209-229).
30. Apart from all the above
mentioned, as well as the very
interesting/consistent academic
points shared inside, this also
certifies Tekla Dömötör’s
physical presence in the
audience (as until the
procurement of this letters from
the USA library she was not
identified with certitude in other
Congress photographs – such as
those published here before all
the letters).

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 287
31. & 32. Lauri Honko did get
printed in the Program and the list of
participants, his presence was
visually documented (REF/JEF 1-2/
2016: 232, and the present, 2023
volume), his facsimile-like text was
eventually published (REF/JEF 1-2/
2016: 224-232).

288 Marin Marian-Bălașa
33. The young assistant
professor John S. Kolsty talks
here about enthusiastic
collaboration, and exchange
of infos and fieldwork
materials (pertaining to
Balkan, namely Albanian and
Serbo-Croatian folklore)
between Harvard and the
Institute of Ethnography and
Folklore in Bucharest.
34. Kolsty’s emphasized connection with
Albert B. Lord and David Bynum (both
going to join and actively contribute the
Congress in Bucharest) reveals a specialized
professional networking. And that of a
biographical/paternal connection with
Bucharest strengthens his interest in
Romanian folk culture and folkloristics.

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 289
35. Kovács Ágnés (who
worked very much on
Hungarian and Roma-
nian Transylvanian
folklores) addresses
herself to Mihai Pop
because she knew he
was able to speak
Hungarian. In his turn,
declining his Hungarian
orthographic ability,
Pop knew Ágnés
understood Romanian
and wrote her back in
his own mother tongue.
A typical Pop game of
fairness.
36. For securing access to
important stuff, the first
doc covers Kovács Agnés’s
postal address. Alas, the
orientalist Diószegi
Vilmos, recommended by
Kovács and then invited
here, will not complete the
Budapestan delegation that
will register and make it to
Bucharest. Only the young
Hoppál Mihály registered
and appeared in the partici-
pants list and one photo.

290 Marin Marian-Bălașa
37. & 38. The situation invited
people to be away from their
work-base is not very rare; yet, in
cases like Daniel Pule Kunene’s
this is overcame by the rapid/
pragmatic actions of infos
sharing. Born and educated in
South Africa, the Californian
professor stamps now the
worldmap from Lusaka/Zambia
to the European Geneva &
London, then to the
American Madison & LA.
Kunene will be registered
and programed to deliver
the paper Metaphor and
Symbolism in the Heroic
Poetry of Southern Africa.
But there is no certitude or
confirmation on his
presence with the Congress
in ’69, as well as no paper
was found/left behind.

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 291
39a. & 39b. Obverse & reverse making one of the documents which prove the righteous-
ness of the choice for publishing documents in their entirety: both objective and subjective
aspects could be of interest for various, future analyses, thus making available archival
funds can make a better job than just extracting just one or another info temporarily suitable
to particular themes of interest (thus neutralizing or hindering further hints or meanings).

292 Marin Marian-Bălașa
40. Distant or at least neutral,
this announcement-letter was
rather conceived and sent by the
“organizing committee” (just
hastily signed by M. Pop). By
its left-hand corner it covers just
the date – same April 3, 1969.
41. The second letter, written
and probably sent the same day –
a clear proof that, overwhelmed
by the correspondence
burden, working equally
together and in parallel,
the organizing commit-
tee (alias Al.I. Amzu-
lescu) and Pop himself
were superseding, doub-
ling or confusing each
other at times. This later
text is however much
warmer and friendlier in
tone then the former,
thus it was really writ-
ten by Mihai Pop
himself.

Remembering ’69: Celebrities’ Letters Connected to the 5th ISFNR Congress (1) 293
42a. & 42b. The
obverse and
reverse/ending of
the same letter.
43a. & 43b. These paper slips may
look strange (maybe inserted by
mistake in the same envelope),
because their connection to M. Pop
is not at all obvious). Yet, since they
arrived in an envelope destined to
either Pop or the Congress (organi-
zers) in Bucharest, and since they
were included – as legal provision
and property – in an academic
research archive, they should also
be put at the disposal or those
historians who could be interested
in the study of academic mentali-
ties, of social-political career-
building processes (on one side
pushy selfpromoting, on other side
suspicions-driven maneuvers) that
are so human, universally.

LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
Muhamed ÇITAKU – assistant professor at “Hasan Prishtina” University of Prishtina,
Faculty of Philology (st. George Bush, no. 31, 10000, Prishtina, Kosovo). In 2014 he
defended his PHD thesis in the field of models of Kosovo’s novel, and since then has
been teaching Sociology of Albanian Literature, Folklore and Literature, and the
Course of Novel Theories. Research themes: Albanian literature, folklore and
literature, the interaction of Albanian and European literature. Muhamed Çitaku is
author of several articles and books, such as Mythos dhe Eidos [Mythos and Eidos],
Strategjitë e rrëfimit [Storytelling strategies] and Romani symbolist i Kosovës
[The symbolist novel of Kosovo]. Email: muhamed.citaku@uni-pr.edu.
Teodosio DE BONIS – Bachelor’s student in Anthropology, Religion and Oriental
Civilizations at the University of Bologna, Italy. He is specialising in Indology and
writing his thesis about the traces of Panchatantra in Georgian literary tradition.
He spent a semester at Ivane Javakhishvili Tbilisi State University, Georgia, studying
and researching about Georgian mythology and folklore.
Chen GANG – currently the Chair Professor and Director of Center for Social and
Economic Behavior Studies at Yunnan University of Finance and Economics in China,
and serves as the Chief Editor of International Journal of Business Anthropology.
He received an MA in anthropology from Iowa State University in USA in September
1993, and a PhD in anthropology from The Ohio State University in USA in June
2000. He used to work as lecturer in Xi’an Jiaotong University (1983-1990), post-doc
research fellow in Department of Human Nutrition at The Ohio State University
(2000-2004), visiting professor in Department of Sociology and Anthropology of Ohio
University (2004-2006). His chief research interests are in the areas of business
anthropology, food safety and culture, development anthropology and tourism,
globalization and culture change. He has received numerous research grants both in
USA and in China, and has published quite a large number of academic papers and
books both in Chinese and English.
Elene GOGIASHVILI – Associate Professor in the Faculty of Humanities at “Ivane
Javakhishvili” Tbilisi State University, Georgia, Department of Folkloristics. She was
a research fellow at the Universities of Mainz and Erfurt, and the Research Libraries
in Gotha and Wolfenbüttel, all in Germany. She is a member of the International
Society for Folk Narrative Research and Europäische Märchengesellschaft e.V. Her
research interests mainly focus on folktales, and the relationship between literary and
oral traditions. Email: elene.gogiashvili@tsu.ge.
REF/JEF (Bucharest) 1-2/2023: 294-298

List of contributors 295
Tian GUANG – senior professor of business administration at Huaihua University, Hunan,
China. He earned his PhD in Economic Anthropology from York University, Ontario,
Canada, in 1995 and used to work as a professor at colleges in Canada and the US.
His major research interesting is in Economical Anthropology, Regional
Development, and Cross-Cultural Administration. He has published over one hundred
academic articles in peer-reviewed referral journals and authored and co-authored
25 books published in English and Chinese.
Hicran KARATAŞ – Assistant Professor of Sociology at Bartın University in Turkey. She
finished her Ph.D. with the thesis “Folk Law Practices and Exiled Brides” in 2016,
published in 2018. Her post-doctoral research is based on eighteen months of
fieldwork conducted among antiquity looters and smugglers. Both her doctorate and
post-doctoral studies were awarded state-funded scholarships. Her research interests
are sociology of law, criminal sociology, oral tradition, social problems, and practices.
ORCID 0000-0002-4134-9159. Email: hkaratas@bartin.edu.tr.
Alma KUNANBAEVA – specializes in cultural anthropology, ethnomusicology,
folklore, and linguistics. Graduated at the Moscow and Almaty State
Conservatories, she earned a PhD from the State Institute of Theater, Music and
Film in St. Petersburg, Russia (1982). In 1987-94, she was an Associate Professor at
the St. Petersburg Pedagogical University. In 1985-89, she chaired the Research
Department of Ethnography of the Peoples of Central Asia and the Caucasus at the
State Ethnographic Museum of the Peoples of the former USSR. Beginning 1993,
while in the US, she has taught at various schools, including Stanford University
(2004-18). She has been actively participating in numerous fieldworks, workshops,
and international conferences dedicated to Central Asia. Author of over 50 scholarly
articles and dozens of entries in Kazakh, Russian, British and American
encyclopedias including the New Grove’s Dictionary of Music & Musicians and the
Garland Encyclopedia of World Music. Her book The Soul of Kazakhstan with
photographs of Wayne Eastep, published by the ExxonMobil Corporation, came out
in New York in 2001 in three languages (Kazakh, Russian, and English). In 2013,
she authored and produced Musical Treasures of the Silk Road House – a unique set
of six compact discs dedicated to the variety of Kazakh epic songs. In 2016, she
authored a solid chapter on Kazakh singing tradition for the first American textbook
The Music of Central Asia (from Indiana University Press). Since 2006, she is
President of the Silk Road House – a cultural and educational center created to
promote an impressive array of diverse ethnic traditions that symbolize the
connections between peoples united by the historical Silk Road and nowadays
brought to life in the US.
Daria ŁAWRYNOW – assistant in Institute of the Polish Language, Polish Academy of
Science in Warsaw. In 2020 in University of Warsaw she received a Ph.D. in literary
studies. Author of the book Swoi wśród obcych. Tożsamość Kozaków kubańskich
byłego Wojska Czarnomorskiego oraz Kozaków kazachstańskich (na podstawie
tekstów folklorystycznych) [A friend among foes. Identity of Kuban Black Sea Host
Cossacks and Kazakh Cossacks (on the basis of folklore materials)]. Her research

296 List of contributors
focuses on Cossacks culture and history, military folklore, Slavic languages, linguistic
worldview, analysis of Soviet propaganda.
Marin MARIAN-BĂLAȘA – senior researcher with the “C. Brăiloiu” Institute of
Ethnography and Folklore (Bucharest), did extensive fieldwork and documentation
worldwide (from anthropological direct observation and participation to minor and
major library funds research). He founded and edited the independent international
annual journal “(East) European Meetings in Ethnomusicology” (1994-2009),
unofficially edited the Romanian Academy’s “Revista de etnografie și folclor” during
its national, 3rd „new series” (1986-1990), and formally edited its international series,
“Revista de etnografie și folclor / Journal of Ethnography and Folklore” (2007–).
Twelve books published and numerous academic and cultural articles in national and
international venues. Email: mmbalasa@yahoo.com.
Khankishi MEMMEDOV – doctoral student and associate professor with the History of
Azerbaijani Literature Department of the Philological Faculty of the Azerbaijan State
Pedagogical University. Carries out scientific work on “Paremy in Azerbaijani folklore:
genres, functional structure and poetic features”; author of more than 100 scientific
articles (more than 50 articles on proverbs and riddles) published in Azerbaijan, Turkey,
Kazakhstan, Bashkiria, Uzbekistan, etc. Co-author of the books “Azerbaijani-English-
Russian Paremiological Units” - Baku: 2019, 524 pp. (together with A. Abbasov), and
“Azerbaijani-English Paremiological Units” – Baku: 2018, 344 pp. (together with
A. Abbasov and P. Pashayeva). Author of monograph “Scientific roots of folklore” –
Baku: 2019, 368 pages, “FFFF” (folklore, physics, fauna, flora) under print – Baku:
2022, 514 pp. Member of Azerbaijan Writers and Journalists Union (4 books of poems
published in different times). Currently working on the book “Azerbaijani-Turkish-
English Proverbs and Sayings”. Email: kankishimamedov_53@mail.ru.
Natalia M. OVOD – assistant at the department of Musicology and Methodology of
Musical Art of the Ternopil Volodymyr Hnatiuk National Pedagogical University
and Honored Art Worker of Ukraine (Ternopil, Ukraine). Her research interests
are aimed at etnology of Western Podillya and history and development of vocal
creativity of Ukrainian singers from the mid-twentieth century to the present day.
She also studies the interaction of creative relations between representatives of
Lviv and Kyiv Schools of Composers. She is an author of scientific articles, vocal
and conducting educational programs and methodical recommendations. Email:
ovodnatalya583@gmail.com.
Oleg S. SMOLIAK – professor at the department of Musicology and Methodology of
Musical Art, Doctor of Art Studies (DA) of the Ternopil Volodymyr Hnatiuk National
Pedagogical University (Ternopil, Ukraine). He is a researcher in the field of
musicology and folklore, teacher, conductor, member of the National Union of
Composers of Ukraine, he is a winner of the regional cultural award in 2016 in the
category “Ethnography and Museology – named after Volodymyr Hnatyuk.” He is
author of numerous scientific and methodological publications, educational programs
in ethnography, music folklore. He is a compiler, editor and publisher of collections of
folk songs and works by Ukrainian composers. Email: smolyak.te@gmail.com.

List of contributors 297
Olena V. SPOLSKA – assistant at the department of Musicology and Methodology of
Musical Art of the Ternopil Volodymyr Hnatiuk National Pedagogical University
(Ternopil, Ukraine). Her research activities are aimed at studying the state of
Christmas rituals in Western Podillya from the end of the nineteenth century to the
present day. She has published more than twenty publications, including
methodological developments, programs, articles, published in professional journals
and in the materials of scientific conferences of various levels. Email:
olenadovbush84@ gmail. com.
George-Bogdan TOFAN – born in Bilbor, Harghita County. In 2012, at “Babeş-Bolyai”
University Cluj-Napoca, Faculty of Geography, was awarded the title of Doctor in
Geography, with the thesis Small depressions, factors and component of the
humanization of the Eastern Carpathians Central Group. Case study: The northern
area of the depression alignment (Drăgoiasa-Glodu-Bilbor-Secu-Borsec-Corbu-
Tulgheş). He also completed a postdoctoral programme at the same institution:
Ethnicity, confession and electoral behaviour in Harghita, Covasna and Mureş
Counties. A geographic study (2008-2014). Since 2014 holds the position of university
lecturer at “Vasile Goldiş” Western University Arad, Faculty of Economic,
Information and Engineering Sciences, Baia Mare Branch. His scientific activity
of 70 papers, studies, books, and maps is mostly focused on the same themes and area
tackled in his doctoral paper.
Ruxandra TRANDAFOIU – reader (Associate Professor) in Media and Communication at
Edge Hill University (UK). She researches the role of social media in the political
engagement and activism of Eastern European diasporas, the political effect of Brexit
on EU nationals in the UK, the impact of music and music policy on the identity of
place in Eastern Europe and transmedia practices seen as practices of migration.
Ruxandra is the author of Diaspora Online: Identity Politics and Romanian
Migrants (Berghahn) and co-editor of Media and Cosmopolitanism (Peter Lang) and
The Globalization of Musics in Transit: Musical Migration and Tourism (Routledge).
Her new books are The Politics of Migration and Diaspora in Eastern Europe: Media,
Public Discourse and Policy, and Border Crossings and Mobilities on Screen, both
published by Routledge in 2022.
Peihong YANG – Associate Professor, Keyboard Instrumental Music Education
Department, Shenyang Conservatory of Music, Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China.
Correspon-dence: peihongyang46@gmail.com.
Li YANGKUO – faculty member at the Business School of Huaihua University. He
graduated with a master’s degree from Jishou University in 2019. His research
interests include economic statistics and finance. Has done a lot of empirical research
in economics, finance, etc., and has published many research papers in journals.
Corresponding author for the published paper: jsumath@sina.com.
Izaly ZEMTSOVSKY – folklorist and ethnomusicologist, a pupil of Professor Vladimir
Propp. Since 1960, worked at the Russian Institute for the History of the Arts

298 List of contributors
(St. Petersburg). Since 1994, in the capacity of visiting professor, has taught various
courses in the United States universities (UCLA, UC Berkeley, UW Madison and
Stanford). Author of a score of books and more than 550 articles published in different
languages. Among his books are The Melodics of Calendar Songs (1975), Folklore
and the Composer (1978), The Historical Morphology of the Folk Song (1987), From
the World of Oral Traditions (2006). A recipient of the Koizumi Fumio Prize for
Ethnomusicology (2011). Since 2006, a founding Board Director of the Silk Road
House – a New Cultural and Educational Center in Berkeley, California. Currently is
working on a book project “Anthropology of Musical Existence”.