International Journal of Sanskrit Research 2017; 3(2): 177-179
International Journal of Sanskrit Research2015; 1(3):07-12
ISSN: 2394-7519
Unveiling wisdom of the Sanskrit Buddhist
IJSR 2017; 3(2): 177-179
© 2017 IJSR
Philosophers
www.anantaajournal.com
Received: 02-02-2017
Accepted: 05-03-2017
Jhumur Mallik
Dr. Jhumur Mallik
Assistance Professor,
DOI: https://www.doi.org/10.22271/23947519.2017.v3.i2c.2811
Department of Sanskrit,
Sanskrit College, Kolkata, West
Bengal, India Abstract
The linguists classify the language of the Veda into the old Indo-Aryan family of languages covering
1500 B.C. to 1000 B.C. This language was in use by a select few, particularly belonging to the priestly
class, for religious purposes. The term ‘Sanskrit’ refers to a language refined within the Paninian model
of grammar, particularly after the fifth century B.C. This language, though technically not identical with
the language of the Vedas, postdates the rise of Buddhism.
The original Buddhist teachings were compiled in Pali, a form of ‘Prakrit’. Various types of Prakrit were
the common language of much of the Indian subcontinent and evolved into most of the modern
vernacular languages. Initially, Buddhists did not write in Sanskrit. After Panini, they turned to Sanskrit
for the composition of fresh texts or translation of existing ones. The growth of Sanskrit writings in
Buddhism was further encouraged from the early Christian era onward.
Buddhist philosophers such as Nāgārjuna, Vasubandhu, Dignāga, and Dharmakīrti concentrated their
philosophical thoughts in Sanskrit. This paper explores their motivations for using Sanskrit instead of
Pali.
Keywords: Sanskrit, Pali, Buddhist Philosophy, Nāgārjuna, Vasubandhu, Dignāga, Dharmakīrti
1. Introduction
The original Buddhist teachings were compiled in Pali, traditionally called Magadhi Bhasa by
scholars such as Buddhaghosa. Pali was the language of the Magadhan region:
Sa Māgadhi mulā bhāsa
Narāyā ya ādikappika
Brāhmaṇa ca sutalapa
Sambuddhasca bhasare
Which means that “ Māgadhī ” which is also called the “mūla bhāsā” is the primeval language.
It was spoken by common folks, scholars and by the Buddhas right from the primordial age.
This view stands in sharp contrast with the popular Indian beliefs on the Sanskrit language.
Initially, the Buddhists did not write in the Sanskrit language. With the rise of Brāhmanism
after the decline of the Mauryans and ascendancy of the Brahmin ruler, viz. Shungas and
kanvas the apparent change in the socio-political climate was to be reflected in the Buddhists
religious literature too. After the Panini, the Buddhists also turn to Sanskrit either for the
composition of the fresh text, or for the translation of the existing ones.
Furthermore, the Kushanas patronage to Buddhism and their vindication for the Sanskrit for all
literary activities since the early Christian era, gave a fresh impetus to the growth of Sanskrit
Correspondence
writings found in Buddhism.
Dr. Jhumur Mallik
Assistance Professor, All kind of the Buddhists teaching or practice if not in unison with the Mahāyāna, central
Department of Sanskrit, philosophy was to be held as ‘Inferior Means’ or ‘Hīna Yāna’ ‘to realize the ideals of
Sanskrit College, Kolkata, West Buddhism’. The volumes of the Mahayana literature flourished; and the language used for
Bengal, India
their composition was in Sanskrit.
~ 177 ~

International Journal of Sanskrit Research https://www.anantaajournal.com
2. Buddhist Philosophers and Sanskrit Usage Prajñā-Pāramitā is also attributed to Dignāga.
2.1 Nāgārjuna (c. 2nd Century A.D.) The Nyāya-Praveśa, or “Nyāya- Praveśa-Nāma Pramāṇa
It has been noted that most Buddhist Philosophers, like Prakaraṇa is another excellent work on Logic y Dignāga. The
Nāgārjuna, Vasubandhu, Diṇnāga and Dharmakīrti Sanskrit original is lost. But a Tibetan translation exists. The
concentrated their Philosophical Thoughts in the medium of work Prajñā-Pāramitā-Pindārtha, the Aṣṭasāhasrikā-Prajñā-
Sanskrit Language. Here, we discuss only the writing of 4 Pāramitā is also attributed to Dignāga.
Philosophers Nāgārjuna of Mādhyamika School, Vasubandhu, Nyāya Praveśa opens thus:-- “Demonstration and refutation
Diṇnāga and Dharmakīrti of the Yogāchāra School. together with their fallacies are useful in arguing with others;
Nāgārjuna, probably belonging to the 2nd century A.D. (150- and perception and inference together with their fallacies are
250 according to Nakamura), a Buddhist philosopher wrote useful for self-understanding: seeing these I compile this
Mādhyamika-kārika in Sanskrit language which laid the Śāstra.”
foundation of the Mādhyamika School. In Mādhyamika
Kārikā Nāgārjuna has occasionally referred to certain 2.4 Dharmakīrti (c. 7th Century A.D.)
technical terms of Ancient Logic, such as punarukta Dharmakīrti is the author of numerous works on logic. I-tsing,
(repetition) in chapter II, Siddha-sādhanā (demonstration of who travelled over India during 671-695A.D. declares
what has already been established) in chapter III and sādhya- “Dharmakīrti made further improvement in logic” after
sama (petition principia) as well as parihāra (avoidance) in Dignaga. He was a Buddhist Logician of the seventh century
chapter IV. A.D. Nyāya-Bindu is excellent work on logic by Dharmakīrti.
There is also a criticism of Akşapāda’s doctrine of Pramāṇa The Sanskrit original of this work was discovered among the
(evidence). palm-leaf manuscripts preserved in the Jaina temple of
A composition of logical treatise, Pramāṇa-vihetana of Santinatha, Camay, and has been published in the Bibliotheca
Pramāṇa-Vidhvaṃsana is attributed by Nāgārjuna, which Indica series of Calcutta by Professor Person. There exists a
literally signifies “the quelling of Pramāṇa.” And which was Tibetan translation of this work also. The Pramāṇa-Vārtika-
in fact a review of the definition of the sixteen categories as Kārikā is one of his renowned work. There was a sun-
given by Akṣapāda. The Sanskrit Original of this work is not commentary called Pramāṇa-Vārtika-Vṛtti on it by
avoidable. Dharmakīrti himself. Pramana-viniscaya quoted by
The Upāya Kauśala-Hṛdaya-Śāstra, the essence of skill in the Madhavacarya (14th century A.D.) and others, is another work
Accomplishment of Action, is stated to be a work on the Art on logic by him. The Sanskrit original of this work appears to
of debate by Bodhisattva Nāgārjuna. Seeing that the Vaiśeṣika be lost, but there exists a Tibetan translation.
and other system were obscure in their terminology, The Hetu-bindu-vivaraṇa, Tarka-nyāya or Vāda-nyāya are the
Nāgārjuna, it is reported, undertook to write this book to give another works on logic by Dharmakīrti. The Santanantara-
a clear exposition of the art of debate. siddhi or Tantrantara-siddhi is a philosophical treatise by
Dharmakirti.
2.2 Vasubandhu (410-490 A.D.) The Sambandha-parikṣā is another philosophical treatise and
Vasubandhu was the author of a large number of very the Sambandha-parikṣāvṛtti is a commentary by Dharmakīrti
valuable works, some of which are available in Sanskrit and himself.
the rest in Chinese and Tibetan translation. He was a
contemporary of Kumāra Gupta, Skanda Gupta, Pura Gupta 3. Reasons for Using Sanskrit
and Baladitya (from 410 A.D. to about 490 A.D.) In the 7th  Most of the Buddhist philosophers had grown up through
century A.D. while Hwen-thsang was travelling in India, he the Brāhmanical atmosphere.
saw three works on the art of debate attributed to  Orthodox system of philosophy, specially Nyāya-
Vasubandhu. The Sanskrit originals of these works as well as Vaiśeṣika and Mīmāṃsā had written in Sanskrit
their Chinese versions are now lost. language. Not only the Sanskrit language but also they
1. VādaVidhi - the method of debate had a special Philosophical terminology.
2. Vāda-mārga - The course of debate  If Buddhists philosopher did not learn Sanskrit or those
3. Vāda-Kauśala - the expedients of debate. philosophical terminology they could not refute the views
of opponent on topic of common interest. So they
Beside these three works, there was a treatise on logic called adopted the same language, the enigmatic and algebrical
‘Tarka-Śāstra’ composed by Vasubandhu. style of the Brahmanical system i.e. Naiyāyikas &
Vaiśeṣikas.
2.3 Dignāga (c. 450-500 A.D.)  They used this language to expound various Buddhist
Dignāga, the father of Medieval logic flourished possibly doctrines to familiar in elite society.
c.450-500 A.D. Satish ch. Vidyabhusan said in his book that
 Professor Tucci shows that categories accepted in the
the Pramāṇa-samuccaya is one of the grandest literary
Nyāya system have become the basis on which the
monuments of Dignāga. It is a Sanskrit work written in
Buddhist masters also built up their edifice.
anustubh metre. It was supposed to be lost a few years back
 Style and mode of argument in all of their works are the
the whole text along with Jinendrabuddhis Biśālamālābati
same with the Orthodox system of Nyāya. In each case
commentary has been discovered in a Monastery in china.
the discussion is started just in the way of a formal
Already the first volume has been published from Vienna. It
debate, as if the opponent is present before the author.
was preserved in Tibetan Translation.
 Arguments are syllogistic. The refutations are generally
The Nyāya-Praveśa, or “Nyāya-Praveśa-Nāma Pramāṇa
through the hetvabhasa fallacies. The views of the
Prakaraṇa” is another excellent work on Logic by Dignāga.
opponents are faithfully given at the outset in their own
The Sanskrit original is lost. But a Tibetan translation exists.
language. They are then analysed and flaws are detected
The work Prajñā-Pāramitā-Pindārtha, the Aṣṭasāhasrikā-
one by one.
~ 178 ~

International Journal of Sanskrit Research https://www.anantaajournal.com
4. The Cullavagga Narrative
In the Cullavagga the question on the language of the
composition of the “Buddha-Vacana” was once raised by two
Brāhmins, Yamela and Kekuta. These monks approached the
Buddha and sought his permission to compose the teaching in
the sophisticated language Chandas (the language of the
Vedas) because the people belonging to all castes, and clans
were joining the order and each was trying to transmit the
teachings in his own language. The Buddha disapproved the
ides of any rendition of his teachings in his Chandas language
and declared that anyone who indulges in an act to translate
his teachings into Chandas shall be liable to the serous
offence (apatti dukkata). He instead prescribed that “his
teachings had to be learnt in one’s own language” (sakaya
niruttiya).
Buddhaghosa the greatest Pali commentator, has carefully
examined these utterances of the Buddha and concluded that
the Buddha himself had spoken in the Magadhika language.
But in the Book, Pali Prabesaka, Bidhusekhar Bhattacharya
explained sakaya niruttiya as everyone should adopt the
Buddha Vacana in his own language. So the argument goes
on. But the fact is that it is in Sanskrit, Tibetan, Chinese and
so on.
5. Conclusion
The shift from Pali to Sanskrit among Buddhist philosophers
was influenced by socio-political changes, the need to engage
with Brahmanical philosophical traditions, and the desire to
communicate effectively within elite scholarly circles.
Sanskrit’s terminological richness and structured debate
methods made it the ideal medium for expounding Buddhist
philosophy.
References
1. Chandra B. Varma, A Hand book of Buddhist Languages,
P.59
2. Bidhusekhar Bhattacharya, Pali Prabeshak, P.79
3. Sanskrit and Prakrit, Sociolinguistics issues Madhav
Deshpande, P. 788
4. Chandra B. Varma, A Handbook of Buddhist Languages,
Buddhist World Press, 2011
5. Satish Chandra Vidyabhusana, A History of Indian
Logic, Motilal Banarasidass, 1988
6. Bidhusekhar Bhattacharya, Pali Prabeshak
7. Suresh Chandra Banerjee, Companion to Indian
Philosophy
~ 179 ~